===== Internet Archive OCR: cu31924023014941_djvu.txt =====




■J* " V- -f- 



CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




Cornell University Library 
PK 3060.A31 

Manu Samhita :Enfi!j,,fi||S|l& 




3 1924 023 014 941 




The original of tliis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924023014941 



MAKtr bamhma: 



Itniittsh ftsinkiaitiim 



viiBtistikb §ok 

iMfe SOClfiTY FOU I HE RESUSCITATION Ofr 
INDIAN LITERATURE. 



ilAKllATfiA »ATH DITTT, (Sliaatri)^ it*A.^ 

Ricior, Keshub Academjf, 

Author of the Efigliih Translations of the R&m&yanant, Mahi' 
, • Bh'dratam, SriinadbhSgavatain, MahdHirvana-Tantram, 
Narivatns'a, Agni Purdnam, Mdrkandeya 
Purdnam, &c., &c, 

3, tijRRutv&tR Strbet, p. O., SBAMBAZAR. 



dAtoijl'iA 

t'tttiiTJSt) AND i>t;ELtSHEO BY H. C. Da^, EiysibM PRk^i 



3, FcRRiAPUKUR Street, 



CHAPTER I. 

i[UNTO) Mjlitu * WiisfuUy seated with his mind abstrac- 
ted frdiji the world of the senses, came the great sages; 
Having wdrShipped hijpi they, cdnformably to reasoii 
iand pr0]^ii6tyit interrcJig^^ted him is the following 

Manner, (i) ^ 

V. . ^.:^ - ■ ■ - ■ -- '■ 

JCuIluka substantiates liis statenieiit Fegardiiig the higtiest 
Idthdtity of the Iii,aitutes 61 Manu among the dharma S'kstras 
'of ancient Iitdia % niakiiig quQtatibils flronl tUe Chhandogya 
Srdhmana, Prihaspati, arid the Mahhbhiratani. 

wkatever Matiii- said is nlediciiie t(i thoSe, ^Iki need medica- 
tion ifor theit impiety; • ; „ ,. 

Chhindogya Brdhinana. 

The superiority of Manu lied in its IJeiiig fdiiiided ori the triie 
inipott of the Vedas. THe SmHti, Which is cbntradictory to the 
teachings of Manu, is lio Smriti at iW. S6 Idng does the science 
bf reasoning 6r Grammar shine as long as Miiiu, the precept<ir iii 
thatters of virtile arid salvation, does ricit appear in the field. 

, Brikaspaii. 

The Par&rias, the liistitiites 6i Manu, tHe Vedas with ttieii: 

allied Sciences, ^aild the A'yuirveds are the fdur (branches of 

study), Which ate, by themselves, authoritative, and which should 

hot be destroyed by mea^ris df sophisticated reasdiiirig (like that 6f 

the Buddhists;. . . . ^ 

Mah'aWiiratam. 

* The fiirst couplet begiiis with the ternl " Maiiii" in aecdi-darice 

with sii established [irecept of Saiiskrit Rhetoric, that "dli literary 

Undertakings nidst begin With a ternl of auSpicidds iniport, or 

signifying Deity," MaiM being the lianie of Agiii (fir^jgi^*), or it 

Prajapati (cteatdr adctirdirig to others:— Kulluka. 

t THe text hii yathd-nyiyani— Iii c6ni6rmity With the *uUs 

^f Logic or propriety, to ask an absutd or improper question tt<^ 

Uterdicted by the rules of our Dh»rma S'Astras.—KytltH^, 



2 Manu Satnhita. 

ft 

Be pieased, O thou, who art posaefssed of the siji 
kinds of opulence, to expound to us, in due ofd^r * thai 
duties of all the (four) social orders, as well as thosef 
of the members pf the mixed castes, t (2) 

Thou alone art cognisant, O lord, of the imports 
and regiflations '.of the self-origined Vedas, incompre-' 
hensible "in (their meaning) and innumerable (in their 
j'amifieations), as well as of the rites <enjoined to be 
(performed), and truths inculcated, (therein.) J 1(3) 

He§ of imponderable prowess, being thus interro^ 
gated by the magnanimous Rishis; replied, hear, O ye 
great sages. (4) 

* Anupurvas'ah : — In due oi'der, that is, commencing with the' 
rite of Jdta Karma (post-natal rite) and, after that, dealing with 
the successive rites in the order in which they are celebrated in 
life. — Kulluka. 

f Antara-Prabhavandncha i. e., sons begotten by members of 

superior castes on wives of inferior castes, and vtce versa, as well 

as those who ar'e the offspring of unions with foreign women.— 

Kulluka. 

X ICarya'tattvartha-vit : — Me^ha'titiA, a bigoted advocate of 
the Vedic rites, explains the passage as "cognisant of the meanings' 
of the principles of Vedic rites and sacrifices." We, however, have 
thought fit to follow Kulluka" Bhatta in our translation, inas- 
nluch as Mepha'TITHi's constraction of the text excludes many a' 
cardinal point of the Vedic doctrine, such as the knowledge of 
Brabraa, etc., narrows the general scope of the Vedas, and restricts 
the enquiry to the discussion of a single topic — TV. 

§ The use of the pronoun in the third person, singular, in the 
present couplet, strongly raises the presumption that the Manu- 
Samhit4,' as we have it now, is not what it was originally wiitteii' 
by its author Manu) but is merely a recension of the original 
work by a disciple of that great patriarch, most probably by 
Bhrigu. The probability amounts almost to a certainty when we 
think that it might have been quite within the province of Bhrigu 
««fc^revised the old Vedic system of Astronomy, to recast anii 
revise the Vedic codes of Ethics" and La ws, wkich were' coUatea 



Rfanu Samhila. 3 

(CW^alTy) was* this universe enveloped in dark- 
ness,t invisible to the sight, without any sign to indicate 

and codified by Manu. Others, on the contrary, assert that, it was a 
common practice with our ancient masters to mention their 
names in the third person instead of saying "I so and so shall 
now discourse on such and such a topic," and quote an aphorism 
oi Jaimini in support of their statement. 

Manu's description of, the creation of the' universe in answer 
to the query of the Rishis regarding the Laws o£ virtue and 
good conduct, etc, should not be regarded as unseasonable or 
out of {dace. Medha'tithi holds that the description of the evolur 
tion of the universe has been here introduced to show that the 
different forms of existence, from the lowest animalculum to the 
most exalted Brahmd., are but the effects of different degrees of 
piety. Hence, this topic has a distmct and special bearing upon 
the ftiain thesis of the Samhita, inasmuch as it unfolds the succes- 
sive stages of evolution of the individualised self (^iva) and 
marks the order in which it wjrks up its progression upward, 
or is constrained to descend, into the lower plaiies of life. Govinpa 
Raja (another commentator of the Samhita) subscribes to the 
same opinion-, and says that, the description of this evolutibri 
of the universe is for the ascertainment of Brahma, the real 
cause of the universe, the knowledge of Brahma being held 
as the Summum bonum of life, and its acquisition, imperatively 
obligatory on all, as so unequivocally enjoined by the holy 
Yajnavalkya, Vadurayaiia, and the aiithor of the Mahabharatam. 
Nor are the S'rutis silent on the point, but rather they inculcate 
the knowledge of Brahma as the highest virtue in ma.n—Kulluka. 

* (A'sid) — From the unknowable and invisible nature of the 
universe, enveloped in primordial gloom, it must not be presumed 
that nothing existed prior to it, that it was evolved out of pure 
Nothingness. Ckhhndogya Upanishad has an express text on the 
subject, " O beloved, there was the only Real (Brahma) in the 
beginning." 

t Tamobhutam :— The gloam of Primal Nature, Prakfiti, re- 
suiting from the latent or potential existence of all ideas in 
her body, the state of equipose among the qualities of Sativaj 
Rajas and Tamas. • 



4 S^O-mi, S'AmftUgk. 

'4s existence^ utiknowabIe>« and bjeyond the inference of 
reasoning or logic— as, if hushed ajl round, in one tinivef-, 

sal sleep,.t t5> 

After t-hsiit, the self.originedBlwty, though unmanifest 
ymselfj ca,us?^ this, universe to b(»gracbiajly i^anifest^ 
ed, by traJtSBiHtingjhJs energy toth^ ^w^wty-four cate-- 
gories such a^ the priniordial elements of indpmitable. 
pi:owess-;:retc, a^ £a,ve. thye fitst ipipetua to. NaJture 
to be.evolved; out.J; (6> 



• Unknowable, eyeni hf. mfiaiB$ of inferfenpjB. (Ariht^aiti)-^' 

t /'j'asH/iAMK:— LuJIeAiftsJe^, iSjOiipOsed'tO-deith, indicating 
ip its mjdst tiap. p9j:ential existenpe of life, anraiting progressive- 
<;volutipn,and in;inifestation. 

:|; By dinjt of his. vi^ill, the Sjlpreni^ B^ahraa, t^he underlying, 
substratum or reality of the universe, 'gave the fir^ ifnpetus to. 
Nature to. shaloe off her state of primal eqtUpo^e, and to, be gradu« 
^ly and sqpcessively evolved- out in,tho?e categoric, and elements, 
\f.hich were hece'ss^ry for the.con^titutidh, of th^ pr,esent universe. 
Nature alone, in the ab^enpe of a guiding, controlling. Wi)I to shape. 
llt,ei;. ^ojirse and destiny, might not have been sufficient to, evoke a.. 
unive'rsp.ip|to,Tjeing. The fortuitons^congregates of atonj^ conjd never- 
have got themselves w.eighed and arrayed in. different groups and: 
measures^for l^lie formation, of- different objepts, without the precon- 
Qerted schema of a, devising Geniu^. The m^d v«;hirl-gig of mole- 
«;ular combines w,ojiJd- never have been, timed witK such majestic 
j^ythm of mptiop,an(li harmony as we find iPi the mariches ' of the 
stars without the coptroj of a master Harmonist, Inertia, and- 
a few other form? of ph5rsjcal force may account for, the! perjiettial 
motion we. see every w.here in, the upjivei;se, but wfho gave the first 
^petus to: mption isa question w,hjqhi canppt be answered without 
3droitting^th,e exiptence.of anpthjBr reality behind the universe. 

"^he Juflian, I^sJiis. '^erh fujly. aw,are of thp absurdity of 
creating, \ system, of philosophy, which, trips, to, accdunt for the 
^vQlHt^n of thp u,n,iversB without the Inter'^ention of this unr 
^nown* reality, endeavoui;s to. dethrone God.from, His throne, an* 



Maiiu Samhtia-. 5 

He, who is beyond the cognisance of the sraises^. 
subtile, unmanifest, eternal, and imponderable, aiid. 
who runs through all created things, originated by him- 
self (7> - 

He, wishing to (M-eate various kinds of creatures fronv 
6ut of his own bod^y,* first created water ,t and cast hia 
geed therein. (8>, 

That ^g had a golden colour, resplendent hke the: 
(aggregative) effulgence of a thousand suns ;-^Iii that: 
(egg) Brajxmi4t himself wai.s horn— --Birahnifl/ the grandr- 
father (progegjtor), of all creatures and region^; (9) 

|)laces Nature on iit in. H;is steact Tfa.'B Bhaga^fidGitcklvtiiixh., 
authority to. this in,terpretation of TS^vyiMViA. viihea it says, 

" Through, my agency Nature gives bitth. to, thempbile amd the- 
im mobile." 

Both GoviN,DARAji\ 4ad MephiA,th;thii explain the term. Tama- 
nudu as dispeUer of gloom, we ^ave fDllo^fied Kulluka's inter- 
pretation, " Prakriti-Pravartaka." 

* The inimacuilate or unmpdified Prakriti, (N%t4ce\ before the- 
commen.cem.en:t o( the proxx^ of evolution, pregnant with the po' 
tential seeds, of the five nvateriaj elements, the five cognitive senses, 
the five operative sertses. th,e rtii^, life (vitality) acts, knowledge- 
and desire, etc, is. calkd th,e body of Brahma in. the parlance 
of Vedantism, an4, as such, npjt h^ing a separate existence from, 
that of Brahm,!. It is through the v?ork.ings of the innate forces, 
of his Self that Brahm^ is transformed in, th;e shape of the 
universe —KulUtka. 

t The first nviterial element evolved out after Mahatj Egoism, 
and the five Tanmatras (subtle senstbles) etc. 

X In the previous cycle of evolution of the univeise, Brahma 
contemplated hlmsislf as Hirdnyagiyhha, who was both identical 
with, and separate from, hjiB» 'Ihe astral bodjf of this Hiranya- 
garbha, whiih survived, the dissolution of the universe as a thought- 
form in Brahma, was reanimated, when Brahma again entered 
it in the form, of life in the beginning of the evolution, .of qjn 
«resent Universe. — Kulluka. 



6 Manu Samhita. 

The water is called Nara, inasmuch as it is the first 
offspring of Nara (the supreme self),* and inasmuch as 
water was the first receptacle of the Supreme Self, 
manifested as Brahma, the Supreme Self is called 
Narayana (lo) 

That which is primal, unmanifest, eternal (principle), 
encompassing both the real and the phenomenal, the in- 
dividual created by that principle is called Brahma, (ii) 

In that egg that divinity, having lived for one 
(Brahma) year, thought, "let the egg be broken in 
halves," and the egg was so divided, (i 2) 

Out of those two parts he created the heaven and 
the earth, an4 in their midst he eternally placed the sky 
and the eight quarters, and the seas all around. (13) 

He recovered the mind, which. partakes of the 
nature of the Supreme Self, and embraceth both the 
character of the noumenon and the phenomenon. Prior 
to the evolution of the mind, (he recovered) the principle 
of Egoism, the real incentive to all works. (14) 

Prior to the evolution of the principle of Egoism, 
was evolved the principle of Mahat (principle of 
apprehension). All these categories (products of evo- 
lution) are possessed of the three qualities (of Sattwa, 
Rajas and Tamas). Gradually he created ^used to be 

The astral bodies or immutable thought-forms exist in the 
eternal consciousness of Brahma, and they become re-animated 
or re-deceased according to the influx or out-flow of life into, or 
from, them, according to the exigencies of the evolution or involu- 
tion of Prakriti, or to express it in the language of everyday 
life, at the creation or dissolution of the universe. 

*The text has Nara-Sunava, the offspring of Nara, the supreme 
Self, the term Nafa, water being derived from " Nara" coupled 
with the affix " an " denoting filialty. v' 



Manu Samhild. j 

gVolved out) the five cognitive senses, the recipients of 
the sound, light, taste, and smdl* (isv 

Eiy combining the subtlest pai'ts o? the principle of* 
Egoism, and the five Tanmitras, with their modifica- 
tions, the senses, and the five material elements, he 
created all creatures. (i6) 

Inasmuch as the subtle particles o^ these six prin- 
ples (Egoism and the five Tanniitras), which con^ 
trive to compose the body of Brahma, enfolded by 
Prakriti (Nature), are connected with the five elements 
as their effect, the wise call the person of Brahma a^ 
his Body (S*ariram), from the fact of its being domposed 
df these si:t {skai) piTnciplSs. (17) 

Froifl Brahma, manifested in the fomi of the fivd 
Tanmdiras, were produced the great (material) elements, 
together with their functions ;t (and) the deathless 
Mind, which is the procreating cause of all creatioiisi, 
together with its subtle functions of inclination, anti- 
pathy, etc. was produced from Brahma, evolved out as 
the prin.Giple of Egoism. (18) 

From the subtle particle's of these seven Purusha- 
likej principles of irrepressible energy viz., the princi-^ 
^les o( Ma/taf, Egoism and the five Tanmdtras has 
originated this imiverse. From the real has proceeded 
the phenomenal. (19) 



• The particle " cha" includes the five operative senses and the 
fire Tanmatras as well. — Kullukai 

t The function of A'kis'a (ether) is space^giviog, that of Viyu is 
motion or arrangement, that of fife is transformation (lit heating 
oi- cooking) ; that of water, aggregation of mass-makiftg, aiid 
that of Earth is receptivity.— Ar«//«*<i 

X because the Purusha was transformed' into them at tlj^e 
eutset. 



I l\kanu Sarhhita. 

Of these elements, each successive on;e partakes ot 
the virtues of the preceding elenient, or in other wordsi 
the virtues of an element is corresponding to the num- 
ber which is placed against it in the list.* (20) 

the names and functions and jlrdfessions bf all 
fcreatures he (Hiranyag»rbha) separately createdt ac- 
cording td the directions of the Vedas. (21) 

TheLdrd cre&ted the Devas, who fdrnied the limBs 
(as il were) of .the religious ritBS,t and the Devas pos^ 
sessed of life, the hosts of subtle Devai, the Sadh^ast, 
and the eternal sapriiice. (^2) . 

The three Vedas, distinguished by the names of 
Riie, Yayush and Sdman^ be milched from the Fire, air 
and the sUn ibr the performances of religious sacri^ 
fices. (23) 

* Either dr A'kni'a, \^hich sUiids first M ttle li^t, has dnly the 
bne prdpertjr df Sduild ; air v^tlieU dcqiliSies the secdad place in the 
list has two prdperties vie , sdUdd aiid tditch ; the third.dlenient 
(iiire) haS three properties, mz., sdurid, tduch and sight, (colotir ; 
the fdurtH el6ri&etlt Wdtei- ha^ the four properties of sdtiild, ttiucH, 
iight (cbldift ) aiid taste, while th« earth. Which stands fifth in the 
ii^, has the five propertied df sdiiiid, tduch, sight ^cdloilt'}, taste 
Stud sdell. — KUllukd. 

f The Vedas, which eteriially .exist, are derged in Bt'Shda at 
ihe time of the dissolution df the uiliverse diily to be patent iii 
the beginning df the next c^cle df its evolution, fiirnlstiiiig 
Hiranyagarbha (the S|)ririt Of the burning egg or .globe of primal 
Cosmic matter) With {Orms and -patterns-0f a former cycle far the 
guidance df his work'Ctf uiiiverssl creation^ 

The priority Of the Vedas to the birth df the universe is alsd 
asserted in the S'arirtika Sutraitt. 

S'abda iti Cheundtah Prabhctviti PratdkshSnu viii^aShyja^. 

X ^e created two clastes of divinities, Mimate such a£ Iqdra 
and others, and inanimate SWch as (ladles 1 etc., the Utensils 
i^hich are employed iti the course df a Vedic sacrifice aod are 
tivested with a kind ai divirtity.— Kulluka. 



H6 Created 'time, the divisions of Time, the stars, 
\)i& planets, the rivers, th6 s6as, the mountains, th6 
|)lains, and the uneven grounds. (24) 

Contemplation {Tapas\, speech, satisfabtion of the 
hiind, desire and ang6r. 'W'ishing to 6reate these crea- 
tures, he thus created this Creation. (25) 

For the ftlasSifidatioh bf dots, h6 (ii|tinguished virtue 
from vice, and connected the creatures with the pairs 
of opposite^ Such as pleasure and pain, (heat and cold)> 
etc. {26) 

With the five Subtile attd tranSfornliiig fahmitras^ 
he Created this universe, in due order, (from the subtile 
to the gross, and from the gross to the grosser, and so 
on). (V) 

To the A^ork, for which he, the lord, ordained a 
creature in the beginning, it spontaneously reverted iit 
its successive inearnatiotis. 1(38) 

To acts of love or Cruelty, of nlildness or feroCily> 
or of virtue or -s^ice, it Should spontaneously revertj 
which he ordained for it in the beginning, (29) 

As the characteristic features of a season of the year 
appear at the advent of that season^ So the acts of 
embodied creatures spontaneously assail them (in the 
proper time). (30) 

For the furtherance of the (good of the) World, he 
created BTAhmAnd,' I^shatriya, Vais'y4, and S'udra from 
his mouth, arms, thighs, and. legs.* (.31)- 

• The division of castes, according to tl)e sOcia] economists of 
aticieilt Ihdia, has. its basis, on th.e . four brdad, distinctive func^ 
tions in the economy of the divirie orgariisnl. The cogitative, 
the protective, the sustetitative arid the Operative functions, which 
are so vitally essential to the continuance of each IndLvidual 
organism, the living envelop of each- individual Self, or yfba, 
must have their prototypes in similar functions of the divine bod/ 
2 



id Mattu Samhita. 

of Bramha, the direct iriotive principle of universal Evolution. A 
man, or a being, inorder to live, must think, and reason, and 
desire. He must have some faculty iVithin him which nright help 
bim to anticipate his wants, to profit by the lessons of the past, to 
co-ordinate his innumerable relations with his enviroilments, and to 
develop the deeper possibilitieE of his nature ; aiid to this functiorl 
or principle, which is governed by the Daws of his prototype's being, 
the ancient A'charyyas gave the name of Bramhana. Similarly, 
there must be in man s&me furiction exclusively set apart for com- 
bating the hidden foes of his organism, to help and accelerate a 
cure in the case of disease ; another function, to store up and manu- 
facture energy from the ingredients of irtgested food, or from the 
physical elements of Nature, and another function to ungrudgingly* 
and unremittingly serve the other three functions in the discharge 
of their works, /. e., to be at the the beck and call of Ideation 
ySrahmana), Protectivenes* (Kshatriya,) and sustentative func- 
tion (l^ais'ya). They respectively gave them the itames oi'Ksha-' 
triya (soldier), Vais'ya (merchant or farroerl and S'udra (artisan oT 
servant!. S'udravtam is held identical with Karmatvaiu, (work, 
action, or service . Oi-iginally a S'udra meant an evangelist of 
service to mankind, although by an unfortunate degeneration of its 
meaning, jit subsequently came to be synonymous With something 
low or vile. 

As in the body, so in the body politic ; as in the body politic, so 
in the universal body politic, and hence the ancient A'charyyas 
came to look upon these relations of Brdhmana, Kshatriya, Vais'ya 
and S'udra, this classification of the units of society for the fur^ 
therance of the common weal, like the classification of functions 
in the divine organism of which they are the exponents, to be 
eternally existing in the social economy of mail, whenever and 
wherever occurring. 

These distinctions of castes have notWirg of tfte batered and 
the sense of inequality, which promptetd many a civilized society 
of modern times to lay down an arbitrary barFi«r between man 
and man, to create an artificial gulf between the classes and the 
masses, only on the basis of money-qualification. The framers 
of the ancient Sambitfts recognised the inevitable necessity of 
organizing a division of labour among the several orders of the' 
society. The caste system had its origin in the principle of co- 



Manu Samhita. ii 

Having divided his body into two parts, He, the 
lord (Brahmd), became male by means of the (onej half; 

operation and reciprocal h«lp, and not in contempt and spitefulness 
as it is now erroneously believed in certain quarters. A good 
S'udra (an artisan) was as much free and as much honourable as 
any Kshatriya, or any Vais'ya, [or even any Brahmana in ancient 
India. The Rishis took them under their owH spiritual clanship 
(Pravara), and sages "tike the holy Kds'yapa, Angira«a, PSlakyapa 
(vide the Agnipuranam) wrote books on sculpture, architecture. 
veterenary medicine and other branches of art entirely for the 
training and guidance of the S'udras of their age. In, the caste sys- 
tem the Rishis solved once for all the problem of capital and labour, 
which so badly threatens the modern industries of the- West; It 
was not the out-conte of monopolies or vested interests, for in the 
primitive societies of communistic enfoyment, man had thg instinc- 
tive wisdom to exclude all exclusiveness, either in- acquisition- or 
possession, for the mere continuance ofhis race and being, if 
for nothing else. It was not based on the superior rights of 
conquest, for a S'udra, if not otherwise morally disqualified, 
used to enjoy all the civic rights and privileges in common with 
a member of the twice-born order. It was not established with 
the imprecations and anathemas of a crafty priesthood, for some. 
of the authors of the ancient Samhitds (Vishnu Ch. 57, V. 16) 
authorised thie Br&braanas to partake of boiled rice cooked by the 
S'udras. For reasons stated abo<ve, the Rishis advised the society 
to protect the interests of its different orders with certain limita- 
tions. Unqualified equality is impossible in society, and the Rishis, 
as the best possible alternative, promulgated general equality in 
civic rights among individuals, and specific limpitations of privileges, 
as of a class against class. The Rishis honestly believed that there 
can be no society without such distinctions, and they did not err in 
their belief. 

Kulluka subscribes to this view when he says, thait, Brihmanas 

etc., arose out of the divisions of the divine energy (Daivyds'cha 

S'aktyd) as expressed by his different organs such as, the face, etc, 

{MukhUHyhyah) . a,nd quotes a i'mti ; the Brahmana was in J^is 

mou^th. 



fZ Manu SamMta, 

and female by meaais of the other,* and on- that femafe 
he begat Viraj.t (3^) 



* He begat, Vairaj i:e: by nteans' of sexual reproduction— 
Kulluka. 

f We- can not suflSciently bring home^ to- the minds of our- 
readers the fact that tjiese couplets (32—34;) reflect » knowledge- 
of Ewbryology and the principle of sexual diamorphism> in our 
ancient masters, which amounts almost to the superhuman, when- 
we read' these verse* in the light of modern- science, and witb 
the heljy of the kinder light of the Ayurveda. Bcamhd, the- 
prototype of all creating agents in this world, first divided his- 
body into- two equal parts, of which the one was endued with the-- 
male and the other wfth the female sexuaT virtues4 1 ben by- 
uniting these two parts or principles he progenerated Viraj. Thus; 
we find the 'three- modes of reproduetion' i.e., reproduction (by- 
fission or divi«ion\ sexual reproduction- as in- hermaphrodistic 
ereaturesj and sexual reproduction' by the union of parents of 
distinct sexual characters plainly contemplated ia the lines- of the- 
couplet. It is indeed a far cry from the birth of Vairaj to the 
evolution of distinct sexual characters in man and woman. Pro- ■ 
fessors Geddes antf Thompson in their excellent work on the- 
'Evolution of sex " huve delineated for general readers the long, 
series of animal existence through whreh the distinct sexual cha- 
racters of our species have been- evolved out, and the many attempts- 
of Nature to- take a retrograde step towards- a Ibst type, but we can- 
not but contemplate the 6ct with the greatest complacence that 
k is Manui who- first promulgated the doctrine that the distinct! 
sexual characters have evolved out of a state of original' her- 
maphrodism, as now demonstrated by the savants of moderin 
science. 

The Vishmipurinam fills up the deficiency in the statement by 
explicitly saying that the left part was endued with the female 
sexual characteristics and the right half with the male ones, antf 
these two opposite po&riries ef life, the PitrikAs'akti and th«- 
M^trikds'akti, according to the Ayurveda, predominate in the righe 
iM left halves of the body of each man and \( omsa. 



Manu S'amHitn. * ej 

HaviiTg practised Tapxis^^ whom,' the Virat-Indi- 
Tidual himsdf created, him,, O ye, foremost of the 
twice-born ones, know to be Maivu, miy (bumble), self,, 
the (second) or immediate creator of all (things and 
beings). (33) 

I, having wished' to progenerate creaturea, pracliised 
the most austere Tapas, and at first created the ten 
great Rishis, the lords of creatures, (nimed as) Marichi, 
Atri, Angirasa, Pulasta, Pulaha, Kratu, Pracliaas„ 
Vas'istha, Bhrigu and N^rada* (34 — 35O 

These (Rishis) of indomitable prowess created, ire 
their turn, seven other Manus,t and divinities other 
than those whom^ BrahmS had created, togethet with 
their celestial abodes, and great sages of irresistible 
prowess. {i(>) 

[And] Yakshas, Rakshas, Pis'ichasv Gandharvas,. 
Apsarasas, Asuras, Ndgas, serpents, birds (such as 
Garuda) and the several classes, of Pitris: (37) 

* A'nanda Giri in his^ommentary on the- Brihad A'ranyaka 
Upanishad [Ch. 1. — Br&hmana (Udgitha) — S. Vlll.} explained the' 
term Angirasa as a compound of Anga meaning members, causes 
and effects, ini,Rasa meaning essence, substance; the whole mean- 
ing is therefore the substance on which the cause and efTects- 
depend. 

Marichih is light, Pulasta is dimensiveness, Pulaha is con- 
tractibility, Kratuh iis moral lawst Prachetas is gelf-conscious- 
ness, Fas'jsfAo is confotmability to Lsvr, Bhrigu is buojrancy or 
supportiveness (Gravitation >), Nirada is water giving or vitali- 
sing .principle. 

'1 he ten PrajSpati» ttoew are the. ten fuudamental principles of 
the material universe. 

t The term Manu here indicates the office of Manu; each 
Manu takes his birth in the cycle of time he is intended to- 
preside ov^i.—Kulluka, 



14 * Manu Samhitar. 

Lightnings, thunders, clouds, shafts of varied colour- 
ed light,* rainbows, falling meteors, meteoric claps- 
or reports,! luminous bodies with trailing banners of 
light.t and other luminous bodies.§ (38) 

Kinnaras, monkeys, fish, various species of birds, 
beasts, deer, njen, and beasts with * two rows of 
teeth. (39) 

Insects, worms, flees, lice, parasites, all kinds of 
gnats and stinging flies, and the different kinds of trees 
and climbing plants. (40) 

Thus these (Manusl, through the merit of th& 
Tapas they had practised, and in conformity with my 
ordination, created all the mobile and immobile things, 
each in the womb, best suited to it in consideration of 
the miss'on of its life.|| (41) 

Now I shall relate to you the work and the nature 
of origin of each of these creatures, as narrated [by the 
masters of old.] (42) 

Quadrupeds, deer, wild beasts, those provided with 
two rows of teeth, Rakshasas, Pi#achas and men, wha 
are viviparous (placental) in their origin, (43) 

All birds, serpents, alligators^ turtles, and fish and 

• The text has Rohita, Kulluka explains it as shafts of refract- 
ed light of prismatic colours. 

t Nirghata:—yih\da literally means the report of any dis- 
turbing physical phenomenon occurring in the earth or heaven 
such a^ that of a meteor or earthquake. — Kulluka. 

X Ketumscha : — Trailing light of any falling heavenly body 
such as a meteor, etc. 

§ Jyotimshi .— KuLLUK* explains it as Dhruvadin, the pole 
star, etc. 

l^Vathd- Karma Tapo Yogdt ■.—The nature of the work a 
creature is intended to perform in life.— Kulluka. 



Manii Samhitd. 15 

*th6lr like, whether amphibious or aquatic in their habits, 
*are oviparous. (44) 

Gnats, Mosquitos, licfi, flees, and such other insects, 
Which originate from heat (decomposed matter) are 
tailed Svedaja. (45) 

All vegetables, whidh Spf out from seeds or graftings, 
are called Udhhit\lit. bursting Out of the earth 1, while 
those (plants), which die aS their fruit (corns) are ripe 
and bear a krgS dumber of flowers and ears, are called 
Oshadhis (cereals). 146) 

Those trees, whieh bear fruit without blossoming, 
iare Called Vnftaspatis, while those which bear both 
fruits and flowers are Called Vrik&has, (4;^) 

There are various kinds ot shrubs and bushy plaiitsj 
and various kinds oi weeds and gr'ass, dreepers and 
trailing plants, iSome of which grow from seeds and 
others frdni grafts. (48) 

Variously enShi^ouded by the quality of Tamas, 
(Igriorance, or Noii^GonsCiousne-s), the effects of their 
Own acts, they retain their cons<3iousnes9 inWard, sus' 
ceptible to pleasure and paiti. (4^ * 



* Even the most CUfSofy feadei' of this ^limbita can not but 
be impressed with thfe deep insight of its anthoi- tiito the nature 
of things, which stfongly faVoufs the hypothesis that the truths 
the Rishis preached were diear perceptive truths ahd Hot mei'd 
deductidns from entpifical knriwiedge. flilxley has demcfftstrated 
the fact that the "difference faetweeil the Vegetable afld artlmal life 
is one of quantity, and tiot of quality " (THrek E!ssaVs) and Prd- 
fessor J. C. Bose (Response in the Living arid Nori-LiVingi his 
startled the world by his epoch-nialcing discovery that the tissues 
of plants give almost the same response under pressufe or 
stimulus. 



^6 Afiinu Salhhi'tli. 

Thus (I have) related the origin of all forflis ot 
existence from Brahma downward, which occur in this 
miserable world of fconstant change, tossing with its 
waves of birth and de^th. (go* 

* These fifty couples from the beginiiihg Irepresent the 
Siccepted, orthodox view of Brihmanism regafdiilg the evolutioil 
of the un^velrse, and as the view of Manu on the subject is r&- 
.garded as the reconciliation between the two opposite schools 
t)f BrAhitianic thought, ■viz., the Sdnkhya and the Veianta, it will 
not be amiss if we try to Undersand here the real sighificatiohs 
of the terms or Concepts occurring in the text, divested of their 
metaphors ahd allegories 

AVai^dA Giri in his Commentiry on the (Brihad A'rauyaka 
VpnmshaA, Brahtnana, III. 3. IX.) says that, creation pre>supposes 
non-creatioh and hence the manifest Creator etttaits the Necessity 
of admitting (he existence of a non-prodUced creator, M the " five 
produced fires " necessarily indicate a don-produced one from 
which they have originated. "This itiinianifest spirit, from which 
tiiranyagarbha or I'svara (supreme ruleri, the first produced, or 
manifest seed of the universe) ofigiAated, is Called Brahma from 
the all-pervading Nature of its Self This Brahma, Or unmanifest, 
absolute spirituality is the receptacle of Prakriti Or itniversal 
Nisciinct. Pfakriti is inherent in Brahma, the absolute Conscious- 
ness, as " my sleep " is inherent in " my consciousness." They are 
not two separate entities, but united co-relatives, perfect Science 
and absolute IVescience. When that Brahma roUses up from sleep 
. state of quiescience after the involution of the Universal Nature, 
that Nescience, or that unconsciousness of sleep of the non-manifest 
Spirit is naturally transformed into the principle of Apprehension 
{Mahat TatUiam). Now the human mind is so constructed that it 
cinnot think of any apprehension without referring it to a Self or 
Ego, "I feel," "I think." "I perceive." As there must be the 
factor of " 1" or mineness in all acts of perception or cognition, the 
principle of Mahat was transformed into Ahankdra the principle of 
mine-ness. With the sense of Egoism arises the necessity of per- 
ception, and so from Ahankdra originit'ed the five subtile Tan- 
mtras, the atoms of perception, if we may be warranted to use 



Manu Samhita. i/ 

S^ch a term. With perception there arose the necessity of int^t- 
lection, and the next category we find inthe list i&ths Manah 
or mind, from which the Indriyas or the senses originated. As 
thinking iniplies adtioh, artd action means the contact with the 
flon-self (the external wOrld), the five Tan-m&tras^ in their turn, 
were transformed into the gross elements of ether, air, light, 
water and earth, to supply the /«rfwy<« with their respective 
Objects. Hitherto we do not find any creator or creation, these 
categories of Mahat, Ahankafa, Paifcha-tanmairas, the Mind, 
the senses and the elements being thd modifications of Prakriti, 
Or the universal Nescience. 

Then what ai'e these ? A'nanda Ciri in his commentary on ths 
Bnhad Aranyaka Upanishad (Bydhmana, III.) says that "what- 
ever is in the effect must also be in the cause." Now, accord- 
ing to the Vedcmta, the individual- soul or self is encased iria subtile 
body cottsisting"of' four ;sheafhs or Kashas viz., the Vij'nanamaya 
Kasha (Intellectual- Sheath), the Manomnya Kosha (the Mental 
Sheath); th« Prdnamaya Kosha (the Sheath of Vital airs> and the 
Annaniaya Kosha (the Sheath of nutriment). The first is composed 
Of intellect and the five intellectual senses. The second is formed 
by the mind ^and the five organs of action or operation, the third 
consists of the five vital airs governing the processes of inspiration, 
Respiration, Circulation, etc. The fourth is formed by the gross 
matter. In the samemanner the principles of Mahat (apprehen- 
Sion\ Ahanh&ya (minehesS), the Tan-mairas and the mind, etc., 
formed the body of Brahma on the eve of the evolution of the 
Universe. The Sheaths or the subtile organism of the individual 
self is inseparable from it as long as it has to undergo transmi- 
grations ; the subtile organism (S'ariram) of the universal self is 
insepirable from it as loilg it has to undergo transformations 
in the form of Hiranyagarbha (the first embodied Self) etc., the 
Ahankara in either case being transformed into three distinct 
binds such as, the Vaikanka (phenomenal, the creator of mind), 
the Taijasa (thermic, the creator of the senses) and the S/iMiarfj 
(the creator of gross matter). 

In the next stage of Evolution we find that /l/Ja (W water), 
whose property is mass-making, has been created, and oh it the 

N. B. For "under pressure or stimulus." (p. ig, I. 31.) read uffder 
"pressure or stimulus as the tissues of animals." 

3 



1 8 Manu Samhita. 

seed or egg of Brahma, resplendent with the aggregative effut-* 
gence of a thousand suns, is lying afloat. We need hardly say 
that this egg, the conglomeration of Paraminus (atoms 1 of the 
Vaii'eshika philosophy, is the globe of the first cosmic matter' 
from which the worlds and systems of the universe have subse- 
quently evolved out, and we need not wonder at the statement 
that the material atoms have come into being out of the im- 
material components of the body of Brahma, if we consider the 
modern Scientific d^nition of atoms, "as projections of unit? 
of consciousness into space." (Maxwell^ 

These twenty four categories then were the body of Brahma, ' 
or in 'which Brahma (the universal substance) was successively 
transformed immediately before this material universe was called 
into existence, as Jayiditya has expressed it in his work. We 
need hardly say that, the Sdnkhya philosophy starts with this 
unmodified Prakriti as the prime cause of this universe; and the 
Vais'eshika, with this resplendent egg of Hiranyagarljjia, the 
conglomeration of atoms {Paramanupunja) &% the first condition 
of creation, though with the difference of meanirigs of these 
two terms. The Mula Prakriti of the Sankhyas and the 
primeval gloom of Manu, which enveloped the supreme Self before 
the creation, are both n«gative entities. But the Mula Prakriti, 
the state of quiescience of the three qualities of Sattwa, Rajas 
and Tamas (knowledge, desire and Ignorance) is an original entity, 
self-existing and eternal. The Sdnkhya dismisses all further 
enquiries into the finil cause by saying, it is impossible to ask the 
origin of that which is original (Mule Mulhbhaoat Amulam 
Mulam) and supplies that starting place to the human mind with- 
out which it can- not exercise its reasoning about cause and effect'. 
The Vais'eshikas, on the other hand, say that, the atoms are- 
eternal, and their cambinations and conglomerations as the only 
mediate condition of the evolution of the universe, are effected 
through the agency of an unseen cause (Adrishta), which is un- 
known and unknowable, and which, like the final cause of all 
agnostic philosophies, partakes of the nature of " fate " or " Neces- 
sity." Beyond this stage there is no material difiFerence of opinion 
among the exponents of the different schools of Brahmanic philo- 
sophy as regards the process and order of the evolution of the 
un^erse. 



Manu Samhili. 19 

Now to return to the Sarahit4 : From out of the body of 
Brahma, the unconditioned Self, was produced Apa (lit, water: and 
in that he cast his seeds which were formed into an egg, bright as 
a thousand suns Then by dint of contemplation, Bramha trans- 
formed himself into /fiVaijyara/'ifta, the first embodied soul, and 
in that egg Hiranyagarbha or Brahml was born. (See note | p. 5.) 

Now let us examine what did the Rishi mean by Ndra 'water) ; 
we learn from the SamhitS. that it is a kind of principle, which 
emanated from the body of Nara, the universal substance whose 
function is fluidity and mass-making (Samhati), and in that prin- 
ciple, the first material force {SakH-rupma fCuUuka) he cist his 
seed. His seed developed itself into an egg resplendent as a thou- 
sand suns, the primal globe of burning cosmic matter. Brahmi 
(Prajapati of the upanishads) by means of his objective mental 
qualities entered that egg and was born in it as Brahmi or 
Hiranyagafhha. The passage of the text elucidates that life was 
inherent in the primal cosmic matter, or as Anandaglri in his 
commentary of the Brihad Aranyaka Upaniihad {Brahmana III, 
S, 2J) expresses it, "this is likeness (identity) of life. This 
identity is not merely found in the iifferent bodies in proportion 
to their size, because life has no shape and is everywhere.'' 

Why this seed was called an egg ? Because, like* the impreg- 
nated ovum, it was divided simultaneously with the commence- 
ment of its evolutien, and was subjected to the influences of two 
polarities of life, motion or vibration, the Upusaypani and the 
Apasarpani of the Vais'eshika philosophy, the centrifugal and 
centripetal forces in the material plane. The universal egg wis 
divided and broken in parts with which the first embodied soul 
created the stars and the solar systems, etc. The text here is only 
a poetic representation of the doctrine of the Vaiseshika, the atomic 
theory of ancient India, in which connection it may be said that 
Kanada, the founder of the Vais'eshika, by pouring a few drops of 
oil in a basin of water and by stirring it with a stick, first demons- 
trated the origin of the worlds out of a prfmil globe of cosmic 
matter. Perhaps the term " Apa " (water) in tij^ text, the vehicle 
of the primordial atoms, is so named after the water of Kanada's 
experiment-basin. 

The notion of Viraj, dividing his own substance into male and 
female, occurs in more than one Purana. But the Manu Samhita 



20 Manu Samhita. 

Having thus created me and all (the universe), He 
of imponderable prowess vanished in Himself, by 
oppressing (destroying) the time (of evolutions with the 
time of Dissolution. 51) 

When that effulgent Being awakes, the universe is 
animated ; when He of reposeful mind sleeps, the uni- 
verse is folded up (vanishes). (52) 

When he reposes in himself, the self-conscious, 
embodied selves, with their bodies, the f uits of their 
acts, cease their respective activities, and the mind,* 
divested of its functions, reposes languid. (53) 

When the all (whole universe) is simultaneously 
merged in it, then this universal spirit, divested of all its 
works, happily sleeps the dreamless sleep .t (54)^ 

The individualised Self, with its senses, long continues 
in a state of unconsciousness, ceases to perform any 
act, then it passes over from its former body in its 
true appearance.J (551 

makes Viraj to be the issue of such a separation of persons and 
Manu himself to be his offspring. The Brihad Aranyaka Upmi- 
shad relates the allegory of an incestuous marriage and intercourse 
of the first Manu with his daughter S'atarupa (B. A. Upanishad. 
Brahmana IV, S. 4. 

* Ihe text has Manas which means the mind with all its 
functions and the senses and their faculties. — Kulluka. 

t Nrivitak :— Devoid of the states of wakening or sleep It 
may be questioned that how can there be any such thing as 
dreamless sleep in the supreme Self, whose nature is perfect 
knowledge and felicity. The answer is that this is merely an 
analogy based upon the functions of animal life (anthropomorphism, 
jfiva dkarma.) — Kulluka. 

% Acts (Karma) — acts ^of respiration and such Hie bodily 
functions. The astral body of the individual leaves and goes out 
of its former gross body and the life (.vitality) and the senses 
(oljow and overtake it in its ne.Kt rebirth, as stated in the 
Brihad A'ran^aka : 



Manu Samhita. 21 

* 

When being extremely attenuated (subtile) in form, 
the individual Self (jiva), in combination with the 
(eight categories),* enters into the seed of a mobile 
or immobile being, then it is said to assume a gross. 
form. (56) 

And thus he (Brahma), though himself deathless, 
by his wakening and sleep, is constantly vitalising and 
killing all the mobile and immobile (creatures). (57) 

Having framed this, (code) at the beginning of crea- 
tion, he (Brahmd) taught it to me jn conformity with 
the rites laid down in the S'Astras ; and I, in my turn, 
communicated it to Marichi and other Munis.t (58) 

This Sage Bhrigu will narrate to you the code, 
inas.nach as he has learnt it in entirety from my 
own self. (59) 

" Him going out Ueaping overj follows life, and the flying life 
do the senses follow." — Kulluka. 

* Samsrisfita — In combination with the eight categories of 
the five subtile eIements,T:he senses, the mind, the intellect, desire, 
Vayus, aats and the Nescience. The astral body (Linga S'arifay , 
goes out in company of these. — Kulluka. 

■\ MeoHatithi asks how is it that, the authorship of this code, 
which was actuatly framed by Brahml himself, came to be attri- 
buted to Manu ? He answers the question by e.xplaining the term 
"S'&stram as "injunctions and prohibitions as disclosed by the true 
meaning of the code." Hence these injunctions and prohibitions 
were ordained 'by BrahmS., and Manu subsequently wrote a Code 
of Laws based on those ordinations, etc., in verse. Kulluka 
subscribes to the same opinion and says that hence it is no con- 
tradiction to say that, "Brahmi originally composed a Samhitd 
containing a hundred thousand couplets and taught it to Manu, 
Y^ho, in his turn, summarised the work and wrote it out again 
in his own language" Hence it is not at all contradictory to the 
couplet of Ndrada, 

He recollected this code composed of a hundred thoi||and 
verses. — Narada. 



22 Manu Samhita. 

Having been thus commanded by him (Manu), the 
great sage Bhrigu complacently told them all, hear, 
O ye Rishis. ,60) 

In the line of this Manu, the son of the self-begotten 
one (Brahmd), six other Manus* were born j those mag- 
nanimous Manus) of great prowess procreated their 
respective progeniqg.t (61) 

Svarochisha, Auttami, Timasa, Raivata, Chikshusa 
of great energy, and the son of Vivasvin (Vaivasvat) 
[these are the six Manus.J (62) 

These seven Manus of great prowess, beginning with 
Svayambhuva, in their respective cycles, created all 
this universe (lit."\ mobile and immobile things.) (63) 

Eighteen Nimeshas^ (twinkles of the eyet make 
one Kdshthd, thirty Kastkds make one Ki^ld, thirty 
Kalis make one Muhurta (forty-eight minutes), and 
thirty Muhurtas make one day and night. 64) 

The sun divided the day and night of the Devas and 
men. The night is for the sleep of creatures, and the 
day is for the performance of works. (65) 

One month of men makes one day and night of 
the Pitris, each fortnight of men being equal to a day 
or a night of theirs. The dark fortnight of men is the 
working time (day) of the Pitris, the light fortnight is 
the time for their sleep (night of the manes). (66) 

One full year of men makes one day and night of 
the Devas. The Northern solstice is their day, the 
Southern solstice is their night. (67) 

• Svah Svah Prajah — I'heir own progenies in their respective 
times, i.e., cycles of time over which they respectively ruled. 

Kulluka. 

t "^e time taken by spontaneously opening and closing the 
eye-lid is called Nimesha. — Kulluka, ^^ 



Manu Samhita. 2| 

The duration of one day and night of Brahtn^, as 
Well as that of each cycle of tinae such as the Satyam, 
6tc., now hear me briilly narrate in succession. 168) 

The Krita Yuaa consists of four thousand years 
(of the Devas) j four hundred such years form the 
Sandhyd* (dawn) of that cycle, and four hundred such 
years form its Sandhydms'a\ (eve). (691 

Of the remaining yugas, the duration of each suc- 
ceeding yuga and its Sandhyd and Sandhydms'a, are 
fespectively less than those of its predecessor by one 
thousand and one hundred years.f (70) 

Twelve thousands of such four Yugas, as computed 
before in their order of enumeration, count as one 
yuga of the Devas. {ji^ 

A thousand yugas of the Devas count as one day 
of Brahma and his night is of a similar duration. (72) 

[The wise], who know such a thousand yugas to be 
a day of Brahma and another such a thousand yugas 
to be his night, are called the knowers of true day and 
night. (73) 

* Sandhyoi here means the forepart of a cycle of time; and 
Sandhyams'a its closing part. — Kulluka. 

f A period of as many hundred years is its Sandhy4 and a 
similar period is its Sandhy&ms'a and the period that intervenes 
between the Sandhya and Sandhy&iis'a is called theyuga. 

Vishnupuranam. 

% The text has Ekapdyena Vartanfe—the amplification of its 
meaning would be that the Treia Yuga consists of three thousand 
(divine I years, its Sandhya and Sandhyams'a being respectively 
composed of three hundred years The Dvapara Yuga consists 
of tTTo thousand (divine years and its 'Sandhya and Sandhyams'a 
being composed of two hundred year's each. The Ka}i Yuga 
is composed of one thousand (divine) years, its 'iandhya and 
Sandhyams'a respectively consisting of a hundred such years. --> 



24 Manu Samhlta 

At the expiry of his day and night, he isi'akes li^ 
from his sleep, and awake, creates the mind, which 
partakes of the nature of both the real and the pheno- 
menal.* (74) 

Impelled by (its) desire of creation, the mind (or 
Mahat creates (begins the work of creation), and the 
A'k^s'a (ether) is Created therefrom (in the order des- 
cribed before)t whose property is sound. (75) 

From the modification of the ether is born the 
pure, mighty air, the carrier of all kinds of smell, and 
whose property is touch. (76) 

From the modification of the air is born the illumi- 
nant, gloom-dispelling, effulgent light, whose property 
is sight, djfi . ^ 

From the modification of light (heat) was born the 
Water, whose property is taste, (and) from the water was 
born the Earth Whose ptoperty is smell. This was the 
Creation at the out-set.J (78 > 

• 1 he text has Srijatl Manah Which beirtg literally translated 
means created the mind. Kulluk* says, that by the'term Srijati 
(creates) is meant that' he engaged his mind in creating the three 
regions of Bhu, Bhuba and Sva, and quotes a Pauranic text in 
support of his statement. 

Manah Srisikshayh-yuktam Sargaya Nidadhe Punah. 

Again he engaged his mind, teeming with the desire of creation, 
in the act of creating. 

Manah here is identical with the principle of Mahat (appreheil- 
sion) into which the energy of the Supreme Brahma was trans- 
formed after the dissolution of the Universe ; what Mahat is to 
Brahma in the first cycle of unspecified creation, the Manah is 
to Brahma in respect of the subsequent specific creations. 

+ In the order of Egoism or Mineness (Ahank&ra), the five 
tanmhtras and so on. — Kulluka. 

i. Srishtiraditah. Creation of material elements.in the begin- 
ning of creation, i.e., after the dissolution of the Universe) and 



Sianu Sanihiia. 2% 

S6v6nty-one of such D'mnQ yugas, 6ach consisting 
%)f twelve thousand years as mentioned before, cons- 
titute the period of a Manvantara (the ruling time of 
a Manu). (79) 

Innumerable such Manvnntaras, innumerable crea- 
tions and dissolutions of the universe,* the Supremef 
Being makes out of sport, J (80) , 

Virtue was fbur-footedjf and Truth, in Special, was 
■entire in the Krita Yuga. [In *that agej men did not 
•earn an3rthing by viCiouS means. || (81) 

In the other Yugas, Virtue, on account of the foul- 
ness! of means by which money or knowledge was 
acquired in them, became successively diyeste4 of its 

• , 

with these elenieilts the various worlds or regions were Subse- 
quently created. — Kulluka. 

* Though only fourteeil Manvantaras llaV6 beeil enumerated 
in the Puranam, in fact there had been innumerable Manvantaras-, 
and innumefablB times the universe had beert created 4nd des- 
troyed. — Kulluka. 

t The text has Pa*amehsthi, lit., hie, Who is not qualified by 
aAy name, form, or attributes (Andvtitta-Lakshane tisthati iti 
Parameshthi) . — Kulluka . 

X This is aiiother iilstartce of the anthMpomorphic virtues 
being attributed to Brahma, which in fact have no room in his real 
hature, Lokavattu LilA Kaivalyam (Human-like is his sport, (crea- 
tion) and emancipation (dissolution of the universe), S'ariraka 
Sutram . 

§ Virtue is represented as a bull in the A'gamas, its foiir feet 
respectively coilsisting of Tapas (contemplation), knowledge, cele^ 
bratiort of sacrifice {Yajna), aitd gift-making {OkAiiA).— Kulluka. 

,11 Nddharmendgama — KuLLUKA explains AdharMena as "by 
meaiis hot sailctioned by the V^das.'* 

! A'gamat :— Vicious or dishortest means— KuLtUKA. Medha* 
TlTHl arid GoviNDARAj explain it with " Veddt," (from the Vedas, 
the whole meaning, according to them, being the virtue, which 13 
earned by living in conformity with the teachings of the Vedas. 

4 



26 Manu Samhita. 

one foot in each. On account of theft, untruthfulness 
atid dissimulation, the virtue, which is earned by pur-" 
suing an honest profession, successively became less ,by 
a quarter [in each Yuga^ (82) 

In the Krtta Yuga (golden age) men knew nd 
disease, and used to witness the realisation of all their 
desires* '! he duration of human life was four hun- 
dred years.t In each of the [three succeeding ages] 
such as the Tretd, etc., the life-duration of man respec- 
tively became less by a quarter. (83) 

The duration of human life, the fruits of acts done 
by the mortals,! and the energies (moral force) of 
embodied creatures§ Jare' proportionate (to the ethical 
forces) of each age. (84) 

Of one kind is the virtue in the Krita Yuga, 
different is it in the Tretd. Of one kind is it in the 
Dvapara and different is it in the Kali Yuga, succes- 
sively and proportionately decreasing according (to the 
spirit of) each age. (85) 

The practice of Tapas (divine contemplation and 
communion) was the greatest virtue in the age of Krtfa ; 
knowledge (of Self) was the highest virtue in the age 
of Treid (the age df three-quarter virtue) ; performance 

• Sarva-Siddhhrthdh : — Successful in all their undertakings. 
They knew no failure as vice, which wards off and opposes all 
success, was absent in that age.. — KuUuka. 

f S'athyu Vh Purusha (the duration of human life is a 
hundred years) is the S'ruti, which lays dowit, according to 
KuLLUKA, the extent of human longevity in the present Kaliyu^ ; 
or S'aiam (a hundred) is here indefinitely used for a large number. 
Ilence the text is not at all contradictory to the S'ruti. 

X A's'ishas'chaib Karmanam — FrUits of Vedic rites performed 
for the fruition oi any desire. — Kulluka. 

■- § frabh&vas'cha S'areerin&m—Ca-picity of Brahmanas to make 
their imprecations or benedictions effective. — KuUuka. 



Manu Samhita. 27 

of religious sacrifices was the highest virtue in the 
Dvapara (age of two-quarter virtue), and gift-making 
or charity is the highest virtue ip the Kali-Yuga. (86) 

For the preservation* of all this creation, He of 
great effulgence, laid down separate duties for those 
originated from his mouth (Brihmanas), from His arms 
(Kshatriyas), from His thighs (Vais'yas), and from His 
legs (S'udras). (87)' 

Study (of the Vedas\ teaching, performance of sacri- 
fices, officiating as priests at other men's sacrifices, gift- 
making, and acceptance of gifts are the duties of 
Brdhmanas. (88) 

Protection of the people, gift-making, performance 
of sacrifices, study of the Vedas^ and abstention from 
luxuryt are, in general, the duties of Kshatriyas. (89) 

Rearing of cattle (sheep, etc.,) gift-making, perform- 
ance of sacrifices, study (of the Vedas), merchandise, 
money-lending and agriculture are the duties of 
Vaisyas. (90) 

Only one work did the lord ordain for' S'udras, 
viz., to ungrudgingly serve the three above-said social 
orders. (91) 

Sacred is the whole person of a man, more sacred 
is the part of his body, which lies above his navel, and 

* Gupiyartham — Each contributing to the well-being of all,' 
and all jointly contributing to the welfare of each in the manner 
of libations of clarified butter cast in the fire by the celebrant of 
a sacrifice (Agnau Prds'tahutih). The vapours of clarified 
butter cast in the sacrificial fire ascend the sun god. The sun 
god, thus propitiated, sends down the rain. The rain greatly 
favours the growth of food-crops, and food gives sustenance to 
the living creatures.— /ira//»fta. 

-j- yishayeshvapraiaktis'cha :— Non-attachment to rausic,'women, 
dancing and articles of \\x)i\xry.-'Kulluka, 



2i Manu Samhita. 

most sacred is his face (head) ; this is what the self- 
orjgined (Brahmi) has said. (92) 

From the fact of bis having originated from the 
mouth, for the reason of his being .the eldest bom lof 
Brahma), for the reason of his being the repository 
of the Vedas^ Brdhmana is the ruler of all the creation, 
in asmuch as he lays down the duties [of all the soda! 
orders.] (93) . 

Him, the self-origined one, having practised Tapas, , 
created from out of his mouth, for the preservation of 
creation, and in order that the Pitris (manes) and the 
Devas (celestials) might obtain their (portions of the 
sacrificial) oblation. 194) 

Through the mouth of this (Brahmana), the celes- 
tials eat their Havyas (oblations), and the manes, their 
Kavyas (oblations.)* (95) 

Of the created things the animate creatures are the 
highest ; of the animate creatures the intelligent ones 
are the highest, of the intelligent creatures men are 
the highest, and among men the Brdbmanas are the 
highest. (96) 

Among Brahmanas the erudite ones are the highest, 
among the erudite Br&hmanas those, who think it 
their duty to perform the S'astric rites,t are the highest, 
among the latter those, who perform such rites, are 
the highest, and among the performers of rites the 
knowers of Brahma are the highest. (97) 

• Havya : oblations offered unto the deities are called Havyas, 
■while those offered unto the manes are called Kavyas. — Kulluka. 

t Krita-Buddhayah— those, who have the notion {Buddhi) of 
duty «'. c, those who are aware of the imperatively obligatory 
•nature of the performance of Vedic rites. — Kulluka^ 



Manu Samhili, 25, 

The Brihmana has originated as the eternal embodi- 
ment of virtue. His origin is for the furtherahce of 
virtue ; he becomes of the essence of Brahma. (98) 

Bom as a Brdhmana, he wields the supremacy of 
the world, the ruler of all creatures, the custodian of the 
treasure of virtue.* (99) 

Whatever property (wealth) is in this world belongs 
to the Brdhmana. For the fact. of his» being the eldest 
born (of the creator),t all wealth legitimately belongs, 
to the Brahmana. (100) 

Whatever does a Brdhmana eat, whatever does a 
Brahmana wear, whatever does a Brahmana receive^, 
is his own property, even if it belongs to another, in. 
asmuch as it is through the kindness of Brdhmanas do 
the othfer ^castes) enjoy, (ion 

For the classification of the works (duties) of the 
Brahmana and other castes of society in the order of 
their enumeration, the wise Manu, the grandson of 
the self-origined on e,t framed this code. (102) 

Ihis I code I should be diligently read and taught 
in its entirety to his pupils by an erudite Brihmana, and 
not by (a member of) any other (caste .§ (103) ' 

* Dharma-Koshasya Guptaye — The Brihmana is virtually the 
ruler of all the other social orders, inasmuch as it is he wha 
formulates the duties of men and teaches them of God and 
religion. — KuUuHa. 

t S'yaisthenabhijanena.: for the reason of his being prior to 
the Kshatriya, Vais'ya, and S'udra in respect of time, 

X Svayambhuba, or the Manu of the first Manvantar, the 
grandson of the self-origined Brahm^. 

§ KuixuKA interprets the^' passage to mean that, all the twice- 
born orders are competent to read this Samhita, and says that it 
authorises only a Brahmana to- teach it to his pupils, condemnigg 
the interpretation of Medhatithi who holds the concluding part 



30 Manu Samhita. 

A Brahmana, who, while observing the vow of self- 
control, continence, etc., reads this code, is not tainted 
by the daily acts of iniquity done by his mind, speech 
and body. (104) 

He sanctifies the row [panktu* and the seven 
generations of his ancestors and descendants. He is 
fit to be honoured even with the gift of the whole 
earth. (1051 

This code \i.e., the reading of this code) is the great- 
est of all auspicious rites.t It improves the intellect (of 
its reader), imparts fame and longevity, and is superla- 
tively auspicious. (106) 

In this (code) are (described) virtues (duties) in 
their entirety, merits and demerits of acts, .and the 
eternal rules of conduct, which govern the four social 
orders. (107) 

Conduct is the highest viitue, as inculcated by the 
Smriti and the S'ruti{Vedas't. Hence, a Brahmana, 
with his senses under control, shall always conform to 
rules of conduct. (108) 

of the couplet to be an intentional repitition, specically disqualify- 
ing the other three castes (Kshatriya, Vais'ya and Sudra) to read 
th&5am^tVa, or to use his own language it is a mere Anuvada {i.e. 
an explanatory repetition or reference to what is already mention- 
ed, and which illustrates or explains a Vidhi or direction previously 
laid down, but does not itself lay down any direStion.) 

* /'«» Ait' .-—means the row of |3rjihmanas with whom he may 
chance to sit down to a S'raddha repast. 

t The text has Svastyayanam which literally means a rite or 
an undertafeJBg in which lies( Yayanam) the continued enjoyment 
or non-destruction of a wished for object. Mutterings of Mantras 
Nomas (burnt [offerings), etc., are usually ' included within the 
Svastyayanam (benedictory rites) in as much as they are calculated 
to oppose the advent of evil and to ensure the continuance of a 
blessing already received and enjoyed.— KtiUuka. 



Manu Samhita, 3* 

Devoid of conduct,* a Brihmana does not obtain 
the merit of reading the Vedas. Possessed of (good) 
Condufct, he reaps the entire fruit (of such study). (109) 

Having thus observed the origin of virtue from 
(good) conduct, the sages accepted conduct as the basis 
of all austerities.! (no) 

The origin of the universe {Jagat),% the sacramental 
tAjs,% {^SamskArasW the performance of vows (Vratas) 
and the rules of ceremonial ablutions. || (in) 

Rules as to visiting one's wife, conditions and forms 
of marriage, the mode of performing the great sacrifices 
{Maha-yajnasj *^ and the eternal S'raddha. (112) 

* The text has Achat Mvichyutah, which literally means " fallen 
frdm conduct." 

f The text has Tapasa which here includes not only conteui- 
pldtion in the manner of Yoga but austere penances, and ex- 
piatory rites such as, the Chandrhyanain, etc. — Kulluka. 

X The term Jagai (universe) emphatically demonstrates the 
fact that the Rishis, who first used the term, were fully cognisant 
of the perpetually moving, changing character of every thing 
■ included within it. 'J he motion of our earth, which was known 
to the Acharyas, at )east two or three centuries before the 
Christian era, is but a necessary corrolary deduced from the denota- 
tion of the term "Jagat. 

§ Such as the rites of tonsure, post-natal purification, etc. 
-^Kulluka. 

II Such as the vow of celibacy (Brahmackarj/ayam etc.) 
— 'Kulluka. 

Snanasya Paramam Viiik-im-^The mode of performing the 
ceremony of ablution by a student after returning from his pre- 
ceptor's house.^— Kulluka. 

<|[ Mahd- Yajnas, the five daily sacrifices of the householder, 
such as the Vais'vadeva, etc. — Kulluka. 



3 2 Mann Samhita. 

Descriptions of professions, the vows of Sndiak&s^ 
*articles which ought or ought not to be eaten, purifi^ 
cation of articles* (113) 

Means by which females can earn Virtue, penitential 
austerities, emancipation of the Self, asceticism, duties 
of kin^s, and laws relating to money-debts. (114) 

The mode o^ examining witnesses, duties of wives 
and husbands, divisions of shares, laws of gambling, 
and the punishment of thieves, etc. (115) 

The specific duties (works) of Vais'yas ^and S'udras, 
as well as those of the members of mixed castes, duties 
in times of distress, and the mode of performing ex- 
piatory penances. (116) 

Re-births according to the merits of three kinds of 
works,t means of self-emancipation, and the ascertain* 
ment of goodness and badness of acts. (117) 

The duties of citizenship, duties peculiar to one's 
caste, and the eternal family-duties, and the duties of 
Pdshandas—\h&%Q are the subjects lord Manu described 
in this code.t ((118) 

The Code, as Manu, interrogated by me, first nar^ 
rated, that you shall hear firom me to-day. (119) 

* Subjects included within asterisks are treated in the fourth 
chapter. 

f Trividham Karma- Sambhavam .—According to the merit 
of any of the three kinds of acts such as good, middling and bad. 
—Ku}luka. 

X Pdshandas — Men, who follow scriptures other than the Vedat, ] 
and do forbidden aCts. — Kulluha. 



CHAPTER n. 

The virtue, which pious men, well read (in the Vedas^ 
and free from attachment and aversion,t have followed 
from time immemorial, (for the reason of its being 
based on the Vedas^ the eternal repository of truth), 
and as to the truth or falsity of which. the dictates of 
the heart are the concluding proof :$ now hear me 
describe that virtue, (i) 

What is virtue ? Kan&da, the founder of the Vais'eshika 
system of philosophy, answers, that, Which gives prosperity 
(cessation of wants) in this life and the highest success (Self-emanci 
pation) hereafter, is called virtue (Yatobhyudayo Nis'reyasa Siddhi. 
Sa dharr^a iti.) 

Ha'rita says :— Now I shall discourse on Virtue. That which 
is sanctioned by the S'rutis (Scriptures, both Vaidic and Tintrik) 
is virtue (S'ruti Pramdnaha Dharma.) 

Jaimini says :— The object indicated (as good) by a Scriptural 
Commandment is Virtue {ChodanA-lakshanortho Dharma, iti). 

1 he Bhavishya Puranam observes, "virtute is synonymous with 
good (S'reya), and "good" denotes prosperity. There are five 
kinds of the eternal virtue which has its basis in the Vedas. 

* The text has Vidvatbhih, Kulluka explains it by Veda- 
vidbhi, men well-versed in the Vedas. 

f The text has Ardgibhih,— which means that it should not 
be pursued out of any desire or greed. Virtue is the offspring 
of an unsullied soul and should be pursued with [an unstained 
heart, and for its own sake only. 

$ 'I'he text has Hridayendbhyunujnato : — KullOKA explains 
it by "which the mind, as charmed by its" sweetness, freely 
approves." 

GoviNDARAj explains it as " that about which the mind does 
not entertain any doubt." 

That, by pursuing which the mind, free from all doubt and 
scepticism, naturally enjoys a state of self-complacency, is calle,d 
Dharma or Virtue. 
5 



34 Manu Samhita. 

Not commendable is the spirit of desire in maily 
nor the total absence of such a spirit (in him^ is 
detected in this world. The study of the Vedas and 
the performance of the Vaidic rites and sacrifices fall 
within the boundary of acts with a desire.* {2) 

Desire is based on volition or de(termination,t 
and the religious Sacrifices are based on iblemn deter- 
minations. All vows, Niyamas (self-^;ontrol), and 
religious dutiesj are said to be bom of desire or 

determination. (31 

No action is found, in this world, of a man without 

Mkdha'tithi explains " Hridayam" (heart 1 by " notions derived 
from perusing the Vedas, the whole meaning, accordisg to him, 
being that to which the mind, pregnant with notions originated 
from the study of the Vedas, gives its unstinted sanction. 

The true meaning of the couplet, we venture to suggest, is 
that " Virtue which does not spring up from the passions of the 
mind, which, like the religion founded by a'false, designing prophet, 
does not live only an ephemeral existence, which, for the reason 
of its being based on the teachings of the eternal Vedas, pious 
men have been pursuing from time immemorial, which the pious 
ritualists, with minds, purified by the teachings of the Vedas, and 
equipped with testimonies and evidences of its truth, have been 
adoring ever since the birth of creation, andjabout the truth of 
which the dictates of the heart furnish the conclusive proof, now 
hear me discourse on that virtue." 

* Acts performed for the fruition of a desire cannot be com- 
mended, in asmuch as it is these acts which bind the Self of a 
man to the necessary chain of re-births, while daily (Nitya) and 
accidental (Naimitti^a) religious rites lead to salvation by illu- 
mining self-knowledge. — Kulluka. 

f '1 he text has SViwia/^a which means volition or desire, as 
well as a solem vow to perform a religious ceremony. 

{ Such as the duties of Snalakas, etc , described in the fourth 
Chapter of this Samhita.— Kulluka. 



Manu Samhita. 35 

de§ire. Whatever act a person does is but the effprt 
of his desire. (4) 

A man, by properly' doing the acts enjoined to be 
performed in the Ved<is,* attains to the state of 
Brahma ;t even in this world he may obtain all his 
wished-for objects.J (5) 

The entire Vedas,^ the la\v codes framed by men, 
well versed in the Vedas, from their recollections,!! 
as well as the rules of life observed by them ,11 the 

* The desire or greed for the fruit of a virtuous act is here 
condemned, but not the desire or wish to perform such an act 
without an eye to its merit. 

t The text has Amaralokaiam (/li. state of the immortals) — 
KULLUKA 'explains it by Brahma- bhduam, the state of Brahma. 

X As in the Chkllndo arya," when he wishes to attain to the 
region of the manes, the manes appear unto him simultaneously 
with his desire (Sa Yadd Piiriloka-kdmo Bhavati, Samkalpd- 
devdsya Pitarah Samuttishihanti.) 

§ The Rik, Soma, Yajus, and Atharva Vedas, as containing 
all precepts fP'trfA J j^, explanatory remarks recommending a pre- 
cept by stating the merit arising from its proper observance 
{Arthavada) and Maniras. — Kulluka. 

II Smriti S'ile Cha [Tadvidam. The recollections of Sages 
well-versed in the Vedas, as recorded in the Law Codes bearing 
their names, and which are collectively called the Smriti (things 
remembered). 

^ 5'«7awi— Observance of rules of life such as Brahmanism, etc. 
•—Kulluka. 

Ha'rita observes that, there are thirteen kinds of S'ilam. 
such as, devotion to the gods and manes, amiability, non-aggres- 
siveness, non-maliciousness, mildness, smoothness (of temper), 
friendliness, sweet ■ speaking, gratitude, protectiveness, kindness, 
and contentment. 

GoviNDVRAj explains S'ilam by absence of attachment and 
aversion, etc. 



36 Manu Samhita 

costumes* etc., of the pious, and the feeling of sdf^ 
complacencyt are the proofs of virtue. (6) 

The duties, which Manu has described as obligatory 
on any particular person, have been so ordained in 
the Vedas, for he (Manu) is omnisciatit.t (7) 

Having observed all the S'asttas,§ allied Vrith the 
Vedas with the eye of knowledge, the erudite one 
shall perform* the duties (peculiar to his order) in 
conformity with the proofs of the S'ruti. (8) 

By practising pieties inculcated in the S'ruti and 
the Smriti, a person acquires fame in this life and 
excellent happiness in the niext. {9) 

The Veda is called the S'ruti, and the Dharma 
S'Sstra is called the Smriti. Their teachings should 
not he put to the test of logic, || for virtue has emanated 
from these two. (10) 

The Br&hmana, who by dint of logic, tries to bring, 
these S'istras into disrepute, shall be excommunicated 

* A'ckara, costumes, etc., of the ascetics such as the blankets^, 
barks of. trees, etc. 

f The text has Atmanastushti satisfaction of the mind in cases 
of alternatives (I^t^a2^0). As for instance, there is a regulation 
that burnt offerings may be made either at sunrise or at sunset. 
The satisfaction of the mind which the offerer derives by making 
such offerings either at morning or evening is the satis&ctory 
evidence that the offering has been rightly made. GARGAsays 
that, in such cases of alternatives Self-satisfaction is the test 
(Vaikalpike Atmatushtis'cha.) 

% Savvajnanamayo hi sah, GovindaraI parses it as an adjec- 
tive to Veda, explaining it by " inasmuch as the Veda is the reposi- 
tory of all knowledge." 

§ Such as the Grammar, MimAiisa, etc. — Kulluka. 
. II Their imports should not be misconstrued by sophistry. 
(Kutarka.)— /irM//«A«. 



Ihafin Jamktta.. ^j; 

from the society, as a heretical* caluiimialor of the 
yedas. (II) 

The /edas, the Smriti, good conduct, and self- 
complacency of one's own, the wise call these four aa 
the positive proofs of virtue, (ra; 

The sense of virtue germinates in those, who are. 
non-attached to desire and wealth. To all ^enquirers of 
virtue the S'ruti is the highest (conclusive) proof. U3) 

In a case of two conflicting S'rutis, both of which 
are equally authoritative, the wise have called both of 
them as virtues of equal authority .t (14) 

[As for example, there are two] Vaidic S'rutis that, 
Homas should be performed before sunrise, and Homas 
should be performed after sunrise. These two times 
are different, but Homas may be performed at either of 
them [according to the privilege of the offerer and 
the nature of the deity to whom the libations are 
offered]. (15) 

He, whose all life, from the rite of Nisheka to that 
9f funeral, is governed by the regulations of the S'istras, 
is alone competent to read,- or to hear this S'istra, and 
no other. (16) 

The tract of country, which lies between the 
Sarasbati, and the Driihadvati, the two celestial rivers, 
that god-built country is called Brahmavartam. (17) 

The conduct of life, as it obtains from gefleration 
to generation in that country among the twice-born 

* Ndstika is the term which occurs in the text ; literally it 
means an athiest, although it is often used in the lense of sceptic, 
agnostic, etc. 

t In the conflict of two Srutis of equal authority either of 
them may be followed as an alternative,— Ga»^a/»o. 



38 Mann Samfiifa. 

and the mixed castes, is called Sad&char (good con- 
duct) (1 8) 

Kurukshetra, Matsya, Pinchila and Surasenaka are 
called the land of the Brahmarshis, they are inferior to 
Brahmavartam (in respect of sanctity).* (19) 

From a Brihmana, bom in this couiitry, every one 
in this world should learn his own proper duties. (20) 

The tract bf land, which extends between the 
Vindhya and the Himalaya, and lies to the east of 
Vinas'anat and west of Pray4ga,t is called Madhya- 
Des'a (central country). (21) 

The tract of land, lying between the eastern and 
the western seas and included between the Vindhya 
and the Himalaya, is called A'ryavarta (the country of 
the A'ryans) by the wise, (zi) 

The country, in which black antelopes are found to 
roam about in nature, should be understood as a 
sacrificial country, the rest is the country of the 
Mlechchhas,\ (23) 

These countries, the twice-born ones shall be care- 
ful to make their home ; a S'udra, in quest of a living, 
may adopt any country as his own. (24) 

1 * Kurukshetra — an extensive tract of land near Delhi ex- 
tending from the south of the Sarasvati to the north of the 
Drishadvati. 

Matsya is the name of a country lying to the west of modern 
Dholpur. Its capital Virat is probably same as Bairat, forty miles 
north of Jeypur. 

Panchala, the modern Gangetic Doab. 

Surasenaka is the country around Muttra. 

t Vinas'and, the country in which the river Sarasvati is lost 
in the desert. 

+ Prayhga is modern Allahabad. 

I Yajniya Deskah i.e., land in which religious sacrifices may 
be performed and celebrated.— /ir«/Za*a. 



Manu Samhitd. 39 

Thus has been briefly descri{)ed the source of virtue,* 
as well as the origin of all (the universe). Now hear 
me describe the respective duties of the different social 
orders. (25) 

With the auspicious Vedic rites, the purification 
of the bodies of twice-born ones shall be effected, as 
(examplified in) the rites of Garbhddhdnam, etc. 
These Vedic rites are purifying both in this life and 
the next. (26) 

By means of the Vedic rites of consecration of the 
womb, post-natal purification, tonsure, and initiation 
with the thread, the sin of the twice-bom ones, per- 
taining to the seed and womb (of, their parents), is 
absolve4. (27) 

The study of the three Vedas, Vows,1; burnt offer- 
ingsj Ijds,^ sons, the great sacrifices,!! and sacrificesH 
make the soul of a man** competent to attain to 
Brahma. (28) 

* The text has Dharmasya Yoni, — ^Kulluka explains it as the 
revealer of virtue, i e., the Vedas, as disclosed by the couplet 
Vedohhila Dharma Mulam, — GoviNDaraj explains it by " origin 
of virtue, i.e., the different acts oi piety such as, the rit-es of 
S'raddhas, Ash^akcis, etc, as contemplated by the first verse of 
this chapter. 

t Vratas or vows of forswearing meat, wine, etc. 

$ Homas or burnt offerings known as the Savitri Hoitia, Charu 
Homa, etc., as well as those daily offered at morning and evening. 

§ Ijas—z'Aes of propitiating the gods, Rishis and manes with 
libations of water by a student (Brt:(kmacharin) ; a man is debtor 
to the Devas by the Vedic study, to the Rishis by sacrifice, and to 
the manes by the son. 

H The great sacrifices are the five Brahma Yajnas. 

^ Yajnas or sacrifices such as the ^yottsioma, etc. 

•* The text has Tanu, which literally means body,— Kulluka 
explains it by " embodied soul." 



40 Manu Samhita. 

The rite of Jataknrtna <post-naital purification) shall 
be done unto a [male child before the cutting of its 
wmbilical cord ; and at that time, it should be fed with 
honey, clarified butter, and gold-leaf. (29) 

The rite of nomenclature shall be done unto it, in 
the tenth or twelfth month, on a day marked by an 
auspicious star, or by an auspicious phase of the moon, 
or by a good AfukurtM. tso) 

The name of a Brihmana shall be a term of blissful 
import, that of a Kshatriya shall be one denoting 
strength, that of a Vais'ya shall be one connected with 
a term denoting wealth, (and) the name of a S'udra shall 
be a term implying vileness. (31) 

The name of a Br&hmaua shall be ^e^ed tQ 
*' S'arman," that of a Kshatriya shall be coupled with 
a term denoting protection, the name of a Vais'ya shall 
be prefixed to a term denoting prosperity, and that of 
a S'udra shall be a term prefixed to one denoting 
service. (32) 

Of women, the nam^s shall be terms which can be 
easily pronounced, not of any cruel import, explicit 
in their meanings, sweet, of auspicious significations, 
ending in long sounds, and coupled with terms imply- 
ing bliss or benediction. (33) 

In the fourth month* shall be done the rite of 
shoTying the child to* the sun ; in the sixth month, the 
rite of feeding the child with boiled rice, or according 
to the custom obtaining in the family. (34) 

For virtue, the rite of tousure, In respect of all 



• In the third month according to Yama, the name of the rite 
(Niscrhmanam) literally means taking the child out of the 
room. 



■the twice-born orders, shall be done, unlo the child in 
its first or third year,* as ordained by the yruti. .(35) 

The rite ,of .initiation with the thread shall be done 
iirito a Brihiftaaa boy ift his eighth year, unto a 
Kshatriya boy in his eleventh year, and unto a.Vais'y^ 
boy iti hi% twelfth year, counted from the day of 
conception. (36') 

Wishihgt the energy of Brahma, J » BrAhrhana (boy) 
should be initiated with the thread ih his fifth year; 
wishing strength,§ k Kshatriya boy should be s6 
initiated in his sixth year ; and wishing wealth, a 
Vais'ya boy should be initiated with the thread iia his 
eighth year. (37) 

The time for itiitiati6n with the thread {Sdviiri) in 
respect* of a Brahma ua lasts till his sixteenth year ;|| 
that of a Kshatriya, till his twenty-second year ; and 
that of a Vais'ya, till his twenty-fourth year. (38) 

Henceforth (beydud these age-limits) "thfese three 
twice born ones, not duly initiated with the thread, 

* In the third yea'r the rite Of tohsure, Or according to the 
faitiily custom —/l'i'i/a/aya«a's Grihya sufthWi. Z 

■(■ Though such a desire oh the part of the child is imiJoSgiblej 
its /athSr is supposed tO cherish them in his heart. — Ktilluh'a. 

% Brahttia Varchasam — The kpiritiial force or energy ^hich is 
'derived fi-6nii the Stndy aftd right understanding Of the. Vedai 
—Ktdluka. 

§ Balarthinah—t. e., strength of k'ijigddm, and that derived 
from the f)ossessiO^ of horses, elephants, etc. ,; 

II The text has A'-S'odaSh4t ; the prefix A' in this instance, ac- 
cording to KuLLUKA, has the force of " till the completion (of" the 
sixteenth year). Others, on the contrary, relying on the opinion of 
Yama, " after his fifteenth year, a Brihmana, not initiated with the 
thread, becomes degraded," s^ that, the force of the prefix A' in 
A'S'odashat is "yp to the limit of." VYc/however, have fallowed 
KuLLUKA in our translation. ' ^ 

6 



'42 Mayiu Sd'tnhifa. 

'become t'riJ^j/af (of- broken vows), and afe degraded 
from- the sdcietyof the Aryails. (39) 

^A Brdhmaoa, even in the time of ' distress, must 
'not hold any connection with these Vr&tyas, not duly 
'expiated according- to the regulation,-either by marriage, 
of*1jy (Vedic) study. (4b, 

The Brahmacharins (of the thrfee social ordefs) 
shall respectively* wear 'hempen, silken, tmd woolen 
cloths, -and put on upper sheets {uttariyas) respec- 
tively made of the skhis of the antelope, Riirui^ species 
of' deer) and goat.* (41) 

The girdle of a Brahniana'(sttldent) shall be made 
'of three strings of Munjd grass, evenly and smoothly 
Hifcd, that of a K^hatriya shall be made of Murvd 
'jBbres tied %i the shape of'a bow-'string, and tliat of 
"a^'fels'ya shall-be "made of ■bemp-tw'ists.H42) 

In the absence of Afunjd -^rass, "etc., the girdles 
'tJf "(BrahmaQas, Kshatriyas and Vais'yas) shall be res- 
ipectively made of =the fibres of Musa, Askmantaka 
and Valv'aja^ cbttsr^tihg Of bile, 'three, or five tiea, 
(according "to the famfly-custom , each tie being tied 
■with three strings of such fibre-thread. (43) 

The holy thread of a firahmana shall be made with 
three stringst of cotton -thread, that of a Kshatriya 

* A Brihmana student shall wear a clothmade -of -hemp twists 
and put on an antelope-skin as his upp6r sheet. A Kshatriya 
Brahmacharin. shall fiut Oh a silk-cl"oth and an upper sheet mad^ 
of the skin of a Ruyu (Jeer, and a Vais'ya Brahmacharin shall 
put on a woolen cloth and an upper sheet madeof the goat's skin 
— Kulluka. 

t TWi«7'(/i7 , th'riceroUhded) is tl»e terrti that occurs in the 
tbxt. But although Manu ordains that the holy thread of a tnicb 
born Che, whethw Brahmana, Kshatriya or Vais.ya, miist consist 



Manu SamhilJ. 43., 

■wtjthtlrtee^ strings of hempen thready and '. that - of :a^ 
Vais'ya with three strings of , -woolen thread, suspended,, 
fiom the upper (part of the body). 144) 

For virtue, a Brahmana shall carry a staff made of, 
the yiiva or the J'a/ds'a w.o,od;* a Kshatriya>vone-made . 
of. the - Vafa or the Catechu wood-; and a Vais'ya, ono. 
made of the A7m or the Aadumvara wpod.;, (45) 

The staff" of a Brdhmana (religious student) shall • 
1^ made of a ,. height so as to reach to the hair of.hi9 
Kead,, that of a-Kshatriy^4student) shall of .a heighl* 
so as to. reach his forehead, while that of,.a.Vais'ya::, 
(student) shall be of a height so ag, to .reach »up to the .- 
tip of his nose, (46);. 

The staff shall be straight^- whole-barked, not eaten.^^^ 
into by worms (h'L unulcerated)', beautiful to look at^ 
Ujiiburnt, anAomcreative of terror to any person.t (47) 

With such a desirable staff" in-^his hand, and having^ 
worshipped the sun and thrice -circumambulated =, the - 
fire,, he (a religious student) shall go forth asking for, 
ajms, as laid down in the-regulation. .(48) , 

The foremost of the twice-born ones (a Brahman? » 
student), duly initiated with thethread, shall beg alms ; 



of , three strings of.. th;;ead, yet in practice it, is made to consist ;• 
0/ nine strings, each three of -th^m, .being fastened with a knof. 
or. Granihi on J:he autjiority of the, Chh4ndagya Payis'ishtam. 

Dbvala too, says that thq holy thread must cor^sist of nine,- 
%ttmgi (yajnopavitamjturvita sutraninava iantavah). 

* The text' has Vtlva indPalasa staffs." But,her&only either, - 
ol, these -Staffs.shoi)ld b&carried as stated inthe Vasishtha, Vailva. 
Phlas'o va Danda (a staff eitjier ^ thq -Vilva or,th^Palis'a woodj^, 
•rrKulluka. 

t An-udvega-karh- Nrin&m — with wbiph he rai(St notthreateo^s 
Qji. terrorise any .per^Q.n.^KullHk«'>. 



4,'4'. M'anu Samkitai 



■ />>: . 



by pronouncing" the tejrm '■'■■Bfiavaf* in the first part* 
a Kshatriya^ by uttering it in the middle part, and a^ 
yais'ya, by uttering, it, at the,- endi (of- his begging 
Vormula). (49) 

He. shall beg alms. first of. his own mo^er, or sister,, 
or mother's sister ,t or of any other woman,' who might 
iiot insult him ^i^ith a refusal. {50) 

Mavingr collected! so. muoh alms' as necessary andU 
ttndeceitfully made over the same to hi& preceptor,, 
he shall sip water : and; pure in body, he shall eat his; 
meal, sitting with his- face towards the east. (,51) 

He> who eats his meal; ■vs^ith his &cettowards the.- 
east, acquires longevity ; by eating his meal with his; 
face towards the- south, a. person acquires farpe. Hej. 
who eats his meal with his facCi towards the. West,, 
acquires opulfence ; by eating with his face; towards; 
the north, he acquires truthfulness. (52), 

Having sipped, water, a. twice-bora one shall eat 
his meal,, each day, self-conttolled ; having eaten, her 
shall agaitt sip water and,touch the external orifices oC 
his organs! with water. (53) 

Each, day, haying wprshipped it, and; without speakr 
ing ill of it, hfi shall eat his foods Let him rejoice at 

* The formula fOrr a Br^htnana is Bhaban Viksham deht, you, 
(be pleased), t.Oiir.give me alms, that for. a Kshatrjya student is. 
Viksham Bhaban dehi (alms you, be pleased to giye), and that for- 
3 Vais'ya student is. Vikshatn. dehi Bhava», giye me alms, O thouj 
Tievered one. 

-f la tjie absence of his mother, he shaft beg. of his sister.; in, 
the absence of a sister he shall beg of his mother's sister ; in the- 
absence of a mother's sister hs shall beg of a w.oman, w.ho might; 
mot refuse him. the alms, — Kullujf^ 

X The text has. Khani, which means the e.xternal or.ifices of' 
the organs. The mouth, the eyes, the nostrils, and, the du.cts erf th.e- 
eavs are what is here contemplated, — KuHuka... 



ik:a'nu Samhita. 45 

M&- sight of, his. entire- food (/«V, boiled:rice', and. 
propitiate it, and. pray it to be available, each day* (54.) 

Food, daily worshipped, gives strength and. vit£(lity. 
TJnworshipped, food destroys both the worlds of its,, 
partakej.t 155) 

Let him not eat the leaving of any body's (food),! 
nor take a (^hirdj meal during the interval of. his. niorii-, 
ijig and. evening ones § Let him avoid laver-eating. Hc; 
iji-ust not go any where- wjthput; Wjashing his mouthj 
after eating, (56) • ^ 

Over-eating brings on ill-he.alth, shortens the dvtrationi 
of life, proves hostile to acts (saprifices) which lead to, 
heaven, is Mhftil; and condemned by men. Hence^ let 
him avoid -over-eating. (57) 

Always shall %, Briihmana, sip water with thej: 
Brahma-tirtham, with i^c^Q Kdya^ or yj'\i}a. ^<SiDaivd-- 
jfz>^A«»«, but never -^Wh \}aQ Pitri-tirthain., (58) 

The. region abput the b?ill of the thumb is called the, 
Brahma-tirtham, the, Kaya-tirthflm lies at the. root 



* As it ij.said in the A'dipura'nam, "in as muf has it is heard 
in the i)'ruti that focd is Vishnu himself, let a per^son,. seeking;^ 
vitality, cp'nstantly meditate upon me, wp^shjp me, eat,.m? with, 
joy, rejoipe at my sight, propitiate me, pray mp to be available . 
each day, and ronoynce, at my sight, his grief from. w)ijtspey«r 
oausearisen, 

t Both M,BDB,A'TiTHf an^ GpviNpARA'jA observe that, this 
W.or.ship is. daily. oWigatory like the r^tes of Sandhyd, and as it is 
a. daily obligatory da^y (Niiy a Karma)i its violatipn, entails sin, 
ajthpugh its performance does. not give any m.erit, Thjts enumera- 
tion of benefits of the wprshipped fopd is, a praise of the food, a. 
inere Arthavddaa.'aA is npt here intrpduped tp,rpu?e up the desire, 
of thfe partaker for, securing thpse fruits or.benpfits in the manner 
Qf a Kdmya Karma (act for tht fruition of a desire).. 

} Hereby th,e giving of leavings even, to a S'udra is prphibited, 

\Yox the purposes of th,e v.o^w of nSnataka.., 



46, Mamt.Samh\tA, 

of the small finger, 'Ca&. Daivam^tirthain \\q%. at ttre> 
tips of the • fingers, KcA'\}a&^ Pitri-tirtham (sacred to 
the manes i lies bgtwpeji the.micl^lec; parts of, the index 
^nd the -small fingers (59) 

First, let him thrice sip water, and; then twice rub> 
l^is closed ilips.- with the . tij of. his , we^ thumb,, A ft&r . 
t|iat, let him. tpuch hij5;;0]^Bs,- chest,* and head with .• 
vrater. {§o\ 

A person, conversant with virtue, apd/ seeking puri-_ 
fication, shall sit in a^lon^y. place, facing towards, 
the egist. 01;, th^^. north, a;nd. congtantly do the rite of 
yJVAa»««M«/«,(sippi]tig^w£ite|;) ,with cpDl,t ftothlesa, wat^: 
l^ the aid of the (above-said][ Tirth^s^ (6ji. 

[In connection^ with the- rite - of/ A'^chamanam] a j 
Brihma^a is..purified,by sipping water, enough to reach , 
down to . (the region of) , his .heart ; a« K^hatriya, by 
sipping, water enough, tOimoisteehis throat ; a Vais'ya,^ 
Ijy sqjping. enough water to moisten ^is., mouth ; and a^ 
S'udra, by sipping a qu^tity sufficiegt, to-, mQtsteji his-, 
Kps and the -tip of:his:tongju% 46:2>v 

A twice-bptn. on^ is.^ai,4.to h^Mpavii'i (wearing-the 
holy thread, in. the,, usual way) wheji the holy thready 
or the upper sheet lies suspendsd -from his-, left shoulder 
on his right hip, leaving the right arm untouched ^ 
and (free), Similariy, wh^n the. same, lies suspended', 
fjom his l§ft shoyldgr, he is., called;. PrSchin&viti, when 



» Ihe text has A'imSnam which means Self. Self or the 
soul, according to the Upanishads, is located in . the heart ; 
hence it is the practice to touch the chest with water-in an aet »f. 
A'ckamanam. * 

t' According to A'fastambka hot or boiled waiter may be used < 
lgf,a sick, or diseased perjoij., 



^Ma'M* Siimhita, 4-7 

It hangs round his neck (like a necklace), he is called 
'Niviti. (63 * 

A torn girdle {Mekkald), antelope-skin {Ajina), oir 
■holy thread, as well as a broken staff, or ewer should 
-be cast in the water, and a new one should be taken by 
consecrating ifwitli the Mantra. (64) 

The rite of Ar«'fl«^a*-should be done unto a Brah- 
mana in his sixteenth year, unto a Kahatriya in his 
-^twenty-second year, and unto a Vais'.ya in his twenty- 
fourth year. 165) 

For the purification of their pefsons, these rit(3s> 
'-excepting that of initiation with the thread, shall be 
done unto women,in dife time and in due order, with- 
out any Vaidic Mantras. -(66) 

The ^sacrament of marriage is to a-'femalfe, what inr- 
-tiation with the thread is to a male. The service of 
•^the husband is to the wife, what his residence in the 
.preceptor's house, as a religious student, is to the fans' 
'band; the household duty is to -a woman, what .th« 
nwking of burnt offerings is to^aman. ;6.7) 

Thus is described the regulation of initiation with 
'the thread in respect of the twice-born ones, the sacred 
initiation which is as a second birth unto them. Now 
-hear me describe the acts and duties [_Karma-Yoga) 
which are obligatory on them, after initiation. <68) 

Having initiated a pupil, let the preceptor teach 
-him the rules of purification and good conduct, as 
-well as the mode of doing burnt offerings and 
^Sandh^^s-., (69) 

-For the end of studying the Vedas^ let a student, 
iseif-controlled, clad in a light garment, and looking. 

* This stanza is but a paraphrase of the opinion of GMiila Oft 
thG bubjec-t. 



'^S ■ Mdnu Sdmhifia. 

towards the north* do the rite of /iVAaw^awaw, khfl 
•unite bis palms in the manner of a Bruhmnnjali^ 
after which, lessons shall be given 16 hirh. (70) 

■ At the cbmmencement and at' the close of his Vedic 
■study, a student sb^U catch hbld df the feet of his 
ijMreceptor, He shall read with the palms of his hands 
Hiiiit-ed. This is called ^/-a^/^eaKya// (the united palms 
of 'Brahma or -^^e-dic study.) <;!) 

'With his arifts p^rallelly outstretched, he shall 
'make "obeisance unto his preceptor, by touching his 
(preceptor's) right-foot with the fight, and his left-foot 
Vith the left hand of his own.J (72; 

'Let ;the .preceptor, free from laziness, address his 
^upil-, M the time of teaching, as " 0, do you read 
'now," and end his (d^y's) lesson by saying, "let there 
'^e a stop here." (.73) 

Let a Brihmana utter Pr'anava at the ccAmence- 
^ent and at the end of his study. Pranava, not 
^uttered at the cpmmfencement, leads to the destruction 
•of the reading; not. pronounced at the close, it kills 
%he remembrance of the studied subject. (.74) 

Seated on a (mattress) of Kus'a grass, wrth theii: 
%Ops directed towards the feast, and purified by taking 
4iold of the Kus'a blades in his hands, let hitfi purify 



* On his right hand side the piipil, looking towards the east dr 
'the north.— Gautama. 

t firaA>»a«ya/r.— Drawing uf) the hands a little in a flexeA 
{posture and then by tittiting the fialms — this iB called Brahmdn- 
jali. — Kulluka. 

% Laying the palrtis of his outstretched hands Oh their back 
•on the ground," let hirti catch hold of his preceptor's right Coot with 

liis right hand 4nd his left foot with his left han^.—Paithancmi, 



Mdfik Samhtth. 4^ 

itiiiil'self by practising thre6 Prdndyamai,* after which 
'he shall become coiiipetent to Utter the Pranma. (75) 

Ak&ru (A>, Ukara (Ui ZxA Makdra (M), (the com- 
Iponent letters 'df the Mamm, 0m), Prajnpati, (the 
creator of the luiiverse), milched from the three Vedas, 
together with the {Vydhriti Mantras) Bhurbhuvah 
■and Svah!\ i.^6J • 

* Pr&nayama — Regakti&n Of the brfeath in a particular rhanner. 

'He Shall purify his body by three Pranayamns, consisting of fifteeft 

Matras (i. e., lastitig foi" a time tiecessary to utter fifteeli short 

vowels). — Gautama. 

t We find both in the Upantshads and the Puranas that, this 

'ihaterial, phenomenal universe, with its life and living inmates, has 
'evolved out of the eternal " Om," the exponent of vibrations of 
'the primordial ether. The inspired rhapsodists of the Rik Veda 
'chant that, there is only One substance in the world, and the 

Tantrikas and Tattvavddms (knOwers of Tattvas) aver that, the 
'different forms of matter have originated from that One substance 
through the variations of atomic vibrations,' or to express it ii 
■their own terms, through the action of the different Matrix sounds 
'iMatrika ' V'amas). Sound is the first expression Of a thought or 
^dea, and therefore the Matrix sounds were the first teaVisation of 
the idea of universal evolution. 

Now the component sounds of "Om" (A + U4-M) represent 
lill the sounds, both vowel and consonant. Of the SanSfci:it Alphabet, 
■and hence they are the rhatrix sounds or vibi-atiohs that ushered ihtft 
'being , all forms of existence. A (?l) is the first vowel sound 
as well as the first letter of the Alphabet, and U (3) is the middle 
Vowel soundj; or in other words, the rest of thfe Vowel sounds are 
•but the modifications of A i^)andu(3). M (?T) is the last 
■consonant sound, the last letter of the five ' Vatgai or groups of 
Sprincipal consonants, the remaining consonants being only aiixi- 
liary or intermediate sounds (Antaithas and Ayogaii&hiis). Thus 
■we see that t,he components of Om represent the three whole 
gamuts of existence, the Vydhritis, or the Bhur bhuva and S-vak 
(the spheres of being, becoming and Self). Prajapati-mi\e,h.ed.- 
this Om, with the three Vyahritis , from the three Vedas, i.e., he 

7 



"Sb Xfunu Safhhrt&. 

Prajapati, the inmate of the supreme spherd, r6=- 
>6ovfered feach (of the three 'feet cff the) Giya^r?, con-^ 
sisting of the Riks, x\ixix\xag as Tad, etc., from the 
-three Veaas. {"jf) 

The J^eaTfl-knowidg Brahmana, who miftters this 
three-footed (Tripada) Gdyatri, precedfed by the 
fh-anava* and the Vykhriti Mantras, at nlfeetings of 
"the day and night, becomes associated witli (obtains) 
the merit of reading the entiffe Vedas. (78) 

A twice-born oiie, who mutters these three Riks 
a thousand times, each day, is -abl* to cast off all sin 
within a month, as a snake casts off its slough. 79) 

A Brahmana, Kshatriya, or a Vais'ya, who becomes 
dissociated with this Rich (Gdyatri), or deviates fronl 
performing his religious "duties in proper times, is 
condemned by the virtuous. (80) 

The thre^ great eternal Vydkriiis, appended to the 
Omkdra., and the three-footed Gdyatri form the mouth 
of Brahma.X (8i) 

He, who unremittingly mutters these Mantras for 
three years in succession, attains to the Supreme Brahma, 
becoming all-Coursing like the air, and unaffected and 
all-embracing like the universal expanse of ether. 182) 

The single-lettered {Mantra, Om) is the Supreme 

recovered this knowledge of the etertial iecoiiortjy of things "from 
the three Vedas, the repository of eternal knowledge. 

* Pranava is same as the " Om or Omkara." 

•J- Vyahritis, the three Vyahritis, such as, the Bhuh, Bhuvah 
and Svah. 

X Brahmana-mukham (lit. mouth of Brahma), Kulluka explains 
it by "the chief means of attaining to Brahma, or the mouth of 
the Vedas, i. e , to be muttered before coriimencing the study of 
th« Vedas. 



Manu Samhita. Ji? 

Bralim^, Prdnayamas* are- the- highest austerity; there- 
is nothing greater than, the- Savitri ( Gdyatri) Mantra,. 
and truthfulness is greater than silence. (83) 

All the Vaidic rites such as, tho-Japas, Hotna's, etc.,. 
do perish in time;t but eternal {lit. decayless) is the- 
Pranava, since Pranava is identical withi Brahma' 
Prajapati. (84) • 

A Japa-yajna (muttering of! a Mantra) is ten times^- 
more meritorious than a Vidhi-yajna (Ritualistic sacri- 
fice). The muttering of a Mantra in a, low or inaudible: 
tone {Updms'u Japa) is a> hundred times,, and a' Manasa 
Japa (mental repetition of a Mantra) is a thousand* 
times as muchi meritorious. (85) 

The. four Pdka.yajnas,% if added to- the Vidhi- 
yajnas,^ cannot count a. sixteenth part of a Japa-yajna 
in. respect of merit. (86) 

Undoubtedly by means of Japa alone^ a- Brihmana> 
achieves success, (becomes liberated), no matter whether 
he performs any other Vaidic sacrifice or not ; since; 
a Bx^hmana is. said, to bea friend || of Brahma. (87) 



* Dharanidhara reads the text a.% Ekakshara-param Brahma,. 
Pranayama-parnm Tapah,, meaning, Brahma is symbolised by the- 
single lettered' il/l2M^j-a (Omi. Tapas essentially consists in prac- 
tising Pranayamas. -We have adopted' Kulluka'S reading who has; 
followed Medha'tithi 

f Perish after-their fruits are-exhausted; — Kulluka. 

X The four- Paka-yajnas {lit. sacrifices in which.rice is cooked>) 
other than the one known, as. the Brahma yajna (study of the-, 
Vedas)a.xG the- Vais'vadevas, Homas, Vali-karmas, daily Sr'addhas 
and Atithi-puja (hospitality- tOii4<jVAis)i 

§ Such 3.&.Darsa-Paurnamasi and the like sacrifices — Kulluka.. 

II The text hs&.Maitro Brahmana Uchyate — Kulluka explains 
it'by. Brahmanah Sambandhi related to. Brahma i, e., he is- merged; 
j;n.the supreme self, as narrated in the A'gamai. 



5'2' M'anu Samhitn-. 

The' senses, spontaneously running towards "tllejT- 
attractive objects of 'gratification', ' the- erudite: one; 
shall control, as a. charioteer controls-, hjs: (sharnessed). 
horses. (SS). 

Of the eleven senses) enumerated- by- the- sages of" 
yore, I shall discourse on ©ach of them, in, detail, and. 
in due: order. (89) 

The.- ears.4 the dsih',, the eyes, th^ tongue^ the nose- 
wliich is, the: fifth, the; anus, the reproductive organ, 
the hands-," th©- legs, and the- speech which, is the- tenths, 
(these are the- ten senses 1 . ■ 90^ 

The: first five^ in. due: succession), commencing -withi 
the- earsj. are: called the- cognitive- senses [Buddhin- 
driyani), the-, (second) five-, commencing with the anus,, 
are- called the- operative- senses [Karmend'riydni.) (91) 

The min<i is. kn-own- as the- eleveiith. (sense-', which; 
partakes of the nature- of both, the- cognitive:- and the- 
operative- senses, and b>y conquering which^ one is; 
enabled to conquer the- ( other-)i ten ( senses). (92) 

(A person)^ through the conatact of his senses (sense- 
organs) with their objects of gratification,, undoubtedly 
acquires sim* Hence, by controlHng. them>. one achieves-, 
success (obtainsTiberation*) (931 

Never is desire e-xtinguished by enjoying the ob- 
jfects of desire ; • like- the- fire- fed with libations, of) 
clarified butter, it doubly- burns- up. t 94' 

* Compace- S'ankaru's commentary- on. the Brihad A'ranyaka 
Upanishad Ch, I. Btahmana III. (Udgitha). For- by contact, whichi 
is their, coniiectioii,' with, thte special work, which tliey. well perr- 
fermed, they were allied with, th^ sin of the demons. 

f Compare the saying, of Yaydti in the Vishnu- purdnam. 
Food grain, gold, animals, and women: that exist in this world, desire- 
even in respect of a single one of these objects of enjoyment is- 
uever, satiated, hence let a man renounce inordinate desire. Witlja 



Mami Samhita^ 53: 

Off one' who has obtained; all the objects offhisv 
dfcsive and theotjier who. has renounced all theobjects. 
of desire, the man of renunciation is superior to hinif 
of enjoyment. 195) 

Thesesenses, attached to. thsiir respeQtive- objects^, 
t?annot be^ so effectively controllediby means of inanitioiit 
(/.e., by withholding them from, their objects) as, by-, 
tihe cultivation of knowledge:*- (9611, . 

The- study of \h&(yedas\ renui^ciationj the -perform-- 
ance of religious sacrifices, self--control and! devotional; 
austerities, madfe by him, QBrahmana,who>is wicked at;.; 
heart, can never be successfiil.t (97) 

The. man, who, haying heardj touched; seeHj eatenv 
or smelled anything (whether, good or bad), <iOes not 
feel pleasure or pain> is; saidi to. have conqjiersdihis., 
senses. (98) 

Of.all the senses (of aman), if only one sensemanages: 
to leak out, thereby all his wisdom leaks out, like the^ 
water, of a water-^bladder (through, its only outlet.) (99) 

Having controlled the concourse of (the external) 
sense, organs and having subdued the mind, let himv 
work out all his ends, averting^ the paiSi of the body ; 
by means of Yoga. (looj , 

During the- morning; 5'a«^>%;X'^,. he (the- votary)-, shall! 

t-he mind attached to objects of the senses, I have liyed a, 
thousand years, complete, still my thirst does, not abate'— Vishnu 
Puranam. 

* Jndnena : — by constantly thinking of the unstable character- 
of prosperity, the transitoriness of human life, and the obnoxouSi 
nature of thp human, body -which, is a Jbag of bones and muscles, . 
etc — Kulluka. 

f Th« text has. Dushta-bhavasya, which literally means of a. 
ijian of bad or sullied feelings.and i4eas, Kulluka. explains, it as^ 
^h.ose mjn,d is tainted by the object of the senses. 



^ Manu SamKittt: 

mutter the- S&vitri {Mantra), standing, until the' sun?. 
is seen (on the horizon). During the- evening Sandhya 
he shall rriutter the Mantra^ in- a sitting posture^ until.', 
the stars do appear (in the heaven).* (lor) 

By muttering the M'antra in a standing position 
during the- rite of morning Sandhyn, one- is absolved' 
of the- sin accumulated ia the night. By muttering 
it in a sitting ptosture in the evening,! one. is absolved, of 
the- sin acqjiired' during the day.f (102)- 

He-, who does- not stand, hy his morning SandhyS,. 
oor worships- in the- evening, shall' be disqualified, from^ 
performing all Brahmanic rites, like unto a S'udra, (103) 

Incapable- of reading a large portion of the Vedas,. 
hCi conforming to the- regulation of daily reading 
the Vedus, shall mutter, self-controlled, and with 
undivided attention, the Sdvitri Mantra, coupled with 
the- Vydhritis, on the shore- of a, river or pool in a^ 
lonely forest. (104) 

There is no prohibition in respect of reading the- 
allied branches of the- l^edic study (such as, the Prosody,. 
Grammar, rules of pronounciation, eta,) or in r^pect 
of the H'oma Mnntra^, or in respe* of that portion- 
of the i^eda which should b? read eick day (i.e., the- 
Sandhyd il/aw^raji, during the period in which the- study 
of the Vedas is. ordina.rily interdicted^ (105), 

* Medha'tithi gives prominence to the postures taken by the 
votgry during the performance of the Sandhyh prayer as the- 
prirjiary faqtor in imparting, merit : 

^- Sandhya. according tOi Yhjna-Valkya, lasts for a Mahurta 
(forty-eight minutes) at either meeting of the day and the night. 

% Compare Yhjna-Valkya ; the sin unknowingly committed byv 
3 man, either in the day or night, is expiated by thrice performing: 
Sandhyh, each day> 



Manu SiimhitS. 5S 

*riiis prohibition does not extend to the daily rites of 
'ijapas, Homas, etc.), in asrtiuch as they are called th6 
'Brahma Satram* (the sacrifice of Brahma) ; the offering 
of Vaidic recitation, inade during the continuance of the 
period of non-study, whifih is Syinb6lis6d by -the Mantra-, 
Vashat^\ produces auspicious fruits. (io6). 

Unto him, who, pui*e and self-coMrolted, studies 
« the t/edas, according to the regulation, continuously for 
a year, (the study) sheds, milk, milk-curd, ' clarified 
•butter and hon6y,t each day. (107) 

A Vaidic student (Brahmachdrin), uttlil he tettons 
to his father's house, shall kindle the fire at morning 
•and evening, beg alms, lie on the bare ground, and do 
what is conducive to the good of his preceptor,t each" 
•day. (108) 

The son of the preceptor, one who is devoted to 
service, a virtuous person, one w^o is pure, a relation, 
one who is capable of comprehending the (meaning of 
the Vedas), an honest youth, a son, and a paying 
student, these ten are fit to be taught. (109) 

Without being asked, one must not speak anything 

* KuLLOKA amplifies tke term Brahrha S&tram as Brahma 
(Veda) eva Satram, i. c , the sacrifice of Brahma, thte prepolsition 
'" 6f " having an appositive sense in this instance. 

f Vashat is the term that is uttered at the close of a Vaidic 
lesson. Hence the term is here figuratively used for the suspense 
■of Vedic studjr, or in Other words it is here used to denote the 
period during which the study of the Vedas is forbidden. 

X The text has Payo-dadhi-ghritam Madhu (milk, curd) 
• "clarified butter and honey) which, according to the technicalities 
of the Hindu Sastra, means.the satisfaction of the gods and the 
manes. Compare Yajna-valkya, the twice-born one, who reads 
the Rig-Veda, every day, is said to satisfy the gods withmilk 
and honey, and the manes with honey and clarified butter. 



5^6 'JlfdHit SamJiitA 

Ho atiy ^^ersbh;* hbr shoifld he speak if any quSstiSfe 
4s put to him without defcbrum. In such cases, the ilr- 
*telligent one shall behave like a dumb person.* iiio) 

He, who l{)uts kh impropei- questioh, Or he whd 
•answeris an improper one, either of thfem mefets his 
*doom, or incurs the^fenmity of the either, ('iii) 

Whfere there is no viirtufe or gain, or where there is 
^no prospect of a counter-balancing service, there know- 
ledge should not be imparted, 4ike a good seed in a 
.'barren 'Tsoil. (ii2j 

Even ih the absfence of a meitns of livelihood, rather 
'let a Vedic precfcptor die with his knowledge thaft 
impart it to an uhworthy recipifeht (pupil) (i 1.3) 

Thfe presiding deity of knowledget came to a 
ISrahraaaa and said, "preserve me, I am thy highest 
treasure. Do ftot impart me to a malicious person, 
'thereby nliy potency will be kept unimpugnfed.t U 14) 

To him, whbtti thou shaft kaow to be pure, per- 
fectly continent, and free from the follies of the world, 
to that Brahmana, to that Custodian of the treasure of 
-knowledge, shaltthou impart me." (115) 

He, who acquires the knowledge of th6 i^sd^is 

(lessons in the Vedas) from a studying pupil, or from a 

teaching preceptor, without his permission, stands guilty 

'Of the theft of Brahrtia and goes to hell for his 

crinie. (116) 



* THfe text has Jadavat, which literally toeahs like a fool 
'or "an idiot. Kulluka expTllins it by Muka-iva, like a dumb 
:pei'son. 

+ The text has vidyd, the presiding goddess of knowledge. 
'Compare Vaistha Ch. 11, vs. 2—5. 



Manu Samhtti. 57 

Mini, from Whom one has acquired any secular, 
Vaidic, or spiritual knowledge,* he shall reverentially 
accost without Waiting to be first spoken to. (117) 

A BrShmana, who, knowing only the Gayatri 
Mantra, conforms to the rules of conduct as laid down in 
the Ordinance, is superior to a Br&hmana, who, although 
well-versed in the three Vedas, eats forbidden food and 
sells things which ought not to be sold.t (118) 

He, who sits on a bed or a cushion on which his 
preceptor (or superior) is used to sit, shall find no 
good (prosperity) in this world. Happening to sit on 
a bed or cushion (at the time), he shall stand up, leaving 
his bed or cushion, and accost his preceptor at his 
advent. (1.19) 

At the advent ' of an old man, old in years and 
Wisdom), the vital airs of a youth heave up and attempt 
to leap over to him ; they are restored to their normal 
condition by his rising up from his seat and duly wel- 
coming him in. (120) 

The duration of life, fame, and bodily Strength, these 
four (things) of him, who sits in the assembly of the 
oldf and serves thetn faithfully, each day, are found to 
increase. (121) 

Having accosted an elderly person, a Brihmana, 

* A spiritual teacher is more veneraWe than a Vaidic precep- 
tor, and a Vaidic preceptor is more veneraljle than an itnparter of 
secular knowledge. — kulluka. 

t The text has Sarvds'i and Sarva'Vikrayi wrhich literally 
means eater of all kinds of food and seller of all articles of sale. 
Kulluka explains it by NishiidHd-bhojanq-s' Ha and Prdtishiddha 
Vikretd which we have adpoted in our translation. 

f In the assembly of preceptors or superiors — Kulluka, 
8 



58 Manu Samhtta 

after the accosting, shall enumerate his mvn name as, 
I am that so and so who accost you * (1221 

If the person, accosted, chances not to know 
Sanskrit (the usual language of accosting), then the 
accoster shall address him as, I am so and so ', likewise 
ladies in general should be thus accosted. < 123) 

At the time of accosting one shall utter the terra 
" Bho" (O) at the end of his name, inasmuch as that 
term, in common with the name of a person, signifies 
the fact of addressing. (124) 

A Br^hmana accoster shall be re-accosted as, " be 
long-lived, O you, handsome-looking one," and the 
last vowel soimd of bis name, in the event of its ending 
in a vowel sound, shall be pronounced in* a Pluta 
voice.t (125) 

A BrdhmaTia, who, having been accosted, does not 
know how to return it {i.e., does not know the formula 
cf re-accosting), shall not be accosted at all by the 
erudite. He is like xmto a S'udra. (126) 

In meeting a Brihmana, his spiritual good willjbe the 
first thing that shall be enquired ; similarly, the world- 
ly peace of a Kshatriya, the opulence of a Vais'ya, and 

* Both Medhatithi and Govindxraja hold that, the accoster 
shall couple his own name with the term of accosting or wel- 
come. 

Let him accost (a superior) by mentioning his own name as, 
1 am so and so that accost you. — Gautama. 

O, I am that so and so, let him thus mention his own name.— 
Sdmkhydyana. 

+ The final vowel of the name of a Brahmana {Ai'udra), or if it 
does not terminate in a vowel sound, the one immediately preced- 
ing the last letter of thi name should be uttered in a thrice pro- 
lated or protracted manner at the time of addressing or accosting 
a Brahmana {Teh pluta Udhtta'Phnini). 



Manu Samhita. 59 

the good health* of a S'udfa are' the things that shall 
be asked after the first meeting. ( i a 7 ) 

A virtuous man shall not address a person, engaged 
in celebrating a sacrifice, although his younger in years, 
by his own name. He shall address him as, " Bho" 
(0),"Bhabat" ( revered one), etc.^(i28) 

One shall address another man's ^\fe, not related 
to him by marriage, as Bhabati (revered lady), etc., 
he shall address his younger sister as, O thou fortunate 
one {Subhage). (129) 

One shall stand up in the presence of one's uncles, 
father-in-la)v, maternal uncles, priests (Rittviks) and 
preceptors, although younger than him in years, and 
welcome them as, I am that so and so, etc., (that 
accost you). (130) 

A Another's sister, the wife of a maternal uncle, or 
a father's sister shall be revered as the wife of a Guru. 
All these are equally venerable as the preceptor's 
wife. (131) 

One shall accost a wife of his elder brother, belong- 
ing to his Jown caste, by clasping her feet, on returning 
from a distant country'; one shall accost his aunt aiid 
mother-in-law by clasping their feet. (132) 

One shall behave unto his elder sister, mother's 
sister, or father's sister as his own mother ; but his 
mother is the most venerable of them all. (133) 



* A'PASTAMVA says that these forms of addressing may' be used 

in accosting one's junior or equal in age. Govindasaja says that, in 

"as much as these terms (Kshema, etqift are synonymous, what is 

contemplated here is that, these different terms should be used in 

accosting persons of diflferent castes. 



6o Manu Samhita. 

Among inmates of the same village or tovm, persons* 
yoiinger than one another even by ten years are equal ; 
among professional dancers and musicians, persons youn- 
ger than one another even by five years are equal. Among 
Brdhmanas well-verspcl in the Vedas^ even three years' 
youngers shall be treated as equals. Among blood- 
relations it is only a small desparity of age that makes 
one entitled to respect and veneration. (134 

A Br^hmana, ten years old, and a Kshatriya of a 
hundred years of age, shall be considered as a father 
and a son ; the Brahmana shall be treated as the father 
of the Kshatriya. (135) 

Wealth (honestly acquired) friends (relations^ age, 
work, and erudition (knowledge) which forms the fifth, 
these are the sources of honour, each succeeding one 
being more honourable than the one preceding it in 
the (order of enumeration.) (136) 

Among members of the three castes, he, who has 
the best of the five abovesaid qualifications, is entitled 
to the highest honour. Even a S'udra of ninety 
years completet shall be respected by the twice- 
born ones. (137) 

[On the road] one must give way to a carter, to a 
man of more than ninety years of age, to a sick folk, 



• An educated man living in the same town or village with an 
illeterate person, older than him even by ten years, shall not show 
any special marks of respect to him for his years, as he is bound 
to do to an equally uneducated fellow citizen of his, older than 
him by more than ten years. — KHlf^uha. • 

+ The text has Das'amimgatah which literally means" in his 
nineties." Kulluka. 



Manu Santhi^a. 6j 

to a carrier of weights, to a woman, to a Sn^taha,* to 
the king, and to a bridegroom.t 1 138) 

When all these meet together (on the road), great- 
est preference shall be shown to the king and the: 
iindtaha. Of a king and a Sndtak^, the first shall 
give way (show respect) to the last. (139) 

A Brdhmana, who having initfeted a pupil with the 
thread teaches him the Vedas with aM its niysteriesj 
and ceremonials, is said to be an A'ckdryaya unto that, 
pupil. (140) 

He, who, in consideration of fees, teaches a portion 
of the Vedas and any of the Vedangas (allied branches 
ofi Vaidtc study) to a pupul, is said to be the Up&dhy&ya 
of the latter. (141) 

He, who does the (consecrating;) ritps, of ATM^^* 
etc., unto a child Recording to the ordinance, and main- 
tains him with food (and raiment), is said to be his Guru 
(father). (142) 

A Brdhmana, who, being appointed by another, does 
for him the religioys sacrifipes, prilled the Agnyadheyam\ 

* The text has Snataka, which means a Brahmana religious 
student returning from his preceptor's house after finishing his 
student's career. 

f Vara here means a bridgroom on his way to, or from the 
bride's house before^ or after the marriage is formally solemnized 
—Kulluka. 

J The text has Sakalpam Sarahasyamcha. Kalpa. means the 
branch of Vaidip literature which deals with 'cerempnial^ and 
the celebration of religious sacrifices. Rahasyam (lit mysferies) 
is the transcendental truths inculcated in the Upanishads. — 

Kullukft. 

* 

§ The rite of first kindling the sacred fire in which oblations, or 
libations of melted butter are fit to be oSes^d— Kulluka, 



62 Manu Samhita. 

Pdka-yajna, Agni-Stoma, etc., is said to be his Rtttvik 
(priest).* (143) 

He, who fills the ears of a person with the eternal 
truths of the Vaidic Mantras, is said to be his fether 
and mother ; against him he shall not rebels (144) 

An A'charyaya excels ten Uphdhyhyas, a father 
excels a hundred A'charyayas, and a mother excels a 
thousand fathers, in respect of veneration.t (145) 

* A Pittvik, otherwise devoid of the qualifications ofiBrakma- 
charin (such as the vow of continence, etc.) should be revered 
as a Brahmacharin — Kulluka. 

t An A'chdryaya is more venerable than ten Upidhy&yas ; a 
father is more venerable than a hundred A'chiryayas, and a mother 
is more venerable than a thousand fathers. — Kulluka. 

It is held by certain western Scholars that, the sentiment ex- 
pressed in this couplet dates from the time when the sanctity and 
obligations of marriage, as a social institution, were but very 
partially observed and discharged by men, or when but a very 
crude form of marriage was adopted in society. After the days 
of promiscuity, the first attempt at forming a domestic economy 
must necessarily be a (government by the mother). The 
mother was the queen, the protectrix, the fooi-earning agent 
in the first house of man. In the days of promiscuous intercourse 
the mothers of men, like the mothers of beasts, had to take the 
sole care of the child ; and hence with the arduous nature of the 
maternal duties there arose the sense of the child's obligation to its 
mother. In that stage of society it was natural for the primitive 
man to look upon his father as a mere progenitor whom perhaps he 
had very little chance of seeing in his life, and to consider the 
mother as a thousand times more necessary and valuable for the 
rearing of his life, from the days of his helpless infancy to those of 
his resourceful adolescence. But the Tantriks, on the other hand, 
relying solely on their admirable embryology hold that, the func- 
tion of the paternal element is only to call the life force latent in 
the impregnated ovum into being, and that the maternal element 
is the real manufucturer of life. Beyond this evoking of life 



Manu Safnhita. 63 

Of one's own progenitor and imparter (teacher) of 
the Vedas, he, who teaches him the Vedas, is superior 
to his progenitor, since the birth of a Brahmana through 
the Vedas is his eternal existence both in this world 
and the next. (146) 

The birth of a man through the lustful meeting of 
his parents in his mother's womb is the birth which he 
has in common with the beasts. (147) * 

The birth, which the A'chiryaya, well-conversant 
with the Vedas, procreates for him through the Satviiri 
initiation, according to the Regulation, is his real, decay- 
less, immortal birth {i.e., birth in immortality). {1481 

Him, who benefits a man by imparting to him a 
lesser or greater amount of Vaidic knowledge, let that 
man revere as his preceptor ((?«r«), on account of im- 
parting that much knowledge of th6 Vedas. (149) 

A Brihmana, who, although of a tender age, causes 
the initiation of an old man in the Vedas, and teaches 
him his religious duties (by explaining their true import), 
him such an old man is in duty bound to venerate as 
his own father. (150) 

Even the infant son of Angiri, whose vision ex- 
tended far into the depths of the unseen mysteries,* 
taught his own fatherst and used to address them as 
sons. (151) 

force in the ovum the paternal element is perfectly inoperative 
and hence they decree that a mother is a thousand times more 
venerable than a father, 

* The text has Kavi. Sayana explains it in his renowned 
Scholia to the Rigveda by Krknta-darshi "of a far-reaching 
vision." 

•j- The text has Pitrin, Kulluka explains by Piirivyan, 
Pitrivya putran, paternal uncles and sons of paternal uncles. 



64 Mann Samhita.. 

Having been tlius addressed by A'ngirasai, they, mad 
with rage, demanded its reason of the Devas, and the 
assembled Devas said unto them, "the boy has not 
sJ)okeri indecorum." (152) 

An ignoramus* is veritably a boy, the imparter of 
• the Matiiratf is like unto a father, for since the Ancient 
time it has been the practice to a call an ignoramus a 
boy and an imparter of the Mantras a father. (153) 

Neither by years (age) nor by grey hairs, neither 
by wealth nor by friends (relations) does one become 
great. The Rishis made a compact of yore that, " he 
of us Who will Study the entife Veda with the allied 
branches of study t will be called great, (154) 

(Elderliness) among the Brahmaaas is accerding to 
knowledge, that among the Kshatriyas is proportionate 
to prowess, that ambUg the Vais'yaS is proportionate 
to wealth,! ^Q<1 ^^^^ among the S'udrsts is proportionate 
to age [lit datfe of birth.) 1155) 

Grey hairs do not make an old man ; a young man, 
who has studied, the D^Vas designate htoi as really 
old. (156) 

* The text has Ajna, which literally meatls " an igitofaidus". 
itullul^ explains it by ''one ignorant of the Vedas.' 

f Mantrada is the term that occurs in the text, its literal 
meaning being the imparter of the Mantra. Kulluka explains 
it by teacher of the Vedas. 

* The text has Anuchanah. Kulluka explains it by S&nga 
Vedadheyata, the reader of all the Vedas with the allied branches 
of knowledge, such as the prosody, grammar, rules of ceremonials, 
rules of pronounciation, astronomy and Mimansa (exiget'ic disser- 
tations on the Vedas) 

§ The text]has Dhana-dhanyatah i.e. accordi^ to one's posses- 
sion of food grains, animals etc. 



Wanu 'SamMta. 65 

liikfe unto a wooden elephant- or a leathern deer, 
^ Brihtnana, who has not studied, bears only the name 
•of a BrihmanA. (157) 

As a eunueh is (sexually) fruitless (uflsuccessful) in 
Tespect of a ■vfroman, as (sexually) fruitless is the meet- 
ing of two eows, as fruitless is the gift to an ignoramus,* 
so fruitless (is the life of a) Brahmana Who has not 
studied the Riks {i.e., the Vedas). (158) ' 

The good of creatures should be eSected with kind 
and sympathetic means ;t desiring virtue, one shall use 
sweet and gentle words under the circumstances. (159) 

He, whose speech and mind are always puref and 
folly restrained,§ derives all the benefits enumerated in 
the Ved&nta.W (''6°) 

Persecuted or oppressed, one must not hurt the 
feelings of others. Let him wish or do no injury to 
any body. Let him not use a harsh word, that bars the 
igate of heaven, to any body. (161) 

Let a Brihmana shun worldly honours, like a poison^ 

* The text has Ajna which means an ignorant person ; certain 
'commentators explain it by " a mad person." 

•[■ The text has Bhutanam * * S'reyo'nus'dsanam-, the 
literal rendering of which has been given above. Kulhika explains 
Bhutanam by "S'ishydnant (of pupils),'' and SVcyo, by "instruc- 
tion," the whole Jneaning, according to him, [is that instructions 
should be given with the help of compassionate means. 

% The text has S'uddhi (pure). Kulluka explains it as speech, 
unsullied by untruthfulness, and mind, free from desire, aversion, 
hatred, etc. 

§ The text has Samyaggupte, Kulluka explaiils it as mind 
restrained from walking in forbidden paths. 

II Veddntopagatam phalam. i.e , lordliness of the universe, 
and emancipation of Self, etc., described in the Vedanta, as the 
result of practising its tenets. 



56 Manu Samhila> 

throughout his life. Desiring immortality, let him court 
humiliation all through his days. (1621 

He, who habituates himself to bear humiliation, 
happily sleeps, happily wakes (from sleep) and travels 
in the path of duty.* The humiliator suffers a double 
death.t <i63) 

Let a duly initiated Brahmana, by dint of gradual 
practice, acquirS, while residing in the house of his 
preceptor, this Tapas (penitential austerity), which 
would enable him to fully comprehend the import of 
the Vedas.X (164) 

By means of special austerities and various (other) 
vows practised according to the Regulation, a twice- 
born one (Brdhmana) shall master all the yedas with 

• The discomfiture, which a man suflfers for having had to beaf 
with humiliations, ceases to torment the person, who, from his 
very childhood, learns to look upon honour and dishonour with 
equal indifference, and thus robs humiliation of its sting. In the 
armoury of the petty vexations of life there is no dart keen enough 
to hurt him under his mail of healthy contempt for littleness. 
There is nothing in this world to disturb his night's repose, or to 
cloud the gladness of life wjhich returns to him, each day, with the 
morning song and sunshine. With his head touching the stars in 
the conscious glory of a larger manhood, he treads triumphant in 
the path of duty, without casting a look at the shady by-paths of 
•life, or lending his ears to the siren-songs of pleasure. The glory 
of this world, at its best worth, is but a mist, a vapour, and the 
commercial success of life may, in reality, be the very opposite 
of success. 

t The text has Vinas'yati, Kulluka explains it by " doubly 
dies out of self-reproach." 

% The text has Brahmhdhigamikam tapah which may also 
mean penitential austerity that enables one to attain to Brahma. 
Kulluka has explained Brahma by Veda, and we have adopted 
Kulluka's interpretation. 



Manu SamkriS- 67 

their Rakasyas {i.e., the mystic transcendentalism as- 
inculcated in the Upaniskads). (165) 

Let the foremost of the twice-born ones (Brih- 
manas) constantly commit the i/edas to memory, in- 
asmuch as the study (recitation) of the Vedas- is said 
to be the highest Tapasyd* for a Br^hmapa. (,166) 

Even he, who indulges in such articles of luxury 
as, the garland of flowers, etc., by studj^ng the Vedasy 
each day, according to his might, acquires such an- 
efficiency in Tapas that its (energy) surcharges his 
whole body from the tips of his fingpr-nails. to the 
crown of his head. (167) 

A Brdhmana, who not having studied the Vedas, 
tries to acquire other forms ' of (secular) leaining,t is 
degraded to the status of a S'udra with all his progeny, 
even in. his life-time. (168) 

The first birth of a Brihmana is in the womb of 
his mother,, his second birth is through his initiation 
with the holy thread, and his third birth lies through 
his initiation in the l^aidic sacrifices [Jyatishtoma,. etc.)' 
as ordained by the. S'ruti.X (169) 

In respect of the birth of a Br^hmana in 'Brahma^ 
of which the wearing, of the holy gjrdle {Mekhaia) is 
the symbol, the Sdviiri {Gayatri iW antra) is his- mother 
and the preceptor {A' ch-dryay a)- \s his father. (170) 

* Tapas means austerity wkh coinmunion with the supreme 
Self. 

•(■ The text has Anyatra Kurute S'ramam. Kulluka explains it 
by " forms af learning other than the Smrtti and Vedangas." 
Compare Sankha, " Before the studying the l^edas, let him not 
study any other subject of study." 

J Which the priests {Rittviks) perform to make him competent 
for the celebration of the Vaidic sacrifices, to make him initiated 
in. the sacrifice ; through, that he takes birth agaifi.— iVatj. 



6® Ma-nii Samfitfa, 

Before his initiation with' tlie thread, a Btihrnanai 
is not competent to perform any kind of religions, 
rites ;* hence, for the fact that, the; Ahharyaya im- 
parts to him, the knowledge of the Vedas, the-. A! char- 
yaya is liis called father, (d 7 1 ) 

A Brdhmana, until he is again bom. in th& VedaSf. 
continues like unto a S'udra. Let him not utter any 
Vaidic Mantras except those of tha S'rdddhafi before: 
his initiation with the thread. (172) 

To a Br^hmana, duly initiated with the: thread, shalL 
be given instructions, regarding the practice of vows,t 
gradually and in conformity with the Regulation; he; 
shall be made to get by heart the (different portions§ of 
the) Vedas.. ( 173) 

The kmds of skin, thread,, staff and. girdle;, which, 
have been ordained for a {Brahmachdrin) at the time 
of 'initiation with the thread, shall be likewise used, by 
him in connection with practising a vow.|| (.174) 

* The text has- Karma, Kulluka explains, it by Srauta or 
S'marta Karma, i. e., acts, enjoined to.be performed in the S'ruti 
^Vedas). znd Smriti. 

i" Svadha iB the term that occurs in the text. Svacfha is. 
the WQiid which is uttered at the time of offering oblations to. 
the manes. Here it figuratively stands for the S'raddha Mantras.. 
KuLiiUKA explains it iiy "Mantras which are recited, during, thee 
celebration of a first (Nava). S'raddha ceremony." 

J The text has Vratades%n, Kulluka explains it by "command- 
ments to practise the vows which he promised to undertake at 
the time of initiation, vis., I will collect fuel for the sacrificial 
■ tire, I will not sleep in the day, etc. 

§ Brahmana,, the successive portions of the Vedas such as^ 
the Mantra Brcihmanas, etc.— Kulluka, 

II Such as the pefiances ol Govartot Chhndrayamm, etc 



Manu Samhita. Sgt, 

A Brahmachdrin, while residing with his- preqeptor^ 
shall control his senses and observe these rules 
of conduct for the augmentation of his psychic 
power. (175) 

Let him be pure, let him bathe each day,* prppitiat©; 
the gods and manes with libations of water, worship, 
the deities, and cast sacrificial twigs {Samidh) iij tha- 
fire, each morning and evening. (176) * 

Let him forswear the use of honey, meat, scents,, 
garlands of flowers, and articles of sweet taste which, 
acquire an acid flavour when stale. Let him refrain 
from visiting women and killing animals. (177) 

Let him forswear the use of anointments (unguents), 
ColljTiums, shoes, and umbrella ; 'let him renounce lust, 
anger, greed, dancing, singing and music : (178) 

Gambling with dice, idle gossips, scandal, falsehood, 
embracing, and casting lustful eyes on females, and 
doing injury to others. (179) 

He must sleep always alone, and let him not cast 
his seed (by any unnatural means.) A lustful casting;^ 
of seed kills one's vow. (180) 

A Brihmana religious student, who has uninten- 
tionally spent himself in sleep, shall bathe and wor- 
ship the sun (and thrice mutter the Rik running as 
Funarmam. (181) 

He shall fetch pitchers-fiil of water, flowers, cow- 
dmig, clay and Kus'a grass asmuch as his preceptor 
might require, and beg alms, every day. (182) 

• Morning and evening, let him bathe each day, — Vishnu. , 
Though daily baths are forbidden by Gautama in respect of" 
Brahmacharins, this prohibition extends only to wanton bathing, 
as Saudhayana expresses it. Let him not bathe (many tiraps) out 
of a spirit of hnyAdo.—Baudhayana. 



yo Manu Samhtta. 

Of house-holders, who celebrate the Vaidicsa.cn~ 
fices and complacently perform the duties peculiar 
to their order, a Brahmachdrin, pure in body and spirit^ 
shall beg alms, each day. (183) 

He shall not beg alms of his preceptOT's family, 
nor of his cognates and relations. In the absence of 
any other house-holder, he shall beg alms, leaving each, 
preceding one of these persons. (184) 

In the absence of (fit persons of whom the- Vedas: 
gives a Brahmachdrin the sanction to beg alms), let 
him, silent and self-controlled, beg alms of the whole- 
village {i. e., of all the four castes) without repeating the- 
proper formula of begging. (r8'5> 

Let him collect fuels (Samial for the sacrjficial fire 
from a distant forest* and place them in the open ; 
with them he must punctually offer the burnt offer- 
ings, morning and evening, each day. (186) 

In health, if a Brahmachdrin fails to beg alms, or tO' 
kindle the sacrificial fire with the fiid of Samid twigs,, 
for seven days in succession, he must do the penance 
of an Avakirni (of broken vow). (187) 

A Brahmachdrin, having been invited to a repast 
given in connection with a S^rdddha offered to the 
deities, may take- to his satisfaction (articles of food) 
which do not soil the vow) of a vowist ;t invited to a 
repast in connection with a s^rdddha offered to the 
manes, he may take to his satisfaction such food, which 

* The dry twigs of trees which have been mentioned in the- 
Ferffli as holy and fit to be used with the burnt offerings. They 
should be collected from a distance as it is evident from the- 
use of the term Durht in the text. 

■f- The text has Vratabat, i. e., all articles of food excepting 
meat, hosey, etc., Madhu Mamsa-Varjam — Kulluka. 



Manu Samhiia. 11 

Si Kishi ftiay 6at* Without impugnity, even if without 
Jncurring the sin of eating the food given by one and the 
same person ; thereby his vow is not nullified. (i88 — 89) 

Wise men have ordained alms-begging as equally, 
obligatory on Brakmachdrins of all the twice-born 
castes (Brihmana, Kshatriya, and Vais'ya), but a Ksha^ 
triya or a Vais'ya Brahmacharin is not authorised 
to partake of a S'rdddha repast given* by a single 
person. (190) 

Goaded by his preceptor or not, he shall take 
special care of his lessons and evince a special interest 
in things conducive to his preceptor's benefit, each 
day. (191) 

Controlling his body (physical propulsions), Speech, 
intellect, senses and mind, let him sit with the palms of 
his hands, united together, looking at the face of his 
preceptor. (192) 

Covering his body With the upper sheet ''of garment 
in a manner so as to leave) the right arm free and un» 
covered, let him sit, meek and self-controlled, each day, 
in the front of his preceptor, after being told by him, 
" sit down here." (193) 

By the side of his preceptor he shall eat food and 
Wear garments inferior to those of his preceptor. Aftei* 
him he shall go to, and prior to him he shall leave 
his bed. (194) 

Comfortably lying in bed or seated on a cushion, or 
with his face turned back, he must not hear his precept 
tor's order, nor speak to him. (195) 

If his preceptor orders him for any thing when he 
is seated, he shall rise up ; if he does that standing, he 

* Rishivat, i e., Nivara grains and such like food-stuff which 
a holy sage Usually eats in his hermitage.— /ifai/MAa, 



yi MaHu Samhiia. 

shall advaiic6 a few steps.towards him ; if he do6s that 
'while stfoUing, he shall follow him ; and if he does that 
"wtiile going away, he Shall run after him and receive 
that order or speak to him. (196) 

The preceptor happening to look at any other side^ 
•he shall stand in front of him ; the preceptor happening 
to be at a little distance, he shall go unto him ; and his 
preceptot happening to be in > bed or seated, he shall 
hung down his head and receive his order and speak 
xtato him. (197) 

By the side of his preceptor he shall always 
occupy a lower bed or seat ; within the sight of his 
preceptor he must not sit in an easy or careless 
posture. (198) 

He shall not utter his preceptor's name even at 
his back. He must not mimick his gait, speech of 
voice. (199) 

Let him shut up the ducts of his ears in a place 
where his preceptor is calumnised or spoken ill of, or he 
must go elsewhere from that place. (200) 

A calumniator of his Guru shall be bom as an ass, 
and a vilifier of his Guru shall be a dog, in his next 
birth. For having wrongfully enjoyed the property of 
his Guru, he shall be born as a worm ; one envious of 
his Guru's excellence shall take birth as an insect in 
his next incarnation. (201) 

He shall not worship his Guru (w^ith garlands of 
flowers, sandal-pastes, etc ,) from a distance,* nor when 
angry or in the company of ladies. Happening to 
meet his Guru from a car or from (raised , seat, he shall 
get down and pay him respect. (202) 

* He shall not send such ofTerings of flowers, etc , to his Guru 
through a third person from a distance. — Kullaka.' 



Manu Samhita. 73 

He must not sit with \ih Guru when the wittd will 
be blowing, from his direction to that of his Guru* 
or the contrary ; while in his company, he must not say 
anything which is inaudible to his Guru. (203) 

In a bullock cart, in a cart drawn by a horse or 
a camel, on the terrace of a buiiding, in a courtyard, on 
a large mattress of reeds, on a stone-slab, in a boat he 
may sit by the side of his preceptor [Gilru). (204) 

In the event of the (preceptor) of his preceptor 
being near, he must behave unto him as unto his. own 
preceptor ; while residing in his preceptor's house, he 
(the pupil) shall not accost even his own parents without 
first having obtained the preceptor's permission. (205) 

Unto^ his preceptor, (teacher; and superior relations 
such as uncles, etc.), unto counsellors of good, and 
unto those who dissuade him from evil ways^ he shall 
always thus behave. (206) 

As well as unto his elders in virtue and wisdom : 
likewise unto his preceptor's sons and friends and 
relations thus he shall constantly behave. (207) 

A preceptor's son, if he be his younger or equal in 
age, or if he be a disciple of his in respect of the cele- 
bration of a religious sacrifice, he (the pupil) shall res- 
pect as his own preceptor, in the event of that (son) 
having taught him the Vedas. (208) 

He shall not rub the person of his preceptor's son, 



» 1 he text; has Prativcite Anuvate. The wind is said to be 
Prativdta when it blows from the direction of the Guru to that 
of the pupil, and Anuvdta when it blows from the direction of the 
pupil to that of the preceptor. A pupil is forbidden to sit by 
his Guru, when the wind blows from either of these directions, 
lest the particles -of saliva, etc., from his mouth, while speaking, 
might not fall upon his preceptor's body. , ^^ 

10 



74 Manu Samhiia. 

nor help him ih bathing, nor eat the leaving of his food, 
(as he shall do in the case of his preceptor). (209) 

The wives of a preceptor of his own caste shall be 
revered (by a pupil) as the preceptor himself. His 
wives of different castes shall be honoured . with mere 
accosting and by rising from the seat. (2101 

A pupil shajl not anoint the person of his preceptor's 
wife, nor help her in her bath, nor rub her person, nor 
comb her hair. (211) 

A pupil, twenty years old, (or) who has attained the 
age of discretion, shall not accost his preceptor's wife, if 
she be a youthful one, by clasping her feet. (212) 

To defile men is the nature of women, hence the 
wise are never infatuated nor un-circumspect about 
them. (213) 

Man, by nature, is'subject to lust and anger ; women 
are quite competent to lead even the wise men astray, 
not to speak of fools, (their easy victims). (214) 

One shall not reside in a solitary place even with 
his own mother, sister or daughter. Powerful are the 
passions (lit senses) of a man, and they sometimes over- 
whelmn even the wise. (215) 

If desired, the young pupil may accost a youthful 
wife of his preceptor, according to the Regulation,* by 
mentioning his name as I am so and so (that accost 
you).' (216) 

Having returned from a distant country, he, bearing 
in mind the rules of good conduct, shall accost (an 
elderly) wife of his Guru by clasping her feet, on the 
first day ; on all subsequent days, he shall simply accost 
her without clasping her feet.) (2171. 

• That is without clasping her iteU—Kulluha. 



Manu Samhita. 75 

As by digging (the earth) with a digging instrument, 
one gets water, so by faithfully serving him, a pupil 
acquires (all) the knowledge which is contained in his 
Gui'u (preceptor). (218) 

A Brahmachdrin, whose head is clean shaved, or 
who wears clotted hair, or grows a single tuft of 
clotted hair on his crown, let not the rising or setting 
sun find within the precincts of" a vilkge **(2i9) 

If the sun rises, seeing him asleep, out of wilful 
laziness, or goes down finding him resting in bed out 
of ignorance, let him mutter the Gayatri Mantra and 
fast for a whole day. (220) 

A sleeping (brahmachdrin)^ roused up from his 
sleep by the sun, if he fails to do this penance, is asso- 
ciated with a great sin. (221) 

Both in the morning and evening, let him, pure and 
self-controlled, mutter the Gdyati i, and pray, sitting in 
a holy place, as laid down in the Regulation. (222) 

Even if a woman or a S'udra advises , him to do any 
good act, let him do that, or whatever his mind approves 
of, (if that is not hostile to the S'dstra.) (223) 

Some say that virtue and wealth are the only good 
in life, others aver that wealth and desire are the 
highest good, some hold that virtue is the only good, 
others say that wealth is the only good in life : virtue 
wealth and desire combinedly form the good in life. 
This is the conclusion. (224) 

The preceptor is the living image of Brahma, the 
fathCiT is that of Prajdpati (creator) ; the mother is the 
living image of the earth, and the uterine brother is 
one's own image (second, self.) (225) 

* He mustbe in his forest-home before the sun sets, nor quit 
it for a village before he rises in the morning. 



^S Manu Satnhita. 

Hence, a man, and specially a Brdhmana, even being 
hardly oppressed by them, shall not insult a father, 
a mother, or an elder brother. (226) 

Even in the course of a hundred years, a son can 
not repay the trouble which his parents have under- 
gone for the purpose of bringing him up. (227) 

Let him constantly do what is good to his parents, 
and speciallji" what conduces to the comfort of his 
preceptor. The satisfaction of these three is the con- 
summation of all Tapas (penitential austerities) (228) 

Serving these three constitutes the highest Tapas ; 
without their permission, let him not practise any 
other; piety. (229) 

These three represent the three Regions,* the three 
orders of the society. They are the three Vedas, they 
are the three fires. (230) 

The father is the household fire, the mother is the 
southern fire, and the preceptor is the sacrificial 
fire. These three fires are the most glorious in the 
world. (231) 

A house-holder, who does not commit any folly 
in respect of these, conquers the three regions ; efful- 
gent as a god, he, even in his mortal firame, is enabled 
to enjoy the felicity of heaven. (232) 

By means of devotion to his mother one conquers 
this world, by devotion to his father he conquers the 
middle world (firmament), and by devotion to his pre- 
ceptor he attains to the region of Brahma. (233) 

He adores all the virtues, who adores all these 
three ; He, who belittles these three, belittles all the 
virtues. (234) 

* Trayo Lekah, the earth, the firmament, and the heaven. 
Trayo As'ramah the order of Brahmacharin (the^ religious 
Student), the order of the house-holder, and the order of hermits. 



Manu Samhitd- 77 

So long as these three live, let him not practise 
any other virtue (piety) ; let him tenderly serve them 
and . always do whatever is good and pleasant to 
them. {235) 

Whatever other virtues does he practise by mind, 
speech and acts, for his good in the other world, 
he shall inform them thereof. 1236) 

To serve them tenderly is the highest and most 
manifest consummation of his duty, all other pieties* 
are minor virtues. (237) 

Respectful, let him acquire an auspicious knowledget 
even from a S'udra ; the highest virtue,! even from a 
man of vile caste ; and a good wife,§ even from a bad 
family. (238) 

Ambrosia may be taken even out of poison ; a 
good word, even from an infant ; a good conduct, even 
from an enemy ; II and gold, even from an unhallowed 
person. (239) 

Women (wivesl, gems, knowledge, virtue, purity, 
good words (counsels), and the various kinds of art 
may be acquired from anywhere. (240) 

In times of distress, a Brahmana student may take 

* Apadharma is the term that occurs in the text, Kulluka 
explains it by Vaidic ■sacrifices such as the Agmshtoma, etc. 

t S'ubhdm Vidydm — knowledge of manifest, or tested power 
and potency, such as the Garudi Vidya (drugs and incantations 
for the cure of a snake-bite). — Kulluka. 

X Param Dharmam, means liberation of the soul. — Kulluka. 

§ 1 he text has Stri-ratnam which literally means "a gem 
of a woman." 

II Amitradapi Sadvrittam i.e., even the good conduct of one's 
enemy should be imitated. — Kulluka. 



7? Manu' Samhita 

his les30iis from a non-Brahmana* preceptor, and he 
shall serve his Guru ^teache^j only so long as he shall 
actually study.t (241) 

Wishing the most exalted existence (i.e., liberation 
of self), aftef death, let not a Brihmana student live 
for good in the house of a non-Brdhmana preceptor, 
or in the house of a Brihmana / who has foresworn 
good conduct, "and renounced his function of a Vaidic 
teacher. (242) 

A (ritualistic) Brahmachirin, if he desires to live 
for good in the house of his preceptor, must render 
him services to the last day of his- life. (243) 

A Brihmana, who, to the last day of his life, thus 
serves his preceptor, attains by his own spiritual energy 
to the eternal abode of Brahma. (244) 

Let not a virtuous Vaidic student pay any (money) 
to his preceptor ere he returns from his house after 
finishing his career. After having bathedt with the 
permission of his Guru, he must pay him a honorarium 
according to his pecuniary circumstances. (245) 

• 1 he text has Abrahmanat which literally means from a 
non-Brahmana. Kulluka explains it by " in the absence of a 
Brdhmana, he may study under a Kshatriya ; and in the absence 
of a Kshatriya, under a Vais'ya preceptor." 

t Render all other services except that of washing his feet 
and eating the leaving of his food, etc. — Kulluka. 

Brihmana students shall serve a Kshatriya imparter of the 
Mantra (teacher of the Vedas) by such acts as following him etc. 
A Br4hmana even who has'acquired knowledge from him shall be 
regarded by a (Kshatriya) as his Guru.— Vyas'a. 

X Ablution at the close of his student's career, which formed, 
as it were, a signal for quitting the preceptor's roof for that of 
his paternal home. 



Manu Sainhiia. ^ 79 

A plot of land, gold, a cow, a horse, an umbrella, 
a pair of shoes, paddy, vegetables,* glothes, or whatever 
he is capable of giving him, with that he shall evoke 
the pleasure of his preceptor. (246) 

On the death of his preceptor, unto a qualified 
son of his, or unto his (widowed) wife, or unto a cognate 
of his he shall behave as his preceptor. ^247) 

In the absence of all these three, let him, making 
use of his preceptor's seat and cushipn, offer burnt 
offerings,- (morning and evening, each day), and thereby 
make his Self competent to attain to Brahma. (248) 

A Brahman a, who thus undeviatingly practises the 
vow of a ritualistic Brakmachdrin, obtains an excellent 
status,t after death, and stands not under the necessity 
of reverting to human existence. (249) 



* In return of the knowledge acquired from him, he shall give 
unto his preceptor a few vegetables even if his wordly circum-- 
stances do not admit of his giving any other thing. A gift how- 
ever precious or costly is no adequate return for the benefit 
which a preceptor accords to his pupil. Compare, 

There is no such thing in this world, by giving which a pupil 
can discharge his debt to a preceptor, who has taught him, no 
more than a single letter of the alphabet, — Laghu Harita. 

■\ In the absence of a qualified son of his Guru he shall behave 
unto (render services) to his widowed wife as his preceptor, and 
even in the absence of such a widowed wife he shall extend the 
same differential treatment to a surviving ccignate of his (such as 

an uncle, etc. — Kulluka. ^ 

« 

j: The text has, Uttamam Sthanam, Kulluka explains it by 
"he goes to the vicinity of Brahma.^' 



8o Manu Samkita, 

CHAPTER III. 

In his preceptor's Ijouse, a Brahmachdrin^ having prao 
tised the vow of (studying) the three Vedas* for thirty- 
six years, or for a half or a quarter of that period,t or 
for a period necessary to fully comprehend tbem. ; (i) 

Or having studied (all) the Vedas, or two Vedas, or 
a single Veaa-\^ in the proper order of Mantra, Brih- 
mapasj etc., without the least deviation from his 
vows,§ shall enter the order of the householder. || (2) 

A lyouthful) BrahmachdAn, renowned for the com- 
pletion of his vow of a Vaidic study, and who has 
studied the Vedas from his father o» preceptor, and is 
about to enter the order of the house-hDlder,T shall be 

* Traivedikam Vratam, literally means the "vow of three 
Vedas ;" but although the three Vedas {Rik, Saman and Yajus) 
have been here specifically mentioned, we shall have to understand 
the four Vedas (viz., the Rik, Saman, Yajus, and Atharvan) by 
the term Traivedikam, the Atharvan being included within the 
Fig Veda. Hence we find in the Vishnu Puranam, "The 
allied branches of Vaidic study and the four Vedas (Angani 
Vedas' chatvarah, etc). 

■]■ Compare Yajnavalkya — The vow of a Brahmacharin for 
twelve or five years in respect of (studyingl each Veda {Praii- 
iiedam Brahmacharyayam Dvadas'tKvdam Pancha vd.) 

J According to the Sakha (school) of the Vedas he belongs 
to. — Kullaka. 

§ Manilas, Brihmanas are the different divisions of the 
Vedas. 

II The vow of perfect continence and abstinence from honey, 
meat,, etc. 

^ The text has Garhasthyas'rama (the order of the house- 
holder) i. e., he shall impose upon himself the obligations of 
matrimony and discharge the duties of married life, marriage, 
being the first step to house-keeping. — Kulluku. 



! Manu Samhita^ 8i 

presented with a cow, and a cup of honey,* when he, 
decorated with garlands of flowers, will be found seated 
in his bed. 13) 

Having bathed with the permission of his Guru at 
the termination of his vow, a Brdhmana shall marry a 
wife of his own caste, possessed of auspicious signs. (4) 

For the purposes of marriage and sexual intercourse, 
a girl, not related to his mother by the,tie of Sapinda\ 
relationship, nor to his father as a SagoiraX (cognate), 
is as well recommended in respect of a Brihmana. (5) 

However great (illustrious), or opulent with (the 
possession of kine, goats, sheep, money and paddy), 
they might be, (the following) ten families should be 
avoided in inspect of taking a bride from (any of; 
them. (6) 

* The father or the preceptor shall thus worship (offer) him 
with a cow and a cup of honey {Uadhu-parkam). 

t i'fl/ijMia-relationship is • extinguished in the seventh degree 
of descent. 

J Sagotra means persons belonging to the same spiritual clan- 
ship, or descendants frbm a common ancestor. 

According to the Dharma Sastra one cannot marry a female 
Sapinda relation of his mother, though he can marry a female 
Sagotra relation of hers. 

The particle "cha,'' includes father's sisters and their 
.'daughters who are not his Sagotras. l^asa, on the other hand, 
forbids the marriage with a mother's Sagotra girl. 

Some desire not marriage with a mother's sagotra girl. In 
a case when the name of the girl's family is not known, one can 
marry her without the least hesitation. — Vyasa. 

Having married a daughter of his maternal uncle, or a girl 
belonging to his mother's Sagotra, or a gir) belonging to the same 
Gotra or Pravara (spiritual clanship i with his father, or having 
gifted a girl in such a marriage, a Brahmana shall do a Chditiror 
yana penance by way of expiation.— FafsifAa. 
II 



82 Rfanu SamhitA. 

A family of doers pf mean acts, a family in whicli 
no male child is born, a family of men devoid of 
Vaidic knowledge, a family of hairy men and women, 
and a family in which consumptive, epileptic, leprous or 
leucodermic members are born, these are the ten 
families in which one is forbidden to marry, i^) 

Let him not marry agirl of brown complexion, or 
one with a limb in less or excess, or one who is a pro- 
nounced invalid, or a hairy one, or one devoid of hairs 
on her body, or a garruUous one, or" one whose eye-balls 
are brown or yellow. (8) 

Nor a girl who has a ijame implying a star, tree, 
river,' mountain, bird, serpent or servilence, nor one 
whose name denotes a dreadful object. {9) 

A well-formed girl, without hairs on her limbs, and 
having a sweet name and a gait resembling that of a 
swan or an elephant, slender, with small pearly teeth, 
and a crown of thin, silky hair, he shall take for his 
wife. <<io) 

A girl, who has no uterine brother of her o-wti, or* 
whose father's name is unknown, shall not be married 
out of the apprehension of a PutrikaA compact. ( 1 1 ) 

* A girl married on the express coadition that the son of 
her womb will be a son unto her father ; or given in marriage 
with such an intention is called a Putrikd. Abhisandhi- mdtr at 
Futrika — Gautama. 

■j- GoviNDARAjA explains the verse by referring the term 
Putrika dharma Sankaya to both the clauses, "who has no 
uterine brother" and "whose father's name is not known." We 
have adopted Kulluka's interpretation as being more consistent 
with reason. Kulluka siys that the prohibition as regards 
marrying a girl of unknown parentage is for the apprehension 
lest she might be a foundling or an illegitimate one. 



Manu Samhiia. 83 

A girl belonging to his own caste is recommended 
to a Brahmana for holy wedlock ; for desire, a wife he 
may take from any of the .three remaining castes, her 
precedence being according to her caste. (12) 

A S'udra woman is the wife of aiS'udra ; a Vais'ya 
can marry a S'udra or a Vais'ya wife, a Kshatriya 
can take a S'udra, a Vais'ya or a Kshatjiya wife ; and 
a BrShmana can marry a S'udra, Vais'ya, Kshatriya 
era Br&hmana wife. (13) 

In nt) history or chronicles can be found that, even 
in the time of distress, a Brahmana or a Kshatriya has 
(lawfully) married a S'udra wife. 114) 

By marrying a low caste woman through the intoxi- 
cation of desire (passion), a twice-born one* degrades 
himself, with the nine generations of his progeny, to 
the status of a S'udra. (15) 

He, who marries a S'udra woman, becomes de- 
graded. This is the opinion of Atri and of [Gauta^a^ 
the son of Utathya. By visiting a S'udra wifet for 
the purpose of begetting offspring on her, a twice-born 
one becomes degiaded; this is the opinion Qi S''anaka. 
The fathership of his S'udra children degrades a twice- 
born one. This is the opyiion of Bhrigu. (16) 



* Whether a Brahmana, or a Kshatriya, or a Vais'yu.—fCulluka. 

t The text has 'Sufoipatiya (by procreating children) and 
Tadapatyataya (on account of his having z. e., begetting Suira 
children). Both Mrdhatithi and Govindaraja explain the first 
( \utdpattyh) by "visiting a S'udra wife, accidentally married out of 
ignorance, on the fourth day of her menses for the purpose of 
procreating a child as enjoined in the Sastm, even if there be no 
offspring of that union, and the second O'adapatyatayd) by "wil- 
fully and knowingly begetting children on a S'udra wife. 



g^ Manu Sanihita. 

By lyiflg with a S'udra woman in his bed, a Br&h- 
maiia falls into a degraded existence ; by begetting 
ja child on her, he stands divested of his Brahman- 
ism. (1 7) 

The oblations, offered by a twice-bonj one who is 
assisted by a S'udra woman in the capadty of his 
principal marijed wife in the rite of a Pitri or Daiva 
S'r&ddha ceremony, neither the manes, nor the divini- 
ties partake of Even by practising hospitality to 
Aiithis* he -cannot ascend to heaven, after death. (i8i 

By sucking the lips of a S'udra wife, by inhaling 
her breath, or by begetting children on her person, a 
twice-born one can never find any succour. (19) 

Now hear me discourse on the eight forms of 
marriage, . which contribute to the good, or to the evil 
of the four castes of men in the next world. (20) 

They are known as the Brahma, Daiva, A'rsha, 
Prdjipatya, A' sura, Gdndharva, Rdkshasa and Pat- 
s'dcha, whifch forms the eighth. (21) 

Now I shall discuss all the forms of marriage which 
are proper for each of the social orders, the merit and 
demerit which appertain to each such form, and the 
benefit or otherwise which the offspring of each form 
can accord (to its parents). (22) 

The six forms (of marriage) commencing with the 
first one {Brahma) are proper for Brihmanas ; the four 
forms counted from the end {Pais'dcha) are not sinful 
for Kshatriyas, and the same set excepting that of 
Rnkshasa shall be regarded as proper for Vais'yas. and 
S'udras. (23,) 

The four forms (of Marriage) the seers have ordained 
as proper for Brihmanas ; only the Rikshasa form as 

* Aiithis i. e., chance guests or chance arrivals at his house. 



Manu Samhita. S'S,. 

proper for Kshatriyas, and the A'sura form as propar fof 
Vais'yas and S'udras* (24) 

Thus out of these five formst of marriage,* threet 
are lawful, and two are sinful (unlawful). Let a maft; 
never marry a wife either in the Pis'acha or in the: 
A'sura form, since" these two forms are prohibited. (25) 

A marriage,, whether effected in the pjire Gindharva-,. 
or in the pure Rakshasa form, as described before, or in 
a mode which is a combination of both of them,§ is. 
(primarily) lawful for a Kshatriya. (26.) • 

The form (of marriage) in which .a well-atfired 
bride, decorated with ornaments, is given in marjiage 
to an erudite, good-charactered b.idegroom, especially 
invited by the bride's father himself to , receive her, 
is called Br4hma. (27)- > 

* These are the forms of mar/iage which a Brahraana, a Ksha- 
triya, a Vais'ya and a Sudra shall respectively consider as the most 
approved forms of taking a wife, and think of marrying in any 
.other fashion when the marriage cannot be effected in any of 
these modes. — Kulluka. 

t The five forms of marriage referred to in the text the Prajh- 

patya, the A''sura, the Gandharva, the Rakshasa and the Pisacha. 

t The three lawful forms are the Prajapatya, the Gandharva, 

and the Rakshasa, the Prajapatya form is lawful for Brahmanas ; 

■ the Gandharva, for members of all the four social orders ; and the 

Rakshasa, for Vais'yas and Sudras. — Kulluka. 

§ The text has Mis'ram (mixed) the form of marriage in which 
the bridegroom, conscious of his well-returned or well-requitted 
love, carries away the bride by force or conquest, is called Mis'ra 
or GAndharva-Rakshasa. — Kulluka: 

The marriage of Dushmanta and S'akuntala, furnishes the illus- 
tration of a pure Gandharva form of marriage ; that of Vichitra- 
virja and Ambic4, of a Rakshasa form, and that of Arjuna and 
Subhadra, of a mixed Gandharva and RS,kshasa form. — 



86 Manu Sarithita. 

The form of marriage in which the bride is gifted 
{i.e., given in marriage) to the person duly officiating 
as a priest at a Vaidic sacrifice, which is being cele- 
brated, is called Daiva by the holy sages. (28) 

The lawful form (of marriage) in which a bride, on 
the receipt of an ox and a cow, or of two oxen and two 
kine for the performance of religious sacrifices, is duly 
given in marriage to the bridegroom^ according to the 
ordinance, is called AWsha (by the wise.) (29) 

The form, in which after having worshipped the 
bridegroom, the bride is given to him in marriage with 
the injimction, " let both of you jointly discharge the 
duties of a house-holder, is called PrUjapatya. (30) 

The form, in which the bridegroom, on paying 
money to her father and to herself, out of the prompt- 
ings of his own desire,* receives the bride in marriage, 
is called A'sura.* (31^ 

* The text has Svachchh-andyaf, which means out of his own 
selfish wish, in direct contravention of the provisions of the 
S'istra. It may be set down to the credit of our ancient Rishis 
that, they were the first to condemn, and to rule out of court, 
this commercial element of the matrimonial compact. In all 
primitive sacieties, the father had absolute proprietary rights 
in his sons and daughters, and accordingly he missed no oppor- 
tunity to make a good capital out of his daughters, by selling them 
to the highest bidders in the matrimonial market.. Thus in the 
very nature of things the daughters came to be looked upon as ex- 
cellent marketable commodities, and the dearest purchasers of their 
charms and favour Is the most eligible bridegrooms. No wonder 
then that husbands, in their turn, learnt to look upon their wives as 
a kind of moveable property, a class of slaves whom they had to 
purchase for money or its equivalent. Thus we see in the earliar 
societies of the Roman empire, for-any encroachment on the con- 
jugal rights of a husband, the trespasser had to pay a fine to him 
just in common with an ordinary trespasser on land or on.'any other 



Manu SanihtlA. Sf 

The form, in whieh, for the reason of a reciprocal 
ttiarriage of hearts, the bridegroom is mated with the 
bride, is called Gindharva. It originates from a couple's • 
passionate desire of being united with each other* (32) 

The form of marriage, in which the bridegroom, 
by killing or hurting the guardians or relations of the 
bride, and by forcing open the door of her house,' 
forcibly carries her away, weaping and* screaming, is 
called Rakshasa. (33) 

The form in which the bride, when alone, asleep, 
senseless, intoxicated, or delirious with wine, is ravish- 
ed by the bridegroom,;is called Pis'dcha, the eighth and 
the most sinful form of marriage. (34) 

The marriage of a Brahmana must be preceded by 
the rite of water-gifting, the nfarriage of a member 
of any other caste may be preceded by (negotiated 
with) a formal betrothal, if the parties mutually desire 
it so. (35) 

O Br^hmanas, now hear me fully describe the 
virtues (merits) of these different forms of marriage as 
narrated by Manu of yore. (36) 

civic rights of his neighbour. But the Rishis in their perfect 
wisdom foresaw the evils of this form of legal marriage, which 
is but a modified form of slave-trade, and restricted it to Vaisyas 
(Merchants) and Sudras (artisans) alone whose compulsary stays 
in foreign or distant countries many times left it the only form 
of marriage, open to them among strangers From its name 
we can legitimately presume that this form of marriage was iii 
vogue among the Assyrians .(Asurus , and more so, when we 
consider that in ancient Chaldea and Babylon it was quite honour- 
able for a girl to earn her marriage-dowry even by selling her 
favours. 

* The consummation of marriage by the lovers, even before 
it is formally solemnized, is- not condemned in the Gandharva 
form of marriage. 



S8 Mantc Samhtta 

The male offspring oi ^.Br&hma form of marriage, 
if he does good works, succours his own self, as -vyiell 
as his ten ancestors* and ten descendantst from ^the 
eiEfects of) sin. {37) 

The male oJSspring of a Daiva form of marriage 
succours (his own self and) his seven ancestors and 
seven descendants; and that of an A^sha form of 
iparriage succsurs (his own self) and his three ancestors 
and three descendants, while that of a Prajdpatya. 
form of marriage succours (his own self) and his six 
ancestors and six descendants, (from the effects of) 
sin. (38) 

Sons born of the four forms of marriage, conse- 
cutively counted from the Brahma form, become 
possessed of the energy of Brahma^ and are recognised 
(as well-born) by honest men. (39) 

Handsome looking, wealthy, renowned, possessed 
of fortitude and good qualities, virtuous and amply 
provided with all the objects of enjoyment, these sonsj 
live for a hundred years. (40) 

Sons of the remaining (four) low (forms of marriage) 
are born cruel, untruthful, and hostile to the religion 
of Brahma {i.e., to the i^edas). (41) 

Sons begotten on commendable wives§ arfe' bom 
with commendable traits (in their character) j sons, the 

• Das'a Purvan — Ten ancestors such as the father, the grand- 
father, the great-grand-father, etc., and Das'a Paran means ten 
descendants such as the son, the grandson, the great grandson, etc. 

f Qualities which mark the spirit of a union {i e., form of 
marri^e) are inherited by its offspring. — Kulluka. 

% Offspring of these four forms of marriage, viz , Brahma, 
Daiva. A\shah and Praj&patyah. 

\ Good wives married in any of the four preceding comraen- 
dable forms of marriage. 



M&Hu SamhilH. tg 

t>lfeprril§ of unions with condemnable wives, are bom 
with condemnable traits in their character. Hence, 
M a man avoid a vile form of matrimony. (42) 

In a marriage between a maa and a woman of the 
same caste they shall join their hands, while in the one 
tiontracted between a bride and a bridegroom of differ^ 
ent castes the following rules should be observed. (43) 

In hei' marriage with a Brahmana, a Kshatriya girl 
shall clasp a shaft ; a Vais'ya girl, a goading stick ;* 
and a S'udr5, the frill of his Cloth with her hand, during 
Ihe ceremony. {44) 

Always faithful to her, for sexual pleasures, let him 
Visitt his wife during her nlenstrual period, aVoidiilg 
the days of the Parva,t and when not observing a 
Vow.§ (45) 

* The text has Pratoda which means a stick, or a rod used by 
a cow-herd in goading the kine of his flock. 

The brides shall respectively clasp an arfqW) a gOadiilg-Stlbk, 
etc., carried by the bridegroom in his hand during the cere^ 
taoay.—Kulluka. 

f This regulatiOA is iot one who has not procreated a son, 
the procreation of a son being obligatory oh every ohe for dis- 
charging his debt to the manes. 

Cf. By his birth a Btrahmana is a debtor by three debts. 

By sacrifice he discharges his debt to the deities, by pfo- 
tteating a son he discharges his debt to the manes, and by studying 
the Vedas he discharges his debt to the Rishis. — S'ruti. 

Also compare. — He who visits not his wife after she has bathed 
(on the fburth day of her menses,) commits the sin of foeticide. — 
Par^sara 

For the end o,f begetting a male child he shall visit his wife 
on the even days during her menstrual period. — Sushruta. 

J Parvus, sueh as the day of the full or new moon, etd 

§ A Vowist, as well as one who has begotten a son, stands 
hot under the obligation of visiting his wife during her menstrual 
period. 

12 



go Manu Samhita 

The menstrual period of a woman naturally lasts 
for sixteen nights (days) inclusive of the four days of 
flow, which are condemned by the wise.* (46) 

Of thesjp (sixteen days), the first four, and the 
eleventh and the thirteenth art condemned by the 
wise for sexual purposes, the rest ten days are com- 
mended. (47) 

Sons are born on the even days and daughters on 
the odd ones (of the menstrual period.) Hence, one, 
desiring the birth of a son, shall visit his wife on an 
even day. (48) 

Even on an (odd day, a comparative excesst of the 
paternal element gives rise to the birth of a male child, 
a comparative excess of the maternal element gives 
rise to the birth of a daughter. A sexless child, or a 
twin (a son and a daughter) is born when the paternal 
element is equal to the maternal one. (49) 

Leaving^these (six condemned days) and eight days 
out of the commended ten days, a person, to whatso- 
ever order he might belong, who visits his wife on 
these two days alone, shall be regarded as a Z?/-aAw«a- 
ckdrin.t (50) 

An erudite father of a girl shall not take any thing 
by way of -^'ulka from her bridegroom. By taking 

* The first four days of the flow. 

t The " S'ukra-bahulyam" or A'rtava-bahulyam of the text 
denotes the preponderance of the Katabolic (Pitrika S'akti) or 
Anabolic energy (Mdtrika :>'akti) in the impregnited ovum through 
the gi:eater intensity of the father's or mother's desire at the time. 

MEDHA'xirHi holds that two days are allowed to a man, be- 
longing to any order of the society whatsoever, for the enjoyment 
of conjugal pleasures, and says that, thereby his vow of conti- 
nence is not brolfen. Govindaraja holds that the license is given 
to a man after the death of his only son. ' 



Manu Samhita. gi 

a dowry out of greed, he becomes the seller of his off- 
spring. (51) 

The friends and relations of a woman,* who, out 
of folly or avarice, live upon the property belonging to 
her,t or the wicked ones who oust her of the en- 
joyment of her own balongingst such as cloth, etc.,§ 
go to hell, (after death). (52) 

Even the acceptance of a bovine j?air (by the father 
of the bride from the bridegroom) is designated as 
a dowry by certain authorities, (the acceptance of) a 
dowry be it costly, or be it of insignificant value, 
constitutes the sale of the girl.|| (53) 

* Bandhavah 'friends and relations' is the term that occurs 
in the text. Kulluka explains it by "Pati-Pitradaya," father, 
husband, etc. 

f The text has S'tridhanam (woman's property) which 
consists of dowries given to her by her friends and relations at 
the time of marriage, or on such-liUe occasions — Kulluka. 

% Xari yandni is the term that occurs in the text, Kulluka 
explains it by "horses, slave girls, etc." 

§ Vastram (cloth). It lays down that it is sinful to dispossess 
her even of her most insignificant belonings such as, a cloth or a 
garment. — Kulluka. 

II GoviNDAEAjA, grounding his statement on the view ex- 
pressed in the preceding couplet, opines that, the verse 29 of 
this chapter, which authorises the bride's father to take a dowry of 
a bull and a cow from the bridegroom, does not reflect the opinion 
of Manu on the subject, but is merely an extract from another 
Code, quoted to be subsequently discussed and refuted. The 
acceptance of a dowry, however small and inexpensivesj by the 
bride's father, or by the father of the bridegroom, spells as the5 
price paid for the hands of the bride or of the bridegroom, and 
gives a commercial aspect to the transaction, transforming it 
into a veritable contract of buy and sale. 

Medhatithi is evidently puzzled by this apparent contradiction 
and retires without being able to satisfactorily account for it. 



92 Manw SamMta. 

A marriage in which the bride's relations cIo> 
accept* the dowry (voluntarily presented by the bride- 
groom's father, etc.,") is no sale (of the bride), since 
such a present is but an adoration of the bride, done 
out of love or affection.t (54) 

Seeking many a blessing («.<?., God's gifts) in life, h^r 
father, mother, husband, or husband's younger brother 
shall maintain a bride witht a respectful Iove,t and give 
her ornaments for the decoration of her person. (55) 

[ The deities smile on the femily] where the females 
are honoured (held in respect) ; fruitless are the acts§ 
(in the family) where they are dishonoured. (56) 

KuLLUKA says that, there is no contradiction at all between 
these two verses. In the A'rsha form of marriage although the 
bride's father is authorised to take a bull and a cow in the shape 
of a dowry from the bridegroom, the dowry is accepted to help 
the married couple to celebrate religious sacrifices (Dharmatah) 
and not for any specific gain or benefit of the bride. Under these- 
circumstances it is no dowry [at all, inasmuch as it is misnomer to 
call a benefit benefit that is not actually derived or eiqoyed. 
iVIarriage, according to the Rishis, is a holy sacrament, a kind 
of psychic transformation, the two parties to it being blended 
together in spirit, and for all eternity,'the two parties to it being 
transformed into that "human centaur" which is called man and 
wife. To turn it into a mere social or commercial contract is to 
transform Psyche into a shop-girl. 

* Nadadate i. e. do not appropriate it to their own use, or 
derive any benefit from it. 

f The text has Anris'amsyancha which literally means " out 
of compassion " 

X Pujydh literally means to be adored or worshipped, Kullu- 
KA exphins it by "shall be respectfully supported with delectable 
articles of fare. etc. 

§ Viphald Kriya The religious rites, even duly performed, fail 
to bear their fruits. 



Manu Samhita. 93 

Prosperity reigns supreme in the family where 
females do not grieve ; the family, in -which they grieve, 
suffers a speedy destruction* (57) 

Like a fiend-cursedt home, utterly perisheth the 
house, vsrhich its daughters,t through suffering, mortifica- 
tions, do but (sadly) imprecate. (58) 

Hence they should be satisfied with presents of 
food, raiments, ornaments, etc , by men sediing pros- 
perity, on festive and ceremonial^ occasions. (59) 

In the family where the husband is contended with 
the wife, and the wife with the husband, steadfast is 
the blessing of the deity. (60) 

If even with garments and ornaments the wife feils 
to be attractive, or if the husband does not find any 
pleasure in her, no progeny of the husband is possible 
on account of the lack of that pleasure. (61) 

A charming wife lends her charm to every thing 
and makes the whole world look attractive to her 
husband, a charmle?s|| wife robs the world of its 
charm, {di) 

* The text has Jamaya. Both Medha'tithi and Govinpara'ja 
explain the term by newly married daughters in law, daiighters, 
etc. (Duhitti Navoda Snushddaya.) 

•j- Krityahatani : — Krityh is a kind of female fiend evoked 
by murderous incantations. 

X 'Jamaya, daughters, sisters, daughters-in-law described in 
the preceding stanza. 

§ Satkareshu :— Such as the festivities of Kaumadi (night of the 
full moon in the moijth of A's'vina,) etc. — Kutluka. 

II The text has Arochamana which leterally means charmless, 
Kulluka explains it by Bhartri-Vidveshatayci. Narantara Sam- 
parkat Malinam a wife who through her hostility to the husband 
and her intrigue with another man makes the house gloomy, 



94 Manu Samhita. 

By a bad marriage, by the extinction of religious 
ceremonies, by the non-study of the Vedas, and by 
insulting a Br^hmaiia, the prestige of a good family is 
annihilated* (63) 

By pursuing handy craft* or agriculture, by begetting 
children on a S'udra wife, by trafficking in cows, horses, 
or carts, by entering the king's service, by oflSciating 
as a priest 8Et the sacrifice of one who ought not to 
be so served, by living in open hostility to the Vedas, 
and by their non-study, men (Br^hmanas) degrade their 
families.t (64 — 65) 

Families, rich in the opulence of Vaidic studies and 
in the performance of Vaidic sacrifices, even if they 
be poor in the riches of the world, are counted among 
the illustrious families (of the landi in point of renown 
and dignity. (66) 

In the nuptial firet a house-holder shall perform, 
according to the ordinance, all the house-hold rites,§ as 
well as the five great sacrifices ;]| likewise over that fire 
shall be cooked the (daily) food of the household. (67) 

* The text has Kulanya kulhni Janti — which literally means 
families become no families. Kulluka says that a bad marriage, 
extinction of the religious ceremonies, neglect of Vaidic studies 
and a wilful affront to a Brahmana are the factors, which, being 
done in a family, kill its good name and position in the society. 

■j- The text has Nastikyena Which literally meens by Hying 
the life of an athiest. We have adopted Kulluka's explanation. 

J The text has Bibahike'gnau i. e. in the sacred fire kindled 
on the occasion of his nuptial ceremony as opposed to the A'ha- 
vaniya (sacrificial) fire. 

§ Grihyam Karma— the burnt offerings offered, each morning 
and evening, as well as the rites of Ashtakh S'raddhas (to be 
described later on). Kulluka 

II Pancha-yaj'nas— the five daily sacrificial rites such as, the 
offerings to the Visvadevas (i. e to all the duties) etc. Kulluka. 



Manu Samhita. 95 

A householder has five places where animal lives 
are destroyed ; they are the hearth, the grinding stoney 
the broom-stick, the pestle and mortar, and the stool 
for the water-pitcher. These five, when performing 
their proper functions, kill animal-life. (68) 

For the expiation" of the sin committed by him in 
each . of these five places, the great sages have ordained 
that, the householder-celebrants of sacrifices*(«.e., house^ 
holders) shall daily perform the five great sacrifices 
{Pancka-Fajnas\ {69) 

The sacrifice of Brahma consists in teaching the 
Vedas, offering oblations or libations to the manes is 
called a Pitri-yajna, burnt offerings to the deities con- 
stitute a Daiva-yajna ; offering oblations (food) to the 
animals is called a Bhuta-yajna, while hospitality to 
chance-guests is called a Nri-yajna, (70) 

By not suffering the daily performance of these five 
sacrifices to be omitted, a householdft-, even living in 
his house, is not associated with the sin committed 
in the five life-killing places in the household {Pancha- 
suni) (71) 

He who does not feed the deities, the chance-guests, 
the beasts, the manes, and his own self, each day, by 
performing the five great sacrifices, is a dead man, even 
though he breathes. (72) 

The five great sacrifices are czlled. A hutam, Hutam, 
Prahutam,, Brdhma-hutam and Prasitam. ^73) 

A Brahnia-yajna or muttering of Mantras is called 
Ahutam ; offering oblations (food) to the beasts is called 
Prahutam ; hosptality to men, chance-guests and Brih- 
maaas, in special, is called Brdhma-hutam, and offering 
oblations to the manes (in connection with the daily 
S'raddas) is called Prasitam. (74) 



§6 Man'u HamkilA. 

[In the event of his incapacity of practising hoSpi- 
taUty to chance-guests, etc.], let him be constantly 
engaged in studying the Vedas^ and in making burnt 
offerings to the divinities. He, who constantly engages 
himself in doing the works of the deities, supports all 
the universe. (75) 

Libations of clarified butter duly cast in the sacri- 
ficial fire aScend to the sun ; from the sun originates 
the rain ; from the rain, do the provisions ; and from the 
provisions, the creatures. (76) 

As all creatures live by taking recourse to the air, 
so all the.different orders (of mendicants, forestsiwellers 
and anchorites) depend upon the householder for their 
existence. {77) 

As the three orders of ascetics are maintained by 
the householder with the gifts of food and knowledge 
of the eternal Vedas, the householder is the foremost of 
all the four orders. (78) 

Desiring eternal heaven, and happiness in this life, 
one shall assiduously discharge the duties of a house- 
holder. A weak mind and the imcontroUed senses are 
the barriers against the proper discharge of these 
duties. {^<^ 

The Rishis, manes, animals, guests and relations 
expectantly look upon the householder ifor maintc' 
nance, etc.) Hence, a wise householder shall properly 
discharge the duties he owes to them. (80) 

Let him satisfy the Rishis with his Vaidic studies ; 
the deities with the proper burnt offerings ; the manes, 
with the S'raddha offerings ; the guests, with food ; 
and the animals, with oblations offered unto them. (81) 

Let him constantly celebrate the {Pdrvana) S'rSddha 
ceremonies by offering fruit, (,ediblej roots, boili d rice, 



^ Manu Samhita. 97 

Xfralfer and vegetables, etc., unto his manes, and evoke 
•their satisfaction in special. (82) 

In connection with the celebration of a S'rdddha 
ceremony included within the five daily sacrifices, let 
him feed a single Brihmaua ; he need not feed any 
Br4hmaaa in connection with the celebration of a 
Vais'vadeva sacrifice. (83) 

Let a Brihmana offer, each day, oblatigjis of conse- 
crated boiled rice, cooked over the household fire, 
•unto the following deities according to the Regula- 
tion, {pizj (84) 

Unto Agni, unto Soma, unto Agni and Soma com- 
'bined, unto all the deities, unto Dhanvantari, unto 
Kuhu, unto Anumati) unto Prajipati, unto the earth 
■and firmament, and unto Svistakrit at the end. (85-^86) 

Having thus duly offered oblations unto each of 
■these deities, he shall circumambulate them from the 
east by the south and west to the north as follows :— 
Obeisance to Indra and obeisance to the attendants of 
Indra in the east, obeisance to Yama and obeisance 
■to the attendants of Yama in the south, obeisance to 
Varuaa and obeisance to the attendants of Varuna in 
'the west, and obeisance to Soma and obeisance to the 
■attendants of Soma .in the north. (87) 

Then at the threshold of the sacrificial chamber he 
shall offer oblations unto the Maruts, imto the " water" 
in the water, and unto the Vanaspatis (lords of the 
forest) in the pestle and mortar. (88) 

On the head of the Vdstupurusha he shall offer obla- 
tions unto the goddess S'ri, by saying, " obeisance unto 
S'ri, at his foot to the goddess Bhadrakali, by saying 
" obeisance linto Bhadrakali," imto Brahma inside the 
chamber, by saying, "obeisance unto Brahma," and 

13 



9$ Manu Samhita. 

finally unto the presiding deity of the household, by 
saying, " obeisance unto V dstudevata." (89) 

Unto all the deities, unto ghosts that are abroad by 
day, and unto those that roam about in the night he 
shall offer oblations in the sky. (90) 

On the ground, at his back, he shall offer oblations 
unto all the ghosts, by saying, " oblations unto all the 
spirits," and the residue of the food (boiled rice), thus 
offered unto t^e ghosts) he shall collect, and offer 
to the manes in the south, by saying, " obeisance to the 
manes." (91) 

Unto dogs, unto the degraded, unto Chanddlas* and 
persons afflicted with diseases which are the out-come 
of sin,t and unto crows and worms he shall offer 
oblations of boiled rice on the groimd, taking care that 
they may not be soiled with dust. (92) 

A Br^hmaua, who thus daily worships all creatures 
with food, assumes a resplendent body, and goes by the 
straightest road to the abode of supreme bliss.f (93) 

After offering these oblations, a householder shall 
first feed the Atithi guests arrived at his house, and 
then dole out ■.alms§ to Brahmacharins and mendi- 
cants (94) 

A Brihmana householder obtains the same merit 

* The text has " S'vapachas " which literally means cookers 
or eaters ot dog's flesh. 

t The text has Paf>a-rogmam i. c. persons afflicted with le- 
prosy, phthisis, and kindred affections. Kulluka. 

J The text has Sa Gachchhati Param Sthdnam. Kulluka 
explains it by " he is merged in the supreme Brahma. 

§ The text has Bhikshh, which means a morsel of grain given 
to a poor man as alms. 

Grasamhtra Bhavet Bhikshh ( A morsel of food is the quan- 
■>-4ily that shall be given as alms to a beggarj — S'atatapa. 



Manu Samhiti. 99 

by giving alms to beggars as a Brahmachdrin does by 
making the gift of a cow to his preceptor in confor- 
mity with the ordinance. (95) 

Let alms, or pitchers, fvill of water, be gifted to a 
Brihmana, thoroughly conversant with the meanings of 
the i^edas, by one duly worshipping him, and mutter- 
ing words of benediction. (96) • 

Oblations offered imto the manes and deities by 
men, who, ignorant of the true spirit of gift-making, 
make gift unto burnt out* Brihmanas, certainly do 
perish. (97) 

Oblations cast in the mouth-fire of a Brahmana, 
kindled with the energy of Vaidic study and peniten- 
tial austerities, succour one from great danger and from 
great sin as well. (98.) 

Let a householder give a cushion, and water for 
washing his feet unto an Atithi, airrived at his house 
(without invitation), and duly offer him cooked rice- 
with curries etc., according to his might, (gig-i 

A Brdhmana guest, liappening to remain unfed and 
unattended to even in the house of a householder, who 
daily lives upon the pickings of the field, or worships 
the five .fires,t carries away the merit of all his pious 
acts. (100) 

* The text has Bhasmibhuta which literally means burnt 
down to ashes. Kulluka e.^cplains it by "Brahroanas who are 
devoid of Vaidic studies and do not offer oblations to- the manes 
and deities, and hence are like unto the extinguished charcoal. 

■)■ The text has Panehagninapi j^uhvatah : The worshipper of 
the^five fires, «.«., an extremely indigent Brahman. The five fires 
are the Tretigni ( the triad of fires, , the Avasakhyaagni and the 
Sabhya, Sabhya being the fire which on« uses iv warming hirosdf 
( in want of c\ot'b,ti.)~-KMuk<u 



100 Mann Samhtta 

Haysj* groiind,t water, and a sweet word, whicfo 
forms the fourth (in the list), are never wanting in the- 
houses of the good. (loi) 

A Brihmana, whi resides for a single night in the 
house (of another), is called an Atithi (chance guest< ; 
since there is no certainty of his staying (there, the- 
next day) he i| called an Atithi.X (102) 

A Bra.hmana living in the same village with him, 
or one who lives on his wits, even if he calls at the 
house of a man living with his wife and (sacred) fire 
therein, must not be called an Atithi. (103) 

Householders, who, ignorant of the demerit of 
eating food given by others, stroll about in a -village- 
other than his own, out of a greed for sharing other 
men's hospitalities, become the domestic beasts of those 
whose hospitalities they then partake of (104) 

An Atithi arrived after sunset§ at the house must 
not be discarded under any circumstances. An Atithi 
(guest), whether arrived at the house in the proper 
or improper time, must not be kept unfed. || (105) 

» The text has Trindni (hays) i'.*'., hays for a bed. — Kulluka. 

■\ The text has Bhumi, grournd Kullbka expla'ns it bjr 
A'sanam, a cushion. 

X Atithi is derived from "A," without and " Sthiti," stay i.e., 
onei whose stay in the house is uncertain for more than one night. 

§ The text has Suryodhah, literally carried or borne by the win. 

II In the proper time i. e. at the time of the performance oi 
the Vais'vadeva vali (offerings to all the deites.) 

GoviNDARAJA holds that it is a special provision for hospitalities' 
to Atithis discarded on the score of not arriving at the time of the 
Vais'vadeva offering or of arriving at night fall. 

Cf. O king, the sin of discarding an Atithi after sunset is eight 
times greater than what is incurred by not practising hospitality to- 
xn Atitht in the day, — Vishnupuranam. 



Mann Samhita. 'or 

Let not (a householder) eat that himself which hiy 
Atithi has not partaken of; hospitality to an AtHhi 
brings on wealth, fame, and longevity, and ensures 
heaven to'him who practises it. (io6) 

Cushions, bedsteads, beddings, following* and wor- 
ship should differ according to the stations of Atithis. 
Better cushions, etc., should be given to Atithis of 
superior status, ordinary ones to Atithis of equal rank 
with the host, and inferior ones to Atithis of inf^ior 
ranks (in life). (107) 

If a guest {Atithi) arrives at his house after the- 
completion of the Vais'vadeva offering, and after another 
guest has previously arrived, he shall duly cook and. 
offer food (boiled rice) to the second Atithi, but there 
is no need of making aisecond offering to the Vais'va- 
devas.f (108) 

Let not a Brahmana mention his own name and 
family for enjoying one's hospitality ; he, who eats by 
giving out the name of his own self and family,, eats- 
egesta. (109) 

A Kshatriya, Vais'ya, or S'udra guest in the house 
of a Br^hmana, as welljas a preceptor or a relation, hap- 
pening to call at his house, is not called an Atithi. {110) 

But even if a Kshatriya calls (at the house of a 
Brahmana) as an Atithi^X the master of the'house shall 

• The text kas Anuvrajydm which means an act of respectfully 
following a revered guest at the time of bis departure. — Kulluka 

+ In Gonneetion with the sacred act of hospitality it is eh- 
joined in the S'astra that offerings should be made to att the 
deities ( Vis''<oadevas) before feeding the Atithi. 

t The text has Aiithi^Dharmena which means a Kshatriya, 
a resident of a, distant or different village, seeking the hospitati- 
ty of the house for the Asy.— Kulluka. 



r02 Manu Samhila. 

feed him sumptuously after the Brihmana Atiihis have 
been repasted. ( 1 1 1 ) 

If Vais'yas and S'udras arrive at his (Brihmana's) 
house as A tit his, he, out of compassion, shall feed them 
in the company of his own servants* {ii2) 

His friends and relations happening to be guests 
in his house out of love or affection, he (Brihraaaa) 
shall feed them with cooked food, as his circumstances 
would admit of, in the company of his own wife.t (113) 

Newly married daughters and daughters-in-law,t: 
infants, sick folks and pregnant women in the house 
he shall unhesitatingly feed before§ feeding the 
A tit his. (114) 

He, who without having fed the abovenamed persons 
and the Atithis in the house, first eats anything himself, 
does not know that, his body will be devoured by dogs 
and vultures, after death, (i 15 1 

Let the master and mistress of the house eat vrluit 

• The text has Kuiumva which literally means dependants. 
KoLLUKA explains it by " in the company of the servants of the- 
house after the Kshatriya Atithis \i%\& been fed and before the 
master and mistress of the house have taken their repast. 112: 

•j- The text has Saha- Bharjyaya i.e. in the company of his 
wife. KuLi-uKA says that it is only another mode o-f Saying that 
at the time when the master of the house will eat his meal, for 
it is laid down in the S'hstra that the meal time of the master 
is the same with that of the mistress of the house. 113. 

% The text has Suvdsinik which literally means well clad 
girls. We have adopted Kulluka's explanation. 

§ MedhatiTHI reads the line as Atithibhyonvagevaitan, si- 
multaneously with feeding the /4<z'</iti (guests.) We have how- 
ever adopted Kulluka's reading and explanation in our rendering - 
ef the te.xt. 114. 



Manu Samhita. loj 

remains after feeding the Brihmanas (guests), relations 
and servants, (i 1 6) 

After worshipping the deities, Rishis, guests, manes 
and the household divinities* with oblations of boiled 
rice, l«t a householder eat his food at the end. (117) 

He, who cooks food for his own sole use,t eats sin ; 
food, which is the residue of sacrificial obl?itions, is 
recommended by the virtuous. (1181 

One's King,! Rittvika, Sndtaka^\ preceptor, son-in- 
law,|| father-in-law or maternal uncle, happening to 
call at his house after the lapse of a year,l he shall 
well come by first offering him a cup of honey {Madhu- 
parkom). (119) 

A king or a Snataka^ happening' to call at his house 
«ven within a year (of the last visit) on the occasion 
of a sacrificial ceremony, he shall welcome in the 
method of Madhuparkam, and not otherwise ; this is 
the conclusion. (120) 

Each evening, the housewife shall offer oblations of 
cooked rice, without muttering any Mantras^ to the 

* The text has Grihyds'cha Devatdh Kulluka says that 
the Bhuta- Yajna j(ofFering oblations to beasts) is also included 
within the meaning of the term. 

f Cf. Kevaldgho Bhavati Kevaladah (jhe who eats alone be- 
comes associated with sin.)— S'ruti. 

% A duly crowned Kshatriya. — Kulluka. 
§ He who observes the vow of ceremonial ablution simply 
as a vowist or for studying the Veas. — Kulluka. 

I! The text has Priya, Kulluka explains it by "Jamhta, a 
son-in-law. 

\ The text has Parsimvatasardt; after the expiry of a year. 
The prefix Pari in this instance has, according to Jay4ditya, the 
sense of "leaving aside." 

Medha'tithi reads it as ,Partsamvatsarin, i.e., those who 
have come back after the lapse of a year. 



504 Mattu Samkita. 

Vais'vedevas, inasmuch as such offerings are erijoifled ' 
to be made, (eaeh) morning and evening. (121 1 

-Let a Brkhmana, who is a keeper of (the sacred) fire, 
offer a Pinda S'rdddha to his manes on the day of the 
new moon, and after ithat perform the Pindanvahdrya.- 
kam S'rdddha from month to month. (122) 

Monthly ^i'raddkas offered by men to their manes 
aie called 4*'^ahdryam by the wise ; commendable 
meat-offerings should be madei to them on these occa- 
sions. (123) 

O ye foremost of Brihmatfas, now I shall fully des- 
cribe who shall be invited to, and who shall .be" avoided 
in, a S'rdddha repast, as well as the number (of Br^h- 
manas) to be invited and the nature of food with which 
they are to be fed. (124) 

Two Brihmanas shall be fed on the occasion of a 
Daiva S'rdddha ceremony ; £tnd three, on the occasion 
of a Pitri S'rdddha ; or one BrShmana on each such 
occasion. Even prosperous enough to feed many Brah- 
manas, he shall not exceed the number, (fixed) (125) 

In cases of feeding a large number of (Brihmanas), 
proper attendance to them, and ascertainment of their 
purity, impurity, and the place and time of repaating 
(invitation I are the five factors that axe destroyed 
<apt to suffer). (126) 

This rite (of offering oblations to the manes) on 
each new moon* day is said to be conducive to the 

» The text has Vidhu-kshaye (i. e. on the last day of the moon's 
wane) which is the reading adopted by Kulluka, Kandaraja and 
Medha'tithi. Govindaeaja reads it as Vidhi-kshaye and explains 
it as this is the rule ( Vidhi) on the last days of the moon's wane 
{Kshaye), i. e., such S'rdddkas siiould be offered to the manes on 
the day of the new moon, each month. We have adopted 



MaHu SumMtn. 'loj 

%fcttfefit of the manes. He, who is constantly engaged in 

»performing this ^marta'*^ rite, acquires Qpulence.t (127) 

Givers shall give unto Br&hmanas, well-read in the 

Vedas, the oblations of food they have offejred to tjie 
<manes and deities ; given to the most deserving reci- 
pients (Brahmanas), they bear great fruits. 1.128) 

A Brihraa^a shall feed a single Brahma^a, conversant 
■with th« Ifedax, on the occasion of a S'raaaha ofiered 

to the manes or deities ; great is the merit which he 
•shall acquire by -feeding such a single (Brahmana), there 
'being ,no merit jn -feeding a large number of Br4hmaiias 
who are ignorant of Vaidic Mantras. (129) 
> ' The parentage.J etc, of -a F^^a-knowing BrAhmaija 
-should be far enquired into; Vaidic Brahmaiiap, sons 
of anscestors who had been well conversant with the 

Vgdas, are the vehieles§ for conveying th« oblations to 
'the manes and deities. Gifts made unto such Brihmauas 
>aje as meritorious as gifts made unto A4ithis.\\ (130) 

In f^the :>'rdddha where thousands of Brdhmanas, 
ignorant of the Vedas.f9xe -fed ; if a single Fe^a-know" 

■KutiUKA'STeading as being identidal with those of the aticient 
'commentators of th£ SamhitH. 

• The text has L»ukihi, Kuixuka explains it by Smarta, ?.e., 
a rite enjoined to be performed in the ^mriti. 

f The text has Preta-Krityd, Kulluka explains it by Pitro- 
pakarartham, i.e., conducive to the benefit of the manes, and hence 
'imparting Wealth, good progeny etc. to the performer by way of 
■reward.^ 

% Durddiva Pariksketa, the parentage, piety, erudition of these 
Brdhmanas and their remote ancestors should be enquired so as 
to determine. y«;hel^her they haye acquired their excellence by 
■heredityor not. 

§ Tirthas : Lit. landing places. 

II The same merit which one acquires by practising hospitality 
•and making gifts to Atithis. - * . . 

J4 



k'oS Mmu SamAHa. 

ihg Brihnlana therein is satisfied with the S'r&dXhH 
repast, the merit of feeding such thousands on th® 
occasion is acquired by feeding that Brahmana 
alone. (131) 

Oblations offered to the man«s and deities should 
be given to Brahmanas who are the niost excellent in 
respect of knowledge ; blood-stained hands are not 
washed pure ij/ith blood. (132) 

A Brahmaaa, ignorant of the Vedas, shall have 
to eat as many morsels of burning spear-heads> after 
death, as he eats of the s'rdaaha oblations to the manes 
and deities, in life. (133) 

Some Brdhmanas are devoted to (the cultivation 
of) self knowledge, others are devoted to the prac 
tice of penitential austerities ; some there are who are 
devoted to the study of the l^edas and to penitential 
austerities^ while others are devoted to work. (134) 

Oblations offered to the manes shall be given to 
BtihtAanas devoted to the knowledge of self to eat, 
oblation^ offered to the deities should be duly given to 
,all these four classes of Brahmanas., (135) 

Of a Brihmaiia who is well-versed in the <^edas 
and whose father was ignorant of the l^edas, and one 
who is himself ignorant of the Vedas but whose fathet 
was well-versed in them, ^he ignorant son of the Veda^ 
knowing father should be regarded as a \<rorthier guest 
(in respect of a o'raddha repast) ; but since adgrable 
are the Mantras of the Vedas, a Fe^/a-knowing son 
of a father, ignorant of the Vedas, should be as well- 
honoured (with an invitation to a H'raddha repast. 
(136—137) 

No one, out of friendship, should be invited to a 
S'raddha repast,, friendship should be shown with other 



Manu Samkita-. rof 

acts and monetary (presents). Let him invite -a Brih- 
mana to the SWdddha repast whom he neither knows 
to be his friend or foe. (138) 

A S'rAddka* offered by a person to his manes or- 
to the deities, in connection with, which it ts mainly 
bis friends that are repasted, fails to bear any fruit in; 
the next world. (139) • 

A person (Brihmana), whoj out of ignorance, tries, 
to make friendship through the. instrumentality of a. 
Srnddha repast, that worst of BrShraanas, for acquir- 
ing, such .SVarfflfAfl friends, falls from heaven.t (140) 

A Sraddha repast, given to one?s friends and rela- 
tions, is, called a fiendish repast by the Rishis. Lika 
blind cows huddled together in one pen such a repast;, 
may contribute to cement friendship in this world, but 
gives no benefit in the next. (141). 

As a sower, by sowing seeds in an alkaline soil, 
reaps no harvest, so a giver, by giving oblations (i <?., 
feeding) taa Brahmana, ignorant of the Vedas, (in con- 
nexion with a S'raddha), derives no benefit. (142). 

A honorarium, duly given to an erudite (Veda- 
knowing> Brahmana, makes its giver and recipient 

* GoviNDARAjA asserts that feeding Brahmanas is the essential 
{actor of i S'raddha ceremony, the offiering, of Pindas being only 
its minor aad a,ccessory feature. Kulluka, following A'pastamhhn 
aad others, asserts that the offering of oblations or offerings to the 
manes and the subsequenJt acceptance of those offerings by the 
Brihmanas, present, form, what is.called.a S'raddha. 

+ The heaven-giving merit of a S'raddha is described by 
Yhj navalkya. 

Longevity., progeny, opulence, erudition, heaven, salvation, 
happiness and kingdom, do .the maaes,. satisfied, with S'r&diUia, 
offerings, impart. 



l.&^ Manu SamhiHi. 

entitled to. religious merits^ both, in this world' and tlte 
next. (143) 

[In the absence of a qualified "BrUhmana], better it^ 
is to feed a friend or a relatioa than to feed an erudite; 
foe on the occasion of a S'rdddka ceremony, as 
oblations offered to a foe fail to bear any fruits in the; 
next world. (1^4); 

On the occasion of a S^radebha repast, let him care- 
fully feed a Btahmana who has studied the Rik, Yajus^. 
or the Sama Veda with all its sub-divisions (such as thfc 
Mantras, Brahmanas, etc^v (145); 

The satisfaction,, which the seven generations of his. 
ancestors who feeds Miy such BrAhmana (on the oc- 
casion, of a SWdddha ceremony), derive from the act ; 
lasts for all eternity. (146) 

The aforesaid Veda-knowing, Btahmanas [S'rotriyasy 
should be regarded as the: worthiest recipieaits off 
SWaddha oblations, offered by a man to the manes or 
deities, the following, are their substitutes whom the. 
wise shall feed when, such S'mtriyas. would be unavaiK 
able. ii!47> 

One's mother's &ther, mover's brother, sister's- san„ 
fetlier-in-law, preceptor, daughter's son,, son-in-law,, 
and sons, of mother's; or father's sistess: priest,, and dis- 

* The te.xt has: Phalabhdginah • •■ * Pretyachehacha.. 
Both Mi'DHATiTHi antt'GoviNDARAjA explain it by "honorariutn- 
dflly g^iven to.a Veda-know.ing Brihmana accords spiritual benefitr 
to the donor in the next, and fame and good name etc., ina 
this world. KutLUKA explains that such, a gift accords fame- 
etc;, to th-e donor in thiS' w%>rld' and salvatidOk etc., in the next,. 
as described" by Yhjnavalkya, and' the recipient of the donation,, 
by celebrating religions sacri'ice's- therewith, acquires spirituali' 
benefit aftd the fame of earning- honest money in this world, as^ 
an sacrifice celebuted with. iU-gotten< gain fails to bear. anjrKcuits. 



re<; should be fed on the occasion Of a S'fSddha 
r.epast in the^ absence, dfi (^he ten. aforesaid SWotriyas)-.. 
(148) 

FitnesS) erudition^ etc, of Brahmanas, to be fed. on, 
the occasion of a' /?«?»« 5Vi</^A« cereanony, must not. 
be tested, which shall be carefully done- in respect of:" 
those to be- fed, on the: occasion of a. J Va<^<//4fl offering; 
to the: manes. (142) " 

Those BrAhmatias, who are gold-stealers, degradtedi, 
sexless; or athiests must not be invited, on the oc- 
casion of a Srdddha, offered, to the manes, or to thei 
deities, this, is tha- dictum of Manu. (1,50) 

Brahmacbdrins who. wear clotted hairs,* or who are^ 
ignorant of the* Vedas, Brahmanas, who are afflictedt 
with skin diseasest or are- gamblers, or ofiScjate as. 
priests at many men's sacrifices must not beefed, on the- 
occasioni of a; s''raddha ceremony. (iiSi) 

BrAhmanas, who are: professional physicians,, or, live: 
by worshipping divine; images, or are meat-«ellers,- or 
carry on any kind of trade, should, be avoided on the. 
occasion of a S'raddha, offered to the manes,, or to, the; 
deities. (152), 

Servants of the king or of a. village community,, 
those, afflicted with bad nail, black toothed ones, those: 
who are hostile to their preceptors, and those (Br&h-- 
manas) who have renounced their sacred fires and. 
leligious rites (enjoined to be performed in) the Vedas 
and Smriti, or live by usury. (153): 

* The text has Jfatilam, Kulluka explains it asi Brahma- 
chdrins who wear clotted hair or clearly- shave their heads. 

, -f The text h^s Durbalam, weak. Kulluka. explains it by- 
Briihraanas suffering from cutaneous' affections. 



I lO Mann Samhita 

Brahmanas sufferii^ from phthisis, those wha rear 
cattle for livelihood, or marry before their elder- 
brothers have been married, or have renounced the 
performance of the five (daily house-hold) sacrifices, or 
are inimically disposed towards the BrElbmanas, or 
suffer their younger brothers to marry before them, or 
are incumbents upon endowments (whether money or 
monasteries) mafle by others for the public weal. (iS4)> 

A Br^hmana, who is a professional dancer, a Yati 
or a Brahmachdrin whose vow of continency has been 
soiled biy the contact of a woman, the Rahman a) 
husband of a Sluira woman, one begotten on a re- 
married widow,* the son of a woman bom before her 
marriage, and one who lives; with a faithless wife. (vi55) 

He who teaches the Vedas for money,, as well as 
he who learns them from him, he who. has got Sudra 
disciples or teaches S'udra students, a. harsh tongued 
(Brahmaua), and sons born in adultery d"uring tlite life^ 
time or after the death of their mother's husband. (t$(>) 

One who has wrongfully deserted his parents; or- 
preceptor, as well as those who are associated either ini 
Vedaic study or through marriage with those- who. have; 
been degraded in life. (157) 

One who is guilty of poisoning or oCincendiarism,. 
one who- sells the Soma plant, one who partakes of 
the food of a man bora in adultery^ a sea-faringv 

* The text has Punarbhava. It may also mean- the son of a>' 
woman born in. adultery after the demiseof her husband. 

t The text has Kundak, a son born injadultery during the- 
Hfe-tirae of her mother's lawful husband: Kulluka, holds that, 
the two kinds of incestuous offspring' mentioned in, the preced-- ' 
ing couplet are here contemplated by the termj Kputdah, whichi. 
includes both Kundah and Galakah*, 



Manii SamMta. tti 

'BtS.'hinana, a professional eulogist, an oilman, and a 
te:g6r of doeuments or a falsifier of weights. (15S) 

One who quarrels "with his father,* a deceitful one.t 
•a drunkard,} one afflicted with a (foul) sinful disease ot 
imder an 5M,pr6cation, an aitogaftt (BrAhmana), as well 
■as the one who deals in any Mnd of sweet sap such as, 
<sugarcane juice, etc.) (159^ 

A (Brahmana) who constructs bovfs and ^rows, 
one who marries a girl with an unmarried elder sister, 
one who injures his friends, one who lives by gambling 
Vith dice, and he who has learnt the Fedas from his 
ison. (160) 

One afflfeted with epilepsy, scrofula, or leucoderma, 
or one who is wicked, insane, or blind, or speaks evil 
of the Vedas. (ifii) 

A trainer of cows, horses, camels or elephants, a 
,professional astoologer, a tamer of beasts and one 
teaches the science of war. (162) 

One who obstructs a water course or diverts it in 
^another channel, a professional mason or ar<:hitect, one 
who plants trees, or goes on errands for money. (163) 

A dog-player, one who lives by training felcons, a 
defiler of .girls, one who kills animals, one who is 
in the "service of a S'udra, and one who serves all 
classes of society as a priest. (164) 

One who does not observe the riiles of good con- 
duct, a sexless (Brahmana), one who daily begs, or lives 

* The text has Pitra Vivadamdndh, Ki;lluka explains it, one 
who quarrels with his father whether for arguing a point (A 
6'astra or for any worldly object. 

■j- Several editions read lieknrah, squint-eyed. 

% Madyapa i.e., one who drinks any form of intoxicating liquoif 
other than j/uru ^wiaej. 



^y agriculturfe, one afflicted with elephaiitisis '6f tlft 
legs, and one condemned by honest men. 1 165) 

A Br&hmana who rears sheep or buffalloes fori a 
living, one who has married a girl previously wedded 
to another, and one who carries corpses for money, all 
these Brihmanas should be studiously avoided on th6 
occasion of a a'rdddha ceremony. (j66) 

A good aad erudite Br^hijiacta must avoid all these 
(t e., the aforesaid) vile and condemnable Brihmaaas, 
who disgrace the r©w of eaters ia a S'rdddha re- 
past. (167) 

A Brahmana, who has Hot studied the Vedas, is 
like unto a rush fire that is soon extinguished, to him 
oblations must; not be offered, as ho one casts fire^ 
offerings in the ashes. <i68) 

The merit which the giver acquires in the oth^ 
virorld by giving oblations unto Brahmanas, unfit to be 
^iven access to a row of diners, in connection with a 
di'rdddka offered to the manes, or to the deities, now 
h,earme describe in detail. ^169) 

Whatever is eaten by Brahmauas who ^e non- 
observant of the l^aidk '&i S'dstric vows, or by those 
who are guilty of the sin of Parivetta, or by Brahmauas 
\vho are uniit to sit in the row of diners (. ipdnkteyas) 
in a J 'r.iddlia repast, is eaten by monsters. (170; 

A younger brother, who marries or kindles the 
sacred fire before his elder (brother) has married or 
kindled such a fire, is called a Farivettd, the latter a 
Parivitta. (l^l) 

A Parivetid, a Parivitia, the bride given away in 
5such a marriage, the giver of the bride and the priest 
who solemnizes the marriage ceremony, aii tnese tive> 
igo to hell, (after death). {1/2) 



MafiU Samhita, 1 15 

Hfc, Vvho, otherwise thaii undeir ail appointment of 
'begetting a' son on her, visits the widow of his deceased 
elder brother, out of passion, is Called the husband of 
a deceased elder brother's widow. (173) 

Sons begotten by a man on ^nothibr's wife are 
dialled either Kundas or Gotakas. The son of a 
woman, born in adultery, during the^life tinie of her 
iawful husband, is called a Kunda, while a son begotten 
oh a i^ridow, after the demise of h.tt huSband> is called 
a Goldka. '(174) 

5Vafl'flf/(ft oMations* offered to either of these two 
kinds of sons, (incestuously) begotten on another nian's 
wifis, destroy all the merits of their donors (both iii thii 
world and the next, 1175) 

If a Brahmana, wnfit to be invited to a S'rdddha 
repast (Apdnkieya),f 'sees a number of comp'eteht 
Brihmanas eating their meal (in connection therewith.), 
the unfortunate giver of the repast is deprived of the 
ttierit of feeding that number of Brahnjanas, seen 
eating by the Ap&nkteya one.^(i76} 

[In the event of the dinnet being] thus looked 
•atj by a completely blind ApAnktey.a, the giver of the 
repast is deprived of that much merit as is acquired by 
feeding ninety Brahmanas ; looked at by one, blind in the 
one eye, he is robbed of the merit which is acquired by 

• Any oblatitjn whether offered to the manes, or to the deities 
on the occasion of a S^rdddha ceremony. 

t Such as Brahmanas, guilty of gold stealing etc. 

% How can a'blind man see ? The meaning is that, if a blind, 

ApSnkteya intruder Can reasonably infer from sounds, etc., that 

tberepast is going on. KulIuka explains that a blind, Apdnkte^a 

lonrooker, sitting at a place whence it is possible for one with 

eyes to writnes:s the repast. 

'5 



114 Manu Samhita. 

feeding sixty Brahmanas ; looked at by a leper (leuco- 
dermic Brihraana) or by one afflicted with a sinful 
malady, he is robbed of the merit which is acquired by 
feeding a hundred or a thousand Brahmanas. (177) 

If a Brihmana, who is the priest of S'u^ras, touches 
with his limbs any number of worthy Brahmanas, • 
eating a S'raddha repast in the same row with him, 
the giver of thS repast is deprived of the merit of 
feeding the Brahmanas so touched (by the priest of 
S'udras). (178) 

Even a K^^/a-knowing BrAhmana, who has accepted, 
o«t of greed, [any gift from a Brfthmana who serves 
as the priest of S'udras, shall meet his doom, like an 
unbaked clay-pot (immersed) in water. (179) 

A gift made unto a (Bl^hmana) seller of Somaplant 
is like unto excreta,* a gift made unto a professional 
physician is like unto pus and blood. Destroyed is the 
gift which is made to a paid worshipper of a village 
deity {Dcvala), while that which is given to a usurer 
(Brihmana) can not standt before the deity. (i8o) 

The gift made to a trader (Brihmana) is of no bene- 
fit either here or hereafter. Like libations of clarified 
butter cast in the ashes is the gift made to a Bsfthmana 
who is the son of a faithless widow, born after her hus- 
band's dennse. (iSi) 

Oblations offered to the manes and deities, if they 
are given to the aforesaid impious said condemnable 
BrihmanM who are not fit to be invited to a b'rdddha 

* Can never be acceptable to the manes or deities — ^Kulluka. 

+ The text has Apratishthamfu which literally means has n© 
lotus standi. KuLLUKA explains it by" Anas'rayttaya Nishpha- 
lam, futile as it is not supported (csutiteninced; by the gods. 



Manu Samhita. 1.15 

repast, are like unto blood, fat, flesh, marrow, bones 
etc.,* this is what the wise men say. (182) 

Hear me speak in detail of those foremost of 
Brihmanas whose presence sanctifies a row (of diners) 
in a S'raddha repast which has been sullied by the 
presence of an Ap&nkteya BrUhmana, (not fit to sit in 
the row). (183) 

Those (Br&hmanas), who are foremosf {i.e., well read) 
in all the Vedas and Vedangas,^ and whose ten ances- 
torsj were well conversant with the Vedas., are called 
sanctifiers of the »ow (Panktipavanas) > 184) 

He who has taken the vow sf reading the Trind- 
chiketa,\ or the three Suparna'i\ or has studied the six 
allied subjects of Vedic study, or sings the Jyeshtha 
Sdman, or keeps the five sacred fires, or is the o£Espring 

* KuLLUKA says that in th6 opinion of the wise these oblations 
are transformed into many an abominable thing, such as raw fat, . 
meat, etc. which their giver to the worthless Brahmanas is obliged 
to partake of in the next world ; or he is necessitated to take 
birth in a family in which such impure things are eaten. 

f The text has Pravachaneshucha. Pravachanam means any 
branch of knowledge which serves to illucidate the meaning of 
the Vatdic text. Yama includes A(yaya , philosophy and the six 
allied branches of Vaidic study within the Pravachanam in as 
much as he extends the privilege of Pankiipavana to a student 
of Nyaya philosophy or of any of the Shadangas (six sub-divisions) 
of Vaidic study. Nyayavichcha Shadangavit. 

% The text has S'rotriyanvayhajscha which means descend- 
ants oHyrotriya) Keif a -knowing ancestors. The meaning adopted 
in the translation is based on an aphprism of Usana, Chhandasa 
S'uddha Das'a Purusha, ten generations of ancestors purified by 
Vaidic study. 

$ the for^ part of the Yajur Veda, 
II Taittiriya Arauyakam X. 48—50; 



ii5 Mantt Samhifi*. 

of a marriage celebyated in the Brahma form (is a S3p.c- 
tifierdfthe row. (185) 

A knower of the Vedas, an expositor of Vedic 
doctrines^ a religious student^ a m?iker of many gifts,, 
and a ceiitenarian, snould be known as sanctifiers; of 
t«e row. (186) 

On the occasion of a S'rdddha, at least three Brih- 
manas possessing the aforesaid qualifications should be 
respectfully invited on the day of the ceremony, or on 
the previous day. (187) 

A Brihmana, on being invited to a repast given im 
connexion with a S'raddha offering to the manes, shall 
observe perfect continence and refra.in from studying 
the Vedas; the celebrant of the S'raddha dsi&vaonj 
slriall as well observe the same (rules of/ conduct. (188) 

The manes do invisibly enter the persons of Brih- 
manas invited (on the occasion of a S'rdddha), follow 
them like the air,* and sit by them when they are 
seated (189) 

Even the foremost of Brihmanas, who, having ac- 
cepted an invitation (to a S'rdddha repast), wilfuBy 
violates his pledge (to attend it), is sure to incur 
sin, and will be reborn as a hog in his next birth. (190) 

He, who, having be*i invited to a S'raddha repast. 



* The text has Vajiutachchanugachchhati foUpvys like tha 
ai^-. K;ulluka explains, "Yayu" by '^ Prhna Vayu" vital .airs, 
the whole meaning according to him being that, " Pitris (manes) 
enter the organisms of the Brahjn^na guestsjust as spylf oLmen 
entar the seeds in their parents' bodies. 



sexually knows a S'udra wife,* is associated! vsrith aU tUe 
sin done by the giver of the repast.t > 191) 

Xhe manes are wrathless, cleanly (in their habits , 
and magi:^animous,t are prior to the gods, and have laid 
aside their arms. 193 

Ihe source of their > manes' origin, those who con- 
stitute this, region of the manes, and the mode of wor- 
shipping their Pitris (progenitors.) now hoar me describe 
in detail. 193) 

The Pitris are the sons of Rishis, Marichi, etc., whoi 
are the sons of Manu, the son of Hiranyagarbha. (194). 

Of these, Somasadas, the sons of Virat, are the manes; 
of the Sadhyas ; and Agnishattas, the sons of Marichi^ 
who are renowned in the three regions, are the manes 
of the dfeities. (195) 

Barhishadas, the sons of Atri, are the manes of 
Daityas, Danavas, Gandharvas, serpents, Rakshasas, 
Kinnaras and birds. (196) 

Soma pas (^oma-driii|kers) are the manes of Biah- 
manas, Havirbhujas (eaters of oblations) are those of 
Kshatriyas, Ajyapas (drinkers of clarified butter) are 

* The text has Vrishali which means a S'udra wife. Both 
Mbdhatithi and Govindaraja bold that, intercourse even with 
his Brahmana wife by a man, invited to a Sraddha repast, is for- 
l>i.4dQn. They give the etymology of the term Vrishali as' 
Vrihasyante chapal4yati Bhartaram, one who covets her husband 
and makes him restive,'' in short, an amorous wife." Perfect 
continence on the part of the guest on the occasion is what is 
contemplated by the text. For other meanings of " Vrishali" 
see Apastombha. 

f Xhe text has Pratipadyati, that is, all sin of the giver of 
the repast is transferred to the incontinent guest. 

X The text has Mahabhagah j, e. possessed of the eight 
moral virtues of clemency, etc. Kulluka 



nS Manu Samhita. 

tb« manes of Vais'yas, and Sukdlinas are the manes of 
S'Hdras. (197) 

The sons of the celestial bard (Bhrigu) are called 
Somapas, the sons of Angira are called Havirbhujas, 
Ajyapas are the sons of Pulastyaj a^d Sqk41inas are the 
sons of Vasishtha. (198) 

Agnidiigdkds; Anagnidagdhds (Kt, not burnt in fire>, 
K»vyas, B.irhishadas, Agnishattas, asd Saumyds should 
be known as the manes of Brdhmapas. 1199) 

Thus the principal ones among the manes have been 
described, infinite are their sons and grand-sons in this 
universe* (200) 

From the Righist have origiaated the Pitris 
(manes) and from the manes have sprung the races 
of demons and divinities, and from the deities have 
originated all things in the order of immobile, mobile^ 
and 90 on. (201) 

Water, reverentially offered to the manes in a silver 
vessel, or in a vessel plated with silver, gives them 
infinite satisfation. (202) 

The performance of Pitri S'rdddhas (i e., S'rdddhas 
offered to the manes) is more specifically obligatory 
on thg twice-bora ones than the performance of Daiva 
S^rdddhas {i.e. S'rdddAa-tiffenngs made to the deities). 

• The Markandeya Puraaam describes these sons and grandsons 
of the Pitris as the manes of lower animals such as the cow, 
the horse, etc. 

f Celestial sages such as Marichi, etc. Hence even in 
.Vrdddha ceremonies of one's own father, grandfather, or great 
grandfather, the Somapa manes should be as well worshipped, in 
as much as they are the remote descendants of such soma-drinking 
Pitris.— Kulluka. 



Manu Snmhtt/l. tig 

A Dai-on S'rdddka is held only as a prelude* to a Pifri 
ii^r&ddha (ceremony). (203 1 

For the protection of a Pitri S'raidha ceremony 
it should be preceded by a Dalva S'rdddha offerlhgt 
A S'rdddha, not protected in this manner, is destsoyed 
by monsters. (204) 

Hence the Vis'vedevas should be invoked at the 
outset, and formally bid adieu at the cldSe, of a Pitri 
S'rdddha ceremony, the manes should not be invoked 
or dismissed in a S'rdddha before the intocation and 
dismissal of the ^is'vedsvas. He perisheth vrith his 
progeny who invites the Brahma nas or dismisses the 
BrAhmaaa representatives of his manes in a SWdddha 
ceremony without first worshipping the Vis'vedevas: 
0s directed above.)! (205) 

Let him seek out a soliteiry and holy§ plot of 
land for the performance of a ^'rdddha (thereon) aad 
plaster it with cow-dung ; the ground must be (artifi- 
cially) made to slope towards the south, if tt is not 
so by nature. (206) 

S'rdddhas offered to the manes on river-banks, in 
solitary 'places, in recesses of forests,* ete., satisfy them 
to the greatest degree. (207) 

« A Daiva S'rdddha forms only a'preliminary and auxiliary 
function of the Pitri S'raddha. cerennoay. 

t Invocation and offerings to the Vishvadevas (j. «., all the 
deities). 

X All rites done unto BTahmanas in connection with a S'rdddha 
offering to the manes must be preceded by similar rites being 
done unto the Vis'vedevas — Devala. 

§ Tho text has s'ucht, sacred, Kulluka explains it by free from 
bones and charcoals. 

II The text has Avakds'eshu choksheshu^ Kvlluka, expkins it 
by Svabhavenas'uchayo'ranyadipradtf^anteshu, Recesses of natw- 
ally sacred places such as, forssts, etc. 



120 Mann Samhtta 

There, after they ha\'e bathed and duly sipped water, 
the invited Brahmanas shall be seated, each on A 
iseparate cushion, containing Kusha grass* (208) 

Thus having seated these commendable Brdhmanas 
on conifortable cushinons, they should 'be worshipped 
with the offerings of safifron, sandal paste, and garlands 
of sweet-smelling flowers, those who 'represent the 
deities being first worshipped, and after them the re- 
presentatives of the manes. ( 209 ) 

Then having offered the water of veneration 
\Arghyn), containing sesame and Kus'a grass, he shall, 
With their permission, make fire offerings in the manned 
following. (2£o) 

At the outset let him satisfy Agni, Soma, and Yama 
with libations of clarified butter, and, after that, offer 
oblations unto his manes. ( a 1 1 ' 

In the absence of the sacred fire,t let him (the 
celebrant) offer the oblations on the hands of the 
Br^hmanas. " Fire is the Br^hmana," thus Brahmanas, 
well-versed in the f'i^flfaj, have said. (212) 

The foremost of the twice-born ones (BrAhmanas), 
devoid of all irascible feelings, ever graciously disposed, 
the-oldest born in the economy of the unfverse, and per- 
petually engaged to promote the weal of the world, have 

• On each of the cushions of Brahmanas who are the reptesen- 
tatives of the Vis'vadevas shall be placed two blades of kus'a grass 
with their tips direcPed towards the east, on each of the cushions 
of the Brahmanas who represent the mines shall be placed a single 
blade of kusa grass with its top pointed towards the south — Devala. 

f As is probable in the case of an unmarried religious student, 
duly initiated with the thread, who has finished his study and 
returned from the house of his preceptor, or of 4 widower.— 

Kulluka. 



Manu S-atnhitd. I9t 

been described by the ■Rishis as the proper recipient 
deities of S'raddha offerings (oblations). (21,3^ 

AH acts* in connection" with the fire-offering must be 
done by the offerer, seated in, or looking towards, the 
isouth, with his right hand. He shall sprinkle water on 
the ground on which the oblation will be offered. (214) 

Let him make three Pindas (oblations) out of the 
remnants of oblations cast in the fire T and facing the 
south, with his whole soul bent thereon, let him offer 
the same on the Kus'a blade, with the Pitri Tirtka^ of 
his right-hand. (215) 

Then having offered the Pindas on the Kus'a 
blades conformably to the rules (of his own school 
of Grikya Regulatioil)> let him filb his hand over the 
Kus'a roots for the satisfaction of his three generations 
of ancestors, Starting with his great grand-father^ 
in the ascending line, who are fond of such pasty 
scrapings of oblations.]: (216) 

Then having directed his face towards the north, he 
must sip water, and gently practise three Prdnaydmas, 
and make obeisance to the six seasons of the year and 
to themanes.§ (217) 

The residue of water, contained in the wa^r-vessels, 
shall be gently poured out near each of the Pindas 

* Such as Paryukskanam, (silently sprinkling water over the 
fire without muttering any Mantra, etc. — Kulluka. 

f Part of the hand between the fore-finger and the thumb, 
considered sacred to the manes. 

X On the kus'a roots let him scrape the sticky paste (of oblation) 
from his hand— Vishnu. 

§ .Respectively running as " I make obeisance to spring" (I'aiaM- 
iiya Namastubhyam) and " obeisance to you, manes" (Namo Vak 
Pitarah) — Kulluka. 
16 



i'22 Manu Samhtta 

(ob&ticois), and the PiAdas shall he smelled iti the order 
in which they have been offered. (218) 
^ After that, let him take a small portion from each 
o'f the ohlations offered to the fathers, etc., and give 
th^ first to the BrShma^as, present, to eat. (219) 

In the event of his father living, let him (the' 
celebrant) oiiet S'rdddhas to his three ancestors pre- 
ceding his fkther,* or feed his own father instead of the 
Brdhmana, who is usually appointed to represent him 
in the ceremony. (i2o) 

But he. whose father is dead, but whose grand-father 
ifi alive, let him offer a S'rdddha first to his deoeased 
fether, aftd after that, to his departed great grand- 
father.t (221) 

A living grand-father can eat the oblation himself 
instead of the Brihmana representing him (in connec- 
fiqn with a -sVif «?fl?Aa offered by his grandson), or the . 
grandson may perform the ceremony in any way he 
Ekes with the perhiission of the grand-father. (2^2) 

Then having given water and Kus'a grass in the 
hands of the Brahma^ja^- let*^ him offer the first 
pfekings from the oblations thereof, • by muttering the 
Mantra^ oblation to the manes "\Pitri Svadfid).^* -{222) 

There, tarrying the plate of boiled rice "with hii 
-hands, he, meditating on his departed ancestors, shall 
pllaoe it near the Brdhmanits for serving the« boiled rice 
tp^them. (224) 

* Grandfather, great grandfather, great great grandEather. 
, A son is privileged to pertorm S'raddhas, which are accessory 
to an expiatory rite (Prayas'chittam) even in the life time of his 
father. 

+ Gbvindaraja, following Vishnu, explains it as, "He whose fkther 
and Igreat-grand-father are dead, let him Rrst offer a Pindd 
^'rdddha) to his two ancestors, preceding his grand-father. 



Matm Samhi^a. i:^ 

The boiled rice, contained .jin a plate which is ncft 
carried with, the two hands, or is served o^t only 
with asingle hand, is robbed by the maligriaQt Asuras 
{demons). (225) 

[Plates, containing] vegetable curries or soups, milk, 
curd, honey and clarified butter, must be carefully 
deposited on the ground before serving them to Brah- 
manas put of the same. (226) • 

Articles ' of confectionary, sweet porridge,* edible 
roots, fruit, palatable preparations of meat, and aromatic 
cordials. (227) 

These should be gradually brought near the Br£h- 
manas with undivided attention and served to them by 
commending the actual quantity served out at a 
time. (228) 

One must not shed tears at the time of ^serying out 
. the dishes (to the Brihmanas), nor give vent to aHger, 
nor i^pej^k falsehood, nor scatter the boiled, rice, nor 
touch it with his feet. (229) 

Tears shed by one, at the time of serving the boilSd 
rice, augment the satisfaction of -ghosts^; a . fit of 
anger at the time leads to the pleasure of one's 
eneniies, a falsehood spoken at the time, augments 
the satisfaction of^ dogs, boiled rice, trampled under 
feet, leads to the satisfaction of monsters, and 
scattering boiled rice, leads to the satisfaction of 
miscreants. (130) 

* The text has Bhalcshyani>, anything that is eaten by chewing, 
and Bhojyam, anything which is taken in the manner of a sweet 
porridge or thick barley gruel, etc, Kulluka explains Bhakshyam 
by Modakadi (confection) etc. and Bhojyam, Payasadi, rice 
cooked with milk and sweetened with sifgar, and supfe lilee 
preparations. ' 



134 Manu Samhitit, 

Articles of food, to which the Brahmanas show a 
fondness at the time, must be unstintedly served out 
to them ; a discourse on the supreme Self at the time 
leads to the satisfaction of the manes. (231) 

During the S'rdddha repast Vedas, Purdnas,* 
Itihasas and Khilas\ should be recited to the Brdh- 
mana guests, when they would be eating. (232) 

In a cheerful frame of mind, he, (the giver of the 
repast), shall satisfy the Brahmanas, feed them gently, 
and repeatedly ask them to partake more and more of 
the (proferred) dishes, etc,, by dilating on their ex- 
cellence. (233) 

Let him assiduously feed a religious student, related 
to the deceased ito whom the .S V(J<Wa« is offered; as 
a daughter's son, and honour him with the present of 
a blanket,! and scatter sesame on the groimd of the 
S'raddha. (234) 

Three things are sacred in a S'rdddha, vis., a 
daughter's son, a blanket and sesame ; three things are 
commended in a S'raddha ceremony viz., cleanliness 
(purity of mind and body), non-irascibility and absence 
of hurry. (235) 

Let the Brahmanas silently eat all the cooked food, 
luke warm, in a S'raddha repast.. Repeatedly asked to 
pronounce on their excellence or otherwise, they must 
not open their mouths. (206) 

As long as the food remains warm, as long as the 

* In his commentary on Brikod A'ranyaka, S'ankara describes 
Purdnas, as woiks dealing with the creation of the universe. 

t Khilas, KuLLUKA explains it by S'risuktas, S'iva San- 
kalpas, etc. 

X The text has Kutaptm, Kulluka explains it by " Nepdla 
Hmvalam," a blanket manufiQtured in the country of ffepala. 



Manu Samhita. 125 

Brahmanas eat that in silence, as long as they do 
not remark on the excellence of the food, so long do 
the manes eat. (237) 

What the Br&hmanas eat with their heads, covered, 
whatever do they eat with their faces towards the 
south, whatever do they eat with their shoes on, the 
monsters (and not the manes) eat all that. (238) 

Let not a Chandhla, a hog, a cock, a dog, a woman 
in her menses, or a enuch see these Brahmanas eating 
a {S'raddha repast). (239) 

Any thing looked at by (any of these creattires) 
in the course of a fire-offering, gift-making, repast, 
or a S'rhddha in honour of the manes or deitiess, pro- 
duces, contrary effect. (240) 

A hog by his scent, a cock by flapping his wings, 
a dog by his sight, and a vile-caste man by his touch, 
'destroys a iV^flf^A*.. (241) 

A lame' or one-eyed nian, or one who has a limb in 
less or excess, even if he chances to b© a servant of 
the giver of the repast, must be removed' from the 
place of the S'rdddha. (242) 

A householder or a mendicant Brahmaca, if he 
happens to ask for a meal on the occasion, he shall 
feed, according to his might, with the permission of the 
I Brihmanas, who are the eaters of the S'raddha re- 
past. (243) 

All kinds of cooked curries and boiled rice etc,. 
blended together and mixed with water, shall be depo- 
sited on Kus'a blades before the repasted Brah- 
manas. (244) 

These leavings deposited on the Kus'i (grass) are 
unfit to be east in the fire ; they form the portions of 



126 Manu Samhita. 

spirits of deceased infants, and of faithless wives who 
had left their husband's familes ih life* 1 245) 

'rtie leavings of food cast on the ground in a 
^i'raddha fepast|is laid down as belonging to the portion 
of, artless and energetic servants pf the ^ouse. (246) 

S'rhddhas, which shQuld be offered to the spirit 
of a newly deegtased person till the perfoiiaance of the 
Sapindikaranam rite, should be performed wit;hout 
ofiering oblations to the Vishvedevas ; and only a single 
Bt&hma^a, a single oblation, and a sihgle blade of Kus'a 
grass are necessary fot each of thetn.t (247) 

After the performance of his Sapindikaranam, 
the sons of the deceased, whose funeral rites have been 
done according to the Regulation, shall offer oblations 
to his spirit on the day of his deaths vi the manner 
of a Pdrvana S'rllddha.% (24S) 

Having eaten a S'rdddha repast, the foolish one, 
who gives the leavings of his plate to a it^udra, falls 
headloij^g into the hell of KdU S^utram (thread of 
time). (249) 

In the excreta of him, who has sexually known a 
woman within twenty four hours of eating a S'rdddha 

* The. text has Tydgindm — Kulluka explains it by Gurvddi- 
Tyaginam who have abandoned their husbands and superiors* ' 
We hare adopted Govindraja's explanation in our translation. 

f With only a single Arghya offering, devoid of oblations to the 
deities, invocation and fire-offerings, and with a single Kus'a blade 
should be performed such an Ekodduhta'.S'rdddha (i.e.) a S'riddha 
offered . to the spirit of a person who has recently departed this 
Mto—Y&jnawdkya . 
' "'- t On the day marked by the same lunar phase in each month 
of Wie year. 

$ Pdrvana S'rdddha is a S'rAddha offered to the manes on the 
dm^ of the full or new moan {Parva). 



Manu Samhita. i<27 

te^st, sliall his iTianes lie for a fttofith from tha£ 
date. (250) 

Having asked the Br&hmanas, "have you well eaten?" 
or "have yon been repleted ?", he shall ask them to waeb 
their mouths and hands, and after they have so washed, 
request them to take rest, saying "rest yoiirselves 
O, Brihmanas." (251) 

After rest, the Brihmanas shall say, *Svadhh Asi" 
(let the manes be satisfied);* in all rites of S'rdddha it is 
the highest benediction. (252) 

After that, he shall ask the Brihmanas in which 
way the Residue of food (prepared oh the occasion) to 
to be distributed. He shall giVe it to persons as they 
will direct him to do. (253) 

In all S'rhddhas offered to one's father or mother, he 
shall enquire about the satisfaction of the Br&hmanas, 
by asking, "have you well eaten?"; in those offered to 
all the ancestors fgeskthi) by asking, " have you well 
heard ?" in those offered on auspicious occa&wa.fA^bkyu-'^ 
daikaj by asking, "isjit well done ?", a«d in those offered 
to the deities, by asking, "does it please ?" (254) 

An auspicious aftemoon,t Kus^a grasses, plastering 
the house with solution pf (fresh) cowdtmg, sesame 
seeds, unstinted gifts (to the Br^hmanas>, ^urifica- 
tiont ^d cooking of the edibles, and acquisitioii 

* The full meaning is that,' let the manes be satisfied and let 
blessing accrue tbereirom te the celebrant of the H'raddha 
ceraenDivy. 

f Afternoon ||pi^ases of S'r0dhas oflfered on the day of the 
new moon. Abeording t» another Smriti, S'tddihas to be' 
offered on auspicious occasions (Abhyuddiyahtt)- should be done' 
in the morning. 

\ The][texti has Samskira, which means either purifiestion of or 
cooking curries, belled rice, confection etc. 



128 Manu Stttnkiia. 

of jTOW-sanctifying (Pankti-pdvanas) Brihmanas, thesd 
are the blessed auxiliaries of a S'raddha ceremony. (255) 

Kusa' grass. Mantras, morning> H avishyhnnam and 
things, which have been enumerated as sacred before, 
are the blessey accessories to a S'raddha offered to the 
deities. (256) 

Food grains used by Munis (divine contempla^ 
tors),* milk, Soma-\vi\CQ, raw meatt and non-alkaline 
saltsi are called natural oblations. (257) 

Having dismissed the Brahmanas, let him, piire, 
silent and self-controlled, longingly cast his look towards 
the south, and pray the manes as follows : (258) 

May the number of gift-makers, O ye manes, im 
crease in our family, may our progeny and wisdom in the 
Vedas grow from more to more, may veneration to* 
wards the Vedas never depart from our family, and 
may we have many things fit to be gifted away. (2591 

Having thus performed the S'raddha and at the 
close of the prayer, the oblations {Pindas) should be 
caused to be eaten by a cow, or by a Brdhmana, or by a 
goat, or they should be cast in the water or fire. (260) 

Several authorities advise to offer the Pindas to the 
manes after the BrShraanas have been fed; others advise 
to give the oblations to the birds to eat, others advise 
to cast them in the fire or v^atgr. (261) 

^ ^ L , C„„> ., - • 

• S'ankara in his commentary on the Brih ■ W, Aranyaka 
Upanishad defines ■'Muni" ismanandt Muniftron ■, lading tt^e 
supreme Self he is called Muni. The text has Mu-^ nndni that 
Is the kind of -food grains which is eaten by her^ts ,,iths forest, 
such as Nivara etc. ^ 

\ Flesh of an animal which is not forbidden to b,-, iten, such 
as venison, hare's flesh,or goat's flesh, which may be j,:., ,'ed to the 
manes as oblations. ,,j\ 

I Such as Rocksalt, sea salt, etc. ,.,. 



Martu Samhita. 139 

The second oblation* (^jWa) should be given to a 
faithful ani lawfully married vi^ife, eager to worship the 
manes and desirous of conceiving a male child* (262) 

[Thereby] she will give birth to a long-lived, intelli- 
gent, well-renowned, opulent, and virtuous son, spiri- 
bually disposed, (who, in his turn), will be the father of 
a large family. (263) 

Thus having washed his hands and sipped (water, 
be shall, with the greatest attention, feed his father's 
cognates> and after that, the relations on his mother's 
side. (^64) 

, Let not the leavings be removed till the Brahmanas 
have departed from their seats; and after that, ;let hijn 
make the household offerings, this is the Regular 
tion. (365) 

Now I shall describe the kinds of oblations, which, 
being duly offered to the manes, give them satisfaction 
which lasts for a long time, or for all eternity. (266) 

Sesame, barley grains, Vrihi graips, kidney beans, 
water, -fruits, and edible roots, ,duly offered to the 
manes, keep them satisfied for one month. (267) 

P4thina fish (keeps them satisfied) for two months ; 
venison, for three months ; mutton, for four months ; and 
flesh (of clean) birds, for five months ; ^268) 

Goat's flesh, for six months ; flesh of a spotted deer, 
for seven months ; the flesh of, an ^na deer, fpr eight 
months; and the flesh of a Ruru deer, for nine 
months. (269) 

Flesh of the buffalo or rhinoceros satisfies the manes 

* The text his Madhyamah Pindah {i e ) the oblation offered 
by her]husband to his deceased grandfather, and duly consecrated 
with the Grihya mantras. 

'7 



130 Manu Samhitd, 

for ten months ; the flesh of a hare or tortoise, for 
eleven months ; (270) 

Preparations of cow-milk, and Pdyasa for one full 
year ; the flesh of a white, old goat, for twelve 
years. (271) •> 

The satisfaction, which they derive (from) Kola- 
s' aka (a kind of vegetables), large scaled fishes, flesh of 
the rhinoceros or of red goat, honey, and food grains lasts 
for all eternity. (272) 

Anything mixed with honey, which is offered to 
them on the thirteenth day of the fortnight, marked 
by the asterism Magkd,* leads to their satisfaction for 
eternal time. (273) 

" May he be bom in our family, who will offer us 
Pdyasa offerings, mixed with honey and clarified butter, 
on the day of the thirteenth phase of the moon, marked 
by the asterism Maghd, or under the auspices oiKunJara- 
chchhdydA (274) 

Anything, which is reverentially offered to the 
manes, gives them infinite and eternal satisfaction in the 
next world. (275) 

The days of the fortnight, from the tenth day to 
the day of the new moon, excepting the day of the 
fourteenth day of the moon's wane, are auspicious for 
the performance of S'raddhas. (276) 

* Thtf Trayoiiashi (the thirteenth day of the moon's wane) 
is specifically mentioned, the thirteenth day of the moon's wane 
in the month of Bh^dra should be considered as meant — as Sankha 
opines. 

■j- When the sun is in the asterism Hasta in the month of 
.i4'i/i»jK, the thirteenth day of the lunar wane in the month of 
Mukhya Bhadra in connection therewith, marked by the asterism 
Maghh, is called Kunjara-Chehhaya, see Vishnu. Ch. 
LXXVIII— 52, S3- 



Manu Samkitd. 131 

S'raddhas, offered under the auspices of even 
numbered asterisms (such as, the second, fourth lunar 
mansions), or of the even numbered phases of the moon, 
grant the fruition of all desires ; while those, offered under 
the auspices of odd numbered asterisms, or lunar phases, 
grant a family of opulent and erudite sons. (277) 

As the dark fortnight is more auspicious than the 
light one for the purposes of S'rMdha 'o&Qx'mgs to the 
manes, so evening is better than forenoon for that 
end. (278) 

With the holy thread placed on his right shdulder, 
and the Kus''a grass in his hand, let him assiduously 
perform all rites in connection with a S'raddha to the 
manes with the help of the Pitri-tirtha of his right 
hand. (579) 

Let him not offer a S'raddha offering in the night ; 
night is the time for monsters, nor they should be offered 
at either meeting of the day and night, nor just at sun- 
rise. (280) 

In the event of his inability to offer S'rdddhas, each 
month, let him in this manner offer three S'rdddhas 
in Summer, Rain", and fore-winter (Hemanta). (28 1) 

The fire offering to be made in a S^rciddha must 
not be made in any other fire than that in which Vedic 
and Smart a rites are performed ; a Brahmana keeper 
of the sacred fire must not offer a S'raddha on any other 
day in the dark > fortnight except on the day of the 
new moon. (282) 

The foremost of Br^hmanas obtains the same 
merit by offering libations of water to the manes after 
his bath, as is acquired by instituting the Pitri- 
yajnas {i.e., S'rdddhas, lit. sacrifipes offered to the 
manes.) (283) 



12Z 



Mantt Samhttik 



The Rishis call the (heirarchy of) fathers as Vasns^ 
the (heirarchy of) grand-fathers as Rudras, and the 
(heirarchy of) great grand-fathers as A'dityas (284) 

Every day, eat the residue of cooked food left after 
first feeding the Brihmanas (Vishvasa); eai, every day, 
ambrosia. The first is called Vishvasa, the second is 
the residue of food left after performing a sacrifice 
therewith. i2S5)» 

Even the eternal S'ruti has aknowledged the divi- 
nity of the manes. Thus I have told you all about 
the mode of performing the five daily sacrifices, and 
a:ll rites in connection therewith. Now hear me des- 
cribe the means by which the twice-born ones shsdl 
earn their livelihood. (286) 



CHAPTER IV. 

A TWICE-BORN one shall reside for the first quarter 
of his life* in the residence of his preceptor, and the 
second quarter (thereof) in his own house as a married 
man. (i) 

A Brahmana, other than in the time of distress, 
shall earn his livelihood and maintain, his family by a 
means, which does not clash, or clash veryjittle, with 

other men's interests.f (2) 

J 

• The text has Chaturthamdyusho Bhagam, a quarter part 
of the duration of life, >. e. twenty five years, since according 
to the S'rutii a hundred years is the ordained space of human 
existence. S'atayurvai Purushah. 

I In short by teaching, by celebrating sacrifices on behalf of 
their celebrants, and by receiving gifts, from the pure and the holy, 
cic., yajanadhyapana-Vis'uddha-prati grahadibhih—Kulluka, 



Manu Samhita. 135 

He must earn money, enough for his merest exist- 
ence, by works which do not disgrace the social order 
he belongs to, and which do not entail much physical 
labourer hardship. (31 

Let him live by Ritam and Amt itam^ or by Mritam 
or Pramitam, or by Satyanritam, but never by the 
avocation of a dog* (4) 

Picking up , grains of paddy fronf the stubbly 
fields (uncha vritti), or collecting the ears of paddy 
constitutes what is called Ritam. 

Anything obtained without solicitation is called 
Amritam (lit, nectar); to live hy begging is called 
Mritam (death), and to live by agriculture is called 
Pramritam. (5) 

Trade is called Satydnritam, and it is good that a 
man should live by trade. Service is called the 
vocation of a dog, hence it should be shunned. (6) 

Either be a Ens' ala-dhdnyaka'\',ox a Kumbhi-dhan- 
yaka,t ori store up enough to support the family for 
three days, or only enough for the morrow. ( 7) 

Of these four kinds of Brihmana house-holders 
(kus'aladhdnyaka etc), each succeeding one is more 
meritorious than the one immediately preceding it 
(in the list), inasmuch as on account of the compara- 
tively greater poverty of their resources they are com- 
pelled to practise self-abnegation (lit, self control) 
by which they are enabled to conquer the whole 
world. (8 J 

* The text has S'va-vrittya by the avocation of a dog, ».«., 
by accepting service. 

f One vfho has got food grains stored in his house, eiiough for 
three years' consumption of his family.- ' 

J One who has stored up food gi-iin enough for a year's 
consumption of the family. 



134 Mann Satnhita. 

A householder (with a large family) may earn a 
living by six acts,* one (with a smaller family than the 
former) by three acts,t one (with a small family) 
by two acts,t and one with a very small family by 
teaching alone. (9) 

A Brihmana, living by S'ila or Uncha means of 
livelihood, should only be devoted to the keeping of 
the fire, and «do the sacrifices which are enjoined to be''^ 
performed at the end of a Parva or Ayana. (10) 

For a livelihood, let him (BrS.hmana) not take to 
any (vile) means, lusually) adopted by ordinary men,§ 
let him maintain himself by a profession which is h onest, 
artless, holy and worthy of a Brahmana. ( 1 1) 

Resting in contentment, a seeker of happiness must 
restrain himself from pursuing more and more wealth. 
Happiness is rooted in contentment, misery is based 
on discontent. (12) 

Following any of the aforesaid professions, a 
Snataka Brahmana should observe the following rules 
of conduct and vows, which impart fame and longevity 
In this life and lead to heaven (after death.) (13) 

By unremittingly discharging his duties alone, as 
ordained in th^ Vedas, to the best of his ability, one 
comes by the most elevated status. (14) 

• Such as Ritam, obtaining without solicitation, begging, 
agriculture, trade and money-lending. 

t Priesthood, teaching, and gift taking. 

X Teaching and officiating as priests at sacrifices celebrated 
by others. 

§ The text has Na Loka Vrittam, Kulluka explains it as " not 
by falsehood, deceit, sycophancy, self advertisement, and imitation 
of the dress and manners of one's master as is usually done by 
common men. 



Manu Samhita. r^jg 

He shall not earn money by acts which enthral 

the senses of man, nor by means forbidden by the 

Vedas : In the event of his possessing money, or in 

wafttj'one must not endeavour to earn money from 

any source, without discrimination* (151 

Let him not wilfully addict 'himself to any^object 
of sense-gratification ; in case of extreme attachment 
he must counteract jiti by means of his wilPforce. (16) 

Acquisition (of wealth,'' etc),T hostile to his t^ediac 
studies, must be avoided; if he ; can study his Vedas, 
each day, by anyjhow supporting his family, that is his 
success in life. (17) i 

His dress, speech and his discernment (feelings) 
must be in conformity with his birth, wealth, age and 
F^iifiac knowledge. (18) 

He shall peruse, each day, S^dstras whose perusal 
serves to improve the intellect, as well as those which 
treats on the art of money-making.t Likewise, he shall 
study the Nigamas which illucidate the (true) import 
of the Vedas.t (19) 

A man acquire? proficiency in the S'dstras he reads, 
each day ; and illuminated with their light, his general 
knowledge increases. (20) 

Let him not omit performing the Riski-yajna, 
Deva-Yajna, Bhuta-Yajna and Pitri-Yajna\ accord- 
ing to the best of his might. (21) 

* " Prasangena " is the term that occurs in the text, Kulluka 
exaiuplifies it by "dance and music" (Nritydgitddina). 

f Dhanyini, the science of money maMng, such as the works 
of Ushanas and Brihaspati. ,X The Upanishads, etc. 

§ Rishi-yajna, i. e. study of the Vedas, Devayajna, i. e. five 
offerings to the deities, Bhj-itayajna oblations to animals^ A/'«. 
yaj'na, i. e, hospitalities to men ; and Piiri-yajna, S'raddha. offer- 
ings to the manes. 



J 36 MaHtt Samkila. 

Some there are, who, though conversant with the 
mode of performing both external and internal yajnas,f 
perform these five kinds of yaj'nas, by withdraw 
ing the five senses from their respective objects of 
gratification. (22) 

Several wise householders, knowing that immortal 
is the fruit of performing sacrifices With speech and 
vital airs, cdhstantly cast offerJngs of speech in the 
vital airs, and those of vital airs in the speech.t (23) 

Several other Brihmanas, possessed of tile know 
ledge of Brahma, constantly perform these five sacri- 
fices by means of their knowledge of Brahma ; with 
their sight oi vrisAova {Upanishad), ih.QY behold that 
knowledge is the primary end of all (religious) acts. (24) 

Let five offerings* in connection with the Agnt- 
hotra sacrifices be offered in the fore-part of the day 
or night, or in the first or last part of the day, or in 
the first or last part of the night. At the close of the 
dark fort-night he shall perform the Darska sacrifice, 
and at the close of the light fort-night the one known 
9S Paurnamdsa. (25) 

A Brahmana must celebrate the (Agrayana) 
sacrifice on the harvesting of the new crops,! the 

* Vdhya Abhyantara yajnas, Vdhya yajnas are religious rites 
or ceremonials, while Abhyantara yajnas consist in practising 
yoga with its accessories. 

■J- Mutter the Mantra, " I cast the offering of speech in the 
fire of vitality, while not speaking; and the one running as, "I cast 
the offering of life in s^ech" at the time of speaking. 

J The text has S'asydnte, which literally means after 
the stock of the previous year's food grains has run out. 
KuLLUKA, grounding his statement on the aphorism of the 
Sutra-Kdra, Saradi .Vavdandm, the harvest-sacrifice in S'rat 
(October-November), asserts that the sacrifice must be performed 



Mafru Samhiia. ijy 

^hSrarmdsyn) sacrifice at the close of a seasoft,* the 
*tiiiflal sacfifice at the beginning of a Ayana,\ and the 
Soma^ajnas at the close of the year.J (26) 

A fo^hiftana, with the sacred fire, wishing a long 
Mfe, shall not partake of newly harvested food grain, or 
■Cooked meat ^frithout first performing the Navdnnam 
<new food grain) and aaiiAa,l sacrifice9.4 (27) 

The fire consumes the Vitality of the gluttonous 
Brihraana (with the sacred fire), if he partakes of the 
newly harvested food grains and meat without first 
offering them as oblations to the fire. . 28) 

Let not an Aiifhi (guest), unpropitiated with a 
cushion, bed, food, water, fruit or edible roots to the 
feestof his might,. reside in his (Bi^hmanas) house. (29) 

Let him not welcome with speech even (guests) 
who go contrary to the Ve^as, or live by professions 
other ithan those peculiar t« his order, or are cat- 
naturedll or dispute the doctrines of the Vedas by 

after the harvest of the new grains has been gleaned, no matter 
whether the stock of the previous year's food grains has been ex- 
tiausted m not, as otherwise a rich housetholder, with several years' 
provisions in his store, will be discharged from the obl^ation of 
<6f cdebrating this sacrifice. 

• A RHuh (season), according to Ki}i,i,uKA, consists of four 
months, a year is divided into three seasons, a fact which shows 
that, this celebrated commentator of the Manu Samhita was a 
resident of northern India. 

f Ayana means the period when the sun is either in the nor- 
thern, or in the southern solstice. 

J The text has Sdmante, (lit, at the close of the year) (.«., in 
spring, inasmuch as the Vediac year which used to be computed 
with the first day the lunar month in Chaitra was considered 
'coaipl'ete with winter. 

§ Soma Yaijnas such as, Agnishtoma etc., 

\ The text has Vaidila Vrittikhn and Vaka Vratins i.e, mea 
who are iJeceitful as cats, or carry «loiks of religion. 
18 



^138 Manu Samhttv, 

false logic, or have no faith in the Vedas, or are crane" 
natured.* (30) 

* Le.t him honour the house-holders, who have per- 
*formedthe rites of ceremonial ablutions at the comple- 
tion of the Vedic study, or at the close of a vow, or 
both, with oblations offered to the gods and manes, and 
avoid those who are otherwise qualified.! 131) 

A househslder shall give cooked food to Brakma- 
ckdrins etc.,t who do not cook their meals ; and after 
keeping enough food for his relations and dependents, 
he shall distribute the residue among the birds and 
beasts. 132) 

A sntiiiika householder, famished with hunger, 
shall ask money of the king, or of his pupils and disci- 
ples, but of no other men. This is the conclusion. (33) 

A. Sndiaka BrShmana must on no account sufier 
himself to be overwhelmed with hunger ;§ and possessing 
nioney, he must not wear a torn or dirty cloth. (34) 

• Cf \ ishnu. Chapter LXXXII. Aphorisms 5 and 7. 

f Let him invite them on the occasion of a .SVaift^Aa, offered 
to the, gods or manes. 

% Medhatithi and Govindaeaja, on the basis of the couplet, 
Bhikshancha Bhikshave dadyat Vidhibat Brahmachhrine, etc., 
S^y that, Bkikskus, f'aribrdjakas, Brahmncliarins, etc., 
have been provided Tor in the above quotedcovipl.H, and hold that 
this stanza contemplates the giving of cooked food to mendicants 
of other pursuasions, or to those who denounce the authority of 
the Vedas fPdshandins). 

J Even water should be given to trtaes and plants, each day, 
by a Brahttana householder. v 

§ The te.xt has. Na Sidet Snataka Vipra, KuLLUKA explains, 
that a fully educated Snataka enjoys the privilege of receiving 
gifts from proper persons, so he need not beg any thing of the king, 
as he has many ether substantial means of keeping the wolf from. 
ttie door vrithout depending upon the bounty of the statej. 



Manii Samhita. '39 

With his hair and beards cleanly clipped and his 
finger nails decently paired, he, pure in body anji 
spirit> self-controlled and clad in a white garment, 
shall study the Vedas, and be mindful of his own 
benefit.* (35) 

Le;t him carry a bamboo stick in his hand, an ewer, 
full of water, his Veda, and the holy thread, and wear 
a pair of beautiful, golden ear-rings. (36)' 

He must not gaze on the rising or setting sun, 
nor look at the sun in the mid sky, nor during an 
eclipse, nor at his reflected image in the water. (37) 

He must not leap over the tether of a calf, nor run 
while it is raining, nor look at his image in the water. 
This is the injunction (of the Sistra). (38) 

A heap of earth, a cow, a divine edifice, a Br&hmana, 
clarified butter, honey, a crossing of roads, and large 
forest trees, these he shall circumambulate (from right 
to left.) (39) 

Even extremely heated, he must not visit his wife 
during the three forbidden days of her periods, nor 
share the same bed with her. (40) 

Intellect, vigour, strength, eye-sight, and vitality 
of a man, who goes unto a woman in her menses, are 
impaired. (41) 

Of him, who avoids a woman in her menses, the 
intellect, vigour, strength, eye-sight and vitality are 
improved. (42) 

Let him not eat in the company of his wife, nor 
see her eating, nor while she is' yawning or sneezing, or 
sitting {eK dishabille) at ease. (43) 

• The text h^.^ ^A'tmahiteshucha, Kulluka explains it by 
"taking special care of his own health with the help of suitabla 
medicines, if necessary, and by avoiding unwholesome any indiges» 
table food." 



r^O Rtann Satnkit/f, 

Nor while she is applying, collyrium! alon^ her 
eye-lid«, or anointing her uncovered person with oil ; 
HOT while she is giving birth to a child, his wife should 
be looked at by the foremost of Brahmanas, seeking 
vigour. (44) 

Wearing a smgle cloth, he must not eat his meal, 
nor bathe dtript of all clothes. He must not pass 
urine on the road, or in- a pasture-ground, or on the 
ashes. {^$) 

Nor in a ploughed field at in the water, nor in » 
cremation groimd, nor on the mountain, nor in a^ 
dilapidated temple, and never on, an ant hill. (46) 

Not in a hole dwelt by an animal, neither when 
walking, nor staying, nor having arrived at a riva: bank^ 
nor on the summit of a mountain. (47) 

Facing the wind, fire, a Brahmana, the sun, the 
water, or a cow, let him never evacuate urine or 
excreta. (48) 

Covering the earth with wood, clods of earth, leaves,. 
or Weeds, with covered head and body, silent, and 
having washed his mouth, {let him evacuate urine and 
excreta. (49) 

In the day he shall evacuate stool and urine with 
his face turned towards the north, looking towards the 
sbuth he must do it in the night ; at either juncture 
af the day and night he must do it as in the day. (50) 

In the night, in the event of the stars, 'etc., being 
enveloped by the cloud,, in times of peril to life, let 
a Brahman evacuate stool and urine, facing any quarter 
of tile heaven he pleases. (51) 

Facing the wind, the fire, the sun, or the moon, or 
looking at a cow, or a Br&hmana, he, who evacuates 
stool or urine, is robbed of his intellect, (52) 



Martu SamhtU. 14 » 

Let him not cast any unholy thing in the, fire, nor 
warm his feet over it. Let him not blow a fire with his- 
ipouth, nor look at his naked wife. {53) 

Let him not keep a fire underneath his bedstead,'^ 
nor leap over a fire. He must not place a fire at his 
foot, nor do any thing that imperils life. (54) 

At either meeting of the day and night, let him not 
eat any thing, or lie down, or walk {?>.,»go any where). 
He must not dig lines in the ground, nor himself re- 
move the garland of flowers he has worn, (55) 

In the water he must not evacuate stool or urine, 
nor cast sputa, poison, blood, or any thing smeared 
with any excreted organic matter. (56) 

He must not sleep alone in a solitary chamber, nor 
rouse up a superior from his sleep. Let him not speak 
with a woman in her flow, nor go to a religious cere- 
mony without invitation. 57) 

He must keep his right arm free, and uncovered 
by his vpper sheet of apparel, in the chamber of the 
sacred fire, in a pasture ground, in the company of 
the Brihmauas, at the time of reading the \i^edas^ and 
at the time of eating his (meal). (58) 

He must not restrain a cow from drinking water 
or suckling her calf, if he sees her in the act; nor 
shall he report it to any body. An intelligent person, 
who has beheld a rainbow in the sky, must not show- 
it to others. (59) 

Let him not long reside in an impious village, nor 
in >on§ infected with any d!isease. iJe must not go 
alone on a long journey, nor stay long on a mountain 
summit. (60) 

Let him not reside in a S'udra kingdom, nor in one 
teeming with an ungodly population. He must not 



142 Mann Samhita 

live in a country abounding in revilers of the Vedas, nor 
in that which is infested by vile-caste men. (61) 

He must not eat any thing .whose oleagindus 
essence has been taken out,* nor over-load his stomacht 
with food ; and let him not eat any thing too early 
in the morning or evening, nor take any thing in the 
night, if he has been over-repleted in the day. 62) 

Let him not make any futile attempt,} nor drink 
water with the united palms of his hands ; he must 
not eat any thing by placing it on his thighs, nor be 
needlessly inquisitive about any matter. 1 63) 

He must not sing a tune, or dance a measure, or 
play on a musical instrument, prohibited in the science 
of music) ; he must not vauntingly stroke the muscles 
of his upper arms, nor gnash his teeth, nor bray 
like an ass out of an exuberance of) emotional 
feeling. (64) 

He shall never wash his feet in a vessel of white 
brass, he must not eat in a cracked plate, nor in a vessel^ 
repugnant to his sensibility. (65) 

A holy thready an ewer, a coth, a garland of flowers, 
an ornament, and shoes, previously used by another, he 
must not wear. (66) 

He must not ride on a wild (unbroken), hungry, 
diseased, beast of conveyance, nor on one with pierced 
hoofs and mutilated tails, or broken horns. (67) 

He shall travel by 1 horses or elephants) that are 

* Such as Piny4ka, mustard cake, etc.,— fCulluka. 

t Fill half of the stomach with food, its quarter part with 
water, and leave a quarter part of its cavity free for the circulation 
of air. — Vishunpuranam. 

% The te.xt has Na kurvita Vritha Cheshtam, i.-e. he must 
not spend his physical energy to do an act which does not bring 
him any good either immediate or prospective. 



Manu Samhite, 143 

ikstgOing, quiet, handsome and good coloured animals, 
possessed of auspicious features, sparing the mace or the 
whip as much as possible. (68) 

The heat of the autum sun,* the smoke of a crema- 
tion ground, a cracked or fissured seat, he must avoid ; 
he must not tear his hair or finger nails, nor cut his 
finger nails with his teeth. (69) 

He must not wantonly grind clay or« clods of earth 
with his hands, nor cut weeds with his finger nails ; 
let him not attempt a futile act, nor do any thing which 
may create troubles in the future. t (70) 

He, who (wantonly) grinds earth (with his fingers), 
or I cuts his finger nails (with his teeth), as well as 
a malicious calumniator, and one, who neglects his 
pearsonal cleanliness, soon meet destruction. (71) 

He must not lay any wager (as regards matters of 
S^dstras or concerns of life), nor go out wearing a 
garland of flowers round his neck ;J in every way it 
is condemnable to ride on a bullock. (72) 

Let him not enter a (walled) village or a house by 
any other entrance than the froHt door (or gate) ; he 
shall avoid from a distance the roots of trees in the 
night. § (73) 



* The text has Valdtapak, tome commadtatort explain it by 
" ray of the msrning sun.'' It really means the heat of the sun 
when it remains in the sign of Kanyi (Virgo). 

f This stanza it not a mere repetition of stanza 63, there 
Cheshth meant physical exertion ; the present stanza contemplatee 
all mwtal acts, such as plaAning, willing etc., for the performance 
of an act which does not confer any D£neit.on its d«er. 

\ lie must keep it concealed under his upper sheet of gar- 
ment, when going out. Kulluka. 

§ He^m ust not think of lying or taking shelter under a tree in 
the ni(hk 



144 hfann Satafiith. 

He must not play a game with dice, nor carry ift hii 
hand the shoes he wears ; let him not gradually eat a 
morsel of food he has taken in his hand, nor by placing 
the plate (of food) on a cushion. 74 ) 

He must not eat any preparation of sesame, or any 
thing, cpotaining sesame, after sunset ; let him not lie 
down entirely naked in the bed, nor go any where 
without washiBg his mouth after eating. (75) 

He must eat in wet feet, but he must act lie 
down in wet feet ; he, who eats in wet feet, acquire 
longevity. (76) 

Let him not go to a place, which is not easily ac- 
cessible and which is beyond sight ; he must not look at 
the excreta, nor swim across a river with his arms. (77) 
\ person, wishing to live a long life, must not stand 
on the ashes, on skeletal bones, on bits of broken, baked 
earthen vessels, on heaps of cotton seeds, nor on husks 
of paddy. (y8 

For a moment even, let him not associkte with the 
degraded, with CkandSlas, with Pukhas'as,* with the 
illiterate, with the purse-proud, and with low caste men 
{Antyavasdy ins) . (791 

He must not give, any worldly advice, or the leaving 
of his food,t or the residue of the fire-offering to a S'udra ; 
let him not giye religious instructions to a S'udra, not 
£raat him (S'udra) sanction to practise a vow. (80) 

The Brihmaoa, Who gives religious instructions to 
a S*adra, or advises him to practise a religous vow, is 

* A son of a S'udra wom^n bya Brahmana is called a Nishdda. 
The son which a Nishdda begets on a Sudra -woman is called a 
i'tikkas'a, and the son begotten by a Chanddla on a Nishdda wifie 
is called an Autyaiiasaviii. 

t Ha can give the leaving of his food to his S'udra servant. 



Matiu Samhita. I45 

■dtownied with that S'udra m the hell of Asarnvritam 
(unrestrahied darkness). (81 ) 

Let him Hot scratch his head with his united hands, 
nor touch it without w^ashing his ifiouth^ after eating, 
nor bathe without immersing his head in the water. (82) 

He^must not strike any one on the head, nor pull 
him by his hair ; after bathing, head-anointed, let him 
not touch oil with any other part of hi« body. {83) 

He must not accept the gift of a king, who is not 
the son of a Kshatriya, nor of him who lives by selling 
meat,* nor of an oil-presser,t nor of a wine-seller,t nor 
'of him who lives upon the income of prostitution. (84) 

An oil-presser is ten times as vile as a butcher 
(meat-seller), a wine seller is ten times as vile as an 
oil-presser, an enjoyer of the earnings of a prostitute is 
ten times as vile as a wine-seller, and a non-Kshatriya 
king is ten times as vile as the enjoyer of a prostitute's 
earnings. (85) 

A non-Xshatriya king is like unto a butcher, who 
keeps ten thousand slaughter-houses going; and hence, 
to accept the gift of such a king is a deadly sin. (86) 

He, who accepts the gift of a greedy king, who 
does not rule in conformity With the Regulation, goes 
to the twenty one hells in succession, known as, (87) 

Tdmisram (hell of darkness), Andha-tamisram (hell 
of sable .darkness), Mahd-rauravam (the great howling 
hell), Kkla-sutram (the hell of the thread of time) 
and Maha-narakam (the great hell). (88j 

* The text has' 'taunika which means a butcher, from Sund, 
a place of slaughter. 

f Chahram^—a.i\ oil-press. 

J The text has Dhvajin, Dhavja means a pennon, a wine-seller 
is called Dhvajin, because in ancient India a pennon is used to be 
hung down on the door-way of each wine-shop. 



J 46 Martu Samhita. 

The Sanjivanam (animating heliy, Mahdvkki (heH 
of great billows), Tapanam (burning hell),- SAmpratat 
panam (extremely heating hell), SangJtdtam (the^ crush- 
ing hell). Sakdkolam (hell with crows and owls) 
K^dmalam, Putimrittika,m (hell of foul-smelling, 
soil). (&9> 

Laha S'anhu (hell of iron tongs), Ripsham (ftying), 
Pantha, Sh&lmifli, Nadi, Asipatravanam (sWord-leafed 
forest) and Lohadarakam (iron-breaking)w (90) 

Erudite, Brihma-knowing Brahraanas, aware of 
these things, do not accept gifts from tsuch) a king, 
for their good in the next world, (jgr 1 

He must leave his bed at the Brahma, M-uhurta* 
(forty-eight minutes before the sun-rise), meditate on piety 
and worldly interests, ponder over the form of physicaJ 
labour by which they can be secured> and ascertain? 
the true imiport of the Vedas.-\ (92) 

Having left his bed and atten'ied to the calls of 
nature, he, well washed, and pure in spirit, shall, with vm- 
divided attention, mutter the morning Gayatri and the 
Gdyatrts, which are connected with the other Sandhya 
rites as well. (93) 

• GoviNDARAjA interprets the term Brahma Muhurtia Ky 
mean the latter end of the last watch of the night. 

t The injunction, ordaining the contemplation of the real 
mport of the Vedas at that time, is for the fact that, intellect be.-: 
copies frpsh and clear in the morning, which leads to a clear con- 
ception of the divinity which hedges round our daily duties irv 
life. All our acts are subordinated to the will.of the providence, we 
live in God and live for God o,nly, and all our works are His works. 
This is the true import of the teachings of the Vedas, and there. 
can be no better moment for thinking of thisldivine nature of our 
mission in life than the cool and calm hours of the morning, thus to 
begin life, each day, with the thought and conviction of divine 
help and contact. 



Manu Samhita. 147 

The Rishis were long-lived becaiise they tised to 
devote greater lengths of time to their rites of daily 
Sandkyd (prayer), and for this they obtained fame, 
progeny, celebrity, and the energy at Braked. (94) 

Having performed the rite of Upakarmk* on the 
day of the full moon in the month of S^rdvand or 
Bhddi-a, he shall devotedly read the Vedas for four 
months and a half (95) 

After that period, under the auspices of the asterism 
PushyS (iri the morith of Pausha), he shall, out-side 
the boundary of his villagfe, d6 the rite in connection 
A^ith the completioii of his Vedic study, or do it on the 
fotetioon of the fifst day of the light fortnight in th^ 
month of Mdgkd.^ (^6) 

Having duly performed th6 rite of bidding adieu 
to the Vedas% at the out-skift of his village, he shall 
refrain from studying the Vedas for that day and night, 
or for that day and night and the next day only 
(Pakshini). (97) 

After that, let him study the Vedat during the 
•strhoXe of the light fortnight, and the allied branches .of 
study {Veddngas such as Grammar, Prosody, Astro- 
nomy, etc.,) during the entire dark fortnight. (98) 

He must not indistinctly read the Vedas, nor read 
them near a S'udra ; tired with reading the i^edus 
in the last watch of the night, let him not sleep 
again. (99) 

* The rite of Up&kariha consists in making a fire-offering for 
the worship and gtofification of the Achdryaya, preceptor) 

f Those who have performed the Upakaytiia on thfc fiill modri 
day of Bh^dra must do this rite in the first day of the light 
fortnight' in Migha^ 

J FirB offerings riiade after finishing the study of the fVrfai 
for four months and a half. 



14S' Manu Samhit'th 

In the aforesaid manner, a Brihmana shall devotecBy 
read the metrical Mantra porticHi of the Vedas ; and in; 
the absence of distressing circumstances, he shall devo- 
tedly read their Mantra and Br&hmana portions as 
well. (100) > 

Both thej^reading student and the teaching preceptor 
must not read the Vedas under the following circum- 
stances of non-study {Anadhyayam). (ror)) 

In the rainy season, when the: wind, is heard roaring, 
in the night, ch: when the wind is seen raising clouds of 
dust in the day, (a&they are the circumstances, which. 
the learned, acquainted with rule of F^rfzfl<:study„say as. 
eccasionii^ the non-study (of the Vedai)t. (aoa) 

When it laarts-with thunder and lightning, and wheit 
showers of meteors fall from the skies, are the circums- 
tances, said to> occasion the accidental non-study of the 
F«fl?«j' (from that time to the next day)» 1 his is^ what 
Manu has ordained. (103) 

If these phenomena (thunder, lightning, etc,,) occur 
at the time of kindling the Homa fire in the evening, 
during, the rainy season, they should not be regarded as. 
occasions of imn-study, but ia other seasons of the 
year the appearance of clouds at the time, of kindling, 
the: Homa-Gie. will occasion non-study. (104) 

Earth-quakes, with rumbling sounds in the earth, 
and eclipses of the sun and moon, even if they happen im 
their proper seasons,, should be regarded as occasioning 
periods of non-study. (105). 

If lightning and claps of thunder happen to be seea 
and heard at the. time of kindling the Homa-^K, the 
period of non-study will last till the extinction of the: 



Ma?iw Samhifa. >4i9 

Iwminary * while it shall extend for the whole day anct 
night, if it happens to rain after the occurrence- of either 
of the aforesaid 'phenomena. ( io6) 

For extremely pious men, thestudy of the. Vedas vat 
a crowded village,, or in places, always full of foul smel^ 
is prohibited.t (107} 

In a village from which a dleadi body has not beett 
removed, by the side of an extremely impfous; person,!: 
in a crowded place, or in a place where the crying; 
soiond is heard, the Vedos shall never be studied. (108), 

In the water, at mid-night,§ at the time of evacuating; 
stool and urine, in unwashed mouth after eating, and 
aftea: having eaten a S'raddhaxiepast„let him notcoa- 
template (the Vedas) in his mind; (109) 

An erudite Briihmana,, on accepting an invitations toj 
an Ekoddishta S'riddha repast, must not read the Vedas^ 
for three days (from the date of such acceptance) ; (simi- 
larly), h© must not read them for three days on the birth 
of a king's scm, or on the occasion of a solar or lunar 
eclipse. 1 1 10). 

So long as the scent ot residue of saflforn-pastes etc.,, 
with, which his body has been smeared on the occasion^ 

* Tffl the sun sets, if it happens in the day; and till- the stars: 
disappear in heaven, if it happens, in. the night. 

t The text has, Dharmamaipunya- Kdminah, Kulluka ex- 
plains it by Dharmitis'aydrthituth, those w.ho. seek, the highest 
form of virtue. 

% The text has Vrishala, Kulluka explains it by Adh&rmikah, 
^pious person, and' not a S'udra. 

§ The text has Madhyardtre, Kulluka explains it by Muhurta-- 
chatftshtaya, 192 minutes in. the midnight, and he is- supported by 
Gautama, " Nis'dydm Chaturmuhurta, for 192 minutes in tha 
mid-night. Govindaraja explains it hy Dviprahara, at the sscondi 
Frakara of the night, a Prahara being equal to three hours. 



150 Manu Samhita. 

of an Ekoddishta S'riddha, remains on his person, 
an erudite Brihmana must not read the Vedas. (iii) 

Lying, or sitting on his haunches, or with his thighs 
uncovered, after eating cooked flesh, or boiled tice 
(food) soiled by a birth or death-vmcleanness, he must 
not read the Vedas. (112) 

In a forest, on hearing the sound of flying arrows,* 
at either juncture of the day and night, and on the day 
of the new or full moon, as well as on the eighth and 
fourteenth days of the fortnight, and on the occasions of 
Ashtakas, he must not read the i^edas. (113) 

The day of the new moon destroys the preceptor, 
the fourteenth day of the fortnight kills the disciple 
(student), Ashtaka's and the day of the full moon lead 
to the loss of their ( Vedas] memory ; hence, these days 
should be avoided in reading the i^edas. (i 14) 

In dust storms, on the appearance of a meteoric Kght 
on the horizon, when the jackals howl, and dogs bark, 
or the asses bray, and camels scream, as well as in a 
company, let not a Brahmana read the Vedas. (115) 

Let him not read (the Vedas) at a cremation ground, 
at the outskirt of a village, in a pasture ground, wear- 
ing the dress, he had on when he visited his wife, and 
on accepting a S'raddha gift^ 11 16) 

Having accepted a SVSddha gift,, whether animate 
(such as a cow, etc.,) or inanimate, he must not read the 



* The text has V&na H'amie, several commentators exidain 
Vdiui,, which ordinarily means anarrow.by Vina Visesha, a kind 
harp or lyre,, the whole raeaaing. according to them being on 
kearing the notes of a harp. 



Manu SamhiiS. i§t 

tV</ar, inasmuch as the hands of a BtShmani are said 
to be like uflto his mouth* (117) 

A terror of thieves and blazes breaking out in the 
Village, as well as all abnormal phenomena of nature? 
taust be understood as occasioning periods of nonstudy 
(of the Uedas). (iiS) 

The period of non-study lasts for three nights at the 
close of the rite of Upd karma at Utsttrgn ;t that in 
connection withj an ^51 ^a/fea or the completion of a 
season of the year is one day and night, (i 191 

Let him not read (the Vedas on horse-baek, nof 
■while riding on an elephant, or sitting on the bough of 
a tree, nor while riding an ass or a camel or going in a 
boat or a vehicle, nor standing on a bar»en> waterlesa 
ground. 1120) 

Nor while wrangling or fighting, nor near a troop 
of soldiers, nor in a battle-field, nor immediately aftef 
eatingjf nor while suffering from ind-Jgestion, nor aftei' 
vomiting, nor after a sour rising. (121) 

Nor without taking permission of a guest [Atiifhi)\n 
the house, nor while the winds are violently blowing, 
nor after bleeding from any part of the body, nor after 
a cut from a weapon. ( 1 22f) 

* Tljfe text has Panythsyah, lit,, hand'mouthed, the m«aii>ing id 
that acceptance, of a gift by a Brahmana with his hand is like 
unto his eating the same. 

+ For Uisarga and Uphkarma, see Note, under V. (,o of this 
chapter. 

% Ashtakas.—TYie eighth days of the moon's wane during the 
three months commencing with the day of the full moon in the 
month of Agrahiyana. 

§ Cf. Vasishtha, Yamiirdr.aphniriti," as long as the (washed) 
hands remain wet after a meal. 



1^2 Manu SamkitA 

H€ must not read the Riki and Yajush ( Vedns) as lofig 
as the chants of the Sama Veda will ren&in audible> 
Bor any other Veda^ aftet completing the rea>ling of 
one Veda with its (allied) A''ranyakam. (123) 

The gods are the presiding deities of the Rig- Veda,, 
tnen are those of the Yajush^ and the manes are 
those of the Sama Veda ; hence, unholy are the chants 
of the Sama i^eda.\ (124) 

Knowing these (tutelary gods), the erudite ones first 
mutter the Pranava^ the Vyahriti and the Gdyatri, the 
essence of all the Vedas, and read the Vedus after 
that. (125) 

A cow, etc.,t a toad, a cat, a dog, a snake, a mim^ 
goose or a mouse, happening to pass between (the pre- 
ceptor and his disciple) at the time of teaching the 
vedas, the period of non-study shall be deemed as ex- 
tending for one day and night. (126) 

The impurity of the place of Vedaic study,§ and 
personal uncleanness of the reader, these two are the 
permanent causes of nons-tudy ; let a Brdhmana carefully 
avoid these two occasions of non-study. (127) 

A Snataka Brihmana must shun the bed of his wife 
on the day of the full or new moon, as well as on the 

• Religious rites and sacfifices to be performed by men 
and the mode of performing them form the main thesis of the 
Yujurveda. 

i" The Bhagavad Gita, on the other hand, gives the highest 
precedence to the Soman among the four Vedas. 

Cf Vedanhm Sdmavedosmi, I ( supreme deity ) am the Sama 
Veda among the Vedas. 

% The text has Pas^u, which literally means a beast, Kulluka 
explains it by Gavddi, hoarned :attle, etc. 

§ Such as dsfilement of the floor of the study with leaving of 
food, etc.. 



Murtu Sitmhtm. igS 

^rglith or fourteenth days of the moon's \irane W 
increase, even if his wife be in her menstrual period* at 
^he time. (128) 

He must not bathe after eating, nor while ill^t not 
-at midnightj nor with a large number of clothes on,§ not 
•in an unknown tank or reservoir of water. (129) 

Let him not wilfully leap over the shadow* of his 
'king or preceptor, nor that of a diyine iftiage, nor that 
-of a eow, nor that of a Sndtaka, nor that of an initiator^ 
*ior that of a brown cow, nor that of an initiated 
person. (130 

-He must not long tarry at a cross road at midday 
'or midnight, nor after eating meat in a Sr^ddha repast, 
«ior at either meeting of the day or night. (1311 

Let him not wilfully touch with his feet used cosmatic 
pastes, II bathing water, excreted matter, blood, mucous, 
^puta and vomited matter (lying on the ground). (132) 

iet him not associate with (i.e., serve) his enemies, 
"with the friends of his enemies, with impious men, with 
'thievesjand other men's wives. (133' 

Nothing so shortens the life of a man in this world 
«s the act of (clandestinely) visiting another's wife. (134) 

* Twtelve days from the fourth day of her period. 

t An iristitator of a religious ceremony, happeiyng to fall ill 
ahd hence incapable of bathing, must bathe without Immei-jing his 
9iead in water and by rubbing his body with a wet towel. Jdvala. 

\ Not forbidden in the case of touching a Chandala, or a low- 
"ca^e man. 

\ Except those forms of Ceremonial ablutions which are 
^ade for the fruition of any specific desire, like those performed 
il'nder the auspices of a lunar eclipSe,. etc. 

II The text has Udvartanam, Kulluka explains it as Abhyanga 
tnaldpakak^hana pishtakam, pasted tcinleric, Erablic myrdbalans 
etc mixed with oil, with which the body is rubbed for removing 
its impurities. 
20 



154 Manu SamhttA 

A man, however prosperous in life, must not insult 
a Kshatriya, a profoundly erudite Br^hmaBa, or a 
serpent,: (thinking him to be too weak to retaliate) ; 
likewise one must not humiliate the weak and the 
defenceless. (135) 

These three, insulted by a man, verily consume 
him (like fire) ; hence, the intelligent one must not 
insult them und^ any circumstances whatsoever * (136) 

Let him not disparage himself on account of his 
past failures or misfortunes ; let him pursue fcjrtune 
even to the last day of his life and never think her 
beyond his reach, (137) 

He must speak truth, and truths that are pleasant j 
he must not speak an unpleasant truth nor a pleasant 
lie. This is the eternal virtue.t (138) 

Even in cases of ungentle dealings he must say 
" that's good,"t " that's good," or he shall say "good" 
to all ; he must not engage in a futile quarrel, nor oreate 
a barren enmity, with any person. (139' 

In the early dawn or evening, or at midday, he must 
not go anywhere, nor with a man of unknown character 
and parentage, nor with a low born miscreant.§ 140) 

Persons possessing limbs in less or excess, old men, 

• The text has Buddhimana Kulluka explains if by 
kalyana Buddhi which may, mean one gracioUsiy disposed, or 
seeking his own good. 

f The text has Na manyet Durlabham. He must not think 
that itis too late or impossible for bim to acquire a fortune. 

} The text has '■ Bhadram'' Bhadram iti Bruyat Bhadram ' 
ityeva. KuLLUKA says that the first " Bhadram (good) means 
instances of ungentle behaviour, or unfair treatment. 

§ The text has P'niAa/n. JKulluka explains it by " S'udra," 
we ho vever find no reason to interpret it in any other sense than 
that in which it has been used in Stanza io8 of this chapter. 



Manu Samhita. 155 

illiterate persons, those devoid of personal beauty and 
worldly possessions, and men of low birth, he must not 
taunt for their (unfortunate) deformities or privations 
(141) 

Without washing his mouth, after eating, he must 
not touch a Brdhmana, a cow or fire with his hand. Im- 
pure, when in health, he must not gaze upon the lumin- 
aries {i. e. stars etc.,) in the heaven. (i42>* 

Happening to touch a cow, etc., while he is in an 
' impure conditon, he must sip water and touch the ex- 
ternal orifices of his organs (such as tjie nose^ ears, etc.) 
and his umbilicus with water. {143) 

Not otherwise ill or indisposed, he must not wantonly 
finger the external dtiets of his organs (such as 
the nostrils, etc.,) nor handle the private hairs of his 
body. All these should be avoided. (144) 

Always he must be of aupicious conduct;* pure in 
body and spirit and self-controlled, let him unremit- 
tingly mutter the sacred Mantras and make the fire- 
offerings. (145) 

Calamitiest befall not those who constantly be of 
auspicious conduct, nourish a clean spirit in a dean 
body, constantly mjitter the sacred Mantras*?sa&. do the 
fire-offerings. (146) 

L^t him diligently study the Vedas,X whenever he 
finds an opportunity; that is the highest duty of« 

* The text has Mangalachdra Kulluka explaifns it by- Gora- 
ehanadi dhamnam,. Aocording to him, putting of toteijis of 
pasted Gorochana fgall stones of oxes) on the loreftead, etc. is also- 
included within Mangalachdra. 

t Vinipata, KuLLUKA explains it bjr physical' diisturbanees 
(such as earthquakes, disease, or breaT'emejits. 

X The text has Vcdam ILulb^itka explains it by " th» VyJ^riti^ 
Pratiava,, ttc. 



156' Manw Samhita. 

Brahmanat, all other being^ his minor or accessory- 
duties. (147) 

Constant study of the Vedas, eleanlinessof the body 
and mind, contemplation, austerities {Tapas) ani 
compa^on towards all creatures arc what bring to a 
man the remembrances of his past existences (J&ti- 
sfnara. (148J. 

Remembrances of his past births- make him apathetfc; 
to the world and its concerns, and lead ; him to attain 
the Supreme Brahma ; and by existing in this supreme" 
self (5rflA7«5)* he enjoys infinite and eternal happiness: 
(beatitudes). 1149) 

On the day of the full or new moon, he must make- 
the fire-offerings known as the ^davitrior S^&nti- 
Hondas, and worship the manes with Sraddha-<MenD.^. 
on the days of Ashtakds and Anvashtakas. (150) 

The stool and urine should be voided at a distance 
from the fire chamber ; at a distance from the fir& 
chamber should be cast the washings of feet,, lea-mgs of 
food, and the semen. (151) 

Voiding stool, performance of toilet,, bathing, clean- 
ing' the teeth, applying colyrrium along the eye-lids; 
and worshipping the deities must be j)erformed before 
sun-rise at the close of the night. (152)' 

On the day of the Par-m (such as the day o^ the 

* Brahmabhydsena is the term that occurs in the text. 
KuLLUKA explains Brahma by " Veda". This is h&wever 
another instance of the attempt to further Veda at any costs an* 
even in cases where the terms admit of another kind of interpre- 
tation. Even, men liie S'ankara, R^m^nuja, Savara Svami, and. 
KumarUa an' not free from the fault of advocating their respec- 
tive cults even at the cost of distorting the true meaning of the- 
text, we, however, find no reason to alter our dicision as regards^ 
the true meaning of the stanza. 



Manu Samhita, 1'57 

fall or new moon), he must go- to pay respect to a 
divine image, to a protecting king, and to his parents; 
and superiors. (153) 

He must welcome the elders (on their arrival to 
his house), give them cushions to, sit upon with has- owni 
hands, sit before them with the palms of his hands- 
meekly united together, and fbllpw them when they 
shall go out. (154) • 

Unremittingly he must observe the rules of good 
conduct, commended in the- Vedas and Smritis as: 
proper to the social order he beloirgs to,, as the fbuntaiik 
source of all virtues. (155) 

Through (observing 1 good conducj; one acquires a. 
long life, through conduct one acquires a desirable 
progeny ; through good conduct one acquires a decay- 
less wealthy and good conduct kills, all the inauspicious 
(bodily) traits of a person.* '156) 

A man of misconduct is condemned "in the worlds 
suffers perpetual misery,, is afflicted with' disease, and 
dies a premature death. (157) 

Even devoid of all auspicious traits; a man of good 
conduct, believing (in God) and envying no one, is 
enabled to live for a hundred years. (158) 

Works, which make one dependent on others, he 
mu-st studiously avoid ; works, which are entirely under 
hi§ own control, he must diligently pursue. (159) 

Liberty (in all respects) is happiness and depen- 
dence, (in all matter) is misery. These know to ba 
the general definions of happiness and misery. (i6o> 

A work, by doing which the inner man is satisfied, 
do by all means, avoid the contrary. (161) » 

N.B. — For Sakakolam (crows and owls) read Sabdkolam (h.eU 
o£ ravens.)— p. 14,6. 



ijS Manu Samhita, 

An AchSryaya, an expounder of the Vedar, one's o\to 
parents or superiors,. Brihmanas, cows, and Tapasvins 
(asceties) one must not any wise hurt or mjure.''{i62) 
. Let him avoid atheism, reviling the gods and the 
Vedast, arrogance, vanity, anger, and harshness. (163) 

Let him not raise a elub to any body, nor strike- 
any body with a dub, excepting his son and disciple 
for the purposel of discipline. (164). 

With a desire to kill» if a twice born one raises a 
club to a Br^hmap^, he shall live for a century in the; 
hell of extreme darkness ( Andha Tamisram) . (165) 

For wilfully striking a Br§.hmana, out of anger,, 
even with a weed, the striker shall be reborn for- 
twenty one existences in vile wombs. 1166) 

He, who draws blood out the body of a non- 
fighting Brihmaiia, suffers extreme misery 'for that 
, piece of his folly in the next world. (i$7) 

For as [many number of years the; assaulter is eaten 
by dogs and jackals in the hell as the number of 
particles of dust on the ground which are soaked by 
the (spilt) blood of the Brahmana. (168) 

Hence the erudite one shall not raise his stiek to a. 
Brahmana, nor strike him (even -with a weed, nor (fraw^ 
blood from his person (by assulting). (169^) 

An impious man, he whose wealth is iH-gotteir, he 
wha is constantly envious of others, any of these men 
can not enjoy happiness in this world. (170) 

Seeing the reverses of the dishonest and |the un- 
gbdly, let him not, in mwnents of scarcity or mone- 
tary -wants, turn his thoughts to dishonest gain. (171) 

Like seeds sown in the earth, iniquities do not 
taike fruit,, the same day; but fully evolved out ioi 



Manu Samhita. igg 

tiOUfSe of" tinie, they Cut the root {i. e. fcompletely des> 
ttoy) their perpetrators. (172) 

The iniquities of a sinner will bear fruit in his sons' or 
grandf-sons even if they fail to be fruitful in- his own 
self. Th6y can never be fruitless. (173) 

By iniquity (dishonesty) a man may thrive, may see 
many a g9od in life, may conquer his enemies, but 
ultimately iniquity is sure to completely overwhelm 
and destroy him. (1741 

Let him, with his tongue, arm, and belly properly 
controlled, constantly devote himself to truth, piety 
good conduct and purity, and govern his disciples ac- 
cording to the rules of the S'dstra. (175) 

Let him avoid money, and desires which are bereft 
of virtue, let him not practise a virtue by practising 
which he incurs the enmity of others, of which brings 
him trouble in the future. (176) 

He must avoid all fickleness of hands, feet, eyes, 
and speech, do what is straight and honest, and never 
think of doing any hostility to any body. (177) 

In virtues of conflicting authority, let him take 
to the pathi adopted by his fathers and grand-fathers j 
l^ adopting that path, he will not incur eimiity of any 
man. (178) 

He" must not quarrel with his priests, Riitvigs (z>., 
celebrants of sacrifices on his behalf), preceptors and 
maternal uncles, Atithi guests, dependants, servants,, 
infants, 'old. men, sick folks, physicians, cognates, 
marriage-relations and relations. (179) 

Nor with his, parents, sisters, daughters-iiJ-law, sons' 
wives, and brothers, and slaves. (180) 

By avoiding quarrels with these, a house-holder may 



l6o Manu SamMfa. 

be exoaerated of all sin ; by eonquering these, ^ lidige* 
holder can conquer all these worlds. (i8i) ' 

A (propitiated) predeptor leades him to (/«V. is the 
master of) the region of '^Brahma, a satisfied father 
leads him to the region of Praj&patic, a well'-pleased 
Atithi \ guest leads him to the region of Indra, and a 
satisfied Rittvik leads him to the region of gods. (182) 

His well-pleased daughters (and daughters-in-law) 
tead him to the region of the Apsarasas, his friends 
- lead him to the region of the Vis'vedevas, his brothers' 
in-law lead him to the region of Varuna and the 
influences of his mother and maternal uncles are upon 
the earth. (183) 

Satisfied old men, infants, weaklings, and sick folks 
lead him to the region of the firmament, he shall res^ 
pect his eldest brother as his own father, and consider 
his wife and children as parts and parcels of his own 
self. (1S4) 

He shall look upon his slaves as his own shadow 
and his daughter as the respectacle of highest affec- 
tion; worried by them, he must patiently bear with 
such a worry. U85) 

' Even capable of accepting a gift, he must give up 
all attachment to gift-taking ; gift-taking speedily 
extinguishes the energy of the supreme self which is 
in a Bi^dhmana. (186) 

Ignorant of the regulations of the Sastra as re 
gards the taking of gift articles, a (Brdhmana), over 
whelmed with hunger, must not take a gift. (187) 

Gifts of gold, horses, lands, cows, food grains, 
clothes and sesame seeds, made to an ignorant Brdhmana, 
are consumed, like a wood cast in the fire. (188; 



Manu Samhila. 16 k 

Tke life-dutation of an ignorant Brdhmana 'suffers, 
if he accepts a gift of gold or food grains ; by accep- 
ling the gift of a land or a co\* he suffers in health ; 
for accepting the gift of a horse he is deprived 
of his sight, for acceptlftg the gift of a cloth his 
skin suffefd, for a(::cepting the gift of clarified butter 
his energy, and for accepting sesame, his progeny are 
consumed. (189) 

A Brahma na, who is devoid of all ascetic Virtues, 
is unread in th6 Vedas and very fond of gift'-taking, if 
he takes '.a gift, is drowned with its donor, like a stone 
taft with its rider. (190) 

Hence, let an erudite (Brihmana) be afraid of ac- 
cepting a gift from all and sundry ; even by taking 
a small gift, a Brahmaaa is drowned like a cow in 
the mire. (191) 

A virtuous man must not make even an insigHificant 
gift to a BrUhmana, who is cat-natured (selfish), or carries 
a cloak of religion ( Vakavrata^ or is not read in the 
Vedas. (i$2) 

By giving a well-gotten wealth to any of these 
three kinds of Br&hmanas, both the doitor and 
the receiver of the gift come to grief in the next 
world. (193) 

Like a man, attempting to cross (a river) with the 
aid of a stone raft, both the ignorant donor and acceptor 
of a gift are drowned. (194) « 

He who, though extremely covetous of wealth, 
carries a cloik of religion, is deceitful (lit,, dissimulating), 
arrogant, and envious, and can not bear the praise of 
others, and hence tries to snub down all men, is called 
cat-natured ( Viddla-vrataka). i. e., He is like unto a 
cat, who assumes meekness only to decoy his prey out 
21 



i62 Manu Satnhita. 

of his safe-hold and then pounces upon it with all th« 
native fury of his soul.) (195) 

With eyes cast down, to conceal his ferocious pur- 
pose, he, who to gain hi§ own ends, roams about in 
deceit and falsehood, like a crane, is called Vaka-vrati 
(crane-itiatured.) (196) 

Those Brahmanas, who are cat-natured or crane- 
natured, fall intp the hell of extreme darkness through 
the effects of their (treacherous deeds). (197) 

After committing a crime, let him not practise the 
expiatory penance in the pretext of practising a virtue, 
for the purpose of duping females and S'udras. (198) 

A vow or a penance practised in the way of a pretext 
goes to the monsters ; those Brihmanas, (who are cat- 
natured or crane-natured), are condemned by the 
Brahma-Vadins. (199) 

A person, who tries to earn a livelihood by falsely 
wearing the badges or marks of an order he does not 
belong to, robs all the sin of that order, and is reborn 
in the womb of beasts. (200) 

Let him not bathe in another's tank (not endowed 
for the public use) ; by so bathing, he is partly associated 
with the sin of its owner. (201) 

He must not use without its owner's permission a 
vehicle, a bed, a cushion, a well, or a tank, belonging to 
another,; by so doing, he becomes associated with a 
quartef part of its owner's sin. (202) 

Let him always bathe in rivers, in natural reservoirs 
of water, such as tanks, ponds. Cartas (lakes less than 
eight miles in length) and fountains, (203) 

Let him constantly practise self-control and not 
vows only ; he, who practises vows only, but no self- 
control, meets his fall. (204) 



Manu SamhilA. 163 

Let not a Brahmaria eat anything in a religious 
sacrifice wherin fire offerings have been performed by a 
Brahmana, ignorant of the Vedas, or who serves as a 
village priest, or by a woman or eunuch. (205) 

A religious sacrifice in which such persons perform 
the fire-offerings tends to destroy the prosperity of the 
Brahmanas, and is not liked by the gods ; hence, it 
should be avoided. (206) * 

Let him not eat the food offered by an insane, 
angry, or diseased person, nor that containing hair £«nd 
flies, nor that which has been wilfully touched by one 
with his feet. (207 • 

Nor the food looked at by a foeticide, nor that 
touched by a woman in her menses or hiked at by 
a bird, nor thit touched by a dog. (208) 

Nor that smelled by a cow, nor that which has been 
offered to the hungry and the indigent by proclamation, 
nbr ;that of a monastery, nor that offered by a courte^ 
san, nor that condemned^by the wise. (209) 

Nor that of a gold-st@aler, nor that of one who 
lives by singing, nor that of a Takshana, nor that of 
an usurer, nor of one initiated in a sacrifice (without 
performing the ^^«« Somiya yajna)^ norj that of a 
miser, nor of a chained prisoner. (210) 

Nor that of an accursed person, nor that of a 
eunuch, nor that of a corrupt woman, nor that of an 
arrogant person, nor the food, containing sweet, that has 
acquired an acid taste, nor that which is stale or 
has been prepared over night, nor that which is t-he 
leaving of a S'udra's food. (211) 

Nor that of a physician, nor that of a hunter^ nor 
that of a cruel person, nor that of one who cats leaving, 
nor that of one engaged in dreadful acts, nor 



164 Manu Samhtta 

that of a newly parturient womsm, nor^ of those 
Brdhmanas who continue eating, after a diner in their 
row has finished eating and washed his mouth 
{Parjachinta). (212) 

Nor what has been slightingly offefed, nor the 
flesh which has not been formally offered to the deities, 
nor the food of an unprotected woman, nor of an 
enemy, nor th^t of a city, nor that of the degraded, 
nor that which has been sneezed over. (213) 

Nor that of a scandal-monger, nor that of one who 
bears false witness, nor that of one who sells the 
merits of religious sacrifices for money, nor that of 
a professional &ctor, nor that of a tailor, nor that of 
an ungrateful person. (214) 

Nor that of a black smith, nor that of a Nishada, 
nor that of a stage-manager, nor that of a gold smith, 
nor that of one who manufactures bamboo articles, 
nor that of one who sells weapons. 1215) 

Nor that of a keeper of dogs, nor that of a wine- 
seller, nor that of a dyer of clothes, nor that of a 
washerman, nor that of a cruel person, nor that of 
one whose wife's paramour lives disguisedly in his 
house, (216) 

Nor that of one who connives at the misconduct 
of his wife, nor that of an extremely oxorious person, 
nor that of one who is affected by a death uncleanness, 
nor that which fails to give satisfaction. (217) 

Food, given by a king, robs its (partaker) of his 
spirit and energy, that given by a S'udra robs the 
Br&hma energy (of its partaker) ; food given by a 
gold smith impairs the vitality, and that offered by a 
cobbler (leather-seller), destroys the good name (of their 
partakers). (218) 



Manu Samkita. 165 

The food of an artisan kills the progeny, that of a 
dyer kills strength ; the food of a hotel, or of ajcourtesart 
leads to the fall of its partaker from the heaven (he 
has acquired by his acts). (219) ' 

The food, given by a physician, is like iiftto pus ; the 
food given by a corrupt woman is ■ like unto semen, 
the food given by a usurer is like unto excreta, and the 
food given by a weapon-seller is like unto mucous. (220) 

The food', offered by those whose food is ut^fit to 
betaken as mentioned above, should be deemed as 
respectively like unto their skin, hair and skeletal 
bones. This is what the learned have said. (221) 

. Having unwillingly partakeh of the food of any 
of these persons, one must fast . for three nights. 
Having knowingly eaten (food of any of these), he 
must practise a CMndrhyanam penance. The same 
is the penance for eating excreta. (22?) 

An erudite Br^hm&na must not eat the cooked 
food of a S'udra, devoid of Sraddhas; but he may 
take his uncooked food, enough to last him for a single 
night. (223) 

One is a Veda-knowing miser ; and another, a usurer, 
though charitable ; deciding about these two persons, 
the gods came to the conclusion that the food of 
these two is equally (defiling). (224) 

But Brahmil came unto the gods and said, " do not 
consider the food of these two, virtually possessed of 
contrary virtues, as of like nature ; the food of the 
charitable usurer is purified by kindness, but the food, 
offered by a miserly Veda-knowing Brdhmana, isjoffered 
with reluctance, and^^ hence it is defiled. (225) 

Let him with proper feelings mnremittingly do 



1 66 Manu Samhifa. 

the Ishta and Purta works* These works, done with 
the honest money, bear decayless fruits.t (22*6) 

Qn obtaining a fit recipient of gift, let him 
do the Ishta and Purta works with the greatest self- 
complacence, and to the best of his means. {zzT) 

Let him practise small gift-makings without any 
feeling of anger or vexation ; by them he shall some 
day obtain a*gift-taker who will be able to succour 
him in every way. (328) 

A giver of water enjoys (lit acquires) satisfaction, 
a food-giver enjoys decayless felicity ; a giver of sesame 
-seed* obtains a desirable progeny, and a giver of lamps 
(lights) obtains a commendable sight.J (22^) 

A gifter of land acquires a landed property, a gold 
gifter obtains gold ; A gifter of houses obtains splend- 
id buildings, a giver of silver is blessed with personal 
beauty. (230) 

A giver of clothes attain to the region of the moon- 
god, a giver of horses ascends to the region of As'visi 
a giver of bullocks enjoys prosperity, a cow-giver goes 
to the region of the sup. (231) 

A giver of a bed or cushion obtains (a good and 
handsome) wife ; a giver of refuge acquires an unbounded 
wealth ; a giver of paddy enjoys eternal felicity, and 
a giver of the Vedas attains the supreme Brahma. (232) 

Of all gifts, whether they be of water, cowl, cloth, 
sesame, gold or clarified butter, a gift of the Vedas 
stands preminently the most meritorious. (233) 

* Religious sacrifices. 

f Endowment of wells, tanks of water, gardens, etc., for the 
public^weal are called Purta Kdryayas. 

% The text has Dipadas'chahshuruttamam, which may aho 
mean that a gifter of lights is blessed, with a supersensous vision 
ia his next existenae. 



Mattu Samhiia. Jfi? 

A gift,- which one makes out of a certain ni©tite* 
in this life; shall be returned to him in his next life, 
honoured with the fulfilment of that motive. (234) 

He, who/ being duly honoured, makes the gift, a« 
well as he, who, being duly honoured, accents the gift,, 
both of them go to heaven ; if otherwise, they go to 
hell. (235) 

He must not wonder at, nor be proud bf the powers' 
(he has acquired by dint of Yoga and austerities, nor speak 
untruth on celebrating a religious sacrifice ; even highly 
oppressed by him, let him not speak ill of a Brihmana,, 
nor brag of the gifts he has made. (2j6) ' 

One's sacrifice is decayed by falsehood ; (one's merit 

of) Yoga and penitential austerities, by (his' wonder 

(at the success, achieved). Duration of life is shortead 

^ by calumniating a Brihrnana ; and one's merit of gift- 

' making, by (his) vaunting of it. (237; 

Little by little let him store up virtues, as white ants; 
build up an ant-hill, for his benefit in the next, worldy 
without creating hardship on any creature. (238) 

In the next world, neither his wife [and children, 
nor his parents and relations will be of any 'avail; 
it is virtue alone that stands by him (in the next 
world). (229) 

Alone a creature comes into being, alone does h& 
meet his death ; alone he enjoys the merits of his good 
deeds, and the consequence of his misdeeds does he 
suffer alone. (240; 

Leaving behind him his dead body, like a log of 
wood, or a clod of earth, on the'ground, his friends and 

* The text has Yena Vena tu bhhena (i.e., out of that, that 
motivej. Kulluka explains it by the motive out of which a 
gift is made in this life, either for the enjoyment of celestial bliss,, 
or self-emancipation, etc. 



1 68 Manu Samhtta. 

relations go away turning their backs on it ; it is Virtue 
alone thatjfollows him (in the darkness of death). (241) 

Hence, inorder to have virtue as his ally, let him 
little by little store up Virtue ; with the help of vhtue 
a man sails across the shoreless darkness. (242) 

The effulgent, ethereal body of a man of dominant 
virtue, who has extinguished his sin by ptactising peni- 
tenSal austerities^ Virtue herself will swiftly carty up to 
the other world, after death. (243) ' 

For the elevation of his own family, let him create 
relationships with nobler families, and avoid those 
that are mean and humble. (244) 

By creating relationships with families that are pro- 
gressively nobler and nobler and by avoiding connec-- 
tions with low ones, a Brdhmana obtains elevation ; 
by doing the contrary, he becomes (degraded as) a 
S'udra. (J45) 

A thorough worker (in the line of good deeds), mild, 
self-controlled, and bereft of envy, he who does not 
associate with the miscreants, conquers by his gifts and 
and self-control. (246) 

Fuel, water, edible roots, offered without soHcita- 
tion,{as well as honey and reftige (protection), may be 
accepted from all.* (247) 

Gifts, offered without solicitation, and to which no 
previous reference has been in any way made, may be 
received even from the miscreants, this is what Brah- 
md has acknowledged. (248) 

His manes do not eat his oblations, nor the fire 
convey his oblations to the deities, who insult (refiiseji 
to accept) these gifts. (249) 

* Excepting corrupt women, eunuchs, etc, as laid down by 
Y&jnavalkya. — Kulluka, 



Mafiu Satfthi'ia. 169 

Ijifts of b6ds, houses, Kus'a grass, scents, water, 
ftowers, gems, milk-curd, fried rice, fish, mills, flesh, 
and s'akas, these, if offered without solicitation, must 
not be refused. (250) 

For supporting his parents, preceptors, gu69ts, 
servants, wife, and family, as well as for the purposes 
of worshipping the deities, he can accept gifts from] any 
person whatsoever, but not for anywise benefiting his 
own self. (251) 

On the death of one's parents, 6r in the event of 
his living separate from them, even when they are 
alive, he must always accept gifts from honest persons 
for his subsistence. (252) 

Among S'udras, a Brihmana may partake of the 
cooked rice of one who Cultivates his fields, or of one 
who is an ancient friend of his family,* or of one who 
keeps his cows, or of his slave or barber, as well as 
of him who has surrendered himself to his proteo^ 
tion. (2S3) 

; Let him give out to a proper person his true nature, 
the kind of work he intends doing, and the extent of 
service he is capable of rendering him. (254) 

He, who gives himself out to honest persons as 
something different from what he really is, is called the 
worst of miscreants ; truly he is a thief, inasmuch as 
he dissimulates his real self (255) 

All things are inherent in the meanings of (spoken) 
words, all things are founded on speech, all things 
emanate from speech (words) ; he; who speaks false- 
hood, is said to be a imiversal thief (stealer of all 
things.) (256) 

« The text has Kulamitram, i.e., the descendant of a S'udra- 
family living in amity with that of his own from a long time. 
22 



170 Manu Samhtia. 

Having duly discharged the debts to the great sageS/ 
to the manes and deities, and entrusted all things to his 
Son, let hiiH live unattached (indifferent) to all things 
of the world. (257) 

Seated in a solitary place, let him always pondef 
over the good of his Self; by contemplating in a 
solitary place, he will obtain the supreme bliss. (258) 

Thus the etefnal duties of a Brihmana house-^holdery 
as well as the duties of the order of ^nataka, which 
augment the quality of Sattva in men, have been 
formulated. (259) 

A F^afa- Knowing Brahmana, who maintains him- 
self by means, laid down iii the 5'asira, is absolved of 
sill sin arid is glorified in the region of Brahma. (260) 



CHAPTER V. 

Thus having heard the duties of a Snataka* as duly 
promulgated before, the Rishis asked the fire-origined 
Bhrigu as follows, (i) 

Brahmanas who are well read in the Vedas and 
thus duly discharge the duties of their order, how 
can Death assail them, O lord, (before the appointed 
time)? (2) 

He, the true-sould Bhrigu, the son of Manu, said 
to the great sages, hear for what fault doth Death des- 
troy the Brahmanas ? (3) 

* Sndtaka. — A Brahmana, who after the completion of the 
vow of a religious student, has performed the ceremonial ablutioft. 

t The text has Anala-pyabhavam, i.e., the fire-origined one. 
Cf. S'ruti.— His first seed, which lay effulgent, was transformed 
into the primival sun (Aditya), and its residue took embodiment 
in Bhrigu. 



Manu Satnhita. 171 

Through non-study of the Vedas, through non- 

observanca of the rules of conduct, through idleness, and 

through partaking of unwholesome food, Death destroys 

the Brdhmanas. (4) • 

The garlic, turnip, onion, and mush-room are the 

three (vegetables), unfit to be eaten by Brihmauas, (inas 

much as) they are origina,ted from impurities (unclean 

things* (5) 

Hard, red (gummy) exudations of tr'ees, exudations 
(obtained by making) incisions in trees,t the Shelu 
(fruit) and the milk of a newly parturient cowt should 
be carefully avoided. (6) 

KrisarasjX Samydvas^ and cakes, not offered to the 
deities, unconsecrated meat, and offerings not offered to 
the deities, and clarified butter before being used in a 
fire-offering. (7) 

The milk of a newly parturient cow within ten days 
of her parturition, the milk of a she-camel, or that of a 
female animal with unbifurcated hoofs, || the milk of an 

* Cf. Inasmuch as they are cultivated with manure prepared 
from excreta, Vidjatani according to Ydjnavalkya. 

Cf. Atho Khalu Ya Eva Lohito, yo vd Bras'chandnnir- 
yasati tasya ndsya Kdmamanyasyeti — Now, the red exudations 
of a tree, as well as that which exudes froni a cut in the tree 
should not be taken, exudations of trees other than these should 
be taken.— raiV^jVeya S'ruti. 

t The milk of a newly parturient cow, before the tenth day 
of her parturition, is formed into hard lumps when cooked. 
r—Kulluka. , 

X Krisara is a kind of preparation of rice and sesame (Tila 
Tandula-samparkdt Krisara So'bhidiyate.—Chhandogya-paris'ish- 

tarn. 

\ Samya'va—a. cooked compound of clarified butter, treacle, 

jnilki and wheat-flour. 

H The text has Ekas'opha, such as a mare, etc. 



173 



Manu Sam hit a. 



evre, or of a cow in her heat,* or that of a cow without 
her calf. (8) 

The milk of all wild female beasts except that of a 
she-buffalo, the milk of a woman, and all naturally 
sweet articles {Sukias) that have acquired an acid taste 
(in the course of time). ^9) 

Of Sukias, milk curd and articles prepared from 
curdled milk,t as well as ^uktas prepared with the addi- 
tion of auspicious fruits, flowers, edible roots, etc.. may 
be eaten. (lo) 

The flesh of all kinds of carnivorous birds, the flesh 
of a village fowl, the flesh of an unconsecratedj 
animal with unbifurcated hoofs, and the flesh of a 
Tittibha bird must not be eaten (lit, avoided. (11) 

(Similarly,^ the flesh of a Kalivinka, of a diving 
swan, of a swan, of a Chakravika, of a domestic fowl, 
of a crane, of a Rajjuvala, of a Dyatuha, of a S'uka 
and of aS'iW/^a. (u) 

(And) Pratudas, web-footed birds, Koyashtis, 
Vishikiras, diving fish-catchers, butchers meat and dry 
meat must be avoided. (13) 



* The text has Sandini, which means a cow that seeks a bull. 
KuLLUKA forbids the use of Sandini-miYk, on the ground that 
it is nothing but transformed menstrual blood. 

f The text has Dadhisambhavan, i e., articles prepared from 
milk curd such as, whey, butter, etc. 

J The text has Amrdishtdns'chaikas'aphan, i.e., the flesh of 
animals with unbifurcated hoops, not slaughtered on the occasion 
of a religious sacrifice. The Horse-sacrifice of the Rig or the 
Yajur Veda is capable of bearing another interpretation than 
what is usually put upon it. A horse-sacrifice, or the use of 
horse-flesh as an article of fare ought to have been repugnant to 
the finer sensibilities of the ancient Aryans, and points to the 
Scythian origin of the practice or ceremony. 



Manu Samhtli. 173 

Nor a crane, heron, jackdaw, Khanjaiitaka, nor, 
fish-eating animals, swine that eat excreta, and all 
species of fish. ( 1 4) 

He, who eats the flesh of an animal, is called the 
eater of that animal ; he who eats fish eats the flesh of 
all animals, hence let him forswear eating fish. (15) 

Pdthina, Rohita, Rdjiba, and Sakula fish, and all 
large-scaled fish may be eaten, but all those should 
be first offered to the gods and manes before 
being eaten. (16) 

He must not eat the flesh of animals that move 
about alone (like a snake), nor of those beasts and birds 
whose name and nature are not known, nor of those, 
whose flesh is not forbidden, nor of those which are 
possessed of five nails. (17) 

An attempt to ascertain the true meaning of the term As'va 
medha and the nature of the ceremony which, the Vedaic Rishii 
used to celebrate under that denomination, may not be out of the 
sphere of a commentator of the Manu Samhitd, as it will help us 
to some extent in fi.^ing the date of its r,ecension by Bhrigu, 
or in other words, of the " Institutes of Manu" as we have it 
at present. 

The term As'va-medha according to its usual acceptation 
means a horse-sacrifice, a sacrifice in which a horse is slaughtered 
as an offering to the sun-god. By a fiction of Vediac ceremony 
the horse is supposed to absorb in his self the plaints and prayers 
of the celebrants and is sent to the sun-god as an atonement for 
their sin. Even before his immolation and at the time he is being 
brought to the sacrificial ground, heralded by a bleating mult i- 
colouFed goat, the priests sing a hymn the first part of which 
ends with "may this vigorous horse bring us exemption from, 
wickedness," [Rig-Veda Ashtaka II. S. VI. (CLXII.)]. According' 
(to the Yajush XXIV. 58) and the Katyayana S'utra (98 etc.1, a 
black goat, a victim "sacred to Agni, is tied to the front. of the 
horse at the sacrificial post, and is first immolated. '. 



174 Manu Samhita 

The Porcupine, Shalyaka, lizard, (Godha), rhinoceros 
tortoise, and hare, may be eaten among the five-nailed 
animals ; of animals possessed of only one pair of teeth, 
the flesh of a camel may be eaten (on the occasion of 
a religious sacrifice. (i8j 

According to the K&ty&yana S'utra, twenty-one posts of 
various kinds of wood, each twenty-one feet long, are to be set 
up to which the different animals are to be fastened, amounting 
to three hundred and forty-nine, besides two hundred and sixty 
wild animals, making altogether six hundred and nine. The text 
in the Rigveda does not warrant such a multiplication of posts 
and seems to say that a singla post is intended. We wish to 
conclude this paragarph with the observation that, the horse, thQ 
victim in the sacrifice, must be possessed of thirtyfour ribs, 
according to the text of the Rigveda, which run as Chatustrins'ah 
Vajino deva-bandhorvamkriras'vasya svadkitih sameti, may the 
axe fully penetrate the thirtyfour ribs which lie on both sides of 
the swift goer, the beloved of the gods. (Rigveda, II Ashtaka. 
}62 Sukti I i Rk.) 

Such is the interpretation of the Sutrak4ras, and of Yaska, 
Siyana, and Mahidhara. Wilson says that, " although some of the 
expressions are obscure, and perhaps contradictory, yet it is un-i 
deniable that the hymn describes the actual sacrifice of a horse." 

Another section of Sanskrit scholars^, who hold that the Sarga of 
the Vediac Rishis is Mongolia of our modern geography and 
the Brahmarshi Des'a was a conntry which was situated to the 
north gf modern Siberia along the Artie Sea, which was then 
habitable, finds in Rik II of this Sukta, the first domestication 
of the horse which was first found in Tartary (the Sarga of tho 
Vedas) and its employment to the servige of man. " Yamenadattam 
Trita enamayunagindram enam prathamo adhya-tishthat. 
Gandharvo asya ras'anamagribkuat surddas'vam Vasaba 
nirtishthat. 

These two 5ets of opinion practically eschanst all in favour 
of holding the • actual sacrifice of a horse ; or interprating the 
term, A'sva in the usually acceptation of the term, (horsej. 



^ Manu Sam/iiia. 173 

By AViifuUy eating a mushroom, a domtistid pig, a 
garlic, a domestic Codf , an onion, or a turnip, at twice^ 
born one becomes degraded [i.e. loses the privileges of 
his order. (19) 

A£^i (the riame dt a Vediac pati'iai'Ch) gaVe it (horse) to 
VAyu, who yoked it to the chificit, arid Iridra (the king of Sarga) 
fode first in| this chariot. GandharVa (Somal took the reins oi 
this horse irt his hands, arid O ye Vasus, you originated him 
from the sun (Rik. 11. Suskta i6i. Ashtaka II). 

We, an the ather hand, beg to differ fi'om the views of these 
illustrious glossits arid commentators, and make bold to Say that, 
the actual immolation of a horse Was never contemplated by the 
inspired singers of these Hiks. All shades of religious opinion in 
India and all forms of creed, whether Paurinik, Tantrika, at 
pure Vedantik, trace their origin and draw their inspirations from 
the Mantras of the Vedas and Brahmanas. Even the Vdmachayiit 
Tantriks find the essential tenets of their cult presaged in the 
musings of Agastya and Lopamudra (A I. Sukta 172). and in the 
concluding chapter of the Brihad Aranyakam (Adhoyajna. Br. 4 
Ch. 6 ; and manifestly the doctrines of the Vedhnta and Shnkhya 
philosophies are found in embryo in the Sukta 164 of the second 
Ashtaka of the Rikveda. These things show that the Riks maj" 
admit of different or contrary interpretations in many instances, 
and it may be that contrary interpretations have been made ; at 
Afferent times in order to extort sanctions out of them for some 
new customs or newer forms of worship or sacrifice, Which the 
increased contact of our forefathers with the neighbouring nations 
and principalities added to the national code of rituals as neW 

■I 
accretions. 

Thus we find the Anukramanika enjoys that, the reputable 
Purusha Suktam, the muttering of Which, according to the later- 
day Dharmas'astras, forms the atonement for many a deadly sin, 
to be read out on the occasion of a human sacrifice. We fail to 
detect why should it have been so enjoned, when it is capable of 
bearing a truly grand meaning, a meaning which at once illuci- 
dates the loftiest aspirations of the Upanishads, and more so, when 
we consider that the whole spirit of the Vedaic mantras is 



176 Mann SamkitA'. 

Having unintentionally eatea these six tHingg, (aa 
are mentioned in the preceding stanza), he shall practise 
a Krichcha Santapannm penance (which lasts for seven 
days) or a Yati-chandrdyanam. For eating any thing 
other than the six preceding ones (such red j' gummy 
exudations of trees, etc) , he shall fast for a day and 
night. (20) 

c 

' absolutely antagonistic to such of uel and barbarous rites. It 
sounds totally absurd when .ve consider that the Veda was a song of 
the gladness of life, sung by men with Whom life was a joy, a blessing 
of God to be thankful for, and who would never have denied that 
gladness to the humblest of creatures that trails on earth. With 
them it was a high preoragative of man to witness the glorious 
birth of each song-girdled Day on verdant fields and golden 
hill-tops, and such atrocities need must have been entirely 
foreign to their simple understanding when we consider that an 
aot of kindness done to a peafowl has been made use of in the 
Vtdas as a mechanism of setting the sympathy of the Universal 
Heart in favour of its doer. Vediac civilisation was singularly 
conservative of life and its offerings were absolutely blood-less. 

Now let us see in which connection does these two Richas 
occur so that, in accordance with the recognised rules of inter- 
pretation {Tantrayukti) such as inference (Uhi), concord (etc), we 
will be able to determine the disguised meaning of a term, if it bears 
any such disguise. The preceding Suktam (CLXI. A. 11) is in 
honour of the ^tiAKf, the solar rays, the personified leaders ot 
the rays who reside in the unapprehensible sun (Aguhyasya 
A'dityasya)], for the purpose of fertilising the earth. Indeed, the 
tenth verse of this Suktam contains a reference, according to 
Siyana's interpretation, to the immolation of the victim and the 
quartering of its body, but this too may be explained in a 
different way ; S'rondmekain Udakam may as well mean yellow 
coloured water as blood (Rudhirara^, which is Sayana's explana- 
tion. The succeeding Suktam is the 165, the same one which 
is called the parent of Vedantism and which will help us much 
in our attempt at explaining the so called Horse-Sacrifice Riks. 



Man-u 'Sjtfnkif&. «.77 

Eyeii t biirsory acqiiaiiitance With the VediaC liteiratur^e ^jll 
■Sisclose the 'fact that, the explanatiofts of Richas had updergoiie 
'Changes in the hands of different' commentators, most pr9bably 
■to sujt the spirit of their conteraporaty times, |aftd [to squeeze 
sanctions out of them for some religioaS rites or ceremo]tiies that 
might have heen newly added to the code of rituals c^i pie prevail- 
ijng Brahni^nism. Yaska's Nirukata deals only with that aspect of 
their ipeanings which, has its exponents in the physiqal,ph,9jiqmefia 
■of the universe. The causation 'pf rain, the births and deatjisof 
Oays, the March of seasons, and sttch like physical . iitcidents of 
Nature ,are, according to. him, fqrni the inner meanings of a)l ohscutp 
Verses of the ji?«^7W», In his work we completely lose s^ht of 
that grand .metaphysipjil spirit pi the ancient masters ifl interpreting 
the Vediac Mantras, which is so markedly prominent, in |;he Upa- 
^ishads like Brihad A'ranyiika and Chhaadogya, etc. ,Sayana, on the 
•other hand, mainly Conteijts himself *ith giving the lexicon mean- 
ings pf the Richas, footing from the.Niru&tam instai^ces Where it 
■differs f^om his explanations. A Rik of the fit-st Ashtaka of 
the Rig'veda may serve as an illustration of Sayana's Commen- 
tary whfre Vrika, which . Yasba has explained as Brinhitasras' 
■mis'chndraiH^, inasardhamdsasamvaisayadiikartth, (the thicfc- 
rayed moon, the creator of months, h^lf months, seasons and 
full years, etc , he (Sayana) explains by Aranyas'vn, (forest dog i.e., 
wolf). However, the genitis of Brahmanic philosophy can not Me 
asleep fot good even in Sayana, the scholarly premier qf prince 
Vakku ; and hence, we find hio^ tagging at times philosof^ical in- 
terpretations to those by Yashka and his self, as in the Rik, striyak 
sateestdn Ume pumsa ahafi, etc., (Rik. i6, Suktai64, Ashtaka II. 
K[g). Lastly, let us consider the interpretations put upon the 
y^diac mantras by the immortal S'ankara in his commentaries on 
, th« Upanishad^ several quotations from which have been given in 
the preceding pages, and we will find that, they were made at a 
time when the doctrine of Vedantism reigned supreme in India. 
And all these fully substantiate our theory . that, the Vediac 
■mantras have been variously interpreted in diverse times to meet 
the exigencies of the then prevailing forms of faith, and that 
all of them are capable of bearing metaphysical meanings. In fact, 
it would be highly interesting to trace the gradual changes in 
the faith and religious ceremonies of India, if we can hit upon the 

23 



178 Manu Samhita. 

exact dates of the Ramayanatn, Mahabharatam, and Ydshfea. Wtf 
shall presently show that, there might have been no.iactual immola' 
tion of a horse in the Vediac As'vamedha, and that the descriptions 
of the sacrifice, as contained in the Ramayanam and Maha- 
bharatam, strongly intimate the probability that, borse-killing sacri' 
fices were imported from our ancient Scythean* neighbours. Most 
probably when the Scythean or Hungarian settlers in the:country 
came to be assimilated in the Brahmanic faith, the contemporary 
Brahmanism, by ^ay of a compromise, or concession to the 
national ceremonies of its new proselytes, had to invent some 
sort of theological fiction by which they could be shown to have 
directly carried their sanctions from the Vediac text, but which, 
like all such fictions and stratagems, only serve to disclose the 
truth by its attempted concealment. 
/' Let us now proceed to examine more closely how far we are 
justified in holding this view. We all know that, the terms 
" Vrisha " (bull) and "Ai'va" (horse) denote, according to the 
Brahmanas, the soal of the universe (vis'vasya atma) and also 
its prototype entombed in the human body. The Taittiriyam 
is sufficiently explicit on the subject when it says, A'ditya 
vrishas'va itt (the sun is the bull or the horse). Thus we see that, 
the bull, the horse, the self, aod the sun are all synonymous in the 
mystic phraseology of the Vediac seers. Moreover, we learn from 
the Sukta 164, Rik. II of the second Ashtaka of the Rigvedo 
that the horses of the Surr (i.e., the solar rays), though seven ia 
number, are virtually one ; the one horse represents th« collective' 
rays of the sun, or the entire manifesting factor {Saptam yumjanti 
t athamekaehakrameko As'va Vahati saptanama). 

Epuipped iwith these clear cut definitions of "As'va," we must 
now proceed to discuss the nature of the horse, for whose 
immolation in the sacrifice OAxr opponents find such an unequivocal 
and unmistakable sanction in these Riks (162 — 164, Sukias, IT 
Ashtaka of the Rigveda). The third Rik of the 163rd Sukta 
addresses the alleged horse as, " O thou goer (Arvan), thou art 
Yama (fire), thou art A'ditya (sun), thou art I'rita by a mystic act 
(Asiyamo Asyadityo Arvannasi Trita guhyena V ratena); Thott 
art associated with Soma (Asi somena samaya viprikia), thou ha«t 
three binding places in heaven, thus say the wise, {A'huste trini 
divi bandhanetni). S^yana explains this mystic act by "■durdinena" 



Manu Samhita. 179 

«> , tm a cloudy day, or by dint oi yoga {yogadisadhana rupena)- 
the sun is transformed into Trita. 

We ask, how Trita, who, according to Sdyana, is a Rishi or sage, 
can be transformed into a horse or the sun on a cloudy day, or 
by dint of Yoga? The whole explanation is absurd, but the 
meaning becomes intelligible enough, if we explain Tritah 
(Tra and Ita) as Trigunopitah Manushyah, man or the 
human soul, enveloped by the three qualities of Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas as its upadhi or distinctive attri^tes, in contra- 
distinction to the ^Vz^a or the universal self {Vis'vhtmh). The 
whole meaning then runs as something like this, O Goer (i.e., 
human soul,) thou art one in substance with the fire, thou art 
identical with the universal self (Aditya) in nature, who is 
transformed in to thy own self through the mysteries of Yoga 
and psychic transformation. This explanation is further borne out 
by " Trini Bandhanhni " etc., (lit) thy t-hree binding places, three 
in heaven, three upon earth, and three in the firmament. How can 
a mere horse have threejbinding places in heaven, and three in the 
firmament ? Sayana, not to be perplexed by any thing, explains 
" Bandhanani" by "\Utpatti karanani" (causes of origin), pro- 
bably in the light of the tenth Rik of the next Sukta (164. c 22. M. 
I. Ashtaka II.) where Tisro Matrristrinpitrrinbibhradeka urdha- 
stathau (Not befriended by any, he, the one (absolute) sun, who, 
having three mothers and three fathers, is borne up on the high) 
is explained by Si.ya.xa as three mothers, the three regions of the 
earth, firmament and Tnesivsn (kshitydcfi Loka trayam); and three 
fathers, by " air, fire and sun, the supporters of the three regions. 
The sun stands on high, according to Sayana, as the causal agent of 
the past, present and future {Bhutabhavishyadadyatmana). We fail 
to understand why the same acceptation may not be extended 
to the trini bandhanani. What would be the harm, if we explain it 
by Sattva Raja tamdnsi, i.e. (qualities of Sattva Rajas and Tamas, 
which govern the entombing body of the soul on earth, in heaven 
and in the astral plain (antariksha) ? We know the human body is 
called Tristhunam, Tridandi (three posted exponent of the three 
preceding principles.) And continuing the metaphor of a horse, 
(self or goer — Arvan), will it not be absolutely legitimate to call 
the thr^e fundamental, principles of its body as its binding stakes 
«r places ? It is superfluous to add that, a smattering pf Brahmanic 



iSdi Manti, Samkiia. 

I^hilocophy mlT convince a man that the- Sattva, Rajah and Tskraa* 
are identical with the future, present an<i> past, or ether (air), fice; 
aad Tater in the parlance of Brahmanic philosophy. 

The term Apsu i tit. in the waters i in the Rik, which S^yanat 
explains by earth, may be interpreted to. mean all ere tted beings: 
(sarvam Bhuta grhmam) as he himself has done in the Rik XII. 
Cb,. VII, 3 An. S. (^4). As (Apas'chana praminanti Vratapt 
Vam) where "Apas" is used by mytonemy "f&r all beings."' 
And if this vi«v» be correct, the three binding places (Trini 
Bandhanhni) dan not have any other meaning than the qualities. 
of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. 

The Vishnupuranam [Ch. I. V.] explicitly enunciates that, the 
Purusha includes earth, firmament, heaven, etc.,. and on the basis, 
of its' authority we can safely say that, "As'va" of the AsVamedha 
is the Purusha of our subsequent philosophical systems. 

We will conclude this portion of our dissertation by enquiring 
a little more into the nature and origin of the AsVa, as set 
forth in the Richas themselves. In the Rik T, Sukta 167, we 
find that the coursing' sapta (which may mean a mov«r ex- 
pander or the horse) is originated from the energies of all 
the gods ( Fo/Vwo Deva jatasya sapte). The As'va is identical 
with various 'divinites. The various parts of the AsVa consists, 
of the energies of various divinities, the Dawn goddess form- 
ing its head {Ushd vd as'vasya medhvasya S'ira iti — Sruti). 
A little' knowledge of the Upanishads will be enough to disclose 
that, various divinites, such as Agni, Aditya, Prajipati etc. form 
(1. e., preside over) the different senses and organs of an indivi^ 
dualised %(M (Sapta), which, like its supreme prototype, is ever 
expanding. Even for once we could have entertained the idea of 
explaining "As'va" by horse, if the iRiohas had given it Jhirty-six 
or thirty eight ribs instead of thirty four. It is our duty now ta 
see if we can exiplain it in any other way. 

Our present contetton is that, how can a horse have thirty four 
ribs? We cannot deny the Vedidc Rishis the knowledge of 
veterinary anatomy, if we once admit that a horse was used to be 
immolated in the As'vamedha sacrifice ; since the different parts 
arid members of the quahnired body of a sacrificial victim have been 
ehj6iried to be carved a'nd quartered in the peculiar fashion. Th» 
Aitireya Br jftimina fuHy bears out the point. How can we'thea 



Manu Samhila. \8i 

necount for this anomaly? Sayana explains away the ^iiHculty , 
by saying that, " other animals such as, the goat, etc., have twenty- 
six ribs, while the horse has thirty»-four ;" and this is manifestly an 
error based on the ignorance of veterinay anatomy. 

First tali;ing As'va to mean the sun (Surya, the motive force or 
?oul of the universe, Sarvasya pr$r,ayitd) the thirty four ribs 
may be explained as the thirteen months, consisting of the twelve 
solar months and the intercalary one, the fifteen Tithis, and the six; 
seasons. As regards the existence of the thirt^nth month, we can 
refer to the Rik XV of the Sufetam 164. Ch. XXII. M. I. Asht II, 
■of the Rigveda {Samkajanam Saptatha, mhhureka, some assert 
that there are seven seasons, born of the sun etc.,) where Sayan^ 
quotes from the S'ruti, " there is % thirteenth month " CAsH 
trayodas'o mdsa iti). Now let vs see if we can reconcile it ta 
A' sva in its acceptance of self or human soul. The thirty four 
panjaras or essential components of an individualised self -aro 
the seven fundamental organic principles of lymph chyle, blood 
etc., the three Dhatus of Viiyu, Pittam and Kaphah recognised by 
the Veda{C(. Tridhdtu S'arma Vahantam), the ten sense organs,^ 
the ten senses, the five material elements, the five tanmdtras 
(elementals), and ifanak, Buddhi and Ahankdr (sense of mineness) 
making thirty-four,- together with the self. 

The essential components of the individualised Self have been 
differently computed by different philosophers of India. The 
holy Agnivesha asserts that, the five elements, together with cons- 
ciousness, are called the Purusha (Individualised Self', Cons-. 
ciousness alone, according to others, forms the Purusha. On the- 
other hand, the twenty fonr categories such as, the mind, the ten 
organs, the objects of the senses, etc., are collectively called the- 
Purusha (Khadayaschetand dkatu Shashthastu Purusha Smriiah ; 
Chetanh dhaturapyekah smriiah Purusha samjnahah. Punas'cha 
dhatubhedena Chaturvins'atikah smriiah ; Mono das'endriyan-. 
yarthah Prakriti s'chashiadhaiukee ( Charafca. S'4rira, Ch. I. Vs. 
X4_j5). From this it will appear that, the method of computing 
the constituents of the Purusha (individual Self) which we have 
lidapted is not only legitimate and parries the sanction of the- 
ancient masters, but that it would give a total of thirty four,. 
}f the common factors are eliminated from these different lists. 

It will thus be seen that, the above e.\apl?nation precisely fits. 



lS2 Manu SamkitA. 

in with .the nuatb.er gtren in tli^ tect, amd it has this additional 
advantage that, it does aoray with the necessity of hypotltecating ail 
ignorance of the veterinary anatomy in the Rishis of these Mantras ; 
an ignorance, if thsy admit, will at once knock off the bottom 
of the arguments of- our opponents, endeavouring to prove the 
actual immolation of a horse in the As'vamtdka. * 

Now let us see who is the immolator of the so called As'iia. 
The ninteenth Rik of the Suktam 162. runs as follows : there is 
one immolator of th% radiant As'va, which is Time, there are two 
that hold him fast, 1. e., the day awl *tght, or thejearth and heaven- 
(Ekastashtu ras'vasyd Vis'astd dvd yamtdrd bhavatastatha rituh), 
S&yana explains the second line of this Rik by " those of thy limbs 
which I cut |up in due season, I oiFer them made into balls (of 
meat) upon the {ire (yd U gatranamritutha krinomi tata 
pindanam pra juhomyagnau). We should rather explain it by 
" the waste which your limbs and organs etc. have suffered in 
the course of time, them I offer as oblations in the vital (ire." This 
view has been adopted even by Siyana in his commentary on 
the Rik 14 of the Suktam, where he explains the five hotris 
{offerers) of Soma as the five vital airs which Trita, a yogin, 
for the acquisition of super-human, powers, suppressed and 
concentrated with the Cbakra: or umbilical plexus. The line 
of the Rik under reference runs as Trito nayan panchahotrin 
abhishtaye avavarttad. avaran chakriya avase. He made the 
vital airs, desirous of issuing from himself, to turn back into his 
own presence and to concentrate with umbilical plexus, for 
the entire completion of the rite) those airs such as Prana, Apana 
and the rest constituting the five nunistering priests. These Riks 
clearly demonstrate the fact thati the Rishis had a precise 
knowledge of the existence of spiritual plexuses in man, and that 
they u$ed to perform a rite some what analogous to the Tantrik 
Shatchakra Bheda (penetrating through the six occult plexuses) 
which most probably then went by the denomination of 
As'vamedha. How easily a confusion of the two different 
meanings of the term {As'vamedha) may arise may be illus- 
trated from the last named Rik alone. If we explain Chakrena 
by lance or spear { Sisktikakkyena A'yudkena) instead of 
explaining it by umbilical plexus, the Pauranik conception of the 
rite (Horse sawifice) will become irresistably patent ; and to the 



ftlind, blinded by the legendary practice of horte-kHling, the true and! 
hobler meaning of these Richas will be utterly incomprehensible. 
We find no reason which should hinder us from giving the 
preceding rendering, especially when we know that ''Juhomi" in the 
sense of maintaining the metabolic fire of the orgainsm either by 
the ingestion of food, of through the effect Oi the constructive or 
destructive metabolism of the body, occurs both in the Charaka and 
Sushruta, and that Lat (present tense) is used for the past and all 
the preterites (£a«^, Ling, Lung, ^u^, etc.)iin the Vedas. What 
can be more natural for an institutor of an As'vamedha (sacrifice 
to the soul) to address his soul as, " the wastes of my body, O self, 
which have been made in the course of time, have been cast in the 
fire of life, (which is but thy inseparable exponent) as oblations] 
in a fire-offering and have been re-absorbed and re-assimilated 
in thy essence ? The origin and merging of the body with its 
environments from, and in, the Self is sung in the', Riks, XXX and 
XXZn, of the suktam 164, portions of which have been enjoined 
by the Anukramanika to be used in the middle portion of the 
As'vamedha, which means, according to our view, a sacrifice 
instituted for the glorification or honorification of the soul {As'va 
self, medhyate, pujyata, is worshipped or glorified, Asmin herein). 

The self, continuing unchanged and undecaying amidst the 
incessant changes of its oi^nic embodiment, was fitly made the 
highest object of Teneration in the As'vamedha. Those who 
doubt the identity of Self with Aditya we only refer to the R. 5 of 
the Sukta 164. the seven threads (dhatus, Somayajnas according 
to Sayana) whicli the Sages have spread to envelop the sun, Baskaye 
i.e. the container ot reality, the abode of all ( Vatse Baskaye'dhi 
Sapta Tantun) 

We admit that there are Riks in the Sukta 16a. such as the 
Riks IX, X, 3f '1 XIII, XV. which apparently indicate the actual 
immolation of a horse and contain references to the cooking of 
its flesh, to the distribution of the broth, to the caldron, odoriferous 
with its boiling contents, to its (horse's; grease smeared upon the 
brush or the axe. 

But there is no ground for holding that, even these Richas, if they 
are not actual interpolations, are not capable of bearing a meaning 
which may not shake our faith in the bloodless character of the 
As'vamedha, In the Rik 34. Sukta 164 Ashtaka II. of the Rig Veda 



Jthe Rijshi asks "v^hat is thfe seed ttf this showering sUil (PrickchhaH 
Vrishno As'vasyti retah) aild the ihswer to this qUefy is supplied 
in the Rik XXV of the same Sukta, in the statement that this Soma. 
is the seed of the horse (sun) (Ayam soma VHshno As'vasya 
retah). The Rik 44 of the same suktam says, the three tresses 
%ot the dniversal self,) fire, air and the sun in proper seasons looks 
■over the earth, oiie of theni shears the tresses, ithe cereals, herbs 
and forest leaves) at the eiid of the ear ( Trayah keshina ritntha 
vi chakshati satlvfitsfire vapata ika esham), and ill the same 
Suktam occurs the Rik whieh says, the priests cook the soma ox as 
their primary duty (ukshanam Pris'nimapachanta virah prathama-> 
tairasyan.) Now, «onsiderii)|; that ox !s;identicil with horse which 
signifies the sun or the self, and that soma plant is the body of 
the ox or horse, and further that the Soma is called the seed 
t>f the horse, and the cereals etc. are his ttesses, 31& we not 
Warranted to suppose that the cooking of the different limbs 
iand bodily prittdples of the As'va, described in the Riks of the 
Suktam 163 of the Rigveda, is only«a poetical mode of describing 
the fermentation of the Soma beverage, whose soul-exhilarating 
|)roperties had been many times eulogised in the Vedas, and which 
vspecially ill the glotifieition sacrifice offered to the self (As'va- 
medha) might naturally seem to them to be the only 6t and 
adorable offering to the Real in man ? We have seen in the Rik 
f XI. of the Suktam CLXIII. that the hairs of the horse's manes 
are the flames of the fire which ate tossed in manifold directions 
and spread in the foi^ests {Tdva S'ringani^ Puratra-ranyeshiif, 
eharanti R. Ilv S. lii. VlS. A II. 

Now even if we, like Yaska, confitte ourselves only to that kind 
of interpretation of the|Riks which I'eQects only the occurra bee of 
certain physicial phenomena, we will be quite justified in holding 
that, the quartered members of the As'vas body are nothing more 
than the cei^eals, foodgrains and Soma plants, which have been 
figuratively described as the limbs and organic principles of the 
A'sva, or the sun, or the fire incarcerated in the soil and the womb 
of the Earth. 

We know that in the mystical language of the Brlhmanas the 
sun (Aswa-goer) or Indra (the burning one) is the soul of the 
universe ; by a poetical analogy and with a little difference of 
meaning all these terras Indf a (the holder of the sensed Asva (the 



Manu SamhitS. 185 

^eV 't*fe reality that gffes out of the bodjr at death , the Surya 
'<the impellor) were extended to denote its human prototype. 
Prishni the mother '.of the sun or gods is the Firmament, 
^rishni, the Soma plaftt is ttie Seed of the Ashva (Selfi and 
Soma is the name of the most ImpQttant of the orgahic vital 
1>rinciples (protoplasmic albumen) which ^as been described by 
the Rishis as the quintessence of life, and which is contained in 
the heart and the viscera (Hridaveva Kukshaya Samadhana.) 
According, to their view the san, the Self and the (ire, whether ' 
*Called by the epithet of horse or ball, represent the three different 
aspects of the same substance, if it be tight to call force a subs- 
tance. Similarly, the Soma (protoplasmic albumen), the Soma 
(plant, the seed of the Self) are the food of both the gross and subtle 
life. The yellow jaice of the red or yellow species of Soma, and 
twenty four of them are recognised in the Ayurveda (And now 
this divine Soma may be divded into twenty four species accord- 
ing to the difference of its habitat,, virtue, potency, structure, 
>colour, SitG. — Atha Khalu Bhagavan Somah Sihanhkritigunajiir- 
yaya vis'eshaisckaiuy-vims'atidha bhavati.—Sushtati. Chik. C. 
39 — C3.) have been termed as the blood, its bruesed stem as flesh, 
and these may account for interpretations which have been put 
Upon theae terms in the As'vamedha Suktam, and which have 
led many level headed scholars to come to a positive dicision 
about the actual immolation of a horse in the As'vamedha. 

The next point that our opponents may urge against our mode 
of interpretation is that actual Qooking etc of horse flesh has been 
iinequivocally described in these Richas. But their contention falls 
to the ground if we say that these terms, the derivatives of the 
toot pacha ito cooki may also unequivocably mean to grow mature 
to continue in existence. Kdlah (Time) Pachati (matures* Bhudtni 
(all beings) is a Sanskrit maxim which known even to a veritable 
Tyro in Sanskrit. I'he caldron, the ladle etc. which occur in [these 
Richas may also |be more consistently explained as the " caldron of 
time, the ladle of seasons,") and scores of instances can be quoted 
from the Rigveda where chamasau, two ladles, have been called 
the yoni of the sacrifice and of all creatures in the shape of Earth 
and Heaven. 

The Singers of the As'vamedha Richas were not a race of 
p-rimitive nomads. They were far advanced in the arts of 

24 



l86 Manu Sainhtta 

civilisation and knowledge. Astronomy, prosody, gcaxAtixit iHA A 
rudimentary form of Logic, together with works ofi ceremonially 
and medicine, are found to have been frequently mentioned in! 
the Rig Veda. In fact, the fundamental principles of each 
abstruse system of philosophy such as, the ^Ankhya and Vedd.ntal 
were presaged in the Suttani 164, the next one to the As'vamedha 
Sukiam. There is an unequivocal reference to the Prakriti 
(Natufe) of the SinkhyaS iA Asthndvantam Yadanasthd Bibhartti 
(one with bone »». the primal self, is borne by the boneless (illusivei 
Prakrit!). Fqi' the first tinie we find the oneness of the universal 
self Wtth the individual Soul clearly enunciated in the Rik. (18.) 
of this Suktam which runs as, "he who knows the protector of this 
universe as the inferior associated with the supefiof, and the 
superior associated with the inferior," Avah parena Pitaram yo 
asydnuveda para evdvafena ; and in'the Rik XX of the same 
Suktam running as, two birds associated together, and two friends 
(as they are) take refuge in the same tree ; one of them (individual 
Self) eats the sweet Pippala fruit, the other ( Supreme Sel^) 
eating not, merily looks on (Dv£ saparnh Sayuja Sakhayi 
Samdnam Vriksham parishasva ^dti ; Tayoranyah pippalam 
Svadvattyanas'nannanya abhi Chakasheeti •) The famous dictum 
of the Upanishad regarding the sexless character of the Self is 
but the echo of the Rik, Striyah Saieesima Ume pumsa dhu etc. 
In short, all forms of philosophic ideas had their origin in the 
Vedas. Under these circumstances, are we not warranted toi 
assert that, the mysticisims of the Yoga likewise originated from 
the metaphysics of the Vedas i We have shown abovs that, a 
rite analogous to the rite of Tdntrika yotm, commonly known as 
Shai chakra Bkeda, Was not unknown to the Rishis of the second 
Ashtaka of the Rig Veda, and we must say that, frOm the metaphy 
sical meaning which the As'vamedha Richas are capable of bearing^ 
the Asvamedba (the sacrifice for the glorification of Self), in its 
original inception, must have been somewhat identical with this 
Shatchakra bhedah. This spiritual or mystic character of th« 
rite was not lost sight of even at the time when Ehirigu made 
his famous recension of the Manu Samhita. Later on in thi& 
chapter we shall come across a couplet, which lays down that, a 
noa-killer of animal life (abstainer of meat diet) is as much meri- 
torious as a perfsrmer of a hundred horse sacrifices. This couplet 



Manu Samhita. 187 

would have been ridiculously absurd, if As'vantedha had entailed in 
fact the immblation of six hundred and nine animals. For in that 
case the couplet would mean something like this, vix., to for- 
swear meat is as meritorious as killing six hundred and nine 
animals, a hundred times multiplied. Or in other words, the 
merit of forswearing false-hood is equal to that of telling a 
hundred thousand lies. , 

The greatest obstacle to the acceptance of our view of inter- 
pretation is the 'description of the horso^sacrifice in the 
As'vamedha Parva of the Mahabharatam (Anugiti Parva Ch. 88 
VS 27 — 35 and Ch. 89. VS 1—5.). Before proceeding further 
with this dissertation, we must add that, the arguments, which we 
shall adduce to account for its description in the Mahabharatam, 
shall apply mutatis mutandis to the description of the As'vamedha 
contained in the Ramayanam. One thing, which strikes us most 
in the sufercial view of the matter, is that both in the Rig Veda 
and Mahahharata the As'vamedha is associated with deep and 
abstruse metaphysical disquisitions. In the Rig Veda the philosophi- 
cal Suktam follows the As'vamedha Richas, in the Mahabharatam 
the philosophy precedes the description of the As'vamedha. In 
the Mahabhatam, the A'svamedha was instructed to be instituted 
primarily for expiating the sin of a disastrous civil war ; but the 
actual eating of horse-flesh by the priests or the institiitor of the 
sacrifice, as seems to be sanctioned by the Sayana's commentary, 
was dispensed with in the Mahabharatam. King Yudhishthira 
then smelled the smoke, capable of purging one of his sin, of the 
marrow of the horse that was thus cooked [Asvamedha Parva: 
Ch, 89. V. 4). In the Mahabharata the sacrificial horse was 
made to wander all over the world for the purpose of collecting 
tributes from the kings of countries through which it had passed. 
The launching of a campaign of world-wide conquest as a preli- 
minary to the institution of the A'svamedha was never contem- 
plated in the Richas of the Rigveda. A little knowledge of the 
ancient history of the world will help us to point out the source 
from which this Horse-sacrifice was imported into Brahmanism, and 
to trace the steps taken by her priesthood to celebrate this Horse 
sacrifice with the Mantras, relative to the soul-worship of the 
Vedas. We know that the ancestors of Huns or Hungarians were 
proverbially fond of horse-flesh, both literally and metaphorically. 



I^B Munu Samhitit, 

T&ete worshippers" of the'Serce/tawny coloured' god, Rudra,- whO), 
in the shape of the bull, b^ot Maruts on Pris'ni, disguised as % 
brindled cow (Eitropa ?), used to celebrate their victories in war 
with horse-sacrifices. The descendants of these H-uns, after their 
conquest of, and settlement in northern India, came to-be assimilated 
in Brahmanism. And Brahmanism^ in its turn, to please the fancy of 
the conqueror and to prove his lineage from, the Vediac gods, sane- 
tionqd the sacriRce as a Vedaic sacrifice, adopting and altering the 
sense of the Mantles to the exigencies of the ceremony, to con- 
ceal its character of a foreign and im.ported innovation. 

Seyeral eminent authorities, both Indian and European, hold 
certain parts of the Mahabharatam such as, the Bhagavad Giti etc., 
to he interpolations ; and there is nothing to show to the contrary 
that, the Anugitiparvadhydya, containing the description of the 
hor^e-sacriSce, is no>t a subsequent addition to that immortal epic,, 
as it gives hut the contemporary ' view of the meanings of the 
As'vamedha Richas as it was understood and celebrated in that age. 

We can assert without the least fear of contradiction that, the 
Vedas have been explained in different times according to the 
genius and intelligence of each age. Yashka's Nirukta, which reads, 
the description of rain, thunder, lightning, or storm in each Rik, 
must have been written at an age when the Brahmanic genins,, 
devoid of its keen^ighted and subtle philosophy, began to look 
upon the physical phenomena as the highest manifestations of 
the Divine. The early Sutrakdras and Mimansa (rules of 
interpretation of Vedaic mantras), were written at a time when 
the divine authorship of the Vedas came to be first seriously 
doubted. Sankara's interpretation of the Mantras, contained in 
the Upanishads, could not help being metaphysical in the face 
of such a keen and potent Buddhistic opposition of the age (tenth 
century). Sayana's commentary (14th century A. D.) reflects, 
the spirit of an age in which the reconquest by Brahmanism, 
was once more complete, and all the different forms of interpreta- 
tion could be equally authoritative and obligatory, and which, 
discarding none, tended to augment the literary fame of its 
erudite author. It is impossible within such a narrow compass to 
fully advance and elucidate all the arguments that favour the 
mode of interpretation we have adopted. We have given only 
the main heads of our argument and the line by which we hav* 



Manu Samhita. 189 

To remove the doubt whether he has eaten any- 
unclean article of fare or not, a twice-born one shall 
practise a Krichchha penance, once within a year. Having 
knowingly eaten any forbidden articles of fare, he must 
practise penances, especially enjoined to be performed 
for expiating the sins of eating those articles. (21) 

For the purposes of a religious sacrifice, or for the 
maintenance of his dependants, a Bribmana can kill 
the commendable beasts and birds, as did Agastya oi 
yor6. (22) 

In religious sacrifices instituted by the Rishis, Br4h- 
manas, and Kshatriyas of yore, oblations of meat-cakes 
used to be made of the flesh of beasts and birds, (there-, 
in immolated.) (23) 

Commendable articles of food, even after they have 
become stale, may be eaten with the addition of any 
oleaginous substance ; residue of oblations (such as sacri- 
ficial porridge, etc.,), left 'after the performance of a 
fire-offering, may be eaten (even without such addition 
of clarified butter, etc.) (24) 

Articles made of barley or wheat flour, all modifica- 
tions of milk, even after they have become stale, or 
if prepared a long time ago, may be eaten by twice- 
born ones (25) 

Thus the commendable and forbidden articles of 
diet in respect of twice-born ones have been specifi- 

arrived at that explanation and leave it to our readers, if they 
approve of our view, to carry on the investigation for them- 
selves. 

The discrepancies found in Sayana, Mahidhara, and Maha- 
bharata, etc., regarding the mode of celebrating the actual cere- 
mony, are enough to thdw that the Asvamedha originally meant 
f omething other than a mere horse-sacri&ce. 



igo Manu Samhiia, 

cally describea, now hear me describe the mode of 
using or forswearing meat-diet. (26) 

Residue of meat-oblations, cast in the fire in a re- 
h'giobs sacrifice, as well as that offered in a S'r&ddha 
repast, may be eaten ; flesh may be eaten at the request 
of Brahmanas, and in diseases, or under circumstatices 
which imperil life. {2j) 

Whatever ^ists in the world, all' that Prajdpaii 
has ordained to be the food of living jbeings ; all, both 
mobile and immobile, is the food of creatuies. (28) 

The immobile are the food of the mobile Ccreatures), 
the toothless ones are the food of the toothed creatures ; 
the handless, are that of the hand-possessed ones ; and 
the timid, that of the brave. (39) 

An eater, eating an animal and thinking 'it to be his 
legitimate food, does not commit any sin, inasmuch as 
the ordainer has created some animals as eaters and 
the other as their food. (30) 

The eating of flesh on the occasion of a religious 
sacrifice is the divine ordination, to eat flesh for any 
other purpose is a monstrous practice. (31) 

He, who, having brought, or procured, or received 
the gift of, the flesh (of an animal), eats it after having 
first offered it to the manes and deities, is not defiled 
thereby. (32) 

[Otherwise than in times of distress,] a Brihmana, 
who eats the flesh (of an animal) in a manner con- 
demned by the Regulation, isjeaten, defenceless, by that 
animal in the next world. (33) * 

A huntsman, who kills animals for money, does not 
acquire the same demerit in after life, as one who 
cats flesh in violation of the ordinance. (34) 



Manu Samhita, i^t 

But the persoti, who being appointed to do a reli" 
|[ious sacfificis, does not eat the (consecrated) flesh, 
Nvill be rc-born as a beast for twenty-one births in 
succession. (35) 

Let a Brahmana never eat the flesh of an animal^ 
unconsecrated by Mantras ; conforming to the eternal 
brdinance, he must always eat thd consecrated flesh, (36) 

Desiring to eat fiesh. rather let Mm eat its effigy 
made of dough and clarified butter than eat the un- 
consecrated flesh of au animal, not immolated in a 
religious sacrifice. (37) 

For as many number of times does the wanton killer 
of animal life meets death in his successive re-birthS 
hereafter as there are hairs on the body of the immo- 
lated animal. (38) 

For the purposes of religious sacrifices the beasts 
were created by the self-origined one, the saprifice id 
for the elevation of the whole universe, hence killing 
is not killing in a religious sacrifice (yajna). (39) 

Cereals, beasts, trees, animals of the tortoise specieg 
and birds, immolated on the occasion of a religious 
sacrifice, obtain the eternal status. (40) 

A Madhupatka, a Sriddha, offered to the manes 
and deities, and a religious sacrifice are the occasions 
on which a beast should be sacrificed, and on no other 
occasion. This is the dictum of Manu. (41) 

By killing beasts on these oocasions, a Brahmana, 
conversant with the inport of the i/edas, accords a 
more elevated status both to his own self and to the 
self of the (immolated) beast. (42) 

Even in times of distress, a self-controlled Brah- 
mana, whether residing in the forest, or in the house 



f^z ManU Sa»ihitn. 

t)f his own, or of his preceptor> must liot do ill iflt 
of killing not sanctioned in the Vedas. (43) • 

Aets oif killing which the Vedas have sanctioned 
in the universe should be regard as acts of non- 
killing, in as much as all virtue has emanated from thd 
Vedas. (44) 

He, who in quest of his own pleasure kills the 
harmless animals, does not obtain aiiy happiness* 
whether dead or alive. (45) 

He, Who does not wish to inflict on any animal 
the pain of death or captivity, is said to be the well^ 
Wisher of all, Sueh a man obtains perfect felicity. (46) 

Whatever he contemplates, whatever he strives for, 
whatever he puts his heart upon, he gets that without 
effort, if he does not kill any animal life. (47) 

Flesh cannot be obtained without killing a beast, 
animal-killing does not lead to heaven ; hence, a man 
must forswear (eating flesh. (48) 

Considering the origin of flesh (which is a kind 
cf tratisformed menstrual blood) and the pangs of 
death and incarceration the beast suffers, he must 
forswear eating all kinds of flesh, (whether approved 
of or prohibited by the ordinance). (49) 

He,' who does not eat fleslij like a monster, in viola* 
tion of the ordinance, becomes a favourite with all 
and is not afflicted with any disease. (50) 

He who sanctions the killing of an animal, he who 
quarters its slaughtered body, the actual immolator, 
the seller and buybr of its flesh, the man who cooks 
the flesh, he who serves that cooked flesh to the eaters, 
and he who eats it are called the killers. (51) 

He, who otherwise than for the purposes of 
S'raddkas offered to the manes and. deities, tries to] 



Ifiigihent the flfesh of his body with thfe fl6^h 6? -a 
%east, is thfe greatest of ail sinners. (52) 

The merit of him, who forswears the use of meat, 
'is equal to that af one who performs the As'iiamidita 
Sacrifice, each year, for a eentury. (53) 

By living on fruit, toulbs, oir food grains used by the 
'holy sages, a man does not acquire the same religious 
taer-it as he does by forswearing the use af meat. (54) 

He^ whose flesh I eat in this life, shall eat my flesk 
•in the next ; this is the essential attribute of flesh, as 
•disclosed by its etymological SignificatioH, according 
•to the wise. (55) 

No sin is attached to wenching, flesh-eating, of 'Viriiie* 
■drinking ^ these are the natural propulsions of Man, but 
■abstinence bears greater fruits. (56) 

Now I shall discourse on death-uncleanness, as it 
•affects the members of the four social orders in the order 
of the enumeration, as well as on the mode of purifying 
'the defiled articles. (5?) 

The Bandhus {i.e., Sapindas and Samdnodakas) of 
-a male child, dead before, or after cutting his teeth, or 
>at the age of tonsure or initiation with the thread, be- 
Kjome undean on his death ; likewise his Bandhus 
i)ecome unclean on the birth of a male child. (58) 

Death-uncleanness continues for ten days among 
f Sapinaas., or until the bones are Collected {i.e.., for four 
•days as in the case of a fire-keeping Brahmana), or 
for three days, or for an entire day and night. (59) 

The .S'fl/)2'w<^a-relationship is extinguished in the 
seventh generation ; ^awiwoafa^a-relationship lasts for 
■all eternity, being extingjiished .only When the name 
and Gotya are not known. (60) 

^5 



194 Manu SamhitM, 

Th« term of death-uncleanness, hrrcin l^id dowii, 
should be also regarded as holding good in respect of 
Wrth-uncleanness among Sapindas, desirous of obtain- 
ing perfect purity. (6 1) 

Personal impurity during the term of a death-un- 
cleannes is equal among all the Sapindas ; but in res- 
pect of a birtU-imcleanness, the mother of the (ne\r 
born) child remains unclean for ten days, while its 
fether regains his piirity on bathing. (62) ' 

Having wantonly cast his seed, a man shall regain 
^is purity by bathing ; but having cast his seed in a 
woman other than his married wife, he shall remain 
unclean for three days. (63) 

A Brahmana, who has touched the dead body of a 
Sapinda relation, shall remain-.unclean for three times 
three days and one day ; a Brahmana, who has touched 
the dead body of a bam&nodaka relation, shall remain 
imcleaii for three days. (64) 

A disciple, happening to", perform the fimeral rites 
unto his deceased preceptor, i shall remain unclean for 
ten days like the Sapinda relations of the latter. (65) 

In a case of abortion or miscarriage (of pregnancy 
from within three to ^six months), purification will be 
effected after the lapse of days, equal in number to that 
of the months of pregnancy, (the period of uncleanness 
being three days in respect of an abortion before three 
months) ; a chaste woman in her menses will be pure 
by bathing after the cessation of her flow. (66) 

(Sapinda relations of a) boy, dead before his rite 
of tonsure, shall remain unclean for one day and night ; 
while on the death of one, dead after the rite of 
tonsure (and before his initiation with the thread), 
they will remain uAclean for three nights (days). (67) 



Manu SamhitA. 195 

His relations shall bury the corpse of a ©hild, 
dead before completing the second year of his exist- 
ence, in a pure ground at the out-skirt of the village, 
fully decorated, without performing the rite of bone- 
collecting. 1 68) 

His (its) corpse must not be cremated, nor libationc 
of water must be offered to his (its) spirit ; leaving it 
in the forest, like a log of wood, they (;.*., relations) 
shall pass three days in uncleanness. (69) 

On the atath of a boy, less than three years of 
age, his relations must not do the rite of (offering 
libations of) water unto him. The departed spirit of 
an infant, dead after cutting his teeth, or after hit 
rite of nomenclature, becomes happy with such a water- 
rite, though its performance is not obligatory on his 
relations. (70) 

The period of uncleanness, incidental to the death 
of one's fellow-student (of the Vedas), is one day only, 
while on the birth of one's Sam&nodaka, one should 
be regarded pure on the expiry of three days (from 
the date of the birth ) (71) 

On the death of a betrothed, (though) unmarried 
girl, her friends (such as her affianced husband, father,^ 
etc.) become purified after the expiry of three days ; her 
Sapinda relations also become purified after the expiry 
of the same period. (72) 

During the term of a (death-uncleanness) thiey shall 
eat their meals without any (artificial) salt, must bath© 
on each of the three days i of .uncleanness), forswear 
meat-diet, and sleep separately on the ground. (73) 

The mode of observing a death-uncleanness (by 
Bandhus and relations), residing in the vicinity, has 
b«aa described; the fbllowiijig should be known at tb* 



t^ M'emu Samhtt* 

Hmde of observing it by Bandhus and rel'ationsi, r«*. 
siding at a distance, {74) 

' Happening to hear of the death of. a relation in a., 
distant country, within ten days of its occurrence', he- 
shall remain unclean for the unexpired portion of (the; 
period of) ten days. (75) 

If he hears it after the- expiry of ten days, he shalL 
remain impure "for three days only. Happening to- 
learn it after one year of its occurrence, he shall, 
legain his purity by bathing, (76) 

Happening to hear of the birth of his son, or of 
the death of his relation, ten days after its occur- 
rence, a. man becomes purified by bathing. vui.thhi9v 
clothes on. (77) 

On the- death-of a Samdnodaka relation,, or of a. 
child dead before- teethang in a distant gountry, he? shall 
ba purified by bathiiog with all his clothes oiu (78) 

A birth or death uncleaiuiess, occurring withia the^ 
term of a pre-existing one, must abate with the; expiry- 
o( th.& latter {i.e., the- previous uncleanness. ) ^79). 

It is- said that, one's uncleanness, incidental to the- 
death of his preceptor, lasts for three, days-; that om 
the death of a preceptor'^, son. or wife is for one day- 
and night. (80) 

On the death' of one's: fellow student of the- 
Vedas in the same- house; the- period of uncleanness: 
is three days : fOn the death of one's brother, disciple- 
or iprie^t, he shall 'remain impure for two days andt 
the night between them (Pakshini)-.- (8i) 

On the death of the king of the country where* 
in he resides, let him observe a death-uncleanness for 
the day or night in which the death hasioccurred» 
The period of uncleaiinMs in* respect of the. death of 



Manic Samhitiat, 19?^ 

©f a Veda-ignorant, or Veda-knowing, preceptor, is for.- 
the entire ' day or night in which thej death hasi 
occurred. (82), 

A Brahmana. shall regain, his^ purity after ten; days ;, 
a Kshatriya, after twelve days ; a .Vais'ya, after fifteen, 
days ; and;a Sudra, after a month. 183) 

Let him not extend, the period of uncleanness, nor. 
cease to make the Vediac fire-offerings ; if he gets them-, 
done^ by a Sapinda proxy, he does not become im- 
pure.. (84). 

Happening to touch, a Chandkla^ a woman in her.- 
flow, a degraded person, a. (newly )j parturient woman,, 
a dead jaody, or a person who has touched a corpse^ 
one shall regain his purity by bathing, (85) 

Having seen an. unholy sight after the perfor- 
mance of A' chamanam (sipping water) in connectioma 
with a daily religjousirite;, one. must diligently mutter- 
the Mantras sacred, to the sungod, or any other sacredt 
Mantras, to the best of his ability. (86). 

Happening, to touch a human skeletal bone^. 
smeared with, grease, or marrow, a Brahmana shall 
regain his purity by bathing ; having touched, such ai 
dry bone, he shall purify himself by touching a cow,, 
or by looking at the sun. (8i7) 

A religious student {BrahmucMrin) , before fulfill- 
ing his vow,.i must \ not do obsequious rites unto the 
spirits of his departed relations ; after the completion 
of his vow he shall observe a death-uncleanness for 
three days, and thereafter regain his purity by offer- 
ing libations of water unto them. (88) 

Unto the ( souls of) persons of hybrid castes (be- 
gotten by men of inferior castes on women of superior 
castes) and unto the souls of ascetics and of men vrho. 



i^S tf»nu Samhi/a. 

have committed suicide libations of water must not be 
offered, after death. (89) 

(Similarly), not unto the spirits of atheists, defiler» 
of the Vedas, moral wantons, and wives who had 
been drunkards, or faithless to their husbands, or guilty 
of committing abortions of pregenancy. (9o> 

For carrying, or cremating the dead body of hi* 
own initiator ioKBrAhmanism, or of his preceptor, father,, 
mother, or of any other superior relation, a religious- 
student (Brnhmackartn) must not be considered as. 
dis-associated<i. e. to have broken) with his vow. (91) 

The corpse of a deceased S'udra must be carried out 
©f his house through the eastern door of its southern 
portion ; that of a Vais'ya, through the western door,, 
thai of a Kshatriya through the northern door, and that 
of a Brahmana through the eastern exit. (92) 

Kiftgs (t. e. crowned and duly anointed sovereigns, 
of the Kshatriya caste), Brahmacharins, and celebra- 
tors of Vediac sacrifices are never affected by death or 
birth-uncleanness, inasmuch as the kings are the re- 
presentatives of Indra (on earth), and the two last 
named ones are those of Brahma. (93), 

In irespect of a king, seated on the glorious cushion 
of sovereignty, the (period of) uncleanness is laid down 
as one day only,, the reason being that sovereignty exists 
for the protection and welfare of the subjects.* (94) 

No imcleanness exists in 'respect of the death of 
persons, killed in a battle not conducted by the king,. 

• Kings are not governed by ordinary Laws of uncleanness. 
as their persons must be kept always pure inorder to leave them 
norally competent to- make gifts and to do other prophylactic rites, 
for the welfare of their' subjects in cases of emergency such as. 



Manu SamhiU, I199 

»t Struck dead by lightning, or killed in executioa of 
the sentences of royal tribunals (lit, king's commands), 
as well as in respect of the death of those who have 
surrendered their lives for the protection of kine and 
Brahmanas, or of those whose deaths by the king's 
command should not give rise to such uncleanness. {95) 

The king is the embodiment of the (energies of the) 
eight lords of regions such as, the Moon, the fire, the 
air, the sun, Indra, the lord of wealth (Kuvera), the lord 
of waters (Varuna) and Yama„ (96) 

Sovereignty is founded on the energies of the lords 
of the eight regions ; hence, a king is not affected by 
uncleanness. How can he, whose commands make 
mortals subject, to cleanness and uncleanness, be him- 
self affected by uncleanness ? (97) 

A person, killed with an uplifted weapon (such 
as a sword, etc) in battle in discharge -.of the duties 
of a Kshatriya, instantaneously acquires the merit of 
i^an Agnishtoma) sacrifice, and is at that momsnt 
purged of uncleanness. (98) 

(After the performance of the S'raddha and at the 
expiry of the period of uncleanness i, a Brahmana is 
purified by sipping water ; a Kshatriya, by touching a 
weapon and a charger ; a Vaisya, by touching a goading 
stick and the reins (of a horse) ; and a Sudra, by touch- 
ing a stick. (99) 

O you foremost of Brahmanas, thus I have related 
to you the rules of cle,anness among the Sapinda rela- 
tions of the decased, now hear me describe the rules 
of cleanness to be observed by the Asafiinda relatioBS 
of the deceased. (100) 

A Brahmana, having carried and cremated the 
corpse of an Asapinda relation, like a relation, be- 



forties pur* after a threedays' undeanfless. Simiiifry^ 
iiaving Carried and cremated the corpse of a? deceased 
and intimate relation (uterine brother or sister of his 
mother), he shall observe a period of three day's un- 
"clealln'esi. (lol) 

Having partaken of the food id the house of his 
■decased Asapinda relation (during this term of im- 
cleanness)> a Btahman shall remain unclean for teft 
<days, his mere residence in the house without partaking 
t)f the food (of the family) \^ill make him uilClean for 
one day only. (102) 

HaViflg followed the corpse of a deceased person> 
whether related to him as a Cognate or not, a man shall 
leffect his purificatioil by bathing with all his clothes 
on, by touching fire, and jby drinking clarified butter 
(after thit). (103) 

In the event of his having had relations of his own> 
the corpse of a deceased Brahmana must not be 
carried by S'udras ; such a corpse (lit, bodily oblation 
lo death), defiled by the touch of the S'udras, leads 
Hot its spirit to heaven. (104) 

Knowledge (of Brahma), yogi and penitential 
austerities ( Tapas), the fire, food, the earth, Conviction^ 
water, pastes and unguents, the air, deed, the sun and 
Time are the purificators of embodied creatures. (105) 

Of all purifications (or purities 1 the purification or 
purity of the mind is the greatest purification or 
purity^ He who is pure in intent (thought or idea) is 
truly pvu'e, purification with the help of clay and 
water is no (real) purification. (106) 

Through forbearance the erudite are purified, through 
gifts wrong'doers are made pure. Sinners iii secret 
are purified by muttering or nieutally repeating {yapyof 



Manu Samhita, 20 1 

the sacred Mantras, and the foremost of Veda-know- 
ing Brahmanas are purified through the practice of 
penitential austerities. (1071 

Things to be purified are purified with clay and 
water ; a river is purified by its current ; a woman, 
by her flow ; said the best of Brahmanas, by 
asceticism. (108) 

Water purifies the limbs and bodily members (of a 
person) ; truthfulness purifies the mind ; the individua- 
lised Self is purified by knowledge and penitential 
austerities ; and intellect (Discriminative faculty) is 
piurified by knowledge. (1091 

Thus the mode of purification in respect of your 
persons has been descibed ; now hear me discourse on 
the mode of purifying various articles (and sub- 
stances), (no) 

The purification of all gems, metallic articles, and 
things made of stone should be effected with the 
help of water, ashes and earth. This is what has 
been said by the wise, (r 1 1) 

A golden vessel, bereft of smear («. e.^ not 
smeared with grease or any unclean paste), is purified 
by washing it with water ; the same rule holds good 
in respect of articles made of stone, of aquatic subs- 
tances, and of unstriated articles of silver. (112) 

Silver and gold have originated from the fire and 
water, hence the purification of gold and silver should 
be effected with fire and water, their parent subs- 
tances. (113). 

Articles, made of copper, iron, bell-metal, brass, 
zinc, or lead, should be respectively purified with alkali 
(ashei), acid and water, as suited to each of them 
(See Brihaspati Samhita). (114) 
26 



2C2 Manur Samhita. 

All fluid substances (such as dil, clarified BfutteSy 
etc., defiled by a crow, or by a fly) should bS purified 
by stirring them (with a ladle). Articles, made of the 
combination of several other things, should be purified 
by sprinkling water over them, and wooden artielesf 
should be purified by scraping them. (115) 

During the celebration of a religious' sacrifice, 
siacrifidal vessels are purified by rubbing them with 
the palm of hand, while ladle and spoons are purified 
by washing them. (116) 

Sacrificial porridge, and sacrificial spoons and ladles, 
known as Sruk and Sruva, are purified by wash- 
ing them with hot water ; winnows, carts, pestles and 
mortars are purified by washing theto with hot 
water. (117) 

A pile of paddy or clothes, (defiled by any impure 
contact)^ is purified by sprinkling water over it; a 
snmll quantity of paddy, or a small number of clothes 
is p>urified by washing it with water. (118) 

The purification of Bamboo articles, as well as 
of those made of leather should be effected in the 
manner of clothes ; whereas the purification of 
Sakas, fruit and bulbs should be made in the manner 
of paddy. (119) 

Wearing stuffs, made of the threads of silk-worm- 
fcocooHS {Kausheya\ and stuffs made of sheep's wool 
must be purified with alkali; blankets, such as are 
manufactured in the coulitry of Nepal, must be purified 
with Nimva leaves ; cloths made of flax and Jute-twists 
must be purified with Vilva fruit, while those made 
of bark-twists (Kshauma) must be purified with white 
mustard seeds. •( 1 20) 

Let the knowing one effect the purification of 



Manu Satnhita, 203 

articles made of horns, conch-shells, bones, or teeth 
(tusks) in the manner of Kshauma cloths, or with 
water and cow's urine. (i?i) 

Wood, weeds, straws, etc , are purified by sprink-. 
ing water over them, a room is purified by washing and 
plastering it (with cowdung, etc , while earthen vessels 
are purified by baking them again. (122) 

Earthen vessels, defiled by the touch of urine, 
fasces, sputam, pus or blood, are not purified by re- 
, baking them. {133) 

A ground, (defiled by stool, by urine, or by the 
residence of a Chandala thereon and such like causes), 
is purified by brooming, plastering, washing, and 
scraping it, or by keeping kine thereon. (124) 

An article, nibled by a bird (whose ■ flesh may be 
eaten), or sraelled by a cow, or spitted upon, or trampled 
under foot, or defiled by the touch of an insect or 
hair, is purified by throwing earth over it. (125) 

An article, smeared with any impure substance, 
must be rubbed with earth and washed with water 
until the smear and its foul smell are removed. This 
is the rule in respect of the purification of all 
articles. (126) 

The gods have ordained three things as pure for 
Brahmanas, viz.^ those which have not been found to 
be any wise polluted, those washed with water, and 
those declared as pure by speech (word . (127) 

That quantity of water, which is enough for a cow 
to quench her thirst with, if it stay? on the ground, 
not bereft of (its proper] smell and colour, and uiv 
defiled by the contact of any impure thing, should 
be regarded as pure. (laS) 



204 Manu Samhita. 

Always pure is the hand of a maker of flower- 
garlands, always pure m the shop is an article spread 
out for sale, and always pure is the article of gift in the 
possession of a Brahmacharin. This is the conclu- 
sion of the Sastras. 129) 

Always pure are the faces of women, pnre is the 
bird in the act of felling down a fruit ; pure is the 
mouth of a calf at the time of milching a cow, and pure 
is the mouth of a dog in catching a game in 
a hunt. (130) 

Pure is the flesh of an animal killed by a dog ; 
as well pure is the flesh of an animal killed by a 
Chandala, or by a carnivorous beast. This is what 
Manu has said. (131) 

At all times pure are the external ducts of organs 
situated above one's umbilicus, always impure are the 
ducts of organs situated below the navel, as well as 
the refuse matter which are secreted or discharged 
through them. {132) 

Flies, particles of saliva escaped out of the mouth, 
a shadow, the cow, the horse, the rays of the sun, 
dusts carried in the air, earth, fire and air have been 
held as pure in respect of their touch. (133) 

Earth and water, enough for the purpose, should 
be used purifying the parts after defication or mina- 
tion, or after the discharge of any of the twelve afore- 
said bodily excretions. (134) 

The fat, semen, blood, marrow, urine, faeces, the 
waxy deposits in the ears and nostrils, phlegm 
(mucous) tears, sweat and the mucous deposit in the 
comers) of the eyes, these are the twelve refuse products 
of the bodies of men. (135) 

A person, wishing purification, must nib his genitals 



Manu Samhil/l. 205 

once, his anus thrice, his left hand ten times, and 
his both hands seven times, with earth iclay) and 
•water. 1136) 

This is the (rule of) purification for house-holders ; 
Brahmacharins, forest-dwelling hermits, and anchorites 
(Yatis) shall respectively double, treble and quadruple 
the number (of purificatory measures laid down in the 
preceding couplet I . (137) » 

After defecation or urination, after having eaten his 
meal, or wishing to study the Vedas, he shall sip water 
and touch the apertures of his organs. (138) 
• Desiring the purification of his body, he must thrice 
sip water and thrice wash his mouth with water. Only 
once must a S'udra and a woman do each of these 
things. (139) 

Following the path of equity, S'udras must shave 
their heads once, each month, follow the rules of puri- 
fication laid down in respect of the Vais'yas, and eat 
the leavings of Brahmanas' food. (140) 

Particles of saliva falling on the limbs, hairs of the 
beard getting into the mouth, and the particles of food 
retained in the interstices between the teeth must not 
be regarded as leavings of food (Uchchhishtam). (141) 

Drops of water, falling down on the feet of one at 
the time of helping another to rinse his mouth with 
water, should be regarded as pure as the water, lying on 
the ground. (142) 

A person, with an article in his hand, happening 
to be touched by the leaving of food, shall, recover his 
personal purity by sipping water, without placing the 
same article on the ground. (143) 

After purgation or emesis (induced by a medicine) 
a person shall bathe and drink clarified butter ; having 



9«6 Manu SamhtU 

bclohsd sSbat taking his meal, he must sip water in 
tjie manner of an Achamanam. It is said fhat, after 
Visiting the beds of their wives, men must purify their 
persons by bathing. (144) 

After having slept, sneezed, eaten, spitted, drunk 
water, or spoken a lie, or before commencing his Vediac 
^udy, let him assiduoudy do an Achamanam. {145) 

Thus the mode of effecting the personal purifica- 
tion, as well as that of purifying (various) defiled 
articles) has been elaborately and exhaustively des- 
cribed ; now hear me discourse on the duties of women 
of all the (four) social orders. (146) 

A girl, or a maid, or an old woman must not do 
any thing independently (j.^., at her own will) in the 
house. (147) 

In childhood let her remain under the control of 
her father, under the control of her husband in youth ; 
and under the control of her son after the demise 
of her lord in old age. A woman must not assume 
independence under any circumstances whatever. (148) 

She must not wish separation from her father, 
husband or sons ; a woman living separate from these 
(relatives) becomes condemnable in both families. (149) 

Skillful in her household duties, let herjmaintain 
a happy and cheerful frame of mind, keeping the furni- 
ture neat and tidy, and avoiding extravagance. (150) 

During the life-time of him unto whom her father, 
or her brother, with her father's consent, might have 
given her in marriage, him she must (devotedly) serve, 
and make no transgression against him, after his 
demise. (151) 

The ^religious sacrifice, known as the Prajdpati-^ 
yn/na and other bliss-giving rites should be instituted 



ManU Samhiia. 267 

Oil thd occasions of their martiagfe) ; firt atKpicioiasness } 
{i.e., for fraitioit of the dbjadt/of- marriage) ; the fofitial 
giving away (betrothal, or giving of word according 
td Kuiluka) dreates^the right of husbandship. (152) 

The lawfully married husband, the doer of the rite 
of consecration by Mantra {i.e., Marriage) ; is at liberty 
to visit his wife during"iher|biesstrual period, or at any 
Other tinie, since it is he who gives »pleasare to the 
Wife both in this' world and the next. (153) 

Like a deity, a chaste wife shall always serve her 
husband, even if he be found devoid of learning, eharac 
ter and conjugal fidelity. (154) 

A wife has no other religious rite or vow of her own 
thj^n an unflinching devotion to her lord, whereby she 
will be glorified in heaven. (155) 

A virtuous wife, desiriiJg to attain the regioH of 
the husband) must not do aay thing "unpleasant to bef 
lord, in life or death. (156) 

After the demise of her loTd, let her control her 
passion by lining on auKpicions flowers, bulbs, and, fruity 
and never dreatn of taking the name of another 
man. (157) 

Forbearing, self-«ontrolled, and emulating the excel- 
lent virtues of chaste Wives, let her pass her whole 
life in the constant practice of asceticism, (for swear- 
ing meat, honey, wine and sexual intercoatse, etc.) (158) 

Many thousands of celebrated Brahmtzchdrins (such 
as, Sanaka, BHakhilyas, etc.,) aad thousands of 
Srihmanas have gone to heaven (even) without (the 
(merit of) procreating children. (159) 

After the demise of her lord, a virtuous wife, by 
taking to the life ©f asceticism, may go to heavien. 



:B08 Manu Samhita, * 

even though not blest with a child, like the Brahma- 
charins. (i6o) • 

Out of a greed for progeny, a wife, who makes 
transgressions against her lord, acquires infamy in this 
life and is ousted of the region of conjugal felicity 
[lit. region where virtuous wives are re-united with 
their husbands after death.) (i6i) 

A son, begotten by a man on another's wife, and 
vice versa) can never be called a son, and nowhere a 
virtuous woman has been advised to take a second hus- 
band {in the Sastra.) {1621 

A woman, who, discarding a former though inferior 
husband of her own, marries a better and greater 
husband, ifor the second (time), is condemned in society 
and is called a fore-enjoyed wife (Parapurva.) (163) 

For acts of infidelity to her lord, a wife becomes, 
condemnable in society ; she will be reborn as a 
she-jackal, afflicted with many a foul disease (such as 
leprosy, etc). (164). 

Controlled in her speech, body and mind, a wife, who 
transgreeses not her lord, attains the region of the 
husband and is glorified as a chaste woman by the 
world. (165) 

Controlled in her speech, body and mind, and by 
thus faithfully discnarg^ing the duties of matrimony, a 
a woman (wife) acquires glory in this life and attains 
the region of the husband, after death. (i66) 

A true-born one (Brahmana), shall cremate the 
corpse of such a dutiful wife, dead before him, in the 
Agni Hotra fire, together with the wooden utensils used 
in that sacrifice. (167) 

Having thus cremated his deceased wife, the sur- 
viving husband shall again marry a second wife, or 



MaHU Samhim, 2iO^ 

IpSS 'thte 'iteitiaiflcfef <jf his life in dding Hre-oiffer- 
'ings. (i6gy 

A housfr-holdet riiust not abandon the performance 
of thb five daily Sacrifi'ces, conformably to the rules 
stated before, and shall reside married in his house for 
=the second division of his life. (1697 



CHAPTEII vl. 

HAviifGlhus dtily discharged the duties of the liftasfe- 
hblder, a Sndtnka Br^hmana, ■n^ith all the passion* 
of his heart sobered and Iranquilised, shall live, self^ 
controlled, in the forfe^. ( i) 

A house-holder, when he will find his hairs turned 
grey and the skin -^ his body furrowed with lines and 
Vrinkles and see the son of his own son, shall resort 
to tie forest. (2) 

Forswearing the use of all kinds of food-grains, 

as iSrell as that of vehicles and wearing apparels used 

hy (men) in the Village, and placing his wife under 

the pfotectioh of his Son, or in her Company, let him 

'take refuge in the wood. (3) ^ 

Taking the S'rauta and the <^;»-«^j)'«-fii'es, together 
'with the spoons anS ladles, etc., used in the Agni- 
hotra offerings, ■tt^ith him, let him come out of the 
Village, and live, peaceful and self-controlled, in the 
forest. (4) 

With food-grains used by Mtinis (divine contetn- 
platers) -and holy roots, fruit and S'akaSi let him duly 
perform these five grealt sacrifices. (5) 

27 



aio Manu Samhita. 

Let him be clad in skin, tags, or barks of trees, 
bathe morning and evening, each day, wear beard,, 
mustache and clotted hair, and grow finger-nails. (6) 

Out of his own food let him make offerings and 
gifts to the best of his might to the poor, and worship 
(serve) the guests in his hermitage with offerings of 
water, fruit and edible roots. (7) 

Always devoted to the study of the Vedas, with 
all his senses under control, beneficient and compas- 
sionate to all, let him ceaselessly make gifts without 
receiving them from any one, and exert for the good 
of all creatures. (8) 

He must do the Vaitanika Agnihotra* fire offer- 
ing according to the Regulation, and perform the 
sacrifices on the days of the lull and new moon in 
turn. (9) 

Successively he shall institute the religious sacrifices, 
known as Rikshiskie, Agrayana (the harvest offer- 
ing), and Ckaturmasya, as well as those which are 
respegtively to be instituted under the auspicies of the 
two solstices (Uttardyana and Dakshinayana). (10) 

Let him separately offer oblations of sacrificial 
porridge, etc., cooked with food grains used by Munis, 
in Spring and Autumn, which he himself must glean 
for the purpose. ( 1 1) 

Having first offered oblations of holy forest-grains 
(such as Nivara, etc.,) duly cooked, to the deities, let 
him eat the residue thereof, and use the salt which 
he himself has manufactured. (12) 

* The consecrated fire which a house-holder duly inaugurates 
on the altar in the house is called Garhapatydgni. The mixing 
of this fire in the pit with the southern fire is called Vitdnam and 
Vaitanika Aernihotra consists in casting libations of clarified 
butter in this fire. 



Manu Samhita, 21*1 

Flowers, fruits and edible rootSj whether grown oa 
land or wafer, and the fruit of holy forest trees, as well 
as oils pressed out of wild seeds he shall take. (13) 

Let him avoid honey, flesh, mushrooms, Bhustri-, 
nam, Shigru and Shleshmataka fruits. (14) 

In the month of As^vina, he must give away his 
store of food grains, fit to be eaten by Munis ^ and 
which he might have collected in the prc^oiis year, and 
cast away the old clothes and fruits, bulbs and Sakasi 
collected in the previous year. (15) 

Let him not eat any thing grown on a ploughed 
field even if it be voluntarily offered; even imder 
the most pressing circumstances, he must not eat any 
bulb or fruit, grown in a village, (16) 

He must eat his food by cooking it over firey or 
fruits spontaneously ripened in course of time, or by 
grinding the (edible things) with stone, or by simply 
grinding, or chewing them with his teeth. (17) 

He must store up food grain enough for a day's, 
month's, half year's, or year's use. (i&) 

Collecting it to the best of his ability,, let Mm eat 
his food in the day or night, or on the night of the 
second day after a fast of the previous day, or on the 
night of the fourth day^after fasting for the three pre- 
ceding dayst (19) 

Or he shall live as laid down in respect of the 
Chandr&yana penance in the light or dark fortnight, 
or at the dose of the fortnight i^i.e., on the day of the 
full or new moon) he must drink barley gruel omly one 
time. (20) 

Or he shall live on fruit, roots and flowers alone,, 
on ro those which have ripened, or witherd ia 



2T2- Bfanu Samhifik 

Bourse of titnej or live the'^ life of a fbrest-dweflm^ 
hermit. (21) 

He' shall either stroll on the ground^ op standi on' the" 
tips of his toes during the day,, or gently ramble- in» the; 
place of his staying,, and baths at: momingv noon< 
and evening, (22). 

In summer let him practise the? five penances,* liet- 
in. the open* during, the rainy season, and wear wet 
plothes in. the fore part of winter.. Thus let him gra-r 
dually increase his penitential austerities. (23^ 

Thrice bathing, and ©fferiiag libations of water untO' 
the gods, Rishis and manes, each day, let him purify hisi; 
body by means of austere penances such as fasting for. 
a month or fortnight at a time). {24) 

Having duly installed the sacrificial fii-eon his oww 
self, as is practised by the forest-dwellihg hermits, he , 
must observe the vow ofi silencer; and houseless and 
unpossessed of fire, he must live on fruit and edible- 
roots (of the forest.)' (^5* 

Apathetic to the objects ef pleasure, and' continent,, 
he must lie on the bare ground, knowing no other house 
than the tree-shade, and despising any ether place of 
refuge. (26) 

Of Tapasvt'ns, forest dwelling, or house holdec 
Brihmanas he shall beg his necessaries of li& (daily 
fcod'i. (27^ 

Or having collected it from the village, he shall; 
eat eight morsels thereof in the wood, placing ths; 
same in the holow of his palm,, or in, a chip of bark,, 
or in a cup of tree-leaf (28.) 



• The text has Panchatapah which consists in placing one's, 
self amidst five fires, i.e., the four fires Blazing on his four sidea. 
•ad tibe sun shining over.-head.— ZVasi/oto?:.. 



Manu Siunkita. 2^3: 

Thtis living' iii' the wood; a forest hermit shall dis+- 
eharge these duties (of his order) ; for the realisationt 
and correct knowledge of his. own Self he shall ponder- 
over the Sruiis which apertain to the science of" 
((BrahmaK (2.9) 

With a view to augment their penance and know-- 
ledge; and for the purification of their persons, Rishis,, 
Brihmanas and (.even) householder ferahmanas hav«; 
made use of (lit, served) these Upanishads. 1301 

On the advent of an incurable, disease; let him,, 
living on air and water, and with, his Self rapt in Yoga,, 
go straight to the north east until he quits, this mortall 
life. (31) 

By quitting his body in any of these modes of the 
great sages; a Brahmaua. void o£ tear and grief, is^ 
■glorified in the region, of Brahma. (32) 

Thus living in the forest, he shall pass the- third, 
period of his life ; and forswearing company, he shall 
dedicate the fourth period of his life to the practice 
of asceticism. (33) 

Thus having successively passed from one' order of." 
life over to another, he, the conqueror of his senses, 
and institutor of many a fire-offering, tired with the 
labour of begging and offering oblations,, shall augment 
or increase his pleasures in the next world by taking 
to asceticism. (.34)' 

Having discharged his three debts, let him devote- 
his thought to Self-Emancipation ; striving to attaia 
emancipation without dicharging these debts, a mait. 
©btains a degraded status. (35) 

Having studied the Vedas accoyding to the Regu- 
lation, procreated sons according to the rules at 
virtue, and performed the religious sacrifices, to. the 



214 Manu Samkita. 

best of his ability, let him turn his thought to Self- 
Emancipation. (36) 

For seeking the emancipation of self, without 
having studied the Vedas, and procreated children and 
performed the sacrifices, a Brdhmana shall obtain a 
very degraded status in the next world. (37) 

Having studied all the Vedas and paid honoraria ta 
his preceptor, and performed the Prajapatya sacrifice 
and installed the sacrificial fire on his own self, a 
Brahmana must abandon his home and take to the 
life of asceticism. (38) 

Those Brahmanas, who, declaring protection to all 
creatures, leave their homes and take to asceticism 
attain the effulgent regions. (39) 

The soul of a Brdhmana who gives no cause of 
terror to any creature, does not obtain a fright from any 
creature in return, after escapmg from his body. (40) 

Having abandoned his home, let him, observing the 
vow of silence and carrying the holy paraphernalia of 
asceticism (such as, a staff and an ewer*), betake the 
life of an ascetic, apathetic to all objects of desire (such 
as, palatable food-, etc.) (41) 

Alone and unfriended, let him roam about for work- 
ing, out the emancipation of his self. Having thus 
alone achieved success, he will neither abandon, n^r 
will be abandoned, in his tiurn, by, any body.f (42) 

* The text has Pcmitropachiiah, Medhatithi explains it by 
" Pamtrairmantra "fapairathava pdvanai Krichchhrayadibhih 
i,e., associated vrith the sacred Mantras and attached to the practice 
of austere penances. — Tr. 

t Apathetic to fedings of pleasure and pain. He will not 
miss the absence ^of his- sons and relations, nor will be missed bjr 
themi.— Tr. 



' Manu Samhiti: 215 

Houseless, bereft of the sacred fire, apathetic and 
speechless, let him, maintaining the perfect equanimity, 
enter the village for begging his food. {43) 

This carrying of alms bowl, the housing about the 
roots of trees, companionlessness, the wearing of rags 
and non-destinction of friends and foes are the charac- 
teristics of an emancipated individual. (44) 

Life or death he must not court > like a servant 
waiting for the receipt of his salary, he must bide the 
time of Death (45) 

With his sight he must purify his each foot-step,* 
drink water which has been strained through a piece 
of linen, speak the speech which truth has purifie, 
and do whatever his conscience would approve of (46) 

Dispassionately he must bear with his revilers, 
nor offer affront to any one ; let him not, for the sake 
of this (frail and pathogenic) body, create enmity with 
any person whomsoever. (47) 

Let him not enrage an already angry or infuriated 
person, speak sweetly and gently to one who is not 
angry, and refrain from uttering any word about any 
temporal subject through any of the seven speaking 
appliances of the mind* [i.e., speak about nothing but 
Supreme Brahma). (48) 

* The text has :iaptadvdrdvakirndncha, lit promulgated 
through the seven doors of the mind, which, according to the 
Vedanta comprise the eye, the nose, the ear, the tongue, the skin, 
the intellect, and discrimination. Govindaraja, on the other hand, 
explains it by speech originating from its seven objects such as, 
virtue and wealth, desire and virtue, wealth and desire, and virtue 
and desire. Certain authorities explain it by " (even regions," as 
correlated to speech. In short, the meaning is that he must not 
speak of any object of sight, touch, taste, smell etc., which belongs 
to the earth and is earthly, and does not appertain to Brshnia, the 
only reality in the universe — Tr. 



:3>i6 'Stwmi Satrihtttk 

Always brooditig tipon the thougHt of Bf ahiiia, hbft* 
Attached to any thing of this wotld, and desiritg 
nothing both here and hereafter), let him in the conr- 
pany of his self alone roam about in the world for the 
{Measure of emancipation. 1(49) 

He must not desire to obtain gifts by reading 
portends and omens, nor by practising ^divination or 
■astrology, nor by«readiQg physiognomy, 'no* by inter*- 
,pfeting'and preac*hilig S^astras, (s'd) 

He imuSt not enter a room, crowded by hermits, 
Brd^hmauas, birds, beggars of others. (51) 

With his hair, beard and finger-nails clipped, and 
carrying a ^talF afid an ewer, he shall wander without 
•creating hardship on any creature. (52) 

His ewers, etc., shall be made of unbroken nom 
metallic ivegetable) substances ; like that of sacrificial 
ladles during the celebration ot a religious sacrifice, ; 
their purification should be made with water. {53) 

Vessels made of gourds, wood, earth or bamboo, 
should be used by the fourth order of ascetics (yatis). 
Xbis is what Manu has said on the subject. (54)- 

Once a day, let him stroll out for begging alms 
and refrain from attempting to secure a large quantity 
of foodrstuff by beggiiig; through attachment to a 
laTger ulms'coliecting, a jya^/ (ascetic) may ultimately 
become attached to things of the senses. (55) 

After (the hearths of house-holders) have ceased 
to emit smoke, after pestles and mortars have been 
laid aside for the day, after the hearth-fires have been 
extinguished, after the house-holders have all eaten 
their meals, and plates with leavings have been cast 



H^anu SamhitS. S'lf 

li^ay, let an ascetic stroll oat for alms, each day (in 
the evening). (56) 

He must not h& sorry, if he obtains no alms, not 
rejoice at its receipt; collecting alms (food), enoiigh, 
for the purposes of barest existence, he must free him* 
self from the sensibilities of contraries, pleasure, pain, 
htak, or cold, etc.) ij.^) 

By all means, let him condemn gifts talms), given 
"with honour ; by such glorifying gifts, a jyaii, though, 
■emancipated, is eiichained again. 58) 

By taking small food, and by residing in solitude, 
he must withdraw his senses from their attracting 
objects of enjoyment. (59) 

By restraining the senses, by annihilating love and 
aversion, by extending compassion to all creatures, 
■(•a yati) attains immortality. 60) 

He must ponder tja the sufferings of human life, 
brought about through the effect of evil deeds such 
as, the consignment of (souls) to the tortures of hell, 
and the dreadful sufferings therein to be endured, <6i) 

On separation from objects of love and association 
with those who are loathsome, on the ravages of age 
and imbelicity, and affliction from desease. (62) 

On the exit of the soul from the body, and its re- 
birth in another womb, after death, and on the transmi- 
gration of this inner spirit through tens of millions of 
wombs. {631 

On the affliction which is endured by" all embodied 
creatures through the predominance of sin, and on the 
eternal felicity they enjoy through the effect of their 
Virtue and virtuous wealth. (64) 

By means of yoga he must comprehend the des- 
embodied self of sapreme Brahma, which, in its gross 



2i8 Manu Samkita 

from, runs through all types of living beings, good of 
bad, high or low. (65) 

Placed in whatsoever station of society, and (how^ 
soever) defiled, let him practise virtue and be equally 
(compassionate) to all creatures. The mere cloak of 
virtue (Garb of holy orders) is no virtue. {66) 

It is the (actual contact of) a Kataka seed which 
tends to clear w^ter of its impurities, the mere mention^ 
of its name can not make (tur bid) water, clear. (67) 

In day or night, and even in disease, he musty 
for the protection of (small) animals such as, the ant, 
etc.) walk by carefully observing the ground. (68) 

For expiating the sin of unconsciously or unknow- 
ingly killing animal lives in the night, a yati must 
bathe, and six times suppress his breath in the manner' 
of a Pranayama. {d^") 

Even three Prindyamas, coupled with Pranava 
and Vyahritis and duly practised, should be under- 
stood as forming the highest penance of a Brah^ 
mana. (70) 

As burning metals are purged off their dross, so the 
impurities of the senses are burnt off by practising the 
PrdnHyama. (71) 

Let him burn down the defects of his senses' 
(mental propulsions) with Pranayama ; sin,, by con" 
centrating his mind on Self ; attachment to the world, 
by withdrawing the senses from the external objects ; 
and ungodly attributes of his self, by means of 
divine contemplation. 72) 

The all-pervadingness of this Inner Self, which 
runs through all creatures, whether high or low, is 
ynintelligible to untrained and uncultured intellects. 



Manu Satnhita. 219 

let him witness this all-pervadingness by means » of 
Communioristic contemplation {Dhyana Yoga). (731 

Him, who has fully witnessed this (all-pervadingness 
of supreme) Self, the acts do not enchain ; bereft of 
this witnessing, a man shall revert to thisVorld. (74) • 

Universal compassion, annihilatipn of all killing , 
and injurirag (desires,) control of the senses, institution, 
of religious rites enjoined in the Vedhs, and practice 
of austere penances are the factors by which one can, 
realise the Supreme Self in life. (75) 

Supported by the pillars of bones, bound by liga- 
ments, plastered over with flesh and blood, and covered 
with skin, this body should he understood as the foul- 
smelling refuge of urine and excreta. ■ 7 6) 

He shall have to quit this bodily frame, subject 
to age; and imbecility, the abode of diseases, afflicted 
with pain and suffering, the transitory embodiment of 
material elements, characterised by the quality of 
Rajas. (77) 

As a tree tumbles down from the bank of a river 

as a bird quits a tree (at day break), so the self, like aii 

aquatic animal freed from the jaws of an aquatic mons- 

. ter (crocodile,) with the greatest difficulty, becomes 

liberated from this body. (78) 

Leaving his good to his dear ones and his evil to his- 
enemies,* let him, by dint of contemplation, attain the 
eternal Brahma. (79) 

When through the effect of contemplation he will , 
be entirely desJreless about things of the- world, then .. 

* Let him leave the good he has done to his friends and the 
evil which he has suffered at the hands of his enemies 'Work out ■ " 
their respective, effects in them, and let him not any wise associate^ - 
liLs Self with them and banish their thought! from his mind.— ^»v 



220 Mann Samhitm. 

he shall acquire eternal felidty both here, and here^ 
after. (80) 

Thus by gradually ahandoning all associations, and 
becoming, free from pairs of contraries", his self will 
merge in Bruhma. ^8ii 

All these aforementioned, (latent possibilities of his; 
nature such as, the knowledge of identity of his self 
with Supreme ^rahma, extinction of all feelings of 
mineness, etc.,' bocome pa: eat omly tluou^h the prac- 
tice of meditation ; he who has not acquired the know- 
ledge of this identity will not obtain the highest gooA 
(emancipation of self) through meditation. iS^s) 

He must constantly mutter the sacred mantras 
which are related to the performance of Vediac sacri- 
fices, or to the adoration of Vediac deities, or to the: 
knowledge of self, as well as those of the Vedanta 
which treats of eternal realities.* (83 J 

This Brahma is the refuge of all knowing as well 
as ignorant beings. It is the final goal of the aspira- 
tions of all heaven-desiring individuals. 84 ) 

A Brihmana, who, following these graduated steps, 
takes to asceticism, shakes off all sin and attains the 
supreme Brahma. (85) 

I hus have I disclosed to you the duties of the self- 
controlled yatis (fourth order of ascetics), now hear 
m* promulgate the duties i^ediac Sannydsikus.i (86) 

* The text has Adhiyajnam which means the spirit of 
Vi^knu i^l-pervading sell) residing as the tutilasy divinity of 
religious sacrifice in his eternal and infinite emhodiment. Compare 
Adliiyafnohamevutradehe (I am Adhiyajna in this body). 

Bhagavudgiia. — TV. 
•f Veda. SamnyAsikat) cottage-dwilling anchorites who have 
abandoned, the performance of Agni'hotras and other religiou& 
«»crtiii:e»..enJ9it>edjto be performed' iathe Vedas. — 7V. 



MaHu Samhiia. 321 

Brahmajchhrins^ house hUders^ forest 4'welilers. aiwl 
yatis fourth, order of ascetics , all these fow several 
orders have sprung from thje order of hows© holder, (87)1 

All these orders, adapted and goo© thsough accord- 
ing to the Regulation, lead a Brihroa,oi» who has duly 
discharged the duties they respectii«f©ly entail^ to tbft 
supreme status. (881 

Of all these orders, the order of hguseholder is saidl. 
to be the highest according to the ordinance of the: 
Vediac Law code,, since it is the order of householdec 
that supports all the other three orders. (8:9; 

As all rivers, whether bearing masculine or feminine- 
names, finally draw their support from the ocean, so. 
all the orders (of ascetic, Brahtnackarins, etc.,) draw 
their maintenance from the order of houseiholdep; (90)' 

By Brihmanas, belonging to all' these foar 
orders, should be assiduously pursued the tea-attributed 
virtue. (91 j 

Contentment, forbearance', non-attachment to world-- 
ly concerns,: non-avarice, purity, subjugation, of th& 
senses, knowledge of the immutable princip^les, erudititDir^ 
truthfulness, and non-irascibility, are the- ten specific 
attributes of virtue. (92) 

" Brihmanas, who having throughly learnt of these 
ten attributes of virtues, practise them in life, attain 
the most exalted status. (93) 

A Br^hmana, havipg discharged, the threerfoldl 
debt of life and practised the ten-attributed virtue 
and heard the discourse on Vedanta according to. tb« 
Rugulation, must be take to aaceticesm. (94), 

I{£^ying abandoned; aU; 2^^ and. scuHhiMsdi the 
demerit arising from work, lot; hioi GO£tsitaQtl|}s sttuify 



223! l^apu Samhifa, 

the Veitasy liring in the- maintenance of his 
son. (95) 

Bereft of all work, apathetic to the pleasures of 
heaven as factors of oichainment, on account of the pri- 
vilege of witnessing his Self, and by constanUy brooding 
over Brahma, a Br&hman attains the highest bliss. (96) 

Thus the fourfold Virtue of Brahmanas, auspici* 
ous and bearing eternal fruits, has been narrated to you^ 
nov? hear me discourse on the duties of kings. (97) 



CHAPTEU VH. 

Now I shall relate the rules of conduct which should 
be followed by the king, iand the mede by which he. 
shall achieve the highest success. ( i) 

The protection of all should be justly and lawfully 
made by a Kshatriya (king), intiated with all the 
initiatory rites inculcated in the Vedas, according ta 
the laws of his own realm and in the exercise of the 
functions peculiar to his own order). (2) 

Out of terror all creatures run about when thes 
world suffers anarchy ; hence, the lord created the king 
for the protection of all. (3;^ 

Out of the eternal essence of the deities^ Indra, wind 
god, Yama (Death", Sun, Fire, Varuna (water god', 
Moon, and Vittesha 1 the lord of riches. ) (4) 

Since the king has been made out of the essence of 
Indra, and such like deities, his eaiergy overwhelms all 
creatures in the world. (5) 

Like the sim, he dazzles the sight and mind ; no one: 
can look at his £cice in this world. [6) 



Manu Samhita. 223 

. In his energy he is like unto Agnt (fire,) Vayu (wind 
^od) Arki* (sun Soma moon ,the lord of virtue Yama', 
Kuvera, Varuna and the great Indra. (7) 

The king, ilf he be an infant, ittust not be belittled 
tn the knowledge of his human birth, he is the great 
idivinity manifest in the shape of a man. (8) 

Fire doth consume a man who may unconseiously 
come in its contact, the fire of king's wrath burnd 
^own one's whole family with all its animals and 
possessions. (0) 

He (the king), in due consideration of the exigen- 
cies of the work, force, country and time, assumes 
diverse attributes under diverse (iireumstanees for the 
realisation of the irlceptiVe principle of his exist-', 
ence.* (ic) 

He, in whose grace dwelleth the goddess of opu* 
lence, in whose prowess resides victory iaild in whose 
^s^rath abideth death, needs must be full of all energy 
(i. e. all effulgent.) (11) 

He, who, out of folly, intiurs the enenlity of the 
king, certainly meets his doom ; speedily doth ths king 
tesolves his destruction. 1121 

Hencej let not a man violate the gradious or ungra- 
cious command of the king which he might be pleased 
to make in respect of his friends or foes. (13) 

For the achievement of his '(king's) end, the lord 
(iJrahma) created, out of his own essence, his son, the 
punishing rod of sovereignty for the protection of all 
creatures. (14) 

Out of fear of that (rod), all created things, whether" 
mobile or unmobile, are enabled to enjoy their respec-» 
tive enjoyments and do not diviate from their speeifie 
duties in life. (15) 



2f4 Manti Samhita. 

In due cdfitsfderation of thie time, place, know^tedga 
and specific HAture of his offfenfce he must inflict proper 
punishment on an offender. (i6) 

That rod of sovereignty is in fafit the sovereigh ; he 
is said to be the leader and regulator (of dpciety,) the 
surety for 'the due discharge of their duties by (the 
members of) the four social orders. ( 1 7) 

The rod of SOvtri^ty governs the subjects, the rod 
t!»f punishment protects all the subject people ; it id 
the rod ot punishment that wakes up by the side of 
those who are asleep, the erudite ones call punishment 
the embodirfient of virtue. (18) 

Punishment, justly inflicted after due deliberation, 
endears all subjects ; unjtistly inflicted, it destroys them 
all. (19) 

When the king fails to unremittingly inflict punish^ 
ments on offenders, the powerful will torture the weak, 
like fishes fried* on gird irons. 20) 

(Had there been no terror of punishment), crows 
Vrould have drunk the sacrificial porridge, the dogs 
would have licked off sacrificial elarified butter, no one 
would have had the right of ownership in any thing 
and the misfcreants would have been paramount in 
society, {it) 

Men are dominated by the fear of punishment, rare 
is the man who is moral for the sake of morality ; it is 
the terror of punishment that enables all men to enjoy 
their earnings or possessions. (221 

Evfen gods, and demons, Gandharvas. Rakshas, and 
celestial serpents and birds, dominated by the fear of 
divine retribution, tend to discharge their respective 
duties (for the advancement of the universe). (23) 



Manu Sdmhita. 91}) 

l£*tinction, ot anomaly of, punishment will vitiate all 
the social orders, cau-e all bridges to be broken dpwn, 
and create a panic among all ranks of the society. (34) 

Subjects are not agitated (in the country where 
•stalks the blue-coloured, red-eyed rod of punishment, 
if its wielder (king) fails not to see things in their true 
^ight. (25) 

Such a truthful, intelligent, inflictor of punishments, 
"who is possessed of good deliberations and understands 
the principles of virtue, desire and Wealth, men call 
the king. (26) 

The three categories (of virtue, desire and wealth) 
•of the sovereign, who justly and properly inflicts punish- 
ment, become augmeiited ; while punishment des- 
troyeth a self'seekiag, sensuous, deceitful, and arrogant 
Jiing. (27) 

This mighty rod of punishment, which is loo heavy 
to be borne by an uncultured king, will destroy, with 
his friends and relations, a sovereign, who has deviated 
from the pfath of virtue. <2^ ) 

After that {t'.e., after the complete ruin of an iniqui- 
tous king with his progeny^ etc.,), an unjustly inflicted 
punishment (will) lead to the destruction of his kingdom, 
forts and subjects, both nsobile and immobile, and 
then proceed to oppress the gods and holy sages, who 
reside in heaven, (by making the offering of oblations 
to them impossible). (^9) 

Devoid of the co-operation of his allies (ministers, 
igenerals, priests etc.,', foolish, greedy, uncultured, and 
attached to the pleasures of the senses, such a king 
becomes incapable of inflicting punishments in proper 
cases. (30) 
^9 



226 Manu Sam}iit&. 

A pure, truth-seeking, intelligent king, possessed <& 
good allies (cohorts) and acting conformably to thd 
teaching^ of the Sastra, i^ alond capable of exercising 
the rod of punishment. (311 

Let him be jtfst and equitable in his own dominion^ 
hard-hitting in respect of his enemies, stiaight in his 
dealings with hit^ friends, and.forbearing to.the peaceftd 
Brdhmanas. <32) 

The fame of a king oi su(ih Conduct, 6ven if he 
lives on fared of poverty, shall Expand in this worlds 
like oil-drops on water. (33) 

The fame of a king of (Contrary Conducty who has 
not controlled his senses, shall Contract in this world> 
like drops of clarified butter on water. (34) 

Of the miembers of all the (four) several castes 
* • in their order of enumeration, tirUe to the duties of 
their respective orders, the king has been created thie 
protector. 1351 

Now I shall enumerate to you ih due order thte 
duties of the king and his servants in protecting the 
subjects. (36) 

A king, leaving his bed at early dawn, shall wop-- 
ship old Br&hmanas, well-versed in the three Vedas, 
and abide by their instructions. (37) 

Daily he shall abide- by the instructions of pure, 
old, and Veda-knowing Brihmanas ; a king, who acts 
according to the instructions of the old, is certainly 
and always worshipped even by Rakshas (38) 

Even though humble in spirit, he must learn h^pir- 
lity from them (Br&hmaoasi, each day ; a king, who is 
humble in spirit, can never be destroyed. (39) 

Many kings, with their progenies, have been des- 
troyed through ^arrogaaoe (hauteur) \ aiid kings, who 



Manu SnmkitH. 227 

r 

had been exiles m forests, have regained their kingdoms, 
through hiynility. (40) 

Vena, king Nahusha, SudAsa, YAvani, Sumukha and 
Nimi were destroyed through hauteur. (41) 

Through humility, Prithu and Manu regained their 
kingdoms ; through humility Kuvera obtained wealth 
and opulence ; and the son of Gddhi (Vis'vimitra)., the 
status of a BrShmana. (42) ^ 

From BrAhmanas, well-versed in the three Vedaa, 
be must learn the three Vedas, the eternal principle 
of punishment, the science of reasoning, the. science 
of Self-knowledge, the principles of trade, agriculture, 
and cattle rearing, and the science of wealth. (43) 

Day and night, he must be engaged in conquering 
bis senses ; a kingj. who has conquered his; senses, is 
enabled to keep his subjects under control. (44) 

Let him assiduously avoid the ten evil habits, which 
originate from desire (lust),, as well as those eight, 
which result from anger, and whidi are sure to enii 
ia grief. (45) 

A king, addicted to- vices resulting from desire 
(tust), becomes dis-associated with virtue- and wealth ; 
addicted to tho^g which result from anger, he meets- 

A hunting excursion, a game with dice, day-sleep\ 
^lUmny,. promiscuous, intercourse (lit, a large concourse- 
of wives),, intoxication, singing, diancihg, music, andi 
idle rambling, these- are; the- ten vices which originate 
firora desire. (47 V 

Deceit, or crookeAiess of temper, rashness, thee 
seeking of other men's discomfiture, envy, the spirit of 
&ult-findrn[g,.the robbing of other men's money br non- 
payment of just deblSj use of abjisive language, and 



iaS Mamt Samhtta 

battery, these are the eight vices which originate' fiotn 
anger. (48) 

Assiduously he must conquer that greed which alt 
erudite men have described to be the parent of these 
two sets of vices. (49) 

Abuse of wine, gamMing with dice; promiscuous^ 
sexual intercourse, and a hunting exctlrsion,^ these four 
should be sueoessively regarded as the most inveterate 
of vices originating from desire. (50) 

Battery with a club, use of abusive language, and 
encroachment on other men's wealth, these three 
, should be always regarded as the most inveterate of 
vices resulting from irascibility (anger,) (51) 

A self-controlled king must know these seven con- 
comitant evils ^such as, the abuse of wine, gambling with 
dice, promiscuous intercourse, hunting excursion, as- 
sault, use of abusive language, and encroachment on 
other men's wealth) of the two (preceding) sets of vices 
as most heinous, each preceding one beiAg more heinous 
than the one immediately following it in the list. 152) 

Of vice and death, vice is more painful, in as much 
as a vicious man, after death, will sink down to a lower 
and lower status, whereas a non-vicious man will ascend 
to heaven. (53 > 

He shall select seven or eight ministers of tested 
virtue and ability who would be conversant with the 
prices of lands, well-versed in the Sastras, valorous, 
and bom of noble families, with unmissing aims in 
archery or in the use of arms. 154) 

Even a work, which may be easily accomplished, 
may appear difficult to an unaided man to accomplish ; 
how can a kingdom, which involves so many mighty 
issues, be governed by a single, unaided person ? (55) 



Jtfanu ^amhtfa. "229 

With them he must ^liberate on all general topics- 
cf treaty and war, on the maintenance of forces, on. 
,the state of the exchequer, on the capacity of the- 
. capital and the kingdom as regards the location and 
food-supply of their inmates, on way? and. means, ou 
the protection of his person and kingdom, and the dis- 
tribution ot revenue among its worthy recipients: 
(public officers I (56) 

Having heard the several and independent opinions; 
of th^e counsellors, let him carry that mudi of those 
opinions inta practice whidi conduces to- his wd- 

fere- (57) 

The King, shall deliberate with the most erudite 
BrShmana among these condllors on the iiu)st impor- 
tant topic regarding the six predicatives of the^kingdomi 
{viz. treaty, war, expedition,, etc.). ^58) 

Having been confident of his integrity,, let hih* 
entrust all works to him i«>., ot the RrAhmana premier) 
and iindertake all works, after first having deliberated 
with him. 159) 

Other councillors, pure, intelligent, affluent iri wealthy 
and of tested virtue and comprehension, he shall also- 
appoint. (00) 

Kings shall appoint so many skill&l, intelligent and 
hard-working officials^) as may be considered necessary 
for the due discharge of their kingly duties. (61.), 

Out of these he must appoint ^illfiil^ valorous: 
men of noble parentage in protecting the wealth ol 
the kingdom, and in supervising the mines (sources of 
revenue) ; and conscientious men he shall appoinli in 
matters of domestic economy. (62) 

An .intelligent, pure^hearted man of noble femily, 
efficient, well-versed in all the S5stras, and capable of 



230 M.atiu SamhilA^ 

ihterpretitig other men's feelings from their meins anfi 
demeanours he shall appoint as an ambassador. (63) 

A person, handisome-looking, intdligent, skillful,, 

-pure-hearted» devoted: to his- person, capablb' of judging 

tie spirit of the place and time; fearless and' eloquent,. 

fe recommended to be the- arabassadbr of the king. {64) 

The-forces of the- realm, as well as the- maintenance- 
©f its internal pgace should' be in tiie hand^ of the- 
General ( AraiStya) ;• the- government and- treasury in the* 
bands of the king, and' the declaration of)- war audi 
toeaty in the: hands of the ambassador. (65). 

The ambassador ia fit to create or break an alliance-; 
he does that, by wftich those who are not united are- 
united in alliance, and those who are allies are severed; 
from one another. ((66) 

He I the ambassador) shall ascertain from- the ges~ 
tures and demeanours of the intimate friends (associates) 
and relations of a (foieign kiing), as well as from those: 
of his servants, the scope and nature of his^ works andt 
undertakings. (67) 

Having ascertained the nature and scope of th& 
works (of a foreign king), he shall so deport himselS 
(in his realm) so as not to aay wise imperil: his personal 
safety. (68) 

He, Cthe king) must live in a dry, fertile country,, 
(enjoying much of sun light and bereft of swamps andi 
jtirigles), containing large stores of food-grain and a large- 
population of Aryan settlers, clear 1 frea from disease: 
and disturbing physical phenomena), beautiful with, 
shady trees and creepers, bordered by (adjacent to that 
territories of his submissive vassals, and which off^s, 
uieans of livelihood (by trade or agricutturfi. 169) 



MaMU Sathhiia. 231 

fie shall live by taking refuge either in a fort 
Ifgirdled by'<ifeserts), br in a land-fort, or in a w^ter-fort, 
'or in a wood-fort, or in a ifort composed of men (z. e.>, 
.yarded by troops of soldiers). (70) 

By aill endeavours let -Mm take refuge in a hill- 
fortress ; a hill-fort is the best oif all forts for its many 
^excellent features and advantages. (71) 

Of thfese, the first three forms of torts are respeo- 
tively inmated by quadrupeds, hole dwelling animals, 
and aquatic creatures, fenS the remaninig three are res- 
pectively inmated by monkeys quatfirumanas), men and 
Hieities. J2) 

As hulitsmen can. not hurt these aliinjals, whilfe 
residing in these fortresses, so his enemies cannot assail 
a king who has taken rfefuge in any of them. 73) 

Since from behind the battlement of a castle an 
■Archer can fight a hundred archers, and a hundred 
^rchers can fight a ten thousand archers, so the building 
•of a castle is imparatively obligatory (on a king.) (74) 

The fort should be equipped with weapons, moneyi, 
Cood grains, transport-animals, Brihmanas, artisans* 
engines, forage and water. (75^ 

Within this fort the kitig shall cause his palace to be 
4)uilt, commodious, secret, white, fit for all seasons of 
"the year, and provided with trees and water. (76) 

Residing therein, he must marry a wife, beautifai, 
accomplished, possessed 'ctf commendable bodily fea- 
tures, born of noble parentage, and belonging te.his 
•ewn caste. Xtj) 

He shall appoint a priest and a Ritvik, who will 
respectively perform his domestic sacrifices and the 
'F«//i«//ta fire-oifferings. (j8) 



ajS Manu Samhtta. 

The king shall institute various sacrifices,' and^ pay 
honoraria to priests officiating at them; for tlleacquisfr 
tion of virtue likewise he shall make gifts of money and 
articles of enjoyment to Brihmanas (79) 

At the end of the year, he shall collect revenue 
&om men appointed to collect it (from his subjects):; 
and he shall be like a father imto persons, true to the 
Sastra, and residing in his dominion. (80) 

And in those matters he will appoint efficient super'- 
visers (agents ?), •who ■vfill superintend the works of 
men (appointed by the king. (81) 

The king must be the worshipper (pecuniary helper) 
<ot Brahmaaas, returned from the houses of their pre^- 
ceptors. This (worship) is said to be the eternal 
treasure of a king in Brahma. (821 

That treasure) the thieves steal not, nor enemies 
destroy ; hence a king should deposit that eternal 
treasure in Brihmaoas. (83) 

Oblations (food) cast in the mouths of Brahmanas 
are superior (in respect of merit) to those offered in 
A^nihotth iire-offerings, inasmuch as they do not 
deteriorate, nor wither, nor decay. (84) 

A gift, made to a non-Brihmana, bears ordinary 
merit ; those made to a degraded Brahmaua, to a 
well-read one, and to a Veda~}sja.o^m.g Br^hmaaa 
respectively bear double, hundred thousand and eternal 
merit. (851 

Through the difference of characters of its reci» 
pients, and the variation in the sincerity of feeling with 
which it is offered, a gift acquires a greater or lessef 
merit in the next world (86) 

A king, protecting his subjects, if called by an equate 
ly powerful or more or less powerful adversary to 



fe&ttldj Must hot be rductant to fight in consideratiori 
tof his martial duties. (87) 

A non-reluctance to fight, th6 protection df subjects 
tod serving the Brdhniarias are the mdst auspicious 
duties of kings. (88) 

Of two Jkings, trying to kill 6adh oth6r with superior 
forces, the one, who does not turn his back on thd 
battle-field, goes to heaven, after d6ath.»(89) 

Fighting, he must not kill his enemies in battW with 
hidden weapons) nor with barbed, poisoned, burning or 
fire-^mouthed arrows. (90) 

Himself riding in a chariot, he niust not Mil an ad-^ 
versary, standing on the ground, nor one who is a 
feunuch, or prays for life, or surrenders himself. (91) 

Nor one who is asleep or unarnioured, nOr ond 
Who is unarmed or stript of clothes, nor ond who id 
ia mere non-fighting on-looker, or is Engaged with 
another. (92) 

Nor one whose weapon is broki^n, dr who is fa^moart' 
ing the loss of a killed relation, or is seriou^y wounded ; 
nor one who is afraid of life, or flying from the battle'- 
fifeid i^ consideration of his martial dutjes. (93) 

Afraid of life, if one, while flying from the fidd of 
battle, is killed by the enemy, he acquires all the deme- 
rit of his master (employer) (94) 

Ail the merit, which such a run-away (froni battle) 
blight have acquired for heaven, his master will acquire 
in the event of his being killed during flight. ij.(95) 

A car, a horse, or an elephant, as well as paddy^ 
wealth (money), women and all other articles, or any 
me tal other than gold or silver, whatever one might havs 
eonquered ((captured in war), would be his own. (gjj) 
30 



234 Manu Samhtta, 

" The residue shall go to the king" is the dictum of 
the Vediac law on the subject ; a thing, which has not 
been captured by any particular man {i. e., all such arti- 
cles)i he (king) shall divide among all the soldiers. {97} 

The eternal and commendable duty of a warrior is 
(thus) desctibed ; a Kshatriya, While engaged in killing 
his adversaries in battle, must not deviate from this 
duty. (98) • 

(A king) must covet what has not been acquired, 
assiduously protect what has been acquired, augment 
what has been kept and protected, and distribute 
this augmented wealth among worthy recipients (i. e., 
spend it on worthy projects.) (99) 

The preceding four acts he must risgard as the high- 
est good in his life ; Mid hence, assiduously be must do 
them from day to day. (loo)- 

A king shall covet a thing, uUgained, by means of 
force ; keep the acquired wealth by giving due atten- 
tion to its increase {i.e., the acquired wealth with 
iitterest accrued thereon), and pay over the increase t(4 
worthy recipients, (roi) 

Each day, he must maneuver his forces ; each day, 
he must manifest his prowess; each day, he must conceal 
the performances of incantationary rites ; and each day, 
seek the weak points (watch the discomfitures) of his 
enemies. (102) 

The world is overwhelmed with the- terror of a king, 
who daily maneuvers his forces '. hence, he must bring, 
to submission all the world with tlie (show of his)' 
might. (103) 

Secret in his design, he must be straight-forward iff 
his dealings, and never live by deceit ; but he must be 



Manu Samhita. 233 

wise enough to understand the stratagem of his adver- 
sary. (104) 

He must not let his enemies know of his weak- 
points, but he must learn them of his adversaries; like 
a tortoise hiding his limbs](within the cavity of its shell), 
be must conceal his own weaknesses (lit, holes.) (105) 

(Patiently, and concealed,) like a heron, he must 
watch his own interests {i.e., the disconJfiture of a fish- 
like fickle adversary), attack his enemy (even if big like 
an elephant) with the courage and prowess of a lion, 
dart upon (his prey) like a leopard, and beat out a 
retreat (with the fleetness and subtility of) a hare. (806) 

Those, who will (dare) being the enemies of such a 
conquering king, he must bring under his control with 
the appliances of conciliation, etc, (107) 

If thy do not stand [i.e., can not be conquered with) 
the application of the first three appliances (conciliation, 
buying off [z-uA. division,) he must conquer them at once 
or gradually with his forces. (108) 

Of the four expedients (of Government such 
as, conciliation, buying off, division and war), wise men 
recommend the adoption of conciliation and war for 
the advancement of the kingdom. (109) 

As a weeder weeds out the weeds and preserves the 
paddy plants in the field, so a king must protect the 
kingdom (loyal subjects) and destroy its enemies, (no) 

A king, who has indiscriminately ploughed (the 
field of) his kingdom, shall be ousted thereof; he shall 
meet destruction with his relations (progeny, etc), (in) 

As the vitality of a man ebbs away (on account of 
the aggravation of his bodily humours) through fasting 
(and such like depletory causes), so the life of a king 



2^6, M'a,nu. Samhiia,- 

?b}))s, away Ijhjougli. thp enragement of hiS;, suli^ 
jects. (112), 

This, measure shojild b^e always a.dopted for the 
management of the state'; a king whose kingdom is, 
'^ell-managed (well-otderedji a,ttains happiness. (113) 

For ^ha. ordeily management of the state, he shal^ 
appoint governing oflBcers over each circle (gulma) 0% 
one hundred; tesro hundred, three hundred, or five 
liiUndred; villages. (,114) 

He shall appoint a head, man of each village, a. 
headman, over ten villages, a headman over twenty 
yiilageSf a headman over hundred villages,, and a head 
man over a thousa,nd villages. (115) 

The governor of the village shall try 3,11 cases of 
offence occurring therein; cases which he ^is not 
competent to, 4pci4e» he shall refer to the governor 
of ten villages. In cas^s of doubt or incompetency,^ 
the lord of ten villages shall refer to the lord o^ 
twenty villages ; and the latter, to the lord of a hundred^ 
villages ; and he too, under similar circumstsmces, to the 
lord of a thousand villages. ri6 — 1:17) 

Thei. king's 4aily dues from the inmates of at 
village, (such as articles of food or drink, and fuel etc.,), 
the governor of thq tillage shall receive (enjoy, each, 
#y. (ii83 

A governor of ten villages shall enjoy a, Kula mea- 
sure* ol land ; a governor of twenty villages, five KuLas ; 
a govemp; of a, hundred villages shall ^njoy ^.yill^ge ; z^ 
governor of a thousand villages, a town. (119) 

• The measure pf land which a cultivator can plough with, a 
plough, yoked with six bullpcks, in a day (morm^g and evening), 
9f six hours. 



Manu Samhiti. 237 

Other ' confidential ministers of the king shall 
gssiduouslji supervise the works of these village*- 
governors and pother works as well. (120)' 

In each city the king shall appoint officers, mighty 
Jike the mighty planets, seen among the stws in the, 
higher spaces of heaven.lwho will think of all matters 
relating to its government. (121) 

He (city governor) shall go but on tours, hispecting 
the works of headmen of villages, and of the works of 
these city-governors the kjng shall be cognisant through 
spies. (122) 

The king's servants, connected with the government 
of the realm, are often found to he exacting and 
^eceitfi;} ; the king shall protect his subjects from (thQ 
exactions of) these officials. 1123) 

The king shall excommunicate from the comitry 
corrupt ofBcials, who would receive tmdue gratification* 
ftom suitors (at their courts), and confiscate thgir good^ 
as well. (124) 

Maids, messengers, and minials,.engaged in the king's 
service, shall be daily paid their wages at rates varying 
according to the nature of their posts and services. (125) 

0^e Pana (Anna) should be the daily wages of 
menial servants, and six Panas those of higher ones. 
Each menial should get one Drona of paddy, every> 
month ; and a higher servant, six Djonas ; each menial 
should ohtain a cloth, every six month, while a higher- 
servant should get six pieces (three pairs). (126) 

Taking' into consideration the baught-price as well 
as the sale-price of his goods, the cost of conveyance^ 
the costs of his daily living; and other contingent 
expenses, as well as the gost of ensuring safety ta 



23S Manu SamhtH 

his goods {yoga^kshema), the cost of policing the 
forestSj rivers, hill-passes, etc.) he shall lety taxes on 
merchants. (127) 

The king, after due deliberation, shall always im- 
pose taxes on profits of traders and cultivators, as 
well as on those of the state. (128) 

As leeches, calves and bees, little by little, draw 
their respective sustenances, so the king shall draw 
his revenue from his realm, little by little, each 
year. (129) 

A fiftieth part of its value should be the tax on 
gold or animal ; and a sixth, eighth or twelfth part of 
its value on food-grain, according to circumstances, 
should be collected by the king, each year, from his 
subjects. (130) 

He shall take a sixth part of profits derived from 
trees, honey, clarified butter, scents, cereals, saps, 
flowers, roots and fruits. (131) 

As well as of that derived from leaves, s'akas, weeds, 
leather, bamboo-made articles, earthen vessels, and all 
kinds of stone-ware. (132) 

A king, even at the point of death, must not receive 
any revenue from a S'rotriya Brahmana ; nor must 
he suffer a S'rotriya, living in his territory, to be 
oppressed with hunger. (133) 

The kingdom of a king, wherein a S'rotriya is over- 
whelmed with hunger, is soon consumed by that 
hunger. (134) 

Informed of his Vediac knowledge and holy rituals, 
the kipg shall provide for his proper means of subsi- 
tence ; and like a son of his own loins, he shall protect 
him {S'rotriya) from thieves, etc. (135) 

The religious rites which a S'rotriya, protected 



MaHU Samhitd. 2fJ^ 

by thef fcingy performs every day, tend to increase the? 
longevity, riches, and territories of the king. (1361 

The king shall levy a nominal tax on poor men^ 
living by plying small trades in bis kingdom. (137 

The king shall cause each artisan, manufacturer^ 
S'udra and labourer, to work for him for a day, each 
month. (138)' 

Out of affection for his subiedts, he'must not brin^ 
about his own ruin by forswearing to collect his revenue 
ftom them, nor cause their ruin by his greed ; by so 
bringing about his own ruin, he will become an op- 
pressor of his own self, as well as of his subjeots. ( 139) 

The king rnuSt be mild or sharp (hard) according to 
the exigency of each case. Endeared to all is the king 
Who 6'an be thus mild and hard, (140) 

Tired or incapable of personally attending to the 
aiEfairs of the state, the king shall place in his own 
stead ( i. e., delegate his authority to) his wise, nobly- 
born premier, who has controlled his senses. (141) 

An energetic sovereign, free from folly, thus for-- 
tHulating and ascertaining his duties, shall protect \x\si 
subjects. (142) 

The king, who with his ministers and ofiScials, sees 
and suffers his subjects to be harassed by thieves and 
robbers, is a dead, and not living, king. (143) 

The highest duty of a Kshatriya (king)' Js the pro^ 
tection of his subjects ; a king, who enjoys the just 
and properly levied revenue (of his realm), becomes 
associated with (i. e., acquires) virtue. (144) 

Having left his bed in the last Watch of the night,- 
and attended to the calls of nature, and carefully 
washed himself, he, after having cast oblation^ in the 



j2^5 Manu SamhitA. 

fire and Wdrsbipped the Brahmaiias, Shall enter thg 
auspicious hail of assembly. (145) 

Seated ill that (assembly-hall^ he shall graciously 
ispeak to and (courteously) dismiss his subjects ; and 
kaving disniissed them all, he shall deliberate with his 
ministers. (146) 

On the hill-toiJ, in the solitary chamber of his 
t>alace, or in the dense solitude of a lonely forest where! 
even birds eannot penetrate, he must deliberate (with 
his ministers 1 without letting his resolution being in any 
\iray detected (by them). (147) 

A king, whose counsels the vulgar can not detect^ 
is enabled to enjoy the whole world, even if he be* 
bereft of treasure. (148) ^ 

He must avoid the (presentie of) idiots, of dumb or 
deaf oties, of birds (such as parrots> etc.), of extremely 
old meUj of women, of Mlethchhas (barbarous people).j 
c(f sick folks> and of those who have got limbs in 
less. ((4§i) 

It is fickleness, and parrots and women in special^ 
who disclose the counsels of kings ; hence, they should 
be studiously avoided (at the time of delibera-* 
tion). (150) 

Jleposed and refreshed, either alone, or in their 
a. e,, ministers') company, he must ponder on (themes) 
of virtue, desire and wealth at midday, or at mid- 
hjght. (15J) 

Aoquisitions of virtue, desire and wealth, which do 
not conflict with one another, should be made; the 
daughters should be married ; and sons, protected. (152) 

The sending of spies (into the realm of his 
adversary), the execution of acts ajready undertaken^ 
the Gomtemplation of deportments of the female 



Sfttfflatfis of the palace,* as well as of the endeavours 
of his spies in foreign countries, should be made (by 
thekin^. 1153). 

His entire eight-fold dTiity,t his five-fold espionage 
i^Varga),X love and aversion i of (his subjects, and 
the usages (rf his country he must ponder on. (154) 

He must assiduously watch the expansion of a 

* His queen killed king Vidutatha with a weapon, which she 
(previously kept concealed within the braid of her hair, and the 
queen of the knig of Kasi killed her lord with the contact of her 
iipoisoned anklets (Nupur). 

t A'ddnecha Visargecha tathdpraisha-nishedhayoh; Pancho' 
■mechdrtka-vachane Vyavahdfasya chekshane. Danda s'uddhyoh 
sadd Yuktasten&shtagatikonripak. — Ushand. . 
. Collection of revenue, disbursement of the revenae in the 
'shape of salaries t6 state-officials, restraint on ministers and offi- 
xials in affairs of the state, declaration of injunctions in respect of 
hostile acts done by the king's servants, supervision of the admi- 
nistration of justice, infliction of punishment, and the institution of 
ipurihcatory rites for expiating the sin of an iniquitous act, these 
■are the eight duties of the king. KuHuka gives the above extract 
from Ushand in support of the explanation he has offered. Medhd- 
iithi, on the other hand, describes the duties of sovereignty as 
"undsttaking of acts not already undertaken (AkrUdrambha), cora- 
Ipletion or execution of those, already undertaken (Kritdnushthd-. 
nam), specification of an act already executed (Anushthita- 
msheshanam). 

Construction of roads, caravans and bridges, the buildingf(of 
'forts, repairing forts and other public buildings already constructed, 
'Capture of elephants, working of mines, construction of barracks 
for soldiers, and clearing of forests, according to others. 

•j- Appointment.of spies such a«, those who disguise themselves 
as (I) students (Kapatikas), or (2) Sannydsins, or (3) peaceful 
householders, (4) or MQ-chants (Vaidehikas) or as (5) shaven- 
headed ascetics (Tapasvms) 

3» 



*44 - " *^irnu SamMla. 

•Madkyamai* or Udhina^ sovereign, and th6 ftiov6niedl3 
J^'a Vijigtsku king^lii., of a king bent on 'conquest 
■i. ?., the central monarch). <i55) 

These four sovereigns {Prakriti^ collectivly form 
the basis of thfe circle of sovereignty (Aiandalam, balance 
o( power). Together ;with the eight other Prakritis* 
they are twelve in number, and constitute the Prakritis 
•(eoflStitUfent eleSnedts of the state and allfes, etc.) (igS) 

Each of jthese twelve Prakritis (sovereigns, allies) 
has five Prakritis (essential cqnstituents of the state) of 
their own such as, ministers, government, forts, treasury^ 
■and punishment (Administration of justice), thus form- 
ing seventy two in all. (157) 

The king, whose realm adjoins that of his own, (2) 
4ie mast reckon as his adversary {Art), as well as hinl 
"who is the ally of that adversary ; him whose realm is 
YX)ntig^'oti3 to that of his foe as his ally {Mitram) ; and 
him who is other than these two (foe and ally) as in* 
different (Udasina.) <I58) 

With the expedient meaures of State-craft sfldh asj 
Cotofcilliation, divisiotii (brfeach^making among allies)^ 
etc., eithir jointly or severally applied, or with 
prowess oi diplomacy, he must bring these (sovereign^ 
Imder his control. (I59) 



* A king Whose territory lies between the realm oi a conquest^ 
{landing sovereign (i.e., central monarch' and that Of his adver-> 
sal^ (Art) and who is capable of doing good to them when com- 
bined, but is povrerful enough to subdue them severally when not 
lillied with each other, is called a {Madhyama, jntermediate) sove-> 
reign — Kulluka. 

f Udasina {lit. indifTerent) means a sovereign who is capable 
of benefiting or suppressing the Madhyama, Ari and Vijigishu 
kings at will, whether they are combined or uncombined— 
Kulluka. 



Manu Samhittt, 2"43j 

He must constantly ponder on the six political 
expedients of treaty, war^ military expedition, toleration: 
{i. e., waiting for opportunity), dividing the army- 
and attacking the enemy in dfetachments,* and making 
alliance with a more powerful king (when attacked by 
an enemy). (i6o) 

According to circumstancesj. he (the kmg) mast tako' 
rfecourse to the expedients of toreratibn, expedition, 
treaty, war,, guerilla skirmishes {Dvaidhi}^ or alliance; 
with a more powertui sovereign:, (tei) 

Of twofold nature is Treaty, of twofold nature is 
War, of twofold nature is expedition, of twofold nature- 
is toleration (waiting for opportunity), and of twofold 
nature is an alliance with a more powerful ally. (162) 

A treaty entered into by two sovereigns, for offen- 
sive (and defensive)' purposes for the time being, is; 
called Samdna-ydna-karma ; while- the one> which is 
entered into for a prospective benefit and which takes: 
effect in some future timcj is called i^ifarita. These- 
are the two forms of treaty. (163) 

A war, whether declared fn the proper or improper 
season,t by a king for his own good, and a war so. 
declared by him for the protection of his ally (illustrate >' 
the two kinds of war. (164) 

Twofold is the nature of a military expedition; 
(campaigning) according as it is undertaken at will by a 

• The text has Dvaidhihhdvam^. whicih, according to- several 
authorities, implies d'auble-deaHng, i. e., keeping an apparently 
firienely, relation with the enemy. We> however, have adopted! 
Kulluka's explanation. 

f Akale (lit, at an improper time) i.e. in any month of the yeas- 
Qtber than that oi^Mdrgas'trsa — Kulluka. 

Kile (at the proper time), i.e. when the pncmy is in. distress. 



244 H^anu Samlhta, , 

king alonf foil the sudden discomfiture of his enemy)^, 
or in eombination with an ally. (165): 

Twofold is the nature of A'sanam (toleration of^ 
or bearing with,, the rising supremacy of his enemy v 
accorcUng as it is either made bjr a king on account of 
the loss of his forces thsougjti his^ past follies or as- 
Hhe effect of sin of his former birth; or as it is; 
resorted to by a capable or powerful sovereign, at the 
request (and for the welfare) of his ally)'. ( 1 66)1 

Twofold is the nature of the oivision/ of the army, 
accordingly as it is made for the achievement of 
the object (of the war), or for the protection of the 
sovereign. This is what has been said by experts; on. 
the six expedients of state-craft. ( 167) 

Twofold is said, to be, the nature: of alliance; 
with a more powerful ally, according, as it is made by 
(a sovereigit) hardly pressed, by his enemy at the timej. 
or only as a pretext to intimidate his- fiiture aad in- 
tending invaders. (168.) 

A sovereign,, when he shall find that, at the cost of 
an inconsiderable pain or loss for the present, he caa 
purchase his permanent superiority in fulure, must 
then enter into a treaty even at the cost of that' little- 
pain or loss (payment of money). (169) 

A kiitg>, when he shall find his subjects' and allies-^ 
fully contented (with his gifts and honours, etc.), andv 
himself in a very exalted position in respect of his- 
forces («' e.y at the head of a spirited and well-equip- 
ped army), shall then declare war (with his adver- 
sary). (170) 

When he shall find his» forces exhilarated and 
largely augmented and those of his adversary in a 
contrary condition, then the king must go out cam- 
paigning against him. (171) 



Manu SamhiM. 24^1 

Having lost his forces and transport mmaXs, he- 
shall gradually concilliate his enemy, and enter into- 
a:defensive alliance with a more powerful ally. (172) 

The king,, whfen he shall consider his- adversary- 
more powerful than his own self in every respect,, thea 
having divided his army into divisonsi shall proceed to- 
achieve his own purpose. ( 1 73) 

The king, when he shall apprehqpd to be mada 
a captive by the forces of his adversary, shall then, 
ent&c into an alliance with {h'L place himself under 
the protection ot) a virtuous, powerful sovereiga 
(ally), (174) 

Him {i.e., the ally), who is capable of punishing 
both the subjects (generals ministers, etc., throligh 
whose infidelity his captiure was made possible) and. 
the adversary, the king must daily and assiduously 
worship as his preceptor. (175) 

If hfe detects any treachery in that ally, let him 
fearlessly wage an honourable war* against him. (176) 

By means of all political expedients, a king, Well 
versed in the laws of state-craft, shall so exert that, 
his allies, foes, and indifferent sovereigns may not 
acquire a higher supremacy than his owft Self (177) 

He must righly ponder on all works (of the- 
state) in .their rdatioris to the past, present and future, 
as well as on the good or evil accruing therefrom (178) 

* The text has Suyuddham, Kulluha explains it by Sobhanam 
yuddham, honourable war. Though there is little chance of his 
coming victorious out of the contest with such a powerful, though 
treacherous ally, and although there is every probability of |iis, 
being killed in the conflict, yet it is infinitely more honourable to 
die like hero, than to put up with affror^s offered by a cowardly 
though powerful potentate, who can violate the laws af ho^i~ 
tality and take advantage of an ally in distress. 



24.6 Manu Samkiia. 

A king, who can rightly and speecGly ascertain the 
good or evil of all past, present, or future issues, suffers 
no discomfiture at the hands of his adversary. (179) 

The king shall so arrange all matters that, neither 
. his enemies and allies,' nor indifferent kings ( Udasinas) 
may deceive him (surprise him unprepared). This is 
the synopsis of the Law of state-craft. (180) 

When the .lord (king) shall march on the capital 
of his adversary in a campaign, he shall slowly 
approach it by arranging all matters in the aforesaid 
manner. (181) 

In the auspicious month of MhrgasSrsha (November 
December), or in the month of Phhlguna (February 
March), orinCAa?Vra (March-Apiil), the king, at thet 
bead of (the four divisions of) his army, shall march 
out (aginst his adversary). (182) 

In seasons (months) other than the aforesaid ones, 
he the king) shall break all treaties, march out with his 
forces against his adversary, if he will find the prospect 
of a sure victory, or the (internal) distress of his enamie's 
(realmi due to the infidelity of his ministers, etc). (183) 

Conformably to all rules which should be followed 
in respect of the protection of his own realm at the 
time of marching,* and having won over the servants 
and officials of that part his enemie's territory wherein 
he intends to mobilise ; and having stationed spies in= 
due order, 184). 

And having cleared the three kinds of ways, andv 

* Strengthening the fortifications of his own kingdom, protec- 
tion of the rear of his realm with trustworthy rear-guard allies 
{Pdrshingrahas), distribution of proper forces for the preserva- 
tion of its internal peace, collection of food, forage,, water, traos- 
port animals, armours, and arsenals, etc. 



Manu SamhitA, 347 

|)urififcd the Six kinds of his own forces, lie (the king), 
¥ully equipped with all the munitions of war, shall 
slowly march into the kingdom of his adversary. (185) 

An ally, who secretly serves the adversary, and who 
had once been openly in alliance with the enemy but 
has again been won over to his side, thus serving as a 
link between the two beligerents, should be regarded 
by a king as the more dreadful (treacherous; of the 
two enemies. (186) 

With his forces drawn up in the array, known as 
Danda^ S'akata^^ Varii.haX Makara,\ S''uchi^ or 
Garuda-vyuha,"^ he shall march that way {i. e. on the 
Toad to his objective) (187) 

He shall extend the (front 0? his forces in the 
quarter from whence he will apprehend any danger, 
-and shall himself remain in the midst ^of the ^ corps 

* Th« array, in which the general (Balidhyaksha) leads the 
van ; the king, the centre ; and the lieutenant general, the rear ot 
the army, "and each of its wings is composed of elephant-men, 
icavalry soldiers and infantry in the order of their enumeration 
aie.i first the «lephant-meft, flanked by the cavalfy, and the Cavalry, 
Banked by the infantry, is called th« Dandaka Vyuha. 

f The array, in which the van of an army it drawn up in a 
liiarrow and compact order, its rear expanding in extended columns 
like the back of an Indian cart (S^akatai, is cilled the Sakatat 
Vyuha (cart array.) 

$ The array, in which the army is drawn up in the order, 
narrow at the van and rear, and thick and extended at its centre, is 
called the Vardha Vyuha (boar-array). 

§ The reverse of Vardha Vyuha is called the Makara Vyuha, 

II The array of soldiers in extended columns, one man, follow- 
ing one another like a swarm of ants, is called the S'uchi Vyuha. 

^ The array, in which the centre of thejarmy is thick, and 
bulges out both ways, is called the Garuda Vyuha, 



^^t Manu Samheta 

guarded by soldiers, drawn up in the array, kflotf^n as 
iPadma l^yuha* (i88) 

Let him place Senhpati and Balhdhyakshas\ in all 
^quarters, first placing them in that quarter from whence 
the danger is apprehended. (189; , 

He shall place piquets or patrols of trusted {Gulma)X 
troops, to fall in at the sound of any particular instru- 
ment, expert iH» fighting as well as in covering the 
tetreat, valorous and incorruptible, (for the purpose 
of guarding the entrance of hostile soldiers into the 
line). (190) 

He shall fight, placing the soldiere of lesser fight-' 
ing capacities in compact squads, and placing the 
veterans in extended lines ; drawing up his troops in 
the Snc'hi (needle) or Vajra (thunder-bolt) array,* he 
shall fight (the hostile army). (191 » 

On the even ground he shall engage his charioteers 
and -cavalry, in swamps he shall engage his elephant 
riders, on the water he shall engage his flotilla, on 
grounds covered with trees and shrubs he shall engage 
his archers, and on the level ground he shall engage his 
bucklers and swordsmen. (192) 

* The array, ia which the king is protected by troops drawn up 
in circles, within a compact square of soldiers, is called Padma 
(lotus) arrayi. 

f The leader of one elephantman, one horseman, and ten foot- 
soldiers is called a Pattika, An officer who commands ten such 
Pattikas is called a Sendpati, the leader of ten Sendpatis is called 
a Balddhyakiha (general). 

% 9 Elephant-soldiers, 9 charioteers, 27 horsemen, and 45 foot- 
soldiers from a Gulma <group1. 

For a better knowledge of the formations of brigades, army- 
corpses, battle-arrays, and orders of attack and retreat, the reader 
is referred to the English translation of the Agnipuranam (Wealth 
of India series). Vol. 11. CH. CCXLII. pp. 871— 880. 



Wafiu Samkfltt. 24,9 

^e shall fight placing in the front line of fighting 
%&Ch tall and light-limbed soldiers as men of Kuruk- 
'Sh'etra, Matsya, P^nchala and Surasena countries. (193) 

Drawn up in the battle array, let him supervise and 
Encourage his troops and ascertain th«ir feelings to- 
wards the enemy. (194) 

Let him closely besiege the enemy and hafasS 
iiis territories ; likewise he must Constantly vitiate 
(%n^eQOm)ks food stuffs, fotage and water. (195) 

Let him demolish fortwallsand cut down the banks 
"of dykes and water-tanks (of the enemie's country); 
Safely encamped for the night, he must constantly 
harrow his enemy with terror. (196) 

Having Severed those (such as, ministers of the 
«nemy ^ who would be capable of being severed (from 
the cause of their master) and ascertained the inten- 
tion of the enemy, he (the king), fearless and intending 
to win the Victory shall fight his enemy 'Oft the auspi- 
cious moment (2. e., watched by auspicious stars). (197) 

With concilliation, payment, and breach-making, 
'severally or combinedly applied, he must endeavour 
to conquer Tiis enemy ; and never by fighting. (198) 

Since, dubious is victory in a battle between two 
belligerents ; and since, defeat in battle is sometimes 
seen, let him accordingly avoid war. (199) 

In cases when the thrtee aforesaid expedients (of 
tjoncilliation, etc.,) would be unavailing, let him, fully 
lequipped) so fight his enemies that, Victory might cer- 
tainly wait ©n kis banner. (200) 

Having won the victory, he must worship the 
deities and virtuous Brihmauas, give gratuities to the 
inhabitants of the conquered country (for the advance- 

32 



250 Manu Samhtta 

medt of the public weal), and declare a general pardoB 
(amnesty). {201) 

Thus having ascertained the intention (of the 
ministers, etc., of the conquered king), he shall re- 
instate a scion of that family on the throne of the 
country, and determine (formulate) his duties and obli-^ 
gations. (202) 

He shall v&ify their laws and usages, and glorify 
the (newly-appointed) king amd his ministers with pre- 
sents of gems. (203) 

Unpleasant is the non-giving (confiscation or with-- 
holding) of the desired objects (of individuals) and 
pleasant is their giving ; but such withholding is recom- 
mended under certain circumstances. (204) 

All these works are contingent on the laws of men 
and gods ; unthinkable (unscrutable) is the <^vine dis- 
pensation, while measures are possible in respect of 
human afi^irs. (205 1 

Having found the three kinds of benefit such as^ 
land or territory (ceded ta himi, gold, and an ally (i» 
the person of the conquered sovereign), let the king 
depart with his (forces and alliesi after assiduously 
making tl;e treaty. 1206) 

Having judged the attitude of the hostile king iij 
the rear of his realm {Pdrshnigrdha), as well as^that 
of one (A^krandd)y whose conduct controls- the actioa 
of the former, and from their amity or Mimity, let hinj 
infer the success of the expedation. (207) 

With the acquisition of gold ot territory a king:does^ 
not prosper so much as with the acquisition of a true 
and steady ally, who can be powerful in future. (208) 

An ally, virtuous, grateful, contented, devoted, and 



Manu Samhifa. 3S^ 

resolute in his undertakings, even if he be weak, is 
recommended (as worth-having). (209) 

An enemy, who is intelligent, well-born, valorous, 
efficient, grateful, munificent and possessed of a good 
comprehension, the wise call the most inveterate of 
foes. (210) 

Urbanity, with a knowledge of men, valour, gene- 
rosity, and munificence in gifts, are *the excellent 
traits in an Uddsina (indifferent) sovereign ally ; (and 
hence, the alliance of such a one should be always 
courted.) (211) 

A king, in consideration' of his own safety {i.e., in 
the absence of any other means of self-protection), 
shall unhesitatingly give up a land (country), possessed 
of auspicious traits, fertile (i.e., well-watered by rivers), 
and always affording excellent facilities for the rear- 
ing and increase of cattle. (213) 

Let him preserve money for (times 'of) distress, 
protect (his) wives at the sacrifice of wealth, and 
always protect himself at the cost of wealth and 
wives. (213) 

Finding all dire distresses to be simultaneously pre- 
sent, let a wise man apply these expedients either 
severally or combinedly. (214) 

Considering his own self (his own capacity), the 
nature of the object to be obtained, and the expedients 
(to be applied for its realisation), he must proceed to 
achieve his own end. (215) 

The king, having thus deliberated on all these sub- 
jects with his ministers and taken physical exercise, 
shall enter the seraglio to eat his meal at mid- 
day. (216) 



2'sz- Mtfnoi Sarmkit».^ 

There he shall eat his nieal, well-tested ^ to ite 
feeing free from poison) by trusted* incorruptibie {lit. \a^ 
separable) cooks, who are acqiiainted^ with the- hours 
of his meals, by consecrating, it with Mantras of anti^ 
toxic virtiiesi 217) , 

All articles of his ^royal)" use should be- protectedl 
■writh (the admixture of anti-toxic- drug-comipoundg: 
(Agadas), and be must always bear on his person gems; 
of venom-destroying properties. 1218; 

Respectful and well-dressed ladies, well-exafnineJ 
^that they do not secrete any weapon or poison m the 
fplds of their garments), shall fan hinj, and carry 
ki$ water goblets, and bmrn ^fogrant; incense before 
him. <2i9) 

. Thus- he roust exercise caution ia respect of his 
vehicles, beds,, seats, baths, toilet^ and all personal 
decorations. (220) 

Having eaten his meal, he must sport m the com- 
pany of the ladies of the seraglio j and having reposed 
a little, he must again pond^ on the affairs of the: 
state). (221) 

Decorated, he must inspect his troops arsenals^ 
animals 0/ transport and conveyance, and all weapons 
and ornamoits (i.e., state jewels, etc), {^zz) 

Having performed his Sandhya (prayer), he, armed 
with weapons, shall hear tales of wonder and the 
reports of his spies in an inner chamber of the 
palace. (223) 

-: Then having entered another chamber and directed 
them (spies) as to their fresh undertakings, he, sur- 
rounded by the ladies (of the palace)^ shall, enter it 
again to take his (night) meal. (224) 



Manu Samhita, 353 

Then having eaten, and been exhilarated for a wbalee 
vitb the .sounds of musicj he diall gP' to bed andi 
leave it, fully refreshed, at the proper time («. ^., at 
early dawn.) (225) 

Tlie king {lit. lord of the world) shall observe these 
sales of conduct in health ; and in disease he shall 
delegate these duties; to. his servants; {226) 



CHAPTER Vm. 

Wishing to see (f.^., attend to ac^*udications^ of) hm 
suits, the king, in thefcompany of Brahmanas and 
ministers, versed in law (lit. judgment oti delibera- 
tion), and in a gentle mein^ shall wAss the assembly 
(court). (i> 

Seated in, or staying at,^ that (assemMy) iH' plain 
(t. e., as opposed to gaudy (x majestic) garments and 
ornaments, he shall supervise the cases of suitors, fa) 

Each day, conformably to the rules of the S'dstra 
and usages of the country, he shall severally adjudi- 
cate (cases arising from) the eighteen sources of law- 
suits (subjects of legal contest such as^tbe non-payment 
of a money debt, etc.) (3) 

Of these (subjects'.of contention),, the non-discharge 
of a debt, creation of a trust, sale of a property by CHie 
other than its lawful owner, co-partnership transactions 
(mercantile causes;', resumption of a gift, non-payment 
of his salary to a servant, non-performance of a promise 
or contract, non-delivery or non-claiming of a good 
bought or sold, dispute between a cowherd and an 
owner of cattle, dispute in respect of a boundary, 
assault and use of abusive language, theft, rash act 



354 Manu Samhita. 

(robbery), adultery, duties of husbands and wives, the 
division of an ancestral estate, gambling with dice, and 
wagers in respect ; of animal-fights, form the eighteen 
legs (subjects of law suits). (4 — 7 > 

In these matters of men, variously contesting with, 
one another, he, conformably to the eternal Law, 
shall adjudicate. (8) 

When the king can not himself attend to the ad- 
judication of a law suit, he must delegate his authority 
to an erudite Brdhmana for its decision. (9) 

He the appointed BrAhmaaa), accompanied by 
three other jurors, shall enter the assembly-roon» 
(court room) ; and there, either seated or standing^ 
they shall witness these transactions. (10) 

(The assembly), wherein are [present (seated) three 
Veda-'kaovr'mg Brahmanas and an official of the state 
(judge) is called a Brahma assembly. (11) 

All the members of the tribunal, in which truth 
(or justice) is conquered by feilsehood (or injustice); 
and falsehood is not pierced by the needle of justice, 
should be regarded as smitten with impiety, (i 2) 

Rather one should not attend a tribunal, but once 
there, he must speak nothing but truth; by keeping 
silenti or speaking falsehood in a tribunal, a man be- 
comes; guilty of vice. (13) 

The members of a tribunal, wherein truth is killed 
by untruth, and virtue by Vice, are killed by that 
(partial or prejudiced) sight. (14) 

Virtue (justice), killed, kills (in its turn); virtue, 
(justice), preserved, protects (in its turn) ; hence^ virtue 
should not be destroyed; may not killed virtue (/.*.> 
i failure ;of justice) destroy us all. (15) 



Manu Samhita, 2$$ 

Virtue (justice) is the showerer ;* he, who impedes 
the (full working of virtue, is^called Vrishala; hence, 
virtue should not be obliterated. (i6i 

Virtue is the one tiue friend of man who follows 
him even after death ; with the death of (hisj body all 
other (friends) fall off. (171 

A quarter part of the (sin of) injustice is attached 
to the person making the false complaint, a quarter 
part is attached to his false witnesses, a quarter 
part is attached to the members of the tribunal, and 
another quarter part is attached to the king, (18) 

The king becomes sinless, the members of the 
tribunal are absolved of the sin, and sin goes to its 
perpetrator, when the offender is righly condemned 
(punished). (19) 

The Judicial officer of a king must be a BrShmana, 
even if he be a mere Br4hmana by birth (and bereft 
of the virtues of his order), or a mere professional 
adjudicator of issues, and not a S'udra under any oir- 
cumstaces whatsoever. (20) 

The realm of a king, wherein a S'udra official 
administers justice, is destroyed under his very eyes, 
like a cow merged in the mire. 121) 

The kingdom, wherein S'udras abound and which is 
infested with an atheistic, non-Brahmana population, is 
soon destroyed in its entirety, stricken with famine 
and pestilence. (22) 

• Vrisha (which usually means a bull) is the term that occars 
in the text. Vrisha here means a showerer of desired benefits, 
Kamhnam Varshith. The whole meaning of the couplet is that, 
by birth alone a mm does not become a S'udraj; a man of easy 
virtue is as much a S'udra ,as one born of S'udra parents. 



Seated oft the judidal seat, the khlg, with hU body 
well-covered, and having made obeisaftCe to the lords of 
the quarters of heaven, shall commence to witness the 
affairs of the court (adjudications of law'-suits). (23) 

Bearing in ^ind the good (Of the protection of 
Subjects) and the evil (of their destruction), and piety 
justice) and impiety (injustice) alone, (so that they may 
Hot clash with feach other), the king shall attend to the 
(judicial) matters in court, and take up cases in 
preference to the castes of the suitors. (24) 

From external features such as, their meins> de* 
taeanours, tones of voice, gestures, and looks, he shall 
ascertain the inner feelings of men. (25) 

From meins, gestures, movements, depoitments, 
tones of Voice, and expressions of faces and eyes should 
be comprehend the inner mind. (26) 

The estates of friendless orphans the king shall 
keep in his custody for so long as they do not come up 
to age and marry. (27) 

So shall he protect the estates belonging to sterile 
or sonless women, to women who have not got any 
iiapinda relation (and whose husbands are absent in 
distant countries, to widows, and to chaste but sickly 
wives. 28^ 

A virtuous king shall punish, like thieves, those of 
their male (lelations) who might have attempted to 
rob them (of their estates) during their life^-times. (29) 

For three years, the king '.shall hold in trust a 
property whose rightful owner cannot be ascertained ; 
after three years, he shall confiscate it (by law of 
escheat.) (3©) 

" Saying it mine," he, who shall claim such a 
treasure, must give its exact (measure and description, 



Manu Satfthi'tit. 2,57 

%6d if th6y be found correct, the king shall make it 
■over to hkn. (31) 

Failing to ^ive the correct colour, size, and des- 
tsription of the lost article which he has claimed, as well 
as the time and place of its loss, the king shall fine 
IhiA its equal value in money. (32) 

The khig shall receive from the owner of a lost 
article in case of its recovery, si sixteenth or twelfth 
part of its value according to the superior, middling, 
•or inferior status of its owner^ (33) 

The king's official Shall make over to the king all 
lost articles which ihight have come into their posses- 
sions, and the king shall cause all thieves caught (in his 
i'ealm) to be (trampled down) killed by elephants. (34) 

From the man, who shall truly claim a lost treasure 
as his own, the king shall realise a sixth or twelfth part 
■of its value. ^35) 

In the event of one's falsely claiming such a lost 
article, the king shall fine him an eighth part of its 
value, or a lesser fine in the case of doubt. (36) 

An erudite Brahmana, having received a treasure 
previously given by another j shall take the whole of 
it, inasmuch as he is the lord of all (wealth). (37) 

The king having found an old treasure, buried 
Imderneath the ground, shall give a half thereof to 
Brahmanas, and half he shall deposit in his treasury. (38) 

Of old treasures, and metals (and minerals, etc., 
found underneath the soil, the king shall retain a 
ttioiety thereof, inasmuch as he is the owner and pro- 
tector (of mines) . '39) 

The king shall recover from thieves all articles they 
have stolen, and make them over to their respective 
owners without any distinction of Castes ; a king, by 
33 



S'SS Manu Samhita. 

enjoying such stolen artietes, acquires the sin of a( 
thief. (40> 

The king, cognisant of laws, and in eonsideration 
of the dutife of the (four) several orders of society, 
as wdl as of usages and customs of different localities^ 
guilds, communities and families, (not' incompatible' 
with the doctrines of the Vedas) shall disch^ge hi» 
own duties {i.e.^ enact and enforce laws, recognizing 
the valid authority of those customs and usages). (41) 

Men, discharging their own specific duties, even 
if they happ^i to be remote, become endeared to the' 
world for the fect^of their being true to their respeo 
tive works (duties). (42) 

The king, or king's oificisds (judges, t\.0 shall never 
fScibricate a false .case, (01 institute a false law-suit) out 
of -greed,* nor put oS(lit. be indifferent to, the hearing; 
of a case for (illegal) gratifications. (43) 

As a huntsroan traces the wounded quarry ta its lair 
by means of its Mood-streaked^foot-prints on theground^ 
so the king shall administer justice {i.e., adjudicate 
cases) by means of inference (and positive proof (44) 

The king, presiding over a tribunal, shall ascertain 
the truth and determine the correctness o4 the (alle- 
gation regarding) the subject of the suit, the correctness 
of the testimonies of witnesses, the description, time, 
and place (country) of the transaction (or incident) 
giving rise to the case, as well as its usages, and 
jprononnce the true judgment in consideration of the 
merit he will acquire (in heaven by so doing). (45) 

• The king, out of partiality or greed, must not ;drag non- 
litigant men into a law suit ; he must not fabricate Mse cas«^ 
nor falsely start law suits against his subjects for monej'. 
Katyana, 



Afanu Samhiti. 2|9 

Whatever has been done by good men, or ^hat 
ever has J)een done by the virtuous BrlhmaBas, should 
be regarded as valid, if they be not contrary to the 
law and usages of (their country), and the king shall 
shall give judgment in conformity therewith. (46) 

If a creditor makes an allegation (institutes a suit) 
against a debtor for the recovery of his money, the 
king, after the debt has been proved, shall cause such 
money to be realised from the debtor, and make it over 
to the creditor. (47) 

By those means, by which the creditor can realise 
the amount of claim from the debtor, the king shall 
cause it to be realised from the debtor and make it 
over to the creditor. (48) 

By means of friendly pursuasion,* by getting its 
payment assured by a bond or oath.t by means of 
fraud,t by arresting the person of his son, etc, or 
by employing force,! which forms the fifth means, a 
creditor can realise the money from his debtor. (49) 

He, who will thus realise his money from his 
creditor, must not be indicted by the king for his 
having realised the same. (50) 

* The text has Dhartifa, Suhrii Sambandhi-sandishiaih 
Samena Chdnugamenacha ; Prayena Va rini ddpyo dharma esha- 
Uddhritah. 

Realisation of a debt by a creditor from a debtor by means of 
gentle pursuasion, or by following him, or through the pursuiion 
of his friends is called Dkarmah. 

f The hypothecation of his property to, or execution of a bond 
by him in favour of,"his'credit-or by a debtor is called Vyavahdra. 

i As by seizng another man's money kept with or in the posses- 
sion of the debtor (Anyahritddi Vdhritya dapyate tatra sopadhih). 

! By dragging him bound to his (creditors) own house and inti- 
midating him with sticks and cudgels (Baddhd Svagrihamdniya 
tddanddyairupa_ Kramaik). 



26o Manu SamhttA 

If a debt or does «ot admit the'debt, and if that 
debt be subsequently proved in court (by. means of 
documents, etc.), the king shall recover and mi^<s over 
the debtal amount to the creditor, and impose a 
small fine upon the debtor according to his pecuniary 
circumstances. (51) 

In the event of the debtor not admitting the debt 
even after the tribunal has ordered him to pay it off,, 
the complainant shall substantiate his claim with 
documents (and witnesses), and the king, after the 
proving of the debt, shall impose a fine^ upon the 
debtor for this fraudulent denial. (52) 

[The king shall dismiss the suit, instituted by] a 
plaintiff who has cited witnessess who can not be 
possibly present at the time of the transaction (i.e. 
payment of the money!, or has purposely foiled to 
produce witnesses, he has already cited, or does not 
understand that his later allegations contradict his 
former ones. 

Or tries to amend a former statement by alleging 
a new and different fact,* or who, releveiatly interro- 
gated by the coint, refuses to give any answer. (54) 

Or consults with his witnesses in a solitary place 
where he should not so consult, or does not answer 

* As for example, having said that, the debtor took a Palam 
weight (four toUas) of gold from my hand" the creditor or the 
plaintiff corrects himself afterwards, "yes, the debtor took a 
Palam weight of gold from my son." — Kulluka. 

f The text has .?a»jyai P»anihilan.chartham i.e. interrogated 

as to why xiid he lend that money in the darkness of the night 

. and in the absence of any witness, the plaintiff does not give any 

reply (Kasmat tvayd rdtr&vasdkshikam dattamityevantddi prid- 

vivekena prishtah Sanna SamadhatteJ — Kulluka. 



MaHu Samhiia, 261 

qaestions by this court, or hrariedly Ifeave^ the premises 
of the court. (55) 

Or refuses, when asked (by the court to speak out, 
or fails to prove his allegation, or understands not 
what is required to be proved iand the means by which 
that proof can be established. In such cases cre- 
ditors shall not be entitled to recover from debtors 
their claims. (56) , 

And for these reasons the judge shall dismiss the 
suit of a plaintiff, who, having alleged to have wit- 
nesses, shall fail to produce them in court,^ after being 
so directed by it to do. (57) 

A complainant who refuses to depose toy thing in 
court after filing his written statement (plaint or Com- 
plaint) shall be punished with death (in a complaint of 
grave and serious nature), or with a lighter peaialty 
(in a light case) ; and his case shall he dismissed if he 
refiises to answer for three weeks. (58) 

If a (defendant I fraudulently disowns a true debt, 
or if a plaintiff sets up a false claim, in -court, the king 
shall fine them double the amount, so fraudeiitly dis- 
owned or claimed. (59) 

If a debtor (defendant), interrogated .by the judge) 
denies the debt, then he shall have to prove his non- 
indebtedness before the king and Brihnianas with 
(the testimony of at least) three witnesses. (6o) 

Now I shall discourse on witnesses by whom 
creditors shall get their transactions attested, and the 
mode in which they shall bear the true testimony. (6i) 

Kshatriya, Vais'ya and Sudra house-holders who 
are residents of the same village or town) with the 
dredStdr, are fit to be witnesses. In times of distress 
any person may be a witness. (62) 



362 Manu Samkita. 

In all matters, ttustworthy, nonrararicious men, who 
are conversant with all forms of virtue, should be 
made witnesses ; and men of contrary characters should 
be avoided. ^'63) 

Persons having pecuniary relations with the parties 
(or having any interest in the transaction), or their rela- 
tions, dependants ^cohorts), or enemies, as well as sick 
folks or person^ degraded for any hdnous crime, or 
those who have known to bear false witnesses, should 
not be made (/.«., cited as) witnesses. (64) 

The king, an artisan, a professional actor, a musician, 
a S'rotriya Brahmana, an ascetic^ and a religious men- 
dicant can not be called as witnesses. (65) 

A bom dependant, a man of condemnable character, 
a highway robber, a miscreant, an infant, an old man or 
one deprived of any bodily organ (must not be cited 
as a witness). (66) 

A man in bereavement, an intoxicated person, one 
afflicted with thirst or hunger, a fatigued, angry, or 
sexually excited person, and a thief, (must not be made 
witnesses) {fift 

Women shall be the witnesses of women (in money 
transactions etc.,> and members of twice bom orders 
shall be the witnesses of men of their respective orders ; 
virtuous S'udras shall be witnesses (m behalf of S^udras 
and members of vile orders, on behalf of men of 
their own castes. (68) 

Any one, who is aware of the acts of the litigants, 
done in a room or forest, or at the time of death) is 
competent to bear witness. (69) 

In the absence of any other available evidence, a 
woman, an in&nt, an old man, a disciple, a friend, a 
slave, or a servant may bear testimony. (70) 



Maau Samkita. 263 

f he fetlteriiig speech is th^ indicator of an old mail, 
infant, or> a sick folk deposing any thing false; under 
the^e circumstances their real mind should be inferred 
from gestures 'and demeanours. (711 

In all casts of violence,* theft, kidnapping, lot 
elopement of females), abuse, assault, or battery, wit- 
besses (of aforesaid qualifications) should not be re- 
garded) and examined ad the only , competent wit* 
ness.t {72) 

In cases of conflicting testimonies (lit, wherein 
witnesses contradict one another) the king shall causa 
the evidenced of many witnesses to be taken down 5 
in cases of equal number of testimonies (on each side , 
testimonies of witnesses of Commendable qualifica'- 
tions will prevail, and in cases where their (qualified 
witnesses') number is equal, the testimonies of excellent 
Br^hmslnas shall prevail. (73) 

The testimony of an eye-witnesd in respect of a 
fact which can be seen, or the hearing by a witness of 
a matter which can be heard, should be regarded as 
valid ; a witness by spea king truth »in respect thereof 
is not disassociated with virtue and wealth ,and does 
not become liable to a fine or money penalty). (74) 

A witness, who has spoken in the assumbly of 
venoiables (in court) any thing other than what he 
has actually seen or heard, shall be ousted of heaven, 
and fall headlong into hell, after death. (75) 



* Such as acts of incendiarism, poisoning ^administration of 
poison, etc) — Rulluka. 

t In these cases the court must not refuse to record the testi- 
mony of men who are not possessed of the qualitications mention- 
ed in verse 6a of this chapter, but is at liberty to taken down 
evidences given by infants, old men, in short by all persons consi- 
dered able to give material informations.— Tr. 



2^4 Matiu Satnhtta. 

A person, (present tft court) must depose truly aS 
to what he has seen or heard, when asked, even 
though he may not have been cited as a witness (by 
any party to the suit),. (76) 

A single non-avaricious male witness should be 
regarded as enough and competent for testifying to a 
fact, while a host of virtuous women should not be re- 
garded as comp^ent witnesses owing to the fickleness 
of the female temperament. Likewise, those, who beaf 
stigmas on their characters, (whether male or female), 
are not competent to be witnesses. ()?;) 

Whatever a witness has spontaneously (i. e., volun- 
tarily) alleged shall be taken cognisance of for the 
adjudication of a case by the court) ,- his allegations of 
a contrary character (i.e., those made out of fear, or 
through inducement or pursu£^ion etc.,) should be 
rejected as worthless. (78) 

The presiding officer of the court [PradvivekaJ , 
shall interrogate the witnesses, present, in the presence 
of the complainant and defendant, courteously address- 
ing (lit, consoling) them in the manner following. (79) 

Speak truly what you know regarding the deal- 
ings between the plaintiff and the defendant which 
form the subject of the present suit you have been 
cited as a witness in this matter. (80) 

A witness, who alleges truth in his deposition, 
attains the exalted regions after death and acquires an 
excellent fame in this life ; this is a statement which 
BrAhma has approved of dit., worshipped). (81) 

A witness, for giving false testimony, shall be 
oppressed, a captive, for a hundred existences, under 
water, tied with the, serpent nooses of ^aruna (water 
god) ; hence, a witness must speak truth. (82) 



Manu Samhiia. 265 

Truth purifies a witness, and it is Truth that 
augmenta virtue (justice) ; hence, witnesses of all 
castes must Speak truth. {83) 

His Self (soul) is the witness to his own self (i.e., 
to all his acts) ; Self is the refuge of self; hence, by 
bearing false witness, one must not insult his own self, 
(the omniscient and eternal witness to all inci- 
dents). (84) 

Miscreants think that, there is none to witness 
their secret vices ; the gods and their inner Selve^ are 
the witnesses to their misdeeds. (85) - ^ 

The two worlds (Heaven and Earth), the water, the 
heart, the sun, the moon, the lord of Death, the 
wind-god, the night, the two junctures of the day and 
night, and virtue are cognisant of the thoughts of 
all creatures. 186) 

In the presence of the gods (divine images) 
and Br&hmanas, let him, pure (in body and mind), ques- 
tion the pure Brahmana witnesses, with their faces 
turned towards the north or the east, about the truth, 
in the forepart of the day. (87) 

He (i. e. the judge) shall say unto a Brihmana (wit- 
ness " speak," " speak truth" unto a Kshatriya ; by the 
sin of stealing a cow, gold or seeds he shall charge a 
Vais'yu witness to speak truth ; and a. Sildra (witness), 
by all sins. 88) 

To regions, which are said to be reserved for killers 
of Brihmanas and women, for infanticides, for the 
violators of friendship, and for the ungrateful, go (the 
souls of) those who speak falsehood, (after death). (89) 

O thou gentle one, may the (merits of) virtues, 
which thou hast practised since thy birth, all go to the 
dogs, if thou speakest falsehood. 90) 
34 



266 ^ Manu Samhita. 

Think not, O thou gentle one, that, " I am the soul, 
and nothing exists but my own self;" for, the eternal 
witness to virtue and vice always dwelleth in the 
heart. (911 

If you quarrel not (by tellih'g . lies) with the 
Supreme Self, the representative of the sun and Death, 
which is ensconced in the heart {i.e. conscience), you 
■need not go to tb a (sacred) Ganges or Kurukshetra (for 
the expiation of. sin). (92) 

Bare-bodied, shaven-headed, blind, and oppressed 
with thirst and hunger, shall he go (to the doors of) his 
eneniies for begging his food, ^who shall bear false 
witness. (93) 

In respect of ascertaining the truth {lit, virtue), the 
sinful one, who, being duty interrogated, shall speak 
falsehood, shall fall headlong into the hell of extreme- 
darkness [Andhii-tdmisram). (94) 

He, who being summoned to court (Hi. present in 
the tribunal) alleges distorted facts, or facts which he 
has not personally witnessed, (in consideration of bribes 
offered to him , does not know that his conduct is like 
that of a blind man attempting to eat a fish with its 
bones. (95) 

A greater being than the Self of a man, which at 
the time of'his deposing (in court) never apprehends 
that, he will speak falsehood, the gods know not in 
this world. (96 

O thOu beloved one, hear me describe the specific 
kinds of falsehood and the numbers of his ancestors 
which one kills by telling lies. (97) 

By telling a liein respect of an animal, one kills five 
(generations of his ancestors ; ten (generations of his 
ancestors, by telling a lie) in respect of a cow ; a hun- 



Manu Samhita. 267 

dred (generations of his ancestors.lby telling a lie) in 
respect 0/ a horse ; and a thousand generations of his 
ancestors by telling a lie)|in respect of a person. {98) 

By telling a lie in respect of gold, one kills all his 
ancestors and unborn (descendants) ; by telling a lie in 
respect of a land one commits the sin of killing all 
creatures. Hence, one should not tell a lie lor a 
land. (99) • • 

False evidence given in respect of waters {i.e., tanks 
ponds, etc.), carnal knowledge of a woinan, gems, or 
any kind of stone-ware is as sinful as a lie spoken in 
respect of land. (loo)" 

Considering these evils of giving false evidence {Hi. 
speaking falsehood), you must speak what you have 
actually seen or heard. ( 1 1 ) 

Brahmanas, w:ho live by tenUng cattle, as well as 
those (Br4hmanas) who are traders, artisans, profes- 
sional actors or musicians, money-lenders, or are in 
the service (of any body), should be treated as S'udras, 
(if summoned to a court as witnesses). (102) 

A witness, who, out of corrpassion, has knowingly 
stated a fact otherwise than it is in reality, shall not 
be ousted of heaven therefor, since such a speech 
(statement^ is called a divine allegation. (103* 

In cases where the allegation of truth would lead to 
the (lawful execution {lit. death) of a S'udra, Vais'ya, 
Kshatriya or BrS.hmana, a witness is warranted to 
speak falsehood. In such a case a lie is Jgreater than 
truth, (104) 

Such (false) witnesses shall worship the deity (of 
Speech with offerings of sacrificial porridge, that being 
a good expiation for the sin of speaking such lies. (105) 



258 Manu Samkita. 

Or muttering the Kushmand i Mantra^ or the 
three Rickas running as Uditi^ or the thrfee Richas 
sacred to Varuna, he shall duly cast libations of 
clarifiedfbutter in the sacrificial fire. (io6' 

A witness in health {i.e., not incapacitated by disease 
or sickness), having refused to depose in respect of a 
money-debt in court, shall pay the equal amount of the 
debt to the creditor and » tenth part thereof to the 
king. (107) 

The witness, who, within a week of his deposition 
in court, is found to be punished with a disease, or with 
the death of a relation, or with the burning of his 
house by fire, shall be liable to pay the debt (/. e., 
the amount in claim) and a fine to the king.* (108) 

In a suit without witnesses, the truth should tie 
ascertained by causing the contending parties (litigants) 
to swear or affirm on oath. {1091 

The gods and great sages have sworn for deter- 
mining the truth (in suspicious cases) ; Vas'ishtha swore 
in the court of king'Paiyavanat (of yore), dio', 

A wise man shall never wantonly swear for a small 
thing; by unnecessarily swearing a man is destroyed 
both in this world and the next, (i 11) 

A swear (falsely made by a husband of many wives 
as to his preference to one of them, present at the 
time), as well as that made in respect of a matrimonial 



• Such calamities are considered to be the effects of divine 
retribution for the false evidence of the witness, he must make 
good the amount Of money which the defeated creditor might 
have lost in conrt, and also pay a fine to the king for perjdry. 

t Once on a time, Vis'vamitra accused Vas'ishtha of having 
eaten a hundred sons of his own. Vas'ishtha to exculpiate himself 
swore to his own innocence in the court of king Sudamd, the 
son of Piyavana. 



Manu Samhili 269 

(negotiation) in respect of forage for cattle, in respect 
of, fuel, (sr the one made for the advancement of a 
Br^hmana, does not entail any sin. ;i 12) 

A Brihmana shall be caused to swear by truth ; a 
Kshatriya, by his weapons and riding animals ; a 
Vais'ya, by his cattle and seed-grains ; and a S'udra, 
by the sin of all the crimes. (113) 

Or he (s'udra) shall be caused to cjrry fire* in his 
hands, or to be drowned in water,t or to swear by 
touching the head of his son or wife. (114 

Him, whom a well-kindled fire burns not, nor water 
ean drown, nor disease does strike, should be speedily 
pronounced innocent in an ordeal. (115) 

Of Vatsa, who was accused (of his S'udra origin) 
by his younger (step) brother of yore, the fire, in con- 
gnisance of the good of the world, did not burn the 
hair, on account of the truth of his assertion, (116) 

In all litigations (/>. partly heard or adjudicated 
suits) in which false evidence would be subsequently 
detected, all orders and proceedings must stay, and 
whatever has been done (in connection therewith) must 
be regarded as undone. ( 1 1 7 i 

False evidence is said (to emanate) from, greed, 
ignorance, fright, friendship, desire, anger, foolishness, 
and juvenile (fickleness.) (118) 

I shall enumerate in due order the punishments 
to be inflicted on a witness who gives false evidence 
under circumstances («. e., out of reasons) other than 
these. (119) 

* A red hot iron ball, weighing fifty Palas and to the girth of 
eight fingers, should be carried on the palm, strewn over with 
Asvatha leaves. 

+ As regards other forms of ordeals see Vishnu Samhita, 



270 Manu Samhita 

For giving false evidence out of greed, out of mental 
agitation, out of terror, or out of affection,, one shall 
be respectively punisHed with a fine of a thousand, 
two hundred and fifty, one thousand, and a thousand 
Panas. (120) 

For giving false evidence out of lust («. e., sexual 
obligation) one shall be punished with a fine of two 
thousand and five hundred Panas; for giving false 
evidence out of anger or spite the penalty shall be a 
fine of three thousand Panas, for giving false evidence 
out of ignorance one shall be punished with a fine of 
two hundred Panas, while the penalty for giving; false 
evidence through inadvertance shall be a fine of a 
hundred Panas. (121) 

For guarding against the failure of justice, and 
for repressing crime, wise men have laid down these 
penalties for giving false evidence. (122) 

A virtuous sovereign shall punish false witnesses of 
t^e three social orders in the aforesaid manr.er and banish 
them from the country ; while he shall simply exile 
a false witness of the Brahmana caste from the realm 
(without punishing him with a money-penalty). (123) 

Unhurt even in those ten places (limbs), on which 
the self-origined Manu has directed that punishment 
should to be inflicted, a Br4hmana offender shall be 
banished fiom the country. (124) 

The reproductive organ, thej tongue, hands, legs 
which (stand) fifth (in the list), the eye, the nose, the 
ears, property and body (are the ten places of punish- 
ment. (125) 

Consid«riflg the Wilful repetition [i.e., wilful and 
repea;teid perpetratioii) of a crime by (an oSender),^as 
well as the time,Tplace, and circumstances of itsi perpe- 



Munu Samhita. 271 

tration, the light or serious nature of the offence 
committecl, and the bodilj^ strength (and pecuniary 
circumstances of the offender to bear the penalty), 
punishment should be inflicted on an offender. 1126) 

An unlawful punishment destroys fame and renown 
and shuts out the heaven in the next world ; hence, 
(the king) shall withold an illegal punishment. (127) 

By punishing those who should not be punished, 
and by not punishing those who ought to be punished, 
the king acquires a great infamy and goes to hell, after 
death. (128) 

A, first offender should be let off with a (warn- 
ing , a secondi offender (i.e. one who has committed 
the same offence for the second time) should be let off 
with a. strong censure ; one, who has committed the 
same offence for the third time, should be punished 
with a fine; while death (corporeal punishment, or 
mutilation of a limb) should be the penalty for one 
■who has committed the same crime for the fourth 
time. (;i2 9) 

Im 'cases where corporeal punishment would not 
prove sufficiently deterrent, all these four forms of 
penalty : should be simultaneously inflicted on the 
offender. (130) 

Now I shall enumerate the measures of eopp^, 
silver, arid gold as they are known in daily use (i.e., 
barter or exchange by men), and by which names they 
are current in the world. (131/ 

The smallest particle of dusty which is seen to float 
in a ray of sun-beam, admitted through a hole in 
the window, is called a Tusra-renu. (ija)- 

Ei htsuch Ti-isra renus make a Liksha ; three 



2']i Manu. Samhita. 

Likihas make a Raja -Sarshapah ; aud three Raja Sar- 
shapas make one Gaura Sa,rshapah. (133) 

Six (Gaura) Sarshapas make one Yavamadhya, 
and three Yava-(madhyas) make one Krishnalam 
{Ratti) ; five Krishnalakas make one Md^ha, and six- 
teen Mdshas make one Suvama weight of a (Gold 
mohur). (134) 

¥o\a Suvar%as vaakQ ouQ^Palam, ten Palas make 
one Dharanam ; two Krishnalas of equal weight make 
one Raupya-mnshaka. (135) 

Sixteen such Raupa (silver) maskakas make one 
Dharanam or Raupa (silver) puranam ; one Karshika 
(eighty Ratth or a quarter Palam) of copper is called 
a Panah or Karshhpanah. (136) 

Ten Dharanams make one Raupya (silver) Ja^a- 
»«a«a and four Suvarnas make one Nishka. (137) 

Two hundred and fifty Panas constitute what is 
called Prathama Sdhasa ; five hundred Panas, Madh- 
yama Sahasa', and a thousand Panas, Uttamasahasa. 

(138) 

In the event of the debtor acknowledging his debt 
to the creditor, the king shall fine him (at the rate of) 
five Panas for each hundred Panas of the debtal 
amount ;,while in the case of his falsely denying the 
debt (the king shall fine him) double the amoimt {i.e. 
ten Panas for each hundred Panas of the amount in 
claim.) This is the injunction of Manu. (139) 

A money-lending creditor shall charge interest (on 
the money lent and advanced on a mortgage) at the 
rate fixed by Vasishtha, i.e.^ an eightieth part of each 
hundred per »2^«j«/«. (140) 

' Conformably to the practice of virtuous men, let 
him take interest at the rate of two Panas for each 



Manu Samhita, 273 

hundred Panas per mensum ; by charging interest at 
the rate of two Panas for a hundred Panas per 
mensum, a man does not commit any sin. (141) 

Interests shall be respectively charged from (the 
members of the (four) social orders in the order of their 
enumeration at the rates of two, three, "four and five 
Panas for a hundred Panas, per menstin. (1 42) 

No interest shall accrue when tRe debtor will 
borrow money by assigning the use of the mortgaged 
property to the creditor ; and the mortgaged premises, 
for being long held in mortgage, shall not be considered 
as any thing other than a mortgage, and as such, in- 
capable of being sold. (143) 

A creditor, forcibly enjoying a mortgaged property 
which ought not to be so enjoyed, shall remit tha 
interest on the money (lent and advanced) and satisfy 
the debtor with the price thereof; in default whereof 
he shall be punished as a stealer of the mortgaged 
property (article*. (144) 

An article, held in trust or under a mortgage, should 
be returned to its owner on demand without the least 
delay ; even after the long continuance of such an 
article in trust or mortgage, its return or reconveyance 
to its owner must not be withheld. (1^5) 

It may be necessary to make use, out of amity, by 
a person of a C3w, horse or camel, made over to 
him to be tamed or broken to harness, but such an use 
will not extinguish the right of its owner in the 
animal. 1145^) 

If the owner nf a ?MiaiI property (money), knowingly 

cf^nnive.^ ,'it i'.s possession and enjf^yment by another 
for ten- years, ';e shall not Lo conpeLcnt to recover 
35 



274 Manu Samhila. 

er daiiw ft back as- ihi* owa after the lapse of that 
period. (147) 

If the owner of such a property be not an Idiot 
or a minor, an uninterrupted possession thereof by a 
person (holding it in adverse possession) will create 
his right of ownership therein. (148) 

Enjoyment of a mortgaged article, of a boundary 
land, of aminoi's property, of a trust propeiiyi of a 
fsealed) deposit, or of a woman, does not extinguish 
the right of ownership. (149) 

A foolish mortgagee, who without the consent of its 
owner (the mortgager) has enjoyed (the mesne profits 
of?) a mortgaged property, shall have to remit a moity 
of interest to him by way of compensation. (150) 

Principal and interest, simultaneously recovered at 
one time, must not double the amount (originally lent 
and advanced) ; in respect of paddy, fruit, wool and 
animals of conveyance five times the quantity or 
number (originally lent) may be recovered, and not 
more. (151) 

A5 rate of interest other than what has been laid 
down in the S'astra (in respect of the members of 
a certain caste), if agreed upon (by them), must not 
be held as valid, in other instances interest may be 
charged 'at the rate of five percent (as sanctioned by 
Manu.) (152) 

A creditor shall not recover from a debtor interest 
(accrued due on money advanced by him) not later 
than a year,* nor at rates disallowed by the Sastra 



* The text has Natisanwaisarim Vriddhim, i.e. a creditor 
who has agreed to receive interests after three, four or six months, 
must not let it accrue due for more than one year. He shall 
demand and receive it withiD that period. 



Manu Samkita. 875 

such as, Chakravriddhi (compound interest), Kalw. 
vridhi* karita\ and Kayika.% (153) 

^ A debtor, incapable of discharging his debt and 
willing to renew the 'bond, must pay off [the whole 
amount of interest accrued due thereon and execute a 
fresh one in the favour of the creditor. (154) 

Failing to pay off the whole amount of interest, 
he shall add up the principal and theu balance of in- 
terest, and execute a bond (in favour of the creditor) 
entering therein the consolidated amount as the prin- 
cipal). (155) 

A (carrier; who has stipulated to carry (a thing) for 
a certain time, or for a certain distance {lit. place) in 
consideration of fares, charged at the rate of compound 
interest, shall not be entitled to it (compound interest), if 
he fails to carry it for that much time or distance.* (156) 

In such cases, the rates of interest on fares, which 
traders Dy land or sea {lit., seafaring merchants), 
conversant with the laws of time, place and fares, 
might have thought fit to lay down aiid fix, shall 
prevail. (157) 

He, who stands surety for the appearance of a debtor 
(in court), is boujid to discharge the debt with his own 
money, if he fails to make the debtor enter appear- 
ance. '168) 

A son is not bound to discharge the gambling debt 
of his father, or the unrecovered balance of a fine 

* Kalamriddhi, i.e., the interest must not double the amount 
originally lent and advanced, no matter how long the debt might 
have been standing unrealised. 

f Karita, the heavy rate of interest which a debtor in distress 
may be agreed to pay. 

% Kayika, the exorbitant rate of interest which is e.xacted 
from a debtor by means of threat or violence. 



276 Manu Samhita. 

imposed upon him, nor to pay off the money, due from 
him for standing surety for another (money recognisance) 
or a gift made by him to a unworthly person. (169)* 

The rule in respect of one""? standing a surety for , 
the appearance of another has been stated above ; 
in the event of the death of one who has stood a 
surety for goods, Ijis heirs shall pay off the recognisance- 
money. )i6o) 

(If it be asked) why should the heir of a person 
who has entered into a recognisance for the appearance 
of another or for (the delivery of) goods, pay the 
recognisance money, ithe answer is) that, on the death 
of one who has stood such a surety on having received 
a proper sum of money from the debtor (or the 
defendant) his heirs are jjound to refund it to him \i.e. 
debtor.) (161) 

In the event of the surety having received tnough 
money from the debtor to pay off his recognizance, 
his heirs, shall pay it back to the debtor out of their 
own funds. (162) 

An act (money-transaction), done by an insane, 
intoxicated, or diseased person, or by an infant or old 
man, or by one, not duly authorized in that behalf, can 
never be valid. (163) 

A deed of agreement or contract, (containing pro- 
visions) contrary to law (Dharma) and confirmed 
usages, if it be executed by one, must not be held.as 
valid. (164) 

A mortgage, sale, gift, acceptance, or trust, if found 



* The text has Vrithadinam, Kjulluka explains it by parihasa- 
nimiUam BhandMibhyodeyntvena pitr&ngikritam, money gifts 
promised by the father to 'fools and jesters, etc^ for jokes or 

oolings. 



fiianu Samkita. 277 

to be fraudently dofte, shall abate, and all proceedings 
made under it should be regarded as unmade. (165) 

If one dies after having made a debt for (thei mainte^ 
nance of the) family, then all the members of that 
family, whether joint or divided, shall discharge that 
debt out of their own funds. (166) 

A debt, contracted by a slave for the maintenance 
of his master's family, the master, whether residing in 
that or in a distant land, is bound to acknowledge and 
approve as one contracted by himself (167) 

Anything given, or written (executed) through the 
application of force, or forcibly enjoyed, (as well as) 
all acts done under force, should be considered as 
undone ; this is what Manu has said. (168) 

A witness, a surety, and an umpire are the three 
(persons) who suffer pain for the sake of others ; and 
a king, a capitalist {lit. rich man), a BrahTnana, and a 
merchant are the four (persons) to whose thriving do 
the others contribute. (169) 

A king, even in direst need, must not "take what 
ought not to be taken ; even when most affluent in 
wealth he must not give the veriest trifle of what 
ought not to be given. (170) 

By taking what ought not to be taken, and by giving 
what ought not to be given, the weakness of a king is 
proclaimed ; he perisheth both here and hereafter (171) 

By receiving his just dues, by preventing the inter- 
mixture of castes, and by protecting the weak, the 
strength of a king is augmented ; he thrives both in 
this world and the next. (170). 

Hence, the king shall^conquer his anger and senses ,"'j 
and forswearing personal love and^derison, he shall be, 
like unto death, impartial to all. (1731 



2^8 Manu Satuhita. 

The bad-souled king, who fails to administer even 
handed justice out of greed or folly, his enemies soon 
do subjugate. (174) 

Him, who, with his anger and desire fully control- 
led, administers justice {lit., adjudicates cases), do the 
subjects fondly follow, like the rivers, following the 
sea, (175) 

If a debtor lodges a complaint against a creditor, 
endeavouring to realise his just money from the former, 
the king shall punish the debtor with a fine, equivalent 
to a [quarter part . of the debtal amount, and realise, 
and make over to the creditor, his just dues. (176) 

If the debtor be of the same caste with the creditor 
or belongs to a caste inferior to that of the creditor, 
he shall pay off the debt by bodily work (compatible 
with his social order) ; while a debtor, belonging to a 
caste superior to that of the creditor, shall repay his 
debt by easy instalments. (177) 

Conformably to the aforesaid rules, the king shall 
decide law-suits between the parlies thereto with the 
help of witnesses, and testimonies, etc. ( 1 78) 

A wise man shall deposit money in trust with a 
high-born, good charactered, virtuous, truthful and 
opulent person with a large family (of sons and rela- 
tions. (179) • 

In the same manner, in which a man will deposit 
any money in the hand of another, will it be returned to 
him on demand. As the deposit is, the refund is. (180) 

On the deposit-holder failing to refund the trust [lit. 
deposit) money to the depositor on demand, the latter 
shall apply to the judge, and the judge, at the back 
of the depositor, shall demand the money of the 
trustee. (181) 



Manu SamhitA. 279 

Iti the absence of any witness in such a transaction, 
the judge, for the determination of truth, shall cause 
a handsome looking attendant (officer of the court) 
disguised so as to conceal his identity, to deposit gold 
with the alleged (deposit-holder) and to demand the 
same of him. (182) 

If the holder of such a deposit can return the gold 
in the same form and in the same condition ( i e., sealed 
or unsealed^ in which it was originally deposited, it 
shall be presumed that he does not hold the deposit 
as alleged by the complainant (plaintiff). (183) 

But if he fails to return the deposit (gold) made by 
his attendant in its original form and condition, the 
judge shall recover from him both the deposits («.?., 
gold and the article or money alleged to be deposited 
by the plaintiff) This is the decision of law. (184) 

One shall not give an article, mortgaged to or 
deposited with him, to his heir, inasmuch as either in 
his life-itime or after his demise (such a giving may 
lead toSthe probable destructiou of such a pledge or 
deposit article. (185) 

If after the demise of the depositor, the holdw of 
the deposit, out of his own motion, returns the deposit 
article to his (depositor's lawfuli heir, the relations of 
the depositor shall not be competeiit to bring an action 
agaiiist him (/.^., the holder of the deposit) in the king's 
court (on the allegation of the existence of more such 
deposits with him) (186) 

On the institution of such a suit {lit. after the filing 
of such a complaint), the king, forswearing all dupli- 
city, shall endeavour to recover the deposit article with 
amicable means ; and in cDnsidaratioa of the character 



28o Sfanu Samhfta 

of the deposit-holder _he shall achieve his end with 
concilliatory appliances. (187) 

This rule holds good in respect of realising'all kinds 
of deposit articles ; if the deposit-holder returns a sealed 
deposit article with the seal intact, or does not take 
anything out of it, he shall not be indictal^e. (188) 

A deposit-holder is not liable to make good the 
deposit article in the case of its being stolen by a thief 
or in the event (tf its destruction by water or fire. (189) 

(Th» king shall) examine the stealer of a deposit- 
article, as well as the one who fraudently demands an 
article that has never been deposited as a trust, by 
means of all the aforesaid expedients (of concilliatory 
measures, etc.,) as well as by means of ordeals men- 
tioned in the Vedas. (190) 

He who refuses to give back a deposit article, and 
he who demands an article without having kept it as 
a deposit, both of them should be punished as thieves, 
and the value of such an article should be recovered 
(from either of them.) (191) 

The stealer of a deposit article shall be punished 
with a fine equal in value to that of the article deposited 
with him* and the king shall punish a stealer of a 
pledged article with a fine, equal to its value, without 
any distinction of caste or person.* ^192) 

He, w^o on a falset pretext robs another of his 

* This couplet is not a mere repetion of what has been stated 
in the preceding verse, but contemplates cases where Brahmanas, 
who were above all corporeal punishments, would be guilty of 
offences enumerated here in. — Kulluka. 

•(• The text has UpadhabhisJia on a false pretence. Kulluka 
exemplifies it by illustrations such as, when a n>an goes to his 
neighbour and says "the king is angry upon you, pay me so 
much money and I shall shield you from the king's wiath: 



Manu SamhilS. ' 28 1 

Vncnfey, shall W 'punished, together with his abettor, 
with any of the various corporeal punishments* (men- 
tioned before. (1931 

An article (such as gold, etc.,) dbposited with a man 
in the presence of a witness, should be returned to the 
'depositor ( on demand) in the same quantity or measure 
in which it was deposited ; and such a witness, deposing 
falsely to its (original measure or qi»ntity), shall be 
liable to punishment. (194) 

An articlCj which as been deposited and received 
in secret, should be secretly returned (to its depositor 
on demand); like the deposit is the taking back. (195) 

The king, without anywise oppressing the deposit- 
holder, shall ascertain the fact whether the ariic'.e is 
actually a deposit, or a pledge, or a deposit out of love 
or affection.t (i^(>) 

The king shall never accept the testimony of him, 
\vho, without having any right of ownership in it, sells 
an article without the consent of its rightful owner, 
and who, although a.Jthitf in reality, does not consider 
himself as such. (1971 

Such a person, who is equally culpable as a thief, 
if he happens to belong to the family of the rightful 
owner, should Be punished with a fine of six hundred 
Fanas ; otherwise he shall be held gpilty as a thief and 
punished with the penalty for theft. (198) 

A sale or mortage of a thing by a person other 
than its right and lawful owner, as well as all acts 
___^ ..« 

• Imprisonment, or mutilation of any Ijmb or organ such as, 
the hand, leg, etc. — Kulluka. 

' f The text has Prityopanihitwya. That is, an article 
deposited with a person, out of love by the depositior, for its 
temporary use by the former. Kitlluka. 

3^- 



2ti Man SaMhita 

doiis by him (in connection there with> must M 
regarded as invalid (lit, not done). This is the deci* 
Sion of Law. (i9^i 

In the case where possession (of a property by 
one) is evidenced, but not the means (right Or little) 
under which hd has come by it, the title will determine: 
the right of ownership therein and not the possessiom 
This is the decisiofl of law. (loo) 

At a public auction, the man, who purchases a 
property (lit, wealth) for a (good) value in tie presened 
of legally conipetent witnesses, is said to lawfully come 
by it, sinqe (a good) value or consideration purifies thO 
.property i.e. removes any defect in its little after the 
sale.) (201). 

If the auction-purdias^ (vender of M article ox 
property), on his failure to produce (lit, show) thd 
vendor,* Can prove (the fact of his purchasing thfe 
same at a public [lit, open auction and] its consetjuant 
purity for its being so purchased, he shall not be 
punishable for purchasing it from one who is not its 
rightful owner ; but the rightful owner of the article' 
in such a dase shall have |it back on payment of half 
the consideration to the purchaser. (202) 

An article (of one species) mixed with another of 
a different (species), a pithless substance, an article 
weighing less than its svrrface or manifest w'eight, and 
an article that is under a cover or lies at a distance, 
must not be sold. (203* 

If by showing a (more handsome) bride (at the 
time of fixing the dowry) another (of more homely 



• As in the event of his deatli, or departure to a distant 
country.— Kulluka, 



Manu SamJtiia^ 28 j 

features) is given in marriager, than the bridegroom,' 
shall be- entitled, to marry both of them on pay- 
ment of that (single.) dowry).;, this is. what Manu haa 
saidi (204)' 

He ^^ho gives away in marriage- aninsane gidj or 
©ne who is not virgin, or is afflicted with any^ fornf ofc' 
cutaneous affections, without informing (the; bride* 
groom) of her such disqualification^ sliall^ he . liable., toi 
punishment. (^^05) 

If a rittvik (priest) duly appointed to officiate at a; 
religious sacrifice, abandons his office, the ihstitutors: 
of the irite shall be beund'to pay him his honorarliihi 
{Dakshind) proportionate to the work he. has per^^ 
formed. (iq6)s ' 

Having officiated, as a priest" at a sacrifice till the- 
payment of the honorarium {i.e., nearly up to the com- 
pletion of the rite), if he is compelled' to abandon hts 
office, he- shall bs entitled to the entire amount of; 
Bakshind, and. to get the. remaininf rites done by 
another. (107) 

The query is whether in respect of a religious ritef, 
idx the- performance of each part whereof a sepatatei- 
Dakshind (Honorarium) has been sanctiolied by thd 
SUstra, persons who have respectively performed those ■ 
parts shall each obtain- a- Z?s/JjA««^", or, shall they apor- 
tion among themselves the entire Dakshiua (f)ai.d..in one . 
lump sum at the,close-of the sacrifice ? (208-) 

(Among the followers of certain branches of the- 
Vedds the-practice is that) the Ajihvarjti- shall obtain^- 
a- chariot, the- Brahma shall receive- a swift-goingr 
hotse,, the./^o/i shall obtain,a.horse^.an.d \h&.Mdgdt£: 



284 Itfdnu Samhifa. 

(chanter of the Samveda) shall' obtain the cart at which, 
the Soma plants have, been carried* (209)1 

(In a Jyotishtoma sacrifice- th& Dakshina (which; 
consists of a hundred kine should be distributed among 
the sixteen priests as follows, vts.,) the (four J principal 
priests (Hatii, Adhuaryu, B-rahma and UdgAta) shalt 
each receive, a Dnkshind of- a dozett kinOj those 
known as M-aifnavatuna, Pratistold, Brahmanan-- 
chchhansi and Prastota shall each recfflve a half Of the- 
Dakshina of the formpr (;>., six kine each); the priests: 
of the third set (tchchkavak, Nashtni, A. nidhra. 
and I Pratiharta) shall each h3=ve. a third part of tho^r 
Daki.hin&: (of a principal priest, «>., four kine each), 
and the priests of the- fourth set {Grdva$tut, Unnita^, 
Pota and Suhrahmanya) shall each have a quarter part 
of the Bakshina of ^ principal priest v«--^-> they shall 
have three kine each.t (210) 

* The text Ckdpyanahkraye, which KuUuka explains by 
Soma'Ttakannr^akatatn, ^ c!t.rt or hiTtow eniplojced ta- bring- the 
soma plant to the hall of sacrifice. In the Rick. 19 of the Sukta^ 
IX (XLl) of the second Ashtaka (Eighth Adhyaya of the Rigvedaj 
we find a reference to these carts or barrows which, ate placed in 
front of the hall of sacrifice ; north and south of an alfar erected 
outside.. Tha Sakatas are requested, according to Sayana, to 
proceed to, the west part of the northern Vedi, oe altar ; accord- 
ing to Katyayana, they are also termed Havirdhdnas, oblation> 
containers, and part of the ceremony consists in dragging them, 
into different positions at difFerMit periods accompanied by appror 
priate Mantras which are given in Yajar Veda. V. 14-31^ 

•|- The sixteen are thus enumerated by Kulluka Bhatta, in, 
the order and proportion in which they are entitled- to share in a< 
Dakshina of a hundred cows-, being arranged in four classes,, 
of I which the first four are severally the heads, and th© 
others subordinate to them, in. the same course of succession :—. 
I. ffotri, Adhwaryu, Udgktri and Brahman, are to. have 



Manu Samhita, 285, 

The- shares of several men, jointly dDing a work; 
ai this 'world, should' be respectively determined 
by applying the above-said principle (of division ef 
Dajishinii, [ziiy^ 

twelve each, or fqrty-eight in all. ^ Maitrc^varmia. PratistotrJ. 
Brahtnanachchhansi, and, Pratiharitri, six each, or twenty- 
fOlir. 3. Achchavaka, N^shtri, Agnidhra and Prati/tarttri, four,- 
each, or sixteen,; and' 4. Gravadut, Niitri,,ati&iubyahmanya, three 
each, or in all twelve ; malc|Hg- up the total of one hundre<^;. 
EAmanatfia, in his commentary on the Amara KasKa, vii. 17, 
also gives the names of the sixteen priests, w<ith a few variations 
frpm KuLLUKA. GrcLvastut. is his reading, instead of, Gravadut,, 
and it" is tjie more usual one ; and in place of the Prastotri Nftri,. 
and Polri. he gives, Prasthatri, Prasastri- an^- Balachchha : W-B 
have the Potri repea^dly named in the text of the ^tcA, as well' 
as th« Prasastri. Ifi the Aitafeya Brahm^na b. vii. I, the six-, 
teen priests to whom portions of the ofFering^area^signed are als(^. 
enunierated with some modifications, having, instead of the 
Pratistetri, Grcmaduf, Neiri, and Subrahmanya, of the fir^t list, 
! Pratiprasthatri, Upagairi, A'treya, afld Sadasya. The same 
aiUthori-ty-,- however, adds as priest not included ia the sixteen, 
Cravastut, Unnetri, Subrahmanya, and the Samitri, immolatoii 
wljen a Brahman. In Madhava's commentarjj on the Nyaya, 
maih. vis(.a,ra oi Jaimini,' ior ao, extract from which Lam in-, 
de^bted to,Dr-> Gold^tucker, he enumerates _the. sixteen priests a«. 
classed in four orders, following the authority- of Kumaril Bhatta, 
much to the same eflFect as-KuLi-UKA ; they are : I. iTie Adhwaryu, 
Pi-atiprasthatri, and Unnetri-;. 2. t,he- Brahma, _ Brahmanachch-. 
hansi, Agmdhra and.Potri a-tke Udgatri, Prasfoiri,\Prfiiiharttri,, 
znd, Subrahtnanya ; And 4. ihe Hutri, Maitrhvaruna, Achchha- 
lidka, and Gravasfut. The four first. are especially charged with 
the ceremonial of th* Kfl/Mj'-^P'^fio r: the next four superintend, 
the whole acpording to the ritual of the thaee, Vedas ; the thiiyt 
qlass . qbant the hym^, especially, of the Sama Veda, and the- 
fpurth repeat the hymns of.tlje Rich; the head of each clas&: 
receives the entire Dakshina, or- gratuity ; the second, one-half-; 
the third, one-third-; and the fourth, a quarter :,th9 several func^ 
tjions-are not very explicitly described. 



3^6; Matm Samkiiiti, 

One, who has given, or has promised', to give- at 
small) sum of money to a person for a religious rite', 
^ajt get back the- money or withhold the. gift in the^ 
event ofthfelatter's failure to perform the' same. (212) 

If the- supplicant, out o£ greed or foolishness^ &ils: 
to refund the money to the giver, the king shall fine^ 
fegn a.~Suvarna (gold mohur) for-the theft. (2i?3) 

Thus is "described the lajv. relating to malefeasance; 
in respect of trusts. or deposits ; now I shall discourse- 
on (the law, relating^^ito) non-payment of. wages (to> 
servants, etC;) (^14) 

A, servant, wor.kipg for a stipulated pay> if he rer 
&ses to do, without being sick or indisposed, the. work. 
j^greedupon;out of.insolencQ;Or impertinence, shall be- 
punished with a fine of eight kriihnalas of gold ; andi 
the wages shall not be paid, to .him-. (21-5^ 

(But) if' he had,been really ill, and if after recovery- 
he resumes his work as originally.-agreed,.upon, he shall 
be entitled to his pay, dpCrto him. for howsoever long- 
a period (?i6) 

He, who fails, (to. get the stipulated" work done by 
others), when ill, or refuses to dp it himself when well,, 
shall get no wages, even, ifi a very small part of the- 
work is lefE undone^ (217^ 

Thus the law relating to the payment- of wages haSr 
been fully set forth, now I" shall discourse on the law 
relating to l^aach of. prpmise-or coBtract. (218) 

Him, who, having promisedt on oath to abide by the; 
Bulesof the-guild.or assembly of his village or country, 
fereaks that promise. (A^., transgresses the- rules) out of' 
greed, (the; king) should, banish from- the- country. (219);, 

Havjng thus punished the- breaker of promisej (thct- 



Mnnu Samhilli. 2B? 

iiiWg shall impdsfe upon him) a fine of fdur smarnas or 
six Nish/fas, or one hundred silver coins. (220) 

A virtuous kirtg shall adopt this law of penalty 'iie.-f 
inflict these penalties on) in respect of persons who 
have violated their donlpacts with th«ir caste-gmids 
or village-assemblies. (221) 

ii J, who, having purchased or sold an article repents 
his sale or purchase, must rfeturh it' (to the seller or 
purchaser) within ten days of the sale or bargain. (222) 

After the expiry of ten days such an article must 
not he given or taken ; for giving or taking it (after 
the lapse of ten days) the king shall punish the giver 
or the taker) with a fine of six hundred Panas. (2231 

Him, who gives a faulty girl in marriage without 
ineiitioning the defect, let the king puiiish with a fin'^ 
of ninety-six Panas. (2^4) 

He, who, out Of Spite, calls a virgin, Unvirgiil, shall 
be fined a hundred Panas, on his failure, to substantiate 
his statement. (225) 

Nuptial Mantras arte related to (Hi., established 
on ■ virgins,* and they are never applicable in respect 
of unvirgined brides, inasmuch as they stand outside 
the pale of {Hi. are bereft of ; all religious rites. (226) 

* The text has Kanya which Kolluka his explaitled by 
Akshatayotn, which is ordinarily interpreted td mearl a girl 
who has not menstruated. It, would have been far iJiof^ 
desirable, if the celebrated commentator could hive tlsed 
any other term less equivocal afld less confounding. The 
intention of the author is plain enough, and we would prefer to 
explain KaHyd by Akshiinna-Sati'Chchhada (a girl with un- 
ruptured hymen, which is the recognised evidence of virginity 
in a girl). The marriage of a girl, after menstruation, is not con- 
demned by Manu, nor does his Samhita depict her status as a 
wife in any way inferior to that of one married before the age 



258 Ma mi Sbmhiln, 

The nuptial Mantras impart the status cA a wife, 
=aiid the rite of Suptapudi (walking seven steps), gone 
through by the bride, completes the creation of wife- 
hood. <22^) 

In whatsoev'er transaction (i.e., not only in a sale, 
or purchase, or payment of wages), him, who shall have 
any cause of cdmplaint, the king 'feteill gif* this equit- 
able relief in accordance with the abovesaid rules. (228) 

L 

ot puberty. In the Vetse X'C of the IX. Chapter we find that, an 
unmarried girl, after mehstruation, is -enjoined to live for thred 
3nsars in her father's house, and to seek out a husband thereafter ; 
and the verse XCIII. of the same Chapter exempts a man, marrying 
such a girl, from the obligation of paying a dowry to her father. 
The right of using Vediac Mantras in marriages of pregnant 
biides, and the privilege of recognising such marriages as sacre- 
ments were not denied to 't'h'6v!patties thereto by Maliu, as would 
from Ya Garbhini Samskiiyati or Vadhu Kanyd Samudbhabam 
etc. In respect of the Gandharva form of marriage, which 
» may be solemnised even after its actual consunimation- by the 
couple, Devala enjoins that Vediac Mantras and rites should be 
respectively recited and gon* through 6n the Occasion of its 
solemnization before the nuptial fire. (Gdndharvesha Vivdheshtt 
punar Vaivdhika Vidhik ; Kartavyas'cha tribhirvariiai/t Samaya- 
ndgni Sdkshikah), The couplet in the ninth chapter of this 
Samhita whi'gh lays down that 4 man Of thirty should marry a 
handsome girl of tyrelve (Trinsadvarsho-dvahet Kanydm hridydm 
Dvddas'aiidrshikim) does ilot necessarily suggest that girls should 
be married before pubeirty, since menstruation has been knovvn to 
occur in many Cases earlier than that age. What the couplet 
does at best is to fix the highest desparity of age allowable 
between the married couple. The intention of the Samhita is to 
ensure the highest sanctity of marriage and this verse evidently 
contemplates that a bride must be a chaste virgin in order to be 
consecrated with the sacrament of marriage. (Dharmay Vivdh2\ 
which the loss of her virginity before the wedlock does not entitle 
her to claim. , 



Manu Satnhita. 28i^ 

Now I sliall duly discourse (on the law relating to) 
'disputes lietWeen owners and keepers of cattle, arising 
out of their (respectivej Short-cdniings {i.e., negligenC^i 
or oniissions). (229) 

The keeper of afl animal, niade over to' him for 
"tending, sh^li be arisWefable for any injury done to it 
"during the day, while its owner shall be answerable for 
an injury done to it iii his house during the night ; but if 
the terms of tending be otherwise ii. e., for the day 
and night) the keeper shall be answerable for injuries 
done to it both in the day and liight. (230) 

A cowherd, who has agreed to take milk in lieu 
'of his Wages, shall milch with the consent of thd 
owner, the best 'ohfe imong (each group of) ten cows. 
In the absence of a stipulation for any other form of 
Vages, this should be held as the (Standard) wages of 
cow-keepters. (231) 

If an animal strays ibut of sight, Or is killed by 1 
reptile or, by falling into a pit (lit uneven ground) 
through the wilful negligence of the keeper of his 
duties, the keeper shall be bound to make good its loss 
(to the owner .of the beast. (2321 

If a beast be stolen by a gang of thieves, who have 
perpetrated the crime 'with the beat of drum, the 
keeper of the flock shall not be liable to make good it^ 
loss if he informs its owner of the fact at the proper 
tirne and place. (233) 

If a beast dies a natural death, its keeper shall cut 
off its ears, skin, hairs, bladder, sineWs, gall-stones, or 
'Other bodily appendages which may testify to its natural 
death, and show theiti to its owner (for his better 
conviction). (234) 

In the ab^nce of the'flock-keeper, if a wolf attacks 

2,1 



•^jSjO Manu Sam'hi'ta, 

'the flock anS carries away a beast, the flock-keepeJ 
shall be answerable for, and liable to make.good the 
loss of, that animal to its owner, 435) 

But if a wolf darts upon and kills one of the animals, 
grazing in flocks in a wood in his presence, the flock* 
keeper shall not be answerable ifor the death of that 
animal to its owner.) (236) 

A strip of laftd to the extent of four hundred cubits 
or to the width ot three large sticks at the outskirt of 
a .village should be set apart for pasturage ; a ground of 
thrice as much measure should be kept reserved for the 
purpose at the outskirt of a town ot city. (237) 

If the cattle graze on and destroy the crops standi 
ing on an unfenced ground, adjoining the pasture-Iand> 
the king shall inflict no penalty on th« cattle-keepers 
<for such destructions of crops.) (238) 

Such a land {i.e, the one adjoining or close to the 
pastwe ground) should be enclosed with a fence or en=- 
closure over which a camel would not be able to see, 
and too dense to allow a dog or a hog to thurst its nosQ 
or snout into it. (239) * ■ 

If a flock of cattle, attended by its keeper, tres- 
passes on an enclosed field near the road side, or at th@ 
outskirt of a village, or close to a pasture ground (and 
grazes upon the growing crop), the king shall fine him a 
hundred panas \ the owner of the field is bound to keep 
them off, if the cattle, unattended by the keeper, 
attempt to enter upon it. (240) 

If the cattle trespass and graze on fields other 
than those described above, the keeper shall be punish- 
ed with a fine of one Pana and a quarter ; but under all 
circumstances he shall be liable to make good the loss 
to the owner of the field, (241) 



Mlanu SamkilS. 39 1' 

No penalty exists in respect of the dfestruction of &i 
crop by arcow within tendays of. her parturition, or by 
a bull branded with the sign of a discus or trident, or- 
by a bull; dedicated to a deity, whether attended by the- 
the cowherd or otherwise. This is^ the decision of'^ 
Manu: (2421 

In the event of the destruction of the crop through- 
the negligence or omission of the owner of the field, 
he shall be punished with a fine of ten times the? 
measure of grain payable (as revenue) to theking (in/ 
respect of that field) ; and half of the above fine - shalL 
be the penalty when the loss will occur through acts of 
the owner's servants and without his knowledge. (243) 

Conformably- to thesexules the- virtuous king shall, 
settle disputes between keepers and owners of animals,, 
arising out of their respective omissions- or short- 
comings,. (244) 

In, a dispute as to boundaries between- two- villages,-, 
the boundary should be determined in the month of ' 
Jdhhtha (May Jime^ after the -border embakments have; 
%become fully apparent (onthe recedence of water. (245)' 

Trees such as the Nyagrodha,.Aihvattha, Kins'uka,. 
S'almali, Sdla, Ta/a, and A'xAm should be. made ij.e.,. 
planted to dfemarcate) boundaries. (246). 

Boundaries, demarcated.by shrubs> bamboos, various: 
kinds of Shamisj, ( ), creepers, mud-rpillars, or,- 

Kuvjaka plants are never obliterated. (247) 

At the meeting, of boundaries, tanks; pond§, foun-- 
tains or reservoirs, of water should be. made, or divine ; 
temples should' be erected. (248) 

Considering, the blunders- committed, by, men vkt 
determining or ascertaining boundaries, other hiddeni 
signs of boundary-demarcation should be made. (249) 



29? Man Samhtta.; 

Stones, bones, cow's hairs, husks bf p^djiy, aghes^ 
Ipjts of brolicn pottery, dried cow-dung cakes, bricks,^ 
charcoals, broUen bits of baked clay and s^nds. (250) 

(Or in other words all things which the earth may- 
not consurrie in course of tiiine should.be buried under^. 
neath the soilj for the purpose pf fixing tfeg bpun-_ 
daries. (251) 

The king sh«H lay down, the boundary between, the- 
two contending (villages) by the abovesaid dgmaicating- 
substances, having determined it by previous possession, 
and (the existence of) water-coyrses. (25-2) 

In the case wtjere the. [existence of boundary-jnarks; 
would. giv§ rise to, a suspicion the testimony of witnesses, 
■would settle the dispute as. to the boundary. (253.) 

He {i.e., thg king) shall interrogate^ thQ witnqsses- 
as to the bonndary iparks in the presence, of the dis-. 
putants and the inmates of the.sam^ village.' (254) 

Statements made by the witnesses regarding the- 
determination of boundaries, together with their names, 
the king shall cause^to be entered into t.h^ bonndary-. 
paper (jrecord), (,255) 

The. w:itnesses, clad in red. garments, decked with; 
garlands of, red flowers round their necks, and carrying - 
loose earth on their heads, shall swear as to the. cor-. 
rectness of the boundary l?y their respective goodi 
deeds. (256) 

Their true testimony shall purify these trnthful; 
witnesses, but the king shall punish each of them, 
with a fine of tw:o hundred, panfis, if they give false, 
evidence. (257) 

In the absence of witnesses, four persons, living 
?| the four angles of ithe village, {S'amantas), sUaU 



Manu Safnhita. 293; 

^.ssinjiuously determine, the boundary iit the presence, 
of the king. (258) 

' In the absence of Samantas, persons who are. the. 
members of old-established families in the- village, shall 
be cited as. witnesses, and in ca.ses Where even they 
wouldi be unavaila|),Ie the. foresters, [such as trappers,, 
fowlers, cowherds, "/Ta/wfl >5^a J .(fishermen)) herb-collec- 
tors, snakercatchers, and grainrpickess]' shall be interr:. 
^ogated> (259-^^360,) ' 

Interrogated by him> whatever they will say as to, 
the mode of demarcating the boundary between, the, 
two villages the king shall, lay dpwn the boundary iuj 
accordance therewith. \26x) 

In demarcating the boundaries of a field, well, pond*. 
orch,aj:d, or a house, the testimony of a. man, living in., 
the neighbourhood and. cognisant thereof, shall be^ 
taken. (262)1 

The king- shall punish, each of these witnesses with, 
a fine of Madhyama Sdhasa (five hundred Panas), if 
they giye fajse evidence in respect of l^g boiinr- 
dary. (^63), 

For having wrongfully taken, possession of a house, 
or orchard by intimidation, one shall bp. pmrished; withj 
^ fine of five hundred Panas, for having unknowingly- 
taken possession, thereof] one. shajl be; punished, with, 
a fine of tw^o hundred /"awflj. (264), 

In the case;wher6it wjU be: impossible to (rightly),, 
demarcate the boundary, the king sh^U go to the- spot 
in person and. allot the lands (in, djspute) to such (of- 
the disputants) to whom, they may be most useful. (265) 

Thus the law {i.e., procedure) relating to boundary^ 
disputes, has been laid dpw,n in. its entirety ; hqncefortb. 



294 Mvnu Samhitn. 

I* shall! discourse- on the law relatittg to the use ofc/ 
abusive language. (266) « 

For having used any abusive language to a.BrAh-. 
mana, a Kshatriya ^all be punished with a fine- of one- 
hundred Panas ; whereas for the same offence a. Vais'yau 
shall be punished with a fine of one hundred . »id fifty- 
or two hundred fawaj ; and aS'udraj-.with a corporal 
punishment (flogging, etc) (t^dli) 

For having used abusive language to a Kshatriya a 
Br&hmana shall be punished with a fine oL fifty Panas ; 
while for having used abusive language to a Vais'ya 
Qr S'udra he shall.be punished with a fine of twenty-five 
or twelve Panas. i269i^ 

In the case of abusive language among members of 
the twice-born castes, the offender shall be punished, 
with a fine of twelve Panax, while in the event of filthy, 
^nguage- being used the offender shallij be punished, 
with a fine of double value (twenty four Panas.) X^ep) 

If a S'udra uses any offensive language to a member 
ol the twice* bom caste^(Brahmana)i his tongue shall be; 
slipped off, inasmuch as he-cS'udra^ has. originated from, 
a vile place (o€ the body of Supreme Brahma). (2701 

If a S^udjra abuses a member of thetwiccTiom. order 
by mentioning his name and caste, a burning tong 
to the length of ten flijgexg. shall be.- inserted, into his. 
mouth. ((271)1 

If a S'udra. insolently gives-, any rdigibus-or morali 
advice to>ai 6r&hma.Da, the; king shall cause: %ot oil to* 
be poured into his^ mouth and ears. (27'2), 

For having cast unjust aspersions, on one<s learning,, 
cotmtry, caste, deeds, or bodily features, the kiq^ 
shall punish the offender with. 9, fine of two, hundred 
Panasi. (273), 



'/lia-Hu SainhiPa, ^95 

{''or having taunted a than fox his phygifcal deformity' 
(lit. for having "called a lamfe man, lame, and a biin& 
ma;n blind) or for having cortimitted a similar offence out 
"of insolence, the king shall puftish the offender with k 
•fine of one Karshd Panam (sixteeft Pahas. (2^4) 

For having used abusive language to his riiothfei*-, 
'father, wife, brother, *«r son, and for ndt having giveft 
way to his preceptor, the king shaifl pu»ish the offender 
with a fine of one hundred Panas. (275) 

In the case where a Brihmana has used abusivd 
language 'to a Kshatriya, and iice versa, 'the kiftg shall 
punish the Brihrnana with a fine of the Prathant'a 
Sahasa class (one hundred Punas) and the Kshatriya 
with a fine of the Madhyama iahasa ctos (twO 
hundred and fifty Panas. (276^ 

For such a (quarrel^ having occftrred betweeft a 
Yais'ya and a S'udra, the Vais'ya shall be punisheii 
"with a fine Ksf the Pratkama .'i/ihaia das§, and the 
S'udra, without having had his tongue dipped off, shall 
Ije punished with a fine of the Madhyama Sihasa class. 
This is the decision of law in reSpedt of punishmenl 
(foi these offences). (27^) 

Verily thts the punishment fof the use of abusive 
language has been described. Now I shall discourse 
on the law relating to assault or battety. (278) 

The limb With Which a member of a vile caste shall 
assault a member of a superior caste shall be cut off. 
This is the injunction of Manu. (27,9) 

If a member of a Vile caste raises his hand against, 
or assaults, a member of a superior caste with his 
hand, his ^hand shall be cut off by way of punishment ; 
if he commits the same offence with his leg out of 
anger, his leg shall be cut off^ (280) 



296 lii'dnu S'dthhtta. 

If a vile person attiiempts to sit '6n the same seat 
Or cushion with a mah of superior caste, the kfng shall 
punish him by branding his waist and exiling him froni 
the country, or by lopping 'off his hips. (281) 

If any one insolently spits on the person (of a 
Brahni^aa) the kirtg shall cause his lips to be cut off; 
if any one urinates or passes flatus (out of insolence) 
on the person of*a Brihmaaa' the king shall cause his 
penis or rectum to be cut 'Off. '(■2'82) 

If any body pulls him (BrAhmana) by the hair 'Or 
beard, the king shall cause his (oflfender's) hand or leg 
to be cut Off, if any body pushes him (Brihmapa) 
by the n6ck the 'king shall causes his testes to be 
severed. (283) 

A Breaker of ^kin or drawer of blood (on the body 
of one of his own caste) shall be punished with a fine 
of one hundred Pdnas, a piercer of flesh, with a fine 
tt^f six Nishkas \ and breaker of bone with exile. (284) 

Any one injuring the factors by which the trees 
iaild vegetables may be used and enjoyed (such as 
fruits, flowers^ etc.) shall be punished with penalties 
deterniined according to the gravity or lightness of his ' 
offence. (2^5) 

If men Or beasts are grieviously hurt, let (the 
offender) be punished with a punishment proportionate 
to the greviousness of the hurt. (286) 

In (a case of assault attended with) the injury of a 
limb or organ, or with a wound or bleeding, the king 
Shall cause the assaulter to pay to the assaulted person 
the costs of the medical 5 treatnient necessary for his 
cure; in default whereof he shall be punished with a 
fine, double of such costs in Value. (287) 



Manu Samh'i'ta. 2^1 

j^or having kndwiAgly or unknowingly done any 
Wischief to another's property (or go'ods), the offender 
shall satisfy the injured party by paying off its price or 
by replacing the same, and also he shall pay a fine 
of equal value to the king. (288) 

For having knowingly or unknowingly destroyed 
a leather, or 4 leathern article, a wooden or earthen 
vessel, or a flower, bulb or fruit, (belonging to another) 
one shall pay a penalty of five times its value. (289) 

Except under the ten circumstances (hereunder 
mentioned) the carman, pAsSenger and the owner of a 
car shall be liable to punishment. (^90) 

If a mischief happens to any beast or person (on the 
road) on tk'e breaking of the nose-rope (ot a bullock 
yoked to a bullock cart), on the breaking of the shaft 
<of a horse car), on account of the uneven nature of 
the ground, on the breaking of a wheel or its spoke, 
on the breaking of the straps, reins, or headrope, or 
even after being loudly warned of , the danger, (the 
carman, or carowner etc ,) shall not be liable to punish- 
ment. This is what Manu has said (on the subject.) 
(291 — 292) 

If for the inefficiency of the driver any mischief (oi: 
accident) happens (to a person or beast), the owner of 
the car shall be punished with a fine of two hundred 
Panas (for having employed an unskillful carman. (293) 

If the driver (car-man) be an efficient one, he alone 
shall be liable to a fine of two hundred Panas ; other- 
wise the riders, car owner etc., shall be each liable to 
a fine of oiie hundred Panas. (894) 

If for being obstructed in his way by beasts or carts, 
A charioteer, while driving his chariot, happens to kill 
38 



2g8 Manu Samhita, 

any creature, he shall be sumfflarity punished (for that 
rash adt.) (295) 

, For thus having killed a man, he shall be summarily 
pjmished with the penalty for theft (/. e., with a fine 
of one thousand Panas and not with the punish- 
ment for man-slaughter), while the penalty shall be 
half as much {i.e., five hundred Panas) if he chances to 
kill a large qua(Sruped such as, a cow, elephant, horse 
or camel) (296) 

Two hundred Panas shall be the penalty for killing 
small beasts under the circumstances, while that in res- 
pect of killing an auspicious beast (such as, deer) or bird 
(such iis a parrot, etc*, is fifty Panas. (297) 

Five Mdshas (of silver) is the penalty for (thus) kill- 
ing as ass, goat o{ lamb, while a Mdsha of silver fe the 
penalty for killing a dog or at hog (under the circum- 
stances) (298) 

A wife, son, servant, disciple, or uterine brothery 
found guilty of an offence, should be punished with a 
chord or with (a foliated) bamboo stick. (299) 

They shall be chastised on the lower parts of their 
bodies, and never upon the upper limbs. For having, 
flogged them in any other fashion one shall be liable to 
punishmeftt for theft. (300) 

Thus the law relating to assault and battery has' 
been fully set forth ; now I ^all discourse on the law 
relating to theft. (301) 

The king shall assiduously endeavour to repress the 
thieves in his kingdom ; by repressing theft the fame 
and kingdom of a king are augmented. (302) 

Always worshipped is the king who grants protec- 
tion from thieves (to his honest subjects); verily 
augmeuteth his sacrifice (of sovereignty) which grants 



Manu Samhita. 299 

perpetual protection (to his subjects)*as its Dakshinds 
(honorarium) (303) 

The king receives a^sixth part of the religious merit 
of his subjects whom be in every way protecteth, and 
a sixth part of their sins if he fails to properly pro- 
tect thenj. (304) ' 

Whatever Vediac studies do his subjects do, what- 
ever sacrifices do they perform, wjiatever gifts they 
make, and whatever prayers they oflFer to the deity, 
through his properly protecting them he enjoyeth a 
sixth part of the merit thereof. (305) 

By lawfully protecting his subjects, and by punish- 
ing those who deserve punishment, the king acquires 
the merit of a sacrifice which is performed daily with a 
Dakshind of a hundred thousand cows. (306) 

The king, who without protecting his subjects rea- 
lises from them a sixth part of the produce of their 
fields, revenue, duties, royalties* and fines, goes to hell 
alfter death. (307) 

Thp wise have called such a king, who realises a 
sixth part (of tjie agricultural products of his subjects 
without giving them the safety of life and property, as 
the filth-taker of all. (308) 

A law-breakjng, avaricious, non-protecting, oppres- 
sive, king who sucks up the life-blood of his subjects 
{i. e. squeezes out their subftance by means of unjust 
and oppressive taxes) should be regarded as one (al- 
ready) doomed to a vile existence (after death.) (309) 

By the three lawful expedierits of imprisonment, 

* The text has Praiibhagam, Kolluka explains it by Phala- 
kusuma, S'akn-irin&dyuphyanam Pratidinagrahyam Tolls or 
royalties of fruitSi flowers, edible bulbs, ha/s, etc, daily piid to 
the king. 



300 Manu Samhita. 

enchainment and various forms of corporeal punish- 
ment fsuch as the mutilation of a limb, etc.,) let hin* 
assiduously repress the miscreants. (3101 

By repressing the wrong doers and encouraging 
the virtuous, kings are constantly purified as Brdh- 
manas are purified by the performance of religious 
sacrifices. (311), 

A king, seeking^his own welfare shall always toler 
rate the calumnious remarks made by suitors, defend- 
ants, infants, old men and sick folks regarding him- 
self. (312) 

He who bears with ill-reports (adverse criticisms) 
made by the aggrieved is glorified in heaven ; he who 
out of pride of wealth can not tolerate such criticisms 
goes to hell for that. (313) 

A thief, with his hairs dishevelled, must run to the 
king, confessing his own guilt and asking him to punish 
his self. (314) 

Carrying a cudgel, or a club of catechu wood, or a 
sharp spear, or an iron rod on his shoulder. (315) 

Killed, or alive after being punished by the king, a 
thief is exonerated from his crime ; but the king who 
lets off a thfef without punishment himseif acquires 
the guilt of theft. (316) 

The sin of a fseticide is transferred to the person 
who partakes of his food, the husband of a faithless 
wife obtains the sin of her adultery, the sin of the dis- 
ciple is contaminated to his preceptor, and the sin of a 
yajdtnana (institutor of a religious rite) is transmitted 
to the priest officiating at the ceremony. (317) 

I After having committed crimes, men, punished 
by the king, become free from impurity and go to 



Manu Samhili. 351' 

heavea ftfter death as honest and virtuous men 
do., (318) 

He who has stolen a pitcher from a well, or broken 
down a water house,* shall be punished with a fine of 
one Masha and liable to return the stolen good to its 
owner. (319) 

For having stolen paddy of more thjn ten kumbha^ 
measures a person shall be punished with death (corpo- 
real punishment or mutilation of a limb) ; for having 
stolen paddy of a lesser measure he shall be punished 
with a fine of eleven times the quantity of the stolen 
paddy, which should be restored to the owner, (320) : 

Capital punishment should be inflicted on a thief 
for having stolen a tula weight of gold or silver or 
precious (silk) cloths, weighing more than a hundred 
falas. (221) 

Mutilation of a hand should be the pimishment for 
stealing the abovesaid articles, numbering more than 
fifty and less than one hundred. For stealing less than 
fifty (pieces of cloth) the penalty should be eleven 
times their value. (322) 

Death should be the punishment for stealing jewels 
and precious gems belonging to high born ladies and 
men. (323) 

For stealing large quadrupeds, weapons, and medi- 
cines, the king shall inflict proper punishments in consi- 
deration of the hardness of the time and the gravity 
of the offence or otherwise. (324) 

Half of the' leg of a thief should be cut away for 

• The text has Praph {which means a house where water is 
given to the paisers. 

f Two hundred Palas make one Drona, and twenty Drenas 
make one liumbha. 



302 Manu Samhita. 

having stolen and threaded the nose pf a Bf^hmana's 
cow, or for robbing an animal intended to be itaraolated 
in a sacrifice (325) 

For the theft of cottou-threads, cotton, enzyme, 
cow-dung;, treacle, milk-curd, thickened milk, whey, 
cordials or hays. (326) 

(Or of) bamboo made vessels,. sialts, earthen vessels, 
earth and ashes as well. (307) 

(Or of all kinds) of fish, birds, oil clarified butter, 
meat, honey, or any other animal produce. (328J 

Or of other articles, wines, intoxicating drugs, 
articles of food, or confection, the penalty shall be a 
fine double the value of the article, stolen. (329) 

For the theft of green paddy, of a shrub or creeper, 
or of any other kind of unthreshed grains the penalty 
sha.ll be a fine of five krhhnalas. (330) 

For the theft of threshed paddy, ^&kas, edible root? 
or bulbs, or fruits by one who is not related to their 
owner the punishment shall be a fine pf one himdied 
Panas, whereas the fine shall' b^ fifty P^nas^M i\\s 
oifender is found to be a relation of th^ owner. (331) 

The forcible taking or carrying aw?iy ©f a thing 
(with the knowledge and in the presence of the owner) 
constitutiBs what is called Sakasa (robbery), taking 
away ot a thing in the absence lOf its owner constitutes 
^^f ;»«»», and the hiding of a thing after having stolen 
it is called Chauryam. (332) 

Hirar who has sitolen any of the abovesaid articles 
made suitable for human use or has robbed the sacred 
fire from the fire-chamber, the king shall punish with 
a fine of the Prathama Sdhasa class {i.e., one hundred 
Panas.) (333) 



Mattu Samhita. 3o3- 

With Airhatsoever limb of his body one shall at- 
tempt to commit theft, the kiflg, for checking the 
Recrudescence of that crime, shall cause that limb to 
be cut off. (334) 

A fathSi', preceptor, relation, mother, wife, son or 
priest, who fails to discharge his specific duties, should 
be punished by the king. (335) 

For the offence for which an ordinary person would 
be punished with a fine of one Kdrshdpanam, a penalty 
of one thousand K&shapanam should be inflicted on 
the king, if he is found guilty thereof. This is the con- 
clusion. (336) 

For having committed theft, a S'udra, cognisant 
of the law, shall be punished wkh a fine eight times 
the usual one in value ; a Vais'ya, with a fine sixteen 
times ; a Kshatriya, with a fine thirty-two times ; and a 
Brdhmana, with a fine sixty-four, hundred, or hundred 
and twenty-eight times the usual one in value. 
(337— 338) 

The taking of truits and roots of trees, fuel wood 
for fire, and hays for cattle, if they belong to others,, 
does not constitute theft, 1339 

A Brihmana, if he wishes to take even Jiis just fees 
for teaching (a pupil) or perforniing a religious sacrifice) 
from the hand of one whom he knows to be a thief 
fand which money he knows to have been obtained 
by theft) shall be liable to punishment as a thief. (340) 

Por having taken two pieces of sugar cane and two 
edible roots from another's field, an indigent, way-faring 
BrAhmana, shall not be liable to punishment. (34 1> 

Wrongful detainers of stray cattle, as well as those 
who let loose the horses tied to their posts in a stable 



304 Man Satnhtt6> 

and 'those who rob slaves, horses and chariots should 
be punished as thieves {lit. are guilty of theft.) (342) 

A king, by thus repressing the thieves (in his realm) 
acquires renown iii this world and enjoys perfect 
felicity in the next. (343) 

Wishing to attain the status of Indra (king of the 
deities) and an etrnal fame, let the king show not the 
least indulgenee for a moment to a robber. (344) 

c 

A robber should be regarded as a worse miscreant 
than a thief, assaulter or foul-mouthed person (345) 

The king who tolerates (the depredations of a 
robber soon incurs the ill will (of his Subjects) and 
meets his doom. (346) 

Let not a king, out of feelings of friendship, or in 
Consideration of a large pecuniary gain, let off unpunish- 
ed robbets, who are the dread of all creatures. (347) 

When (the practice of) virtue is obstructed (by 

tyranny), when the eternal division of castes is any 

wise jeopardised, Brdhmanas may wield arms (for the 
preservation of law). (348) ' 

He, who destroys life (commits man^^slaughter) for 
the defence of his life and property, in a justiand fiiir 
fight, or for the protectioii of women and Br^manas, 
does not bebome thereby morally condemnable. (349; 

A preceptor, old man, infant, Bfiahmana, or Vastly 
erudite person, coming as an A'iatayin,* must be killed 
without the least hesitation, (350) 



* Agnid* Garadas'chaiva S'astrapdni Dhandrpahah kshetrd 
idrdpahdricha S'adeti dtatiyinah. He Who administers poison, 
sets fire to his house, comes to assaul't him with a weapon, or 
robs him of his treasure, or deRles his mother or wife are said 
to be the siz Atatyanis (mortal enemies) of a man. ^ 



Manu Samhtta. 305 

Bykilling an /iVa^ijj//« the killer acquires no de- 
merit, inasmuch as it is anger that kills anger in fact 
in such a case. (35 ij 

The king, having clumsily mutilated thdr persons, 
shall eause the defilers of other men's wives to be bani- 
shed froni the country. (352) 

^ Since it is through such iften that hybridisation 
of *castes is eifected ; and intermixture ^ castes is the 
primal cause of vice which leads to universal destruc- 
tion. ^^5 3' * 

A man, who is known to have held incests with 
other men's wives before, if found conversing in soli- 
tude with another's wife, should be punished with a 
fine of the Prathama Sahasa class {i. e., one hundred 
Panas). (354) 

- , But a man, who is not impeached with an act of 
.previous incest, if found conversing in solitude With 
•another's wife for any just reason, shall not be liable 
to punishment, inasmuch as there is no delinquency 
'on/his part. (3^55) 

If one accosts, and converses with another's wife in 
-a* lonely wood or forest, or at a hbly pool or confi\jence 
of rivers, he shall be guilty of the offence jaf adultery 
{rtinishable with a fine of one thousand Panas. (356) 

Sending presents of scents and flower-garlands to 
•another's wife, cutting jokes with, or embracing her, 
touching her ornaments and catching hold of her wear- 
ing apparel, and eating, or sharing the same bed-stead, 
with her are acts which are said to constitute Stri- 
samgraha (adultery with another's wife) (357) 

A woman who tolerates being touched at het pri- 
vate lit., untouchable) parts by a man, and a man who 

39 



"3<3^ MuTttt Santhi'ta. 

'^tolerates being 'similarly touched by her are said to be 
i'guity of adultery- by mutual consent. (358) 

-A non-BrAhmana (S'udra', found guilty of adultery, 
^ shall i-be pimished with death, inasmuch as it is incum^ 
'bent on men of all the four castes to protect their wives 
-above (all other possessions). *(359) 

' Beggars, professional panegyrfst's, men initiated ifl a 
"sacrifice, and artisans (such as cooks, etc.,) may, if not 
•otherwise "^forbidden, ^speak with other men's wiVes 
i (while alene) (360) 

Forbidden to speak wfth another's wife, one must 
"not Converse with her. For thus conversing inspite of 
■•the warning the offender shaU be 'liable to a fine of one 
suvarna-{go\di Mohar.) (361) 

This tule does not hold good in respect of WiVes 
'of Chdranas (professional actors or musicians 1, A'tmopo' 
•jivins* and of those who sell their wive's embraces fof 
money, inasmuch as they deck out their wives for the 
embrace of others, or lie concea-led to help them (to 
carry on their obnoxious trade.) (362 

For having conversed with the above said females* 
maid-servants, and false female ascetics (nuns) in 
solitude, the offender shall be liable to pay a very 
small fine. (363) 

He, who de fries a maid, not «matiV«ly disposed, 
should be punislied (with the mutilation of his repro- 
ductive organ), but for having visited an amototis maid 
t)f his own caste one shall not be liable to corporeal 
punishment. (364) 

For sharing the bed of a man of superior Caste, 
a maid must not; pay any fine, for having carnally 

• Those who connive at the adultery of their Wives for money 
and live upon the earnings of their infidelity. 



Manu Samhita.^ , 397 • 

known, a man of inferior caste she should 1)0- kept m^ 
ciarcerated'in the house. (365) 

For. having visited a. womaai > of ^superior caste- a ? 
man of inferior caste must be punished with death ; 
Ijut if for having visited a girl of his own caste, the • 
father ofl the girli asks for ax,, money compeHsation,' 
(lit, duty) he shall have, to pay it to the father. (366) 

The fingers of him who forcibly ruptures thre- 
hymen of a virgin therewith shall be clipped off, ^nd .. 
he shall be further- liaWe. to pay a .,fine^.. of .six. hnndted : 
Panas. (36^^ 

Ai ^man, founds gviilty. of .destroying thfe virginity^ 
an amorous girl of .his own caste with his fingers, shalL 
have- his fingers clipped oflE!; and for checking the. 
rficrudescence of the. crime, the offender shall be^ 
f unished with a fine of two hundred Panas. (gjSS) 

A girl committing th© same- offence -upon another 
girl shall be pimished/ with stripes and a fine of twos 
hundred /'tf««j;: ^e- shall be' (further liable to pay a. 
compensation of j double valuei ( faur.^ hundred Pxinasy 
tx) the father of "(the-deflowered girl). (369), 

A wojnan found, guilty - of committing - the • same • 
offojice on the person of a gid- shall ha\«.' her head 
shavedr! and fingers clipped off; and thus mutilated) 
^e shall' he perambulated, oa an ass (round the , 
town;. (37©)- 

A wife, who out of pride of personal, beauty and : 
opulent relationship j has made transgressions against,; 
her husband,, the- king; shall cause to be devoured by. 
ferocious dogs- in a well-crowded locality. (371) 

The king shall cause the male miscreant (adulterer); 
%). he. laid down o;i a.hot bed of iron and.the public 



3oS » Manu Samhita. 

executioners shall cast logs of wood: iit the- fire-becfe 
till his body is consumed to ashes. (372) 

A person, found gAiilty of adultery withiti one year 
of his Jiaying been punished for the sanve offence, shall; 
be liable to double the penalty ; for squally visiting- 
a girl of uncQnsecrated caste ( 'V/7/j)/a).the:pftni3Jty is, 
the same as that for carnally knowing ^ Ch^mbil^ 
woman. (373). *- 

For having sexually visited a womaft of any twice- 
born caste, whether protected, or unprotected by her 
husband, a S'udra shall be punished 'with the mutila^ 
tion of his reproductive organ and a confiscation of 
all his goods and estates in the first named instance- 
{i.e., for knowing an unprotected twice-born woman), 
and; in the last named case he shall pay the penalty- 
with his life and all his f goods and estjates) will be- 
escheated to the sovereign. .374) 

A Vais'ya, found guilty of carnally knowing a pro- 
tected Br&hmaua woman, shall be punished, with im-- 
prisonment for one year, after which all his estates-- 
will be escheated to the king A Kshatriya, found 
guilty of the same offence, shall be punished with a, 
fine of one thousand Panas and his head shall be: 
shaved with urine. ( J75). 

A Vais'ya and a Kshatrity found gu^ty of carnally 
knowing ap unprotected , BrAhmana woman shall be- 
respectively liable to pay fived hundred and one thou- 
sand Panas (to the king.) (376) 

Either of them, found guilty of carnal knowledge- 
of a protected Brahmana woman, shall be punished as a 
S'udra guilty of the same offence and burnt in a hay 
fire. (377) 

For having forcibly ravished a protected; Brahmana. 



Manu Samhitn. 309' 

woman, a Br&hmana shall be punished with- a fine of 
one thoflsand Patins, for having know,n such a Brah- 
mana woipan with her knowledge and consent he shall 
be punished: with a, fine of five hundred Punas. (378) 

In respect of a, Brihmapa a death sentence must 
be commuted to one of shaving the hair of his 
head ; death-sentences may be passed on members o^' 
all other castes. (379) ' 

Let him (Uing) not kill a Brahmapa, even, if he. 
be found guilty of ^l,the crimeg ; hemustbj^nish him, 
(Br^hmana) from the realm unhurt and. with, all his a 
possessions, (380) 

A more heinous sin exists, not in.this world than:^ 
murdering (killing), a Brahmapa ; let not a. king even 
think of such a project in his, mind, (381 > 

If a, Vais'ya is found, guilty of the- carnal knowledge- 
of a protected Kshatriya, woman, or if a Kshatriya is 
folind. guilty of visiting the- bed. of a, protected. Vais'ya 
■woman, either of them, must be punished, with the; 
penalty laid down for the carnal knpwjedge.of an un- 
protected Brahmaaa woman. (382 j 

For having visited, the bed of a,protectedi Vais'ya,, 
or Kshatriya. woman, a. Brahmana shall be punished 
with a fine of one thousandi-. Panas.; a. ^ajs.'ya or a^ 
Kshatriya, guilty of the carnal knowledge cf a pro-, 
tected S;udra. woman, shaili be finejd; one_ l^housandt 
Panas. (383) 

For having carnally known an unprotected, 
Kshatriya woman, a. Vais'ya shall be punished with, 
a fine of five hundred Panas ; a Kshatriya, guilty- off 
the same offence, shall have the hair* of his head 
shaved with (ass's* urine) or hq shail pay a. fine of 
f,ve hundred Panas. (384), 



3i^o> Sf^inu Samfti/a-, 

For having' visited, the: bed. of an-, unprotected^ 
Kshatriya, Vais'ya, or S^udra woman^ i^Brahmaiia shall:* 
be: punished, \nth. a) fine: of five hundred' /'anaj; for- 
having gone unto a, vile-caste -woman, he-shall' be- liable- 
to .a. fine- of. one thousandi Panas. (385) . 

The king ir^^ whose- realm there exists not-a thief,! 
a defiler of another's, wife, a. foul-mouthed person, a 
robber, or an as^ulter attains the-region of- Indra (the^ 
king of the;celestials), (386) 

The.: repression of these- five kinds (of^miscreants)' 
h!^ a king in. his own. realm grants him suzerainty over - 
his compeers (contemporary sovereigns) and^ a; high-, 
fame in this world. (387)? 

Either of the Ka/awflfwa (institutor ofa religious- 
ceremony) who unjustly renounces a priest, capable- 
of performing ^that sacrifice), or the priest- who re-, 
nounces a Yajamdna, not in any way defiled, or- 
degraded, should', be- liable to pnyv- a fine-- of- one- 
hundred Panas. (388) 

It is not proper (for a. man) tfh desert his- mother^, 
father, wife, or son ; for having deserted any of-them> 
not ini any way degraded, the king^ shall punish himi 
with, a. fine- of six. hundred, /'a«fl5, (389) 

In a disptite among Brahmanas regarding the proper 
interpretation! 06 a procedure of riiueil (lit, domestic- 
sacrifice) the- king, for the reason of his owm well-, 
fare, shall refrain from gftgsihg any decisive opinion on 
the subji3«t. (39p)) 

In such a case., the king having, properly honoured 
^6; Brahmana (disputant^s), and> appeased- their anger 
by conciliatory words must proceed- to give> the proper 
iiiterpretatjon. of their duties, with the. help of. (pthejr), 
Brahmanas (of his court;. (391.) . 



Ih feormectioh with an auspidous ritfe iii \vhich it is 
^fceessasy to feed ti/^fenty Brihmanas, if a Brahmaaa 
^eisds others 'in «xclusion of Ms neighbours and the 
inmates of his house, he shall be liable to pay -a Bne 
-of one JfIisha(oi silver to the king.) (,392) 

A S^f^triya (i. e-, Veda-]iinosf\a^ Br4hHiana, 'failing 
'to feed a virtuous 5Vi?/^i>a '^(tieighbour or inmate of his 
iiouse) on the occasion of a rite of prosperity (/jV. 
4hat which con&tis progeny and prosperity such as, 
marpjagfe, et«.) shall give him twice as touch food, and 
'a fine of one Masha (of gold to the king.) (393^ 

A blind '«>t lame nian, an idiot, one above seventy 
.'years of age, and one who does any benefit to a Vedar- 
iknowing Srdhmana must be exempted from paying any 
■tax (or revenue to the king). 1394. 

Let, the -king always do honour to \i.e.y provide 
'for) a S'rotriyoy sick man, invalid, or infant, -as well 
-as to the indigent, high-born and the revered. (395) 

A washerman iftust gently wash the clothes on a 
Smooth-board of S'Mraali (Bombax Malabaricum) plank, 
•he naust not mix one s clothes with another's, nor give 
■©ne's clothes to another for use or wearing. 396 > 

For each ten Palam weight of cotton thread given 
to a weaver, he must retui'n eleven Palam weight of 
manufactured eloth ; otherwise he shall be liable to 
pay a fine of twelve Panas. (397) 

At toll stations or customs houses, the king shall 
receive a twentieth part of the profit on the price of 
an article, determined by men, expert in fixing the 
prides of commodities. (398) 

The king shall confiscate all the goods (estates etc.,) 
of him, who, out of greed, shall attempt to sell a 
commodity which is the king's monopoly, or to export 



2'li Idiirtu Sahthitil. 

'corartiodities whicli kre forbidden to be exporlfed 
(coiitra-bands) to forfeigii countries. (399) 

For having avoided the .pkblic highway or sold his 
,=goods in thfe ftight, or given out a lesser number (i. e., 
■a false manifest of) of his goods with a view to 
'defraud the toll duties or custoriis, one shall be liable 
to pay a fine eight times the value of the d&firauded 
'duties. (400 1 * 

In consideration df the distance from which an 
Article has come or to whieh it shall be despatched, 
■and for which period* must it be kept in stock and 
what prices it will obtain thereby, and the 6xpendi- 
• 'tures to be in6urred under these heads the king shali 
•fix the prices of articles of merchandise (401) 

At the end of each fifth day, or at the close of each 
fortnight, the king in the presence of the appraisers of 
^F^ces and in consideration of their stock in the lAarket 
sliall lay down the prices of Commodities. (402) 

Weights and measures of trade let the king 
lJ)ersoHally determine and lay do\^n> and let him exjftnine 
those weights and measures at the end of «acli six 
•months. (403) 

The freight for taking a vehicle across a, ferry is 
one P&'tia, that for taking a load, which can be carried 
i>y a mj.n, across a ferry is half a Pnna^ the freight for 
taking a beast or a woman Across a ferry is a quarter 
Pana, and that for taking a man -^vithout lilggage is 
one-eighth Pana {lit. half of the latter amount.) (404) 

Ferry rates in respect of vehicles^ full of goiods 
of merchandise, should be determined according to 
the preciousness or otherwise of those commodities, 
those in respect of indigent persons and empty sacks 
ard guny-bags must be very small. (405) 



Manu Samhiti. 3*3 

The hire of a boat should be proportionate to the 
dEstance .'of the journey alA must be determined in 
consideration of the nature of the season and \ht 
current of the riV^r. No rule exists in determining 
freights of sea-going vessels. (406) 

Pregnant women till during the second month of 
.gestation, sages who have taken the vow of asceticism, 
Brihmanas, «n^ Brahmacharins (religious students) are 
exempted from paying ferry-toll*. (407) 

Whatever loss the passengers of a boat might sus- 
tain through the fault of the crew, the crew must 
make that good out of their respective shares (in 
fireights). (^08) 

Thus the law relating to boatmen has been set 
forth ; any thing lost in water through the fault of th6 
crew must be made good by them, who are not liable 
for any thing destroyed by an act of ptovidence. (409) 

The king shall cause a Vais'ya {i.e. members of th6 
Vais'ya ccste) to carry on trade, money-lending, agri- 
culture and cattle rearing ; and a S'udra, to serve the 
iSr&hmlnas. (4101 

A Brahmana shall lovingly support a Vais'ya and a 
Kshatriya, incapable of maintaining themselves, by 
engaging them in their proper works or profes- 
sions. (411) 

For having compelled an initiated Brahmana to 
serve as a servant inspite of his disinclination for 
such service, a Brahmana shall be punished by the king 
with a fine of six hundred Panas. (41?) 

A S'udra, whether a slave purchased or otherwise, 
must be employed in service, inasmuch as it is for 
seving the Brihmana that he has been created by the 
sclf-begott en one. (413) 
40 



314 Manu Samhita. 

Even set af liberty by his ma^er, a S'udra can riolf 
be liberated from service : service is his vocation by 
nature; who shall emancipate him from that? (414) 

A captive of war, a slave for maintenance, the son 
of a female slave, one purchased for money , a slave' 
obtained as a present,- a hereditary one, and one 
condemned to slavery for any offence, these aie the' 
seven kinds of ^ve (lit., sources of slavery). (415) 

A wife, a son, and a slave can never acquire any 
property for themselves ; whatever they earn go to him' 
to whom they belong. (4^6) 

Let a Brihmana unhesitatingly appropriate to him-= 
self whatever (his) S'udra (slave) has earned, inasmuchr 
as nothing can belong to the latter, he being himself aiv 
enjoyable good of the Brdhmana. (417) 

Let (the king) assiduously cause the Vais'yas and 
S'udras feithfuUy discharge their proper and specific 
duties, since their non-performance ten^ to oppress 
(disturb) the whole world («'.«. social economy.) (418) 

At the close of his duties, let the king regularly 
supervise his income, expenditure, treasures and mines, 
each day. (4i9> 

A king by observing these rules {lit. fulfilling these' 
duties) becomes exonerated from all sin and acquires a© 
exalted status (after death). (420) 



Manu Samhita, 515 

CHAPTER IX, 

I SHALL discourse on the eternal duties of the bus- 
t)and and wife, leading a virtuous life, as well as on 
those which are obligatory on them when they live 
together or apart.* (s) 

Men should never give any license to their wives in 
■day and night; by keeping them engaged in com- 
mendable pursuitSjt they should keep t6em under their 
own control. (2) 

The father protects her in infancy ; the husband, in 
youth ; and sons, in old age ; a woman does not deserve 
independence. (3) 

Condemnable is' the father who does not marry his 
daughter at the proper age ; condemnable is the hus- 
band who does not visit his wife (during her menstrual 
periodj) ; and condemtiable is the son who does not 
maintain {Iz'i protect) his mother after the demise of 
her lord. (4) 

Women should be especially protected from the 
■slightest of corrupting influences (such as, a bad com- 
pany etc.,) since an unprotected woman aggrieves the 
two families {i.e., those of her farher and husband). (5) 

• KcLLUKAiStates that, the duties of married life,'alth()ugh not 
falling within the purview of the ordinary legal duties of an indi- 
vidual, have been dealt with in this chapter as such, because their 
violations are punishable by law as crimes, and the king's coutt has 
jurisdictton to take cognisance of cases in which the rights or 
obligations, which these duties entail, are sought to be established 
«r enforced. 

t The text has Vishayeshu cha Sajyantyah, Kolluka explains 
it by Anishiddheshvapi ruparasddi-Vishayeshu in not condemna- 
ble objects of sight, hearing, etc. 

X Within eight days of the cessation of her flow. ' .__ 



3I& Manu Samhita. 

This (protedfeion of wives) forms the highest duty off 
the members of all the four social orders. Even weak. 
(i. e., diseased or physically deformed) husbands should 
endeavour to protect their wives. (6>) 

By assiduously protecting his wife, a man protects 
(the purity of his) progeny and family, as well as his-, 
character, Self, and virtue. ( 7) 

The husband, 4>y entering (into the body of) the 
wife, takes birth as the fetus in her womb, a wife is. 
called Jiyi (Jenetrix.), inasmuch as the husbaed is again, 
born in her. (8) 

A wife gives birth to a child similar (in every res- 
pect) to the man who impregnates her ; hence, for the 
purity of his progeny, one must assiduously protect 
his wife. (9) 

Wives (lit., women) cannot be kept by force ; it is 
by the application of the following expedients^ that, 
they can be kept under control. (10) 

They should be employed, in storing and', spending- 
money (i.e. in looking after the expenses of the house- 
hold), in maintaining the cleanliness of their persons 
and of the house, and in looking after the beddings, 
wearing apparels, and household furniture. (11) 

Imprisoned in the house and closely guarded by 
their male relations, (bad) women are not sufficiently 
protected (i.e. they can find opportunities to gratify 
their evil propensities). Women who guard themselves 
are said to be truly guarded (and protecte'd). (12) 

Wine-drink fng, evil company, separation from the 
husband, idle rambling, sleep at the improper time, and 
residence in another's house are the six factors which 
tend to defile a woman. (13) 

They do not care for the personal beauty or young 



Aianu Samhita. 317 

age; v^omen only long for sexual intercourses with 
men, whfether they be good-looking or bad lookmg. (14) 

On account of the germination of erotic fancies in 
their minds at the mere sight of men, and on account 
of the inborn absence of affection and innate fickle- 
ness of heart, women, though well protected by their 
husbands, make transgressions against them. {15) 

Thus having known their god-give5;nature {lit., as 
created by the creator of universe, Prajapati), let a man 
protect his wife to the best of his endeavours. (16) 

Fondness for ornaments, beds and cushions, intense 
erotic feelings, anger, crookedness, and scandal are 
natural to women in the opinion of Manu. (17) 

The purificatory rites of women are {i. e., must be 
performed) withoat the Vediac Mantras ; this is the 
decision of the law code. And for this disqualification 
of Mantra-less-ness, women are like unto inorganic 
things. This is the conclusion. (18) 

The proneness of women to infidelity has been 
largely sung in the f^edas and Nigamas. Now hear 
what has been said in the Veeias regarding the expiation 
of their incestuous sin. (19) 

"Inagmuch as my mother, faithless to her lord, used 
to stroll about in quest of other men's (embcaces,) may 
my father purify her ovum, defiled by her incests with 
others)." This (Mantra of the yeda) serves as an 
illustration (of what has been said in the preceding 
couplet). (20) 

For the expiation of the sin which a woman com- 
mits by contemplating transgressions against hdr lord, 
however slight, this Mantra has been enjoined to be 
employed. (21) 

As a river in contact with the sea becomes briny}" 



jiS Manu Satnhita. 

so % woman acquires traits of mind and character 
similar to those of the man she is united with. <23) 

Though born of vile castes, Aksham&l&, united with 
Vas'ishtha, and S'irangi, wedded to MandapMa, became 
highly glorified. (23) 

These and other women of low origin acquired 
excellent traits of character through [contact with 
the auspicious ifiental traits of their respective hus- 
bands. (24) 

Thus the rule relating to the auspicious living of 
men and Iwomen (husbands and wives) has been laid 
down ; now hear me ^discourse on the law relating (to 
the right in) children* which is conducive to happi- 
ness both in this world and the next. (25) 

For conceiving progeny, wives, the lights of house- 
holds, the repositories of bliss and auspiciousness, 
should be honoured with presents of apparels and orna- 
ments). No distinction exists between the wife and 
the goddess of fortune in the house. (26) 

Wife is the manifest source of procreation and 
bringing up of children, and of the performance of the 
duties of every day life as well.t (27) 

Giving birth to children, performance of reli- 
gious sapriftces (Agni Hotra, etc.^, nursing, excellent 
(sweeti^t) love, and the acquisition of heaven by one 
and his manes are contingent on his wife. (28) 

She, who, pure and controlled in her mind, speech 
and body, transgresses not her lord, attains to the re- 

* Whether the son belongs to its natural father, or to the 
husband of its mother ? (Kim Ksketrino'patyamuta Sijinak). — 
' Kulluka. 

t Such as hospitality to Atithis, and feeding his friends and 
relations {Atithi mitra-bhojanadeh.)— Kulluka. 



MaHU SatHhiia. pg 

gidfl of the husbands (Patiloka) aiid is called chaste 
by the ^Pirtuous. (^9) 

Through transgressions against her loiTd, a wife 
becomes tfondemnable in this world, takes birth in 
the womb (of a • she-jackal in her next existence, and 
is afflicted with diseases of sm. (30) 

Now hear me relate the anecdote regarding the 
procreation of a son which the great sages of yore 
had narrated for the good of the iltliverse, {31) 

The son belongs to the father, but regarding the 
denotation of " father" there are two contrary dicta 
of the S'ruti (i.e., Veda). Some call the actual pro- 
genitor of the son as his father^ while others at^ that, 
the man on whose wife the son is begotten is his 
father, (32) 

The woman is said to be like unto a field, and 
the man is like unto a seed ; the origin of all creatures 
is (in) the union of the seed and the soil. (33) 

In some cases the pre-eminence is of the seed,* and 
in others the dominance is of the soil ;t commend- 
able is the offspring where the seed and the soil are 
equally dominant. (34) 

Of the seed and the soil the predominence is said 
to be of the seed, inasmuch as the births of al| created 

* The birth of Budha illustrates a case of this kind. Soma, 
without any appointment begat Budha on the person of Hi and 
claimed him as his son in opposition to the lawful husband of 
his mother. 

t Procreation of children on the widows of Viehtrarirya by 
Vyisa, under an appointment, furnishes an example of ithe pre- 
eminence of the soil, where the sons of the unian, (Pandu and 
Dbritarashtra) became the lawful tons of the deceased husband 
of their mother. 



320 llfanu Samhtta<. 

things are marked by the (specific) traits of thieif 
seeds. (35) * . 

Like the seed, which iS sown in a cultivated field 
in the proper season, is the sprout that germinates there- 
from, niarked by its (seed's) specifics features. (36) 

This earth is said to be the eternal womb of all 
created things; but at no stage of its development a 
plant is seen t« partake df the specific properties of 
the soil. (37) 

Different kinds of seeds, sown in the sime field fay 
husbandmen in the", proper season, are seen to sprout 
up in different forms according to the specific natural 
variations of their species. (38) 

Brihi, Salis, Mudga, sesame, kidney beans, garlids 
and sugar-cane sprout up according to the natute of 
their seeds. (39) 

From the s^eds of one kind sprouts of another 
kind (of vegetables) are not seen to germinate : like 
sprouts germinate from the like species of seeds. 40. 

Hence, a wise, modest, man of sicience and erudi- 
tion, seeking longevity, must not sow his seeds in 
another's field (wife). (41) 

Men, learned in history, recite a verse on the subject, 
framed by VHyu, which forbids man to sow thdr seeds 
in other men's wives. (42) 

As an arrow, hit by one into the aperature of art 

arrow on the body of an animal previously shot by 

another, bepomes futile,* so the fruit of the seed, cast 

i by one in the wife of another, does not belong to 

him. (43) 

Historians say that, this earth is called Pritki-oi 
from the fact of her first being the wife {i.e., enjoyed 
by) king, Prithu ; a field is named after the person who 



Xfanu Samkit'a, Z^'i 

'iRrst clears it of the jungle, and a game belongs to hini 
who hits it firtt. (Hence, a son procreated on another's 
wife does not belong to his progenitor.) (44) 

It is only with his wife and' progeny that a man 
becomes complete. Hence, the wise call the hu^and 
and wife as ideiitical. (45) 

By sale or separation (abandonment) the husband 
and wife can not be liberated (sev6red) frot^ each other ; 
we know this law to have |been originally made by the 
(H-eator of the uuiversfi. (46) 

Only once can the partition of an estate be made, 
only once can a girl be given away in marriage, and 
only once can a thing be gifted. Each of th6se three 
things can be made only for once. (47) 

As in respect of cows, mares, she-camels, female 
skyes-, she-buffalos, she-goats tad ewes the young ones 
do not belong to, their progenitors, so sons begdtten 
on other m6n's wives do not belong to their natural 
fathers. (48) 

Seed-ownters, without fields of their own, who sow 
their seeds in other men's fields, can never be entitled 
to the crops raised thferefrom. (49) 

Eveii if a bull procreates a hundred calves'" oii 
another's 'cows, all fthose calves shall belong ta 
the owner of the kine ; in vain the bull has spent 
his seed ! (50) 

Similarly, the sSed cast by one irf ilnother's field 
(wife) contributes to the benefit of the owter of thd 
field, the caster of the seed does not obtain the ftuits 
(offspring) thereof. (51) 

In the absence of any express agreement between 
the owner of the field (husband of the woman) and the 
caster of the seed regarding the right in the fruits 
41 



3S'2F Matite Samktta'. 

(offspring or issues of the union), the fruits shall tSiAuU 
festly belong to the former, inasmuch as. in such art 
instance the womb has a greater preeminence thaa 
the seed. (52) 

But if there be a previous compact of giving the 
fruit to the caster of the seed, then both the caster 
of the seed and the owner of the field {i.e., the husband 
of the womaa) shall be equally entitled to enjoy the 
fruit (offspring). (53) 

If a seed, carried away by the wind or a stream 
of water, sprouts in another's field, the owner of the 
field shall have it and not the sower of the seed. (54) 

This is the law relating to (the right in the) off- 
spring of a cow, mare, female slave, sbe-goat, ewe and 
a female bird. (55) 

Thus the synopsis of the law relating (to the rela- 
tive pre-eminence of) the seed and the Womb have been' 
prontulgated ; now hear me discourse on the duties of 
women on the failure of issues. (56) 

The wife of an elder brother is said to be like a 
preceptor's or superior's wife unto his younger brother, 
and the wife of a younger brother is said to be like 
' unto a daughter-in-law to his elder brother. (57) 

Except in the case of a failure of issues, an elder, 
By going unto the wife of his younger brother, or a 
younger brother, by goiijig unto the wife of an elder 
brother, even under an appointment, becomes de- 
graded. (58) 

In the absence of a son, a woman wishing to obtain 
a progeny, shall lie [clown, under an appointment, with 
a younger brother, or with a ^ff/jWa relation, of her 
husband for the procreation of a son. (59) 

A man, appointed to procreate a sen on a widowy 



Manu SamhitA. 323 

» 

^all anoint his person with clarified butter and silently 
procreate a son on her in the night ; but he must not 
procreate a second son under any circumi^ances what- 
soever. (60) 

Men, wise in the knowledge of procreation of children, 
aver that one with a single child must be regarded as 
almost sonless ; hence, a man (i.e., a Sapinda or younger 
brother of her husband), under an appointment, may 
procreate two children on a woman. (61) 

Ailer the procreation of a son on a widow iby a 
younger or an elder brother (of her deceased husband) 
I he shall revere or look upon her as a preceptor's wife or 
a daughter-in-law as the case may be. (62) 

An elder brother or a yoimger brother, who trans- 
I gresses the rules of appointment out of amorous 
exuberance, commits the sin of defiling the bed of a 
daughter-in-law or of a preceptor's wife, {(>i) 

Brdhmanas shall never allow a widow of their own 
to get a son procreated on her by any one under an 
appointment ; by so engaging her one kills the eternal 
virtue. (64) 

Procreation of children by appointment on another's 
wife (Niyoga) has nowhere been mentioned in the 
Mantras of nuptial rites, nor the marriage of^ a widow 
has ever been mentioned in the Sastra. (65) 

This beastly custom, which first prevailed among 
men during the reign of king Vena, is condemned by 
the erudite Brdhmanas. if>(i\ 

That foremost of kings (Vena), having enjoyed the 
whole earth, with his mind clouded by erotic feelings, 
introduced this custom (procreation of children under 
appointment on another's wife) of yore among men 
which led to the intermixture of castes, {(ti), 



^^ Aianu Samkita^ 

Since that time, he^ who has appointed a widow- 
to get a son procreated on her by another man, has, 
been condemeed by the virtuous. (68) 

A girl whose, betrothed husband has been deSdafter- 
the betrothal her (deceased) husband's brother shall 
t-ake (niarry) in the following manner. (69) 

He, having married her, pure in body and mindi 
and clad in a white cloth, shall visit her once- in each, 
month during her menstrual period. (70) 

Having married a girl to one, let not a wise 
man marry her again to another ; by so doing a max* 
commits sin. 1 7 1) 

Even having formally accepted the gift of {t.e.,, 
married) a girl, possessed of any inauspicious physical 
features-, diseased-, deflowered, or fraudulently given in, 
marriage by .suppressing a physical deformity, one. 
laay abandon her (before the. rite of seven steps is 
gone into). (72) 

If a miscreant gives away a faulty girl in marriage, 
■without giving out the nature of her defect, the gift 
of such a miscreant (i.e., the marriage bond of the 
girl) may be cancelled. (73) 

A man of business must go, to a, foreign county- 
after first? having made provisions for the maintenance 
of his wife ; an honest wife may be compelled to take 
to the evil path in want of a. suitable provision.. (74) 

In the event of her husband having made suitable 
provisions for her before leaving the country, let hei; 
live with the greatest propriety ; in the absence of 
any suoh provision, let her live by plying any com- 
piendable art (such as weaving, spinning, etc.) (75) 

For eight years a wife shall wait for her husband, 
absent in a distant country for prosecuting an object 



Manu Samhiia, 335 

of virtue ; for six years shall she bide her tjme for a 
husband, absent in a distant country for study or for 
achieving fame, and three years for a husband, absent 
on a visit to a co-wife in a distant country, (after which 
she shall go to her lord). (76) 

A husband shall wait one year for a hostile wife ; 
after the lapse of a year, if her hostile feelings still 
continue, he shall take back what he might have given 
her, and marry a second wife. (77) 

Of a wife who slights her husband for his sickness, 
or for his addiction to wine or gambling, the husband 
must forswear the bed for three months, and she must 
not be allowed to use her beddings and ornaments 
during that period. (78) 

But a wife failing to nurse an insane, degraded, 
sexless or seedless husband, or one afflicted with a sin- 
ful disease, is not fit to be abandoned by the husband 
for that hostile conduct, nor tiie things which he might 
have presented to her can be taken back firomjher. (79) 

In the event of one's wife becoming a drunkard or 
feithless, hostile, invalid, extremely hot-tempered or 
spend-threft, one shall marry a second wife. (80) 

Xhe husband of a sterile woman shall remarry on 
the eighth, the husband of a wife whase children die 
in infancy on the tenth, and the liusband of a wife 
who has given birth to daughters only on the eleventh 
year of their respective marriages, while the husband 
of a harsh-tongued wife may remarry without the least 
delay.* (81) 

* Such a harsh-tongued wife, if she has given birth to a male 
child, may be abandoned by the husband, but he will not be 
competent, in pursuance of a prohibition by A'pastambha, to marry 
.duT'ng Jier life-tim«k in asmuch as by giving birth to a son she 



326 Afanu Samhita, 

If a wife of good conduct,IISwho is attached to the 
good of her lord, happens to be afflicted wit6 (an 
incurable) disease, let her husband marry again with 
her consent ; but he must not insult ior neglect) her 
under any circumstances whatsoever. (82) . 

But if the first wife of a remarried husband (at- 
tempts to) leave his house out of anger, he must either 
keep her imprisoned -(in the house) or send her to her 
father's family for good. (83) 

The wife (of one other than a Br&hmana),'who, 
being pfohibhed to drink wine in a marriage-festival, 
drinks it, or attends a public dancing party, should be 
punished with a fine of six Krishnalas. (84) 

If members of twice-born castes happen to marry 
wives of other castes, thdr precedence, honour, and 
dwelling-houses should be according to the superiority 
of their castes. (85) 

A wife belonging to his own caste must attend to 
the physical comforts of a man having many wives^and 
shall be his cohort in prttctising virtues (performing 
religious rites) : a wife who is not of the same caste 
with her husband must never do these things. (86) 

He, who, having a wife of his own caste, csijases, 
out of foolishness, a wife of another caste to perform 
these'duties, is said to be, by the ancient sages li^ke unto 
a Brihmana Chundala {i.e., a son begotten by a S'udra 
on a Br&hmaiia woman). (87) 

A girl, even before having attained the proper age 
of marriage, #hould be duly married to a handson.e, 
qualified husband of her own caste, (if such an oppor- 
tunity occurs). (88) 

has acquired the privileges m( a Dharma Patni (indefesible right 
of wifehood;. 



Manu Samkiia. 327 

Rather should a "^girl, who hag attained puberty, 
Stay unmarried in her father's house for her whole 
life-time than she should be wedded to a non-eligible 
{lit. disqualified) husband, for any consideration what- 
soeven (89) 

A girl, who has attained puberty, shall wait (un- 
married in her father's house) for three years (after 
the appearance of her first floWi ; after that, she shall 
take a husband of her own caste and status (without 
waiting tor the consent of her guardians.) (90) 

For taking a husband herself, a girl, not given away 
in marriage-at the proper tim* by her;[father, acquirss 
no demerit, nor does the man who takes her as his 
Wife. (91) 

A girl, who through her swn endeavours has taken 
a husband, must not tak« away the ornaments, etc., 
given to her by her father, mother or brother, inas 
much as by so doing she will be guilty of theft. (93) 

For having married a girl who has attained her 
puberty, one must not pay any money to her father, 
inasmuch las for having impeded conception during the 
menstrual period his right of fatherhood (Juris peters) 
in the'girl has been extinguished. (95) . 

Let a man of thirty years marry an amiable girt 
of twelve years of age, or a man of twenty-four years 
marry a girl of eight years of age.* One may marry 



* This couplet does not lay down the minimam age limit of 
marriage, but enjoins that the highest dssparity of age allowable 
befeween the huSband and wife. Under no circumstances, the 
age of the wife should b« less than one-third of that of the 
husband. 



^iS Aitanu Samhitak 

earlier, jf delay be detrime»tal to one's religioii§ 
duty* (94) 

Through the ordaination of the gods one obtains 
a wjfe and never by his own willing.t Let him always 
maintain such a virtaous wife and (thereby) do the 
pleasure of the gods. 195) 

Women are created to conceive pregrianeies, and 
rnen are created to«mpregnate women. Hence, like the 
act of procreation, the religious duties of the husband 
and wife are correlated.f This is said in the Veda. (96) 

If the (betrothed husband) of a girl happens to die 
after he has paid the price for hdr hand {tit. marriage 
duty) to her guardian, she should be married to a 
younger brcfther of the dedeased, if shd approves (of 
such a marriage). (97) 

Even a S'udra must not take any price (lit. duty or 
pecuniary consideration) for the hands of his slaughter 
when giving her away in marriage. Such acceptance 
of money constitutes a sale of the girl iii disguise. (98) 

Honest men of yorcy never did, not the virtuous 
men at the present do marry a girl to another after 
having agreed to marry her to one. '99) 

* As in the q^ise Of a Bi;&hmana wha has finished his Veddic 
study before the age of twenty- four and thus stands under the 
obligation: of settling in life as a house-holder. — Kulluka. 

■ t The gods such as Bhaga, Aryaman (the presiding deity of 
day) 'afld Savita (the sun-god lit impeller of the universe) of' 
mighty intelleet have given me a wife to discharge the duties of 
the household (Bha^oryamh Saviia Purandhi Mahyam VadhuY' 
ghrhapatyaya, etc., S'ruti). 

% The wife must be the companion of the husband in doing 
religious sacrificesl: "clad in a silk cloth, let the wife, and 
the husband kindle the sasred fire (Kshaume Vashnavagnintt' 
I dadh iyhiam.—S'mi \), 



Manu Samhita, 3^9 

Even ill niy ^^st existences never did I haar of 
the disguised sale of a girl iii the form of a marriage 
■on the acceptance of money (by- her father.) (o'orj 

There should be mutual fidelity (between the hus^ 
band and wife) till death. This should be ktiown as tha 
primary duty, of the husband and wife in brief. (lot) 

A married man and woman should always so 
endeavour as not to live separate from, and make trans- 
gressions against, each other. (102) 

Thus the loving duties ot the husband and wife to* 
wards ea6h other, as •tt*'ell as those, which are obligatory 
(on them) for the procreation of sons in their absence, 
have been foririulated ; now hear nie discourse on the 
law relating to the division of paternal estates. (103) 

After the demise of their father or mother, let tha 

(brothers congregate and equally partition the paternal 

(or maternal) estate among themselves : during his (of 

her) life-time they are not the lords thereof («.«., have 

no right therein.)* (r 04) 

[If the brothers wish to live undivided], let the 
eldest one take the whole of the paternal estate, and 
the rest (i.e , the other brothers) shall depend upon 
(obtain from) him for their maintenance as* they did 
on their father (before). (105) 

The moment one's eldest born comes into being 
one becomes possessed of a son and discharges the 

* But in a paternal estate partitioned by the father among 
, his sons during his life-time the sons have all rights of owaer- 
^ «hip.-Cf. 

If the father voluntarily makes a division af his estate, let hm 
partition it among his sons (Vihhhganoka pUd Kuryat ickckhayS' 
ViShajet Sutan].—1tdjna-aalhiia, 

4? 



33* Manu Samhita. '"- 

debt to his manes [Piiris) ; hence the eldest ffou is 
entitled to receive the entire (paternal estate.) (io6) 

He {i.e., the eldest son) on whose birth the debt 
(to the manes) is disclmrged and the father obtains 
immortality is called the son according to virtue 
{Dharma-putra), the rest are sons of {Le., begotten in) 
lust. (107) 

Like a fatltet must the eldest brother maintain his^ 
younger brothers, and the younger brothers must live 
in obedience to him as to their father. (108) 

Inasmuch as the eldest brother can exalt the family 
<by his noble conduct), or bring ruin upon it (lyy sett- 
ing a bad example to his yottngers), the eldest brother 
is the most revered ; and the virtuous younger brothers 
should not condemn their eldest brother. (109^) 

The eldest brother, who stands imto his youngers as 
their father or mother, is like a Mher or mother 
unto them ; filing to discbarge these duties, him they 
should respect as a friend (.relation), (no) 

Thus they (brothers) should live undivided ; or seek- 
ing the furtherance of virtue,* they should be separate 
and separately perform the (five great daily house-boldf) 
sacrifices, (in) 

A twentieth part of the paternal property, tc^ether 
with the best of articles is the portion of the eldest 
son, a fortieth part (of thfe paternal estate) forms the 
portion of the second son, and an eighieth part (of the 

♦ Cf.- Briha^ati^Of brothers living in commensality the rite of 
worshipping the manes, Brahmanas and gods should be one (andl 
joint) i living separate, each of them should perform these rites 
in his separate house: Eka pakena vasaidm pitrtdtvadvifd 
rthanam; Ekam bhabet bibhaktinam tadeva sySd grihe grihe.)- 



Manu Samhiia. 33^ 

paternal estate) forms the portion of the youngest 
son.* (112J 

The portions which should fall to the eldest and 
youngest sons have been laid down ; sons intermediate 
between them should all have the portion of the 
second son (t.e., a fortieth part of the whole paternal 
estate. (113) 

The eldest sonf shall take the belt one of the 
articles (left by the father), as well as the best one of 
each ten animals (such as, cows^ etc.) (114) 

Among sons equally discharging the ten religious 
duties of {Vediac study, etc., ie., equally qualified) the 
eldest one shall obtain no (prefeifential) excess share, 
but a little in excess should be given to him for his 
honour. (115) 

After the division of the paternal state in the afore- 
said manner, the brothers shall equally apportion the 
residue among themselves ; or in the alternative, they 
shall partition it in the manner following. (116) 

The eldest son shall take one share and one share 
in addition thereto {t.e. two shares,) the second son 
shall take one and a half share, and the other younger 
sons shall take one share each. This is the decision of 
Law. (117) 

The brothers fhall separately give quarter parts out 
of their respective shares to their unmarried sisters ; 

* The residue of the estate should be equally divided among 
thera (Avashiihtam dhanam Santam Kritva vibhajaniyantj 
Kulluka, 

f In the event of the eldest son being possessed of excellent 
qualifications and the other sons being devoid of them. — 
Kulluka 

X Cf. Dasdta Pas'unam (the best one of each ten animall)' 
Gauiamd. 



332 Manu Samhtta. 

and failing to give them (sisters) such shares, they shall 
become degraded in life. (ii8) 

A goat, a lamb, or an animal with unbi-furcated 
hoofe, remaing odd after the division, shall fall to the 
share of the eldest son. {119) 

A son, begotten by a younger brother on the wife of 
his eldest brother under an appointment, shall have an 
equal shire witfi his uncles (at the time of the division 
of the paternal estate amcHig them).* This is the deci- 
sien of Law. (lao) 

A son begotten on the wife of the eldest brother 
caa not be lawfully called the son of the eldest'brother 
inasmuch as the preeminence is of the progenitor in , 
respeet of the procreation of a child. Hence, he should 
be discarded t (121) 

If a doubt arises as to how shall the division of the 
paternal estate be made, if the eldest son is begotten . 
on the youngest wife, and the youngest son is begotten 
on the eldest wife of a man : — (122) 

The son of the eldest wife (in such a case) shall 
take the best bull as his preferential share (although he 
is the youngest son of his father), and the sons of other 
co-wives, though they be his elders, shall take compara- 
tively inferior bullocks according to the juniority of 
. their respective mothers. (123) 

The eldest son, begotten on the eldest wife, shall 
take fifteen dows and one bullock (as his share), and the 
other sons shall take according to the precedence of 
their respectfve mothers. This is the decision. ( 1 24) 

* He must not claim an excess share under the husband of his 
nother, the eldest son of his grandfather. 

f i.e. ha Mn not claim an excess or additional share under the 
husband ef his mother as the lawfulfy begdttin son of the eldest 
Itrother. 



Manu Samhili. 333 

The seniority among sons of cowives of the same 

a 

caste is said to be according to their births, and 
not according to the priority of their respective 
mothers. (125) 

[ The invocation of Indra in the Agnishtoma sacri- 
fice] by the Mantt-a,'knoiwa2i% Sva brdhmana, ihonldi 
be made by the eldest brother; apd in re«pect of 
twin-born sons, the one, that is first delivered of the 
womb, should be regarded as the elder." (126) 

If a sonless man marries his daughter to another on 
the stipulation that, "sons born of her womb shall do 
my S''r6ddhas and offer me oblations," that daughter is 
called a Putrikli. (1271 

In this way Putrika (compacts^ were created of 
yore for the increase of his progeny by the patriarch 
(///, lord of creatures) Daksha himself. (128 

Decked with ornaments, ten (of his daughters) he 
complacently gave to Dharma (the god of virtue) ; 
thirteen to Kas'yapa ; and twenty seven, to king 
Soma. (129) 

One's Self is identical with his son, and a daughter 
is like unto a son : in the presence of one's (putrika) 
daughter,' who is identical with his self, who else shall 
take his property '/iV. wealth)? (130) 

The mother's dowry shall be the portion of"<her) 
daughter, and his daughter's son shall take the entire 
estate of a sonless man. (131) 

(His) daughter's son shall take the entire estate of 
a sonless father, and he (».?. daughter's son) shall offer 
two oblations {Pindas), one to his (own deceased) father, 
and another to (his deceased) mother's father. 1 132) 

Virtually ,thei'e exists no difference between a son's 
son aad a daughter's son in this world, both their 



324 M0HU StttnhiU. 

respectJive futhei and mcttfaer havs originated from the 
body of one and the same man. (133) 

In the event of the birth of one's son after the crea- 
tion of the PutrikS (compact), that son and the son of 
the Putrika daughter shall hare ' equal ^shares in his 
estate, in asmuch as a female can not have the privi- 
leges of) eldest-bom-ship. (1341 

On the death of a sonless Putrikd daughter, her 
husband shall unhesitatingly take the entire estate left 
by her (1'.*., her father shall have no right in her pro- 
perty on the strength of that Putrika compact.) (135) 

By the son, whom one's daughter, whether married 
with or without the Putrika compact, gives birth 
to, her Mher becomes possessed of a son ; such a 
daughter's son shall offer C^^r&ddha) oblations to her 
(deceased, sonless), mother's father, and take (inherit) 
his estate. (136) 

By a son one conquers the worlds, by a son's son 
one attains ths infinite, by the son of a son's son one 
attains the region of the sun. (137) 

Since a son succours his father from the hell called 
Put ; hence, the sdf-begotten one (Brahm&) has called 
a son, PutraJ^lit, deliverer from the hell of Put.)' (138) 

No distinction is found between a son's son and a 
daughter's son in this world, in asmuch as Ja daughter's 
son, like a son's son, can succour a man from 
hell. (139) 

The son of a Putrikd daughter shall first offer an 
oblation (Pinda) to his (deceased) mother, then to his 
mother's father, and then to her father's father. (140) 

A Dattaka (adopted) son, possessed of all com- 
mbndable qualife^ations, though born of another 



Maftu Samhfia. 3^33 

Goit-a (family*, shitll take? the estate of his putative 
fathen* (141) 

An adopted son must not take the property or 
Gotra (family title) of his natural father. The Pinda 
toUoWs tl;ie estate and the property, ;t hence, an 
adopted son must not offer S'rdddhas unto his natural 
&ther. (142) 

The son, begotten on a girl without an appointment 
firom her guardians, and the son, begotten on a woman 
with a son by her husband's younger brother even 
Under an appointment, shall have no shares (in the 
paternal property), inasmuchas they are bastards, and 
offsfHTing of lust. (143) 

A son, begotten on a woman under an appointment 
but not conformably to the rules, shall not be compe- 
tent to inherit (his) ancestral property, inasmuchas he 
has been procreated by a degraded person. (144) 

A son, begotten on one's wife by another under an 
appointinent, shall take an equal share in the estate (left 
by him) like a son born of his own loins ; in asmuch as 
the seed virtually belongs to the owner of the field 
(husband of the woman) in such a case, and the son thus 
begotten is his legitimate son. (145) 

* Ekevaurasak putyah pitrasya Vasunah prabhuh (only the 
son of one's own loins, is the lord of (heir to) the whole ancestral 
estate. Kulluka quotes the preceding maxim and says that, in the 
presence of a son of one's own loins his adapted son is not entitled 
to his whole property but must take a sixth part thereof as his 
own share like a Kshetraja son. Govinoaraja, on the other 
hand, holds that, one's adapted son is heir to the whole estate 
left by him even in the presence of a son of his loin;, if any. 

f A man obtains ^is heir to) the wealth and family title ^Gotra) 1 
of him unto him he offers S'rhddha vblations (PindasJ, 



gij6 Mann Samhita, 

He who maintains the estate and widow of A dfl' 
Ceased elder brother shall procreate a son on the person 
of that widow and give his (deceased brother's) estate 
to the son, thus begotten. (146) 

The son of her, who, even under an ?ippointment 
from her guardians gets him procreated on herself by 
the younger brother of her deceased husband, or by any 
(of his male Sapln^a relations) out of lust,* is called , 
lust-begotten and invalidly procreated; such a son 
shall take no Share in (the paternal estate). (147) 

This should be understood as the law relating to 
the diVisioa (of the paternal property) among uterine 
brothers' of the sama caste, no\y hear me expound the 
law relating to the division (of the paternal property) 
among sons begotten, by oile and the same man on 
Women of different castes. (148) 

If a Brihmana has had wives belonging to the fouf 
(different) castes in the order of their enumeration, 
the division of the estate among sons of those 
wives should be made conformably to the following 
rule. (149I ..• 

One tiller, a cow, a bull, the house (or room); 
•ornaments and the best portion of other estates .shall 
go to the sou of the Brahmana, wife as his (Uddh&ra) 
preferential share. (150) 

Out of the remaining estate three parts shall go to 
the Br&hmana son. two to the Kshatriya son, one and 
a half part to the Vais'ya son, and one part to the 
S'udra son. (151) 

* Cp. Narada Mukhat mukhtm pariharan gitrairgatranyaiam- 
spris'an ; Kule tadavashesheoha santdndriham na khmata iti, 
without touching her face and limbs with hU face and limbs, let him 
procreate a son (on her; for progeny and not out of lust, etc. 



Manu Samhita. 3U 

[ Or instead of giving a preferential shjspe (excess) 
to theBfihmauason], let the-versed-in law divide the 
whole estate into ten (equal ' parts, and allot thepi (to 
the sons) in the following lawful manner : — (152) 

Let the Bsihrnana (son) take four (such) shares ; the 
Kshatriya (son), three ; the Vais'ya (son), two ; and the 
S'udra (son), one. (153) 

But let him not in consideration of ^virtue give more 
than a tenth share to his S'udra son, whether he be a 
good son or otherwise. (154) *" 

The son of a Brahman, Kshatriya, or Vais'.ya by a 
S'udra wife is not entitled to take . any shafe in his 
property ; whatever his father will give shall b'e the 
portion of (such a S'udra son).* (155) 

Of sons of twice born ones by wives of their own 
castes, let the younger sons give preferential shares to 
J;heir (respective) eldest brothers and then equally 
divide the estate among themselves. (156) 

A S'udra is not competent to marry any other wife 
than one of his own caste, and sone begotten on her, 
even if they number a hundred, shall take equal shares 
(in their paternal property). (157) 

Of the twelve kinds of sons of men, as. said (re- 
cognised) by the self begotten Ma»u, six a^e heirs and 
Bandhus, and six are neither heirs nor Bandhus. (158) 

The Auras'a (a son of one's (fwn loins), Kshetreja (a 
son procreated on one's wife or widow by another), 
Datta (adopted son), Kritrima (filiated sqp), JSudkot- 
panna (a son secretly procreated on one's wife) and 



* This is not contradictory to provisions laid down in the 
precteding verses (151, 15J and I5'4)- Kulluka says that, this rule 
shall hold good in respect of sons of twice-born ones by S'udra 
women who are not their mar-ried wives. 

43 



338 Manu SatnhUa. 

Apaviddha (taken and adopted) these are the six^ sotfg 
who are both h^frs and Bandhus. {159) 

Six sons (such as), Kaninah, Sahodah, Kritah, 
Paunarbkava, Svyamdatta, and S'audra (son by a 
S'udra wife) are no heirs (to their paterpal property), 
although they are Bandhus {ie^ competent to offer 
libations of water etc., to their fictitious, deceased 
father.)* (160) * 

Disastrous is the result of attempting to cross over 
the darkness of death with the help of a bad son lik© 
unto that of sailing across a river with a badly madff^ 
raft.t (i6i) 

Though one's Kshetraja son and a son of his owit 
loins are both heirs to one and the same property 
(i.e., to the estate left by him), yet each of them shall 



• The text has Shadadayadabandhavah. MbDHAtiThi eX' 
plains it by " Shadftflhyad abdndhavah " in as much as these six 
sons are not competent to inherit the estate of; their deceased 
father, they are abdndhavah, i. c. not competent to offer 1 ibations 
of, water, etc. to'his spirit. Baudhayatta, however, confirms our 
view of interpretation and asserts that, although these six sons 
are not heirs, 'they are not disqualified from oiTering water etc., 
to the spirit of.their deceased father by fiction ; and hence, they 
are Bandhus, 

Qi., Kdninancha Sahodancha, Kritam paunarbhavam" tatha ; 
Svayamdattam Nishddancha Gotrabajah prachakshate. Sons 
such as, Khnina, Sahoda, Kreeta, Paunarbhava, Svyamdatta and 
Nishada (son of a Brahman by a S'udra wife) partake of the 
gotras of their fathers, i.e. they are competent to do the water- 
rite etc. to his spirit. 

+ A son of inferior status such as, a Kshetraja son {i.e. a son 
■begolten on one's wife by another under an appointment), lii^e at 
foolish or illiterate son ;of one's own loins, fails to do the fullest 
spiritual benefit to the spirit of his fictitious father. 



Manu Samhila. ^5 

talce the estate of his own natural father, and no 
other* (162) 

Only the son of one's own louas is the owner of 
(heir to) the paternal estate ; with a view to create no 
hardship on them, let him give maintenance to other 
sons (of inferior status. (i63)- 

The son of one's own seed, while^dividing the pater- 
nal estate, shall give a fifth 01 sixth part thereout to the 
Kshetreja son (of his father) as his share. (164) 

One's Kshetraja and Aurasa (son of his own loins) 
sons are heirs to {lit. sharers of) the paternal estate ; of 
the ten remaining (kinds of) sons (such as, the Dattaka 
etc.,) who share the Gotra of their father, each suc- 
ceeding one shall take a share in (/. e., inherit) the 
paternal property in the absence of one immediately 
preceding him in the list of enumeration. fi6s) 

A son begotten by a man himself on a lawfully 
married wife of his own caste should be known as his 
Aurasa (son), the foremost of sons in respect of status 
or pre-eminence. (166) 

A son procreated on the wife of a sick or impotent 
person or on the widow of a deceased individual under 
an appointment by another, is called di.' Kshetraja or 



* In the light of the dictum of Yajna-Valkya, "'VirtuaHy, he is 
the heir, and shall offer Pindas to both of them," Ubhayora- 
pyasau rikihee pinda-ddidcha dharmatah. 

The couplet contempletes the case where after the procrea- 
tion of a son on one's wife by another under an appointment, 
one of his own loins is born. Both MbphaTithi and Gcvinpa- 
RAJA explain ^Mcaiaire in the couplet by a son procreated by one 
on another's wife without an appointment, which is manifestly 
absurd, inasmuch as such a son is not competent to t*ke a 
share in his estate. 



34© Manu Samkita, 

Talpaja (proereated in the bed of) son (of that sicfe^ 
impotent or deceased person.) (167) 

The son whom his (natural) father or mother gladly 
gives to one of his own caste during the distress of his 
son-less-ness (?' e. gives him to be filiated by one on the 
failure of one's issue), by consecrating him with water, 
is called a Dattaka or Datrima) son. (168) 

The sQji whom a knower of merits and demerits* 
takes out of hisj own caste and entrusts him with the 
duties of a ]saa is called a Kritrima {lit artificial 
one. (169) 

The son who is begotten on one's wife in his own 
housejby an unknown man is called a Gudhotpanna 
(secretly born) one ; as a son, he belongs to him in 
whose bed he is procreated. (170) 

The son, who deserted by his parents, or given by 
either of them is adopted as such by one, is called an 
apaviddha son to the latter. ^171) 

The son who, is secretly procreated on one's wife 
before her marriage in her father's house is called his 
Kanina son, the offspring of the girl whom he has 
married. (172) 

The man who'manies a chaste wife, either yrith or 

without the f)atent_,signs of pregnancy, is said to be the 

father of that ^ahoda (lit., got with the marriage) son, 

" born in the womb at the; time of the maniage. ( x 73) 

The son, ; whom one buys for filiation from his 

parents, is said to be his' Kreeta (purchased)* son, 

[1 whether he be of his own caste or otherwise.* (164) 



* According to Yajnavalkya aH these filiated sons must be of 
the] same caste with their putative fathers. (Svajdtiyeshvayam 
frekta sta^ayeshu mays, vidliihj. According toJManu, all kinds 



Manu Samhita. ^ 341 

The son, whom one's widow, or deserted wife volun- 
tarily gets procreated on her person by her second 
husbandj is said to be the Paunarbhava (lit, the son 
of a remarried woman) son of the latter. (175) 

If that wife, with unruptured hymen, takes another 
husband,then let the second husband lawfully marry 
her again ; similarly if a wife, after having deserted the 
husbanid of her girlhood and known another man, 
returns to her husband of girlhood, then let that first 
husband lawfully marry her again. (176) 

The son, who in the absence of his natural parents, 
or being deserted by them without any reason, gives 
himself up to a man as his son, is said to be the 
Svayamdatta (self-given) son of the latter. (177) 

The son whom a Brahmana procreates out of lust 
on his S'udra wife is like unto a corpse (S'ava) even 
when alive (pdrayana,) and is accordingly called a 
Parasava (Hi, a living corpse). (178) 

The son of a S'udra by a slave girl, or by the wife 
of a male slave, shall take an equal share in his estate 
with the sons of his married wives, if he (the father) so 
desires it. This is the decision of law. (i 79 > 

o 

The sages have enumerated (recognised) these 
eleven kinds of sons such as, the Kshetraja etc., as 
proxies of the aurasa son to guard against the extinc^ 
tion of the rites of Srdddha, etc. (180) 

' Excepting the Kshetreja son, [soiis, procreated by 
other men's seeds (on one's wife) and incidentally 
mentioned in connection herewith, should be regarded 

of filiated sons, excepting the one called Kreeta (purchased), 
must be of the same caste with their'putative fathers. 



342 



Manu Samhita, 



as the sons of those from whose seeds they have prigi- 
nated, and of no other* (i8i) 

If one among several uterine brothers gets a son, by 
that son ^U of them shall be possessed of a son. This 
is what Manu has said on the subject. (182) 

Of several co-wives, if one ot them gets a son, then 
by that son all of them, will be possessed cf a son. 
This is what Manu has said. (183 > 

In the absence of a son of superior status, one of 
the immediately inferior status shall be entitled to , 
(the paternal' property ; of several sons of equal or 
similar status each' shall have a share (in the paternal) _ 
property. (184) 

Sons shall- take (inherit) the property of their father, 
and Hot his (/. e. father's uterine) brothers or ancestors 
(grand-father etc.,) shall inherit his property ; but the 
father shall take (inherit) the property of a son-less 
son,t and in his (father's) absence the brothers of the 
son shall take (his property . (185* 

Let a man do the water-rite and offer oblations to 
bis three ancestors {i.e. father, grand-father and great 
grand-father), no Sapinda relation-ship exists between 
the offerer of such oblations and his fifth ancestor {i.e. 
great great grgnd-father.) (1861 

Of the Sapinda-t^'a.Wcia.%, one nearest to the deceased 
shall inherit the property (in exclusion of one more 



* As the wis* use oil as a substitute for clarified butter, so 
these eleven kinds of sons are only proxies for Aurasa and 
Putrika ones. J^jyam Vina yathh iailam Sadbhi pratinidhi 
Kriiam, Tathaikadas'a piitrhstu puMkaurasayorvinh Briddha 
Brihnspati. 

t I. «. of a son, dead without leaving a wife, daughter, or a son 
of any Ifind. 



Manu SamhilA. 343 

teliilote ] in the absence of one's Sapindas one's Samdno^ 
dakas sh'all inherit his property, and in the absence of a 
Samdnodaka his preceptor, and in the absence of a 
preceptor his disci jfl* (shall inherit his property.)* (187) 



• In the absence of a son of any of the eleven kinds the line 
6f succession shall be as follows ; widow of the deceased, in hef 
absence \!ci<i AputYika daughter, inl Her' ab'sence the father of 
toother of the deceased, in theif absence the uterine brothers, in 
their absence their sons, in their absence the father's motKer, in 
the abseiiCte of the sons of the graild father, then the sons of 
the great- grand father, in their absence Samanodakas, in their 
absence his disciple. 

Medhatiths says that, a widow is disqualified from inheriting 
the estate of her deceased husband, but the following express 
provisions <3i the several ancient law codes will serve to con- 
clusively demonstrate the error of his viewj l87 

^l^^ ^IT^^WI 1 



344 Manu SamhilA. 

Wife fwidowl, daughters, father, mother, brothers, their sons 
Gotraja (of the same family), BancLhns, disciple and Brahmacharins 
of the same school, each succeeding one is heir in the absence of the 
person immedintely preceding him in the order of enumeration — ^ 
This is the law in respect of the inheritence to the property of a 
sonless deceased person of whatsoever caste. 

yhjtiavalkya 

In the Vedas, Smrttis, ajod Tantras as well as in conlmon parl- 
ance of the world the wise men call the wife the half of her 
husband. « 

He who has left a widow surviving him has got the half of 
his body verily alive, and when half of his body is alive, who else 
shall take hi« property ? • • • 

The king should punish as thieves, the Sapinda relations of her 
deceased husband, attempting to rob her inheritartce, (her husband's 
estate) or to oust her thereof. 

Brihaspaii, 

A chaste widow, self-controlled and preserving the sanctity of 
the bed of her deceased husband, shall offer him oblations and 
take his entire estate. 

Briddha Manu 



nu SamhilB. g4| 

111 the absence of all these relationsj Brihm^nas, 
'W'ell-versed in the three Vedas, pure, ancl with theit 
'senses fully controlled^ shall take (the) estate, whereby 
Virtue will not be impaired. (i8'8) 

Unacceptable {i.e., uninheritable) is the estate of 
a Brahmana by the king under all circumstances ; on 
the failure of all thes'e heirs (successors), let the king 
%ake the estate of a deceased person of whatsoever 
«ther caste. (189) 

Let the widow of a deceased, sdnless man get a s'on 
procreated on her person by a man of her husband's 
Geira [i.e., his younger brother, or a Sapmda relation^ 
aiid let th« entire estate of that deceased person be 
invested in that son. (190) 

Of tXvo sons, begotten on 'th® same woman by tW(J 
^different men, contending for the paternal estate^ let 
either of them take the property left by his own 
^[natural) father and no other. (191) 

On the death of their mother, let all tlie uterinS 
brothers ?kvA their iramarried sisters equally partition 
the mat-ernal estate among themselves, and kt then! 
give quarter parts of their respeetive shares to their 
married "sisters. (192) 

To the (unmarried) daughters of thase (married) 
daughters should be lovingly given out of the estate 
of their (deceased) grand-mother {i -e., mother's nlother) 
ia little as worthy of each of them. (193) 

Presents given to a woman before the nuptial fire 
fidhyagniJi those given to her at the time of her 
going to her husband's family from her father's house 
{Adhyavdhanikam), those given to her on happy riteS 
{lit. ceremonies of gladness)) and those respectively 
given to her by her father, mother and brother form 

44 



34§ MaHU SamhilM, 

the six kinds of Siridhanam {lit. woman's pro- 
perty) (194) 

Estates, given to her after her marriage by hef 
parents, husband's parents, and relatiofts (Anvadheyam) 
as well as those given to her by her husband out of 
love, I6t her sons divide among themselves, if she 
happens to die in the life-time of her husband. (195) 

Estates received by the wife in the Brahma, Daiva^ 
A'rsha, Gdndharva, or Prdjdfatya form of iiiarriage 
(<.f., the si^ kinds of Siridhanam) her husband shall 
take, if she dies sonless in his life-time. (196) 

Whatever property is given to a woman in the 
A^sura, etc., forms of marriage, her mother, and (in her 
absence), her father shall take, if she dies sonless in hef 
or his life-time, (197) 

Any thing given to his co-wives (of different ca&tes) 
by her father, the daughter of his Brihmana wife shall 
take ; and in her absence, her son. (198) 

Out of the estate jointly belonging to many of theii' 
relations, wives shall not be competent to create theif 
Stridhanas, nor out of the estates of their respective 
husbands without their consent ; (otherwise the estates 
shall not be regarded as (S^^-i'ii/AflKaj). {199) 

The ornaments which a woman has worn during 
the life-time of her husband his heirs shall not take ; 
by so-doing they shall be degraded. (200) 

A eunuch, a degraded person, a born blind or deaf 
man, an idiot, or those devoid of any organ, shall not 
take any share in the paternal property. (201) 

But ample and adequate maintenances should be 
given to themjaccording to the resources of the estate ; 
a non-giveriof. such maintenances shall te degiaded in 
life. (202) 



Manu Samhita, 347 

But if these eunuchs, etc, ever feel I'ndined to 
marry {i.e., get rid of their sexual incapacities), sons 
begotten by them (on theirTwives) shall have shares in 
the paternal property. (203) 

After the demise of their father, however small 
a property the undivided eldest brother may acquire, 
the educated youngest brother shall take a share 
therein. (204) ' • 

In the property acquired by the exertions of the 

illiterate yoimger brothers, even if that be not the 

paternal estate, all of them shall have equal shares. 
This is the decision. (205) 

The wealth which one's acquires by his skill or 
knowledge (Vidyd-dkanam) ,* the wealth which one 
obtains from his friends (Maitrya-dhanamJ , the wealth 
which one obtains on his marriage, and the wealth 
which one obtains as a present of honour on the occa- 
sion of a Madhuparka (offering of a cup of honey) 
shall be exclusively his own. (206) 

If a brother, capable of earning money (tit. wealth) 
by his own skill or exertion.t does not wish to take his 
share in the paternal estate, then his other brothers 
shall give him something for his maintenance out of his 



• Vidyddhanam-^kt-j^yim. explains it by the wealth which 
one acquires by his knowledge acquired from another by staying in 
the house and eating the food of the latter. The wealth which one 
acquires hy such knowledge can not be partitioned. Pata bhakta 
pradhnena praptd vidya yadanyatah, tayh praptamcha vidhitii 
vidya-prapfam taduchyate, Upanyasii cha Yallabdham Vtdyaya 
panjpurvakam Vidya dhanantu tadvidyat vihhhgena vibhajyate. 

f Such as by entering the king's service, etc., {RajAnugamanadi 
Karman&)—Kulluka. 



348 Manu Samhila, 

own share, make hira separate,^ and divide the residue 
among themselves.* {201) 

Whatever one has earned by his own labour without 
impairing {lit. destroying) the paternal estate, one may 
not give a share of that self-acquired » property to 
another, if he so desires it. (208) 

A son, who ba^ managed to recover an ancestraf 
property which bis father bad failed to do in his 
life-time, nrust not divide the sam«^ ^mong his. own 
brothers ; if h& does not so desire it. (209) 

Divided brothers, if after having lived jointly {i.e. 
joint in food and funds; for a while, 'again wish l€> 
partition their estate, they sh?'! partition it equally 
among themselves ; in such a o. je there exists no 
preferential (excess) share for the eldest brother. (210) 

Of brothers, some of whom, whether the eldest or 
the youngest, are absent at the time of the division of 
the estate, the shares of the absent brothers therein 
yf iW. not be extinguished for their absence. (211) 

His uterine brothers shall congregate and divide 
such ^ares (of their dead, absent, or ascetic brothers) 
among tbemselvesjt and the joint and undivided (step) 
brothers and, uterine sisters shall divide sudi shares 
among them. (212) 

The eldest brother, who, out of greed, deprives his 
younger brothers (of their paternal property) is not 
worthy of the honour of eldest-botn-ship, has no right 

* The sons of such a separate brother shall not claim any 
share in the paternal property, to which he baa vohmtarily 
relinquished his right. — Kulluka, 

+ In the absence of a son, wife, diaugbter, father or njotber 
of the absent or defunct brother. 



Mattu Samkifa. 3149 

to claim the preferential (excess) share of the eldest- 
born, ahd deserves to be punished by the king. 2 1 3> 

Brothers, addicted to vices, shall have no shares 
(in the paternal estate) ; the eldest brother, without 
giving their shares to- his younger brothers, must not 
make any exclusive property of his. own out of the 
paternal estate. (-SI 4) 

If the brothers live undivided Vith their father 
and all earn money, then at the division of the estate 
the father must not give an excess share to any of 
them. {215) 

A son bom after the partition of his paternal estate 
shall have his share .tj^erein ; if the brother live un- 
divided, he shall obl^n his share from the undivided 
brothers. {2i6;j 

The estate of an unmarried son, deceased without 
an issue, shall go to his mother ; in the absence of the 
mother, his father's mother shall get the same. (217) 

After the due division of the paternal estate, if any 
debt or assets of the father be found out, then let 
the brothers equally divide the same among them- 
selves. (218) 

Clothes, leaves, ornaments, articles of .confectionary 
(KritdnnamJ, slave girls, priests, and pasture grounds 
are said to be indivisible. (219) 

Thus I have described to you (the law relating to) 
the division of property and the procedure of (pro- 
creating) Kshetreja sons, etc ; now hear me discourse 
on the law (for the prevention of) gambling with dice 
(Dyutam). (220) 

Let a Iking banish gambling with dice {Dyutam) 
and betting on fighting animals {Samdhvaya) from his 



350 Manu Samhita, 

realm ; both these (vices) tend to destroy the kingdoia 
of a sovereign. (221) 

Gambling with dice, or betting oi» fighting animals 
is a theft, openly committed ; the king should always 
endeavour to repress these two '^crimes). (222) 

Gambling with inanimate things (such as dice, rods, 
etc.,) isicalled hyutam ; betting on (fighting) animals is 
called Samahva^a. (223) 

All of them, who engage themselves, or cause others 
to engage iij gambling with dice, or in betting 00 fi-ght- 
ing animals, the king shall kill, as well as those Sudras 
who wear the insignias of Brihmanas (224) 

The king shall speedily banish from his realm 
gamblers, street-dancers and" singers, men of cruel 
deeds, reviles of the Vedas, miscreants, and wine- 
brewers. (225) 

By staying in the realm, these (miscreants), who 
are thieves in disguise, daily cheat the honest sub- 
jects of the king (of their earnings), and thus prove a 
source of torment to them. (226) 

Gambling has been known to create great enmities 
of yore ; hence, a wise man must not gamble with dice 
even out of fun or sport. (227) 

On him„who shall openly or secretly gamSle with 
dice, the king shall be competent to inflict an ample 
sini condign punishment according to the gravity of hfe 
offence. (228) 

A Kshatriya, VaiVya, or S'udra, incapable of pay- 
ing the penalty, shall pay it by the labour of hisibody ; 
a Brihmana, similarly circumstanced, shall pay it off 
by easy instalments. (229,) 

Women, infants, old or insane persons, poor mer», 
and sick folks» incupaWe of paying the penalty, the 



Mann Samhita. 3^! 

king shall pimlsh With stripes of bamboo-twists, of 
With chords, or by binding them. (230) 

Officers in the king's service, who, in consideration 
of bribes {h't. affected by the heat of wealth)^ have 
destroyed the afifeirs of suitors, 'the king shall make 
Stript of all their possessions. (231) 

Falsifiers of the king's mandates, Cdrrupters of thd 
king's ministers, killejs of women, of infants, and of 
Br^hmanas, and men in allegiance with the enemy the 
king shall cause to be killed. (232) 

Whatever has been lawfully adjudicated in accord* 
ance with the instructions of the S^dstra (ns judi'- 
cata ?) the king shall pfohibit the revival thereof (in thd 
court.) {233) 

Whatever the Counsellors or judges, employed ia 
hearing suits, shall wilfully abjudicate in the [Wrong 
way, the king shall re-adjudiCate himself and shall 
pUnii^ them with a fine of one thousand Panas^ 
each. (234) 

A killer of a Brahmana, a wine-drinker, a thief, 
and a defiler of his preceptor's or superior's bed should 
be respectively known as Mahapatakins (great 
sinners), (235) 

Any one of these four kinds of Mihdpatakins^ 
failing to perform the expiatory penances, the king 
shall punish with fines as well as with corporeal punish* 
ments. (236) 

The mark of a female generative organ should be 
branded on the forehead of a defiler of his preceptor's 
bed ; that of a wine^bowl, on the forehead ot a wine- 
drinker ; that of a dog's foot, on the forehead of a 
gold-stealer ; and that of a headless human body, on the 
forehead of the killer ot a Brahmana. (23 7 j 



3g2 Mttn>u SamhifA^ 

No one shall eat ■with thetn, or serve lhe;ik- as 
priests, or teach them the Vedas, or marry theit 
daughters to them ; they must Wandej: miserable is this 
world, ousted o? all forms of virtue. (238) 

Their relations shall renounce these eruel mis= 
creants, branded with the aforesaid signs and unto 
whom no one shall make obeisance. This is the ordi- 
nation of Manu. ^239) 

But these (sinners), 'after having done the proper 
e-xpiations according to their castes, shall not be brands 
«d with the aforesaid signs on their foreheads ; but they 
shall pay a penalty of the Uttama Sahasa class to the 
king^ (240) 

A BrSjimana, accidentally (/<V. tift'v^ilfully) guilty of 
any of these great sins (Mahapatakas), shall pay a fin^ 
of the MadkyAma sdhaia class to the kiilg ; wilfully 
guilty of any of these crimes, let the king banish 
him from the country with all his clothes and bf^ong'- 
iiigs. (241) 

Others {s.e. Kshatriyas etc.^) accidentally guilty of 
ffny of these great Crimes, shall be dispossessed of all 
their possessions ; Wilfully guilty, they shall be banished* 
from the country. (242) 

Let not 'the virtuous king take the wealth of H 
Mahdpaiakin \ by taking it out of greed, he is associated 
with that fgreat) sin. (243) 

The fine realised from a Mahdpaiakin (great sinner) 
shall be thrown into the water as an offeiiiig to 
Varuna (the god of water , or it should be given to a 
BrAhmana, well read in the Vedas. (244^ 

Varuna is, the lord of punishment, he wields the 
f od even over kings ; a Brdhmana, welltversed in the 
Vedas, is the lord of the universe. (245) 



WtiKu Smtihi'ta,. S'SJ 

1(1 I'hfe Country, \«-here the kirig does not accept the 
>/ealth o'f the miscreants, long-lived men are born at 
proper times {i:e\ no premature birth or death occurs 
therein). '(246) 

There the Vais'yaS fully hart^est the several CropS> 
^as they so\<r (during the year , children do not die ia 
infancy, and babes are not born deformed. (247) 

A S'udra, guilty of \frilfuliy tormenting a BrAhmana, 
let Ihe king put to death by the painful mutilation of 
lais limbs or organs. (248; ^ 

In respect of the impartial administration of justice 
\tit. infliction of punishment), a king commits the same 
<Crime ^y punishing an innocent man as he does by 

'suffering a,^tSlty person to go unpunished. I'a^g) 

I'hus the procedure relating to suits between two 
litigent parties, which are divided into eigteen branches, 
lias been fufly described. (250) ' 

Let the king, fully discharging these duties^ covet 
the country which he has not conquered (///. ob' 
tained) and protect that which he has conquered. (251) 

Building forts according to the S'astra in a welt- 
populated country and residing therein, let the king 
assiduously weed out the thorns (exterminate the 
caitiffs, etc ,) of his i<ealm. (252) 

Kings, always eager to protect their subjeets, go to 
heaven by protecting the virtuous and punishing the 
wicked lit^ by clearing the realm of thorns.) (253) 

The king, who receives the revenue from his sub- 
jects without punishing the thieves (and miscreants), 
.produces a SbUrce %i terror in his realm and becomes 
i^epriv«d of heaven, (after death.) (254) 

The kingdom of the king, Under the protection af 
45 



354 Manu Samhttai 

whose strong arms the realm becomes free iiavA terrof, 
thrives like a tree watered, each day. (255) 

The king, who sees through his spies, must detect 
two kinds of thieves ; those who openly rob other men 
and those who rob tham in secret. {2561 

The open deceivers are those several kinds of trades-* 
men (who openly steal by means of false weights and 
exorbitant prices)* while the secret thieves are those 
who rob people in forests, (or by boring holes in the 
walls of their^ouses.) (257) 

Bribe-takers, those who extort money from othera 
by intimidation (robbers), cheats,* deceivers,! falsa 
soothsayers, palmists, men of secret vices, trainers of 
elephants who train them badly or inadequately, half- 
educated physicians, professional artists (painters, etc.), 
adepts in the traffic of females, and non-aryans who 
use the insignias of Aryans, these should be known 
as the open thorns (thieves) of the realm. {258—260) 

The king, by encouraging spies, stationed in many 
places, and ostensibly carrying on the same professions 
with these miscreants, shall bring them imder his con- 
trol. (261) 

The king, by proclaiming the offences of. these 
(open and sedtet thieves) in their respective trades, shall 
punish them according to their bodily strength and 
pecuniary circumstances. (262) 

Since, without punishment these evil-minded ones, 
wandering meekly in the disguise of honest men, can 

• VanchakTsr, such as those who give gif'ded metals in ex- 
change of gold. — Kulluka, 

t fCitabas, such as those who gamble with dice, or bet up»n 
fighting iaiiaiis.-^Kulluka. 



Mattu SamhilM. 355 

not be dissuaded from carrying on their nefarious 
trades. '{263) 

The king shall cause public assembly-rooms, water- 
chambers * cake-shops, wine shops, houses of infamy, 
hotels {lit. food-shops\ crossings of roads, grounds 
underneath the famous trees, trysting places, places of 
public shows or spectacles (P'rekshanllni) , dilapidated 
gardens, forests, houses of artisans,* deserted rooms, 
orchards, artificial bowers, etc., to be searched by spies, 
or by stationed or moving columns of foQt-soldiers for 
repressing the thieves. (264 — 2661 

He {i.e. the king) shall detect and destroy them 
{i.e., thieves) with the aid of skilful former thieves, 
who had been tlieir abettors or accomplices, and 
who are fully acquainted with their practices and loca- 
tions, etc. (267) 

They shall decoy them out of their retreats with 
prospects of feasts {lit. food and eatables etc.,) or of 
seeing holy Brdhmanas, or of witnessing deeds of 
valour, and have them congregated (at a previously 
appointed place). (268) 

Those (thieves), who shall not congregate there, or 
being warned by the spy-thieves of the king shall avoid 
their company, let the king forcibly attack.and kill with 
their friends, cognates, and relations. (269) 

Let not the virtuous king kill a thief caught without 
his booty (or implement of boring holes in the walls) ; 
caught with these, let him kill the thief (withchit) the 
least hesitation. (2701 

Them also> who shall [knowingly give food and 
shelter to thieves, or give. them utensils of (daily use). 



• The text has Prapa which literally means a chamber where 
water is given to the way-farers and psssers by. 



3g6 Ma/HVi Savtrkfta, 

the king shall kill (for their in<Krect coin^Ii'cil5r fa 
the crime.) {zfi) 

Those who are entrusted' with the duty of policing 
the realmy as well as those who- guard' its bouncferiesj if 
found implicated with planning thefts (or robberies)), 
shall be- punished as- thieves by the kireg. (2721 

The king shall punish the swerving oSdf man of" 
virtuous living. \i.e. BrahmaiKi) ff om> the patb of his: 

duty. (27.3) 

Them, wfio' on hearing that a village-is being lootedv 
or a bridge is being, hewd dowii^ or a theft is being; 
eommitted by thieves, do not chase them* for their ap- 
preheiTsion to the best of their might,, let the- king 
ianish &oni the country, with ^J their belongings (Jit^ 
Bnstript of their cloths. ^-5^4) 

Stealers of king's treasure, those who\are' bcstile- to» 
fiira, as- well as those who secretly contrive- to< advance 
the cause of the king's enemv, he {i.e. therking.1 shalli 
kill by inflicting various punishments- on them. (275) 

Of thieves, who commit thefts in the night by 
feorning holes (in the w^fe of bouses), let the king 
eut off the hands ; and after that, place them cm the 
tops of sMjp pointed pikes. (276) 

Those" who steal by cutting knots of dothes ■(«>:- 
things tied up in knots at the ends of cloths)> 
should be punished^ with the mutilation ot fingersi 
on the first Gonyictsou^ with the mutilation of hands; 
and legs' on the second, and with deatli ob the: 
third. (277) 

Them, who shall knowingly give fire, food, tools or 
shelter to thieves, or secrete their stolen articles in theis 
houses, let the king punish as actual thieves. (27&) 



Mctnu SamkiM, SSTi 

I 

He who- has cut away the emb.anktne;it (/<V, des^ 
ttroys) « tank should be killed, or killed by beings 
dffowened in water; but in the event of his d^y^ 
repairing the same and making it as before-, he shall pay 
a fine of the Uttama Sdhasa class to. the king. (279) 

Those, who break open a royal storcTiouse, or 
a treasury,, or a divine temple> or an- arsenal, as well a» 
stealers of king's elephants or horses," should bepunisht- 
ed with death without the least hesitation. (2S0.) 

He, who has destroyed the entire water of a tank,, 
dedicated to public use, or has stopped the channel 
©f a running water course by means of an embank- 
ment, shall be punished with a fine of the Prathattfa 
Sahasa class. (2S1) 

One, found guilty of defecating, except in the time 
of distress, on the king's high way, shall be punished 
with a fine of two K&rshdpanas ; moreover he shall be 
caused to remove the feces himself. (282) 

But a distressed person, an infant or an old map^ 
found guilty of the same offence, shall be liabe to 
to remove the feces. This js the decision^ (283) . 

Physicians, found guilty of niaking wrong mediqal 
treatments in respect of beasts and men, shall be res- 
pectively punished with fines of the fir;st Sdhasa and 
middling Sahasa class. (284) 

A breaker of a flii^t of steps, of a tenner -post, 
cr of a divine image shall be punished with a fine of 
five hundred Pianas \ he shall be liabl.e to. reconstruct 
and replace the same. (285) 

For having adulterated an unadulterated a,EticIe, 
or having bored a gem which ought not to be bored, or 
for having bored it at the wrong place, one shalljje 



358 Manu Samhila. 

punished with a fine of the Prathama Saahasa 
class. (28 6r 

He, who sells unequally (mixed) goods to one who 
has paid the proper price for the superior quality, or 
sells articles of equal value to one for a? greater and to 
another for a lesser value, shall be liable to pay a 
fine of the middling Sdhasa class to the king. (287) 

Houses of incarceration (Prison houses) should be 
situated near the public high way, so that the en- 
chained misq^eants may be seen in their miserable 
plight by the passers by. (288) 

A house-breaker, a filler of a ditch, and a breaker of 
a wall-door shall be instantaneously banished from 
the country. (289) 

For having practised a fatal incantation {i.e. a spell 
practised for one's death), for having hypnotised (/?V, 
subjugation of one's mind) one who is not his in- 
timate relation,* or for having practised an incantation 
for the distraction of one's mind, the offender shall 
be punished with a fine of two hundred Pannas, (if 
death of its victim has not resulted therefiromt) (290) 

For having sold devitalised seeds or bad seeds as 
good ones, or for having obliterated (lit demolished) 
the boundaiy marks of a village), one stall be 
punished with rasitilation of organs (such as the nose, 
ears, etc). (291) 

* The text hac <4>ia^^ai, which means not by his- own people. 
A wife,* mother or a father is at liberty to hypnotise her husband 
or his or her son ; but one atteniptmg to hypnotise another with 
a view to make hin make large gifts in his favour, or to extort 
money Irom him, is guilty of the offence, dealt with in this 
couplet. 

+ If death-results from such an incantation, its practiser shall 
be punished as a murderer. — Kulhika. 



Manu Sa»ihita. 359 

llie gold smith is the -wi-orst of all thorns of the 
Jffealm ( ue. thieves) ; hence, a gold smith, fomid guilty 
of treading the path of iniquity \i. e., of StSaling gold) 
Should be put to death by cutting him to pieces with a 
razor. (292) 

For having dtolen implements of agriculture, or 
weapons, or medicines, the king shall punish the 
offender in consideration of the hardness of the time, 
and the motive of his crime. (293) 

The soverign, the premier, the capital or palace, 
the kingdom, the treasury, the army, and the ally, 
these are the seven essentials [Prairiiii of govern- 
ment ; and (hence), a kingdom is called a seven-limbed 
(polity). (294) 

Of these seven limbs of government, the destrue- 
tidn of each preceding one is more diresome (moment- 
ous) than that of the one immediately succeeding it 
In the order of enumeration. (295' 

As there is no difference of importance among the 
three staves (of an ascetic bound together to form one), 
so these seven limbs af government, though contrary 
to one another in their virtues {i. e. ends and nature), 
are co-operative ; one does not excel another in res- 
pect of eminence or importance. (296) • 

In those works, which are effected by any particular 
limb of government-, should be judged its specific 
pre eminence. (297) 

By means of secret spies, by encouraging his army, 
and (by the ability; to institute works (of public utility) 
the king must judge his own strength as well as that of 
tis enemy. (2(^8) 

In consideration of the prevalence of dreadful epide- 
, mics in his (enemy's) country or of any other distress 



5%& Mafiu Sam%tfa. 

therein, as wftTl as of the great or Small clisturTbaa?^ 
in his state polity, let the king make war or peace 
As'ith his adversary. (299) 

Tired of {ie.-, unsuccessful in) his attempting to 
increase his territory a%d Gon(|uer the kingdom of his 
advefsary, let the king put forth new efforts (lit> 
tindertake fresh .works) to that end. The goddess of 
(fortune embraces the man who has undertaken 
a work. (500) 

I riie' ^iflfSrent cycles of '.time stich as] the Kritam, 
Treta, Dvapdra and Kali are but the undertakings 
kK kings. {J.e. they consist of the incidents of royal 
fives). Hence, the king is ealled (the embodiment ofj 
a^«jfrt (cycle of time . {301) 

When the king sleeps > remains idle and inoperative) 
Vie is the Kali Yuga, when he is awake [i.e.y without 
XiU'dertaking any sort of exploit!, he is the Dvdpara^, 
when he energetically undertakes an exploit he is the 
Tretd, and when he is on the move, (fully operative 
and wakeful) he is the Kritam (golden age.) (302) 

The divine energies of (the deities) Indra, Arka (the 
sun', V^yu (the windi, Yama (the god ot death), Varuna 
(the god of oceans), Chandra (the moon), aod Agni 
(the fire), 'ftrhich enter into the composition of his 
£,elf, the king shall call into play (in his works in 
life) (zoz) 

As Indra ithe lord of rains) pours showers of rain 
on the earth for four months in the year, so the king, 
by showering gifts and riches on his subjects for fouf 
months, shall practise the vow of Indra i.e.^ imitate 
the conduct of Indra.) 1304) 

As the sun-god soaks up Water (from the earth) with 
his rays during the eiglit mouths in the year, so the 



tflanu Samhi'ta. i6l 

kiiig stiall extract the revenue from his subjects, this 
is what is called acting like unto the sun {Arka 
Vratam.) (305) 

As the air runs through all created things, so the 
king shall penetrate into the hearts of all his subjects 
with the help of his spies. (306) 

As Yama <the lord of death) deals impartially With 
all (irrespective of his votaries or revilers), so the king 
shall administer even-handed justice to all his sub- 
jects ; this what is 'called Yama Vratam {i.e., acting 
like unto Death.) 1307) 

As Varuna (the god of ocean) is seen to bind (the 
Sinners) with his noose, so the king shall punish the 
miscreants (with imprisonment, etc.). This is what 
is called the Varuna Vratam (acting like unto 
Varuna. (308) 

As men rejoice at the sight of the full moon, so 
the king, in whom stayeth the delight of his subjects, 
te called the moon-vowed one. (309) 

Mighty, and full of indomitable prowess, the king, 
who constantly consumes the miscreants and the re- 
fractory vassals of his own, is said to act like unto the 
fire (Agneya Vratam). (310) ^ 

As the Earth supports all creatures on her (buoyant) 
body (in the air), so the king supports all his subjects. 
This is what is called his acting like unto the Earth 
{Partkiva Vratam). (31 1) 

Always energetic and possessed of these expedients, 
let the king suppress the caitiffs both in his realm and 
in other countries. (312) 

Even having obtained {i.e. fallen in) the direst dis- 
tress, let him not enrage Brahmanas ; (inasmuch as) 
46 



362 Manu Samhtta. 

enraged, they may instantaneously kill him with hi3 
army and riding anynals. (313) 

Who may not meet his doom by enraging the 
Br4hmagas, who made the fire, the eater of all things 
(clean and unclean), the great ocean,, undrinkable, 
and the wasting moon, full again ? (314) 

Who can prosper by insulting the feelings of 
Br4hmanas, who *n fits of anger can create separate 
worlds with their presiding deities, and undeify the 
gods?* (315) . 

Who, loving life, shall oppress Brdhmanas on whom 
do the worlds and deities constantly depend for their 
existence, and whose only treasure is Brahma ?t (316) 

As the fire is the great deity, whether consecrated 
or unconsecrated ; so a great deity is the Brdhmana, 
whether he is erudite or unread. . (3 17) 

The mighty-prowessed fire is not defiled even in 
the cremation ground ; but fed with libations (of 
clarified butter, and other offerings) in a sacrifice, it 
becomes freshly augmented. (318) 

And so, even if Br^hmanas betake to all kinds of 
evil acts, they should be regarded as (prototypes of) 
the supreme deity. (319) 

The Brihslana is capable of making full reprisals 
for wrongs done by an extremely spirited (arrogant) 
Kshatriya on Br^hmanas (by means of imprecation, 
etc.) The Kshatriya has originated from (the arm of) 
Brahma (320) 



* i.e., Can divest them of their divinities. Many deities of 
the Brahmanic pantheon, such as I ndra, etc., are known to have 
been changed-into mortals under imprecations of holy sages. 

t KuLLUKA explains Brahmu by Veda. 



Manu Sainhtta 363 

From the water originated the fire,' from Rrahma 
emanated the Kshatriyas, and from stone originated 
iron ; they are subdued by their respective sources of 
origin. T321) 

The Kshatriya without the Brahmana {i. e., foirce 
without intellect) and the Brahmana withoiit the 
Kshatriya can never thrive ; acting in co-operation 
with each other they prosper in this -v^orld. (322) 

Having given all money realised as fines froiti 
miscreants (other than Mahnpnkins) to BrShnlanas^ and 
made over the throne to his son, let the king, (afflict- 
ed with an incurable disease), go to and die in ai», 
battle* (323) 

The king, discharging all the duties, (laid down in 
this chapter), shall employ all his servants for con- 
stantly doing good to his subjedts. (304) 

Thus all the atts and eternal' duties of the king 
have been fully described, now hear me expound the' 
duties of Vais'yas and S'udras in succession. (325) 

A Vais'ya, initiated with the holy thread, shall 
marry, and daily attend to agriculture and cattle- 
rearing. (326) 

Prajnpati (consciousness embodied' by the uni- 
verse) c'reated the beasts and gave them to the 'Vais'ya; 
and all the creatures he gave to the king and the 
Brahmana. (327) • 

The "Vais'ya must not desire to keep no beasts; 
if the Vais'ya desires to keep beasts {i.e., to rear 
animals", let none else do that. 1328) 

Let the Vais'ya appraise (cultivate the knowledgfe 
of) the prices and qualities of gems, pearls, corals, 

* Or to quit his life by starvation in the absence of a battle— 
Sangrdmd sambhave tvanas'anddindj. — Kulluka. 



364 nfanu SamkttA^ 

fiietals, woven stuffs, scented things (such as camphor, 
etc.,) and salts. (329) 

Likewise, he mu^ possess the knowledge of sow- 
ing seeds, of the specific traits erf the soil, of the 
measures of (i.e., the rules of measuring) lands, and the 
rules of weighing articles. (330) 

(As well as) defects or excellences of articles, the 
good or evil traits of countries, profits or losses ia 
manufactured articles and the increase of animals (the 
method of rearing cattle, etc.) (331) 

He must £now the wages of artisans and workmen, 
and languages of different races of meji, shall be able 
to forecast the increase or decrease in the prices, 
and amelioration or deterioration in the quality, of an 
article at a particular place and time, as well as the, 
mode of selling or buying. 332 

He shall constantly try to multiply his riches by 
honest means and give food to animals out of all 
creatures. (333) 

Serving the renowned house-holder Brahmanas, 
well-versed in the Vedas, forms the highest virtue 
(duty) of S'udras. (334) 

Pure in body and mind, of gentle speech and 
demeanour, a S'udra, by living under the shelter of a 
Brihmaua, itttains a considerably higher status (lit, 
caste) among his fellow S'udras. (335) 

Thus the auspicious duties of the Members of the 
four castes in times of peace {i.e., not in times of dis- 
tress, have been described; now hear me discourse 
on their duties in times of distress. (336) 



Manu Samhttd 365 

CHAPTER X. 

The members of the three twice-born orders, attend- 
ing to the specific duties of their castes, shall read 
(the Vidas), but the Brihmarias alone shall teach the 
Vedas, and none else, this is the conclusion ( 1 1 

Cognisant of the modes of livelihood of all castes 
of men, and discharging the specific duties of his own 
order, let the Brahmana advise on the same to mem- 
bars of all (the four) castes. ^2) 

By the excellence of his specific djities, by the 
loftiness of his birth (from the face of Brahma), and 
by bis comprehension of the Vedas,* the Brdhmana is 
the lord of all the castes. (3J 

The Brahmana, Kshatriya, and Vais'ya are the three 
twice-born castes ; the S'udra is the fourth, there being 
no sub-castes among S'udras, and there is no fifth 
caste. (4) 

Sons, begotten by members of the (four several) 
castes on lawful married wives, belonging to their 
respective social orders (castes) in the due order of 
enumeration, and with unraptured hymens (at the 
time of marriage , should be regarded as the best (of 
sons). , Sons, begotten by twice-born ones on wives 
not belonging to their respective castes, do, not bceome 
of the same castes with their fathers ; they belong to 
different castes. Sons begotten by members of twice- 
born castes on wives belonging to their next inferior 
castes (in the order of enumeration) are said (by Manu) 
not obtain the castes of their fathers owing to the 
degraded castes of their mothers. (5 — 6) 

• The text has Niyamasya cha Dkaranat. GoVINPARAJA 
explains it by " for his pi-actising the vow of Snatakas, etc., 
Sndtaka Vratadidharandt, 



366 Mattu Samhita. 

Thus the status of sons begotten by fathers on 
wives respectively belonging to their next inferior 
castes has been described ; now hear me discourse on 
the status of sons, begotten by men on wives belonging 
to the next but one, or next but two inferior castes of 
their own. (7) 

Sons begotten by Brihmanas on their lawfully 

married Vais'ya wves are called Ambashthas ; s6ns 

begotten by Brahmanas on|jieir S'udra wives are called 

Nishddas or Pdras'avas (lit. living corpses). (8) 
« 
Sons begotten by Kshatriyas on their S'udra wives 

are called Ugras ; they become cruel in deeds and 

temperaments owing to the natural mental traits of 

their respective parents. (9) 

Sons begotten by Brihmanas on wives of the next 
three (inferior) castes \ie., Kshatriya, Vais'ya and 
S'udra), those begotten by Kshatriyas on wives of the 
next two inferior castes, and by Vais'yas on wives of 
the next inferior castfe (S'udra , in their order of enu-^ 
meration, should be regarded as six! inferior (Apasada) 
sons. (10) 

A son begotten by a Kshatriya on a Brahmana 
woman becomes a Suta by caste; sons begottea by 
Vais'yas on Kshatriya women are c<>X!i&AMagadhns, and 
sons begotten by Vais'yas on Brihmana women are 
called Vaidehas. (11) 

Sons begotten by S'udras on Vais'ya women are 
called Ayogavas, those begotten on Kshatriya women 
by them are called Kshattas, and those which they 
beget on Brihmaua women are called Ckandalas, the 
most abominable creatures. Thus the mixed castes 
are originated. (12) 



Manu Samhtta. ^6'f 

Sons begotten by men on wivies, belonging to castes 
tiext by one to those of their own, computed in the order 
of enumeration such as, the Ambasktha £^nd Ugra^ bear 
the anology with Kshatta and Vaidehas, which are 
begotten by fathers on wives belonging to castes next 
by ,one to those of their own, counted in the inverse 
order of enumeration. (13) 

Sons of the twice-born ones, begotten by them on 
wives belonging to the next inferior castes to those 
of their own as described before, are tailed Antar 
Janmas, owing to the defects (inferior castes) of their 
respective mothers. (14) 

Sons begotten by a Brdhmaaa on Ugra, A'^mbastha 
and A''yogava women are respectively called Avrita, 
Abhira and Dhigvana. 15) 

The Ayogava, Khattd and Chand&la, the lowest of 
men, inasmuch as they were begotten by S'udras on 
women respectively belonging to superior castes in the 
inverse order of enumeration, should be regarded as 
extremely low castes. (16) 

The Magadha and Vaideha, begotten by the Vais'ya, 
and the Suta, begotten by the Kshatriya, should be 
regarded as of vile castes, inasmuch as they have been 
begotten by their fathers on women (of ftieir superior 
castes) reckoned in the inverse order of enumeration. ( 17) 

A son begotten by a Nishada on a S'udra w^oman, 
becomes a Puhkasa by caste ; a son, begotten by a 
S'udra on 2l Nishada woman is called a Kukkutaka. 11 81 

A son, begotten by a Kshatta on an Ugra woman, 
is called a S'vapaka ; a son, begotten by a V aide ha 
on an Ambastha women is called a Vena. ( 19) 

Sons begotten by twice-born ones on wives of their 
own castes, and devoid of the rites of initiation with the 



366 Maitu SatnhitA. 

thread, etc., are called Vraiyas (lit. broken VoWed 
ones.) 20 

Sons begotten by Vrcltya Brihmanas on law- 
uUy married wives of their own castes, are called 
Bhurjakantakas ; they are also known by the desig- 
nations of Avantyhs Vhtadhanas, Pushpadhas and 
S'aikhas also. (21) 

Sons begotten by Vrhtya Kshatriyas on lawfully 
married wives of their own castes, are called Jhallas, 
Mallas, IVataf, Karanas, Khasas and Dravidas. 12a) 

Sons begotten by Vrhtya (uninitiated) Vais'yas on 
wives of their own castes, are called Sadhanv, acharyaya 
Kdrustia, Vtjanma, Maitra and Svatata. (23) 

Through the intermixture of castes, through in- 
termarriages among forbidden castes, and through 
renunciation of their specific duties by (members of 
the four several; castes, that the hybrid ones are 
born. 1241 

Now I shall describe in detail the castes of low 
origin which spring up from sexual intercourses among 
members of the four several) castes, reckoned in the 
usual or inverse order of enumeration. (25* 

SutSs, Vaidehakns, Chandalas, the vilest of men, 
Mdgndhas, Kshattds and Ayogavas are the six hybrid 
castes, (begotten by fathers on mothers^ respectively 
belonging to) castes, counted in the inverse order of 
enumeration [Pratilomnja^. '26) 

Members of these six hybrid castes beget on women 
respectively belonging to their superior castes, or to 
castes of their mothers, or to their own castes, sons 
who become of their own castes. (27) 

As sons begotten by a Br&hmana on a Vais'ya or 
Kshatriya wife, or on his Brihmana wife are superior 



%o his soiiB by a S'udra wife, so among members df 
inferior .castes, sons begotten jfey Vais'yas on|Ksbatriya 
women, or thoss begotten by Kshatriyas on Bribmana 
^oraen are a little more honourable than sons 
begotten by S'udras on women, belonging to their 
(superior) castes, reckoned in the inverse order of 
'enumeration, {li) 

Sons begotten by members of the aix hybrid castes, 
such as the Ayogavas, etc., on women belonging 
to their immediately superior ^r inferior castes, (lit. 
castes reckoned in the usual or inverse order of 
enumeration) should be respectively reckoned as viler, 
and more condemnable ; and more deprived of the 
privilege of doing religious rites. (29) 

As S'udras begot the vilest Chanddlax\ on Brih- 
mana women, so the vile sons, begotten by members of 
the vile hybrid castes on women respectively belong- 
ing to the four castes, shall be regal^deSj a^ extremely 
vile, degraded and condemnable. (30) 

Sons begotten through intermarriage by the 

members of the six hybrid castes such as, the Ayogavas, 

,<tc,, among their own castes, are divided into (grouped 

under* fifteen castes; land) th«y are more j degraded 

, than tHeir progenitors. '(31) 

Sons, begotten by members of the robber castes oil 
women of the Ayogava caste are called SairinMras ; 
they are .expert in dressing hair, and although not 
actually servants (lit slaves, Ddsas), they live by 
service and by capturing birds and beasts. (32) 

Sons begotten by Vaidehas on Ayogava women 
are called Maitreyas ; they lavishly sing the eulogies 
of the king at dawn, and rouse him from sleep by 
Xringing bells (va. the morning'. (33) 
47 



37« Manu SatnHilA. 

Son«, begotten by NisMdhas on Ayoi^aiia Wom<Jll, 
are '.called Margavas, who live by working as boatmen J 
the inhabitants of Aryavatta call them Kaivartds. (34) 

Of women Jof the Ayogava caste, who wear the 
clothes of corpses and eat the leavings ot other men's 
food, are bom the three vile castes {Sairandhra, 
Maitreya and Mdrgava) who do not obtain the castas 
of their 'fathers. '(3 5) 

Of K&ravara Womeh by Nishddas are born the 
Charmakarms (Cobble's), and of Kdravara and Nishada 
Ss^omen by Vaidehdkas are respectively born the 
Andhras and Medas, who live outside villages. (361 

Of Vnidehika women by Chandalas are bom 
Pandapakas, who manufacture bamboo-made articles 
and of Vaideha women by Nishadas are born the 
Ahindakas. (t,"]) 

Of Pukkaia women by Chnndalas are bom the 
loathsome, villainous Sopdkas, who live by working as 
public executioners {lit. by executing criminals punished 
with death.) (38) 

Sons begotten^ by Chandalas on Nishada women 
are called Antyiivasnyins, who live by working as 
attendants j^ at cremation grounds, and they 'are ; the 
vilest of all vile castes. (39) 

Fathers and mothers of these hybrid castes have 
been set forth, those of unknown parentage should be 
detected by their respective works. J140) 

Of sons begotten by twice-born ones (Brihmanas 
and Kshatriyas) on wives of their own castes, or on 
wives belonging to castes next, or next by one to those 
of their own,' six castes (of sons) have the right t)f 
being initiated with the thread {lit. the privilege of 



Manu Samhita. 371 

twice-b®rnship), and the rest are S'udras, partaking of 
the status and privileges of S'udra. (41)' 

But in each cycle of time, these men (such as 
Vi3'y4mitra, etc.) {i.e., those born of parents belonging 
to the same caste or contrary), by dint of peniten- 
tial austerities, and through the excellence of their 
(Beejas) paternal elements (such as, Rishyas'ringa, etc.) 
acquire higher castes, (and through contrary causes) 
are degraded to yiler castes in life. (42) 

The following Kshatriya, castes, through=the extinc- 
tion, (non-performances) of their proper religious rites 
and on account of not seeing [i.e., in the absence of 
their contact with) B^dhmanas, have been degraded to ■ 
the S'udra caste in this world. (43) 

[ They are J the Paundrakas, Andras, Dravidas, 
Kamvojas, Javanas, Sakas, Paranda?, Pandavas, Chinas, 
Kiratas, Daradas, Kashas. [Kshatriyas of these countries 
have become S'udras for having renounced the religious 
rites.] (44) 

Members of castes, respectively originated from the 
face, arms, thighs and legs of Brahman [i.e., Brah- 
mana, Kshatriya, Vais'ya and S'udra) who have been 
comprised outside the pale of these four castes for 
the extinction of their religious rites, are all called 
Dasyus, whether they speak an Aryan or a non-Aryan 
(Mlechchha) tongue. (45) 

Castes begotten by the twice-born ones on women 
belonging to their next inferior castes in the due order 
of enumeration ( ^pasadas , as well as those begotten 
by men on women belonging to castes, counted in the 
inverse order of their enumeration, shall live by doing 
lowly works, which the Brihmanas are incapable of 
(doing. (46) 



372" M'anu Sam^M 

Sutai shall Ih* by- working its- charloteeis ; AmSa^^ 
tkas. by practising medicines ; Vaideh/tkas, by gjuarditig^- 
ttie haremsf ol^ lung's, aitid' if'd^attfms by tracEn^. (47) 

Nishadas stvall live by klllihg: fi^es; Aytogdvar, Hxf 
doing GiEpentry ; and Medas, Andkras, ChahcMds,. 
and iI/^a5f«J, by killing wild beasts. (48) 

Kshal/as, UgraioaA Pukkasas shall lire 1^ killing; 
or capturii^ hole-dwelling animals ^ cwitag off leather 
(cobbler's work) is the profession of; Dkigvatias, aiiid 
drum- beating, %tc , is that of the Venai. (49) 

Doing their proper woxks, these castes shall live 
in the' fortet, or about cremation-grounds, or oa hM 
tops, or underneath the lordly tree& 1 50 > 

Chand'alas and Svapachas kltt. doig-eater^ shall Kve; 
at the out-skirts of villages, they shall tkse do utensils ;: 
dogs and asses being their only ■vi^ealthi. (5r> 

Th&y ^Chand/<ilas, etc., shall wear the- apparels ot 
corpses, &X but of broken pots^ wear ornaments of 
steel, and live a nomadic life. (52) 

Oiie, while doing a rdigious rite, must Rot see, or 
speiak to them (CAi«<jf^/aj) ; they shall carry on their 
monetaty or matrimonial transactions among members, 
©f their own caste. (531 

One shalt cause food to be given to- themi througb 
his servants in broken saucers; and they must not 
be allowed to rodm about in a village in the night. (54) 

Stamped with the signs of king''s permits on their 
persons, they shall enter the village on business {i.e.,. 
for the sale or purchase of goods) in the day ; 4nd the 
decision is that, they shall remove the corpses of the: 
friendless deceased (from villages). (55) 

They shall kill, according to the rules of the -^astra^ 
criminals punished by the king with death, and take: 



Manu S.ainktla 37.;$ 

the beddings and wearing apparels of the executed 
coDTicfs. 156) 

In respect ot ascertaining the Aryan or nqn^Aryaiv 
origins of men of vile parentage, who stand outside 
the pale of the four castes, their respective works 
(acts or coifdact) should from the criterion ofjiidg- 
meiit. (57> 

Meanness^, cruelty, malice, and doing improper acts 
(».*., improper deeds) point to the vile origin of a 
man. (58) 

^ son partakes of the nature of his father or mother 
or of both of them ; a man of vile descent can never 
conceal his origin. (59) 

Born in a noble family, the son of a faithless 
mother, bred in adultery, partai<es more or less of the. 
wicked nature of his vile progenitor. (60) 

The kingdom, wherein such ruinous hybridiseVs of 
castes are born, soon perisheth with all its inmates. (61) 

By voluntarily laying down their lives without any 
consideration of gain or reward for the good (succour) 
of Brahmanas, kine, infants or women, these (castes) 
men ascend to heaven (after death . (621 

Annihilation of killing prppensities {i..e , compassion 
to all), truthfulness, non-stealing, purity and subjuga- 
tion of the senses, these fonr, Manu described as the 
general duties of all the four castes. (63) 

If the daughter of a Brahmaoa by his S'udra wife 
is married to a Brihmana, and the daughter of that 
union is again married to a Br^h'mana, and so on utj- 
interruptedly up to the seventh generation in the 
female Jihe, then at the seventh generation the issue 
of such union is #vested of its Pd>as'ava caste and 
becomes a BrAhmana. (64) 



374 



Manu Samhtta. 



Thus a S'udra may obtain the caste of a Br&htnaua 
and a Br&hmaaa may obtain the caste of a 9'udra ; 
similarly, the sons of Kshatriya or Vais'ya fathers may 
acquire higher or lower castes. (65) 

Of sons, begotten out of lust by Brihmanas on 
non-Aryan women, and sons begotten by non-Aryan« 
on Brahmana women, whose is the preference ? (65' 

Certainly the 'sons begotten by Aryans on non- 
Aryan women become possessed of the privileges (of 
instituting Pa^;a-Yajnas, etc., ».«., they become Aryans), 
while sons begotten by non- Aryans on* Aryan women 
become non-Aryans. This is the decision. (67) 

Owing to the defects (degraded nature) of their 
births, both these two kinds of sons {i.e., sons begotten 
by Brihmanas on non-Aryan women and sons begotten 
by non-Aryans on Aryan women) are divested of the 
rights of being initiated with the thread, etc., (/«/. 
of the right of purificatory rit«s being done unto 
them.) (68) 

As (from) good seeds, sown in a good soil, excellent 
cereals sprout up, so the son, begotten by an ".Aryan 
on an Aryan woman is worthy of {Hi. acquires the 
privilege ofi all purificatory rites being done unto 
him. (69) . 

Several wise men assert the pre-eminence of the 
soil ; others, of the seed ; while some there are who 
speak of the equal importance of both the seed 
and the soil. In such cases of conflicting opinions 
the following is the decision of law {i.e., criterion of 
judgment.) (70) , 

Sown in a barren soil, a seed dies before sprouting, 
while a good field without seeds is but a hard fallow 
{Sthandilam.) (71) 



Since through their excellent energies (potency), 
Seeds,' cast in the wombs of beasts (by the holy sages), 
fructified in the shapes of human beings, who became 
honoured and commendable Rishis* in life ; the seed 
is commended (as of greater importance in an act of 
fecundation). (72) 

In respect of a non-Aryan, who does the acts of 
(behave like) an Aryan and an Aryan who deports 
himself {lit. does the works of) like a non-Aryan, the 
ordainer, after deliberation, ordained the^fact that, they 
are neither equal nor unequal. (73 ) 

Brihmanas, addicted to the contemplation of Brahma, 
who discharge the duties peculiar to their order, shall 
(alone) earn their livings by doing the six following 
acts. (74) 

Study of the Vedas, teaching the Vedas to pupils), 
performances of religious sacrifices, ofHciating as priests 
at sacrifices instituted by others, gift-making, and ac- 
ceptance of gifts, these six are the vocations {/it. works) 
of the eldest borns of creation {i.e., Brihmanas). ( 75) 

Out of these six acts, by oflSciating as priests at 
other men's sacrificps, by teaching the t^edns, and by 
accepting gifts from clean gift-makers, let the Brih- 
manas earn their livelihood. 76) , 

Teaching the Fedas, officiating as priests at other 
men's sacrifices and gift-taking, which forms the third, 
are ;the three acts which shall never revert to the < 
Kshatriya as against the Brihmaaa.t (77) 

* The holy sage Rishyas'ringa was procreated by Vibhandaba 
in the womb of a she-deer. 

t The text has Brahmanat Kshatriyam. praii, i.e.. a Kshatrija 
shall never be competent to take gifts from a Brihmana> or to 
teach him the Vedn, or to officiate as a priest at a sacrifice insti- 
tuted by a Brahmana. 



gyg Manu SamkiH. 

Similarly, these privileges {lit. acts> must not be 
claimed by the Vais'ya against the Brfthmana,,inasmuch 
as the lord of the universe (Prajapati) did not ordain 
these duties (of gift-taking, etc,,), for the Vais'ya and 
the Kshatriya. This is the decision. (78) 

A Kshatriya shall earn his living by wielding . arms 
and "weapons; and a Vais'ya, by trade, agriculture and 
cattle-rearing. FSr virtue (and not for a living) they 
can study the Veda, make gifts, and institute religions 
sacrifices. (79) 

Of works stated before, the study of the Vedas 
forms the specific duty of Brihmanas; protection 
of subjects forms the specific duty of Kshatriyas ; 
and agriculture forms the speciar vocation of the 
Vais'ya. (80) 

Failing to earn a living by his specific vocation, let 
a BriShmana earn his livelihood by doing the duties 
of a Kshatriya, since the vocation of a Kshatriya is 
more kindred to that of his own (than any other 
calling). (Si I 

Failing to earn his livelihood by either of itjhese two 
callings, how shall a Brihmana obtain a living 7 Let 
him earn^ bi^s living (in that case) by following the 
vocation of a Vais'ya, [viM., agriculture and cattle- 
rearing). (83) 

Failing to earn a living by. following the vocation 
of a Vais'ya, let not a Brihma^a, or a Kshatriya live 
by prosecuting agriculture, which is dependent (on 
bullocks) and entails the destruction of many (under 
Ifround) liviBs. (83) 

Many people consider agriculture to be a com- 
mendable vocation, but, in fact, it is condemned by the 



Marcu Samhita. 377 

'^iftttotis, ifiasmuch as the iron-boisftd ftitrow penetrates 
^rito th6 earth and destroys many terrestrial lives. {84) 

A BrShnaana, of a Kshatriya, failing to earn his 
livelihood by his proper Vocation, and thereby happen- 
ing to infringe the LaW, shall live by selling the im- 
'tondemnable and wealth-augmenting articles of trade, out 
•of those which are (ordinarily) sold by a Vais'ya. (85) > 

He must not sell edible articles'of all tastes, ^on-^ 
Action made with sesame speds, -stones, salts, feeasts- 
^and men (slaves). (86) , 

[ As well as ] clothes woven with red-colouired 
cotton twists or with, hemp twists, silk-clotha, cloths 
*tiade of sheep's wool, fruits and edible roots, and 
'medicinal drugs (herbs). (87) 

(As well as) Water, weapon, poison, flesh. Soma plant, 
■all kinds of scented things, milk, bee's wax, milk curd, 
■clarified butter, oil, honey, treacle and Kus'a grass, (88) 

[And] all kinds of wild beasts, the fanged ones 
4n special, birds, wines, indigo, shellac, and all beasts 
■w-ith anbifurcated hoops. (89) 

Having wilfully raised a crop of sesame seeds by 
iiimself cultivating the soil, let him speedily sell those 
■holy (seeds) only for the purposes of religious sacH^- 
'fices. (90) J 

For having sold sesame seeds for the purposes of 
food, unguents and gifts, he, with his manes, shall be 
Mierged (born) as worms in the feiccreta of dogs. (91) 

By selling 'flesh, lac-dye, or salt, he shall be degraded 
•on the very day of the sale ; by selling milk a Br4h- 
raana shall become a S'udra in the course of three 
•days. C92) • 

For having wilfully sold other articles bf trade 
^ Brahraana, in the course of seven n^hts (day s), ' shall 
48 



37^, Manu Samhita. 

assume the natufe of a Vais'ya (i.e.t be shall be de< 
graded to the status of a Vais'ya in a week). (93)' 

Saps^suoh as treacle, etc.,) may be given (or taken) 
in exchange of (emolient I §aps such as milk, clarified 
butter, etc)., but sap must not be taken in exchange 
of salt ; similarly, raw rice may be taken in exchange 
of cooked rice, and sesame of paddy. (94) 

Rather should'a Kshatriya in distress live by fol- 
Jovring all these trades ; but under no circumstances^ 
should he emljrace the vocation of a Br&hmapa. (95) , 

Him, who, though of an inferior caste, shall adopt, 
out of greed, the vocation of his superior caste for a* 
living, let the king banish from the country, stript of 
all his belongings. (96) 

It is better that one should live by doing the vile 
works allotted to his own caste than embrace the 
vocation of a superior caste for livelihood ; living by 
adopting the vocation of another caste, one becomes 
degraded the very day. 197) 

A Vais'ya, incapable of earning a living by doing 
the vocation of his caste, shall do the works of a 
S'udra in exclusion of the condemnable ones ; when 
capable, let him resume the vocation of his own 
order. (98) , 

A S'udra, incapable ojT securing the services of 
Brihmanas, shall live as an artisan to prevent the 
death of his wife and children by starvation. (99) 

Let him {i.e., S'udra) do such varied . works of arti- 
sanship (such as painting, carpentry, etc.,) by which 
the Br^hmanas are best served (« e., those which are 
of daily use to Brahmanas). (100) 

Let a BrShmana, discharging the duties] of his 
own order {fit. keeping to his proper path in life) with- 



Manu Samkita. 379 

out living by the vocation of a Vais'ya, do the (follow- 
ing) works {lit. duties for his livelihood), oppressed by 
the absence of any means of living. (101) 

Let him successively accept gifts from all men, 
(condemnable, more condemnable and the most condem- 
nable in their order of enumeration). A holy thing 
can never be virtually called defiled by the contact 
of an unclean substance.* (loa) ' 

In times of distress, . Brihmanas, by< teaching the 
Vedas to the unworthy, or by officiating as priests at the 
religious sacrifices of their degraded institutors, or by 
accepting the gifts of the vile, are not degraded, in as 
much as they are like unto the water and the fire {j.e.y 
above all defilement). (X03) 

By taking his food at a place (however sinful or un- 
holy), a Brahmana on the point of death, like unto the 
ether purging off all dust, shall not be associated with 
the sin. (104) 

The hungry (sage) Ajagartahy for having attempted 
to kill his son (S''unahs'epka) in order to appease his 
hunger (with his flesh), was not associated with the 
'sin (of child killing). (105) 

The famished V&madevahy the knower of sin and 
virtue, for having wished to eat [dog's 'flesh inorder 
to avoid death from starvation,^ was not associated with 
the sin (of eating dog's flesh. (io6.) 

Opressed by hunger in a lonely forest, the (holy) 

* As the water of the holy Ganges can never be defiled by 
the touch of running and unclean water-channels from the road, so 
a Brihmana, true to his own duties, can never be degraded by 
»cc«pting gifts even from the vilest of person* for his living-— 
Kulluka,. 



38d> Maniti Samhi4'A. 

BhaJadVaja of great austerity, together witb hfa- saa^ 
was not associated with the sire (of taking vile gifts)* 
for having accepted the gift of a large number oC 
kine froih FrzVAw who was- a carpenter (loy) 

Oppressed by hunger, the holy Vi^vdmitraf. the,- 
knower of merits and demerits, for having, accepted the: 
gift of the fiesh of a. dog's thigh from, the: hand of ai 
Chandala) was not associated with sin. (zoSi) 

[Of sinsj of teaching the Vedas (to* the unworthy)^, 
of officiating • as psiests (at the sacrifices of> the- 
degraded), aiid bt accepting (vile gifts) ^ the last 
named one shonld be regarded! as the most degrading 
for a Brabmana in his life after death, (109)* 

In. times- of distress let thff BrAhmanas teach- the-. 
Vedas to, and officiate as priests at I sacrifices insti- 
tuted by, the twice-born ones and accept gifts fromu 
S'udras. (no) 

He gets, rid of the sin of teaching thetmworthy- 
and doing sacrifices on behalf of tlie degradei. by 
means of Japas and homas, that which is incidental 
to his taking (vile gifts) he shall get rid of by means of. 
pjenitential austerities and by renunciation (i.e., by. 
renouncing the articles of gift. (11 1) 

A Br&hmana, living any where he pleases {i.e., vm 
a dale or a valleyTwithot living by his proper vocation)^ 
shall live by practising S'ila and Uncha ; Sila (described 
before) is.better than gift-taking, and Uncka (to live- 
by| picking up grains from fields or stubbles) is more: 
meritorious than yila. (112) 

Sndtaka Brahmanas, in the absence of [thein proper 
means of liveslihood, may beg [for paddy, food grains,, 
liirearing stuff, or any metal, other than gold oc salver,. 



M'onu Samkitv. 38 Ir 

®ff the king ; if the; king refuses to make thesegifts, 
they should not be asked, the second time:* (113) 

Unprepared (uncultivated) fields are less sinful, (as 
gifts) than, those prepared, (cultivated by men), and 
of kine> goats, sheep, gold, paddy and< cooked food 
each preceding one ia^ less sinful (as a gift) than, one 
immediately following, it in. the. order, of enumeira- 
tion. (ii4)< • 

Inheritance, presents (from* ftiendfe), purchase, con^- 
questjt accretion by interest, .investment in (trade oe- 
agriculture), and taking, gifts from. the. worthy form thcw 
seven lawful (honest or virtuous) sources of. pecuniary.- 
income (/«'^. access of wealth). (1.15) 

Teaching sciences-other than the Yedas (iii. educa- 
tion,) art, service, doing other men's behests, cattla- 
rearing, tirade, cultivation (done by ■ one's own-sfelf).;^, 
contentment, {i.e., resting content with little what is- 
Qbtained),. alms-begging, and. money lending are the ten-. 
means- of livelihood. in times of distress. J (116) 

A Br^hmana or a Kshatyiya must not lead money;' 
for interest ; but for the purposes- of virtue he ma]p 

* The text has tyagfiinarhati.. Both MsoHATiTHi^and GoviNi-, 
T3h!RA}tL.^ explain it by. iasya de'ie na Vastavyam — let them nofe 
live in his country. ^ 

f The first three should be understood as the honest sourees. 
of wealth in respect, of all the four orders of society. . Conquest;., 
is only lawful for a. Kshatriya. Money-lending and-, investments 
in trade and agriculture are open only, to Vais'yas, while giftr- 
taking from worthy, donors is- lawful for Br&bmanas only.^— -- 
Kulluka, 

J Ofi these, means of living, which are unlawful for a particukr 
caste under ordinary, circumstances (i4«a/iflrf«), may be embraced 
or adopted by it und^r emergency or in times- of distress, 
^•padi). — Kulluka, 



j$3f Manu SamkttH, 

lend money to> % miscr^mt at a very small rate of" 
interest. (117), • 

In times of emergency, a king, fiill'< protecting his 
subjects by his mighty prowesi^ shall not be guilty off 
the^in (of exacting rack-rents) ,, if he; taJces^a quarter part, 
of the agricultural produce fcoro each of them. (118;) 

Conquest (of foreign countries) is. the proper duty 
of the king, let Wm not dissuade from battl©^ (when 
called upon to fight> : by protecting the Vaisya* withi 
his arms, let him collect tha proper revenua (fronu 
them.) (ii9> 

In times of emergfflicy, let, the king, receive-an eightht 
part of the (stored up food grains and a twentieth, part 
of eadi KdrsMpatuim. (loC collected money) fcom tha 
Vaisiyas.* S?udras, artisans, and confectioners (Ka-raa,asyi 
etc., should be made to work in lieu of revenue, (imo) 

[If by serving a Bar&hmiana hc' fails to obtain ixt 
adequate livingj, let^ the Sudra take- the; services of at 
Kshatrfya or of a rich Vaisya and thereby earn his; 
livelihood. (i2i> 

For the acquisition fi»f heaven (after death), or both 

for heaven and a living, let the Sudra serve the. Br Ah- 

Vana J the sigiuficance. of the term Jata-BrhAmatieL 

(lit. bom for serving the Br&hmanas) which, demotes 

a Sudruy will be thereby fully realised. (12a). 

Servii^g the BrAhmauas forms the Summum bonuti 
(highest duty) ©f a Sudra's life; whatevw else he does 
is futile. (123) 

In consideration of the skilfulness of their^senrices^ 
their capacity of work,, and the number of their 

* A twelfth part of hit grrains should be taken from a Vais'y^.' 
is the injunction. In times of extreme emergency the kipj^ uk, 
|»iivil%ed to take a fourth part. 



Manu Samhifa. 383 

^ftpendanls, let him (Brihmana) adequately fix the 
salaries of his Sudra (Servants). 1(124) 

He shall gite him the leavings of his food * his old 
and cast off clothes, and his old beidings and gfainless 
Jpaddyforhisbed. (125) 

A S'udra commits no sin by (eating the prohibited 
Sirticles of fare , he Can hot be initiated With the thread, 
lie Is not privileged to institute ( Vedtad) sacrifices, not 
lie is precluded from doing the (Paka-yaynas). (126) 

But S'udras, who are the knowers pf virtue and 
«eek to acquire virtue, commit no sin by imitating the 
doings of the virtuous in exclusion of the Vediac 
Hantras; rather they become commendable by so 
doing. (127) 

Non-malicious Sudras proportionately acquire like 
tommendations and elevations in this World and the 
iiext as they do comparatively better deeds in this 
life. (128) 

A S'udra, even capable of earning money, must not 
accumulate wealth, lest in pride of his riches he might 
oppress a Brihmana. (129) 

Thus I have described to you the duties of the 
four social orders in times of distress, by faithfully 
discharging which men acquire exalted status. (130) 

Thus I have fully described the duties of the 
four social orders, now I shall discourse on the 
mode of doing the auspicious, expiatory rites {Prhyas' 
chittam), (131) 



* The previous prohibition in respect of giving leavings of 
his food by X Brihmana to a S'udra (A'a S'-udr&ya, Maiim dadyat 
nockchhishtant, etc, holds good only in the case of a S'udra, 
who is not his servant. 



584 Wanu Samrkita^ 

'CHAPTEfe XI. 
'Those who marry only for the purpose of pWCreat* 
'ing children iSantdnikks), those who desire to com-' 
plete religiotis sacrifices already i'flstituted by them 
iVaks^yand), itinerant Br^hmauas, those'who have gifted 
away all their belongings, [ as Dakshinas (fees) fot 
. Vis'vajtt sacrificet], those who beg for the purposes of 
supporting their parents or preceptors, or for defraying 
the costs of their Vediac studies, sick folks (Brihrnanas) 
whoTjeg for paying the costs of their medical treat- 
ment— these nine Sn4takas must be known as mendi- 
■cants for virtue {Dharma Vtkshui). To these indigent 
persons (Brihmanas) must be made gifts* preferentially 
according to their eruditions, (i — 2) 

To those foremost of Brahmanas should be made 
igifts of food (raw food- grains, etc.,) and money, and 
to others gifts of cooked food should be made outside 
the sacrificial platform. (3) 

Let the l*ing make gifts of all kinds of gems as well 
as of fees (Dakshinas) for religious sacrifices to these 
Brahmanas and to those who are well versed in the 
Vedas. (4) 

A married man, who marries a second Wife by beg^ 
ging money of another, enjoys only the benefit of 
sexual gratification in her {i.e., the second wife) ; sons 
of her womb belong to him who has paid him the ex- 
pense of the marriage; (5) 

But let a man give money according to his might 
to Veda-knowing Brihmanas, as well as to those who 

• Inasmuch as charity fgift-makingi is the primary form of ex- 
piation for all kinds of misdeeds (Odnena-Kdrya-Karinah), the 
framer of the code has thought fit to describe the njne proper 
^recipM»tg of gifts at the commanceraent of the present chapter. 



l^mu Sumh'i'iit. '^SS 

\iik^h renounced th6 brder of house-holdfir, whereby hd 
^hall acquire heaven, after death. (6) 

lie who has got thr6e years' provisions of his family 
•Sind the wages of his s6rvants for three years, stocked, 
and stored up in hts house, is alone cortipetent to drink 
the Soma juice (i.e., to do the Soma Vajna: (7) 

A Brihniana, with a smaller provision, who has 
performed a Soma sacrifice, has hdt acquired the full 
merit of th6 performance. (8) 

The gift by one, who can find means tg give id other 
indigent persons in the presence of his own peopled 
suffering from penury, may seem to him sWe6t and 
Virtuous for the time being, but it will be like unto 
poison in the end. That (gift) is but the shadow of 
Virtue. (9) 

Whatever virtue {lit. any thing done for Iti^ 
Elevation in the next vsror^'d) one practises by treating 
hardships on his dependants beconies a sourcfe of tor- 
ment to him both here and hereafter, (io) 

In the event of there being a king, if a pdrt of" a 
religious sacrifice instituted by a virtuous Kshatriya> 
or by a Brahmana, in special) stands unperformed for 
want ^ of funds ; let him for the performance thereof 
forcibly carry away that much money frcjm the^ housS 
a non-sacrificing Yais'ya, who, although possessed of 
9. large number of animals, does not drink the Soma 
juide («■(?., perfqrnis the 5'owa VajUd.) (ii— 12) 

In the absence of such a Vais'ya, let him forcibly 
Carry those articles from the house of a S'udra in the 
tevent of two or three limbs of his Kama Yajna (ft 
isacrifice instituted for the fruition of definite desire) 
standing unperformed : gift? shall not be taken front 
t. S'udra for the purposes of a religious saerififeg, 
49 



3S6 3tianu Samhita, 

(no harm there jexists |in forcibly taking articles from 
hisjhouse). (13) 

Moreover, from a (Br^'Hrnana or Kshatriya) relation 
of his, who, although not a keeper of the sacred fire, is 
possessed of a hundred kine, and from a (Brihmana 
or Kshatriya) relation who, although a keeper of the 
sacred fire, does not perform the Vediac sacrifices, 
although he is possessed of a thousand kine— from 
these two relations, let him unhesitatingly take the 
articles requisite for his sacrifice. (14) 

From him, who daily accumulates money by taking 
gifts but does not spend it in religious sacrifices or in 
works of public utility, let him forcibly take the 
articles necessary for the performance of his sacrifice, 
whereby his fame and virtue will be augmented. (15) 

Having fasted for three days in Vant of food, a man 
in the forepart of the fourth day may [steal a day's 
provision from the housQ of a miserly miscreant. (16) 

He shall steal those food-grains from the thrashing 
floor, from the field, or from the granary (of such a 
miscreant', or from any other part (of his house), con- 
venient, ; and if he interrogates him [i.e., the stealer 
about the theift), let him speak the reason thereoC. (17) 

A Kshatriya (as well as a Vais'ya or a S'udra' must 
never steal what belongs to a Brihmana ; but from a 
Brihmana, who is the author of bad deeds and does 
not perform the Vediac sacrifices, a Kshatriya may steal 
articles necessary for the performance of a sacrifice 
in the event of it standing unperformed for their 
want. (18) 

He, who having taken (stolen or extorted) money 
from miscreants give it to the virtuous (Brihmanas), 

verily converts himself into a raft whereby he takes 



Manu Samhili. 387 

both its recipients and his own self across the ocean 
of misery. (19) 

The wealth of those who regularly institute reli- 
gious sacrifices is called the divine property by the 
wise, the wealth of non-sacrlficers is called demoniac 
wealth. (20) 

The virtuous king must not inflict punishment on 
a person who has stolen or forcibly "carried away the 
wealth (of a non-sacrificer), since it is through the 
foolishness of the Kshatriya (king) that hunger over- 
whelms a Brdhmana. (21) 

Having ascertained the number of his {i.e., starving 
Brdhmana's) dependents, and the extent of his erudi- 
tion and piety {lit. good conduct), the king must grant 
him a stipend firom his own treasury. (22) 

Having provided him with a stipend, let the king 
protect him in every way from thieves, for such pro- 
tections the king receives a sixth part of his religious 
merit. (33) 

For the purposes {i.e., completion of) of a religious 
sacrifice a Br&hmana must never beg money of a 
S'udra ; for having performed a religious sacrifice with 
such money he shall be born as a JOhandila in his 
next ificarnation.* (24) 

A Brihmana, who, having obtained money by beg- 
ging for the performance of a religious sacrifice, does 
not spend it all for that purpose, becomes a crow or 
a Bhdsa bird in his next birth for a hundred years, (as)- , 

The miscreant, who, out of greed, robs the property 
of a god or of a Brdhmana, shalUive on the leavings of 



• Only begging is prohibited ; a Brdhmana is not precluded 
fcom. instituting » religious sacrifice Trith money Toluntarily 
j^ivea by a Sudra.-Wf «//«,*««, 



3;58; Manu. Samhita, 

Cultures (tottea carcases), all through; his. life in; Wa 
next birth. (26>, 

For expiating th& sin. of his not having- perfonuedi, 
the; ajniroal sacrifice or Soma Yajna, a, Brahmana may 
take.' money from a S'udra to institute', a Vais^amtrm 
sacrifice therewith at the close of the year.* (;^2ft> 

A, Br^hman^, who, in the time of safety does % 
religious rite in the manner laid down for its perfbrm"- 
ancc: in times of distress> shall not acquire tha merflt 
thereof in heaven. This is the decision. (28)' 

Vis'vedeyas, Sidbyas (an. order of celestial beings)^ 
BrShmapas, and the great sages have done' the; 
Vais'vinari sacrifice; by proxies tjnder circumstances^ 
perilous to life. (39) 

Thq eyil-njinded one, who, although capable- of" 
instituting a religious sacrifice in persob (lit as a prin- 
cipal), does it by proxy, does not obtain the merit; 
thereof in the next world. (39) 

A virtuous Br&hmana must not complaia ot any 
wrong done to him. to. the: king ; he shall punish the: 
wrong-doer by means of his own ((psychic) power. (31) 

The BjT&hmsnic (psychic force) is stronger than< 
the royal prowess ; hence, let a Brahmana punish his; 
enemies by means of his, own (psychic) powers. (32) 

Without the least compunction in his mind he shall, 
5Qcite the. A'ngirasi S'ruti, as laiddpwn in ihQ. Atharvatti 
ili^e., practise, deadly incantations). Word is the weapon* 
of a Brdhmana, let him. kill his enemies therewith." (33), 

A Kshatriya shall get rid of his, trouble: by the- 
pj;o,wess. ot his arm ;. a. Vais'ya or a S'udra, by the aid. 

* According to.a.cert^ifii calendar the Vediao year used to com> 
®,ence witl!Ltt>.e. lig^ht. fottnigljt at CMteB.. 



i)t h\^ wealth ;■ and a good Brihmana) by means ok 
Jja.^as and Nomas. (341)) 
, An ihstitutor ot proper religious rites,* governor- 
©f sons and disciples, expounder (of spiritual or moral, 
truths, or of Law CJode&K equally compassionate to. 
all creatures, is called a Brihmana ; a harsh or abusiva> 
language must not be- used; unto. him;(?uch. a. Bi^h^- 
Biana. (35) 

Ah unmarried girli,. a youthful matron^ an ijnread 
Brdhmana, one of small learning,, one, afflicted, with. $t 
disease, or uninitiated with, the^ holy thread, must not 
perform, the Agnih0tra Homa^ (fire, offering). (3,6.) 

For hating cast 9u,ch libations in the fire, thgse^ 
((Unmarried girls, etc,) shall go to hell, together with t^Q: 
person on whose behalf they do swch, fire-ogejripgs j; 
bejice, a Brdhnaana, well-versed; in the Veidfis. and in thft 
art of performing such fire-offeyngs,, shall act as a, 
ffotd (i.e., offerer of the. libation, or doer of the. firo? 
offering.) (37) 

He, who, having had the mmns to, give. a» horsQ, 
which is, sacred to Prajdpati, to, the ofijcjating priest 
{Rittvik) as his. Dakshina (fee) on the occasion of firsl;. 
establishing (kindling) the sacred fire, does not give it. 
to him, remains as one who has not kindled the sacred 
fire, and fails, to obtain the merit of the rite.. (38) 

Let not one, believing and self-controlled, doing 
other religious rites, perform sacrifices by giving 

* The text has. Vidhdta 'whi.ch may also, meaA a.n ordainer oJf 
l?ws. 

f They are not fcompetent to perform the Homas enjoined tOi 
be performed in the Vedas by a Brihmana, morning and eveniog^ 
e^Qfe day (SraKian Shyam. frMa^r homdn na Kur)iuk).-r-KuJlu&.a^ 



39®' Manu Samhita, 

small amounts of fees (Dakshin&J to the officiatfag^ 
priests), (39) 

A sacrifice, performed with a small amount of fees 
(paM to th© pries^, destroys, the progeny, (domestic), 
animals, fame and the senses of its institutor, shortens; 
the duration of his life, and acts as a bar against his; 
Heaven. Hence, let no one perform a sacrifice vritlt 
a small amount ot' money. (40) 

An Agnihotri\ (performer of the Agnihotra fir6~ 
offering) Brihmana, who wilfully neglects to do the; 
(ire-offering, morning and evening, each day, shall do. 
the penance of Chandr&yana for a month, inasmuch as. 
the sin (thereby committed) is equal to. that of killing^ 
(one's own) son. (41) 

They, who having obtained; money from S'udras^. 
do the Agnihotra fire-oflerings, are jcondemned by thct 
Brahmavadins as the priests, of S'udras. (42) 

Resting his feet on the heads of those foolish^ 
Btttviks (sacrificers) who do the fire-offerings with the.- 
belp of money obtained from him, the S'udra donor 
(of the money) shall rise up from, and get rid. o^ 
hell, (43) 

For having done improper acts and failed to 3o the; 
commendable ones (rites), and for having been attached^ 
to objects of the senses, a man stands under the obliga" 
tion of doing an expiatory penance> (44) 

(Several) wise men assert that, atonement is possible^ 
only for sins, iiivoluntarily committed; while others,, 
grounding their decision on precedents |in the Vedas,. 
hold that, expiation is possible even in respect of sins^. 
deliberately committed, (45) 

A sin, unwittingly committed, is atoned, by reading 



I^anu Samhiia. 39 1 

llffe Viias) those, wilifuliy comittitted, requirfe separate 
tipiatofy penances for their atonement. (46) 

Having incurred the obligation of doing an expia^ 
lory penance for a sin accidentally (unwittingly) com^ 
taitted in this life, or for one done in his previous 
Bxistente, a Brihmana must not associate with othef 
(pure) Brihmanas before he has made the atone=' 
Inent. (47) 

Of miscreants, some through misdeeds done in this 
life, and others through sine committed in their previous 
existences {become deformed in their persons. (48) 

A gold-stealer is (born with) bad nails ; a wine- 
drinker, with black teeth ; a Brihmanicide is afflicted 
With consumption ; and a defiler of his preceptor's bed» 
with skin-troubles (Hi. bad skin.) (49) 

A true calumniator is born with fetid nostrils (i.e., 
is afflicted with foul-smelling nasal catarrh) ; a falsa 
calumniator, with a bad smell in his mouth ; a paddy^ 
stealer is bom with a limb in less; and a mixef 
(adulterer of grains, etc.), with a limb in excess. (50) 

A stealer of food is (punished With) a sluggish 
appetite ; and a stealer of words,* with dumbness ; a 
cloth-sljealer is. born with leucoderma, and a horse,= 
istealer is born maimed. (51) • « 

A lamp (light)-stealer is born blind ; an extinguished 
of light, blind in the one eye ; a killer of animal lives is 
(punished with) many diseases (in this life) and a 
ravisher of another's wife, with (a nervous swelling of 
the limbs (due to nervous disorder) (52). 

Thus (through the dynamaics of) different misdeeds 

* The text has Vdgdpahhrakah. Kclluka explains it by 
" Ananujnatadhydin," ' otLQ who learns the Veda by hearing it 
recited by another without the premission of a preceptor. 



^5% l&am 'Samhi'ta. 

Mfeii arfe born idiotic, d^af, dumb, blind, i^6f6rtiie4, at 
possessed of limbs in less or excess, abhorred by th6 
virtuous (53). 

Thus for the purification of Self, expjjjting penanc6s 
'should be always practised; unexpi^ted sinners are 
\>ora -with condemnable bodily traits (54). 

Killing a Br^hmatia, wine-drinking, gold-stealing, 
'and defiling the bed of a preceptor are said to be the 
igrfeat sins, the company of these sinners being the fifth 
(great sm). (^5) 

False speaking with a view to give out one's self 
tts belonging to a superior caste, accusing one before 
the king of a Crime punishable with death, and false 
allegation (calumny) in respect of one's own pre- 
■ceptor tantamount to killing a Br^hmana (Brahma- 
>kalya) (5'6) 

Forgetting the Vedas throug'h non-study fon the 
^art of a Brihmana), reviling 'the Vedas-, bearing false 
^s'itness iti a Court of justice and eating unclean things 
are equal to wine-drinking (57). 

Stealing an article^ held in trust, and stealing a biafi> 
liorse, land, diamond or gem are said to be equal t<J 
gold^stealing (5^) 

Casting* seed m one'^s 6wft uterine sister [Svaybhi)-, 
tn an uninarfied girl, in a Chandila woman, in one's 
t)wn daughter-in-law, or in a friend's vrife is equal lo 
idefiling the bed of one's ovWi preceptor. (59) 

CoW-killing, officiating as a priest at a sacrifice in- 
stituted by an unworthy person, incest with another's 
\irife, abandoning one's own parents, preceptor, or soft 
i(i\^., otnissioh to do purificatory rites unto him), as well 
as renouncing the study of the "^edas and non-perforra= 
a&cea of fire-offerings. (60) 



Manu Samhfta. 393 

Marriage of a younger brother before the marriage 
of his elder, an unmarried elder brother suffering his 
younger to marry before him, giving a girl in marriage 
to either of two such brothers, and officiating as a 
priest at such a marriage ceremony. (6i) 

Defiling an unmarried girl (with the finger),* living 
by usury, breaking the vow (of continence), and selling 
one's tanks, orchards, wives, and sons* (62) 

Failure to initiate a child with the thread (before 
he is sixteen years of age), abandoning one's relations, 
teaching the Vedas for money, studying', the Vedas 
under a preceptor who takes fees for his teaching, 
and selling things which ought not to be sold. (63) 

Working in all kinds of mines (under the king's 
command, raising large dams or embankments, des- 
truction of medicinal plants, living by the earnings of 
the prostitution of one's own wife, practising deadly 
incantations, and hypnotising by means of drugs. (64) 

Felling down unwithered trees for fuels, cooking 
for one's own self (and not for the gods or manes), and 
eating condemnable (prohibited) articles of fare. (65). 

Omission to establish the sacred fire, gold-stealing, 

undischarging the debts due to the gods, to the Rishis 

' and to 'one's own manes, cultivation of, prohibited 

sciences, and adopting the profession of a songster,. or 

of a musician. (661 

Steafing paddy, animals, iron and copper etc.,t 
going unto a drunk woman, killing a Vais'ya, S'udra, 

* The text has Kanyaya-dushananckaiva ; Kulluka explains 
it by Maithuna Varjamanguli prakshephdina which would not 
bear translation. 

t The text has Kupyam which sigpifies any metal other than 
gold or silver. 

50 



3^4 Manu Sttmhtta. 

Kshatriya or a woman, and atheism (non-confornfity' tcy 
the doctrines of Vediac religion) — all these afe called 
minor sins {Upuphtakas). (67) 

[Each of the following acts such as,] assaulting a 
Britbnla'nai with a club", etc., smelling wine or any other 
unclean substance which ought not to be sm'elled^ 
crooked dealiifgs, and committing unnatural offence 
oit a man, constitutes east-degrading (Jdti-tShtansa' 
karaj sin* (68) 

Killing ^ asg, horse, camel, deer, elephant, goat^ 
kmb, fish, snake or a buffalo constitutes Sankari^ 
karanam (hybridising) sin.t (69) 

Receiving money from the condemnaMe, tradings 
serving a &udra, or speaking &Isehood constitutes a sin 
whicb is known as Apatrikaranam.X (70) 

Killing a worm, insect or a bird, ^ting food brought • 
on the same plate with wincj stealing fruits, flowers^ 
fuels, or feeling agitated at the slightest cause of dia^ 
turbance constitutes a sin which is called Maldvakam 
or (mind-soiling sin.) (71) 

These sins have been separately and specifically 
described, now hear me discourse on the expiatory 
penances which should be respectively practised for 
their atoneqient. (72) 

For the purification of his self a Bfahmanicide 
shall stay for twelve years* in the forest, building a hut 
therein, living on food obtained by begging, and carry- 

• A person guilty of any of thcBe crimes becomes degraded 
from his caste. 

t A person, guilty of killing any of th«se animals, will have a 
mixed caste {JSankara Jati) in his next existence. 

%' Apdtrikaro -"ini I.e., a sin which makes one unworthy of re- 
ceiving gifts. 



Manu Samhita. 395 

lag the cranium of a human skeleton as the token of 
his (fell crime).* (73) 

Or he shall voluntarily make himself the target of 
arrows shot by archers with unfailing aims ; or he 
shall thrice cast himself in a burning fire with his head 
downward so that death may ensue. (74) 

Or he shall institute any of the following Vediac 
sacrifices, viz., the As'vamedha, the Sarjit, the Gosava, 
the I'is'vajit, the Trivrit, or the Agmshtut. (75) 

For the expiation of the sin of killing a^r4hm&na, 
he, self-controlled, and sparing in his diet, shall travel 
a hundred Yojanas H e-, eight hundred miles', mutter- 
ing any of the VedasA (76) 

Or he shall make over all his belongings to a 
Brahmana, well-versed in the Vedas, or shall give 
him a well-furnished house and ample wealth for his 
living. (77) 

Or living on a vegetable diet, he shall walk along 
the shore of the river, Sarasvati from* its source to its 

* This is only in respect of an accidental killing of a Brahmana. 
According to the Bhavishya Puranam a man (Brahmaaa) of 
superior qualifications, having accidentally killed an unqualified 
(foolish and impious) Brahmana, shall do this penance for twelve 
years. For having wilfully killed a member of his own caste, a 
Brihmana shall do this penance for double the aforesaid period 
(«.«., twenty-four years). A Kshatriya, a Vais'ya, or a S'udra, guilty 
of unwillingly killing 'a Brahmana, shall respectively do this 
penance for twenty-four, thirty-six, and forty-eight years. 

f This is the expiation for accidentally killing a man, who is 
merely a Brihm.ana by caste, and when the killer is either a 
Brihmana, Kshatriya or Vais'ya. The Bhavishyapuranam reads 
and interprets the passage as, if a feiia-knowing Brdhmana, 
a regular institutor of the Agnihotra fire-offering, accidentally 
kills one, who is a mere Brdhmana by caste, then this is the 
expiation for hira^ , 



3g6 Manu SamhttA, 

place of junction with the sea, or observing mo,deration 
in food he shall thrice recite a Vedaic Samhitd, each 
day. (78) 

Or (at the end of the twelfth year), he, with his 
head cleanly shaven, and finger-nails parid o£f, shall 
live at the out-skirt of a village, or in a cow-shed, or 
in a hermitage, qf underneath a tree, devoted to the 
good of kine and Brdhmanas. (79) 

Or by laying down his life for the succour of a 
cow, or of a»Brahmana, he shall be exonerated from the 
sin of killing a Brihmana ; by succouring a cow or a 
Br&hmana, (before the lapse of the twelfth year), he 
shall be free from the sin of an act of Brahmana killing, 
even if he does not die in the attempt. (80) 

Or by thrice fighting with the robbers for the re- 
covery of the goods (they have stolen from the house 
of a Brdhmaaa), or by recovering the goods in a single 
fight, or by giving an equal amount of wealth to the 
robbed Brdhmana attempting to kill himself for its 
loss, he shall be exonerated from the sin (of killing a 
Brdhmana. (81)" 

Thus having practised these austere penances, and 
lived an absolutely continent life for twelve years, he 
shall be ejionerated from the sin of killing a Brcih- 
maua. (82) 

Or having confessed his guilt at the close of an 
As'vamedha sacrifice, instituted by the king, and per- 
formed the ceremonial ablution (Avabhrita Snanam) 
at the end of the ceremony, he shall be from the sin 
of Brahmana killing. (83) ^ 

The Brdhmana is the root of virtue, the Kshatriya 
is its forepart; hence, by confessing his guilt in their 
assembly, a man becomes free from sin. (84) 



Manu Samhili. 397 

On his very birth the Brdhmana becomes the god 
of the gods and the authority (in matters of virtue) 
in this world. The Veda testifies to the source of 
his authority. (85) 

Whatever three 'of these Veda-kno^t'vag Brihmanas 
shall speak ;in respect of the expiation of one's sin 
shall be his perfect expiation ; holy is the speech of 
the erudite ( Veda-knorw'mg BrShmanas). (86) 

The self-controlled Br&hmana, with his mind fixed on 
God, shall impartially* practise any cf these penances 
for the expiation of the sin of Brihmana-killing. (87) 

For having uriwillingly killed a foetus in the womb, 
a Vais'ya or a Kshatriya engaged in performing a re- 
ligious sacrifice, or a woman in her menses, one shall 
practise the same expiatory penance. (88) 

As well as for having borne false witness, or 
calumnised his preceptor, or robbed an article held by 
him in trust, or killed a friend or a woman, (89) 

Thus the penance is laid down for expiating the sin 
of accidentally (unwillingly) killing a Brdhmana; no 
expiation there exists for the sin of wilful Brdhmana- 
killing. (90) 

• For having drunk {PaishttJ wine,t one shall atone 
his sin by drinking a cup of burning Wine ; he shall be 

* Without showing any perference to any particular form of penance. 
Or in other words, he must not choose and observe a light penance, if 
his guilt requires the practice of a severe one. 

t The Bhabisbya-puranam interprets Sura by Paihkii wine (i.e,, 
wine made from pasted rice) and asserts that the expiatory penances 
laid down in respect of wine-drinking in. the il/an» apply to drinking 
Pafshti wine alone in exclusion of other species of wine such as Gaudi, 
Mddhvi, etc. 

Surd cha Paiskli Mukhyokta na tasyd stvitaresdme, Paishtyak pane 
tu chaiiisim prAyas'chittam nivodha me. 



39^ Manu Samhila, 

free from the sin after his inner organism has been 
burnt by that wine («.^., after death from drinking 'hot 
wine. (91) 

Or he shall live on flame coloured cow-urine, 
water, milk, clarified butter, and cow-dung serum till 
death. (92) 

For the expiation of the sin of wine^rinking, let 
him, clad in a woolen cloth, wearing clotted hair, 
^nd carrying the mark of a wine-bowl on his fore^ 
head, live for a y|ar by eating sesame-cake or broken 
bits of rice, once in the night. (93) 

Wine (surdj is the impure essence (Uf. refuge 
matter) of grains, and sinful is a refuge matter ; hencei 
let nc^ Br4hmanas, Kshatriyas and Vais'yas drink 
wine (Surd). (94) 

G^uffi (treacle wine), Paishti (wine of pasted rice) 
and M&dhvi (wine made from the flowers of Mahua 
tree) are known to be the three species of wine ; all of 
them, like any, must not be drunk by the foremost 
of Brihraanas. (95) 

Flesh, wine, and fermented saps are the food of 
Yakshas, Rakshas, and Pis4chas ; they should not be 
eaten or drunk by Brihmanas, who partake of tlje 
oblations of th6 gods. (96) 

An intoxicated Brdhmana may fall on an impure 
ground, or recite the Vediac mantras, or do any other 
improper acts under the influence of wine. (97) 

He, in whose body the 'encased Brahma is washed 
with the stream of wine, stands divulged of his Brah- 
pianiac energy and becomes a S'udra. (98) 

Thus the excellent expiation for the sin of wine- 
drinking has been described ; now I shall discourse on 
the expiation for the sin of gold^stealing. (99) 



MaHU Siimhita. ' 35^ 

A firahmana, who has stolen gold, shall go i<s tbd 
bin^ ; and confessing his guilt, he shall say, " punish 
tile, OKing," (160) 

The king, taking hold of a dub, shalll kill him 
(the gold stealer) with oile blow, inasmuch as death 
purifies a gold-stealer ;* a Brahraana gold-stealer shall 
effect his purifieation by dint of penitential atiste- 
tities. (loi) 

A Brihrnatia, Wishing to exculpate the sin of gold 
Stdalingt by means of penitential austeprities, shall, clad 
in fags, practise the expiating penande, laid down for ail 
adt of Brihmana-killing, in the forest. (10 i) 

Brihrnanas {lit., twide-born ones) shall exculpiate 
themselves of the sin of gold-stealing by means of 
these penitential austerities ; from the sin of de- 
filing the beds of their pr«(cept6i:s they shall kikewis© 
exonerate themselves by means of these purificatory 
penances. ({03) 

A Br4hmana, guilty of defiling the bed of his pre- 
ceptor ii.e. of incest with his own step mother), having 
confessed his guilt, shall lie down in a red hot iron bed/ 
holding in his embrace a burning female figour of iron, 
tilMeath ; he is purified by his death. (104) 



* Dead, -or surviving, if almost dead, he (gold-stealer) shall be 
purged ofE of his sin. — TtajnaValHya. 

t Stealing gold weighing eighty Ratis or more constitutes the' sin 
of Steyaru according to Manu, and if the gold belongs to a Brahmana, 
theft of five Krishnalam or sixteen kashas weight, thereof would 
constitute the offence. The Bhavtshya Puranam, on the other hand, in^ 
creases the weight of gold in such cases to five Nishkas Says it— ("Men 
belonging to) three castes, commencing with the " Kshatriya," happen-> 
ing to rob an amply qualified Brahmana of gold to the weight of five 

Nishkas .shall regain his purity by immolating his body 

'in fire. 



4@o , Martu Samhita. 

Or after having cut off his reproductive organs and 
held them in the hollow of his blended palms, let him 
slowly go towards the south-west, uiitil he falls down 
and expires. (105) 

Stamped with the figure of a bedstead on his fore- 
head, let him, clad in rags and growing a Heard, practise 
the penance of Krichcha-vratam for a year in the 
forest, with all his^senses fully brought under his con- 
trol* (106) 

Or for expiating the sin of (accidentally) visiting 
the bed of his bwn step-mother (lit. elder's or pre- 
ceptor's wife) he shall live on barley gruel, or on a 
Habishya (vegetable) diet, and parctise, self-controlled, 
the ChUndrayanam penance for three months (in 
succession.) (107) 

The sin of great sinners (Mahapatakins) should be 
expiated by practising these penances ; persons, guilty 
of minor sins (t^/a/fl^fl/§f«j), shall practise the following 
purificatory penances by way of atonement. ( 108 ) 

One,- who has committed the minor sin of killing 
a cow, shall live on barly gruel during the first 
month of his penance, and having cleanly shaved his 
head, beard and moustache, shall live in the pas- 
ture ground, clad with the skin of the cow he has 
killed. (109) 

[During the second and third months of his penance] 

self controlled, he shall eat a moderate quantity of 

food with (any sort of) non-alkaline salt in tlie evening 

- of each second day, after having fasted on the previous 

one, and bathe with cow's urine, (iioi 

* The expiatory penance owing to its comparatively lesser aa\itere 
character seems to contemplate the case in which a man visits the 
bed o{ his own step-mother, mistaking her for his own v\i^.—Kulluka. 



MaPiu Samhtia. }^o\ 

irt \h^ day hft shall follow the kine (to the pasture 

J^roundy, inhale the dusts risen by their hoofs from the 

ground, and tend them with Care ; and after having 

made obeisance to them, he shall sit up in the night in 

the posture, known as the Virhsanam* (in) 

Bereft of all feelings of vexation or pride, he shall 
istand when . the kine will remain «standing, sit down 
when they will lie down, and follow them when 
they will roam about. (112) 

By all means he must succour them, vfhether afflict- 
ed with any disease, or frightened by tigers and thieves, 
etc., or fallen in the mire, or in any unfavourable pre- 
dicament. (113) 

In heat, in rain, in cold, or when a strong, wind is 
blowing, he must not protfect his person before provid-^ 
ing a suitable shelter for them (kine) ^to' the best of his 
ability. (114) 

Having seen a cow grazing on a field, or on a thras- 
thing floor, whether of his own or of^another, or having 
seen a cow suckling her calf, he- must not speak of it to 
any body. (115) 

A cow-killer, who follows a cow in this manner for 
three months in succession, becomes free from the sin 
of cow-killing. (116) 

Having thus well-practised the purificatory penance, ' 
he shall make a gift of a bullock and ten kine to a 
Ffi'^d-knowing Br^hmana.; or in their absence he shall 
make over all his belongings to such a BrS,hmana. a 17) 

BrS.hmanas, who have committed the .minor sins 
{Upapatakins), excepting those who have broken 



* Virasanam — Sitting on hams, with his right Isnee flexed and right 
foot placed on the left thigh and with left knee flexed, and left thigh 
placed on the rjght thigh. — Vas'isktha. 

51 



4&Z Manu Sam/tita. 

their VOWS (Avakirnis), shall practise the (abovesaI*'y 
penances, or the Chhndrlt^nam penance for punfica-' 
tion. (ii8) 

A vow-breaker shall sacrifice an ass, Wind in the one' 
eye, at a crossing of roads, to the deity, Niriti, in the 
night, by uttering the Mantras of the P&kayajna. (119) 

Then having d^ne a fire-offering (with the flesh 
of the immolated) ass unto the deity, Niriti, he shall 
offer libations of clarified butter unto V&yu^ Indra, 
Brihaspati and Agni in the fire, by muttering thff 
Rik, runiring a {Sama Sinchantu Maruta, let Maruta 
sprinkle with water, etc.) (120) 

The Brahmavadins, the knoWBTs of the Law, aver 
that, by violating bis vow, and by wilfully casting hisr 
seed (during, its observance), a Bramaeharin (re- 
ligious student) becomes guilty of the sin of vow- 
breakinjg x^vakimi). (121) 

The Brihmanic energy of a religious student, which 
has' originated from his study of the Vedas, etc., ascend 
to (/.^ are merged in) the (deities) Maruta, Pinuhuta 
(Indra), Guru (Brihaspati) and Agni, after he has. 
broken his vow.* (122) 

Having committed such a sin, let him (the vow- 
breaker), clad'in the skin of an ass, beg alms at sevea 
houses, confessing his guilt. (123) 

For a year he shall live taking, once a day, food 
obtained by begging as above described, and bathe 
thrice, every day, whereby he shall be free trom his 
sin. (124) 

Havsng wilfully comraitftd any of tiie caste- 
degrating (ydti-Bhransakard) sins, he shall praQtise a^ 

* Hence a vow-breaking Brahmachclrin shall offer Ubotions of clari- 
tied buttec unto these deities. 



lHanu Samhiia, 4-03 

Krkhchhra Sdntapanm penance ; for th« expiation 
of ariy of such sins Involuntarily committed, he must 
practise 2, Pr&jdpatyam penance. (125 

Having committed a sin of the hybridising {San- 
kari Karanam) or Apdtri Karanam group, he shall 
practise for a month the Chdndrayonam penance, for 
its expiation ; having committed a crime of the mind- 
soiling {Malini Maranam) group he'shall live on barley 
gruel for three days in succession. ( 1 26) 

For having wilfully killed a (good patured Ksha- 
triya, one shall practise the quarter part of the expia- 
tory penance (i.e. for three years) laid down in respect 
of an act of Brdhmana-killing ; and a sixteenth part of 
the same penance should be practised for the expiation 
of killing a sacrificing Vaisya, and a S'udra respet- 
tively. (127) 

The foremost of Br^hmanas, having accidentally 
killed a Kshatriya, shaU duly practise the expiatory 
penance, and make '.the gift, of one bullock and a thou- 
sand kine to a Brahmana (at its end.) .(128 

Or self-eontrolled, and wearing clotted hair, he shall 
practise the expiatory penance laid down in respect of 
tin act of Brahmana-killing, living, remote from the 
village and under a tree, (129) , 

For having accidentally killed a Vais'ya, engaged in 
performing a sacrifice, let these foremost of Brdhmanas 
practise the (preceding) penance for a year ■ and make 
the gift of one hundred kine to a Brihmana at its 
close. (130 1 

For having killed a S'udra, let him do the same 
expiatory penance for six months, and give a Dakshind 
of one bullock and ten white kine to a Brah- 
mana. (131) 



404 Manu Samktta, 

For having wilfully killed a cat, an iohneunioW;^ 
a Ch4sa bird, a frog, a dog, a lizard (Godhft). an owl, Qr 
a crow, let him do the penance, laid down for expiation 
of the sin of killing a S'udra. (132) 

[For having accidentally killed a ^. etc.,] be 
shall live for three days on a milk-diet ; or shall travel 
one Yojanam, each day, for three dayS ; or shall bathft 
in a runniug strean* of water for three days ; or recite 
the {Apohist^, etc.) Suktam oi the Veda for three 
nights. (133) 

Having killed a, snake, let the foremost of Brdh- 
manas give a sharp-pointed steel rod to a Brahmana ; 
for having killed an impotent person, he shall make the 
gift of a Bhara of straw, and of a Mh.sha weight 
of lead. (134) 

For having killed a boar, he shal make the gift of a 
pitcher, full of clarified butter, and of a Drona measure 
of sesame ; for having killed a peasant or parrot, he 
shall make the gift of a calf, two years old ; of a calf, 
three year old, he shall make a gift, for having killed a 
heron. (135) 

For having killed a crane, a swan, a duck, a pea- 
cock, a monkey, a falcon, or a Bhasa bird, he must 
make the gift ^of a cow to a Brdhmana. (136) 

For having killed a horse, he must give a cloth to a 
Bruhmana; and five Nila bullocks, for having killed an 
elephant ; for hayiiig killed a goat, or a sheep, he must 
give a bullock to a Brdhmana ; for having killed an ass 
he must make the gift of a calf, one year old, to a 
Brdhmana, U37) 

For having killed a carnivorous beast, let hinj give 
a milch cow to a Brahmina ; for having killed a her- 
bivorous^aniraal, he must give a calf to a Brdhmana, land 



Manu Samhiia. 4<^5 

for having killed a camel, he shall make the gift of a 
rati of gold to a Brihmana. (138) 

For having killed a faithless wife, belonging to any- 
of the four castes, a Brihmana shall make the gift of a 
leatlier bag; a Kshatriya, of a bow; a Vais'ya, of a. 
goat,; and a S'udra, of a lamb. (139) 

A Brihmana, incapable of expiating his sin of snake- 
killing, etc., by means of gift, shall* do a Prajhpatya 
penance fo^ the expiation of each of such sins. (140) 

For having killed one thousand of vertebrata 
animals, one shall do the penance for an act of S'udra- 
killing ; the same penance should be practised for 
having killed a cart-load of invertebrate animals. (1:41) 

For ha^ng killed a (small) vertebrate animal, ons 
shall give a smalf Dakshina to a Brdhmana ; having 
killed a small vertebrate animal, one regains his purity 
by doing a Pranayama. (143) 

For having filled a blossoming, fruit-yielding tree, 
creeper,, shrub or plant, one shall mutter a huiidred Rik 
mantras. (143) 

For killing parasites which germinate in food grains. 
or in sweet s^^ps (such as treacle, etc.,) or in fruits and 
flowers, drinking of clarified butter should be known as 
the expiation. (144) , 

For having cut down cereals, growing on a cultivated 
soil, as well as those which spontaneously grow in un- 
cultivated fields, one shall regain his pmrity by living on 
a milk-diet for a day and by following the cows to, the 
pasture-ground. (145) 

By means of these penances, the sin, originated from 
acts of killing, should be expiated ; now hear me dis- 
course on the expiatory penances to be done for eating 
improper foo4, whether wittingly or unwittingly. (146) 



4o6 Afanu Samhita. 

Having unknowingly drunk Vinmii wina»* olfe 
must be re-initiated with the holy thread ; for'havteg 
knowingly drunk it, one shall atone iox his sin by his 
life, this is the decisian. 147) 

Having drunk water kept in a s^ne bowl, as in a 
cup (of that species of wine which is called) Suri, 
one shall live on milk cooked with Sankhapushpi 
(creeper) for five days .in successian. (1481 

Having touched, or given wine (to any body,) or 
having duly accepted a gift, or having drunk water, 
previously tasted by a S'udra, one shall live on the 
washings of Ku'sa grass for three nights. (149) 

A Soma-drinking Brihmana, having smelled the 
breath of a drunkard, shall do three A'chumanams and 
three PrAndydmas in water, and shall effect bis purifi- 
cation by drinking clarified butter. (150) 

Members of the three twice-born castes, having 
unknowingly tasted e|xcreta or anything deRled by 
the touch of wine, deserve re-initiation with the 
thread. (151 1 

The shaving of the head, (wearing of) the holy 
girdle, carrying the staff, alms-begging, and practising 
the vow (of 'a Brahmachirin) are dispensed with in 
such re-initiations of the twice-born ones. (152) 

Having eaten the food of those whose food ought 
not to be eaten, or having eaten the leavings of S'udras' 
or of women's food, or having eaten the flesh of prohir 
bited animals, one shall live on barley gruel for seven 
nights. (153) 

. • V&ruui is a kind of wine prepared from fermented i^cerboil- 
iugs. For having drunk any of the nine species of wine, mention- 
ed by Pulastya, other than Paishti, M ddhavi, and Gaudi the expia- 
tion cOrtsists in being reinitiated with the thread. 



Ittanu Samkili. 407 

Having taken Suktas (cordials which acquire an 
acid taStd when stale) and decoctions of astringent 
drugs (such as Chebulic rayrobalans etc.,) one shall 
remain impure until they are not evacuated from his 
bowels. (154) 

Having taken the stool or urine of a domestic pig, 
of a bear, of an ass, of a camel, of a jackal, of a 
monkey, or of a crow, a Brihmana sltall do jthe Chltn- 
drhyanam penance (for his purification.) (155) 

Having eaten dry meat, earth-born mushrooms, 
butcher's meat, or the flesh of an unknown animal, one 
shall do the same penance {j..e. Ch&ndrajianam.) (156) 

For having eaten the flesh of a carnivorous animal, 
of a boer, of a camel, or of a cow, or having eaten the 
flesh of a man, of a crow, or of an ass, the performance 
of the Tapta Krichchham penance should'b^nderstood 
as (the proper) purification. 1 157) 

A Brdhmana, who before having completed his 
Vediac study shall eat a monthly iPraddha feast shall 
fast for three days, one of which he shall pass by sit- 
ting in water. (158. 

A religious student who has somehow eaten flesh 
or has taken honey, shall complete the residue of 
his vow (of Brahmacharyam) by doing a Krichchha 
Prajcipatyam penanoe. (,159) 

Having eaten the leavings of the food of a cat, of a 
crow, of a rat, of a dog, or of an ichneu-mon, as well 
as boiled rice infested with insects and hairs, one shall 
drink Brahma subarchala (a kind of consecrated lin- 
seed gruel.) (160) 

Ohe, valuing the purity of his ownself, must not 
partake of any kind, of ' forbidden food ; having un- 
knowingly eaten such a fare, one must immediately 



4oS Afanu Samhita. 

belch that out, or adopt any other kind of purifyiilg 
measure. (l6l) 

The various purificatory penances for the expiatioti 
of him, incidental to eating prohibited food, have been 
described ; now hear me discourse on .the expiatory 
penances to be pfaetised for acts of gold-stealing. (t62) 

The foremost of Brihmdnas, having wilfully stolen 
paddy (food-grains), food 6t money from the house of a 
member of his own caste, shall be purified by practising 
a Krichchhra ppnance for a year. (163) 

For having stolen a man (slave;, a woman, a 
house, or a field, or the water of a tank or well, 
the ChaHii^ayonam should be understood as the proper 
expiatioii. O64) 

For ha^|^[|Ji stolen an article or substance of insigrti- 
ficent value (such as, lead, etc,) from the house of 
another, he shall make over the same, to its owner, and 
do the Kriehchhara Shntapanam penance for the puri- 
ficotion of his self. (165) 

For stealing articles of food which are eaten by 
chewim, or any kind of liquid food, as well as for 
steating a bedding or a cushion, a vehicle, a fruit, a 
root, or a flower the drinking of Panchagavyam com- 
pound is the proper expiation. (166) 

For having stolen hay, wood, trees, treacle, dry food 
grains, cloths, hydes,' and flesh, one shall fast for three 
days (lit., three day's fast is the expiation). (167) 

For having stolen gems, pearls, . corals, popper, 
silver, iron, white copper and stones, one shall live on 
a gruel of particles of broken rice. (168) 

For having stolen cloths made Jof cotton. Silk or 
wool or an animal with bifurcated or unbifurcated hoofe, 



itfanti SamhiUi 409 

birds, scents, cereals or camphor, one shall live on (milk 
for three days. (169) 

By thesse (expiatory) penances a Br4hraan {lit., 
twice-born Joiie) shall purge off his sin of stealing ; the 
sin of carnally knowing a forbidden Woman should be 
expiated by the following ones (penances). (170) 

For casting his seed in the Womb of his own 
uterine sister, of a friend's wife, gr of his daughter- 
in-law, or of an unmarried girl, or of a woman of vil6 
{Chanddla) caste. (171) 

Or for carnally : knowing a daughter* of one's own 
father's or mother's sister, or a daughter of the brother 
of one's own mother, one shall do a Chandrhyanam 
penance. ^72) 

Let not the intelligent one covet any of the (pr6ced- 
ing) three ;kinds of sisters for his wife, inasmuch as 
they are unobtainable (unraarriageable) on account of 
their tie of agnateship (yndiiivam) ; by goiiig unto 
such a (sister), one becomes degraded. (173) 

For having cast his seed in a man, in a she-animal 
(other than a cow), in a woman in her metises, in 
any part of the (female body other than the propeir 
channel), or in water, one shall practice a Krichchara 
^verely. austere) S&ntapanam (penance)., (i 74) 

After having carnally known a man or a woman, 
or aiter having copulated (anywhere, whether) in a 
bullock cart (or otherwise), a Baihmana must bathe, 
with all his clothes on, in water. (175) 

By carnally knowing a Chanfi&la or a vile caste 

woman, by partaking of their food, or by accepting 

gifts' from them, without the knowledge of their vile 

caste, a Brahmana becomes degraded; by wilfully 

52 



410 Manu Samhita. 

doing all these acts, he becomes of the same cast 
with them. (176) 

A wilfully faithless wife let the husband keep 

. imprisoned in a chamber, divested of all her wifely 

duties ; and let him cause her practise the penance laid 

down in connection with the sin of a man's carnal 

knowledge of another's wife' (177) 

If she, soljcited'by a man of her own caste, suffers 
herself to be defiled by him, in that case the perform- 
ance of a Krichchra Chandrayanam penance is the 
proper expiation (178) 

The sin which a Brahmana commits by sexually 
knowing a Chandhla woman* is expiated by his living 
for three years on food obtained by begging, and by 
muttering the sacred {Savitri) mantra (during all that 
period) (179) 

Thus the purificatory rites for the expiation of 
sins of the four kinds of sinnerst have been described) ; 
now, hear me describe those which should be done for 
the expiation of sin, incidental to one's associating with 
the degraded (180 ) 

By sharing the same bed, or cushion, or by riding in 
the same car with, or by eating in the compj^y of 
a degraded pejr son for a year, a man becomes degraded ; 
by teaching the Vedas to such a person, or by officiat- 
ing as a priest at a sacrifice instituted by him, or by 

* The text has Vrishali ; Kulluka sxplains it by Chanddla 
woman. "The terra may also mean a vile-caste or S'udra woman, 
an unmarried girl in her jraenses, an old woman, or a married 
woman in her flow. 

+ Killers of animal lives, eaters of prohibited articles of food, 
gold-stealers, and those who hold sexual intercourse with prohi- 
bited female relations or forbidden women. 



M»nu Samhtta. 4I[ 

contra^cttfig any '.marital relation with him, one be- 
comes degraded on the same day (i8i) 

' He, who associates with a degraded person, must 
practise the same penance for his purification,, as is 
laid down for the expiation of the sin through which 
that person has become degraded (182) ~ 

The Sapindas or i5a«</^«iJ(relations) of a degraded 
person shall do the water-rite unto him in his life time, 
at the outskrit of their village, and in ^ the presence 
of his cognates (Jndtis), priest and preceptor, on the 
evening of a condemnable day of the lunar month 
(such as the ninth day of the moon's wane or 
increase). (1S3) 

A slave-girl of theirs shall kick off a pitcher, full 
of water, as if he had been dead ; and after that, his 
Sapindas (and Samdnodakas) shall fast and observe ■ 
uncleanness for a day with his Bandhus, (184) -' 

From thence all dealing, speaking, association, or 
sitting with that degraded person by others shall cease ; 
the patrimony of such a person ^hall not be given to 
him (185). 

The right of eldest-bornship, the honour due to 
him as such, and the right to a preferential excess 
share as the eldest born (of his ifather) shall be ex- 
tinguished as fat as such a degraded (eldest brother) 
is concerned; a more qualified younger brother shall 
take the share (in the paternal property) djue to him 
{i.e., degraded leidest brother) (186) 

Having done (the proper) expiatory penance, he 
(the 'degraded person) in the company of his 
Sapindas and Samhnodaka relations) shall bath in a 
tank and cast a^new pitcher, full of wafer, therein, (187), 



412 Manu Sammiih 

, Having cast th« pitdier tin th« ws^r, h» rtisfll 
enter his house, and thence forward discharge all th« 
duties of relationship with his cognates {/neiti) (i88) 

All these measures should be adopted in respect 
of women who have become degraded ; but they should 
be provided with food and raiments, and allowed to 
live close to their houses (189) 

Let no one have any dealings with an unexpiated 
sinner, nor in .any way calumnise the one who has 
made th'e proper atonement for his sin. (190) 

Let no one associate with an infanticide, with a 
treacherous person, with a woman-killer, or with one 
who has killed a man?taken under his protection, even 
after he has done the proper expiatory penance. (i9i> 

Twice-born ones, who have not been initiated with 
the Ghyatri at their respectively proper ages (of initia- 
tion), shall first practise three Krichchhra penances ;* 
thereafter they should be initiated with the holy 
thread. (193) 

Brihmanas, who do improper acts,t and who, 
though initiated with the thread, are ignorant of the 
Vedas, if they wish to do the expiatory penance, should 
be likewise •advised*to> practise the same penance {ie. 
Krichchhra Vratam) (1931 

The sin. which a Br&hmana commits by earning 
money by vile means is expiated by his muttering the 
purifying Mantras and by renouncing the same. (194) 

• Vr&tyastoma penance according to VAjnavalkya, the nature 
Of the expiatory penance should be determined in these cases with 
xh eye to the physical capacity of the penitent to do the same — 
Kullukq 

f Such as taking gifts from S'udras, or s€fving them in any 
capatity whatsoever— ^rK/ZwAa, 



Manu Samhtta. 413 

Bx oitltfering, sdf controlled, the Sdvitri mantra 
three thousand times, by living in the pasture ground 
on milk only for one month, a Brahmana becomes 
exonerated from the sim of accepting the gift of an 
tinworthy person (195) 

Returned from the pasture ground, depleted with 
fasting and fully subdued, him (Bi;ihni,ana) they must 
ask, " well, beloved do you wish to bA on an equal 
footing with us ?* (196) 

Having said "yea" to the Brihraanas, he shall 
scatter grass before the cows; after the cows have 
commenced eating that fodder in that land, converted 
into a temporary sanctuary (on account of the cows, 
eating there on), they (the Brdhmaaas) shall accept 
that agreement (as to his future good conduct) (197) ' 

Having officiated as a priest at a sacrifice in stituted 
by a Vratya (a twice born one not initiated with th e 
thread within the proper age limit) for the expiat ion 
of his sin {i.e.. at a Vratya Stoma sacrifice), or having 
attended the funeral rites of one (other than his parent 
or preceptor), or having practised any deadly incanta- 
tion (such as S'yena ydga, etc), or done the Ahina 
sacrif]ice,t one shall be free from sin by doing three 
Krichchra penances (198) • 

A Br&hmaBa, who although capable, has not given 
protection to its sepker, or has taught the Vedas 
to one who should not be so taught, shall expiate his 
sin by eating barley corn for a year. (199) 

* i.e. do you promise not to accept gifts of the unworthy in 
futurej? 

^ Ahina sacrifice is a Vediac • sacrifice in which fermented 
Soma juice was used to be drunk in large quantities for three days 
(nine according to others) in succession. To officiate as a priest at 
an Ahina sacrifice is defiling — Sruti. 



414 Manu Satnhtta, ' 

Having been bitten by a village dog, jdckal, ass, 
man. horse, camel, or.a boar, a Brihmana shall purify 
himself by doing a Prdndyama. (200) 

For having eaten in the same row Jwith diners, not 
fit to sit therein (Up&nkteyas), for a month, one shall 
take food on the evening of each fourth day, fasting on 
the days previous, and read the Sanhiths and do fire- 
offerings, each day, for his purification. (201) 

Having wilfully riden in a carriage drawn by an 
ass, or by a cEjpiel, a Br&hmana shall purify himself by 
bathing stript of all clothes, and by practising a Prd- 
ndyama. (202) 

A man, afflicted with a natural urging for stool or 
urine, having micturated or defecated without water,* 
or in water, shall regain his purity by bathing with all 
his clothes on in a running stream at the out-skirt of 
a village, and by touching a cow as well. (203) 

For omission to perform the daily religious^ rites 
et^joined to be performed in the Vedas, as well as for 
breakiijg the vow of a Snataka (the rite of ceremonial 
ablution to be performed by a Brahmacharin) fasting 
for an entire day and night is the expiation. (204) 

For having arrogantly ordered a Brdhmana to keep 
silence, or for, having bethoued one's preceptor, the 
penitent shall bathe and fast for the day, and thereafter 
appease the insulted (Brdhmana or preceptor) by catch- 
ing hold of his feet. (205) 

For having assaulted a Br&hmana even with a straw, 
or for having fastened his throat with a piece of cloth, 
or for having defeated him in a dispute, one shall 
appdase tym by prostrating himself at his feet. (206J 

* Having not washed himself with water after micturation 
Or defecation. 



Manu Samhita, 415 

For having taised a club (rod) with the intention 
of assaulting a Brahmana, one goes to hell for a hundred 
years}; for having assaulted him therewith he lives in 
hell for three thousand yearf (207) 

For as many thousands of years as the particles 
of dust which are stained by his blood, the assaulter 
of a BrAhmana shall live in hell. (ao8) 

For having threatened a Brahmana with a stick, one 
shall do a Krichchhram {Prajapatyam) penance, for 
having beaten him with a stick one shaU do an Ati- 
Krichchhra penance; and for having drawn blood on 
his body, one shall do a Krichchhrati Krichchham 
penance. .(209) 

For the expiation of sins in respect of which no 
purificatory measures have been specifically laid down 
(in this code), expiatory penances should be advised 
in consideration of the lightness or gravity of the sin 
and the capacity of the penitent to do the same. (210) 

Measures, by adopting which men are exonerated 
from their sins and which had been embraced (of 
yore) by the manes and deities, I shall presently des- 
cribe to you. (211) 

A Brahmana, doing a Praj&paiyam penance, shall 
eat his meals in the day (during the fisst three days 
of its term), at the evening (during the second three 
days), shall live on food obtained without solicitation 
(and arrived at any part of the day (during the third 
three days), and fast for the (last) three days yai its 
term.)* (212) 



* On the first three days he shall eat twenty-six morsels of 
food, each as large as a hen's egg, [on^^the second three days he 
shall eat such twenty-two morsels of food in the evening, and 

such twenty-four morsels of food on the third three days. 

Pardsdya. 



4t6 Mattu Satnhita. 

A Krickchhra Sdntapanam penance is said to Con- 
sist in living on a Compound of cow-dung, cow'g yrine, 
cow-milk, curdled cow^niilk, clarified cow-butter and 
the washings of Kus'A- grass on the first day, and in 
observing a fast on the day following. (213) 

A -Br&hmana, doing aii Ati-Krichchhram penanCdi^ 
shall eat one morsel of food, eacih day, for the first 
three days of its term as described before, and fast 
on the succeeding three days. (214) 

A self-Controlled BrUhmana, doing a Tapta Krick- 
chham penance, shall bathe onc6 a dy and drink hot 
water during the first three days, hot milk during the 
second three days> hot clarified butter during the third 
three days, and hot air during the fourth three days 
pf its term. (215) 

A Parakct penance, which consists in oile's fasting 
foi; twelve consecutive days with his senses jRiUy 
brought under his control, removes all sin. (216) 

Let him bathe thrice and partake- of fifteen morsels 
'of food on the '.day of the full moon, diminish the 
tiumber of morsels by one on each successive ds^, 
'Observing a &st on the day of th^ new moon, and 
thereafter increase the number of morsels by one,* each 
day, till it again reaches fifteen on the next full moon- 
day. This penance is called the Chdndrayanam. (217) 

The same rule should be followed in respect of a 
Chdndrdyanam of the Yava ntadhya (barlefy-middled) 
kind with the exceptibn that, the morsels of food should 
be increased by one, each day, cbmmencing from the 
first day of the moon's increase, [till the nungiber of 
morsels reaches fifteen on the full-moon day, and 
thereafter decreasing it by one, each day, during the 



iiark fbrtiitght-, the penitent fasting on the day of the 
ilext nja'fi moon. (2 1 S ) 

A Br^hmana, doing a Yati Chdndrdyanam, shall 
partake of eight niorsels of vegetable food, each day, 
self-controlled, for a month. (219) 

Let a self-controlled Brahmana eat four niorsels of 
(vegetable) food after sun-rise, and fouir such morsels 
after sun down, each day. This is -^hat is called the 
S'is^u Chandrayanam. (220) 

He, who, self-controlled, eats thrice eighty morsels 
of vegetable food ill the course of a month, ascends 
to the region of the moon-god, {i.e., the region of the 
lunar Pitris.)* (22,1) 

(Eleven) Rudras, (twelve) A'dityds, (eight) Vasus, 
Maruts and the holy sages, for the extinction of 
all digjsordant elements (in their souls), practised this 
Chandrayanam. penance of yore. (222) 

Each day, during its performance, the penitent shall 
personally do the fire-offering, known as the Makd- 
Vyahriti Homa, and live a life of absolute simplicity, 
truthfulness, and non-irascibility, free from all killing 
propensities. (223) 

[For a month] daily he shall bathe with all his 
clotlies on, thrice in the day and thrice in the night, 
abjuring all talk with women, with S'udras and with the 
degraded. (224) 

Worshipping the gods, BrShmanas and preceptors, 
continent, and carrying the staff, etc., let him, day and 



• AcGcrding to the Bf ahmanic Cosmogony the region, whence, 
the soul, roused from its sleep of repose, and acted upon by the 
dynaniics of acts of its farmer incarnation, is drawn towards the 
plane of human existence, and wherein it stays until it enters the 
life-energy of the creator of its organic frame on earth. 

53 



41 8' Manu Samhita. 

night, sit up awake ; incapaWe' of sitting up,' let hinr Ife 
down on the bare ground' (225) 

He' shall mutter the Sdvitri and other sacred 
Mantras to the best of his ability ; (Hence), muttering 
of these Mantras is commended in connection with 
practising all kinds of expiatory penances. (226) 

Thus Brihmanas^ shall purify themselves of sins- 
which they are pnblickly known to have committed ; 
sins, they have done in secret, they must expiaj^c by 
means of Htmas (fire-offerings 1 and Japas (mutterings- 
of sacred Mantras^. (227) 

By confession, by Repentance, by penitential austeri- 
ties, (and) by ( Vediac) study, a sinner is absolved of 
his sin ; of a sin committed in time' of distress one is 
absolved by gift making (charity.) (228) 

Whenever a man confesses the sin he has himself 
committed, he casts it off as a snake casts off his 
slough. {229) 

Whenever his mind censures the misdeed (he has 
done) his body becomes free from that sin. (2301 

Having repented for his sin, he becomes absolved 
thereof; the mind becomes purified by the determina- 
nation to desist from it in future. (231) 

Having pandered in his mind on the feet that one 
has to suffer the effects of good or bad deeds in 
the next world, let him be engaged, body and soul, in 
doing good deeds, each day. (232)i 

Wishing to be free from the consequences of mis- 
deeds, which he might have wilfully or unwilfuUy 
committed, let him refrain from doing it for the second- 
time (in future.) (233) 

If after having done an expiatory penance, one does^ 
not acquire the (desired) ease {lit. lightness> of spirit^ 



Ufanu SamhtlA. 419 

lie must continue to do the penance until his mind be- 
come's fully relieved of its burden. (234) 

Tapasyi (devotional austerity and divine commu- 
nion) is the root of all happiness which is to be found 
in heaven or on earth ; in Tapasya^ doth it stay and 
in Tapasya does it merge. This has been said by 
the Veda-knowing wise. (235) 

Knowledge is the Tapas of a'BrS.hmana, protec- 
tion of subjects forms the Tapas (highest duty) of a 
Kshatriya, agriculture, trade and cattle rearing form the 
Tapas of a Vais'ya, and service forms the Tapas of 
a S'udra. (236) 

The self-controlled Rishis, who live on fruits, roots 
or air, by means of Tapasyd alone, behold the three 
regions (ie., the universe) with all its inmates, both 
mobile and immobile. (237) 

Medical knowledge, knowledge of Antidotes to 
poisons, knowledge of Brahma and residences in various 
regions of heaven are attained by means of Tapasya, 
Tapasyd is the only instrument .through which they 
are realised. (238) 

Whatever is insurmountable, whatever is unacces- 
sable {/it. unavailable), whatever is impassable, and 
whatever is impossible to be performed, is easy of ac- 
complishment by Tapasyd alone ; verily irresistible is 
the prowess (energy of) Tapasya. (239) 

Makdpitakins and other miscreants become free from 
sin by means of austere penitential austerities. (240) 

Insects, flies, beasts and birds, and immobile things 
ascend to heaven through the energy of Tapasyd. (241) 

■* Sin which a man may commit by his body, mind and 
speech, Tapasvins (practisers of penitential austerities) 
can speedily consume by their Tapas. (242) 



^20 Manw Satnhita. 

Of a Brihman, purified by penitential austeijties^ 
the gods accept the offerings and fulfil his desires. (243) 

By dint of Tapasyd the lord (Prajapatu created 
this Sastras (framed this code) and by Tapasya the 
sages obtained the Vedas. (244) 

The gods, observing the' highest merit of Tapasyi 
pronounces Tapasym to be the greatest fortune (of 
man). (2451 

Daily reading of the Vedas according to one's 
ability, perrbriflance of the five daily sacrifices, and 
forbearance tend to destroy the sin, incidental to 
the commission of any of the great sins (Makd- 
pdtakas.) (246) 

As fire speedily consumes its fuels with its ovsrn 
energy, so a Feafa-knowing (Brahmana) consumes all 
his sins with the fire of knowledge. (247) 

Thus I have described conformably to the Regula- 
tion the expiatory penances in respect of sins ; now 
hear me describe the purificatory penances for the 
expiation of sins committed in secret. (248) 

By practising sixteen Prdndydmas, each day, accom- 
panied by the Gydtri S'ira Mantra coupled with 
Pranava and Vyahritis, one becomes absolved even 
of the sin of billing a Brahmana in the course of a 
month. (249) 

By muttering sixteen times, each day, for a month 
the Mantra running as A' pa na :>'os'uchad, etc.,* 
first sung by Kutsa, or the Mantra Pratistomehi 
rushasam, etc., first sung by Vasistha, the Mdhitram\ 
or the in'uddhavatyaX Rik, a wine-drinker becomes 
free from his sin. (250) "^ 

* A'po na S'os'uchadagham, etc. 

f Mahitreenamadho'-stri, etc. 

t S'addhavatya etanindram Stavamahe. 



Manu Samhit*, 421 

5y^nce muttering the Vediac Suktam, Vamiyam* 
etc., or /the S'ivasamkalpa^ Mantra^ a gold stealer 
becomes speedily free from his pin. (251) 

By muttering for a month the Mantra, Havishanta, 
etc.^ or Natamaniho, or the Purushu Suktam, a defiler 
of his preceptor's bed becomes free from his sin. (252) 

A great sinner {Mahdpdtakiti),-* seeking absolution 
from his sin, shall mutter, for a year, any of the following 
Suktas, viz-, Avati Helo Varunayo, etc., or Yatkimchid 
Varanadevo etc., or Hi me manah, etfc. (253) 

Having accepted a gift from a vile or degraded 
person, one shall mutter for three days the (four) Riks, 
running as tarat Samandu dhdvati, etc., whereby ha 
shall be purified. (254) 

By bathing in a running stream and by muttering 
for a month the p.ik, running as Soma Rudrd, ate, or 
the (three) Riks, running as A'ryayamanam Varunam 
Mitrancha, etc., one becomes free from varied 
sins. 1255) 

By mnttering for six months the seven Richas 
commencing ' with Indra Mitram Varuna, etc., a 
penitent becomes free from all sin ; by living on food 
obtained by begging for a moth after having evacuated 
the excreta of of his body in water, a 'man becomes 
sinless. (256) 

By making fire-offerings with libations of clarified 
butter accompanied by the recitation of the S'dkala 
Mantra (running as Daivakritsyainasa) for a whole 
year, or by muttering for a year the Mantra, Nama 
Indras'cha, etc., one becomes free from a Mah&- 
pdta'kam. (257) 

• Asya Vamiyamasya Vdmasya patitasya etat, etc. 
t Yajjajfrato du'ram, etc. 



42 Z Manu Samhifa. 

A great sinner (MaMpatakiri) shall live on food 
obtained by begging, and follow the kine to the pasture 
ground, reciting the Pavamdni Mantra, each day, for a 
year, -whereby he shall be freed from his sin. (258) 

Or by practising three Parhka penances, and by 
thrice reciting, self-controlled, any of the Vediac 
Samhitas, he becomes free from all sin. (256) 

Let him fast for three days, thrice bathe each, day 
and recite the Aghamarshanam ::)uktam, at morning, 
noon, and e\«ning, whereby he shall be free from all 
sin. (260) 

As the As'vamedhfi, the king of religious sacrifices, 
tends to absolve all sin, so the recitation of the 
Aghamarshanam Suktam is sin-absolving in its 
effect. (361) 

Sin toucheth not a Brahmana who well remembers 
his Vedaic Mantras even if he destroys the three 
regions, or .eats his food at unclean places {lit. here, 
there and any where.) (262) 

By reading the Rik, Yaj'us or Sdma Samhita to- 
gether with the Upanishads, a Brahmana, self-con- 
trolled, becomes free from all sin. (263) 

As a brick-bat, thrown into a large lake, soon* sinks 
into its bottom, so all sins are merged in the three- 
fold (Trivrit) Veda. (264) 

The Rik Veda, the Yujur Veda and other various 
kinds of Sama Mantras are collectively, called the 
three-fold Veda (Trivrit Veda); a Brihmana who 
knows this is called z^Veda-^movi'mg one. (265) 

The Mystic Pranava Mantra (Om), the beginning 
of all the Vedas, as well as their stay,£which consists 
of three letters, is also called the Trivrit Veda ; he who 
knows it well, is also called a Veda-\ViOwaxg one. (266) 



Manu Samhiea. t^ij 

CHAPTER XII. 

O THbtJ sinless one, you have discoursed on the duties 
of nienibers of four social orders, now truly describe 
to us the effects of acts, done by men in their former 
binhs. (I) 

Unto them-, Bhiiga of virtuous soul said/ hear me 
(describe) the true effects of all such acts. (2) 

It is the auspicious or inauspicious effects of acts, 
bom of mind, speech and body^ which impart tc 
men superior, middling, or inferior statt^, according to 
their respective natures', {^f 

The mind should be understood as the irapdlor of 
these three-fold (superior, middling or' inferior) and 
thTee-located (?. e., born of speech, mind and body) acts 
of an embodied self, which are" possessed of the ten 
following attributes. (4) 

Coveting other men's goods, planning evil to others,- 
and false* notion fas to the next life, etc.) are the three 
inauspicious mental acts. (5) 

Harsh speaking, false speaking, speaking ill of 
another at his back, and idle gossiping are the toui^ 
inauspicious lingual acts. (61 

Receiving what has not been givew, killing animaf 
life (not according to the Regulatiosi) and ii^cest 
with another's wife are the three inauspicious bodily 
acts. (7) 

A man enjoys through his ntind, speech and body 
the effects of acts he had done by his mind, speech) 
and body respectively in (his former existence). (8) 

Through the dynamics of his (inausprcious) bodily 

' -— -^ 1-^ — ^ . , -in .1 



* The text has Vitathdhki nivesdh i—Kviaaska explains it by 
" Na'sti Paralakak, deha eva a'tina, eti," is Such notions as 
there is no next life, the body is self, etc^ 



424 Manu Samhifa. 

acts a man takes birth as an insensate thing ; thrdtigh 
the dynamics of his inauspicious lingual acts, Ife shall 
be born as a beast or bird, and it is through ,the 
dynamics of his inauspicious mental acts that he shall 
be born as a man of vile caste in this world. (9) 

He who has conquered his body, mind and speech 
and has the faculty in his intellect of keeping them 
under restraint is said to be the man of three restraints 
(Tridandin). (10) 

Controlling kis lust and anger, he who can exercise 
these three kinds of rods (restraints) in respect of all 
creatures, obtains emancipation. (11) 

He who causes the body to be operative is called 
Kshetrajna (individualised self) and the body which per^ 
forms these acts is called Bkutdmd (material organism) 
by the wise. (12) 

Another self there is who takes birth with each 
individual creature, and through the angency of whom 
pain and pleasure are perceived (by them) in their 
(successive) re-births. (13) 

This Kshetrajna (individualised self) and Mahat 
(Soul as distinct from the body and the individualised 
consciousness), are intimitaly associated with the five 
material elements, and ensconced in the bodies of all 
creatures, high and low, they depend upon the Supreme 
Soul for their existence. ( 14) 

Innumerable (subtle) embodied '$>Q\^&%{Kshetrajnas\ 
which fall off like sparks from the eternal body of this 
Supreme Soul, make the bodies of all creatures, high 
and low, animative and operative. (15) * 

Truly out of the subtile essences of the five kinds 
of material elements subtile bodies are formed with 



itanu Samhita. 4125 

"tvtiJc!* the se!ves of miscreants are dotheiJ, iafter deatb, 
Yor^the purpose of suffering paiti. ( u6) 

Lying merged in the subtile essences of the five 
-elements of their gross material frames, after death, 
'they (miscreant selves) suffer the pangs which tha 
great La\v- (Kama) has ordained for thetfi. (i;^) 

leaving suffered pangs for its* attachment to for- 
liidden pleasures of sight, taste, touch, etc., in life, the 
Self (encased in the gross, subtile and causal bodies)* 
becomes purified again and attaches itself; {i.6.^ b&- 
"comes merged in) to the Mahat and KshetrajHa. (18) 

These two {Ii!fahat and Kshetrajna) with Sleepless 
'eyes witness the good or bad deeds of the individual, 
through the effects of w'hich he enjoys pleasure, or 
suffers pahl, after death. (19) 

\i he %ad done greater good than evil in life, ha 
"shoald enjoy the pleasures of Paradise, Clothed with 
those material elements, (j..e., with. a material framey 
-after death. (20) 

If he had done greater evil than good in his life^ 
•he, forsaken by those elements (devoid of a material 
'body), should suffer the pangs \irhich the Law has 
ordahied for him.f (21) , 

* Acceding to the Vedanta each individual has three kinds 
(tf bodies, iiiz., Bhuta (gtass material frarwe), Sukshma Xinade oiE 
■the subtile essences of the five elements of the gross body) and 
"Linga (Causal). After the destruction of his gross bedy, the 
%elf of a man continues in his subtile and causal bodies. Kulluka 
•explains -its by Bhuta-Sukshma-Linga-S'ai'ir&vachchhinna. 

f The text has Ydmistd Ydtandh : which is usually translated, 
as pangs inflicted by Yatfia, the Idrd of Death. We havetbsbght 
!fit to interpret Yama by Niyama, the Law, the Ordanier. In the 
I'auranic literature this Law has been deified and invested with 
■a body perhaps to bring home to the minds »i its readers the 

54 



436 Manu Samhita, 

t 

tffee from sin, for having undergone those pftRgs 
of existence, after death, the individual Self again .at- 
taches itself to the five material elements. (22) 

Pondering over these pangs or pleasures of the 
individualised self through sin or virtue, let him engage 
his mind in the performance of virtue. (23) 

The Saitva (manifestation), liajas (desire) and Tamas 
(nescience) are the ?hree qualities of Self, with which 
MaAai (Consciousness converted into intellection), 
covering all becomings (created things), exists. (24) 

Out of these, the quality which predominates in 
an individual imparts its characteristic virtue to his 
self (character). (251 

Sattva is knowledge, R^jas is attachment and aver- 
sion, and Tamas is nescience ; these qualities permeate 
the bodies of all created things. (26) 

The pure, illuminating peace in the soul should be 
understood as the 5(j/^wfl. (27) 

That, which is assoiciated with misery, is un- 
pleasant to the soul, and creates in embodied crea- 
tures an attachment to the objects of the senses, 
should be understood as the irresistible Rajas. (28) 

That, which is unmanifest, devoid of the discrimina- 
tion of good and evil, creates an attachment to the 
objects of the senses, unknowable and unscrutinisable, 
should be understood as Tamas. (29) 

Now I shall fully describe the superior, middling and 
inferior effects of these (three kinds of) qualities. (30) 

Studying the Vedas, practising penitential austerities, 
cultivating knowledge (of the Sastras\ purity, subju- 
gation of the senses, performances of religious rites, 

^ ^ » 

Vedantic Law of Karma in a concrete and comprehensible form. 
^-Trandator, 



Manu Samhita, 427 

and c(j,ntemplation of Self are the indications of the 
quality of Sattvd (manifestation . (31) 

Undertaking acts (for the fruition of a definite 
desire), impatience, performance of forbidden acts, and 
a constant enjoyment of the objects of the senses, are 
indications of the quality of Rajas (desire). (32) 

Greed, somnolence, want of fortitude, cruelty, God- 
lessness, embracing forbidden vocations, beggary^ and 
folly are the indications of the quality of Tamas 
(nescience.) (33) ' 

Of these three qualities, which exist through all 
eternity,, past, present and future, the following^ 
should be understood as the collective indications o£ 
attributes. (34) 

An act, having dbne, cm: doing, or intending to dp' 
which a man becomes ashamed of himself, is called 
as marked by the properties of the quality of Tamas 
(darkness or nescience) by the wise. (351 

An act, by doing which one acquires a high renown 
in this world, and on the failure to complete which 
he does not feel any grief, should be understood asi 
marked by the quality of Rajas.' (36)1 

Ah act, about, which every one wishes to know, 
and by doing which one does not feel any, shame and 
the inner-self feels complacent, is said to emanate fronii. 
the quality of ^attva. (37) 

•Lust is the effect of Tamas, wealth is the object 
of Rajas, and virtue is the indication of Sattva ; of 
these each succeeding (quality) is higher than the 
preceding one in respect of merit, (38) 

Now I shall briefly descfibe in du^ order- the states' 
which a man acquires through the working of eacht 
of these three qualities. (39) 



f4!2'8']J M'anu Samhiia, 

Beings,, possessed of the-quality oi\ Sativa, acquirer 
divinity, those, markedl by the quality of, RtijiK lake; 
births' as men,, and those- marked; by the. quality, of, 
Tamas are bora as beasts. Thus: thethree- fold exisfr-- 
ence(throughj the. dynamics- of! these qualities) isdes^ 
cribed* (40>) 

This three-fold existence admits- of a (further) 
secondary-^ thresffold division such as^ superior, mid'-- 
dling and inferior, accorcfing; to the: acts and, know- 
ledge, etc., of beings (respectively marked, by. these; 
qualities;)' (411) 

Births as.immobilethiBgsi( trees. etc.)> worms, insects^, 
fishes, snakes, tortoises, beasts and, dear are the- effects; 
of the inferior or worst kind of Tamas, (42) 

Births^ as^ elephantsj horses, S'udras, condemnable; 
.Mlechchhas, lions, tigers,, audi boars, are. the effects of 
the middling kind of Tamas. (43) 

Births as dancers; arroganfc men, (black, legs),, 
Rdkshasmi,^x^Lj^s'''kch'as are;ther effects of the superior.- 
(mast. refined) kindi of Tamas. (44J 

Births as Jhallas (clubs-meni),. Mij^/rtj (wresUers),. 
actors, arms-tnen, gamblers; and drunkards- are; the: 
effects of the inferior kind of" Rajas. (<4.5)) 

Sixths. a& anointed kings; of countries, priests , of." 
kings, and wrestlers are the effects- of the. middling, kindi , 
of Rajas. (461) 

Births- as; GandfJinrvaSy GuhyakaSyVaksUns^ attenr 
dants-of the- gods* and Apsarasas^ are-, the. effects of the.-, 
superior, kind of Rajas^ (47)1 

Births ?i&.Tapasfls: (practisers of penitential austeri- 
ties), Yatis,' Brdhnmnas, the scalers of heaven, ^tars-. 
and Daityas are the. effects of inferior Sattva. (4S) 

' 1 Births, as celebrants^ of religious sacrifices,, (?ages)» 



Mamw SamkilSi 4l2^ 

Tedliac- gods, embodied deities j. stars such as the pole> 
Stat, etc, years, Pitris and, sidhyas are: the, effects, of." 
the- middling, kind; of! Sattva. (49) 

Births as-Brahm^, Marich* B:ajapati; the'embodiedj. 
virtuBi tne embodted. principle of! intellection (Mahat), or 
the- unmanifest Nature^ are- thfr effectfs of thetsuperior- 
kijsdQf Ja^fwa. (50) ' , 

Thus- i have- fully described the>kindfe of acts (such, 
a^ mental, lingual andi bodily) andi the three- kinds of 
existences whiidi originate- from them^ ^marked, by thes 
qualities^ of Satlma Rajas and: Tamas\ and the exist-- 
eneias (jn. detail which all creatures obtain according 
to their three-fold character (superior,, middling andt 
in&rior); (51) 

,By indulging; in, pleasures of the senses, by not 
Higtituting the religious, rites (such, as, the rites of puri-- 
ficatibn, etc.) the foolish, miscreflnts obtains sinful exis-^ 
tences, 152) 

Now hear, me describe the: wombs in which the,: 
individealised. Self is constrained to take its successive 
births in this world and the acts through which it getSi, 
such existences. (.53J 

For many years having suffered p^ngs in hell, the^t 
souls- of Maha.patakins (great sinners) 'are bora in the;; 
fiollQwing wombs in this world (54) 

' A Brdhmana-killer is born, in the womb o£ a bitch,,, 
sow, she,-^s, she-camel, cow, ewe, she:^ear, hen bird,, 
Chand^la, woman and, Pukkasa. woman.. (55) 

A wine-driningBrdhmana isbornin the wombs ^ of; 
worms, insects, filth-eating birds and feiocious- beasts^ 
of the forest. (56) 

For. a, thousand times a goldrstealer Brihmaoa, isi 



4.30 3fa»u Samkita- 

born in the wombs of spiderS) snakes, lizards, crocddHlb^ 
and malignat Pis'dehas. (57I 

For a hundred incarnations a defiler of his prd^ 
ceptor's bed is bom ;as a weed, a bush, a creeper, as a 
flesh-eating and ferocious beast, and a fan^d beast of 
the forest, given to- killing (such- as-, a lion or tiger. (58) 

Killers of animal Mves are re-born as beasts- that 
eat raw flesh ; eaters of forbidden- food are re-born asi 
vile worms ;. thieves are re-born as beasts that eat eacte 
other's flesh; and those who go- untO'Vik'-caster women,, 
are re born as Z'/'^^as. (ghosts). (59)' 

By keeping the company of the- degraded^ by carnal- 
ly knowing another's wife, by steailing a Btihmana's 
property, one is re-born as a Btahma-Rhkshasa^ (6or) 

For having stolen jem^ pearls, corals and various: 
kinds of gems out of g^eed, one shall take birth, in thee 
womb of a golcLsmith's wife-. (61). 

For having stolen paddy (food grains), one- shall be 
reborn as a mouse; for having^stolea white brass, he 
shall be reborn as a diving bird,; for having stolen honey^ 
he shall he reborn as a stinged %&; for having stolea 
milk, he shall be reborn ,as a crow ; tfjr haying, stolen: 
any kind of sweet sap, he shall be. rebo^ as a dog ;. and 
for having stolen clarified butter,, he shall be rebora 
as an ichneumon. $62;) 

For having stolen fleshy he shall become a vulture ; 
for having stolen lard, a diving crane ; for having, stolea 
oilj'ja oodcroach; for having stolen salt, a Chirivhk- 
insect; and for having stolen milk-curd, a small 
heron. (63) 

Fpr having stolen a silk cloth he shall become' a. 
Titteri bird ; for having stolen a cloth of vegetable 
&bces) a frog; for having stolen a cotton cloih^ a heron ;. 



Manu SamkitM, 43 1 

tor having stolen a cow, a lizard (Godha); and for 
havifig stolen tYeacle, a bat. (64) 

. For baring stolen, scents he shall become a mole ; 
forihaving stolen edible leaves, a peacock ; for having 
stolen confection, a porcupine ; and for having stolen 
an uncooked artiple of food, a S'alyaka. (65) 

For having stolen fire, he shall become a heron ; 
for having stolen a household impliment (such as a 
winnow,. etc.), a Grihakitri bird;(a species of bird which 
builds its nest with clay, weeds, etc.); 'and for having 
stolen a red cloth, a Chakora bird. ((>()) 

For having stolen a deer or an elephant, he shall 
become a wolf; for having stolen a horse, a tiger ; for 
having stolen fruit or roots, a monkey; for having 
stolen a woman, a bear j for having stolen drinking 
water, a Ch&taka bird ; for having stolen a cart, a camel; 
and for having stolen «iny other kind of beast, a 
goat. (67) 

For having forcibly stolen any thing, belonging to 
andthfer, or clarified butter not offered as a libation, he 
mtisl needs takes birth as a beast. (68) 

For having stolen these things, women also acquire 
detnerit and are reborn as wives of > the aforesaid 
beasts. (69) 

For not having discharged the proper duties of their 
respective orders, in times of peace (lit. undistress), 
members of the four social orders take, births in the 
wombs of the following beasts and become'.servants of 
their enemies in their next births. (70) 

A Brdhmana, who has swerved from his duty in life, 
shall become a ghost, living on egesta, and vomiting 
flames of fire ; a Kshatriya, for the same offence, shall 



43^ ITuKM SttMhUtt. 

live in the hello'f k:u'taputaHa, eatihg excreta oS^fi 
. iputrid 'carcasses. f7i) 

A Vaishya ^for the same offen<^) shall become a, 
■Maitrak^ha-Joyotika -(anus-mouthed) Ghost> {lit. «at- 
jng, the vermins, lice, etc., of worn cloth"^.' 172) 

The senses, tlirough which sensuous men most enjoy 
the sensual pleasures,*bec6me the keenest, after death> 
?and prove a source of torment to them. (73) 

By dint of practising those acts, (sotils of foolish 
Tmen suffer) pangs in this world and are re^boin id ' 
those wombs. (74) 

They suffer torm^ents in the hell of darkness, in Ihe 
Itell of the forest of sword^leavtss, and in the joint" 
•splitti5Hg hell. (75) 

They suffer various kinds of torments, are devoured 
by crows land owls, are made to walk on hot sand 
banks, and are >vhirled in the Whirling torrents of the 
hell'of Ktin^hip&ka, (f6) 

They take births !i) the -v^ombs of beasts and con- 
■stanUy suffer the pangs of those miserable existences^ 
subjected to the torments of heat and cold, and seeing 
many frightful visions, {tj) 

Frequent refidences in Wombs, frequent painful 
births, pains of incarceration (as beasts), and sei%itade 
of others they are constrained to suffer. (78) 

Separatiqn from friends and dear ones, association 
with the miscreants, acquisition or loss of things, and 
creation of friends and enemies (torment them). (79) 

Helpless old age(imbecility), affliction with diseases, 
various kinds of pain (such as hunger, thirst, etc.,) and 
the uncdnquefable death (add to their torments in 
life). (80) 



Umhu Samhitt. 43:; 

■ The feftling, ^frith which a man does an act in life, 
toparts to his self a suitable body for the enjoyment 
of 'the fruit thereof in the next world, and the 
nature of which is determined by the nature of that 
feeling. (8t) 

Thus all the 'dynamical energies of acts have been 
fully described ; now hear me disc(^rse on those duties 
of Brihmanas, by doing which they can attain the 
highest good (emancipition). (82) 

Studying the Vedas, practising penitential austerities 
(divine contemplation and realising one's oneness with 
the Supreme Self), knowledge, subjugation of the 
senses annihilation of all killing propensities, and serving 
the elders are the acts which lead to the highest 
good. (83) 

Of all these auspicious apts, which one brings the 
highest good to the individual ? (84) 

Ot these, the knowledge of self is the highest duty, 
that is the foremost of all knowledge, since through it 
one attains immortality. {S5) 

Of the syc (aforesaid) acts, the institution of Vediac 
rites should be understood as the most benificial in 
this<life and the next. (86) 

All those acts are intimately connected with the 
institution of Vediac rites (z.s. they lead to self-kilow- 
ledge. (87) 

Vediac acts may be divided unto two classes, such 
as the Pravrittam and Nivritiam ; by Pravriiiam zcts 
one enjoys happiness and prosperity (elevation), by 
NivHAtam acts one acquires emancipation. (88) 

An act or rite, don© or instituted for the fruition of 
a definite object either in this life or in the next, is' 
called Pravriiiam ; an acts voluntarily done without 
55 



■^4 Manu Samnfta. 

■any prospect of gain or reward, is called a Mivrittartt 
One, (89) 

By doing Pravriitam acts, one attains equality with 
the gods ; -and by -doii^ Nivrittam acts one gets con- 
trol over the material elemfents. (90) 

■Seeing his Self -equally in all things, and all things 
in his Self, a celebrant of the Sacrifice of Self attains 
the kingdom of self (emancipation), (91) 

The foremost of Brahmanas, by abjining all acta 
enjoined to be •performed in the Sastra, shall strive 
to subjugate bis senses, to study the Vedas, and to 
acquire the knowledge of Self. (92) 

This is the highest success in the life of a Brdhmana 
in special, achievement of any other kind of success 
is not his success in life. (93) 

The Vedas are the eternal eyes of the gods, manes^ 
•and men ; the Vedas have no human authors and are 
independent of all logic or argument. This is the 
decision. (9<i) 

Smritis which afe not based on the Vedasy and 
S'&stras which are hostile to the Vedas and are founded 
on sophistry, are worthless in respect of the next life* 
They emanate from the quality of Tamos. (95) , 

S'astras, wTiich are not founded on the Vedas and 
are framed by men, are ooming into being and vanish*, 
ing. They are false and worthless. (96) 

The four castes, the three regions, the four orders 
of house bolder, etc.) the past, present ,and future are 
founded" on the Vedas. (97) 

Somid, touch, sight, taste, and snrell, which is tha 
tiflk, have originate4 from tl\e Vedas-, the VedahaA 
giyen birth to every thing according to its nature and 
function. (98) 



M-anu Samhita-, - 433^ 

Xhe- eternal Vedah embraces all created things;: 
fc&nce, the wiseqall it the greatest instrument of realising' 
the mghest good- of human life (emancipation.) (99)' 

A t'^^a-knowing man is- fit to be entrusted with 
generalship, sovereignty, or the highest judgeship 
of the land, nay, with the over-lordship- of all th& 
legions. (100 ' 

As a fully kindled' fire consumes even the moist 
trees,, so a l^eda-knomvig man by dint, of his (right) 
knowledge burns all the d&merit, born of his acts; (roi) 

A Brahmana, a knoiyer of the true imports, of 
the Vedas, in whichsover order of life he may be 
staying, happens to be one with Birahma, even in this; 
Me. (102) 

A i-eadfer of books is- greater than an illiterate one; 
one who has got those books by his heart is better than- 
a mere^ reader; one who has got a true- knowledge of 
their contents- is greater than one who remembers them>. 
and one who acts ' according to- that kno-wledge is 
greater than one who has merely gained, a.knowledge of 
their contents. (103) 

TapasyS, and' self-knowledge are- the- highest good' of 
a Brihmana. Tapasya consunrieth: sin, s«ilf knowledge- 
giveth him immortal life. (-104)1 * 

He who wishes to know the true principle of virtue 
must know all the' sciences: which are- based^ on posi- 
tive, observation, inference and; the: teachings- of tha 
Vedas.. (los)- 

Hci, who discusses theethical teachings of th« Vedas 
and! of the- veda-based. ,^mritis, with, processes o4 
reasoning'not.hostile to their tenets is alone enabled, to. 
knom thej right principle, of virtue and.no one else. (i.Q&fc 



43<S; Manu SamAifa. 

Now, all "expedients by which seltemancTpatfcSi i» 
/obtained have been described; now hear me expound 
the secret teachings of the Institutes of Manu. (107^ 

Laws, not specifically laid down is this code, should 
be unhesitatingly accepted, as virtuous ^qualified) Brih- 
manas would lay down and interpret. (108) 

Thoge who hav8 thoroughly studied the Dharma 
S'^stras, are well-versed in the Vedassnd Vedangas^ 
and lead the life of a Brahmacharin and are the living 
muniments of the texts of the Sruti should be judged | 
as duly qualified (lawgivers). (109) 

Whatever a council ,of ten, or of three qualified 
Brihmanas, faithful to their duties, shall lay down as 
the law, must be accepted as such, (no) 

Such a council must consist of at least ten Br4h- 
manas, who have studied the three Vedas, are acquaint- 
ed with rules of reasoning and inference, and are well 
versed in the Nirukta and law codes, (in) 

In respect of determing a doubtful point of law, the 
council must consist of at least three Brdhmanas, well 
versed in the Rik, Yajush and Sam Vedas. (112) 

Even whatever a single Veda-knowing Brihmana 
shall determine as the law shall be accepted as such in 
exclusion of what has been said by ten thousand igno- 
rant Br^hmanas. (113) 

A council, consisting of thousands of assembled 
Brahmanas, who are devoid of penances (vratas) and 
Vediac knawledge and live by the emblem of their 
caste, can never acquire the status of a true coun- 
cil. (114) 

The sin of that false law, which foolish Br&hmanas,' 
unread in the law codes, and full of the ^quality of 



Mim» Samhita. ^yf 

Tam^, sbalT fey ddwit^ shall belncreased hundred fold 
and: attach itself to its speak^si (115) 

'Thus I have described to yoU' all that confer th& 
tiighest good on man ; those vrhO'Swearvenot fromthesa 
duties become emancipated. ( 1 16) 

Thu* the lord (j.e. Manu), for the good of the uni- 
rerse-, has disclosed to me all the: sacred principles of 
virtue (Law.) (117) 

Self-CMitrolIed, let h&i see all thingsy whether real 
&c uiireal, as located in the Supreme Self; the mind of 
him who sees all thii^ located in Self never turns to>; 
evil (118) 

The Self is siH the di&ities, alt thiiigs aire located 
in Self; it » Sdf that lea^ the embodied beings to 
action, ^iig^) 

By thought let hmt realise the idratity of the ex- 
ternal ether with the ether in \m mind^ of the external 
air with the bodily air which is the cause oi its move^ 
ments and functi(»is, of the external fire with the fire 
which biisns in his eyes and digests the food in his 
stomach, of the external water with watery parts of his. 
body, and of the external earth witlk the eorthly con- 
sUtufflits of his frame. (12C1) 

Let him realise the identity of the ^mocat-god with 
his mind, of the quarters with bis ear,, of Vishnu with. 
his &culty of locomotion, of Hara with his strength, of 
fire with his speech, of Mitra with the :evacuating. 
faculty of his body and of Praj^pati with his &culty 
of procreation. (121) 

The governor of all these deities^ minuter than the: 
niinutest atom, the effulgent, great Self, which is 
comprehensible only in a trance, let him meditate 
upon. (122) 



43'S tfoHu SamSifn. 

Some call this sapretne Sdf fire-, others Manu ^^some 
call it Prajipati^ others senses. Some- call it Iife:^ 
others the eternal Brahmm (123). • 

It is^ this supreme Self^ which,, covering all tiie crea> 
tures with hi& five material aspects of earth, etc.,.i». 
revolving this: wheel of existence b>y means. o£ growth 
and decay. (124), , 

Thus he, who surreys his Self ia all thirds by 
his Self, realises, his. identity with all and attains the- 
supreme status; of Brahma. (1^25)1 

Ey reading these institutes of Manu as narrated 
by Bhrigu, one becomes of good conduct and. ii 
enal^ed to acquire any kind of exalted existence ho: 
Ukes. (126^ 

FiNISJKt 



fAltg bt CONTENTS. 

M'anu Samhita. 

'Chapter I. 
'Ifhe hol^ sagej iiiterl-dgate Manu about the soutces of 
Law — Mahu's reply to them — CasmogonJ— Bhrigu 
expounds the Law by the order of Manu— Different 
'Cycles of time— Duties Of the fouir social erders 
General plan of the book disbussed ... >n v^^t 

' CBAPTBR tt. 

flie four l^roofs »f Viftile— Rules of the otdel- olf 
^^aAmacA^nn— Duties Of pupils — The mode of salut' 
ing the prteeptof, eet. .» ... ..> 3}'^?$ 

CHAttER lit. 
Rules o! marriage for the membei's of the four fecial 
orders — Eight forms of marriage and their descrip>' 
tions, the five daily gfeat (household) sacrifices- 
Hospitality to guests and Change arrivals in the 

house— The eternal merit of S'riddha offerings, etc. 80— t ja 

• • 

Chapter IV. * 

Rules for the guidance of Householders, etc. Household 

duties ... ... ... ... I32-I7<JJ 

Chapter V,. 
Descriptions of commendable and forbidden food-" 
' Periods of uncleanness— Purifications of defiled 

articles— Duties of wives, etc. ... ... l?o— 263 

J 

tHAMER-Vl. 

Duties of the (Jififercnt social orders hi m 3og-«»aia 



iH "OONtElfJTS, 

, ' CajntrA VII. ^ 

Duties ot tdngs— £icpeaient< for the proteetioii ot s * * 
kingdom .•. ... ... ... 2i2-^ZSi 

Compondon of tribiin^slot justice, lav suits, sotftees ot 
litig^don, law relating to evidence, to punishment, 
excillpialting nature of piinishment, efit. ... asi—%iK 

CraYtek IX. 

Duties of men and women, Law of Inheritance, Gam* 
bling, appreheasbn of thieves, tlnties of Vyis'yas 
and S'udras ... ••• ... ... 31S— 364 

Ckapvbk X. 
Origins 0! mixed castes— Means of sttbsistenca of the 

members of the four castes in times of distress ... 365— 3S3 

<Q^T^ XI. 
Expiatory penances ... .„ „• 3S4«>4» 

chajcter xn. 

Rebirths, knowledge wai l^lf ^ouncipati^n ,„ 4*3 






:- ■!' 






f. 



'J' ..', 



1 -v*. 









< . ' "'"Ji, 



V V ;^ > 



, J Z*'^ V^;^ 






























* -i. r, tsv'.VV' " ,- v-' -' .&»*'« 






