===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.163375.Markandeya-Puranam_djvu.txt =====

A 


fEOSE  ENGLISH  TRANSL4TI0H. 

r-  " OF  - ^ 

! MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


MAHMATHA  NATH  DUTT,  M.A.,  M.EJl.S. 

^ Rector,  Keshub  Academy; 

Anf^r  tif  JSnf^luk  TVansldlimt  af  tht  Ramay&na^  Sriatai- 
ihagoMtam,  MaAaiharata,  Shagaval-  Gila  and  elktr  warkf. 


calcutt:m 

Trintid  »»  IT.  C.  Dam, 

FRtsi,  iSs/«  Dsasok  Strut. 

1800. 


k 

I . 
If  / 


I 


INTEODUCTION. 


’0-^ 

cliftcrcnt  works  known  by  the  name  of  Puranas  (or  old)  ari 
evidently  derived  from  the  mytho-heroiC 
Owsral  01ijii'»el«'.  stage  of  Hindu  belief.  They  deal  with 

five  characteristic  topics,  which,  as  Mr. 
t'olchrooke  Wcnlions  ate  ft)  Primary  creation  (a)  Secondary  creation 
(|)  the  Genealogy  of  gods  and  patriarchs  (4)  reigns  of  the  Manus  and 
(J)  history  or  !inch  patticvtlars  as  have  been  preserved  of  the  princes 
of  the  solar  or  Htnar  races  and  of  their  descendants  to  modern  times. 
Siva  and  Vi<.lm«,  under  one  or  other  form,  are  almost  the  sole  objects 
that  cl.titn  liiitnarte  ti!  the  Hindus  in  the  Pnranas.  These  arc  the 
sliatAvlrtriu 'I  id  liu-  i’ut.uiu'i  as  given  by  Auuu  Sinha,  the  great 
lesictigtApliri.  Bui  the  Pitranas,  which  wc  see  in  the  present,  do 
not  conform  fit  this  description.  The  reason  is  not  far  to  seek. 
There  has  been  a considerable  addition  of  .subject  matter  in  the 
shape  td  inlcrp<»iaittm.  .Sanskrit  «choIar.s  in  India  never  cared  for 
ihclr  own  name,  Bw  to  preserve  what  Is  considered  by  one  as  his 
best  pfo«)uction  in  letters  is  % human  instinct.  Thus  we  find  fine 
bterary  cotn{mailions,  emanating  from  the  pens  of  .Sanskrit  Pundits, 
iiine  hi  lime  shelved  In  the  bulk  of  great  leterary  works.  These 
imeipolaiiOBi  In  the  original  body  of  a work,  made  at  different 
ppffodii.  present  it  W ns  as  a completely  different  book.  It  is  for  this 
tesjtwn  we  find  so  many  heterogenous  things  in  old  Sanskrit  works. 
Wliatcver  may  he  the  value  of  the  Puranas  as  a history  or  a record  of 
the  knowledge  of  the  ancient  Hindus  their  importance  as  books  of 
tchgioMs  inktmetton  Is  undoubtedly  very  great. 

The  invariable  form  of  the  Puranas  is  that  of  a dialogue  in 
, which  some  person  relates  its  contents 

’ ' in  reply  to  the  enquiries  of  another. 

Thu  diiliiguc  is  interwoven  with  others  which  arc  repeated  as  hav* 
tBI  been  held  on  other  occasions  between  different  individuals.  The 
narmioi  is  coaimooly  Lomahatshana,  the  disciple  of 


11 


^ ■ c.toDOsed  to  communicate  what  was  imparted  to  him 

WmO  is  SU.pt' 

hf  hh  preceptor.  . ' . 

Til  Puranas  commonly  stated  to  be  eighteen  m number.  It 
is  said  there  are  also  eighteen  Upa  or 
BiTision*  Minor  Puranas— but  the  names  of  all 

^ The  principal  eighteen  Puranas  are  Brahmav 

these  are  not  touii'j*'  r r o nr  t j * - 

Padma  Ylshntt,  Saiva,  Bhagavat,  Naradiya,  Marhandeya,  Agni, 

Brahma  Vaivarta,  Linga,  Varaha,  Skanda^  Vamana, 

Kmma.Mat^a,GarudaandBrahmanda. 

All  these  Poranas  are  classed  into  three  groups  according  to  the 
qualities  which  prevail  in  them.  The  Matsya  Puran  remarks  that 
diose  in  which  glory  of  Hari  or  Vishnu  prevails  are  Satwika  ; those 
in  which  the  legends  of  Agni  or  Siva  predominate  are  Tamasa  and 
those  which  dwell  most  on  the  stories  of  Brahma  are  Rajasa.  The- 
two  representative  works  of  the  first  group  namely  Vishnupuran  and 

Bhagavatpman  we  have  already  translated.  Markandeya  Puran,  the 
sabl^ot  our  present  translation,  is  the  representative  of  the  last 
group.  ‘Truly  does  professor  Wilson  remark  that  the  Rafasa  Puranas- 
lean  to  the  Sakta  division  of  the  Hindus,  the  worshippers  of  Sakti  or 
the  female  principle. 

“ That  Parana  in  which  beginning  with  the  story  of  the  birds  that 
were  acquainted  with  right  and  wror>g. 
everything  is  narrated  fully  by  Mar- 
fcandeja,  as  it  was  explained  by  holy  sages,  in  reply  to  the  question 
0f  the  Muni,  is  called  the  Markandeya  containing,  nine  thousand 
verses/'  This  is  tlie  account  given  of  it  in  the  Matsya  Puran.  Al- 
though according  to  this  account  as  well  as-  that  of  other  Puranas 
^ original  work  is  said  to  consist  of  nine  thousand  verses,  the  te:xt, 
iiat  Is  now  seen,  consists  only  of  six  thousand  and  nine  hundred  verses. 

It  is  ve^  difilcult  to  ascertain  the  date  of  these  works.  Internal 
evidence — Jaimini  applies  to  Markan- 
deya for  an  explanation  of  some  of  the- 
iscldeats  described  in  Mahabharata — establishes  the  priority  of  ther 
. Mahabharata  to  the  Markandeya  Parana.  This  in  hot  Of  a piece  with 
the  tradition,  that  having  finished  the.  Puranas  Vyasa.  wrote  the- 
■ po-em^.  \ ^ '■ 


Bate. 


^fatkandeya  Turan  in  in  liu;  same  category  %¥ith  ilie 

tolksrshipaaiastiqultj.  ''r, las  am!  ilestribed  as  an  iinmediaio 

prodttciioti  from  Brahma's  mouth.  AW 
ftiiMigli  t Turana  it  m nni  atiribuii:?d  to  Xymi  wlio  m considered  as 
llie  aiilhrif  r*f  alUvofks  inMiiug  that  ap|ieBatiou.  The  Markaiideya 
liiiei  not  ackt^nivkJge  him  as  hs  composer,  editor  or  compfler*  fi* 
cltiriiH  lioiioiir  wiib  ihi’ Vcdai  lhemselve?i.  It  is  clearly  sami 

friun  llie  llsuigal  Manuscripts  that  the  Maikatuicya  |ireseuH  a 
^enn'iilai'  euccpliiiii  lo  this  liacfenevcd  enumer.uiau  of  the  eigliiccm 
IhiraiiiW  atiil  ilic  cdeliraiiiin  of  Vyasa's  name  as  x\ni  author  of  ihcnn  a!’. 
The  ffilltittii'jg  k A lyriopsls  of  the  work.  When  Markandc?ya 
Sptflls  a*^kcd  by  jaiitiini  to  explain  .some  iitci* 

ikuilH  in  the  Mahahliarala  he  rekfi  llicm 
to  tiifiie  tiifiii  living  tm  lh»*  Vimlhya  mountain  of  a celestial  origin  and 
litiifoniidly  verged  in  the  Vedas  atnl  die  knowledge  of  sfdriUial  Iriilhs. 
jaifum*  ai:i'Udurr:H'  !o  tlr^on  and  yeiM  to  them  ?he  following  rpies* 
linli'i  ''Why  waa  Va  siuh'va  !*.Mtu  a'l  a man  ' i low  w-as  it  that  lhan|nid 
W4f»  llie  oi  hve  raudavan  f Whe  ihd  Bakuleva  expiate  lhali-- 

IfUiniCide,  And  aliy  wrir  fhr  chsldien  of  llraupadi  killed  when  the/ 
had  litlaliiui  aiid  Aijuiia  t-o  help  them/*  Idieite  are  llic  %umt 
iiicid€.in%'  '"tm  tioehng  links  m ii  were  in  the  Mahaliharala^—deicribtd: 
III  ihi!  fir*l  |tiaftmn  of  lids  Pnrana.  Heaiilea  its  iiidepcficknl  merit 
aiiwoikol  an  ifttjcifiing  iiiofat  imiruciirms  it  has  mt  addiiton- 
al  value  id  flihrig  tipilir  gap  In  the  great  epic. 

,,  Begefidiol  \diiasiita’s vicaih,  Baladeva's  prtmnce,  Ilarislic!i»aiitlfa*s 
lo  heaven  and  the r|tiiitrtt  helweeii  Vwliwainilrt  and  Viiiili* 
ili*i  mt  hilfwwed  by  a %lnmmm\  regardini  tdrilii  death  ittd  sin*  Tliii 
m fiilliiitd  t»f  a far  wore  ftccmint  of  belli.  Il  gifts  a 

td  the  Verla-1  and  the  rirlifin  of  ihe  pairiarcha!  faniilie?i. 
Tlirre  h an  accutiiil  of  the  Manwaniaras  which  h folhiweil  by  a 
ot  IrgemN,  old  and  nmm  tie#,  relating  to  ilie  min  and  liiii 

laioiprfiiy  la  Vaivaswaia  Miifin  and  hk  mm,  leriiiinalirig 

Idiaitia,  ihr  wii  ol 

lire  iiio:r:niii|;iijfiii»i  ihc  epi-rtnle  of  the  M.irkaiiileia 

Ihtrana  h the  iluindlpiuha  : ii  work  in 
¥rry  gteat  estiimaihm  througliaiil  ileti|fti. 
*iilt  llie  voiai  ici  «if„  loddeii  kali  aird  othef  deiuw  la  lihaia 


oSerea.  Th.  «.  f 

c*  ,te  Kltoi  ».d  irwrfSUtUlOM 
111  ombatt  rth  thatoMlwI  J"* 

which  end*  whh  th«  foddcM 

rd,7»i.8-l.«®q»l.*.a  god.™  ■"•i' 

,.c«  q.l»  dltoht  from  Itat  d Ito  q^' 

Puranss.  It  1*  ^ * 

sectarian  spirit  which  Is  seen  in  mhtf 
:ely  10  be  seen  prayers  and  insoationt » 

„•«  ia  narrative  and  It  abcmnds  In  • »»»*«»  «* 


, ‘sangonaTy  sacrifices  are 
• is  attached  to  it  because 

■whole  poem  is  a detail  < 

• aoddess  during  her  dr 

Spirits  fortbe  mastery  of  the  universe. 

.»  annihilating  their  power  c-- 

: irespective  dommions. 

This  Parana  has  a chatacter  qti  i 
Puranas* 

" Charaetwistlcs.  sectarian 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


CHAPTER  I. 


Om!  Sahilaiioit  unto  the  Divinu  Vlsuckva.  May  those 
two  lotus  feul  iif  Hari,  capaljle  of  tlissipatiug  the  aflliclioti 
i:onsuf]u«uii  upon  ttu*  Uuit  of  t-xistenre,  which,  being  got  al^ 
arc  ation’4  liv  the  ast'etics  comptmed  rniruls,  and  which, 
ciimiiig  tuio  view,  hnw  in  order  envebprtl  heaven  and. 
earth  and  lire  neihrr  regitni,  purify  you.  May  he,  who  is 
ciipatile  of  dr?a roying  all  sins,  who  reposed  on  the  serpent 
(Aniinia)  living  in  the  interior  nf  the  Milky  ocean,  and  in 
whose  cofiipaiiy,  th#  iiiauari,  altlKHigh  leaving  Iht*  idllaws  of 
ilH  wallers  reiiflcred  lerrifir  by  its  breath,  seemed  to  dariicc% 
proteci  you. 

fltviiig  saluted  the  Supreme  Deity  (NlrSyana),  and  the 
liigtitil  of  mate  beings  (Mara)  ns  alto  the  godflesi  of  leariiitig, 
.Saraswati,  lei  %m  cry  uiircess.  The  highly  energetic  Jaimini, 
llie  iliicijile  of  Vyasa,  asktal  the  great  ascetic  Mirkaudeya,, 
eiigiigiKlifi  ItaiaJ  aiislerities  and  the  stmly  of  the  Vedas  (l)* 
'*(1  Reverend  Hir,  the  i^tory  of  /i/iflmfn,  that  has  been 
trialed  !:iy  the  ti.igli-souted  Vy»iia,  in  full  of  many  brilliiiiit 
f'Xprfc^.‘4oii^i  ctillectecl  from  various  scripiurcs,  ttiil  conskti 
■of  divine  meirci  and  figures  of  Hjiecidi,  eiccellent  wordSi 
amt  ifietr  sofiiiituvs  (a— As  Vtilmii  ii  amongit 
llie  rt'ImaiKi!'-  a l.li'aiiiiuimi  amtingat  fuetii  the  prerleis 


2 


MARKANOF.VA  rURANAW 


jewel  amongst  all  ornaments,  the  tlnin«ler4M»it  unoog  .t  .»if 
weapons  and  mind  amongst  all  organs,  so  is  the  »m'4  « k rl 
\tni  Mahdbkdrata  o-mangst  all  sacred  writings  In  it 

are  described  both  collectively  and  separately  wraith,  vhhtc 
desire  and  liberation  (6).  It  is  the  (oremost  of  all  rchginns 
scriptures,  the  most  excellent  of  all  treatises  treating  of 
wealth,  the  foremost  of  alt  works  relating  to  dt  sirc  and  the 
best  of  all  discoursing  on  liberation  (y).  ()  great  Sir,  in 
it  have  been  described  by  the  intelligent  V'cda  Vyasa,  the 
practices,  mode  of  living  and  the  attainment  ol  ohjrcl  hr- 
longing  to  the  four  conditions  {of  life)  (S).  ()  Sir,  this  ha* 

been  so  composed  by  the  generous  Vyasa  that  this  grr,ai 
scripture,  albeit  very  extensive,  is  not  a!  >.;ulc«l  liy  conitadi* 
tions  (9).  The  earth  has  been  freed  from  ihist  by  ihr  walrry 
billows  of  Vyasa’s  words  coming  down  from  the  mount  ol 
the  Vedas  and  capable  of  destroying  the  tree*  of  lalic  argw* 
ments  (to).  The  huge  lake  of  the  Veda*  compottcd  by 
Krishna  (DwaipSyana  Vyasa)  has  the  swert  words  for  tifs 
big  swans,  the  great  stories  for  Us  rscrlimt  Intu-ir* 


and 


the  saying  for  expansive  water  (it).  Jlriog  dc'drou's 
of  learning  (from  you)  faitlifully  this  story  of  mdmfa 
instinct  with  deep  im()Oft  and  full  uf  Srnin  I have 
approached  you,  0 reverend  Sir  {12).  Why  did  fanardana, 
the  son  of  Vasudeva,  although  devoid  of  fpialiiio*,  aifnimr 
a human  form  for  the  creation,  preservation  and  dr'»tMuiir»n 
of  this  universe?  (13).  Why  did  Krishna,  the  daoghtrr  of 
Drupada,  alone  become  (he  •pieen  of  the  five  soie.  of  i*jnd»i  'f 
I have  a great  doubt  in  this  (14).  f bw  did  the  highly  .pimn 
u alarima,  having  a plough  for  Ids  weapon,  atone  for  ihr 
sin  of  BrShmanacide  by  visiting  holy  shritus  ? (in'.  Why 
f»d  the  mighty  car-warriors,  tin*  high-studed  uf  I b anpadi. 
having  the  Famlavas  as  their  lords,  .lie  bdore  tlmy  unc 
married  like  forlorn  (persons) ? (it.)  It  hrhover.  y..u  t.. 
desciibt.  all  Ihi.s  in  dt  tail  to  nif,  fm  Mm  alw.ai  b erdighli  n 
ignorant  peopIe’Mi?)-  Heating  tho,.,.  \m  hoi,{..  ih^  grr.,» 


MARKANt)K\  A I’URANAM  3 

.Ticclii'  frt  i il  from  tli!*  cigliioon  shortcomings* 

ndtlresscrf  himself  to  speak  (18). 

MaUKANDEYA  said  foremost  of  Munis,  the  hour 

for  performini'  my  rites  is  present ; this  is  not  the  proper 
time  for  ties*  rilling  it  in  detail  (ip).  J shall  name  now  some 
birds,  O Jaimini,  that  shall  describe  (this  to  you)  and  remove 
your  doubt  (20}.  I hose  best  of  birds,  conversant  with  true 
knowledge,  who  always  think  upon  scriptures,  and  whose 
onderstantling  is  ever  free  in  entering  into  the  knowledge 
of  the'Vedk  scriptures,  Drona’s  sons,  I’ingSksha,  Vihodha, 
Siipiitra  and  Sumukha  are  living  in  a cave  of  the  Vindhya 
(mountain) ; go  there  ami  ask  (fiem  (aliout  what  you  seek 
to  learn)"  (31—22).  lli-ing  thus  accosted  by  the  intelligent 
MSrkandcya,  that  best  of  a.scctic.s,  having  his  eyes  expanded 
with  wonderment,  replied  (33), 

lAlMlNl  s.aid  Highly  womlerful  it  is,  O Brahman, 
tliat  biffls  speak  lik<i  nun  (.itul  gri'.ater  it  is)  that  they  should 
.attain  to  knowledge  which  it  is  so  dillieutt  to  acejuire  (24).  If 
they  have  sprung  from  the  species  of  birds  wherefrom  have 
they  attained  to  this  knowledge  ? Where  arc  these  birds 
cnllcit  the  sons  of  l)ron,a  ? (35).  \¥ho  again  is  Drona  who  has 
these  four  sons  born  to  him  ? How  did  these  high-souled  and 
aecomplishe*!  ones  acrpiirc  knowledge  of  righteousness  ?’'  (26). 

Markanukva  said  " Listen  attentively  to  what  took 
place  in  N.imlana  (the  garden  of  gods)  when  Sakra, 
M&rada  and  Apsaras  met  (37),  Nirada  saw  Sakra,  the  king 
of  the  celestials,  in  tins  midst  of  the  courtesans  with  his  looks 
firmly  fixed  upon  their  faces  (38),  As  soon  as  he  was  espied 
by  that  best  of  ascetics,  Sachi's  lord  (Indra)  .at  once  rose 
wji  and  respectfully  offered  him  his  own  seat  (29).  Be- 
holding that  destroyer  of  Vala  and  Vitra  rise  up,  the  celes- 
tial d,amsels,  tmnding  low  with  humility,  bowed  to  that 

• Slw|>,  lii'tiiuiik,  fear,  anger,  stiipefactkin,  priiJu  itnmnity,  nsftHtrenr*,  sur. 

tktuiii,  msHce,  envy,  insincerity,  falsehood,  faithlessness, 

liatUaUly  all*!  ijinufRiice. 


markanoeya  puraham. 


4 

cekstial  saint  (30).  Being  honored  by  them  #iul  on  thr  per- 
former of  hundred  sacrifices  taking  Hs  seat,  (the  ascrlic).  jhily 
welcomed,  started  a pleasant  conversation.  After  it  h,i<f 
ended,  the  performer  of  hundred  sacrifices  said  to  the  grc.rt 
ascetic  (31). 

Sakra  said : — “ Command,  let  one  of  them,  whom  yoo  like, 
dance — Rambha,  Misrakesi,  Urvasi  Tilottami,  tihritarhi, 
Menaka,  or  (any  one  else)  whom  you  choose  " (33).  i fearing 
the  words  of  Sakra,  NSraJa,  the  foremost  of  the  twi<  e Iwrn, 
thinking  (for  a while)  said  to  the  ApsarSs  who  stood  (befnrr 
him)  (33).  "Let  her,  amongst  you,  who  consider*  Ini  #cl< 
superior  in  beauty  and  nobility — dance  before  me  fj,})  One, 
devoid  of  beauty  and  accomplishments,  cannot  att;tin  to  ton 
summation  in  dancing.  A dancing  which  is  accoi)i|».i«h<d  by 
gestures  is  (real)  dancing— any  thing  else  is  but 

Markandeya  said  -.—Immediately  after  he  Imtl  spoken 
this,  each,  bowing,  said "I  am  superior  in  accomplishment*" 
while  the  other  said  “ not  you,  not  you"  (36).  Swing  ihrh 
bewilderment  the  Divine  chastiser  of  Pkka  said 
you  the  ascetic  and  he  will  say  who  amongst  you  is  sMjwrbr 
in  accomplishments’"  (37).  Hear  from  me,  0 Jaimini,  what 
NSrada  then  said  on  being  asked  by  them,  following  the 
direction  of  Sakra  (38).  " I shall  consider  her  i»  be  ij„. 
foremost  in  accomplishments,  who,  by  her  charm,  shall  agitaie 
the  foremost  of  ascetics  Durvflsa,  carrying  on  hard  aMstirrili«*s 
on  the  mountain-chief”  (39).  Hearing  his  words,  thry  «j|, 
shaking  their  heads  said  " We  are  all  incapjible  of  dbwg 
tiiis”  (40).  Amongst  them  one  ApsarS,  by  name  Vapn.  prs,,,} 
of  (her  capability)  to  agitate  the  sage,  said "I  shall  go  where 
the  anchoret  is  (41),  I shall  make  to-day  that  driver  W thr 
chariot)  of  the  body  who  has  controlled  the  horse*  of  ll.r 
senses,  lose  the  hold  of  reins  and  become  an  unskilbd 
driver  (^).  Even  if  Brahmi.  Janardana,  and  the  Wtie-red 
(deny  Stva)  come  to  me  I shall  make  to-day  tlmlf  hearts 
pierced  with  the  shafts  of  desire"  (,y).  Having  said  tb... 


MARKANDKYA  rURANAM. 


5 


Vapii  then  went  to  tiin  mount  Prakya,  (where)  by  the  power 
of  the  ascetic's  penances  the  ferocious  beasts  and  asylums 
were  rendered  quiet  (44).  Remaining  at  a distance  of  two 
miles  from  where  the  great  ascetic  was,  that  excellent  Apsara, 
having  the  sweet  voice  of  a male  coel,  began  to  sing  (45). 
Hearing  her  music,  the  ascetic,  having  his  mind  filled  with 
surprise,  went  where  that  damsel  of  sweet  voice  was  {46), 
Heholding  her,  all  whose  limbs  were  graceful,  the  ascetic, 
controlling  his  mind  and  knowing  that  she  had  come  to 
agitate  it,  was  filled  with  wrath  and  indignation.  Then 
the  great  sage,  of  hard  austerities,  told  her  the  following  (47). 
" Since,  0 ranger  of  the  sky,  0 you  intoxicated  with  pride, 
you  have  come  to  cause  me  woe  and  to  put  impedi- 
ments in  my  austerity  acquired  by  pain,  you  shall,  therefore, 
O you  of  vicious  unilerstanding,  sullied  by  my  wrath,  be 
horn  in  the  species  of  IukIs  (and  remain  such)  for  sixteen 
years  (qH-  jq)-  n wreU  h of  an  ApsarS,  renouncing  own 
form  and  assuming  that  of  a bird  four  sons  will  be  born  to 
you  (50).  And  not  obtaining  delight  in  them,  and  purified 
by  (the  stroke  of  an)  weapon  you  shall  again  acquire  your 
residence  in  heavni.  I here  is  nothing  for  you  to  say  in 
reply"  {51).  Making  that  damsel  of  tremulous  bangles,  hear 
of  this  unliearable  speech,  that  Bribrnana,  of  eyes  reddened 
with  anger,  lc;iving  the  earth  containing  the  GangS  of 
liquid  waves.,  went  to  the  celestial  Gang!  endued  with  well- 
known  virtues,  (gi). 


fiARKANDEVA  said:— There  mm  a khg  d kmk,  lif 

Garuda,  the  son  of  Arishthancmi ; hr  ha*{  * son,  krtottti 
npati  <!).  He  had  a heroic  son,  Siiplrshw#,  fnihied  *^iih 
locityof  the  wind  : Suplrshwa's  son  w«*  Kiiwihhi  and 
hi's  son  was  Pralolopa  (2).  He  had  two  wing.  Kanka 
andhara  {3),  Kanka  saw  on  the  summit  of  the  Kaillsa, 
Jhasa,  having  eyes  like  iotus  pelais,  ihe  follower  of  ihJ 
riches,  known  as  Vidyudrupa  (4).  Wearing  a hrilliant 
and  raiment  and  seated  with  his  spouse  on  a beamiful 
larble  slab  he  was  engaged  in  drinking  M,  A*  mtn  m 
seen  by  Kanka,  that  Raksha,  filled  with  n«pr,  Mid  s- 
ce  have  you  come  here,  0 wretched  ovipaftMt? 

0 you  come  to  me  who  am  waiting  here  with  my  wife  ? 

not  the  procedure  of  the  intelHgeot  in  things  imcfcil 

recy  ? ’ (7).  Kanka  said  "This  mountain-chief  is 


MARKANDEVA  I'UKANAM, 


7 


<*yes,  in  a moment,  attacked  the  mountain  with  his  wings 
{U— tj).  He  saw  there  the  night-ranger,  engaged  in  drinking 
with  countenance  and  eyes  rendered  coppery  and  seated  on  a 
golden  sofa ; having  !»is  head  encircled  with  wreaths  adorned 
with  Hari  sandal,  and  furnished  with  a countenance  highly 
terrific  with  teeth  resembling  the  inlying  leaves  of  Ketaki 
(14— tS).  He  saw  also  his  wife,  by  name  MadaoikS,  of  large 
eyes  and  gifted  with  the  sweet  notes  of  a male_,  coel,  seated 
on  his  left  thigh  (iG). 

Thereupon  having  his  mind  filled  with  wrath,  Kandhara 
said  to  him  who  was  waiting  in  that  inountain  cave  " O 
wretch,  give  me  battle  (ty).  As  my  eldest  brother,  (always)  i 
confiding,  has  been  slain  by  you  I sball  tlu’rtdore  despatcli 
you,  possessed  by  pride,  to  the  abode  of  Yama  (18).  Being 
slain  by  me  to-day  you  shall  go  to  tlu’  hells  designed  for 
(hose,  who  destroy  the  eonliding,  women  and  civildreu” 

MAUKANUKYA  said  : — Heiiig  tints  ;nlil(cssed  by  the  king 
of  birds  in  the  ptesetn  a of  his  wife  llu:  Kaksha  repUetl  to  the 
bird  who  was  tilled  with  anger  (ao).  " If  1 have  killed  your 

brother  forsooth  I have  displayed  my  prowess ; 1 shall  also 
slay  you,  ()  liird,  with  this  »vvor<l  of  mine  (at).  Wait  & 
moment,  f)  wretch  of  a bird,  and  you  shall  not  go  hcncc 
living."  Saying  this  he  took  up  a shining  sword  resembling  a 
mass  of  collyrum  (23).  There  arose  an  uncijualled  encounter 
between  the  king  of  birds  and  the  follower  of  the  king  of 
Vakshas  like  that  between  (iaruda  and  Sakra  (33).  Thou 
in  great  anger,  taking  up  vehemently  tho  sword  having  tlie 
hue  of  extinguished  charcoal  the  Kkksliasa  hurled  it  at  the 
king  of  birds  (24),  As  f ianitla  (lakes  up)  a snake,  the  king 
of  birds,  raising  the  sword  a little  u|)  from  the  ground, 
look  it  tiy  his  beak  (25).  Then  breaking  it  with  beak  and 
talons  that  oviparous  one  was  worked  up  with  anger ; on  tlu? 
sword  being  thus  snapped  there  misued  a hand  to  hand 
rnconnfiT  (,•(>).  fhen  striking  the  Kikslmsa  on  his  breast 
the  king  «i  biidb  severed  bis  cntrail.*,  fed.  fuanrls  and  head 


8 


MARKANDEYA  PL’RANA.Vf 


(from  his  body)  (27).  On  his  IwinK  Ihn*  sI.hii, 
sought  refuge  with  ^cbird;  and  being  l.'rrifu'i!  4 litUe 
said.  “I  will  be  your  wife"  (38).  Then  Sihing 
foremost  of  birds  went  back  to  his  own  house;  .inil  |,y 
troying  Vidyudrupa,  he  was  relieved  (of  the  JWfri^w  con- 
sequent upon  the  death)  of  his  brother  (39),  to  the 

abode  of  Kandhara,  that  daughter  of  Men.’iki,  b.'tvtni;  fair 
eye-brows  and  capable  of  assuming  forms  at  will,  took  tbjrt 
of  a female  bird  (30).  He  then  begat  on  her  that  bent  f»f 
ApsarSs,  a daughter  named  Tlrkshi—sullied  by  thf 
precation  of  the  ascetic — .and  the  bird  gave  her  |f?r? 
of  Tarkshi  (31).  MandapSl.i  h.id  four  highiv  intelligr  tit  sons, 
the  foremost  of  the  twice-born,  j.trita  and  oflit’rs  endifi^  with 
Drona  (32).  The  youngest  of  Ihetn,  vntuou',  sonfcil  and 
conversant  with  the  Vedas  and  its  bram  hes,  rspoMsc*!  ttu*  (air 
Tarkshi,  by  the  permission  of  Kandh,ara  (33).  Allr-r  *01110 
time  Tirkshi  conceived  and  when  the  conception  paKtcc!  over 
seven  fortnights  she  went  to  Kurukshctr.a  (14).  fhe  rlread- 
ful  combat  between  the  Kurus  .and  I’Ind.oas  going  on  jit  that 
time,  she,  from  the  inevitable  course  of  actions,  ritiero*!  into 
the  thick  of  battle  (35)‘  riicre  she  bidiidd  the  rnctomnter 
between  Bhagadatta  and  Kiriti,  by  the  continued  disrhar *»( 
whose  arrows  the  sky  was  filled  as  if  with  locusts  (36)  'There 
a shaft,  dark-blue  like  a serpent,  discharged  from  the  |»«»w  of 
PSrtha  and  coursing  vehemently,  severed  the  skin  ttf  her 
abdomen  (37).  On  the  abdomen  tn-ing  riven,  four  fgrffs, 
endued  with  the  lustre  of  the  moon,  being  deslinrd  to  livir, 
dropped  to  the  earth  like  a mass  of  cntlon  (;,S).  Awl 
Simultaneously  with  their  fall  the  Intgis  Indl  tHI  down  Irani 
that  best  of  elephants,  Supr.itik.a.  having  its  lir,  , ,,1  },y  mt 
arrow  (39).  Although  it  dropped  down  at  the  tinu‘ 

along  with  the  eggs  riving  the  face  of  the  c.inl,,  fy,-!)  *}„- 
eggs  of  the  bird  were  covered  by  it  above  the  H-ta-rc 

Braitru":? 

,,adatta,  had  been  slam,  the  battle  between  ibr  .ttmicn  at 


MARKANDKVA  HURANAM, 


9 


Ihe  Kurus  and  Panclavas  went  on  for  many  a day  (41).  After 
the  close  of  the  battle,  Uharma’s  son  (Yudhisthira)  went  to 
the  son  of  Santanu  (Bhisma)  to  hear  from  the  high-soukd 
(Bhisma)  an  exhaustive  discourse  on  religion  (42).  A self- 
controlled  ascetic,  the  foremost  of  the  twice-horn  by  name 
Shamika,  came,  in  search  of  them  where  the  eggs  lay  under 
the  bell  (4.1I  There  be  heard  the  indistinct  cries  which, 
though  they  had  full  knowledge,  the  embryos  were  ^‘mmitting 
on  account  of  their  infancy  (44).  Then  the  sag'',  filled  with 
surprise,  along  with  his  disciples,  took  up  the  bell  and  saw  there 
the  young  ones  having  no  parents  (45).  Seeing  them  in  that 
way  on  the  ground  the  divine  ascetic  Shamika,  filled  with 
surprise,  said  to  the  twice-born  who  were  following  him 
(46).  “Beholding  the  army  of  the  Daityas  assailed  by  the 
celestials,  well  did  that  foremost  of  the  twice-born  Sukra, 
tht!  son  of  PsanS,  say  ; — (47).  ''Desna,  you  should  not  go— 
wlit^re  do  you  go  in  icui  i'  Wherever  you  may  go  renouncing 
fame  and  heroism  you  must  not  die  (4S).  As  you  have  been 
created  by  the  Deity,  so  long  he  wishes  you  must  live 
whether  you  light  or  nut  (49).  Some  die  in  their  own  homes, 
others  whde  flying  away,  and  others  perish  while  taking 
food  or  drinking  water  {50).  Others  (again),  enjoying  the 
sweets  of  life,  pos.iessiug  good  h",ilili,  and  having  their 
pcr  iotifs  not  wounded  by  weapons,  t-oiae  under  the  siibjeclton 
of  the  lord  of  the  dead  (51).  Others,  engaged  in  hard 
austeriliei,  are  carried  atvaybythe  followers  tif  the  king  of  the 
dead : even  tluise  who  practise  can  never  attain  to  immor- 
tality (53).  Formerly  the  ihuiuier-liolt  was  hurled  by  the 
holder  of  thunder  ihidra)  at  Samvara  ; ho  was  wounded  at 
the  chest  and  still  the  Asnra  tlid  not  ilie  (53).  But  when 
the  time  came,  with  the  self-snnie  thunder-bolt  and  by  tho 
lame  Indra  the  Daityas  immediately  met  with  destruction 
(si).  Knowing  this  you  should  not  he  afraid  and  do  you 
return  ' Thereupon  castitig  oil  the  fear  of  de,ath  (he  Daityas 
•Icaisited  (5;,)  The  words  y(  Sukra  have  been  verified  by 


to 


MARKANDKVA  PURANAM- 


these  excellent  birds  for  they  did  not  meet  Hith  drath  r vf  m 
in  that  superhuman  hattlcf  5f)).  O Vipraa,  tthat  «,i'.  ihe 
fall  of  birds  and  what  was  the  sinuiltaneows  jlronpiof;  nl  ihe 
bell  ? And  what  again  was  this  battle  covering  thr  rarth  wiib 
flesh,  fat  and  blood  ? (57).  O Vipras,  who  all  these  ihmbl 
may  be— they  are  not  ordinary  birds ; the  favour  of  the  liniy 
sometimes  displays  good  lurk  in  this  worhlt^S),  flavmg 
said  this  and  seeing  them  he  again  spoke  " Slop,  go  to  ihe 
hermitage  taking  with  you  these  yming  ones  of  tl  r bif,| 
(59).  Keep  these  oviparous  ones  at  a piare  where  v.iis,  ml*, 
hawks  or  murgooses  may  not  come  (6»}.  What  is  the  »«e 
of  over  care,  0 twice-born  ones?  As  creatures  Ive  or  $Ut> 
by  their  own  actions,  so  it  will  he  with  the-ie  young  nn#«  .4 
the  bird  (61).  Still  a man  should  put  torth  ho  endeavouj' 
in  all  that  he  does;  if  he  does  not  enipioy  his  energy  he  i t 
censured  by  the  good"  (63).  Thu*  commandeit  by  the  *mtik 
the  sons  of  the  Munis,  taking  the  bird*,  went  to  the  itetmll* 
age,  beautified  with  the  prestmee  of  saints  and  fd.«  k liec» 
swarnning  round  the  branches  of  trees  {f,  { dliritMig.  a* 

he  liked,  roots,  fruits,  flowers,  and  A'ufa  grass,  the  lwice*lwir« 
one  performed  various  religious  rites,  sanctioned  by  the  Srsuft, 
in  honor  of  the  bolder  of  discus  (Vishmi),  ftmlra, 

BrahmS,  Indra,  Yama,  the  god  of  fire,  the  lord  of  waters, 
the  lord  of  speech,  the  god  of  wealth,  tfic  wintl  gotl,  ONitIh 
Vidhata  and  Vishwadeva  ((34—65). 


CHAPTER  Ilf. 


J “U 0 loremoM  Vi|,ra,, 

».th  food  water  (0.  Wifhia  a Ud  ..  I., 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


II 


the  sons  of  the  ascetics,  with  eyes  expanded  with  curiosity, 
began  to  fly  about  in  the  course  of  the  sun’s  car  (sky)  (2). 
Having  gone  round  the  earth,  resembling  the  wheel  of  a 
car,  abounding  in  cities,  seas,  and  great  rivers,  those  high- 
minded  ones,  not  l>orn  of  any  female,  with  their  minds  and 
bodies  exhausted,  returned  to  the  hermitage  (3).  By  the 
potency  of  the  ascetics  their  knowledge  became  manifest 
at  that  place  (4).  While  the  Rishi  (Shainika),  for  favouring 
his  disciples,  was  discoursing  on  the  certain  truths  of  religion, 
they,  circumambulating  him,  bowed  to  his  feet  (5).  (They) 
said  O ascetic,  we  Ijave  been  saved  by  you  from  a dread- 
ful death ; hy  giving  us  shelter,  food  an<l  water,  you  have 
proved  to  be  our  father  and  preceptor  (b).  Our  mother  died 
when  we  were  in  the  womb  and  no  fatl»cr  has  brought  us 
up  ; you  have  given  us  our  life,  for  you  have  protected  us 
in  our  infancy  (7).  f)  >h>u  oI  imdeteriurating  energy,  taking 
away  llit*  hell  tif  the  elephant,  you  did  remove  our  misery 
while  we,  on  the  c<artli,  were  <lrying  up  like  so  many  earth- 
worms (8).  ‘When  will  these  poor  (young  ones)  grow  up? 
When  shall  I sec  them  strong  ? When  shall  I see  thcni  go 
to  the  tree  from  the  earth  and  fly  about  from  one  tree  to 
another?  (p).  When  shall  the  native  lustre  of  my  body  meet 
with  destruction  by  the  dust  raised  by  the  wind  of  the  wings 
of  these  ones,  ranging  about  me?'  (lo).  Thinking  in  this 
wise,  O father,  we  have  been  brought  up  by  you.  We  have 
now  grown  up  and  our  understanding  has  increased,  what 
shall  we  do  now  ?”  (n)*  Hearing  those  their  distinct  words 
resembling  those  of  a rdined  speech,  surrounded  by  all  his 
disciples  and  his  son  Hringi,  the  ascetic,  stricken  with 
curiosity  and  with  his  hairs  standing  erect,  said ; — “ 'I'eU  iih> 
truly  how  you  can  utter  speech  (t2--»3).  U behoves 
you  to  speak  to  ns  by  ivhose  imprecation  you  have 
conn*  by  this  change  in  your  lotm  and  speech’’  (14), 
The  birds  said " Formerly  there  was  a great  ascetic 
well-known  by  the  name  of  Vipulkswan  He  had  two  ictss 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


born  to  him,  Srikrishna  and  Tamvaru  (15).  Of  the  self-con- 
trolled ascetic  Srikrishna  we  are  the  four  sons,  always  con- 
ducting ourselves  with  humility  and  bending  low  with  re- 
ference (16).  While  he  was  engaged  in  hard  austerities, 
according  to  his  will,  with  his  senses  restrained,  we  used  to 
collect  for  him  sacrificial  fuel,  flowers  and  other  requisites 
(17).  Thus  we  all  living  there  in  that  forest,  came  to  us  once 
the  king  of  the  celestials  assuming  the  form  of  a huge, 
breken-winged  and  a decrepit  bird,  having  coppery  eyes  and 
trembling  body,  for  imprecating  a curse  on  us  and  asking 
(something)  of  that  foremost  of  Rishis  endued  with  truth- 
fulness, purity,  forgiveness,  good  conduct  and  nobleness  of 
mind  (iS-ao).  He  said  < O foremost  of  the  twice-born, 
you  should  save  me,  who  am  stricken  with  hunger,  I seek 
r 00  , O great  one,  and  be  you  my  help  (21).  While 
on  the  summit  of  the  Vindhya  mountain,  I was  thrown 

of  Vi.’  k violent  wind  generated  by  wings 

(Ga^d.)  by  b™ilde«  , 

rteken  With  hunger,  desirous  of  food,  with  deliVht 
ton,,,”  ® such  food  aa  „«y 

fono  of  aL  ,7,  "P'i'd  ‘“Wra  in 

— 0.  .he  f T 

proem  ^ replir-T  a d ' 

delight  m the  flesh  of  men’  (27)  ^ I find  great 

The  Rishi  said'—.n  o • 

*“*“«"aayo„,,outl,;rc,rlo°“h  Zd 

yoo,  when  the  eedijjj  j . ' “S'  's  now  with 

Why  then  even  ia  „„„  Z I 

f^8-39).  What  i,  human  ae,hplJh^°“"'  Z 

vviiatisthe  end  Of  your  life? 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 


13 


The  desires  of  the  wicked  never  meet  with  perfect  pacifica- 
tion?  (30).  And  what  is  the  use  of  my  speaking  this?  We 
should  now  think  that  what  has  been  promised  must  be 
given’  (31).  iSaving  said  this  to  him  that  best  of  the  Vipras, 
making  up  his  mind,  s{H*.cdily  sent  for  us.  And  praising 
each  according  to  his  merit,  that  ascetic  of  aggrieved  heart, 
addressed  highly  cruel  words  to  us  all  who  were  bending  low 
with  humility,  filled  with  devotion  and  had  our  hand.s  Joined 
‘{Horemost  of  the  twice-born,  you  have  subdued 
yourself  and  luvt;  bemti  freed  from  your  debts  along  with  me. 
i > twice  born  ones,  as  yon  are  my  offsprings,  you  have  begotten 
excellent  children  (34).  !f  I am  your  preceptor,  worshipful 
and  your  father,  worthy  c*f  your  reverence,  then  do  you  satisfy 


-ly  wort!*  with  a good  spirit'  (35).  As  soon  as  we  were 
.iddressed  by  him  affcetionately  witli  these  words  we  said 
' riiitik  what  you  hav<-  said  to  nr.  as  :die.idy  .accomplished’  (36). 

I'lli-;  UiMil  ;„ud  ■— ‘ I bis  bird,  stricken  wiHi  hunger  and 
thirst,  has  Howgltt  reluge  with  me.  Do  you  soon  do  that 
iiy  which  he  may  obtain  r.atisfaclion  wilii  your  flesh  and 
shake  his  thirst  with  your  blood  (37).  M hereupon  pyned 
and  trembling  with  great  fear  wc  said,  ‘ Alt*  J Ala#  | this 
cannot  hr;  done  by  us  (38).  Why  should  a wise  man  destroy 
bin  own  body  far  the  sake  of  others;  one’s  own  body  It 
like  one’s  own  son  (jo).  A son,  as  mentioned,  satisriea  th® 
•kbt*  of  the  .incestral  mane#,  deities  and  human  buinga  but 
m never  gives  his  body  (40).  Therefore  we  shall  not  d® 
Iris ; nor  those,  that  have  |>a8scd  away,  did  it ; a person, 
iving,  attains  to  well-bcitig ; a {lerson,  living,  perform*  pious 
lends  A perion,  dying,  loses  his  body  and  all  his 


MARKANDEVA  RjRANAM. 

Having  said  this  to  us  and  performed  his  own  funeral 
rites  according  to  the  ordinances  he  said  to  the  hird  ( i ‘ n 
foremost  of  birds,  do  you  cat  me  up  confidiindy . I have 
converted  this  body  of  mine  into  food  for  you  (4*')  >*  br-ii 

of  the  birds,  as  long  as  a Brahmana  observes  truth  m hmy, 
his  [Brahmanahood  is  maintained  (47!.  h Brlhmana  does 
not  acquire  piety  so  much  by  sacrifice,  gift  or  any  other 
act  as  he  does  by  observing  truth'  {4S).  Henring  these 
words  of  the  Rishi,  Sakra,  under  the  guise  of  a bird,  having 
his  mind  filled  with  surprise,  replied  to  the  ascetic  (49).  * t » 

foremost  of  Vipras,  resorting  to  Vn^a,  renounce  your  own 
body — I do  not  feed  upon  living  animals,  O liesi  of  Hrihmanat 
(50).  Hearing  his  words  the  ascetic  eng,igccl  in  Then 

knowing  his  determination  and  assuming  hi*.  o*v»  form  Sakra 
said: — (51).  ‘O  best  of  Vipras,  t)  inli'lligcnt  one,  do  yon 
understand,  by  your  intelligence  what  should  be  Mnilcrsiood. 
0 sinless  one,  Cor  trying  you,  t have  committed  this  offence 
by  you  (53).  0 you  of  pure  mind,  either  forgive  me,  there- 
fore, or  do  what  you  will ; I have  been  highly  pleased  with 
you  for  satisfying  your  promise  (53),  From  to-day  you  shall 
have  knowledge  of  Indra  and  there  will  be  no  disturbance 
to  your  religious  penance’  (54).  After  Sakra  had  deparled 
having  said  thb,  we,  saluting  our  sire  filled  with  anger,  thus 
addressed  the  great  ascetic  (55).  *0  noble-minded  erne, 
you  should  forgive  us,  poor  asiwe  arc,  who  have  besen  afraid 
of  death  j (certainly)  wc  do  love  our  life  (56).  We  t herisb 
attachment  for  this  body  which  it  made  of  skin,  bones,  and 
flesh  and  filled  with  pus  and  blood,  for  which  no  .atachraenl 
shwdd  be  cherished  (57).  Hear,  O great  one,  how  people 
k— . become  infatuated,  losing  all  control  over  thenoiclvca,  l*y  the 

powerful  enemies — the  vices,  lust,  anger,  fftc.,  ($8).  'Iho 
Idag,  Puruska,  endowed  with  consciousness,  Jives  in  tin-  grrui 
city  (body)  encircled  by  the  ramparts  of  wisdom,  having 
bones  for  its  support,  a strong  founchilion  of  skin,  pasted 
■with  flesh  and  blood,  having  nine  entrances,  (the  flood  gate^*) 


lo  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

The  Rishi  said : — ‘ What  have  I said  can  never  l»e  falsi- 
fied. 0 my  sons,  to  this  day,  I have  never  spoken  an  un- 
truth  (74).  I consider  destiny  in  this  as  supreme ; Oh  fie 
on  useless  manliness  I by  which  perforce  I have  unthinkingly 
perpetrated  an  iniquity  (75).  Since  you  have  propitiated 
me  by  bowing  to  me,  you  shall  even,  when  born  as  birds, 

, attain  to  knowledge  (76).  Having  ways  discovered  by  your 
knowledge  and  your  distressirrg  sins  washed  away  through 
my  grace,  you  shall  unhesitatingly  attain  to  most  excclleiit 
Stddhi  (accomplished  piety)  (77).  When,  0 my  sons,  you 
shall  begin  speaking  (in  answer  to)  Jaimini’s  qucirtions  about 
his  doubts  you  will  then  be  freed  from  my  curse.  This  is 
the  favour  I extend  to  you  (78).-  O worshipful  Sir,  in  this 
way  we  were  formerly  imprecated  by  our  sire  under  the  in- 
fluence of  destiny  and  after  a lapse  of  time  we  have  been 
born  m another  species  (79).  We  have  been  born  in  a battle 
field  and  brought  up  by  you.  O foremost  of  the  twlce-born, 
m this  way  we  have  come  by  the  state  of  birds  (80).  There 
isjo  such  (person)  in  this  world  who  is  not  governed  by 

^ Markandeya  said 0 reverend  Sir,  hearing  their  words 

were  around  h,m  (82).  I have  already  spoken  to  you  ail  ihit 

born  ones  for  II, ey  did  not  nroet  with  doalh  in  Ihaf 
buman  battle  (83).  Then  obtaining  per»ia,i„„ 
g^uled  one  who  was  glad  at  heart,  they  repaired  to  that 

^ Vindhya  filled  with  trees  and  rreepera 

84.  Even  up, 0 the  present  Jay  these  pi„„s  bird,  Hye  h 
that  mountain  being  enpao-M  u.  i »v'e  in 

study  of  the  Fedas  Ld  fi  a o '?  and  ihe 

at,  firmly  determined  upon 

on)  the  contemplation  of  mind  fSte)  u • . 

goodhebasionriremtaas  'l  ^ H»v,.g  .h„,  received 

who  came  by  the  state  ol  h'  ] ’ r ****  aoeboriic, 

y stale  ol  birds,  five  with  mind,  controlled 


MARKANUF.YA  PURANAM. 


17 


iii  the  woods  of  that  best  of  mountain  in  the  Vindhya  range, 
(abounding  in)  high  sacred  streams  (86). 


CHAPtER  IV. 


Markandkva  said  ;~-'riius  did  the  sons  of  Orooa,  the 
birds,  obtain  knowledge.  Tliey  live  in  the  Vindhya  mountain ; 
do  you  adore  them  and  ask  them  (regarding  your  question)  (i). 
Hearing  the  words  of  the  saint  Markandeya,  |aimiiii 
went  to  the  summit  of  the  Vindhya  where  tlie  pious  Inrds 
were  (2).  Approaching  lliat  inonntaiu  he  heard  the  smmd 
of  reading  and  at  this  filled  with  surprise  Jaimini  thought  (31. 
“The  foremost  om's  of  the  twice-born  arc  reciting  the  Vedas 
with  proper  accent  and  emphasis,  controlling  their  breaths, 
without  any  fatigue,  with  distinctness  and  without  any  fault. 
(4).  Me*thinks  it  is  a wonder  that  the  goddess  of  learning 
has  not  forsaketr  th^'^e  sons  of  tin?  anchorite  who  have  come 
by  a different  birth  (5),  h fiend*  and  acquaintances,  leaving 
one  according  to  their  will,  go  to  another  house  but  the  god* 
dess  of  learning  never  forsakes  him  (6).’»  Thinking  this  he 
entered  the  mountain  cave  5 and  entering  there  he  saw  the 
twice-born  ones  seated  on  a mountain  slab  (7).  nchohling 
them  recite  (the  Vodas)  without  .-my  di.*tortitm  of  ihr-  f,u  c,  he, 
filled  with  delight  and  sorrow,  said  to  them  all  (K).  ",\lay  good 
betide  you,  0 eminent  twice-born  ones,  know  imt  as  Jaimini, 
the  diseijile  of  Vylsa  who  have  come  here  to  see  you  fq), 
You  should  not  be  sorry  for  being  born  .is  birds  and  for  being 
imprec.ati'd  by  your  sire  in  great  anger ; this  is  all  rlestiny 
(10).  O foremost  twice-born  ones,  some  intelligent  persons, 
born  in  an  affluent  family,  were  comforted,  av  the  less  of 
3 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


wealth,  by  a barbarian  (h).  Some  persons  giving  (their  all)  j 
go  about  begging;  others  killing  (some)  are  themselves  killed  j 
some  bringing  down  (others)  are  themselves  prostrated:  all  this 
Springs  from  the  wane  of  asceticism  (12).  Many  such  contraries 
have  been  seen  by  me : the  world  is  perpetually  disturbed 
with  these  contending  chances  and  mischances  (r  3).  Think-  | 
ing  this  in  your  mind  you  should  not  grieve : this  is  the  fruit 
of  knowledge  not  influenced  by  joy  or  grief  (14).”  Then  wel- 
coming Jaiminl  with  water  to  wash  feet  and  an  offering  of 
Ku^a  grass  they  all,  bowing  to  the  great  ascetic,  enquired 
about  his  well-being  (15).  Then  all  those  birds  said  to  the 
ascetic,  the  disciple  of  VySsa,  seated  at  ease,  and  relieved 
of  fatigue  by  the  wind  of  their  wings  (t6).  "Blessed  is  our 
birth  to-day  and  our  life  has  proved  to  be  a good  life  since 
we  have  seen  the  pair  of  your  lotus  feet  worshipped  even  by 
the  celestials  (I/).  O Vipra,  that,  which  originating  from  onr 
father's  anger,  exists  in  our  bodies  has  been  quenched  to-day 
with  the  water  of  your  presence  (i8).  At  your  asylum,  (>  • 

Brahman,  is  it  all  well  with  birds  and  beasts,  trees,  creepers, 
groves  consisting  of  bark  only,  grass  and  others  of  the  samo 
origih  ? (19).  Or  perhaps  we  have  not  made  a proper  en- 
quiry, regarded  by  you  as  We  are;  how  can  they,  who  are 
with  you,  suffer  misfortune  ? (20).  Do  you  favour  us  and  tell 
Us  the  cause  of  your  coming  : your  noble  presence  is  like  the 
company  of  the  celestials.  By  what  great  good  luck  you  ; 

have  been  brought  within  the  range  of  our  vision  (zt)."  Jai-  ; 

itiei  said; — ■"Hear,  0 you  the  foremost  of  the  twice-born  ones,  1 

ivfiy  I have  come  to  this  charming  hollow  of  the  Vindhya 
watered  by  the  river  Reva  (22).  t have  come  here  to  ,nsk 
you  about  some  doubts  in  the  scripture  B/ulraia.  h’ornierly 
asbing  the  higli-souled  Markandeya,  the  best  of  the  Bhrigti 
race,  Icame  across  Some  doubtful  points  in  MMrata,  I have 
been  tbld  by  him  ‘There  are  in  the  great  mountain  Vindhya 
the  htgh-souled  sons  of  Drona : they  will  speak  to  you  (on 
Ibis)  at  length’  (23—24),,  Following  his  words  I have  comM  I 


MARKANnEYA  TURANAM. 


*9 


to  this  great  mountaiji : <lo  you  hear  llicm  exhaustively  am! 
explain  them  to  me”  (*5)-  birds  said;— -“Wo  shall 

tell  you  if  it  be  a (worthy)  subject,  do  yoti  hear  it,  slioru  of 
fear.  And  why  should  we  not  speak  out  what  has  come  within 
the  range  of  our  intellect  ? (26).  And  although,  O foremost 
of  the  BrShmanas,  our  intellect  ranges  over  the  four  Vedas, 
the  scriptural  works,  all  its  branches  and  others  recognised 
by  the  Vedas  still  we  cannot  pledge  ourselves  to  any  promise 
(about  it)  (27 — 2H).  Communicate  to  us  confidingly  if  you 
have  any  doubts  in  Bhimta  and  we  shall  i^xplain  them  to 
you,  0 you  conversant  with  virtue,  unless  we  are  over- 
powered by  stupefaction  (20).” 

Jaimini  said  O you  of  pure  souls,  hear  what  doubtful 
points  I have  in  Bhtiraia  and  hearing  them  you  should  ex- 
plain (30).  Although  devoid  of  qualities,  why  diil  Jatitlrdana, 
the  son  of  Vasudeva,  the  stay  of  the  universe  and  the  cause 
of  all  causes,  conn;  by  the  state  of  a m;u\  ? (.ji).  Why  did 
Krishna,  the  daughter  of  Ifrupada,  become  tiic  one 
queen  of  the  five  sons  of  PAndu  i*  I have  a great  doubt  itt 
this  (32).  How  did  llm  highly  powerful  Vatadeva,  having  a 
ploughshare  for  his  weapon,  expiate  the  sin  of  Brtlima- 
nicide  by  visiting  holy  shrines  (33}.  Why  did  the  mighty  car- 
warriors,  the  high-souled  sous  of  Dranpatlt,  having  the 
P&ndavas  for  their  lord,  meet  with  death,  before  they  enter- 
ed upon  matrimonial  life,  like  those  who  have  none  to  help 
them  (34).  Explain  ail  these  my  doubts  anent  BMmia, 
which  I have  spoken,  so  that  accomplishing  my  object  1 may 
return  to  my  own  hermitage  (35). 

The  birds  said Salnling  the  lord  of  the  celestials,  the 
highly  powerful  Vkhmi,  the  Purusha  of  incomparable  (energy), 
the  eternal  and  undocaying,  identical  with  four  lyuAas,  the 
three-fold  qualities  and  shorn  of  them,  who  is  most  excclleni, 
most  powerful,  worshipful  and  iinmorlal;  him,  than  whom 
there  is  nothing  greater  or  smaller,  by  whom,  unborn  and 
the  beginning  of  the  world,  this  universe  has  been  perincaleil , 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


20 

him,  who  appears  and  disappears,  who  is  seen  and  not  seen, 
who  is  the  creator  and  the  destroyer  of  all  in  the  end ; bowing 
with  a controlled  mind  to  the  Prime  deity  BrahmS  who,  bring- 
ing out  from  his  mouth  Rik  and  Saman,  purified  the  three 
worlds  (36—40).  Saluting  I^Sna,  defeated  by  whose  .single 
arrow  the  Asuras  cannot  put  in  obstacles  in  the  sacrifices  of 
the  sacrificers  (41)  ; we  .shall  describe,  at  length,  the  moral 
truths  which  have  been  revealed  in  BMrata  by  VySsa  of 
wondrous  deeds  (43).  Water  has  been  called  N&ra  by  the 
ascetics  seeing  the  true  essence  of  tilings : Ire  who  reposed 
on  it,  in  the  beginning  is  called  Ndrdyana  (43).  O Brahman, 
the  divine  lord  NSrayana,  permeating  all,  exists  in  four  fold 
forms,  (either)  endued  with  qualities  or  being  devoid  there- 
from (44).  One  of  these  forms  cannot  be  defined  ; the  wise 
behold  it  as  white  ; this  form,  called  V.lsudcva,  is  .seen  as 
being  engarlanded  by  effulgence,  the  principal  stay  of  the 
Yogis,  distant  yet  near,  above  the  attributes  and  shorn  of  alt 
attachments  (45 — 46).  Form,  color  do  not  really  belong 
to  it,  but  are  the  work  of  imagination.  Its  form  is  one, 
eternal,  pure  and  glorious  (47).  The  .second  form,  known 
as  Sesha,  remaining  underneath,  holds  the  earth.  It  i.s  per- 
vaded by  the  quality  of  ignorance  and  is  accordingly  called 
as  belonging  to  the  brute  creation  (48).  The  thir<l  goes 
through  actions,  being  engaged  in  protecting  people;  it  is  per- 
meated by  the  quality  of  goodness  and  is  known  as  establish- 
ing righteousness  (49).  The  fourth  lies  w'ithin  water  resting 
on  a serpent  bed  : darkno.ss  is  its  attribute  and  it  always 
carries  on  the  work  of  creation  (50).  That  third  form  of 
Hari,  which  is  engaged  in  protecting  people,  alw.iy.s  esta- 
blishes righteousness  on  earth  (51).  Slaying  the  rising  Asuras 
who  always  disturb  virtue,  it  protects  the  deities  and  other 
^ picHis  men  always  intent  upon  protecting  virtue  (53).  At  all 
times,  0 Jamini,  whenever  the  virtue  has  suffered  deteriora- 
tion this  form  has  been  incarnated  for  raising  righteousness 
(53).  Formerly  assuming  the  form  of  a boar,  and  divichtif 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


21 

the  water  with  the  projection  of  the  mouth,  it,  with  one 
tooth,  raised  up  the  earth  like  a lotus  {54).  Assumtufr  the 
form  of  man-lion  ho  slew  Iliranyakayipu  and  other  DSn.avas 
headed  by  Viprachitti  (55).  Dwarf  and  various  other  forms 
of  his — I do  not  like  to  enumerate.  The  present  one 
is  his  Mathura  incarnation  (5).  When  the  form  permeated 
by  the  quality  of  goodness  was  incarnated  it  engaged  in  the 
work  of  preservation  under  the  name  of  Pradytimna  (57). 
Either  born  as  a celestial,  a human  being  or  a lumst,  Vasudeva, 
according  to  his  will,  assumes  the  nature  of  llu-  form  (in 
which  he  is  born)  (58).  All  this  has  been  descrilu'd ; now 
hear  next,  how  the  lord  Vishnu,  although  attaining  to  perfect 
success,  assumed  the  form  of  a man  (5<A. 


C H A V T K It  V . 


The  BIRDS  .said  Formerly  the  Patri.arch  T-ishbl  hail 
a .son  hy  name  Tri^ira;  (once)  performing  autcrities  with  \m 
head  downward.^  he  was  slain  hy  Sakr.i  in  fear  (1).  O 
Brahman,  Tashta'.s  son  being  slain,  Indra's  energy  suffered 
impairment  being  greatly  assailed  by  the  sin  of  Brihmanicitle 
(3).  On  account  of  thi.s  iniquity  Sakra’s  energy  entered  into 
righteousness— and  hi.s  energy  having  entered  into  righteous, 
ness  Sakra  became  shorn  of  it  (3).  Thereupon  hearing  of  tho 
destruction  of  his  son  the  I’atri.areh  TashtI,  worked  with 
anger,  tore  a matted-lock  and  said:— (4),  '•  f^t  the  three 
worlds  with  the  deities  behold  my  prowess  to-day ; let  Atge» 
the  wicked-minded  chasti-ser  of  I>aka,  who  has  slain  « 
Brahman.i,  witness  it  also,  by  whom  my  son,  ciig.aged  in  y$| 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


own  penances,  has  been  killed.”  Saying  this,  he,  having 
his  eyes  reddened  with  anger,  offered  the  m.ntted-locks  to 
fire  (S — 6).  Thereupon  arose  a mighty,  huge-bodied  Asura, 
Vritra,  engarlanded  by  flames,  having  huge  teeth  and  resem- 
bling a mass  of  crushed  collyrum  (7).  Being  impregnated 
by  the  energy  of  TashtS,  the  highly  powerful  enemy  of 
Indra,  of  incomparable  energy,  daily  grew  in  strength  like 
the  course  of  an  arrow  (8).  Beholding  the  mighty  Asura 
Vritra  for  his  own  destruction,  Sakra,  stricken  with  fear,  sent 
the  spen  Rishis  for  making  a peace  (9).  The 'sages,  ever 
engaged  in  the  well-being  of  all  creatures  with  a glad  heart, 
arranged  for  a conditional  treaty  between  him  and  Vritra  (10), 
When  disregarding  the  condition  Vritra  was  slain  by  Indra, 
his  strength  became  enfeebled  on  account  of  his  being  as- 
sailed by  the  sin  of  Vritra’s  destruction  (n).  The  strength 
driven  out  of  Sakra’s  body  entered  into  air,  all-spreading, 
invisible  and  the  deity  presiding  over  all  prowess  (la),  When 
t^waing  the  form  of  Goutama,  Sakra,  the  lord  of  the  celes- 
tials, ravished  AhalyS,  hiS  beauty  disappeared  (rj).  The 
grace  of  his  limbs  which  was  highly  charming,  leaving  the 
wicked  king  of  the  deities,  resorted  to  N5.satya8  (the  twin 
sons  of  Aswini)  (14).  Knowing  that  the  king  of  the  celes- 
tials was  shorn  of  virtue  and  energy  and  deprived  of  strength 
and  l^auty  the  Daityas  addressed  themselves  for  vanquish- 
ing him  (15).  O great  ascetic,  being  desirous  'of  vanquiBhing 

the  king  of  the  celestials,  the  highly  powerful  Daityas  were 
born  in  the  races  of  mighty  monarchs  (16).  Once  on  a 
fee,  the  earth,  assailed  by  her  load,  went  to  the  summit  of 
femaunt  Meru  where  there  was  an  assembly  of  the  coles- 
fes  (iy)  She,  distressed  with  a heavy  load,  communicated 
to  them  the  cause  of  her  affliction  arising  from  the  Daityas. 
l»  “ All  those  powerful  Daityas,  who 

had  l^destroyed  by  you,  have  been  born  in  the  region  of 

• cnen  in  the  houses  of  the  kinoQ  /Tr^^  t*!.* 

Ai,ai.«.,i,-  > y.  ? ^ ^ many 

Akshouhini  (m  numberKdistressed  by  them  I am  going  down  ; 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


3J 

do  you  so  arrange  therefore,  O celestials,  that  I may  attain 
to  peace  (20).” 

The  Birds  said  ■.—Thereupon  dividing  their  energy 
the  celestials  descended  on  earth  from  their  own  region  for 
protecting  creatures  and  relieving  the  earth  of  her  burden. 
(21).  Then  the  deity  Dharma  put  the  energy  of  Indra^s 
body  in  Kunti  and  then  was  born  the  highly  energetic 
king  Yudhisthira  (22).  The  God  of  Wind  gave  away  his 
energy  and  Bhima  was  born  ; and  Pirtha  (Arjuna)  the  con- 
queror of  the  god  of  riches  was  born  from  a half  of  Sakra's 
energy  (23).  The  highly  effulgent  twins  resembling  8akf.*i 
were  born  from  Madri.  In  these  five  ways  did  the  Divinr 
performer  of  hundred  sacrifices  incarnate  himself  (24).  His 
great  wife  came  out  from  fire  as  Krishna  (25)-  Krishnft 
was  the  wife  of  Sakna  and  of  none  else.  The  gre.at  Fog/x 
can  convert  tlnur  hotly  into  many  (26).  We  b.ave  thus  des- 
cribed  to  you  how  one  Injcame  the  wife  of  the-  live.  Heat- 
how  Valadcva  went  to  tlic  Sarnswati. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

T HE  Birds  said : — Hnowing  that  Krishna  htu!  a great 
love  for  Pirtha,  Rinia,  having  the  plough  fttr  his  weapon, 
thought  much  as  to  what  should  be  tlonc  (t).  •' Without 

Krishna  I shall  not  go  to  the  side  of  Duryodhanaand  how  can  I, 
siding  with  the  Pindavas,  slay  the  king  Durytidhana,  my  son- 
in-law,  disciple  and  lord  of  men  ^ Therefore  I •hail 

purify  myself  by  visiting  holy  shrines  so  long  a*  the  Kiirwamni 
l*Sndavas  do  not  exterminate  eacli  other  (4)."  Thus  greeting 


« 


^4  MARKANDEYA  RURAHAM. 

Hnshikeca,  Panlia  and  Duryyodkana,  ValarSma  (Somi)  sur- 
rounded by  his  soldiers  went  to  Dwarka  (5).  Ooinp  to 
Dmrka  filled  with  contented  and  healthy  men,  Rama 
holding  plough  as  weapon,  began  to  drink  on  the  day 
ceding  his  departure  to  holy  shrines  (6).  Then  linfsLig 
hts  glass  and  holding  by  the  hand  the  proud  Real!,  rrsem- 
Wing  an  Apsara  he  went  to  the  rich  garden  of  Raivata  (y). 

reTd  ' “ "^1°'  as  ho  was, 

reeled  as  he  went  along.  The  heroe  then  saw  the  higl% 

fi  r'"fh  ^ i”*''  allsoa^ns, 

ltd's  A It  foles  emitted  by 

birds  creating  delight,  pleasant  to  the  eats  and  greatly 

je.  f.o).  He  saw  those  trees,  loaded  with  the  fr't.  /, 

a I sevens  and  shining  with  the  Bowers  ol  all  seasons  echoed 

with  the  notes  ol  birds  (rt),  mangoes,  hog-plums,  4„vt. 

«,«ts  .roftWoto,  jeeras,  prontogranates.  ViaTnTa  ' 

Panasa,  Ukuchas,  Mochas,  highly  charming  NipaTm 

Sndltltnt'btT;  '"f  . 

VibhilalLt 

a ,T  '^^'.kriiuoinc  or  Yadu  saw  these  and 

Cte^pakas,  sTapaXl^lTkararSV^^ 

dlras,  Mandarasy  Jujubes,  floury  ^ 

Salas,  Talas,  Tamalas,  ^Kineukas  Ld  vf  \ 

of  trees,  filled  with  sweet  strains 

ChakoraSySatapatras,  black-bees,  parrots^  malf 

HWtas, . Jivajivakas,  Pryaputrai  ChMlp  , sparrowi, 

birds  (t2~ig).  (H^  saw  C ? , 

lightful  waters  overspread  with  1t*  of  do- 

lotuses,  Kalharas,  and  filled  • red 
-ter.fowls,  Kar^ndLas  L J ! ^hacravlto, 

other  acquatic  animals  '(30^22)  shags  and 

forest,  one  by  one,  Souny  foIIoweLy  womT"'^ 

lent  grove  ol  creepers  (on)  H.  “h  exeel- 

P He  sow  there  the  Iwiee-horn 


MaRKANDKYA  PURANA&t. 


3S 


bhes  versed  in  the  Vedas  and  their  liranches,  Kou^dkas. 
Bhargavas/  the  descendants  of  Ilhwarntlaja  with  those  ol 
Goutama  and  other  eminent  twice-born  ones  born  in  various 
races,  who,  seated  on  A'wftf  sheets,  on  spacious  black 
deer  skins  and  other  seats  of  the  ascetics,  were  listen- 
ing with  attention.  Amongst  them,  Suta  was  discoursing 
on  themes,  relating  to  Purinas,  on  the  character  of  this 
original  celestial  saints  (24—36).  Beholding  RSma  with  eyes 
reddened  with  di ink  and  considering  him  to  hi:  iiutuiate  all 
the  twice-born  hurriedly  .stood  u|)  (27).  They  ail  wch  omed 
the  holder  of  plough,  except  him  wim  was  born  in  the  ram 
of  Suta  (28).  Thcu  .it  the  highly  |)owi-rful  holder  of  plough, 
hlled  with  anger,  and  his  eyes  ndling,  wfio  had  .slain  number- 
less DInavas,  killed  Suta  (ay).  Suta,  being  slain,  .Utained 
to,  the  dignity  of  nr.ilunll  ; and  alt  tin*  Iwicc-born,  clad  in 
antelope  skin,  wi-nt  away  from  tlie  forest  { yi!.  t ousidcriug 
him.self  siillii'il,  the  ludder  of  plough  lliaunh*  A grcsit 
iniquity  Ivas  perpetrated  Ity  me  1 have  sl.iio  ,!a 

who  ha.s  attained  to  tin;  dignii  >■  of  Bf  ahruii;  and  seeing  mc 
all  these  twice-horn  one.s  ii.ive  gone  away  (32).  'I'hi:  smell  ol 
my  body,  hard  as  iron,  i.i  creating  unea:uness.  I have  degraded 
my  own-self  cursed  with  the  destruction  of  a Urihmana  (3J)» 
Fie  on  spite,  drink,  egoism  and  rashness,  possessed  by  which 
I have  perpetrated  this  mighty  iniquity  I'or  expiating 

my  sin,  I shall  observe  a vow  isxtcnding  over  twelve  years 
by  washing  away  my  deed  and  nuking  an  excellent  atone- 
ment (35).  In  this  visit  of  the  holy  shrines  which  t have 
undertaken  I shall  go  to  Prnlthmd  Saraswatl'*  (3f>).  ‘i'here* 
upon  Rama  repaired  to  PratHomtl  Saraswati  ; hear  nest  she 
narration  concerning  the  Pandavas  (37). 


4 


The  Birds  said : — Formerly  in  the  TretS  age,  there  was 
a royal  saint  by  name  Harisbchandra : that  ruler  of  tlie 
earth  was  virtuous,  renowned  for  good  deeds  and  of  a hand- 
some person  (i).  During  his  rule  there  was  no  famine  or 
disease  or  untimely  death  amongst  men  ; nor  his  citissens 
tfsed  to  take  delight  in  impious  deeds  (2),  They  were  not  proud 
of  their  riches,  prowess  and  asceticism  j and  no  woman  ever 
gave  birth  to  children  before  she  attained  her  youth  {3), 
Once  on  a time  it  so  happened,  that  as  that  mighty-armed 
■one  was  engaged  in  pursuing  a deer  in  the  forest  he  heard 
the  cries  of  “Save  me”  coming  from  a certain  women  (4). 
Then  leaving  the  deer  the  king  said  “No  fear ; what  wicked 
person  is  engaged  in  doing  wrong  during  my  regeme  ?’*  {5). 
He  (then)  proceeded  to  the  direction  of  cries : in  the  intcrvaii 
the  dreadful  Deity  of  impediments,  who  puts  in  obstacles  ia 
the  beginning  of  every  thing,  thought  (6)  : "Carrying  on 
unequalled  devout  penances  the  highly  powerful  Vi^;wSmitra 
ohservbg  a vow,  is  striving  to  acquire  various  learnings 
Bhava  and  others  never  before  acquired  by  any  (7).  The* 
being  accomplished  by  the  ascetic,  endued  with  forgivene^* 
silence  and  self-control,  and  assailed  by  fear,  are 
crying.  What  should  I do  now  ? (,8).  The  foremost  of 
-is  energetic  and  we  are  greatly  weak : assailed  with  fear 

crying;  this  appears  as  incomprehensible  to  me  fai  I 
have  got  here  the  king  exclaiming  for  the  moment,  'Do*  J 
fear.  Entering  mto  his  body  I shall  accomplish  whaH 
desire  (to).  Thinking  thus,  the  dreadful  DeL  of  imnedi 


am  present  here  (r2)?  Who,  to-day,  pierccil  ait  over  with 
shafts  discharged  from  my  how,  lighting  up  all  qnatters, 
shall  enter  into  a long  sleep*'?  (1 3)  Thereupon  hearing  the 
words  of  the  king,  Vi^wlmitra  was  enraged ; and  that 
foremost  of  Rishis  having  been  exercised  with  anger,  all  I hose 
forms  of  learning  immediately  disappeared  (14).  Beholding 
all  on  a sudden  the  ascetic  Vi^jwlmitra,  the  king,  stricken 
with  fear,  began  to  tremble  like  a leaf  of  an  tree  (15). 

When  the  ascetic  said  " Stay ! O wickcd-minde<!  man," 
the  king,  bowing  down  with  hunuUty,  said  (t6).  "O  reverend 
Sir,  this  is  my  duty  ! O lord  ! there  is  no  folly  of  mtm*.  O 
ascetic,  you  should  not  be  angry  with  me  who  have  followed 
my  own  duties  (17).  A virtuous  king  sitiiuld  perform  chatilk* 
and  protect  (people)  j and  in  pursuance  of  scripture  he  should 
fight  lifting  up  his  bow"  (18). 

ViSHWAMiTRA  Said ; — " Whom  should  you  roufrr  upon  (t 
thing),  whom  should  you  protect  ai*d  with  whom  should  you 
fight,  O king?  Tell  me  this  speedily,  if  you  fear  uniightcoiig' 
ness"  (I9).  Harishchand.ra  said : "(lifts  Hhould  be  made  to 
the  foremost  of  Vipras  and  those  whose  business  does  not  pay 
them  ; those  that  are  afraid  should  be  ppotected  and  robbers 
should  always  be  fought  with"  (30).  V'l^vvliuilra  said  :«• 
*‘If,  Oking,  you  observe  fully  all  the  duties  of  a king,  I 
appear  before  you  as  a Br5hmaiu  desirous  of  begging 
something;  give  me  my  dcsired-for  gift"  (ai).  The  birds 
I words,  the  king,  havf 
considered  himself  t 
ugika  (33).  Ilarbhch 
roe  freely,  0 reyerctsd  Sir,  what  I shall  have  to  give  you, 
and  even  it  be  diflRcult  to  procure  know  it  as  already  given 
bo  you,  (23)— be  it  silver,  gold,  son,  wife,  body,  life,  king 
dom,  fortune  or  any  other  thing  that  you  may  like  to  have’* 
(24).  Viewimitra  said  : Consider,  O king,  what  you  have 

said  as  accepted  by  me.  First  give  me  the  DakshijtS  of  the 
Rtiashoya  sacrifice,"  (35).  The  king  said  I nIoiII  confer 


MARKANDKVA  I’URANAM. 


markandeya  puranam 


THE  biros  said  U..-  words  of  t!*o  khu, 

king,  without  any  change  on  hi*  countenance  and  with  a 
delighted  heart,  said  “ 50  be  it”  with  joint-.!  hand.  ^ 

VlSHWAMirRA  said: — » If,  ()  r.tyal  saint,  you  ».»vt  given 
away  to  me  your  kingdom,  earth  an.l  forces  who  Uu-n  h the 

king  of  them  all,  myselE  being  engaged  in  auslerifH-s  , C.M?- 

Harishchandra  said  :-~“From  the  time ! liave  giv.-ti  over  to  yon 
this  earth  with  kingdom,  you  are  tlie  lord  and  Sung  «l  the 
earth,  0 reverend  Sir"  (32)-  VlywAmitra  said  U you 
have  conferred  upon  me,  0 king,  the  entire  »iid  if  thm 

be  my  property,  then  do  you.  leaving  off  all  your  oft»am.uit». 
fte  thread  round  your  waist  and  wearing  hark,  go  out  from 
' with  your  wife  and  son*^  (33"-*“34)‘ 

The  birds  said  :~Saylng  io  be  it’ liH**  king 
himself  for  departure  along  with  bis  wife  SabyS  iitiil  tiii  • 
a boy  (35).  As  he  was  going  away  he  iVifwimiira)  0lii- 
tructin^'  his  path  said  to  the  kiag-*^  Where  do  ywi  go  %f  ititoiil 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


29 


gifts  of  fejashuya  should  be  given  (39).  You  had  promised 
before  that  you  would  give  what  you  promised,  fight  with  the 
robbers  and  protect  the  distressed*'  (40).  Harishchandra 
said  ''0  reverend  Sir,  I have  nothing  at  present  but  I shall 
give  you  in  time ; favour  me,  O Brahmana  saint,  cherishing 
good  feelings  towards  me*'  (41).  Vigwamitra  said : — How 
long  shall  I wait,  O lord  of  men  ; tell  me  speedily  or  the  fire 
of  imprecation  shall  consume  you"  (42).  Harischandra 
said: — Within  a month  I shall  confer  upon  you  the 
Dakshina,  O BrAhmana  saint  : at  present  I have  nothing  ; 
you  should  permit  me  (therefore)"  (43).  Vigwamitra  said  : — 
Go ! go ! O foremost  of  men  and  satisfy  your  duties  ; may 
you  fare  well  on  the  way  and  may  not  the  robbers  disturb 
you"  (44)/, 

The  birds  said: — ^Then  permitted  with  saying  go' that 
foremost  of  royal  saints,  the  lord  of  the  earth,  having  bis 
mind  possessed  by  wonderment,  departed.  His  wife,  unused 
to  walking,  followed  him  (45).  Beholding  that  foremost  of 
kings  issue  out  of  the  city  with  his  wife  and  son,  the  citizens 
following,  began  to  lament  (46) ; — O lord,  why  do  you  leave 
us  distressed  and  opj^es^d  kinf,  you  have 

always  acted  piously  and  been  kind  to  the  citizens.  If  you 
observe  virtue,  O royal  saint,  take  us  (also  with  you)  {47). 
Wait  for  a moment,  O best  of  kings,  we  shall  drink  your  lotus 
countenance  with  these  black  bees  of  eyes}  When  shall  we 
see  you  agmn  ? (48).  The  wife,  taking  the  bOy  son  (with  her) 
follows  him,  whom,  when  going  beforOj  the  kings  used  to 
follow  (49).  The  self-same  Harishchandra,  the  foremost  o£ 
kings,  whose  servants  mounted  on  elephants  used  to  precede 
him,  is  now  going  on  foot  (50).  O king,  how  shall  your 
beautiful  face,  having  a fair  nose  and  eye-brows,  be  sullied 
with  dust  on  your  way?  (51).  Wait ! wait  I O best  of  kings, 
satisfy  your  own  duty ; compassion  is  the  best  of  virtues 
especially  for  the  Kshatryas  (52).  Of  what  avail  are  tfce 
wives  and  the  sons?  What  is  the  use  of  riches  and  corns  f 


MARKANDEVA  PURAHAM. 


Leaving  all  these  we  will  follow  you  like  your  shadow  (53). 
0 lord « 0 great  king ! O master  1 why  do  you  rpnoimce  «s? 
Wherever  you  will  be  we  will  go  ; wherever  you  Hvt:  tlu'rc  is 
our  happiness  ; wherever  you  reside  there  is  our  cUy— where 
the  king  is  there  is  our  heaven”  (54).  Hearing  the  he* 
wailings  of  the  citizens,  the  king,  possessed  by  sorrow  and 
having  compassion,  stopped  on  the  way  (55)-  Seeing  him 
agitated  by  the  words  of  the  citizens  and  approaching  there 
VigwStmitra,  having  his  eyes  expanded  with  anger  and 
indignation,  said  : — (56)  " Fie  on  you ! who  are  wicked,  speak 
false  and  utter  untruths ; having  given  your  kingdom 
to  me  you  wish  to  take  it  back”  (57).  Thus  addreisetl 
by  him  with  harsh  words  he  began  to  tremble  and  saying 
” I go”  he  speedily  went  away  taking  his  wife  by  the  hand 
{58).  While  his  tender  wife,  exhausted  with  fatigue,  was  thus 
drawn,  Vifwamitra  all  on  a sudden  struck  her  with  a chastising 
rod  (59).  Beholding  her  thus  struck,  Harishchandr.*!,  the 
lord  of  the  earth,  stricken  with  grief,  said  “ ! am  going”  and 
did  not  utter  any  thing  else  (60).  Seeing  Harishchandra, 
the  lord  of  men,  thus  circumstanced,  the  five  Vi^wadevas, 
inoved  with  pity,  said  (61)  “ To  what  region  this  greatly 
sinful  VifwSmitra  attain  by  whom  this  one,  the  foremost  of 
t^se  performing  sacrifices,  has  been  deprived  of  his  own 
kingdom  ? (62).  And  drinking  whose  Soma  sanctified  by 
reverence  and  offered  in  great  sacrifice  with  Mmiras 
shall  we  attain  to  great  delight  ? ” (63). 

Hearing  those  their  words,  the  son  of  Kopika,  filled  with 
S^^t,  anger,  imprecated  them,  saying  ' Do  you  all  become 
(64).  Being  propitiated  by  them  the  great 
Mcetic  again  said Although  born  as  men  you  will  not 
IgJ^children  nor  wives,  nor  there  will  be  ill-fcellng  for  you. 
shorn  of  lust  and  anger  you  shall  again  become  celos- 
:|6§— 66),  Thef^i^n  all  those  deities,  with  their  own 
virtuei^^e  incarnated  in  the  house  of  the  Kurus  as  the  five 
sogs  of  the  Pindavas  sprung  from  the  womb  of  Draupadi  (67), 


MARKANDEVA  PURAMAM. 


It  is  for  this  reason  by  the  Imprecation  of  the  great  a«:cll« 
the  mighty  caowarriors,  the  sons  of  the  Wlndavat,  did  not 
obtain  wives  (68).  Thus  we  have  describecl  to  you  every  Ihiog 
relating  to  the  history  of  the  son*  of  the  Plndavas  fUKl 
the  four  questions.  What  more  do  you  wish  to  hear  ? 


CHAPTER  Vni. 


Jaimini  said: — " All  this  you  have  tlescribed  to  me  in 
order  of  my  (juestion.s.  But  I h.ivo  a grt’.it  curiosity  as  to 
the  story  of  Ilarishchandra  (i).  Al.as  | a gru.it  misfortune 
befell  that  higlKsoiiled  one,  but  did  he,  ()  foremast  of  the 
twice-born  one,  ever  attain  to  felicity  like  before?''  (a). 

The  Birds  said: — Hearing  the  word*  of  Vi?wliaitri»  tlie 
poor  king,  accompanied  by  hi*  wife  SalvyS  and  th®  hoy  »o«, 
duly  proceeded  {3).  He  thought  ‘This  city  is  above  tl»e  enjoy- 
ment of  human  beings  being  created  by  the  triflcnt-handcd 
deity  (Siva)’  (4),  and  then  going  to  the  celestial  city  Virtnash! 
(Benares)  he  stricken  with  grief  proceeded  on  fool  along 
with  his  obedient  wife  but  at  the  entrance  of  the  city  he 
saw  Vi^wlmitra  present  (g).  Seeing  him  present  he  bowed 
down  with  humility,  then  folding  his  hands  Harbhchandra 
said  to  the  great  ascetic  (6).  “This  is  my  life  1 this  is  my  fion 
and  this  is  my  wife,  O ascetic.  Do  you  take  one  of  the*® 
which  you  like  best  and  require  at  present.  You  should  also 
command  me  what  else  can  we  do  for  you  (/—S), 

VisnwAMiTRA  said: — “The  month  is  complete,  O royal 
saint : give  me  my  D.ikshina  relative  to  RSjashuya  if  you 
remember  your  own  words”  {9). 


MARKANDEYA  paa Afi All. 


HarishchANDRa  Said:— O Brahman,  O effulgt'nt 
lo.cky  the  month  will  be  complete!  Wait  half  a day  more, 
vou  sbali  not  have  to  wait  long  (lo). 

VISHWAMITRA  said  :-Let  it  be  SO,  O great  king,  f come 
t Wn.  If  you  do  not  give  me  to-day  I shall  curse  you,  (l !.) 

The  Birds  said:— Saying  this  the  BrShmana  went  , 

'away  and  the  king  thought:-"  What  DakshinI  shall  I give 

him  which  I have  promised  ? Where  can  I get  substaulia! 
friends?  (12).  And  where  can  I get  wealth  ? If  I do  not 

redeem  my  promise  I shall  come  by  perdition?  (13V  Shall 
I give  up  my  life?  Where  shall  I go ? If  1 meet  with  des- 
traction  by  not  giving  what  I had  promised,  1 shall,  being 
guilty  of  robbing  a BrShmana  of  his  wealth,  become  a worm, 
the  vilest  of  vile  (14)-  It  is  better  that  selling  myself  I shall 
enter  into  servitude”  (15).  (Then)  his  wife,  with  words  snp- 
pressed  with  grief,  said  to  the  poor  and  anxious  king  thinking 
IMS  head  hanging  down  (16).  "Give  up  thonghl,  « > great 
king,  and  satisfy  your  promise  : a man,  who  has  been  driven 
■ out  from  the  range  of  truth,  should  be  shunned  like  a crema- 
tion-ground (17).  They  say  there  is  no  other  duly  greater 
for  a man,  than  the  satisfaction  of  one's  own  promise, 
0 foremost  of  men  (18).  The  perpetual  mjiimcnancK  of 
''  A'lSswfed  €re,  the  study  of  religious  books,  all  the  pioiit 
. acts, . charity  and  others  become  fruitless  for  him  whose 
words  are  barren  (19).  Persons,  versed  in  roUgious  scrip- 
tures, hold  that  truth  greatly  leads  to  s:i!v,ation  nhereai 
untrutli  brings  down  those  who  have  not  controlled  their  own 
klves  {zo).  Having  performed  seven  horse  sacrifices  yon 
celebrated  the  Rljashuya  sacrifice.  O king,  for  one 
single  untruth  should  you  be  cast  down  from  heaven  ? (21). 

' ©••king!  I have  borne  children."  Saying  this  she  began  to 
. Then  the  king  having  his  eyes  filled  with  tears 

Hais^chandra  said Renounce  your  grief,  O fair 
0 ne  ! this  boy  waits  here ; speak  out  if  you  want  to  say  any- 


WARKANnEYA  I’URANAM. 


33 


Ihing  more,  0 you  endued  with  the  gait  of  an  elephant  (23). 
The  wife  said  : — “ O king,  I have  borne  children  ; the  virtuous 
marry  for  having  sons  : therefore  selling  me  for  money,  give 
the  Dakshina  to  the  Br§hmana  ” (24-) 

The  Birds  said:-— Hearing  this  the  Lord  of  the  earth  swoon- 
ed.away : . regaining  his  consciousness  he  bewailed  piteously 
(25).  " Mighty  is  my  grief,  0 fair  one,  that  you  speak  this  to 
me,  have  I,  a sinner  as  I am,  forgotten  your  smiling  conversa- 
tion ? (26).  Alas ! Alas ! how  could  you  speak  this,  ()  you 
of  pure  smiles?  And  how  can  I carry  this  word  so  hard 
to  utter?”  (27).  Saying  this  that  foremost  of  men  again  and 
again  exclaimed,  “ ( Jli  fie  on  me  1 fie  on  me ! ” and  fell  down 
on  the  earth,  deprived  of  consciousness  (28).  Seeing  Harish* 
chandra,  the  king  of  the  earth,  lying  down  on  earth,  tho 
queen,  greatly  stricken  with  grief,  gave  vent  to  these  piteous 
accents  (29).  ” Alas  1 0 great  king,  what  a eircumsUnce, 

beyond  conceptiuii,  is  present,  since  you,  used  to  the  cover- 
lets of  Ranku  deer  akin,  are  lying  down  on  earth  (30).  The 
king,  my  husband,  who  conferred  upon  BrSdimanas  ten  million 
of  precious  kinc,  sleeps  on  the  ground  (31).  Oh,  what  a great 
misery!  OGodj  what  did  this  king  commit  by  you  that  he, 
resembling  Indra  or  Upendra,  has  been  reduced  to  this 
strait”  (32).  Having  said  this,  that  one  of  fair  hips,  assatlecl 
with  the  unbearable  afiliction  of  her  husband,  swooned  away 
and  fell  down  on  earth  (33).  Seeing  his  parents  thus  lying 
down  on  earth,  the  boy,  greatly  assailed  with  hunger  and 
sorrow,  said  (34).  “ Father,  father,  give  me  foodf  mother, 

mother,  give  me  food ! my  hunger  is  growing  powerful  and 
the  top  of  my  tongue  is  dried  up”  (35). 

The  Birds  said : — In  the  interval  ViywJlmitra  of  hard 
austerities  came  there.  Seeing  Harishchandra  lying  down 
on  earth  bereft  of  consciou.sness  and  washing  him  with  water, 
he  said  to  the  king  : — “ Rise  ! Rise]  O best  of  kings,  give  me 
my  DakshinH.  The  misery  of  a man  who  is  in  debt  (alwaya) 
multiplies”  (36 — 37). 

5 


I 


34 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


Having  been  washed  by  ice-cold  water  tlie  king  regained 
his  consciousness;  but  seeing  Vi^wamitra  he  again  lost  it 
and  the  ascetic  was  worked  up  with  anger  (38),  Condoling 
the  king  that  foremost  of  the  twice-born  said " if  you 
wish  to  observe  piety,  give  me  that  Dakshina  {39),  By  truth 
the  sun  gives  its  rays,  in  truth  the  earth  exists  ; truth  b 
spoken  of  as  the  great  virtue  and  heaven  (itself)  is  estab* 
lished  in  truth  (40).  A thousand  horse-aacrifires  and  truth 
being  weighed  in  the  same  balance,  trulb  weiglis  heavier 
I than  thousand  horse-sacrilires  (41).  What  is  the  use  of 
speaking  these  sweet  words  to  you,  who,  ailhough  a power- 
ful  king,  are  now  a dishonourable,  vicious-designed,  cunning 
and  untruthful  man  ? Hear  this,  what  I speak  candidly  (43), 
If,  0 king,  you  do  not  give  me  iny  DakshinS  to-day,  1 shall 
forsooth  imprecate  a curse  on  you,  on  tin;  sun^oing  to  the 
setting  hlli  ” (43),  Saying  this  the  Brlilunnna  went  away  and 
the  king  remained  assailed  with  fear  (thinking)  "Reduced 
to  such  a degraded  state,  without  any  means  and  oppressed 
by  the  rich  where  shalllgo?”  (44).  His  wife  again  said : 
"Act  up  to  my  words.  Burnt  down  by  the  lire  of  hi*  im- 
precation, do  not  meet  with  death"  (45),  Urged  on  re- 

peatedly by  his  wife  the  king  said  " I shall  shorn  of  shame 
even  sell  you,  0 fair  one  (46).  I shall  do  even  what  the 
heartless  cannot,  provided  that  I can  utter  such  a word 
which  it  is  so  hard  to  speak  out"  (47).  Having  said  this  to 
lis  wife  with  his  throat  and  eyes  obstructed  with  tears  and 
going  to  the  city,  the  grief-stricken  king  said  (48).  **  O ye 
ei&eas,^  hear  ye  all  my  words.  Why  do  you  ask  me  ? lam 
. a merciless  one,  not  even  a man  (49).  I am  a veritable 
demon,  hardAeajfted  or  even  viler  than  it,  for  ^ am  ready  to 

sell  my  beloved  wife  and  not  renounce  my  own  life  (|o),  !| 
^wae  of  you  would  require  her  as  a maid-servant  who  is 
^ j - . dearw  than  my  life  itself,  let  him  speak  out  quickly  before 
I put  an  end  to  my  life"  (5 1). 

I j The  Birds  said  :-Thereupon  advancing  3 little  an  aged 


t 

i 


MAKKANDKVA  IHJIUHAM.  3; 

BrSlmiana  said  to  the  king (Jive  me  this  mtici^ierraiit 
I shall  buy  her  giving  the  pric<^  (52).  I have  profuse  wealth 
and  highly  tender  is  my  beloved  wife ; she  ctrinol  do  tlie 
work  of  household,  so  you  give  her  to  me  (53).  Your  %vife  is 
one  of  those  that  are  active,  young,  fair,  and  gocMl^riatiired  : 
give  me  the  woman  and  take  this  fair  price”  (54).  Being 
addressed  by  the  BrShmana  the  mind  of  the  king  Harlili- 
chandra  was  sundered  by  grief  and  he  could  not  speak  any 
thing  (55.)  Then  having  tied  fast  the  money  \vitfi*'the  corner 
of  the  king^s  bark  the  Brihmana  began  to  drag  llie^  quren 
holding  her  by  the  hair  (56).  Seeing  liis  mother  thus  drawn 
the  boy  Rohittswa,  having  locks  on  his  head,  began  lo  cry 
pulling  the  cloth  by  his  luinds  (57).  dim  queen  said 
'^‘Leave  me,  leave  me,  till  I Imve  seen  the  child.  O niy  boy, 
it  will  be  very  difficult  for  yms  to  see  me  agaiii  (5H)  Beliold, 
behold  your  inotlier,  O Ijoy,  who  havr  be«'ome  a slave.  Iliil 
do  not  touch  mrq  O priiic<‘,  I atn  tuuvmthy  of  tontIie*f 

by  you^*  (59).  lliea  se;eing  all  on  a sudihm  hin  iiMitlnn'  thui 
drawn,  the  boy,  with  eyes  ovci  flowing  with  tears,  followed  her 
crying  mother ! (60).  llie  twice-born  one  in  anger  kicli«!i! 

him  with  foot  who  was  then  coming  Imt  still  lit!  kept  iip 
crying  mother^'  and  did  not  let  his  mother  go  (61).  The 
queen  said  0 master,  show  me  this  favour,  rio  you  also 
buy  up  this  boy ; although  bouglit,  1 shall  be  of  nu  us«j  yf»« 
without  him  (62).  Unfortunate  as  I am,  he  you  kind  to  me. 
Link  me  with  him  as  a cow  is  united  with  its  c.i!f '*  (&3). 
The  BrShmana  said: — “Take  thi.s  moftey  and  jjive  me  your 
boy.  Persons,  conversant  with  scrijjturcs,  ii.nvt*  settled  the 
value  of  both  a man  and  a woman  at  a fmndred,  a 
thousand,  a ten  thousand  and  a ten  million  coin'*  (<14). 
Then  tying  the  money  in  his  cloth  (the  BrUhmaiia)  took 
the  boy  along  with  hi.s  mother  and  bomui  them  together 
(65).  Seeing  them,  his  wife  and  boy,  thus  taken  .aw.ry,  the 
king,  greatly  stricken  with  grief,  heg.an  to  l.im.-i.t  sighing 
hot  again  and  ng.'tin  (66).  “ riial  my  wife,  whom  even  the 


36 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


wind,  the  sun  and  the  moon  or  any  man  whatever  di«l  not 
see  before,  has  now  come  by  the  condition  of  a slave  (67). 
Descended  from  the  solar  race,  this  my  boy,  having  tender 
fingers,  has  been  sold.  Oh  [ fie  on  me  1 Fic  on  my  perverted 
sensei  (68).  Oh  dear  1 0 my  child!  through  my  unfair  con* 
duct,  who  am  a dislionourable  man  it  is,  that  you  have  come 
by  this  state  under  the  influence  of  destiny ; still  I do  not 
die ; Oh  I fie  on  me”  (69).  While  the  king  was  thus  be« 
wailing,  the  Brahmana,  taking  those  two,  quickly  disappeared 
in  the  midst  of  trees  and  houses  (70).  Immcdiattdy  after 
Vi^wSimitra  came  there  to  the  king  and  asked  for  the  money  j 
and  accordingly  Harishchandra  handed  over  to  him  the 
money  (71).  Finding  the  money  that  came  from  the 
sale  of  his  wife,  to  be  small,  Kouyika,  enraged,  said  to 
the  king  who  was  overwhelmed  with  sorrow  (73).  “() 
wretch  of  a Kahatrya,  if  you  consider  this  to  be  fit  for  my 
sacrificial  gift,  then  behold  to-day  the  great  strength  of  my 
hard  austerities,  unalloyed  Brahma  energy,  terrific  prowess 
and  pure  studies”  (73—74).  Harishchandra  said  :—*'f  shall 
confer  upon  you  other  gifts,  0 reverend  Sir,  tarry  for  a 
moment.  At  present  I have  nothing,  I have  sold  my  wife  and 
son”  (75),  VifwSmitra  said,  ” 0 king,  a fourth  of  the  day 
remains  j I shall  wait  till  then,  but  you  should  not  give  any 
other  reply”  (76). 

The  birds  continued  -.—Having  thus  addressed  that  best 
of  kings  with  cruel  and  merciless  words,  the  son  of  Ku?ika, 
taking  the  money,  speedily  went  away  (77).  Vijwimitra 
hawng  departed,  the  king,  drowned  in  the  middle  of  the  oceans 
of  ffear  and  sorrow,  determining  every  thing,  cried  aloud  with 
his  face  bent  downwards  (78).  '<  Let  him,  that  would  buy  me 
as  bis  slave  for  money,  declare  his  intention  speedily  beforo 
the  sun  sets”  (79).  Then  came  there  quickly  the  Deity  of 

virtue  under  the  guise  of  a Chandala  smelling  bad,  deformed, 
rough,  bearded,  large-toothed,  of  a dreadful  look,  black,  with 
a huge  abdomen,  of  twany  dreadful  eyes,',  harsh-speeched, 


carrying  a numoer  or  niras,  aaornca  wiin  a gariiino  or  ucari 
bodies,  with  a skull  in  hand,  huge-faced,  terrific,  always 
ing,  surrounded  by  a pack  of  dogs,  of  a fearful  look,  with  a rod 
in  his  hand  and  appearing  to  have  no  form  (8o — Ii« 
said : — “ I want  you,  tell  me  quickly  how  much  do  you  want 
for  your  service,  small  or  great,  by  which  I may  buy  you  up" 
(83).  The  birds  said  : — Beholding  him  in  that  form,  of  terrible 
looks,  highly  ruthless  words  and  of  dreadfully  had  ways,  tiie 
king  asked:  "who  are  you"  {84).  The  ChandSha  replied:-— 
"I  am  a ChandSla,  known  in  this  most  excellent  city  as 
Pravira—-!  am  the  executioner  of  those  that  are  sentenced 
to  death  and  take  the  blankets  from  the  corpses"  (85). 
Harishchandra  said  : — " I will  not  be  a servant  of  a Chand&la 
so  highly  degraded.  Rather  I would  be  consumed  by  the 
fire  of  imprecation  than  be  a slave  of  a Chandala  (8f>)’'.  The 
birds  said : — While  he  vva.s  thus  giving  out  the  great  ascetic 
Vifwamitra,  his  eyes  rolling  in  anger  and  iiuligiiation,  came 
there  and  said  to  the  king  : — (87).  "'rins  Ciinixlaia  ha-s  come 
here  to  give  you  plenty  of  money.  Wfiy  do  you  not  give 
me  in  full  the  sacrificial  gift  ? (88).  Harishchandra  said 
“ 0 reverend  Sir,  0 son  of  Kufika,  I know  me  as  descended 
from  the  solar  race.  Desirous  of  money,  how  can  I enter 
irjto  the  service  of  a Chandaia  (89).  Viyw&mitra  replied  : — 
" If  you  do  not  give  me  the  Chandala’s  money  that  you  will 
get  by  selling  yourself,  forsooth  shall  I,  when  the  time  comes, 
imprecate  a curse  on  you"  (90). 

The  Birds  said : — ^Thereupon  the  king  Harishchandra, 
bewildered  by  anxiety  and  sorrow,  held  the  asccstic’s  feet 
saying  " Favour  me"  (91).  Harishchandra  said  " I shall  be 
your  slave,  I am  afflicted,  I am  affrighted  ; I am  particularly 
your  devoted  votary.  Favour  me,  O Brihmana  saint;  to 
serve  a Chandila  is  a misery  (92).  With  all  my  wealth  gone 
1 shall  serve  you,  performing  every  .sort  of  work.  O foremost  of 
ascetics,  I shall  be  your  servant  satisfying  every  desire  of 
irours"  (93)'  Viywiinitra  said:— "If  you  arc  my  scry^t,  I 


MARKANDEVA  PURAHAM. 


make  you  over  to  this  Chandala  for  the  consideration  of  a 
hundred  million  coin”  (94). 

The  birds  said  ; — When  he  had  said  tlsis  the  Swapftka,* 
delightedly  giving  the  money  to  Vi^vvJlmitra  and  finding  the 
king  who  was  greatly  trembling  on  being  beaten  by  the  rod, 
whose  senses  were  agitated,  who  was  disconsolated,  for  being 
divorced  from  all  that  was  dear  to  him  and  his  friends,  took 
him  to.  his  own  house  (95—96).  Living  in  the  hotise 
of  the  Chandala,  the  king  Harishchandra,  every  morning, 
noon,  and  evening,  sang  (97).  “ Seeing  her  boy  poorly  before 
lier,  the  damsel,  seated  with  an  woe-begone  countenance,  re- 
members  me  (thinking)  'the  king  shall  liberate  ns  both,  by 
earning  wealth  and  giving  it  profusely  to  the  Brahwarm"  {98). 
That  one,  having  the  eyes  of  a young  deer,  «loe.s  not  know 
that  I have  fallen  into  worse  misfortune  (99).  Alas  1 a series 
of  misfortune  has  (befallen  me)— the  loss  of  kingdom,  the 
retemcktioii  of  friends,  the  selling  off  of  the  wile  nml  cliild 


and  my  coming  by  the  state  of  a ChandSia”  ! (too)  Thus 
living  there;  deprived  of  all  and  stricken  with  grief  he  used  to 
remember  daily  his  beloved  son  and  his  wife  devoted  to  him 
(loi);  After  a length  of  time,  the  king  H.irishdiandra, 
brought  under  this  (ChandSla's)  control,  was  engaged  in  stripp* 
inf  the  corpses  of  clothes  at  the  cremation  ground  (102'.  He 
was  instructed  by  the  Chandkla,  engaged  in  robbing  the  dead  of 
clbthes,'  ‘Wait  here  day  and  night  watching  the  arrival  of  dead 

bodies  (103).  For  every  corpse  a sixth  of  the  proceeds  Is  to 

be  given  to  the  king,  three  are  mine  and  two  are  your  wages 
1H)•^  Thus  advised  he  went  to  the  house  of  the  dead,  then 


type,  son  of  a Ugr*  woman  by  a 

ISH^a  fatherand^Juised  with  the  Chandala  with  whom  he  it  to  live 

vessels,  to  wear  the  clothes  of  th# 
d24ftaa,^9noather,iwot«rty  than  asses  and  dogs  a to  be  exclu- 
ded from  ail  intercourse  with.other  tribes.  He  can  only  be  employed  as 
wSed  the  bodies  of  those  who  die  without 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


39 


situated  to  the  south  of  VarSnash;  (i05)--to  the  cremation 
ground,  filled  with  terrible  sounds,  a pack  of  jackals, 
scattered  with  the  skulls  of  the  corpses,  giving  out  a 
detestable  smell,  filled,  with  profuse  smoke,  abounding  in 
malevolent  spirits,  ghosts,  goblins,  female  imps  and  Yakshas, 
swarming  with  vultures  and  jackals,  strewn  with  bones  smell- 
ing horribly  and  filled  with  heart-rending  cries  of  the  relatives 
of  the  dead.  “O  son,  0 friend,  O kinsman,  O Itrolhcr, 
O child,  0 my  dear  husband,  O sister,  <)  molbei's  father, 
O father,  O grandson,  O relative,  where  arc  yon  gone  ? 
Come  here,’  there  a number  of  men  were  crying  in  this 
way;  (105 — no)  there  it  was  filled  with  the  cracking  sounds 
of  burning  flesh,  fat  and  marrow;  there  half-burnt  an«! 
darkened  corpses,  showing  their  row.s  of  teeth,  seemed  to  laugh 
in  the  midst  of  fires  as  if  to  say.  ‘ This  is  the  end  of  the  body’; 
(in)  there  were  heard  the  emcking  sounds  of  ll.imcs 
accompanied  by  the  cries  of  birds  in  the  midst  of  tin’  collcc 
tion  of  bones,  the  hewailings  of  Iricmls  .and  the  rheering 
sounds  of  the  Pukkasas  (Ch.andlla.s)  ; ami  were  hcanl  the 
hideous  songs  of  ghosts,  goblins,  malignant  spiritu  and 
demons  resembling  the  roars  of  the  universal  dissolution  j 
there  the  collection  of  the  dung  of  cows  and  luiffaloc*!, 
surrounded  by  heaps  of  bones  mixed  with  flames  ami  diverse 
presents  of  garlands  and  lights  (to  the  dead)  and  offerings  to 
the  crows,  made  the  cremation  ground,  filled  with  various 
noises,  resemble  the  hell  (n2 — nit).  Filled  with  the  loud 
cries  of  the  ominous  jackals  of  burning  mouths  and  as  well 
as  with  those  of  others  living  in  caves,  the  fearful  crcmatiim 
ground,  full  of  lamentations,  seemed  to  strike  ternn  evru  into 
the  heart  of  Fear  (117).  The  king,  going  there,  filled  with 
grief,  began  to  mourn  : — "O  god,  where  are  those  servants, 
councillors,  Ihahmanas  and  the  kingdom  gone?  (ttS). 
0 SaivyS,  O my  boy,  forsaking  me,  who  am  wretched  where 
have  you  gone  through  Vi^wanntra’s  imprecation  ? " (irtj). 
Thus  did  he  think  again  and  again  by  tire  Cluimlahis.  Pale, 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


with  his  body  rough  all  over,  with  (profuse)  hair,  smcllidg 
(bad)  with  a braid  of  hair  as  well  as  a staff,  looking  like  the 
very  destroyers  he  rushed  about  crying,  “ Here  is  the  corpse, 
this  is  the  price  that  I have  received.  This  is  mine.  This 
is  the  king’s.  This  is  the  ignorant  Chandala’s."  Thus  going 
about  hither  and  thither,  the  king  seemed  to  have  under- 
gone a change  of  existence  (20 — 22).  He  was  clad  in 

blanket  made  of  rags  stitched  together ; his  face,  arms  and 
chest  were  covered  with  the  ashes  of  the  funeral  pyres; 
and  his  fingers  were  besmeared  with  fat,  marrow  and  ashes. 
Sighing  he  lived  upon  the  food  offered  to  the  numberless 
dead  and  was  contented  therewith  (t  22-— 134).  He  adorned 
his  head  with  their  garlanda  He  did  not  sleep  in  the  night 
or  in  the  day  but  always  cried  “ Ala-S  \ Alas  f (135).  Thus 
did  the  twelve  months  appear  like  a hundred  years.  Once 
on  a time  that  foremost  of  kings,  separated  from  his  fiiends 
and  having  a rough  body,  was  fatigued  and  possessed  by 
sleep.  He  slept  motionless.  Sleeping  there  he  saw  a highly 
wonderful  dream  in  consequence  of  his  habit  of  living  in  a 
cremation  ground  or  through  the  influence  of  jiowerful 
destiny.  Having  conferred  on  hi.s  preceptor  his  Dakshini 
in  another  body  and  undergone  miseries  extending  over 
twelve  years  he  has  been  liberated.  He  saw  himself  t)orn  of 
the  womb  of  a Pukkashi  (a  female  Chand&la).  Remaining 
there  the  king  thought  "Having  come  out  of  it  I shall 
practise  virtues  and  charities"  (126-130).  Afterwards  whea 
he  was  born  as  the  son  of  a Pukkasa  be  was  always  engaged 
la  the  performance  of  purifactory  rites  of  the  dead  Ui  the 
cremation  ground  (131).  When  he  became  seven  years  old 
e saw  the  dead  dody  of  a poor  but  accomplished  BrShmana 
^ught  to  the  cremation  ground  by  his  friends  (132).  Bei^g 
^sed  by  him  demanding  the  fee,  the  Brahmanas  8aith|- 
IS  Vicwamitra’s  action  (133).  Do  this  unrighteous  ak, 
sinful  wretch.  Formerly  the  king  Harishebandra,  yds, 


MARKANDEVA  1‘URANAM. 


41 

\vhat  you  promised,  have  been  reduced  to  R Pokkasa  by 
Vi^wSLmitra  (134)-”  Because  he  did  not  show  them  any 
consideration  he  was  imprecated  by  them  in  anger  “ O wretch 
of  a maO)  go  you  immediately  to  a dreadful!  hell  (i35)*” 
soon  as  this  had  been  said  the  dreaming  king  beheld  the 
messengers  of  Yama  with  nooses  in  their  hands  (ijb)-  He  then 
saw  himself  carried  forcibly  by  them.  Greatly  pained  he  ex- 
claimed “0  father,  O mother  ? Where  are  you  to-day  ?"  (*37)* 
As  soon  as  he  said  this,  he  was  thrown  into  a hell  of  boiling 
oil  (138).  Severed  with  a saw,  sharp  as  a ra»or  on  the  lower 
part  of  his  body,  he,  tormented,  began  to  feed  on  pus  and  blood 
in  darkness  (139).  Born  as  a Pukkasa,  in  the  seventh  year, 
he  found  himself,  when  dead,  burnt  and  boiled  every  day  in 
hell  (140).  Here  was  he  depressed  and  there  penitent  and 
elsewhere  beaten  and  tortured  ; plunged  in  waters  and  burnt 
and  assailed  by  severe  cold  and  wituls  (i4>)-  In  the  hell  one 
day  appeared  like  a hundred  years.  Then  from  the  guards  in 
the  hell  he  heard  that  a hundred  years  had  passed  away  (143). 
Then  he  was  thrown  on  earth  and  was  born  as  a dog  living  on 
excretion.  Feeding  on  refuses,  he  assailed  by  cold,  died  within 
a month  (143).  He  then  saw  himself  in  the  body  of  an  us, 
an  elephant , a monkey,  a beast,  a goat,  a cat,  a heron,  a cow, 
a ram,  a bird,  a worm,  a fish,  a tortoise,  a boar,  a <leer,  a cock, 
a male  parrot,  a female  parrot,  a serpent  and  other  iintnobtle 
objects.  Daily  born  in  the  species  of  various  creatures  and 
assailed  by  sorrow,  he  considered  a day  to  be  a hundred 
years  (144— -146).  After  hundred  years  had  passed  away  in 
his  being  born  as  those  cursed  animals,  the  king  saw  hiimicll 
one  day  in  his  own  race.  (147).  While  he  wa-s  living  there 
he  was  deprived  of  his  kingdom  through  g.amblingi  then 
losing  wife  and  son  he  alone  went  to  woods  (r48).  He  saw 
there  a dreadful  lion  with  hia  mouth  wide  open  coming 
forward  along  with  a Sarabha*  to  devour  him  (149),  Devoured 


6 


* A gigantic  fabulvuii  anlraal  with  eight  tegi. 


MARKANDEVA  PURAMAM. 


lil' 


by  him  he  lamented  for  his  wife  (crying)  “ O SaivyI  ! where 
do  you  go  now  leaving  me  here  in  danger  (?)"  Again  he  saw 
his  wife  along  wilh  his  son  (crying)  “Save  us,0  ffarishchandrt, 
no  more  with  gambling  (150— rs  i).  Your  son,  wilh  your  wife 
SaivyS,  has  been  reduced  to  a miserable  plight—*’  He  ran 
about  hither  and  thither  but  could  not  see  them  (152).  Then 
stationed  in  the  sky  the  king  again  saw  her,  distressed  and 
naked  with  dishevelled  hair,  carried  away  forcibly  and  ex* 
claiming  ‘’Alas  1 alasi  save  me."  He  then  saw  Home  persons 
stationed  in  the  sky  at  the  command  of  the  king  of  righteous* 
ness  exclaiming  “Come,  0 king,  Yain.i  has  been  comman- 
ded for  you  by  Vi^wamitra’' (153—155),  Having  been  thus 
accosted  the  king  was  forcibly  carried  away  with  a noose 
of  serpents  being  informed  that  this  was  the  doing  of 
Vi9wSmitra  (156).  Still  no  pious  thoughts  did  arise  in  his 
raind.  All  these  miseries,  which  he  had  seen  in  dream,  he 
aufered  for  twelve  years.  After  the  expiry  of  twelve  years 
he  was  taken  away  by  the  emissaries  (of  Yama)  (157—150). 
He  saw  there  Yama  in  his  own  form  who  said  to  the  lord  of 
men.  ''  This  is  the  irrepressible  wrath  of  the  high-souled 
Vifwamitra  (159).  Kaufika  will  even  bring  about  the  death 
of  your  son.  Go  you  to  the  world  of  men  and  go  through 
^ rematning  sufferings.  Going  there,  O king,  you  shall 
meet  with  your  well-being  (.60).  After  the  expiration  of  the 
twelfth  year  there  will  be  an  end  of  your  miseries,  O king.’* 
Then  pushed  by  Yama’s  emissaries  he  fell  down  from  the 
sky  (161).  Then  dropping  down  from  the  region  of  Yama 
he  a.woke  from  an  excess  of  terror  and  thought—"  Ala* ! what 

a misery,  k is  sprinkling  salt  over  a sore  (Ida),  f,,  a dream 

I have  seen  a great  misery,  the  end  of  which  I do  not  get  at : 

to  h.,e,welv«  yea™  passed  «eing  Ihi. 

M dteam  — m great  tear  ke  asked  tke  Pukkaaas  who  wen 

waiting  there.  Of  them  some  said  ‘no’  others  ‘yes’  (163—164). 
earu^phis  the  king,  stricken  with  grief,  sought  refuge 
he  gods,  saying  “ 0 deities,  grant  me,  Savyl  and  my 


- J e 

“ / - * < J 


■ 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


43 


boy,  good  fortune  (165).  Salutation  unto  the  Great  Dharma, 
salutation  unto  Krishna,  the  Disposer,  salutation  unto  the 
Prime  of  prime,  the  holy,  the  ancient  and  undecaying 
Salutation  unto  thee,  O Vrihaspati  and  unto  Vasava.'* 
Haying  said  this  the  king  engaged  in  the  work  of  a PukkasA 
and  the  settlement  of  funeral  fees,  like  one  who  had  lost 
recollection  of  all  things.  The  king  became  dirty  .and  dusky  ; 
his  h-airs  became  matted,  he  had  a stall  and  his  senses  were 
bewildered  (167 — 168).  Then  neither  his  .son  nor  his  wife 
came  within  the  range  of  recollection  ; and  dis[»iritcd  on 
account  of  his  having  lost  his  kingdom  he  liveil  in  the  cre- 
mation ground  (KSg).  One  day  taking  her  own  dead  son, 
bitten  by  a serpent,  came  there  bewailing  the  wife  of  that 
hing  (lyo).  She  repeatedly  exclaimed ; — “ O my  son  i O 
my  child  1”  She  was  lean,  discoloured,  absent-minded  and 
bad  her  hairs  covered  with  ashes  (17*)-  I he  kings  wife, 
said  “ See,  O king,  to-day,  a moon  on  earth,  your  son, 
whom  you  saw  befort;  playiog,  bitten  by  a mighty  serpent 
and  dead  (172).”  Ib  aring  her  lamentations,  the  king,  think- 
ing “ I shall  get  the  blanket  of  the  dead”  speedily  went  there 
(173).  The  king  could  not  recognise  hw  bewailing  wife 
stricken  with  sorrow  consequent  upon  living  long  in  ,a  foreign 
country  and  seeming  to  have  been  born  again  (174),  Aiul  the 
princess  too  could  not  recogni.se  the  king  formerly  wearing 
beautiful  ringlets  but  now  with  matted  locks  looking  like  « 
withered  tree  (17s).  Beholding  that  boy  beaten  by  a deadly 
serpent  covered  in  black  and  endued  with  the  marks  of 
royalty  the  king  thought  " Oh  what  misfortune  j born  In 
the  race  of  what  king,  this  infant  has  been  rmluced  to  such  a 
condition  by  the  wicked-minded  Destroyer  (jyb— 177),  Seeing 
this  boy  lying  on  the  lap  of  bis  mother  I remember  my  buy 
the  lotus-eyed  Rohitasljwa  (178).  If  he  ha«l  nut  been  brought 
to  it.s  control  by  the  Dreadful  Deatli  ho.  must  Iiave  also  i oine 
at  this  age"  (879).  'I'he  queen  said  : — *'U  my  hoy,  by  the 
malignant  desire  of  what  sinful  man,  this  dreadful  niii- 


M f 


44  MARKANDEYA  RURANAM. 

fortune  has  overtaken  us  the  end  of  which  I do  not 
get  at?  (i8o).  Olord,  O king,  without  solacing  me  who 
am  assailed  by  grief  how  and  where  do  you  remain  in 
security?  (i8i).  0 Destiny,  what  have  you  not  done  to  the 
royal  saint,  Harishchandra,  the  destruction  of  kingdom, 
the  renunciation  of  friends  and  the  selling  off  of  the  wife 
and  son”  (182).  Hearing  those  her  words  the  king,  recog- 
nising his  beloved  wife  and  dead  son,  dropped  down  from 
his  place  (183).  " Oh  1 painful  1 this  is  SaivyJ,  this  is  my 
boy  ’•  cried  he ; thus  stricken  with  grief  he  wept  and  swooned 
away  (184).  Recognising  him  and  seeing  him  in  that  plight 
she  fell  into  a trance,  and  stricken  with  grief  dropped  down 
on  earth  motionless  (185).  Then  regaining  consciousness 
both  the  king  and  the  queen  began  to  lament,  being  greatly 
stricken  with  sorrow  and  laden  with  the  weight  of  sorrow 
(186).  The  king  said : — " Oh  my  boy,  seeing  your  pale  face, 
tender  and  having  beautiful  eyes,  eye-brows  and  a nose  why 
does  not  my  heart  tend?  (187),  Clasping  whom,  coming 
of  himself  to  me  with  sweet  “Papaj  Papa  j"  shall  I call  *'0 
my  child  1”  out  of  love?  (188).  With  tire  twany  dust  of  whose 
thighs  shall  my  scarf,  lap  and  limbs  be  covered?  (189) 
Descended  from  my  loins,  you,  the  delight  of  my  mind  and 
heart,  were  sold  like  a chattel,  0 my  child,  by  this  worthless 
father  of  yours?  (190).  Having  robbed  me  of  my  vast  terri- 
tories, possessions  and  wealth,  the  ruthless  serpent  of  destiny 
has  bitten  my  child  (191).  Casting  my  looks  upon  the 
lotus  face  of  my  son  bitten  by  the  serpent  of  Destiny  { have 
been  blinded  by  the  dreadful  venom”  (192).  Having  said  this 
he,  his  voice  choked  with  the  vapour  of  grief,  embraced 
bis  son,  swooned  away  and  dropped  down  motionless  (193). 
i The  Queen  saidt— " Forsooth,  from  his  voice  he  appears 
fa  ^ that  best  of  men  Harishchandra,  the  moon  of  the  minds 
of  ^ leaned  (194).  Uke  his  nose  it  ish%b  and  curved  down- 
ward at  the  top.  Like  those  of  the  illustrious  high-souied 
one  his  teeth  resemble  the  buds  {195).  But  why  has  that 


lora  oi  mtin  com t;  to  uio  crcmsitiuii  t a wen 

off  the  grief  consequent  upon  the  death  of  his  son  she  looked 
upon  her  fallen  husband  (196).  The  exalted  (queen),  pale, 
filled  with  surprise  and  assailed  by  the  grief  of  her  son  and 
husband,  casting  her  looks,  saw  the  hateful  rod  of  her  hus- 
band (197).  (Crying  out)  " I am  Swapaka  " that  one  of  expan- 
sive eyes  fell  into  a swoon.  And  regaining  consciousness 
within  a short  time  she  said  with  a heavy  voice  (198).  " Fie 

on  you,  O Destiny,  who  are  greatly  hard,  hateful  and  devoid 
of  dignity,  by  whom  this  king,  resembling  an  immortal,  has 
been  reduced  to  the  state  of  a d'a/zr/afyi’a  (199).  Having  brought 
about  the  destruction  of  his  kingdom,  the  renunciation  of 
friends,  the  sale  of  wife  and  son,  you  have  not  released  him  ; 
this  king  has  been  made  a Chandaia  (200).  Why  do  you  not, 
raising  me  from  the  earth  who  am  burning  in  grief,  say,  O 
hing,  'get  upon  this  bed  !'  (201)-  I do  not  sec  to-day  your 
umbrella  or  your  or  ehowrio  or  fan.  What  is 

the  change  brought  about  by  De.sliny  (302).  'J'hat  best  of 
kings,  before  whom,  formerly  while  going  out,  the  kings  used 
to  do  the  work  of  menials  and  make  the  earth  freed  frooi 
dust  with  their  scarps,  that  one,  under  the  influence  of  mis- 
fortune, fs  now  living  in  the  cremation-ground  filled  with 
earthen  water-pots  and  vessels  coming  in  contact  with  human 
skulls,  dreadful  with  profuse  hairs  sticking  to  the  threads  of 
the  wreaths  of  the  dead,  covered  with  greese  and  dry  faggots, 
terrific  with  a mixture  of  ashes,  charcoal,  half-burnt  bones, 
and  marrow ; from  which  small  birds,  terrified  by  vultures  and 
jackals,  have  fled  away ; darkened  all  over  by  tire  flames  of 
the  funeral  phyres  ; and  where  the  night-rangers  are  brimful 
w'ith  delight  by  eating  the  flesh”  (203>-2o7).  Having  s^d 
this  and  elapsed  the  neck  of  the  kings  the  princess,  the  reject 
of  numberless  miseries  and  afflictions,  began  to  lament  in 
piteous  accents  (208). 

* A golden  vessel  used  on  v Im  occasion  of  royal  ceremoolah. 


46 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 


The  Queen  said: — “0  king,  is  this  a dream  or  a reality  j 
tell  me  what  you  think,  O great  one ; my  mind  is  st  upified 
(209).  If  this  be  so,  O you  conversant  with  morality,  virtue 
is  of  no  avail;  and  there  is  no  merit  in  worshipping  the 
BrShmanas,  the  deities  and  in  protecting  the  earth  (210). 
There  is  then  no  truth,  sincerity  or  kindness,  since  you,  m 
pious,  have  been  deprived  of  your  kingdom"  (2ti).  Hear- 
ing her  words,  heavy  and  accompanied  by  hot  siglia  (he) 
described  to  that  damsel  of  slender  make  how  he  had  be- 
come a Swapaka  (212).  Weeping  long,  sighing  hot,  that 
timid  lady,  stricken  with  grief,  described  duly  to  him  the 
death  of  her  son  (213). 

The  King  said:— “0  dear,  I do  not  like  to  undergo 
this  misery  for  a long  time.  O s!cnder-m,ade  lady,  behold 
my  misfortune  that  I am  not  (even)  a master  of  own 
self  (2I4)*  If  without  obtaining  permission  from  the  Chandlia 
1 enter  into  fire,  I shall,  in  another  birth,  become  thi?  slave 
of  one  (such)  (215)).  Or  I shall  fall  into  a bell  as  an  insect 
feeding  on  earth-worms;  or  I shall  fall  into  FarVariwi  filled 
with  profuse  pus,  fat,  blood  and  muscle  (216).  Or  going  to 
R forest  of  sword-blades  I shall  be  sorely  cut ; or  going  to 
Raurava  or  Mahi  Raurava  I shall  suffer  misery  (217). 
if  a*  man  is  drowned  in  a sea  of  miseries  he  can  come  to  an 
end  by  giving  up  his  life.  The  only  boy,  a son  on  whom 
depended  the  perpetuation  of  the  race,  even  he  is  drowned 
by  the  powerful  tide  of  destiny.  A wretched  slave  ns  I am, 
hOw  can  I relinquish  my  life  ? (218—219).  But  a distressed 
.^d  troubled  person  does  not  care  for  sin.  Not  even  in 
beittg-bom  as  a beast,  nor  in  the  forest  of  sword  blades  or 
in  Vaitarini  is  that  misery  which  comes  from  the  loss  of  a 
(220)- . O slender-made  lady,  I shall  throw  myself  into 
.^'J€re  blazing  with  the  body  of  my  son ; you  should  pardon 
ma'Iortbis  iniquity  (221).  Permitted  by  me,  go  you  to  the 
hSQSe  the  Bi^hmana,  O you'of  fair  smiles,  and  consider 
my  a concentrated  mind  (333).  If  I have 


V,' 


■'B' 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


47 


practised  charities,  if  I have  performed  sacrifies,  if  I have 
pleased  my  spiritual  guide,  I shall  again,  in  another  world, 
be  united  with  you  and  my  son  (223),  What  is  the  possibi- 
lity of  my  object  being  secured  in  this  world?  i should 
therefore,  with  you,  wend  the  way  of  my  son  (224).  If,  O 
you  of  fair  smiles,  I have  said  anything  indecent  in  private 
(even)  by  way  of  jest,  you  should  pardon  me,  who  am 
begging  (225).  Out  of  haughtiness  that  you  are  a rpieen, 
you  should  not  disregard  the  twice  born  one ; but  C)  fair 
one,  you  should  please  him  even  like  a husband  or  a thiity  ” 
(226).  The  queen  said  : — “O  royal  saint,  even  this  very  day 
I shall  enter  into  this  burning  fire  with  the  load  of  grief  in 
your  company  " (227). 

The  Birds  said : — Then  making  a funeral  phyre  and 
placing  his  son  thereon,  the  king,  with  his  wife,  began 
to  meditate  upon  the  8U[)retne  si)irit,  the  I,or<l  NarHyana, 
Hari,  living  in  the  cave  of  heart,  VAsialeva,  the  Itird 
of  the  eelestials,  without  b(!ginning  and  «-nd,  BrahmA, 
or  the  holy  deity  clad  in  yellow  raiment  (Krishna)  (228 — 229). 
While  he  was  thus  thinking,  all  the  deities  with  Vtsava,  taking 
Dharma  before  them,  came  there  speedily  (230).  They,  all 
coming  there,  said  i — “ Hear,  hear,  (>  king,  (>  lord,  here  is 
the  grand-father  (Brahmi),  here  is  tho  reverend  Dh.'irum  and 
these  are  the  Sidhyas,  the  Viskwas,  the  Maruts,  and  tho 
Lokapaias  with  their  respective  conveyances,  Nig&»,  StMkgs, 
with  the  GandAarvas,  Rudras,  as  well  m Amim's  i those 
and  others  as  well  as  Vi9wimilra,  of  whom  the  three  worlds 
could  not  make  a friend,  are  anxious,  for  their  behoof,  to 
have  you  as  their  friend.”  Then  Sakra,  DImrma  and  <i.»dfu“9 
son  came  before  him  (231—234).  Dharma  said  Be  not 
rash,  O king;  I am  Dharma  who  have  come  to  you  having  been 
pleased  with  your  qualitie.s  of  forgiveness,  self-control,  truthful, 
ness  and  others”  (235).  Indra  s.aid ”0  great  l!artsh» 
Chandra,  I am  Sakra  and  have  come  to  you.  You  have  along 
with  your  wife  and  son  gained  the  eternal  region  (236).  tio 


■=:k 


If' 

i 'i; 


is 


lir  i| 


48  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

to  the  celestial  region,  0 king,  accompanied  by  your  wife  and 
son  which  is  hard  to  be  got  at  by  other  people  but  you  have 
acquired  it  by  your  acts  ” (337). 

The  Biros  said  :-*-The  Lord  Indra,  who  had  come  there, 
at  the  funeral  phyre,  created  a nectarine  shower  from  the  sky 
capable  of  destroying  violent  deaths  (238).  He  caused  a 
great  shower  of  blossoms  and  huge  celestial  drums  to  be 
sounded.  Then  in  that  assembly  of  celestials,  assembled  In 
parties,  the  son  of  the  bigh*souled  king  rose  up,  with  a 
tender  body,  healthy  and  with  sprightly  senses  and  mkn 
(239 — 240).  Then  immediately  embracing  his  son,  the  king 
Harishchandra,  along  with  his  wife,  was  covered  with  grace 
and  adorned  with  celestial  garlands  and  raiments  (*41).  He 
then  became  comforted  with  his  mind  entirely  filled  with 
great  felicity.  Immediately  Indra  again  said  (243) ; ‘'Yott 
shall  with  your  wife  and  son  attain  to  great  bliss.  O great 
one,  rise  up  in  consequence  of  your  own  acts”  (343).  Htrish- 
ehandra  said: — “0  king  of  the  celestials,  without  being 
permitted  by  my  master  Swj^aka  and  obtaining  a release 
from  him  I cannot  go  to  the  region  of  the  celesliab”  (244). 
Dharma  said Coming  to  know  of  your  futii  re  sufferings  by 
my  own  power  I had  brought  myself  to  the  state  of  a Stmfiaka 
aM  displayed  that  fickleness  (24^.  Indra  said  "Harish- 
Chandra,  ascend  the  region  of  the  pious  men,  the  most 
exalted  station,  which  all  men  on  earth  seek  (246).  Harish- 
chandra said  Salutation  unto  you,  O lord  of  the  celestials, 
hear  these  my  words,  which  favoured  by  you,  I shall  apeak 
^ you  with  ■ a delighted  countenancef,  on  «coifi?t  of  your 
taving  been  pleased  (247).  People  are  living  in  the  city  el 
thmr  minds  sunk  in  mygprief.  Leaving  them 
^md)  now  can  1 go  to  the  celestial  region  ? (24^).  Thw 

sinTtfrrl  » follower  is  eqpitify  as  mighty  a 

and  ^ ° ® aB'^man«,8preceptor,acow’ 

‘ hereaLrr^1.-^^'''^^'t„  Tkere  fe  noJmppioess,  either  here  or 

for  hioi  rto  ud  i,TOO»l 


r 


MAbkANDEvA  PURANA&f. 


i§ 

follower.  Therefore,  0 Sakra,  go  you  to  heaven  (250).  If, 
O lord  of  the  celestials,  they  go  to  heaven  with  me,  I ihall 
go  there  or  I shall  go  to  hell  alohg  with  them  (251).  Indra 
said Various  and  divetsified  are  their  virtues  and 
iniquities.  How  can  you  go  to  heaven  along  with  so  many  V, 
(252).  Harishchandra  said: — 0 Sakra*  it  is  through  the 
energy  of  his  dependents  that  a king  enjoys  his  kingdom 
and  celebrates  great  sacrifices  and  Purtta  acts  * (253),  1 shall 
never  forsake  them  through  the  desire  of  getting  heaven, 
them,  niy  benefactor’s,  by  whose  help  I have  performed  every- 
thing (254).  O lord  of  the  celestials,  let  whatever  small 
merit,  therefore,  I may  have  acquired  by  gifts,  performance 
of  sacrifices  and  recitation  of  religious  formula,  bej  in 
common  with  them  (255).  And  through  your  favour  let  me, 
with  them,  in  one  day,  enjoy  the  fruit  of  my  acts  which  is  to 
last  for  a long  time  (256). 

I'liE  Birds  said:— 'riicn  saying  '•  so  it  shall  l>e  " S.ikra, 
the  king  of  the  three  worlds,  with  a delighted  heart,  iJiharma, 
and  Gadhi’s  son,  Vi^wlniitra  came  down  from  heaven  to  earth 
abounding  in  million  of  cars  and  said  to  the  people  of 
AyodhyH,  “ Do  you  come  up  to  heaven  " (257—258). 
Hearing  Indra’s  words  and  [deased  with  the  king,  VicnvSmilra, 
of  hard  austerities,  brought  Rohilftshwa  and  sprinkiccl  tl,,* 
prince  in  the  charming  city  of  Ayodhyl.  And  the  celeitials, 
with  the  ascetics  and  Siddha.s  sprinkled  that  lord  of  men 
(259—260).  Then  in  the  company  of  the  king,  all  those  fat 
and  contented  people,  together  withitheir  wives  and  sons, 
went  to  the  Celestial  region  (261).  And  men  began  to  m»»VR 
from  one  Car  to  another  with  an  accession  of  delight.  The 
king  Harishchandra,  the  lord  of  men,  (going  to  heaven)  in 
a car,  obtained  immense  wealth  and  lived  in  n city  fortified 
by  walls  and  battlements  (262—263).  Seeing  his  prosperity, 
the  great  preceptor  UshanS,  ver.scd  in  all  branches  of  learning, 
hymned  the  following  verses  (264), 

* Acts  of  pious  liborality  such  tJit’uing  a wcU  or  tank. 

7 


uAmknmvA  nmhnAhi 


MARKANDEYA  PIJKAPAM. 

SUKRA  said: — There  has  nwshtmi^  nor  mill  |ii%  a kiffg 

like  Harishchandra.  Whoever,  assailed  hy  griefs  Iklem 
to  it,  shall  attain  to  great  felicity  (ahs).  One,  asfiifing  afttr 
heaven,  obtains  heaven  ; one,  clcsirciws  cif  cliildmi,  otilatni 
children  ; one,  desirous  of  a wife,  gets  wife  ; anci  one, 
for  kingdom,  gets  kingdom  (266).  t)h  the  force  of  jKilieiief^ 
Oh  the  mighty  result  of  charity,  for  Harti^fichatidra  lias  attain* 
ed  heaven  and  the  dignity  of  Indra  (J6;}. 

The  Birds  said; — We  have  Ihtm  drscribecl  to  yoii  i| 
detail  all  the  actions  of  Harishchandra  ; fiear  llie 
..0  leading  ascetics  (268);  the  disinrhaiice  of  lire  Rajahkiyi 
sacrifice,  which  led  to  the  destrueikm  of  the  earth  as  w'dl  ai 
the  great  battle  between  Ari  and  (|lie  heren;^  that  uriidnated 
from  that  disturbance  (269). 


CH/IPTER  IX. 


■■  ' AHE  Birds  said: — On  Ifarishclumdri  having  f>eei 

deprived  of  his  kingdom  and  gone  to  the  region  of  the  celes- 
tials, his  highly  effulgent  priest  come  out  of  his  watery  habita- 
tion, on  the  expiration  of  the  twelve  years  whkli  he  spent  on 
the  Ganges.  The  ascetic  Vashisllu  learnt  everything 
about  the  work  of  VifwSmitra,  the  misfortune  of  the  liberal 
king  Harisbehandra,  his  being  reduced  to  the  condition  of  a 
Chandaia  and  the  sale  of  his  wife  and  son  (r—j).  Hearing 
' ^his,  that  energetic  and  great  one,  who  was  delightctl  with 
'^s&  king,  became  offended  with  the  ascetic  V^iwSmitra  (4). 
Vi^istha  said : — My  hundred  sons  were  destroyed  by  Vi^wl- 
mitra ; even  in  that  I was  not  offended  so  much  as  I have 
been  to-day,  hearing  that  this  high-souled  and  greatly  mcri- 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


torious  king,  given  to  the  adoration  of  ike  doilies  and  liie 
Brikmanas,  has  been  deprived  of  his  kitigdom  (5--4I* 
As  the  truthful  and  the  self-controlled  king,  having  no  ill 
will  even  towards  his  enemies,  meaning  no  harm,  virtnoiis* 
souled,  careful,  and  our  support,  has  been  reduced  to  tliis  stale 
along  with  his  wife,  servants  and  son,  and  has  been  deprivcil 
of  his  kingdom  and  subjected  to  various  miseries,  that  viebiii- 
souled  hater  of  a BrUhmana,  that  one,  foolish  and  shorn  of 
wisdom,  imprecated  by  me,  shall  became  a heron 
The  birds  said  Hearing  of  the  imprecation,  the  highly 
energetic  Vifwfimitra,  the  son  of  Ku<,dka,  cursed  him  in  retiirit 
saying  you  an  ArV^  (i0.)»  And  in  accordance  with  eiicli 
other^s  curse,  both  Vashistha  and  the  highly  energetic 
mitra,  the  son  of  Ku<,'ika,  although  endowtul  with  great  cffiit* 
gence,  came  by  inferior  births  (li).  Although  horn  in  olher 
species  they  both  of  incompara!>ie  ent^rgy  and  «mducd  with 
mighty  strength  and  prowess,  Indfig  greatly  muageth  hnighi 
with  each  other  (12).  0 llrAhmana.  the  Art  was  two  thou* 

sand  Yojanas  higli  and  ilw  heron  was  three  thousand  nnd 
ninety-six  Yojanas  high  (13).  Endued  with  great  strength, 
they,  srtiking  each  othtr  with  their  wings,  created  exceediiig 
fear  of  creatures  (14).  Shaking  Ins  wings,  the  licrfin, 
with  reddened  eyes,  struck /fri  and  the  latter  loo,  ii|»lifiing  its 
neck,  attacked  the  heron  with  its  legs  (15)*  Dashed  with  llie 
wind  of  their  wings,  the  mountain  dropped  down  mt  earth, 
and  assailed  by  the  downfall  of  tlic  mountain  the  earth  shook 
(i6)-  The  earth  shaking,  the  ocean,  overleaping  iti  hounds* 
flooded  the  earth  ; and  sinking  on  one  side  the  earili  %v;in 
going  to  seek  the  nether  region  (17)*  Some  by  the  fall  ni  the 
mountain,  some  with  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  ami  some  willi 
the  shaking  of  the  earth,  all  creatures  met  with  deilmction 
(iS).  All  greatly  agitated  and  depriviMl  <4  their  conscioustirH^ 
began  to  exclaim  Oh  ami  A/as.  fl'Iu:  universe  was  gi catty 
agitated  and  the  terrestrial  round  was  all  coidusmi  ''  l„)|i 
child f 0 husband;  0 inlaiu  ! Fly.  I am  in  this  plights  mf 


52  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

dear,  0 my  husband,  the  mountain  falls  down.  Do  ye  fly 
at  once.”  Thus  did  the  creatures,  overwhelmed  with  fear, 
cry  at  that  time.  Then  came  the  Grandfather  (BralunS) 
encircled  by  all  the  celestials  (20—21).  The  I,onl  of  the 
Universe  addressed  them  both  who  were  greatly  worked  up 
with  anger ; — “ Do  you  both  desist  from  fight  and  let  the 
creatures  get  respite”  (22).  Although  hearing  the  words  of 
self-sprung  BrahmA,  they,  possessed  by  anger  and  spite,  fought 
on  and  did  not  desist  (23).  Thereat  beholding  the  destruction 
of  creatures  the  Deity,  the  Grandfather,  wishing  the  well* 
being  of  them  both,  removed  their  beast-hood  (aj). 
Those  two  best  of  ascetics,  Kau^ika  and  Vashistha,  regaining 
their  former  forms  on  the  destruction  of  the  condition  per- 
vaded by  Ignorance,  the  Deity  BrahmE  said (25).  "My  child 
Vashistha,  0 you  foremost  of  the  Koupikas,  desist  trom  this 
conflict  having  its  origin  from  the  quality  of  ignorance  (26). 
This  conflict  of  yours  obstructs  the  Rijashuya  of  king 
Harishchandra  and  brings  destruction  of  earth  (27).  Nor 
has  this  foremost  of  Koufikas  committed  any  wrong  to  the 
king;  but  (on  the  other  hand)  being  instrumental  to  his 
Attainment  of  heaven  proved  a benefactor  to  him  (28). 
Having  come  under  the  control  of  anger  you  have  been  the 
agents  in  obstructing  asceticism.  May  good  betide  you,  cast 
it  off.  Brahman  is  highly  powerful”  (29).  Being  thus 
addressed  by  him  both  of  them  were  ashamed ; embracing  each 
other  affectionately  they  forgave  each  oilier  (30).  Thereupon 
worshipped  by  the  celestials  Brahm§  repaired  to  hb  own 
region.  Vashistha  wended  his  way  to  his  own  habitation  and 
Kou^ka  to  hb  own  hermitage  (31).  This  conflict  between 
Ari  and  heron  and  the  story  of  Harbhchandra,  as  soon  as 
heard,  become  free  from  sin  those  mortals  who  hear  m well  as 
iiose  who  narrate ; nor  any  impediments  fall  in  the  way  of 
thtlr  action. 


’ s ""s'-  - 


■00- 


U AiMiNi  said  : — O eminent  twice-born  ones,  do  you  re- 
move my  doubt,  who  ask  you  regarding  the  birth  and  death 
o£  creatures  obtaining  (in  this  world)  (i)  Why  is  a crrahiie 
born,  why  does  it  grow  up,  why  with  its  bo<ly  assaihul  by 
sufferings  does  it  live  in  the  womb?  (2)  Why  coming 
out  of  the  womb  does  it  attain  growth  ? And  why  at  the 
time  of  death  is  it  deprived  of  'consciousness  ? (3)  Verily 
does  a man  while  dying  reap  the  fruit  of  both  his  good  and 
bad  actions  ? How  dobs  an  act  products  its  fruit  ? {4)  Why 
in  the  womb  of  a female,  where  is  digested  the  food  which  i* 
hard  of  digestion,  is  not  a small  lump  of  flesh  digested  ? (5) 
Do  you  explain  to  me  all  this  so  that  all  rny  doubts  may  Im 
removed.  This  is  a great  mystery  wherein  all  creatures  aro 
Btupified  (6), 

The  birds  said Tho  question,  that  you  have  put  to  u%  iit 
a difficult  one,  though  of  very  great  interest ; refendog  to  the 
existence  or  otherwise  of  all  creatures  it  is  not  within  the 
range  of  easy  comprehension  (y).  O great  one,  hear,  whal 
formerly  a highly  virtuous  son,  Uy  name  Sumati  said  to  hk 
father  (8)  A certain  high-minded  Urihmana,  bora  in  the 
ra<x  of  Bhrigu,  said  to  his  gentle  son  Sumati,  resembling  ono 
void  of  sense  at  the  time  of  his  investituMi  with  sacred  thread 

(9) .  “Study  the  Vedas,  0 Sumati,  in  doe  order  being 
intent  upon  serving  your  preceptor  and  depending  Hjmn  alms 

(10) .  Then  entering  the  life  of  a house-holder  do  you  c®le* 
bratc  excellent  sacrifices  and  beget  desirable  offspring  and 
then  enter  into  woods  (n).  When  you  shall  live  in  the  forest, 
O child,  and  leaving  the  company  of  your  wife, lead  the  life  oia 
mendicant, you  will  attain  to  that  Mra/man,  approaching  whom 
no  one  grieves  (12)/’  The  birds  said  ;-Alihot,gh  accoslcd  tliua 


L 


54 


MARKANUEYA  PURANAM. 


in  many  ways  (the  son)  could  not  say  anything  on  ;ict:niint  ot 
his  decrepitude  ; but  the  father,  out  of  affection  addressi  d him 
again  and  again  on  many  topics  (13).  Being  thus  urgeti  on  by 
his  father  out  of  parental  affection  with  nectarine  words,  he, 
smiling,  said; — (14)  "0  father,  all  that  you  advise  me  to  study 
has  been  exhaustively  read  by  me  together  with  various  other 
branches  of  learning  and  diverse  mechanical  arts  {15),  Ten 
thousand  births  more  come  to  my  recollection.  I w.ts  conver- 
sant with  happiness  and  misery  and  was  engaged  in  cles- 
tructidn,  progress  and  prosperity  (t6).  I had  union  with 
enemies,  friends,  and  wives,  as  well  as  separation  from  them. 
I saw  many  a mother  as  well  as  many  a father  (17).  f 
experienced  thousands  of  miseries  and  happiness.  I had  a 
great  many  friends  and  different  kinds  of  father  (18).  ! lived 

in  a female  womb  sullied  by  urine  and  excreta  and  I suffered 
from  severe  diseases  and  ailments  in  thousands  (19).  I 
suffered  numberless  mberies  in  the  womb  in  infancy  and 
youth  and  in  old  age  ; all  these  I now  recollect  (20).  I was 
horn  as  a Brahmana,  a Kshatriya,  a Vaisya  and  a Sudra  and 
again  asabeast,  a worm,  adeerand  abird  (21).  I was  born  in 
the  houses  of  the  royal  retainers  and  war-like  kings,  as  I havi; 
been  born  in  your  house  (22).  I became  servants  and  slaves 
of  many  men  and  I came  by  mastery,  lordship,  and  poverty 
(23).  I slew  many  and  in  turn  was  slain  and  struck  down  by 
them.  My  wealth  was  given  away  by  many  to  others  and 
I also  gave  away  much  (24).  I was  always  pleased  by 
fathers,  mothers,  friends,  brothers  and  wives ; and  when  t 
^came  poor  I bathed  my  countenance  with  tears  (25), 
Thas  revolving  on  the  perilous  wheel  of  the  world,  1 have 
attained  to  this  knowledge,  0 father,  which  is  instrumental 
to  the  attainment  of  liberation  (26).  Acquiring  this  know- 
le%  all  the  actloni  sanctioned  by  Rik,  Yafus  niid  Sdma 
a#ftshr:to  me  as  shorn  of  any  virtue  and  inadequate  (37) 
Theiefore  of  what  use  are  the  Fedas  to  me  who  have  aerjuired 
understanding,  have  been  satiated  with  the  wisdom  of  the 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


preceptor,  am  devoid  or  exertion  and  am  fond  of  the 
sou!  ? (28).  I shall  attain  that  most  excellent  Brahma  state 
which  is  shorn  of  the  six  kinds  of  action,  jfiisery,  happiness, 
delight,  sentiment,  and  attributes  (29).  Therefore  I shall 
go,  0 father,  renouncing  the  collection  of  evils,  as  is  well- 
known,  originating  from  sentiment,  joy,  fear,  anxiety,  anger, 
spite,  decrepitude,  and  casting  off  the  three  Vedas  which 
are  like  the  KimpSka  fruit  and  lead  to  demerit  (30 — 31)/' 

The  Birds  said: — Hearing  his  words,  the  great  father 
with  delighted  heart  said  to  his  own  son,  being  filled  with 
joy  and  wonder  (32) : — What  is  it  that  you  say,  O my  son  ? 
Whence  has  this  your  knowledge  come  ? By  what  your  pre- 
vious dullness  been  changed  into  wisdom  ? (33).  Is  it  that 
on  the  wane  of  the  curse  of  an  ascetic  or  a deity,  your 
knowledge  that  was  once  lost  to  you  has  come  back?  (34). 
I wish  to  hear  all  this;  great  is  my  curiosity.  Tell  me  O 
my  child,  all  that  you  did  formerly^^  (35).  The  son  re- 
plied:— '^  Hear,  0 father,  my  history,  the  origin  of  happi- 
ness and  misery  as  to  what  I was  in  another  birth  and  whafe 
took  place  thereafter  (36).  I was  formerly  a Brahmana 
having  my  soul  consigned  to  the  Supreme  Spirit  ; I acquired 
eminence  in  discussion  relating  to  self-knowledge  (37). 
Being  always  engaged  in  Yoga  in  that  birth,  I,  from  practi- 
sing integrity  of  conduct,  companionship  of  tlie  pious,  from 
passing  a righteous  course,  from  reforming  the  ordinances,^ 
attained  great  delight  and  acquired  the  position  of  a pre- 
ceptor being  eminently  fitted  to  remove  the  doubts  of  the 
disciples  (38 — 39).  Thereupon  after  a long  time  I attained 
highest  concentration.  But  the  tranquility  of  mind  being 
disturbed  through  ignorance,  I,  by  my  carelessness,  fell  into 
peril  (40).  But  till  the  time  of  my  death  my  memory  did 
not  fail  me;  and  I remember  all  the  days  of  my  life  which 
I have  told  (41).  By  virtue  of  my  previous  practice,  O father 
1 shall,  controlling  my  senses,  so  endeavour  to  work  that  the 
same  thing  might  not  befall  me  again  (42).  This  my  recoW 

I ■ » 

/ . . 


56  markandeya  euranam. 

lection  of  the  previous  births  which  is  the  fruit  of  know* 
ledge  and  gift,  is  not  acquired  by  men  engaged  in  duties 
laid  down  by  the  three  Vedas  (43).  Resorting  to  the  virtue 
of  intense,  whole-mirtded  concentration,  acquired  in  previous 
birth  I shall  exert  myself  for  acquiring  emancipation  (44), 
Tell  me  therefore,  O great  one,  the  doilbts  which  exist  in 
your  mind.  Encompassing  your  pleasure  on  this  head  I shall 
be  freed  from  the  debts  that  I owe  you”  (45).  The  birds 
said  s—Reverenclng  bis  words,  the  father  asked  the  son  of 
the  same  thing  that  you  have  enquired  of  me—thc  birth  and 
death  of  creatures  (46).  The  son  said Hear,  O father,  a 
true  account  of  what  I have  experienced  again  and  again. 
This  wheel  of  an  worid  Is  undecaying,  still  it  has  no  existence 
(47).  Commanded  by  you,  O father,  I shall  communicate  to 
you  all  from  the  time  coming  out,  which  no  one  else  can 
speak  (48).  In  this  body,  the  bile,*  growing  angry,  being 
fanned  by  a strong  wind  and  flaming,  although  nearly  no  fuel, 
pierces  the  (very)  vrtals  (49).  Then  the  wind  named  Ud&nei\ 
moves  over  it  and  obstructs  the  passage  of  the  meat  and 
drink  taken  (50)-  Only  those  persons,  that  have  given  away 
food  and  drink  to  others,  enjoy  comfort  at  that  precious 
moi^t  (51).  He,  who  has  given  away  food  with  a meal 
purified  by  reverence,  obtains  satisfaction  even  without  food 
(52).  He  who  has  never  uttered  a falsehootl,  he  who  has 
not  made  a distinction  of  love,  he  who  believes  in  God  and 
who  is  reverential,  meets  with  happy  death  (Ja).  Those  who 
are  intent  upon  adoring  the  deities  and  BrShmanas,  who 
«»  free  from  spite,  who  are  pure  In  spirit,  are  liberal  and 
bashful,  meet  with  easy  death  (54).  He  who  does  not  for- 
sake virtue  through  lust,  anger  or  spite,  he  who  keeps  his 
promise  and  is  gentle,  meets  with  easy  death  (55).  Bathe  who 


MARKANDEYA  RURANAM.  S7 

does  not  give  water  to  one  who  is  thirsty,  food  to  one  who 
is  hungry,  are  assailed  by  them  when  death  presents  ttseff 
(56).  Those  who  give  fuel  conquer  cold,  those  who  give 
sandal  conquer  heat ; but  those,  who  afflict  people,  come  by 
a dreaful  pain  destroying  (the  very)  life  (37).  those  worst 
of  men,  who  cause  ignorance  and  stupefaction,  attain  great 
fear  and  are  crushed  by  fierce  pangs  (58).  Those,  that  give 
false  evidence,  ot  speak  false,  or  satisfy  the  orders  of  a 
Wicked  man,  or  disregatd  the  Vedas,  die  in  ignorance  (59). 
The  dreadful  artd  vicious-souled  followers  of  Yama,  breathing 
hellish  smell  around,  with  nooses  and  rtlaccs  in  hands ; 
approach  them . (60).  And  when  they  cotne  within  the  range 
of  their  vision  they  all  tremble  and  continually  bewail 
for  their  brothers,  mothers  and  sons"  (61).  Then  their 
speech  becomes  indistinct,  0 father,  and  is  compos*!*!  of 
one  letter ; theii*  eyes  roll  and  their  faces  ah:  dried  up  with 
fear  and  sighs  (62).  Then  with  breath  running  high,  sight 
dimmed  and  assailed  by  pain  he  tonouiiccs  his  body  (<5j). 
Then  going  before  the  body,  for  undergoing  afiltclion  conic- 
quent  upon  his  acts  he  assumes  another  body  not  sprung 
from  a father  ot  a mother  but  wtiich  has  the  same  ag«, 
condition  and  habitation  as  assigned  to  the  other  body 
(64).  Then  the  emissaries  of  Varna  quikly  bind  him  with 
dreadful  nooses  and  drag  him  to  the  south,  trembling  with 
the  stroke  of  the  rod  (63).  Then  he  is  dragged  by  the 
emissaries  of  Yama  sending  out  dreadful,  inauspiciouf 
yells  through  grounds  rough  with  Kusa,  thorns,  ant-hills, 
pins  and  stones,  glowing  with  flames  at  places,  covered  with 
pits,  blazing  with  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  burning  with  Its 
rays— (66— 67).  Dragged  by  the  dreadful  (ennssaries)  and 
eaten  by  hundreds  of  jackals,  the  sinful  person  goes  to  Yama's 
house  through  a fearful  passage  (68).  But  those,  who  h.'ive 
distributed  umbrellas  and  shoes,  those  who  have  given  away 
cloth,  and  as  well  as  those  who  h.ave  given  away  food,  go 

easily  by  that  way  (69).  Going  through  such  suffcringSi 

8 


58 


Markandeya  puranam. 


losing  all  control  over  self  and  assailed  by  sin  a man  is  takertj 
on  the  twelfth  day,  to  the  city  of  Dharma  (70).  When  his  bwly 
is  burnt  he  experiences  a great  burning  sensation  ; and  whea 
his  body  is  beaten  or  cut  he  feels  a great  pain  {71).  His 
body  being  thus  destroyed,  a creature,  although  walking  into 
another  body,  suffers  eternal  misery  on  account  of  his  owtt 
adverse  actions  (72).  Going  there  he  feeds  on  the  sesame 
and  water  or  the  ball  of  boiled  riee  offered  by  his  descen. 
dants  (73).  A person  receives  comforts  from  his  relatiom 
rubbing  their  bodies  with  oil,  from  their  kneading  tlieir  limb# 
and  from  their  taking  their  food  (74V  He  enjoys  rest  by, 
his  relations  lying  down  on  the  ground.  A dead  manl$ 
pleased  with  his  relations  by  his  performance  of  ch.tritaWi 
Works  (75).  Taken  to  his  own  home  on  the  twelfth  day  he 
sees  it  and  feeds  on  the  Pinda  and  Water  that  .are  oilered  oa 
the  earth  (76).  After  the  twelfth  day,  being  drawn,  a matt 
beholds  the  dreadful  and  terrible-looking  iron  city  of  Yama 
(77)-  As  soon  as  he  enters  there  he  beholds  Yuma  in  the 
midst  of  the  Destroyer,  Death  and  others  having  blood-red 
eyes,  and  resembling  a mass  of  crushed  collyrium,  with 
face  with  dreadful  teeth,  and  a dreadful  frowning  count- 
enance; the  lord,  encircled  by  hundreds  of  distempeitt 
having  disfigured  and  dreadful  visages,  carrying  his  ro4 
mighty-armed,  with  the  noose  in  hia  hand  and  htgh^ 
fearful  to  look  at.  A creature  attains  to  *a  state,  good: 
or  bad,  assigned  by  him  (78—80).  One  giving  false  evi- 
dence or  uttering  falsehood  goes  to  Raurava.  Hear  noW, 
Twill  give  what  is  the  true  description  of  Raurava  {81}. 
It  measares  two  thousand  iFojvawaj.  There  is  a pi 
which  IS  knee-deep  and  difficult  of  being  crossed  (82). 
*.  levelled  with  heaps  of  flaming  charcoal  it  is  heated  by  a 
H^e  of  land  burning  dreadfully  with  coal  (83).  Into  it 
the  followers  of  Yama  throw  the  perpetrator  of  improa# 
deeds.  And  burnt  by  the  dreadful  fire  he  runs  about  (84). 

IS  feet  get  torn  and  injured  at  every  step  and  within  a day 


MARKANDEYA  I'l’RANAM. 


•Vi 

and  niglit  he  can  but  once  take  away  his  feet  (85).  When 
(■  he  thus  goes  over  a thousand  Yoyanas  he  is  let  alone,  then 

■ to  have  his  sins  washed  off  he  is  taken  to  anotlier  such  hell 

(86).  After  having  gone  through  all  the  hell.s  the  sinner 
takes  upon  a beastly  life.  Then  going  through  the  live* 
of  worms,  insects,  and  flies,  beasts  of  prey,  knats,  elephants, 
trees,  horses,  cows,  and  through  diverse  other  sinful  and 
miserable  lives,  he,  coming  to  the  race  of  men,  is  horn 
as  a hunch-back,  or  an  ugly  person  or  a dwatf  or  a 
! Chandala  Pukkasa  (87 — 89).  Then  carrying  the  rcinnaiit 
I of  his  virtue  and  vice  he  goes  up  gradually  to  the  higher 
caste,  Sudras,  Vaishyas,  Kshatriyas,  Bt&hmanas,  iuul  the  sale 
of  the  king  of  gods ; .sometimes  perpetrating  inirpjiles 

he  falls  into  the  hell  beneath  (90 — 91).  Hear,  I shall  now 

describe,  how  virtuous  people  proct:ed.  The.se  iietsons  fol- 
low the  pious  course  laid  down  by  Yarna  (9.*).  With  tiaii- 
dharvas  singing,  Ap.sara.s  tlancing,  vvcaiing  many  a hf.uiitiul 
and  shining  garlands  they  proceed  in  cxi  ellent  cais  nuht-i 
lished  with  chains,  bangles  and  other  beaulilul  urnanKitts 
(93).  Coming  down  therefore  they  are  born  in  the  fanaUcs  of 
other  high-souled  kings  and  protect  people  eiigagcdi  in  itoble 
works  (94).  After  having  enjoyed  all  the  best  things  of  life 
they  go  upward  j but  if  they  go  down  they  fare  as  before  (ys), 
I have  thus  described  to  you  all  about  the  sufferings  iff 
creatures.  Hear  now,  O Braiiinana  saint,  liow  embryos  are 
created  (96), 

CHAPTER  XI. 


T HE  Son  said  As  soon  as  the  male  seed  is  mixed  wStli 
female  blood  on'*,  released  from  heaven  or  hell,  enters  ioto 


- ' maricahde^a 

U (i).  Omer,  the  l„.  Mnd.  ot  seed  l„-m„  

im  e attains  stability.  He  then  grows  into  nrotinl  ^ 

gem  that  grows  tip  in  the  lumps  of  flesh  is  riJh.  f i , 

aad  then  are  gradeally  pr„d„ce,l  the  n,ri  , ! t"" 

the  minor  limbs,  finger,,  eyes,  nose,  race,  „„d  e-.„  " 

pen  prs  grow  on  the  skin  anti  then  thosi. ««  »i  . 

Asacocoanut  fruit  grows  along  with  Its  Lo 
increase  along  with  its  case,  with  is  face  tJ  h ? ^ ‘ 

n ^w,  beeping  its  hania  wL'T’tot.T-T'''’- 
pesj  the  thumbs  are  placed  on  the  thiirhs  i,«  f hlf^* 

ind  the  nose  is  within  the  thighs.  The  hips  11%  f ® 
wb  heels;  the  arms  and  legs  remain 
jetiture,  lying  i„  the  womb  of  a feZ  ! i!  **  " 

^rtibroys  of  other  creatuts  “P 

» 6).  ..  getsrrS^t^fitte^  ’r"”*  "■ 

^aten  and  drunk : the  embryo  erists  in  T.  f '"'’*** 

'flbh  virtue  and  vice  (lo).  The  « n * **,  ^^ependinj; 
a IWtiavelis  attached  to  the  entr^"l  of  tl  "1  fiiwi 

(tr),  Having  its  Tdv  * 1 ^ows 

y foed  and  drinkaerLurmI  f""  the  womb, 
gets  the  recolle.-tion  of  Its^  r* 

^shed  hither  and  thither  it  comes  t?  and  then 

p a state)  (13).  Having  beTrl^  ' f f *"  “ ^**‘*t**® 

f shall  never  do  it  again-I  shall  Wmb-- 

tve  to  enter  ini^m  *1.^  1 shall  so  strive  that  I shall  «,.( 

™e«bori,T.  bund  ‘ U.  “ S 

^oy  which  he  had  expwl^'need  be('*”*'r  I'* 

= “««  of  time,  the  Te^  !i Then  in 

itaelf  and  tbrn  hlr’in”'  ‘T 

^ Wini-^""  “ *'  “ »«A'd  b'lh'”,*'™"' 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


fn 

it  bewails  (17).  Coming  out  of  the  womb  it  falls  ihto  an 
unbearable  trance  ; it  regains  its  consciousness  when  it  feels 
the  (surrounding)  air  (18).  Then  the  enchanting  illusion  of 
Vishnu  takes  possession  of  it ; having  Its  soul  possessed  by 
it,  it  sustains  a bewilderment  of  sense  (19).  With  the  loss 
of  sense  the  creature  comes  of  infancy,  boyhood,  youth  and 
old  age  (20).  A man  repeatedly  goes  through  a cycle  of  births 
and  deaths.  In  this  way,  'he  rolls  like  a clock  on  the  wheel 
of  the  world  (2 1).  Sometimes  a man  attains  heaven,  some- 
times he  goes  to  hell  and  sometimes  a dead  man  reaps  both 
heaven  and  hell  (22).  And  sometimes  born  again  in  llii* 
earth  he  reaps  the  fruits  of  his  own  acts.  And  sometimes 
enjoying  the  fruits  of  his  own  acts  within  a short  time  ho 
breathes  his  last  (23).  Sometimes,  O best  of  Drihmanas, 
living  in  heaven  or  hell  for  a short  time  on  account  of  hi* 
limited  merit  or  demerit  he  is  born  in  this  earth  (2.}).  O 
father,  the  dwellers  of  heaven  are  seen  by  them  to  <‘njny 
happiness — and  then  those,  brought  down  to  perdition,  think 
that  there  is  a great  misery  in  hell  (35).  Even  in  heaven  thcr© 
is  incomparable  misery  for  from  the  time  of  ascension  every 
one  conceives  in  his  mind.  " I shall  fall"  (36).  Beholding 
the  people  of  hell,  they  attain  to  mighty  misery  thinking  day 
and  night  "I  shall  be  brought  to  this  condition"  (37).  Mighty 
is  the  pain  of  living  in  the  womb,  of  being  born  from  a fematei 
of  the  infancy  of  one  when  born,  and  that  of  decrepitiido 
as  well  (28).  There  is  also  great  misery  in  youth  Influenced 
by  lust,  malice  and  anger ; old  age  Is  also  full  of  mtseriee  and 
the  culmination  of  this  is  death  (29).  Mighty  is  the  pain  of 
those  who  are  carried  away  by  force  by  the  emissaries  of  Yamii 
and  thrown  into  hell ; then  again  is  birth  in  the  womb  and  death 
and  hell  (30).  In  this  wise  bound  by  the  fetlera  of  nature  tho 
creatures  revolve  on  the  wheel  of  the  world  like  a clock  and 
suffer  miseries  (31)  0 father,  there  is  not  the  least  ha()pinet* 
in  this  world  abonding  in  a hundred  miseries.  Why  then  sfuilt 
j,  exerting  for  emancipation,  follow  the  three  Vedas  ? (|3). 


a 


The  father  said : — Glory  be  to  you,  O my  child  j in  the 
shape  of  imparting  instructions,  you  have  given  a higidy  useful 
discourse  on  the  wilderness  of  the  world  (i).  In  this  you 
have  described  Raurava  and  all  the  other  hells.  Do  you  des- 
cribe them  now  at  length,  0 you  of  great  intelligence  (3). 
The  son  said I have  first  described  to  you  the  hell  called 
Raurava ; then  hear  of  the  hell,  0 father,  known  as  Mabarau- 
rava  (3).  It  extends,  on  all  sides,  over  twelve  tlionsand 
Yoyanas,  There  the  ground  is  coppery  and  underneath  i* 
the  flaming  fire  (4).  Heated  by  that  fire,  all  the  grounrl,  hav- 
ing the  resplendance  of  the  rising  moon,  appears  dreadful 
look  at  or  feel  (5).  There  the  sinner,  bound  hand  and 
foot,  IS  left  by  the  envoy  of  Yaraa  and  he  rolls  in  it  (6),  Be- 
ing eaten  by  crows,  herons,  owls,  scorpions,  knats  and  vulturea 
he  IS  pulled  by  them  on  the  way  {7)  Being  bewildered  and 
greatly  agitated  he  continually  cries  out,  "0  father,  O 
mother,^  0 brother,  O child" and  does  not  obtain  any  respite 
( ).  It  is  after  Ayuta  and  Ayuta  of  years  that  the  wicked 
sinners  find  release  from  those  (sufferings)  (9).  There  is 
another  hell  called  Tama,  bitterly  cold  by  nature  j it  k as 
spacious  BS  Makaraurava  and  enshrouded  by  darkness  (10). 

c en  with  cold  people  run  about  in  that  dreadful  drakness 
^remain  clasping  each  other  (1 1),  Stricken  with  cold  and 
^blmg  ttar  teeth  break  up  and  they  suffer  from  hunger, 

overtht"  ^ A dreadful  wind,  blowing 

froS^Aur’iK  ^ and  blood  coming  out  there- 

tht  ■ ^“1  ° Brihmanas,  do 

the  peopK  |u%r  greatly  so  long  their  das  are  not  washed 


MARKANDEYA  puranam. 


^*3 

away  (14).  There  is  another  principal  hell  called  Ntirmiamt ; 
in  it,  O father,  potters’  wheels  are  continually  rolling  (15). 
Getting  upon  them  people  are  cut  off  from  the  soles  of  their 
feet  to  their  heads  by  the  dreadful  threads  held  by  the  fingers 
of  Yama’s  envoy  (16).  These  do  not  however  perish,  O fore* 
most  of  the  twice-born,  and  the  portions  of  their  bodies, 
sundered  into  hundreds,  are  again  combined.  Thus  the  sinner* 
are  sundered  for  a thousand  years,  so  long  their  sin  is  not  com- 
pletely washed  off  (18).  Hear,  I shall  now  descrilm  the  hell, 
Apratishtha  ; living  in  it,  people  suffer  aillictions  hard  to  bear 
(19).  There  are  wheels  at  places— and  the  clocks  at  others— 
the  instruments  of  affiictions  to  persons  of  impious  deeds  (,«>)■ 
Some  men,  fast  fixed  on  the  wheels,  are  whirled  on  and  they 
cannot  come  out  even  for  a thousand  years  (3t).  Firmly 
fixed  on  the  machinery  of  the  clock  even  as  a clock  is  fixed 
in  water,  people  are  whirled  on,  continu.ally  vomilting  blood. 
(22)  Vomitting  forth  blood  through  their  mouths  and  having 
eyes  overflowing  with  tears  Hic.se  creatures  suffer  intolerable 
afflictions  (23).  Hear  again,  f shall  describe  another  hell, 
the  forest  of  sword  blade.s,  which  is  all  fire,  covering  the  earth 
for  a ’thousand  Yoyanas  (24).  Scorched  by  the  terrible  and 
fierce  rays  of  the  sun,  creatures,  dwelling  in  hell,  always  drop 
there  (25).  In  it  there  is  a beautiful  forest  covered  with  cool 
foliage.  The  leaves  and  fruits  thereof,  O foremost  of  the 
twice-born,  consist  of  sword  blades  (jf»).  There  bark  a 
million  of  powerful  dogs,  with  large  ftrouth,  huge  icelh  and 
, dreadful  like  tigers  to  look  at  (27).  Beholding  before  them 
the  forest  covered  with  dews  and  shades,  creatures, 
afflicted  with  thirst,  rush  towards  « (28).  Hiiving 
their  feet  burnt  by  the  fire  raging  luidcrnealh,  they, 
greatly  afflicted,  cry  out,  V‘0  father,  O mathcr  1"  (ay).  As 
soon  as  they  reach  there,  the  wind  blows,  shaking  the  sword 
leaves  and  the  swords  fall  on  them  (30).  They  then  drop  down 
on  earth— here  a collection  of  fire  and  there  all  abla/e  with 
flames  spreading  all  over  the  surface  (31).  The  dreadful  dog* 


H 


MARKANDBYA  PURANA!^ 


then  quickly  tear  into  pieces  their  bodies  and  numberless  limbs 
as  they  cry  in  agony  ! have  described  to  you,  O father, 
the  forest  of  sword-Mades.  Hear,  nov^  from  me,  of  the  far 
more  dreadful  TaptakuMbha  (^3).  It  has  ail  around  it  heated 
pans,  encircled  by  flames  of  fire,  filled  with  iron  dust  and  boil* 
ing  oil  resembling  flames  (34).  In  these  vessels  are  thrown  by 
the  envoys  of  Yame  perpetrators  of  wicked  deeds  with  their 
faces  bent  towards  the  ground  ; they  are  fried  there  with  their 
bodies  bursting  and  rendered  foid  with  fatty  excretions  (35). 
With  their  beads,-  eyes  and  bones  coming  out  they  are  forcibly 
taken  up  by  ferodous  vultures  and  afe  again  thrown  into 
them  {3p).  Then  accompanied  by  hissing  sounds  and  com 
verted  into  liquid  their  heads,  bo^es,  tendons,  flesh,  skin  and 
bones  are  mixed  up  with  oil  (37).  Then  the  perpetrators  of 
iniquities  are  pormded  in  these  volumes  of  eddying  oil  with  a* 
laddie  by  the  emissastes  of  Yama  (38).  Thus  I have  des- 
cribed to  you  as  length,  O fafter,  the  hell  Taptakumbfm 


1 HE  sor^  said In  the  seventh  birth  preceding  this,  ^ 
was  born  in  the  Vaishya  race.  Formerfy  I obstructed  the 
approach  of  kine,  tto  a efeservoir  (i).  From  that  adverse 
action,  I was  thrown  into  a!  dreadful  hell,  terrific  with  flames 
and  abounding  in  iron-beaked  birds  (a)  ; covered  with  mice 
^ the  streams  of  blood  Cbnring  out  from  bodies  cruslmd  by 
inSIriusaents  (of  torture)  and  filled  with  the  cries  of  sinnere 
down  sundered!;^.  Thrown  there  and  oppressed 
by  posneri'd  heat  asnd  ddr^  and  burning  I remained » 
hundred  yei^s  .and  inefe  {4,  It  so  happened  that  one 


MARKANDBYA  PURANAM.  6| 

(lay  came  to  me  a fresh  coo!  iireexe  deiiglitiog  my  heart, 
flowing  ffom  an  earthen  vessel  filled  with  meals  inisr’d  with 
curds  (5).  By  its  touch  the  numberless  afflictions  of  the 
people  were  brought  to  a close  and  I too  attained  that  est* 
cellent  joy  which  is  enjoyed  by  the  inhabitauts  of  the  celes- 
tial region  (6).  (Thinking)  ‘What  is  this,  with  eyes  expanded 
and  shaking  with  joy  we  saw  near  us  a most  excellent  man, 
the  jewel  of  the  race)  {7).  A dreadful  emissary  of  Yama,  res- 
plendent like  lightning,  with  a rod  in  his  hand,  wailed  hefore 
him  showing  him  the  way  and  saying  'come  this  way'  (8). 
Beholding  the  hell  abounding  in  a hundred  miseries,  lie, 
filled  with  compassion,  said  to  the  follower  of  Yama  • 
(9).  “Tell  me,  O emissary  of  Yatna,  what  inieptity  did 
I commit  before  by  which  I have  Ix^en  consigned  to 
this  dreadful  hell  filled  witlj  terrible  afflict  ions  (to).  I 
was  celebrated  for  my  erudition  in  the  fainily  «d  my 
fore-fatliers.  Born  in  Vedaha,  I governed  well  the 
people  (il).  Performing  many  sacrifiecs  I 1 ij;li!eoii:dy 
protected  tlie  earth ; I never  did  turn  away  from  tight  »»or 
did  any  guest  go  away  disappointed  (from  rny  Irouse)  (13), 
I never  dishonored  my  manes,  the  cehtslia!  saints,  or  the 
servants.  And  never  did  I covet  another's  wife  or  wealth 

(13) .  As  kine  come  to  at  rough  so  the  manes  coinr  of  them, 
selves  to  a man  during  a Parva,  and  deities  on  lunar  days. 

(14) .  The  Ishth  and  Purl  ha  acts  of  a householder  become 
fruitless  from  whose  house  tlmy  go  away  disappointed  (15). 
The  sighs  of  the  departed  manes  destroy  the  religious  merit 
of  seven  generations  and  forsooth  those  of  deitii-s  destroy 
that  of  three  generations  (16).  For  this,  I always  tiind  to 
encompass  the  pleasure  of  the  manes  and  the  deities.  Tirere- 
fore  have  I been  doomed  to  this  highly  dreadful  hell  t*"  (17) 


9 


<• 


H 


CHAPTER  XrV. 


1 HE  Son  said  .—Thus  addressed  by  that  high-soided 
one  in  our  hearing,  the  dreadful  emissary  of  Yam.i  retilled 
in  soft  words:-(i).  “You  have  spoken  the  truth,  O great 
king,  there  is  no  doubt  about  it.  f shall  now  remind  you  of 
a small  amount  of  sin  committed  by  you  (2).  You  h’id 
wife  born  in  Vidharbha  named  Pivari.  When  she  was  in 
menses  you  made  them  go  fruitless  (3).  Yoti  had  your 
heart  then  attached  to  the  highly  beautiful  Kaikeyt ; and  in 
consequence  of  your  making  her  menses  fruitless  you  have 
been  consigned  to  this  dreadful  hell  (4).  As  at  the  time  of 
a Homa  (sacrifice)  the  fire  expects  sacrificial  ofT.-rings  so  does 
the  Lord  of  creatures  expect  seed  at  the  time  of  mense.s  (t) 

A person,  however  virtuous  he  may  be,  ^vl.o  disregards  this 

injunction  and  desires  for  another  woman,  falls  into  a hell 
on  account  of  his  sin  (for  not  satisfying)  the  nneestra!  debts 
( ).  This  is  your  sin  and  nothing  more ; come  then,  O kine 

I sha  I go,  O emissary  of  the  deity  (Yama)  wherever  vou 

wi  a e me  , I shall  ask  you  something  and  you  should 

speak  to  me  the  truth  (8).  These  crows,  having  leaks  hke 

adamant,  are  plucking  out  the  eyes  of  men,  but  they  are 

. .--^P'n'ng  their  eyes  again  and  again  (9).  lU  ««  what  an 

iniquity  they  had  perpetrated  ? These  (crows)  are  also 

V out  their  tongues  grovvinsr  anew  7 ^ 

««:  **.*.  anew  again  and  again  f 10).  Whv 

are, these  unfortunate  men  being  severed  by  saws?  And 

'"aw  7"  ‘■'“S i»  •ar.h.„ 

, filled  with  meal  mixed  with  curd?  (n)  t.H  Z i 

th^  afflicted  having  the  joints  of  their 

by  il-beCbtd  r'"'"*"'' 

: uttering  shrieks  (of  pain)?  (12)  Hav’  ^ 

all  .«r  „l.b  ,be  i d'SicW 

auu  amicted  these  men  are  sufferiof 


Describe  to  me  at  lengtfj  by  what  adverse  actions  tijcsc  sitt 
ful  men  arc  undergoing  miseries  which  I see?*'  (14).  I h«* 
emissary  of  Yama  said  " O king,  yon  have  asked  me  regard- 
ing  the  consequences  of  sinful  actions  ; 1 shall  duly  descrilK; 
them  to  you  in  brief  (15).  A person  reaps  the  fruit  of  virtue 
or  vice  by  turns;  and  when  the  fruit  of  virtue  or  vice  b 
reaped  it  is  spent  (16).  Without  reaping  the  fruits  of  good 
or  bad  actions  a person  is  not  released  therefrom  in  the  least  . 
the  extinction  (of  an  action)  originates  from  the  reapittg  (of 
the  fruit)  (17).  Hear  me  explaining  virtue  and  vice  ; wrcti  h«  il 
sinners  are  visited  by  famine  upon  famine,  pain  upon  pain, 
fear  upon  fear  and  death  upon  detath ; hy  the  fetters  of  action 
creatures  come  by  various  conditions  (tB — 19).  Fersoits, 
cherishing  reverence,  controlling  their  sotils,  distributing 
wealth  and  performing  auspicious  acts,  enjoy  festivities  after 
festivities,  heaven  after  h('av<'n  and  happiness  after  happi 
ness  (20).  But  sinners,  ass.ailcul  by  inifjuitics,  are  rloomeil  f,* 
places  filled  with  beasts  of  prey,  elefihantH,  »er(>enls,  rn/.t»r*i 
and  other  dreadful  things.  What  more  for  pious  men  ? (jri). 
Wearing  fragrant  garlands,  clad  in  good  raiment!*,  driving  on 
beautiful  cars,  feeding  on  savouring  viands  and  eulogised  hv 
sacred  hymns  they  repair  to  sacred  groves  (22).  In  this  way- 
virtue  and  vice,  of  men  gathered  through  hundreds  and 
hundreds,  thousands  and  thousands  of  births,  hccome  the  seed* 
of  happiness  and  misery  (23).  As  a seed  expects  a shower. 
O king,  so  virtue  and  vice  are  dependent  upon  time,  place 
and  action  as  the  cause  (24).  If  a person  commits  a si!i||ht 
sin  generated  by  place  and  time,  he  suffers  such  an  alJliction 
as  is  derived  from  treading  upon  thorns  (25).  A gre,aU?r 
sin  in  the  same  way  leads  to  greater  sufl'critig  such  as  a piece 
of  land  filled  with  darts  and  pins  nrul  unbcaralde  hcail 
diseases  (26).  At  the  time  of  iheir  being  united  wiih  fnujM 
the  sins  mutually  expect  the  instruments  of  uinvholcHninc 
food,  cold,  heat,  fatigue  and  burning  {27).  In  the  like 


markandeva  puranam.  : 

manner  greater  miquitie»  briog  long  enduring  diseases  an 
other  evi  s and  sufferings  from  arms, fire  and  chain*  (a8)  bV* 

.dfo™  M.  B«gr«a..r  virtue 
(3  )•  Thus  the  people  live  here,  reaping  hapuiiic.  - 
«ery|„„  virtue  dnd  vico  originating  torn  rn^nlr.r'l.i,'  h 

nd  place,  reraam  combined  in  the  soul  (ta)  IVrfom 
;"g  a d„M  deed,  .m.  by  body,  „i„d 
>S  never  estebhshed  m virtue  (33).  Whatever  a p.-rson  V 

Sod\3rii:;«:^-^ 

tfen  K.,  kr.-  . ' "*®  v>«ue  or  vice  finds  cxtinc* 

tion  by  being  reaped  (33).  In  this  way  tfiese  m,..,  .!  • 

m the  heart  of  hell,  are  spending  away  their  miiditv  *' 

7 ■« 

company  of  immortals, 'enjoy  bliss ^Jkenin^'r^r'^"’  ‘*’® 
the  Gandharvas,  Siddhas  and  ApsarSs  fty\  f ^ 
born  as  a deity,  a human  being  or  a beal  'reLT^r' 

originating  from  virtue  or  vice  characterised  i * 

misery  (-iS)  You  tiaw  *®d  as  happiness  or 

y yo;.  You  have  questioned  me.  O h!,,*,  r , ! 

sms  are  these  sinners  going  through  tlw,.*  * 
‘Wriboit.tlengil,  {39).  Tb.  .dfm.L.b«r.Tr;  ' f"" 
out  the  eyes  ol  those  wretched  m(*n  , i.  i 7^*^ 

WM  rvu  eyes  ar  wd,  »“* 

again  and  again  (40-41).  They  will  LZ  r ?? 
as  many  thousand  years  as  these  f 7 7°”  ^ 

1-WM.d  .bo  orL7)  rt  so  "7 

adamaBt-beaked  birds  will  pkek  out  tJ  ^**^'’* 

-w  .„i.  „d  .goi„9,  i7op:“„7‘rr* 

Wf^ly  th.  .pirUoo,  oiji,,  on.™ 

7”“'  oCd^M,!  7e"vT  I ' 

*■1.0.,  ,ho  ,„i„.b„„  ‘I--  Vod.,o,  t|„. 


: 1 

i.  t 
' 

fiiii 

u 

(!;  1: 

k- 

h ■ 

iV  ■' 

ItIJ'lll 

MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


69 


Behold,  0 king,  those  wretched  men  severed  by  »awi,  wha 
brought  about  dissension  amongst  friends,  separation  of  a 
father  from  his  son,  that  amongst  relatives,  that  between  a 
priest  and  a sacrificer,that  of  a mother  from  her  son, that  of  com* 
panions  (from  each  other)  or  that  between  a husband  anif  a 
wife  (46—47).  'rhose  who  afflict  others,  those  who  obstruct 
the  enjoyment  of  others,  those  who  deprive  people  of  paftnyra 
fans,  air-passages,  sandal,  U^ira  (a  fragrant  grass)  and  those 
wretched  people  who  bring  sufferings  destroying  (even)  file, 
on  innocent  persons,  reap  their  sins  by  being  placed  on  samI 
vessels  full  of  meals  mixed  with  curds  (48 — 49).  'nuwe 
persons,  who  being  invited  by  others,  feed  on  the  Sradilhtt 
performed  by  another,  cither  for  the  ancestral  manes  or  deities, 
are  dragged  by  these  birds  in  two  (opposite)  directions  (50). 
Those,  who  pierce  the  vitals  of  the  pious  with  their  own  hands, 
have  their  own  in  return  pierced,  without  any  ohslnn  tion,  hy 
these  birds  (5 1).  He,  who  by  his  piTvertcd  iniiui  ami  wotd, 
commits  an  iniquity,  has  his  tongue  severed  in  twain  by 
sharpened  razors  (53).  Those,  that  through  haughtiness  of  heart, 
disregard  their  fathers,  or  mothers,  or  preceptors,  arc  plunged, 
with  their  faces  bent  downwards,  into  pits  fdlcd  with  pus, 
urine  and  excretion  (53).  Those  wicked  {icople,  that  take 
their  food,  before  the  deities,  guests,  servants,  new  comers, 
ancestral  manes,  the  fires  and  birds  are  fed,  arc  born  as 
Suchimukhas  (birds)  huge  as  hills  and  take  delight  in  eat- 
ing pus  and  dung  (54 — 55).  Those,  who,  while  observing 
a vow,  feed  with  partiality  the  Brihmanas  an<l  person*  born 
of  any  other  order,  feed  on  dung  like  these  (56).  TIuhc.  who 
take  their  food,  without  treating  the  poor  and  beggars  and  tlmsc 
who  drive  the  same  interest,  feed,  like  these,  on  pldcgn*.  (57), 
O lord  of  men,  those  who  while  unclean  from  eating,  toucl* 
kine,  Brihmanas  or  fire,  have  their  hands  burnt  in  this  fljiming 
fit  (58).  Those  who,  while  unclean  with  eatirig,  willingly  j-ec 
the  sun,  moon  or  stars,  have  their  eyes  cast  into  fire  by  the 
envoys  of  Yama  and  are  purified  there  (59).  'rtiosc  men,  Ihat 


MARKANDEVA  PUmHAU 


have  with  their  feet  touched  kine,  hr**.  i}»>'u  mAthp  *, 
Vipras,  their  elder  brothers,  fathers,  %i«trr<.,  »!>’ >*i  wives,  I 

preceptors  or  elderly  men,  have  their  limbs  !>v  • h din  g 

of  heated  fire  ; and  being  placed  in  heaps  «(  burienjj  f 
burn  up  to  their  knees  (60 — bi).  B^-hold  those  4tr,(,il  men,  '1/ 
who  have  eaten  PayUt^a,  h'lfara,  jf»rtat's  ctr  ,iriy  I«w4  f , 

given  to  the  deity  .after  having  rleserrated  d,  Hron^dit  <|<nvn  (n  ' 
the  earth  looking  with  rolling  eyes  that  are  Imirtg  oat  f 

with  teeth  in  the  mouth  of  Yam.a*«  foilmvj  fs  s6.>  Thri#*  * 

wretched  sinners,  who  have  suffered  then  pje,  vpi..*,.,  deiiw.  U 
Br5hmanas  and  the  Vedas  to  he  villihrd  and  have  tak-,! 
delight  in  that,  have,  although  crying,  iron  pin*.  <.h«Hvrriiig  fire, 
driven  repeatedly  into  ears  (64...65).  Tho>4e.  ih.u  po,*i-s*eii  ' 
by  anger  and  covetousness,  have  brttken  and  demobshed 
watering  places,  images,  houses  of  the  llrftbman.i'..  rcmpJei,  ,| 
magnificent  assembly  halls,  although  crying  repeatedly,  have  | 
their  skin  separated  from  their  body  with  sharpcim.l  weapons  fi 
by  the  highly  terrific  messengers  of  Y.am.i  ffiti  Those  S; 

men,  that  pass  urine  or  excretion  in  the  way  of  Icim*.  ftifthniaosi  t 
or  the  sun,  have  their  entrails  extracted  by  i ,tm  * through  " 
their  anus  (68.)  He,  that  having  given  awav  his  ri.inghlcr  to  I 
one  again  gives  her  to  a second  man,  bring  sundered  info  ^ 
piects,  is  thrown  into  a river  of  alkali.  0,^).  Tlw^c,  that  I 
possessed  by  anger  forsake  helpless  sons,  .servant*,  wives  or 
friends  on  the  occasion  of  a famine  or  any  cabimity.  being 
thussunderedbyYama's  retainers,  feed  on  thdr  own  iVi-b 
w hunger  and  again  gorge  it  out  (70-71).  fk,  who  for*.akes 

out  of  cupidity  dependants  living  upon  service,  bassaded  with  / 

en^ncs.  by  the  servants,  of  Yama  {7a).  Those  persons,  .h- 
sell  their  religious  merit  acquired  all  through  their  lives  , .u. 
passed  with  stones  like  those  perpetrators  of  iniquitir . 

Those,  who  misappropiate  deposit  money,  Stoun  i ,,:i 
0^*  Are  constrained  to  feed  day  and  night  on  woims,  ..... 
pio»,ci^s  and  owls  (74).  Those  si„f«f  persons,  who  visit 
women  by  day  or  who  live  with  olhm s'  wives,  aie  mildct  .0  I 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


alrticltons  and  tiavn  their  tongues  and  palates  dried  up  with 
hunger  and  tliirst  {75).  See,  they  have  been  fixed  on  Shalmaii 
trees  with  long  iron  pins  and  their  bodies  have  been  severed 
and  are  bathed  in  streams  of  blood  (76).  And  see,  O foremost 
of  men,  those,  who  ravished  others'  wives,  killed  by  Yama's 
servants  being  thrown  in  crucibles  (77).  The  man, 
who  putting  his  preceptor  to  shame  or  striking  him 
dumb,  receives  lessons  or  learns  any  mechanical  art  from  him, 
suffers  misery  by  carrying  stones  on  his  head  and  is  greatly  as- 
sailed in  the  way  of  men ; he  suffers  day  and  night  from 
hunger  and  fatigue  and  his  head  aches  for  carrying  the  load 
(y8 — 7g).  Those,  that  discharge  urine,  phlegm,  stool  &c,,  in 
water,  are  doomed  to  this  hell  fdled  with  the  bad  smell  of 
phlegm,  excreta  and  urine  (80).  Those,  who  never  treated  be- 
fore each  otherwitb  hospitality,  are  now  possessed  by  hunger 
eating  each  others' flesh  (Hi).  Those,  that  villified  the  Vedas 
and  tliose  that,  lighting  sacrilicial  fire,  disregarded  it,  are  repeat- 
edly being  thrown  down  from  mountain  peaks  (Ka),  Those, 
who  p4.H.s(:d  their  days  as  the  husbands  of  widows,  being  ema- 
ciated, are  reduced  to  those  worms  that  are  being  eaten  up  by 
ants  (83).  Those,  who  accept  gifts  from  an  out-caste,  who  offi- 
ciate as  his  priests  and  those  who  serve  him,  become  worms 
living  inside  the  rocks (84).  Those,  who  take  sweets  in  the  pre- 
sence of  their  servants,  friends,  and  gtn^sts^  have  got  to  swallow 
burning  coal  down  their  throat  (85).  O king,  those  who  feed  on 
the  flesh  of  another's  back,  has  his  own  daily  eaten  by  dreadful 
wolves  (86).  The  cursed  men,  who  turn  ungrateful  to  persons 
who  do  them  good,  roam  about,  being  stricken  with  hunger, 
or  being  blind,  deaf  and  dumb  (87).  This  highly  vicious- 
minded,  ungrateful  wretch,  injuring  his  friends,  is  thrown  into 
a Uei^d  vessel  and  pounded  there  (88).  fie  is  then  tortured 
by  thu  engim-s  in  U»?  sand  vessels  containing  milk  with  curd 
and  is,  then  severed  with  saws  in  the  forest  of  sword-blade* 
^ (8§);  He  will  be  then  hewn  by  the  thread  of  time  ; tini* 
undergoing  various  alllictions  I do  not  know  how  he  will  be 


^2  MARKANOEYA  PURANAM. 

freed  therefrom  (go).  Those  wicked  BrShmanas,  leaping 
over  one  another,  ate  the  food  of  a Sraddha.  They  now 
drink  the  foam  coming  out  from  all  their  limb.s  (gi). 
That  stealer  of  gold,  that  killer  of  a Brlhmana,  that 
consumer  of  strong  drinks,  and  that  ravisher  of  his 
preceptor’s  wife,  are  being  burnt  for  many  thousand 
years  by  a fire  flaming  above  and  below : these  are  again 
born  as  men  marked  with  leprosy,  consumption  and  other 
diseases  (92 — 93).  When  dead  they  go  to  hell  and  are  again 
born  in  the  same  manner.  O king,  they  will  suffer  from 
diseases  till  the  end  of  Kalpa  (94).  One,  who  kills  a cow, 
goes  to  hell  for  three  successive  births— -this  is  also  the  fate 
of  the  perpetrators  of  minor  crimes  (95).  Hear,  I shall  des- 
cribe the  respective  births  which  persons  coming  out  from 
hell^  take,  ordained  by  their  sins  (96). 


, CHAPTER  XV. 

YamA’s  servant  said:— Taking  gift.s  from  a fallen  person 
a Brahmana  becomes  an  ass  : the  priest,  of  a fallen  person, 
being  liberated  from  hell,  is  born  as  an  earth-worm  (l).  A 
twice-born  one  who  plays  his  preceptor  falst;,  or  desires  for 
his  wife  of  covets  his  property,  forsooth  becomes  a dog  <2). 
If  a person  disregards,  his  parents,  he  becomes  an  ass  ; it  he 
is  angry  with  his  father  and  mother  he  is  born  as  a female 
parrot  (3).  If  a person  insults  his  brother’s  wife  he  come* 
by  the  state  of  a pigeon  j oppressing  her  he  is  boro  as  a 
tortoise  (4).  He,  who,  taking  the  food  of  his  master,  does 
not  seek'his  welfare,  is  possessed  by  stupefaction  and  is  born 
as  a monkey  when,  dead  (5).  He  who  appropriates  mm«f 


MARKANDKYA  PURANAM.  73 

held  in  trust,  is  born  as  an  earth-worm  when  liberated  from 
hell ; and  he,  who  b given  to  calumny  when  freed  from  hell, 
becomes  a Rlkahasa  (6),  A treacherous  man  is  born  as  a 
fish.  He  that  steals  paddy,  barley,  sesame  seeds,  misha 
Kulathathii  mustard,  oats,  Kahlyi,  Kalama,  Afudga,  wheat, 
alasi  or  any  other  kind  of  grain,  being  bereft  of  his  sense, 
is  born  as  a long-faced  rat  resembling  a mungoose.  He,  who 
ravishes  another's  wife,  is  by  and  by  horn  as  a dreadful  wolf, 
a dog,  a Jackal,  a vulture,  a serpent  and  a heron.  That  one 
of  perverted  sense,  who  lives  with  his  brother's  wife,  becomes 
a male  coil  on  his  being  freed  from  bell  (7 — to.)  Tlmt  hi.st- 
ful  person,  who  violates  tlx*  wife  of  a friend,  or  of  a pre- 
ceptor or  of  a king,  is  born  as  swine  (t  i).  He,  who  obstructs 
sacrifices,  gifts  or  a wedtiing,  becomes  an  c.irth  worm.  He  that 
gives  away  his  daughter  for  tlie  second  lime  is  born  as  an 
earth  worm  (13).  He  who  takes  his  foot!  without  (first) 
giving  it  to  the  deities,  the  ancestral  manes  ami  the  Urfihntanas 
on  being  freed  from  hell,  is  born  as  a crow  {13),  He,  who  dis- 
regards his  elder  brother  who  is  like  a father  to  him,  on  being 
freetl  from  bell,  is  born  as  a Krauncha  (14).  A Sudra,  who 
lives  with  a BrAhmana  woman,  is  born  a*  an  earth-worm, 
and  begetting  children  on  her  he  becomes  a worm  living 
inside  a wood,  a hog,  an  e.arth-worm,  a shag  and  a Cliandaba. 
An  ungrateful  and  degraded  man,  on  being  liberated  from 
hell,  is  by  turns  born  a*  an  earth-worm,  a worm,  an  Insect 


of  a woman  or  that  of  a child  is  horn  as  an  earth  worm  (18). 
By  stealittg  food  a man  is  born  a*  a fly.  There  is  something 
particular  about  food ! he,tr  it  (19).  By  stealing  rice,  one, 
on  being  (reed  from  hell,  is  born  as  a cat.  He,  who  steals 
rice  mixed  with  sesame  and  Ptnyaka,  is  born  as  a rat  (ao). 
By  stealing  cl.nrtfied  butter  a man  becomes  a mungoose,  by 
stealing  goal's  flesit  he  becomes  a Matlgn  or  a crow.  A 
person  that  sttnals  flesh  or  meat  becomes  a crow ; one  thi* 


74 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


steals  the  meat  of  a deer  becomes  a hawk  (21).  He  who  steals 
salt  becomes  a water-crow  and  he  that  steals  curds  becomes 
an  earth  worm ; by  stealing  milk  one  becomes  a crane  {22).  He 
who  steals  oil  becomes  a cock-roach ; by  stealing  honey  a 
man  becomes  a gad-fly  and  by  stealing  flowers  an  ant  (23). 
By  stealing  nishpava  one  becomes  a house  lizard.  By 
stealing  wine  one  is  born  as  a tittiri  (24),  The  sinful  man, 
stealing  iron,  is  born  as  a crow  ; by  stealing  belf-mct.'t!  one 
becomes  a wood  pigeon  and  by  stealing  silver  vessel,  a 
pigeon  (25).  By  stealing  a golden  vessel  one  is  born  as  an 
earth-worm ; by  stealing  a silken  cloth  one  becomes  a par- 
tridge (26).  By  stealing  a satin  cloth  one  is  born  as  a chry- 
salis. The  sinful  man,  who  steals  gold-embroidered  satin, 
a fine  cloth  made  of  goat’s  hair  or  linen,  is  horn  as  a male- 
parrot.  By  stealing  cotton  cloth,  one  is  born  as  a Kraumha 
and  by  stealing  bark  a heron  (27-— 28),  By  stealing  a paint 
or  S&kapatra  one  is  born  as  a peacock ; a person  stealing 
a red  cloth  becomes  a peasant  (29).  By  .stealing  scents 
One  is  born  as  a mole ; and  by  stealing  a dress  a hare.  By 
stealing  fruits  one  becomes  a bull  and  by  stealing  wood  a 
wood-worm  (30).  One  stealing  flowtms  becomo.s  poor  and 
one  stealing  a conveyance  lame.  One  stealing  potherbs 
becomes  a wood  pigeon  and  one  stealing  water  becomes  .a 

CUtaka  Going  to  dreadful  hells  Raiirava  and  other* 
the  stealer  of  land  becomes  succes-sively  grass,  shrubs 
creepers,  plants  and  trees  with  only  barks  on,  and  his  sins 
growing  less  and  weakened  he  become-s  a man  (33).  Then 
he  is'  born  as  an  earth-worm,  an  insect,  a grass  hopper,  an 
aquatic  fowl,  a deer,  a cow  and  a cursed  Cfmndala  ora 
Pukksa  (33).  He  is  then  born  as  a cripple,  m a blind  man 
as  a deaf  man,  as  a leper  and  as  one  suffering  from  phthysb  ; 
he  is  assailed  by  diseases  of  mouth,  eyes  and  stomach  (31}'. 
H&  becomes  epileptic  and  is  born  as  a Sudra  (35).  Thwe 
are  the  successive  states,  to  which  are  reduced  the  stealers 
of  cow  and  gold  or  those  that  steal  learning  or  lands 


MAKICANDEVA  l-'URANAM. 


7S 


held  retd,  fiec  l)y  lhf!ir  preceptor?^  (36).  Hie  fool^  wli0 
gives  aw.iy  one's  wife,  to  ariolliefi  being  freed  front  the 
various  pains  is  liarii  as  a bull  (37)*  The  man>  who  offers 
oblations  to  fire  not  perfectly  lighted  up^  is  assailed  by 
the  disease  of  itidigesiioit  and  becomes  dyspeptic  (38). 

Calumny,  ingratitude,  giving  pain  to  another's  mind,  cruelty, 

impudence,  adultery,  robliing  one  of  his  own,  impurity,  vilt* 

fying  the  gods,  deceiving  fieciple,  miserliness,  man  slaughter 

these  and  other  forbidden  acts  and  a constant  tendency 

towtirds  them  all  speak  that  (the  authors)  have  just  come 

out  of  the  beli ; (whereas)  kindness  for  creatures,  the  bring* 

ing  of  good  news,  service  to  the  people  of  the  other  ri^giotg 

trutlifulnessi  words  for  the  behoof  of  creatures,  the  evidence 

of  l!ie  Vedas,  t!ie  worsluji  of  the  preceptors,  adesiial  saints  i 

and  Stddhas,  companionship  with  the  pious,  the  practice  of 

good  works,  lrifunllin<‘ss  -•thf*^e  and  Vtirious  other  rectiipiiscd, 

good  and  moral  wmk*'  are  considered  by  a learmol  m:\n  as  the 

marks  of  pious  men  fn^t  i.‘oming  out  from  heaven  (3*i»-“4.p) 

Thus  I have  dcHcribtal  ii\  you,  O king,  everything  about  men 

reaping  the  frutls  of  ihrir  arts— pious  or  siultil  (45)*  We  ^ 

shall  now  go  Ici  another  jdace  ; you  have  seen  everything. 

Yoii  liave  ifcti  hell ; tel  m go  elsewhere  (46)* 

Tub  Sun  said  ;~'ihen  ptaciiig  tiim  ahead  the  king  ad*  ; 

drmed  himself  for  going,  Tlimi  all  men,  nuflering  from  | 

tgOiiies,  cried  ahiiid  (47}.  ** Favour  us,  0 king,  wait  for  a 

itiomeftt  The  wind  loiictiing  your  limbi  delighti  our  hearti 
(48).  O foreriiiist  of  men,  (it)  drives  compktuly  the  heal  ofemr  j 

bodiei  t»  wcdl  m iltseasiti  mid  aibiumtu  ; favour  us,  therefore 
0 king/*  (49).  Hearing  llieic  their  words,  the  king  asked  the 
envoy  of  Yiiiia  *'Wliy  do  these  people  delight  in  my  ilty  ? 

(50).  Tell  me,  what  greatly  pious  action  did  I perform  in  ' , 

the  region  of  mortalH  which  showers  delight  on  them**'  (51). 

The  tiiiiisiry  of  Yam#i  said  **Ycnir  body  attained  to  iimirisfi* 
merit  by  tlie  retiiiiant  of  the  food  ollercd  to  ifte  ancestral  ■ 
iimici,  g^iCiU  and  :*ciV4iil">  aiu!  bee your  mind  was  always  ' 


s 


■jS 


MARKANDEYA  PURAHAM. 


devoted  to  them,  therefore  the  wind,  touching  your  limbs, 
gives  them  delight  and  these  sinners  do  not  feel  the  pain, 
0 king,  (52 — 53).  Because  you  duly  performed  horse  sacri- 
fices and  others,  therefore  seeing  you  and  thwarted  by  your 
energy,  these  intruments  of  Yama,  engines  and  weapons,  and 
fires  and  crows — the  causes  of  affliction,  wounds,  burning 
and  other  great  sufferings,  have  become  milder  (in  their  ac- 
tion)’’ (54 — 55)-  The  king  said:— *“  The  happiness,  that  one 
enjoys  by  affording  relief  to  creatures  in  distress,  is  not  ob- 
tained by  men  either  in  heaven  or  in  the  region  of  BrShma*— 
this  is  my  conviction  (56).  If  for  my  coming  near  them 
they  do  not  suffer  torments,  I shall,  0 fair  mouthed  one,  live 
here  motionless  like  an  inanimate  object  {57).”  The  envoy 
of  Yama  said:— “Come  0 king,  we  shall  go;  leaving  the 
sinners  with  their  sufferings  do  you  enjoy  happiness  reaped  by 
yOur  pious  acts  (58).” 

The  King  said: — “As  long  these  will  nunain  greatly 
stricken  with  grief  I shall  not  go;  the  dwellers  of  hell 
become  happy  by  my  living  near  them  (59).  Cursed  is  the  life 
of  that  man  who  does  not  know  mercy  towards  the  distressed 
seeking  refuge  with  him,  even  if  they  for  certan  belong  to 
the  side  of  the  enemies  (60).  Sacrifices,  gifts,  asceticism  do 
not  bear  him  fruit  either  in  this  world  or  in  the  next  who  has 
not  his  mind  bent  upon  relieving  distress  (6t).  I do  not 
consider  him  a man,  whose  hard  heart  is  not  drawn  to 
children,  the  distressed  and  the  old— rather  he  is  a Rlkshasa 
(62).  If  by  living  near  them  do  I suffer  miseries  of  hell  —the 
heat  of  fire,  piercing  effluvia,  hunger,  thirst  and  any  other 
great  affletion,  depriving  one  of  his  consciousness,  I shall 
consider  my  act  of  affording  them  relief  greater  than  the 
felicity  of  heaven  (63—64).  If  many,  in  distress,  secure 
happiness  by  my  being  in  it,  what  have  I not  obtained  ? So 
you  go  without  any  delay  (65).”  The  envoy  of  Yama  said 
“Here  are  Dharma  and  Sakra  come  to  take  you  away ; so  you 
must  go  and  therefore  come,  0 king  (66)»  Dharma  said “ I 


/ 


MARKANDEYA  FORANAM* 


77 


sliall  take  you  to  Inutveti  for  1 hav<*  boon  duly  aclored  by 
yotL  Get  opciti  this  diariol ; come,  do  tiol  delay  (67)/* 

II  The  KJNif  said  of  men  arc  suffering  iti  llie 

hellt  O Dhiirriia.  They  are  crying  to  oie  in  dislress  **  nave 
I shatt  n«)t  go  (bH).  Inclra  »ai4  : — By  tlteir  aetn  these 
sinners  have  come  to  bell  | and  yon,  O king,  by  yonr  pbns 

; acts,  shonid  go  Ui  lieavcm  \6g).  The  king  sakl ; df  i am  to 

know  yon  as  Dharma  mul  if  1 am  tn  know  you  as  Saehi's  lord 
yon  ihoidd  t«dl  me  the  extent  of  my  rcHgicms  merit  (ja). 

' Dharma  said  Like  drops  of  water  in  the  ocean,  like  stars 

[;  in  the  lipiiiariieni,  likt!  showers  pouring  like  samIs  on 

f the  Ganga  and  like  crninlJeHS  parlides  in  water,  O great  king, 

r yonr  rcligifiUH  merit  cannot  be  ennmeraird  (yi—ya).  And 

I this  compiisHion,  whirli  yon  have  extended  to-day  to  the 

I dwellers  of  hell,  has  multiptiinl  your  ndigious  merit  a fuindrcc! 

r and  thousnnd  fohl  (73)*  Ttirrefore,  go,  i)  yon  the  foremost 

I of  kings,  to  the  re';*itm  of  immortah  (or  enji»yini»  it;  and  let 

I them  expiate  in  hett  the^  sin  hegttitrn  by  their  own  actions 

i (74)*  The  king  said ; -Why  do  those  men  long  for  my  coni*- 

paiibiiihip  if  iliey  are  not  elevated  by  my  living  near  tficm?; 
(75)»  If  I have  dune  any  pioiii  act,  G king  of  heaven,  iheti 
kt  tlmse  sin  trims,  iiiffering  froni  torments,  be  rekaicd  fratii 
bell  {76)* 

Inijra  said  thifi  yon  have  obtained  a higher  region, 

0 king  and  behold  ihcie  iiiiiicti  released  from  hell  (77). 

Tiili  Si>M  iiiid  c---'-‘rheii  flowers  were  ihowered  upon  tti« 
{itacing  liifn  upon  his  ear  Hari  look  him  to- hb 
own  regbri  fyS).  Myself  aiid  others  there  being  freed  from 
syffcriiigs  came  by  other  birllii  appointed  by  our  own  aclioiin 
(7f)*  ^ hive  itiiii  ckicribeci  Ici  you,  C)  foremost  of  the  twice* 
born,  all  tin!  tielk  ; and  I have  dcicribed  to  yoii^  all  m icen 
before  by  me,  all  lliii  births  taken  in  par^^uance  of  (their) 
reipective  sins  | (I  have  given  you)  a truthful  accmiiil  (lasetl  on 
my  previous  impel  knee  ; what  inoic  shall  I tell  you,  0 great 
otic? 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


HE  Father  said My  son,  you  have  tioscrlbcd  to  me 
truly  the  most  hateful  order  of  tlie  world,  goiofj  on  per- 
petually like  a clock  ; 1 have  fully  learnt  all  this.  Such  iKung 
the  case,  tell  me  what  I should  do  (i — 2). 

The  SON  said: — If  you,  O father,  unhcstitalingly  rely  on 
my  words,  then  renouncing  the  condition  of  a hou.se- holder 
enter  into  woods  (3).  Duly  entering  upon  this  life,  givir.g 
up  sacriGcial  fire,  severing  all  ties  and  being  freed  from 
dissession  concentrate  your  mind  upon  self  (4).  Taking  youf 
food  every  alternate  day,  controlling  ymir  mind,  become  ,T 
# mendicant  shaking  off  inaction.  And  there  when  becoming 
intent  upon  Yoga  you  .shall  be  above  the  external  infltiencft 
you  will  then  obtain  that  Yoga  which  is  the  remedy  of  the 
miseries  of  existence,  the  mean.s  of  lihersHiot),  incomparable, 
and  indescribable,  and  which  is  not  acquired  in  company  .and 
obtaining  which  you  will  no  more  be  related  to  matter  (5  -6) 

The  father  said -Describe  to  me,  0 my  son,  Yoga 
■which  is  the  best  means  to  emanapation,  by  which  I shall  not 
attain  to  misery  for  my  again  being  united  with  njatter  (7). 
Explain  to  me  that  Yoga,  which  is  unattached  and  by  which 
my  soul,  greatly  attached,  may  not  be  fettered  by  worldly 
bonds,  (8).  Do  you  sprinkle  the  cool  water  of  speech  regard- 
ing  the  knowlege  of  Brahma  on  my  body  and  mind  assailed 
and  bewildered  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  of  a world  (»)).  By 
making  me  drink  your  nectarine  words  do  yon  revive  me  who 
^ dead  again  by  being  beaten  by  the  black  serpent  of 
^orance  and  possessed  by  its  venom  (10).  By  opening 
speedily  the  gate  of  love  and  knowlege  do  you  release  me 

Wtoam  fettered  by  the  chains  of  son,  wife,  house  and  field  i 

(ti).  The  son  said  :-Lislen  properly,  O father,  to  Yoga 


Alarka  wlien  ftirmeiiy  c{iircHtbnecI  by  him  (I2).  The  fattwr 
said ‘Whose  mn  wan  Daitltreya  ? Why  did  lie  explain  Yoga  ? 
Who  was  the  great  Alarka  who  cjucstioned  (him)  about  Yoga^ 
(13)  The  hou  Haiti  lliftre  was  a certain  Brahmana,  Kau- 
^ika,  in  the  city  of  Priitliisihiiiit,  who^  in  consequence  of  hm 
pristine  sins,  was  iissailed  by  leprosy  (14).  His  wife 
served  her  dcseased  husband  as  if  he  was  a deity,  by  sham- 
pooing his  feet  and  limbs,  bathing  him,  clothing  him,  feeding 
him.,  wiishing  off  liii  phlegm,  urine,  feces  and  lilood,  by 
serving  him  in  solitude  and  treating  him  with  sweet  %vrirdi 
(15—16),  Although  always  served  hy  her  witli  humility 
that  highly  irascible  and  cruel  (lirlhmana)  us^nl  to  rebuke 
her  angrily  (i  /h  Stilt  the  humble  wife  crmHidefcd  him  as  a 
deity  itricl  n^garded  Ifml  horrible  one  as  the  best  <d  men  (iH). 
Altliongh  inrapablrof  moving  abiml  t!mt  f*iremr>Ht  of  the  twice- 
born  one  flay  said  In  his  wife:  w*  ‘Take  me  to  the  liouse  of 
the  ccitirleiJ'in  liviii|j  by  tlm  road  ; she  lives  in  my  heart,  C)  you 
conversant  with  viriiie  ao).  I saw  that  girl  at  sun-rise 
and  it  is  now  nighi—lrfun  the  lime  of  seeing  her  sliu  c!ot?i  ncit: 
disappear  IVfint  iny  Iieiirt  {2f)*  If  that  omt  of  a stencler 
imike.,  periVelly  beaiilifui  with  iibitnp  hijc^  auff  tireasls,  does 
not  embra«:e  ni«*  you  wait  see  me  dead  (at),  Kama,  (the  god 
of  love)  k hoslile  to  men  anti  she  is  solicited  by  many  ; 1 
■am  incapable  of  moving  abfmi, ; it  afipears  hoprdess  to  me 
(23)/*  Hearing  thes«^  words  of  tier  liusfrand  slricken  wilti 
hist,  his  biglwminfled  and  itevotfnl  wife,  born  in  a noble- 
family,  making  a firm  resolution,  taking  profuse  money  and 
carrying  her  husband  on  her  slimdders,  proceeded  slowly 
(24—25)*  It  w*as  night  ; Uu5  sky  was  covered  with  clouds. 
That  lirlhitiaiiak  wife,  wishing  to  rma>mpaHH  the  pleasure 
of  her  Iruiibaiid,  went  along  the  highway  disroveretl  by  the 
flftih  of  lightning  (iCik  Cht  the  way  m darkness  that  twice- 
born  one  of  the  race  tif  Km^tka,  muuntetl  on  his  wbfr-ii 
shoiildcrs,  piiilieii  Mamtavya  who  w*-is  greatly  sutt'ering  from 


8o 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


agony  having  been  placed  on  a dart  for  being  suspftCt«*<I 
as  a thief  although  he  was  not  so.  Being  enragjed  for  having; 
been  pushed  with  feet  Mandavya  .said  to  him  (27—28)' 
“That  sinful  wretch  of  a man,  by  whom,  1 sorely  afflicted 
and  reduced  to  a mi.serable  plight,  have  been  pushed  with 
feet,  shall  forsooth  be  deprived  of  his  life  at  the  sun  rtse- 
As  soon  as  he  will  see  the  rays  of  the  sun  he  will  meet  with 
destruction”  (29— 30).  Thereupon  hearing  that  dreadful 
curse,  his  wife,  greatly  afflicted,  said  “The  sun  shall  not 
rise”.  (31)  Therefore  the  sun  not  rising  there  was  a con- 
tinuous night  extending  over  many  days  and  accordingly 
the  celestials  were  terrified  (32).  They  tliou^iit  “ How  can 
this  entire  universe,  shorn  of  Vedic  recitations  and  those  of 
Vashat,  Swaha  and  Swad/za,  be  saved  from  being  utterly 
ruined  ? (33).  Without  the  division  of  day  artel  night  that  of 
months  and  seasons  will  cease  and  from  its  being  destroyed 
the  summer  and  the  winter  solistice  cannot  be  knerwn 
(34).  Without  a knowledge  of  solistice  how  can  the  time  be 
measured  iby  a year  ? And  without  year  no  knowledge  of 
time  can  be  had  (35).  At  the  words  of  that  faithful  wife 
the  sun  will  not  rise  and  without  the  rising  of  the  sun  bath- 
ing, gifts  and  such  other  acts  cannot  take  place  (36).  There 
is  no  lighting  of  the  sacrificial  fire  and  the  want  of  sacrifice* 
is  observed.  And  no  gratification  of  ours  can  accrue  but 
from  oblations  to  fire  (37).  Being  duly  gfratified  by  the 
.mortals  with  our  due  share  in  the  sacrifices  we  favour  meni 
with  rain  for  the  growth  of  corn  (38).  On  oshadhis  having* 
ibeen  procured  the  mortals  wonship  us  with  sacrifices ; and  bei  ng 
adored  by  sacrifices  and  others  we  grant  them  their  desire* 
(39).  We  shower  down  and  the  mortals  shower  up— •w© 
■with  water  and  men  with  clarified  butter  (40)-  The  wicked’ 
and  the  greedy  do  not  perform  the  daily  rites  for  us  but  they 
devour  the  sacri-ficial  shares  themselves  (41).  For  the  des- 
truction of  these  sinful  and  wicked  men  we  vitiate  water, 
the  sun,  fire,  air  and  earth  (42).  By  their  partaking  of  the 


MAMKANDEYA  PimANAM.  8 1 

vitiated  water  many  dreadfu!  symptoms  appear  for  the 

destruction  of  sinful  iiiuri  (43).  But  we  confer  holy 

regions  opori  those  high-soidecl  men,  who^  satisfying  m all 
first,  feed  thcniselYes  upon  the  remuani  (44),  But  nothing 
of  this  exists  now ; litnv  can  creiiiion  be  preserved  ? Mow 
can  d«iy  appear  again  Thus  did  the  celestials  confer  with 
one  another  (45).  ileiiring  the  words  of  the  celestials  assem- 
bled there  and  afraid  at  the  stoppage  of  sacrifices  the  god 
Prajipaii  (ItrahiiiA)  said;— (4^).  “Energy  is  pacified  by 
energy  and  ascelirism  fiy  asceticism  ^ hear,  O ye  immortals, 
my  words  (47).  For  the  ghu‘ific,:“ation  of  the  chaste  wife  the 
iun  will  not  rbc ; and  for  his  not  rising,  you  and  the  mortals 
(are  so  anxiouH)  (48).  If  yon  wish  that  the  sun  should  risci 
you  should  projiitJaie  /\tfi*s  wifci  the  ascetic  and  devotedly 
chaste  AtnisitS**  (49],  lln>  son  said  :~lleiitg  propitiated  by 
them  she  said  “ Ictl  me  what  do  yon  wish  tii  have/'  The 
deities  then  begged  of  her  tijai  there  might  be  day  as  for- 
merly (50),  Anusiil  said  II1C  glory  of  a chaste  woman 
never  suffers  dcxa’case.  Ifonoring  this  pious  lady,  tliercforo, 
i shall  create  clay,  (4  codestiab  (5i|»  So  that  there  may  be 
again  day  and  iiiglil  and  that  the  liiisband  of  that  rigliteotii 
lady  may  not  meet  with  destruclioii'*  (51)*  The  icm  said:— 
Having  said  this  to  the  c*4«*stiati  that  ayspicious  tady  repaired 
to  her  house  and  enijuired  of  the  welfare  and  virtue  of  hericlf 
tftd  her  hiisbiifii!  (51).  Atinsni  said  0 auttpicioui  lady, 
do  you  find  delight  from  ieeiiig  the  fiica  of  your  husband  ? 
Po  you  regard  ytmr  luiiband  more  than  alt  the  deities  taken 
together  ? {54),  It  k by  lerving  my  huskind  that  I have  at'^ 
tained  this  gicat  fruit  ; itiid  for  iiiy  having  otiiained  the  fruit  of 
every  desire  all  im pediments  have  dbappeared  (55).  ()  clmptc 
lidy^  a nttii  stiiiiift!  always  pay  five  kinds  of  drlits  and  iihouUl 
amass  rictiei  In  consoriancc  with  the  dtitirs  of  his  own  errder 
(56)t  He  iliciuld  then  iluly  give  away  his  accumulaUnl  wealth 
to  proptfr  recrpiniis.  He  should  always  pracliHe  Irulli, 
iincerilyi  iticclkisiii  iiriil  kindness  Bcoig  slioiii  ol 

II 


a 


82 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


anger  and  malice  he  should  always  perform  acts  laid  down 
by  scriptures  with  reverence  and  accompankal  by  gifts  as 
much  as  lies  in  his  power  (58).  O chaste  lady,  it  is  by  very 
great  toil  that  a man  attains  to  regions  appoitUed  for  his 
own  order  and  then  gradually  to  that  of  Brahrnl  and  others 
(59).  But  by  serving  her  husband  a woman  obtains  a moity 
of  the  religious  merit  acquired  by  a man  with  fiardsliips  (60), 
A woman  has  not  separate  sacrifics,  Sra<ldhas  or  fasts ; by 
serving  their  husbands  they  attain  to  wished  for  regions  (61)* 
As  the  husband  is  the  most  excellent  course  for  women,  ymi 
should,  0 chaste  and  noble  lady,  always  set  your  heart  upon 
serving  your  husband  (62).  Being  wholtvmindedly  intent 
upon  serving  her  husband  a woman  reaps  the  religions  merit 
earned  by  a man  by  worshipping  deities,  his  aiu'estral  manes 
and  guests  and  by  the  performance  of  pious  rites'^  (63)*  The 
son  said: — Hearing  h^r  words  and  honoring  them  duly,  she 
spoke  to  Atri^s  wife  Anusul  (64).  ‘^Blessed  an<l  favonreti  I 
0 you  auspicious  by  nature,  since  the  celestials  have  looked 
upon  me  and  you  (have  endeavoured)  to  increase  my  reverence 
again  (65).  I know  full  well  that  there  is  ‘no  better  refuge 
to  women  than  their  husbands— devotion  to  them  leads  to 
their  benefit  both  . in  this  world  and  in  the  next  (6b)»  The 
husband  being  pleased  with  her,  a woman  becomci  glorioui 
both  in  this  world  and  in  the  region  of  the  dead  and  attaiiii 
to  felicity;  the  husband  is  like  a deity  to  women  (67).  Tell 
me,  0 fair  one,  what  shall  myself  and  iny  worshipful 
husband  do  for  you,  worthy  of  reverence,  who  have  come  to 
our  house”  (68).  AnusuHsaid; — ^^The  distinction  of  day  and 
night  and  pious  acts  having  ceased  at  your  words,  all  tha 
deities  with  Indra,  stricken  with  grief,  have  come  to  me  and 
solicit  the  favour  of  your  so  ordering  that  the  day  and  night 
may  be  same  as  before.  It  is  for  this  that  I have  come  to 
you.  Listen  to  my  words  (69—70).  For  the  want  of  clay 
-there  is- a stoppage  of  all  sacrifices.  0 female  -ascetic,  for 
want  of  them,  the  celestials  do  not  receive  any  nouriiliment 


t 


MAKKAN'DKVA  1'1’RANAM. 


‘‘^•5  I 

of  day  there  is  Ihe  extinction 
of  ail  pious  observances  ; troin  tlu:  dranjrht  that  arises  from 
this  extinction  tlie  universe  will  be  annihilated  (72).  If  you 
wish  to  deliver  the  univeise  from  this  calamity,  he  you 
pleased  with  people,  (>  chaste  lady,  and  let  the  sun  rise  as 
before"  (73).  'I'lie  wife  of  the  Itrahmana  said  “My  lord,  my 
husband,  has  b(;en  j'ursed  by  the  great  Miindavya,  in  anger 
saying  “yon  will  meet  with  destruction  at  the  sun  rise" 

(74).  AmisuX  said; — “If  yon  wish,  O gentle  one,  at  your 
words  1 sliall  make  your  Imsband  youthful  h.iving  a body 
as  before  (]^).  ()  fiiir  one,  ! .dways  n-gard  the  ptnver  of  llte 

chastity  of  women  and  therelore  honour  yon"  (7b).  "I'lie 
son  said  ■Thereal  she  agreeing  to  it,  the  ascetic  Ai'tisuA, 
taking  up  the  Ar-iliyu,  began  to  invoke  the  sun.  It  was  then 
night  for  ten  nights  togiuher  fyy),  Tlieu  the  divine  Viva- 
swan  (suu)  lesembliug  a tail  bhuvn  lotus  and  having  a big 
disc  rose  on  the  rising  bill  {/8‘.  In  tlie  interv.d  loo  bii  .ti.uid. 
divornui  from  liie,  dioppi-d  on  the  ground  and  while  f.dbng 
was  taken  up  by  her  (yo). 

ANUSIIA  said  \ du  rthould  not  grieve,  t)  gruitle  lady, 
and  behold  now  withmit  tlelay  my  ascetic  junver  actjiiired  by 
my  serving  my  husband  (Mo).  In  beauty,  clmraetcr,  intelU- 
gence,  speech  and  gratre  atol  otiter  acconijilishments  I have 

not  Seen  any  other  person  ruiuat  to  my  htisband^ by  tbar 

truth  let  this  Vijir.i,  (reed  from  diseasi;,  regain  his  life  anti  he 
again  a help  to  liis  wife  (or  a hundred  years  (St  -82), 

As  I have  not  considered  even  a d»:ily  erjual  to  my  husband 
by  that  trutli  let  this  Brfthmana  revive  without  hinderance 
{83).  I have  always  been  intent  upon  *:i<loring  my  husbaml 
with  my  tieeds,  uiind  and  vvords,  by  that  let  the  twieedmrii 
one  revive"  (H4),  "I'lie  son  said  'riiereupon  the  BrShmann 
rose  u[>  freed  from  disease  and  regaining  his  youth,  and 
lighting  up  tlie  room  with  his  native  <*ffti!gem*e  like  a eeles- 
tinl  naver  touched  by  rlecrepitiule  'rbeii  ftdl  showers  of 

blossoms  and  celestial  instruinenls  were  somuled  ; the  dcittea 


iK 


: Hj 


L*-  - 


84  MARKANDEYA  PURANft,\r. 

then  delightedly  said  to  Anusui  (86).  “Fray  for  a boon,  0 
auspicious  lady,  you  have  done  a great  work  for  the  deities, 
and  they  are  ready,  0 anchorite,to confer  a boon"  (87).  Amisui 
said  5— ‘if  the  celestials  headed  by  BrahmS  are  propitiated 
with  me  and  are  prepared  to  give  me  a boon  and  If  am 
deemed  by  you  worthy  of  it,  then  let  BrahmS,  Vishnu  and 
Maheswara  be  born  as  my  sons ; and  may  I with  my  hiishaiitt 
acquire  Yoga  leading  to  the  liberation  from  miseries"  (88^ — 8g). 
Thereupon,  Brahmi,  Vishnu,  Siva,  and  other  gods  said  ‘so 
be  it.”  Then  honoring  that  female  ascetic  they  repaireii 
to  their  respective  habitations  (50). 


eH AFTER  xvn. 


rv-i 

1 HE  Son  said  Thereupon  after  a long  lime  Brahma’'8 
son  the  divine  Atri  cast  his  look  upon  his  own  wife  AnusuJ 
(i)  ! bathed  after  her  course  having  all  her  limbs  purified 
and  an  excellent  form  worthy  of  being  coveted  by  all. 
Having  his  mind  stricken  with  desire  that  ascetic  thought 
in  his  mind  of  that  one  of  a blamcicbs  person  (^).  Kngrossed 
by  her  thought  he  discharged  his  vital  fluid  and  the  power- 
ful wind  carried  it  upwards  and  indirectly  (j).  Palling  on 
^1-  sides  that  white  fluid,  with  Brahma  energy,  covered  the 
ten  cardinal  quarters  in  the  shape  of  tire  moon  (4).  'Phe 
ra^Dy  the  stay  of  the  life  of  all  creatures,  was  born  m the 
mind  begotten  son  of  the  patriarch  Atri  (5X  Well-pleased 
hlgh-souled  Vishnu  was  born  from  his  own  body  as  the 
best  the  twice- born,  DattStreya  permeated  by  the  quality 
of  gtwin^s  (6).  Incarnating  himself  Vishnu  was  born  as 


^fARKANl)^■;YA  I'URANAM. 


85 


the  secoml  son  of  Atri  known  under  the  name  of  DattStreya 
who  Slicked  tlie  breast  of  AnnsuX  (7).  Getting  angry 
he  got  out  of  his  mother’s  ttomb  within  a week.  Seeing  the 
haughty,  perverse  and  guilty  king  of  Haihayas  and  getting 
angry,  enraged  as  he  w.as  before  with  the  vexation  and  trouble 
of  living  in  tlic  womb,  he  made  up  his  mind  for  killing  that 
Haihaya  (S-— i;j.  Then  was  born  Durvasi,  a portion  of  Rudra 
impregnated  with  the  cpiality  of  darkness.  Thus  BrahmJl 

Vishnu,  and  .Siva  were  born  as  her  three  sons  (to).  By 

virtue  of  the  boon  conferred  upon  her  by  the  celestials 
Brahmil  was  born  as  the  moon,  Vishnu  as  D.ittiltreya  and 

Sankara  as  nurv.lsa  (11).  The  patriarch  Soma  (moon), 

nursing  with  his  own  cool  rays  plants,  herbs  and  men,  always 
resides  in  tin;  lirmament  (heaven)  (I2).  Daitatieya,  a por- 
tion of  Vishnu,  protects  the  creatures  by  ditstroying  the 
wicked  demons  and  favouring  the  good  people  Assum- 

ing a body  {iin|ireguat<‘<l  l.y  the  energy  of  Rudra)  the.  riivine 
unborn  Durv.'is^,  of  dreadful  looks,  ihoughts  and  words,  burns 
down  those  who  insult  him  (14).  rtie  Patriarch  Rrahmfi  became 
born  in  the  family  of  Atri  as  Soma  (the  moon).  Hari,  born 
as  DattStreya  and  engiigcd  in  Yoga,  began  to  enjoy  the 
worldly  objects  (15).  Forsaking  hi|  father  and  mother  and 
resorting  to  the  most  excellent  vow,  IJnmatha  or  madness 
he  wandered  over  the  earth  (i(>).  The  ascetic  Dattatrcya  was 
always  encircled  by  the  sons  of  ascetics  ; but  tlesiring  for  dis- 
association  that  lord  lived  sunk  in  a lake  for  a long  time  (17). 
Still  those  boys  living  on  the  banks  of  the  lake  did  not  leave 
the  noble  ascetic  of  an  extremely  liandsomti  look  (18).  , And  even 
on  the  comjdetion  of  a humired  celestial  ye.os  tire  sous  of  the 
ascetics  did  not  leave  the  bank  of  the  lake  out  of  love  for 
him  (ig).  Thereupon  arose  from  the  water  the  ascetic 
taking  with  him  an  auspicious  lady,  chad  in  a cele.stial  rai- 
ment, and  gifted  with  beautiful  Irreast  and  hips  (sn),  thinking 
" the  sons  of  ascetics  will  leave  me  on  seeing  me  in  the 
company  of  a woman  atul  then  I shall  live  disassociated” 


86 


MARKANDEYA  PURAHAM. 


II  ■' 

'ii 

I 

f? 


.ji* 


(21).  Still  the  boys  did  not  leave  the  ascetic  and  in* 
began  to  drink  wine  in  the  company  of  the  wwnari  {22), 
But  even  then  those  sons  of  the  ascetics  did  not  leave  liiin  al- 
though engaged  in  drinking  wine  with  his  wife.  Altlioiigli  he 
was  sullied  by  the  enjoyment  of  carnal  pleasure,  sifigiiig^itiiisic 
and  the  company  of  a woman,  and  even  by  drinking  iviiie 
still  he  was  regarded  (by  them)  as  one  having  a great  soul 
(22 — 23).  Nor  did  that  great  ascetic  commit  any  sin  by 
drinking  wine  like  air  blowing  in  the  house  of  a Clianclila 
(24).  Drinking  wine,  that  one  conversant  with  Yoga,  praciiscri 
austerities  in  the  company  of  his  wife.  That  masti  r iit 
Yogis  was  worthy  of  being  contemplated  by  thc:rii  desiroiii 
of  emancipation  (25Y 


CHAPTER  XVIlh 


-:o:- 


. 1 HE  SON  said : — Some  time  after  Kritavirrya  had  gone 
to  heaven,  the  citizens  together  with  the  couiicillori  anil 
priests  called  his  son  Arjuna  with  a view  to  install  him  on  the 
throne  and  he  then  said:~-^4  shall  not  govern  my  king- 
dom, 0 ministers,  which  leads  to  helL  If  that  for  which  t 
king  takes  revenues  is  not  done  it  goes  for  nothing 
By  'giving  over  to  the  king  a twelfth  of  their  proceetk  the 
■ merchants  can  go  along  roads  protected  by  the  police  from: 
the  robbers  (3).  The  cow-herds  give  a sixth  part  of  the 
'clarified  butter,  whey  or  whatever  they  get  and  the  collivator 
also  a sixth;  If  they  give  more  than  the  share  ancl  if . the 
king  accepts  it  from  traders,  it  leads  to  the  deft  met  ioti  of 
Ishtha  and  Purtha  acts  and  that  king  acts  like  a tltkf  (4—5). 
If  they,  hating;paid  their  revenue,  are  protected  by  olhert, 


MARKANDEYA  t’URANAM, 


87 


the  king,  receiving  the  sixtJi  part  of  the  outturn  as  revenue, 
certainly  goes  tc>  hell  (rt).  This  has  been  fixed  by  the  former 
sages  as  tlie  remuneration  of  the  king  for  protecting  them  | 
if  lie  fails  to  prottjct  them  he  becomes  guilty  of  theft  (7),  If 
tfmrefore.  by  practising  hard  auHteriti<\s  I can  attain  to  the 
state  of  a Yogi  whicf»  I wish,  I Khali  be  the  one  king  of  the 
earth  endued  with  the  power  of  protecting  the  %vorld  (8)  , 
bearing  arms,  Inmored  by  all  and  giftcnl  with  prosperity.  I 
shall  not  make  me  a sharer  in  sin  (9)/^  The  son  saul 
Learning  his  decision,  tiie  higldy  intelligei^t  and  elderly 
ascetic  by  name  Ciarg-i,  seatm]  in  the  innlsi  of  the  minisiers, 
said  (ton  ‘if  for  governing  your  kingdom  well,  you  wish  to 
do  this,  i^rince,  tlo'U  listen  to  my  words  and  act  according 
to  thent  (n),  Wiirship,  C)  king,  the  great  Datlatreya,  a 
refuge  unto  all,  who^*  living  in  tin*  valh*y  of  tlio  Haltya 
mountain,  protects  the  three  worlds;  iinimu'Sfnl  in  Yoga, 
noble,  iinpartial  tcnv.ird%  all,  a pot  lion  of  V^isluiu,  incarnatetl 
on  earth  for  rt!l«’asmg  the  worhl ; adtiring  whom  the  ihousatuT 
eyed  Deity  (tndra)  ri*giined  his  own  siaiitm  robbed  by  tho 
wicked-souled  Daityas  and  slew  the  sons  of  Diti*^  (ia~i4). 

AnjUM4  said  How  tlid  the  celestials  atlore  the  power- 
ful DattiUreya.  ? How  ilid  VAsiiva  regain  the  dignity  of  Indra 
which  had  hvin\  robinol  (l>y  the  Dailyas)  ?'*  (15I 

CiAMCiA  siiift  ‘rbere  arose  a dreaful  bailie  hetween  the 
celestials  and*  the  D^navas;  the  lord  of  the  Daityas  wa« 
Jattibha  and  ihat,  of  the  celeitials  the  husband  of  Sachi 
(Indra)  (ifi)*  Wliile  lliry  were  fighting  a celestial  year 
pilisccl  away  and  thi?n  the  celt^Htmls  were  defeated  and 
the  Daityas  came  off  vicioriotiH  (i  jl  'Ihen  iiefeaitsl  by  the 
Dtiiavai  iiiitl  itepfessed  on  account  of  tluy  success  of  the 
eiiemici  the  cehistials  heailed  by  Viprachiui  addressed  them- 
telves  for  flyiiig  (18).  De,?»iroiiH  of  roaUng  the  demonak 


* It  iii.tf  4K/1  ** ,1  b4ik  ill  rn*hir4m'*j''  friiu  .S*a-\rri,  I'Kitience  aft# 


u 


MAKKANDEYA  PU^ANAM. 


host  Vrihaspati  came  there  and  began  to  consult  witli  those 
Rishis  called  Valikhilyas  (19). 

Vrihashpati  said  : — You  should  with  dovoticm  gratify 
the  great  ascetic  Datiatreya,  the  high-souled  son  of  Atri  of 
uncommon  ways  (20).  A giver  of  boons  as  he  is»  he  will 
confer  one  for  the  destruction  of  the  Daityas  and  then  the 
deities  all  assembled  will  slay  the  Daityas  and  Dlnavas^^  (21). 
Garga  said: — Thus  addressed  the  celestials  then  repaired 
to  the  hermitage  of  Dittttreya  and  saw  tin*  liigh-mHilecl 
(ascetic)  in  company  witli  Lakshmi  liymttc^d  by  the  Gan- 
dharvas  and  engaged  in  drinking  wine.  Ooing  there  they 
bowing  prayed  to  him  for  effecting  what  ought  to  be  done 
(22—23).  They  sang  his  praises  and  provided  meats,  drtnki 
and  garlands  for  him.  The  c<destials  waited  when  he  waited 
and  moved  when  he  moved.  And  when  he  sat  on  the  eiishion 
they  worshipped  him,  having  seated  themselvt^s  btdow  (24)* 
Dattatreya  then  said  to  the  celestials  who  bowed  to  Inm 
What  do  you  expect  of  me  that  you  are  serving  me  thus** 
(25).  The  deities  said: — ^^0  foremost  of  ascetics,  by  the 
demons  headed  by  Jambha  invading  the  three  workli  we 
have  been  deprived  of  Bhur,  Bhuva  &c  , and  of  all  our  shifes 
in  sacrifices  (26).  We  pray  for  your  grace ; concert  iome 
plan,  0 god,  for  their  destruction  and  our  safety  so  that 
we  may  regain  the  celestial  region*'  (37).  Dattitraya 
said. — "I  am  addicted  to  drink  and  am  impuro— I am  not 
master  of  myself.  Why  do  you,  0 celestials,  expect  from 
me  a defeat  of  you  enemies**  (28).  The  deities  said  :— **  0 
sinless  one,  thou  art  the  lord  of  one  universe^ — -no  iinpiirity 
can  attach  to  thee  whose  mind  has  been  washed  and  purified 
by  learning  resplendent  with  the  rays  of  knowledge  (29)* 
Dattatreya  said:— '‘True  it  is  0 celestials,  that  I,  looking 
■ufon  all  things  with  impartiality,  have  knowledgir— but 
associating  with  this  woman  I have  been  sullied  (30).  The 
association  with  a woman  being  bent  on  enjoyment  leads  to 
inquity,**  . Thus  addressed  the  deities  again  said  {31)*  O 

f' 


Markanheya  euranAr*. 


Stj 

foremost  of  llio  twice-horo,  this  sinless  mother  of  llie  universe 
is  never  polluted  like  the  rays  of  the  sun  equally  touching 
& twice-born  one  and  a Chandala"  (32).  Garga  said  -There- 
upon being  thus  addressed  by  the  deities  DattAtreya,  smiling, 
said  to  the  celestials:—"  If  this  be  your  opinion,  d celestials, 
then  inviting  all  the  Daityas  to  battle  speedily  bring  thenl 
within  the  range  of  my  vision  (33 — 34).  Being  seen  by  me 
and  having  their  strength  and  energy  enfeebled  by  the  fire 
tjf  nly  looks  tliey  all,  numberless  as  they  are,  will  meet  with 
destruction"  C35).  Hearing  his  words  the  mighty  Daityas 
were  challenged  to  fight  by  the  celestials  and  in  anger  rushed 
against  them  (311).  B-ing  slain  by  those  Daityas,  the  celes- 
tials, stricken  with  fi-ar,  all  speedily  went  to  the  hermitage 
of  DattAtreya  seeking  his  protection  (37).  Slaying  the 
Celestials  the  Daityas  too  entered  (here  and  saw  the  greatly 
powerful  anti  fiigh-souled  DattAtreya  (3H) ; with  Ids  wife 
seated  at  the  left,  the  welfare  and  the  wished-for  of  the 
entire  vltliversc,  beautiful  of  all  limbs — Lakshmi,  having  n 
tnoon-like  countenance ; (.pj).  with  beautiful  eyes  like  the 
pet,al8  of  a blue-lotus,  with  graeefitl  hips  add  breast,  speaking 
In  sweet  words  and  endued  with  all  the  accomplishments  of 
a female  (40).  Beholding  her  before  them  the  Daity.is  had 
their  minds  stricken  with  desire;  and  thus  assailed  they 
could  not  with  a patient  mind  bear  the  rising  (desire)  (41). 
Leaving  off  the  celestials,  they  having  their  ertergy  erffeebled, 
became  desirous  of  stealing  that  d.tmsel ; assailed  (by  desire]! 
and  overwhelmed  by  sin,  they  thus  said:-— (42).  *' If  we 
can  secure  this  jewel  of  a damsel,  the  essence  of  the  three' 
Worlds,  we  shall  then  he  crowned  with  success— even  this  is 
our  conviction  (43).  Then  placing  her  on  a palanquin,  O you 
the  repressors  of  the  celestials,  let  us  all  go  to  our  habitations — 
this  is  our  determiimtion”  (44).  Possessed  by  desire  they 
thus  spoke  amongst  themselves.  Then  placing  the  chasttf 
damsel  on  a palanquin  and  carrying  it  on  their  heads  the 
Llaityas  and  Danavas,  assailed  by  lust,  proceeded  toward# 
12 


I 


P I'l  'Ml 


II 


•I  I 


[ t - I 
1 


go  MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 

their  habitations  (45— 46).  Then  smiling  Datt.ltrcya  said 
the  celestials : — "Fortunately  you  will  prosper ; since  Lakshmi, 
passing  by  the  seven  other  places,  has  got  on  the  heads  o{ 
those  Daityas,  she  will  seek  a new  man”  (47).  The  deities 
said Tell  us,  O lord  of  the  Universe,  stationed  in  what 
places  she  confers  what  fruits  upon  men  or  brings  about  their 
destruction”  (48).  Dattatreya  said ; — “When  placed  on  the 
foot  of  a nvan  she  confers  upon  him  a house  ; when  on  the 
thigh  she  gives  clothes  and  diverse  riches  (49).  When 
placed  at  the  organ  of  excretion  she  gives  wife  and  when 
on  the  lap  she  gives  offspring  ; and  when  in  tlie  heart  she 
gratifies  the  desires  of  men  (50).  When  the  best  Lakshmi 
is  placed  on  the  throat  of  those  endued  with  prosperity  she 
gives  an  ornament  of  the  throat,  union  with  beloved  friends 
and  wives  living  in  foreign  countries,  cultured  words,  grace 
and  makes  Iris  commands  always  carried  out.  When  she, 
sprung  from  the  ocean,  is  placed  on  the  mouth  she  gives  the 
power  of  a poet  (51 — 52).  When  she  is  placed  on  the 
head  she  forsakes  (the  man)  and  seeks  refuge  elsewhere. 
She  is  now  on  their  heads  and  will  immedi.alvly  renounce 
thenr  (53).  Do  you  all  take  »p  your  we.apons  and  strike 
those  enenaks  of  the  celestials.  These  shodicl  not  be  greatly 
feared  by  you  for  they  have  been  robbed  of  their  energy  by 
me.  By  ravishing  another's  wife  all  their  pietks  have  been 
consumed  and  their  prowess  has  been  destroyed  (54).  There- 
fore those  enemies  of  the  gods  should  be  killed  with  various 
weapons.  While  Lakslimi  has  occupied  their  heads  they  will 
meet  wkh  destruction.  This  has  been  heard  by  «s”  (55). 
Then -eulogized  by  the  celestials  who  were  all  filled  with  delSghl 
Jn  consequence  of  the  destruction  of  th?  Daityas,  Lakshmi 
leaped  down  (therefrom)  and  went  to  the  great  ascetic  DattS- 
♦reya  (56).  Thereupon  sakting  the  intelligent  Dattitreya,  the 
deities,  freed  from  anxiety  as  before,  repaired  to  the  celestial 
region  (57).  If,  0 foremost  of  kings,  you  wish  to  have  your 
desired-for,  matichkss  wealth,  do  you  speedily  worship  hitsu 


f. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


1 HE  Son  .said  ; — Repairinfj  to  the  hermitage  of  DattS- 
treya  at  the  words  of  the  Rishi,  Kartaviryya,  the  king  of 
men,  adored  him  with  devotion  (i).  By  shampooing  his 
legs  and  otherwise,  by  collecting  honey,  etc,,  by  bringing  for 
him  garland.s,  sandal,  scetits,  water  and  fruits,  by  arranging 
for  his  meals,  and  taking  away  the  refuses,  he  gratified  the 
ascetic.  As  the  deities  had  bium  addressed  by  him  formerly 
in  the  s.ami!  w,iy  he  s,aid  to  him  (the  king)  describing  him 
as  polluted  by  the  drinking  of  wine: — “This  woman  is 
always  be8i<le  me — and  I have  been  contaminated  hy  her 
company.  You  .should  not  retpiest  me  who  am  in(',apablc. 
Do  you  seek  anothi’r  who  is  c.ipnble,”  (2 — 5).  T im  son 
said— •Thus  addressed  by  the  ascetic  and  remembering  the 
words  of  Ciarga,  Kritaviryya's  son,  Arjuna,  bowing,  replied 
(6).  Arjuna  said  : — “ St.tlioned  in  your  own  illusive  energy, 
why  do  you  delude  me,  Ogod?  You  are  sinless  and  like- 
wise is  the  goddess,  the  mother  of  all  creatures.'*  (7).  There- 
at thus  addressed  and  tlelighted,  the  god  said  to  tlie  great 
Kirtaviryya,  by  whom  the  entire  earth  had  been  subjugated 
(8).  “ Fray  for  a boon,  since  you  have  been  able  to  perceive 
my  true  form,  I have  been  greatly  pleased  with  you,  O 
king  (9).  Kneompassing  their  great  delight  I confer  wives, 
sons  and  wealth  upon  those  men  who  worship  me  along  with 
Lakshmt  with  fragrant  wreaths  and  others,  with  presents 
of  wine  and  meals,  with  sweetmeats  and  clarified  butter  ac- 
companied by  the  adorations  of  the  Hrahmanas,  songs  and 
the  charming  music  of  Vini,  flute,  conch  and  bugle.  And 
I bring  about  tfudr  stidden  dt:aths  who  disregard  me  (10 — 13.) 
May  good  betide  you  ; <lo  you  pi"iy  (or  a desired-for  boon  ; 
by  youf  singing  my  secret  glories  I have  been  ready  lo' 


§2 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


'li  ‘ 


ejftend  my  grace  to  you  (X3).  KSrtaviryya  said; — "If  thou 
art  propitiated  with  me,  0 deity,  do  thou  confer  upon  me 
jsuch  ejfcellent  prosperity  by  which  I may  protect  my 
subjects  and  he  not  touched  by  impiety  (14).  f may  read 
the  intentions  of  others,  may  have  none  to  match  mo  in 
battle  and  I wish  to  have  a thousand  arms  and  light-handedt 
pess  (15).  I may  go  unobstructed  every  where—on 
piountains,  m w'ater,  on  eartli,  in  sky  and  the  nether  region 
nnd  1 may  meet  with  death  from  one  who  is  mightier  (than  I) 
(16).  I may  point  out  good  ways  to  them  wlitj  always 
wend  wrong  ways  and  may  my  guests  be  gratified  with  gifts 
of  endless  riches  (17).  By  recollecting  me  let  no  one  loose 
bis  property  in  my  kingdom  and  may  f have  whole  minded 
devotion  in  thee*’  (x8).  DattStreya  said  You  will  get 
all  the  boons  you  have  begged  and  by  my  favour  you  will 
he  the  I^ord  Paratpouat”  (19).  The  son  said: -.Thereupon 
sahttmg  Dattatroya  and  summoipng  together  all  his  subjects 
h,e  duly  i^ceiyed  installation  (20).  Then  by  the  favour  of 
Battatreya,  bringing  all  articles  of  installation  camo  thero 
all  the  leading  Qandharvas,  Apsarlis,  the  Rishis  headed  by 
Yasistha,  the  mountains  headed  by  Miaru,  the  rivers  headed 
by  the  Qanges,  the  oceans  full  of  waters,  Plaksha  and  other 
trees,  the  celestials  headed  by  VAsava,  the  hirtls  headed  by 
Tirkshya,  the  citizens  and  villagers.  The  celestial  UrahmS 
and  others  engaged  in  conversation  with  one  another.  For 
the  destruction  of  impiety  and  the  protection  of  virtue  b® 
was  installed  by  NSrayana  in  the  form  of  Dattatreya  by 
Je  r,iv,ers  and  oqeans  with  the  sprinkling  of  water  and  by  the 
. m xs  (?irrT25).  Established  in  his  kingdom  and  endued 
Wdh  strength  for  obtaining  great  prosjrerity  from  Dattatreya 
that  ^aihaya  ixrad^  a proclamation  (36).  "Whoever,  save 
^ shall  take  up  a weapon,  from  to-day  and  a robber  and  one 
xp^  upon  injuring,  others  shall  be  slain  by  me"  (27).  Wkh 
the  issue,  of  >he  plodamalionYhere  was  no  liolder  of  weapon 

that  kingdom  save  that  foremost  of  men  gifted  with  gfeat 


MARKANDEYA  EURANAM. 


93 


prowess  (28).  lie  alone  was  the  protector  of  villages,  of 
beasts,  of  fields  as  well  as  of  the  twice*born  (29).  He  be- 
cattle  the  protector  of  the  ascetics  as  well  as  that  of  traders* 
And  that  slayer  of  liostile  heroes,  as  soon  as  he  was  thought 
of,  used  to  release  people  stricken  with  fear  of  rc^bers, 
beasts  of  pray,  fire,  or  weapons,  those  drowned  in  the  occean 
or  those  assailed  by  other  calantitios  (30 — 31).  While  he 
ruled  the  earth  no  body  lost  liis  property.  He  celebrated 
many  sacrifices  accompanied  by  profuse  gifts  (32).  He 
undertook  many  battles  and  performed  hard  austerities.  Be- 
holding hii  prosperity  and  intelligence  the  ascetic  Angirl 
paid:  (33).  **  Forsooiln  kings  will  never  be  able  to  equal 

ICArtaviryya  in  sacrilici^,  in  gltlH,  in  asceticism  and  great 
energy  in  bailie/^  (34),  That  king  used  to  cedeiirate  a sacri** 
fice  in  honor  of  Ihiitfitrcya,  on  that  day  on  which  from  him 
heobtaincil  prosperity  {35).  And  theie  l>ehobllng  the  great 
prosperity  of  the  king  the  subjrHls  too,  with  devotion,  used 
to  celebrate  sacrificr^s  in  Ids  honour  (3fvl.  Sucli  is  the  glory 
of  the  inieHigent  Hattitrcyie  The  incarnaiions,  of  the  great, 
eternal  ViHluuq  llie  preceptor  of  the  mahile  and  tmmo* 
bile  creration*  incomparable  and  the  holder  of  the  Sranga 
bow,  conch,  mure  and  chib,  have  bt-m%  described  in  th© 
Puranls  (37-««;|S).  The  man,  wdm  meditates  upon  this  most’ 
ixceUonI  form,  bitcomcs  hap|iy  and  is  fioed  fiirever  from 
worldiineis  (39).  Why  shall  not  men  seek  refuge  with  him^ 
who  tlw«ayi  says  : ■ i am  easily  aititinahk  unto  the  votaries  of 
¥iilinii  by  devotion*^  (40),  For  the  destruction  of  tmpiely 
and  proteclicm  of  virtue  the  deity,  without  beginning  or  end, 
ctrrbi  ©ti  lh«^  work  of  creation  and  preservation  (41),  I" 
shall  now  relate  to  you  Itm  birth  of  Alatka,  Dattltreya 
described  Yoga  to  llial  liigh*saulerl  royal  saint  Alaika  devote, 
cd  to  liii  sire  (42I* 


♦ 


t 


' - jf.' 5 
: if: 

M i'l 


H 

II' 


I'L 

'1 


CHAPTER  XX, 

T 

I HE  SON  said  : — There  was  a highly  energetic  king  la 
the  days  of  yore,  by  name  Shatrujit  in  whose  sacrifice  drink, 
ing  Soma  Purandara  was  gratified  (i).  His  son  became 
greatly  energetic  and  capable  of  smiting  his  enemies  and. 
in  intelligence,  prowess  and  grace,  was  equal  to  the  preceptor 
SukraorAswini  (2).  The  prince  was  always  encircled  by 
other  princes  of  equal  age,  intelligence,  energy,  prowess  and 
exertion  (3).  They  sometimes  used  to  eng.ige  themselves 
scriptural  discussions,  sometimes  in  the  criticism  of 
poems,  dramas  and  music,  sometimes  in  the  pleasurable 
game  at  dice,  sometimes  in  learning  the  use  of  arms  and  the 

art  of  warfare  and  sometimes  in  riding  elephants,  horses,  or 

m nving  cars  (4  5).  Thus  did  the  prince,  filled  with 
delight,  sported  day  and  night  in  the  company  of  other 

' tedf  • Vaisyas  of  the  same  age  del igh* 

edty  joined  them  (y).  After  some  time  two  NHga  princes, 

sruised  i R youlkful  and  beautifui  (Nngas)  dis- 

Sir  bodTeJ  r°"'  ff  ' ““■* '»  «'S«lhcr,  rub 

.ngufutti  r «rt::, 

prince  those  two  Na<ya  orinc^s  ^ a V ‘ 

every  day  (12).  With!  ‘here  delightedly. 

iSation  the  prince  too  attaf°d*r*'^°'^^*’ conver- 
(13).  Without  them  h 14°  satisfaction  from  them 

y y bor  could  he  enfoy.  or  read  scriptures  for  Hi# 


pWS'S 


{ 


MARKANDEYA  PU^ANAM.  . 


95 


Jmprovcment  of  his  own  self  (14).  And  Without  that  highk 
souled  one  llicy  too  used  to  spend  night  in . the  nether 
region  sighing  heavily  and  used  to  come  away  every  day  (15) 
After  a long  time  the  father  asked  the  two  sons  : — “ To  whom 
in  the  region  of  mortals  ate  you  so  attached,  0 my  sons? 
(16).  You  two,  beautiful  as  you  are,  have  not  been  seen  by 
me  for  many  days  during  the  day  time  in  the  nether  region, 

1 sec  you  only  in  the  night"  (17). 

The  son  said  :— -Thus  addressed  by  their  sire  andjbowing 
with  folded  palms  those  two  great  sons  of  the  king  of 
serpents  replied  : -(tS).  "O  father,  there  is  a son  of  Shatrujit 
celebrated  by  the  name  of  Hritadhwaja,  endued  with  beauty 
and  simplicity,  heroic,  honourable  and  sweet  sj>eechcd  j he 
does  not  speak  uticalled  for,  is  an  expert  in  speaking,  learned 
friendly  and  a mint:  of  accomplishments  j he  honours  the 
honourable,  is  inielligent,  modest  and  has  humility  for  orna- 
ment ; our  minds  have  been  pilfered  by  his  good  behaviour 
and  love  ami  wc  Itave  ihj  altaeliment,  O father,  either  for  the 
region  of  Nfigas  or  the  region  illiuva  (19— 2 1).  In  his 
sepfiration  even  the  nether  region  docs  not  appear  cool  but 
produces  allliclion  from  heat,  in  lits  company  even  the  rays  • 
of  the  stm  give  dt'light"  (22).  The  father  sard  : Blessed 

is  that  son  of  a pious  man  whose  accomplishments  are  being” 
sung  even  in  his  absence  by  accomplished  beings  like  your- 
selves (23)  Persons,  well-read  in  scriptures,  (sometimes) 
behave  themselves  lutl  (whereas)  there  are  ignorant  menr 
who  behave  well ; O my  sons,  I consider  him  more  blessed 
who  has  a good  character  m well  as  a knowlotlge  of  scrip- 
tures (34).  His  father  has  a true  son  whose  friends  speal! 
of  his  qualities  as  a friend  and  whose  enemies  speak  highly 
of  his  prowess  (25 ) For  the  satisfaction  of  the  mind  of 
that  your  benefactor,  have  you  ever  accomplished  his  desired 
for  objects  ? (aft).  He  is  blessed  and  blessed  is  his  life  and” 
birth  from  whom  persons,  expecting  something,  do  not  go 
away  disappointed  and  who  is  never  weak  in  doing;  good  to 


his  friends  (27).  You  can  without  hesitation  confer 
him  whatever  he  likes  of  gold,  jewels,  conveyances  and 
seats  that  are  in  my  house  (28).  Cursed  is  tlu*  life  of  that 
man,  who,  without  returning  the  benefit  of  friends  doing 
good,  thinks,  ‘ I am  living”  (3(9).  People  desire;  for  the  per* 
petual  advancement  of  that  wise  man,  who,  like  a cloudj 
showers  benefits  upon  his  friends  and  injuries  on  entvmies'* 
(30).  The  sons  said ” What  can  we  do  for  him  who  always 
does  what  should  be  done  and  in  whose  house  persons  are 
always  united  vVith  their  desired-for  objects  (31).  \Vhere  are  in 
the  nether  region  those  jewels, seats,  conveyances,  drrtsses  and 
ornaments  that  are  in  his  house  ? (3af)-  The  knowledge  that 
exists  in  him  is  not  to  be  seen  elsewhere.  O father,  he  is 
the  foremost  of  those  who  sever  the  doubts  of  the  wise  (3'3)- 
There  is  otte  thing  to  be  done  by  him  which  it  is  impossible 
for  us  to  accomplish— -only  BrahmS,  Vishmi,  Maheswara  and 
others  Cart  do  it”  (34>).  The  father  said : — ''Whether  it  is 
within  my  pow'er  or  not  I wish  to  bear  of  that  excellent  work 
of  his.  What  is  there  which  the  learned  cannot  do?  (3|)< 
Those  who  have  a firm  perseverence  can  get  by  all  they 
desire — the  dignity  of  a god,  that  of  the  king  of  immortals 
or  that  which  even  they  Worship  (36).  For  the  energetk 
men  who  have  controlled  their  minds  and  senses  there  i# 
nothing  unknownable,  unapproachable  and  unattainable  either 
rn  this  world  or  in  the  celestial  region  (37).  While  moving 
on  an  ant  goes  to  the  length  of  a thousand  yoyanas  and  if  hw 
does  not  like  to  go,  Garuda  even  cannot  stir  out  a footstep 
(38).  There  is  nowhere  to  go  or  not  to  go  for  inactive  men. 
Where  is  the  earth  and  the  region  of  Dhruva,  which  the 
king  tfttanapada’^s  son  I>ruva  attained  to  although  living  on 
earth  (3’9).  Tell  me,  O sons,  therefore  what  you  can  do 
for  the  great  prince  by  which  you  tmy  be  freed  from  hie 
(40).  The  sons  said "What  had  befallen  that  one 
gftod  eonduct  in  his  boyhood  was  described  by  that  hlg^- 
souled  0*6,  G f^her  (41).  Obee  came  to  the  king  Slrntrujil 


MARkkNDEYA  PURAnAM. 


MARKAN’DKSA  PUkANAM. 


a Icatlinj^  and  prosperous  twice-born  one  by  name  GSlava, 
taking  an  excellent  horse  (42).  He  said  to  the  king  :• — 
“Coming  to  my  hermitage,  O king,  a sinful  wretch  of  a demort 
is  devastating  it  {43).  Assuming  the  forms  of  a lion*  elephant 
and  of  other  small  wild  animals  day  and  night  he  uselessly 
so  obstructs  me  who  am  inmersed  in  concentration  and  medi- 
tation and  am  o!>sefvant  of  the  vow  of  silence,  that  my  mind 
is  agitated  (44-— 45*)  I am  capable  of  consuming  him  imme- 
diately with  the  fire  of  anger,  but  I do  not  like  to  waste* 
(3  king,  my  hard  earned  austerities  (46).  O king,  oncej  on  a 
time,  being  distresserl  by  him,  while  I was  sighing  heavily  with 
a depreSHCtl  heart  on  st^eing  that  demon,  this  horse  %vii.s  im- 
mediately dropped  down  from  tin*  sky  and  words  were  uttered 
not  by  hcHtily  beings.  Hear  them,  (47-— 48)*  “To  you  m 
given  this  mtjst  exetdieni  horse,  which,  without  ext^rtiou,  is 
capable  g*>ing  roiuui  the  circumference  of  the  <mtire  earth 
along  with  the  sun  {49).  It  shall  have  its  course  «nol>structed 
in  ttie  nether  region,  in  the.  firmament  or  in  the  water  and 
and  its  motion  shall  not  be  liroken  even  while  going  to  all 
the  quarters  or  the  mountains  (50)*  Since  it  is  capable  of 
going  round  the  circumference  of  the  earth-  withouf: 
any  exertion  it  shall  be  known  on  earth  by  the  name  of 
Kiivalaya  (51),  (Horemost  of  the  twicc-born,  riding  on  this- 
horse  i iritadwaja,  the  son  of  the  king  Satrujit,  shall  destroy 
that  sinful  wretcii  of  a tiemon  who  is  distressing  you  day 
and  night.  And  obtaining  this  jem  of  a horse  he  will  be 
welbkfiowii  tbrcjygh  it  (53“53).**  For  this  1 have  come  to 
you  ; sulidiie  him,  C)  king,  who  throws  impediments  in  the 
way  of  ascetti*i»iii.  A king  too  is  entitled  to  a due  share  of 
ascetic  merit  (54).  I dedicate,  O king,  this  jem  of  a h-orse  to 
you.  Do  you  order  y«nir  son  so  that  virtue  may  not  dis- 
appear'* (5|).  At  Ills  words  the  virtuous-souled  king,  placing 
his  ioii  Ilritidwaja  on  that  jem  of  a horse  and  perfiirming 
betiedictory  rites,  despatched  him  with  (iaiava.  Taking  him 
the  ascetk  too  repatrini  to  liis  exalted  hcimitagc  (5^^’~57)* 


CHAPTER  XX f. 


f ' 

I 

i- 

I, 


fp 

1 HE  Father  said ; — ^Wonderful  5s  your  story,  O sons, 
tell  me  what  was  done  by  the  prince  proceeding  along  with 
Gl.lava  (i).  The  sons  said  : — Residing  in  the  charming  her- 
mits^e  of  Galava  the  son  of  the  king  removed  all  the  im- 
pediments of  those  conversant  with  Rrahman  (2),  That 
wretch  of  a Danava,  beside  himself  witli  vanity,  conld  not  per- 
ceive that  the  heroe  Kuvalayiswa  was  living  in  the  hermitage 
of  Galava  (3).  Thereupon  one  day,  to  inflict  the  Brahmana 
Galava,  engaged  in  evening  prayers,  he  came  there  assuming 
the  form  of  a boar  (4).  Then  the  disciples  of  the  ascetic 
crying  aloud,  the  prince,  riding  quickly  on  his  horse  and 
taking  up  the  bow,  pursued  the  boar  {5).  And  stretching 
his  strong  and  beautifully  painted  bow  he  struck  him  with  a 
bow  lustrous  like  the  crescent  (6).  Being  pierced  by  the  arrow 
and  anxious  to  save  his  life  the  beast  entered  into  a huge 
forest  abounding  in  hilly  trees  (7).  Then  spurred  on  by  the 
prince  engaged  in  satisfying  the  command  of  his  father,  the 
horse,  fleet  as  the  mind,  quickly  pursued  him  (8).  Then  passing 
over  quickly  a,  thousand  yoyanas  the  boar  fell  into  a pit  oa 
the  face  of  the  earth  (p).  And  following  him  immediatefy 
the  prince  too,  with  the  horse,  fell  into  that  huge  pit  covered 
with  darkness  (la).  The  prince  could  not  see  him  there  : b® 
then  saw  the  light  and  nether  region,  but  could  not  se© 
htnv  in).  He  saw  there  a-»city  resembling  that  of  Puran- 
data,  surrounded  by  ramparts  and  abounding  In  a number  of 
golden  palaces  (12'}.  Entering  into  that  city  he  did  not  see 
man'^and  then  while  retracing  his  steps  quickly  he 
espied  a damsel  (1-31),  Thereat,  that  one  of  a slender  make  was 
asked- by  him;  “ To  whom  and  for  what  are  yon  going  P** 
The  damsel  sai§  nothing  and  weal  up  to  a palace  ( 14).  liad- 


f 


MARKANDF.YA  TURANAM. 


S9 

ing  the  horse  somewhere  the  prince  fearlessly  followed  her 
having  his  eyes  expanded  with  wonderment  (15).  He  then 
saw  a damsel  like  Rati,  the  companion  of  KSma,  lying  on  a 
highly  spacious  hed-stead  all  made  of  gold  (16).  Her 
countenance  was  like  that  of  the  moon  : eye-brows  fair, 
hips  and  breast  round;  her  lips  were  like  Vimva  fruits; 
she  was  thin  built  and  her  e}'es  were  like  red  lotuses  (ty). 
Her  nails  were  dark-blue  and  a little  high ; her  body 
was  dark-blue  and  lender  and  her  hands  and  legs  were  cop- 
pery ; her  thighs  were  like  the  trunks  of  an  elephant— she 
had  beautiful  teeth  and  her  curling  locks  were  dark-blue, 
thin  and  firm  set  (iS).  Beholding  her  with  every  limb  fair 
like  the  tender  creeper  (wife)  around  the  body  of  the  bodiless 
(god  of  love)  the  prince  took  her  to  be  a goddess  of  the 
nether  region  (n>).  fhdmlding  him  too  with  dark-blue  locks, 
with  wtdl-huilt  thighs,  arms  an<i  shoulders  that  fair  one  also' 
took  him  fur  Mud,tna  (the  god  of  love)  (40).  Having  her 
mind  agitated  that  noble  lady,  of  a slender  make,  rose  up  but 
immediately  yielded  to  the  control  of  bashfulness,  wonder  and 
restlessness  (31).  fShe  thought)  " Who  is  he  ? Is  he  a god, 
a Yaksha,  a Gandharva,  a serpent,  a Vidyadhara  or?a  man 
who  practised  virtue#  only  that  has  come  here?  " (22).  In- 
dulging in  this  way  in  various  thoughts,  sighing  heavily  and 
sttingon  the  earth,  that  one,  of  inebriete  eyes,  fell  into  a trance 
(33).  Assailed  by  the  shafts  of  Cupid  the  prince  too,  ap- 
proaching, ctmsoled  her  and  said  " Do  not  fear'*  (24).  Taking 
up  a palmyra  fan,  the  damsel,  who  had  been  seen  before  by 
the  high-souled  one,  began  to  fan  her  anxiously  (25).  Then 
soothing  her  he  encjuired  into  the  cause  of  her  trance  and  the 
damsel,  a little  abashed,  described  every  thing  through  her 
companion  (26).  She  described  to  the  prince  at  length,  that 
the  trance  was  owing  to  her  seeing  him,  as  she  had  been 
CommwsioatHl  by  her  nristress  (27).  The  woman  said - 
“0  prince,  she  is  the  dauglitcr  of  the  king  of  Gandharvia 
iiving  in  the  tcleslwl  region  celebrated  by  the  name  ©f 


I 


too 


MARKANDEYA  PURANaM. 


Vishawavasij.  This  one,  of  fair  fye-brows,  is  known  as 
Madaiasi  (28).  .The  fierce  Dinava,  capable  of  riving  tht 
enemies,  known  as  PStaiaketu,  the  son  of  Vajraketn,  lives  b 
the  nether  region  (29).  When  she  came  to  the  garden  witb 
j out  me  that  vicious-souled  one,  resorting  to  his  illusive 

! energy  begotten  of  darkness,  carried  her  away  (30b  The 

Asura  shall  espouse  her  on  the  thirteenth  lunar  day.  He  dors 
not  deserve  this  fair  one  as  a Sudra  is  not  entitled  to  read 
the  Vedas  (31),  While  at  the  end  of  the  day  this  lady  was  about 
to  lay  violent  bands  upon  her  own  life  Surabhi  said  to  Hit  . 
“The  wretch  of  aDSnava  shall  not  be  able  to  get  you.  (32b 
O great  lady,  the  one,  who  will  pierce  him  with  shafts  when 
j gone  to  the  region  of  mortals,  shall  soon  become  your 

I husband.  (33).  I am  her  loving  companion  by  name 

j Kundala,  daughter  of  Vindhyavan  and  the  wife  of  Veerapush- 

karamalin,  (34).  My  husband  being  slain  by  Shumbba  I am 
observing  a vow  and  bent  upon  going  to  tlm  next  world 
roaming  about  from  one  shrine  to  another  by  virtue  of  nty 
celestial  gait.  (35).  The  vicious-souled  Paialaketu,  aasu- 
I ming  the  form  of  a boay,  has  been  pierced  with  an  arrow  by 

j some  one  for  protecting  the  ascetics.  (36).  For  learning 

the  truth  I have  come  here  speedily,  for  certain  that  wretch 
of  a Danava  has  been  struck  by  some  body.  (37).  Listen, 
now  to  the  cause  of  her  falling  into  a trace.  O conferrer  of 
I honors,  from  the  very  moment  she  saw  you  she  fell  in 

I love  with  you.  (38).  You  are  like  the  son  of  a god  and 

1 gifted  with  sweet  speech  and  other  accomplishments.  She  is 

I the  wife  of  that  one  by  whom  tliis  DUnava  has  been  pierced. 

I ^ (39)-  For  this  reason  she  has  fallen  into  a great  trance. 

I Will,  this  spare.Mlt  damsel  go  through  life-long  mesiries  ? 

• She  has  been  attached  to  you  whereas  another  will  be 

her  husband  and  then  her  misery  will  last  for  life;  Sarabhi’a 
word  can  never  be  otherwise.  (41).  I have  been  stricken  with 
grjef, Olord,  For  my  love  for  her  I have  come  here:  there 
is  no  p.articularjdiffnreugc  between  one’#  own  body  and  bet* 


f 


MARKANDF.VA  PURANAM. 

companion  (42).  If  this  fair  one  can  get  a desired-for 
heroic  husband,  I can  then  carry  on  my  hard  austerities  with 
a mind  shorn  of  anxiety  (43).  O you  great  one,  who  are 
you  and  for  what  tiave  you  come  here  ? Are  you  a deity, 
a Daitya,  a Gandharva,  a I’annaga  or  a Kinnara  ? (44).  For 
such  is  not  a human  body  nor  can  he  come  here.  Do  you 
therefore  speak  to  me  the  truth  as  I have  told  you”  {45). 
Kuvalayashwa  said:— "You  have  asked  me,  O you  conver- 
sant with  virtue,  who  I am  and  for  what  1 have  come.  Listen, 

0 you  of  unsullied  understanding,  I shall  relate  all  from  the 

very  beginning  {46).  1 am  the  son  of  the  king  Satrujit. 

Despatched  by  my  sire,  O fair  one,  for  protecting  the 
ascetics  1 came  to  (he  hermitage  of  Gillava  (47).  VVbj^ 

1 engaged  in  protecting  the  ascetics  of  pious  observances 
some  body,  assuming  the  form  of  a boar,  came  to  obstruct 
them  (48).  Being  struck  by  me  with  an  arrow  resplendent 
like  the  rresceiu  be  lied  away  ([uickly  and,  1 on  horse  back, 
followed  him  {4<)).  Botli  he  and  my  horse  all  on  a sudden 
fell  into  a pit.  Audi,  on  horse  back,  alone  roamed  about  in 
darkness  (50).  Then  while  I got  light  I saw  you.  But 
when  asked  by  me  yon  gave  no  reply  (51).  Following  you 
then  I enterctl  into  this  most  excellent  palace.  I have  thus 
spoken  to  7011  the  truth — I am  neither  a god  nor  a Danava  j 
(53)  nor  a Fannaga.  nor  a Gandharva  nor  a Kinnara,  O you 
of  pure  smiles.  All  these  deities  and  others,  0 KundalS,  are 
worthy  of  my  vener.’ttion.  I am  a m.an  and  you  should  not 
fear  me”  (53). 

The  Sonh  said : — Then  filled  with  delight  tliat  damsel 
became  inert  with  bashfulness.  She  kept  gazing  on  the  most 
beautiful  countenance  of  her  companion  and  could  not  speak 
anything  else  {54!.  Her  companion  (Kundata)  delighted 
with  bearing  that  all  that  he  s-aid  wms  compatible  with  the 
words  of  Surabhi,  replied.  Kiind.d.’l  s.nid  (55).  " O hero,  you 

have  sjtoken  the  truth’ — there  is  no  doubt  ntwut  your  words. 
Her  heart  shall  not  go  elsewhere,  Seeing  you  she  has  beeit 


102  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

pacified  (56).  Supreme  grace  seeks  refuge  with  the  moon, 
the  rays  with  the  sun,  prosperity  with  the  lucky,  etidurance 
with  the  heroe  and  forgiveness  with  the  good  (§y).  Un. 
doubtedly  that  sinful  wretch  of  a DAnava  has  been  struck  by 
you.  Why  should  Surabhi,  the  mother  of  kine,  speak  false- 
hood? (58)  Blessed  and  fortunate  is  she  by  having  you 
near  her ; do  you,  O hero,  duly  perform  what  shmild  he  done 
now”  (59).  The  sons  said  : — *0  father,  the  prince  then  said 
to  her  I am  not  my  master ; how  can  f espouse  this 
damsel  without  obtaining  permi.sMon  ? " (KundalU  saitl) . 
Don’t  speak  like  this.  She  is  really  the  daughter  of  a god. 
Marry  her.”  Thus  addressed  by  her  he  agreed  to  marry  her. 
olfKundalS)  then  thought  of  Tumvuru,  tier  family  priest.  He  too, 
■*sfoc  his  love  for  MadalasS  and  reverence  for  Kimdal.n,  iinme- 
l''dMCely  came  there  with  Samif  and  Ku(i1  in  bis  bands. 

Lighting  up  fire,  offering  oblation  consecrated  with  Mantras, 
^ pitforming  the  benedictory  rite.s,  and  celebrating  duly  the 
. nuptials  of  the  girl  that  intelligent  (ascetic)  repaired 
to  his  hermitage  for  carrying  on  hi.s  asceticism  (60— -<>4).  She 
(Kundala)  then  said  to  her  companion  “ I have  been  satisfied, 
O fair  one,  seeing  you,  beautiful  as  you  are,  connected  with 
him  (65),  Now  with  an  undisturbed  mind  I shall  engage 
in  matchless  austerities.  I shall  have  my  sins  washed  by  the 
water  of  the  holy  river  and  then  I shall  not  be  so  again  (66).’' 
She  then,  desirous  of  going  away,  bending  low  with  humility 
and  with  words  suppressed  by  the  love  for  her  companion, 
said  to  the  prince  {67).  KundalS  said  :~'-Even  men  cannot 
induct  persons  like  you,  O you  of  matchless  wisdom,  how 
can  women  ? So  I do  not  impart  instructions  upon  you.  (68). 

ut  my  heart  has  been  attracted  by  love  for  thii»  youthful 
damsel  and  you  too  trust  me.  Therefore  I do  remind  you,  O 
ayer  of  enemies  (69)5  that  a husband  should  always  maintain 
an  protect  his  wife.  A wife  always  helps  a husband  in  the 

acquirement  of  virtue,  profit  and  desire  (70).  When  a husband 

a?  a wi  e are  .attached  to  each  other  then  is  the  union  of 


WARKANDEYA  PURANAM, 


105 

three-fold  oI»icct<?,  namely,  virtue,  profit  and  desire 
(is  brought  about)  (71).  liow  can  a man,  O lord,  acquire 
virtue  without  wife  or  how  can  he  get  profit  or  desire— for 
these  three  are  establisfied  in  a wife  {72.)  And  in  the  same 
way  a wife,  without  her  husband,  is  not  capable  of  acquiring 
virtue  etc  for  the  accomplishmeiu  of  three  fold  objects  i» 
dependant  upon  the  conjugal  relation  (73).  O prince, 
without  wife  a man  cannot  adore  the  gods,  the  ancestral 
manes,  the  servants  and  the  guests  (74).  In  the  absence 
of  a wife  or  when  united  with  a bad  wife,  the  wealth,  even 
when  actiuiretl  by  men  and  brought  to  their  house,  is  spent 
away  (75).  It  is  direetly  seen  that  men  cannot  accomplish 
their  desired  for  objects  without  wives.  The  husband  and 
wife,  when  they  jointly  carry  on  pious  observances,  attain  to 
three  fold  virtues  (7&)'  a nt.tn  .satisfies  bis  ancestral 

manes  with  offspring,  the  guests  with  food  and  the  immortal* 
with  adoration,  .so  with  all  these  .•should  he  protect  Ids  chaste 
wife  (77).  The  wife  tt>o,  witliout  her  husband,  cannot 
acquire,  virtue,  desire,  wealth  and  offspring  for  these  three- 
fold objects  follow  only  the  conjugal,  relation  (78).  I bav# 
thus  said  this  to  you  both.  I shall  now  go  to  my  wished  fo» 
place.  Do  you  advance  with  her  in  prosperity,  offspring  and 
happiness  (yq). 

Tub  sons  said:— Having  said  this,  embraced  her  com- 
panion and  saluted  him,  she,  with  her  celestial  motion,  went 
away  where  she  liked  (80).  Having  placed  her  on  the  horse 
whih  Satrujit’s  son  was  about  to  come  out  of  the  nether 
region,  the  offspring,  of  Danu,  informed  of  it,  all  on  a sudden 
cried  out “ He  is  stealing  away  that  jem  of  a girl  which 
had  been  brought  from  heaven  by  Hataiaketu  {&t — 83). 
Then  with  Parighas,  Nishtringshas,  maces,  darts,  arrows  and 
other  weapons  the  host  of  the  DBnavas  came  there  along 
with  Pltftlaketu  (83).  Then  exclaiming  "Wait!  waitj" 
those  leading  DBnavas  mad*;  a downpour  of  arrows  and 
darts  upon  the  prince  (84).  Then  the  hig!\ly  powerful  son 


104 


MARKaNdEYA  puranam. 


I 

I 


i 

) 


of  Satrujit  easily,  as  if  smiling,  sundered  all  tlinse  weapons 
with  a network  of  arrows  (85).  Cut  into  pieces  by  his  arrows 
the  mass  of  swords,  Saktis,  Hrisbthis  and  daggers  of  (the 
Daityas)  covered,  in  no  time,  the  surface  of  the  nether  region 
(86).  Then  taking  up  the  weapon  Ta.shtra  he  discharged 
it  at  the  DSnavas.  By  it,  greatly  fierce  like  a garland  of 
flames,  all  the  Dinavas,  with  PStaiaketu,  were  consumed, 
with  their  bones  reduced  to  ashes  like  the  sons  of  Sagara 
by  the  energy  of  Kapila  (87 — 88).  Having  slain  the  leading 
Asuras,  the  prince,  on  horse  back  in  company  with  that  jem  of 
a female,  went  to  his  father’s  city  (89). 

Having  saluted  him  he  communicated  to  bis  father  ali- 
bis going  to  the  nether  region  and  meeting  with  Kuudala  (90)  j 
his  obtaining  MadalasS,  his  encounter  with  the  Dinavas,  their 
destruction  by  arms  and  as  well  as  his  return  (91).  Hearing 
of  the  adventure  of  that  one  of  a charming  disjtosition  his 
fathet  was  exceedingly  pleased ; then  embracing  his  son  he 
said  to  him  son  (92).  “Worthy  and  high-souled  as  you  are, 

O son,  you  have  redeemed  my  promise  and  releaved  from 
fear  the  ascetics  practising  their  own  pious  observances  (93). 
The  fame,  that  had  been  established  by  my  forefatliers,  and 
had  been  spread  by  me,  has  been  magnified  by  you,  0 
heroe,  endued  with  prowess  as  you  are  (94).  The  per»7n, 
who  does  not  destroy  the  fame,  wealth  or  prestige  acquired 
by  his  father,  is  considered  as  of  mediocre  worth  (95).  And  . 
the  wise  designate  him  as  the  best  of  men,  who,  by  virtue 
of  his  inherent  might,  increases  the  influence  (96;.  And 
that  one,  who  decreases  the  wealth,  power  or  fame  acquired 
by  bis  father,  is  called  the  worst  of  men  (97).  I had 
rescured  Brahmanas  as  you  have  done  j but  you  have,  0 
my  son,  0 foremost  of  men,  in  addition  to  this  gone  to  the 
nether  region  aftd  destroyed  the  Asuras  (98).  Blessed  are 
you  therefore,  O my  son ; and  obtaining  you  who  have  * 
excelled  all  in  virtues  I am  worthy  of  being  applauded  even 
by  the  virtuous  (99).  The  man,  who  is  not  excelled  by  his 

• 


» 


MARKANDRYA  I'URANAM. 


io5 

son  in  generosity,  wisdom  and  prowess  does  not  experience,, 
me-tliinks,  the  Joy  of  having  a son  (ico).  Oh  fie  on  the 
life  of  a man,  who  is  known  in  this  world  through  his  father 
and  blessed  is  his  birth  who,  through  his  son,  obtains  fame 
(loi).  He,  who  is  known  through  himself,  is  fortunate,  he 
who  is  known  through  his  f.nher  or  grand-father  is  middling 
but  the  worst  of  all  is  the  man  who  gains  renown  through 
his  mother  or  maternal  relations  (to2).  Do  you  therefore, 
0 my  son,  flourish  in  riches,  power  and  happitiess.  Never 
do  you  forsake  this  daughter  of  Gandharvas"  (103).  Having 
thus  addresst'd  him  repeatedly  with  many  sweet  words  and 
embraced  him  tlic  father  sent  his  son  along  with  his  wife  to 
his  house  (to4).  And  in  com(tany  with  hb  wife  he  began 
to  sport  in  the  palace  of  his  father  as  well  as  in  otlu-r  places, 
in  gardens,  woods  and  slopes  of  the  mountains  (105). 
Saluting  the  fi’ct  of  h«'r  father-in-law  and  molher-in-lavv  every 
morning,  that  fair  .ami  youthful  damsel  disported  with 
him  (106). 

CHAPTER  XXII. 


T HR  said  : - Then  after  a considerable  time  th«# 

king  again  addressed  hb  son  “ Go  now  and  wander  over 
the  world  for  the  deliverance  of  the  Brahmanas  (i). 
Mounting  on  this  horse,  in  the  morning  you  should,  every 
day,  he  intent  upon  ever  seeing  that  the  leading  Brhhmanas 
may  not  meet  with  obstacles  (2).  There  are  hundreds  of 
wicked  Dtnavas  born  from  sinful  sources.  Do  you  so  act 
that  the  ascetics  may  not  meet  with  hindrances  from  them 
Then  the  prince  did  as  he  was  commanded  by  hb 

.14 


ranged  over  the  entire  earth  and  theft  saluted  the  feet  of 
his  sire ; and  the  remaining  portion  of  the  day  he  passed 
merrily  with  the  daiftty-waisted  damsel  (4-*s)-  ft  so  happen, 
ed  that  once  on  a time  while  he  was  passing  along  the  banks 
^ the  Yamuna  he  espied  Paiaiaketu’s  younger  brother 
Talaketu,  who  was  living  in  a hermitage  at  that  place  (6) 
That  Dinava,  of  illusive  powers,  remained  there  assuming 
the  fetm  of  an  ascetic.  Remembering  former  enemity  he 
said  to  the  prince  {■}).  -Q  pdnce,  if  you  wish,  do  what  I 
tell  you  i O you  of  truthful  vows,  you  should  not  disregard  the 
prayer  of  one  (8).  For  acquiring  virtue  I shall  celebrate  a 

sacrifice  and  shall  also  perform  the  Mtts.  For  thb  I shall 

have  to  make  necessary  fires  but  I have  no  sacrificial  prosenta 
t give  (gi  Therefore  for  my  gold,  give  me,  O heroe,  the 
ornament  that  is  around  your  neck,  and  protect  m, 
hermitage  so  long  I do  not  come  back  speedily,  aLr  having^ 
under  water,  propitiated  the  deity  Varuna,  the  lord  of  acquatk 
animals,  ^th  Vedic  formula  relating  to  Varuna  condudve 
to  the  well-being  of  the  creatures."  When  he  had  said  thia 

mered  into  the  water  of  the  river  and  hTtoopr^ectd  hh 

(i6),  "While  1 of  others 

heroic  Kuvalay?ishwa  fiffhti  ^ '"T  asylum,  the 

rtrt.*  o.  hi,  hrea,,  „i,h  a Iw!  n'*""*""' 

to  the  power  o(  iu„,ip„  L B*'?*  tesorlieg 

this  neck  ornament  to  me  He  has^h ' * 

0 roe.  He  has  been  cremated  in  the 


and  with  tears  iii  its  eyes,  was  neighing  distressfully  it  was 
carried  off  by  that  wicked  Ufinava  (ao).  This  has  been  wit- 
nessed by  me,  heartless  and  wicked  as  I am.  After  this  you 
should  do  what  ought  to  be  done  at  this  juncture  (ai).  Do 
you  also  take  this  neck  ornament  capable  of  giving  solace 
to  your  heart.  What  shall  we  ascetics  do  with  gold  ? ” (22). 
The  sons  contituied  ; —Saying  tliis  and  throwing  the  ornament 
on  the  earth  he  went  away  as  he  had  come.  And  then  alh 
filled  with  grief  and  possessed  by  trance,  fell  down  on  earth 
(23).  And  immediately  regaining  consciousness  all  the  female* 
of  the  king's  seraglio,  the  queen  and  the  king,  stricken 
heavily  with  grief,  liegan  to  bewail  (24).  Beholding  that 
neck  ornament  and  hearing  of  the  death  of  her  husband, 
Madalasa  at  once  renounced  her  life  (35).  And  there  arose 
a great  noise  of  l.imcnt.ntions  in  the  houses  of  the  citizens 
and  in  the  palace  (2ti).  Beholding  Madalas&  de.^d  from  the 
separation  of  her  husband,  the  king,  gaining  his  mental  equili- 
brium by  his  judgment,  said  lo  alt  the  people  — (27).  **  You 
should  not  mourn.  ! perceive  the  unreality  of  ail,  of  myself 
and  of  all  connected  with  me  {28).  Should  I mourn  for  my 
daughter-in-law  ? To  consider  it  properly  none  of  them 
should  be  mourned  for  they  have  done  their  duties  (29). 
Having  engaged  himself  in  the  protection  of  the  Brihmanas 
in  pursuance  of  my  command  my  son  met  with  his  death. 
Why  should  (therefore)  that  Intelligent  one  be  mourned  (30)  ? 
While  he  has  sacrificed  Ins  body,  a body  which  must  go,  on 
behalf  of  the  twice-born,  it  will  forsooth  lead  to  his  well-being 
{31).  This  one  l»orn  in  a noble  family  has  followed  her 
husband.  Why  should  she  be  mourned  ? A woman  has  no 
other  god  but  liusband  (32).  If  she  had  survived  her  hushanrl 
she  would  have  been  an  object  of  pity  to  ourselves,  our  friemls 
and  to  other  compassionate  people  (33),  Hearing  of  the 
destruction  of  her  hosband  this  l.ady  immediately  followed 
Wm.  Why  should  she  he  mourned  by  the  wise  ? (34).  rhose 


' i 


1 ■■ 


Io8  markandeya  puranam. 

wcimen  who  suffer  from  the  loss  of  their  husbands  should  be 
mourned  and  not  they  who  die  with  them.  This  fjrateful  lady 
bad  not  to  suffer  the  loss  of  her  husband  (3s).  How  can  & 
woman  consider  her  husband  as  a man  who  is  the  di.spenser 
of  happiness  of  both  the  worlds,  here  and  hereafter  (36)? 
Thereupon  neither  he,  nor  this  lady,  nor  I,  nor  his  mother 
should  be  mourned.  Having  given  his  life  for  llte  interest 
of  the  Brahmanas  he  has  saved  us  all  (37).  Having  given 
up  his  half  nourished  (youthful)  body  my  noble  son  has 
liberated  himself  from  his  debts  to  the  Brahmanas,  fa  virtue 
and  to  myself  (38).  Having  cast  off  his  life  in  battle  for  the 
protection  of  the  twice-born  he  has  vindicateri  his  own 
heroism,  his  mother’s  chastity  and  the  purity  of  my  rat  «*  (3^). 
The  Son  said: — Hearing  of  lusr  son's  destnietion  and  ^ 

beholding  her  husband,  KavalaySshwa's  mother  followed  Iter 

husband  (40).  Saying:-— “ 0 king,  neither  my  motiier  nor 
my  sister  experienced  .such  a joy  a»  I have  tlone  on  hearing 
of  the  destruction  of  my  son  for  the  protection  of  tlic  ascetics 
(41),  In  vain  did  their  mothers  bear  them  who  (lie,  assailed 
by  deseases  and  sighing  sorrowfully  before  Ibeir  friends  (43). 
But  those,  who  while  fighting  fearlessly  for  the  protection  of 
the  kine  and  the  twice-born  are  wounded  and  die,  are  really 
men  on  earth  (43).  The  father,  of  a man  who  does  not  turn 

away  from  suitors,  friends  and  enemies,  ha.s  indeed  a aon  in 

him  and  his  mother  has  borne  a hero  (44),  When  her  son  is 
either  victorious  in  battle  or  slain  in  biittle  the  mother  then 
considers  the  misery  of  carrying  a child  crowned  with  good  re 
suit  (45)."  The  sons  said;— The  king  then  performed  the  fune- 
ral obsequies  of  his  daughter-in-law;  then  issuing  out  ho  bathed 
and  offered  water  to  his  son  (46).  Taiaketu,  too  coming 
out  of  the  water  of  the  Yamuna,  said  to  the  prince  the  follow, 
mg  sweet  words  in  love  (47).  ‘-Go,  0 prince,  I have  got  the 
a^i^phshment  of  my  object  through  you.  You  having 
waitfNl  hem  steadfastly  I have  been  able  to  accomplish  my 
long  .cherished  work  (48),  the  sacrifice  of  Varuna.  the  high- 


f 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


»og 

6oHle<l  king  of  waters.  All  this  which  I had  desired  ha.s 
been  carried  out  (4()).”  Then  saluting  him  the  king  mount- 
ed liis  steed  gifted  with  the  vigor  of  Stiparna  or  the  wind  and 
repaired  to  tlie  city  of  his  father  (50). 

CHAPTER  XXIfl. 


jrrt 

1 HF.  SONS  JHrud  rcaciiing  ht?^  own  city  hastily 

* desirous  of  sululing  the  feel  of  his  fatlier  and  beholding 
Maclaksi  the  prince  saw  the  peojde  filled  anxiety  and  their 
faces  Ijetniying  sailneKs,  Atn!  inunediately  he  found  them 
overwhrdinetl  with  \vondf*rnient  and  their  faces  iiulic^aiful 
joy*  He  saw  some  oitu'fs  willi  eyes  ( xpan<led  exclaiming 
*M,^uck!  Luek ! *itid  speaking  to  one  another  in  joy  they 
said  Long  livci  0 you  of  great  atiipkiausness*  Miiy  yowr 
enemiesi  meet  with  dmirucimn^  do  you  gladden  tlte  hrarif 
of  your  parerils  itml  free  us  also  from  anxiety’’  (l~^4)*  Say- 
ing Ihii  they  encircled  him  on  hts  front  and  rear.  And 
experiencing  insfantiineous  joy  he  entered  his  father’s  house 
(5]»  Embracing  him  his  auspicioui  mother^  father  and  his  other 

■ rekttoiis  cemferred  iipoti  hint  blessings  (6).  Saluting  him  and 
filled  with  siirprise  lie  tiked  his  father  **  What  ii  this  all,  O 
fithtr.”  He  too  deicribed  to  him  every  thing  {7).  Then 
hearing  of  llie  dembe  of  liii  beloved  consort  Madalasi  and 

. seeing  liis  parenli  before  him  be  was  sunk  in  a sea  of  shame 

■ and  sorrow  (8).  He  thougfil  Hearing  of  my  death  that 
chaste  lady  giive  up  her  cxislencot  Oh  fm  on  my  cruel 
heart  (§)*  I am  hetrtleis  and  ignoble.  Shameless  1 am, 
I am  alive  wiiliout  tbai  one  of  the  eyes  of  a deer  who,  bn-  mOi 
nifit  with  death  Clo)»  Then  consoling  his  mind  and  driving 


aeaa 


agairt  thought  {II).  “ U I resign  my  ute  oecau«e  sue  is 

on  my  account,  what  good  can  I do  to  her  ? rhis  is  api^lan^ 
ded  by  the  females  (only)  (u).  If  I mourn  poorly  exclaim, 
ing  again  and  again  " Oh  my  dear  1"  this  will  not  lead  to  my 
praise  for  we  are  men  (i3)-  overcome  by  grief  and 
stricken  with  sorrow  I throw  away  my  garlands  and  besmear 
my  body  with  dirt  I shall  be  the  object  of  the  triumph  of 
my  enemies  (14).  My  duty  is  to  subdue  my  enemies  and 
serve  the  king,  my  father.  My  life  is  at  his  command,  how 
can  I give  it  up  ? (15).  Then  what  again  do  I consider  as 
my  duty  ? Have  I done  with  enjoying  women  ? But  that 
even  will  not  lead  to  the  well-being  of  that  thin-built  (lady) 
(16).  Whether  good  or  bad  to  her  I should  observe  some 
pledge  for  her.  This  even  is  small  in  as  much  as  she  has  give# 
up  her  life  for  me  (ly)*” 

The  sons  said;— Having  thus  made  up  his  mind,  he  per- 
formed the  ceremony  of  offering  water  and  other  rite*. 
•Hritadhwaja  again  said ’(iS)  “ When  that  tliin-built  Mada- 
lasa  is  no  longer  my  wife,  no  other  (woman)  shall  be  my 
wife  in  this  life  (19).  Excepting  that  daughter  of  a Ga»- 
dharva  having  the  eyes  of  a doe  I shall  not  sport  with  any 
#ther  woman.  This  is  the  vow  I take  (*o).  Leaving  that 
my  pious  wife  moving  like  a she-elephant  I shall  not  enjoy 
in  the  company  of  any  other  woman.  This  is  the  vow  I 
take”  (21). 

The  sons  said : — ^Then,  0 father,  giving  up  all  enjoyments 
in  the  company  of  women,  in  her  separation  he  began  to 
beguile  his  time  in  disporting  with  companions  of  the  same 
gifted  with  excellent  character  (22).  Who  is  capable,  0 
, of  accomplishing  this  great  work  for  him  ? Even  the 
cannot  with  difficulty  do  it,  what  to  speak  of 
otters?  (23). 

The  (innert)  son  said Hearing  those  their  words 
their  father  became  sorry.  Then  deliberating  over  (he  matter, 


f 


MAKKANDEYA  mRANA«. 


ni 


the  king  of  NSgas,  smiling,  said  to  his  sons  (34) “ If  by 
knowing  things  to  be  impossible  of  execution  people  renounce 
perseverence  in  action  a great  injury  will  be  produced  from 
the  absence  of  perseverence  (25b  Therefore  without  giving 
up  manliness  a man  should  engage  in  actions.  The  issue, 
of  an  act  depends  upon  the  energy  of  an  individual  as  well 
as  on  the  Divinity  (26).  I shall  therefore  so  exert  in  this 
matter  that  I may  in  no  time  come  off  successful”  (27).  The 
(innert)  son  said; — Having  said  this  the  king  of  Nagas, 
repairing  to  the  sacred  spot  Plakshavatarana  on  the  mountain 
HimavSn,  engaged  in  hard  an.sterities  (38).  Then  with  his 
mind  centered  in  her,  restraining  his  food  and  bathing  during 
three  twilights  he  hymned  the  goddess  of  learning,  Saraswaii 
(29).  Aswatara  said  De.sirous  of  adoring  the  auspicious 
goddess  who  protects  the  universe,  I,  bowing  down  my  head, 
hymn  Sarasvvati  sprung  from  Urahina  (30).  All  states,  real  or 
unreal,  fraught  with  profit  or  liberation,  although  nneonnected 
with  thee,  O goddess,  appear  ;is  being  conneeted  with  thee  (31). 
0 goddess,  thou  art  the  supnnne  letter  in  which  all  is  eatftb> 
lished.  And  this  supreme  letter  pervades  all  like  an  atom 
(33),  The  letter  is  the  great  Orahman  and  the  universe 
composed  of  water.  And  as  lire  exists  in  wood  and  a.s  the 
atom  |>ervades  the  earth  so  this  Brahman  as  well  as  the 
entire  universe  exist  in  thee.  O goddess,  the  lelter  Dm,  the 
Stable  and  the  unstahie,  the  three  measures,  the  existent 
and  the  non«exbtent  are  in  thee.  The  three  worlds,  the 
three  Vedas,  the  tree  branches  of  h.-ariiing,  the  three  fires, 
the  three  luminous  bodies,  the  three  orders,  the  kinds  of 
morality,  the  three  principles,  th«  three  sounds,  the  three  gods, 
the  modes  of  life,  the  three  kinds  of  lime,  the  three  ages, 
the  ancestral  manes,  day  and  night—all  ihe.se,  0 goddess, 
constitute  the  three  measures  which  arc  thy  form,  O Saras- 
wati  {33^ — 37).  It  is  by  the  utterance  given  by  then,  O 
goddess,  that  the  Brahmv,tdin»  can  perform  the  seven  kinds 
of  recitations,  original  and  eternal,  assigned  to  SontS,  Hari 


..wv*  * IQT  piTSOf)’^  0\  Ul\*t*r,S(*  OlrCtls 

There  is  another  supreme  form  of  thin,-  in  h.  Ji  n„-,-,su,,. 
is  not  represented,  which  is  divino,  and  n(»( 
changes,  decay  or  development;  (his  thy  sup.mno  f.,rm  1 
cannot  describe  in  words.  It  cannot  he  desrrih.-d  hy 
tongue  or  palate.  Indras,  Vasus,  Br.ihm.’i,  the  num„,  d,,, 
and  the  other  constellations,  (are  thy  I„  ( he.;  ,.xisi  t},,! 

abode  of  the  universe,  the  form  of  the  universe,  the  h„,i  of 

the  universe,  the  Great  Lord,  wlmtcver  has  I .nentione.I 

m Sankhya  and  Vedanta,  and  has  been  a.seeri.dned  I.y 
branches ; whatever  is  without  beginning,  middle  nr 
whatever  is  existent  and  non-existent,  whatever  i.  re.al' 
that  which  is  one,  that  which  is  many,  that  whieft  is  ih-  toot 
of  the  difference  in  creation;  ami  that  whhd,  e,ms  hv  the 
name  of  six  attributes,  four  objects  and  wi.h  h is  the  ,o..t  .,J 
the  three-fold  qualities;  that  which  is  the  essence  of  vuious 
powerful  energies;  that  which  is  happiness  or  misery';  a„d 
that  which  IS  supreme  felicity  is  manifest  in  thee 
Thus  thou  dost.  0 goddess,  pervade  ail  objectn.  crmle.or 
rnanitest.  In  thee  exists  Brahma  both  in  His  one  and  many 
rms  (45)  Through  thee  are  properly  perceived  nil  ohj,;,.(s 

supersll!  th  ; • Kross,  the  subtle  or 

supersubtle.  that  exists  in  the  earth,  i„  the  sky.  and  at  any 

.“llfTs'  a’'LL''VarwhLt‘'  "" 


MARKANDEYA  PVUAHAM. 


Its 


Sahaswai'1  s-iid  ;_‘‘0  kin<^  of  Nfigas,  tliere  are  seven 
ttotes^  sevcMH  kinds  of  Ajigns*  ; seven  classes  of  songs^ 
seven  Miure/ianasf  ; forty  nine  measures  and  three 
Gramast>  AH  this  ^ha!l  you  sing  as  well  as  Kamvala,  0 
less  one  (S  By  rny  favour  you  will  know  many  other 

things  also,  C.)  king  of  serpents.  And  I shall  confer  upon  you 
a knrnvh*«{ge.  of  four  Padas.^  three  Taias,\\  three  Lttms^^ 
six  yaiis$  and  four  By  my  favour,  ()  king  of 

serpents,  (you  will  have  a knowledge  of)  all  this  or  more  tlmt  is 
inchuhui  in  this  or  is  depeiHlcmf  on  this  and  that  is  related  to 
vowels  and  consonanls.  All  this  has  been  exhaustively  given 
to  you  as  well  as  to  Kamvala  (53—55).  O serpent,  on  earth 
and  in  t!»e  m*ther  region,  you  two  shall  he  the  authors  ol  all 
these— in  the  nether  region,  the  regiot\  of  gods,  on  earth,  () 
you  serpents(s6).  Tlu*  (inert)  son  said ‘---Having  said  this 
the  laluH-c!yed  goildc'ss  Saraswati,  the  tongue  of  all,  iinmeili* 
aUdy  vanislu’d  friuu  tin!  vi«nv  rd  tlu'  Xaga  (57).  Anti  ris  said 
both  the  inotlmrs  actpiireil  all  that  knowletlge  consummate 
regarding  Piida,  tneasurt*  ami  notes  (58),  Then  singing  by 
nates  to  the  accornpaiiiinent  of  time  kept  by  stringed  iiiitru- 


* Magti  riiraiii  the  iigrr*'r*,ilile  rffrrt;  tlial  h lifCHlneed  by  a delermhuUe  suretii* 
dun  yf  is  tiOl  r*. telly  what  b uiuler^oud  by  air  fwr  yne  k*»ga 

may  Oirisra  «f  a inimiter  <4  ^irs,  Hugm  are  six  in  tu.imber. 

t **h  Irrut  rx|irf‘Siivr  tif  the  full  rnUmt  uf  the  Himht  mmk  tif  mniile  ; ami  as 
tWi  oifisistTi «.»!'  f lure  tirtnves  llien?  are  ec.»iiHet|Mently  twenty  one.  Muri:'fmnm,** 

} A ^iiriei  nf  arr.iiigeil  uml  certain  Iaw?i,  A gmma  mn» 

siiN  III  »»ev'eii  |iriiiri|i,.s,l  mM-i  AV,  CAi,  Mti,  DAa*  Ni  currfist|ioncling  to 

C A‘,  f\  0,  ^tmi  11. 

I *4  r.rMr  iihei't  *l'if/ilar*  ist  strain*  /ifthtfti,  secamf,  Sa/it'Aaf/,  third 
and  AMmgti  , rvery  air  nueii  tuaeast  yf  at  lea.«t  twa  imrtH. 

II  Musical  tiinr  nr  itmainrit. 

% The  ntfraitt  t»f  lime  that,  rnim  thrtntgha  niece  *4'  cumponititm  frOiii  the  ins* 
laiittil  iH  iiiie|4iiin  la  llial  when  it  milrti|ipetl.  The  three  kimb  uf  /aiya  arc 
{l|  iiMitiiai,  (4  l*ii.tm%Hi4i  next,  ami  then  (S)  drnto. 

I A :4s4I  j » M”*!  ill  iini'aC. 

**  lujiir  kimli  i4  ui-ai  tttiiane*  fj  .1  ‘*rriiH^eil  f a)  #1 

Wdi;  f jy  hliiwiiie  Vh^ina^  unaaiic  imitiwmcnU*, 

IS 


the  summit  ot  Kaiiaga,  tne  oest  oi  mountains,  me  aestroyer  ot 
Cupid’s  body  with  their  words  and  senses  restrained  and  minds 
concentrated,  exerted  themselves  greatly,  morning,  night, 
noon  and  evening  (59—60).  Then  after  a considerable  time, 
the  Deity,  having  the  emblem  of  a bull  on  his  banner,  was 
greatly  pleased  with  their  songs  and  said  "Pray  for  a boon'* 
(61).  Then  bowing  to  Mahadeva,  the  sable-throated  lord  of 
U mi,  Ashwatara,  along  with  Kamvala,  said:  (62.)  "O  thoa 
having  six  sorts  of  wealth,  O god  of  gods,  O thou  havingthreo 
eyes,  if  thou  art  propitiated  with  me  then  do  thou  confer  upon 
us  the  boon  we  pray  for  (63).  O god,  may  Kuvalayashwa's  dead 
wife  be  born  as  my  daughter  at  once,  attaining  to  the  same 
age  (64).  May  she,  endued  with  the  same  beauty,  and  the 
recollection  of  her  pristine  birth,  be  born  in  my  house  as  a 
Yogini  and  Yogamita  (the  mother  of  illusion)  65). 

Mahadeva  said : — O foremost  of  Pannagas,  by  my  favour, 
what  you  have  said  shall  all  come  to  pass.  Listen  to  this,  O 
serpent  (66).  At  the  time  of  her  Sriddha,  do  you,  O foremost 
of  serpents,  being  pure  and  of  controlled  mind,  eat  the  middle 
Pinda  {^fj.  After  you  had  eaten  it,  from  your  middle  hood 
shall  that  auspicious  damsel  spring  in  the  same  form  in  which 
she  died  (68).  Cherishing  this  desire  in  your  mind  do  yoa 
offer  water  to  your  departed  manes  ; and  as  soon  as  you  will 
sigh  that  one  of  fair  eye-brows,  that  auspicious  damsel,  shall 
come  out  from  your  middle  hood  and  in  the  same  shape  it» 
which  she  died  (69).”  Thereupon  hearing  this  and  saluting 
the  great  deity  those  two,  filled  with  delight,  again  reached 
Rashtala  (70).  Then  the  NSga,  the  younger  brother  of 
Kamvala,  performed  the  SrSlddha  and  as  directed  ate  the 
middle  Pinda  (71).  Then  cherishing  that  desire  as  soon  as 
he  drew  forth  a sigh  there  sprang  from  his  middle  hood  that 
slender-waisted  damsel  in  the  same  form  as  before  (72).  The 
serpent  did  not  disclose  it  to  any  one  but  secretly  kept  that 
one  of  fiae  leedi  ia  his  seraglio  guarded  by  women  (73). 


Every  day  the  two  NSga  princes,  resembling  the  immortals, 
sported  happily  with  Hritadwaja  (74).  One  day  the  snake- 
king  delightedly  spoke  to  his  sons : — "Why  do  you  not 
do  what  I had  said  to  you  before  ? Why,  my  sons,  do  you  not 
bring  to  me  that  giver  of  honors,  that  prince,  the  benefactor 
of  yours  so  that  I may  render  some  good  to  him  ? (75 — 76)*' 
Thus  addressed  by  their  father  affectionately  they,  going  to 
the  city  of  their  friend,  sported  with  that  intelligent  one  (77). 
Then  after  having  talked  on  other  matters  they  affectionately 
inviteul  Kuvalayashwa  to  go  to  their  house  (78),  The  prince 
then  said  to  them  " Forsooth  this  is  your  house — all  these 
riches,  conveyances,  clothes  and  others  are  yours  as  they 
are  mine  (79).  U sous  of  the  twice  born,  if  you  love  me, 
confer  upon  me  whatever  you  like  of  those  riches,  gems  etc'" 
(80).  I have  hithorto  been  disappointed  by  the  wicked 
destiny  since  you  do  not  regard  my  house  as  your  own  (81). 
If  you  wish  to  encompass  my  pleasure,  if  you  wish  to  favour 
roe  then  consider  these  my  riches  and  house  as  yours  (82). 
What  is  yours  is  mine  ami  what  is  mine  is  yours.  Know  this 
for  certain,  and  you  two  arc  my  life  moving  about  outside 
(83).  Never  again,  O best  of  twice-born  one,  speak  of 
such  a difference.  For  love  for  me  be  favourable,  I charge 
you  on  my  life"  (84).  Then  with  their  faces  bathed  with 
tears  of  tove  and  somewhat  enraged  from  affection  those 
two  N&g.a  princes  said  to  the  king's  son  •(Sj—SS),  " O 

Hritadhwaja,  there  is  no  doubt  in  what  you  have  said  to  us. 
Even  such  is  our  fccliog.  You  need  not  fear  otherwise  (87). 
But  our  noble  father  repcalerlly  told  us  " I wi,sh  to  see 
Kuvakyashwa  (88).’*  Then  rising  up  from  his  excellent  seat 
Kuvalay&shwa  said  " My  fallier  has  said"  and  then  bowed 
low  to  the  ground. 

KUVAI.AYASHWA  said:-—"  Blessed  am  1 and  great  is  my 
piety;  who  else  is  erpial  to  me  for  my  htther  is  so  eager  to  see 
me  (89).  Rise  up,  I do  not  like  to  disregard  liis  command 
even  for  a moment ; I swear  by  his  fed  (pn)."  'i'lic  inert 


MARKANDKVA  PURANAM. 


116  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

(son)  said : — Having  said  this  the  prince  went  away  with 
them.  And  having  i.s.sued  out  of  the  city  th'*y  rf.arhed  the 
holy  Gomati  (gl).  The  sons  of  the  king  and  N'aga  went 
along  the  breast  of  the  river.  'I'he  prince  tlmiight  that  their 
house  was  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  (cj^i.  Then  they 
pulling  him  took  the  prince  to  the  nether  region.  And  there 
he  saw  the  two  Naga  princes  shining  with  the  »■flulg<•^ce  of 
the  gems  crowning  their  crestfand  bearing  auspicious  tn-arks  . 
on  their  breast  (93).  Beholding  them  of  hcsaiitiful  persons, 
the  prince,  with  eyes  expanded  with  wonder,  said  smilingly  out 
of  love: — "Well  done,  O foremost  of  the  twicc-born"  (94). 
Then  they  communicated  it  to  their  father,  the  king  of  serpents, 
the  gentle  Ashwatara,  worshipped  even  of  the  celcsiiab 
(95).  Then  the  prince  saw  the  nether  regiotj  to  be  highly 
charming  ; beautified  with  boys  and  youths,  old  jieople  .and 
serpents,  daughters  of  N&gas  bedecked  with  ear-rings 
and  necklaces,  sporting  all  around  as  the  sky  is  beautified 
with  stars,  filled  with  songs  accompanied  by  the  tnusic  of 
flutes  and  Ftnas,  with  the  sounds  of  Mn'tlan^as  Panmims 
and  Aiodyas 3.t\A  abounding  in  hundreds  of  be-autiful  houses 
(9®~97)-  Casting  his  looks  upon  the  nether  region,  that 
subduer  of  foes,  the  son  of  Satrujit  proceeded  along  with 
those  two  loving  serpents  (98).  Then  they  all  entered  the  palace 
of  the  king  of  serpents  and  saw  the  great  king  se.atcd  there 
with  excellent  garlands  and  dress,  adorned  with  enr*ringh  set 
with  gems,  bedecked  with  chains  of  transparent  pearls— that 
great  one  adorned  with  armlet.s,  and  seated  on  a throne 
ely  made  of  gold— whose  true  form  had  been  hitlden 
the  effulgence  of  rubies,  sappires  and  lapises  (99—103). 
He  was  then  shown  by  them,  sayihg,  "This  is  our  father’’  and 
to  their  father.  " This  is  the  hero  Kuvalriyas\va"(ro3>. 
the  feet  of  the  king  of  NSgas  and 
of  Nigas,  too,  taking  him  up,  embraced  him 
smelling  his  head  he  said 
your  enemies  slain,  may 


MARKANDEYA  I'UUANAM. 


U7 

you  servo  your  fatlior  and  mother  (105).  Fortunate  you  ar,* 
0 my  child,  for  ovoti  in  your  absence  my  sons  speak  of  your 
extraordinary  virtues  (lob).  For  this  you  shall  grow  in 
mind,  speech  and  eiier'ty.  The;  life  of  an  acconiplislied  man 
is  praiseworthv,  while  one,  devoid  of  accomplishments,  is  dead 
even  when  alive  ftoj).  Kneompassin^  the  satisfaction  of  his 
parents  and  giving  pain  lo  his  enemies,  a meritorious  man, 
placing  his  ennlid.-m  e in  great  im'n,  secures  his  own  well- 
being (loS).  felestials,  departed  manes,  relatives,  Brah- 
inanas,  friends,  snilots  atnl  iti.iiined  persons  all  wish  for  the 
long  life  of  a ineritoi  ions  [lerson  (kh)).  Blessed  is  the  lib-  of 
an  acenmpli-hed  man.  rh  sisiitig  from  calumny,  cherishing 
kindness  for  all  and  s.',tving  shelter  to  the  distressed"  (IIo). 

The  (inert)  ^.t^n  eemtinned; Having  said  thus  to  the 

herop,““the  serpent,  desimns  of  entertaining  Kuvalavashvva, 
spoke  to  his  sons  (tii).  " Having  finished  <nir  bath  and 
Other  acts  duly,  dinnk  wine,  enjoyed  other  pleasures  and 
taken  our  meals  after  ourhe.tri  we  shall,  w itlt  rielighted  hearts, 
spend  some  time  with  K.nval  lyashwa  in  ermversation  ritsem- 
bling  the  festivity  of  heart  ( 1 1 j—t  13).’’  Satnijil's  son  silen- 
tly agreed  to  that,  And  the  noble  of  king  serpents  acted 
acconlingly  (t  14).  Then  that  seIf-controlle*l  and  the  truthful 
king,  of  the  powerful  serpents,  in  the  company  of  his  sons 
and  the  prince,  ate  and  drank,  enjoying  the  climax  of 
pleasure  («i5). 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Jara  (iuerl)  said; — After  that  high-soulcd  king,  of 
those  living  on  air,  had  linishetl  his  meals,  he  was  adored  by 
his  sons  as  well  as  l»y  Hie  prince  (t).  'J  hen  the  gn  at  st  rpeiiti 


iir; 


:i  i’ 


U8  MARKANDHYA  PURANAM. 

wHh  delightful  words  pleased  the  friend  of  his  sons  and 
said (2).  “ You  should,  O gentle  one,  renouncing  all  mis- 
givings, who  have  come  to  my  house,  tel!  me  even  as  a son 
speaks  to  his  father,  what  I can  do  for  you  (3).  Tell  me 
what  would  you  have,  even  if  it  be  hard  of  oblainment-— silver 
gold,  raiment,  conveyances  or  seats”  {4).  Kuvalayashwa 
s,aid  :r-‘‘  By  your  favour,  I have  gold  in  my  father's  house. 
I have  never  felt  the  want  of  any  such  article  (5).  My  father 
having  ruled  over  the  world  for  a thousand  years  and  yourself 
over  the  nether  region  my  mind  has  never  been  bent  00 
solicitation  (6).  They  are  worthy  of  heaven  and  religious 
merit,  who,  their  father  living,  consider  in  their  youth,  a koti 
of  coins  as  chaff  (7).  My  friends  are  of  the  same  tempara- 
ment  with  me  and  my  body  is  free  from  diseases  My 
father  is  gifted  with  wealth  and  I am  with  youth  ; what  then 
teive  I not?  (8).  A man,  having  no  wealth,  has  his  mind  bent 
i^on  begging.  But  myself  having  enough  why  should  my 
tpngue  beg?  (9).  Blessed  are  they  who  depend  on  the 
shade  of  their  father’s  arms  without  thinking  whethere  there  it 
wealth  in  their  house  or  not  (10).  But  they,  who  having  no 
father,  from  their  boyhood  are  engaged  in  maintaining  their 
relatives,  have,  me-tliinks,  been  deprived  of  the  taste  of 
happiness  by  the  Providence  (it).  By  your  favour,  out  ol 
the  wealth  amassed  by  my  father  and  given  to  me,  I,  accord^ 
tng  to  my  desire,  distribute  riches  amongst  the  suitors  (ta). 
While  I have  been  able  to  touch  your  feet  with  the  jewel 
cresting  my  crown  and  while  I have  touched  your  body  I 
have  secured  all  these,”  (13).  Jara  (inert)  said  :-Having  been 
thus  addressed  with  humble  words  that  foremost,  of  serpents 
out  of  love,  said  to  the  prince,  the  benefactor  of  his  sons 
(14).  " If  you  do  not  wish  to  take  jewels  or  gold  from  me, 
m me  what  do  you  like  and  I shall  confer  it  upon  you  ” 
(tS).  ICuvalayashwa  replied  By  your  favour,  O reverend 
every  kind  of  object  is  in  my  house ; I have  obtained 
them  m particular  from,  feeing  you  (i6).  I have  accom- 


MARKANDEVA  PIJRANAM. 


119 


plished  all  my  objects  and  my  life  has  been  united  with  fruits, 
for  being  a man  I have  touched  your  body  who  is  a god 
(17).  White  the  dust,  of  your  feet,  has  been  placed  on  my 
head,  what  have  I not  attained,  O king  of  serpents  ? (18). 
And  still  if  you  wish  to  confer  upon  me  a desired  for  boon> 
let  it  be  that  the  inclination  for  the  performance  of  pious 
acts  may  not  leave  my  mind  (19).  Conveyance,  house, 
seats,  gold,  jewels,  precious  stones,  wife,  meats,  drinks,  sons, 
beautiful  garlands,  perfumeries,  song,  music  of  instruments 
and  all  other  desired  for  things,  I think,  are  but  the  fruits 
of  the  tree  of  piety  (30-21).  Therefore  every  self-con- 
trolled roan  should  water  tlje  roots  of  piety  ; there  is  nothing 
difficult  of  attainment  to  tliose  who  are  drwoted  to  virtue-' 
(22).  Ashwalara  said  wise  man,  your  mind  shall  ever 
be  inclined  in  this  way  to  virtue.  Truly  .as  you  have  said, 
such  is  the  fruit  of  virtue  (23).  Still  having  come  to  my 
hou.se  you  must  accept  something  which  you  like  and  which 
cannot  be  secured  in  the  region  of  men*'  (24).  Hearing  his 
words  the  prince  cast  his  looks  on  the  faces  of  the  sons 
the  king  of  serpents  (aj).  Tlum  bowing,  those  two  heroes 
communicated  plainly  to  their  father  what  was  in  the  mind 
of  the  prince  (2Ct).  They  said  : — “Imposed  upon  by  a wlcked- 
souled,  vicious  ami  inimical  Dhnava  his  beloved  spouse, 
hearing  of  his  destruction,  gave  up  her  life— -the  daughter 
of  the  Gandharva  king,  known  by  the  name  of  Madalasl 
(37—28).  Thereat  this  one  faithful  (to  his  wife)  made  this 
vow  " Renouncing  Madalasl  I shall  not  take  to  any  other 
wife"  (29).  O f,ather,  this  hero  Hritadhwaja  is  eager  to  have 
a look  on  her,  beautiful  of  all  limbs.  If  you  can  do  this  you 
will  do  a good  servicts  to  him  (30).“ 

AshwATARA  said " While  the  elements  have  been  once 
decomposed  how  can  they  be  united  again  except  in  a dream 
or  by  the  illusive  energy  of  Sam  vara"  (.jt.) 

Jara  (inert)  said : -Tlien  saluting  the  king  of  serpents 
Satrujit's  son,  filled  with  bashfulncss  and  love,  said  to  that 


IB 


ii! 


m! 


me  Madalasa  created  through  the  power  of  illusion 
I shall  consider  it  a favour  done  to  {33).  Ashwatara 
said  ‘df  you  wish  to  behold  (her  in)  illusion,  ()  my  child, 
see  her.  Though  a boy,  you  are  worthy  of  my  reverence 
as  a preceptor  for  you  have  come  to  my  hoiisej'"  (34).  Jara 
(inert)  said: — Then  the  king  of  serpents  brought  MaclalasJ 
protected  in  her  house.  With  a view  to  deceive  them  he 
uttered  loudly  a number  of  words  (35),  He  then  showed 
the  auspicious  damsel  to  the  prince.  **  Is  she  or  not  your 
.wife  Madalasa,  0 prince”?  (36).  Beholding  that  slender- 
inade  damsel  he,  at  once  throwing  off  shame,  riistiecl  towards 
her  cryii]g  ” My  beloved,”  ami  the  Kftga  Ashwatara  pre- 
‘Vented  him  saying  (37).  ” My  son,  this  is  illusion.  Do  not 
touch  her.  I have  alr<5ady  told  you  that  an  illusary  figure 
^vanishes  as  soon  as  it  is  touched  (38).”  At  once  he  fell  down 
senseless  on  earth  exclaiming  O my  beloved. 'Flie  fair 
one  thought  (39).  “Ohjwhat  great  afTection  has  tlie  king 
Tor  me — his  mind  is  firm  since  he,  who  brings  the  enetnies 
to  the  ground,  lias  been  brought  down  vvitiiout  wcaponii  (40), 
I have  been  shown  by  him  (the  ser[)ent)  as  an  illusory  (figure), 
It  is  evident  that  an  unreal  illusion  is  produced  by  the 
active  energy  of  air,  water,  light,  earth  and  ether*'  (41) 

Jara  (the  inert  son)  said: — Then  comforting  Kuva- 
layashwa  the  serpent  told  him  every  thing  regarding  the 
revival  (of  Madalasa)  (43).  Then  delighted  on  obtaining  his 
•beloved  (the  prince)  saluting  the  NSga  thought  of  his  horse 
which  immediately  came.  Then  mounting  on  it  he  started  for 
-bis  charming  city  (43.) 


€H  A PTEfi  XXV. 


XIaVING  returiHsd  to]  his  tnvn  city  he  communicated 
e\rery  thing  to  his  father  how  he  had  obtained  that  slender 
built  damsel  after  she  had  died  (i).  That  auspicious  lady 
bowed  down  at  the  feet  of  her  father-in-law  and  maiher-in- 
law  and  honoured  all  her  relations  with  salutations  an<l  em- 
braces with  reference,  to  propriety  and  age.  And  then  there 
was  in  that  city  a great  festivity  of  the  citizens  Amt 

Hritadhwaja  too,  tor  a long  time,  s{K>rted  with  that  slender- 
waisted  damsel  near  the  fountains  of  the  mountains^  the 
banks  of  the  rivers,  in  charnung  forests, as  well  as  gardens  (4), 
And  desirous  spetuling  her  religious  merit  thrmigh  the*  cm- 
joyrneni  of  desirable  objects  slu!  spf>rte<l  with  that  greatly  \m- 
loved  one  at  charming  places  (5).  After  a long  time  the  king 
Satrujit,  having  governed  well  the  earth,  breatlmd  his  last 
(6).  Then  the  citizens  installed,  as  king,  \m  mn  Uritadhwajii, 
higleiOiiled  and  of  liberal  actions  and  conduct  (7).  And  while 
he  was  governing  wid!  hb  iubjects  as  if  they  were  Iiis 
own  begotten  children  Madalasi  gave  birth  to  her  first  son 
(8).  The  father  gave  to  his  intelligent  son  the  mime  of 
Vikrlntii.  The  servenls  were  greatly  delighted  and  Mada- 
Iasi  laughed  (9).  One  day  while  her  baby,  lying  at  ease  on 
her  lap,  was  crying  in  indistinct  notes,  Madidasi,  by  way  of 
soothing  hinii  said  (to)  **Tliou  art  pure,  O child,  and  without 
a name.  It  is  by  iinagiriation  that  a name  has  been  given  to 
thee.  This  tliy  body,  composttd  of  five  elements,  is  not  thine. 
Nor  dost  thou  belong  to  it.  Wherefore  dost  thou  weep  ? 
(li).  Or  |ierliii|w  thou  tlost  not  weep--This  is  a self  product! 
sound  coming  out  llirougli  the  kingb  son.  Various  cpialities, 
good  or  bad,  relating  tti  the  clomentSj  have  been  atiributed  to 
thy  organs  {12)  In  this  world,  beings,  extremely  ieeble^  tc* 
16 


*1 


123  MARKANDEYA  mjRANAM. 

quire  their  growth  by  help  of  the  elements,  and  taking  meats 
and  drinks;  but  thou  hast  no  growth  or  decay  (13).  This 
Ijody  is  a covering  and  it  will  be  shattered  and  still  thou  wilt 
live  on  ; therefore  thou  shouldst  not  yield  to  stupefaction  in 
this  body.  It  is  by  virtue  of  good  and  bad  acts  engendered 
by  stupefaction,  caused  by  pride  and  other  passions  that  this 
covering  of  a body  has  been  fixed  on  thee  (14).  The  father, 
the  SOB,  the  mother,  the  wife,  the  relatives  and  those  that 
are  not  so,  are  nothing ; thou  shouldst  not  attach  too  much 
importance  to  this  collection  of  elements  ( 1 5).  Those,  who 
have  their  minds  stupified,  consider  pain  as  neutralizitjg  pain 
and  enjoyment  as  leading  to  pleasure.  Ignorant  persons,  who 
have  their  minds  possessed  by  stupefaction,  consider  pain  as 
pleasure  (16).  When  a woman  laughs  her  bones  come  out 
and  her  two  shining  eyes  throw  out  anger.  Her  breast  is  a 
mass  of  flesh  and  so  is  her  organ.  Therefore  i-s  not  a woman 
a hell?  (17).  On  earth  is  the  conveyance,  in  the  conveyance 
is  the  body — and  in  the  body  is  placed  another  person.  The 
sense  of  this  is  mine  does  not  exist  there  as  it  is  in  the  body. 
Oh  fie  on  the  infatuation  (18). 


.A.S  her  son,  shorn  of  attachment, grew  up  day  by  day  the 
queen  taught  him  knowledge  of  self  in  the  shape  of  minister- 
ing to  him  in  sickness  etc,  (1).  As  he  duly  acquired  strength 
and  the  heart  of  bis  father  he  attained  to  self-knowledge  by 
his  motet’s  woids  (2).  Having  been  thus  instructed  from  hi* 
very  birth  the  wise  (son),  with  bis  mind  shorn  of  attachments, 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


123 


did  not  tbink  of  entering  the  life  of  the  house-holder  (3). 
She  gave  birth  to  her  second  son  and  the  father  gave  hint  the 
name  of  SuvShu  and  thereat  Madalasi  laughed  (4).  And 
she  soothing  him  in  the  same  way  as  before,  that  highly  intel- 
ligent one  obtained  the  same  kind  of  knowledge  (5).  And 
when  after  the  birth  of  the  third  son  the  king  named  him 
Satnimarddana  that  one,  having  fair  eye-brows,  laughed  for 
some  time  (6).  In  the  same  way  he  was  instructed  from  his 
boyhood  by  that  sleinler-waisted  damsel-  He  was  without 
any  desire  and  rendered  no  pious  offices  (7).  And  when  the 
fourth  was  horn,  the  king,  desirous  of  giving  him  a name, 
looked  to  Madalasil  of  pure  ways  who  smiled  gently. 
And  while  she  was  thus  smiling,  the  king,  somewhat  stricken 
with  curiosity,  sai*!  to  her  («S). — Whenever  I was  ready  to  give 
a name  you  laughed.  Tell  me  the  cause.  Vikranta,  Suv.^lhti 
and  Satrunuirdd.ana,  the  natue.s  I gave,  1 believe  arc:  all  good 
names.  The  Kshatriyas  should  have  names  embodying  ideas 
of  heroic  spirit  (9-10).  If  they  do  not  lind  room  in  yotir  mind, 
0 auspicious  lady,  you  assign  a name  to  this  fourth  son  (»f). 
Madalasi  said:  -What  you  have  said,  O great  king,  I must 
carry  out.  I shall  give  a name  to  this  fourth  son  (la).  This 
virtuous  one  shall  be  celebrated  in  the  world  by  the  name  of 
Alarka.  This  your  youngest  son  shall  also  be  intelligent  (13). 
Hearing  this  meaningless  name  Alarka  given  to  the  son  by 
his  mother,  the  lord  of  the  earth,  smilingly  said:  ~(i4).  “O 
auspicious  lady,  this  wante,  which  you  have  given  to  my  son, Is 
meaningliss.  Why  i»  this  O Madalasi?"  (15),  Madalasi 
said  r—’i  have  given  the  name,C)  gre.tt  king, out  ol  fancy  only 
but  in  consonance  with  custom.  Listen,  O king,  to  the  meaning- 
lessness r»f  the  names  given  by  you  (t6).  The  wise  describe  the 
soul  as  omnipresent  but  imitti  mmm  from  aac  place  to 
amtker  {xf).  But  the  Lord  of  the  body  being  omnipresent 
does  not  go  (frotn  one  place  to  another).  So  the  name  of 
Vikrlnta  in  my  view  is  nicaningless  (iH).  O king,  'in  consi- 
^Bcace'  of  the  soul  having  no  lonn,  the  name  ol  .Suvihtt 


1;24  MARKAN0EYA  PURANAIW. 

which  you  have  given  to  your  another  ^on,  is  meaningless  (tg). 
The  name  of  Satrumarddana,  which  you  have  given  to  your 
third  son,  has  also  no  meaning.  Listen  to  the  reason  hereof 
(20).  When  the  self-same  soul  lives  in  every  body,  then  0 
king,  who  is  its  enemy  and  who  its  friend  ? (21),  Elements 
are  destroyed  by  elements.  But  can  that  which  has  no  form 
perish?  On  account  of  the  .separate  existence  of  anger  and 
others  such  a conception  is  meaningless  (2.2),  If  in  pur- 
suance of  custom  such  imaginary  names  are  conceived  why 
does  then  Alarka  appear  meaningless  to  you?”  (23).  Thus 
addressed  with  excellent  word.s  by  his  rjueen  the  highly  in- 
telligent king  said  to  his  beloved  spouse  who  had  spoken 
the  truth  "this  is  so”  (24).  And  when  tlte  fair-browed  lady 
again  engaged  in  the  same  way  in  instructing  her  .son  in  the 
knowledge  of  self  the  king  said  (23)— ■"  What  are  you  doing 
P foolish  one  ? You  are  going  to  bring  ill-luck  upon  this  my 
son  as  before  by  initiating  him  into  the  knowledge  of  self 
(26).  If  you  wish  to  encompass  my  pleasure,  if  you  regard  roy 
words,  then  lead  this  son  to  the  way  of  de.sire  (27).  The 
road  of  action  should  not  be  destroyed,  O reverend  lady,  nor 
should  the  funeral  cake  be  withheld  from  the  manes.  In  conso- 
nance  with  good  or  bad  actions  the  ancestral  manes  go.  to 
heaven,  are  born  as  lower  animals,  or  as  men  or  in  any  other 
life.  W^hen  they  are  stricken  with  hunger  or  thirst  and  are 
weakened  accordingly  men,  by  constantly  offering  them 
funeral  cakes  and  oblations  of  water,  relieve  the  ancestral 
manes.  And  0 fair-browed  lady,  in  the  same  way  they  please 
the  deities  and  guests  (29 — 30).  Gods,  men,  ancestral  manes, 
goblins,  ghosts,  Guhyakas,  birds,  worms,  insects  and  -all 
depend  on  men  .for  their,  subsistence  (sx).  Therefore,  0 
slender  made  lady,  perfectly  instruct  my  son  in  the  duties 

of  a Kshatrya  which  may  lead  to  his  well-being  both  in  this 

world  and  in  the  next  (32).”  Thus  addressed  by  her  husband 
that  most  excellent  lady  Madalasi.  instructed  her  son  Alarka 
by  wayof  consoUBghim:(33h  " Grow,  my  son,  and  giatify 


MARKANDEVA  RURANAM. 


125 


my  lord  with  acts.  Be  you  for  the  good  of  friends  and 
destruction  of  enemies  (34).  Blessed  are  you,  0 my  son^ 
who,  freed  from  your  enemies,  will  govern  the  earth  for 
a long  time.  May  all  enjoy  happiness  by  your  rule,  and  may 
you,  by  acquiring  religious  merit, be  immortal  (35).  You  should 
attentively  gratify  the  BrAhmanas  at  every  Parva,  satisfy  the 
desires  of  your  friends,  should  think  of  doing  good  to  others 
and  abstain  from  violating  others*  wives  {36).  By  celebrating 
various  sacrifices  you  should  gratify  the  celestials,  with 
profuse  wealth  you  should  please  the  twice-born ; you 
should  satisfy  the  hunales  with  numberless  articles  of  enjoy- 
ment and  your  enemies  with  fight,  O h€‘roe  (37).  In  boy- 
hood satisfy  your  friends,  in  youth  your  worshipped  rrliitiveii 
by  obeying  tfunr  ('ommands,  in  manhood  the  females  having 
ornaments  of  n«d>Ie  ancestry  ami  in  old  agf%  ()  my  son,  in 
the  forest,  the  rangiTS  thereof  (3K).  While  ruling  you 
should  gratify  your  friends,  prestect  iht*  pious,  <*elel)rate 
sacrifices,  destroy  the  wicked  and  enemies  in  battle  on  behalf 
of  kirie  and  Hra-hmAnas  and  then  meet  with  death  (39). 


CHAPTER  'X  X V I L 


Jara  (iNElcr)  said  :~Thwii  comforted  by  his  mother  every 
day  the  mm  nariietl  Alarka  grew  up  in  yearn  and  iturlligence 
(T).  On  Itii  aliaitiiitg  lo  youth  and  being  invested  with  sacred 
thread  the  wise  son  of  i Iritadliwaja,  bowing  to  his  inolher, 
said  (2)  r-—**  Speak  to  me  all  who  iim  bowing  to  you  an  ui 
what  I shmilit  do  leacling  iiihap|dness  both  here  anti  heftmfier*^ 
{3}.  Mtulatiisl  saitl  O my  cldld,  bfdng  installerl  uii  llic 
Ihtoiic,  14  king,  wkliiiiil  itifriiigiiig  the  duties  ol  hi^  own  older, 


^IIV^UIU  g - ^ V .jr 

evils*  which  strike  at  the  seven  rootsf  a king  by  keeping  his 
counsels,  should  protect  himself  from  his  enemies  (5.)  As 
from  a car  of  strong  wheels  one  meets  with  death  in  eight 
ways,  so  does,  forsooth,  a king,  by  giving  out  counsels  (§). " 
He  should  ascertain  whether  his  enemies  have  corrupted  his 
courtiers  or  not ; and  through  careful  spies  he  >hould  make 
himself  acquainted  with  the  ways  of  his  enemies  (y).  A 
king  should  not  confide  in  his  friends,  adherents  and  kinsmen  ; 
and  when  the  necessity  comes  he  should  confide  even  in 
his  enemies  (8).  Not  influenced  by  lust  a king  should 
acquire  the  knowledge  of  place,  increase  anti  decrease  and 
possess  the  six  attributes  (9).  First  controlling  his  self,  next 
I the  ministers,  next  the  servants,  next  the  citizens  he  should 

I enter  into  hostilities  with  his  enemies  (10),  The  king  of 

I uncontrolled  self,  who,  without  first  subjugating  all  these, 

desires  to  defeat  his  enemies,  on  being  defeated  by  his 
courtiers,  is  brought  under  the  control  of  his  enemies  (n). 

; Therefore,  my  child,  desires  should  be  conquered  first  by  a 

king ; on  them  being  brought  under  control  success  surely 
} attends  a king ; but  if  he  is  conquered  by  them  he  meets  with 

; destruction  (12).  The  enemies  are  lust,  anger,  covetousness, 

I pride,  idea  of  self  and  joy,  and  they  bring  on  the  ruin  of 

i kings  (13.  Thinking  that  Pandu  was  deprived  of  his  life 

j through  lust,  that  Anirudda  was  deprived  of  his  son  through 

j anger,  that  Aila  was  deprived  of  his  life  through  covetousness 

that  Vena  was  killed  by  the  twice-born  through  his  arrogance, 
that  Anusu^^s  son  Vali  was  destroyed  through  his  over  ween- 
ing  self  conceit  and  that  Puranjaya  was  killed  through  excess 
'i.  of  joy,  one  should  throw  off  these  passions  (14 — 15),  Con* 

quering  those  the  high-souled  Mirutta  subdued  the  entire 

^ f Hunting,  gambling,  sleep  during  the  day,  calumny,  concviplsctnce,  danc* 

i»g#»ttgingi  sporting,  useless  walking,  drinking,  violence,  creating  Rmlice,  ill. 

will,  deceipt,  cruelty  and  vilMfying  others* 

t Loidsbip,  counsellors,  Ctlends,  tu^sury,  punishment,  kingdom  and  capltii 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAH* 


127 


earth.  Remembering  this  a king  should  cast  off  all  these 
shart-com.iiigs  (16).  A king  should  take  his  lessons  from  the 
crows,  Kokilas,  tlie  black-bees,  the  harts,  the  serpents^  the 
peacocks,  the  swans,  the  cocks  and  the  iron.*  A king  should 
act  like  worms  towards  his  enemies  and  in  season,  O king, 
should  show  the  diligence  of  acts  (18).  He  should  spread 
like  the  scintillations  of  fire  or  like  the  seeds  of  the  cotton 
tree.  And  governing  the  earth  like  the  sun  and  the  moon‘ 
a king  should  learn  wisdom  from  the  prostitute,  the  lotus, 
the  Sarava  the  Suiika^  the  breast  of  a woman  big  with 
child  and  the  milk-woman.  ( 19 — 20)t.  For  governing  (his 
subjects)  a king  should  act  like  Indra,  the  king  of  gods, 
the  sun,  Yama,  the  Moon  and  the  wind-god  (21),  At  Indra 
pleases  the  creatures  of  tlic  earth  with  showers  for  four 
months  so  the  king  should  satisfy  his  subjects  with  self- 
sacrifice  (22).  As  tlic  sun  with  his  rays  draws  up  the  water 
for  eight  months  m the  king,  with  minute  means,  should 
collect  his  revenue  (23).  As  Yama  metes  out  punishment 
both  to  those  whom  he  likes  and  to  those  whom  he  hates 
when  the  proper  time  comes,  so  the  king  should  impartially 
deal  with  tliose  whom  he  loves  and  whom  he  dislikes*-Hhe 
good  and  the  wicked  (24).  That  king  truly  behaves  like 
the  Moon  in  whose  regeme  all  the  iubjecti  are  happy  and 
experience  delight  like  what  persons  derive  from  seeing  the 

• As  eSafitjr  from  a crow,  p#rft€lb«i  from  a Kokib,  th#  habit  of  teeumiilii* 
tioii  Irom  a bee,  the  hiibit  of  not  tiiilly  golog  to  the  clutches  of  an  tnemy  from 
thi  hart  j how  to  bring  down  1 big  t army  with  a small  expedient  from  a 
strptnl.  He  should  lake  thi  good  thing  and  leave  of  the  had  thing  m a swan 
drtftki  thf  fuilfe  out  of  water  mixed  with  it.  He  should  karn  how  to  rise  Mrly 
from  i cock  mi  ihoold  b#  huftl  and  ititful  llk«  iron. 

t Hi  ihould  Ittrii  from  the  prostlliile  how  to  please  many  j llkt  lotos  h# 
ihoald  not  only  bt  btautlfwl  of  person  but  be  aecompllshtd  also.  Tho 
Smma  it  a stmnf  anlwil  Like  Smtikm  hi  should  tfitlrely  kill  hit  tnemy.  As 
milk  Is  ertatid  In  th#  br«i,«t  of  a woman  for  the  future  child  so  tho  king 
•hoald  maki  preparatloin  for  the  future,  Ai  a milk  woman  cm  maki  nstny 


128 


markandeya  pobamam. 


full  moon  (25).  As  the  air  scretly  goes  through  all  creatures 
so  the  king,  with  spies,  should  read  his  citizens,  courtiers  and 
friends  (26).  The  king,  whose  mind  is  not  possessed  by  lust, 
the  desire  for  wealth,  or  any  other  thing,  repairs  to  the  celes- 
tial region,  0 my  son  (27).  The  king,  who  brings  back  to  the 
pale  of  their  own  religion  those  foolish  persons  who  stay  away 
from  right  paths  and  fall  off  from  their  duties,  goes  to  the 
celestial  region  (28).  The  king,  in  whose  kingdom,  O my  child, 
the  duties  of  the  various  orders  and  Asramas  do  not  suffer 
deterioration,  attains  eternal  happiness  both  in  this  world  and 
in  the  next  {29).  To  establish  persons  in  their  own  religion 
which  is  being  disturbed  hy  wicked  people  constitutes  the 
paramount  duty  of  a king  and  leads  to  his  success  (30).  By 
governing  his  subjects  a king  accomplishes  hts  end— -and 
by  governing  them  well  and  assiduously  he  is  entittled  to  a 
portion  of  their  piety  (3 1).  A king,  who  protects  the  four 
orders,  attains  to  happiness  and  ranges  with  Sakra  in  his 
own  region  (32). 

so:--' 


CHAPTER  XX.Vin. 


Jara  (inert)  said: — Hearing  the  words  of  his  mother 
Alarka  again  accosted  her  regarding  the  duties  of  the  various 
orders  and  conditions  of  life  (i).  *'0  noble  body,  you 
liave  described  to  me,  the  duties  of  the  kings.  I wish  to 
fear  now  of  those  regarding  the  various  orders  and  conditions 
^e”  (2).  MadalasA  saids — ■’“Gifts,  study  and  sacrifice 
are, th©,  duties  of  a Brkhmana  5 he  has  not  the  fourth  duty, 
except  carrying  on  trade,  for  subsistence  (3).  The  adequate 


MARKANOEYA  PURANAM, 


U9 

ItteanB  of  liiB  livplihood  has  boon  <Jescribe<I  as  three-fold, 
namely  tuition,  oHici.itinfj  as  priests  at  sacrifices  performed 
in  a pure  spirit  and  receiving  sanctified  gifts  (4).  The 
duties  of  a Kshatrya  have  been  described  as  three-fold, 
namely,  gifts,  study  and  sacrifice;  the  administration  of  the 
earth  and  the  use  of  weapons  are  the  means  of  his  liveli- 
hood (5).  Gifts,  study  and  sacrifice  constitute  the  three-fold 
duties  of  a Vaifya  ; trade,  tending  cattle  and  agriculture  are 
the  means  of  his  livelihood  (6).  Gifts,  sacrifice  and  serving 
the  twice-born  have  been  described  by  me  as  the  duties  of 
a Sudra;  handicrafts,  serving  the  other  orders,  keeping  cattle 
and  buying  and  selling  are  the  means  of  his  livtdihood.  I have 
described  to  yon  tlu;  dnlies  of  the  orders  and  hear  I shall 
now  describe  the  duties  relating  to  the  diverse  modes  of 
life  fy— 8).  By  observing  the  duties  of  his  order  and  not 
deviating  therefrom  a person  is  <'fowned  with  snceess  ; but 
when  one  docs  a thing  which  is  proscribed  he  goes  to 
hell  {9).  .So  long  as  u person,  belonging  to  om-  of  the  twice- 
born  orders,  has  not  been  invested  with  sacred  thread  so 
long  he  can  act,  sjteak  or  mit  according  to  his  will  (to).  But 
when  thtj  pro(n:r  ceremony  of  investiture  is  gone  through 
he  must  live  in  the  house  of  his  spiritual  guide  as  a Brahma- 
charin.  Hear,  ! shall  describe  his  duties  (u).  The  study 
of  the  Vedas,  and  the  krteping  of  sacred  fire,  going  about 
begging,  taking  food  with  the  preceptor’s  permission  after 
having  previously  dedicated  it  to  him,  to  satisfy  him  complete- 
ly, promptitude  in  tise  prer;eptor's  work,  to  engage  In  study 
at  his  command,  rievotion  to  him,  concentration  of  mind 
upon  him  (are  the  duties  of  a Brahmacharin)  (12 — 13). 
Having  obtained,  one,  two  or  all  the  Vedas  from  the  precept- 
or’s lips,  leaving  saluted  him  anti  with  Ids  permission  he  should 
present  to  the  preceptor  (14).  Then  desirous  of 

entering  upon  the  life  »»f  a householder  one  should  do  it ; or 
he  can,  according  to  his  desire,  enter  upon  the  fourth  mode 
, of  life,  namely  Vtimpriuhtha  (15).  Ur  the  twice-born  oiift 
17 


MARKANfDEYA  PURANAM. 


may  live  in  his  preceptor’s  house  performing  hnnl  aiisteretieg; 
shorn  of  vanity  he  should  live  as  a Brahmacharin  ministering* 
to  his  son  in  (he  absence  of  the  preceptor  and  to  his  disciples 
in  the  absence  of  his  preceptor's  son’.  Then  returning  from 
his  preceptor’s  house  and  desirous  of  entering  upon  the  life 
of  a householder  he  should,  for  leading  .a  domestic  lib;,  marry 
a girl  of  a different  race,  befitting  him,  free  from  disease  and 
having  no  defective  limb  {i6 — 18).  Then  acquiring  wealth 
by  his  own  exertions  he  should  gratify  completely  the  deities, 
the  departed  manes  and  (ho  guests  and  support  his 
dependants  (19).  And  as  much  as  lies  in  bis  power,  he 
should,  with  food,  support  his  servants,  sons,  persons  in 
distress,  the  blind,  the  fallen,  beasts  and  birds  (20).  This 
is  the  duty  of  a householder  as  well  as  that  of  living  with 
his  wife  while  in  her  season.  And  he  should,  to  the  best  of 
his  pofwer,  celebrate  the  five  sacrifices  (21).  Respected  by 
, he  shotild,  along  with  his  servants,  feed  upon  what 
remains,  proportionate  to  his  means,  after  the  departed 
manes,  the  guests  and  the  kinsmen  have  eaten  (22).  Thus 
have  I described  to  you  in  full  the  duties  of  a hoti-seholder. 
Hear,  I shall  now  describe  to  you  the  duties  of  one  entering 
upon  the  Vdnapraskiha  mode  of  life  (23).  Shoeing  his 
children  and  grand  children  as  well  as  the  decay  of 
hia  own  body  a wise  man  should  retire  to  woods  for 
purifying  his  soul  (24).  There  living  on  wild’  fruits  he 
shoufd  improve  his  soul  by  ascetici.sm.  He  should  sleep 
otr  the  earth,  practise  the  lirahntnchafyyn  mode  of  life, 
perform  ateta  on  behalf  of  the  departed  manes,  deities  and 
guests,,  perform  Homa,  bathe  three  times  a day,  wear  bark 
and  matted  locks,  practise  Yo^a  and  feed  on  the  wild  prO" 
duces  of  the  fofrest  (25—26).  He  should  thus  lead  the  V&na- 
tha  mode  of  life  for  washing  off  his  sins  and  improving 
The  Vikshu  (mendicant)  mode  of  life  is  the  finat 
of  a man  (27),  Hear  now  from  me  the  true  account  of 
the  fourth  corklStion  of  Bfe,  ^ iwt 


MARKANDF.YA  TURANAM. 


»3i  ji 

has  been  described,  O my  child,  by  great  men  (28).  One,  in 
this  mode  of  life,  shouhl  renounce  conijwny,  practise  Brahma^ 
eharyya,  drive  ruvny  wrath,  mortify  his  senses,  should  not 
live  at  one  place  for  a long  time,  withdraw  himself  from  all 
actions,  feed  once  only  on  whatever  has  been  got  by  beg- 
ging, should  acrpiire  the  knowledge  of  self  and  an  insight  into 
his  soul  (29 — 30).  f have  thus  described  to  you  the  duties  of 
the  fourth  stage  of  lift;.  Do  you  now  listen  to  me,  describing,  r 

in  a general  way,  the  duties  of  the  other  orders  and  modes 
of  life  (31).  'rnith,  purity,  freedom  from  malice  and  the 
desire  of  iujuriirg  others,  forgiveness,  kindness,  liberality  and  | 

contentment  as  the  eighth  ritiality— tlrese  have  been  described 
in  brief  by  me  tr)  yon  ?is  the  duties  of  the  various  orders 
and  moties  of  life,  livery  one  should  satisfy  the  duties  of 
his  own  order  jiiid  condition  (32  * 33).  A king  should  mete 
out  puiiishntent  to  him  who  goes  astray  transgr«‘ssing  the 
duties  of  his  own  order  and  stage  of  life  (34).  If  the  king 
does  not  punish  a man  who  disregards  his  own  duties  his 
hhta  and  Purht  acts  come  to  naught  (35).  Therefore  Iho 
king  should  carcdully  place  all  the  orders  in  their  respective 
duties  and  inflict  punmlmiciit  on  them  whenever  they  go 
astray  fjC). 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


AwFAUKA  said  fell  me  truly,  who  ask,  what  nets  .shoul(| 
be  duty  jR  iformi’r!  by  a luniseholder,  leaving  wbicb  undone 
oiH!  is  fetieretl  and  performing  which  one  attains  to  libera- 
tion—that  which  leads  to  the  wvU-beiug  ol  men,  that  which 


which  should  be  done.  Tell  me  all  this  duly  (1—2}/'  Mada- 
las'a  said  : — ''By  adopting  the  life  of  a householdefi  0 my  son, 
a m^n  nourishes  the  entire  universe  and  thereby  conquers 
the  wished-for  regions  (3)  The  departed  manes,  the  ascetics, 
the  deities,  the  goblins,  men,  worms,  insects,  flies,  birds, 
beasts  and  demons  all  depend  upon  a hoiiseholcier  for  their 
subsistence  and  attain  to  gratification  through  him.  Think- 
ing 'will  give  or  not'  every  one  looks  at  his  face  {4^ — 5).  This 
is  the  support  of  all  and  the  cow  of  the  three  (Vedas)  on 
which  is  established  the  universe  and  which  is  recognised 
as  the  cause  thereof  (6).  The  JRtk  i$  her  back,  the  Vafur  is 
her  middle,  the  Saman  is  the  face  and  neck,  tshiha  and 
Puria  are  her  horns ; the  sacred  Sukias  are  her  hairs  ; Smii 
and  Pushti  are  her  urine  and  excreta  and  the  orders  and 
modes  of  life  ate  her  developments.  The  whole  iifuvcrse  is 
sustained  by  her.  She  suffers  no  deterioration  or  decay 
(7—8).  My  son,  Swaha,  Swadha,  Vashai^  kanin  are  her 
four  udders.  The  deities  suck  the  udder  depart- 

_ ed  manes  the  udder  Swadhi^  the  ascetics  that  of  Vmhai 

and  all  save  the  deities,  goblins,  Asuras  and  others — the 
human  beings  suck  the  udder  Hania.  Thus  my  son^  the 
cow  of  the  threefold  Vedas  gratifies  all  beings  9 — u).  The 
I man  who  destroys  these  is  guilty  of  a mighty  iniquity.  He  is 

i plunged  into  TamijrS  and  Andhatamifr^  (hell)  (12).  The  per- 

son, who,  in  season,  makes  her  calves,  the  immortals,  drink 
! her  milk,  attains  to  the  region  of  the  celestials  (13).  Tbere- 

1 » fore,  0 my  son,  it  is  incumbent  upon  every  human  being 

j to  support  the  deities,  the  departed  manes,  men,  ghosts  as 

he  sustains  his  own  body  (14).  For  this  reason  having  bathed 
! and  purified  liimself,  a person,  with  a concentrated  mind, 

I ; should  offer,  in  due  time,  oblations  of  water  to  deities,  depart- 

I ^ e<f  ttanes,  and  Prajipati  (15).  After  worshipping  deities  with 

sandal  iiid  incense,  a man  should  w^orship  fire  and  then  offer 
eatables  (r6).  ‘ In  a room  a person  should  place  to  the  ^casl 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


m 


And  nortlj  offerings  of  food  for  Brahma,  the  Vishwadevas  and 
Dhanyantari  (17).  The  food,  intended  for  Sakra,  should  be 
placed  in  the  east  and  that  for  Yama  in  the  south,  that  for 
Varuna  in  the  west  and  that  for  the  Moon  in  the  north  (18). 
The  food  for  DhltA  and  VidliAta,  should  be  kept,  at  night,  at 
the  gate  of  the  house  and  that  for  the  sun  should  be  kept 
arouud  outside  the  house  (19).  A person  should  scatter  in 
the  air  fhe  food  intended  for  ghosts  and  night-rangers. 
Placing  one's  self  towards  the  south  one  should  offer  food  to 
the  departed  manes  (20).  Then  being  up  and  doing  and  con- 
centrating his  mind  well,  the  householder  should  take  up  water 
for  rinsing  his  mouth  (21).  Tlien  the  wise  oue  should  scatter 
food  at  different  places  designed  for  the  deities.  Having  thus 
made  offerings  of  food  at  his  house  the  householder,  purifying 
himself,  shoulil  offer  food  to  the  ghosts  for  their  gratification. 
He  should  keep  on  the  ground  food  intended  for  dogs, 
Swapachas  and  birds  {22 — 23).  'I'he  offering,  named  Vaishya- 
deva,  sljoutd  be  performed  in  tlie  morning  and  evening. 
Then  rinsing  his  mouth  the  wise  man  should  look  towards 
the  door  (34).  Then  for  an  eighth  part  of  a Mukurtta  he 
should  look  on  in  expectation  of  a guest.  And  on  getting 
a guest  at  that  place  be  should,  to  the  best  of  liis  might, 
gratify  him  with  meats  and  drinks  and  witli  fragrant  flowers. 
One  should  not  receive  as  a guest  a friend  or  a person 
living  in  the  same  village  (35 — 26).  A BrShmana,  of  un- 
known name  .and  birth,  stricken  with  hunger,  wearied, 
and  destitute,  and  who  comes  at  that  hour  and  begs  for 
food,  has  been  called  a guest  and  should  be  entertained 
by  the  wise  according  to  their  power  (37).  A learned 
man  should  not  enquire  after  the  Icne^ge,  status  or 
Vedic  accomplishments  of  his  guest.  Whether  beaniiful  or 
ugly  he  should  be  considered  as  FrajUpafi  bimselt  {38). 
Because  a man  does  not  live  for  ever  tlu^refore  he  is  t ailed 
AtUhL  And  when  a guest  is  gratified  the  houhcholder  is 
freed  from  the  debt  of  Nriyajna  (29).  I'hc  sinful  mail, 


•iniquity  and  lives  on  dung  in  the  future  life  (30).  The 
guest,  that  goes  away  disappointed  from  tlic  house  of  a man, 
transfers  to  the  liouseltolder  all  his  sins  and  takes  away 
the  latter’s  religious  merit  (31).  To  the  best  of  his  might  a 
man  should  entertain  his  guest  with  water,  herbs  or  any 
other  thing  that  he  himself  takes  {32).  A person  should  per- 
form always  iht  Sraddha  with  water  and  food  for  the  depart- 
ed  manes  and  feed  one  or  more  Brahmanas  (33).  Taking  off 
the  first  portion  of  rice  one  should  offer  it  to  a Brahmana 
and  he  should  offer  alms  to  the  begging  meiulkants  and 
Brahmacharins  (34).  A mouthful  of  rice  is  called  IJhtkshi  and 
four  mouthfuls  make  an  Arghya  and  four  Arghyas  make  up  a 
Hanta.  Thus  say  the  leading  twice-born  ones  (35).  Without 
offering  Hanta,  Arghya  or  Bhikshd  according  to  his  own 
power  one  should  not  take  meals  (36).  After  having  fed 
guests  one  should  feed  his  kinsmen,  friends,  suitors,  boys, 
(bid  people,  the  diseased,  destitute  people  stricken  with 
hunger  and  begging  food.  If  he  has  money  he  should  also 
feed  poor  relatives  who  desire  it  (37—38).  If  a person, 
'obtaining  a prosperous  kinsman,  meets  with  poverty,  the 
sins,  committed  by  him  in  that  state,  visit  the  pro.sperou8 
kinsman  (39).  This  procedure  should  also  he  followed  in 
the  evening.  When  a guest  comes  at  about  sunset  he 

should,  to  the  best  of  one’s  power,  be  entertained  with  a 
^eat,  fooding  and  bed  (40).  H a person  thus  bears  the 
"burden  of  a domestic  life,  the  friends,  deities,  departed 
manes,  great  saints,  guests,  beasts,  birds  and  smallest  worms, 
being  gratified,  bring  about  his  well-being  (41—43).  The 
pious  Atrl  sang  a hymn  in  this  connection.  Hear, 
D greatly  righteous  -one,  the  same  having  the  household  life 
for  its  subject  (43).  Wheo  a house-holder  has  money,  he 
(Abntd,  after  Worshipping  the  celestials,  the  departed  manes, 
guests,  friends,  kinsmen  and  bis  Spiritual  guide,  keep  food  on 

and  dogs.  'I'hc  Vatshwadeva 


WARICANDEVA  RUEANAM. 


^35 

ceremony  sho\il<l  lie  performed  both  in  the  morning  an<f 
evening  (44—45)*  shoiihl  not  take  meat^  rice,  herbs 

or  any  other  culinary  article,  that  may  be  in  his  house 
without  oflering  duly  a portion  of  them  (to  girests)  (46). 


CH  after  XXX. 


j^ApAiASA  said:— 'The  chitie*^  of  a householder  are 
threefold  natncly  Niim  (daily)  AVf/w/V//4vi  (occasional)  anci 
NiiynfinimiiiihL  Il«sar  tfunu,  O my  son  ft"^.  TTte  ceremonies 
relating  to  tlie  five  s;trrificf*s  tlescrilunl  to  you  hy  nn:  before, 
are  callecl  Niiya.  '.fhe  i^ermuonicH  tliat  are  performed  on 
the  birth  of  a mm  m well  asi  others  are  callml 
Smdiikas  on  Panm  days  are  regarded  Iiy  the  kirntdi  at 
NiifiiMiiimiiiihi.  The  eeremtinies,  that  are  performed  on 
the  birth  of  a son,  shcnihl  also  be  performed  in  dna  order 
0!t  the  occasion  nf  his  wedding  (2—4).  fn  the  eeremony 
called  Nfhidmfikkft  the  dcjiarted  manes  nhcnild  be  properly 
worshijipeci  Sitting  with  his  face  turnml  towardii  the  north 
or  the  east  tlie  nacrificer  should,  with  his  mind  coneonfrtfecf, 
offer  Fmdas  (batlH)  of  barky  and  curdn.  Some  peopfe 
^hold  thit  thif  ceremony  in  wilhoot  Vainhwadeva  (5™6).  In 
thm  ceremony  after  having  circumambulated  them  a crmple  of 
Brihmanas  shoiild  lie  wori^liippcd.  This  h called  Friddki 
Smddfm  Mi  I m fa  Hit*  ffmir  now  of  the  Aurddfi^  d^iiika 
Ekmidkkifm  which  should  be  performed  on  behalf  of  a 
parson  on  the  day  of  \m  demise.  In  this  no  wf)r»hi[i  of  ihs 
dritiei,  no  iiivocalion  or  oblation  to  fire  h to  be  m:ule  ; only 
Alupl  slioukl  be  iiteil  in  if.  Mear  the  lc?aving^  a 


remembering  his  name  one  should  pour  water  with  sesamum 
seeds.  This  should  be  thrown  at  the  spot  where  the  Kusa 
made  Brahmana  has  been  left,  saying  " May  this  be  without 
deterioration  and  may  he  be  gratified  with  it  and  they  will 
say.  ‘ We  have  been  gratified.^'  Every  month  of  the  year 
this  ceremony  should  be  performed  by  men.  When  the  year 
is  over  or  when  an  opportunity  presents  itself  Sapindakai'anO. 
ceremony  should  be  performed.  I shall  describe  to  you  the 
rules  of  this  ceremony  (7 — 'I2),  In  it  there  Is  no  worship 
of  the  deties,  no  offering  of  oblation  to  fire  and  no  invocation 
is  to  be  made.  Only  an  Arghya  and  Ku(a  are  to  be  offered, 
Placing  Pindct  and  water  in  an  opposite  direction  he  should 
feed  an  odd  number  of  BrUhmanas  (13)*  The  peculiar 
characterestic  of  this  ceremony  is  that  additional  rites  should 
be  performed  every  month.  Hear  with  attention,  I shall 
describe  this  to  you  (14).  My  son,  four  vessels,  containing 
sesamum  seeds  and  fragrant  water,  should  be  kept— three 
for  the  ancestral  manes  and  another  for  the  departed  {15). 
An  Arghya  as  well  as  the  vessel  intended  for  the  departed 
should  be  washed  over  the  three  vessels  and  then  reciting 
the  Mantras  Tesamana,  the  ceremony  should  be  concluded 
(16).  This  ekoddista  has  also  been  laid  down  for  women. 
But  when  they  have  no  son  they  are  not  entitled  to 
j Sapindakarana  (17)-  Men  should  perform  BkoddishtA 

j every  year  for  females ; as  in  the  case  of  men  it  should 

. . be  duly  performed  on  the  day  of  her  death  (18).  In  the 

absence  of  a son  (the  ceremony)  should  be  performed  by 
those  entitled  to  offer  watery  oblation.  Those  that  are  a 
mother’s  Sapindas  and  those  that  are  a mother’s  Sahodakss 
should  act  according  to  these  injunctions  ; and  a person,  who 
is  without  a son,  should  have  his  rites  performed  by  his 
diiBghter’s  son.  A daughter’s  son  should  thus  perform  the 
\ ceremony  for  his  maternal  grandfather  (19 — 20).  This  rite 

I ' . is  called  A mother's  father  and  a father’s 


'5:1 

'Si 


MARKANDEYA  RURANAM. 


*37 


father  shoukl  be  properly  worshipped  by  Naimittika  SraddM 
(si).  In  the  absence  of  any  other  relatives  the  wives  should 
perform  this  rite  for  their  husbands  without  any  Mantra.  In 
the  absence  of  wife  a king  should  have  the  obsequies  of  the 
deceased  properly  performed  by  one  of  his  own  relatives 
or  persons  of  the  same  caste.  For  the  king  is  the  friend 
of  all  orders  (22 — ‘23).  I have  thus  described  to  you,  my  son, 
the  Nitya  and  Naintittika  rites ; listen  now,  I shall  describe 
other  sorts  of  Nitya  and  Naimittika  rites  connected  with 
tSraddha  (34).  'riie  period  of  the  moon's  wane  is  called 
Darsa  ; this  is  the  time  of  those  rites  and  indicates  their 
permanence  (25). 


CHAPTER  XXXI- 


A-  father’s  graml-father  is  not  entitled  to  Sapinda- 
karana  and  being  a paternal  ancestor  of  the  fourth  degree 
and  upwards  he  is  deprived  of  the  paternal  pinda  (i).  He 
is  the  fourth  among  them  and  feeds  on  the  lepa*  and  rice 
offered  by  the  son  ; he  h.»»  no  relation  and  is  entitled  only 
; to  the  enjoyment  of  food  (2).  The  father,  the  grand-father 
and  the  great  grand-father— these  three  generations  are 
[,  regarded  as  being  entitled  to //'m/s  (3).  The  three  ancestral 
j generations,  beyond  the  grand  father's  grand-father,  can 
( receive  only  the  //•/«  ; and  of  these,  the  one  performing  the 
rite  is  considered  as  the  seventh  (4).  This  relation  of  the 
seven  generations  has  been  laid  down  by  the  ascetics.  Those 

* The  wlpinjjtj  uf  the  h;i(>d  whieh  has  offered  funeral  ohUttions  to  three 
ancwitori  ami  whkh  are  cuinidered  as  an  oblation  to  ancestors  in  the  4th,  fill 
ami  6th  d^rm. 


tjjS  markandeya  puranam. 

who  precede  the  sacrificer  can  receive  aHuh'pa*  (5).  Listea,  0; 
my  son,  I shall  de$cribe  now  the  different  Sraddas  which  a sacrh 
ficer  should  duly  perform  for  the  gratiiication  of  the  ancestors 

preceding  them,  tor  those  living  in  the  hell,  for  those  ho*tt 
as  beasts  and  those  bora  in  other  orders  of  elemental  creaticuts 
(6 7),  Those,  who  are  born  as  Pishdehas,  obtain  gratifica- 

tion from  the  food  that  is  placed  on  the  ground  by  men  ^8), 

0 my  young  boy,  those,  that  have  been  converted  into  trees, 
are  gratified  by  the  drops  of  water  tljat  full  on  the  earth  from 
wet  clothes  (9),.  The  drop,  of  water  that  falls  on  thf  ground 
from  a person's  body,  brings  about  the  gratiiication  of  thoss 
that  have  been  born  in  the  order  of  deities  (to),  Tht»e, 
that  are  born  as  beasts,  obtain  gratification  from  tuc  particles 
of  food  that  fall  down  on  the  ground  at  the  time  of  the  taking 
up  of  Hat  pinda  (ii).  Those,  who  although  worthy  of  perfor- 
ming rites,  had  been  burnt  in  their  childhood,  without 
receiving  the  sanctification,  obtain  gratification  from  scattered 
food  and  water  falling  from  a broom  (is).  The  others  obtain 
their  gratification  from  water  that  falls  wlren  the  Brahmanas 
rinse  their  mouths  or  wash  their  feet  (13).  Thus  the 
ancestors,  of  the  persons  who  perform  duly  the  Sraddkas 
born  in  other  species,  are  gratified  by  tl>e  food  or  water,! 
pure  or  otherwise  that  is  cast  by  the  sacrificer  or  the  twice- 
born  (14),  If  one  performs,  the  Sraddha  of  his  ancestoc 
with  money  obtained 'from  another  then  tl^e  ancestor,  born  in 
the.orjder  of  or  Pukkas,  finds  gratification  there- 

from. Thus  my  child,  ancestors  born  in  other  species  are 
^fUified  with  meats  and  drinks  that  are  offered  by  his 
kinsmen  at  the  time  of  a Sraddha  (15 — 16).  The  ancestral 
manes,  in  numbers,  obtain  gratification,  from  droj^  of  virater 
particles  of  fopd  which  the  kindred  cast  on  the  occasion 
of  tbe  performance,  of  Sraddhaf  (17).  So  a person  should 
duly,  vvith.  deyotiott,  perform  a Sraddha,  even  with  lierbsj 
Sraddha  being  performed  no  one,  born  in  the  race,  suffers 

■ ' .■  '■  ' 7 ~'™*'''*******'*‘~****'*******’'***"'*‘*^^  

. That  wbick>  IS  offered  ^ter  kpa  le  oieftd. 


ilARKANl)EYA  HORAKAM. 


*39 


j^rivAtion  (iB).  I shall  novir  describe  to  ydd  the  Jjrbpet-  tliAe 
fdr  the  performance  of  Nitta  and  NaimitHka  rites  by  ttien. 
Ltsteh  tb  the  procedure  thereof  desfcribed  by  mfe  (19).  On 
the  tvine  of  the  Moon  SrSddha  should  be  performed  during 
IhO  day  of  the  New  Moon  as  also  during  the  eighth  lunar  day 
df  the  dark  half  of  the  month,  do  you  hear  from  me  of  the 
dptfonat  seasons  (for  it)  (20),  If  an  excellent  Bralimand  is 
gecurtfd  and  if  the  articles  for  the  SrSddha  are  procured, 
0 sif  son,  a SrSddha  should  be,  of  one's  own  accord,  celebra- 
tion the  ecclipse  of  the  sun  or  moon  during  a half  year, 
during  the  equinox,  during  the  course  of  the  sun  through 
the  Zodiac,  on  the  appearancrj  of  an  evil  omen,  on  the 
: vision  of  an  evil  dream,  on  the  ascension  of  the  natal  star, 
or  during  the  malign  influence  of  any  planet  (3t — 22). 
An  educated  person,  a Shrotrio,*  a Yogi,  one  versed  in  the 
Vedas  and  singing  the  Yyesttm  Saman,t  one  versed  in  three 
Nttekiki(as,X  one  who  is  versed  in  the  three  Madhus,^  the 
thfee  Suf>atnax\\  and  tl>e  six  a daughter's  son, a priest 

a son-in-law,  a sister’s  son,  a father-in-law,  one  who  b 
engaged  in  the  performance  of  five  fire  rituals,  one  engaged 
in  asceticism,  a motiier's  brother,  a person  devoted  to  his 
parents,  a disciph*,  a wife's  brother,  and  a relative,— all  theae 
eininent  twice-born  ones  are  competent  to  perform  the 
' ' StWdha  (23 — 25).  A twice-born  one,  my  aon,  who  has  not 
; practised  ftrahmncharyya,  who  is  diseased,  who  has  extra 
I MW,  who  has  not  the  natural  number  of  limbs,  Who  is  born 
\ ef  a twice-married  female,  who  i»  without  an  eye,  who  b 
lib  illegitimate  child  of  a female,  whose  htisband  is  living  or 

f •A  pwicin  ¥fwt*rl  In  I lie  ’ihiily  «!  tlin  Vetliiii. 

t A |^0rtk)tt  <if  mcltitlon  of  which  utii'  mtm%u 

I ‘ ttllgtwi  ^trii 

I Till*  t^rri  of  Niichiketa. 

f Tht  Ihrer  t 

I Thrw  cliwwfi  til  Iiir4«  llrtt  rfe4lrtl  by  llrubmatlikriii  mi  includletl  In  thi 
4dlf  pre«nkiti0»i  of  W4t«r  t« 

t Sik  hfuttiliti  d 


markandeya  puranam, 

of  a woman  whose  husband  is  dead,  who  has  injured  his 
friends,  who  has  diseased  nails,  who  is  impotent, 
who  is  possessed  of  dark  and  twany  teeth,  who  has  an 
ugly  form,  who  has  been  imprecated  by  his  father,  who  is 
crooked-minded  or  malicious,  who  sells  soma,  who  has 
sullied  his  daughter,  who  practises  medicine,  who  has 
forsaken  his  father  and  preceptor,  who  teaches  for  remunera- 
tion, who  is  an  enemy,  who  is  the  husband  of  a widow, 
■who  has  renounced  the  Veda  or  fire,  who  is  married 
to  a girl  of  twelve  who  has  attained  her  puberty,  who 
js  stained, — these,  as  well  as  other  twice-born  ones  guilty  of 
transgressions  should  be  forsaken  at  the  performance  of  the 
funeral  rites  of  the  ancestors  (26 — 29).  The  above  mention- 
ed  best  of  Brahmanas  should  be  invited  on  the  previous  day 
and  should  be  engaged  in  ceremonies  for  the  ancestral  manes 
and  celestials  (30),  These  should  keep  in  restraint  all  propen- 
sities as  well  as  he,  that  is  to  perform  the  SrSddha, 
The  ancestral  manes,  of  a person  that  visits  a woman  after 
distributing  gifts  in  a Sraddha  and  taking  his  meal,  lie  on 
his  semen  for  a good  month  (31).  The  ancestral  manes,  of 
a person,  who,  after  knowing  a woman,  takes  his  meals  or 
goes  to  a Sraddha,  live  on  semen  and  urine  for  one  good 
month  (32).  Therefore  a wise  man  should  first  invite  people. 
Even  if  (Brahmanas)  are  not  had  on  that  day,  those  who 
have  associated  with  women  must  be  renounced  (33).  After 
gratifying  them  with  salutation  a person  should  attentively 
feed  the  self-controlled  ascetics,  arrived  in  due  time  for 
•alms  (34).  As  the  dark  half  of  the  month  is  more  liked 
' by  the  ancestral  manes  than  the  light  so  is  the  afternoon 
more  liked  by  them  than  the  morning  (35).  Adoring  duly 
wkh  welcome  the  invited  guests  in  the  house  he  should,  with 
! ,1teiids  purified,  make  them  take  their  seats,  after  they  have 
riaied  their  mouths  (36),  In  a ceremony  for  the  ancestors 
an  odd  number  of  educated  Brlhmanas,  and  in  a ceremony 
for  the  celestials  an  even  number  of  educated  Brihinanas 


power,  may  engage  a single  Brilhmana  both  in  the  rites  for 
ancestors  and  celestials  (37).  This  is  also  the  procedure  to  be 
adopted  in  rites  performed  for  the  ancestral  manes  on  the 
mother's  side  as  also  in  Vaishwaiievas.  Some  people,  if  they 
like,  may  adopt  a dilTcrent  procedure  in  these  ceremonies  (38). 
Rites, for  the  celestials, should  be  performed  by  a person  with  his 
face  towards  the  east  and  the  rites  (or  the  ancestral  manes  with 
his  face  towards  the  north.  This  is  also  the  practice  in  the 
rites  for  maternal  ancestral  manes  as  laid  down  hy  the  wise 
(39).  (laving  hatnletl  over  Knja  for  seats  a wise  man  should 
adore  them  with  Ar^/ij>a  etc  ; offering  a rope  of  pack  thread 
a wise  twice-born  one,  with  their  pcinus.sion,  should  invoke 
the  deities  with  Mantras.  Having  olTtwed  an  arghya 
containing  barley  attd  water  on  behalf  of  the  Vishimdcvas 
one,  after  dedieattiig  garlands,  incense,  lamps,  and  water, 
should  perforin  all  the  eermnonies  for  aneestral  manes  on  the 
right  side  (40  4 J),  Then  nlfering  a double  tpiantity  of 
Darbha  grass  aiul  with  their  leave  a wise  [rerson  should  in- 
voke his  ancestral  manes  with  the  recitation  of  some  Mantras 
(43).  0 great  one,  desirous  of  gratifying  hia  anccatral  manes 
he  should,  on  the  right,  dedieuie  an  arghya  oi  barley  mixed 
with  sesame  (44).  Thereupon  commanded  by  the  twice- 
born  to  celebrate  the  (ire  rite,  with  saying  " Do  it*’  he  should, 
as  directed,  offer  to  the  (ire  rice  devoid  of  curries  and  ashes 
(45).  (Then  .saying)  "'ro  the  bearer  of  Kavya  (offering  of 
food)  fire — Swulia"  the  first  oblation  shonld  be  offered.  (Then 
saying)  **To  the  Moon  having  I’itris — Swaha"  the  second 
oblation  should  be  offered.  'I'hen  what  remains,  after  thft 
oblations  have  been  offered,  should  be  made  over  to  the  ves- 
sels of  the  twice-born  (4f>— 47).  '*  Do  you  to  your  desire 
feed  on  these"  with  these  sweet  words  spoken  to  them  he 
should  duly  offer  to  them  the  food  placed  in  their  vessels 
(48)  And  they,  as  desired,  will  intently  ami  silently  take 
the  food  (49).  Temptitig  them  gently  and  casting  off  anger 


markandeya  puranaii. 

a nian  should  gradually  offer  them  the  food  most  liktd 
by  them  (50).  He  should  then  fecite  the  Mantras  that  ati 
capable  of  slaying  the  RakshaSas,  and  then  scatter  ori  earth 
sesame  seeds  as  well  as  white  mustard  for  them,  for  theffi 
ate  many  impediments  in  a Sraddha  (51).  Then  he  should 
address  the  Brahmanas  saying  “ you  have  been  gfRlified  with 
nutritious  and  delightful  food”  and  they  should  te{»!y  “we 
have  been.”  Then  permitted  by  them  a man  should  stattet 
rice  all  ovet  the  ground  and  duly  offer  water  for  rinsing  theit 
mouths.  Then  with  their  permission,  he,  restraining  his  body, 
mind  and  words,  should  make  a funeral  cake  containing 
sesame  and  place  it  on  a DarhM  on  the  southern  side, 
near  the  leaving,  for  his  ancestral  manes  (52-*-54).  Theft 
with  a concentrated  mind  he  should  offer  them  water  fro# 
the  sacred  vessels  belonging  to  the  ancestots-^he,  who,  0 
prince,  performs  With  devotion  a sacrifice  on  behalf  of  his 
ancestral  manes  (55).  Then  in  (he  same  way  Offering  dafy 
Pindds  for  the  ancestral  manes  on  hiS  mother’s  side  he  shtould 
offer  water  for  ritfsing,  together  with  perfumeries,  garlands  etc. 
(56)  Then  conferring  upon  them  gifts  according  to  hii 
power  lie  should  say  " may  this  prove  an  agreeabfe  st’adM'' 
and  on  their,  being  gratified,  saying  “So  be  it”  he  should 
maifee’  them  recite  the  Vaish'diaddmi  Mantras— “O  VishwatdevaSj 
be  you  plfeased'.  May  you  farewell.”  And  after  they  hUYi 
smtd  ‘So  be  it”'  he  Should  pray  for  their  bleSsingS  (5y-^58)i 
Thenf  with'  sweet  wbtds  and  saluting  them'  reverentially  ffd 
should  dismiss  them.  They  must  be  followed  to  the'  ^or ; 
aud  when:  they  shall  bid  him  adieu  he  should  come  back  (5^); 
Then  the  daify  rites  should  be  performed  and  the  saicriffcet 
^ul'd  entertain  his  guests.  Some  good  fieople  get  the  ddliy 
ti^s  performed  fbr  their  paternal  manes  (6c>).  Others  Say 
Should  not  be  performed  for  them.  The  remaining  lior- 
tiow  rtiould'be  gone  through  in'  the  aforesaid  way.  Some 
say  there  is  nd  necessity  Of  separate  cooking  in  patetnal  rite's; 
while  according  to  others  it  must  be  done  (6iV  Tlich  a 


matt  sha«i«  taKc  inac  nee  aiong  witn  ttia  servants,  u you 
conversant  with  piety,  in  this  way  or  in  any  other  way  you 
should  attentively  perform  the  Sr5ddha  of  your  ancestral 
manes,  so  that  the  leading  twice-born  ones  may  be  gratified 
(62— 63)-  Itt  ^ SrJlddha  three  things  are  sacred,  a maternal 
gran^on,  a Kn/a^a*  and  the  sesamum  seeds ; and  three 
according  to  the  leading  Bralnn.nn.as,  are  to  be  cast  off,  viz 
anger,  walking  and  hurry  (64).  My  son,  in  a SrXddha  silver 
vessels  are  best  and  silver  should  be  seen  and  given  away 
(65).  It  is  said  on,  earth,  Snmdhd  was  milched  by  the  ances- 
tcali  manes  with  a silver  vessel ; therefore  the  silver  vessel 
is  acceptable  to  them  and  it  itjcreases  their  delight  (66). 


• :0:~ 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 


BiiaDAbASA  said:— Hear  now  with  reverence,  0 my 
son,  as  to  what  should  be  procured  for  paternal  manes  and 
what  should  be  given  up  on  their  behalf,  and  what  oncoa- 
passes  their  gratific.'^ion  (i).  By  living  on  rice  mixed 
with  clarified  butter  onu  gratifies  the  paternal  manes  for*  a 
month  and  by  living  on  meat  and  fish  gratifies- them  for  a 
couple  of  months  (2).  Deer’s  flesh  brings  about  the 
gratification  of  paternal  manes  for  three  months ; hare's 
flesh  nourishes  them  for  four  months  (3),  Bird’s  flesh 
(nourishes)  them  Cor  five  months  and  boar's  flesh  for  six 
months goat's  flesh  for  seven  months  ; Ena'sf  flesh  for 

• Tilt  fifth  MnhufttA  m » thf  day,  It  h aw  tliglhk  tlmt  for  lb# 

^rfommae#  of  rilts  far  Ibt  maati, 

■ t A.M«d  of  dttr. 


144 


maskanoeya  puranam. 


eight  months  (4).  Ruru’s*  flesh  certainly  gratifies  them  for  nirw 
months  and  Gavaya'sf  flesh  for  ten  months  (5).  M ulton  gratifies 
the  paternal  manes  for  eleven  months  and  cow’s  milk  or 
Payaca  for  twelve  months  (6).  My  son,  the  flesh  of  the 
rhinoceros,  black  hares,  honey,  flesh  offered  by  a daughter  or 
any  descended  from  the  same  line,  GaurisutaX  or  SrAddha 
performed  at  GayA-— these  undoubtedly  encompass  the  eternal 
gratification  of  paternal  manes  (7 — 8).  Sysmaka  (3), 
shyamaka  and  as  well  as  FrSsntika,  Nivara  and  Puskala 
these  various  sorts  of  rice  are  agreeable  to  the  paternal 
manes  (9).  Besides  these,  barley,  Vriht  rice,  wheat,  sesame,- 
Mudaga,  mustard,  ^ryangu^  Kovidara  ami  Nhhpava  can- 
also  bring  about  their  gratification  (10).  Makat/a,  Raja- 
tnansa,  Knuviprusika  and  Masuru  should  not  be  used  in  a- 
Sraddha.  Garlic,  turnip,  onion,  carrot,  powdered  barley 
mixed  with  cards,  any  thing  devoid  of  color  and  moisture, 
Gandharika,  the  bottle  gourd,  salt,  treacle  and  red  exudations 
should  be  discarded  in  a Sr&ddba.  Things  got  by  bribe,  from 
a fallen  person  or  obtained  by  money  exacted  unfairly  by 
marrying  one’s  daughter,  are  to  be  eschewed  in  a SrAddha. 
Water  that  gives  out  bad  odour  or  that  is  frothy,  that  is  small 
in  quantity,  from  which  a cow  does  not  obtain  gratification, 
that  has  been  got  at  night,  that  has  been  rejected  by  every 
one,  that  is  unfit  to  be  drunk,  that  has  sprung  in  a Nfpana^ 
should,  my,  child,  be  always  eschewed  in  rites  for  paternal 
manes  (ii — 16).  A deer's  milk,  goat’s  milk,  camel's  milk, 
that  of  an  animal  with  a single  hoof,buffaloe’»  mWk, Chamaru's 
milk,  the  milk  of  a cow  within  ten  days  of  her  giving  birth 
to  a calf,  milk  that  has  been  got  by  saying  "Do  you 
give,  me  milk  for  my  father’s  ceremony  should  not  be 
used  in  a SrAddha.”  The  earth  of  a spot  that  gives  out 

• • Another  kind  of  doer. 

t Another  klttd  of  - deer..-  ■ 

t A kind  of  Sraddha* 

I A ditckiiw a Wf U. 


.MARKANDETYA'  PURANAIi. 


' fead  smell/' that  is  filled  with  worms,  rough,  or  burnt  by 
' fire,  that  is  full  of  disgusting  and  vicious  sounds,  must  be  es- 
chewed.in  Sraddha  (l6 — ^19).  Those  who  have  disgraced  the 
race,  those  who  have  engaged  themselves  in  injuring  another's 
family,  those  that  are  nude  and  that  are  sinful,  injure  cere- 
monies for  ancestral  manes  by  their  presence  there  (20).  An 
impotent  one  cast  off  by  his  parents,  a cock,  a wild  boar,  a 
dog  and  Rakshasas  despoil  a Sraddha  by  merely  looking  oh  it 
(21).  Therefore  well  guarded  by  people  should  a householder 
scatter  sesame  seeds  on  earth.  By  doing  this,  O my  son, 
protection  in  Sraddha  is  obtained  by  both  the  parties  (22}.  A 
person,  impure  for  the  birth  of  a child  or  by  the  touch  of  some 
^ unclean  animal,  a valetudinarian,  or  a fallen,  an  impure 
person  cannot  bring  on  the  nourishment  of  a paternal  grad- 
;fafehers  (23).  A woman, in  menses,  should  not  be  seen,  on  this 
occasion;  one  with  his  head  shaven  as  well  as  a drunkard 
• . should  also  be  avoided  by  a sacrificer  (^4).  The  food,  that 
has  been  polluted  by  the  touch  of  hair  or  worms,  that  hasf 

f been  looked  at  by  the  dogs,  that  gives  out  bad  smell,  that  is 

I* " 

’I  «tale  or  that  has  been  touched  by  the  wind  of  the  cloth,  must 
t be  eschewed  in  a Sraddha  (25).  Whatever  is  dedicated 
reverentially  to  the  ancestral  manes  in  their  name  and  gofrUf 
becomes  their  food.  Therefore  in  a ceremony  for  the  manes 
selected  articles  should  be  duly  kept  in  a vessel  with  the 
object  of  affording  gratification  to  the  ancestral  manes 
(26—27).  A learned  man  should  entertain  Yagh  (at  a 
Sraddha).  Because  the  ancestral  matnes  are  the  receptacles 
:/  of  Yoga  they  should  always  be  entertained  (28).  If  a single 
is  entertained  in  the  place  of  thousands  and  thousands 
kj  of  Brahmanas,  he  delivers  the  sacrificer  as  well  as  those  who 
feed  like  a’ boat  which  carries  people  in  a river  (29).  The 
/ Brahmavadtns  di  hymn  which  had  been  sung  by  the 

manes  in  honour  of  the  king  Aila.  ‘‘When  shall  such  a 
! ^ood  son  be  born  to  us  who  will  offer  for  us  funeral  cakes  on 

I the  earth  out  of  the  leavings  of  the  Yogis^  or  for  affording  u* 
19 


markandeva  puranam, 


gratification  every  month  in  Gii/a  offer  us  excellent  Havw 
in  the  shape  of  rhinoceros,  black  herbs,  liladhyas  or  Krisara 
^20—32).  In  offering  food  in  the  Vatslfwaiicva  and  Saumva 
ceremonies  the  flesh  of  the  rhinoceros  is  considered  as  the  best 
Havi.  When  we  get  the  flesh  of  a rhinoceros  having  no 
horns  we  feed  on  it  so  long  as  the  sun  is  in  the  sky”  (33). 
On  the  thirteenth  lunar  day  of  eitlier  fortnight  when  Magha 
is  in  the  ascendant  one  should  perform  the  Srruldha  according 
to  the  prescribed  ritual.  And  during  the;  southern  solistice 
mixed  vvith  honey  and  clarified  biUter  should  1k‘ offered 
(34).  With  a view  to  accomplish  his  object  and  liberate 
himself  from  sins,  a man,  my  son,  should  reverenlially  adore 
his  ancestors  (35).  When  the  ancestral  manes  are  pleased 
with  a Srtddha  they  make  Vasus,  Rudras,  Adiiyas,  stars, 
planets  and  other  constellations  favourably  disposed  towards 
the  people  (36).  When  the  ancestral  mane.s  ,are  pleased  with 
fh-addha  they  confer  longevity,  wisdom,  riches,  learning, 
heaven,  liberation  and  happiness  as  well  as  kingdom  {37), 
Thus, my  son,  I have  described  all  about  the  Srftdd ha  ceremony 
I shall  now  describe  to  you  the  hin,ar  dnys  regarding  Kamya 


ItIaPALASa  said  r— •The  first  day  of  the  light  half  of  tho 
awmth  is  auspicious  for  the  acquirement  of  riches,  the  second 
te  ptosperky,  the  third  for  ob^aioing.  btrons  and  the  fourth 
fm  thi  destruction  of  enemies  {tV.  The  fifth  gives  good 
fortune  aad  the  honor.  Tlje  sevcjuh  gives  tl»e  w*pr«» 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


147 


tnacy  over  his  own  people  to  a man  and  the  seventh  finished 
intellect  (2).  The  ninth  confers  on  him  wives  and  the  tenth 
the  accomplishment  of  all  his  objects.  One,  performing  a 
Sr&ddha  on  the  eleventh  day,  acquires  a knowledge  of  the 
Vedas  (3).  One,  adoring  the  ancestral  manes  on  the 
twelfth  day,  gains  victory,  children,  intelligence,  cattle, 
ptosperity,  independence  and  nourishment  (4).  If  man 
r^yeitntially  performs  with  rice  the  Snhhlha  of  his 
afttii^ral  manes  on  the  thirteenth  day  he  certainly  comes  by 
• a ltMig  life  and  riches.  A man,  whose  ancestral  manes  died 
to  youth  or  were  slain  by  weapons,  should,  to  gratify  them, 

^ perform  their  rites  on  tlic  fourteenth  day.  A man,  celebrating 
with  care  and  purity  the  Srihidha  of  his  fatlter  on  the  day  of 
the  new  moott,  obtains  all  objects  and  eternal  heaven.  A 
man,  by  adoring  his  ancestral  manes,  on  the  ascension  of 
Kirtit^a,  attains  to  the  region  of  the  ctdestials  (5 — 8).  One, 

* desirous  of  offspring  (should  perform  it  under  the  influence 
of)  Rohini  ; one,  by  performing  it  during  the  influence  of 
Saumya,  attains  energy.  A person  acejuircs  heroism 
; by  performing  it  during  the  influence  of  Artim  and  he  ob- 
I tains  laud  by  performing  it  during  the  itifluence  olJPuHarvasu 

! (9).  By  ever  performing  the  Srdddhu  during  the  influence 

of  Pushya  he  attains  nourishment  and  by  celebrating  it 
daring  the  influence  of  Ax/th'ska  he  gets  worthy  sons, 
During  the  influence  of  Magha  he  gets  the  lead  of  his 
! kinsmen  and  good  fortune  in  that  of  Phalguni  (to).  During 
I the  influence  of  IJttam  Phalgtmi  one  becomes  liberal  and 
i gets  offspring ; and  a man,  performing  tlie  Smddka  during  the 
i;  influence  of  forsooth  attains  to  excellence  (n).  Under 

I tte  ascendancy  of  Chitm  one  becomes  beautiful  and  gets 
I children.  Swati  gives  prosperity  in  trade  and  Vishakha 
I the  accomplishment  of  the  desire  of  having  sons  (13).  I*er« 

, forming  (the  Sradd/m  during  the  influence  of)  hnuradha 
ofte  attains  to  the  dignity  of  lord  Ihiraniount,  supremacy  under  » 
tht  influCBce,  of  Jytsxlha  and  good  health  during  tbrt 


1^8.  MARKANDEYA  PaRANAM. 

oi  Mala  {i^)-  During  the  influence  of  Ash&ra  one  obtains 
fape,  and  immunity  from  grief  during  Uitara  ; during  srkvana 
excellent  regions  and  great  riches  during  Dhanishtht  (14)* 
By  performing  the  ceremony  in  abhijit  one  becomes  versed 
in  the  Vedas  and  by  doing  so  in  varuna  he  becomes  a master* 
of  medicine;  ajevitha  in  prausthapada  and  the  Posterior  gives  . 
iafantry  (15).  h\  Revati  one  gf^ts  metals  except  silver  and 
gold  and  horses  in  Atwnis]  and  performing  the  SrMdha  in  , 
Bharani  one  obtains  good  length  of  life.  Thus  knowing  the 
truth, one  should  perform  the  Kamya  SrMdha  during  the 
ascendancy  of  these  stars  (16), 

I 

; CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

’ ■ \ 

— :o:— 

IVIadalasa  said  }■— Thus,  my  child,  the  deities,  ances.i 
tral  manes,  guests  and  friends,  goblins,  servants,  beasts, 
birds,  ants,  beggars,  suppliants  and  persons  living  in  the 
house  be  entertained  with  Havya  and  Kavya  and  rice  by  a 
pious  householder  of  virtuous  ways.  One,  neglecting  the 
Nitya  znA  Naimittikd  rites,  is  visited  by  sin  (t— 3).  Alarka 
said “ Mother,  you  have  described  to  me  Nitysy  Naimittika  i 
and ‘iVi^ya  these  threefold  rites,  the  duties  of  a 

person  (4).  0 you  born  in  a great  race,  I wish  to  hear  06. 
the  righteous  ways  by  which  a person  secures  happiness  botlii 
io  this  world  and  in  the  next  (5).”  . Madalasi  said " A.- 
bot^holder  should  always  observe  the  rules  of  good  conduct, ! 
A-  ^fetwn,  devoid  of  righteous  conduct,  does  not  obtain  haftpi- , 
nesSiboth  in  this  world  and  in  the  next  (6).  Sacrifice,  gift 
xfid  'atticism. o'n  tlktt  earth  of  a man,  who  acts  by, disregard**; 


other  objects  of  life  (14).  Think  of  all  these  as  dependent  upon 
each  other.  I*i«ten,  I shall  now  describe  righteousness,  elc.| 
{ffi  independent  of  one  another  {i$).  Virtue  and  morality  that 
is  dependant  upon  it,  do  not  clasli  with  profit.  As  desire  is 
divided  into  two  kinds  by  its  conjunction  with  these  two, so  also 
virtue  and  profit  divide  iheinsclves  in  combination  with  desire 
(16).  One  should  get  up  at  the  Brahma  Muhurlta*  and  engage 
himself  in  the  contemplation  of  virtue  and  worldly  profit  and 
the  pains  of  which  they  are  the  roots,  and  In  understanding 

* A day  aceording  to  th«  Himtuf  it  divided  Into  thirty  ifukuritux,  Om 
pteeeeding  the  »»«  rlt«  is  calted  ttrakmm,  whkh  i«  fit  lor  contemplation  *tt4 
Mcltatlwi. 


KIARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


I|Q-- 

the  true  meaning  of  the  Vedas.  Then  rising  up,  concettat- 
Lng  his  mind,  purifying  himself,  rinsing  his  mouth  and  sitting 
; with  his  face  towards  the  east  one  should  finish  his  morning 

1 prayers  {Sandhyk)  while  the  stars  are  still  visible  in  the  sky 

I and  his  evening  prayer  while  the  sun  U yet  shining.  One 

) should  never  disregard  it  in  peaceful  times  (17 — 19).  O my 

I son  (at  this  time),  one  should  avoid  evil  talk,  falsehood,  rough 

: words  and  the  reading  of  books  containing  pernicious 

I doctrines,  evil  discussion  and  impious  service  (19).  Having 

^ controlled  himself,  every  morning  and  evening,  he  should  offer 

I oblatibns  to  the  sacrificial  fire.  He  should  not  look  to  the 

» solar  disc  at  sunrise  and  sunset  (20).  Arranging  the  hairs, 

f looking  in  a mirror,  cleaning  the  teeth  and  offering  watery  ob- 

= lations  to  the  celestialsj  should  be  performed  in  the  early  part  of 

] the  day  (at).  One  should  not  pass  urine  or  excreta  on  a road, 

I passing  through  a village  a dwelling  house,  a holy  spot  or  a 

I field  or  a cultivated  land  or  a pasture  (33).  One  .should  not 

I cast  his  looks  upon  a nude  woman  who  is  another's  wife  or 

on  his  own  stool.  And  one  should  not  see,  touch  or  talk  with 
a woman  in  her  monthly  course  {23).  A man  should  not  pass 
urine  or  excreta  in  water,  nor  should  he  know  a woman  there. 
A wise  man  should  not  sit  on  excreta.  Urine,  hair,  ashes,  pot- 
sherds, chaff,  embers,  bones,  torii-out  cloth,  a rope,  a road 
and  the  ground  (24—25).  First,  adoring  according  to  his  power 
ancestral  manes,  celestials,  men,  and  ghosts  a householder 
should  afterwards  feed  himself  (26).  Sitting  with  his  face  to 
the  east  or  north,  he,  purifying  himself  and  controlling  his 
6pe«x:h>  should  rinse  his  mouth,  and  then  folding  his  knees  he 
should  sit  down  and  take  the  rice  with  his  mind  concentrated 
(the  act  of  eating)  (27).  Without  provocation  a wise  man 
should  not  give  out  the  shortcomings  of  another  and  he 
sh<lS»ld  not  take  salt  that  is  seen  and  overhot  rice  (28).  A 
self-controlled  man  should  not  '.pass  urine  or  excreta  while 
walking  Of  sittingi  n<xr  should  he  take  anything  after  having 
rinsed  bis  mouth  (29),  While  impure  for  his  taking  food  h« 


MARKANDEYA  puranam. 


151 

should  not  converse  or  read  the  Vedas  or  touch  kine, 
BrShmanas,  fire  or  his  own  head  (30).  He  should  not,  of  his 
own  accord,  see  the  sun,  the  moon,  or  stars,  and  should  avoid 
a broken  seat,  bedstead  or  vessel  (31).  Showing  his 
reverence  by  rising  up  he  should  offer  seats  to  his  preceptors, 
should  task  with  them  favourably  and  follow  after  saluting 
them ; he  should  never  apeak  to  them  unfavourably  (33). 
A wise  man  should  not  take  liis  food  or  worship  the  celestials 
with  a single  cloth  on,  should  not  make  bearers  of  Brabamans, 
pass  urine  on  fire  or  bathe  or  lie  down  in  a state  of  nudity  ; 
nor  should  he  itch  his  hesds  with  both  the  hands  (33—  34). 
Persons  should  not  bathe  or  always  wash  their  heads  without 
any  cause,  or  rub  any  limb  with  oil  after  having  washed  their 
heads  (35).  He  should  not  recite  the  Vedas  on  interdicted 
days  and  should  never  pass  urine  before  Brlihmanas,  fire,  kine 
and  the  sun  (3G).  Facing  the  north  in  tlie  day  and  the  south 
in  the  night  should  a person,  with  ease,  pass  urine  or  t‘xt;reta 
at  a spot  free  from  disturbances  (37}.  One  should  not  com- 
municate (to  others)  the  wrong  doings  of  his  parents  and  he 
should  pacify  them  when  they  are  angry.  He  should  not  hear, 
if  any  other  man  speaks  ill  of  them  (38).  One  should  make 
way  fora  ilrUhinaua,  a king,  one  stricken  with  distress,  one 
more  learned  than  himself,  a preceptor’s  wife,  one  overburdened 
although  a junior,  a dumb,  a blind,  a deaf  man,  a mad  naan,  a 
drunkanl,  a bavved,  an  enemy,  a boy  and  a fallen  person  (39—40). 
A wise  man  should  circumambulate  a temple,  a fig-tree, a cross- 
ing of  the  four  roads,  one  more  learned  than  himself,  a pre- 
ceptor and  a celestial  {41).  One  should  not  use  the  shoes, 
cloth  or  garland,  worn  by  another  and  should  discard  the 
holy  thread,  ornament,  and  the  water-pot  (belonging  to 
another)  (43).  One  should  abstain  from  profusely  smearing 
the  person  with  oil,  sexual  connection  on  the  eighth,  four- 
teenth or  fifteenth  lunar  day,  or  during  a Farva  (43)  A 
sensible  man  should  not  sit  stretching  out  his  legs  and  feet  ; 
one  sliould  not  cast  about  his  feet,  nor  should  he  sit  with 


MAKKANDEYA  PURANAM, 


.legs  (4.4)'.  ' A wise  man  should  avoid  cutting  another  b the 
.quick,  giving  way  to  anger  or  proving  cruel  to  any  one.  He 
should  not  brag,  attach  too  much  iniportance  to  him.self  and 
avoid  harsh  words  (4$).  He  should  not  mock  at  an  igno- 
rant man,  a mad  man,  onte  in  difficulty,  or  deformed,  a magi- 
cian, one  of  defective  limbs,  one  having  additional  ones 
(46).  He  should  not  inflict  punishment  on  any  one  else  or 
on  his  sou  and  disciple  under  inslraclion.  A wise  man 
should  not  drag  his  seat  with  his  foot  (47).  Sanyava, 
Kriqara  and  meat  should  not  be  made  ready  for  one’s  on  n 
self.  Entertaining  his-  guests  both  in  the  morning  and 
evening  he  should  afterwards  take  his  meal  (48).  Restrain- 
ing his  words  a man  should  cleanse  his  teelli  with  his  face 
towards,  the  cast  or  north.  And  as  a rule,  O my  son,  he 
uld  discard  a tooth-brush  made  of  forbidden  wood  (49). 
One  should  never  sleep  with  his  Itead  towards  tl>c  north  or 
tte  west;  but  one  should  lie  down  with  Ins  head  towards  the 
south  or  : east  (50).  One  should  not  bathe  in  foul  water  or 
in  the  night.  A person  should  bathe  at  night,  only  when  the 
ecclipse  takes  place.  (5 1).  After  bathing  a man  should  not 
riib  his  body  with  his  cloth  or  hands ; nor  should  he  toss  about 
his  hair  or  cloth  (52).  Before  bathing  a wise  man  should 
never  besmear  his  per.son  with  unguents,  nor  should  he  put 
on  a red  or  black  cloth  or  one  of  many  colors  (53).  One 
.should  not  wrongly  use  his  scarf,  cloth  and  ornaments.  One 
.should  throw  away  a cloth  greatly  worn*  out  and  having 
•no  ends  (54).  My  child,  one  should  never  take  rice  coti- 
.tAinlng  hair  or  worms,  trodden  upon,  that  has  been  seen  ot 
.licked  by  a dog,  that  has  been  vitiated  for  its  essence  being 
(extracted,  the  fllesh  of  the  back,,  meat  not  consecrated,  or  thjft 
be  rejected,  or  salt  placed  before  (55 — 56).  O my 
SWii  .rice,  that  is  state  or  many  days  old,  should  be  rejected, 
as'iyell  as,  0 prince,  cakes,  herbs,  sugereane  or  milk,-— or 
flesh— if  the  preparation  thereof  has  stood  over  for  days, 
• It  *my  alro  »ean  pofttttet.  He  woni  m the  ” 


MAkkANbkVA  kURANAM. 


should  be  avoided.  One  should  avoid  lying  dowh  at  8un*rise 
snd  sun-set  (57-*-58).  One  should  not  lie  down  after  bathing, 
sleep  sitting  or  li(;  down  absent  minded.  A person  should  not  sit 
down  on  a bed  or  on  the  ground  sounding  it  (59).  He  should  not 
eat  with  one  cloth  on  or  while  speaking  or  without  giving  away 
> portion  to  the  spectators.  After  bathing  in  the  morning 
and  evening  a person  should  take  his  meals,  according  to 
the  injunction  (60).  A wise  man  should  not  visit  another’s  wife. 
The  intercourse,  of  a man  with  other’s  wives,  destroys  IstA/t 
and  purita  rites  and  bngivity  (6t).  There  is  no  other  thing 
In  the  world  which  so  much  destroys  'the  longivity  of  a man 
as  is  his  intercourse  with  another’s  wife  (62).  A man  should 
adore  the  deities,  perform  the  tire  rites  and  make  obei.sance  to 
elders.  After  properly  rinsing  his  mouth  a man  should  take 
his  food  (f>3).  Taking  with  reverence  pure  water,  free  from 
foam,  bad  smell  and  dirt,  one  should  rinse  his  mouth  thttre- 
with  facing  the  east  or  the  rrorth  ((14).  A man  .should  not 
take  earth  from  under  the  water,  from  his  homestead,  from 
an  ant  hill,  ftom  the  hole  of  a rat,  or  from  clay  left  after  per- 
forming the  act  of  purification  (65).  After  attentively 
washing  his  hands  and  feet  and  sprinkling  water  he  should 
sit  folding  his  knees  inward  and  sip  the  water  three  or  four 
times  (66),  Rubbing  twice  the  corners  of  his  mouth,  the 
cavity  thereof  and  th«5  head,  he,  being  purified,  should  perform 
the  ceremony  after  duly  sipping  water  (67),  A person 
should  always  reg.vdfully  perform  the  ceremonies  for  the  dei- 
ties, sages  and  departed  manes  (68).  After  having  sneezed, 
^at  or  put  on  his  dress,  a wise  man  should  rinse  his 
mouth  with  water.  After  having  sneezed,  licked,  spat,  or 
thrown  up,  a person  should  rinse  his  mouth,  touch  a cow’s 
back,  look  at  the.  sun  aiid  hold  hb  right  car  (69 — 70).  As 
ttiodh  as  lies  in  his  power  be  should  adopt  the  after  process 
In  the  absence  of  one  preceding.  In  the  absence  of  the 
former  the  adoption  of  the  latter  is  considered  favourable 
(71).  One  should  not  gnash  his  teeth  or  afflict  any  part  ol 
30 


Markanoeya  puranAw. 


■»$4 

his  body.  At  the  time  of  two  twilights  one  should  avoid  fy* 
ing  down,  study  and  eating  (72),  In  the  evening  one  must  not 
engage  in  a sexual  intercourse  or  start  for  another  place  (73). 
in  the  forenoon,  my  son,  a man  should  regardfully  adore 
the  Celestials,  at  mid-day  human  beings  and  in  the  after- 
noon the  ancestral  manes  (74).  Washing  his  head  a man 
ihould  worship  the  deities  and  the  ancestral  manes.  One 
should  have  his  beard  shaven  facing  the  east  or  the  north  (75), 
Although  born  id  a good  family  a bride,  that  is  diseased 
that  has  not  got  a limb,  that  is  deformed,  that  is  twany 
coloured,  that  is  talkative  and  that  is  full  of  defects,  should 
be  shunned  (76).  A man,  wi.shing  well  of  himself,  should 
hiarry  a girl  that  has  all  the  limbs,  that  has  a beautiful  nose 
and  is  gifted  with  all  auspicious  marks  (77).  He  should 
tharry  the  fifth  or  the  seventh  daughter  of  her  parents.  He 
should  protect  his  wife,  throw  off  jealousy,  and  should  not 
lie  down  in  day  and  carry  on  sexual  intercourse  (78}. 
A man  should  avoid  acts  that  may  give  anguish  to  others  and 
pain  to  the  creatures.  Persons,  of  all  the  orders,  should  avoid 
for  four  nights  women  in  their  menses  (79).  If  a nran  wishes 
that  a da[ughter  should  not  be  born  to  him  he  should  also  avoid 
her  on  the  fifth  day ; he  should  go  to  his  wife  on  the  sixth 
flight;  fqr  a night  occuring  on  an  even  date  is  always 
auspicious,  my  son  (80).  If  a man  knows  his  wife  on  the 
night  of  an  even  date  he  has  a son  ; whereas  one,  who  visits 
her  on  an  uneven  night,  has  a daughter  (born  to  him).  So  if  one 
wishes  for  a son  he  should  live  with  his  wife  on  an  even 
night.  If  a man  co-habits  in  the  forenoon  he  has  a son  who  re- 
linquishes his  own  religion  ; his  son  becomes  a hermaphrodite 
Who  does  so  in  the  twligbt  (81).  My  son,  if  a man  goes  through 
a shaving,  if  he  has  thrown  up,  co-habrted  or  gone  to  a 
I , cremation  ground,  he  should  bathe  with  the  cloth  on  (82). 

j ' ' should  villify  the  celestials,  the  Vedas,  the  twice-born« 

wrtuous  and  faithful  men,  noble  parents,  chaste  women,  men 
■Who  perform  sacrifices  or  ascetics ; if  a proud  naan  cries 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


»55 


them  <1own  he  should  not  hear  him  (83 — 84).  A man 
diould  not  sit  down  on  the  bed  or  seat  of  either  his  elder  or 
junior ; one  should  not  put  on  inauspicious  raiment  or  use 
inauspicious  words  (85).  One  should  use  a white  cloth 
and  white  flowers.  A learned  man  should  not  make 
friends  with  a proud  man,  a fool,  an  insolent  fellow, 
one  of  a had  character,  a thief,  a miser,  a covetous  man,  a 
bawd,  the  hushatul  of  one  such,  a powerful  man,  a bad 
character,  out;  ol  a .scandalous  character,  one  who  fears 
every  thing,  and  one  who  depends  on  destiny  (86—89).  But  he 
should  contract  friendship  with  pious  persons  of  good  ways, 
the  wise,  the  powerful  and  the  energetic  (90).  A wise  matt 
should  always  live  with  those  who  arc  versed  in  the  Vedic  lore 
and  who  alway.s  bathe  after  the  observance  of  penances. 
When  these  six  jterMins,  worthy  of  honor,  a friend,  one 
initiated,  the  king,  a Snalah),  a f;ither-in-law  ainl  a priest 
themselves  come  to  one's  house  .slur  should  worship  them. 
According  to  his  might  one  should  entertain,  carefully  with 
Madhuparka,  at  the  proper  tiinc  those  twice-born  ones  that 
have  lived  for  a year.  And  if  one  wishes  his  own  well-being  he 
should  be  obedient  to  them.  He  should  not  quarrel  with  them, 
even  if  they  remonstrate  with  him  (6t — 93).  Having  duly 
worshipped  the  house  he  should  at  the  proper  place  adore 
the  fire  and  offer  oblations  duly  to  it  (94).  The  first  oblation 
must  be  offered  to  Brahma,  the  second  to  Prajhpati,  the  third 
to  the  Guhyakas,  the  fourth  to  Ka^yapa  and  fifth  to  Anumati 
(the  fifteenth  day  of  the  moon)  and  then  he  should  offer  food 
to  the  spirits  of  the  air.  Then  as  1 told  you  while  explaining 
to  you  the  daily  rites  he  should  make  offerings  to  Vishwadevas, 
Hear  now  as  to  the  method  from  me.  Kecj>ing  in  view  the 
different  abodes  and  the  respective  shares  a man  should  make 
separate  offerings  to  the  dirties  (95  —96.  He  should  make 
three  offerings  near  the  clouds,  the  waters  an«l  the  e.arth 
respectively  and  also  to  the  air ; b ginning  with  the  east,  offer, 
ings  should  also  be  made  to  each  oi  the  taidiual  quatlet 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


IS6 

with  due  order  (98)  ; then  gradually  to  Brahman,  the  sun,^ 
the  sky,  the  Vishwadevas  and  all  the  elements  of  the  universe 
99).  Then  he  should  make  offerings  in  the  north  to  Dawn 
and  the  king  of  ghosts.  Then  reciting  Swadha  and  Namas 
he  should  make  offerings  to  the  paternal  manes  in  the  south 
(loo).  Then  wishing  to  keep  the  remaining  quantity  of  rice,  he 
should  take  water  out  of  the  vessel  by  means  of  the  space 
between  his  thumb  and  fore-fiinger  and  then  reciting  (the 
Vedic  formula)  Yakshaitatt^  should,  as  prescribed,  offer  it 
in  the  north-west  (loi).  Then  taking  out  the  first  portion 
of  the  rice  of  the  measure  of  a Hantakara^  dindi  with  Mantras 
for  entertaining  guests  one  should  duly,  according  to  injunc- 
tion, offer  it  to  a Brahmana  (102).  Then  with  the  res- 
pective Tirthas  (parts  of  the  hand)  one  should  duly  per- 
form the  cereniony.  By  the  help  of  the  Brahma  Tirtha  a 
man  should  sip  water  on  behalf  of  the  celestials  (103).  The 
line  at  the  base  of  the  thumb  of  the  right  hand  is  called 
Brahma  Tirtha  and  is  used  for  the  purpose  of  rinsing  (104). 
The  portion,  dividing  the  thumb  and  fore  finger,  is  called  Pitri 
Tirtha.  All  offerings,  to  the  paternal  manes  except  Nandi- 
mukha,t  should  be  offered  through  this  part  (105). 
Deva  Tirtha  is  near  the  finger  tips  and  with  this  part 
tiie  ceremonies  for  the  deities  should  he  performed.  At 
the  base  of  the  youngest  finger,  is  the  Kay  a Tirtha ; with  it 
should  the  ceremony  for  Prajapati  be  performed  (106).  In 
this  way  ceremonies  for  the  deities  and  ancestral  m^nes 
should  be  celebrated  by  the  help  of  Tirthas  and  nothing  else 
^ould  be  used  for  this  purpose  (107).  For  rinsing  Brahma 
Tiriha  ts  the  best ; with  Pitritirtha\2i 'person  should  perform 
ceremonies  for  the  paternal  manes  j those  for  the  deities 


.*SKteeii  handfols  of  rice  make  a Hantakqra,  Sridhar a in  Vishnu- 
fmtmmm.  it  called  so  00  account  of  the  word  Hania  appearing  in  the 
Ma$drapts^  is  recited  oti  tkis  occ^ion. 

t TW»  is  performea  on  festive  occatiOBS  in  honor  of  the  departed  manes. 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


*57 


should  be  performed  with  Deva  Tirfha  and  those  for  PrajSpati 
with  Kaya  Tirtha  (io8).  He  should  also  offer  Pinda  and 
watery  oblations  to  Nandi-mukha  progenitors  and  with  Praja- 
pati  Tirtha  he  should  perform  that  for  him  (109).  A discreet 
man  should  not  hold  fire  and  water  at  the  same  time 7 nor 
should  he  stretch  out  legs  in  front  of  dieties  or  preceptors 
(no).  One  should  not  look  to  a cow  suckling  her  calf,  not 
drink  water  held  in  the  cavity  of  palms.  Serious«  or  others 
wise  every  sort  of  purificatory  rites  must  be  performed 
promptly ; one  should  not  blow  on  fire  with  his  mbuth 
(ill — 1 1 2).  A person,  0 my  son,  should  not  live  in  a country 
that  has  not  got  a money  lender,  a physician,  a Brahmana 
versed  in  the  Vedas  and  a river  full  of  water  (113).  A wise 
man  should  settle  permanently  in  a country  where  lives 
a powerful  and  virtuous  king,  who  has  conquered  all  his 
enemies.  How  can  happiness  be  in  the  country  of  a bad 
king?  (114).  A man  secures  comfort  by  living  in  a country 
which  is  ruled  by  a powerful  king,  which  is  fertile,  contains 
: self-controlled  inhabitants  who  are  just  and  void  of  envy 

(115).  A wise  man  should  live  in  a country,  where  the  hiis*^ 
bandmen  are  not  luxurious  and  where  there  is  a plenty  of 
healing  plants  (116).  A man,  O my  son,  should  not  live  in 
a country  where  these  are  always  present,  peopile  eager 
for  victory,  persons  who  were  once  inimical  and  those 
always  given  to  festivities  (117).  A wise  man  should  alw^^ 
live  amongst  those  who  have  good  characters.  I “have  thus,  0 
fiy  son,  described  to  you  all  this  for  your  well-being  (118). 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 


_;0; 

I^ADALASA  said : — Hear,  next,  of  the  remedies  for 
Ibings  that  should  be  rejected  as  well  those  that  should  be 
accepted.  Stale  rice  should  be  always  taken  after  mixing 
k with  oily  substances  ; barley,  wheat  and  curds  may  ho  wever 
be  taken  without  oily  substances.  The  flesh  of  a hare, 
tortoise,  inguana,  hedgehog,  and  rhinoceros  may  be  taken, 
my  son  ;but  that  of  domescated  boar  or  of  a domesticated  hen 
should  always  be  avoided.  There  is  no  harm  of  a eating  the 
lemnants  of  a sacrifice  to  the  paternal  names  and  the  deities. 
Nor  is  there  any  harm  of  eating  flesh  that  has  been  desired 
by  the  Brabmanas  at  a Sradha  and  which  has  been  purified 
Wlh  water  being  sprinkled  over  it,  as  well  as  by  the  recita- 
tion of  muntras^  as  also  what  has  been  prescribed  for  medi- 
cine (i — 3).  A conch,  stone,  gold,  silver,  a rope,  a clothj 
potherbs,  roots,  fruits,  a basket  made  of  split  bamboo, 
a hide,  a ruby,  a diamond,  a coral,  a pearl,  or  the  human  body 
h pmrified  by  means  of  water  (4 — 5).  Articles  made  of  iron 
are  purified  by  means  of  >vater.;  and  those  made  of  ston^ 
by  being  rubbed  and  the  purification,  of  vessels  smeared  with 
ml,  is  made  by  hot  water  (6).  A winnowing  basket,  paddyi 
a deer-skin,  a mace,  a wooden  mortar,  clothes  and  bedding  are 
purified  by  being  sprinkled  with  water  (7).  All  sorts  of 
barks  are  purified  by  water  and  alkaline  substances.  Grass, 
wood  and  annual  plants  are  purified  by  sprinkling  water  (18). 
When  a ^olen  cloth  or  one  made  of  hair  is  dirty  it  is  puri- 
fied by  water  mixed  with  must  arch  or  the  busks  of  sessame 
fg).  When  a cotton  cloth  is  unclean,  my  son,  it  is  purified 
by  water  and  ashes  (10)*  Things  made  of  inferior  metals 
am  pArf  by  water.  Wood,  teeth,  a bone,  and  a horn  is 


markandkya  puramam. 


purified  with  being  burnt  again.  Alms,  the  hand  of  a 
mechanic,  commoility  of  Jcommerce.  the  face  of  a female 
are  naturally  pure.  Things,  that  have  been  brought  in  car- 
riages, tliat  arc  unknown,  that  have  been  carried  by  servants, 
that  are  always  spoken  of  as  pure,  that  have  been  lying  for 
days  together,  that  are  light,  that  have  passed  through  many 
hands,  are  by  nature  pure.  Things  In  large  quantities,  a boy, 
the  acts  of  an  old  man  or  of  one  suffering  from  disease  (are 
by  nature  pure)  (if — 13).  A house,  where  heaps  of  charcoal 
are  lying  about  after  the  performance  of  a .sacrificial  rite,  is 
pure,  as  well  as  a woman  that  gives  milk  to  her  child,  or  water 
that  is  current,  that  has  no  bubble  or  that  does  not  give  out 
bad  smelt  (14).  A ground  is  juirified  in  time  by  being  burnt, 
besmeared  and  with  the  font-marks  of  the  kine.  A dwelling 
house  i.s  purified  by  pasting  (eow-tlung),  scraping,  washing, 
sweeping  and  worshij)  (15).  A place  or  thing,  that  has  been 
touched  by  hair.s  or  worms,  that  has  been  smelt  by  kine,  thfit 
has  been  infested  by  fleas,  is  purified,  my  son,  by  water,  earth, 
and  ashes  (tfi).  A copper  vessel  is  purified  by  acid,  a *inc 
or  leaden  vessel  by  potash  and  a betl-inelalled  vessel  by  ashes 
and  water  and  the  liejuid  by  the  process  of  plavet*  (17). 
And  all  other  things,  when  they  are  defiled  by  polluting  sub- 
stances, are  purified  on  being  cleansed  with  water  and  earth 
until  the  bad  smell  is  removed.  All  other  things  are  purified 
when  both  their  hue  and  bad  snudl  are  removed  by  these 
two  substances  (iS).  The  water,  that  Hies  in  its  natural  state 
on  the  earth,  and  is  capable  of  satisfying  the  kine,  Is  pure. 
The  meat,  of  any  beast  brought  by  a Chandaia  or  a carnivo- 
rous animal,  is  naturally  pure  (19).  U is  said,  my  son,  that 
cloth  and  .simibar  things  lying  on  the  high  way  are  purified 
by  the  air  (20).  Dust,  fire,  a horse,  a cow,  a shade,  the 
solar  and  lunar  day,  the  wind,  the  eartii,  a drop  of  water, 

• Tti«  |iri)ctiidf  talliif  wpieibil  Gh«©  witbth^  blatJtj  of  grts* 
Iroppifif  ll  in  ifi. 


cii  isi 


vicious  things  (2i),  me  mouin  a 

clean  but  that  of  a calf  is  not  so.  The  urine  and  dung  of  a 
cow  that  has  given  birth  to  a young  one  as  also  the  fruits 
dropped  by  a bird  are  pure  (22).  Like  the  commodities  for 
sale,  a sit,  a bed,  a vehicle,  a boat,  a grass  growing  on  the 
way,  are  clean  for  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  moon  fall  over  thent 
and  the  air  passes  over  them  (23).  A person  should  change 
his  dress  after  walking,  bathing,  eating,  drinking,  passing 
urine  and  excrata  and  should  rinse  his  mouth  with  water  (24). 
If  a road,  clay,  water  or  anything  made  of  brick  and  clay 
is  defiled  for  coming  in  contact  with  a polluting  substance  it  is 
purified  by  air  (2$).  If  aheap  of  rice  is  polluted  slightly  a quan- 
tity should  be  taken  from  the  surface  and  thrown  away.  Then 
by  rinsing  the  mouth  with  water  and  sprinkling  water  on  the 
rest  andby  earthit  is  purified  (26).  If  a man  unknowingly 
eal^  rice  that  has  been  defiled  he  should  fast  forUhree  nights ; 
but  if  he  does  it  knowingly  he  must  perform  the  penance  as 
laid  down  (27).  If  a man  touches  a woman  in  her  menses,  a 
horse,  a jackal,  a woman,  who  has  of  late  given  birth  to  a 
child,  the  offspring  of  a Chandala,  or  an  undertaker,  he 
•sliould  hathe  for  the  purpose  of  being  purified  (28).  If  a 
person;  touches  a human  bone  covered  with  fat  be  is  cleansed 
,by  bathing ; but  if  he  touches  a human  bone  without  fat  he 
should  rinse  his  mouth  with  water,  touch  a cow  and  behold 
the  sun  (29).  A wise  man  should  not  walk  over  blood  or 
spit  or  leap  over  an  elevation ; nor  should  he  remain  in  a 
garden  or  such  like  places  during  a twilight  (30).  A man 
fh^ld,  oot  talk  with  a woman  that  has  no  husband  or  one 
ysho  is  generally  reprehended.  A man  should  throw  outside 
hia  house  leavings,  urine,  and  excreta  and!  water  with 
whicb  bis  feet  have  been  washed  (31).  A man  should  not 
ba^  in  another's  tank  without  digging  therefrorn  five  lumps 
X)f  day:j  birtooe  should  bathe  intheGangS,  in  any  lake  or 
river  or  natural  water  (32).  If  a person  touche*  or  talk# 


MARKANDKYA,  puranam* 


i6i 

•vfith  a tnan  who  villififis  the  deities,  the  ancestral  manes) 
the  holy  books,  sacrifices,  Mantras,  he  is  purified  by  looking 
at  the  sun  (33).  If  a wise  man  beholds  a woman  in  her 
menses,  a Chandala,  a fallen  person,  a dead  body,  an  un- 
believer, a Woman  who  has  of  late  given  birth  to  a child,  a 
hermophrodite,  one  nude,  an  offspring  of  a Chandala^  those 
who  take  out  things  belonging  to  a child-birth,  an  adulterer^ 
he  is  purified  by  the  same  means  (34 — 35).  If  a man  touches 
forbidden  food,  a woman  just  delivered,  a hermophrodite,  a 
cat,  a rat,  a dog,  a cock,  one  fallen,  cast  off  and  polluted 
things,  a Chandala,  an  undertaker,  a woman  in  her  menses, 
a domesticated  boar,  a man  unclean  for  child-birth,  he  is  puri- 
fied by  bathing  (36— 'jy).  He,  in  whose  house  Nitya  rites  are 
neglected,  he,  who  lias  been  foresken  by  the  Brahmanas,  ts 
the  worst  of  men  and  a sinful  wretch  fsH).  Therefore  a man 
should  not  put  a stop  to  Nifya  (oldigatory)  rites,  lixeept 
on  the  occasion  of  birih  or  death,  if  he  stops  it,  he  is  to  suffer 
bondage  (39).  If  a m.an  is  impure  on  account  of  any  birth 
or  death,  if  a BrShmana,  he  shouhl  not  for  ten  days  make 
gifts  and  perform  fire-ceremony  and  other  obligatory  rites  { 
a KshatriyS,  for  twedve  days  and  a Vaishya,  for  fifteen  days 
(40).  A Sudra  should  abstain  from  his  own  work  for  a month, 
After  that,  each  order  should  perform  their  respective  rites 
as  laid  down  in  holy  books  (41).  The  dead  body  having 
been  crematml  outsiile  the  house  by  the  persons  of  the  same 
gotrSi  water  should  bo  given  to  the  departed  spirit  on  the 
first,  the  fourth,  the  seventh  or  the  ninth  day  (42).  On  the 
fourth  day,  the  ashes  and  bones  of  the  dead  person  should 
be  collected  by  the  persons  of  the  same  blood.  After  such  a 
collection  their  bodies  become  touchable  (43).  After  such  a 
collection  alt  the  rites  should  be  performed  by  those  who  are 
entitled  to  offer  water.  On  the  day  of  death,  persons,  both 
who  can  offer  IHnda  (and  who  can  offer  water),  may  be 
touched  {44).  In  the  event  of  death  being  brought  about 
by  weapon,  water,  hanging,  fire,  poison,  fall  from  an  elevated 
21 


MaRKANDEYA  puranam. 


[ ^ 

place  or  by  the  vow  -of  starvation,  or  (by  mere)  starvation,  the 
period  of  impurity  lasts  for  only  a single  constellation  (45), 
If  one  dies  in  infancy  or  in  a distant  country  or  affer  having 
left  his  home,  impurity  disappears  on  the  very  day.  Some 
say  that  the  period  of  impurity  lasts,  for  three  days  (46).  If 
after  the  death  of  a Sapinda  another  Sapinda  dies,  all 
the  ceremonies,  that  are  to  be  performed  by  the  latter, 
become  performable  by  the  Sapinda  on  the  expiration  of  the 
period  of  impurity  calculated  from  the  date  of  the  first 
death  (47).  A similar  injunction  is  followed  duly  on  the 
birth  of  a child,  both  by  the  Sapindas  and  Samdnodakas  (48). 
It  is  enjoined  that  on  the  birth  of  a child,  the  father  .should 
bathe  with  the  (cloth  on  49).  If  after  the  birth  of  one,  another 
is  born,  in  that  case  too  the  purity  is  said  to  take  place  by 
counting  the  days  from  the  first  birth  (50).  On  the  expiry 
of  ten  days,  twelve  days,  fifteen  days  and  thirty  days  the 
four  orders  should  duly  perform  their  re.spective  rites  (51) 
On  the  expiration  of  such  a time  the  Ek<sddkhta  should  be 
performed  for  the  departed  spirit.  The  wise  .should  make 
pre.sents  to  the  Brahmanas  (52).  If  one  wishes  to  make 
(these  ceremonies  eternally  (fruitful),  he  should  make  presents 
of  whatever  object  is  held  in  highest  esteem  in  this  world 
and  whatever  agreeable  object  is  in  the  house,  to  the  accom- 
plished Brlhmanas  (SS)*  After  the  period  of  impurity  is 
over,  all  the  orders,  touching  water,  as  also  the  animals  they 
ride  or  yoke  to  their  cars,  weapons,  whips  and  goads,  should 
perform  the  usual  ceremonies  (54).  Being  purified  they 
should  perform  the  ceremonies  and  acts  that  are  ordained 
respectively  for  the  various  orders  for  they  lead  to  prosperfty 
both  in  this  world  and  in  the  next  (55)-  The  three  Vedas 
should  be  chanted  every  day  and  they  should  behave  thenr- 
selves  like  the  learned.  Acquiring  riches  by  lawful  means, 
they  should  attentively  perform  the  sacrifices  (56).  O my  son, 
one  should  fearlessly  perform  an  act  which  does  not  bring 
tensure  dh  his  own  self  and  which  does  not  require  to  be 


thus,  O i»y  dear  son,  a householder  acquires  religious-  merit,, 
worldly  profit  and  desire,  and  becomes  happy  both  in.  this- 
world  and  in  the  next. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 


JaRA  said:— Thus  instructed  by  his  mother,  Hrita- 
dhwoja’s  son,  on  attaining  to  his  youth,  duly  took  to  a wife  (0- 
The  mighty  one  begot  oHspring  on  her,  and  adored  the  celes- 
tials with  sacrifices,  And  he  satisfied  the  behest  of  his  father 
at  all  times  (a).  After  a considerable  time,  when  he  became 
old,  Hritadliwaja  iiisiaUcd  hb  son  on  the  throne  (3).  I hen 
the  virtuous-souled  one,  desirous  of  practising  austerities, 
i entered  into  woods  along  with  his  wife.  I hat  great  king 
descended  on  the  earth  as  the  great  protector  {4).  In  order  to 
dispell  the  attachment  of  her  son  to  the  enjoyment  of  pleasure 
i MadalasI  said  these  pregnant  words  to  him  (5).  ' A house- 

holder is  always  lilted  with  attachment  and  is  therefore  the 
abode  of  misery.  You  have  adopted  the  order  of  a householder. 
When,  while  governing  your  kingdom,  you  meet  with  insuffer- 
; able  pain  engendered  by  the  separation  from  dear  friends  or 

Jii  begotten  by  the  impediments  put  in  by  the  enemies  or  pro- 

1 ’ duced  by  the  loss  of  wealth,  you  should  read  what  is  inscribed 

' on  this  ring  in  minute  letters  (6—8). 

1 jARA  said Having  said  this,  she  handed  over  to  him  a 

:■  golden  ring  ami  such  benedictions  as  should  be  followed  by 

one  leading  the  life  of  a householder  (c)).  Then  having  mmle 
over  the  kingdom  to  their  son,  Kuvalayashawa  and  liis  queen 

retired  into  forest  for  carrying  on  asceticism  (lo.) 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 


xJaRA  said : — The  righteous-souled  Alarka  duly  governed 
his  subjects  as  if  they  were  his  sons  who  were  all  Riled  with  joy 
and  established  in  the  duties  of  their  respective  orders  (i). 
He  attained  great  joy  hy  inflicting  punishment  upon  the 
the  wicked  and  affording  protection  to  the  pious.  He  grati.. 
fled  the  deities  with  great  sacrifices  (2),  To  him  were  born 
sons  who  were  possessed  of  great  strength  and  prowess, 
noble  and  pious  minds  and  who  never  trod  wrong  ways  (3), 
Self-controlled  as  he  was,  he  acquired  wealth  by  virture  and 
virtue  hy  wealth.  He  enjoyed  all  worldly  objects  without 
their  interfering  with  each  other  f4)-  Thus  governing  the? 
kingdom,  being  equally  mindful  of  virtue,  worldly  profit  and 
desire,  many  long  years  passed  over  his  head  like  a single 
day  (5),  Enjoying  various  sweet  objects  of  life,  he  did  not 
feel  distaste  for  them ; nor  was  he  satiated  with  the  acquisi-. 
tion  of  virtue  and  wealth  (6).  His  brother,  by  name,  SuvihiJ^ 
living  in  the  forest,  heard,  that  not  having  been  able  to  con-i 
trol  his  senses,  he  was  carelessly  given  to  the  enjoyment  of 
worldy  objects  (7).  Thinking  on  this  for  some  time  and 
desiring  to  awaken  him,  the  king  thought  that  an  alliance  with 
the  monarch’s  enemies  would  be  the  best  means  (^8).  With 
a view  to  take  away  their  kingdom,  the  accomplished  (Snv&hu) 
repeatedly  sought  the  help  of  the  king  of  Kashi  who  was 
a master  of  an  army  and  powerful  animals  (19).  He  made 
a display  of  his  soldiers  against  the  king  and  sent  messengers 
to  him  asking  him  to  make  over  the  kingdom  to  Suvl.hu  (lo), 
fully  knowing  his  own  duties,  Alarka  was  reluctant  to  make 
over  the  kingdom  at  such  a command  and  replied  to  the 
envoy  of  the  king  of  Kashi  (t  t),  “ Let  my  elder  brother 

coaaing  to  tn«  with  brotherljr  feelings  beg  the  kingdom.  From 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


165 

hit  of  an  attack  I shall  not  make  over  even  a small  portion 
of  my  land  (12).*’  The  greatly  Intelligent  SuvShu  did  not  beg 
the  kingdom  of  his  brother.  Begging  is  not  the  duty  of  a 
Kshatrya.  Prowe.s8  i.s  his  wealth  (13).  Then  encircled  by 
bis  entire  army,  the  king  of  Kashi  advanced  for  attacking 
the  kingdom  of  the  monarch  Alarka  (14).  Making  alliances 
with  the  feudatory  cl)iefs  and  vassals  of  the  kingdom,  the 
ihvador,  through  the  servants  of  those  chiefs,  attacked  Alarka 
and  brought  him  under  his  control  (15).  By  well-laid  seiges 
he  a.ssailed  the  army  of  Alarka  and  brought  the  guards  of 
the  forts,  forest-patroi.s  and  wood-men  under  his  subjec- 
tion (t6).  And  among  the  feudatory  chief-s  of  Alarka,  some 
were  won  over  by  the  grant  of  subsidies,  some  by  creating 
dissensions  and  odicrs  by  conciliation  (17).  Thus  afflicted 
by  the  {>oIicy  of  his  onemies  the  king  became  weakened. 
His  treasury  was  largrdy  dr.awti  upon  and  his  capital  was 
invaded  by  the  enemy  (tS).  Thus  assailed  and  (imling  his 
treasury  drawn  upon  every  day  the  king  became  greatly 
cheerless  and  his  mind  was  very  much  agitated  (if)).  Over- 
whelmed by  a mighty  distress,  he  thought  of  the  ring  about 
which  his  ntother  MrulalasS  had  spoken  before  (30).  Purify- 
ing himself  by  a bath  and  making  some  exalted  Brahmanas 
utter  the  benedictions,  he  tookiout  the  piece  of  writing  and 
paw  the  letters  distinctly  written  on  it  (21).  When  the  king 
read  aloud  the  inscription  signs  of  joy  ajrpeared  on  his  person 
and  his  eyes  were  exp.'inded  with  excess  of  delight  (33). 
(The  word.s  were) Association  should  be  renounced  with 
whole  heart ; if  one  cannot  do  it,  he  sliould  astsociate  with 
the  pious ; for  the  assoelation  with  the  pious  is  a (powerful) 
panacea  (23).  Desire  should  be  renounced  with  all  heart. 
If  one  cannot  do  it,  that  should  be  directed  towards  liberation  j 
for  liberation  is  a powerful  medicine  for  this  (24).  The  king 
read  aloud  the  words  many  times  and  began  to  think  of  what 
leads  to  the  well-being  of  mankind.  Having  sctUe<i  that 
this  can  be  aerjuired  by  Uberat'on  and  thi  iking  that  liberit- 


MARKANDEYA  rURANAM. 

tjon  would  spring  from  association  with  the  pious,  the  Icing 
began  to  ponder  over  the  subject  of  association  with  the 
pious.  Then  with  a greatly  disturbed  mind,  he  Went  to  the 
highly  blessed  DattSLtreya  (:?S— 26).  Having  presented  Wm- 
self  before  that  high-souled  and  sinless  one,  he  saluted  him  t 
and  having  adored  him  with  due  rites  he  said  (27).  “ O Brah- 
ihana,  show  your  favour  to  me.  You  are  the  refuge  of  those 
who  seek  refuge  with  you.  Remove  my  sorrow,  who  am 
greatly  assailed  by  it  and  possessed  by  desire".  (2S) 

DaTTATREYA  : — "I  shall,  0 king,  remove  your  sorrow  this 
very  day.  Tell  me  truly,  O monarch,  what  is  that  sorrow 
of  yours  (29)." 

JARA  said:-r.Thus  accosted  by  that  greatly  intell'^ent 
Rishi  the  king  began  to  reflect.  Me-lhiuks,  tlm  abode,  of  the 
three  kinds*  of  pain,  is  self  (,39).  The  wise  and  highly  in* 
teUig^Bt  king,  reflecting  long  and  repeatedly  upon  the  self 
withtlie  help  of  self,  smilingly  said  (31).  "I  am  not  earth  j 
nor  water  ; nor  light,  nor  wind,  nor  ether.  But  Iraving 
been  united  with  the  body  I desire  happiness  (32).  In  this 
body  which  is  composed  of  five  elements,  pleasure  aiHl  pain 
vary  as  regards  their  measure.  If  they  belong  to  me,  no 
good  will  be  to  me,  me  that  live  in  some  thing  else  (than 
body)  (33);  that  have  mutnberless  bodies  to  go  through  in 
the  course  of  eternity  and  that  happens  to  be  up  and  down 
on  account  of  the  diminution  or  growth  of  pleasure  and  pain 
When  freed  from  egoism  the  self  appears  in  its  true  light  (34) 
Seeing  the  self  in  the  subtle  Tanmatras  forming  the  third 
(stBge  of  Prakriti),  what  pleasure  or  pain  can  attach  to  me 
who  am  sheathed  with  a body  composed  of  five  elements 
(35).  Pain  exists  in  mind.  What  is  called  pleasure  belongs 
to  the  mind  also.  As  I am  not  my  mind,  therefore  I have 
neither  pleasure  nor  pain  (36).  As  I am  not  my  oonscioius. 

* TEe  three  pains  according  to  the  Sankh^a  philosophy  are  i Adhynt- 
mtia  those  proceeding  troov  mind  and  body  a.  ArfAirfoiv/Aa— •su.peraa- 
tural  3.  Aihibhoutika-r-'git^wx^wg  fiom  af  ^it^nt  etc. 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  167 

ne«s,  as  1 am  nol  my  mind  ; as  I am  not  my  understanding, 
liow  can  pain,  which  is  begotten  by  inner  faculties  and  which 
is  alien  to  me,  be  mine  (37)?  As  I am  neither  my  body  ndr 
ray  mind,  it  appears  that  I am  separate  both  from  my  mind 
and  body.  Therefore  whether  pleasure  or  pain  exists  in  the 
mind  or  in  the  body,  I have  nothing  to  do  with  either  of  them 
^38).  The  one  born  before  this  body  desires  to  have  this  king- 
dom. If  this  body  be  only  a mass  of  five  elements  on  account 
of  the  tendency  of  attributes,  what  have  1 to  do  with  it?  He 
(my  brother)  is  in  it  (body).  He,  however,  is  different  from 
fcts  body  as  1 am  irom  mine  {30).  He,  that  has  no  hands 
4nd  various  other  limbs,  he  that  has  no  flesh.  No  bones  and 
no  nerves  an<l  arteries,  what  has  he  to  do  with  elephants, 
borse-s  and  cars  and  treasures  ? Man  has  nothing  to  do  with 
them  (40).  1 luive  no  enemy,  I have  no  p.ain,  I have  no  plea- 

sure, I have  no  city.  I have,  no  treasury.  I have  no  army 
consisting  of  horses  and  elephants  .and  others.  He  has  not 
them.  Nor  hat.  any  tme  else,  as  1 have  n<it  got  them  (4a). 
As  one  Akasha  (space)  is  seen  as  manifold,  when  put  into 
jugs,  jars,  Kamandnlti  etc.,  so  the  self  which  is  ona  and  tlwe 
same,  appears  as  Suvaliu,  the  king  of  Kashis,  and  myaelf,  in 
different  bodies,  on  account  of  the  diversity  of  bodies. 

CHAPTER  XXXVin. 


Jara  said Then  having  saluted  the  high-souled  Brah- 
mana  Datt&treya,  bending  low  with  humility,  he  said  these 
words  in  reply  (l).  *'For  my  seeing  correctly,  O Brahman, 
I see  that  1 have  no  pain.  Those  who  do  not  see  (things) 
correctly,  are  always  immersed  in  an  ocean  of  grief  {3).  To 


|68  MARKANDEYA  I^URANAM;  I 

whatever  object  the  mind  of  a person  is  attached,  it  extract^ 
sorrow  therefrom  and  gives  it  to  its  owner  (3).  The  measure 
of  sorrow  that  is  felt  when  a domesticated  cock  is  eaten  up 
by  a cat^  differs  from  what  is  felt  at  the  cat  eating  up  a spar- 
row or  a mouse,  because  neither  is  Cherished  attachment  for  (4)^ 

I am  neither  miserable  nor  happy,  for  I am  above  PrakritL 
The  material,  which  is  subjiigated  by  mattet,  is  subject  to 
pleasure  or  pain*  (5) 

DattaTREVa  said  0 fotemost  of  men,  it  is  eten  what 
has  been  described  by  yoii.  The  consciousness  of  self  is  the 
root  of  pain,  and  the  absence  of  it,  brings  about  its  cessation 
(6),  From  the  instant  of  my  questioning,  you  have  acquired 
;5uch  an  excellent  understanding,  that  by  it  the  consciousness 
lof  self  will  be  dissipated  like  cotton  fibres  7.  The  mighty 
*tree  of  ignorance  is  in  the  heart ; it  has  originated  from  the 
ifoot  of  ego ; it  has  the  consciousness  of  self  for  its  trunk,  the 
bouse  and  land  for  its  branches^  children,  wife  etc-  for  its 
.twigs  5 wealth  and  corn  are  its  large  leaves  ; it  does  not  grow 
«up  soon ; virtue  and  sin  are  its  flowers ; happiness  and 
misery  are  the  great  fruits  j the  relations  formed  out  of  \g* 
morance,  are  the  water  that  nourishes  it ; it  is  surrounded  by  t 
number,  of  bees  in  the  shape  of  desire  for  actions^  and  k 
stands  in  the  way  of  liberation  (8— -ro).  How  can  they 
attain  to  emancipation,  who,  exhausted  with  walking  in  the 
road  of  the  world  and  subjected  to  happiness  begotten  by 
ignorance,  seek  the  shade  of  this  tree  (n)?  Those  only,  who 
can  Cut  off  this  tree  of  self-consciousness  with  the  ate  of 
knowledge  whetted  well  on  the  stone  Of  the  company  of  the 
good,  Can  go  by  this  road  (12),  Reaching  the  forest  of 
Brahman,  cool,  freed  from  dust  and  thorns,  the  wise,  divorced 

. * ?rakrttij  according  to  the  Sankhya  system  ©I  phllosophyi  is  th©  material 

mature.  Puruska  is  ihet  soul.  Sankhya  system  completely  disavows  the 
dreatlcn  by  volition.  It  is  by  the  uhioa  of  PraMH  with  Purmha 

tln^t  creation  is  made.  The  material  or  Sikuia*>Sarira  fhoiifjf  which  is 
. i;oinp9sed  of  fiye  el^ats,  W sahjecfe  to  pleasare  or  paia- 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


169 


from  feelings,  attain  to  the  most  excellent  liberation  (13). 
None  of  us,  O king,  either  yourself  or  myself,  is  identical 
with  elements  and  senses  and  is  gross  j nor  any  one  of  us  is 
composed  of  Tanmairas*  or  Afanasf  (14)  none  amongst 
us,  0 emperor,  do  I see  identical  with  PradhanaX  > the  souI§ 
transceniis  the  body  whereas  all  other  objects,  the  combina- 
tion of  elements,  are  composed  of  Gunaa^  (essential  ingre- 
dients) (15). 

Alarka  said  :--By  your  favour,  O reverend  Sir,  I have 
attained  to  this  most  excellent  knowledge  which  creates  the 
notion  of  distinction  between  self  consciousness  and  the 
principle  of  greatness  (17).  But  my  mind  being  drawn  to 
t»  the  objects  of  sense  I am  unable  to  attain  to  a state  of 
equipoise.  Nor  can  I make  out  how  shall  I liberate  myself 
from  the  fetters  of  nature  (iH).  Tell  me,  O Brahman,  how 
shall  I not  be  subject  to  re-birtb  ; how  shall  I be  free  from 
gunas  and  fmw  shall  1 be  united  with  the  eternal^  Tell 

^ iubtln  ikmantj  tbit  m*tk«  uji  the  subtle  buily. 

t The  intelleelual  beultirs. 

I Accoffilfiff  tci  teiicltifs  Pmkf^iii  Ji  called  Prtcihaiia  or  Ibt 

p-riedple  of  greatfie^s* 

‘ I The  word  in  the  text  h that  which  knows  the  body* 

.This  is  the  soul  in  the  system* 

I Gmm  cannot  hi  properly  remh^rid  by  quality,  or  attribute.  Accordlnf  to 
theSaokhya  system  they  enter  Into  the  compositbu  of  a materkl  object.  They 
are  equally  m «i?4iinliat  ingredienti  in  the  formation  of  material  objecti  as  th« 
trees  for  that  of  » forest.  In  Sankhya  philosophy  the  Purmka  or  tht  ioul  It 
quite  differirit  kmn  the  innly.  Tlirre  are  again  two  bodies.  One  ii  cailtd 
SiMa  or  groii  which  H made  of  elenients  and  the  other  Imgtt  or  subtle  which 
is  made  of  fanmMirm  m the  inblk  Immatiu hit  forms. 

1 As  this  chiiplef  and  the  syeeerdtng  three  or  four  chapters  give  a d@»orlp« 
tbn  of  thft  Yofiif  we  think  it  belter  to  give  it  brief  outllnt  of  this  iyatim  of 
Kiflidu  philosophy  to  eriabti  otir  reatlsrs  to  ufidifstand  It  fully. 

The  Yoga  tytteifi  of  plilbtophy  was  propounded  by  Patanjali  ; ll»  object 
% to  Ittch  the  nietni  by  which  the  humin  soul  may  attain  comptett  union 
with  the  supreme  sotil,  may  be  freed  from  the  fetters  of  Nature  and  oseap® 
n-blrth.  F#fii  Ilieralty  mitaos  coneentration  of  mind  upon  the  DIvina  iouh. 
Ty$  conctntritkm  can  b«  by  preventing  the  modlficationi  of  Ckiiim 

aa 


1^0  MARKANDEYA  PURAN^M. 

me,  0 Brahman,  0 you  of  great  wisdom,  this  Yoga.  I beg  yoo 
■with  humility.  Association  with  the  good  is  always  bene- 
ficial to  mankind  (20). 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

:o: — 

DattatrEya  said : — The  separation  of  a Yogin  from 
ignorance  by  knowledge  is  emancipation,  and  disunion  with 
the  essential  ingredients  of  Prakriti  (nature)  is  union  with 
Brahman  (i).  Emancipation  springs  from  Yoga  and  Yoga 
from  consummate  knowledge;  Oking, knowledge  .springs  from 
pain  which  belongs  to  those  whose  minds  are  attached  to 
the  consciousness  of  self  (2).  Therefore  a man,  who  is 
desirous  of  securing  emancipation,  should  cast  off  attachment; 
from  the  absence  of  attachment  proceeds  the  destruction  of 
the  consciousness  of  self  (3).  The  absence  of  attachment  leads 
to  happiness;  from  the  distaste  for  the  world,  the  defects, 
thereof,  are  perceived  j as  distaste  for  the  world  originates 

or  thinking  principle  ; by  the  constant  habit  of  keeping  the  mind  in  unmodified 
state  and  by  the  practice  of  Vairagya  or  the  complete  suppression  of  passions 
Or  the  distate  for  the  world.  This  Vairagya  can  be  acquired  by  the  contem- 
plation of  the  Supreme  Being,  who  is  unaffected  by  works,  applications  &c. 
The  knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Being  may  be  obtafined  by  repeating  the 
monosyllable  Om  accompanied  by  mental  concentration.  This  Cfm  Is  composed 
of  three  letters  A.  U.  M,  significant  of  the  Supreme  Being  as  developing 
bimself  in  the  Triad  of  god,  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  Siva.  The  eight  means  of 
faental  csoncentration  are  (i)  Yama,  forbearance  or  self-restraint  (a)  Niyama, 
iWSgtous  observances  (3)  Asana,  postures  (4)  JPrattayama,  suppression  of 
the  breath  (5)  Vraiyahara,  restraint  of  senses  (6)  Dharana,  steadying  of  mind 
(7)  Dhyana,  contemplation  (8)  Samadki,  a state  of  religious  trance,  the  out- 
come of  ptofotthd  meditation. 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM.  I7t 

from  knowledge,  so  knowledge  also  springs  from  the  dis- 
taste for  the  world  (4).  That  is  a house  wherein  a man 
lives:  that  is  food  by  which  one  sustains  himself;  that  is  called 
knowledge  which  leads  to  emancipation — any  thing  else  is 
called  ignorance  (5).  By  reaping  the  fruits  of  virtue  and 
vice,  by  performing  the  daily  obligatory  rites  without  any 
desire,  by  the  dissi{)ation  of  the  acts  formerly  performed 
and  by  not  doing  new  acts,  a body  is  not  repeatedly 
fettered  (6 — 7).  Know  this,  O king,  as  Yoga,  which  1 have 
described  to  you.  By  acquiring  this  Yoga  a man  does  not  seek 
refuge  with  any  one  else  except  the  eternal  Brahman  (8). 
The  Yogins  should  lirst  conquer  their  selves  (by  the  knowledge 
of)  soul  for  it  is  difticuU  of  being  conquered  by  tirem.  You 
should  endeavour  to  conquer  this  (self).  Hear,  I shall  des- 
cribe the  means  (9).  By  Pranayama  he  should  consume  the 
short-comings,  by  Dharana  the  sins,  by  Pratyaharu  the  ob- 
jects of  sense,  and  by  Dbyana  the  Gunas  of  the  mind  which 
is  not  controlled  (lO).  As  all  the  im[>urities  of  mountain 
metals  are  removed  by  burning,  so  by  the  suppression  of 
vital  breaths,  the  impurities  of  senses  are  consumed  (ii). 
One  versed  in  yoga  should  first  undertake  the  suppression 
of  vital  brarths.  The  suppression  of  two  vital  breaths  Prdna 
and is  called  Pnluftyama  (la).  Prinayama  is  of  three 
kinds,  namely  Laghu,  Maddhya,  and  Uttarya>  Hear, 
0 Alarka,  I shall  explain  to  you  the  measure  of  all  these  (13). 
Laghu,  has  twelve  Matras,  Madkyama  has  twice  the  number 
and  Utiama  has  been  described  to  have  thrice  the  number 
(14).  The  time  occupied  in  opening  and  shutting  the  eye- 
lids is  the  measure  of  a Maira.  For  giving  the  measure  of 
Prknly%ma,  the  division  called  Laghu  has  been  described 
to  consist  of  twelve  Afairas  (15).  By  the  first,  perapi- 
ration  should  be  conquered—by  the  second,  trembling  and 
by  the  third,  the  (various)  defects  such  as  cheerlessness  etc. 
should  he  duly  conquered  (16).  As  the  lion,  the  tiger  and 
the  elephant  arc  quieted  down  by  training,  so  the  Prdm  of 


172  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM* 

yogis  is  brought  down  to  subjection  (by  these  processes)  (17) 
As  an  elephant  trainer  brings  an  infuriated  elephant  to  subjec'- 
tion  according  to  his  will  (by  training  it),  so  the  Yogin 
brings  to  his  subjection  the  Prana  (18).  As  when  a lion 
is  trained,  it  kills  only  the  deer  and  not  men,  so  when  the 
vital  breaths  are  properly  suppressed  they  destroy  the  impu* 
ritiesand  not  the  body.  Therefore  a Yogin  should  always 
assiduously  practise  Pr^nS^yama  (19).  Hear  now,  of  the 
fourfold  stages  of  PrSnayama  which  are  the  fruits  ot 
liberation;  0 king,  they  are  Dhvash]  prdpti^  Samvit 
• and  Prasdda]  do  you  listen  in  order  to  their  characteristics 
as  I describe  them  (20—21).  The  state,  in  which  the  fruits 
of  acts,  good  and  bad,  are  destroyed  and  along  with  it  the 
impurities  of  mind  are  destroyed  is  called  Dhvasti{22),  I'hat 
state  extending  over  all  time,  in  which  a Yogin,  controls 
all  desire.s,  both  of  this  world  and  the  next,  begotten  by 
covetousness  and  stupefaction,  is  called  Prdpti  (23).  That 
state  of  Pranayama,  in  which  the  Yogin,  by  virtue  of  his 
consummate  knowledge,  acquiring  the  same  power  with  the 
sun,  moon,  stars  and  planets,  comes  to  know  of  the  past  and 
future  and  things  not  visible  and  greatly  distant,  is  called 
Samvit  (34—25).  That  state  of  a Yojjin,  in  which  the  men- 
tal faculties,  the  five  vital  breaths,  the  organs  of  sense  and 
the  objects  of  sense  are  purified  is  called  PrasUa  (26).  Heaj 
now,  0 king,  I shall  describe  the  characteristics  of  PrinaySma 
and  the  postures  that  are  laid  down  for  those  who  also  carry 
on  Yoga  practices  (27).  Placing  himself  in  various  postures 
(such  z&)  padmdsana,  Ardhhsana  and  Swasttkdsana  and 
reciting  in  his  mind  the  mystic  syllable  'Om’  one  should 
engage  in  Yoga  (28).  Seated  straight  in  an  even  posture 
contracting  his  two  legs,  with  the  mouth  closed  and  the 
thighs  firmly  placed  in  the  front,  he  should,  controlling  his 
i«md,  so  sit  that  his  heels  may  not  touch  the  organ  ot  gene- 
and  testes.  He  should  so  raise  up  his  head  that 
one  rew  of  teeth  t»ay  not  touch  the  other.  (29—30).  Fixing 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


m 


hU  look  on  the  tip  of  his  nose  and  not  diverting  it  in  any 
other  direction,  and  then  obstructing  darkness  by  passion 
t and  passion  by  goodness,  and  being  stationed  only 
ill  the  pure  principle  of  goodness,  the  Yogin  should 
practice  Yoga.  Sunultaneously  withdrawing  the  senses 
from  their  objects,  controlling  the  mental  faculties  and 
vital  breaths,  one  should  engage  in  practising  pra- 
tyah&ra.  Like  a tortoise  withdrawing  its  limbs  he,  who, 
restraining  iiis  desires,  lives  with  his  mind  centered  in  the 
soul,  sees  the  Divine  soul  in  the  hnman  soul.  I he  same 
wise  man,  should,  alter  first  purifying  his  external  and 
internal  limbs,  Iroiu  the  throat  to  the  navel  downwards,  and 
filling  thebody  with  breath,  begin  practising  pratyaMra. 
These  twelve  forms  of  Ftiin.^ya.ma,  are  called  Dharana. 
(31 — 35).  And  the  two  Dharunas  are  called  Yoga  by  the 
Yogiiis  acquainted  with  Tatiwas  or  principles.  When  a 
Yogin,  ever  restraining  his  self,  is  engaged  in  Yoga,  all  hb 
impurities  are  destroyed  and  he  attains  to  a peaceful 
stale ; and  he  sees  the  great  Ikaliman  different  from  the 
fc  essential  ingredients  of  Nature  (36 — 37))  as  also  the  atoms, 
j ether  etc.,  and  the  pure  soul.  Thus  with  restricted  diet  a 
r Yogin  should  engage  in  Prantyima  (38).  He  should  slowly 
restrain  himself  like  one  ascending  a house.  Thus  when  a man 
cannot  conquer  the  soil  fi.e.,  restrain  the  bodily  faculties) 
all  the  passions,  diseases  and  ignorance  always  multiply. 

; One  should  not  set  bis  foot  on  a soil  which  is  not  conquered'*' 
' (39),  In  consequence  of  restraining  the  vital  breaths  it  is 

\ ailed  Pran&y&mti  {40).  it  is  also  called  Dhirani  for  by  it 
j the  mind  is  held  or  restrained.  It  is  also  called  Pmtydhdra, 
; , for  by  Yoga,  persons  who  have  restrained  their  self,  withdraw 
^ the  senses  from  their  objects  such  as  sound  (41).  The 


* It  f*  mttaphoricnf,  S»ii  here  wiMni  bodily  (icuUiss.  Patanjall 
dwervtit  that  a man  cannot  awomplbh  the  union  witli  tiod,  which  is  tlM 
mmmum  huum  of  Ws  Ilf#  without  restraining  the  bodily  faculties. 


i::' 


i 

I 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

expedients  have  also  been  pointed  out  by  the  great  Yogins— 
the  great  Rishis^  by  which,  obstacles^  such  as  diseases  and 
others,  may  not  come  in  their  way  (42).  As  a thirsty  man 
drinks  slowly  water  through  a vessel  or  a tube  so  the  Yogin^ 
without  any  exertion,  should  inhale  air.  Dhhrant  or 
oentration  should  be  first  made  on  the  navel,  then  on  the 
heart,  then  on  the  chest,  then  on  the  throat,  the  njouth^  the 
tip  of  the  nose,  the  eye,  the  space  between  the  eye-bows,  the 
head  and  the  last  of  all  on  the  supreme  spirit.  This 
concentration  is  called  the  best.  These  are  the  ten.  forms 
of  Dkaranh  or  concentration  acquiring  which  one.  attains  to 
unification  with  the  Eternal  5k>ul  (43 — 45).  M a Yogin,  O king, 
wants  to  accomplish  his  purpose  he  should  never  engage  in 
practising  Yoga  when  he  is  hungry,,  fatigued  or  unsettled  in 
mind  (46}.  .Nor  should  he,  in  extrenne  coM  or  hot  seasons  or 
in  <^ber  extremes  or  at  a time  when  the  high  winds  blow, 
engage  in"  Y(^a  or  medlkation  (47).  In<  places  filled  with 
noise  near  fire  or  water, dilapdated  cow-sheds, in  the  crossings 
of  the  four  roads,  on  withered  leaves,  in  a river,  in  cremation 
grounds  filled  with  reptiles,,  in  dangerous  places,  on  the 
bank  of  a well,  on  tombstones,  on  ant-hills — in  all  these 
places  should  a wise  man  renounce  the  practice  of  Yoga 
(48^49).  So  long  as  the  quality  of  goodness  is  not  properly 
devdpped,  (bad)  times  and  places  should  be  avoided.  The 
sight  of  an  impious  man  does  uot  lead  to  Yoga  and  so  he 
should  be  avoided  (50).  Those,  that  through  foolishuesp^ 
practise  Yoga  disregarding  the  distinctions  of  time  and  ptece^ 
are  assailed  by  shortcomings  that  impede  their  Yoga  ; hear,  J 
shall  describe  tbem  ($t).  Such  an  ^ncxant  man  is  afflicted  by 
deafness,  decripittMie,  dumbness,  the  loss  of  memory  and 
blindness  and  fever  (52}.  If  the  Yogins,  through,  their  carer 
lessness,  are  visited  by  these  evils,  bear,  I shall  describe  the 
fmedkl  ‘measures*  they  should  adopt  for  counteracting  (their 
actions)  (53).  For  the  cure  of  Guimas,  caused  by  (some  dis- 
order in  the  One  should  eat  Mgbiy  heated  Yavagu  when 


MARKANDEYA  puranam. 


175 


cooled  down  and  apply  it  to  the  afflicted  part,  to  the  navel 
and  the  stomach  (54'.  Yav&^u  and  air  counteract  all  the 
ills  caused  by  the  disorder  of  the  wind.  In  a similar  treat- 
ment he  should  conceive  in  his  mind  a huge  and  motionless 
mountain  (55).  On  the  organ  of  speech  being  afflicted  by 
deafness  he  sliould  think  of  the  organ  of  hearing,  as  one, 
stricken  with  thirst,  thinks  that  a mangoe  fruit  is  on  the 
organ  of  taste  (56).  Then  whatever  part  of  the  body  is 
descased  the  remedy  should  be  applied  tliere-~hcat  for  cold 
and  cold  for  heat  (57).  Placing  a wooden  peg  on  the  head 
strike  it  with  another  piece  of  wood — and  the  Yogin  will 
immediately  regain  his  lost  memory  (58).  Let  him  also 
conceive  that  the  immense  space  between  the  earth  and 
heavens  is  filled  with  tempest  and  fire.  Tiiese  are  the 
remedial  measures  laid  down  for  superhuman  impediments 
(59).  If  any  superhuman  creature  enters  into  the  Yogin's 
mind  he  should  consume,  it  living  in  his  body,  by  the  concep- 
tion of  fire  and  hurricane  (60),  Thus  O king,  by  all  means 
should  a Yogin  protect  his  body  since  it  is  the  root  of  the 
accomplishment  of  virtue,  worldly  profit,  desire  and  emanci- 
pation (61).  Prom  the  description  of  ttie  characteristics  of 
propensities  and  wonderment  arises  the  loss  to  the  Yogin  of 
his  knowledge  j therefore  these  should  be  kept  secret  (6a.) 
The  absence  of  the  agitation  of  the  mind,  the  freedom  from 
diseases  and  cruelty,  fragrant  odour, passing  occasionally  urine 
and  excreta,  grace,  delight  of  mind  and  melody  of  voice— 
these  are  the  primary  characteristics  of  the  tendency  for  Yoga 
(63),  The  most  prominent  characteristic  of  this  accomplish- 
ed state  is  that  people  always  with  love  sing  his  praises  in 
his  absence  and  no  creatures  fear  him  (64).  He  only  has 
attained  to  perfection  who  meets  with  no  impediments  from 
extremes  of  cold  and  heat  and  does  not  fear  any  thing  (65) 


JLIaTTATREYA  said : — ^There  are  many  obstacles  to  the 
Yogin's  realization  of  the  spirit.  Hear  I shall  describe  them 
briefly  (i).  He  longs  for  actions  of  desire,  objects  of  human 
enjoyment,  women,  fruits  of  charity,  learning,  magical  powers, 
wealth,  heaven,  the  dignity  of  the  celestials,  the  station  of 
the  king  of  celestials,  chemical  works,  the  raising  of  winds, 
sacrifics,  entrance  into  fire  and  water,  the  fruits  of  all  sorts 
of  gifts  and  Sraddhas,  religious  regulations,  and  as  well  as 
that  of  fasting,  the  performance  of  Purtta  acts,  the  adoration 
of  the  deities  and  all  other  pious  observances.  He  longs 
for  all  tiiese  being  surrounded  by  those  impediments  (2 — ^4), 
If  bis  mind  is  inclined  towards  this  the  Yogin  should  with- 
draw it;  and  then  uniting  his  mind  with  Brahman  be  should 
lioerate  it  from  all  these  evils  (5).  All  these  impediments 
being  remedied,  other  evils  again  overtake  a Yogin  orginating 
from  the  qualities  of  goodness,  passion  and  ignorance  (6)v 
There  are  five  dreadful  impediments  which  the  Yogin  meets 
with  in  (the  way  of  his)  Yoga — they  are  Pratibha^  relating 
to  intellect ; relating  to  the  organ  of  hearing,  Daivi^ 

belonging  to  gods,  Bhrama  or  wandering,  and  Avartta  or 
whirlpool  (7).  That  by  which  the  meanings  of  the  Vedas, 
of  the  Kavyas  (poetical  literature)  and  endless  learning  and 
mechanical  arts  are  unfolded  to  the  Yogin  is  called  Pratihha 
(8y  That  by  which  one  understands  the  endless  meanings 
of  the  sounds,  and  catches  sound  even  from  a distance  of  a 
thousand  Yojanas  is  called  Srbvana  (9).  The  wise  designate 
that  state  as  Daiva  in  which,  he,  equal  to  a deity,  sees 
completely  the  eight  quarters  like  a mad-man  (lO).  The 
sboftcoming  by  which  the  mind  of  the  Yogin  wanders  about 
without  (fcfimte  reject  and  traDgressing  all  sacred  injunctions. 


MARKANDEYa  ruranam. 


177 


is  called  Bhrama  (i  i).  The  whirlpool  of  knowledge^  agitated 
like  that  of  water,  cicHtroys  (the  equanimity  of  his)  mind  and 
this  impediment  is  called  Avartta  (1.2)*  All  those  born  in 
the  order  of  deities,  having  their  Yoga  destroyed  by  these 
dreadful  obstacles,  repeatedly  turn  round  and  round  (13), 
Thus  covering  himsfdf  with  the  white  blanket  of  bis  mind, 
the  Yogin,  fixing  his  mind  upon  Him,  should  meditate  upon 
the  Great  Brahman  (14).  Restraining  his  senses  and  living 
on  restricted  food,  the  Yogin,  intent  on  practising  Yoga, 
shoald  conceive  in  his  head  the  seven  subtile  elements'^  such 
as  earth  etc.,  (15)*  Let  the  Yc^gin  meditate  upon  the  earth 
and  he  would  attain  to  felicity.  He  should  first  conceive 
himself  as  earth  and  then  shake  oR  its  fetters  (16).  In  the 
same  way  he  should  comprelirnd  the  property  of  savour  or 
taste  in  Apas  or  water,  tlie  {iroperty  of  form  or  colour  in  Tefus 
or  fire  or  light,  the  property  of  tangibility  in  or  air, 

and  sound  in  Kkam  or  ether  and  he  shoubl  afterwartU  cast 
off  these  conceptions  from  his  mind  (17—18).  When  again 
by  his  mind  ( he  enters  into  tlK-  minds  of  all  creaturei, 
his  mind  by  such  stemiying  becomes  lubtla  (19).  After 
attaining  the  inielh^ctual  perception  of  til  creaturet  and 

u • Thtsi  iw  Ihi  fivi  rn^twilMlf  iir  m*hlk  demtnts,  partlckt  out  of  which, 
tht  grosser  ekmiiits  mrt  with  Buddhi  or  intclbct  and 

Ahinkdm  or  tht  stnst  of  liMliviflwality.  Tht?  first  production  is  the  Intolkctuil 
perciptbn,  which  again  if  lh«  stnirce  of  Ahmkim  or  ftn»#  of  indivIdwiHty 
which  again  |iro4ucii5i  the  five  r#iuwafraf  which  tr#  1 AAoto,  * «thtr  * or  the 
itthitrttiirn  of  scnitul ; a,  air  with  the  propifty  of  tangibility ; 3 T^im 
firt  or  lifhl  with  tht  propirly  of  forin  or  colour  4 Apm  water  with  the 

] pmperty  of  tivour  or  %%%\m  \ 5*  earth  with  the  property  of  mlour  or 

smelL  Truly  tloes  Sir  Mciukr  Willkfiif  ohitrve  **  that  Akm$a  must  not  b« 
exactly  Idttitificil  with  the  oiodirti  tthtr*  In  some  of  its  proptrtles  and 
fuftctloui  It  mori  cormpoudf  with  the  ifwa#  vacant  space  of  Lucretius,’^ 
t Thi  Mmai  can  he  better  rtridirtd  by  mind  or  mental  faculties.  It  Is 
with  Ahmkim  or  'lelf  consclontneii  the  production  of  Mmha^  or  Intelbc* 
teal  pretptbri.  M&mt^  which  It  an  internal  organ-  of  perception,  volition 
and  action,  acctirdliif  to  th#  Sattkliya  teachers,  iteiids  between  the  fivt  orpiii 
d senii  and  fivt  organi  of  action. 


i : 


liliM 

fclli 


, 1 


ii 


■ 


MARKANDEYA  PUHANAM. 

then  the  most  subtle  intellect,  one  versed  in  Yoga  should 
cast  it  off  (20).  0 Alarka,  the  Yogin,  who,  after  duly  com- 
prehending these  seven  elementary  particles,  drives  them 
away  from  his  mind,  does  not  suffer  from  rebirth  (21),  Ob- 
se^rving  gradually  the  subtlety  of  the  seven  elementary 
particles  by  Dhhran^  or  steadying  of  mind  and  dismissing 
them  gradually,  the  self-controlled  Yogin  attains  to  the  most 
accomplished  state  (22).  0 king,  by  being  excessively 
attached  to  things  which  he  holds  dear,  he  is  deceived  {23). 
Thus  after  comprehending  that  these  subtle  elementary 
particles  are  connected  with  each  other,  the  man,  who 
dismisses  them,  attains  to  a great  state  (24),  The  distaste 
for  elemental  creation,  engendered  in  the  mind  of  a man 
conversant  with  the  knowledge  of  truth,  by  the  perception 
of  seven  elementary  particles,  leads  to  his  liberation  (25)* 
if  he  becomes  attached  to  smell,  etc.,  he  is  ruined  and  is 
born  again  and  again  as  a man,  remote  from  Brahman,  0 
king  (26).  Having  thus  fixed  his  mind  upon  these  seven 
elementary  particles,  the  Yogin,  0 king,  can  become  absorbed 
in  whatever  subtile  element  he  likes  (27).  He  can  become 
absorbed  in  the  bodies  of  deities,  Asuras,  Gandharvas,  serpents 
or  Rakshasas — ^but  he  never  becomes  attached  to  anything  (28). . 
O king,  be  attains  to  eight-fold  divine  attributes'^  leading  to 
annihilation — namely,  Antmh^  Laghimh^  Mahimh^  Prhpti^ 
Prhkhmyay  hhitya^  Vashitya  and  Kam&ms&yitya  (29 — 30). 
The  state  in  which  one  becomes  subtler  than  subtle  is  called 
Animh ; that  by  which  one  becomes  liglit-handed  and  quick  ’ 

♦ A Yogin  may  acquire  ^ght  great  powers  ^th.  he  will  have  the  power  of 
shrinking  into  the  form  *of  the  minutest  atom  j that  of  assuming  a gigantic 
body;  that  of  becoming  extremely  tight;  that  of  becoming  extremely  heavy  ^ 
that  of  unlimited  reach  of  the  organs,  as  touching  the  moon  with  the  tip  of  the  I 
Snger;  that  of  irresistible  Will  (as,  sinking  into  earth  as  easily  as  into  water) ; 
that  of  perfect  dominion  over  the  inner  of  the  body ; and  that  of  mastery 

over  .alt  b^ogs,  animate ; and  inanimate.  These  strange  effects,  attributed 
to  Vog^pr^tiees,are  tbese«:ret  of  the  power  whi^hthls  doctrine  has  at  all* 
times  exercised  over  the  Hindu  min4 


MARKANDBV4  PURANAM* 


179 


is  called  Laghimd ; that  by  which  one  becomes  worshipped 
of  the  world  is  called  Makirnd;  that  by  which  everything 
is  obtained  is  called  PMpii  (^t)*  That  by  which  one  becomes 
omnipresent  is  Prdkdmya-t  that  •by  which  one  becomes 
the  lord  of  all  is  called  /skiiya;  that  by  which  one  can  keep 
all  under  his  control  is  called  Vashisiya — this  is  the  seventh 
attribute  of  a Yogin  {$2).  That,  which  one  can  move  about 
and  do  according  to  his  will,  is  called  Kdmavasdyiia,  By 
these  eight-fold,  qualities  a Yogin  can  act  like  the  God  (33). 
(The  appearance  of  these  qualities)  O king,  indicates 
(a  Yogin^s)  liberation  and  the  annihilation  of  self  and  that  he 
will  neither  be  born  nor  increase  nor  meet  with  decay  (34). 
He  will  meet  with  no  metamorphosis  or  end,  and  he  will  not 
be  afflicted  hy  galling  pain,  burning  heat  and  drying  up 
through  etem.ent»  such  as  earth,  etc*  (35)*  The  five  elements, 
sound  and  other  properties,  shall  not  lie  able  to  subdue  him  ; 
he  shall  not  enjoy  them  nor  will  he  attached  to  them  (36). 
0 king,  as  a piece  of  gold,  %vhen  melted  in  fire  and  freed 
from  impurities  like  a bad  metal,  is  join%td  with  another  piece 
of  gold,  so  whan  all  the  evils  are  consumed  by  the  fire  of 
Yoga,  the  Yogin  attains  to  unification  with  Brahman  and  has 
no  seperate  axiitence  (37^38).  As  fire,  when  it  is  thrown 
into  fire,  is  united  with  it,  becomei  indantical  with  it,  recieves 
the  same  appellation  (of  fire)  and  does  not  present  any 
distinction,  io  when  the  Yogin,  O king,  having  his  sins  con- 
sumed, becomoi  unified  with  the  great  Brahman,  he  presents 
no  difference  (39^40^*  As  water,  when  it  is  thrown  into 
water,  is  united  with  it,  no  the  soul  of  the  Yogin  becomes  at 
mt  with  the  Supreme  soul  (4 1)* 


‘jkti . . 


CHAPTER  XL  I. 


Alarka  said : — "0  reverend  Sir,  I wish  to  know,  in 
sooth,  of  the  conduct  of  the  Yogin  as  well  as  of  the  ways  of 
Brahman  following  which  he  does  not  meet  with  deteriora, 

tion"  (i).  Datiatreya  said:— “Honour  and  dishonour  are  the 

instruments  of  success  and  anxiety  to  mankind.  When  they 
bear  opposite  meanings  they  bring  on  the  accomplished  state 
to  the  Yogin  (2).  Honour  and  dishonour  are  spoken  of  as  poi- 
son and  ambrosia  ;of  them  dishonour  is  ambrosia  and  honour  is 
the  deadly  venom  (3).  He  should  not  place  his  footsteps  with- 
out carefully  examining, the  ground,  should  not  drink  water  that 
is  not  cleansed  by  cloth,  should  not  speak  a word  that  is  not 
purified  by  truth,  and  should  not  engage  in  a thought  that 
is  not  purified  by  intellect  (4).  For  accomplishing  this  object 
a Yogin  should  not  resort  to  hospitality,  the  performence  of 
Sraddhas,  sacrifices,  festivities  and  singing  parties  in  honour 
of  deities  and  great  men  (5).  When  the  house  of  a house- 
holder is  freed  of  smoke  and  fire  and  after  all  of  them  have 
taken  their  meals  the  Yogin  should  go  out  for  alms— 
and  this  not  thrice  a day  and  nor  even  daily  (6).  Without 
desecrating  the  ways  of  the  good  the  Yogins  should 
so  act  that  they  may  be  dishonoured  and  discomfuted  by  men 
(7).  He  should  beg  alms  of  the  householders  and  priests — of 
these  the  first  is  spoken  of  as  the  best  (8).  A Yogin  should 
41ways  go  to  the  householders  who  are  modest,  reverential, 
self-controlled,  well-read  in  the  Vedas  and  high-souled,  (9) 
and  who  again  belong  to  the  higher  order,  are  not  touched 
by  any  sin  and  are  not  fallen.  To  beg  alms  from  persons 
of  inferior  orders  is  considered  as  the  most  contemptible  life 
(10).  Yetv&gu,  Tnkfdf  milk,  Yhvaka,  fruits,  roots,  Priyangu, 
Kama,  Pifyika  Sakhis  the  foods  (u),  These  are 


ment  of  tlieir  ohjpctH.  Th.ese  should  be  procured  by  alms 
and  they  should  live  on  ttiem  with  great  concentration  of  mind 
and  devotion  (i2).  Before  taking  his  meals  he  should  observe 
silence  and  restrain  his  self  and  then  saying  (ho 

should  sip  water)  —this  has  been  laid  down  as  the  first  ob- 
lation (13).  Then  saying  Aphttava^Samanaya^  Udhndya  and 
Vyinaya  be  shonld  ofler  the  second,  third,  fourth  and  fifth 
oblations  (14).  Ilien  separating  (his  body)  by  Pranlyima 
(suppression  of  vital  breaths)  he  sliould  eat  according  to  his 
desire;  then  again  sij^ping  water  he  should  touch  his  heart 
(15).  Ahscuce  of  the  desire  of  stealing,  life  of  celebacy,. 
renunciation,  absence  of  covetousness  and  harmlessness  are 
the  five  observances  of  a mtmtlicant  (16).  Absence  of 
anger,  to  mitiistcr  to  the  preceptor,  purity,  the  restriction  of 
diet  and  the  ibdly  study  of  the  Vedas—these  have  been 
spoken  of  as  the  fivt*  regulations  (to  be  observed  by)  them 
(17),  He!  shoultl  seek  to  ace|uire*  that  knowlcHlge  which  is 
the  essence  of  all  and  the  instrument  of  the  nccomplislimtnt 
of  all  objects-— the  varirty  of  knowledge  (however)  im.pedti 
Yoga  (iS).  One  who  thirsts  after  knowledge  thinking  ihi$- 
should  bi  kmmm  ! ihk  should  bs  kmwm  does  not  attain  to  ■ 
knowledge  even  witltin  a thougand  Kalpast  (19).  Being 
disassociated,  con«|uertng  anger,  restricting  diet  and  res- 


• Thtse  are  th©  five  vital  breather  niutwdy  Prana,  Apana,  Samana,  Udana 
and  Vyana. 

t Th«  itm  knowk%«i  accoriling  to  PaianjaU  \n  that  of  the*  s|>irtt 

or th® God;  from  It  tht  knowledge  of  at!  othur  things  fiowi.  Acairtllng  to 
Mm  a man  &houUI  this  irut  knowktlgo,  tho  mmmi&ut  all  aru!  by  and  by 
k wilt  com®  to  know  cvtrr  thing  in  the  world.  If  hownvnr  one  seekt  know* 
ledp  of  %mtf  thing  k mm  in  the  world  at  the  »acrifico  of  iupmitio  knowledgo 
or  Pari  fniam  ho  will  ncivnr  act|uire  It  mm  in  thoufancli  of  ymm.  According 
to  the  Arya  Rishis  lhi«  iWi  yadm#  In  the  only  supreme  knowlctlgn'— the 
knowledge  of  tlio  great  llrahniAti  which  people  j^houldt  ntrivc  tti  nct|iurc  If  thoy 
want  to  liboralo  ihciniidvoi  from  th«  three  fold  pauui  and  the  l*in?r»  ol  tht 
knowledge 


I 


i:  5 


l|S(  *IaRKANDEYa  puranam.  I 

i 

training  senses  and  forming  the  gateway  by  inteilect  one 
should  engage  his  mind  in  Dhydna  or  contempl^ition  (20). 
Resorting  to  mountain  caves,  forests  or  lonely  places, 
a Yogin,  intent  on  practising  Yoga^  should  always  ^ngage  in 
contemplation  (21).  He  who  has  been  able  to  cpntrol  the 
three  Dandas  or  staff  namely  words,  actions  an4  mind,  is 
called  Tridandi  and  is  a great  Yogin  (22).  0 king,  who  is 
liked  and  who  again  is  disliked  by  him  who  considers  this 
universe,  existent  and  non-existent,  at  one  with  Gunas  and 
divorced  from  them,  and  identical  with  himself?  (23).  He, 
whose  intellect  has  been  purified,  who  considers  a brick  bat 
and  gold  in  the  same  light,  who,  concentrating  himself  in  all 
elements,  sees  only  the  eternal  and  undecaying  Brahman,  the 
stay  of  all,  as  existing,  is  never  born  again  (24).  The 
Vedas  and  all  the  sacrificial  rites  are  superior  to  all  other 
things— above  it  is  the  recitation  (of  Mantras)  and  above 
is  the  road  of  knowledge  and  above  it  is  Dhydna  or  contem- 
plation which  is  freed  from  association  and  attachment.  By 
this  one  can  attain  to  the  eternal  Brahman  (25).  By  being 
self  controlled,  intent  upon  meditating  upon  Brahman,  assi- 
duous, pure,  whole-mindedly  devoted  and  of  restrained 
senses,  one,  who  acquiries  this  Yoga, ‘attains  to  the  union  of 
the  soul  with  the  Supreme  Soul  and  then  to  liberation  pro-^ 
cccding  therefrom  (26), 


GHAPTERlXLTr. 


D ATT ATREYA  said:-— Even  hundreds  of  birth  cannot  dis- 
lodge a Yogin  from  his  position,  who,  intent  on  practising 
Yoga,  follows  such  a method  (x).  Seeing  the  Great  Souli 


MARKANDKYA  PURANAM. 


183 

manifest  in  the  form  of  the  imiverse»  having  the  universe  for 
his  feet,  head  md  neck,  the  Lord  and  the  Protector  of  the 
Universe,  he  should,  for  obtaining  Him,  recite  the  great  and 
sacred  monosyllable  Om,  The  study  of  this  (Om)  is  (nothing 
but)  listening  to  its  great  and  true  form  (2 — 3).  A,  U,  M 
are  the  three  letters — these  are  the  three  Mdtrds^  partaking 
of  the  quality  of  goodness,  passion  and  darkness  (4).  There 
is  another  half  Mdird  of  this  Om  which  is  placed  high  and 
above  the  reach  of  the  three  qualities ; for  its  dependence 
on  the  Musical  note  Cilndkdraf  it  b called  Gdnd/ulrL  Ita 
motion  and  toucli  is  like  that  of  an  ant ; it  is  perceived  on 
the  head  (S).  As  when  recited  Om  goes  to  the  head  so  the 
Yogin,  by  every  letter,  becomes  identical  with  Om  (6).  The 
vital  breath  is  the  bow,  the  soul  is  the  shaft  and  Brahman  is 
the  excellent  aim;  so  by  assiduously  piercitjg  Brahman  like  a 
shaft  one  becomes  at  one  with  Him  (7).  That  Om  is  the 
three  Vedas,  the  three  worldii  and  the  three  fires,  Visluiu, 
BrahmH  and  Siva,  as  well  as  Rik,  Saman  and  Yayush  (8).  Yoa 
should  know  truly  that  there  arc  three  half  Mdiris  of  Om ; 
the  Yogin,  who  is  intent  upon  reciting  it,  attains  to  fusion  or 
laya  into  it  {9}.  Again  A is  intended  to  mean  Bhu  (earth)  U 
Bbuva  and  M the  celestial  region  ( to).  The  first  M&iri  is 
Vyaktd  (Brahma)  the  second  is  called  the  third  is 

the  ehii  or  thinking  principle ; and  the  half  Mdirk  is  the  Brah* 
man  (11).  These  should  be  duly  known  as  grounds  for 
practkbg  Yoga ; by  the  recitatiott  of  Om^  all  things,  existent 
and  non-exLitent,  lire  realised  (ta).  The  first h Mrasya 
(short),  the  second  Deerght  (long)  and  the  third  Piutdt 
the  half  MMrd  is  not  within  the  range  of  words  (13), 
Thus  the  person,  who  thoroughly  understands  and  meditates 

• As  sylkbk  (mt 

t Ont  of  tbi  siviR  primary  aolts  of  Mwik. 

I Tht  tfiiri  •ound  glvca  to  vow®h  dio  protracted,  or  continuous  sound 
btinf  three  fclmti  the  liingth  of  the  short  vowel  and  occupying  three  momtnti 
bits  utleriince. 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


184 

upon  the  great  Brahman  designated  by  the  great  monosyllable 
renouncing  the  wheel  of  the  world  and  being  freed  from 
the  three  fetters,  attains  to  fusion  or  Laya  in  the  Brahman 
the  Great  Soul  (14 — 15).  If  the  fetters  of  his  actions  are  not 
snapped,  he,  knowing  death  by  Aristha*  and  having  the 
recollection  of  theprestine  birth,  in  another,  again  is  born  as  a 
Yogin  (16).  By  his  accomplished  Yoga  in  another  life  as  well 
as  by  that  in  this  life  he  is  always  acquainted  with  Aristha 
and  does  not  sink  down  at  the  time  of  death  (17). 


CHAPTER  XLin. 


X^ATTATREYA  said;— Hear,  0 great  king,  I shall  enu- 
merate the  signs  of  approaching  death  ; by  observing  them 
the  Yogin  may  know  when  he  will  die  (1).  He,  who  cannot 
see  the  road  of  the  celestials,  Dhruva,  Sukra,  the  moon,  his 
own  shadow  and  Arundhati,  meets  with  death  after  the  ex- 
piration of  one  year  (2).  The  man,  who  sees  the  solar  disc 
without  rays  and  the  fire  full  of  the  rays  of  the  sun,  does  not 
live  more  than  eleven  months.’ (3).  He,  who  in  a dream  sees  gold 
or  silver  in  what  is  thrown  out,  urine  and  excreta,  lives  only 
for  ten  montlis  (4).  If  one  sees  ghosts,  PisSchas,  the  city  of 
the  Gandharvas  and  golden  trees,  he  lives  only  for  nine 
months  (5).  If  one,  who  is  fat,  all  on  a sudden  becomes  thin, 
if  one  thin  built  man  at  once  becomes  fat,  his  natural  lease 
of  life  will  surely  run  out  after  eight  months  (6).  He,  who 
wheti  he  sets  his  fobt  on  mire  or  manure,  has  the  mark  of 

'i-' 1...  .a  , , . „ , 

* The  sign  or  symptom  of  approaching  death. 


MARkA^^DEVA  PURANAM.  185 

the  heel  or  the  fore  part  half  stamped,  lives  only  for  seven 
tttonths  (7).  He,  on  whose  head,  sits  a vulture,  pigeon,  Kilcola, 
crow,  other  carnivorous  (birds)  or  dark-blue  birds,  does  not 
live  more  than  six  months  (8).  One,  who  is  assailed  by  a 
tow  of  crows,  or  a downpour  of  dust  or  who  sees  his  own 
shadow  in  the  opposite  direction,  lives  for  four  or  five  months 
(9).  He,  who,  in  the  absence  of  clouds,  sees  lightning  in  the 
southern  quarter  and  rainbow  in  the  night,  lives  only  for  two 
or  three  months  (10).  He,  who  does  not  see  his  own  shadow 
In  clarified  butter,  oil,  mirror  or  water,  or  even  if  he  does  so 
B«e8  it  without  head,  does  not  live  more  thana  mouth  (u). 
tltc  Yogin,  O king,  from  whose  body  comes  out  the  smell  of  a 
corpse,  lives  only  for  half  a month  (12).  He,  whose  heart 
and  feet  are  dried  up  immediately  after  bathing,  whose  throat 
is  dried  up  although  he  drinks  water,  lives  only  for  ten  days 
(13).  Deaili  is  impending  to  him  whose  vital  parts  are 
pierced  by  tlie  winds  clashing  with  one  anoth(;r  and  whose 
hairs  do  not  stir  even  by  the  touch  of  the  water  (14)  Death 
is  present  to  him,  who,  in  a dream,  proceeds  singing  to  the 
southern  quarter  in  conveyances  of  bears  and  mtmkejs,  (15). 
He  also  does  not  live  when  in  a dream,  a female,  clad  in  a 
dark-blue  and  crimson  cloth,  takes  him  to  the  southern  <iirec- 
tion,  singing  and  smiling  (16).  A learned  man,  seeing  alone  a 
nude,  and  highly  powerful  Buddha  mendicant  in  a dream 
laughing  and  U;a(ung,  knows  death  to  be  present  {17).  The 
man,  who  in  a dream,  sees  his  own  body  drowned  neck  deep 
In  mire,  meets  with  immediate  death  (t8).  Hainan  sees  in 
dream  hairs,  char-coals,  ashes,  serpents  and  rivers  void  of 
water,  he  meets  witli  death  on  the  eleventh  day  after  ten  days 
(19).  If  a man  sees  in  a dream,  a highly  terrific,  dreadful  and 
dark  man,  striking  with  uplifted  weapons  and  stones  he 
meets  with  immediate  death  (20).  If  a jackal  passes  before 
a man  or  behind  him  or  goes  round  him  at  sun  rise  he  meets 
with  immediate  death  (31).  Forsooth  the  lease  of  a man's 
life  has  run  out  who  feels  hungry  immediately  after  taking 
34 


I ■ 


l86  MARKAN0EYA  FURANAM. 

meals  and  whose  teeth  gnash  against  one  another  {I2), 
who  does  not  perceive  the  smell  of  a lamp,  who  becomes 
afraid  either  in  the  day  or  night,  who  sees  his  own  reflection 
in  another's  eye,  does  not  live  (23).  The  one,  knowing  his 
self,  should  for  certain  perceive  his  end  who  sees  the  rain- 
bow in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  the  stars  during  the  day 
(24).  The  lease  of  his  life  has  run  out  whose  nose  becomes 
crooked  whose  ears  are  either  elevated  or  depressed  and  whose 
left  eye  sheds  tears  (15).  The  wise  man  should  then  know  his 
end  to  be  at  hand  when  his  face  becomes  red  and  tongue 
yellow  (26).  Forsooth  should  be  know  that  his  death  is 
imminent  who,  in  a dream,  goes  to  the  southern  quarter  in  a 
conveyance  drawn  by  camels  or  jackals  (27).  He,  who  pro- 
jecting bb  ears,  does  not  hear  the  sound  made  by  himself  and 
the  vision  of  whose  eye  is  lost,  docs  not  live  (28).  There  b 
the  end  of  bis  life  who,  falling  into  a pit  in  a dream,  does  not 
find  the  entrance  and  accordingly  cannot  come  out  (29)» 
The  upward  looks,  the  eyes  becoming  red,  dilated  and 
whirling,  the  heat  of  the  mouth  and  the  dilation  of  tlie  navel 
surely  indicate  the  future  birth  of  a man  (30).  There  is  the 
end  of  his  life,  w^bo,  entering  into  fire  in  a dream,  cannot  come 
out  nor  entering  into  water  can  come  out  of  it  (31).  He,  who 
b assailed  by  mbehevous  ghosts  either  in  the  day  or  in  the 
night,  forsooth  meets  with  death  within  seven  nights  (32). 
He,  who  sees  his  clean  white  cloth  either  m crimson  or 
darkblue,  has  his  impending  death  ascertained  (33).  It 
n said  that  Yama  and  An  taka  are  near  those  wlio  have 
the  perversity  of  their  nature  and  character  (34).  The 
wise  designate  it  as  the  end  of  that  mart  who  disregards  and 
villifies  them  before  whom  he  should  always  be  bumble  and 
who  are  worthy  of  bis  respect,  who  does  not  adore  the  deities, 
vilifies  the  preceptor,  the  elderly  men  and  BrShmanas,  who 
does  not  perform  the  obsequies  of  hb  parents,  who  does 
not  welcome  his  son-in-law  and  who  insults  the  Yogins,  the 
wise  and  other  great  men  (35—37).  O king,  the  Yogins 


Snouia  wuii  va.li*  IU41U  incsc  lore-Doaings  ocar  iruua 

daily  or  at  the  end  of  the  year  (38).  Observing  particularly 
0 king,  that  these  fruits  are  dreadful  they  should  always 
think  of  that  time  in  their  mind  (39).  Knowing  full  well 
that  time  and  resorting  to  a place  void  of  fear  the  Yogin 
should  practise  Yoga  so  that  the  time  may  not  be  divorced 
from  its  fruits  (40).  Beholding  these  omens,  casting  off  the 
fear  of  death  and  marking  the  characteristics  of  the  time 
when  they  set  in  the  Yogin  should  engage  in  Yoga  in  whatever 
division  of  the  day  they  may  appear.  In  the  morning,  in 
the  evening,  in  the  noon  or  in  the  night  or  whenever  these 
omens  arc  seen  he  .should  engage  in  Yoga  till  the  proper 
time  comes  (41-43).  Casting  off  all  fear,  controlling  the 
time  and  restraining  his  own  s<>lf  he  should  engage  in  Yoga 
with  the  Great  Soul ; then  conquering  the  three  fold  (jualities 
and  making  bis  own  soul  at  one  with  the  Supr*‘nu;  Soul  he 
should  cast  off  intellectual  f, acuities  (44  -45).  Me  will  then 
be  able  to  all.ain  to  the  great  beatitude  which  is  beyond  the 
reach  of  senses  and  intellect  and  is  incapable  of  being 
described  (46),  I have  described  to  you  all  this  truly,  O 
Alarka;  I shall  now  relate  in  brief,  how  you  will  attain  to 
Brahman ; hoar  me  (47).  When  the  jewel  Ckandrak&nta 
is  united  with  the  rays  of  the  moon  it  dkchai^es  water  and 
not  when  it  is  nt>t  united ; this  has  been  described  as  a 
ffl'mile  for  the  Yogins  (48).  When  the  jewel  Suryak&nta 
is  united  with  the  rays  of  the  sun  it  displays  fire  and  not 
alone;  this  is  a simile  for  the  Yogins  (49).  Ants,  rats,  cats, 
Grihagodha  and  Kapinjalas  live  in  a house  where  the  house- 
holder resides ; on  his  death  they  go  elsewhere  (50).  At 
the  destruction  of  their  master  they  feel  no  sorrow.  This 
instance  of  their  dwelling,  O emperor,  is  also  a simile  for 
the  Yogins  (st).  An  earth-worm,  although  its  mouth  is  very 
small,  gathers  up  a heap  of  earth  ; this  is  also  an  instruction 
for  the  Yogins  (5a).  Beasts,  birds,  mankind  and  other 
creatures  destroy  the  trees  crested  with  leaves,  flowers  and 


,lg8  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM, 

fruits ; from  this  the  Yogins  should  draw  a lesson  (53).  The 
top  of  the  horn  of  a young  one  of  a Ruru,  although  it  is 
like  a sessame  seed,  grows  up  with  it ; seeing  this  the  Yogin 
.should  attain  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  object  (54). 
Observing  the  movements  of  the  limbs  of  a person  while 
ascending  an  elevation  from  the  surface  of  the  earth  with 
a vessel  filled  with  liquid  substance  in  his  bands  what  does 
not  a Yogin  learn  (55)?  Knowing  truly  the  exertion  of  ’ 
mankind  that  they  destroy  every  thing  for  their  own  subsis- 
tence the  Yogin  can  attain  the  accomplishment  of  his 
object  (59).*  Wherever  one  lives  is  his  house ; that  by 
which  dne^s  life  is  sustained  is  his  food  and  that  by  which 
one^s  object  is  accomplished  is  his  happiness  ; so  why  there 
should  be  an  attachment  (57)?  Although  solicited  as  an 
effect  is  produced  by  causes  so  by  intellect  and  others  which 
are  not  his  own  he  should  strive  to  accomplish  (the  union 
with  the)  Great  Soul  (58). 

Thereupon  saluting  him  and  bending  low  with  humility  the 
king  Alarka,  filled  with  deliglit,  said  (57).  O Brahman, 

^ These  verses  arc  very  tcnie  and  «'in  explanation  is  therefore  necewary, 
The  object  of  the  Yogin  is  to  cast  off  all  attachment  for  the  \vorUl  and  to  effect 
an  union  of  his  own  soul  with  the  Great  Souh  For  renouncing  this  attachment 
he  should  take  lessons  from  the  various  objects.  (48  Sloka)  Ah  by  the  union 
with  the  rays  of  the  moon,  the  jewel,  so  called,  discharges  water  so  the  mi®d» 
of  the  Yogin  when  engaged  in  the  contemplation  of  the  supreme  spirit,  enjoys 
a happiness  which  he  cannot  otherwise  feel.  (49) — As  when  touched  by  the 
rays  of  the  sun  the  jewel,  so  called,  displays  fire,  so  the  Yogin,  by  virtue  of 
Yoga  or  concentration  of  the  mind,  can  see  the  Great  Brahman.  (59)— From 
the  ants  and  other  creatures,  going  away  to  another  house  after  the  death  of 
a house-holder  and  cherishing  no  attachment  for  him  the  Yogin  should  learn 
that  after  the  destruction  of  one  body  another  springs  up  and  therefore  he 
should  cherish  no  attachment  for  the  body.  f5i)-~As  an  earth  worm,  though 
an  insigniffcant  creature,  can  collect  a heap  of  earth,  so  though  the  attainment 
of  Brahman  is  a difficult  task  it  can  be  gradually  had  by  the  practices  of  Yoga, 
(52)— As  a tree,  enveloped  with  blossoms  and  fruits,  la  felled  by  men,  so  this 
body,  however  rich  and  great  a man  might  be,  will  fall  a prey  to  death.  So 
the  Yogin  should  cherish  no  attachment  for  this  body  which  is  frail 


gendered  by  the  terror  of  a defeat  from  the  enemy  (6o). 
By  good  fortune  it  is  that  the  king  of  Kashi  is  gifted  with 
prowess  and  prosperity  for  whose  ruin  I have  come  hither 
and  been  united  with  you  (6t).  By  fortune  it  is  that  my 
strength  has  been  weakened,  my  servants  have  been  slain, 
my  treasure  has  been  exhausted  and  I have  been  possessed 
by  fear  (62).  By  fortune  it  is  that  the  pair  of  your  feet 
came  within  tlie  range  of  my  recollection  and  by  fortune 
It  is  that  your  words  have  found  room  in  my  heart  (63).  By 
fortune  it  is  that  I have  attained  to  knowledge  by  seeing  you. 
And  by  forltine  it  is,  O Brahman,  that  you  showed  me  this 
kindness  (64)*  With  the  advent  of  good  luck  to  a man 
even  an  evil  is  converted  into  good ; for  this  calamity,  by 
bringing  me  to  you,  1ms  conduced  to  my  well-being  (65)* 
Suvihu  is  a benefactor  of  mine,  as  also,  thf!  lord,  the  king 
of  Ka^hi,  hy  xvhom  I Imve  been  brought  to  you,  the  lord  of 
asceticism  (6b)-  And  ilmt  1,  having  all  my  sins  cotmumed 
by  the  fire  of  yotir  grace,  shall  so  engage  in  hard  austerities 
that  I may  not  agaiti  come  by  these  rniseries  (67).  Obtaining 
permtisbn  from  you  who  are  high-souled  and  can  confer 
knowledge  I shall  east  oil  this  condition  of  a house-holder 
which  is  a forest  of  the  trees  of  llli  (68).*^  DattStreya 
said  Depart,  O king,  may  you  fare,  well  As  related 
by  me,  aliorn  of  attachment  and  egoism,  do  you  so  exert 
as  may  bring  on  lihcratbn  {69).*’ 

Jaha  said  :■*— Being  Ihui  addressed  and  saluting  him  he 
came  speedily  where  the  king  of  Kashi  and  his  elder 
brother  SuvAhti  were  (70),  Approaching  the  large-armed 
and  the  heroic  king  of  Kaihi,  Alarka,  as  if  smiling,  said  to 
him  in  the  presence  of  Suvihti  (71),  lord  of  Kashi, 
desiring  for  kingdom,  enjoy  this  kingdom  earned  by  you  as 
you  like  or  confer  it  upon  SuvShu  {72)/’  The  king  of  Kashi 
said  Why  do  you,  O Alarka,  surrender  this  kingdom 
without  a battle ; such  is  not  the  duty  of  a Kshatriya  and  yon 


MARKANDEYA  PURANaM, 


190 

too  are  converasnt  with  their  duties  (73).  Having  brought 
under  his  subjection  the  host  of  ministers  and  cast’off  the  fear 
of  death  a king  should  take  arrows  aiming  at  his  enemy  (74), 
And  having  conquered  him  the  king  should  enjoy  all  the  most 
desired  for  objects  and  celebrate  great  sacrifices  for  accom- 
plishing his  great  object  (75).^'  Alarka  said ^‘Formerly 
such  was  my  mind,  0 hero.  But  now  it  is  quite  the  contrary. 
Hear  the  cause  (76).  As  the  body  of  a man  is  but  a collection 
of  elements,  so  all  the  inner  faculties  and  essential  ingredients 
(Gunas)  are  composed  of  elements  (77).  There  exists  only 
one  Absolute  intelligence  and  none  else;  how  can  then  be,  0 
king,  the  notion  of  an  enemy,  friend  lord  and  servant?  (78), 
Afflicted  by  pain  begotten  by  the  fear  of  you,  I have,  O king 
by  the  grace  of  Dattatreya,  attained  to  excellent  knowledge 
(79).  Having  conquered  the  number  of  senses  and  cast  off  vari- 
ous associations  I shall  concentrate  my  mind  on  Brahman, 
Obtaining  Him  a man  gets  every  thing  (80).  A man  should 
set  forth  every  exertion  for  obtaining  Him  save  whom 
nothing  exists.  By  controlling  the  senses  one  can  attain  to 
Him  (81).  I am  not  your  enemy,  nor  you  are  mine.  This 
Suvahu  is  not  my  malefactor.  I have  learnt  all  this  truly. 
So  do  you  seek  for  another  enemy  (82).^'  Having  been  thus 
addressed  the  king  SuvUhu  delightedly  rose  up  and  welcom- 
ed bis  brother  with  saying,  '^By  good  luck  it  is  so/*  He  then 
said  to  the  king  of  Kashi  (83). 


CHAPTER  LXlV. 


SuVAHU  said  : — " I have  obtained  in  its  entirety  thdt  for 
which  I sought  refuge  with  you,  O foremost  of  kings.  I shall 
go  now;  may  you  be  happy"  (r).  The  king  of  Kashi  said: — 

" For  what  did  you  come  to  me  and  what  have  you  obtained  ? 
Tell  me  this,  0 SuvAhu.  I have  been  stricken  with  great 
curiosity  (3).  Your  great  ancestral  kingdom  was  occupied  by 
Alarka.  You  urged  me  saying  " conquering  him  give  me 
my  kingdom'’  (3).  Therefore  invading  your  younger  brother’s 
kingdom  I have  brought  it  to  your  control.  So  do  you 
enjoy  it  according  to  the  custom  of  your  family”  (4). 

SuVAHU  said:— "0  king,  of  Kashi,  hear  for  what  did  I 
' make  this  attempt  and  make  you  do  it  (5).  This  my  brotlier, 
although  acquainted  with  the  real  princii)le8,  wa.s  attached 
to  ordinary  objects  of  enjoyment.  (He  thought)  "my  two 
brothers,  although  possessed  by  stupefaction,  were  gifted 
[ with  the  knowledge  of  principles"  (6).  0 king,  an  our  mother, 

i in  our  fancy,  gave  ndlk  to  us  so  ahso  did  she  impart 

: upon  us  three  the  knowledge  of  principles  (7).  O king, 

our  mother  placed,  before  our  minds,  the  knowledge  of  all 
these  objects  which  is  worthy  of  being  known  by  mankind ; 
this  is  not  all  (R).  As  the  good  feel  sorrow  at  the  ruin  of 
the  one  of  many  following  the  same  interest  so  is  the  case  with 
us,  0 king  (9).  O king,  posstt.s.sed  by  the  infatuation  of 
worldliness  he  was  ge)ing  down.  We  hive  a connection  with 
him;  in  this  body  he  is  our  brother  (loj.  Therefore  I ascer- 
tained that  from  calamity  he  would  acquire  distaste  for  the 
world  and  accordingly  I sought  refuge  with  you  for  making 
this  attempt  (ii).  C)  king,  from  this  calamity  he  has  acquired 
true  knowledge  from  which  has  sprung  distaste  for  the  world. 
My  object  it  accomplished  and  so  I depart.  May  good  betiie 


I 


103  MARKaMDEYA  PURaNAM, 

you  (12).  Living  in  MadalasH’s  womb  and  sucking  in  the  sanie 
way  her  breast,  may,  he,  0 king,  wend  the  way  which  is  not 
trodden  by  the  sons  of  other  women  (13).  Ascertaining  all 
>this  in  my  mind  and  seeking  i‘ef«ge  w'ith  you  I made  this 
attempt.  My  object  is  accomplished.  1 shall  depart  again 
to  accomplish  the  object  of  ray  Yoga  (14).  O king,  I do  not 
consider  these  men  as  having  their  senses  in  due  order  but 
rather  deranged  who  disregafd  their  friends,  kinsmen,  and 
relatives  when  they  are  assailed  by  misfortune  (15).  The 
friends,  relatives,  and  kinsmen,  in  the  face  of  whose  efficiency 
a person  is  assailed  by  the  deterioration  of  virtue,  wordlv 
pi^t  and  desire,  are  censurable ; he  is  not  (at  all)  to 
blame  (16).  By  your  company  I have  accomplished  this 
great  work,  0 king.  May  you  live  in  happiness,  be  the  foremost 
of  the  pious  and  participate  in  knowledge.  I depart  (17),” 
The  king  of  Kashi  said : — " You  have  done  a great  service  to 
tte  pious  Alarka.  But  why  do  you  not  turn  your  mind  to- 
wards doing  me  good?  ig.  The  association  of  the  pious 
with  the  pious  always  bear  fruit ; it  never  becomes  futile. 
Therefore  it  is  but  proper  that  I should  advance  in  your 
company^''  ig. 

SuvAHu  said  Virtue,  worldy  profit,  desire  and  liberation 

are  the  four-fold  objects  of  a man.  Of  them  you  have  already 
acquired  virtue,  wordly  profit  and  desire.  But  you  have  the 
want  of  the  other  (/.  e.  liberation)  (20).  I shall  therefore 
describe  them  in  brief.  Do  you  hear  with  attention.  Hearing 
them  and  discussing  them  properly,  0 king,  you  should  exert 
for  your  well-being  (21).  You  should,  O king,  never  cherish 
the  ideas  of  ‘I  and  mine'.  But  you  should  duly  think  of 
virtue  for  in  its  absence  a man  becomes  destitute  of  help  (22). 
Deliberating  yourself  you  should  know  “To  whom  do  I 
h«img?''  Deliberating  thus  at  the  end  of  night  you  should 
in  thinking  of  external  faculties  (23).  Everything 
froK.tlUs  invisible  (Barusha)  to  nature  is  without  any  meta» 
inorphoim  tad  coasdo^oess,  you  should  therefore  know  what 


MaRKANDEYA  fukanam. 


is  ^risible  and  invisible  ; also  what  else  should  be  known,  who 
should  know  and  who  am  I ?'  (24).  Knowing  this  in  particu* 
lar  you  will  know  every  thing ; to  consider  what  is  non-soul 
(body)  as  soul  and  what  is  not  own,  as  own  constitutes  igno- 
rance (25).  According  to  human  practice,  O king,  I 
am  present  everywhere.  I have  thus  described  to  you 
everything  you  asked  of  me  and  I shall  now  go  (26). 
Having  thus  spoken  to  the  king  of  Kashi,  the  intellegent 
Suvahu  went  away.  And  the  king  of  Kashi  too,  having  wor- 
shipped Alarka,  repaired  to  his  own  city  (27).  Having  installed 
his  eldest  son  as  king,  Alarka  too,  leaving  all  human  associa- 
tions, entered  into  woods  for  attaining  the  summumbonum  o£ 
his  life  (38).  After  a considerable  time,  being  above  the  in- 
fluence of  opposites,  and  separated  from  wife  and  dependants 
and  acquiring  incomparable  pro.sperity  of  Yoga  he  attained 
the  most  excellent  beatitude  (39).  Beholding  this  entire  uni- 
verse, with  the  deities,  A.suras  and  men,  bound  by  nooses  com- 
posed of  the  qualities  and  being  perpetually  fettered  by  them 

(30)  — ^by  bonds  originating  from  sons,  brothers'  sons,  one’s  own 
relatives  and  those  who  are  not  one's  own ; and  thus  appearing 
as  various,  and  attached  by  the  senses,  overcome  by  miseries  } 

(31)  seeing  it  hopelessly  sunk  in  the  mire  of  ignorance,  and 
finding  himself  beyottd  it,  the  high-minded  Alarka  sang  this 
hymn  (33)  “Alas  what  pain  ! We  ruled  this  kingdom  before, 
but  I have  come  to  know  this  afterwards  that  there  is  no 
felicity  greater  than  Yoga"  (33). 

Jada  said  : — For  liberation,  do  you  resort  to  this  most  ex- 
cellent yoga  by  which  you  will  get  the  Brahman,  obtain- 
ing whom  you  will  not  grieve  (34)  Then  I too  shall  go.  O 
what  avail  is  sacrifice  or  recitation  to  me?  The  blessed 
always  work  for  ascertaining  the  true  form  of  Brahman  (35) 
Therefore  obtaining  your  permission,  and  being  above  oppo- 
sites and  not  wanting  anything  I shall  so  exert  for  liberation 
that  I may  find  everlasting  peace  (36)” 

The  bjhds  said 0 Brahman,  saying  this  to  his  sire  and 
2S 


; I 


■I 


194  MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 

obtaining  his  permission,  the  intelligent  one,  renouncing  the 
company  of  his  followers,  went  away  (37),  His  father  too,  int 
the  same  way  gradually  acquiring  good  understacling  resorted 
to  the  fourth  stage  of  life,  namely  that  of  Vanaprashtha. 
(38)  Being  united  there  with  his  son,  casting  off  the  fetters  of 
qualities  he  attained  to  the  highest  state  of  Yoga  by  virtue 
of  the  noble  impulse  that  arose  in  him  at  that  time.  (39)  0 
Brahmana,  we  have  thus  described  to  you  in  detail  what 
you  asked  of  us.  Tell  us,  what  further  more  you  wish  to 
hear  of  us  ? (40) 


CHAPTER  XLV 


U AiMiNi  said  0 foremost  of  the  twice-born  one  yoti 
should  describe  to  me  the  two-fold  Vaidika  rites — PravnUi 
and  Ntvrith,  (Or  leading  to  the  knowledge  of  the  means  of 
success  and  the  discountinance  of  the  worldly  acts.)  What 
a wonder,  that  by  the  grace  of  your  sire  you  have  obtained 
such  a knowledge,  by  which  although  born  as  birds  you  hafe 
dispelled  ignorance  (2).  Blessed  , are  you  since  your  minds  are 
in  their  pristine  state  and  have  not  been  agitated  by  ignorance 
begotten  by  worldly  objects  (3).  Fortunately  the  revered  and 
intelligent  Markandeya  spoke  of  you,  the  dispeller  all  doubts 
and, ignorance  (4).  Whilejroving  in  this  greatly  perilous  world 
men  cannot  get  the  company  of  ascefeies  like  yuoreelves  (5)1 
If  I cannot  accomplish  my  object  in  the  company  of  such 
wise  persons  as  yourselves,  where  can  I then  meet  with 
f (6).  I do  not  think  any  one  else  has  that  clear  urn* 
derstanding  which  you  have  in  the  two-fold  actions  of  know* 

means  of  success  and  th#  disconti*-. 


|l  \ 

I ' i\ 

^ i ’'‘-.I 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


195 


nance  of  the  worldly  acts  (7).  O foremost  of  the  twice-born 
one,  if  your  mind  is  bent  upon  showing  me  favour  do  you 
describe  to  me  in  full  all  these  subjects  (8).  How  has  this  uni- 
verse,composed  of  themobile  and  the  immobile  has  originated  ? 
And  where  does  it  go  again  at  the  time  of  universal  dissolu- 
■ tion,  0 great  one.  (9).  How  from  the  various  families  origi- 
nate the  celestials,  the  Rishis,  the  Pitris  and  other  creatures  ? 
What  are  the  Manwantaras  and  the  accounts  of  the  various 
families  (10).  All  the  various  creations,  all  the  various  disso- 
lutions, all  the  various  Manwantaras  (ii).  The  position  of 
the  earth,  the  extent  of  the  earth  as  well  as  the  situations  of 
oceans,  mountains,  rivens,  and  forests  (12)  The  account  of  the 
regions  of  Bhu  and  celestials,  and  of  ITitala  and  the  move- 
' ments  of  the  even,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the  planets  and  other 
luminous  bodies;  (tj).  I wish  to  hear  of  them  all  from  the 
orgin  to  the  dessolutian.  1 wish  to  know  also  what  will  remain 
after  the  dissolution  of  this  uidverse  (14). 

The  Birds  .said: — t)  foremost  of  sages,  fearless  arc  the 
questions  you  lutve  put  to  us.  Hear,  we  shall  describe  them 
f at  length,  0 Jaimini(i5).  This  wa.s  formerly  described  by 

'!  MSrkandya  to  the  .son  of  the  twice-born  one  Kraushtu, 

'*  intelligent,  of  a ciuiescent  soul  and  who  had  just 

completed  the  period  of  his  studentship  (16).  0 lord,  this 

very  question  was  put  by  Ivraushtuki  to  the  high-souled 
MUrkandeya  when  he  sat  encircled  by  the  leading  twice-born 
ones  (17).  Hear,  O foremost  of  the  twic-born,  we  shall  re- 
count what  was  .said  by  the  son  of  the  Bhrigu  (18).  Having 
; saluted  the  lord  of  the  universe,  the  lotus-sprung  Brahm5  the 
orgin  of  the  world,  who  protects  the  creation  in  the  form  of 
! Vishnu  and  de.itroyH  it  in  the  form  of  the  dreadful  Rudra  (19) 

; Markandeya  aaid:^ — As  soon  as  the  uncreate  Brahmi 

i ‘ came  into  being  there  came  out  from  his  four  mouths 

all  these  Puranas  and  Vedas  (20).  The  superior 
sages  compiled  many  ancient  samkitas,  and  made  a 
thousand-fold  division  of  the  IWrt.v  (ii).  Righteoustusss  or 


196  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM, 

Dharma,  divine  knowledge,  renunciation,  and  power  over 
the  elements,  these  four  can  never  be  bad  except  through 
his  (Brahma’s)  instructions  (22).  The  seven  primal  Rishis 
; (sages),  the  spiritual  offsprings  of  Brahma,  recieved  the  Vedas. 

, from  him,  while  his  other  spiritual  sons  the  primal  Munis 
received  from  him  the  Puranas  (23)*  Chyabana  had  those 
Puranas  from  Bhrigu,  and  by  him  were  the  twice-born  sages 
instructed  in  them  ; by  these  high-souled  Rishis  again  were 
these  communicated  to  Daksha  (24).  By  Daksha  again  they 
were  related  to  me  in  those  days.  I shall  relate  that  to  you 
to-day  which  destroys  the  sins  peculiar  to  this  kali-yuga  or 
dark-age  (25).  Do  you,  Oh  highly  fortunate  one,  hear  all 
this  from  me  with  undivided  attention.  I shall  relate  it  to 
you  even  as  I myself  heard  it,  of  old,  from  Dakshd{2S). 
Having  saluted  Brahmd,  who  is  himself  unborn,  and  without 
decay,  but  from  whom  has  sprung  this  world,  who  is  the 
refuge  of  all  the  moving  and  immoveable  creat  ion,  the  stay 
of  the  universe,  the  most  superior  abode  (of  the  spirit),  the' 
primal  person,  from  whom  is  the  birth,  stay,  and  final 
dissolution  of  the  world,-— having  saluted  Hiranya-garvha 
the  guide  of  all  beings,  and  the  inspirer  of  intelligence, 

I shall  duly  relate  to  you  the  nature  of  the  superior  ele- 
nflents  (27 — 29).  This  creation, — from  the  unmanifested 

source  of  matter  and  mind— the  Mahai  of  the  Sdnkhya 
philosophy,  down  to  the  Bishesha  of  Kanhd,  with  all 
its  changes  and  properties,  that  which  can  only  be 
established  by  the  fivefold  forms  of  testimony,  and 
which  is  joined  with  the  five  avenues  of  the  senses, 
which  though  in  a state  of  flux  is  yet,  on  account  of 
the  presence  of  the  Purusha  in  it,  in  the  main,  beyond" 
change,— hear  all  about  it,  0 thou  highly  fortunate  one,  with 
superior  concentration  of  the  mind  (30—31).  The  unmani- 
fested  cause,  called  the  Pradhlna  by  the  Shnkyas,  which  is 
named,  by  the  Maharshis  or  great  sages,  as  Prakriti-^ 
subtle  of  nature,  composed  of  both  that  which  is,  and 


f 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  '}  1 97 

that  which  is  not  but  simply  appears  to  be,— which  is 
.everlasting, — which  is  subtle,  is  indestructible,  not  subject 
to  old  age,  which  cannot  be  measured,  which  is  unrelated, 
devoid  of  smell,  form,  and  taste,  and  is  without  sound  and 
touch : which  is  the  source  of  this  wbrld,  born  of  the  three 
qualities — Saiva,  Raja,  and  Tama ; which  is  above  loss  or 
decay  ; which  is  not  joined  to  anything  else,  vvhich  is  beyond 
comprehension, — which,  in  fact,  is  Brahman  and  existed  from 
the  beginning  : — by  him  is  all  this  endless  creation  pervaded 
after  each  Pralaya  or  elemental  dissolution.  Afterwards  from 
this  harmony  of  the  three  qualities  owing  to  the  presence 
in  them,  of  the  soul,  O Muni\  at  the  time  of  creation 
again,  through  the  movement  of  the  qualities  for  purposes 
of  creation,  does  the  essence  of  the  Pradhana  arise  and 
cover  the  unmanifested  Mahat  (32 — 36).  Even  as  the  kernel 
of  a seed  is  encased  in  its  shell,  so  his  Mahat  enveloped  by 
the  unmanifested  Pradhana.  This  Mahat  manife.sts  itself 
in  a three-fold  form  according  as  one  or  other  of  the  three 
qualities  of  Satva,  Raja,  and  Tama  predominates  over  the 
others  (37).  From  this  Mahat,  then,  arises  the  threefold 
consciousness,  named  Baikdrika,  Tatjasa  and  Tdmasa  ; 
which  is  the  source  of  all  the  elements  (38).  Even  as  the 
Mahat  is  enveloped  by  the  unmanifested  Pradhana  this 
Ahankara  or  consciousness  is  enveloped  by  the  Mahat', 
and  from  this,  through  the  changes  wrought  upon 
it  by  this  origin  of  all  elements — the  Mahat,  proceed 
the  primary  elements  of  sound  (39).  He  then  created  from 
the  primary  element  of  sound,  ether  or  Akasd,  of  which  the 
property  is  sound-;  and  Ahankara  then  enveloped  this  Akasd, 
of  which  the  measure  is  simple  sound  (40).  There  is  no 
doubt  of  it  that  from  this  is  born  the  primary  element  of 
touch  j then  arose  air,  which  is  full  of  force,  and  it  is  known 
that  touch  is  the  property  of  air.  Akasd  or  ether  of  which 
the  measure  is  sound,  enveloped  the  air  of  which  the  measure 
is  touch  (41).  Air  by  undergoing  change  sent  forth  th# 


' [i 


ixps  r MARKANDEYA  pueai^am. 

primary  element  of  sight  Air  generates  lights  and  of  this^ 
form— visibility— is  said  to  be  the  property  (42).  Air  of  which 
the  measure  is  touch,  enveloped  that  of  which  the  measure  is 
visibility,  and  light  again  undergoing  change  sent  forth  the 
primary  element  of  taste  (43).  From  that  is  born  water  of 
which  the  essential  property  is  taste,  and  the  water  of  which 
the  measure  is  taste  covered  light  of  which  the  measure  is 
form  (44).  Water  again  undergoing  change  sent  forth  the 
primary  element  of  smell ; — from  that  is  born  the  earth,  of 
which  the  principal  property  is  known  to  be  smell  (45).  In 
this  manner  by  the  respective  elemental  4 of  tlm  primary 
element,  they  are  said  to  be  measured.  'Fhere  can  be 

no  other  specification  of  them,  therefore  arc  they  called 
AMshesha  (46).  Owing  to  this  want  of  any  sj>ecification, 
these  elementals,  thus  produced  from  ignorant  con- 
sciousness, Ahankara,  are  neither  tranquil  nor  disturbed,  nor 
inert  (47).  From  the  Ahankara  that  is  moved  by  the  quality 
of  Satva  and  that  is  of  the  nature  of  tluit  quality,  and  under- 
goes evolution,  all  this  evolving  creation  is  simultaneously 
proceeded  (48).  The  five  senses  and  the  five  organs  of 
action,  these  senses  full  of  light  are  called  the  ten 
evolved  Devas,  of  these  the  mind  is  the  eleventh 
all  these  are  taken  as  the  evolved  I)evas\  (49)  The  ear,  the 
tactile  nerves,  the  eye,  the  palate,  and  the  nose,  these  obtain 
knowledge  of  sound  and  touch  &c,  therefore  are  they  said 
to  be  joined  with  intelligence  (50)  The  two  feet,  the  arms 
the  generative  organ,  the  two  hands  and  the  organ  of  speech^ 
these  are  the  five  organs  of  action ; for  by  these  are  the  func-^ 
tions  of  walking,  discharging  the  foeccs,  generation,  manu- 
facturing various  articles,  and  that  of  speech  are  performed. 
(51)  Akasi  of  which  the  measure  is  sound,  entering  into 
that  of  which  the  measure  is  touch,  the  tri^qualitative  air 
is  brought  forth  ; of  this  air  touch  is  said  to  be  the  elemental 
property*  (52)  Both  the  qualities  of  sound  and  touch  entered 
in  'the  ...same  way  ia to  the  elemental  of  visibility,  whence 


1.- 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  igg 

is  produced  the  tri-qualitative  fire.  It  has  the  three  proper- 
ties of  sound,  touch,  and  visibility  (53)  Sound,  touch,  and 
visibility  entered  into  the  elemental  of  taste,  from  that  is 
produced  water,  which  ha.s  four  properties,  and  which  is  known 
to  be  of  the  nature  of  taste.  (54)  Sound,  touch,  visibility, 
and  taste  entered  into  the  elemental  of  smell  and  this  ele- 
mental of  smfl!  being  condensed  composed  and  covered  this 
earth.  (55)  That  earth  posse.ssing  the  five  qualities  of 
sound,  touch,  visibility,  taste,  and  smell  becomes  visible  among 
the  gross  objects  ^therefore  are  these  specified  elements,— 
the  Buheshaa  arc  specified  as  tranquil,  disturbed,  and  inert.  (56) 
These  enter  into  one  another,  and  hold  up  one  another;  all 
this  crowded  world  as  far  as  the  region  of  the  sun  has  this 
earth  as  its  stay  and  basis  '57).  Owing  to  their  persistence 
the  specified  elements  are  declared  to  be  the  objects  of  the 
senses,  and  the  succeeding  elements  receive  the  qualities  of 
the  proceedings  onc.s  (58).  When  existing  unconnected 
with  one  another,  and  with  their  energies  independent  of  one 
another,  they  cannot  bringforth  any  of  the  objects  of  crea- 
tion, (59).  Entering  into  mutual  relation,  and  being  inter- 
dependant  upon  one  another,  and  thus  coming  into  a mysterious 
ttnion  with  one  another,  through  the  favour  of  the  Unmani- 
fested,  these  elementals  become  the  seat  of  the  Purusha,  or 
soul,  and  give  birth  to  the  egg  of  this  universe,  containing  all 
objects  from  the  Mahat  to  the  Bishesha  (60 — 61.)  Like  a 
buble  of  water  is  this  egg,  and  produced  from  the  elements, 
the  great  egg,  Qh  highly  intelligent  one ! sleeps  in  that  wry 
water  (/.  e.  exists  in  those  elements)  (62).  The  soul, 
whose  consciousness  is  that  of  the  Brahman  grows  in  this 
Nature’s  egg ; he  is  called  the  owner  of  the  body,  the  First, 


and  the  Purusha  (63).  He  is  the  first  master  of  the  elements,  he 
is  Brahmh,  who  existed  before  everything  else,  by  him  is  alt 
this  world  both  that  moves  and  that  moves  not,  pervaded 
(64).  The  poles  came  into  existence  after  him,  as  also  the  moun- 
tains/djr/'ayH  ; the  oceans  ate  as  it  were  the  inner  waters  pf 


t 


^00  MARKANdEYA  puh  amam. 

that  infinitely  capacious  egg  (65).  AH  this  world  with  the 
gods,  the  men,  and  the  Asuras  that  inhabit  it,  the  islands,  the 
mountains,  the  oceans,  and  all  the  multitudes  of  the  celes^ 
tial  bodies,  are  contained  in  the  egg,  while  water,  air,  fire^ 
the  sky  and  and  the  earth  cover  the  outside  of  this  egg  by  the 
ten  properties,  (the  five  subtle  and  the  live  gross  properties  of 
sound,  touch  visibility,  taste  and  smell),  severally  and  jointly 
(67).  It  is  also  covered,  along  with  Ihese^  with  Mahai,  which 
stand  as  their  measure  and  proof  j and  with  all  this,  in* 
eluding  the  Mahat  itself,  it  is  covered  by  the  unmanifested* 
Prakriii  (68).  This  egg  is  covered  by  these  seven-fold 
Prakrifis^  and  the  eight  Pmktitis  (incUidtng  the  egg  which 
is  the  eighth)  exist  entering  into  one  another  (69)*  This 
(collectively)  is  that  Prakriii  which  is  everlasting,  and  he 
is  the  Purusimf  who  inheres  in  it ; of  whom,  called  Brukmi 
I have  already  spoken  to  you.  Hear  of  him  once  more 
from  me  in  greater  details  (70).  Just  as  a man  get^ 
ting  drowned  in  water  throws  up  while  getting  out 
of  it,  both  the  things  that  are  born  in  the  %vater  and  the 
water  itself,  in  the  same  manner  is the  author  of 
the  Prakriii  (71),  The  Unrnanifested  is  designated  as  the 
Ksheira  or  tlie  field,  and  lirakmk  is  called  the  knowei 
and  owner  of  the  field.  Know  all  these  to  be  the  specifica** 
tion  of  the  properties  of  the  Kslmira  and  the  Kshitrajn^ 
(6a).  This  natural  creation,  presided  over  by  the  Ksheirajm^ 
first  came  into  being,  without  any  premeditationi  tike 
a flash  of  lightening  (73). 


CHAPTER  XLVr. 


l\.RAUSTtJKl  said : — The  revered  one  has  duly  related 
to  me  the  birth  of  the  egg, and  the  high-souled  one  has  similar- 
ly told  me  of  the  birth  of  the  soul  in  this  egg  of  Brah- 
mS  (i).  And  I desire  to  know  in  truth,  O thou  descendant  of 
the  clan  of  Bhrigu,  when,  in  course  of  time,  all  this  enter 
into  final  dissolution  ? At  the  end  of  this  period  of  dissolution, 
what  becomes  of  the  elements,  and  how  are  they  reproduced, 
or  whether  do  they  exist  at  all  (2)  ? 

Markandeya  said When  this  fleeting  universe  loses 
itself  in  Pmkriti or  Primordial  nature,  the  learned  call  this  as 
dissolution  into  the  Prakrlti  (3).  When  the  Unmanifest, 
having  withdrawn  unto  himself  the  course  of  creation,  lives 
in  himself,  then  both  Prakriti  and  Purusha  remain  in  their 
own  nature  (4).  Then  the  two  qualities  of  Tamas  and  Satvsa 
remain  in  a state  of  equilibrium,  without  increase  or  de- 
crease and  in  harmony  with  each  other  (5).  Just  as  oil 
exists  in  the  sesamum  seed,  or  butter  in  milk,  so  does 
the  third  quality  of  Rajas  exist  in  the  qualities  of  Tamas 
and  Saiwa  (6).  The  limit  of  the  life  of  BrahmS  are 
200, 000, 000, 000,0(30, 000  years  ; the  length  of  the  days  of  the 
supreme-lord  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  period  of  his  sleep* 
and  night  (7).  At  the  commencement  of  the  day,  be  the 
«n*caused  cause  of  this  fleeting  world,  the  source  of  all, 
unapproachable  by  thought,  the  supreme  spirit,  who  ti 
above  all  activities,— awakes  (8).  The  soul  of  the  world 
immediately  enters  into  Pr-akriti  and  Puruska,  and  the 
superior  lord  of  alt  quickens  them  thus  by  means  of  his 
superior  union  with  them.  {9).  Just  as  pubescence  quickens 
the  nerves  of  a young  maiden,  just  as  lightning  quickens 
the  atmosphere,  even  so  does  this  lord,  entering  iale 
26 


203 


MARKANDEYA  PUKANAM. 


Prakrati  and  Purusha,  quicken  them  (lo).  And  I have 
already  told  you  that,  when  Prakriti  is  quickened,  that 
bright  one  called  Brahnna  manifests  himself  through  living 
in  the  “egg”  (li).  He  is  at  first  the  quickener  of  the 
Prakriti ; and  having  quickened  her,  he  becomes  himself 
her  spouse  and  is  moved  himself ; and  thus  he  resides 
in  the  Prakriti^  holding  to  the  two-fokl  cliaracters  of  draw- 
ing in  and  sending  out  that  which  inheres  in  the  Prakriti. 
At  first  he  was  the  cause  of  the  quickening  of  Primordial 
Nature,  then  he,  the  lord  off  1‘rimordial  Nature,  him- 
self became  quickened  ; in  tliis  way,  through  the  dual  process 
of  dissolution  and  evolution,  it  is  he  who  exists  even  as 
Nature  or  Pradhana  (12).  Having  thus  come  into  activity 
he,  the  origin  of  this  fleeting  universe,  though  himself  heyoiid 
tive  three  qualities,  took  hold  of  the  quality  of  Rajas  as 
Brahma,  and  entered  upon  the  work  of  creation  (13).  As 
Brahma,  having  created  the  creatures  ami  coming  afterwards 
into  an  excess  of  the  quality  of  SaiUHt  in  the  form  of 
Vishnu,  he  ruled  and  sustaiiiPtl  the  worUi  as  Pharma  nr  law 
(14).  Then  owing  to  the  growth  of  the  quality  of  Tamas,  as 
Rudra,  he  withdraws  into  himself  ail  this  immense  universe, 
and  becomes  once  more  inactive.  Thus  though  he  is  reaHy 
beyond  and  without  the  three  rpialities  of  Rajas,  Raima,  and 
Tamas,  in  the  three  periods  of  creation,  preservation  and  dis- 
solution of  the  world,  be  takes  to  these  three  qualities  res- 
pectively (15).  In  as  much  as  he,  who  exists  before  creation 
as  occupying  by  his  essence  all  space,  becomes,  by  turn  in 
creation,  its  mover  and  owner,  preserver  and  tlestroyer, 
he  , is  designated  as  Brahm^,  Vishnu  and  Mahaswara  (16), 
As  Brahmi.  he  creates  the  worlds,  as  Rudra  he  dissolves 
them  ; and  as  Vishnu  he  preserves  them  ; yet  the  self-caused 
.one,  though  he  attains  these  three  states,  exists  equaUy 
indifferent  to  all  (17).  Rajas  is  Brahma,  Tamas  Rudra, 
and  Sdtwa  Vishnu ; the  lord  of  the  universe  becomes 
all  these,  through  the  preponderance  of  the  qualities ; thus 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


203 

are  the  three  gods  manifested  through  these  three  quali- 
ties. (18).  These  are  however  joined  in  pairs,  one  with  the 
other,  and  are  related  to  one  another  ; there  is  not  even  a 
moment’s  separation  among  them  ; they  never  leave  one  another 
(19).  In  this  way,  before  the  sending  forth  of  this  world,  the 
four-mouthed  Brahmc}.j  the  god  of  gods, adopting  the  quality  of 
the  RqfaSi  entered  upon  tlie  work  of  creation  (20).  He  is 
ffiranyngar^haj  the  first  of  the  gods ; and  in  a sense,  he  is 
without  begitining.  This  BrahniS,  who  resides  in  the  sheath 
of  the  lotus-seed  of  the  world,  (i.  e. — who  is  himself  the  seed 
of  all  that  is — ) wms  the  first  to  come  to  being  (21).  The  age 
of  that  high-souled  being  is  a hundred  years.  The  calculation 
of  these  years  is  made  on  the  standard  of  Brabmic  measure- 
ment; hear  this  from  me.  (22).  Viliocn  Nimes/m  (the  time 
taken  up  in  a twinkling  of  the  eye)  make  one  Kasia.  Thirty 
Kasias  make  one  A'f^Ai^—lhirty  KalL^  make  one  Jlfuhurta. 
Thirty  such  Mu/iut/as  make  one.  human  day  and  night. 
Thirty  such  days  aiul  nights  or  two  Pakshns  or  fortnights 
make  one  month.  By  .six  ol  these  months  is  one  Ayma  or 
equinox  made  ^ and  by  two  Ayams  is  made  a year-— these 
Ayanm  or  equinoxes  are  called  the  southern  and  the  northern 
Ayanax.  Tliis  year  with  two  Ayams  makes  one  day  and  night 
of  the  gods ; of  these  Ayanas  the  northern  Ayana  forms  the- 
day  of  the  gods  (23— 25).  By  twelve  thousand  years  ofThe 
gods  are  the  four  yt4fas  called  Saiya^  Treti  &c.,  (Saiya^ 
Treiif  Dwilpam^  and  Kali)  formed.  Hear  from  me  their 
divisions  (26).  Four  thous^and  years  of  the  gods  are  called 
Satya-^yngu  ; the  evening  and  twilight  of  this  Yuga  are  each  of 
■ four  hundred  yaars^  duration  (27).  Trctd  is  formed  by  three 
thousand  yean  of  the  gods,  and  its  evening  and  twilight 
' contain  three  hundred  years  each  (28).  Dwdpara  contains 
• two  thousand  years,  and  its  evening  and  twiliglit  are 
each  of  two  hundred  years  (29).  O most  excellent 
Brahmana  \ Kaii  is  one  thousand  years  of  the  gods,  and 
its -evening  and  twiligld  are  each  said  to  be  of  one  hundrtd 


204 


markandeya.  puranam. 


years’  duration  (30).  These  twelve  thousand  years  are 
called,  by  the  learned,  Yugas,  and  these  multiplied  a thousand 
fold  is  declared  to  be  a day  of  Brahma  (31).  0 Brahmana 

in  such  a day  of  Brahma  twelve  Manus  are  generated, —and 
the  period  of  each  Mmu  is  again  divided  into  a thousand 
parts  (32).  The  gods,  the  seven  Rishis  with  Indra,  Manu 
and  the  Manu’s  sons,  the  kings,  are  all  created  with  each 
Manu,  and  are,  as  before,  dissolved  again  with  him  (32).  One 
Mamaantara  takes  place  in  more  than  seventy  such  Yugas. 
Hear  from  me  an  enumeration  of  the  years  contained  in  a Man>. 
‘wantara  as  measured  by  human  years  (34).  Full  thirty  crores 
sixty  seven  millions  and  twenty  thousand  human  years 
make  one  Manwaniara.  Hear  from  me  now  the  measurement 
of  a Manwantara  according  to  the  year  of  the  gods  (35--36), 
Eight  hundred  thousand  years  of  the  gods,  with  another 
twice  fifty  thousand  years,  multiplied  by  fourteen,  are  said 
to  be  a day  of  Brahmt.  At  the  close  of  this,  it  is  said  by  the 
sages,  the  periodical  dissolution  takes  place  (.?7'38).  The 
terrestrial,  the  celestial,  and  the  etherial  worlds  are  all  liable 
to  destruction,  and  therefore  they  are  all  then  destroyed ) 
only  the  Mahalloka  or  the  fourth  world,  remains  (39).  The 
inhabitants  of  this  world  also,  are  driven  to  the  Jana- 
loka  by  the  heat  that  is  generated  at  the  time  of  the  dissolu* 
tioD.  The  three  worlds  become  one  vast  ocean,  and  on  this 
ocean,  BrahmSsleepeth  during  his  night  (40).  The  measure  of 
the  night  of  Bralim^  is  the  same  as  that  of  his  day ; at  the 
close  of  this  night,  he  again  creates  this  world.  Measuring 
by  this  a year  of  Brahma,  multiplying  it  a hundredfold 
and  again  multiplying  the  result  by  a hundred,— is  found 
Ihe  period  of  time';  called  Pa  ram.  Fifty  such  periods  of 
years  are  declared  to  be  a Par&rdka  (41—42).  At  the  close 
of  such  a ParMka,  0 most  superior  Brahmana,  occurred 
Mahhkalpa  which  is  heard  of  as  Padma  (43).  The  present  Is 
the  second  Parhrdhaf  0 thou  twice  born  one,— of  the 
called  which  is  thought  to  be  the  first  Kalfia  (44). 


CHAPTER  X L ¥ 1 I . 


^CraUSTUKI  said  : — Tell  me  in  detail  the  manner  in  which 

^ I' 

, the  lord,  the  lord  of  creation,  the  first  creator  Brahm& 

created  all  creatures  (i). 

Markandeva  said  : — I shall  relate  to  you,  O Brahmana, 

; how  the  author  of  this  universe  created  all  the  mobile  and 
immobile  objects— he,  who  is  possessed  of  the  six  qualities 
or  powers,— the  dAagas,  and  is  everlasting  (2).  At  the  close 
$ of  the  Mahhkalpa  called  Padma, — vvheti  the  world  existed  in 
* ' a state  of  dissolution,  having  awakened  from  his  nightly 

f slumber  or  inactivity,  the  lord  looked  on  the  universe 

I moved  by  the  quality  of  Sahaa  and  saw  it  a void  (3).  Here 

is  mentioned  this  verse  which  has  been  applied  to  Narayana 
—who  is  of  the  nature  of  Hralimana  and  is  the  cause  of 
the  growth  and  destruction  of  this  world  (4).  I have  heard 
it  said  that,  N&r&  is  the  name  of  water.  And  he  sleeps  on 
that  water,  therefore  he  is  called  Nirdyana, — '(he  whose  shelter 
is  water)  (5).  On  awaking  from  this  sleep,  he  inferred  that  the 
world  had  gone  down  into  that  water,  and  then  he  became 
■desirous  of  recovering  the  eartli  (6),  As  of  old,  at  the 
commencement  of  the  previous  Kalpas  he  liad  assumed  the 
bodies  of  fish  and  tortoise,  similarly  now  he  assumed  another 
body— that  of  the  boar  (7).  The  .dl-prevading  deity  of  whom 
are  made  all  the  sacrifices  of  the  Vedas,  the  author  of  all,  he 
who  has  entered  into  all,— the  lord  of  the  world — the  object 
of  meditation  of  the  sacred  souls  inhabiting  the  Janaloka 
—having  assumed  the  luminous  form  composed  of  Vedio 
sacrifices, — entered  into  the  waters,  and  recovering  the  earth 
from  the  nether  regions  posited  it  upon  the  waters  (8—9). 
On  that  collection  of  water  the  earth  stood  like  an  immense 
boat,  and  owing  to  the  extendeducss  of  its  body  it  did  qo| 


306 


MARKANDEYA  PURAKAM. 


sink  (ro).  Then  having  levelled  the  earth,  on  the  earth  he 
set  forth  mountains.  As  the  previous  creation  had  been 
burnt  by  the  heat  of  dissolution,  the  mountains  all  over  the 
world  were  found  shrivelled  up  by  that  same  heat  (n).  These 
mountains  had  been  sunk  in  the  universal  deluge,  beaten  by 
the  wind  ; and  now  they  came  up  and  became  .stationary  in 
the  very  places  where  they  had  .sunk  (12).  Having  divided 
the  universe,  adorned  with  tlie  seven  islands,  he  thought  of 
the  creation  of  the  four  worId.s  as  before  (13).  Meditating  on 
tlie  creation  of  this  universe,  as  in  the  previous  Kalpas,  the 
unipremeditated  creation,  composed  of  the  tjuality  of  Tamas, 
came  into  existence  from  it  (14).  Ttimas,  or  inertion,  Moig, 
or  ignorance,  Mahhmoha^  or  infinite  ignorance,  Tamisra  or 
darkness,  Andhaiamisra  or  blinding  darkness  and  Avidyh  or 
nondiscrimination,  these  live,  as  before,  came  into  being  from 
the  high-souled  BrahmS  (15),  Proceeding  from  him  thus  medita- 
ting, the  unconscious  creation,  botli  the  internal  and  external  of 
which  were  un-illumined,  where  the  spirit  lay  concealed,  and 
which  was  composed  purely  of  mountains,  became  .stationed  in 
five  different  quarters  (16).  Because  the  jirincipal  mountains 
came  to  light  in  thi.s  creation,  therefore  it  is  c.alled  the  main 
creation.  Having  seen  this  creation  fniitless,  he  meditated 
again  on  a fresh  creation  (17).  From  him  thus  meditating 
another  creation,  that  of  oblique  currents,  came  forth. 
Because  from  this  have  originated  all  indirect  and  oblique 
movements  therefore  it  in  called  an  oblirpie  current  (18), 
The  lower  animals  arc  known  to  belong  to  this  creation  ,* 
they  are  almost  inert,  without  reason,  folhnvcirs  of  evil  ways, 
and  though  devoid  of  wisdom  yet  have  the  conceit  of  it 
(*•9)'  They  are  proud  and  self-conceited,  ami  arc  of  tvventy- 
eight  kinds  or  classes  ; they  have  a little  light  within  them- 
selves, but  are  covered  from  one  another  (20).  Finding  this 
txeation  also  as  useless,  he  meditated  ; and  from  that  medita* 
tioa  another  creation  came  forth.  It  is  tlie  creation  of  an 
upward  current,  the  third  creation,  of  the  quality  of  Safwtf,  aad 


MaRKANDEYA  puranaim. 


207 


it  moves  upwards  (21).  The  creatures  born  of  this  upward 
current  arc  full  of  love  and  happiness  ; their  inner  and  outer 
natures  are  both  uncovered  and  illumined  (22).  This  third 
creation  which  gave  satisfaction  to  his  soul,  he  named  as  the 
bright  creation.  Then,  on  the  accomplishment  of  this 
creation,  BrahmS  became  pleased  (23).  After  this  he,  at  that 
time,  began  to  meditate  for  the  creation  of  another  creation 
that  should  be  useful  and  good.  From  him,  the  Unimanifest 
one,  thus  meditating,  whose  meditation  is  ever  true,  came 
forth  the  creation  of  a lower  current  fitted  to  serve 
his  purpose.  The.se  crcature.s.  though  largely  enligh- 
tened, are  yet  moved  by  Tamas  or  ignorance,  and  have  an 
excess  of  the  quality  of  Rajas  ; therefore  they  are  largely 
subject  to  pain,  and  are  repeatedly  born  ; both  their  inner  and 
outer  natures  are  illumined  ; they  are  men,  fitted  to  serve  the 
purpose  of  Brahmfi  (2.}, — 27).  The  fifth  is  the  creation  of 
favour,  it  is  po-sited  in  four  classes, by  division  into  Biparyaya, 
Stddha,  Shtlnta  and  Tushla  (2S).  'rhe  creatures  of  this  crea- 
tion know  both  the  pa.Ht  and  the  prtisent  object  of  all  the  crea- 
tures commencing  with  the  elements.  This  is  called  the  sixth 
creation  (39).  The  creatures  of  this  creation  are  all  the 
recipients  of  sacrifices,  and  are  also  engaged  in  dividing 
these  j they  are  the  inspirer  of  all,  they  are  known  as  the 
origin  of  elements  (30).  Of  these  creations  of  BrahmSl,  the 
first  is  to  be  known  as  that  of  Mahat  or  Primordial  Nature ; 
the  second  is  the  creation  of  the  measures  of  Primordial 
elements — it  is  called  the  elemental  creation  (31).  The  third 
is  the  creation  of  degeneration  and  is  called  the  sensual 
creation  ; this  is  the  natural  creation  made  through  premedi- 
tation (33).  The  main-creation  is  the  fourth;  the  main  cresv- 
tures  here  are  the  mountains  ; that  which  I have  stated  as  the 
oblique  current,  that  Is  the  fifth  creation,inhabited  by  birds  and 
insects.  (33).  The  next,  higher  current,  is  the  sixth,  it  is  called 
the  creation  of  the  bright  ones  ; the  next  is  the  seventh,  and  is 
composed  of  human  beings.  (34).  The  eighth  creation  is  that 


2o8 


MaRKANDEYA  puranam 


called  Anugraha,  it  is  composed  of  both  the  (lualities  of 
Satwa  and  Tamas.  Of  these,  five  are  creations  of  de- 
generation and  three  are  natural  creations.  (35'-  Besides  these 
natural  and  degenerate  creations,  the  ninth  creation  is 
called  Kaumara.  These  are  the  nine  creations  of  the  lord 
of  creatures,  described  here  by  me  (35 — 36}. 


CHAPTER  XLVIII. 

KlRaustuki  said : — The  process  of  creation  in  due  form 
has,  been  briefly  described  to  me  by  the  reverend  one.  But 
,0  Brahmana,  do  thou  tell  me  in  detail  of  the  birth  of  the 
gods  and  others  (i). 

Markandeya  said: — 0 Brahmana!  at  that  time,  from 
Brahma,  engaged  in  the  work  of  creation,  proceeded,  from  his 
mind,  the  four  kinds  of  creatures  commencing  with  the  gods 
ending  with  the  inanimate  objects,  moulded  by  their  previous 
actions  both  good  and  not  good,  who  nolbeing  liberate  are 
by  him  drawn  back  at  the  time  of  the  final  dissolution  (2— -s). 
Being  desirous  of  creating  the  four  classes  of  beings  namely^ 
the  JDevas,  the  Asuras,  the  Pitris  and  the  men,  he  put  himself 
in  relation  with  that  water  (4).  When  he  joined  himself 
with  that  water,  the  quality  of  Tamas  arose  in  the  lord  of 
creatures ; he  then  first  of  all  produced  the  Asuras  from  his 
■thigh  (5).  He  then  gave  up  that  bo:dy  of  his  which  was 
composed  only  of  the  quality  of  Tamas.  From  that  bo<ly  thus 
tbnown  away  by  him  was  night  immediately  produced  (6), 
a second  body  being  desirous  of  creation,  and  found 
, ;Frojm  the  .mouth, of  that  body,  moved  by  the 
quilittof-51«fWK%e  i?«wy  forth  (y).  This  lord,  the 

4 - - ■ 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


209 


master  of  creatures,  threw  away  that  body  also,  and  from 
that  thus  thrown  away  was  produced  day,  which  is  almost 
full  of  the  quality  of  Satwa,  the  property  of  which  is  light. 
(J5).  Then  he  took  another  body  which  was  composed  only  of 
the  quality  of  Satwa,  and  from  this  were  produced  the  Piiris, 
the  manes  (9).  Having  created  the  Ptiris,  he,  the  lord,  threw 
away  that  body  also.  That  body  thus  thrown  away,  became 
the  twilight,  existing  between  the  intervals  of  day  and 
night  (10).  He,  the  lord,  then  took  another  body  composed 
only  of  the  quality  of  JRajas ; from  that  were  produced  human 
beings,  born  of  the  quality  of  Rajas  (i  t).  Having  created 
the  human  beings,  be,  the  lord,  threw  away  that  body  j from 
that  was  produced  the  light  of  the  moon,  that  which  exists 
in  the  night,  but  with  its  face  towards  the  day  (r2).  These 
then  are  the  bodies  of  that  god  of  the  gods,  the  intelligent 
one,  called,  O thou  twice-born  one,  night  and  day,  and 
; twilight  and  moonliglit  (13).  Moonlight  and  twilight, 

’ as  also  the  day  arc  called  the  three  bodies  composed  only 
of  the  quality  of  Satwa,  while  the  night  is  competed  only 
of  the  quality  of  Tamas  ; she  is  therefore  of  three  parts  (14). 
For  this  reason  are  the  gods  most  powerful  during  the  day 
and  the  Asuras  during  the  night  ;-*4:hc  human  beings  are 
strongest  when  the  moonlight  appears,  and  similarly  the 
PiMs  are  strongest  during  twilight  (15).  They  become 
undoubtedly  strong  and  invincible  to  their  opponents  during 
these  periods } and  during  the  opposite  periods,  they  become 
different  (16}.  Moonlight,  night,  day,  and  twilight — these  four 
are  the  bodies  of  the  lord,  ^rakmh,  composed  of  the  three 
■qualities  of  Satwa,  Rajas  and  Tamas  (17).  Thus  the 
lord  of  creatures  having  produced  these  four  bodies,  being 
overtaken  by  hunger  and  thirst,  took,  at  night,  another 
body,  composed  of  the  two  qualities  of  Rajas  and  Tamas 
(18).  In  that  darkness  the  lord  who  is  himself  uncaused, 
having  created  ugly  beings,  haggard  through  hunger,  and 
with  overgrown  beards,  they  began  to  eat  that  body 


. 

'1 


jra  makkandeva  i’urakasu 

Aniong  these,  others  who  said,  ' we  shall  keep  it,’*  were  the 
; and  those  who,  O thou  twiceboru  one,  said  "w* 
shall  eat'  it,”  on  account  of  their  attempt  to  eat  became 
Yakshas  (20).*  Seeing  them,  the  hair  of  this  Brahml 
became  separated  from  his  head  through  displeasure.  Tlicf, 
thus  detached  from  tlte  head  of  the  BrahinS,  became  moving 
and  living  objects.  On  account  or  this  movement,  they 
'became  reptiles,  and  from  leanness,  snakes  are  they  called 
(3i).t  Then  seeing  the  reptiles,  the  enraged  Brahu»5,  through 
anger,  made  carnivorous  creatures  of  irritable  nature, by  invesb 
ing  them  witli  brown  colour  (22).  Then  came  forth  from  hint 
meditating  on  words  (sounds),  the  ; and  as  they 

were  produced  by  him  while  meditating  on  words  sounds 
(lit, — drinking  words)  therefore  are  they  called  Gandharvat, 
That  lord,  on  these  eight  classes  of  bright  beings  having 
been  produced,  then  from  his  own  body  produced  others, 
birds  and  beasts.  From  his  mouth  he  sent  forth  the  goats  t 
from  his  breasts  he  created  sheep ; from  the  abdomen  and  from 
his  two  sides,  the  Brahma  produced  the  bovine  .species ; from 
the  two  feet  were  born  horsf.H  with  elephants,  as.ses,  hare% 
deer,  camels,  colts,  and  other  aiiiimtls  of  v.nrious  fonns 
(24 — 26).  From  the  hair  of  his  body,  hr  [h  wdiic<‘<l  herhs  hearing 
fruits  and  having  roots  (27).  In  this  way,  tltc  lord  having 
created  the  herbs  and  the  beasla  and  others  (?*<•.,  birdi, 
reptiles  &c.}  performed  sactilices,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
Kalpa,\n  the  face  of  the  second  or  the  I'reti-Yuga  {2%}, 
Cows,  goats,  buffaloes,  sheep,  hor«e.s  and  cali.s,  and  the  asses, 
these  are  called  domestic  beasts  or  animals.  Hear  from  ire 
of  those  that  are  wild  and  live  in  the  jungles  (3^).  Thf 

* N. — R.  30  There  i*  a rskrenen  in  this  *ta«*a  to  thn  two  naitt  fioitt 
which  the  two  word*  Rnktham  and  lAiljAa  am  formed— hw 
keen  derived  from  the  root  Rak$ka~iii  keep;  Yaksthan  from  the  root  Yttkduh" 
to  hat. 

f Here  again,  there  i«  a reference  to  the  root*  oi  the  two  mfitA*  Sarp»  ixA 
'«*4f  meaning  both  snakes.  TWt  connection  being  with  Sarpa  smd  Ahw. 


MXRKANDEYA  PUHANAM. 


2i!  ■ 

ffturderous  animals  with  two  hoops,  the  elephant,  the 
monkeys,  and  fifthly,  the  birds;  the  sixth  class  are  the  animals 
that  live  in  water,  and  the  seventh  the  reptiles  (30).  The 
Gayatn^iht  7'krich,  the  Triblth^  the  Sama^  the  Rathantara  \ 
Agnistoma  also,  these  sacrifices  he  made  from  his  first 
mouth  (31)*  From  his  southern  mouth,  he  created  the  Yagus, 
the  versification  called  Trishtiib^  and  likewise  the  fifteen 
Stoma,  the  large  Saman  and  Uktha — a portion  of  the  Saman 
Veda  (32).  'riie  Samans,  the  versification  called  Jagati 
and  likewise  the  fifteen  Stobham  or  verses  in  praise  of  God, 
the  Bairnpa,  the  Atirairam  he  made  from  the  western  mouth 
{33).  The  twenty-one  BrAhmanas,  the  infallible  Aryamanas, 
Anustabk  with  the  Bairaja,  be  created  from  his  northern 
mouth  (34).  the  thunderbolt,  as  also  the  clouds, 

* the  straight  rainbow  and  the  curbed  rainbow,  and  also  the 
birds,  the  reveretl  lord  created  these  at  the  commencement 
of  the  Hie  gotnl  and  the  evil  creatures,  are 

produced  ftoin  his  litnfis;  having  first  created  the  four  classes 
of  creatures,  tlie  gotls,  the  Asuras,  the  PUris  and  men,  he 
then  created  the  immoveable  and  the  moveable  objects* 
Yakshas,  Piskac/nts  (goblins)  Gmidharvus^  and  similarly  the 
classes  of  Apsaras  (3^—37)  men,  Kinnaras^  Rakshasas^  birds, 
■.beasts,  reptiles  all  these  that  are  stationary,,  and  that  move, 
that  are  perishable  and  that  perish  not,  the  works  that  they 
performed  in  the  previous  creation,  being  created  again  and 
again,  they  perform  those  very  functions  (38 — 39).  The 
murderous  and  the  not-murdcrous,  as  also  the  mild  and  the 
cruel  instincts,  as  well  as  righteousness  and  unrighteousness^ 
truth  and  untruth,  all  these  enter  into  the  creatures  as  they 
are  meditated  upon,  and  liked  by  them  (40).  The  director  of 
all/even  the  lord  himself,  did  join  their  senses  to  their  diflFer- 
eni  objects,  in  the  bodies  of  the  creatures  (41).  He  made 
.from  the  original  Vedic-smmds,  the  designations,  the  forms, 

. 'and  the  multitudinous  .functions  of  the  gods  and  other 
/creatures  (42)*  In  this  way  he  named  the  Rishiti  and  Uiosf* 


K-Kaustuki  said: — 0 Brahman,  that  Ar^aJk  cartwrt 
of  creation  whence  human  beings  sprang,  which  has  beea 
related  by  the  revered  one,  kindly  tell  me  in  detail  how 
Brahm&  created  it.  O thou  of  noble  aspirations  ! tell  me 
all  as  to  how  the  castes  and  the  qualities  and  the  resper^ive 
ordained  duties  and  functions  of  Brahmanas  and  others,  were 
created  (1—2). 

Markandeya  said : — 0 Muni  \ from  the  mouth  of  Brsdaa 
meditating  on  truth  and  entering  upon  the  futictioM  of 
creation,  were  produced  a thousand  pairs  (3).  They,  thwi 
born,  were  ail  moved  by  the  quality  of  Satvia,  and  were  Jt^ed 
to  the  right  understanding.  Another  thousand  pairs  hi 
created  from  his  breast  (4).  They  alt  were  moved  hy  d>e 
quality  of  Rajas,  and  were  full  of  strength  and  inviadhli. 
Another  thousand  pairs  he  created  again  from  his  thigh 
They  were  moved  by  the  two  qualities  of  Rajas  and  Taam 
and  were  full  of  energy  and  enterprise.  From  his  two  fed 
he  created  another  thousand  pairs  (6).  They  were  ait  moved 
by  the  quality  of  Tamas,  and  were  without  beauty,  mI  oI 
little  understanding.  Then  these  beings,  thus  priwdm’ed  |i 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


that  are  created  among  the  gods,  as  also  those  that  com© 
to  being  at  the  close  of  the  night  (43).  Just  as  at  the  time  of 
the  various  seasons  the  different  signs  of  that  seasons  app^,, 
similarly  do  the  signs  of  creation  appear  at  the  commencement 
of  each  cyc^e  (44).  At  the  close  of  the  night,  on  the 
awakening  of  BrahmS,  of  unmanifested  origin,  at  each  /Cai^a, 
are  the  creations  produced  in  this  wise  (45). 


RfARKANDEYA  ]^RANAM  313 

pairs,  were  moved  by  delight,  and  being  desirous  of  one, 
another  commenced  to  come  together.  Since  then,  in  this. 
Kalpa,  creatures  are  born  in  pairs  (7 — 8).  In  those  days  the 
females  did  not  keep  time  every  month,  therefore  though 
the  pairs  came  together,  they  never  pro-created  (9).  Only 
once,  at  the  close  of  their  life  they  would  give  birth  to  pairs. 
Since  then  in  this  Kalpa  creatures  are  born  in  pairs  (lo). 
Only  once,  through  meditation,  were  creatures  brought  into 
being  by  the  mind,  and  the  pairs  were  pure  and  invested 
with  the  five  functions,  of  which  the  objects  were  sounds,  &c.,, 
(li).  This  then  is  the  mental  creation  of  the  lord  of 
creatures,  as  it  took  place  in  the  beginning,  subsequent  to 
that  were  produced  those  creatures  by  whom  this  world  is 
filled  (ra).  The  creatures  could  then  use  and  enjoy  the 
rivers,  the  oceans,  the  lakes  and  the  mountains  at  their 
pleasure,  and  in  that  cycle  both  heat  and  cold  were  moderate, 
therefore  the  creatures  could  move  about  everywhere  (13). 
O thou  of  high  aspiration.s ! having  found  natural  gratifica- 
tion in  the  objects,  they  bad  no  obstacles  in  their  way,  and 
no  envy,  and  no  anger  (14).  They  were  entirely  without  any 
habitation,  they  used  to  live  in  mountains  or  in  the  oceans, 
they  moved  about  without  any  desire,  and  their  minds 
were  constantly  full  of  delight  (rs).  Pisbachas,  serpents, 
H&kshasas,  as  well  as  envious  beings,  beasts,  birds,  alligators, 
<(|6)  fishes,  reptiles  all,  whether  born  of  mothers  or  from 
■eggs,  were  produced  by  unrighteousness.  In  those  days 
there  were  neither  roots  nor  fruits  nor  flowers  of  herbs  and 
trees,  nor  were  there  the  seasons  nor  the  years.  (17).  All 
times  were  pleasant,  and  there  was  neither  excessive  heat 
nor  excessive  cold  ; in  du<'  time  (lieir  wishes  would  attain 
wonderful  fulfilm-'-nt  (jH)  ! -h  .r^ain  whether  in  the 
forenoon,  or  at  noon,  vMieucver  they  felt  any  Want,  it 
would  be  satisfied  without  any  effort,  even  as  they 
asked.  (19.)  And  similarly,  whenever  they  wished,  they 
could  put  forth  their  intellectual  effortb.  Then  agai% 


I i 


MARKaNDEVA  PURaNAW 


owing  to  the  subtle  powers  of  the  waters  in  those  days, 
the  attainment  of  their  various  wishes  full  of  delight  would, 
be  secured,  such  as  would  fulfil  all  their  desires.  Those 
■creatures  had  no  need  of  sacraments  for  the  purification  of 
their  bodies,  and  their  youth  was  permanent  (20 — 2i.)  Without 
any  determination  they  would  beget  creatures  in  pairs  ; who 
were  like  them  in  the  process  of  their  birth,  in  their  form  and 
beauty,  and  they  would  also  die  like  them  (22).  They  were 
without  any  conflicts  of  desires,  and  without  envy  or  ill-will 
and  in  this  way  they  would  live,  with  one  another  ; the  term 
of  their  life  was  the  \same,  and  they  w'cre  all  without  any 
distinction  c|f  superior,  or  inferior  among  them  (23).  They 
would  live  for  four  thousand  years,  measured  by  human 
measurement,  and  were  without  any  misery,  and  did  not  come 
by  any  harmful  accident  (24).  Now  and  then  they  would 
come  into  being  a second  time,  always  owing  to  the  good 
fortune  of  this  earth,  just  as  in  course  of  time  human  beings 
are  reborn  (25).  Similarly,  they,  whose  objects  were  at- 
tained always,  would  gradually  die ; and  on  all  of  them 
being  destroyed,  men  would  drop  down  from  tlie  sky  (26), 
Generally  they  would  appear  with  the  heavenly  tree  that 
satisfied  all  wishes,  called  the  house-hold  AW/>«.lree  and  from 
them  they  would  gain  the  satisfaction  of  all  their  desires  (27). 
in  those  days,  at  the  commencement  of  the  Tretd-Yttga,  they 
lived  holding  on  to  these  heavenly  trees,  Afterwards  in 
course  of  time,  of  a sudden,  attachment  grew  upon  them  (28). 
This  cau.sed  the  repeatition  of  the  monthly  courses,  which  led 
to  repeated  child-bearing.  Then  owing  to  the  birth  of 
attachment  in  them,  those  trees,  called  the  household  trees, 
O Brahinana,  next  began  to  throw  out  other  branches,  and 
dso  produce  garments  and  ornaments  and  fruits;— in  those 
fruits  of  tliose  trees  was  produced  honey  in  ijuantittes 
measured  by  (a  sort  of  cup)  and  which  was  full  of 

sweet  smell  and  flavour  and  of  beautiful  colour,  which  was 
highly  strengthening  and  which  was  nut  produced  by  bees.  ► 


WARKANDEYA  EURANAM 


21 S 

(29 — 31)-^  At  the  commencement  of  the  Treta-Yuga,  they 
lived  on  ' this  honey.  Then,  in  course  of  time  they  were 
overtaken  by  greed  (32').  And  on  their  lieart  being  overcome 
by  the  sense  of  ownership  of  these  trees,  they  took  possession 
of  them,  and  on  account  of  the  wrong  thus  committed  by 
them,  those  trees  were  destroyed  (33).  Then  came  conflicts, 
between  cold  and  heat  &c.,  and  to  overcome  those  conflicts 
they,  for  the  first  lime,  built  houses  (34).  In  deserts,  passes, 
mountains,  and  caves,  {another  reading — rivers)  they  took 
shelter,  also  in  fortresses  built  in  trees,  mountains, and  on  water. 
Similarly  they  made  artificial  fortresses  having  measured  (the 
ground)  by  the  measure  of  their  own  fingers  j for  which  pur- 
pose they  had  previously  made  standards  of  measuremeivt 
(34 — 36).  Of  those  measurements,  the  first  is  the  most  subtle 
atom,  then  the  Trasarenu,  which  is  equal  to  six  atoms,  next  the 
Makiraja,ntyA  the  end  of  an  hair,ihen  the  MirMa,then  thaytiha 
then  tht  ya6jdar,o(  these,  eleven  make  one  anguii  ot 

finger,  sixteen  angulis  make  one  pada  or  foot,  and  two  padas 
make  om  bilast i;  similarly  two  bitastis  make  one  cubit; 
which  is  the  measure  of  the  circumference  of  a Brahmya 
iirtha ; four  cubits  make  one  bow-rod, — and  also  one 
nadikayaga.  Two  thousand  bow-rods  make  one  Gahyutif 
and  four  times  this  is  called  by  the  wise  a which  is 
the  highest  of  allj  (lineal  or  spatial)  measures  (36 — 40).  Of 
the  four  kinds  of  fort,  three  are  self-made,  the  fourth  is 
artificial,  and  they  (men)  always  build  it  (41).  0 thou 
twice-born  one,  house,  village,  Khetaka,  and  like  them, 
Drontmookha^  and  suburb,  and  Karbataka  or  small 
towns, — ^these  three  ; — and  villages  without  wall,  and 
Satighosha,  with  dwelling  houses  built  separately  in  them, 
with  high  walls  and  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  ditches — 
these  they  built  themselves  (42 — ^43).  One-half  of  a Yojana 
is  called  a bishkambha  ; and  one  eighti)  of  a bishkamba 
is  the  measurement  of  a pura-  These  puras  were  extended 
'.towitrds  either  the  cast  or  the  north  and  were  spacious,  eht 


MARKaNDEYA  PU'^ANAW 


;jzi6 

'Central  beam  supporting  them  was  pure  and  went  beyond  tt 
(44).  By  one-half  of  this  (Pura)  was  made  similarly  a 
•Kheiaka  and  by  one-fourth  of  a Kheiaku  was  Karbatake 
made;  and  that  which  was  less  than  a Karbata  by  one- 
eighth,  was  called  a Dronimookha  (44).  The  pura  that  was 
devoid  of  wall  and  ditch  used  to  be  called  a barma ; and 
another  place  the  resort  of  the  ministers  and  the  courtiers  fot 
purposes  of  pleasure,  was  called  a Sukhanap^ar  or  suburb 
^46).  Similarly  the  plac  ’’'rh  w 'S  ii'luibiltd  mostly  by 

and  of  which  the  wtalh  n/nsistf-d  in  the  capacity  of  < 
the  agriculturists,  which  was  situate  in  the  midst  of  cultivated  ; 
6elds,  was  called  a village  or  Srama  (47).  When  people  | 
come  from  another  place  and  live  in  a place,  for  purposes  of  I 

transacting  any  business  in  the  city,  that  is  known  by  meo  \ 

as  a residential  quarter  (48).  The  village  which  i»  ; 

mostly  inhabited  by  bad  men,  who  are  powerful,  and  not 
owning  any  fields  themselves,  live  upon  the  fields  of  other 
people,  this  village,  the  place  of  resort  of  the  favourites  d|  | 
:the  king,  is  called  an  Akrimi.  (49).  Having  thus  made  town# 

■&c  for  their  own  residence,  they  made  houses  for  the  haW*  ' 
-tation  of  the  pairs  {54).  Those  crdatures,  remembering  th# 
house-like  trees  that  they  inhabited  of  old,  made  all  tb^ 
present  habitations  after  the  same  model  (53).  Jfust  as  tht 
the  tree  sends  forth  its  branches,  the  new  bouses  also  shni> 
darly  sent  out  its  branches,  one  standing  below  the  other,  and  • 
■they  similarly  made  coverings  for  the  house  like  the  barks  of 
.trees  (53).  Those  that  of  old,  O thou  most  exalted  of  tto 
itwice-born,  were  the  branches  of  the  Kalpa  tree,  now  tlwy  ? 
became  the  branches  of  the  houses,  and  for  that  reason,  thef  ] 
.were  invested  with  the  qualifications  of  dwellings  {54}.  Ha*» 

4og  thus  adopted  means  to  overcome  the  conflicts  betww  ; / 
|j*at  and  cold,  they  began  to  meditate  upon  the  means  ofp«»» 
iWing  their  cattle  and  crops,  because  of  the  entire  dMtroo* 
t^j  of  ^e  Kalpa  trees  with  all  the  honey  they  produced  (55)»  f , 
.Tpie  creatures  became  lown  cast  mod  distracted  through  bei^ 

i 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


217 


presssfid  by  hunger  and  thirst.  Then  at  the  commencement  of 
the  Trsta  Yuga  in  those  days,  they  attained  to  miraculous 
powers  in  agriculture  (59).  The  cattle  and  the  crops  were 
obtained  by  them,  and  for  them  the  rains  came  down  at  their 
will;  and  on  earth  those  rain-waters  began  to  flow  downwards 
(57).  With  the  obstruction  of  this  down-flowing  rain-water 
rivers,  and  canals  were  made.  The  rain-water  that  had 
previously  found  the  level  of  the  earth,  afterwards  coming  in 
contact  with  the  earth,  became  faultless.  Then  fourteen 
kinds  of  trees  and  herbs  that  had  not  been  cultivated  by 
the  plough,  that  had  not  been  sown,  and  that  put  forth  flowers 
and  fruits  at  all  .seasons  were  created.  At  the  commence- 
ment of  the  Treia  Fzrfl'a  .season-flowers  and  herbs  also  came 
into  existence,  and  on  those  herbs,  O Muni!  did  the 
creatures  live  in  the  Trcta  Yuga.  All  of  a sudden  the 
creatures  being  moved  by  attachment  and  greed,  in  those 
days,  began  to  appropriate  to  themselves  rivers  and  fields, 
and  mountains,  and  tree.s  and  herbs,  according  to  each 
person’s  might  (58 — 62).  On  account  of  that  wrong,  O 
thou  twice-born  one  [ the  vegetables  were  destroyed.  O 
thou  high-minded  one,  at  that  time  those  herbs  were,  all  of  a 
sudden,  eaten  up  (by  the  earth)  (63).  At  the  destruction 
of  those  herbs  and  vegetables  those  bewildered  beings, 
driven  by  hunger  sought  the  protection  of  BrahmS,  of  most 
superior  will  (64).  By  virtue  of  his  spiritual  in.sight,  he  too, 
having  then  known  of  the  eating  up  of  the  herbs  by  the  earth 
'I  the  lord,  the  possessor  of  all  the  powers  and  riches,_.milched 
I the  earth  having  made  a calf  of  the  northern  pole  (65),  By 

j Mm  was  this  cow  thus  milched  of  seed-grains  ; those  seeds, 

I being  of  two  kinds,  those  that  grew  near  human  habitations 
I (cultured)  and  those  that  grew  in  the  jungles  (wild),  were 

I created  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  (66).  These  herbs  are 

'{  ^troyed  on  the  ripening  of  their  fruits  and  are  said  to  be 
of  seventeen  kinds,  namely  paddy  wheat,  kanu,  \\a\v\yg 

fnyungn,  uSira,  koradosha,  chimka,  nishpabaj  kuktfmidg' 

aS 


21 


MARKANDEYA  ruranam. 


I 

t 


adaka,  mash,  moong,  viasoor,  chatiakd,  these  are  the 
seventeen  herbs,  these  were,  in  the  olden  times,  grown  near 
hnman  habitation  (67—69).  The  herbs  used  in  sacrifices 
and  that  grow  in  villages  and  jungles  are  fourteen  in  number 


paddy,  yaha,  wheat,  ami,  jinjily,  and  priyangu,  these  are 
seven,  while  the. eighth  is  Kululftivakd,  shaimka,  and  nibara, 
ye^ttfa,  sagabedhuka,  kurubinda,  ^markataka,  benu,  and 
gradha,  these  are  said  to  be  tfie  fourteen  herbs  that 
grow  both  near  habitations  ami  in  the  jungles 
When,  though  thus  fully  brought  forth,  the  herbs  did  tu;^ 
again  germinate,  then  he,  the  Bi.ihnia,  created  means 
for  their  growth  and  sub.sistence  (73).  The  self-created 
lord  Brahma  created  the  skill  of  hand  born  of  work,  (with 
reference  to  the  art  of  agriculture).  Since  tlien  the  herbs, 
began,  to  grow,  and  became  dilTicult  of  decomposition  (74), 
In  this  way  after  the  establishment  of  the  tneans  of  subsistence 
for  them,  the  lord, bimself,  establisdied  honour  and  precedence 
apiong  them  according  to  their  respective  rights  and  qualifi- 
cations (75).  The  chief  of  th,c  upholders  of  righteousness, 
thus  created  the  castes  and  the  orders,  engaged  in  the  due 
performance  of  their  duties  and  the  attaiiuncrit  of  their  par* 
poses,  as  also  the  law  of  duty  for  people  of  all  castes  (7$), 
The.  honor  of  the  Brahmanas  devoted  to  sacrificial  works  is. 
tf  be  of  the  station  of  the  lord  of  creatures.  Of  the  Kshatriya? 
who  dp  not  run  away  from  the  field  of  battle,  the  honoui;> 
is  that  of  /»dra  the  cfiief  of  the  gods.  The  place  of  the. 
J^atshyas  Imng  by  the  performance  of  their  own  duties  is  1 
oi.  Marutha  and  the  station  of  the  Gandharba  is  assigned, 
tp  the  Sudra,  following  the  law  of  service  (78),  The  place i 
of  the  disciple  who  lives  with  his  master  is  that  where  cigbQr* 
eight  tlhousand  Rishis,  the  conquerors  of  lust,  live  (79).  The. 
^adoii  which  is  said  to  belong  to  the  seven  Primal  Rishiii 
is  that  of  the  hermits  who  live  in  jungles.  The  station  of, 
the.  Idpiv  of.. creature  is,  the  meed  of  the  householders;  of- 
tfiose.  wha,h|Ye.  reliaquiihed  . everything  for  God,  the  plaec 


I 

k 


markandeya  puranam. 


and  honour  is  that  of  the  Brahman  himself,  while  the  place  of 
the  yogi's,  is  immortal  life.  These  are  the  statements  of  the 
positions  of  honour  among  men. 


CHAPTER  L. 


m markandeya  said  : — Afterwards  from  him  thus  medi- 
tating came  forth  objects  born  of  his  mind,  with  all  the 
functions  and  senses  produced  from  his  body  (i).  From  the 
limbs  of  him— the  intelligent  one,  came  out  created  souls ; 
they,  that  i.<!,  who  have  already  been  described  by  me  (2). 
All  creatures  beginning  with  the  gods  and  ending  with  the 
inanimate  objects,  are  said  to  be  composed  of  the  thtee 
qiiklities  of  Saiwa,  Rajas,  and  Tamas.  Like  these  are  ail 
creatures  both  animate  and  inanimate  (3).  When  ill  these 
ertatures  of  this  BrahmS. — the  intelligent  one,  did  not  in- 
crease, he  then  created  others,  sons  born  of  bis  mind,  and 
like  his  own-self  (4).  Namely Bhrigu,  Pulasthya,  Pulaha, 
Kratd,  Angira,  Maruchi,  Daksha,  Atri,  and  Bashishta,  all 
bnrrt  of  his  mind  (5).  These  nine  have  been  ascertained  by 
the  PUraH  to  be  the  sons  of  Brahmil.  Afterwards  BrahmS 
again  created  Rudra,  born  of  his  angry  self ; as  also  Sankatpa 
and  Dkarma,  which  last  was  born  before  even  the  firs-t 
born  (6— *7).  Sananda  and  other  who  hkd  been  of  old 
created  by  the  self-created  one,  they  being  absorbed  in  medi- 
tation and  listless  to  everything,  did  not  attach  themselves 
to  this  wforld.  They  were  all  possessed  of  tfic  knowledge  of 
that  which  is  yet  to  come,  and  were  devoid'of  attachment,  and 
free  from  envy  (8 — 9).  On ’:tliein,  indifferent  fo  the  Orcatioa 


320 


markandeya  puranam. 


of  progeny,  came  down  the  anger  of  the  high-souled  Braht^. 

Of  this  came  forth  a person  of  huge  size  whose  body  was 
half-man  and  half-woman,  " Divide  thyself  into  two’’— 
having  said  this,  he  disappeared  from  that  place  (lo).  He, 
being  thus  addressed,  differentiated  his  female  nature  from 
the  male,  and  divided  the  male  portion  into  eleven  parts. 

The  beautiful  and  the  not-beautiful,  the  peaceful  and  the 
not-peaceful,  in  this  ‘way,  he,  the  lord,  the  god,  divided 
the  male  and  the  female  into  many  according  to  colour  and 
nature  (l2).  Then  the  lord  of  creatures,  the  lord  BrahmS 
having  created  at  first  from  himself,  the  self-begotten  Manu, 
who  was  like  himself,  and  Satarupa ; tins  lord  Manu, — the 
self-begotten  one,  took  unto  him  as  wife  that  woman  whose* 
sins  had  been  washed  by  penance  (14).  By  that  person  i 
Satarupa  had  two  sons  both  distinguished  by  their  own  works, 
Priyabrata  and  UtbAnapada  by  name  (15).  Similarly  she 
bore  two  daughters  Riddhi  and  Prasuti.  Then  the  father  gave 
Prasuti  to  Daksha,  and  Riddhi  to  Ruchi,  in  those  days  (16). 

He,  the  lord  of  creatures,  produced  from  them  Jajna  with  I 
Dakshina;  and  then  0,  thou  highly  fortunate  one,  joined 
this  son  and  this  woman  as  husband  and  wife  (17).  And  on 
Dakshina  were  produced  twelve  sons  of  Jajna — they  are  the 
gods  Y5ma  of  the  age  of  the  self-begotten  Manu  (18).  They 
were  the  bright  sons  of  Jajna  born  of  Dakshina,  similarly 
Daksha  produced  on  Prashuti  twenty-four  daughters.  Their 
names  are  here  given  each  by  each,  Sradha,  Lakshmi, 
Dhriti,  Tushti,  Pushli,  Kriyfl,  Medhft.  Rudhi,  LajjS,  Bapu, 
Shanti,  Shidhi,  Keerti,  these  thirteen  of  Daksha’s  daughters 
were  married  to  Dharma,  while  the  remaining  and  younger 
eleven  daughters,  namely,  Kbyiii,  Satya  Sambhuti,  Smriti, 
Preeti,  Kshama.Shannati,  Anishuya,  UrjjS,  ShwahS,  Shwadbi 
were  given  in  marriage  to  Blirigu,  Bhaba  Mareechi,  Angira^ 
Pukstya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Bashista,  Atri,  Banhi  and  Pitara  in 
order,  Sradha  gave  birth  to  Kima,  Sree  to  D.trpa,  Dhriti,  to  ; 
Niyama,  Tushti  to  Shantasha,  Pushti  to  I.obha,  Sruta  was 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


122 


I born  of  Medhl,  Kanda,  Naya  and  Binya,  of  Kriy^,  Bodha 
^ of  Budhi,  Benoy  and  Bapu  of  LajjSl  Byeboshaya  and  Kshema 
were  born  of  SStnti,  Shukha  of  Shidhi,  Yasha  of  Keerti.  These 
were  all  sons  of  Dharma.  K5.ma  game  birth  to  Atimukha 
and  Harsha.  These  were  the  grandsons  of  Dharma  (19 — 28). 
Hansa  was  the  wife  of  Adharma  and  Anrita  was  born  of  them 
•Niriti  was  the  daughter  of  Adharma.  Of  Niriti  were  born 
two  sons,  namely,  Naraka  and  Bhaya  who  married  MayS. 
and  Bedanl.  M^y^  bore  desolating  Mrityu.  Of  the  marriage 
of  Rourab  and  BedanSl  was  born  Dukha.  It  is  said 
either  Mrityu  or  Dukha  gave  birth  to  Byaclhi,  Jara,  Shoka, 
Trishna,  Krodha.  All  these  are  ungodly,  They  have  neither 
wife  nor  children.  Mrityu  has  got  two  other  wives,  namelyi 
P Niriti  and  Alakshmi.  By  Alakshmi  he  has  fourteen  sons 
who  do  his  biddings  and  deal  with  men  at  the  time  of  death, 
f Hear  all  about  them.  They  dwell  in  the  ten  senses  of  per- 
ception and  action  and  in  the  mind  of  men  to  lead  them  to 
to  their  respective  objects.  Thry  attack  the  senses  with  the 
help  of  anger  and  attachment  and  lead  men  to  ruin  by  divert*^ 
ing  them  from  the  path  of  virtue.  Some  of  them  live  in 
the  A/mnkdra  or  egotism  and  some  in  the  understanding. 
Hence  men  are  deluded  and  strive  after  ruining  women. 
Certain  of  them  live  in  the  houses  of  men.  Amongst  them 
there  is  one,  Dushaha  by  name,  who  has  a voice  much  like 
that  of  a crow  and  is  so  ill-dressed  with  rags  as  to  be  almost 
naked.  He  is  always  hungry  and  his  face  is  always  down’ 
caste  and  h!s  voice  is  like  that  of  row.  And  he,  the  riches 
of  penance,  was  created  by  Brahma  to  devour  everything,  and" 
as  this  hideous  and  all  devouring  Dushaha  who  is  fearful 
to • look  was  about  to  devour  all,  .BrahmI.at  the  creator 
the  changeless,  the  pure,  all  pervaded,  with  Brahman,  and- the 
origin  of  men,  said,~devour  not  this  world,  withhold  thy  rage 
and  be  calm  (39~4o). 

BRAttMa  said  :~This  world  is  not  fit  to  be  eaten  by  tbee. 
Forsake  ^ thy^  anger,  be  calm.  Give  up  this  Tdmasa  desi|%.^ 


£22 


MARKANDfiYA  PURANAM. 


and  throw  away  that  part  of  the  quality  of  Rajas  which  ^ 
■moving  thee  now  (41)- 

DuSHAHA  said I am  weak  through  hunger,  0 lor^ 
of  the  world,  and  am'thirsty  and  feeble.  How  shall  I gaia 
satisfaction,  how  shall  I become  strong  ? What  is  my  refuge, 
tell  me,  on  what  may  I live  in  •'peace  (42). 

Brahma  said ; — The  house  of  men  is  thy  refuge ; the 
■unrighteous  man  is  thy  strength ; by  the  default  of  sacrifice 
thou  shalt  grow,  my  son.  Useless  words  are  thy  garments, 
and  I am  assigning  also  proper  food  to  thee.  The  wounded, 
that  on  which  woims  have  grown,  Bimilarly  that  which  has 
been  bitten  by  dogs,  that  which  is  kept  in  broken  vessels, 
that  which  has  been  .subdued  by  breath  of  mouth,  the  re* 
mains  of  food,  that  which  is  not  ripe,  that  which  has  not  beea 
cooked,  that  which  is  not  worshipped  by  the  strong,  that 
which  has  not  been  sanctified,  that  which  is  eaten  by  perstms 
sitting  on  broken  scats,  and  during  twilight  with  their  fac« 
to  the  north,  that  which  Is  eaten  by  one  dancing  or  playing oa 
any  musical  instrument  or  singing,  that  which  has  been 
stirred  or  polluted  by  women  keeping  time  or  eaten  or  seen  by 
women  keeping  time,  or  whatever  food  or  drink  Is  decotA* 
posed,  these  and  others  shall  I assign  to  thee  for  thy  growth 
^43-— 47).  Whatever  is  offerred  to  the  sacrificial  fire  irithout 
feith,  or  whatever  is  given  with  disrespect  to  persons  whose 
caste  and  station  are  not  known,  as  also  whatever  is  given 
without  due  offering  of  water,  'or  whatever  is  thrown  away 
without  any  purpose  or  whatever  shall  be  exposed  simply  to  be 
■ditown  away,  or  given  through  exce-ssive  surprise,  or  whatever 
is  given  by  one  overcome  by  anger,  such  polluted  object,  0 
Jaksha,  is  thy  portion  (48—49).  Or  whatever  sacrificiaf  works 
are*  performed  for  purposes  of  the  next  world  by  a person 
bSMfw  of  a mother  who  had  taken  unto  her  a second  httsliaa'di 
■or  whatever  is  done  similarly  by  a woman  born  of  a mother 
who; has  takes  a second  husband,  that  is  assigned,  OJfaksha, 
to  time  for  thy  satisfaction  (30)^  Or  whatever  works  are 


marlandeya  puranam. 


225 


undertaken  for  the  attainment  of  wealth  for  payings  the  price 
of  brides,  and  whatever  sacrifices  are  performed  in  accord- 
ance with  un authoritative  and  untrue  scripturesj  or  whatever 
is  satisfied  by  mere  wealth,  and  whatever  is  not  studied 
guided  by  the  spirit  of  truth,  (according  to  a second  reading 
whatever  works  relating  to  the  next  world  are  performed 
1:^  men  while  weeping)  all  these  are  thy  portion,  I give 
them  for  thy  satisfaction  (51 — 52),  Those  that  approach 
women  in  their  family  way,  who  do  not  perform  the 
daily  worship  in  proper  time,  and  ;whatever  is  polluted 
by.  unscriptural  works  or  words  among  men,  O Dakshahaf 
always  will  these  be  subject  to  thy  influence  (53^ — 54). 

In  the  division  of  rows  while  eatings  in  the  division  of  cook- 
ing in  vain-preparation  of  food,  and  in  family  desputes,  will 
he  thy.  permanent  abode  (55).  When  cows  and  horses  &c  are 
kept  confined  but  not  given  proper  food,  and  when  the 
dwelling-house  is  not  besprinkled  with  water  of  an  evening, 
thseo  shalt  thou  be  the  dread  of  men  (56).  Those  who  when- 
overtaken  by  evil  stars  or  when  seeing  the  three  kinds  of* 
onieQ-r-euch  as  earth-quake  &c,  shall  not  perform  any  sacri- 
fice for  obviating  the  evils  due  to  them,  shalt  thou  overtake 
and  overthrow  (57).  Those  men  who  fast  without 
cause,  those  who  are  addicted  to  wine,  women,  and  gambling, 
those  who  speak  ill  of  their  benefactors,  those  who  adopt  the 
vow  of  the  cat  (/.  e.  who  are  hypocritical),  who  study* 
the  Vedas  without  knowledge  (of  the  rites)  and  the  works  - of 
of  those  who  shall  live  in  forests  for  purposes  of  penance  buti 
ehall  not  be  the  master  of  their  appetites,  and  shall  seek, 
vulgar  enjoyments)  and  also  the  works  of  those  Brahmanas;  - 
and  Kshettriya’s  and  Vaishyas  and  Sudras  who  have  fallen  from 
the  duties  of  their  station,  and-  those  works  that  have  for  their 
object  ;tbe  attainment  of  good  in  the  world  to  comC)  and  what- 
ever are  the  fruits  of  those  works,  all  these  works,  all  these, 
Ohi  JakshaJ  shall  be  thine.  I shall  tell  you  of  other  thingsi 
alsuassigned  for  thy  growth  hear  ot  them  with  attention  * 


224 


MAKKAN’DKYA  in?RANAM. 


(58 — 61).  Whatever  offerings  shall  be  made  to  thee,  uttering!) 
thy  name,  with  the  words,  these  are  thine, — at  the  close  of  i 
the  sacrifice  to  the  Vaiahvya-deva  shall  be  subject  to 
thee  (62). 

He  who  eats  food  duly  sanctified,  whose  mind  at>d  body  are 
pure,  who  is  not  greedy  or  avaricious,  who  is  not  subject  to  ’ 
his  wife,  do  thou  avoid  his  house  (63).  Who  worships  the 
gods  by  offerings  of  yhec  to  the  fire,  and  the  manes  similarly 
by  offerings  of  cakes  of  rice  &c— and  who  worships  the  sons 
ofYama,  do  thou.  Oh  Yaksha  ! avoid  his  house  (64),  The  house  • 
where  there  is  goodwill  towards  children,  old  men,  women  and 
men,  and  similarly  towards  friends  and  relations,  that  house* 
too  shalt  thou  avoid  (65.  The  house  to  which  the  women  are 
strongly  attached  and  are  not  anxious  to  go  out,  and  are  full 
of  modesty,  always,  Oh  Yaksha,  avoid  that  house  (fi6).‘The 
house  where  seats  and  beddings  are  arranged  in  accordance  to? 
age  and  relation,  that  house  is  to  be  avoided  by  thee.  O' 
Yaksha,  through  my  command  (67).  Where  people  are  kind,  ’ 
and  constantly  engaged  in  good  works,  and  satisfied  with' 
the  commonplace  necessaries  of  life,  that  house  is  to  avoided' 
by  thee.  Oh  Yaksha  1 (68)  WItere  at  the  approah  of  the  spiri- 
tual guide,  the  aged,  and  the  Bnlhman  those  who  are  seated' 
occupy  their  seats  no  longer  (/.  c.  receive  them  with  due  • 
respect,  standing)  that  house  is  to  be  avoided  by  thee  always, Oh  ’ 
Yaksha  (69).  The  house  the  threshold  of  which  is  not  over- 
grown with  trees  and  herbs,  or  where  the  heart  of  men  are* 
not  pierced  with  grief,  that  house  is  not  proper  for  thee  (yo).' 
Where  the  food  of  the  owner  of  the  house  consists  of  what 
remains  after  offerings  have  been  made  to  gods,  the  manes/ 
the  guests, and  men  (needing  food),  avoid  thou  that  house  (71). 
Avoid  thou,  0 Yaksha,  men  who  speak  the  troth,  who  are 
forbearing,  not  given  to  injuring  others,  who  are  net  remorse- 
W/M  well  as  those  that  are  not  envious  (73).  Avoid  thou 
those  women  also  who  are  devoted  to  the  service  of  their* 
bpsbands,  who  avoid  the  company  of  bad  women,  and  who'- 


WARKANDEVA  FUftANAM. 


21 S 

live  on  the  food  left  after  their  relations  and  husband  have 
had  their  fill  (73).  Avoid  thou  also  those  twice-born  persons 
(Br^hmanas)  whose  minds  are  attached  to  sacrifice  and  study 
and  religious  exercises  and  charity  ; and  who  are  engaged  in 
performing  sacrifices  tor  others  and  in  teaching  others, who  live 
by  what  comes  as  gifts  unasked  and  unsought  (74).  Avoid, 

Oh  Dushaha!  that  Kshetriya  also  who  is  always  after  works 
of  charity,  and  study,  and  sacrifices,  and  who  earns  his  liveli- 
hood by  collecting  rightful  taxes  or  by  receiving  pay  using  his 
weapons  (75)*  Avoid  also  that  sinless  Vaishya  who  is  joined 
with  the  three  above-named  virtues  (namely  charity,  study, 
and  sacrifice),  who  breeds  cattle,  and  earns  his  livelihood  by 
agriculture  and  commerce  (76).  Avoid,  O Yaksha,  that  Sudra 
also  who  makes  charity,  and  sacrifice  and  the  service  of  the 
twice-born  classes,  the  chief  object  of  his  existence,  and  who 
earns  his  livelihood  by  the  service  of  the  Brlhmanas  and  others 
(77),  The  house  where  the  house-holder  earns  his  livelihood 
by  works  that  do  not  go  against  the  injunctions  of  the  Vedas 
and  the  Law,  and  where  his  wife  follows  him  in  everything,  and 
where  the  son  worships  the  spiritual  guide,  the  gods,  and 
similarly  his  father ; and  where  the  wife  worships  the  husband, 
bow  can  there  be  any  fear  of  Alakshmi  (the  goddess  of 
poverty  and  misfortune)  in  that  house  ? (78-79)  Where  early  m 
the  morning  and  in  the  evening  the  house  is  besmeared  and 
besprinkled  with  water,  and  where  sacrificial  offerings  ate 
adorned  with  flowers,  that  house  thou  canst  not  strike  (80)* 

■ Where  the  beddings  are  not  seen  by  the  sun,  and  where  fire 

■ and  water  exists  always,  and  where  lights  are  presented  to  the 
sun,  that  house  is  loved  by  I^^kshmi,  the  goddess  of  fortune  (81)* 
Where  there  are  bull, and sandaUwood, and  Vina^and  mirror, honey 
and  Ctoand  the  Kdska  grass,  as  also  where  there  are  Brih* 
mmm  and  vessels  made  of  coper,  that  house  is  not  be  possess* 
ed  by  thee*  (82),  Where  the  trees  are  thorny,  where  there  is  * 

* Bttll,  sandal,  »ari>  all  needed  for  household  saorlficet 

hiMe  the  mmm  where  fchtre  art  lacrlficial  appUtncea*  ' ' 

29 


^26  MASKAMDEYA  puranam 

the  Mishpiba  creappr,  where  the  wife  is  a widow  who  has  taken 
asecond  hpsband,  where  there  is  an  anthill,  that,  O Yaksha 
thy  terople  (Ssl-  The  house  where  there  are  five  men 
three  women,  thr^e  cows,  and  where  the  fire  is  kindkdin 
darknes?,  that  house  is  thy  abode  (84b  The  house  where 
there  are  one  goat,  two  chamari  deer,  three  cows,  five 
bu0aloes,  six  horses,  seven  elephtints,  that  house,  O Yaksha  j i 
4(0  thou  destroy  soon  (8$).  When  shovels,  and  cutlases, 
snd  cooking  utensils  and  plates  and  other  vessels  are  thrown 
about  everywhere,  they  shall  give  thee  excellent  shelter  (8A),  * 

^Y'bea  women  sit  on  pestle  arul  the  grain  grinding  vessel,  and 
^iinilarly  on  the  wooden  bases  of  the  door-frame,  or  on  rubbish, 
and  thus  sitting  they  converse  with  one  and  other,  these  be,  I 
come,  U Yaksha  1 thy  benefactor  (87).  The  house  where  both 
ripe  and  unripe  paddies  are  threshed,  ,nnd  similarly  where  the 
scriptures  are  ov.er-riden,^  there,  0 Dushaha  t mayest  thou 
move  about  at  thy  will  (88).  !n  the  house  of  endless  sin  wbera 
fire  is  given  on  cooking  utensils  or  on  the  lid  thereof,  or  h.a 
spoons  or  on  a cutlass  or  other  weapon,  there  shall  thou  find 
superior  repose  (89b  The  house  where  there  are  human-bones, 
or.  where  the  dead  body  remain.s  for  one  day  and  night,  them, 

0 Yaksha,  is  thy  abode,  ns  also  of  other  Rakshasas  (90). 
Whoever  take  their  food  without  first  giving  cakes  and  wafcwj 
to  friends  and  relations,  as  also  to  those  who  are  partakers  <rfi 
the  funereal  cakes  and  water,  thou  shalt  at  once  possess  those 
men  (pt).  The  house  where  lotu«,  large  lotus,  young  wotnett 


MAtfeANbEYA  227 

Thosd  WMo  bathe  in  thirhiiti  of  atlir  ^itoHuced  by  tfii  wth'how- 
ing  fatti  er  in  water  contained  in*  k pot,  bf  in  water  dripj^frtg 
from  wet  cttithes^  or  in  that  in  which  the  ehdl  of  the* 
ha^e  been  dipped,  go  to  them  of  itil-rtature  (95).  Thd'ii  art 
feot  to  keep  the  company  of  men  who  fotlow  the  ordinance 
of  their  class,  perform  Japa  and  Homa^  and  the  anspicioita 
Worship  of  gods,  according  to  the  cOistoW  of  the  conniry,  and 
tnf  dtie  forms  prescribed  fbr  th:f  particular  time  or  yu^d  to 
which  they  belong  and  who  duly  follow  the  rules  of  pUHty 
and  tradition  (0). 

MarkAndeva  said having  told  aff  this  to  Dushaha, 
Brahmi  at  once  disappeared,  and  the  former  also  followed 
these  injunctions  aS  they  were  related  fay  him  who  is  born  in 
the  Idtus  (97), 


CHAPTER  LI, 


JtViARKAi^bEYA  sMid Dushiha  Had  a Wife  kribWtf  by 
the'  name  of  Nirmasti,  wh'O  hdS  bord  of  ‘thb  Wife  of  Kali,^ 

V Wh6*had  s4en  a CUHdald  while'  keeping  tiirtjie(iy.  6f  these 
two  Were  born  sixteen  issues  Oxtdnding  o'vOr  all’  th€'  wOr^ld,:- 
■<rfght  of  whom’  were^'  Son#  and'  efgh^  daughtterA'  and  All'  of  thonf 
mceedingly  ftarfu;!  beings  (2):  Dantakris^ta,  aOd'  Ukti^ 
iidrile  Another  wai  , Paribarta,  Angfadhnk,  Shakunii 
(JahdaprihfcArativ  Garblmlii,  add  anOtfhdr  Shashyaha,^ 

* Thi&e  nkmei  irt  di^tinatly  and  palpably  allegorical — vlaf  (i)— ‘ttn* 
Wlo*  dAiwI  by  by  tMh,  (2)  the  ineartihA  of  is  dyf-ciyifr^  (3)'' 

cWge,  (4)  HeWMburM  tlse  limbi;  ($}  Vultui^r  Mi' WHoi©  lo'^e  l«  iif. 
tbt  eitremltkt  of  tbe  chops,  (7)  The  destroyer  of  foetus,  (S)  The  destroyer  of  ^ 
harvest  similarly  the  names  of  the  daughters  also  show  that  they  ai®  imm 
allegories. 


1 r 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM,  22g 

other  son,  it  is  said^  direct  men's  good  and  evil  (i6).  There- 
fore has  the  lord  of  creatures  said  this  that  in  evil  things 
delay  as  also  an  absolute  giving  up  of  all  endeavours 
i$  proper,  while  in  matters  that  are  good  men  should 
work  with  despatch  (17).  The  other  son  living  within 

men's  mouth,  O most  superior  of  twice-born  persons  j in 
half  a second,  eats  up  all  the  works  of  men  and  destroys 
their  good  name  and  good-will  (18),  By  hearing  instructions 
from  Briihmanas,  by  the  adoration  of  gods,  and  also  by  draw- 
ing out  certain  specific  herbs  by  the  root,  0 twice-born  one  I 
and  by  bathing  in  water  containing  the  urine  of  the  cow  and 
white  mustard,  by  worshipping  the  natal  star  of  the  person, 
and  also  by  the  worship  of  other  stars,  as  also  by  seeing 
weapons  which  are  used  for  the  support  of  righteousness,  and 
by  disregaid  of  this  world  is  the  GandabS.n  propitiated  (19-20). 
Similarly  the  other,  GarbahS  by  residing  in  the  womb  of 
pregnant  women  destroy  their  fruit.  The  safety  of  the 
foetus  against  him  is  always  to  be  secured  by  perpetual 
observance  of  purity  (21)  by  writing  wellknown  mckntms^ 
by  wearing  garlands  &c.,  as  are  usually  used,  and  by  living  in 
purified  and  clean  houses,  0 thou  twice-born  one,  and 
by  not  overexerting  one's  self — is  the  evil  produced  by 
Garbaha  averted  (22).  Similarly  another  the  Shashyahi  } 
who  destroys  the  growth  of  grains;  his  evil  is  to  be  averted 
by  putting  on  wornout  shoes  (23).  Likewise  is  his  evil 
averted  by  walking  southwards,  by  the  entrance  of  a 
candala  into  the  field,  and  by  offerings  given  outside  the 
field,  and  by  chanting  hymns  dedicated  to  the  moon  and 
the  clouds  (24).  The  daughter  who  directs  men  and  other 
beings  to  rob  other's  wife  and  wealth  she  is  Niyojika  (25). 

By  reading  pure  scriptures  by  giving  up  anger  and  greed, 

^'she  directs  me  to  these"  thus  thinking  and  by  giving  up 
all  conflicts,  is  the  evil  caused  by  her  averted  (26).  When 
attacked  by  others  or  driven  by  others  the  wise  should  not 
be  subject  to  feelings  of  retaliation,  thinking  that  it  .i$  Ibis 


MAftK^r^DEYA  PUEaNAW, 


23«> 


Niyojika  Whd  thus  itnpfcls  me  to  it  (27).  '‘This  Niyojiki  is 
teadiAg  me,  to  have  connections  virith  other’s  wives”  the  wise 
Shall  think  also  this  rYis-i  (28).  She,  the  other  one,  Birodhini 
Creates  discord  among  husbands  and  wives  who  ought  to 
love  each  other  as  also  between  friends  and  friehds  aridi 
relations  and  relations,  between  father  and  son,  and  be- 
tween people  of  the  Same  caste  ; froth  her,  safety  should  be 
attaitied  by  sacrificial  Offerings,  by  forbearance  even  when 
abused,  and  by  observing  the  ordinances  of  the  scriptures 
f ig-30).  “fhe  daughter  (of  Dushaha)  who  eats  paddy  froih’ 
the  barii  or  from  the  house,  rObs  milk  froth  the  Cows,  and 
similarly  robs  butter  from  the  cU’-d,  and  robs  the  value  of 
things  having  value,  she  is  called  Swayamhirikll,  always 
engaged  in  spiriting  away  things.  From  the  cookrooin  she  robs 
half-boiled  rice,  as  also  rice  that  is  preserved  in  the  place 
where  fide  is  kept  (3f-32)  Ss  also  rice  that  has  been  put  Out 
on  the  plates,  and  she  eats  with  those  engaged  in  eatfng,  and 
this  burhara  also  fobs  the  food  left  afteC  eating  by  men  (33) 
From  the  place  where  paddy  is  stored  or  boiled.  She  robs  boiledf 
paddy,  Oh  thou  twice  born  one  J and  robs  milk  from  the  breasts 
Of  women  and  cow.s,  she  is  therefore  always  the  robber  of  iwilk 
(34).  She  robs  butter  from  curd,  oil  ftom  jiiljily,  and  similarly 
frOfti  the  place  reserved  for  storing  away  wines,  she  robs  wine, 
as  also  the  colour  from  kusunt  and  "other  flowers,  atid  thd 
ilbteS  from  cotton  (35).  She,  this  Swayamh'trifca,  6 thou 
itiWice  born  one,  inces.santly  rObs  things.  For  protection  Sgainsf 
Iter,  a pair  of  peococks  or  artificial  wotriert  should  be  made; 
and  the  vessels  for  milk  and  gheg  See,  should  be  cleansed  by 
Ste  ashes  of  Aonta  performed  in  honour  of  the  gOdt,  or  by 
Chose  of  bcen'se  burnt  to  them.  These  are  said  to  be  charkns 
d^iilft  her  (36-38).  Another  causes  dislurbande  tO  mett 
ft^ing  stationed  in  one  place,  and  that  daughter  iS  caHeff 
iSrlteiani  (3$).  Protection  against  her  iS  secured'  by  Strew- 
ing ’Whi'be  mustard  oil  the  sCat,  the  bed,  and  oh  the  grodtid 
where  that  maiHives  (4t)).  And  that  man  shall  also  meditate 


MAr'kAHQEYA  PU8ANAM 


m 

tbus-r-‘'this  evil  mindect  (girl)  leading  me  fro*  pne;  place 
to  another,”  and  shall  again  and  again  repeat  the  Bhu-SiMik9 
of  the  Rigveda,  with  all-absorbing  concentration  of  tbp 
mind  (41).  Another  daughter  of  Dushaha  is  engaged 
in  robbing  the  flower  (generative  power)  of  the  women, 
sfle  is  to  be  known  as  RituhUriklt  (42).  For  averting  tho 
evils  caused  by  her  the  woman  should  be  made  to  bathe 
in  holy  places  sacred  to  the  gods,  in  places  of  worshipi 
(or  in  Maths  of  the  Buddflists),  on  table-lands,  at  the  junction 
pf  two  or  more  rivers,  and  in  canals  (43),  and  should  be  treated 
with  superior  medlciue  prescribed,  by  a twice-born  person 
wellversed  in  the  treatment  of  diseases,  and  who  knows 
the  Mantras  and  the  esoteric  meaning  of  actions  (44).  She 
is  another  daughter  [of  Dushaha]  who  runs  away  with 
the  memory  of  wonren,  she  is  Smritiharika ; by  living 
iip  solitude  is  the  evil  caused  by  her  averted  (45).  There 
Is  another,  a most  dreadful  girl,  who  destroys  the  seed  ol 
both  women  and  men.  By  eating  sacrificial  food  and  by 
bath  is  the  ev.il  caused  hy  her  averted  (46)  The  eighib 
daughter  is  by  name  Dbeshini,-sTthe  source  of  dread  to  mei» 
and  wom,etj,  the  object  of  people’s  malice.  For  the  cure  of  he® 
evil  should  be  performed  by  jiyjily  soaked  in  honey  and 
nulk  zni  ghee^  and  similarly  by  performing  the  sacrifice  called, 
Mitrabinda  is  thSi  eyil  caused  by  her  averted  (47 — ^48)..  Of 
those  sons  and  daughters,  0 thou  most  superior  among  thft 
twice-born  ■,  there  are  thirty-eight  offsprings,  hear  their  oair^a 
from  me  (49).  Of  Dantakrista,  there  was  a daughter  Bijafpa  aa 
also.  Kalaha.  Bijalpa  chatters  always  disdainful  words,  and; 
Ues,  and  evil  expressions.  For  her  cure  the  wise  shall, 
meditate  even  on  her,  and  the  householder  shall  ex^ersisb 
self-ifftStraint.  l^aJaha  creates  quarrels  ip  the  houses  of  men 
iacessantily  (SOrrsSr).  She  is  thp  cause  of  the  destruction,, 
of  one’s  own  relations.  Hear  the  ipeans  of  hpr  cure.  It| 
condsts  in  making  sacrificial  offerings  of  grass-blades  soaked 
in  honey,  and  pil’k  (-52).  These  should  be  thrown, 


232 


MARKANIJEYA  PURANAM 


into  the  fire  and  thus  the  homa  performed  as  well  as  the 
following  hymn  should  be  chanted : — For  the  satisfaction 
of  the  boys — with  the  mothers  of  creatures,  for  the  satisfac- 
tion of  all  knowledge  and  penance,  and  self  restraint  and 
discipline,  for  agriculture  and  the  attainment  of  commer- 
cial prosperity,  may  they  all  grant  me  peace  (53 — 54).  May 
they  be  worshipped  as  laid  down  in  the  sacred  books,  and  find 
entire  satisfaction  the  pumpkins,  and  the  grain  and  other 
vegetables  called  ganah  (55).  Through  pleasure  of  the  Mahi- 
deva  or  the  great  god,  according  to  the  will  of  the  great  god, 
may  all  these  rest  satisfied  with  men  (56).  Being  satisfied  may 
they  dispel  all  the  evil  deeds  and  evil  ceremonies  as  also  that 
■ give  rise  to  mortal  sins,  as  also  that  cause  other  evils  (57). 

Through  their  favour  may  all  our  evils  and  obstacles  be  des- 

Itroyed  during  marriages  and  all  ceremonies  concerning  the 
manes  (58).  During  virtuous  rites  and  during  the  worship 
of  the  guru  and  the  gods,  as  also  during  the  sacrifice  called 
yapayajna  as  also  during  occasions  of  leaving  the  house 

!on  journeys  (59),  may  they  grant  peace  and  health  and 
enjoyment  of  my  body,  as  also  happiness,  and  charity 
I and  wealth  to  the  old,  the  young  and  the  infirm, — of  my 

family  (60).  The  moon,  the  sun,  the  fire,  the  wind  and  the 
I oceans  may  they  all  grant  me  peace.  Of  Ukti  similarly, 

the  son  was  Kalijibha,  whose  abode  is  in  the  palm-tree. 
Whose  mother  he  possesses  that  vicious  person  he  kills. 
The  sons  of  Paribarta  were  two,  O thou  twice-born  onej 
Birupa  and  Bikrita  (6t — 62).  They  two  lived  on  the  top  of 
trees,  on  walls  and  ditches  and  lakes, — and  on  the  trees  etc., 
change  the  foetus  of  the  pregnant  women  (63).  There- 
fore 0 Kraustiki,  women  in  the  family  way  shall  not  walk 
among  trees,  or  in  mountains,  on  walls  or  travel  on 
expanses  of  water  nor  on  ditches.  Angadhuk  got  a son 
ktiosto  by  the  name  of  Pishuna  (64—65).  He  eats  up  the 
streng;th  ‘of  the  bones  and  nerves  of  the  men  who  have 
not  conquered  themselves.  Shakunt  had  five  sons,  the 


PURANAM, 


333 


eagle,  the  croW)  the  dove,  the  vultute  and  the  owl,— the 
Suras  and  the  Asuras  took  them.  The  eagle  was  taken 
by  Death,  Time  took  the  crow,  Niriti  took  the  dreadful  owl. 
Disease  took  the  vulture,  while  his  lord  Yama  himself 
took  the  dove  (66— 68)«  These  are  said  to  be  their  instru- 
ments in  working  evil.  Therefore,  0 thou  most  superior 
among  the  twice-born  people  ! he  on  whose  head,  eagles ' and 
others  alight  or  in  whose  dwelling  they  enter,  by  them  should 
sufficient  sacrifices  and  propitiatory  rites  be  performed  for 
purposes  of  self-preservation  (69).  The  house  where  they 
breed,  similarly  where  they  build  their  nests,  that  house 
shall  man  forsake,  as  also  that  the  top  of  which  is  attacked 
by  the  doves  (70).  On  the  entrance  of  the  eagle,  the 
dove,  the  vulture,  the  crow,  and  the  owl,  O thou  twice- 
born  one,  into  a house,  the  days  of  the  dwellers  of  that 
house  are  said  to  be  numbered  (71).  Such  a house  shall 
the  learned  quit,  and  perform  propitiatory  rites,  the  sight 
of  a dove  even  in  dream  is  not  considered  as  auspicious 
(72).  Similarly  of  Gandaprlntarati  the  issues  are  said  to  be 
tixi  .They  live  in  the  courses  of  women,  hear  from  me 
of  Ihetr  time  also  (73).  Four  days  and  nights  before, 
and  another  the  thirteenth,  and  similarly  another  the  eleventh 
day  after  the  courses,— these  are  his  son^s  (74).  These 
days,  as  also  others,  namely,  the  day  when  offerings 
are  made  to  the  manes,  as  also  other  days  when  there 
are  any  festivals,  by  the  wise  are  these  avoided  for  that 
leason  (75).  Of  GarbahS  the  son  was  Nighna  and  daughter 
Mohini.  Entering  into  the  womb  of  the  pregnant  woman, 
one  eats  up  the  seed,  and  another  having  eaten  the  flesh  of 
the  woman  hypnotises  her  (76).  Through  her  charm 
frogs  and  tortoises  and  reptiles  or  again  mere  phcecds  ‘ 
are  born  of  her  (77).  In  this  way  they  eat 
the  flesh  of  * the  pregnant  woman  for  six  months  with 
oiut  any  restraint.  The  woman  who  lives  in  the  shade 
of  trees  during  night,  or  at*  the  junction  of  three  or  four 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM- 


.roads,  or  sleeps  on  the  ground  where  the  dead  are  cremated, 
,^r  goes  about  without  a second  covering,  or  cries  out  at 
night,  this  (Mohini)  possesses  that  woman  (78—73). 
larly  of  ShashyahS.  there  was  one  son  known  by  the  name 
.of-  Kshudraka.  He  always  on  finding  an  opening,  destroy* 
the  strength  and  value  of  the  harvests.  Hear  from  me  all 
about  him  (80).  Whoever  sows  the  grain  seeds  on  an 
inauspicious  day,  with  a dissatisfied  heart,  into  hw  field, 
whose  end  is  near,  he  enters  (81 1.  Therefore  on  a day  re> 
cognized  as  fit  for  the  purpose,  having  worshipped  the  moon, 
with  a gladdened  and  satisfied  heart,  and  taking  due  help 
from  others  should  the  work  of  sowing  the  seed  be  under- 
taken . (82).  Of  that  daughter  of  Dushalil,  of  whom  I have 
spoken  as  going  by  the  name  of  NiyojikJ,  was  born 
a daughter  by  name  Prochodikft.  Of  her  there  were  four 
daughters  {83).  They  are  Mottk,  Unmotta,  Pramatia,  and 
Nab5-  These  women  always  enter  into  men  for  their  destruc- 
tion, and  move  them  to  most  cruel  acts  (84).  They  pre- 
sent,  unrighteousness  as  righteousness,  lust  as  not  lust,  evil 
as  good,  and  bondage  as  salvation,  to  men,  who  are  proud 
and  have  no  purity  of  mind  and  body  ; and  driven  by  these 
eight  maidens  men  incesantly  stray  away  from  the  highest 
object  of  human  existence  (85-86).  Their  entrance  into  the 
house  is  during  even-tide,  when  the  offerings  are  not  made 
in  proper  time  to  DhS.ta  and  Bidhdta  (87).  Those  are  con- 
taminated by  the  entrance  of  ihese,  among  whom  men  and 
women  eat  and  drink  together  (88).  Of  Birodhini  were 
three  sons,  Chodaka,  GrUhaka  and  armther  Tamapracbadaki 
Hear  from  me  all  about  their  characteristics  (89).  Where 
the  pestle,  the  mortar,  shoes,  seats,  and  women  are.' 
polluted  by  coming  in  contact  with  lamp-oil;  where  the 
wtnkowing  fan  and  the  cutlass,  &c.,  are  drawn  by  the  feet, 
and  sat  upon,  and  where  people  move  about  in  the  house 
without  having  adored  it  by  besmearing  it  with  water,  &c. ; 
where  is  collected  or  taken  from  one  place  to  anoth#  on  the 


marLai^deyA  ruIranAAi. 


*35 


f 


r 


spooa,  the  sons  of  Biro  ihini,  inspired  by  their  mothet,  spread 
themselves  there  (90-92).  Of  these  one  given  to  lies  aitd 
falsehood,  entering  into  the  tongue  of  men  and  woiheii, 
causes  malice  and  ill-will  in  the  house,  he  is  called  by  the 
name  of  Chodaka  (93).  Another  with  great  attention  resides 
in  the  ear,  he  is  Grahaka,  of  exceedingly  evil  nature,  who 
runs  away  with  the  words  of  men  (94).  Another  of 
evil  nature,  who  having  drawn  people's  mind  forcibly 
towards  him  and  having  covered  it  with  ignorance,  creat^es 
anger ; he  is  Tamapraschadaka  (95).  Of  ShwavamharikSl 
were  born  three  sons  by  Chaurya, — namely  SarbahSiri^ 
and  Ardhali^ri,  and  similarly  BiryahSri  (96).  In  the  houses 
where  the  inmates  do  not  wash  their  mouth  before  and  after 
meals,  in  the  houses  where  evil  ways  prevail,  where  the  in^ 
mates  enter  the  cook-house  with  unwashed  feet ; in  the  house-r 
hold  where,  whether  in  the  ground  used  for  threshing  corn, 
or  in  the  field  where  the  cattle  graze,  there  are  constant 
quarrells,  in  those  houses  they  all  move  about  and  enjoy  them- 
selves as  of  right  (97 — 98).  Of  BhrSmani  there  was  only  one 
son,  known  as  Kikajangim,  those  that  are  possesscdby  him  find 
no  pleasure  whatever  in  their  him  (99).  Whoever  sings  while 
eating;  sings  and  laughs  while  attending  calls  of  nature,  and 
the  man  who  meets  his  wife  just  at  the  juncUon  of  the  day  and 
night, in  such  a man,0  thou  twice-born  oiVe,does  he  enter  (too)* 
Tlie  girl  called  Rituh§.rini,  gave  birth  to  three  daughters  (lol) 
One  girl  is  KuchaharS,  another  is  Byanjanaharik§l,  wliile  this 
third  daughter  is  named  Jatali5,rini  (102).  Of  the  woman  whose 
marriage  rites  are  not  duly  performed,  or  performed  after 
the  proper  period  of  life,  the  one,  KuchaliarS,  robs  the  two 
breasts  of  such  a person  (103).  The  girl  who  is  given  in 
marriage  without  due  offerings  have  been  made  to  the  manes 
or  without  due  worship  of  her  mother,  similarly  the  other,  the 
Syanjanahirika,  robs  her  of  the  marks  of  womanhood  (104), 
Entering  into  the  confinement  room  which  is  devoid  of  fire, 
itfd  w^ater,  and  incense,  and  light  and  iron,  and  mortar  ani 


23.6 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


i ' mustard  seed,  and  collirium,  she  robs  the  baby  just  bom  of 

her  mother,  of  its  life  and  even  there,  O thou  twice-born  one, 

I ! leaves  the  carcase  (105 — 106).  She  whose  name  is  Jatahlrioi 

I ; is  exceedingly  cruel,  and  she  eats  the  meat  of  the  new-born 

I babe,,  therefore  the  confinement  room  should  be  protected 

i with  great  care  (107).  Her  son  Prachanda  by  name  living  in 

I 'i  works  mischief  to  the  memory  of  those  persons  who  do  not  live 

I empty  houses  according  to  the  law  (108).  From  his  grandsons 

j were  born  a hundred  thousand  LikSs,  and  the  eight  kinds  born 

! of  Chandala  women,  all  exceedingly  dreadful  through  always 

1 going  about  with  staves  and  ropes  (top).  The  Lik^s  then  and 

^ those  begotten  of  CSndala  women,  possessed  by  hunger,  ran 

after  one  another,  desirous  of  eating  up  one  another  (tio). 
f ; Those  Likas  and  those  offsprings  of  Chandala  women  being 

I ; restrained  by  Prachanda,  in  time,  settled  down.  The  manner 

I li  in  which  they  did  so  hear  thou  that  from  me  (lit).  Hence* 

i forth  whoever  shall  give  quarters  to  the  LikSs,  there  is  no  doubt 

? about  it  that  on  him  I shall  inflict  immeasurable  punishment 

(r  12).  And  the  Lika  that  will  give  birth  to  a child  in  the  house 
I ; of  any  offspring  of  Chandala  women,  all  her  children  and  she 

I herself  shall  meet  with  destruction  that  self  same  day  (113), 

The  girl  Bijaharini,  who  robs  both  men  and  women  of  their 
I ji  seed,  gave  birth  to  two  daughters, — Bataropt  and  Aropi, 

these  two  are  her  weapons  (114).  The  man  and  wife  out 
whom  the  Batarupa  throws  her  cliild,  get  certain  diseases  of 
the  reproductive  organs  (i  15).  Similarly  by  Arupa  is  the  man 
robbed  of  his  reproductive  power,  who  eats  without  bathing; 
or  has  connections  with  low  caste  women  (116).  That  girl 
Bidbeshini  by  name  whose  face  is  made  croaked  through 
frowns,  has  two  sons,  one,  who  works  men  evil,  and  the  other 
^ho  leads  them  to  trumpets  torth  their  own  good  deeds  (117). 
The  man  or  woman  who  disregards  the  rules  of  purificatioft, 
Is  given  to  malice,  who  is  avaricious,  and  who  drink* 
fowl  water,,  lose  the  reproductive  power  (u8).  They  two; 
exist  attacking  the  man  who  is  moved  by  malice.  The  matt; 


M>RKANf>€YA 


237 

wlio  is  the  object  of  the  ill-will  of  mother,  brother,  similarly  of 
friends  and  relatives  and  welbwishera  and  enemies  meet  with 
destruction  both  in  his  religious  and  his  worldly  life.  One  of 
these,  the  worker  of  iniquity,  leads  one  to  publish  oner's  own 
virtues  among  men,  the  other  destroys  the  qualities  of  friend- 
;Ship  among  men.  Thus,  these  are  all  the  progeny  of  Yaksha 
and  Dusaha  ; they  are  noted  for  their  iniquities,  and  by  theni 
is  the  whole  world  covered  (up — lai).  ; 


CH  A PTER  LII. 

— ;o: — 

]M[arkandeya  said: — This  then  is  the  creation 
Brahmi,  of  unmanifested  birth,  that  is  composed  of 
quality  of  Tama  or  ignorance  and  sin.  I ahall  presently 
relate  in  detail  the  creaiion  that  is  called  Rudra,  listen  fr); 
As  also  his  daughters,  as  well  as  his  eight  wives,  and  simi-^ 
larly  his  sons,  (all  these  shall  I presently  relate  to  you)^ 
On  the  lord  meditating,  at  the  commencement  of  the  Kalpa,. 
on  a son,  who  shall  be  like  him  in  all  respects,  a son,  called, 
Nilalohita  came  forth  from  bis  limbs,  ajid  moving  about  cried 
in  sweet  tones,  0 thou  most  superior  BrShmana  (2-7^3).  Him^ 
thus  crying  Brahmi,  asked, — why  dost  thou  cry  ; and  he  spoke 
in  reply  to  the  lord  of  the  world, — ‘^Give  me  a name  (4). 
(He  said)  :~Thou,  0 Deva  or  Bright  One,  shall  be  of  the; 
name  of  Rudra.  Do  not  cry.  Be  patient  Thus  spoken  to^ 
then  he  cried  again  and  again  seven  times  (5).  Then  to* 
him  the  lord  gave  seven  other  names,  and  also  the  abodes 
ol  these  eight  Rudras,  and  their  wives  and  sons,  0 thou,\ 
Iwkirborn  one,  (were  duly  assigned)  (6).  - The  lord,  itm; 


♦ 


238  M^RKANDEYA  PURANAM* 

Grand-father  ( BrahmA  ),  spoke  and  gave  these  names^— 
namely  Bhaba,  similarly  Eshima,  likewise  Pashu^ati, 

Bhima,  Ugra,  Mahideva  and  made  abodes  for  these 
Tlje  sun,  the  water,  tlie  earth,  tlie  fire,  the  ether,  the  initiated 
Brahman,  and  the  moon,  these  became  respectively  thelt 
abodes.  Subarchal^i  and  similarly  UmSi,  Bikesht  and  anotheri 
Shwadha,  ShwShS,  and  likewise  Disha,  Dikshi,  Rohini  these 
respectively,  0 thou  superior  among  the  twice-born,  became 
with  the  sun  &c.,  the  possession  of  the  holders  of  the  names 
commencing  with  Rudra  &c.,  (9-- -lo).  Their  sons  respec- 
tively were  Shanaishchara,  Shukra,  Lohit8.nga,  Monajaba, 
Slipndha,  Sarga,  Santina,  and  Budha,  (ir).  In  this  way. 
this  Rudra  welcomed  Sati  as  his  wife, — and  that  Sati  through 
being  angry  with  Daksha  gave  up  her  body  (12).  She 
became,  0 thou  most  superior  Brahman  i the  daughter  of 
Himavat,  and  his  wife  Mena.  Her  brother  is  Mainlka,  than 
whom  the  ocean  has  not  a better  fneni<L  The  lord 
Bhaba  again  married  that  self  same  Salt  (13).  Khylti,  the 
wife  of  Blirigoo  gave  birth  to  two  gods  and  BidhitH  and 

also  to  Sri, — she  the  wife  of  the  god  of  gods  N^r^yana  (14)* 
Of  the  high-souled  Meru  there  were  two  daugliters  Ayatli 
and  Niyati,  tliey  were  given  as  wives  to  DhMS  and  Bidhiti. 
Of  these  two  were  born  two  sons  (15).  They  were  Prantr 
and  Mrikaodu— he  is  rtfy  father  known  to  fame.  I was  born 
of  him  on  Manashbini.  My  son  is  BedashirS,  born  of  my 
wife  Dumrabati.  Hear  also  from  me  of  the  sons  of  Prina. 
The  son  of  PrSna  is  Dyutimln.  His  son  is  IJtpanna 
and  also  Ajari.  Of  these  two  were  born  many  sons 
and  grandsons.  Sambhuti,  the  wife  of  Marichi,  gave  birtli  to 
'Patfnamasa‘(i8).  OT  him,  the  high-iouled  one,  were  born 
two  sons  Biraja  and  Parbata.  At  the  time  of  the  enumert*^ 
tion  of  the  geme^Ogy  of  any  family, O tlioH  twice-born  one, the 
names  of  their^  sons  should  be  preilrflS  (If).  Smritl,the  wife  of 
Angirl,  simjTarly  gave  birth  to  dauglders,  pm,  Sintbili,  Ktihu, 
Rika,  Anumati  (20).  Anusuya  similarly,  the  wife  of  Atri, 


i 


gav^  birth  to  sons  free  from  all  sins — they  are  Soma,  Dur- 
bSlsasa  and  Datti,treya,  (21).  Of  Priti,  the  wife  of 

Paulasta  was  born  Dattoli;  in  a previous  birth  he  was  known  as 
Agastya,  born  during  the  age  of  the  Swayambhuba  Manu  {22}* 
Kshamiljthe  wife  of  the  lord  of  creatures  Pulaha,  brought  forth 
three  sons  namely  Kardama,  Charbbira  and  Shahishnu  (23).: 
Sannati  the  wife  of  Kratu  gave  birth  to  the  Balkhilyas,  who. 
were  sixty-thousand  Rishis  all  of  whom  had  completely  mas-, 
tered  their  sexual  instincts  (24).  Of  UrjjSL,  the  wife  of 
Bashishta  were  born  seven  sons,  namely,  RajogSltra,  Urdha*. 
bShu,  Sabala,  Anagha,  Sutapi,  Shukta, — these  all  are  the 
well-known  seven  Rishis  (25).  He  who  is  the  presiding  deity 
in  fire, — the  eldest  among  the  sons  of  Brahm^, — from  him 
Shwada  had  three  sons  all  of  them,  O thou  twice-born  one, 
of  most  superior  powers; — namely  P^lbaka,  Pabam9.n  andi 
Shuchi  whose  food  is  water  (26 — 27^  Their  sons  were  forty 
and  five  in  number,  these  sons  and  fathers  are  highly 
spoken  of  (28),  They  are  (the  father,  three  sons  and  the 
grandsons)  thus  forty-nine  in  number,  and  are  spoke# 
of  as  invincible*  The  Pitris  as  created  by  BrahmS.  haveak 
ready  been  described  by  me  to  you  (29).  They  who  werdi 
the  Aguish watta,  the  Barhisbada  the  Anagnaya,  and  tli# 
Si.gnaya,  from  them  ShwadhSL  had  two  daughters,  Mena  and 
Baidh?lrini  (30).  They  were  both,  Oh  thou  twice-born  one  ji 
teachers  of  the  wisdom  of  Brahman  and  were  both  Yof^ni$^ 
and  were  possessed  of  superior  wisdom  and  were  adorned 
with  all  the  virtues  (31).  These  are  the  sons  and  the  descen*' 
dents  of  the  daughters  of  Daksha  related  by  me.  When  they* 
are  remembered  with  faith  and  reverence,  the  descendents  of 
the  person  so  remembering  them  are  extended  and  increased 
(3a). 


CHAPTER  LIll- 


. IV.R/VUSTUKI  said  This  Manwantara  associated  with  the 
Snraymbhuba  Manu  which  has  been  described  by  thee,  I de- 
sire to  hear  in  detail  everything  ;about  it,  Oh  thou  possessor 
«f  the  six  miraculous  powers  or  Bhagas,  tell  me  all  about  it. 
Tell  me  the  measure  of  that  Manwantara,  as  also  of  the  gods; 
and:  the  godly  Rishis,  and  of  those  that  were  the  lords  of 
earth,  and  the  king  of  the  gods— the  Indra— tell  me  all  these 
exactly  as  they  were  (1—2). 

. Markandeya  said:— The  measure  of  Manwantaras  is 
made  by  the  figiire  seventy  one ; hear  from  me  the  measure 
Ufa  Manwantara  calculated  by  human  standards  (3).  Thirty 
crores,  multiplied  twenty  thousand  times,  and  sixty  seven 
Hfjutas  (of  years)  are  the  measurement  of  a Manwantara,  and 
not  more  (4).  Measured  according  to  the  standards  of  the 


'*  The  five  Sab&rnl  Manus  are  Brahma-Sabarnl,  Dharma.Sabarnl,  Rudia* 
Sabami,  Deba-Sabarni,  Indra-Satmmi.  Some  autboiitles  mentkio  another 
Daksha-Sabami,  and  one  who  is  simply  Sabarni. 


WARKANDEYA  PURANaM 


whom  this  world  with  all  the  seven  islands  and  mountains  are 
inhabited  (lo).  They  entered  into  this  world,  each  one  into  a 
seperate  continent,  consisting  of  oceans  and  mines.  In  the 
Tretayuga^  at  the  Lime  of  the  first  or  Swayamhhuba  Mawantara, 
was  the  earth  thus  occupied  by  the  sons  and  grandsons  of 
Priyabrata,  the  son  of  Swayambhuba  Manu.  Of  the  mighty 
Priyabrata  was  a daughter  born  unto  Prajabati  (ii  — 12).  That 
girl,  endued  with  the  six  great  virtues  of  kindness  &c,  bore  two 
daughters  and  ten  sons  to  tlie  lord  of  creatures  Kardaina, — 
these  two  daughters  bore  princes  in  their  womb  (ijb  Their 
ten  brothers  were  mighty  personages,  even  like  unto  the  lord 
of  creatures  in  prowess.  They  are  Agnidfira,  Medhatithi/ 
BapushmS.n  Jyotishmfln,  Dyutimln^  Bhabya,  Sahana, — these 
seven.  I^riyabrata  anointed  them  in  due  form  as  kings  of  the 
seven  lauds.  Hear  from  me  also  all  about  these  lands.  The 
father  made  Agnidhra, — king  in  Jambudwipa  (14 — 16). 
By  him  was  Medh§.tithi  made  the  lord  of  Plakshadwipa, 
in  Shitlmali  Bapushmanta,  and  in  Kushahhaya  Joytishmanta, 
in  the  Kraunchadvipa  Dyotimanta,  and  of  Shak^hbaya  Bhabya 
was  made  the  lord.  While  he  made  his  son  Sabana  the  lord 
of  Pushkara  (17 — 18).  The  two  sons  of  the  lord  of  Pushkara 
were  Mahibita  and  Dh^taki.  Having  divided  Pushkara  into 
two  parts,  these  two  were  installed  there  (19),  Of  Bhabya 
the  sons  were  seven,  hear  tron  me  of  them,  by  their  names. 
Jalada,  and  KumSlra,  and  Sukum^ra,  and  Baniyaka  and 
Kushottara  and  MedhS-bi  and  Mahidruma,  who  was  the 
seventh.  He  (z*.  e.  Bhabya)  made  countries  called  after 
their  names  (20 — 21).  Similarly  of  Dyutimlln  ther^  were 
seven  sons,  hear  of  them  from  me.  I'hey  were  Kushala, 
Manuga  Oshna,  PrS,kS.ra,  Arihak^raka  Muni,  and  Dundubhi, 
who  is  describrd  as  the  seventh.  And  after  their  own 
names  were  countries  established  similarly  in  Krauncha- 
dwipa  (22 — 23).  In  Kushadwipa  also  the  different  king- 
doms were  marked  by  the  names  of  the  sons  of 
JyoiishmSln.  Hear  of  their  names  from  me  (24),  They  are 


24* 


markandeya  puranam 


Udbhida,  Baishnava,  Suratha,  Lambana,  Dhritimat,  Prav5- 
kara  and  K5pila  which  was  the  seventh  (25).  Of  Bapushman, 
the  lord  of  Shalmaladwipa,  there  were  seven  sons,  namely 
Shweta,  Harita,  Jimuta,  Rohita,  Baidyuta,  Manasa,  and 
similarly  Ketnman,  who  was  the  seventh.  Similarly  in  Sillmala- 
dwipa  also  were  seven  kingdoms  established  whose  names 
were  equal  to  those  of  these  princes  {26 — 27).  Of 
MedhStithi,  the  lord  of  Plakshadwipa,  were  there  also  seven 
sons,  according  to  whose  names  kingdoms  were  marked  in 
Plakshadwipa  into  seven  fold  (28).  Of  these  the  first  is 
the  Shkkabhaba  continent  and  next  Shishirn,  then  Shuka- 
doya,  then  Ananda,  Shiba,  Kshema,  and  similarly  Dhraba 
(29).  The  law,  according  to  the  division  of  the  castes, 
of  the  five  islands  commencing  with  Plakshadwipa  and 
ending  with  the  Shakadwipa,  shouhl  be  known  as  ever- 
kisting,  devoid  of  the  injunctions  regarding  the  destruc- 
tion of  creatures  ; and  they  are  common  in  these  five  con- 
tinents (30-31).  To  Agnidhrn  did  his  father,  O thou  twice- 
born  one,  give  at  first  Jambndvipa.  He  had  nine  sons, 
alt  like  the  lord  of  creatures.  The  eldest  was  called  NShhi,  of 
him  the  younger  was  Kiirpurusha  ; the  third  was  Haribarsha, 
the  fourth  was  IlHhrita  (32 — 33),  the  fifth  was  Ramya, 
the  sixth  was  called  Hiranya  ; of  them  the  seventh  was 
Kuru  and  Bhadra.shwa  is  known  to  have  been  the  eighth  (34), 
the  ninth  was  KetumSla  ; by  their  names  were  principal- 
ities established.  Those  places  names  Kim[)ur*KHha  and 
others,  with  the  exception  of  that  ctdied  Hiinabhaya  gained 
their  objects  naturally,  and  they  were  full  of  etijoyments 
which  could  be  had  without  any  effoits;  and  in  them  there 
were  no  reverses  nor  the  fear  of  otd<agc  and  death  (35 — 36), 
ncr  unrighteousness  were  there  (in  those  continents)  neither 
righteousness  nor  even  (the  distinctions)  hetween  good,  iniddb 
ing,  and  bad  ; nor  were  there  it>  them,  any  of  the  conditions 
of  the  four  Yugm,  neither  the  courses  of  wonnen  nor  of  the 
seasons  (37).  Of  NSblii  the  son  of  Agnidhra  was  born 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


243 


a son.  Oh  thou  twice-born  one,  by  name  Rishabha.  Of 
Rishabha  was  born  BhSrata,  the  brave,  and  the  most  superior 
among  a hundred  (sons)  (38).  Rishabha  having  anointed 
his  son  as  king  took  to  the  order  of  Bhnaprastka  or  final 
renunciation  of  the  household  life,  and  the  highsouled  one 
practiced  penances,  taking  shelter  in  the  hermitage  of  Pulaha 
(39).  The  father  gave  to  BhSrata  the  southern  continent 
of  Himabha  (another  reading — the  continent  to  the  south 
of  the  Himalayas) ; and  therefore  from  the  name  of  that 
highsouled  prince  is  it  called  Bhiratabarsha  (40).  Of 
BhSrata  there  was  a son,  Sumati  by  name,  who  was  a righ- 
teous king, and  having  placed  the  kingdom  upon  him, 
Bharata  too  went  to  the  forests  (41).  By  their  sons  and 
grandsons, — as  also  by  the  (other)sons  of  Priyabrata,  was 
the  world  consisting  of  the  seven  islands,  enjoyed  during 
the  time  of  the  SwiSlyambhaba  Manu  (42).  This  creation 
is  called  Swdyambhuba, — the  first  Manwantara,  as  described 
to  you  by  me.  Oh  thou  superior  among  twice-born  persons 
what  more  shall  I tell  you  ? (43). 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 

IT 

XvRAUsTUKi  said How  many  are  the  islands,  tlie 
oceans  ; how  many,  O thou  twiceborn  one,  are  the  mountains, 
and  how  many  are  also  tlia  continents,  and  what  are  the 
riYera  of  these  ? What  again  are  the  measures  of  the  great 
elements,  and  similiarly  of  the  mountain  Lokliloka  and  the 
changes,  the  measures,  and  the  movements  of  the  moon  and 
the  sun,  Tell  me,  0 thou  great  Muni,  all  this  in  detail  (1—3). 


244 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM 


Markaiiaeya  said  : — This  earth,  Oh  thou  twice-born  one, 
is  fully  a hundred  and  a half  crore  (of  }^ojana)  in  extent. 
I shall  describe  to  you  all  the  places  contained  therein,  hear 
thou  of  that  (4),  Those  islands  that  have  been  described 
by  me,  commencing  with  the  Jambudwipa,  0 thou 
twice-born  one,  and  ending  with  the  Pnskaradwipa,  hear  of 
them  again  in  detail,  Oh  thou  possessor  of  the  eight  good 
qualities  of  kindness  &c.  (5).  The  islands  called  Jatnbu, 
Plaksha,  and  then,  Shamala  and  Kusha,  and  Craun- 
cha,  similarly  Snka  and  the  island  t^iskara,  of  these,  each 
succeeding  one  is  double  the  extent  of  that  which  is  named 
before  it  {6\  And  they  are  covered  on  all  sides  by  the 
seven  oceans,  namely  the  Labana,  tlie  Dugdha,  the  Sarpi,  the 
Dadhi,  the  Ikshu,  and  the  Jala,  of  which  also  each  one  is  twice 
the  extent  of  the  preceding  one  (7).  I sliall  tell  you  of  the 
position  of  the  Jambudwipa,  listen  to  me.  It  is  in  length  and 
breadth  a Idc  of  yajana  (8).  I'he  seven  Ku/a  mountains  in 
this  are  Himab3.n,  Himakuta,  Rishabha,  Meru,  Neela,  Sweta, 
similarly  Siingi  (9).  The  tw^o  great  mountains  in  the 
middle  of  it  are  each  a Ihc  of  yojana  in  extent.  Of  these 
two,  that  which  is  towards  the  south  and  that  which  is 
towards  the  north,  of  them  one  is  less  than  the  other  by  ten 
thousand  yojana,  their  bight  is  two  thousand  yojana  and 
similarly  the  whole  extent  of  the  base  is  also  two  thou- 
sand yojana  (10 — 1 1).  Ml  the  six  Kula  mountains 
enter  into  the  womb  of  the  ocean  ; and  the  earth  here 
is  sloping  towards  the  south  and  north,  and  at  the  middle 
it  is  raised  to  great  heights  (12).  Know  that  on  the  southern 
side  of  this  are  three  continents  or  Barshas  and  similarly 
three  on  the  northern  side  ; and  between  them  the  Ilibrata- 
Barsha  stands  as  a crescent  (13).  Towards  the  east  of  it 
is  the  Barsha  of  Bhadrlshwa,  and  to  the  west  that  of  Ketu- 
maia,  and  in  the  centre  of  Iiabrata  is  the  golden  mountain, 
Meru  (14).  The  height  of  this  great  mountain  is  eightyfour 
thousand y a j and  it  has  entered  into  the  earth  to  sixteen 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  5145 

thousand  and  is  sixteen  thousand in  breadth 

(15).  Because  it  stands  in  the  form  of  a circular  plate 
therefore  its  top  is  thirtytvvo  yojanas  in  extent,  and  on 
the  four  sides,  commencing  with  the  east,  of  the  four 
colours,  white,  yellow,  black  and  red,— the  four  castes 
reside,  according  to  their  respective  colours*^  (i6 — 17). 
In  this  mountain  are  the  courts  of  Indra  and  other  protectors 
of  the  world,  and  in  the  centre  of  them  all,  is  the  court  of 
Brahma,  which  is  fourteen  thousand  in  height  (x8)» 

Similarly  below  it  is  the  Biskamba  mountain,  whose 
height  is  ten  thousand  yojana.  In  the  division  of  sides 
according  to  the  east  &c.,  are  one  after  another  stationed 
the  mountains  Mandara,  GandhamlLdana,  Bipula,  and  similarly 
SupSrsha,  adorned  with  trees  peculiar  to  each.  The  mount 
Mandara  has  got  the  Kadamha  tree  as  peculiar  to  it ; while 
the  distinctive  tree  of  Gandhamrulana  is  the  Jamhu  or 
the  jaman  ; similarly  the  Aswathwa  tree  is  peculiar 
to  Bipula,  and  the  immense^  Bata  is  peculiar  to  Sup.^rsha  ; 
and  these  mountains  are  eleven  hundred  yojanas  in  extent 
in  all  (19 — 21),  The  mountains  on  the  eastern  side  are 
Jathara,  and  Devakuta,  and  Anila  and  Nishadha  which  two 
have  run  into  each  other  (22).  Nishadha  and  Pgripttra 
are  situated  on  the  western  side  of  Meru,  as  in  the  eastern 
mountains  similiarly  also  in  these,  the  extent  is  the  same 
as  that  of  Anila  and  Nishadha  (23)  On  the  south  are  the  two 
great  mountains  Kailgsa  and  Himabgn  they  two  are  extented 
from  east  to  west  and  stand  extended  to  the  limits  of  the 
ocean  (24).  Similarly  the  mountains  to  the  north  are  Sringa- 
bgn  and  also  Jirudhi ; as  in  the  south  so  also  in  the  north 
these  extend  to  the  limits  of  the  ocean  (25).  Oh  thou  most 
excellent  Brdhman^  these  eight  are  called  the  Maryldg  moun- 
tains. Himabat,  Himakuta,  and  other  mountains  are  at  the 

* The  Brahmins  bein^  of  white  colour  occnpit*d  the  white  or  tim  ea?itern 
side,  the  Vaishya  of  yellow  colour,  the  western  side,  the  Sudra  uf  dark  colour 
occupied  the  northern  side,  while  the  Kshettrya  of  red  coUmr  iuhiibilcd  lb* 
ioutheru  side. 


246 


MARK'nNDEYa  PUkANAvI 


distance  of  nine  thousand  Yofanas  from  each  other,  from 
east  to  west,  and  south  to  north  ; and  are  situate  on  all  sides 
of  Meru  in  the  Barsha  called  Iiabrita  (26—27).  Those 
Jaman  or  Jumbu  fruits  that  grow  in  the  GandhamSdana  moun- 
tain, of  the  size  of  the  body  of  an  elephant,  fall  on  the  top 
of  the  mountain  (28).  From  the  melting  of  those  fruits 
arise  the  river  known  by  the  name  of  Jambu,  where  is  pro- 
duced the  gold  called  Jatnbunada  (29).  She  (this  river) 
having  encircled  the  Meru  enters  again  into  its  own  source, 
and  the  waters  of  it  are  drunk.  Oh  thou  tiger  among  the 
twice-born  persons,  by  the  people  of  those  regions  (30). 
Vishnu  exists  in  the  Bhadrashwa  as  Ashvvasira,  in  Bhhrata  as 
the  tortoise,  in  Ketumala  as  the  boar,  and  in  the  next 
Barsha  liabttiha  as  fish  (31).  In  these  four  Barshas  objects 
that  defeat  the  evil  influences  of  stars  are  arranged  according 
to  the  arrangement  of  the  stars.  (32). 


■00' 


CHAPTER  LV. 


IVLarkandeya  said “In  the  four  mountains  commen- 
cing with  Mandira;  Oh  thou  most  excellent  among  twice-born 
persons,  the  gardens  that  are  four  in  number,  and  lakes,  hear 
of  them  with  attention  (i).  On  the  east  is  the  garden  named 
Chaitraratha,  on  the  south  the  garden  Nandan,  on  the  eastern 
peak  is  the  garden  catted  BaibhrSja  and  on  the  northern 
mountain  is  the  garden  cal'ed  SSbitra  (2).  The  lake  Arunoda 
is  on  the  east,  and  the  MSnasa  on  the  south,  Shitoda,  on  the 
west  of  Meru  and  similarly  Mahabliadra  on  the  noith  {3). 


MARKANDEYA  RURANAH 


HI 


Sitarta,  Cbakramunja,  Kulira,  and  then  Sukankaban,  Mani 
shaila,  then  Brishaban,  Mahanila,  the  mountain  Bhaba, 
Sabindu,  Mandara,  Benu,  T;imasa,  Nishadba  likewise  Deba-r 
sbaila — the^  great  mountain  to  the  east  of  Mandara,  Triknta^ 
Shikhar^dri,  Kalinga,  and  then  Patangaka,  Ruchaka,  Sanuman 
mountain,  then  Tamraka  and  Bishakhaban,  Shetodara,  Samula 
Basudhira,  Ratnaban,  Ekasringa  Mabashaila,  Rsijashaila^ 
Pipataka,  Panchashaila,  then  Kailksha,  and  the  most  superior 
among  mountains  Himabat  these  mountains  are  said  to  be 
situate  on  the  right  (or  southern)  side  of  the  mountain  Meru 
(4 — 8).  Suraksha,  Slushiraskha,  Baidurya,  similarly  Pingala, 
Pinjara,  and  then  Mahabhadra,  Surasa,  Kapila,  Madhu^ 
Anjana,  Kukkuta*  Krishna,  and  the  best  of  mountains  Pkndura ; 
and  the  mount  Sahasrashikhara,  Ph.ripatra,  with  Sringaban^ 
are  similarly  situate  on  the  west  of  Meru,  and  Biskama 
is  similarly  situate  on  the  other  side  of  the  w'est  /.  e.  the 
eastern  side,  of  Meru  (9  — ti)*  Hear  of  the  other  moun- 
tains to  the  north,  Saiikhakuta,  then  Bnshabha  likewise 
the  mountain  HansanJibha,  similarly  the  mount  Kapilendra, 
and  Sinum3.n,  and  Nila,  Swarnasringi,  Shatasringi,  Puspaka, 
and  the  Meghaparbata ; BirajSksha,  the  mountain  Barlha, 
Mayura, — these  are  the  mountains  to  the  south  of  Meru. 
The  valleys  of  these  mountains  are  exceedingly  charming 
(12 — 14),  They  are  adorned  with  gardens,  and  lakes  and 
pure  water;  in  them  are  born  men  of  virtuous  deeds  (15). 
These  are  as  heaven  on  earth,  more  meritorious  than  even 
heaven  itself.  In  them  there  is  no  acquisition  of  fresh  virtue 
or  sin  (16).  In  them,  it  is  said,  that  even  the  gods  enjoy  the 
fruits  of  their  righteous  deeds.  0 thou  most  excellent  among 
the  twice-born,  towards  the  close  and  beginning  of  the  winter, 
in  these  mountains,  are  formed  the  great  and  beautiful  habita- 
tions of  Bidyadharas,  and  Yakshas  and  Kinnaras,  and 
Nagas,  and  Rakshasa.s,  and  gods,  and  of  the  Gandharvas 
(17 — 18).  They  are  highly  pure,  and  have  plcMsure^gardenS 
attached  to  them  that  are  pleeising  to  the  rnind,-^ — ^and 


248 


MARK^NDEYA  PURaNAW. 


similarly  there  are  in  them  lakes  pleasing  to  the  mind,  and  of 
which  the  breeze  is  pleasant  in  all  seasons  (19).  In  these 
there  never  arises  any  uneasiness  or  want  of  satisfaction 
among  men.  This  is  the  selfsame  mundane  lotus,  described 
by  me,  of  four  leaves;  Bhadrashwa  and  BhArata  etc  these  arc 
its  leaves  on  the  four  sides.  Tnat  region  towards  the  south, 
called  Bhkrata  which  has  bet  n described  by  me,  is  the  place 
of  merit  and  demerit  {Karmabhumi)  in  no  other  place  are  the 
fruits  of  Karma^  enjoyed  ; in  it  are  all  laws  established.  F'or 
this  reason  are  heaven,  and  the  fruits  of  merit,  and  all  births, 
human  or  hellish,  and  tliose  of  birds  or  of  any  oth®r  animals, 
attained  here  only  by  men  (20 — 23). 


CHAPTER  LVr. 


T 

1 HAT  foot  of  Narayana  which  is  the  sure  refuge  of 
Brahma,  the  cause  of  this  fleeting  world,  the  goddess  of 
Ganga,  who  flows  in  three  currents,  proceeded  from  tl>at  (i). 
Having  entered  into  the  source  of  nectar  and  the  stay  of  the 
waters ; (the  moon)  and  from  there,  having  been  purified,  and 
attaining  powers  for  the  purification  of  others  through  coming 
into  relation  with  the  rays  of  the  sun,  she  fell  on  the  back  of 
the  mount  Meru,  and  from  there  flowed  in  four  channels 
and  fell  in  torrents  obstructed  by  the  ends  of  the  mountains 
Meru  and  Kuta  (2).  With  her  waters  spread  on  all  sides 
without  any  support,  she  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  mountains 
Mandara  and  others,  and  her  waters  were  divided  equally 
(4).  The  w-aters  fell  in  four  currents,  on  the  head  of  four 
different  mountains,  the  eastern  current  well  noted  for  it# 


MAkKANDEVA  PUEANAM. 


541) 


wfint  to  the  |]^arclen  of  Chitraratha  (5).  An^  having  deltigcni 
it,  it  went  to  the  lake  Barunoda  and  from  there  to  the  molin'* 
tain  ShitUnta,  and  thence?  gradually  to  other  mountains  (f>). 

And  having  descended  to  the  eartln  from  moimt 
Bhadrashwa  it  went  (and  fell)  into  the  ocean*  Similarly  that 
current,  of  the  name  of  Aiakam.uula,  having  gone  to  the 
Gandhamadana  in  the  souih,  and  the  garden  at  the  foot  of 
the  Meru,™Nandana,  that  which  p)f•as^•H  the  gods,  and 
having  by  great  force  deluged  tin*  lake  Minasa,  and  having 
similarly  gone  to  the  peak  of  the  Prince  of  monnfains,  and 
from  there  to  all  the  mountains  that  rise  tti  the  south,  and 
having  flooded  them»  fotnul  the  great  iiHUintain  liimagirip 
'Fhere  Shamhhu  held  hf-r,  and  he  whose  ensign  is  the  Inill 
(i>.,  Shiva)  would  not  release  her  {7“icA.  l‘he  lord 
having  been  worshipped  by  Bhagiratha,  In*  meatis  of  fasts 
and  praises,  released  her.  Rehoased  from  there  l»v  Shiva  the 
flooding  great  river,  in  seven  <dmnnels  enffTml  t!m  south- 
ern  ocean  ; and  also  entered  the  eastern  in  three  channells  ; 
and  following  the  car  of  Bhagiratha  in  one  current  flowed 
towards  the  south  (ii:— 12).  Similarly  that  great  river  entered 
the  large  western  foot  of  mount  Meru,  and  from  there  iiiider 
the  name  of  Swarakshu  went  to  t!ie  mountain  BaibhrijA 
(13).  From  there  the  great  river  having  flooded  the  lake 
Shitod^,  i^^ving  found  the  mountain  Swnrakshii  went  to  ! 

mount  Trikuta  (14),  From  there  gradually  falling  on  the 
top  of  the  mountains  and  finding  Keturmlla,  entered  into 
the  ocean  called  Lavana  (15),  Similarly  having  gone  to  the 
Supirshwa^  at  the  foot  of  the  mount  Meru,  and  atlaiiiing 
there  the  name  of  Soma,  she  went  to  the  garden  Sahitii, 

Having  purified  that  she  found  next  the  lake  Mah^blmdra,  from 
there  the  great  river  went  to  Shankhakutii  (16—17),  From 
there  having  one  after  another  found  the  mountains  Brishahha 
and  others,  and  having  flooded  the  mwthern  Kuru  country, 
she  f()un<!  the  great  ocean  (iH),  O thou  !)ull  among  tn  ice- 
born  persons,  thus  is  the  story  (d  the  Gauge’s  n laird  to  ym 
3^ 


250 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


by  me,  from  her  entering  into  the  Jambuchvipa,  as  also  the 
Barshas  in  due  form  (19).  In  all  those  Barshas  commencing 
with  that  called  Kimpurusha  live  creatures,  full  of  happiness, 
free  from  fear,  devoid  of  all  inequalities  of  greater  or  less 
(20).  In  all  these  nine  Barshas  there  are,  in  each,  seven  moun- 
tains, called  the  Kula  mountains,  and  in  each  there  are  rivers 
flowing  from  these  mountains  (21).  In  the  eight  Barshas,  O 
thou  most  excellent  among  the  twice-born  persons,  commen- 
cing with  that  called  the  Kimpurusha,  the  waters  flow  from 
but  of  the  womb  of  the  earth  ; in  niifirata,  however,  water 
is  obtained  from  the  clouds  (22).  In  these  eight  Barshas  the 
attainment  of  people’s  objects  are  of  six  kinds,  namely, 
those  that  are  called  Bdrhhi,  SwiiliMhiki,  Dcxhya,  Toyottha 
Mdnau,  and  Karmaja  (23).  The  attainment  of  objects  from 
divine  trees  that  fulfil  people’s  desires,  is  called  Bdrkskt, 
and  that  which  fulfils  itself  is  called  StvdMdbtki—n&ixxx&X 
^Stddhi ; and  that  which  is  due  to  the.  virtue  of  any  peculiar 
Couhtry  is  ; and  that  which  is  attained  through  the 

subtility  of  the  waters  is  Tayottha  Siddhi\  and  that  which  arises 
from  meditation  is  Mhnasi  Siddhi,  while  that  which 

rssults  from  works  of  divine  worship  is  '(\\t  Karmaja  Siddhi 
(24 — 25).  Besides,  in  these  Barshas  there  are  neither  mental 
pain  nor  disease,  nor  the  conditions  of  the  and  no 

wbrks  giving  rise  to  merit  and  ih-inerit  ; none  of  these  are  in 
these  Barshas,  O thou  most  excellent  Brflhmana  (26). 


CHAPTER  L V n . 

rV,RAuSTUKl  said: — O Revered  One,  you  have  in  detail 
described  to  me  the  Jambudwipa.  This  has  been  related  by  the 
revered  one  that  leaving  BhSrata,  actions  that  produce 


from  here  that  men  attain  heaven  and  salvation,  both  tempo- 
rary and  final ; and  in  no  other  place  on  earth  are  works 
assigned  to  men  ; therefore  0 Brahman,  describe  this  Bhkrata 
to  me  fully  what  are  its  divisions  and  what  its  limits,  as 
also  its  exact  position,  and  0 thou  tiger  among  the  twice-born, 
tell  me  also  what  are  its  mountains  (i — 4). 

MARKANDEYA  said: — Of  this  Bh^rata  there  are  nine  divi- 
sions, of  which  hear  from  me  with  attention.  They  are  to  be 
known  as  existing  between  oceans,  and  unapproachable  from 
one  another  (5).  Iiulradwipa,  Kasheruman,  Stamrabarna. 
Gabli  istiinan,  N^gadwipa,  likewise  Saurnya,  Gandharba, 
Banina,  and  of  them  the  ninth  is  this  island  surrounded  by 
the  ocean.  This  island  is  one  thousand  yofana  in  extent 
from  south  to  north  (6  —7).  Of  that  country,  to  the  east  are 
^he  habitations  of  the  Kirata  |)eople,  and  to  the  west  lie 
those  of  the  Yubanas;  while  within  it  live  Briihmans, 
Kshetriyas,  Baishyas  and  Shudras,  O thou  twice-born 
one  ! (8).  They  are  put  ifit^d  by  the  performance  of  sacri- 
fices and  daily  worsliips,  and  by  trade  and  other  works;  and 
their  conduct  is  also  regulated  by  these  works  (9) ; and  the 
attainment  of  heaven  or  of  earthly  good,  of  merit  or  de^ 
merit  is  also  due  to  these  works.  The  seven  KuUchalas 
here  are  the  Mahendra,  the  Malaya,  the  Sahya,  the  Suktiml.n, 
the  mount  Riksha,  the  Vindya  and  the  Paripatra  (lo).  Near 
them  are  another  thousand  mountains  (u).  They  are  of 
great  extention  and  height,  and  their  tablelands  are  large 
and  pleasant.  Their  names  are  KolSihala,  BaibhrUja, 
Mandara,  the  mount  Dardura,  BAtaswana,  Baidyuta, 
MainAka,  Swarasa,  Tungaprastha,  NAgagiri,  Rochana,  and  the 
mount  PdndarA,  Puspa,  the  mount  Dujjayanta,  ’Raibata,  and 
Arbuda,  Rishyamukkha,  Sagomanta,  the  mount  Kuta, 
Kritasmara,  and  the  mount  Sri,  and  Kora,  and  hundreds 
of  other  mountains;  and  on  them  are  interspersed  habi- 
tations divided  among  tlie  Aryan  and  the  Mh‘chchas  (12—15)* 


which  are  drunk  by  ibeii** — namely  the  Ganges^  the  Saraswati, 
the  Indus,  and  likewise  others,  the  ChandrabhSga  (the  Chenab) 
and  the  Jamuna,  and  the  Shatadru,  the  Bitasta,  (the  Jhefuin), 
the  Irabti,  (the  Ravi),  the  Kuhn,  the  Goniati^  the  Dhutapipa, 
and  the  Bahuda  and  the  Drishadbati,  the  Bip^shS,  (the  Bew^), 
the  Debika,  the  Raukshu,  the  Nirschira,  the  Gandaki, 
the  Kaushiki,  the  Apaga,  all  these,  O Brahman,  that  have 
proceeded  from  the  foot  of  the  Hinialayas  (i6 — 18).  The 
Bedasmriti,  the  Bedabati,  the  Britraglnii,  the  Sindhura,  the 
Benwa,  the  Sanandani,  the  Sadanira,  and  likewise  the  Maid, 
the  Para,  the  Charmanwati,  the  T^pi,  the  BidishS,  and  aho 
the  Betrabali,  and  likewise  the  Shipra,  and  ilie  Ai)arni,«— 
all  these  are  said  to  be  dependents  of  the  mount  ITiripStra 
(19 — 20).  The  Sone,  the  Mah^nada,  the  Narmadi,  tie 
Suratha,  and  the  Adrija,  the  Mandlkini,  the  Daslu^rna,  and 
similarly  another  the  Chitrakutil,  the  Chitrc>t(nil§,  with  the 
Tamasa,  the  Karamodi,  the  Pish^chika,  similarly  otliers,  the 
Pippali,  the  Srini,  the  Bipashfi,  and  the  river  Bajjul*^,  the 
Sumeruji.,  the  Shukimati,  the  Shakuli,  and  the  Trldibi,  and  the 
Akramu,  and  likewise  many  others  of  strong  current  have  risen 
from  the  foot  of  mount  Skandha,  (another  reading,  the  mount 
Riksha)  (21 — 23),  The  ShiprS,  the  Payoslud,  the  NirbindhyS. 
the  Tapi  with  the  NishadhSibati,  tlie  Benwa,  the  Baitarani, 
and  also  the  Sinibali,  the  Kumudbati,  the  Korotayft,  the 
Mahagauri,  the  Durga,  and  likewise  the  AntashirE,— all  these 
rivers  of  pure  water,  and  beautiful  have  proceeded  from  the 
foot  of  the  Vindya  mountains  (24—25).  1 he  Godibari^ 

the  Bhimaratha,  similarly  another  the  Krishnabenwa^  the 
Tungabhadra,  the  Supray?lga,  the  Bilhya,  the  Kaberi,  and 
likewise  the  Apag^,  ail  these  excellent  rivers  have  also  their 
sources  at  the  foot  of  the  Vindhya  range.  Tfie  Kritamlli,  the 
Ttmraparni,  the  Pushpaji,  with  the  UtpalSbati,  these  rivers 
of  tooling  waters  have  proceeded  from  the  mount  Malaya. 
The  Pitrikulyl,  SomakulyS,  RishikulyH,  the  Ikshuki  and  that 


known  to  have  taken  their  rise  from  the  mountain 
The  RishikulyS,  the  Kiunfiri,  the  Mandagr^,  of  R^iiile 
current,  the  KripS,  (second  reading,  tlie  Kri^ha)  the  Ihillshifii 
are  known  to  have  risen  from  the  mountain  Shiikiiinal* 
They  are  all  sacred  rivers  like  the  (Janges,  and  flow  into 
the  ocean  ; they  are  all  mothers  of  the  world,  and  are 
all  said  to  possess  the  power  of  taking  away  sins*  And 
tiiere  are,  O most  excellent  among  twice-born  fierscini, 
other  thousands  of  small  rivers  (26—31),  those  that  flow  cirity 
during  the  rainy  season,  as  well  as  tliose  that  flow*  during 
all  seasons.  Matsya,  Aswakuta,  Kulya,  Ktinlala,  ICist, 
Koshala,  and  Atharba,  and  Kalinga,  Malaka  witli  Iltika,  nr« 
generally  spoken  of  as  the  provinces  of  ilie  Madtiyadcsha 
or  central  division  (32—33).  That  |)riwinco  whirh  is  silnaled 
on  the  north  of  mount  Sahya,  where  tin*  rivor  C#od;1th.if  i flow«i, 
that  is  the  most  plcsisanfc  country  in  all  the  oarih  13  |).  d*he 
pleasant  city,  Gobardhana,  of  the  high»s«niled  BItfIrualia,  anil 
Fialhika,  Bitadhana,  Abhira,K'iIatoyaka,Aparanii'i|Ht,iilfii,tAilk* 
ba,  CharmakhandikH,  Gtndhar,  Yab?ina,  Hiiidtiu.,  Saiiliifii 
Madraka,  Satadruja,  Kalinga,  Pirada,  Ib^riibhuiihikai 
Bahubhadra,  Kaikeya,  Dashamalika,^ — all  these  the  coloiiien  of 
Ksheiriyas,  as  also  of  Vaishyas  and  Sudms  Kambojii,  mill 
Darada,  Barbara,  Harshabardhani,  China,  and  Khara,  li^fnila 
peopled  by  men  ; and  Atreya,  BharadvUja,  Puslikabi,  and 
Kasheruka,  Lampaka,  Shulakira,  Chulika,  with  the  JagmJai 
Aupadha,  Anibhadra,  belonging  to  the  tribes  of  Kiratiw  |— 
Tamasa,  Hansabhlrga,  Kashmira,  I'ungana,  Shuliku,  Knhaka, 
Jarna,aud  likewise  Darba  (35—41).  Tlu^se  are  the  provinces  of 
the  north,  hear  from  me  of  the  countries  to  the  east.  Adhrarakii 
Mudakara,  Antargirya,  Bahirgirya,  likewise  Prabangn^Hatigcy^t, 
M?lnada,  Manabartika,  Brahmottarya,  Prabijaya,  Blulrgabii, 
Jneyamallaka  PrUgjyotisha,  Madra,  Bi<!eha.  llmfiibjuaka^ 
Malla,  Magadha-Gomanta,— these  arc  known  to  be  the 
eastern  [iroviuccs  (42— 44).  Then  th(?re  are  other  |irtHiiice» 


MARKAND.EYA  PURANAM. 


■m 

inhabited  by  the  people  of  the  Deccan  Puudra,  Kerala, 
and  likewise,  Golangula,  Shailusha,  Mushika,  Kusuma, 
Basaka,  Maharastra,  Mahishaka,  Kalinga,  all  these  and  Avira, 
with  Baishikya,  and  Adakya,  and  Shabara,  Punlinda, 
Biindhya.  Mauleya,  Bidarbha,  with  Dandaka,  Paurika, 
Maulikar  and  Ashmaka,  Bhogabardhana,  Nashika,  Kuntala, 
Andhra,  Udbhida,  Ba^^^adaraka ; these  are  tlie  provinces  of  the 
santhern  countries.  Hear  of  the  western  countries  froin  me. 
They  are  Suryaraka,  Kalibala,  Durga,  Anikata,  Pulinda, 
^unpiina,  Rupapa  with  Swapada, likewise  Kurmuina»Kataksliara, 
Nasikyaba,  s^nd  others  that  are  ontlie  north  of  the  Narmada; 
Bhirukaccha,  Samaheya  with  S^raswata,  Kashmir,  Surastra, 
Abanti  with  Arbuda-~rthese  are  all  the  western  provinces, 
^iear  of  the  provinces  on  the  Vindyarange  (45—52). 

Karoslia,  Kerala  vydth  Utkala,  Ultamarna,  Dasharna, 
with  Kiskindhaka,  Toshala,  Koshala,  as  well  as  Tri|)ura, 
likewise  Bidisha,  Tumbura  and  Stumbula,  Pataba,  with 
l^i^hadaj  Annaja,  Tushtikara,  Birohotra,  Abanti  all  these 
provinces  ^re  on  the  back  of  the  Vindya  hills  (53—55).  I 
sha,]!  next  relate  to  you  the  mountainous  countries;  viZ‘ — 
Nihlra,  Hansamarga  Kuraba,  Gurgurm,  Khasha,  Kimta,  Pr|-* 
b^rana.,  Urna,  Darba^  Sakritraka,  Trigartha,  Mllaba,  with 
^nd  Tamasa.  In  these  places  the  Vugas,  Treta  &c, 
fche  laws  of  these  are  well  established.  This  is  the 
Ph|ra^barfiha,  which  has  countries  on  all  its  four  quarters 
{5677-5?),  In  the  south,  the  west,  and  the  east  of  it  is  the 
great  ocean,  while  the  Himalaya  stands  to  the  north  of  it  like 
fh#  striiDg  of  a bow  (59).  This  is  that  BhUratabarsha,  O 
e,3tceUent  among  twiceborn  persons,  which  contain^ 
thf  of  all  that  exist.  It  is  here,  O Brahman,  that 
il^cording  to  the  fruits  of  people’s  action  the  state  of 
Braluiian,  of  the  lord  of  the  immortals,  of  the  gods,  the 
.state  of  Maruta  similarly,  and  likewise  the  births  of  deer, 
beasts,  Apsar^s  and  of  all  reptiles,  aqd  that  of  the  inanimate 
.objects,  are  attainable.  This  is  the  field  of  .K^rma  such  as 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAi. 


fexists  nowhere  else.  Oh  thou  wise  ambrt^  iBrShmabs,  it  is 
the  heart’s  desire  even  of  the  gods  to  be  deprived  of  their 
state  as  gods  to  come  to  earth  as  men  (born  in  Bhlrata** 
barsha).  Man  here  does  that  whicii  even  the  gods  and  the 
Asuras  are  not  able  to  do.  People  here  are  bound  by  the 
chains  of  Karma,  and  are  anxious  to  finish  that  Karma ; they 
do  no  works  moved  by  the  least  happiness  {6o — 64). 


CHAPTER  LIIL 

—00^ 

KkRAUStlJKr  said:— O revered  one,  by  theehas  Bharata 
been  duty  described  to  me  ; including  the  fakes,  the  moun- 
tains, the  provinces  as  well  as  those  that  inhabit  them  (l). 
But  I am  exceedingly  eager  to  hear  of  the  position  of  Hati 
who  has  been  described  by  thee  as  living  in  Bbirata  as  a 
tortoise  (2).  How  that  bright  one,  the  oppressor  of  tbe 
Asura— I.  e,  Bishnu,  exist  in  the  form  of  tortoise,  and  from 
that  how  are  peoples’  merits  and  demerit  revealed,  tell  me  all 
that  in  detail,  from  begining  to  end  (3), 

M -vkKANDEY  \ said  Tim  Possessor  of  the  six  qualities 
and  powers  called  Bhagas,  the  bright  one,  of  the  form  of 
tortoise,  exists  with  his  face  towards  the  east,  holding  this 
Bh^rata,  divided  into  nine  parts  (4),  On  all  sides  of  him  are 
stationed,  in  nine  quarters,  nine  stars;  and  the  countries  that 
are  ruled  by  them,  hear  of  them,  O most  superior  among  twice 
horn  persons,  with  attention  from  me,  in  due  manner  (5}. 
Vedamantra,  Bimandal-jya  ShalmanipS,  Shaka,  Ujjihana,  like- 
wise Batsa,  Ghosha,  Sankya,  similarly  Khasha,  SSraswata, 
Matsya,  Shurasena  with  Matimra,  Dharm^ranya  Jyotishika, 
Gauragriba,  Ciu<lashmaka,  Udbeliaka  with  P5,nchala,  Sanketai 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


255 

Kankamaruta,  Kalakoti  with  Paslianda,  and  the  province  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Paripatra,  Kapingala,  Kunirbahya  and  simi- 
larly Udumbara,  and  G^jabliaya  these  are  situate  in  the 
middle  of  the  tortoise  tliat  live  in  the  water  (6—9).  And  the 
three  stars  Kirtika,  Rohin,  and  Saumya,  are  the  workers  of 
g^ood  and  evil  among-  these  inhabitants  of  the  central  portion 
(of  the  tortoise)  (10  . Brishadhvaja,  Anjana,  Jambnakhya,  Mana* 
bichala,  Shupakarna,  Byaghramukha,  Kharmaka,  Karbati- 
shana,  and  likewise,  Chandreswara,  Khasha,  Magadha,  Girl, 
Mitliila,  Pundra,  Badanadantiira,  Pragjyotisha  with  Lohita 
Samndra,  Purusliadaka,  PurnatkSti,  E^hadragour,  likewise  Oh 
tl.ou  twiceborn  one:,  Udayagiri,  KashSya,  Mekhala,  Muslita, 
Tamralipta,  Ekapadapa,  BardhamAna,  Koshala,  are  all  situate 
in  the  mouth  of  the  tortoise  (l  i — 14).  And  the  three  stars^ 
Raudra,  Punarbashn  and  Pushya  are  stationed  at  this  mouth. 
Oh  Kraushtuku,  hear  me,  I shall  tell  yon  of  the  countries  that 
lie  on  the  south  feet  of  the  tortoise.  Kalinga,  Banga,  Jatliaru, 
Kosbala,  Mrishika  likewise,  ChedI,  Urdiiakarna,  and  the  in- 
habitants of  Matsya  &c.,  on  the  Vindyarange,  the  peopUj  of 
Bidbarbha,  NArikela,  Dharmadwipa,  similarly  AlikA,  Byaghra- 
griba,  Mahagriba,  of  Tripura,  and  ShniasrudhAri,  of  KiskindA^ 
tiemkuta,  Nishadha  and  of  Katakasthala,  Dashirna,  Elarika 
and  the  naked  people  of  BishAda,  and  Kakula  attd  Alaka  and 
similarly  of  Panashabara  exist  in  the  south  east  foot  of  the  tor- 
toise. AshleshA,  likewise  the  star  called  the  I^itri,  as  well 
as  the  First  Falguni,  these  three  exist  holding  on  to  the  south- 
eastern foot.  Lanka,  KAlfijina,  Shaulika,  and  likewise  the 
people  of  Nikata,  and  those  that  live  in  the  mountains 
Mohenclra,  Malaya,  and  Durdara,  and  these  that  live  in  the 
forest  Karkotaka,  and  the  people  of  Bhrigukacca  with  those 
of  Konkan,  all  these  and  similarly  the  people  of  Abliira  and 
those  living  on  tlie  banks  of  the  river  Benwa,  the  people  of 
Abanti,  Dasapara,  and  likewise  the  inhabitants  of  Akaniy 
the  Maharattas  with  the  people  of  Karnata,  Gonarda,  and 
Chitrakuta,  Chola  and  those  of  Kolagiri,  Kraunchadwipa  and 


f^ARKAKDEiVA  i»URAHAM. 


237 


of  tht  mounts  Shankhaj  Sukti  and  Baiduryya,  and  similarly  the 
people  of  BadcharH,  and  of  Kol  and  Charmapatta,  the  people 
of  Gandhav^hya,  and  Para  and  those  that  inhabit  the  islands 
KrishnA;  those  people  that  inhabit  the  mountains  Sarya  and 
Kumada  and  also  those  of  Aukhavana,  with  those  of  Pishika, 
and  those  that  belong  to  Karmanayaka, those  of  southern  Kuru- 
sha,  and  those  of  the  hermitage  of  Rishika,  those  of  Rishabha, 
and  of  Singhala  (Ceylon)  and  the  inhabitants  of  Kanchi 
and  of  Tilanga,  Kunjara  and  those  people  that  inhabit 
Darikaccha,  and  Tamraparni  likewise  Kukshi,  these  all  live 
on  the  southern  portion  of  the  tortoise  (15 — 28).  The  Uttara 
Falguni,  Hasta  and  Chitra,  0 thou  twice-born  one,  these 
three  stars  reside  in  the  southern  belly  of  the  tortoise.  Sinlilar- 
ly  the  people  of  Bapyap§.da  and  Kamboja,  of  Palhaba,  and 
likewise  of  Badav§.mukha  as  those  of  Sindh,  and  Sauvira 
with  the  people  of  Anarta  and  Banitamukha.  The  people 
of  Dcabana,  those  of  Sargiga,  those  of  Sudra,  and  the 
savage  people  of  KrUnapreyadha,  the  Kiratas,  the  Paradas, 
those  of  Pandru  likewise  those  of  Pirashaba  and  Kala,  those 
of  Dburtaka  and  Hemagiri,  those  of  Sindh,  Kalaka,  and 
Raivata,  and  those  of  Surastra,  and  Darada,  and  Dravida  and 
of  Maharnava,  these  habitations  are  situate  on  the  other  one 
of  the  two  southern  feet  of  the  tortoise.  The  stars  Siti 
BishSkha,  and  Mactin,  these  three  (are  the  workers  of  their 
good  and  evil)  (29^ — 33).  Manimegha,  Kshuradri,  Khanjana 
and  likewise  Astagiri,  the  western  Haihaya,  Santika 
Biprashasthaka,  Konkan,  Panchanadaka,  Banian  and  likewise 
Abara,Taraksbara,  Aogataka^  Sarkar,  Shabnabeshmaka,  Guru- 
swara,  Falgunaka  Benumabi — those  inhabiting  these  places, 
likewise  those  that  live  in  Falguluka,  Ghora^  Gurubha,  and 
Kala  and  those  of  Ekekshana,  Bajikesha,  Dergagriba,  with 
those  of  Chuleka,  and  Aswakcsha,  all  these  people  live  in  the 
tail  of  the  tortoise.  Aindra,  Mulaand  likewise  Ashada,  these 
are  the  three  stars  (that  rule  over  their  destinies).  The  people 
of  Maudabya,  and  Chandakhara,  and  Asbmaka,  and  Lalan% 
33 


and  Balika  and  Nrisimhay  and  Benumati  and  others  likewise 
of  Balabasta  and  similarly  those  of  Dharrnabadha,  and  Aluka^ 
ind  the  people  that  live  in  Crukarma,  these  people  live  on 
the  side  of  the  left  feet  of  the  toftoise  ; where  the  three  stars 
Ashada,  Sraban  and  Ghanishta  are  stationed.  Kailash, 
Himabani  and  Dhannshmao,  and  likewise  Basuman,  and  the 
people  of  Kraunclia,  and  of  Kurubaka,  and  Kshodrabina  and 
Rasalaya,  with  those  of  Kaikeya,  and  Bho^aprasta,  with  those 
ok  Yamana  and  Antardwipa,  Trigartta^  Agnija  with  the  in-* 
habitants  of  Ardana,  similarly  the  people  of  Ashwamukha^ 
Prapta  and  of  Chibida  who  wear  long  hairs^  those  of  Dasaraka 
and  Batadhana,  and  Shabadhana;  those  of  Pushkala,  and  the 
inferior  Rairata  similarly  those  that  live  in  Takshashilaj 
those  bf  Ambala^  Malaba,  Madra,  Benuka,  with  those  of 
BMantika,  those  of  Pingala/Minakalapa,  flana,  and  Kuhalaka, 
those  of  Mandabya,  and  Bhntiyubaka,  Saptaka  and  Hema- 
taraka;  those  of  Yoshamati  with  those  of  Glndhara  with 
those  whose  refuge  is  Svarasagara,  those  of  Yaudeya  and 
Dasameya  and  Rajanya  and  those  of  Shyamaka,  as 
well  as  those  of  Ksheraadhurta, — all  these  live  in  the  left 
belly  of  the  tortoise  (34-- 47).  Here  the  star  is  Baruna^ 
likewise  the  two  Praustapada.  The  kingdom  of  the  Kinnarasy 
Pashppila,  with  that  of  Kichaka,  and  that  of  Kashmir,  and 
liko'^ise  the  people  of  AbhisSra  and  those  of  Dabada  and  of 
Angana,  and  those  of  Kulata  and  of  Banarashtra,  and  those 
of  Saurista  and  Brahmapura  and  similarly  those  of  Banabahya 
those  of  Kirata,  and  Kakshikinanda,  and  the  people  of 
Palhaba  and  Lolaua  and  those  of  Darbada,  and  of  Maraka^ 
and  pf  Kurata  and  qf  AnadSraka,  and  of  Ekaplda  and 
tJlpse  of  Khasha,  and  Ghosha  who  are  as  faulters  as  the 
people  of  heaven— similarly  those  of  Hinga  with  the  Yabasas^: 
and  those  of  Chiraprabarana,  those  that  live  in  Triantra  and 
^bse  of  Puruf  and  the  Gandharbas,  on  most  e:|oelIent, 
among'  twice-boi'n  personal,  these  live  on  the  north-east^rtj 


are  the  three  stars  of  this  region  (48-^53).  In  the  rtgions 
mentioned  hj  me  the  stars  belonging  to  them  cause,  good  . 
and  evil,  0 thou  excellent  Muni.  In  these  countries..  O thou 
twice-born  one,  these  stars  in  the  order  related  by  me  cause 
pain  to  them.  While  they  grow  and  gain  all  sorts  of  good 
when  the  stars  are  in  their  proper  places  (54 — 55).  Tlie 
particular  planet  which  is  the  lord  of  the  paiticular  star 
riling  over  a country,  of  that  country,  0 thou  superior  among 
Munis,  both  fear  and  happiness  are  caused  by  that  planet  (56). 
In  each  country,  O thou  most  excellent  one  among  twice- 
born  persons,  the  evil  or  good,  befall  men  equally,  from  these 
stars  and  planets  (57),  When  the  natal  stars  of  creatures 
are  inauspicious,  the  evil  that  befalls  them  is  slight,  and 
similarly  by  the  planets  also  they  are  subjected  to  slight 
pain  (58).  Similarly  when  the  star  is  auspicious  by  the 

sages  who  know  all  these  things,  it  is  said,  tlmt  by  planets 
in  evil  stations  but  little  harm  is  caused  to  men  (59).  When 
the  €vi  sight  of  the  planets  falls  on  the  effects  of  the  vktnmM 
men,  or  on  their  cattle,  or  on  their  servants,  or  on  their 
fiiendi,  or  on  their  sons,  or  on  their  wives  or  their  hotset 
there  is  iaar  of  evil  (€0).  When  the  s^ht  of  the  evtt 
planet  falls  on  one^s  own  self,  there  Ja  cause  of  great  fear 
to  men  of  little  merit  or  those  that  are  given  to  sin, 
while  there  is  no  cause  of  fear  to  the  sinless  (61).  All  . 
the  good  and  evil  arising  from  either  the  locality  or  the 
quarter  in  which  people  live,  or  from  their  kings  or  from  . 
their  own  selves,  or  from  the  operation  of  the  stars  and  the 
planets, — ^all  these  naen  suffer  or. enjoy  (62).  Their  mutual 
safety  h caused  by  stars  that  are  not  inauspicious,  and  by 
them  when  they  are  inauspicious  is  caused  loss  of  good, 
O lliou  prince  among  Brihmans  ! (63).  The  position,  of  stars 
in  the  particular  parts  of  the  tortoise  as  related  by  me,  is 
common  to  all  the  countries  situate  in  those  parts,  and  so 
is  also  the  evil  or  good  caused  bj  them  (64).  Therefr^ie . 


26a 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM* 


knowing  the  presiding  stars  of  the  country  as  also  the  un- 
favourable influence  of  one^s  own  (natal)  stars,  the  wise 
and  the  good  shall  propitiate  them  according  to 
lokahada  (65).  The  desires,  of  the  gods  and  Datyas  that 
fall  on  the  earth  from  the  sky,  are  called  lokahada  (66). 
The  learned  shall  duly  perform  those  propitiatory  rites  nor 
give  up  the  lokahada  of  those  men  who  perform  these  ; the 
coming  in  of  evil  is  obstructed,  and  the  good  arises  and  evil 
is  utterly  destroyed,  O most  excellent  among  twice-borfi 
persons ; while  of  those  who  do  not  observe  these,  they  (the 
stars)  destroy  the  senses,  and  also  the  household  properties, 
&c.  Therefore  are  the  wise  given  to  the  performance  of 
propitiatory  rites,  and  are  devoted  to  traditions  similarly  ; the 
propitiatory  rites  should  be  performed  and  the  lokahada 
observed  whenever  the  stars  are  unpropitious  (67 — 69).  Then 
the  wise  do  not  work  harm,  do  not  fast,  perform  auspicious 
works,  and  pay  homage  to  places  of  sacrifice,  and  perform 
japa  and  homa^  and  likewise  acts  of  charity,  and  bathing 
and  give  up  anger  and  other  passions,  and  ill  will 
towards  all  creatures,  and  practise  good  will  towards  them, 
avoid  bad  words,  and  similarly  harsh  and  unpleasant 
words,  and  the  worship  of  the  stars  ; these  should  men  do 
when  suffering  from  evil  stars.  In  this  way,  O thou  most  excel- 
lent Brahman,  all  evils  are  fully  remedied  in  men  who  thus 
control  and  discipline  themselves.  The  lord,  the  possessor  of 
the  six  high  qualities,  the  BkagaSj  the  spirit  who  is  un- 
approachable by  thought,  Narayana,  who  exists  as  tortoise 
in  Bharata,  and  in  whom  all  is  established,  and  where  the  gods 
are  also  established, — has  all  been  described  by  me  (70 — 74). 
In  this  (tortoise)  the  gods  exist  holding  on  each  to  a star. 
There  in  the  middle  exist  the  carrier  of  sacrificial  offerings~the 
god  Agni,  and  the  earth,  and,  O thou  twice  born  one,  the  moon 
and  three  stars  (of  the  signs  of  the  zodiac)  the  lamb  &c— -exist 
in  its  middle,  and  the  pairs  &C-— exist  in  the  mouth  of  the 
tortoise,  while  the  crab  and  the  lion  exist  in  the  south-eastern 


in  the  belly  ; the  balance  and  the  scorpion  exist  on  the  south- 
eastern foot  ; the  scorpion  exists  on  the  back  with  the  archer 
the  archer  and  the  three  stars  commencing  with  the  horse^ 
exist  on  the  north-eastern  foot,  while  the  tortoise  and  the 
fish,  0 thou  most  superior  among  the  twice  born  persons, 
similarly  exist  in  the  northern  belly  of  this  (tortoise),  while 
the  fish  and  the  lamb  exist  on  the  north-eastern  foot  (75 — 78). 
In  this  way  are  the  different  regions  of  the  earth  and  in  those 
regions  their  respective  stars,  and  in  those  stars  their  respec- 
tive signs  of  the  zodiac,  and  in  those  signs  their  respective 
planets  stationed.  Therefore  the  evils  arising  from  the  stars 
and  the  planets  are  said  to  be  Deshapida  or  evils  pertaining  to 
particular  regions.  And  on  these  evils  arising  the  injunction 
is  that  people  shall  bathe  and  perform  horn  and  acts  of  charity. 
That  foot  of  Vishnu  which  exists  among  the  planets  is 
Brahma,  called  even  as  the  Narlyana;  lie  is  unthinkable  and 
is  the  cause  and  lord  of  the  world  79 — 81. 


'00- 


CHAPTER  LIX. 


Oh  Muni,  the  Bharata  Barsha  is  duly  described  by  me. 
The  Satya,  the  Tceta,  the  Dwapara,  and  the  Kali,  these  are 
the  four  Yugas;  and  it  is  here  alone  that  these  Yugas  and 
thetfour  castes  exist.  Oh  thou  twice-born  one  j Oh  Brahman, 
in  the  four  Yugas,  Satya,  Treta  &c  here  people  lived 
for  four,  three,  two,  and  likewise  one  hundred  years  respective- 
ly. The  Barsha  Bhadr^^hwa  by  name  that  is  situate  to  the 
east  of  Debakuta,  at  the  back  of  the  Prince  of  mornutains,  hear 


26a  MARKANbEYA  PURANAM 

•of  it  from  me.  In  this  Barsha,  Swetaparna,  and  Nila,  and  the 
most  excel'lejit  among  mountains,  Shaibila,  Kamanja,  Pana- 
shalagra,  these  five  are  the  Kula  mountains  ; their  offsprings 
there  are  many  others,  small  moun tains  (i — 5)*  them  are 

a thousand  provinces,  of  Various  kinds,  that  appear  like 
flowers,  and  the  tabledand  of  these  smaller  mountains  is 
clean  and  auspicious  looking  (6j.  Shita,  Shankilbati,  Bhadrl, 
Ghakrabarta,  these  and  others  are  the  rivers  in  this  Barsha,— 
they  are  all  of  great  extent,  and  the  carriers  cyf  great  volumes 
orf  cooling  waters.  The  men  in  this  Barsha  are  possessed 
of  the  glamour  of  pure  gold  and  mother-of-pearl,  associates 
of  the  gods,  righteous,  and  the  length  of  their  life  is  a 
thousand  years.  Among  them  there  is  neither  good  nor  bad, 
all  of  them  look  On  this  creation  with  an  equal  eye,  and  they 
are  endowed  with  the  eight  natural  virtues  of  indifference  to 
the  conflicts  of  heat  and  cold  &c— There  the  four-armed  god 
Janarddana,  exists  as  Aswashira,  adorned  with  three  eyes,  and 
having  head,  breasts,  the  reproductive  organ,  the  feet  and  the 
hands.  Of  him.  the  lord  of  the  world  is  this  to  be  known  as 
the  property  (6 — ^n).  To  the  west  of  it  is  the  Ketumala 
Barsha  5 hear  of  it  from  me.  Bishala,  Kambala,  Krishna, 
Jayanta,  the  mountains  Hari,  Bishoka,  and  Bardham^n,  these 
seven  are  the  Kula  mountains  here.  There  are  a thousand 
other  mountains  wherein  people  live.  The  Manlaya,  the 
Mahakaya,  the  Shakapota,  the  Karambakl,  the  Angull,  and 
others,  hundreds  of  peoples  live  there,  who  drink  the  waters 
of  the  Rangkshu,  the  ShySma,  the  Kamball,  the  AmoghS, 
the  Kamini,  and  of  a thousand  other  great  rivers  (12— IS). 
The  duration  of  human  life  here  is  the  same  as  in  the  pre- 
vious Barsha,  and  Hari,  the  possessor  of  the  six  great 
qualities,  the  Bhagas,  exists  in  the  form  of  the  boar  with  Ms 
feet,  breast,  back  and  sides,  all  like  the  boar, — in  this  Barsla, 
which  has  three  staxs  attached  to  It,  and  all  these  stars  are 
propitious.  Thus  tben^  is  the  Ketmmila  Barsha  tp 

you,  O esdceBent  Muni,  by  mo  Next  I shall 


% 


fruits  oE  honey  and  they  constantly  bear  flowers  and  fruits ; 
and  tfiey  produce  cloth  and  in  their  fruits  are  produced  orna- 
ments; those  trees  are  able  to  fulfil  all  desires,  and  bestow 
the  fruits  of  all  sorts  of  wishes  (i8 — 19).  The  earth  is 
made  of  precious  stones  and  metals,  the  air  is  sweet-scented 
and  pleasant  during  all  seasons.  Men,  who  fall  off  from  the 
region  of  the  gods,  are  born  there.  They  are  born  in  pairs  of 
males  and  females,  who  live  for  equal  periods,  and  are 
attached  to  each  other,  even  as  the  Cakrabakas  (20 — 21), 
The  duration  of  their  life  is  fourteen  and  a half  thou- 
sand years.  In  that  Barsha  ChaudrakSnta,  and  Suryakanta 
these  two  princes  of  mountains  are  the  Kulicalas ; and  be- 
tween them  the  great  river  Bhadrasoma  flows  on  the  earth 
and  the  current  of  its  waters  is  pure  and  without  any  unclean» 
things.  Similarly  in  the  northern  part  of  this  Barsha  there 
flows  a thousand  other  rivers,  some  of  whose  currents  are  of 
ghe0  and  of  some  of  milk.  In  that  Barsha  there  are  likewise 
many  lakes  of  curd,  and  many  smaller  mountains  j and  many 
kiadf  of  fruits  whose  flavour  and  taste  are  like  those  of 
nectar,  are  tibere  in  the  forests  of  that  Barsha,  which  number 
hundreds  a#sd  tbQu«ands,  A ud  there  Vishua,  the  possessor 
of  the  six  great  <|ualitks,  the  BAagas,  he  .whose  face  is 
towards  the  east,  is  of  the  form  of  fish  (22 — 26).  O thou 
most  excellent  among  Munis,  there  the  stars  are  nine  in 
number  arranged  ia  groups  of  three,  and  the  quarters  are 
also  divided  into  nine  parts.  In  the  ocean  (of  this  Barsha), 
oae  island  is  Candradwipa  sad  another  likewise  Bhadradwipa 
and . these,  0 thou  great  Muni,  are  well-known  as  sacred 
among  places  in  the  octan.  Thus  is  the  Kurubarsha  des- 
cribed by  me  to  you,  0 Brahmana-  Hear  from  me  now  all 
about  the  Kimpurusha  and  other  BarsUas  (27 — 29). 


C HAPTER  LX. 


* 


shall  presently  describe  to  you,  O thou  twice-born  ofie^ 
that  which  is  Kimpurusha  Barsha,  where  the  duration  of  the 
life  of  men  with  well-grown  bodies  is  a ten  thousand  year ; 
where  men  and  likewise  the  women  are  without  disease  and 
without  bereavement*  The  Plaksha  tree  there  is  said  to  be 
as  big  as  in  the  garden  of  the  gods — Nandana.  Those  men 
always  drink  the  juice  of  the  fruit  of  that  tree;  and  the  wo- 
men have  permament  youth,  and  are  possessed  of  the  sweet 
scent  of  the  lotus  (1—3.)  Next  by  me  will  be  described  the 
Hari  Barsha  which  is  situate  next  to  the  Kimpurusha  Barsha, 
The  men  there  are  born  with  the  glamour  of  gold,— they 
have  all  fallen  off  from  the  region  of  the  gods,  and  are  in 
every  respect  possessed  of  the  beauty  of  the  gods.  In  the 
Haribarsha,  all  men  drink  the  auspicious  juice  of  the  sugar- 
cane. There  old  age  does  not  oppress  people  nor  make  them 
lean  iri  any  way  ; as  long  as  they  live  they  live  free  from 
disease  (4—6).  That  which  has  been  described  by  me  as 
Ilabrita,  is  the  Meru  Barsha ; it  stands  in  the  middle— there 
the  sun  does  not  burn,  nor  do  the  men  there  become  infirm 
and  decrepit ; there  the  rays  of  the  sun  or  the  moon  do  not 
gain  their  own  objects  (they  do  not  give  light)  ; nor  even  the 
s of  the  stars  and  the  planets  ; there  the  glow  of  the 
Meru  is  the  most  superior  light.  There  men  are  born  hav- 
ing the  colour  and  brightness  of  the  lotus  and  eyes  like  the 
petals  of  the  lotus  and  the  sweet  scent  of  the  lotus,  and  who 
live  on  the  juice  of  the  Jamiu  fruit.  (7-^.)  The  duration 
6i  life  is  thirteen  thousand  years,  in  Ilavrita  which  exists 
like  a saucer  in  the  body  of  the  Meru.  There  the  Meru  is 
naduntain.  Thus  is  Iltvrita  Varsha  described. 


me.  There  too  the  Nyagrodha  tree  is  of  exceeding  height 
and  of  green  leaves,  and  drinking  the  juice  of  the  fruit  of 
this  tree,  so  they  live.  There  the  duration  of  life  is  a ten 
thousand  years,  and  the  men  enjoy  the  fruits  thereof ; they 
are  distinguished  for  their  affections,  and  are  pure,  and  devoid 
of  old  age  and  bad  smell  (io-~-l3).  Froni  that  to  the  North 
is  the  Barsha  called  Hiranmaya,  there  the  river  is  the 
Hiranvati  brightened  by  immense  lotuses.  Men  there  are 
born  of  exceeding  strength  and  full  of  vigour,  and  of  the  fornt 
of  Yaksha,  and  possessing  great  energy,  riches,  and  pleasant 
to  look  at  (14 — 15). 

A 

CHAPTER  LXI. 

Jn^RAtiSTlKi  said  :-“0  Mahamuni,  what  I asked  thefe  has 
keen  duly  described  by  theei—namely  the  positions  of  the 
land  and  the  waters  and  likewise  their  measurements  and 
the  stars  J and  their  position  and  measure,  and  also  of  the 
three  lokas,  Bhu  &c.,  add  all  the  nether  worlds, — and  like- 
wise has  the  Manwantara  of  the  Swayambhuba  Muni,  been 
described  to  me — ^0  Muni,  I desilre  to  hear  now  of  the  other 
Manwantaras  with  the  mastets  of  thbse  Manwhntaras,  and 
the  gods,  the  Rishis,  and  the  sons  of  the  Manus  arid  the 
kings  (1—3). 

Markandeya  said  After  that  ManWantara  called  the 
Swayambhuba,  which  has  been  described  to  you  by  me,  there 
was  another  Manwantara,  called  the  Sanfisha  Manwantara, 
hear  of  that  from  me  (4)-  A certain  superior  person  among 
the  twice-born  castes  lived  in  the  town  of  ArunSspeda,  on  the 
34 


266 


markandeya  huraman. 


banks  of  the  river  BarunS,  0 Brahitian,  who  was  in  beairty 
even  as  the  twins  the  Aswinis  (5).  He  was  of  a mild  dis- 
position,  living  by  righteous  occupation  and  learnt  the 
Vedas  and  the  VedSngas  in  all  their  entirety,  a lover  of 
guests,  and  the  shelter  of  persons  coming  to  bis  house  after 
night  fall  (6).  But  he  had  this  idea,  " I shall  see  the  whole 
world,  which  contains  most  pleasant  forests  and  gardens,  and 
is  adorned  with  many  cities  (7).”  Then  once  upon  a time 
came  a guest  to  his  house,  who  knew  of  the  virtues  of  many 
herbs,  and  was  an  expert  in  magical  formulas  (8).  This 
(guest)  having  been  served  by  him  with  a mind  purified  by 
reverence,  told  him  of  many  countries,  and  beautiful  cities, 
and  forests,  and  rivers,  sacred  and  extensive,  and  mountains. 
He  then  being  possessed  with  admiration  addressed  that  most 
superior  among  twice-born  persons  (thus)  (9—10).  *'Thot» 
must  be  overtaken  by  extreme  fatigue  for  Imving  seen  many 
places,  but  thou  art  not  very  old,  nor  hast  thou  gone  very 
far  away  from  youth,  0 thou  twice-born  one,  how  dost  thou 
in  this  short  period  travel  all  over  this  world  (1 1)." 

Tke  BrahmaNA  said  : — 0 Brahman,  by  the  power  'of  a 
herb  sanctified  by  magic  forumlas  with  unohatructed  move- 
ment, I walk  a thousand  Yofana  in  h.alf  a day  (t.i). 

Markandeya  said  ; — Thei>  timt  Bi.^Iiman  again  spoke  to 
him  thus  with  due  respect,  being  possessed  by  unshaken  faith 
in  his  words  (13).  “Grant  me  this  favour,  O thou  posseasor 
of  the  six  great  qualities  the  Bhagas,  of  the  power  born  of 
magic  or  mystic  formulas.  I hsive  got  a very  great  desire  to 
see  this  world  (14).“  That  BrShman,  of  a generous  mind, 
gave  to  him  the  feet-salve  and  also  influenced  the  quarters 
named  by  him  hy  the  power  of  mystic  formulas  with  great 
care  (15).  Then,  0 thou  most  superior  among  twice  born 
persons,  that  twice  born  one,  having  covered  his  feet  with 
that  salve,  with  a view  to  see  it,  went  to  the  JIim.alay8  that 
have  many  8pring8,--thinkiog  that  while  I ah, all  go  a thousand 
Y oj9na  in  half  a day  in  the  ether  half  I,  shall  return  (home). 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


267 


(16 — 17).  Having  found  the  top  (lit  the  back)  of  the  Himalayas  | 

without  getting  any  bodily  fatigue  the  twice  born  one  then 
walked  there,  the  top  of  the  mountain  covered  by  snow  (18).  jj 

Then  of  him  thus  walking  the  feet  salve,  produced  by  superior 
herbs  dissolved  by  the  snow,  was  washed  away  (19).  Then 
his  movement  being  made  slow,  he  walking  here  and  there  ; 

saw  many  most  pleasant  table-lands  of  the  Himalaya  moun- 
tain (20).  Seeing  these  table-lands  inhabited  by  Sidhas  and 
Gandharbas,  and  enjoyed  by  the  Kinnaras,  and  which  was 
pleasant  on  account  of  there  being  held  the  play 
grounds  and  promenades  of  the  gods — , and  crowded  by 
hundreds  of  heavenly  Apsar^s,  this  person,  most  superior  | 

among  the  twice  born,  O Muni,  though  full  of  delight,  was 
not  however  satiated  t(2i — 22).  Some  place  was  pleasant 
because  of  the  falling  of  water  from  some  springs ; another 
place  was  resounded  by  the  sound  of  the  dancing  peacocks  j 

(23).  Some  place  was  full  of  most  pleasant  looking  Datya- 
hoka,  Yastika  and  other  birds,  and  of  the  notes  of  the  black- 
birds that  run  away  with  the  hearing  of  people  (24).  He, 
fall  pf  rapture,  saw  the  great  Mountain  Himalaya  which  is 
fanned  by  wind  scented  by  the  smell  of  flowering  trees  (2S). 

Having  seen  this  great  Mountain  Himalaya^  this  son  of  the 
twice  born  person,  thought  I shall  see  it  again, and 
turned  his  mind  towards  his  home  (26),  Then  with  his 
feet  salve  dropped  off,  and  with  his  movement  gradually 
becoming  slow,  he  began  to  think,  ‘Vhat  is  this  that  has  been 
done  by  me  through  ignorance  (27).  My  salve  has  been 
destroyed,  having  been  dissolved  by  the  waters  of  the  snow, 
and  this  mountain  is  also  very  difficult  to  walk,  and  I am  come 
here  a great  way  off  from  my  home  (28),  I shall,  consequent- 
ly, be  subject  to  loss  of  the  daily  sacrificial  rites  as  the  keeping 
up  of  the  fire  at  the  family  altar ; what  shall  I do  here,  in  the 
face  of  this  great  difficulty  (29).  In  this  superior  mountain, 
crying  this  is  beautiful,  this  is  beautiful,  I shall  tnever,  with 
«iy  eye  thus  attached  to  it,  find  satiation  or  satisfaction  in  .a 


268 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


' I 

'i  ^ 
I ' 

'ji 


j 

i 


Jiundrcd  yc3.rs  (3^)'  sides  the  songs  of  the  ICinn^rsts 

attract  the  ear,  and  the  smell  of  flowering  trees  attracts  the 
. sense  of  the  smell  (31)-  Similarly  the  breeze  here  is  pleasant 
to  the  skin,  and  the  friuts  are  full  of  flavour  and  the  lakes,  that 
are  beautiful  to  the  mind,  rob  the  heart  per  force  (33).  Under 
these  circumstance  if  I can  see  some  jewel  of  a hermit,  he  will 
instruct  me  in  the  means  by  which  I can  go  home  (33).” 

MARKANDEYA  said That  Brahman,  thus  thinking,  walk- 
ed  about  on  the  Himalayas,  having  been  exceedingly  dis- 
tracted  owing  to  the  loss  of  the  power  of  the  mystic  feet- 
salve  (34).  Baruthini,  the  daughter  of  Mania,  a most  superior 
Apsara,  possessed  of  great  beauty,  and  possessed  of  the 
eight  qualities,  namely,  kindness,  &c.,'  said  to  that  superior 
Muni  thus  walking  on  the  Himalayas  (35).  Then  seeing  that 
superior  twice-born  person,  Baruthini,  immediately  being 
moved  by  love,  her  heart  drawn  by  cupid,  began  to  think, 
<‘who  is  this  man,  with  most  beautiful  features?  My  birth 
shall  be  full  of  fruit  if  he  does  not  rejtxit  me.  O the  sweet- 
ness of  the  beauty  of  this  person  1 O the’graceful  movement 
of  this  person  1 I have  seen  gods  and  likewise  Asuras  and 


Siddhas  and  Gandharbas,  and  PannagSs,  but  there  has  not 
been  a single  one  equal  in  beauty  to  this  great  aouled  one. 
Should  he  be  as  full  of  love  to  me  as  I am  to  him,  then 
shall  I know  that  I had  accumulated  a mass  of  virtue.  If 
he  should  cast  to-day  affectionate  and  loving  glance  on  me, 
then  what  woman  in  the  three  worlds  is  more  endowed 
with  the  fruits  of  virtue  than  myself  (36—42)." 

Markanoeya  said  : — That  alhereal  woman,  stricken  by- 
Cupid,  thus  thinking  showed  herself  of  most  lovely  figure, 
(to  the  Brahman).  That  son  of  the  twice-born  person  see- 
ing Baruthini  of  most  superior  beauty,  approaching  her  with 
due  respect,  spoke  these  words  (43).  "Who  art  thou,  the 
glow  of  whose  face  is  of  that  of  the  unfolding  lotus,  ? Whose 
art  thou?  What  art  thou  staying  here  for?  1 am  a Brlb- 
mana  who  have  come  here  from  the  city  called  .XrunSspada 


MAl^KANDEYA  PURANam 


26g 


(44).  Dissolved  by  tlie  waters  of  the  snow  my  feet-salve  has 
been  destroyed,  by  virtue  of  which  I had  come  here,  O 
thou  whose  eyes  are  like  the  rapturous  Khanjana  bird  (45).'' 

Baruthini  said I am  the  daughter  of  Muleya,  am  the 
possessor  of  the  eight  qualities  of  kindness  &c.,  known  by 
the  name  of  Baruthini.  I always  rove  about  this  beautiful 
great  mountain  (46).  Such  am  F;  now,  0 Brahmana,  seeing 
you,  I have  been  stricken  by  lust.  Order  whatever  you  want, 
that  shall  be  done  by  me,  I am  subject  to  thy  will  (47). 

The  Brahmana  said  : — O thou  whose  smile  is  pure, 
tell  me  by  what  means  I may  get  to  my  home.  O thou  auspi- 
cious one,  all  my  sacrificial  works  are  being  neglected^ 
and  the  non-performance  of  the  daily  and  the  periodical 
sacrifices  is  the  greatest  loss  to  twice-born  persons.  There- 
fore 0 gentle  one,  do  thou  deliver  me  from  the  Himalayas 
(48 — ^49).  Living  away  from  their  homes  is  never  permitted 
to  the  BrShmanas ; neither  have  I any  fault,  O thou  timid  one, 
except  the  curiousity  to  see  strange  countries  (50).  Always 
in  the  house  of  superior  twice-born  persons,  there  is  the  per- 
formance  of  all  sacrificial  works  ^ and  there  is  non-perfor- 
rnance  (a  loss)  of  both  the  daily  and  the  periodicaF  sacri- 
fices of  the  BrShman  who  lives  away  from  his  home  (51). 
What  more  shall  I say,  do,  0 thou  of  good  name,  that  by 
which  I may  see  my  own  home  before  the  setting  of  the 
sun  (52). 

Baruthini  said  : — Do  not  say  thus,  O thou  possesser 
of  the  good  eight  qualities  of  kindness,  &c.  May  that  day 
never  be  to  me  when  leaving  me  thou  shalt  repair  to  thy 
own  house  (53).  O thou  son  of  a twice-born  person,  even 
heaven  itself  is  not  more  beautiful  than  this  Himalaya. 
Therefore,  we  live  here  leaving  the  city  of  the  gods  (54). 
Therefore  0 my  love,  by  roving  about  this  lovely  snow- 
peaked  mountain,  with  me,  thou  shalt  not  recollect  thy 
earthly  friends  (55).  I,  who  have  been  subject  to  thee  by 
cupid  and  whose  heart  has  been  robbed  by  thee,  shall  give 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

270 

thee  here  garlands,  and  wearing  apparel  and  ornaments,  and 
food,  and  objects  of  enjoyment,  and  scents  and  annoiot- 
ments  (56).  The  music  Vika  and  Vena,  and  songs  of  the 
Kinnaras  that  please  the  mind,  the  breeze  that  delights  the 
limbs,  warm  rice,  and  pure  water  (57);  bed  after  thy  mind, 
and  sweet-scented  annointments, — all  these  are  to  be  con- 
stantly bad  here,  O thou  possesser  of  the  eight  good  qualities 
of  kindness,  &c.,  what  more  is  there  in  thy  own  home  (58). 
Living  here,  old  age  shall  never  be  thine,  this  land  of  the 
iohabitants  of  Tridasha,  the  country  of  the  gods)  is  the  giver 
of  every  thing  that  keeps  up  the  youth  (59).  Thus  saying 
she,  whose  eyes  are  like  lotus, — saying  this,  “O  thou  favour 

nie-” intent  on  enjoying  him,  all  of  a sudden,  embraced 

him  full  of  love  (60).  ; 

The  Brahmana  said  : — 0 thou  vile  one,  touch  me  not, 
go  to  others  who  are  of  thy  class  and  nature.  By  one  art 
thou  sought  for  one  thing,  and  thou  seekest  me  for  another 
thing.  By  performing  sacrifice  with  sacrificial  offerings 
morning  and  evening  men  go  to  the  eternal  abode  of  bliss. 
O thou  fool,  all  these  three  worlds  are  established  on  the 
sacrificial  offerings.  Therefore  tell  me  of  that  by  which  I 
may  swiftly  go  to  my  own  house  (6l — 62). 

Baruthini  said : — Why,  0 Brahmana,  am  I not  dear  to 
thee?  Is  not  this  mountain  pleasant  ? Leaving  the  Gandharbas 
and  Kinnaras,  who  can  be  the  object  of  thy  desire.  There 
is  no  doubt  of  it  that  thou,  O reverend  one,  shalt  go  from 
here.  For  a little  while  do  thou  enjoy  that  pleasure  with  me 
which  is  difficult  of  attainment  (64). 

The  Brahmana  said  ; — ^The  three  sacrificial  fires,  Garha- 
patya  and  others  are  the  objects  of  my  desires,  the  place  for 
the  sacrificial  fires  is  most  pleasant  of  all  places  to  me,  and 
the  goddess  Bistarani  is  my  love  (65). 

Baruthini  said: — 0 thou  twice-born  one,  those  that  are 
the  eight  virtues  of  the  spirit,  of  them  the  first  is  mercy  ; O 
thou  observer  of  the  right  law,  why  dost  thou  hot  perform 


MARKANDEYA  puranam. 


27 1 

that  (mercy)  to  me  (56).  I am  so  full  of  love  for  thee  that 
forsaken  by  thee  I shall  not  live.  This  what  I say  is  not 
false,  therefore  be  kind  to  me,  O thou  the  gladdener  of  thy 
clan  (67). 

The  BrahmanA  said : — If  thou  art  really  full  of  love,  and 
if  thou  dost  not  say  so  to  me  merely  from  courtesy,  then 
explain  to  me  the  means  by  which  I shall  be  able  to  reach  my 
own  home  (68). 

Baruthini  said  : — Thou,  0 revered  one,  shalt  without 
doubt  go  from  here  to  thy  own  home ; only  for  a little  while 
enjoy  with  me  those  pleasures  that  are  difficult  of  attain- 
ment (69). » 

The  BrahmaNA  said  : — 0 Baruthini,  nothing  is  permitted 
to  the  Brahman  to  be  done  for  the  sake  of  enjoyment.  All 
the  works  on  earth  of  the  Brahmanas,  are  for  pain,  but  they 
bear  fruit  in  the  world  to  come  (70). 

Baruthini  said  : — By  working  the  salvation  of  me  who 
is  dying  the  friut  of  thy  meritorious  action  shall  be  assured 
in  the  next  world,  as  also  enjoyment  in  another  birth.  In 
this  case,  thus  these  two  are  causes  of  thy  advancement. 
By  thy  rejection  I shall  find  death  and  thou  shalt  attain, 
sin  (71—7:3). 

The  Brahmana  said  : — strange  woman  shall  not  be 
desired,  so  said  my  preceptors  (gurus,  meaning  both  father, 
mother,  the  teacher  of  the  vedas  and  the  spiritual  preceptor). 
Therefore  I do  not  desire  thy  love,  however  much  thou 
mayest  lament  or  grieve  (73). 

MarkanDEYA  said: — So  saying  that  possessor  of  the 
eight  good  qualities  of  kindness  &c.,  having  touched  water, 
being  calm  and  subdued  in  mind,  and  pure,  having  saluted  the 
Garhapatya  Agni,  said  this  in  such  a way  that  none  might 
hear  it Thou  revered  Grahapatya  Agni  j thou  art  the  root 
of  all  sacrifices;  from  thee  have  sprung  the  Ahavanya  Agni, 
and  the  Dakshina  Agni,  not  from  any  one  else  ; through  thy 
s itisfaction  ' do  the  gods  become  the  cause  of  rain  and 


MaRKANDEYA  purAnam. 


harvest,  and  from  that  harvest,  the  whole  exists,  not  frnfrt 
any  thing  else.  In  this  way  by  the  power  of  truth  by  which 
from  thee  all  these  worlds  grow,  similarly  (by  thy  power) 
may  I see  my  own  home  to-day  when  the  sun  is  still  (on  the 
firmament).  As  by  me  the  Vedic  rites  have  never  been 
neglected  in  their  due  time,  by  the  power  ot  that  truth  may 
I see  the  sun  while  stationed  in  my  own  house.  As  I never 
had  a desire  for  other’s  riches  or  other’s  wives,  by  virtue  of 
that  may  the  desire  of  mine  find  fulfilment  ({74—79). 




CHAPTER  LXU. 


]M[aRKANDEYa  said ; In  the  body  of  the  son  of  the 
twice-born  person,  speaking  in  this  wise,  the  Agnt  Ghrhd- 
f/a(ya  even  then  entered  (1).  Thus  possessed  by  him,  he, 
(the  Brahmana)  thus  illumined  that  region  even  as  a second 
sacrificial  fire  (z).  Necessarily,  the  love  of  the  {ethereal 
woman  (Barutbini)  looking  on  this  twice-born  person  thus 
glowing  with  the  brightness  of  the  sacred  (ire)  became  great 
towards  this  Brahmana  (3).  Then  that  son  of  the  twice- 
born  person  possessed  by  the  carrier  of  sacrifices— the  Girha- 
pe^ya  Agni—bc^&n  at  once  to  move  as  before  (4).  Thus 
looked  on  by  that  goddess  he  swiftly  went  out  of  her  sight, 
by  the  sighs  of  whom  of  lean  figure,  the  whole  forest  regiott 
began  to  tremble  (5).  Then  in  a moment's  ftime  be  having 
got  to  his  own  house,  the  most  superior  among  the  twice-bore 
persons,  performed  all  the  sacrifices  as  they  all  declared  (in 
the  law)  (6;.  Then  that  woman,  all  who.se  limbs.wcre  beauti- 
ful, being  attached  to  him  with  all  her  mind  and  soul,  made 


MAbkANbEVA  bURANAM. 


273 


^Sghs  her  chief  refuge  during  both  the  day  ahd  the  night. 
That  woman,  of  unblemished  limbs,  sighitig  cried  hd 
(these  exclamations)  and  cried  repeatedly;  and  she,  whose 
eyes  were  like  the  rapturous  Khanjana  bird,  cursed  her 
bad  luck  (y-S).  In  those  days  she  did  not  bind  the  desires  of 
her  heart  either  to  walking,  nor  to  eating,  nor  to  the  beatiti- 
fal  forest,  nor  to  valleys  pleasant  to  the  mind.  Her  desires 
went  only  to  the  rolling  pass  of  Cakravakas,  forsaken  by  him. 
That  excellent  woman  only  cursed  her  own  youth  (9 — lO). 
Drawn  by  the  force  of  evil  fate  why  did  I come  to  this 
mountain,  and  who  brought  such  a man  before  me  (li).  If 
that  possessor  of  the  eight  great  qualities  does  not  meet  me 
to-day,  then  the  jfire  of  Cupid,  hard  to  bear,  shall  surely  burn 
me  up  (12),  That  (Himalaya)  which  was  so  pleasant  to  the 
mind  owing  to  its  being  resounded  with  the  notes  of  the 
black-bird,  on  account  of  his  absence* — ^even  that  seems  to 
be  burning  me  to-day  (13). 

MARKANDEYA  said : — In  this  way  she,  possessed  by  Cupid, 
went  about,  0 thou  most  excellent  among  the  Munis,  And 
then  her  love  towards  him  also  grew  at  every  moment.  (14)* 
A Gandharva,  Kali  by  name,  who  having  loved,  had  been 
repulsed  by  her,  previous  time,  saw  her  now  in  that  state 
(15).  He  thought  within  himself,  ‘%hy  is  this  Baruthini, 
whose  movement  is  like  that  of  the  elephant,  dried  up  by 
the  breath  of  sighs,  moving  about  in  this  mountain  (16)  ? Is 
she  wounded  by  the  curse  of  some  Muni  ? or  has  she  been 
insulted  by  any  one  ? For  which  reason  she  is  bearing  this 
face  wet  by  tears  (17).^^  Therefore  he,  Kali,  moved  by 
curiosity,  thought  over  this  fora  long  time;  and  then  by 
virtue  of  Sam^dhi  knew  everything  exactly  as  it  happened 
(r8).  0 Muni,  he,  Kali,  again  thought,  having  known  all 
this,  ^*this  has  happend  owing  to  my  good  fortune  earned 
by  meritorious  actions  performed  in  a previous  existence  (19)- 
By  me,  ful^  of  love  was  she  repeatedly  prayed  and 
she,  who  repelled  me  then,  will  by  me  be  found  to-day  (20) , 
35 


markandeya  puranam. 

She  is  full  of  love  for  man  ; therefore  I shall  assume  that 
form,  and  she  will  unsuspectingly  enjoy  pleasures  with  me. 
Why  should  I delay — I shall  do  so  (21)/’ 

MarkANDEVa  said  : — Having  by  the  power  of  his  spirit 
assumed  the  form  of  that  twice-born  person,  he  began  to 
walk  about  the  place  where  that  Barulhini  was  lying  (22), 
She,  of  most  superior  form,  who  was  charmingly  lean,  see- 
ing him,  with  her  eyes  somewhat  opened  with  delight,  came 
near  him  and  repeatedly  cried— “Be  kind  to  me,  be  kind  to 
me  (23).  Forsaken  by  thee  there  is  no  doubt  of  it  that  | 
shall  give  up  this  life,  then  that  will  be  a greater  sin  to  thee, 
and  will  also  lead  to  loss  of  thy  sacrificial  works  {24),  In 
the  beautiful  valley  of  this  mountain  that  has  many  great 
.valleys,  by  coming  near  me  thou  shalt  surely  earn  the  merit 
of  saving  my  life.  6 thou  of  great  understanding  j surely 
the  end  of  my  days  has  approached,  therefore  hast  thou,  O 
gtaddener  of  my  heart,  abstained  from  going  away  from 
men  (25 — 26)." 

Kali  said:— What  shall  I do?  Here  there  will  neces- 
sarily be  loss  to  any  sacrificial  work,  and  O thou,  of  lean 
waist, — thou  too  speakest  in  this  wise — therefore  i am  npw 
in  a painful  fix-  If  thou  dost  as  I bid  thee,  then  there  may 
be  my  connections  with  thee,  otherwise  not  (27 — 38). 

, Baruthini  said  Be  kitid,  wh.atever  thou  shalt  say  that 
shall  I do.  This  is  not  untrue — Tell  me  what  thou  wantest 
to  have  done  by  me  without  any  doubt  or  apprehension  (29). 

Kali  said :— This  day  at  the  time  of  the  enjoyment,  I 
am  not  to  be  seen  by  thee  in  this  forest.  O thou  of  beauti- 
fd  brow,  thy  connection  with  me  shall  be  with  closed 
eyes  (30). 

Baruthini  said : — So  be  it.  That  which  thou  wishest,, 
is;  well,,  and  be  it  so  j I am  now  in  every  way  subject  tOr 
thee  (31). 


CHAPTER  LXIII. 


IVIarkandE'Ya  said  : — Then  he  roved  about  with  her  on 
the  table  lands  of  mountains,  or  Heart  satisfying  gardens 
with  flowering  trees,  and  on  lakes  that  are  pleasing  to  the 
mind  (r)-  on  pleasant  Valleys  and  on  the  banks  of  rivers 
that  are  pleasant  to  the  mind  and  likewise,  0 thou  twice- 
born  one,  in  many  other  regions  (2).  She  with  closed’ 
eyes  begat!  to  think  of  the  beauty  of  the  Brahman  as  he 
appeared  when  possessed  by  the  fire,  at  the  time  of  living 
with  Kali  (3),  At  that  time  she,  O thou  most  excellent 
Muni,  became  pregnant,  through  connection  with  the  Gari- 
dharva  and  thinking  on  the  beauty  of  the  twice-born  one 
(4).  He  (Kali),  who  had  assumed  the  form  of  the  Brahmana 
then  having  pacified  Baruthini  bearing  his  child,  and  having 
been  given  leaVe  by  her  with  love,  went  away  (5).  That 
child  was  born  full  of  light  even  as  the  burning  fire  ; as  the 
sun  illummes  all  the  quarters  by  his  own  rays  (6),  glows  by 
the  glamour  of  his  own  rays,  even  did  that  boy  j therefore 
he  becatrie  known  by  the  riaihe  of  Sharochi  (7).  That 
possesser  of  the  eight  good  qualities  of  kindness,  &c.,  grew 
with  his  age  every  day,  and  with  many  good  qualities,  even 
as  the  new  moon  grows  disc  by  disc  (8).  He  then,  the* 
possesser  of  the  eight  good  qualities,  kindness,  &c.,  coming 
to  youth,  learnt  the  knowledge  of  weapons,  (military  science) 
and  also  of  the  VedaSi  in  right  order,  and  also  other  kinds 
of  knowledge  (9).  Once  upon  a time  walking  about  the 
mount  Mandara,  ^he,  whose  works  were  all  lovely,  saw  a 
maiden  on  the  mountain  pass,  stricken  with  fear  (ro).  See- 
ing him  she  at  that  time  uttered  the  words  '^save  me.”  He 
also  to  her  whose  eyes  were  filled  with  tears  from  fear, 
said  thus  "be  not  afraid”  (ri).  ‘What  is  the  matter, ’—being' 


2^S 


MARKANDEYA  PURAMAN. 


thus  addressed  in  bold  words  by  that;  high-souled  one,  she 
then  said  with  her  words  broken  by  sighs  (12). 

The  Maiden  said : — I am  the  daughter  of  the  Vidya- 
dhara  Indivaraksha,  ManoramS  by  name,  born  of  the  daughter 
of  Marudhanva  (13).  Vibhavari  born  of  the  Vidyadhara 
Mandara  is  my  friend  ; and  also  another  Kalavati,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Muni  Para  (14).  Going  to  the  excellent  tableland  ol 
the  mount  Kailasa,  there  a certain  Muni,  of  an  exceedingly 
lean  and  hagard  figure,  was  seen  by  me  along  with  them, 
whose  throat  had  grown  very  lean  through  hunger  and  whose 
eye  balls  were  without  lustre  and  sunken  deep  in  the  socket 
{15).  Being  laughed  at  by  me,  and  getting  enraged  he  at 
that  uttered  a curse  on  me  in  very  feeble  tones  and  with  his 
lips  moving  sightly  (x6).  0 thou  non-Aryan,  thou  whose 
penance  is  for  evil,  as  I have  been  laughed  at  by  thee,  there- 
fore thou  shalt  without  delay  be  overcome  by  a Rjlkshasa” 
(17).  When  he  had  thus  cursed  me,  that  Muni  also  was  chidden 
by  my  two  friends,  (who  said)  " Fie  to  thy  station  as  a 
Brahmana,  by  thee  have  all  these  penances  been  made 
without  practising  the  virtue  of  forgiveness.  Thou  hast 
grown  lean  through  malice  and  through  the  strictness  of  thy 
penance.  The  essence  of  the  quality  of  a Brahmana  reside.s  in 
forgiveness, — and  his  frenance  is  the  subjugation  of  his  anger 
(18-19).”  He,  of  unabated  effulgence,  hearing  this,  cursed 
those  two  also,  namely  that  on  the  limbs  of  one  there  shall 
be  leprosy,  and  the  other  shall  get  consumption  (20).  These 
grew  exactly  on  those  two  even  as  uttered  by  the  Muni, 
even  at  that  very  moment,  and  on  me  also  a great  Rak.shasa 
is  coming  following  my  foot  (3 1 ).  Dost  thou  not  hear  this 
terrific  sound,  of  him  who  is  roaring  near  • this  is  the  third 
day  that  he  has  not  given  up  hi.s  pursuit  of  me  (22).  I shall 
communicate  to  thee  all  the  knowledge  of  weapons  and  all  the 
knowledge  of  heart  {Hridayapuinh)  save  me,  O thou  high- 
minded  one,  from  this  Rkkshasa  (23).  T his  knowledge  was 
at  first  communicated  to  SwUyambuba  Manu'  by  Rudra 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


mi 


liimself,  the  holder  of  the  bow  Pindka  ; Swayambhuva  gave  it 
to  that  most  superior  among  the  Stddhas]  by  him  was  it  com* 
municated  to  CitrSyudha,  my  mother^s  father.  His  father-in- 
law  himself  gave  it  to  my  father  at  the  time  of  his  marriage 
as  a marriage  gift  (25).  In  my  early  age  it  was  learnt  by  me, 
0 brave  one,  from  my  father — this  Hridaya  of  all  the 
weapons,  that  can  punish  all  foes  (26).  Do  thou  accept  this 
soon,  which  is  the  refuge  of  many  weapons,  and  then  kill 
this  evil-spirit  as  soon  as  it  comes  near  me  ”(27). 

MarkANDEYA  said  : — On  his  saying  so  be  it,  then  by 
touching  water  she  gave  to  him  that  knowledge  called  the 
Hridaya^  with  all  the  secrets  regarding  its  calling  back  and 
sending  out  (28).  In  the  meantime  that  Rskshasa  of  fearful 
features,  roaring  with  a dreadful  roar  quickly  came  there  (29). 
He,  Swarochi,  saw  him  saying, — shall  eat  thee,  without 
any  loss  of  time,’'^  and  seeing  him  approach  her,  he  thought 
within  himself,  “let  him  take  her,  and  let  the  words  of  the 
great  Muni  be  fulfilled and  that  Rakshasa,  also  coming  near 
her  quickly,  took  her  of  fine-waist  who  was  crying,  'save  me^ 
save  me,  in  most  piteous  tones  (30 — 32).^  Then  Swardchi, 
moved  by  anger,  directed  that  fierce  weapon  on  the  Rakshasa, 
and  looked  with  fixed  eyes.  Then  being  overwhelmed,  he,  that 
Rakshasa  letting  off  that  girl,  cried  “be  gracious,  control  the 
weapon,  and  hear  me  (33—34),  0 thou  of  great  effulgence,  by 
thee  am  I delivered  from  a most  dreadful  curse,  uttered 
against  me  by  the  most  austere  and  wise  Brahmamitra  (35). 
There  is  no  greater  benefactor  to  me  than  thou,  O possessor 
of  the  eight  good  qualities  of  kindness  &c.,  by  whom  I am 
delivered  from  a great  curse  which  caused  me  such  immense 
pain  (36).'' 

Swarochi  said  : — For  what  reason  wast  thou  cursed  by 
the  great-souled  Muni  Brahmamitra.  And  of  what  kind  was 
that  curse  given  of  old  (37). 

Rakshasa  said  : — Brahmamitra,  having  gathered  from  the 
Atharvaveda^  studied  the  whole  of  the  Ayurveda  with  the 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM, 


wiin  Bumuiiy,  ne,  kj  inou  orave  one,  did  not  comrftunicate 
th&  knowledge  of  the  Ayurveda  ; the  knowledge  of  tfe  un- 
failing Ayurveda  was  then  obtained  by  me  by  eaves  drop- 
ping, from  him  when  he  was  communicating  it  to  his  disciples 
, (41—42).  Eight  months  after  my  thus  gaining  this  knowledge, 
one  day  I was  overwhelmed  with  joy  and  began  to  la'ugit 
again  and  again  (43)  Knowing  the  secret  6f  my  laughihg'- 
he^  the  great  Muiii  possessed  with  anger,  with  trembling: 
ii«:k,  told  me  these  harsh  words  (44).  ‘As  like  a Rakshasd 
O evil-minded  one,  by  thee  has  this  knowledge  been  got  from' 
me,  unseen,  through  stealing  and  as  thou  ijast  been  laughing 
to  show  thy  want  of  respect  for  me,  therefore  in  seven  nights, 
O thou  evil  one,  being  overtaken  by  my  curse,  thoh  shSl^ 
without  doubt  become  a cruel  Rakshasa  (45—46).’  On  his' 
saying  this,  being  propitiated  by  salutation  and  other 
means  of  worship,  he  again  told  me,  being  softened  id 
mind  at  once  (47).  “What  has  been  uttered  by  me,  must 
^ Gandharva;  there  can  be  no  violation  of 
hat  ; but  having  become  a Rakshasa  thou  shalt  again  find  : 
% own  body  (48).  When  with  thy  recollection  destroyed 
*ou  Shalt,  moved  by  anger,  desire  to  eat  thy  own  offspring,- 

lllkshal)  ten  burnt  ty  telrt  ^ h'" 

^nAk,  / ^ r Station  in  the  communtty  of  the 

He  am  I,  O thou  possessor*  of  the!.’ 
q^...es  of  ki„d.e«  „hi,  h,,  b«„ 

aerelMe,,  O thou  brave  one*  accent  ^ 


MiVRKANjJEYA  PuRANAM  2^^ 

o^f  11'  ‘r  ° 

garlands  and  ornaments,  gave  him  that  knowledge  (J 

».a  jt;"  titmif ■“ 

daughter  thus  spoke  to  his  father  who 'hid  HldT  'h’' 

irais’htrr;  - 

r/.r  ' loved  ever  since  I saw  him 

(55)-  But  they,  my  friends,  are  suffering  from  the  miseries 
caused  by  me,  therefore  r do  not  wish  ! enjoy  biTtr  : 
enjoyment  with  him  (56).  Such  cruel  acts  evL  men^  c „ 
perform  how  then  shall  I,  a woman  like  me,  by  nature  of  a 

!wo  ma?r°'‘‘'°"'  1 

I also  live  b nusenes  caused  by  me,  so  shall 

twG^sha?^  h^*^*  S^4>-— By  the  grace  of  the  Ayurveda,  they 
two  shall  be  madefrefh  again~%.  friends,  therefore  refrain! 
Oh  thp^  of  beautiful  wafrt,  .fron,  grieving  for  them  (5^). 

th  sa>d:--Then.he  the  father  himself  gave 

that  daughter,  according  to  prescribed  forms,  and  in  that 
mountam  Swarochi  married  her  of  lovely  eyes.  Then  the 
randharva  having  consoled  that  maiden,— hjs  daughter  given 
m marriage,  went  in  ethereal  gait  from  there  to  his  own.  city 

(Sor^i)  He  also  (r.  Swarochi)  with  the  lean  one  then 

went  to  that  garden  where  the  two  maidens  had  got  diseased 
through  that  curse  (62).  Then  he,  Swarochi,  the  unconquer- 
able one  the  knower  of  the  inner  significance  of  things,  by 

of  healthy  body  (63).  Then  those  two  maidens  of  exceeding 
beauty,  the  auspecious  ones,  being  cured  from  the  disease, 


28o  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

began  to  walk  on  that  mountain,  having  illumined  all  the 
four  quarters  by  the  glamour  of  their  beauty  (64). 


CHAPTER  LX  IV. 

Markandeya  said;— Thus  cured  of  her  disease  the 
maiden,  moved  by  delight,  thus  spoke  to  Swarochi,— "Hear 
my  words,  0 lord”  (i)  I am  the  daughter  of  the  Vidya- 
dhara  MandSra  known  by  the  name  of  Vibh5vari.  0 my 
benefactor!  I give  myself  to  thee,  accept  me  (2).  I shall 
also  give  thee  that  knowledge  by  which  the  speech  of  all 
creatures  shall  de  revealed  to  thee.  Therefore  be  then 
gracious  to  me  (3). 

Markandeya  said : — On  this  being  said  by  the  righteous 
Swarochi — so  be  it,  the  second  maiden  then  spoke  this  word 
(4).  "My  father,  Pi.ra  by  name, — ^he  who  is  a Brahmarshi 
had  been  a BrahmaeSri  from  his  boyhood ; he  was  greatly 
possessed  of  the  eight  good  qualities  of  kindness  etc.,  and  had 
seen  the  limits  of  the  Vedas  and  the  Vedangas  (5).  Then 
of  old,  during  spring  time  which  is  made  pleasant  by  the 
cooing  of  blackbirds,  came  to  him  an  Apsarl  known  by  the 
name  of  PunjikastanA  (6).  • Being  overtaken  by  Cupid,  he 
the  superior  Muni,  then  met  her,  and  on  her  was  I born  in 
this  great  mountain  (y).  Leaving  me  when  I wa.s  a mere 
baby,  alone  in  this  forest  that  is  devoid  of  human-beings,  and 
full  of  all  sorts  of  murderous  animals,  my  mother  also 
went  away  (8).  Then,  O excellent  one,  I grew  from  day  to 
day  by  drinking  the  growing  disc  of  the  moon  (9).  From 
that  was  niy  name  KalAvati — given  me  by  my  high-souled 
father  who  ^ took  me  (lo).  Then  I was  asked  for  in  matriage 


b)r  the- Gandharva,  Alina,  of  beautiful  face  wKa  » m 

foe  of  the  irod<!  ■ 'jc^ucuui  race,  who^  was  the 

w,fe  of  Shamblm,  »f  ootaUiag  ,„,h_3,,i 

Ihou  n,a.dca  of  boauliM  brow,  great  shall  be  thy  ^00°^ 

tarthr  Swarochi  shall  be  thy  husbaodr  aod  ^f  hL  tborsbrit 

Bhall  svir  “ VomUl-ii).  The  Mass* 

shall  with  respect  obey  thy  orders;  and  shall  give  thee 

wealth  « thou  desitest,  O thou  beautiful  one  (14)  By 

rrme  tl'tir  ° .“f""'  =Wt  attain  all  this  ;tcep^- 
from  me  that  knowledge,  P^mimh,  name;  this  knowledge 

.SJomh,pped,by  all  the  gods  (.5).»  Thus  spoke  ,0  m^ 
aughter  of  Daksha,  Sati,  whose  highest  refuge  is  truth. 
Thou  art  Swarochi.  That  goddess  would  never  say  a thing, 
wh  ch  was  not  true  (.0).  Such  am  I who  today  want  to  givi 

befn n'r"-'™!  “ •*”>  ““P*  'k'”. 

grawous  to  me  (17).  . 

^ ‘•’at  maiden 

V affectionate 

gkrw^ofyibhavan,  he  ^airried  them  two  there,  and  the 

musid  of  divine  musicians 


tlARkANDETA  PURANAAf 


i 


sSai 


to  the  knowledge  called  Padmini,  brought  to  him  at  will,  art 
sorts  of  most  precious  objects  of  enjoyment,  and  the  sweetest 
honey ; and  garlands,  and  clothes  and  ornaments  and  oint- 
ments rich  in  fragrance,  and  most  white  seats,  and  gold,  and 
cups  and  plates  of  gold,  likewise  different  kinds  of  bed, 
furnished  with  most  bright  and  beautiful  beddings  (2 — 4). 
Thus  he  enjoyed  life,  in  that  superior  mountain  scented  with 
heavenly  fragrance,  and  glowing  with  the  effulgence  of  his 
(Svvarochi’sj  own  rays  with  them  (his  wives)  (5).  They  too' 
found  most  excellent  pleasure  with  him,  on  that  mountain, 
even  as  (the  goddesses)  find  pleasure  in  the  enjoyments  in 
heaven  (6).  A certain  Kdlahansa  (a  species  of  duck),  moved 
by  desire,  at  the  loving  relations  of  him  (Swarochi)  and  theff 
(his  wives),  spoke  (thus)  to  a ChakravSka  living  in  water, 
•'lie  is  blessed,  he  is  endowed  with  the  fruits  of  most  superior 
merits,  who,  on  attaining  to  youth,  enjoys  such  desirable 
pleasures  with  these  his  beloved  ones  (8).  There  exist  many 
highly  qualified  youths,  but  their  wives  are  not  very  beauti- 
ful ; there  are  but  few  husbands  and  wives  in  this  world,  who 
are  both  exceedingly  beautiful  (9).  Of  some  (husband)  the 
wife  is  most  beloved)  of  some  (wife)  again  the  husband  is 
most  desired ; but  conjugal  pairs,  wl>o  are  rich  in  each  other's 
love,  are  rare  indeed  (ro).  Blessed  is  this  (Swarochi)  so  much 
loved  by  his  wives,  and  these  (his  wives)  also  are  most  dear 
to  him.  Of  the  blessed  alone  is  born  such  mutual  attach- 
ment 'll).”  Hearing  these  words  spoken  by  the  Kdlahansi, 
the  Chakravaki  told  her,  with  her  mind  unmoved  by  any  great 
admiration  (12).  "This  person  is  not  blessed  because  he  is 
not  shy  on  account  of  the  nearness  of  his  other  wives ; he 
enjoys  one  of  the  wives,  his  heart  is  not  on  all  of  them  (13). 
As,  0 friend  1 the  affection  of  the  heart  is  placed*  always  on 
one  person  only,  then  how  shall  this  person  be  full  of  love 
to  all  his  wives  (14)?  They  are  not  the  beloved  of  their 
hosband,  nor  is  the  husband  their  beloved ; they  are  mere 
pastimes  (to  Wm)  like  any  other  attendant  (15).  If  be  b* 


WARKANDEYA  PURANAM, 


m 

really  the  object  of  the  desire  of  these  (women)  then  why  do 
not  they  give  up  their  life?  Even  as  he  embraces  one  of 
his  wives,  be  is  meditated  upon  by  others  (i6).  This  person 
is  sold,  as  a slave,  for  the  price  of  the  gift  of  knowledge. 
Love  does  not  equally  flow  to  or  rest  on  many  objects  (17). 
O K&lakansi  \ blessed  is  my  husband,  and  blessed  also  am  i 
whose  hearts  are  for  ever  fixed  in  one  person  only  (18). 

MarKanDEYA  said  : — The  invincible  Swarochi,  who  was 
acquainted  with  the  language  of  all  beings,  hearing  this,  felt 
ashamed  (of  himself)  and  thougiit, — ''This  is  true,  and  not 
false  (19).^^  Then  after  a hundred  years  had  gone  (after  this) 
while  (one  day)  walking  about  with  them  (his  wives)  on  the 
great  mountain,  he  saw  in  front  of  him  a deer,  of  lovely  and 
fat  limbs,  and  roving  about  among  a herd  of  deer,  and 
surrounded  by  sweet-scented  female  deer  like  itself  (20 — 21,). 
Then  on  those  female  deer  drawing  the  reservoir  of  his 
scent — (the  musk,  supposed  to  exist  in  the  navel)  and  begin- 
ning to  smell  him,  that  deer  said; — "0  woman,  immodesbas 
you  are,  get  you  gone.  I am  not  Swarochi,  nor  am  I of  bis 
Cbaracler,  0 you  of  beautiful  eyes.  There  are  many  shame- 
less persons  like  him,  go  to  them  {2% — *23).  As  wdien  one 
woman  follows  many  men  she  becomes  the  object  of  divisiqn 
among  men,  similarly  also  when  one  is  looked  upon  by  m a ivy 
with  an  eye  to  enjoyment,  that  one  becomes  .an  object  pf 
deresion  (24).  Fiom  day  to  day  the  sacrificial  duties  of  that 
man  are  neglected  and  lost  ; he  is  always  attached  by  lust 
to  another  wife,  even  when  enjoying  one  wife  (25).  Others 
who  are  like  these,  and  of  their  character,  who  have  turned 
their  face  from  the  next  world  and  the  good  thereof,  do  you 
desire  them.  I am  not  like  Swarochi  (26). 


CHAPTER  LXV . 


1 said r—Hearing  those  female  deer  thus 

repulsed  by  the  deer,  Swarochi  began  to  feel  himself  even  as 
fallen  being  (i).  He,  who  was  thus  spoken  of  by  the 
Chakravaka  and  the  deer,  and  who  was  the  subject  of  tL 
disdainful  speech  of  the  deer,  resolved,  O thou  most  sunerior 

th^  again  his  desire  grew,  and  the  instructions  iox  teaJ 

ciation  were  thrown  away  and  he  enjoyed  life  with  them  for 

t;tr  ■ " 

and  ‘‘“"gfter  of  Indivara,  gave  birth  to  Vijaya 

PrabhIva(6)'‘  Hrtl  f Z KalSvati  to 

( t I j ' father  Swarochi,  by  power  of  that- 

now  edge  called  Padraini  which  secures  all  objects  of  en? 

•vijaya,  1..  rart^hlfsTT ‘’’'r'"'"' 

: - 4 .1  M::ir  ..°:aror^i'r 

vati,  adorned  with  hicyh  fiM*  i j . JNanda- 

' "'gn  table  lands,  and  walls  1T«-  .i 

son  of  Kaiavnt;  D,„ui  ^ V.9A  for  the 

rvaiavati,  PrabhAva,  was  built  a citv  0--! 

Situate  dn  cuy^  called  Tala 

l«"i»  (»).  On..  lh«  1 ‘'■'m  1"  Plaasant 

atom  in  Ih.  for  J "" 

Jrew  liis  bow  (12)’  faal  before  bin, 

' f'='*'-®'*iy—  un  me  do  thou  send  rht,  nrw — 


HARKAttDBYA  TORANAtt. 


% 

be  gracious  uhto  me  (13).  What  good  Wilt  thou  gain  bjr 
killing  this  (boar)  today?  Soon  kill  me;  the  arrow  discharged 
by  thee  shall  deliver  me  from  misery  (14)/' 

SWAROCHI  said  Thy  body  is  not  found  to  be  full  (^1 
disease  by  us.  What  then  is  that  cause,  for  which  thou 
desirest  to  kill  thy  life  (15). 

The  Deer  said  : — My  heart  has  made  one,  whose  heart 
Is  attached  to  another  person,  its  object.  Without  him,  death 
is  my  remedy.  What  greater  medicine  is  there  ? 

SwARCOHI  said  ; — Who  is  he  who  does  not  desire  thee^ 

0 thou  timid  one,  and  to  whom  art  thou  moved  by  love,  by 
hot  gaining  whom  thou  art  resolved  to  give  up  thy  own 
life?  (17), 

The  Deer  said : — May  good  befall  thee,  even  thee  I 
desire.  By  thee  has  my  mind  been  carried  away.  Therefore 

1 shall  embrace  death.  Do  thou  discharge  the  arrow  on 
me  (18). 

SWAROCHI  said ; — 0 thou  of  lovely  glance,  we  are  ’of 
the  form  of  men,  and  thou  art  a deer,  how  can  there  be  any 
f<^wiec^’ion  with  thee  of  persons  like  ourselves  (19). 

The  Deer  said  If  thy  heart  is  set  on  me,  then  do  thou 
embrace  me.  If  thy  heart  be  good,  I sliall  do  whatever  is 
desired  by  thee,  and  shall  be  most 'glorified  (20). 

MarkANDEvA  said  ; — Then  Swarochi  embraced  that  female 
deer ; and  embraced  by  him  she  at  once  became  invested 
with  a most  bright  and  beautiful  body  (21).  He,  then  struck 
with  wonder,  said  ‘*who  art  thou  ?"  She  too  told  him 
(this)  in  accents  Stricken  with  loving  modesty  (22).  I ,am 
goddess  of  this  forest,  honoured  by  the  gods.  O thou  higb- 
iouled  one,  Manu  is  to  be  produced  on  me  by  thee  ;(2 3). 
I say  this  to  thee  according  to  the  instruction  of  the  gods  ; 
ido  thou  beget  on  me,  who  am  full  of  love  for  thee,  a son 
who  shall  be  the  ruler  of  this  world  (24). 

MaeEANDEYA  said: — He  then  begat  even  at  that 
-moment  on  her  a son,  marked  by  all  the  auspicious  mark% 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAIH, 


full  of  energy,  and  like  unto  himself  (25).  As  soon  as 
was  born  the  musicians  of  the  gods  struck  (pleasant)  notes, 
and  the  lords  of  the  Gandharvas  began  to  sing,  and  the 
ApsarHs  began  to  dance  (26).  The  Risliis,  and  those  whose 
wealth  is  their  penance,  and  the  gods  showered  flowers  from 
all  sides  (27).  Seeing  his  effulgence  his  father  himself  made 
his  name, — Dyutiman,  because  by  his  effulgence  even  all  the 
quarters  illumined  (23).  That  boy,  maned  Dyutiman,  full 
of  great  strength  and  prowess,  because  he  was  the  son  of 
Swarochi,  therefore  became  Swarochisha  (29).  He  Swarochi, 
while  walking  about  a pleasant  mountain  streamlet,  saw  a 
duck  with  his  mate  (30).  That  duck  said  to  the  female  duck 
who  was  repeatedly  expressing  her  desire  for  him  ^'Restrain 
thyself;  long  bast  ihou  enjoyed  with  me  (31).  What  is  the 
good  of  indulging  in  enjoyments  at  all  periods  of  life  ? Thy  # 
last  days  are  near.  0 thou  rover  on  the  water,  the  time 
has  come  when  both  thou  and  I should  renounce  (all 
pleasures)  (32). 

The  Female  Duck  said: — What  time  is  there  which  is 
not  fit  for  pleasure.  The  whole  world  is  for  enjoyment 
Even  the  srlf-restraincd  DiTilunauas  perform  sacrifices  for  | 
the  sake  of  the  enjoyment  (33).  And  those,  who  have  at- 
tained the  power  of  discriniinaiion,  desirous  of  enjoyments 
both  seen  and  unseen,  porforin  woiks  of  charity  and  other 
meritorious  works  (34).  Wi»y  then  dost  ihou  not  desire  enjoy- 
ment. Enjoyment  is  the  result  of  human  exertions, — as 
much  of  those  that  have  gained  the  power  of  discrimination 
and  those  that  are  self-restrained.  Why  then  shall  it  not 
be  good  for  birds  and  beasts  ? (35). 

The  Duck  said  .—The  mind,  of  those  whose  heart  is 
attached  to  pleasure,  and  who  are  eager  for  the  associationi 
of  friends,  is  rarely  moved  towards  God  {36).  Attached  to 
sons,  friends,  wives,  people^s  minds  languish,  even  like.;;^© 
eltphint  sinking  in  the  slough  of  the  lake  (37).  Dost  thou 
not  teei  good  lady,  that  Swtiroebl,  belnf  overcome  by  at- 


.MAKKANDEVA  puranam. 


a$j 

tachment  even  from  his  boyhood  being  moved  b>y  desire, 
has  sunk  in  the  mire  of  worldly  affection  (38).  In  youth 
exceedingly  attched  to  his  wives,  now  to  his  sons  and  grand- 
sons, the  mind  of  Swarochi  is  sunk  (in  the  mire  of  this 
world)— how  shall  he  find  deliverance  (39)?  O thou  who 
movest  in  water,  I am  not  like  Swarochi,  subject  to  women. 
Presently  I have  attained  to  discrimination,  and  have  with- 
drawn myself  from  enjoyments  (40). 

MarKANDEYa  said  Hearing  the  speech  of  the  bird, 
being  uneasy  and  taking  his  wives  he  went  to  another  forest 
for  practising  penance  (41).  There  the  charitable-minded 
one,  having  performed  most  austere  penances,  and  having 
repelled  all  sins,  went  to  the  most  pure  region  (42). 


CHAPTER  LXVII. 


Then  the  possessor  of  the  six  Bhagas,  (SrahmS)  Made 
the  son  of  Swarochi,  Dyutiman  by  name,  Mattu,  the  lord  of 
creatures.  Hear  (all  about!  his  Manwantara  (i).  Those 
that  were  the  gods  in  that,  and  those  that  vt'ere  their  sons, 
and  those  that  were  kings,  Oh  Kroustiki,  I am  relating  all 
these,  hear  (2).,  0 thou  twice-born  one,  the  gods  in  that 
Manwantara  of  Swarochisa,  were  Paravat  and  likewise 
Tushita,  and  the  Indra,  was  called  Vipaschila  (3).  In  that 
.Hrja,  Stamva,  PrSna,  Dattoli,  Rishabha,  Nishchara,  and 
Aurvaviran  these  became  the  seven  Rishis  (4).  Chaitra  and 
Kimpurusha  etc.,  were  the  seven  sons  of  these  high-souled 
ones;  they  were  of  great  eneregy,  and  the  rulers  of  the  earth 
(5).  As  long  as  his  Manwantara  lasted  so  long  their  deseejs- 


10  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

deats  enjoyed  this  earth ; then  was  the  second  MarmaMaH. 
(6).  Men,  hearing  with  faith  and  reverence  of  the  age  of 
Svrarochisha,  are  liberated  from  idl  sins  (7). 


CHAPTER  LXVIIi. 


Krustuki  said . — O revered  one,  by  thee  has  the 
of  Swarochisha  as  also  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Swarochisha 
been  described  in  all  their  details  (i).  That  knowledge^ 
Padroini  by  name,  which  brings  all  objects  of  desire,  as  also 
those  Nidhis  that  are  attached  to  it,  tell  me  of  them  in  detail 
(2).  0 Guru,  the  eight  Nidhis  and  the  objects  they  live  in, 
and  their  nature,  all  these  I desire  to  hear,  related  by 
thee  (3). 

Markandeya  said : — The  knowledge  that  is  called  Pad-* 
mini,  has  Lakshtni  as  its  presending  goddess;  its  receptacles 
are  the  Nidhis  -,  hear  of  them  from  me  (4) ; Padcaa,  Maha- 
likewise,  Makara  and  Cacchapa,  Mukunda,  and  Nan- 
daka,  as  also  Nila,  while  Shankha  is  the  eighth  NidM  (i), 
Wherever  there  is  Riddki  (good  fortune)  they  exist  there, 
and  of  them  Siddhi  is  born.  These  eight  are  called  NiMis ; 
they  have  been  described  to  thee,  0 Kraushtuki  (6),  0 Mua», 
through  the  grace  of  the  gods,  and  through  the  service  the 
society  is  the  property  of  men  iUumined  by  these  always  (7). 
Of  what  nature  they  arc,  hear  from  me  speaking  to  yo«. 
The  first  Nidhi  Padama  by  name  belongs  to  Maya,  0 
h'Kifie'dtprja  one  (8),  It  belongs  perpetually  to  his  ton  as|d  bis 
Wms,  Rli  their  grandsons.  When  possessed  by  this  MhfAi 
tn«Et>he«me  Strang  in  prowess  and  skUl  Aadt  0 th»o 


markandeya  puranari; 


289 


possesser  of  the  eight  good  qualities  of  kindness  etc,  he  be- 
comes the  receptacle  of  wealth,  for  this  Nidhi  is  of  the 
quality  of  wealth  (lo).  He  gets  gold  and  silver  and  copper  and 
all  other  metals,  in  very  large  quantities,  and  also  trades  in 
them  (ix)i  He  also  performs  sacrifices  and  gives  the  sacrifi- 
cial fees  ; with  devotion  he  causes  assemblages  (of  the  learned 
to  meet)  at  the  temples  of  the  gods  (12)*  There  is 
another  Nidhi,  the  receptacle  of  the  great  of  Satwa,  spoken  of 
as  MahSpadma ; possessed  by  him  a man  becomes  strong 
in  the  quality  of  Safwa  (13).  He  gets  padmardga  and  other 
jewels,  and  pearls,  and  corals,  and  buys  and  sells  them  (14). 
Those  who  live  according  to  the  laws  of  Yoga  to  them  he 
gives  all  this  wealth  as  also  habitations  (for  them)  and 
himself  becomes  of  their  character,  (15).  His  sons  become 
of  that  character,  with  their  sons  and  grand  sons.  It  does  not 
leave  his  descendants  to  the  seventh  generation  (16).  The 
Nidhiy  Makara  by  name,  is  of  the  quality  of  Tamas]  looked 
on  by  him  a person,  of  most  excellent  character,  becomes  over- 
taken with  ignorance  and  indiscrimination  (17).  He  gains 
arrows,  swords,  double-edged  swords,  bows  and  shields, 
prepares  binding  instruments  (Pishas)  and  attains  friendship 
with  kings  (18)*  He  give  these  to  those  persons  who  live  by 
valour,  and  to  kings,  and  to  those  who  are  liked  by  them  ; 
and  finds  pleasure  in  the  rightful  sale  and  barter  of  weapons 
(tp).  All  these  ^appen  to  one  only  and  it  does  not  follow 
his  descendants ; he  finds  destruction  for  these  objects  from 
soldiers  or  in  battle  (20).  The  man,  who  is  looked  on  by  the 
Nidhi  the  Kacchapa  (tortoise),  becomes  possessed  of  the 
quality  of  Tamas  because  this  Nidhi  o\  the  quality  of 
Tamas  (21.  He  performs  works  of  various  kinds  shorn  of 
righteotisuess,  and  builds  all  sorts  of  places  for  business;  and 
does  not  put  his  trust  in  any  one  (22).  Even  as  the  tortoise 
withdraws  unto  itself  all  its  lines,  so  having  drawn  unto  him 
people’s  hearts,  he  himself  exists  with  his  own  mind  perfectly 
restrained  (23).  He  neither  gives  (his  wealth)  to  others  nor 


37 


««ioy  (it)  heins  al.vays  distracted  by  , 

o".  a„d  po„  it  in  „„  ^ , ^ 

yby  <>„ep,ra™-(„„t  by  hi,  descend;!  i 
r Nidhi,  MukuniJa  bj  name,  is  of  the  quafe ' 
-ewteebetn  cnc,  the  „a„,  i, 

gets  Kma,  fotfe, 
instruments,  and 
(money)  to  danewrs 
jects  of  enjoytneflfs 
ministrels  and  MSgbadhas,  and 
to  sexual  pleasures,  and  dandng  gin^^ 

The  lifian,  %hom  thi® 

“ ‘^®®psny  of  harlots,  and 
orre  (woman) 
dht,  Nanda  by  name,  is  codi- 

attains  th^ae 

“ "it  i «' 

««dls  .„d  p„o<„„ 

and  also  perforffis  theft' 
gives  'protection  tp  reMoi^  j 
and  he  does  not  br»dlr  '*t>k 


u,  uecomes  'ot  that  quality  (25) 
^Mndanga,  etc.,  tlte  four  kinds  of  mu 
■ settles  pensions  'on  singers 

:(a6).  0 thou  twice-bornfone, 

•day  and  night  'to  bards,  and 

•alid  enjoys  these  with  them  (27) 

'AW/5r  worships,  does  n’ot  move  in  th 
■others  like  therti;  he  afw 
%nIy  (-28).  The  other  JS 
‘■posed  (df  the  qualities  c 
%poli  by  it,  ■?  ■ • • 
gains  all  >l<inds  of  V 

'pure  .and  pleasant  food ‘grains  etc 
«aleand  baifter  '(3o).  He  also 
BHd  guests,  and  travellers,  i 
indignity,  0 thou  great  MUni 

S'"'  s«i»faction,  ,„d  he  give,  („  p, 

moat  bcaotifobiod'child-bearfng 

aod'thft  km  .Wadda  folW,  L d«ccl„T.ra 
5««.lra„  (33).  ,0  thou  ,b,cc,„„, 

give,  tltb  Iorg«t  term 
«n  (whdm  it  pM,e„„)  H 

l»'W.bdl,  ;.i  .t,o.tho,o'i,h,  have doma.tr:.  ' 
> botradthirad  in  the  Ildit'Wia ; nor  ilok,  the 

3%vards  Associates;  itfbfeeoWiam  it  Aih;.,. L ^ 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


agi 

attains  to  its  character  {z.e.  the  qualities  of  Satwa  and  Rajas) 
(37).  He  gains,  0 Muni,  cloths  and  cotton,  and  foodgrains 
&c.,  and  fruits  and  flowers,  and  also  pearls  and  corals  and 
conches  and  mother  of  pearls  (38),  and  also  other  things 
that  are  born  in  water,  and  wood  &;c  ; as  also  he  sells  and 
barters  them,  and  his  heart  is  not  set  on  any  other  thing 
{39).  He  makes  lakes  and  ponds,  and  likewise  gardens>  and 
bunds,  and  cannals,  and  plants  trees  (40] ; he  grows  by; 
enjoying  scents  and  flowers,  and  the  Nidhi  Nila  becomes  hisi 
for  three  generations  (41).  The  other  Nidhi,  Sankha  by 
name,  is  composed  of  the  qualities  of  Rajas  and  Tamas,  and 
O Brahmana,  by  it  also  is  the  lord  of  this  Nidhi  led  to  attain 
these  qualities  (42).  It  becomes  of  one  man  only  and  does  nqt 
find  any  other  man  {i.e,  his  descendants) ; hear  of,  0 Kraustiki, 
the  characteristics  of  him  whose  this  Sankha  Nidhi  becomes 
(43).  He,  by  himself,  eats  the  rice  cooked  by  him,  and  simi- 
larly also  wears  fine  clothes,  while  the  members  of  his  family 
as  also  hU  dependants  and  servants  eat  bad  rice  and  do 
not  p|ic  on  fine  clothes  (44).  He  becomes  a,lvvays  devofed 
to  his  qwh  m^aintenance,  and  doe?  qot  give  (proper  food  and 
clothes)  to, iciend,  wife,  brother,  son  or  daughter-in-|aw  andi 
others  (45).  Thus  these  nre  the  reputed,  to  be  the 

presiding  deities  of  the  wealth  end  riehea  of  uaen  ; ^Lhey  ace 
superior  o\\  account  of  their  superior  look,  and  are  the  givers; 
of  fruits  according  to  the  natures  of  men  (46).  Through 
being  looked  on  by  them  a man  attains  that  charaptec  vyhicli 
bplpngs  to  them.  0 thpu  tvyice-born  one,  the  Padmini,  which* 
is  of  the  character  qf  the  goddess  of  fortune—Lakshmi, 
ei:ercises  pontrql  over  all  these  (47). 


y ii^:! 


CHIAPTER  LX  IX. 

Kr.ustuke  said  :-0  BrStaana,  the  StvSroehisha 
Manwantara  has  been  related  to  me  by  thee  in  detail,  and 
likewise  also  the  eight  Nidhis  as  asked  by  me  (i).  And  the 
first  Manwdniara,  called  the  Swdyambkuvam  has  also  been 
described.  Now  tell  me  about  the  third  M&nwdntara  called 
Auttama  {2). 

^ Markanoeya  said  The  son  of  Utthinapada  and  Suru- 
chi  was  known  by  the  name  of  Uttama— a king  reputed  to 
be  possessed  of  great  strength  and  prowess  (3);  and  righteous 
and  high-souled  and  endowed  with  the  wealth  of  manliness 
who  having  surpassed  all  beings  became  as  glorious  as  the 
sun  (4).  O thou  great  Muni,  he  was  impartial  both  to 
fnends  and  foes,  and  just  to  son  or  servants  ; to  the  workers 
of  iniquity  he  was  even  as  the  god  Yama,  and  to  the  virtuous 
even  as  the  moon  (5).  Uttama,  that  righteous  son  of  UttSna- 
pada  married  Vahula.  well-known  to  fame,  the  daughter  of 
Babhru,  even  as  Indra  did  Shachi.  His  mind  was  always 
full  of  affection  (towards  her)~and  he  placed  his  (heart’s)  stay 
on  her,  even  as  that  of  the  Moon  was  towards  Rohini  (6-7) 
His  mind  never  was  moved  by  attachment  to  any  other 
object.  The  mind  of  that  supporter  of  the  earth  rested  on 
er  even  in  dream  (8).  That  king,  immediately  on  seeing  her 

im  1"^ ^ embrace  her  body,  and 

nesTirh  conscious. 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM  293 

insults  from  her  he  regarded  as  great  honour  (lo).  She 
would  despise  the  garland  and  even  most  lovely  ornaments 
(when)  given  by  him^  and  would  get  up  leave  his  com- 
pany (unceremoniously)  causing  bodily  pain  to  him,  when  he 
would  be  drinking  most  superior  wine  (ii).  In  this  way  she 
was  not  favourably  disposed  towards  that  high-souled  one 
who  was  always  favourably  disposed  to  her ; (and  yet 
the  lord  of  the  earth  would  love  her  more  than  ever  (12). 

If  held  by  the  band  even  for  a moment  by  the  lord  of  men, 
she,  not  being  sufficiently  pleased,  would,  0 thou  twice-born 
one,  eat  but  little  food  (13).  Then,  once,  the  king,  while 
engaged  in  drinking,  with  great  respect  offered  her,  the  in- 
telligent one,  a drinking  cup  filled  with  wine  (14).  She,  looked 
upon  by  the  supporters  of  the  earth,  (2.  <?.  the  assembled 
princes)  with  the  coutezans  who  were  adepts  in  dancing  and 
singing,  and  who  were  singing  most  sweet  tunes,  turned  her 
face  from  it,  and  did  not  wish  to  accept  that  cup,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  lords  of  the  earth.  Then  that  king  repulsed  by 
that  lady  so  loved  by  him, — her  husband  not  loved  by  her, — 
beiog  angry,  said,  calling  the  keeper  ©f  the  gate,  and  breath- 
ing even  lik<^  a serpent  (15 — 17).  0 keeper  of  the  gate,  taking 
this  one  whose  heart  is  bad,  leave  her  soon  in  a lonely  forest. 
Thou  art  not  to  judge  this  order  of  mine.  e,  thou  art  not 
permitted  to  think  whether  I shall  do  as  the  king  bids  or  not 
&c)  (18), 

Markandeya  said — Then  that  door-keeper,  obeying  the 
order  of  the  king  without  judging  (of  its  propriety  or  impro- 
priety) having  placed  her  on  a chsiriot,  left  her  in  the  forest 
(19).  Thus  taken  by  him,  she  (the  Queen)  also  regarded 
that  banishment  in  the  forest,  being  put  out  of  sight  of  the 
lord  of  earth,  as  even  a great  favour  (done  to  her)  (20),  He 
also,  that  supporter  of  the  earth,  the  son  of  Uttana- 
p^da  with  his  mind  burning  with  the  pain  of  his  love  for  her 
did  not  take  a second  wife  (21).  And  he  thought  of  her,  of, 
nfbst  lovely  limbs,  without  break  day  and  night,  and  per- 


MARKANDIEYA 


formed  the  works  of  his  kingdom,  according  to  the  law  as 
prescribed  for  the  government  of  subjects  (22).  To  him 
governing  (his  subjects)  even  as  father  his  self-begotten  son^,. 
came  a Brahman,  in  a painful  state  of  the  mind,  and  saidi 
this  (23). 

The  Bkahmana  said : — 0 great  king,  hear  me  speak,  I 
am  ill  great  distress.  The  distress  of  men  is  not  ren\tn 
died  by  any  one  else  except  the  king  (24).  My  wife 
has  been  stolen  by  some  one  when  I was  asleep  at  night, 
with  the  door  of  my  house  not  bolted.  Thou  sliouldst  bring 
her  back  to  me)  (25). 

The  King  said; — 0 thou  twice-born  one,  thou  dost  not 
know  by  whom  she  has  been  stolen,  or  where  she  has  been 
taken,  then  for  whose  punishment  shall  I exert  myself,  or 
whence  shall  I bring  her  (26). 

The  Brahmana  said:— 0 lord  of  the  earth,  if  the  wife, 
of  a man  sleeping  with  the  doors  closed,  be  stolen,  by  whom 
and  why  (has  she  been  stolen)  should  be  found  out  by 
thee  (27).  Thou,  0 lord  of  men,— who  takest  the  sixth  part 
of  our  produce)  as  thy  remuneration,  art  the  protector  of  the 
law,  therefore  the  sons  of  Manu  (/.  e.  men)  sleep  fearlessly 
at  night  (28), 

The  King  said  ; — Thy  wife  has  not  been  seen  by  me; 
what  form  is  she  physically,  what  also  is  her  age,  tell  me,  as 
also  what  is  the  character  of  thy  Brahmani  (2^). 

Brahmana  : — ^Of  hard  eyes  is  she,  and  excee.dingly  tall, 
and  of  short  arm,  and  shrunken  face ; she  is  very  ugly,  0 lord, 
of  the  earth,  I don’t  speak  ill  of  her,  she  is  reajly  such  (3Q), 
In  words  she  is,  0 king,  exceedingly  harsh,  and  by  character 
she  is  not  amh-ible.  Thus  is  my  wife  described  by  me,  she  p 
in  form  exceedingly  unpleasing  to  the  Bight  (31).  Q ^ingt 
her  first  youth  has  jused  passed, —qf  such  ^ descriptpfl  fs  py 
wife;  this  is  the  truth  spoken  by  me  (32). 

Tap  Kih6  said  need  h|ist  thou,  0 
I ihah  give  thee  another  wife#  4 leyely  wife  ho^enfesi 


UMKhHbtYA  PmANAU. 


e^ttise  of  happiness,  bfie  tike  her  is  Only  a cause  of  pain  (33). 
fieauty  and  good  characte^r  heconhes  a cause,  D Brahman,  of 
happiness;  for  that  reason  she,  Who  Is  without  character,  is 
to  be  forsaken  (34)* 

The  BrahMANA  said  : — it  not,  Oh  king,  a good  injunc- 
tion of  the  scriptures,  that  tlie  wile  is  to  be  protected,  for 
on  the  wife  of  being  protected  the  children  are  pro- 
tected (35).  On  her  is  the  Self  begotten,  therefore,  0 
lord  of  men,  she  is  to  ’be  protected  ; on  the  children 
being  protected  self  is  protected  (36),  If  she  is  not 
protected  intercaste  connections  arise,  and  that  brings  down, 
0 lord  of  the  earth,  the  ancient  forefathers  from 
heaven  to  hell  (37)*  deprived  of  my  wife,  there  will 

be  daily  violation  of  the  sacrifical  rites,  and  owing  to  the 
violation  of  daily  sacrificial  duties  it  will  be  for  my  fall 
(38).  Of  her,  0 preserver  of  the  earth,  will  be  born  my 
children  ; and  she  will  thus  become  the  giver  of  the  sixth 
part  of  the  produce,  and  the  cause  of  the  maintenance  of  the 
Law  (39).  Therefore  has  my  wife,  who  has  been  taken  away,, 
heen  thus  deSrCribed  by  me  to  thee,  0 Lord,  Bring  her,  for 
by  rigfht  art  thou  our  protector  (40). 

Markandeya  said  :~I’iearing  these  words  of  his  the 
lord  of  men,  being  somewhat  displeased— ascended  his  great 
Chariot  supplied  with  all  the  necassaries  (41).  By  him,  wan- 
dering here  and  there  about  the  earth,  was  seen  in  the  great 
forest  an  excellent  hermitage  (42).  This  (king),  getting  down 
there  (from  the  car)  and  entering  (the  hermitage),  saw  there 
the  Muni  sitting  on  the  seat  made  of  the  kusha  grass,  which 
imparts  vigour  and  energy,  and  as  if  burning  by  his  efful- 
gence (43).  He,  on  seeing  the  king^s  approach,  getting  up 
with  alacrity,  and  having  honored  him  by  .saying — Swagata 
(welcome),  asked  his  disciple  to  bring  the  offerings  (due  to 
a prince  by  visitors)  (44).  To  him  the  disciple  said  in  a 
low  tone,  what  offering  is  to  be  given  him,  O Iviuni ! order 
ttiUt  ifte^r  due  deliberation  ; I shall  do  thy  faiiddihg  (451)%**^^ 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM- 


2^6 

Then  having  known  the  story  of  that  king  the  twice-born 
one,  who  has  been  established  in  his  self,  honoured  him  by 
a seat  and  words  of  welcome  (46), 

The  RiSHi  said: — For  what  object  hast  thou  come  ? what 
is  thy  purpose?  I know  thee,  king  Uttama,  the  son  of 
Uttanapada  (47). 

The  King  said  ; — From  a BrShman^s  house  his  wife  has 
been  stolen  by  some  one,  0 Muni,  whose  identification  is 
unknown  ; looking  for  him  have  I come  here  (48).  Therefore 
whatever  I shall  ask  thee,  0 possessor  of  the  six  great 
virtues,  (the  Bhagas),  that  thou  shouldst  moved  by  mercy  tell 
me,  who  am  a guest  in  thy  house,  and  am  adoring  thee  (49)^ 

The  Rishi  said : — Ask  what  thou  desirest  to  ask,  0 pro- 
tector of  the  world,  without  any  reserve  or  delicacy  ; if  that 

may  be  spoken  to  you  by  me,  I shall  relate  it  truly  to 
thee  (go). 

The  King  said -That  oftering,  0 Muni,  which  on  see- 
ing me  at  first  ^approach  thy  house,  thou  wert  on  the  point 
of  making  me,  why  is  that  offering  withheld  (5O? 

The  Rishi  said : — When,  0 king,  on  seeing  thee  out  of 
eagernesss  and  delight  was  this  disciple  ordered  by  me,  then 
I was  by  him  called  back  to  my  own  consciousness  (52). 
This  disciple  knows,  through  my  favour  even  as  I know  my- 
self, whatever  is  past  or  is  present  or  has  not  come  to  pass  in 
this  world  (53).  On  his  saying  consider  and  oder^'  by 
me  was  also  then  every  thing  known,  therefore  I did  not  give 
you  offerings  according  to  the  injunctions  of  the  scriptures 
(54).  Thou  art,  0 king,  truly  deserving  of  offering  being 
born  in  the  race  of  SwSyambhuva  ; inspite  of  that  we  did 
not  consider  you  as  deserving  of  superior  offerings  (55). 

The  King  said: — 0 Brl,hman{  what  has  been  done  by 
me  either  consciously  or  unconsciously,  for  which  although 
coming  here  after  a long  time,  I am  not  thought  deserving 
of  receiving  due  offerings  from  thee  (56)  ?* 

4.  The  highest  o€etlng,  that  is  fit  to  be  given  to  a spirittial  gaide, 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


29; 


The  RlSHl  said : — Has  it  been  forgotten  by  thee  that 
thy  wife  has  been  sent  by  thee  to  the  forest?  With  her,  O 
king,  hav€  also  all  the  sacrificial  rites  been  forsaken  by  thee 

(57) .  Man  becomes  unworthy  of  being  touched,  by  violation 
or  neglect  of  the  sacrificial  rites  for  a fortnight,  and  the  viola- 
tion of  thy  daily  sacrificial  duties  has  extended  over  a year 

(58) .  As  the  wife  must  be  favourably  disposed  towards  the 
hasband  if  he  be  of  bad  character,  similarly  is  the  wife  of 
bad  character  to  be  supported  (by  the  husband),  G lord  of 
men  (59).  That  wife  of  that  Brahmana  who  has  been  stolen, 
is  against  her  husband,  still  that  (BrAhmana),  O king,  desir- 
ous of  merit,  is  anxious  to  regain  her  (60).  0 lord  of  the  world, 
thou  dost  re-establish  those  that  are  fallen  from  their  duties, 
in  their  respective  functions,  who  else  shall  establish  thee 
when  thou  art  shaken  from  the  law  (61), 

MARKANDEYA  said  : — That  lord  of  the  earth  thus  spoken 
to  by  that  wise  one,  being  ashamed,  and  saying  it  is  as  thou 
sayest,^^  asked  of  that  twice-born  one,  about  the  stolen  wife 
(62).  O thou  the  possessor  of  the  six  great  qualities,  the 
SAagas,  by  whom  has  that  wife  of  the  Brlhmana  been  taken, 
and  where.  The  revered  one  knows  truly  that  which  has 
occurred  and  that  which  is  yet  to  come  in  this  world  (63). 

The  Rishi  said  The  Rakshasa,,  Valaka  by  name,  the 
son  of  Adri  has  stolen  her.  O king,  thou  mayest  see  him  this 
day  in  the  forest  of  Utpalavatara  (64).  Go,  and  do  thou,  with 
despatch,  join  that  most  excellent  person  among  the  twice- 
born  with  his  wife  ; let  him  not  go  to  the  place  of  the  sinners 
from  day  to  day  like  their  own  self  (65). 

to  the  king,  to  the  son-in-law,  &c.,  consists  of  calf  or  cow,  but  the  ancient 
authorities  say  that  this  offering  is  due  to  those  guests  who  come  at  least 
after  a year.  Hence  the  king  here  mentions  the  length  of  time. 


38 


MarkANDEYA  said Then  having  saluted  the  great 
Muni,  be  got  upon  his  own  chariot,  and  by  it  he  went  to  that 
forest  known  as  Utpaiavatam  (i).  The  lord  of,  men  then 
saw.  that  wife  of  the  twice-born  one  of  the  same  description 
"as  related  by  her  husband,  eating  bael  fruits  (2).  He  asked, 
‘Why,  O good  one,  hast  thou  come  to  this*, forest,  tell  me  dis- 
tinctly ; art  thou  the  wife  of  SusharnaS  the  son  of  Bisbala  (3). 

The  Brahmani  said : — I am  the  daughter  of  the  twice- 
born  one,  Atiratra,  who  lives  in  the  forest ; and  the  wife  of 
the  son  of  Bishala  whose  name  has  been  mentioned  by  thee 
(4}.  That  am  I who  has  been  brought  away  by  the  Rakshasa 
Valaka  of  evil  spirit,  when  I was  asleep  in  my  bouse,  and 
have  thus  been  separated  from  my  brother  and  mother  (5). 
May  that  Rakshasa  be  reduced  to  ashes  by  whom  I am 
separated  from  mother,  brother  and  others  and  am  placed 
here  in  great  misery  (6).  Brought  by  him  I have  been  left  in 
this  dense  forest;  I do  not  know  the  reason,  why  he  neither 
enjoys  nor  eats  me  up  (7)  ? 

The  KING  said  : — ^Dost  thou  know  where  the  Rakshasa 
has  gone  after  leaving  thee  here  ? O thou  daughter  of  twice- 
born  parents,  I have  been  sent  here  by  thy  husband  (8). 

The  Brahmani  said : — That  rover  in  the  night  exists 
even  in  the  borders  of  this  forest:  enter  and  see  him,  if  thou 
art  not  afraid  of  him  (9), 

Markandeya  said : — Then  he  entered  from  there,  by 
the  road  pointed  out  by  her,  and  saw  the  Rlkshasa  surroun- 
ded by  his  family  (10).  Then  immediately  on  seeing  him 
that  Rakshasa  made  haste  to  touch  the  ground  with  his  head 
from  a distance,  and  went  near  his  feet  (il). 

The  Rakshasa  said ; — By  thee  coming  here  to  my  house 


MARKANDEYA  RURANAM. 


fias  great  favour  beeA  done  to  me.  Be  gracious,  telf  me 
what  may  I do  for  thee,  I live  in  thy  kingdom  Aotept 

this  offering,  take  this  seat,  we  are  servants^  thou  the  lord, 
order  me  firmly  (13). 

The  King  said By  thee  have  all  the  rites  due  to  a 
guest  been  fully  performed.  Why  has  the  wife  of  the 
Brahman  been  brought  by  thee,  O thou  rover  in  the  night  ? 
This  one  is  not  beautiful,  of  excellent  limbs,  that  she  has 
been  stoten  by  thee  for  making  her  thy  wife.  If  brought  for 
eating  why  has  not  she  been  eaten  by  thee,  tell  me  this 
(14—15). 

The  Rakshasa  said : — We  are  not  cannibals,  O king, 
they  are  other  Rikshasas.  We  eat  that,  O king,  which  is 
the  fruit  of  our  merit  (16).  We  eat  the  character  of  men 
and  women  when  insulted  or  honoured  (by  them),  but  are 
not  eaters  of  animals  (i7)«  Therefore  when  men’s  power 
of  forbearance  is  eaten  by  us  they  become  subject  to  anger; 
and  on  their  bad  disposition  being  eaten  up,  they  become 
full  of  good  qualities  (18),  We  have  females  who  please 
US,  Q king,  equal  in  beauty  to  Apsar§S,  and  when  these 
Raksa^  exist  what  cause  is  there  for  our  becoming  attached 
to  women  ? (ip). 

The  King  said If  this  woman,  0 thou  night-walker,  is 
is  not  meant  for  ehjoytrient  nor  for  food  then  why  has  she 
been  stolen  by  thee,  entering  into  the  Brahman^s  house  ? (20); 

The  RaksHAsA  said  — 0 king,  that  superior  person, 
among  the  twice-born,  is  well  versed  in  spells  ; and  by  read- 
ing spells  for  the  destruction  of  Rakshasas  he  expels  me  from 
every  sacrifice  where  I go  (21).  We  suffer  from  hunger  by 
Ws  reading  the  spells  for  the  expulsion  (of  the  Rakshasas) ; 
where  shall  we  go,  that  twice-bom  one  becomes  the  priest 
in  all  the  sacrifices  (22).  Therefore  has  this  disqualification 
of  him  been  worked  by  us;  in  the  absence  of  their  wives, 
men  become  unfitted  for  the  performance  of  sacrificial 
rites  (23), 


300 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


Markandeya  said  : — ^Then  that  king,  on  the  fact  of  tlic 
disqualification  of  the  high-souled  Brahman,  being  related 
(to  him)  became  exceedingly  sad  (34),  By  speaking  of  the 
disqualification  of  the  BrShmana,  he  is  condemning  even  me- 
that  most  superior  Muni  also  said  that  I was  not  competent 
to  receive  offering  due  to  a guest  (of  my  position)  (25).  The 
disqualification  of  that  Brahmana,  as  also  of  mine,  is  spoken 
of  by  the  RJLkshasa.  Such  am  I,  who  owing  to  want  of  wife 
have  come  to  this  great  difficulty  (a6), 

Markandeya  Said ; — 0 Muni  1 to  the  king  thus  medi- 
tating, the  Klkshasa,  saluting  low,  and  with  his  hands  joined 
said  once  more  (27). 

The  Rakshasa  said: — -0  lord  of  men,  by  ordering  me 
as  to  what  I should  do,  favour  me,  who  am  thy  servant,  and 
obedient  to  thee,  and  who  live  in  thy  kingdom  (28). 

The  King  said : — This  which  has  been  spoken  by  thee, 
O thou  night-walker, — that  we  eat  the  characters  of  men,— 
even  that  do  we  desire  (of  thee),  hear  from  me  of  the  work 
by  which  thou  mayst  (fulfil  my  wishes)  (29).  By  thee  to-day 
is  the  bad  character  of  this  Briihmani  to  be  eaten;  so  that 
with  her  bad  character  eaten  up  by  thee,  she  may  become 
mild  of  disposition  ; (30).  And  by  thee,  should  she  be  taken 
to  his  house,  0 thou  night-walker,  whose  wife  she  Is.  On 
•thy  doing  this,  every  thing  (needful)  will  be  done  to  me  who 
have  come  (as  a guest)  to  thy  house  (31).  ^ 

Markandeya  said Then  that  Rakshas.a,  by  force  of 
bis  own  occult  powers  leaving  entered  into  that  woman, 
up  her  evil  disposition  by  his  own  powers,  in  accordance  with 
the  command  of  the  king  (32).  That  wife,  of  that  twice-born 
one  thus  relieved  of  her  exceedingly  fierce  evil  disposition, 
told  that  lord  of  the  world  (33).  ‘'By  virtue  of  my  own  works 
have  I been  separated  from  that  great-sonled  one,  ray  lord, 
this  R&kshasa  was  only  an  instrument  (in  the  hands  of  Pro- 
vidence) (34).  This  is  not  the  fault  of  this  oue  {Le.  the 
Rhksbisa;  nor  of  him,  my  high-iouied  husband  { it  is  my  faul^ 


WARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


301 


not  of  others.  People  always  enjoy  the  fruits  of  their 
actions  (35).  In  a privious  birth  separation  of  some  woman 
(from  her  husband)  had  been  worked  by  me.  That  has 
come  to  me  also.  What  fault  is  there  (for  this)  of  this  high- 
souled  one  (36). 

The  Rakshasa  said: — Lord,  I shall,  in  accordance  with 
thy  command,  take  this  (woman)  to  the  house  of  her  lord. 
Command  me,  0 king,  what  also  is  to  be  done  by  me  (37). 

The  King  said  : — 0 thou  rover  in  the  night,  on  thy  doing 
this  everything  will  be  done  to  me.  Thou,  0 brave  one,  wilt 
come  to  me,  whenever,  I ttiay  remember  thee,  for  the  per- 
formance of  any  work  (38). 

MarkANDEYA  said  : — Then,  be  it^'— saying  this,  that 

Ri^kshasa  taking  that  twice-born  woman,  who  had  become 
pure  through  removal  of  her  evil  disposition,  conveyed  her  to 
her  husband^s  house  (39). 



CHAPTER  LXXI. 


arkandeya  said — Having  sent  that  woman  to  the 
house  of  her  husband,  the  king  also  began  to  think,  sighing, 
*^what  shall  be  good  for  me  under  these  circumstances  (i). 
That  high-minded  (Rishi)  spoke  to  me  of  my  pain  for  my 
unworthiness  to  receive  the  offerings  meet  for  a guest  (of 
my  position) ; and  this  night-walker  spoke  of  my  disqualifica- 
tion, referring  to  the  case  of  the  BrAhmana  (2).  Such  am  I, 
what  shall  I do  ? That  wife  of  mine  has  been  forsaken  by 
me.  Or  shall  I ask  that  most  superior  Muni  possessed  with 
an  illumined  vision  (3)  ? Thus  meditating,  that  lordj  of  the 


302 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAVI 


j 

i 

I 


earfh  getting  into  that  chariot  of  his,  went  there  where  the 
righteous  great  Muni  who  knows  the  three  periods  of  time 
{i.e.  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future)  lived  (4).  Getting 
down  from  the  chariot,  he  then  approaching  him  and  making 
due  obeisance,  related  his  interview  with  the  Rakshasa  exact- 
ly as  it  happened  ($),  and  similarly  his  interview  with  the 
wife  of  the  Brahmana,  and  her  cure  of  her  evil  disposition, 
and  also  her  despatch  to  her  husband’s  house,  and  that  which 
was  the  object  of  his  visit  (6). 

The  Rishi  said : — That  which  has  been  done  by  thee, 
0 Lord  of  men,  as  also  the  object  of  thy  coming  to  me,  all 
this  was  already  known  by  me  (7).  Ask  me  now, —what  is 
to  be  done  by  me,  I am  anxious  in  mind,  on  thy  coming  to 
me.  Hear  that  which  is  to  be  done  by  thee,  0 lord  of  earth 
(8).  The  wife  is  the  most  powerful  incentive  of  men  to  the 
observance  of  the  law  and  the  attainment  of  merit ; espe- 
dally  is  the  law  forsaken  on  her  being  forsaken  (9).  The 
wifeless  man,  0 king,  is  not  entitled  to  perform  his  sacrificial 
duties,  be  he,  O king,  a BrShmana,  Kshatriya  or  Vaishya.  In 
forsaking  thy  wife  thou  hast  not  done  a graceful  act ; for 
even  as  wives  cannot  desert  their  husbands,  so  too  men  can- 
not forsake  their  wives  (ri). 

The  King  said : — O thou  possesser  of  six  great  qualities 
the  Bhagas,  what  shall  I do  ? This  is  the  result  of  my  ac- 
tions. Because  she  was  not  favourably  disposed  towards 
me  who  was  always  lovingly  inclined  towards  her,  therefore, 
has  she  been  forsaken  by  me  (12).  Whatever  she  did  I 
forbore  all  that  with  a burning  heart,  0 possesser  of  the  six 
great  qualities,  with  my  mind  always  afraid  of  the  pain  of 
her  separation  (13).  Now  that  she  has  been  left  in  the 
forest  I know  not  where  she  has  gone,  or  whether  slie  has 
been  eaten  in  the  jungle  by  Korvs  or  tigers  or  Rakshasas-  (14). 

The  Rishi  said She  has  not  beien  eaten,  O lord  of 
by  the  lion  or  tiger  or  Rakshasa,  she  is  now  living 

in  the  lower  r«^ion  wife  h«E  character  unsullied  (15):, 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


303 


The  Rishi  said : — The  king  of  serpents,  known  as 
Kapotaka,  lives  in  the  nether  regions  ; that  beautiful  young 
lady,  forsaken  by  thee,  and  roving  about  in  that  great  forest 
was  seen  by  him,  who  knew  her  story,  and  was  moved  by 
love  towards  her, — and  taken  to  the  nether  regions  (16 — 18). 
His  daughter  with  beautiful  eye^brows  was  Nanda  by  name, 
O lord  of  the  world,  and  the  wife  of  this  king  of  the  serpents, 
possessed  of  intelligence,  was  Manorama,  by  name  (ig). 
This  beautiful  (lady)  will  become  the  co-wife  of  my  mother,— 
(she  thought),  and  seen  by  her,  she  was  taken  to  her  own 
house  and  artfully  concealed  in  the  female  appartment  (20). 
When  besought,  Nanda  did  not  reply  to  the  king;  then  the 
father  told  that  daughter  ^^thou  shalt  be  dumb’'  (21).  Thus 
was  his  daughter  cursed  by  him,  and  she,  the  chaste  one, 
(thy  wife)  0 lord  of  the  earth ! captured  and  taken  by  that 
lord  of  the  serpents,  lives  there  (now)  (22). 

MarkaNDEYA  said: — Then  the  king  overcome  with  great 
joy  asked  him  the  most  superior  among  the  twice-born  the 
cause  of  his  misfortune  so  far  as  his  wife  was  concerned  (23). 

The  King  said  thou  possessor  of  the  six  great 
qualities,  the  Bkagas,  the  affection  of  the  whole  world  towards 
me  is  very*  great.  What  then  is  the  cause,  for  which  my 
own  wife  is  not  overhanging  towards  me  (24).  O thou  great 
Muni,  my  love  towards  her  is  very  great,  even  more  than  that 
towards  my  own  life,  but  she  is  ill-disposed  towards  me,  tell 
me  the  cause  of  it,  0 thou  twice-born  one  (25). 

The  RiShi  said : — At  the  time  of  taking  her  hand  {ue. 
thy  marriage)  thou  wert  looked  upon  by  the  Sun,  the  Venus, 
and  the  Saturn,  and  thy  wife  by  the  Mercury,  and  the  Jupiter 
(26).  At  that  moment  the  moon  became  hers,  while  similar- 
ly the  son  of  the  moon  became  yours,  these  two  are  mutually 
opposed;  therefore,  0 king,  is  thy  misfortune  (27).  There- 
fore go  and  govern  the  earth  according  to  the  injunctions  of 
thy  order  and  class;  taking  thy  wife  as  thy  helpmate  perform 
all  sacrificial  and  other  religious  duties  (28), 


304 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 


Markandeya  said  .-—Being  thus  spoken  to,  Uttama,  the 
governor  of  the  earth,  having  saluted  this  (Brahman)  and 
then  getting  upon  his  chariot,  went  to  his  own  city  (39). 


CHAPTER  LXXII. 


iflARKANDEYA  said Then  having  found  his  own  city 
the  king  saw  that  twice-born  one  with  his  wife  who  had 
attained  an  excellent  disposition,  and  was  full  of  delight  (i). 

The  Brahmana  said : — 0 thou  most  superior  king,  I am 
gratified,  for  the  law  is  maintained  unto  me  by  thee  who 
kuowest  the  law  and  who  brought  my  wife  to  me  (2). 

The  King  said Thou  art  gratified,  O most  superior 
among  twice-born  persons,  owing  to  the  due  observance  of 
the  law  of  my  order,  but  we,  O BrShmana,  whose  wife  is 
not  in  the  house,  are  in  a most  painful  situation  (3), 

The  Brahmana  said  :-If  she  has  been,  O Lord  of  men, 
eaten  up  by  wild  animals  in  the  woods,  what  can  be  done 
by  her.  Why  there  is  not  the  hand  of  some  other  (maiden) 
taken  by  thee  (in  marriage).  Owing  to  thy  subjection  to 
anger  the  law  is  not  being  observed  by  thee  (4), 

The  King  said:— My  love  has  not  been  devoured  by 
wild  animals:  she  lives,  in  truth,  with  unblemished  character. 
What  shall  I do  now  (5)  ? 

The  Brahmana  said :— If  thy  wife  lives  and  is  not  at- 
t^hed  to  any  other  person  then  why  is  the  sin,  caused  by 
the  absence  of  the  wife,  committed  by  Jjiee  (6). 

The  King  said:— Even  if  brought  she  will  always,  O 
Brahmana,  be  opposed  to  me,  she  is  only  for  my  sorrow  and 


MARKANDKYA  PURANAM.  3O5 

not  tor  my  happiness — she  has  no  love  for  me.  Do  thou  so 
try  that  she  may  be  subject  to  me  (7). 

The  BrahmanA  said  : — For  her  love  towards  thee,  I shall 
perform  tiuit  sacrifice,  called  Mitravinda,  which  great  and 
beneficial  sacrifice  is  performed  by  those  who  desire  love  (8). 
That  sacrifice  is  the  worker  of  superior  love  among  husband 
and  wife  who  are  not  loved  by  each  other.  For  tl\y  benefit 
I shall  perform  that  sacrifice  (9).  O Lord  of  the  earth,  bring 
her,  thy  wife,  of  beautiful  eye-brows,  from  where  she  exists; 
she  will  give  thee  most  superior  happiness  (10). 

MARKANDEYA  said  : — Being  thus  spoken  to,  he,  the  lord 
of  the  world,  brought  the  endless  objects  (needful  for  the 
sacrifice)  and  he,  that  most  superior  Brahmin  also  performed 
that  sacrifice — (yapza)  (li).  With  a view  to  work  up  the 
wife  of  tliat  king,  that  superior  person  among  the  twice-born, 
again  and  again  performed  that  sacrifice  seven  times  (12). 
When  that  great  Muni  felt  that  the  love  of  her  (the  queen) 
had  been  fully  established  on  her  own  husband,  then  that 
Brihmana  told  the  lord  of  men  (13).  “O  thou  most  superior 
among  men,  bring  her,  who  is  the  object  of  thy  love,  near 
thee;  and  enjoy  the  objects  of  pleasure  with  her, 
and  perform  sacrifices  likewise  being  honoured  (by  her) 
(.14)- 

Markandeya  said: — Being  thus  spoken  to,  by  that  Br§,h- 
rnana,  the  ruler  of  the  world,  at  that  time,  overcome  with 
wonder,  then  remembered  that  Rakshasa  of  great  energy 
and  steadfast  resolution  (15).  0 great  Muni,  remembered 

by  him  at  that  time,  that  (Rakshasa),  immediately  approach- 
ing the  lord  of  men,  after  salutation  said, — *'What  may 
I do'^  (16)?  Then  having  been  informed  in  detail  by  that 
lord  of  men,  going  to  the  nether  regions  and  securing  the 
wife  of  the  king,  he  came  back  to  him  {17).  Thus  brought 
she  beheld  then  her  lord  with  great  love,  and  said  again  and 
again,  being  full  of  delight — '' Be  gracious''  (i8)*  Then  that 
king  ertibracing  that  honoured  one  with  great  eagerness 
29 


30$  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

exclaimed— ‘'I  am  always  gracious  to  thee,  my  love,  why 
then  dost  thou  say  so  again”  (19). 

The  wife  said. — If  thy  mind  is  exceedingly  gracious 
towards  me,  O lord  of  men,  then  I beg  this  of  thee,  “do  thou 
do  this  which  is  the  object  of  my  worship”  (20). 

The  King  said: — ^Tell  me  without  fear,  whatever  is 
desired  by  thee  of  me,— that  will  not  be  unattainable,  O thou 
timid  one ; there  is  no  doubt  of  it,  that  I am  under  thy 
control  (21). 

The  wife  said: — For  my  sake  by  that  serpent  has  his 
daughter,  my  friend,  been  cursed' — saying, — “thou  shalt 
be  dumb,”  and  she  too  has  come  by  dumbness  (22).  If  thou 
canst  effect  a remedy  of  her,  for  the  removal  of  her  dumb- 
ness, moved  by  thy  love  for  me,  what  great  good  wilt  thou 
then  do  untome  {23). 

Markandeya  said : — Then  that  king  asked  that  BrSh- 
mana  “ under  the  circumstance  what  kind  of  work  (sacrifice) 
is  to  be  performed  for  the  remedy  of  that  dumbness,”  and 
he  also  said  that  to  the  king  (24). 

The  Brahmana  said : — In  obedience  to  thy  order,  O 
lord  of  the  earth,  I shall  perform  the  sacrifice 

and  owing  to  the  setting  in  of  the  power  of  speech  of  NandS 
this  thy  wife  shall  be  released  of  her  debt  (of  gratitude  (25). 

Markandeya  said  : — That  most  superior,  among  twice- 
born  persons  for  that  object,  performed  the  sacrifice  called 
Saraswati  and  with  concentrated  mind  repeated  the  Saras- 
watt  Suktas  (26).  Then  Garga  told  her,  whose  power  of 
speech  had  began  to  work,  in  the  nether  world,  “this  good, 
very  hard  to  work,  has  been  done  thee,  by  the  husband  of  thy 
friend”  (27).  Coming  by  this  knowledge,  Nand&.  the  self  begot- 
ten  daughter  of  the  serpent,  having  quickly  found  that  city 
And  then  having  embraced  her  friend  the  queen,  and  having 
also  done  honour  to  that  rultsr  of  the  earth,  and  having  re. 
peatedly  uttere^  benedictions  (on  them),*— -the  serpent  woman 
taking  her  seat  spoke  (thus)  sweetly  (28—29).  "By  the  good 


heart  has  been  drawn  to  thee.  Hear  what  I speak  (30). 
O thou  lord  of  men,  thou  shalt  have  a son  endowed  with 
great  energy,  on  this  earth  ; his  arms  shall  be  invincible  (31). 
He  shall  know  the  meaning  and  significance  of  all  scriptures 
and  shall  be  devoted  to  the  law  and  the  sacrifices  ; that  intelli- 
gent one  shall  be  a Manu,  the  lord  of  Manwaniara^*  (32}. 
Thus  having  uttered  this  blessing  on  him,  the  daughter  of 
the  king  of  serpents,  0 Muni,  after  embracing  her  friend  duly 
went  away  to  the  nether  regions  (33).  There  a long  period 
passed  of  that  king  enjoying  life  with  her  (the  queen)  and 
governing  his  subjects  (34).  Then  a son  was  born  of  that 
high-souled  king  unto  her,  just  as  the  full-diced  and  beautiful 
moon  appears  on  the  full  moon  night  (35).  On  the  birth 
of  that  high-souled  one  all  the  people  found  great  delight 
and  the  flutes  of  the  Gods  were  played  and  flowers  fell  in  a 
shower  (36).  Munis,  having  come  (to  see  him)  and  seeing 
the  loveliness  of  his  limbs,  and  his  future  character,  gave 
him  the  name—Auttama  (37).  ‘This  one  is  born  in  a good 
family,  similarly  in  a good  timer  and  unto  Uttama,  and  is? 
of  a good  form^  therefore  he  shall  be  Auttama^  (38). 

Markanoeya  said  ; — Then  this  one,  the  son  of  Uttama, 
and  similarly  known  by  the  name  of  Aattama,  became  Manu ; 
hear  of  his  prowess  from  me  (39).  Whoever,  that  heats  daily 
the  whole  of  the  story  of  Uttama, and  that  of  birth  of  Auttama, 
shall  never  become  the  object  of  men^s  ill-will  (40). 
Of  him  who  shall  hear  or  read  these,  there  shall  never  be 
any  separation  with  objects  of  his  desires  or  wives,  or  sons^ 
or  friends  (41).  Hear,;  O Brlhman,  of  his  Mdhwaniara^  from 
me  as  also  of  him  who  is  the  Indra  (in  that  Manwantara) 
and  who  are  the  Gods  and  who  are  Rishis  (42). 

IP..— .1..., 


IUarkandeya  said  :-Usten  to 
you)  the  gods,  the  lord  of  the  god 
in  this  Manwanfara,  the  third  r 
(I).  The  gods  were  Swadhdmds, 

truth  of  their  names)  and  a second  class 
similarly  of  the  species  of  the 
class,  similarly  of  the  specie 
superior  Muni,  called  Shivas 
buiva  himself,  and  were 


am  relating  (^0 

and  the  tings-: 

one,  of  the  Auttama  {Manu) 

, they  whose  works  imitated': 
testimony  to  the 
named  were" 

•s ; and  also  a third 
gods,  were  O most 
they  were  of  the  nature  of 

“ (-3).  A„d . 2Z  ITlfT 

gods,  0 thou  superior  Muni  n d ^pccies  of  the 
Auttama  (4).  a fifth  da,,  ,h  »'  «■«  Mana 

tara),  O thou  twice-born  one 

(callad)  the  and  Jl  'tiZTo 

of  the  „a,.„  iudicatcd  by  he  ZT  ’ 

are  known  to  have  been  the  five  ch„i  „t  n ' 

aacrific*,  in  this  0 hoV  ,„if  ' 

raen  ; all  these  were  the  tw^lL  superior  among 

lard,  the  poa.eea„7  .he  aLht''r‘7 

and  known  by  the  name  of  Snslinti  '""■''■'as 

gethered  the  hundred  sacrifir^.  i ' gathered  to- 

worlda  (j,.  Hymn,  adevned  Z T«  ‘"f' 

cure  of  diseases  (8),  The  lovely  To 'd  7iJ"  T 

with  the  gods  SAwas,  Saiyas  f 

iariins  (9).  Of  that  Manu  there  w similarly  JSasAa. 

f«l  and  famous  like  th^  _ . '"‘‘f  ®°"®’  power- 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


309 


energetic  Manu  lasted  his  offsprings,  being  lords  of  men, 
governed  the  whole  world  (ii).  The  seven  sons  of  that  great 
souled  one,  who  was  the  mOsSt  superior  person  among  men 
by  their  own  energy  born  of  penance,  became,*  in  that 
Mamvantara  the  seven  principal  Rishis  (12),  This  is  the 
third  Manwantara^  now  related  to  you  by  me;  the  Tamasi 
is  said  to  be  the  fourth  Manwantara  (13).  O Brahman, 
hear  from  we  who  will  relate  to  you  (presently)  the  birth  of 
that  Manu,  by  whose  fame,  though  he  was  born  of  a low 
caste  mother,  the  whole  world  was  illumined  (14).  The 
character  of  the  others  as  well  as  of  his,  and  likewise  his 
birth;  and  the  influence  of  these  high-souled  ones  should  be 
known  as  beyond  the  comprehension  of  the  senses  (15). 

— 

CHAPTER  LXXIY. 

l^AliKANDEYA  said  : — There  was  on  earth  a king  Swa- 
rastra  by  name,  famous,  and  full  of  energy,  the  perfo^er  of 
many  sacrifices,  wise,  and  unconquerable  in  battle  (i).  Wor-i 
shipped  by  his  councillor  the  sun-god  gave  him  long  life,  and 
O thou  twice-born  one,  his  wives  were  a hundred  in  number 
(2).  Of  him,  the  long-lived  one,  the  wives  were  not  long-lived* 
O Muni ! and  in  time  the  servants  and  the  councillors  similar- 
ly all  were  dead  (3).  In  this  way  separated  from  his  wives 
as  also  from  his  attendants  who  were  born  with  him,  being 
restless  in  mind  he  began  to  lose  his  energy  day  by  day  (4). 
Then  at  that  time,  (a  king)  by  name  Bimardda  deposed  him 
from  his  kingdom, — who  had  lost  his  vigour  and  was  sad, 
having  been  forsaken  by  most  intimate  attendants  (5).  He, 
the  possesser  of  the  eight  good  qualities,  deposed  from  his 


MARKANDEYA  PURAMAN. 


3^'iO 

kingdom,  with  his  mind  bowed  down  by  sorrow  and  bereave- 
ment, going  to  the  forest,  and  living  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Vitasta,  practised  penances  (6).  He  practised  the  penance 
of  the  five  fires  in  summer,  and  got  himself  wetted  in  the 
waters  of  the  clouds  during  the  rains,  and  lying  in  water 
during  winter,  he  lived  without  food,  taking  the  vow  of  self- 
control  (7).  Then  while  he  was  thus  practising  the  penances, 
during  one  rainy  season,  there  was  a great  deluge  owing  to  an 
incessant  down-pour  from  the  clouds  (8).  The  quarters 
could  not  be  distinguished,  neither  the  east,  nor  the  south 
nor  the  west,  nor  the  north ; everything  seemed  to  be  covered 
with  darkness  (9).  Then  owing  to  the  great  deluge  that 
king  was  carried  away  by  the  extremely  rapid  current  of  the 
river,  and  though  praying  for  rescue  he  did  not  find  its  banks 
(10).  Next  the  lord  of  the  earth,  carried  to  a long  distance 
by  the  current  of  water,  came  across  a deer  in  that  water; 
and  he  caught  her  by  the  tail  (11).  By  that  craft  (of  a tail) 
was  he  conducted  here  and  there,  in  that  darkness,  on  this 
earth,  and  at  last  he  found  land  (12).  Having  crossed  exten- 
sive and  deep  sloughs,  pulled  by  that  deer,  that  king  found 
another  pleasant  forest  (13).  In  that  darkness  did  the  deer 
draw  the  lord  of  the  world  attached  to  her  tail,  and  grown 
lean  ^nd  weak)  by  cruel  austerities  (14).  Walking  about 
again  and  again  in  that  darkness,  his  mind  being  moved  by 
passion,  he  found  great  pleasure  in  her  touch  (15).  In  that 
forest  knowing  that  lord  of  men  full  of  love  (towards  her) 
and  engaged  in  touching  her  back,  that  deer  (thus)  spoke 
to  him  (16).  "Why  dost  thou  touch  my  back  with  trembling 
bands,  0 lord  of  men  ? This  action  has  taken  a contrary 
course  (17).  Thy  mind,  0 lord,  is  not  set  on  an  unworthy 
object ; thy  connection  with  me  is  not  forbidden*— but  this 
Lola  stands  in  the  way  of  my  union  with  thee  (18). 

Marrandeya  said Hearing  this  speech  of  that  deer 
tte  lord  of  the  world, ; moved  by  curiosity,  spoke  this  word 
to’  the  deer  (19).  ■ 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


3^1 

The  King  said : — Tell  me  who  thou  art,  O deer,  and 
how  dost  thou  speak  like  a human  being  and  who  again  is 
this  Lola  who  stands  as  an  obstacle  to  thy  connection  with 
me  (ao). 

The  deer  said : — I am,  O king,  thy  wife,  known  before 
as  Utpalivati,  the  chief  queen  among  a hundred  wives,  and 
the  daughter  of  Dridadhana  (21), 

The  King  said: — But  what  didst  thou  do  by  which  thou 
hast  found  this  birth.  Why  has  she,  who  was  devoted  to  her 
husband,  and  assiduous  in  the  observance  of  the  law,  come 
by  such  a state  (22), 

The  deer  said  : — In  my  fathers^s  house,  as  a maiden,  I 
went  with  my  friends  and  companious  to  the  forest  for  a 
pleasure-walk,  and  there  saw  a he-deer  united  with  a female- 
deer  (23).  Then  by  me,  who  went  near,  was  the  female 
deer  driven  away  and  through  fear  of  me  she  went  to  another 
place;  then  the  male  deer  being  angry  said  (24).  Thou  fool, 
why  hast  thou  become  so  mad;  fie  to  thy  evil  disposition, 
by  which  is  this  my  union  frustrated  i (25).**  Hearing  bis 
word,  who  was  speaking  like  a human  being  over-taken  with 
with  fear  I told  him  this-— who  art  thou  that  hast  attained 
this  birth  (26).  Then  he  said: — ‘‘  I am  the  son  of  the  Rishi 
Nribrittichakshu,  SutapI  by  mame ; being  moved  by  desire 
for  this  female  deer,  I have  become  a deer;  (27)?  And 
become  subject  to  her  through  love,  I was  also  desired  by 
her  in  this  forest;  but  O evil  one,  we  are  separated  by  thee  ; 
therefore  shall  I curse  thee  (28).''  By  me  was  also  spoken 
this:— “0  Muni,  through  ignoronce  I have  offended  thee  ; be 
gracious  to  me,  it  is  not  meet,  O respected  one,  that  thou 
shouldst  curse  me  (29)/^  Thus  being  spoken  to,  0 lord  of  the 
earth,  that  Muni  also  told  me  this  : — “I  will  not  curse  thee,  if 
I may  give  myself  to  thee  (30).”  By  me  was  also  spoken  (this) 
— am  not  a female  deer,  thou  who  art  of  the  form  of  a deer 
ihalt  find  another  female  deer  in  the  forest  ; therefore  control 
thy  passion  for  me  (31)/'  Being  thus  spoken  to,  he  said,  with 


tnrough  anger,  and  his  h>s  trem. 
er,  by  thee  has  this  been  spoken  ■ 
I=.naIo  (32), 

k=  k.<l  beaf 
fully  composed,  again  and  again 

1 (33)*  f am  a mere  girl, 
therefore  has  this  been 
the  father  alone  is  the 
■emselves  (34).  q most 
Xists,  how  can  I accept 

3US  to  me,  o lord,  I salute 

I her  who  was  saying — be 
ou,  that  most  superior 
ken  by  me  shall  never  be 
jly  become  a female  deer 
. r,. , ^‘'fhy  state  as  deer 

Mum  S.ddl.abirya,  O thou  lovely  one  j 
arm,  thy  womb  (i>.,  vvill  be 
Thou  Shalt  regain  thy  memory  of  thy 
pregnancy  occurring  to  thee,  and  find- 
— speak  in  the  tongue  of  men 
from  the  state  of  the 
' Shalt  gain  those 
hy  the  workers  of  iniquity 
‘'"^rgy,  having  killed  his 
m entire  world,  shall  at 
>us  cursed,  and  attaining 
■ hy  thy  touch  is  this  fast- 
•e  I say  that  thy  mind, 
nor  am  I beyond  the  range 
™y  womb  has  created  an 

■Then  being  thus  spoken  to  th,r 
supreme  dehVht  fin  « . “ ‘ 


»«iu«c,on,--"oe  gracious  to  me 
inexperienced  in  (the  use  of)  words, 
spoken  by  me;  in  the  absence  ot 
husband  accepted  by  the  maidens  tJ 
excellent  Muni,  when  my  father  e 

(thee) ; or  even  if  I am  guilty,  he  graci( 

1 thee  (35)."  Otliou  high-souled  one!  to 
gracious,  be  gracious,  after  saliilati 
Muni  said  this  (36).  . " The  word  spol 
otherwise;  thou,  being  dead.shalt  sur. 

^ even  in  this  forest, 
will  the  son  of  the 
Lola  by  name,  mighty  of 
born  of  thee)  (38), 
former  birth,  on  that 
ing  thy  lost  memory,  thou  shalt 

(39) -  At  his  birth,  being  liberated  f 
deer,  and  honoured  by:  thy  husband, 
Mas  which  are  not'  attainable 

(40) .  That  Lola  also,  mighty  of 

father's  enemies  and  conquered 

’ last  become  Maau  (41).’’  Beino' 
the  state  of  the  beast  after  dea 
us  born  in  ray  womb  (42),  There 
‘”®'  *’*‘3  "Ot  been  misplaced, 
of  thy  lawful  love,  but  this  Lola  in 
obstacle  (43). 

MaRkandeva  said 

king,  also  found 
my  son  hav 


MAkkANDEYA  .PtTRANAM. 


earth  (44).  Then 
endowed  with  all 
found  delight  (45).  More 
of  this  son,  mighty  of  s 
that  female  deer,  released 
lent  lokas  {46).  Then, 
Rishis  coming  to  h 
name  to  that  high*souled  < 
‘vho  found  a Tamasa  birth, 


remale  deer  brought  forth  that  son 
good  signs,  and  at  his  birth  all  beings 
particularly  this  king,  on  the  birth 
trength,  found  great  delight;  and 
from  the  curse,  found  most  excel. 

o most  Mu„i,  ,11  the 

andsosinj  his  /ut„„  glory,  , 

<”>'  (47).  H.  is  bom  of  , 

Then  thst  Tomas,.  „„rsod  by  tba.  (LorTo  .h  ^17“^' 
h.s  .n telLgeoce  grow,  spot,  tbi.  to  tbo  fatbor  Q 1 ’ 
lent  Muni ! (49).  « Who  art  thou  father  an/  K 

—zn;  bTr  i 

order  of  the  father  (sr)  His  Jl,  f ‘o  the 

happiness  caused  by  the  sight  ofTbe^lo  ’ 7'”^ 
from  the  body  found  the  /ui ./earned  by  pZLZ\lT"'^^ 
fices  (54).  Having  conquered  all  the  world  that  king  cdlld 
amasa,^  became  the  called  Tamasa  ; heaf of  his 

Manwaniara  from  me  (55),  of  all  those  who  were  the  aods  and 

theV  V were 

the  R.sh.s,  and  those  who  were  the  sons  of  that  _the 

ru^rs  of  the  earth  (56).  0 Muni,  the  Satyas  and  si/ilarl/ 

thers  the  Siddlns,  the  SurupSs,  and  likewise  the  Haris  these 

17  iZrTTT  7T  mrnaantara) 

(57).  Similarly  the  lord  of  those  gods  was  th*,  ci.n.L- 


■ SH 


' MARKASDEYA  puranam. 


imighty  of  strength  and  energy,  and  joined  to  a hundred 
sacrifices  (58).  O BrShman,  Jyotirdhama,  Pritha,  Kftvya, 
Chaitra,  Agni,  Balaka  and  Pivara,  these  seven  were  the  seven 
leading  Rishis  (59).  The  kings  exceedingly  powerful, — Nara, 
KshSnti,  Skanda,  DSnta,  Jangha  &c.,  were  likewise  the  sons, 
of  Tamasa  ^6o). 

aO— — 

CHAPTER  LXXV. 


Markandeya  said:— The  Fifth  Manu  is  spoken  of 
Raivata,  0 BrAhman  : hear  of  his  birth  in  detail,  I shall 
jrelate  if  to.  you  (i).  0 thou  possesser  of  the  eight  good 

qualities  of  kindness,  &c.,  tliero  was  a Rishi  known  as 
RitSvak ; of  him  the  higb-souled  one,  who  was  sunless,  was 
born  a son  in  the  (sign  of  the)  star  Revati  (2).  He  perform- 
ed according  to  the  law  all  his  sacraments  coninaencing 
with  that  of  Jatakarmit  (or  the  birth  cerenvony)  and  likewise 
Upunayana,  and  he  too,  0 Muni  became  a bad  character 
(3).  From  the  ti:ne  when  this  one  was  born  that  RisJii,  the 
most  superior  among  Munis,  was  overtaken  by  a lingering 
and  enduring  disease  (4).  His  mother,  laid  up  with  leprosy 
and  other  diseases,  was  subjected  to  extreme  suffering,  and 
bis  father  being  sad  thus  thought  (within  hintself)  (5).  “What 
bdiis?”  And  then  that  exceedingly  evil-minded  son  of  his 
took  away  the  wife  of  another  Muni’s  son  who  was  attached 
to  him  (6).  Then  RkavAka  ottered  hfith  a heavy  mind  j— » 
•^SooiessBess  of  men  is  better  than  the  possesaia.  of  had 
SOBS  (X).  A bad  son  always  eaaaes  pain  to  the  hewib  ©f  the 
latWe  aad  of  the  mother,,  atod  hriogs  down  (t©  the  lowes 
Regions)  hss  aneosteta  stati^oed  in  heaven  (8)-  He  ia  of 


v*MmmmYJi  wuftAJtfcufe  §is 

good  to  friends,  nor  of  arty  Satisfafctioft  to  tlie  ntan'ea ; M is  a 
.source  of  misery  to  his  father  ;•  the  birth  of  such  aat  evil-doer 
is  to  be  lamented  (9).  Blessed  are  they  whose-  sono  are  afteSr 
the  mind  of  all  the  world,  the  worker’s  of  good-  nntd  .men 
and  of  a quiet  disposition,  and  devoted  to  virtuOuS  works 
(10).  Our  life  is  unhappy,  and  bad,  and  not  tendif^  to- 
wards the  next  world,  but  tendirrg  towards  hell,  and  ndt 
.heaven,  owing  to  its  connection  with  an  evil  sort  (ill).  He 
causes  humiliation  to  friends,  and-  glorification  to^  those  who 
wish  us  ill,  and  also  brings  on  old  age  and  infirmity  on  the 
father  before  his  time  ; a bad  son  surely  does  all  this  (12).” 

Markandeya  said:-^ — That  Muni,  with  his  heart  burnt 
by  the  conduct  of  this  bad  son,  asked  Garga  the  eaiuse  of 
all  this)  (13). 

Ritavak  said  ; — ‘By  me  were  the  Vedas  of  old  duly  learnt 
from  Subrata } having  finished  (the  study  of)  the  Vedas,  I 
took  unto  me  a*wife  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions  of  the 
law  (14).  And  by  me  have  all  sacrificial  works,  works,  throt 
mte  ordained  in  the  Sranta  Sutras^  as  also  ttiose  by 

as  also  the  sacrifices  to  fire, -’^een- performed!  with 
my  wife  (as  help  mate);.  O great  Muni  1 none  of  my  works 
has  been  imperfectly  done  till  now  (15).  Accordtftg!  td 
the  law  of  producing  progeny,,  not  under  Idift  influence  of  lust 
but  for  the  sake  of  a son,  has  this  one  been  begotten  by  mej 
who  was  afraid  of  (the  hell)-  called  Put  (16).-  Such  is  tWt 
one  (my  son) ; O Muni,,  is  it  for  his  own- fault,  or  through 
any  guilt  of  mine,,  that  he  has  become  the’  source  of  misery 
to  us  and  the  giver  of  pain  to  my  friends  by  his  bad 
character  (ly).. 

Garga  said  0 most  superior  Muni,  this  thy  son' is  bom 
within  the  sphere  of  the-  star  Revati ; therefore  hatf  he 
become  a source  of  thy  misery,,  for  be  is  born  in  an  evU 
time  (l8)j  * There  is  no  wrong  due’to  thee,  or  to  bis  mother, 
or  to  thy  family;  the  cause  of  his  evil  disposition  is  his  com- 
k»g  to  this) world  withiti  the  sphere  of  the  star  Revati  ^(ip)  . 


markandeva  puranam. 


316 

RitAVAK  said As  this  evil  disposition  of  my  only  son 
is  due  to  the  influence  of  the  star  Revati,  may  that  Revati 
therefore  even  fall  (from  her  orbit)  (20). 

Markandeva  said: — In  this  way  on  the  curse  being 
uttered  by  him,  the  star  Revati  fell  (from  her  orbit)  in  the 
presence  of  all  the  world  whose  hearts  were  over-powered 
by  wonder  (21).  The  Revati  star  also  fell  on  all  sides  of  the 
mountain  Kumuda,  all  of  a sudden  illumined  the  forests,  the 
caves  and  the  streamlets  (22).  On  account  of  that  fall  the 
mountain  Kumuda  also  became  known  as  Raivataka,  the 
most  pleasant  mountain  on  all  the  earth  (23).  The  loveliness 
that  was  of  that  star  became  the  lake  Pankajini : — from  it 
was  born  then  a maiden  most  charming  on  account  of  her 
beauty  (24).  0 Bhagura  t seeing  that  maiden,  born  of  the 

loveliness  of  Revati,  the  Muni  Pramucha  gave  her  the  name 
of  Revati  (25).  That  possesser  of  the  eight  good  qualities 
of  kindness,  &c.,  Pramucha,  even  in  this  great  mountain, 
brought  up  this  girl  born  in  the  vicinity  of  his  own  hermit- 
age (26).  That  Muni,  seeing  that  maiden  endowed  with 
great  beauty,  come  to  youth,  thought  (within  himself)  who 
shall  be  the  lord  of  this  (girl)  ? (27).  O Muni ! Thinking 
in  this  way  a long  time  elapsed,  and  yet  the  great  Muni  did 
not  come  across  a bridegroom  worthy  of  her  (28),  Then 
to  enquire  of  the  god  of  fire  about  her  bridegroom  that 
Muni  Pramucha  entered  the  place  of  sacrificial  fire,  and  to 
him  thus  questioning  the  eater  of  sacrificial  offerings  (i.  e., 
the  god  of  fire)  said  (29).  ‘The  lord,  of  the  earth,  Durgama  by 
name,  mighty  of  strength  and  energy,  of  pleasant  speech 
and  devoted  to  the  law,  shall  become  the  husband  of  this 
one’'  (30). 

Markandeva  said -Afterwards,  0 Muni,  that  lord  of 
men,  the  wise  Durgama,  born  of  the  race  of  Priyavrata,  and 
mighty  of  strength  and  valour,  the  son  of  Vikramashila,  born 
in  the  womb  of  K&lindi,  came,  in  course  of  a bunting  ex- 
pedition, to  bis  hermitage  (31—32).  That  lord  of  the  earth, 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


317 

wintering  the  hermitage  and  seeing  her  of  slender  limbs, 
calling  her  as  his  dear  one,  asked  about  that  Rishi  (33). 

The  King  said: — Where  has  the  most  superior  Mun 
the  possessor  of  the  six  great  qualities,  the  Bhagas^  gone 
from  this  hermitage  ; I desire  to  salute  him  here,  therefore 
tell  me  this,  O thou  graceful  one  (34). 

Markandeya  said  : — The  Brahmin,  who  had  gone  to  the 
place  of  the  sacrificial  fires,  hearing  those  his  words,  as  also 
his  addressing  her  as  the  dear  one,  came  out  in  haste  (35). 
That  Muni  saw  the  great-souled  king,  possessed  of  all  the 
signs  of  the  lord  of  men,  and  bending  before  him  in 
reverence  (36).  One  seeing  him  then  he  addressed  his 
disciple  Gautama  thus — '^Gautama,  bring  soon  due  offerings 
for  this  lord  of  the  world  (37).  On  the  one  hand  this  one 
is  a king  come  after  a long  time,  on  the  other  hand  he  is  my 
son-in-law,  therefore  it  is  my  opinion  that  he  is  worthy  of 
especial  offerings  (38). 

Markandeya  said:— Then  that  king  began  to  think 
upon  the  cause  of  his  being  (spoken  of  as)  the  son-in-la^, 
and  could  not  decide  it  j therefore  the  king  accepted  that 
offering  in  silence  (39).  The  great  Muni  welcomed  that  lord 
of  kings,  who  had  taken  his  seat  and  had  accepted  the 
offering  and  said:— Is  everything  well  with  thy  home, 

(40) ,  O lord  of  men,  with  thy  treasury,  with  thy  army,  with 
thy  friends  and  feudatories,  thy  servants  and  courtiers  and 
likewise  with  thy  ownself  on  which  are  all  these  established 

(41) .  Thy  wife  also  is  well  ; I do  not  ask  therefore  of  her, 
who  lives  here  ; are  thy  other  wives  well  (42)  ? 

The  King  said  :— O thou  of  good  vowsi  through  thy 
mercy  there  is  no  bad  news  concerning  any  one  belonging 
to  me.  But  I am  curious,  O Muni,  to  know  who  is  here  my 
wife  (43). 

The  Rishi  said:-*— That  excellent  wonfjan  Revati,  the 
possessor  of  the  six  good  qualities,  and  who  most  beautiful 


3i8 


-MARKANDEYA  PURAWAM. 


in  aH  the  three  worlds,  is  thy  wife  ; dost  thou  not  know  her  n 
king?  (44).  V 

The  King  said  Subhadra,  the  daughter  of  Shanta  ft. 
Jaughwr  o(  Kaberi,  O lord,  and  also  Snjlta  the  daaghle’r  rf 
Surashtra,  and  Kadamva  the  daughter  of  Baratha,  BiplthJ 
and  also  Nandioi,  I kno»  as  my  wive,  living  i„ 

O t on  tw,ee.bor„  one.  O thou  possessor  of  the  L great 
qaaht,.,,  the  Bkaga,,  I do  not  know  who  this  Reval  t, 

The  Rishi  said  .—That  one  of  superior  colour  who  has 
just  been  spoken  to  by  thee  as  the  dear  ene.  O lord  of  earth 

ha^P  "47' 

butQ“M''''“  ‘■"I  •Pbto"  by  me. 

pet  that  thou,  0 revered  one,  should  be  angry  with  mer-I 
beseech  thee  for  it  (48).  ^ * 

thv  me!  sayest  truly.  O lord  of  earth, 

5hy  n,eamng,s,notevtl;0  lord  of  men.  thou  didst  say  this 

garner  of  the  sacr.ficral  offerings)  having  been  asked 
by  me  as--who  shall  be  the  ht^band  of  this  one.  by 
h.m  was  .t  satd  even  this  day  that  thou,  O revered  one,  shalt 
bMher  husband)  (50)^  Therefore  accept.,  O lord  of  men, 
th.s  ma.den  g.ven  unto  thee  by  nae.  She  has  also  been, 
addressed  by  thee  as.  the  dear  one.  then  why  dost  thou 
bcMtate?  (ht  think  of  it  in.  thy  mind)  (51)1., 

MARKANDEYA  said.-Tben  this  lord  o<  the  earth,  being 

became  speechless ; the;  Rishii  also 
made  himself  ready  to.  perform  her  marriage  rites  (sa).  That 

rr'mt  ""b 

IW  f father,  who  was  making  preparatkm^  foi 

i^nT"*'®'  ‘'P'»fll<»i{lbOM  .art.  Inll.  ot  lava  .far  ma 

1>|.»  <1  ».  m«t,  lha,  am-  sbaw  m.  ibi,  („o»,  that 


Markandeya  puranam* 


319 


being  gracious  towards  me  thou  shalt  perform  my  marriage  at 
the  ticne  of  the  star  Revati  (54). 

The  RisHi  said:-— The tstar  Revati,  existing  in  conjunc- 
tion with  the  moon  ; exists  not,  O thou  good  one  ! There  are 
other  stars,  O thou  whose  eye  brows  are  excellent,  fit  (to 
preside  over)  thy  marriage  (55). 

The  Maiden  said : — ^It  seems  to  me,  father,  that  without 
him,  the  time  of  my  marriage  shall  be  fruitless.  How  shall 
the  marriage  of  one  like  myself  be  performed  at  a fhiitless 
time^  (56).  The  performer  of  penances,  well  known  by  the 
name  of  Ritav^k,  became  angry  with  Revati,  and  by  him 
thus  angry  was  the  star  destroyed  (57).  And  by  me  also 
has  it  been  promised  to  this  one  that  this  one,  with  intoxica- 
ting  glance,  shall  be  thy  wife.  If  thou  dost,  not  desire 
marriage,  a great  difficulty  has  presented  itself  to  me  ($8). 

The  Maiden  said  : — What  penances  have  been  practised 
by  that  Muni  Ritavak,  such  as  have  not  been  practised  by 
thee,  my  father?  Am  T then  the  daughter  of  an  inferior 
Bi^hpaana  ? (59). 

TI4e  Rishi  said:— Thou  art  not,  my  girl,  the  daiightcf^ 
bf  am  inferior  BrSthmana,  nor  even  of  the  performers  of 
penances ; thou  art  my  daughter,  who  is  capable  of  cfreating 
Other  gods  (60). 

The  Maiden  said : — If  my  father  be  one  who  has  attained 
the  virtues  of  penance,  then  why  is  not  marriage  performed 
in  that  star,  having  previously  set  it  in  the  bright  firmament 
(61). 

The  Rishi  said: — So  be  it  then  for  thy  good,  0 thou 
good*  one— Be  pleased,  fOr  tliy  sake  V shall  again  establish 
the  star  Revati  on  the  orbit  of  the  moon  (6^). 

Markandeya  said  : — Then  O thou  superior  Brahmana,  by 
the  power  of  his  penances  the  great  Muni' made  the  star 
Revati,  as  before,  joined  with  the  moon  (63)'.  And  having 
performed  the  marriage  of  the  daughter,  according  to  the 
law,  and  to  the  accompaniment  of  sacred  formulas,  being 


320 


markandeya  puranam. 


fined  with  delight  he  again  thus  spoke  to  the  son-in-law  (6a) 
0 governor  of  the  earth,  say.  what  shall  I give  thee  as  tJv 
marnage  present;  I shall  give  thee  even  things  that  are  Jsl 
bard  to.get  j the  power  of  my  penances  is  invincible”  (6k) 

THE  KtNGsmd:-!  am  born  of  the  descendants  oVthe 
Swayambhuva  Manu,  0 Muni ; I pray  that  I may  have  bv 

ilrJZT’ 

_ The  Rishj  said This  thy  desire  shall  come  to  pass 
Thy  son,  O ruler  of  the  world,  shall  be  Manu  and  shall  enioy 
all  the  earth,  and  shall  also  be  righteous  ^ ^ 

Markandeva  said  :~Then  taking  her  the  king  went  to 

fi^sown  aty  .and  from  he,  Revati,  was  born  a son,  the 
Manu  Revati  (63).  He  was  invested  with  all  the  virtues 
and  was  unconquerable  by  men,  and  knew  all  the  sciences’ 
an  was  versed  in  the  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  the' 
Vedas  and  other  scriptures  (69).  Hear  with  undivided  atten- 
ton,  0 Brahman,  O Muni,  from  me  relating  the  gods  the 
ord  of  the  gods,  the  earthly  kings,  &c . (70)^  Otl 
twice-born  one,  in  that  (Manwaniara)  the  Sumedhas,  the 
Bliupatis,  the  Vaikuntas,  the  Amiiabhas,  were  the  gods,  each 

ctssts  B-n  r'”  of  these  four 

classes,  B.bhu,  by  name,  was  the  enjoyer  of  a hundred 

TZoZ  Va  ' n the  Manu  Revata  Hira- 

STml  I T\'  ^ttnilarly  others.-VedavShu. 

nos?e  ’ f M ° the  great  Muni  Vashista,  the 

possesser  of  the  six  good  qualities  of  kindness.  &c.,  and  who 

thes?°"^  ‘ ‘'te  Vedantas 

W S r f Salabandhu.  Maha- 
b.rya,  Suyastay^ia,  and  likewise  others,  Satyaka,  &c  were 

Revatr  (75).  • The  MaLs,  ending  with 

tt  etceodo”  Zu  .r  to  you  by  me,  are  altwith 


CHAPTER  LXXVI. 


I WIarkandeya  :t — Thus  have  the  five  Manwantaras  been 

I described  to  you  by  me.  Hear  next  of  the  sixth,  belonging 

i to  ChSLkshusha  (l).  In  the  previous  birth  this  one  was  born 

of  the  eye  of  Paramesti,  therefore,  O thou  twice-born  one, 
even  in  this  birth  his  name  became  Chakshusha  (2).  The 
wife  of  the  high-souled  Rajarshi  (the  princely  Rishi) 
Anamitra  bore  a son,  learned,  and  pure,  and  possessed  of 
the  recollections  of  all  former  births,  and  powerful  (3).  At 
his  birth  his  mother  embraced  him  with  love,  lying  on  her 
lap,  loudly  expressing  her  joy,  and  again  and  again  did  she  so 
(4)*  He  was  born  endowed  with  the  knowledge  of  former 
births,  therefore  lying  on  the  mother^s  lap  he  laughed ; at  this 
the  mother  becoming  angry  spoke  these  words  (j).  “I  am 
overtaken  by  fear.  What  is  this  my  child  ? There  is  smile  on 
thy  face — thy  intelligence  is  born  prematurely.  Dost  thou 
see  any  happy  augury?  (6).^^ 

The  Son  said: — -Dost  thou  not  see  that  this  female  cat 
before  thee  is  willing  to  eat  me^  and  the  secend  one  (washing 
to  eat  me)  is  this  Jataharini,  who  is  out  of  thy  sight  (7).  Be- 
cause moved  by  the  love  of  thy  son,  thou,  O revered  one,  art 
beholding  me  with  affection,  and  by  crying  aloud  art  embra- 
cing me  many  times,  from  which  arises  rapture  (in  thee)  and 
thy  sight  is  filled  with  tears  born  of  love,— therefore  has 
this  smile  come  to  (my  lips);  hear  also  its  reason  (8 — 9). 
Drawn  by  selfishness  this  female  cat  is  longingly  looking  at 
me;  and  similarly  the  other  one  the  Jataharini,  who  is  out  of 
sight  (ro).  Just  as  these  two  are  devoted  to  me  with  tender 
hearts  from  selfishness  similarly  thou  too  also  art  moved  by 
selfishness,  so  it  seems  to  me  (ii).  But  while  the  female 
cat  and  Jataharini  are  bent  upon  enjoying  me  (imme- 
diately) thou  desirest  such  fruits  of  me  as  thou  mayst  enjoy 
41 


322 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


gradully  in  time  (X2).  Thou  dost  not  know  me, —who  this 

oneis;  Borhastthoubeenbenefittedbyme,  our  association 

is  not  of  long,  only  of  five  or  seven  days  (13).  Still  thou 
lovest  me,  embracest  me  with  tears,  and  dost  address  me 
with  such  words  as  father,  son,  the  good  one,  See. 

The  Mother  said : Not  for  any  benefit,  O beloved  one, 
do  I embrace  thee  with  love.  If  this  be  not  pleasant  to  thee,’ 
and  I be  deserted  by  thee,  whatever  selfish  objects  may  be 
gained  from  thee,  they  are  given  up  by  me  (15). 

Markandeya  said:— Thus  saying,  she, .leaving  him,  got 
out  of  the  confinement  house,  with  iier  exiernal  senses  be 
numbed  and  unfit  for  work,  but  her  inner  spirit  pure  (16), 
Then  Jdiaharini  took  that  (child) ; and  she,  having  stolen  their 
boy,  placed  him  on  the  bed  of  king  Vikrfinta,  and  took 
his  son  (17).  And  taking  him  also  to  another  house,  and 
taking  up  the  son  of  that  house,  gradually  JatHharini 
ate  up  that  third  one  (18).  This  exceedingly  cruel  one, 
thus  continually  stealing  (peoples’  children)  and  exchanging 
one  after  another,  always  eats  up  tlie  third  one  (19).  Then 
the  lord  of  earth  Vikr5nta  performed  all  the  sacramental 
ceremonies  which  arc  performed  by  the  kings  (20).  The 
father,  that  lord  of  men,  VikrSnta,  moved^hy  supreme  delight, 
according  to  law,  gave  him  the  name  Ananda  (21).  To  him, 
and  the  boy  after  his  Upanayana  sacrament  had  been  per- 
formed, the  Guru  said,  -‘at  first  go  and  make  obeisance  to 
thy  mother”  (22)-  Hearing  that  word  of  the  Guru  he  said 
laughing , Which  mother  is  to  be  adored  by  me,  whether 
she  who  gave  me  birth  or  she  who  nursed  me  (23).” 

The  Guru  said: — This,  O thou  possessor  of  the  eight 
great  qualities,  is  she  who  gave  thee  birth,  she  the  daughter 
of  jarutha,  and  the  chief  queen  of  Vikrinta,  known  by  the 
^ame  of  Haimini  (24), 

Ananda  said :— Shetis  the  mother  of  Chaitra,  resident  of 
Vkhaiagrima  and  son  of  the  Brthman  Agravadha,  who  is 
born  of  I^er ; we  are  born  of  another  (25). 


again  is  Chaitra  spoken  of  by  thee  ? where  art  thou  born, 
and  why  art  thou  here ; tell  me,  I apprehend  a great  diffi* 
culty  (29). 

ANand^  said: — The  universe  being  thus  stationed  wher'e 
is  the  opportunity  for  stupifaction  ? O Br§,hmana  saint,  who 
is  whose  sou  and  who  is  whose  friend  ? (52).  All  such  re- 
lations  originate  with  the  birth  of  mankind  and  they  are  all 
snapped  by  death,  0 BrShmana  (33).  The  relation,  with  the 
friends  that  springs  up  with  the  birth,  ceases  with  the  dis- 
solution of  the  body ; such  is  the  law  of  the  universe  (34)1 
Therefore  do  I say  that  there  is  no  friend  while  living  iu  the 
world.  Who  is  else  is  an  eternal  friend  ? Why  then  is  thy 
understanding  bewildered  ? (35).  Even  in  this  birth  1 have 
got  two  fathers  and  two  mothers.  What  wonder  is  there  il 
this  happens  again  in  the  next  birth?  (36).  I shall  (now) 
engage  in  devout  penances.  Do  thou  therefore  bring  him 
from  VishSLlagrama  who  is  the  son  of  the  king  (37). 

Markandeya  said  : — Thereupon  the  king,  along  with  his 
wife  and  friends,  was  stricken  with  wonderment.  Then  with- 
drawing all  attachment  he  orderd  him  to  retire  into  woods 
(38).  Then  bringing  his  son  Chaitra  and  reverencing  the 
Brahmana  by  whom  lie  was  brought  up  in  the  light  of  a son 
he  trained  him  up  for  the  kingdom  (39).  ‘ Then  Ananda, 
a mere  boy, ^engaged  in {rigid*austerities  in  the  forest  for  ex- 
hausting his  actions  that  stand  in  the  way  of  salvation  (40). 
Whilst  thus  engaged  in  rigid  austerities  the  deity  BrahmS 
said  to  him  0 son,  tell  me  why  hast  thou  engaged  in  such 
rigid  austerities^^  (41). 

Ananda  said: — ‘*0  Reverend  Sir,  with  a view  to  purify 
my  own  soul,  and  exhaust  those  actions  that  have  fettered 
me  I have  engaged  in  this  devout  penance^^  (42). 

Brahma  said: — ^‘One,  engaged  in  actions,  has^no  right 
(to  practise  devout  penances)  and  is  unworthy  of  salvation. 


i 


sea  ot  energy,  attain  to  salvation? 

as  the  sixth  Manu:  do  thou  there- 

There  IS  no  need  of  asceticism  unto 
becoming  a Manu)  thou  shalt  attain 

Having  been  thus  addressed  by 
magnanimous  (Ananda),  bent 
from  carrying  on  devout 
(4S)«  Having  taken  him 
BrShma  addressed  him  as 
«®®P°«sedVidarbhl  the  daughter 

and  begat  on  her  a number  of  sons  of 
prowess  (47).  Hearken,  O twice-born  one,  who 
were  the  gods  and  the  Rishis.  who 

‘ ’*’*“  ■ (48).  In  it  the  gods 

were  divided  into  nine  classes, 
deeds,  used  to  feed  upon 
- ■->  prowess  and  energy 
their  effulgence.  There 
’hO'  wtre  divideci  , 
of  deities  came 
s'o  divided  inte 
. class  of  deities 

eightfold  divisions  (51)  0 twice 
fifth  class;  of  deities,  whp 
and  used  to  feed  on  ambrosia 
- — t a hundred  sacrifices  became 
' was  a partaker  of  sacri- 
aja8»  Havishman,  Unnata, 
le  seven  were  the  Ri?his 
cl  others  were  the  highly 
and  they  all  became  the 
described  to  you,  O you 
the  birth  and  the 

•shaCsG).  The  one,  who 


fore  go  and  become  so. 
thee ; by  doing  this  (r. 
to  salvation  (44)." 

Markandeya  said 
Brahma  and  acquiesed  in  it  the  nr 
on  becoming  (a  Manu),  desisted 
penances  and  repaired  therefrom 
away  from  his  ascetic  observances 
Chakshusha.Manu  (46).  H 

of  the  king  Ugra 
well-known 

during  this  Manwaniara 

was  the  Indra  and  who  were  his 
•were  called  Aryas  and  they  1 
0 Vipra,  they  were  all  of  illustrious 
Havya  in  a sacrifice,  were  of  well-known 
and  were  difficult  of  being  eyed  for 
was  another  class  of  deities  called  I 
into  eight  sects  (49.-.50).  Anothi 
into  being  called  Vavyas  who  also 
eight  sects  and  then  came  th 
who  were  also  divided  into  < 
born  one,  in  this  Manwaniara  the 
appeared,  were  called  Lefchas  u. 

(p).  He,  who  having  celebrated 
their  lord,  was  called  Manojava  ai 
ficial  offerings  (53),  SumedhI, 

Madhu,  Atinimaand  Sahishnu,  tl 
(54)*  Uru,  Puru,  Shatadyumna 
powerful  sons  of  Manu  Chakshusl 
lords  of  the  earth  (S5).  i have  th 
t^e-bom  one,  the  sixth  Manma. 
character  of  the  high-souled  Chakshi 


ARKANDEYA  said  : — 0 great  one,  the  daughter  of 
Vishwakarman  was  the  wife  of  the  sun,  by  name  Sajn2l  who 
begat  on  her  a son,  by  name  Manu,  who,  illustrious  as  he  was, 
was  equally  a master  of  various  branches  of  learning.  He  was 
the  son  of  Vivaswat  and  was  therefore  called  Vaivaswata  (i — 2). 
As  soon  as  she  was  espied  by  the  sun  Sajna  used  to  close  her 
eyes  and  therefore  he,  in  anger,  addressed  to  her  cruel  words 
(3)  <^Since,  O stupid  one,  you  close  yours  eyes  as  soon  as  I ca^t 
txiy  looks  on  you  therefore  will  you  give  birth  to  Yama,  the 
destroyer  of  creatures  (4)."'  Thereupon  the  goddess,  stricken 
with  fear,  assumed  trembling  looks,  at  which  the  sun  again 
said  to  her  (S).  Since  beholding  me,  you  have  assumed 
trembling  looks  you  will  give  birth,  as  your  daughter,  to  the 
fickle  river  (6)/^  Thus  by  the  imprecation  of  her  husband 
she  gave  birth  to  Yama  and  the  great  river  celebrated  under 
the  name  of  Yamuna  (7).  Henceforth  she,  with  great  diffi- 
culty, began  to  suffer  the  effulgence  of  the  sun.  And  unable 
to  bear  it  she  began  to  think  (8).  ''What  shall  I do  ? Where 
shall  I go  ? Repairing  where  can  I get  respite  and  be  not 
subject  to  the  ire  of  my  husband?’^  (9).  Thus  meditating 
in  many  ways  the  great  daughter  of  the  Patriarch  thought 
well  of  the  protection  of  her  father  (10).  Thereupon  bent 
on  going  to  her  father’s  house  the  illustrious  (goddess)  con- 
verted her  own  body  into  the  favourite  shadow  of  the  sun 


MARKAN0EYA  PURANAM, 


' me,  live  in  the  abode  of 
behave  thyself  towards 
■ Even  when  accosted  i 
^rture.  On  the  other  h 

“I  am  Sajna.’'  (13) 
ew,  I shall  carry 'out 

not  pull  me  by  the  hair 
eiate  the  story  when  he 


, s-epnired  to  her 

wastn  who  had  all  his  sins 

5«(i5).  She  was  received 

an  and  that  blameless  lady 
house  (16).  Thereupon 
--.Uimbs  who  had  not 

great  love  and  honor  (he 
thee,  my  girl,  even  many  live- 
a moment  But  virtue  is 

praiseworthy  for  females  to  live 

relations;  and  if  is  the  desire  of 
the  women  may  live  in  the  house  of  their 
wedded  to  the  Sun  the  lord 
does  not  behove  thee,  O my  girl,  to 
rem,>  f,^  *1,  l husband  (30).  Do  thou 

0 adore  thee.  Come  n»e,!«  r\  ■ 


too  uvea  tor  some  time  in  her  father’s  I 
having  greeted  his  daughter  of  beautiful 

lived  there  for  a long  time  with 

said)  (i7)  ;_<.when  I behold 
ong  years  appear  as  the  half  of 
disappearing  (18).  U ig  not 
long  in  the  house  of  her 
their  kinsmen  that 
husbands  (13).  Thou  bast  been 
of  the  three  worlds 

live  for  ever  in  the  house  of 
therefore  r — ' 
pleased  with  thee 
cions  girl,  to  see  me  (21). 
c Markandeya  said  Having-  h»«.,  *1 
»re,  O ..cetic,  she  "So  be  it 

reiuoteot  to  b..;'re  T, 

Mb  ravq  ^ of  tli«j  Sm  and  a 

in  t:;«itc'  oC^LTto)  nJrT"  * ” 

her  as  Sajna  the  Sun  bei?at  on'  hif  * regar 

b bieuy  b^ntiin,  xboT:!:'!-::  7: 


MARKANDEYA  fURANAM. 


327 


manifest  that  excessive  affection  towards  the  sons  and 
daughter  of  Sajna  as  she  did  towards  her  own  offspring  (25). 
She  daily  looked  after  their  own  comforts,  Manu  forgave  her 
for  this  but  Yama  could  not  do  so  (26).  Then  to  strike  her  he 
raised  up  his  foot  in  anger — and  then  immediately  stricken 
with  mercy  he  did  not  let  it  fall  on  her  person  (27).  There- 
upon^ 0 twice-born  one,  the  illusory  Sajna,  with  her  palms 
trembling  and  lips  expanded  in  anger,  imprecated  a curse  on 
Yama  (28),  ‘‘Since,  out  of  irreverence  thou  hast  raised  a 
foot  against  me  who  am  thy  father^s  wife  thy  that  very  foot 
shall  drop  off  to-day^’  (29).  Having  thus  heard  of  the  curse 
thus  imprecated  by  his  mother  and  been  stricken  with  fear 
Yama  approached  his  sire  and  having  saluted  him  said  (30): — 
'^It  is  a great  wonder,  0 father,  never  witnessed  by  any  that  a 
mother,  relinquishing  all  affection,  imprecates  a curse  on  her 
son  (31).  Methinks,  as  does  Manu  hold,  that  she  is  not  our 
mother,  for  even  when  a son  grows  unnatural  a mother  does 
not  become  (32). 

Hearing  Yama^s  words  the  Divine  Sun  sent  for  the 
ill^spry  SajnSL  and  asked  her  where  Sajnt  had  gone^^  (33). 
Whereto  she  replied  : — '‘0  Sub,  I am  the  daughter  of  Twastri, 
Sajna,  thy  wife  and  the  mother  of  all  these  children^’  (34). 
Although  accosted  by  the  Sun  in  many  ways  she  did  not 
communicate  any  thing  else.  Then  the  Sun  in  anger- 
addressed  himself  to  imprecate  a curse  (35^  Thereat  she 
communicated  everything  truly  to  the  Sun.  Informed  of  all 
the  Sun  repaired  to  the  abode  of  the  divine  Twastri  (36). 
Thereupon  he  worshipped  the  Sun  with  great  reverence, 
adored  of  the  three  worlds  who  had  come  to  his  house  (37). 
Then  when  questioned  about  Sajna,  Vishwakarma  told  him  - 
“Despatched  by  thee  she  came  to  my  house“  (38).  Then 
having  concentrated  his  mind  the  Sun  saw  her,  carrying  on 
ascetic  observances  in  the  form  of  a mare  in  the 
province  of  Uttarakuru  (39).  The  Sun  then  came  to  know 
of  the  object  of  her  penances  namely,  “May  my  husband 


become  of  a mild  form  and  the  performer  of  auspicious  deeds’' 
(40).  The  Sun  then,  O twice-born  one,  said  to  VishwakarmS 
the  father  of  Sajn5,  "do  thou  to-day  losen  the  fierceness  of 
my  rays-  (41).  VishwakarmS  then  reduced  the  effulgence  of 
the  Sun  who  travels  over  a year  and  the  deities  then  began 
to  hymn  him  (42). 


CHAPTER  LXXVIII. 


Markandeya  said  Thereupon  having  assembled  to- 
gether the  celestials  and  the  Rishis  began  to  hymn  the  glories 
of  the  sun,  worshipped  of  the  three  worlds  in  the  following 
words  (i). 

The  Celestials  said : — Salutation  unto  thee  who  art 
in  the  form  of  Rik,  Saman,  Yayur,  salutation  unto  thee,  who 
art  the  refuge  of  all  and  dost  light  all  (2).  Salutation  unto 
thee  who  art  the  only  stay  of  knowledge,  identical  with  pure 
effulgence,  who  art  pure,  whose  soul  is  purified  and  who  hast 
not  the  tinge  of  the  quality  of  ignorance  (3).  Salutation 
unto  thee  who  art  the  greatest  and  the  most  excellent  of 
all,  the  great  soul  and  whose  manifestation  is  the  whole 
universe  and  whose  form  is  Atman  (4).  Salutation  unto  thee, 
ho  primary  cause  of  all,  the  stay  of  all  who  have  their  intel- 
lects  Illumined  by  knowledge,  who  art  identical  with  the  light 
th.  .o„Uh,t  i,„|,  (5S.  s„„uiio„ 

^ "“'5'  ■“‘■•“'"Mt  of  tie  mating  of  the  night,  e« 

thy  ni*to.'*(  ° (""'"Otto);  b, 

thon  .rt  . ruining  J 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


whole  universe,  mobile  and  immobile  (7)..  Touched  by  thy 
rays  all  this  becomes  purified ; touched  by  thy  rays  even  the 
water  becomes  purified  (8).  As  long  as  this  universe  is  not 
connected  with  thy  rays  so  long  the  performance,  of  Homk^ 
charities  and  other  ceremonies,  does  not  lead  to  the  well- 
being (of  the  performers)  (9).  From  thy  one  limb  has  eman- 
ated the  Rikf  the  Sdman  from  the  other  and  Yayur  from  the 
third  (10).  O lord  of  the  universe,  thou  art  identical  with 
Rik,  Yayur  and  Sdman  and  therefore,  O lord,  thou  art  iden- 
tical with  three  (il).  Thou  are  the  subtle  and  gross  form 
of  BrS-hman  ; thou  art  with  form  and  without  it ; thou  dost 
exist  both  in  thy  gross  and  subtle  forms  (12).  Thou  art 
identical  with  Nimesha,  Kashtha  and  other  (divisions  of  time) 
as  well  as  with  Khla  the  destroyer  of  all.  Be  thou  pleased  of 
thy  own  accord  and  make  an  end  of  thy  own  effulgence  (13). 

Markandeya  said  : — Having  been  thus  eulogised  by  the 
deities  and  the  saints  the  undecaying  bundle  of  effulgence 
|fbe  Sun)  renounced  his  own  lustre  (14).  The  earth  wsrs 
engendered  by  that  portion  of  bis  effulgence  which  was  ideiiti- 
ml  with  Rik — the  etherial  region  was  created  by  what 
was  identical  with  Yayur  and  heaven  by  what  was  identical 
Sdman  (IS),  The  Divine  Architect,  made  with  those 
fifteen  divisions  of  his  effulgence  that  had  been  exhausted,  the 
trident  of  Siva,  the  discus  of  Vishnu,  the  dreadful  maces  of 
Vasus,  Sankara  and  the  fire  god,  the  conveyance  of  the  god 
of  riches  and  other  shnining  weapons  of  Yakshas,  Vidyadharas 
and  other  celestials  (16 — 18).  Thenceforward  the  Divine 
Sun  bears  only  the  sixteenth  portion  of  his  effulgence,  which 
was  thus  distributed  into  fifteen  divisions  by  the  celestial 
Architect  Viswakarman  (19).  Thereupon,  having  assumed 
the  guise  of  a horse  the  Sun  repaired  to  the  province  of 
Uttarakuru  and  espied  SajnS  in  the  form  of  a mare  (2©). 
Seeing  him  thus  approach  and  taking  him  in  fear  to  be 
another  person,  she  went  in  front  of  him  (21).  Then  united 
with  each  other,  they  smelt  each  other^s  nose  ; then  on  the 


42 


MARKANDEVA  ruranam, 

scmintil  fluid  being  discharged  ther 
• nostrils  Afwinis  and  Revanta  seated 
-daggers,  armour,  arrows  and 
the  Sun  displayed  his  own 
.form  SajnS  assumed  her  < 
stealer  of  wat 
SajiiS,  who  had  assumed 
Then  was  born  his  first 
second  , son  Yama,  on  ac 
mother,  became  of  virtuous 
about  an  end  of  his  imorera 


rc  came  out  of  the  two 
1 on  horseback  with  swords, 
ver  (32-23).  Thereupon 
form.  Beholding  this 
was  delighted  (24).  Then 
lit  her  own  loving  wife 
own  form,  to  his  house  (25). 

the  Manu  Vaivaswata;  his 
t of  the  imprecation  of  his 
•■S  (a6).  His  father  brougitt 
>»yine,-<.The  worm,. 
down  on  the  earth  1(37). 

And  impartial  both  towards 
»ther  appointed  him  in  the 
(aS).  Yamuna  became  the 
'inis  were  appointed  by  their 
nd  Revanta  became  the  king 
nn.  of  the  mandate  issued  by 
ms  (25-30).  The  first  of 
Sajna  was  like  Manu.  This 
lation  of  Savarnikt  (91),  He 
when  Bali  wili  attain 


CHAPTER  LX XIX. 


IYLarkandeyA  said  :-~r.Adityas,  Vasus,  Rudras,  SSidhyaj*, 
Vishvvadcvas,  Maruts,  Vrigus  and  Angiras  were  the  gods  oC 
that  period  (t),  Adilyas,  Vayus  and  Rudras  should  be 
known  as  Kashyap^'s  sons-^SSdhyas,  Vasus  and  Vishvvadevas 
were  sons  of  Dharma  (2).  The  Bhrigus  were  the  son^  of 
Angiras ; they  should  all  now  be  known  as  the  sqns  of 
Marichr»  O twice-born  one  (3).  The  king  of  all  these  gods 
wai;  the  high-soulcd  Urjashwi,iwho  was  the  partaker  of  sacri- 
fieial  offerings.  All  these  kings  of  the  gods  past,  present, 
and  future  were  endowed  with  equal  marks — thousand-eyed 
and  holders  of  thunder-bolt  ; they  were  all  subduers  of 
foes  (4-— 5).  They  were  all  performers  of  sacrihces,  were 
Uke  bulls,  with  horns  and  were  performers  of  hundred  sacri- 
fices and  were  all  capable  of  over-powering  creatures  (6).. 
They  were  all,  by  virtue  and  other  pious  rites,  endowed  with . 
govertiing  qualities  and  were  ordainers  of  past,,  present  and 
future.  Hear,  O twice-born  one,  of  the  three  worlds  (7)^  The 
earth  is  called  the  region  of  Bhu,  the  etherial  region  Div  and 
heaven  Divyaw-these  are  called  the  three  regions  {&).  Atrr, 
Vashshtha,  the  great  saint  Gautama,  Bharadw5ja,  ViswamitrS 
Koushika,  and  Jlraadgni,  the  son  of  the  high-$ouled  Rkhilc^, 
these  were  the  seven  » Rishis  of  Manwantar a (9 — lO)* 

IfcshwAku,  N^bhaga,.Dhrista,  SharySLti,  Narishwanta,-  Dishta,*^ 
Karusha,  Piishadra,  and  Vasuman,  well-known  in  the  world,' 
these  nine  were  the  sons  of  Manu  Vaivaswata  (11-— 12). 

O Brahman,  I have  thus  related  to  you,  Vaivaswata  Man- 
wantara  ; men,  hearing  of  it,  0 great  one,  arc  released  from 
all  sins  and  attain  tq  great  piety  (13). 


CHAPTER  LX  XX. 


K, 


..ROUSHTI  said : — You  have  described  all  Manus  begin- 
ning with  Syambhuva  as  well  as  the  gods,  kings,  and  Rishis" 
of  those  periods  (r).  Do  thou  describe  in  detail  the  seven 
Manus  and  the  various  gods  of  those  Manwantaras  that  will 
rise  in  the  present  Kalpa  (2). 

Markandeya  said  I have  spoken  to  you  about  SAvarni 
the  son  of  the  illusory  SajnS.  He  is  equal  to  the  previous 
Manus  and  will  be  the  eighth  (3).  Rima,  Vyasa,  Galava, 
DiptimAn,  Kripa,  Rishyasbringa,  and  Drouni  will  be  the  seven 
Rishis  in  that  period  (4).  Ara,  Sutapa  and  Amitabba,  were 
the  gods-divided  into  sixty  classes  (5).  Tapa,  Tapas,  Sbatru 
Dyuti,  Jyot'i  Prabhakara,  Prabhasa,  Dayita,  Dharma,  Teja 
Rashmi,  Vakratu  and  others  were  the  twenty  deities  called 
Sutapa.  Prabhu,  Vibhu,  Vibhasa  and  others  were  the  twenty 
of  the  class  of  deities  called  Amitabba.  Hear,  I shall  des- 
cribe  the  third  class;  Dama,  Dinta,  Rita,  Soma,  Vinta  and 
others  were  the  twenty  of  the  class  of  gods  called  Mukhya 
they  were  all  the  lords  of  Manwantaras ; they  were  the 
descendants  of  the  Patriarch,  Maricha  the  son  of  Kashyapa  ; 
they  will  be  gods  m the  Manwantara  of  Mann  Savarnt 
2-^).  0 Muni,  .Virochana's  son  Bali  is  their  future  Indra. 

re^on  (jo).  Virajacharvavira,  Nirmoha,  Satyayak,  Krith 
Vtshnn  and  others  will  be  the  sons  of  Manu  Shyarni  (ir). 


CHANDI. 


CHAPTER  LX  XX  I. 


IWarkANDEYA  said  : — “The  Savurni  (son  of  the  sun)  was 
said  to  have  been  the  eighth  Manu.  Hear  i I will  copiously 
relate  his  birth. 

Manus,  possessors  of  great  shares,  were  the  founders  qf 
Manwantaras,  by  the  favour  of  MahamSya,  among  them  was 
Savurni. 

In  the  Manwantara  of  Swaro-chisha  in  former  times  Surad- 
ha,  who  was  born  of  the  race  of  Chytra,  became  a monarch  of 
the  whole  earth. 

He  ruled  this  subjects  paternally;  the  kings  who  were 
hunters  of  wild  boars  then  became  hostile  to  him. 

A valiant  and  mighty  kiagi  among  the  hunters  of  wild 
boars,  conquered  him  in  battle,  and  reduced  his  power. 

Thence  the  holder  of  extensive  portions  returned  to  his 
city,  and  ruled  over  only  his  owa  tract  of  country ; that  king 
then  became  endompassed  by  the  greatest  enemies. 

The  counsellors  and  evil  disposed  possesssed  the  wealth 
of  the  humble  king,  who  lost  all  the  treasures  in  his  city. 

He  lost  his  royalty.  Under  the  pretext  of  hunting,  he 
retired  tp  a dreary  forest  alone,  mounted  on  his  horse. 

He  saw  the  hermitage  of  an  excellent  .Dwija,  thronged 
around  with  wild  beasts  and  adorned  by  the  presence  of  his 
disciple!  and  sages. 

He  lived  there  some  time,  revered  by  the  Muni,  and  wan- 
dered about  here  and  there. 

He  ruminated  there  on  the  love  that  agitated  his  mind 
thus : what  my  predecessors  ruled,  I afterwards  lost. 


markandeya  puranam. 


334 

I wonder  whether  my  subjects  are  governed  with  equity 
«r  not,  I know  not  the  fate  of  my  counsellors,  and  my  trained 
elephant  Surahusti. 

They  arc  now  in  the  possession  of  my  enemies ; what 
pleasure  can  they  now  enjoy,  who  were  formerly  pampered 
with  food  and  riches. 

Now  they  are  certainly  maltreated  by  the  foreign  kings ; 
lavished  on  vain  purposes  is  the  treasure  that  was  assumed. 

The  king  was  sorrowful  that  his  treasury  was  expended. 
On  these  and  other  things  he  was  perpetually  meditating. 

He  saw  a Vysa  near  the  cell  of  a Vipra,  “O  who  art  thou" 
said  he  “what  is  the  cause  of  thy  coming  here?" 

Why  dost  thou  appear  pensive  and  melancholy,  O wealthy 
man  ? why  are  your  eyes  red  with  sorrow  ? 

M&rkandeya  said,  “hearing  the  humble  speech  of  the 
king,  the  Vysa  obsequiously  replied  to  him." 

My  name  is  Samadhi,  a Vysa.  I am  born  of  a wealthy 
tribe,  I am  banished  through  my  sons  and  wife's  covetous- 
ness, and  wickedness. 

My  sons  are  possessed  of  my  fortune,  and  I have  become 
destitute  of  wealth,  a consort,  and  children  ; in  sorrow  I took  re- 
fuge in  the  forest,  leaving  behind  me  my  friends  and  relations. 

I live  here  unacquainted  with  the  happiness  or  misery  of 
my  sons,  the  welfare  of  nny  people,  or  wife. 

Whether  their  house  is  in  safety  or  danger,  at  present  ? 
how  my  sons  are,  whether  they  are  engaged  in  moral  or  evil 
deeds?  ‘ ' 

The  Rajah  asked,  “ why  do  you  love  those  sons  and  that, 
wife,  through  whose  avarice  you  are  banished  ?”  ^ , 

The  Vysa  replied,  “ knowing  my  sentiments,  why  do  you 
interrogate  me,  I cannot  harden  my  heart,  what  can  I do.’* 

Covetousness  has  .extinguished  their  filial  affection,  yet  I 
fed  for  my  people. 

‘0  wise  man,  I am  simple,  for  my  heart  is  attached 

to  wy  trt^fierous  kinsmen  ttior^h  1 know  them. 


MARKAND^YA  PURANAM, 


W5 


How  can  I hate  them,  or  bear  malice, in  my  heart, 

Markandeya  said,  » the  VysA  by  name  Samadhf.  and  the 

noble  king  went  to  the  Muni.’*  . a me 

They  were  duly  respected  by  him  as  prescribed  in  the 
ordmances:  they  both  conversed  on  history. 

ask  one  ^ divine  personage  j I am  desirous  to 

its  flcH  ? -P'ain  it  to  me,  my  mind  has  lost 

on,  I am  troubled  with  anxiety  y 

tran;i/"“"'"‘  ' ^ ‘^°-cious  of 

tan, .tor, lii,, 

and  all  my  retinue.*  ^ ® ’ 

latillt  >>y  'ds  son,  wife,  attendants,  and  his  re- 

lations, yet  he  feels  pity  for  them. 

unto"^e?^'""T,' 

unto  reprehensible  actions.f 

on,'^« ‘J“  “"r  ° “K'r  ">»”«>>  ta  nre  ingnni- 

. y t our  affection  produces  cecity  in  action. 

The  Rishi  said,  «'0  great  sharer,  wisdom  exists  in  all 

others  again  that  appear  equally  blind  both  day  and  night. 

so  - all  H prudent,  but  are  not  really 

, all  the  beasts,  birds,  animals  have  knowledee 

What  kaowledge  mankind  i,  pnisessed  of,  the  other,  are 
equally  endowed  with.  * 

See  the  birds  being  wise,  though  oppressed  with  hunger 
themselves,  yet  lovingly  pick  up  the  crumbs  with  their  befks 
and  feed  their  young  ones? 


* J Wh  conscious,  &c,  that  is,  though  I have  sufficient  knowledge  to 

know  the  instability  of  human  transactions,  yet  like  an  ignorant  penon  /am 

sulififirvi^nt  to  the  finotions  of  my  soul. 

t Reprehensible  action;  w>.,  mundane  affection,  and  the  neglect  of  ab 
atracted  religiom  devotion.  ff  ect  of  ab- 


336 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


O chief  ef  kings ! do  you  not  see  men  lovingly  support 
their  offspring  for  the  benefit  of  others.* 

By  attraction  they  fall  in  the  vortex  of  love.  By  the 
fiower  of  Mahamaya,  the  world  was  originally  created. 

Mahamaya  seized  the  lord  of  the  world  when  at  his  slum- 
her  yoga;  the  great  illusion  enveloped  Hari,  she  shackles  the 
wdrld-t 

The  divine  goddefls  possesses  irresistibly  the  heart  of 
even  the  wisest,  and  forcibly  leads  into  great  deception, 

By  her  the  universe  consisting  of  animates  and  inanimates  - 

was  created,  her  blessings  procure  emancipation.J 

The  knowledge  of  her  is  the  means  of  supreme  salvation ; 
she  is  eternal  and  links  mortality  ; she  is  the  supreme  goddew 
over  air  goddesses.  i 

The  Rajah  said,  “0  divine  personage  1 who  is  that  god-  J 

dess?  O twice-born  1 whom  you  mentioned  just  now,  how  1| 

was  she  born  ? what  miracles  did  she  do  ?”  ' 1 i 

What  stupendous  action  did  she,  whose  form  is  admirable,  li 
perform  ? I am  desirous  of  hearing  about  those  things,  0 li 
excellent  among  those  who  know  the  almighty,  tell  me  ? I 

The  Rishi  said,  “ the  form  of  the  world  is  eternal,  alJ  f 

things  were  created  by  her,  I was  frequently  toJd  her  birth.’'  J 

She  is  eternal  and  only  took  form  for  the  benefit  of  ■ I 
the  gods.§  I 

When  the  world  was  deluged,  Vishnu  the  Divine  Superior  i 
Lord  was  reclining  on  the  serpent  bed  at  the  end  of  Kalpa.  J 

Then  two  horrible  Asuras:  named  Madhu  and  Kitabha,  I 

was  born  from  the  wax  of  Vishnu^s  ear  and  endeavoured  to  I 
slay  Btlhma.  I 

Prajapati  residing  in  the  lotus  naval  of  Vishnu,  saw  the  ‘ 
two  wrathful  Asuras  and  the  sleeping  Janarddana,  who  was 

- -lOf.. Others  posterity. 

t.ShacklM  the  wQrid,  being  the  great  attracti^^ 

f r«^w»  emaaoipaMott  from  eecokr  noncerns. 
f Benefit  of  the  God*,  that  is,  to  destroy  demon*. 

; . ' 

V ' - . 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  337 

(in  Yoganidra),  he  thus  prayed  with  strict  fafth  to  her,  who 
made  Hari^s  eye  to  be  her  abode. 

O goddess  of  the  universe  ; mother  of  the  earth  ! creator 
of  matter  and  destroyer  of  it  Goddess  of  the  slumber  of 
Vishnu,  who  has  extreme  brilliancy,  is  surpassing  and 
superior. 

Brahma  continued,  thou  art  Swaha,  thou  art  Swad^ha, 
thou  art  Vash-ut-kara,  thou  art  Sudha,  thou  art  Akchara, 
thou  art  eternal,  and  of  three  powers;  Matra. 

Ardha-matra,  constant,  perpetual,  thou  art  she  who  is 
moreover  inexpressible,  thou  art  Savitri,  thou  art  the  light, 
and  a superior  matron. 

Thou  art  the  sustainer  of  all  things,  thou  hast  ^.created  all 
f things,  thou  governest  all  ^things,*  thou  existest  to  the  end 

constantly. 

Thou  art  the  principle  of  creation,  thou  art  plastic,  thou 
art  the  preserver,  thou  art  the  destroyer  in  the  end,  thou 
pervadest  through  the  universe. 

‘ Thou  art  the  supreme  knowledge,  thou  art  the  great 
illusion,  the  supreme  intellect,  the  supreme  memory,  the  great 
love,  the  ample  light,  the  mighty  goddess. 

Who  contemplates  all  matter  by  three  kind  of  powers, 
Kalaratri,  MaharStri,  and  Moharatri,  dreadful. 

Thou  art  prosperity,  thou  art  the  goddess,  thou  art  Hari, 
thou  art  the  wisdom  that  creates  understanding,  thou  art 
modesty,  strength,  and  gratification;  thou  art  mildness  and 
forgiveness. 

Thou  art  Khudgini,  Sulini,  the  frightful  Gadini,  Chakrini, 
Sankhini,  Chapini  Bana,  Brusundi,  Parigha. 

Thou  art  placid,  the  greatest  among  the  meek  ; beautiful, 
excellent,  supreme  among  the  excellent ; thou  art  the  great 
goddess. 

Thou  existest  in  all  that  is  little,  and  all  that  is  great ; in 


Three  powers. — Creation,  preservation,  and  destruction. 

43 


338 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


gay  and  sad  things,  and  thou  powerful  by  the  acquirement 
of  their  strength,  who  is  left  to  praise  thee  ? 

Thou  makest  the  world,  thou  destroyest  the  world,  who 
can  praise  thee  ? 

Thou  possessest  the  body  of  Vishnu,  and  also  Maha. 
Esina,  both  of  whom  were  made  by  thee,  and  who  is  able  to 
praise  thee  ? 

He  plauds  the  goddesses’  eminent  actions,  that  she  may 
link  the  wicked  giants  h^fidhu  and  Kitabha. 

And  that  she  might  awake  the  supreme  lord,  who  was  to 
slay  both  the  great  wicked  demons. 

The  Rishi  said,  the  creator  thus  praised,  that  the  enraged 
goddess  might  awake  Vishnu  to  kill  Madhu  and  Kitabha. 

She  liberated  Vishnu’s  eyes,  nose,  arms,  bosom,  and 
breast,  and  appeared  to  Brahmi,  whose  birth  is  pure. 

Janarddana  was  delivered  by  her  ; the  lord  of  the  earth 
arose  from  his  serpent  bed  in  the  ocean  and  beheld  them. 

Madhu  and  Kitabha,  ill  disposed  heroes ; warlike,  with 
red  vision,  endeavoured  to  extirpate  Urahmt. 

Rising  afterwards,  they  both  wrestled  with  the  divine  Hari 
for  five  thousand  years. 

TIjey  were  intoxicated  by  (he  great  deception ; the  elate 
with  pride  desired  Keshava  to  mention  bis  wish. 

Bhagavfin  relied,  “You  shall  both  die  by  met  what  other 
desire  have  I,  know  this  is  my  only  wish." 

The  Rishi  said,  that  they  looked  at  the  universe  over, 
flowed  with  water  and  deemed  themselves  deceived,  th^ 
looked  at  the  divine  lotus-eyed,  and  spoke  thus— 

“We  are  satisfied  with  the  combat  and  praise  thee;  0 
vanquish  and  conquer  us  in  a spot  not  moistened  by  water} 

The  Rishi  said  to  the  holder  of  the  Saoka  and  Chakon,  the 
■divine  said,  I will  do  so.  He  then  cut  off  their  heads  with 
the  Chakra  on  his  thigh. 

Brahma  himself  applauded  the  deed.  I will  tell  thee  copi* 
ously  of  the  miracles  of  the  goddess,  hear  them. 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  339 

Thus  far  extends  the  first  chaper,  mentiornng  the  destruc- 
tion of  Madhu  and  Kitabha. 


CHAPTER  LXXXII. 

In  former  times  war  was  waged  between  the  deities  and 
demons  for  the  full  space  of  one  hundred  years  ; also  be- 
tween Mahisha-sura,  the  greatest  of  demons,  and  Poorunder 
(the  greatest  of  deities). 

The  Asura  of  ample  heroism  repulsed  the  army  of  the 
Devas ; Mahishasura  vanquished  all  the  angels  and  became 
as  Indra. 

After  this,  the  conquered  deities  went  with  Prajapati 
whose  abode  was  the  lotus  to  Garuda-dhwaja  (or  the  eagle 
bannered. 

The  Tridasas  laid  before  him  the  distress  of  the  gods  with 
an  account  of  Mahish-asura^s  actions. 

That  he  had  usurped  the  authorities  of  Surya,  Indra  Anila, 
IndU|  Yama,  and  Varuna;  and  others  hims'elf. 

They  said,  the  gods  are  oppressed  by  the  ill  disposed 
Mahisha;  the  whole  multitude  of  Devas  have  left  heaven  and 
wander  on  the  earth  like  mortals. 

Those  are  the  deeds  of  the  enemies  of  the  immortals,  wt 
humbly  bow  to  thy  asylum  to  meditate  on  their  death. 

Madhusudana  hearkened  to  the  words  of  the  deities ; 
Sambhu  was  wroth  contracting  his  brows  with  furious  ire. 

Afterwards,  Chakrini's  face  was  transported  with  rage, 
abundance  of  light  issued  from  BramhA  and  Sankara. 

An  immense  mass  of  light  proceeded  from  the  bodies  of 
Sakra  and  all  the  other  Devas,  and  conglomerated. 


340 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


This  effulgent  lustre  appeared  as  a flaming  mountain : the 
Suras  having  seen  the  flame  receded  to  the  extremities  of 
regions. 

The  peerless  light  issued  from  the  bodies  of  all  the  Devas 
and  the  phenomenon  was  transfigured  as  a woman  extending 
through  the  three  worlds. 

The  energy  of  Siva  created  her  face ; the  brightness  of 
Yama  made  her  hair ; her  arms  were  formed  by  the  light  of 
Vishnu. 

Her  two  breasts  were  made  by  the  moon  ; the  space  be- 
tween them  by  Indra ; her  thighs  and  the  calves  of  her  legs 
by  Varuna;  her  loins  by  the  light  of  Bhuvi. 

Her  feet  by  the  energy  of  Brahma';  her  toes  by  the  rays  of 
the  sun ; her  fingers  by  Vasus  her  nose  by  Cubdra. 

Her  teeth  were  created  by  the  brightness  of  PrajSpati ; 
her  three  eyes  by  the  energy  of  Pavaka.  * 

Her  forehead  by  the  light  of  Sundhia ; her  ears  by  Anilaj 
the  brightness  of  other  deities  formed  her  body. 

From  the  glory  of  the  light  of  all  the  Deva-s,  Siva  sprang ; 
the  Amaras  perceived  the  destroyer  of  Mahisha  and  exulted. 

The  holder  of  the  Pinaka  took  out  his  Sula  and  conferred 
it  on  her;  Vishnu  gave  her  a Chakra  drawn  from  his  own 
Chakra. 

Varuna  gave  her  the  sank;  Hutasana  the  Sacti;  Maruta 
spread  a bow  with  arrows,  and  quiver  complete. 

Indra  took  the  Vajra  from  his  Culisa,  the  one  thousand 
eyed  god  took  the  bell  from  the  elephant  Iravata,  and  gave 
it  to  her. 

Varuna  gave  her  a Cala-dunda;  and  Yama. the  Pasa, 
PrajSpati,  lord  of  the  subjects,  bestowed  an  Akchamdla  and 
Comundala  on  her. 

^ The  maker  of  day  filled  his  rays  in  the  roots  of  her  hair; 
Cila  granted  a transparent  sword  and  shield. 

A necklace  pure  as  milk,  immaculate  Panoply,  a Chuda- 
mani,  and  divine  Cundala  and  Cataca. 


IMARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


341 


V 


A crescent;  a beautiful  Keyura  over  her  arms;  shoulder  j 

ornaments  and  beautiful  neck  jewels. 

Rings  of  precious  stones,  on  all  her  fingers.  Viswa  Karma 
afforded  her  the  limpid  Parasu. 

Implements  of  different  forms:  likewise  an  invulnerable 
coat  of  arms  ; a never  fading  garland  of  lotus  for  her  head 
and  neck.  , 

Jaladhi  conferred  on  her  a prosperous  Chaplet  of  lotus  ; 

Himavunt  gave  her  lion  vehicle  and  various  gems.  I 

Dhanadhipa  gave  her  a golden  vase  with  imperishable  | 

wine  to  drink  ; Sesha  gave  her  a necklace  of  serpent^s  orna-  ] 

ments  and  magnificient  gems.  ; 

Prudhwi  granted  a neckless  of  snakes,  and  the  other  Suras  I 

geve  her  jewels  and  arms. 

She  shouted  frequently  with  a terrible  voice,  the  sound  of  1 

which  filled  the  sky. 

The  eternal  vault  echoed  with  the  terrific  sound  of  ‘‘  0 ! 

Mayah/^  all  the  world  was  alarmed,  the  ocean  trembled.  ; 

The  earth  quaked,  all  the  mountains  were  moved,  the  | 

Devas  joyously  exclaimed,  ^Wictory  be  to  the  rider  of  the  ' 

lion.*'' 

5: 

Munies  were  delighted  and  faithfully  made  obeisance  to  < 

her;  she  beheld  the  whole  of  the  three  Lokas  grieved  by  the  ^ 

enemies  of  the  Amaras.  I 

All  the  nearest  armies  were  amply  provided  with  imple-  | 

ments,  Mahisha-asura  furiously  said,  what  is  this?^' 

The  sound  of  his  voice  reached  the  surrounding  multi-  j 

tude  of  Asuras  ; he  saw  the  goddess  pervade  the  three  Lokas.  j 

She  indented  the  earth,  occupied  by  her  foot,  her  crown  ! 

struck  the  sky:  tthe  sound  of  her  bow-string  terrified  the 
whole  subterraneous  world. 

She  grasped  all  the  space  of  the  regions  by  her  one  | 

thousand  arms ; fierce  war  was  waged  between  the  goddess  | 

and  the  enemies  of  the  Suras. 


342 


MARkANDEYA  PURAN.  AM 


They  shot  many  powerful  arrows;  her  arms  extended 
towards  all  the  cardinal  (points ; the  leader  of  the  army  of 
Mahisha-sura  was  a great  Asura,  by  name  Chickchura. 

He  fought  at  the  head  of  an  Ayuta  of  great  cjieeked 
Asuras.  The  mighty  Asura  Asiloma,  advanced  with  50,000 
Neyutas. 

Bhaskala  conducted  one  hundred  and  sixty  thousand 
Ayutas  to  the  battle,  accompanied  by  one  hundred  elephants, 
and  many  steeds. 

Bidala  led  one  ATo/Zof  in  that  war,  and  fifty  thou' 
sand  Ayutas. 

The  other  leaders  were  attended  by  one  Ayuta  of  ele- 
phants, ruths  and  horses. 

The  great  Asuras  encountered  the  goddess  with  Koti-Koti 
thousands  chariots,  and  elephants. 

And  with  the  same  number  horses,  Mahisha-asura  wielded 
the  Tomara,  Bindivala,  sacti  and  Musala. 

He  fought  the  goddess  with  his  Khudga,  Parasa,  and 
Puttisa;  some  of  the  Asuras  threw  the  sacti,  and  some 
the  Pasa. 

Devi  began  to  destroy  them  with  her  sword  Chundica 
afterwards  threw  arrows  and  astras. 

She  sportively  cut  them  in  pieces  by  the  shower  of  her 
powerful  shafts  and  arrows,  Devi,  the  imperishable  was 
greeted  by  the  excellent  Suras  and  sages. 

The  goddess  shot  the  powerful  shafts  and  arrows,  and 
severed  the  bodies  of  the  Asuras;  the  lion  of  the  goddess 
being  enraged,  swiftly  shook  his  mane  and  marched  against 
the  hostile  army,  like  fire  against  a forest. 

During  her  achievments  in  war,  the  goddess  sighed 
thereby  instantly  were  produced  hundreds  and  thousands  of 
GanSs  (or  Amazons). 

Who  fought  with  the  demons,  with  Parasa,  Bindivala, 
and  Puttisa ; the  powerful  voice  of  Devi,  destroyed  the  hosts 
of  Asuras, 


MARKANDEYA  PtjRANAM. 


343 


The  Amazons  sounded  the  Pataha,  likewise  the  conches, 
kettle-drums,  and  other  instruments  in  the  festival  of  war. 

Afterwards  Devi,  by  the  trident,  by  the  mace,  by  the 
sactivrusti,  by  the  ’sword,  and  so  forth,  killed  immense 
number  of  Asuras,  and  made  others  to  fall  by  the  ringing  of 
the  bell. 

She  tied  the  Asuras  with  the  Pasa  on  the  earth ; and  some 
were  cut  down  into  pieces  by  the  keen  cut  sword. 

She  afterwards  crushed  the  troops  with  her  mace  on  the 
earth:  some  vommited  blood,  having  been  struck  by  the 
Musala. 

She  cast  some  on  the  earth,  breaking  their  bosom  with 
the  trident,  she  destroyed  some  by  the  keen  shaft,  in  the 
field  of  battle. 

The  commander  of  forces,  the  oppressors  of  Tridasas,  for- 
feited their  lives  : some  had  their  arms,  others  their  throats 
cut. 

The  heads  of  som’e  of  the  vigorous  Asuras  were  cut  off, 
and  the  calves  of  the  legs  of  others  were  severed  and  thrown 
down  to  the  earth. 

Devi  had  maimed  each  of  the  Asuras  of  an  arm,  an  eye, 
and  a foot ; and  though  their  heads  were  severed  from  their 
bodies,  the  trunks  rose  again. 

The  trunks,  holding  the  excellent  arms,  fought  with  Devi; 
the  Apsaras  danced  during  the  battle,  accompanied  by  great 
shouts. 

The  trunks  of  the  Asuras,  whose  heads  were  cut  off,  still 
held  the  sacti,  Khudga,  Vrusti,  and  spoke  aloud  ; stand  j 
stand. 

The  fallen  chariots,  elephants,  and  steeds  of  the  Asuras 
'were  innumerable ; where  the  great  battle  was  fought,  ins- 
tantly rivers  of  blood  were  streaming. 

The  centre  of  the  army  of  Asuras,  the  chariots  and  horses 
of  Asuras  were  annahilated  by  AmbikS,. 


344 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM, 


In  a moment  the  forces  of  the  Asuras  were  destroye4  in 
abundance  by  fire,  like  grass  and  wood. 

The  Kesari  (or  lion)  made  an  excessive  roar,  it  produced 
a concussion  among  the  bodies  of  the  foes  of  the  Suras. 

By  the  Amazons  of  the  Devi,  victory  over  the  Asuras  was 
achieved,  the  gods  were  gratified  and  poured  down  Amaran- 
thine flowers  from  heaven. 


CHAPTER  LXXXin. 


m 

1 HE  Rism  said  .-—The  mighty  Asur.a,  by  name  Chick* 
chura,  general  of  the  army,  on  beholding  the  destruction 
his  force  proceeded  to  fight  again.sl  Arnbikil. 

That  goddess  poured  a shower  of  arrows  on  the  Asur,  as 
the  clouds  rain  on  the  peak  of  Meru  mountain. 

The  goddess  sportively  cut  hts  mighty  weapon,  and  killed 
the  steeds,  and  driver  by  her  arrows. 

She  instantly  broke  his  bow  and  his  highest  flag-staff : she 
wounded  him  in  the  body. 

Having  lost  his  bow,  he  was  deprived  of  hw  chariot,  his 
horses,  and  drives  were  killed  : the  Asura,  holding  a shield  and 
sword,  ran  against  Devi. 

He  struck  the  head  of  her  lion  fiercely  with  the  keen  bladte 
of  his  sword  : he  struck  the  right  arm  of  the  goddess. 

0 prince  | when  the  sword  reached  her  arm,  it  broke  s 
Asura  then  took  a Sula,  Ida  eyes  being  red  with  wrath. 

And  discharged  it  at  Bhadra-KSli,  flaming  with  a bright- 
ness equal  to  the  orbit  of  the  sun  in  heaven. 


■ MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  345 

The  goddess  receiving  the  Sula,  discharged  by  the  demon, 
threw  a trident  which  cut  the  mighty  Asura’s  weapon  into  a 

hundred  pieces  and  killed  him.  ■ 

When  the  great  valiant  demon  was  dead,  Chamara,  the 
general  of  Mahisha’s  army,  oppressor  of  Tridasas,  mounted 
on  an  elephant. 

Firmly,  discharged  a Sacti  on  the  Devi,  but  by  her  shout 
^ she  made  it  to  fall  on  the  earth  innoxious. 

With  anger  he  beheld  the  Sacti  broken  and  fallen,  and 
discharged  a Sula,  she  then  cut  it  with  her  arrows. 

She  leapt  from  the  lion  to  the  globular  forehead  of  the 
elephant,  and  direly  wrestled  with  the  foes  of  Tridasas. 

During  the  combat,  they  both  dismounted  and  began 
furiously  to  beat  one  another. 

Afterwards  the  enemy  of  the  beasts,*  swiftly  attacked  and 
! separated  the  head  of  Chamara,  from  his  body,  by  the  strokes 

j of  his  paws. 

Devi  killed  Vudagra,  by  hurling  stones,  trees,  &c.  upon 
him,  she  made  Carala  to  fall  by  her  teeth  and  feet. 

Devi  being  enraged  by  the  blows  of  her  mace,  ground  him 
into  powder;  Bhiscala  by  Pindivala j Tomara  and  likewise 
Andhaca  by  her  arrows. 

The  supreme  goddess  killed  Vugramsa,  Vugra-Virya  like- 
wise Maha-Hanu  and  Trinatra,  by  her  trident. 

She  made  the  head  of  Bidala  to  fall  by  her  sword  ] deJs** 
troyed  Durdhara  and  Durmukha  by  her  arrows. 

While  she  was  thus  destroying  his  army,  Mahishasura 
impeded  those  Ganas  in  the  form  of  Mahisha. 

Some  by  biting  with  his  mouth,  and  others  by  kicking 
with  his  hoofs,  some  by  the  lashes  of  his  tail  and  by  the  gor- 
ing of  his  horns. 

Some  of  them  by  the  loudness  of  his  bellow,  by  his  burn- 
ing  breath  he  made  them  to  fall  to  the  ground. 


♦ Enemy  of  the  beasts— lion. 

44 


MARKANDEYA  PURA^AM 


34fi 

The  Asura  having  caused  Pramadas  to  fall,  angrily  ran  to 
kill  the  lion  of  the  goddess. 

The  great  hero  enraged,  tore  up  the  earth  with  his  hoofs 
and  cast  down  the  highest  hills. 

He  speedily  turned  about,  cracked  the  earth,  laslied  the 
ocean  with  his  tail,  and  made  it  to  overflow  everywhere. 

The  clouds  were  dispersed  by  his  long  horns,  the 
mountains  and  sky  were  blown  into  hundred  pieces  by  his 
breath  and  sighs. 

The  great  Asura  vvrathfully  bellowed  ! Chandiki.  looked, 
highly  enraged  and  endeavoured  to  lay  hold  on  him. 

She  threw  out  a PSsa  to  bind  him,  he  w.is  tied,  and  relin- 
quished his  buffaloc's  form  in  this  great  combat. 

He  instantly  turned  into  a lion,  within  the  time  that 
Ambika  cut  of  this  head  ; he  then  converted  himself  into  a 
man,  held  a sword  and  disappeared. 

Afterwards  the  goddess  pierced  him  with  her  arrows,  he 
with  his  sword  and  shield  turned  into  a mighty  elephant. 

1 he  elephant  pulled  the  lion  with  his  trunk,  and  made  a 
terrific  noise,  the  goddess  cut  his  proboscis  with  her  sword. 

Afterwards  the  great  Asura  assumed  the  form  of  a buflfaloe, 
and  terrified  the  three  Lokas  of  animates  and  inanimates. 

The  passionate  CliandikS,  matron  of  the  world,  frequently 
drank  excellent  liquor,  bearing  wrathful  redness  in  her  eyes. 

The  Asura  being  highly  endowed  with  bravery  and  Inst, 
furiously  hurled  mountains  with  his  horns  on  ChundikS. 

She  pulverized  them  with  her  strong  arrows,  and  with 
increased  intoxication  and  angry  looking  face. 

Devi  cried.  Oh  ! vain  noise  j noise  1 wait  a moment  until 
r perfectly  drink  this  liquor;  wlien  you  are  slain  by  me  here, 
all  the  gods  will  exclaim'. 

The  Rishi  said,  she  laid  hold  on  the  great  Asura,  (who 
advanced  towards  her  conveyance),  with  her  feet,  she  struck 
him  with  her  Sula. 

When  he  was  caught  held  an  by  her  feet,  hb  half  teal  form 


r 


ruKANAM. 


f . 

hy  a blaze  ^fghry"'*  goddess  was  surrounded 

Afterwards  every  one 

Daitya  was  annihilated  ■ the  army  of  the 

bighly  delighted.  ’ " ^ multitude  of  deities  were 

the  god7eL"‘^tretingrorGL!^^  applauded 

Thus  far  is  related  in  the  third  Cht 
destruction  of  Mahishasura.  ^ 


chapter  LXXXIV. 


£ rf  f 

and  ,„™,.  Q An.MkI,  ,h„„  art  rC nd 

y le  tmes;  the  magnificent  sages  faitlifuliy  prostrate 
hemseives  to  tiree  r mayest  thoo  give  us  prosperity  ^ 

arrH  H “"P»rallele<I,  BhagavSn.Auanta,  Brah-ni 

»»d  Kara  are  unable  ,„  express  it.  Mayest  tbou.  O ardihfi  I 

.ndeavour  to  preserve. he  „or,d,  and  dispel  the  tear,  .ahj 

ef  " » S'xi'l«=3 

Vieie  ^ “ *”  «y  in  the  abode  ol  the 

Vicmus,  as  sense  ,„.  the  heart  of  the  wise,  as  faith  i„  mankind, 


34* 


markandeya  puraman. 


and  modesty  in  the  Superior  castes ; to  thee,  O Goddess  j I 
make  obeisance  and  implore  thee  to  rule  the  universe. 

How  can  I describe  thy  form  which  is  inconceivable  ? 
thou  art  great,  heroic,  ample  : destroyer  of  the  giants.  Thy 
deeds  in  war  are  admirable,  0 Goddess  f and  superior  to  the 
hosts  of  giants  and  gods. 

Thou  art  the  instigating  cause  of  the  universal  earth,  of 
three  powers ; incomprehensible  to  sinners,  and  even  to  Hari- 
Hara,  and  so  forth ; thou  art  attended  by  all,  and  art  the 
proprietress  of  this  world  : thou  art  undefinable,  inscrutable, 
and  the  excellent  principle  of  matter. 

Thou  art  Swihl.  in  all  tlie  sacrifices.  By  the  devout 
expression  of  thy  name  all  the  deities  are  gratified  : people 
pronounce  thee  by  the  name  of  SwadhS  for  the  expiatory 
oblation  for  deceased  ancestors. 

Thy  stability  confers  inconceivable  salvation,  which  is 
obtained  by  those  votaries,  who  subdue  their  organs,  thou 
art  a goddess,  thou  art  the  supreme  knowledge  to  edify  the 
searcher  after  beatitude,  sages,  and  those  that  are  free  from 
different  offences. 

Thou  art  the  word,  source  of  the  purest  Rig,  Fq/m,  and 
Sdman,  of  eloquent  florid  phrases.  0 divine  Goddess  | thou 
art  of  three  powers : for  the  augmentation  of  the  world  j thou 
art  the  destroyer  of  the  universe  and  remover  of  severe  evils, 

O Goddesss  j thou  art  intelligence  ; essence  of  the  Sub- 
stance of  various  sciences  ; impenetrable  ; a vessel  on  the 
difficult  sea  of  secularly  ; unassociated  ; chiefly  resident  in 
the  heart  of  the  enemy  of  KhytS.bha,'^  Gouri,  thou  art  worn 
by  the  crescent  crowned  god. 

..  With  a soft  smile,  thou  art  the  purest  representative  of  the 
perfect  orbit  of  the  moon  ; thou  hast  a beautiful  golden  hued 
body.  It  is  an  entire  wonder  that  Mahishasura,  with  self- 
created  anger  could  look  on  the  enraged,  and  brow-contract- 


• MARKANDEYA  RURANAAfi 

ti  courtMance  oMteg„ddess.glowing  as 

not.nslanOy  ,„ie  his  ,„„|. 

■enraged  Untaka  ? 

0 Goddess!  we  now  entreat  thy  con 

ample  increase- of  generations;  we  ii^plore 

thy  wrath  the  extensive  posterity  of  the  fore 

and  ‘o  bestow  the  desired  wealth,  fame,  ine. 

■off  pangs,  attendants,  consorts,  and,  pr;moti 

>e  countries  thou  favourest,mayest  thou  c 
da,  n,  the  virtuous  by  faithfully 

y *^0  different  divine  services,  and  consecj 

eayen,  and  thereby  reap  the  fruit  of  their  la 
worlds. 

O Durgaj  all 
thee ; thou  dost 
release  from 
ful  to  oblige  in- 
than  thee. 

All  the  uni 
-giants,  and  tho  _ 
long  time  which 


creatures  lose  thei 
grant  abundance  of  pre 
pain  and  grievous  distress; 
every  respect ; and  who 


Sasadhara-Iiterally,  hare.ho!dery  fh.  muon, 


3S0 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


Thy  prowess  is  without  equal,  ftljy  form  will  create  fear  in 
the  enemy  : in  peace  thou  art  complacent,  and  in  war  thou 
art  implacable.  O goddess!  thou  givest  benedictions  in 
the  three  worlds. 

Thoii  hast  killed  the  foes  at  the  head  of  the  battle,  and 
Paved  (he  whole  of  the  three  worlds  ; multitude  of  enemies 
proceeded  to  heaven.  We  are  exempt  from  fear,  and  pros- 
trate ourselves  to  thee,  who  art  a foe  to  the  intoxicated  enc- 
of  Surns- 

O Ambika ! preserve  us  by  thy  trident  and  sword  ; pre- 
serve us  by  the  ringing  of  thy  bell,  and  by  the  sound  of  thy 
bow-string.  0 ChandikS  \ guard  the  East  and  the  West, 
and  the  South.  Oh  Erahmani  j defend  (he  North  with  thy 
trident, 

Mayest  thou  support  the  saints  and  good  spirits  that 
wander  in  three  Mas;  mayest  thou  retain  a number  of 
tremendous  forms  on  the  earth,  that  wield  the  sword,  trident, 
club,  and  other  instruments  in  their  hand,  to  defend  us  at  all 
times  and  places. 

Xhe  said,  tbe  Suras  tbus  praised  and  joyfully  wor*' 

shipped  her  with  the  divine  flowers  of  the  garden  of  Nandana, 
tubbing  sandal  on  the  universal  DhStri. 

All  the  Tridasas  faithfully  offered  her  sweet  smelling  in- 
cense, the  mild  faced  goddess  said  to  the  humble  Suras. 

Devi  said,  O Tridas.is  j I am  pleased  with  your  worship 
I will  affectionately  give  you  whatever  you  desire.  The  Devas 
replied,  O divine  goddess  j we  have  every  thing  that  we 
require. 

Thou  hast  sl.iin  our  adversary  Mahiohasura,  all  our  de- 
sires have  been  obtained  through  thy  favour,  we  have  only 
one  thing  more  to  request  of  thee. 

Secure  from  harm  whatever  mortal  recollects  to  call  upon 
thee,  repeatedly,  in  the  time  of  danger, 

O beautiful  Face  I deign  to  pve  them  aogamtation  of 


M*RKA-NDEVA 

ncto.^spo„«s,  a.d  p„p„,i=.  Ma,.,ul,ou  p“ 

w.r“.“  4:a7rd\f"T’ 

then,  O KiagI  .1,,  vanlhaj  Ehadra-Kali;  aad 

He  related  to  the  kincr  fi.a.  i,- 

of  fho  goddaaa  a,  o/Z°w;' a°"'r““'°“ 

anxious  for  the  weal  of  these  three  worlds. 

Again  she  was  born  from  the  bodv  n(  r 

r:L‘" ir-sic.: 

Pfof» ::  sr.,a 


a K,s„,  said,  fomari  Aaaraa 

Nmmbha,  by  ,ha  a.r.npb  of  i„obriation  Z 

Z pTd”  Z ‘’’O  “‘'oe  y-orlda." 

cl  , , '"'*'■0.  Sarya,  Kubora 

■bonZd  d7“  H,a  deUUa' 

=»  a„d  dopnvod  of  their  realms  .„d  fled. 

He  assumed  the  authority  of  Tirdasa.!  <. 

t .e  mghty  Saras  beiag  deserted  recollected  S 

Thou  hast  bestowed  tliis  favour  on  all  of 

shall  remember  thee  in  the  hour  of  danger  tl 

Mmove  the  peril  from  us."  ^ ' 


35» 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 


Thus  they  meditated  on  the  goldess  in  their  hearts  and, 
repaired  to  Himavant,  (king  of  mountains)  there  they  greeted 
the  goddess  of  the  illusion  of  Vishnu- 

The  Devas  said,  we  salute  the  great  goddess,  maker  of 
joy,  and  continually  prostrate  ourselves  and  pay  homage  to 
the  auspicious  matter ; we  humbly  bow  to  the  pious. 

Salutation  be  for  ever  to  Radri,  reverence  be  to  the 
Dhatri,  eternal  prostration  to  the  light,  to  the  form  of  the 
moon  and  beatitude ; twice  obeisance  to  the  prosperous,  to 
the  prolonger,  maturer,  and  Kurme. 

Twice  salutation  to  the  Niruta  supporter  of  the  earth, 
and  the  goddess  of  riches,  SarvSni. 

Twice  salutation  to  Durga,  remover  of  difficult  limits  j 
constant  salutations  to  the  renowned  one,  likewise  to  the 
sable  and  dusky. 

Twice  salutation  to  the  ample,  the  mild  and  the  austere; 
prostration  to  the  cstablisher  of  the  world  and  to  the  gaddess. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess,  who  is  called  an 
illusion  of  Vishnu  in  all  creatures. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  godde.ss,  who  is  the  mind  in 
all  creatures. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess,  who  is  the  intellect 
in  all  ceatures. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess,  who  is  repose  in  all 
features. 

Five  times  prostration  to  the  goddess,  who  is  the  appetite 
in  all  creatures. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess,  who  is  the  shadow 
in  all  creatures. 

Five  times  salutation  ;to  the  goddess,  who  is  a power  in 
all  creatures. 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess,  who  is  gratification 
in  all  creatures. 

Five  timef  salutation  to  the  goddess*  who  is  mercy  ta  a^ 
creatures. 




" 353 

c "»« i>  a caal.  i„  all 

all  creatu'^irs"  ""  S»'i'i«ss,  who  is  modesty  i„ 

creamms.‘““  “■  Saddess.  who  is  pi,y  io*,, 

all  ■“  ""-a  - Wt*  ia 

allc^IL'::'  -pl^ioo,,:., 

proverityT„'l|7'“s“°"s.'’  »‘"aa  “a  farm . of 

all  oreti're's““'“'“‘'°”  SPddess,  who  is  the  intelleot  ia 

Five  times  salutation  to,  the  goddess  who  i,  ft, 
in  all  creatures.  S^^aess,  who  is  the  memory 

in  all.creatures!^'''^^^'°"  &°^dess,  ,who  lives  as  favour 

all  '^"‘“■“  ‘a.ke.Pddes,  who  li.e.  asJoyi„ 

Five  times  salutation  to  the.  goddess 
mother  in  all  creatures.  ^ 

Five  times  salutation  to  the  goddess  wh'k  n 
of  delusion  in  all  creatures.  ' ® 

ia  au"e'e!ra“s“'°“"°°  "iddoo, 

Five  times  salutation  to.  the  goddess,  who.  is  above  .h 

arg^s  and  eternally  .petvades  through  all  creator!, 

We  salute  the  goddess  who  resides  in  all  th^,  1.1 
a.form  of  effulgence.  " all  the  woHd  as-i' 

Suras,  Indras,  Dinesa  assembled  together  and  nrt.  j 1 
ber  aecording  to  their  former  re,„esl  0 g^^s 

of  happmess  ; bestow  prosperous  blessings  on  ns  d .„!! T 
danger  that  encompasseth  us.  ^ “s , dispel  : the  , 

We  and  the  Suras  salute  thee:'  Destroy  the  proud,  Paity„ 


354 


MARKANDEVA  pur  a NAM. 


whoever  conlefnplates  thee  with  obei.sancr,  their  misfortunei 
shall  he  instantly  removed. 

The  Rishi  said,  when  the  deities  applauded  PUrvati,  0 
prince]  she  went  to  perform  ablntion  in  the  water  of  JSnhavi. 

She  asked  them,  " Whom  did  you  greet  there.”  The  res- 
plendant  Siva  emanated  irom  her  hotly,  and  spoke  thus 
to  her. 

" They  recited  my  praise.s,  because  they  were  expelled  by 
the  giant  Sumbha,  all  the  deities  retreated  before  Nisumbha 
in  the  war." 

From  the  body  of  PUrvati,  AmvikS  issued,  and  was  deno- 
minated Koufiki  throughout  the  univcr-se. 

When  she  had  emanated  from  P.'lrvaii,  (who  turned  black), 
she  was  called  Kouyiki  and  resorted  about  HimSchala. 

Her  transcendent  form  beautiful,  and  creating  admiration 
was  seen  by  Chanda  anti  Munda,  who  were  ailendanU  of 
Sumbha  and  Nisumbha. 

They  mentioned  to  Sumbha,  O great  sovereign  j there 
is  a beautiful  female,  exalted  on  the  Him&chala  mountain, 
she  charms  the  heart  of  all  beholders. 

There  is  no  shape  resembling  her  yet  seen  by  any  body. 
Find  out  who  she  is  and  pass  that  angelic  female, 

Tliat  charming  body  it  a gem  among  the  damsels,  glow- 
ding  in  all  directions  ; 0 Indra  of  the  giants  I it  remains  fw 
thee  to  behold  her. 

0 Lord  I you  have  already  stored  in  your  mansion,  all 
the  precious  gems  of  these  three  world# ; steeds  and  ele- 
phants.  The  elephant  AirSvata,  yon  have  brought  from 
Purandara,  or  Indra,  the  tree  Pirijita,  Ukewbe  the  steed ' 

U.cchaisravS. 

‘ €ir  wilh  divine  swans  rtroittis  in  y^iir  miRslosi  ■ 

wMch  was  made  of  preciou#  stone#  to  the  astonishment  of 
Veda,  you  have  brought  the  Nidhi  and  Mahl-Padma  from  the ' 
god  of  riches. 


The  ocean. has  conferred  on  you  the  lotus  and  a garland 

of  unfading  lotus. 

The  gold  shedding  umbrella  of  Varuna  is  in  your  house> 
and  so  is  the  excellent  vehicle  of  Praj5pati,  who  passed, it 
formerly. 

Yqu  took  the  Sakti,  by  name  Utcranta,  the  cord  of  the 
king  of  waters,  was  occupied  by  your  brother. 

Vanhi  has  bestowed  on  Nisumbha,  all  sorts  of  gems  found 
in  the  sea  at  the  time  of  his  performing  his  holy  rites. 

0 sovereign  of  the  demons  j you  have  acquired  all  the 
precious  articles ; why  do  you  not  take  this  auspicious  female 
gem. 

The  RIshi  said,  Sumbha  was  constantly  listening  to  the 
speech  of  Chanda  and  Munda ; the  mighty  giant  sent  a mes- 
senger Sugriva,  to  the  goddess. 

Said  he,  “go  and  tell  her  that  I want  her;  convey  my 
errand  swiftly,  effect  the  mandate  you  are  sent  upon,  pleas- 
ing her  in  any  manner*’’ 

He  proceeded  to  tlje  mountain,  where  the  auspicious  wasS 
Motioned,  and  delivered  the  message  to  the  goddess,  endea- 
vouring to  move  her  with  mellifluous  accents. 

The  Duta  said,  0 Goddess  j Sumbha  is  the  lord  of  the 
Daityas,  he  is  a mighty  sovereign  of  the  three  worlds,  I am 
hi  s messenger  sent  by  him  hither. 

He  has  perpetual  and  unbounded  authority  over  all  the 
deities,  he  has  conquered  all  the  foes  of  Daityas,  hear  what 
he  says. 

1 possess  all  the  deities  of  the  three  worlds,  and  receive 
solely  all  the  sacrificial  oblations. 

1 have  gained  the  excellent  gems  of  the  three  worlds  ; 
the  precious  elephant  of  Indra,  he  humbly  delivered  to  me. 

I am  lord  also  of  the  horse,  named  Ucchaisravg.,  which  was 
producted  from  the  milky  ocean,  when  the  mighty  Sura^ 
churned  it. 


356 


MA«KANDRVA  PUftANAM. 


All  Ibe  precious  things  foun4  among  the  deities,  Gan- 
dliarvas  and  Uragas  are  mine. 

The  world  esteems  thee,  O Goddess  j as  a female  gem 
come  to  us  and  we  will  wear  thee. 

0 thou  of  the  darting  glance!  choose  either  meoriny 
valarous  younger  brother  Nisumbba,  who  are  the  possessors 
of  the  gems.  * 

You  shall  gain  abundant  and  unmeasured  wealth  by 
taking  me  ; consider  and  be  wise,  and  forthwith  possess  me. 

“ The  Rishi  said,”  the  goddess  with  a disdainful  smile, 
replied  to  him. 

"Devi  said,”  what  you  have  declared  is  true,  there  is  no 
falsehood  in  your  speech.  Sumbha  is  lord  of  the  three 
worlds,  and  so  is  Nisumbha. 

But  how  can  I repeal  my  determined  vow,  hear  what  I 
formerly  swore  to  without  consideration. 

That  whoever  can  vanquish  me  in  combat,  whoever  can 
oppress  my  pride,  whoever  is  equal  to  me  in  vigour  in  this 
world ; he  shall  be  ray  husband. 

Whether  Sumbha,  or  the  mighty  demon  Nisumbha,  call 
them  here  to  conquer  me,  I will  seize  their  hands  without 
delay. 

The  messenger  said,  how  do  you  arrogantly  say  this  in 
my  presence,  is  there  any  individual  in  the  three  worlds  able 
to. cope  with  Sumbha  and  Nishumbha. 

All  the  deities  united  were  unable  to  withstand  the  giants 
in  the  war,  then  how  canst  thou,  a single  woman,  resist  them. 

Indra  and  all  the  other  deities  could  not  cope  with  him ; 
how  could  it  be  possible  for  Sumhha  to  enter  into  the 
presence  of  a woman  ? You  will  be  obliged  at  last  to  go, 
disgracefully  dragged  by  the  liair,  to  Sumbha  and  Nishumbha. 

Devi  said,  "is  such  the  vigour  of  Sumbha,  and  is  such 
the  great  valor  of  Nisumbha  ( I have  formerly  resolved  and 
rowed  without  deliberation,  what  can  I do  now  ? 

Go  directly  and  reveal  to  your  master  all  that  I spoke, 


attd  appeal  to  the  Indra  ^of  dem'on$  ; awd  let  tlienl  ife  '#balt  is 
expedient. 

Thus  far  is  related  in  the  fifth  Chapter,  containing  fte 
conversation  of  the  goddess  and  messenger. 


CHAPTER  LXXXVI. 


TThe  Rishi  said,  hear  the  word  of  goddess  ! the  mes- 
senger transported  with  rage  went  to  the  king  of  Daityas, 
and  addressed  him  thus — 

0 sovereign  of  Asuras,  hearken  to  the  speech  of  your 
messenger,  he  then  related  the  whole  circumstances  to 
Nisumbha,  who  furiously  told  Dhumralochana,  (who  is  a 
superior  of  the  giants). 

0 Dhumralochana,*  surround  with  your  force  and  bring 
that  wreth  to  me,  forcibly  drag  her  into  my  presence  by  her 
hair. 

4f  there  is  one  remaining  to  protect  her,  bring  him  also 
whether  he  be  immortal,  Yaksha,  or  Gandharva. 

I 

The  Rishi  said,  the  giant  Dhumralochana,  as  directed, 
marched  accompanied  by  sixty  thousand  Asuras. 

To  the  goddess,,  resident  on  Tuhinachala,t  he  beheld 
her  arid  spoke  loudly,  '^come  to  Sumbha  and  ]Nishumbha. 

If  you  go  not  cheerfully,  I shall  convey  you  by  force  to 
my  King,  dragging  you  by  your  hair/^ 

Devi  said,  ^‘the  Lord  of  the  Daityas. has  sent  a valiant 
demon  with  an  army,  if  you  carry  me  away  what  can  I do  ?’' 


* Dhumralochana — liberally  smoky-eyed, 
t Tuhinachala— snowy  mountain. 


The  Rishi  said,  the*  gia„t  Dhumralorh 

She  funousfy  rose  and  made  a fnVhtfu 
Proved  the  force  of  Asuras  by  her  Hon/ 

each'^lfr'"*^  j ^eraons  she  dasf 

each  other  and  killed  the 

hy  the  blows  of  her  hand, 

The  lion  tore  some 

strokes  of  his  paws,  separs 

Havi 

the  lion, 


some  by  the 

hoi  '*',’1!^  by  Ih, 

hole  of  h.s  army  was  defeated  by  the 

g™'  Asi™ 

goi'r.xtCh.'r  h^r”''' 

■**  fs  related  iu  the  iIjpiIi  t. . 

humralochana,  general  of  V 'ncntioning  the 

I general  of  Sumbha  and  NianmM.™ 


^UMBHa  havin 
Munda  attended  1^ 
roarched  the  foremost 
The  goddess  be 
Stupendous 
The  demons 
accomplish  their  designs,  and  the 
bOw  dfew  near  to  her. 

Ahivika  then  became  terribly 
changed  her  face  into  a hideous  I 
Her  contracting  brows  oven 
terrific  faced  Kali  slung  her  Paga 
She  wore  a wonderful  Khutw 
of  human  skulls,  she  wore  a tig< 
dried.  ^ 

Her  mouth  expanded,  she  had 
red-tinged  eye,  her  front  filled  the 
She  furiously  fell  upon  the  Asu 
of  deities  and  devoured  their  force 
She  took  Parswagrahi  with  < 
Yadha-Ghumta,  with  the  other,  anc 
Likewise  the  troopers’  chariot 
threw  them  in  her  mouth, -.and  chev 
Ijorribly. 

She  laid  hold  of  some  by  their  h 
or  by  the  hand,  she  crushed  somt 
bosoms  of  others. 

She  wrathfully  swallowed  up  her 
powerful  arrows,  and  the  arms  of 
chewed  with  her  teeth. 


g directed  those 
by  four  sorts  of  I 
--  to  the  fight. 

'ng  on  the  lion 
golden  mountain,  saw  thei 
beheld  her  and  hicrii 


Chanda  and 
arms,  thev 


enemies 


360 


MARKaNDEYA  puranam. 


The  magnanimous  goddess  devoured  or  crushed  all  the 
forces  of  the  valiant  Asuras. 

She  killed  some  with  the  sword,  and  struck  some  with  the 

Khutwanga  weapon  ; the  giants  died  with  the  pressure  of  her 
teeth. 

In  a moment  all  the  forces  of  the  Asuras  fell ; Chanda 
beheld  it  and  ran  to  the  frightful  KHIi. 

The  mighty  Asura.with  a shower  of  numerous  and  tremen 

arrows,  and  ,ho™a„d.  o(  Chakras  apcodil,  tnv.lopad 
the  dreadful  eyed  goddess. 

^ Abundance  of  the  discuses  she  swallowed,  her  face 
became  as  the  orbit  of  the  sun  enveloped  by  the  clouds. 

Then  Kaii,  angrily  shouted  : her  voice  was  horrible,  her 
thouth  became  distended  and  frightful,  and  she  gnashed  her 
tremendous  teeth. 

The  goddess  made  her  lion  to  rise,  ran  at  Chanda,  and 

laying  hold  on  him  by  his  hair,  she  cut  off  his  head  with  her 
sword, 

After  this  Munda  seeing  the  fall  of  Chanda,  marched 
against  her,  she  made  him  to  fall  on  the  earth  and  fnstanta- 
killed  him  with  her  sword, 

thol!r  perceived  the  fall  of  Chanda,  and 

. ^ _iant  Mundri,  and  through  fear  retreated  in  all  directions. 

.;hn  ' 1 °°  of  Chanda,  likewise  of  Munda,  and 

shQutnigly.  exclaimed  to  ChandikS. 

I have  killed  the  great  beasts  Chanda  and  Munda,  you  will  • 
s|4y_Sa„jbha  and  Nisumbha,  in  the  sacrifice  of  battle. 

prosperous  m, 

as  thou  hast  brought  the  heads  of  the  great  demons 

Chanda  and  Munda,  you  shall  be  renowed  in  the  world  by 
we  name  of  CbamundH.” 

deaW  nf  comprising  thp 

death  of.  CJhanda.  and  Munda. 


chapter  LXXXYllI. 


1 HE  Rishi  said,  Chanda  was  killed  and  Munda  fell  their 
abundant  forces  were  diminished,  ’ 

The  bravest  lord  of  the  Asuras,  Sumbha  was  moved  to 
nger  and  directed  all  the  forces  of  the  demons  to  be  prepared, 
en  the  giants  of  various  forces  with  eighty-six  sorts  of 
arms,  eighty-four  kinds  of  cumboos,  set  out  in  legions 

One  hii  of  heroes,  fifty  thousand  of  the  giant  race  the 
tribes  of  Dhoumra  marched  by  his  order.  ’ 

Kihkas,  great  Mowryas,  and  likewise  Kalakeya,  directly 
prepared  for  battle  by  his  order.  ^ 

The  lord  of  the  Asuras,  the  frightful  leader  Sumbha  ad- 
vanced,  attended  by  myriads  of  cohorts.  ’ 

Chaiuiilti  viewing  the  approach  of  this  dreadful  armv 

"■«  ‘■•Ilf 

The  sound  of  the  roar  penetrated  to  the  e,l,.„etie,  of 
the  repons,  the  mouth  of  Devi  eapanded  hideously 

The  army  of  fhe  giaut,  having  heard  the  sound  ta  the  four 
wile  Khir°“^  --tounded  the  goddess,  the  lion,  uud  like- 

O king  I previous  to  the  time,  that  the  enemies  of  the  Su- 

Mmortut'' 

The  powers  of  Brahma,  Efa,  Guha,  Vishnu.  likewise  of 
Indra,  issued  from  their  bodies  and  proceeded  on  their  respec 
tive  forms  towards  Chandika.  respec- 

The  similar  forms  with  their  vehicles,  ornaments,  and  valour 
of  the  deities  went  to  fight  with  the  giants 
46 


with  a strinff  of  heads,  and  a piccner  ot  water  in  ner  hand,  she 
was  called  Bralimani. 

M^heswari  rode  on  the  ox,  she  held  an  excellent  trident, 
great  serpents  were  coiled  round  her,  she  was  adorned  by  the 
signal  crescent. 

Koumari  held  a Sakti  in  her  hand,  she  was  mounted  on  an 
ekcellent  Mayura,  and  proceeded  in  the  form  of  Ouha  to  fight 
with  the  giants. 

Vaishnavi  sitting  on  the  Garuda,  held  the  conch,  dis- 
cus, mace,  SSrana,  and  a sword  in  her  hand  and  marched 
cmt. 

Hari  assumed  the  peerless  form  of  Yagna-Varaha,  took 
the  form  of  the  boar  and  attended  there  in  a terrific  shape, 

Narasimha  assumed  the  dreadful  body  of  Narasimhi,  and 
with  her  mane  extinguished  the  constellation. 

Indri,  holder  of  Vajra,  Was  mounted  on  a mighty  elephant 
having  one  thousand  eyes  like  Sakra. 

E5lna  Was  surrounded  by  the  Sakti,*  of  the  deities,  and 
said  to  Chandika,  “kill  directly  the  Asuras  for  my  satisfac- 
tion.” 

The  implacable  power  of  ChandikH  proceeded  from  the 
body  of  the  goddess  in  a dreadful  form,  named  Siva,  whose 
voice  increased  an  hundredfold. 

She  said  to  Egana,  (who  was  smoky-hued,  unattainable, 
ah'd  a divine  messenger),  “go  to  Sumbha  and  Nisumbna. 

' Tell  those  proud  giants  to  prepare  for  war,  together  with 
the  other  demons. 

- • Irtdra  Sshall  resornd  the  three  worlds,  and  gods  will  devour 
the  sacrificial  oblations  : if  they  wish  to  live,  let  them  go  to' 
t%aik. 

" If  they  '^resdtfre  to  wage  war  with  me,  the  jackals  shall  be 
glutted  with  their  flesh.  > 

^ powQm.  ' 


^AUKANDfYA  fURAMAM. 


* As  Siva  sept  the  message  bjr  the  gedde^s  tp  the  giants 
she  was  called  a Siva-DutS,  or  Slva^s  messenger  in  thJjf 
wopld. 

The  great  Asura  having  hearkened  to  the  message  of  the 
gpddess  sent  by  Siva,  was  transported  with  rage  and  repaired 
to  the  place  where  K^ttyani  lived. 

First  the  enemies  of  the  immortals  furiously  rained  show- 
ers of  arrows  and  Saktis  on  the  goddess. 

She  in  turn  discharged  the  great  arrows  from  her  boyv  a^d 
sportively  cut  off  their  arrows  by  her  trident,  Chakra  and  Pa- 
rusu. 

In  their  front  Kali  struck  them  with  her  trident,  and  with 
the  Khutwanga  and  achieved  mighty  deeds. 

Brahmani  destroyed  wherever  she  went,  the  heroic  and 
Valliant  enemies,  by  pouring  water  from  her  Kamandalp  on 
them. 

Maheswari,  by  her  trident,  likewise  Vaishnavi  with  her 
discus,  Kaumari  with  her  wrathful  Sakti  killed  the  giants. 

Indri  pierced  one  hundred  decnons,  and  evil  gepies  wich 
her  Kuhfa,  and  threw  them  on  the  earth,  their  Wood 
gushed  out 

Brahmamurti  broke  their  breasts  with  the  discus. 

By  her  nails,  she  tore  and  devoured  many  of  the  great 
Asuras;  Narasimhi  talked  in  the  battle ; her  voice  filled  the 
directions  and  sky. 

The  goddess  shouted;  she  struck  the  dpmons  to  the 
ground  and  devoured  them. 

The  chief  amazons  detested  the  mighty  Asuras,  and  the 
Various  demons  were  ineffectual,  and  having  overcome  their 
nfteasures  and  stratagems,  the  warriors,  adversaries  of  god, 
fled  away. 

Seeing  the  retreat  of  the  Daityas,  the  great  demon 
^ackta-Bija,  (whose  blood  is  a seed),  became  enraged  and 
l^roceeded  to  fight. 


3^4 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


When  a drop  of  the  blood  from  his  body  fell  on  the  earth ; 
it  produced  the  same  sized  giants  from  the  ground.  ; 

The  great  demon  holding  a mace  in  his  hand,  fought  with 
Indri,  who  held  the  Sakti  Vajra. 

He  was  struck  by  the  Kulifa,  the  blood  gushed  out:  other 
demons  immediately  arose  of  similar  form  and  valour. 

Equal  in  number  to  the  drops  of  blood  that  fell  from  his 
body,  demons  of  the  same  heroism,  vigour  and  fortitude,  were 
produced. 

By  the  severe  beating  of  the  weapons  of  the  chief 
amazons  as  also  by  the  cut  of  the  Va)ra,  his  head  fell  off. 

When  the  blood  was  streaming,  thousands  of  demons 
were  produced  by  it;  Vaishnavi  beat  him  in  the  battle  with 
her  discus. 

Indri  smote  the  lord  of  giants  with  her  mace ; Vaishnavi 
struck  him  with  her  discus,  and  the  blood  was  spilt. 

Thousands  of  the  giants  of  the  same  feature  abounded 
in  this  world;  KaumStri  beat  him  with  her  Sakti;  likewise 
VarShi  with  her  sword. 

BrShmani,  with  a cudgel  of  BrShnaani,  and  Narasimhi 
tore  him  with  her  claws, 

Maheswari  beat  on  the  bosom  of  the  great  giant  Rackta- 
Bija  with  her  trident  for  be  did  not  move. 

He  being  surrounded  by  the  enraged  chief  amazons, 
severely  beat  them  with  his  clubs. 

He  tcut  off  abundant  of  the  Sakties,  tridents,  and  so  forth 
and  made  a hundred  to  fail  on  the  earth. 

The  giants  produced  by  the  blood  thronged  over  all  the 
world ; the  gods  afterwards  were  overwhelmed  by  fear. 

ChandikS.  looked  at  the  discomfitted  Suras,  and  speedily 
said. to  Kali,  “O  Chaniunda  open  your  mouth  widely. 

Great  Aspras  are  produced  by  the  drops  of  the  blood  of 

lUckn-Bija,  you  must  instantaneously  lick  up  the  lood  before 
it  falls  to  the  ground. 


- 365 

* DevoMT  the  blood  before  the  demons  are  pfodliced;  the 
Daityas  will  be  diminished  and  become  void  of  blood. 

If  you  do  this  they  never  can  spring  up  again/' saying 
thus^the  goddess  pierced  them  with  her  trident. 

Kill  sucked  up  the  blood  of  Rackta-Bija  ; ChandikS  beat 
him  violently  with  her  mace. 

By  the  vehement  beatings  of  the  clubs,  a profusion  of 
blood  gushed  out  all  over  bis  body. 

Chandika  licked  it  up  ; ChSmunda  drank  his  blood. 

Devi  by  her  trident,  arrows,  sword,  and  fists  killed  Rackta- 
Bija,  and  drank  his  blood. 

He  being  overwhelmed  by  a number  of  arrows,  O Ruler 
of  the  earth!  the  mighty  demon  Rackta-Bija,  fell  on  the 
earth,  and  became  void  of  blood. 

Afterward  the  deities  felt  the  highest  degree  of  pleasure, 
the  chief  amazons  proudly  danced. 

Thus  extends  the  eighth  Chapter,  mentioning  the  death 
of  the  Rackta-Bija. 


chapter  LXXX  X. 


1 HE  Rajah  said,  '^0  divine  one  ! you  have  disclosed  to 
me  the  wonderful  story,  and  the  sacred  action  of  the  goddess, 
which  exterminated  Rackta-Bija. 

I am  now  desirous  of  hearing  the  actions  of  Sumbha,'  and 
the  excessive  anger  of  Nisumbha. 

The  Rishi  said,  at  the  death  of  Rackta-Bija,  and  others 
in  battle.  Sumbha  and  Nisumbha  were  uncommonly  enraged- 


366 


MARKAN0SYA  FURANilM 


Seeing  their  immenae  army  destroyed,  the  demons  tvere 
filled  with  ire.  Nisumbha  ran  to  their  succour  with  consider*^ 
able  reinforcement. 

In  the  front,  rear,  and  flanks,  he  was  attended  by  mighty 
giants,  who  were  wrathfully  biting  their  lips,  and  meditating 
the  death  of  the  goddess. 

The  mighty  Asura  Sumbha,  surrounded  by  his  force, 
fought  with  the  chief  amazons,  and  furiously  proceeded  to*, 
wards  Chandiki, 

Sumbha  and  Nisumbha  then  commenced  a dreadful  com- 
bat with  the  goddess,  and  shot  powerful  showers  of  arrows, 
thick  as  clouds  of  rain. 

ChandikS.  cut  them  to  pieces  witli  her  own  parts,  and 
pierced  both  the  chief  Asuras  with  several  arrows. 

Nisumbha  then  took  his  keen  sword  and  resplendent 
shield,  and  struck  on  the  head  of  the  lion,  the  noble  convey- 
ance of  the  goddess. 

When  her  excellent  aiumal  was  beaten,  Chicbura  took 
a sharp  sword  and  cut  in  two  pieces,  the  shield  of  Nisumbha, 
called  Asta-Chandra.* 

That  Asura  after  his  shield  was  destroyed,  shot  a Sakti, 
but  as  it  was  whizzing  towards  her,  the  goddess  cleft  it  in 
twain  with  her  discus. 

Then  Nisumbha  made  a furious  charge  with  his  Sula ; the 
goddess  pulverized  the  hostile  weapon  witli  her  fist. 

The  demon  then  swung  his  mace  at  ChandikI,  but  the 
goddess  by  her  trident  reduced  it  to  calx  instantaneously. 

After  this  disappointment,  the  chief  of  the  Daitayas  seized 
a battle  axe  and  approached  Devi,,  she  levelled  the  warrior  tO' 
the  earth  with  her  arrows. 

When  the  dreadful  Nisumbha  fell  to  the  ground,  htg 
lifother  burning  with  fire  repaired  to  kill  Amvikl. 

..  Being  mounted  on  his  chariot,  he  grasped  h!s  missiles, 


Mi^SKANQfiYtA  PtlMAMM/-  3^ 

ah4  potent  implemeti-t,  and  with  unequafled  vora:  peftetrated 
over  all  the  sky, 

Thte  goddess  perceived  his  conaing  and  sounded  her  conch 
and  her  bow-string,  the  noise  of  which  was  insupportable,  ' 
The  sound  of  her  bell  filled  the  etherial  space  ; the  diffe- 
rent detachments  of  the  Daityas  were  dismayed.  ■ ■ 

The  hon  lustily  roared,  the  sound  penetrated  the  sky  earth 
aftd  the  ten  directions. 

Afterwards  Kali  leaped  up  towards  heaven  and  kicked  the  ' 

ground,  at  the  piercing  sound  of  her  voice  the  giants  ■ 
vanished. 

Siva-Duti,  shouted  at  the  misfortune  of  the  Asura  the 
noise  reached  the  giant  Sumbha  who  furiously  proceeded 
towards  the  goddess. 

Amvika  said  to  him,  O impious  wretch  i stand'  stand* 

the  gods  immortal  inhabitants  of  the  sky  have  cried  "victor# 
to  be  thee  ^ 

Sumbha  discharged  a Sakti,  which  issuing  in  a terrific 
flame,  became  a mass  of  fire,  she  opposed  him  with  a 
Maholka. 

The  lion  like  voice  of  Sumbha,  overspread  the  three  world  ’ 
(Oh  lord  of  the  earth)!  by  the  appalling  sound  of  it,  he  hoped 
to  conquer.  , . ; 

The  goddess  cut  off  the  arrows  of  Sumbha,  by  her  own 
shafts,  into  hundreds  and  thousands  of  pieces. 

Chandika,  was  enraged,  and  struck  him  with  her  trident: 
the  giant  thereon  fainted  and  fell  on  the  earth. 

Nisurnbha  having  revived,  took  his  bow  and  beat  the  god- 
dess Kali,  and  the  lion  with  bis  arrows- 

The  king  of  giants,  with,  ten  thousand  arms,  enveloped 
Chandika,  with  numerous  weapons,  discuses,  and  arrows. 

■ Then  the  goddess,  the  iniccessihlfc,  thfe  subduer  of  various 
ills,  being  enraged  cut  off  those  direful  weapons  with  her  ar-  : 
rows  into  hundred  pieces.  ...  ; ; , 


368  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

Nisumbfia  swiftly  took  the  club,  (and  attended  by  hjg 
giant’s  forces),  ran  to  kill  Chandikl. 

The  goddess  destroyed  his  club  and  threw  her  keen  sword 
the  demon  took  a trident. 

Nisumbha,  the  oppressor  of  immortals,  was  going  to  Chan- 
dika,  she  broke  his  bosom  with  a Sula,  with  a mace  fixed 
to  it. 

His  bosom  being  broke,  another  demon  came  out  of  him 
the  goddess  smiled  and  cut  off  his  head  with  her  sword,  and 
he  fell  on  the  earth. 

By  the  teeth  of  the  lion,  by  Kali  and  Siva-Duti,  other 
giants  were  decapitated. 

Koumari  destroyed  some  giants  by  her  Sakti ; Brahman! 
with  her  enchanted  water  slew  others. 

Maheswari  demolished  some  by  her  trident  Varihi  by  beat- 
ing reduced  them  to  powder  on  the  earth. 

Vaishnavi,  with  her  discus,  crushed  the  giants  to  pieces; 
Indri  with  her  weapon  Vajra  killed  others. 

Many  of  the  giants  retreated,  many  were  annihilated  in 
that  horrible  war,  Kali,  Siva-Duti  and  the  great  lion  devoured 
others. 

Thus  far  is  related  in  ninth  Chapter,  comprising  the  des- 
truction  of  Nisumbha. 


CHAPTER  XC. 


The  Rishi  said,  Sumbha  perceived  the  discomfittirf  ftf 
his  lorces,  and  tke  death  of  his  brother  Nisumbha,  who  w» 
dear  to  him  as  bis  own  sout),  and  furiously  said. 


MARKAJjoe  vll' ' 


" Darga  1 do  not  be  prbud  « " O rttlmrtrtA.f 

you  prevail  by  the  aid  of  others.”  niodest  one  I 

Devi  said,  "l  am  alone,  who  is  &ere  besides  • *t-* 

»-ia.  “ O profligM.  o.,  1 behold,  h u " ! , 

lliat  IS  created  into  many  forms,"  ^ ”” 

As  she  spoke  Brahmani  and  the  other  or.rl^s=;  j 

tions,  and  powers  coalesced  to  her  Spirit  - the^^'^rl 

became  alone  and  sole.  ^ ^ §o'^‘iess  then 

Devi  said,  “ I can  assume  at  will  several  f i ■ 
sbalUetain  one  form  only,  meet  me  therefore  in  Me  ” 

The  Rish.  said,  after  tins  challenge  Sumbhl  and  th 
goddess  began  a fierce  combat;  the  gods  and  dd-  I 

spectators  of  this  dreadful  encounter.  ™ons  stood 

With  showers  of  arrows,  powerful  weapons  and  c 1 

cr„.,^t,,cy  both  dcsparotCy  fooght  for  the  o^T' 

0.  ttrsfjr o'ppi^fd  rr'by 

Parameawari  sportively  destroyed  his  holy  arrows  bi/  the 

sound  of  her  voice  HumeSra.  /the 

Th,  Aror>  corcrod  the  godde,  b„,<,,od,  of  ir„„, 
she  gtowmg  d,  deefroyed  his  bo»  with  her  dWo#,.  . 

The  .chief  of  the  giants,  having  Idsl  this  weapon,  speedity 

yetrL^taS'  !■ 

‘f’e  shield 

fhe'oir"  He  ran  furiously  towards 

(ihandika  cut  through  his  sword  and  discharged  her  keen 
arrows,  pure  as  the  beams  of  the  sun. 

a trim!  ^ow,  seised 

a tiemv-nuous  Mudgara,  intending  to  kill  Amvika. 

his  ^ ™ l-e,  with 


47 


markandeya  puranam. 


Hft  hastily  shot  a musti,  she  made  it  to  fall ; and  struck  the 
bosom  of  the  chief  of  the  Daityas. 

. The  severity  of  the  blow  felled  him  to  the  earth  ; the  king 
of  giants  speedily  rose  up  again,  and  flew  up  to  heaven  with 
the  desire  of  laying  hold  on  the  goddess ; though  he  was 
incumbent  in  the  skies,  he  fought  with  ChandikS. 

They  mutually  fought  in  the  sky,  and  perform'  d wondrous 
feats  in  battle,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  sages  and  angels 
. By  leaping,  turning,  and  casting  each  other  on  the  earth ; 
they  fought  a long  while. 

, The  ill  disposed  descended  to  the  earth,  directly  closing 
his  fist  with  an  intention  of  killing  ChandikS. 

The  goddess  saw  the  lord  of  giants,  coming  and  pierced 
his  bosom  with  her  trident,  and  made  him  to  fall  on  the 
ground. 

He  yielded  his  life,  being  transfixed  by  the  trident  of  the 
goddess;  as  he  fell  on  the  earth,  the  seven  islands  and 
mountains  moved. 

Every  one  was  delighted  at  the  death  of  the  miscreant, 
the  world  was  in  peace ; the  sky  became  serene. 

, The  clouds  dissolved  in  air;  inauspicious  omens,  hence- 
forth ceased  ; while  the  sun  beams  converged  as  usual ; and 
the  rivers  flowed  in  the  beds  a.ssigned  them. 

. All  the  gods  were  filled  with  joy ; Gandharvas,  on  his 
death  pleasantly  sang. 

Others  shouted.  Apsarls  danced  | hallowing  breezes  began 
to  blow ; the  sun  became  resplendent. 

The  inflaming  fire  moderated } the  noise  of  the  elephants 
of  the  regions  was  hushed ; the  planets  revolved  in  peace ; 
tfte  moon  enlightened  the  whole  firmament. 

Thus  far  is  related  in  the  tenth  Chapter,  containing  the 
4eath  of  Sumbha. 


CHAPTER  XCI. 


The  RiSHI  said,  when  the  chief  of  the  Asuras  was  killed 
by  the  goddess,  ladra,  Suras,  and  Vanhi  appeared  before  her, 
and  with  joyful  countenances  advanced  to  greet  KStySni  for 
the  favor  slie  had  conferred  on  them. 

0 goddess  i thy  countenance  removes  the  grievances  of 
thy  people,  thou  art  the  beneficent  mother  of  .the  whole 
universe.  O sovereign  of  the  world  1 save  the  earth. 

, Mayest  thou  preserve  the  world;  thou  art  • the  goddess 
of  animates  and  inanimates. 

Thou  dost  sustain  alone  the  world  in  the  torm  of  the  earth, 
.0  parragoii  of  heroism  i thou  as  water  refreshest  all  the 
people. 

^ Thou  art  the  power  of  Vaishnavi,  thy  valour  is  endless,  thou 
art  the  element  of  the  universe,  thou  art  the  supreme  illusionj 
O goddess  [ thou  bindest  all  things  in  love,  thou  art  the  great 
first  cause,  thou  art  the  bestower  of  salvation  on  the  earth^ 
thou  art  the  essence  of  all  sciences,  thou  art  the  rich  one; 
thou  fillest  all  things,— who  can  praise  thy  holy  eloquence  ? 

Thou  art  the  bestower  of  heaven,  and  salvation  on  all 
creatures  ; what  expression  can  sufficiently  applaud  thee?  * 

1 salute  thee,  O goddess ! NirSyani,  who  liveth  in  the 
hearts  of  thy  subjects,  as  a form  of  intellect,  and  giveth  to 
paradise  a local  and  unperishable  abode. 

I salute  Narayani,  who  protects  all  things  in  a spiritual 
and  material  form,  she  is  the  over-ruling  power  of  ih6 
universe.  ‘ 

I salute  NSlrSlyani,  who  is  the  auspicious  bestower  of  pros- 
perity, happiness,  and  every  desire;  who  is  the  conferer  of 
obligations,  who  is  three  eyed  and  brown.  . ^ * i 


372 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


I salute  Narlyani,  who  has  power  to  create,  preserve,  and 
destroy ; who  is  the  reservoir  of  virtue  from  all  ages. 

I salute  the  goddess  NarSyani  who  saveth  those  that  seek 
her  protection,  who  comfortelh  the  wretched  and  grieved  ; 
who  is  the  dispeller  of  all  sorrows. 

I salute  NatSyani,  who  sits  mounted  on  a car,  drawn  by 
divine  swans,  who  asumes  the  form  of  Cr5hmani,  and  eats 
vegetables. 

I salute  NarSyani,  holder  of  the  Sura.s,  Chundra,  Jyuda,* 
who  rides  on  t!)e  ample  ox  in  the  form  of  Maheswari. 

I salute  Namyani,  attended  by  the  peacock,  and  holder  of 
the  mighty  mountain  on  her  nails  who  acquired  the  form  of 
Kaum3.ri. 

I salute  NarSyani,  the  posse.ssor  of  the  Sanka,  Chakra, 
Gads,  and  Sarna ; who  favors  all  in  the  form  of  Vai.shivavi. 

I salute  NarSyani,  who  took  the  ample  Ch.ikra,  and  sus- 
^ned  the  earth  on  her  proboscis,  in  the  form  of  VarSha  and 
Siva. 

I salute  NSrSyani,  who  assumed  the  wrathful  form  of 
Nrisimhi,  and  slew  the  giaiit.s  to  preserve  the  three  worlds. 

I salute  NSrSyani,  who  is  crowned  Indra,  the  holder  of  the 
Vajra,  who  glowes  with  one  thousand  eyes,  the  drawer  of  the 
soul  of  Vritra. 

I salute  NSrSyani,  who  destroyed  t!>e  valiant  giants,  in 
the  form  of  Siva  Duti,  whose  form  was  dreadful  in  the  great 
battle. 

I salute  NSrSyani,  whose  teeth  and  mout!>  are  frightful 
like  the  lions;  and  who  is  adorned  by  a necklace  of  skulls; 
the  crusher  of  the  head  of  ChSmundS ; tho  modest  j the  omni... 
scient ; the  faithful ; and  strong  Swadha ; the  steady ; the 
pighty  ; and  the  skilled  in  abundant  arts. 

I salute  NSrSyani,  .who  is  intelligence  and  excellence; 
Sa|-4wati;  the  bestower  of  prosperity;  the  wrathful ; the 
ftttsiece;  aai  the  giver  of  all  benefits. 

I salute  the  godd^  DargS*  who  has  nsaiofold  forms;  who 


MARKANDEYI^  tlfRANAM. 


373 


is  Itie  lord  of  all  things  : abounding  with  different  po^wers  ; 
the  saviour  of  the  fearful. 

I salute  Katytni,  whose  face  is  mild  ; who  is  adorned  with 
three  eyes ; who  preserves  all  creatures. 

I salute  Bhadra-Kali,  whose  face  is  terrific;  who  destroyed 
the  whole  race  of  giants  5 may  such  a trident  guard  the 
fearful. 

May  the  bell  of  the  goddess,  the  sound  of  which  has 
appalled  the  energy  of  the  giants,  and  penetrated  through  all 
the  worlds  : preserve  us  as  its  childern. 

We  prostrate  ourselves  to  Chandika,  whose  exquisitely 
bright  sword  was  stained  by  the  blood  and  flesh  of  the  giants; 
and  became  the  instrument  of  the  death  of  Sumbha. 

Thou  healing  from  all  kind  of  disorders,  givest  pleasure 
and  strength  to  all  people  ; those  that  desire  to  follow  thee, 
shall  not  feel  distress,  but  will  be  restored. 

Thou  hast  destroyed  the  great  Asuras,  who  are  the  enemies, 
of  virtue,  by  thy  actions  and  transfigurations. 

Thou  art  supremely  exalted  in  the  sciences;  in  knowledge; 
in  wisdom  ; in  eloquence  ; in  virtuous  practice  ; the  vrorld  is 
overwhelmed  in  the  excess  of  thy  love. 

7*hou  dwellest  even  among  venomous  serpents  ; amongst 
hardened  and  depraved  robbers;  ane  where  there  are  com- 
bustibles and  fire  5 thou  art  in  the  sea,  and  thou  supportest 
the  world. 

O Goddess  of  the  universe!  thou  shouldest  preserve  the 
world,  thou  pervadest  through  the  world  holding  it.  The 
world  prostrates  itself  to  thee ; thou  art  followed  by  the 
world ; thou  art  faithfully  loved  by  the  world. 

O Goddess  1 protect  and  preserve  the  people  from  the  fear 
of  enemies,  by  destroying  always  the  giants,  as  thou  didst  of 
late  : extinguish  the  sins  of  the  world,  which  proceed  from 
accidental  causes. 

0 Goddess  1 thou  shouldest  favour  him,  who  humbly  bows  * 
O dispeller  of  universal  alarm  ! the  inhabitants  of  the  three 


?374 


MARKANOEYA  PURANAM. 


worlds,  shall  prostrate  themselves  to  thee ; O bless  the 
people  ! 

Devi  said,  “O  band  of  Suras  t I will  bless  you  ; ask,  and  I 
will  bestow  what  you  desire,  for  the  benefit  of  the  gods." 

The  Devas  replied,  "0  supreme  godde.ss  of  the  three 
worlds  1 we  solicit  thee  to  expel  all  danger  and  destroy  our 
enemies  ; this  is  thy  task." 

Devi  said,  on  the  twoniy-eigluh  age  of  Vibhasvvatta,  Sura- 
bha,  and  Nisumbha,  shall  he  regenerated. 

I shall  reside  on  the  moiuitain  of  Vindhya,  I shall  be  born 
in  the  race  of  cowherds  in  the  womb  of  Yasoda,  and  destroy 
them. 

I shall;be  incarnate  on  the  earth,  and  shall  slay  the  great 
giant  Viprochitta, 

I shall  have  my  teeth  red,  like  pomegranate  flowers,  then 
all  tlie  gods  and  mankind  shall  give  me  applause  and  call  me 
conslanily  Racta-DauticH. 

A famine  shall  happen  for  one  hundred  years  without  raiui* 
being  greteed  by  the  sages  I .sliall  be  self-born. 

Then  shall  I look  at  the  sages  with  one  hundred  eyes, 
therefore  mortals  will  call  me  Satakshi,  (or  hundred  eyes,)  , 

The  whole  world  shall  subsist  by  the  divine  vegetable, 
which  shall  be  produced  from  my  body  until  the  rain  shall  fall. 

I shall  be  esteemed  in  the  earth  by  the  name  of  Sacura- 
bhari,  the  preserver  by  vegetables,  I shall  be  denominated 
Durga  Devi. 

I again  shall  assume  a dreadful  form  on  the  mountain 
Himadiala,  and  devour  the  giants  to  protect  the  sages  : all 
the  ascetics  will  bow  and  applaud  me, 

I shall  be  called  Bhim&-Devi,  when  Aruna  shall  disturb 
the  three  world  ; then  I shall  turn  a roving  beettle. 

I will  destroy  the  great  giant  for  the  advantage  of  these 
thfee  worlds : ah  wUl  applaud  me  by  the  name  of  Bramhani 
in-thfe,w.o#^i., ^ . ..r 


MARKANBEYAr  PURAMitM. 


37  S 

Whenever  disturbances  shall  arise  from  the  giants,  then 
I shall  incarnate  and  destroy  the  enemies, 
j 'fhus  far  is  related  in  the  eleventh  Chapter,  mentioning 
the  d^ath  of  Sumbha  and  Nisumbha. 


.00 


CHAPTER  XCII, 


Devi  said,  he  who  forever  joyfully  applauds  me,  him 
I will  undoubtedly  shield  from  all  kinds  of  danger. 

; Whoever  recites  the  dissolution  of  Madhu  and  Kaitabha, 
and  the  destruction  of  Mahishasura  ; likewise  the  death  of 
Sumbha  and  Nisumbha, 

On  the  Astami  or  eighth,  Navami  or  ninth,  Chaturdasi 
or  fourteenth,  with  an  intent  and  pure  heart  and  faithfully 
praise  of  my  noble  actions,  ^ 

They  shall  incur  no  manner  of  sin,  shall  never  be  exposed 
to  distress,  and  never  suffer  any  trouble,  or  feel  any  pain. 

Nor  shall  he  be  in  fear  of  foes,  or  thieves,  or  fire,  sword, 
or  water,  at  any  period. 

Therefore  my  actions  should  at  all  times  be  chaunted  in 
peace  voluntarily ; and  always  be  heard  with  joy. 

All  the  dangers  of  evil  and  the  three  different  plagues,'^^ 
shall  be  counteracted  by  my  meritorious  deeds. 

Whoever  daily  attentively  reads  my  words  in  his  house 
I shall  not  leave,  but  dwell  in  his  presence. 

During  the  offering  of  food  to  Bali  worship,  fire  oblation. 


* ’•‘  Three  different  plagues,  viz,,  Adhi-Infirmity,  Viadhi-disease,  and 
Itlbadha — annoyance  by  animals. 


376 


karkakdeya  puranam 


or  festival,  mankind  should  completely  read  and  hear  my 
actions. 

Whoever  either  knowingly  or  ignorantly  gives  the  offer- 
ing, food,  or  fire  oblation  ; 

Whoever  yearly  performs  the  adoration  in  the  Sarat  (or 
sultry  season),  and  hears  willingly  my  action  recited,  they 
will  undoubtedly  obtain  my  favour. 

Whoever  hears  my  consecration,  pro.sperity  will  attend 
him,  and  he  shall  be  brave  in  combat. 

Their  enemies  shall  be  de.stroyed ; the  rich  will  attend, 
and  listen  to  my  miracles  the  race  of  mankind  will  b» 
pleased. 

Every  where,  when  the  preliminary  ceremonies  are  per- 
formed, evH  dreams,  the  inau.sjncious  aspect  of  the  planets 
shall  cease  during  the  recital  of  my  actions.  i 

The  disturbances,  the  malignant  influence  of  the  placets 
will  discontinue,  unlucky  dreams  shall  turn  out  prosperous^  ' 

Evils  to  which  children  are  liable  fioin  demons,  I will  re- 
move, and  heal  the  breach  of  friendship  in  my  people. 

By  reading  it  with  strict  faith,  the  strength  of  all  ill- 
disposed-persons,  the  giants,  demons,  and  evil  spirits,  shall 
be  destroyed  j 

Wliocver  brings  me  an  offering  of  noble  beasts,  of 
flowers,  Arghya  incense,  sandal  and  tapers  ; 

Whoever  feeds,  the  Vipras,  performs  the  various  rites  of 
the  Homa,  every  day  and  night ; 

Pleases  me  throught  a year,  and  hearkens  to  my  actions,  ■ 
shall  have  their  sins  remitted  and  shall  obtain  the  blessings  ; 
of  earth. 

I will  preserve  all  creatures,  who  read  of  my  birth  and 
deeds  in  words  comprising  the  dissolution  of  the  wicked  ; 
giants. 

They  ^all  not  be  in  fear  of  foes  and  shaU  obtain  the  ^ 
praise  o!  sacred  sages. 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 

This  is  ordained  by  Brahmi  who  provides  for  the  pros- 
perous  wise.  If  in  the  skirt«  nt  (■!».»  'u  ^ 

devouring  fire;  «^ilderness  parched  by 

While  surrounded  by  robbeirs  in  Ibe  plain,  attacked  by  the 
lion,  tigers,  or  wild  elephants  ; ^ 

persl\ccu^ed\T'^^'‘^-'‘"‘^^^  t«>r  bwd,ftr  ^ecute  a 

When  in  d ’ ^”7  ane  fail  m the  wide  ocean  ; 

, tootle  when  m imminent  risk  and  tormented  by  pain- 
him  hiraffl-  actions,  I will  remove  from 

Htn  his  afflictions  though  they  be  as  fierce  as  the  lion 

Z be  dispelled, 

e I?.ishi  said,  the  warlike  goddess  Chandika  while 

ished,  and  the  gods  regained  their  former  authoritiel 
without  any  obstruction.  ,«».  tnorities 

Tbuu  enemies  being  destroyed,  they  enjoyed  the  sacri- 
fic.^  oblations,  after  .the  demons  and  Snmbba  yere  plain 

m "“Vb  p«bflei«  atlJ 

^MrNip«bm.,ng  dead,  the  .urvisjng 

o King  I tbe  diyUw  goddes,  pras  r.p„ud|y  incarnated  to 
preserve  the  world,  she  shakles  and  creates  the  universe  ’ 
bbe  gives  knowledge,  pleasure,  intellect.  O sovereign 

J?-  V-c'  “""e'"’"'  globe  ol  Btahmi.  , 

ill  ' ‘I’O  form  ol  a grept  goddess,  the  high 

lllpsion,  Ihe  ancient,  creates  the  world  occasionally  ^ 
neriof  r”"!*’  :®'*’'''  “ ‘'''‘‘''l'^  '''l'”=  P'oP‘«i”fulor. 

period  where  she  is  not  present  their  mislortnnes  cause  rin 

hoeyet  ptmse,  "otships  her  tyilb  flowers,' sandal 
««se,^.ds,  .lorth,sh=  gives  t^.m  pmsperiiy,  ok“i„;: 

TMdP  ^Ar  c^ttend.  the  twelfth  Chapter,  mentioning  the 
advsw)|:^g^s  of  praying  to  the  goddess.  ^ 

48  " 


CHAPTER  XCm. 


0 King,  these  are  the  excellent  actions  of  tlie  Devi 
I mentioned  now,  such  is  this  glorious  goddess,  the  holder  of 
the  universe. 

The  illusion  of  the  divine  Vishnu  constructed  this  vast 
machine;  by  her,  you,  the  Vysa,  and  others  are  being  bound 
in  love. 

0 chief  sovereign,  go  to  the  assylutn  of  the  goddess, 
whoever  adores  her,  will  enjoy  both  Iieaven  and  earth. 

MJlrkaudeya  said,  Surdha,  hearkened  to  his  words;  the 
chief  of  mankind,  the  possessor  of  great  shares,  prostrated 
himself  before  him  and  made  a vow. 

Being  puzzled  by  love,  and  deprived  of  his  kingdom,  he 
instantly  repaired  to  perform  devotion. 

The  Vy.sa  remained  on  the  shoal  of  the  river  to  have  an 
interview  with  goddes.s. 

fie  performed  the  devotion  praying,  repeating  the  Devi- 
Sukli,  he  made  a clay  form  of  the  gorldess  on  the  shoal,  and 
invoked  her  with  flowers,  incense,  Arghya,  Tarpana,  and  other 
offerings. 

He  mortified  his  body,  and  in  this  manner  he  worshipped 
for  three  years. 

Chandika,  the  matron  of  the  world,  being  pleased,  appear- 
ed to  him,  and  said,  "0  King,  Prince  of  a goodly  tribe  j I 
have  heard  you  pray,  and  cheerfully  bestow  on  you  all  you 
request. 

M&rkandeya  said,  the  monarch  being  distressed,  entreated 
her  to  restore  his  realm,  vanquished  by  the  arms  of  his 
enemies. 

He  Vysa,  having  a susceptible  heart,  implored  from  her 
wisdom,  and  abstraction  from  social  and  secular  concerns. 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


379 


Devi  said  to  the  king,  O lord  of  men  f you  will  destroy 
your  enemies  and  resume  your  kingdom  ; you  shall  afterwards 
die  and  be  regenerated  as  Vibhaswata,  by  the  name  of 
Savarnika  Manu  of  the  earth. 

O excellent  Vysa,  according  to  your  desires  you  shall 
obtain  wisdom,  the  goddess  thus  blessed  them  and  granted 
their  desires;  she  then  vanished.  Suradha,  the  chief  Chatrey- 
ah,  having  thus  obtained  her  blessings,  became  Savurni  Manu 
in  his  next  birth. 

Thus  far  is  related  in  the  thirteenth  Chapter,  containing 
the  plaudits  of  Chandikii,  and  ends  Chandipat  Parvas. 


IYIarkandrya  said: — I have  thus  related  tAyou  {« 
the  Manwantam  of  Manu  Slvarni,  the  glories  of  the  goddMt 
and  the  destruction  of  the  hnflalloe-faced  demon  (i); 
origin  of  the  goddess  and  other  mothers  in  the  great  encotihter 
as  well  as  the  origin  of  the  goddess  Chruminda  (2). 

I have  described  to  you  the  glories  of  tShivadynti,  the  de*» 
truction  of  Sumhha  and  Nishumbha  and  as  well  as  thst 
Rakta-Vija  1(3).  Hear,  O foremost  of  Monts,  of  a 
Savarni.  This  Savarni  is  the  son  of  Onksha  and  is 
future  ninth  ^fanu  (4).  O Muni,  I ihall  describe  now 
will  be  the  gods,  sages,  and  kings.  ParA,  Mariehibharga 
SudharmS—these  will 

These  three  classes  will  again  severally  he  divided  into  twelv« 
each.  Their  future  king  will  be  highly  powerful  atil 
thousand-eyed  (6).  The  six-faced  deity,  who  is  now 
as  Kartikeya,  the  son  of  the  fire,  will  he  the  king,  by 
Advuta,  of  the  AfamvdHhim  of  this  Mann  {7).  M 
Vasu,  Satya,  Yotishman, 

these  will  be  the  seven  Rishis  (8).  lihrishtaketn, 
Panchahasta,  Niramaya,  Pritimshrava,  Ardtishman, 
urimna,  Vrihadvaya—witl  be  the  sons  of  that  Daksha’s 
and  kings.  Listen,  O twicc-born  one,  I shall  now 
the  Manwdatara  of  the  tenth  Manu  (9—10).  During 
tenth  ManwdHtara  of  the  intelligent  son  of  Brahtnl  Sakto. 
senas  and  Nirudhas  will  be  the  gods  (ti).  During 
regime)  of  this  future  Manu  the  gods  will  he  a bonded 
number-— as  the  gods  will  be  a hundred  in  number  so 
be  the  cre,ature8  (13).  Sinti  will  be  the  king  of  all  these 
and  endowed  with  all  the  accomplislimr'itts  ol  Indra. 
now  from  me,  who  will  he  the  seven  Riihis  at  that 
(13),  Apomurti,  Haviihman,  Swkrita,  Satya,  Nibhiga, 


markandeya  puranam; 


381 

tishtha  add  Vashishtha  will  be  the  seven  Rishis  (14).  And 
Sukshetra,  UttamonjS.,  Bhurisena,  Viryavana,  Shat5.nika, 

Vrishabha,  Anamitra,  Jayadratha,  Bhuridyumna,  and  Suparvi 
—these  will  be  born  as  the  sots  of  that  Man u.  Hear  now 

of  the  Manw&ntara  of  SSvarni,  thh  son  of  Dharma  (15 16). 

(At  that  period)  there  will  spring  into  eacistence  three  classes 
of  gods  eaJch  severally  divided  into  thirty  (17).  Amongst 
them,  months,  seasons  and  days  will  be  the  lords  of  creations 
and  birds,  nights  and  moments  will  be  able  to  move  on  at 
their  will  (18).  Their  lord  will  be  known  by  the  name  of  ; 

Vnsha  of  well-known  prowess.  'HavishmAnj  Varislitha,  Rish-  I 

thi,  Aruni,  Nishchara,  Vrishthi  and  Agni  will  be  the  seven 
Rishis  at  that  (19^20).  Sarvaga,  Sushartoan,  ■ 

DevSnika,  Purndvaha,  Hetnad'hanva,  -Drirayu  will  be  hiS  ' 

sons  and  kings  (21).  Hear,  who  will  be  the  gods  and  Munis  ! 

during  the  of  the  Man®,  fey  name  Savarni,  the  1 

son  of  Rudra  (22).  Sudharftianas,  Sumanas,  Haritas,  Rohi-  f 

t§s  and  Suvarnas  will  fee  the  five  classes  of  deities  each  \ 

severally  divided  into  ti^  (*3;.  Knoiwfef  the  highly  poW-  't 

ftrf  Ritadhama  as  their  lord  endued  with  a-ll  itbe  ijualitieS  of  | 

Indrfe,  hear,  now,  from  me  of  the  sdvea  Rishis  ,'(24).  iDyttti,  • 

Tapashvi,  Sutapas,  Tapomurti,  Taponidhi,  ' Tapotati,  and  | 

Ta4K>dhriti  Will  fee  the  sevein  Rishis  -(2?S>.  DevavSn,  Upadeva,  | 

Devashrestha,  Viduratha,  Mitravan,  and  Mdl!ravinda“^will.be 
the  sons  of  that  Manu  and  kings  (26).  Hear,  d shall  now  i 

relate  to  ydu  the  sons  of  the  thirteenth  Manu  Rochya,  ithe  I 

seven  Rishis,  -kirigs  and  ;gods  (27).  G forertiost  of  Munis,  ;j 

Sudharmas,  SukarmSs,  and  Susbarmas,  will  be  the.  (gods  lot  j 

that  period  (28).  Their  'king  will  be  iDivashpati  of  great  j 

^rength  and  prOweSs.  -Hear,  I-shall  now  describe  the  seven 
Rishis  that  will fee  (29).  Dhritman,  A<vya,  Tatwadairshi,  Nitab- 
suka,  Nifttioha,  Sutapas  and  Nisbppakampa  will  fee  theseven  • 3 

Rishis  (30)  Chitaasena,  Vichitta,  Nayati,  Niibhaya,  Drida, 

Sunetra,  Kshatrivaddhi,  abd  SUvrata  will  be  thfc  sons  of  that 
Manu  (31).  . ' 


CHAPTER  XC?. 


IVIarkandeya  said: — In  the  days  of  yore,  the  Patriarch 
Ruchi,  being  shorn  of  attachments,  pride  and  fear  and  res- 
training his  sleep,  travelled  all  over  the  earth  (l).  Seeing 
him  divorced  from  fire,  home,  hermitage  and  company  and 
living  on  one  meal  his  departed  manes  said  to  that  ascetic 
(2) : — “ 0 child,  why  dost  thou  not  go  through  tlie  most 
sacered  marriage  which  is  the  source  of  heaven  and  eman- 
cipation and  the  absence  of  which  brings  on  fetters  (3). 
Having  worshipped  the  gods,  the  manes,  the  Rishis  and  the 
guests  a householder  enjoys  the  various  lokas  (4).  (By  not 
taking  a (wife)  you  are  being  daily  fettered  by  the  debts 
due  to  the  gods,  manes,  humanity  and  other  creatures  (5). 
He  should  worship  the  deities  with  the  exclamations  of 
SviaM  the  manes  with  those  of  Sieadhh  and  the  guests  with 
food  (6).  Without  having  engendere  1 progeny  and  brought 
about  the  satisfaction  of  the  gods  and  manes  how  dost  thou, 
out  of  foolishness,  aspire  to  a better  state  ? (7).  We  perceive 
the  various  miseries  that  will  befall  you  for  leaving  a single 
life.  You  will  attain  to  hell  after  death  and  suffer  miseries 
even  in  your  next  birth  (8)." 

Ruem  said : — Marriage  leads  to  excessive  misery,  hell 
and  wretched  existence ; it  is  for  this  I did  not  marry 
before  (9).  The  control  of  the  self  by  various  good  processes 
is  the  instrument  of  emancipation  and  not  marriage  (10). 
To  wash  daily  the  soul  that  is  sullied  with  the  mire  of 
egotism,  with  the  water  of  eternal  consciousness  shorn  of 
attachment  is  the  most  excellent  course  (it).  Therefore 
having  controlled  the  senses  the  wise  should  wash  their  souls 
sullied  wiO»  the  mire  of  actions  begotten  in  various  births 
wMh  the  water  of  good  desWe  (»»)/’ 


markandeya  puranam,  383 

The  Manes  said:— "Of  course  it  is  proper  that  one, 
having  controlled  his  senses,  should  wash  his  soul.  But,  O 
child  will  the  path  in  which  you  are  now  stationed,  lead  to 
liberation?  (13).  As  ones^  sin  is  destroyed  by  making  gifts 
divorced  from  the  desire  of  fruits  so  the  pristine  actions  are 
destroyed  by  going  through  the  result,  good  or  bad  (14). 
He,  who  thus  engages  in  chraitable  works,  is  not  fettered  (by 
actions) ; one,  by  thus  engaging  in  action  without  desire,  is 
freed  from  all  bonds  (5).  Thus  pristine  actions  are  destroyed 
by  day  and  night  going  through  happiness  and  misery;  the 
ways  of  mankind  are  thus  identical  with  virtue  and  vice  (16). 
In  this  way  the  wise  waUi  their  souls  and  guard  them  against 
bonds  for  which  tiie  soul  is  not  deprived  of  conscience 
and  accordingly  is  not  sunk  in  the  mire  of  sin  (17).'' 

Rucni  said:— 0 ancestors,  the  road  of  action,  has  been 
mentioned  in  the  Vedas  as  ignorance  then  how  do  you  en- 
gage me  in  that  action  ? (18). 

The  Manes  said  :— True  it  is  ignorance,  but  that  igno- 
race  is  engendered  by  action  is  false;  on  the  other  hand 
without  doubt  action  produces  knowledge  (19).  The  self- 
restraint,  that  is  undergone  by  the  wicked  for  emancipation 
without  having  made  arrangements  for  the  satisfaction  of 
their  duties,  brings  on,  onj  the  contrary,  a worse  state  (20), 
O child,  you -have  made  up  your  mind  to  wash  thy  soul 
but  (on  the  contrary)  you  are  being  consumed  by  sins  be^ 
gotten  by  the  negligence  of  duties  (21).  If  administered 
by  proper  means  ignorance  conduces  to  the  well-being  of 
mankind  like  poison  ; it  never  brings  on  bonds  for  them  (22). 
Therefore  0 child,  marry  porperly;  let  not  your  life  prove 
futile  by  wending  the  way  not  approved  of  by  mankind  (23). 

RUCHI  said  :—0  ancestors,  I am  now  an  old  man,  who 
will  confer  a wife  on  me?  Besides  I am  a poor  man  so  it  is 
very  difficult  for  me  to  take  a wife  (^4)., 

The  Manes  said: — O child,  if  you  do  not  hear  us,  we 


MARKANtMIVA  RURAMAM. 


shall  fall  down  and  along  with  us  you  will  be  aubjecked  to  a 
wretched  state  (35). 

MarkAnORVa  said  i“**0  forernost  of  KluniSi  having  said 
this,  the  manes  disappeared  before  the  very  eyes  of  Rucbl 
like  a light  put  out  by  the  wind  (2b). 


CaAPTfiR  XC?I. 


tb«  words  of  M»c  ant^atral  ^anes  his  mind  was 
greatly  agitated  aijd  that  BrAhtnana  saint,  de,si*^pn8  of  having 
a bride,  wandered  over  the  earth  (1).  But  being  unable  to 
secure  a bride  and  burnt  by  the  fire  of  the  words  of  the 
manes  he  was  stricken  with  great  anxiety  and  his  mind  was 
agitated  (2).  (He  thought)  “Where  shall  I go  ? What  shall 
I do  ? How  can  I sequre  a bride  by  which  immediate  pros* 
.perity  may  be  secured  unto  my  ancestors”  (3).  Thus 
jinking  the  high*souIed  one  arrived  at  the  determination  ?** 
*<By  ascetic  observances  I shall  worship  the  lotus-sprupg 
deity  BrahmR  (4)*  Thereupon  he  carried  on  devout  penancep 
:dedicated  to  Brahma  for  a hundred  celestial  years.  And 
observing  proper  regulations  he  worshipped  him  (5).  There- 
at the  Great  Patriarch  Brahma  appeared  before  him  and 
said,  “I  am  pleased  with  thee,  tell  me  what  thou  desirest” 
(6).  Thereupon  saluting  Brahma,  the  lord  of  the  univarve, 
be  communicated  unto  him  what  he  sought  for  in  accordance 
wWj.die  words  of  the  ancestral  manea.  And  hearing  of  bis 
for  object  Brahma  said  to  the  Vipra  Ruebi  (7).  •‘flpi 
'^alt  1^  a patnarah-  and  create  prbgeny.'  flaving  created 
•progeny . Aild  tegotten  SOBS  and  pesformed  alLthe  ceremonies,' 


MAhKANDEYA  puranam 


Ot  thy  time,  attain  to  Siddhi 
h«refore  as  commanded  by  thy  ™a„e»  do  thou  t,to  a «.ifo 

manes  They,  being  pleased,  will  confer  upon  thee  thir 
wished  for  spouse  and  offspring;  when  gratified  what  cannot 
the  ancestral  manes  give^^  (lo)  ? 

Marimnoeva  said  ;-Hoari„g  those  words  ot  the  unborn 
Brahma  he  began  to  offer  oblations  to  the  manes  on  70 
banks  of  the  nver  Vivikti  (ti).  With  whole  mindedness  care 
and  w,  h h,s  shoulders  bending  low' with  humlity  that  Vipra 
began  to  prop, t, ate  them  with  the  following  hymn^  (,a). 

appeara",  ‘"‘'■7®“'“'““"  »”•'>  “ose  ancestral  manes  who 
appear  as  presiding  deities  on  the  occasion  of  the  Sraddhn. 

r;.dt7rr  sii':'"""* 

(4)-  Salutation  unto  those  ancestral  manes  in 

grair  I,  c 77  ""  of  •mancipation, 

* a with  great  deeotion  (14).  Salutation 

unto  those  ancestral  manes  whom  in  he.yen  Lti  .^e  ^ ‘‘a. 

on  the  occaston  of  S^aMias  propitiate  with  the  present  oi 

tl  eTanT'  7""'”'  <‘5>-  “«• 


386 


MARKANBEYA  PuRANaM 


capable  of  conferring  the  fruits  of  the  three  worlds  whom  the 
Kshatryas  worship  witit  Swadhits  and  with  various  Kavyas 
(21).  Salutation  unto  those  manes  who  are  daily  worshipped 
by  the  Vaisyas  on  this  earth,  intent  upon  the  performance 
of  the  duties  of  their  own  order  with  flowers,  incense, 
food  and  water  (22).  Salutation  unto  those  manes  who  are 
celebrated  under  the  name  of  Sukalin,  to  whom  on  this 
earth  Sudras  offer  oblations  on  th«  occasion  of  the  Sraddkas 

(23) .  Salutatio^  unto  those  manes  whom  the  Asuras,  re- 
nouncing pride  and  haughtiness,  worship  in  the  nether  region 
on  the  occasion  of  the  Sraddkas  and  whose  food  is  Swadha 

(24) .  Salutation  unto  those  manes  whom  the  Nigas  in 
Ras3tala  duly  worship  in  view  of  many  desired  for  objects 
by  performing  Sraddkas  accompanied  by  various  objects  of 
enjoyment  (25).  Salutation  unto  those  manes,  whom  even 
the  serpents  in  Rasitala  gratify  by  reciting  duly  Mantras  and 
dedicating  objects  of  enjoyment  on  the  occasion  of  a 
Sraddha  (26). 

Salutation  unto  those,  manes  who  reside  in  the  region 
of  the  celestials,  in  etherial  atmosphere  and  on  the  earth  and 
whom  even  the  deities  worship.  May  they  accept  what  I 
dedicate  unto  tnem  (27).  Salutation  unto  those  ancestral 
manes  who  are  the  great  souls,  and  who,  assuming  forms, 
drive  the  chariots,  with  whom  the  ascetics  of  pure  souls  seek 
refuge  and  who  are  the  instruments  of  the  cessation  of 
miseries  (28'.  Salutation  unto  those  ancestral  manes  who 
live  in  heaven  with  forms,  who  live  on  SwadhS,  who  are 
capable  of  fulfilling  all  desires,  who  confer  emancipation  on 
those  shorn  of  desire,  who  grant  the  fulfillment  of  the  desires 
of  those  who  seek  them,  who  confer  the  degnity  of  gods, 
that  of  Indra,  or  even  that  superior  to  it,  and  who  give  off- 
spring, animals,  wealth,  strength,  home  and  other  things, 
May  they  be  gratified  with  my  humility  (29—30).  May  those 
aneestral  manes  find  gratification  in  the  water,  food  and  scents 
aad  attaia  to  nourisliment  therefrom,  and  who  reside  in  the- 


i 

I 


'Ww 


•h 


IMREANDEYA  HmANAM. 


riys,of  the  xnooDi  rays  of  the  sun  and  white  C^fs  (31);  May 
ti^ose  ancestry  nianes  here  be  propitiated  with  the  w^er 
and  food  offered  by  me,  who  are  satisfied  with  Havi  offered 
in  the  fire,  who  take  their  food  in  the  ^uise  of  the  BrUhmanas 
and  who  are  delighted  with  the  offerings  of  pinda  (32), 
May  they  attain  to  gratification  here  who  are  propitiated  by 
the  celestials  and  leading  saints  with  the  meat  of  rhinoceros, 
beautiful  celestial  black  sesame  and  black  vegetables  (33). 

I dedicate  those  scents,  food  and  edibles  unto  them,  who 
find  delight  in  various  Kavyas  and  who  ate  adored  by  the 
immortals;  may  they  come  nearer  (34).  May  those  ancestral 
manes  find  gratification  .here  who  accept  worship  every  day, 
at  the  end  of  every  month,  at  Ashtaka  and  are  wor- 
shipped at  the.  end  of  every  year  (35).  I always  bow  unto 
those  ancestral  manes  who,  invested  with  the  lustre  of  lillies 
and  the  moon,  are  worshipped  by  the  Brahmanas,  by  the 
Ksbatriyas  in  their  hue  of  the  rising  sun,  by  the  Vaisyas 
in  the  hue  of  pure  gold  and  by  the  Sudras  in  that  of  dark- 
blue.  May  they  find  gratification  from  the  incense,  food, 
Water  etc.,  which  I,  dedicate  as  well  as  from  the  Homa  cere- 
AlOny  (36 — 37).  r bow  unto  them  who  feed,  With  great 
satisfaction,  on  Kavyas  that  are  offered  to  the  deities  in  the 
holly  fire,  and  delighted  thereat  who  bestow  various  prosperity; 
may  they  be  propiated  here  ^38).  I bow  unto  them  who 
eittirpate  the  Rakshasas,  ther  fierce  Asuras  and  the  ghosts 
•and  destroy  the  inauspiciousness  of  creatures,  who  are  the 
precursors  of  the  celestials,,  and  who  are  worshipped  by 
the  leading  immortals.  May  they  find  gratification  here  (39). 
I offer  oblations  to  the  ancestral  manes  called  Agnishvatwa, 
Vahirshada,  Ajyapa  and  Somapa  ; may  they  find  gratification 
in  this  sraddha  (40).  May  the  ancestral  manes  called  Agnish- 
vStwa  protect  my  western  side  and  rnay  the  ancestral  manes 
called  Vahirshada  protect  my  south  (41).  May  the  manes 
called  Ajyapa  protect  the  east  and  the  ancestral  manes 
called  Somapa  the  north.  May  their  king  Yaina  protect  me 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


against  the  RSkshasas,  ghosts,  PifSchas  and  Asuras.  Vishwa, 
Vishwabhuk,  Aradhya,  Dharma,  Dhanya,  ShubhSnana,  Bhu- 
tida,  Bhutikrit  and  Bhuti  these  are  the  nine  classes  of  the 
ancestral  manes  (42 — 43).  Again  KalySna,  Kllyata,  Karta, 
Kalya,  Kalyatarashraya,  Kalyatapetu  and  Avadha — these 
are  the  six  classes  (44)  Vara,  Varenya,  Varada,  Pushtida, 
Tushtida,  VishwapHta  and  DhSta  these  are  the  seven  classes 
(45).  Mahin,  MabatinS,  Mahita,  Mahimavan,  MahSvala — these 
five  constitute  the  class  that  destroys  sins  (46).  Sukhada, 
Dhanada,  Dharmada,  Bhutida,  these  are  the  the  four  classes 
of  the  ancestral  manes  mentioned  (47).  These  are  the  thirty- 
one  classes  of  the  ancestral  manes  who  reside  all  over  the 
entire  universe.  May  they  obtain  satisfaction  and  nourish- 
ment at  my  sraddha  and  always  encompass  my  well- 
being (4S). 


ARKANDEYA  said 


■While  he  was  thus  chanting  the 
glories  (of  the  manes)  a bundle  of  effulgence  came  within  his 
perception  and  was  spreatl  all  over  the  sky  (i).  Beholding 
that  great  stationary  effulgence  enveloping  the  universe, 
Ruchi,  kneeling  down,  chanted  the  following  hymn  fa). 

Ruchi  said :— ■!  bow  always  unto  the  manes  who  are 
worshipped  of  all,  who  have  no  forms,  who  have  burning 
Algence,  who  are  always  engaged  in  meditation  and  who 
have  celestial  vision  (3).  I salute  them,  who  are  the  leader# 
of  tftdra  and  others,  as  well  as  of  Daksha,  Marichi  and  the 
#«yen  Rishi#  and  who  bestow  all  desired  for  objects  (4).  I 


ifARKAN0EVi&  WRANAM. 


cilways  bow  unto  those  manes  who  are  the  leaders  of  Maiiu 
land  other  principal  saints  as  well  as  those  of  theAun,  moon, 
*and  the  ocean  (5),  I salute  them  with  folded  palms  who 
guide  the  stars,  planets,  the  air,  the  fire,  sky,  heaven  and 
earth  (6).  I always  salute  them  with  folded  hands  who  are 
.the  progenitors  of  the  celestial  saints,  who  are  saluted  by 
all  the  world,  who  always  bestow  everlasting  fruits  (7). 
I bow  unto  ,Praj§pati,  Kashyapa,  Soma,  Varuna,  and  the 
other  Yogins  (8).  Salutation  uno  the  seven  Ganas  who  live 
in  the  seven  regions  ; I bow  unto  the  Self-sprung  Brahma, 
who  has  yoga  for  his  eyes  (9).  I bow  unto  the  manes  of 
whom  Soma  is  the  stay  and  who  have  yoga  for  their  forms 
and  unto  Soma  (himself)  who  is  the  father  of  the  world  (10). 
I bow  unto  those  other  ancestral  manes  who  have  the  fire  for 
their  forms  and  from  whom  this  endless  universe,  full  of 
Agnishtoma,  has  emanated  (it).  With  a controlled  mind 
I bow  again  and  again  unto  all  those  ancestral  manes,  efful- 
gence is  whose  support,  fire  and  the  sun  are  whose  forms, 
the  universe  and  Brahman  are  whose  real  nature  and  who 
always  carry  on  yoga.  May  they,  who  feed  on  SwadhS,  be 
propitiated  with  me  (12— 13). 

MarkaNDEYA,  said  ; — O foremost  of  Munis,  having  been 
thus  eulogised  the  manes,  lighting  the  ten  quarters  with  their 
effulgence,  came  out  (14).  He.  beheld  them  before  him, 
adorned  with  flowers,  perfumeries  and  pastes,  that  he  had 
dedicated  unto  them  (15).  Then  again  bending  low  with 
reverence  he  again  honored  them  severally  exclaiming  I 
bow  unto  you!  I bow  unto  you!'*  (16).  Thereupon  the 
ancestral  manes,  delighted,  said  to  that  foremost  of  ascetics  : 

Pray  for  a boon."  He  too  hanging  his  head  said  (17)  :— 

0 lord,  I have  been  commanded  by  Brahma  to  engender 
progeny;  therefore  I wish  to  take  a wife  who  may  be  of  a 
heavenly  and  glorious  life  and  may  give  birth  to  children  (18). 

The  Ancestral  Manes  said  :_Immediately  at  this  very 
moment  there  shall  spring  up  a charming  wife  for  thee,  tfiou 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


390 

shalt  beget  on  her  a son,  who  shall  be  a Manu  (19).  O RucW, 
.that  intelligent  lord  of  a Manwaniara  shall  be  designated 
by  thy^name  and  he  will  acquire  reputation  all  over  the  three 
worlds  under  the  appellation  of  Rouchya  (so).  He  will  be 
the  father  of  many  highly  powerful  and  high-souled  sons 
who  will  be  all  the  protectors  of  the  world  (21).  Thou,  too, 
conversant  with  virtue  as  thou  art,  and  a patriarch  having 
created  four  classes  of  progeny,  sJbalt,  on  the  expiration 
cf  thy  regime,  attain  to  Siddhi  (22).  We  will  be  pleased 
with  that  man  who  will  reverentially  chant  our  glories  with 
this  hymn  and  shall  confer  upon  him  various  objects  of  en- 
joyments, the  most  excellent  knowledge  of  self,  good  health, 
children  and  grand  children.  Therefore  those,  who  will  seek 
these,  mu!?t  eulogise  us  with  the  hymn  first  instituted  by 
thee  (22—24).  Whoever,  that  shall  on  the  occasion  of  a 
Sraddha,  chant  this  hymn,  so  pleasing  to  us,  wdth  reverence 
before  the  leading  BrSlhmanas  while  taking  their  meals,  when 
we,  delighted  with  hearing  this  hymn,  shall  approach  there, 
shall  have  SrSlddha  done  witljont  any  obstacle.  There  is  no 
doubt  in  this  (25 — 26).  If  that  Srlddha  be  without  any 
Shrotrya,  if  it  be  sullied  in  any  way,  either  with  the  spend- 
ing of  ill-gotten  wealth  or  otherwise,  when  carried  on  by 
unfair  means,  or  at  a bad  time,  bad  place  or  in  an  irregular 
proceiis  or  if  that  Sraddha  be  instituted  with  haughtiness 
or  irreverence  still  if  this  hymn  be  sung  that  shall  conduce 
to  our  gratification  (27 — 29).  If  this  hymn,  conducing  to 
bur  satisfaction,  be  chanted  at  a Sraddha  we  shall  obtain 
gratification  extending  over  twelve  years  (30).  If  it  is  chant*- 
ed,  in  Hemantt  (season  ef  dews)  it  shall  give  us  gratifica- 
tion for  twelve  years,  if  in  winter  this  excellent  hymn  shall 
give  us  satisfaction  for  twice  the  period  (31).  If  it  is 
’bhanted  on  the  occasion  of  a SrSddha  in  spring  it  shall 
give  us  gratification  for  sixteen  years  and  when  performed  in 
^iinimer  it  shall  also  afford  us  gratification  for  sixteen  years 
1(32).  0 Rucht,  if  a Sr&ddha  be  performed  imperfeett)' 


I ' snail  attord  im  pv#»r 

a Sraddba  during  autumn  it  confers  upon  us  gratification 
extending  over  fifteen  years  (34).  Id  a house  wfere  tMsTs 
daily  kept  written  if  a SrSddha  is  performed  it  at  once 
draws  us  near  (35).  Therefore  when  the  Brlhmanas  aL 
JlLt  1 ^ Sraddha,  you  shouW^ 

Vd  ,T  them  listen  to  it,  and  we  shall  then  be  satis- . 

reap!  tL  it  in  mind  one; 

reaps  the  same  fruit  as  is  reaped  by  the  performance  of  a 

Kurukshetra  or  Naimisha.  Having 
conferred  this  boon  on  Ruchi  thA  * 1 naving 

to  Siddhi  (37).  ancestral  manes  attained 


XTXARKaNDEYA  said  .-Thereupon  from  the  middle  of 

he  nv.r  (h,„  „„se  b,(or.  hta  a 6ea«,i(al  and  charm 
ing  ApsarS  of  slender  make  byname  Preralochi  (i)  Thar 
excellent  Apsara  Premlocte,  of  fair  eye-browrbei!din/l 

asr!r  i thou  accept  as  . thy  Wife,  O foremost  of  the 
ascetics  the  most  beautiful  daughter  of  mine,  beootten  on 
me  by  the  h.gh-souled  Pushkara.  the  son  of  Varu^a  Shi 

W.II  8,.e  b„lh  to  tby  son,  tha  highly  i„t,„ig,„, 

He  having  pven  his  consent  she'  took  up  from  the  watrr 
her  daughter  of  a fair  body  by  name  MSlini  (5).  Thereupon, 
having  brought  together  all  the  leading- ascetic  that  foremost 
of  ascetics  Ruchi  espoused  -ker  duly  on  the  banks  of  the  river 


392 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


(6).  He  begot  on  her  a highly  energetic  and  intelligent  son 
who  was  celebrated  on  earth  as  Rouchya  after  the  name  of 
his  father  (7).  I have  already  related  to  you  in  detail  the 
gods,  Rishis,  the  king  and  his  sons  of  that  Matvw&ntara  (8), 
Forsooth,  a man,  hearing  of  this  MatmAniara,  secures  an 
acquisition  of  wealth,  freedom  from  diseases,  prosperity, 
corns  and  offspring  (9).  0 great  Muni,  hearing  of  the  above 
mentioned  hymn  of  the  manes,  and  of  their  number,  one,  by 
their  grace,  lias  all  his  desires  accomplished  (10). 


CHAPTER  XCIX. 


iVlARKANDEYA  said  Hear  now  of  origin  of  Bhoutya, 
of. the  gods,  Rishis,  his  sons  and  the  kings  (i).  Angiras  had 
a highly  wrathful  disciple  by  name  Bhuti.  For  a trifle  he 
used  to  imprecate  a dreadful  curse  and  he  never  knew  what 
a sweet  word  was  (2).  In  his  hermitage  the  wind  could  not 
blow  high,  the  sun  could  not  pour  fierce  rays  and  the  cloudst 
could  not  discharge  rain  in  such  a way  as  to  create  much  ; 
mud  (3).  Even  the  moon,  when  full,  used  to  pour  not, 
very  cold  rays.  Afraid  of  that  fierce  and  wrathful  (Rishi) 
the  seasons,  renouncing  their  natural  order,  used  to  cover,  * 
at  his  command,  all  the  trees  of  his  hermitage  with  the  fruits ; 
and  flowers  of  all  seasons  (4 — 5).  Afraid  of  the  powers  of  , 
that  high'souled  one  the  waters,  near  his  hermitage,  U8ed> 
always  to  enter  into  his  kamandalu  at  his  pleasure  (6),  O Vipra, 
I^  was  highly  wrathful  and  could  not  bear  the  least  inconvenk. 
enco.  That  great  man  bad  no  issue  and  therefore  made  up  1 
his  mind  to  carry  on  devout  penances  (7).  He  tiiougjvk 


markandeya  puranam. 

r rf 

devout  06^00^8"  and  ‘'“  a-  fi*"®  ^ shall 

Muni  (9^ 

desisted  from  his  penances  (to).  His  brother  « 
usdettook  a sacrifice  and  invited  him  to  perform  it  f 

ShC;r'“'J'  intern  e„t 

rTadv  to  b ’ °'  * kunit 

oi  5‘broZ'‘4varc!L"‘''  11^''  '’h  fT"'  “ ''''  ' 
(.3).  Always  awake  tb»sh:u?l  evt;:att'': 

ZL^^Taidlnar  "r'  ' 

his  discinld*  cjo  b-  ’•  thus  commanded  hi 

nis  aisciple  Santi  sayine  ‘so  bo  it*  fi,a>  x 

bv  his  orA»-  k XL  ^ ^ ‘he  preceptor, 

(■5).  And  Ssnti  too'cX"ftom  ft  “■  '’" 

!°  “lad  with  devotion  to  his  ore 

Bhnr*^*^'  '°  ”**"  aa'ions  the  fire,  that  was  kept 

Bhuti,  was  extinguished  (17)  n^hr.u-  . ^ 

"What  shail^°do°?"'How“iu°fte”'“" 

What  Shan  I do  to-day  ? By  doing  whaTrairj  LTp" 

guthed  he^wiZh  f^'^eptor  beholds  his  fire 

g shed  he  W.II  throw  me  to-day  into  dreadful  misery 

surely  reduce  me  to  ashes  for  he  sees  everything  (2r). 

and  curse  both  the  £ 


MAKKANUKYA  PURANAKf 


myself  as  <lo  I for  U»e  ittiquity  cominiUed  towards  the  pre- 
ceptor (23).  Forsooth,  beholding  the  fire  extinguished  the 
preceptor  will  imprecate  a curse  on  me  or  even  the  (ire 
worked  up  with  anger  for  that  twice-born  one  is  equally 
powerful  (23).  He,  terrified  by  whose  prowess  even  the 
celestials  carry  on  his  behest  for  what  reason  will  he  not 
curse  me  who  have  committed  a sin  {24)  ? 

Markandrya  said  : — Thinking  tlniH  in  many  way,  he,  the 
foremost  of  the  intelligent  and  always  afraid  of  his  preceptor, 
sought  refuge  with  the  fire  (25).  Then  controlling  his  mind 
and  kneeling  down  he,  with  whole-miiulcilness  and  folded 
hands,  began  to  recite  the  following  hymn  (26). 

Santi  said C)m  1 Salutation  inito  the  high-souled  (Agni) 
who  is  the  stay  of  all  creatures,  who  residest  at  the  Rajshyua 
««oriflce  in  sixfold  forms  (27).  Salutation  unto  firt^  who  gives 


then  converted  into  air  (30).  By  it  are  created 
O thou  the  charioteer  of  the  wind,  all  the  creati 
pily  on  all  these  endless  plants  (31).  With  the 
ed  by  thee  men  perform  sacrifices.  And  by  tli 
O fire,  the  gods,  Daityas  and  Rakshasas  an 
fire,  thou  art  the  supporter  of  all  these  sacrifices 
art  the  source  of  all  and  identical  with  all  (aa— ; 
Danavas,  Yakshas,  men,  beasts,  trees,  wild  s 
reptiles  are  all-satisfied  and  nourished  by  thee, 
all  originate  from  thee  and  meet  with  dissol 
<34—35).  O God,  thou  dost  create  the  watei 
drink  it  up  ’,  and  all  the  (plants)  when  rotten  by 
to )thej nourishment  of  creatures  (36).  Thou  < 
effulgencd  in  the  midst  of  the  gods,  as  physical 


markandeya  puranam.  395 

midst  of  the  Siddhas,  as  poison  with  the  serpents  and.  as  air 
in  the  midst  of  the  birds  (27)-  Thou  art  anger  amongst  men, 
stupidity  in  the  beasts  and  birds.  Thou  art  the  stay  in  trees 
and  hardness  in  the  earth  (38).  0 lord,  thou  art  the  liquid 

element  in  water,  the  velocity  in  the  air,  the  space  in  the  sky 
and  as  the  soul  every  where  (39).  Thou  dost  travel  in  the 
hearts  of  all  creatures  and  protect  them.  0 fire,  the  poets 
sometimes  describe  thee  as  one  and  again  as  three  (40).  And 
again  designating  thee  as  eight  the  Prime  Purusha  undertook 
the  sacrifice.  The  great  Rishis  say  that  this  universe  has 
been  created  by  thee  (41),  0 fire,  without  thee,  this  whole 

universe  at  once t meets  with  dissolution.  By  adoring  thee 
with  Havya  and  Kavya  and  with  the  recitation  of  Swaha  and 
Swadha  a twice-born  one  attains  to  a position  ascertained  by 
his  own  actions.  Thou  art  also  worshiped  by  the  immortals. 
Having  emanated  from  thee,  the  scintillations,  the  end,  soul 
and  energy  of  creatures,  burn  down  the  entire  elemental  crea- 
tion. Thou  art  Jataveda,  thou  art  highly  effulgent. — thou  hast 
created  this  universe  (42 — 44).  Thou  art  the  author  of  Vedic 
rites  and  the  universe,  identical  with  all  the  elements.  Salu- 
tation unto  thee,  O Anala,  O Pingiksha,  0 Hutasana  (45). 
Salutation  unto  thee,  O P^vaka,  who  art  the  beginning  of  all ; 
Salutation  unto  thee,  O HavyavSlhana  (the  carrier  of  sacri- 
ficial offerings).  Thou  dost  cook  what  is  eaten  or  drunk ; 
thou  dost  purify  the  entire  universe  (46).  Thou  dost  make 
the  corns  ripe — thou  art  the  nourisher  of  the  universe — the 
cloud,  the  air, the  seed  of  the  corns  (47).  Thou  dost  nourish 
all  creatures  and  thou  art  the  past,  present  and  future ; 
thou  art  the  light  in  all  the  elements— and  art  Aditya  and 
Vibhavasu  (41)  Thou  art  the  day  and  the  night  and  two 
Sandhy^s.  O Vanhi,  thou  art  Hiranyaretas  and  thou  art  the 
cause  of  the  origin  of  Hiranya  (49).  Thou  art  Hiranya- 
garbha— thou  art  bright  like  gold — art  the  moment  and 
Khana  (lesser  division  of  the  time);  thou  art  Tridi  and  Lava 
(50).  0 lord  of  the  universe,  thou  dost  exist  in  the  shape  of 


396 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


Kata,  Kashtha,  Nimesha  and  other  divisions  of  time.  Thou 
art  the  entire  universe  and  K&la  identical  with  the  dissolution 
of  all  (51).  O lord,  do  thou  protect  us  from  all  fear,  sin  and 
the  great  dread  of  this  world  as  well  as  of  the  next  with  thy 
tongue  called  K5li  w'hich  is  the  support  of  Kala  (52).  Do 
thou  save  us  from  all  sins  and  the  great  terror  of  this  world 
with  thy  tongue  called  Karfila  which  is  the  instrument  of  the 
. great  dissolution  (53).  Do  thou  save  us  from  all  sins  and  the 
great  dread  of  this  life  with  thy  that  tongue  which  is 
called  Manojava  gifted  with  the  quality  of  Laghim&  (54), 
Do  thou  save  us  from  all  sorts  of  sins  and  the  great  fear  of 
this  life  with  thy  that  tongue  which  is  called  Sulohita  and 
grants  the  desires  of  all  creatures  (55).  Do  thou  save  us  from 
all  sorts  of  sins  and  the  great  fear  of  this  world  with  thy 
that  tonge  which  is  called  Dkrumravarna  and  which  is  the 
cause  of  the  diseases  of  all  creatures  ($6).  Do  thou  save  us 
from  all  sins  and  the  great  fear  of  this  world  with  that  thy 
tongue  which  is  called  Sphulaga  and  is  the  root  of  the  well- 
being of  all  (57).  Do  thou  save  us  from  all  sins  and  the  great 
fear  of  this  life  with  thy  that  tongue  which  is  called  Vishwa  and 
which  gives  peace  to  all  creatures  (58).  Thou  art  Pingaksha 
(yellow-eyed)  Lohitagriva  (dark-nhcked)  of  black  hue  and 
Hutashana-  Do  thou  save  me  from  all  sins  and  the  great 
danger  of  this  world  (59).  0 Vahni,  O Saptarchi,  O Krishanu, 
0 Havyavahan,  be  thou  pleased.  1 recite  thy  eight  names 
as  Agni,  Pavaka,  Sukra  etc  (60).  Be  thou  propitiated,  0 
Agni,  0 the  first  born  of  all  the  elements,  0 Vibhavasu,  0 
Habyavaha,  O eternal  and  0 thou  identical  with  hymns  (68). 
Thou  art  eternal,  incomprehensible  Vahni,  prosperous,  greatly 
fierce  and  hard  to  bear.  Thou  art  undecaying,  dreadful 
and  dost  destroy  all  the  worlds.  Thou  art  highly  powerful 
and  hast  a form  (62).  Thou  art  most  excellent,  the  heart  of 
aU.  energies,  art  endless  and  worshipped  of  all.  From 
thee  has  emanated  this  universe,  mobile  and  immobile.  0 
Hutishana,  thou  art  one  and  many  (63),  Thou  art  un  decay- 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM, 


]M[arkANDEYA  said He  having  thus  chanted  his 
glories,  0 Muni,  the  divine  Havyavahana,  enveloped  with 


ing,  art  this  earth  with  mouiitains  and  forests,  art  the  sky 
with  the  sun  and  the  moon,  art  the  time  with  the  day  and 
night  and  art  the  forest-fire  lying  in  the  womb  of  the  great 
ocean.  By  thy  gteat  lustre  thou  dost  reside  in  the  rays  (64). 
The  great  saints,  observant  of  regulations,  always  worship 
thee  as  Hutasana  in  the  great  sacrifice.  Invited  at  the 
sacrifice  thou  dost  drink  the  soma  Juice  and  Havi  after  recit- 
ing Vasatkara  for  the  posperity  (of  the  creatures)  (65).  For 
reaping  fruits  the  Br3,hmanas  always  worship  thee  on  this 
earth.  Thou  art  being  chanted  in  all  the  Vedas  and  their 
branches.  With  a view  to  worship  thee  all  the  leading 
twice-born  ones  always  master  the  Vedas  (66).  Thou  art 
Brahma  ever  intent  on  performing  sacrifices;  thou  art  Vishnu, 
Siva,  Indra,  Arjami  and  Varuna.  Being  pleased  with  Havyas 
the  sun,  the  moon,  the  celestials  and  Asuras  all  obtain  their 
desired  for  fruits  (67).  Objects,  however  impure  they  may 
be,  are  at  once  purified  by  the  touch  of  thy  rays.  Even 
when  bathed  with  thy  ashes  one  attains  to  highest  purifica- 
tion. For  this  the  Munis  adore  thee  in  th^  evening  (68)* 
Be  thou,  who  art  Vahni  Sachi,  propitiated.  Thou  art  Pivaka 
Vaidyuta  and  Prime — be  propitiated  and  save  me,  O thou  the 
eater  of  Havya  (69).  Like  unto  a father  protecting  his 
own  begotten  son,  do  thou,  O Vahni,  protect  us  with  thy 
all  auspicious  form  and  seven  tongues.  I do  chant  thy 
glories  (70). 


398 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM, 


his  rays,  appeared  before  him  (i).  0 twice-born  one,  the 
the  lord  Vibhavasu  was  delighted  with  the  above  hymn  and 
said  to  Santi,  who  was  bowing,  in  words  deep  as  the  mutter- 
ing of  clouds  (2).  “ O Vipra,  I have  been  delighted  with  the 
hymn  that  thou  hast  reverentially  sung;  I shall  therefore 
confer  upon  thee  a boon  ; pray  for  what  thou  likest  (5),” 

Sani'I  said; — O lord,  blessed  am  I,  since,  I have  beheld 
thee  in  thy  form.  Still  hear  what  I communicate  unto  thee 
bending  low  with  humility  (4).  O god,  my  preceptor,  leaving 
his  own  hermitage,  has  gone  to  be  present  at  his  brother’s 
sacrifice.  May  he,  on  his  return  to  the  hermitage,  behold  thee 
stationed  as  before  (5).  O VibhSvasu,  may  that  twice-born 
one  behold  thee  as  before,  stationed  here  which  thou  didst 
leave  before  for  my  folly  (6).  If  thou  dost  show  me  another 
favour,  0 lord,  then  let  there  be  an  excellent  son  born  unto 
my  preceptor  who  has  no  issue  (7).  And  may  my  preceptor 
grow  equally  mild  towards  all  other  creatures  as  he  will  be 
towards  his  own  son  (8).  O eternal,  as  thou  hast  been 
pleased  with  me,  0 thou  conferrer  of  boons,  for  my  chanting 
thy  glories,  may  he  likewise  be  propitiated  with  me  (9). 

Markandeya  said : — Hearing  hi.s  words  and  being  again 
adored  with  hymns  on  account  of  the  devotion  unto  precep- 
tor Pivaka  (Fire)  said  to  that  foremost  of  the  twice-born  (10). 

Agni  said  : — O Brahmana,  thou  ha.st  prayed  for  two  boons 
for  thy  preceptor  and  not  for  thy  own  self.  For  this  I have  been 
greatly  delighted  with  thee,  0 great  Muni  (ij).  Therefore 
what  thou  hast  prayed  for  thy  preceptor  shall  all  be  fulfilled. 
He  will  be  friendly  towards  all  creatures  and  will  have  a 
son  (12).  He  will  be  the  lord  of  a Manwantara  and  be 
known  by  the  name  of  Bhoutya ; and  your  preceptor  too 
will  be  highly  powerful,  highly  energetic  and  wise  (13). 
Whoever,  that,  being  self-controlled,  shall  chant  my  glories 
with  his  hymn,  shall  have  all  his  desires  fulfilled  and  piety 
{14),  This  most  excellent  hymn,  conducing  to  my  nourish- 
^ ment,  when  chanted  at  the  ^ sacrifices  at  Parvas,  at  sacred 


IWAftlcANGm  3^^. 

|,n<l  H«.,,  *i|l  l„d  ,o  U.»  acquisition  „(  virtao  (,<). 

J , [ ““  '■y"'”  «'l>i=h  ia 

so  derytlful  ,„  „i||  committed 

(root  the  performance  of  a Horn,  at  an  improper  season  and 
_y  improper  pefson,  are  immediately  removed  by  merelv 
Wen,,*:  to  this  (.,).  This,  when  listened  to  proper, 

Pur^^ma,  ^mavasya  or  any  other  Parva,  leads  to  the 
destruction  of  all  sins  (i8). 

Markandeya  said  :-Having  said  this  the  divine  Agni,  Q 

Mum,  disappeared  immediately  in  his  own  presecnce,  like 
unto  a light  put  out  by  the  wind  (19).  After  Vahni  ha^ 
departed  Shanti,  with  a delighted  heart  and  his  hairs  standing 
erect  m joy,  entered  the  hermitage  of  his  preceptor  (20) 

He  saw  there  fire  ablate  as  before  at  the  very  place  where 
It  had  been  kept  by  his  preceptor.  Thereat  he  attained  to 
an  excess  0 delight  (21).  In  the  interval  the  preceptor  re- 
turned to  his  own  hermitage  from  the  sacrifice  of  his  high- 
souled  elder  brother  (22).  His  disciple  at  first  touched  his 
feet.  Then  after  accepting  seat  and  adoration  the  preceptor 
said  to  him  (23).  » O child,  I find  in  me  a growing  love  tow 

wards  thee  as  well  as  other'  creatures ; I do  not  understand 
wha^t^)is  this.  Tell  me  speedily  if  you  know  anything  of 

Thereupon,  0 great  Muni,  that  BrShmana  Santi  related 

ru  y everything  unto  his  preceptor  beginning  with  the  des- 
truction of  the  fire  (25).  Hearing  this,  O great  Muni,  and 

embracing  him,  the  preceptor,  having  his  eyes  bathed  with 
tears  of  love,  delivered  unto  his  disciple  all  the  Vedas  with 
their  divisions  and  sub-divisions  (26)  Then  there  was  borii 
to  Bhuti  a son  by  name  Bhoutya  who  became  a Manu.  Hear 
from  me  of  the  gods,  risliis  kings  of  bis  Manwafiifara 
{2^),  I shall  describe  at  length  who  will  be  all  such  in  tivc 
Manwantara  of  this  would-be  Manu,  as  well  as  who  will  be 
king  of  gods  of  illustrious  actions  (28}..  Chakslmsha, 


400  MARKANDEYA  puranam. 

Kanishtha,  Pavitra,  jBhrSljira  and  DhSrivika-— these  will  be 
the  five  classes  of  gods  (39).  Suchi  will  be  the  lord  of  all 
these  gods — highly  powerful,  highly  energetic  and  endowed 
with  all  the  accomplishments  of  a king  of  gods  (50).  Agnidhra 
Agnivfthu,  Shuchi,  MuktS,  Midhava,  Shatru  and  Ajita— 
these  will  be  the  seven  Rishis  (31).  Guru,  Gabhira,  Vradhna, 
BharatSL,  Anugraha,  Strikh^ni,  Pratira,  Vishnu,  Sankrandana, 
Tejaswi  and  Suvala  will  be  the  sons  of  Manu  Bhoutya.  I 
have  thus  described  to  you  the  fourteenth  Marmantara 
(32—33)- 

O foremost  of  Munis,  hearing  of  these  Manwantaras  in 
order  a man  acquires  virtue  and  endless  offspring  (34). 
Hearing  of  the  first  Manwaniara  a man  acquires  virtue  and 
hearing  of  that  of  Swarochisha  he  acquires  the  fulfillment  of 
all  his  desires  (35).  In  Auttoma  one  acquires  wealth,  in 
Timasa  knowledge,  in  Raivata  the  faculty  of  understanding 
Srutis  and  a beautiful  wife  (36).  In  Chllkshusha  people 
acquire  freedom  from  diseases  and  in  Vaivaswata  strength, 
and  in  Surya  SSlvarniki  accomplished  sons  and  grand  sons 
(37).  In  Brahma  Slvarni  one  acquires  glory  and  in  Dharma 
Savarni  auspiciousness.  In  Rudra  Savarniki  a man  acquires 
intellect  and  victory  (38).  In  Daksha  Savarniki  one  be- 
comes the  foremost  amongst  his  kinsmen  and  is  endowed 
with  accomplishments.  0 foremost  of  men,  hearing  of 
Roucliya,  one  has  all  his  enemies  destroyed  (39).  Hearing 
of  Bhoutya  Manwantara  one  acquires  the  grace  of  gods, 
Agnihotra  and  accomplished  sons  (40).  O foremost  of  Munis, 
hear  what  an  excellent  fruit  does  a man  reap  when  in  order  he 
hears  of  all  the  Manwantaras  (41).  O Vipra,  hearing  of  the 
gods,  Rishis,  Indras,  Manus  and  their  sons  of  the  respective 
; periods  one  is  released  from  all  the  sins  (43),  Indras,  gods, 
Rishis,  kings  and  Manus  of  the  various  periods  become 
greatly  delighted  and  bestow  excellent  inclination  (43). 
Thereupon  acquiring  good  inclination  and  performing  good 
actions  one  attabs  to  a better  sbtion  as  long  as  the  fourtee» 


_ fliilRKANDEYA  PURANi^M*  401 

ladras  exist  (44).  If  one  hears  in  order  of  all  the  Manwan- 
taras  all  the  seasons  do  him  good  and  all  the  planets,  without 
doubt,  become  propitious  towards  him  (45). 


^00 — — 


CHAPTER  Cl. 


KkROUSHTl  said : — Reverend  sir,  you  have  described  in 
detail  and  order  all  the  Manwantaras  and  I have  heard  of 
them  all  (i),  0 foremost  of  the  twice-born,  I wish  to  hear 

of  the  progeny  of  all  the  kings  beginning  with  BrahmS.  Do 
thou  describe  them  in  full  (2). 

MarkANDEYA  said  O child,  hear  of  the  origin  and  life 
of  all  those  kings  beginning  with  Prajapati  who  is  the  origin 
of  the  universe  (3).  This  family  was  adorned  with  hundred^ 
of  pious  kings  who  had  performed  many  sacrifices  and  been 
victorious  in  war  (4).  He,  who  listens  to  the  origin  and 
story  of  all  these  high-souled  kings,  is  released  from  all 
sins  (5).  Hearing  of  the  family  in  which  were  born  such 
heroic  kings  as  Manu,  Ikshawku,  Anaraya,  Bhagiratha 
who  were  intent  on  performing  sacrifices  and  conversant 
with  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  and  who  all  ruled  over  this 
earth  a man  is  freed  from  all  sins  (6 — 7).  Hear  of  this  family 
from  which  descended  thousands  of  the  families  of  kings 
like  the  branches  of  a fig-tree  (8).  O foremost  of  the  twice- 
born,  in  the  days  of  yore,  the  patriarch  BrahmS,  with  a View 
to  create  various  creatures,  procreated  from  his  right  thumb 
the  patriarch  Daksha  and  from  his  left  thumb  his  wife.  In 
this  wise,  the  father  of  the  universe  the  divine  lord  Brahma 
created  the  great  cause  of  the  world  (9--*io),  The  beautiful 

51 


402 


markandsya  puranam. 


Aditi  was' born  as  the  daughter  of  Daksha.  Kashyapa  begat 
on  her  the  divine  sun  (ii).  He  is  identical  with  Brahman 
the  conferrer  of  boons  in  this  endless  universe,  the  begin- 
ning, the  middle  and  the  end  and  the  ordainer  of  the  creation, 
preservation  and  destruction  (i2).  O twice-born  one,  from 
him  has  emanated  this  entire  universe  and  in  him  it  is  sta- 
tioned ; he  is  the  entire  universe  with  the  celestials,  Asuras 
and  mankind  (13).  He  is  identical  with  all  the  elements  with 
the  soul  and  is  the  great  soul  and  is  eternal.  Aditi  had  prayed 
for  it  before  and  therefore  the  Divine  sun  was  born  in  her 
womb  (14). 

KrOUSTHI  said ; — 0 Reverend  Sir,  I wish  to  hear  of  the 
true  form  of  the  sun  and  why  was  he  born  as  the  own 
begotten  son  of  the  prime  deity  Knshyapa  (15).  0 fore- 

most of  Munis,  I wish  to  hear  in  detail,  as  narrated  hy  you 
in  detail,  how  he  was  worshipped  hy  the  goddess  Atliti  and 
Kashyapa  and  what  did  the  sun  say  on  being  adored  by 
them  a.s  well  as  of  his  prowess  when  incarnated  (16 — 17.) 

Markandeya  said : — Vishtapa,  the  great  learning,  Jyotis- 
bhS,  Shwashwati,  Shphuta,  Kaivalya,  knowledge,  Avibhu, 
PrSkamya,  Samrit,  Bodlia,  Avagati,  Smriti,  discriminative 
knowledge,  these  were  the  forms  of  the  sun  who  is  the  form 
of  the  univer.se  (18 — 19.)  Hear,  O great  one,  in  detail  as 
narrated  hy  me,  of  the  incarnation  of  the  sun  of  which  you 
have  asked  (20).  When  this  universe  was  shorn  of  lustre 
and  light  and  was  enveloped  in  darkness  a huge  egg 
which  is  the  great  cause  came  itito  being  (21).  living 
inside  it  the  Divine  Grand  Father  Brahma  rent  it  as-, 
sunder  j that  lotus-sprung  deity  is  the  creator  and  the  lord 
of  the  universe  (22).  0 great  Muni,  from  his  mouth  came 
out  the  great  sound  Om;  then  originated  therefrom  BAu, 
Bhams  and  Swara  (23).  These  three  words  are  the  true  form, 
of  the  sun ; and  from  Om  has  come  out  the  great  subtle  form 
of  the  sun  (24).  From  Om  have  proceeded  in  due  order 
the  seven  forms,  gross  and  grosser,  such  as  Mahas,  Janas, 


MAEK^NPEYA  EURANAM. 


4^3 


Tapas,  Satya  etc.,  (25)*  These  forms  appear  and  disappear 
simultaneously  for  undoubtedly  the  presence  and  absence  of 
all  these  are  brought  about  by  this  (26).  0 Vipra,  the  great 
subtle  form  Omy  which  I have  described  to  you,  is  the  begin- 
ning and  end  of  all.  That  great  form  has  no  (material  form) 
that  is  the  real  great  Brahman  and  his  body  (27). 


CHAPTER  CII. 


WIarKANDEYA  said : — O Muni,  when  that  egg  was  rent 
asunder,  the  Riks  first  originated  from  the  mouth  of  the 
unborn  Brahma  (i).  They  were  of  the  hue  of  Java  flowers 
and  were  endowed  with  energy  and  form.  They  were  in- 
vested with  darkness  and  were  separate  form  each  other  (2). 
From  his  that  mouth  that  was  towards  the  south  Came  out 
without  any  obstruction  Yayus — they  were  of  the  hue  of 
gold  and  unconnected  with  each  other  (3).  Then  from  the 
western  mouth  of  Parameshth  Brahma  came  out  the  Samans 
accompanied  by  their  respective  metres  (4).  Then  from  the 
northern  niouth  of  the  creator  came  out  the  endless  Athar^* 
mns  that  were  dark  like  the  black-bees  and  collyrium.  They 
were  divided  into  Ahhicharika  and  Shantikas^  permeated 
by  joy,  goodness  and  ignorance  and  were  of  the  forms  both 
gentle  and  otherwise  (5 — 6).  0 Muni,  Riks  were  permeated 
by  the  quality  of  darkness,  the  Samanas  by  that  of  igno- 
rance and  Atharvanas  by  both  goodness  and  igaorance  (7). 
They,  all  burning  in  unparalleled  effulgence,  continued  to 
exist  separately  as  before  (8).  Then  the  effulgence,  which 
emanated  from  the  hature  of  the  prime  effulgence  that  is 


404  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 

designated  as  Om,  covering  it  wholly,  existed  (9).  O great 
Muni,  the  effulgence  of  Yayush,  being  united  with  that  of 
Saman,  began  to  exist  in  the  great  effulgence  (10).  Thus 
0 Brahman,  ShSntika,  Peshthika  and  Abhich&rika  these  three 
ended  in  Rik,  Y ay ush  Saman  (ll).  By  it  as  soon  as 

the  darkness  was  dispelled  the  whole  universe  became  clear 
and  accordingly  the  down,  up  and  oblique  sides  were  dis- 
tinctly perceived  (12).  Then  the  best  effulgence,  of  the 
metres  forming  a circle,  was  united  with  the  great  effulgence, 
O Brahman  (13).  Because  it  emanated  from  Aditya  it  was 
called  so.  0 great  one,  that  undecaying  energy  is  the  cause 
of  this  universe  (14).  Rik,  Yayush  and  Saman  these  three 
shed  effulgence  in  the  morning,  noon  and  afternoon  (15). 
Riks  give  it  in  the  morning,  Yayush  in  the  noon  and  Saman 
^n  the  afternoon,  O foremost  of  Munis  (16).  Santika  enters 
into  Rik  in  the  morning,  Pounchika  into  Yayush  in  the  noon 
and  Abhicharika  into  Saman  in  the  afternoon  (17).  The 
ceremonies  for  the  manes  should  be  performed  in  the  noon 
and  morning  by  the  Abhicharika  and  in  the  afternoon  by 
Saman  (i8).  At  the  time  of  creation  Brahmk  is  identical 
with  Rik,  at  the  time  of  preservation  Vishnu  is  identical 
with  Yayush  and  at  the  time  of  dissolution  Rudra  is  identical 
with  Saman,  and  therefore  he  (Rudra)  is  considered  impure 
for  a sacrifice  (19).  Therefore  the  Divine  sun  is  identical 
with  the  Vedas,  is  the  stay  of  the  Vedas  and  is  mentioned 
as  the  Great  Purusha  having  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas 
(10).  Therefore  he  is  the  cause  of  the  creation,  preservation 
and  destruction  and  passes  under  the  appellation  of  BrabmS, 
Vishnu  and  others  by  resorting  to  the  qualities  of  darkness, 
goodness,  etc.,  (21).  He  has  the  Vedas,  as  his  form,  the 
entire  host  of  mortals  for  bis  forms  and  is  without  it.  He 
is  the  Prime  and  the  support  of  the  universe.  He  is  l^ht 
and  comprehended  by  Vedanta  and  is  the  greatest  of  the 
i^eat  tod  the  gods  always  chant  his  glories  (22).  ' 


CHAPTER  cm. 


]M[arkandeya  said  :~When  the  sky  and  the  earth  were 
heated  by  the  rays  of  the  sun  the  lotus  sprung  grandfather, 
with  a desire  to  create  progeny,  began  to  think  (i).  “As  soon 
as  I will  create  it  everything  will  be  destroyed  by  the  heat  of 
the  divine  sun,  the  cause  of  the  creation,  preservation  and 
destruction  (2).  All  the  creatures  will  be  deprived  of  their 
lives,  the  water  will  be  dried  up  by  his  heat  and  without  water 
it  will  be  impossible  to  carry  on  the  creation  of  the  universe 
(3).^'  Thinking  thus  the  Divine  Brahma,  the  grandfather  of 
the  world,  with  his  mind  fixed  on  him,  began  to  chant  the 
glories  of  the  Divine  Sun  (4). 

Brahma  said  Salutation  unto  him  who  is  identical 
with  this  whole  universe,  who  is  identical  with  all  who  has 
the  universe  for  his  form,  who  is  the  great  light  which  is 
meditated  on  by  the  Yogins  ; (5).  who  is  identical  with 
Rih^  who  is  the  root  of  Yayushy  who  is  the  origin  of  Saman, 
who  is  of  inconceivable  energy,  who,  for  his  grossness,  is  iden- 
tical with  three,  the  half  mdtra  is  whose  great  form  and  who 
is  beyond  all  qualities  (6)  3 who  is  the  cause  of  all,  who  is 
worthy  of  being  eulogised  greatly  and  being  known,  who  is 
the  great  light  Avanhi  in  the  beginning,  who  is  gross  being 
identical  with  the  gross — I bow  unto  that  greatest  of  the  great, 
the  Sun,  the  first  of  all  (7).  Urged  on  by  this  prime  energy 
I create  water,  earth,  air,  fire,  gods  and  various  other 
endless  objects  beginning  with  Om  ; and  in  due  order  pre- 
serve and  destroy  them.  I can  never  do  so  of  my  own  ac- 
cord (8),  Thou  art  fire.  By  thy  prowess  I dry  up  the  water 
and  create  the  world  and  perform  the  first  cooking  process  of 
the  world.  Thou  art,  0 lord,  manifest  over  the  universe  and 


IYIarkandeya  »aicl Having  rmalml  ibis  univerit 
BrahmS,  as  before,  made  the  nr«tj»rr  divinions  of  VarM, 
Asrama,  seas,  mountains  and  IsfamU  (l).  And  llie  Diviae 
Lotus  sprung  Deity  made  arrangements  for  the  pasitbftftod 
form  of  the  gods,  demons  and  Uragas  (4}»  The  son,  that  WH , 
l»rn  to  Brahmi,  was  known  as  Maiiehi— his  son  was  Kart* 
ya^H*>his  son  was  Kishyapa  (3).  l Ue  thirteenth  daughter  of 
Daksba  was  hit  wife.  He  had  many  son*  amongst  the  godij 
Daltyas  and  Uragas  (4).  Aditi  gave  birth  to  ttic  gods  th*  ^ 


^06  markansiva  puranam. 

identical  with  AkSsa  (space).  Thou  art  protecting  this  mU 
verse  in  fivefold  way*  (p).  By  undertaking  sacrifices,  person# 
conversant  with  great  soul,  worship  thee  j thou  art  Vtvaswan— 
thou  art  Vishnu—thouart  the  lord  of  at!  and  the  greatest  of 
the  great.  Desirous  of  emancipaibn  and  controlling  tWr 
mind  and  soul,  even  the  ascetics  mediate  on  thee  (lo).  Sdu* 
talion  unto  thee  who  art  in  the  form  of  sacrifice,  art  the  great 
Brahman  and  being  meditated  upon  by  the Yogins  (ti).  0 
lord,  I am  engaged  in  crcalion—llilk  bundle  of  effulpacf 
has  stood  in  my  way~do  thou  withdraw  it  (ia|. 

MARKANDEYA  said : — Having  bren  thus  eulogised  in  » 
most  excellent  manner  ny  Brahml,  the  creator  of  the  universe, 
the  Divine  Sun  withdrew  his  own  great  effulgence  and  held# 
little  (13).  Then  the  lotus-sprung  great  Bfihmft,  0 great 
Muni,  created,  as  in  the  previous  Kalpa,  the  similar  gods, 
Asuras,  men,  beasts  and  others,  trees,  creepers  and  htUt 
(i4--t5)« 


S4ARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 


407 


lords  of  the  three  worlds  and  Diti  to  fierce  DSnavas  of  dread- 
ful prowess  (5).  Virata  gave  birth  to  Garuda  and  Aruna  to 
Yakshas,  Rakshasas  and  various  other  birds,  Kadru  gave  birth 
to  Nagas  and  Muni  to  Gandharvas  (6).  Krodha  gave  birth  to 
the  river  and  Rishtha  to  Apsaras.  O twice-born  one,  Ira 
gave  birth  to  Airavata  and  other  elephants  (7).  O twice- 
born  one,  Tamra  gave  birth  to  girls  Sweni  and  others, 
who  (in  turn)  gave  birth  to  birds  such  as  Swany,  Bhasa 
and  Suka  (8).  Of  Iia  were  born  the  trees  and  of 
Pradha  the  birds.  By  the  offspring  of  Kashyapa  who  was  born 
of  Aditi,  by  his  sons  and  daughters,  grandsons  and  by  their 
sons  and  daughters,  O Muni,  this  world  was  covered  (9—10). 
Amongst  the  sons  of  Kashyapa,  the  gods  were  the  foremost ; 
they  were  divided  into  three  classes  namely  those  possessed 
of  the  quality  of  goodness,  those  of  darkness  and  those  of 
ignorance  (iJ.)  The  great  Patriarch  Parameshithi  Brahma, 
the  foremost  of  those  conversant  with  Brahman,  made  the 
gods  the  partakers  of  sacrificial  offerings  and  the  lords  of  the 
three  worWs  (12).  Their  step-brothers,  the  Daityas  and 
pSnavas  being  united  together,  began  to  throw  obstacles 
in  their  way.  The  Rakshasas  too  joined  them.  Accordingly 
there  was  waged  a highly  dreadful  war  (13).  After  a thousand 
celestial  years  the  gods  were  defeated  and  being  victorious 
the  Daityas  and  Danavas  grew  powerful  (14).  Thereupon 
having  beheld  her  own  sons,  the  gods  defeated  and  ousted 
from  the  sovereignty  of  the  three  worlds  and  deprived  of 
the  sacrificial  offerings  by  the  Daityas  and  Danavas  AdUi,. 
O foremost  of  Munis,  was  overwhelmed  with  grief.  She  then 
set  forth  mighty  exertion  for  worshipping  Savitri  (15 — r6).'. 
Then  abstaining  from  food  and  observing  regulation  she,  with 
whole  mindedness,  began  to  please  the  Sun,  the  collection  of 
light  stationed  in  the  sky  (xy). 

Aditi  saidji  Salutation  unto  thee  who  hast  assumed  a! 
subtle  golden  form.  Thou  art  energy,  the  lord  of  the  ener-, 
getic  and  the  eternal  support  of  energy  (x8)  Thou  art  the 


assume  at  the  time  of  drawing  it  for  the  benefit  of  the  wmM 
(19).  I bow  unto  thine  that  dreadful  form  which  thou  dost  m 
sutne  for  taking  in  eight  month*  the  Juice  of  the  moon  (j*o), 

0 Bhishman,  I bow  unto  thine  that  most  delightful  dead 
form  which  thou  dost  assume  at  the  time  of  pouring  that 
water  (29).  I do  also  bow  unto  thine  that  Bhiskara  form 
which  thou  dost  assume  for  ripening  those  plants  that  spring 
up  from  the  showers  discharged  by  thee  (aa),  { do  bow 
unto  thine  that  cold  form  of  dews  that  thou  dost  assume 
for  nourishing  the  corns  at  that  time  (23).  I bow  again  and 
again,  0 God,  O Ravi,  unto  that  thy  gentle  form,  which  it 
neither  very  fierce  nor  very  cold  which  thou  dost  assume  In 
spring  (24).  I bow  unto  thine  that  form  which  is  delightful 
unto  the  numberless  gods  and  the  ancestral  manes  and  is  the 
instrument  of  the  ripening  of  fruits  (35).  I bow  unto  thy 
that  form  which  gives  life  to  the  creepers,  which  is  identical 
with  Soma  and  which  is  the  source  of  ambrosia  which  is  drunk 
by  the  gods  and  ancestral  manes  (afi).  Salutation  unto  that 
form  dientical  with  Gana,  O Arka,  which,  being  united  wltih 
twofold  forms  of  Agnistoma,  has  created  this  universal  font 
(37.  O Bibhivasu,  salutation  unto  that  form  which  has  beM : 
created  by  Rik,  K«/«rA  and  SAm«H  united,  which  U this 
universe  and  which  is  called  Trayi  (aB).  Salutation  unto  thli 
form  which  is  superior  to  that  which  is  called  Om,  whii^ 
is  subtle,  which  has  no  end,  which  is  eternal  and  which  is  not 
sullied  by  any  shortcoming  (29). 

Markandeya  said  ;-—0  Muni,  thus  observing  vows  and 
abstaining  from  food,  that  goddess,  for  worshipping  the  sub, 
began  to  recite  this  hymn  day  and  night  (30).  O foremost 
the  twice-born,  thus  after  a long  time  the  Divine  Sun  came 
within  the  view  of  the  daughter  of  Daksha  in  the  sky  (31). 
She  saw  a bundle  of  light  spreading  simultaneously  over  the 
earth  and  sky,  and  growing  fierce  to  look  at  for  being  united 
with  highly  effulgent  rays  {3*).  Seeing  this  the  goddess 


4. 

ii 


markandeya  puranam 

possessed  by  great  fear.  She  th 
I can  not  see  thee  (33),  Abstaii 
thee  m the  sky,  hard  to  look  at,  si 

the  satne  time  (34).  I again  beho 

effulgence  on  the  earth.  Theref 
I wish  to  see  thee.  Thou  dost  sh< 
votaries.  0 lord,  I am  thy  votarv-c;.v« 

art  the  protector;  thou  hast  created  th^uni 

^He^Tho.:"“  --^ost 

Thou  art  BraTIi' va' 

soul  and  the  form  of  all  Hr.  t ^ 

art  the  lord  of  sacrifice!  Folio  I ^37)-  Thou 
born  every  dayTorshio  n T"?  twice- 

Controlling  their  minds  afi^  b^g  L^ta^r" 

eh.  T^::iT4%ZLr:::T  ““ 

hr  rays,  di.play  i,  „d  i,  JJ,  “j.'"*  ■''“"""S 

barged  with  water.  The  gods  and  m ^ ’r  rays  sur- 

_ • -lucgoas  and  men  salutf.  t-l  ■ 


sn  said  “Be  pleased,  0 Sun 
ing  from  food,  Tat  first  saw 
edding  heat  and  lustre  at 
d the  same  bundle  of  thy 
)re  O Sun,  be  propitiated  ; 
w compassion  towards  thy 

"35)'  Thou 
erse : bein^* 
protect  it  ; 
at  the  time  of  dissolution. 


410 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 


bending  low  her  head  as  soon  as  he  came  in  view,  the  sun  t 

said  to  her : — “Pray  for  thy  desired  for  boon  whatever  thoa 
seekest  from  me  (2)"  Kneeling  down  on  earth  and  bending 
low  her  head  Aditi  said  to  the  Sun,  the  conferror  of  boons 
who  was  before  her  (3).  “O  god,  be  pleased,  the  Daltyas  and 
Danavas  growing  powerful  have  deprived  my  eons  of  the 
three  worlds  and  sacrificial  offerings  (4).  O lord  of  rays, 
therefore  confer  upon  me  this  favour,  that  descending  as  their 
brother  in  a portion  of  thy  rays  do  thou  destroy  their  enemies  « 

(5),  0 Ravi,  being  pleased  with  me  do  thou  show  them  this  j 

mercy,  0 lord,  that  my  sons  may  again  partake  of  the  sacrifi-  j 

cial  offerings  and  be  lords  of  the  three  worlds.  Thou  dost 
remove  the  misery  of  the  afflicted  and  thou  art  spoken  of  as 
the  lord  of  creation  (6—7).’’ 

Thereupon,  0 Vipra,  the  Divine  Bhiskara,  the  pilferrer  of 
water,  being  prepared  to  show  his  favour  said  to  Aditi  who 
had  prostrated  herself  (8).  “0  Aditi,  being  born  in  thy  womb 
in  my  endless  thousand  rays  I shall  speedily  make  an  end  't, 

of  the  enemies  of  thy  sons  (9).”  Having  said  this  the  Divine 
BhSskara  disappeared.  She  too,  having  secured  all  her  I 

wishes,  desisted  from  carrying  on  her  penances  (jo)  There-  j 

upon,  of  the  thousand  rays  of  the  Sun  the  one  called  Sousha- 
mna  took  the  incarnation  of  Vipra  in  the  womb  of  the  mother  f 
of  the  gods  (ii).  She  too,  being  attentive,  performed  the 
vows  of  Krishnachandrayana  etc  and  being  purified  held  the 
conception,  0 twice-born  one  (12).  Thereupon  Kashyapa  '' 

addressed  to  her  angry  words : — “Fasting  every  day 
will  you  kill  this  embryo  (13)?’’  She  too  said  to  him  : — 

“0  thou  wrathful  one,  I have  not  killed  the  embryo  that  * 

thou  dost  see — ^he  is  for  the  destruction  of  the  enemies’* 

(14).  Saying  this,  she,  wroth  at  the  words  of  her  husband, 
at  once  discharged  the  conception  which  began  to  shine 
la  efiulgence  (15).  Beholding  that  embryo  effulgent  at  the 
rising  Sun,  Kadhyapa,  bending  low,  began  to  hymn 
its  ffloiT  the  prime  Riki  (t6).  Being 


MARKANOEYA  puramam. 


thus  eulogised  by  him  the  Divine  Bhashkara,  assuming  a 
lotus-hued  body,  came  out  o£  the  egg  and  filled  alt 
the  quarters  with  his  effulgence  (i7)*  Then  were  heard 
divine  words  deep  as  the  muttering  of  the  clouds  sur- 
charged  with  water  from  the  sky,  addressing  Kashya|lj(,  the 
fdt'emost  of  Muftis  (i8).  ‘^0  Muni,  since  thotr  didst  stsk  me 
to  Mil  (Marita)  this  egg,  sd  my  son  will  be  called  MSrtattda, 
ITiis  son  wilt  perform,  oto  earth,  the  fuftctiortS  of  fhe  sun  aft'd* 
destroy  the  Asuras  who  are  pitferriug  the  sacrificial  offer- 
ings’'  (19—20).  Perceiving  that  the  wordb  came  out  of 
the  sky  the  gods  attained*  to  great  delight  aftd  the  Dinavas 
were  dispirited  (at).  Thereupon  when  the  performer  of  a 
hundred  sacrifices  invited  them  to  battle  the  Danavas  delight- 
edly confronted  the  gods  (a-a).  Then  there  arose  a great  ert^ 
counter  between  the  gods  and  DSnavas  (in  which)  aH  the 
corners  of  the  world  were  illumined  with  the  lustre  of  the 
arms  of  both  the  parties  (23).  In  that  encounter  all  the 
leading  Asuras,  as  soon  as  they  were  looked  upon  by  the 
Efivlfle  MSrtandt,  were  burnt  down  to  ashes  {24}.  Thereat 
all  the  gods  attained  to  great  delight  and  began' to  hyrntf  ’ 
both  Aditi  and  Mclrtawda,  born  of  effidgende  (25).  After 
they  had  been  stationed  as  before  in  their  positSofis  and* 
entitled  to  sacrificial  offerings  the  Divine  MSrtanda  began 
to  spread  his  own  dominion  (26);  Then  displaying  his  lustre 
like  that  of  Kadamva  flowers  he  began  to  pour  his  rays  both 
in  the  sky  and  on  the  earth.  He  bedame  like  a Buring  handle 
of  fire  and  assumed  a body  of  great  efPnl'gence  (27).  y ■ 


CHA.PTER  CYI. 


IVLarkandeyA  said; — Thereupon  propitiating  and 

saluting  him  the  Patriarch  Viswakarma  conferred  on  Vivaswan 
his  daughter  Sajna  (l).  Vivaswan  begat  on  her  Manu 
Vaivaswata,  I have  already  described  to  you  in  full  his  true 
form  etc.,  (2).  The  lord  of  rays  begat  on  her  three  children 
two  great  sons  and  the  daughter  Jamuna,  O Muni  (3)- 
Sraddhadeva — the  Patriarch  Manu  Vaivaswata  was  the 
eldest — there  were  born  the  twins  Yama  and  Yami 
(4),  The  effulgent  M§.rtanda,  with  his  growing  lustre,  greatly 
distressed  the  three  worlds,  mobile  and  immobile  (5^-  Be- 
holding the  circular  form  of  Vivaswan  and  unable  to  bear 
his  rays,  Sajna,  addressing  her  own  Shadow,  said: — (6)-. 
“May  good  betide  thee.  I am  going  to  my  father’s  bouse. 

O auspicious  dame,  at  my  command,  thou  shouldst  live  near 
the  sun  without  being  agitated  (7).  Thou  shouldst  with  care 
bring  up  these  my  two  sons  and  the  most  beautiful  daughter. 
Thou  shouldst  never  communicate  this  unto  the  Divine 
Sun  (8).” 

The  Shadow  said: — O goddess,  as  long  as  the  sun  will 
not  take  me  by  the  hair  or  imprecate  a curse  on  me  so  long  I 
shall  not  communicate  any  thing  unto  him.  Go  wherever  thou 
wishest  (9).”  Thus  addressed  by  her  Shadow  Sajna  repair ti 
to  her  father’s  house;  and  that  one,  of  auspicious  eyes,  lived 
. there  for  some  time  (10).  And  thereafter  when  she  was 
repeatedly  requested  by  her  father  to  go  to  her  husband  she 
assumed  the  form  of  a mare  and  repaired  to  Uttarakuru  (i  i). 
O great  Muni,  that  chaste  damsel,  abstaining  from  food, 
began  to  carry  on  devout  penances  (12).  After  she  had 
gone  to  her  father’s  abode,  she,  the  Shadow,  assuming  the 
form  of  Sajna  aind  intent  on  carrying  on  her  words,  appeared 


before  Bhlskara  (13)*  Taking  her  as  SajnS  the  Divine  Sun 
too  begat  on  her  two  sons  and  a daughter  (14).  O foremost 
of  the  twice-born,  the  first  born  of  the  two,  Savarni  (by 
name)  was  equal  to  the  preceeding  Manus  (in  prowess)  (15). 
The  second  one  became  the  planet  Shani  ; and  the  daughter 
was  named  Tapati  whom  the  king  Samvarana  espoused  (16). 
The  shadow  of  SajnS.  did  not  show  that  affection  towards 
the  first  born  children  as  she  did  towards  her  own  (17). 
Manu  forgave  her  for  this  but  Yama  could  not  do  so,  and 
therefore  he  was  repeatedly  solicited  by  his  father's  wife  (t8). 
Thereupon  out  of  anger,  childishness  and  the  force  of  future 
incidents  Yama  raised  up  his  foot,  0 Muni,  to  strike  her  ; she 
too,  greatly  revengeful,  imprecated  a curse  an  Yama  (19). 

Sajna  said: — am  thy  father's  wife  and  therefore  thy 
superior  ; and  since  thou  hast  threatened  me  with  that  foot, 
undoubtedly  it  shall  fall  off'  (20).  Having  his  mind  greatly 
agitated  by  that  curse  the  high-souled  Yama,  along  with 
Manu,  communicated  all  unto  their  sire  (21), 

Yama  said: — ^^0  lord,  our  mother  does  not  treat  us  afl  ^ 
equally.  Leaving  us  who  are  elders  she  always  seeks  to  rear  ’ 
up  the  younger  ones  (22).  I raised  up  my  foot  against  her 
but  it  did  not  fall  on  her  body.  If  it  be  either  out  of  childish^ 
ness  or  ignorance  it  behoves  thee  to  forgive  me  (23).  O 
father,  I am  her  son  and  still  I have  been  imprecated  by  the  * 
mother.  Therefore,  0 foremost  of  the  ascetics,  I do  not  con- 
sider her  as  our  mother  (24).  0 father,  a mother  does 

never  become  hostile  towards  the  sons  even  when  they 
become  so.  Then  how  can  she  say  to  her  son,  '^your  leg 
shall  fall  off’'  (25).  0 lord,  0 divine  sun,  do  thou  think  of  a 

measure  by  which,  by  thy  grace,  my  foot  may  not  fall  off  on 
account  oC  tlie  imprecation  of  the  mother  (26)." 

The  Sun  said  : — Since  thou,  0 son,  truthful  and  pious  as 
thou  art,  didst  come  by  anger,  undoubtedly  there  is  some 
cause  of  it  (27).  There  is  a remedy  for  every  curse  but  there 
is  none  such  for  the  imprecation  of  a mother  (28).  Therefore 


EIARKANDEYA  PlJRAHAlSr. 


J 


^,4  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

I am  unable  ta  undo  the  words  of  thy  mother  but  I shall 
show  thee  some  favour  out  of  my  fatherly  love  (29).  Taking 
flesh  from  thy  foot  the  worms  shall  fall  down  on  the  earth. 
By  this  her  words  will  be  verified  and  thou  shaltbe  saved  (30). 

MarkANDEYA  said Then  the  Sun  said  to  the  shadow 
of  SajnS : — “All  the  sons  are  equal,  therefore,  why  dost  thou 
show  partiality  towards  one  (31)  ? How  can  a mother  curse 
her  sons  even  when  they  grow  disobedient?  Forsooth  thou 
art  not  their  mother — but  some  body  else  come  to  me  (32). 
To  evade  (an  answer)  she  did  not  say  anything  to  the  Sun. 
Then  concentrating  his  own  self  he  saw  every  thing  in  its  true 
form  (33)-  Observing  him  on  the  point  of  uttering  a curse, 
O Bralimana,  the  shadow  of  SainS,  trembling,  communicated 
every  thing  truly  to  the  Sun  (34).  Hearing  all  and  getting 
angry  the  Sun  went  to  his  father-in-law.  Then  consoling 
and  adoring  him  who  was  desirous  of  consuming  all  in  anger 
(Vishwakarmi.)  of  good  vows  said  (35) 

“The  whole  universe  has  been  overspread  by  thy  great 
effulgetkce.  Unable  to  bear  thy  form  which  is  so  greatly  hard 
,, to  bear  SajuS  is  carrying  on  devout  penances  in  the  forest 
(36).  Thou  shalt  behold  to-day  thy  own  pious  wife  carrying 
on  hard  penances  in  the  forest  for  thy  form*  (37)*  ^ remember 
the  words  of  BrahmS ; O god,  0 lord  of  the  day,  if  it  pleases 
thee  1 shall  make  thy  form  charnaing"  (38). 

Formerly  the  form  of  tl»e  Sun  was  circular ; therefore  the 
Divine  Sun  said  to  the  (celestial  Architect)  Tastri  “So  be 
it”  (39)‘  Having  oMained  the  command  and  engaged  the 
Sun  to  travel  in  the  insular  continent  of  ShSka  Vishwakarmi 
set  himself  to  <*i8eHjog  his  effulgence  {40).  When  the  Sun, 
the  navel  of  the  endless  world,  began  to  roam,  the  earth,  with 
its  seas,  mountains  and  forest,  got  up  to  the  sky  (41).  O 
BtHfamana,  along  with  it  the  sky,  with  the  moon,  planets  and 
stsw^i-came  down,  O great  one,  and  became  greatly  agitated 


♦ The  8ercen«»  of  the  Sen  may  he  l«ii«nad4i»4  he  may  •»»»»«  * 
m’lhierConn, 


V..,.  .nc  waters  ot  the  oceans  became  all  aglt^ted-th. 
great  mountains  were  rent  assunder  and  thel  s.,  ^ 

were  shattered  (43).  The  huge  clouds,  dri-n  L.  ! 

thuhtr  by  tbt  ,,l»dly  of  ,1,.  .un's  motion,  coring 

7?^  r™  (45).  0 toromoa  ot  Monis 

atea  by  the  motion  otthoBuo,  ,b<.  f„'‘ 

worlds,  0 Vipra,  thus  revolving,  the  celestial  saints  and  the 
gods  along  with  Brahma  eulogised  the  Sun  (47)  «<  Thr,., 

the  Prime  Deity  ; this  is  trulyknown  to^^e^^l  T^do^^ 
exist  m thy  threefold  forms  at  the  time  of  creation,  preserva- 
tion and  destruction  (48).  May  good  betide  ther,  Olord 

of  the  universe.  0 thou  the  mine  of  heat,  rains  and  dews  O 

god  ^ gods,  0 maker  of  the  day,  do  thou  bring  peace  unto 
mankind  (49).”  Indra  top,  coming  there,  chanted  the  glories 
of  the  revolving  Sun  :--'‘Salutation  unto  the  gpd  who  is 
manifest  all  over  the  universe.  May  thou  be  victorious  O 
lord  of  the  universe  (50).”  The  seven  Rishis  too,  headed’by 
Vashistba  and  Atri,  saying,  “May  .^food  betide  thee  j may 
good  betide  thee  11“  pleased  him  with  the  chanting  of  various 
hymns  (51).  The  BaiakWlyas  too,  filled  with  delight,  pleased 
the  revolving  Sun,  by  reciting  the  prime  and  most  excellent 
Jliis  recorded  in  the  Vedas  (52),  “Thou  art,  0 lord,  the 
beaulitude  of  those  who  have  obtained  it,  thou  art  the  object 
of  the  meditation  of  those  who  engage  in  it.  Thou  art  the 
refuge  of  all  creatures  engaged  in  action  (53).  Thou  art  the 
lord  of  the  gods,  may  good  betide  the  creatures  through  thy 
mercy ; thou  art  the  lord  of  the  universe ; mayst  thou  en- 
compass our  happiness,  peace  and  well-being.  May  good 
betide  us  all  always  who  are  two-legged  as  well  as  all  those 
that  are  quadrupeds  (54).”  Thereupon  the  Vidyadbaras. 


MARKANDEYA  poranam. 


4r6 

bear  thy  effulgence  (55-56)-”  Thereupon  Hahahuhu, 
Narada,  and  Tutnvura,  versed  in  Sharaja,  Madhyama, 
Grlndhara  and  the  three  Talas  as  well  as  the  other  arts  of 
Gandharvas,  began  to  sing  delightful  tunes  with  the  accom- 
paniment of  Murchana,  Prayoga  and  time  (57— 58).  ^Vishwachb 
Ghritachi,  Urvashi,  Tilottama,  Menaka,  Sahajanaya,  Rambha 
and  orther  leading  Apsaras,  displaying  gestures^  and  various 
other  charming  gaits,  began  to  dance  at  the  time  of  the  re- 
volving  of  the  sun  (59-5o)-  At  that  time  hundreds  and 
thousands  of  flutes.  Vinas,  Darduras,  Panavas,  Pushkaras, 
Mridangas,  Patahas,  Anakas,  celestial  bugles  and  conches 
were  sounded  (61).  When  the  Gandharvas  sang,  Apsaras 
danced  and  cymbals  and  other  musical  instruments  were 
struck  all  was  filled  with  noise  (62).  Thereupon  with  folded^ 
hands  and  with  heads  bending  down  with  reverence  all  the 
deities  bowed  unto  the  revolving  sun  of  a thousand  rays  (63). 
When  there  arose  a great  tumult  on  account  of  the  gathenng 
of  all  the  clestials  Vishwakarma  gradually  cut  off  his  efful- 
eence  (64).  Thus  the  Divine  Sun  is  the  source  of  summer, 
rains,  and  dews.  Hari,  Kara,  and  Brahma  too  chant  his 
glories.  One,  by  listening  to  the  story  of  lessening  his 
effulgence,  attains  to  the  solar  region  after  his  death  (65). 


CHAPTER  evil. 


‘ l^ARKANDEYA  said: — Thereupon  while  thus  chiselling 

htSbody  Patriarch  Vishwakarma,  filled  with  growing  delight, 

(Wanted  the  following  hymn  of  the  Vivaswat  (i). 

Salutation  unto  thee  who  art  the  mine  of  rays,  who  dost 
«iacompass  the'  well-beitig  of  and  show  mercy  nnto  those 


MARKAN0EVA  PURANAM. 


417 


who  bow  unto  thee,  who  art  the  great  soul,  who  hast  seven 
horses  all  gifted  with  equal  speed,  who  art  of  good  effulgence 
and  dost  give  life  to  the  lotuses  and  who  art  clever  enough 
to  dispell  darkness  (2).  Thou  dost  purify  others,  art  of 
pious  deeds,  dost  confer  diverse  wished-for  objects,  art  the 
source  of  the  highly  effulgent  fire,  art  rays  and  art  the 
benefactor  unto  all.  I bow  unto  thee  (3).  Thou  hast  no 
• birth,  art  the  cause  of  the  three  worlds,  art  identical 
with  all  the  elements,  the  lord  of  the  universe  and  righteous- 
ness,* the  foremost  of  the  merciful  and  the  sun  who  gives 
vision  unto  all ; I bow  unto  thee  (4).  Thou  art  the  source 
of  rays  and  the  innermost  soul  of  the  learned  ; in  thee  the 
world  is  stationed  and  thou  art  the  benefactor  of  the  universe, 
art  self-sprung,  the  vision  of  all  and  the  foremost  of  the' 
gods.  Thou  hast  incomparable  effulgence,  I bow  unto  thee 
(S).  Thou  dost  adorn,  for  a moment,  the  hill  whence  thou 
risest  like  a garland  of  jems  and  encompass  the  well-being 
of  the  world  along  with  the  celestials.  The  thousand  rays 
are  thy  body ; to  dispell  darkness  thou  dost  spread  them  over 
the  universe  (6).  Drinking  the  wine  of  worldly  darkness 
and  under  its  influence  thy  body  becomes  red ; from  that 
arise  thy  rays  that  display  the  three  worlds  and  accor- 
dingly dost  thou  appear  in  great,  effulgence  (7).  O 
lord,  ascending  thine  highly  beautiful  chariot  of  equal 
proportions  moving  mildly,  thou  dost,  through  the  help 
of  numberless  horses,  always  wander  about  unobstructed 
for  encompassing  the  well-being  of  the  world  (8).  By 
bestowing  simultaneously  ambrosia  and  the  rays  of  the  moon 
thou  dost  bring  about  the  gratification  of  the  gods  and  manes 
and  the  destruction  of  the  enemies.  Therefore  dp  I,  saluting 
thee,  chisell  thine  effulgence  for  the  benefit  of  the  world  (9). 
0 thou  fond  of  thy  votaries,  O thou  the  purifier  of  the  three 
worlds,  0 Ravi,  do  thou  save  me,  who  have  touched  with 

• The  word  in  thu  text  is  Vrisha  i.  e.  bull.  In  Puranas  a bull  with  four 
lef#  is  the  emblem  of  rightcousnes. 

53 


\ ' 

1 I 418  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM, 

: my  head  the  earth,  purified  with  the  dust  of  thy  feet  and 

■ j trampled  down  by  golden-hued  horses  (10s.  Thou  art  like 

j I the  mother  of  the  universe  and  tlie  highly  sacred  abode  of 

!'  j the  three  worlds.  Thou  art  the  lamp  of  the  entire  universe 

and  what  more,  thou  art  Vishwakarmil ; I bow  unto 
I thee  (n). 


C H 


AFTER  C V m. 


f : 


I ' 


I:;;! 


]M[arkandeyA  said  : — Having  thus  chanted  the  glories 
of  the  sun  VishwakarinS  put  the  sixteenth  part  of  the  efful- 
gence of  the  creator  of  the  day  into  his  circular  disc  (l). 
Fifteen  portions  of  his  rays  being  chiselled  out  of  his  body 
the  sun  a.ssuinerl  a highly  ciiarining  form  (a).  With  the 
effulgence  that  was  chiselled  out  of  his  body  he  made  the 
discus  of  Vishnu,  the  mace  of  Siva,  the  vehicle  of  the  god 
of  riches,  the  rod  of  tlie  Regent  of  the  dead  and  Sakti  of 
(KSrtikeya)  the  commander  of  the  celestial  army  (3).  With 
the  rays  of  the  sun  Vishwakanni  made  many  other  shinning 
weapons  for  other  gods  for  the  pacification  of  their  enemies 
(4).  With  his  effulgence  thus  chiselled  as  soon  as  the  Divine 
sun  appeared  with  not  very  warm  rays  his  body  became  ex- 
ceedingly charming  (5).  Then  concentrating  his  mind  he 
saw  his  own  wife  carrying  on  penances  and  observing  regula- 
tion in  the  shape  of  a mare  never  thought  of  by  any  creature 
(6).  Thereupon  repairing  to  Uttarakuru  and  assutniiig  the 
form  of  a horse  the  sun  approached  her.  Beholding  him 
thus  approach  and  taking  him  for  a stranger  she  turned  her 
face  towards  him.  Thereupon  they  touched  each  other's  RffiBl 


i 


MAIiiK4AJ0B;yA 


419 


(7—8),  T^c  energy  qf  the  sun  entered  into  the  «iare  through 
her  nostril  and  therefrom  originated  the  two  gods  A9wiiiis, 
the  foremost  of  the  physicians  (9).  They  both  came  out  of 
the  mouth  of  the  horse  and  are  the  sons  of  Mlrtanda  assum- 
mg  the  form  of  a horse  (10).  From  the  seminal  fluid  came 
out  Revahta  who  had  in  his  hands  dagger,  bow,  arroiy  and 
quiver  and  a coat  of  mail  on  his  body  and  was  seated  on 
horseback  (ii)- 

Fhen  the  sun  displayed  his  own  improved  form  ; and 
seeing  his  mild  form  she  attained  to  great  delight  (12). 
Thereupon  the  sun,  the  pilferer  of  water,  took  to  his  own 
house  his  loving  wife  Sajna  who  bad  assumed  her  own  form 
(13).  Then  his  first  son  became  Manu  Vaivaswata  and  the 
second  Yama,  on  account  of  the  imprecation  and  favour, 
followed  only  righteousness  (14).  Having  his  mind  greatly 
assailed  by  the  curse  Yama  liked  only  virtue  and  therefore 
he  was  called  Dharmarafa  or  the  kmg  of  virtue  (15). 
His  father  brought  about  an  end  qf  his  imprecation  by  say- 
ing  “Taking  the  flesh  of  thy  feet  the  worms  shall  fall  down 
on  earth”  (i5).  Since  he  had  always  his  eye  on  righteous- 
ness and  was  impartial  both  towards  friends  and  foes,  the 
dispeller  of  darkness  appointed  him  as  the  Regent  of  the 
dead  (17),  0 Vipra,  l?eing  propitiated  with  him  the  Divine 

Sun  conferred  on  him  the  dignity  of  a Patriarch  and  the 
sovereignty  over  the  ancestral  manes  (18).  Thereupon  he 
converted  .Yamuna  into  a tributary  of  Kalindi  and  the  two 
Afwinis  were  appointed  by  their  high-souled  sire  as  the 
the  physicians  of  the  celestials  (19).  Revanta  was  appointed 
as  the  king  of  Guhyakas.  Then  the  Divine  Sun,  worshipped 
of  all  the  worlds,  said  to  him.  “0  child,  do  thou  become 
adorable  by  all  the  worlds  (20).  Those  mortals,  who  shall, 
in  fear  of  the  forest  fire,  enemies  and  robbers,  remember  thee, 
will  be  freed  from  all  those  great  dangers  (21).  Adored  by 
them  aad  delighted  accordingly  thou  shall  confer  on  man- 
kiud  peace,  intellect,  Irappiness,  kingdom,  recovery  from' 


420 


markandeya  poranam 


diseases  and . advancement  (22).  The  highly  illustrious 
Savarni  too,  the  son  of  the  immitation  Sajna,  shall  also  be- 
come the  eighth  Manu  by  name  Savarni  at  some  future 
period  (23).  That  lord  Savarni,  still  now,  is  carrying  on  hard 
penances  on  the  summit  of  the  mount  Meru.  His  brother, 
Sani,  at  the  command  of  *the  sun,  has  become  a planet  (24). 
0 foremost  of  the  twice-born,  the  youngest  daughter,  that 
was  begotten  by  Aditya,  has  become  the  foremost  of  rivers 
Yamuna  purifying  the  world  (25).  I shall  now  relate  in  full 
the  account  of  Manu  Vaivaswata,  who  is  high-souled  and  the 
eldest  of  all  and  whose  reign  is  now  going  on  (26).  He, 
who  listens  to  or  reads  the  birth  and  glorious  account  of  the 
gods,  Vaivaswata  Manu,  his  sons  and  the  divine  sun,  is 
released  from  the  impending  danger  and  attains  to  great 
fame.  Hearing  of  the  glorious  account  of  the  Prime  Deity 
the  high-souled  Mirtanda  one  has  all^his  sins  committed  day 
and  night  destroyed  (27—28). 


— 

CHAPTER  CIX. 


KlROUSHTHI  said  : — 0 Reverend  Sir,  you  have  related 
in  full,  the  birth  of  the  children  of  the  Sun,  the  Prime  Deity, 
his  glory  and  his  true  form  (i).  O foremost  of  Munis,  I 
wish  to  hear  again  fully  of  the  glories  of  the  Prime  Deity 
Bbaskara ; do  thoii  delightedly  describe  them  (2). 

Markandeya  said  : — Hear,!  shall  recount  the  glories  of  the 
Prime  Deity  Vivaswan  and  what  he  did  do  in  the  days  of  yore 
when  he  was  adored  by  people  (3).  The  illustrious  Rajya- 
varddhana,  the  son  of  Dama,  became  the  king  ; that  lord  of 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


421 


■% 


( 


the  earth,  governed  her  well  (4).  That  kingdom  being 
righteously  governed  by  that  high-souled  one,  it  grew,  O 
Vipra,  daily  in  men  and  riches  (5).  During  his  administra- 
tion both  the  citizens  and  villagers  became  hale  and  hearty 
and  equally  rich  like  the  king  (6).  There  was  no  impedi- 
ment, no  disease  and  no  fear  from  dangerous  animals ; (what 
more)  even  there  was  no  fear  from  the  scarcity  of  water 
when  Damans  son  became  the  king  (7).  He  undertook  great 
sacrifices  and  gave  away  presents  to  those  who  sought  for 
them  ; and  without  interfering  with  real  virtue,  he  engaged 
in  the  enjoyment  of  worldly  objects  (8).  Thus  governing 
his  kingdom  and  ruling  well  his  subjects,  seven  thousand 
years  passed  away  like  a day  (9).  The  respectful  daughter 
of  Viduratha,  the  king  of  Deccan,  by  name  Manini,  became 
his  wife  (10).  Once  on  a time  that  one,  of  fair  eye-brows, 
Mi.nim,  while  engaged  in  picking  up  the  grey  hairs  of  the 
king,  began  to  shed  tears  in  the  presence  of  all  the 
aisembled  kings  (n).  When  those  drops  of  tears  fell  on 
the  body  of  the  king  he  saw  her  face  bathed  in  tears  and 
asked  her  (u).  Beholding  her  weeping  and  shedding  teari 
in  silence  Rljyavarddhana  said  to  Mlnini  ^'What  is  this?^* 

(13) .  Although  thus  accosted  by  her  husband  that  great 
lady  did  not  say  anything ; thereat  the  king  asked  her  again 

(14) .  Thereupon  repeatedly  asked  by  the  king  the  youthful 

(queen)  showed  to  the  king  a grey  hair  growing  in  the  midst 
of  the  tuft  of  hairs  (15).  (She  said)  ‘'  Behold  this,  O king  ; 
what  is  this  ? This  is  the  cause  of  my  grief,  unfortunate  as 
I Thereat  the  king  laughed  (16).  Smiling  he  said 

to  his  wife  in  the  presence  of  all  the  kings  and  citizens  who^ 
had  assembled  there  (17).  “Othou  of  expansive  eyes,  no 
more  with  sorrow;  0 auspicious  dame,  do  not  weep;  all’ 
creatures  are  subject  to  birth,  development  and  decay  (18),  O 
fair  damsel,  I have  studied  all  the  Vedas,  I have  performed  a 
thousand  sacrifices,  I have  made  gifts  unto  the  twice-born 
and  procreated  progeny  (19),  I have  with  you  enjoyed  many 


422 


MARKANDEYA  PURAHAM. 


objects  of  enjoyment  which  are  dear  to  the  mortals.  I have 
governed  well  the  earth  and  fought  many  fair  battka  (20)* 

I have  enjoyed  much  in  the  forest  and  elsewhere  in  the  com- 
pany of  chosen  friends.  What  is  there,  0 auspicious  dame, 
which  I have  not  done?  Wherefore  art  thou  afraid  of  my 
decaying  hairs  (:?t)?  Let  my  hairs  grow  grey^  my  skin 
folded  and  my  body  slackened— I achieved  all  my  objects 

0 M^nini  (22).  Repairing  iu  the  forest  I shall  treat  all  those 

grey  hairs  which  thou  hast  seen  on  my  head,  O auspicious 
damsel  (23).  0 fair  one,  my  fore-fathers  behaved  like  infants 

in  their  infancy,  like  boys  in  their  boyhood,  like  young  men 
in  their  youth  and  in  the  old  age  they  entere<l  into  the  woods. 

1 shall  ^Iso  act  like  them.  Therefore  do  I set  no  reason  for 
thy  sheeding  tears  (23— ;25).  Do  not  grieve  therefore.  The 
grey  hair,  that  thou  hast  seen,  is  the  in  Uriiment  of  my  proi- 
perily  ; therefore  do  not  weep  (26). 

Markandeya  said  : — Thereupon,  0 great  saint,  all  the 
assembled  kings  and  citizens,  who  had  come  here,  saluting 
him,  said  to  Rajyavarddhana  (27).  '*0  king,  there  is  no 

reason  for  thy  wife  to  wec‘p,  but  ourselves  and  all  the  crea- 
tures shall  have  to  weep  (2S).  0 lord,  hearing  thy  words  of 

repairing  to  woods,  the  mind.s  of  m all,0  king,  who  have  been 
maintained  by  you,  have  become  dejected(  29).  Thereforf, 
0 king,  we  shall  all  go  to  the  forest  if  you  go  there.  Thy-» 
self  repairing  to  the  forest,  0 lord,  the  works  of  all  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  world  shall  undoubtedly  be  stopped.  II  thii 
leads  to  the  obstruction  of  virtue  do  thou  give  up  this'  idea 
(39*^3 1}.  Thou  hast  ruled  this  earth  for  seven  thousand 
years*  Observe  therefore,  0 king,  the  virtue,  tl.at  has  arisen 
ther^kom.  (33).  The  devout  penance,  O king,  ih'at  thou  shtlt 
ei^ry  on  by  living  in  the  forest,  is  not  equal  to  the  ikteiolli 
pfrt  of  thy  governing  the  world  (33). 

. ;TWE  Ring  said  :--I  have  governed  Ihk  ^ egrth  for  .itvitn 
^nmtsaiid  the  time  for  re  pairing,  to  woods  hat 

amY^d<34)*  I lb$Ye  begotten  children  and  hav#  mm%  tltm 


markandeva  puranam, 


-all'll!  not  see  ft  any  longer  (3.5),  ^h 

--n  .„y  *.<'ad..Ocid.e„s,  coaside'  the.  a 

<■  non  ary  an  Death  of  greatly  fierce 
or<*,  p acuig  my  son  on  the  throne  ar 

objects  of  enjoyment  I shall  repair  to  wo 
on  evout  penances  so  long  the  sole 
come  (37). 

Markandeva  said  :-~Thereupon  des 
woods  that  great  king  enquired  of  the  a« 
proper  day  and  time  for  the  ifistaltat 
Hmrmg  the  king's  words  their  minds  we 
t ley,  althoufjh  conversant  with  Shastras 
Ute  proper  day  and  hour  (39).  The  astr 
Ktng  rn  suppressed  accents-^'  0 king. 

MI  ot*r  knowledge  has  been  destroyed 
rom  other  cities,  depondant  states  and 
many  barling  BrUbmanas  arid  apptoachih. 
wto  was  bent  upon  tepairtag  to  #oot 
titeir  heads,  said  (41--42),  .p  Be  pleased, 
all  as  hebre.  0 kbe-, 
worlds  will  j - 
that  the  world 

as  we  shall  liye,  we  shall 
this  ihtone  1 ■ • 

MAJhKANDfiVA 
twice-born  ( 
and  otliets  said  this 
resolufirtn  of  r— -*• 
said  “death  will  not  let  me 
th'i  councillors,  the  servants,  elderly  citize 
born  ones,  ass(*nibling  teethe 
should  do  (47).  They 


that  city  Caiiie 
hfng,  O Munh 
1 bending  low 
g,  and  govern 

,r„rA  • r , ^ td  woods  all  tlWf 

h to  rum  (43).  Therefore,  0 king,  do  thoti  so  act 
■■I  r»AynotgotorUm.  0heroe,01ord,  as  long 

a moment,  to  see 

Without  you  (44). 

i said:— Although  these  BrShrtianas,  othAf 

ones,  the  citizens,  the  kings,  servants,  Coundllovs, 
-.-..-i  repeatedly  yet  he  did  Hot  give  up  hil. 
repairing  to  Woods  5 on  the  other  hand,  he 
alone”  •(4S--*46j.  ThereupoH 
ns  and  the  twice- 
r,  begaiv  to  Consult  what  they 
- all  attaelied  to  the  highlv  vicfOa 
now  km,,  0 Vipr.,  aad  tofore  »(«r  afri.ej 

« «.«  co»d««o«  (4»).  •■CPrt.rt,«i6S6„  «m<l,4.dai„. 


I 


424  MAKKANDEYA  puranam. 


trolling  ourselves  we  shall,  with  penances,  worship  the  divine 
Sun  for  a longer  lease  of  life  for  this  king  (49).’’  When  they 
had  all  arrived  at  this  determination  some,  in  their  own 
houses,  engaged  in  worshipping  the  sun  by  duly  offering  him 
Arghya  and  other  articles  (50).  Some  with  the  silent  recita- 
tion of  Riks  and  others  with  Yayus  and  Saman  pleased 
the  sun  '$*)•  Some  BrSlhmanas,  abstaining  from  food,  lying 
down  on  the  bank  of  a river  and  carrying  on  devout  penances, 
worshipped  the  sun  (52).  Others,  engaged  in  the  perform- 
ance of  Agnihotra,  recited  day  and  night  Ravisukta  where- 
as others  remained  with  their  eyes  fixed  on  the  sun  (53). 
Thus  resorting  to  their  respective  modes,  they  all,  in  various 
ways,  made  up  their  minds  for  worshipping  the  sun  (54). 
When  they  all  thus  perseveringly  carried  on  the  worship  of 
the  Sun  a Gandharva,  by  name  Sud&m&i  coming,  there  said 
(55)*  “ O ye  Vipras,  if  ye  are  determined  upon  worshipping 
the  sun  do  ye  so  act  as  may  please  him  (56).  On  the  huge 
mountain  in  KSmrupa  there  is  a forest  called  Vishala  resorted 
to  by  Siddhas.  Do  ye  all  speedily  go  there  (57).  And  with 
controlled  minds  do  ye  worship  the  sun  there  where  every 
one  gets  Siddhi  and  auspiciousness  and  attains  all  his  wished 
for  objects  (58). 

Markandeya  said -Hearing  his  words  and  repairing 
to  that  forest  the  twice-born  ones  saw  the  holy  and  auspi- 
cious form  of  the  sun  (59).  There  abstemious  of  food  and 
diligent  all  the  Brahmanas  and  other  castes  began  to  worship 
him  with  incense,  flowers  and  other  presents  (60).  Worship- 
ping him  with  flowers,  sandal  pastes,  incense,  scents  and 
other  things,  recitations,  Homa,  food,  lamp,  etc.,  the  twice- 
born  ones,  0 Brabmana,  with  controlled  minds,  there  eulogised 
the  sun  (61). 

The  Brahmanas  said:— We  seek  refuge  with  the  God 
who  excels  in  effulgence  the  gods,  Danavas,  Yaksbas, 
planets  and  luminous  bodies;  (63).  He  who  is  the  lord 
of  the  gods,  who  stationed  in  the  sky  ligbbi  • «p  all  the 


WAKKANI>f:YA  PURA'NAM, 

wlio  fills  th^»  flirty  j I 

»i.o  i.  ""  ""*'“■  °'  “■«  ■'•y; 

8 ^ 4; , who  IS  (fhe  fire  of  dissolutioo  at  the  enH  «f 

four  who  goes  even  to  the  end  nf  1 • 

hard  u i ^ dissolution  and  is 

~re^ 

- Ag^ra  ofthe.sh.“;:if— 

ZTTT"'  ' d iZroZ 

and  beyond  comprehension.;  we  seek  refuge  with 
that  sun  (68).  He  is  BrahmS,  Siva,  Vishnu,  pfajapati  • 
he  H a.r,  ether,  water,  and  the  earth,  with  momuains 
and  oceans;  (69).  [le  is  planet,  star,  the  moon  and 

of  v^tue  and  vice  m both,  what  is  manifest  or  not  (70) 
He  has  three-fold  forms  of  Brahma,  Vishnu  and  SiL . 

lord  o tl  *“”•  “«  f/l).  He  is  the' 

lord  ot  the  universe  and  is  without  birth ; his  limb  is  this 

universe  and  he  is  the  life  of  the  world ; may  he  be  propi- 

whos'e  RlVk"^  propitiated  with  us 

whose  Bhtskara  form,  enveloped  with  rays,  is  hard  to  look 

Dtvme  .Sun  be  propitiated  with  us  with  whose  these  two 
forms  the  world  has  been  created  and  filled  with  fire  (74)  ‘ 
MMKANDRYA  said  :~0  foremost  of  the  twice-horn,havi„g 
»ten  thus  eulogised  by  them  with  reverence  and  worshipped 
or  three  months  the  Divine  Sun  was  pleased  (75).  Thereupon 
a I lough  hard  to  work  at,  he,  as.suming  the  effulgence  of  the 
rising  sun,  came  down  from  his  disc  and  appeared  before 
th«m  (76).  Thereat  trembling  in  joy  and  beniing  low  with 
reverence  all  the  people  there  bowed  unto  the  unborn  sun 
54 


426'  MARKANDEVA  PURANAM,  ( 

who  came  there  in  his  clean  form  (77)»  (T'hey  «aid)  r-N 
tation  unto  thee,  O thou  of  thousand  rays,  thou  I 
cause  of  all  and  the  guide.  Thou  art  worthy 
eulogised  and  worshipped  by  all.  Do  thou  protect 
Thou  art  the  refuge  of  all  sacrificci : the  Yogitis  r>; 
on  thee;  be  thou  propitiated  with  us  (7S)* 


CHAPTEK  CX- 


Mark/vnDKYA  $aid:--Thftreupmt  d- the 
Sun  said  to  all  the  people  “ O ye  twu  i-horu  ones  and 
tell  me  what  do  ye  seek  from  me”  (t).  Beholding: 
stationed  before  them  all  the  Brahmanas  and  others,  ; 
him  with  reverence,  said  to  that  lord  of  the  universe 

The  Subjects  said;— C)  fyord,  O thou  the  disp 
darkness,  if  thou  art  pltfased  wiilt  our  devotion  may.  i 
live  for  ten  thousand  years  (31.  May  he  be  alwa 
from  diseases,  may  he  defeat  lus  enemies,  may  his  ! 
remain  always  full,  and  may  he  be  ever  youthfJ 
Rajyavarddhana  live  for  ten  thousand  years  (4). 

Markandeya  said: — 0 great  Muni,  having  sai< 
it’  the  sun  assumed  his  own  form.  They  too,  ha 
tained  their  boons,  and  been  delighted,  approached  t 
of  men  (5).  0 twice-born  one,  they  cominuniGate 
thing  fully  unto  the  king  how  they  had  obtained 
from  the  sun  (6),  O twice-born  one,  hearing  this 
Miitti  was  delighted.  But  the  king  thought  for  soi 
and 'ltd  not  say  any  thing  to  the  people  (7).  T 
touioi,  having  her  heart  fillied  with  delight,  saic 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  427 

husband  0 king,  by  luck,  you  have  got  a longed  leas^  of 
(8).  0 twice-born  one,  although  her  husband  was  thus 

congratulated  by  MAnini  in  delight  the  king  did  not  say  any 
thing  and  his  mind  was  stupified  by  pensiveness  (g).  He 
began  to  think  with  his  head  cast  downwards.  Slie  again  said 
to  her  husband  king,  why  art  thou  not  pleased  with  the 
accession  of  such  a good  fortune  (lo).  From  to-day  thou 
shalt  live  a healthy  and  youthful  life  for  ten  thousand  years, 
why  art  thou  not  pleased  then?  (li).  0 king,  tell  me  the 

cause  of  the  anxiety  that  has  possessed  thy  heart  even  at 
the  advent  of  such  a good  fortune^*  (12). 

The  King  said:— 0 auspicious  damsel,  what  is  that  good 
fortune  to  me?  Why  art  thou  congratulating  me?  A 
thousand  miseries  have  come  for  me  ? Why  do  you  please 
me?  (13).  I shall  alone  live  for  ten  thousand  years.  Thou 
shalt  meet  with  death.  Will  not  that  cause  grief  unto  me? 
(14).  Beholding  my  sons,  grandsons,  their  sons  and  other 
relations  passing  away  before  me  shall  I experience  a small 
grief  ? (I5)»  When  servants,  greatly  attached  to  me,  as  well 
the  friends  shall  pass  a^way,  there  shall  be  no  end  of  grief 
unto  me?  (16)*  Even  they,  who  by  carrying  on  penances 
have  reduced  their  bodies  to  skeletons  for  me,  will  meet  with 
death.  Shall  I alone  live  and  enjoy  2 0 fie  on  me  (17). 
Therefore,  0 fair  one,  this  is  no  prosperity  to  me  but  a great 
calamity.  Why  do  you  not  consider  this?  And  why  do  yaa 
congratulate  me  ? (18). 

MaNINI  said: — Undoubtedly  what  thou  hast  said,  0 great 
king,  is  true.  In  our  joy,  neither  myself  nor  the  citizens 
couUl  observe  this  defect  {19).  Therefore,  think,  0 king,  what 
should  now  be  done.  What  the  Divine  Sun  has  said  in 
propitiation  shall  never  be  otherwise  (20). 

The  King  said: — Without  repaying  the  benefit  which 
has  been  done  me  by  citizens  and  servants  delightedly  how 
ifiill  ! enjoy  various  objects  of  enjoyment  ? (21).  I too 
to-day  ihad  g<>  to  the  mountain  and  with  controlled  mind 


MARKANDEYA 


4:^ 

and  abstaining  from  food  shafl  warship  the  sun  and  carry  on 
penances  (22).  As  I shall,  by  his  favour,  live  for  ten  thou- 
sand years,  being  yonthful  and  freed  from  diseases,  likewise 
if  my  subjects,  servants,  sons,  grandsons,  their  sons,  friends 
and  others  live  by  the  favour  of  the  sun,  then  with  delight 
I shall  be  their  king  and  enjoy  the  objects  of  enjoyment 
(23 — 25).  If  the  sun  does  not  encompass  this,  0 Manini, 
I shall,  abstaining  from  food,  carry  on,  in  this  mountain, 
devout  penances  so  long  my  life  does  not  run  out  (26). 

MarKANDEYA  said : — Having  been  thus  addressed  by 
him  she  said  ^ so  be  it*"  to  the  king  and  with  him  repaired  to 
that  mountain  (27).  Having  reached  that  valley,  0 twice- 
born  one,  the  king,  engaged  in  his  service  along  with  his 
wife,  began  to  worship  the  sun  (28).  The  king  grew  lean 
with  fasting  and  so  did  she.  Bearing  cold  and  heat  she 
earned  on  hard  austerities  (29).  He  thus  worshipping  the 
smm  and  carrying  on  hard  penances  for  a little  over  a year  the 
sun  was  delighted  (30).  O foremost  of  the  twice-born  ones, 
he  then  conferred  the  boon,  as  desired  by  the  king,  with 
regard  to  all  his  servants,  citizens  and  sons  (31).  Having 
obtained  the  boon  and  returned  to  his  own  city  the  king 
delightedly  governed  his  kingdom  and  piously  ruled  his 
Sii>jects  (32).  He  performend  many  Fajnas  and.  made 
charities  day  and  night.  And  that  one  conversant  with 
^ue  enjoyed  many  objects  of  desire  in  the  company  of 
Manini  (33).  He  lived  a youthful  and  happy  life  for  ten 
thousand  years  along  with  the  servants,  sons,  and  grand- 
sons  (34).  Se&ing  his  life,  Pramati,  of  Bhrigus"  race,  filled 
with  surprise,  composed  the  following  theme  (35).  * O what 

is  the  power  of  devotion  to  the  sun,  since  Rajyavarddhana 
has  gained  a long  life  both  for  himself  and  his  own  men  (36.)^’ 
^pVipmf  as  asked  by  you  I have  thus  recounted  to  you  the 
of  the  Prime  Deity,  the  effulgent  Aditya  437).  By 
tl^enmg  to  or  reading  in  full  this  mo^  excellent  glorious 
theme  the  Brahmanas  are  released  from  sins  committed  for 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM.  439  i , 

seven  ni^Us  so  also  are  other  men  (38).  Tl)e  i.itelJigeint  ; I 

tttari,  who  fntditates  on  this  theme,  becomes  Ireed  from  i 

diseases,  rich,  prosperous,  is  horn  in  the  family  of  the  intelli- 
gent  and  becomes  highly  wise  (39).  O foremost  of  Munis, 
tho<e,  who  are  unfortunate  and  beset  with  calamities,  if  they 
recile  this  theme  of  the  Sun,  three  times  a day,  are  freed 
from  ^ins  (40^.  The  sun  lives  always  near  the  house,  where 
this  his  glorious  theme  is  chanted  and  he  never  leaves  it 
(41).  Therefore,  0 Brahman,  you  should,  desirous  of  acquir- 
ing great  piety,  meditate  over  and  clmnt  this  glorious  theme 
of  the  sun  (43).  0 foremost  of  the  twice-born,  by  listening 

for  three  days  to  this  glorious  theme  of  the  sun  one  reaps 
the  same  fruit  which  he  does  by  making  a gift  of  a beautiful 
milch  cow  having  golden  horns  {43). 


CHAPTER  CXI. 


l^ARKANOEYA  said  Krausthika,  the  eternal  Divine 
Sun,  about  whose  glories  you  did  reverentially  accost  nre, 
is  thus  gifted  with  rays  (i).  He  is  the  (Paramatman  (great 
soul)  of  all  those  Yogios  who  have  concentrated  their  minds 
in  Yoga.  He  is  Kshetrajna  of  the  Sankhya  philosopliers 
and  the  lord  of  sacrifices  of  those  who  perform  them  (2). 
Tlie  Manu  of  the  seventh  Manwantara  took  his  birth  as  his 
son.  He  had  all  his  doubts  dissipated.  IkshwSku,  NSbhaga, 
Rishtha,  Narishyanta,  Ntbhaga,  Prishadra  and  Dhrista 
were  his  sons.  They  were  all  very  highly  powerful,  of 
illu8triou.s  renown,  were  well  read  in  scriptures  and  became 
the  rulers  of  the  earth  (3—5).  With  a view  to  have  a more 


430 


■MARKANDEYA  PU'RANAM: 


accomplished  son,  that  Manu,  the  foremost  of  surcessful  men^ 
aofain  undertook  the  perform»ance  of  a sacrifice  in  lionour 
of  Mitra  and  Vanina  f6).  O great  Mtinti  on  account  of  the 
ba#  conduct  of  Hotl  in  that  sacrifice  Manu  got  a highly  youth- 
ful daugliter  by  name  IlS  (7).  Thereupon  beholding  that 
daughter  horn  Manu,  pleasing  Mitra  and  Viruiia,  said  (8) « 
‘^Expecting  that  a most  accomplished  son  would  he  born  to 
me  hy  your  favour,  I undertook  this  sacrifice~b«t  a daughter 
is  born  (9).  If  you  are  pleased  with  me  and,  are  ready 
to  grant  a boon  may  this  daughter,  by  your  favour,  become  a 
highly  accomplished  snn^^  (lO).  The  gods  having  said,  *so 
be  it^  that  daughter  115.  immediately  became  a son  known  by 
the  name  of  Sudyumna  (n).  While  going  about  a-luiritirig  in 
the  forest  that  highly  intelligent  son  of  Manu,  again  by  the 
curse  of  the  Providence,  assumed  her  female  form  (12).  There 
she  gave  birth  to  a son  by  name  Pururava  who  became  In  time 
Lord  Paramount  (13).  After  the  birth  of  the  son  he  performed 
a great  horse-sacrifice.  Sudyumna  then  regained  his  manhood 
and  became  the  king  (14).  Sudyumna,  in  his  manliood,  begat 
three  sons,  Utkala,  Vinaya  and  (I,tva~they  were  alt  very 
powerful  and  energetic  and  were  irUeut  upon  performing 
sacrifices  (15).  All  his  sons,  born  in  his  manhood,  had  their 
minds  devoted  to  virtue  and  goV(*rnfnI  this  c»irth  (1 6).  Purii* 
rava  was  born  in  his  womanliood.  He  did  not  oblain  a 
•portion  of  the  earth  since  he  was  I lie  mm  of  llurlha  (17}* 
According  to  tire  words  of  Vishlstha,  a bc.st  of  cities,  Praliili- 
thina,  was  conferred  u[)on  him*  Ik  became  king  in  llitl 
highly  charming  city  (18). 


CHAPTER  CXI  I. 


M 

iTlARKANDEYA  said  : — Manu’s  son,  PrishadlVra,  by  name, 
went  out  a-lmnting  into  the  forest.  Going  about  there  in 
that  lonely  wood  he  did  not  find  any  deer.  He  was  assailed 
hy  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  was  possessed  by  hunger  and 
thirst  while  moving  about  hither  and  thither  (i — 2).  There 

he  saw  a highly  beautiful  sacrificial  cow  belonging  to  an 
Agnihotra  Brahtnana  (3).  Taking  it  for  a Gavaya  he 
discharged  a shaft  at  her.  Having  her  heart  pierced  by  the 
arrovv  she  fell  down  on  earth  (4).  Beliolding  the  sacrificial 
cow  of  his  father  thus  fallen  the  Brahmacliari  son  of  that 
Agniliotri,  ever  engaged  in  Tapas,  imprecated  a curse  on  him 
(5).  His  name  wa.s  IMbhraya  and  was  sent  by  his  father  to 
look  after  the  kine.  0 Muni,  he  was  by  nature  angry  and 
wrathful.  So  he  was  worked  up  with  anger;  he  began  to 
perspire  and  her  eyes  were  agitated  (6).  Beholding  the 
Muni’s  son  angry  the  king  Prishadra  said  f‘Be  ple^d  ; why 
are  you  being  possessed  by  anger  .like  a Sudra  (/)?  Such 
trt  anger  can  never  possess  a Kshatrya  or  a Vaisya  even, 
as  has  possessed  you  who  are#born  in  an  eminent  Biahmana's 
family  (8)»  . ■ 

Being  thus  remonstrated  with  by  the  king  that  Rishi’s  son 
TOprecated  a curse  on  that  vicious-souled  one,  saying  .^^Be  a 
Sudra  (9).  Since  thou  hast  killed  the  sacrificial  cow  of  my 
preceptor,  the  Vedas  shall  not  come  out  (of  thy  mouth) 
whi^h  thou  didst  learn  from  thy  preceptor  (10)/^  Being  thus 
imprecated  and  possessed  by  anger  the  king  took  water  in  his 
hand  to  curse  him(ir).  That  foremost  of  the  twice-born 
became  angry  for  the  destruction  of  the  king.  But  approach- 
ing him  speedily  his  father  prevented  him  (12),  saying  "O 
child,  away  with  anger  which  is  the  great  enemy  of  advance- 


merit.  Ft)rgivene.ss  only  encompMSues  the  we-ll-hetng  of  the 
twice-born  botli  in  this  world  and  the  next  f'13)  Anger 
de.stroys  ascetici.srn  and  longivity.  An  angry  man  loses 
knowledge  and  riche.s  (14I.  The  angry  do  not  arquire  virtue 
nor  riches.  Persons,  who  have  their  minds  possessed  by 
anger,  do  not  attain  objects  leading  to  happiness.  Even  if 
knowing  it  full  well  the  king  has  killed  the  sacrificial  cow 
still,  (actuated  by)  good  sense  you  should  show  forgiveness 
towards  him  (16).  And  if  unconsciously  he  has  killed  this 
cow  how  does  he  then  deserve  an  impreCJition  since  he  is  not 
wickedly  bent  (17).  A person,  who  seeks  his  own  goed  and 
at  the  same  kilLs  others,  has  his  good  sense  destroyed.  Such 
a man  is  an  object  of  commisseration  ( 18).  If  ll»e  learned 
puni-'h  an  innocent  man,  mc-thtnks  the  illeterate  are  supe- 
rior to  such  learned  men  (19).  Therefore,  O my  son,  you 
should  not  have  cursed  ihe  king  to-day.  By  her  own  Karma 
this  cmv  has  met  with  a painful  death  (20). 

TIvon  saluting  the  Muni’s  son  with  his  liead  down  Pti- 
shadnasaid: — "Be  pleased,  I have  unknowingly  killed  her 
(3t).  0 Miiiii,  lakiiig  In-r  (or  a Gavava  I have,  out  of  igno- 

rance. kiljed  ymir  sacrilicial  cow  (J2). 

T llK  Rishi's  son  said:— -0  king,  I Imve  never  spoken  an 
untruth  since  my  hinh.  0 great  one,  to-day  my  anger  shall 
never  be  otherwise  (23).  Therefore,  O king,  I shall  not  be. 
able  to  undo  this  curse.  But  I refrain  from  imprec;rtiiig  the 
sec>md  curse  which  I was  about  to  do  (23''  ' 

On  his  sHviug  this  the  father  taking  hts  8(»n  with  him  re- 
paired  to  his  own  heriuit«ge.  Prishudhra  loo  hr^ame  a Sutira 


chapter  CXlll. 


said :— Karusha  had  seven  sons  who  wefe 

called  Karushas  ; they  were  heroic  and  brave,  from  them 
^rang  seven  hundred  heroes  and  thousands  of  others  (i) 
Nabhaga  was  Dishthi’s  son.  When  he  set  his  foot  on  his  first 
youth  he  saw  a highly  beautiful  daughter  of  a Vaisya  (2). 

s soon  as  he  saw  her  his  mind  was  agitated  by  desite.  The 
prince  then  began  to  sigh  (3).  He,  then  approaching  the 
father  of  Uie  girl,  prayed  for  her.  The  father  then,  with  folded 
hands,  said  to  the  prince  whose  mind  was  possessed  by  desire 
and  whose  father  he  used  to  fear,  words,  bending  low  with 
humility  (4-5):~'‘You  are  kings,  we  are  your  servants  and 
ryots.  Why  do  you  wish  to  have  an  alliance  with  us”  (6)? 

Thk  Prince  saidi—The  equality  of  human  bodies  is 
rendered  by  desires,  stupefaction  etc.  The  human  body  is 
united  with  them  in  time  (7).  They  also  lend  to  their  bene- 
faction. The  pious,  thoughithey  belong  to’ different  castes, 
depend  on  each  other  (8).  By  the  influence  of  time  even  the 
unworthy  objects  become  worthy  and  worthy  objects  become 
unworthy— the  worthiness  is  thus  dependant  on  time  (9). 
The  body  is  nourished  by  desirable  edibles— thus  it  is  nourish- 
ed when  food  is  taken  in  proper  time  (10).  Thus  I have 
come  to  like  your  girl.  Do  you  confer  her  on  me  or  else  my 
body  will  be  destroyed  (ii). 

The  Vaishya  said  : Both  of  US  are  equally  dependants ; 
obtaining  the  permission  of  your  father  the  king,  do  you  take 
her  and  I shall  give  her  away  (12). 

The  Prince  said True,  at  all  times,  the  people  should 
obtain  the  permission  of  their  elders  | but  in  such  unwor- 
thy actions  the  elders  should  not  be  consulted  (13).  The 
talking  of  love  affairs  and  the  hearing  of  the  elders  are  oppos* 
55 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


ed  to  each  other ; the  elders  should  be  consulted  by  men  in 
other  matters  (14). 

VAiSHYA  said : — Of  course,  tin’s  will  be  a conversation 
of  love  for  you  to  ask  your  father.  I shall  ask  him,  this  is 
no  love  affair  to  me  (15). 

, Markandeya  said : — Having  been  thus  addressed  the 
grince  remained  silent.  He  (the  Vaishya)  then  communi- 
cated every  thing  duly  unto  the  prince’s  father  (16).  There- 
upon having  sent  for  leading  twice-born  ones,  the  Richikas 
and  others,  as  vvell  as  the  prince  be  said  every  thing  of  what 
bad  been  communicated  {by  the  Vaisya)  {17).  Thereupon 
communicating  all  he  said  " I have  been  placed  in  this  con- 
dition, tell  me,  O ye  leading  twice-born  ones,  what  should 
be  done  in  this  (id).” 

The  Rishi  fea|.id ; — O prince,  if  you  have  cherished  at- 
tichment  for  this  Vaisya  girl  it  will  be  considered  as  morality ; 
butithis  must  be  observed  duly  (19).  You  must  first  e.spoiisft 
the  daughter  of  the  king  Miirdhabhishikta  anti  then  you 
must  marry  her  (20).  If  you  enjoy  her  in  this  way  there 
will  i be  no  sin,  but  if  you  carry  her  nvvny  stealthily  you 
will  be  degraded  from  your  most  eminent  caste  (3i). 

Markandeya  said; — Having  been  thu*  addressed  and 
disregarding  the  words  of  those  high-soulcd  ones,  coming  out 
therefrom,  taking  her  away  and  uplifting  his  weapons  he 
said (23).  ” I have  taken  the  Vaisya  girl  under  the 

Rakshasa  form  of  marriage  ; whoever  has  the  power  let  him 
come  and  release  her  (33)."  Thereupon  beholding  his 
daughter  thus  carried  away,  the  Vaisya,  0 twice-born  one, 
speedily  sought  refuge  with  Ins  father,  saying  ” Save  me” 
(24).  Thereupon  being  worked  up  with  anger  the  king 
ordered  his  huge  army  saying,  "kill,  kill  this  wicked  and 
sudul  NSbhSga  (25),”  Then  ilie  soldturs  began  to  fight  with 


Markandeya  said Thereupon  the  king  desisted  from 
fighting  with  his  own  son.  His  son  too  espoused  the  daughter 
of  theVaisya  (i).  Thereupon  attaining  Vaisyahood  and  ap- 

I proacliing  the  king,  he  said  *^Oking,  order  me,  what 


his  own  soldiers,  himself  went  out  to  fight  with  Mm’ (37), 
Then  there  arose  a great  encounter  between  the  kin;g  an4 
his  own  son.  The  father  was  excelled  by  the  prince  in  the 
use  of  arms  (28).  Thereupon  all  on  a sudden  coming  from 
the  sky  the  ascetic  Paribrata  said  to  the  king  Desist  from 
the  fight  (“29).  0 great  one,  your  son,  high-souled  as 

you  are^  has  lost  his  caste.  0 king,  it  is  not  proper  for  you 
to  fight  with  a Vaisya  (30)-  A Brahmana  does  not  lose  his 
caste,  if  after  marrying  first  in  the  house  of  Brahmana,  he 
takes  wives  from  other  castes  (31).  Similarly  O king,  *a 
Kshatriya  does  not  lose  his  caste,  if  after  first  taking  the 
hand  of  a Kshatriya  girl  he  marries  other  caste  girls  (32). 
So  a Vaisya  is  not  excluded  from  his  caste  if  he  marries 
a Sudra  girl  after  first  taking  a Vaisya  wife.  This  is  the 
due  order  (33).  0 king,  the  Brahmanas,  Kshatriyas,  and, 
Vaisyas  lose  their  caste  if  they  marry  the  girls  of  other  castes.^ 
before  taking  wives  from  their  respective  orders  (34).  If 
persons,  before  taking  wives  from  their  own  castes,  marry 
in  inferior  races,  they  cannot  enjoy  their  objects  tlrere 
This  your  sinful  son  has  become  a Vaisya.  But  you 
Kshatriya.  He  has  no  right  to  fight  with  you.  O king, 
do  not  know  the  cause  which  may  sanction  such  an  encounter; 
therefore  desist  from  fight’^  (36). 


436 


markandeya  puranam. 


I to  do,”  (2).  The  king  said  : — The  ascetics  Babhravya  and 
others  are  engaged  in  looking  after  the  morals  ; let  them 
say  what  you  should  do  and  act  accordingly  (3).”  TherC'^ 
upon  the  ascetics  and  courtiers  all  said,  ” His  duty  is  to 
look  after  cattle,  agriculture  and  trade"  (4).  The  prince  had 
deviated  from  his  own  order  and  so  ho  acted  according  to 
what  had  been  suggested  by  the  pious  sagos  (5).  He  begat 
a son,  known  by  the  name  of  Bhanandana.  Ilis  mother  said 
to  him  " go,  O my  child,  and  be  a protector  of  the  world” 
(16).  Having  been  thus  ordered  by  bis  mother  and  saluted 
her  bo  approached  the  royal  saint  Ncepa  who  was  living  on 
the  Himalaya  mountain  (7).  Approaching  him  and  saluting 
his  feet  duly,  Bhanandana  said  to  that  royal  saint  (S).  " O 

reverend  sir,  my  mother  has  ordered  me  to  he  a protector 
of  the  earth.  So  I must  protect  the  earth  : l)ut  how  can  I 
obtain  her  permission  ? (<))■  I can  ruUi  over  the  subjects  if 
she  agrees.  But  my  earth  Ims  been  tnv.ided  by  my  power- 
ful kinsmen  (10).  I am  thy  servant.  Do  thou  so  order,  O 
lord,  that  I may,  by  thy  favour,  obtain  the  earth  ; 1 ah.all  carry 
out  thy  order"  (ii). 

Markandeya  said Thereupon,  O Brahman,  the  royal 
saint  Neepa  conferred  upon  the  high-souled  Bhanandana  all 
the  arms  (12).  Having  obtained  the  knowledge  of  arms  and 
being  ordered  by  that  high-souled  one  he  went  to  his  cousins 
Vasurat  and  others  (r3).  He  then  wanted  the  half  of  his 
ancestral  kingdom.  They  said,  “ you  are  a son  of  a Vaisya, 
how  can  you  enjoy  the  earth?  (14).”  Then  Bhanandana 
bei^n  to  fight  with  VasurSt  and  others  horn  in  his  own 
family  who  in  anger  began  to  make  a downpour  of  weapons 
(15).  Having  wounded  a!!  their  soldiers  with  weapons  and 
vanquished  them  all  in  fair  fight  that  one,  conversant  with 
virtue,  took  the  earth  from  them  (ifi).  Having  defeated  ail 
his  enemies  he  dedicated  the  entire  earth  and  kingdom  to 
his  fatlw,  but  he  did  not  accept  it.  He  then  said  to  bis 
son  In  the  presence  of  his  wife  (17). 


II 


MA.RKANDEVA  PURANAM.  437 

NaBHAGA  said  0 Bhanandana,  this  kingdom  was  creat- 
ed by  your  fore-fathers.  This  belongs  to  you.  I did  not  .make 
this  kingdom.  This  was  not  owing  to  my  inability  (18),  I 
have  attained  to  Vaisyahood  and  did  not  carry  out  the  order 
of  my  father.  Having  displeased  my  father  I married  the 
daughter  of  a Vaisya  (19).  A king  is  not  entitled  to  the 
enjoyment  of  sacred  regions  till  the  time  of  dissolution  (20). 
And  then  again  disregarding  the  order  of  my  father  if  I 
govern  the  earth  I shall  not  attain  emancipation  even  in  a 
hundred  Kalpas  (21).  I am  a respectable  person  5 it  does  not 
behove  me  to  enjoy  a kingdom  earned  by  your  arms;  (then 
again)  I am  weak  (22).  Therefore  do  you  yourself  govern 
the  kingdom  or  give  it  over  to  your  kinsmen.  I am  your 
father ; it  is  not  so  much  becomng  for  you  to  govern  the  earth 
as  it  is  for  you  to  carry  out  my  order  (23). 

MarKandeya.  said: — Thereupon  his  graceful  wife  Supra- 
bhS  laughing  said  to  her  husband  : — '^0  king,  accept  this  pros- 
perous kingdom  (25).  You  are  not  a Vaiysa  nor  am  I born  in 
a Vtisya  family,  0 king.  You  are  a Kshatriya  and  l am  also 
born  in  a Kshatriya  race  (25).  In  the  days  of  yore  there 
flourished  a king  by  name  Sudeya.  Dumrashya's  son  Nala 
was  his  friend  (26).  In  the  month  of  Madhu/  0 king,  he, 
along  with  his  friend  and  wives,  went  to  a forest  of  mangoes 
on  a pleasure  trip  (27).  There  accompanied  by  his  friend 
and  wives  he  enjoyed  diverse  drinks  and  edibles  (28).  There- 
upon on  the  bank  of  the  tank  he  saw  the  highly  beautiful 
royal  wife  of  Pramati,  the  son  of  Chyavana  (29).  His  vicious- 
minded  friend  Nala,  under  the  influence  of  drink,  caught  hold 
of  her,  who  was  crying  out  *Save  me,  save  me''  in  the  very 
presence  of  the  king  (30).  Hearing  her  cries  her  husband 
Pramati  came  there  speedily  saying  ^What  is  this''  (31)  ? 
There  he  saw  the  king  Sudeva  and  his>  wife  in  the  grasp  of 
the  viciou8*minded  Nala  (32).  Thereat  Pramati  said  to 
Sttdeva — ‘‘Desist  him.  Thou  art  the  governor  and  king.  O 
ling,  (in  your  presence)  this  Nala  has  committed  such  a 


438 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


violence  (33).”  Hearing  bis  distressful  words  and  on  account 
of  his  great  love  for  Nala,  Sudeva  said  to  him : — “I  am  a 
Vaisya:  seek  refuge  with  a Kshatriya  for  her  safety  (34),” 
Thereupon  when  the  king  said  that  he  was  a Vaisya,  Pramati, 
worked  up  with  anger  and  as  if  burning  all  with  his  energy, 
said  to  him  (35) : — "True  it  is,  that  you  are  a Vaisya.  He, 
who  saves  one  from  injury,  is  a Kshatriya.  They  take  up 
their  arms  lest  any  one  sets  out  a doleful  cry.  You  are  not  a 
Kshatriya  but  the  wretch  of  a Kshatriya"  (36). 


CHAPTER  CXV. 


]^([arkandeya  said : — 0 twice-born  one,  thereupon  hav- 
ing imprecated  that  curse  on  him  and  as  if  burning  down  the 
three  worlds  in  anger,  Pramati,  of  Bhrigu's  race,  said  to 
Nala  (i) : — "Since  you,  in  my  own  hermitage,  have  shown 
violence  to  my  wife  under  the  influence  of  desire,  you  will  be 
consumed  at  once*'  (3).  As  soon  as  those  words  were  uttered 
•he  was  immediately  reduced  to  a.shes  by  the  fire  originating 
from  his  own  body  (3).  Beholding  his  prowess  Sudeva, 
•divested  of  haughtiness  and  saluting  him  said  Forgive  me, 
forgive  me  (4).  0 revernd  Sir,  1 was  under  the  Influence  of 
■flqbor.  Therefore  forgive  me,  be  pleased  and  withdraw  youf 
curse’*i(5).  Having  been  thus  pleased  by  him  and  on  Nala 
being  consumed,  Pramati,  of  Bhrigue's  race,  said  with  a 
•dried  lieart  (6).  "The  words,  that  have  been  given  vent  to  by 
me,-8hail  never  he  falsified.  Still  being  propitiated  with  you 
t will  show  you  some  excellent  favour  {f).  You  will  be  born 
in  the  race  of  the  Vaisyas,  llicre  is  no  doubt  about  that. 


1 


But  immediately,  in  this  very  birth  you  will.be  a Kshatriya  (S).  - 
When  a Kshatriya  will  take  away  your  daughter  by  force  y-ou 
will  become  a Kshatriya”  (9).  In  this  way,  O king,  my' 
father  Sudeva  became  a Vaisya.  What  I am,  O great  one, 
hear  all  in  detail  (10).  There  was  a royal  saint  by  name, 
Suratha  in  the  mount  Gandhamadana.  Repairing  to  the 
forest,  abstaining  from  food  and  forsaking  all  attachment  he 
became  an  ascetic  (li).  Thereupon  as  soon  as  he  saw  there 
a Sarika  dropped  from  the  beaks  of  a Swena  his  mind  was 
possessed  by  mercy  j and  immediately  stupefaction  came  over 
him  (12).  When  he  came  to  his  senses  I sprang  from  his 
body.  Beholding  me  he  took  me  up  with  an  affectionate  heart 
(13).  The  lord  said,  "Since  this  daughter  is  born  when  my 
mind  is  possessed  by  mercy  she  will  be  called  Kripavati  (14).' 
Then  I daily  drew  up  in  his  hermitage  and  began  to  wander 
about  jin  the  forest  with  my  mates  of  equal  age  (15), 
Agaslya's  brother  was  equally  well-known  like  his  brother. 
When  he  came  to  the  forest  for  gathering  the  produces  there- 
of his  anger  was  excited  by  my  female  companions  and  he 
imprecated  a curse  (16).  .‘Since  you  have  called  me  a Vaishya, 
you  will  be  born  as  the  daughter  of  a Vaishya.-  £ give  you 
this  curse.'  After  he  had  said  this  I said  (17),  "O  foremost 
of  the  twice-born,  I have  committed  no  offence  by  thee,  why 
dost  thou  curse  me  for  another’s  offence”  (18)  ? 

The  Ascetic  said  : — Even  a good  man  becomes  wicked 
when  he  associates  fwith  them.  Even  good'  things,  made  of 
milk,  are  spoiled  with  a single  drop  of  wine  (ig).  Still  as  yoii 
are  innocent  and  have  pleased  me  with  salutation,  hear,  Q 
girl,  what  favour  I shallj  extend  to  you  (2a),  “When  aftet 
being  born  in  the  race  of  a Vaisya  you  will  despatch  yout 
son  for  governing  the  kingdom,  you  will  come  to  recollect 
your  pristine-  birth  (21).  Then  again  attaining  t6  Kshatriya^ 
hood  along  with  your  husband  you  will  enjoy  many  heavenly 
objects.  Go,  you  have  no  fear  (22).  0 king,  I was  thus' 
formerly  cursed  by  that  great  saint.  My  father  was  also  thus 


440 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


crused  by  Pramati  (23).  Therefore,  O king,  you  are  not  a 
Vaisya  nor  is'my  father.  So  neither  yourself  nor  I am  fallen. 
Why  will  you  be  then  fallen  (in  my  company)  (34)  ? 


CHAPTER  CXVL 


l^ARKANDEYA  Said: — Hearing  the  words  of  his  wife 
and  son  that  pious  king  again  said  to  them  (i).  "!  shall  never 
accept  the  kingdom  that  I relinquished  at  the  behest  of  my 
father.  What  is  the  use  of  speaking  in  vain  ? Why  do  you 
attract  my  mind  (2).  I have  taken  to  this  Vaisya  mode  of 
life.  I shall  pay  you  the  revenue.  Do  you  enjoy  this  king- 
dom as  you  like  or  give  it  up”  (3), 

Having  been  thus  addressed  by  his  father  the  prince 
Bhanandana  took  a wife  and  began  to  govern  the  kingdom 
piously  (4).  0 twice-born  one,  the  wheel  (of  his  car)  became 
unobstructed  all  over  the  earth.  No  one  had  his  mind  in 
vice  and  all  the  kings  became  his  tributaries  (5).  He  duly 
celebrated  Yajnas  and  properly  ruled  the  earth.  iJe  alone 
became  the  ruler  of  the  earth  and  his  administration  extend- 
ed all  over  (6).  To  him  was  born  a son  by  name  Vatsapri, 
who,  high  souled  (as  he  was),  excelled,  by  his  accomplishments, 
even  his  sire  (7).  Viduratha’s  daughter  Sounantia  became  hi* 
wife.  She  was  equally  great  and  chaste.  Having  slain  Kuj- 
rlmbha,  the  king  of  demons  and  the  enemy  of  Indra,  the  king 
qf  gods,  he  obtained  her  by  his  own  prowess  (8). 

,.‘,;  Kroushthik  said 0 reverend  sir,  do  you  delightedly 
describe  to  me  how  Vatsaprl  killed  Kujrimbha  and  got  her 
. as  bis  wife  (9).” 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


Ul 

MarkANDEYA  said There  w,as  an  illustrious  ki®g  m 
earth  by  name  Viduratha.  He  had.  two  sons,  Suhiti  and 
Suinati  (lo).  Once  on  a time,  going  out  to  the  forest  a-hunb- 
ing  he  saw  a huge,  widening  pit  like  the  mouth  of  the  earth 
(II).  Seeing  it  he  thought  “What  is. this  dreadful  thing 3 
Methinks  this  is  the  door  to  Patala.  This,  is,  not  of  the 
earth”  (12).  While  thus  thinking  he  saw  in  that  lonely  forest 
a Brkhmana  ascetic  by  name  Savrata  (13).  The  king  then 
wonderingly  asked  him  : — “What  it  this.  The  very  bottom  of 
the  earth  is  being  seen  through  this  deep  pit  (14.)" 

The  RisHI  said : — 0 king,  methinks,  you  do  not  know 
this;  there  should  be  nothing  on  earth  which  a king  should 
not  know  {15).  There  lives  a highly  powerful  and  fierce 
Dknava  in  RasStala.  He  makes  the  earth  yawn  and  there- 
fore he  is  called  Kujrimbha  (16).  Whatever  wonder  is  there 
on  earth  or  in  heaven  that  is  his  work.  How  is  it  that  you 
do  not  know  him  (17).  That  vicious-minded  one  stole  away 
the  mace  Sunauda  which  was  formerly  made  by  the  celes- 
tial Architect.  He  kills  his  enemies  in  battle  with  it  (18). 
Living  in  Pitala  he  rivfs  the  earth  with  it  and  accordiiB^ 
creates  a door  for  all  the  Asuras  (19).  Now  he  has  riven 
the  earth  with  that  mace  Sunanda.  Howi  will  you  enjoy 
this  earth  without  having  killed  him  ? (20).  This  dreadful 
and  powerful  (demon)  spoils  sacrifices,  distresses  the  gods 
and  welcomes  the  demons.  He  has  this  mace  for  his  weapon 
fal).  If  you  can  slay  that  enemy  living  at  the  furtherest  end 
of  FEtSla  then  will  you  be  the  lord  of  the  entire  earfhand 
the  great  god  (22).  The  mace  of  that  powerful  one  is 
spoken  of  by  people  as  Sounanda  ; Ct  king,  intelligent  men 
call  it  Balavala  (23.)  0 king,  when  touched  by  a female  that 

mace  grows  powerless.  On  the  second  day  it  again  grows 
powerful  (24.)  The  vicious  one  does  not  know  -the  prowess 
of  his  mace  and  the  fact  that  it  becomes  powerless  as  soon 
as  it  is  touched  by  a female  (25).  O king,  I have  thus  des- 
cribed to  you  the  power  of  bis  mace  (26).  Do  you  now 
56 


442 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


act  accordingly.  O king,  he  has  made  this  hole  near  your 
city.  How  are  you  then  at  rest  ? (27)”  Having  said  this  he 
went  away.  The  king  too,  repairing  to  his  city,  began  to 
consult  there  with  his  experienced  counsellors  (28).  He  duly 
described,  to  his  ministers  as  he  had  heard,  the  power  of  the 
mace  aud  how  it  is  destroyed  (29).  Living  by  his  side  his 
daughter  Mudavati  heard  all  the  counsels  of  the  king  with  his 
ministers  (30).  Thereupon  after  the  expiration  of  a few  days 
the  youthful  Mudavati,  accompanied  by  her  friends,  went  to  a 
garden.  Thence  Kujrimbha  slole  her  away  (31).  Hearing 
that  and  ^having  his  eyes  agitated  by  anger  the  king  said 

to  bis  two  sons  who  were  acquainted  with  that  forest : ,“Go 

ye  speedily  (32).  There  is  a hole  on  the  bank  of  the  river 
Nirvindya.  Entering  through  that  to  Rasatala  kill  there 
the  wicked  one  who  has  taken  away  Mudivati  (33), 

Markandeya  said  Thereupon  those  two  sons  reached 
that  hole  and  following  his  foot  steps  (they  went  to  Ras3tala); 
and  accompanied  by  their  army,  they  in  anger,  began  to  fight 
with  Kujrimbha  (34).  . They  set  up  a highly  dreadful  en- 
counter with  (the  dischaige  of  a)  number  of  Parighas,  Nish- 
tring-sas,  darts,  Saktis,  Parashwadhas  and  shafts  (35). 
Thereupon  having  slain  in  battle  their  innumerable  army  that 
Daitya,  powerful  of  illusion,  enchained  those  two  princes 
(36).  0 foremost  of  Munis,  hearing  of  bis  sons  being  fetter- 
ed and  worked  up  with  great  agony  the  king  said  to  all  his 
soldiers  (37).  -I  shall  confer  upon  him,  this  my  dauahter 
of  expansive  eyes  who,  after  having  slain  the  demon,*‘will 
release  my  two  sons  {38).  0 Muni,  giving  up  all  hopes  of  the 
release  of  his  son  and  daughter  the  king  made  this  proclama- 
toon  in  his  own  city  {39).  ■ Thereupon  Bhanandana's  son 
Vatsapn  heard  of  this  proclamation.  He  was  an  expert  in 
use  of  weapons  and  was  gifted  with  heroism  (40).  Then 
ng  that  best  friend  of  his  father's,  the  foremost  of 
saluting  him  with  all  humility  he  ‘said  (41);^ 

« command  me  immediately  ; slaying  that  demon  by 


my  own  energy  I shall  release  now  both  your  son  and 
daughter  (42).” 

Markandeya  said  Having  embraced  in  joy,  the  son 
of  his  most  beloved  friend,  the  king  said,  “Go  my  child  and 
achieve  your  object  (43).  You  will  really  do  the  work  of  a 
friend’s  son  if  you  encompass  this.  Do  this  immediately,  my 
child,  if  you  are  worked  up  with  energy”  (44), 

Thereupon  taking  up  his  dagger  and  bow  and  putting  on 
finger  protectors  that  heroe  speedily  went  to  the  nether  region 
through  that  hole  (45)'  There  that  prince  set  up  a terrible 
twang  with  whicli  the  whole  of  the  nether  region  was  filled 
up  (46).  Thereupon  hearing  that  twang  of  the  bow,  Kujrim- 
bha,  the  king  of  Dinavas,  encircled  by  his  own  army,  came 
there  in  great  anger  (47).  These  arose  an  encounter  between 
demon  and  the  prince  who  had  not  the  same  strength  and 
army  as  he  had  (48).  Having  fought  with  him  for  three  days 
the  DSnava,  his  mind  filled  with  anger,  ran  forward  to  bring 
the  mace  (49).  O great  one,  that  mace,  made  by  the  celes- 
tial Architect  was  in  the  inner  appartment  and  was  adored 
there  with  incense,  garland  and  scents  (50).  Mudavati  knew 
the  prowess  of  that  mace.  Therefore  bending  low  her  neck 
she  touched  the  mace  (51).  Then  the  great  demon  again  took 
up  the  mace,  and  with  a view  to  adore  it  touched  it  again 
and  again  (52).  Then  that  lord  of  Asuras  went  there  and 
began  to  fight  with  the  mace,  but  the  strokes  thereof  became 
fruitless  on  the  enemies  (53).  0 Muni,  after  his  mace 

Sounanda  had  lost  all  its  power  that  demon  fought  with  his 
enemy  in  battle  with  various  other  weapons  (54).  That  Asura 
could  not  equal  the  prince  in  weapons.  The  mace  was  his 
strength— but  it  was  made  useless  by  the  force  of  intellect  (55). 

Thereupon  discomfitting  all,  the  weapons  of  the  demon 
the  prince  immediately  brought  him  down  from  the  chariot. 
Then  taking  up  daggers  and  leathern  fences  he  ran  forward 
(56).  When  displaying  greatly  his  prowess  Kujrimbha,  the 
enemy  of  Indra,  came  there  in  great  anger  and  with  fury; 


the  prince,  with  his  fiery  weapon,  effulgent  like  the  fire  of 
dessolution,  killed  him  (57).  Having  his  heart  wounded  by  the 
fiery  weapon,  that  enemy  of  gods  gave  up  his  ghost.  Then 
there  arose  a great  festivity  of  the  leading  serpents  in 
RasStala  (58).  Thereupon  flowers  were  showered  npon  the 
prince,  the  Gandharvas  sang  and  the  celestial  instruments 
were  sounded  (59).  Having  slain  him  the  prince  too  released 
the  two  sons  of  the  king  and  his  daughter  Mudivati  of  slender 
make-  (60). 

After  the  death  of  Kujrimhha,  th«i  king  of  the  serpents, 
Ananta,  designated  Sesim,  took  up  that  mace  (hi).  O ascetic, 
that  king  of  serpents,  .S<;sha,  was  greatly  ple,ased  with 
Mudavati  (62).  That  highly  beautiful  damsel  knew  of  the 
power  of  the  touch  Of  a woman's  hand  and  so  she  repeatedly 
touched  the  mace  Sounanda  (63).  O twice*born  one,  tlwre- 
■fore  Mudavati  was  named  Sunanda  by  the  king  of  serpents 
in  grnat  delight.  This  was  On  account  of  the  virtue  of 
Sounanda  (64).  He  then  speedily  brought  her  along  with 
her'two  brother.s  before  the  king  and  saluting  him  said  ■.—{(>$). 
“O  father,  by  your  command,  I have  brought  your  sons 
and  daughter";  command  me  what  more  shall  1 have  to  do 
now  (66).  Thereupon  the  heart  of  the  king  was  (tiled  with 
delight.  He  then  exclaimed  in  sweet  words,  *' well-dotje, 
my  boy  (67).  By  three-fold  causes  ! h.ave  to-day  become 
a Couttier  of  the  gods;  you  have  become  my  son-in-law,  the 
enemy  ha.s  been  killed  and  my  children  have  returned  un- 
‘■SCathed.  I corrrmand,  t'o-<lay  is  an  ’auspicious  d.ty,  «lo  you 
'aefcept  the  hand  of  my  daughter  Mudftvati,  fair  of  all  limbs 
^and  eVer  delightful,  O prince  and  make  my  words  true"  (68— 
70).  The  prince  said  " O father,  it  is  my  duty  that  I should 
‘carry  out  your  order.  But  you  know  whether  we  have  any 
‘l%ht,in  this  (71)."  Thereupon  the  king  celebrated  the  mar- 
'rikg^  of  hts  daughter  Mudavati,  with  Bhanandana's  son  (72). 
‘¥at«apri  was  in  his  youth ; he  spent  his  days  delightedly 
in  their  Company  in  pleasant  country  and  on  the  terraces  of 


MAKKANyEYA  PUSANAM.  44S 

the  palaces  {73).  In  time,  his  father  Bhanandaea  feecame  #ld 
and  repaird  to  woods.  VatsSpri  became  the  king  (74).  H© 
always  performed  Yajnas  and  governed  .his  subjects  righte- 
ously. That  high-souled  one  being  engaged  in  ruling  over 
his  subjects  like  their  father  his  prosperity  began  to  in-. 
crease.  In  his  time  there  was  no  misalliance  arid  no  fear, 
of  the  people  from  wild  animals,  robbers  and  wicked  peopk 
that  king  governing  the  earth  there  was  no  impediment  what- 
soever (75-*-76). 


CHAPTER  CXVIl. 


iPiiiAKANDEYA  said: — He  begat  on  SufiandS  twelve  sotrs. 

They  were  Prangshu,  Pravira,  Shoora,  Suchakra,  Vikralna, 

Krama,  Vala,  Vataka,  Chanda,  Prachanda,  Suvikrandta  and 
Swarupa.  They  were  all  great  and  ever  vietorious  in  battle 
( i~2).  The  eldest  of  them,  the  highly  powerful  Prangshu, 
became  the  king.  The  other  brothers  were  submissive  to 
him  like  servants  (3).  His  sacrifices,  in  which  various  ■■ 

articles  were  given  over  by  the  twice-born  and  other  inferior 
castes,  made  good  the  name  of  Vasuridhara  (4).  He  used  j 

to  govern  his  subjects  well  like  his  own  begotten  soni  : 

With  bis  wealth,  that  was  in  his  treasury,  thousands  of  saCri-  | 

Sees  were  celebrated.  There  was  no  number  of  them— 

(even  it  could  not  be  numbered)  by  Ajuta,  Koti,‘Padma, 
etc.,  (5—6).  His  son  was  Prajati  in  vVhose  sacrifice  partak- 
ing of  the  offering,  even  the  porformer  of  hundred  sacrifices, 
along  with  other  celestials,  attained  to  great  delight  (7). 

That  foremost  of  the  powerful  killed  ninety-mine  highly.  ' 1 


44-6 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


; 


Hi 


powerful  and  leading  Danavas  and  their  king  Jamblia,  as 
well  as  other  highly  powerful  enemies  of  the  immortals  (8). 
€)  Muni,  Prajati  had  five  sons  headed  by  Khanitra.  Amongst 
them  Khanitra,  well-known  by  his  own  prowess,  became  the 
king  (9).  He  was  of  quiet  nature,  truthful,  heroic  and  ever 
engaged  in  the  well-being  of  creatures.  He  was  ever  ob- 
servant of  the  duties  of  his  own  order,  used  always  to  attend 
upon  the  aged  and  was  well  read  in  various  scriptures  (10). 
He  was  a good  speaker,  humble,  an  expert  in  fighting  and 
freed  from  haughtiness.  He  was  beloved  of  all  and  used 
to  say,  day  and  night  (ii).  “Let  all  creatures  be  happy 
always  and  find  delight  even  in  a solitary  forest.  May  they 
all  live  happily  and  be  freed  from  fear  (12).  May  they  not 
suffer  from  diseases  and  mental  affliction.  May  all  people 
cherish  friendship  towards  each  other  (13).  May  good  be- 
tidte  the  twice-born  and  may  they  love  each  other.  May  all 
ether  Varnas  grow  prosperous  and  may  all  attain  their  ends 
(14).  O ye  people,  may  you  all  wish  well  of  creatures  as 
you  do  seek  that  of  yourselves  and  your  sons  (15).  Such  a 
good  feeling  should  be  cherished  towards  all.  If  no  one 
offends  the  other  there  will  be  a great  good  (unto  all)  (16.) 
Forsooth  does  a man  reap  the  friut  of  an  evil  committed  by 
him  foolishly  towards  another.  For  the  fruit  precedes  the 
doer  (17).  O ye  people,  considering  this,  do  ye  cherish  good 
feeling  towards  all.  Do  not  commit  the  worldly  sins  and 
then  you  will  attain  good  regions  (18).  Good  will  betide 
him  always  on  . earth  who  will  love  me  to-day  j may  he  eve® 
meet  with  auspiciousness  after  auspiciousness  who  will  iniure 

^ Such  was  Khanitra,  the  son  of  that  king.  He  was  gifted 
trith  all  accomplishments  and  the  goddess  of  riches  embraced 
feim  (20).  Having  placed  with  delight  his  brothers  in  various 
Wagdoms  he  himself  ruled  this  earth  abounding  in  oceans  (21): 
He  placed  Shouri  in  the  western  portion,  Udavasu  in  the 
Sunaya  in  the  eastern  and  Maharatba  in  the 


li^aicAiiDEYA  mumAM. 


447 


n^lhern  (23).  He  and  they  were  of  separate  gotras  and  bad 
i^parate  priests  and  ascetics.  And  their  ministers  were  alsO' 
heriditary  (23),  Suhotra,  of  Atri^s  race,  was  the  priest  ot 
Shonri ; the  priest  of  UdSvasu,  KushSvarta  was  born  in  the  J 
race  of  Goutama  (24).  Pramati,  born  in  the  race  of  Kashyapa,. 
Wlyi  StiliAya^s  priest.  And  Vashishtha  was  the  priest  of  the 
king  Mahlrath  (25)*  Those  kings  respectively  ruled 
over  their  own  kingdoms.  Khanitra  was  the  king  of  the 
whole  earth  and  their  emperor  (26).  That  king  Khanitra 
always  sought  the  well-being  of  his  brothers  as  well  as  that  of 
bis  subjects  like  unto  that  of  his  own  sons  (27). 

Once  on  a time,  Shouri's  minister  Vishwavedin  said  to 
him,  king,  I have  something  to  speak  to  you  in  private 
(28):  He  alone  is  the  king  to  whom  belongs  this  entire  earth 
and  to  whom  all  these  kings  are  dependants.  He  is  succeed* 
ed  in  order  by  his  son  and  grandson  (29;.  As  his  brothers 
are  entitled  to  small  properties  before  so  their  sons  inherit 
smaller  states  than  theirs,  and  their  grandsons  still  smaller 
($0),  Thus  getting  in  time  poorer  from  generation  to 
generation,  his  descendants,  0 king,  become  cultivators 
(in  the  long  run)  (3t)*  A brother  does  not  save  his 
brother  out  of  affection*  So,  O king,  the  relation,  between 
their  sons,  becomes  more  estranged  (32).  O king,  their  sons 
become  more  and  more  distant.  Why  therefore  will  hU  son  love 
(the  son  of  bis  brother)  (33)  ? And  if  again  a king  is  pleased 
some  how  or  other,  what  is  the  use  of  his  appointing  ministers 
(34)  ? If  you  consult  with  me  you  will  be  able  to  enjoy 
the  whole  kingdom.  If  you  are  contented  with  it  why  do  you 
keep  (uselessly)  a small  kingdom  (35)  ? A kingdom,  wliich 
does  so  many  things,  requires  both  an  actor  and  an  agent. 
To  wi?h  for  a kingdom  is  your  work.  You  are  a doer  and  we 
are  your  agents.  Therefore  govern  your  ancestral  kingdom 
through  our  instrumentality.  This  will  give  you  and  not  us 
fruits  in  the  next  world”  (36 — 37).  ' 

The  King  said;— Our  eldest  brother  has  become  the 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM 


44S 

emperon  Since  we  are  his  younger  brothers  lie  has 

ruling  over  the  entire  earth  and  we  are  ruling  over  ® 

territories  (38).  0 highly  intelligent  one,  we  are  five  brofel^^*^^ 

and  the  earth  is  one;  for  this  reason  we  have  been 

over  separate  portions.  How  can  we  all  rule  over  the 

earth  (39)  f 

VlSHWADEvl  said  : — ^True  it  is,  O kir^  ; if  the  earfeli 
-one,  why  dost  thou  not,  being  the  eldest,  take  it  and 
over  it  (40)?  Be  thou  the  head  of  all  the  brothers  and 
emperor  of  the  earth.  As  f am  trying  for  thee  so 
ministers  are  also  working  for  them  (41). 

* The  king  said  : — Our  elderst  brother  is  a king  and 

us  all  like  his  sons.  How  can  I covet  his  kingdom  then  C-4-^)  ^ 

VlSHWADEvl  said: — Becoming  their  eldest  and  secuirijrigf 
the  kingdom  you  may  also  please  them,  O king.  Araon  g^s^ 
men  seeking  kingdom  there  is  none  who  is  the  eldest 
none  who  is  the  youngest  (43). 

MakkaNDEYA  said  The  king  having  agreed  to  this  tho 
minister  Vishwadevi  brought  all  the  brothers  to  his  side 
He  then  engaged  their  priests  in  the  work  of  their  own  t>eno«- 
diction  and  the  destruction  of  Khanitria  (45).  He  sowed 
vision  amongst  his  followers  by  the  various  means  of  corx  — 
ciliatibn,  charity  and  others.  And  he  set  forth  ccntinuJ-^d 
exertions  for  continuing  his  own  power  (46).  The  folxir 
priests,  having  carried  on  dreadful  magicid  operations  daty 
and  night,  produced  four  Krit'yas  (female  deities)  (47). 
were  greatly  fierce,  ‘of  dFeadlul  faces  arid  of  mighty  terriftc:* 
looks.  They  h?}d  uplifted  huge  darts  in  their  hands  and 
highly  dreadful  to  look  at  (48).  They  then  canie  where 
king  Khanitra  was.  He  was  not  polluted  by  any  sin  ari  d so 
they  were  obstructed  by  the  cbirectioh  of  his  virtue(49).  TTni^oscs 
female  deities  then  simultaneously  fell  upon  the  priests  of  tfto 
Mugs  and  Vishwadevi  (^o).  Thereupon  theierhale  deity, 
naiue  Nihanti,  completely  consumed  the  wicked  minister  of  tlio 
Mng  SferWri,  Vishwadevi,  together  with  the  pr?ests  (51^^ 


CHAPTER  CXVIII. 


IMi^RKANDEYA.  said  : — They  all  used  to  live  in  separate 
cities  ; so  when  they  were  all  killed  at  onee  all  the  worlds  were 
filled  with  great  surprise  (i).  Thereupo.n  the  great  king 
IChanitra  too  heard  of  the  destruction  of  the  priests  <©f  his 
brothers  as  well  as  that  of  his  minister  Vishwadeyi.  O 
foremost  of  Munis,  he  was  filled  with  great  surprise  thinks 
ing  “what  is  this  ?”  for  he  did  not  know  the  cause  (2-^3) 
Thereupon  when  Vashishtha  came  to  his  house  the  king 
asked  him  why  the  minister  and  the  priests  of  his  brother 
had  met  with  death  (4).  Accosted  by  him  the  great  ascede 
told  him  all  fully-»-what  was  spoken  to  him  by  bis  minister^, 
what  he  did  say ; how  he  (the  minister)  attempted  to  bring 
about  dissension  amongst  the  brothers  and  what  the 
prieits  did,  on  being  urged  on  by  the  wicked  minister  (5^)  f, 
why  the  priests  of  the  king,  even  compassionate  towards  the- 
enemies,  met  with  death,  on  account  of  their  attempt  to  injure 
an  innocent  person  (7k  Hearing  this  and  exclaiming  ‘Alas  I 
am  done !’’  the  King  blamed  himself  much,  0 twice-born 
one,  before  Vashistha  (8). 

The  King  said : — “ O fie  on  me,  I have  no  piety — I am 
unfortunate — every  thing  is  vicious  in  me.  Destiny  is  ad- 
verse to  me — I am  sinful  and  the  most  wretched  of  all  (9). 
For  me^  the  four  Brdhmanas  have  been  killed ; who  -else 
ibete  (is  on  earth  that  is  more  sinful  than  I .am  (10).  If 
I had  not  been  born  in  this  earth  as  a man  then  the  priests 
of  my  brother  would  not  have  met  with  destruction  (ii). 
O lie  on  my  kingdom,  fie  on  my  birth  in  the  raceiof  the  kings, 
for  I have  been  the  instrument  ofihe  destruction  of  the  twice- 
born  (J2).  They  were  the  priests  of  my  brothers  ; working 
for  their  client  they  met  with  death.  They  were  not  wicked, 
57 


MARKANDKYA  PURANAM. 


I am  sinful  f^r  I am  the  cause  of  their  death  (13).  Wfui 
shall  I do  ? Where  shall  1 go  ? There  is  no  one  else  mor. 
sinful  than  I am  on  this  earth  who  have  been  the  instrument 
of  the  death  of  the  twice-born  (14)."  Having  his  mind  thu^ 
agitated  and  with  a view  to  retire  into  the  forest  the  Kinperot 
Khanitra  installed  his  son  (15).  Having  installed  on  the 
throne  his  son  by  name  Ksliupa,  the  king,  along  with  his 
three  wives,  retired  into  woods  for  carrying  on  penances  (16). 
He  was  conversant  with  the  duties  of  a VSnaprastha’s  life. 
Going  into  wood  he  carri«“d  on  hard  austerities  for  three 
hundred  and  fifty  years  (17).  O foremost  of  the  twice-born, 
having  his  body  reduced  by  hard  austerities  and  obstructed 
all  the  currents,  that  foremost  of  kings,  living  in  the  forest, 
renounced  his  body  (t8).  He  attained  to  highly  sacred 
eternal  regions  conferring  all  wished-for  objects  that  are 
gained  by  the  kings  by  the  performance  of  horse  sacrifices 
(t9).  Having  given  up  their  lives  with  him  his  three  wives 
also  attained  to  the  same  region  with  that  fortunate  king  (20) 
By  listening  to  and  reading  tlie  story  of  Klianitra  one  has 
all  his  sins  destroyerl.  Hear  now  of  the  story  of  Ksluipa  (ill 


CHAPTER  CXIX, 

WIarkanokyA  said  s — Having  obtains kingdom 

Kshanitra’s  son  Kshupa  pleased  and  righteously  governed 
all  the  subjects  like  a father  (l).  As  that  king  was  charitable 
and  the  performer  of  sacrifices,  so  was  he,  in  the  conduct  0I 
men,  impartial  towards  his  friends  and  foes  (a).  O Muni, 
one  day  while  he  was  in  his  own  room,  the  panegyrists  said 


markandeya  puranam. 


451, 


Brahma’s  son  Kslmpa  was  formerly  the  king  of  the  eRrth  ; the 
conduct  of  the  present  (king)  was  like  his  (4).  The, king 
said: — '‘I  wish  to  hear  of  the  life  of  the  great  Kshupa,  I 
shall  try  to  lead  a life  like  his^’  (5).  The  panegyrists  said  ■ 

“0  king,  formerly  the  king  Kshupa  freed  the  kine  and  the 
- Brkhmanas  from  taxes.  And  that.high-souled  one  used  to 
celebrate  sacrifices  with,  the  sixth  portion  of  his  revenue’'  (6). 

The  king  said : — “What  man  like  myself  can  immitate 
those  high-souled  kings.  How  can  one  like  myself  endeavour 
to  follow  their  best  conduct?  (7).  Hear  what  promise  I 
have  recently  made.  I shall  immitate  the  conduct  of  that 
great  king  Kshupa  (8).  I make  this  , promise  on  this  earth 
of  four  Varnas  that  I shall  celebrate  three  sacrifices  each 
with  one  corn  (9).  I shall  return  the  taxes  to  the  Brkh- 
manas  and  the  kine  which  they  had  paid  before  to  the 
king  (10).  " '1 

Markandeya  said: — Having  promised  this  Kshupa  satis- 
fied it.  That  foremost,  of  those  who  celebrate  sacrificesi 
performed  three  sacrifices  with  one  corn  (ii).  He  ma^e 
gifts  to  other  BrShmanas  and  kine  equivalent  to  the  valwe  nl  • 
the  rents  paid  to  him  by  the  Brahmanas  and  the  kine 
That  king  begat  on  his  queen  Prsmatha  a highly  heroic  and 
praiseworthy  son  by  whose  prowess  and  bravery  all  the  kings 
were  brought  to  subjection  (13).  Nandini,  of  Vidharbha, 
became  his  wife  ; that  lord  begat  on  her  a son  by  name 
Vivingsha  (14),  While  the  highly  powerful  Vivingsha  govern- 
ed the  earth,  its  whole  surface  was  continually  filled  to  the 
brim  with  people  (15).  The  clouds  discharged  showers  in 
proper  time  and  the  earth  yielded  harvest.  The  corns  were 
ripe  and  the  fruits  were  juicy  Cl®)-  All  the  juices  conduced 
to  the  nourishment— and  this  nourishment  was  not  converted 
into  the  instrument  of  madness  for  any  .one.  ,,  Although 
coining  by  immense  riches  people  were  not  inflated  with 
pride  (17).  0 great  Muni,  the  enemies  were  terrified  by  . his 

prowess  and  the  friends,  attaining  health,  were  filled  with 


452 


MARKANDEYA  t’URANAM. 


delight  (i8).  Having  celebrated  many  sacrifices,  governed 
the  earth  well  and  been  killed  in  a battle  he  attained  to  the 
region  of  Shakra  (u)}- 

CHAPTER  CXX. 


I^ARkandeya  aaid  : — His  son  was  Khaninetra,  endued 
with  great  strength  and  prowess.  In  his  Vajita,  the  (»an- 
dharvas,  filled  with  surprise,  sang  (i).  There  was  none  equal 
to  Khaninetra  on  this  earth  in  the  performance  of  sacrifices. 
He  celebrated  an  Ayuta  of  sacrifices  and  made  a gift  of  the 
earth  with  oceans  (a).  Having  made  a gift  of  the  entire  earth 
unto  the  high-souled  Br&hmanas,  and  having  acquired  articles 
by  asceticism  he  released  it  (3).  The  riches,  of  that  highly 
charitable  king,  being  multiplied  the  BrSihmanas  Imd  to 
accept  gifts  from  no  other  king  (4).  He  collected  profuse 
gifts  for  sixty-seven  thousand,  sixty-seven  hundred  and  sixty- 
seven  sacrifices  (5).  O great  Muni,  he  b.ad  no  son.  There- 
fore to  collect  meat  for  the  performance  of  sacrifices  In  honor 
of  the  Pitris  for  having  a son  he  went  out  n-hunting  (6), 
Without  any  soldiers,  he,  alone  on  horse  back,  with  leathern 
finger  protectors,  arrows,  bow  and  swords,  entered  Into  a 
huge  forest  (7).  As  soon  as  he  urged  on  his  steed  for  going 
elsewhere,  a deer,  issuing  out  of  the  dense  forest,  said  to  him  s 
^•Having  slain  me  do  you  accomplish  yowr  object"  (K). 
The  king  said : — "Seeing  me  the  other  deer  have  Hod  away 
“in  great  fear  ; why  are  you,  sacrificing  yourself,  anxious  for 
death"  (9)?  The  deer  said "0  great  king,  I have  110  issue 
and  therefore  useless  is  my  birth.  U king,  thus  1 see  no 
neccsbityjOf  living"  (107. 


MAftKAHDEYA  PURANAiVf. 


45S 


Thereupon  coming  there  another  deer  said  to  him  in  the 
presence  of  the  other  deer  king,  there  is  no  use  of  killing 
him  (il).  Slaying  me,  accomplish  your  work  with  my  meat. 
Then  only  I shall  achieve  my  object  and  be  greatly  bene^ 
fitted  (12)*  O great  king,  you  are  willing  to  celebrate  a 
sacrifice  in  honour  of  your  manes  for  having  a son.  How  will 
you  thus  accomplish  your  end  with  the  meat  of  that  deer 
Which  has  no  issue  (13),  You  should  procure  things  befitting 
the  work  undertaken.  By  a bad  smelt,  that  of  sweetscented. 
articles  is  not  determined  ^14). 

The  King  said  : — The  deer  has  just  mentioned  to  me 
the  fact  of  his  having  no  issue  as  the  cause  of  his  disgust 
for  the  world.  Relate  now  why  you,  out  of  disgust,  wfeb 
to  renounce  your  life  (15).  ’ 

The  oeer  said  : — I have  many  sons  and  rhany  daughters.  I* 
always  live  in  the  midst  of  the  forest  fire  of  sorrow  consequent 
upon  anxiety  for  them  (16).  0 king,  the  deer  are  always 
‘very  weak  and  are  therefore  brought  under  the  control  of  all. 

I fc»ye  a gte^d:  attachment  for  my  childreh  and  accordingly  I 
am  very  sorty  (17).  For  I live  in  a perpeiual  dread  of  meni^ 
Hons,  Wolves,  and  others,  even  of  the  dogs  and  jackals, 

O lord,  who  are  infeidr  to  alt  creatures  (t 8).  Therefore,  for 
those  children  of  mine,  I always  wish  that  the  earth  may  be 
freed  from  the  fear  of  men,  lions,  etc  (ip).  Even  for  bringing  ^ 
them  up  I Wish  that  the  kine  and  horses,  that  graa^e  on  grass 
may  meet  with  death  (20).  When  my  young  ones  go  oul 
Ittld  difiFerent  directions,  hundreds  of  thoughts  possess  m^ 
whose  mind  is  full  of  attachment  (21).  (Metbinks)  my  sonj 
while  maming  in  the  forest,  is  ekhW  ensnared  in  a net,  or 
assailed  by  a thunderbolt  orhas  been  belaboured  by  men  or 

lions  (22).  If  one  amongst  them  comes  home  (I  always  think) 
**one  has  come  periiaps  others  have  wandered  away  into  the 
great  forest;  what  may  be  their  state  {23)/^  0 king,  when  all 
my  sons  come  to  me,  I feel  a little  delighted  and  then  begin 
to  think  of  their  well-being  for  the  night  (24).  When  the 


454 


MARKANDEYA  I’URANAM. 


dawn  sets  in  I pray  for  their  well-being  for  all  the  day  and 
when  the  sun  sets  I pray  for  the  night.  I always  wish  that 
they  may  meet  with  well-being  for  all  the  hour.s  of  the 
day  (23). 

I have  thus  related  to  you,  O king,  the  cause  of  my 
alnxiety  ; therefore  show  me  the  favour  and  discharge  the 
shaft  at  me  (26).  I have  thus  <lescribed  and  you  have  heard 
O king,  why  being  afflicted  with  a hundred  miseries,  I wish 
to  renounce  my  life  {27).  Those,  who  lay  violent  hands  on 
themselves,  repair  to  the  regions  void  of  the  sun.  But  O 
lord,  the  beasts,  of  sacrifices,  attain  to  better  regions  (38). 
Formerly  the  fire  became  a beast  atul  even  Varn.a,  the  lord  of 
waters,  became  so.  And  then  the  sun  too,  meeting  with 
death  in  the  shape  of  a beast  of  sacrifice,  attained  to  the 
negion  of  Uchriti  (29).  Therefore,  O lord,  confer  upon  me 
th\s  Uchriti.  And  then  obtaining  a son,  you  wilt  achieve 
your  object  (30). 

The  first  deer  said  ;-~0  king,  do  not  slay  him  } he  has 
thay  sons  and  blessed  and  fortunate  is  he  therefore.  There- 
fore, kill  me,  for  I have  no  issue  (31). 

The  second  Deer  said  Blcsseil  are  you,  for  you  have 
the  misery  for  one  body — 1 have  nmnv  bodies  .and  therefore 
innumerable  are  my  sorrows  (32).  When  I was  single  i had 
one  single  misery  on  account  of  my  attachment  for  my  body. 
When  I took  a wife  that  misery  became  two-fold  (33).  When 
the  children  were  born  the  miseries  multiplied  themselves 
proportionate  to  the  number  of  their  bodies  (34).  Are  you 
not  blessed  as  you  have  not  taken  your  birth  for  this  exces- 
sive misery  ? My  birth  in  this  world  is  for  misery — ^ami  this 
will  bring  in  iiufiediments  in  the  next  world  (35).  And  as 
Talways  think  and  try  for  the  protection  and  maintenance 
of  /my  children  I shall  forsooth  be  born  in  hell  {36). 

Tme  Kino  said : — 0 deer,  I cannot  discern,  whether  a 
man,  with  sons,  is  blessed  or  one  who  has  no  issue,  I have 
undertaken  this  sactifice  for  children,  therefore  my  mind  li 


MAHKAN0EVA  PURANAM. 


455 


Ml  of  doubts  (37).  True,  a son  brings  on  miseries  in 
this  world  and  the  next,  but  I have  heard  that  a map,  who, 
has  no  son,  is  involved  in  debts  (38).  Therefore,  0 ;deer, 
without  slaying  any  animal  I shall  engage  in  hard  austerities 
for  a son  like  the  former  king  (39)* 





CHAPTER  CXXI. 

lyi^ArtKANDEYA  said  : — Thereupon  repairing  to  the  sin* 
dcstroyirig  (iomati,  the  king,  observing  regulation,  pleased  the 
god  Puraiulara  (i).  Having  restrained  the  functions  of  the 
body,  mind  and  speech  and  concentrating  his  mind,  he,  with 
bard  penances,  began  to  chant  the  glories  of  Indra  for  a son 
(a).  0 great  Muni,  being  propitiated  by  his  aseeiicisra, 
votion  and  the  recitation  of  hymns  the  god  Indra  said  to  him 
(3h  ^*0  king,  I hart  been  pleased  with  thee  for  thy  ascetic 

observances,  devotion  and  the  recitation  of  the  hymns.  Tell 
me,  vvhfit  boon  you  do  pray  for^'  (4). 

The  Kin<?  said  .—I  am  sonless,  may  a son  be  born  to  me 
and  may  he  be  the  foremost  of  heroes,  pious,  religious  and 
tuccessful  and  may  his  prosperity  never  decrease  (5). 

MaRKANDEYa  said:— Sakra  having  said 'so  be  it'  the  kiirg, 
obtaining  the  accomplishment  of  his  object,  returned  to  his 
own  city  for  governing  his  subjects  (6),  1‘here  he  engaged 
in  celebrating  sacrifices  and  governing  his  subjects  w^eli.  By 
the  tfavour  of  Sakra  a son  was  born  to  him  (7).  His  father, 
the  king,  gave  him  the  name  of  Bali.shwa  and  trained  him  in 
the  use  of  diverse  arms  (8).  After  the  demise  of  his  father 
he  sat  on  the  throne  and  became  the.  king.  BalSshwa  brought 


456 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


all  the  kings  of  the  earth  under  his  subjection  {yb  Having 
taken  the  principal  portion  that  king  made  them  all  pay  re- 
venues and  governed  all  hi*  subjects  (lo).  Thereupon  all 
those  kings  and  his  powerful  kinsmen  rose  up  and  st(»pped 
the  payment  of  revenue  (ii).  They  all,  setting  themselves  up 
as  independent  kings  in  their  respective  kingdoms  and  grow- 
ing discontented,  occupied  the  earth  of  the  king  (12).  O 
Muni,  he,  then  growing  weak,  began  to  live  in  his  own  city. 
All  other  kings  made  dissensions  with  him  (10).  Ap- 
proaching him  ail  those  kings,  who  were  highly  powerful  and 
gifted  with  riches  and  various  means,  imprisoned  the  Em- 
peror (14).  When  his  city  was  beseized  he  grew  angry.  But 
having  impoverished  treasury  and  arms  he  bec.ime  very  much 
poorly  (15).  O foremost  of  the  twice-born,  then  finding  no 
means  for  the  protection  of  his  army,  with  his  mind 
aggrieved,  put  his  hand  on  his  mouth  and  began  to  sigh  (id) 
Then  wvoked  by  hts  breath  there  came  out  through  the 
cavity  of  his  hand  hundreds  of  chariots,  serpents,  horses  and 
soldiers  (17).  That  highly  powerful  and  excellent  army  soon 
covered  the  city  of  the  king,  0 great  Muni  (19).  Then  being 
encircled  by  that  huge  and  highly  powerful  army  and  issuing 
out  of  his  city  live  kii^  vanqoii,bed  them  all  (19),  Having 
defeated  tliem,  brought  them  under  subjection  and  made  them 
pay  tributes,  that  great  king  was  again  crowned  with  prospe- 
rity (20).  And  because  from  the  shaking  of  hts  hands  ori- 
ginated that  army  which  destroyed  the  enemies,  Batishwa 
was  called  KarandhttMa  by  the  people  (21).  He  was  virtuous^ 
great  and  friendly  towards  all  animals.  The  king  Karandhama 
became  famous  in  the  three  worlds  (aa).  Having  obtained 
this  army  from  virtue  he  destroyed  the  enemies  of  all  terror* 
Striken  people  (23). 


CHAPTER  CXXII 


M. 


nf  h :~Viryachandra's  daughter  Veera 

iv2  Observant  of  vows,  married  ip 

Sayamvara  the  great  king  Karandbama  (i).  On  her  the 

powerful  king  begat  a son  by  name  Avikshita  who  in  'd 

renown  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  (2).  On  his  birth  thlking 
consulted  the  astrologers,  ‘-Is  my  son  born  in  gopd  time  and 
under  ausp.c.ous  stars  (3)?  Have  the  auspicious  stars  cast 

the.r  looks  on  the  birth  of  my  sons  Have  not  the  evil  star^ 
looked  on  him”  (4)?  Having  been  thus  accosted  by  the 
king  the  astrologers  said  to  him  -.-"This  your  highly  power- 
ful, energetic  and  great  son  is  born  in  good  conjunc- 
tion and  under  auspicious  stars.  O king,  your  son  will  be 
emperor  (5-6).  Residing  in  the  seventh  house  Guru  and 
Suk^  have  cast  their  looks  on  him.  Soma,  living  in  thefpurth. 
house,  has  cast  his  look  on  him  (7).  Residing  pt  comer 
Soma's  son  too  has  cast  his  look  on  him.  But  the  'sW,' 
Bhowma  and  Shani  have  not  cast  their  looks  on  him  (8).  0 
great  king,  your  son  will  be  fortunate  and  will  be  endowed 
with  all  auspiciousness  and  prosperity  (9).” 

Having  hfeard  the  words  of  the  astrologers  and  having 
his  mind  filled  with  delight,  the  king,  in  his  own  house,  said 
to  them  (10) "Amongst  the  gods,  Vrihaspati,  Sukra,  Somji 
and  his  son  have  cast  their  looks  on  him  and  the  Sui 
Mangala  and  Sani  have  not  cast  their  looks  on  the  boy  (n^' 

Since  you  have  repeatedly  used  the  word  (seen) 

my  son  will  be  celebrated  on  earth  by  the  name  of  Avik^ 
8hita"(u).  ‘ '■ 

Markandeya  said  ; — His  son  Ayikshita  was  well  read 
in  the  Vedas  and  their  divisions.  He  received  the  knowledge 
of  weapons  from  Kanwa’s  son  (13).  That  prince  excelled 
5« 


in  beauty  the  two  Aywinis,  in  intellect  Vrihaspati,  in  grace, 
the  moon,  in  effulgence  the  aun,  in  gravity  the  ocean  and 
in  patience  the  earth.  In  her«)i.srn  there  was  none  equal  to 
that  high-souled  one  (14—15).  Him  did  accept  in  Swyamvara, 
Himadharma^s  daughter  Vara.  Stidiva’s  daughter  Oouri*  Vali*s 
daughter,  LtlSvati,  Veerahhadra^s  daughter  Anibhl,  Bhima^i 
daughter  Minyavati  and  Datnbhi's  clitugluer  Kiimurlvali 
(16 — 17).  They  all  welcomed  him  in  Swayamvara.  Having 
vanquished  all  the  princes  as  welt  iih  the  tiieinliers  of  tlicir 
paternal  family  and  resorting  to  bin  chvu  sirtoigili,  that  power- 
ful and  heroic  prince  too,  elated  with  Irk  own  sirciigifi,  took 
them  all  by  force  (18—19).  Once  tin  a time,  Vakliilitili  ol 
tine  teeth,  the  daughter  of  V^kliila,  the  king  of  Videiha,  lietd 
her  Swayamvara.  He  was  not  selected  by  her.  Therefore 
that  (prince),  proud  of  the  strenghi  having  varicjiiiihed  all 
the  kings,  0 saint,  carried  her  away  by  force  (20-^21).  Tliert* 
upon  having  been  msulted  and  deif?attd  liv  that  proud  prince 
all  those  numberless  kingn  hpuke  to  eacii  othi'f  (22),  * Hu  ye 
allow  this  damsel  to  be  carried  tiway  by  one  against  so  many 
powerful  kings  of  one  caste.  Oh  t lie  an  ye,  O kings  (aj). 
He  alone  is  a K^hatiiya  whu  savrs  one  when  assailed  by 
powerful  man.  Others  take  this  name  for  nothmg  (24).  How 
h your  considciation,  that  yini,lu>rn  in  a Kshatriyit  race, do  not 
save  yourselves  from  this  wi«*ked  one  (2$)  O lake  is  the 
eulogy  that  is  chanted  by  the  poets,  panegyriis  and  priioiieri* 
Make  it  good,  O heroes,  by  destroying  your  enemy  (ati)*  You 
are  all  born  in  eminent  families.  Reiorting  to  your  manfi- 
mm  do  not  make  art  idle  iound  of  the  word,  king,  in  alt  the 
quarters  {27)*  Who  does  not  fear  death?  Who  becomes 
immortal  without  fighting?  Thinking  of  this,  fnaiiliiitii 
should  not  be  destroyed  by  those  who  trade  in  armi'*  {18). 
Hearing  this  and  filled  with  revenge  the  kings  spoke  to  each 
mlier  and  took  up  their  weapons  (rg).  Scime  f nt  upon  the 
charteli,  some  rode  the  rfeplranis,  sonit*  horses  and  ottieri,  tlii 
iiilaniri I filled  with  reveiigr^  folkm*ctl  ttirm  (30). 


^M[arkaNDEYA  said  — Thus  t)ie  kings  and  princes, 
nrraiiged  in  order  of  battle,  vanquished  a good  many  of  them, 
Wilting  for  that  time  (l).  Then  there  arose  a dreadful 
encounter  between  him  and  them — one  with  many  kings  and 
mighty  princes,  0 Muni  (2).  All  those  greatly  powerful 
(kings)  with  swords,  Saktis,  club  and  arrows  in  their  hands, 
fought  with  him;  he  too  fought  with  them  all  (3).  That 
highly  powerful  son  of  a king,  an  adept  in  the  use  of  arms, 
pierced  them  with  a hundred  fierce  arrows.  They  too  struck 
him  with  sharpened  shafts  (4).  Some  had  their  arms  toroj, 
some  had  their  heads  sundered,  some  were  wounded  to  the 
very  vitals  and  others  were  struck  on  the  breast  (5).  They 
Sttodered  the  trunks  of  the  elephants  and  the  heads  of  the 
bofiei  md  then  again  the  horses  of  the  other  party^s  car$ 
as  well  as  their  charioteers  (6).  The  arrows,  falling  down^ 
sundered  twain  the  shafts  of  the  enemies.  He  cut  off  the 
sword  of  the  enemies  as  well  as  their  heads  by  virtue  of  light- 
handedness  Their  armours  being  shattered  the  prince  killed 
the  enemies.  And  seeing  others  wounded  the  infantry  lef^#' 
the  battle-field  (8).  The  entire  host  of  kings  being  thus 
agitated  seven  bundled  heroes  stood  there  determined 
upon  meeting  with  death  (9).  They  were  all  of  respectabre 
pedigree,  elderly,  heroic  and  modest.  After  all  the  solders 
had  been  defeated  and  taken  to  their  heels,  that  son  of  the 
ling,  greatly  worked  up  with  anger,  fought  righteously  with 
all  those  kings,  approaching  them  ^one  by  one  (11— 12). 
Tri»t  highly  powerful  one  attempted  there  to  shatter  their 
jreapons  and  coats  of  mail ; they  too,  0 great  Muni,  worked 
up  with  rage,  renouncing  righteousness,  began  to  fight  with 
him  who  was  combating  righteously.  All  the  princes  began 


to  perspire  like  a forest  filled  with  water  (13  “-14).  Some  he 
wouned  with  a collection  of  arrows  ; and  the  armours  of  others 
were  shattered  by  him  and  again  he  struck  down  on  earth  the 
standards  of  others  (XS).  Others  killed  the  horses  and  broke 
down  the  chariots  and  drove  the  charioteer  with  the  strokes  of 
clubs  and  arrows  (16).  On  bis  bow  being  shattered,  the  prince, 
in  anger,  took  up  his  sword  and  shield  and  that  even  was 
struck  down  by  another  (17).  Having  his  sword  and  shield 
shattered'that  one,  the  foremost  of  those  holding  maces,  took 
up  his  mace.  And  that  too,  one  cut  off  with  a horse-shoe 
headed  arrow  like  one  of  a sure  aim  (18).  All  those  kings, 
ever  averse  to  a fair  fight,  forming  a trough,  sundered  them, 
some  with  a thousand  shafts,  some  with  a hundred  shafts 
(ig).  When  assailed  by  many,  he,  being  over-powered,  fell 
down  on  earth ; thereupon  those  great  princes  bound  him 
(20).  Then  having  over-powered  that  prince  by  unfair  eimitts 
they  all,  along  with  the  king  Vishala,  entered  the  city  of 
Vidisha  (21).  Having  brought  that  prince  bound,  they  all 
rejoiced  and  delightedly  placed  him  before  the  maiden  who 
had  arranged  for  the  Swayamvara  (23).  She  was  again 
urged  on  by  her  father  and  the  priest,  saying  “ choose  any 
one  amongst  the  kings  as  your  husbaml"  {23).  When 
that  honoured  damsel  did  not  choose  any  one  .is  her  husband 
O Muni,  the  king  asked  the  astrologer,  for  the  marriage 
(saying)  (24) -“Tell  me  of  a day  which  is  best  suited  for  her 
marriage ; to-day  has  been  sullied  by  a battle  which  has  pre- 
sented many  obstacles  (25).** 

MarkandeYA  said  — Having  been  thus  addressed  by  the 
king  the  astrologer,  Durmanits,  imformed  of  best  things, 
thinking  said  to  him  (26),  “ 0 king,  there  shall  soon  be  «Rher 
days  that  will  be  greatly  aspiclous  for  the  marriage  (27).  0 
cbttlerror  of  honors,  you  may  celebrate  the  marriage  when 
4^  comes.  There  is  no  need  of  celebrating  this  on  this 
4ay  when  a huge  obstacle  has  presented  Itself  (sB). 


CHAPTER  CXXIV. 


]M[arkandeyA  said  : — Thereupon  Karandhama  heard  of 
his  son  being  fettered  as  well  as  his  wife  and  other  heroes 
of  his  party  (t).  Then  hearing  of  his  son  being  taken 
away  by  unfair  means  by  all  the  kings'  of  the  earth,  O 
great  Muni,  the  king  engaged  in  meditation  (2).  Some  Ol 
the  kings  said  that  all  those  kings,  by  whom  he  had  been 
fettered  by  unfair  means  in  battle,  should  be  slain  (3). 

" Arrange  soon  the  army"  said  others  “ what  is  the  use  06 
waiting.  The  wicked  Vishala  should  be  slain  as  well  as  others 
who  have  assembled  there”  (4).  Others  said  that  the  morality 
was  not  observed  here  by  Avikshata,  for  she,  not  wishing 
him,  was  taken  away  by  unfair  force  (5).  In  that  Swayamvara 
where  numberless  kings  (were  present)  that  princess  was 
imposed  upon  by  him  and  he  was  overpowered  by  them  all 
collectively’*  (6).  v ' 

Hearing  those  words  that  heroic  (queen)  the  mother  of  a heroic 
son, the  wife  of  a heroic  husbaod,and  who  had  descended  from 
a heroic  family,  ws^  pleased;  and  she  said  before  her  husband 
and  other  kings:— “The  kings  were  treated  well  by  my  son 
who  (always)  does  good.  Taking  away  that  girl  by  force  arud 
vanquishing  all  the  kings,  he  fought  for  her.  To  fight  with 
one  tdone  is  not  fair.  Besides,  I do  not  see  any  blame  on 
the  part  of  my  son  that  may  l«^d  to  the  destruction  of 
his  glory  (7— 9)-  This  constitutes  manliness  for  him  who 
does  not  observe  morality.  Even  a lion,  who  kills  creatures, 
d<»s  not  consider  it  fair  (to).  That  maiden,  who  was  present 
at  the  Swayamvara, was  taken  away  by  my  son  in  the  presence 
of  many  respectable  kings  (ii).  Who,  born  in  the  race  of 
a Kshatriya,  begs— a practice  resorted  to  by  the  mean.  A 
Kshatriya  takes  (a  thing)  by  force  in  the  presence^  of  th^_^ 


46a  MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 

powerful  (12).  They  (even),  when  fettered  with  iron  chain*, 
and  assailed,  do  not  seek  protection  ; even  tile  pious  kitigf 
do  (things)  by  force  (13)-  Therefore,  useless  it  is  to  be 
sorry ; praiseworthy  is  his  being  fettered  and  as  well  as  the 
fall  of  weapons  on  your  heads  (14).  Even  if  taken  steal- 
thily the  earth,  sons,  wealth,  wife  and  preceptors  of  the 
kings  become  sources  of  their  glory  (15),  Therefore 
proceed  quickly  to  the  battle  ; get  up  on  your  chariots  and 
arrange  without  delay  horses,  elephants  and  charioteers  (16), 
Are  you  thinking  of  the  fight  with  many  kings  ? Does  a 
little  fight  lead  to  the  satisfaction  of  a heroe  (117).  Who  is 
not  capable  of  fighting  with  a small  number  of  kings,  whom 
even  the  afflicted  amongst  the  enemies  does  not  fear  (18)  ? 
He  is  the  heroe  who  discomfits  all  the  worlds  like  the  sun 
dispelling  darkness"  (rg). 

MarkAndeya  said  t— O Muni,  having  been  thus  urged 
on  by  his  wife,  the  king  Karandhama  made  military  arrange- 
ments for  the  destruction  of  his  son's  enemies  (20).  0 great 

saint,  then  there  took  place  an  encounter  between  tl»e  king 
Vishila  whose  son  had  in’cn  imprisoned  and  those  innumerable 
kings  (2t).  There  continued  for  three  days  the  battle 
between  the  king  Karandltama  and  all  those  kiiu'S  following 
VishEta  (32).  After  all  the  kings  had  heeti  ti«fe,ued,  ViahiU 
with  Arghya  in  iiis  haml,  arrived  before  Karandhama  (2j). 
Being  worshipped  by  that  king  and  pleastui  witlt  him  and  on 
his  son  being  released  Karandhama  spent  the  nigitt  happily 
(24).  When  Vishaia,  with  the  dattghtcr,  arrived  there, 
Avikshita,  O sasze.  sooke  before  his 

her  or 
>«eR  a 
me  'hi 
is  pow 
y for  I 
sd  by  I 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 


463 

Iter  (28^,  Men  are  always  independant,  only  the  females  are 
dependant.  Where  is  manliness, for  him  who  is  dependant  (29)  ? 
How  can  he, who  had  been  before  her  very  eyes  thrown  on  the 
ground  by  other  kings,  see  her  again.  How  can  I see  her” 
(30)  ? Having  been  thus  addressed  by  his  son  the  Icing  said 
to  him *‘I  have  heard  your  word,  O my  son,  high-souled  as 
you  are  (31),  0 auspicious  damsel,  select  any  other  husband 

whom  you  like.  O you  of  beautiful  looks,  I shall  confer  upon 
you  a habitation  wherever  you  like  under  the  Sun”  (32). 

The  Girl  said  : — 0 king,  he  has  been  defeated  by  many 
in  a battle  destructive  of  his  fame  and  prowess.  But  they 
did  not  act  fairly  (33).  Having  confronted  many  in  battle 
like  a lion  he  displayed  his  most  excellent  heroism  (34).  He 
not  only  stood  in  battle.  And  although  defeated  by  so  many 
in  battle  he  displayed  his  prowess  (35).  He  is  endowed  with 
bravery  and  prowess.  Hei  fought  with  all  the  kings  in  fair 
baule  but  they  vanquislx^d  him  unfairly.  Where  is  the  shame 
then  {36)  ? 0 father,  it  is  not  by  his  beauty  only  that  I have 

Come  to  love  him, but  my  mind  has  been  attracted  by  his  hero- 
ism, prowess  and  patience  (37).  Wliat  is  the  us€  of  speaking 
more.  Beg  him  for  me,  0 king.  Save  this  high-minded 
one,  no  one  else  shall  be  my  husband  (39). 

ViSHALA  said  :~0  prince,  really  my  daughter  has  given 
vent  to  most  excellent  words.  There  is  no  other  prince  like 
thee  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  ^9).  Incomparable  is 
thy  heroism  and  great  is  thy  prowess.  By  taking  this 
daughter  of  mine,  do  thou  purify  my  race  (40). 

The  Prince  said : — 0 king,  I shall  not  take  her  nor  any 
other  damsel.  The  thought  of  a woman  shall  be  concen- 
trated on  me  only,  0 king  (14). 

MARKANDEYa  said  : — Thereupon  Karandhama  said : — ^'0 
my  son,  take  her  ; the  fair  daughter  of  Vishaia  has  been  firmly 
attached  to  thee”  (42).  The  prince  said ^“0  lord,  1 had 
never  before  violated  thy  command.  Therefore  order  me, 
i»y  tather,  I sliall  carry  out  thy  mandate”  (34).  (Beholding) 


markandeva  pur  ana  Vt. 


464 

♦ 

the  prince  firmly  made  up  aginst  his  daughter  Vishila,  havitnr 
his  mind  agitated,  said  to  her  (44) Take  away  your 
mind,  0 daughter,  from  him.  Select  any  other  husband. 

There  are  many  other  princes"  (45). 

The  GtRL  said  i — “O  father,  if  he  does  wish  to  take  me,  I 
shall,  after  carrying  on  penances,  pray  for  this  boon  that  even 
in  other  births,  I may  not  have  any  other  htcHband"  (46). 

Thereupon  having  spent  Uiere  in  delight  three  days,  the 
king  Karandhama  repaired  to  his  own  city  (47).  Having 
been  consoled  by  his  father,  other  kings  and  the  citwens, 

■with  various  tokens  Avikshita  too  repaired  to  his  own  city 
<48).  Repairing  to  woods,  divorced  from  her  own  relations, 
abstaining  from  food  a«»d  cherishing  most  excellent  disgust  ! 

for  the  world  that  maiden  too  carried  on  penances  (49). 
Abstaining  from  food  for  three  months  and  suffering  from 
great  affliction  she  was  reduced  and  her  veins  were  weakened 
(SO).  Having  lost  all  energy  and  desirous  of  dying  that  maiden 
princess,  of  a slender  body,  made  up  her  mind  to  forsake  ] 

her  life  (51).  Thereupon  coining  to  know  that  she  had  made  * 

up  her  mind  to  put  an  end  to  herself  the  celestials  sent 
their  emissary  to  her  (52).  Approaching  the  princess  the 
emissary  said  to  her.— ('Hear,  for  what  f have  been  sent 
to  you  by  the  go  Js  (53).  You  should  not  renounce  the  body 
which  it  is  so  difficult  to  get  : you  will  be  the  mother  of  a 
Lord  Paramount  (5^.  O great  lady,  having  slain  al!  his 
enemies,  and  with  his  commands  never  baffled  he  will  enjoy 
for  long  this  earth  consisting  of  seven  insular  continents  (55). 

H«  will  kill  first  Taruilt,the  enemy  of  the  god#  as  well  a# 
toe  dreadful  Ayas-Shanku.  And  he  wilt  establish  his  SMbkcis 
»n  morality  (56).  By  him  will  be  slain  the  robbers,  Mlechas 
^cll  as  other  wicked  people  (57).  0 lady,  he  will  perform 
vawus  sacrifices,  sixty-thousand  in  number,  such  as  horse, 
aacrifice  and  pthers,  finished  with  profuse  gifts  (CS), 

Beholding  him  stationed  in  the  sky  and  adorned  with 
celestial  garlands  and  pastes  toe  princess  said  gently  to  the 


em«  ary  of  the  gods  (59),  “True  it  is.  O emissary  of  the  gods, 
doub  i "r",  " region.  There  is  no 

me  (60)?  I have  taken  this  vow  in  the  presence  of  my 
sire  that  save  Avikshita  no  one  else  will  be  my  husband  even 
in  another  birth  (61).  He  does  not  (however)  want  me  He 

was  requested  by  my  father,  by  Karandhama,  as  well  as  by 

myself"  (6a).  ^ 

The  Emissary  of  the  Gods  said  r—What  is  the  use  of 
of  speaking  more,  0 great  lady?  A son  will  be  born  to 
thee.  Do  not  commit  the  sin  of  renouncing  thy  own  life  (63). 
Live  in  this  forest  and  nourish  thy  weak  body.  By  virtue  of 
asceticism  thou  shalt  fare  well  (64). 

Having  said  this  the  emissary  of  the  gods  repaired  where 
he  came  from.  That  lady  of  beautiful  eye-brows  daily 
nourished  her  own  body  (65).  ^ 


CHAPTER  eXXV. 


IVIarkandeyA  said: — Thereupon  the  heroic  mother  of 
Avikshita,  a mother  of  heroic  sons,  summoning  him  on  an  aus- 
picious day,  said  (i),  “O  my  son,  I shall  fast  for  observing  the 
vow  of  Kimkhaka.  1 have  been  ordered  by  your  high-souled 
sire  (2).  This  is  within  the  power  of  yourself  and  myself. 
If  you  promise,  my  son,  I shall  take  the  vow  (3,).  I shall 
confer  upon  you  the  hall  of  your  father’s  treasure.  The 
wealth  is  your  father’s  (no  doubt)  but  I have  obtained  per- 
mission from  him  (4).  The  vow,  although  a very  hard  one,  is  i 
ill  my  power  and  will  produce  well-being.  Even  if  you  catt 
59 


466 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM. 


accomplish  it  by  patting  forth  your  power  and  energy,  even 
if  it  be  beyond  your  power,  or  you  can  accompliih  it  with 
difficulty,  still  if  you  promise  it,  O my  son,  {shall  get  it} 
speak  out  your  mind" 

AVIKSHJTA  said : — "Wealth  is  in  my  father’s  possession. 

I am  not  its  master.  Whatever  can  be  accomplished  by  my 
body,  I shall  do  it  at  your  command  (7).  You  will  accom'- 
plish  your  Kimtchaka  vow,  O mother,  if  you  have  obtained 
the  permission  of  my  father,  the  king,  who  is  the  master  of 
riches.  Remove  your  anxiety  and  sorrow"  (8).  Thereupon 
the  queen  began  to  observe  the  vow.  With  words,  body 
and  mind  restrained  she  began  to  worship  the  king  of  kings, 
the  numberless  Nidhls,  the  protectors  tliereof  and  as  well  as 
Lakshnii,  (the  goddess  of  riches)  with  great  devotion  (f— to). 
The  king  Karandhama,  while  he  was  seated  In  his  house, 
was  thus  addressed  by  his  ministers  well-versed  in  the 
science  of  Polity  (it). 

The  Mini.stkrs  said  ; — O king,  governing  the  earth  you 
have  grown  old.  You  have  only  one  son  Avikshila  who  has 
made  up  his  mind  not  to  take  a wife  (J2).  While  th.at 
sonless  (prince)  .shall  <*ngage  in  religions  practices,  O king, 
the  earth  shall  forsooth  pass  into  the  hands  of  your  enemies 
(13),  You  race  will  be  exterminated  and  the  ancestral 
manes  will  be  deprived  of  water  and  Finda.  This  great  fear 
of  the  enemies  will  put  obstacles  in  your  religious  practices 
(.14),  Therefore  accomplish  that,  0 king,  by  which  your 
son  may  cherish  a desire  leading  to  tho  wetbbing  of  your 
ancestral  manes  (t  5). 

Mawkandeya  said In  the  meantime  the  king  heard 
the  words  addressed  by  the  priest  to  the  beggar*  (l6j.  "Wlio 
wants  what  ^ Whnt  b there  which  it  will  be  hard  for  them 
49. achieve  since  Karandhama’*  queen  is  observing  the  vow 
Miif<tichak»  (17)."  Bearing  the  pirest’s  word*  the  prince 
Avikshita  said  to  all  the  beggars  assembted  at  the  palace- 
gate  (fS).  *‘L4!t  eyecy  one  say  what  he  wants.  I ahall  even 


RiAtejfCANbSVA  PURAMM.  ^5^ 

tceompliBh  it  with  my  body.  My  »reat  ‘ l • 

v„„  ,£  Ki,.M.ka  (.61,  He!  O v^h  “ 

.t.«  I .h,np„  you  w l, 

KimcMa  U boing  „boo„ed  (by  „y  SZ) 

Thsreupoo  keuriog  those  words  given  ,o„t  ,„  by  bis  son 
the  king  appronching  him  said;_“0  son,  I am  I beggar  ■ 
Gire  me  what  I wish'^  (21). 

AvmSHlT.  .aid  i-Tell  me,  O la, her,  wha,  I shall  have 

give  you,  even  il  it  he  very  difficul,  ,o  p,„ou,e,  whether 
Within  my  power  or  not.®  (22)  ^ 

I wLh'  give  me  what 

wish.  Show  me  the  lace  ol  my  grandson  seated  on  my 

lap  (23). 

AviksHITA  said  I am  your  only  son,  0 king,  and  am  ob- 
serving a life  of  celibacy.  How  can  I show  you  the  face  of 
a grandson  ? (24). 

The  King  said  .-—The  life  of  celibacy,  that  you  are 
leading,  is  taking  you  to  sin.  Therefore  release  yourself 
from  that  and  show  me  a grandson  (25). 

Avikshita  saidi—This  is  a difficult  thing,  O king;  orde* 
me  for  some  thing  else.  Retiring  from  the  world  1 have 
given  up  associating  with  females  (26). 

The  King  said  I have  been  seeing  my  many  enemies 
coming  off  victorious.  Still  if  you  wish  to  retire  from  the 
world,  you  are  an  ignorant  man  (26).  What  is  the  use  of 
speaking  more  ? Give  up  your  life  of  celibacy.  Show  me' 
and  your  mother  the  face  of  a grandson  (28). 

MarkANDEYA  said  ; — Although  repeatedly  reqliested'by 
hia  son  the  king  did  not  pray  for  any  thing  else.  The  son 
then  said  again  (29).  “ Offering  to  give  you  what  you  will 
want  i have  fallen  into  a great  difficulty,  0 father  ; tfaerefdre, 
being  shameless,  I shall  take  a wife  (30).  Before  a female 
I was  vanquished  and  thrown  on  earth.  I shall  be  again 
the  husband  of  a woman.  0 father,  it  is  a very  hafd  thing 
(for  me)  (31).  Still  what  shall  I do  ? I have  come  within  * 


468 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


the  fold  of  truth.  I shall  do  what  you  say  ; govern  your  own 
kingdom  (32).” 




CHAPTER  CXXVI. 


^^ARKANDEYA  said: — Once  on  a time  while  roaming 
a-hunting  in  the  forest,  the  prince,  having  killed  deer,  boars, 
tigers  and  other  animals,  heard  all  on  a sudden  the  voice  of 
a female,  (saying) : — “save  me  [ save !“  and  bewailing  in 
piteous  accents  suppressed  by  fear  (1—2).  Exclaiming  “Don’t 
fear  I don’t  fear”  that  prince  quickly  urged  on  his  steed  to 
whence  the  sound  proceeded  (3).  There  bewailed  the 
damsel  in  that  lonely  forest  being  caught  firm  by  the  hair  by 
the  son  of  Danu  (4).  (She  saul)  “A  non-aryan  is  taking  me 
away  in  this  forest  who  am  the  wife  of  the  intelligent  king 
Avikshita,  the  son  of  Karandhama  (5).  All  the  kings,  Gan- 
dharvas,  as  well  *,as  Guhyakas  are  not  capable  of  standing 
before  him.  I am  his  wife  and  am  being  c,arried  away  (6). 
He  has  the  anger  of  death  and  prowess  of  Sakra.  I am  the 
wife  of  that  son  of  Karandhama  and  am  being  carried 
away  (7)." 

Mahkandeya  said:— Hearing  this  that  prince,  who  hart 
the  bow  in  his  hand,  thought.  “How  is  this?  My  wife  in  the 
forest  (8).  Eorsooth  this  is  the  illussion  of  the  wicked 
Rikshasas  who  live  in  the  forest.  Or  who  has  come  here? 
I shall  ascertain  the  cause  of  alt  (9).’’ 

Going  there  speedily  he  saw  in  that  forest  a highly 
maiden  adorneil  with  all  ornaments.  She  was  caught 
by  tihe  hair  by  the  son  of  Danu,  with  a club  in  his  haiul  and 
was  repeatedly  exclaiming  “Save  me|  Save  me!"  (lo-ii). 


MARKANDEYA  PpRAfJAM.r  46^ 

He  laid  "Don't  fear,  don't  fear.  He  is  already  slain.  The 
king  Karandhama  governing  the  earth  what  wicked  man  can- 
live  here?  All  the  kings  of  the  earth  have  been  humbled 
by  his  prowess"  (12).  Beholding  him  approach,  with  an  ex- 
cellent bow  in  his  hand,  that  slender-made  damsel  said  “Save 
me!  .save  me!  lam  being  carried  away  by  him.  I am  the 
daughter-in-law  of  the  king  Karandhama  and  the  wife  of 
Avikshita.  I have  a lord  but  am  being  carried  away  by  this 
wicked  (demon)  like  one  who  has  none”  (13 — 14). 

Markanoeya  said:— -Thereupon  Avikshita  began  to 
consider  the  words  given  vent  to  by  her.  (He  thought) 
How  is  she  my  wife  and  the  daughter-in  law  of  my  father 
I shall  first  release  this  fair  one  and  then  ascertain  the 
cause.  The  Kshatriyas  hold  their  arms  for  saving  the  dis- 
tressed (t6).  Thereupon  the  heroe,  worked  up  with  anger^ 
said  to  that  highly  wicked  demon  “Live  and  go  and  let  her 
alone;  or  else  you  will  not  live”  (17)-  Thereupon  releasing  her 
and  taking  up  his  club  the  demon  ran  towards  him.  He  to,o 
Covered  him  with  shafts  (18).  Having  been,  covered  with  w- 
rows,  that  demon,  excited  with  pride,  hurled  his  club,  coated 
with  a hundred  goads,  at  that  prince  (rp).  While  it  was 
about  to  fall  (on  him)  the  prince  cut  it  into  pieces  with  bis 
arrows.  Then  taking  it  up  immediately  with  a loud  cry 
Dama  stood  in  the  battle-field  (20).  Creating  a down  pour  of’ 
shafts  he  discharged  them  at  Dama  He  too  cut  them  into 
pieces  with  pikes  shot  off  his  bow  (21).  Then  the  demon  dis- 
ebarged  a stone  at  the  prince.  That  too,  discharged  by  his 
light  handedness,  fell  down  baffled  on  earth  (23).  The  prince, 
easily  cut  into'i  pieces  .with  arrows  all  the  weapons  that 
the  (lemon  hurled  at  him  in  anger  (23).  Thereupon  having 
bis  club  and  all  the  weapons  broken,  the  demon,  clenching 
his  first,  ran  towards  the  prince  (24).  Thereupon  cutting  off 
his  head,  who  fell  on  him,  with  a Vetasa  leaf  the  prince  threw 
it  on  the  ground  (25).  That  wicked  demon  being  slain  all 
the  gods  began  to  praise  Karandhama’s  son  saying  ‘ well 


470 


markandeya  puranam. 


done ! well  done  i”  (26)*  On  being  addressed  by  Ibe  godt 
saying  “pray  for  a boon”  the  prince  said  "I  pray  for  a son, 
highly  powerful,  for  encompassing  the  delight  of  my 
sire  (27).” 

The  Gods  said  : — ”0  sinless  one,  you  will  beget  a highly 
powerful  son,  a lord  Paramount,  on  this  girl  released  by 
you  (28). 

The  prince  said : I have  made  this  promise  by  my  sire 

that  I shall  wish  for  a son.  But  being  thrown  down  00  earth 
by  the  kings  I gave  up  all  desire  of  taking  a wife  (29b  And  so 
I did  renounce  the  daughter  of  king  Vishlla ; she  too  for  me 
has  declined  to  take  any  other  husband  Tell  me  then 

how  leaving  aside  the  daughter  of  Vishtla  I shall  like,  a cruel 
hearted  person,  take  any  other  woman  as  my  wife  (31)  ? 

The  Gods  said  -She  is  your  wife  of  whom  you  ipoko 
so  highly,  the  daughter  of  Vishala  having  fair  ey«-brow8  and 
who  is  carrying  on  penances  for  you  (32}.  On  her  you  will 
beget  a heroic  son,  who  will  coiuiuer  the  seven  insular  conti- 
nents, perforin  a thousand  sacrifices  and  who  will  be  Lord 
Paramount  (33). 

Markandeya  said  : — O twice  iHirn  one,  h.ivtng  said  this 
to  Karandhania’.s  son  the  gods  went  away.  He  too  then  said 
to  his  wife: — "0  timid  ^lady,  what  is  this (3,1) ?'*  She  then 
said  to  him  : — “Having  been  forsaken  by  you  and  left  behind 
all  my  (people,  I came  here  out  of  disgust  of  mind  (35), 
Here,  0 beroe,  having  my  body  weaki  ned  by  hard  ansirrities 
I was  about  to  renounce  iny  life  when  nn  emissary  ol  the 
gods  brought  me  the  intelligence  {36).  “You  will  give  birth 
to  a highly  powerful  son  who  will  be  Lord  Paramount.  He 
will  satisfy  the  gods  and  destroy  the  demons  (37).”  Having 
been  thus  informed  of  the  command  of  iho  gods  by  their 
emissary  I did  not  renounce  my  life  with  the  hope  of  being 
unit^  with  you  (38).  Day  before  yesterday,  ()  great  one, 
I went  to  the  Ganges  to  bathe.  A«  ioon  as  I got  there  I 
syas  over-powered  by  an  old  aerpent  (39).  The#  I vtm  taken 


MASKANOEYA  PVAAIIAEf; 


47^ 


by  him  to  RasJtala.  There  thousands  of  serpents*,  their 
wives  and  sons  pleased  me  and  others  adored  me  ; then  the 
serpents  and  their  females  humbly  prayed  to  me  (40—41). 

Show  us  the  favour  of  preventing  your  son  from  slaying 
us  who  will  offend  him  (42).  The  (serpents)  living  on  air 
Will  commit  offence  by  your  son.  You  should  pervent  him. 
Show  us  this  favour^^  (43).  After  I had  said  ^so  be  it'  I was 
tdorned  with  beautiful  ornaments  of  PStala  flowers,  scents 
and  heavenly  raiments  (44),  Then  I was  brought  here  by  the 
serpent  equally  beautiful  and  graceful  as  I was  before  (45.) 
Seeing  me  thus  beautiful  and  adorned  with  ornaments  this 
highly  wicked  demon  caught  me  by  the  hair  with  a view  to 
carry  me  away  (46).  0 prince,  I have  now  been  released 

by  the  strength  of  your  arms,  O you  of  large  arms;  be 
pleased  and  take  me.  There  is  no  other  prince  on  this  earth 
like  you.  I speak  the  truth  (47). 


-♦o*- 


chaptbr  cxxvii. 


BIIaHKanideya  said  :^Hearing  thus  her  words  and 
rtmembering  the  excellent  words  of  his  father  which  the  king 
said  after  he  had  taken  the  vow  of  Jikim/cAaM  the  prince 
^ Amiksbila  said  to  the  maiden.  have  my  mind  always 

attached  to  you ; for  you  I raiounced  all  sorts  of  eryjoyment; 
As  I forsook  you  of  slender  body  on  being  defeated  by  the 
enemies  so  I have  again  obtained  you  after  having  van^ 
qiii^d  my  foes.  Tell  me  what  ! shall  do”  (i — 3). 

The  MaidEH  said: — Do  thou  accept  my  hand  in  this 
charming  forest.  The  union,  of  one  willing  with  another 
efualJy  willingr  produces  good  results  (4).  ^ * r 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


The  Prince  said  : — ^May  good  betide  you.  Providence 
is  the  instrument  in  this  or  why  have  we  met  elsewhere  ($)? 

MARKANDEYa  said In  the  meantime,  O Muni,  Gan- 
dharva  Tunaya  came  there  acompanicd  by  most  excellent 
Apsaras  and  Gaiidharvas  (6). 

The  Gandharva  said : — O prince,  she  is  my  beautiful 
daughter  by  name  Bhamini.  By  the  imprecation  of  Agastya 
she  became  Vishnia's  daughter  (7).  By  her  childi.sh  freaks 
she  excited  the  wrath  of  Agastya  who  imprecated  a curse 
(on  her  saying),  '*  Be  you  a woman''  (8).  We  however 
pleased  him,  saying : — “ O Saint,  she  is  a thoughtless  girl. 
You  should  forgive  her  and  show  us  the  favour"  (y).  Being 
propitiated  by  us  the  great  Muni  said  “ Considering  her 
as  a child  I gave  a small  curse ; while  I have  pronounced  it, 
it  shall  never  be  otherwise"  (to).  Then  by  the  cuwe  of 
Agastya  my  fair  girl  Is  born  as  MUniui  in  the  house 
Vishata  (li).  For  her  I have  come  here.  Take  this  princess, 
my  daughter.  She  will  give  birth  to  your  son  who  will  bo 
Lord  Paramount  (12). 

MARKANDEYA  said  : — Having  said  ' .so  be  it'  the  prince 
duly  accepted  her  hand.  Tamvuru  performed  iIom.a  there 
(13).  Gods  and  Gandharv.as  sang  there— the  Apsaras  danced, 
the  clouds  showered  flowers  and  the  eelesti.al  instruments 
were  sounded  (14).  There  came  at  the  nuptials  of  the 
prince  all  the  protectors  of  wealth  who  are  the  givers  and 
the  agents  of  prosperity  (15).  O Muni,  then  they  all,  without 
any  exception,  went  to  the  region  of  the  Gandhavas  along 
with  that  high-souled  one.  The  prince  and  princess  also 
accompanied  them  (16).  The  prince  Avikshita  enjoyed  there 
in  the  company  of  Bhamini.  She  too  in  his  company  e«- 


tl 


lliat  slender-made  damsel  and  she  with  that  high-souled 
ope,  sported  day  and  night  in  various  charming  countries 
(20).  The  Munis,  Gandharvas  and  Kinnaras  brought  for 
them  there  various  edibles,  pastes,  raiments,  garlands  and 
excellent  drinks  (21).  That  good  damsel  gave  birth  to  a son 
for  that  heroe  spending  his  days  happily  with  Bhamini 
in  the  region  of  Gandharvas  unattainable  by  others  (22). 
0 foremost  of  men,  on  that  highly  powerful  son  being  born 
there  took  place  a great  festivity  of  the  Gandharvas  (23). 
Some  of  them  sang,  some  played  on  Mridanga,  trumpets 
and  Anaka  and  some  played  on  Venu,  Vina  and  other 
musical  intriiments  (24).  There  danced  innumerable  Apsaras, 
the  clouds  dischanged  sliowers  of  flowers  and  the  wind  blew 
gently  (25).  When  there  arose  a great  tumult  Tumvura, 
being  thought  of  by  Tunaya,  came  there  and  performed  the 
yaitikar/jui  ceremony,  0 Muni  (26).  There  came  the  gods  and 
the  immaculate  cclesilal  saiuls  and  the  leading  Na^as  headed 
by  Sesha,  Vasuki  and  Takshaka  from  Patala  (27).  And  came 
all  the  leaders,  0 foremost  of  the  twice-born,  of  the  gods, 
Asurai,  Yakshas  and  Gukyakas  and  all  the  V§yus  (28).  The 
great  city  of  the  Gandharvas  w^as  agitated  by  all  the  Rishis, 
gods,  Danavas,  Pannagas  and  Munis,  who  had  come  there 
(29b  Having  performed  all  the  ceremonies  consequent  on' 
the  birth  of  the  child  Tumvaru  undertook  the  performance 
of  a benedictory  rite  preceeded  by  eulogy  (30).  Do  thou, 
becoming  a Lord  Paramount,  highly  powerful,  energetic  and 
mighty-armed,  rule  over  this  endless  earth  for  a long  time 
(3l)t  May  Sakra  and  all  the  gods,  all  the  Lokapalas  and 
Rishis,  do  good,  0 heroe,  to  your  prowess  destructive  of 
your  enemies  (32).  May  Marut  do  you  good,  and  may  it 
blow  with  no  dust  before  it.  And  the  pure  southern  wind 
ihali  blow  gently  for  you  (33).  The  Western  Marut  will 
give  you  most  excellent  energy  and  the  northern  Marut 
will  give  you  great  prowess  (34)*^^  After  the  completion  of 
this  benedictory  rite  a voice,  without  any  body,  said  “ there 
60 


will  DC  many  manu!;  lor  you  as  me  prccepcor  nas  said. 
And  accordingly  he  will  be  celebrated  on  earth  by  the  name 
of  Marutta  (35).  All  the  kings  on  earth  will  carry  out  his 
command.  And  this  heroe  will  be  at  the  head  of  all  kings 
(36).  Having  subdued  all  the  kings  this  highly  powerful 
Lord  Paramount  will  enjoy,  without  any  obstnirlion.the  earth 
consisting  of  seven  insular  continents  (37).  He  will  be  the 
head  of  all  the  kings  celebrating  sacrifices  and  he  will  exccll 
all  the  kings  in  heroism  and  energy  (38). 

Markandeya  said : — Hearing  the  words  of  the  gods 
expressed  through  some  one  all  the  Vipras,  Oandharvas  and 
as  welt  as  his  parents  were  delighted  (39). 


CHAPTER  CXXVIU, 


j^ARKANDEYA  s.nid  : — Thereupon  t.aking  that  dear  son  and 
followed  by  Vipras  and  Oandharvas  on  foot  the  prince  went 
to  his  own  city  (i)  Having  reached  his  father's  house  he 
saluted  his  feet  with  reverence.  And  so  rlid  the  bashful  thin- 
built  princess  (a).  Then  faking  the  boy  the  prince  said  to 


8H  uanqiiarvas  who  bad  come  there  (7),  Therqqpqn 
there  took  place  \n  the  hoqses  of  all  citizens  a great  festivity, ^ 
who  all  thought,  “ A son  is  horn  to  us  and  not  to  him  (8).” 
That  city  being  delighted  and  filled  with  tfie  singing  and 
and  music  of  beautiful  damsels,  other  women,  of  exquiste 
beauty,  began  to  dance  (9).  The  king  delightedly  iqade 
unto  the  leading  twice-borq  gifts  of  jewels,  riches,  kine,  rai- 
ments and  ornaments  (10).  That  boy  grew  up  like  the  moon 
in  the  light  half  of  the  month.  He  gave  delight  fo  his  parents 
and  was  loved  by  his  people  (n).  O Muni,  he  first  took 
lessons  iq  the  Vedas  from  the  preceptors  and  then  in  number- 
less scriptures  and  then  in  the  science  of  archery  (12).  He 
was  always  energetic  in  the  use  of  swords  and  bow ; and  that 
heroe  never  felt  tired  in  the  use  of  other  weapons  too  {13). 

1 hereupon,  0 Vipra,  being  humble  and  reverent  towards  his 
preceptor  he  took  lessons  in  arms  from  Bhargava  of  Bhrigu’s 
race  (14)'  Having  learnt  the  use  of  arms,  mastered  the 
Vedas  and  seen  the  other  end  of  archery  he  became  highly 
accomplished  in  all  branches  of  learning  (15)'.  Vishala  too, 
having  heard  ^1  of  his  daughter  and  of  the  proficiency  0^  hpr 
son,  had  his  mind  filled  with  joy  (16).  Having  seen  his  grand- 
son and  obtained  his  desired-for  object  the  king  performed 
many  sacrifices  and  gave  away  gifts  to  many  (17).  Haying 
performed  many  ceremonies,  the  king,  gifted  with  strength 
and  intellect  (as  he  was)  and  (ever)  vanquishing  his  enemies,' 
piously  ruled  the  earth  with  the  help  of  his  own  caste  people 
(18).  Then  desirous  of  returning  into  the  forest  he  said  to 
his  son  Avikshita.-— “0  son,  I have  grown  old.  I shall  there- 
fore) go  to  the  forest ; take  from  me  this  kingdom  (19).  I 
have  no  other  (desire)  save  your  installation.  Do  yqq  t^^e 
from  me  this  well  established  kingdom  which  I offer  you”  (ap). 
Thus  accosted  by  his  father,  the  prince  Avikshjta,  haying 
his  mind  bent  upon  going  to  the  forest  for  carrying  on  penan- 
ces, said  humbly  to  him  (21)  ”0  father,  I shall  not  rule  over 
this  earth.  My  mind  does  not  find  pleasure  in  kiqgdo^n. 


476 


MARKANDEVA  PURANAM, 


Appoint  (therefore)  another  man  (22),  Wh  n I was  en- 
chained I was  released  by  my  father  not  by  my  own 
prowess.  Where  is  then  maiilineis  for  me  «anfl  the  earth 
is  to  be  governed  by  manliness  (23).  Hmv  can  !,  who  ccnilfl 
not  nrok’Ct  my  own  self,  preserve  lliis  earth  ? llierefcirt; 
conter  this  kingflom  upon  some  body  vhe.  (24).  Ilcnv  can 
the  man,  who  had  been  overpowered  by  others  aiul  who  had 
been  released  by  yon  from  the  hrn\%  observe  the  cbily  of 
his  own  order?  How  can  f,  %\im  liave  Ibe  nature  of  a fciiialik 
be  a king  (25). 

The  Father  said  There  is  no  dislincliiin  betiveeii  a 
father  and  a son.  As  is  the  fal!it'‘r  so  is  lint  som  Cl  lirroe, 
yon  were  nol  rr leased  by  any  one  else  biii  by  your  faltier  (26)* 

1'he  .son  SAID:™!)  king,  I caniicit  cliiiiigo  my  iiiitnt  oilier* 
w‘iiie»  lliero  is  a great  shamo  in  my  mind  iince  I mm  relea.s^ 
ti  byyoii  (27X  He,  who  etijoyi  ilie  ricliti  icqiiirtil  by  Ids 
father,  who  lias  been  saved  from  difTicully  by  Iiii  fiilfieri  whoit 
fiarne  is  made  known  by  his  father,  is  not  horn  in  die  rare  of 
iivankind  I will  fedhov  the  rominrt  of  wlm  ae- 

quirr  rirbes  f o’  f lo'^-n wirh  rr'piit .itlon  ami  rrfnove  ihrnv* 
ielvrs  l!u‘U’  *e.vn  dila-  idi;*'-.  ’./  'b 

M A II K A N ? 1 1-;  V A ? a i 4 ; a ) M u o u w f o*  11  r r | o*  a led!  re  * 
quelled  by  b:„i  f4lh"r  he  *iaid  flm  king  plir't’^i  liis  »oin 
Manilla  cm  tfie  ibrime  f;yd.  {I^voo^  fibiaiiird  i|ii*i  king- 
dofti,  %vilh  t!ir  tsmseol  of  bis  father*  it  too  iiis  |♦rillu!'.ll!^er  lio 
fiilly  rniitrilmled  to  ih-^  pyv  r4  bis  kiiraio'ii  i2l;.  KlllU 
Kmmulhnnm  ioti,  roMraodog  bis  mtii»h  lotdy  and  sperelt, 
relired  to  ivnod^  willi  lor  carryout  rfii  h.-f^l  aii’.frrslie^ 

for t lliriio^and  years  and  fUrn  is-io:iiii|r'rn|t  bm  bn  !y  the  Ling  r# 
paiicil  to  the  reipon  of  sTdasr  yj4' . ll;%  \%  i,r  VrrTt,  fovrird 
mitlcil  lock^  and  impnriiirs*  rarri-d  on  jom.tiices  for  aiioififir 
httiilfecl  crlesikl  years  {j,|s  Woduog  ilm  sasie  region  iviih 
bit  iligh^ioiiled  lord  in  liraven,  %iie  bvrd  on  ifoLk*  niitl  iaoif| 
retlifi  In  ilm  hermitage  M Illilr|ata  in  ilie  mid-a  id  ibr  wivet 
©f  the  twict*bern  swd  engigtii  litrself  iti  llieir  service  Cjs|. 


CHAPTER  CXXIX. 


TT 

IVrouSHTHUKI  said  0 revered  Sir,  you  have  describ- 
ed to  me  in  full  the  story  of  Karandhama  as  well  as  that  of 
Avikshita  (i).  I wish  now  to  hear  the  story  of  the  high- 
souled  king  Marutta,  Avikshita’s  son.  I have  heard  he  was 
greatly  energetic,  lord  Paramount,  noble,  heroic,  beautiful, 
highly  intelligent,  conversent  with  piety.  He  performed  many 
religious  act.s  and  governed  well  the  earth  (2 — 3). 

MARKANDEYa  said:— Having  obtained  the  kingdom  froth 
his  grand-father  with  the  consent  of  his  father  he  governed 
it  piously  like  a father  taking  care  of  his  own  begotten  sons 

(4) .  He  dv:1y  performed  many  Yajnas  terminated  with  gifts 
and  gladly  carried  out  the  command  of  Ritwikas  and  priests 

(5) ,  His  wheel  was  unobstructed  in  the  seven  insular  can- 
tinsnfs  and  his  nsovement  was  unimpeded  in  heaven,  PAtAla 
and  water  (6).  Having  obtained  riches,  O Vipra,  he  duly 
performed  his  own  actions  and  propitiated  the  gods  headed 
by  Indra  with  Yajnas{7)-  The  inferior  castes  too  zealously 
engaged  in  their  respective  duties,  and  performed,  with  Ae 
wealth  obtained  from  him,  Rishtha  and  Purtha  ceremonies 
(8).  The  earth  being  governed  by  the  high-souled  Marutta 
the  celestial  region,  with  its  inhabitants,  grew  prosperous,  0 
foremost  of  the  twice-born  (9).  He  not  only  surpassed  all 
the  kings  of  the  earth  but  with  sacrifices  even  the  king  of 
the  gods,  the  performer  of  a hundred  Yajnas  (10).  His 
Ritw'ika  was  the  high-souled  ascetic  Samvartta,  the  son  of 
Angiras  and  the  brother  of  Vrihaspati  (ii).  He  broke  down 
the  golden  mountain  Munjavan,  where  the  celestials  used 
to  go  for  he  had  pilfered  the  conch  shell  of  that  king  (12).  0 ' 
twice-born  one,  by  giving  away  lands  in  his  Yajna  he^ 
pleased  alUhe  ascetics  (13)-  A"  the  Rishis  sing  fully  th* 


king  on  this  earth  who  can  perform  Va/nas  like  Ivlarutta,  in 
whose  Yi^na  all  the  Rishis  have  been  pleased  (15).  He 
distributed  Soma  juice  amongst  all  the  gods  headed  by 
Shakra  and  DakshinAs  amongst  ail  the  twice-born  (i6).  In 
the  Yajna  of  what  king  like  that  of  Marutta  will  the  twice- 
born  one  leave  aside  profuse  gold  in  houses  filled  with  jewels 
(17)  ? All  his  palaces  were  made  of  gold.  All  the  three 
Varnas  gained  something  or  other  from  tiim  and  equally  gave 
it  away  (18).  All  those  men,  who  had  their  ends  achieved  with 
the  remnant  left  off  by  him,  performed  many  Yajms  there- 
with in  different  countries  (ip).  O foremost  of  Munis,  while 
be  was  reigning  and  governing  his  subjects  an  ascetic  came  to 
him  and  said  (20) : — '*0  king,  having  seen  a host  of  ascetics 
assailed  by  the  poison  of  serpents,  elated  with  pride  your 
grand-mother  has  communicated  this  to  you  (at).  *tlavlttf 
governed  the  earth  well  your  grand-father  has  gone  to  heaven. 
I too,  incapable  of  carrying  on  penances,  am  living  in  the 
hermitage  of  lirva  (22).  0 king,  yourself  governing  the  king- 
dom of  your  grand-father,  f set*  an  irregularity  (that  never 
took  {dace  timing  the  regrtne  of)  your  predecessors  (aj). 
Forsooth,  you  have  btu'ti  htindlv  aUacheti  to  the  objects  of 
enjoyment  atul  have  lost  all  contrtd  over  senses,  since  yoti  do 
not  understand  who  are  wicked  ,mtl  wht»  nre  not  {^4).  Having 
come  from  IMtila  the  serpents  have  bitten  seven  Miini  boys 
and  vitiated  the  water  (35).  They  have  jd%o  desecrated  the 
purified  Havi  wirh  urine,  excreta  etc.  Fereeiving  your 
coming  do  you  soon  offer  foo<l  to  the  serpents  {36). 


C.n  d,.sa  ,sfi.d  »,th  „e  or  aliooatrd  from  me  by  tbe 
Derf  ••  enemies  (30)  ? Who 

^1  Who  IS  to  be  punished?  Who  is  to  be  protected  ? 
m.t  persons  should  be  looked  aftet  by  nte  (3:)  ? pt  fear 

aid  pkce'st  M ''"f’  “"derstanding  well  thh  timd 

A kf  t 1.  u intellfgenc.  (33). 

Lt  lL  " spies  (to  ascertain  the  cbl- 

eltlf ^^3).  Having  his  rnind  d% 

fbff  f t ehjoynlents  (34).  O kin# 

lins  w i?r  ^35).  If  a kibg  Maih- 

e 1 this  earth  and  obsetves  hiS  duties,  he  suffers  gr^at 

neTt  (36)"  U 7 supreme  delight  in  the 

0 If  L relinquishing  all  pteasures, 

fcnl  A ^ y^ut  rule,  you  m^k 

«•  4.  * e t ‘ ^ * Whit  is  thu  isis  bf  speaking  tnore  ? In- 

ftwt  punishnatifit  dn  tbn  winked  a«d  protect  fhe  gotrd.  Yba  atu 
the  king  and  ate  etilittred  to  thb  Sixth  portion  of  virtue  m 
By  proteeiing  thew  and  subduing  the  Wicked  you  will 
be  visited  by  all  sins.  Do  thie  ff  yob  like  (40).  r have  M 

^^mumcated  all  to  you.  I ath  ybar  grknd-mothet.  Db  Ibis 
»f  yea  like,  0 king  (41). 


wtiiCM 


words  of  the  ascetic 


iVlARKANnEYA  said  : — Hearing  the 
the  king  was  filled  with  shame.  Then  saying,  *'  Fie  on  me 
who  am  negligent”  and  sighing  he  took  up  his  how  (t). 
Thereupon  speedily  repairing  to  the  herinit.ige  of  Anrva  he 
touched  the  feet  of  his  fatfier’s  niotlter  VeerJ  with  his  head 
(2).  The  ascetics  too  duly  welcomed  him.  Beliolding  the 
seven  Rishis  hiiteu  by  the  serpents  on  the  gromul  the  king 
blamed  himself  in  their  presence.  He  said — *'  May  the  etilire 
world  with  gods,  demons  and  men  see  how  T dc.al  with  the 
wicked  serpents  who  have  distegarded  my  prowess  and 
proved  hostile  to  the  BrShmanas  (3~“5)* 

MarKAndeya  said:— Having  said  this,  the  king,  in  anger, 
took  up  the  weapon  called  Santvartaka  for  the  destruction 
of  the  innumerable  serpents  living  in  lYilRia  (fi).  'riu-rcupon 
O Vipra,  there  wa.s  a conllagratiaii  all  around  tin-  city  of 
Nagas,  on  its  being  continually  burnt  down  by  the  clfnlgence 
of  the  great  weapon  (7).  Being  assailed  by  that  we  apon  the 
serpents  began  to  give  vent  to  words  as  ” O father ! O 
mother  1 0 child !”  (8).  Some  with  their  tails  burnt,  some 
w’Uh  their  hoods  burnt,  taking  their  wives  and  sons  wlh 
them,  keeping  aside  their  ornaments  and  clotlies  and  re- 
nouncing Patala  proceeded  to  seek  refuge  with  Ilhamitn, 
the  mother  of  Murutta,  who  had  formerly  promisrd  them 
protection  (g—to).  Having  approached  her  they  all,  stricken 
with  fear,  saluting  her,  said  with  suppressed  words  ” Remem- 
ber what  you  said  to  us  before  (n).  Formerly  we  ivoisliip- 
ped  you  in  RasStala  for  something;  the  time  for  that  is  now 
Save  us,  O mother  of  heroes  (12).  O queen,  stop 
yObr  son,  save  our  lives.  The  entire  region  of  the  serpent* 
is  being  burnt  down  by  the  fire  of  his  weapon  (13).  Save 


ittmed  by  your  son.  Have  pity  on  us,  O illustrious  lady”  (14). 

Hearing  their  words  and  reraenabering  her  former  words 
the  chaste  lady  addressed  the  following  words  respectfully 
to  her  husband  (15}. 

Bhamini  said  :-~Formerly  in  P&tala,  the  serpents  wel- 
coming you  adressed  to  you  some  words  regarding  your 
•on  (16),  They  are  now  being  consumed  by  his  energy  and 
have  come  here  in  fear.  Formerly  I promised  them  protec- 
tion (17).  Those  who  have  sought  my  protection  have  also 
sought  your  protection  for  observing  the  same  religious  life 
with  you  I am  now  under  your  protection  (t8).  Therefore 
•top  your  son  Marutta.  At  your  words  and  requesting  me 
he  will,  forsooth,  be  pacified  (19). 

AvikshitA  said : — For  their  great  iniquity  Marutta  has 
been  worked  up  with  anger.  Irrepressible  is  the  ire  of  my 
son,  I think  (20). 

The  SEKPKNT.S  said : — O king,  we  have  sought  refuge 
with  thee.  Do  thou  show  us  the  favour ; the  use  of  arms  is 
for  the  protection  of  the  afflicted  (21). 

Markanoeya  said  i—Heariag  the  words  of  the  serpeols 
who  came  for  protection  and  being  requested  by  bis  wife 
the  highly  illustrious  Avlkshita  said  {22).  " O gentle  lady» 
I shall  soon  go  and  request  your  son  to  save  the  serpents. 
Those,  who  seek  protection,  should  never  be  forsaken  (23)1 
If  he  does  not  withdraw  his  weapon  at  my  words  1 shall 
oppose  the  weapon  of  my  son  with  mine”  (24). 

Thereupon  taking  up  Ids  bow,  Avikshita,  the  foremost  of 
Kihatriyas,  speedily  left  for  the  hermitage  of  Bhargava  along 
with  hit  wife  (25). 


€t 


XTXAKK.AtMUB.YA  saiQ  : — oc  sftw  Dts  SOU  YYitti  a most  eicel- 
lent  bow,  his  fterce  wcs|>on  spreading  its  hre  upon  alt  tht 
quarters,  vomitting  forth  greid  fire  burning  down  tte  entirt 
earth  and  reaching  the  heart  of  PStaia,  irrepressible  lutd 
dreadful  (t — 2).  Beholding  the  frowning  face  of  the  king, 
he  said: — "You  should  not  be  angry,  0 Marutta;  take  away 
yonr  weapon  (3).  Intelligent  greatly  (as  you  are)  you  have 
carelessly  broken  down  the  order  of  creatures."  Hearing 
the  words  of  his  father  and  looking  at  him  repeatedly,  be 
with  his  bow,  saluting  him  revorenttaliy  said  0 lather, 
the  serpents  havegreatlf  offended  me  During  my 

rule  they,  disregarding  my»  prowess  and  coming  to  SapiMci«Mi, 
(hermitage)  have  Wtten  tito  ascetk  boys  (6).  O king,  daring 
my  regime,  these  wicked  (serpents)  have  spoiled  the  J/aph 
kept  in  the  hermitages  of  the  ascetics  {7).  'i  hey  all  have 
also  spoiled  the  tank.s.  For  this,  O father,  you  iiliould  not 
speak  any  thing.  You  should  not  stop  me  from  slaying  these 
serpents,  tho  killers  of  Brahmanas  (8). 

Avncsiuxa  said:— If  they  have  killed  the  Vipras  they 
will  go  to  hell  alter  death.  Now  dbey  my  words  and  rettrain 
your  weapon  (9). 

Marutta  say  :--I  too  shall  also  go  to  bell  if  I do  not 
tty  to  bring  the  wiched  to  bay.  Do  not  prevent  me  there* 
fore,  0 father  ( to). 


with  me.  Out  of  honor  to  me  do  you  withhold  your  weapon 
What  is  the  use  of  being  angry,  0 king  ? (it). 

: Marutta  said : I shall  never  forgive  these  wicked  feltowi 


. 483 

punishes  those  who  deserve  punishtneat  and  protects  those 
who  are  good,  attains  to  sacerd  regions.  One,  who  neglects 
this  duty,  goes  to  bell  (13).  , 

Markandeya  said  Although  he  was  thus  repeatedly 
prevented  by  his  father  the  son  did  no-t  withhold  Ms  weapon< 
He  then  again  said  (14^ : — “ Although  prevented  by  me  you 
are  still  bent  upon  killing  the  serpents,  who  in  fear  have 
sought  refuge  with  roe.  I shall  then  adopt  the  reEne(Kal 
Rieasure  (15).  I have  also  learnt  the  use  of  arms;  it  is  not 
you  alone  who  are  an  expect  in  it.  O Wicked  one,  what  is 
your  proweess  before  me  (16)  ? 

MarkaNDEYA  said : — 0 foremost  of  Munis,  thereupon 
Avikshita,  with  his  eyes  reddened  with  rage,  took  up  the 
weapons  of  Kala  (17).  He  then  set  to  the  bow  the  highly 
powerful  and  most  excellent  weapon  of  Kala  capable  of 
burning  down  the  enemies  (iS).  Assailed  by  Samvarta 
weapon  the  earth  was  agitated.  And  when  the  Kala 
weapon  was  taken  up  all  the  mountains  were  agitated 
Beholding  the  deadly  weapon  uplifted  by  his 
Marutta  said  aloud;->«“I  have  taken  up  this, 
punishing  the  wicked  and  ool  for  kilHag  you^  Why  4o  ym 
therefore  discharge  the  deadly  weapon  at  me,  your  sou, 
observant  of  his  own  duties  and  always  obedient  to  you 
(»0— ai)?  0 great  one,  my  duty  is, to  protect  my  subects.; 
ior  whose  destruction  have  you  taken  up  this  weapon  (22)  ? . 

Avikshita  said:—!  have  made  this  exertion  for  pf^ 
teeting  them  who  have  sought  my  shelter.  Thou  art  thehr 
destroyer;  do  not  save  me  (23).  Either  having  slain.. me 
with  the  prower  of  your  weapon  do  thou  kill  the  wicked 
•erpeots,  or  having  slain  thee  with  the  strength  of  my  artns 
i i^all  |wotfict  the  great  serpents  (24).  0 fie  on  th^.hfe 
of  that  man  who  does  not  help  him  who  seeks  his  sheltpr 
even  if  he  be  one  of  the  enemies  (25),  I am  a Kshatriya 
mi  they  in  fear  have  sought  my  shelter;  thou  art  their  enemy. 
Why  ihoaldtt  thou  not  be  slain  by  me  (26J  ? . 


484 


MARKANDiVA  KmAffAM. 


MaruttA  said He,  who  puts  in  impediments  in  the  way 
of  governing  the  subjects,  be  he  a friend,  & relative,  a father 
or  the  preceptor,  should  be  slain  by  the  king  (27).  i shait 
therefore  strike  thee,  O father.  Do  not  be  offended.  I am 
observing  my  own  duty  and  am  not  angry  with  thee  (aS). 

Markandeya  said -Thereupon  beholding  them  both 
bent  upon  killing  one  another  all  the  Munis,  Bhargavas  and 
others  came  there  (ap).  They  said  to  them  “You  ibould 
not  discharge  your  weapon  at  your  father  and  you  should  not 
also  kill  your  son  of  illustrious  deeds’*  (30). 

Marutfa  aa«d The  wicked  should  be  slain  by  me  and 
the  earth  should  be  protected.  These  are  wicked  serpents. 
Where  Is  my  folly,  O ye  twice-born  ones  (31). 

Avikshita  said My  duty  also  Is  to  protect  them  who 
have  sought  refuge  with  me,  O ye  Vipras,  my  son  bat  com* 
wtod  aa  offence  for  he  isidMMit  to  kill  «y  doptndanli  CSIf), 

.Tmk  Riffits  said;— Tell  these  serpents  whwe  eyes  aft 
rolling  with  terror  that  we  shall  revive  the  Vipras  who  have 
been  bitten  by  the  wicked  serpents  (33).  No  use  therefore 
of  fighting,  0 ye  foremost  of  kings.  Be  reconciled.  Both  of 
you  are  of  firm  promises  .ind  are  conversant  with  your 
duties  (34). 

Markandeya  said Then  Veerl, approaching  her  grand* 
son,  said  t— “0  child,  at  my  words  you  have  addressed  your- 
self for  destroying  these  serpents  (35).  My  object  has  been 
accomplished,  for  the  BrShmanas,  who  were  dead,  have 
regained  their  lives.  You  should  therefore  save  them  who 
have  sought  your  protection  (36). 

SHAMtHi  said I was  formerly  welcomed  by  them  Hvinf 
in  Pitlia  and  therefore  my  hnsband  wot  engaged  In  thto 
, work  by  myself  (37).  Therefore,  0 worshipful  one,  It  Is 
i proper  that  there  should  bo  an  end  of  fight  between  my 
^Mhoiamd  and  son,  your  grand-son  and  non  (3%). 
''"ft||*llAOKANDEYA  said  s— Thereupon  with  heavenly  mtdlcln# 
iii%  liking  away  their  poilwn  the  ifrpeoti  reeved  tbo«e 


""  M.rntUsal.l.d.hef.„ 

roar  oZi  r f" 

T;i“r  "■*  ^-“"eno^rj  c:“ 

^^otTad';''’'^^’-.  '"-orcT'.^ 

•»  tha  was,  atlaiMd  to  the  *”'>  obaste 

(43).  The  hiag  MaratU  .r™  e3"t,,:ear.h  " 

'‘vr“ " r 

pleasures  (44).  The  great  Prabhavati,  the  dau^rhf^r  „f 
wi'.M  M “s  '‘"“eMer  or  SaairaheLoie  hi, 

Ma;:i:f,’-  hetir 'h »' 

or  Siodharirii,  .he  hiag  „r  Mad, a ,36).  Sol'S.:- rX' 
baa.  f(\  ‘‘’®  daughter  of  Sindhu,  king  and  the 

b.aa„(al  daaghter  ot  the  king  of  Chedis  became  his  wive. 

a™,'  ° «“'•  M'4  ki»«  begat  00  them  eighteea 

b«  hi?  r.el""'®'  ”1““ 

lia?at?LT  I -bTa  >'»  ‘he  seven  insalar  coo. 

lment.(4s,).  Like  that  royal  saint  of  incomparahle  energy 

•ad  pmw...  ,ha„  had  been  „o  king  in  the  past  no,  will  S 

nr  >0  l“‘“te  (50).  Hearing  the  accoant  of  this  high-sooled 

tobl V , 17°“  °'  ""  one  gets  the  he? 

birth  «iid  is  freed  from  all  sins  (51). 


CHAPTER  CXiXtl 


IVrouShthoki  said; — 0 reverend  Sir,  you  h#fe  re* 
counted  in  full  the  story  of  Marutta.  f wish  to  hew  of  an 
account  of  his  progeny  (i).  O great  Muni,  I wish  to  hear  ol 
those  of  his  children  who  were  powerful  and  became  kings. 
Do  you  relate  it  (a). 

Markandeya  said Marutta  had  a son  celebrated  by 
the  name  of  Narishwanta;  of  the  eighteen  sons  he  was  the 
eldest  and  foremost  (3).  Marutta,  the  foremost  of  the 


(4).  Having  governed  his  kingdom  righteously,  performed 


^anta  be  retired  into  woods  (5).  Having  carried  on  bard 
austerities  with  a concentrated  mind  and  filled  the  heaven 
and  earth  with  his  fame  he  ascended  the  heaven,  O Vipra 

(6) .  Observing  the  conduct  of  his  father  as  well  as  that  of 
Other  kings  his  son,  the  intelligent  Nariswanta,  began  to  think 

(7) .  “In  this  family,  my  predecessors,  the  high<souled  kings, 


aouled  ones  (9)  ? ! wish  to  follow  his  actions  and  immttate 


goes  to  bell  (1 1).  While  they  have  wealth,  what  wonder  is 
tirtre  if  the  king  performs  great  Ya^nas  and  makes  charities 
(ISJ  ? Pride  of  birth,  shame,  anger  towards  enemies  and 
own  duties  prevent  a roan  from  flying  away  from  the 
bstttwiidd  (13).  Ait  these  were  completely  accompllslied 
by  my  ancmdoci  and  my  father  Mwbtta.  Who  can  immitate 


^ nut  Deen  oone 

by  my  foreftthera?  They  all  performed  Yajnas,  made 
<*arities,  never  came  from  the  battle-field,  were  great  war- 
rior«  and  manly.  I shall  do  such  works  as  had  not  been 
attempted  by  them  (15—16).  My  predecessors  celebrated 
Y^ms  no  doubt  but  they  could  not  do  so  uninterruptedly. 

I ihall  do- this  {17).  ^ 

MarKANOEYA  said  Thinking  thus  that  king  undertook 
a Ya}na  adorned  with  the  gifts  of  riches  the  like  of  which 
had  not  been  performed  by  any  (18).  He  gave  away  profuse 
riches  for  the  maintenance  of  the  twice-born  j the  king  then 
gave  hundred  fold  food  in  that  Yajna  (19),  He  then  con- 
ferred  upon  each  man  of  the  earth  kine,  raiments,  ornamentsi 
And  store-houses  of  corn  (20).  Thereupon  when  that  king 
again  undertook  the  celebration  of  another  Yajna  and  when 
rt  was  taken  in  hand  he  invited  many  Brahmanas  but  could 
not  get  any  (21).  Every  one,  of  those  Brahmanas  whom  the 
king  invited  to  take  up  the  duties  of  a Ritwika,  said^.to  him. 

are  engaged  elsewhere  in  another  Yajna  (22).  Request  , 
some  body  else,  0 king.  The  riches,  that  you  gsves^M  * ' 
your  Y ajna,  have  not  been  exhaifsted  as  yet"  (23}.  ' ^ . 

Markandeva  said  When  the  king  of  the  whole  fartb 
did  not  get  Brahmanas  to  act  as  Ritwifcas  be  began  to  give 
awi^  gifts  at  the  outside  altar  (24).  Still,  they,  who  had  theirf 
temples  filled  with  wealth,  did  not  accept  them.  He,  then 
wlAi  a view  to  make  gifts  unto  the  twicerborn  with  a 
heart,  said  (25).  *'  Oh  j it  is  a highly  grand  thing  that  there 
is  no  poor  Btfihmana  on  this  earth.  But  the  treasury  has 
grown  useless  and  frutless  is  the  object  of  those  who  perform 
Yajnas  (sfi).  No  one  will  require  a Ritwika  for  the  people 
of  the  world  wiH  oot  celebrate  Yajnas.  We  shall  not  be 
aWi,  even  if  we  wish,  to  n»dce  g^fts  unto  the  twice-born  (27). 

If  ARKANOEYA  said  {—Thereupon  saluting  repeatedly  with 
nivetence  seme  BddHnanas  he  made  them  Ritwikas  in  fais 
Yajna  and  they  b^an  that  great  ceremony  (28).  It  was  a 


great  wonder  that  when  that  king  undertook  that  y&jHa 
there  were  many  men  on  earth  engaged  in  similar  cermonies 
{29).  (So)  there  did  not  assemble  a concourse  of  the  twice* 
born.  Few  Brthmanas  came  there  for  accepting  gifts  (30). 
Whenever  the  king  Narishwanta  engaged  in  celebrating 
Tgjms  many  people,  with  the  money  given  by  him,  under* 
took  numberless  such  ceremonies  on  earth  (31).  When  the 
king  Narishwanta,  O Muni,  undertook  the  performance  of  a 
yajns  there  took  place  simultaneously  eighteen  Ksiis  of 
in  the  west,  seven  in  the  north,  fourteen  in  the  south, 
and  fifteen  in  the  north  (32 — 33).  O Vipra,  such  was  the 
virtuous  king  Narishwanta,  the  son  of  Marutta,  in  the  days 
of  yore  renowned  for  hit  strength  and  bravery  (34), 


IYIarkandeya  said  s—Narishwanta’s  son  Dams,  the 
subduer  of  wicked  enemies,  had  the  strength  of  Sakra  and 


(Narishwanta)  begat  him  on  Indrasenk.  The  highly  iUusIrl- 
ous  one  lived  in  his  mother’s  womb  for  nine  years  (a).  At 
he  suffered  endurance  by  living  (so  long)  la  his  mother’s 
womb  the  prince  wilt  be  patient  by  nature  (3).  Then  his 
priest;  conversant  with  the  present,  past  and  future,  gave  the 
name  of  Dama  to  the  son  of  Narishwanta  (4).  The  prince 
%«a  learnt  in  full  the  science  of  archery  from  the  king 


Heftiest).  He  learnt  the 


lesson’  ■ self-controlled  (prince)'  received 

nt  J W f Arshmishena  (7).  Suma- 

her  hnwK  '^^^yamvara,  invited  by  her  father,  accepted  him  as 
ani  ^cconiphshed,  l\igh-souIed,  highly  powerful  and 

m««  c"  I ^ presence  of  all 

men  who  had  come  there  for  her.  She  was  the  daughter  of 

^ le  powerful  Chirukarman,  the  king  of  Dasharna  {8— 9).  The 
»g  > y powerful  and  heroic  son  of  the  king  Madra  was  greatly 
attached  to  Sumana  (10).  And  so  were  the  great  bowman 
anc  tie  highly  intelligent  prince  'V'apushman,  the  son  of 
Sangkrandana  and  the  prince  of  Vidarbha  (ii).  Seeing 
ama,  the  subduer  of  wicked  enemies,  selected  by  her  they 
began  to  consult  with  each  other,  assailed  by  Cupid  as  they 
were  (12)  :-~''Taking  away  this  beautiful  girl  by  force  frorti 
him  we  shall  go  to  our  houses.  His  amongst  lis  this  fair 
one  will  be  the  religiously  wedded  wife  whom  she  will  select 
of  her  own  accord,  according  to  the  rules  of  Sayamvara  (13-^ 
14K  If  she,  of  inebriate  eyes,  does  not  like  any  one  of  us, 
she  then  must  marry  him  who  will  slay  Dama  (15). 

Markandeva  said  .•—Having  made  this  resolution  * the 
three  princes  carried  away  that  fair  one  from  the  side  of 
Dama  (ift).  Thereupon  some  kings,  who  were  on  his  side, 
lamented  much  as  well  as  some  others  who  were  the  arbi- 
trators (17)’  O great  Muni,  beholding  them  sorry  on  all 
iidts,  Difiia  said  to  them  (i8), 

Dawa  said  :~0  ye  kings,  Sayamvara  is  mentioned  in  the 
liit  of  religious  acts.  Do  ye  consider  whether  her.  being 
rnrried  away  by  force  is  fair  or  wrong  (19).  If  (co  save 
hc?r)  h wrong  I should  not  take  any  step  and  must  marry 
iinother  wife.  And  if  it  is  fair — fie  on  me  if  with  my  ; life  t 
catiriol  save  her  by  subduing  the  enemies  (20). 

Thereupon  the  king  Chtrudbarma,  the  lord  of  Dasharna, 
iiaklitg  them  all  silent,  addressed  the ‘assembly,  O great, 
Mmil  (tl).  ‘^Do  ye  consider,  0 yc  kings,  what^  Dama  ’has 

62 


IVlARKANUr.VA  I’URAS^AIil 


said  relatiu}?  to  what  is  right  and  wrong  so  that  mv  virtnr 
not  suffer  deterioration"  (22). 


lord  of  the  earth  : — "There  i«  also  sanrlkin  tor  flandharva 
marriage  that  is  broi  ght  abii**t  bjf  attachwr  ni  towat  lt -ne 
otiicr  (23).  This  is  good  for  th : Kshalriyas  n<’t  for  Vaishy.i*, 
Sudras  and  Br^hmaiias.  Your  datighlet'ii  marriage  ha*  lir"ii 
celebrated  with  Damn  (24).  Hirrr  fore  lighlly  voiir  ».*««ghlrr 
belongs  to  Dama.  Only  In  . who  ii  j’'afirssf  il  hy  drsiir,  docs 
otherwise  (25).  Then  tho  e Uigicsouicd  kinj  s,  who  were  (of 
the  words  of  the  king  of  Dasharna,  said  [ih) 1'liry  have 
foolishly  said  that  the  Glindharva  lorni  «l  tnarrtagr  i»  the  hr»t 
for  Kshatriyas.  There  i t •txulhrr  form  of  marriage  called 
Rikshasa  for  tlie  Ksliatriyaa  (jy  . }}«,  who  has  taken  her 

away  by  force  after  slaying  all  the  intruderi.  may  also  marry 
her  according  to  the  Ratisbasa  form  of  marriage  faS).  1 his 
k the  best  form  of  marriage  for  the  ICsh«lriy««~the  other 
one  is  the  second.  This  K the  duly  of  thr  Kshatriyas  at 
laid  down  by  MahSnaiid;*  and  othrra  (2«|). 

Markandkva  said  : — f lifmijion  thr  kings,  who  had  lietn 
addressed  before,  again  said  words,  maintaining  their  caste 
and  religion  out  of  regard  firr  rach  other  {30).  Tfue  it  it 
that  the  Rakshasa  form  of  marriage  is  alsii  ianctirmed  lor  the 
Kshatriyas.  But  he,  of  all  metr,  was  tclctlrd  by  that  maldpti 
as  her  fitting  husbarrd  (31).  That  ie  called  the  Rakshata 
fornn  of  marriage  when  one  takes  away  a girt  hy  force  after 
having  slain  all  the  relations  ©I  her  father.  Hot  it  is  not  m 
When  she  has  accepted  a husband  (32).  In  the  pre«price  of 
all  the  kings  she  selected  Damn.  How  c«n  gprr  he  then 
either  the  Gandharva  or  Rakshasa  form  of  maitragr?  rj  if. 
Maidenhood  dons  not  hold  In  the  case  of  mm  tied 
% marriage  the  girls  are  allied  to  (otlier)  kings  fti).  They 

S’J't'""  ?".*!'*>'  u.m.  . ,lKy  h„. 

this  hy  force  but  it  i«  not  fair  (35). 

Mamandeva  iaid:~.H«afing  this  Dtwa  had  his  ry«« 


markanoeya  puranam. 
mi^tntAsvkhkt.  He  then  set  aright  h-  u 

(36).  “If  I behold  my  wife  being  carded 

men  what  is  the  use  of  my  arms  who  a by  powerful 

(;.7).  OU  r.e  o„  * 

f«e  on  my  arrows  l fie  on  my  bow  ! and  fil  * bravery  I 

family  of  the  high-souled  Marutta  (.8) 
powerful  men  survive  after  taking  awav 
my  proficiency  in  the  use  of  how  (39)  «eless  « 

these  words  to  the  Mngs  headed  by  Mabs  addressed 

<>- «».,  „<  *.« 

Dama  said  ;-~How  can  this  all  beautiful 
ebriete  eyes  and  bom  i«  this  family  be  the  wT^L 
this  one  or  that  one  ? Thinking  this,  O kings,  dJ  ye  lo  ^ 

battle  that  ye  may,  after  vanquishing  me  make  fhis  “ 

able  lady  your  wife  (42).  ^ ^ 

Markandeya  said: — Having  said  this  be  k > 
.how.r  arrow  comio*  ,11  the  Iriog,  u 

(43)4  All  those  heroic  kitiffs  too  di«oKa  a 

•rrom  shot  bj-  him.  And  Narisinraiita’s  son  too  out  ih, 
Rrrews  dkchwged  by  those  kings  C45).  there  yvas 

gmng  on  a conflict  between  Dama  and  all  theikings  ent^ed 

there  Mahlnanda  with  a dagger  in  his  hand  (46).  BehoWinr 

him  approach  with  a dagger  in  his  hand  in  that  great  en, 
counter  Purandara  discharged  a downpour  of  arrows  like  a 
shower  (47).  Those  weapons  and  the  network  of  arrows 
Mahlnanda,  with  his  dagger,  immediately  cut  off  (48).  There 
«pon  getting  in  anger  upon  Dama’s  car  the  highly  powerful 
Mabananda  engaged  in  an  encounter  with  him  (49).  Maha- 
nanda  fighting  in  many  ways  Dama,  out  of  light-handedness, 
discharged  an  arrow,  burning  like  the  fire  of  dissolution,  at  his 
heart  (50).  Thereupon  taking  it  out  of  his  heart  which  was 
rut  Mahftnanda  threw  a shining  sword  at  Dama  (51).  Dama, 
with  his  Sakti,  cut  this  off  which  was  like  a ’fire-brand  and 


markandeya  purakam 


about  to  fall.  He  also  cut  off  with  « 

Vetasa  leaf  ($2).  On  Mahananila  bring  slain  all  thr  Kings 
fled  away.  Then  stood  there  Va{>nshmiin,  the  kinj*  «f 
Kundina  (53).  Then  the  son  of  the  king  of  lieccan,  i lated 
with  the  pride  of  strength,  coming  t<>  the  battle.lirhf,  fought 
with  Dama  (54).  The  light-hnnde»f  heron  (Dam.ij  cut  off  i« 
battle  his  dreadful  sword,  the  head  of  his  chariotc*  r .itnl  !ii«i 
flag-staff  (S5).  Having  his  sword  shattered  he  to»>k  np  hi*i 
club  of  many  thorns.  That  too  he  immediately  rtif  off  from 
his  hand  (56).  And  as  soon  as  Vap«!<hman  was  .ifmul  to 
take  up  another  powerful  weapon  Dama,  piercing  him  with 
an  arrow,  immedaitely  struck  him  down  on  e.ifth  {57). 
Falling  down  on  earth  he  began  to  tremble  with  all  his  limbs 
dislocated.  Then  the  princes  made  up  their  minds  to  fly 
from  the  battle-field  (58).  Then  seeing  them  thus  disin- 
dined  to  fight,  leaving  them  behind  and  taking  Sumani  the 
self-controlled  Damn  went  away  {59).  Tlien  the  king  of 
Dasharna  duly  celebrated  the  marriage  between  D.ama  ,ind 
SumanS  (60).  After  his  marriage  Dama  lived  fur  somr  riiitr 
in  the  city  of  the  king  of  Dasharna  iiiid  liu-u  with  his 
wife  went  to  his  own  city  (6t).  'I'hcn  coiifrrriukf  upon  hint 
elephants,  horses,  chariots,  kine,  asse.s,  taincls,  fcnuile  ser- 
vants,  and  many  servants,  clothes,  raiments,  hows  ami  vessels 
filled  with  many  excellent  things  the  king  of  Dasharna  sent 
him  away  (62 — 63). 


Arkandeya  said: — O great  Mttiii,  having  obtained 
^ as  his  wife  the  prince  aahiled  the  feet  ot  liis  father 


MA  EK  A NDEVA . 

•Itif  mother  (r)*  Sumant,  of  faJr  eye-brows,  also  saluted  her 
ftther-iu4aw  and  mother-in-law.  They  too,  O Vipra,  also 
welcomed  them  with  blessings  (2),  On  his  marriage  and 
return  from  the  city  of  the  king  of  Dasharna  there  took  place 
a great  festival  in  Narishwanta^s  city  (3).  Hearing  of  the 
alliance  of  his  son  with  the  king  of  Dasharna  and  the  defeat 
by  the  kings  the  emperor  Narishwanta  was  greatly  delighted 
^ (4)‘  The  prince  Dama  sported  with  SumanS  in  gardens, 

palaces,  forest-lands  and  in  the  valleys  of  the  mountains  (5), 
Having  enjoyed  many  pleasures  and  grown  old  the  king 
Narishwanata  installed  his  son  Dama  in  the  kingdom  (7).  His 
wife,  the  illustrious  IndrasenS  also  followed  him  to  the  forest 
and  led  with  him  the  Vinaprastha  mode  of  life  (8).  Vapush- 
min,  the  son  of  Sangkrandana,  the  king  of  Deccan,  went  to 
that  forest  for  hunting  followed  by  a small  retuine  (g).  See- 
ing the  ascetic  Narishwanta  covered  with  dust  and  his  wife 
fndrasenl,  greatly  reduced  by  hard  aurterities  be  asked  him, 
•*1  II Who  are  you?  Are  you  a Vipra,  Kshatriya  or  a forest 

a Vaiiya  who  is  leading  the  Vinaprastha  mode  ofi 
llfei  Tell  me  ii),  ■■  ^Tberanpon  the  , 

ini  of  the  vow  of  silence,  gave  him  no  reply.  IndraaenI 
communicated  unto  him  everything  duly  (12). 

MaekANDEVA  said: — Being  informed  that  Narishwanta 
wti  the  father  of  his  enemy,  Vapushmin,  saying  '1  have  got 
yott^'  held  him  by  the  matted  locks  (13).  Indrasena  crying 
aloud  *Alas ! Alas  ? in  suppressed  words  he  took  up  his 

iword,  and  said  (14) ‘'He  is  the  father  of  Dama  who  van^ 
cpished  me  in  battle  and  carried  away  ray  Sumanl.  I shall 
kill  him;  let  Dama  save  him  (13).  I shall  slay  the  father  ol 
the  wicked  one  who  vanquished  the  entire  host  of  kings 
aisembled  for  securing  the  maiden  (xq)-  I shall  -.kiU.tbe 
fttitr  of  my  enemy,  the  wicked  Dama  who  fought  with  me 

in  battle.  Let  him  prevent  (17 )•  ^ ' ■ 

MaeicANDEYA  said: — Having  said  this  the  wicked  kinf 
Vipiiilimlo  cut  off  -his  head  whilst  Indrasena  kept  up  crying 


m 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAM. 


(i8).  Thereupon  ail  the  ascetics  and  other  dwellers  of  the 
forest  said  to  him,  '‘Fie  on.  you  ! Fie  on  you  f*'  Seeing  it 
he  left  the  forest  for  bis  own  city  (19).  On  his  departure, 
lodrasena,  heaving  a deep  sigh,  despatched  a Sudra  ascetic 
to  her  soil  (20).  She  said,  "Go  injmediately  and  comrauni- 
ote  to  my  son  my  words.  You  know  everything  about  my 
husband^s  affair.  What  more  shall  I speak  (2j)  ? Still  you 
should  inform  my  son  of  what  I say,  with  great  sorrow  on 
beholding  the  wicked  condition  of  the  king  (22).  He  is  the 
king,  lord  and  the  protector  of  the  four  Varnas.  How  fair  iit 
is  that  he  does  not  protect  the  ascetics  living  ip  hermitagea 
(23}?  While  I was  crying  "O  lord  ! O lord  V‘^  Vapushman, 
holding  my  husband  Narishwanta,  engaged  in  ascetic  observ- 
ances, by  the  hair,  killed  him  without  any  fault.  You  have 
gained  this  reputation  as  a king  during  your  rule  (24—25). 
Such  being  the  case,  hebave  yourself  in  a way  that 
may  not  disappear.  I should  not  speek  (more)  in  this. 

I am  a female  a«:etiG  (29).  Your  father,  an  aged  ascetic, 
has  been  killed,  though  he  was  innocent.  Think  what  you 
should  do  in  this  (27).  You  have  heroic  ministers  well  read 
in  all  branches  of  learning.  Discussing  with  them  do  what 
is  proper  (28).  O king,  this  is  not  in  our  province  who  axe 
ascetics  i you  are  to  do  this.  Hear  of  the  conduct  of  other 
(29).  Viduratha's  father  was  killed  by  a Yavana  whose, 
family  was  destroyed  (in  turn)  by  his  sou  (30).  The  father 
of  Jambha,  the  king  of  Asuras,  was  bitten  by  serpents.  And 
so  by  him  all  the  serpents  living  in  PatSla  were  kiUed. 
Heanng  that  bis  father  has  beea  killed  by  a Rdkshasa 
Parashara  completely  destroyed  Afte  race  of  Rakshasas  with 
fire  (32).  A Kshatriya  cannot  brook  . the  insylt  offered  to 
other  member  of  his  family  what  to  speak  of  the  des- 
jMction  of  his  father  {33)  ? this  ypur  father  has  not 
been  killed  nor  a weapon  has  struck  him  but  methinks 
^.l^^en  killed  and  wouaded  whh,  a weapon  ^ 

him  who  has  plaoed  his  weapon  on  the  dwellers 


MARKANDEYA  PURANAMI  4^5 

of  the  forest  ? Will  you  fear  when  your  son  is  killed  (35)  ? 
Therefore,  0 king,  you  should  mete  out  a condign  punish- 
ment to  Vapushman  along  with  his  servants,  kinsmen  and 
friends  (36). 

Having  despatched  Indradfis  with  this  intelligence,  that 
great  lady,  embracing  the  body  of  her  husband,  entered  into 

fife  (37)- 


^^^ARKANDEYA  said : — Being  commanded  by  IndrasenS 
the  Sudra  ascetic  went  there  and  communicated  the  destruc- 
tion of  his  father  unto  Dama  (i).  Being  informed  by  ttie 
•acetic  of  the  death  of  his  father,  Dama  burnt  with  rs^ 
like  fire  excited  by  clarified  batter  (3)*  O great  Muai, 
consumed  by  the  fire  of  inger  and  presssing  one  hand  again^  ^ 
the  other  he  gave  vent  to  the  following  words  (3).  “Inspite  o| 
my  existence,  his  son,  my  father  was  killed  by  that  greatly 
cruel  one,  throwing  an  insult  at  my  family,  like  one  having 
none  (4).  If  I forgive  him  I shall  do  so  for  want  of  manliness  j 
my  duty  is  to  punish  the  wicked  and  help  the  good  (5). 
What  is  the  use  of  lamenting  much  as  ‘Oh  (father)'.  I should 
now  do  what  should  be  done  in  this  mattar  (6).  If  I do  not 
bring  about  the  gratification  of  my  father  with  the  blood 
coming  out  from  Vapushman’s  body  I shall  enter  into  fire  (7) 

1 shall  perform  the  water-giving  ceremony  of  my  father 
with  his  blood  slain  in  battle ; I shall  feed  well  the  twice-born 
with  his  flesh.  Or  else  I shall  enter  into  fire  (8).  Even  if  the 
Aiuras,  Gods,  Yakshas,  Gandharvas,  Vidyadharas  and  all  the 
Siddhas  come  to  his  help,  even  them  with  him  I shall  reduce 


MARKANDRVA  PURANAM 


*|J,ARKAN0RYA  said  i— Having  inatle  il»i«  promtM  Narirti* 
waa^  ton  Daina,  with  hit  ej'«t  roUttig  in  angtr,  hold  hl« 
hittrda<wkhrhit  banii  (l),  Bewaitiug  the  dcMth  oK  hb  Jaihei 


to  ashes  with  my  weapons  (9).  Having  sl.tiii  the  coward, 
sinful  and  dishonest  king  of  D«ccan  in  battle  I shall  enjoy 
the  earth  fully.  If  I caiiiuH  kill  him  I shall  enter  the  fire  (10). 
I shall  slay  today  the  highly  wicked  one  together  with  his 
friends,  relatives,  infantry,  cavalry  and  the  army,  who  slew 
the  aged  ascetic,  observing  the  bmv  of  silence,  living  in  the 
forest  and  alway.s  extending  words  of  filesHings  (t  1).  Taking 
«p  their  bow  and  sword,  riding  this  chariot  and  confronting 
the  army  of  the  enemy  I shall  carry  on  an  onslaught  there. 
All  the  gods  assembled  there  will  see  it  (la).  I shall  lead 
this  great  army,  brought  up  by  myself,  for  the  immediate 
and  absolute  destruction  of  the  families  of  those  who  will 
help  him  while  engaged  in  an  encounter  with  me  to-day  (13). 
If  the  king  of  gods  comes  to  the  battle  with  the  thunderbolt  in 
bis  hand,  the  king  of  Hilris  taking  up,  in  anger,  his  dreadful 
rod  and  if  the  king  of  riches  and  Vamoa  endtavour  t©  save 
him  still  I shall  kill  him  with  sharpened  shafts  (14).  May  the 
vultures  be  satisfied  with  his  flesh  and  blood  by  whom  despite 
my  existence,  his  son,  my  father  has  hcen  slain,  fie  had  his 
mind  under  control,  was  freed  from  folly,  had  his  movements 
from  the  forest  to  heaven  .and  used  to  live  on  fruits 
dropped  from  trees  au«l  w.a»  friendly  towards  all  crea- 
tures (t5). 


and  censttring  destiny  be  said  to  all  the  ministers  add  som- 
moned  his  priest  (2). 

DAMA  said; — ^Tell  me  now  what  is  proper.  My  father  has 
gone  to  heaven.  You  have  heard  what  the  Sudra  ascetic  has 
said  (3).  That  king  was  an  old  ascetic,  was  leading  the  Vana- 
prastha  mode  of  life  and  observing  the  vow  of  silence.  My 
mother  IndrasenS  has  communicated  everything  to  me  in  thidi ' 
M what  should  be  done  to  Vapushman.  That  wicked  one,  ■ 
taking  up  his  sword,  and  bolding  by  the  hand,  killed  the  king  ’ 
a*  if  he  had  none.  My  good  mother  has  addressed  the  word 
‘fie’  to  me  (4—6).  Having  embraced  the  unfortunate  Naris- 
wanta  shorn  of  all  beauty  she  entered  fire  and  attained  to  the 
region  of  gods  (7).  I shall  to-day  encompass  what  has  been 
said  by  my  mother.  Arrange  therefore  the  elephants,  car^ 
horses  and  the  army  (8).  Without  vanquishing  my  father’s 
enemy,  slaying  the  destroyer  of  my  father  and  carrying  out 
the  words  of  my  mother  why  shall  I try  to  live  (9)? 

MariCANUSYA  said: — Hearing  his  words,  the  ministers  • 
llm  amfvaRts  and  army,  having  their  minds  exeirc^d,'^ 
began  te  ktneirt^  exclaiming  ‘Aks  f.-i  Alas’* 
leing  before  them  and  obtaining  blessings  .from  the  prfesm  f 
C^niiaat  of  the  present,  past  and  fatuns’,  they,, with  the  army,,-? 


issued  out  (II).  Sighing  like  the  king  of  serpents  and  kill*  ' 
ing  the  army  of  SoumapSla  and  others  in  Jamya  country 
Dana  quickly  approached  VapushmSln  (12).  Sangkrandana’s' 
son  Vapushm§.a  was  informed  that  Dama  with  his  army  and : 
ministers  had  come  (13).  Without  the  least  agitation  of  the' 
mind  he  commanded  bis  army  and  sent  an  emmissary  out  of. 
the  city  (with  the  news)  (14).  "0  Ksbatrya,  come  quickly  to  - 
me; Narlshwanta,  with  his  wife,  is  expecting  you  (15).  These 
ray  sharpened  arrows,  shot  off  my  bow,  piercing  your  body,  will 
drink  your  blood  in  lMU:tIe  (16). 

MarkandeyA  said  :~Hearing  all  thk  from  tie  messenger, 
and  remembmng  his  former  promise  Dama  went  there 
•p^dlly,  sighing  like  a serpent  (17).  Inviting  him  to  battio^ 


a great  encounter  between  Dama  and  Vap«!»hn»3n  (iS).  The 
charioteer  fought  with  the  charioteer,  the  elrpliant  with  the 
elephant  and  hors©  with  the  horse.  Tliere  thii^  arose  a grr-at 
encounter,  O saint  (19).  O Brahman,  Dama  fighting  10  anger 
in  the  presence  of  all  the  gods,  Sid»lha«  and  (Unrlharras  the 
earth  trembled  (20).  Neither  the  cliariotetr,  nor  the  elephant, 
nor  the  horse  could  stand  his  arrows.  Then  Vapitshmln's 
commander-in-chief  fought  with  Damafit).  Dama  slrurh  hw 
s^ft  deep  into  his  heart.  On  his  death  the  arm^  took  t» 
thdr  heels.  Then  Dama  said  to  his  master  (Vapushmln) 
(23) Having  slain  my  ascetic  father,  who  had  no  weapota 
apd  who  was  carrying  00  penances  where  do  you  go,  0 wickeil 
one?  Return  if  you  are  a Kshalriya"  (sj). 

Markandeya  said Thereupon  eoming  hick  the  prouii 
(Vapusbm&n)  with  hie  younger  brother,  sen,  friendt  aeil 
relatives,  fot^ht  with  him  (14)>  ‘^E'hen  the  eky  and  the  (fsatlwte 
were  ooverd  with  shafts  discharged  off  his  how.  He  alto 
covered  Dama  with  his  car  and  horse  with  a net  work  «l 
arrows  (25).  Thereupon  in  anger  begotten  by  the  death  ol 
his  father  Dama  cut  off  those  arrows  and  wounded  bis  limbs 
with  his  own  {26).  With  one  arrow  he  dc»p*li’l»cd  lo  the 
abode  of  Yama  his  seven  tons,  brotheri,  rektives  and  frittAdb 
(ay).  On  the  death  of  his  sons  and  relatives  the  car>warriar 
VapQshmSn  fought  with  Dama  in  the  haltie-^ld  with  arrows 
resembling  serpents  (aS).  O great  Muni,  he  too  cut  ^ Ml 
mrows.  Both  of  them,  desirous  of  kitling  each  otlwr,  then 
fought  fiercely  (2f),  Having  their  bows  shallered  wiUi  the 
dbcharge  of  arrows,  tlioie  two  highly  imwerful  heroes 
fought  with  each  other  with  np.lifted  sword*  (^).  Thinking  for 
s^moroent  of  the  destruction  of  hi*  ktlmr,  the  king,  in  the  foreii 
and  holding  him  by  the  hair  and  ihrowiof  him  on  oarili, 
idMiog  his  foot  on  his  head  and  raking  up  his  hand  &mmi 
saidv  (sj),  " Behold,  yc  gods,  men,  Siddha*  and  Pannip^  I 


MARKANDBYA  EWSAIAAMt  499i  ’ 

Markammya  »ald -.—Having  said  this  Dam  cut  off  kis 
hmxt  wilh  \m  sword.  With  a view  to  bathe  in  his  blood 
the  gods  did  not  prevent  him  (33).  Thereupon  with  the 
blood  of  Vapushmln  he  performed  the  water-giving  cere* 
inony  and  wilh  bis  flesh  he  offered  Pinda  (34).  He  fed  the 
Brahmanas  and  Rakshasas,  and  then  being  freed  from  debts 
to  his  father  he  left  for  his  own  city  (35).  Such  were^^thft 
kings  of  the  solar  dynasty  as  well  as  oUier  intelligent  hero«, 
performers  of  Ya/ffas  and  well  read  in  the  Vedas  and  rel 
ligioas  books.  1 do  not  like  to  enumerate  them.  Hearing  of 
iheir  account  a man  is  released  from  sins  .(36—37). 


CHAPTER  cxxxvn. 


i HE  Brnos  said Having  said  this  wtd  left  the 
of  Krousliihttki  the  great  ascetic  Mirk^deya  perfom^  Jhei 
mid-day  rites  (1).  We  have  also  he^d  from  you^  0 great 
ascetic,  what  you  have  said.  This  is  the  Siddhi  without  tegi»r 
nlng  described  formerly  by  the  Self-Sprpng  Deity  (?). 
which  you  communicated  unto  the  ascetic-Markandeya/^i^l^ 
and  auspicious  as  it  Is  and  which  giy^longivHy  ^ 
compiiihment  of  all  objects  (3l-  Hearing  an^^ding^  foar. 
«l«estions  which  you  put  in  the  beginning  peojde  are 
from  ill  Sint  {4).  0 Muai,  you  hive  described  unto  m-M 
C0iiftr«tti©a  bftfrien  lie  aiid 

of  the  Sfll-sprung 

history  of  the  kings.  W|at  mere 

til  these  or  rediing  t^m.te  a»  ^ 

•las  wasbedt  tads  Wmi^W  at  one  Brahpao.  }■ 


tibe  eighteen 


Padma,  Vishnu,  Siva,  Shlgavat,  and  Naradifa  and  the 
seventh  is  MSrkandeya  (B),  The  eighth  Purina  is  Agni  and 
Bhavishya  is  the  ninth ; the  tenth  is  Brahma  Vaivarta  and  the 


of  a horse  sacrifice.  The  Purana,  that  has  the  four  qualitie* 


of  Brahmanicidi  and  others,  at  wet!  at  other  inautpkioua 
things  are  dissipated  like  cotton  driven  by  the  wind.  By 
hearing  it  one  gets  the  piety  equal  to  Uiat  Mquired  by  bath- 


woman,  or  one  whose  child  dies  at  birth,  if  she  heart  this 
truly,  gets  a son  crowned  with  all  marks,  as  well  as  corns, 
riches  and  the  eternal  heaven  (15).  Hearing  this,  a man 
even  if  he  has  offended  the  gods,  is  freed  from  nil  sins  and 
flourishes  in  heaven  (16),  O foremost  of  the  twice«born, 


IIAW(A{teg¥A 


hi  win  Btver  to  piety.  Such  » Bian  !b  desigaated  by  the 
vvtHe  asUhej  purtoiner  of  acripturea.  The  gods  are  o(^  pleased 
with  him  and  the  aoee^ral  manes  jlo  not  accept  the  things 
offered  hy  him  inSrtddhmi.  The  thief  of  scriptures  does  not 
reap  the  fruit  of  bathing  at  holy  ^shrines  and  is  censured  by 
the  reciters  of  tlw  Vedas  (aa~.24).  After  the  compietion  of 
Markandeya  a wise  man  performs  a fe^ival  and  makes  a gift 
of  a mi!ch<cow  for.  being  neteased  from  all  sins  (25).  He 
also  gives  away  cloAea^and  |ewels  unto  the^twice-born  with 
their  wives,  as  Well  as  golden  ear-rings,  turbans,  clean- 
beds  gold-coins,  sefeo  sorti  of  corns,  brass  vessels  for 
taking  food  and  vewiels  for  clarified  brdter  (26 — 27).  Doing 
this,  0 foremost  of  the  twice-born,  a man  achieves  all  his 
objects.  Hearing  the  redting  of  all  these  Puranas  duly  a 
ntan  reaps  the  fruits  of  a thousand  horse  sacrifices,  and  a 
hundred  Rajashuya  ceremonies.  He  does  not  stand  in  fear  of 
death  or  hell  (38— -ap).  Being  freed  from  all  sins  he  purifies 
the  present  and  future  generations ; forsooth  the  continuity  of 
H <30).  He  goes  tp^  the  regiop  of 

Indra  and  lb  ftycNi  of' 

highly  he  wilt  again  ' Thus  by  listen- 

ing to  the  recitation  of  Puranas  one  aifaSps  to  most  excel- 
lent yoga.  Gifts  should  not  be  maib  unto  an  atheist, 
adulterer,  vilUfier  of  the  Vedas,  aii^%im  who  speaks  against 
his  preceptor,  him  who  breaks  his  vbw,  fm-sakes,  fiis  parents 
and  steals  gold ; unto  him  who  shall  disregard  Pn  honour- 
able man  and  speaks  agpunW;  his  kinsmen.  No  ^Uts 
should  be  made  unto  these  even  if  iptal  breath  comes  up 
to  the  throat  (38—34).  If  out  of  thrice,  ignorance  or  fear 
one  reads  It  or  makes  others  read,  forsooth  does  he  go  to 
hell  (35).  5;  ‘ 

you,  out  of  friendship,  have 
remof^  W*  of  iirae>  the  solutiott  whereof  I did  not 
find  la  Wmidta.  Who  else  will  doit  (^?  Do  ye  live  long 
freed  ffom  diseases  and  gifted  with  wealth.'  And  may  your 


MARKAND^YA  PURANAM, 


understanding  grow  in  Sapkya  Yoga  (37).  You  will  be 
freed  from  the  curse  of  your  father.'” 

Having  said  this  he  left  for  bis  own  hermitage  (38)« 
Thinking  of  the  noble  words  of  the  birds  the  great  Jaimini 
adored  the  leading  twice-bori)  ones  (39]. 


