===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.45856.The-Matsya-Puranam_djvu.txt =====

THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  HINDUS 


Translated  by  various  Sanskrit  Scholars 


BDITBD  BT 

MAJOR  B.  D.  BASU,  l.M.S. 


VOL.  XVII.-PART  I. 


PUBUBHBD  BY 

THE  OFBlOa  BHUVAMBSWARi  A8RAMA,  BAHADUROAW, 


Biiababab 

Primtbd  by  Apurva  Krishna  Boss,  at  thb  Indian  Prbss, 

1916 


THB 


MATSYA  PURANAM 


TRANSLATED  BT 

A TALOQDAR  OF  OUDH. 


POBUBHBD  BT 

SDDHiNORA  NATHA  VABV 

iaSM  THE  pA^i^i  ofbick,  bhuyanbswarI  Asrama,  bahAdtjroanj, 


auababa& 

PRtNTBD  BY  ApURVA  KRISHNA  BoSB,  AT  THB  INDIAN  PrBSS, 

1916 


OM 

IKo  Ifhe  Ifon’ble  ^ir  famed  fcorgie  jfEedton^ 

K.C.S.I..  LL.D.,  V.Dm 

LIEUTENANT^OVERNOR  OF  THE  UNITED  PROVINCES  OF 
AGRA  AND  OUDH. 

IS  RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED  THIS  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SACRED  MATSYA  PURANAM 
^ WITH  HIS  HONOUR'S  KIND  PERMISSION 

AS  A TOKEN  OF  THE  TRANSLATOR’S  SINCERE  ADMIRATION  OF  HIS  HONOUR 
WHO  BY  HIS  UNRIVALLED  SYMPATHY 
FOR  THE  PEOPLE  OF  THESE  PROVINCES 
WHOM  PROVIDENCE  HAS  CALLED  HIM  TO  RULE 
HAS  ACQUIRED  THEIR  EVERLASTING  GRATITUDE  AND  AFFECTION 
AND  WHOSE  BENEFICIAL  ADMINISTRATION 
THEY  WILL  ALWAYS  COMMEMORATE 
BY  THE  FOLLOWING  SONG 

^ 5mr 

II 


FOREWORD. 


Modem  Sanskrit  scholars  have  not  bestowed  that  amount  of 
attention  on  the  study  of  the  Purft^as  which  they  have  done  on  that  of 
the  Vedas.  This  neglect  of  the  study  of  the  Pur&gAs  proceeds  from 
more  causes  than  one.  Everyone  of  the  Pur&nas  is  a real  Enepelopedta 
Irdiea  and  so  a very  comprehensive  knowledge  of  the  whole  range  of 
Sanskrit  literature  is  necessary  to  understand  them.  There  are  very 
few  scholars  who  possess  such  a knowledge. 

The  present  translation  of  the  Matsya  Purina  has  been  done  by  an 
esteemed  Talukddr  of  Oudh— well  known  ior  his  scholarly  attainments  in 
Sanskrit  and  English. 

The  introduction  has  been  written  by  Pandit  Lalit  Mohan  Kar,  who 
obtained,  the  diploma  of  KdmjaJtirtha  from  the  Sanskrit  College,  the 
degree  of  M.  A.  in  Sanskrit  and  Pali  from  the  University  of  Calcutta  and 
is  professor  of  Sanskrit  in  tlie  Ripon  College. 

Most  of  the  appendices  are  from  the  pen  of  my  brother,  Rai  Baha- 
dur drlfe  Chandra  VidyArnava,  whose  profound  knowledge  of  Sanskrit  has 
enabled  him  to  rightly  interpret  many  difficult  passages  in  this  Pur&na. 
It  is  hoped  that  the  notes  and  appendices  may  be  of  use  fo  scholars 
interested  in  the  study  of  the  Pur&nas.  , 

The  greater  part  of  the  present  volume  is  taken  up  with  a descrip- 
tion of  Vratas  or  fasts,  followed  by  feasts  and  gifts  to  the  BrAhmapas. 
They  are  of  interest  only  to  the  Hindu  public.  To  the  non-Hindus  they 
are  of  very  slight  importance. 

According  to  its  own  statement  in  Chapter  53,  this  Purina  is  16th, 
in  the  order  of  precedence.  This  is  according  to  the  northern  rescension, 
where  the  Brahma  Purina  stands  first.  ^According  to  the  southern  rescen- 
sion, the  Matsya  Purina  heads  the  list,  showing  thereby  that  this  is  por 
esceellence  the  Purina  of  the  southern  people.  It  probably  owes  its  origin 
to  the.|outh. 

To  complete  the  dynastic  records  of  the  kings  of  the  Kali  age,  the 
matter  has  been  somewhat  anticipated,  and  Chaptei's  271,  272  and  273 
have  been  inserted  in  this  volume.  This  part  is  complete  in  itself,  and  its 
second  part,  which  will  appear  in  future,  will  not  break  the  continuity  of 
the  book. 

Epitob. 


CONTENTS. 

Page. 

Introductiou 

... 

i vii. 

Translation  of  the  Matsya  Puriipin  Ohapters  1 128 

1-380. 

Appendix  1 

... 

...  i xii. 

„ ll  ... 

, • . ...  ... 

...  xiii  xxvi. 

„ III  ... 

... 

...  XX vii  xlviii. 

„ IV  ... 

...  Table  to  face  p.  xlviii. 

» V 

... 

„ VI  ... 

...  ...  ... 

...  liii”-lxxiv. 

„ VII  ... 

...  ...  ... 

...  Ixxv  -Ixxviii. 

„ VIII  ... 

...  ...  ... 

(xxix  xcii. 

„ IX  ... 

... 

xciv—ci. 

X ... 

...  ...  ... 

cii-  cvi. 

The  present  war  between  the  European  Powers,  the  royal  represen- 
tatives of  which,  in  many  cases,  stand  to  each 
MahflbhftratoWar.  Other  in  the  relation  of  cousins,  brings  forth,  in 

the  brightest  colours  to  the  Indian  mind,  the 
long  past  glories  of  another  great  field  where  cousins  had  met  to  measure, 
their  swords.  The  date  of  that  war  is  still  an  open  question  like 
many  other  great  events  of  the  Indian  tradition.  Many,  indeed,  there 
have  been  who  deny  it  the  name  of  an  historical  event  and  like  to  look 
upon  it,  as  merely  a part  of  the  faiiy  tales  wliicli  the  Sanskrit  Fiiraoas, 
ill  their  opinion,  abound  with.  Tlie  details  of  that  war  are  so  familiar  to 
every  -one  of  us  that  we  have  never  questioned  its  occurence,  but  as  to 
its  probable  date  we  are  merely  content  with  believing  it  to  be  very  veiy 
ancient.*  Many  European  scholars,  in  their  over-eagerness  to  prove  Indian 
civilization  to  be  of  a late  growth,  have  assigned  to  the  war  a date  not 
far  beyond  the  birth  of  the  Christian  era.  Leaving  this  tug  of  war 
regarding  Indian  dates  to  take  care  of  itself,  let  us  try  to  find  out  what  in- 
ternal evidence  the  Purfinas  can  supply  us  to  prove  our  case. 

Custom,  it  is  said,  becomes  law,  when  it  is  recognised  by  the  state ; 
and  tradition,  we  may  say  on  the  same  analogy,  is  accepted  as  history 
when  borne  out  by  evidence  recognisable  by  critical  and  scientific  intellects. 
Thanks  to  the  indefatiguable  laboui’s  of  scholars  like  Mr.  Pargiter,  who 
started  on  a study  of  the  Purd>nd.8  with  some  faith  in  the  realities  of  their 
accounts — with  the  requisite  amount  of  ^raddhd  which  the  Ved&ntins* 
enjoin— we  are  in  a position  to  take  the  Mahabhfirata  War  from  a 
realistic  point  of  view. 

Of  late  Babu  Ramaprfind  Gupta,  in  the  Asvin  issue  of  the  Pravasi  of 
the  last  year  (Vol  XV.  Pt.  I,  6th  issue,  pp.  740  et  8eq\  has  made  an 
attempt  to  fix  the  date  of  the  Mahabharata  War,  and  has  referred  to 
two  different  theories,  viz, : (1)  the  6th  century  B.  C.,  founded  on 
astronomical  observations  and  (2)  2450  B.  C.,  based  on  the  RSjatarngini. 
He  holds  a 'third  view,  namely,  that  the  War  took  place  a thousand  and  a 
half  years  before  Christ,  and  says  that  many  great  scholars,  Indian  and 

European,  have  accepted  the  same  view. 

Notb.— Here  I beg  leave  to  point  oat  an  oversight  of  Babn  Rftmaprflnft  Oapta.  He  says,, 
at  p.  741  [first  colamui  towards  the  bottom]  (of  which  1 give  the  translation) : It  is  written 
In  the  Mth  Sioka,  Chap.  24,  Part  IV,  of  the  Vifpu  that  Farikfit  waa  annointed  King  120e 


IkirnowoTim 


the . eommencomeDt  of  Kali,  etc.  And  he  finds  it  difflonlt  to  reeonoile  this 
passage  with  what  follows  in  the.Vifiin. 

But  evidently  this  interpretation  is  faulty.  The  verse  of  the  Vi^j^u 
in  question  is 

fi  3 Mtviivn  li'SiroH  I 


ViantilV,  24.  84. 

The  meaning  of  the  second  line  is : — 

"At  that  time  (the  time  of  Pariksit)  began  the  fiTaZt^n^a,  which 
comprises  of  1,200  (divine)  years.”  Cp.  the  lines  following  in  the  Vi§nu. 

What  Babu  RdmapiAna  says,  appears  like  an  alternative  theory,  and 
may  mislead  readers.  This  arises,  probably,  out  of  the  worthless  vernacular 
translations,  published  by  Indian  press,  bristling  witli  mistakes,  although 
purposed  to  have  been  done  by  the  great  Pandits. 

Let  us  examine  this  view  a little. 

This  theory  has  been  built  upon  the  interval  of  time  that  elapsed 
between  the  birth  of  Parik^it  and  the  inauguration  of  Mahapadiua  Nanda. 
The  words  of  the  different  Puranas  are  quoted  below  : — 


(1)  Brahinfinda — 

siwT  i 


(2)  Visnu — 


in-LX;tlV.-227. 


(3)  Bhagavata — 

»RRh  3I5II  qrsren^nf«^*w!:  i 

5RT  II 


IV~XXlV-82. 


XII,  U.-2C. 

(4)  V&yu — 


Vol.  II,  Cliap.  XXXVU-409. 

All  the  Purapas  have  given  the  names  of  the  Dynasties  yhich  ruled 
in  India  during  this  period.  They  are  tlie  B&rhadratha,  the  Pradyota 
and  the  Sisun^ga,  which  last  was  overthrown  by  Mah^padma  Nanda. 
The  Matsya,  the  Vayu,  and  the  Brahmanda  mention  the  respective  reigns 
of  each  king,  while  the  others  give  only  the  names  and  the  sum  total  of 
the  different  reigns. 


niTBOWOTlOliiT  ■ ■ M- 

According  to  the  first  set  of  Parfi^As,  the  kings  and  the  duration  of 
their  rules  (as  suggested  by  a critical  perusal  of  the  different  Purft^s  and 
their  different  versions)  are  as  follows : — 


I. — 22  Bftrhadrathas ; — 


(1)  SomAdhl 

aVB 

... 

58  yearn. 

(S)  SrutMravM 

ik* 

.1. 

67 

(8)  Ayatiyus 

• ft  • 

... 

36 

»» 

(4)  Niramitra 

ft.. 

40 

w 

(6)  Bukfatra 

... 

... 

66 

» 

(6)  Bfhatkarfnan 

■ •t 

... 

... 

23 

» 

(7)  Benajit 

t ■ i 

•••  ... 

60 

(8)  Srutanjaya 

aa 

... 

40 

(0)  Vibhu  ... 

• •a 

28 

»> 

(10)  Such! 

... 

... 

58 

» 

(11)  Kfema 

• •• 

28 

If 

(12)  Buvratas 

• •• 

04 

29 

(18)  Sunetra  1 

••• 

.ft. 

35 

ft 

(14)  Nirvrti 

ttl 

58 

ft 

(16)  Sasramaaya 

tf  ■ 

88 

tl 

(10)  Dfflhasona 

... 

48 

ft 

(J7)  Mahinetra  or  (Sumati) 

83 

ft 

(18)  Sucbala 

... 

32 

ft 

(10)  Sunetra  11 

... 

40 

It 

(20)  Satyajit 

...  ••• 

83 

It 

(21)  Visvajit 

*•<* 

36 

ft 

(22)  Hipudjaya 

... 

... 

50 

II 

Total  ...  1,000  years.* 

Regarding  this  list,  it  is  to  be  noticed,  that  wherever  a parallel 
reading  has  been  given  by  Mr.  Pargiter,  there  has  been  no  difference  in 
the  name,  except  in  the  three  following  instances  : — 

(1)  Suneira  I and  Dharmanetra,  where  the  readings  regarding  the 
latter  are  rather  confused,  and  hence  less  deserving  of  acceptance. 

(2)  Mahinetra  and  Sumati,  where  there  would  be  no  difference  if  the 
king  be  regarded  as  having  two  names,  their  period  of  mle  being  the  same. 

(3)  Trinfitra  and  Sufiramasya,  where  it  appears  as  if  both  had  an 
equal  claim  to  be  accepted  as  the  correct  name.  But  if  both  were  to  be 
accepted,  the  list  would  not  be  of  22  kings,  but  of  23  ; but  this  is  impos- 
sible as  the  list  is  confined  to  22  and  22  ouly.f  Now,  which  name  to 
reject  ? 

Brahmt^aa— CXXIV,  121. 

^ wRran  TOPWt  i— 

— BrahmAnda— 

III,  oxxlv--l2t 


IVTRODOOTIOU. 


The  line  devoted  to  Trinltra  readn  as  follows : — . 

iwWqq.'sw!  WNt  to»  i 

which,  compared  with  the  line  celebrating  Snn^tra  (II). 

wn  *059  win  i 

presents  a striking  similarity  (excepting  of  course  in  the  number  of  years). 
This  led  me  to  suppose  that  it  would  be  a repetition  of  the  same  thing 
if  we  accepted  both  these  lines,  and  so  I preferred  to  adopt  the  line  for 
Smframasya.  I find  that  I am,  most  fortunately,  banked  by  other  readings 
of  the  Matsya  which  actually  have  Sun^tra  for  Trinfitra,  and  the  line  for 
Suiiramasya  can,  therefore,  bo  safely  accepted  for  tlie  one  for  Trinfitra. 

It  may  be  here  remarked  that  long  reigns,  and  almost  absurdly  long 
ones,  are  occasionally  met  with  In  Indian  chronologies.  But  it  is  ^o  be 
remembered  tbat  the  names  are  of  memorable  kings,  and  often  the  reigns 
of  predecessors  and  successors  of  minor  importance  and  less  worthy  of  a 
separate  remembrance,  have  been  added  on  to  those  of  these  remarkable 
ones.  To  give  a familiar  instance,  can  anybody,  excepting  a specialist,  re- 
member with  correctness  the  two  shorter  periods  of  rule  of  Georgfe  IV  and 
William  IV,  while  the  long  and  memorable  reigns  of  George  III  and  of 
Victoria  the  Good,  are  reineni bored  so  exactly?  If  people  were  to  write 
history  after  the  lapse  of  a dozen  centuries,  these  two  shorter  periods 
would  be  engulfed  in  either  of  the  longer  ones  in  the  traditions  of  this 
long  period. 

II. — 5 Pradyotas 

(1)  Pradyofca  ...  ...  ...  2S  yoar«, 

(2)  Poiilaka  ...  ...  24 

(3)  Visfikhayflpa  ...  ...  50  „ 

(4)  Ajaka  ...  ...  ...  21  „ 

<6)  ^^andivardha’ia  (tho  Pradyota)...  20 

Total  ...  138  years. 

As  there  are  no  two  opinions  reg-arding  the  names,  the  reigns  or 
the  total  period  of  these  kings,  the  traditions  regarding  them  seem  to  have 
been  very  well  preserved. 

III. — 10  Sisunagas: — 


fiisnnfiga  ... 

50 

years. 

Kftkavarna 

86 

Kseinadharma 

30 

Esatrauj4 

40 

Vimbiadra 

28 

«» 

Ajfttiiaatrii 

27 

D.^rs»Ua  ... 

25 

If 

UdAyin 

S3 

If 

Nandi vard liana  (tho  SaisniiAga) 

42 

ft 

Mahftnandiu 

48 

If 

Total  ...  860 


IVTRODVOTION. 


xiii 

This  is  exactly  the  total  Dumber  of  years  as  given  by  Matsya  Vur&nS, 
The  VifiQia  gives  362  years  as  the  total  period  of  the  SisunAgas,  but 
does  not  give  the  reigns  against  each  king.  So  it  is  not  verifiable.  The 
above  reigns  have  been  taken  from  the  maximum  periods  given  in  the 
Purfipas,  and  this  must  be  the  correct  reckoning,  as  it  tallies  exactly  with 
the  total  periods  given  even  by  those  PurAnas  which  do  not  give  the 
details.  How  to  account  for  these  2 years  of  the  Vi$nu  ? 

But  a very  strange  result  is  obtained  by  adding  together  these 
different  totals.  They  give  the  grand  total  of  (1,000+138+360=)  1,498 
years,  or,  according  to  the  Visnu  (1,000  + 138  + 362=)  1,500  years,  while 
they  declare,  as  already  observed,  that  the  period  between  Pariksit’s 
birth  and  Mah&padina  Nanda’s  inauguration  covered  1015,  1050  or  1115 
years. 

This  discrepancy  was  observed  when  working  at  the  Matsya  PurAna. 

The  totalised  interval  thus  coming  far  above  the  three  different 
totals,  as  given  by  the  different  Puranas,  the  only  possible  explanation 
lay  in  tjfia, — When  there  are  three  divergent  readings  in  the  Puranas, 
depending,  no  doubt,  on  slight  variations  in  the  texts,  could  not  there  be 
a fourth  and  certainly  more  reasonable  reading  to  say  that  the  period 
was  1500  years  ? 

Very  happily  this  reading  has  been  actually  found,  as  given  by  Mr. 
Pargitor,  at  p.  58  of  his  Dynasties  of  the  Kali  Age. 

This  clears  up  all  doubts  regarding  the  interval  between  Pariksit 
and  MahApadtna  Nanda.  It  was  a period  of  1500  years. 

If  a comparative  estimate  be  desired  between  the  totals,  as  given  by 
the  different  Purauas  (viz.,  1,015,  1050  and  1115  years),  and  the  sum  total 
found  out  by  calculation  of  the  details,  the  scale  must  turn  in  favour  of 
the  latter,  as  a corruption,  or  at  least  a variation,  depends  on  the  mutation 
of  two  or  three  letters  of  the  alphabet,  as  is  evident  from  there  being  tliose 
different  versions  of  the  total  period,  while  the  details  are  more  definite. 

It  is  worthy  of  note  here  that  this  contradiction  had  struck  l^ridhara 
SvSmt,  the  worthy  commentator  of  the  Bhagavata,  whose  critical  spirit 
is  noticeable  in  another  portion  of  his  commentary,  viz.,  where  he  dis- 
cusses the  Ipngth  of  the  Jambfldvipa.  In  his  commentary  on  the  26th 
verse  of  the  2nd  chapter  of  the  12th  skandha,  he  remarks  : — 

‘‘In  fact,  the  interval  between  Pariksit  and  Nanda  is  less  than 
one  and  a half  thousand  yearn  by  two  years.* 


INTRODUCTION. 


xir. 


The  2 years  added  to  360  by  the  Vi$nu  seems  to  have  proceeded 
from  the  desire  of  making  the  sum  total  of  the  durations  of  the  three 
dynasties  (viz.,  1,000+138  +360)  come  exactly  to  1,500  years. 

Now,  Pariksit  was  a posthumous  son  of  Abhimanyu,  who  died  in 
the  War,  so  that  many  months  did  not  elapse  between  the  War  and  his 
birth,  which  preceded  Mahlipadma  Nanda’s  inauguration  by  1,500 
years. 

Mahapadma  Nanda  ascended  the  throne  in  422  B.  C.,  as  we  come 
to  know  from  Indian  History.  So  from  a retrospective  calculation  we 
arrive  at  1922  B.  C.  as  the  date  of  the  Great  War  fought  on  the  field  of 
the  Kurus. 

The  astronomical  data  supplied  by  some  of  the  Pur^^aa  seem  to  go 
against  this  date.  The  Visnii  and  the  Bh&gavata  state  that  the  Great  Bear 
was  in  the  Magh&  in  Parikijit’s  time  When  it  will  go  to  Pfirvas&dhA, 
it  will  be  the  time  of  Nanda,  and  the  Kali  ago  will  begin  to  attain 
maturity.  (There  is  no  mention  of  the  speed  of  the  seven  Iii§is). 

The  VSyu  adds  the  seven  Ilisis  dwell  in  a Nak^atra  for  a cenlury. 

So,  as  Purvaaftdh&  is  the  10th  from  Magha  the  interval  between  the 
days  of  Pariksit  and  Nanda  comes  to  ten  centuries. 

The  Bramhtinda  corroborates  this.  But  the  Matsya  says:  ‘The 
seven  Ui^is  were  tlieii  (on  a line)  with  the  towering,  blazing  .4gni’**;  and 
that  being  the  presiding  deity  of  the  Krittikii,  wo  conclude  that  in 
Parik^it’s  time  the  seven  Ri^fis  (the  Ursa  Maj(jr  or  tlio  Great  Bear)  were  in 
the  constellation  Kfittika.  From  K|ittika  to  PurvAsi'idha  are  19  Nak?atras ; 
and  so,  from  Parik^fit  to  Alahapadma  Nanda,  there  elapsed  a period 
of  1900  years. 

The  statement  in  the  other  Puranas  may  be  easily  explained.  In 
their  anxiety  to  be  consistent  with  the  Rtatemcnt  of  1015,  10.00,  or  1115 
years — (and  regardless  of  the  totalised  number  of  years) — they  fixed  on  the 
tenth  star  from  Parv-lHridha  (about  which  there  are  no  two  opinions),  by 
backward  calculation. 

As  the  Matsya  claims  a superior  place  among  the  Puranas,  the  data 
it  gives,  verified  by  calculations  which  the  other  Puivanas  supply  as  well, 
and  corroborated  by  backward  and  forward  references,  are  throughout 
consistent,  and  hence  the  date  arrived  at  from  them  are  well  worth 
accepting. 

Matsya- tXtLIll  XX— Sloka. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XV 


We  are  thus  in  a poeition  to  say  that  the  Kuruk^tra  War  took 
place  as  many  years  on  that  side  of  the  birth  of  the  Oi^'er  of  Peace  as  the 
present  (var  has  occurred  on  this  side  of  it. 

Aluhabad  : 

13th  June,  1916. 

Lalit  Mohan  Kar. 


mE. 


mattSya  ptiranam 


n 

salutation  to  ganeSa. 

SALUTATION  TO  THE  ADORABLE  V^SUDEVA. 

iVot«.— The  sacred  word  “ Om  '*  is  formed  by  the  letters  o,  u,  m.  Of  these,  a represents 
yi9na,  ii,  Siva,  ni,  BrahniA.  Pranava  is,  therefore,  the  symbol  of  the  sacred  Trinity. 

• CHAPTER  I. 

May  the  loins  feet  of  Bhava,  who  shook  the  diggajas  at  the  time 

of  His  (lance,  disperse  all  obstacles. —1. 

Note.— Bhava  is  a name  of  the  God  iSiva.  Tauilava  is  a particular  kind  of  dance 
of  which  ^^lva  is  very  fond.  Diggnjas : It  is  biid  down  in  the  paurftiiic  allegory  that  the 
universe  lies  balanced  on  the  tusks  of  ten  elephants-  each  elephant  supporting  a quarter. 

May  the  words  of  Lord  Vibnu,  embodied  in  the  Vedas  and 
uttered  by  His  Matsya-avutAm,  in  wliich  incarnation,  at  the  time  of  His 
sallying  forth  from  the  region  of  tlie  patala,  the  I)low  of  His  tail  caused 
the  seven  seas  to  intenningle  with  the  high  heavens  and  then  to  fall 
down,  spattering  the  sphere  of  the  eaith,  steal  away  all  your  evil ! . — 2. 

A'ote.-Brahmfiiuia,  literally^  means  the  Egg  of  the  Creator,  and  the  word,  as  it  stands, 
applies  to  all  the  regions— both  upper  and  lower.  In  the  above  sJokn  Brahmftnda  is  coupled 
with  the  word  Urddlia,  wliicli  means  upper.  Here  the  complete  word  is  Urddha  Brabmftiida 
which  means  the  upper  regions.  Matsyflvatdra  is  the  incarnation  of  Lord  Visnu.in  the  forn 
of  a fish.  The  Merciful  mainfests  Himself  in  different  forms,  whenever  Ho  finds  it  neces- 
sary—(1)  To  educate  the  world  in  the  performance  of  its  manifold  duties  which,  in  spite  of 
their  being  incorporated  in  the  works  of  Divine  revelation,  very  often  remain  incompre- 
hensible ; (2)  To  save  the  world  from  wilful  neglect  of  duty. 

Compare.-* 

ii” 

5^  11” 

(8)  '*  Old  order  changeth  yielding  place  to  new, 

God  fulfils  Himself  in  many  ways. 

Lest  one  good  custom  should  corrupt  the  world," 


2 


THE  MATfiYA  PUR  AS  AM. 


' To  doal  with  the  doubts  that  aro  very  often  raised  on  the  theory  of  incarnation,  it 
wonid  be  necessary  to  make  copious  roferonces  to  VodAnt.-*,  Upaiiisads,  and  NyAya,  and  to 
add  exiriustivo  commentaries  on  timse  dof^^matical  aphorisms  which  would  swell  the  bulk 
of  the  Pup/iiia.  Twill  therefore  confine  myself  to  veP3"  brief  notes  on  most  important 
Items.  The  nepe.ssitv  of  Matsyfivatftra  will  later  on  become  clear  by  going  through  this 
PnrAna.  iSrutl  means  the  Vedas,  that  are  regarded  by  the  Hindus  to  bo  the  words  of 
Divine  revelation. 

MatRyapurana  wliicli  is  tlie  dispellor  of  all  ignorance,  aliould  be 
read  after  saluting  Narjlyana,  Nara,  Nan'ttaina,  Devi  Sarasvati.— 3. 

A'ofc.— Nfipfiyana,  Naroitama,  etc.,  are  all  analogous  ox presf^ons,  and  apply  to  the 
Supreme  Being,  who  is  omnific,  omnipotent,  omnipresent  and  omniscient.  Words  cannot 
describe  Him  or  His  glory. 

Compare.— 

ferarflr  ^ 

I salute  Lord  Bralinia  who,  tluuigh  nnhorn,  manifests  Himself 
for  the  sake  of  creation,  and  is  known  mnlcr  different  epithets,  — 
NArfiyana,  Trignna  -L  * 

.Vote, — Trigunas  aro  Satva.  Hajasnnd  Tarnas.  Mii.va  is  the  resultant  of  Trigunas.  When 
MflyA  combines  with  any  particle  of  <Jniin present  l\uM))ralinia,  that  particle  is  known  as 
firahmft.  Triveda  moans  the  throe  Vod.is, . Uig,  Vajus  and  KAman.  The  metre  which  is 
prosodical,  but  cannot  bo  cliantod,  is  called  Uik.  and  Kig-Veda  is  full  of  such  metres.  The 
metre  which  is  neither  prostdical  nor  can  i»c  chanted,  is  called  Yajus  and,  Yajupveda 
is  full  of  such  metres,  'Jho  uiotrcs  that  can  h-c  chanted  are  known  ns  SAma,  and  there- 
fore the  Veda  containing  such  metre'^  is  called  .SAuia-'’oda.  Strictly  speaking,  therefore, 
there  are  only  three  Vedas.  The  sage  iiu  collocti'd  several  met  res  of  the  above- 

mentioned  f/iree  Vedas  dealing  with  A.Mirvoda  and  • Sul ilfsirina,  etc.,  and  compiled  the 
Atharva-Veda,  which  now  forms  the  fourth  Vod'..  The  Vedas  aro  the  works  of  Divine 
revelation,  and  are  held  very  sacred  J»y  the  MjndiH.  Lord  Urahmn  i.s  the  chief  rovealor  of 
the  sacred  Vedas.  Now,  with  the  aijovc  verso  ends  the  introductory  versos,  after 
which  the  siibjecft  matter  of  the  Jhirrua  couiuieiice.s.  Heforo  proceed! nn  farther,  somo- 
thing  roust  be  said  about  maugolAcharana.  Alaugaia  is  of  three  kinds,  r/4f.'-(l)  NamaskArAt- 
niak— mtihgala  is  that  in  which  there  is  salutation  to  some  Deity  ns  in  “ telreo  Ganosuyna- 
mfth,**  and  “ Ora  Namo  Bhagavate  Yasudevaya,  which  occur  in  the  very  beginning  of  tho 
ParAn.a  (2)  Vastunirdesatniakamaiigala  is  that  in  whicii  there  i.s  some  clue  to  the  subject 
matter  of  the  work,  following  it  (3)  A^irvadAtamkamaugala  is  that  in  which  some  Deity 
is  invoked  to  shower  Its  blessings  on  someimdy. 

The  couplet  “Prachand  Tandavatope,  etc,,  contains  a prater  to  Lord  biva  which  shows 
that  later  on  there  will  be  something  about  I he  annihilation  of  the  iinjversc.  ttiva  is 
SanhArkartA.  Tho  **  stanza  PAtalidyutpaitishwo,  &c.,  contains  a prayer  to  Ltyrd  Viaiiu  which 
shows  that  there  will  also  bo  a description  of  the  Rthiti.  ViNnu^s  iSAntikartA.  The  above 
two  stanzas  are  both  VastunirdcKAtmaka  and  A'jirvadAtmaka.  The  couplet,  “ajopp’  &c., 
contains  salutations  to  Lord  ^ vayaipfihA,  i.c.,  BruhniA  which  shows  that  the  PiirAna  contains 
a history  of  creation  also.  BrainhA  U Sristikartn.  This  coiiplot  is  NamaskArAtmaka  as 
well  as  Vastu  Nirdesatmaka. 

Ganesa.  The  Lord  of  ^Siva’s  attendants.  It  is  laid  down  in  biva  PnrAiia  that 
God  i^iya  was  in  the  habit  of  going  into  His  abode,  oven  when  His  consort,  the  Goddess 


OUAPTEB  I. 


PArvatf,  would  be  haviog  her  bath.  The  Goddess  did  not  like  this,  and  in  order  to  keep 
i^iva  out  at  the  time  of  Her  bath  she  once  upon  a time  made  a figure  of  sand  clay  and 
put  life  into  it.  Afterwards,  the  goddess  located  Him  at  the  door  of  the  house,  directing 
Him  not  to  let  any  one  enter.  A little  while  after,  Lord  8iva  turned  up,  but  the  figure 
at  the  door  drovo  Him  away,  biva  got  very  angry  and  sent  His  attendants  to  subdue 
Him,  but  they  were  repulsed.  Then  the  Lord  sent  a large  army  under  the  Dev&s  to 
subdue  Him.  They  were  also  on  the  point  of  being  routed.  When  Siva  Himself  appeared 
on  the  scene  and  overpowering  Him  by  His  large  army,  cut  His  head  with  His  trident. 
The  head  was  carried  away  by  the  nymphs.  Afterwards,  the  sage  N&rada  appeared 
and  related  all  this  to  PArvati,  who  got  very  much  vexed  and  determined  to  destroy 
everyone;  which  caused  a great  consternation,  and  all  the  Dev  As  began  to  pray.  The 
Goddess  was  pleased  with  their  prayer  and  devotion,  and  said  that  she  would  not 
give  effect  to  Her  determination,  provided  Her  son  was  recalled  to  lifo  and  allowed  the 
first  place  in  all  the  ceremonies ; which  they  all  promised  to  do.  But  when  a search 
for  the  head  was  made  it  was  not  found.  They  found  the  head  of  an  elephant  with 
only  one  tusk  lying  somewhere  at  a distance  which  they  put  on  the  body  and  then 
infused  life  into  it.  GAnesa  lit  us  came  to  have  the  head  of  an  elephant  on  His  shoulders. 
Afterwards,  He  was  given  the  first  placo  in  all  ceremonies  and  was  made  the  Lord  of 
Siva's  attendants.  Owing  to  His  having  the  first  place  in  all  cororoonies,  He  is 
always  saluted  at  the  beginning  of  MahgalAcharatia  in  each  work. 

Wg  itnderstand  from  tlio  Maiigalacharatia  that  Matsya  Pur  Ana  mainly  deals  with 
the  history  of  — 

(L)  The  creation  of  the  Universe  by  Krahma,  the  Creator  ! 

(2)  The  annihilation  of  the  Universe  by  Siva,  the  dostroyor ! 

(8)  The  preservation  of  tlio  Universe  from  total  annihilation  by  Visnu  the  saviour. 

BrabmA,  Vi^nu  and  Siva  are  the  different  manifestations  of  the  one  and  the  same 
supremo  Being. 

Once  upon  a time,  the  inhabitants  of  Naimi.>aranya,  at  the  close 
of  a long  sacrifice,  began  to  relate  to  one  another  pious,  charming 
stories  from  different  Puranas.  The  great  sage,  8uta,  was  present  in  that 
assembly,  ^aiinaka  and  other  sages  who  were  also  there  on  that  occa- 
sion, after  complimenting  Suta  on  his  deep  lore,  said  : — 

“ 0 sinless  one,  we  wish  to  liear  again  the  very  same  nectar-like 
stories  of  the  Purinas  wliich  have  been  recited  to  us  by  you.’* — 5-6. 

iVotc.*-NamiBAranya  is  modern  NimkliAr-Misrikh  in  the  Sitapur  district,  Oudh. 

“ Tell  US  please,  how  Brahma  created  the  Universe,  and  for  what 
reason  Visnu  adopted  the  form  of  a fish.  We  are  also  anxious  to  know 
why  l^iva  took  the  goblet  of  human  skull,  why  He  is  called  Purari,  and 
how  Bhava,*  the  cause  of  our  prosperity,  came  to  be  known  as  Bhairava  ? 
0,  Siita ! be  gracious  enough  to  relate  all  this  exhaustively,  for  we  never 
feel  satiated  with  listening  to  your  sweet  narrations,  as  one  is  not  with 
nectar.”— 7-8. 

Note,—*  Bhava'  means  the  giver  of  prosperity.  This  is  a synonym  of  God  Siva. 

‘‘  Bhairava ' means  terrific  or  one  who  causes  fear.  This  term  applies  to  a form  of 
God  Sivb. 


4 


TRE  MATSYA  PURAEAR. 


* EapAU  HteralUj  means  one  who  carries  a human  skull.  This  eKpression  also 
applies  to 

'Vfi^bhadbvaja'  means  one  who  has  a bull  for  his  convo3*anee.  Mva  rides  the 
bull ; therefore,  this  term  denotes  biva. 

SAta  said  : — Hear,  now,  0,  Bralnnanas,  the  sacred  Matsyaparftpa 
ivhich  was  revealed  Lord  Vi^nu  in  the  form  of  a fish.*’— 9.  , 

Aote.-— Now  follows  the  narration  of  the  ParAiia. 

In  ancient  times  (Vaivasvata)  Manu,  the  Merciful,  the  fii-st  king 
of  the  Solar  dynasty,  after  making  over  his  kingdom  to  his  son,  devoted 
Idniself  to  rigid  asceticism.  On  a summit  of  the  Malaya  inouri'  liii, 
the  devout  austerities  of  that  resolute  hero,  who  was  a lorned  ith 
Bpiritual  knowledge,  and  whose  equi librium  of  mind  was  just  t’je  sam  in 
adversity  as  in  prosperity,  were  er-uvncd  with  the  altainment  of  transcen- 
dent yoga  (that  is,  iinion  with  the  Deity.' — lO-l I 

Note.— ‘Ravinandan’  mtaiis  tlio  Son  of  *lio  .^un. 

Vaivasvata  Mann  v.as  ilie  oJTs|»rjii,-Lc  of  tiu*  <.»od  uu  fron^  SajtiA  the  daughter  of  Lord 
Ho  wsis  the  foundot'  of  ij-dar  of  \’as. 

iNotr.— Malaya  is  a range  of  im-uutaiiiH  in  Sontliorn  iiulia  aboijiuling  in  sapdal  trees. 
It  is  to  the  west  of  Malaiiar. 

Samaduhkhasukhavira  nioan?»  t lie  hero  who  is  noithei  overwhelmed  by  misfortunes 
nop  is  carried  away  by  prosperity,  but  remains  ftrm  un(b*r  all  eirciimstancos.  Such  a 
bent  of  mind  is  not  common.  Only  those  few  who  resign  themselves  to  His  will  and 
concentrate  their  minds  on  the  saouMl  olrjeci  of  their  devolion,  ea''  remain  so  firm''Uijndcd. 
Devotion  to  God  alone  le.ids  to  such  a Idiss. 

It  points  out  to  the  soul  tho  jiUfalls  of  lif«*  and  fin*  numdaiie  luipcalitles.  It  takes 
away  tho  .shroud  of  illu-ion  and  plMoes  tho  soul' .-n  iho  piunn^'le  of  celestial  glory  where 
eternal  peace  and  content nnmt  n;ign.  Uhakf  i or  Y'>oa  begetN  such  knowledge. 

The  King  Vaivasvata  M tim,  inspite  of  lu'<  worldly  a:lories,  was,  not  negligent  of 
the  life  after  death.  Like  many  juk'iomi  king^.  the  Jirsi  ilorn  of  his  duty  was  to  acquire 
this  jfiftna,  andho  became  ftaja-Uisi  It  i-.  thorefur*  no  wonder  that  a U5jVUisi,  like 
the  King  Vaivasvata  Mann  should  hiiv»*  bevn  so  Hnn. 

After  a period  ol  a years  r>r  conlinned  asceticism,  Lord 

Brahma  became  pleast*d  towards  him,  ami  lold  him  to  ask  Tor  a boon. — 12. 

iVotc.'- Kanial&sana  l.s  another  name  of  Ood  Urnlitna.  It  Htorally  means,  one  who 
has  a lotus  to  .sit  uimn.  It  i.s  laid  down  in  the  [faur&t/ic  allegory  that  at  the  time  of 
creation,  a lotus  with  Brahma  sitting  on  it,  springs  from  the  navel  of  Visnu. 

Having  been  tints  addro'^so  l (by  nrahina  ),  the  king,  after  saluting 
Him,  said  : Tiord  ! I iiave  only  one  boon  to  bog  of  you,  which  is  above 
all  other  boons.  May  1 have  power  sufliciont  for  tlie  protection  of  the 
whole  creation,  moveable  and  immoveable,  wlien  the  hour  of  Pralaya  will 
come." — 13-14. 

Note.— * PitAmaha’  means  paternal  grand^fathor. 

BrahmA  is  the  Creator  of  the  Uutverso  ; lie  is  therefore  called  PitAmaha, 

Note.— Pralaya  is  chiefly  of  two  kinds,  (1)  Khan  da  pralaya,  in  which  ther* 
is  a partial  diasolntion,  and  (2)  MahA  pralaya  in  which  there  is  a total  di88olation« 


CHAPTER  I. 


5 


In  this  Pnrfti.8,  there  taamcntlen  of  Khan.>pr8l*3r».  •2 

UlaBtriouB  sovereign  of  the  Solar  race.  This  shows  how  seUess.  g f 
righteous  the  kings  in  ancient  times  werce 

Lord  BrahiuA,  the  Soul  of  the  Uiiivense,  after  grautiag  tJie  pnyer 
of  the  king  (in  the  following  words,  “Be  it  so “),  disappeared  then  and 
there,  and  the  Devas  profusely  showereil  a rain  of  Sowers  from  the 
ethereal  regions. — 15. 


iVo^e.— Pa^pavfiati.  The  Dovas  showered  flowers  on  the  king  to  express  Their 
unbounded  pleasure  and  appreciation  of  his  highest  righteousness. 

One  day,  in  his  hennitage,  when  the  king  was  making  a libation  of 
water  to  the  manes  of  liis  deceased  ancestors,  a carp  (a  small  fish)  fell 
into  Ills  hands  along  with  the  water.  - 16. 


Note.— Tarpapa  is  a libation  of  water  to  the  manes  of  the  deceased  ancestors  which 
a Hindu  is  in  duty  bound  to  perform  regularly. 

[Oonsnlt  ‘ The  Daily  Practice  of  the  Hindus  'by  Rai  Bahadur  Sris  Chandra  Vidytrnava.] 

Papfita,  Le.f  fell  from  the  king's  vessel  oat  of  which  he  was  pouring  out  water  for 
libation. 

fciaphari  is  a very  small  variety  of  flsU  called  earp.  It  is  very  tiny  and  alivays 
restless,  gaatem  poets  very  often  employ  it  in  their  similes,  in  thoir  dc.scription  of  the 
inoveiiionts  of  beautiful  eyes. 

On  seeing  lliat  tiny  fish,  the  merciful  king,  oat  of  compassion, 
wanted  to  preserve  it  and  put  it  into  Iiis  water  jar.  That  tiny  fish,  in 
course  of  a day  and  niglit,  grew  into  the  form  of  a large  fish,  measuring 
sixteen  fingers  in  length,  and  (feeling  uncomfortable  inside  the  water  jar 
where  it  was  placed  by  the  king),  cried  for  deliverance.— J 7-18. 

The  king  took  it  out  of  the  water  jar  and  put  it  in  a large  pitcher 
but  there  also,  in  course  of  a night,  it  grew  three  hands  in  length.  “I 
am  at  your  mercy,  conic  to  iny  succour.”  The  king,  again  hearing  these 
cries  of  the  fish  took  it  out  of  the  pitcher  and  deposited  it  in  a ivell.  Later 
on,  the  well  also  proved  iusulBcient.  The  king  then  accommodated  it  in  a 


tank.— 19-20. 


Note.— Bahasrakirau&tmaja,  the  Son  of  the  Sun,  t.e.,  king  Yaivasyata  Manu.  Sahasra* 
kirana  means  the  Sun. 

In  the  tank,  again,  the  llsh  grew  a yojana  height  miles)  in  length, 
and  again  appealed  to  the  king,  in  a plaintive  tone,  to  help  it  out  of  the 
tank.  Then  the  king  put  the  fish  in  the  Gauges  and,  finding  that  it 
increased  there  too,  ho  placed  it  in  the  ocean.  The  fish  went  on  increas- 
ing and  increasing  in  bulk,  until  it  very  nearly  filled  the  vast  expanse  of 
the  great  ocean.  The  king,  seeing  this,  was  awe-stricken  and  said, 
“Are  .you  the  chief  of  the  Asiiras?  Ur  are  you  Vasudeva;  who  else  has 
such  an  extraordinary  power  to  assume  such  a tremendously  big  form 
extcyiding  to  sixteen  hundred  miles  ? ”-22-25. 

. . Aiura  * mens  a demon.  * Iswara  * literaUy  means  master  . 


6 


THE  MAfSYA  PUBAiJAM. 


I have  come  to  know  you,  0,  Kedava  ! You  are  puzzling  me  in 
the  form  of  a fwh.  I bow  down  to  You,  0,  Hriaiketia,  Jagannfttha, 
Jagaddhsima/’  [These  are  all  different  names  of  God.]— 26, 

Being  thus  addressed,  Bhagav&na  JanAirdana,  in  the  form  of  a fish, 
complimented  him,  and  said  : “ 0 Spotless  One,  I have  been  truly  known 
by  you.  In  a few  days  time,  0 King,  the  Univcise  shall  be  drluged 
with  water,  along  with  the  mountains  and  forests.  The  Devas  have  made 
this  boat  to  rescue  the  creation  from  such  a calamity,  placing  in  it 
acedajaSf  andajas,  udbhijas  and  jarayujas,  0,  King ! you  take  charge 
of  this  boat  and  help  the  distressed  at  the  lime  of  the  impending  danger 
When  you  find  the  boat  in  danger  of  being  blown  away  by  the  strong 
gusts  of  wind,  tie  it  to  my  horn.  By  rescuing  the  ifflicted  from  uich 
an  awful  misfortune,  you  will  be  rendering  a great  paternal  seivice 
to  the  creation.  And,  O,  blessed  sovereign  ! You  shall  reign  for  one 
Monvantava,  from  the  beginning  of  flie  Kvihujuja,  and  filial/  be  veneraterl 
by  the  Dcvas.’'““^7-33. 

Aotc.—*  civedaja,*  ‘ literally  ’ mcaus,  born  of  sweat ; therefore  insects  cliuj^ing  to  one's 
person,  sach  as  bugs,  Hco,  &e.;  *anilaja,*  animals  born  of  an  egg;  Udbhija,  things  that 
sproat ; * JarSyuja,'  born  of  woml),  i.c.,  Mammals. 

A'otc.— Kritayiiga  is  the  same  as  Satyayuga,  the  age  of  truth,  ^fanvantara  is  a period 
of  5,48,00,000  years. 

Here  ends  the  Chapter  dcaliny  with  the  conversation  between 
Mayiu  and  Vipai. 

CIIAPTEU  Tl. 

Suta,  continuing  Ids  narration,  said,  that,  on  hearing  anch  words 
of  the  Lord,  t)ie  king  begged  Him  to  reveal  to  him  in  liow  many  years  the 
time  of  destruction  was  likely  to  come.  The  king  also  entreated  the  Lord 
to  point  out  to  him  the  means  of  saving  the  creation  from  such  a distress, 
and  to  let  him  know  wlien  ho  would  again  be  fortunate  enough  to  meet 
Him  face  to  face. — 1-2. 

The  fish  replied  that  from  tliat  day  tliere  would  be  no  rain  for  a 
hundred  years,  and  the  universe  would  be  overtaken  by  a dire  famine. 
After  that,  all  the  inferior  beings  of  the  universe  would  be  scorched  to 
death  by  the  seven  ordinary  rays  of  the  sun  which  shall  become  seven  times 

more  powerful.—  3*4. 

The  seven  rays  of  the  sun,  are 

(«)  ftiwawr,  (^) 

in  addition  to  all  that,  the  subteranean  fire  would  shoot  ont,  Se«a, 
from  bis  abode  in  the  lower  regions,  would  send  forth  venomous  flames 


CHAPTER  IL 


7 


from  lus  thousand  mouths,  and  a furious  fire  would  emerge  from  the  third 
eye  of  l^iva, — 5^ 

Not«.— It  is  said  in  the  paurAulc  allegory  that  the  universe  rests  on  the  head  ot  a 
thoasand*hooded  serpent  which  is  more  popularly  known  as  8e§a. 
y.  The  fire  emitting  from  the  third  eye  of  biva.  lie  has  a third  eye  in  the  forehead 
which  always  remains  shat  The  Lord  opens  that  third  eye  only  on  occasions  of  anger,  and 
necessarily  at  the  time  of  destruction.  As  soon  as  the  third  eye  is  opened,  all 
objects  falling  within  its  range  are  reduced  to  ashes,  as  it  sends  forth  a big  flash  of  fire. 

Thus  the  three  worlds  would  be  crumbled  to  ashes  by  the  combined 
fury  of  all  those  various  fires.  The  sky,  with  all  the  stars  and  planets, 
would  also  be  destroyed  by  the  heat  thus  originated.  -6-7. 

Then  tlui  seven  destructive  clouds  viz. — Samvarta,  BliirnanAda, 
Drona,  Ohanda,  Balflhaka,  Vidyut  pataka  and  Sona,  wonld  spring  up  from 
the  vapours  arising  out  of  such  a lieat,  and  would  lafn  in  torrents  till  all 
the  seas  become  united  into  one  great  mass.  In  fact  the  whole  earth 
would  be  covered  with  one  vast  expanse  of  water,  then  get  hold  of  that 
yonder  boat  and  put  the  seed  of  creation  and  the  saci-ed  Vedas  in  it. 
After  thafl,  fasten  the  boat  to  my  horn  by  means  of  this  rope  that  I 
give  you,  and  then  the  contents  of  the  barge  will  be  saved  by  my  glory.” 
0,  Pious  One ! when  everything  will  be  destroyed,  your  good-self,  the 
moon,  the  sun,  niy^self,  Brahma,  the  sacred  river  Narmada,  the  great 
sage  Markandeya,  the  sacred  Vedas,  the  Pnranas,  the  God  ^iva,  the 
various  sciences,  will  alone  be  saved,  and  tlie  reign  of  king  Chaksusa 
Manu  sliall  terminate  with  the  coining  partial  dissolution. — 8-14. 

At  the  boginiiing  of  the  re-creation  of  the  Universe  which  would 
f(dlow  the  period  of  destruction,  I sliall  propagate  tlie  Vedic  knowledge.” 
So  saying,  lie  suddenly  vanislied  away. — 15. 

The  king,  till  the  time  of  dissolution,  of  which  intimation  w^as  given 
to  him  by  Lord  Vasudeva,  engaged  liimself  in  the  practice  of  Yoga. — 16. 

At  the  commencement  of  dissolution,  tlie  Lord  appeared  again  in 
the  form  of  horned  fish.  At  tlie  same  time,  l§esa,  the  Serpent  King, 
appeared  before  the  King  Vaivasvata  M^u  in  the  shape  of  a rope,  and  the 
king,  through  his  Yogic  power,  collected  together  all  living  beings  and  put 
them  in  the  boat.  And,  after  fastening  the  boat  to  the  horn  of  the  fish, 
by  means  of  the  rope,  the  king  saluted  the  Lord  and  got  into  it. — 17-19. 

S(ita  said,  ” 0 sages  ! liear  the  history  of  creation,  &c.,  which  you 
have  asked  me  to  narrate.  I shall  now  proceed  to  relate  it  in  the  words 
of  ihe  LoW  which  were  addressetl  to  the  King  Vaivasvata  Manu.”— -20-21. 

Manu  entreated  the  Lord  to  relate  to  him,  how  the  dissolu- 
tion and  the  creation  of  the  universe  took  place,  how  the  generations  of 
mankind  came  into  being,  the  meaning  of  Manvantara,  tlie  biographies 


8 


THE  MATSYA  FURANAM. 


of  eminent  men,  the  expanse  of  tlie  universe,  the  ways  of  cliarity,  the  path 
of  duty,  the  precepts  of  t^niddlia,  tlie  divisions  of  Varna  and  Aiframa,  tlie 
waj'8  of  sacrificial  rites,  llie  greatness  of  the  Devas,  etc. — 

iVote.— Sraddha  is  an  act  of  devotion  to  tho  pitris  nnd  manes  \»hich  every  Hindu 
bag  to  perforin  by  moans  of  certain  proscribed  rites,  after  which  food,  etc.,  is  distributed 
to  the  Brahma  nas, 

*Varna*  means  tribe,  oastc,  ‘AsraimV  tho  four  kinds  of  roligioas  order,  viz.,  (!>  Braroha- 
charyya  or  the  student  life,  ^2)  Qrahusta  or  tho  hoasoholdor*s  Hfo.  (8)  Vauaprastba  or  the 
anchorite’s  Hfe,  (4)  Sanyasa  or  hermit’s  lifo. 

Matsya  ftaiil  that  during  the  periotl  of  Ijicat  Ui-soliition  the  universe 
was  enveli'ped  in  daikncss  and  was  in  a state  of  trance,  as  it  were,  incon- 
ceivable, still,  and  nndclinahic.  In  ihal  slate  of  unimaginable  and 
indescribable  trance,  appeared  Luid  Svayanibhu,  wlio  is  also  known  as 
Narayana,  owing  to  His  omnipresence  in  Sthuhi-sarira,  made  llis 
appearance  to  create  llic  universe. — 

Note.—*  Sthfila  Siirira,  is  corporeal  body,  ?\c.,  what  is  visible  to  the  naked  oyo, 

Svayanibhu,  with  tlie  dt'sire  of  (‘renting  the  nniverso,  fii.-it  created 
water  and  planted  the  seed  of  creation  in  it.  'Hie  s('c<l  of  creation,  ?.e., 
chaitauya  (consciousness)  by  coming  into  contacjt  with  water,  |>roduccd 
a vast  egg  vie.,  the  egg  of  livalima),  of  golden  line,  whicli,  after  one 
thousand  years,  became  ten  thousand  times  m ae  luminous  than  the  sun. 
After  that,  Svayamhhu  merged  nim^df  into  iluit  irememhms  llrahinriiKla, 
and  owing,  to  His  omnipresence  in  it  He  came  to  he  known  as  V^isiui. 
-28-30.  ^ 

lie  I'Svayamblm  then  en-ated  tlie  Sun  liy  His  glory,  which  owing 
to  its  first  place  in  tlie  (ucarion,  is  known  a-  Aditya.--d’H. 

After  divi<]ing  the  huge  Ihahmantja  into  I w j parts,  He  'Svayanibhu) 
made  the  Heaven  and  Eartli,  Aka.'^a  and  the  quarters.  The  upper 
portion  of  tho  divided  Brahm.iiaj.i  formed  tho  iKavcm,  tho  lower  one 
the  eartli.  Tho  direoiiou  in  whieh  the  Sun  was  locaknl  was  termed, 
purva  i.e.j  East,  the  direction  on  the  right  hamlsivle  of  llralima  was  named 
daksina,  i.e.,  South,  tho  direction  to  llis  Icfi.  liand  side  was  styled 
uttara,  i.e.,  North,  and  the  one  falling  at  IJi.s  hack  came  to  be  knoAvn 
as  patfchima,  i.e.,  West.— 32.  * 

Note,-  Purva  moans  aiul  Iho  iliroction  wa.9  so  named,  because  prodity.a  the  first 
object  of  creation  happened  to  ho  looatod  tliat  side. 

PaCichima  moans  behind.  This  diroctioii  w'a.s  named  so,  because  it  fell  to  tho  back  of 
the  Creator,  who  was  standing  factid  to  tho  Easf. 

Dakhsina  means  right.  This  direction  foil  to  tho  right  of  BrahmA. 

Uttara  means  sub.9equent. 

Afterwards,  the  principal  mountains,  like  the  Meru,  clouds, 


OHAPIEB  III. 


9 


lightning,  embryo,  rivers,  pitj-is,  Manu  and  the  seven  oceans,  full  of  various 
.gems,  were  created.— 33-34. 

A'ot Pitarah'  meaiAi  manes  of  tbe  dead,  Forethors.  The  seven  oceans  are 

. wi5^j 

1 iio  above  is  the  ancient  division  o(  oceans. 

r>raiim&  created  the  Brahnianiasaud,  owing  to  His  desire  of  calling 
the  Universe  into  being,  lie  is  also  known  as  Prajapati.  Martanda 
came  into  being  by  tlie  glory  of  the  Creator. — 3i> 

More.— Bhddova  means  the  mundane  Gods,  i.e.,  tbe  Brthmans.  They  were  so  named 
because  they  were  inspired  with  Divine  knowledge. 

Prajftpafci  means  the  father  of  progeny,  i.e.,  tlie  Creator. 

riio  Sun,  owing  tf>  \l>  (lashing  out  of  tbe  Brnhinanda  at  the 
time  of  its  breaking,  i.e , being  divided  into  two  parts,  is  known  by  the 
name  of  Martanda,  and  the  image  of  tlie  (h-eator,  Brahma,  the  four-headed 
Deity,  who  is  full  of  the  element  of  Rajoguna  came  to  be  called  as  Alaliiit- 
man. — 36. 

iVotc.— Rajoguna  is  the  constituent  quality  of  all  the  material  substances. 

The  Creator  BrahinU  has  four  mouths  that  are  visible,  and  that  is  why  He  is  called  so. 

Mahiitman  in  the  phraseology  of  H4nkliya,  means  Mahatsutva,  f.e.,  the  attribute  of 
buddhi  and  when  this  attribute  has  more  of  rajoga^a  then  it  is  called  Brahm^. 

The  same  Common  Cause  of  the  [Jniverse  who  created  all  the 
[)evj\s,  Demons,  and  mankind  is  known  by  the  name  of  Brahma,  wlio  is 
full  of  Rajoguna  and  who  is  also  styled  Mahat-satva  for  Brahma). — 37. 

Here  ends  the  second  Chapter  dealing  with  the  destruction 
of  Brahmanda. 

CHAPTER  HI. 

The  king  asked  the  Lord,  how  Brahma  created  tlie  universe  and 
the  reason  of  His  having  four  heads.  —1. 

The  Lord  Fish  replied  that  first  of  all  Brahma  practised  devout 
austerities,  whereby  were  revealed  the  sacred  Vedas,  together  with  their 
complements  and  supplements  and  the  metres.  The  oldest  of  all  ^astras 
was  first  recollected  by  Brahm;\— the  eternal  Brahman— in  words,  with 
its  ten  million  elaborations.  After  that,  BrahniA  revealed  the  sacred  Vedas 
and  the  sciences  of  Miinansa,  Nyaya,  &c.,  together  with  the  eightfold  proof. 
Inspired  with  tlie  Vedic  knowledge,  Bralima  became  conscious  of  His 
supreme  poflentiality  and  through  Ilis  desire  created  the  ten  sages, 
who  are  known  as  the  M&nasa  sons  of  the  Creator,  viz.,  Marichi,  Atri, 
Angira,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Prachetu,  Bhrign,  Vasistha  and  NArada. 

In  addition  to  tlie  fore-mentioned  ten  sages,  the  following  came 
into  existence  from  the  various  limbs  of  His  body,  without  having 
any  mother:  from  His  right  thumb  appeared  Prajapati  Daksa,  from 


. THE  MATSYA  TURANAlH.. 


.'His  Dharma,  from  Hia  heart  Cupid,  from  Hia.  brours  Anger,  from 
Hie  lips  Greed,  from  Hia  intellect  Delusion,  from  - Bis  egoism  Arrogance, 
from  Hia  throat  Glee,  from  Hia  eyes  Death,  from  Hia  hands  the  sage 
fiharata.  These  are  the  nine  sons  0 King  and  tlie  tenth  was  a girl,  called 
Ahgajfi..— 2-12. 

IVote--*Auga]a*  means  originating  from  the  body. 

At  this,  the  king  Vaivasvata  Mann  said 

“Lord  ! I have umloi-stood  that  inlelloct  hogot  Delusion  and  egoism 
begot  arrogance,  but  what  is  iiiiolleet?**'  -IS. 

The  Lord  replied  that  tlie  presence  of  the  three  attributes,  viz.— 
Satva,  Rajas,  Tainas,  in  equipoise,  form  the  Prakriti.  The  same  Prakriti 
is  also  known  as  Prad  liana,  Avyakta  and  May  A.  The  Creation  springs 
from  this  very  Prakriti  and  ultimately  disappears  into  it.  By  a distur- 
bance in  these  attributes,  the  same  one  form  manifest - d it-self  into  three, 
as  Brahma,  Visnu  and  Maheswara.  Similarly,  the  presence  of  the  three 
attributes  in  unequal  parts  begets  Muhatatva,  which  is  also  known  as 
intellect.  Egoism  sprang  from  the  ^Maluitatva,  and  tlie  five  organs  of 
perception  and  other  five  organs  of  aotimi,  originateil  from  Egoism. 
-14-18. 

These  are  : —The  ears,  the  skin,  the  eyes,  the  tongue,  tlie  nose,  the 
anus,  the  male  and  the  female  organs  of  generation,  tl»e  hands,  tlie 
feet,  the  speech.— 19. 

iVote-The  first  five  are  the  organs  of  perceprion,  and  tho  last  five  are  the  organa 
of  action. 

The  five  organs  of  perception  pr'>diif\"l  tiiiuOi,  form,  flavour, 

and  smell  ; and  the  five  organs  of  actio. i h.’mglit  forth  emission,  liajipine.ss, 
taking,  walking  and  spcecii. 

The  mind  is  reckonefl  to  bo  the  oleventh  organ,  as  it  helps 
the  faculties  of  intellect  and  action  in  tlieir  respective  operations.  Tlie 
minute  molecules  of  all  the  organs  form  the  snlistratnm  for  tlie  individual 
soul  that  lies  enshrined  in  it,  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  the  frame 
within  whicli  lies  the  asylum  of  tlie  individual  soul  is  known  by  the 
name  of  subtle  body.  The  individual  s.ml  liy  coming  in  contact  with 
this  atomic  body  is  called  corporeal  'Flie  mind,  propelled  by  desire 
to  create,  starts  the  work  of  creation.  The  subtle  element  of  sound 
brought  ether  into  being.  Round  is  the  only  attribute  of  ether. — 21-2«3. 

Note.— Lord  Brahmd  first  of  all  wishod  to  croato  and  thon  He  throw  Hia  mind  in  the 
achievement  of  the  work  of  His  dosire.  Helped  by  Hi.s  mind,  He  proceeded  with  the  work 
of  creation. 

By  a concussion  in  ether,  came  forth  wind,  possessing  the 
qualities  of  soiind  aqd  tangibility,  and  the  subtle  element  of  tangibility 


.OHAPT^R  HI.  :liy 

prodaoed'  briUianoyr.  ;which  caused  water  attributed  witb*  . sound, 
tangibility  and  form.— 24^25, 

The  earth  was  produced  by  the  potency  of  the  subtle  element 
of  liquidity  inherent  in  water,  and  it  has  the  attributes  akin  to  water 
and  also  of  the  subtle  element  of  fragrance.  The  Mahfitatva,  which 
is  formed  by  the  five  subtle  and  primary  elements,  is  called  the 
VijnAnmaya-ko^a  by  the  Vedantins ; buddki,  i.e.  intellect,  is  another  name 
for  the  same.  The  man  possessed  of  this  twenty-fifth  element  enjoys 
and  suffers. — 26-27. 

iVote.— Twenty-fifth  (element),  i.e,  (conscioasnesa).  Ood  has  laid  down  certain  laws 
tor  mankind  to  follow.  Any  action  against  the  established  laws  leads  to  wrong  which 
always  causes  pain.  We  have  been  given  the  faculty  to  distinguish  between  right  and 
wrong,  and  it  is  onr  own  fault  if  we  choose  the  latter.  A man  always  reaps  the  fruits 
of  his  actions.  He  suffers  if  ho  deviates  from  the  right  path  and  does  wrong,  and  enjoys 
as  long  as  he  continues  to  follow  the  right  track  and  does  good. 

The  body  tlierefore  comprises  the  t\veuty-.six  elements,  and  the 
individual  soul,  which  is  subordinate  to  tlie  wishes  of  the  Ijord,  closes 
the  iif^tsd  the  elements  tliat  make  up  the  human  body. — 28. 

Lord  Brahnui  created  the  fuiiverse  by  the  help  of  the  above 
enumerated  elements  ; and  Sankliya,  which  is  one  of  the  six  systems  of 
Hindu  philosophy,  is  so  called  by  Kapila,  etc.,  because  it  enumerates 
these  elements.— 29. 

Lord  BrahmS,  after  creating  His  manasa  putras,  was  not  quite 
satisfied  with  the  work  of  His  creation,  lie  set  about  devising  some 
plan  which  wouhl  cany  on  the  work  of  creation  and  would  relieve  Him 
of  the  task.  With  this  view.  He  began  to  invoke  Cljiyatri.  After  some 
time  the  goddess  Gayatri,  known  under  different  names,  rw.— Satarfipa, 
S&vilri,  Saras vati,  BrahmA.ni,  &c., — appeared  in  the  form  of  a girl  from 
the  half  portion  of  Brahuids  body  who  at  the  first  sight  mistakenly 
took  Her  for  His  daughter.  Afterwards,  the  Creator,  seeing  that  form 
of  exquisite  beauty,  was  fired  with  love  and  repeatedly  uttered,  “ What 
an  enchanting  form !”— 30-33. 

At  this,  the  Mfinasa  putras  of  Brahma,  i.e.,  Vasistha,  <&c.,‘ taking 
S&vitrl  for  their  sister,  began  to  express  their  feelings  of  seething  indigna- 
tion and  coirtempt  at  the  attitude  of  Their  Father  (Lord  Brahmd),  but  He 
was  BO  mucll  absorbed  in  love  that  He  did  not  heed  anything  in  the  least. 
-34. 

Brahmfl  continued  uttering,  “ Oh  ! what  an  enchanting  form ! . 
oh ! what  an  enchanting  form  !”  in  His  love  for  the  goddess  S/lvitrf,  and 
the  latter,  after  saluting  Him,  began  to  circumambulate  Him  in  reverence. 
Brahmft  fixed  his  gaze  on  SAritri  and  could  not  distract  Himself 


TiB  MlTSYA  PtiR’AUAU: 

,:,t ::: m :: 

wWi  As  she  was  circmnambulating  Him,  Ho  felt  shy  of  turning^'r 
His  head  each  time  to  Her  direction,  as  His  M>\na8a  putras  were  standing 
qU)SQ  by.  He  therefore  created  four  heads,  each  pointed  to  a direction, 
in  order  that  He  may  see  Savitri  undistur  jed,  without  having  to  turn  His 
head  each  time  in  course  of  Her  circumambnlations.  Seeing  BrahmS  in 
such  a condition,  Satarup \ went  to  Ijeavon  with  the  Manas  sons  of  the 
Creator,  and  as  she  was  travelling  towards  heaven,  Brahnni  put  on  a fifth 
head  right  on  top  whicii  afterwards  He  covered  with  His  long  matted  hair. 
This  is  how  Brahm?1  caiJie  to  have  five  heads.  After  this,  Brahma  lost  his 
powers  tliat  He  had  acquired  by  practising  acesticism,  owing  to  His 
not  controlling  Ilis  mind  and  falling  into  the  snares  of  Cupid.  Then 
Bralirna  dispersed  His  sons,  after  directing  them  to  carry  on  the  work 
of  Creation.— 35-41. 

The  sons  of  Brahma,  in  obedience  to  His  instructions,  set  them- 
jsolvcs  to  complete  the  woi  k of  croatiuii,  and  afterwards  they  took  leave 
of  Brahmri  with  sal utut ions. 

Braljiiui,  lired  with  passion  in  Her  comi>any,  married  ISatarfipa  and 
began  to  pass  His  days  in  enjoyment  inside  a l»*ins.  He  enjoyed  the 
company  of  Savitri  for  hundred  years,  and  after  a long  time  Manu  was 
bora  to  them.--13-44. 

Maim,  thus  born,  was  Svayambhu  Manu,  who,  owing  t«)  his  close 
affinity  to  Brahma,  is  also  called  A'il|niru-;:!a  Utic  first  man).  The  progeny 
of  Svayambhu  Manu  multipiioa  conMdcrably  and  tiie  Vainljas  are  among 
them.— 45-40. 

Svarocliisa,  <fec.,  tiie  seven  Manus,  and  another  sot  of  seven 
Manns,  Auttami,  i&c  , altogether  the  foiunon  Manus,  belong  to  the  family 
of  Svayambhu  Manu.  '■  U,  King  Vaixasvaia  Manu/'  sai<l  the  Lord,  “ You 
are.  the  seventh  of  the  last  set  of  Manu.-*.'  - -47. 

Here  ends  the  third  Chapter  d&dut^j  tritfi  primary  creation. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

The  king  said,  “ 0,  Merciful ! I feel  awfully  grieved  to  hear 
that  Lord  Brahma  married  AAguja.  Piay,  tell  me  wliy  lie  was  not  regaid- 
ed  as  having  committed  a fearful  sin  by  having  done  so.  Remove  my" 
doubts,  0,  Master  of  the  Universe ! by  graciously  explaining  to  me  why 
the  offspring  of  Brahma  were  allowed  'to  intermarry  in  their  paternal 
ciTcle  without  any  regaid  for  close-knit  kinship.”  Tlie  Lord  Fisli  replied  ; 

0 King!  such  doubts  only  arise  in  the  cast' of  mankind,  for  men  have 


OBAFTBR  IV, 


13 


alotnie  bodies  and  beget  children  in  a different  my.  M the  primeval 
creation  is  celestial  in  vhicli  Rajognna  predominates.  The  Deras  not 
have  supemneuous  Ijodies  anti  they  beget  progeny  in  quite  different  ways 
The  celestial  forms  come  into  being  in  other  ways,  and  it  is  very  difficult 
fnr  men  liaving  sensaous  bodies  to  understand  this:  great  secret.  Only 
supernatural  intellect  causes  celestial  creation  j tlierefore  those  alone  can 
uuileYstand  its  great  secret  who  themselves  are  possessed  with  such  an  intel- 
lect; Justus  a serpent  alone  can  trace  the  footprints  of  another  serpent, 
and  aerial  tracks  can  only  be  discerned  by  birds  and  other  beings  that 
fly  in  the  air.  0,  King  ! the  qiie.stion  of  any  prescribed  order  on  prohibi- 
tion does  not  arise  in  the  deeds  of  the  Deva*?.  Only  Their  desire  is  taken 
into  consideration  in  whatever  they  do.  Other  beings  reap  the  fruits 
of  their  karma  (doings)  which  the  Devas  do  not.  No  doubts  should 
therefore  be  raised  regarding  the  doings  of  tlie  Devas,  nor  should  the 
beings  having  sensuous  bodies  think  of  doing  the  same  deed.’'-  1-6. 

Besides  this,  as  Lord,  Brahma  is  the  governor  of  the  Vedas,  so  is 
tlie.  godcTesa  Oayatri  of  the  Brahmans  fthe  sacred  text,  /.e.,  the 
Vedas^  Slie  is  the  better-half  of  the  Lord,  and  that  is  why  she  appeared 
from  His  body.  BrahmS  and  Gayatri  are  inseparables.  Sometimes  only 
one  of  the  two  luUs  on  appearance  and  sometinies  botli  do  the  same,  but 
Jill  tlie  same  both  are  always  together.  They  never  remain  apart.  As 
sunshine  or  light  never  lives  devoid  of  its  shadow,  similarly  Brahma 
never  lives  apart  from  Gayatri.  Brahma  is  the  master  of  the  Vedas  and 
Savitri  (another  name  for  Gayatri;,  is  the  governess  of  the  same  ; Brahma 
is  therefore  also  the  master  of  the  latter,  and  consequently  fie  committed 
no  sin  by  marrying  Ifer*-’. — 7-10. 

“ In  spite  of  all  this,  Lord  Brahnni  felt  ashamed  for  not  being  able 
to  suppress  Mis  passion  in  presence  of  His  mdnasa  sons.  He  therefore  got 
much  vexed  with  the  God  of  love  and  cursed  Him  after  the  departure 
His  (manasa)  sons.’’ — 11. 

“The  object  with  which  you  nrade  me  the  target  of  your  arrows 
will  ere  long  lead  you  to  be  reduced  to  ashes  by  l^iva,  when  you  similarly 
behave  with  Him,’  was  the  curse  that  Brahma  pronounced  on  Cupid.”— -12. 

“Hearihg  this  curse  of  Brahma,  the  God  of  love  -shuddered 
with  fear  and  cried  out  in  great  dismay,  ‘ 0,  Lord  ! You  created  me  with 

♦ ProfossoF  Wilson  writes 

^ “ The  Matsya  Parana  has  a little  allegory  of  its  own,  on  the  subject  of  Brahma's 
intorcourse  with  Satarapft;  for  it  explains  the  former  to  moan  tho  Vedas,  and  the  latter, 
the  8&vltri  or  holy  prayer,  which  is  their  chief  text ; and  in  their  co-habitation  there  is. 
therefore,  no  evil.'; 

VIsim  Parana,  2nd  Bdition  VoJ.  I.p.  108.J 


14 


TBS  MATStA  PVBABAii. 


the  object  of  captivating  the  minds  of  men  and  women  and  kindling 
amorous  feelings  within  them.  You  never  instructed  me  to  make  any 
exception  in  Your  case.  I only  carried  out  Your  mandate  and  have  com- 
wnjtted  no  sin  for*  which  I may  be  subjected  to  such  a dreadful  curse, 
-r  13. 

Therefore,  be  pleased  with  me  and  by  Your  clemency  save  me  from  the 
elTects  of  Your  curse  and  grant  me  the  boon  of  assuming  form  again.” 
—13-16. 

“ Hearing  such  entreaties  of  Cupid,  Lord  Brahma  melted  with 
compassion,  and  said : * In  the  reign  of  King  Vaivasvata,  Rama  the 
destroyer  of  many  Riiksasas  and  iny  compeer  in  power  and  prowess,  will 
be  born  in  the  family  of  King  Yadu.  When  Rama,  the  valiant  prince,  will 
fix  Dwarikii  as  His  headquarters,  You  will  be  born  as  a son  of  His 
brother,  the  God  Kjisna.” — 17-18. 

iVote— Rama  hero  means  Balarama«  iho  brotLor  of  KrLsna,  and  uot  the  king  of  AyodhyA. 

“ ‘ In  that  body -as  the  sor.  of  Kii-.na',  you  will  liavc  a series  of 
enjoymeLts  and  afterwards  you  will  bo  born  a son  of  Vatea  in  tlie 
family  of  King  Bharata.  After  ibis,  yon  will  live  till  the  time  of  dissolu- 
tion that  will  close  the  reign  of  Vidyadluiius,  ami  then  you  Avill  again 
come  back  to  me.’  '--'ltl-2(^ 

*\ofc— Vidy4dhara  is  a class  of  demi-gods. 

“ The  God  of  lo\'c  took  leave  (d  Bi'ahniA  and  departed  with 
mingled  feelings  of  joy  and  sadncss--joy  on  account  of  the  hope  given 
by  the  Lord  and  sadness  for  fear  of  sufferings,  as  the  effect  of  His  curse.” 
-21. 

After  heaving  this,  the  Kiiig  Vaivasvata  Manu  again  addressed 
the  Lord  thus*  f/jrd  ! 13c  gracious  (Mioiigh  to  satisfy  my  curiosity 

by  telling  me  who  was  King  Vadu,  in  whose  family  the  God  of  Love 
took  fits  birth,  how  l.ord  Siva  reduced  Cupid  to  ashes,  who  was  King 
Bharata  and  how  the  work  of  cieatiori  continued  onwards.” — 22-23.  , 

The  Fish-god  replied  : ” lying ! Gayatri  tliat  appeared  from  the 
body  of  Brahma  possessed  of  infinite  forms  and  organs  begot  the 
following  seven  cliildren  : — Svayanibhu  Manu,  Rati  (the  wife  of  Cupid. 
It  also  means  desire  of  something).  Tapas,  Manas  (mind),  Hik  Rambliraina 
(delusion),  and  Mahattatva.”— 24-25.  ' 

“The  Mfinasa  sons  of  BrahinA — Martclii,  &c. — wlio  were  born  first, 
began  to  pass  their  days  in  the  terrestrial  globe  in  the  practice  of 
asceticism.  The  Creator,  marking  the  indifference  of  His  Manasa  sons 
with  regard  to  the  work  of  creation,  produced  Vaniadeva,  the  wielder  of 
the  trident  and  also  Sanatkumar,  the  first  even  of  the  first  horns.” — 26-^27. 


GHAPtm  IV.. 


15 


“ from  the  mouth  of  Lord  VSmadeva  came’  fortU  the  BrShma^as, 
from  His  arms  the  Ksatriyas,  from  His  thighs  the  Vaidyas', ' arid-  from  His  . 
feet  the  l^ddras.”—  28. 

" Afterwards  came  forth  lightning,  thunderbolt,  clouds,  rainbovr, 
metres  of  various  kinds,  several  varieties  of  medicines,  eightyfour  crores 
of  DeVfls,  known  as  SAdhya,  and  who  have  three  eyes  and  are  immortals, 
without  any  fear  of  getting  old.’' — 29-30. 

" Lord  Br.'ihntt'i,  finding  ^ira  creating  such  a race  of  Immortals, 
said  that  it  was  advisable  to  create  only  such  beings  as  would  reap  the 
fruit  of  their  own  knrmas.  J^iva,  on  hearing  this,  instantly  stopped  His 
propaganda.”— 31-32 

Sthftnu,  litorally,  the  trunk  of  a tvoo.  It  means  that  Mva  instantly  stopped 
the  work  of  creation  and  became  fixed  like  the  trunk  of  a tree.  In  other  words,  He  did 
not  carry  on  the  work  of  creation  after  Rrahm&  offered  Him  His  sagfl^estions.  From  that 
day  He  is  also  known  as  iSth&nii. 

“ Afterwards,  Svayainblui  ^lanu  became  the  Inisband  of  Ananti, 
whom  he^ obtained  after  great  penances.  **  By  this  alliance,  Svayambhii 
Mann  was  blessed  with  two  sons,  viz. — Priyavrata  and  Uttaiiap&da,  and  of 
these,  the  latter  was  married  to  SAupita  the  daughter  of  Dharma.” — 33-34, 

“ Uttftnapada  became  the  father  of  the  following  four  childi*en, 
viz  : — Apasyati,  Apasyanta,  KirtiinA-na,  and  Dhruva  (Pole  Star)." — 35. 

" In  the  bygone  ages,  Dhruva  practised  severe  penances  for  a period 
of  three  thousand  years  and  obtained  from  Bralima  an  abode  in  the 
eternal  celestial  regions.  The  Saptarisis,  acknowledging  liim  as  their 
chief  clustered  themselves  round  Idin." — 36-37. 

iVotc,— The  seven  Xtisis  (sagos),  i.c.,  the  Mdnasa  sons  of  Urahnia.  It  means  the  cons* 
tellation  known  as  Ursa  Major  (the  seven  stars  of  which  are  said  to  be  the  seven  sages, 
i.e.,  the  Mftnasa  sons  of  Brahmd). 

“ Dhruva  begot  a son,  ^ista,  from  Dhanyl,  the  daughter  of 
Svayambhii  Mann,  and  l^ista  liad  five  children,  viz. — Kripa,  Ripunjaya, 
Vpta,  Vfika,  and  Vvikatejasa,  from  Suchclihaya,  the  daughter  of  Agni. 
Ripunjaya  became  the  father  of  Cbaksujrom  Vlrini,  the  grand -daughter  of 
Bralunii.  Chaksu  became  the  father  of  ChAksusa  Manu  from  the 
daughter  of  Vlrini,  and  CliAkbiisa  Manu  begot  on  the  princess  NadvalS  ten 
valiant  and  enterprising  sons,  — Urfl,  Puru,  ^atadyumna,  Satyav&ka, 

Havi,  Agnis^ut,  Atiratra,  Sudyiimna,  Aparajita,  and  Abhimanyu,." — 38-42. 

“ UrA  had  the  following  six  sons,  viz. — Agni,  Suman,  Khy&ti, 
Ritu,  AftgirA,  and  Gaya,  from  his  consort,  Agneyf.-— 43. 

“ ArpgirA  became  the  father  of  VSna,  from  SunlthA,  the  daughter 
of  Pitfi.  The  sages  rubbed  V$na  to  death,  owing  to  his  tyranny,  and,  as 


TBE  MATS? A POBANAM. 


they  were  rubbing  him,  King  Pfithu  appeared  from  his  hand.  The  great 

; King  Pfithu  was  the  father  of  Aiitardhi\na  and  HavirdliAna.  *—44. 

• • “MAricha  was  the  son  of  AiitardhAna  from  Sikhandiiil,  and 
..Ha\drdhAna  had  six  sons,  vh.  — Pnicliinvarhisa.  SAnga,  \ania,  Jukra,  Vala 
and  i^ablia,  from  Dhisija,  the  daughter  of  Agni.” — 45. 

**  Prachinvarliisa  begot  many  children  belonging  lo  the  Havirdhau 
clan.  He  had  tioi  stalwart  sous,  well  versed  in  archery,  who  are  known 
as  Pracliotas,  from  vSavania,  the  daughter  of  Samiulra.  d'liey  all  devoted 
themselves  to  asceticism,  and  the  trees  that  they  grew  to  form  a small 
jungle  where  they  couM  practise  (heir  austerities,  in  process  of  time 
developed  into  a tiiick  forest  of  vast  latitudes  which  was  ultimately  burnt 
tiown  by  the  lire  at  the  commantls  of  Imlra  < the  (loiI  of  Itain).** — 4()-4iS. 

“Tljeteu  IVacIietas  liad  M-lris,  tiu*  daughter  of  Chamlrama,  for 
tiieir  wife,  from  whoju  they  begot  tlio  Prajapali  Daksa.” — 4^. 

“ After  giving  birlli  to  Prnjapati  l)ak>a  the  daughter  of  the  moon 
brought  forth  the  trees,  the  herbs,  and  the  liver  Cliandravati.” — 50. 

**  Now  liear  the  tal^>  of  the  multiplication  of  the  eighty  ‘crores  of 
Daksa’s  s\)us.” — 51. 

“ Daksa  lieeamo  the  pro^euitorof  a most  queer  race.  Among  his 
children  some  were  bipeds,  su.uc  had  inon^  feet,  some  had  long  ears 
and  some  liroad  ones,  some  had  hsiture^  resembling  ihose  t)f  the  horse,  the 
bear,  the  lion,  the  dog,  ihebiar,  >r  Vm  camel,  tbs  sciug  such  avast 

* multitude  of  Ids  progcsiy,  Hak^a  cr'ate  l a largo  number  of  women.” 

-~52-5n 

“Out  of  ihe  girls  ho  created,  lie  gave  ten  to  Oliarma,  thirteen 
to  Ka^yapa,  and  twont} -^ovon  r.'  the  moon  rluit  form  a certain  galaxy  of 
stars.  Tlieso  very  sanu^  daughlors  of  D.iksa  produc.ed  t.is?'  further  race  of 
Devas,  Raksasas,  maiikirnl  and  tlic  oilier  beings  inhabitieg  the  extensive 
universe.**— 54-55. 


CHAPTER  V. 

The  sages,  after  hearing  this,  roituesPid  the  Sage  Silta  to  relate  to 
them  how  Devas,  DAnava.s,  Gandharvas,  serpents  and  Uaksasas  were  born. 
^1. 

Slita  said  that  in  ilie  days  gone  by,  the  work  of  creation  was 
originated  by  desire,  perception  and  touch.  Later  on,  Daksa  started  the 
work  of  creation  by  the  conjunction  of  men  and  women.  -2. 

“Hear,.0  sages!  I shall  now  relate  to  you  liow  l)ak§a  introduced 
a new  system  of  creation  at  the  injunction  of  13rahm4.**— 3. 


OHAPTBB  V. 


n 


Daksa  begot  tliousands  of  issiieB  from  his  wife,  PA,nchajan!,  wlien 
he  saw  that  the  Devas,  the  llisis,  and  tlie  serpents,  etc.,  created  from 
the  mind  of  the  Creator  bad  not  the  same  faculty  to  help  the  growth  of 
creation.— 4. 

N&rada,  on  seeing  the  progress  of  Daksa  in  the  field  of  creation, 
said  : — 5. 

“ 0,  ye  Ri§is,  who  are  sons  of  Daksa  ! first  reconnoitre  the  extent  of 
the  universe  and  then  set  yourselves  to  the  work  of  creation.*’ -6. 

“ On  hearing  the  above  words  of  tlie  Sage  Narada,  the  sons  of 
Daksa  started  to  survey  tlie  length  and  breadth  of  the  universe,  and 
ultimately  lost  themselves,  as  tlie  rivers  do  when  they  fall  into  the  ocean. 
They  have  not  returned  unto  this  day.** — 7. 

The  lost  sons  of  Daksa  were  known  by  the  name  of  Haryarfva, 
and  the  former  giving  them  up  for  lost,  created  one  tliousand  BrAh- 
luanas  known  as  Siival. — 8. 

On  ^finding  the  jJavals  carrying  on  the  work  of  creation,  the 
Sage  Narada  went  to  them  and  said  -.—“First  examine  the  extent  of  the 
universe  and  tiy  to  reclaim  your  lost  brothers,  then  carry  on  the  work 
of  creation.** — 9-10. 

“Taking  to  the  words  of  the  sage,  tliey  started  to  reclaim  their 
lost  brothers,  but  met  with  the  same  fate;  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that 
no  one  dares  to  repeat  the  same  experiment  unto  this  day.*’ — 11. 

On  losing  tlie  latter  batch  of  his  sons,  Daksa  begot  sixty  daughters 
from  Pdnehajani,  the  daughter  of  Virani.  Out  of  those  girls,  he  gave  ten 
to  Dharma,  thirteen  to  Kasyapa,  twentyseven  to  Chandramd  and  four  to 
Aristaneini.  He  also  gave  two  to  the  son  of  Bhrigu,  another  two  to 
Kritia^va,  and  two  to  Aftgira.  Their  names  will  be  related  hereafter.— 12-14. 

Mariitvati,  Vasu,  Yami,  liamba,  Blianii,  ArundhatJ,  Safikalpa, 
Muhfirtii,  Sadhya,  Viava,  who  were  given  to  Dharma,  were  the  mothers  of 
the  Devas.— 15-16. 

^ I 

Visvadeva  was  born  of  Visvd,  Sadliyaguna  from  Sadhya,  Marutvanta- 
gan  from  Marutvati,  VSsava  from  Vasu,  Bhanava  from  Bhdnu,  Muhfirtaka 
from  Muhfirtii,  Ghosa  from  Lamba,  Nagrithi  from  YfimJ,  the  dweller  in 
pntala  from  iCrundhati,  Safikalpa  from  Safikalpfi. — 17-19. 

The  most  powerful  of  the  Devas  that  pervade  the  univei-se  are 
known  by  the  name  of  Vasus,  who  are  eight  in  number,  viz, : — Apa, 
Dbruva,  Soma,  Dhara,  Anila,  Auala,  Pratyusif  and  Prabhasa. — 20-21. 

The  four  sons  of  Apa  are  Santa,  Danda,  Sdmva,  and  Manivakra. 
They  became  the  protectors  of  sacrifical  rites. — 22, 


THE  MAT8YA  PURANAM. 


1% 


Dhruva  became  the  father  of  Kala,  Soiii  of  Varchft,  Dhara  of 
Dravi^a  and  Havyavaha.  Dravina  and  llavyavaha  were  born  of  Kalya^t, 
and  Manohar^,  the  daughter  of  Hari,  was  the  mother  of  Prana,  Ramana, 
disra. — 23-24. 

Anila  became  the  father  of  the  two  powerful  sons,  viss. : — Manojava 
and  Avijnatgati  from  Siva, — 25. 

Anala  perchance  cast  his  seed  in  a heap  of  reeds,  wlienee  sprang  up 
Kumara,  Saklia,  Vij^aklia  and  Naigameya.  'fhey  were  fostered  by  the 
Pleiades,  and  that  is  why  they  arc  known  as  Ivartikeya,  and  the  great 
Risi  Devala  was  begotten  ])y  Pratyusa. — 2d-27. 

Note.— Efittika,  the  third  of  the  27  lunar  mansions  orastcrisms,  consisting  of  six  stars. 
The  six  stars  are  represouted  as  nymphs  acting  as  nurses  to  Kartikeya,  the  Qod  of  war. 

Prabhasa  begot  the  renowned  arcliiiecl  and  builder— the  great 
Visvakarma  • to  make  inansionjj,  pleasure  gai'dens,  statues,  oriiaiii.mts, 
tanks,  wells,  etc. — 28. 

Vamadevas,  i.e.,  Riidras,  tlic  creators  of  the  Immortals,  are  eleven 
in  number;  vis.:  Ajaikapada,  Ahirlnidlinya,  Vinlpfiksa,  Raivuta,  tiara, 
Bahurupa,  Tryamvaka,  Savitra,  dayanla,  Pinaki,  Aparajita.  The  eleven 
Rudras  were  created  by  the  mind  of  Brahma  each  holding  a trident  in  Ids 
hand.  An  account  of  their  having  created  a race  of  Immortals,  numbering 
84crores,  has  been  given  before.  The  Jtudras  pervade  and  protect  the  nni- 
veraeaud  have  l)eg«.jtten  many  ehildron  from  the  womb  of  Surabhi. — 29-32. 

Here  en(h  the  fifth  Chapter^  dctilhifj  irith  the  progenies  of  Vasus 
(Uid  Jiudras, 

CHAPTER  YI. 

Shta,  addressing  the  sagos  who  were  listening  to  his  narrations 
with  wrapt  attention  at  Xaimisaranya,  sal(i  : — ’‘0,  sages!  I shall  now 
enumerate  to  you  the  names  of  Kas^yapa’s  sons  that  ho  liad  from  Ids 
13  wives.  Aditi,  Dili,  Dann,  Arista,  Sursa,  Siirabhi,  Vinat/i,  TAinrA, 
KrodhavasJa,  Ira,  Kadru,  Virfva  and  Muni  were  the  thirteen  wives  of 
Kailyapa. — 1-2. 

Devas  called  Tusita  who  flourished  in  the  reign  of  Chak^usa  Mann, 
came  to  be  known  as  Adityas  (Suns,,  owing  to  their  having  been  born  as 
thesonsof  Devas  called  glorious  Karfyapa  from  Ids  wife,  Adhi,  during  the 
reign  of  King  Vaivasvata  Mann.  They  were  twolv^e  in  number,  inz,,  Indra, 
DhA,tii,  Bhaga,  Tvast?!,  ^litra,  Vanina,  Yama,  Vivasvana,  SavitA,  PusA.,  An- 
itum&na,  and  Visnu.  Those  were  the  12  Adityas  —the  centre  of  rays. — 3-5. 

The  Devapraharanas  the  sons  of  Kriaasva  Risi,  and  the  twelve  Adityas 
appear  at  the  beginning  of  every  Manvantara  and  Kalpa  and  vanish  at 
their  termination.  Dili,  the  second  wife  of  Karfyapa,  gave  birth  to  two  eons, 


obapteb  Vi. 


id 


mz.,  Hiranyakafiipu  and  Firanydk^a.  Hiranyakarfipu  had  four  sons,  viz.. 
Prahlfida,  AnulilAda,  Saiphlada  and  Mlada.  Prahinda  had  the  following 
sous  Ayushinana,  Shivi,  BAskala,  and  Virochana.  Bali  was  the  son  of 
Birochana^and  the  former  had  one  hundred  sons,  the  oldest  of  whom  was 
BSna. — 6-10. 

The  notable  brothers  of  Bana  were  : — Dhritarastra,  Silrya,  Chandra,. 
Chandraipsutapaiui,  Nikumbhanabha,  Gurbaksa,  Kuksibbima,  and  Vibhi- 
$apa. — 11. 

These  were  the  most  notable  of  Bana’s  brothers.  Bana  had  one 
thousand  arms,  and  each  arm  was  bedecked  with  a different  kind  of  weapon. 
Vanawasan  ardent  devotee  of  Lord  Siva,  and  had  won  over  the  latter 
by  his  deep  devotions.  In  fact,  he  was  such  an  earnest  devotee  that  he 
bad  almost  unified  liiinself  witli  the  Lord.  His  realm  was  guarded  by 
Siva  Himself,  the  wielder  of  the  trident. — 12-13. 

Uluka,  ^akuni,  Bhuta-samtripana,  and  Malianabha  were  the  sons 
of  Iliranyliksa.  The  four  sons  of  Iliranyaksa  begot  an  invincible  band  of 
demons,  numbering  77  croros,  who  had  mighty  limh.s,  various  kinds  of 
faces,  and  were  most  hardy. — 14-15. 

Danu,  the  third  wife  of  Ka*iyapa,  brought  forth  one  hundred  mighty 
demons,  the  principal  one  of  whom  was  Viprachitti. — 16. 

Dvimfirdhii,  jJakuni,  Sankurfirodhara,  Ayomukha,  l^ambara,  KapMa, 
Vfimana,  Maiichi,  MeghavAna,  Ira,  Garbharfira,  Vidrabaua,  Ketu,  Ketuvirya, 
i^atlirida,  liulrajit,  Saptajit,  Vajranablia,  Ekachakra,  Mahabahu,  Vajrakba, 
Tciraka,  Asiloma,  Piiloma,  Vindu,  lUpa,  Svarbhanu,  Vri^aparva  were 
chiefly  the  noteworthy  brotliers  of  Viprachit. — 17-20. 

Svarbhanu  gave  birth  to  a daughter,  named  Prabha,  PulomA  gave 
birtli  *to  l^achi,  Maya  to  Updanavi,  Mandodari  and  Kiihii,  Vri§aparvan 
to  ^armis(ha,  Sundari  and  OhandrH,  and  Vaitlvknara  to  Pulom^  and 
Kalika.--21.22. 

Puloinfl  and  Kalika  were  married  to  the  demon  King,  Marlchi, 
who  begot  another  formidable  batch  of  Kaksasas,  numbering  60  thousand 
from  them. — 23. 

The  P^ulomas  and  the  Kalikgyas,  i.e.,  the  demon  progeny  of  PulomA 
and  KalikS,  after  being  made  invulnerable  even  against  the  Devas, 
began  to  live  in  Hiranyapura.  Lord  Visnii  killed  the  Pauloinas  and 
KrdikSyas,  who  had  become  most  haughty  after  they  were  made  invul- 
nerable  by  Brahmft.  Only  Viprachit  survived,  and  he  produced  another 
race  of  thirteen  demons,  known  as  Saihimkfiya  from  the  womb  of  SiiphikA 
the  sister  of  Hirapyakarfipu.— 24-25. 


20 


BE  MATSYA  UBABAM. 


Note, — The  Paulomas  and  the  Edlikdyas  were  only  made  invulnerable  by  Brahmlt 
and  only  the  minor  (iods  could  not  kill  them,  bat  Lord  Vi^nn  is  the  Supremo  God. 

Vyamsa,  Kalpa,  Nula,  Vatapi,  Ilvala,  Nainuchi,  Svasripa,  Ajana, 
Naraka,  Kalaiiabha,  Saniirina,  Kalavirya,  Potaraua  were  among  the 
SaihiipkSya  class  of  demons.  Saiplilada,  tlie  of  Iliranyakasipu,  produced 
the  race  of  Nivatkavacha  demons. — 2C-28. 

■j  iVote.--Potarana,  the  thirteonth  domoii  of  the  Saihiiokaiya  class,  is  not  mentioned 
in  the  text,  but  the  lumibor  thirteen  is  laid  down  in  the  text.  To  complete  the  list, 
therefore,  1 have  included  the  name  of  Potarand,  on  the  authority  of  Hari  Vamsapurdna. 

This  class  of  Nivata-kavacha  demons  that  Avas  made  invulnerable 
to  the  Devas,  <lemons  and  serpents,  was  nitimately  destroyed  by  Arjnna — a 
hero  of  Mahabharata — by  the  grace  of  Siva. — 21). 

Kadyapa  had  tlie  following  six  dan-.  liters,  from  his  wife,  Tamra  : — 
^uki,  ^eni,  Bluisi,  Sngrivi,  Gridhribi,  iSuchi.  — 30. 

^uki  became  the  nxdher  of  rfuka  and  Ulfika,  ticiu  of  ^yena, 
Bhi'isi  of  Kurara,  Gfidld  of  Gridhra  and  Kapota,  J?nclji  of  Ifnmsa,  Sarasa 
and  Vaka,  &c.  — 32. 

Note.  - Sdka=  Parrot.  Uldka  = Owl.  .iyena=llawk.  Kurara—Osprey.  Gfidhra== 
Vulture.  Kapdta=  Pigeon.  Ham.sa-=.S\van.  Sarasa^  Crane.  Vaka=I)nck. 

Sugrivi  gave  biilh  to  goat,  horse,  ram,  camol,  mule,  i^c. 

From  his  wife  Vinita,  Kailyap-a  begot  Gannln,  the  lord  of  birds,  the 
Aruna,  and  a daughter,  named  Saielr.jniiii  ( Liglit  ning'. — 3‘».34. 

Sampnti  and  Jatayidi  were  tl«<»  sons  <»f  Arena,  and  Vabliru  and 
l^ighragha  were  the  sons  of  Sainpnti. --'‘Jo. 

Jataynli  was  the  father  of  Ktunikaia,  S5alag:1mi,  Sfirasa,  HajjiivAla 
and  Bherunda  — 30. 

The  above  nicjjtioned  son.s  of  Jalayuh  became  the  ancestors  of 
different  species  ol  bir<ls,  and  Sinasa,  one  of  the  wives  of  Kadyapa, 
became  the  inotlier  of  serpents. — 37. 

Kadru — a wife  of  Kasyapa  -gave  birth  to  several  thonsand-liooded 
serpents,  the  principal  ones  of  whom  are  : -i:5esa,  Vasuki,  Karkota,  i^a/iklia, 
AirAvata,  Karpbaln,  Diiananjaj’a,  Mahujiila,  I’adma,  Asvalara  (mule), 
Tak^aka,  Elapattra,  Alahapadma,  Dhritarastra,  Balahaka,  f^ankhapala, 
MuliAsankha,  Pudpadahstra,  i^iiljlianana,  i5a/jkuromA,  Bahrda,  Vainana 
PAnina,  Kapila.  Diirmukha.  and  Patahjali.— 3iS-41. 

The  ubove-named  sons  of  Kadni  and  Kadyapa  were  the  fore-fathers 
of  different  classes  of  serpents,  most  of  whom  were  consumed  in  the 
great  Racritice  of  Jarnnejaya.-''42. 

Note.Waiimejaya  wns  the  non  of  King  Pariksita.  The  latter  was  bitten  by  a serpent 
and  ^ied  in  consequence.  Jaumejay a,  therefore,  to  avenge  his  father's  death,  performed  a 
great  aaorifica  to  consome  all  the  serpents  in  which  a large  nnmber  of  them  was  destroyed. 


OHAPTEB  Vtl. 


21 


P'roni  Ilia  wife,  Krodhvafia,  Karfj^apa  had  a race  of  KrodbavaA^ 
demons,  Tiunibering  a million  who  were  ultimately  killed  by  Bhimasena  -a 
hero  of  Malu'ibhArata.—  43. 

Snrabbi,  one  of  the  wives  of  KaiJyapa,  gave  birth  to  the  attend- 
ants of  Riidras,  cows,  buffaloes,  &c. — 44. 

iVote.— Rudras  aro  a group  of  Gods,  eleven  in  nimiber,  supposed  to  be  the  manifesta- 
tions of  Siva,  who  is  said  to  be  the  head  of  the  group. 

Muni  and  Arista,  otlier  two  wives  of  Karfyapa,  gave  birth  to  the 
class  of  Munis  and  Apsaras  and  the  race  of  Kinnaras  and  Gandharvas, 
respectively. — 45. 

Froin  IrA,  Kaslyapa  begot  reeds,  trees,  creepers,  &c.,  and  from  his 
wife  Virfva,  he  produced  a race  of  numerous  Yaksas  and  demons. —46. 

Diti— a wife  of  Karf^’^apa— gave  birth  to  19  maruts  fGods  of  wind), 
who  were  the  beloved  of  the  Deva's. 

Here  ends  the  sixth  Ghapter  dealing  with  the  progeny  of  Kasyapa. 

" CHAPTER  VII. 

The  Risis  said How  did  Diti  again  beget  the  Maruts  and 
how  did  the  latter  become  the  friends  of  the  Dovas  ?-— 1. 

Suta  said: —In  the  days  gone  by,  wlieu  Lord  Visnu  des- 
troyed the  offspring  of  Diti  in  the  great  war  between  the  Devas  and 
Asuras,  Diti  repaired  to  Syaiiiantapanchaka — a holy  place — on  tlie  banks 
of  the  Sarasvati,  and  devoted  herself  to  the  worsliip  of  her  husband 
and  practised  severe  penatices  for  a considerable  length  of  time. — 2-3. 

Note, — A true  Hindu  wife  always  regards  her  husband  as  her  supreme  Lord.  She 
has  the  same  devotion  for  her  as  one  has  for  God.  Her  salvation  lies  through  her 
husband. 

After  a little  more  than  a century,  Diti,  the  mother  of  demons, 
who  had  practised  hard  penances  like  a liWi  and  had  become  emaciated 
and  aged  owing  to  lier  living  on  phalahara  and  regularly  keeping 
up  Cliandniyana  and  other  fasts,  asked ^asisjha  and  other  sages.— 4-5. 

Note.— Pbalfthfira.  The  Hindus  in  course  of  their  fasts  do  not  take  cooked  food. 
They  only  take  light  things  and  particularly  fruits.  Ptialahdra  literally  means  a repast 
of  fruits. 

CbUndrAyana  is  a particular  fast,  the  chief  feature  of  which  is  that  one  has  to  regu- 
late his  morsels  of  phalahara  to  the  phases  of  the  moon,  i.e.,  on  the  new-moon-day  he  has 
to  take  only  one  morsel  which  ho  goes  on  increasing  one  by  one  each  day,  for  a fortnight, 
when  the  fast  terminates. 

Sages  ! Tell  me  some  such  vrata  tlint  would  free  me  from  the 
crushing  grief  of  iny  son’s  destruction  and  make  me  feel  happy  in  this 
world  as  well  as  in  the  next.” — 6. 


THE  1HAT8YA  PUHAEAM. 


it 


Aiote.— 7rata  means  fast.  Any  self-imposed  raligtons  observance,  Boetriotion, 
Vow,  Precept,  Penance. 

In  this  loorld  as  n<ell  os  in  the  next : '’’he  Hindus  believe  in  the  transmigration 
of  sonl.  According  to  this  idea,  there  in  a life  after  death  nntil  the  sonl  becomes 
totally  unified  with  Brahma,  which  is  Kirvfina  or  final  rest.  The  nest  world  here, 
therefore,  refers  to  the  re-bIrth  after  transmigraiion  of  sonl. 

The  sage  Y.asi-stlia  advisod  Diti  to  ohsprvo  tlie  Afatlana-Dvadailt 
fast,  by  keepiiipr  wliicli  Oifi  hecanie  the  inotlier  of  the  Mamts  and 
was  liberated  from  her  pangs  of  grief.— 7. 

The  liisis  said  ; — “ Pious  Sage,  Suta ! we  are  very  anxious 
to  know  something  of  the  iladana-IVndadi'  fast,  by  the  observance  of 
which  Diti  begot  forty-nine  sons  again  faftor  her  progeny  was  destroyed 
by  Visnu;.” — 8. 

Suta  said  “ Hear,  0 Risis  ! wliat  the  Sage  t'asistha  said  t j Diti 
about  the  fast  in  question.  I sludl  repeat  to  you  the  same  in  detaiJ.” 
—9. 

"The  fast  begins  in  tlie  inontli  ol  Cliaitra,  on  the  lifib  day  of 
the  bright  fortnight.  One  who  observes  this  fast  shonhl  jjlace  a jar 
of  gold,  silver,  copper,  biiiss  or  eartli- -ae<*or(Hng  to  his  means — <in  an 
earthen  platform,  after  filling  it  with  (lUTeimi  fniils,  pieces  of  sugar- 
cane, and  white  rice,  before  idacing  the  jar  ..n  ilio  platform,  it  should  also 
be  painted  with  white  sandal  and  eiivered  with  two  pieces  of  wliite  cloth. 
After  this,  a small  plate  of  copper  conluinitig  some  fruits,  gold  and  raw 
sugar  should  be  placed  .in  tlie  top  of  the  jar.  .Above  It  shmdil  be  placed 
a plantain  leaf,  bearing  an  imago  of  Cupid,  and  to  the  left  of  it  should  be 
placed  the  image  of  Rati  made  of  suirar.  After  this,  the  w'orship  of 
Cupid  and  Hati  sliould  bo  perlormed  in  the  billowing  manner  t — 
The  images  should  first  bo  bathed  with  incense  and  water,  then  white 
flowers,  rice,  and  sesamnm  siionld  he  offered.  Afterwards,  the  Aftgapfij.^ 
(body  worship)  should  follow,  as  indicated  below  ;~Aftcr  pronouncing 
Otfi  K&mdya,  worsbip  tbe  feet.  After  jironouncing  Om  fiaitbhigyadaya , 
worship  the  legs.  After  pronouncing  (hn  Simurdya,  worship  the  thighs. 
After  pronouncing  0»/i  Manmathaya,  worship  the  waist.  After  pronouncing 
Ont  Svatohodardya,  woraliip  the  stomach.  After  pronouncing  OijiAna^dj/u, 
worship  the  breast.  After  proiumneing  Orfi  Vadmamulthdya,  worship  the 
mouth.  After  pronouncing  Utji  Panehaaaraya,  worship  the  hands.  After 
pronouncing  Otfi  Sarvdtmave,  worship  the  head.  Oji  the  completion  of 
this  worship,  sandal  and  incetisc  should  be  offeied,  and  then  prayers 
should  be  sung  accompained  by  music.  In  case  there  be  no  one  to  sing 
prayers  and  play  on  the  music,  then  the  glories  of  KAina  and  Keiava 


naAPTER  VII. 


hIiouM  be  narrated  and  listened  to.  On  the  following  morning,  the  jar 
should  be  given  to  a Brahmana. — 10-18. 

A'ote.— In  the  text,  only  Kaniayit,  Saubhlgijaddya,  &o..  are  given.  Bat  all  those 
expressions  should  be  prefixed  by  (Om)  and  saflixed  by  (Aatnah),  before  being  pronounced 
at  the  time  of  worship.  Kdiu&ya,  thus  prefixed  and  suffixed,  becomes.  Orp  Kamdya  tiamaii, 
which  means  **  I salute  Kdma,  the  God  of  love.  Similarly  all  the  expressions  are  sitnply 
meant  to  convey  the  salutations  of  the  worshipper  to  the  Lord  of  love— expressive  of  the 
former's  devotion  and  reverence  to  the  latter.  All  the  expressions  are  only  adjectival 
that  ultimately  apply  to  Cupid,  uia,— Kania-God  of  Love,  Cupid. 

Anaugn,  literally,  moans  without  a body.  Cupid  was  destroyed  by  Siva  and  became 
bodiless.  Ho  is  thoreforo  known  as  anaiiga  also. 

Saubhfigyad a,  literally,  means  the  giver  of  good  luck,  and  here  applies  to  the  (iod 
of  Love  who  brings  good  Jnek. 

Smara  literally,  means  reniombrancc.  Because  Cupid  appears  and  begins  to  exercise 
His  influence  merely  by  thinking  of  Him,  the  term  itself  has  become  a name  of  Cupid. 

J^admamukha  literally,  means  the  mouth  of  a lotus  or  (ii)  one  who  has  a face  as  beauti- 
ful as  a lotus.  I’liis  expressioii  is  often  employed  by  Indian  poets  to  describe  a beautiful 
face.  As  the  f.aee  of  Cupid  is  :is  aromatic,  as  delicate,  as  soft  and  as  healthy^looking  as  a 
lotus,  Ho  is  known  i»y  this  name  also. 

Panchaifera  literally,  means  one  who  holds  five  arrows.  Cupid  is  armed  with  the 
following  live  arrows : — 

'sr  ^ 'sr  I eraw:  ii 

The  same  five  arrows  are  also  differently  named  as : — 

^ s&rrarenvfswT  i «Bniw  sTsftfmn.*  ii 

Ho  is  therefore  known  as  Panclia:iara  also 

ekirviilm  oi  moans  the  whole  soul  and  applies  to  Cupid. 

After  making  over  the  jar  to  a deserving  Brabmana,  the 
worshipper  should  feast  a number  of  Brahmanas  with  devotion,  and 
aflei  wards  he  should  have  his  own  meal  devoid  of  salt.  Then,  the 
invited  Br:lhinanas  should  be  dismissetl  with  presents,  and  the  following 
prayer  should  be  uttered  before  giving  them  presents  : — 19. 

0,  Lord  Janardana,  in  the  form  of  Cupid ! Who  bring  bliss 
to  every  soul,  be  pleased  witli  thy  devotee.** — 20. 

The  same  routine  of  worehip  should  be  observed  each  month, 
on  the  twelvth  day  of  the  bright  fortnight,  and  continued  on 
for  a whole  yeai*.  The  worsliipper  should  obsei  ve  a fast  on  the  ] 3th 
day  of  the  brifelit  fortnight  and  worehip  Vi§nii.  On  the  12th  day  of 
every  bright  fortnight,  he  should  live  only  on  fruits  and  sleep  on  the  floor. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  IStli  month,  he  is  to  finally  complete  his  cycle 
of  fasts  by  performing  worship  as  mentioned  before,  and  on  its  completion 
ho  should  worship  the  golden  image  of  Cupid.  Afterwards,  white 
sesamum,  mixed  with  clarified  butter,  should  be  poured  into  fire  and  at 
the  time  of  each  sacrificial  offering  the  various  names  of  Cupid,  already 


H 


THE  MAT8YA  PURAHAM. 


mentioned,  prefixed  with  om  and  suffixed  with  Smhd,  shouhl  be  pro- 
nounced'. At  the  close  of  the  sacrifice,  the  worshipper  should  also  worsliip 
the  officiating  priest  and  his  consort,  and  then  dismiss  all  his  Bnlhniana 
guests  after  feasting,  garlanding,  and  giving  them  presents  of  clarified 
butter,  cows,  decentlj^-arranged  beds,  clothes,  ornaments,  sugarcane. 
The  golden  image  of  Cupid  should  be  given  to  the  officiating  priest 
along  with  other  presents  mentioned  above,  according  to  the  means  of 
the  worshipper.““21--(). 

One  wlio  observes  the  Mmlana  Dvadarfi  fast  in  this  way,  becoines 
liberate<l  from  evils  and  begets  worthy  children  and,  finally,  passes 
away  in  peace,  for  V'i>iin  and  Sinara  are  ilie  same.  -27-28. 

Kote.— Liberated  from  all  erils  or  or  vices.  In  otlicr  words  Maclan-dvftdasi  fast, 
by  exercising  its  inflnonco  on  tlic  body  and  mind,  iinpri>vos  the  man  both  physically 
and  morally.  Later  on,  by  being  blessod  with  children,  he  ;.asso.M  away  in  leaceand 
attains  rest;  for  bo  feels  that  his  worthy  children  would  discharge  their  duties  unto 
God,  their  deceased  ancestors,  and  mankind.  It  is  for  the  fullllrnent  of  these  duties  that 
a Hindu  is  always  so  anxious  to  beget  worthy  sons. 

The  worsliip  of  Kfima  fulfils  the  desires  of  the  worshipper. 
Bearing  the  advantages  of  the  Madana  Dvadaili  fast,  Diti  observed  it 
devoutly.— 29. 

Katiyapa  chanced  to  meet  his  wife  Diti.  and  through  his  powers 
(of  asceticism)  made  her  voung  again.  On  being  questioned  by  Katfyapa, 
Diti  said  that  slie  wanted  to  be  mother  of  sucli  a progeny  as  would 
kill  Lord  Indra  and  conquer  all  tlic  Devas.  Ka»<yapa  promised  to  beget 
such  a child  from  her  womb  when  tlie  sage  Apastamlia  perforrne<l  a 
putresti  sacrifice.  The  sage  Apstamba  eventually  began  to  perform  the 
sacrifice.— 30-34. 

Note.— Putresti  is  a special  sacriflee  svhich  is  performed  to  beget  an  offspring. 

At  the  time  of  peiTorming  the  sacrifice,  the  sage  Apastamba  began 
to  recite  Indra  Satrurbhavasva  Smha,  at  wliich  the  Devas  became  pleased 
and  the  demons  were  overpowerd  with  grief.— 35. 

Note.-- Indra  Aitrurrurdha  svu  and  J7idra  Satrurvardha  sm  Svdhd  mean  the 
same  thing,  but,  strictly  speaking,  the  lutkr  expression  was  applied  by  the  sago 
Apastamba.  It  has  been  put  in  a modified  form  to  suit  the  metro.  It  is  a compound 
word,  and  can  be  expounded  in  two  ways,  vie.,  (the  enemy  of  Indra)  and  (Indra  is 
whose  enemy).  Apastamba,  through  a coincidence,  began  to  pronounce  the  expression 
with  such  accent  and  emphasis  as  would  admit  the  latter  way  of  expounding  the 
compound  word  which  entirely  reversed  the  object  of  Diti  and,  consequently,  the 
Devas  were  pleased  and  the  demons  were  overtaken  with  grief.  It  is  therefore  said ; - 

At  the  concInBioii  of  the  Hacrifice,  Kiu^yapa  performed  I he  purifica- 
tory ceremonies  to  facilitate  conception,  and  began  to  counsel  liis  wife 
how  a pregnant  woman  should  live.— 36. 


OBAPTBB  VJL 


26 


He  advified  Diti  to  remain  in  tliat  liermitage  for  a century  and 
not  to  take  any  meals  in  tlie  morning  and  evening.  Continuing  ])is  advice 
he  said  that  a pregnant  woman  should  not  often  go  and  sit  at  tlie  root  of 
a tree,  nor  should  slie  sit  on  a hroom-sfiek  or  a pestle.  Slje  shotdd  not 
enter  or  plunge  herself  in  deep  waters,  and  should  also  avoid  living  in 
a solitary  house,  sitting  iipr)n  an  ant-hill,  and  also  depression  of  mind. 
She  should  not  write  by  lier  nails,  charcoal  or  ashes,  on  tlie  floor,  and 
should  avoid  much  sleeping  and  labciur.  She  sliraild  also  'abstain  from 
sitting  in  a place  covered  with  coal,  cliaff,  and  bones,  as  uvl I as  from 
quarreling  and  j^awning.  She  should  not  keep  her  hair  unkempt,  nor  her 
person  unclean,  nor  should  she  sleep  with  her  head  towards  the  north. 
She  should  never  doff  her  garments,  and  should  not  allow  her  mind  to 
be  afflicted  or  her  feet  to  remain  wet.  She  should  avoid  much  laughing 
and  the  use  of  inanspieious  words.  She  should  s?rve  her  preceptor,  do 
pious  deeds,  aiul  bathe  in  lukewarm  medicated  water.  She  should  take 
great  corg  of  herself  in  every  way,  should  wear  fine  orinnnents,  worsliip 
Vastu  (household  deity),  keep  herself  pleased,  and  devotedly  serve  her 
husband.  She  should  give  alms  to  the  poor  and  worship  Gauri  (the 
wife  of  ^iva)  on  the  3nl  day  of  a bright  fortnight.  A woman  and,  particu- 
larly one  who  is  in  the  family  way,  if  she  follow  such  a course,  begets  ami- 
able, valiant,  and  long-lived  cliihlren  ; otherwise  there  is  always  a clanger 
of  miscarriage.  “Therefore  0 beloved!  follow  the  directions  just 
explained  to  .you,  May  }’’c)u  be  blessed.  I am  now  going  to  practise 
penances  37-48. 

After  this,  Katfyapa  vanislied  then  and  there,  and  Diti  followed 
the  instructions  of  her  lord  to  the  letter. — 49. 

Tndra  came  to  know  all  this,  and  became  fearfully  alarmed. 
In  his  consternation,  he  left  His  kingdom  of  Heaven  and  going  to  Diti 
began  to  serve  her.  He,  putting  on  a briglit  appearance,  patiently  and 
craftily  began  to  pry  into  tlie  daily  life  of  Diti,  in  the  hope  that  she  might 
give  Him  an  opportunity  of  cjiusing  an  abortion,  by  some  way  neglecting 
or  omiting  to  follow  closely  the  precautions  suggested  by  her  husband. 
—50.51. 

Diti,  not  knowing  the  foul  intentions  of  Tndra,  did  not  entertain 
any  suspicion,  and  she  went  on  following  the  injunctions  of  her  husband 
very  closely,  till  there  remained  only  three  days  to  complete  the  century. 
She  was  so  much  surcliarged  with  joy  that  she  failed  to  observe  the 
precautions,  and  one  day  she  did  not  wash  her  feet,  kept  her  hair 
unkempt  and  went  to  sleep  like  that.— 52-53. 


n 


TRB.MAT8YA  PURAVAU. 


In  her  recklessness,  she  slept  in  course  of  the  <layi  with  her 
head  towards  the  north.  All  those  irrepfiilarities  afforded  a good  opportu- 
nity to  Indra  to  enter  into  her  womb  in  His  subtle  body ; and  by  Hie 
weapon  divided  the  child  in  the  womb  into  seven  parts.  To  His  great 
surprise  and  dismay  each  part  developed  iido  a child.  They  all  began 
to  cry  in  tlie  womb,  then  Indra  divided  each  one  into  seven  parts. 
Indra  thus  divided  the  child  in  the  womb  into  fortynine  parts,  but  each 
part  became  a child,  and  they  all  began  to  cry.  On  seeing  this,  lie  was 
awfully  astonished,  and  asked  them  not  to  cry.— 58. 

Aote^—AJirodistn:=:  “rtoiiot  wcop  or  cry.'*  said  Indra  to  the  crying  children  in  the 
womb  ; and  that  is  why  they  uoro  uamod  *•  Marnt  “ afterwards. 

Indra  came  to  know,  through  llis  Vogie  powers,  that  it  was  on 
account  of  Oiti’s  observance  of  the  Pvailarfi  fast  and  woishipof  Kama  that 
His  weapon  could  not  destroy  her  child  in  the  womb.  His  own  ihonghts 
began  to  oppress  Him.  He  said  to  Himself  that,  instead  of  one,  they 
multiplied  into  forty-nine.  Devas  could  not  destroy  them.  It  would 
be  safer  to  make  them  f)evas.’'‘  50  01. 

After  this,  Indra  appeared  before  Diti  and  besought  her 
to  forgive  Him  for  His  base  action.  He  said  that  lie  did  that,  ])ecaii8e 
statesmanship  dictates  that  a wise  man  should  always  endeavour  to  put  an 
end  to  bis  enemies.  Tin  y would,  fioiu  tliat  day  forward,  he  known  as  the 
‘*Marut*’and  would  rank  among  the  iVvas  and  would  be  entitled  to  a 
share  in  the  sacrificial  olTerliig'^,  like  other  Devas. 

In  this  way,  India,  after  making  llie  '‘llaruts"  into  Devas  and, 
taking  Diti  with  Him  in  His  vimAiia,  returned  to  Heaven. — fii. 

A'ote.-*ViDi&na  : tho  conveyance  of  the  Komotlun^;  like  the  flying  machine  of 

the  present  times. 

Since  then,  the  Marnts  arc  classed  among  the  Devas.  Tliey  receive 
their  share  of  sacrificial  offerings,  and  after  leaving  llie  demons  their 
kith  and  kin,  they  have  closely  identified  themselves  uitli  the  Devas. — 65. 

Bere  ends  the  seventh  Olmptev  de  ilinfj  vnih  Madana  Dvddasi  Vrata* 

CIIAITKU  VIII. 

Tlie  Risis  said 0 Suta ! Wo  have  heard  with  concentrated 
attention  what  yon  have  been  ]deased  to  relate  to  ns  ; now  we  feel  desirous 
to  know  the  lives  of  the  kings  that  flourished  at  each  order  of  creation. — 1. 

The  Sage  Suta  said  : — At  the  time  when  King  Piilhn  was  anointed 
and  made  lord  of  tlie  world,  Chandrama  was  made  the  king  of  medi- 
cinal herbs,  sacrifices,  fasts,  penances,  stars,  planets,  Brahmanas,  trees, 
thickets,  creepers;  Vanina  of  waters;  Kuvera  of  wealth  and  (other) 
triners : theSuD  of  the  twelve  Adityas  * Agni  of  Vasus ; Daksa  of  Prajdpatb; 


OBAPfBS  It. 


ar 


Indra  of  gods ; PraliUda  of  demons;  Yarna  of  pitps;  l^ivaof  demons 
ajid  Yak^as  ; the  Himalayas  of  the  mountains ; the  Ocean  of  the  watei-s ; 
Chitraratha  of  Oandharvdfi  and  Kumaras  ; Vasuki  of  powerful  serpents; 
Tak^aka  of  other  snakes ; Airnvata  of  the  Diggajas  and  other  elephants; 
tlie  peacock  of  birds,  Uchaiilrava  of  horses  ; the  lion  of  the  animals  living 
in  jungles ; tlie  bull  of  the  cows  ; the  trees  of  the  herbs.  —2-8. 

Similarly,  Lord  Brahma  made  the  Devas  Sudharma,  Sankhapada, 
Eetumana,  Hiranyaroinn,  the  kings  of  East.  South,  West  and  North 
respectively  ; and  They  protect  the  universe  by  destroying  its  enemies, 
unto  this  day. — Si-10. 

The  various  kings  named  above,  collected  together  and  took  part 
in  the  coronation  of  king  Pjithu,  and  recognised  him  as  the  sovereign  of 
the  world.  King  Pi  ithu  reignctl  till  the  end  of  rhak^nsa  Manvantara,  when 
he  was  succeeded  by  King  Vjiivasvata  Manu  of  the  solar  d}'nasty. — 11-12. 

Here  ends  the  eitjiuli  Chapter  dealinfj  with  the  coronation  of  Kings, 

CHAPTEIl  IX. 

Tlie  Sage  Sula  said:  “After  hearing  tliat,  King  Manu  again 
requested  the  Fish  Ood  to  narrate  to  him  the  career  of  the  Manus  who 
flourished  in  bj’gone  ages’*.—!. 

Tlie  Fisli  (iod  said  : “ O King  ! listen.  1 shall  relate  to  you  briefly 
the  lives  of  the  Manus  of  yore,  and  shall  give  you  a short  history  of 
Manvantai'cas  and  their  times. — 2. 

“ 0 Son  of  Martanda,  liear  attentively.  In  tlie  bygone  ages,  at  the 
close  of  the  reign  of  Svayambliuva  Manu  there  was  a group  of  Devas, 
known  as  Yamas.  In  all  Manvantaras,  classes,  such  as  Marichi,  &c.,  are 
recorded  to  have  appeared.  Svayambliuva  Manu  had  ten  sons,  tis, : — 
Agniglira,  Agnivaliu,  Uipliplia,  Savala,  JyotismAna,  Dyulimfina,  Havj-a, 
Medha,  Mgdhatithi,  Vasu.  They  having  established  a code  of  law  and 
morality  departed  to  felicity.  Tiiis  has  been  narrated  as  the  Svayain- 
bhuva  Manvantara.— "3-6. 

The  Svarocliida-manvantara  followed  it.  There  were  of  Svnrochisa 
Manu  four  sons,  viz,,  Nabha,  Nabhasya,  Prasfiti,  Biiavana.  Of  this  Man- 
vantara, the**fo!lowiiig  are  recorded  as  seven  Bisis : viz,,  Datta,  Nisfehaya, 
Vanastamba,  Prana,  Kaiiyapa,  Aurva,  and  Brihaspati."  The  seven  Devas 
of  this  Manvantara  were  sons  of  Vasis(ha,  known  as  Tusita,  Hastiiidra, 
Sukrita,  Murti,  Apa,  J^mti,  and  Ayasmaya.— 7-10. 

In  the  third  or  Auttaniiya  Manvantara,  ^Vtanu  named  Auttami  had  ten 
eons,  «i«., W,  Drja,  Tarja,  Suchi,  i^ukra,  Madhu,  Madhava,  Nabhasya, 
Nabhi,  and  Saha  *'  (who  was  most  illustrlousV  The  group  of  Devas  in  this 


TUB  MATSYA  PtJRABAlit- 


es 

Manvantnra  was  known  by  the  name  of  iiAvana.  The  following  were  the 
seven  Itijjis  in  lliis  Afanvanlara  wh  > were  also  known  by  tlie  name  of  Orja 
Kuuknriii,i()i,  I )al Miysi,  .^ankliu,  l^ravahann,  Siva,  Sita,  Sasmita. — 11-14. 

In  the  fonrth  Manvantaia  wliieh  was  called  'laniasa,  flie  seven  Wisis 
were: — Kavi,  P|ithn,  Agni,  Akapi,  Kapi,  Jalpa,  and  Dhiinana;  and  the 
group  of  Devas  were  known  bj^  the  name  of  Sadhya  — J5-16. 

The  King  T.'unasa  Mann  had  ten  sons,  vis,  :—x\kalma.sa,  Dhanvl, 
Tapomula,  Tapodhaiia,  Taporati,  Tapasya,  Tapodyuti,  Parantapa,  Tapo- 
bliogi  and  Tapoyogi. — 17-18. 

In  the  [fifth]  Raivat  Manvantara,  Dovabrdra,  Subfihu,  Parjanya, 
Somapa,  Hiranya-Roina,  SaptasSva  were  the  seven  Risis;  and  Abhutarajas 
was  the  group  of  Devas.  Arnna,  Talvadarrfi,  \'ittavan,  Havyapa,  Kapi, 
Yukta,  Nirntsuka,  Satva,  Nirnioha  and  Praka^aka  were  the  ten  pious  and 
illustrious  sons  of  Itaivalaka  Alami. — It) — '22. 

In  the  sixth  or  Chik^iira  Manvantara,  Rhngu,  Sudlulma,  Viraja, 
Saliirfnu,  Nada,  Vivasvanji  and  Atinama  were  the  sev(*n  ITi^is.  Ihc  group 
of  five  Devas  was,  bokluis,  Itihlifis,  ltil)lnis,  Ikn  imulns  and  Divankasas 
in  this  Manvantara.  (Inik^uva  Mann  had  tom  sons,  sncli  as  Urn,  &c.,  as 
has  been  already  inentionofl  by  me  in  tlio  g»  nealogy  of  Svayambhiiva 
Manu  in  Ciha])ter  I 

After  the  Cliak'^U'^a  Manvanta’a,  as  narniied  hy  me,  shall  occur  the 
seventli  Manvantara,  wiiicli  is  caliiMi  Vaivasvata.  •“’I’O 

In  the  Vaivasvata  .Manvanmra,  Ani,  Vasi-tha,  ( lanlama,  Karfyapn, 
Bharadw-ija,  the  pownifnl  Yo^i,  Visw.unit ra,  daindagni,  aio  tlie  seven 
Risis.  The  severj  Uisis,  albn*  e-tal>li>hing  a codi?  of  law  and  morality 
depart  to  felicity.  S.ldliy.js.  Vi4»s,  Itn  1im>,  .Marnts,  Vasns,  AsvaniknniAras, 
Adityas  are  tlie  classes  of  Devas  in  Vaivasvata  .Manvantara.  The  King 
Vaivasvata  iranu  liad  ton  renr)wijed  sons,  r/c. --Iksvrikn,  &c.  In  every 
Manvantara  there  arc  seven  Risis  who,  after  cstahlisliing  a code  of  law 
and  morality,  depart  to  I'd  icily. — l?7-ol. 

Now  1 shall  ex])laiii  to  you  something  a ))out  the  Savariiya  Man^ 
vantara.  AsivathAmA,  J^aradv.-ina,  Kau'Jika,  fl;dava,  Satfinanda,  Kai53'apa, 
Rama,  are  the  seven  Risis  in  this  .\lanvanta»a.  Dhriti,  Variyfnia,  Yavasa, 
Suvarna,  Vri^ti,  Cliarisrni,  Idya,  Kumati,  Vasu,  Snkra  arc  the  ten  valiant 
sons  of  the  Manu  Slvai  ni”; — 

Raucliaya,  &c.,  shall  bo  another  six  Alarms  after  Savarni. 

From  Prajlpati  Itnchi^theio  shall  be  Ranchya  Manu,  from  Prajnpati 
Bliutya  there  shall  be  Bhaiitya  Maim  and  from  Rralima  there  shall  be 
Meros&varnya,  Rita,  IlitadlnimA,  Visvakesna  Manus. 


CHAPTER  X. 


“ I have  explained  to  you  sometliing  about  the  past  and  future 
Manus,  0,  King!  Similarly,  commencing  from  the  age  of  Devas,  in  the 
904lh  age,  the  afore-mentioned  fourteen  Manns  rule  in  succession.  In« 
their  time,  they  play  their  part  in  the  creation  of  tlie  moveable  and 
immoveable  objects,  and  afterwards  attain  (Inal  rest  with  Brabm^,  at  the 
end  of  tlie  age.'  They  (the  Manus',  after  1,000  tiges,  shall  be  absorbed  in 
BrahmiS  and  be  joined  to  Vianu  **. — 34. 

Here  ends  the  ninth  Chapter  dealing  with  Manvantaras. 

CHAPTER  X. 

The  sages  said  that  in  ancient  times  the  kings  came  to  be  called 
Pilrthiva,  on  account  of  tlieirsway  all  over  the  land  ; but  how  did  the  earth 
come  to  be  known  as  Prithvi  ? 0 Suta  ! tell  us  also  why  the  earth  came  to 
be  called  “Gau?  V-  12. 

Sfila  said  that  Prajapati  A/iga,  in  the  family  of  Svayambhuva  Manu, 
was  born  Mio  was  mariied  to  the  vile  daughter  of  Mrityn,  named  Sunitha 
the  shrew,  who  gave  birth  to  Vena.  King  Vena  was  valiant,  but  oppressive 
and  sinful.  The  sagos,  seeing  the  sinful  deeds  of  the  king,  who  used  to 
forcibly  seize  the  wealth  and  the  women  of  others,  approached  him  with  the 
object  of  bringing  about  law  and  order  by  giving  him  good  advice. — 3-5. 
But  when  the  king  did  not  listen  to  the  good  advice  of  the  sages,  they 
killed  him  by  their  curse.  After  that  being  afraid  of  anarchy,  the  sinless 
Brahinanas  began  to  churn  the  dead  body  of  the  king  from  which  first 
came  out  the  races  of  Mlechhas. — 0-7. 

A'ote.— Mlectihas  has  been  deSiied  by  Baudhdyana  as  moaning  “ Non-Aryan,  a foreig- 
ner, sinner,  outcast,  barbarian." 

Black  as  soot  the  barbarian  race  that  came  out  of  V6nu  was  the 
outcome  of  the  evil  qualities  of  his  mother  ; and  from  the  portion  of  the 
good  qualities  of  his  pious  father,  appeared  from  the  right  hand  of  the 
dead  king,  a most  brilliant  figure,  wearing  au  armour,  studded  with  preci- 
ous stones,  and  armed  with  bow  and  arrow  in  one  hand  and  holding  a club 
in  the  other.  The  illustrious  figure  thus  produced,  after  so  much  difficulty, 
was  named  Pjithu.  King  Piithii  was  anointed  by  the  Brahinanas,  but 
even  then  he  practised  severe  austerities. — 8-10. 

Lord  Viijnu,  greatly  moved  by  the  profound  devotion  of  the  King 
Pritlni,  showered  His  blessings  upon  liim.  The  king,  after  being  thus  blessed 
by  the  Lord,  became  most  powerful  and  illusti'ious.  On  seeing  the  earth 
devoid  of  Vedic  rites,  he  was  filled  with  righteous  indignation,  and  pre- 
pared himself  to  destroy  it  witli  his  never-failing  arrow.  The  earthy  trem- 
bling with  fear,  assumed  the  form  of  a oow  and  took  to  flight. — 11-12. 


80 


THE  MATSYA  PUBANAM. 


iVote.— This  exprosscs  a heflutiful  allog^opy.  The  righteous  king  saw  that  the  people 
had  given  up  the  practico  of  the  Vodic  rites  and  wore  drift  iig  towards  sin  by  leaps  and 
bounds.  Yathfl  tnthft  Pr.ija  - no  wonder,  tJierefcre,  (hnt  the  people  should  have 

become  so  much  demoralised  during  tlio  sway  of  his  predecessor  - the  wicked  V^na. 
Pfitbu,  the  pious,  could  not  possibly  tolerate  such  a chaos,  and  in  his  rage  he  made  up 
bis  mind  to  destroy  the  sinners,  when  suddenly  a thought  flashed  through  his  mind  that  law 
and  order  could  be  ovolvod  oven  without  resorting  to  such  an  extreme  measure.  The 
laud  appeared  to  him  like  a cow  that  could  give  sweet  milk,  if  properly  milked.  He 
therefore  applied  himself  to  uplift  the  degenerated  and  to  take  good  care  of  the  new 
generation. 

Cf.- 

Besides  this,  the  cow  is  the  most  imporhint  of  all  nnimals  in  India.  She  plays  a 
great  part  in  the  agricuUnral  pru.sperlty  of  tin*  country  by  bringing  forth  oxen.  She 
nourishes  the  nation  with  her  sweet  milk  and  glu  e.  She  is  a very  docile  and  harmless  crea- 
ture. Her  hide  supplies  shoes  to  the  people.  Site  takt^s  mot  hot  ly  care  of  the  nation,  and 
that  is  why  she  is  held  .so  sacred  by  the.  Aryans  \\h«>  are  the  otiginal  inhabitants  of  bliArala- 
varsa.  Even  now  a man,  to  seek  forgiveness  or  shelter,  pins  in  a Idudo  of  grass  in  his 
month  and  addresses  a real  Aryan,  “I  am  your  eow,  f»»rgiv(‘  me  or  save  me.”  The  moment 
such  a man  approaches  a true  Aryan,  ho  is  rendered  all  pos.sible  as.sistanco  at  every  risk 
and  stake  by  the  Aryan. 

Similarly,  when  tliat  thought  crossed  (ho  mind  of  I’iitliu,  ho  compared  the  land  to 
the  cow,  and  then  he  could  not  do.stroy  it. 

Thirdly,  it  is  tlu!  poetic  way  saying  Iha^,  ^^lle^  Ihr  earth  l)ccamo  so  terribly  afraid 
of  the  power  of  the  king,  it  appealed  lor  meicy  by  appearing  before  him  and  telling  him 
that  it  was  his  cow. 

Fourthly,  the  sinners,  trembling  with  fear,  eravod  the  forgiveness  of  the  sovereign  by 
calling  themselves  his  cow  and  promising  to  turn  over  a new  leaf  - which  will  be  clear 
further  on. 

The  eartli  went  on  rmlnin^.,^  tind  tlie  kiii^  continued  the  cliase. 
After  getting  overpowered,  slie  Rtoi>pe(l  and  ciaved  forgiveness  and  asked 
what  to  do. — 13. 

Aof«.— -The  allegory  is  continued.  The  king  is  portrayed  as  chasing  the  race  of 
shineni  who,  to  save  their  lives,  are  depicted  to  be  running  away  and  calling 
themselves  cows,  so  that  the  king  may  not  shoot  his  arrow  at  them.  The  sinners 
in  their  consternation  have  no  couiago  to  faco  their  righteous  * sovereign,  until 
they  are  deadbeat  and  can  proceed  no  further.  The  sovereign  would  not  let  them 
inn  away,  for  he  is  anxi«>us  to  reclaim  and  nplift  them.  He  would  therefore  simply 
put  his  arrow  on  his  bow  to  guard  them  from  evils  and  also  to  stop  them  from  running 
away  to  any  out-of-the-way  place. 

A cow,  when  she  runs  away  like  this  from  lier  master,  is  similarly  chased  by  the  latter 
with  a stick  in  hand.  The  master  does  not  mean  to  kill  the  cow  with  his  stick*  Be 
tlisU  with  Mm  for  bis  own  safety  as  well  as  for  hers.  He  also  uses  his  stick  in.diiMUag 


OHAPTBB  XL 


31 


the  footsteps  of  tho  animal,  Tho  bow  and  the  arrow  were  similarly  carried  by  the  king  in 
his  pursuit  of  the  earth  that  was  running  away  from  him  In  tho  form  of  a cow. 

At  thiK,  tlie  kin^  addressed  r.]ieeart]i  and  asked  lier  to  quickly  minis- 
ter to  the  needs  of  all  heings,  whether  moving  or  fixed.  The  land  pro- 
mised to  obey  tlie  beliesls  of  the  king.  Then  the  king,  after  making 
Sva^’ambhuva  Mtinu  as  the  calf,  milked  the  eartlj  in  the  form  of  the  cow 
with  his  own  liands.  Tije  earth  then  produced  the  different  kinds  of  grain, 
which  support  mankind  ; after  which  tlie  sages,  using  the  moon  as  tho 
calf  and  Biihaspati  as  the  milk-man,  milked  the  fearth; cow  ancl  extracted 
the  milk  of  virtue  in  the  pot  of  the  Vedas.  Then  the  DevAs,  after  making 
the  God  India  the  calf  and  the  God  Mitra  as  the  milkman,  milked  the 
(earth)  cow.  They  <1  re w out  tho  milk  of  elixir-vitas  in  the  pot  of  gold. 
The  Pitfis  also  milked  the  same  thing  in  the  pot  of  silver.—  14-18. — 14-18. 

A'otc.— Tho  jillegorj*  goes  on.  The  quality  and  richness  of  the  milk  depend  on  the 
care  and  feeding  of  the  cow.  The  earth  is  a cow  that  will  give  any  kind  of  milk,  provided 
due  care  is  taken  of  it,  and  people  milking  it  know  how  to  do  it. 

Thefi  Antaka,  after  making  the  God  of  death  the  ealf,  milked  tlie 
(earth)  cow  and  took  out  Svadha  from  it.  Similarly,  the  NAgas,  after 
making  I'aksaka  the  calf  and  DhritarA^tra  ns  the  milkman,  got  out  poison 
in  a gourd,  and  the  AsurAs,  making  Virochana  the  calf  and  DvimflrdhA 
as  milkman,  pressed  out  MAyfi  into  a pot  of  iron.  The  Yak^as  pressed  out 
in  an  earthen  pot  the  knowledge  of  making  themselves  invisible  after 

making  Knvfira  the  calf. — 19-22. 

Note.— Yabruvana  is  same  as  Kuvera,  the  God  of  wealth. 

Tlie  Pretrs  and  Uiiksasaa,  mnkinf»  SiimAli  the  ealf  and  Ranpya  the 
milkman,  drew  out  tlie  stream  of  blood.  The  Oandliarvas  and  Apearas  made 
Chaitraratli  the  calf  and  Varariiclii  (he  milkman  and  got  out  on  a lotus- 
leaf  various  kinds  of  fragrance,  and  the  mountains  obtained  several  kinds 
of  precious  gems  and  niedicinal  herbs  whioli  they  extracted  in  the  foot  of  hill 
ranges,  after  making  the  Mount  Himalaya  the  calf  and  the  Mount  Sumeru 
the  milkman.  The  trees  also  in  their  turn  took  out  the  power  of  regermi- 
natiug  even  after  being  lopped,  in  a Iraf  of  I’alAsa  (Rutea  frondosa),  after 
making  ShAla  (Sliorea  robusta)  the  milkman  and  the  figfree  the  calf.  In  the 
same  way,  eveVy  one  who  milked  the  earth  got  the  “ fruit”  he  wished  for. 

In  the  Vigil  of  King  I’rithu,  people  were  long  lived,  wealthy, 
had  peacfnl  relations  with  their  neighbours.  None  was  wicked,  poor  or 
sick.  In  the  glorious  reign  of  Pfithu,  there  was  no  phenomenon  fore- 
boding evil  that  w'ould  have  caused  consleriiatioii  to  his  subjects.  Every 
one  passed  Ills  days  in  perfect  peace  and  contentment,  without  getting 
pyercome  by  grief  or  pain.  Pfithu,  the  Great,  by  the  power  of  his  bow, 


32 


THE  MATSYA  PURANAM. 


made  many  a part  of  liis  extensive  Empire  liabitable  and  cidtnrable. 
During  the  time  of  that  valiant  inonareh,  there  was  no  need  of 
a fortress,  it  was  not  necessary  for  the  people  to  arm  themselves,  the 
science  of  polirical  economy  was  not  in  vo(>ne.  It  was  simply  lying 
unhonoured.  All  the  people  performed  their  duties  and  prescribed  rites. 
“ I have  explained  to  you,  0 King!  liow  they  milked  the  earth  and  got  out 
of  it  what  they  wished,  from  which  it  must  he  understood  that,  at  the  time 
of  performing  sacrificial  rites,  the  thing  that  each  got  out  of  the  earth 
should  be  offered  to  Iiim.  ” The  learned  also  call  the  land  iVithvi  because 
it  was  milked  by  the  old  King  Prithu,  the  righteous. — 23-35. 

It  is  callcrlGo,  because  it  appcarccl  in  the  form  of  a cow  when  Pfithu  took  op 
his  bow  and  arrow  to  destroy  it.  ^ 

Here  ends  the  tenth  Chapter  dealing  with  the  stonj  of  Vend, 
CHAPTER  XI. 

The  sages  said,  “ 0 Suta  ! be  pleased  to  relate  to  us  the  history 
of  the  solar  and  the  lunar  races.” 

Suta  said  that  in  the  <lays  gone  by  Kasynpa  begot  from  liis  wife, 
Aditi,  a progeny  named  the  Sun,  and  the  latter  hail  three  wives,  m:  — 
SamjnA,  UAjrsi  and  Prablia,  R^jhi,  the  dangliterof  Raivata,  brought,  forth 
Revata,  Prablni  gave  birth  to  lhabhala  an<l  Siiinjh;'i,  tlie  daughter  of 
VijjvakarmA,  became  the  motlier  nf  King  (Vaivasvala)  Mann. — 2-3. 

SamjfiA  also  ^avc  birth  toYamaand  a girl  called,  Vamuna,  who  were 
twins.  When  Samjaa  could  not  bi'ar  tlio  power  of  t(a*  .Sun,  she  produced 
from  her  body  a lady  known  as  ('hliAya  (shadow).  St  eiug  (!)liliaya  standing 
face  to  face,  Samjua  directed  her  t')  .serve  her  maMer  ami  also  to  take 
motherly  care  of  lier  progeny.  On  ('hliaya’s  agreeing  to  carry  outlier 
injunctions,  Samjiui  went  away  somewhere. — 4-7. 

The  Sun  mistaking  Chlniyu  for  Simjfia  begotffrom  her  Savarni  Manu 
so  called  because  he  is  of  the  .same  Vaina  as  Valvasvata  Manu  ami  Sani, 
and  also  tiie  two  girls,  named  Tapati  ami  Visti.  When  Chhaya  herself 
became  the  mother  of  these  children,  she  began  to  devote  more  attention 
to  her  own  offspring  than  to  tiie  progeny  of  Sarnina.  Maim, did  not  mind 
this,  blit  Yama  look  it  scrionsly.  and  one  day  lie  lifted  his  right  leg  to  kick 
Chliaya.  Chhaya.  also,  getting  in  a fit  of  rage,  cursed  Yama,  and  said  that 
his  leg  would  be  eaten  by  worms  and  would  always  discharge  pus  and  blood. 
-8-12. 

Hearing  such  a dreadful  curse,  Yama  went  to  his  father  and  told 
him  that  lie  had  been  cursed  for  no  fault  of  his  by  his  mother.  In  a 
childish  freak,  he  lifted  up  his  foot  at  her,  at  which  in  spite  of  the 


OH  AFTER  XI. 


33 


entreaties  of  Mann,  she  pronounced  that  curse  upon  him.  Yaina,  continu- 
ing, said  that  sucli  an  attitude  of  Chlrayd  showed  that  she  was  not 
their  mother.  The  Sun  said,  what  could  lie  do.  Who  does  not  get  into 
trouble  b}"  committing  an  act  of  folly?  What  to  say  of  others,  even 
the  oinnipotept  Lord  l^iva  had  to  reap  tlie  fruits  of  His  actions.  But,  in 
spite  of  all  that,  he  would  give  him  a cock  that  would  destroy  all  the 
worms  of  his  foot  and  would  also  remove  the  blood  and  pus  flowing 
from  it. — 13-17. 

On  getting  no  redress  from  his  father,  Yaina  went  to  Gokarna 
tirtha,  and  began  to  practise  severe  penances  by  merely  living  on  fruits, 
leaves  and  air.  After  practising  penances  for  one  hundred  thousand 
years,  Lord  l^iva  appeared  and  asked  him  to  seek  a boon. — 18-19. 

Yaina  asked  the  Lord  for  the  power  of  protecting  the  world, 
the  Kingdom  of  Pitris,  and  the  faculty  of  distinguishing  virtue 
from  vice.  The  Lord  granted  liim  the  boon  he  asked  for,  and  then 
disappeared. — 20  21. 

The  Sun,  causing  fear  to  Chh/iya,  discovered  that  SaipjnS,  after 
leaving  her  behind,  had  gone  to  live  with  her  father.  At  this,  he  got 
very  angry  and  went  to  Kiivera,  and  asked  him  to  send  SarpjnS  back 
along  wjtli  him.  Hearing  the  above  words  of  the  Sun,  VirfyakarniS  said 
that  SarnjnS,  not  being  able  to  bear  his  power,  ran  away  in  the  form  of 
a mare  after  leaving  Chhaya  behind.  On  reaching  home,  she  was  very 
severely  taken  to  task  for  running  away  like  that,  and  was  denied 
admittance  into  the  house. — 22-25. 

iVotp.—VadavfirOpa  means  in  the  form  of  a mare— which  implies  that  she  ran  at  a 
great  speed  from  the  house  of  her  Lord,  the  Sun,  so  that  she  might  not  be  overtaken 
by  him  in  the  way. 

Consequently,  she  repaired  to  Maru  derfa,  wliere  she  was  roaming 
about  in  the  form  of  a mare. — 26.  * 

Note,--  This  implies  that  even  in  Maru  desa,  Saipjiia  was  running  abont  here  and  there 
at  a tremendous  pace,  in  order  to  find  out  for  herself  a good  shelter  whore  she  could 
hide  herself. 

Vi^vakarmS,  continuing  his  speech,  said  that,  under  the  cir- 
cumstances, he  would  like  to  diiniiiisli  his  power,  provided  the  Sun  would 
willingly  accord  him  permission  to  do  so.  He  suggested  that  lie  would 
reduce  his  power  by  means  of  a special  instrument,  after  which  he  would 
become  agreeably  strong  to  every  one ; to  which  the  Sun  agreed,  and 
Viilvakarma  by  his  instrument,  Blirami,  sliced  away  some  portions  of  the 
Sun’s  unbearable  power.  VirfvakarmS  then  made  a quoit  (Chakra)  for  Vi^^u, 
a trident  for  iSiva  and  a Vajra  (thunderbolt)  for  Iiidra  to  destroy  the 
Daityas  and  DAnavas  out  of  the  particles  of  power  that  he  took  away  from 


34 


THE  MAT8YA  PURAEAM. 


the  Sun.  The  Sun  after  tl)at»  became  fairly  agreeable ; but  as  be  did  not 
allow  any  power  to  be  reduced  from  his  feet,  they  continued  to  be  vety 
dazzling.— 27-30. 

Note — The  feet  of  the  Suu  mean  the  rays. 

Nobody  could  stand  the  dazzle  of  his  feet,  and  consequently  let  no 
one  ever  make  the  feet  of  the  Sun  in  his  image,  for  the  purpose  of 
worship  even.  One  who  makes  the  feet  of  the  Sun  in  his  image,  goes  to 
hell  and  suffers  from  leprosy.  Let,  therefore,  no  one,  who  is  anxious 
for  his  own  welfare,  make  the  feet  of  the  Sun,  even  in  pictures  or 
temples.— 31-33. 

The  sun,  after  tlius  getting  Ins  power  modified  by  VirivakarmA, 
went  out  in  the  form  of  a horse  and  enjoyeil  himself  in  the  company 
of  Samjila,  wdio,  not  recognising  him  and  Inking  liim  for  another  person, 
became  terrified,  but  was  helpless;  she  conse'quently  ejected  the  semen 
virile  through  her  nostrils,  out  of  which  Asviniknniaras,  called  otherwise 
NAsatyas  and  Dasras,  were  liorii.  They  are  called  Nasatyas,  because  they 
were  born  from  the  nose  (nasa^  and  Dasras,  because  they  were  born  as 
Sons.  Afterwwds,  Sanijua  recognised  her  I.ord  and  became  pleased,  and 
went  with  her  Lord  in  a vimfina  to  heaven.— ?)4-o7. 

Note.-  ‘ Asvarnpena  ’ijkjuijs  ia  tlio  form  of  a liorsi*— wliicli  implioH  that  the  Sun  being 
ovorpoweri^d  with  pas.sion  ran  willi  llio  speed  of  a horse  to  enjoy  himself  in  the  company 
of  8am jh&. 

‘ MaiiasSksohhanr^was  agitated  ill  mind,  because  she  ctmhl  not  recognise  her  Lord 
at  the  first  sight.  She  met  tlii‘ .Sun  aft(*r  a long  time,  and  quite  uhrA-prr tally,  and  then 
there  was  a groJit  dilTerenoo  in  hi.M  features,  as  his  ]>n\\ei*  was  moderated  by  Visvakarrafl. 
The  Run  of  cour.so  re(‘ogni.sed  Sainjiiii.  and  mixed  witlj  her  in  the  usual  way.  feiatpjnfi, 
being  overpowered,  became  helpless,  hut  was  very  much  agitated  iji  mind. 

Siivarnj’ii  Mann  is  still  living  ami  practising  penances  unto  this  day 
on  Mount  Mem,  and  k^ani,  by  means  of  liis  asceticism,  brought  about 
domestic  concord  (between  the  sons  of  Chhaya  and  Samjua).  YamunA  and 
Tapati  became  rivers,  and  Visti  obtained  dark  blue  colour  and  was  located 
iu  time  (Hell).— 38-39. 

Vaivasvata  Manu  had  ten  powerful  sons,  the  eldest  of  whom  was  Ila, 
who  was  born  by  the  performance  of  putresti  sacrifice.  His  brothers  were : — 
IkswAku,  KurfanAbha,  Arista,  Dhrista,  Narisyanta,  Karusa,  I^Aryfiti, 
Pri^adhra  and  NabliAga,  who  were  all  very  valiant  and  illustrious. 
Manu,  after  anointing  his  son  11a  and  putting  the  reins  of  the  Govern- 
ment into  his  hands,  went  to  practise  asceticism  in  the  forest  called 
Mahendravana.  —40-42. 

After  sometime,  Ila  started  on  an  expedition  of  conquest  and  visited 
Several  countries.  Following  the  horse,  ho  happened  to  enter  SJarava^a, 


OHAPTEB  XI. 


3$ 


the  pleasure-garden  of  ^iva  which  was  blooming  with  various  kinds  of 
trees,  creepers  andperenial  foliage. — 43-44 
A’ote.— ‘Digjaya’  means  conquest 

* AswAkriftah  ’ means  led  by  the  horse.  The  ancient  practice  of  conquest  was  that  t|^e 
sovereign  wishing  to  conquer  the  world  used  to  let  loose  a horse  and  follow  it  with  his 
army.  The  monarchs  throagh  whose  dominions  the  horse  passed  would  either  let  if  pass 
on  without  resistance,  which  implied  their  accepting  the  master  of  it  as  their  sovereign 
lord,  or  would  capture  and  tie  it  up.  In  the  latter  case  there  used  to  he  a fight  between 
the  master  of  the  horse  and  the  monarch  tying  tho  animal.  If  the  sovereign  led  by  his 
horse  returned  to  hi.s  kingdom  after  thus  subduing  the  monarchs  offering  resistance  or 
being  acknowledged  as  their  sovereign  lord,  then  he  usod  to  perform  the  HAjasfiya 
sacrifice,  in  which  all  tho  monarchs  were  invited  to  take  part ; at  tlie  conclusion  of 
which  the  sovereign  performing  the  sacrifice  used  to  be  declared  and  accepted  as  the 
sovereign  lord  of  all  the  kings  present. 

At  that  time,  l^iva  and  Parvati  were  enjoying  themselves  in  their 
^ravana,  and  they  had  willed  it  that  any  male  being,  coming  within  a 
radius  of  ten  yojaiias  of  their  forest,  would  be  transformed  into  a female 
being.--  4.'’)-46. 

The*King  Ila  entering  the  Suravana,  without  knowing  the  will 
of  ^iva  and  Piirvati,  was  instantly  transformed  into  a woman,  and  his 
horse  was  also  transformed  into  a mare.  The  king,  thus  deprived  of 
manhood,  was  very  miwdi  amazed  to  find  himself  in  the  form  of  a woman. 
He  was  named  lift  and  had  breasts  like  women.  His  thighs  became 
stouter  and  his  face  becapie  like  the  moon— which  made  him  look  more 
enchanting  in  that  female  form.  Who  would  not  be  enamoured  by  the 
glances  of  such  a beautiful  form?  His  arms  were  long,  his  black  tresses 
of  hair  were  kissing  his  feet,  there  were  no  hair  on  his  body,  his  teeth 
were  well-shaped,  and  his  voice  was  exquisitely  stmorous.  4t-t)0. 

His  complexion  was  a happy  admixture  of  dark  and  white,  his 
strut  was  graceful  like  that  of  hatpsa  (crane)  and  elephant,  his  brows  were 
like  the  bow  and  his  nails  were  fine  and  red. — 51. 

HA,  of  such  unsurpassing  beauty,  began  to  roam  about  in  that 
forest,  and  was  thinking  as  to  who  and  where  were  her  father,  brother 
and  mother.  She  also  thought  as  to  who  and  where  was  her  lord  and  how 
long  would  she  have  to  remain  in  the  world.  As  she  was  lost  in  that 
reverie,  the  sOn  of  the  moon  appeared  before  her.  On  seeing  Ila,  of 
matchless  beauty,  Budha— the  son  of  the  moon— was  fired  with  passion 
and  began  to  devise  plans  for  marrying  her.  52-54. 

One  day  Budha,  with  a mace,  a water-pot  and  a book  in  his  hand, 
and  accompanied  by  a train  of  Bralimacbaris,  each  holding  a bamboo 
manA  and  wearing  ear-rings,  set  out  in  quest  of  ku4a  and  sacrificial 


86 


TEB  MATS7A  PUEANAM. 


fuel.  He  passed  close  to  that  forest  where  lU  was  roaming.  Seeing  IIA, 
Budha  stopped  belli lul  a tree,  at  a disfance  from  the  forest,  and  from 
there  beckoned  IIT  to  come  to  him.  - 55-57. 

Notp.— BrahmachAri  means  a stnclent.  In  olden  students  were  made  to  lead 

the  life  of  perfect  celebacy.  They  carried  a bamboo  mace  and  wore  ear-rings, 

Budha  was  careful  enough  not  to  get  within  the  forbidden  limits  of  the  pleasure- 
garden,  for  fear  of  being  transformed  into  a woman. 

When  lU  approached  Budha,  the  latter  said,  “ Dear  ! Tliis  is  not 
the  proper  time  for  you  to  roam  about  in  the  forest.  Why  did  you 
come  away  leaving  me  at  home  and  neglecting  tlie  arrangements  of 
agnihotra?  Come,  come,  why  are  you  looking  perplexed?  This  is  the 
time  when  you  should  have  put  the  house  in  order  by  washing  the  floor 
and  decorating  it  with  flowers.  Itjs  now  dusk,  and  not  the  time  for  you 
to  be  sauntering  about  liere.’*— 58-00. 

Hearing  those  words  of  Budha,  lid  said,  “ Lord  ! I know  not 
why  I forgot  to  do  what  3^)11  have  just  said.  I am  really  in  a peculiar 
fit  oE  forgetfulness  at  present,  so  much  so  that  I am  not  able  to,  recognise 
either  m3’self  or  yourself.  Toil  me  where  3’ou  live,  O Pious  one!*' — 61. 

Budha  replied  that  her  name  was  lid -and  tliat  he  was  TCamuka, 
who,  owiu^  to  his  versatile  genius  and  deep  lore,  was  known  as  Budha 
(a  learned  scholar).  He  was  liorn  in  an  illnstiious  family.  Ilis  father  was 
the  lord  of  Brahmarias.  Hearing  those  words'of  Budha,  lid  accompanied 
him  to  his  residence.  Sl»o  was  .^verjrm'd  to  see  the  liouse  of  Budha,  with 
its  golden  pillars  studded  with  precious  stones  and  erected  through  divine 
magic  ; and  greatly  adininMl  the  character,  the  appearance,  the  riches  and 
the  family  of  her  Imsband.  I la,  for  a long  time,  thus  enjoyed  herself  in 
the  house  of  Budha  that  looked  to  her  like  the  house  of  liidra.  - C2-66. 

Here  ends  the  eleventh  Chapter  called  meeting  with  Budha, 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Suta  said  that  sometime  after  Ikswaku,  &c.,  the  brothers  of  Ha, 
set  out  in  quest  of  him.  In  their  wanderings  they  chanced  to  piiss  by  the 
Saravana,  where  they  came  across  the  rnare,  on  which  was  the  saddle, 
glittering  with  jewels.  On  seeing  the  mare  with  that  jewelled  saddle, 
they  all  recognised  it  to  be  CijandraprabliA,  the  famous  charger  of  the 
Monarch  Ila.  They  were  highly  astonished  to  find  the  charger  transformed 
into  a mare,  and  questioned  the  priest  Maitra-Varuna  (Vasi^tha)  about  it. 
The  sage  began  to  explain  to  them  tlie  m3^3tery,  through  his  powers  of 
Toga.  The  sage  Vasi<^tha  said  that  ^iva  and  P4rvatl  had  determined  that 


CHAPTSB  Xn. 


ST 


w 

any  one  entering  the  limits  of  their  pleasure-garden  would  instantly  be 
transformed  into  a female  figure.  Unfortunately,  both  the  king  and  tlie 
horse  happened  to  do  so  and  they  were  transformed  accordingly.  The 
brothers  of  the  transformed  monarch  tlien  besought  the  great  saga  to 
devise  some  means  by  which  Ila  could  be  restored  to  manhood. — 1-7. 

Vasistha  said  that,  by  devoutly  worshipping  l^iva,  the  monarch 
could  be  restored  to  manhood.  Hearing  that,  the  brothers  of  11a  (Sons  of 
Manu)  repaired  to  the  abode  of  iSiva  ; where  they  pleased  Him  by  their 
devotion.  The  God  then  said  that  He  could  not  go  against  His  determina- 
tion, but  that  if  Ikswaku  performed  the  ativamedha  sacrifice,  then  11a 
would  become  a Kiinpurusa  (Mongolian  type  ?),  though  it  would  be  im- 
possible for  him  to  assume  Ins  previous  (Aryan  ?)  form.  After  that,  the 
brothers  of  Ila  performed  the  a^vamedha  sacrifice,  and  the  latter  became  a 
Kiinpurusa.  -8-11. 

On  becoming  a Kimpnrnsa,  Ila  used  to  remain  in  the  form  of  a man 
for  one  montli  and  the  next  month  he  used  to  become  a woman  again. 
Ha,  in  the  form  of  Ilii,  conceived  in  the  house  of  Budha,  and  gave  birth  to 
a notable  son.  Budha,  after  tlie  birth  of  that  son,  went  to  heaven. — 12-13. 

That  region  where  this  liappened,  came  to  be  known  as  Ilfividtavarsa 
(Mongolia?),  and  Ha  in  that  way  appeared  at  the  inception  of  the  Solar 
and  the  Lunar  races,  in  other  words,  Piirurava,  tlie  son  of  Budha,  from  IlA, 
was  the  founder  of  the  lunar  race,  and  Iksvaku  of  the  solar  clan. — 14-15. 

Ila,  after  becoming  Kiinpurusa,  came  to  be  known  as  Sudyumna. 
Sudyumna  became  the  father  of  Utkal,  Gaya,  Haritaiva.  Utkal  became  the 
king  of  Utkala,  Gaya  of  GayA,  Ilaritailva  of  Purvakuru  country.  Pururava 
became  the  monarch  of  Pratisthi\na  and  Iksvaku  of  Madhyadesa. — 16:19. 

Note.— Utkala  \h  modern  Orissa.  Pratisthftna,  the  country  situated  opposite  to 
Allahabad,  the  modem  Jliusi.  Madhyadesa,  the  country  lying  between  the  Him&laya  and 
Vindhya  mountains.  Kuru,  about  the  site  of  modern  Delhi. 

N&risyanta  was  the  father  of  ^ucha,  NdbhAga  of  Ainbarisa,*^  Dhfista 
of  3 sons,  named  Dhfitaketu,  Chitranatha  and  Ra^adhri^tra,  l^ary&ti 
of  Anarta  and  of  a good  girl,  named^DArika  — 20-21. 

Rochamana  was  the  son  of  Anarta.  He  was  very  valiant,  and  was 
the  sovereign*  of  Anarta  country  whicli  had  Kinlasthnli  for  its  capital. — 22. 

Note.— Anifrtadesa  is  the  same  as  DwftrikA ; Kushasthali  is  the  country  situated  in 
the  defiles  of  the  Yindhya. 

RocliamAna  was  the  father  of  Reva,  who  became  the  father  of 
a hundred  children,  the  eldest  of  whom  was  Raivata,  also  named 

* Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  considered  it  ** not  improbably,  a gratuitous  perversion"  of 
a passage  in  the  Hariva^sa  (See  his  translation  of  Vifpn  Purfiya  Yol.  Til  p.  ; 
fieoond  Edition.) 


38 


THE  MAT8YA  PUBAtJAM. 


Kakudmt.  He  had  also  a daughter,  named  JRevati,  irho  was  the  wife  of 
Balardma.  Kara$a  begot  innumerable  progeny,  who  were  known  by  the 
name  of  Kftrii(^.  Pri^adlira  became  tfudra  by  the  curse  of  bis  preceptor 
for  killing  a cow. — 23-24. 

Risis!  now  listen,  I am  going  to  relate  to  you  the  family  of 
Ikijvaku : — 

Of  the  hundred  sons  of  IkavAku,  Viknksi  was  the  eldest  whose 
fifteen  sons  reigned  in  the  eountry  to  the  north  of  Mount  Meru,  and  one 
hundred  and  fourteen  to  the  south  of  it.  The  eldest  of  the  Kings  who 
reigned  south  of  of  Mern  was  Kakntsu,  whose  son  was  Snyodhana,  the 
father  of  Ppithn.  The  latter  was  iho  father  of  Viiivaga,  Virfvaga  of  Tndu 
and  Iiidii  of  Yuvanaiiva. 

iSravasta,  the  sou  of  Yuvanasiva  was  the  founder  of  the  town  of 
^r&vasti,  in  the  country  of  Cljinda.— :?o-30. 

A'ote.— j^r&vasti,  a town  in  northern  Koiiala,  whore*  Lava  roignocl.  It  is  also  called 
NrAvati  in  Raghnvamsa.  It  is  identified  with  Sahet  Mahet,  north  of  Ayodhy&.  Gouda 
=Oour  in  Northern  Bengal.  • 

Sravasta  was  the  father  of  Brihadasva,  and  tlie  latter  of  Kiivalarfva, 
who  was  also  called  Dhundhumrira,  on  account  of  his  having  killed 
[a  demon  named]  Dhuiidliu.  The  valiant  Dhuudhumfra  had  three  sons, 
viz, — DridhArfva,  Danda  and  Kapilasiva — 31-32. 

Dridharfva  was  tlie  fatlier  of  I^rainoda,  the  latter  of  HaryaiJva, 
Haryarfva  of  Nikuinhha  and  Xikumbha  of  SambatasJva. — 33. 

Sagihabirfva  had  two  sons,  AkriLisiva  and  Ranafiva.  Ranasva  Avas  the 
father  of  Yuvamijjva,  and  the  latter  of  Mandluita. — 34. 

Mandliata's  sons  were,  “Punikutsa,  Dhavmasena,  Muchakunda  and 
^atrujit. — 35. 

Puruktttsa  who  had  a son,  named  Vasiida,  was  the  lord  of  Narinadft. 
Vasuda  became  the  father  of  SainbJiuti,  and  the  latter  of  Tridhanva. 
Tridhanva  was  the  father  of  Trayaruna,  the  latter  of  Satyavrata 
and  Satyaratha  was  the  son  of  Satyavrata.  Satyaratha  was  the 
father  of  Elarirfchandra,  the  latter  of  Rohita  ; Roliita  of  Vrika  and  Vrika  of 
BAhu.  Sagara  was  the  son  of  Bahu,  and  Prablia  and  Bhfmumati  were 
the  two  wives  of  Sagara  the  pious. — 3d-39. 

Both  the  queens  of  Sagara,  desirous  of  [begetting]  sons,  pro- 
pitiated the  sage,  Afirva  Agni,  who  became  pleased  and  said  that  he  would 
bless  one  to  beget  sixty  thousand  sons  and  the  other  he  would  bless  to 
beget  only  one  son,  who  would  continue  the  line  of  the  Solar  race.  They 
were  welcome  to  make  a choice  for  themselves.  Prabhft  wished  to  be  the 
mother  of  sixty  thousand  sons. — 39-41, 


OBAPTER  Kill. 


39 


Bhftnnmati  be^t  a son,  named  Asamanjasa,  and  PrabliA  of  the 
family  of  Yadu,  became  the  mother  of  sixty  thousand  sons. — 43. 

Once  upon  a time,  the  sixty  thousand  sons  of  PrabhA  were  reduced 
to  ashes  by  the  Sage  Kapila— an  incarnation  of  Vi^nu — while  they  were 
digging  the  earth  in  search  of  the  A^ramedha  horse.  The  wife  of 
Asamanjasa  gave  birth  to  Dillpa  was  the  son  of  Aipifu,  and 

Bhaglratha,  who  brought  the  mother  Ganges  to  the  earth  after  practising 
great  penances,  was  the  son  of  Dilipa.— 43-44. 

The  queen  of  Bhagtratlia  gave  birth  to  NAhhAga.  and  the  latter 
was  the  father  of  Ainbarisa.  Ambarisa  became  the  father  of  Sindhudvipa. 
Sindhudvlpa  was  the  father  of  Ayutayu,  the  latter  of  Rituparna. 
Kalma^ApAda  was  the  son  of  lliltiparna  and  the  father  of  SarvakarniA. 
SarvakarmA  was  the  father  of  Anaranya,  and  the  latter  of  Nighna. 
Nighna  became  tlie  fatlier  of  Ananiitra  and  Ragbu. — 45-47. 

Anamitra  went  to  the  forest  to  practise  penances,  and  Ragbu 
became  the  fatlier  of  Dilipa.  and  the  latter  of  Aja. — 48. 

Dirgbabahu  was  the  sou  of  Aja,  Ajapala  of  DirghabAhu  and  Daifa- 
ratha  of  Ajapala.  Daiiaratha  became  the  father  of  four  sons,  who  were 
the  incarnations  of  NArAyana,  and  Rama,  who  killed  Havana,  was  the  eldest, 
and  whose  biogliraphy  Avas  written  by  the  great  poet  Valmiki.  RAma 
was  the  father  of  Lava  and  Ku4a. — 49-.51. 

Ku4a  was  the  father  of-  Atithi  whose  son  was  Nisadha,  the  latter 
was  father  of  Nala,  and  Nala  was  the  father  of  NabliA.  Puntlarika  was 
the  son  of  Nabha  and  father  of  KsAmadhanvA.  KsAinadhanva  was  the 
father  of  UevAnika.  Devanika  was  the  father  Ahiiiagu,  and  the  latter  of 
Sabasratfva.  Chandravaloka  was  the  son  of  SahasvAifva  and  father  of 
T.Ai'Apicja.  Ohandragiri  was  the  son  of  TArApt^aand  father  of  BhAnuchan- 
dra.  The  latter  was  the  father  of  l^rutayn,  who  was  killed  in  the  great 
Avar  of  BhArata.  In  the  family  of  KArfyapa  there  were  two  Nalas,  viz.-- 
one,  the  son  of  Virasena  and  the  other  of  KisAdha. 

Sfita  said  : “ I have  related  to  you  the  names  of  the  chief  kings  of 
in  the  dynasty  of  Vaivasvata  and  of  IkijvAku  race.”— 57. 

Here  ends  the  ttoelfth  Chapter,  describing  the  Solar  race. 
CHAPTER  XIII. 

Manu  said  : “ Lord  ! I am  very  eager  to  hear  something  about 
the  important  family  of  the  Pitfis  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.” — (1). 

The  God  Pish  replied  that,  out  of  the  seven  groups  of  the  Pitfis 
residing  in  Heaven,  the  Pitfis  belonging  to  three  particular  groups  are 


THE  MATSYA  PUBANAM. 


40  . 


without  form,  (llmt  is  composed  of  intellectual,  not  elemental,  substance), 
wliilo  the  Piljis  of  the  remaining  four  groups  have  form  (i.e.,  corporeal). 
The  formless  ones  are  the  Pitfis  of  Prajapati  Vairaja.-*-(2-3). 

The  celebrated  Vairaja  devas,  disturbed  in  their  yoga  practices 
having  attained  to  ancient  regions,  worsliip  there.— (4;. 

These  Bralunavadins  are  re-born  at  the  end  of  Brahma’s  day, 
and  by  their  previous  practice  of  yoga,  they  acquire  the  memory  of 
their  past  lives  and  the  knowledge  of  S.lnkhya  Yoga,  which  begets  in  them 
supernatural  faculties  and  cmables  them  to  attain  to  Nirvana.  It  is  there- 
fore very  fruitful  to  feed  the  yogis  at  the  time  of  performing  a funeral 
ceremony  in  hom)ur  of  the  departed  spirits. — (5-6). 

Momi,  the  cpieen  of  Himalayas  was  tlie  in&nas  a daughter  of  the  Pitfis. 
She  was  tlie  mother  ot  Meuaka  and  Krauncha  of  whom  the  latter 
was  the  elder.  The  continent,  surrounded  by  the  glirila  ocean  and  adorned 
with  the  range  of  Kranficlia  hills,  came  to  be  known  as  Krauncha  continent. 
Men&  also  became  the  mother  of  the  following  three  daughters: — 
Uni4,  Ekaparna,  and  Aparna,  who  were  devoted  to  the  practices  of  yoga 
and  rigorous  penances.  Hiimilaya  gave  UniA  to  Si\  a,  Kkaparn»i  to  Sita, 
and  AparnA  to  Jaigisavya.  All  these  were  given  to  performances  of  great 
penances. — (7-9 

The  llisis  said:  ‘H")  Sage  Suta ! tell  us  why  Sail,  the  daughter 
of  Daksa,  consumed  licrself,  and  how  again  she  took  birth  as  the 
daughter  of  HiiuAhiya.  “ Also  tell  ns  in  detail,  0 Suta,  wliat  Dak^a,  the  son 
of  Brahma,  told  her,  the  mother  of  Hokas,  at  the  time  of  her  consuming  lier 
body.** — (10-11 ). 

Suta  said  that  when  Daksa  invitn<l  all  the  Devas  to  take  part 
in  the  great  sacrifice  that  he  performed,  Sati  asked  liiin  the  reason  of  his 
having  excluded  her  husband,  ciiva.  Daksa  answered  that  Siva  was  not 
invited,  because  he  was  not  considered  worthy,  since  he  always  remained 
besmeared  with  the  ashes  oC  the  funeral  pyre  and  armed  with  his 
trident.  He,  being  tlie  destroyer  of  the  universe  also,  it  would  have  been 
utterly  inauspicious  to  invite  Siva  on  tlie  occasion  of  that  big  sacrifice. 
Hearing  those  words  of  Daksa,  Sati  was  enraged,  and  said  she  would  give 
up  the  body  begotten  of  him,  Sati  continuing,  added  that,  in  the  course 
of  the  performance  of  his  sacrifice,  Daksa  would  be  killed  by  Her  Lord — 
MahAdeva — and  lie  would  again  Iiave  to  take  birth  as  the  son  of  the  ten 
Pitfis.  After  that,  Sati  produced  a blazing  fire  by  Her  yogic  power 
in  the  sacrificial  pool,  an<l  began  to  consume  Herself  into  it,  seeing 
lYbiqb  all  the.  Devas,  Asuras,  Kinnaras  and  Gandharvfis  present  there, 


OBAPTEB  XIll. 


11 


asked  wkat  was  it  due  to?  Dak^s  became  very  sad  and  saluting, 
Baid.-12.l7. 

“Devi!  Thou  art  the  mother  of  the  universe  and  the  giver  of 
happiness  to  all.  Only  through  sheer  kindness  tliou  tookest  birth  as  my 
daughter.  None  of  the  moveables  and  immoveables  can  thrive  in  the 
universe  without  thee,  be  pleased,  do  not  forsake  me,  0 pious  one !“ — 
18-19. 

Hearing  the  above  words  of  Daksa,  Sat!  said.  “I  shall  accomplish 
what  I wish.  Hear  1 you  should  practise  penances  after  your  sacrifice 
is  destroyed  by  ^iva,  and  then  you  will  be  born  of  the  ten  PrajSpatis ; you 
shall  then  have  sixty  daughters,  and  T shall  give  you  yoga  after  becoming 
pleased  with  your  austerities.” — 20-22. 

Daksa  then  asked  the  Devt  to  tell  him  in  which  sacred  places 
he  wonld  find  her  abode  and  under  what  epithets  he  should  worship  her 
in  course  of  his  penances. — 23. 

Satl  <replied  that  she  was  to  be  found  at  every  time,  in  every 
region,  in  every  being.  There  was  nothing  in  the  universe  in  which  she 
was  not  to  be  found.  She  was  ominpresent.  Even  then  she  would  name 
the  particular  places  where  penances  should  be  practised  to  obtain  his 
desires  early.  -24-25. 

She  was  known  under  the  following  different  names,  at  the  following 
different  places,  where  by  practising  penances  one  would  attain  the  fruits 
of  bis  austerities  early : — 

VUitUkst  in  041;  Lingadbfirint  in  Naimi^firapya:  Lalit&  in  PrayAga ; 
E!AraAk§l  in  the  Qandham&dana  hills ; Knmndfi  at  the  MSnasa  lake ; Vidva- 
kfiyfi  in  Ambara ; Gdmatl  in  Gdmanta ; Omachaript  at  the  Mandar  hills ; 
Maddtkatfi  in  the  Chaitraratha  forest ; Jayanti  in  HastinApnra ; GanrI  in 
KAnyakubja ; Rambhd  on  the  Mount  Malaya  ; Klrtiwat!  in  EkAmbhaka; 
ViAvA  in  VidveAvara;  PurfihutA  in  Pnskara;  MArgadAyint  in  EedAr; 
NandA  in  the  HimAlayas;  BhadrakarnikA  in  Gokarpa;  BhavAni  in' 
SthAneAvara ; BilvapatrikA  in  BUval ; Madhavl  in  Srisaila ; BhadrA  in 
BhadreAvara ; JayA  in  VarAhak^etra ; EamalA  in  KamalAlaya ; RudrApt  in 
RudrAkdti ; EAli  in  Ealanjar  hills ; EapilA  in  MahAliAga ; MukuteAvarl 
in  Markdta ; hfahAdevl  on  the  banks  of  the  I^AlagrAmt  river ; JalapriyA 
in  Aivalinga  ; KumAii  in  MayApurt ; LalitA  in  SantAna  ; UtpalAkpl 
in  SahasrAk^a ; MahdtpalA  in  KainalAkpa  ; MangalA  in  GangAtirtha ; 
VimalA  in  Puru^dttama  ; Amdghnkst  on  the  banks  of  the  VipAi^  river; 
PAfalA-  in  Pup^vardhspa ; NArayapl  in  SnpArAva ; Bhadmsundarl  in 
'Vikfita ; VipulA  in  Yipula ; Kalyfip!  in  MalayAcbala ; Efitavl  in  Efiti 
; SngandhA  in  MAdhavavana ; IVisandhyA  in  GfidAAirania ; llatl^i^ 


THE  MATSrJL  TUBAEAM. 


..  in  Gangdtrt ; ^ivAnandA  in  ^ivakapda;  Naudini  on  the  banks  of  the 
Deviki  mer;  Rakmi^t  in  Dtrftrikfi;  Rftdb&  in  Vrindfiva^a;  Deyakt 
I in  Mathura;  Paramedvaii  in  P&t^la;  iSttfi  inOhitrakhta;  ;Vindavfisint 
in  Vindhyftchala ; BkavfrS  in  Sabyftdri ; Ghandrikfi  in  Hariifchandra ; 
Rama^a  in  R&ma  tirtha ; MrigSvatt  on  the  banks  of  the  river  yamunA  ; 
MabAlakfml  in  Karavtra ; Umddevt  in  VinAyaka ; ArogA  in  VaidyanAtha ; 
Maheifvar!  in  MahAkAla ; AbhayA  in  G|natiitha;  AmfitA  in  the  caves  of 
Vindhyachala ; MAndavi  in  MA^dvaye  ; SvAltA  in  MAheAvara ; PrachapdA 
in  OhAgalA^da ; ChandikA  in  Amarakantaka ; VarArdhA  in  SomeAvara ; ' 
PuekarAvatt  in  Prabhasa ; DeramAtA  on  the  banks  of  PArAvAra  of  the  < 
Sarasvati  river ; MahAbliAgA  in  Mahalaya ; PingalAAvari  in  Paydsni ; 
SinhikA  in  Krita  Mancha  ; YsAaskiiri  in  KartikAya ; LolA  in  UtpalArarta  ; 
Subbadra  at  the  couflueuco  of  tiie  Ganges  and  the  Sone  ; HiIutA  in  SMdlia- 
pnra;  LaksmirnnganS  in  BhnratSifrdma ; Vidvaimikht  in  Jalandbara; 
TArA  in  KiskindhA ; Pu§ti  in  DevadAmvana ; AIAiihA  in  Xastimir ; BhimA 
in  HimAlaya;  Puifti  in  ViiiveAvar;  ^udJii  in  Kapulatndchana';  MAta  in 
KAyAvardhapa ; Dhvani  in  ^ankhddhar;  Dhfiti  in  Pipdaraka  ; KAlAon  the 
banks  of  the  river  ChandrabhngA ; l^ivakArint  on  the  Achddaka  tank ; 
AmfitA  in  VenA ; UrvaAi  in  BadarinArAyana ; Ausadht  in  Uttaraknru ; 
KuAodaka  in  EnAadvipa  ; Maninatlia  in  Ilemkiita  ; Satyavadini  in  Muknta  ; 
Vandaniya  in  Aivatha;  Nidhi  in  the  town  of  Kiivera;  Gayatri  in  the 
Vedas ; PArvat!  in  KailAAa  ; IndrAni  in  Devaloka  ; Sarasvatl  in  the  mouth 
of  Brahma;  Prabha  in  the  disc  of  the  Sun  ; Vaisnavi  in  the  Alatrik^etra  ; 
Arundhati  among  the  Pativratas  ; Tildttania  among  women  ; and  Brahma- 
kalA  in  the  mind ; and  Sakti  in  all  bodies.— 26-53. 

Note.-  Malay&ohala,  one  of  the  seven  principal  chains  of  mountains  In  India.  It  is 
most  probably  to  be  identified  with  the  southern  portion  ot  the  gbftts  running  from  the 
•onth  of  Mysore,  and  forming  the  eastern  boundary  of  Travanoore. 

Bastinfipnra=Delhi.  KfinyabubjasKananj.  Paskara=:AJmer.  Sdmedvarasln  Ka- 
..jthiawar.  Devadtrn-vana=1n  Almora  near  Y&gesvara.  Uttara-kurusTibet.  Mftdhava- 
"vanasln  Muttra.  Karav{ra=Karur.  MAbakftln=In  Ujjain.  Mfindavyasln  MfindvL 
Kapftla-M6ohan=In  Gaya.  Uemkfita=Betwccn  Mcru  and  Himalaya.  AmbarasAmber  in 
Ja^nr.  06karna=In  Almora.  llilvabala=:In  Almora.  Rfidrakfitisln  Eoteavar  (Almora). 
6filgrfimi-nadf.=Qandak!  river, 

“ The  above  are  the  hundred  and  eight  chief  namec,  under  which 
I am  usually  known.  I have  also  enumerated  to  you  the  names  of  the 
principal  holy  places  which  1 have  for  my  abode.  One  who  hears  or 
reads  the  names  mentioned  above  or  bathes  in  the  tirthas  and  then 
* worships  me  there,  is  liberated  from  all  sins  and  goes  to  l^ivaloka,  where 
he.  remains  for  one  Ealpa.  One  who  resides  in  the  sacred  , places  men* 
*tioned  above,  attains  BirvA^a.  One  who  recites  the  hundred  and  eight 


CBAfTSS  XtV. 


4& 


names  before  on  Trittyft  and  Affarot,  is  bleesed  with  many  children. 
One  who  repeats  these  names  at  the  time  of  giving  away  a cow  in  charity, 
or  on  the  occasion  of  performing  a funeral*  ceremony  in  honour  of  the 
departed  spirits,  or  at  the  time  of  worship,  goes  to'  BrahmA."  After 
uttering  these  words,  the  goddess  Sati  consumed  herself.  -54-59. 

Again,  after  sometime,  Daki^  was  born  as  the  son  of  Prachetfi,  and 
PSrvatl  after  being  born  as  the  daughter  of  Himalaya,  became  the  better- 
half  of  iSiva.  Arundhatl,  after  worshipping  Parvati,  the  daughter  of  Mehfi, 
obtained  the  highest  yoga.  By  worshipping  the  same  Parvatt,  Pururavd 
became  R^jar^i,  Yayuti  begot  progeny  and  Paratfurama  obtained  wealth. 
Similarly,  many  Devas,  Daityas,  Brfihmanas,  Ksutriyas,  Vaiifyas  and 
I^Qdras  obtained  supernatural  faculties.  Wherever  there  is  a book  con- 
taining the  names  of  Parvati  which  is  worshipped  along  with  the  Qods, 
no  calamity  befalls  there.— 60-64. 

Here  ends  the  thirteenth  Chapter  dealing  with  the  genealogy  of  the 
• Pitria  and  the  108  names  of  Qauri. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Sdta  said : The  group  of  Marichinandana  Pitfis,  whom  the  Devas, 
constantly  meditate  upon,  live  in  Soraapatha  regiona  Those  known  as 
Agnisv^tta  pitris  (because  they  performed  great  sacrifices  to  fire,  i.e.,  kgai), 
reside  there  where  these  sacrificers  dwell,  and  the  river  AchchhodS  is  their 
Mfinasa  daughter.  In  days  of  yore,  the  stream  Achchbodct  was  brought 
into  existence  by  Pitfis.  Achcbhod&  practised  penance  for  one  thousand 
years. — 1-3. 

After  which,  the  young  and  handsome  Pitfis,  wearing  beautiful 
garlands  and  having  sweet  scents  on  their  person,  appeared  before 
Achchhod&  to  grant  her  a boon.  She  was  overcome  with  passion  and 
expressed  the  desire  of  marrying  Ainlivasu  Pitri,  on  account  of  which  sinful 
desire  she  lost  the  power  she  had  obtained  from  practising  asceticism. — 4-6. 

She  used  to  live  in  heaven,  owing  to  her  supernatural  powers ; 
but  the  moment  she  had  such  a base  desire  she  fell  to  the  earth.  The  date 
on  which  she  expressed  such  a desire  and  Am&vasu  Pitfi  did  not  give  way 
to  passion,  came  to  be  known  as  Ara&vfisyfi  Tithi.  Amflvfisyfi  is,  conse- 
quently, very  dear  to  the  Pitfis,  and  offerings  made  to  them  on  that  Tithi 
are  very  heartily  accepted  by  them. — 7-8. 

Non Bee  R.  H.  Wilion'e  treMletloii  of  the  Vtf  pn  Partite,  Vol.  IT.  p.  Ml  tor  other 
etymologlee  of  AtsAodsyd. 


4#  THE  MATarA  TOBAVAU. 

in  Gangdtrl ; l^ir&nand&  in  ^ivakap^a ; Nandini  on  the  banks  of  the 
Devikd  river ; Rakinipt  in  Dw&rikd ; Rddh&  in  Vrindfiva^a ; Devakl 
<in  Mathura;  Paramedvart  in  PdtSla;  Sita  in  Ghitrakhta;  VindaT^sint 
in  Vindby&chala ; EkavfrS  in  Saby&dri  ; GhandrikS  in  Hariiicbandra ; 
Rarpn?*  in  R&nia  tirtha ; MrigSvat!  on  the  banks  of  the  river  yamund  ; 
Mah&lakemt  in  Karavira ; Uni<1dev!  in  Vinfiyaka  ; Arogft  in  Vaidyanfitha ; 
Mahedvari  in  Mahakala ; Abhayd  in  C^nattrtba ; Amritd  in  the  caves  of 
Vindhyachala ; Mandavi  in  Mca^d^aya ; SvahS  in  MShedvara ; Prachand^ 
in  GhSgaldad^ ! Gliapdikil  in  Amarakantaka ; Vardrdhfi  in  Somedvara ; ' 
PuskarSvati  in  Prabhasa;  DevamAtii  on  the  banks  of  Ptlr&v&raof  tbc< 
SarasvntI  river;  MahabhAga  in  MaliAlaya ; PingnlSeirari  in  Payds^i ; 
SinbikA  in  Krita  ^aucha ; Yaifaskart  in  KiirtikSya ; LolA  in  UtpalAvarta ; 
SubbadrA  at  the  confluence  of  the  Ganges  and  tlie  Sone  ; MAtA  in  SicMha* 
pnra;  LaksrairanganA  in  Bliarataifraina ; Viifvamuklii  in  Jalandbara; 
TArA  in  Kiskindba  ; Pusjti  in  Devadamvaua ; MAdbA  in  Kashmir  ; BbimA 
in  HimAlaya;  Pu^ti  in  Vi^verfvar;  ^udlii  in  Kapalamdchana*';  Mata  in 
KAyAvardbana ; Dlivani  in  ^ankbodbur;  Dhriti  in  Pindaraka  ; KAlAon  the 
banks  of  the  river  GhandrabhagA ; ^iraktirini  on  the  Achddaka  tank ; 
AinfitA  in  VenA ; Urvadi  in  BadarinriiA3’ana ; Ansadbl  in  Uttarakuru ; 
Ku^odakain  Kurfadvipa  ; ManinathA  in  Heinkuta  ; SatyavAdini  in  Muknta ; 
VandaniyA  in  Aivatha ; Nidlii  in  the  town  of  Kuvera ; Gfiyatri  in  the 
Vedas ; PArvati  in  KailAtfa  ; Indrani  in  Devaloka  ; Sarasvat!  in  the  mouth 
of  Brahma ; PrabhA  in  the  disc  of  tlie  Sun  ; Vaisnavi  in  the  MAtrik§etra  ; 
Arundhati  among  the  Pativratas ; Tilfltfama  among  women  ; and  Brahma- 
kalA  in  the  mind ; and  Sakti  in  all  bodies.— 26-53. 

Note.-  Malayftohala,  one  of  the  seven  principal  chains  of  mountains  in  India,  It  is 
most  probably  to  be  identified  with  the  sonthern  portion  of  the  gbftts  running  from  the 
•(rath  of  Mysore,  and  forming  the  eastern  boundary  of  Travancore. 

Hastinfipura=inelhi.  Kfinyakubjasslfanauj.  PufkarasAjmer.  Sfimfisvarassln  Ka- 
.^iawar.  I>evadftrn-Yana=:1n  Almora  near  Yfiges'vara.  Ottara-kurnssTibet.  Mfidhava- 
vana=In  Muttra.  Karavira=Karur.  Mfihakfila=In  UJlain.  MAndavya=In  MfindvL 
Kapfila>M0chan=In  Oaya.  IIemkfita=:Botween  Mem  and  Himalaya.  Ambara^Amber  in 
Jaipur.  QAkarnasstn  Almora.  Bilvabala.s:ln  Almora.  RftdrakAtissIn  Kotea'var  (Almora). 
Sfiigrfimi-nadisQandakt  river. 

“ The  above  are  the  hundred  and  eight  chief  namec,  under  which 
I am  usually  known.  1 have  also  enumerated  to  you  the  names  of  the 
principal  holy  places  which  I have  for  my  abode.  One  who  hears  or 
reads  the  names  mentioned  above  or  bathes  in  the  tlrtbas  and.  then 
worships  me  there,  is  liberated  from  all  sins  and  goes  to  divaloka,  where 
he.  remains  for  one  Ealpa.  One  who  resides  in  the  sacred  places  men* 
•tioned  above,  attains  NirvAga.  One ' who  recites  the  hundred  and  eight 


CBAtTSSXflt. 

names  before  l^iva,  on  Tritlyd  and  Aefami,  is  blessed  with  many  children. 
One  who  repeats  these  names  at  the  time  of  giving  away  a cow  in  charity, 
or  on  the  occasion  of  performing  a funeral-  ceremony  in  honour  of  the 
departed  spirits,  or  at  the  time  of  worship,  goes  to  Brahm&.’'  After 
uttering  these  words,  the  goddess  Sati  consumed  herself.  — 54*59. 

Again,  after  sometime,  Oakija  was  born  as  the  son  of  Prachetfi,  and 
PSrvat!  after  being  born  as  the  daughter  of  Himalaya,  became  the  better* 
half  of  Siva.  Arundhati,  after  worshipping  Parvati,  the  daughter  of  Meh&, 
obtained  the  highest  yoga.  By  worshipping  the  same  Parvati,  Pnruravd 
became  Rdjarsi,  Yayuti  begot  progeny  and  PararfurSma  obtained  wealth. 
Similarly,  many  Devas,  Daityas,  BrShmanas,  Ksatriyas,  Vairfyas  and 
Sddras  obtained  supernatural  faculties.  Wherever  there  is  a book  con* 
taining  the  names  of  Parvati  which  is  worshipped  along  with  the  Qods, 
no  calamity  befalls  there.— 60-64. 

Here  ends  the  thirteenth  Chapter  dealing  with  the  genealogy  of  the 
• Pitris  and  the  108  names  of  Oauri. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Sdta  said  : The  group  of  Marichiuandana  Pitfis,  whom  the  Devas, 
constantly  meditate  upon,  live  in  Somapatha  regions.  Those  known  as 
Agnisvktta  pitris  (because  they  performed  great  sacrifices  to  fire,  i.e.,  Agni), 
reside  there  where  these  sacrificers  dwell,  and  the  river  Achchhod4  is  their 
M&nasa  daughter.  In  days  of  yore,  the  stream  Achchbod4  was  brought 
into  existence  by  PitfU.  Aohcbhod4  practised  penance  for  one  thousand 
years. — 1-3. 

After  which,  the  young  and  handsome  Pitfis,  wearing  beautiful 
garlands  and  having  sweet  scents  on  their  person,  appeared  before 
Achchhod&  to  grant  her  a boon.  She  was  overcome  with  passion  and 
expressed  the  desire  of  marrying  Aindvasu  Pitfi,  on  account  of  which  sinful 
desire  she  lost  the  power  she  had  obtained  from  practising  asceticism. — 4*6. 

She  used  to  live  in  heaven,  owing  to  her  supernatural  powers ; 
but  the  moment  she  had  such  a base  desire  she  fell  to  the  earth.  The  date 
on  which  she  expressed  such  a desire  and  Am&vasu  Pitpi  did  not  give  way 
to  passion,  came  to  be  known  as  Am&vfisyfi  Tithi.  AmftvSsyfi  is,  conse- 
quently, very  dear  to  the  Pitfis,  and  offerings  made  to  them  on  that  Tithi 

are  very  heartily  accepted  by  them. — 7*8. 

Nora Bee  H.  H.  Wilson's  translation  of  the  Vif  ParAfia.  Vol.  IT.  p.  SOI  for  other 
etytoologies  of  AmAvdsyd, 


44  TES  MAfSTA  PQHAEAU. 


Aohohliod.^,  after  loaing  the  powers  acquired  by  penances,  became 
aahamed  and  crest-fallen.  She  cast  her  bead  down  and  besought  the  Pilfte 
lor  her  salvation.— 9. 

The  Pitria,  seeing  her  weeping,  pondered  over  the  destiny  and  the 
work  of  the  fatnre  Devas,  and  addressed  her  very  gently : — 10 

" In  heaven,  a celestial  being  has  to  reap  the  fruit  of  his  deeds,  in 
the  same  celestial  form.  Celestial  beings  instantly  reap  the  harvest  of  their 
actions,  only  the  beings  residing  on  the  earth  reap  the  fruits  of  some  of 
their  actions  in  other  forms  after  death.  Daughter ! on  account  of  your 
ignoble  wish,  yon  will  be  born  from  the  womb  of  a fish  in  the  28th  OwA* 
para,  and  will  become  the  daughter  of  Vasu.  After  that,  you  will  return 
to  your  region.  In  an  island  covered  with  a number  of  jujube  trees 
(Badarikadrainaj  you  will  beget,  through  Para^ra,  a son,  named  B&darfi> 
ya^a,  who  will  be  a particle  of  Visnn  and  will  divide  the  Veda  into  several 
parts.  You  will  beget  two  sons,  Chitra&gada  and  Vicldtravirya,  by  be> 
coming  the  queen  of  king  t^^iuann  a portion  of  sea,  and  having  begotten 
these  two  Ksetraja  sons  to  that  wise  one,  you  will  again  return  to  the  region 
of  the  Pitfis,  in  the  form  of  Praas(ha  af(nk&.  You  will  be  known  as 
Satyavatl  on  earth,  and  as  Astak-t  in  Pitfildka.  You  will  be  the  giver  of 
longevity,  of  health  and  fruits  of  all  desires.  After  some  time,  you  will 
become  the  holy  and  celebrated  Achchhoda  river  in  the  world  ”. — 11>20. 

Mots— Owipara  U the  tUrd  age  of  the  world. 

After  addressing  her  thus,  the  Pitfis  vanished,  and  Achchhodfi  also 
began  to  reap  the  harvest  of  her  actions,  as  told  by  the  Pitfis. — 21. 

Here  ends  the  fourteenth  Chapter  describing  the  dynasty  of  Agnifvdtta 
Pitrie  and  birth  of  the  river  Aehehhodd. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Sfita  said : " In  heaven,  there  are  other  illustrious  regions  called 
Vibharajas  where  dwell  the  pious  Barhi^da  pitfis  so  named  because  their 
VimAnas  are  carried  by  peacocks  (barhi)  and  where  people  making  offerings 
to  the  manes  of  their  deceased  ancestors  go  and  find  happiness.  These 
Pitfis  are  venerated  by  the  Devas,  Asuras,  Apsatfis,  Gandharvas,  Rfik^aaas 
and  Yak^as.  The  Barhi^da  Pitfis,  possessed  of  great  Yogic  powers,  are 
the  sons  of  the  sage  Pnlastya.  They  are  the  givers  of  safety  and  freedom 
tear  to  their  devotees.  These  very  Barhi^ada  Pitfia  had  a m&ncM 
daugliter,  named  Pivart.  Slie  was  well  versed  in,  and  mother  of.  Yoga  and 
practised  severe  penances  for  a long  time,  when  Lord  Vispu  pleased  with 
her  devotion  appeared  before  her  and  directed  her  to  aak  fora  boon ; ehe 


OBA^BS  XIV. 


4$ 


prayoid  for  a husbaad  who  would  be  beautiful,  possessed  of  Yogio  powers 
and  able  to  curb  hie  passions.  The  Lord,  in  granting  her  that  boon,  said  : 
“ Thou  shah  be  the  wife  of  ^uka  the  teacher  of  Yoga,  the  son  of  VySsa.  And 
thou  shalt  be  blessed  with  a daughter,  named  Kritvl,  who  will  be  well  vers^ 
in  Yoga  and  will  be  married  to  the  manly  Rajah  of  Panchala.  Kritvi, 
after  practising  Yoga,  will  also  be  known  as  66,  and  she  will  beget  a son, 
named  Brabmadatta. — 1-10. 

“ Thou  shalt  also  become  the  mother  of  Krisna  Gaura  Prabhu,  and 
Bainbhu,  who  will  be  great  Mah&tmfts  and  will  ultimately  depart  to 
felicity.  Thou  shall  also  attain  Mok$a,  after  giving  birth  to  such  illustrious 
sons.” — 11. 

Note.— MahttmA-msgcnsiiimans. 

S6ta  said  : *'  The  group  of  Manasa  Pitpis,  who  are  most  handsome 
and  virtuous  and  known  as  Sumfirtimantas  (Vasistha's  sons,)  reside  in  the 
region  called  Jyotirobhftsas  where  stars  and  planets  light  up  their  sur- 
roundings by  their  rays.  This  region  is  a high  one  where  people  making 
offerings  to  the  manes  of  their  deceased  ancestors  go  and  have  various 
enjoyments.  Even  the  ^udras  performing  tfr&ddha  go  to  that  region  in  a 
vimAna ; what  to  say  of  a Brdhraapa  who  performs  draddba  devoutly.  66 
was  the  raanasa  daughter  of  those  Pitris,  and  was  married  to  l^ukra  and 
who  enlianced  the  reputation  of  Sadhy&s. — 12-15. 

" fn  the  Solar  world,  there  are  regions  called  Marichigarbbas,  where 
Havismftna  Pitfis,  the  sons  of  AipgirU)  reside.  Ksatriyas  performing 
Br&ddha  in  a holy  place  go  to  the  samo  region,  and  that  is  why  Havi^mfina 
Pitfis  are  worshipped  by  Ksatriyas.  Yaifoda  was  the  manasa  daughter 
of  Havi^mfina  Pitfis.  She  was  married  to  King  Aip^umAua  and  was  the 
daughter-in-law  of  Fancbajank,  mother  of  Dilipa,  and  grandmother  of 
Bhaglratha. — 16-19. 

"There  are  other  regions  known  as  K&madughas,  where  reside  the 
pious  Pitris,  called  Snsvada  as  well  as  Ajyapft  in  the  region  of  Prajapati 
Kardarma.  They  are  the  sons  of  Pulalia  and  are  worshipped  by  the 
Vaidyas.  The  worshippers  of  these  Pitfis,  by  performing  ^rAddha,  go  to 
the  same  region  where  they  see  the  manes  of  their  deceased  ancestors, 
mother,  &ther,  sister,  friends,  relations,  etc.”  Viraj&  was  the  m&nasa 
daughter  of  Ajyap&  Pitfis  and  was  the  queen  of  King  Nahusa  and  the 
mother  of  Ifsy&ti.  She  was  afterwards  known  as  Eka§tak6  in  Brahma* 
loka.— 20-24. 

Something  has  been  said  about  the  three  groups  of  pitfis  who  are 
UEorshipped  by  men  and  have  forms,  now  follows  the  description  of  the 
fooFth  set  of  Pitfis.— 26. 


46 


TBB  UAfSYA  PVaABAHL 


There  ia  a m&uaaa  region  in  the  upper  BrahmUncJa  which  is  the 
abode  of  Sdmapa  Pitfis.  They  are  eternal,  the  very  incarnation  of  Dharina, 
and  are  as  venerable  as  Brahma.  They  are  born  of  S\vadh4,  and  having 
attained  Brahmahood,  by  their  power  of  yoga,  they  carried  on  the  work* 
of  past  creations  and  now  rest  in  \l&nasa  regions.  Nariiiada,  which  flows 
in  the  southern  part,  is  the  manasa  daughter  of  the  Sdmapa  Pitris  that 
purifles  the  people  by  her  sacred  watei-s. — 26-28 

The  Manus  have  sprung  from  these  Pitps,  and  their  progeny 
perform  drSddha  even  when  there  is  an  absence  of  Dliarina  in  the  world. 
It  was  they  who  at  the  beginning  of  the  Creation  started  the  system  of 
sraddha,  after  acquiring  yoga  and  begetting  children.— 29-30. 

The  Pitfis  mentioned  above,  like  vessels  of  silver  or  of  any  metal 
having  some  admixture  of  silver.  By  performing  rfraddha  in  such  vessels 
and  by  giving  them  away  to  a tleserving  priest  one  makes  them  feel  very 
happy.— 31. 

Offerings  should  be  made  to  the  Pitfis  in  the  name  of  Agni^oma, 
and  Yama.  Where  fire  is  not  available,  then  they  should  be  made  in 
water  or  in  the  hand  of  a Brah1na9a.It  is  excellent  to  make  offerings  in  the 
ear  of  a goat  or  a horse  ; and,  similarly,  it  ia  very  nice  to  perform  tlr&ddha 
near  the  place  where  cows  are  kept  or  near  a good  stream  of  water.  Pitfis 
live  in  heaven,  and  offerings  should  also  be  made  to  them  by  facing 
towards  the  south. — 32-33. 

At  the  time  of  making  offerings,  one  should  put  his  sacred  thread  on 
his  right  shoulder  and  offer,  water,  sesauium,  kiuia  grass,  flesh,  Patluna,  cow's 
milk,  sweet  things,  the  flesh  of  rhinoceros,  honey,  rfyaniaka,  rice,  barley, 
wild  rice,  kidney-bean,  sugarcane,  wliiie  flowers,  clarified  butter.  34-35. 

A'ote.— Pftthina  is  a kind  of  fish.  Mcadhu-sweets,  honey,  nectar  of  flowers,  wine,  water, 
■flmajaioe,  milk,  vernal  season.  8yAtn&ka  is  a kind  of  corn. 

The  things  mentioned  already  are  appreciable  to  the  Pitfis  and 
should  be  offerred  to  them ; the  things  not  liked  by  them  and  which 
should  be  discarded  at  the  time  of  efraddha  are  enumerated  now,  nie. — 
Masflr,  hemp,  ripe  black  mustard,  masa,  safflower,  lotus,  wood-apple, 
sunflower,  the  white  thorn-apple,  the  fruit  of  Nima  tree,  the  fruit  of 
Adhatoda  vasika,  the  milk  of  sbe-goat,  kodrava,  split  chick  pea,  liquorice, 
linseed,  should  never  be  offered  in  efr^ddha  to  the  Pitfia  by  one  who  wishes 
to  win  their  favour.  One  who  pleases  the  Pitfis  by  devotion,  is  blessed 
by  them  in  return. — 36-39. 

Pitfis,  when  they  are  pleased,  give  robust  health,  heaven,  and 
children  to  their  devotees.  The  worship  of  Pitfis  is  more  important  than 
that  of  the  Gods.  The  Pitfis  should  be  satisfied  first.  They  are  soon 


OHAPTBR  XIV. 


47 


pleased  and  are  devoid  o(  anger.  They  are  harmless  and  of  steady  affection. 
They  are  of  peaceful  soul,  lovers  of  purity,  always  soft  speaking,  and  givers 
^of  happiness  and  prosperity  to  their  devotees.  The  Sun  is  their  Lord.  I 
have  narrated  to  you  the  family  of  Pitfis  by  listening  to  which  one  gains 
life  and  virtue;  therefore  everyone  should  read  and  listen  to  it.— 40-43. 

Here  ends  the  fifteenth  Chapter  describing  the  birth  and  dynasties 

of  the  Pitfis. 

The  following  important  note  on  Pitfis  is  reproduced  from  Wilson  h 
Vi§pu  Piirana  edited  by  Fitzedward  Hall. 

We  may  here  take  the  opportunity  of  inquiring  who  arc  meant  by  the  Pitfia : and. 
generally  speaking,  they  may  ho  called  a race  of  divine  beings,  inhabiting  celestial 
regions  of  their  own,  and  receiving  into  their  society  the  spirits  of  those  mortals 
for  whom  the  rite  of  fcllowsliip  in  obsequial  cakes  with  them,  the  SapinJikarana,  has  been 
duly  performed.  The  Pi(<ris  collectively,  therefore,  include  a man’s  ancestors ; but  the 
principal  members  of  this  order  of  beings  are  of  a different  origin.  The  Vdyu,  Matsya,  and 
Padma  PunCnas,  and  Hari  Yamsa,  profess  to  give  an  account  of  the  original  Pitfis.  The 
account  is  m8ch  the  same,  and,  for  the  most  part,  in  the  same  words,  in  all.  They  agree  in 
distinguishing  the  Pitria  into  seven  classes ; three  of  which  are  withont  form  Amurtayah 
or  composed  of  intellcctnal,  not  elementary,  substance,  and  assuming  what  forms  they 
please ; and  four  are  corporeal  S amurtayah^  When  they  come  to  the  enumeration  of  the 
particular  classes,  they  somewhat  differ ; and  the  accounts,  in  all  the  works,  are  singularly 
imperfect.  According  to  a legotid  given  by  the  Viyu  and  the  Hari  Vamsa,  the  first  Pitjfis 
were  the  sons  of  the  gods.  The  gods,  having  offended  Brahmsi,  by  neglecting  to  worship 
him,  were  cursed,  by  him,  to  become  fools ; but,  upon  their  repentance,  he  directed  them 
to  apply  to  their  sons,  for  instruction.  Being  taught,  accordingly,  the  rites  of  expiation 
and  ponanoe,  by  their  sons,  they  addressed  thorn  as  fathers ; whence  the  sons  of  the  gods 
were  the  first  Pitfis. 





So  the  Matsya  has. 

* The  Pitfis  are  born,  in  the  Manwantaras,  as  the  sons  of  the  gods.'  The  Hari 
Vamsa  makes  the  sons  assume  the  character  of  fathers ; addressing  them,  * Depart, 
children 

<i>q«t  $im  ^ ^ it  ’sv  i 

Again,  the  Ydyu  Pnrdnd  declares  the  seven  orders  of  Pitfis  to  have  been,  originally, 
the  first  gods,  the  Yairdjas,  whom  Brahrad,  with  the  eye  of  Yoga,  beheld  in  the  eternal 
spheresi  and  who* are  the  gods  of  the  gods : 

wJwlSwi  nm  (NN  wmit  i 

# ^ ^ t’Rn:  R 

WIKII  MfKIVII  nflUfli  I 
M WHIWIW  | 


THE  UATSITA  ftntANAit 


M 

WW  I r I,.  r.;-i»,fi,.i  . 1 .iwfc  ■— * .fa.-Mi.-.  ..1.  iiMirBri  giaitiiwiiniim 

Afatn,  In  tlia  nme  worki  we  have  the  inoorporeal  PttH*  ealM  TatH(|Hi  faem 
htfnf  the  eona  of  the  PiaJiCpati  Tin(ja : 

<111^:  f^^pnn!  ^ i 
WWW  ifwj  Kw  wiw  fp9  wmr:  i 

The  Mateya  agrees  with  this  latter  statemoat,  aad  adds,  that  the  geds  worshij^ 
them : 

anaiR  svnifh  i 
Inan  ^ ii 

The  Hari  Vam^a  has  the  same  sUtemont*  but  more  precisely  distingaUhes  the 
Vairdjas  as  one  class  only  of  the  incorporeal  Pitris.  The  commentator  states  the  samSp 
calling  the  three  incorporeal  Pitfis,  Vairiijaa,  Agiiishwiittas,  and  Rarhiahads ; and  the 
fonr  corporeal  orders,  Sukdlas  Angirasas,  Suswadhas,  and  Romapas.  The  Vairdjasere 
described  as  the  fathers  of  Mena,  the  mother  of  Umi.  Their  abode  is  variously  termed 
the  Sdntanika,  Sandtana,  and  Soma  loka.  As  the  posterity  of  Viraja,  they  are  the 
domaaads  of  Manu.  The  other  classes  of  Pitris  tho  three  Purdnas  agree  with  Manu  in 
representing  as  the  sons  of  the  patriarchs,  and,  in  general,  assign  to  them  the  same  offices 
and  posterity.  They  arc  the  following 

Agniahwdttas^-sons  of  Marichi,  and  Pitris  of  tho  gods  (Manu,  Matsys,  Padma) : 
living  In  Soma  loka,  and  parents  of  Achchhodd  (Matsya,  Pndroa,  Hari  Vamsa).  The 
Vdya  makes  them  residents  of  Virajn-loka,  sons  of  Pulastya.  Pitris  of  the  demigods  and 
demons,  and  parents  of  Pivarf ; omitting  tho  next  order  of  Pitris,  to  whom  these  oir- 
enmstances  more  accurately  refer.  The  commentator  on  the  Hari  Yamda  derives  the 
name  from  Agnishu  * in  or  by  oblations  to  fire,'  and  Atta  * obtained,'  'invoked.' 

Barhishads-^sous  of  Atri,  and  Pitris  of  the  demons  (Manu) ; sons  of  Pulastya,  Pitris 
of  the  demons,  residents  in  Valbhraja  fathers  of  Pivari  (Matsya,  Padma,  Hari  Vamsa). 

These  three  are  the  formless  or  incorporeal  Pitris. 

Somapas,- descendants  of  Bhrigu,  or  sons  of  Kavi  by  Swadha,  the  daughter  of  Agnl ; 
and  Pitris  of  the  Brahmans  (Manu  and  Vdju  Purdiia).  Tho  Padma  calls  them  Ushmapas* 
The  Hari  Vamsa  calls  the  Soraapas— to  whom  it  ascribes  the  same  descent  as  the  Vdyii,— 
the  Pitris  of  the  bddras ; and  tlie  Sukalas,  the  Pitfis  of  the  Brahmanas. 

Haviahmats-in  the  Solar  sphere,  sons  of  Angiras,  and  Pitfls  of  tho  Rahattriyai. 

Ajyapa8-*sons  of  Kardama,  Pitris  of  the  Vaisyas,  in  the  Kdinaduha-loka  (Manu,  fte.) ; 
but  the  lawgiver  calls  them  the  sons  of  Pulastya.  Tho  Pitfis  of  the  Vaisyas  are  called 
Kdvyas,  in  the  Nandi  Upapurdna ; and,  in  the  Hari  Vamsa  and  its  comment,  they  are 
termed  Suswadhas,  sons  of  Kardama,  descended  from  Pnlaba, 

8akdlins--8ons  of  Vasistha,  and  Pitris  of  the  6ddra«  (Manu  and  Vdyu  Purdna). 
They  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Padma.  The  Matsya  inserts  the  name  and  descent,  bat 
speoifles  them  as  amongst  the  incorporeal  Pitfis  : 

Hm  fi  nnrai:  m ^ ii 

It  may  be  suspected  that  the  passage  is  corrupt.  The  Hari  Vamsa  makes  the 
Bttkdlas  sons  of  Vasi^tha,  the  Pitris  of  the  Brahmans  ; and  gives  the  title'of  Somapaa  to 
the  Pitris  of  the  Budras.  In  general,  this  work  follows  the  Vdya,  but  with  omissions  and 
transpositions,  as  if  it  had  carelessly  mutilated  Its  orignal. 

The  Mat9]fa-purdfidt  by  evident  corruption,  gives  the  Sukdllns— as  it  them— 
the  synonym  Mdnasas. 


GHAmu  XVI, 


4tf 

BetidOB  these  Pltfls  or  progenitors,  other  heavenly  beings  are,  someHmes,  made  to 
adopt  a similar  character.  Thus,  Manu  says : “ The  wise  call  our  fathers  Vasus ; our  patcr^ 
nal  grandfathers,  Rudros ; our  paternal  great-grandfathers,  Adityas ; agreeably  to  a text  of 
the  Vedas  t"  that  In,  Ihcno  divine  beings  aro  to  be  meditated  upon,  along  with,  and  as  not 
distinct  from,  progenitors.  HcmiCdri  quotes  the  Nandi  Upapnrdna  for  a different  practice, 
and  directs  Vislmn  to  bo  identified  with  the  father;  Brahmd,  with  the  grandfather ; and 
8lva,  with  the  great-grandfather.  This,  however,  is  Saiva  innovation.  Tlio  Vaishnavas 
direct  Aniruddha  to  be  regarded  as  one’s-self ; and  Pradyumna,  Sankarshana,  and  V.<sudeYa, 
as  tho  throe  ancestors.  Again,  they  are  identified  with  Varuna,  Prdjdpatya,  and  Agni ; or, 
again,  with  monthn,  seasons,  and  years.  Nirnaya  Sindhn,  p.  2S4.  It  may  bo  doubted  how 
far  any  of  these  correctly  represent  the  original  notions  inculcated  by  tho  texts  of  tho 
Vedas,  from  whicli,  in  tho  most  essential  particulars,  they  are  derived. 


fTTAPTER  XVr. 

Sflta  snid,  af(or  lieari 11"  (lint,  King  Maim  again  enqniiwl  fioni  flie  Lord 
Keiiava,  about  tlip  porioda  for  the  perfnnnanco  of  ifraddhaa,  the  different 
kinds  of  rfraddlias,  tlio  <wieo-born  worthy  of  being  fed  on  that  occasion 
and  those ^who  ought  to  he  discarded  from  tlio  feast,  the  time  of  the 
day  when  (irsiddha  should  he  performed,  the  vessels  that  should  he  used  in 
performing  the  ceremony,  the  ways  of  performing  the  rite  and  the  mode 
of  giving  satisfaction  to  the  TMtris. — 1-3. 

The  liOrd  replied  that  rfraddha  should  bo  performed  daily  and  the 
Pitfis  should  be  satisfied  by  ofTering  any  of  the  following  things  :-  <iraiii. 
water,  milk,  roots,  fruits. — 4. 

The  rfraddhas  arc  of  three  kinds,  viz.  :--Nit}’a  (Daily),  Naimitfika 
(Occasional),  Kamya  (Optional).  In  performing  Nitya  rfrnddha,  no  oblation 
(arghya),  invocation  or  Visvadeva  worehip  is  necessary.  Naimittika 
4raddhn  is  that  which  is  performed  on  the  fourth  and  the  eighth  day 
of  each  half-month  and  on  the  days  of  tlie  full  and  tho  new  moon 
fpSrvana  days).  Pdrvanas  aro  of  three  different  kinds,  hear  it  0 Lord 
of  the  world.  First,  it  should  be  noted  what  class  of  people  ought  to  be 
invited  to  the  feast  of  Naimittika  (Pfin’ana)  4raddha.  One  who  is  acquaint- 
ed with  the  doctrine  of  the  five  mystic  fires  (Pafich&giiii  a Sndtaka 
Brahmachftri,  one  who  is  well  versed  in  the  Vedas  with  their  six  afigas,  the 
^rotriya  BrAhmania,  the  son  of  such  a iSrotriya  Br^hma^a,  one  highly  profi- 
cient in  the  rules  of  Vidhi  (or  Laws),  one  who  is  thoroughly  acquainted  with 
the  sacred  hymns,  the  minister,  one  who  belongs  to  a wellknown  family, 
one  who  has  a sound  knowledge  of  the  PurA^as,  one  who  knows  the 
dharma,  a regular  reader  of  the  Vedas,  and  performer  of  japa,  a devotee  of 
diva,  Pitfi,  Sun,  Vispu,  and  Brahmfi,  a Yogi,  one  who  is  peaceful,  one  who 
can  control  his  passions,  o&e  who  is  virtuous,  especially  a daughter’s  son,  a 


50 


THE  MATSYA  PVRANAM. 


friend,  a preceptor,  a typical  sanyaei,  or  tlie  lead  of  the  Vairfyas,  a 
maternal  nncle,  a member  of  the  commnnity  (kinaman),  a flitvija  priest,  a 
teacher,  a Soma-sacrificer,  a grammarian,  a knower  of  the  Mimansa  doctrine 
about  Sacrifices,  one  who  performs  Vedic  sacrifices,  one  who  knows  the 
Silmaveda  and  how  to  chant  it,  one  who  is  so  learned,  respectable  or 
eminent  that  his  very  presence  may  be  considered  to  elevate  and  purify 
the  people  who  sit  to  feast  with  him  in  the  same  row,  the  chanter  of  the 
Sdmaveda,  a Brahraachfiri,  a professor  of  Vedas,  one  who  knows  Brahma,  are 
the  sort  of  people  worthy  of  being  invited  to  the  tlnlddha  feast.  Where 

such  people  are  feasted,  the  sraddha  is  real  and  earnest. — 5-13. 

A'ote.— Dwije  means  twice-born.  Everyone  is  born  as  a Sfidra  and  becomes  twice- 
born  on  being  invested  with  the  sacred  thread. 

Now  it  should  be  noted  what  class  of  people  are  to  bo  discarded 
from  snch  a feast. 

The  fallen,  the  ciii*8ed,  eunuchs,  backbiters,  those  deformed  iiy 
disease,  those  having  deformed  nails,  those  having  yellow  teeth,  bastards, 
bastards  of  widows,  horse-tamers,  offspring  of  a younger  brother  married 
before  an  elder  brother,  those  who  offer  themselves  for  service,  those 
addicted  to  drunkenness,  mad  men,  the  hard  heariefl,  cheats,  swindlere, 
the  conceited,  temple  priests,  the  ungrateful,  the  atheist,  inhabitants  of  a 
Mlccliha  country  (Non-aryans*,  Tiisankus,  of  Barbara,  and  of  Dravavila, 
Hravieja,  of  Kofikana,  and  the  Lingis!!)aving  prominent  sectarian  marks', 
should,  under  no  circumstances,  be  invited  to  ifi  Addlia  feast, — 14-17. 

The  guests  to  the  Sraddha  feast  should  be  cotirlenusly  invited  the 
same  day  or  a day  previous  to  tlie  f>‘ast.  The  )’it(is  accompany  the  invited 
twico-born,  in  the  form  of  air,  and  alt  along  with  them  at  the  time 
of  the  feast.  The  host  sliould  go  and  invite  his  twice-born  guest  by 
touching  his  right  knee  and  address  him  thus  “ thou  lia.st  been  invited  by 
me,  accept  my  invitation.”  After  Urns  addressing,  he  should  remind  the 
guest  as  well  as  his  paternal  kinsmen  in  these  words You  should  be 
withorit  anger,  observe  purity  and  rules  of  eontineuce  the  whole  of  this 
day,  and  I the  performer  of  i^riddha  would  also  observe  the  same  along 
with  you." — 18-20. 

One  who  maintains  the  sacrificial  fire,  should  perform  the  i^rAddba 
after  offering  oblations  of  water  called  Tarpana  to  the  Pitils,  as  well  as  after 
offering  of  pi^d^t^  them,  on  every  Am&vasyS.— 21. 

Sr&ddhn  should  be  performed  near  a cow-pen  or  by  a pool  of  water, 
after  plastering  tbe  floor,  which  should  be  sloping  towards  the  south, 
with  oowdung.  One  who  consecrates  and  maintains  the  sacred  fire,  should 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


51 


cook  rice  (charu),  and  after  offering  with  equal  handfuls  and  saying  f“  1 am 
offering  to  the  Pitfis),”  shoxild  place  everything  toward  the  south. — 22-23. 

Then  he  should  sprinkle  with  ghee  in  front  of  the  three  ninod^ 
plates.  They  should  be  of  tlie  same  size,  that  is  four  lingers  broad,  and 
place  on  them  balls  of  rice.  —24. 

Three  silver-mounted,  smooth  ladles,  otaeaeia  catechu,  measuring  one 
hand  in  length  with  closed  fist,  and  having  the  form  of  the  palm  of  hand 
at  the  end,  should  be  made.  After  putting  the  sacred  thread  over  the 
right  shoulder,  the  person  performing  !§ri\ddha  should  put  a water  goblet, 
and  a vessel  of  bell-metal,  and  meh^na  (name  of  a sacrificial  vessel), 
sacrificial  wood,  Kuda,  sesamum,  leaf  plates,  sandal,  new  cloth  and  scent, 
incense,  and  sandal  paste  towards  the  south.  After  thus  putting  together 
the  articles  for  worship,  tlie  worshipper  should  draw  a circle  by  the  urine 
of  cow  on  the  floor  plastered  with  cowdung,  and  there  he  should  worship 
the  circle  with  nnhusked  rice  and  (lowers.  The  worshipper  should  then 
wash  the  feet  of  his  Bralnnana  guests  with  great  respect  and  comiesy,  and 
after  offering  them  water  for  rinsing  their  mouth,  should  seat  them  on  the 
kufla  mattings. — 25-29. 

Two  BrAhmapas  should  be  fed  at  the  time  of  offering  oblations  to  Gods 
and  three  at  the  timo  of  Pitfi  worship,  or  one  Br.Ahmana  may  be  fed  on 
each  occasion. — 30. 

Even  the  rich  man  should  not  feast  more  than  this  number  on  this 
occasion.  Water  should  first  be  offered  to  the  BKllimapa  invited  to  take 
part  in  the  rite  of  offering  oblations  to  the  Bevas,  and  his  feet  should  be 
washed  first. — 31. 

By  the  permission  of  the  Brahmanas,  the  worshipper,  according  to 
the  rules  of  his  Grihya  Sfitras,  should  take  the  boiled  rice  (Charu),  in  a 
vessel  of  bell-metal  and  offer  it  to  fire,  the  Moon,  and  Yama,  in  the 
Dak§inSgni,  or  Ekfigni  if  he  docs  not  keep  all  the  fires.  He  should 
perform  Paryuksana  with  the  sacred  thread  on  the  left  shoulder,  and 
one  who  knows  all  the  rites  should  perform  it  with  the  sacred  thread 
thrown  on  the  right  shoulder.  — 32 — 34. 

Note.— Parynkyanassprinkling  round  water  silently  and  without  nttering  any  ritual 
formulsd. 

After  that,  six  balls  should  be  made  of  the  remaining  boiled  rice 
and  water  mixed  with  sesamum,  and  offered  with  the  left  hand.  Then  the 
worshipper  should  sit  on  his  left  knee,  with  concentrated  attention,  and 
draw  a line  on  the  sacrificial  altar  with  ku4a  blade,  and  turning  his  face 
towards  the  south  he  should  sprinkle  water  on  the  darbba  grass  with  a ladle. 


TUB  MAT8YA  PUBABAM. 


■ 


that,  be  should  offer  the  balls  of  rice  by  putting  a kuila  on  the  line 
dravrii  on  the  altar  and  by  uttering  the  name  and  clan  of  the  ancestor. 
Then  he  should  wipe  his  hands  with  the  kuAi  and  thus  satisfy  the 
Lepahk&gis.  (A  paternal  ancestor  in  the  4th,  5th  and  6th  degree). —35— 38. 

Then  water  should  again  be  sprinkled  on  the  darbba  grass  and  the 
six  Pitris  should  be  saluted  and  woi’shipped  with  incense,  *S:c. — 39. 

After  thus  invoking  them  by  Vedic  hymns,  one,  who  is  Ekiigni, 
should  offer  only  one  ball  of  rice  with  a ladle. — 1(\ 
iVote.— Kk&gui—oue  who  perforrna  agiiihotra. 

After  satisfying  the  male  ancestors,  offerings  should  be  made 
to  the  female  ancestors  by  means  of  the  kujfci  grass,  who  should  also  be 
invoked  and  dismissed  in  the  same  way.— 41. 

Then  he  should  take  a little  out  of  the  l)alls  of  j ice  and  offer  it  to 
the  invited  guests,  aecorditig  to  precedence,  making  the  first  offer  to  the 
Bralmianas.— 42. 

Because  the  twice-buni  cat  tlic  particles  from  the  lice-balls  on  the 
occasion  of  the  Ainavasya  feast,  it  is  called  AnvaliArya.— 43. 

First  of  all,  the  twicc-l>orji  invited  lu  the  feast,  should  be  given 
rings  of  kuia  grass  to  wear  on  their  ring  lingers,  and  then  a portion  of  the 
ball  of  rice  should  be  pre.seiilod  to  them,  after  putting  a little  water  and 
aesainiun  in  their  hand  by  uttering  Siv{idhaisu7n'2si,u.—i4. 

SwaiUiaisAmastii ~[Jcrc  is  the  food  to  the  raatics  [>crsoiuflcd. 

At  the  time  of  feasting  the  invited  guests,  llic  host  should  enqiiii^ 
whether  they  relish  llie  food,  lie  should  on  no  ueeount  be  in  angry  mood. 
He  sliould  concentrate  Ids  mind  on  XAraymia  llari.-  ‘lo. 

Alter  the  invited  {Briduiiuna)  gtiesl.-s  arc  satiblied,  the  host  should, 
on  unsaiiclilicd  earth,  i)lace  food  with  water  and  rice  for  the  acceptance  of 
all  classes.  This  is  called  \ ikira  tscatlcriiig).'  -40. 

After  the  invited  guests  have  wirshcd  their  hands  ajid  mouths,  the 
host  should  place  water,  llowers  ajid  imliuskecd  rice  in  their  hands, 
and  ask  them  to  bprinklc  it  on  the  balls  of  rice  offered  to  the  Pi tpa,  pro- 
nouncing Swastu  (Be  comfortable,).- -4 7. 

Ihe  Ciods  should  also  bo  satisfied  uii  the  occasion^ of  the  perform- 
ance of  Sniddha  ; foi'  ollicrwiso  i^r&ddliu  i.s  not  complete.  The  Br^hmana 
guests  invited,  should  bo  circumambulated  before  being  respectfully  dis- 
missed. 48. 

Facing  south,  the  following  boon  should  be  sought  frott!  the  Pitfia: 


GSAPTBB  XYI. 


53 


“ You  may  continue  to  be  our  donors.  The  Veda8"may  exist,  and  our 
progeny  may  prosper.  Let  our  devotion  not  diminish,  we  may  have  ample 
wealth  to  give  to  the  needy,  we  may  have  plenty  of  grains,  we  may  be 
visited  by  many  guests.  People  may  ask  for  help  from  us,  we  may  not 
have  to  seek  anything  from  others.”  This  is  the  Anvd.]j&ry8  l^rMdha,  which 
is  also  called  PArvana.— 49— 51. 

The  Kdmya  or  the  third  kind  of  Srkddha  should  be  performed 
also  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Ptirvana  l§raddha  described  above.  It 
should  be  performed  on  Am&vasyA,.  The  balls  of  rice  should  afterwards 
be  given  to  cows,  goats,  llrahmanas,  or  should  be  thrown  into  fire  or' 
water,  or  they  should  be  made  over  to  birds. — 52—53. 

The  ball  of  rice  in  the  middle  should  be  given  to  the  wife  of  the 
Ijost  (this  is  the  peculiarity  in  this  ^r&ddba).  It  begets  progeny.  She 
should  eat  the  ball  of  rice  after  pronouncing  the  following  words: 
“ Adhatta  pitaro  fjarhhamatra  santana  vardlianam  ” (Pitfis  grant  to  me 
progeny  that  would  continue  the  line  of  the  house,'.  The  host  should 
remain  standing  till  the  Brahmanas  depart.  He  should  then  perfoi'm  the 
retnaiuing  rites.— 54. 

After  the  Sraddhu  rites  arc  over,  the  iiost  should  make  an  offering 
to  Vaiilvadeviis  by  presenting  oblations  to  lire,  and  then  he  should  enjoy 
a hearty  repast  in  coiupany  of  his  friends,  concentrating  his  mind  on 
the  Pitfis.—  55. 

That  day  one  who  performs  ^rfiddha,  as  well  as  those  who  partake 
in  the  ^r&ddha  feast,  should  not  take  their  food  twice.  They  should  not 
go  out  of  the  village  when  the  rfruddha  is  performed.  They  should 
neither  use  any  conveyance  nor  approach  their  wives.— 50. 

'J'hc  Veda  should  not  be  read  on  that  ilay  ; the  >\oi'shipper  should 
not  quan*cl  with  anyone,  nor  should  he  sleep  in  course  of  the  day.  This 
is  how  ^niddha  should  bo  performed.— 57. 

In  this  waj’,  an  Agnihotri  should  perform  l^naddha  in  the  dark  fort- 
nights of  the  mouths  wheu  the  sun  is  ill  the  sign  of  Virgo,  Aquarius,  and 
Taurus.  Whenever  the  Sapludi  karana  Sniddha  is  to  be  performed, 
there  also  the  above  ceremonial  should  be  observed  by  one  who  keeps  the 
sacred  fiiti.  — 5S. 

Here  ends  Uie  sixteenth  Chapter  dealimj  with  the  ritual  of  srdddhas 
in  the  case  of  those  toho  maintain  the  sacred  Jire, 

THOTS. 

The  fbllowing  note  on  Brfiddhas  is  from  Professor  WilsonWiiqu 
PurAna. 

The  offoriugs  ul' the  JUiudus  to  the  l'ilri«  partako  oftlir  character  of  those  of  the 


54 


THE  MAT8YA  PUBANAM. 


Romans  to  tho  lares  ami  mauos,  but  boar  a more  conspicuous  part  m their  ritual.  TKov 
arc  sald»  indeed,  by  Maim  (IH.,  208),  in  words  ropciitod  in  the  Vuyn  onl  Matsya  ruraiias 
and  Hari  Vamsa,  to  be  of  more  moment  than  tho  worship  of  i he  gods 

These  coreiuonios  are  not  to  be  reganltnl  a.s  merely  olwo(|uial ; i’or.  imlepondently  of 
thorites  addressed  to  a recently  deceasod  rol<itive,~aiid,  in  eo?  snxion  with  him,  to 
remote  ancestors,  and  to  the  pr«»p;oiutors  of  all  boing.s  - which  are  «*f  » strictly  obseiiuial 
or  funeral  description,  offerings  to  deceased  uneestora,  and  the  Titi  is  in  general,  form  an 
essential  ceremony,  on  a great  variety  of  festive  and  domestic  oee.ision.s.  The  Xlriiaya 
Sindhn,  in  a passage  referred  to  by  Mr,  Colebrooke  (Asiatic  Res' 'are  lies.  Vol.  VII.), 
spocities  the  following  .SrAddhas  : 1.  The  Nitya,  »m*  perpetual ; daily  I’lTerings  to  aneestoiA 
in  general : 3.  The  Naimittika,  or  ot*ea.sional ; as  tln>  Rko(ldi.shia,  obsO([iiial  o/TMriiigs 
on  account  of  a klnsmau  poeoiitly  deceased  : Th(»  Kaaiya,  vohintaiy  ; performed  for  t he 
aecomplishmentof  a special  desire,  such  as  fort  lie  birth  of  a son  :4.  Tin-  Vriddhi;  petTormni 
on  oceaaions  of  rejoicing  or  prosperity:  The  Rapiuibina;  offerings  tc*  all  individual 

and  to  general  ancestors  : (1.  The  t\irv.ana -sraddha  : olTerings  to  (io*  m.ines.  i»n  e(‘rtain 
Iniiardays  called  Parvanas.or  day  of  full  mo  m and  new  mofin,  and  ihi*  ei  rhth  :unl  foiuteentli 
days  of  tho  lunar  fortnight : 7.  The  (b*siitiii  f<»rthc  ad  van*. 'me  of  .i  niimls'r'if  leipiied 
persons,  or  of  an  as*<embly  of  Brahmans,  inxitedfor  the  |Mirpo,r;S.  The  Siuldhi : onr 
performed  to  purify  a person  from  some  denienient.^an  expiatory  •*’  ladyiia  : 1).  The 
Karmanga;  one  forming  part  of  tho  iniiiuton  ceremonies,  or  SamsKaras.  disorvcd  at 
conception,  birth,  tonsure,  &c. : 1' . The  Daivika ; to  which  the  gods  are  invited  : ll.  1 he 
Tdtrd  Srdddha;  held  by  a person  going  a journey  : and,  12.  Tho  Push ti  >:racldha;ono 
performed  to  promote  health  and  wealth.  Of  these,  the  four  w*hich  are  eonsldorod  the 
most  solemn  are  the  rite  performed  for  a parent,  or  near  relative,  lately  deceased;  that 
which  is  performed  for  kindred,  collectively  ; that  observed  on  certain  lunar  days;  and 
that  celebrated  on  occasions  of  rejoicing.  Nirnaya  Sindhu.  p.  172. 


CHAPTER  XVJI. 

Sftta  said  : I shall  now  relate  to  yon  wliat  Lord  Visnu  said  about  tlie 
general  ritual  of  J^raddha  (applicable  to  ail  whether  llioy  keep  fi»acred  fire 
or  not),  that  gives  prosperity  and  oiuaucipation  — 1. 

Summer  solstice,  winter  solstice,  the  period  when  tlie  sun  is  in  the 
equinoctial  pjints,  the  ])erlod  when  the  roin  [-asses  from  one  zodiacal 
iato  another,  thepevlol  whoa  nny  plarn^fary  b aly  passes  frosn  one  Zodiacal 
sign  into  anolber,  on  tbe  Amavasya  and  the  asiaka  of  tlie  dark  fortnight 
and  on  tbe  fifteenth  day  of  tbe  moon,  tlie  period  uF  the  (Ardni)  pixth,  the 
(Magba)  tenth  and  tljc  fRohini)  fourth  Junarmansions,  rJiC  presence  of 
materials  and  Br&hmanas,  the  time  of  a gajnehehMya^  the  day  of  full  moon 
on  a Monday,  the  days  called  Vi.stis  and  Vaidhritis,  the  third  day  of  the 
bright  fortnight  of  the  month  Vairfakha  which  is  the  anniversary  day  of 
the  Satya  Ynga,  the  9th  day  of  the  bright  fortnight  the  month  Kartika, 
the  anniversary  day  of  the  ‘Trcta  Yuga’,  the  15th  day  (full  moon)  of 
M&gha,  the  anniversary  day  of  the  Kali  Yuga,  the  thirteenth  day  of 


GHAPTBB  XVII. 


ri5 


the  flark  fortnight  of  the  month  Bh&dra,  roirpsponding  to  Aognet-Septem- 
her,  wli  'oh  is  the  anniversary  day  of  the  Dvapara  Yngn,  are  the  periods  and 
rccasioiis  when,  by  performing  iSrSddha,  one  gets  bliss  and  exhaustless 
merits.  So  also  on  the  anniversary  days  of  the  beginning  of  a ^lanvantara, 
as  detailed  below. — 2-5. 

The  ninth  day  of  the  bright  fortniglit  of  the  month  Arfvin,  the  twelvth 
tithi  of  the  month  Kdrtika,.ihe  third  lunar  day  of  the  month  Chaitra,  the 
ihlrd  lunar  tithi  of  BhSdra,  the  Amft.va6ya  of  the  month  Plifilguna,  the  11th 
Umar  tithi  of  the  month  Pausa,  the  10th  lunar  tithi  of  the  month  Asndha, 
the  7th  tithi  of  the  month  Magha,  the  8th  of  dark  fortnight  in  the  month 
f^rAvana,  the  full  moon  day.s  of  the  months  A.sadha,  the  full  moon  day.s  of 
of  the  months  Kartika,  Phalgnna,  Chaitra  and  J3'e^tha,  these  fourteen  day® 
are  anniversary  days  of  the  beginning  of  fourteen  Manvantaras  re.spectively. 
These  are  the  periods  in  which,  if  the  Si’Addha  is  performed,  it  gives 
unbounded  satisfaction  to  the  Pitfis  and  brings  exhanstless  merit  to  the 
worshipper^ — 6-8. 

The  seventh  day  of  the  month  of  MAgha  is  caller]  Batha-Saptaini  day, 
named  after  the  Sun’s  ascending  the  chariot  alrearly  mentioned  above  as 
the  anniversary  day  of  the  beginning  of  a Manvantara.— 0. 

The  Pitfis  say  that  one  who  offers  them  a libation  of  even  water 
and  sesaranm  on  the  Ratha-Saptami  day,  gets  the  same  benefit  as  he 
would  by  performing  ^rAddha  regularly  for  a thousand  yearn. — 10. 

i^rAddha  should  be  performed  on  the  full  moon  day,  in  the  montli 
■)f  VairfAkba,  at  the  time  of  au  eclipse,  on  the  occasion  of  (he  sacred-threarl 
ceremony  and  Mahalaya  festival,  in  a holy  city  (tlrlha\  near  a place  where 
cows  are  kept,  in  gardens  illuminated  with  lamps  and  in  villas  after 
plastering  the  floor  with  cowdung ; and  the  BrAhmana  guests  should  be 
invited  to  the  feast  the  same  day  or  a day  previous  in  the  manner  men- 
tioned before.  “1 1-12. 

The  BrAhma^as  invited  to  the  feast  shouhi  be  well  behaved,  of  good 
deeds  and  habits,  young  and  good-looking.  Two  BrAhmanas  shonlcl  be 
invited  at  Daiva-Sraddba  and  three  at  the  Pitriya  ^rAddhA  feast,  or  only 
one  may  be  invited  on  each  occasion. — 13. 

A lai*ge  iftimber  need  not  be  invited,  even  if  the  host  has  great 
resources  at  his  command.  First,  the  BrAhmana  invited  to  Daiva-i^rAddha 
should  be  attended.  He  should  be  seated  and  offered  barley  and  flowers. 
-14. 

Two  vessels  should  be  placed  with  kuifa  rings,  and  water  shovld  be 
poured  in  one,  after  uttering,  “ Om  l^miS  Devt,"  etc.,  and  barley  should 


5fl  THE  MATSYA  PUBANAM. 


he  pnt  in  the  other,  after  uttering,  “ 0»»  ynro  si."  etc.  Flower  and  sandal 
ahotild  also  he  put  in  the  veasela  offered  to  the  Vaiilvn  devas  with  llije 
mantra,  VikeedevA"  etc.,  who  should  l)e  thus  invoiced  and  barjoy  • 

should  be  thrown.  After  offering  (lowers  and  sandal,  (ho  host  slionlrl  | 
offer  Arghya  water  to  them  with  the  majjtra  “ YAdivya"  &c>  When  the  * 
VWvadeva  worship  is  finished,  the  Pitfi  wowhip  should  be.  commenced. 

-ir».17. 

First,  three  kusJa  should  be  placed  for  the  Pilris  to  take  their  seats 
on,  and  then  kuia  rings  should  be  placed  in  three  ’ 'ssels  in  whicli  water 
should  bo  poured,  after  reciting,  “ Ojn  Sanno  Devi."  * Sesamum  ^ hould 
be  offered  by  reciting,  " 0»i  Tf/o  sj,”  etc.  after  which  <and.al  and  fiiwers 
shonld  Ije  offered.  The  vessels  for  the  Piffis  should  be  ma  le  of  any  f the 
following  materials,  n;  : — r,  )tiis  Imvcs,  wood,  conch-sliell,  gold  and  sdver. 
-18-20. 

If  Jt  silver  vessel  nt.iy  not  ho  nvailahle,  then  tlie  worshipper  may  give 
away  a little  silver;  if  he  cannof  afford  that,  then  he  may  simply  look  at  it 
or  merely  mention  its  name.  Hy  devoutly  offering  even  wafer,  out  of 
silver  or  vessels  made  of  alloyed  silver,  the  worshipper  gains  everl.asting 
bliss.  The  silver  vp.ssels  are  flic  best  to  be  n.soil  at  the  time  of  offering 
libation  and  of  pinda.s  and  of  food  to  the  pitris  of  watiM.  Silver  has  come 
out  of  the  eyes  of  J^iva,  and  eonsei|nenliy  it  is  so  mncli  appreciated  by 
the  Pitris;  but  it  should  not  be  employed  at  the  time  of  Deva  worship, 
for  it  is  inauspicious  there. — 21-2.‘». 

According  to  lus  means  the  worshipper  should  give  away  the  vessels, 
and  perform  Saidcalpa  by  taking  a knda  in  his  hand  and  by  reciting,  “Om 
Y&  Divya"  etc. .and  the  name,  etc.  of  bis  father  and  gotra. — 24. 

Then  the  worshipper  shouW  say,  “ Pilritiavahaisyami,"  [1  shall  now  in- 
voke the  pitris]  when  the  assembled  priests  [BrAhmanas]  permit  him  by 
saying  “Kuru."  Afterwai-ds,  the  worshipper  shonld  say,  " UkintaslvA" 

“ Ayentumh  Pilaral}"  and  tlms  invoke  the  Pitris  with  these  two  Rig 
Verses.— 25. 

After  saying,  “VddivyA"  etc.,  the  worshipper  should  oSer  argya, 
that  is,  some  water  in  a pot,  along  with  flowers  and  sandal,  and  should 
put  knrfa  rings  in  the  dishes  and  pour  on  them  the  offered  water  out  of 
the  pot,  and,  after  saying  “ Pitrihhya  stMmmasi,"  should  place  the  pot 
downwards,  to  the  left  of  the  Pitri’s  scat. — 26-27. 

Afterwards  the  homa  “ Agni  Karana  " rite  should  be  performed,  as 
explained  before,  and  then  the  worshipper  shonld  fetch  the  pot  of  food 
with  both  hands  and  pnt  it  in  the  dishes.  At  the  time  of  putting  the 


OBAPTER  XVII. 


5? 

food  in  the  dishes,  kui^  should  be  held  in  the  hand  with  serene  mind. 
.^Vcral  kinds  of  pulses,  vegetables,  and  other  victuals  should  also  be 
'-arranged  in  the  dishes.  In  offering  food,  curds,  milk,  clarified  butter 
''of  cow’s  milk  and  sugar  should  also  be  put  in  the  dishes.  Pitrisare 
exceedingly  fond  of  flesh,  m Lord  Kedava  has  said. — 28-30. 

*■  ’fr 

r . The  Pitfis  say  that  the  offering  of  fish  keeps  them  satisfied  for  two 
• months,  the  flesh  of  deer  for  three  months,  mutton  for  four  months,  the 
flesh  of  birds  for  five  months,  goat’s  flesh  for  six  months,  Parsat’s  flesh 
for  seven  inpnths,  ena’a  flesli  for  eight  months,  ham  and  biiffaloe’s  flesh 
. for  ten  montlfs,  hare  and  turtle’s  flesh  for  eleven  months,  cow’s  < flesh? 
and)®  milk  and  rice  cooked  in  cow’s  milk  for  a year,  the  flesh  of  Ruru 
for  lo  months,  lion’s  flesh  f(n-  twelve  years,  Kalasfaka  (pot  herb)  and  flesh 
of  the  rhinoceros  for  a groat  number  of  years,  the  cow’s  milk  mixed  with 
honey  and  rice  cookeil  in  cow’s  milk,  clarified  butter  made  of  cow  s milk 
offered  even,' in  a small  measure  satisfies  tlie  Pitps— the  Purvadevatus  to 
an  extreme^degree, — 31-30. 

Vote.—Pfirsat,  Ruru,  Bna^spocios  of  deer. 

The  worsliipper  sliouhl  read  some  of  the  following the  Vedic 
mantras  relating  to  Pitiimedha,  Puranas  of  all  kinds,  Brahma  Sukta, 
Vi.snu  Sukta,  Surya  Siikta.,  Rudra  Sukta,  Indra  Sukta,  Agni  Sukta,  Soma 
Sukta,  Pavanani  Silkta,  according  to  one’s  capacity,  as  well  as  Vrihadra- 
ibantar  Sama,  Jyestlia  Saiua,  Rauhina  Sama,  f5antikadliya3’^a,  Madhu 
Brafimana,  Mandala  Brrilimana  any  other  thing  that  may  appeal  to  the 
worshipper  and  the  Brahrnanas. — 37-39. 

When  the  Brahmanas  are  about  to  finish  their  nieal,4hen  Vikira  rite 
should  be  performed  for  all  the  classes.  Tlie  food  should  be  put  in  one 
plate  and  scattered  in  front  of  the  Br.ilimaiis  along  with  some  water.~40-4l. 

At  the  time  of  performing  Vikira  rite,  the  following  mantras  should 
be  road.  These  menu  Those  beings  tliat  have  been  burnt  in  the  fire, 

♦ Professor  H.  U.  Wilson  writes : - 

**  The  expression  gavya  implios  ail  that  is  derived  from  a cuw ; bnt,  in  the  test 
it  is  associated  with  ^ flesh’;  and,  as  the  corainentator  observes  some  consider  the 
flesh  of  the  oow  to  bo  here  intended.  But  this,  ho  adds,  relates  to  other  ages.  Tn  the 
Kali  or  present  ago,  it  implies  milk  and  preparations  of  milk.  The  Sacrifice  of  a cow 
or  calf  formed  part  of  the  ancient  b'rAddha.  It  then  became  typical ; or,  as  a bull  was 
turned  loose,  instead  of  being  si  iiightered,  and  this  is  still  practised,  on  some  occasions. 
In  Mann,  the  term  Qavya  is  coupled  with  others,  which  limit  its  application 

3 ^ i 

* A whole  year  with  the  milk  of  cows,  and  food  made  of  that  milk.*  ” 

(Yifpu  PnrAna  Vol.  III.  p.  193.) 

S 


58 


THE  MAT8YA  PlJBANiM. 


those  beings  that  have  not  been  cremated  in  iny  faiinly,  may  feel  satisfied 
by  the  Vikira  rite  and  attain  emancipation.  Those  who  have  no  father 
or  mother,  no  brother,  no  clansman  to  olfer  them  food,  may  feel  satisfied 
witli  tlic  food  oiTercd  in  the  A^ikira  rite  and  attain  peace.  Those  wIjo 
were  not  iin^eated  witli  the  sacred  thread,  those  women  discarded  by  their 
kinsmen,  may  feel  satisfied  willi  the  food  offered  in  Vikira. — 42-44. 

When  the  BrA-hinanas  have  finislied  tlieir  meal  and  are  satisfied,  then*, 
water  should  be  poured  out  on  their  hantls  and  on  the  floor  plastererl 
with  cowdung.  Knrfa  sliould  lie  strewn  towards  the  south,  and  on  them 
the  balls  of  various  eatabh^s  should  bo  offered. — 4.5-4fl.  • 

The  balls  should  be  offered  after  sprinkling  watoi*  and  reeiting  tlie 
name  and  tlic  gotra  of  the  worshipper  as  mentioned  before  in  avanejana  rile, 
then  incense,  sandil,  &c.,  should  he  offered,  and  then  water  should  be 
sprinkled  again.  This  sprinkling  is  called  ‘imityaviwejana.  By  putting 
the.  left  knee  down  on  the  floor  and  by  liolding  water  along  with  kiuJa  in  the 
left  hand,  the  Pilris  hliould  be  invoked  and  cinuiniambulated.-- 47-48. 

Similarly,  sandal  and  dii)a  should  also  be  oflered.  After  tlm  Brah- 
manas  have  washed  their  hands  and  montli,  the  worshipper  sliould  him- 
self rinse  liis  mouth  with  water  and  offer  \vat(?r  to  liis  guests.  —49. 

Note.— Djpa-- waving  a liglit  before  the  object  of  worship. 

Then  flowers,  rice  fnnhusketl  se^amum,  should  be  offered  to  the 
Bralimanas,  after  which  they  should  be  giveii  some  Daksina,  according 
to  the  means  of  the  worsliipijer,  wln^  .should  nlTcj*  ii  ?o  cacli  Brilhinana  by 
calling  out  his  name  and  lineage.  - oO. 

.Vote.  -DakHiD&  is  inonoy  offopod  to  iiralimanas. 

The  worshi])])er  should  give  away  cow.-,,  land,  gold,  clothes  liked  by 
the  Bralimanas,  appreciated  by  the  Pitjis  and  appealing  to  the  worship- 
per’s own  fancy. — 51. 

There  should  be  no  niggardilincss  in  the  giving  of  Dak^irul,  and  to 
please  the  Pitris  the  worshipi)er  should  ask  the  Brrdunanas  to  do  Swadlia- 
Vachana.  Water  .should  be  put  in  the  hands  of  the  IJrahnianas  after  virfva 
deva  ceremony  and  the  tv.orshipper  should  j’eceive  the  blessings  of  the 
Brdhmanas  by  facing  lumscli'  towards  the  East.  We  should  first  say 
**  Aghordh  Pitarnli  SantUj''  (“let  the  pilris  be  auspicious”),  in  reply  to 
which  the  Bralimanas  should  say  **  8antu  “ “ (lei  it  be  so)  — 52-53. 

The  host  should  again  say,  tatha  Vurdhatdmnal}/'  to 

which  the  Brahmanas  should  reply,  “ Vardhatdm  (let  similarly  our  clan 
be  increased)  ”,  the  worshipper  should  say,  “ DaUinmobhivardhantam  flet 


GHAtTEB  VXIL 


59 


the  giver  of  preseate  lucrease  in  our  family,”)  the  Bralimripae  should  say, 
“ VardhantAm  (may  they  Increase)  " the  worehipper  ” Etdhtatynsi^h  santu 
(lot  these  blessings  be  true),”  the  Bralimarias  “ Santa  ( may  it  be  so).”  After 
finishiug  svadliiivilchaua  like  this,  the  worshipper  should  perform  “ iicli- 
chhai^apa”  at  the  time  of  dismissing  his  invited  guests,  and,  after,  that  he 
should  perform  “ graha  bali." — 54-55. 

l^chchc^t'ina^is  doAiiod  bolc^if. 

(tra1iabali=:domcatic  oblation.  Offering  of  tlio  reoiiiants  of  meal  to  all  crea- 
tures, sucJi  as  animals,  sapornatural  beings  and  particularly  household 
Dei  tics. 

IJclichliosaaa  ” is  to  loavo  some  food  scattered  on  the  door,  for  the 
acceptance  of  the  attendants  of  the  Pitris  known  as  Astika  and  Akutila. 
The  Pitria  themselves  started  this  rite  for  the  satisfaction  of  their  attend- 
ants wJiicli  should  be  j)ei  1‘onncd  by  all  —those  who  have  children  and  those 
who  are  childless. — otWS. 

Afterwards,  the  worshipper  shonl«l  stand  before  the  Brahmanas,  made 
of  kiirfa,  wi^h  a pot  of  water,  and  after  reciting  “ Vrije,  etc.  should 

(lisiniss  them  with  the  ku*la  end.  The  worshipper  should  tlieii  move 
eight  steps  out  of  the  house,  and  along  with  his  wife,  son  and  kinsmen 
should  complete  the  rite  of  rfraddha. — 59-150. 

'riien  lie  should,  after  sprinkling  water  silently  round  the  fire,  with- 
«)ut  uttering  any  ritual  formulae,  perforin  Vairfvadeva  and  Nityabali. — 61. 

iYot(?.— V^aisvadeva=aii  olYGring  to  all  tlie  Deities  (made  by  presenting  oblations  to 
firo  before  meals.)  Nityabali-=daily  offering. 

After  the  Vaitfva  deva  ceremony  ho  may  partake  of  the  food  with  his 
servants,  sous,  kith  and  kin  and  other  guests. —62. 

This  form  of  Sadljilraiui  liraddlia  can  be  performed  even  by  those, 
who  have  not  been  invested  with  the  sacred  thread,  those  who  are  in 
a foreign  country  and  liave  not  their  wives  with  them.  The  HSildras  may 
also  perform  it  without  reciting  any  sacred  formulae.  — 63-64. 

The  third  rfraddha  is  called  Abhyudaikam,  which  is  also  known  as 
Vriddhi  rfraddlia.  ft  is  performed  on  auspicious  occasions  such  as  a big 
sacrifice,  marriage,  &c. — 65! 

Ill  Vriddhi  rfraddha,  offerings  arc  made  in  the  following  order  : — 
Mother,  grandmother,  great-grandmother,  father,  grandfatlier,  great-grand- 
father, maternal-grandfather,  maternal  great-grandfather,  luatenial-great- 
great-grandfather,  ViiS vadeva. — 66. 

The  worehipper  should,  after  circumambulating,  turn  his  face  to- 
wards the  East  and  should  then  remove  the  balls  made  of  curds,  uncooked 
rice,  fruits,  water,  and  laden  with  kuila  and  dfirva  grass.— 67. 


«0  TBE  MATSYJ  PUBANAM. 

The  Br&hmaoas  sbonld  be  offered  water  (arghya)  twice,  with  the 
words,  ‘ Sampanmm,  (accomplished )'  and  should  be  worshipped  and  offered 
clothes,  gold,  &c,,  by  the  twice-born.— 68, 

Barley  should  be  offered  in  lieu  of  sesamuni ; this  is  also  called 
Ndudimukha  srSddlia,  and  propitious  mautras  in  performing  it  should  be 
uttered.— 69. 

A l^ddra  cau  also  perforin  the  ordinary  as  well  as  the  Vridlii 
rfraddlia  with  uncooked  grain,  by  uttering  the  formula  of  nainali 
instead  ot  Vedic  inautvaa.  -70. 

For  thus  said  the  Lord  Bhagavan Charity  is  the  best  thing  for  a 
{^ftdra,  by  performing  which  he  gains  all  liis  ends.— 71. 

Uere  ends  the  secenteenth  ehipter  deserihing  the  Sddharana  and 
Ahhyndaya  Sraddhas. 

CHAPTER  XVfll. 

Suta  said : 1 sliall  now  relate  to  you  the  Ekoddista  ^radclha,  as 
explained  by  the  Lord,  and  will  also  tell  you  for  wliat  period  a son  should 
consider  himself  defiled  after  the  deatli  of  liis  fntlier.  By  tlie  death  of 
a kinsman  [Sapktda)^  a Bi-rdniiana  renutins  defiled  for  ten  days,  a K^atrya  for 
12  days,  a Vaisjya  for  15  days,  a J^ildra  for  a inonih.  By  the  demise  of  one 
whose  tonsure  ceremony  was  not  perfortiK'l,  one  remains  defiled  f(»r  3 
nights.  Similarly,  people  of  all  classes  are  defiled  for  a period  wlien 
there  is  a child-birth  in  ihe  Ijousc.  At  the  lime  of  a death  till  tht 
corpse  is  burnt  and  the  ashes  arc  collected,  tlu-  person  in  wliose  family 
the  death  occurs  should  not  be  considered  contaminated.  Commemnng 
from  the  day  of  tlie  demise  of  the  person,  a lump  of  food  should  be  offered 
to  the  departed  spirit,  for  a period  of  twelve  days.  That  offering  is 
Patheya  (that  is  viaticum)  and  is  consequently  most  agreeable. — 1-5. 

In  case  of  offering  Pinda  to  the  deceased  on  the  1 2th  day  after  his 
death,  the  attendants  of  i'ama  do  not  carry  the  spirit  to  the  city  of  the 
God  of  Death,  and  during  this  period  the  departed  spirit  sees  his  sons, 
wife  or  any  other  member  of  the  family,  and  observes*  whether  they 
provide  it  with  sometliing  for  its  comfort  on  its  long  journey  or  not.  It  is 
for  this  reason  that  a pitcher  full  of  water  is  suspended  from  a tree,  for 
a period  of  ten  days.  Its  water  soothes  the  heat  of  cremation  and  also 
refreshes  the  spirit  when  it  gets  weary  on  the  great  journey.— -6-7, 

A Brahmana  on  the  lltli  day  after  deatli  should  feast  11  Bnihinanas 
and  K^atriyas,  &c.,  should  feast  an  uneven  number  of  Bruhma^as.  On  the 


OBAPTER  XVni.  61 


day  following  the  completion  of  the  period  of  defilement,  one  should 
perform  the  £koddi^(a  l^raddha  in  which  all  the  cei-emonies  previously 
described,  barring  invocation  and  hotna  ceremony  of  Virfvadeva,  should  be 
performed.  In  this  Srfiddha,  only  one  kmia  ring  should  be  put  on,  end 
only  one  ofiering  of  water  ^arghya)  and  ball  of  food  (pi^d^)  should  be 
made.  After  reciting  “ Upatiithatarn,"  sesamum  and  a handful  of 
water  should  bo  offered.—  8-10. 

Nafe.— Upatlf^hatAmsIt  is  offered  to  thee. 

Svahitani  should  be  recited  at  the  time  oJ  performing  the  Vikira 
rite,  anil  Abhiramyatairi  should  be  uttered  at  the  time  of  dismissing  the 
departed  spirit,  'riie  rest  of  the  rite  should  be  performed,  as  explained 
before.  Similarly,  ^raddlia  should  be  performed  each  month,  and,  on  the 
second  day  of  tlie  completion  of  the  period  of  defilement,  a well-bedecked 
bed  should  be  given  away.  At  the  same  time,  an  image  made  of  gold 
and  well  dressoil,  should  also  be  given  away  and  the  Brahniana  as  well 
as  his  cor«ort  should  he  worshipped,  after  being  well  dressed  and  made 
lo  wear  good  oniaments.  A bull  should  be  set  free,  and  a really  good 
fow  and  a pitcher  full  of  water,  along  with  nice  eatables,  should  also  be 
given  away.  The  pitcher  should  be  filled  with  sesamum  along  with  water. 
After  a year,  the  Sapindi-karana  jJrSddha  shouM  he  performed.  After  the 
performance  of  Sapindi-karana  rfraddha  the  deceased  fpreta)  beccmies 
entitled  to  receive  a share  out  of  the  Parvana  liiv.rlciha  .and  become  legible 
for  woi ship  at  Vriddlii  rfraddha,  and  the  householilcr  also  beeomes  entitled 
to  perform  N:nulimukha  ^rad<iha,  &c.  Virfvadeva  rite  is  performed  in 
sapindi-karana  rfraddha,  and  the  ancestors  and  the  fresh  departed  spirits 
arc  offered  separate  scats.  Water,  mixed  with  sandal  and  sesamum,  should 
bo  put  in  four  different  vessels  for  offering.  The  vessels  meant  for  the 
Pitfis  and  the  departed  spirit  should  he  mixed  together. — U-18. 

Similarly,  four  balls  of  food  should  be  offered,  and,  after  reciting 
y&'"sfimandh  samansah,  the  balls  meant  for  the  departed  spirit  should  be 
divided  into  three  parts  and  mixed  with  tlie  balls  of  food  meant  for  the 
Pitris.  Excepting  in  Sapindi-karana  rfraddha,  there  is  no  separate  rite  for 
the  deceased  in  any  other  ceremony.  The  departed  spirit  becomes  delight- 
ed by  the  performance  of  sapindi-karana,  for  it  then  joins  the  Pitpis 
(and  ceas(?s  to  be  a preta).  The  departed  spirit  joins  the  Agniqcdtta  giowip  of 
Pil|’is  and  drinks  with  them  nectar ; and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  no  Pineji- 
dana  is  performed  for  the  departed  spirit  after  the  sapindi-karana.  The 
ball  of  food  (pineja)  should  only  be  offered  to  those  who  join  the  group  of 
Pitfis.  After  sapi^di-kararia,  three  balls  are  offered  on  the  occasion  of  an 


62 


THE  MATSrA  IMURAN  AM. 


eclipse  or  when  the  sun  or  any  planetary  body  passes  from  one  zodiacal 
s^ign  into  another ; and  on  the  date  of  demise  only  one  ball  is  offered.  If 
on  the  date  of  death  one  leaves  the  Ekoddisja  sniddba  and  performs  the 
Pdrvapa,  he  commits  a sin  equal  to  that  of  murder  of  father,  mothers  an<l 
brother,  and  goes  to  hell.  -19-25. 

Tlie  deceased,  after  living  with  the  Preias  (spirits)  for  a long 
time,  begins  to  feel  uncomfortable.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  Ekodclista 
should  be  performed  every  year.  Oiie  wlio,  being  ilevoid  of  jealousy,  gives 
awfiy  a jar  full  of  water  along  with  grain  for  one  fiillyear,  for  the  benefit 
of  the  departed  spiril,  lias  llie  same  reward  as  is  obtained  by  performing 
the  AiJvaniedlui  sacrifice. — iM-itl. 

When  a jJraddlm  is  performed  vvitli  nncookefi  grabv  then  'gni- 
kavanii  nnd  Plndndiim  slu^iild  also  he  performed  with  tlie  same  By  the 
performance  of  sapindi-Ivaj'an«a,  r.lie  deceased  >omI  joiu.s  the  first  tltree 
groups  of  Pitris,  and  tlioii  it  finds  emancipation  in  process  of  titne.  Ere/? 
after  attaining  o/nancipation  they  get  their  sliaio  of  (Icpa)  rfraddJia  by  the 
hands  being  wiped  with  a fcnrfa.  From  (ho  4tli  to  the  fill)  generation,  the 
forefathers  get  their  share  of  4ivlddha  from  (lie  Kiisa  wiping  (lepa)  and 
not  pindas,  and  tlivce  generations,  father,  grandfatlier  and  great  grand- 
father, they  are  entitleil  to  the  ball  of  food  (piinja),  the  sevontli  being  the 
giver  of  the  Binda.  Iliese  .sciva  are  kiuuvn  as  sapinclas  for  the  sapincia 
hood  includes  these  se\en  counting  the  pciforinor  of  the  sacrifiee.““27-2!). 

Here  ends  the  eiijhtecntli  ehnptcr  deuliin;!  iritJi  the  ceremn}iif  of  sapivdi- 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

'riie  liisis  askcd:--Ho\v  the  offerings  to  tlie  ancestors  and  the  Oevas 
are  to  lie  made  hero  by  men.  Tliey  also  recjuestocl  liim  to  explain  to  them 
in  what  way  the  offerings  made  in  this  world  roach  the  Pitps  in  the 
Pitfiloka  and  who  is  the  medium  between  the  Pitris  and  the  man  who 
makes  offerings.  We  see  that  men  eat  and  offerings  are  made  in  the 
fire,  how  do  they  then  reach  the  deceased  ?- -1-2. 

Suta  said  : —It  is  written  in  the  Veda  that  the  eight  Vasus  are  tlie 
Pitfis,  the  eleven  Rudras  are  the  Pitainahas,  and  the  twelve  Adityas  are 
the  PrapitAmahas.  The  recitation  of  name  and  clan  of  the  Pityis  by  means 
of  the  sacred  formula  with  devotion,  carries  the  offerings  made  to  the 
Pitris : — 3-4. 

Agnis^vatta,  &c.,  are  appointed  as  rulers  of  deceased  ancestors.  They 
transport  the  offerings  made  to  the  ancestors  even  though  they  have  been 


OHAPTER  XX. 


63 


reborn  in  the  meanwhile  under  another  name,  clan,  place  and  time, 
'nie  PitfiB  carry  the  hall  of  food  offered  in  the  form  of  nectar  if  the 
deceased  ancestor  has  become  a Deva  througli  his  good  karma.  If  he  is 
reborn  as  a Daitya,  the  offering  reaches  him  in  the  form  of  worldly 
enjoyment.  If  taking  birth  as  a beast,  lie  gets  it  in  the  form  of  grass  ; 
those  ill  the  body  of  serpents  get  it  in  the  form  of  air  ; those  in 
form  of  Yaksa  get  it  as  wine ; those  in  the  body  of  the  Rakt^asa  get 
it  in  the  form  of  flesh  ; those  in  the  body  of  dAnavas  get  it  in  the  form 
of  iiiaya  (delusion  or  glamour),  those  in  the  form  of  ghosts  get  it  as 
blood  and  water ; and  those  who  are  born  as  liuinan  beings  get  it  in  the 
form  of  grain  and  water  and  otlier  multifarious  objects  of  enjoyments. — 5-9. 

The  faculty  of  sensuous  enjoyment,  beautiful  women,  delicious 
vioLiials  and  the  power  of  enjoying  them,  wealth,  the  power  of  charity, 
liaiidsomo  form,  health  are  the  (lowers  offered  in  i:iraddha  performed  with 
(levolion.  The  attainnient  of  Brahma,  good  age,  sons,  wealth,  knowledge, 
heaven,  bliss  of  emancipation  are  the  fruits  offered  in  i^raddha. — 10 — 11. 

'riie  Piti’is  confer  kingdoms  on  their  devotees  when  they  are  pleased 
and  it  is  also  said  that  the  sons  of  Kainlika  Risi  attained  NirvAna  througli 
the  glory  of  the  Pitps,  in  their  fifth  cycle  of  birth. — 12. 

Hire  enfis  the  nineteenth  chapter  dealiiuj  ivitli  the  ritual  of  &rf1ddha. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

The  Risis  asked  the  sage  Suta  fo  relate  them  liow  the  sons  of 
Kamfika  in  their  fifth  cycle  of  birlli,  putting  an  end  lo  their  desires, 
attained  emancipation  by  their  power  of  Yoga.— 1. 

Suta  said,  once  upon  a time  there  lived  in  KurukhOtra  a virtuous 
Uisi  named  Kausika.  tie  liad  seven  sons.  Every  one  of  whom  did  the 
deeds  as  connoted  by  their  respective  names.  They  were : — Svasripa, 
Krodliana,  Hinsra,  PisJuna,  Kavi,  Vagdus^a,  Pitrivarti.  They  were  pupils  of 
Carga. — 2-3. 

Svasripa^Moving  at  ploasuro  or  will.  Krodhaua^Irasciblc.  Hinsra^Savage. 
I’isana—Baokbitor.  Kavi=Pocfc.  Vflgduala— •'•'cnrrilons.  Pitfivarfci=DGVotee  of  the* 
J^itfis. 

After  the  death  of  their  father  the  land  was  visited  with  a terrible 
famine  when  a large  number  of  people  were  ruined  owing  to  the  cessation 
of  rain  and  many  died  of  starvation.  In  those  days  the  seven  sons  of 
Kauifika  used  to  look  after  the  coav  of  Garga  and  were  residing  in  a 
forest.  One  day  not  getting  anything  to  eat  they  felt  fearfully  oppressed 
with  the  |>angs  of  hunger.  In  those  eiroiimsianees  tliey  resolved  saying 


64 


THE  MATSYA  PURANAM. 


we  shall  eat  the  cow  to  appease  our  hunger.  At  that  stage  the  youngest  of 
them  all,  said  to  his  brothers If  this  cow  must  be  killed,  let  us 
sacrifice  her  to  our  pitjis  in  iSraddha  for  the  cow  sacrificed  \^ith  that  view 
would  decidedly  save  us  from  all  sin.”  “ Do  so  said  the  olher  brothers 
to  Pitfivarti.  The  cow  was  sacrificed  and  Pitfivarti  performed  the 
rfraddha  with  great  dcvoiitm.  Two  lirotluMs  officiated  for  the  lirahmanaa 
invited  to  Viivedeva  idi,  il:e  rest  tliree  similarly  officiated  for  the 
Brfthmapas,  invited  to  'a\'f  part  in  the  Pitri-karnia  and  the  seventh  one 
represented  the  Atithi.  lu  los  w.i  - (lioy  all  after  peiTorniiii!:;  the  ^raddha 
with  due  Mantras  and  Meditating  Pilrls  feustojl  on  the  sacrificed 
cow.—  4-9. 

.Vo^e.— Atithi —guest.  According  to 

After  that  they  ivpai red  to  ilieir  preceptor  (hirga  and  o.divt  ring 
the  calt  to  him  said  ‘‘(riiru!  the  row  has  been  devoured  by  the  lion, 
tills  ealf  was  saved,  wliieli  take  bark  " 

In  that  way  the  seven  niceties  eommilted  [earh^s.-^ly  a cruel  art  on 
the  strcngtli  of  the  Vedic  injunction  and  ate  the  cow.  - 11. 

In  process  of  time  tliey  were  all  gatliereil  to  tlieir  fathers  and  were 
re-born  in  the  house  of  a hunter  ; but  as  they  performed  the  t^raddha  with 
great  devotion  they  had  a re<*nlh*ctioii  of  their  previous  life  tlirongh  the 
glory  of  the  Pitris  They  wcir  liowever  boni  in  the  family  of  a hunter  on 
account  of  their  having  commired  m rntr]  deed  ; ])i!i  i\^  tlicy  had  a 
recollection  of  their  previous  iifr,  liiey  n.  a lit  of  asceticism  spurned  at 
all  mundane  luxuries  and  put  an  end  to  tlieir  existence  by  fasting.— 12-14, 

Afterwards  they  w'crc  re-born  as  deer  on  tlio  1v?iliinjara  hill  and 
through  the  glory  of  the  Pitris  maintained  their  recollection  of  their  pre- 
vious lives.  They  then  devoted  ihcinsclvos  to  the  Pitris  and  the  God 
^iva.— 15. 

They  again  gave  up  the  ghost  by  carrying  on  tlic  penance  of  fasting ; 
and  were  re-born  in  the  form  of  Chakravaka  bird  on  the  banks  of  the  Mana 
Sarovara  lake,  under  the  following  names; — Sumana,  Knmuda,  S>udddha, 
Chhiclradaiiji,  Sunetraka,  Snnetra,  and  AmsnrnAn.  They  were  endowed 
with  tlie  attributes  connoted  by  their  respective  names  and.  did  similar 
deeds.— 16  T8. 

iVot6.—Samanft= Pleasing  to  the  mind.  Beautiful.  Knninda^lotus.  Sudddha—Pure. 
Ghhidra-darai:=Captious,  Critic.  Sunetraka^  i laving  good  eyes  Sunetra^s Having  beauti- 
ful eyes.  AmsumAu^lllustrious. 

Out  of  those  seven,  the  three  fallen  from  yoga  began  to  roam  about 
hither  and  thither.  One  day  they  came  across  Vibliraja  the  valiant  king 


CnAPTEB  XX. 


65 


of  PaScb&la  who  was  enjoying  himself  in  his  pleasure  gurdeu  and  had  a 
large  retinue  of  followers  and  conveyances. — 19-20, 

Pitravartt  the  youngest  of  all  the  brotliers  and  who  had  performed 
the  l^raddha,  became  desirous  of  becoming  a king  ; the  other  two  biothers 
wished  to  become  the  courtiers  of  a king ; the  remaining  four  did  not 
cherish  any  wish  and  tliey  were  consequently  born  as  Brahmanas.  One 
of  them  (Pitfivati)  was  born  as  Br4hmadatta,  the  son  of  King  . Viblnfija, 
two  brothers  were  born  as  Kandarika  and  Subalaka  the  sons  of  the  king’s 
mjnister ; and  sometime  after  that,  Drahmadatta  was  anointed  and  pro- 
claimed as  king.— 21-24. 

Brahmadatta  was  tlie  most  illustrious  sovereign  of  Panchala.  He 
ruled  the  country  with  great  piety  and  even-handed  justice.  He  was  well- 
versed  in  all  tlie  sastras,  yoga  and  understood  the  languages  of  all 
animals.— 25. 

The  cow  that  was  sacrificeil  and  feasted  upon  by  them  as  the  sons 
of  Kautjika  was  born  as  Sannati  the  daughter  of  Devala  and  was  eventually 
married  to  Brahmadatta.  Because  she  had  served  as  an  offering  of  the 
Pitfis,  she  became  learned  in  tlie  Braljina  lore,  and  the  king  ruled  the 
country  to  the  satisfaction  and  prosperity  of  his  subjects  in  conjunction 
with  his  noble  consort  Sanati. — 20-27, 

On  one  occasion  the  king  in  company  of  his  queen  in  his  pleasure 
garden  saw  an  ant  attempting  to  please  his  better-half.  Being  over- 
powered with  the  arrows  of  Cupid,  the  ant  crawled  behind  its  help-mate 
and  said.  “ Ah  ! my  love ! I have  not  seen  a prettier  and  sweeter  form 
than  thine  in  any  of  the  three  regions.  See  how  delicate  thy  waist 
is?  Both  thy  thighs  resemble  the  plantain  trunk,  thy  swelling  breasts, 
thy  strut  of  an  elephant,  thy  golden  complexion,  thy  melodious  voice 
resembling  that  of  the  cuckoo,  thy  enchanting  smile,  thy  eyes  like 
lotus,  thy  tongue  that  loves  the  taste  of  pure  sugar,  are  indeed  matchless. 
Thou  art  an  ardent  devotee  of  thy  husband  so  much  so  that  thou  wilt 
never  breakfast  before  me,  thou  wilt  always  bathe  after  me,  thou  art 
always  gloomy  (juring  my  absence,  thou  always  shiverest  when  I am  in  an 
angry  mood,  what  is  the  reason  of  thy  turning  your  face  away  from 
me  in  anger  to-day  ”?  Hearing  such  a speech  of  the  ant  his  wife  said 
“ Do  not  talk  like  that ; you  are  false  to  me.  I know  all  thy  tricks, 
yesterday  thou  feasted  another  with  tlie  particles  of  sweet.”  28-34. 

The  ant  said  Dear ! I mistook  her  for  yon  as  she  resembled  you  so 
minutely  and  through  this  over  sight  1 feasted  lier  with  sweets.  This  is 
however  my  first  fault  which  you  should  forget  and  forgive.  I shall  never 


THE  MATSYA  PURAVaM. 


repeat  such  a blunder,  I promise  this  sincerely,  be  pleased,  1 fall  at  your 
feet.”-35.36. 

Sflta  said  that  on  hearing  the  flattering  words  of  her  lord,  the  ant 
dismissed  all  Iier  rage  and  ofTereil  lierself  to  him. — 37. 

The  King  Rrahmadatta  wlio  knew  the  language  of  all  creatures  by 
the  grace  of  Vi^nn,  was  highly  astonished  to  hear  wliat  transpired  between 
the  couple. — 38. 

Iley'e  ends  the  twentieth  chapter  dealing  with  the  derision  of  the  she-ant. 

CIIAPTKK  XXl. 

The  Risis  asked: -Flow  did  the  King  Brahmadatta  acquire  the 
faculty  of  uiulerstandiiig  tlie  langiinge  of  all  crcainres  and  in  what  ianiily 
were  the  other  four  craties  horn  ? — *. 

Sula  rcplieil  : — They  were  hoDi  in  ilie  family  of  a poor  and  old 
Bnilfmana  in  tho  kingdom  of  llraliinadatta  an  l they  had  a recollection  of 
their  previous  lives.  - 2. 

Dliritiinnna,  Tuttva<hu«i,  Vidynehanda  and  Tapotsuka  were  the  four 
sons  of  tlio  poor  lirahmana  -Sudaridra  '-aud  t1)py  all  had  the  attributes 
connoted  hy  their  respeiuive  --3. 

*Vot^».--Dhritimfln:=:Stoadfa‘«  t.  Tattvna.a*-:ii~PliUn>o|ihr‘r.  Vid  va'chandari Very  learned. 
TapotsukH=oagor  to  practise  aspctirism, 

ddioy  ail  dotenninod  lo  acfjniro  omancipaiion  hy  practising  asceti- 
cism. -4. 

Sudaridra  felt  very  miserable  when  he  came  (o  know  of  the  resolution 
of  his  sons  and  in  a veiy  ]jlaijiti\e  tt»ne  asked  tlietii  the  reason  of  their 
doing  so.  Ho  tried  lii.s  I)est  to  di.-^snade  his  sons  from  doing  that  and 
said  that  to  repair  to  forest  h?avirig  an  aged  fatlier  behind  in  a helpless 
condition  was  no  virtue,  ami  w’nat  would  he  tlicir  fate  for  doing  that  act. 
Hearing  those  wonlsof  their  <jld  and  infirm  fatlier  tliey  said  that  he  should 
not  stand  in  their  way  and  tliat  (rod  had  made  ample  provision  for  his 
subsistence.  By  reading  tho  following  .41oka  before  his  king  he  would  get 
plenty  of  money  and  villages.— 5-8. 

“The  seven  sons  of  the  Hrfdonanari  in  Kurujangala  were  re-born  as 
the  sons  of  a hunter  in  iJiisapura,  again  they  were  ro-born  as  deer  on  the 
KSlinjar  hills  and  then  again  as  cranes  on  the  banks  of  the  Maiiasalake  ; 
we  are  those  very  same  who  liave  now  attained  final  beatitude.” — 9. 

Thus  addressing  their  father  they  departed  from  him  to  practise 
penances  in  the  forest.  The  father  crawled  towards  the  King’s  palace 
• 1 -A-  mnnpv  from  him. — 10. 


OBAPTBB  XXL 


Anagha,  the  son  oC  VibhrSja  the  valiant  sovereign  of  P&nch^Ia  adored 
the  God  Vis^u  with  the  object  of  getting  an  heir.  Sometime  after,  the 
Lord  being  pleased  with  the  king  s devotion  appeared  before  him  and 
asked  him  to  seek  a boon  On  hearing  those  words  of  the  Lord,  the 
King  sought  the  following  boon.— 11-13. 

“ Sire,  grant  me  a son  who  may  be  powerful,  illustrious,  dutiful, 
very  well  versed  in  all  the  rfastr^s  and  yoga,  aud  who  may  be  conversant 
with  the  languages  of  all  the  creature.^.**  The  Lor. I said  “Be  it  so  ” and 
vanislicd  then  and  iliere.  Con.sequently  his  son  firahmadattu  was  so 
illustrious.  He  was  sympathetic,  valiant,  conversant  in  the  languages  of 
all  the  creatures,  the  ruler  of  all  the  beings. — 14-17. 

Brahmadatta  understanding  what  irans^^ired  between  the  ant  and 
his  helpmate,  laughed.  —18. 

The  Queen  Saniiati  seeing  his  lord  laughing  apparently  without  any 
rhyme  or  reason  asked  him  the  cause  of  his  doing  so.  She  said  “ Sire,  why 
are  you  L'\ughing  without  any  reason,  will  you  please  explain  .it  to  me  ? ** 
19-20. 

SOta  said  that  after  hearing  those  words  of  his  consort  the  king  said 
that  the  conversation  between  the  ant  and  his  better  half  made  him  laugh 
so  much  and  so  suddenly.  Tliere  was  no  other  reason  for  his  doing  so. 
The  queen  said  that  the  explanation  was  not  true,  and  that  he  laughed 
at  her.  She  would  give  up  her  life.  How  could  a mortal  understand  the 
language  of  lower  beings  without  being  a God  ? — 21-23. 

“ What  more  disgrace  can  there  be  than  this.”  Hearing  those 
words  of  the  queen  tlie  king  became  speechless.  In  order  to  please  the 
queen  the  king  observed  a penance  and  began  to  worship  Lord  Visjau 
without  tasting  any  food  for  a week.  The  Goil  appeared  to  him  in 
a dream  and  said  ” you  will  come  across  an  old  Bnlliinana  to-morrow 
in  course  of  your  rambles  in  the  town  and  you  must  acquaint  yourself 
with  everything  from  him.”  Saying-that  the  Lord  vanished.— 24-2(5. 

In  the  morning  the  king  in  the  company  of  his  queen  and  courtiers 
came  across  the  old  BrAhmana  in  the  suburbs  of  the  town.  The  Brdlimana 
recited  the  same  eSloka  wliich  his  sons  had  taught  him  at  the  time  of  their 
departure  to  the  forest. — 27-28. 

The  king  along  with  two  of  Ins  ministers  instantly  got  the  recollection 
of  their  previous  lives  on  hearing  the  illokaand  the  sovereign  fainted  and 
fell  on  the  ground.  Subdlaka  the  son  of  Vabhriiand  the  author  of  the 
erotic  science  and  the  scholar  of  all  the  rfastrds  ; Kancjarika  the  propagator 


TtlE  MATSYA  PURANAM. 


68 

of  the  vedas;  getting  a recollection  of  tbcir  previous  lives  fell  on  the 
ground  in  a swoon. — 29-31. 

Recovering  from  their  fainting  fit,  they  all  three  repented  of  their 
fate  and  said  “ Oh  ! we  have  become  devoid  of  Yoga  by  falling  into  the 
snares  of  desires.”— 32. 

Afterwards  they  extolled  the  blessings  of  tiraddha  and  dismissed  the 
BrShmaqa  with  presents  of  money  and  villages. — 33. 

On  the  departure  of  the  Bruhmana,  tlie  king  handed  over  the  reins 
of  the  Government  to  his  son  Visvaksena  and  afterwards  left  the  empire 
along  with  his  two  ministers.  They  a!!  seven  joined  one  another  at 
the  Manasa  lake.— 34-35. 

Brahmadatia  and  Ins  brothers  the  great  devc^tee  of  the  Pitris  wore 
very  pleased,  but  Sannati  was  very  sad  on  the  idea  of  her  being  the  cause 
of  her  husband’s  abdication  and  said  “ Dear  ! It  is  owing  to  me  that  you 
have  abandoned  your  mundane  empire.” — .3()-?>7. 

The  king  said  **  Darling ! Indeed  it  is  tlirougli  thee  that  we  all  liave 
liberated  ourselves  from  tlm  l)onds  of  tlie  world.”  Thus  praising  tlie 
queen  they  all  after  practising  yoga  attained  final  beatitude  after  letting 
the  Jiva-Stma  escape  from  their  body  through  the  Hrahniarandlira. — 38-39. 

Note.— Braliinarandhra  an  aportnre  in  the  orown  of  the  head  throuph  which  the 
•oal  is  said  to  escape  on  its  leaving  tilie  body.  .See  the  Sacred  books  of  tbo  Hindus— Vol. 
XV.— The  Yoga  Sfl.stra. 

The  Pitps  on  becoming  pleased  tints  bestow  on  their  devotees, 
long  life,  knowledge,  lieaven,  omaneipaiion,  emnfort,  tmd  empire.— 4(^ 

One  who  relates,  reads  or  listens  to  tlie  history  of  the  Pitris  and  king 
Brahmadatta  enjoys  pleasures  for  age.s  and  ages  in  the  Bralmialoka. — 41. 

Here  ends  the  twenty-first  chapter  narrnt'niq  the  story  of  Brahmadatta 
and  the  power  of  Pritis. 

CHAPTER  XX 11. 

The  Risia  said. — “ Wlien  does  that  ffraddlia  give  everlasting  benefit  ? 
In  what  parts  of  the  day  and  at  what  sacred  places  should  it  be  per- 
formed ?”— 1. 

Sfita  said  Charity  performed  a little  after  midday  ifl  the  third  part 
of  the  day  in  Abhijit  or  Rohini  gives  everlasting  benefit.  I shall 
enumerate  to  you  in  a nutshell  the  chief  holy  places  that  are  dear  to  the 
PHri8.-2.3. 

Note.— AbhiJIt  is  the  name  of  asterism. 

QayA  is  the  principal  Pitritiftha.  Lonl  Brnhinil  Himself  resides 


OHAPTEB  XXll. 


69 


there  And  the  PitfiA  anxiong  for  a share  in  tlie  oSerings  have  sung  this 
story  there.— 4-5. 

It  is  well  to  wish  for  a number  of  sons,  but  if  even  one  son  goes 
and  performs  tiraddha  there  at  Gayd,  or  performs  the  Aiivaniedha  sacrififre 
or  sets  fiee  a black  bull,  it  is  more  than  ample  for  the  satisfaction  of  the 
Pitfis.  The  sacred  V/iranasl  (Beiiai-es)  which  is  the  abode  of  Vitnalerfvar 
the  giver  of  Prosperity  and  Emancipation,  is  also  dear  to  the  Fitfis. — R-7. 

Prayuga  is  another  Piti'itirtha  that  fulfils  the  desires  of  the  worship- 
per. It  is  the  abode  of  Vateifvar  who  was  located  there  by  Vispu  and 
Lord  Keifava  always  is  lost  there  in  His  reveries  of  yoga. — 8-9. 

Daifa^vamedha,  Gangfidvrira,  Nanda,  Lalita,  MuySpuri,  Mitrapada, 
Kedara,  Gangi-sagara,  are  also  the  sacred  places  where  4r4dd)ia  should  be 
performed. — 10-11. 

So  is  Brahmasaru  a pool  in  the  Satadru  river  and  Kairnisa  the  trysting 
place  t>f  all  the  lirthas,  are  also  very  dear  to  tlie  Pilfis. — 1^. 

Gangodbheda,  in  the  Gomati,  Varftha-ksetra  which  is  the  abode  of 
Maliadeva  and  the  eighteen  handed  Siva,  the  place  where  the  quoit 
■ chakra)  of  Vispu  fell  is  Naimi^tlranya  wliich  is  the  most  sacred  of  all 
the  tirllias  and  where  Lord  Varaha  is  worshipped  are  ail  sacred  places. 
One  who  goes  there  is  liberated  from  all  bis  sins  and  attains  emanci- 
pation.— 13-10. 

Iksnmati  tlrtha  where  resides  the  God  Nfisinha  is  held  very  dear 
to  tlie  Pitfis;  it  is  on  tho  confluence  of  the  Ganges.-— 17. 

Kui-uk^etra  is  another  most  sacred  place  where  all  the  Pitfis  are 
always  present. — 18. 

The  river  iSai  ayfl  venerated  by  all  the  Devas  is  holy  and  so  is  the 
sacred  IrAwatl,  the  rivers  Yamuna,  Devika,  KsH,  Chandrabh3ga,  DriiJadvafi, 
VenumatJ,  Vetravati  are  sacred  and  dear  to  tbe  Pitpis,  and  drSddba  per- 
formed on  their  banks  confers  great  benefits  on  the  worshipper.  19-20. 

Jambumarga  whence  the  path  of  the  Pitpis  is  visible  is  a Pitpitirtha 
unto  this  day.  The  pitpiUrtha  Nilaknpda,  Rudrasarovara,  Mnnsarovara, 
Maudakinl,  Aqhchliodiv,  Vipilda,  Sarasvati  are  also  sacred  tirthas.— 21-23. 

PurvamHrapada,  VaidyanStha,  the  river  Kijipra,  Mahikila,  Kfilinjara- 
hill  are  also  very  sacred  places. — 24. 

Vansodblioda,  Harodblieda,  Gangodbheda,  are  among  the  sacred 
places  and  so  are  RlmdreiJvar.i,  Visjpnpada,  NarinadAdwara.  Offering  Pipd^t 
there  is  equivalent  to  offering  it  in  GayS-  These  are  the  Pitpitirthas  that 
wash  off  all  the  sins  of  man.— 25-26. 


70 


T^B  MATSYA  PVRAVAM. 


The  mere  recollection  of  these  sacred  places  gives  great  benefit ; 
what  to  say  of  those  who  perform  rfrAddha  there.  OihkSra,  K&verl, 
Kapilodaka,  the  confluence  of  the  river  Chandaveg/i,  Ainarkantaka  are 
also  sacred  places  whore  by  bathing  one  gets  hundred  times  more  ber.efit 
than  by  bathing  at  Kurnksotra.  Sukratirtha,  Pindara,  Somestvar  are 
the  sacred  places  that  dispel  all  impediments  and  it  is  very  pious  to 
perform  iraddha  or  give  charity  there.  K’lyavarohana,  Charmanvati  river, 
Gomatl,  Varana,  amtanas,  niiairavaksetra,  BIi|igiitiifiga,  nauritivtlia,  are 
also  holy  places.  Vainaynkn,  Bhadrcfivara  arc  tbo  holy  places  that  release 
one  from  sins  and  Sf^  also  Tapti  river  is  sacred.  Millalap?,  Payosni, 
and  her  confluence  llaiiAboilhi,  I'atahl,  NP.galirtIui,  Avanli,  Maharf:\la, 
river  Vena,  MaliArudra,  ^bihAlinga,  river  Da^farnA,  iSatnrndrA,  J>atahvfi 
river,  VisJvapada.  tlio  river  Xifiguvrihika,  Sona  rive*.  (Ihrighara  river, 
KAlika  river,  Vitasta  river,  Droni  river.  Vata  river,  Ksira  river, 

are  also  tlio  places  wlioro  rfrAddha  hoing  performed  gives  great  satisfac- 
tion to  the  Pitris.  Gokarna,  Oajakarna,  Piirnsottama,  DwarikA,  Arviula, 
Sarasvatl  river  are  among  ihe  holy  places.  rivers^  Manimalb 

Girikarnika,  Dlmtap'ipam.  flic  srmtliern  'cean.  Meghakara  tirtha 
which  is  the  abode  of  Janardana  and  Vi>nn,  !Mandodari  tirtha,  the  river 
Champa,  Sarnalnatlin,  ^^allA^(a^  river,  (’liakravaka,  (.’hannakola  lirtlia, 
Janmerfvara,  Arjumiksptra,  Tripniioirthn,  ^Nidlie^^vara,  Sri^^aila,  N.arasinho, 
are  also  the  places  fit  for  p<‘vrornii!«g  ftrAddlm  hn*  il.o  satisfaction  of  the 
Pitps.  Mahendra,  f:5rirofiga  me  ilic  places  v.liO'c  j^nuldiia  slK)nld  be  per- 
formetl.  They  are  so  sacred  a?^  to  iree  ore  fican  ^ii-.s  ijiorely  by  going 
there.  The  rivers 'rungahhadra  and  Uliimaratlii,  Ifliinie.s'var,  Krisna  Veiift, 
the  rivers  Kaveri,  KmJmalA  and  (iodavari,  IVisaridhya  tirllia,  TraiyainvakA. 
the  abode  of  jJiva  and  wliich  is  univeisally  venerat(s],  are  very  holy  places. 
A mere  reco11ecri(m  of  tlicse  Imly  places  dispels  all  sins  and  the' 
performance  of  rfraddlia  tlierc  gives  imboimded  satisfaction  to  the  Pitfis. 
27-48. 

The  rivers  i^riparni  and  'J'Ainr.i[»arni,  Jayaliitha,  llie  sacred  river 
Matsya,  f^ivadhar  tirllia,  Pliadra,  the  river  BampA,  It.-imc^vara,  ElApura, 
Alampura,  Afigabl.uta,  AnandAkamahi,  Ibidlia,  AmratakesvarA,  Ekam- 
bhakfl,  GovardhaiiA,  llarisVhandia,  Kripuchandra,  Pi  ithudaka,  SahasrAksa, 
Hiranyaksa,  the  river  Kadali  the  abode  of  Ibnna,  Saufnitri  vSaAgama, 
Indrakila  Mahanada,  Elakkselia,  are  very  sacred  places  owing  to  the 
abode  of  gods  and  rfraddlia  porformcfl  there  highly  satisfies  the  Pitfis. 
The  sacred  T3alm  river,  Siddliavana,  Pa^lnpata,  the  river  ParvatikS, 
are  the  places  where  *lhe  performance  of  rfiaddha  is  many  times  more 
beneficial.  Pitritirtha  near  the  Godavari  river  which  teems  with 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


71 


myriads  of  images  of  Ssiva  is  an  exceedingly  sacred  place.  It  is  also 
known  as  Jam.'idagni  tirtha.  It  is  there  that  the  river  Godavari  has 
become  ruptured  through  the  fear  of  Pratika  Hisi.  It  is  both  Dew 
as  well  as  Pitii  tiitha  and  is  also  known  under  the  name  of  Apsaroynga. 
Tliere  the  performance  of  siiaddha,  Agniliotra  and  charity  is  held 
millions  of  times  more  sacred.  Sahasrali/iga,  Raghaveslvaia  the  river 
Indraphensi  where  India  had  His  downfall  and  where  He  after  destroying 
the  demon  Namuchi  went  to  Heaven  by  the  practice  of  penances,  are  the 
places  wdiero  the  performance  of  draddha  by  men  bears  everlasting 
fruit.  Pufikara,  Saligrama,  so  also  Somaparia,  the  home  of  VaitJwfinara  are 
Sacred  tirthas.— 49-01. 

Sarasvata,  Swaini,  the  river  Malandara,  Jrilandliara,  Mount  Lohadanda, 
Kauiiiki  river,  the  river  Cliandrikri,  the  river  Vaidarhha,  Vaira,  the  river 
Payosni,  Prahgmuklia  river,  the  Kaveri,  Chitrakuta,  Vindhyachala, 
Kuhjjiblira,  the  hanks  of  tlie  IJrvarfi  river,  Sarnsarairiochana,  Rinamochana, 
Attahiisa  Gaiitamcsvara,  Vasistlm,  Ihuita,  Ihahin^varta,  Knrfavarta,  Hava, 
Pindaraka,  ^afikhcdliara,  Gliantesvara,  A^ilvakeslvara,  Nilkesvara,  Dharani- 
dhara,  Rfimtirtha,  Asva,  Vedasira,  Anghavati  river,  Vasnprada,  Chaglanda, 
Badari,  Oana,  ifayant,  Vijaya4akra  tirtha,  Sripati,  Raivata,  i^arada, 
Bhadrakale^vora,  Vaiknntlia,  Bhimerfvara,  MahAdeva,  Matrigralia,  Kara- 
vlrapnra,  Knserfaya,  Ganrisikhara,  Nakulesia,  Kardamala,  Dincji,  Pnndarlka- 
pnra,  Godavari  tho  abode  of  Tirthesfvara,  are  the  places  where  by  performing 
iJraddha  one  gives  complete  satisfaction  to  the  Pi^ris  and  paves  the  way 
for  tlie  attainment  of  final  beatitude.— 62-78. 

I have  onnmeratrd  to  you  tlie  names  of  the  Tirthas  very  briefly. 
Even  Brihaspati  cannot  adequately  describe  their  glory  what  to  say  of 
a man. — 79. 

Satya  tirtha  (observance  of  truth),  Dayft  tirtha  ^performance  of 
charity),  Ii^driyanigraha  (control  of  passions)  should  be  considered  as 
tirthas  even  by  those  who  cannot  leave  their  homes  for  purposes  of 
pilgrimage— 80. 

i^raddha  performed  at  these  place  is  millions  of  times  more  sacred. 
One  should  therefore  perform  slniddha  with  devotion  and  according  to  the 
rules  laid  down,  at  these  holy  places.— 81. 

The  three  morning  muhurtas  are  called  safigava,  the  three  mnbdrtas 
in  the  midday  and  afternoon  are  uttama,  the  evening  muhurta  which  should 
bo  avoided,  or  A-Addha  is  Raksasi.  There  are  fifteen  muhflitas  in  the  day 
and  the  8th  of  them  is  called  the  kntnpa. — 82-84. 

A^ote->  Muhurta  - A period  of  48  minutes. 


72- 


THE  MATSYA^  PVRANAM. 


Ill  the  noon  the  movement  of  the  aim  becomes  slow  therefore  it  is 
beat  to  perform  dr&ddha  at  that  time.  —85. 

The  hour  of  midday,  a vessel  of  rhinoceros*  horn,  a Nepal  blanket, 
silver,  Darblnlr  grass,  sesamuin,  kine,  and  a daughter's  son,  are  the  eight 
essentials  of  a rfniddha.  Kutsit  is  another  synonym  of  Papa  (sin)  ..lul  the 
eight  things  ennmueratod  above  consume  (tfipa)  all  sin  ‘kn),  therefore  they 
are  known  ris  kutupns.  -—80-87. 

The  nine  mnhurtas  after  the  kiitupa  muhurla  are  known  as 
SvadhS.— 88. 

Kuifa  and  black  sesainum  were  produced  from  tlio  htuly  of  Visnu, 
that  is  why  they  are  neoes'^arily  employed  in  the  pert'a-inaijoe  of  rfi  ildha. 
Tlie  devas  have  also  .sai«l  tliat  a Iiandfnl  of  ivafo'-  mixed  wifi  Nrsaninin 
and  oUcred  by  the  renidenfs  of  a samod  phiec  by  lioldl.ig  Knst:*  in  one 
hand,  is  also  n kind 'd  i^iaddiin.  i^O 

Sraddlia  slionld  l)e  performed  with  -.ne  hand  only  but  IVonaiia  with 
both  hands. — 91. 

Suta  said  that  the  performanee  of  sidddha  in  a holy  place  gives  long 
life  and  washes  off  all  siu^,  this  has  been  said  by  the  f^oi  d Matsya  —92. 

One  should  recite  it  at  thejinn^  -of  sr‘ddha  one  who  reads  it  or  beans 
it  becomes  wealthy,  emiseqnently  the  residonts  »>f  a Irdy  plane  slionld 
recite’it  to  dispel  nil  their  *-\\]<.  01 

This  sJraddlia  mahatniya  is  ihedispelloi  of  all  sins  ami  it  is  venerated 
by  !^iva,  Brahma  and  the  God  sun. — 94. 

Here  ends  the  twenty-siuv)nd  chapter  eanraeraHn^  the  fi  iwcd  tlrlkas  for 

Srdddhas, 

CHAPTER  XXfll 

The  Risissaid  How  did  the  moon  0 ! scholar  of  all  the  Srstras, 
become  the  sovereign  of  the  Pitfis  and  how  did  the  Rajas  of  the  lunar 
dynasty  become  so  illnstricais  ?— 1. 

% 

Si^taaaid  At  the  time  of  tlie  first  croatif)n,  the  sago  Atri  as  clesirerl 
by  BralimA  practised  austerities  for  the  purpose  of  cieatioi*.— 2. 

The  Blissful  Brahms,  tlie  dispeller  of  all  troubles  of  the  world  and 
who  id  enshrined  within  Vii^uu,  Siva,  and  the  sun  Uadra  and  who  is 
sapersensaous  and  is  the  giver  of  all  peace  and  who  is  enthroned  in  the 
eyes  of  peaceful  beings  ; the  same  BrahmA  becoming  pleased  with  the 
anfltarities  of  A trl  was  the  cause  of  his  happiness,  in  other  words,  He 


CHAPTER  XXIIL 


causod  the  moon  to  bo  produced  from  the  eyes  of  Atri.  At  that  time 
Lord  i^iva  with  His  Cotisort  the  goddess  PArvati  became  highly  pleased 
to  see  the  moor!  and  decorated  His  head  witli  It ; and  the  power  produced 
from  the  water  and  emitted  from  the  eyes  of  Atri  illumined  the  nnirerse 
with  Its  lustre. -3-6. 

All  the  directions  anxious  to  beget  progeny  absorbed  that  lustre  in 
the  form  of  damsels  and  then  it  remained  in  their  womb  for  tliree  Iinndre<l 
years.  After  that  period  the  directions  could  not  bear  the  power  in  their 
womb  and  so  they  ejected  it.  Brabma  collected  it  together  and  created 
an  illiistrions  Being  bedecked  with  all  the  arms.  He  tlien  gave  him 
vedic  powers  and  seated  Him  on  a chariot  drawn  ])y  a tlioiisaiul  horses 
and  thus  took  Him  to  His  region  where  seeing  Hiin  all  the  Braluna-Risis 
acknowledged  Him  as  their  Sovereign  Lord.- -7-10. 

Afterwards  tlic  Pitris,  Devas,  rJandliarvas,  Ijerhs  along  with  ilie 
Hod  [ndra  began  to  adore  Brahma  by  reciting  the  SomedevR  mantras.— 11. 

Then*  by  the  Y'ogic  glory  of  the  l.f)rd  Brahma,  that,  became  .still 
more  illustrious  and  merged  into  the  moon.  By  Its  lustre  the  herbs  in 
the  world  profusely  thrived  and  tlie  moon  became  much  more  radiant  in 
the  night  and  consequently  it  (the  moon)  came  to  be  the  sovereign  of  flic 
l^crbs  and  the  Brahmanas. — 12-13 

'riiis  disc  of  the  moon  is  the  resort  of  the  Vedas  and  the  nectar.  It 
waxes  in  tlie  bright  fortnight  and  wanes  in  the  dark  fortnight.— 1 1.  . 

In  the  days  gone  by  Dak^a  Prajiipati  son  of  Praclietas  gave  liis. 
twenty  beven  beautiful  (laughters  to  the  moon.  I'he  moon  to  please  Lord 
Visnii  practised  austerities  for  a considerable  length  of  time.  The  Lord 
became  pleased  with  his  devotion  and  directed  Him  to  ask  for  a boon. 
The  moon  wished,  that  he  might  conquer  the  realm  of  Indra,  the 
Devas  might  go  to  His  region  and  officiate  as  Brahman  as  in  His  Rajasfiya 
sacrifice,  and  Lord  l^iva  might  protect  it  ^sacrifice,')  with  his  trident 
standing  at  his  door. — 15-19. 

On  Vi^nu’s  granting  this  boon,  the  moon  performed  the  RajasOya 
sacrifice  in  which  the  sage  Atri  became  the  Hota  priest,  Bhrigu  officiated 
as  Adhvaryu,  Brahmfi  was  the  ITdgata,  Lord  Hari  officiated  as  Brahmana 
priest,  and  the  Sages  ^aunaka,  &c.  were  the  Sadasyas  in  that  Rajaeiiya 
sacrifice. — 20-2 1 . 

A^ote.— Adhvaryu  -An  officiating  priest  whose  duty  is  to  measure  the  ground,  build 
the  altar,  prepare  sacrificial  vessels,  fetch  wood  aud  water,  light  the  fire,  bring  the  animal 
and  Immolate  it  and  while  doing  this  to  repeat  the  Yajnrveda. 

ITdgfttft--one  of  the  priests  at  the  sacrifice  who  chants  the  Sftmaveda. 
in 


74 


THE  MATSYA  PUEAh'AM. 


Hota’s  fanctlon  was  to  recite  Rigveda  and  ho  was  also  the  Chief  priest,  while  nrahma 
priest  superintended  the  others  and  was  in  chari;;c  of  the  Atharvaveda. 

The  ten  Virfvadevas  officiated  an  chainasri-acllivaryii.  In  tliat  sacrifice 
the  moon  gave  the  three  lokas  as  Dakshia  to  tlio  sacrificial  priests.— 22, 
Note.— Chainasfi— A vessel  used  at  sacrillees  for  drink iug  the  Soma  juice. 

On  the  conclusion  of  that  sacriticial  batli,  the  nine  goddesses  fired 
ivltii  Jove  ivcnt  to-have  a look  at  the  moon. 

Laksini  went  after  lea\ing  N irayana,  Siniviili  wont  after  leaving 
Kardaina,  Dyiiti  went  after  forsaking  Vihln'ivnsu,  1’nsii  went  after  leaving 
Dliatara,  Prabha  went  after  leaving  the  Sun,  Knhn  werit  after  leaving 
Havismfin,  Kirti  went  after  leaving  Jayanti,  \'asi»  went  after  leaving 
Marichi  Kusfyapa,  Dhriti  went  after  leaving  her  linshand  Nandi.  All 
those  goddesses  went  and  ad(»rned  the  Moon.  The  .Moon  also  looke(I  upon 
them  as  His  own  wives,  'riieir  Lords  even  seeing  them  go  astiay  like 
that  did  not  use  their  missile  of  curse  against  tlie  Mor^n.  The  liiminons 
Moon  shed  its  light  on  all  directions  and  became  the  sole  Monarch  of 
the  seven  worlds  owing  to  His  Yogie  powers,  evt  ii  after  attakiing  such  a 
store  of  liapp’ness  uhicli  is  envied  by  sages.  — 2L2(S. 

Once  upon  a lime  tlie  JfiKUi  came  acuoss  'laia,  the  wife  of  Priliaspali 
whilst  she  was  roaming  in  the  garden,  (b)  seeing  Tara  adorned  with 
flowers,  having  projected  l)rea>.ts  ami  too  dclicale  \o  cull  a flower  even,  llio 
Moon  was  fired  with  p.ssion.  Ib‘  approached  that  figure  of  exquisite 
beauty  whose  eyes  were  so  lovely,  and  caught  her  by  tlie  hair,  d'aia  also 
seeing  the  enchanliiig  form  of  tiio  mmin  wa-»  fii(-d  wiili  passion  and  enjoyed 
herself  in  his  company.  The  M'-on  enjoyed  in  In-r  company  for 
a very  long  lime  and  Iheu  to(jk  her  to  his  nalm.  d'he  Moon  became  f-o 
enamoured  of  her  that  he  did  nor  feel  snlllc’uMitly  satisfied  even  after 
enjoying  himself  in  licr  company  h)r  sucli  a long  time.  Ibihasjjati  was 
pining  away  for  Tara  dming  her  ab.sencc.  He  came  to  know  all  about 
her  through  meditation,  but  could  not  overcome  the  Moon  by  curses, 
incantations,  arms,  fire,  pois«»n.  'I'lien  Jhiliaspati  burning  with  passion 
went  to  the  Moon  and  Very  humbly  besought  liim  to  restore  him  his  wife. 
The  Moon  who  was  much  attached  to  Tarii  refused  to  do  so.-~2!j-34. 

Afterwards  the  moou  refused  llio  similar  request  even  of  SJiva, 
Brahma,  Sadhya  Deva.s,  llie  Maruts,  iS[c.,  which  thrown  Lord  5>iva  in  a 
feJirful  rage  and  bcfrietKling  Hi'ihaspati,  Vamad(?va  armed  with  His 
Ajgava  bow  and  followed  by  His  attendants  and  the  BlintetSvar  Siddhas, 
started  to  fight  with  the  Moon.  At  that  time  SJiva  emitting  fire  from  His 
tliird  eye  looked  awfully  fearful  by  the  reflection  of  the  dazzle  cast 
on  Him  by  the  Moon.— 35-37. 


CHAPTER  XXIIl. 


75 


Seeing  Siva  going  out  on  a figlit,  His  other  attendants  Ganesa, 
arpiecl  with  various  weapons,  and  Kuvera  also  with  His  innumeraahle 
army  rollowe<l  Him.  —38. 

Seeing  liis  foe  mardiing  against  him,  the  Moon,  seething  with  wrath, 
started  along  witli  his  vast  retinue  of  Vetalas,  Yaksas,  Serpents,  and  a train 
of  a million  and  a half  of  chariots,  to  measure  swords  with  Him.— 39. 

When  the  Moon  in  his  martial  array  surrounded  by  his  followers 
— the  demons,  stars,  planets  Saturn,  Mars,  etc.,  appeared  before  Siva  to 
meet  Him  in  fight,  the  seven  worlds  became  terrified  and  tlie  Earth 
with  the  ocean  and  mountains  began  to  tremble.— 40. 

Siva  approached  JTis  adversary  armed  to  the  teetli,  glittering  like 
fire.  A dreadful  battle  ensued  between  the  two  armies.  Various  kinds 
of  weapons  wore  used  and  the  onslaught  was  so  terrible  that  both  the 
armies  were  destroyed.—  41-42. 

After  Yards  the  mightirst  of  the  glittering  and  barbed  arms  that 
consume  the  heaven,  the  eartli  and  the  lower  regions  were  employed  which 
inade  Jjiva  still  more  furious  and  He  hurled  His  formidable  Brahmastra 
at  the  Moon  and  the  latter  made  use  of  his  fearful  SomAstra.— 43. 

By  the  clash  and  fall  of  those  two  mighty  weapons  the  heaven  and 
the  earth  sidvered  with  consternation.  Finding  the  universe  in  peril 
Lord  Brahma,  realized  the  gravity  of  the  situation.  Somehow  or  other 
He  put  Tlim.'^olf  between  the  two  dreadful  missiles  and  saved  the  Moon 
along  with  other  Devas  fruu  that  impending  calamity.  Afterwards 
He  thus  addressed  the  Moon:— “You  have  indulged  yourself  in  this 
gory  onslaught  for  .such  an  ignoble  object  on  caccount  of  which  even 
after  ceasing  to  carry  on  the  warfare,  you  will  become  a planet  of 
malignant  aspect  at  the  end  of  the  white  fortnight.  Give  away  the  wife 
of  Biihaspati,  there  is  no  disgrace  in  retiring  from  war  which  is  conducted 
for  the  retention  of  illgotten  hooly.” — 44-46. 

Suta  said  that  on  being  thus  reprimanded  by  Brahma,  the  Moon 
retired  from  the  battle  and  Bfihaspati  also  returned  home  completely 
satisfied  in  the  company  of  his  wife  Tara. — 17. 

iVote.— May  it  not  mean  that  tho  terrestrial  Moon  went  ont  of  its  orbit  and  attracted 
one  of  tho  Moons  of  tho  Jupiter  and  thus  disturbed  tho  Solar  Equilibrinra  which  was 
brought  to  harmony  again  by  the  birth  of  Morciiry  (Uiidha)?  Moon  must  have  had  a bigger 
mass  in  those  pro- terrestrial  day. 

Here  ends  the  tioeitty-third  chapter  of  dealing  with  the  war  between 
the  Deoae  and  Sonia  for  the  return  of  the  toife  of  Brihaepati 


76 


THE  MAT8YA  PURANAM.  ^ 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Sftta  said. — After  a year  a handsome  cherub-boy  shining  like  the 
twelve  suns,  wearing  yellow  raiments  and  resembling  the  Moon,  was  born 
from  the  womb  of  TarA,.  He  was  a master  of  all  the  snstras  and  was  the 
author  of  a treatise  on  elephants.  lie  was  known  as  Rajputra,  the  doctor 
of  elephants,  and  was  afterwards  named  Budha  owing  to  his  being  the  son 
of  the  Moon.— 1-3. 

He  conquered  all  the  powers  since  the  time  of  his  birth.  Brahma 
and  other  deities  in  company  with  the  sages  assembled  at  the  1 ouse  of 
Brihaspati  to  take  part  in  the  ceremony  in  comiect{(m  with  the  'irtli  of 
the  child  Budha,  and  asked  Taid  from  whom  the  bube  was  horn.-  4-5. 

Hearing  that  Tani  at  first  held  her  peace  out  of  shyness,  but  i n being 
questioned  repeateilly  slio  said  bashfully  after  a long  sileiwf*  that  the 
ahih)  born  from  iIk*  Mo  mi,  hearing  whieli  tlie  latter  accepted  him 

as  bi>  so/i  atul  luniiiiK  hi'n  IfiiJhn  (Mnrnurv)  ga\'e  him  n region  below 
the  Earth. 

Tlien  Brahuij  ahaii;  with  ihe  Braliiiiarisis  anointed  him  as  a 
Planetary  Lord  airl  phiood  him  on  a par  wiih  other  planets.  Afterwards 
He  vanished  the  sight  of  the  Devas  then  and  there,  and  Budha  begot 
his  pious  son  from  hi^  wife  lla.-  S-tf 

'i’hat  progeny  performed  nuny  an  asvaiuedh  i sacrilice  by  his  glory 
and  was  univeisally  veiuMMicd  nii  ler  the  ijonn?  of  Pnntrrtva  who  afterw^ards 
became  the  sov/u-eign  Lor  i ol'  the  >even  worlds  by  ])ractisi ng  asceticism 
r>n  the  glorious  sienvclad  peak.->  of  the  Himalayas.  -’-10. 

It  wa.s  lie  wlio  annihilated  thr  d^nnons  Ke.si,  Ac.,  and  whose  wife  the 
colesiial  nyinpli  ho  vaj^i  became  on  being  enamonrod  of  him.  It  was  ho 
who  ruled  the  scvim  worlds  witii  e-vim-lianded  justice  and  sympathy  and 
thus  benelited  his  empire.—  1HL3, 

Above  all  that,  he  attaineil  divine  fame  and  through  the  grace  of 
Visnu,  Indra  usojI  to  olTer  liim  a seal  liy  His  side.  He  guarded  Dharma, 
Artha  and  Kama  dutifully.  All  the  three,  i;/.?.,  Hharma,  Artlia  and  Kama 
went  to  that  King  to  see  whether  the  latter  viewed  thorn  *with  equality. 
The  king  seeing  them  come  acoorde<l  them  greetings  and  olTered  thorn 
argha  and  piidya. — 14-lb. 

iVotc. —Dhanna,  Duty.  Arliia,  Kichos.  Kama,  Oosiiv.,  Argtui  respectful  offering  to 
venerable  men  consisting  oi  DQrva  grass,  &c.,  with  or  without  water.  PAdya,  water  for 
washing  the  foot  of  revered  pors(iiis. 

Then  he  seated  tlicm  on  tluee  dillojenl  golden  seats  and  worshipped 


OB  AFTER  XXIV. 


77 


them  devoutly,  but  maintained  greater  devotion  for  Dharma.  At  that  K&ma 
and  Artha  became  displeased  with  the  King  and  Artha  cursed  him  to  get 
destroyed  by  avarice.  KAma  cursed  hjm  to  the  effect  that  he  would  turn 
mad  from  the  separation  of  Urvadt,  in  the  Kumaravana  on  the  Gandha* 
inAdana  bill.  On  hearing  the  curses  of  the  two,  Dharma  blessed  him  with 
long  life  and  said  that  he  would  have  his  lineage  till  the  sun  and  the  moon 
exist.  He  would  flourish  thousands  of  years  and  his  progeny  would  never 
become  extinct.  Saying  so,  they  all  three  disappeared  instantly  and  the 
king  afterwards  occupied  himself  with  the  affairs  of  the  state. — 17*21. 

That'  king  used  to  go  to  see  the  god  Iiulra  every  day.  One  day 
seated  in  his  IJak^in.^inbarachari  chariot  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  realm  of 
Indra,  when  he  accidentally  saw  the  Daitya  Kerfi  carrying  away  Cbitra- 
rckhA  and  Urvasfi  forcibly. — 22-23. 

Seeing  Unit  the  king,  anxious  for  his  glory,  made  use  of  several  wea- 
pon'^, and  then  ultimately  snbdned  him  by  VAyavyastra  by  which  he  had 
overpowered  Ihdra.  After  tiius  subjugating  the  demon,  the  king  deli- 
vered the  rescued  Urvasi  to  Jucira  and  became  his  fast  friend.  Indra  thus 
Itccuming  Ids  friend  tind  getting  highly  pleased  with  him,  made  him  most 
valiant,  heroic,  illustrious,  wealthy,  and  famous  in  all  the  worlds;  and  that 
nymph  also  becoming  highly  delighted  sang  the  glories  of  the  Pururava 
family. -24-27. 

L'he  celestial  dramatist  Bharata  had  composed  a drama,  called  the 
svayamvara  of  Laksm!  to  which  he  had  asked  MenakA,  Itambhiv  and  Urvasi 
to  play  several  parts. — 28. 

Syayamvara—solf  election  by  tbo  bride  of  her  hnsband,  self  marriage. 

Then  Urvarfi  wlio  was  playing  the  part  of  Laksini  and  was  dancing 
and  winging  melodiously  in  unisnui  with  the  music,  saw  Pururava  and 
being  fired  with  passion  forgot  the  part  which  Bharata  had  taught  lier. 
Bharata  in  a rage  cursed  Urvarf?  saying  that  she  would  become  a subtle 
creeper  on  tlie  earth  for  35  years  on  account  of  the  separation  from 
Pururava  and  the  latter  would  lapse  iiito  a PijJncha.— 29-31. 

After  that  Urvarfi  made  Punlrava  her  lord  and  on  the  conclusion  of 
the  effects  of  curses  she  brought  forth  the  following  eight  valiant  sons  : — ■ 
Ayii,  Dridhftyii,  Asvuyii,  DhanAyu,  UhritimAii,  Vasn,  Suchi  VldyA,  and 
iiiatayii.  Ayu  the  eldest  of  them  all  became  the  father  of  Nahusa,  Vfiddha- 
tiarma,  Raji,  Dainbha  and  VipApina.  These  five  were  all  heroes. — 32-34. 

Raji  became  the  father  of  one  hundred  children  who  came  to  be 
known  as  RAjeya.  He  devoutly  practised  penances  and  was  granted  a 
boon  by  Visnu,  on  account  of  which  he  was  powerful  enough  to  conquer 
the  I^vas,  demons  and  men.- -33-36. 


78 


TUB  MAT&YA  PVRABAM. 


Once  upon  a time  a pitched  battle  ensued  between  tlie  Devas  and 
the  Asiiras  for  three  certturies,  in  which  tliere  was  a treinendouB  fight 
between  Prahlada  and  India.  The  batlle  was  indecisive.  At  Unit 
both  the  Devas  and  the  Asuras  asked  Brahnnl,  as  to  wlu)  was  likel}'  to 
bear  away  the  palm  of  victory.  Bralnnri  said  tliat  the  i>arty  headed  by  Raji 
would  be  victorious.  Hearing  that  the  Devas  eager  for  their  victory 
requested  the  King  Itiiji  to  take  their  part  in  the  great  war.—  37-30. 

The  Asuras  also  approached  him  with  a similar  roiiuest,  but  Raji 
had  accepted  the  invitation  of  the  Devas  so  ho  refused  tlic  proposal  of  tlie 
Asuras.  The  Devas  then  entreated  him  to  lead  tlieir  army  and  destroy 
the  Asuras.  The  king  tlien  killed  those  Asuras  who  could  not  lie  con- 
quered even  by  India, —40-41. 

Indra  was  highly  deliglitcd  at  that  valoiirons  feat  of  tiie  king,  so 
much  so  that  lie  took  birth  as  Ills  son.  Wlieii  Indra  was  born  as  bis  son, 
the  king  making  over  tiie  charge  of  Ids  vast  dominions  to  him  went  to 
devote  himself  to  contemplation  and  meditation.- « 

The  other  valiant  sons  f»f  Raji  forcibly  df’throned  India  and  usurped 
all  the  kingdom  and  sbaie  of  saeriliees  fn*Hn  him.  Indra  tiius  hmeft  of  his 
position  went  and  laid  hiuHcIf  at  the  mt-n-y  of  Hiihas[)Mti.  Th?  said  to 
Bfihaspati  that  lie  had  been  doprivod  of  liis  ip.-din  as  well  as  of  tlie  right 
of  a share  in  sacrifices  and  api-eah*  1 to  him  to  jnlvisr  him  to  get  hack  his 
kingdom  -43-44. 

Bi’ishaspati  then  restMied  indin  io  jov\ov  iiy  perfoiming  a rite  called 
Qraha  Isanti  or  pacifying  the  malignant  inllnence  of  the  pi.im-ls.  — I.")- 16. 

Bfiliaspati  then  went  and  •ieiudr*!  the  other  sons  of  Ilaji  with  false 
philosophy  and  established  lle^  dina  icligiuii  oppiisccl  to  ilu*  vedas,  though 
bimself  a knowerof  tlie  ^'edas  and  Indra  on  finding  tin'  sons  (d  Biiliaspati 
propagating  a religion  different  from  the  Vedas  based  on  a sIk.w  of  reason 
oidy  killed  them  with  Ids  mighty  ihuinlei boll. — 17-11). 

Now  bear  sometbing  about  the  seven  pious  sons  of  Xaliusa.  They 
were: — Yati,  Yayati.  Samyati,  Udhhava,  IVichi,  Saryidi,  ?vleghiiyiiti.— 50. 

Yati  turned  an  anchorite  since  his  very  early  days  and  Yayati 
began  to  rule  his  kingdom  witli  jiieiy.  - f)!. 

Yayati  had  two  queens,  r/i*.,  Devayani  llio  danglilcr  of  fulcra  and 
SarmistbA  the  daughter  of  Vbisaparvana. — 5i. 

Yayati  had  five  sons;  Yadn  and  Turva.su  from  Devayani  ; and  three 
sons  Druhya,  Ann  and  Burn  from  jJarmislha.  Of  them  Yadu  and  Puru  were 
the  promoters  of  the  dynasty.  King  Yayfiti  was  the  protector  of  the  realm 


CHAPTER  XXIV,  ' 


79 


with  truth  and  heroism  and  was  also  tlie  perfcJrmer  of  many  sacrifices. 
ITe  was  a great  lover  of  sacrifices  and  worshipped  the  Pitris  with  great 
devotion.  He  won  over  liis  subjects  and  protected  them  dutifully. — 53-56. 

Once  upon  a time  the  king  grew  aged  and  was  deprived  of -the 
vigour  of  youth.  Finding  liimself  infirm,  he  surnnioned  his  sons  Yadu, 
Anu,  Turvasu,  Druhya,  and  Puni  and  said  to  them,  “Suns!  I wish  to 
become  young  again  and  carry  on  amorous  frolics  with  damsels,  you 
come  to  my  succour.” — 57-50. 

Hearing  those  words  of  the  king,  Yadu  tlie  eldest  sfm  from  Devayanl 
said  “ In  what  way  can  I l)elj>  you  with  niy  youth  ?”— GO. 

Then  Yayati  asked  his  sons  to  exchange  tlieir  youth  with  his  old 
age  and  thus  make  him  fit  for  carnal  enjoyments. — 61. 

“Sons!  after  performing  great  many  sacrifices,  I have  become  old  by 
the  curse  of  Snkra,  but  my  tbirst  for  enjoyir.enls  has  not  yet  been 
quenched.  You,  therefore,  give  me  3’our  vigour,  and  thus  enable  me  to 
fulfil  my  desires.”— 62-63. 

Yadu  and  his  three  brothers  did  not  agree  to  the  proposal  of  his 
faiher  wliich  enraged  the  latter  and  ho  cursed  them  saying  that  none 
from  their  family  would  ever  succeed  to  the  throne. — 64. 

Then  the  younger  Puru  said  “ Sire  ! give  me  your  old  age  and  take 
my  vigour  and  satisfy  yourself.  With  your  permission  1 will  succeed  you 
as  an  old  monarch.”- -65. 

'riien  YayAti  transferred  his  old  age  to  him  and  taking  his  vigour 
became  young  again. — 66. 

Puni  began  to  rule  tlie  vast  empire  with  the  old  age  of  the  king. — 67. 

The  king  not  satisfied  with  his  mundane  pleasures,  even  after  a 
period  of  a lliousaiul  years,  addressed  his  son  Puru  thus  : — “ Y^ou  are  the 
promoter  of  my  dynasty,  by  your  having  a son,  I am  not  heirless,  in  this 
world  my  dynasty  will  be  named  Paurava,  after  you.” — 68-69. 

Afterwards  Yayati  got  Puru  miointed  and  then  sometime  after- 
wards died.— 70. 

Now  something  will  be  related  about  that  djmasty  of  Puru  in  which 
Kings  Bharata,  &.C.,  the  proinolers  of  the  Hharata  dynasty  \Yere  born.  Hear, 
0 1 Sages,  this  relation  witli  attention,-T71. 

Here  ends  the  tioentij- fourth  ehipter  deiUnj  with  the  history  of  Yayati  of 

the  solar  race. 


80 


TIIE  MAT8YA  PURANAM. 


^ CHAPTER  XXV. 

The  asked  Why  Paurava  dynasty  became  so  illustrious  and 
why  Yadu  the  eldest  of  Yayati’iJ  sons  became  the  foimder  of  an  inferior 
and  poor  dynasty.  Besides  this  0 ! Sflta,  relate  to  ns  at  length  other 
things  connected  witii  the  history  of  Yayati,  because  his  virtue  which  is 
the  giver  of  long  life  is  held  in  high  esteem  even  by  the  Devas.— 1-2. 

Sflta  said  : — Uisis,  the  same  question  was  put  by  ^atanika  who  asked 
Saiinaka  almiit  the  sacred  history  of  YayAti.-  X 

Sat  mika  asketl : — “ .'^aunaka,  how  my  ancestor  Yayjtti  who  was  tenth 
in  descent  from  Pitajapati  inarried  the  dangluer  of  rfnkra.  0,  Sage  ! I am 
anxious  to  hear  about  it.  I arn  still  more  anxi.ir.^  to  Ijenr  the  hist  ory  of 
the  Paurava  kings  serially.  Re  gracious  (Miougli  relate  all  tl  .0  in 
detail.  "-4-/5. 

answered  : — King  YnyiUi  was  as  handso/ne  as  Inrlni  and 
was  blessed  both  by  J^ukra  and  Vri.saparvana.  I .shall  relate  to  you  all 
about  that  and  will  also  e.xplain  to  yon  how  YaviUi  the  son  of  Nalinhu 
married  Devayrmi."— fi-7. 

Once  upon  a time  the  Devas  and  the  Asnnis  fell  out  wdth  each 
other  for  the  kingdom  of  the  three  world.s.  'Phoii  the  Devas  anxious  r(> 
have  the  best  of  the  contest  made  Brihaspati  tlicir  sacrilicial  priest  and 
similarly  rhe  Asuras  made  Snkratlieir  priest  Roth  the  sagos  -Brihaspati 
and  Sukra — were  at  daggers  drawn  with  each  other.  I^ukra  by  his  lore 
brought  into  life  all  the  Asiiras  tinit  were  killed  hy  the  devas  and  they 
again  appeared  to  face  them  on  the  battle  held.  Brihaspati  (!ould  not 
sirnilary  restore  to  life  the  Dcvjh  killed  by  the  Asiiras,  because  he  did  not 
possess  tlie  same  knowledge,  at  which  the  Devas  were  greatly  dismayed. 
The  Devas  getting  fearfully  alariiied  went  to  the  son  of  Bfihaspati  named 
Kacha.— 8-14. 

The  Devas  said  “ Kacha,  we  are  at  your  iiiercy,  do  come  to  our 
rescue.  We  beseech  yon  to  somehow  acquire  tlm  sahjivani  /Resuscitation) 
^knowledge  from  Sukra,  by  doing  that  you  will  hecome  entitled  to  receive 
a share  out  of  the  offerings  made  to  us.  You  should  try  to  meet  ^lukra 
in  the  court  of  Vrisaparvan.  Who  guards  the  Asuras  and  not  the  Devas. 
You  alone  can  propitiate  him  none  else  can  do  it.  None  excepting 
you  can  also  please  Devayani  the  daughter  of  Siukra.  By  pleasing  her 
with  tact,  shrewdness,  and  sweetness  you  will  be  able  to  acquire  that 
wonderful  sanjlvarii  knowledge." — 1.5-19. 

With  those  words  the  Devas  after  worshipping  Kacha  sent  him  to 


mAVTBn  XXV. 


81 


Vri?:ipamn.  K wha,  after  being  trorehippefi  by  the  Devas  went  etraight 
to  ^akra  and  after  ualuting  him  said  : — 20-21. 

“ 0,  Preceptor,  accept  me  named  Sacha,  the  grandnon  of  Ahgiraaa 
and  eon  of  Bfihaspati  as  your  pupil.  Preceptor,  1 ahall  lead  a typical 
diaoiple’s  life,  keep  me  ae  your  pupil  for  thousands  of  years.” — 22-23. 

l^ukra  said  ” Kacha,  you  are  welcome  and  so  also  your  words. 
Yon  are  worthy  of  being  adored  and  so  also  Brihaspati.”— 24. 

l^aunaka  said  that  afterwards  Kacha  followed  all  the  injunctions  of 
l^ukra  and  observed  the  fasts  at  the  proper  periods  according  to  the 
prescribed  rites,  and  began  to  serve  l^ukra  and  DevayAni. — 25-26. 

He  pleased  Devayiinl  who  had  attained  puberty  by  singing,  dancing 
playing  music  and  offering  of  flmvers  and  other  presents  — 27-28. 

Devayiint  also  interested  herself  in  that  pious  Brnhinapa  and  took 
every  care  of  him. — 29. 


In  that  way  Kaclia  went  on  for  a period  of  five  hundred  yeai-a.  The 
Asuras,  knowing  the  piety  of  Kacha  and  out  of  their  spite  for  Bi-ihaspati, 
took  him  to  a secluiied  place  in  tlie  forest  where  he  was  grazing  the  cows, 
and  slaughtered  him  for  the  sake  of  their  own  protection.  After  that  they 
divided  his  corpse  into  many  parts  and  then  got  it  devoured  by  wolves 
and  jackals.  Then  the  cows  bereft  of  their  keeper  returned  to  their 
abode. — 30-32. 


UevayAni  seeing  the  cows  returning  home  without  Kacha  addressed 
f^ukra  thus  : — 

“Sire,  you  have  finished  yonr  Agnihotra,  the  sun  has  descended 
below  the  horizon,  these  cows  are  without  their  keeper,  and  Kacha  is  no- 
where visible  to-day.  Undoubtedly  Kacha  has  been  either  killed  or  captur- 
ed and  if  this  be  the  case  I say  truly  I cannot  live  without  him.” — 33-35. 


^ukra  said  : — “ 1 am  just  going  to  recall  Kacha,”  so  he  called  Kacha 
back  to  life  by  means  of  his  Sanjivani'knowledge.— -36. 

Then  the  murdered  Kacha  came  running  to  ^ukra  and  saluted  hitug* 
from  a distance  and  told  him  all  about  his  being  killed  by  the  Asuras. — 37/ 


Once  again  Kacha  went  reciting  the  Vedas  to  fetch  flowers  for  Dev^ 
y&ni  from  the  forest.  The  demons  seeing  him  gathering  flowers  in  the 
forest  powdered  him  to  death  and  mingling  his  remains  in  the  wine  gave 
it  to  dukra  to  drink.  38-39. 

Devay&nt  on  not  seeing  Kacha  return  again  spoke  to  her  father  “ He 
was  sent  .by  me  to  gather  flowers  for  me  but  he  has  not  returned.  Assuredly 


rm  mtsn  HfttmAU. 

'] — ‘ - 

fl  *' ' 

bfM  bf^n  WiWM  (igiin  and  I tell  yon  honastly  lhat  I cannot  li 
^ hi»n**.— 40-41. 

^tikp:i  said  Dnvaynn!,  tlmUfui  of  Hiiliaspati  was  restored  to  lib 
after  hei*>ii;  intrdered,  wliat  ran  I do  when  he  liaa  been  killed  again.  Yoi 
* should  not  U neiit  It  does  not  behove  persons  like  you  to  iiiouni  in  tliif 
world.  Von,  who  through  tny  power  of  asoetioisoi  are  being  courted  b] 
Brabm4,  Ajvanikuinars,  Tndra  and  othei  Gods,  and  Asuraa,  a3*e,  every  ont 
in  the  universe,  slionid  by  no  means  mourn  like  this.  The  Br'dtmana  wh( 
1ms  been  kiMed  again  after  being  restored  to  life  once  is  beyond  my  powei 
to  be  recalled  to  life  Jigain.’*  — 42‘44, 

t)evfiy4ni  sa/d  7Vie  grandson  of  AAgira^^a,  the  non  of  Bi’ihaapati 
Kaclm,  who  is  a scion  of  such  an  illustrious  family,  who  is  so  clever  and 
cha.ste  is  very  deir  to  me.  Why  shall  I not  w'^ep  for  him.  I shall  not  take 
my  meals  and  will  set  out  in  quest  of  liim/'— 46. 

^antiaka  said  : — Hearing  those  words  of  Devayrmi,  KAvya  l^nkra 
said  in  his  mind  tliat  “ undonbte  lly,  the  Asurns*  hate  me,  because  they 
constantly  ilestroy  my  ilUc/iples.  The  Asnr  ts  perhaps  wish  to  anniliile»e 
the  Brahmaiyis.  I am  worshippptl  l)y  the  D inavas  as  their  preceptor  in 
vain,  for  the  Uralim^gni  can  destroy  Indra  even,  who  tlien  can  escape  the 
consequences  of  the  lonl  deed  perpetrated  by  them  in  killing  the  Brfdi- 
iiiaim  Kachii.”  Snkra  again  revived  Kaclia  hy  means  t»f  his  safijivani 
knowledge.  At  that  K icha  began  to  speak  slowly  in  tlie  stomach  of 
^ukra  Then  vjukra  asked  him  : — By  whom  killed,  thou  art  inside  my 
stomacli,  tell  me  that,  0 cliild/’-  17-40. 

Kacha  saiti : — “ Tlirougli  your  grar*e  I remember  everything.  Hnder 
these  circuiiistaiices,  1 am  not  iKing  my  power  of  asceticism;  but  1 feel 
a great  discomfort.  The  Asuras  after  powdering  me  to  death  mixed 
my  remains  with  the  wnie  and  matle  you  drink  it,  but  through  the 
glory  of  your  Brdimauism  1 am  not  oppresse^l  by  the  diabolical  freaks 
of  the  Asuras.” — 50-51. 

^ ^ukra  said  : Devavani,  how  am  I to  satisfy  you  ? It  eeeme  difficult 
to  save  Kacha  whilst  I am  living,  because  how  can  become  out  witboot 
tearing  my  Rtomacli,*’^*i3. 

DevayAnl  said  “ Tlie  double  pains  that  T am  undergoing  are  con* 
auming  me  like  fii'e,  t,e.,  the  destruction  of  Kacha  and  tlie  prospect  of  yonr 
not  living  in  the  event  of  his  escaping  death.  1 can  have  no  comfort  on 
the  de«itli  of  Kacha  nor  can  I live  if  yon  are  deitm3'eKl.*’**^53. 

^iikra  laid  (X  son  of  Brihaaoati ! who  k nriaad  be  Hmmdt/t. 


cBAPTSfi  arxr. 


become  a seer  ami  acquire^  my  aaSjivant  kiiowleilge  fi»r  I am  aaRured 
mm  that  you  are  not  Itidra  in  the  dirtguiHe  of  Kaclia.  BecauRe  none 
excepting  a Bn’llima^a  can  live  in  my  Rtomach,  and  Iridra  being  a 
K^atriya  would  have  been  digesie<l  by  me.  Tlierefore  learn  this  Kcience 
from  me.  Come  out  of  my  Rtotiiacli  as  rny  son,  t.e.,  first  acquire  the 
safijlvani  knowledge  and  then  come  out  of  my  stomach  after  ripping  it 
open  and  restore  me  to  life  and  then  satisfy  the  expectation  of  this  dutiful 
daughter  of  mine,  after  having  mastered  this  science  from  me,  thy  guru." 
54-56. 

l^aunaka  said  that  the  Brnlimana  then  acquired  tliat  knowledge  from 
his  preceptor,  and,  after  opening  the  stomach  of  l^ukra,  emerged  from  it 
as  does  the  full  moon  at  tlie  approach  of  night  by  bursting  open  through 
the  eastern  horizon.— 57. 

On  finding  liis  preceptor  lying  dead,  Kacha  l>y  means  of  that 
safijtvant  knowledge  recalled  him  to  life,  and  then  adressed  him  thn.s: — 
“ VlTorthy  jne,  3mu  are  bounteous  like  an  ocean  and  the  most  generous 
among  the  givers  of  boons.  Those  who  do  not  show  due  regard  to  such 
a preceptor,  are  sinners  doomed  to  hell  after  being  wrecked." — 58-59. 

iSaunaka  said  that  Sukra  who  was  deluded  through  drinking, 

on  getting  back  his  lost  disciple,  and  seeing  his  graceFiil  form  and  powers 
of  asceticism,  desirous  of  doing  a good  turn  to  the  Rrahmanas,  taking  the 
wine,  uttered  tlie  following  words  against  drinking  and  its  evil  conse- 
quences : — 61. 

“ Henceforth  the  foolish  Br'dimana  who  drinks  wine  shall  become 
devoid  of  Dharma  and  coininit  the  sin  of  iniirdering  a Bnllimana  and  he 
despised  in  this  world  as  well  as  in  the  next.  I have  laid  down  this  Law 
for  the  Brnhmarias  in  the  whole  universe,  and  let  the  pious  nraliniaQas 
know  the  injunctions  of  the  preceptor  and  let  the  Devas  and  Daityas  also 
listen  to  these  words." — 62453. 

I^aunaka  said  that  the  illiistrlons  seer  iSnkra,  after  saying  that, 
called  all  tlie  Dinavas  of  clouded  intellect  and  said  : — " Hear,  you  foolish 
Hcinavfis!  My  disciple,  Kncha,  after  acquiring  snujivani  knowledge  from 
me,  has  become  equally  powerful  like  myself;  and  has  become  a true 
Brahina^a  and  one  with  Brahma.  *6^  63. 

^aiinaka  said  that  Kacha,  after  residing  with  his  preceptor  for 
another  century,  took  leave  of  him  to  go  to  heaven.." — 66. 

^ere  ends  the  twenty-fifth  chipter  relating  the  story  of  Kacha 
and  DeeaydnL 


84 


THE  MATSYA  PUBAEAM. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

I^aunakassid  : — On  the  fnifilmentof  his  vow  when  Kacha,  after  taking 
leave  of  l^ukra,  was  about  to  start  for  heaven,  DevayAnf  addressed  the 
following  Words  to  him  : — I, 

DevayAni  said  ; — “ 0,  grandson  of  Ahgiras  ! You  shine  on  account 
of  your  wealth,  family  status,  learning,  pious  conduct,  asceticism,  and 
sobriety.  As  the  sage  Ahgira,  of  great  renown,  is  respected  by  my 
father,  so  is  Bfihaspati  respected  and  revereil  by  me.  Knowing  this,  0 
seer ! consider  what  I say  unto  you.  You  know  how  I behaved  towards 
you,  while  you  were  observing  the  vow  with  its  restrictions.  Your  learn- 
ing is  now  accomplished.  You  sliould  not  forsake  me,  who  am  devoted 
to  you  ; therefore  accept  my  liand  in  marriage  acoorditig  to  due  rites  and 
Mantras.” — 2-5. 

Eacha  said  : — “Your  father,  being  iny  preceptor,  is  just  like  my 
own  father  anti  commands  my  respect  and  honour.  Similar''^  you,  too, 
being  the  daughter  of  my  preceptor  and  the  btdovcd  of  Bhrirgava  Sukra), 
are  worthy  of  being  venerated  and  adored  by  me.  Your  father,  the  sage 
^iikra,  is  my  venerable  preceptor,  consequently  it  <loe8  not  behove  yon 
to  make  any  such  proposal  to  me  because  you  are  to  be  honoied  as  a 
daughter  of  my  guru  and  therefore  slionid  be  hi»nored  as  my  guru.*’  0-8. 

Devayani  said  : — “You  are  the  son  of  Brihaspati  and  not  of  my 
father;  and  consequently  you  are  worthy  of  being  respected  and  Iioiiored 
by  me.  You  must  reeall  to  your  mind  my  uniicasing  warm  love  for  you 
ever  since  you  were  killed  by  the  Asuras  again  and  again  Is  not  this 
a sufRcient  proof  of  my  unbounded  love,  attuclimenr  ami  devotion  towards 
you.  I,  therefore,  0 You,  who  know  the  law,  your  devotee,  do  not  deserve 
being  discarded  by  you.”— 9-11, 

Eacha  said  ; — “ 0,  Pious  one  ! You  ask  me  to  enter  into  an  engage- 
ment which  is  so  improper  You  are  greater  even  than  the  preceptor.  Be 
pleased,  0 moon-faced  ! 1 have,  also  lived  in  the  stomach  of  l^ukra  where 

you  had  also  lived  ; in  this  way  you  are  lawfully  my  sister.  I passed  my 
days  in  comfort  here.  I have  cornmirted  no  fault,  am  not  angry  with  you 
at  your  illegal  proposal.  Now  I take  leave  of  you  ; wish  *me  a happy 
journey.  You  may  tliink  of  me  in  connection  with  anything  which 
may  be  in  conforitiity  with  Dharrna.  You  should  always  adui'e  my  pre- 
ceptor with  constant  attention.”— 12-16. 

Devayani  said  : — ” I rescued  you,  with  the  idea  of  making  you  my 
husband,  when  you  were  killed  by  the  Asuras.  Now  as  you  are  abandoning 


85 


, CHAPTER  XXVI. 


me  who  makes  a lawful  request,  you  will  not  be  able  to  successfully  apply 
this  safijtvani  knowledge." — 17. 

Kacha  said  : — “ Why  are  you  pronouncing  such  a curse  on  me  ? I 
am  going  away  with  the  penuissionuf  my  preceptor  and  have  not  accepted 
you,  on  account  of  your  being  the  daughter  of  my  preceptor,  and  notin 
consideration  of^jthere  being  any  fault  in  you.  DevayAni ! You  ought 
not  to  curse  me  who  lias  only  expounded  the  Law  of  the  fti^is  to  you  [for 
according  to  that  Law,  our  marriage  would  be  illegal].  Because  you  have 
cursed  me,  you  will  never  be  able  to  gain  your  desire.  No  son  of  a Riiji 
will  ever  accept  you  as  his  wife.  My  sahjivani  knowledge  will,  of  course, 
jiot  be  fruitful  to  rne  on  account  of  your  curse,  but  it  will  most  decidedly 
bear  fruit  to  one  to  whom  I shall  impart  it." — 18-21. 

^nnaka  said  : — Kacha,  after  thus  addressing  Devaydnl,  instantly 
went  to  heaven,  where  Indra  and  other  Devas  finding  him  returned  said 
to  him  : — 

“ Kaqha  ! You  have  done  a great  deed  for  our  sake ; consequently 
your  fame  will  never  diminish  ; it  will  diffuse  all  round." — 22-24. 

Here  ends  the  twenty-sixth  chapter  describing  the  curses  of  Deoaydnt 

and  Kacha. 


CHAPTER  XXVir. 

^aunaka  said  : — The  Devas,  on  seeing  Kacha  back  with  sanjlvant 
knowledge,  accorded  him  a most  cordial  welcome,  and  after  acquiring 
that  supreme  knowledge  from  him,  became  highly  satisfied ; and  then 
having  approached  Indra,  said  thus: — “To-day  is  the  time  to  show  valor, 
kill  thy  enemies,  0 Purandara."  Accepting  the  request  of  the  Devas,  the 
Maghavan,  along  with  them,  set  out  on  his  mission  and,  in  the  way. 
He  came  across  a group  of  women  in  the  forest.  He  saw  those  damsels 
bathing  and  enjoying  themselves,  as  they  do  in  the  pleasure-garden  of 
Kuvera.  Then  Indra,  in  the  form  o^  a gust  of  wind,  blew  away  and 
mixed  up  their  garments. — 1-4. 

At  that,  all  the  maidens,  hastily  coming  out  of  water,  dressed  them- 
selves with  thfe  clothes  as  they  found  them.  In  that  hurry-scurry, 
^urinisthft,  the  daughter  of  Vrisnparvan  put  on  the  clothes  of  Devayfini 
timtugh  oversight,  at  which,  there  ensued  a quarrel  between  the  two — 
^rmi^tha  and  Devay&nl. — 5 6. 

Devaynui,  in  a fit  of  rage,  said  ; *'  0 daughter  of  an  Asura ! You 
being  my  father’s  disciple,  how  dare  you  put  on  my  garments.  You  will 
never  prosper  on  account  of  your  ignorance  of  laws  of  good  conduct” — 7. 


darn  iRtliii  said : Your  father  aits  and  nleepa  al  the  coininand  of  i»y 
lairher ; he  praisea  him  and  aaka  and  answera  queationa  put  by  my  father 
' bbm  hia  throne,  while  your  father  aits  humbly  on  a lower  seat.  You  are  the 
daughter  of  a father  who  alwaya  begs,  sings  panegyrics  and  receives  gifts 
from  my  father ; whilst  I am  the  daughter  of  one  who  is  always  praised, 
*18  tlie  giver  of  gifts,  but  accept  no  gifts  from  any  one.  ^ou  begt:ar!  1 
do  not  cara  a straw  for  you.  How  dare  you  uiiarnted,  show  your  wrath 
to  me  who  is  armed  ? *’—8-11. 

daunaka  said  Saying  so,  darmis(hn  put  on  her  garments.  After- 
wards she  threw  the  astonished  and  bewildered  l)e\i^vanl  into  a well  and 
then  returned  to  her  palace.— 12, 

Thus  Sarmi^lha,  after  committing  such  a sinful  aot  and  taking 
Devayani  to  be  killed,  and  not  waiting  for  her,  returned  home  f dl  of 
wrath,  — 13. 

After  that,  Yayati,  fl»e  son  of  Nahiita,  getting  tired  and.  thirsty  in 
course  of  his  shoot,  went  to  drink  water  at  the  same  well.  As  stvm  as 
that  thirsty  monarch  peeped  into  the  well,  he  saw  a beauty,  gleaming 
like  the  flame  of  fire,  inside  it.  On  seeing  that  girl  of  Divine  form  and 
consoling  her,  that  beat  of  kings,  said  in  words  full  of  sweetness:—**  0 
young  beauty,  adorned  witli  ornaments,  how  and  for  what  reason,  have 
you  fallen  into  this  well  covered  with  grass?  Whose  daughter  are  you? 
Tell  me  all  this/’-H-lS. 

Devayani  replied : **  1 am  the  daughter  of  that  6ukra  who, 
through  his  Kcicnce,  restores  the  Daitya.s  to  life,  wlieii  they  are  killed 
bj  the  Gods.  You  do  iiot  know  me  lull  well.  King!  C'ateli  hold  of 
my  riglit  iiand  with  its  fingers  dec  ked  wiih  coppei  coloured  nails  and 
pull  me  out  of  this  well  ; I know  you  are  of  nohle  hirih.  I know  jmu  to  be 
self-controlled,  strong,  and  illustriou.s  ; therefore  I know  you  are  capable  of 
delivering  me  from  this  well.’*— 19  21. 

Snunaka  said.—  King  Yayivti,  knowing  her  to  be  of  the  RnlhmaijLa 
caste  and  also  a woman,  caught  hold  of  her  riglit  hand,  and  by  his  force 
pulled  her  out  of  the  well.  After  that,  the  king  saluled  and  welcomed 
Devayfni  and  returned  to  his  metropolis.— 22-23. 

Devayani,  thus  abused  and  full  of  sorrow,  commanded  her  maid, 
Qhurpika,  who  had  returned  in  search  of  her,  thus : — “ go  quickly,  0 
0hurnik8,  and  acquint  my  father  with  all  that  has  happened,  and  also  h-11 
him  that  I have  made  up  my  iniml  not  to  enter  the  King  Vri^aparvan’s 
oity.”-24-25, 


HBAPTBB  xxrm. 


Banska  Baid.-~-OliurQikfi  iiwisiitly  repaired  to  tb«  palare  oF  the 
Aanra  and  seeing  the  high  priest  l^ukra  there,  said  to  him  trembling  and 
coufuserlly 

'*  Saga ! Sarmi^hfi,  the  daughter  of  King  Vri^aparvan,  has  iujnred 
Dovayln!.’’-L'6-27. 

^nkra  on  getting  the  ill  tidings  of  her  daughter  being  injared  at 
the  hands  of  Sarinis(h»l,  was  overwlielroed  with  grief  and  immediately 
started  in  quest  of  Devayan!  in  the  forest.— 28. 

On  meeting  Devayanl  face  to  face  in  that  forest,  ^iikra  embraced 
her  with  open  arms  and  sorniwfuity  8ai<l : “ Every  being  reaps  the  harvest 
of  pain  and  pleasnte  in  tliis  world,  ac'conling  to  his  actions ; consequ- 
ently,. I look  upon  this  affair,  as  ^rini^tha  taking  revenge  upon  you  for 
some  evil  deed  of  yours.” — 2U-30. 

DevayAnt  said  : “ Tliere  may  or  may  not  have  been  a revenge  ; but 
listen  to  what  the  daughter  of  Vri;aparv8iii  said. — 31. 

Ts  it  true,  that  I am  merely  a singer  in  the  palace  of  the  Daityas,  for 
Sarinis(ha,  the  daughter  of  Vri^parvan  tells  me  so.  She,  with  harsh  and 
sharp  words  and  eyes  red  with  anger,  spoke  : — ‘ I am  the  daughter  of  a 
king,  who  is  praised  hy  thy  father  and  who  gives  gifts  to  him,  but  accepts 
nothing  from  any  body'  an<i  whilst  thou  art  the  daughter  of  him  who 
sings  the  praises  of  my  father  and  hegs  and  accepts  gifts  fro.m  him.’ 
Ttius  Siiid  Sarnii.-;(hd.,  the  daughter  Vri^sparvan,  with  eyes  red  with  anger 
and  face  flushed  with  pri  Ic.  Father,  I tlien  said  to  Sarmi^thii  that  if  I 
were  the  daughter  of  a panegyrist,  and  a beggar,  I would  also  please  her 
similarly.  ” —3 1 -35. 

Sukra  said,  “ 0 child  ! thoit  art  not  the  daughter  of  a panegyrist 
or  of  a beggar ; on  the  other  hand,  thou  art  the  daughter  of  one  who  is 
always  praised  by  others,  0 Devayatii.  King  Vri^aparvan  knows  that  my 
pure,  matchlees  and  inconceivable  spirituality  is  my  power ; so  also  know 
Indra  and  King  Yay&ti. — 36-3f. 

Here  end*  the  lieenty-ueenih  tiiapler  deneribiwg  the  hidory  of  King  Tagdti. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

■ l^akra  said. — “DevayUnt!  hear,  one  who  calmly  and  patiently 
endnrea  the  hard  speech  of  others,  conquers  all  One,  who  curlia  his 
rising  anger,  like  a fiery  steed,  is  called  the  real  driver  by  the  wise,  and  not 
ha  who  msfsljr  holds  th*  reins.  Oas  -who  conquers  snothsr’s  arising  aogsr 


tUB  UAT8YA  PGRABaB. 


d8 

by  not  getting  angry  himself,  conquers  the  universe  "Know  thi8,«0 
Devay/ini.  One  ivho  thrnies  aei<le  the  oatbursting  of  his  wrath  by 
forgiveness,  as  a serpent  discards  its  worn  out  skin,  is  said  to  be  truly  a 
man.  One  who  hankers  after  virtue,  always  shows  forbearance  to  all, 
and  does  not  cause  pain  to  others  even  after  suffering  great  pain,  is 
the  receptacle  of  high  and  sublime  merits.  Between  the  one  who  per- 
forms many  Asvametlha  sacrifices  each  month  for  hundreds  of  years,  and 
the  other  who  does  not  get  angry  with  any  one,  the  latter  is  decidedly 
superior.  As  in  childhood,  boys  and  girls,  through  their  folly  become 
enemies,  not  do  so  the  sensible,  and  after  considering  their  power  and  the 
weakness  of  their  foes,  never  entertain  any  feeling  of  enmity.” — 1-7. 

Devay4nl  said. — ‘‘Father!  In  spite  of  my  girlhood,  I know  the 
causes  and  consequences  of  actions  in  the  matter -'f  anger,  repr<H>f  and 
relative  strength  or  weakness  of  acts.  A sensible  man  should  not  tolerate 
an  unbecoming  action  of  his  disciple.  I have  therefore  no  desire  to  live 
among  people  whose  conscience  is  loaded  with  vice.  A person  desirous 
of  his  welfare  and  prosperity  should  uot  live  among  those  vicious  men 
who  are  uot  well  spoken  of,  by  men  of  character  and  position.  People 
who  are  considered  high,  by  men  of  character  and  position,  are  worthy  of 
company.  Cf)n8eqnently,  the  harsh  words  of  Vri^aparvan’s  daughter  arc 
rubbing  against  my  mind  like  Arani  (the  two  pieces  of  wood  used  in  kind- 
ling the  sacred  fire).  Father  ! I do  not  think  there  is  anything  baser  in 
the  world  than  the  adoration  of  an  enemy,  howst>ever  majestic  he  may  be, 
by  one  who  is  in  the  humbler  walk  of  life  and  is  devoid  of  riches.”  — 8-13. 

Here  ends  ike  tirenlv-eighth  chapter  descrihing  the  history  of  the  King 
YayAti  and  the  dialogue  of  Deoaydiii  and  ^hra. 

CFIAPTER  XXIX. 

kanaka  said  : — On  hearing  those  words  of  Devay.ani,  Bukra  the  best 
of  the  Bhrigns  also  got  angry  and  going  to  the  King  Vrit^aparvan  who  was 
sitting  on  his  throne  spoke  to  him  without  caring  for  the  consequences. 

“ King ! a sinful  act  does  not  instantly  fructify,  but  is  like  a cow 
which  does  not  git's  birth  at  once  after  (conception).  A sin  is  sure  to 
produce  its  fruit,  just  like  a heavy  meal  to  produce  colic  in  the  stomach, 
uot  at  once  but  after  sometime.  In  process  of  time  it  entirely  roots  out 
the  sinner.  He  who  overlooks  his  own  faults  or  those  of  his  sons,  and 
grandsoas,  etc.,  loses  his  Trivarga,  the  three  objects  of  wordly  existence, 
PM.,  Artha  (riches  or  worldly  prosperity),  Dharma  (religion),  KAma 


OBAPTBR  XXIX. 


8d 

(#njoyrnents).  You  are  Riire  to  renp  tlie  fruit  of  your  sin  of  killin^r 
the  grandson  of  Afi/^irasa  and  son  of  B|iiniHpati,  and  tijen  causing  his 
remains  to  be  <leposited  in  iny  stomach  by  mixing  them  with  iny  wine. 
King!  on  account  of  your  having  killed  my  disciple,  who  was  sinless, 
cliaste,  submissive  and  unworihy  of  being  slain,  as  well  as  for  the 
injury  done  to  my  daughter,  1 leave  3^011  along  wdth  3'Our  kinsmen.  J do 
not  consider  it  prc^pcr  to  stay  in  your  empire  any  mi)re.  As  you  do  not 
heed  the  actions  of  30111-  vicious  and  proud  danghtM*,  I cciisider  yon  from 
today  a l)aii3’a  who  talks  much  hut  does  not  tliiuk  of  keeping  his  pro- 
mises ; thou  thiiikest  me,  0 iJaitya  ! censurable  and  a talker  of  false- 
hoods.**— 1-6. 

V|-ihaparvan  said  : — Bhargava  ! I do  not  consider  5’ou  as  censur- 
able or  a talker  of  falsehood  because  1 am  so  well  aware  of  your  truth  and 
asceticism  ; theicfoic  he  pleased  v ith  me.  Excepting  yon,  none  can  protect 
me  ; and  if  yon  are  going  to  leave  me  t(sda\-,  I will  drown  myself  in  thu 
ocean,  for  here  is  no  other  rcFnge  Tor  me.”  7-9. 

Snkra  said  “ You  .may  cither  drciwn  youixlf  in  the  ocean  or  roam 
about  in  the  woild,  my  daughter  is  very  deai  to  me,  and  I cannot  make 
her  feel  hurt.  You  sliotdd  please  I)eva3"ani.  1 shall  settle  down  with  her 
wherever  she  goes.  If  .you  will  phsise  her,  I shall  guard  y’ou  as  B|iliaspati 
does  India  and  other  Devas.” — 

Vii^aparvan  said  : — ” Bhargava!  3^011  are  the  master  of  elephants, 
chariots,  horses  and  all  the  riches  of  the  Asuras  ;.and,  similarly,  3’ou  are 
the  master  of  all  my  wealth  and  belongings.”— Jl^ 

iSukia  said  : — “ King  of  Asuras!  1 will  consider  myself  the  master  of 
the  Daityas  then  only  when  3’ou  please  Devayani  and  not  otherwise.” — 13. 

i^aumika  said  : — Hearing  that,  tiukra  w-ent  to  Devayani  along  with 
V|isaparvana  and  sai<l  to  her  ” Now  thy  words  are  realized,  for  I am 
considered  as  lord  of  all.” — 14. 

t 

Devayani  said: — “If,  0 Fallier ! thou  art  the  lord  of  the  king’s 
wealtli  then  I will  believe  it  if  the  king  himself  Ra3's  so  to  me.” — 15. 

Vj-i^aparxian  said  : — “ Deva3^mi ! 1 shall  fullil  your  desires,  howso- 
ever difficult  they  may  be.*’-  -16. 

Devayani  said  “ When  you  promise  to  fulfil  my  desires,  I wisji 
Sarmii;«th/i  to  be  my  maid,  with  a thousand  damsels  ; and  she  should  go 
with  me  wherever  my  father  may  please  to  marry  me.** — 17. 

Vri^aparvau  said  : — “ 0 Hurse,  get  up,  go  and  bring  ^armis(h4  at. 
once  in  my  presence.  I shall  do  exactly  as  Devayfinl  desires.**— 18. 

13 


^unalca  said  Od  being  thus  commanded  by  the  king,  the  nuree 
at  once  went  to  Sarmi^tha,  and  told  her  0 iSarmi^tha ! get  up  and  save  your 
kinsmen  from  impending  calamity  ; because  incited  by  his  daughter,  iSukra 
is  forsaking  his  disciples  and  the  fulfilment  of  Devayanl's  desires  rests  on 
you.  You  have  become  the  maid  of  Devayani.” — 19-20. 

^rmisthk  said  : — “ I shall  do  whnt  she  wants,  let  iSiikra  not  go  away 
in  a fit  of  anger  nor  Devayani  get  offended  at  what  I have  done.** — 21. 

^aiinaka  said  'i'hoii  at  the  behpst  of  iier  father  jdarmi^thfi  in  a 
palanquin  went  to  Devayani  along  with  a thousand  maids ; and  said, 
“ Devayftui ! I have  come  with  a thousand  maids  to  serve  you  and 
shall  accompany  you  wherever  you  go,  after  being  married  by  your 
father.**-22-:i3. 

Devayani  said  : — “ I am  the  (laughter  of  a panegyrist,  one  who  Legs 
and  receives,  how  then  do  you,  who  are  the  daughter  of  one  praised,  serve 
me  as  my  maid  ?”  - 2i. 

: — “ It  is  my  bounden  duty  (.<;  do  that  wliich  may 
bring  relief  to  my  distressed  kinsmen  ; consequently  I shall  follow  you  as 
your  maid,  and  will  also  .iccompany  you  after  your  marriage  wherever 
your  father  may  wed  you.*’ — 25. 

^aunaka  said: — **  After  the  daughter*  of  Vrisaparvau  made  up  her 
mind  to  serve  Devayani  as  her  maid,  ilie  latter  said  to  her  father  :-~ 

“ Father  ! I am  satisfied.  Indeed,  the  power  of  thy  knowledge  and 
wisdom  is  infallible  and  fruitful.  I shall  now  enter  the  city.*’— 20-27. 

Hearing  those  words  of  his  daughter,  Sukra,  worshipped  by  the 
Dd.navas,  cheerfully  entered  the  town. —28. 

Here  ends  the  twentij-uiuth  chapter  in  the  history  of  Yayati  dealing 
with  the  pacification  of  Devayani, 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

^aunaka  .said  : 0 king  ! Long  after  that,  DevayAni  again  went  to 

amuse  herself  in  the  same  forest  in  the  company  of  l^armi§th&  and  a 
thousand  maids.  Whilst  she,  along  with  her  compani(3nB  was  thus  amusing 
herself  thereby  drinking  wine  and  eating  various  victuals  and  fruits,  King 
• Yayfiti,  also  chanced  to  visit  the  same  forest  with  the  object  of  enjoying  a 
shoot,  and,  feeling  thirsty  whilst  he  was  in  search  of  water,  he  saw 
DevayAnl  and  Sarmi^tha  along  with  other  women  folk  drinking.  Among 
them  he  marked  DevayAnt,  the  beautiful,  who,  wearing  lovely  orna- 
raetits,  was  sitting,  attended  by  8nrmisth&  and  other  maids.  Then 


ms 


muma: 


— ? — — 

« King  YayAl!  said : *'  Two  of  you  ai'e  charming  teauties  boi  izoned  by  two 
" <d)ouaand.  women.  I request  you  to  please  tell  me  your  names  and 
*clan.’*— Wr  , ' 

DevayAnI  i-eplied  : — “ King ! Hear  what  I say.  I am  the  daughter  of 
the  Sage  l^ukra  who  is  preceptor  of  the  Asuras  and  she  is  my  maid-in-chief, 
^arini^thA,  the  daughter  of  Vfi^aparvan,  the  mighty  king  of  the  Danavas. 
She  always  accompanies  me  wherever  I go.”— 9-10. 

YayAti,  who  was  astonised  to  hear  that,  enquired  how  that  daughter 
of  the  king  of  the  Asuras  came  to  be  her  maid-in-chief. — 11. 

DevayAnI  said  ; — “ Do  not  be  astonished.  All  this  has  been  ordained 
by  BrabmA.  Yon  look  like  a king  from  your  bearing  and  sweet  and  dig- 
nified speech.  Tell  me  your  name  and  parentage.” — 12-13. 

YayAti  said  ; — “ I have  studied  all  the  Vedas  after  leading  a student’s 
life,  and  I am  King  YayAti,  the  son  of  King  Nalniha.”— 14. 

DevayAnI  said  : — ‘‘King!  What  for  have  you  come  here — to  drink 
water  or  to  enjoy  a shoot  ? ” — 15, 

YayAti  said  In  course  of  my  slioot  I have  happened  to  come  to 
this  spot  to  satisfy  my  thirst  and  am  ready  to  obey  your  commands.”— 16. 

DevayAnI  said  : — “Friend!  I am  at  your  disposal  with  iSarmisthA 
and  ray  retinue  of  maids,  he  my  lord.”— 17. 

YayAti  said  : — “ Lady  ! You  are  the  daughter  of  Siikra,  who  is  a 
BrAhmapa,  and  consequently  you  cannot  be  wedded  by  a K^atriya  sove- 
reign.”—18, 

DevayAnI  said  : — “ King  ! the  rjice  of  the  Ksatriyas  has  been  created 
by  HrahrnA  and  is  supported  by  him.  0,  son  of  Nahuba!  you  are  a sage; 
and  also  the  son  of  a sage ; by  all  means  marry  me.” — 19. 

YayAti  said  “ 0,  Lady  I Tliougli  all  the  four  castes  have  sprung 
from  one  and  the  same  body  of  Brahma,  yet  their  duties  and  rules  of  life 
are  entirely  different  from  one  another,  and  a BrAhmana  k superior  to 
all.”— 20. 

DevayAnI  said  “ 0,  son  of  Nahu§a  I this  hand  of  mine  has  not 
been  touched  ^by  any  other  pereon  and  you  have  once  grasped  it.  I there- 
fore choose  you  to  be  my  partner  in  life.  Who  else  can  take  my  band  ? You 
took  me  by  the  hand,  because  you  are  the  son  of  a sage  or  because  you  * 
are  a sage  yourself.”— 21-22. 

TayAtt  said  : — “ The  sages  of  hoary  lore  have  said  that  a BrAliraapa 
is  more  formidable  than  the  mouth  of  an  angry  venomous  'serpent  and 
the  raging  fire.”— 23. 


* JDe’siiydnl  «aid  “ 0,  RIpssihI  one  ! How  do^y^ou  .(leficjrvll)(? 
umna  to  bo  nmro  formi<lal)le  timu  an  an^iy  venomous  snuHg  and  ihh 
raging  five?'* — 24.  . * ' 

Yayrifi  sniil }iv  /he  bile  of  a poisonous  serpent  and  by  the  blow 
of  a weap<)ii  only  one  life  is  lost,  bn!  by  i lie  anger  of  a Braliinami  the 
whole  realm -and  country  is  devastated;  this  is  my  reason  for  having' 
described  a B«;ihnjjma  as  such,  and  I fluM'i'fiue  cannot  accept  you  in 
marriage  without  your  father’s  cnnseut.  “2r»-2(». 

Devay  uii  said  : — “ King  ! When  my  father  gives  me  away  to  you 
of  Ilia  own  accord,  ynii  will  then  in-et'pt  me  as  yours.  Yon  cannot  beg,  1 
know;  and  consequently  1 have  aceepted  \\n\  as  my  l'»ial  ; now  there  is  no 
question  of  receiving  on  your  part,”-  27. 

^niinal<a  sni<l,  — After  tlmt,  the  nnr-e.  deputed  by  Devavinii,  went 
and  explained  all  that  to  .'^ukin.  .^nkra  m iuMiring  liiat  went  to  tin*  king, 
and  both  of  them  were  pleased  t**  nn  each  other.  2S-:-'lt. 

The  king,  seeing  .^nkra.  ^alnled  him  v.  ith  fnldiMl  hands  ; and  tlio 
latter  also  spoke  to  him  rnihily  an  1 soeetly.  - 

Devayani  s.iid  to  her  I’aiher  tljai  the  Vay‘-li  had  t>nee  grasped 

lier  hand,  when  slie  wn^  in  g'v.it  iilll  ol.'  an  1 In* -di  'uld,  ihei-efore *deilicate 
her  to  him,  and  that  she  won!  I ’na*-iy  n.»  mm  *X'  * piMig  him.  *U. 

i^iikra  then  said  t i V.iy  ni,  that  ho  had  lie.*n  c*ii  )sen  by  lier  daughter 
before,  whom  lie  ‘dmn’d  im.eept  as  \i\<  after  willingly  made 

over  to  him  liy  hej’  f'Ui.'er.  - .h2 

Yayali  said  “ IVli.’.i  !i  i\a  ! Ijysneli  de<-.i,s.  \ mar,  I will  (commit  a 
sin  ; I tht'n-fore  l>e.*eaeh  y.,ii  to  jarsy  (-iT  die  .'•in  of  I'realing  a cunfusion 
of  castes  liy  snrdi  intHnuan  ia je.” --  od. 

l^uk  ra  »Said  : — ” I *-hall  fiee  yon  fiMm  all  sin.s.  Accept  this  gift 
chosen  by  her.  Yh>u  will  beetnne  laml.dilo  by  this  marriage  ; I free  you 
from  the  future  sin  ; marry  this  amiable  Hevuyaid,  aecording  |ij  law  and 
have  every  enj^wment  mj  hm’  c • sjsmy  ; lids  Sarini^f.ha,  the  daughter  of 
Vjisaparvan,  will  attend  (mi  \mn,  and  you  .-^Iniulvl  never  invite  her  to  your 
I.)ed.*’-:U-3I). 

f^anr.ka  said  ; — On  liearing  ti.nse  w >rds  of  tlm  S(;er  3nkra  tliat  king 
circumambulated  the  latter,  and  witlj  his  p^n-missiou  entered  his  city  with 
great  rejoicing.s.— 37. 

Here  ends  the  thirtieth  ohnpfer  descrihing  the  marringe  of  Yayiti 
^ with  Decayaut. 


■«  mAPTER 

# # ' - V . 

--41.  - -r  i 

-I#  ^ ^ • 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 

. i^aiTWka  m\(\  ; — Ynyf-ti  entororl  Iiih  capital,  wliicli  was  afs  beautiful 
as  the  city  oflndra  He  tljcri  ushered  DevayAni  into  bis  palace  and, 
accordinjEf  to  the  advice  of  tlie  <|U0fMu  located  rfarinistlr'*,  tlie  dau^liter  of 
Kin^f  Vrisaparvan.  in  a separate  hf>use  in  Arf  )kavana.  Thus  SSarmistliei, 
alon^j:  with  her  retinue  of  a tljousand  maids,  uas  aepamted  after  lieing 
provided  with  cloilies,  pn)visions,  and  ornaments,  'riien  that  son  of 
King  Nahiisa  enjoyed  himself  like  the  Devas,  in  the  con»[»any  of  Devayani, 
for  a great  number  Af  3'ears.  In  the  fullness  of  time.  Deva^’anl  conceived, 
and  after  ten  months  gave  birth  to  a chihl  — 1-/>. 

’ After  a thousand  ,vears,  .^armistha,  tlie  daughter  of  Vrisaparvan, 
when  slie  was  in  her  full  bloom  of  youth,  felt  very  sari  on  not  liaving  a 
husband.  She  said  in  her  mind  : “ What  will  be  meet  for  me  to  do?  How 
am  I to  getliappinoss  ? Oevaviini  lias  given  birth  to  a son,  hnt  my  youth 
is  detdining  for  nothing.  I will  al<ao  make  tlie  king  niv  linsband,  as  she 
has  done,  I will  request  the  king  to  give  me  a similar  fruit  in  tlie  shape 
of  a son.”  With  these  tliouglils,  she  longed  to  see  tlie  king  privately. 
Now,  at  tliat  time  the  King,  coming  out  at  pleasure,  was  astonished  to  meet 
Sarniisfchi,  outside  the  As'  ^kavana.  {^armi^Hia  meeting  the  king  in  private, 
addressed  him  with  folded  hands:  — 

“ King ! Even  Soma,  India,  Varuna  and  the  wind  are  incapable 
of  seeing  the  women  in  your  palace.  Yon  know  me  to  be  a beauty, 
full  of  modesty  and  coming  of  good  parents  ; I beseecli  you  to  cuj<y  inj' 
company.” — 0-13. 

Y’ayati  replied  :-‘‘I  know  all  thy  qualifications.  I know  thou  art 
the  cliaste  daughter  of  flie  valiant  king  of  the  Dail^'as.  Tliou  art  modest, 
but  1 cannot  look  at  thee  with  any  feeling  of  lust,  because  at  the 
time  of  1 eva^vauiV  marriage  SVikra  enjoined  on  me  not  to  invite  thee  to 
my  bed.”— 14-15. 

Sarmistha  said:— “King!  there  is  no  sin  in  speaking  untruth  at 
the  time  of  indulging  in  sexual  pleasures,  011  tlie  occasion  of  marriage, 
when  life  is  in^danger,  wealth  is  at  slake,  and  in  joke.  Tying  on  tln'se 
five  occasions  is  venal.  It  is  only  a sin  to  speak  an  nntruth  at  the  time  of 
being  summoned  as  n witness,  or  uhen  one  is  entrusted  to  dispute  of  a 
thing,  or  when  one  is  asked  his  advice  on  any  point.”  — 16-17. 

Yeyati  said  “ A king,  being  the  auiliority  for  his  people,  should 
abstain  from  untruth,  even  at  the  time  of  danger.”— 18. 

^armisthil  said  One’s  own  husband  and  the  husband  of  her  com- 


' “ ^ „ V . 7 - 

■'  ^ 

paiHQiQ  aie  equal ; and  as  you  are  the  lord  of  my  compadon,  you  must  alcK) 
telce  me  as  wedded  to  you.”— 19.  ; 

Yayftti  said  “ One  should  give  away  according  to  one’s  means 
to  one’s  supplicants  ; and  it  is  also  my  vow  not  to  have  any  matrimonial 
connections  with  you ; now  you  j’ourself  tell  me  what  am  I to  do  of 
these  two  things.”— 20. 

^armi^tha  said : — “ King  ! Save  me  from  imnforality  by  your 
righteousness.  1 shall  loail  tlie  life  of  highest  virtue  after  getting  a child 
through  you.  King  / n wamnu,  a servant  and  a son  all  these  three 
have  been  said  to  be  prior ; for  the  wealth  aeqnirerl  hy  tliein  belongs  to 
their  master.  I also  take  my  meals  with  l)evayanf  and  live  as  a maid, 
dependant  on  her ; therefore  receive  me  also  I am  worthy  of  your 
support.”— 21-23. 

^aunnka  said  : — Hearing  those  wmdsof  ^^armibtha,  the  khigaceopted 
her  and  guarded  her  virtue.  They  then  mi  joyed  themselves  in  each 
other  s company  and  were  immen>ely  pleased.  Tlirougli  that  conjunction, 
the  daugliter  of  VrisaparvaTi,  conceived  and  gave  birth  to  illustrious  sons 
gleaming  with  the  radiance  of  the  sun.— 24-27. 

Here  ends  the  thirty- first  chapter  descrihimf  the  secret  marriage  of 
Yaijfiti  with  Sarwiitha. 

(TTAPTKll  XXXII. 

^aunaka  said  On  liearing  the  news  of  Sarmi^tha  giving  birth  to  a 
child,  Devayani  became  deejily  afilicted  and  went  and  asked  her,  why  she 
committed  that  sin  by  being  a slave  to  Oupid.— 1-2. 

Sarmistha  said  : — “A  seer,  well-versed  in  the  Verlas,  came  to  me  whom 
I pleased,  taking  him  as  my  lord  ; and  this  sou  has  been  born  of  him.  0 
blessed  one  ! I have  not  basefidly  been  a shave  to  passions.  This  child 
has  been  born  of  a Uisi ; believe  tliis  without  doubt.”— 3-4. 

Devay&iii  sard:— “Sarniistha!  If  this  is  true,  I am  no  more  angry 
with  you,  but  how  can  it  be  made  certain  that  you  'have  got  this 
progeny  from  a high  class  Brfihniana?  1 wish  to  know  his  clan  and 
lineage.”— 5-6. 

Sarmisthfi  said  :—**  Lady  ! I felt  myself  overpowered  by  his  glory. 
He  was  so  valiant  and  illustrious,  I could  not  therefore  ask  him  any- 
thing.”-7. 


CBlPTm  txxii. 


d5 

w- 

Saunaka  said After  that  mutuail  conversation,  Devay&nt  believed 
what  Sarmis(hft  told  her,  and  then  she  retarned  to  her  mansion.'— 8. 

Then  King  YayAti  begot  two^ons— Yadu  and  Turvasu— as  glorious 
as  Indra  and  Vifiyu,  from  DevayAnl.— 9. 

Druhya,  Ann  and  Puru,  those  three  sons  were  born  from  SarmisthA. 
After  that,  DevayAni  went  with  King  Yay4ti  to  the  Harit  forest. — 10-11. 

There  she  saw  the  three  boys  of  divine  elegance,  as  beautiful  as 
Sanat  Kumaras,  playing,  at  which  she  amazingly  said  ; — “ King  ! whose 
sons  these  boys  of  divine  lusture,  and  bearing  such  a close  affinity  to  you 
arer-12.l3. 

After  putting  that  question  to  the  king,  she  then  approached  the 
boys  and  asked  them  to  tell  her  frankly  and  sincerely  whose  sons  they 
were  and  what  was  their  clan.  The  boys  in  reply  to  her  query  pointed 
with  tlieir  finger  to  Yaynti  as  their  father  and  Sarmi^tha  as  their 
mother.  Saunaka  said,  that,  on  ascertaining  that  from  the  boys,  she,  along 
with  the  boys,  Imrried  back  to  the  king.  The  king,  afraid  of  the  presence 
of  Devayan!,  did  not  fondle  those  bo\'s,  as  usual,  at  which  they  went 
weeping  to  i^armi.sthil. — 14-17. 

DevayAnl,  knowing  them  to  be  the  sons  of  the  king,  went  and  spoke 
to  SarraisthA : — “ You  liar  ! why  do  you  incur  my  displeasure,  in  spite  of 
being  my  dependent  ? Do  you  not  fear  me,  and  dare  you  continue  lo  follow 
your  Asurik  ways?” — 18-19. 

^annistha  said  “ 0 Sweet  smiling  lady  ! Wliat  I told  you  before 
about  the  Kist  is  truth  and  nothing  but  truth.  I am  leading  a life,  as 
dictated  by  religion  and  morality.  Why  should  then  I be  afraid  of  you.  0 
Beautiful  one  ! the  moment  you  made  this  king  your  husband,  he  became 
my  lord  as  well,  on  account  of  his  being  the  husband  of  my  companion. 
You  aro  honored  by  me  on  account  of  being  a Brahman!  and  my  elder  in 
age,  and  consequently  this  Rajarsi,  who  is  your  husband,  is  worthy  of 
being  shown  more  honor  and  respect  by  mo.  Do  you  not  know  it  ?” — 
20-22. 

i^aunaka  said  : — Dn  hearing  those  words  of  Sarmi^tha,  Devayfinl  said 
to  the  king  that  she  would  no  longer  stay  with  him,  because  he  had  done 
what  was  extremely  hateful  to  her.  Saying  that,  she  went  to  her  father, 
the  sage  l^ukra,  with  her  eyes  full  of  tears. — 23-24. 

The  king  also  followed  her  and  did  his  best  to  pacify  her,  but 
Devayfinl,  whose  eyes  were  red  with  anger,  did  not  heed  him  ; and  shedding 
tears  and  mumbling  something  to  the  king,  she  hastened  to  her  father. 
The  king  also  followed  her  there. — 25-26. 


ITfl®  MATBYA  PORAT^AM. 


m/:  . 

After  taking  a little  pause,  Devayani  saluted  her  father  and  YnyAti 
also  showed  hU  reverence  to  the  sage.-  27. 

Then  Devayani  said “ Father ! rigliteoiisneas  has  been  conquered 
by  unrighteousness,  l)ecause  tliis  king  has  begotten  three  sons  fnan  Sar- 
mistha,  that  discarded  daughter  of  Vriyaparvan,  whilst  he  has  begotten 
only  two  from  my  mifortunate  self  Father  ! this  king  is  called  righteous, 
but  he  is  the  transgessor  of  the  boumls  of  virtue.” —28^30. 

I^ukra  said  : King ! ns  yon  have  (‘onmiitfed  a sin,  in  spile  of  your 

being  virtuous,  you  will  he  visited  sor)n  with  invincible  old  age.”-~3l. 

Yayati  said  : — “ 0 Rnhinan  ! One  who  does  not  satisfy  the  desire  of 
a damsel,  after  the  termination  of  her  nuMistnralion,  commits  tlie> 
slaying  a BrAhinana  ; and  one  who  does  not  grant  llic  ilcsire  a ti  n> 
even  on  her  making  such  a request,  he  o.  said  lo  commit  a sin  e/pinl  U 
the  sill  ()[  slaughtering  a great  /hvihmana.  O rreceptor ' foi  fear  n 
such  sins,  1 tremblingly  oiTcred  myself  to  Sarnii^tlia.*’  • 

Sukra  said  : King!  you  do|H»:id  on  me,  you  oiiglil  lo  have  taken 
my  advice,  tlieiTforo,  your  iloing  sucli  an  :u't  witltout  my  permission,  even 
on  the  score  of  righteousiu'ss,  is  imihing  sliort  of  tlc-ft."  —^o, 

^aiiiiaka  said  : -'riien  the  King  VayAii,  aft<‘r  being  tfuis  curset]  by 
the  wrathful  sage  Sukra,  instantly  turned  old.  -Sb. 

Yayati  then  said  to  the  sago  that  he  had  n<)t  liadouf»agli  of  enjoyment 
with  tiie  ^mung  Devayani  th*?rc/nie  he  might  mcrciruily  uard  olT  his  ' Id 
age  from  him. — 37. 

Sukra  said: -“King!  My  \v«)rds  rniniot  prove  false.  You  are 
therefore  bonml  to  be  old,  but  you  can  (•xcnatig(*  it  vviih  the  youth  of  some 
young  man. ”--38. 

Y'ayati  said : — “Brahman!  Bo  pleased  to  grant  this  favour  that 
one  who  exchanges  liis  youth  with  my  old  age  will  inherit  my  kingdom 
and  will  get  fame  ami  honor.”— 3lh 

Sukra  said  By  my  favour,  0 King!  You  will  exchange  your 
old  age  with  youth  witliout  committing  any  sin  ; and  any  of  your  sons, 
willingly  giving  you  liis  youth  in  exchange  for  your  old  age,  will  certainly 
be  blessed  with  many  children  and  will  lie  illustrious  and  long-lived.”— 
40-41. 

llei'e  enda  the  thirty  second  chapter  dealivg  with  the  curse  of  Suhra 
on  Yaydti, 


OHAPTEB  XXXIII 


9T 


CHAPTER  XXXin. 

^aunaka  said.— On  being  visited  with  old  age,  King  Yay&ti  went  to 
bis  capital  and  said  to  his  eldest  son,  Yadu,  that  owing  to  the  curse  of 
l^akra  he  had  become  old,  though  he  had  not  had  ample  satisfaction  of  his 
desires  in  his  youth  ; that  he  might  therefoi-e  exchange  his  youth  with 
his  old  age  and  thus  enable  him  to  satisfy  his  cravings,  and  that  after  a 
thousand  years  he  would  return  his  youth  to  him  and  take  back  his 
old  age. — 1-4. 

Yadu  refused  to  exchange  his  youth  with  the  old  age  of  the  king, 
who,  on  account  of  it,  looked  lean,  decrepit  and  furrowed  and  incapable 
of  indulging  in  enjoyments  ; and  said  that  the  king  had  other  sons  dearer 
than  him  to  whom  he  might  transfer  his  old  age. — 5-7. 

At  that  YayAti  got  vexed  and  cursed  Yadu  that,  as  he  being  hie  son, 
refused  to  give  him  his  j'onth,  hia  sons  would  be  wicked  like  his  maternal 
uncle  ; and  afterwards  he  made  a similar  request  to  his  son  Turvasn,  mak* 
ing  the  same  promise  to  him  of  restoring  back  to  him  his  youth  after  a 
thousand  years.  Turvasu  also  refose<l  to  accept  the  pioposal  of  the  king, 
saying  that  he  would  not  accept  the  old  age  which  made  one  devoid  of 
potency,  power,  enjoyment,  beauty,  intellect  and  honour. — 8-11. 

Yayfiti  cursed  him  for  his  refusing  to  accommodate  his  father  with 
his  youth,  and  said  that  his  ohm  would  become  extinct ; and  tliat  he 
would  be  the  king  of  the  vilest  of  the  MIechchha  races  who  would  be 
thieves,  the  doers  of  unnatural  deeds,  flesh-eaters,  indulging  in  im- 
moralities with  the  wife  of  their  preceptor  and  lower  animals. — 12-14. 

After  cursing  them  thus,  he  asked  his  son,  Druhya,  from  Sarmii;(h4, 
to  accede  to  his  wishes  on  the  same  condition  of  getting  back  his  youth 
after  one  thousand  years.  Druhya  also  refused  to  do  that,  and  said  that 
he  did  not  feel  inclined  to  put  himself  in  the  old  age  in  which  he  would  be 
incapable  of  enjoying  his  kingdom,  chariot  drive,  riding,  tlie  company  of 
women  and  feeling  love.  YayAti  cursed  him,  and  said  that  in  consequence 
of  his  refusal  to  meet  with  his  wishes,  inspite  of  his  being  his  son,  he 
would  never  enjoy  the  things  he  wishe<l  for.  Thou  and  thy  children 
will  go  to  that  place  where  there  will  be  no  enjoyment  of  kingdom,  nor 
enjoyment  of  beauty  and  youth. — 15-20. 

The  king  then  put  the  sjime  proposition  before  his  son,  Ann,  who 
also,  like  his  other  brothers,  discarded  it,  saying  that  he  could  not  force 
the  old  age  upon  him,  in  course,  of  which  a man,  like  an  infant,  takes  his 
meals  in  spite  of  his  remaining  defiled  all  the  time,  and  is  not  able  to 
U 


•TflJS?  MATSYA  PUBANAM. 


d8 

perform  a sacrifice  at  any  moment.  The  king  pronounced  a curse  on  him, 
as  well,  sjiying,  tSat  being  his  son,  he  di^l  not  accede  to  his  proposal  and 
that  he  would,  al8«>  sooner  or  later,  he  visited  with  the  old  age,  which  he 
decried  and  his  progeny,  born  in  his  youth,  would  not  survive.— 21-24. 

Yaytlti  thou  put  the  same  proposal  to  his  sou,  Puru,  and  saict  that  by 
carrying  it  out  he  would  be  the  dearest  of  all  his  sons.  He  had  been  visited 
with  that  untimely  and  fornii<Iab!c  old  age.  and  had  not  been  able  to 
satisfy  his  desires.  He  would  thereloro  restnre  Inn)  his  bloom  of  youth 
after  ten  centuries. — 25-27. 

Hearing  that,  1*.  ru  said  tliaf  he  would  d»>  exactly  what  his  father 
wished  and  asked  liiin  to  do.  Let  him  satisfy  all  his  cravings,  and  that 
he  woii/d,  most  willingly^  accept  hh  oht  a^o  nm)  iv(>  /hi  do  wJjat  appeared 
to  him  best.— 28-o0. 

—This  chapter  has  mit  been  traiiRlateil  literally. 

Here  ends  the  Utirlfj^bird  chapter  dealing  with  the  acceptance  by 
Punt  of  the  old  age  of  Yayati, 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

^annaka  said  : — On  hearing  those  words  of  the  prince  Purn,  king 
Vay&ti,  after  juentally  reciting  the  nauu'  of  Mukra,  transferreil  his  old  age 
to  his  son;  and  tlien  king  Yayati,  the.  son  of  Nuhn-n,  cheorfully  indulged 
iiirnself  in  tliC  enjov’iient  of  pleasures.  Jfe,  lio\ve\er,  did  not  do  that  at 
the  sacrifice  of  his  royal  duti('.s ; for,  ace  udiu^  to  tite  times,  witli  earnest- 
ness, and  in  conjiniction  uiih  the  [)rcscrilj('d  rules,  lie  performed  the 
libations  to  the  Deities,  an<i  the  manes  of  tlie  ancestors,  was  regular  in 
the  performance  of  f^raddha  and  sacrifices,  was  merciful  to  the  poor  and 
satisfied  ilie  wishes  of  the  Bralunanas,  enimtained  his  guests  by  minis- 
tering to  their  comforts  and  supported  the  Vai»*yas  by  protecting  them  ; 
was  not  cruel  to  the  Sudras  and  kept  thieves  down  by  inflicting  proper 
punishment  on  them.  In  that  way,  the  king  was  alert  in  his  duties  and 
was  thus  supplied  all  tlie  wants  of  his  subj(!Cts,  like  the  God  ludra. 
That  king,  valiant  like  tlie  lion,  never  deviating  from  the*  path  of  virtue 
and  continuing  his  pursuits  of  enjoyment,  led  a life  of  sublime  comfort 
and  happiness.— 1-7. 

On  getting  satisfied,  after  enjoying  himself  for  a thousand  years,  he 
recalled  to  his  mind  the  bygone  days ; and,  finding  that  his  cherished 
days  were  complete,  he  spoke  to  his  son,  the  prince  I^uru  : — 

**Sou!  a man  never  feels  satisfied  with  pleasures,  the  lust  foi 


CBAPTBB  XXXIV. 


pleasures  waxes  by  daily  indulgence,  as  the  fire  flames  all  the  more  by 
ghee  being  poured  into  it.  1 have  become  sober,  on  the  consideration 
that  the  mundane  boons  in  the  form  of  grain,  gold,  domestic  animals, 
(horses,  cattle,  etc.)  women,  are  not  meant  for  any  single  individual. 
Son  ! I have  liad  enough  of  pleasures  according  to  my  potency  by 
acquiring  your  vigour  of  youth  ; I am  consequently  very  much  pleased 
with  you,  now  you  take  back  your  bloom  of  youth  from  me  and  also 
receive  charge  of  this  vast  realm.  You  are  my  dearest  son.*' — 8-13. 

Saunaka : — After  that,  king  Yayati  turned  old,  and  Puru  became 
young  again. — 14. 

Then  the  king  appointe<l  a day  for  Puru  being  anointed  and 
proclaimed  king,  when  the  Brahmanas  and  ofliers  assembled,  said  ; — 

“ King!  how  do  you  confer  this  vast  kingdom  on  Puru,  overlook- 
ing prince  Yadu,  who  is  the  grandson  of  tJiikia  arnl  the  eldest  son  from 
the  queen  DevayAid!  Yadu  is  your  eldest  son,  next  to  him  is  I’urvaKii, 
your  third"  son  is  Uruliya  from  the  Queen  Sarinistha,  younger  to  him  is 
Anil,  whilst  Puru  is  tlie  youngest  of  all.  How  then  are  you  making  Puru 
a king,  overlooking  the  claims  of  his  elder  brothers  ? 0 king  ! you  should 
not  forsake  justice.” — lo-l8. 

Yayati : — Brnhmanas  and  otJiers  ! Hearken.  My  eldest  son  did 
not  obey  my  commands.  I therefore  do  not  give  him  the  empire  ; for  a 
disobedient  son  ought  not  to  be  recognised.  This  is  what  the  great  men 
have  said  ; and  Turvasu,  Driihya  and  Anu  also  disobeyed  me.  Puru 
stood  firm  and  obeyed  my  behests;  therefore,  he  alone  is  entitled  to  my 
monarchy.  It  is  he  who  exchanged  his  full  flourish  of  youth  with  my 
infirmity,  and  it  is  through  him  that  1 have  fulfilkd  all  luy  desires.  'I'he 
sage  Sukra  ha<l  also  blessed  that  one  who  would  cairy  out  my  orders 
would  be  the  Emperor.  For  these  reasons,  you  should  all  consider  Puru 
to  be  fit  for  the  Empire.” — VJ-25. 

Then  the  Commons  (Prakfiti)  all  assembled  there  cried  out  in  a 
chorus:  **  Indeed,  the  son,  endowed  with  all  the  good  qualities  and  who 
obeys  the  mandates  of  his  parents,  deserves  being  proclaimed  a sovereign, 
in  spite  of  his  iieing  the  youngest.  0 king  ! Puru,  who  has  done  you  a 
good  turn,  appropriately  deserves  the  kingdom  and  the  sage  isukra  has 
also  said  so:  ihorefore  nothing  need  now  be  said  about  this.” — 26-27. 

Saunaka- — Wlien  the  assemblage  pronounced  that  verdict,  the  king 
seated  the  prince  Puru  on  the  throne,  after  which  he  quitted  the  metro- 
polis and  went  to  the  forest  in  company  of  many  Brahmanas  and  ascetics. — 

28-29. 


100 


THE  MAT87A  PVnANAii. 


Yadu  begot  Y&davas,  Turvaau  begot  Yavanas,  Drabya  begot  Bhojaa 
and  A^u  became  the  father  of  the  MIechchhas. — 30. 

Para  became  the  founder  of  the  Paarara  dynasty  in  wiiich  you  are 
born  a king,  which  afterwards  came  to  be  known  as  the  Kuru  clan  and 
in  which  the  kingdom  is  to  last  for  one-thousand  years. — 31. 

Here  ends  the  thirty-four  chapter  of  the  Pur&na  dealing  with  iJie 
coronation  of  Puru. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

^unaka.— Thus  King  YaySti,  making  over  his  Empire  to  his  son, 
Puru,  turned  an  anchoi-ite  ; and  living  on  fruits,  passed  a number  of  days 
in  that  forest  and  afterwards  went  to  Iteaven,  where  Iio  began  to  pass  his 
days  in  happiness.  iScnneti.'nc  after,  Indra  hurled  liim  to  the  earth,  but  ho 
managed  to  gain  liis  footing  on  flie  celestial  soil  .and  .again  rose  to  heaven 
oirin/j  to  his  being  in  tonob  ivitli  tiie  Kings,  Astaka,  Jic.  It  is  said  that 
Yayati  returned  to  houvru  Innn  tiio  fijoiaincnt  in  company  of  the  Kings 
A%(aka,  ^ibi  Vasumai  and  I’ratarvlana. — 1-5. 

^atanika. — “Sage!  tell  us  in  di-tail  Uow  Yayili  ^Yas  hurled  down  to 
the  earth  and  how  he  again  wctit  to  heaven.  King  \ayAli  was  powerful 
like  Indra,  radiant  like  tlifSiin,  and  wa>  tlie  promoter  of  the  Kurnclan.  (.) 
Sage  ! I am  eager  to  hear  the  story  oi  id-  ci  ltslial  and  niundauo  glory.”— 

6-9 

^aunaka.— “ Hear  \'ou  all  thf^^  ‘..acred  histoiy  of  Yayiiti  which  is  the 
dispeller  of  all  sins  Hear  it  with  atteniion,  I am  going  to  relate  it  to 
you."-in. 

King  Yayati,  after  putting  his  sou  on  the  throne,  went  to  the  forest 
as  an  anchorite,  in  other  word.s,  he  made  over  his  vast  dominions  to  Puru 
and  put  his  otiior  sons,  Yadu,  &c.,  to  discharge  the  various  offices  of  the 
state,  after  doing  which  he  passed  a great  number  of  days  in  the  forest, 
living  on  fruits  and  herbs.  Hy  suVxlning  his  mind  and  conquering  his 
anger  he  regularly  performed  agniliotra  and  offered  libations  to  the  Deities 
and  the  manes  of  ancestors,  according  to  the  rules  prescribed  for  anchorites. 
He  entertained  his  guests  by  offering  them  the  jungle  fruits  and  ate  what 
he  could  get  by  picking  np  gleanings  of  Ijarvest  (Siloncblia-vritti).  Thus 
he  passed  a thousand  years.  Tlien  be  lived  only  on  water  for  three  years 
and  kept  up  his  vow  of  silence.  Afterwards  he  wanned  himself  with  the 


Ohapteb  xxxvl. 


101 


heat  of  fire  around  him,  and  for  aiz  months  he  practised  penance  by 
standing  on  one  leg  only.  The  glory  of  the  king’s  ascerticism  went  up 
to  heaven  from  the  earth. — 11-17. 

Here  ends  the  thirty-fifth  chapter,  dealing  with  the  forest  life  of  Yaydti. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

^aunaka.— That  king,  on  reaching  heaven,  was  venerated  by  Sfidhyas,. 
Maratgan/is,  Vasus  and  the  Devas.  Afterwards,  on  account  of  his  virtue,  he 
went  to  Brahmaloka,  where  he  resided  for  a long  number  of  years.  Once 
upon  a time  that  sacred  King  Yayfiti  chanced  to  go  to  the  region  of  Indra, 
when  the  latter  asked  him. — 1-3. 

Indra. — “ King ! tell  me  plainly  what  yon  said  to  your  son,  Puru 
(who  taking  your  old  age  roamed  about  the  world',  et  the  time  of  his 
coronation  ?” — 4. 

Yay&ti. — “ After  making  over  charge  of  my  realm,  with  the  approval 
and  advice  of  my  ministers,  and  the  people  ^Prakfiti)  to  Purn,  1 told  him  ; 

' You  will  be  the  sovereign  of  the  country  lying  between  the  Ganges  and 
the  Yamuna.  Your  other  brothers  will  be  under  yon  and  rnling  over  the 
lands  bordering  on  your  kingdom’.”  At  the  same  time,  the  following  piece 
of  advice  was  also  given  to  Jiiin  .Man  devoid  of  anger  is  superior  to 
one  full  of  it ; man  with  forbearance  is  superior  to  one  who  is  bereft  of  it; 
as  man  is  superior  to  non-hninan  beings,  so  a learned  man  is  superior  to  an 
illiterate  fool.  One  who  shows  forgiveness  to  another  who  abuses  ?>im  in 
angei',  eon.sumes  that  angry  being,  and  gets  all  hi.s  virtue.  One  should 
not  utter  such  a harsh  word  as  may  csuise  pain  to  another.  One  should 
not  accept  anything  from  a low  caste  man.  One  should  not  use  a speech 
that  would  grieve  others.  A harsh  speaker,  whose  words  pierce  others 
like  nails,  should  be  considered  a low  creature,  who  goes  to  hell.  A man 
should  always  win  the  admiration  of  high  class  people,  and  should  always 
be  defended  by  them  at  his  back,  should  bear  their  criticism,  obey  their 
advice,  and  lea4  & Harsh  words  penetrate  a man  like  arrows 

and  cause  grief ; they  should  therefore  be  avoided  by  sensible  men.  In 
the  three  worlds  there  is  nothing  superior  to  friendship,  charity  and  sweet 
speech ; consequently  one  should  always  be  gentle  in  his  speech  and 
should  show  obedience  to  high  class  men  and  not  curse  any  one.” — 5-13. 

Here  ends  the  thirty-sixth  chapter,  dealing  with  the  adoice  given  by 
Yaydti  to  his  son  Puru  at  the  laUer's  coronation. 


102 


TEE  MATSYA  PURAEAU. 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

Indra. — “ King  ! 1 ask  you  to  please  tell  me,  liow  you  practised  aus- 
terities after  renouncing  your  kingdom  and  repairing  to  the  forest  as  an 
anchorite.”—  1. 

YayAti. — “ I do  not  consider  the  austerities  of  the  Devas,  men, 
Qandharvas  and  Maharsis  as  equal  to  my  own.  *’ — 2. 

India. — **  King  ! you  do  not  know  the  glory  of  Iiigh  souls  and 
you  decry  other  beings  who  are  as  good,  nr,  better,  than  you  ; consequent- 
ly, you  are  not  fit  to  reside  in  those  regions,  because  by  this  sin,  you  have 
lost  your  virtue  and  the  privilege  of  living  here.  You  must  fall  to-day, 
0 King.” — 3. 

Yayati, — India  ! If  I have  lost  my  virtue  and  the  privilege  of 
living  here  by  running  down  the  glory  of  the  Devas,  llisis,  Gandliarvas, 
and  men,  I wish  to  fall  from  this  Heaven,  among  good  people. — 4. 

Indra,—  ” You  will  fall  now  among  goo«l  people,  where  yon  will 
regain  your  lost  position.  From  this  experience,  yon  should  no  more 
despise  those  who  uie  your  equal  or  beiter  than  you.’'—‘r). 

Saunaka.— After  tliat,  Vayati  was  thrown  from  the  heaven.  Abtaka, 
residing  in  tlie  central  region  and  knower  of  the  highest  virtue,  seeing 
him  fall,  said 

Abtaka.  0,  young  soul,  beautiful  like  Indra,  sliininglike  fire,  and 
brilliant  like  the  t»un  among  the  planets  ! Who  are  you  ? 0,  being,  shining 
like  the  fire  and  the  sun  and  laMing  from  the  path  of  the  sun,  on  seeing 
yon  going  down,  we  are  confused  and  are  in  doubt  wbetlier  the  time  has 
not  come  for  all  of  us  to  fall.  We  have  come  to  make  enquiries  about 
you,  but  we  are  bewildered  by  your  power.  You  do  not  seem  to  lieed  us 
and  make  enquiries  about  us  ; consequeiitly,  we  make  ourselves  bold  to  ask 
you  the  reason  of  your  fall  fjxmi  tlie  heavtuis.  ij  Soul,  beautiful  like  Indra, 
cast  away  your  fears,  grief  and  delusion.  Nobody  can  view  you  with 
disrespect  when  you  are  standing  face  to  face  with  high  souls.  The  good 
ones  are  empowered  to  support  the  fallen.  Here  are  the  ^good,  the  lord 
of  the  moveable  and  the  immoveable  creations,  and  you  are  now  in  this 
holy  company.  P'ire  is  lord  in  imparling  lioat,  the  Earth  is  lord  with 
regard  to  those  things  wliich  fecundate,  the  Sun  is  lord  of  all  objects  that 
shine;  so  a guest  is  lord  to  all  good  nien.”— 6-13. 

Here  ends  the  thirty-seventh  chapter,  describing  the  fall  of  Yaydti 
and  his  meeting  with  Abtaka. 


OBAPTBR  XXXVHL 


103 


CFTAPTER  XXXVIII. 

YayAti- — “I  am  King  Yiivati,  sou  of  Nahu^a  an<I  father  of  Pnru. 
Iiulra  lias  hurled  me  down  from  the  world  of  .Sur.'is  and  Siddh&s  for  des- 
pising all  creatuies  ; and,  now  devoid  of  virtue,  1 am  falling.  I do  not 
Biilute  you,  for  I am  your  senior  in  age,  becanse  among  the  twice-boin, 
one  who  is  greater  in  learning,  or,  ascetici.sm  or  senior  in  age,  is  a 
respected . " — 1-2. 

A%taka.--“  King  ! You  say  you  are  senior  in  age  which  is  also  a 
degree  of  superiority  ; but  among  the  twice-born,  one,  who  is  greater  in 
wisdom  and  asceticism,  is  alone  reckoned  superior,  and  not  one  who  is 
merely  senior  in  age.”— 3. 

YaySti.— “ They  say,  it  is  a sin  to  act  against  the  rules  of  courtesy, 
and  the  doer  of  sneh  a thing  goes  to  the  region  of  sinners  ; consequently, 
the  good  never  follow  the  example  of  the  wicked,  when  the  latter  speak 
against  the  rules  of  courtesy.  I had  vast  riches  which  I had  earned  by 
ray  exertions, — considering  this,  who  devotes  himself  to  the  good  of  the 
self,  that  man  is  truly  wise.  A wise  man  should  take  everything  in  the 
world  to  be  subordinate  to  Fate,  but  taking  the  dominance  of  bis  fate  into 
consideration,  he  should  not  give  way  to  despair  under  adverse  circum- 
stances. One  should  always  look  upon  prosperity  and  adversity  to  be 
subordinate  to  the  Supreme  Being,  and  should  never  consider  them  to  be 
within  his  own  power.  Taking,  therefore,  fate  to  be  predominant,  one 
should  not  be  influenced  by  grief  or  happiness.  A^taka,  thus  taking  fate 
fo  be  all  powerful,  I am  never  overcome  with  delusion  in  fear,  and  never 
keep  my  mind  loaded  with  grief.  1 believe  that  I shall  go  wherever  my 
fate  may  take  me.  Apdaj«.  Svedaja,  Jarilyuja,  Udbhija,  snakes,  reptiles, 
fish,  stones,  grass,  wood,  &c.,  assume  their  forms  through  fate.  A?taka! 
Regarding  prosperity  and  adversity  to  be  frail,  I do  not  worry  myself 
about  them.  In  other  words,  what  was  I?  what  I have  become?  what  1 
shall  do? — I never  bother  myself  with^thoughts  like  these.” — 4-11. 

^aunaka.— Then  that  Astaka,  on  hearing  those  words  of  his  maternal 
grandfather— Yayilti — asked  him  again — 12. 

Astaka. — ” King!  Tell  me  all  about  the  chief  regions  where  you 
have  been  to,  because  you  lecture  on  Dhnrma  like  a learned  man.  ” — 13. 

YayAti. — ” First,  T became  a king  of  an  extensive  Empire ; afterwards, 
through  my  virtue,  I lived  in  the  region  of  Mahat,  for  a thousand  years ; 
and  from  that  place  1 passed  to  higher  spheres  where  I lived  for  another 
ten  centuries  in  the  enclianting  realm  of  Indra,  which  is  four  hundred 


104 


THE  MAT8YA  PDRANAM, 


koda  in  extent  and  has  a Ibonsand  gateways ; whence  I went  to  still  higher 
regions.  Then  1 passed  one  thousand  years  in  the  divine  and  ageless 
realm  of  Prajapali,  which  is  inaccessible  [oven  to  the  Oevasnnd  Lokapalas.] 
Afterwards,  according  to  the  will  of  the  (lod  of  Qods  a-nl  conqueiinfir 
several  spheres,  1 lived  there,  according  to  niy  choice,  vc'ieniled  by  the 
handsome  and  illustrious  Devas  equal  in  gloiy  and  lustre  to  the  gods  ; after 
which,  1 went  and  spent  ton  thousand  years  in  the  pleasure  garden  called 
Nandana  the  Kaina-rflpi,  where  1 enjoyed  the  bloom  of  the  flowers  along 
with  the  captivating  faces  of  the  Gandharvas  and  the  nyinplis.  Thus 
I enjoyed  there  for  a considerable  length  of  time,  until  a ferocious  atten- 
dant of  the  God,  came  ainl  said  loudly,  ‘ Throw  him  down,  throw  him 
down.*  At  that  very  instant,  I fell  from  the  lieaven,  but  as  I fell 
from  Nandana,  I heard  the  voice  of  the  Devas  who  said,  ‘ This  pious 
king  Yayati  is  falling  with  tlie  loss  of  his  virtue,*  at  which  I requested 
them  to  show  their  clemency  by  lelting  me  fall  amongst  the  good  on  a 
sacred  soil ; and  in  this  way,  1 liave  come  to  this  land  of  ^sacrifices  of 
yours,  guided  tliereto  by  rlie  smell  of  incense  and  of  the  offerings  made  to 
the  fire.*’— 14-22. 

Here  ends  the  thirty-eighth  cbipter  descri^yiitg  the  dialogue  between 
Yoyati  and  Astaltn, 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

Astaka. — **  After  spending  tc  a thousand  years  in  the  pleasure 
garden  called  Nandana  Kainarupa,  iiuw  did  you  happen  to  come  to  this 
Earth  again  ?”— 1. 

Yayati. — “Asa  penniless  man  is  foisakeu  by  his  companions  and 
relations,  so  the  man  deprived  of  virtues  is  deserted  by  the  Devas 
in  heaven.” — 2. 

Astaka. — “ In  that  region  1k)\v  do  the  people  become  bereft  of  virtue, 
and  then  to  which  regions  do  tht'y  go?  Do  remove  my  doubts." — 3. 

Yay&ti. — “ King!  Most  of  Ihem  fall  to  tlte  earth  and  many  of  them 
fall  so  low  that  they  are  ultimately  feasted  upon  by  vultures  and 
jackals.  Consequently,  it  is  meet  for  kings  to  always  l^eep  themselves 
aloof  from  forbidden  things.  I have  explained  all  this  to  you ; what 
more  do  you  wish  to  enquire  about?” — 4-5. 

Astaka.— “ King  ! I now  wish  you  to  please  explain  to  mo  wliat 
pain  do  they  suffer  when  they  are  eaten  by  vultures  and  jackals,  and  what 
is  the  way  of  saving  thoinselves  from  that  hell  torture?  Also  tell  me  all 
(tbout  the  hell  on  earth  and  the  means  to  save  one  from  it.**— 6. 


CHAPTER  XXKiX: 


105 


Yay&ti. — “The  people  who  are  not  conscious  of  their  duty  in  course 
of  their  existence  on  earth,  and  whose  corporeal  actions  are  not  lofty,  go  to 
the  mundane  hell.  First,  they  hover  about  in  the  sky  in  the  form  of  air, 
for  a period  of  sixty  thousand  and  eighty  terrible  years,  and  then  at  the 
time  of  their  fall,  they  are  devoured  by  terrestrial  Rfiksasas  who  have 
formidable  fangs,” — 7-8. 

A^aka. — “ How  do  they  escape  the  torture  inflicted  upon  them  by 
ferocious,  terrestrial  Raksasas  with  formidable  fangs  and  how  are  they 
born  on  the  earth  ?” — 9. 

Yay&ti. — “ The  menstrual  flow  of  a woman  suddenly  developes  con- 
ception as  soon  as  it  mingles  itself  with  the  semen  virile  of  man,  through 
the  sap  of  the  flowers  of  herbs. —10. 

Note. -PafprasAnnyaktam.— lit.,  endowed  with  the  juice  of  flowers.  It  means 
semen  virile,  pnriScd  and  made  potent  by  the  properties  of  the  Juice  of  medicinal  herbs. 

“ Medicinal  herbs,  full  of  vigour,  go  to  the  human  and  animal  embryo, 
after  getting  into  water,  earth,  air  and  the  sky.” — 11. 

ilVote.^Apov4yum  pfithvim  ch&ntriksam.- lit.,- water,  air,  earth  and  the  sky.  It  is 
said  that  the  body  is  made  of  those  elements.  It  therefore  means  that  the  vigour  of 
medicinal  herbs  gets  into  the  womb  through  the  semen-virile,  after  first  getting  into  the 
corporeal  system. 

A§taka. — “ Does  this  soul  present  itself  in  the  womb  with  the  help 
of  other  bodies,  or  of  its  own  accord  ? Pray  remove  this  doubt.  Also 
explain,  0 king ! how  the  body  is  developed  and  how  the  organs  like 
the  eyes,  ears,  etc.,  are  formed.  I regard  you  to  be  endowed  with  the 
supreme  wisdom,  and  I therefore  venture  to  request  you  to  remove  all 
these  doubts.” — 12-13. 

YayAti. — “ At  the  time  of  menstruation,  the  air  draws  the  semen 
virile  up,  from  the  inside,  after  which  it  magnifies  itself  there  ; and  then 
it  developes  into  the  embryo  and  assumes  human  or  animal  form  (according 
to  the  kind  of  the  womb  where  such  development  occurs) ; it  then  hears 
the  sounds  through  the  ears,  sees  tilings  tlirough  the  eyes,  smells  with 
the  nose,  tastes  with  the  tongue,  feels  perception  with  the  skin,  meditates 
with  the  mind.  Similarly,  all  the  limbs  are  gradually  formed.” — 14-16. 

Astaka.— “ The  body  which  is  consumed  in  fire,  buried  or  eaten 
away  by  the  lower  animals  ; how  does  it  again  enshrine  the  soul  within 
it?”-17. 

YaySti. — “ Just  as  a sleeping  animal  maintains  life,  similarly  the  soul 
a^ter  vacating  the  corpse,  enters  another  body  according  to  its  virtue  or  sin. 
A virtuous  soul  is  reborn  (as  a sequence  of  its  good  actions),  in  the  form 

U 


JOi  MAT8YA  PBRANAii. , 

\ of  a pious  being,  and  similarly  a vicious  soul  takes  its  birth  as  a rpptile 
or  insect.  It  is  not,  for  me,  to  enumerate  the  sins,  the  commitment  of 
which  leads  the  soul  to  be  bom  as  a reptile  or  an  insect.  Ai^taka ! I 
have  explained  to  you,  briefly,  the  reasons  of  the  soul  becoming  a 
quadruped,  lower  animal  and  man.  Now  tell  mo  what  more  do  you  wish 
to  ask  me  ? 18-20- 

A^taka. — “ Sire  ! Tlirougli  what  knowledge  or  which  form  of 
asceticism,  does  a man  attain  high  name,  and  through  what  deeds,  does 
he  achieve  high  regions;  please  answer  these  questions.” — 21. 

Yayati.—”  For  a man,  the  following  seven  things  are  the  gates  to  # 
heaven,  viz.: — asceticism,  charity,  self-control,  restraint,  modesty,  honesty, 
and  kindness  to  all  living  creatures.  Sages  also  say  tliat  even  ascetics  are 
ruined  by  conceit  and  tamogiina.  A student  wlio,  thinking  too  mncii  of 
his  learning,  employs  his  kuowlege  to  belittle  others,  loses  his  privilege  of 
finding  a place  in  the  higher  nigioiis,  and  that  wisdom  does  not  liear  him 
fruit.  Tlie  following  Four  tilings,  ciz.^  the  performance  of  agii’.hotra,  the 
obserrance  of  the  vow  of  silence,  the  acquirement  of  knowledge  and  the 
performance  of  sacrifices,  in  spite  of  thoir  being  good  deeds,  are  marred 
by  indulgence  in  drinks  and  conceit,  it  is  worthy  of  a large-minded  man 
not  to  become  elated  on  being  praised  by  others  and  not  to  get  angry  at 
their  calumnies.  Uigh-ininded  men  worshi])  the  good,  and  the  wicked 
never  get  supreme  knowledge  in  tlie  world,  To  give  alms  and  to  study 
the  Vedas,  acconling  to  tlie  ways  prescrilw],  slioiild  lu-  considered  to  be 
the  best  of  all,  and  the  vices  mentioned  above,  slnudd  always  be  discarded  ; 
which  would  enable  the  leaniefl  to  go  closer  to  lhaluna,  througli  ctmstant 
contemplation,  and  then  attain  final  beatitude.” — 2^-28. 

Here  ends  the  fhirUj-ninth  chapter  descrihinrf  the  dialogue  between 
Yayutiand  Astaka. 

CHAPTEIi  XL 

A^^ka. — “ 0 King ! 13e  good  cnongh,  to  tell  me  how  does  a house- 

holder go  to  the  Devas  in  the  Heaven  wmrld,  and  how  do  a Sanyasi  and  a 
Brahmach&ri  reach  them  ? Similarly  liow  does  a V^napraStha  attain  the 
heavens?”—]. 

Yayati.—“  A student  [BrahinachariJ  attains  his  end  by  diligently 
studying  when  called  by  Ids  teacher  to  do  so,  by  showing  reverence  and 
obedience  to  his  preceptor,  by  getting  up  ahead  of  his  preceptor,  and  by 
going  to  bed  after  him,  by  being  mild,  by  controlling  his  passions,  by 
keeping  himself  steady  and  not  fickle,  and  by  applying  himself  to  his 


OHAPTEB 


lor 

studies.  A householder,  [QfiliaMha],  is  said  to  he  ideal  Tvhen  lie  earns  an 
honest  Jiving,  performs  sacrifices,  entertains  his  guests,  gives  aims*  to 
poor,  and  does  not  beg  from  others,  nor  accepts  anything  unless  gi\’^n. 
unasked,  and  constanly  studies  TTpanisads  and  Puranas.  An  anchorite, 
[Vanaprastlia],  should  live  in  the  forest  on  his  daily-earned  subsistence, 
is  said  to  reach  his  goal  when  he  earns  his  subsistence  by  self-perseve- 
rance, keeps  himself  quite  aloof  from  sins,  is  entertaining  and'ofgood 
cheer  to  others,  and  does  not  cause  injury  to  any  one.  Such  a muni 
attains  perfection,  being  regular  in  his  diet  and  activities.  The  SannySsi 
should  subsist  on  begging,  and  should  not  resort  to  any  craft,  should 
liave  no  house  of  his  own  to  live  in,  who  check  his  passions,  keep  himself 
devoid  of  all  company,  sleep  under  a tree,  having  limited  ambitions, 
travelling  in  various  countries,  and  having  one  suit  of  clothes.  lie 
is  said  to  be  a true  Bhik^uka.  At  night  time,  when  the  rest  of  the 
world  is  indulging  in  sensual  pleasures  by  being  a slave  to  Cupid, 
the  lejirned  uermit  should,  peacefully,  pass  his  time  in  the  forest,  because 
the  man  who  fixes  his  abode  in  the  forest  after  weaning  himself  from  the 
world,  leads  his  twenty-one  generations,  including  himself,  viz.,— ten 
ancestors  and  an  equal  number  of  his  successors,  including  hirrself,  to  the 
path  of  virtue.” — 2-7. 

Aetaka. — ” King  ! I wish  to  hear  who  are  to  be  classed  among  sages 
who  keep  the  vow  of  silence  (munis),  and  among  observers  of  the 
vow  of  silence  how  many  kinds  of  vows  of  silence  (Mauna)  are  there?” — 8. 

Yayati. — “One  who  dwells  in  the  woods  and  turns  his  back  upon 
habitations,  and  also  one  who  lives  in  town  having  his  hack  turned 
upon  tlio  forest,  are  both  high-minded  munis.” — 9. 

Astaka.-— “ How  one  dwelling  in  the  woods  has  his  back  turned 
on  habitation,  and  how  one  residing  in  town,  has  his  back  turned  on 
the  forest.” — 10. 

Yay&ti. — “ The  muni  who,  fixing.his  dwelling  in  the  forest,  spurns  at 
all  the  provisions  of  the  town,  and  lives  only  on  the  produce  of  the  woods, 
ia  said  to  turn  his  back  on  habitation.  The  sage  (muni,  who  has  passed 
the  stage  of  performing  agnihotra  and  has  no  house  of  his  own,  and  has 
transcended  the  limitations  of  golras  fclan),  and  Charanas  (Vedic  Schools), 
puts  on  only  a kawpina  or  wears  cast  off  garments,  eats  only  to  keep  his 
body  and  soul  together,  is  the  ascetic  (muni;  living  in  the  village  hi^ 
back  turned  towards  the  forest.” — 11-13. 

Note.<-KaupCfia— A strip  of  cloth  worn  ss  cover. 

The  seer  imuni^  who,  after  forsaking  all,  curbs  bis  passions  and 
pbeerves  the  vow  of  silence,  accomplishes  his  object  in  the  world, — 14, 


ilWS  J ■ T'BB  UiTSVA  PURASMi. 

'it'r  ' ' •• — ^ : 

A seer  (muni),  howsoever  shabby  he  may  be,  oitght  to  be  adored  by 
even  such  a man,  who  keeps  his  teeth  clean,  pure,  white,  alwajrs  trims  his 
. finger  nails,  bathes  every  day,  wears  ornaments  on  his  body,  and  leads  a 
chaste  life,— 15. 

Note.— It  means  that  a scor  (muni),  howsoever  dirty  and  shabby  he  may  be,  is  worthy 
of  being  venerated  and  adored  without  demur  even  by  a good  man  whose  person  is  com- 
paratively most  clean.  The  latter  should,  on  no  account,  feel  disgusted  by  the  former's 
ngly  appearance. 

One  whose  plethora  of  flesli  «'ind  hloocl  has  disappeared  by  his 
severe  penances  and  wlio  has  ilioieby  hoconie  reduced  to  a mere  skeleton, 
showing  bII  his  decayed  bones,  and  devoid  of  the  feeling  of  pjosperitj"  or 
adversity,  sticks  to  his  ineditation,  is  said  to  be  firm  in  his  vow  of  silence 
(munil.  When  such  a sage  chews  his  moj-sel  like  a cow,  and  reiaains 
silent  like  the  latter,  he  wi?is  both  the  worlds  and  paves  his  way  for  the 
final  bliss.— 16-17. 

Here  ends  the  fortieth  ehipter  deserildng  the  ditties  of\he 
four  stages  of  life, 

CHAVTEU  XLI. 

A§taka.— King  ! Who  between  the  two  (orders),  ivV,  the  Sanyasi 
or  the  Vanaprastha  attains  to  tlio  region  of  the  I>evas  first  ? Both  of  them 
are  striving  after  Dovaliood  in  the  heavenly  patli  like  the  sun  and  the 
moon.” — 1. 

Yayati. — “A  Sanyasi,  though  living  in  the  village  and  amongst 
gfihastas,  but  having  no  house  of  liis  own  and  control  over  his  desires, 
goes  first  to  Devahood  and  is  better  than  one  living  in  the  forest.” — 2. 

“ One  who,  getting  the  body  of  man  obtained  with  difficulty,  com- 
mits sins,  must  repent  sincerely  for  them  ajid  tlien  practise  rigid  penances 
in  forest  to  wash  them  off.  Whatever  is  cruel,  is  said  by  the  wise  to  be 
unwholesome;  the  follower  of  the  path  of  unrighteousness  is  foolish  ; and, 
as  an  unrighteous  man  is  aimless.  Mimilarly,  0 King  ! holy  man  is  truly 
simple,  who  is  always  in  meditafion,  and  is  really  noble. ”--*2-4. 

Aftaka. — “ How  liave  jmu  chanced  to  come  here  ? You  are  young, 
adorned  with  a beautiful  garland  'of  flowers),  and  full  of  lustre.  In  which 
direction  do  you  live,  and  where  have  you  come  from.”?— 5. 

Yayfiti. — “Losing  my  virtue,  and  consequently  falling  from  the 
heaven,  I have  come  here.  J shall,  after  telling  you  all  my  eixperieiice  of  the 
iiAftvAn.  jcro  to  the  boll  on  earth,  whilst  all  of  you  and  these  Brfihma^fts 


ORAPTm  XLL 


lOd 

will  go  to  heaven.  It  is  throngh  the  clemency  of  Indra  that  I have  had 
the  pleasure  of  meeting  you  good  men,  the  lofty  and  the  learned  folks  of 
this  region.”--6-7. 

Astaka. — “ King ! T reckon  you  to  be  pious,  and  I therefore  venture 
to  ask  you,  whilst  you  are  falling,  whether  there  are  any  regions  for  me 
also  in  the  heaven.” — 8. 

YayAti. — “ Take  it  for  certain,  that  there  are  as  many  regions  for 
you  in  tlie  heaven,  as  there  are  forests  in  your  worldly  realm,  full  of  cows, 
horses,  birds,  &c.” — Ih 

Asiaka.  — “ King  ! 1 dedicate  .‘dl  those  regions  of  mine  in  the  heaven 
(Deva  plane),  as  well  as  in  the  astral  plane,  to  yrm,  on  account  of  your  fall. 
May  you  reach  there  ere  long.” — 10. 

Yayati. — “ King  ! A Non-BrShmana,  versed  in  the  Vedas  like  myself, 
cannot  accept  any  charity.  1 have  also  given  away  alms  in  my  former 
days,  as  is  Always  given  to  Brlhinanas  daily.  Excepting  a Brahmapa, 
no  one  of  any  other  caste,  howsoever  poor  he  may  be,  can  accept  the 
offerings  of  charity.  Even,  the  wife  of  a Brahmapa,  having  a valiant 
husband,  does  not  accept  alms.  On  these  considerations,  bow  can  I 
persuade  myself  to  do  a thing  which  1 never  did  before,  and  accept  your 
gift.”-lM2. 

.Vote.— Mark  the  roagiianimity  of  Astaka  and  the  Arm  righteonsness  of  TaylM.  Jhe 
ideal  of  that  high  civilization  is  also  remarkable. 

King  Pratardana.— “ 0 beautiful  one ! I am  King  Pratardana.  Have 
you  also  hear<l  anytliing  about  there  being  any  regions  for  me  in  the 
Deva  or  the  astral  world  ? I put  this  question  to  you,  because  I consider 
yon  to  be  so  holy.” — 1.3. 

Yay.iti. — “ King ! TJiere  are  many  regions  for  you,  on  account  of  your 
having  poured  a stream  of  ghee  and  honey,  into  the  fire  for  full  seven 
hundred  days.  All  these  of  yonr  regions  are  devoid  of  grief  and  every 
day  incessantly,  leaks  with  honey  for  seven  hundred  days  at  a time.  They 
are,  however,  measurable." — 14. 

Pratardafla.  — “ King  ! I also  dedicate  my  regions  whether  in  the 
Devaloka  or  in  the  astral  plane  to  yon  who  are  falling,  and  may  you 
instantly  attain  them  in  the  heaven.” — 15. 

Yayftti.— " King!  an  equally  valiant  king  does  not  accept  help 
and  support  from  his  compeer.  A king,  even  getting  into  trouble  through 
accident,  should  never  do  anything  undignified.  The  thinker  of  Dharma, 
the  knower  of  Dharma  and  fame,  the  learned  like  myself  should  never 


THE  MAT8YA  PUBAEAM. 


m 

Ayulfh  A tiling  as  you  wish  me  to  «lo.  Wliat  lias  not  been  done  befoi*^, 
,,  neyer  do  now/ —16-17. 

Then  King  Vasinnan  addressed  Yayati  who  was  talking  like  that— 18. 

Here  ends  the  forty-first  chapte)*  describing  the  offers  of 
ami  Pratardana  to  Yayati 


OlfAVTER  XLIJ. 

VasumAn, — “ 0 ruler  of  men  ! 1,  King  Vasumiin,  known  as 

Aurfadaivi  ask  you  about  that  world  of  mine,  whether  it  is  in  Heaven  or  in 
the  middle  region,  for  F eonsidt'r  to  knt)\v  the  duties  pertaining  to  that 
world. — 1. 

Yayati. — “ King  ! lake  the  lustre  of  yonr  worhl  wide  fame,  your 
regions  in  thelieaveu  glitter  like  the  sun  and  are  awaiting  for  you.” — 2. 

Va8uman.-~“  I bestow  all  lho.se  regions  on  yon  who  are/alling,  and 
OKing!  if  you  oaniiot  accept  them  as  a present,  then  be  good  enough 
to  buy  them  from  me  after  making  a nominal  payment.”— 3. 

YayAti. — King  ! I have  never  gone  in  for  sucli  a sliam  purchase 
even  in  my  boyhood.  A coiiscientions  man  never  resorts  to  such  me- 
thods/-! 

Vasuman. — ‘‘King,  if  3"ou  are  not  willing  to  accept  them  on  pay- 
ment of  something  nominal,  then  take  them  as  a gift  from  me.  1 will 
not  go  tliere,  may  lliev  be  yours.”  — o. 

^ibi. — ^‘Sire!  T J^ibi,  de.^cfmdant  of  [Tfiinara,  and  knowing  you  to 
be  pious,  1 also  wish  to  enquire  whether  tliere  are  any  quarters  for  me 
in  the  heaven  and  the  middle  region.”— t*. 

Yay&ti. — “ King  ! Yon  liavo  never  decried  or  defamed  any  one 
either  in  your  mind  or  by  yonr  words;  consequently,  you  have  many 
regions  in  the  heaven  tliat  shine  like  lightning  and  alwaj^s  resound  with 
music,  and  are  wide  stretching.”— 7. 

^ibi. — “ King  I Be  pleased  to  accept  tho.se  regions  after  paying  me 
something  for  them  if  you  do  not  feel  disposed  to  accept  th^m  as  a present. 
I shall  not  go  to  those  regions  ; you  take  them  for  yourself.”  —8. 

Yayati. — ” Your  regions  are  as  illustrious  as  yourself,  who  are  as 
glorious  as  Indra,  but  I do  not  feel  inclined  to  go  to  the  regions  conferred 
on  me  by  others,  nor  do  I approve  those  words  of  yours.” — 9. 

A^taka. — ” King ! Thou  dost  not  accept  individually  any  one  of 
our  regions  given  separately  nor  do  you  approve  our  words,  we  will  all 


O&AFfER  Xtil. 


141 


therefore  prefer  collecti'veJy  to  go  to  hell,  after  conferring  all  our  respective 
worlds  on  you.” — 10.  * • 

Yaydti. — “ You  being  the  speaker  of  truth,  and  noble,  should  ulter 
proper  words.  1 do  not  accept  the  fruit  of  the  deeds  not  done  by  me’  iji  pay 
past  life,  not  because  you  have  expressed  your  wish  like  this  to  one  ' whbv 
does  not  banker  after  anything,  but  the  words  with  which  you  offefi^d 
them  to  rao  will  give  yon  juauifold  benefit  for  having  done  so.”  — 11-12.' 

A^(aka. — “To  whom  do  these  five ciiariots,  visible  at  a distance  and 
shining  like  gold  and  luminous  like  the  flame  of  blazing  fire,  belong  ?” — 13. 

Yayfiti. — “ These  chariots,  glittering  like  gold,  are  meant  for  you  and 
myself.  You  are  worthy  of  going  to  heaven  after  getting  yourself  seated 
in  them  along  with  me.” — 14. 

A^taka. — “King!  You  get  yourself  seated  in  the  chariot  and  go 
to  heaven  through  the  skJ^  We  shall  also  go  there  when  our  turn 
comes.  ” — 15. 

Yayfiti. — “All  of  you  are  even  now  worthy  of  going  to  heaven,  because 
you  have  won  it.  This  seems  to  be  your  spotless  road  to  heaven.”— 16. 

iSaunaka. — At  the  time  of  their  ascending  to  heaven,  seated  in  those 
chariots,  they  looked  as  majestic  as  Heaven  and  Earth  covei’ed  by 
Dharma. — 17. 

A§taka. — “ Indra  is  my  companion  ; and  1 had  thought  that  I should 
go  the  best  way  ; but  how  is  this  King  i^ibi  going  now,  seated  in  the 
chariot,  drawn  by  the  swiftest  of  hoi-aes?~18. 

Yayiiti.  King  ^ibi  has  given  away  all  in  charity  for  the  sake  of 
going  to  heaven,  consecpiently,  i^ibi,  the  son  of  H^iuara,  is  superior  to  all  of 
you.  0 King ! Siibi  is  charitable,  pure,  truthful,  harmless,  modest, 
wealthy,  enduring,  gentle,  and  views  every  one  with  equality.  It  is  for 
this  reason  that  he  is  going  in  that  finest  chariot.”— 19-20. 

^aunaka.—Astaka  again  asked  his  maternal  grandfather,  who  was 
like  Indra,  through  curiosity,  to  tell  him  who  he  was,  how  and  whence 
he  went  there,  because  there  was  no  other  BrAhraaria  or  K^triya  who  bad 
pursued  high  actions  like  him. — 21. 

Yaykti. — “ I am  King  Yayftti,  the  world  Emperor,  the  son  of  Nahufa 
and  the  father  of  Puru,  and  your  maternal  grandfather.  I never  speak 
untruth  before  any  one.  I conquered  all  the  world  and  dedicated  it  to 
BrAhmanas,  and  also  conferred  on  them  many  a beautiful  steed.  The 
Devas  seeing  me  doing  such  noble  deeds  acknowledged  my  virtue.  After 
giving  away  the  laud,  flourishing  with  all  kinds  of  produce,  to  the 


112 


TRB  UATSYA  PURAMit. 


BftmaijaB,  I also  bestowed  on  them  innumerable  cows,  horees,  elephants, 
and  a vast  quantity  of  gold.  On  account  of  trutlifulness,  my  glory  shines 
before,  wen  and  the  ])evas  on  Eartli  'and  in  the  Heaven  respectively. 
I have  not  said  anything  untrue,  because  it  is  only  truth  that  is  admired 
by  the  high-minded.  0 As^aka ! I am  speaking  the  trutli  to  you  and 
to  Pratardhana,  Vasuninii  and  IS^ibi.  My  conviction  is  that  all  the  Devas, 
sages  and  regions  deserve  being  worsliippcd  and  venerated  only  on  account 
of  truth.  Aliy  one  who,  after  having  conquered  tlie  Heaven,  offers  ungrudg- 
ingly and  without  envy  to  the  best  of  the  twice-born,  will  attain  the  same 
regions  where  we  are  going.”--'-22-27. 

Saunaka.— “ King!  That  high-souled  Yayati  in  this  way,  through 
' bis  magnanimous  daughter's  sons,  was  saved  from  fall ; and  after  leaving 
the  earth,  that  doer  of  great  charitable  deeds  rose  to  Heaven,  filling  the 
Earth  with  his  renown.  This  history  of  King  Yayfdi  I liave  narrated  to  you 
in  detail.  It  is  in  his  dynasty,  which  is  famous  by  tlie  name  of  Kauravayas, 
that  you  have  been  born,  0,  Son  of  Mann,  illustrious  like  Ind,ra.” — 28-29. 

Here  ends  the  forly-second  chapter  dealing  ivith  the  story  ofYayaii 
horn  in  the  Lunar  dynasty. 

CHAPTER  XLIll. 

Siita.— King  Satauika  was  amazed  to  hear  all  that  from  Saunaka  and 
glowed,  like  the  full  moon,  with  delight.  Afterwards,  he  presented  jewels, 
cows,  gold  and  se\eriil  kinds  of  clothes  to  Saunaka.  Saunaka  also  dis- 
appeared then  and  thert',  after  distributing  to  the  Rrahmanas  all  that  he 
had  obtained  from  the  king.  -1-3. 

The  Risis. — “ SQta  ! Now  we  arc  anxious  to  hear  in  detail  about 
the  sons  of  King  Yayati,  and  the  dynasty  which  was  established  in  the 
world  by  the  sons  of  Yadu  and  others. — 4. 

Sfita.— “ Hearken,  0 Risis  I I am  now  going  to  narrate  to  you  at  full 
length  about  the  family  of  Yadu,  the  eldest  son  of  Yayati.  Yadu  had  five 
sons  of  mighty  chariots  and  great  bows  who  looked  like  the  Devas.  They 
were  named,  Sahasraji,  Krosthu,  Nila,  Antika,  Tiaghu.  The  eldest— 
Sahasraji— was  the  father  of  jJataji.'-S-?.  * 

Haihaya^  Haya  and  Venudiaya  wore  the  three  famous  hoii-s  of 
^atajl.— 8. 

Dharmanetra  was  the  son  of  Haihaya  and  the  father  of  Kunti.  Kunti 
was  the  father  of  Satphata  and  Flaiphata  was  the  father  of  Mahism&n. 
Mahi§mAn  begot  an  illustrious  son,  Rudrairenya.— 9-10. 


OEAVTBR  Xmi. 


113 


Rudrarfreaya  was  afterwards  the  famous  king  of  Kfid!  and  became 
the  father  of  Durdama.— 11. 

Kanaka,  the  intelligent  and  powerful,  was  the  son  of  Durdania. 
Of  Kanaka,  there  were  four  famous  sons,  m.,  Kritavirya,  Krit&gni,  Krita- 
varmfi,  KritojA. — 12. 

Arjiina,  who  was  the  Lord  of  seven  continents  through  his  thousand 
arms,  and  the  son  of  Kritavirya,  practised  difficult  penances  for  ten 
centuries  and  worshipped  Datta,  the  son  of  Atri,  who,  becoming  pleased, 
granted  him  four  boons. — 13-15. 

Arjuna  sought  and  got  the  boons  of  having  a thousand  arms,  of  ^' 
the  power  of  protecting  the  virtuous  against  the  doers  of  evil  deeds, 
the  power  of  ruling  the  world  righteously  after  conquering  it,  and 
his  destruction  in  war  at  the  hands  of  an  adversary  more  valiant  than 
himself.  After  thus  getting  those  four  boons  by  his  valour,  he  conquered 
this  world  of  seven  continents  by  righteous  war,  conducted,  according  to 
the  Ksatra  rules,  together  with  the  oceans  and  mountains.  At  his  mere 
wish  lie  got  a thousand  arms ; and  it  is  also  said  that,  similarly, 
chariots  and  banners  were  also  called  into  being.  FJe  performed  ten 
thousand  sacrifices  and  had  access  to  every  nook  and  corner  of  the  uni- 
verse. Fie  gave  enorinons  presents  to  the  BrSlimanas  at  those  sacrifices. 
On  the  occasion  of  those  sacrifices,  the  pillars  and  the  sacrificial  altar  were 
made  of  gold,  and  the  Devas,  seated  in  their  Vimfmas,  the  Qandharvas, 
men  and  ApsarSa  took  part  in  them. -16-22. 

Seeing  the  glory  of  that  sovereign,  the  sage  Narada,  the  Gandharvas, 
and  the  ApsarAs  began  to  sing  the  praises  of  his  sacrifices.  There  was  no 
other  Kaatriya  king  who  could  rival  him  in  the  performance  of  sacrifices, 
in  the  giving  of  alms,  in  tlie  practice  of  asceticism,  in  prowess  and  in  the 
learning  of  the  Sastras.  That  monarch  always  toured  about  his  extensive 
state,  and  punished  the  thieves,  and  the  wicked  with  his  sword,  quoit,  and 
arrows. — 23-25. 

He  ruled  the  Earth  for  eightyfive  thousand  years.  He  was  world 
Emperor  and  had  a treasury  full  of  gems.  He  was  the  protector  of  cattle 
of  fields  ; he  wixs  the  giver  of  rain  like  thunder-cloud  and  the  defender  of 
the  faith,  and  through  his  asceticism  became  illustrious.  He  looked  as 
beautiful  as  the  thousand-rayed  autumnal  sun,  at  the  time  of  his  twanging 
his  bow  with  his  thousands  arms.  He  founded  the  city  of  M&hi^matl,  after 
conquering  the  Nnga  King,  son  of  Karkotaka.  That  city  was  laved  by 
the  waves  of  the  ocean  during  the  rains  wherein  the  king  played  in 

the  waves,  as  it  ebbed  and  flowed  in  the  beach. — 26-30, 

16 


114 


THE  MAT8YA  PVBANAM. 


When  he  agitated  the  waters  of  the  river  in  his  gambols,  the  Nar- 
madS,  trembling  with  fear  at  his  sight  and  becoming  highly  astonished, 
snrrendered  herself  to  him.  He  alone,  with  his  thousand  arms,  swelled 
it  by  patting  the  water  of  tiie  sea  into  it  and  increased  it,  as  it  increases 
in  the  monsoon ; and  the  ocean  being  thus  agitated  by  bis  thousand  arms 
became  subdued  by  him,  and  be  extended  liis  sea  power,  so  that  the 
residents  in  Fat&Ia  (antipodes)  became  inoffensive  and  quiet. — 31-33. 

When  he  would  break  the  surges  and  powder  the  sharks  and  the 
fish,  &o.,  by  his  thousand  arms,  and  remove  tlie  foam  arising  out  by 
contact  of  the  wind,  he  really  looked  as  if  he  was  annihilating  the  very 
ocean.  At  that  time,  by  the  tremour  of  the  Mandara  Mount,  the  mighty 
serpents  clustering  round  it,  trembled  with  fear,  thinking  that  they  might 
again  be  employed  in  the  churning  of  the  ocean  to  get  out  nectar  ; they 
were  quiet  like  the  plantain  leaf  that  does  not  shiver  in  the  evening  when 
there  is  no  wind  to  shake  it. — 34-36. 

I 

That  king  once  tied  up  the  valiant  Ravana  and  stunned  liiiu  with  his 
five  arrows  in  his  own  kingdom,  Lanka.  After  conquering  liini  he  brought 
and  confined  Rdvana  in  his  capital — Maliismatipurl  when  Pulastya  went 
and  solicited  Arjuua  to  release  his  son  Ravana  wliich  ho  did.— 37-39. 

The  sound  of  his  thousand  arms  resembled  the  echo  of  clouds  that 
arise  at  the  close  of  Yuga ; but  it  is  very  strange,  that  liis  thundering  arms 
were  cut  down  by  Parasuruma,  the  descendant  of  Blipgu.— 39-40. 

Arjuna,  who  had  a tliousaml  arms,  that  looked  like  golden  palm  trees, 
had  burnt  the  forest  of  the  sago  Apava,  at  wliich  the  latter  becoming 
enraged  cursed  him  that  Parasurama  would  humble  his  pride  and  deprive 
him  of  his  thousand  arms,  and  that  the  same  powerful  ascetic,  after  cutting 
down  his  thousand  arms,  would  also  kill  him. — 41-43. 

Sflta  said : — On  account  of  that  curse  of  Apava,  that  thousand-armed 
king  was  killed  by  Parufiarama.  He  had  also  himself  sought  the  boon 
of  being  killed  in  battle  by  some  valiant  adversary  superior  to  him  in 
prowess. — 44. 

That  thousand-armed  motiarch  ha<l  one  hundred  sons,  and  out  of 
them,  five  were  the  most  righteous,  valiant  and  illustrious.  The  first 
valiant  son  among  them  was  ^Qrasena,  next  the  powerful  Sura,  then  Kros^u, 
then  Jayadhvaja  of  diverse  deeds,  and  lastly  Avanti. — 45-46. 

T&lajangba  was  the  powerful  son  of  Jayadlivaja  who  had  one  huiif 
dred  sops  under  the  name  of  Td^lajanghas.— 47. 


OHAPTEB  XLIV. 


115 


Afterwards,  those  sovereigns  of  the  Haihaiya  clan  had  these  five 
illustrious  clans,  oiz. — Vltihotras,  l^ary&tas,  Bhojas,  Avantis  and  Ku^di* 
keras.  Vltihotras  begot  the  powerful  Anarta,  who  became  the  father  of 
Duijeya,  the  conqueror  of  all  enenvie8,~Hl8-49. 

That  Kartavirya  Arjuna,  of  thousand  arms,  was  renowned  for  his 
prowess,  righteousness  and  protection  of  his  subjects. — 50. 

He  conquered  the  earth  up  to  the  sea  with  his  bow  and  arrow.  One 
who  recites  the  name  of  the  thousand-armed  king  in  the  morning,  never 
loses  his  wealth  ; on  the  other  hand,  he  gets  back  his  lost  riches.  One 
who  would  relate  the  birth  of  KAritavIrya  with  a clear  conscience  will  go 
to  heaven. — 51-52. 

Here  ends  the  forty-third  chapter  dealing  with  the  history  of  Soma 
dynasty  in  the  family  of  Yaydti  and  of  K&rtaoirya  Arjuna. 

CHAPTER  XLIV. 

The  Risis  said  Sflta  ! Why  did  the  thousand-armed  King  ESrta- 
vlrya,  burn  the  forest  of  the  Sage  Apara  ? Please  tell  us  fully  the  reason 
of  his  having  done  so.  We  have  been  given  to  understand  that  that  royal 
sage  was  the  protector  of  his  subjects ; how  then  did  he  bum  the  forest 
of  that  ascetic. — 1-2. 

Sdta  answered. — Once  upon  a time,  the  Sun  went  to  the  king  in  the 
form  of  a Brkhmaiia,  and  said, ' 0 Lord  of  men,  I am  Aditya,  grant  me  one 
satisfaction.’ — 3. 

The  King  said  :—0  Lord,  the  Day-maker,  what  will  satisfy  you? 
What  shall  1 offer  you  for  your  repast  ? Hearing  which  I shall  make  the 
arrangement  for  the  same.— 4. 

The  Sun.  — ' 0 the  best  giver  amongst  all  persons ! give  me  all 
stationary  objects  (trees,  &c.)  to  feast  upon,  and  that  would  satisfy  me.' — 5. 

The  King. — 0 God ! I have  not  the  power  with  all  my  energy  or 
strength  to  cook  the  entire  stable  objects  of  the  world  as  thy  food,  so  I 
bow  down  to  thee. — 6. 

The  Sun. — “ King  ! I am  pleased  with  you,  and  I present  you  with 
the  ezhaustlesB  quiver  of  arrows  that  would  have  their  effect  in  all 
directions.  These  arrows  will  be  endowed  with  my  potency,  and  the 
moment  you  discharge  them  on  the  trees  they  would  be  consumed.  These 
arrows  endowed  with  my  potency  will  dry  up  the  trees  and  reduce  them  to 
sshes  afterwards,  and  thus  I shall  get  satisfaction,  0 Lord  of  men.” — 7-8, 


lil  ¥hb  hai^ta  pum^au: 

Sflta.— -Afterwards,  the  Sun  presented  him  with  the  arrows,  and  the 
kltAr  burnt  all  the  trees  with  them.  He  burnt  up  the  villages,  hermitages, 
the  population  of  lierdsinen,  big  cities,  forests  of  ascetics  and  orchards 
In  that  way,  when  he  consumed  the  eastern  direction  it  became  treeless, 
grassless,  and  the  land  was  destroyed  along  with  the  south,  by  that  ten'i- 
ble  heat.— 9-11. 

The  Sage  Apara,  who  was  practising  penances  standing  in  watei 
for  ten  thousand  years,  found  on  his  return  that  his  forest  had  been  burni 
down  by  the  king — at  which  hebceatnc  enragfui  and  cursed  him,  as  stated 
before.  Now  listen  to  the  history  of  the  glorious  dynasty  of  King  Krostu. 
-12-14. 

It  was  in  the  family  of  tliis  very  King  Krohtu  lhal  the  God  Vi§nu 
incarnated  Himself  as  Krisna,  wlio  afterwards  pronic-ied  the  Vriijin’  clan, 
which  1 am  going  to  relate  to  you  in  due  order.  Krostu  begot  Vrijinivana, 
and  the  latter  became  tlie  fatlier  of  tlie  powerful  Svfdjr:,  and  Riisafigu  was 
the  son  of  Svali^. — 15-1(3. 

Sanimya  was  the  son  of  Husangu  and  the  father  of  C’liitra  and 
Chitraratha.“-17. 

SaiJavindu  was  the  son  of  Chitraratha,  who  was  vonownod  for  Ids 
charity,  and  became  World  Emperor  18. 

Afterwards,  the  family  of  Sasiavindu  became  of  worldwide  fame.  He 
begot  one  liundred  sons  who  also  1)egot  the  same  number  of  sons.  - -19. 

Out  of  the  hundred  grandsons  of  rfa^avindii,  the  following  six  were 
the  most  illustrious,  clover,  handsome,  wealthy,  powerful,  and  all  having 
the  title  of  Prithn,  viz,,  :--Priihn?^rava.  E|*ilhnya»  j,  IVithndbarma,  Pp- 
thufijaya,  Pfitliukirti  and  Prithumam’i  Ont  of  them,  the  learned  in 
PurSnas  speak  very  Inghly  of  J'litliurfrava,  who  performed  many  sacrifices. 
He  was  the  fatlier  of  Suyajna.— 20-22. 

Suyajna  became  the  father  of  UrfaiiA,  who  was  the  protector  of  the 
world  and  the  performer  of  one  hundred  asivamedha  sacrifices. —-23. 

Titiksu,  the  destroyer  of  enemies,  was  the  son  of  Urfana  and  the 
father  of  Marutta,  best  of  all  royal  sages. — 24 

Marutta  begot  Kainbalbarhisa,  tlie  father  of  the  learned  Rukma- 
kavacha,  who  also  conquered  his  enemies  and  performed  arfvamedha  sacri- 
fices and  gave  many  presents  to  the  Brahmanas,  when  out  of  the  sacrificial 
fire  emerged  five  valiant  sons,  armed  with  bows  and  arrows.  They  were  : — 
Rukmesu,  Pfithuriikma,  JyAmagha,  Parigha,  Hari.— 2.5-28. 


6BikP1:BR  XLlf. 


Parigha  and  Hari  were  given  to  rule  the  Videha  country  by  their 
father,  while  Rukmeftu  aucceeded  to  the  throne  [of  his  father]  and  was  a 
ruler  of  a protectorate  under  him. — 20. 

Jy&magha  was  tii  ned  out  by  his  other  brothers,  and  in  disgust  he 
took  to  SannyAsa,  and  was  taught  by  a BrAhmana,  and  so  became  of  serene 
mind  and  again  entered  the  order  of  house-holders. — 30. 

After  that,  he  armed  himself  with  bow  and  arrows  and  seating 
liimself  in  a chariot  with  a streaming  banner  over  it,  started  all  by  himself 
to  seek  his  fortune  in  other  lands.  He  went  to  some  place  on  the  banks 
of  the  Narraad/*,  whence  lie  went  to  the  Riksavanta  hills  and  settled  there 
along  with  others.  There  he  married  a noble  lady,  named  ChaitrA.  He 
did  net  marry  any  otlier  lady,  in  spite  of  his  not  getting  any  children  from 
his  wife  ClmitrA.  Sometime  after,  the  King  Jyamagha  brought  a beautiful 
(^amsel  as  a booty  of  his  victory  in  a war ; and  said  to  the  queen,  through 
fear  of  her,  that  she  was  a dangliter-in  Jaw;  whereupon  the  queen,  amaz- 
ingly enquired  whose  son’s  wife  she  was.— 31-34. 

The  king  replied,  “ She  shall  be  the  wife  of  the  son  born  to  thee  in 
tlie  future.”  Hearing  which,  through  the  virtue  of  great  austerities  of  that 
girl,  Ohaitra  begot  a son,  named  Vidarblia. 

He,  Vidarblia,  begot  out  of  that  princess  Kratlia,  Kai!(ika  and  Loma- 
pada,  who  were  heroes  and  well-versed  in  the  art  of  war.— 35-36. 

Lompfida’s  son  was  Manu,  whose  son  was  Jfiati. — 37. 

Kaitiika  was  the  father  of  Ohidi,  wlio  was  the  founder  of  Chaidya 
dynasty  of  kings  ; Kratha,  the  third  son  of  Vidarblia,  was  the  father  of  Kunti 
and  thelattarof  |)hfistra,  \Yho  was  renowned  as  most  valiant  and  righteous. 
Dlifistra  became  the  father  of  Nirvriti,  the  valiant  and  virtuous — 38-39. 

Nirvriti  was  the  father  of  Viduratha,  and  the  latter  of  DaifAha,  the 
father  of  Vyoma  The  son  of  Vyoma  was  Jimuta. — 40. 

Vimala  was  the  son  of  JimAta  and  the  father  of  Bhtmaratha,  who 
begot  Navaratha.— 41. 

Navaratha  begot  Dridbaratha,  the  father  of  l^akuni,  who  begot 
Karainbha,  the  father  of  DevarAta.  DevarAta  \VSis  the  father  of  the  very  famous 
Devak^atra,  the  father  of  Madhu,  the  rejoicer  of  Devanakshatra  and  born  as 
if  a Deva.  He  was  father  of  Puravasas,  who  begot  PnrudvAn,  of  Vidarbha 
clan;  the  father  of  Jantu  from  bis  wife  Bhadrasenl,  daughter  of  Vidharva 
clan.  Jantu  bore  from  his  wife,  the  lady  of  the  IksvAkii  clan,  SAtvata  who 
difiused  the  name  and  fame  of  the  SAtvatas ; YAdavas)  through  his  sattvaguna. 
One  who  hears  the  narration  of  the  lunar  race  of  JyAmagba  is  blessed  with 
childk'eU.— 42-46. 


tHS  MATSyA  POBAiiAU. 


The  lady,  named  Kauiiilya,  begot  the  progeny  known  by  the  epithet 
' 0f  S4tvata,  the  righteous.  The  Siltvata  kings  were  Bhaj in,  BhajamUna, 
..l)ev&Tfidha,  Andhaka,  Mah&bhoja,  Vri^^i  and  Yadunandana,  under  four 
different  sub-divisions,  which  is  going  to  be  narrated  in  detail.— 47-48. 

King  Srinjayi  bad  two  daughters,  both  of  whom  became  the  wives 
of  Bhajainftna.  They  Avere  Srinjayi  and  VAhyakft.  Their  progeny  is 
known  under  the  epithet  of  VAhyakfis.  These  two  sisters,  bis  wives,  begot 
many  sons,  viz.,  Nimi,  Krimila,  and  Vri§nl,  the  conqueror  of  enemy’s 
town.— 49-50. 

DevAvfidha  improved  the  relations  with  hit  kinsmen,  bu'  was 
issueless,  and  with  the  intention  of  having  a son  e practised  r ovout 
austerities.  With  that  view,  lie  tonclied  tlie  holy  waters  of  the  Parn  4A  at 
which  that  river  brooded  over  tlie  desires  of  Devavfidlia.  She  decided  in 
" her  miad  that  Deruvfidha  should  beget  n handsome  child  like  herself, 
but  could  not  hit  upon  any  lady  who  would  bear  him  suclw  an  offspring. 
Therefore,  she  determined  in  her  mind  that  she  herself,  having  the  power 
of  manifesting  herself  in  thousands  of  ways,  wotild  give  birth  to  a child 
like  that,  for  him.  With  that  resolution,  she  appeared  before  the  king  in 
the  form  of  a young  beaiUy  and  attracted  the  ascetic  king  towards  her  ; 
after  which  they  became  enamoured  of  each  other  and  enjoyed  themselves. 
Nine  months  after,  she  gave  birtli  to  Vabhru. — 51-5t5. 

The  learned  in  the  Puianas  sing  tlie  praises  of  that  virtuous  king, 
DevAvridha,  as  follows  : — “ As  wc  heard  las  praises  from  .a  distance,  so  we 
find  them  true  when  seeing  him  from  near.  Vabhru  is  best  amongst 
men  and  equal  to  IJevas  and  bis  father,  Dovavridha.  By  the  glory  of 
Vabhru,  the  sou  of  Devav'ridha,  JO.OdO  of  las  ancestors  wore  liberated  and 
attained  final  bliss.  That  King  Vabhru  was  the  performer  of  great  sacri- 
fices, the  giver  of  alms,  valiant,  steady  observer  of  religions  rites,  hand- 
some, most  illustrious,  ambitious  and  fond  of  listening  to  the  ^Astras.” — 
57-60. 

His  queen,  the  daughter  of  (he  King  Kanka^  gave  birth  to  four  sons, 
viz.,  Kukura,  BhajmAna,  Sadi,  Kambal  Varhi^a.~61. 

Vrifni  was  the  son  of  Kukura  and  the  father  of  Dhriti,  who  begot 
KapotromA,  the  father  of  Taittiri.  Taittiri  was  the  father  of  the  learned 
Nala,  and  is  known  as  Nandanodaradundubhi  of  worldwide  fame. — 
62-63. 

He  performed  advamedha  sacrifice  with  the  desire  of  getting  a son. 
At  the  end  of  AtirAttra  ceremony,  his  son,  named  Panarrasu,  arose  in  the 


OH  AFTER  XLIV. 


119 


midst  of  the  assembly  from  the  sacrificial  pool.  Therefore,  be  was  leaned, 
renowned  for  his  love  of  sacrifices,  charities,  &c. — 64-65. 

Punarvasu  begot  a twin,  named  Ahuka  and  Ahukt.  The  following 
l^lokas  are  recited  about  Ahuka.  66. 

“He  always  Tived  equipped  with  an  army  of  armoured  chariots, 
with  banners  dying  over  them.  His  army  consisted  of  ten  thousand 
chariots  thundering  like  the  clouds.  He  was  never  untruthful,  never 
lustreless,  never  remained  without  performing  sacrifices  and  never  gave 
less  than  a thousand  in  charity.  He  was  never  impure,  never  ignorant 
of  learning.  Snch  was  Ahuka,  born  in  tlie  Bhoja  family,  and  after  him 
Ahuka  and  other  clans  came  to  be  known.” — 67-69. 

He  married  his  sister,  Aliuki,  to  Avanti,  and  begot  from  his  queen, 
the  daughter  of  Kaifya,  the  two  sons,  viz.,  Devaka  and  Ugrasena,  who 
were  born  like  the  Devas.  Devaka  also  begot  four  sons  and  seven  daughters, 
viz.,  Devavit-.a,  Hpadeva,  Stideva  and  Devaraksifa.  Their  seven  sisters 
were  Devakl,  Srutadevl,  • Mitradevi,  Yarfodhara,  Sridevl,  Satyadevt,  and 
SutApl,  the  seventh,  who  were  married  to  Vasudeva. — 70-73. 

Ugrasena  was  father  of  nine  sons,  .\mongst  them,  Kamea  was  the 
eldest.  The  others  were  N3'agrudha,  Sundmu,  Kahka,  SaAku,  Ajabhfi, 
Ra^traplila,  Yudhamusti,  Sumusti.  Their  sisters  were  five,  viz.,  KaipsS, 
Kamsavati,  Sutautfi,  IlastrapAli  and  KaAka.  Ugrasena  and  his  descendants 
all  belonged  to  the  Kukura  clan. — 74-76.” 

Bhoja  was  tlie  father  of  the  famous  Viduratha,  who  begot  the 
valiant  RAjSdhideva. — 77. 

RftjAdhideva  begot  two  deva-like,  virtuous  sons,  named  SopAifva  and 
Svetav&hana. — 78. 

Son&efva  had  five  sons,  all  heroic  and  well-versed  in  war.  They 
were Samt,  VedadarmA,  Nikunta,  Siikra  and  Satrujita. — 79. 

Sami  was  the  fatlier  of  Pratiksatrg,  who  begot  Pratiksetra,  the  father 
of  Bhoja,  who  became  the  father  of  Hfidika. — 80. 

Hfidika  had  ten  valiant  sons : — KritavarmA,  was  the  eldest  amongst 
them.  SatadhanvA  was  the  second.  The  (Uhers  were  DevArha,  NAbba, 
Bhlsapa,  MahAbala,  AjAta,  VanajAta,  Kaniyaka,  and  Karambhaka.  DevArha 
was  the  father  of  the  learned  Kambalavarliisa,  who  begot  AsAmanjA,  the 
father  of  Ta-MojA.- 81-83. 

AjAta  begot  the  following  three  illustrious  sous,  who  were  known 
pqdor  the  namo  of  Andhakas  : — Sudans^ra,  SunAbha,  Krifpa.— 84. 


120 


THE  MATBYA  PDRAUAM. 


* One  who  daily  recites  tlie  family  of  the  Andhakas  obtains  a large 
family.— 85. 

Here  ende  the  forty-fourth  chapter  describing  the  Soma  dynasty. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

Suta. — GandhArl  and  Madri  were  ilje  wives  of  Vrisni,  and  Sumitra, 
the  rejoicer  of  his  frieiu-s,  was  born  from  Grindhari.  Msidri  begot  five 
sons,  named  YndliAjita,  Dovainidhnsa,  Anamitra,  Sibi,  Kritalak^^ana. — 1-2. 

Ananiitra  became  the  father  of  Nighva.  who  begot  two  sons,  viz.^  the 
most  powerful  Prasena  and  J>aklisena,  e.lso  known  as  Satrajita. — X 

Prasena  possessed  Syamantaka,  which  UcMs  the  best  of  all  gems  on 
the  earth,  and  was  known  as  the  king  of  all  gems.  Prasena  u*-ed 
always  to  wear  his  beautiful  Svaniantaka  jewel  on  his  breast,  ami  Kri>na 
more  than  once  expressed  a desire  to  ha\(‘  it,  but  was  refused  by  Prasena  ; 
and  even  though  Kri>na  was  powerful  to  take  it  by  fordtf.,  he  did  fiot 
like  to  do  that.  — 4-5. 

Once  upon  a time,  Prasena  wearing  his  Syamantaka  gem  went  out 
for  a hunt,  when  Itearing  the  voic(?s  of  some  wild  beasts  in  a cave  he  entered 
it  and  found  a bear  inside,  and  ihej  looked  at  each  other.  He  fonglit 
with  the  anifual,  but  was  killed  by  the  iaitm'.  After  that,  tl.e  boar  t<  ok 
the  matchless  jewel  fnjtn  the  pers'>n  of  iIh*  dead  King  and  retired  into  tlie 
deeper  cavities  of  the  cave.  In  the.  mcantiine  the  iicws  of  Prasena’s  death 
became  public.  — fi-8. 

Knowing  him  to  be  dead,  Sriki'isna  was  dismayed.  Someone  gave 
currency  to  the  rumour  that  l^rasena  was  murdered  by  K|  isna  for  the  sake  of 
the  Syamantaka  gem.  It  was  insinuated  that  Prasena  went  out  wearing 
his  priceless  vSyamantaka  gem  and  was  decidedly  killed  by  Kri.sna,  who 
usurped  the  jewel  from  him.  Satrajita,  the  brother  of  the  deceased,  also 
thought  the  same.— ‘IMl. 

Sometime  after  Srikrihtia,  also  went  out  to  hunt  in  the  forest  and 
approached  the  very  cave  of  the  bear,  wlien  tbe  beast  seeing  him  began  to 
groan  and  growl,  at  which  he  entered  the  cave  with  sword  in  hand.  He 
found  the  bear  to  be  Jambavanta,  the  King  of  all  bears.  He  then  hastily, 
with  great  valour,  made  tTambavanfa  a captive  and  then  turned  his  eyes 
full  of  wrath  towards  him.  The  King  of  the  bears  then  pleased  JiOrd 
Srtkrisvia,  the  manifestation  of  Visnu,  witli  his  devotion. — 12-15. 

Kri^pa  becoming  pleased  wanted  to  grant  him  some  boon.  Jambav&nta 
^aid  I wish  that  1 may  be  killed  by  Thee,  0 Lord,  through  the  striking 


dBAPfBB  XLV. 


121 


of  Sudartfana  Chakra,  and  this  auspicious  daughter  of  mine  be  accepted 
by  Thee  as  Thy  wife.  This  gem  which  1 had  obtained,  0 Lord,  by  killing 
Prasena,  be  accepted  by  Thee. — 16-17. 

After  that,  Kri^^a  killed  Jsimbavanta  by  his  Sudanjana  Chakra  and 
then  returned  with  the  Syamantaka  and  the  daughter  of  the  King  of 
bears,  named  JSrabayatl. — 18. 

Then  Kfisna  presented  Syamantaka  to  Satrajita  in  the  assemblage  of 
the  Satvatas,  and  told  them  how  much  aggrieved  he  was  by  the  false 
accusation  levelled  by  them  against  him. — 19-20. 

Then  all  the  Yadavas  thus  spoke  to  Vasudeva : — “ Our  idea  was 
that  Prasena  was  killed  by  Thee.” — 21. 

King  Kaikayahad  ten  daughters,  who  all  were  married  to  Satrajita. 
The  sons  born  of  them  were  one  hundred  and  one,  of  worldwide  fame  and 
the  eldest  of  them  was  Bhahgakrua.  Then  Bliaftgakara  begot  from  his  wife 
Vratavati  ihAe  graceful  and  lotus-c^red  daughters  named,  Satyabhama 
the  best  amongst  women,  and  Vratini,  of  strong  vows,  and  Padmavati. 
All  three  of  them  were  the  most  virtuous  of  all  women.  Satrajita,  to 
please  Kri^na,  gave  them  all  in  marriage  to  him. — 22-24. 

Auamitra,  the  youngest  of  the  sons  of  Vrisni,  was  the  father  of 
Sini,  whose  son  was  Satyaka,  whose  son  was  Satyaka.  Yuyudhana,  the 
truthful,  was  the  grandson  of  Sini  and  was  powerful.  Asahga  was  the  son 
of  Yuyudhana  and  the  father  of  Dyuinna.  Yugandhara  was  the  son  of 
Dyuinna.  This  is  how  the  family  of  ^ini  has  been  described. — 25-26. 

The  family’of  Animitra  belonging  to  the  Vri§ni  clan,  has  been  thus 
described : Animitra  was  the  father  of  Yudh&jita,  the  brave,  whose  brothers 
were  Vfisabha  and  K^atra,  both  great  heroes.  Vri^abha  was  married  to  the 
daughter  of  the  King  of  Kadi.  His  wife,  Jayanti,  bore  him  Jayanta  who 
performed  many  sacrifices  and  was  renowned  for  his  prowess  and  hospit- 
ality.—27-29. 

Jayanta  was  the  father  of  Akrdra,  who  was  also  famous  for  the  per* 
formance  of  sacrifices  and  giving  of  many  presents.  He  was  married  to 
Ratn&,  the  daughter  of  Saivya  from  whom  he  begot  eleven  sous,  viz. — 
Upalambha,  SadMambha,  Vrikala,  Virya,  Sini  (Savitara),  Mahdpak^a, 
(Sadapak§a),  Satrughna,  Vdrimojaya,  Dharmabhrit,  Dharinavarmd  and 
Dbristam&na.  Those  sons  of  Ratnd  were  all  very  pious.— 31-33. 

AkrQra  was  also  the  father  of  two  sons,  named  Devavdna  and 
Upadeva,  from  his  other  wife,  Ugrasend.  Both  of  them  were  handsome 
like  the  Devds. — 34. 

W 


|82 


THE  MATSYA  PUBAEAE. 


Besides  them,  Akrfira  had  the  following  sons  from  his  wife,  Adrint 
Pfithu,  Vipfithu,  Aiivathdni^l,  SabAhn,  Sup&nSva,  Gavesana,  Vpiitinemi, 
Sudharmas,  Sarydti,  AbhAmi,  Vajrabhdmi,  Sramistha  and  Sravapa. --35-36. 

Srilirinpa saved  Himself  from  the  calumny  of  stealing  the  Sysmantaka 
jewel,  by  killing  Jarabavana.  One  who  hears  or  recites  to  others  this  piece, 
will  never  be  liable  to  be  falsely  defamed  a thief. — 37. 

Here  ends  the  forty-fifth  chapter  describing  the  Vri^i 
branch  of  the  Lunar  dynasty. 

CHAPTER  XLVI. 

Shta  said  : — -Aiksvaki,  the  daughter  of  King  Iksvilku  bore  Sdra,  a 
heroic  son,  named  and  renowned  as  Adbliutamidhasara,  to  her  lord, 
Porusa.  Sftra,  the  son  of  Puru?a,  begot  from  Bhojii  ten  sons,  named,  the 
famous  and  mighty-armed  Vasudeva,  known  also  as  Anakcidundubhi,  Deva- 
in&rga,  Devairava,  AmuHnihti,  6ini,  Nanda,  Srinjaya,  Sy.lma,  ^mika, 
SamyApa,  and  tlio  following  live  daughters,  cw.— ^rutakirtl,  Prithil, 
^rutadevi,  Srutailrava,  Rajudhiilevl.  All  these  five  girls  were  mothers  of 
heroes. — 1-4. 

Krita  begot  from  ^rutadevi  hie  son,  Sugriva ; Kaikaya  begot  Anu- 
vrata  from  ^rutakirti  ; the  King  Chaidya  heoame  the  father  of  Snnitha, 
from  his  wife,  ^rutaifravA,  who  was  the  conqueror  of  his  enemies  and  the 
observer  of  all  religious  rites  in  the  year. — 5-0. 

After  that  ^fira,  out  of  friendship,  gave  ids  daughter,  Prithfi.,  for 
being  adopted  by  Kuntibhoja,  who  was  very  old,  and  for  that  reason  she 
also  came  to  he  known  as  Kunti,  the  sister  of  Vasudeva.  Vasudeva  gave 
in  marriage  his  sister,  Kunti,  to  King  PApd'i,  for  whom  he  bore  several 
brave  sons,  through  Devas. — 7-8. 

Kunti  gave  birth  to  Yudhistbira,  through  Dharma,  Bhimasena  through 
VAyu,  Arjuna,  as  powerful  as  ^akra,  through  fndra.  Mfidri  gave  birth  to 
Nakula  and  Sabadeva,  through  the  glory  of  the  AiJvini  Kumfiras,  Both  of 
the  brothers  were  brave,  modest  and  handsome. — 9-10. 

Rohini,  of  the  Puru  family,  the  wife  of  Vasudeva  known  as  Anaka- 
dundubhi,  gave  birth  to  the  eldest  son,  BalarAma,  and  to  his  brothers, 
Sirapa,  Durduma,  Damana,  Subhru,  Pipd^lraka,  and  MahAhanu.  She  also 
gave  birth  to  two  beautiful  daughters,  named  ChitrA  and  Ak§i.  — 11-12, 

Vasudeva  begot  from  his  other  wife,  Devakl : — Supepa,  KlrtimApa, 
UdAid,  Bhadrasena,  Ri^ivasa,  and  Bhadravideha  the  sixth,  who  were  all 
hilled  by  the  King  Kaipsa,  as  soon  as  they  were  born. —13. 


obaptm  tLn. 


Lord  was  born  on  the  first  Am&v&sTa  of  the  year,  in  the 

month  of  Vaufekha. — 14. 

(It  is  so  stated  in  the  Paranas,  owing  to  the  difference  in  Ealpa : other- 
wise it  is  laid  down  in  the  Bhi^gavata  that  Efi^na  was  born  in  the  month  of 
Bh&dra,  on  the  8th  of  the  dark  fortnight.)  Tlie  sweet-speaking  SubhadrA, 
the  beautiful  sister  of  Erisna,  was  born  after  him.  Both  Epi^^a  and 
SubhadiA  were  born  of  DevaU.— 15. 

Vasudeva  begot  from  his  wife,  T&mr4,  Safaadeva,  after  whom  Up&- 
saligadhara  and  his  sister  were  bom.  She  was  also  killed  by  Kaipsa.— 16. 

Vasudeva  begot  from  Upadevi : — Rochm&na,  Vardhamina,  Devala, 
and  from  Vrikadevi  be  begot Mah4tm&,  Avag&ha,  and  Nandaka.— 
17-19. 

Afterwards,  Vasudeva  begot  .\Iadana,  the  seventh  son  of  Devakl,  and 
from  ^raddh&devi  he  begot  Qavesana.  Formerly,  he  ha>l  begotten  Eauijika 
from  his  wife  of  the  Vaidya  clan. — 20. 

Note.— This  is  an  instance  ot  an  intermarriage  between  a Kfatriya  and  a Vaisya. 

Pandra  and  Eapila  were  born  from  the  wives  of  Vasndeva,  Butanu 
and  Rathar&jl,  respectively.— 21. 

Of  whom,  the  first  came  to  be  known  as  a great  archer  among  the 
Nisddha  clan,  known  as  JorA  After  him,  Saubhadra  and  Bhava  were  born 
of  his  wife,  of  the  Vaiiya  caste.— 22. 

Uddhava  was  the  son  of  Devamdrga,  who  is  known  to  be  a man  of 
great  learning. — 23. 

Anftdhristi  became  the  father  of  ^atrughna  from  Iksvdkfi,  who  also 
begot  Brftddha. — 24. 

Eing  Earusa,  who  had  no  issue,  was  given  in  adoption  a powerful 
son,  named  Suchandra,  by  ^ri  Efis^a. — 25. 

E^f^9a  begot  Ch&mdeppa  and  ^mba  from  his  wife,  J&mbavatt.— 26. 

Tantipdla  and  Tantt  were  the  sons  of  Nandaua.  Banilka  begot  four 
powerful  sons,  named  VirAja,  Dhanu,  l^yamya  and  lSrinjaya.-^27. 

Sy&mya  Lad  no  issue,  and  i^ratka  despising  all  pleasures  went  to 
the  forest,  where  he  attained  to  RAjar^ihood. — 28. 

One  who  daily  bears  or  recites  the  birth  and  family  history  of  Lord 
Sr!  Eri§9a,  will  become  liberated  from  all  his  sins  and  go  to  heaven. — 29. 

Btre  end$  the  forty-sixth  chapter  dealing  with  the  dynasty  of  the  Friftite. 


184 


THE  MATSYA.  PURANAM. 


CHAPTER  XLVII. 

Sflta  said : — Tiie  Lord  of  all,  the  Protector  of  the  universe,  mani- 
fested Himself  as  iSrlkri^na  for  the  purpose  of  His  pastime.  Through  the 
asceticism  of  Vasudeva,  Srikfi^na  was  born  iti  tlie  womb  of  Devaki.  His 
eyes  were  like  lotus.  He  had  four  arms,  and  His  Divine  form  was  of 
unsurpassing  splendour.  When  He  was  born  like  that  in  His  glory, 
wearing  the  Srivatsa  jewel,  Vasudeva  besought  Him  with  folded  hands, 
saying  “Hide  that  form.  0 Lord,  I make  this  request  to  you,  on  account 
of  my  fear  of  Kaipsa,  who  has  killed  my  powerful  sons,  thy  elder 
brothers.” — 1-4. 

In  compliance  with  those  words  of  Vasudeva,  Lord  Kfi^na  hid  His 
form  of  Divine  glory  and  asked  Him  to  send  him  to  t!ie  house  of  Nanda. 
Accordingly,  Vasudeva  took  him  to  the  house  of  Nanda,  and  requested  the 
latter  to  look  afler  the  Divine  bahe,  like  his  own  child,  and  added  that  the 
celestial  infant  would  bring  prosperity  to  the  Yadavas ; and  this  child, 
born  of  the  womb  of  Devaki,  will  kill  Karpsa  -5-6. 

The  Sages  said  Sflta ! Who  were  Vasudeva  and  Devaki,  to  whom 
the  manifestation  of  T>ord  Visnu  was  born  as  a son  and  called  them  His 
parents;  and  who  were  Nanda  and  YaisodA,  who  saw  the  childish  freaks 
of  that  Divine  babe  ?— 7-8. 

Sflta  said  : — Kailaypa  became  man  and  had  .Aditi  for  his  wife.  The 
former  was  born  by  the  glory  of  the  Creator  and  the  latter  was  created 
from  a particle  of  the  Earth. — 9. 

Note,-  It  means  that  Kasyapa  was  a partial  incarnation  of  the  Creator,  whilst  his 
wife,  Aditi,  was  that  of  the  goddess  of  earth. 

Afterwards  Devaki.  in  the  form  of  Aditi,  was  granted  all  the  fulfil- 
ment of  her  desires  by  Visnu.  —10. 

Note.— It  means  that  Aditi  was  afterwards  born  as  Devaki,  through  the  process  of 
transmigration  of  the  soul,  in  which  life  her  desires  were  fulfllled  by  the  pleasure  of  Vifpn. 

Lord  Vi^pu  manifested  Himself  in  the  human  form  and  deluded  the 
world  by  His  Yogic  powers.  Its  history  is  that,  when  the  earth  became 
deprived  of  righteousness  and  the  Asuras  swelled  the  worhl,  liOi-d  Vigpu, 
in  order  to  re-establish  righteousness,  incarnated  Himself  in  the  human 
form  in  the  Vfigni  family.— 11-12. 

I^rl  Erifpa  had  sixteen  thousand  wives,  of  whom  Rukminl,  Satya- 
bh&m&,  Satyfl,  Nflgiinjiti,  Subhflmfl,  3aivyfl,  Gandhflrl,  Lak^mapfl, 
Mitravindtli,  Kflliudl,  Jflmba-Vati,  Su^ilfl,  Mfldrt,  Kautfalyfl,  Vijayfl  were 
the  principal  ones.— 13-14. 


OaAPTEB  XLVII. 


m 


Rukmint  gave  birth  to  the  following  eons,  proficient  in  the  art  of 
war,  viz.,  Ch&rucle^^a,  Pradyumna,  Suchd^ru,  Bhadrachftru,  Sude^Qa, 
Bliadra,  Paraiin,  Ciifirugupta,  Ch&rubhadra,  Sucbfirtika,  ChAruh&sa,  and 
a girl  named  Chfirumatl. — 15-16. 

Sfl  Kfisjia,  the  beautiful-eyed,  begot  from  Satyabhfimfi  four  eons, 
named  Rohita,  Diptamana,  Tilrnra  Chakra,  and  Jalandhama,  who  had  four 
younger  eiuterH  also. — 17-18. 

J&mbavati  gave  birth  to  Samba,  who  was  an  ornament  to  all  assem- 
blages. MitravindA,  became  the  mother  of  MitravAna  and  Mitravinda. 
Sunltha  and  Mitra  BAhu  were  born  from  NAgnajiti.  — 18-19. 

Beginning  with  these,  there  were  thousands  and,  according  to  some, 
hundreds  of  thousands,  and  according  to  others  eighty  thousand  sons 
born  to  VAsndeva.  While  others  say  that  he  had  a hundred  thousand 
sons.— 20-21. 

UpAsan^  had  two  sons,  named  Vajra  and  Saftksipta,  and  Bhfirindra- 
sena  and  BhQri  were  the  two  sons  of  G-ave^a^a. — 22. 

Pradyumna  begot  from  his  wife,  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Vidarbha 
(Modern  Berar)  named,  Aniruddha,  who  was  most  brave  and  steady  in  battle. 
That  is  why  he  came  to  be  known  as  Aniruddha.  He  begot  Mfigaketana. — 
23. 

SAtnba  begot  five  valiant  and  truthful  sons  from  his  wife,  KAifyA,  the 
daughter  of  King  SupArilva.— 24. 

The  valiant  YAdavas  multiplied  themselves  into  a race  of  three 
crores,  out  of  whom  60000  powerful  ones  were  born  as  incarnations  of 
Devas  on  this  earth.  The  incarnations  of  Asuras  who  were  killed  in  the 
war  between  Devas  and  Asuras,  were  born  on  earth  as  obstructors  of  all 
human  progiess,  and  in  order  to  destroy  whom  l^ri  Kri^^a  was  born  in  the 
clan  of  the  YAdavas. — 15-27. 

The  YAdAvas,  among  whom  Ijord  Kfispa  was  born,  had  one  hundred 
different  families,  all  of  which  wore  supported  by  Vi^pu  ; and  it  was  for 
that  reason  that  the  YAdava  clan  went  on  prospering.  All  the  YAdavas 
were  the  companions  of  Lord  Kpsna. — 28-29. 

The  Risis  said— Rflta!  How  did  Vi^rm,  the  prime  cause  of  the 
universe,  come  to  be  born  on  this  earth,  along  with  the  seven  Ri^is, 
Kuvera,  Yak^a,  the  sages  MAriichars,  SAlaki  and  NArada,  Siddha,  Dhanvan- 
tari  ? How  many  manifestations  have  there  been  of  Vi^^u,  and  how  many 
of  them  will  be  in  future  ? Why  does  the  Lord  Viifijn  incarnate  Himself 
exclusively  among  the  tranquil  BrAhma^s,  and  the  KjatryAs  ? 0 Rfita  1 


m 


TBtf  MAT8YA  PDRANAM. 


pray  tell  us  the  object  of  Vi^nu’s  incarnating  Himself  in  the  family  of 
Vriftni,  Andhaka,  Ac.,  and  also  the  cause  of  manifesting  Himself  again  and 
again  in  human  form.— 30-33. 

S&ta  said:— At  the  end  of  a Yuga,  and  when  morals  of  the  time 
becomes  lax,  owing  to  the  loss  of  righteousness  in  the  universe,  Tjord 
Vispu  casts  oH  His  Divine  form  and  assumes  that  of  a man  ; or,  when 
the  Devas  and  the  Asuras  combine  to  oppress  the  world,  then  the  Lord 
Hari  incarnates  Himself.  Thus  he  incarnated  when,  in  the  days  gone  by, 
the  Daitya  Hiranya  Kasfyapu  was  ruling  the  tliree  worlds.  Similarly, 
He  incarnated  when  Bali  of  yore  ruled  the  three  worlds.  In  the  reigns 
of  these  two  rulers  there  was  great  friendship  between  the  Devas  and  the 
Asuras. — 34-36. 

But  all  the  same,  the  world  \vasagitate<l  by  the  presence  of  the  Asuras ; 
for  it  was  an  age  of  Asuras,  the  Devas  being  in  minority.  The  Devas  and 
the  demons  residing  under  the  sway  of  Ifiranyakarfyapu  .'nd  Bali  were 
on  equal  footing.  In  other  words,  the  Devas  and  the  Asuras  under  their 
sway  enjoyed  equal  rights  and  privileges.  At  the  same  time,  on  account 
of  the  curse  of  Bhfigu,  there  was  a destructive  warfare  between  the  Devas 
and  the  Asuras  to  cause  pain  to  Bali,  when  Lord  Visnu  manifested  Him- 
self in  the  human  form  to  re-establish  righteousness,  for  the  sake  of  the 
Devas  and  the  Asuraa™37-39. 

The  Risis  said;'-Suta!  Why  did  Lord  Visnu  interest  Himself 
personally  in  the  affairs  of  tlie  Devas  and  the  Asuras  ? How  did  this  con- 
flict arise  of  itself  between  the  Devas  and  the  Asuras.  who  were  living  on 
friendly  terms  before  ? Pray  tell  us  all  tlmt. — 40. 

Sflta  said : — There  were  twelve  hard  fought  battles  between  the 
Devas  and  the  Asuras  on  account  of  getting  their  heritage,  beginning 
from  the  Varaha  (Boar.^  incarnation  and  ending  with  ^anda  and  Marka 
times;  and  there  were  incarnations  on  the  occasion  of  each  war.  The 
flrst  was  that  of  Man-lion  (Nrisitpha),  the  second  that  of  VAmana,  third 
that  of  VarAha,  the  fourth  incarnation  was  on  the  occasion  of  the  churn- 
ing of  the  ocean  for  the  nectar,  the  fiftli  took  place  fit'  Tiirakftmaya 
W’ar,  the  sixth  was  called  the  Adivaka  war,  the  seventh  was  the  Traipura 
war,  the  eighth  was  the  Andhaka  war;  the  war  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  VfitrA.sura  was  the  ninth,  the  DhAtfi  war  was  the  tenth,  the 
H&l&hala  war  was  the  eleventh  and  the  twelfth  was  the  terrific  war,  named 
Kol&hala. — 41-45. 

Nfisiipha  killed  the  Daitya  king,  Hiranyakarfyapu,  VAmana  made  the 
a captive,  by  measuring  the  three  regions.  VarAha  killed 


chapter  xlvu. 


the  Daitya  Hirapy&k^a  with  His  tusks  and  divided  the  ocean  into  two.— 
4647. 

At  the  time  of  churning  the  ocean  for  nectar,  Indra  conqneipd 
FrahUda,  and  then  He  killed  Virochana,  the  son  of  PrahaUda,  in  the 
T4rak&maya  war ; for  the  latter  was  always'  after  the  life  of  Indra  and 
never  was  friendly  to  the  deeds  of  the  Devas. — 48-49. 

At  the  time  of  A(Jlvaka  war,  Jjord  ^iva  killed  the  Daitya  Tripura, 
along  with  other  D4navss,  besides  those  that  He  killed  in  the  Andhaka 
war.— 50. 

In  the  Vritra-n&4aka  war,  Indra,  by  the  help  of  Vi§nu,  killed  Vritr4sura, 
who  was  sided  with  by  men,  Pitfis  and  Devas  and  then  He  also  killed 
most  fearful  D&navas  in  the  l)hiit|-i  and  Haluhala  wars.  He  killed  the 
Daitya  Viprachit  in  the  Kolahala  war,  which  was  an  offshoot  of  the  l^nda 
Markawai-s  that  ensued  between  the  Devas  and  the  Daityas  over  the 
right  of  Avab'.ptlia  bath;  wiien  Viprachit  was  hiding  himself  with  the 
army  of  Diinavaa  under  his  banner. -51-53. 

Note.— A vabhrlthas Bathing  at  tho  ond  of  a principal  sacrifice,  for  purification. 

In  that  way,  there  were  a dozen  battles  between  the  Devas  and  the 
Asuras  in  which  the  military  classes  of  Devas  and  Asurss  were  killed  ; 
but  it  was  good  for  the  general  populace.— 54. 

Hira^yakii^yapu  ruled  the  land  with  all  the  mundane  glory  at  his 
command,  for  a period  of  one  hundred  million  seventy  eight  crores  and 
eighty  thousand  years,  after  whom  Bali  ruled  for  20,080,000  years  and 
PrahlAda  also  ruled  for  a similar  period  with  other  Asuras. — 55-57. 

All  three  of  them  were  tlie  most  powerful  Daitya  Kings,  and  known 
as  Indras  of  Daityas.  This  world  was  under  the  sway  of  the  Daityas 
for  ton  yugas.  After  which,  Indra  ruled  over  the  three  regions  with  mar- 
vellous tact  and  statesmanship.-  58-59. 

Indra  ruled,  since  the  close  of  the  sway  of  PrahlAda,  when  the 
seer,  i^ukra,  deserted  the  Daityas  and  joned  the  Devas.— 60. 

Once  the  sage  ^ukra  happened  to  go  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  Devae, 
when  the  Daityas  called  him  and  asked  him  how  he  did  that  daring  their 
loss  of  kingdom.  The  Daityas  said  that  they  could  ilo  longer  stay  in  that 
region  and  would  repair  to  RasAtala— which  grieved  the  seer,  who  said  thfit 
they  need  not  fear,  he  would  sustaiu  them  by  his  power,  for  it  was  he  alone 
who  had  spells,  medicines,  nectar,  and  the  best  of  things,  in  his  possession 
tp  the  full.  The  Devas  had  only  one-fourth  of  them.  He  would  give  every 
thing  to  them,  for  he  had  preserved  them  with  hii%|(u:  thei;  sah.a>~**^65* . 


THE  MAfSTA  PDEAiJAM. 


The  Devas  on  seeing  the  Daityas  cinstering  aroun<(  the  sage  fulcra 
(Kftvya),  held  a council  of  their  own  to  devise  means  to  acquire  all  lliose 
boons  from  the  sage.  They  all  discussed  among  themselves  that  the 
sage  was  forcibly  usurping  their  dues,  and  so  before  he  conferred  them 
on  the  Daitysis  they  would  all  go  and  manage  to  let  the  Daityas  go  to 
Ptitfila  by  their  stubbornness.  With  that  resolution,  the  Devas  went  and 
caused  trouble  to  the  DAnavas. — 67-68. 

At  that,  the  Daityas,  overpowered  witli  affliction,  went  and  sought 
the  succour  of  Sukra  and  were  rescued  by  him  instantly.  Afterwards 
they  started  their  operations  against  the  Devas  who,  defying  the  support 
of  iSukra,  began  to  annihilate  them. — 69-70. 

Then  the  sage,  thinking  of  the  past,  addressed  the  Daityas  for 
their  well-being: — ‘‘Vfnnaiia  has  deprived  3^11  of  all  3’onr  realm  by 
measuring  it  with  his  three  strides,  and  lias  made  Bali  a captive. 
Besides,  He  has  killed  Janibhasura  and  Virocliana  In  course  of  the 
twelve  battles,  the  Devas  have  killed  most  of  3"our  powerful  members, 
by  their  various  stratagems.  Very  few  of  you  are  left  now,  therefore 
follow  niy  advice  and  cease  fighting  for  sometime.  I shall  teach  you 
a useful  contrivance.  I will  go  to  acquire  the  spell  of  victory  from 
Siva,  and,  after  acquiring  those  powerful  cliarnis  from  him,  shall  make  you 
victorious  iu  your  Gglit  vvitli  tlie  Devas.” — 71-75. 

Hearing  those  words  of  their  Preceptor,  tlie  Asuras  spoke  to  the 
Devas,  “ 0 Devas!  We  are  without  arms,  our  armours  are  broken,  we 
have  no  chariots  ; consequently,  we  will  now  go  and  practise  austerities  in 
the  forest  after  covering  ourselves  with  the  bark  of  trees.”  Hearing  those 
words  of  the  Asuras  and  believing  the  utterances  of  Pralialada  to  be  true, 
the  Devas  cast  off  their  wrath  and  cdic'erfiilly  stopped  fighting  with  the 
defenceless  Asuras.— 76-78. 

Sometime  afterwards,  the  seer  f^ukra  said  to  his  disciples  :—**  P’or 
the  accomplishment  of  your  desires,  keep  yourselves  engaged  in  your 
penances,  and,  0 Daityas  ! go  and  reside  in  my  father’s  house  and  await 
my  return  there.”  Giving  that  piece  of  advice  to  tlie  Danavas,  jJukra 
went  to  Mah&deva. — 79-80.  ^ 

^ukra  said  : — ” 0,  Mahadeva  ! I wish  to  acquire  the  spells,  that  are 
not  possessed  by  Bfihaspati  even,  for  the  defeat  of  the  Devas  and  the 
victory  of  the  Asuras.” — 81. 

Mahd.deva  said : — **Bhargava!  You  shall  acquire  those  spells  after 
practising  austerities  with  your  head  suspended  down  and  imbibing 
the  smoke  of  chaff  for  a thousand  years.  If  thou  succeedest  in  this,  thou 


OHAPTEB  XLVIt. 


m 


Then  Sukra,  accepting  the  injunctions  of  the  Lord  l^iva,  touched  His 
feet  and  said,  “ Sire ! In  obedience  to  your  will,  I start  to  observe  the 
penances  dictated  by  you.** — 83. 

Afterwards,  the  sage,  to  acquire  the  spells  for  the  well-being  of  the 
Asuras,  went  to  practise  asceticism  by  the  side  of  the  altar  from  which 
smoke  emitted  fire. — 84. 

The  Devas,  understanding  the  treacherous  policy  of  the  Asuras,  tried 
to  turn  them  out  of  the  region  where  they  were  residing. — 85. 

The  Asuras,  on  seeing  the  Devas  unexpectedly  advancing  towards 
them  well-armed,  in  company  of  their  Preceptor  Bfibaspati,  became 
grieved  and  said  86-87. 

“ We  have  disarmed  ourselves  at  your  request  on  giving  us  the 
assurance  of  safety,  and  our  preceptor  is  engaged  in  the  observance  of 
his  vow.  How  bnve  j-ou  come  to  fight  ns  after  giving  us  an  assurance  of 
peace.  0 Dev.is,  we  have  not  our  preceptor  by  us  and  are  living  peacefully 
without  weapons,  and  we  are  dressed  in  deer  skin  and  tree  barks  and  with- 
out any  occupation  or  possessions.  0 Devas  ! We  are  not  in  a position  to 
fight  with  you.  We  will  go  and  seek  shelter  from  the  mother  of  our 
preceptor  witliout  offering  3’ou  any  resistance.  We  will  live  with  her  in 
peace  and  safety  till  the  return  of  the  sage,  after  which  we  will  fight  with 
you.**— 88-91. 

All  the  terrified  Asuras  afterwards  went  and  took  shelter  with  the 
mother  of  the  sage  who  gave  them  assurance  of  safety. — 92. 

She  said,  Danavas,  do  not  be  afraid  of  anything  ; drive  away  all 
your  fears  from  your  mind.  Nothing  will  happen  to  you  in  course  of  your 
stay  with  me.** — 93. 

Then  the  Devas,  without  any  regard  for  their  comparative  strength, 
went  for  the  Asuras,  who  had  placed  themselves  at  the  mercy  of  Sukra’s 
mother ; seeing  which  the  mother  of  their  preceptor  very  angrily  said 
that  she  would  make  them  Indraless.  —94-95. 

After  saying  that,  she,  mustering  all  her  will-force,  advanced  towards 
Indra  and  made  him  helpless  and  Rpell-bound  by  her  great  power  of  yoga 
and  austerities. " The  Devas,  seeing  Indra  thus  spell-bound  and  helpless 
like  a dumb  person  by  the  mother  of  l^ukra,  took  to  flight — 96-97. 

After  the  retreat  of  the  Devas,  Lord  Visnii  said  “ Indra ! You 
enter  yourself  within  me  and  I shall  carry  you  away  from  this  place.** — 98. 

Hearing  those  words  of  Vi^nu,  Indra  Purandara  instantly  entered 
himself  within  Him,  when  the  mother  of  the  sage  seeing  him  thus  protected 
by  Vi9pu  said  in  anger : — 99. 


THE  MAT8YA  PVBANAM. 


180 


“ Indra  ! 1 have  such  powers  of  asceticism  that  1 shall  reduce  you 
to  ashes  along  with  Vi§pu,  in  presence  of  all  creatures.** — 100. 

At  that,  both  Indra  and  Vi>nii  were  overcome  with  fear  and  began 
to  contrive  some  means  of  escape.  Vi>nu  said  to  Indra: — “How  shall  we 
escape  from  her  ? *’  Indra  replied  : - “ Ijord  ! kill  lier  before  she  consumes 
me.  I am  solely  protected  by  you,  destroy  her  soon  without  delay.*’ 
Vippu  thought  over  the  great  sin  of  killing  a woman,  but,  in  spite  of  that, 
he  took  up  his  Sudarrfana  Chakra  to  free  Himself  from  that  impending 
calamity.— lOl-J  03. 

Trembling  with  fear,  on  thinking  over  the  consequences  of  her  anger 
and  being  afraid  of  the  consequences  of  His  own  wrath.  He  severed  her 
head  with  His  Ci^akra.— 104. 

The  sage  Bhrigu  then  cursed  Visnu  for  killing  his  wife. — 105. 

He  said  : — “ Visnu  ! You  will  be  born  seven  ti?nesi  among  men  for 
the  sin  of  killing  a woman,  knowing  that  a woman  under  leXeircuinstances 
is  to  be  killed.” — 10(5. 

Since  then,  owing  to  rliat  curse  of  tlie  sage,  Visnu  manifests  Himself 
among  men  for  the  good  of  mankind,  whenever  there  is  a decay  in 
righteousness. — 107. 

Afterwards,  the  seer  Bhrigu  at  once  picked  np  the  severed  head  of 
his  wife  and  joined  it  to  tlie  trunk,  saying  Devi  ! Yon  have  been 
killed  by  Lord  Vissim,  and  now  1 recall  you  to  life  again.”  Saying  that,  he 
joined  tlie  head  and  the  Irimk  togeilier.  ami  said  “Abhijiva;**  (“Be 
revived”) ; if  1 have  fulfilled  ail  the  rules  of  law  and  acted  righteously,  and 
if  I have  alwaj-s  spoken  the  tnUh,  then  tlinuigh  that  truth  you  come  back 
to  life.  I say  so  triitlifnlly. — lOS-llO. 

After  that,  he  sprinkled  cold  water  and  again  pronounced  the 
spell,  “ Abhijiva,”  and  tliC  lady  at  once  came  back  to  life. — 111. 

On  seeing  her  thnsctiming  to  life,  as  if  rising  from  her  slumber, 
everyone  present  tliere  lopeatodly  expiessed  Ins  delight  by  saying,  “ Well 
done,”  “Well  done.” -112 

Thus  that  lady  was  revived  by  Blifigu,  in  the  presence  of  the  asto- 
nished Devatas,  and  the  whole  tiling  was  considered  a miracle — 113. 

Indra  seeing  the  sage  Bhrigu  quietly  bringing  back  his  wife  to  life, 
became  terribly  afraid  and  liad  no  peace  He  said  to  Ins  daughter,  Jayanti : 
— “ Daughter  ! This  seer  Sukra  is  practising  rigid  and  devout  asceticism 
lor  the  sake  of  my  foes,  which  is  causing  me  deep  pain  ; so  should  go 
to  him  and  please  him  by  your  service  and  conduct.  Do  just  what 


aHAPTBR  XLVIL 


ISl 


wishes,  and  serve  him  with  all  diligence.  Do  exactly  what  would  please 
him.  Qo,  I have  dedicated  you  to  him.  Worsiiip  him  and  try  all  tliat 
lies  in  you  to  serve  my  end.*’ — 114-117. 

Hearing  those  words  of  her  father,  Jayanti  went  to  the  spot  where 
the  sage  was  engaged  in  his  rigid  austerities. — U8. 

There  she  saw  the  sage  suspended  with  his  head  downwards  and 
imbibing  the  smoke  of  the  chaff;  while  a Yaksa  had  just  thrown  him 
down  the  side  of  tltc  Kunda.  She  found  him  all  absorbed  in  his 
austerities,  looking  very  lean  and  having  all  his  body  covered  with  ashes. 
Seeing  the  sage  like  tliat,  ><lie  set  herself  to  serve  him  according  to  the 
injunctions  of  her  father.  In  other  words,  she  began  to  serve  the  sage 
by  shampooing  his  legs  and  winning  his  pleasure  by  her  sweet  and  flatter- 
ing speech ; and,  adapting  herself  t>  stiit  his  pleasure,  she  practised  peri- 
ances  along  with  him  for  many  a year.  On  the  lapse  of  a thfmsand  3'ear8of 
practising  thiy.  vow  of  smoke,  the  God  Siva,  becoming  satisfied,  appeared  to 
grant  boons  to  f^iikra,  and  said  “ ^ukra ! You  alone  have  undergone 
this  penance,  none  other  has  done  so,  consequently,  j^ou  alone  will  have 
the  glory  of  conquering  all  the  Devas  by  your  asceticism,  intellect,  know- 
ledge of  the  i^asiras,  splendour,  and  power ; and  0,  Bhrigunandana ! 
in  addition  to  all  these,  you  will  achieve  all  the  rest  of  your  desires.  Do 
not  say  so  before  any  one,  but  you  alone  will  accomplish  everything.”— 
Ill).12i5. 

The  Ijord  Siva,  after  granting  all  those  boons  to  ^ukra,  also  made 
him  master  of  mankind  and  riches  as  well  as  invulnerable. — 126. 

On  getting  all  those  boons,  SJukra  (Kuvya)  had  such  an  unbounded 
pleasure  that  all  the  hair  of  his  btxly  were  thriilecl  with  joy.  After  that, 
the  sage  pleased  the  Lord  by  standing  curved  and  singing  the  hymn  of 
praises  to  the  God  of  blue  red  color. — 127. 

^ukra  said  : — I salute  Thee,  0 f^iva  ! designated  as  6\ti  Kanfha 
(blue-necked),  Kani$(ba  (short-statured),  Suvarchas  (full  of  splendour), 
Lelilid,na  (eats  much),  Kavya  (omniscient),  Vatsara  and  lord  of  Andhaaa, 
Kapard in  (whose  hair  is  matted),  Kanila  (whose  form  is  formidable),  Har- 
yak^a,  Varada  fwho  is  propitious),  Saipstuta  (well  praised;,  Sutirtha  (most 
sacred),  the  Tjord  of  all  the  Deities,  Ramas  (full  of  impetus),  whose  eyes  are 
threatening,  who  wears  a crown  on  His  head,  whose  face  is  handsome,  who 
is  the  Creator,  whose  forms  are  infinite,  who  is  the  seed  of  the  universe, 
fountain-head  of  asceticism,  whose  size  is  short,  hair  is  unkempt,  is  the 
leader  of  forces,  whose  eyes  are  adorable,  who  is  full  of  velocity,  is 
worthy  of  being  worshipped,  whose  complexion  is  red,  whoes  body  is  like 


132 


TEE  MATSYA  POBANAM, 


a sai)dal  woorl  tree  for  tlie  enjoyment  of  serpents,  who  has  a ihonsand 
heads  and  eyes,  is  bountiful,  beautiful,  ever  omnipresent,  white,  the  soul  of 
the  universe,  reposes  on  moiintains,  is  worshipful,  whose  body  is  cover- 
ed with  wrinkles,  the  Supreme  God,  capable  of  being  pleased  easily,  well- 
dressed,  armed  with  bow,  who  is  known  under  the  epithet  filulrgava,  wearer 
of  a quiver,  full  of  radiance,  known  as  svaksa  and  ksapaua,  a typical 
ascetic,  copper-complexioncd,  fearful,  of  iniglity  form,  of  peaceful  disposi- 
tion (^iva),  the  gieatest  of  the  Gods  (MahAdeva),  the  annihilator  of  the 
universe  (l^arva),  the  soul  of  tlie  universe,  the  great  benefactor,  known  also 
as  Iliranya,  (Hiianya  literally,  means  gold),  the  pre-eminent,  the  highest,  the 
central,  Vilstospati,  armed  with  a bow,  the  exelusive  giver  of  the  final 
emancipation,  the  punisher  of  the  wicked,  the  dexterous,  the  steady  (Sthilnu), 
the  cause  of  speech,  many-eyed,  tlie  foremost,  the  three-eyed,  the  master  of 
all  (Itfvara),  the  carrier  of  the  goblet  of  human  skull  (KapiUin  , the  brave, 
the  destructor,  the  three-eyed  vTryambaka),  having  eapaciohv.body,  of  tawny 
colour,  red  colour,  armed  with  bow  and  arrow,  of  wonderful  form,  also 
known  under  the  name  of  Dundublii  ta  kettle-drnin),  the  only  footpath 
of  a man  leading  to  the  gates  of  heaven,  existing  from  all  eternity,  the 
giver  of  intellect,  the  deweller  in  the  forest,  householder,  the  controller 
of  passions,  the  celibate  iBnilimachari),  the  great  iliscriminator  'Siifikbya), 
the  giver  of  absolution  to  the  soul  by  uniting  it  to  the  supreme  self  (Yoga), 
omnipresent,  the  great  Initiate,  Ineffable,  the  groat  destructor,  the  lord  of 
the  universe,  the  great  restrainer,  tlie  high  bank  of  final  beatitude,  one 
who  is  known  under  tlie  opiiliet  of  Cliekilana,  tlie  pious,  the  greatest  of  the 
seers,  the  revealer  of  tiie  Vedas,  the  pure,  tlic  protector  of  all,  the  expedi- 
tious in  movements,  having  a tuft  of  hair  on  tlie  head,  mighty,  having 
large  teeth,  the  creator  of  the  universe,  the  resplendent,  the  well-known, 
tbe  illustrious,  the  sharp-witted,  the  terrible  in  form,  the  grim,  the  giver 
of  prosperity  to  all,  the  simple,  the  cliief,  the  righteous,  the  propitious, 
the  invulnerable,  the  imperishable,  the  everlasting,  the  perpetual,  the  busy, 
the  most  eminent,  the  supporter,  the  »Siipreme  Being,  the  forgiver,  the 
forbearer,  the  truth,  the  imperishable,  the  Common  Cause,  the  bearer  of 
the  battle-axe,  the  wielder  of  the  trident,  having  the  Divine  Vision,  the 
quaffer  of  the  Soma,  the  inhaler  of  tlie  smoke,  the  sacred,  the  great  director 
of  the  universe,  the  prompt  in  making  appearance  whenever  needed,  the 
annihilator,  the  master  of  flesh-eaters,  the  giver  of  rain  in  the  form  of 
clouds,  the  lightning,  the  albpeneterating,  the  all-superior,  the  great 
nourisber  and  the  supporter  of  all,  the  destructor  of  the  demon  Tripura, 
the  aacred,  having  the  curly  hair  and  sharp-pointed  weapons,  the  great 
aogree  of  communicatioi],  the  giver  of  supernatural  powere  with  the 


CHAPTER  XL7II. 


138 


one  known  under  the  epithet  of  Pulasti,  the  shining,  the  impetuous,  the 
giver  of  prosperity,  the  rider  of  the  bull,  the  nil  and  ever^abiding,  the 
uniter  of  the  soul  with  the  Supreme  Spirit,  the  holy,  the  observer  of 
celibacy,  the  anniliilator  of  demons,  the  conqueror  of  self  and  of  death, 
the  worthy  of  being  offered  sacrifice,  blazing  like  fire  and  known  unBer 
the  epithet  of  Prachetas,  the  pure,  the  destructor  of  the  evil  spirits  and 
beasts,  free  from  all  impediments,  the  very  soul,  tlie  intoxicated  owing  to 
the  quaffing  of  the  poison,  the  anniliilator  of  all,  the  most  unfathomable, 
whose  neck  is  dark  blue,  owing  to  the  drinking  of  the  poison,  (cf.  tpi 

is  known  under  the  epithet  of  Jayanta,  the  Ixird  of 
all  the  realms,  the  independent,  the  Creator,  the  regulator  of  equality, 
whose  hands  are  as  white  as  silver,  all-pervading,  the  omnipresent,  the 
holy,  the  forcible,  the  sovereign  Ixird,  the  far-seeing,  the  possessor  of  high 
class  arrows  and  horses,  the  benefactor,  the  giver  of  emancipation,  whose 
complexion  is  r'.xidish  (Kapila),  the  Lord  of  Deities,  the  most  learned  and 
intellectual,  of  the  mighty  form,  the  illustrious,  known  under  the  epithet 
of  Rodana,  the  patron  of  all,  the  renowned  archer,  the  wearer  of  the 
armour,  the  great  charioteer  (Rathin),  the  guardian  of  all,  the  Lord  of 
Bhpgu,  the  radiant,  the  dweller  in  the  cavity  of  the  heart,  the  creator, 
the  unfailing,  the  serene,  the  wise,  the  best,  the  glorious,  the  soul  of  the 
universe,  the  wearer  of  the  deer-skin,  the  Lord  of  animals  and  ghosts, 
the  Sacred  Symbol  (g^),  the  soul  of  the  Rik,  Yajus  and  S&ma  (Vedas\ 
as  well  as  of  the  oblations  made  to  the  Gods  and  the  Manes  of  ancestors, 
and  the  Deities,  the  creative  power,  the  chief  agent,  the  great  ocular 
evidence,  the.  Vedic  knowledge,  the  Master  of  the  past  and  the  future  of 
the  nniverse,  the  soul  of  actions,  who  manifests  Himself  as  Vasu,  S&dbya, 
Rudra,  Aditya,  Sura,  Visa,  Mdruta,  Dev&tma,  the  knower  of  the  ceremony 
of  bringing  out  Agni  and  Soma,  the  supreme  soul,  the  sacred  text,  the 
Lord  of  medicaments,  who  calls  Himself  into  beinc  at  His  will  (Swayam- 
bhu),  who  is  not  bom  (in  the  ordinary  coui-se),  the  magnificent,  the 
Prime,  the  father  of  creation,  the  sou]  of  BrahmA,  the  Master  of  soul,  the 
Master  of  all,  the  infinite,  the  omnipresent  among  all  the  purified  souls, 
devoid  of  the  pyoperties  belonging  to  all  created  things,  the  roost  excellent, 
the  manifest,  the  immortal,  the  great  nameless,  the  universal  friend,  the 
deliverer  of  the  soul  from  the  fetters  of  the  phenomenal  creation  by 
conveying  a correct  knowledge  of  the  other  tattvas,  the  life  of  the  seven 
worlds,  viz.,  the  earth,  the  astral  plane,  the  heaven-world,  the  space,  the 
aky,  and  of  the  regions  Mahii,  Jana,  Taps  and  Satya,  the  unroanifest 
(Prakriti^  the  Mahattatva,  the  elements,  the  senses,  the  Atman,  the  subtle 
element  called  Videfia,  salutation  to  Thee,  0 Soul  of  alh  Thou  art  the 


TBB  MATSYA  PORANAM. 


eternal,  tlie  subtle,  the  ^;ross,  tlie  onli.!ijhtenef],  the  supreme,  the  giver  of 
final  bliss,  tho  omnipresent  in  the  three  regions  anil  existing  beyonil'theb‘o 
three,  the  pervader  in  the  four  liiglier  realms,  viz  : — Maha,  eTana,  Taps  and 
Satya.- 128  1137. 

0 Lord  Siva  ! if  in  course  of  this  hymn  of  devotion,  I have  failed  to 
describe  Theo  adequately,  forgive  me  in  consideration  of  my  being 
your  staunch  adherent,  for  'fhou  art  alwavs  a friend  to  a Bnlh mans. *—168. 

SOta  said  ; — The  sage,  after  tlius  saluting  Mahadeva,  stood  quietly, 
with  folded  hau  ls,  before  Him.  Tlien  the  l.i>rd  became  still  more  pleased 
with  Sukra  ; and,  after  placing  His  Divine  hand  on  the  seer,  vanished 
instantly.  After  that,  the  sage  addressed  dayauti,  who  was  standing  close 
by  him.  He  s:iivl,  “ Who  art  Thou,  and  why  art  thou  sorrowing  for  me, 
on  account  of  my  penances?  Why  art  thou  serving  me  with  so  much 
devotion  and  austerity  ? O I’leautiful  i>nc ! lam  very  niucb  pleased  with 
thy  devotion  and  atTeeiion.  Wnat  »lo-<t  tlc.ni  wisli?  Tell  thalVo  me.  I shall 
certainly  doanything  for  thy  sake,  howsoever  ditlicult  it  maybe.  — 1611-174. 

Hearing  those  words  of  the  sage,  dayanii  said : BrA liman ! 

Ascertain  my  ilcsires  through  the  powers  of  your  asc<'ticisin.” — 175. 

At  that  expression  of  .layauti,  the  sagv  realized  everything  through 
his  Divine  sight,  and  sail  to  lier:—‘*t)  Eiiehautiug  one ! Tlmii  hast 
thought  of  living  with  me  for  ten  years,  riiis  is  your  desire,  which  will  be 
fulfilled  ; follow  me  to  iny  abode.  ’*  .\ftei  ward«^,  Sukra  took  her  home  and 
married  lier  there, — 17d-l7S. 

Then  the  sage  Bhargava,  to  enjoy  hiin.self  in  her  eonipany  undis- 
turbed, made  hiins{.*lf  invisible*  by  meau.s  of  Ids  m.’gical  power  -179. 

The  Dailyas,  getting  new-,  of  ihe  renirn  of  iheir  preceptor  crowned 
with  success,  went  exliilaraled  to  f^ay  their  homage  to  him  ; but  not  being 
able  to  see  him  owing  to  liis  being  enveloped  in  illusion,  they  returned 
as  they  Inid  gone, — 18f)-lSl 

Unfortunately  for  the  Daityas,  Brihaspati  came  to  know  of  the  doing 
ofSukra.  He  knew  for  certain  that  the.  preceptor  of  tlie  Daityas  would 
not  break  his  shell  of  magic  for  ten  years,  ns  he  was  ciyoying  himself 
with  Jayanti  ; the  Devas,  f)n  theothm’  hand,  also  i anie  to  know  of  the  weak 
point  of  the  Daityas,  that  the  latter  were  ignorant  of  the  distinctive 
features  of  their  precept(»r.  'riiey  consequently  entreated  Brihaspati  to 
do  something  fortlicrn.  Brihaspati  thus  incited  by  his  disciples,  i)erso- 
nating  as  fcJukra,  went  and  rallied  the  Daityas  round  him.— 182-183. 

He,  in  the  form  of  Ji^ukra,  then  addressed  the  Daityas  that  had  flocked 
10  him.  He  said  : — “ <3,  my  disciples ! You  are  welcome.  I have  al^o 


CHAPtBB  XLVIL 


135 


come  here  to  do  you  good.  I ehall  teach  you  the  knowledge  that  I have 
acquired  from  iSivii.  ” Tlie  Daityaa  were  carried  away  by  joy,  and  began 
to  takeleeaoiis  from  liiin.— 181. 

After  the  lapse  oF  ten  years,  the  sage  t^iikra  was  also  free  from  his 
enjoyments  with  Jayaiiti,  and  it  is  heard  that  Devayani  was  born  of  her. 
Then  the  Sage  fcJukra  made  up  his  mind  to  see  his  disciples—the  Daityas — 
and  said  to  Jayanti,  “ Lad}',  I am  going  out  to  see  my  disciples. -'185-187. 

Jayanti  said  ; — “ Lord  ! go  and  look  after  your  devotees.  This  is 
the  duty  of  high-minded  folks  and  I will  not  keep  you  away  from  it.” — 
188. 

^ukra,  on  finding  the  x\snras  deceived  by  Brihagpati,  said ‘to 
them  ” Asuras  ! I am  Sukra,  who  has  pleased  Lord  Siva.  All  of  you 
Iiave  been  ileceived  by  Bfiliaspati,  wlio  was  personating  me.” — 189-190. 

Tlie  lWnavn.s  were  bewildered  to  licar  those  words  of  tlie  sage,  and 
began  to  look  amazingly  at  both  of  them  silting  there.  At  that  time, 
tlie  bewildered  Danavas  couhl  not  say  any  tiling,  mn-  could  they  distin- 
guish their  preceptor,  at  which  the  sage  bVikni  said  : — ” Asuras ! I am 
your  preceptor  Sukra  ; this  is  Bjihaspati,  the  preceptor  of  the  Devas.  Leave 
him  and  follow  mo.” — 191-193. 

Then  the  Asuras  again  looke<l  at  both  of  them,  but  did  not  perceive 
any  difference  between  »^ukra  aiul  Bi;lha.spali. — 191. 

At  that  time,  the  sage  Bjihaspati  instantly  addressed  tlie  Asuras: — 
” Asuras  ! 1 am  your  preceptor,  i^ukra.  This  is  Bj-ihaspati,  wlio  has  come 

here  after  assuming  my  form.  Asuras!  B|ihaspati  is  trying  to  deceive 
you  by  assuming  my  form.”  After  that,  all  tlie  Asuras  held  a council  and 
discussed  among  themselves  that,  that  preceptor  (Bjihaspati)  had  been 
giving  them  lessons  since  ten  years  who,  according  to  their  judgment,  was 
their  real  preceptor — 195-197. 

After  that,  all  the  D.mavas  paid  obeisance  to  the  sage  Bphaspati,  in 
tlie  guise  of  iJukra,  and  accepted  what  he  said  to  them ; for  they  were 
deluded  by  him  during  his  stay  with  tliem  for  ten  years. — 198. 

Then  all  the  Asuras,  with  their  eyes  burning  witli  rage,  most  angrily 
said  to  ^ukra ; — “ He..  Bi  ihaspati,  is  our  well-wisher  and  preceptor  ; depart 
thou  (l^ukra),  for  the  thou  art  not  our  guru.  He  might  be  l^ukra  or 
Bfihaspati,  but  he  is  our  guru.  We  remain  under  his  instruction.” 
-:199-2()0. 

Saying  80,  the  Asuras  acknowledged  Bphaspati  under  tlie  garb 
of  ^ukra,  as  their  preceptor.  At  that,  the  sage  l^ukra,  in  a fit  of 
ap^,  prpQounieed  the  following  curse  upon  the  D&navas  : — ” Ddnavas, 


136 


THE  MATSYA  PtJRAHAM. 


in  spite  of  my  advice,  you  have  refused  to  acknowledge  me  as  your  ghiii, 
in  consequence  of  which  you  will  lose  j'our  intellect  and  will  be  j^ooted 
by  the  Devas.”  Afterwards,  he  departed  from  there. — 201-203, 

Bfihaspati  became  immensely  pleased  to  find  his  object  gained 
when  the  Daityas  were  cursed  by  ^ukra.  Then  he  assumed  his  own  form, 
and  instantly  disappeared,  after  which  the  D&navas  were  confused  when 
they  saw  him  thus  vanishing. — 205.  - 

They  then  said  among  themselves : “ Oh,  we  have  been  grot^ly 
deluded  on  all  sides  by  Bfihaspati  and  got  cui-sed  by  the  sage  ^ukra.” 
—206. 

They  gof  very  vexed  ; and  all  the  Asuras,  under  the  leadership  of 
Prahhtda,  immediately  went  to  their  preceptor ; and  with  their  heads 
cast  down  in  shame,  they  stood  before  him  in  i-cpentence.  The  sage, 
finding  his  disciples  come  back,  a<ldro88ed  them  thus  : — “^hough  I tried 
my  best  to  enlighten  you  all  as  to  the  true  slate  of  affairs,  y6u  did  not  pay 
heed  to  my  warning.  On  account  of  this  disregard  of  my  advice,  you 
will  surely  be  defeated  in  future.” — 207-201). 

Hearing  those  words  of  l^ukra,  Prahlada,  with  his  eyes  full  of  tears, 
falteringly  said  to  the  preceptor : — “ 0 Bhargava  do  not  abandon  us, 
we  all  are  your  devotees  and  look  to  you  for  protection ; shield  us. 
0 perceptor  of  the  Divine  Vision  ! You  are  capable  of  knowing,  that  not 
having  the  good  luck  of  seeing  you,  we  were  deluded  by  Bfihaspati,  the 
preceptor  of  the  Devas.  And,  O Bhfigunaudana!  if  you  will  not  show 
kindness  to  us,  then  all  of  us,  discarded  by  you,  shall  go  to  Rasfitala.” 
-210-212. 

The  sage  ^ukra,  on  hearing  these  words,  curbed  his  anger  and, 
moved  by  pity  and  compassion,  said  : “ You  need  not  entertain  any  fear,  nor 
need  you  go  to  the  Rasatala.  Certainly,  you  will  obtain  prosperity  in  future, 
so  long  as  I am  away,  but  your  destiny  tpnst  be  fulfilled.  I cannot 
make  it  otherwise,  for  fate  is  stronger.  You  must  lose  your  intelligence 
from  to-day,  though  you  will  regain  it  hereafter.  You  will  conquer  the 
Devas  only  once,  and  after  that  you  had  better  go  to  Patiiltv  Now  the  ten 
ages  of  your  prosperity  have  come  to  an  end  ; for  that  was  the  period 
predicted  by  BrahmS  in  which  you  had  world-dominion.  You  will  again 
regain  your  kingdom  in  the  Sfivar^ika  Manvantara,  after  which,  0 Prahl&da, 
your  grandson,  King  Bali,  will  reign  with  all  glory,  in  different  realms  ; 
for,  even,  Lord  Vi^u  will  promise  this  secretly  to  your  grandson,  when 
He  will  deprive  him  of  his  kingdom  in  His  Dwarf  incarnation.  Because 
you  were  devoted  to  Vi9pa  and  your  mind  was  regulated  according 


CHAPfEU  XLVil. 


137 


to  His  will ; therefore  BralimA,  being  pleased  with  you,  gave  you  this 
wotrld-sovereignty.  iSiva,  the  most  supreme  Lord  of  the  entire  universe, 
has  spoken  to  me,  as  a secret,  that  Bali  will  be  the  future  king  of 
the  Devns;  and  therefore  He,  invisibile  to  all,  is  awaiting  that  tjme. 

0 Prahl&da!  Brahma,  on  being  pleased  with  you,  has  granted  another 
bpon  to  you  which  1 am  not  in  a position  to  reveal  to  you,  because  Brahma, 
thp  knpwer  of  the  future,  has  not  authorised  me  to  do  so.  He  has  also 
said  that  both  these  my  disciples  (^anda  and  Marka)  are  equal  in  wisdom 
tQ  Bfihaspati.  These  two  will  protect  you  against  all  the  machinations  of 
the  Devas  in  my  absence.” — 213-224. 

On  hearing  tliese  words  of  l^ukra,  the  rigid  follower  of  ritualistic 
rites,  all  the  Asiiras  retired  pleased,  along  with  tlie  high-souled  Prahlada, 
and  being  assured  by  their  preceptor,  l^ukra,  that  they  would  gain  at  least 
one  victory  over  the  Devas,  the  Asuras,  acting  on  these  words,  put  on  , 
their  armours  .jid  challenged  the  Devas  to  fight  tliern.  The  Devas,  seeing 
the  Asuras  standing  in  the  battle-field  well-equipped  to  fight,  came  out  to 
give  battle.— 225-227. 

The  great  war  between  the  Asuras  and  tlic  Devas  lasted  for  a century 
in  which  the  Devas  were  repulsed  and  the  Aburas  were  victorious.  The 
Devas  held  a conference  and  decided  to  invite  i>anda  and  Alarka  (as  guests 
of  the  Devas),  on  the  occasion  of  their  sacrifice,  after  which  they  would  get 
victory  in  the  next  war.  After  coining  to  that  conclusion,  the  Devas  invited 
both  of  them  to  their  sacrifice,  and  said  : — “ 0,  twice-born  ones  ! You 
forsake  these  Asuras,  we  will  be  yours  always,  after  conquering  them 
through  your  support.” — 228-230. 

The  Devas,  thus  made  friends  with  l^anda  and  Marka,  and  then 
fought  with  the  Daiiavas,  when  they  were  victorious.  As  the  Danavas 
became  powerless  by  being  disserted  by  Sanda  and  Alurka,  so  they  were 
defeated  easily,  and  thus  the  curse  of^ukra  took  effect. — 231-232. 

The  Asuras,  thus  cursed  by  their  preceptor,  and  without  any  spiritual 
support  from  any  side,  and  repulsed,  by  the  Devas,  found  themselves  in  a 
most  helpless  condition  and  eventually  entered  Rasatala  uiifernal  regions). 
The  DAnavas,  being  thus  dispirited  by  the  victory  of  the  Devas  and  through 
the  inatrumeiitarity  of  Bhi’igu,  went  to  Patula. — 233-234. 

Again,  whenever  there  is  decay  in  righteousness,  Vi^nu  takes  birth, 
ill  order  to  establish  righteousness  by  destroying  the  Asuras.— 235. 

Brahm&  had  also  ordained  this,  that  those  Asuras  who  go  against 
the  righteous  injunctions  of  Prahlada  would  also  be  killed  by  men.-  236. 

In  accordance  with  that  ordinance  of  Brahm4,  there  was  a partial 


1$ 


THE  MAT8YA  WBAiirAii. 


m 

incarnation  of  Ndrayana  as  Dharma,  at  the  end  of  the  Cliaksusa  Mauvantfira, 
when  the  Devas  perfonnecl  a sacriOco  at  the  beginning  of  the  Vaivasvata 
Manvaiitara.  At  this  incarnation,  fh*ahm/i  was  the  officiating  priest.  Tfiis 
was  the  first  incarnation.  There  was  another  incarnation  of  the  Supreme 
Soul.  When  the  Dovas  were  in  distress,  then,  on  the  fourth  day  of  the 
Moon,  which  was  tlie  anniversary  of  the  beginning  of  a Yiiga,  Lord  Visgu 
manifested  Iliiuself  on  the  sea-coast.  He  incarnated  Himself  as  Nfisiriiha 
for  the  destruction  of  Hiranyakusipu.  Rudra  oQiciatcd  as  the  sacrificial 
priest.  This  was  His  second  incarnation.— 237-239. 

In  the  seventh  Treta  Yaga,  when  King  Rail  was  in  power,  Dliarma 
was  the  sacrificial  priest  at  the  time  of  the  Lord  manifesting  Himself  as 
Vfimana!* — 240.  * 

0 Sages!  these  three  are  the  celesiial  incarnations  of  Visnu  ; and 
there  are  seven  more  hiuuaii  hieurnatlons  wliicli  the  f4onl  underwent 
owing  to  the  curse  of  liliiigu.  -241. 

[n  the  first.  Trela  Viiga,  when  ilio  fourth  part  of  righteousness  was 

lost,  the  Lord  iucariiatod  Daft  iireva,  and  the  sage  .Markandeva  was 
% • ‘ - 
the  officiating  priest.  Thi^  wa<  His  fotirth  in<‘arnaiioii  --212. 

The  lifth  iiiearnatiou  was  that  of  the  worM-Einperor,  Maudhitri, 
which  took  place  in  the  iifteoiilb  rreta,  when  IJttanga  was  the  officiating 
priest. —243. 

In  the  19th  Tret  i,  there  was  the  slxtli  inearnari.)n,  as  Para^urama, 
r4o  root  out  the  Ksairiyas,  wiion  Vi^vamiir.i  oHiciated  as  tlio  sacrificial 
priest. — 244. 

In  the  24tli  Trot  i Yuga,  t/ie  manifostation  was  that  of  i5ri 

Ramchandra,  as  the  son  of  Dasaratlia,  ami  with  X’asistlia  as  tlie  priest,  to 
kill  Havana.  —240. 

In  the  2cStli  Dvhpara,  incarnated  Himself  as  Vedavyasa,  the  son 

of  Paraiara,  when  Jat.ukainya  sage  was  the  olficiating  priest.  This  was  the 
eighth  incarnation  of  Vdsnu. — 21(>. 

For  the  esiablishment  of  righteousness  and  tlie  destruction  of 
Asuras,  througli  a.«*ceticism,  there  was  the  9th  incarnation,  in  the  form  of 
Buddha  of  Divine  splendour,  with  His  Lyes  as  beautiful* as  lotus,  and 
with  the  sage  Dvaipayana  Vyusa  as  the  nfliciatiiig  i.u'iest, — 247. 

At  the  close  of  Kaliynga  Uhe  present  iron  age),  there  will  be  the 
Kalki  mainfestatioii,  in  tlie  house  of  Visnuyasa,  and  tlie  sage,  PftrAsarya 
Vy&sa  will  be  the  officiating  priest.  This  will  be  the  tenth  iucarnation, 

, and  YAjnyavalkya  will  make  liis  appearance  before  this  coming  raainfesta- 
tipn.— 248. 


CHAPTEn  XLVn. 


m 


This  incarnation  will  destroy  all  the  wicked  ones  and  the  hypocrites ; 
and,  with  a large  army  of  the  Brilunanas,  He  will  kill  i^udra  Kings  and 
drive  away  all  hypocrisy.  After  killing  the  enemies  of  Bralimanas  and 
other  enemies,  fie  will  marcli  on  with  flis  army  in  the  of  the  Kaliyiiga, 
and  thou,  after  purifying  the  jJudras,  will  cross  the  ocean,  where  He  will 
destroy  the  sinful  mixed  castes  and,  thus  fulfilling  His  mission,  He  will 
educate  his  peoples.— 249-253. 

Afterwards,  the  people,  by  becoming  enraged  and  deluded  with  each 
other,  will  kill  each  other  to  fulfil  the  future  destiny. — 254. 

When,  in  ])rocess  of  time,  the  incarnation  of  Kalki  will  vanish,  then 
the  future  kings  will  be  destroyed,  through  rlie  rebellion  of  their 
subjects. — 255. 

The  people,  not  finding  anyone  as  their  protector,  will  fight  amongst 
themselves,  aij;:/’ will  tlien  land  themselves  in  great  troubles  after  killing 
one  another. — 256. 

All  cities  and  villages  will  be  devastated,  and  the  duties  of  castes 
and  the  stagps  of  life  will  disappear. — 257. 

At  that  juucture— the  end  of  the  Iron  Age— men  will  open  markets 
to  sell  boile<l  rice,  the  Brlhmanas  will  sell  the  Vedas  and  the  women  will 
earn  their  living  by  selling  their  hair.— 258. 

People  will  be  very  short  of  stature,  and  they  will  be  short-lived. 
They  will  make  forest,  as  tlieir  place  of  dwelling,  or  they  will  reside  by 
rivers  and  hills,  subsisting  on  roots,  fruits  and  leaves. — 259. 

They  will  clothe  themsevles  with  tattered  clothes,  the  deer-skin,  <tc. 
All  the  castes  will  mingle  into  one  mass,  and  the  people  will  be  reduced 
to  penury  and  will  find  themselves  in  great  distress  and  subjected  to 
many  troubles.— 260. 

Being  thus  tormented  with  myriads  of  troubles  and  difficulties,  all 
the  population  will  become  annihilated  along  with  the  end  of  the  Kali- 
yuga.— 281. 

Satyayuga  (the  Age  of  Truth)  will  follow  on  the  heels  of  the  dis- 
appearing Kajiyuga.  “ This  is  the  narration  of  the  doing  of  the  Devas 
and  the  Asuras  that  I have  related  at  some  length  to  you,  0 sages  ; now 
hear  an  account  of  YaduvaipsSa,  Tiirvasu,  Puru,  Druhya,  A^u,  along  with 
the  glory  of  Vignii.” — 262-263. 

Here  ends  the  Forty-seoenth  chapter  dealing  with  the  curse 
of  ^ukra  on  Asuras  and  the  ten  Incarnations. 

Note.'^A  Bummary  of  thU  chapter  is  given  by  Dr.  John  Muir,  in  Volume  IV  of  his 

Samkrit  Texi$,  pp.  I61-ia6, 


140 


TEB  MAT8YA  PURAEAM. 


CHAPTER  XLVIII. 

Suta  said  ; — Turvasu  was  the  father  of  Garbha,  who  begot  Gobhftnu, 
the  father  of  the  heroic  Tris'lri.  Tristlri  was  the  father  of  Karandhaoia, 
and  Bliarata  was  his  son.  This  Bharata  shunld  not  be  confounded  with 
Bharata,  the  sou  of  Dnsyaiita.  Dusyanta  the  fatlier  of  Bharata,  who  was 
sinless  belonged  to  the  family  of  Puni. — 1-2. 

Because  Turvasu  did  not  exhangc  his  youth  with  the  infirmity  of 
Yayati,  through  the  curse  of  the  latter,  therefore,  the  family  of  Turvasu 
dill  not  become  prominent,  but  it  lapsed  into  the  house  of  Puru. — 3. 

Dusyanta  was  the  father  of  Varulha,  who  begot  Andira,  who  was  the 
father  of  Sand!u\na.  He  also  begot  IVnidya,  Kerala,  Chola,  Karna,  and 
their  respective  couutrie.s  were  nauied  after  them.— 4 o. 

Druhya  was  the  father  of  two  heroic  sons,  named  Setn  and  Ketu. 
Setu  begot  Saradvana,  the  faiher  of  Gainlhara.  after  whok  name  the  vast 
GAndhira  country  is  known.  He  had  choice  horses  of  the  Arratta  coun- 
try.*-6-7. 

Gdndhara  was  the  father  of  Dharma,  who  begot  Dlifita,  the  father  » 
of  Vidufa,  whose  son  was  Piaehcta.  IVacdieiii  was  the  father  of  a hundred 
sons,  all  of  whom  luleil  as  sivereign-  in  the  llli'chha  country  lying  in  the 
north. — 8-9. 

Ann  was  the  lather  of  the  tnllnwing  three  pious  sons,  viz.,  Sabhnnara, 
Chaksu^a,  Paramesu  — IC, 

Sabhanara  was  tiie  father  of  the  icanied  Kolahala  who  became  a 
king.  Kolahalu  became  the  father  of  the  holy  Safijaya,  of  worldwide 
reputation. — 11. 

Saiijaya  was  the  father  of  Purafijaya,  w'ho  begot  Janamejaya,  the 
father  of  MaliAtjala.  .MaliAs'da  wa.s  the  faiher  of  the  renowned  and  pious 
king  MahAmana,  who  w'as  the  lord  of  seven  continents  and  a universal 
monarch.  He  was  the  fatlici  of  two  famous  sotis,  called  Usinara  and 
Titiksu.— 12-15. 

Usfiiiara  l ad  BhritfA,  Kri4A,  NavA.  Daria  and  DrWadvati  as  his  five 
queens,  till  danghter.s  of  a Rujarsi.  IG. 

The  old  king  Usimira,  through  his  piety  and  rigliteouMiess,  begot 
from  his  queens,  tlio  following  pious  and  worthy  sons,  viz.,  Nfigu  from 
Bhpifa,  Nava  from  NavA,  Krisla  from  Kfiii,  Suvrata  from  DurifA,  l3ibi 
Auifinara  from  Dritfadvatl. — 17-18. 


* Kame  of  the  Pefioha*nada  or  PaojAb  (MahAbhArata), 


CHAPTER  XLVIIL 


141 


^ibi  begot  four  famouR  sons,  viz.,  Prithndarbha,  Sutisa,  Kekaya,  and 
Bbadraka ; and  their  countries  Avere  named  after  them,  viz.,  Kekaya, 
Bha^rakii,  Sanviril,  and  Paur&,  and  tlie  country  of  king  Nfign  was  also 
known  as  KekayS. — 19. 

Amba^tha  was  the  name  of  the  capital  town  of  Suvrata’s  country, 
and  Vrisald.  Avas  the  capital  of  Kfiila,  and  Navarastra  was  the  capital  of 
Nava.  Now  listen  to  the  family  of  Titiksu. — 20-21. 

Titiksu  became  a renoAvned  king  and  ruled  in  the  East.  He  was 
the  father  of  Vri^adratha,  Avho  begot  Sena. — 22. 

Sena  begot  Sut&p&,  Avhose  son  Avas  Bali.  Bali,  the  Daitya  King,  was 
Avithout  an  issue ; for  he  Avas  bound  by  the  .Mahatiml  [in  bonds  of 
captivity.]  But,  as  he  was  a great  Yogi,  he  took  birth  in  human  body  as 
Bali,  tlie  son  of  Sutapa,  and  procured  five  Ksetraja  sons  for  himself.  These 
Avere  Aftga,  Vafir;a,  Suhma,  Puijdraand  Kali/iga,  and  their  country  is  called 
B4leya.  The  B^leyas  and  tlie  Bralimanas^  Avere  the  sons  of  that  lord 
Bali.’’-23-25. 

Lord  Brahmii,  satisfied  Avith  Bali,  gave  him  a boon,  namely,  that  Bali 
would  boa  great  Yogi,  Avould  live  for  a Kalpa,  Avould  be  invincible  in  war, 
superior  in  Avisdoin,  and  his  mind  Avould  ahvays  be  inclined  towards 
religion.  He  would  be  endoAved  Avith  knoAvledgo  of  the  past,  present  and 
future,  the  chief  in  his  community,  victorious  in  Avars,  a philosopher,  and 
the  establisher  of  the  prescribed  orders. 

It  was  through  the  glory  of  Braliral  that  Bali  Avas  favoured  with 
children  (even  though  made  a captive  by  Visiju). — 26-28. 

The  family  of  Ahga  will  now  be  described. — 29. 

The  sages  said “ Sdta ! Hoav  was  Bali  blessed  with  five  children  ? 
What  was  the  name  of  the  mother  of  those  children?  Which  Ri§i  begot 
them  ? How  did  he  do  so  ? Be  good  enough  to  relate  to  us  all  this,  and 
also  explain  to  us  the  glory  of  that  sage  (who  begot  those  children  for 
Bali).— 30-31. 

Sfita  said : — In  the  days  gone  by,  there  Avas  a great  sage,  named 
U4ija,  and  Mamatd  was  his  Avife.  Bfiliaspati,  the  younger  brother  of  Udija, 
entertained  a desiie  to  enjoy  in  the  company  of  the  latter’s  wife.  Mamatfi, 
understanding  the  intentions  of  Brihaspati,  told  him  not  to  think  of 
anything  of  the  kind,  os  she  was  bearing  a child  to  his  brother;  and 
added : “ 0 ! Brihaspati,  the  child  in  ray  womb  Avill  get  angry,  for  being 

* Brabnu^as  here  does  not  refer  evidently  to  the  Brhhma^a  caste,  bnt  to  those 
desoendents  of  Bali  from  whom  the  modern  Burma  (fot  ifai  name. 


142 


THE  MATBYA  VUUAVIAM. 


of  the  seed  of  Uelija,  tliy  brother,  he  knows  ali  the  Vedas  [and  will  not 
allow  tliy  seed  to  fecinulate  in  my  womb].  Thou,  ()  Hrihaspati,  art  also 
one,  whose  seed  nercr  gv»es  in  vain.  So  do  not  aijproacli  mo  now. 
After  I am  delivered  of  this  seed  of  ITflija,  ilo  as  thou  thinkest  proper,  0 
Lord.”— 32-30. 

In  spite  of  her  remonstrance,  Bfihaspati,  even  though  ho  was  such 
a mighty  sage,  coiiM  not  cheek  his  passion,  and  forcibly  carried  out  his 
intention.  Wlien  he  was  about  to  emit  his  seed,  tlie  child  in  the  womb 
cried  out 37-3S. 

“ Sire  ! There  is  no  roi>m  for  two  souls  in  the  embryo  ; and  I have 
come  liere  before  ’ — 30. 

Hearing  lli(\se  words,  Brilia^pali  l)ecame  enraged,  and  thus  enrsed 
his  brotliers  sou  in  the  womb: — “ Von,  who  are  prtM'iit  in  tlie  embrvo  and 
are  putting  an  obstruction  in  my  way  of  onjoymoni,  will  siiiTer  from 
blindness.” — 10- Jl.  ' v 

Afterwards,  cm  aciajiint  of  lla'  »‘nrsf‘  nf  l>pha.sf»ati,  tin*  child  was  born 
blind  and  named  I^irghatam  «larknessl.  IbMvas  illu.strions  and 

persevering  like  Bfiliaspati.  -12. 

Dirgliatam  i settled  himself  in  tiie  lionseof  his  hiolher.  leading  a life 
of  total  celibacy.  Whilst  .so  dwelling,  he  learnt  From  a bull,  tlie  diharma  of 
the  cattle,  that  of  promiscuoii.«  inteiei  inve  withoui  reganl  to  rolatitinsliip. 
He  was  supported  hy  Ids  hroihej- and  i;noh‘  S»jnie(inie  after,  an  ox 
happened  to  go  there  n\'  li:>  ••vm  aer  a*  i,  and  begin  to  liim-cif  on  the 
Kuia  grass,  planted  lliere  h.a*  ^aoritieial  pur|HHe-,  when  I )irgliataina 
caught  him  l)y  tlie  liorns.  - l.3-Jd. 

The  ox,  thus  taken  hold  of  by  him,  could  not  extricate  himself  from 
his  grip,  and,  finding  in  a lieljdes.s  condition  said  : — ‘*0,  bravest 

of  the  brave  ! Lot  me  go.  f have  never  come  aero.H.s  a valiant  man  like 
you,  nor  was  there  any  fuie  as  powerful  as  iny>eir.  Now  leave  me.  f am 
pleased  with  you,  and  you  i-aii  ask  for  any  boon  from  me. — 10-47. 

DirghatainA  replied  : — AVliero  will  you  go,  so  long  as  I am  alive  ? 
I shall  not  let  you— the  enen/acher  on  (»ther’s  rights— go.” y-48. 

The  ox  said: — ‘'Sire!  1 have  commitUMl  neither  any  sin  nor  theft. 
There  is  no  hanl  and  fast  rule  laid  down  to  dictate  to  us,  aidmals,  what 
to  eat  and  wliat  not  to  oat,  what  to  drink  and  what  not  to  drink.  Many 
of  thege  dutie.s  arc  imposed  on  bipeds,  and  not  on  ns,  the  quadrupeds. 
We  are  not  guided  by  any  sucli  restrictions  as  to  what  should  be  done 
and  what  should  not  be  done ; and  wliom  we  should  approach  for  sexual 
inforoourse  and  whom  not.”— 4y-50, 


GUAPTER  XLVlll. 


143 


Sflta  said  : -Hearing  from  the  ox  the  natural  laws  of  cattle,  he  releas- 
ed him  from  his  grasp.  Afterwards,  he  fed  him  with  corn,  etc.— 51. 

On  tlic  ox  going  away  satisfied  with  the  repast,  Dirgliatama  began 
to  nieditate  on  the  natural  laws  of  cattle,  and  being  convinced  of  jts 
being  the  true  law,  ho  became  a devoted  follower  of  it.— 52. 

On  one  occasion  he  met  the  wife  of  liis  j^ounger  brothers  son, 
Gautama,  and,  in  spite  of  her  being  with  cliild,  he  taking  the  laws 
relating  to  cattle  to  be  of  superior  importance,  did  jiot  desist  from  her, 
and  caught  liold  of  her  with  a violent  jerk  and  enjoyed  himself  in  her 
company,  though  she  was  like  his  daughter-in-law  in  relation.  Knowing 
about  futurity,  he  began  to  dilate  upon  tlie  cattle  law,  when  that  lady 
said  : — “You  going  against  nature  arc  beljaving  like  an  ox,  and  without 
having  regard  for  the  rules  of  prohibited  relationships  iu  sexual  intercourse ; 
hut  following  the  natural  law  of  the  beast,  you  have  committed  an  incest 
on  your  dauglitci . Conseftueiitly,  I forsake  you  base  and  mean,  and  now 
go  away  ou  jiceiiiint  of  your  doings.’ — oS-tld. 

With  those  words,  she  paeke<l  him  in  a wooden  case  and  threw  him 
into  the  (langOH,  saying,  “ J abandon  you  «aiid  do  not  kill  you,  pityingt 
your  blindness  and  old  age."'— 57. 

'riiat  case,  after  a long  run,  was  drifted  asliore  and  w^as  taken  posses- 
sion of  by  Bali,  the  son  of  Virocliana.  Bali  made  over  the  contents  of 
the  case  to  his  queen,  where  he  was  taken  out  of  the  case  and  nourished 
with  various  kinds  of  dainties.  .Vfter  that,  he  told  Bali  that  he  would 
grant  him  any  boon  he  would  ask  for. — 58-o‘.h 

Bali,  the  king  of  the  Uaiiavas,  besought  liiin  to  beget  progeny  from 
his  wife. — *50. 

In  reply  to  the  request  of  the  king,  that  sage  said,  “ This  will  be  so ; 
hearing  which,  Bali  sent  his  queen,  Sudesna,  to  him  ; hut  she,  thinking  him 
to  be  old  and  blind,  did  not  approach  him.  She,  however,  sent  the  daughter 
of  her  nurse  who,  through  her  coiUact^vitli  that  sage,  gave  birth  to  Kak§i- 
vana  and  otliers. — 61-1)2. 

King  Bali,  feeing  the  J^utlra  sons,  Kaksivaiia,  etc.,  so  well  up  in  saint- 
ly precepts,  so  illuslrions,  so  sacred  and  so  versed  in  saintly  lore,  said  to 
Dirghatama  that  tliey  were  his  sons.  The  sage  said  they  were  not  the 
sons  of  Bali  and  claimed  them  to  be  bis  own,  on  account  of  their  having 
been  born  of  the  dudra  nurse  sent  by  the  queen,  who  herself  had  discarded 
liim  on  account  of  his  age  and  blindness.— 63-66. 

After  that,  King  Bali  appeased  that  sage  and  was  furious  witli  his 


144 


TEE  UAT8YA  PURANAM. 


wife ; and  sent  her  again  well-dressed,  after  her  toilet,  to  the  sage,  when 
the  seer  said.— 67-68. 

‘*0,  Devi ! Cast  off  your  bashfulness  and  then  lick  the  whole  of 
my  body  with  your  tongue,  after  rubbing  it  with  salt,  curds  and  honey  .; 
you  will  then  attain  your  wish  and  get  sons.’* — 69. 

The  queen  followed  the  directions  of  the  seer,  but  omitted  to  lick 
the  hind  private  parts. —70. 

When  the  sage  said  : “ 0,  blessed  one ! Your  eldest  son  will  be 
without  that  part  of  the  body  which  \’ou  have  omitted  to  lick.’* — 71. 

The  queen  said  Sire  ! It  is  not  worthy  of  you  to  bless  me  with 
such  an  offspring.  Be  pleased  at  my  devotif)n  and  show  your  mercy 
to  me.**—  72. 

Dirghatamii  said: — “ 0,  Blessed  one,  tlirough  your  fault  this  will 
happen  exactly  as  1 have  told  you  and  this  son  of  yours  '"ill  not  delight 
you  in  any  way,  but  your  grandson  will  ; he  will,  however,  not  feel  the 
necessity  of  the  missing  part  of  his  body.”  Then  the  sage,  touching  her 
abdomen,  said,  ”0,  queen  beaiuso  you  have  licked  all  parts  of  my  bod^r 
except  the  privates,  y<nu’  sons  will  belike  tlie  full  moon,  and,  in  all  you 
will  be  blessed  with  five  sons  of  Divine  beauty  who  will  be  most  illustri- 
ous, renowned,  righteous  arid  performers  of  soerifices.” — 73-71). 

Suta  said  : — 0 Bisis,  f^iidesna  begot,  tlirough  tlio  favour  of  Dirglia- 
tama,  Afiga,  the  eldest,  along  with  his  brothers,  Kalifiga,  Ihi/idra,  Siiliuma, 
and  VafigarAja.  Thus  the  sage  begot  tlie  above-named  five  sons  to  the. 
king  Bali.— 77-78. 

Afterwards,  the  sage  took  all  tlie  five  sons  through  a course  of 
ceremony,  enjoined  on  all  the  twice-born,  'fhus  that  posterity  was 
begotten. — 79. 

Then  the  divine  cow  Surabhi  said  to  Diraghataina : — “ As  you 
followed  the  cattle  law  deliberately  and  took  it  to  be  superior  to  all, 
0,  sinless  ! I am  very  much  pleased  with  you  and  hereby  remove  your 
blindness  by  smelling  you.  The  sin  of  B|*ihaspati  is  inherent  in  you. 
I however  relieve  you  of  your  old  age,  death  and  loss  of  vision,  by  merely 
smelling  you.’*— 80-82. 

That  sage  was  instantly  restored  to  his  vision  after  being  smelled 
by  Surabhi,  and  got  a long  lease  of  life,  along  with  beautiful  eyes  and 
form.  He  came  to  be  known  as  Gautama,  on  account  of  his  being  relieved 
of  his  blindness  by  (the  smelling  of)  the  cow.  Afterwards,  Kfik^ivfina,  th< 
non  of  that  ^udra  nurse,  went  with  his  father,  DirgbatamA,  to  Oirivraja 


OBAPfER  XLVIIL 


145 


and  after  seeing  and  touching  liiin  practised  penances  for  a long  time,  and 
in  the  fulness  of  time,  through  his  asceticism,  he  pin  ifTed  the  body  obtained 
from  n i^iidi'a  mother  and  became  a Brahnuina,  at  wliicii  Iiis  father  told 
him  : “ I consider  myself  to-day  blessed  with  a son  tliroiigh  you,  and  0 
pious  one  ! I feel  blessed  on  getting  a righteous  and  renowned  son  like  you, 
who  after  casting  off  his  previous  sheath,  has  became  a Brahmaua.”—84-87. 

Kak^iv&tin,  on  becoming  a Brahmana  begot  a thousand  sons,  who 
came  to  be  known  as  Kausamanda  and  Gautamas. — 88. 

Thus  the  circumstances  bringing  Bali,  the  son  of  Virrocl)ana,  into 
contact  with  the  sage,  DIrgliatama,  as  well  as  the  family  of  Bali,  have  been 
explained. — 89. 

Bali  said  to  his  five  pious  sons  that  lie  considered  himself  highly 
blessed  on  having  them  as  his  sons  ; and  then  encasing  himself  in  iiis 
Yoga  Maya,  ho  became  invisible  to  all,  and  began  to  wait  for  the  predict- 
ed period,  in  the  Patalapuri.— 90. 

The  son  of  Aftga  was  the  King  Dadhivahana.  Dadliivahana’s  son 
was  King  Uiviratha,  who  begot  the  learned  Dharinoratha. — 91-92. 

That  Dharmoratlia  the  great,  drank  tlie  draught  of  nectar  witli  tlie 
seer  jJukra,  on  the  Visnnpada  mount ; after  which  he  became  the  fatlier  of 
Chitraratha,  who  begot  Satyaratlia,  the  father  of  Dasanitha,  who'  is  also 
known  as  Lomapada.  He  was  the  father  of  a girl,  named  S^anta  aud  a 
renowned  son,  named  Chatura/iga — 93-95. 

Chatura&ga,  through  the  blessings  of  the  sage  iSriftgi,  was  the 
promoter  of  his  clan.  He  was  the  father  of  Prithuljlksa,  who  begot 
Champa,  after  whose  name  the  country  Champapuri  is  known.  It  fii-st 
belonged  to  Mali. — 97. 

Chanipaka,  through  the  favour  of  Purnabliadra,  begot  Haryaftga,  the 
father  of  Viblianda,  who  begot  Vnrana,  the  resister  of  his  foes,  who  made 
the  celestial  conveyances  descend  on  earth  llirough  his  supernatural 
powei*s.  Haryaftga  was  the  father  Bhadraratha,  who  begot  the  King^ 
Bfihatkarmfi,  the  father  of  Bjihatbhanu. — 98-100. 

Bjfikatbhdnu  was  the  father  of  Jayadratha,  wliose  son  was  Brihadratha. 
Janamejaya,  the  great  conquerer,  was  the  son  of  Bi*ihadrat.ha,  who  became 
the  father  of  the  King  Aftga,  the  father  of  Karna.— 101-102. 

Kariia  became  the  father  of  V|isasena  wlio  begot  Pt'ithuseiia. 
“Ilisis!  1 have  enumerated  to  you  the  family  of  Aft|[a;iu)w  f shall 
relate  to  you  the  family  of  Pur u.”— 103. 

The  eaid Sftta ! How  is  it  that  Karfia  is  said  to  be  the  s6d 


18 


146 


THE  MAfSYA  PDRAVAti. 


of  Sflta,  wlien  you  say  that  lie  was  the  sou  of  Afiga  ? We  wish  to  know 
about  it,  for  you  aio  an  expert  in  these  matters. — 104. 

Sata  said  : — Bphailbhanu  begot  a son,  called  B|‘ihanmana,  who  had 
two  queens,  vis, ; — Yasodevi  and  Satya,  the  daughters  of  the  king  Saivya. 
-105. 

Jayadratha  was  born  of  Yasodevi,  and  Vijaya  was  born  of  Satya. — 106. 

Bfihat  was  the  son  of  Vijaya  and  the  father  of  B|*ihadratha,  who 
begot  SatyakarniA,  tlio  father  of  Adhiratha,  who  was  the  [Suta]  chariot- 
driver  of  Satyakarina.  He  had  nurtured  Karna,  the  son  of  Afiga,  and  so 
Karna  is  known  as  the  son  of  Suta  also. — 108. 

Here  ends  the  forty-ci{jhth  chapter  dealing  with  the  family 
of  Soma  and  the  founiU}tg  of  the  Eastern  dominions. 


CHAPTEH  XLIX. 

Puru  was  tlio  father  of  the  u\n>t  iliusirioiis  Janamejaya  wlio  begot 
PrAchitvata  ap.d  ruled  in  the  East,  and  gave  his  name  to  the  Eastern 
quarter  (Pn.chi  ineaiiR  East  . — 1. 

Prachitvata  became  ih^*  father  (»f  ?daiiasyu,  who  begot  Pitayudha, 
whose  heir  was  Dhundhn,  whoso  son  was  Bah uvidha,  tlio  father  of  Sainpati. 

-2-3. 

Sampati  b^'got  Baljainvarc]}  1,  t!io  f.uiier  of  Bhadrasva,  who  begot  from 
the  Apsara,  naino<l,  DljiifM.  bn  sms,  rr..,  Auelieyi^  Hriseyn,  Kaksej’u, 
Saneyu,  Dhriteyn,  Vir.eyn,  Sdudfvn,  Dhnrmoyn,  vSannteyn  and  Piineyn. 
Jvalana,  the  dangliler  ^f  d’ak-aka,  bncamo  tiie  wife  of  .Ancheyn,  from 
whom  he  begot  the  Kin*::  Antinaia  .anothoi  reading  is  Ifantinilra),  who 
became  the  father  of  iiiany  !^»ood  son^:^  through  iiis  qnemi,  Manasvini.  The 
heroic  Amunarayas.  the  i?ions  Tiivana,  and.  tliird,  a daughter,  named 
Ganri.  who  afterwai'Is  ber’ame  the  inothcr  of  Mandhata,  (were  born  to 
^him). — 4-8. 

TlinS,  tlio  dangliter  of  Yamn,  who  was  an  auspicious  lady  (and  was 
another  queen  of  Anfinara).  hogot  sons  who  were  giffed  with  Divine 
knowledge. — 0. 

The  son  of  Hina  begot  four  sons  throngli  his  wife  UpadSnavi,  nis., 
Ri^j^anta,  Dusyanta,  Prnvira  and  Anaglin. — 10. 

Dnfiyanta  Iwanie  tlio  fatlior  of  a world-conquering  and  Universal 
Emperor,  Bharata,  from  his  wife  ^akuntahi,  whose  descendants  are  called 
Bh&rfttas. — 11. 


on  AFTER  XLITL. 


147 


To  the  King  Du^yantn,  an  incorporeal  Voice  thus  aihlressed: — 
“ Mother  is  like  a pair  of  bellows  to  the  father,  from  whom  the  son  is 
born.  The  son  is  thus  identical  with  tlie  father.  Tlierefore,  0 Itu^yaiita! 
foster  your  son  and  do  not  di-scard  l^akuntal^.  The  son  raises  his  deceased 
father  back  from  the  hell  of  Yaiiia  to  heaven.  TIinu  art  the  generator  of 
this  child.  What  l^ukuntala  said  is  true.  -12-13. 

Thus  Bharata  was  born  of  l^akuiitala  and  Dn>yanta.  In  ancient 
times,  when  all  the  sons  of  Bharata  perished,  tlirnugh  a widespread  and 
virulent  epidemic,  brought  on  by  tho  wrath  of  the  Goddess  Mdtrikft 
[?  smallpox],  then  the  Marut  Devas  brought  Bharadv.nja,  the  son  of 
Bfibaspati,  and  gave  him  to  Bharata. — 14-15. 

The  sages  said  : — ‘Suta!  Please  explain  to  us  fully  how  the  Marut 
Devas  gave  the  most  illustrious  Bharadvilja  to  Bharata.” — 16. 

Suta  said  : — Bfihaspati,  whilst  slaying  on  Earth,  one  day  saw  the  wife 
of  his  brother,  Wija,  who  was  big  Avith  child,  and  addressed  her  thus: — 
“ Dress  thj'sclf  well  and  let  us  enjoy.”  She,  being  thus  addressed,  replied 
to  Brihaspati  thus  : — ” Tlie  embryo  in  my  womb  is  mature  and  is  already 
reciting  the  Vedas,  Thy  seed  will  also  not  be  fruitless  and  thy  proposal  is 
sinful.”  Hearing  which,  Bfihaspati  said  : — ” I need  not  be  taught  morality 
by  thee,  0 sweet  one.”  After  saying  that,  he  carried  out  his  desire  by 
force ; when  on  the  verge  of  his  final  enjoyment,  the  child  from  her  womb 
cried  out  to  Bfihaspati : — ” I have  entered  the  womb  first,  0 Bfihaspati, 
thy  seed  will  also  not  go  in  vain.  There  is  no  room  for  a second  body  in 
this  womb.”  Bfihaspati  being  thus  addressed  by  the  child  in  the  womb, 
replied  in  anger : — “ Because  on  such  an  occasion,  dear  to  every  creature, 
thou  preventest  me  from  enjoyment,  thou  shouldst  see  lasting  darkness 
[Dirgbatamas].”  -17-28. 

Afterwards,  Bfihaspati  cast  his  seed  on  the  floor  which  at  once 
became  a child  ; seeing  whom,  MamatA  said  to  Bfihaspati,  “lam  going 
home,  you  should  support  [Bbara]  this  child  [born  of  us  two  (dvfija)],  0 
Bfihaspati.” — 24-25.  ' * 

Afterwards,  she  went  away,  and  the  child  was  also  given  up  by 
Bfihaspati.  Seeing  the  child  thus  forsaken  by  both  his  father  and 
mother,  the  Maruts,  through  pity,  carried  that  child,  Bharadvaja,  to 
Bharata.—  26. 

At  the  same  time.  King  Bharata  performed  a big  sacrifice  to  beget  a 
progeny,  but  his  object  was  not  gained.  Then  he  performed  the  Marut- 
Boma  sacrifice,  when  the  Marut  Devas  becoming  pleased  Avith  the  devotion 
of  thp  king,  gave  him  the  child  Bharadv&ja.  In  that  way,  the  Marut  Devas 


THE  MAT8YA  PURAVAM. 


m 

presented  this  son  of  Biihasputi,  the  son  of  Aftgiras,  to  tlio  king  Bhnmta/ 

-r27.30. 

Bharata  on  getting  BharaclvSja  said  I consider  myself  blessed 
bn  getting  you.*— 31. 

Bharadvftja  was  named  Vitatlia  [futile],  owing  to  his  being  futile 
as  a son,  for  he  never  entered  the  mother* a womb.  The  Br&hmainias  and 
K^atriyas  born  on  this  Earth  of  Bharadvaja,  came  to  be  known  as  Dvyft- 
mnsy&yana  Kanltnas.  When  Vitatha  was  thus  brought  to  Bharata,  then 
Bharata  went  to  heaven,  and  the  sage  Bharadvilja  also  went  there,  after 
anointing  his  son.-  33-34. 

Vitatha  begot  the  renowned  Bhuvainan.vana,  who  liad  four  f.imons 
sons,  viz.,  Brihatksatra,  Mahavirya,  Nara  and  frarga  Mara  hecame  the  father 
of  Safikfiti,  who  begot  Maliavarfa,  who.  through  Satkriti,  had  two  sons, 
named  Gurudhi  and  Rantideva.  Garga’s  h(*lr  was  tli*'  leai  ncd  l^ibi,  wluiso 
sons,  k?)own  as  rfaihyas  and  Gar.rrns.  woro  tuiefd>n’n  Ks.ntriyas  as  well 
as  Brahmanas.  Urnk^vafa  was  rln*  W'ufhy  >t){i  of  Ahlrya  « .Maiiavirya)  who 
begot,  thruigl]  Vistula,  tliroo  sons,  named  Triyiisna,  Pnskari  and  Kavi, 
and  they  became  Brnlnnanai^  ami  wore  railed  Urfiksavas,  and  these  three 
were  the  highest  Risis  onumg^t  K*ivva<?.  — 

Ihe  Gargas,  tin*  Snfikrilayfis  and  tlie  K’irynrt  are  Iwice-horn 
Brahmanas  wdtli  Ksafrlya  strain  in  lliem.  TLey  were  all  very  learned. 
Ksiti,  the  son  of  Hj'ilnitk'atra,  is  known  as  llasti.  Ht'  was  the  founder  of 
yore,  of  the  city,  Ciilled  flajas'ilivnya  tliastin.-pnra^  Hasli  luul  three  sons 
of  great  glory,  nnined,  Ajaniidji  i.  l)'viniidlia,  and  Vnrnnijdha.  Ajamidha 
had  three  wives,  born  of  Kuni  clan.  Xiiini,  himi-'lni  and  Xc'?iini. — 41-44. 

From  his  wives,  Ajamidlia  b(*got  sons  of  hhirie  lustre;  because 
they  ivere  born  to  him  in  his  ohl  agr,  on  the  completion  of  liis  asceticism; 
therefore,  they  were  very  ])ions  and  p^oweifnl.  d'hey  were  all  born  through 
the  blessings  of  Bharadvaja.  Hoar  now  tlieir  names  in  detail.  ■-  15-46. 

.Ajrnidha  begot  from  Kr-sin?,  Tva»jvu,  who  became  the  father  of 
MSdhatithi,  the  progenitor  t'»f  the  Kanvaya  edan  of  BiAhmanas ; from  his 
wife  Dhumini,  Aimidha  begot  the  Ki»!g  Brihadanu,  who  was  the  father  of 
Brihamta,  wlio  begot  Bidlianfrian  i tlie  father  of  Brihadhann.  who  begot 
Brihaditju,  the  fatlier  of  Jayadraf.ha,  who  begot  Arfviijit,  the  father  of 
Semajit,  who  Inid  four  world-famous  sons,  viz.,  Ruchirarfva,  K&vya,  King 
Dhridaratha  and  Vataaraja. — 17-50. 

VatHar;ij&  was  tlm  foumler  of  the  dynasty  of  Pavivatsaka,  and 
Ruchiraifva  became  the  father  of  Prithusena,  who  begot  Paura  the  father 
of  Nlpa,  who  begot  one  hundred  valiant  sons,  wlio  all  were  known  as 
NlpAs.  Among  them  ^riuiclna  was  the  most  renowned.— 51-53. 


OH  AFTER  XLIZ. 


149 


KSvya  begot  Samara,  who  was  only  fond  of  wars  ; and  he  begot  three 
sons,  namely,  Pdra,  SaippAra,  and  Sadniva.  Tliey  were  renowned  as  great 
men  in  the  world,  and  oC  them  Pilra  begot  Ppthu,  the  father  of  Hukt'ita, 
who  begot  VibhrAja  of  versatile  genius,  who  became  the  father  of  Anuha, 
who  was  the  son-in-iaw  of  l^ukra  and  the  husband  of  Kritvl.  Apuba  begot 
Brahmadatta,  the  father  of  Yugadatta,  who  begot  Vi^vakasena  who,  again, 
came  back  to  this  Earth  on  acconut  of  bis  good  deeds. — o4-d8. 

Visvaksena  begot  Udakasetia,  the  father  of  Bhalhita  who  begot  Jana* 
mejaya.  UgrAyudha,  for  the  sake  of  Janarpejaya,  tlien  put  an  end  to  the 
family  of  Nlpa  kings.— 59. 

The  Ilisis  said  : — “ Suta  ! Whose  son  was  Ugr^yudha,  and  in  what 
family  was  he  born,  and  why  did  he  annihilate  the  Nipa  Kings?  Pray  tell 
as  all  that  fully.” — 60. 

iSuta  said  : — UgrAyudha  was  horn  in  the  Solar  dynasty  and  practised 
penances  f(»r  eighteen  thousand  years,  when  ho  was  dried  up  like  a pillar. 
King  Janarnejaya  adored  liini  for  getting  kingdom  ; and  he,  after  promis- 
ing kingdom  to  him,  killed  the  Nipas.  Once,  the  Nipas  attacked  the 
lii^i  fjgrajnidha  and  Janainejayn,  who  was  serving  him  in  his  Afilrama. 
Ugr&yudha  addressed  the  Nipas  with  many  conciliatory  speeches,  but 
they,  heedless  of  them,  injured  them.  Then  Ugrayudha,  when  being 
thus  injured,  addressed  them:— “Since  yon  have  not  paid  heed  to  ray 
words  asking  protection  and  safety  from  you,  therefore,  I curse  you 
thus:  May  you  all  be  taken  away  by  Yaina,  if  tliere  is  any  force  in  my 
asceticism.”  After  that,  they  were  all  taken  before  tl)e  God  of  Death. 
Seeing  which,  Ugrayudha,  overcome  with  pity,  said  : “ Janamejaya,  you 
are  worthy  of  rescuing  these  misguided,  but  brave  men  ;”  hearing  which 
Janamejaya  began  to  fight  Yama,  after  crying  out  to  his  victims,  “0, 
sinners  ! become  the  slaves  of  Ugrayudha.” — 62-66. 

Strange  to  say,  Janamejaj’a  vanquislied  liis  foe  and  captured  Yama, 
along  with  hells  and  their  tortures. — 67. 

The  God  of  Death,  becoming  pleased  at  the  end,  gave  the  knowledge 
of  emancipation  to  Janamejaya,  after  which  all  the  Nipas  went  to  Lord 
Kfisna.— 68, 

One  who  hears  , their  history  does  not  die  an  unnatural  death,  but 
attains  bliss  in  both  the  worlds. — 69.* 

Now  the  family  from  Dhiimin!— another  queen  of  Ajaraidha. 

’^The  translation  of  vei^ses  62-60  is  tentative  only.  The  passage  is  very  obscure, 
and  not  found  in  many  Mss, 


150'*  " THE  a ATS? A PURANAiiy 

— — ' - — ' -Nw*-*  ■■■  ■ n ir 

•1. 

Ajanildlm  bogot  from  lua  wife,  Dluiininf,  learned  Ynvlnara,  who 
became  the  fatlier  of  Dhritiman,  who  begot  Salyadliiiti,  the  father  of 
the  valiant  Dridhanemi.— 70. 

Dl'icDmnemi  becanio  the  father  of  Siulliarrna,  who  begot  the  illuatrious 
Sarvabhaiima,  who  became  tlie  world-emperor,  and  Miliapanravii  was 
born  in  his  famous  family.  MahApaurava  begot  the  King  Riikmaratha, 
the  father  of  Siipaisva,  wIkj  begot  ll'.e  l iglitcoiis  Smnati,  the  father  of 
Sannatimana,  who  begot  Kiita,  wiio  became  the  disciple  of  Hiranyanabhi 
Kau!Jalya.--7l-r5. 

This  Kfita  was  the  promnlgtiltn*  of  twentyfoiir  kinds  of  Sama  Vedic 
Samhitf^,  and  the  chanter  of  these  Sfimas  came  to  bo  known  as  Eastern 
KarUsamagaa.—  70. 

Ugrayudlia  was  tlio  son  of  Kiita,  and  was  known  as  Karti.  He  was 
the  promoter  of  his  family,  and  it  was  he  wlio  killed  the  father  of  P|'ithu 
by  his  valour. — 77.  ^ 

That  fatlier  of  IVithn  wa^>  Nila,  tin*  kinc  «)f  tlie  PAucliAla,  and  Ksoma 
the  renowned,  was  the  son  of  I -grr vndha.*  7«>. 

Ksema  tvas  the  fatlier  of  Snnitha,  w]io  begot  Xilpaijaya,  (he  father 
of  Viratha.  I'liis  coiiipl(‘tes  the  line  of  (he  Paurava  Kings.-- 7il, 

Here  ends  the  fortij-iunth  clttifU  r dt  ficrihinfj  the  Paiiraia  dynasty. 


CHAPTER  ].. 

Suta  said  : — Ajamiddia  bf-g-a  from  Nilini,  Xila,  who  was  tlie  fatlier  of 
Susilnti,  through  his  severe  an^-tciiiies.  Sn.smti  begot  ParnjAiui.  (lie  fatlier 
of  Prithu,  who  begot  BhadrAs^va.  Now  listen  to  the  jirogeny  of  BhadrA^va. 
He  had  five  sons,  namely,  Miid.galn,  day.i,  Bjihadi.s\i,  Javihara  and  Eapila. 
They  all  five,  it  is  heard,  wore  t!io  kings  in  difTer'^mt  parts  of  the  Panchala 
and  ruled  with  righteousness.  Hence  tiieir  country  was  culled  PanchAla, 
or  ruled  by  the  five.  Thus  we  liave  heard. — 1-4. 

The  sons  of  AIndgala  became  BrAlimanas  from  Ksatri3^as  and  were 
founders  of  the  family  of  Alaudgalyas.  .Mandgalas  and  Kanvas,  mentioned 
before,  were  the  followers  of  the  school  of  Afigira. — f). 

Mudgala  begot  the  renowned  Brahmisiha,  the  father  of  Indrnsena, 
who  begot  VindlnnWva,  the  father  of  a pair  of  twins,  called  Divodasa  and 
the  daughter  AhilyA,  from  his  wife  Menaktl. — C-7. 

Ahilya  begot  the  famous  Uisi,  S^atanauda,  who  was  the  son  of  Sarftd* 


oUAPfEn  L.  ■ i$i 

l^aCAnanda  begot  Sa^adlipti,  who  was  a famous  archer.  He  was  the 
father  of  Amogliavirya.'— 9.  ^ 

At  the  ftiglit  of  a nymph,  Satyarllifiti  cast  hissee<l  in  a pool  of  water, 
out  of  which,  one  son  and  a daughter  were  born. — 10. 

At  the  same  time,  King  Saiitanu  chanced  to  go  for  a hunt  and,  seeing 
the  babies,  took  pity  on  them  and  brought  tliem  with  him. — U. 

AH  tliose  sons  of  S^aradvaua  came  to  be  known  as  Gautamas.  Now 
the  family  of  Divodasa  will  be  narrated. — 12- 

Mitrayu  was  tlioson  of  Divoflasa,  and  he  begot  Slaitreya,  the  founder 
of  the  family  of  Maitrayanas.  They  were  all  Ksatriyas,  but  became  Bh&r- 
gava  Bnlhraarias,  belonging  to  the  gotra  Yati.  King  Chaidyavara  was  the 
son  of  Maitreya. — 13-14. 

Cliaidyavara  became  the  father  of  the  learned  Sudftsa,  who  begot 
Ajamldha  the  secoiid,  the  father  of  Soinaka,  who  begot  Janla.  From  him, 
hundred  sons  were  born  in  tlie  line  of  Ajainidha  and  Somaka.  When 
Sornaka  was  killed,  then  Dhumini,  the  wife  of  Ajamidha,  practised  most 
trying  and  rigid  penances  on  the  loss  of  her  promising  son.  She  went  to 
sleep,  after  duly  performing  Agnihotra  and  iinishing  her  meals. — 15-18. 

Ajamldha  then  enjoyed  liimsclf  with  Dliflmini,  when  she  begot  smoke 
colored  llik.sa,  the  valiant.  Uiksa  begot  Sairivarana,  the  father  of  Kuril,  who 
forsaking  Prayaga,  built  up  Kuruksotra.  lie  practised  long  asceticism  to 
call  India,  who  at  last  appeared  before  him  out  of  fear  and  granted  him 
a boon. — 15-21. 

It  is  for  this  reason  that  Kiireksetra  is  so  sacred.  The  faiinly  of 
Kiiru  multiplied  ; tlie  members  of  which  came  to  be  known  as  the  Kaura- 
vas.  Tlie  five  favourite  sons  of  Kuru,  viz.,-  Sudhanva,  Jahnu,  Pariksita, 
Prajana  and  Arimardana  were  all  very  pious  and  illustrious. — 22-23. 

Sudlianvii  begot  Chyavana,  who  was  very  learned,  and  he  became 
the  father  of  Uiksa,  who  begot  Krinii,  the  great  ascetic,  who  was  the 
father  of  Chaidyoparicliara,  also  kmiwn  as  Vasn.  He  was  a remarkable 
warrior  like  Indra,  and  had  the  power  of  traversing  the  sky.  He  begot 
from  Girik0.  the  following  seven  issues,  named  Maharatha,  known  also  as 
Bi'ihadratha,  King  of  Magadha  (Bihar);  PratiaifravA  ; Kusfa;  Harivfihana; 
was  the  fourth  ; Yaju  was  the  fifth  ; Matsya  and  a daughter,  named  K&li 
who  was  the  seventh.  Briliadratha  was  the  father  of  Kiutagra,  wlio  begot 
Vri§abha,  the  father  of  King  Punyavana,  who  begot  the  King  Punya,  the 
father  of  Satyadhfita,  who  begot  Dlmiiusn,  the  father  of  Sarva,  who  begot 
Saqibbava,  the  father  of  the  King  Briliadratha.  Brihadratha’s  son  was 
born  in  two  parts,  which  Jar&  joined  together  (Sandhita),  who,  on  account 


' — I,--- f..- ■ f-  

of  being  joined  by  Jar4,  came  to  be  known  as  JarAsandha.  Ho  was  the 
conqueror  of  all  tlieTKsatriyas. — 24-32. 

’ JarAsandha  begot  tlie  illustrious  Saliadeva,  the  father  of  the 
illustrious  Soinavi,.  who  was  a great  ascetic.  SutasravA  was  the  son  of 
8oiXk&vi  Thus  the  Kings  of  Afagadiia  have  been  described. — 33. 

King  Jahnu  was  the  father  of  the  King  Suratha,  who  begot  Vidfl- 
ratha,  the  father  of  Sarvabhauina,  who  begot  Jayatsena,  the  father  of 
Ruchira,  who  begot  Bhauina,  the  father  of  Tvaritayu,  who  begot  Akrodhana, 
the  father  of  Devatithi,  wlio  begot  Uaksa,  the  father  of  liliimasena,  who 
begot  Dilipa,  the  father  of  Pratipa,  who  was  tlic  father  of  three  sons,  viz., 
Devapi,  iSantanu,  Balilika.  Bahlika  was  the  father  of  tlie  seven  sons, 
known  as  BahlWvarHS.  Devapi,  forsaken  by  his  subjects  turned  a muni. 
-34-39. 

The  Uisis  asked  SQta  ! Why  was  tl»e  King  Devapi  forsaken  by  his 
subjects.  For  what  fault  of  his  did  the  subjects  not  accept  liiiri?’* — 40. 

Suta  said  Tliat  prince  Devapi  became  a leper,  and  that  is  wliy  ho 
was  forsaken  by  everyboily.  Now  1 will  narrate  the  future  family  of 
Sautanu  \as  given  in  the  Bhavi^ya  PurAiiaj.  - 41. 

King  ^antanu  was  a very  learned  physician,  and  was  highly 
accomplished.  It  is  laid  down  in  the  books  on  mediciiie  tliat  by  his 
mere  touch  even  the  patient  suffering  from  a most  dreadful  disease  would 
be  instantly  cured  and  become  young.  Ho  was  fur  that  reason  known  as 
^antanu.  He  married  the  sacretl  Ganges. —42-41. 

4Vote.->S&atanu  meaas  the  lieaicr  of  the  body. 

iSantanu  begot,  from  Jalinavi,  the  famous  Devavrata ; and  from 
his  second  wife,  Satyavatl,  tue  daughter  of  a fisiierman,  lie  begot  KAli  and 
Vichitravirya.^  The  favourite  and  .sinless  sun  of  fclantanu,  namely,  Vichit- 
ravirya,  had  <lied  childless,  and,  consequently,  Krisna  DvaipAyana  was 
appointed  to  produce  a sou  on  the  widow  of  Vicliitravirya.  He  thus 
begot  three  sons,  uanie<l  Dhritarys.tra,  IViiulu,  and  Vidura.  Dhritara^tra 
begot  one  hundred  .sons,  from  Gaiidhari,-— 45-47. 

Of  his  hundred  sons  Duryodliana  was  the  most  remarkable.  P&c^u 
had  Kunti  and  Aladri  as  his  wives.— 48. 

Then  became  tlie  father  of  the  five  sons,  given  to  him  by  the 

Devas,  viz.,  Yudhis(hira,  from  Dharnm;  Bhiina,  from  Vayu,  Arjuna,  from 
Indra.  From  his  second  wife,  Mudri,  Paijidii  got  Nakula  and  Saliadeva, 
through  the  two  gods  AsSwini.  -49-50. 

* This  8sl3»vati,  while  still  a maiden,  had  given  birth  to  Vodavyftss,  through  Btfi 


dkAPTBB  t 


m 


The  five  sons  of  Panju  had  Draupadi,  as  their  common  wife,  from 
whom  Yudlii§thira  begot  Prativindhya,  Bhtina  begot  i^rutasena,  Arjuiia 
begot  l^rutnktrti,  Sahadeva  begot  £$ruta  Karma  and  Kakuia  begot  Sataiiika^. 
Thus  Draupadi  begot  those  five  sons  to  the  Pai)davas,  and  they  are  known 
as  Drauapadeyiis.  The  five  Pa^d^vas  also  begot  another  half  a cU)zen 
sons,  in  addition  to  thoso  five  born  of  Draupadi.  Tliey  are  known  as 
Papdaveyas  to  distinguish  them  from  Draupadeyas.  Thus,  Bhima  begot 
from  the  Asura  girl  Hidamba,  a son,  called  Ghatotkacha  and  Sarvaga 
from  Karfi ; Saliadova  begot  Siihotra  from  Ids  wife  iladri ; and  Nakulafrom 
Karenumali  begot  Niramitra.  Arjiina  begot  from  Suljhadra,  Abhimanyu, 
and  Yudhiijtldra  begot  a son,  named  Yaudlieyn,  from  Devaki.*-  51-56. 

Pariksit,  tbe  conqueror  of  enemies*  towns,  was  the  son  of  Abhi- 
manyu, and  he  became  the  father  of  Janamejaya,  the  Pious.  When 
Jananiejaya  favored  liisi  Yajnavalkya,  wdioin  lie  appointed  as  his  Brahrn& 
priest  at  the  Sacrifice,  then  the  sage  Vaii^ampayana  cursed  him  to 
the  effect:  “The  innovations  introduced  by  you  0 man  of  perverted 
intelligence,  will  not  be  respected.  They  will  be  honored  only  so  long  as 
thou  wilt  remain  on  earth.“--57-59. 

Thus  all  the  subjects,  seeing  the  Victory  of  Ksatriyas  over  the 
Brfihmapas,  flocked  round  the  King  Janamejaya.  From  tliat  day’s  curse 
the  priests  officiating  at  sacrifices  performed  by  K?atriyas  began  to  decline 
and  refused  to  attend  on  occasions  of  their  sacrifices. - CO-Cl. 

When,  after  finishing  the  sacrifiee  of  Prajnpati,  on  a full-moon  day, 
Janamejaya  was  entering  the  hall  of  Sacrifice,  he  was  prevented  from 
doing  so,  by  Vaisampuyaiia,  but  the  former  did  lu't  heed  him.  On  the 
contrary,  Janamejaya,  the  son  of  Pariksit,  after  performing  two  Arfva- 
medha  sacrifices,  became  a great  VAjasaneyaka,  and  went  to  the  forest 
on  account  of  his  being  cursed  for  entering  into  hostility  with  the 
Bnthmanaa. — 62-64. 

l^at&nika,  the  son  of  Janamejaya,  was  very  valiant;  and  he  was 
anointed  and  proclaimed  king  by  Janamejaya;  iSatanika  begot  the  most 
illustrious  Adhisoma  K|isna,’‘^  by  performing  arfvamedha  sacrifice. — 65-66. 

Sflta  said:  — liisis ! This  Adhisoma  Kri^na  is  reigning  now  ; and  it 
is  in  his  reien  that  you  have  engaged  in  this  big  sacrificial  session,  of 
which  three  years  have  passed  in  Pu§kara  and  two  years  in  Kuruk&etra 
and  Dritfadvati. — 67. 

The  Risis  said  Suta  ! all  this  is  past  history  now.  We  wish  to  hear 
something  about  the  future  kings.  Pray  tell  us  about  the  kings  who  will 

* Mr.  Pargitor,  in  his  Dynasties  of  the  Kali  age,  p.  4,  note  LO.  says  that  the  oorreot 
name  is  **  Adhisima  Krifpa" 

SO 


, TBS  puhaiSaM:  _ ■ 

the  rulers  of  the  land.  Be  pleased  to  tell  us  their  names  and  duration 
of  their  reigns;  please  also  tell  us  the  extent  of  Satya,  Tretft,  Dv&- 
para  and  Kaliyugas,  and  also  explain  to  us  about  the  prosperity,  adveraity 
and  vices  of  those  ages.”— 68-71. 

♦ Sflta  said  :—Ri§i3 ! listen,  while  I narrate  all  which  have  not  yet 
come  to  pass,  as  told  to  me  by  Vyasa,  of  untiring  energy,  both  with 
regard  to  the  future  Kaliyuga  ainl  tlie  Jklaiivanlaras.  After  that,  1 shall 
tell  you  of  the  future  kings.— 72-73. 

I shall  narrate  the  kings  who  arc  to  bo  in  the  families  of  Aila  and 
Ik^taku,  as  well  as  in  the  faiuily  of  Paurani,  among  whom,  tlie  auspicious 
stock  of  the  Aila  and  Iksv4ku  families  was  ostablishcd.  All  that  I sliall 
declare,  as  mentioned  in  tlic  Bhavisya  [Purnna].— 74. 

Besides  these,  other  kings  will  also  arise,  belonging  to  the  castes  of 
KaattrAs,  Parana vas,  and  iiut Inis  as  well  as  those  who  are  outside  these 
[foreigners];  namely,  Andhras,  iJakas,  Piilindas,  Chulik/is,  Yavamis, 
Kaivartas,  Abliiras  and  S^abaras,  an  I those  having  a !Mleehchha  origin.  I 
shall  <leclare  those  kings,  aecording  to  their  sneee.sslou  and  by  name. 
-75-76. 

Note According  to  Mr.  Oargibor,  blio.so  lines  follow  after  tho  words  Mlochcha 
origin”  ui?.,  Pa'iravas,  Vitihobras,  VtiidisAs,  ftvo  (Panchiilas  'f\  KosaUs,  Mokalfts,  Kostalas, 
Paundras  and  Svasphrakas,  Sunidharmas,  Sdkas,  Nipas.’' 

Adhisoina  Krisna  is  the  first  king,  and  1 shall  first  relate  to  you 
his  dynasty,  as  told  in  the  Hhavisy.i  [Pnr.'ina].— 77. 

Adliisoina  Krisna  shall  have  Vivak^u'^’  for  his  .son,  and  after  Ilastinfi- 
pura  is  washed  away  by  tlie  Ganges,  the  latter  shall  make  Kauiambi  his 
capital,  and  lie  shall  bo  the  father  of  eight  powerful  sons.  —78-79. 

Blidri  will  be  the  oldest  and  shall  lieget  Chitraratha,  the  father  of 
i^uchidrava,  who  shall  beget  Vrisn i man,  the  father  of  King  Su§ena,  who 
shall  beget  Sanitha,  'the.  fatiior  uf  KucJia,  who  will  be)  the  father  of 
Nrichak«ju,t  who  shall  beget  Sukhibala,  the  father  of  Pari^nava,  who  will 
beget  SutapA,  the  father  of  Medh'ivi ; and  Puranjaya  will  be  the  son  of 
the  latter,  and  the  father  of  Urva,  who  shall  beget  TigmatuiA,  the  father  of 
Brihadratha,  who  shall  beget  V^asiulAmn. —80-85. 

Vasudama  will  be  the  fatlier  of  fiatanika,  who  will  beget  Udayana, 
the  father  of  the  bravo  Vahinara.— 80. 

Dancjap'lni  will  bo  tlie  son  of  Valiinara  and  the  fatlier  of  Niramitra, 
who  shall  beget  Ksemaka,  The  following  rfloka  has  been  sung  by  the 

* Another  reading  is  Nichak^n, 

• • la  HanA.  Another  reading  is  Suchidratha. 


OBAPTWB  LI. 


155 


ancient  prophets : — “ The  source  of  Brahma-Ksatra  stock  the  family 
honored  by  Devarfis,  will  come  to  conclusion  in  the  Kali  age,  when  it 
reaches  King  K^emaka.”— 87*88. 

Sdta  said  : — BMs ! 1 have  narrated  to  you  this  dynasty  of  Pauravas 
who  descended  from  Arjuna,  the  son  of  Pftpdu,— 89. 

Here  e7ids  the  fiftieth  chapter  describing  the  dynasty  of  the 
Pauravas  up  to  Kfemaha. 


CHAPTEtt  LI. 

The  Bisis.  — ! Suta!  Pray  tell  us  about  those  Agnis  or  Fires 
which  are  honored  aniongst  the  twice-born,  and  narrate  the  history  of  the 
dcscendents  of  that  dynasty  in  detail. — 1. 

Sfita. — Ri^is  ! In  Svayanibhuva  Manvantara,  Agui  Abhitn&ni  (the 
presiding  spirit  of  P'ire),  was  born  from  the  mind  of  Brahma,  and  Srab& 
was  his  wife.  She  gave  birth  to  Pavaka  (Subterranean),  Pavamfina 
(Terrestrial)  and  Suchi  (Celestial)  Fires.  Pavamftna  or  Terrestrial  Fire  is 
produced  by  friction,  and  PAvaka  (Subterranean)  Fire  produces  the  mag- 
netic fire,  called  Vidyuta. — 2-3. 

i^uchi  is  also  called  Saura  (Solar  or  Celestial  Fire).  These  fires 
are  known  as  SthAvaras  or  Fixed  Fires.  Havyav&ha  is  the  son  of 
PavamAna. — 4. 

PAvaki,  Saharak^a  and  HaryarAhamukha  are  sons  of  PAvaka, 
PavamAna  and  ^uchi  respectively.  The  HavyavAhamukha  Agni  is 
sacred  to  the  Devas,  and  llie  first-born  of  BrahmA  (PavamAna)  is  the  Fire 
sacred  to  men.  —5. 

Saharak^a  is  the  Agni  sacred  to  the  Asuras.  These  three  Fires 
belong  to  the  three  classes.  Their  sons  and  grandsons  number  forty.— 6. 

They  are  now  described  and  pamed  separately.  PAvana  (PavamAna), 
the  Fire  of  human  beings  (Laukika),  is  the  first-begotten  of  BrahmA,  and 
Brahmanandana  known  also  as  Bharata,  was  the  son  of  PavamAna.  Havya- 
vAha  is  also  known  as  Vaiifvanara  Agni.  He  died  while  carrying  Havya 
offerings  to  the  Gods.  He  being  deatl,  the  son  of  Atharvan  ( Aftgirasa)  pro- 
duced the  Fire  Puskarodadhi  (produced  by  the  churning  the  cloud),  which 
is  known  as  Atharva  Alaukika  Agni  and  also  as  Dak^i^a  Agui,  by  non- 
rubbing.—7-9. 

Atharvan  was  begotten  from  Bbrigu,  and  Afigiras  was  the  son  of 
Atharvan,  who  begot  the  above-mentioned  Alaukika  Dak^i^a  Agni, — 10. 


TSB  MAT8YA  POBABAit, 


' C 

V Pavamana  is  called  Nirmntbya  Agni,  also  produced  by  (rubbing  fire**— 
.Sticks  or)  aity  friction,  and  the  same  is  known  as  Garhapatya  Agni  or 
' Hausehold  Fire,  the  first  fire  amongst  the  Brahmaoa8.--'ll. 

He  produced,  from  Samslati,  two  sons,  named  Sabliyaand  Avasathya, 
then  Havyavahiina  was  onainoured  of  sixteen  rivers.  The-twice  born  call 
this  Agni  Abhiinani  Ahavaniya  Fire  also.— 12. 

The  sixteen  above-mentioned  rivers  are  : — 

KAveri,  Krisnavenl,  Narnuuln,  Yamuna,  Godavari,  Vitasta,  t^liandra-' 
bhdgA,  Iravati,  Viparfi,  Kan^^iki,  l^atadrn,  Saiayu.  Sila,  Manasvini,  Ilradinl 
and  Piivana. 

<livi(Iinrr  Iiis  body  into  ^Ixtoeii  <lilb*rent  parts,  lie  dallied  witli 
these  sixteen  river-goddeS'^'s.  when  lie  was  attracted  towards  I )liispyas.^^ 
Produced  from  these  niii>nyas  was  the  progt'ny  known  as  Dliisnus. 
Since  tlmy  were  lim  sons  of  Dhisnyas,  tliey  are  called  l)hi>nus.— 13-U). 

All  tliC  sons  of  tin'  rivcis  made  frimids  with  these  Hhisnyas.  Listen 
now  about  the  Viharaniyas'thr*-c  wliicli  are  removable  from  the  altar  and 
Upastheyas  ^tliose  whicli  are  fixed  in  their ) -laces  and  w(»rs]iippod  there), 
amongst  them.  Viblui,  Prav:‘diana  and  Agnidhra  are  fixed  in  tlicir  altars, 
while  the  remaining  Hhifiiu'^arc  -hifting  and  moving,  and  taken  from 
their  places  when  some  auspicious  ucc.isions  aiisc.  Hear  the  names  of 
Anirdesva  and  AnvArya  Agnis.  in  onler  — IT-IS. 

Vasava  and  Krijsooi  arc  h *th  the  Aguis  of  Dviliva  amlf7tta7\t  redi 
(altars;.  Sanuat  was  the  son  of  Aiini,  and  the  Brahmauas  worship  these 
eight  Fires, — 19. 

Parjanya  and  Pavamana  arc  also  Agnis  and  arc  seen  on  the  Dviliya 
altar.  Puvakosaa  and  Samuliya  are  tlie  Agnis  found  in  the  North  or 
uttara  altar.— 20. 

TTavyasuda  and  Asnmrijya  arc  both  known  as  ^amitra.  iSatadh&mii 
and  Sudhf\jyoti  are  described  as  Itandral^va] ya  agnis.  Brahinajyoti  and 
VasudliAinri  are  said  to  be  Brahma'^thilidN’^a.  I'he  llpastheya  Agni  by 
Ajekapada  is  known  to  be  J^Alaniuklia.— 21-22. 

AnirdefSya  and  Aliivbmllmyn  are  carried  to  the  soulli.  The  BiAli- 
manassay  that  those  Upastheya  Agnis  shouhl  be  worsbippetl  by  all.— 23. 

♦ DJiis  o/a. -A  sort/of  subordinate  or  .side  altar,  Kf^nopally  a heap  of  earth,  covorod 
with  sand,  on  wliich  tin?  ilro  is  placctl,  and  of  whieh  8 arc  enumerated,  besides  the 
Agnidhriya  [in  the  Agnidhra],  thnso  in  the  Kadas  holonj^ing  to  the  Hotri,  the  Maitra- 
earin^a  or  Pra-ta^tri,  the  Drdhma'tdcfirhansitt,  the  Potrf,  Neiftrit  and  AchclU(-tk!ka  and  tho 
/MAnier-WnUams*  Sanskrit-EngUsb  Dictionary.) 


OHAPTBB  LI. 


161 


,14  # 

' Now  I shall  describe  the  Viharaqtyas  and  their  eight  sons.  Barhifa 
Agni,  the  carrier  of  sacrifice,  was  the  sou  of  Hotfiya. — 24. 

Prachet&  Agni  is  the  son  of  Prarfaipsya.  He  is  the  second 
Agni.  . Saqisab&yaka  Vi4veveda  is  the  son  of  Agni,  called  Br&bmanS 
cbaqi^i."25. 

SvSmbha  Agni  is  described  having  its  origin  in  the  waters.  His 
name  is  Selu.  These  Dliisnya  Aharana  (shifting)  Agnis  are  worshipped 
along  with  the  Soma  in  the  Soma  sacrifice  by  Brdhmapas.— 26. 

The  good  call  Pavaka  Agni  to  be  Yoga,  and  that  Agni  is  worshipped 
along  with  Varuna  at  the  time  of  purificatory  batlj. — 27. 

Agni,  the  son  of  Ilridaya,  that  tligests  the  food,  is  known  as  Man* 
yuman,  Jntharagni,  and  Vidlingni.— 28. 

The  Agni  tliat  is  produced  sptnjtaneonsly  by  friction  and  consumes 
all  beings,  is  the  son  of  the  Agni  Manynman,  railed  Ghorasarnvartaka. — 29. 

This  Agni  dwells  in  the  oeran,  drinking  water,  in  the  mouth  of 
Vadava  (?  oceanic  volcano),  and  the  son  of  Sanuidravasi  (oceanic  fire)  is 
Saharaksa. — 30. 

Salnirak$a  Agni  resides  in  tiie  houses  of  the  people,  and  fulfils  their 
<Iesijm  Kravyada  Agni,  the  sou  of  Saharak§a.  devours  the  dead  the 
funeral  fire). — 31. 

These  are  the  sons  of  Pavaka  Agni,  as  related  by  the  Brabmanas. 
Their  sons,  through  Sauvirya,  wore  .stolen  by  the  (landharvas  and  the 
Asuras.  —32. 

The  Agni  obtained  by  the  rubbing  of  Arani  went  to  dwell  in  the 
sacrificial  fuel.  This  fire  is  called  Lord  Ayn,  in  which  sacrificial  victims 
are  immolated.— 33. 

Ayu  begot  MaliiniAna,  the  father  of  Dahana.  This  Daliana  is  the 
presiding  Fire  in  Pakayajiia  domestic^sacrifices,  and  eats  the  fire  oblations 
made  into  it  ; and  it  eats  also  offerings  made  to  the  Devas  and  the  pitps. 
His  son  is  Sahita  Adbliiita,  who  is  very  celebrated. — 34-35. 

He  eats  the  offerings,  Ac.,  made  at  Prayasfcliitta  (atonement).  He 
(Adbhuta)  is  the  fallier  of  a portion  of  the  heioic  Dev^tpsa,  known  as 
the  Great. — 36. 

Vividhiigni  was  born  of  the  Vira  DevAmila,  who  begot  Mahakavi. 
Arka,  the  second  son  of  Vividhagni,  begot  eight  sons. —37. 

He  who  is  known  ns  Rnk^oiiAyatikrit  is  the  presiding  deity  in  all 
Kfimya  sacrifices.  The  second  son  is  Surabhi  Uhe  fifth);  Rukmav&u  (the 


TBE  MAnU  POnAUAit- 

«lxth);  Vasuraftu  (the  third),  Aunada  (the  fourth),  Harya^va  (thafiftt), 
Pravargya  'the  seventh),  and  lastly  K^emavana  (the  eighth),  md  incfludirig 
the  progeny  of  Suchi  Agni,  these  are  fourteen.-— 38-39. 

Thus  have  been  described  the  Fires,  which  were  employed  in  sacrifices 
in  previous  world  periods  by  (ho  Devaa,  along  with  the  YAmSs  (a  class 
of  gods). —4(1. 

'Hiese  Agnis  were  the  pn'siding  <leiiies  of  sacrifices  in  Svaymbhuva 
Manvantani.  Now,  tlipso  aro  subsidiary  fires,  shifting  from  one  altar  t(' 
another  and  roaming  among  animate  and  inanimate  beings,— J I. 

They  were  the  presiding  deities  of  altars  and  were  known  a.s 
Agnidhra  Fires  in  ancient  times,  and  were  then  carriers  of  sacrificial 
offerings,  and  were  (miployod  in  those  tlays,  and  may  be  employed  in 
present  days  in  volnntary  (Kainya)  ami  occasional  (naimittikal  rites. — 
42. 

Tliey  were  worshipped  in  tlie  lirst  Manvantara  by  f^nkras,  YAmfis 
and  I)evas.“-4?), 

I’liua  have  been  described  the  altars  and  (he  sources  of  the  various  » 
Fires;  tliey  should  bo  known  as  existing  in  the  seven  XIanvantaras,  begin- 
ning with  vSvAroclds  and  ending  with  Savarna. — J l. 

Thus  have  been  tlescribrMl  the-  Agui^  of  tlie  past  Xfanvantaras.  Now^ 
will  bo  described  the  characteristic  marhs  of  the  Fires  to  be  worshipped 
in  the  present  and  the  future  Xf:invantaras.'-~4o. 

In  all  ilanvanlaras,  these  I'"ircs,  along  witli  VamAs  and  Devas,  make 
their  appearance  in  various  f(*niis  and  for  diverse  objects. — 16. 

These  Fires  live  along  with  future  Devas  ; ami  thus  [ have  described 
the  Pfist  Agnis;  what  more  do  you  wish  to  hear  now,  0 Kisis.~-47. 

Here  ends  the  fifty-first  chapter  descrihiny  the  dynasty  of  Agni 


rniAPTER  Lll. 

The  Risis  said  Siita ! 13c  good  enough  to  relate  to  us  the 
difference  between  Virtue  (Dharma)  and  Vice  (Adharma)  in  detail,  as 
explained  by  the  Lord  Vi§nu,  at  the  respectful  enquiries  of  the  King 
Vaivasvata  Manu.” — 1. 

Sflta. — “ RWis!  Lord  Janardana,  in  the  form  of  Fish,  has  explained 
at  length  Karma  Yoga  and  SAnkhya  Yoga  to  Manu,  the  most  illustrious 


bUAtfBU  tit  lid 

He  explained  them  at  length  the  first  creation  and  the  destruction  of  the 
world.'* — 2-3.* 

jVote.— Karma  Yoga— Performanoa  of  wordly  and  roligions  rites.  Sftnkbya  here  means 
JdAna  Toga,  as  opposed  to  Karma  Yoga. 

‘ Hearing  those  words  of  the  sage,  the  Ri^is  cried  out “Sflta ! We 
are  also  most  eager  to  understand  the  characteristics  of  Karma  Yoga, 
because,  Oh  Pious  Sfita,  there  is  notliing  concealed  from  you  in  this  world, 
and  you  are  the  knower  of  all.” — 4. 

Sfita : — Ridis ! 1 repeat  the  Karma  Yoga,  as  taught  by  Vispu. 
Karma  Yoga  is  superior  to  a thousand  Juana  Yogas,  because  Juana  Yoga 
is  produced  by  Karma  Yoga,  and  from  Jniina  Yoga,  one  attains  tiie  final 
emancipation.  The  divine  knowledge  of  Brahma  springs  from  Karma 
Yoga  and  Jnfina  combined.  Juana  Yoga  in  its  turn  does  not  arise  without 
Karma  Yoga.— 5-6. 

If 

iVotr.— Jniliia  Yuga=coiilomplatiou.  Akarma  JiiAna— Renunciation. 

Consequently  a person  devoted  to  Karma  Yoga  attains  to  eternal 
Trutli.  The  entire  Veda  is  the  fountain-head  of  all  Dharma  ; so  also  the 
conduct  of  tliose  good  men  who  know  the  \'eda8  is  also  a root  from  which 
Dharma  arises. — 7. 

The  eight  spiritual  qualities  must  exist  in  pre-eminence,  in  order  to 
produce  Dharma: — They  are, — (1)  Clemency  to  all  living  beings,  (2) 
forbearance,  (3)  protection  of  him  who  seeks  aid  in  distress,  (4)  freedom 
from  envy  in  the  world,  (.5)  external  and  internal  purification,  (C)  to  calmly 
meet  sudden  emergencies  in  all  works,  (7)  not  to  exercise  niggardli- 
ness in  the  case  of  the  distressed  and  with  regard  to  one’s  earnings,  (8)  not 
to  hanker  after  the  riches  or  the  wives  of  others. — 8-10. 

The  above  eight  spiritual  qualifications  of  the  soul  arc  enumerated 
by  those  learned  in  the  PurApas,  and  the  possession  of  these  qualities  is 
essential  which  is,  for  Krij’fi  Yoga,  the  means  to  tlie  attainment  of  Jusina 
Yoga. — 11. 

None  in  this  world  attains  JuAua  without  Karma  Yoga ; consequently, 
the  duties  enjoined  by  the  l^ruti  and  Siufiti  ought  to  be  closely  followed 
with  diligence. — 12. 

Every  day  one  ought  to  perform  the  live  sacrifices,  m.,  (1) 
worshipping  the  Devas,  (2)  the  Pitfis,  (3)  feeding  men  (4)  and  the  lower 
creatures,  (5)  and  honouring  the  Ri^is. — 13. 

The  learned,  according  to  the  prescribed  rites,  ought  to  (1)  adore  the 
Devas  by  performing  sacrifices  to  the  fire,  (2)  worship  the  Risis  by  the 


THE  UAT87A  PDRANAM, 


l(to 

recitation  of  the  Vedas,  (3)  the  Pitris  by  Sracldha  offering,  (4)  the  men  by 
showing  hospitality  to  guests,  (5)  honour  all  lower  living  creatures 
by  scattering  food  for  them  on  the  ground,  as  described  in  Balikarina  — 
14. 

To  ward  off  the  five  sins  by  which  the  animal  life  is  accidentally, 
destroyed  by  a house-holder,  viz.,  (1)  the  threshing  of  the  grain,  (2)  grind- 
ing of  condiments  and  grain,  (3'  lighting  the  fire-place,  ^4)  fetching  water, 
by  the  water-pot,  fo)  sweeping  by  the  broom ; the  above  five  sacrifices 
have  been  laid  down. — lo. 

By  the  above-mentioned  five  deeds  the  householder  commits  the  five 
sins  that  are  known  as  panchaguna  ; and  he  does  not  go  to  heaven  without 
freeing  himself  from  the  sins,  which  are  wiped  out  by  the  performance  of 
the  five  sacrifices  mentioned  ab(»vo. — 10. 

The  twenty-two  as  well  as  tiic  eight  SumskAras  laid  down  in  the 
law-books,  put  together,  do  not  lead  to  emancipation  if  tlie  man  does  not 
possess  the  eight  spiritual  qualifications  im'ntioncd  above.  — 17, 

Consequently,  a man  pos.sessing  these  qualifications  ought  to  performik 
the  rites  laid  down  in  the  Vedas  and  should  support  the  cow  and  the 
Br&hmanas  with  his  wealtli,  and  always  do  good  to  otljors  .and  slnmld  be 
well-conducted. — 18. 

One  ought  to  worship  iiiva  >Vasudeva)  (!ontaining  witliin  Him 
Brahma,  Vi^nu,  the  Sun,  Ku  ira,  and  the  V^asus,  hy  means  of  cows,  land, 
gold,  cloth,  incense,  llower-garland  and  wator.-*  l!h 

One  should  devoutly,  free  from  jealousy,  worsliip  Siva  iVasudeva), 
according  to  the  prescribed  rite.s,  and  observe  lasts  and  vows.  Siva  (Vasu- 
deva)  is  superhensuous,  peaceful,  iminanifesl,  subtle,  all-pervading,  eternal. 
And  the  whole  universe  is  Ills  form.  All  tlie  following  Devas  are 
his  manifestations  via*.,  Vasudeva,  I/jrd  of  the  universe.  Brahm^, 
Visnu,  the  adorable  Sun,  Siva,  the  eight  Vasus,  t!ie  eleven  lords  of  hosts 
(eleven  Rudras),  the  Lord  of  the  Lokapfdas,  Bifcris,  and  the  Matriganas. — 
20-21. 

These  above-mentioned  Devas  are  said  to  bo  the  powers  of  God. 
These  powers  include  all  moveable  and  immoveable  objects  and  belong  to 
that  Supreme  Spirit  who  is  tlie  root  of  Brahma,  Vijjnu,  Siva  and  the  Sun  ; 
and  who  is  said  to  be  the  overlord  of  the  Unmanifested  (Prakfiti\— -22. 

He  wlio  has  adored  all  the  four  (BrahinA,  Sflrya,  Visriu  and  l^iva) 
withmit  observing  any  difference  among  them,  lias  worshipped,  in  fact, 
universe,  hiolading  the  moveable  and  the  immoveable. — 28. 


OHAPTBR  Lilt. 


161 


He  who  is  the  supreme  abode  of  Brahma  and  the  rest,  in  whom 
all  the  three  (Vedas)  reside,  He  is  PtiHam,  the  personification  of  Vedas ; 
and  consequently  he  should  be  worshipped  with  great  diligence. — 24. 

These  Deities,  Brahma,  &c.,  should  be  worshipped  by  feeding  the 
fire  and  the  Brahmanas.  Moreover,  they  should  be  adored  by  utterance 
of  mantras,  sacrifices,  gifts,  penances,  fasts,  silent  recitation  of  the  sacred 
name,  and  by  fire  oblation. — 25. 

For  those  who  are  devoted  to  the  above-described  Kriya  YogS  and 
who  love  the  Veditnta,  tlic  Srayitis  and  the  ^astras  and  who  are  afarid 
of  sinful  deeds  there  is  nothing  in  this  world  as  well  as  in  the  next 
which  is  beyond  their  reach,  t.e.,  such  people  attain  everything. — 26. 

Here  ends  the  Fifty-second  Qhapler  describing  the  Ki'iyd  Yoga. 


CHAPTER  LIH. 

Tlio  liislis. — Sutu  ! Be  pleased  to  describe  to  us  the  number  and 
bulk  of  all  the  Puranas  in  due  order  and  in  detail  and  also  about  the 
iiiving  of  gifts  and  charity  (Dana  Dharmaj. — 1. 

Sfita. — I shall  tell  you  exactly  what  the  Universal  Soul,  the  ancient 
Male  Lord,  said  to  the  King  Vaivasvata  Mann. — 2. 

I.iord  said  to  Maiiu  ! Brahma  remembered  in  the  beginning  first  the 
Puranas  among  all  the  Ssastras.  So  Puranas  are  the  first  among  the 
Snstras.  Afterwards,  Braliina  uttered  out  the  four  Vedas  from  His  four 
mouths. — 3. 

There  was  only  one  Ihirana  in  the  beginning  of  the  Kalpa.  It  was 
alone  the  means  of  the  accomplishment  of  the  three  ends  of  man  (Dharma, 
Artha  and  Kama).  And  it  was  the  only  holy  book  consisting  of  thousand 
millions  of  stanzas. — 4. 

When  all  the  regions  perished  by  fire  at  the  Great  Dissolution, 
then  1 recited  the  four  Vedas,  with  their  six  Afigas  as  well  as  the  Puranas, 
the  manifold  NyAyas,  the  Miraainsas  and  the  DharmaiSastra.  In  the  begin- 
ning of  the  new.age,  I immersed  myself  in  the  furious  waters,  at  the  time  of 
dissolution  of  the  universe  and  explained  them  fully  to  Brahma,  Who  in 
His  turn  revealed  them  to  the  Devas  and  the  sages,  after  which  they  spread 
all  over  the  world.  Therefore,  the  Puranas  became  the  source  of  all  other 
S&stras.  Later  on,  seeing  the  neglect  of  the  Pur^ina  under  the  changed 
circumstances,  I repromulgated  them  in  every  yuga,  through  my  pai*tial 

incarnation  of  VyAsa.  In  every  DwSpara  yuga  I compiled  the  Purfinas  to 

at  ^ 


fBE  MATSYA  PURABAM, 


the  extent  o(  4 lacs  of  rflokas,  and  spread  them  in  the  world  after  dividing 
tiiiem  into  eighteen.  Even  now  the  bulk  of  the  Purfina  extends  to  a hun- 
dred crore  verses  in  the  Deva  Loka.  On  the  universe,  however,  its  bulk  is 
abridged  only  to  4 lacs  of  iflokas,  and  is  divided  into  eighteen  Purftpas.— 
S-U. 

SQta.— Hear,  0 Ri^is ! the  names  of  the  different  eighteen  Purfipas. 
I shall  enumerate  them  to  you,  as  they  were  described  to  Martchi  by 
Brahmft.— 12.  * 

(1)  The  Brahma  Pttrdtjia- — Brahma  Parana  contains  13,000  flokas. 
One  who  writes  and  gives  it  away  in  charity,  along  with  a cow  and  water, 
in  the  month  of  VaWakha,  on  the  full-moon  day,  passes  his  days  in 
Brahmaloka,  in  happiness.— 13. 

l2;  The  Padma  Purdna. — At  the  time  when  this  univeme  came  out 
of  the  cosmic  waters,  in  Iho  heginning  of  the  L'^tus  TCalpa,  and  in  the  form 
of  a golden  lotus,  then  the  Padma  Punina  was  revealed,  describing  that 
creation,  and  it  is  oalled  Padma  Pnrana  by  ihe  wise.  And  it  consists  of 
55,000  rflokas. — 14. 

<)ne  who  gives  away  Padma  PurAna  in  charity,  along  with  a golden 
lotus  and  soflamum,  in  the  nionth  of  .lyaistha.  gels  the  benefit  of  perform- 
ing an  aivamedlia  sacrifice.  — -lA. 

(3)  The  VipjM  Puram, — Similarly,  the  rules  of  virtue  laid  down  by 
Pararfara,  for  the  period  wlien  there  was  the  Varaiia  incarnation  of  Visnu, 
in  the  beginning  <^f  Vurfdia  Kalpti,  form  the  Visnu  Parana. — 16. 

That  Parana  cojjtaiiis  2.‘h‘»00  41oka>  an{l  one  who  gives  it  away  in 
charity,  along  witli  a cow  and  darifi^’d  butter,  in  the  month  of  Aslfldha,  on 
the  fuli-inoon  <lay,  is  purili(Ml  of  all  sin  aivl  goes  and  rests  in  peace  in  the 
region  of  Vanina. — IT. 

(4)  The  Vnijii  Punhia. — I’hc  rtih  > virl  ue  laid  down  by  Vayu,  along 
with  the  glory  of  Rudra,  ifi  the  »:5veta-kaipa,  is  known  as  Vayaviya  Pur&na. 
It  contains  24,000  sJlokas. — LS. 

One  who  gives  it  away  in  charily,  along  with  a cow,  sugar  and  an 
ox,  to  a Brahmana,  whose  family  is  large,  on  the  day  when  Rakhi  thread 
is  tied  on  Uic  wrist,  in  the  month  of  i^ravuna.  goes  and  resides  for  aKalpa 
in  the  region  of  Siva.— 19. 

f5)  The  Bhagamta  Puvritia. — The  PiirAna  which  begins  with  the 
description  of  the  sacred  Gayatri  worship,  and  goes  on  to  mention  various 
Dharmas  and  which  contains  a narration  of  the  destruction  of  the  demoit 
VfitrAsura  as  well  as  an  account  of  Ihe  famous  men  who  flourished  in  the 
Sarasvata  Kalpa,  is  known  as  Bhagavata.— 20-21, 


CBAPTEB  LUI. 


163 


One  who  writes  BhSgavata  and  gives  it  away  in  charity,  along  with 
a golden  lion,  on  the  fulhmoon  day,  in  the  month  of  Bhadrapada,  attains 
final  emancipation.  It  contains  18,000  tfiokas. — 22. 

ifi)  The  Ndradiya  Purdna. — ^The  Nfiradlya  Pnr&na,  containing  25,000 
rflokas  is  that  in  which  Ndrada  has  described  the  Brihatakalpa  and  the 
dbarnMS  of  the  Bfihatkalpa. — 23. 

One  who  gives  away  this  Purft^a  in  charity,  on  the  full-moon  day  of 
Asvin,  along  with  a cow,  attains  bliss,  and  is  liberated  from  the  cycles  of 
birth.— 24. 

(7)  The  ilirkavdeya  Punlna. — The  PurSna  which  begins  with  the 
story  of  the  birds  solving  the  difficulty  of  Dharma  and  Adharma,  and 
which  the  pious  j^ages  e.xplaiu  in  an  answer  to  the  question  of  the  sage 
(Jaiiuini),  which  has  been  described  at  great  length  by  the  sage  Mnrkandeya, 
at  the  request  of  the  llitfis,  and  which  contains  t),00t)  couplets,  is  known  as 
M&rkan()eya  Pnra^a. — 2.5-26. 

One  who  writes  this  Punlija,  and  gives  it  away  in  charity,  along  with 
a golden  elephant,  on  the  full-moon  day,  in  the  month  of  K&rtika,  attains 
the  benefit  of  performing  Pupd^rika  sacrifice! — 27. 

8.  The  Agni  Purdm. — The  Piirapa  which  commences  with  the 
description  of  the  Itfann  Kalpa,  and  which  was  a path  of  virtue  revealed  to 
Agni  by  Vatfi$tha,  is  known  as  the  Agneya  Purana,  and  contains  16,000 
dlokas.— 28. 

One  who  writes  this  Purana  and  gives  it  away  in  charity,  along 
with  a golden  lotus,  a cow  and  sesamum,  on  the  full-moon  day,  in  MSr- 
gatfinl,  attains  tlie  benefit  of  performing  16,000  sacrifices. — 29. 

9.  The  Bhaei^ya  Purdm- — The  Puran^  in  which  Brahrai  has  des- 
cribed the  history  of  Aghorakalpa,  the  glory  of  the  Sun,  the  existence 
of  the  Universe,  the  characteristics  of  the  aggregate  multitude  to  Manu, 
is  known  as  the  Bhavi^ya  Pur&pa,  and  contains  14,500  i^lokas. — 30-31. 

One  who  gives  away  this  Rirdpa  in  charity,  free  from  the  feeling 
of  jealousy,  on  ^the  full-moon  day  of  Pau^a,  along  with  a pitcher  of  raw 
sugar,  attains  the  benefit  of  performing  the  Agni^toma  sacrifice.— 32. 

10.  The  Brahmamimrta  Purdm- — The  PurApa  which  commences 
with  the  description  of  RathAntara  Kalpa,  and  in  which  Savar^i  Manu  has 
described  to  Nfirada  the  glory  of  Kri^nia  and  the  history  of  the  Rathfin- 
tara  Kalpa,  and  in  which  there  is  also  a constant  allusion  to  Brahmavar&ha, 
is  known  as  Brabmavaivarta  PurAna,  and  contains  18,000  ifiokas. — 33-34. 

One  who  gives  away  this  Brahmavaivarta  PurA^a  in  charity  to  a 


164 


THE  MATSYA  PrUANAM. 


Brfihmapa,  on  an  auspicious  day,  in  the  month  of  M/lgha,  on  the  full- 
moon  (lay,  goes  and  enjoys  in  the  region  of  Bralima. — 35. 

11.  The  Liiiga  Piiniiia. — The  Parana  in  which  fcJiva  explained  the 
‘ virtues  of  Agiii  and  the  four  Vargas,  vit.,  Dharma,  Artha,  Kfuna  and 
Mokaa,  by  manifesting  Himself  through  the  piMar  of  fire,  which  commen- 
ces with  the  description  of  Agneya  Ivali>a,  and  which  was  uttered  by 
Brahma  Himself,  is  sty levl  Tiinga  Parana,  an<l  it  contains  11,000  dlokas. 
One  who  gives  away  tliis  Pnrimi,  along  with  sesamum  and  cow  in  charity, 
on  the  full-moon  <lay,  in  tiie  moutli  of  Phalguna.  attains  the  form  of  and 
similarity  with  Siva. — 3G-37. 

12.  The  Vavdhu  Purun<i, — Tliv  Parana  in  which  Visnn  has  described 
the  glories  of  the  Great  Boar  to  i!io  goddess  Karth,  and  whicdi  was  rccilod 
in  connection  with  tlm  Manava  Kalpa,  is  known  as  the  Van\ha  Parana, 
and  contains  2J,000  stanzas.— 

One  who  gives  away  this  Pur'tna  in  charity,  along  witli  a golden 
eagle  (Gran da),  cow  and  scsaniuin,  mm  liir  r»dl-nioo'i  day,  in  tlic  month  of 
Chaitra,  to  a Brahmana  with  a large  lauiiy,  ivacho  tlio  region  of  Visnu 
by  the  favour  of  Vara  ha.— 

13.  Skan  hi  P irana  m which  ili.*  six-facod  Kar- 

tika  has  expre-sed  tlif  \ luuc-  <.}  hi'^h  ( hi.'^nu  n an  1 al^oahont  the  worship 
of  Mahadeva,  is  known  a-;  Skajcl:'  Pin.':n  i It  c civncnccs  uitli  i!ie  do.-^- 
criptit)n  of  the  .Mahesvarn  l)Ijai  nm.-,  as  i oi  ! in  the  Satfuirusa  lvalj>a. 
and  contains  81. lot)  jJloka-,  in  this  ni'd.il  - 11-1- 

One  who  gives  away  thi-  IVir  ni  i,  ai  »i.l;  wiili  a gi)l  lon  trident,  after 
Avriting  it  out  at  tin,*  time  o{'  tlie  S»i3i  lx  ing  in  il.t-  l:Zth  sign  of  the  Z(xliac 
(Pisces),  goes  to  tbe  regio?i  v>iv:\-  4’\ 

14.  The  Varna }ia  Pardija  - Th<‘  l*Mi’An,i  oi  wliicli  tlic  f(UU’-face<l 
Brahma  has  related  tlie  glorie-  r,|’ Trivikr.iina.  and  wliich  dcscribtjs  the 
three  Vargas  also  to  ilu  [k»\a-,  aftco- doeluring  the  glory  of  Vaniana,  is 
known  as  the  Vamana  P»n’ana.  and  c^uitains  l(».(K)0  ^<lokas.  It  describes 
the  Kalpa,  and  i=5 a>ispi(;ir,n-.  Following  Khnna  Kalpa,  one  who  gives  it 
away  in  charity,  after  writing  it  nut  nnafly  in  Fne  autumnal, equinox,  goes 
to  the  region  of  Vi^nii. — 14- lo. 

15.  The  KArmn  Pnr<hin  -Tlio  Ihirana  in  whieh  Visnu  has  dwclton 
the  glories  of  the  four  Vargas  (Dharnui,  Artlia,  Kama  ajid  Mokija),  in  the 
form  of  a Kflrma,  in  the  RasAtala  regions,  bedore  tlio  sagits,  in  connection 
with  the  story  of  Indradyumna,  where  India  vv.as  also  present,  through 
his  companion  Indradyumna,  is  known  a.s  Kflrma-Purana,  and  is  related 

‘ T*  1ft  060  41okas. — 46-47. 


OHAFrER  TAIL 


105 


One  who  gives  it  away  in  charity,  along  with  a golden  turtle,  at 
the  time  ot  the  equinox,  gets  the  benefit  of  giving  away  thousands  of 
cows. —48. 

10.  The  Matsija  Parana. — ThePurana  in  which  the  Lord  has  related 
the  glory  of  Nfisimha  to  Vaivasvata  ^fanu,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Kalpa, 
with  a view  to  propagate  the  i^ruti.s,  in  tlif3  form  of  a fish,  and  in  which 
the  Lord  has  also  described  about  the  seven  Kalpas,  is  known,  0 sages,  as 
the  Matsya  Piirana.  U contains  M,000  slokas.  — 19-50. 

One  who  gives  this  Pur/ina  away  in  charity,  along  with  a golden 
fisli  and  a cow,  at  the  time  of  tho  summer  solstice,  acquires  the  benefit  of 
giving  in  gift  the  entire  earth. — .11. 

17.  The  Qaruda  Parana. — The  Purana  in  wliich  Kfisna  has  described 
tho  birth  ot  Garuda  out  of  the  cosmic  egg,  in  tho  Garuda  Kalpa,  is 
known  as  Garuda  Punlna,  and  contains  18,000  rflokas. — 52. 

One  who  gives  away  tliis  Purana  in  charity,  along  with  a golden 
flamingo,  attains  a place  in  the  region  of  iS^iva,  endowed  with  highest 
perfection.— 53. 

(18)  The  Brahimnda  Purana. — The  Parana  commencing  with  the 
glory  of  the  cosmic  egg,  and  in  which  Brahma  has  described  the  future 
Kalpas  as  nvoU  as  tlio  history  ot  the  Universe  to  the  Devas,  is  known  as  the 
Brahmauda  Parana,  and  contains  12,200  sllokas. — 51-55. 

One  who  gives  fiway  this  Purana  iu  charily,  along  with  a yellow 
w'oolen  gairaent,  and  a golden  cow  at  the  time  of  Vyatipata,  attains  the 
benefit  of  a thousand  Rajasuya  sacrifices. — 5G. 

Sflla  said  : — Vyasa,  of  wonderful  activity,  explained  these  eighteen 
Puranas,  to  the  extent  of  4 lacs  of  slokas,  to  my  father,  and  the  latter 
told  me  about  it ; ami  I,  0 Risis ! have  described  the  same  to  you.— 57. 

The  venerable  sage  has  abridged  tho  Puranas  for  the  sake  of  the 
good  of  this  W(ukl ; otherwise,  the  entire  Purana  existing  in  tlie  Deva  Loka, 
contains  a hundred  crore  iJlokas.  - 58. 

Upapurav^s — (1)  NrisUpha.  -1  shall  now'  tell  you  about  the 
difference  between  the  Puranas  that  exist  in  tho  universe  and  the  secondary 
PurAnas.  There  is  a mention  of  N|isimha  in  the  Padiiia  Purana,  and  the 
18,000  Slokas  (dealing  with  the  history  of  Narasirpha)  forms  the  NArsimha 
Purana  (which  is  one  of  the  secondary  Puranas). — 59. 

[2j  Nandi  tipapiirdrjia, — Where  SwAmikArtika  has  described  the 
glory  of  the  great  goddess  NandA  (the  portion  dealing  with  that),  is  known 
as  the  Nandt  PurAnia.— 60. 


160 


THE  MATSVA  PURANAM, 


(3)  * Samba  iipapuran*^. — That  Parana  in  which  Lord  ^iva,  taking 
His  most  noble  consort,  Gauri,  as  Lis  audience,  has  related  about  the 
future,  as  found  in  the  Blmvisya  Parana  and  also  is  styled  by  the  sages 
^as  SAmba  Piirana.—Cl. 

(4)  Adilya  npapiirdiia. — The  learned  who  know,  say  that  the  recitation 
of  the  list  of  tlie  Ihii-rinas  dealing-  witli  the  ancient  Kalpa,  is  conducive  to 
glory,  fame  and  long  life.  This  is  the  order  of  the  PurSnas,  as  described 
above.  Similarly,  the  Aditya  rpapurana  is  also  mentioned  therein. — 62. 

()  Risis  ! the  secondary  Ihininas  have  been  deduced  from  the  original 
eighteen  Puranas.— 63. 

The  following  are  tlio  live  characteristics  of  the  Ihiranas : — They' 
describe  (1)  the  creation  (d  ilio  universe,  «l\)  its  genealogy  and  di.ssolntion, 
(3)  the  dynasties,  A)  the  Manvantaras,  «.*>;  tlic  dyna>tic  chronicles.-  64. 

The  Puranas,  with  these  live  characteristics,  siug  the  glory  of  BrahmS, 
Visnu,  the  Sun  and  Rudra,  as  well  as  they  describe  also  the  creation  and 
dissolution  of  the  Earth. — do. 

The  four  Vargas  (Dhanna,  Artlia,  Kama  and  .Moksa)  have  also  been 
described  in  all  tlie  Puranas,  along  with  evil  consequences  following 
from  sin. — 66. 


In  tlie  Satvika  Purina^,  tlicre  is  !aigf*ly  a monlion  of  Hari’s  glory. 
In  the  Rajas  Purana.-^  tlicic  Is  the  grcatiT  mention  of  BralnnaH  glory. 
In  the  Tamasika  Purrnas,  tliere  is  a ineinion  of  i^iva  and  Agni’s  glory. 
In  all  kinds  of  Puranas,  of  all  the  three  attributes,  the  glory  of  Sarasvali 
and  the  pitris  have  brou  described. — dT-OiS. 


The  great  sage  Vvasa,  after  ciinpiling  the  18  Puianas,  indulged  in 
the  composition  of  thest<»ry  of  Muhabharata,  in  order  to  magnify  their 
bulk,  which  was  an  addition  to  the  Purnnas,  by  another  lac  of  eJlokas.  And 
in  which  he  lias  condensed  the  sf use  of  tlie  Vedas. -'-GO. 

The  glorious  story  of  Ramayana,  sung  by  the  sage  Valmtki,  at  the 
instance  of  Brahma,  also  extends  to  a hundied  crore  of  iJIokas.— 70. 


Brahin/i  narrated  tlieorigifial  Ramayana  to  Narada  ; the  latter  reveal- 
ed it  to  V&lrnlki,  who  gave  it  to  the  world,  and  which  is  a means  of  giving 
Dharma,  Kftipa  and  Artha.  And  in  which  way  the  famous  epic  exists  in 
the  world,  and  contains  5,25,000  ilokas. — 71. 

The  learned  know  of  the  Paranas  of  the  ancient  Kalpa.  The  recitation 
of  this  list  of  the  Puranas  is  conducive  to  prosperity,  fame  and  long  life. 
He  who  reads  or  listens  to  it,  gets  wealth,  reputation,  long  life  and  emanci- 
-riotinn.— 72. 


fBB  WAT8¥j^.PURAN4U-: 


(^,  ^ WTOI  Naite  a^ntftya-<M  the  two  ankles  of  tlb  loff«  sacred  to  RoWnt.- 
Bteristn.  ^ - * . . ' ^ ’ 

(3)  ^1%  Nam^Yaradilyta-oii  tho  two  shanks,  fft)ni  th%  anklo  tatho  kneo, 

s the  two  knoes,  sacrolfto  tho  Asvini  asterism.  ■»  ^ ^ 

(4)  fWQ  Xamah  Sivaya — on  the  two  thighs,  sacred  to  the  Pftrva  ^Adha  ^6. 

Jttara  Asadha.  . ' ‘L’, 

(5)  Namah  Patlehasaraya-on  tho  organ  of  generation,  sacred  to  PArW» 
}halguiii  and  Uttaraphfilgnni. 

(6)  Namah  «>arngadh{iraya  - on  the  waist,  wheiv  Visnu  should  be  wc^' 

shipped,  sacred  to  K.rittikd  asterism.  ' 

(7)  Namah  Kesiiiisud'auaya— on  tl  o two  sides  of  tho  ribs,  sacred  to 

JPdrvabhftdrapada  and  Uttarabhlidrapada.  y 

(8)  Namah  Damodarftya—on  tho  two  arm-pits,  sacred  to  Revati  asteriftin. 

^ (fl)  Namah  Madhavaya  -on  the  cheat,  sacred  to  Aniiradha  astorisni.  ; 

^ (10)  Namah  Aghaughavidhvamsakaraya—on  tho  back,  sacred  to 

DhanifthS  asterism. 

(11)  W Namah  MrisiaiikhachakrasigadadharAya  - on  tho  fo<ir  arins, 

sacred  to  VisAkliA  asterism, 

^ (12)  Namah  MudliusuiUiiaxa, -on  the  hands,  sacred  to  Hasta  astorism. 

^ (13)  W Namah  Samnaiiiadliisfi.VH-on  tho  tips  of  tluj  finger,  sacred  to 

. Piinarvasn. 

^ (14) Namah  iMutsyaya.  Then  the  nails  of  tho  Fish  iMatsya)  should; be 

j^>vorshipped,  sacred  to  AslesjA  ast<‘risin.  No  mantra  in  tin'  original. 

(15)  Namsh  KiiiMnaya  Kurniasya  Padaii  Saranam  vjjajAini  — 

,^n  the  throat,  and  the  fool  of  tiio  Tortoiso  (Kilrma),  sacred  to  Jy(‘sth.i. 

H (16) ’T*!:  smjfW  Namah  VaraUAya— on  the  two  ears,  sacriai  to  Nravaina  asterism  and 
tho  Boar  (VarAha). 

(17)  -N*< snail  ’NcisimliaMi  IXiiiavu.sudarol.va  «»n  ilio  month,  sacred 

to  Pu§y&  asterism— Man- Lion. 

• (18)  «WWt^W  Namah  KarauavAmanaya  • on  the  loro  of  I ho  teeth,  sacred  to 
- 8vAti  asterism  and  V:\mana  (Dwarf)  avatara. 

(19;  Namal/BhargavanandanAya  -on  the  gullet  of  tho  mouth,  sacredrlo 

* .Satabhisa  astorism  and  Parasu  Kaiin. 

‘ (20)  Namah  Hainaya—in  the  no'io,  sacred  to  Magha  asterism  and  Uaghnu^r 

:rdanalUma. 

(2l)  »ni:  ^xm  Namah  liamaya  VigUOrnitaksiiya  -in  tho  eyes,  sacred,  to 

.'^figaslra  asterism  and  Bala  Unmii 

ipw  wrm  Namah  Buddliaya  .Sfintay.i -on  the  forehead,  sacred  to'Chltlfk 

Eaiid  Jluddha. 

«i«l;  fwikw  Namah  Vjsvcsvara  KalklrOpiuo  - on  the  head,  saored;^'^ 

asterism  and  Kalki. 

C'  ^24)  ^ Namah  Harayo— on  tho  hair,  sacred  to  Ardra  asterism  and  Purusottama. 


^0-10. 


t;..  On  the  day  of  the  fast  worthy  Bralimanas  should  be  honored. 20.  ' 

^ On  the  completion  of  the  Vrata,  the  devotee  should  give  away  ^ 

.^'.beautiful  and  big  golden  mace,  studded  with  pearls  and  other  jewels,  coWs 


OHAPtwn  uv. 


garfiieuts,  I^dstead,  Ac.,  to  ii  iTioiis^Brahmana,  versed  in  the  Sainavedieij 
The  mace  ebould  be  placed  in  a pitcher  of  water. — 2 1 -'22.  ^ 

all  that-,  the  devotee  fdiould  give  away  other  things  worthy  o{| 
being  offered  to  ft  Brfihmana,«{ifter  which  he  should  devoutly  pray  to  the* 
-.  Lord. to  ful^  his  desirea  in  the  words  : “ Manoratham  nah  Saphalikurusv'at?^ 
hiranya  gai’bli&cliyutariidrarupin”  0 thou  having  the  form  of 

• yij9u.;^d  i^iya,  fulfill  all  my  cherished  desires.— .23.  ="f* 

-The  image  of  Visnii  along  with  that  of*  Lak§ml,  should  be  given^ 
^.avray  tathe  Br^Iimana  and  his  wife,  with  a peaceful  mind.  So  also  shoulcW 

* .be  giv^n  a bedstead,  made  of  wood,  without  any  joints. — 24 

ft  * * . • • 

. The  devotee  sliouhl  recite  the  following  : — “ As  the  worshippers 
Vi§nu  never  get  any  siilTerings  or  sin,  so  let  me  get  beauty  and  health  aa,i 
well  as  highest  devotion  towards  Ke4ava ; as  the  house  of  the  Lord  isl. 
never  devoid  ef  Laksnii,  so  iny  house,  may  never  be  bereaft  of  my  consort* 
in  all  ray  life  ; 0 Krisna.*’ — 25-20.  \ 

j* 

After  that,  the  Bralinuina  versed  in  astronomy,  should  be  dismissed! 
by  giving  away  the  .iraoge  of  the  naksUra  i>nrusa,  along  with  clothes,  »| 
garland,  sandal  paste,  &c.  The  worshipper  slionld  abstain  from  salt  and  oily 
food  during  all  the  tweiity-sevcui  days  of  his  oi)servaiice  of  the  Vrata,  and  ’ 
should  feed  others  according  to  his  means,  witliout  giving  way  to  miserli- 
ness.—27-28. 


The  worshipper  of  the  naksatra  puru$a  attains  all  his  desires,  and 
at  the  ejjd  passes  his  days  in  the  region  of  Vihiiu  with  happiness.  He 
washes  off  all  his  sins  as  well  as  all  the  sins  of  his  deceased  ancestors 
coimnilted  in  his  present  and  past  lives, — 29-30. 

The  married  woman  or  the  man  who  reads  or  hears  the  story  of  this 
observance  with  devotion,  will  free  herself  or  himself  from  all  the  sins  by 
hearing  and  reading  it.  This  observance  confers  many  blessings  on  the 
worshippers. — 31. 

Here  ends  the  fifty- fourth  chapter  dealing  with  th^  observance  called 
naksatra  piirusavmta, 

A/ote.~ The  twenty  seven  Nakfatras  which  are  to  be  worshipped  in  the  ceremonial  in 
the  month  of  Ghaitra  commencing  with  the  Moon  whiui  sho  is  in  the  asterisra,  Mdld,  and 
on  successive  twenty-six  days,  wlien  sho  passes  through  different  other  astorisms  arst 
shown  in  the  Table  opposite  to  this  page  which  has  been  reproduced  from  Colebrooke>. 

The  asterism,  Abhijit,  is  no  longer,  counted  amongst  asterisms. 


93 


m 


THE  MAT8YA  PUEAEAM, 


not  of  lustre,  fortune  oiul  prosperity,  similiirly  let  in > no  l)o  also  in  llio 

enjoyment  of  saino  blessings.*’ — 

“ Lord  ! wlio  else  is  there,  {'Xceptinij  'rhyself,  to  t me  prosperity  ; 
consequently,  bo  jdeased  to  safely  and  eomfortably  see  me  tlnongii  this 
mundane  sea  of  trials  ami  ironldes/' - -7. 

After  that  prayer,  the  devfi'O  sboidd  eireuinambuh  te  and  salute  the 
Deity,  and  then  dismiss  tlie  IbAlnnana  ami  send  to  hi<!  honse  all  the  things 
given  in  cliarity.  None  of  them  slionltl  be  ki‘pt  in  dn*  limise  of  the 
worshipper. — 28. 

Nothing  should  be  said  about  this  saered  oh>ervanci'  to  a blasphemer, 
to  a perst)n  of  evil  eondnet.  t<»  a hypomiie,  or  to  a false  r*‘nsi'm‘r,  for  they 
are  liable  to  profane  it.  nuina  .v>,  \V‘mld  lead  t(^  sin. — 2‘d. 

The  .self-eontr«  lied  ar.d  the  dt‘v«mt  are  worlljy  of  being  told  about 
the  mystery  of  this  <'b.sei vanee.  d'hi)*-e  learned  in  the  Vt‘das  a.ssert  that  it  is 
the  destroyer  of  all  sins  and  gi\er  i>f  all  [jeaee  ami  happiness  to  men. — 30. 

Those  women  and  men  who  ohsin  ve  tliis  ordinanee  witli  devotion, 
are  never  bereft  of  their  sons  and  other  dear  ones.  They  attain  the  Divine 
felicity,  and  are  free  from  the  </f  di-oa>e,  grief  and  suffering. — 31. 

This  or<linance  wa^N  at  <»lw;Mve  1 by  Vasi.^tha,  Arjnna,  Kuvera 
and  Indra.  Hie  mere  n cltatlMa  of  lii»erao>  Mue  from  al!  sins.*— 32. 

One  wiio  reads  or  i;/-  !'a‘'i  oh -*^i-vane(',  endears 

himself  to  In  Ira  .aijd  IkI,*  - ii-s  i*'-.’';.--.  * w ( » t“  Ijcaven  from 

helh-33. 


Here  eivh  th(  ‘/e.'-O’*''?'/;; 

Oiili  { w.;:''/ f wo  V 


t'tr  (jl 


ciiAiHd:!;  Lvi. 

The  adorable  J^iva  >;ii  ! : 1 M;ail  n-  w exfdain  to  ymi  aliout  the 

Krii^nastami  Viata  /(n’'llna.»j<  e v.hirii  i'- tho  <h‘-tr  )yc*r  of  all  evils,  'rids 
fast  gives  victory,  peaeo  and  emarji-ip  ition  t-,  m<  n.  • 

^ahkara  sliould  bo  \vm-l:ipp<d  nn  th(‘  ilghth  day  of  the  dark 
fortnight  in  the  month  n\  M/ovra'hr^a,  on  ihe  eonwponding 

day  of  Pamia,  MahcJ^vam  in  M.'»</h:i,  Mnl./nhoa  in  PhAignna,  Sihanti 
in  Chaitra,  6iva  in  Vais^ddi.i,  Pa^tipati  in  dyaistha,  Ugra  in  i\sAdha, 
l^arva  in  ^ravana,  Tiayarnba!;a  in  Ihiadra,  Mara  in  the  inonlh  of  Atfvina, 
liJAna  in  Kftrtika.  Tlie.se  pujns  should  be  performed  every  month,  on  all 
the  8th  days  of  the  dark  fortnight.  Tlie  devotee  should  worship  the 


CHAPTER  LVl, 


173 


lin  limanaH,  and  nlioiild  obsaive  a f»iKt  after  givinjEj  away  cow,  land, 
gol‘1  and  cloili  to  especially  to  tlie  devc^tees  of  {^iva.  In  tlie 

niflit  time,  S^va  should  iai  wcavhipped  witli  l^ifiehagavya  and  with 
nrlneof  the  cow,  clarifier|-l)iitt(*r,  cow’s  milk,  Kcsaimiin,  barley,  Kurfa 
gijiSH,  water,  the  water  of  tiui  wasliing  of  tli^  eowv,’  luu’ns,  (lie  leaves  of 
l^irisa,  arka  (Calatropis  gigantea),  leaies  of  Bilva  faeglo  inarrnelos)  and 
curds. — 1-0. 

I*aiicliatfav.'»y.a— Five  prorluots  of  tho  cow,  taken  collectively;  t.e.,  milk, 
curds,  clarified  butter,  urine  and  cnwcliing. 

The  worshipper  shoul<l  feast  thr?  Iearnc<l  and  the  pious,  from  Margefi- 
i^a  after  an  interval  of  twf)  iminth<,  n.-ider  llie  followirig  trees  : —ailvatha 
(tho  holy  lig  tree i,  vata  Mho  Ininyau  tree),  ndiinihara  (Ficus  glomerata), 
plaksa  (tho  rose-apphO,  bntea  frondc-sa',  jambu  eugonia  jambo- 

lainO  ; and  he  slnudd  use  the  tooth-bi usli  made  »»f  tliese  trees  tocleansehis 
teeth  on  those  days.  An  olTeriiig  of  arghya  waier  and  Idack  cloth  and 
black  cow  .should  bo  made  to  the  Deity,  and  at  tlie  conclusion  of  the  fast, 
curds,  grain,  canopy,  flags  and  clmiuara,  <Scc.,  should  be  given  away  in 
charity. — 7-9. 

BrAlimanas  should  bo  given  the  five  gems,  along  with  a vase  of  water 
and  a black  <!Ow,  gold  and  dilTerent  kinds  of  cloths.  If  the  worshipper 
be  not  a position  to  give  away  all  that,  he  should  give  a cow  at  all  events. 
Close-fistedness  should  not  be  exereiseii  in  charity,  for  it  leads  to  sin. 
One  who  ob.serve.s  the  Krisna>tami  fast  accf*rding  to  the  rule.s  laid  down, 
enjoys  Ijappiiiess  after  Ijoing  venerated  by  the  Devas.  for  307  kalpaa,  in 
the  region  of  J^iva.--10-1 1. 

Here  ends  the  fi flu-sixth  chapter  denlimj  udth  the  Krivjtaip.vnivixita 
to  be  observed  on  the  eighth  day  of  the  dark  fortnight  of  every  month. 


CHAPTER  LVII. 

NArada  said  : — " 0 Lord  ! with  moon  as  thy  crest-jewel,  pray  tell 
me  all  about  the  ordinance,  the  nbservanoe  of  wliieh  begets  long  life, 
health,  feciindjty  of  the  race,  kingdom,  in  several  successive  lives.” — I. 

Tho  Lord  Siva  said  : — Narada  ! I have  already  explained  to  you 
about  tlie  ordinance  tlial  confers  everlasiiug  blessing  on  the  devotee,  and 
I shall  now  al.so  explain  to  you  more  clearly  about  it,  as  described  by  those 
learned  in  the  Puranas. — 2. 

Rohintclianclra  sJayanavrata  is  most  sacred.  The  devotee  should 
worship  the  image  of  NArAya^a,  .after  reciting  the  names  of  the  moon  in 
observing  it. — 3. 


174 


THE  MATSYA  PURANAM. 


When  the  full  moon  day  falls  ox\  Monday,  or  when  the  Rohini  aaterism 
falls  on  the  full  moon  day  ; the  learned  shoultl  bathe  with  pailchagavya 
and  mustard,  and,  after  that,  should  recite  “ Apyasva”  Mantra  for  a 
hundred  and  ei^^ht  times. — 4-5. 

A’ote.— Apyfisva— A Vcdlc  Mantra. 

Tlie  ^udra  also  may  observe  this  Vrata  with  extreme  devotion,  free- 
ing himself  from  the  C(nnpany  of  all  unbelievers,  and  should  devoutly 
salute  tlie  Gods,  Moon  and  Visnu,  with  the  following  mantra,  instead  of 
the  Vedic  one  : — SoinAya  VaradayAtha  Visnave  clia  namo  namah. — 6. 

After  finishing  his  bath  and  the  recitation  (japa  of  the  mantra,  ho 
should  return  to  his  li«)nse.  and  worsliip  Madhusudaua,  by  offering  fruits 
and  flowers  and  singing  the  nanie:'i  of  Moon  (i>uma\  as  given  below. — 7. 

After  rocitinf?  (1)  %ini|  Suninya  .\antnya  nnmali.  slioiild  be  worshipped  the 

feot  (of  the  Divine  ima^o),  and  nftor  recitiii;;  (2  Auaooulhauiiio  nainalt,  should 

be  worshipped  the  shanks  Uiwl  knees,  ul'toi*  reeibin;?  Julodai'A^a  namah,  the  two 

thighs,  and  after  reciting'  ^4)  sfii:  AnantnbAhvo  natuah,  tliec^gaii  of  genoratiou.-  8. 

After  rcelting  (5)  KAiuAwi  siihhapradaya  namah.  the  waist  of  the  moon 

should  hft  worshipped.  After  reeking  (ft  / Arnritodaraya  namah  the  stomach, 

after  re  iting  (7)  ' a-sAiiicaya  namah,  tho  navel  should  bo  worshipped.— 0. 

After  rocking  (8)  CMmudraya  tiamah.  the  mouth  slionld  be  worshipped,  after 

reciting  (9)  fj^iTrRiqTii  Dwijadhijn'iya  namah,  t lie  tevih.  afier  reciting  (10)  lyii: 

Chandramasc  namah,  the  f:i'*o  (lifisy.im),  after  rcvUling  ; 1 1}  Knnuulvantavana 

priyaya  namah,  the  lips. -lo. 

After  reciting  (12)  Vanau.sadhinas.iya  namah,  (In;  nose,  after  reciting 

(13)  Anaiidaidifitiiyu  namah.  the  l»row>,  afn.-r  reeking  fl  U im: 

ludivarasyainakaraya  nainah,  tlie  eyo.s  like  lotus. — 11. 

After  reciting  (15;  w.  Sian.usiadlivaravanditiya  namah  and  iw: 

Daityanisudan^ya  namah,  the  two  eais,.  after  reciting  (10)  g^n^rwra ’nt:  b'dadhipriyfiya 
namah,  the  forehead,,  and  after  reciting  (17)  Susumnadhipatayo  namah,  tho 

hair.— 12. 

After  reciting  (18)  wjui  i^asamkaya  namah,  the  head  of  MurAri,  after  reciting  (19) 
Vi^svaraya  namah,  (lie  c<»roiiot  (of  the  Divine  imago).  liohini  should  also  be 
worshipped.  The  devotee,  i»y  praxing  : **0,  Kohini,  the  beloved  of  tho  Lord,  also  known 
nndor  the  name  •)f  T.akstni,  O blessed  one,”  siiould,  otfor  sweot-suielUng  flowers,  incenso  and 
eatables,  etc.,  and  sleep  on  the  floor  in  coui-se  of  the  night  on  getting  up  e.'irly  in  (he 
morning,  and  aft! T taking  his  i»a(li,  he  should  offer  a vase  of  water,  gold  and  eatables 
to  tho  BraUmana.  with  the  mantra  ipti;  qrqnpttipmi:  and  then  hoar  the  recitation  of  some 
sacred  book  (ltihftsa)..for  a couide  of  miihartas  (96  niinubcs),  after  taking  twentyeight  morse 
Is  of  food  with  clariftod  butter,  milk  and  urine  of  the  cow,  but  devoid  of  flesh  and  salt.— 
I 3-15. 

Then  be  should  worship  tho  Moon  and  Visnu  with  Kadamba,  blue- 
lotua,  Ketaki,  jastnine,  lotus,  8(«vali,  kuvaja,  while  kaiiiiair  and  chaxnpaka. 
—16. 


CHAPTER  LVlt. 


176 


Hari  should  be  worshiped  with  all  the  various  kinds  of  flowers  that 
bloom  iu  various  months,  from  the  beginning  of  tlie  month  of  Sravana.*— 17. 

In  this  way,  the  devotee  should  go  on  with  the  worship,  according 
to  the  prescribed  rites  till  the  end  of  the  year,  after  which  he  should  give 
away  a bedstead,  along  witli  a mirror  and  other  tilings  in  charity. — 18. 

Then  he  should  make  an  image  of  Rohini  and  tlie  Moon  in  gold. 
The  image  of  the  latter  should  be  six  fingers  in  length  and  that  of  the 
former  four  fingers.  And  lie  should  give  them  away  to  a good  Br4,hmana, 
along  with  eight  white  pearls,  white  cdoths,  milk,  some  utensil  of  bell, 
metal,  rice,  raw  sugar,  sugar-cane  and  fruits. — 19-20. 

lie  should  also  give  away  after  that,  awhile  cow,  with  its  horns 
plaited  with  gold  and  hoofs  covered  with  silver  and  its  back  covered  with 
a cloth,  along  with  utensils  and  a couch. — 2J. 

Afterwards,  the  worshipper  should  bedeck  thcBrahmana  along  with 
his  consort  with  fine  clothes,  &c.,  and  shouhl  look  upon  him  as  the  moon 
in  company  of  Rohini. — 22. 

And  he  should  then  pray,  “ 0 Lord  ! as  Roliini  shines  in  Thy  bouse, 
so  let  my  house,  too,  be  full  of  lustre.— 23. 

0 fiorcl  Moon  ! as  you  bring  happiness  and  emancipation  to  all,  be 
merciful  enough  to  shower  the  same  blessings  on  me  ; and  let  my  devo- 
tion in  you  always  remain  firm.” — 24. 

“ 0 liord  ^looii,  grant  me  health  and  prosperity.  I am  afraid  of 
this  world,  and  desire  bliss  at  your  hands.” — 25. 

This  ordinance  is  very  dear  to  the  Pitjis,  and  the  observer  of  it 
attains  the  region  of  the  moon,  after  being  the  lord  of  the  three  worlds  for 
307  Kalpas,  and  then  gets  final  rest. — 20, 

The  women  folk,  observing  this  fast,  beget  tlie  same  fruits,  and  are 
liberated  from  the  cycle  of  births. — 27. 

One  who  reads  or  listens  to  this  form  of  ordinance,  gets  pure  intellect 
and  goes  to  heaven  where  he  is  venerated  by  the  Devas. — 28. 

Here  e^ds  the  fifty-seventh  chapter  describing  the  worship  of 
Roll  irjiichandra  sa  yn  navrata . 

CHAPTER  LVIIL 

Sflta  said  : — The  King  Vaivasvata  Maim  asked  the  Lord,  who  was 
lying  in  the  water  in  the  form  of  fish,  to  explain  to  him  when  should 
ihe  sacrifioe  be  performed  and  what  feasts  should  be  employed  therein, 


178 


THE  MATSYA  PITRANAM. 


and  wliat  kind  of  altar  should  be  made  for  the  occasion  to  consecrate 
a newly  built  tank,  well  and  pool,  grove  and  temple.  - 1-2. 

He  also  asked  the  Lor<l  to  explain  what  fees  to  the  ofiieiating  priest, 
and  Sacred  offeiinii»s  to  the  Pcity  should  tlien  be  made.  Wluit  arc  the 
proper  time  and  place  for  this  observance,  and  what  preceptor  should  be 
appointed. — 3. 

The  Lord  Fish  said  : — Hear,  0 .Mighty-armed,  the  rules  about 
tanks,  etc.,  as  laid  down  in  the  JtihAsa  and  the  I’urAnns,  by  knowers  of  the 
Ve<la.  At  the  end  of  the  summer  solMiee,  the  man  performing  the  cere- 
mony should  get  the  prepaiatory  riles  to  the  ohservanre  performed  in  an 
auspicious  bright  fortnight,  after  eonsulting  a Bnilnmina. — 4-5. 

After  that,  he  sliould  got  a nice  Vodi  stpiare  altar',  measuring  fonr- 
hands  in  length,  with  four  o]h  nirjgs  imnle.  near  the  lank,  etc.,  to  be 
consecrated,  in  the  nortli-easti  rii  dirtctiou.—  I). 

A pandal  (mainlaim..  lueasmijig  sixtranj  hands,  with  four  openings 
should  also  be  made,  ami  ihin  an'nml  the  altar  sliould  he*  made  pits 
(gartas),  live,  seven  or  nine,  Imi  mu  m«>n*  in  numher,  nno  (mbit  fle^'p  and 
three  circles  nuiiul  them.  The  rce«'ptaf]o  yoni'  of  the  altar  should  bo  « 
one  span  long  ami  six  or  -oven  lingm-^  iu*  a !.  * - 7 S. 

Vita«ti  = A moiisnr<‘  of  I-  iigth  < «j[ual  to  1*2  lint^cTs  (Ivin^  the  di.stjinco  bct.wcen 
the  extended  thumb  and  the  littU* 

Tlie  gnrtas  or  pii^  sh  nlo  bo  feven  in  jnunbc'r,  and  the  circles 
should  be  tlirec  inches  (j'arva".  u*.  j.i  Ijcloiit,  Flags  and  buntings 

of  the  same  colour  sh^iijd  be  oi*  ail  <.  -iK 

In  all  the  four  dlicclinh>  « f tlie  pandal.  arcla's  of  the  twigs  of  the 
Arfvatha,  Udumbara,  IMak-a  an  I X’i.fa  nocs,  Mrndil  bf  iMa'l(\- -iO. 

Then  eight  Bralmiaiia^,  ^niNc-i  in  tie-  A'edas,  ^iiuiil.l  bo  employed  as 
sacrificial  priests  lhotA»,  eight  us  wardfi.-.  umi  another  eight  as  Japakas, 

—11. 

Note— JftpakassOno  who  mutters  prayers. 

The  Brahamana  who  has  all  tlic  virtues  in  him,  who  is  able  to 
restrain  his  passions  ami  know.',  the  mantras,  is  calm  ami  belongs  to  a 
good  family,  should  be  clioseii  to  perform  the  funciiuns  of  the  priest 
(Purohita).— 12. 

Water-pot  and  materials  of  saciifice  should  be  placed  at  each  of  the 
gartas  (pits),  after  which  a fan  and  a white  chamara  should  bo  placed 
on  a big  plate  of  copper. — 13. 

Afterwards,  the  family  guru  (AchA^rya)  should  scatter  on  the  ground 


OBAPTEB  mm. 


177 


the  diffarent  kinds  of  boilsd  rice  and  barley  for  presentation  to  the  Qods, 
after  reciting  the  Vedio  text. — 14. 

The  sacrificial  posts  should  be  made  of  the  glomerous  fig,  measuring 
three  cnbits,  with  closed  fist,  in  length,  of  the  hand  of  the  sacrifioen  It 
is 'also  auspicious  to  get  them  made  of  the  mze  of  the  worahipper. — 15. 

Twenty*five  flitvijas  (the  eight  HotAs,  eight  Dvftrap&las,  eight 
J&pakas  and  one  Pnrohita),  arrayed  in  ornaments  of  gold,  should  be 
presented  with  golden  ear-rings,  armlets,  rings  and  different  kinds  of 
cloths,  without  making  any  difference  between  them.  But  the  family 
(Aoh&i^al  should  be  worshipped  with  double  the  number  of  things  offered 
to  the  Ijtitvijas.  After  that,  tlie  worshipper  should  give  away  in  charity 
the  things  liked  by  him  the  best,  along  with  a bedstead. — 16-17. 

The  turtle  and  the  crocodile  should  be  made  of  gold,  the  fish  and 
the  un venomous  water-snake  should  be  of  silver,  the  frog  and  the  crab  of 
copper,  and  the  Sidum&ra  (porpoise)  fish  of  iron.  All  these  things  should 
be  prepared  from  before,  0 Lord  of  men. — 18. 

Then  the  worshipper  (yajam&na),  bathed  in  the  water*  of  different 
herbs,  according  to  the  Vedic  injunctions,  by  those  Veda-knowing  priests, 
should  enter  the  sacred  pavilion,  wearing  a garland  of  white  flowers,  white 
garments  and  smeared  with  white  sandal  paste,  through  the  western 
arch,  in  company  of  his  consort,  sons  and  grandsons,  etc. — 19-20. 

Then  the  learned  should  draw  up  a ring  with  powders  of  five  colors 
by  uttering  auspicious  sound,  while  the  music  of  drums  is  playing. — 21. 

Then  a circle  should  be  made,  with  sixteen  spokes  in  it,  and  in 
the  centre  a figure  of  a beautiful  lotus  of  four  leaves  should  be  made. — 22. 

Afterwards,  images  of  the  planets  and  the  regents  of  the  world  should 
be  established  in  the  proper  directions  on  the  different  altars,  after  reciting 
the  Vedic  hymns  (prescrbed  for  the  occasion).— 23. 

Then,  images  of  the  turtle  and  other  water  animals  should  be  estab- 
lished in  the  middle,  after  reoitin'g  the  hymns  of  Varnpa  (the  Gk)d  of 
waters),  and  afterwards  images  of  the  Deities,  Bndimi,  l^iva  and  Vii^u, 
should  be  estalrlished. — 24. 

After  establishing  the  images  of  Qapeda,  Lakemt  and  AmbikA,  and 
for  the  peace  of  the  Universe,  the  images  of  the  group  of  the  Bhfitss  should 
be  established.— ‘26. 

ffota— Bhfttaa  Btements,  denums. 

Then  the  pitchers  full  of  water  should  be  covered  with  clotites,  in- 
censed with  the  odour  of  flowers  and  fruits. — 26. 

91 


176 


TEE  UAT87A  PUBAEAM. 


After  garlanding  the  warders  and  patting  sandal  paste  on  them,  the 
Aohftrya  priest  should  ask  the  warders  (tlie  DrArapAla  priests)  by  say- 
ing  patbadbram"  to  chant  the  Veda. — 27. 

In  the  east  should  be  seated  the  Vahavrichas  (the  two  priests  versed 
in  the  Rigveda),  in  the  south  the  two  Dv&rap&las  (learned  in  the  Yajur* 
veda),  in  the  west  the  two  Dvarap&las  (learned  in  the  iS&mveda),  and  in  the 
north,  similarly,  the  two  Dv&rapftlas  (learned  in  the  AthaTva*Veda). — ^28. 

The  worshipper  should  seat  himself  ou  the  south  side,  facing  the 
uorth  and  the  Ach&rya  should  ask  the  eight  (HotA)  priests  " Yajadhvam" 
to  commence  the  sacrifice ; and  to  the  skilful  J&pakas  he  should  say 
“ ti^lhadvam”  (to  sit  down).  Thus  directing  them,  the  Achftrya,  versed  in 
the  sacred  text,  should  sprinkle  water  silently  round  the  fire  without  utter- 
ing any  ritual  formula. — 29-30. 

Sacrificial  fuel  and  clarified  butter  should  be  offered  to  the  Fire, 
after  reciting  the  hymns  of  Varuua,  and  the  sacrificing  priests  should  also 
be  made  to  do  the  same  all  round. — 31. 

Afterwards,  according  to  the  prescribed  rites,  offerings  should  be 
made  to  the  planets,  Indra,  l^vara,  Maruts,  LokapAlas  and  ViilvakarmA.— 32. 

Then  the  knowers  of  the  Rigveda,  seated  in  the  east,  should 
separately  mutter  the  formulae  of  RAtrisfikta,  Rudrasfikta,  the  auspicious 
PAvamAnasfikta,  and  PurusasQkta ; in  the  same  way  the  DvArapAlas, 
learned  in  the  Yajurveda,  seated  in  the  south,  should  separately  mutter 
the  formulae  of  Indra,  Rndra,  .Soma,  Kflsmnnda,  Fire  (.TAtavedas),  and 
the  Sun. — 33-34. 

Similarly,  the  DvArapAlas,  the  chanters  of  the  SAmveda,  seated  in  the 
west,  should  chant  the  hymns  of  VairAjya,  Pauru^asfikta,  Suvarna,  Rndra 
SaipbitA,  ^i^va,  Panchanidhana,  GAyatrisfikta,  Jyestha  SAma,  VAma- 
devya,  BrihatasAma,  Raurava,  Rathantara,  KAnva,  GavAm  Vratam,  Rak- 
fioghna  and  Vayas.  — 35-36. 

Afterwards,  the  learned  (DvArapAlas)  in  the  Atharra  Veda,  seated 
in  the  north,  meditating  on  Varupa,  should  devoutly  mutter  the  formttlae 
of  the  SAntikas  and  the  PauB(ikas.— 37. 

After  performing  the  above-mentioned  ceremonies  on  the  first  day, 
adhivAsana  should  be  done,  and  then  the  earth  of  the  following  places, 
viz.,  Elephant  ward,  stable,  well,  lane,  pool,  cattle-shed,  ant-hill,  the 
place  where  four  streets  meet,  should  be  put  into  the  pitchers  full  of  water 
(placed  in  the  pandal).— 38. 

JVote.— -AdhivtaaiiasSoenting  with  perfamoa.  (S)  Preliminaiy  oonseontlon  of  an  imagoi 
its  invowtioa  and  worship  by  saitable  mantraa,  before  the  oommenoemeat  ofaaaotiAoe, 
(8)  Making  a divinity  auame  its  abode  in  an  image, 


OBAPTBB  IVIIL 


179 


'k' 

Tbea  the  worshipper  should  bathe  in  the  water,  incensed  with  the 
following  things the  yellow  pigment  white  mustard,  sandal  paste  and 
resin  together  with  paSohagavya  (five  products  of  the  cow). — 39. 

Having  thus  finished  the  preliminary  rites  performed  with  the  utter- 
ance of  great  mantras,  with  regard  to  each  ceremony,  the  worshipper 
should  pass  the  night  in  sleep.  In  the  morning,  the  worshipper  should 
give  away  cows  to  the  BrAhmapa,  i.e.,  100  cows  or  68  or  60  or  30  or  25. 
-4041. 

Later  on,  on  some  auspicious  day  and  hour,  as  calculated  by  the 
astrologer  (S&mvat8ara\  the  worshipper  should  give  sway  after  making 
her  pass  through  the  water  of  the  pond,  etc.,  to  be  consecrated,  a cow 
decked  with  gold,  to  the  Br&hmapa  versed  in  the  Simaveds,  after  chant- 
ing the  text  of  the  Vedas  accompanied  with  music.— 42-43. 

Afterwards,  the  worshipper  should  put,  five  different  kinds  of  gems 
on  a plate  of  gold,  and  give  away  to  the  Br4hmapa,  and  should  place  the 
alligator,  fish,  Ac.,  in  a pond.  Then  he  should  worship  the  above- 
mentioned  cow  standing  in  water,  held  by  the  Br&hmapas  versed  in  all 
the  four  Vedas,  with  the  Ganges  water,  curd  and  rice,  and  should  after- 
wards make  it  swim  in  the  water  facing  towards  the  north.— 4445. 

The  cow  should  then  be  bathed  by  reciting  the  text  of  the  Atharva 
Veda,  such  as  punarSmeti,  etc.,  as  well  as  &pohi9(h&,  etc.,  and  then  the 
worshipper  should  return  to  the  circle  of  priests.  Then  the  tank  should 
be  worshipped  and  bali  offerings  should  be  made  on  four  sides  of  it. 
Afterwards,  homa  sacrifice  should  be  performed  for  four  days. — 4647. 

At  the  end  of  these  ceremonies  the  Cbaturthl-Earma  should  be 
performed,  when  the  worshipper  should  give  dsk(iin4  to  the  Br&hma^as, 
according  to  his  means,  and  should  mutter  mantras  of  Varupa. — 48. 

Then  the  entire  materials  employed  in  the  performance  of  the 
sacrifice,  including  the  pandal,  should  be  equally  distributed  to  the 
Ritvijas,  and  the  golden  bedstead^  should  be  conferred  on  the  chief 
priest— 49. 

Afterwards,  the  worshipper  should  feast  either  1,(XX),  8(X),  50  or  20 
BrkhmsQas,  according  to  his  means,  which  is  the  way  of  consecrating  the 
tank,  as  described  in  the  Purkpas. — 50. 

And,  similarly,  it  has  been  laid  down  for  the  consecreation  of  wells, 
pools,  small  tanks,  Ac. — 51. 

As  to  the  consecration  of  palaces,  groves,  lands  and  buildings,  the 
ritual  formulae  are  somewhat  different  from  the  consecration  of  tanks. 


i4V(^'3nIlnl;>]nto’  presorifawd  llten  ritea  fov  Ae  WMlAy^  Fbrty  people, 
iiPleeeilMouMble  oiroueaetatfoeis,  shoald  follow  Ae  EkAgiti  rites,  wiAout 
giving  way ’to  nu8erUne8B.-^52. 

The  consecration  of  tanka  in  the  rainy  seasons  and  autumn  begets 
t]i»  fruit  of- Agnietotoa  sacrifice,  and  of  the  V&japeya  and  Atir&tra  sacrifice 

in  Ae  seasons  of  Hemaiita  and  iSi^ira. — 53. 

Ao/a  -il^olffomassa  protracted  ceremony,  oxtonding  over  several  days  In  spring* 
Vtjapeyssspsrticolsrsaorifloe.  Hemsotssswiater  season.  6ls1ra=spriog  season. 

The  consecration  in  the  vernal  season  tVasanta^  begets  Ae  benefit  of 
Aivamedha  sacrifice,  and  of  the  RAjsfiya  in  the  summer  season. — 54. 

The  Lord  has  said  that  one  who  performs  the  ceremonies  mentioned 
above,  with  the  mind  purified  by  scriptures  and  with  full  faith  in  them, 
goes  to  the  region  of  ^iva  and  resides  iii  heaven  for  many  ages. — 55. 

Afterwards,  that  man  goes  and  enjoys  in  higher  regions,  and  re- 
maining Aere  for  the  full  life  of  BrahmA,  to  the  extent  of  two  Parfirdhas, 
gets  emancipation  and  enters  into  the  liighest  stage  with  Vi^nu.  And 
all  this  he  gets  through  the  merit  ac(|iiired  by  the  performance  of  Ais 
ceremony. — 56. 

Here  ends  the  fifty-eighth  chapter  dealing  with  the  eonseeration 
of  tanks,  reservoirs,  etc. 

CHAPTER  LIX. 

The  Risis. — Suta  ! Tell  us  in  detail  the  rites  which  the  wise  should 
observe  in  dedicating  and  consecrating  a tree,  and  also  the  region  in  which 
he  would  go  after  his  death. — 1-2. 

Sfita. — I shall  explain  to  you,  0 Lord  of  the  world,  the  rites  of 
dedicating  as  well  as  those  prescribed  for  the  laying  ont  groves.  ..  One 
shoald  follow  the  rites,  as  dictated  for  the  consecration  of  a tank,  and 
should  Aen  plant  the  trees  ; the  Ritvijas,  tlie  pavilion  and  the  AehAryas 
should' be  arranged  in  the  same  way,  and  tlio  Brfihmaijas  should  be  adored 
with  sandal  paste,  Ac. — 3-4. 

Afterwards,  the  trees  should  be  baAed  with  the  water,  mingled  with 
allAe-  prescribed  medicinal  herbs,  and  then,  garlanding  them,  they 
Aould'  be  wrapped  with  cloth. — 5. 

Then  with  a needle  of  gold,  the  Karpavedha  ceremony  Aould  be 
performed  on  the  tree  and,  similarly,  with  the  same  golden  stick  Ae  eyes 
of  the  tree  should  be  painted  with  black  pigment.— -6. 

Note.— Karvavedha— The  piercing  ot  the  ear  with  needle  to  put  on  earring. 

il^ter  Aat,  seven  or  eight  fruits  made  of  gold  should  bo  pUfCed  on 

AeadtUB.— 7. 


‘kpekt 


* The  inoenee  of  the  resin  (gugj^la)  is  considered  best  on  snch  an 
OOTftgioni,  Copper  pitchers,  full  of  water,  should  be  placed  and  worshipped 
with  cloth  and  incense,  &c.,  after  placing  corn  on  them.— 8. 

Then  the  pitchers  containing  gold,  &e.,  inside  them,  should  bh 
placed  close  to  the  trees  and  sacrifice  should  be  made  after  which  offerings 
should  be  made  to  Indra,  Vanaspati,  LokapAlas,  <&c.,  according  to  the 
rites  prescribed. — 9-10. 

After  that  a milch  cow,  covered  with  a piece  of  \rhite  cloth  and 
wearing  gold  ornaments  and  having,  her  horns  covered  with  gold,  should 
be  let  loose  between  the  trees  planted,  with  her  face  turned  towards  the 
north.  A milking  vessel  of  bell-metal  should  also  be  included  among 
other  things  to  be  given  away  with  the  cow.— 11. 

Then  the  trees  should  be  watered  with  (the  water  contained  in)  die 
copper  pitchers,  after  reciting  the  Mantras  of  the  lUk,  Yajn,  and  Sfima, 
addressed  to  Varnna,  accompanied  by  music  and  song. — 12. 

Afterwards  the  worshipper  should  bathe  with  water,  taken  from  the 
above  pitchers,  and  wear  white  garments,  and  then  with  a peaceful 
mind  should  confer  on  the  officiating  priestes  the  cows,  the  riches, 
bedsteads,  sacred  threads,  bracelets,  rings  of  gold,  clothes,  sandals,  alSng 
with  other  things,  and  feed  them  on  milk  for  four  days. — 13-14. 

Libations  consisting  of  mustard,  barley  and  black  sesamum  and 
wood  of  butea-frondosa,  should  be  offered  in  the  Fire,  and  on  the  fourth 
day,  festivities  should  be  observed  and  Daksinfi  should  be  given  to  the 
Br4hmapas,  according  to  the  means  of  the  worshipper. — 15. 

The  worshipper  should  also  give  away  with  an  easy  mind  other 
things  which  he  likes,  and  should  salute  and  dismiss  the  chief  priest 
(Achlf^ya),  after  giving  him  twice  as  much  as  he  gave  to  other  officiating 
priests. — 16. 

The  wise  who  observes  these  rites  in  dedicating  the  plantation  of 
trees,  obtains  all  his  desires  and  attains  to  endless  felicity. 

One  who  plants  even  cme  tree.  O' King ! according  to  the  presmabed 
rites,  resides  in  heaven  for  30,000  years  of  Indra.  ■ The  planter  of' trees, 
according  to  the*  prescribed  rites,  liberates  the  same  number  of  bis  past 
and  future  manes  and  attains  the  highest  perfection,  and  is  never  re-bom 
on  earths  One  who  hears  or  relates  to  others  these  prescribed  ceremonies 
goes  to  the  region  of  Brahm&  and  is  venerated  by  the  Devas. — 17-20. 

S&re  ends  the- fifty~ninth  chapter  deseribing  the  rites' o/ 
dedicating  trees' and  planting  groves. 


181 


TBS  MATWA  P&Rilfiii. 


• CHAPTER  LX. 

The  Lord  Fish  said : — 1 shall  notr  relate  to  you  the  Saubhfigya 
8^ana  Vrata  (ordinance),  the  girer  of  all  bliss  which  is  known  to  the 
Paorfipikas. — 1. 

When  the  regions  Bhhb>  Bhuvah,  Svar  and  lifaha,  &c.,  were  consumed, 
then  the  good  fortune  of  all  creatures  went  and  centred  itself  in  the  heart 
of  the  Lord  Vifi^u,  in  Vaiku^tha  heaven.  Again,  long  time  after,  with 
the  object  of  creating  the  world,  0 King ! the  plastic  material,  consisting 
of  Pradh&na  (root  matter),  and  conscious  souls  called  Purusas,  was  envelop- 
ed with  self  consciousness  (ahahkara),  when  there  arose  a rivalry  between 
Brahmft  and  Eri^^a,  regarding  the  fashioning  of  the  future  world.  Then 
(from  their  clashing  wills),  a terrifying  flame  of  fire  arose  in  the  form  of 
a lihga  (pillar),  by  the  warmth  of  which  the  good  luck  of  the  world 
resting  in  the  heart  of  Hari  came  out  (in  the  form  of  perspiration). — 2-4. 

That  good  fortune  emerging  from  the  heart  of  Visnu,  passed  through 
the  Intermediate  plane  (antarik^a)  before  it  could  reach  the  earth  in 
liquid  form,  and  l)ak$a  the  wise  son  of  Brahmli,  drank  up  this  giver  of 
beajfty  and  lovelines. — 5-6. 

Thence  Dakfa  got  mighty  power  and  great  lusture,  and  the  remain- 
der of  (the  good  luck)  which  reached  the  Earth  was  divided  into  eight 
parts.  From  them  were  produced  the  seven  givers  of  prosperity  to  all 
men,  namely  (1)  sugarcanes,  the  Kings  of  all  juices  Rasar&jam  (2)  Nisp&va, 
coriander  seed  (?),  (3)  the  cuminseed  (K&lftjirfi),  (4)  the  clarified  butter 
(ghfita),  (5)  cow’s  milk  (K§!ra),  (6)  saffron  (Kusumbha),  (7)  safflower 
(Kumkuma).  So  also  the  common  salt  was  produced  as  the  eighth,  and 
these  are  called  saubhagya  A^taka,  the  eight  blessings.— 7-9. 

That  which  was  drunk  by  Dakota,  the  son  of  Brahmfi,  the  knower  of 
Yoga,  became  his  daughter,  known  as  Satt  (Parvati).  Pfirvati,  owing  to 
Her  matchless  beauty,  came  to  be  known  as  Lalitft  ; and  that  paragon  of 
beauty  was  afterwards  married  by  the  Lord  Siva.  The  very  Satl  is  called 
the  Goddess  who  gives  bliss  (Saubhfigyamayl),  and  also  prosperity  and 
emancipation.  Those  men  and  women  who  worship  Her  with  devotion 
may  obtain  everything. — 10-12. 

Manu  said 0 Lord  ! explain  to  me  the  ways  of  worshipping  that 
sublime  Goddess,  the  upholder  of  the  Universe,  and  tell  me  completely  the 
ritual  of  Her  worship. — 13. 

The  Lord  Fish  said The  devotee  should  bathe  himself  with  sesa- 
mum  in  the  forenoon,  on  the  third  day  of  the  lunar  fortnight,  in  the  month 
of  Ohaitra,  during  the  vernal  season ; for,  on  that  day,  the  Goddess  was 


oMAvrm  lx. 


188 


^ nfti(id>>  l^ivs,  the  soul  of  the  Universe,  with  marital  rites.  On  that  day, 
^iva,  along  with  His  consort,  P&rvatl,  should  be  worahipped  with  flowers,^ 
fruits,  incense,  lamps,  and  offerings  of  foods,  &c ; and  the  image  (ot  Gauri) 
should  be  bathed  with  Panchagavya  and  scented  waters,  after  which 
Gauri  and  Ankara  should  be  worshipped  as  follows 14-17. 

By  pronounoing  (1)  vmA  PfttaUyai  nama^»  the  feet  of  the  Devi  shoald  be  wor* 
shlppedi  and  those  of  Siva  shoald  be  worshipped  with  the'mantra  Am  iPI:  ^ivdyanania|i ; 
Their  ankles  should  bo  worshipped  after  pronouncing  (2)  Sivdyanamati  and 

sml  w JayAjsinatnah ; after  saluting  Rudra  with  (8)  Ajvn  Trigupdyanamah  and  the 
Goddess,  with  BhavAnyai  namah,  their  shanks  should  be  worshipped.  After 

saluting  Gauri  with  (5)  RudresvarAyai  namah,  Siva  and  with  fkmA  VijayAya 

nama|i,  their  knees  shoald  be  worshipped.  Afcer  saluting  l^iva  with  (6)  f 
HarikosAyanamah  and  Gauri  with  ^ Varade  namah  (the  giver  of  boons),  the  thighs 
should  be  worshipped.— 18-18. 

Their  waist  should  be  worshipped,  after  salutihg  the  goddess  with  (7) 

IsAyal  namah  I salute  the  goddess,  IsA.  He  should  salute  Sankara  with  WR  W 
SafikarAya  namah.  The  abdomen  should  be  worshipped  by  saying  (8)  m:  Kotavai 
namah,  1 salute  the  goddess  Kotavi,  and  by  TO  Suline  namah,  I salute  the  wielder  of 
the  trident.’ —20. 

The  stomach  of  the  Goddess,  after  saying  (0)  MahgalAyai  namastnbhya^, 

I salute  BfangalA  ” (the  giver  of  bliss) ; the  stomach  of  s'iva,  after  pronouncing  W 
SivAya  namah  salute  Siva;'*  the  breasts  of  the  Goddess,  after  saying  (10) 
laAnyai  nama|i,  “ 1 salute  isAni and  of  the  God  by  saying  wfprt  TO  BarvAtmane  namah, 

1 salute  the  All-Soul.— 21. 

The  throat  of  the  Lord,  after  s.aying  (11)  VedAtmaiie  namah,  **  1 salute  the 

soul  of  the  Vedas the  throat  of  the  Goddess,  after  saying  RudrAnyei  namah,  “ I 

salute  RudrAni,"  their  hands,  after  pronouncing  (12)  ^STOfTO*  TripnraghnAya  namah, 

I salute  the  god,  the  destroyer  of  the  demon  Tripura,  and  the  goddess  with  ItoA  TO 
ApantAyai  namati,  “ I salute  the  Infinite.”— 22 

Their  arms,  after  pronouncing  (18)  RAiroi  TrilochanAya  namali  “ I salute  the 
three-eyed,  Hara ; and  the  goddess  by  sruiuuIto)  KAlAnalapriyAyai  namah,  1 salute  the 
beloved  of  the  Lord,”  the  ornaments,  after  saying  (14)  iwiRWW  vi:  « SanbhAgyabhavanA^ 
namaV  their  mouths,  after  reciting  (16)  TOirwrt’W:  ” SvahAsvadhAyai  namah,  for  the 
goddess  and  ♦CWW  ’W:  isvarAya  nama]!,  for  the  god.”— 28. 

The  lips  of  the  Goddess,  the  giver  of  prosperity,  should  bo  worshipped  by  recit- 
ing (16)  AsokamadhuvAsinyai  namali  and  of  the  god  by  ftw  TO  BivAya 

namati.  The  oheeks  of  the  Lord  should  be  worshipped  by  saying  (17)  TO  SthApave 
namaji  and  of  the  goddess  by  saying  to  GhandramnkhapriyAyai  namah.— 24, 

The  nose  of  the  Lord  should  be  worshipped  by  reciting  (18)  iWNR  ArdhanArHAya 
namali  and  of  the  goddess  by  TO  AsitAngyai  namah.  The  eye-brows  of  the  Lord 

of  the  world  should  be  worshipped  by  reciting  (18)  TO  miR  Namali  Ugrtya,  and  of  the 
goddess  by  fAilA  TO:  LalitAyai  namali.— 26. 

the  tresses  of  Biva,  after  reoltlpg  (20)  to;  BarvAya  nama^,  “ I salute  larva,*’  the 


184 


THE  MAT87A  PUBAEAM. 


dMtraotw  ot'Pim,  tho  trcMoi  of  the  balr  of  the  Qoddeas,  after  Maying  'VMavy«l 

I aalnte  VtoaTi,  .the  hair  of  the  god,  after  reoiting  (SI)  namatii^rtkaiH 

tha  n&thiya  and  of  the  goddeas  with  the  same  mantra.  The  head  of  the  goddess,  after  pro* 
nonnoiiig  (2S)  ffihit  Bhimograsamarnpipyo,  “ 1 salate  Bhlmograsamarttpint"  and  of 

the  God  by  so:  Sarvdtmane  namali.--36. 

After  thus  worshipping  bira,  tho  devotee  should  place  before  Him  the  Sanbhdgya 
Aftaka,  the  eight  blessings  consisting  of  tho  following  eight  things  : clarified  butter  (ghee) 
nifpfiva  (?),  saffron,  cow's  milk,  cnminscod,  sDgarc.ine  irasar&jai,  salt  and  coriander  seed. 
All  these  eight  things  are  cousidorod  as  lH>ons,  and  therefore  their  mixture  is  called 
Sanbhfigya  Aytakn.— 37-88. 

.Vote.— The  onumeration  here  is  slightly  different  from  that  of  bloka  9. 

After  offering  these  things  to  Siva  aiui  PAvvatt,  the  dovotee  should 
wash  the  horns  of  the  cow  in  the  night  and  drink  the  same  and  sleep  on 
the  floor. — 29. 

Getting  up  in  the  morning,  tho  devotee  should  bathe,  and  after 
taming  his  rosary,  should  offer  clothes,  garlands,  ornaments,  &c.,  to  the 
Brfthmana  and  to  his  Consort. — 30. 

The  devotee  should  get  a pair  of  golden  feet  made  and  give  them 
away,  along  with  the  eight  blessings  to  the  Brfihmana,  after  invoking  bles^ 
ingof  the  Goddess  Lalihl,  saying  “pfyatam  atra  Lalitft.” — 31. 

Similarly,  for  a year,  tho  worship  should  be  performed  according  to 
the  prescribed  rites,  on  each  third  day  of  the  moon,  by  those  who  desire 
all  blessings.  - 32. 

The  following  special  articles  of  diet  and  mantra  of  gift  'Rina)  should 
be  observed  ; hear  them  from  me.  The  devotee  slionld  drink  the  washing 
of  the  cow’s  horns  in  the  month  of  Chaitra,  eat  cowdung  in  tho  month 
of  Vaitekha.  The  flower  of  Mandara  tree  in  the  month  of  Jyai^tha,  tho 
leaves  of  the  woodapple  ^Vilvapatra)  in  the  month  of  ApSdha,  curds  in 
the  month  of  i^r&vu^a,  tho  water  sprinkled  with  the  Kuifa  grass  in  tlie 
month  of  Bh&dra.  Milk  in  Alvina,  clarified  butter,  mixed  with  card, 
in  Kflrtika,  the  cow’s  urino  in  Margafiira,  clarified  butter  in  Paufa. 
Blibk  sesamam  in  MAgha,  Panchagavya  in  PiiAlguna.  At  the  time  of 
giving  away  the  gifts,  the  devotee  should  recite  the  following  mantra ; 

“ LalitA,  yijay&,  BhadrA,  BhavAni,  KnmudA,  ^ivA,  VAsudevi,  Gaurt,  MangalA, 
EamalA,  Satt,  UmA,  be  pleased.”  In  other  words,  the  devotee  should  in 
each  month  invoke  the  pleasure  of  the  Goddess  by  reciting  a fresh  name 
out  of  the  twelve  names  mentioned,  eix.,  in  Ohaitra  he  should  say,  “ LalitA 
be  pleased,”  in  Vaiitakha,  “ VijayA  be  pleased,”  and  so  on.— 33-37. 

He  should  offer  the  following  varieties  of  flowers  (oueoaeh  month), 
at  Uie  time  of  worship MallikA,  Aioka,  Lotus,  Kadamba,  Htpak,  llAlatt, 


CEAPTSB  LX. 


m 


Kobjaka,  Karablra,  B&nam,  Aml&na,  Kubkuma  and  Sindbuvara ; or  any 
of  the  following  flowers,  as  procurable,  should  be  offered,  oi».— Jasmine, 
Safflower,  MAlati,  Lotus  and  Karabtra. — 38- 40* 

Married  woman  or  maid,  after  devoutly  worshipping  ^iva,  at  the  affd 
of  the  ordinance,  should  give  away  a bedstead,  along  with  all  the  necessary 
roqui8ites.-~41. 

At  the  time  of  giving  away  the  bedstead,  the  following  things  shotild 
also  be  placed  on  it  and  given  away  along  with  it : — The  golden  images 
of  ^iva  and  P&rvatl,  the  golden  figures  of  ox  and  cow. — 42. 

Besides  this,  according  to  his  means,  the  devotee  should  give  to  the 
Br&hma^s  and  their  wives,  clothes,  grain,  ornaments,  cows,  cash,  and 
should  not  give  way  to  niggardliness  or  doubt. — 43. 

One  who  observes  this  ordinance— Saubh&gya-4ayana— achieves  all 
his  ends  and  emancipation.  This  ordinance  had  better  be  observed 
without  any  object  of  bearing  fruits. — 44. 

One  who  observes  this  ordinance  every  month,  begets  good  fortune, 
health,  beauty,  longevity,  clothes,  ornaments,  etc.,  which  last  him  for 
9000000300  years.  One  who  observes  this  ordinance  for  12  years,  8 years, 
or  7 years,  goes  and  enjoys  in  the  region  of  8iva,  for  three  Ealpas. — 45-46. 

The  married  woman  or  the  maid  who  keeps  up  this  ordinance  also 
attains  the  same  benefits  through  the  grace  of  the  Goddess  Lalita. — 47. 

One  who  hears  or  advises  others  to  listen  to  the  account  of  this 
ordinance,  passes  his  days  in  heaven  lor  a long  time  in  the  form  of 
VidyMliara. — 48. 

Cupid  was  the  first  to  observe  this  ordinance,  and  SahasrabAhu,  the 
son  of  KArtavirya,  was  the  second  to  observe  it ; and  afterwards  it  was  kept 
up  by  Varupa  and  Nandi,  and  consequently  this  is  considered  so  sacred 
in  this  world. — 40.  ^ 

Here  ends  Hie  sixtieth  chapter  dealing  with  the  oJufipeanee  called 
SauhhAgyasayamvrata. 


, CHAPTER  LXI. 

N&rada  said: — ^iva ! There  are  named  the  following  seven  regions 
of  the  Devas,  viz. — ^Bhuh,  Bhuvab,  Svab,  Mahah,  Jana^,  Tapa^,  Satyaqi. — 1. 

How  my  mastery  be  obtained  in  succession  over  these  lokAs,  and 
how  one  may  obtain  in  this  earth  prosperity,  beauty,  long  life  and  blessing. 
Please  also  explain  to  me  how  they  become  blessed  with  fortune,  beauty 
and  wealth.— 2. 
to 


^iva  said. — Formerly,  a fearful  fire  was  ablaze  on  this  darth  ac^m* 
pained  with  a strong  wind.  The  friction  caused  by  the  wind  produced 
the  fire  for  the  destruction  of  the  demons,  at  the  command  of  Puruhflia 
(ladra).— 3. 

That  terrific  fire  reduced  many  demons  to  aslms,  when  'IMrakasnra, 
KamalA.ksu,  Ki^ladiinstra,  l'ari\vasu,  and  Viroeliana  fled  frotii  iIkmi*  war- 
fore  with  the  Do\a:>\ — 4. 

They  all  plunged  themselves  into  the  waters  of  the  sea  and  took  up 
their  abode  there,  where  fire  with  the  help  of  air  could  not  consume 
them.— 5. 

Afterwards,  the  demons  began  to  come  out  of  the  waters  aiul  persecute 
the  Devas,  men,  sages  and  other  living  beijigs,  and  disappear  again  into 
the  sea.— t). 

In  that  waj',  the  demons  asserted  their  boldness  for  twelve  tiiousand 
years  and  continued  their  campaign  ot  persecuting  tlie  throe  worlds,  for  a 
period  of  five  or  seven  years  at  a time,  by  taking  slieltcr  in  the  fortress 
of  the  ocean.--  7. 

Later  on,  Indra  directed  the  lire  and  the  wind  to  dry  up  the  oecean^ 
in  the  following  words:— Dry  np  tliis  receptacle  ot  water  c^uickly.— 8. 

**'  Because  it  shelters  my  foes.  They  have  taken  ihcir  refuge  in 
the  home  of  Vanina.  It  should  therefore  be  dried  up  as  quick  as 
possible.” — 9. 

Hearing  that  mandate  ot  linlra,  Imili  lire  and  wind  saiil  to  Him, 
the  destroyer  of  Sambara: — It  would  l)e  a great  sin  to  destroy  the 
ocean.  Because  iniiumerablc  beings  bad  made  it  their  home,  and  the 
destruction  of  tlie  ocean  meant  their  annihilation  along  with  it,  there- 
fore, we,  0 Puraudara,  cannot  do  it.  Lacs  and  lacs  of  beings  inhabit  the 
■''Deean,  within  the  space  of  every  yojuiia.  It  was  not  meet  for  us  to  annihilate 
them.  What  fault  have  they  done  to  be  destroyed,  U chief  of  the  Devas.” 
-10-12. 

Hearing  the  speech  of  the  fire  and  the  wind,  India  became  full  of 
wrath.  His  eyes  turned  crimson  red,  and  it  a[»pearea  as  if  He  was 
going  to  eat  up  both  lire  and  wind.  Jii  his  rage,  he  said lo. 

“ There  is  no  question  of  Dharma  or  adharma  where  Immortals  are 
concerned,  and  your  glory  is  still  more  high.  0 Agui  and  Viiyu ! 
Since  you  have  violated  my  injunction  and  have  adopted  the  duties  of 
the  Muiiis  not  to  injure  any  being,  and  since  you  have  leaned  towards 
the  enemies  who  are  devoid  of  religion  and  politics,  losing  sight  of  duty 


. ■'  '■  "tit; 

’ ' ' , . tf  . ' 

r " ' ’ • ' ™ ' ' ' ' '■ ■ — » "■■” 

andl^fltra;  therefore  Yoa,  0 6re,  trill  now  be  born  by  assnming  one 
body  along  with  Marata,  among  the  mortals,  in  the  forin  of  a sage. 
Til  that  form  of  the  sage  Agaatya,  yon  will  dry  op  the  ocean,  after 
which  yon  will  again  come  back  to  your  Divine  form.” — 14-17.  » 

After  thus  being  cursed  by  Indra,  both  of  them  fell  on  the  earth, 
where  they  were  jointly  born  out  of  the  pitcher  by  the  seeds  of  Mitrfi 
Varufll  and  came  to  be  known  as  Agastya — tlie  younger  brother  of 
Vaiiiftha,  and  one  of  tlie  most  renowned  ascetics.— 18-19. 

NArada  asked  i^iva  how  Agastya  became  the  brother  of  Vatfistba, 
and  how  MitrS  V&rutia  became  his  fatlier,  and  how  the  sage  Agastya 
was  born  out  of  the  pitcher. — 20. 

iijiva  said  that,  once  upon  a time  Lord  Vis^u,  the  son  of  Dharma, 
began  to  practise  rigid  asceticism  on  the  summit  of  the  GandhamSdana 
monntain.  Indra  being  afraid  of  llis  austerities,  sent  n group  of  nymphs  in 
company  of  the  Vernal-season  and  Cupid  to  distract  Him  from  His  penan- 
ces and  destory  His  austerities. — 21-22. 

The  Lord  Hari  was  not  in  any  way  moved  by  the  songs  and  music, 
gestures  and  tones  of  the  Cupid  and  the  spring,  nor  was  his  mind  attract- 
ed to  external  objects. — 2.'>.  ** 

Finding  the  Ijord  remaining  firm,  the  agents  of  Indra  began  to 
shiver  with  fear,  when  the  I^ord,  in  order  to  furtlier  bewilder  them, 
produced  from  His  thigh  a damsel  of  exquisite  beauty,  fascinating  the 
dwellere  of  the  three  worlds. — 24. 

Seeing  whom,  all  the  Devas,  along  with  Cupid  and  spring,  became 
enamoured  of  her,  when  the  Lord  said  to  them,  in  the  presence  of  the 
Apsariis : — 25. 

“ This  is  the  nymph  Urvaill,  0 Devas ! and  I have  created  her  to 
liecome  the  head  of  all  ApsarAs.” — 20. 

Then  the  God  Mitra  called  lier,  and  asked  her  to  enjoy  with  Him, 
which  she  accepted. — 27. 

Afterwards,  the  lotus-eyed  Urvaii,  while  moving  in  the  sky  slowly, 
was  caught  by  Varava,  who  slowly  pulled  her  by  her  cloth,  at  which  she 
told  Him  : ” Your  action  is  not  proper.  Because  I have  accepted  Mitra 
first,  and  consequently  1 cannot  be  your  wife,  0 Varuqa.”  Varuna  told  her, 

” Keep  me  at  least  in  your  favor  and  then  go  el8ewhere.”-~28'29. 

She  replied  : — ” All  right.”  When  Mitra  beard  this,  be  cursed  her : 

” You  go  down  to  the  world  of  the  mortals  and  be  married  to  the  son  of 
moon,  Bndha,  because  you  have  followed  the  ways  of  a courtezau.”  Saying 


18S  THE  UATarA  POBA.VAM. 

that,  both  Varova  and  Mitra  threw  Their  seed  in  a pitcher  of  water,  out  oi 
which  two  sages  (Agastya  and  Vasi§(h8)  came  out-^SO-Sl. 

Once  upon  a time  King  Nimi  was  playing  with  women  the  game  of 
dice,  where  Vasi^tha,  the  son  of  Brahmd,  chanced  to  go.  At  that  time 
the  king  did  not  show  his  respect  to  the  sage,  at  which  the  latter  got 
annoyed  and  cursed  him  to  become  bodyless,  and  the  king  also  pronounced 
another  curse  on  the  sage. — 32-33. 

They  both  became  bereft  of  reason,  as  it  were,  through  the  curse  of 
each  other,  and  went  to  Brahni&,  the  Lord  of  the  Universe,  to  remedy  the 
effects  of  the  curses.— 34. 

With  the  orders  of  Brahmd,,  Nimi  entered  the  eyes  of  the  mankind, 
and  this  causes  them  to  open  their  eyes ; but  when  Nimi  takes  rest,  they 
close  their  eyes ; and  hence  this  sliutting  and  closing  of  the  eyes  is  called 
winking  or  nime§a.  Vasi^tha,  similarly,  entered  that  pitcher  of  water  and 
was  born  out  of  it,  and  after  him  the  sage  Agastya  was  born,  of  the  same 
pitcher,  of  white  colour,  with  four  hands,  sacred  thread,  kamandalu,  and 
garland. — 35-36. 

The  sage  Agastya  went  to  the  Malaya  mountain,  along  with  his  » 
better-half,  and  began  to  practise  rigid  austerities,  surrounded  with  a 
number  of  other  sages,  according  to  the  rules  of  forest-dwellers,  her- 
mits.—37. 

A Long  time  after,  the  sage  Agastya,  seeing  the  world  oppressed  by 
the  demon  T&rak&sura,  drank  the  ocean. — 38. 

Wlien  BrahmA,  Visnu  and  ^iva  went  to  grant  him  a boon  and  asked 
him  to  seek  any  boon  he  wished,  Agastya  said  : — “ I wish  to  have  the  pri- 
vilege of  moving  about  in  the  Vim&nas  on  the  Dak^intichala  mount,  till  a 
thousand  Brahmas  come  and  go  in  turn  for  25  crores  of  times ; and  those 
who  worship  me  at  the  time  of  the  appearance  of  my  VimSna,  should  be 
the  monarchs  of  all  the  seven  realms,  till  the  time  of  the  re-establishment 
of  fresh  sovereignty  in  the  seven  climes.” — 39-41. 

Lord  Siva  said  : — “ It  will  be  so ; ” and  afterwards  all  the  Devas  went 
back  to  their  respective  regions.  It  is  therefore  proper  for  every  sensible 
man  to  give  a libation  of  water  (arghya)  to  the  sage  Agastya.— 42. 

NSrada. — “How  should  a libation  of  water  be  offered  to  the  sage 
Agastya ; be  pleased  to  explain  to  me  the  ways  of  worshipping  him.”— 43. 

The  Lord  said : — The  learned  should  get  up  early  in  the  morning, 
with  the  rising  of  Agastya,  and  bathe  in  water  mixed  with  white  wwamnm 
and  should  wear  garland  of  white  flowers  and  white  clothes.— 44, 


QB^FtBU  til. . 188 

And  then  a.good  pitcher,  free  from  perforations,  should  he  placed, 
after  decorating  it  with  flowers,  cloths,  and  filled  in  with  Pancharatna,  and 
haring  a pot,  full  of  clarified  butter,  put  on  top  of  it.— 45. 

Mote.— PaSohMttns,  L((,  Ato  gems.  They  are  rarioasly  enamersted,  vit. 

(t)  CRN;  ^ I ^ 

H 

qnf  fqsf  vms^i  i h 

(1)  iwk  mKHw  I qm48iDiii{  <jjl- 

11 

Afterwards,  a golden  image,  of  the  size  of  a thumb,  with  extensive 
arms  and  four  heads,  should  be  made  and  placed  on  top  of  the  pitcher ; 
and  then,  after  filling  it  in  with  sapta^dhanya  and  decorating  with 
cloth. — 46. 

Mote— Sapta-dhlnya  seven  grains. 

It  should  be  given  away  to  a Br&hmana,  along  with  a vessel  of  bell 
metal,  rice,  shell,  and  then  the  image  of  gold  should  be  given  away  in 
charity,  with  the  devotee’s  face  turned  towards  the  south. — 47. 

The  devotee,  if  he  can  afford  it,  should  give  away  a milch  cow,  along 
with  her  calf,  after  getting  her  hoofs  covered  with  silver,  and  horns  covered 
with  gold,  and  wearing  a bell  round  her  neck,  to  a Brfihmana. — 48. 

The  devotee  should  observe  this  rite  for  seven  days  from  the  rising 
of  Agastya.'  Some  say  that  it  should  be  observed  for  seveteen  years.— 49. 

" 0 Thou,  as  white  as  Ka4a  flower,  0 Thou  born  of  Agni  and  Marnt, 
0 Thou  eon  of  Mitra  and  Varu^a,  I salute  Thee,  born  of  a pitcher.”  The 
devotee  worshipping  like  this  with  fruits  and  flowers,  never  gets  aggriev- 
ed.—50. 

Afterwards,  homa  sacrifice  should  be  performed,  without  any  desire  of 
obtaining  any  fruits.  The  devotee  should  thus  offer  libation  of  water. — 51. 

The  devotee  offering  a libation  of  water  once,  according  to  the  rites 
prescribed,  gets  beauty  and  health ; the  one  offering  it  twice  gets  a 
place  in  Bbuvara  region,  the  one  performing  it  thrice  goes  to  heaven. 
In  the  same  way.  One  who  performs  it  seven  times  goes  and  enjoys  in 
all  the  seven  realms,  one  after  the  other ; and  the  one  who  offers  it  during 
the  whole  of  his  lifetime,  becomes  united  with  Brahm&. — 52>53. 

One  who  hears,  reads  or  relates  to  others  this  ordinance,  goes 
to  the  clime  of  Vi^pu,  and  is  respected  by  the  Devas  there,— 54. 

Htve  ends  the  sUety-firH  chapter  dealing  with  the  birth  of  Agaett^ 
, and  the  method  of  giving  arghya  to  him, 


190 


TEE  mTSTA  PVUfSAU. 

CHAPTER  LXll. 

King  Vairasvata  Maim  said: — Ijord ! pray  tell  me  about  a vrata  (ordi- 
nance) that  may  be  the  giver  of  good  Inck,  health,  prospei  ify,  emancipation, 
iihd  everlasting  frnit  in  the  next  tvorld>— 1. 

Lord  Matsya  said  1 shall  relate  to  you  what  diva,  the  destroyer 
of  Para,  said  to  Parvati,  in  answer  to  a question  put  by  her,  while 
he  was  sitting  on  the  beautiful  peak  of  the  Kailoifo.  1 shall  explain 
to  you  now  the  ordinance  which  gives  prosperity  and  emancipation, 
03  enunciated  by  Him,  iruthe  course  of  a conversation  on  religious  and 
pleasant  subjects  in  which  they  were  engaged.— 2-3. 

diva  said  : -Hear,  0 lady,  atteufively,  the  vow  which  gives  endless 
merit ; the  best  of  vows,  worthy  of  licing  followed  by  men  and  women. 
The  devotee  should  put  tlic  tilaka  mark  on  his  forehead  made  with  a pa.st(' 
of  goroehana,  fre.sh  urine  of  the  cow,  cowdung  and  sandal,  mixing  them 
with  curds  ; after  bathing  well  and  rnl)I)ing  white  mustard  mi  liis  hotl)’, 
in  the  tnontii  of  Jtluidra,  VaisJaklia  or  tin;  holy  .Margasti'sa  (.\graltayan  and), 
on  the  third  day  of  the  bright  fot  tniglil.  Tiiis  is  giver  of  an.spiciousiicss 
and  health,  and  is  very  much  appreciated  by  tlie  goddess  Ijalita. — 1-().  ^ 

On  every  third  day  of  the  bright  ami  the  dark  fortniglits,  the  male 
devotees,  with  their  minds  controlled,  sluudd  wear  yellow  garments,  tlie 
married  women  red  garmeuts ; the  widows  sliouM  put  on  oehre-coloiired 
gannents,  aud  maidens  should  be  chnl  iji  white.  Afterwards,  die  devotee 
should  bathe  lli<“  goddess  with  pafichagavya  and  milk,  then  with 
honey  and  then  vith  water  aroniated  wit!i  floweis  and  sandal.  Tlieti 
white  flowers,  varioii-  kinds  of  fruits,  salt,  raw-sugar,  milk,  clarified 
butter,  white  rice,  sesaiiium,  coriander  and  cnmiusccd  slionld  be  offered 
to  the  goddess,  and  a liba;;.in  of  water  shoiihl  he  made  on  the  third  days 
of  the  bright  and  dark  fortinghfs  with  the  following  mantras. — 7-10. 

The  feet  should  he  worshipped  after  reciting : (1)  “ VamdAyai  namah,’’ 
(1  salute  the  giver  of  boons),  the  ankles  after  reciting  (2)  “iSrJyai  namab,” 
(I  salute  you  I,aksim,  the  goddess  of  wealth),  the  legs  after  reciting 
(.3)  “ A^okilyai  namah.”  the  knees,  after  reciting  (4)  “ P&rvatyai  namab,” 
the  hips,  after  reciting  (ii)  “ Mafigala  Karipyai  namah,”  “I  satute  the  giver 
of  happiness,"  the  waist,  after  reciting  (fJ; " Vnmadevyai  namab,”  the 
stomaeh,  after  reeltiug  (7)  “ PadmodorSyai  namiib,”  the  breast,  after 
« ■■reciting  (8)  ” K^maifriyui  namah,"  the  hands  after  reciting  fOt  “ SaubbAg- 
' •'yAduyinyai  namab,”  the  arms  and  the  mouth,  after  reciting  (10)“^riyai 
. ^ namab,”  the  face  after  reciting  (11)  “ Darpapa  vAsiiiyai  namab,”  the 
* ' cheeks  after  reciting  (12)  “Smarad&yai  namab,”  the  nose  after  reciting 


CHaPTBB  LXlt 


191 


(13)  “ Gfturyai  namaV’ the  eyes  after  reciting  (14)  "Utpalfiyai  namalj,’’ 
the  forehead  and  the  tresses,  after  reciting  (15)  “Tustyai  namah,”  the 
be:i(l  after  reciting,  (10)  “ K&ty&yanyai  namah.”— 11-14, 

The  Goddesses  Gaurt,  &c.,  should  be  worshipped  also  after  pro- 
nouncing the  mantra : ^ Rnwfi  TO:  TO:  I ^ 

a(^  to:  n “ Salutations  to  Gauri,  Dhispi,  K&ntI,  Sri,  RambM,  LaiitA, 
and  VAsudevt.”  Then  the  devotee,  having  thus  worshipped,  according  to 
rule,  should  draw  in  front  of  the  goddess,  the  figure  of  a Iqtus  with 
twelve  petals,  with  the  pericarp  made  of  safiron.— 15-16. 

The  Goddess  Gauri  should  be  fixed  on  the  Eastern  petal,  Arpa^a  on  the 
South-Eastern  petal,  fihavAui  on  the  Southern  petal,  Itudrdni  on  the  South- 
Western  petal,  Siunnya  on  the  Western  petal,  Madanavrsiid  on  the  Noith-^, 
Western  petal ; and  after  that  Umft  on  the  Northern  petal ; followed  by  the 
terrible  Pdtala  on  the  North-Eastern  petal ; in  the  Centre,  in  due  order, 
should  be  placed,  1.  Maipsdhga,  2.  Mahgala,  3.  ICumudii,  4.  Sati  ;and  the 
Lord  Uudra  in  the  midst  of  all  these  goddesses,  the  goddess  Lalita  on  the 
pericarp 'of  the  lotus  flower,  the  goddesses  should  be  located  with  flowere, 
rice,  and  water  by  uttering  the  salutation,  nainab. — 17-19. 

Afterwards,  auspicious  songs  should  be  sung,  conches  blown,  and 
the  goddesses,  adorned  with  red  sandal,  red  cloth,  red  (lowers,  should  be 
worshipped  and  the  devotee  should  put  red  pigment  and  bathing  powder 
on  them  after  bathing  them,  for,  red  sindnra  and  saifron  are  extremely 
aggreeable  to  them.— -20. 

The  teacher  (guru)  should  also  be  adored,  with  prescribed  rites, 
because  where  the  guru  is  left  unadored,  all  the  rites  prove  fruitless. 

—21. 

The  Goddess  Gauri  should  be  worebipped  with  blue  lotus,  during 
the  moutli  of  Bbadrapada ; with  red  BandLujiva  flow  t.r  in  the  mouth  of 
Asvina ; with  white  lotus  (i^atapatra)  during  the  mouth  of  Kdrtika ; with 
jasmine  flowers  in  the  tnonth  of 'MArgnsirsa  (Agrabryana) ; with  the 
yellow  amaranth  flower  in  the  montli  of  Pau$a  ; with  the  white  jasmine 
or  safflower  inutile  month  of  Magliu;  and  with  the  white  jasmine  or 
Siudlnivara  flowers  in  the  moutli  of  rjialguna ; with  the  Cbampaka  and 
the  Aifoka  flowers  in  the  mouth  of  Chaitra ; with  Patala  flowei-s  in  the 
mouth  of  Vaiihikba ; with  lotus  flowers  in  the  month  of  Jye^tha ; witli  fresh  / 
lotus  during  A8udhn,.with  Kadamba  and  Malati  flowere  during  Bra vaiia.V 
23-24.  ' . 

The  devotee  should  take  the  following  things,  one  after  the  othevr' 
from  the  mouth  of  Bhldrapadu Cow’s  urine,  cowdung,  cow’s  &ilk,  ' 


192  THBUATSYA  PUUANAH. 


curds,  clarified  butter,  the  water  of  Ku^a  grass,  the  leaves  of  the  wood- 
apple  (bilva),  the  flowers  of  Calotropis-gigantea  (arkii),  barley  (yava).  the 
washing  of  the  cow’s  horns,  Pauchagavya  and  Bael  fruit ; and  offer  these 
to  the  Goddess  ns  Prfnfaua.  They  should  bo  taken  oii'.'  by  one,  vis,,  on  the 
third  day  of  BhUdrapada  cow’s  nrine,  in  the  month  'f  Advina  cowdung, 
and  BO  on.-— 25-26. 

In  the  same  way,  on  every  third  day  of  the  bright,  and  ilark  fortnights, 
the  devotee  should,  after  adoring  the  Goil  t^iva)  with  hi  - consort,®  offer  them 
cloths,  g^lands,  flowers,  sandal,  etc.  To  a male  God,  a yellow  garment 
should  be  offered  and  to  a female  goddess,  saffron-colored  dress.— 27. 

The  following  things  should  also  be  given  away  to  the  Goddess:— 
Nisp&va,  cuminseed,  salt,  sugarcane,  raw  sugar,  flowers,  fruits,  a lotus  of 
gold,  with  these  words : Goddess ! as  l^iva  does  not  go  any  where 
forsaking  you,  so  you  should  save  this  devotee  of  yours  through  this 
mundane  sea  of  troubles.”— 28-29. 

The  Goddesses  Kumudii,  Vimaln,  Anantn,  Bhavdni,  Sudhfi,  ^ivA., 
LalitA,  Kamals,  Gauri,  Sail,  BainbhA,  IVirvati  should  also  be  worshipped. 
The  devotee  should  invoke  the  pleasure  of  the  Goddess  by  reciting  each 
of  the  names  mentioned  almvo,  one  by  one,  from  BhAdrapada,  riz.~ 
“Kumudrt  Prlyatam,’'  Kuiniida  bo  pleased  and  satisfied,  and  so  on. 
On  the  completion  of  the  ordinance,  a lieds^tead,  along  with  a golden 
lotus,  should  be  given  away  to  the  Brahmana.— •‘'iO-.‘Jl. 

Every  month,  ~i,  10,  S,  0 or  2 BiAhmaiias,  with  their  wives,  should 
je  adored  by  the  ilevoteo  and  by  his  t'on.sor(.--,‘52. 

After  first  giving  Dak>ina  to  the  ijtirn,  it  should  be  given  to  other 
drahinanas.  This  is  what  has  been  laid  down  for  the  observance  of  this 
irdinance— the  giver  of  infinite  benefit.— 33. 

It  is  the  destroyer  of  all  sin.s,  and  the  giver  of  good  luck  and  health, 
t should  not  be  missed  through  miserliness,  for  the  man  or  the  woman 
who  exercises  miserliness  goes  to  the  lower  regions.— 34.  • 

Women  who  are  in  the  family  way,  maids,  those  in  confinement  due 
to  delivery,  and  those  who  are  ailing,  should  take  tlieir  food  at  night  (not 
seeping  the  full  fast).  If  one  is  in  her  menses,  and  so  cannot  observe  it 
.hrough  impurity,  she  should  get  it  observed  by  others,  according  to  the 
prescribed  rites.  She  herself ‘should  observe  continence. — 35. 

; !*  . One  wbo  observes  this  Tritlya,  giver  of  endless  fruit,  with  devotion, 
remains  in  the  realm  of  Siva  for  a hundred  crore  of  Kalpas.— 36. 


f Till*  offering  maj  be  made  also  to  a Brdhmaoa  and  hie  wife. 


CBAPTBR  LXIIL  19S 

fjran  the  poor  who  observes  it  with  devotion  for  three  years,  accord- 
ing to  the  prescribed  rites,  using  flowers  alone  for  worship,  gets  the  same 
benefit— 37. 

The  maid,  the  married  woman  or  tbe  widow  observing  it,  also  gets 
the  same  benefits  through  the  grace  of  the  Goddress  Gaurt. — 38. 

One  who  reads  or  hears  the  relation  of  this  Gauri  Vrata  or  advises 
others  to  follow  it,  is  honored  by  celestial  beings  and  by  the  Oevas  and 
their  consorts  and  tbe  Kinnaras.— 39. 

Here  ends  the  sixty-second  chapter  dealing  with  AnarUa-triHydrvrata. 

Net*,-— aU  the  above  OoddoBsee  are  really  manlfeatationa  o(  the  aaoM  deity.  The 
words  KiUDiida,eliO.,  may  be  takea  also  as  different  tiome*  of  one  and  tbe  same  Ooddeaa  for 
tbe  pniposes  of  worship  In  different  months  and  titbis. 


CHAPTER  LXIII. 

The  Lord  iSiva  said  I shall  now  describe  to  you  another  Tritlyfi 
ordinance  that  washes  off  all  the  sins  and  is  known  as  “ Rasakaly&ninl 
tritiyA  ” by  knowera  of  ancient  rituals.  In  observing  it  the  devotee  shoul(| 
bathe  in  cow's  milk  and  sesumum  on  the  third  day  of  the  bright  fortnig. 
in  the  month  of  MAgha.  Tbe  Goddess  should  be  bathed  with  honey 
the  juice  of  sugarcane.  The  right  hand  side  of  the  Goddess  should  be 
worshipped  first  and  the  left  baud  side  afterwards,  with  the  following 
mantras : — 1-3. 

The  feet  and  the  aukle  should  be  worshipped*  after  recitiog  (i)  efwiA  **  1 saluti 
the  Goddess  Lalitd,"  the  legs  and  the  knees,  after  pronouiiciog  (3)  Sdntyai  namat 

the  thighs,  after  reciting  (8)  W ’w:  “ .Sriyai  naraah,”— 4, 

The  waist,  after  reciting  (4)  W,  **  Madftlasftyai  namah,”  the  stomhob,  aftei 

reoitlng  (5)  wsrt  ’w:  **  Amaldyai  namah,”  the  breasts,  after  reciting  (6)  Mad- 

avAsinyai  namal^/'  the  shoulders,  after  reciting  (7)  51^  KumudAyai  nainah.*-5. 

Th6  ariDS  and  the  hands,  after  reciting  (8)  aiv®  *'  MAdhavyal  namati,"  the  month  and 
the  faeep  after  reoitlng  (9)  **KaaialAyai  uamah,"  the  brows  and  the  forehead, 

a(^  reoitlng  (10)  “ BudrA^yai  namafi,”  the  locks  of  hair,  after  reciting  (ll) 

**SankarAyai  oamaji.”— 6. 

The  Coronet,  after  saying  (12)  **  YisvayAsinyai  namaO,”  the  head,  after 

reciting  (18)  aaart  **  EAntyai  namah,”  tho  left  forehead,  after  reciting  (14) 

“ MadanAyai  namah,"  the  brows,  after  reciting  (15)  wn;  “ MohanAyai  namah.”— 7 

Tho  eyes,  after  reciting  (10)  w “ ChandrArdhadhArifiyai  naiuah,"  the 

month,  after  reotUng  (17)  9^  **  Tu$tyai  namali,'’  the  throat,  after  reciting  (18) 

‘^Utlm^lhinyal  namah;*  the  bteasto,  after  reoitlng  (19)  WfA  nn:  AmritAyai  naiiia|u'^*^> 
The  left  abdomen  by  reoitlng  (20)  W **  RambhAyai  nama^,'*  the  waist,  sMlIb* 
®W*if  (11)  mi  “ YiidkAyai  namah,”  the  heart,  alter  reciting  (22)  emwfW  ^^.h(an- 
mathAdhiofiyai  namab,”  the  stomach,  after  reciting  (8^  m:  » PitalAyai  nainajh'’^8.  " 
S6 


194 


THE  MATSYA  PaEANAM. 


The  walatk  after  reciting  (S4)  <*daratv&alnyal  nama^i,**  the  thighs,  sfter  T®- 

Oitihg  (25)  Wiftvt  “ ChaiDpskaprtydjal  iiama{i/'  the  knees  and  the  legs,  after  reottlng  (25) 

^Qauryai  namah,'*  the  ankles,  after  reciting  (27)  W <*G5jatryai  namaji,*'— 10. 
The  feet,  after  reciting  (28)  wralw®:  *<])har5dhar5yai  namaji,'' the  head,  after  re- 
citing  W « VlsvakAryai  namah/* 

NamobhavAniyai,  KAininyai.  KAmadevyai,  JagatapriyAlyai,  should  also  be  said.— 11. 

The  Goddess  should  be  worshipped  like  this,  aud  then  the  Brfihma^a 
and  his  wife  should  also  be  honoured  aud  feasted  with  sweet  food  and 
drink. — 12. 

A pitcher,  full  of  water  and  decorated  with  a pair  of  white  cloths, 
along  with  a golden  lotus  aud  flt)wer-garhind8  and  sandal,  should  be  given 
away  in  charity  to  the  Bralimana.— 13. 

Afterwards,  the  devotee  should  say,  OKuuiiid/1  Goddess ! be  pleased 
and  accept  this  lavapavrata.  lu  this  way,  the  Goddess  should  be  wor- 
shipped each  month.  The  Gotldess  Kiiinuda  becomes  pleased  with  the 
devotee  by  the  observance  of  this  ordinance. — 14* 

In  the  month  of  llagha,  salt  should  not  be  taken,  raw  sugar  should 
avoided  in  Phalguna,  nil  aud  mustard  hhouhi  be  discarded  in  Chaitra, 
ihd  honey  and  sweets  should  be  avoided  in  VaiAiklia. — 15. 

In  the  mouth  of  Jai^tha  pndilings  should  be  avoided,  cumin-seed 
should  be  discarded  in  Asadlia,  milk  iu  iSriivana,  curds  in  hhadrapada. — 
16. 

Clarified  butter  in  AiJvina,  lioiiey  in  Karttika,  coriander  iu  Marg- 
rfirsa,  sugar  in  Pausa. — 17, 

On  the  completion  of  the  onlifiance,  a Kamapdalii,  full  of  water,  &c., 
along  with  a full  vessel,  should  be  given  away  in  charity,  each  month,  in 
the  afternoon. — 18. 

(1)  White  balls  of  sweet  (Laddn'j,  (2)  mohanbhoga,  pudding,  (3)  cake 
(puri),  (4)  gharika  cake,  (5)  sweet  cake,  <G)  sweet  cake  mixed  with  spices, 
(7)  raap^aka,  (8)  milk,  (9>  vegetable,  (lO)curd  rice, (11) indm*!  iinartl,  (12)  and 
avokavartika  Gojha,  should  be  given,  one  by  one,  after  putting  them  on  the 
top  of  the  Kamandalu  in  each  month,  t.e.,  in  MAgha,  white  balls  of  sweet 
should  be  given,  in  the  next  month  mohanbhoga,  and  so  on. — 19-20. 

KumudS,  Mftdhavl,  Gauri,  Uainblia,  BhadrA,  JayA,  l^ivA,  UmA,  Rati^ 
Satl,  Mangalfi,  RatilalasA  sliouUl  be  invoked,  turn,  by  turn  each  month, 
Ijeginning  with  Magha,  and  say  ‘ prlyatam.*  The  devotee  should  offer  to 
the  goddess  the  prAdana  with  panchagavya,  and  should  observe  a fast  on 
eaobr  of  the  prescribed  days ; if  he  cannot  keep  the  full  fast,  he  might  eat 
aAmething  in  the  night.~21»22. 


OHAPTBB  LXIV. 


196 


Again  in  the  month  of  Magba,  sugar  should  be  placed  on  the 
Kamapd^^lu,  and,  after  saying,  Goddess  be  pleased,’*  should  be  given  away 
to  a Br^baia^a  in  charity: — the  golden  image  of  Parvati,  of  the  size  of  an 
inch,  after  decorating  it  with  the  five  gems,  rosaiy,  sacred  thread, 
Kamaadalu,  the  figure  of  the  moon  with  four  arms,  white  eyes  and  white 
clothes  ; a pair  of  white  cows,  decorated  with  gold  and  covered  with  white 
cloth,  along  with  a milking  vessel* — 23-25. 

One  who  observes  this  Rasa  Kalyanlnt  Tritiya  ordinance,  becomes 
instantly  liberated  from  sins  and  never  remains  grieved  for  9000001000 
years.  One  who  gives  away  an  image  of  Parvati,  with  a golden  lotus, 
each  month,  gets  the  benefit  of  performing  a thousand  agni§toma  sacrifices. 
-26-27. 

The  married  woman,  or  the  maid,  or  the  widow  who  observes  this 
ordinance,  derives  the  same  benefit  and  gets  good  luck  and  health,  and 
goes  to  the  realm  of  Parvati — 28. 

One  who  reads  or  hears  this,  is  liberated  from  the  sins  of  the  Kali 
Age  and  goes  to  the  region  of  Parvatt.  One  who  relates  this  to  others 
or  induces  others  to  observe  this  vrata,  also  becomes  like  the  Lord  of  the 
^ Devas  and  moves  about  in  aerial  chariots, — 29. 

Here  ends  the  sixty-third  chapter  describing  Bdsakalyiijtinttritty&  vrata. 


CHAPTER  LXIV. 

iSiva  said  : — N&rada  ! I shall  now  explain  to  you  about  the  ordinance 
known  as  ArdrSnandakart  tritiya,  whith  is  the  destroyer  of  all  sins. — 1. 

On  the  third  day  of  the  bright  fortnight,  whenever  the  moon  is  in 
the  mansion  of  any  one  of  the  following  asterisms,  Pfiryfiefi^hfi  (or 
QttarSe&dhft),  Robin!,  Mrigaeiirfi,  Hast^  or  Mfil4,  the  devotee  should  bathe 
in  water  mingled  with  kuda  and  incense. — 2. 

Afterwards,  he  should  wear  a garland  of  white  flowers,  white  raiments, 
and  use  white  sandal  paste,  and  then  worship  goddess  Bbavfinf,  along  with 
Her  consort,  Malifideva,  with  white  flowers  and  incense,  and  then  seat  them 
in  their  proper  places,  and  recite  the  following  mantras. — 3. 

Pirvatl’s  feet  should  be  worshipped,  after  reciting  “Vdsudevyai 
nama1|^,”  and  l^iva’s  feet  should  be  worshipped,  after  reciting  '*l^nkarAya 
nama^,”  and  their  legs,  after  reciting  “ ^okavinfitfinyai  nama(^  and 
Anandfiya  nama^,”  respectively. — 4. 

Their  hips,  after  reciting  Rambhfiyayi  namah  " for  the  goddess,  and 


196 


THW  HATSYA  PUBAtfAIif. 


“I^vftya  naraab”  for  the  God  ^iva.  The  waist  of  the  goddess,  after  reciting 
“ Adityai  nama^,”  and  of  the  God  by  reciting  “ l^dlap&^aye  nanjal^.”-“6. 

The  navel  of  the  Goddess,  after  reciting  “ Mddhavyai  namal(|,’*  and  of 
the  God  i^ambhn,  by  reciting  “ BbavAya  nainal^.”  The  breast  of  the 
Goddess,  after  reciting  “ Anandakftri^yai  naina^,"  and  of  ^^kara  by 
Indudhdripe  nama^.” — 6. 

Tbe  throat  of  the  Goddess,  after  reciting  “ Utkanthinyai  namab,”  and 
of  the  God  Kara  by  “ Ntlakanthfiya  imniah."  The  hands  of  tlie  Goddess, 
after  reciting  “ Utpaladh/lrinyai  namah,”  and  of  the  Lord  of  the  world  by 
“ Rudr&ya  namah.”  The  arms  of  the  Goddess,  after  reciting  “ Parirambhip- 
yai  natnab,"  and  of  Hara  by  “ Triiulilya  nauiab.”~7. 

The  mouth  of  the  Goddess,  after  recititig  “ Vilasinj'ai  namab,” 
the  mouth  of  ^iva,  after  reciting  “ Vri^ediiyn  namab.”  The  cheek  of 
the  Goddess,  after  reciting  “ Sasmeralililyai  namab,”  and  of  the  God  by 
“ Virfvavaktrilya  namab  " — 8. 

The  eyes  of  the  Goddess,  by  reciting  “ MadanavAsinyai  namab,”  and 
of  the  Ootl  Triddlin  by  “ Visfvadliamne  namah.”  The  brows  of  the  Goddess, 
after  reciting  “ Nrityapriy.lyai  namah,”  and  <if  tho  Ijord  by  ‘ TandavetfAy^ 
namab.”  The  forehead  of  the  goddes^-',  after  reciting  “ Indranyai  namnb>”  w 
and  of  the  God  by  “ Havyavahaya  namah.”  The  coronet  of  tlie  Goddess, 
after  reciting  ” SvAhiiy.ii  namah,”  and  of  the  find  “(iangadharaya  namab.” 
-9-10. 

Then  the  following  slioidd  ho  .'aid  tn  them  : — Iwsjii 

fiwswsfti  fiftt  I n 1 salute  i’arvali  and  1^n'aracdvara,  the 

whole  universe  is  whose  bo<ly,  mouth,  hand  ami  feci,  the  auspicious  ones 
with  gracious  countenance. — 11. 

Having  worsliipped  in  this  way,  he  shonld  make,  according  to  rules, 
in  front  of  the  image  of  Siva  and  Parvati,  pictures  of  lotus,  etc.,  with 
various  coloured  powdoi-s.  He  shoidd  also  make  pictures  of  conch,  quoit, 
flags,  tridents  (svastika,  goad  and  ohamara.  As  many  grains  of  tbe 
coloured  powder  as  fall  on  tlie  ground,  tlic  devotee  remains  for  the  same 
number  of  thousands  of  years  in  the  realm  of  Siva. — 12-13. 

r 

For  four  months,  in  tlie  dark  as  well  as  in  the  bright  fortnight,  the 
devotee  should  give  avray  to  the  Br&hmapas  four  kamati<jalusfnll  of  water, 
grain  and  gold,  and  having  a vessel  of  clarified  butter  and  gold  ont  op 
of  diem. — 14. 

Then,  for  another  four  months,  the  4 kamapdaftis  should  be  given  sway, 
after  placing  4 pots  of  barley  meal  (Saktu),  along  with  a vessel,  fnli  of 
on  top  of  them,  and  after  that,  for  another  four  tnonths,  4 |)ots  fo 


OHAPTBR  LXV. 


m 


swunum  should  1^  placed  on  top  of  the  kamap^ulus  and  for  one  year  from 
the  month  of  MArgadira  on  the  trittyi  tithi  the  devotee  should  offer  the 
following  eatables  to  the  deities,  one  in  each  month  (1)  Incense : with 
water  >2)  flower,  (3)  sandal  and  water,  (4)  saffron  and  water,  (5)  cnrd, 
>6)  unboiled  milk  (7)  washing  of  the  cow’s  horns,  (8)  water  and  Sour, 
(9)  water  mixed  with  powdered  kudtha  fa  kind  of  plant,  cdled  Costas 
speciosus),  (10)  Andropogan  Mnricatus,  (IL  water  mixed  with  powdered 
barley,  (12)  cuminseed,  sesamnm  and  water. — 15-18. 

In  the  worship  of  this  Goddess,  white  flowers  are  said  to  be  the  beat ; 
and  at  the  time  of  giving  away  duna  (pi-esents  to  the  Bralimapas)  the 
following  mantra  should  be  uttered. — 19. 

“ 0 Goddess  Gauri,  be  pleased,  O Goddess  ^labgalA,  the  giver  of 
happiness,  liberate  me  from  sins,  0 Goddess  T.a1itri,  promote  my  good 
luck,  0 Bhavftn!,  fulfil  all  my  desires.  ” — 20. 

After  a year,  the  devotee  should  give  away  to  the  BrAhmana  and  his 
wife,  after  saying,  “ 0 Gauri,  be  pleased  with  me,”  the  following  things : 
pitchers,  full  of  salt  and  raw  sn.-ar,  natron,  sandal,  cloth  (netra  patta), 
lotus,  along  with  gold,  the  images  of  l^iva  and  Pnrvatl  made  in  gold,  sugar- 
cane, cotton  and  bedstead,  along  with  mattress  and  pillows.— 21-22. 

, One  who  observes  this  ordinance,  called  Ardranandakaritrittyft,  goes 
to  the  region  of  ^iva  and  attains  healthy  longevity,  wealth  and  happiness 
in  this  world,  and  never  gets  grief  or  woe. — 23-24. 

Married  women,  or  maidens,  or  widows  also,  through  the  grace  of 
the  Goddess,  attain  the  same  benefits. — 2.5. 

The  person,  acquainted  with  the  rites,  duly  observing  this  ordinance, 
goes  to  the  realm  of  the  Goddess  Parvaii. — 26. 

One,  who  hears  or  relates  this  ordinance  to  others,  goes  to  the  region 
of  Indra,  and  is  venerated  by  the  Gandharvas  for  three  ages. — 27, 

The  woman,  whose  husband  is  alive,  and  the  widow,  who  observes 
this  ordinance,  attain  unbounded  happiness  in  their  houses,  and  in  the  end 
goes  to  the  region  of  P&rvatt,  along  with  her  husband,  and  the  widow 
rejoins  her  husband  there. — 29. 

E*re  ends  1ji«  sixty-fourth  chapter  dealing  tcith  Ardrdnandakari- 

trittydorata, 

CHAPTEDl  LXV. 

fiiva  said I shall  now  explain  to  yon  about  the  Akeayatrittyh 
(giver  of  all  desires)  vrata,  on  whiph  day  the  performance  of  charity, 
Miotifice  or  ?apa  gives  inexhaustible  benefit  to  the  devotee.'~‘I, 


- - ^-  -1-  1^1  I . ^ 

The  Lord  said  When  the  eolipse  tales  place,,  at  the  time  when 
the  sun  or  the  moon  is  in  that  particular  sign  of  the  zodiac  under  wbioh 
a person  is  born,  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  bathe  in  water  mixed  with 
herbs,  according  to  the  prescribed  rituals,  as  mentioned  below.  When 
there  is  a lunar  eclipse,  the  devotee  should  get  blessings  invoked  by 
Br&hmapas  and  worship  four  of  them  with  white  flowers  and  sandal 
paste,  .and  place  four  flawless  pitchers,  full  of  water  and  herbs,  before  the 
commencement  of  the  eclipse,  and  consider  these  pitchers  as  representing 
oceans.— -2-4. 

Then  the  iJevas  should  be  invoked,  after  putting  the  following  things 
in  the  pitchers : — The  earth  of  the  elephant  ward,  of  the  stable,  of  the 
chariot-house  (or,  road),  of  the  anthill,  of  the  tank,  of  the  confluence  of 
two  rivers,  of  the  cattle-yard  and  of  the  king’s  gateway,  as  well  as  pancha- 
gavya,  good  and  genuine  pearls,  gorochaua,  lotus,  conch-shell,  panoharatna 
(five  jewels),  quartz  (crystal),  white  sandal,  Ganges  water,  mustard, 
andropogan  muricatus,  Kuinudini  Hotus),  liAjadanta  (ivory),  and  resin 
(guggul).— 5-7. 

The  Devas  should  be  irivoked  with  the  following  mantras  : — “ All 
the  sacred  places,  seas,  rivers,  tanks,  rivulets,  come  here  to  wash  off  the  % 
sins  of  the  devotee.— May  the  God  India,  the  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt, 
known  as  sovereign  of  the  Adityas,  and  liaviug  thousand  eyes,  come  and 
remove  my  suffering  caused  by  the  (inauspicious)  planet. — May  Agni,  the 
mouth  of  the  Devas,  having  seven  flames,  of  immeasurable  brightness, 
come  and  remove  my  suffering  caused  by  the  lunar  eclipse. — May  Yarna, 
the  rider  of  the  buffalo,  representative  of  justice  (Dliarma),  the  witness  of 
the  deeds  of  all  men,  come  and  soothe  luy  pain  caused  by  the  lunar 
eclipse. — May  the  living  god  Vanina,  the  ruler  of  all  waters,  the  rider  of 
the  alligator,  and  wielder  of  the  noose,  consisting  of  sea  serpents,  come  and 
remove  my  suffering  caused  by  the  lunar  eclipse. — May  VSyu,  who  nou- 
rishes all  creatures  in  the  shape  of  vital  breath,  who  loves  black  antelope, 
come  and  remove  my  suffering  caused  by  the  lunar  eclipse.— May  Euvera, 
the  giver  of  wealth  and  master  of  riches,  and  armed  with  sword,  trident, 
club,  4c.,  come  and  drive  away  my  sin  caused  by  the  ^unar  eclipse. — 
May  Sankara,  the  rider  of  the  bull  and  the  wearer  of  tlie  crescent  and 
armed  with  the  bow,  called  pi nd>ka,  come  and  destroy  the  pain  arising 
out  of  the  lunar  eclipse. — May  Brahin&,  Vi^Qu  and  x\rka  as  well  as  all 
mobile  and  immobile  beings  existing  in  the  three  worlds,  come  and  burn 
.up  8-16. 

.thus  invoking  all  Devas  and  other  beings;  the  devotee 
spnulde'upoii  binuwU  the  water  of  those  medicated  .piteh«re.  whioi|i  M« 


OHAPTSS  tIkVUl. 


SOI; 


adorned  with  white  garlands  and  sandal  paste,  and  then  worriiip  the 
BrAhmapas  and  the  family  Deity  by  reciting  the  mantras  laid  down  in- 
the  Rig,  Sftma  and  Yajur  Vedas,  and  then  give  away  a cow,  along  wit^ 
cloth  to  the  Bffthmapae.— 17. 

The  mantras  mentioned  above,  (in  the  versea  8>10,)  should  be  written 
on  a piece  of  cloth  or  on  a lotos  leaf,  and,  placed  in  an  earthen  dish  with 
five  jewels  (gold,  diamond  sapphire,  ruby  and  pearl,  or  gold,  silver, 
coral, ' pearl  and  r&gapatta).  The  BrAhmapas  should  place  on  the  head 
of  the  devotee,  the  said  dish  and  await  the  time  of  passing  away 
the  eclipse.  At  the  time  of  the  eclipse,  the  devotee  should  turn  his 
face  towards  the  east  and  worship  his  family  God.  On  the  cessation  of  the 
eclipse,  cows  should  be  given  away  in  charity,  and  then  after  a bath, 
the  cloth,  on  which  the  above  mantras  are  written,  should  be  given  away 
to  the  Brfihmapa.  -18-20. 

Ouo  who  bathes  according  to  these  rites,  after  an  eclipse,  never  gets 
any  trouble  through  unlucky  stars,  and  his  family  and  kinsmen  will  also 
prosper. — 21. 

The  person  following  the  above  rites  with  devotion,  attains  highest 
bliss,  free  from  re-birth. 

At  the  time  of  a solar  eclipse,  the  mantras  mentioned  above  should 
be  recited  by  substituting  the  word  l^Orya  (the  Sun)  in  the  place  of 
Chandra  or  Moon.  The  additional  gift  in  the  case  of  solar  eclipse  most 
consist  of  rubies.  A beautiful  cow  should  be  giveu  away  at  the  time  of 
any  eclipse  (either  solar  or  lunar),  in  honour  of  the  moon. — 22-23. 

One  who  hears  or  causes  others  to  hear  about  this  ritual  goes  to  the 
realm  of  Indra,  after  being  liberated  from  all  sins,  and  is  glorified  there. 
-24. 

Here  endt  the  eixty^eventh  chapter  dealing  vnth  the  ritual  of  bathing, 
at  the  time  of  eolar  or  lunar  eclipse,  by  a person  in  whose  todiacal  house  of 
birth  the  eclipse  takes  place. 


„ CHAPTER  LXVIII. 

KArada  said Lord ! What  should  be  done  to  restore  the  equili- 
brium of  mind  in  times  of  distress  ? How  is  poverty  to  be  got  over?  What 
should  be  done  at  the  time  of  the  ablation  of  a woman  whose  ofh^ring 
•do  not  survive  ?--. 

Lord  said  The  sins  of  the  past  fructify  in  one's  present  life. 
Disease,  misery,  loss  of  dear  ones,  are  only  the  results  of  ' past  ains.— 2. 


202 


THE  MAI^A  PUEANAH. 


I sliall  now  rlpRcribe  to  yoit  the  riiuals  of  b<ntbing  on  the  seventh 
day  of  a bright  fortniglit,  tliat  washes  oH  all  the  sins,  which  causes 
prosperity,  nnd  destroys  all  iuiman  troubles.  I'shall  also  describe  to  you  the 
rituals  of  the  ablution  of  a woman,  whose  offspiings  do  not  survive,  as  well 
as  for  the  longevity  of  old  and  diseased  men  tis  well  as  of  young  men.  This 
ablution  wliich  is  done  aeeording  to  special  rites,  drives  away  the 
uneasiness  of  the  mind. — 3 5. 

In  a future  Vurriha  Kalpa,  0 King,  there  will  be  a Vaivasvata  Manu 
als(\ — 0. 

Then  in  tlie  SJotli  Satyaynira,  of  that  Vaivasvata  Manvantara,  an 
illiistrinna  ami  powerful  king,  Kritavirya,  the  promoter  of  the  Hsiya- 
Hn3’a  dynasty  will  be  horn  and  llirive. — 7. 

I’hat  king  will  rule  the  world,  consisting  of  seven  continents  for 
seventy  thousand  years,  0 Nar.ida,  with  great  statesnninship. — 8. 

Ho  w’ill  liave  ()n(3  ImsMlre  1 sons  who  will  all  die  as  soon  as  born, 
owing  to  the  cm  sc  of  the  .sage  Chyavana. — 9. 

Sometime  after  that  tlio  K»Mg  Kritavirya  will  be  blessed  witb  a 
renowned  son,  in  ne<l  S.iiMsrab  Lliu  'tli<)iis.nnl-anned).  will  have  beau- 
lifiil  eyes  like  elephant,  will  bo  lucky  and  po.S'^css  all  the  auspieioiis  imuks 
of  a king.  — 10. 

Ilis  fathfu-,  Kritavirya  will  woisljip  the  thonsand-rn\Tcl  Sun  according 
to  the  Vedic  hynms  with  fasts  ami  vo»vs,  in  order  t.t>  ward  off  the  sage’s 
enrse,  so  that  the  son  may  not  die  in  infanry.  He  will  then  come  to 
know  of  the  rituals  of  this  particular  abluiion  froiu  the  God  Sun,  wlio 
will  relate  to  the  king  the  w.iys  of  the  ordimuiee  that  would  wash  off  all 
sins  ami  allay  all  iiii.sfortunes  — 11  IJ. 

The  God -Sun  will  say : King  Kritavliya  ! T am  very  mnch  pleased 
witli  j'onr  devotion  ami  penance.s:  there  is  no  fnrtlmr  need  of  them.  I 
bless  3'on  that  this  son  of  yours  will  bo  long-lived.” — 13. 

I shall  now  explain  to  yon  al)ont  the  ritJials  of  ablution  on  the 
seventh  day  of  a lunar  fortnight,  in  order  tliat  all  men  may  be  benefited 
by  it.  The  woman,  whose  off-^pring  does  not  survive,  ought  to  bathe  on 
the  seventli  day  of  the  lunar  fortnight,  or  on  the  seventh  month  after  the 
birth  of  the  child.-- '14. 

The  worshipper  should  consult  Brahrnanas  about  his  lucky  stars  and 
then  fix  some  auspicious  day  for  the  rituals,  avoiding  the  birth  asterisra  of. 
the  child.  This  ritual  applies  to  old  men  aud  to  others  suffering  from 
illness,  etc.— 15. 


on  AFTER  LXVIU. 


20S. 


According  to  the  rites  of  tbe  EkS^gtii  fire  ceremony,  the  devotee 
should  locate  the  Fire  on  an  altar,  plastered  over  with  cowdung,  and  cook 
on  that  fire  pudding  (cliaru),  with  red  rice  and  cow’s  milk,  and  offer  it  to 
Sfirya  and  lliidra  by  reciting  the  mantras  f)f  lindra  and  the  Ood 

An  offering  of  clarified  butter  should  also  be  poured  into  the  fiie, 
after  reciting  the  seven  Uik  mantras  of  the  Sun,  and,  similarly,  he  should 
offer  to  Rudra  with  liynin  snered  to  Rndra. — 17. 

In  this  sacrifice,  the  fuel  of  Calotropia  gigantea  and  Bntea  frondosa. 
should  be  used.  An  offering  of  barley  and  black  sesaiuuin  should  be 
made  lOS  times  in  this  hotna. 

In  the  same  way,  another  lOS  offerings  of  clarified  butter  should 
be  made,  after  reciting  Vyahriti  mantras.  Afterwards,  tlie  worshipper 
should  bathe. — 18-19. 

Four  pitchers  sliould  be  placed  in  four  corners  by  a Tlrahmana  versed 
in  the  Vedas,  witli  a Knsfi  grass  in  )i*s  hand,  and  a fifili  one  slionid  bo 
placed  in  tlie  centre,  after  filling  it  in  with  curds,  uncooked  rice,  etc, 
reciting  the  seven  Ilik  verses,  ami  then  Agni  sliould  bo  invoked.— 

The  central  pircher,  which  must  have  no  flaw  in  it,  slionM  also  be 
filled  in  with  the  sacred  water  of  the  Siirya  tirtlia.  All  kimis  of  gems, 
and  different  kinds  of  herbs,  paiicliagavya,  pai'chratna,  fruits  and  floweis, 
should  be  placed  in  the  corner  pitchers.  Afterwards,  the  pitchers  should 
be  covered  with  cloth,  and  then  located  at  their  respective  places. — 

The  earth  of  too  following  places  shnnhi  also  be  put  into  those 
pitchers,  along  with  the  things  luenlioneil  above  : -stable,  elephant  yard, 
chariot  house,  anthill,  coiilliieuce  of  two  rivers,  tank,  cat  tie- fold,  royal 
palace  gate. — 23. 

The  Brahmana  touching  the  central  pitcher,  which  is  snrronnderi  by 
four  other  pitclier.'i,  each  containing  precious  stones  within  them,  should 
reL‘ite  the  Ve*lic  mantras  relating  to  the  God  Sun.— 21. 

Seven  Biahmana  ladies,  along  with  their  Husbands  should  be  wor- 
shipped with  garbinds,  cloths,  oriKinients,  etc.,  according  to  the  means  of 
the  devotee.  These  women  should  liave  no  bodily  dr-fect.  Afterwards, 
the  Brahmans  •women  should  perform  the  ablution  ceremony  of  the  woman 
whose  children  do  not  survive,  and  recite  the  following  words  : — 

‘“May  this  child  be  long-lived,  may  this  progeny  of  this  woman  be 
long-lived.  0 Sun,  Moon,  planets,  Star.-<,  Indra,  Devas,  Lokapfdas,  BrahmA, 
Vj^^u,  Siva  and  other  groups  of  Devas,  alwa3'8  protect  this  child.  0 
Mitra,  0 Saturn,  0 other  De^as,  0 Agni,  0 Balagraha,  be  pleased  anJ 

never  injure  the  child  and  his  parents,” — 25-28. 

Note.— iir«^  a A demon  or  any  planetary  influence  tliat  injorea  the  child- 


.g04  * TBB  MAfSTA  POBAVIAU. 

After  this,  the  seveo  Br&bina^a  women  with  their  husbands  and 
children  and  wearing  white  raiments,  should  be  honoured  along  with  the 
preceptor, —29. 

Then  the  image  of  Dharmar&ja,  made  in  gold  and  placed  on  a 
copper  vessel  should  be  given  away  to  the  preceptor. — 30. 

Afterwards  with  his  mind  free  from  jealousy  and  miserliness,  gold, 
cloth,  gems,  clarified  butter,  milk,  &c,,  should  be  given  to  the  Brfih- 
mapas, — 31. 

■ The  Br&hmapas  should  be  fed  fiirst  and  then  the  devotee  should  take 
his  meals.  After  meals,  the  preceptor  should  pronounce  his  blessings 
in  the  following  woi’ds  : — “ Tliis  child  may  live  for  a century  and  may 
always  remain  prosperous.— 32. 

“ All  his  sins  be  instantly  consumed  in  the  submarine  fire.  0 
Brahmft,  Vispu,  l^iva,  Vasu,  Svamik/lrtika,  Indra,  Agni,  protect  this 
child  from  all  calamities  and  bless  him.”  The  preceptor  'pronouncing 
the  above  blessings  should  lie  worshipped. — 33-34. 

Then  a milch  cow  should  be  given  away  in  charity  to  the  preceptor 
who  should  theu  be  dismissed  with  proper  honors.  Tlien  the  woman 
holding  her  child  should  salute  the  Sun  and  ^a&kara  and  eat  the  remain- 
der of  the  charu  (l^fikalya),  and  then  pronounce  “ AditySya  namah.”  This 
is  the  way  which  should  be  followed  to  restore  the  peace  of  mind  caused 
by  evil  dreams  or  calamities,  &c. — 35-36. 

Not«i— snm  =>  The  thing  which  is  offered  as  a libation  in  the  Fire  at  the  time 
o(  saeriffoe.  I salute  the  sun. 

One  who  observes  these  rituals  on  a seventh  day  of  a briglit  fortnight, 
avoiding  his  birth-day  and  asterism,  never  comes  to  grief.— 37, 

The  King  Kfitavtrya,  most  renowned,  got  long  life  and  ruled  the 
world  for  a period  of  ten  thousand  years,  owing  to  his  having  observed 
the  above-mentioned  rituals  repeatedly. — 38. 

The  deity  Stirya,  having  described  this  ablution  called  Saptamt- 
and  which  is  sacred,  sanctifying  and  giver  of  long  life,  vanished 
then  and  there.— 39. 

Thia  Saptamlsn&na,  which  has  been  thus  described,  is  most  sacred 
and  diapeller  of  all  evils.  It  is  the  giver  of  great  benefit  to  child- 
ren.—40. 

Health  ought  to  be  sought  from  the  Sun,  wealth  from  Agni, 
knowledge  from  Idvara,  and  emancipation  from  JanArdana. — 41. 

Thia  ritual  is  the  destroyer  of  great  sins  and  giver  of  happiness  to 


OHAPTER  LEIX.  M. 

the  children,  end  the  Munis  say  that  one  who  hears  about  it  attains 
success. — 42. 

Here  ende  the  aixty-eigMh  chapter  deseribing  the  SajAamtvrata  for  the 
longevity  of  infante. 

CHAPTER  LXIX. 

The  Lord  said  ; —In  the  past,  during  the  Rathantara  Kalpa,  Brahmfl 
asked  biraon  tlie  summit  of  the  Mandarachala  Mountain. — 1. 

Brahm&said,  “ How  one  may  with  tlie  performance  of  slight  austeri- 
ties get  unending  prosperity  and  iiealth,  0 Lord  of  immortals  ? How  may 
men  attain  emancipation  by  practising  brief  austerities? — 2. 

0,  MahAdeva,  nothing  is  unknown  to  thee.  Through  thy  grace  one* 
knows  everything.  Pray,  be  pleased  to  explain  to  me  how,  by  practising 
small  austerities,  one  may  get  large  reward.” — 3. 

The  Lord  Matsya  said  On  thus  being  asked  by  Brahma,  ^iva,  the 
lord  of  UmA,  the  Soul  of  the  universe,  the  creator  of  all  worlds,  began 
to  explain  the  ordinance,  so  pleasant  to  the  mind.— 4. 

Siva  said  :--After  this  23rd  Rathantara  Kalpa,  will  again  follow 
VArSba  Kalpa.  In  that  Kalpa,  also,  there  will  be  14  manvantaras.  The 
seventh  of  these  will  be  Vaivaswata  manvantara.  In  the  28th  DvApara 
ynga  of  the  Vaivasvata  manvantara  will  be  born  the  great  God,  VAsudeva- 
Janardana.  By  the  end  of  the  same  (28th  Dwapara'  age.  Lord  Visnu  will 
manifest  Himself  in  three  different  ways,  to  relieve  the  world  of  its 
burden. — 5-7. 

He  will  manifest  Himself  as  (1)  Dvaipayana  VyAsa,  (2)  Baladeva,  (3l 
^rikri$na,  and  will  bring  relief  to  the  world  by  crushing  the  pride  of  the 
wretches  like  Katpsa,  etc. — 8. 

The  pnri  DwAravatt,  which  is  now  known  as  Ku4asthall,  will  be* 
come  DwArikA'and  will  be  planned  for  the  residence  of  Krlspa  by  Vidva- 
karmA,  according  to  my  instructions. — 0. 

In  the  noble  assemblage''which  will  be  attended  in  that  sacred  city, 
in  company  of  their  beautiful  ladies,' by  Vri$pi,  Yadava  and  the  Kauravas, 
the  PAndava  Bhimsena,' the  most  illustrious  of  all  'assembled  there,  will, 
at  the  close"  of  the  paurAnic  discourses,  ask  Lord  KrispA,  attended  by 
the  Devas  and  the  Gandharvas,  and  He  will  them  explain  about  the  ordi- 
nance just  now  asked  by  you. — 10-12. 

0 BrahmA ! after  that  Bhtmasena'will  follow  the  rituals  dictated  by 
Lord  Kri^^a  and  will  promulgate  it  in  the  world. — 13. 


TEE  MATEY  A PVRAVAM. 


m 

Bhltnasena  is  called  Vrikodara,  on  account  of  liis  liaving  Vfika  or 
' irolMike  tire  given  by  me  in  his  stomach.  His  hanger  will  never  be 
appeased.->14. 

NotCio''  VrikddarasA  wolf  in  tho  stomach." 

Bhima  will  be  most  wise,  chnritalde,  wealthy,  handsome  like  Cupid, 
and  will  have  the  power  of  ten-thousand  elephants. — 15. 

The  pious  who  are  unable  to  suppress-  their  hunger  j ad  keep 
up  a full  fast,  should  observe  this  ordinance,  which  is  tho  best  of  all  for 
them.— 16. 

For  the  benofit  of  tlie  pious,  unable  to  suppress  their  hunger,  T.ord 
VAsudfcva,  (he  Jagadguru.  the  soul  of  the  \iniversc,  will  explain  the  rituals 
relating  to  this  ordinance,  wliicli  will  be  llie  gi'  er  of  the  beiu'fils  of  all 
tho  saciifices,  (be  cl(-<lr>iyor  of  all  sins  and  (’iilainli.es,  l!;e  give;  of  the 
liiglifst  prosperity,  the  nio«t  aiioient  of  all  tlie  foiiii.-  of  ordiiiaocca  .and 
venertifed  by  tl-c  /Vv.is.  "--J  “-KS. 

^'ote. — Now  follows  tuc  CNplanatioii  of  tho  rituals  bv  Lord  Vasmlova,  which  is  another 
epitjiet  of  Kri.sin. 

VAsiulfjvn  sniti  dovotf  o wlio  inny  not,  bo  nido  t')  fast  on  tlio 

eigbtli,  foiirteonlh  ii-:'!  iwolvi-ili  d.iy  ttf  ;i  bri.ubt  Toi  t niglit,  or  mi  tiny  otlioi* 
prescribetl  diiy.  attiiihs  unilioMtkm  with  Vit-nn,  by  keeping  ti  fast  on  tbip 
sacred  day  only. — 

On  tlie  lentil  flay  of  tie*  brii^bt  forrni^lit,  in  tlie  inonlli  of  Miigba, 
the  devotee  slimdd  b.m'ie'  i i ^v.tstn*  niixcd  wiili  sesainnin.  after  anointing 
his  body  \Yith  elarirjf’  l buffer.— -1. 

Ile^^lioubl  then  woisbip  Visnu  v.  iili  tbc  wmd-i,  ‘‘  Xainah  Narayariaya.” 
The  feet  (»f  tlie  1/jrd  sboiiM  be  \V  )ixbipp*.*d  vvifli  " Kii'^nMva  naniah,*’  ibe 
head  with  “ S ii  vAluiaiui  nnnirih,”  llie  tbroat  \vli!i  “ Vaiknnt.baya  niiniah,” 
the  breast  witii  “ JjiivrJs  idbaraya  riauiah,"  ibe  four  arms  with  “ Cbakririe 
nainal.i,”  “Gadiiine  r.aniah/’  “ Varadaya  naniali,”  “f^ankbine  nain.ih,”  the 
stomach  with  “ DAmodar-'.ya  narna  the  region  of  Cupid  with  “ J'anclia- 
ifirA3ui  namah/’  tlie  tbiglis  with  “ Saubbafivan.ltli  lya  namah,”  tho  knees 
with  “ liliuvadbiiiine  iv.nnab,’'  the  sbanks  wiili  “ Xllakaathaya  namah/*  the 
feet  with  * Viiivasrije  nanuih.”  'riien  tlie  Gixldess  fiak^ini)  sliould  be 
worshipped  with  “ l)ev\vai  nain.-ih,”  “£>intyni  naniah,"  “ Lik>r.\vai  iiamal;,’* 
Sriyayai  namah,”  “Pnstyai  nnmah,*’ '*  Tu-.tyai  nainah,’*  “Dliri^bvai  namnh/* 
“Hri^tyai  namah.*’  Aftiu  wards,  Garnda,  tl»e  king  of  birds,  swift  like  the 
wind,  the  destroyer  of  serpents,  should  alwaj-s  Ije  sainted.— 22* 26, 

Having  tlius  woisbipped  Govindu,  iJiva  and  Ganc^a  shouh]  be 
worshipped  with  sanda),  incense,  flowers,  and  various  kinds  of  victuals. 


CBAPTEn  LXIX. 


207 


T])en  tbe  devotee  sliould  take,  iu  silence,  with  ghee,  the  porridge 
miido  of  nice  sesamum  and  grain,  cooked  with  cow’s  milk,  sugar,  and 
walk  a hundred  stops.— 27-28* 

Afterwards,  the  devotee  should  brush  his  teeth  with  a stick  cf 
or  khadir  and  then  rinse  Ins  mouth,  facing  the  east  or  t he  north,  and  holding 
a kiisa  in  his  liand.  After  sunset  he  should  perform  his  sandhya  and 
then  utter:  ‘*Oin  natnonarayanaya  namah,  twamaham  rfarnafigatah. 
I salute  Nftroyann,  I throw  myself  under  your  protection.”  On  the 
Ekadasli  day,  I shall  keep  a fast  and  worship  Narayana  and  keep  a vigil 
at  night;  have  a bath  early  in  the  morning  (ie.,  on  the  Dvadasi;  and 
make  an  oblation  of  clarified  butter  to  Fire.  PnnclarikMk>a,  I shall,  with 
mind  controlled,  eat  rice,  cooked  wiili  milk,  with  a few  good  Brahmans. 
May  that  be  fulfilled  by  Thy  grace,  without  any  obstruction.’ 

With  these  word*?,  he  should  sleep  on  tlie  bare  oai  rh.  Then,  on  d<ay- 
break,  be  shoubl  liear  recilalions  fioin  tlic  Iiiliasn,  ami  go  and  batbe  in 
a river,  after  rubbing  earlli  on  his  bo  ly^  At  this  lime,  he  should  avoid  the 
company  of  wicked  peisom?. — -h-34. 

Aficr  that,  he  should  perform  Ids  ‘•andliya  prayers  and  offer  libations 
of  water  to  the  manes  of  his  deceased  ancestors,  and  then  salute  Hiisikerfii, 
the  Sole  sovereign  of  the  seven  worlds.  'J'lien  lie  slamld  erect  a pandal 
mca.surirjg  ten  or  eleven  hands,  in  .front  his  house.— 35-30. 

A’otf.— Saudhyd-Tlio  raoniing,  noon  and  tho  cvcnhi"  prayer,  performed  by  a twicc- 

burn. 

An  altar,  measuring  four  hands,  should  be  made  in  the  pandal,  and 
a portal  of  the  same  measurement  should  I)e  made. — 37. 

Ho  should  place  there  a pitcher  of  water  and  worship  the  Guardians 
of  tlie  quarters  (I fikpfda'.  Hiere  the  devotee  should  sit  on  a black  deer 
skill  and  over  his  Itead  place  the  pitcher  of  water,  after  making  a hole  iu 
its  centre,  lie  shonhl  allow  the  water  to  trickle,  drop  by  drop  on  Ids  head, 
and,  in  the  satnc  way,  shonhl  allow  a stream  of  milk  to  fall  on  the  head  of 
tho  symbol  of  Visnu.— 38-39. 

There  should  be  made  a sacrificial  pond,  one  hand  deep,  of  the  shape 
of  a conical  triangle  and  surrounded  by  three  circle.s,  and  after  that  the 
BrAlimanas  should  be  asked  to  make  an  offering  of  milk,  clarified  butter 
and  sesamum  to  Lord  Visnii,  after  the  rituals  of  Ekfigni,  with  mantras 
sacred  to  Vi^nu,  after  which  a stream  of  clarified  butter,  of  half  the  size  of 
a winnowing  basket  (Nisp  iva),  shouhl  be  poureil  into  the  fire  as  well  as 
the  charu,  ini.\ed  with  cow’s  milk.  Thirteen  pitchers,  full  of  water,  should 
be  placed.  The  mouths  of  these  pitchers  should  be  covered  with  plates  of 


TBB  MAT87A  PDBANAM. 


m 


fig  leaves  containing  diffei'ent  kinds  of  eatables  and  five  jewels  and  covered 
with  white  cloths.  Four  (ligvedi  Br&hmacas  should  offer  sacrifices  to  Fire, 
facing  north.'— 40-43. 

^our  Bnihmanas,  well  np  in  the  Ynjurveda,  should  recite  the  mantra 
sacred  to  RuJra.  Another  group  of  foui  Bnahmanas,  versed  in  the  SAniaveda, 
should  be  asked  to  chant  the  liymns  of  the  Sriuiaveda,  sacred  to  Viscu, 
along  with  Arista  hymns. — 44. 

The  twelve  Biihmanas  thus  employed  should  be  honoured  with 
garlands  of  (lowers,  saiulal  paste,  bed  sheets,  gold  rings,  gold  sacred 
threads,  gold  bangles,  and  different  kinds  of  cloths.  Miserliness  should 
not  bo  exercised  in  this  respect.  That  night  should  thus  be  passed  in 
rejoicings,  accompanied  with  singing  and  music.--- 45-46. 

Double  of  all  these  Daksinas  should  be  given  to  tlie  preceptor,  and, 
0 Bhimasena,”  on  the  following  morning  thirteen  quiet  and  good  milch 
cows,  with  their  horns  covered  with  gold,  hoofs  with  silver,  covered  with 
cloth  and  painted  with  sandal,  sliould  be  given  away  in  charity,  along  with 
milking  pots  of  bell  metal  to  lirahmanas  well  feel  with  nice  eatables. — 47-49. 

Then  the  devotee  slnmld  take  liis  meal,  without  acid  and  salt. 
Afterwards,  the  Bralimanas  should  be  dismissed,  after  being  satisfied  with 
dainty  dishes. — 50. 

The  devotee  should  follow  the  Br  ilinianas  for  eight  steps  in  company 
ot  his  son,  wdfe,  etc.,  ami  shouhl  .^ay  : “Kerfava!  the  destroyer  of  all 
evils,  be  pleased,  k^iva  is  enthroned  in  the  heart  of  Vi^nu  and  the  VUnu 
in  the  heart  of  ^iva.  As  I d i not  see  any  difference  between  the  two,  so 
there  may  be  long  life  ami  pio-;perity  to  me.” — 51'52. 

With  the.se  words,  tlie  devotee  shoulil  send  the  pitcliers,  the  cows, 
the  bedding,  the  clothes,  &c.,  to  the  house  of  the  Bnihinanas. — 53. 

If  many  beddings  cannot  be  given,  then  only  one  should  be  given 
away,  with  all  necessary  requisites. — 54. 

One  who  wishes  to  acquire  vast  wealth  sljould  read  the  Pur&^as  that 
day.— '55. 

“0  Bhlmisena!  You  should  also  keep  up  this  ordinance  (vrata), 
without  pride  and  with  purity  of  heart.  I have  dictated  all  this  out 
of  affection  for  thee.  Bhima!  This  ordinance  observed  by  you  will  be 
known  after  your  name.”  The  ordinance  (vrata)  of  Bhirnasenft  dw&dadl 
is  the  dispeller  of  all  ills,  and  was  known  as  Kaly&ninf  in  the  past 
Kalpas.  0 Valiant  one  ! You  will  be  the  first  to  observe  this  ordinance 
(vrata)  during  this  Vardha  Kalpa,  having  remembered  all  about  it,  you 


OSAPTBR  LXX. 


m 


mil  be  liberated  from  all  aina  aad  attain  the  rank  of  the  Lord  of  Devas 
(Trida4a8V  Tlie  public  women  of  other  Kalpaa  having  observed  this  vrata, 
have  become  celestial  nymphs  (Apsnras).  One  dairy  maid,  of  a previous 
Kalpa  ^Avira  KnnyA,),  having  observed  this  vrata  out  of  curiosity  alone, 
has  now  become  Urvadl  in  the  heaven  of  Indra.  The  daughter  of  a 
Vairfya  became  the  daughter  of  Pulama  and  the  queen  of  Indra,  by  virtue 
of  this  ordinance  ; and,  similarly,  SatyabliAmA,  the  maid  of  that  girl,  has 
become  My  beloved." — 56-60. 

The  Sun  also  on  account  of  having  bathed  in  a thousand  torrents  on 
the  Kalyapadwadatli,  got  His  shining  body,  surrounded  by  halos,  and  has 
become  the  thousand-rayed  Vivasvan. — 61. 

In  former  times,  the  same  ordinance  was  observed  by  Mahendra  and 
other  gods,  by  the  Vasus  and  by  Asuras.  No  one,  even  with  a thousand 
tongues,  can  adequately  describe  its  effect. — 62. 

Kfispa,  the  King  of  Vadavas,  will  describe  this  tithi  which,  when 
observed,  dispels  ail  the  sin.s  of  the  iron  (Kali)  age.  and  liberates  all  his 
manes  from  the  region  of  Yama,  (Naraka). — 63. 

One  who  devoutly  hears  about  it  or  reads  it  for  the  good  of  others, 
gets  whatever  he  desires  and  even  becomes  unihed  with  BrahmA. — 64. 

What  was  in  the  former  Kalpa,  known  as  Kalyanl-dwadail!  of  the 
month  of  .Milgha,  will  come  to  bo  known  as  Bhiinadwuda^},  when  observed 
hy  Bhimasena,  the  son  of  Pandu. — 6y. 

Here  ends  the  sixty-ninth  chapter,  describing  the  Bhtmadvddakivrata. 

CHAPTER  LXX, 

BrahmA  said  : — Siva  ! I have  heard  of  the  efficacy  of  Varna  Abrams  as 
well  as  of  good  conduct,  as  prescribed  by  the  Dharma  ^astras.  I am  now 
desirous  of  hearing  the  practice  and  conduct  of  public  women.-— 1. 

I^iva  said  There  will  be  16,000  wives  of  Krispa  in  the  Yuga  men- 
tioned before.  When  once,  in  the  spring  time,  those  ladies,  having  decorated 
themselves  witK  ornaments,  would  be  drinking  together  on  the  banks  of  a 
pond  studded  with  full-budded  lotus  flowers,  dancing  with  the  wind  and 
resouuding  with  the  melodious  notes  of  the  cuckoo  and  musical  tunes  of 
the  big  black  bee,  they  will  see  Loixl  j^Amba,  beautiful  like  Cupid,  having 
eyes  handsome  like  those  of  a gazelle,  and  wearing  the  garlands  of  m&lati, 
passing  by.  They  will  cast  on  him  amorous  glances,  their  hearts  being 
flred  with  lustful  feelings  and  they  being  targets  of  the  arrows  of 
Cupid.— 2-0. 


210 


TEE  MAtSYA  POBANAM. 


Lord  Kri^^a  will  come  to  know  all  that  with  his  mental  vision,  and 
will  cnrse  them  as  follows : * Because  you  cherished  the  desire  of 
amorous  pastime  during  uiy  absence,  all  of  you  will  be  taken  away  by 
bandits.’— 7. 

Then  those  ladies,  overcome  with  grief  on  ncconnt  of  such  a curse, 
will  please  Krisna  (by  their  prayers!,  wljen  iho  Lord  will  say  : ‘Dalbliya 
[li§i  of  eternal  soul,  the  favourite  of  the  Brahmanas,  will  teach  you  a viata, 
which  w’ill  be  the  means  of  3’our  liberation  from  the  bondage  and  which 
will  actually  free  you  all.  This  vrata  will  be  of  great  l)enefa  to  futurity. 
With  these  words,  the  Lord  of  Dvai  Avati  left  them. — 8-10 

Then,  ages  after,  there  will  be  a great  slaugliter,  owing  to  the 
musal a affair ; and  Loni  Krisna.  after  relieving  the  nniverso  of  its  great 
burden,  will  go  to  heaven.  Tlie  Yadavas  will  havi  coa^'fl  to  e/ist;  and 
the  ladies  of  Krisna  will  l)e  seized  l\v  robbers,  a warrior,  like  Aijnna, 
being  defeated  utnd  unable  to  proie'*i  tlicmi).  Those  robbers  will  take 
them  to  the  seashore  and  enjuy  with  iliem  (hero.  When  those  ladies 
will  bemoan  their  hard  lot,  the  sago  l>alhhy::,  will  appojir  before  them. 
Those  ladies  will  W(;r&hip  the  >age  by  ()jr»*rlng  iiim  arghya  and  salulei 
him  again  and  ag.tin,  riioy  will  tlion.  wiib  uarfnl  oyos,  romeinber 
their  past  ejijoymt?nts,  use  of  garlands  atvi  suiidal  paste,  and  tliink  of 
their  Lord,  the  uncoijquerabie  uia-^ior  ti»e  uiiivoi-o,  as  well  as  of  flowers 
and  the  beautiful  city  of  Owarik'i.  gliitmlng  witii  itsiichos  and  gems,  and 
of  their  respective  abodes  tiieitun,  tiio  iJivim;  form>  .jf  ih-  ir  sons  dwelling 
in  that  sacred  oily.  Then  llioy  will  put  the  ing  ipu'slion  to  (lie 

sage,  standing  before  him  : -11-10. 

■‘iSage!  We  have  all  been  foioibly  ilofilod  by  rhe.'.o  robbers 
Now  we  have  lost  our  JJharma  atid  [jlaoo  oiirsi!v«s  ;il  ^our  mercy. 
0,  Seer ! Pray  o.Nplain,  why  we  iiavo  boon  degraded  to  the  status  of 
concubines,  we,  wiio  have  i)cen  united  with  (b)il.  Ve»ii  have  been 
ordained  by  the  wise  Ivri^na  to  la;  ojir  guide.  Pray  explain  to  us  the 
duties  of  concubines.”  Thus  (]Uuslior)t*d,  the  sage  will  say, — 17'-19. 

Dalbliya  said  : — ‘‘Ladies!  in  tlio  days  gone  by,  ail  of  you  were 
sporting  in  the  Mansarovara  lake,  wlion  Narada  cluiiie.od  to  go  there. 
Then  you  were  the  daughters  of  Agrii,  in  the  form  of  nymplis.  You 
did  not  salute  the  sage,  but  asked  him  how  Narayana,  the  Lord  of  the 
universe,  would  be  your  liusbaud.  Narada  blessed  you  with  the  boon 
asked  for,  but  also  cursed  you  for  not  saluting  him.  Ho  said  that,  by 
giving  away  two  beddings,  according  to  prescribed  rites,  on  the  twelfth 


(mAPTB&  LXX. 


m 


day  of  the  bright  fortnight,  in  the  months  of  Chailra  and  Vaiidkha,  yon 
nrould  get  Kri^iia  as  your  husband  in  the  next  Ute.”— 20-23. 

And  cursed  you  as  follows  “ Because  in  your  conceit  of  beauf^ 
and  prosperity  you  have  omitted  to  salute  me  before  putting  me  this 
question,  you  will  also  be  separated  from  Krisna  and  will  be  lowered  to 
the  rank  of  public  women,  after  being  forcibly  carried  away  by  thievea 
Tn  consequence  of  the  curses  of  NArada  and  Xrii^na  you  gave  way  to 
lustful  feelings  and  have  become  prostitutes.  Now  listen  to  what  I 
say.- 21.25. 

Once  upon  a time  thousands  and  thousands  of  the  demons  (D&navas, 
Asnras,  Daityas  and  Raksilsas;  were  killed  in  the  war  between  the  Devas 
and  the  demons.  Tndra  told  their  numberless  widows  and  those 
women  who  were  foroildy  seized  and  enjoyed,  to  lead  the  life  of  prostitutes 
and  remain  devoted  to  the  kings  and  the  Devas. — 26-28. 

Indra  continued.  ‘You  should  look  upon,  with  equal  eye,  the  kings 
your  masters  and  on  Sudra.  -Ml  of  you  will  attain  prosperity,  according  to 
your  fate.  You  should  satisfy  those  who  would  come  to  yon  with  adequate 
sum  of  money  to  enjoy  your  company,  even  if  they  be  poor.  But  you 
should  not  give  pleasure  to  proud  men.  You  should  give  away  cow,  land, 
grain  and  gold,  according  to  jmur  means,  in  charity  on  the  sacred  day  of 
worshipping  the  De\as  or  the  ancestors.  You  should  act  as  the  Brabmapas 
will  say.  In  addition  to  tliis,  I shall  also  tell  you  an  ordinance  (or  vrata), 
which  all  of  j'ou  sliould  blindly  practise.’ — 29-32. 

Tills  ordinance  has  been  held  to  be  the  best  means  of  crossing  unscathed 
the  sea  of  tlie  evils  of  life,  by  those  learned  in  the  Vedas.  The  women 
folk  should  bathe  in  the  water  mixed  with  several  herbs,  on  a Sunday,  when 
there  falls  Hasta,  Pusya  or  Pnnarvasu  asterisin.  They  should  then  approach 
the  God  of  Love  and  worship  Pinidarikftk^a,  by  reciting  the  names  of  Cupid, 
fij.—'Phe  feet  of  Vi^nu,  tlie  God  of  tlie  gods,  should  be  worshipped  with 
the  words,  “ Kanulya  iiamah,”  the  degs  with  “ Mobakdrine  namab,”  the 
region  of  Cupid  with  “Kandarpanidliayenaniah,"  the  waist  with  “Prltimate 
uamah,”  the  nJivel  with  “ Sankliyasamndraya  naraah,”  the  stomach  with 
“ R&milya  namab,”  the  heart  with  “ Hridayeiflya  namab,”  the  breasts  with 
“ Ahladakflrine  namah,”  the  throat  with  “ UtkanthAya  namab,”  the  mouth 
with  Ananclakartne,  naraah,”  the  left  limbs  with  Piifpadhanv&ya  namab,” 
the  right  limbs  with  Puspabanftya  namab,  the  head  with  “ M&naa&ya 
namah,”  the  hair  of  the  liead  with  “ VilolAya  namab,"  and  all  the  body 
with  “ Sarv&tmane  namah.” — 33.38. 


TEE  MAfSYA  PVtiAHAM. 

. They  should  then  salute  the  respective  Gods  and  Godesses  with 
the  following  mantras,  “ Namah  Sivftya,  namah  ^antftya/*  “ Namah 
Pftrfanknrfadharriya,**  “Namah Gail i no,”  Namah  Pltavasstrftya (yellow-robed 
oneV*  “ Namah  "^ankhachakra-dharfiya/*  “ Namah Narayauftya,**  “Namah 
KAmatmane/’  “ Namah  Sarvarfantyai.**  “ Namah  Prltyai,*’  “ Namah 
Ratyai,**  “ Namah  firiyai,”  “ Namah  Pn^tj-ai,”  “ Namah  TiL^tyai/'  “ Namah 
Sarvartha  sampado/*  — 39-4fK 

The  wdinon  folk  sIkaiUI  ihon  woislnp  the  Lord,  whose  body  is  oupid 
himself,  by  offoi  ing  ITim  incenso,  flf)ivors,  sandal  and  eatables. — 41. 

Aftcvwnnl:^,  the  Br.'slnuann,  wrll  versed  in  tlie  Vednnta.  who  must  bo 
virtuous  and  free  from  bodily  deformity,  should  be  honoured  with  the 
offerings  of  incense,  flowers,  sandal.— 4!J. 

And  a quantity  (of  the  measure  Prastlia*  of  nneooked  rice,  along  with 
a pot,  full  of  clarified  butter,  sIkmiIiI  be  given  away  to  the  saine  Bnihinana, 
after  saying,  ‘ liord  Mndliava,  be  pleased.’— 43. 

That  Brrdiinana  ^honlil  l)e  well  fer]  and  be  ilevontly  looked  upon  as 
cupid,  for  the  sake  of  sexual  enjoyment.— 44. 

Each  and  every  dosiro  of  that  Bnihinana  slioiiM  be  satisfied  by  the 
woman  devotee.  She  sluniM,  with  all  lieart  and  sind  and  with  a smile  on 
her  face,  yield  liorself  up  to  him. — 4o. 

This  rite  slionlil  be  ob‘<erv(‘d  on  every  Sunday  ; and  the  devotee  sliould 
give  away  the  abovo-nKuitioni'  I piantity  ol  uncooked  vice  for  a period 
of  thirl<?en  months  ; at  the  expiry  of  wliich.  tlie  same  BrAhmana  should 
be  given  a full  bedding,  with  ali  its  requisites,  r/‘j.“-y)illows,  gO('d  sheets, 
dipa  ilamp-,  a pair  of  uiijl>r<d!a,  -.andaL.  o small  ]ueco  of  mattress  to 

sit  upon. — *U)-1S. 

Next,  that  Br/dunana.  with  liir-  w-fe,  should  be  lionoured  with  gold 
threads,  gold  rings,  line  cloth.  ban4ih*s.  and  with  ir'Cnse,  garlands  of 
flowers  and  sandal  paste. — 49. 

Tlie  images  (>lt  Cupid  and  Uati,  seated  on  a plate  of  copper,  placed 
on  a vessel  full  of  molasses,  their  eyes  being  of  gold  and  they  being  well 
dressed,  should  bo  given  away,  along  with  a fine  milch  cow,  a vessel  of 
bell  metal  and  a piece  of  sugar  cane,  by  reciting  the  mantra  of  the 
following  signification. — 50-51. 

‘ As  I do  not  make  any  difference  between  Viynu  and  Cupid,  so 
0 Lord  Visnu,  be  pleased  to  always  fulfil  my  desires.*— 52. 

* 0 Kerfava  ! as  the  Goddess  Lak§ml  never  remains  apart  from  you, 
in  the  same  way  make  my  body  Your  dwelling  place.’— 53. 


OBAPTBB  LXII: 


m 

After  that,  the  BrAhmaQa,  accepting  the  image  of  Cupid,  should 
pronounce  the  following  Vedic  mantra.  * Ka  Tdaqi  Kasm&t,  Ac.'— 54. 

Then  the  Br&hniapa  should  be  dismissed,  after  being  circumambu- 
lated, and  beddings  and  other  things  should  be  sent  to  the  house  of  the 
BrAhmana. — 55. 

Hencefortl],  any  Br&hmanu  coming  to  them  for  the  sake  of  sexual 
enjoyment  on  a Sunday,  should  be  respected  and  honoured. — 56. 

In  this  way,  the  good  Brahmanas  should  be  kept  satisfied  for  a 
period  of  thirteen  months  ; but  if  they  go  abroad,  their  course  of  action 
will  be  different. — 57. 

If,  with  the  consent  of  that  BrAhmana,  another  handsome  person 
norne  to  them,  these  women  should,  with  love  and  affection  and  to  the  best 
of  their  ability,  perform  all  the  fiftyeight  kinds  of  observances  of  Love, 
favourite  of  man  and  gods,  whicli  would  lead  to  pregnancy  and  which  is 
not  harmful  to  their  soul’s  welfare. — 58-50. 

I have  described  to  you  this  vrata  in  detail,  which,  when  always 
performed,  never  leads  the  prostitutes  to  sin. — 00. 

I have  fully  related  to  you  what  Indra  said  to  the  women  of  the 
IVniavas  (demons)  in  ancient  da3^s  —01. 

0,  Women  of  beauty  ! This  vrata  is  the  dispeller  of  all  sins  and 
giver  of  innumerable  benefits.  T wish  well  of  yon  : hence  you  should  do 
as  I told  3^ou. — 6?. 

She  (the  well-favoured),  who  follows  this  ordinance  strictly,  goes 
to  the  region  of  Madliava,  and  is  honoured  by  the  Oevas,  ami  in  the  end 
obtains  a place  in  the  Visnu-loka.— 68. 

The  Lord  said  Tlie  sage  Dalabhvn,  having  thus  taught  those 
women  how  to  observe  tliis  ordinance,  will  go  to  his  own  place  ; and 
those  women  of  divine  origin  will  practise  the  vrata,  as  directed.” — 64. 

Here  ends  titv  seventieth  chapter  describing  Annfi(jadaurrnta<G{ft  of  enpid). 

CHAPTER.  LXXI. 

Brahmd  said. — ” Lord  be  pleased  to  explain  to  me  the  ordinance,  by 
the  observance  of  which  there  may  be  no  separation  between  husband 
and  wife,  nor  should  there  be  any  grief,  disaster  or  pain.” — 1. 

Lord  said. — Ke*lava  always  reposes  in  company  with  Laksinf,  in  the 
ocean  of  milk,  on  the  second  day  of  the  dark  fortnight,  in  the  month 
of  Srftvana. — 2. 


214 


TEE  MATS7A  PURAVAM. 


By  worshipping  Qovinda  on  th«it  clay  all  the  desires  are  fulfilled  ; 
and  by  giving  away  cows,  land,  gohl.  &o.,  the  devotee  goes  and  resides 
in  the  region  of  Vispu  for  a period  of  700  Kalpas.— 3. 

The  ordinance  is  known  under  the  name  of  Afidnya^ayan4dvitty&, 
on  which  daj^  Visnu  should  be  worshipped,  according  to  tlie  rituals  and 
mantras  mentioned  hereafter. — 4. 

The  devotee  should  pray  0,  l^rivatsadhari,  ^nlointa,  Srldhftmana, 
iSripati,  Avina«ii,  let  this  house-hohUM-’s  life  of  mine  which  is  the  giver  of 
tfivarga  (dhanna,  arlha  and  kaina)  may  never  l)e  ilestroyed.— 5. 

0 Piinisottania  ! let  there  be  no  desinietiou  of  my  Agni  or  Pitfis, 
nor  let  there  be  any  separation  between  liusl)and  and  wife. — 0. 

Deva,  as  3^)n  iiever  remain  apart  from  your  consort,  Laksnii,  similar- 
l}',  let  tliere  bo  no  aloofness  Ijetween  me  and  my  wifi  . — 7. 

Madhnsudana  ! as  yonr  household  is  never  l)ereft  of  the  goddess 
Laksmi,  similarly,  let  tiot  mi»ie  be  devoicl  of  niy  wife’h'—S. 

After  this  prayer,  the  hymns  of  Visnu  should  he  sung  in  accom- 
paniment of  various  kinds  of  musical  irist!*nm?nts ; if  that  tnav  not  bo  feasi- 
ble, then  the  mere  ringing  of  the  hell  is  sufiioient,  for  a hell  is  an  embodi- 
ment of  all  musical  instruments. — U 

After  thus  worshipping  (xovin  la,  the  devotee  slionld  have  his  meala 
at  night,  avoiding  oil  and  salt  and  acids. — U). 

In  the  morning,  the  image  >>f  I/iksmi  and  Visnn,  candle,  food  grain, 
cloth,  utensils,  ami  hedstea^l  should  be  glv’^en  away.  — IJ. 

A pair  of  sandles,  shoes,  iiini>rr‘lia,  chamara,  mattress,  white  sheet 
should  also  be  given  away  with  tln^  bedstead.- - 1 2. 

Pillows,  bedding,  fruits,  o!  uamenis,  sli-mld  aUo  be;  given  away,  along 
witli  the  bedstead,  according  to  (Ijc  means  of  tlie  worshipper,  without 
exercising  jealousy  and  miserliness^,  tn  a Ih.ilimana.  who  may  be  versed 
in  the  Vedas  and  be  a dovot-'C  of  Vd-rm,  having  a large  family  and  having 
no  bodilv"  defects  -13-14. 

At  the  time  of  giving  away  the  bedstead,  the  Brahmana,  along  with 
his  wife,  should  be  seated  on  it,  and  the  former  should  be  given  a vessel, 
full  of  nice  eatables  —15. 

The  image  of  Visnu  should  be  given  away  to  the  BrAhinapa  after 
placing  it  on  a pitcher  full  of  water.— 16. 

A woman  with  a husband,  or  a widow,  who  keeps  up  this  ordinance 
according  to  the  prescribed  rites,  witliout  niggardliness,  goes  to  and  resides 
in  Iieaven.  They,  being  always  dutiful  and  free  froni  sorrow  and  blessed 
with  sons,  cattle  and  wealth,  always  remain  in  company  of  their  husband. 


CHAPTER  LXXII. 


215 


without  being  separated  so  long  as  the  sun,  moon  and  stars  remain  in 
heaven.-— 17-18. 

Their  sons,  cattle  and  wealth  are  never  destroyed,  and  the  devotee 
goes  to  the  region  of  Vi$nu  where  lie  resides  for  77,000  kalpas. — ID.  , 
Hereenda  the  eeventy-first  chapter  describing  the  Asuuyasnyanavrata. 

CHAPTER  LXXII. 

i^iva  said. — " Brahfn&  ! Now  listen  to  the  ordinance  that  will  be  the- 
giver  of  wealth,  and  will  come  in  vogue  at  the  end  of  future  Dwfipara. 
It  is  in  the  form  of  a conversation  between  Yudhi.^lhira  and  the  sages, 
PippaUda,  etc." — 1.  » 

‘‘ Yndhisthira,  the  pious,  will  go  to  Naimi^aranya  before  the  sage 
Pippalada,  and  put  this  question  to  him." — 2. 

Yudhi^thira  said:— “0  sage!  IIow  health,  prosperity  and  firm 
faitli  in  religion  can  be  maintained,  and  liow  can  unflincliing  devotion  be 
centred  in  ^iva  and  Visnu,  and  how  may  one  be  free  from  all  bodily 
defects.”— 3. 

I^iva  said  : — " Brahma  ! I shall  now  tell  you  the  reply  of  the  sage 
Pippal&da  to  the  queries  of  Yudhi>thira.” — 4. 

PippalAida  said: — “King!  you  liave  put  a most  useful  question. 
I shall  now  tell  you  something  about  it.”  So  saying,  lie  will  describe  the 
.^bg&ravrata.  xVbout  this,  there  is  the  following  ancient  story  :— 5. 

There  took  place  a dialogue  between  Virochana  and  Blmrgava. — 6. 

Once  upon  a time,  the  miglity  sago,  ^nkra,  seeing  Virochana,  the 
handsome,  sixteen-years-old  son  of  Prahlr'ida,  laughed,  and  saying,  Stdhu, 
Sadhu,  addressed  him,  “ C miglity  -armed  Virochana  ! 0 prince  I 0 may  you 
be  always  prosperous.”  Then  Virochana.  the  enemy  of  the  Devas,  wonder- 
ing at  the  laughing  of  the  sago,  inquired  7-8. 

‘ 0 BrAhmana  I tell  me  the  reason  of  your  laughter  without  any 
apparent  cause  and  why  did  you  again  say,  S.ldhu,  Sadliu,  to  me.— 9.’ 

i^ukra  sayl : — “ I laughed  on  the  sudden  remembrance  of  the  glory 
of  the  Vrata  (which  you  liad  the  good  luck  of  witnessing  in  your  post 
life  and  which  gave  you  this  handsome  form). — 10. 

In  ancient  times,  a drop  of  prespiration  trickled  down  the  forehead  of 
of  l^iva  at  the  time  of  His  getting  into  rage  to  annihilate  Dak^a. — 11. 

That  drop  penetrated  into  all  the  seven  lower  regions  and  dried 
up  all  the  seven  oceaus.  Afterwards,  out  of  the  same  drop,  Vtrabhadra, 


m 


iimti  Ptruilf^Ast. 

widlt  many  a mouth  and  eyes  ‘emitting  flashes  of  fire  from  them,  was 
bom.  He  was  endowed  with  myriads  of  hands  and  feet,  and  destroyed 
the  aacrifioe  of  Dak^a.  This  Earth-born  Virabhadra  destroyed  the  sacrifice 
of  Dak^a  and  then  attempted  to  burn  up  the  three  worlds.  Whereupon, 
^ira  intervened,  when  He  saw  Virabhadra  was  going  to  consume  the 
universe,  and  made  him  abstain  from  his  campaign  of  de8truction-j|2-13. 

A' va  said  : — “ 'V'trabhadra ! You  have  destroyed  the  sacrifice  of  Dak^S, 
and  now  yon  shoniti  not  coii.suroe  tlie  universe.  Be  calm.  You  will  be 
prime  in  the  mansion  of  auspicious  planets,  and  people  will  worship  you 
through  my  favour.  -14-15. 

"You  will  be  known  as  AhgSraka  (the  planet  Mars),  the  eon  of 
the  Earth,  and  your  form  in  the  Divine  region  will  be  a pearless  one  in 
beauty.— 1(5. 

" On  tlie  fourth  day  of  a bright  fortnight,  when  it  falls  on  a Tuesday, 
the  people  worshipping  you  will  get  everlasting  beauty  and  prosperity 
and  health.” — IT- 

Heating  such  words  of  ^iva,  that  son  of  the  Earth,  instantly  became 
placid  and  afterwards  turned  into  a planet. — 18.  » 

“ Some  ^udra  was  worshipping  that  planet  Mars,  and  you  saw  the 
ceremony,  on  account  of  whicli  you  are  so  handsome  and  renowned,  0 you 
son  of  Prahlfida.  You  are  known  as  VirOeliana  by  the  Devas  and  the 
Asuras,  because  you  possess  various  'vi)  far-reaching  intelligence  (Rochi), 
and  hence  you  are  called  VirOchana  (far-reaching  light:.  1 was  astonished 
to  see  the  great  beauty  posse.s.sed  liy  you  simply  by  your  looking  at  the 
ceremony  of  Angfirakavrata,  andoonsequently  I greeted  you  with  the  words 
S&dbu,  Sadhu,  thinking  of  the  great  mahiitmya  of  that  vrata.  When,  by 
merely  looking  at  that  ceremony,  one  gets  beauty  and  lordliness  as  youre, 
I do  not  know  what  would  be  the  case  if  a man  were  to  observe  this  ordi- 
nance.”— 19-22. 

“ 0 Prince  ! You  looked  with  faith  at  the  ceremony  of  giving  away 
the  cows,  &c , in  charity,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  vrata  performed  in  honour 
of  Mars,  the  son  of  Earth,  by  a low-born  despicable  l^udra,  and  consequently 
you  have  been  given  such  a handsome  form  and  are  born  in  the  royal 
family  of  Daityas.”  23. 

^iva  said : — “ On  hearing  those  words  of  ^ukra,  Virdohana  was  very 
much  astonished  and  asked  him.”— 24. 

Virdebana  said.-  0 sage  ! 1 am  eager  to  hear  about  the  ordinance 
as  well  as  about  the  charities  witnessed  by  me  in  my  previous  life.”— 25. 


oUAMn  LXXif:  'iW- 

**  Pray  explain  td  me  the  glory  and  the  rituals  connected  with  that 
ordinance.”  Hearing  those  words  of  Virdchana,  l^akra,  began  to  explain 
it  in  detail. — 26. 

Sukra  said.— 0 D&iiava  ! if  the  4th  day  of  the  bright  fortnight 
fall  on  a Tuesday,  the  devotee  should  bathe  after  rubbing  earth  over  his 
body,  and  then  wear  rubies.— 27. 

He  should  mutter  the  mantras,  “ AgniniflrdliA.  diva,*’  by  turning 
liis  face  towards  the  north.  If  the  devotee  be  a Sudra,  he  should  silently, 
without  uttering  any  mantra,  meditate  over  the  form  of  Bliauma  (Mars). 
The  company  of  women  sliould  be  avoided  that  daj'.— 28. 

At  dusk,  the  court-yard  of  the  Jioiise  should  be  plastered  with  cow 
dung  and  adorned  with  floral  wreaths,  and  uncooked  rice  should  be  placed 
all  round. -29. 

Thereafter,  woi-shipping  Bhauma,  a lotus  of  eight  petals  should  be 
drawn  in  siiffron.  If  salTron  is  not  available,  then  it  should  be  drawn  by 
red-sandal.-  -30. 

Four  pitchers,  full  of  eatables,  should  be  placed,  and  uncooked  rice 
and  rubies  should  be  placed  in  them.— 31. 

The  pitchers  should  be  located  in  the  four  corners,  and  fruits,  flowers, 
incense,  etc.,  should  be  placed  over  them. — 32. 

Then  a milch  cow,  with  her  horns  covered  with  gold,  and  hoofs  with 
silver,  should  be  given  away  to  a Brahmana  in  charity,  along  with  a milking 
vessel  of  bell  metal,  and  her  calf.  So  also  should  be  given  an  ox,  and  the 
seven  kinds  of  grains  tied  in  seven  different  pieces  of  cloths. — 33. 

An  image  of  the  size  of  a thumb  sliould  be  made  in  gold.  Its  four 
arms  should  be  extensive.  The  image  slunihl  be  placed  on  a vessel  of  gold, 
and  the  vessel  should  be  jilaced  on  raw  sugar  and  clarified  butter  — 34. 

Afterwards,  all  that  should  be  given  away  in  charity  to  a Brahmaua, 
who  is  versed  in  the  sacrificial  rites,  is  able  to  restrain  his  passions,  is 
calm  and  modest,  is  well-horn  and  has  large  family.  It  should  never 
be  given  to  a Briilimana,  who  is  a lij’pocrite.  Then  the  devotee  sliould 
recite  the  following  mantras,  with  his  hands  folded.— 35. 

* 0,  Son  of  Eartli,  0 blessed  one,  you  have  been  born  of  the  sweat 
dj*op  of  lord  l^iva,  I pray  you  for  beauty  and  have  taken  shelter  under  you. 
Be  pleased  to  accept  this  arghya,  I salute  you.  Pray  acefept  this  libation 
of  water.*— 36. 

Note (The  inautra  iu  the  original  is  this 

msjem  i 

inne  ^ S II 

as 


TUB  MATSYA  WUANAM, 


21$. 


Tbe  libation  of  water  (argliya\  mingleJ  with  reJ  vandal,  should  be 
made  by  reciting  the  above  mantras,  and  the  Br&hmapa  should  be  wor- 
shipped with  red  sandal,  red  flt)wers,  ntul  red  cloths,  etc. ' 37. 

By  uttering  the  same  mantra,  a cow,  with  an  ox,  should  be  given 
autay  in  charity  in  honour  of  Mara,  and  a bedstead,  well-arranged  with  all 
its  requisites,  should  also  be  given  away. — 38. 

All  the  nice  things  available  or  the  things  appreciated  by  the  devotee 
wishing  to  acquire  everlasting  benefits,  should  be  given  away  in  charity 
to  the  Br&hmana,--  39. 

After  this,  the  Brahmana  should  be  circumambnhited  and  dismissed, 
and  tbe  devotee  should  take  his  evening  meal  with  clarified  butter, 
avoiding  salt  and  acid. — 40. 

I shall  now  desiTibe  to  you  the  benefits  that  accrue  to  the  devotee 
by  observing  this  Ahgaraka  vrata  for  eight  tones  or  even  four  times  with 
devotion.-— 41, 

He  and  dev'olion  to  Siva  and  Vi^pu  in  all 

his  atul  becomes  the  kimr  of  the  .seven  reahns.— 42. 

He  lives  for  seven  Kaip^s  in  the  clime  of  &iva  after  death,  and, 

0 Prince  of  the  Daityas ! You  shouhl  also  therefore  perform  this 
Vrala.’-43. 

PippalAda  said. --After  thus  fle'^cribing  the  rituals,  the  sage  ^ukra 
went  away  an  1 Viroclnma,  the  Prince  of  the  Daityas,  aftersvards  kept 
this  observance,  according  to  (he  prescribetl  rites,  and  0 King  Yudhisthira ! 
Yon  should  also  keep  it.  For  liie  knowers  of  Veda  say  that  its  fruit  is 

1 nexh  ansti  ble. — 44 . 

Siva  .said  — Hearing  all  this  from  the  sage  Pippahida,  the  King 
Yudhist^hira,  of  the  wonderful  deeds  and  prowess,  said  : — “ Let  it  be  so.** 
Ho  then  perfor?ne<l  this  Vrata.  One  who  hears  about  it,  after  pondering 
over  the  words  of  I’ippal.ida  with  attention,  also  gets  the  same  benefit  by 
the  grace  of  the  lord  Mars.  -45. 

Here  ends  the  seoenty-seeoml  chapter  describing  the  Afigdrakavrattx, 

CHAPTER  LXXm. 

PippalAda  said.— “ King ! now  listen  to  the  rituals  pertaining  to  the 
pacification  of  the  malignant  aspect  of  the  planet  l^ukra  (Venus).  On  tbe 
beginning  of  a journey  or  its  end,  or  on  the  occasions  of  the  appearance 
and  the  disappearance  of  l^ukra,  a vessel  of  silver,  gold  or  Ml  metal 


GUAPTBU  LXXni. 


§19 


should  be  made  and  filled  in  with  white  flowers,  white  cloth  and  uncooked 
rice. — 1-2, 

A silver  image  of  l^ukra  should  bo  made  and  given  away  to  a Br&h- 
inn^a  versed  in  the  SSraaveda,  after  decorating  it  with  pearls  and  placing 
it  on  the  top  of  the  vessel. — 3. 

At  the  time  of  giving  away  the  image,  the  foilwing  mantra  should 
be  uttered  i—'O,  master  of  all  realms,  0,  Bhrigunandana,  0 Kavi,  saluta- 
tions to  you.  Accept  thirarghya  for  the  fulfilment  of  my  demres’.  The 
arghya  mantra  is.— 4. 

The  person  who  thus  gives  away  all  the  things,  iimentioned  above,  in 
charity,  according  to  the  aforementioned  rites,  when  undertaking  a 
journey,  etc.,  at  the  time  of  tlie  appearance  of  ^ukrn,  goes  to  the  region 
of  Vi^nu,  after  getting  all  his  desires  fulfilled.— 5. 

The  devotee  should  not  take  his  meals  until  he  has  finished  his 
worship  of  l^ukra  by  offering  Him  white  flowers,  fried  cakes  and  cakes  of 
urad  pulse  and  things  made  of  wheat  and  gram.  Tiie  person  who  does 
so  attains  tyivarga  (religious  merit,  wealth  and  enj(»yinents*.— 0. 

Yudhi^hira!  the  worship  of  Bjihaspati  (Jupiter)  has  been  described 
in  the  same  to  which  now  listen.  An  image  of  Brihaspari  simuld  be 
made  in  gold  and  placed  in  a gfildeii  vessel,  after  being  rlre«sed  in  yellow 
cloth.  The  devotee  then  .should  bathe  in  water  mixed  with  sesamnm,  or 
with  water  mixed  with  the  juice  of  Jbutea-fromlosa  or  Panchagavya. — 7-8. 

He  should  then  put  on  yellow  raiments  and  paint  his  head  with 
sandal  mixed  with  saffron,  and  then  pour  libations  of  clarified  butter  in 
the  fire.  Then,  after  saluting  Brihaspati,  the  image  should  be  given  away 
to  a Brdhinana,  along  with  a cow.— 9. 

Brihaspati  should  thus  be  saluted  ' Salutations  to  Brihaspati,  the 
giver  of  solace  to  those  falling  under'tho  influence  of  evil  stars.*’ — 10.'^' 

0,  son  of  Kunti ! One  who  thus  worships  Briiiaspati  on  a Sankninta 
or  on  undertaking  a journey  or  on  other  auspicious  occasions,  attains  all 
his  wishes.— 11. 

Here  ends  aeventy-^third  chapter  describing  the  PAjd  of  Jupiter  and 

Venus. 

* Note.— 'Tho  pra^Aina  maufcra  of  Brihaspati  is  as  follows 

iRnlt  ^ ii 


sar  tas  ma!f^a1pvsanau. 

CHAPTER  LXXIV. 

BrahmAsahl: — l^rd  i^iva  ! you  are  the  One,  who  sees  all  beings 
safely  through  the  oceau  of  the  worid,  pray  therefore  descr/he  some  such 
ordiuancQ,  as  may  lead  people  to  cross  the  sea  of  the  world  in  safety, 
and  attain  health,  heaven  and  happiness.— 1. 

i^iva  said  : — BrahniA  ! I shall  describe  to  you  the  Saura  dharma, 
consisting  of  the  following  vratas  : ti.  Kal ydna  saptamt  (u)  VieJokasaptaml. 
So  also  [iiii  Phalli  Saptami,  the  dcstroj^ier  of  sins  and  giver  of  great  merit. 
Similarly,  {iv)  the  sacred  iiarkara  Saptami  lo)  ICatnala  Saptami  (rt)  Maiidarii 
Saptami,  (rii;  Subha  Saptami,  the  giver  of  auspiciousness.  I'lieso  are  the 
givers  of  endless  merit.  All  thes-^  have  been  respected  by  the  Devas  and 
the  Uisis,  and  I shall  describe  their  rituals  to  you,  one  by  one,  in  due 
order. — 3-4. 

When  a Sunday  falls  on  the  7tli  day  of  a bright  fortinght,  it  is  known 
as  Kalyariiiii  or  Vijaya  Saptami.  On  that  day  the  devotee  should  hiitiie  in 
cow’s  milk,  in  the  morning,  and  put  on  white  clothes,  and  then  sit 
facing  the  east  and  draw  the  picture  of  au  eight-petulled  lotus  flower, 
made  of  uncooked  rice  powder,  lie  should,  then,  draw  a circle  round 
that  lotus,  and  in  the  centre  of  it  »!raw  its  pericarp,  with  tlic  .same  material. 
-Then,  on  all  sides  of  it,  he  should  draw  eiglit  pictures  of  the  Sun  with 
flowers  and  rice.  The  devotee  should  put  a pincli  of  uncooked  rice  on  each 
petal  of  the  lotus,  after  reciting  tho  fuihoving  mantras Tapamlya 
iiamah,  ilarfancriya  namali,  I>ivakaio'ya  namah,  Vidliatn  nanuih,  Vaiun»\* 
ya  namah,  rihaskaiaya  namah  Vikartanaya  namah,  and  Uavayc  namah,  res- 
pectively, beginning  with  tlie  pi-'-tmo  of  tlie  Sun  on  the  lOasterii  petal,  and 
then  on  those  on  tiio  Soiuh  Kurtcrn,  Somhern,  S(>utli-\Vcstern,  Western, 
North-Western,  Nortliern,  and,  lastly,  on  the  North-Eastern  petals.— 5-5). 

Afote. — A pinch  of  uncooked  rice  ahould  bo  placed  o;i  each  petal  after  rocitiug  oiio 
name  each  time,  until  it  i.s  placed  nji  each  eight  petals,  viz, — On  the  petal  in  the  eastern 
direction  by  reciting  Tapan&ya  namah,  and  .so  on. 

At  the  coiumencement.  as  well  as  at  the  oikI,  and  so  also  iu  the 
luiddle,  of  placing  rice,  he  should  recite  the  Mantra  Paramtlt-iuane  namah 
Then  at  the  end,  tlie  God-Sun  should  be  sainted. — 10. 

The  Sun  should  be  worshipped  on  the  altar  by  being  otfered  white 
cloth,  fruits,  incense,  flowers,  sandal  paste,  eatables  and  raw  sugar,  along 
with  salt,  all  of  which  should  be  given  away  in  charity  to  Brnhmapas. — 11. 

Afterwards,  good  Brahmaoas  should  be  devoutly  worshipped  with 
raw  sugar,  clarified  butter  and  milk,  and  then  they  shouhl  be  given  gold, 
placed  on  a dish,  containing  sesamum. — 12. 


GBAPTEB  LXXV, 


221 


Then  the  BrfthmaDas  should  bo  dismissed  with  fees,  after  reciting 
the  ‘ vyAliriti  ’ mantras.  The  devotee  sliould  then  go  to  sleep  and  then, 
after  getting  up  in  the  morning,  ha  should  bathe  and  finish  his  japa 
(prayers)  and  take  rice  cooked  in  clarified  butter  and  sugar  in  company 
of  the  Br&hmanas.—* 13. 

After  meals,  the  devotee  sliould  give  away  t)  the  Bralimanas,  who 
may  be  free  from  hypocrisy,  a pot,  full  of  clarified  butter,  a*id  a piece  of 
gold,  along  with  a pitcher,  fall  of  water. — 14. 

At  that  time  the  devotee  bliould  say  ; “ 0,  Adorable  Suu,  the  Supreme 
Self,  be  pleased.*’  Tlie  worship  of  the  J^un  .should  thus  be  followed  for  a 
year,  on  the  bright  Saptami  of  every  month,  and  in  the  13tli  month,  13  cows, 
with  their  mouths  covered  with  g)M  and  bodie.s  adornod  with  clothes  and 
ornaments,  should  be  given  away. — 15-]f). 

If  one  cannot  allord  13  cow.s,  he  may  give  only  one.  The  observer 
of  this  ordinance  shoul  I n )t  cKerci-so  inisarlinoss  and  jealousy.  Those 
who  do  so,  go  to  hell.  — 17. 

One  who  tlius  observes  the  Kalyana  Saptami  ordinance,  goes  to 
the  region  of  the  Sun,  after  being  liberated  from  all  sins,  and  obtains 
long  life,  health  and  prosperity  on  this  earth. — 18. 

This  Saptami,  wliicli  is  tlie  destroyer  of  all  sins  and  venerated  by 
the  Devas,  is  known  a.s  Kalyana  Saptami,  the  remover  of  all  evils.— -19. 

One  who  reads  or  hears  about  this  kalyana  Saptami,  the  giver  of 
endless  merits,  is  freed  from  all  sins  on  this  earth. — 20. 

Hen^  ends  th**  chapter  descrihin  j the  Kalyana 

Saptami  rrata. 


CHAFrEU  LXXV. 

^iva  said  : -O  sage ! 1 .shall  ik)w  tell  \’ou  about  the  Virfoka  Saptami 
(the  Sorrow- Destroying  fast'  the  observance  of  whicl)  fast  frees  the  devotee 
from  all  grief.  — 1. 

Note VisOka^Free  from  griof. 

On  tlie  sixth  day  of  the  bright  fortinght,  in  the  month  of  M^ghai 
the  devotee,  after  brushing  his  teeth  in  the  morning  and  rubbing  the  body 
with  black  sesainum,  and  bathing,  should  fast  the  whole  day ; and  at 
night,  again  brushing  his  teeth,  he  should  take  krisarfi  pudding  (consist- 
ing of  rice,  sesamuin  and  a pulse  cooked  in  milk  and  eaten  with  ghee 
and  without  salt).  Then  go  to  bed  as  a BrahmachAri.— 2. 


^ THE  MAT^A  PUBAEAU. 

On  tbe  following  morning,  after  bathing  and  finising  his  daily 
prayer  and  so  being  pure,  he  should  have  a lotus  made  of  gold,  and 
vroTship  it  by  pronouncing  * Ark&ya  natuah-’ — 3. 

- Hote Arakiya  asmshssSslutotloiur  to  the  San. 

The  lotus  should  be  worshipped  with  red  kaiiera  flowers  and  a 
piece  of  red  cloth.  The  devotee  should  pray  to  the  Sun  in  these  words ; — 

' 0 Adit3^a ! asbthis  world  becomes  free  from  all  grief  at  Tliy  rising,  in  the 
same  way,  let  me  also  be  free  from  sorrow,  in  all  my  lives,  and  may  1 have 
always  lii-m  faith  in  Thee.’  —4. 

Thus,  having  performed  Puja  on  the  .sixth  day  of  the  bright  fort- 
night, the  Brahmauas  should  be  worshipped  with  devotion.  The 
worshipper,  after  taking  cow’s  urine,  should  go  to  bed.*  Then,  on  the 
following  morning,  rising  from  his  bed,  bathing  and  finishing  his  daily 
prayers,  he  should  offer  food  to  the  Brahmauas,  in  a vessel  containing  raw 
sugar.  Then  the  golden  lotus  should  be  given  away  to  a BrAlimapa,  along 
with  a pair  of  red  clothes  mentioned  above.  — 5 -6. 

On  the  Saptami  (seventh  / day,  oil  and  salt  should  be  avoided,  and  the 
devotee  should  observe  a vow  of  silence  and  listen  to  some  Parana.  —7. 

The  ordinance  should  tlien  be  continued  on  the  seventh  day  of  each 
fortnight,  till  the  next  mouth  of  Magha.—  8. 

On  the  conclusion  of  the  ordinance,  a pitcher  of  water,  along  with 
a golden  lotus,  should  be  given  away,  and  a bedstead,  witli  all  its 
requisites  and  a milch  cow,  slnmld  aUi  be  given  away.— 9. 

One  who  keeps  up  the  Visoka  Saptami  ordinance,  according  to  the 
rites  mentioned  above,  without  giving  way  to  fni.serliuoss,  attains  bliss,  and 
never  gets  any  sorrow  for  a period  of  ten  padmas,  and  is  also  free  from 
disease.  He  also  attains  his  wishes,  and  if  he  observes  it  without  any 
desires,  he  becomes  uiiified  with  Brahma. — 10-1<J. 

One  who  reads,  listens  to,  or  relates  this  vrata  of  \dioka  Saptami, 
goes  to  the  realm  of  ludra  aucfenevcr  gets  any  sorrow. — 13. 

Here  ends  the  seventy- fifth  chapter  dealing  with  Visoka  saptami  vrata 
or  the  Sorroiv-Destroying  fast. 

CHAPTER  LXXVJ. 

Sjiva  said  : — “ 1 shall  now  describe  to  3’ou  the  Bhala  Saptami,  (fruit- 
gift  fast)  the  observance  of  which  liberates  the  devotee  from  sins  and  leads 
him  to  heaven.— 1 . 

* This  oerenumy  relates  to  the  fsf  (bS  day. 


0B4PTMB  L4Xn. 


m 


5 

la  the  month  of  M&rgutfira,  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  bright  fort- 
night, the  devotee,  after  fasting,  sliould  give  away  a lotus  of  gold,  along 
with  sugar,  to  some  firfthmana  with  a large  family.  A golden  image  of  the 
Sun,  weighing  one  pala  in  measure,  sliould  also  be  given  away  tt>  a 
Br&hmapa  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  devotee  should  say,  ‘ 0 Sun ; be 
pleased  on  me.’— 2-3. 

On  tlie  following  day,  that  is,  on  Aftami,  the  BrAhmauas  should 
worshipped  with  devotion  and  fed  with  milk  and  fruits*;  during  that 
period  of  the  day,  so  long  as  there  is  any  portion  of  the  Kri$pa  Saptam! 
remaining,  and  on  every  seventh  day  of  the  dark  fortnight,  fruits  should 
lie  given  away  in  charity. — 4. 

In  the  same  way,  any  fruit  made  of  gold,  and  a lotus,  along  with 
sugar,  utensils,  cloths  and  flowers  should  be  given  away  on  each  seventh 
day  of  the  dark  and  ihn  bright  fortnights  in  the  month,  for  a full 
year.— 5-6. 

The  following  names  should  be  recited,  one  after  the  other,  each 
month  : — BhAnu,  Arka,  Ravi,  BrahmA,  Siirya,  Bukra,  Hari,  l^iva,  Srlmnn, 
VibhAvasu,  Tva^tA,  and  Varnna. — 7. 

Out  of  the  names  mentioned  above,  one  name,  turn  by  turn,  should 
be  recited  monthly,  on  tlie  seventh  day  of  the  dark  or  bright  fortnight. 
The  desire  of  obtaining  any  fruit  or  merit,  by  the  observance  of  this  vrata, 
should  be  renounced  by  the  devotee.— 8. 

At  the  end  of  tlie  ordinance,  a BrAhmana  and  his  wife  should  be 
adored,  and  then  cloth  as  well  as  a pitcher,  full  of  sugar,  along  with  a lotus 
of  gold,  should  be  given,  and  the  following  prayer  should  be  offerer! : — 
‘ O’Ravi ! as  the  wishes  of  your  devotees  never  prove  fruitless,  so  the 
attainment  of  endless  fniits  be  mine,  throughout  my  future  seven 
lives.’ — 10. 

One  who  observes  this  Phala  Saptaml,  the  giver  of  endless  fniits, 
being  liberated  from  all  his  sins,  goes  to  the  realm  of  tlie  sun.  He  is 
freed  from  the  sins  arising  out  of  drinks,  AiA  wliether  committed  in  this 
or  the  next  world.  All  that  is  destroyed,  who  observes  this  Phala  Saptam! 
fast.  He  wlio  observes  this  Phala  Saptaml,  becomes  free  from  all  diseases 
and  liberates  his  past  ancestors  as  well  as  liis  successors,  for  21  generations 
from  bondage.  One  who  reads,  hears  or  relates  this  to  others,  gets  also 
prosperity.— 11-14. 

Here  enda  the  aewnty^ixtik  (Stapler  rdating  to  PhaJa  Saptam  i 
orthefaatfoUotoed  by  the  gift  of  fruits. 


224 


THE  MATSYA  PURANAM. 


CHAPTER  LXXVIL 

^iva  saiJ, — “ 1 shall  now  explain  to  you  something  about  the 
Sarkara  Saptaml,  (gift  ot  sugar)  the  flestroyor  of  sin,  by  the  observance  of 
which  one  gets  longevity,  prosperity  and  liealtln—l. 

In  the  month  of  VaiAikha,  on  tlie  seventh  day  of  tlie  bright  fort- 
night, the  <levote0  should  bathe  in  water,  mixed  with  white  sesamurn,  and 
then  put  on  wiiite  samhtl  paste  and  a garland  of  white  llowers.  —2. 

A lotus  with  its  potids  and  pericarp,  should  be  drawn  on  an  altar 
with  saffron,  and  flowers  and  incense  shoidd  bo  pnt  on  it,  after  reciting 
‘ SSvitre  naniah  ' — 3. 

Afterwards,  a piteijer  of  water,  with  a vessel  of  sugar,  should  bo 
placed  oil  it.  The  pitclier  should  be  c(A*ered  with  a piece  ot  white  cloth 
and  white  flowers,  sandal  paste,  ami  gold  should  bo  put  on  it.  Then  the 
puja  should  bo  nnulo  with  tlie  following  mantra  : — 4. 

‘O  Pitclier,  You  are  the  Vodainaya.  and,  consequently,  you  arc 
praised  as  knower  of  ail  the  Wilas.  Von  are  bke  in^etar  to  all,  bring 
peace  unto  me,’— 5.  ^ 

Note— Vedamaya— Full  of  all  Vodus,  Vod.iv6di=Tljc  knowor  of  the  Vedas, 

Afterwards,  the  devotee  sliould  drink  pafiehagavya  and  sleep  on  the 
floor,  by  the  side  of  the  pitcliers,  nnd  should  reeito  the  Vedic  mantras 
relating  to  the  Sun,  and  listen  i'»  tin?  Pni'i'inas.  6, 

After  the  lapse  efl'  a day  a?  d niglit,  on  ihe  tSfli  day  of  the  fortnight, 
the  devotee  should  give  away  all  filings  \>)  {he  llrAhiiianas  after  per- 
forming his  daily  prayers, —T. 

He  shuuld  feed  tlic  Hmhmana^,  according  to  his  means,  with  sugar, 
clarified  buttei  and  rice  CO  )kfd  in  milk  and  sugar,  but  should  avoid  oil 
and,  salt.  Ho  himself  sliocdd  i.nko  lii‘<  jjieals  in  silonee.  The  same  rule 
should  be  observoil  eaoli  inoiitli  for  n year,  after  whicli  a pitcher  of  water, 
with  a vessel  of  sugar,  a bedstead,  with  all  its  requisites,  ami  a milch  cow, 
and  if  means  permil,  tiien  a house  containing  all  the  necessities  of  a 
householder’s  life  as  well  as  oatable.s,  should  be  given  away.  Miserliness 
should  not  be  exercised,  for  it  leads  to  sin.  The  devotee  should,  in 
addition  to  the  things  mentioned  above,  give  away  a horse  of  gold  worth 
1,000  Niskas,  100  Niskas,  or  10  Niskas,  or  of  even  5 Niskas,  according  to 
his  means,  by  reciting  the  mantras  pertaining  to  the  Sun.  -8-12. 

Note.— One  Ni^ka  is  equivalent  to  Hs.  4. 

The  nectar  fell  from  the  mouth  of  the  Sun,  whilst  He  was  quaffing  it, 
' out  of  which  (S4li)  rice,  mflnga  pulse  and  sugarcane  were  produced. 


' CHkPTBR  urxwii.  zm 


Stt/afarcane  is  the  best  of  all  these  three,  because  out  of  it  sugar  is  pre- 
pared. Its  juice  is  just  like  nectar;  consequently,  an  offering  of  sugar 
to  Devas  and  Pityis  is  dear  to  the  Sun  rIso.— 13-14. 

This  darkarfi  Saptarnt  is  said  to  give  the  same  benefit  as  Aefvamedha 
sacrifice.  It  removes  all  diseases  and  makes  the  sons  and  the  grandsons 
thrive.  One  who  observes  this  fast  with  unflinching  devotion,  gets  bliss. 
He  passes  his  days  for  one  Kalpa  in  heaven,  and  then  attains  emancipa- 
tion. One  who  hears,  listens,  or  reads  about  this,  goes  to  the  region  of 
the  Sun.  One  who  advises  others  to  observe  this  ordinance,  is  also  vener-* 
ated  by  Devas  and  Heavenly  damsels,  and  passes  his  days  in  heaven. 
-15-17. 

Here  ends  the  seoenty-seventh  chapter  describing  the  Sarhard  Saptami 
or  the  fast  followed  by  gift  of  sugar. 

CHAPTER  LXXVIII. 

^iva  said  : — 1 shall  now  describe  to  you  that  Kam.'ila  Saptami  vrata, 
by  the  mere  mention  of  which  the  God  Sun  becomes  pleased. — 1. 

In  the  spring,  on  the  7th  day  of  a bright  fortnight,  the  devotee 
should  bathe  in  water  mixed  with  white  mustard  and  should  then  make 
a golden  lotus  and  place  it  in  a golden  vessel,  full  of  sesamum.—2. 

Tlie  lotus  should  be  covered  with  a pair  of  cloths,  and  then  the  Lord 
Sun  should  be  worshipped  with  incense,  flowers,  &c  The  following  man- 
tras should  be  recited  at  the  time  of  wonship.  ‘Kamalahastaya  nainah, 
Virfvadhfirine  namah,  ‘Divakarnya  nainah’,  ‘J^rabluUcaraya  namah  and  he 
should  then  give  away  the  golden  lotus  in  the  evening,  along  with  the 
pitcher  of  water  adorning  it,  with  ornaments,  cloths  and  garlands,  and 
then  give  it  to  a Uralimaaa.  So,  also,  according  to  his  means,  he  may 
give  away  a milch  cow  after  adorning  her  well.  -3-5. 

On  the  following  day  on  tlieastaiai  the  Bnihniauas  should  be  fed 
according  to  the  means  of  the  devotee,  but  he  himself  should  not  take 
flesh  and  oil.— 6. 

j 

In  this  way,  the  devotee,  withoui  giving  way  to  miserliness,  should 
observe  the  same  rituals,  on  the  7th  day  of  a bright  fortnight  each 
mouth. — 7. 

On  the  conclusion  of  the  ordinance,  a bedstead  along  with  the  golden 
lotus,  should  be  given  away,  and  a cow  with  its  horns  plaited  with  gold  as 

well  as  uteubil.H  Abana  (seats)  and  candle  sticks  should  also  be  given  awav, 

• S9 


"IT 

aioQg  with  other  necessary  ailioles.  OAe,  who  observes  this  ordinance, 
-according  to  the  prescribed  rites,  becomes  possessed  of  inexhaustible 
wealth  and  goes  to  the  kingdom  of  the  Sun.— 8-9. 

He  also  goes  to  all  tlie  seven  lokas,  in  each  kalpa,  where  he  enjoys  in 
the  company  of  the  nymphs  and  gets  bliss.  One  who  hears,  sees,  relates 
or  observes  this  ordinance  also  becomes  wealthy  and  goes  to  heaven,  where 
he  enjoys  the  company  of  Gandharvas  and  VidyAdharas. — 10-11. 

Here  ends  the  seventy-eighth  chapter  dealing  loith  Kamala  Saptamt  Vvata, 

CHAPTER  LXXIX. 

i^ivasaid:— 1 now  relate  to  yon  about  the  Mand^ra  Saptamt,  the 
giver  of  all  desires,  tlie  most  excellent,  and  the  destroyer  of  all  sins. — 1, 

The  devotee  should  take  some  light  food  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  bright 
fortnight  in  the  month  of  Milgha,  and,  having  arisen  from  his  bed  in  the 
morning  and  brushing  his  teeth  and  bathing,  should  keep  fast  on  that  day 
ow,,  on  the  §a^thi  day. — 2. 

That  day  lie  should  iionor  a few  Bralimanas  and  feed  them  with^ 
delicious  food  at  night.  MandAra*  prarfaim  should  be  offerredto  the  Deva. 
On  the  following  morning,  that  is,  tlie  saptarni  daj",  he  should  feed  the 
Bralimanas  again,  according  to  his  means,  after  his  morning  ablutions.  Then 
procure  eight  Mandara  (lowers  and  prepare  a golden  imago  of  the  Sun 
carrying  a lotus  in  his  hand  and  place  it  in  a copper-vessel  containing 
sesaimim,  and  prepare  also  an  eigiit-petalled  lotus  and  invoke  the  God 
Sun,  thus.  He  should  offer  one  mandura  flower  on  each  petal. — 3-5. 

He  should  then  salute  the  Sun  and  put  some  flowers  and  uncooked 
rice  on  the  lotus  leaf,  in'  the  Eastern  <lirection  by  saying  ' fihfiskar^ya- 
namah*  in  the  South-East  by  saying  ‘ SflryAya  naipah  * in  the  South,  by 
saying  * Arkaya  nainah.  ’ in  the  South-West,  by  saying  “ Aryarane  naraah,’* 
in  the  West  by  saying  ;—**  Veda  dhainne  namah,*'  in  the  North-West 
direction  by  saying  “ Chanda  Bhjiuave  namah,’*  in  the  North  by  saying 
“Puisne  narnah,’’  in. the  North-East  by  saying  ‘ Anandflya  namah.*—6-7. 

The  devotee  should  place  the  image  trf  the  Male  Parana  on  the  peri- 
carp of  the  lotus,  and  after  saying  ‘ SarvStmane  namah,*  white  cloth  should 
be  put  on  the  imago,  and  eatables,  flowera  and  fruits  should  be  offered. — 8. 

Then  all  these  things  should  be  given  away  to  a Br&hma^a  versed  in 
the  Vedas.  He  himself  should  take  his  meals,  but  then  oil  and  salt  should 

* Mandftra  is  the  neme  given  to  several  species  of  plants,  vfs.,  Oalotropls  gigantea, 
Brythrina  indioa,  and  thorn-apple. 


be  avoided.  He  should  observe  the  vovr  of  silence  while  eating,  and  take 
bis  meals  facing  the  Eest.—O.  ^ 

This  ordinance  should  be  observed,  according  to  the  prescribed  rites 
for  a year,  on  the  seventh  day  of  a fortnight,  earh  month,  without  giving 
way  to  miserliness.— 10. 

On  the  conclusion  of  the  ordinance,  the  lotus  of  gold  should  be  given 
away  after  being  placed  on  a pitcher  of  water.  One  wishing  to  acquire 
prosperity,  should  give  away  a cow  in  addition  to  it.— 11. 

The  following  prayer  should  then  he  oilered  * I salute  Mandditindtha 
and  Manddirabhavana,  0 Lord  Sun  ! see  me  through  this  wordly  ocean  of 
troubles.’ —12. 

One  who  observes  tliis  Mand&ra  Saptami  fast  in  this  way  is  freed 
from  all  sins  and  goes  to  heaven  where  he  resides  for  a kalpa.  This 
ordinance  is  like  a torch  that  dispels  all  the  sins  like  pitched  darkness. 
One  who  keeps  it  up  gets  his  desires  fulfilled.  One  who  reads  or  listens 
about  this  ordinance  becomes  freed  from  all  sins. — 13-15. 

Here  ends  the  eeoenly-ninih  chapter  dealing  with  Manddra  Saptami 

vrata. 


CHAPTER  LXXX. 

Sri  Bhagav&n  said I shall  now  explain  to  you  about  the  excellent 
Snbha  saptami  fasting,  which  frees  the  devotee  from  all  diseases,  sorrows 
and  troubles. — 1. 

The  devotee  should  observe  this  ordinance  on  the  seventh  day  of 
the  bright  fortnight,  in  the  month  of  Advina,  after  ablutions  and  morning 
prayers,  when  the  Brdhmapas  have  done  the  svastivAcbana.— 2. 

A milch  cow  should  be  worshipped  with  incense,  flowers  and  sandal 
paste  and  the  devotee  should  say,  ‘ 0,  One  who  has  been  born  of  the  Sun 
and  one  who  resides  in  the  various  dimes,  whose  body  is  goodness  itself, 

1 salute  Thee  for  the  fulfilment  of  my  desires.’— 3. 

After  tills,  a quantity  (of  the  Prastha  measure}  of  sesamnm  put  in 
a vessel  of  copper,  an  ox  of  gold  with  incense,  garland,  molasses,  various 
kinds  of  fruits,  eatables  and  dishes  made  of  milk  and  clarified  butter, 
should  be  given  away  in  the  evening  by  reciting  the  mantra,  “ Aryam& 
PrIyatAm.”— 4-5. 

The  devotee  should  offer  Panchagavya  as  PrAAana.  He  should  be 
free  from  all  pride  and  sleep  on  the  floor.  On  the  following  morning,  he  * 


— ^ — 

^ iikOiald  ^t  up  and  worship  the  Brfthmapas  with  devotion.  Thus  men 
abduid  give  away  each  month  a couple  of  cloths,  a golden  ox  and  a golden 
cow,  and,  nt  the  end  of  the  year,  sugarcane,  molasses,  bedding,  pillows, 
utensils,  aud  mattresses. -G-S. 

Afterwards,  a quantity  (of  the  Prastha  measure)  of  aesHmuin  placed  in 
a vessel  of  copper  and  a golden  ox,  shouhl  be  given  to  a IJrAhrnaoa  versed 
ih  the  Vedas,  with  the  words,  VisvAtmA  IViyatAiri.”— 9. 

One  wlio  keeps  up  this  ordinance  in  this  way  becomes  wealthy  and 
renowned  in  each  birth.  -10. 

He  is  also  lionoiired  by  the  nymphs  ApsarAs  and  Gandhaivas), 
and  resides  in  heaven  as  the  Lord  of  Hosts  L'.e.,  Ganas)  till  the  end  of 
the  kalpa,  after  \Yhich  he  is  born  as  a king.  ~ll. 

Thousands  of  the  sins  accruing  by  the  killing  of  BrAhmaoas  and 
by  wilful  aburtion,  are  expiated  by  the  reading  of  tliis  sacred  vrata  of 
of  Saptaini. — li. 

One  who  reads  this  or  hears  it,  oven  for  a moment,  or  sees  the  vrata 
performed  and  things  given  away,  is  freed  frotn  all  sins  and  becomes  the  i 
Lord  of  the  Vidyidharas.— 13. 

One  wlio  keeps  up  this  Saptami  vrata  (onllnance),  of  sevenfold 
prescription,  for  a period  of  .seven  years,  becomes  the  I-ord  of  seven  regions, 
turn  by  turn,  after  whicli  he  goes  t»)  the  i(*gion  t>f  V^i.snu  aud  attains  bliss 
there.— 14. 

Here  ends  the  eiiihtirlli  cJiafiter  deseriliing  the  Suhhtt  Saptami  vrata. 

CflAPTER  LXXXI. 

Maiiu  asked  Lord ! wliich  is  tliat  ordinance,  l)y  the  observance  of 
which,  separation  from  tlie  dear  ones  ceases  to  be  painfnl  and  which  confers 
prosperity  on  tlie  devotee  and  wliicli  saves  men  from  the  evils  of  this 
life.-l. ' 

The  Lord  said  :— The  question  put  by  you,  0 ManuJ  is  beneficial  - 
to  the  world,  and,  owing  to  the  sublimity  of  the  subject-matter,  is  beyond 
the  reach  of  heaven  even ; and,  though  kept  secret  from  Suras  and  Asuras, 
now,  I shall  relate  it  to  you  on  account  of  your  intense  devotion.—  2. 

The  YidokadvAda^  ordinance  falls  in  the  month  of  Advina.  On  the 
tenth  day  of  the  fortnight,  the  devotee  should  take  some  light  food  and 
' commence  the  oi’dinance  by  observing  the  prescribed  rites,— 3. 


OBkJPTm  txxxiy 


m 

On  the  Bk&daifi  day,  he  should  brush  his  teeth  by  turning  his  face 
towards  the  north  or  the  east.  Then  he  should  worship  the  Lord  Keia'p 
and  the  Goddess  Lak^ml,  and  fast  tlie  day.  “ I shall  take  my  meal 
consisting  of  many  dishes  next  day.”  With  this  thought,  he  should  go 
to  sleep,  and,  on  getting  up  in  the  morning,  he  should  bathe  in  Pancfaa- 
gavya  water,  mixed  with  various  medicines,  and  put  on  white  clothes  and 
garlands  of.  white  flowers.  Afterwards,  the  worship  of  Lak^ml  and 
NArAyania  should  be  ooniinenced  with  white  lotus  flowers. — 4-5. 

The  feet  .should  be  worshipped,  after  reciting  ‘ Virfokaya  namah,’  the 
legs  after  reciting  * Varadaya  namah,*  the  knees  after  reciting  'i^rMaya 
namah,’  the  thighs  after  reciting  ‘ rlalaAiyine  fiainah,’  the  private  parts 
after  reciting  ‘ KandarpAya  iianiali,*  the  waist  after  reciting  ‘Madliavaya 
namah,’  the  stomach  after  reciting  ‘ DAiiDflarAya  namah,’  the  ribs  after 
reciting  ‘ VipulAya  namah,’  the  navel  after  reciting  ‘PadmanAblinya  namah,’ 
the  lieart  after  reciting  * AI«'inniathrya  namah/  the  bieasts  after  reciting 
^ridluiraya  namah,’  the  hands  after  reciting  ‘ Madhujite  namah,*  the  left 
arm  after  reciting  ‘ Cliakrinc  namah,’  the  right  aim  after  reciting  * Gadi- 
ne  namah,*  the  throat  after  reciting  ‘ VaikuntJiAya  namah/  the  mouth  after 
reciting  ‘ YajnyaimikhAya  namah,’  the  nose  after  reciting  * Aiokaniclhaye 
namah,’  the  eyes  after  reciting  * Vasudevaya  namah/  the  forehead  after 
reciting  VAmaiiAya  namah/  the  eye  hr.iws  after  reciting  ‘Haraye  namah,’ 
the  locks  of  hair  after  reciting  ‘ MadhavAya  namah,’  the  crown  after  recit- 
ing VWvarupine  namah,’  the  head  after  reciting  ‘ SarvAtmane  namah. — 
641. 

Thus  worshiping  Vi.snu  with  sandal,  fruils  and  flowers,  an  altar 
should  be  made  on  the  ground  after  making  a oirede. — 12. 

The  altar  should  be  a square  in  shape,  and  of  the  dimensions  of  a 
cubit,  and  should  slant  towards  the  north.  It  must  be  smooth  and  soft, 
surrounded  by  three  small  mud-walls. — 13. 

The  upper  surface  sliouhl  lie  eight  fingers  high  from  the  ground  ; 
and  the  raudwalls  one  finger  high  and  two  lingers  thick. — 14. 

[Al.B.— Oue  finger  is  a little  less  than  one  inch.] 

On  it  should  be  placed  an  image  of  Lnk.smi,  made  of  river  sand,  and 
placed  in  a winnowing  basket,  and  worshipped  according  to  the  rites  here- 
after mentioned. — 15. 

Lak§mi  should  be  worshipped,  after  reciting  the  following  mantras, 
— 


^ilr  ^ ^ i 


Ttt^tyat  Qtmal||i  nama^,  Hriftyai  nama|r.--16  ^ 

? ^ ' The  devotee  should  also  say/  * 0 Vidokfi  goddess,  destroy  all  grief, 

graut  some  boon,  give  wealth,  and  fulfil  all  de8ires^--**17. 

After  this,  he  should  wrap  up  the  winnowing  basket  in  a piece  of 
ijiiCloth,  and  worship  Lak$rnt  with  fruits  and  various  kinds  of  clothes  and 
with  a golden  lotus.— 18. 

The  devotee  should  drink  the  water  purified  by  the  Ku4a  grass,  and 
carry  on  music  and  singing  throughout  the  night;  and,  on  the  lapse  of 
three  quarters  of  the  niglit  thus  past  in  vigil  and  prayer,  the  devotee 
should  sleep  in  the  last  quarter,  and  then  waking  up,  go  and  worship 
them,  along  with  three  couples  of  Brahmanas  and  Bi-rdiinanls  according  to  his 
means : if  not  three,  at  least,  one  couplo  should  be  worshipped.  He  should 
offer  them  sandal,  flowers  and  cloths  as  well  as  bedstead^,  with  the  luautra, 

“ Namastu  Jalailyine.*’  The  night  thus  passed  witli  watching,  music  and 
songs,  the  d'^votee,  after  bitliing  in  the  morning,  sliould  worship  the 
Brahmana  couples,  as  mentioned  above.  They  should  be  fed  according  to 
his  means,  free  from  niggardliness.  And  then,  after  taking  his  meals,  he  ^ 
should  pass  that  day  in  listening  to  the  Puranas.— 19-23. 

The  devotee  should  observe  the  same  rituals  every  month  till  the 
ordinance  is  over ; after  which,  he  should  give  away  a bedstead,  along  with 
the  gu4a  dbenu^  Isugar  cow),  pillows,  bedding,  sheets  and  cloths.— 24. 

Then  he  should  say,  ‘ 0 Lord ! as  Laksml  does  not  forsake  you, 
similarly,  beauty,  liealtli,  and  pleasure  may  always  be  mine*. — 25. 

* As  Laksmi  does  not  go  without  Viaiiu,  let  there  always  he  happiness 
with  me.  Let  niy  devotion  always  remain  centred  in  Vi§nn.* — 2d. 

With  the  fibove  words,  tlie  <levotec  should  give  away  the  bedstead, 
and  guda  dhenu,  the  image  of  liaksmi  and  tho  winnowing  basket,  to  the 
Br&hmana.— 27. 

The  following  flowers  are  always  desirable  in  this  form  of  worship 
viz,y  ‘Lotus,  Kanera,  Bana,  fresh  Bafron  flower,  Ketakl,  Sindhuvftra, 
Jasmine,  Gaudhapatala,  Kadamba,  Knbjaka  and  Cbampaka.  — 28. 

Here  end$  the  eighty-first  chapter  deecrihing  the  Vrata  called  Vikoha 

Dvddait, 


* Cht^a  dhenu  has  been  explained  in  the  next  chapter. 


OHACTER  LXXXIL 


Maiiti  asl^d  :*^0,Lord  of  the  Universe ! pray  tell  me  about  Ouia^ 
dhenu^  How  should  it  be  made^  and  by  what  mantra  should  it>e  given 
away?— 1. 


The  Lord  Mataya  answered  : — 0 King ! I shall  explain  to  you 
the  form  of  Ou4adhenu,  and  the  fruits  of  its  gift,  as  well  as  the  mantras, 
according  to  wliich  it  should  be  given  away.  It  is  the  destroyer  of  all 
sins."-2. 

The  floor  should  be  plastered  with  cowdung,  the  Kufia  grass  shoujld 
be  spread  on  all  sides,  and  then  over  it  shouM  bo  placed  a black  antelope 
skin  of  four  hands  in  length  with  its  neck  towards  the  east.  This  is 
meant  for  the  cow.  A smaller  deerskin  should  be  spread  on  the  floor, 
near  the  first,  and  it  should  be  meant  for  her  calf.  The  cow  should  be 
made  to  face  the  east  and  the  calf  the  north. — 3-4. 

The  image  of  Quiadhenu  (Sugar  cow)  should  be  made  of  4 maunds 
of  raw  sugar,  and  the  calf  of  one  rnatind  of  raw  sugar,  which  is  considered 
to  be  the  first  class ; the  image  of  the  cow  made  of  two  maunds  and  the 
calf  of  half  a inaund  of  raw  sugar  is  considered  to  be  the  next  best.  The 
image  of  the  cow  made  of  one  inaund  and  the  calf  of  ten  seers  of  raw  sugar 
is  considered  to  be  the  last  best.  I'he  devotee  is  to  choose  between  the 
three,  according  to  his  means. — 5-6. 

The  mouths  of  the  images  of  the  cow  and  the  calf  should  be  made 
of  clarified  butter,  and  both  shouM  be  covered  with  five  silk  cloths.  Their 
ears  should  be  made  of  mother-of-pearl  and  legs  of  sugarcane  and  the 
eyes  of  good  pearls. — 7. 

The  tendons,  nerves,  Ac.,  of  these  images  should  be  made  of  white 
threads,  white  blankets  to  represent,  their  dewlaps,  cheeks  and  backs 
should  be  made  of  copper,  the  while  hair  trimmed  from  a chdmara 
(antelope  hair)  should  represent  the  hair  of  tlie  body.*-8. 

The  eyebrows  should  be  made  of  corals,  the  adders  of  fresh  butter, 
the  tail  of  silk  cloth,  a vessel  of  bell  metal  should  be  placed  to  represent  the 
milking  vessel, Jbe  horns  should  be  made  of  gold,  the  pupils  of  the  eyes 
of  sapphire,  the  hoofs  of  silver,  the  scented  fruits  in  place  of  the  nostrils. 
After  thus  making  the  images  of  the  cow  and  the  calf,  the  devotee  should 
worship  them  with  incense,  lights,  &c.,  with  the  following  prayer : — 9-10. 

'The  Goddess,  who  is  inherent  in  all  beings,  in  the  form  of  Laksmt 
and  who  also  resides  among  the  Devas,  let  that  Goddess,  in  the  symbol  of  a 
cow,  may  confer  peace  upon  me.  The  Goddess  who  is  known  as  Rudrftpi, 


rflfif  UAT8YA  PURANAM. 


232 

the  favourite  of  the  Lord  l^iva,  in  whose  form  she  resides,  may  that  very 
same  Goddess  in  the  symbol  of  the  cow,  dispel  all  my  sins.  The  Goddess, 
who  reclines  on  the  breast  of  Vii^nu,  as  Laksini,  who  is  present  in  the 
form  of  Svilhd.  in  the  fire,  and  is  called  the  power  and  the  energy  of  the 
sun  and  the  moon  and  India,  tlie  same  Goddess,  in  the  symbol  of  the  cow 
may  grant  me  wealth.  She  who  is  the  LakstnK wealth)  of  Brahma,  Kuvera, 
Lokapalas  may  grant  me  boons  in  the  symbol  of  tho  cow.  She  who  is 
Swadhfi,  of  tlie  highest  Pitfis,  is  SvAli?!  of  the  DevAs,  may  she  remove  all 
my  sins  and  bring  me  peace  in  the  symbol  of  the  cow.’ — 11-15. 

The  gudadhenu,  thus  invoked  by  the  above  prayer  should  be  given 
away  to  the  Brahmana.  The  same  ritual  is  observed  in  giving  away 
all  sorts  of  cows.— 16. 

0 King ! there  are  ten  sorts  of  cows  tlial  are  siiixl  to  remove  all 
sins,  and  I shall  enumerate  them  to  you.*— 17. 

They  are  : — 1.  Cow  made  of  raw  sugar  (giida  dhenu).  2.  Cow  made 
of  clarified  butter  (ghtita  dheiiuK  3.  Cov\  made  of  sesamum  iTila  dhenu), 
4.  Cow  made  of  water  (jala  dhenu),  5.  (.^JW  made  of  milk  (Kslra  dhenu),  6 
Cow  made  of  honey  (Madhii  dhenu»,  7.  Cow  made  of  sugar  (Sarkara  dhenu), 
8.  Cow  made  of  curds  (dadhi  dhenu},  Cow  made  of  syrup  (Rasa  dlienu) 
and  10,  the  real,  that  is,  the  living  cow. — 18-10. 

The  symbols  of  cows  made  of  liquid  should  be  placed  in  pitchers 
filled  to  the  brim,  and  tho  symb<ds  of  the  cow  made  of  other  substances 
should  be  arranged  in  a heap.  In  this  matter  of  gift,  some  also  like  to 
make  a symbol  of  the  cow  of  geld  -■  20. 

Some  sages  have  also  >5aid  that  the  symbol  of  the  cow  made  of  fr^sh 
butter  and  gems  should  be  given  away.  I'lio  above-mentioned  rituals 
should  be  observed  in  giving  away  .sorts  of  cows  (tle.scril)ed  above). — 21. 

The  devotee  should  give  away,  with  faith,  these  cows  to  attain 
prosperity  and  emancipation,  on  occasions  of  different  festivals,  accompa- 
nied with  the  invocation  of  manlras.  I have  already  explained  in  connec- 
tion with  this  ffU'/a  gift,  the  gift  of  other  symbolical  cows.  Tliese 
gifts  are  destroyers  of  all  sins,  the  givers  of  the  fruits  af  innumerable 
sacrifices,  and  are  very  auspicious.  -22-23. 

Of  all  the  ordinances  the.  one  of  ArfokadvAdarfi  is  the  best,  and  the 
gift  of  gu(}a  dhenu,  as  being  an  ingredient  of  that  vrata,  is,  therefore, 
praised  a§  the  best.— 24. 

It  is  most  appropriate  to  give  away  tho  dhenu,  <So.,  on  the  days 
of  equinoxes,  and  solstices,  on  the  occasion  of  an  eclipse  and  Vyatlpftta 


CBAPTEB  LXXZIII. 


233 


(i.e„  when  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  are  in  opposite  Ayatia  and  hare  the 
same  declination,  the  earn  of  their  longitude  being  equal  to  180°.) — 25. 

This  Vitfokadvfidaili  is  most  sacred  and  dispeller  of  all  sins,  and  is 
anspioious.  He  who  fasts  on  this  Dv&daif!  goes  to  Vi^pn’s  highest  seat. 
He  attains  prosperity,  longevity  and  health  in  this  world,  and,  after  death, 
he  goes  to  the  city  of  Vispu,  remembering  him  always  at  that  critical 
moment.  The  virtuous  devotee  never  gets  grief  or  pain  for  a period  of 
nine  arbuda  and  eighteen  thousand  years.  A married  woman,  observing 
this  Viifokadvddadi  vrata,  with  music  and  dance,  obtains  also  the  same 
benefits.  Consequently,  one,  full  of  faith,  should  always  have  music  and 
songs  in  honor  of  Hari,  on  the  occasion  of  this  vrata,  for,  thereby,  he  gets 
prosperity. — 26-30. 

One  who  reads,  listens  to,  or  sees  the  worship  of  Lord  Madhusfidana 
or  advises  others  to  observe  this  ordinance,  goes  to  the  kingdom  of  Indra 
where  he  is  venerated  by  the  Uevas  for  a period  of  one  kalpa. — 31. 

Here  enda  the  eighty-second  chapter  describing  Asoka  Dc&dast  and  the 
stihsidiarif  gift  of  guf}>i  dhenu  and  other  symbolic  images  of  the  cow. 


CHAPTER  LXXXIII. 

N&rada  said  0 Lord  of  the  Universe  ! 1 wish  to  hear  the  benefits 
of  that  best  of  all  gifts,  that  may  be  the  giver  of  everlasting  benefits  in 
the  next  life  and  that  may  also  be  venerated  by  the  Devas  and  Risis. — 1.. 

l^iva  said  : — 0 Sage  ! I shall  explain  to  you  the  ten  ways  of  the 
gift  or  d&na  known  as  the  Sumernparvata  gift,  by  virtue  of  which, 
the  devotee  attains  the  highest  of  the  climes  and  is  respected  by  the 
Devas. — 2.  ^ , 

l%e  blessings  conferred  by  this  form  of  charity  cannot  be  attained 
otherwise,  not  even  by  the  reading  of,  'or  listening  to,  the  Purdpas,  Vedas, 
performing  sacrifices  and  woraliipping,  or  erecting  temples  to,  the 
Devas. — 3. 

Consequeptly,  I shall  relate  to  you  the  ways  of  this  form  of  charity 
serially.  The  following  ten  hills  should  be  made  and  given  away,  viz. : — 1. 
the  hill  of  grain^  2.  the  hill  of  salt,  3.  the  hill  of  raw  sugar,  4.  the  hill  of 
gold,  5.  the  hill  of  sesamum,  6.  the  hill  of  cotton,  7.  the  hill  of  clarified 
butter,  8.  the  hill  of  jewels,  9.  the  hill  of  silver,  10.  the  hill  of 
sugar.— 4-6. 

Now  I shall  explain  to  yo%  the  ways  of  giving  away  the  different 
hills  enumeroted  above.  The  hills  made  of  grain,  salt,  &c,,  sliould  be  given 


‘ TBE  MAfBYA  PaSAUAM. 


m 

away  on  the  following  occasions : — on  the  day  of  the  sacred  equinoctial 
and  aolsticial  sankrAntis,  at  the  time  of  VyatipAta,  on  the  day  of  the 
conjunction  of  three  tithis  (tryahaspai'ia;,  on  the  third  day  of  the  bright 
fortnight,  on  the  occasion  of  an  eclipse,  on  the  aniAvasya  day,  on  the  occa- 
sion of  the  sacrificial  rites  connected  with  tlie  marriage  ceremonies,  and 
other  festivals,  on  the  12th  day  of  the  bright  fortnight,  on  the  full  moon 
day,  and  on  the  day  of  the  moon  being  in  a sacred  astorism.  -7-5). 

A four-cornered  pandal  should  bo  erected  with  devotion, 

within  a temple  yard,  in  a sacred  place,  within  the  limits  of  a cattle-shed 
or  in  the  devotee’s  own  courtyanl.  It  should  face  the  north  and  be 
slightly  slanting  towards  East  and  North,  and  the  floor  should  be  plastered 
with  cowdung  ami  covered  with  Kusfa  grass.  In  th*'  centre  should  be  made 
the  hill,  surrounded  by  posts  as  props.  <F(Uir  hills  should  he  made  in  the 
corners,  with  Sumeni  in  the  centivi.  d'he  liill  of  l,0i‘0  dronas  orj  1,6000 
seers  of  grain  is  the  first  l)0^t,  of  rf,Ot'U  seers  of  grain  is  the  second  best, 
and  of  4,800  seers  of  grain  the  last  best.  -- 10-12. 

The  Sumeru  hill  in  the  cetitre  should  be  made  of  rice  (vrthi),  thri^' 
trees  of  gold  sliouhl  be  in  it.  Vcarls  and  diamonds  should  be  studded  in 
the  east  side  of  tlto  lull,  cat's  oyo  and  topaz  in  the  soutli,  enierald  an<l 
sapphire  in  the  we^t  and  lapislazuli  and  ruby  in  tlie  itorth.  Pieces  of 
sandal  wood  should  be  placed  on  all  side^.  S*)  al^o  a creeper  of  corals 
should  surround  it,  and  the  suiface  uud  tlie  boitoin  of  the  roedv  should 
be  bedecked  with  ovstor  slieils.— IC-ld. 

The  images  of  Bralimri,  Vi-^nu  and  Siva  as  well  a?>  of  tlie  Sun  sliould 
be  made  of  gold  by  holy  nrAlimana>,  and  placed  .m  the  .summit  of  the 
hiii.-ir>. 

Tlie  four  peak.s  should  be  made  of  silver,  and  silver  altould  also  be 
plaited  at  the  bottom.  Sugarcane  should  be  put  in  place  of  bamboos,  the 
caves  should  be  made  of  butter,  and  the  streams,  of  clarified  butter. — 10. 

The  clouds  surrounding  this  hill  on  four  sides,  sliould  be  made  of 
cloths  of  four  colors,  viz.,  th(>?o  on  the  east,  of  white  cloth,  those  on  the 
south,  of  yellow,  those  on  the  west  of  pigeon-grey,  and  those  on  the  north 
of  red'Colored  cloths.— 17. 

Fruits  of  diiTerent  kinds,  line  garlands  of  flowers  and  sandal  should 
be  put  on  on  all  tlie  sides.  Eight  silver  LokapAlas  representing  1.  Indra 
E,,  2,  Agni  S.  E.,  3.  Yania  S.,  4.  Sflrya  S.  W.,  5.  Varuija  W.,  6.  VAyu, 
N.  W,,  7.  Kuvera,  N.,  and  8.  Chandra  N.  E.,  should  be  made  and  located 
in  their  ascribed  places.  The  hill  in^his  way  should  be  decorated.— 18, 


* ; OBAPTtm  i^xtznt  2» 


The  canopy  should  be  made  of  five  colours,  and  it  should  be  gar^ 
landed  with  white  unfading  flowem.  The  Sumeru  hill  should  thus  be 
located  in  the  centre,  and  its  four  spurs  decorated  with  flowers,  and  sandal 
should  be  located  in  their  proper  places.  Then  the  Mandarachala  hill 
should  be  erected  with  barley  in  the  east  and  adorned  with  the  row  of 
fruits  and  on  the  top,  should  be  planted  a tree  of  gold,  represent- 
ing the  Madra  Kadamba  tree. — 19-20. 

That  bill  sliould  be  adorned  with  a golden  image  of  Cupid,  arrayed 
with  beautiful  dresses,  garlands  of  flowers  and  sandal.  There  should  be 
on  one  side  of  it  a vessel,  containing  milk,  representing  the  sea  of  milk  and 
on  the  opposite  side,  another  vessel,  representing  the  sea  called  Arunodha. 
The  forests  of  the  hill  should  be  represented  by  silver  trees,  according  to 
the  means  of  the  devotee. — 21. 

On  the  south,  the  OaTuIhamsulana  hill  should  be  made  of  wheat, 
putting  some  gold  in  it ; on  the  top  of  which  should  be  placed  a golden 
image  of  Yajiiapati  and  the  lake  Mnnasarovara,  of  clarified  butter  and  a 
garden  of  white  cloth  and  silver  should  adorn  it. — 22. 

On  the  west,  the  Hiraninaya  hill  of  sesamum  should  be  made  and 
adorned  with  sweet  flowers.  Silver,  fig  tree  and  swan  of  gold,  garden 
of  silver-flowers,  a pond  of  curds  representing  the  Sitodha  sarovara  and 
clouds  represented  by  white  cloths,  should  also  be  made. — 23. 

On  the  north,  the  Suparrfva  hill,-  of  urad  pulse  (Phaseolus  radiatus) 
should  be  made.  A golden  vata  tree  and  a cow  of  gold,  should  be  placed 
on  the  top  of  the  hill.  A pond  of  honey,  representing  Bhadra  sarovara, 
and  a garden  of  silver  trees,  should  also  be  made  at  the  bottom  of  it. 
The  BrAihma^as,  versed  in  the  Vedas  and  Purauas,  and  able  to  control 
their  passions  and  of  blameless  character  and  sound  bodies,  should  be 
made  Hotfts  performing  Homa.  The  sacrificial  pond  should  measure 
one  cubit  square  in  size  and  east  of  Sumeru  hill.  Sacrificial  offerings 
should  be  made  of  sesamum,  barley,  clarified  butter,  sacrificial  fuel,  and 
Kurfa  grass.  The  devotee  should  keep  himself  awake  during  the  night 
and  blow  conches,  etc.,  and  sing.  Now  I shall  describe  to  you  the  way 
of  invoking  the  hills. — 24-26. 

In  invoking  the  Sumeru  hill,  the  devotee  should  say,  * 0 hill ! Thou 
art  the  best  resort  of  all  the  Devas.  0 hill  of  immortals ! destroy  quickly 
all  ill-luck  in  our  houses  and  confer  all  prosperity  on  us  as  well  as  the 
highest  peace.  I have  commenced  worship  with  unalloyed  devotion. 
Thou  art  the  adorable  l^iva,  Brahma,  Vis^u,  and  the  Sun.  Thou  art 
formless,  with  and  beyond  all  forms.  Thou  art  the  seed  of  all,  protect  me, 
therefore,  0 Eternal  One.  Thou  art  the  temple  of  the  LokapAlas  and  of 


236 


THE  MATSYA  PUBANAM, 


VijJvamdrti,  the  Great  Omnipresent,  as  well  as  of  Rudra,  the  Adityas  and 
Vasus,  therefore  give  me  peace.  Since  Thou  art  never  bereft  of  the 
Devas  or  Devis  or  by  J^iva,  therefore  take  me  across  the  mundane  ocean 
of  sufferings  in  safety.’ — 27-30. 

After  thus  worshipping  the  Suineru  hill,  the  Alandarachala  should  also 
be  worsliipped  with  tlto  following  words:— ‘0  xMaiuhirachala ! Thou  art 
• embellished  with  the  iorest  oalltd  Oiiaitm-ratha,  and  the  continent,  called 
Bbadraiva,  therefore,  soon  bring  happiness  unto  me.  O,  GandhamA-dana  ! 
Thou  art  the  crest  jewel  of  the  cotiLinent,  ,Jainhudvipa,  and  art  adorned  with 
Gandharvavann,  therefore,  grant  me  high  renown.  0,  Hiranmaya  hill.  Thou 
art  adorned  by  the  Ketmiiila  continent  as  well  as  by  the  garden  called 
Vaibhraja.  Tlie  gokh^ii  fig  tree  is  on  your  summit,  let  my  power  therefore 
be  everlasting.  O Huparrfva  Ijill,  'riiuii  slamlest  majestic,  beautiiied 
by  the  northern  Kuni  e mntry  and  the  S.lviiri  forest,  tlierefovc,  let  my 
pn’ksperity  be  inexlnuistihle.'  After  thus  invoking  tlioscr  hills,  the  devotee 
should  l)ath('  in  the  m"rniiig  ami  give  away  tl/o  best  central  hill,  to  the 
guru  (preceptor).-  'U-Mo. 

The  four  corner  hills  siiouhl  be  given  away,  in  due  order,  to  tiie  four 
Ititvijas,  and,  O M/nada  ! twviity-K.uir  or  ouieows  siioidd  also  be  given* 
away. — 30. 

Nino,  eigiit,  , livt*  ('^»•n  nuc  milch  eow  should  bo  given  away 
to  the  prece[Uor  'guru),  aceoidii.::  to  the  nit'au"  d'  the  dev(»toe.— 37, 

Tills  i.s  the  wav  '■!’  \;.»rslii|.i  n[  all  the  inlls.  Tljo  same  mantras  and 
iiiatorials  for  worship  i be  empbwed  In  uor^.liii^ping  tliem  all.  The 

sacrificial  oli’erings  t-j  the  dillerent  i^tcrisiiis,  Luka  pa  las,  Rrahma  and 
other  iJevas  shonhi  aisD  Iim  r^lb-M-d.  by  aj^plying  tlu  ir  re.'»p(M-tive  mantras. 
Diurnal  fasts  siimd  i iio  ob-je.^'id.  In  cu'^c  the  d«*vi>U-‘e  cannot  do  so, 
he  may  take  his  niealf^  in  (he  night,  Narada  I Now  listen  to  the 
Dana  mantras  of  all  lulls  seiially. —38-10. 

Hear  also  the  rltuaU  of  llioir  being  given  away.  “The  < Anna)  grain 
is  Brahma  and  is  known  as  thogi\erof  life.  'I'Ik!  grain  nourishes  the 
universe;  consoijuently,  it  \’isnn  ami  fAk^mi.  O,  Supreme  of  all  the 
hills!  protect  me  in  tlie  form  i;f  a hill  of  grain.  " — 41-42. 

One  who  gives  away  the  liill  of  grain  in  this  way,  resides  in  Devaloka 
during  the  reign  of  a Imndtcd  Afamis,  and  traverses  through  the  skies 
seated  in  an  aerial  chariot  in  company  of  tlie  nymphs  and  the  Qandharvas. 
On  the  exhaustion  of  his  merit,  he  is  re-horn  in  the  family  of  a great 
king.“43-45. 

Here  ends  the  eiylitif-third  chapter  describintj  the  yift  of  hills 
(i.ti.,  heaps  of  tjrain). 


CHAPTER  LXXXIV. 


237 


CHAPTER  LXXXIV. 

iSiva  said  : — I am  now  going  to  tell  you  about  the  mount  of  salt,  the 
donor  of  which  goes  to  My  region. — 1. 

The  first  best  mount  of  salt  is  of  25(5  seers  (of  the  measure  of  16 
drSnas),  the  next  best  is  of  128  seers  (eiglit  dronas),  and  the  last  is  of 
64  seers  (f.r?.,  4 dronas). — 2. 

The  poor  may  make  it  of  any  weiglit  rising  from  16  seers  (one 
drdna)  onwards.  The  four  corner  mounts  (vijjkambha)  should  be  of  the 
quarter  measurement  of  this  main  mount. — 3. 

And  Brahma,  along  with  the  other  Devas,  should  be  arranged  in 
the  same  way  as  mentioned  before,  and  tlie  golden  Lokapfilas  should  also 
be  so  located. — 4. 

The  ponds  and  Kamadeva  and  otljers  sinmld  he  made  a.s  before.  Tlje 
devotee  should  keep  up  all  the  night.  1 now  explain  to  you  the  mantra 
of  giving  it  awiy.  ‘ O Salt ! 'Fhoii  liast  heen  b'»rn  of  tlie  ocean  of  fortune, 
in  consequence  of  whicli  thou  art  ^tyled  as  the  best  of  all  the  flavours, 
ilonce  this  gift  of  the  mount  of  salt  may  protect  me  from  tlje  evils  of  this 
mundane  world. — 5-6. 

‘There  is  jio  flavour  iu  anything  without  a pinch  of  salt.  It  is  always 
dear  to  both  fcJiva  and  ^iva  \(muri).  Hence,  0 Salt ! give  me  peace. — 7. 

* The  salt  that  has  sprung  from  the  body  of  Visnu  is  the  giver  of  health. 
Therefore,  0 Salt  in  the  shape  of  a mountain,  carry  me  through  the  mun- 
dane ocean  of  troubles  in  peace.’  -8. 

One  who  gives  away  the  mount  of  salt  in  this  way,  attains  bliss  after 
passing  a Kalpa  in  the  realm  of  ^iva  and  Parvati. — 9. 

Here  ends  the  eujhtij- fourth  chapter  describiug  the  rjift  of  the 
mount  of  salt. 

CHAPTER  LXXXV. 

iSiv-a  said  : — I now  relate  to  you  about  the  gift  of  the  mountain  of 
molasses,  the  donor  of  which,  honoured  by  the  Uevas,  remains  in 
heaven.— 1. 

The  mount  of  50  maiinds  (10  bharas)  of  molasses  is  the  first  best,  of 
25  raaunds  (5  bhfiras)  the  second  best,  and  of  15  maunds  (3  bh&ras)  the 
last  best.  The  poor  may  make  it  of  7|  maunds  even. — 2, 

The  invocation,  worehip,  the  golden  tree,  the  worship  of  the  Devas, 
the  four  corner  mounts  (viskambha),  the  ponds,  the  forest,  the  Devas,  and 
the  sacrifice,  the  keeping  up  of  the  night  and  the  Lokapalas  and  the  preli- 


2S8  ' 


TEE  MAT8YA  PORAEAM. 


minary  ceremonies,  all  these  ^onld  be  done  according  to  the  rituals  con* 
nected  with  the  mount  of  grain,  and  the  foIlo;ji7ing  mantras  should  lie 
pronounced : — 3-4.  . ^ 

‘ As  Vi^^u  is  supreme  among  the  Devas,  the  S&maveda  among  the 
Vedas,  Lord  Mahftdeva  among  the  yogis,  the  sacred  Ont  among  the  mantras, 
tho  Goddess  Purvati  among  the  ladies ; similarly,  the  sugarcane  juice  is 
superior  to  all.’ — 5-6. 

' Therefore,  0 mountain  of  molasses,  give  me  unbounded  wealth ; 
you  are  the  brother  of  the  Goddess  Parvati  (the  giver)  of  goodluck,  and  the 
abode  of  P&rvati ; therefore  grant  me  peace.’ — 7.’ 

One  who  gives  away  the  mount  of  molasses  in  this  way,  goes  to  the 
region  of  Parvati  and  is  honoured  by  the  Gandharvfis. — 8. 

After  seven  Kalpas,  lie  bec-onies  the  sovereign  of  the  seven  Dvipas- 
He  remains  also  al  ivays  healthy  ami  never  gets  rtefeat  from  his  enemies. — 0. 

Here  ends  the  eighty- fifth  chapter  dealing  trilh  the  description  of  the 
gift  of  the  mount  of  molasses. 

CHAPTER  LXXXVl. 

1 am  now  describing  to  you  the  ways  of  giving  away  the  mountain 
of  gold,  which  drives  away  all  sins,  and  takes  the  devotee  to  the  region  of 
Brahni&. — 1. 

The  mount  of  4, <'00  tolas (1,00(;  palas)  of  gold  i.s  the  first  best,  of  2,000 
tolas  <50O  palas)is  the  second  best,  and  of  1,000  tolas  (250  palas)  is  the  last. 
The  poor  may  make,  leaving  pride  aside,  (me  of  less  weight,  but  greater 
than  one  pala,  according  to  his  means. — 2. 

The  rituals  prescribed  for  the  mount  of  grain  should  bo  observed. 
The  four  corner  mounts  (viskambha)  should  be  given  away  to  the  sacrificing 
priests,  as  before,  with  the  following  words : ‘ 1 salute  you,  0 mount  of  gold, 

. you  are  the  seed,  the  womb  of  Brahma,  you  are  the  giver  of  unbounded 
fruits.  The  gold  is  most  sacred  on  account  of  its  being  bom  of  Fire ; there- 
fore, 0 Hfigottama ! protect  me.’  One  who  gives  away  the  mount  of  gold, 
according  to  these  rites,  goes  to  the  blissful  realm  of  Brahmfi  where  he 
resides  for  a period  of  one  kalpa,  after  which  he  attains  emancipation. — 
3-7. 

Here  ends  the  eighty-aitth  chapter  describing  the  gift  of  ^e 
mount  of  geld. 


CHAPTER  LXXXVIl. 


239 


CHAPTER  LXXXVII. 

Now  I proceed  to  explain  to  you  about  the  giving  away  of  the  mount 
of  sesaraam,  by  the  virtue  of  which  the  devotee  goes  to  the  realm  of 
Vi^i^u.— 1. 

The  seaamum  mount  of  160  seers  (10  drdnas)  is  the  first  l>est,  of  80 
seers  (5  drdnas)  second  best,  and  of  48  seers  (3  drdnas)  is  the  last. — 2. 

The  four  corner  iiiounts  (viskambha)  should  be  located  as  before,  and 
1 am  now  telling  you  the  iiiautra  to  lie  recited  at  the  time  of  ulTering,  0 
NArada. — 3. 

‘ Sesaiuum,  kuiia  and  iiiAsa  were  proiliiced  from  tlie  sweat  of  Vi^^u,  at 
the  time  of  His  killing  the  demon,  Madhu ; therefore,  mount  of  sesamnni 
grant  me  happiness.  In  Flavya  and  Kavj'a,  (in  the  Deva  as  well  as  in 
Pitfi  worship),  snsamum  is  eonsidered  to  be  the  best,  therefore,  0 mount 
of  sesamum,  I salute  yon.’ — 4-;'. 

One  who  tints  gives  away  the  mount  of  .sesamum,  attains  similarity 
with  Vi§nu,  and  is  never  born  in  this  world. — 6. 

He  gets  long  life,  children  and  grand  children  and  goes  to  heaven, 
where  he  is  honoured  by  the  Devas,  Pitfis,  Gandbarvas,  &c.  —7. 

Here  ends  the  eight y~seventh  chapter  desaibing  the  mount  of  eeaamum. 
CHAPTER  LXXXVIII. 

'I'he  Lord  Siva  said : — I shall  now  fully  relate  the  method  of  the 
gift  of  the  cotton-hill.  By  this  gift,  one  attains  the  highest  state. — 1. 

It  is  best  to  make  the  mount  of  cotton  for  100  maunds  (20  bhAras), 
of  50  maunds  (10  bhAras)  is  the  next  best,  of  25  mannds  (5  bhAras)  is  the 
last  best.  The  devotee,  if  in  straitened  circumstances,  may  make  one  of 
5 maunds  (one  bhAra)  even,  without  exercising  miserliness. — 2. 

0 NArada ! the  rites  prescribed  for  the  giving  away  of  the  hill  of 
grain  should  be  ol)served  in  this  also.  On  the  lapse  of  the  night  of  prayers, 
&B.,  the  devotee  should  recite  the  following  mantra  in  giving  away  the 
hill  of  cotton  3. 

‘ 0 Hill  of  cotton ! you  cover  everyone  in  the  shape  of  cloth,  I salute 
you,  kindly  dispel  my  sins.’ — 4. 

One  who  gives  away  the  cotton  hill,  according  to  these  rites,  goes  to 
the  region  of  ^iva  where  he  resides  for  one  Kalpa,  after  which  he  is  born 
as  a king. — 5. 

Here  ends  the  eighty-eiykth  chapter  dealing  with  the  gift  of  Cotton-Maee, 


m 


THB  MATSYA  PUnAVAU. 


^ CHAPTER  LXXXIX. 

Now  1 sliall  describe  to  yon  about  the  gift  of  the  mount  of 
clarified  butter.  It  is  like  nectar,  and  its  <?liarity  is  the  destroyer  of  all 
ills. — 1. 

The  mount  of  clarified  butter,  consisting  of  20  pilcliers,  full  of  it,  is 
the  first  best,  of  ton  pittdiers  is  tlio  second  host,  and  of  five  pitebers  is  the 
last  best. —2. 

People  with  liniited  re,  m ices  may  make  it  of  two  pitcliei-s  even. 
The  corner  spurs  should  he  duly  located  in  the  four  sides,  like  the 
previous  oiie.s. — .'1, 

Vf»ssf>!si  of  niK'Oiikrf]  rirt*  ^hnuhl  I)»?  iv\’it1y  I'lnrrd  on  tlit- 
of  the  pitchers,  touching  cacii  (Jthor.  ninl  risinr;  up  iujr)  tiu'  form  of  a peak 
like  a pyramh\  ami  slmuM  l»o  ath'*rncJ.  aroonliiiLT  tt)  rule-.-  1. 

They  sliouM  he  snrroin;f|«Ml  wiilj  miojucmhc,  iVuil  aiitl  cloth,  etc. 
The  rest  of  tlic  rituals  arc  the  same  as  ihose  (Uscril)i“l  for  tlic  hill  of 
grain.— 5. 

The  devotee  should  keep  liinisclf  awake  during  the  night,  perform 
fToma  offerings  and  worship  tlic  lVitie<,  and  give  away  everything  to  the 
preceptor  (guru)  in  tlie  morning.— t). 

Tlie.  spurs  of  the  liillock  iviskambha  cornoi-  sliould  be  given 

away  to  the  Ritvika  priests,  as  before,  after  wiiicdi  ilie  flevotec  should  say 
with  a peaceftd  mind:  'The  clariliefl  butter  ha. < been  produced  by  the 
confluence  f)f  the  fire  and  nectar,  tlicrehiro.  t ) f^ankara,  the  Lord  of  the 
universe,  be  pleased.  Rriliinncv  h Brahma  wliich  i^;  present  in  the  clarified 
butter,  therefore,  let  lliere  always  be  rnv  protection,  by  virtue  of  this  charity 
of  the  clarified  butter  liill.  t tne  who  gives  away  (lie  first  best  bill  of 
clarified  blitter,  decidedly  goes  to  t!io  kingdom  of  jiiva,  in  spite  of  liis 
being  a great  sinner,  and  rosifl(*s  in  lieaven  till  the  dissolution  of  the  world 
where  be  roams  about  in  an  tvrlal  cliariot  decorated  with  cranes,  birds, 
small  bells,  perforated  work  and  portholes  in  the  company  of  Apsaras, 
Siddhas,  Vidyudliaras  aiifl  the  pitris --7-Hk 
Here  evds  the  eightf'-nuith  chapter  deserihinrj  the  gift  of  the  mount  of  Ohee, 

CHAPTER  XC. 

1 am  now  going  to  explain  to  you  about  the  mount  of  gems.  The 
mount  of  one  thousand  pearls  is  the  first  best ; of  500  pearls  tlie  second 
j -e  onn  *1,^  l,,af  The  smirs  (viskambha)  in  the 


OHAPTEB  XO. 


241 


corners  should  be  made  and  located  in  their  proper  places,  the  quantity 
consisting  of  one-fourth  of  the  main  mount— 1-2. 

The  eastern  spurs  of  the  mount,  should  be  made  with  diamonds  and 
cat’s  eyes.  The  southern  spur  (Gandhamadana  mount)  should  be  made 
of  sapphires  and  topazes. — 3. 

The  western  spur,  called  the  Vimahichala,  should  be  made  with 
corals  and  lapis  lazulis,  the  northern  spur  to  be  made  with  topazes  and 
gold.  The  rest  of  the  rituals  should  be  observed  as  laid  down  for  the  hill 
of  grain.  The  trees  and  tlie  images  of  gold  should  be  made  and  invoked 
in  the  same  way  and  worshipped  with  incense  and  flowers.  After 
the  night  is  passed,  the  devotee  should  give  everything  away  to  the 
preceptor  (Guru),  priests,  &o.,  by  uttering  the  following  mantras: — 4-6. 

‘ When  all  the  Devas  are  dominant  in  the  jewels,  and  you  are  the 
mountain  of  gems,  you  are  of  immortal  stability.  I salute  you. — 7. 

* Lord  Hari  is  pleased  by  the  gift  of  precious  stones,  therefore  protect 
me,  0 Lord  ! by  virtue  of  this  gift  of  gems.* — 8. 

One  who  gives  away  the  hill  of  gems,  according  to  these  rites,  goes 
to  the  region  of  Visnu  and  is  venerated  by  the  Devas  like  Indra,  &c  ; where 
after  passing  his  blissful  days  for  a very  long  time,  he  is  re-born  as  an 
emperor  on  Earth,  endowed  with  beauty,  health  and  all  good  qiialities. — 
ILK). 

His  sins  of  killing  a Brahmana  are  destroyed  as  the  thunderbolt 
destroys  the  mountains. — 11. 

neve  ends  the  ninetieth  chapter  describing  the  gift  of  pcarU  and  gems. 

CHAPTER  XCI. 

Now  I shall  explain  to  you  about  the  mount  of  silver,  by  the  gift 
of  which  the  devotee  goes  to  the  realm  of  the  Moon. — 1. 

The  first  beat  silver  mount  is  of  40,000  tolas  (10,000  palas)  of  silver, 
the  second  best  of  20,000  tolAs  (5,000  pains),  and  the  last  best  of  10,(K')0 
tolas  (2,500  palas}.— 2.  ^ 

The  devotee,  in  less  favourable  circumstances,  should  make  a mount 
from  80  tolas  (20  palas)  of  silver  and  upwards,  as  much  as  he  can  afford, 
and,  as  before,  the  four  corner  spurs  should  be  one-fourth  in  dimension  of 
the  main  central  mount. — 3. 

According  to  the  rites  mentioned  before,  the  mounts  should  be  made 
of  silver  and  the  Lokap&las  of  gold. — 4. 

SI 


TEB  MAT87A  PUBAEAU. 


Separate  images  of  Brahm&,  Vispu  and  the  Sun  ( Arka)  should  be  made 
and  placed  at  the  bottom  of  tlio  hill ; whatever  has  been  ordained  to  be 
made  of  silver  in  other  places,  should  be  made  of  gold  hero.  - 5. 

The  rest  of  the  rituals,  like  Homa,  vigil,  &c.,  should  be  observed,  as 
before.  The  devotee  should  keep  himself  awake  during  the  night  and  give 
away  the  silver  mount  to  tlie  preceptor  (guru),  and  the  corner  mounts, 
after  being  decorated  with  cloths,  and  worshipped,  slumhl  bo  given 
away  to  the  priests  (Ritvijas).  Afterwards,  the  (h-^votee,  holding  a blade  ol 
kusa  grass  in  his  hand,  should  recite  (he  follcuving  mantra,  wilii  u peaceful 
mind  : — 0-7. 

‘ The  silver  is  pleasing  t • the  Pitris,  and  so  ii  is  to  Vibnu,  Jmira  and 
Siva,  therefore,  mount  of  silver  ’ protect  me  from  the  ocean  of  sorrows 
of  this  world.’ — 8. 

One  who  thus  gives  away  the  m >unt  <»r  silver,  attains  tlic  benefit  of 
having  given  away  ton  tliousu!i-l  (••>ws,  and  goes  to  the  region  of  the 
Moon,  after  being  venerated  by  Imsts  of  (iaudharvas,  Kinnaras  and  Xyniphs, 
and  resides  there  till  the  dissolnticn  of  tlie  world.-  'd-Ht. 

Here  e)^ds  the  chnfiter  thrnjit  ^>1'  fJte  wnu)it  f>/  ailver. 

(di.NPTEif  xr:ii. 

1 now  rchiic  i . y ui  th<‘  way.^i  away  (he  mountain  of  sugar 

in  gift,  by  the  virtue  which  Vism,  >^iva.  and  tdie  8nn  alwtiys  remain 
pleased.— 1. 

The  lirst  host  luouiii  ol  '^ugar  oi  i?o  maund'^  S Idiaras)  of  sugar, 
the  second  best  of  10  mauiul- ' I hluoas  ;iud  tlje  last  best  of  maunds 
(2  bbiras). — 2. 

People  of  lirnite'!  circinnstunces  may  imike  if  from  2.1  to  1}  mauiids 
(one  to  one-half  bhara  , and  the  f*»nr  corner  spurs  should  be  made  one- 
fourth  of  the  central  mount, — ‘j. 

The  rituals  connected  with  the  mount  (jf  grain  slionid  bo  observed 
here  as  well.  The  hills  should  ))o  made  with  tlic  images  o"  Clods  settled 
on  them,  and,  as  l^nfore,  tlie  three  golden  trees  of  Mandara,  Parijata  and 
.Kalpadruma,  sl)oiild  bo  loeated  (m  the  Sumf*ni  peak,  'riicse  three  trees 
should  always  be  located  on  the  gift  fif  every  kiiul  of  lull.— 4-r). 

Harichanriana  and  fiantana  trees  slioulfl  bo  located  on  the  east  and 
the  west,  respectively.  This  shonhl  he  done  in  the  case  of  the  gift  of 
every  hill,  and  particularly  in  the  instance  of  the  one  made  of  sugar.— 6. 


OEAjprm  X.01L 


The  image  of  Cupid  should  be  located  on  the  MaoadarAchala  peak 
facing  the  west,  that  of  Kuvera  facing  the  north,  on  the  top  of  the  Qandhit' 
mAdana,  on  Vipulfichala,  the  incarnation  of  the  Veda,  in  the  form  of  the 
Swan,  facing  the  east ; facing  the  south,  the  (Surabhi)  cow  of  gold  on  the 
Supfirava  hill. — 7-8. 

The  invocation,  &c.,  should  be  done,  as  before,  in  the  case  of  the  mount 
of  grain,  after  which  the  central  hill  should  be  given  away  to  the  Preceptor 
(guru),  and  the  corner  spurs  should  be  given  away  to  the  priests  (fiitvijas), 
whilst  reciting  the  following  mantras ; — 9. 

‘ This  liill  of  sugar  is  known  as  tiie  essence  of  prosperity  and 
nectar;  therefore,  let  thou  be  the  source  of  everlasting  bliss  to  me, 
0 Lord  of  hills.  0,  mount  of  sugar ! the  drops  of  nectar  that  fell  from 
the  Devas  when  they  were  quaiBng  it,  produced  thee,  0 sugar,  therefore, 
protect  me.  The  sugar  has  also  been  generated  from  the  floral  arrows 
of  Cupid,  thou  art  the  mount  of  the  very  same  sugar : therefore,  save  me 
from  this  sea  of  troubles  in  the  world.’ — 10-12. 

One  who  gives  away  the  hill  of  sugar,  according  to  these  rites,  is 
liberated  from  all  sins,  and  attains  bliss.  — 1.‘). 

By  the  grace  of  Vispu,  the  ilevotee  traverses  through  the  sky  seated 
in  ail  an-ial  chariot,  shedding  lustre  like  the  moon  and  the  stars,  after 
which  he  becomes  the  lord  of  tlie  seven  dvipas  at  the  end  of  a hundred 
Kalpas,  and  enjoys  health  and  wealth  for  three  arvuda  of  lives. — 14-15. 

In  observing  the  rites  of  giving  away  these  different  hills,  the 
devotee  should  feed  as  many  Brahmanas  as  he  can,  according  to  his 
means  ; and,  then,  with  their  permission,  should  take  his  meals  without 
salt  and  acid.  Uc  should  send  away  the  materials  of  the  hills  to  the 
houses  of  the  Brtlhmanas. — 16. 

^iva  said  : — In  ancient  times  (Brihat  Kalpas  there  was  a king 
named  Dharmaniurti,  the  friend 'of  ludra,  who  killed  thousands  of 
Daityas. — 17. 

He  eclipsed  even  tlie  sun  and  the  moon  by  his  lustre,  and  he  destroyed 
hundreds  of  enemies,  and  was  ever  victorious.  In  spite  of  his  being  a 
mortal,  he  had  access  to  every  region  ; and,  roaming  about  hither  and 
thither,  he  subjugated  many  of  his  foes.— 18. 

His  queen,  Bhfiuumati,  was  the  most  beautiful  of  all  the  ladies  in 
the  three  regions.  She  was  matchless,  like  the  Goodess  I,ak9mi,  and 
excelled  all  the  beautiful  ladies  of  her  time.  She  was  dearer  than  life  to 
the  king.  She  shone  like  Lakfmi,  even  in  a group  of  10,000  ladies.— 19-20. 


244 


TEE  MAT87A  PUBANAM. 


Thousands,  aye,  millions  of  Rajas,  could  not  be  compared  to  him. 
On  one  occasion,  that  remarkable  sovereign,  whilst  seated  on  his  throne, 
asked  his Purohita,  thoRageVasi>tha,  with  mind  full  of  bewilderment. — 21. 

The  King  said  0 Sage ! be  pleased  to  tell  me,  on  account  of 
what  good  deeds  in  my  past  lives,  I have  become  so  illustrious  and 
wealthy  in  my  present  life  P—22, 

Vasistha  said  : — ‘ Some  time  in  the  past,  there  was  a public  woman, 
named  Lilavat!,  who  was  devoted  to  i^iva.  She  gave  to  her  preceptor 
(guru),  a mount  of  salt,  along  with  the  trees  of  gold,  &c.,  as  prescribed  in 
the  rituals,  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  bright  forttiight. — 23. 

In  the  house  of  LiLivati  used  to  live  a f^udra  servant,  named  ^aunda, 
goldsmith  by  profession,  who  was  very  clever.  ITo  had  made  beautiful 
golden  tree^  and  images  of  Devas,  with  faith,  ainl  with  marked  -kill,  and 
did  not  charge  anything  f(«r  Ids  labour.  Me  never  charged  any  wages.  Me 
thought  that  those  were  all  meant  for  teligious  juirpuM's.  - 2'l-2b 

The  wifcM.f  that  gohlMnilh,  King!  Qx(v!  ilm.sp  trees  artistically 
on  that  mount,  after  pulishiiig  tlieni  well.  —2b. 

Lilavati,  along  with  ihu'-e  two.  uhiL-^i  wt.‘r?^lnt‘l‘iiig  iiio  mount  with 
faith,  showed  great  dev(ojon  io  their  preceptor  guru*  .\f(rr  a long  time, 
Lilavati  died,  and  by  vlrtm*  of  lier  ri«arily,  slie  wa-  lii)eiaii"'l  from  her 
sins  and  went  to  llic  kingdt.>m  <.j  S'o'a.' 

The/  poi/i’,  bat  higli-Jnindetb  g’->i«Umith,  wli'>  ijj  fin*  house  oi 
Lilavati,  and  wii'.>  did  JU'l  rharge  anytliing  hn  niamil.'icturing  those  trees 
of  gold  and  image'',  has  h'cC]!  hum  in  yoiw  person.— *'*■» 

By  the  same  virtue,  you  avo  '-o  illu>.irionrs  and  have  your  sway  over 
the  seven  continenls,  Voui  wife  of  ii;(‘  pa^i  life  liad  jnJished  up  the  trees 
and  had  fixed  them  up  on  th*'  mount,  in  (‘onseq nonce  f»f  wldcli  she  lias 
now  been  born  as  your  tjuecn  uhinnmati  - -30, 

She  is  of  matchics.''  fji->lish»*'| , hcamy.  on  account  of  her  judishing 
those  tree^j,  and  botli  of  y-iU  had  devotedly  served  in  the  gift  of  the  mount 
of  salt ; consequeiitiy,  yon  have  obtained  In-alth,  wealth  and  king- 
dom.— 31. 

You  should  give  away  in  yonr  pre-eni  life  tlie  Inn  kinds  of  hills, 
according  to  llie  pre.scribcd  rites’  Acting  on  that  advice  <»f  the  sage 
Vasistha,  the  king  performed  the  gill  ^-f  ten  hills,  heginning  with  Dlnlnya- 
chala,  and  went  to  the  malm  of  Visnn. — .32. 

One,  who  himself  cannot  p^n-fomi,  hut  merely  touclies,  hcai*s  el- 
even advises  others  to  give  iLcso  gifts,  i.s  liberated  from  sins  and 


OHAPTER  XGll. 


345 


goes  to  the  region  of  Vi^pu.  So,  also,  one*  who  is  poor,  but  who,  full  of 
faith,  sees  this  Puja  performed  by  others. — 33. 

By  reading  this,  evil  dreams  do  not  come,  and  tlieir  effects  are 
removed.  One  who  gives  the  gifts  with  devotion,  undoubtedly  consumes 
all  worldly  fears. — 34-35. 

Here  ends  the  ninety-second  ehaptei'  describing  the  glory  of  gifts 
of  sugar  hill  in  general. 

UHAPTEU  XGIIl. 

Sffta  said  ; — in  the  days  gone  by,  ^aunaka  asked  Vaisainpuyana,  who 
was  seated  at  iiis  leisure,  to  explain  to  him  the  ways  of  the  acquirement  of 
all  desires  by  the  performance  of  ^anti  anrl  Pu^ti  rites. — 1. 

Note. The  past  Kartnas  of  a man  tend  to  produrc  either  some  bad  or  some  {^ood 
reBultfii.  Thoso  Kfirmik  toiiilcncio.s  arc  indicated  by  the  aspects  of  tho  planets,  at  the 
I line  of  one’s  birth.  The  iiinu<;nco.s,  which  tend  to  the  production  of  sorrow,  are  malignant, 
and  those  which  tend  tho  production  of  happiness,  are  bonelicial.  The  effects  of 
Karmas  being  the  results  of  actions  perfonned  in  past  lives,  can  naturally  be  modified  by 
appropriate  actions  done  in  this  life.  Hence,  the  necessity  of  i!’ftntika  and  Panstika  rites. 
Those  which  pacify  or  neutralize  tho  nialiguaiit  influences  are  called  bantika  ritcs>  and 
those  which  strongthou  and  augment  tho  bcncliccnr  tendencies,  arc  called  Paustika  rites. 
As  karmas  by  themselves  are  inert,  but  work  through  tho  ngencios  of  the  Lords  of  Karmas 
designated  by  the  names  of  planets,  hence  the  worship  of  the  planets,  or.  their  propitia> 
lion. 

Vairfajuptiyaiia  said  : — 1 shall  now  relate  to  you,  listen  to  it  attentive- 
ly Tvhat  shoiilcl  be  done  by  persons  desirous  of  acquiring  wealth,  peace, 
longevity,  and  of  freeing  themselves  from  malignant  influences  and 
how  the  offerings  to  the  planets  should  be  made  by  a person  desirous  of 
t^finti  and  Pu^ti. — if. 

i shall  explain  to  you,  in  brief,  on  the  basis  of  all  I^Astras,  the  wavo 
of  propitiating  the  planets.— o. 

On  an  auspicious  day  as  pointed  out  by  almanacs  and  Brahmanas, 
and  after  inviting  the  Bnihinanas,  the  different  planets  and  their  rulers 
should  be  located  in  tlieir  proper  places,  through  a Brahmana,  and  homa 
sacrifice  should' be  performed. — 4, 

The  kiiowers  of  the  Piirnnaa  and  Srutis  have  describcvl  the  planetary 
offerings  as  being  of  three  kinds,  viz, — 1.  of  tlie  thousand  homas  (fire  obla- 
tions) ; 2.  of  a lac  or  a liimdred  thousand  homas  ; 3.  of  ten  millions  of  homas, 
that  fulfil  all  desires.  Hear  the  ways  of  performing  the  homa  with 
a thousand  offerings,  as  told  in  the  Punlnas.  This  is  called  Navagraha 
yajna,  or  the  sacrifice  to  the  Nine  Planets.  An  altar,  measuring  two 


246 


THE  HAT8YA  PURANAM. 


vitasti  wide,  within  the  sacnficial  pond,  Bhould  be  made  in  the  direction  of 
north-ea&t  of  the  lire  pit.— 5-7. 

The  vedi  (altar)  should  be  one  vitasii  in  height  and  square,  facing 
the  uortl).  It  should  have  two  buttresses  on  which  the  Devas  should  be 
located.  Afterwards  fire  should  be  lighted  in  tho  (ire  pit  and  the  thirty- 
two  Devas  should  be  invoked  in  tliat  lire.— S-9. 

The  following  arc  tin*  nine  planets,  viz,: — The  Sun,  the  Moon,  tho 
Mais,  the  Mercury,  the  Jupiter,  the  Venus,  the  Saturn,  the  Halui  and  the 
KStii.  They  always  bring  good  to  all  creatures  fto  .*all  some  them 
malignant,  is  a mere  moile  of  speech). 

U)  The  vSun  should  be  located  in  tlie  centre,  \2)  the  Mars  in  the  south, 
(3^  the  Mercury  in  tlje  north-east,  (4  the  eliipiter  Jii  .iie  i:.'?rth,  (3)  tiie  Venus 
in  the  east,  ^6)  the  Moon  in  the  south-east,  (7 1 ihe  Saturn  in  the  west.  (8)  the 
Kiihii  in  tJie  soiith-ive'<  and  tin*  Ketn  in  Ti.ntli- wesi . .Ml  tlie  planets 
should  be  drawn  with  niicroked  riee  powder-  11-12 

(.10;  Siva  isllio  Presiding  Iteity  ladhidevat.i ; ol  iheSnn,ill)  the  Motl- 
dcbS  iWrvati  of  the  Mo-ni,  (12’  .’^kaiida  iKartika’  •»[  the  Mai^,  and  (13)  Ilari 
of  the  Mercury,  il4)  Braliinn  of  the  Jupiter,  'lo'  ludra  oi  tlie  \*onus,  (16.‘ 
Yama  (Dharmaiaja)  of  the  Saturn.  (17  Kala  of  tho  llalin,  and  (bS)  Chitra- 
gupta  of  tlie  Kelli.  lO-  Agni.  \Vati*r,  »2i)  Karth,  (22)  Visim,  (23) 
ludra  i24)  Aindri  =wife  uf  Indra  , 2o  l^rajujiati,  2h)  Sarpa,  (27)  Braluna, 

1 28;  (ranesia,  *29)  iJiirgo,  Vi‘,yu  aiul  Akosa  are  tlie  secondary 
presiding  Deities  ( Bratyadliidevulu'.  All  make  n[}  31,  In  which 

number  adding  the  Twin  A?§viriikuiiiaras,  ilio  gioup  becomes  of  32.  All 
of  them  .slunild  be  invoked  in  tliC  '^aeiilicial  fire  by  Vyalij'itis. — 14-10. 

\ol«  Vy.llinti  means  iiUoraiiCH-.  A my^tie  wonl.  vh.  i he  .S.vnal)lcf»,  Uhuvali,  Bvah, 
Mahah,  Janah.  tapali.  Satyatp,  and  Om. 

The  colours  of  these  planets  should  lie  as  follows  : — The  Sun  should 
he  drawn  in  red,  tlic  Moiui  in  white,  tin*  .Mars  in  red,  the  ^lercury  and  the 
Jupiter  in  yellow,  tlie  Venus  in  white,  the  Saturn  and  the  Rfihu  in  black 
and  tho  Ketu  in  smoke  colour.  17. 

Tlicir  forms  are  of  the  .same  colour  as  indicattnl  abov(\  They  should 
be  dressed  in  tlie  sauic  colour  of  cloth  and  offered  the  same  colour 
of  flowers.  Incense,  liighU  fragrant,  should  he  oll'ered  to  them,  and  a nice 
canopy  should  be  placed  over  tlie  altar,  wliicb  must  be  well  decorated,  by 
hanging  flowers  and  fruits.  -18. 

Rice,  cookeil  in  coarse  sugar,  should  be  oll’ered  to  the  Sun,  clari- 
fied butter  and  rice  cooked  in  milk  and  sugar  to  the  Moon,  mohanabhoga 
^Tiiiddinfir)  to  the  Mars,  milk  and  rice  to  the  Mercury,  rice  and  curds  to  tlie 


CUAFTEB  Win. 


247 


Jupiter,  coarse  sugar  and  lice  to  the  Venus,  rice,  sesamum  and  pulses,  cook- 
ed in  milk  to  the  Saturn,  mutton  to  the  R&lm,  and  coloured  rice  to  the 
Ketu.-19-20. 

To  the  north-east  of  that  altar»  a flawless  pitclier  of  water  painted  with 
rice  and  curds  (five  powdera)  and  decorated  witli  pancha-ratna  (five  gemsj, 
the  leaves  of  Uie  mango  tree,  fruit  and  cloth,  should  he  placed,  and 
Vaniitia  should  be  located  on  it. — 21-22. 

The  earth  of  the  elephant  ward,  stable,  chariot-house,  ant-Jiill,  tank, 
cattle-shed  should  be  mixed  with  water,  along  with  tlie  different  herbs  and 
Ganges  water,  and  the  devotee  should  bathe  in  it,  after  reciting  the  following 
mantras  : ‘ All  the  rivers,  seas,  tanks  and  rivulets,  come  to  wipe  out  the 

sins  of  the  devotee.*— 23-25. 

0,  sages  ! the  iJeities  should  be,  similarly,  invoked,  and  afterwards 
Homa  offerings  of  clarified  butter,  barlf'v,  uncooked  rice,  and  sesamnm 
should  be  made  to  the  (iiv.— 2t5. 

The  wood  of  Arka  (Calotropis-gigantea*,  Palurfa  i}3nteafrondo.sa», 
Khadira  (Catechu),  ApAinargii  (Achyranthes-spera),  Arfwatha  ithe  Iioly  fig 
tree),  Qdambara  (tlio  fig  tree),  i^ami  'Prosopis  spicigera-,  Kusa  and  Durva 
grasses  are  to  he  used  for  lighting  the  sacrilical  fire.  I'lie  Homa  offering.s, 
consisting  of  lioney,  ghee  and  curds  of  milk,  should  be  marie  either  101 
times  or  only  28  times  to  each  planet. 

The  sacrificial  twdgsrof  the  plants  lumied  abovos  in  all  homas,  should 
eacii  measure  a span  in  length  (pradesa).  and  should  not  contain  roots, 
branches  and  leaves.  Such  a kind  of  fuel  shouhl  he  used  by  the  wise 
in  all  sacrificial  offerings. — 29. 

A'otfv- Prftdo^aiiiAtra.  A span  measured  from  the  tip  of  the  thumb  to  that  of  the 
forefinger. 

Particular  kind  of  sacrifiicial  fuel  should  be  used  for  the  particular 
Oeity  (named  above),  and  offerings  should  be  made,  after  uttering  the 
particular  mantras  in  low  voice,  with  the  name  of  the  Deity  for  whom  it 
Ts  intended. — 3(1 

Tlie  sacrificial  twigs  should  be  soaked  in  clarified  butter  and  then 
thrown  into  the  fire.  Afterwards,  the  eatables,  like  charn,  etc.,  should  also 
be  put  into  the  fire.  Ten  offerings  should  be  made  at  first  to  one’s  own 
particular  mantra.  The  completion  of  the  sacrifice  should  be  performed 
by  the  vyfthriti  mantras.— 31. 

The  learneil  Brflhmanas  should  be  placed,  either  facing  the  North  or 
the  East,  and  the  cooked  rice,  charu  (pudding),  should  be  placed  in  front 
of  each  DevatA,  with  recitation  of  the  proper  mantras.- -32. 


248 


TEE  UATBYA  PURAEAM. 


After  the  Homa  of  cooked  rieo  fcfcaru\  the  remaining  offerings 
should  be  made  with  the  twigs  isainidhs),  in  honor  of  the  planets,  viz,, 
offering  (1)  to  the  Sun  should  be  made  after  reciting  ‘ Akrisuai,’  etc.,  (2) 
to  the  Moon  after  reciting  ‘Apynsva/  (3)  to  the  Mars  after  reciting 
‘ AgnirmfirdhSdiviih/  (4)  to  the  Mercury  after  reciting  ‘ Agnevivasva- 
durfase,  ’ 'O)  to  tlie  Jupiter  after  reciting  ‘ B|‘ihaspate  paridiyfirathena  *, 
(6)  to  the  Venus  after  reciting  ‘i^ukran  te  anyat,’  (7)  to  the  Saturn  after 
reciting  ‘l^annodevirabhista,’  (S  ro  the  l{nhu  after  reciting  ‘KnyfinaiJ- 
chitrSbhuvat  \ dlj  tlie  Ketu  after  reciting  ‘ Ketunkrinvan,’  <10)  to 
Rudra  after  reciting  ‘ AvorajA.’  'll)  tn  l^mA  after  reciting  ‘ Apolii§ta. 
(12)  to  KSrtika  after  reciting  ‘ Sycriaprithvi/  tl3)  to  Vi:jtiu  after  reciting 
‘Idain  Visnu/  (,14)  to  Brahma  afuu-  reciting  ‘ Tamisana,’ (15)  Indra  should 
be  invoked  by  reciting  * hniramiddovattiyn,*  (IG'  to  Yama  by  »*ecitiiig 
' Ayahgaii,’  17)  Knla  by  reciting  ‘BrahmajajnAnani/  offering  should  bo 
made  (18)  to  Chitraguptn  after  reciting  ‘AjnAtame/  • I!)'  to  Fire  after  reciting 
‘Agnitndutamvrinitnahe.*  ‘rrinttaimim  Varnnam  ‘ is  tlie  mantra  for  (2t^)  Va- 
nina, ‘ Prithivyanrarik^ain  ’ for  >21  tlie  Kartli,  ‘ Sahasrarfirsapurua&'  forf22) 
Vi^jiiu.  ‘IrdrAyendomarnivata'  for  2.3  hulra,  ‘I ’rtAnaparne  subliage’ for  (24) 
the  Godde'-s  liulrAni',  ‘PnijApati'  for  {25)  Prajapati.  ‘Namostn  Sarpebliyah' 
for<2G)  Serpents,  * KsibraliniAyaiii vigbliyah  ’ f^r  27  Bialiina,  ‘AnOnanr  for 
(28)  VinAyaka  <‘hiue*fa  , ' Jataveda'^esiinavAma  roi  2(),  liurgA,  ‘Adit- 
pratnasyaretasa'  foi  (Gm  the  Aka4u.  Kr  inaiiifitn*  inahinAnciia'  for  (31)  tlie 
Vayu.  ‘Ejjousji  apnr\  \ for  M2;tn»'  Twin  Aj^viniknin  .ras.  M urdliAnaindivah 
is  the  inantia  for  ofleiing  i.ho 'a-t  olhiition,  cidh'*!  tii,*  I’urnah’tti,  to  com- 
plete the  sacrifice  - 33- 

Afterward.-^,  tiic  devotee.  Uicjn^  thecas!  !«rTlio  iinitli,  shfudd  gel  him- 
self sprinkled  witli  file  aid  of  the  pitcher,  hv  the  prescribr'd  mantras 
aoconipauied  with  inu-iic.  blowing  of  conch  and  songs  -”4‘d. 

Four  Brahmana’-,  lice  from  i:atiiral  deformity  and  wearing  garlands 
and  golden  ornanient^,  should  barh»^'  the  (le\otce.“-  5n. 

At  that  time  tlicv  should  utter  the  following  mantras:  “Brahma, 
Visnu,  MahesSa,  all  the  iljree  finds  may  sprinkle  you  with  the  holy  watere, 
and  n.ay  Vasudeva,  dagganniitha,  Sankarsano,  lhadyumnn  and  Aniruddlia 
lead  you  to  victory.-  51. 

“Indra,  Agni,  Yama,  .Nirfiti,  Vnrnna,  VAyu,  KnviM'a.  Siva,  BrahniA, 
Se§anAga  and  DikpAlas  may  protect  yom—o^. 

“Klrti,  Laksmi.  Dhpfi,  MedliA,  Pu>ti,  SraddhA,  Kriyu,  Mati,  Buddhl, 
Lajj&,  Vapu,  l^Anti,  Tuati,  Kanti,  who  are  called  the  Mothers,  and  are 
nKttrmftnAtnlR  inav  come  and  sprinkle  you  with  holy  waters. — 53. 


GHAPfBR  XCIIL 


249 


Note.^Kittif  BeDown  ; Lakfos!,  wealth,  Qoddeaa  of  wealth ; Dhfiti,  Firmneit, 
fortitude,  satisfaction,  Joy  ; Modhd,  Power,  Intellect ; Lajjft,  Bashfulncss,  modesty,  serene- 
ness;  Piifti,  nourishment;  h'raddhA,  Devotion;  Kriy&  Accomplishment;  Mati,  Sense; 
Baddbi,  Talent ; Vapu,  Body;  Naiiti,  Peace ; Tufti,  Contentment;  Kanti,  Lastre. 

The  Sun,  the  Moon,  tlic  Mars,  the  Mercury,  the  Jupiter,  the  Venus, 
the  Saturn,  the  RAhu  and  the  Ketu  may  also  sprinkle  you  with  holy 
waters,  after  being  satisfied. — 54. 

The  Devas,  the  Danavas,  the  Gandljarvas,  the  Yak^s,  the  Raksasas, 
the  Serpents,  the  Seers  and  Sages,  the  Cows,  the  Divine  Mothers,  the 
trees,  the  nymphs,  the  Nngas,  the  Daityas,  the  weapons,  the  arms,  the 
kings,  the  king’s  vehicles,  tlie  herbs,  tlie  gems,  the  various  parts  of  Time, 
the  rivers,  the  oceans,  the  niountaliis,  the  sacred  places,  the  clouds  and 
the  rivulets,  may  also  s])rinkle  you  with  holy  waters,  for  the  fulfilment 
of  all  your  desires.” — 55-.>7. 

Afterwards,  the  devotee  should  get  himself  sprinkled  by  the  Brah- 
inanas,  with  the  water  mixed  with  dilferont  herbs  and  incense  and  then 
put  oil  white  clothes,  and  wliitc  sanclal  pa^te. — 58. 

Then  the  devotee  should  fasten  his  garments  wnh  these  of  his  wife 
and  worship  the  priests  with  devotion,  and  offer  them  appropriate  fees, 
with  full  faith. — 59. 

A milch  cow  should  bo  given  away  in  the  name  of  the  Sun,  a conch  in 
the  name  of  the  Moon,  a rod  ox  in  the  name  of  the  ifars,  gold  in  the  name 
of  the  Mercury,  a pair  of  yellow  garments  in  the  name  of  the  Jupiter,  a 
white  horee  in  the  name  of  the  Venus,  a black  cow  in  the  name  of  the  Saturn, 
iron  in  the  name  of  the  Ralni,  goat  in  the  name  of  the  Ketu.  The  fee  in 
each  case  must  be  a piece  of  gold,  called  suvarna  (a  golden  coinb  or  cows 
adorned  with  gold,  in  the  case  of  eveiy  one  of  these  planets,  or  a suvarna 
coin  in  the  case  of  each  planet.  If  he  cannot  do  that,  then,  he  may 
give  whatever  may  appeal  to  the  fancy  of  the  preceptor  (guru).  Eveiything 
should  be  given  away,  after  reciting  the  prescribed  mantras  with  fees,  as 
noted  below. — 60-63. 

“ 0 Cow  ! Thon  art  woi-shipped  by  all  tbe  Devas,  Thou  art  Rohini, 
Thou  art  the  sacred  pilgrimage,  containing  all  the  Devas,  let  there  be 
i&nti  to  me.  0 Conch  ! thou  art  sacred  amongst  all,  thou  art  auspicious 
amongst  all  auspicious  things  ; thou  art  held  by  the  Lord  Visnu, 
therefore  let  there  be  rfanti  to  me.  0,  Ox ! thou  art  the  symbol  of  justice, 
source  of  the  world’s  happiness,  the  conveyance  of  the  Lord  l^iva 
possessing  eight  forms,  therefore  grant  me  elfinti.  O Gold  ! thou  art  the 
womb  of  the  Golden' Child  (born  of  the  golden  egg  of  the  Lord),  and  art 
82 


250 


THE  MATSYA  PVRAEAM. 


•¥ 

also  the  seed  of  the  Sun  and  the  giver  of  everlasting  rewards  of  good  deedSi 
therefore  grant  me  jfaiiti.  Since  yellow  raimantR  are  beloved  to  Thee> .. 
0 Vdsudeva  (Kfisna),  lienee,  bo  pleased  with  me  by  their  gifts,  0 Visnii, 
and  grant  me  danti. 

“ 0 Visnn,  Thou,  in  the  form  of  the  lioi*se,  rose  out  of  the  ocean  of  nec- 
tar, and  Thou  art  the  eternal  carrier  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  therefore, 
grant  me  iAiiti.  Cow  ! Thou  art  the  symbol  of  the  Earth  and  Thou  art 
the  beloved  of  KeeJava,  destroyer  of  all  sins,  so  grant  me  iAiitj.  0 Iron  ! 
since  all  difficult  works  are  under  thy  control,  thou  helpest  in  the  forging 
of  the  plough  and  arms,  Ac.,  therefore  grant  me  ilariti.  0 Gold,  thou  art 
an  ingredient  of  all  sacrifices,  tliou  art  the  eternal  vehicle  of  the  sun,  there- 
fore grant  me  rfanti.  ()  Cow  !*  Fourteen  regions  are  present  in  thy  body, 
therefore  give  me  wealth  in  this  world,  as  well  as  happiness  in  the  next. 
As  the  bed  of  Visnn  is  never  devoid  (^f  r-ak^mi,  therefore,  my  bed  may 
never  remain  unoccupied  by  my  wife,  l)y  tlie  virtue  of  my  giving  away  this 
bed  in  cliarity.  tliero  is  always  the  prohcnce  of  the  l)evas  in  all 
gems,  so  may  the  i)evas  grant  mo  all  jewels,  l)y  virluc  of  my  giving 
away  precious  stones  in  charily.  All  the  f‘»rms  of  charity  do  not  come  * 
up  to  even  /gtli  of  the  gift  of  land,  lliercfore,  let  there  be  rfanti  to  me  by 
virtue  of  gift  of  this  land  tvl-70. 

Witli  devotion,  devoid  of  miserliness,  worship  should  bo  performed 
with  jewels,  gold,  clotli,  inceiiHC,  11  iwers,  and  sandal.  -'77. 

One  who  worships  the  planets  in  tliis  way,  attains  all  his  wishes  and 
,goe8  to  heaven  after  death, — 78. 

The  particular  unlucky  planet  sliould  be  worshipped  with  great 
care,  according  to  the  prescribed  fidl  riles.  Otlicr  planets  should,  then, 
be  worshipped  witli  abridged  rites.  This  is  for  a man  of  limited  means; 
otherwise  all  planets  ahoiild  be  worshipped  with  full  rites. — 71). 

The  planeis,  cows,  King  and  IJniliinana.s,  especitilly,  are  worthy  of 
being  worshipped,  TlH)se,  wlio  \v(usliip  them,  aie  nourished  by  them,  and 
those,  who  insult  them,  are  destroyed.-  80. 

As  the  armour  shields  the  warrior  frmn  the  blows  of  arrows,  similar- 
ly, the  propitiation  ceremony  (A'liifi)  }>rotects  tlicm  from  tlie  effects  of  tlie 
bad  destiny.— 81. 

The  person  desirous  of  acquiring  prosperity  should  not  perform 
any  sacrifice  without  giving  away  the  fees  (Daksina),  since  by  the  giving 
of  handsome  fees,  even  the  Deva  is  propitiated. — 82. 

/.  ten  thousand  Homos. 

Wnma  sacrifice  with  ten  thousand  offerings  is  prescribed,  in  the 


GH AFTER  XCIII. 


251 


ceremony  of  the  propitiation  of  the  Nine  Planets.  The  same  number  of 
Homa  offerings  should  be  made  in  connection  with  the  nuptial,  festive, 
yajila  ceremonies  as  well  as  with  the  ceremonies  of  the  installi^ion  of 
sacred  images. — 83. 

0 Sage ! the  ways  of  performing  the  sacrifice  of  ten  thousand 
offerings  to  ward  off  obstacles,  (%c.,  caused  by  one's  past  karmas,  as 
well  as  the  dangers  arising  from  evil  spirits,  have  been  described.  Now 
1 shall  explain  to  you  the  ways  of  performing  the  Homa  sacrifice  of  a 
hundred  thousands  of  offerings.— 84. 

II.  The  hundred  thousand  liomas. 

The  learned  have  said  that  a saciilice  of  a lac  of  offerings  should  be 
pefornied  for  the  fulfilment  of  all  desires.  It  is  very  pleasing  to  the 
Pitfis,  and  is  the  giver  of  prosperitj’  and  emancipation. — 85. 

The  devotee  should  get  the  blessings  invoked  by  Brahmapas,  after 
selecting  an  auspicious  day,  according  to  the  benign  influences  of  planets 
and  stars,  and  then  make  n pandal  to  the  north-east  of  the  house, 
ora  square  pandal,  measuring  10  or  8 hands,  should  be  made  to  the  north* 
east  of  a temple  of  ^iva. — 80-87. 

The  altar  should  have  a slant  towards  north-east,  and  it  should  be 
made  with  great  care.  The  same  north-east  corner  of  the  pandal,  should 
be  selected  for  the  purpose  of  digging  the  fire  pit.  This  pit  should  be  a 
square,  beautiful  and  according  to  rules.  The  pit  should  hare  girdles 
round  it  and  of  the  form  of  the  mouth  of  a yoni. — 88-89.  * 

The  girdle  should  be  4 fingers  in  breadth  and  of  the  same  height, 
slanting  from  east  to  north.  It  should  be  even  in  other  directions. — 90. 

The  sacrifice  for  the  propitiation  of  the  nine  planets  has  been  laid 
down  for  the  peace  of  all.  It  is  dangerous  to  make  the  sacrificial  pond  of 
more  or  less  dimensions  than  prescribed.  Therefore,  it  should  be  made 
carefully,  as  described  above. — 91. 

Brahmft  has  said  that  the  sacrificial  pit  in  the  ceremony  of  a hundred 
thousands  of  Qoma,  should  be  ten  times  the  demensions  given  above.  The 
dak§infi  to  the  priests  should  be  ten  times  that  given  in  the  ordinary  ten 
thousand  homas. — 02. 

To  perform  the  sacrifice  of  a lac  of  offerings,  a sacrificial  pond  of  4 
hands  in  length  and  2 in  breadth  should  be  made.  Its  mouth  should  he 
made  of  the  shape  of  a conical-triangle.  Three  girdles  should  also  be 
made  to  sqrround  the  pit. — 93. 


2S2 


TUB  MAT8YA  PURANAM. 


To  the  north-east  of  the  panda],  after  leaving  a space  of  throe  vitastas, 
the  sacrificial  pond  should  bo  dug.  On  the  land  selecfed  for  it,  a square 
altar  slanting  north-east  should  be  erected. —U4. 

Visvakanuu  has  said  that  the  buttres.s  of  tlie  altar  should  be 
vitasti,  that  is,  half  of  the  above  measureinent,  and  should  have  three 
girdles.  The  Deities  should  be  hnuUed  on  this  buttress. — DiJ. 

The  first  girdles  should  bo  fingers  liigh  and  the  remaining  two 
should  bo  only  one  finger  high. — 9b. 

The  breadth  of  all  tlio  three  girdles  sliould  1)0  three  lingers,  and 
the  wall  round  the  altar  should  be  ten  lingers  liigh.  The  Devas  sliould  be 
invoked  on  it,  with  llowors  and  uncooked  rice.— 97. 

0 Sage!  the  presiding  (Adhi-devatAs)  and  tlie  minor  (Pratyadhi 
devatas)  Deities  should  al!  face  the  east,  and  not  ilio  north  (»r  the  wc-t. — 98. 

Persons,  desirous  of  acquiring  wcabli,  should  worship  (iarudu  also, 
in  addition,  by  reciting  the  following  luanlni ‘ the  clianting  of  the 
Samaveda,  is  Thy  body  ; 'rii  Mi  art  the  veliicle  of  Vi’^nu  and  the  destroyer 
of  poison  and  sins,  therefore  grant  me  s:inii.‘--“99. 

In  the  former  manner,  the  pitcher  of  water  slionhl  he  jdaecd,  and  then 
the  hoina  should  be  performed.  The  sacrifu'e  of  a lac  of  olTorings  being 
finished,  if  tliore  remain  some  more  Mieriliclal  fucN,  then  tlu^sc  sliould 
be  thrown  into  the  lire,  willi  lie*  i/oe.rlng  •»[  ;//ee  on  the  pitcher,  in  the 
form  of  a contimions  stream  as  a ^’a'^mHiAiA.  PV-'. 

' Tlic  saerilicial  ladle  slioul']  ]«*  made  *1  the  lig  tree.  It  shouhl  be  of 
fresh,  sappy  wood,  and  straiglit,  aiel  free  from  rot.  Ii  sliould  be  one  hand  in 
length.  This  ladle  should  he  i»face*d  on  two  supports,  aud  clarified  butter 
sliould  be  poured  through  it  iu  a cumiiiuni!r>  stream  into  tlio  fire. — 101. 

The  hymns  of  the  Agneya-sukta,  Vaisnava-sukla,  IJaudru-sukta, 
Chandra-sukUi,  MaliAvai'^vAuara  sukta,  SAma  and  dyestha  Sama  should  be 
recited,  whilst  s'>  ]><)iii'iiig.  lf»2 

The  hatliing  of  the  devfiiee  with  tiie  holy  waters  aud  the  Svastiva- 
chana  should  he  done  as  bofuro,  aud  tlie  <iovoiee  should  also  give  Daksi^i^ 
separately,  as  before.- -lOd. 

The  Dak^inA  to  the  saerilicial  priests  should  be  gh'cn  free  from 
anger  and  bias,  and  with  «a  calm  mind.  I’licro  sliould  he  four  lirAhma^as, 
well-versed  in  the  Vedas,  to  olficiate  on  tlie  oc<;a8ion  of  the  sacrifice  of  the 
Nine  Planets,  or  only  two  sucli  Braliinanas,  of  peaceful  disposition  and 
versed  in  the  Vedas,  should  be  made  offieialing  priests.  This  is  in  case  of 


CHAPTER  XCIIL 


258 


the  sacrifice  of  ten  thousand  Uoma  offerings.  The  number  of  Br&bmanas 
need  not  be  greater  than  those  inentionod  above.— 104-105. 

In  the  sacrifice  of  a lac  of  offerings,  tliere  may  be  eight  or  ten  priests, 
or  even  four,  according  to  one’s  means.  —106. 

The  sacrificial  material  should  be  ten  times  more  for  the  sacrifice 
of  a lac  of  olTerings,  than  what  it  is  in  the  sacrifice  in  c uiiiection  with 
the  worship  of  Nine  Planets.  Eatables,  (n'liaments,  bedsteads,  necklaces, 
sacred  threads,  rings,  etc.,  shouhl  bo  given  away,  according  to  the  means 
of  the  devotee  — 107- 1*  ^8. 

Uaksiiia  should  he  given  according  to  the  mean.s  of  the  devotee. 
It  should  not  be  reduced  through  miserliness.  If  he  does  not  give  any 
dak^ina,  through  avarice  or  delusion,  his  family  becomes  extinct.— 100. 

The  devotee,  anxious  for  prosperity,  should  give  away  also  grain  in 
charity,  according  to  liis  means,  because  the  ceremony  without  the  gift 
of  grain  brings  famine  on  tlie  sacrificer  and  his  country. — 110. 

There  is  no  greater  enemy  of  mankind  than  an  ill-conducted 
sacrifice ; for  the  priests,  if  not  versed  in  the  rituals,  are  destroyed,  and  the 
devotee  is  destroyed  by  not  giving  Dak^i^a,  and  the  country  is  destroyed 
where  food  grain  is  not  given  in  charity. — 111. 

A man  in  narrow  circumstances  should  never  perform  a sacrifice 
of  a lac  of  offerings,  for  the  spending  of  even  a small  fortune  in  that  case 
leads  to  disease  and  distress.  -11 

Tlie  sacrificer,  with  devotion,  according  to  pre.scribed  rites,  should 
engage  even  one,  two,  or  three  Jbahmanas,  and  the  man  in  straitened  cir- 
cumstances may  employ  only  one  Biahmana,  well  versed  in  the  Vedas 
whom  he  should  properly  honor  and  give  full  DaksinA.— 113. 

The  sacrifice  of  a lac  of  offerings  should  be  performed  only  by 
that  man  wfio  possesses  a farge  fortune ; for  the  man  performing  such 
a sacrifice  accurately,  acciu’ding  to  the  prescribed  rites,  attains  all  his 
desires.— 114. 

Tlie  man  wlio  does  so,  is  venerated  by  Vasu,  Aditya,  Manitgana,  in 
the  realm  of  ^iva,  and  attains  emancipation  after  800  kalpas.— 115. 

The  man  who  performs  this  sacrifice  of  a lac  of  homas,  with  any 
object  in  view,  attains  his  desire  and  goes  to  heaven,  where  he  gets  bliss. 
-116. 

The  man  desirous  of  sons,  obtains  sons,  one  desirous  of  riches,  gets 
riches,  tlie  devotee,  eager  for  a wife,  gets  a beautiful  wife,  and  if  a maiden 
performs  this  sacrifice,  she  gets  a good  husband  by  virtue  of  it.— 117? 


TUB  MATSYA  PUBAVAM. 


m 


Farther  more,  by  the  virtue  of  this  sacrifice,  a dethroned  sovereign 
gets  bock  his  realm,  the  man  hankering  after  prosperity  gets  prosperity, 
in  fact,  the  devotee,  desirous  of  anything,  gets  that  thing.  But  the 
one,  who  performs  it  without  any  object  in  view,  attains  the  Supreme 
Brahman.— -118. 


[fl.  The  W millions  Homas. 

Lord  Brahma  lias  doscrihed  tlie  sacrifice  of  ton  millions  of  Iiomas,  a 
hundred  times  more  eflicacious  than  llie  saorifioe  of  a lac  of  offerings. 
The  money  given  away  in  DaksinA,  and  the  olfoot  and  the  result  are  a 
hundred  times  more  than  the  last.— 111). 

In  performing  this  bigger  sacrifice,  invocation  and  dismissal  of 
Devas  should  be  done  as  before.  The  same  mantras  are  to  be  used  in 
ablutions,  offering  libations  and  giving  charity.  I sliall  now  describe  the 
special  mode  of  preparing  sacrificial  pomi,  altar  and  pandal ; pay  attention 
to  my  words.— 120. 

In  the  sacrifice  of  a crore  of  offerings,  the  receptacle  should  measure 
four  hands  and  should  be  made  of  a conical  shape,  on  a scjuare  base,  and 
surrounded  by  three  ginlles  ; while  the  pond  should  have  two  openings. 
-121. 

A wise  man  should  make  tlie  first  girdle  two  fingers  high,  the  second 
three  lingers,  and  the  height  as  well  as  tlie  thickness  of  the  tliird  one,  should 
be  four  fingers.  The  thickness  of  the  first  and  the  second  girdles  should 
also  be  two  fingers. —122-12*). 

The  receptacle  .slioiild  be  one  vitasti  (half  a cubit,  or  12  fingera)  in 
extent,  but  the  height  should  he  of  (J  or  7 fingers.  It  should  be  raised  in 
the  centre  as  the  back  of  a tortoise,  and  one  linger  high  on  the  sides.— 124. 

It  should  resemble  the  lips  of  an  elephant  in  extent  and  in  having  a 
hole.  Such  will  he  the  receptacle  as  regards  all  kinds  of  sacrificial  ponds. 
-125. 

Over  the  girdles  everywhere,  an  altar  of  4 vitasti  in  measurement 
(i.e.,  2 cubits  or  1 yard)  and  of  the  shape  of  a peepal  leaf,  should  be  made. 
This  is  in  the  case  of  tlie  sacrifice  of  a crore  of  offerings.— 126. 

In  this  form  of  sacrifice  the  altar  should  be  made  square,  measuring 
four  vitasti  and  having  three  girdles.  Their  height  and  extent  should  be 
as  indicated  before.  - 127. 

The  pandal  should  be  made  of  sixteen  cubits  in  extent  and  should 


CHAPTMn  XGIll. 


255 


have  4 doomaye.  On  the  eastern  gate,  a Brfthma^a,  proficient  in  the 
9igveda,  should  be  located.  —128. 

A Btihinana,  versed  in  the  Yajurveda,  sliould  be  located  in  the 
south,  one  versed  in  the  Slmaveda  in  the  west,  one  knowing  the  Atbarva 
Veda  in  the  north. — 129.  • 

Bight  more  Bnihina^an,  well  up  in  the  Vedas  and  Vedangas,  should 
be  made  to  officiate  as  Homa-offering  priests.  These  twelve  Brkhmanas 
should  be  sincerely  honoured  with  cloths,  sandal,  garlands,  and  ornaments, 
as  before. — 130. 

In  the  east,  hymns  from  the  Ratri-sukta,  Ruudra  and  Pavamana,  and 
SumaAgala  mantras,  for  the  peace  of  the  universe,  should  be  chanted  by 
the  Brabmana  versed  in  the  Rigreda  and  facing  north.— 131. 

The  Yajurvedi  BrAhmana,  seated  in  the  south,  should  recite  the 
mantras  relating  to  ^luti,  God  Indra,  Saumyn,  Ku^manda,  &c. — 132. 

The  SAmavcdi  Brahmiina,  sitting  in  the  west,  should  sing  the  hymns 
of  ^uparna  Vairaja,  Agiuiya,  RndrasatnhitA,  Jyesthasania,  and  pe.ice  chant. 
-133. 

The  Athnrvavedi  Brabmana,  seated  in  tlie  north,  should  read  the 
following  mantras  S&nti  Sukta,  Saura,  ^kunaka,  Pautftika,  Mah&r&jya. 
—134. 

h'ive  or  seven  Brahmanas  should  perform  the  homa  sacrifice  as  before, 
(the  remaining  llomakas  helping  thenr).  The  manti’as  relating  to  bath 
and  the  gift  are  the  same  as  before. — 135. 

The  VasudhtirA  or  the  way  of  letting  the  stream  of  clarified  butter 
fall  in  the  fire  from  a vase  is  the  only  peculiar  rite  of  the  sacrifice  of  a 
lac  of  offerings  (as  mentioned  before.  That  should  be  done  here  also). 
One  who  performs  this  sacrifice  of  a crore  of  oiTerings,  according  to  the 
prescribed  rites,  attains  all  his  wishes  and  obtains  the  rank  of  Vifnu — 136. 

He  who  reads  or  hears  this  description  of  these  three  sacrifices  of  the 
Grahas  (Planets),  becomes  purified  of  all  sins  and  attains  the  rank  of 
Indra.  —137. 

The  benefits  of  this  sacrifice  are  similar  to  those  derived  by  the  per- 
formance of  18,000  Advamedha  sacrifices.— 138. 

fSiva  has  said  that  the  sin  of  killing  a crore  of  BrAbmapas  and  of 
making  10  crores  of  abortions,  is  washed  off  by  the  performance  of  this 
sacrifice. — 139. 


m 


TUB  MATSYA  PURABAy. 


Magic  and  Sorcery. 

The  sacrifice  relating  to  the  worehip  of  tlie  nine  planets  should  be 
performed  before  the  perfonnaiioc  of  the  rites  of  Abhichfira  (sorcery), 
Uchohatana  and  Varfya  Karma,  &c. — 140. 

[iVotc.  l?chchAtana:=A  magioal  incantation  that  causes  a man  to  go  away  out  of  dis- 
gust. Vanya  Karma^A  magical  spell  that  fascinates  and  snbdnos  a foe.] 

(Otherwise,  no  rite  has  the  desired  effect ; so  tliis  sacrifice  of  ten 
thousand  offerings  to  the  planets  shoidd  necessarily  be  performed  as  a 
preliminary.— 141. 

In  the  sacrifice  connected  with  Vailikarana  ami  rdichatana,  the  sacri- 
ficial pond  shouhl  bo  made  of  the  lueasnro  of  a hamlful  (ell) ; it  should  bo 
surrounded  with  three  girdles,  be  circular  in  shape,  and  have  one  mouth, 
and  the  offering  of  the  wood  of  Ihitea  frondosa,  spi  inkled  with  honey,  cam- 
phor, gorochana  and  agara,  dissolved  in  water,  mixed  with  saffron,  should 
be  made.-' 142-143. 

An  f)ffering  of  woodapple  I Hael)  and  lotoses,  mixe:l  with  honey  and 
clarified  butter,  should  he  made.  Ihahm  r lias  said  that  ton  ihonsand 
offerings  sliouM  he  made  in  .sm  li  sacrilices. — 141.  « 

In  a sacrifice  for  Vasikarnoa,  tlie  f)fforin£:s  of  w«)odapplc  (Baen  and 
lotuses  should  be  made,  and  tlie  5*>iimitriy.\na  Apa  O'^adha  mantra  should  be 
recited  in  offering  lloma. — 1 ITi. 

No  .sprinkling  with  lioly  wat^^ix  o7*  )•  cation  of  a pitclier  of  whaler  should 
be  made  in  these  forms  of  'sacrifices.  A householder  slionld  bathe  in  the 
water  mixed  witli  herbs,  dress  iu  white,  put  on  white  fiowors,  worship  the 
Br^hmaiias  with  gold  threads.  They  should  also  be  given  fine  costumes 
and  Dak§ina  of  gold.  .A  white  cow  should  also  be  given. — I4fi-147. 

This  sacrifice  subdues  the  worst  of  enemies,  endears  those  W’ho  have 
no  love,  and  dispels  ills.— 148, 

The  sacrificial  prmd  for  tin*  perfonnanci'  of  tlie  sacrifice  intended  for 
Abhichira  and  Vidvesana,  slioidd  bo  traingular  in  .shape,  measuring  one 
hand,  surrounded  by  two  girdles,  and  having  openings  towards  the 
vertices.— 149. 

[Note.— Vidvesana  - A spell  that  causes  fpiction.] 

Then  the  Brahmanas  wearing  red  garland,  red  sandal,  rod  sacred 
thread,  red  turban,  and  red  raiments,  should  perform  the  sacrifice. — 150. 

With  three  vessels  containing  the  blood  of  the  young  crows  before 
them,  bones  of  the  hawks  in  their  left  hand  and  sacrificial  fuel  in  the 
other,  and  their  hair  loose,  the  Biahmanas  should  perform  the  sacrifice, 


CHAPTER  XCIV. 


257 


all  the  while  thinking  ill  of  the  enemiee  at  the  time  of  making  theae 
offerings.— 151. 

With  the  iJyenamafitra,  ‘durmitriyastasmai  santn  huip  phata,’  the 
razor ‘should  be  sanctified  ; with  tliis  the  image  of  the  enemy  should  be 
cut  piecemeiil  and  offered  to  the  fire. — 152-153. 

Having  performed  tlie  sacrifice  of  the  Grahas,  the  proper  AvichSra 
sacrifice  should  be  performed.  Such  is  the  rule  for  Vidvesana  **  sacrifice 
as  well. — 154. 

Such  deeds  only  hear  fruit  in  the  present  life  and  do  not  beget  good 
results  in  the  ne.vt,  so  a man,  desirous  of  iiltifuate  good,  sliould  not  indulge 
in  such  deeds. — 155. 

One  wlio  performs  the  worship  of  the  stars,  along  with  the  prescribed 
sacrifices,  without  any  object  in  view,  goes  to  the  clime  of  Visnu,  whence 
he  never  returns  to  this  world.  — 150. 

One  who  hears  or  relates  this  to  others,  never  suffers  from  any 
pain,  owing  to  the  evil  intluenco  of  the  planets  ‘U*  lo  the  de&tnicdon  of 
friends. — 157. 

The  children  of  the  house  in  which  these  sacrifices  are  written  down, 
never  suffer  from  any  ill,  mental  or  physical,  or  any  other  calamity. — 158. 

The  sages  are  of  opinion  tliat  this  sacrifice  of  a crore  of  offerings  begets 
fruits  of  many  a sacrifice  and  dispels  all  ills  ; it  is  the  giver  of  worldly 
prosperity  and  final  emancipation.  The  sacrifice  of  a lac  of  offerings  gives 
the  benefit  of  the  arfvamedha  sacrifice.  Tlie  sacrifice  performed  in  course 
of  a twelve  (lays  and  the  sacrifice  connected  with  the  worship  of  stars,  give 
equal  benefits. — 159-lGO. 

Thus  T have  told  the  mode  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  Nine  Grahas  and 
the  Abhiseka  in  divine  sacrifices  (the  sprinkling  of  the  devotee  with  the 
holy  waters.)  These  are  to  bo  done  to  dispel  all  ills  and  hindrances  to 
ceremonies  of  rejoicings.  These  purge  all  sins,  who  reads  or  listens 
to  it  subdues  all  his  foes  and  gets  longevity  and  health. — IGl. 

Here  ends  the  ninety-third  eJtnpter  describing  the  mode  of  Navogrcdia 

homa  santi. 

CHAPTER  XCIV. 

I^iva  said  The  image  of  the  God  Sun  who  causes  the  lotus  to  bud- 
should  be  made  as  seated  on  a lotus  (Padm^sana).  with  color  like  that  of 
a lotus,  with  two  hands,  with  a lotus  in  one  hand  and  the  other  hand  raised 

88 


268  THE  MATSVA  PORAEA^f. 

in  the  posture  of  giving  blessings,  ami  having  seven  horses  in  His  chariot, 
drawn  by  seven  reins. — 1. 

iVofe*- Padmfisana^: A Intus-soat.  An  opinion  of  S;iin.  A particular  poaturo  in  reli- 
gions meditation.  (Seo  Sacred  Hooks  of  the  Hindns,  Vol.  XV.  -Tiie  Yoga  Sfistra.)  ^ 

The  image  of  the  ihuni,  the  gixer  (»r  boons,  should  he  nuulo  in  white 
color,  (Iressevl  in  white  ri»hos,  seuleJ  on  a white  eliariot,  having  a white 
horse  for  His  conveyance,  liaving  two  hainls,  one  holding  a clnh  and  the 
other  raised,  in  the  posture  of  giving  l)lcs<itigs.  — 2. 

The  imago  of  the  Mars  should  he  made,  having  while  hair,  four 
hands,  armed  with  a ^pear.  a h.mee  and  cliih,  wiili  the  fourth  iiand  raised 
in  tlie  posting  of  giving  hlessings.  wearing  .ed  roh^s  and  garland.- '-i. 

The  image  of  the  Mercury  .slionld  Ix'  ma  le  yellow,  dressed  in  jtIIow 
robes  and  wearing  a yellow  garland,  with  four  han  ts  armed  with  i sword, 
shield  and  club,  and  tin?  hnntli  h m 1 ral';  * ! in  (he  posture  of  giving  ))los- 
singrt,  and  having  a lion  for  hi-  e 'uvt yaneo.-  I. 

The  Venus  and  (he  Jnpi!<  r i)f  made  in  white  and  yellow 

respectively.  Tliey  -liould  havn  h nr  hand-,  h elding  '-tali’,  rosary,  and 
karaandalu,  and  the  fourlli  han‘1  rai<e<i  in  f'no  ]>ostui'e  of  giving  hies-* 
sings. — 5. 

The  Saturn  shoiild  hr  .1  ih.-  roh,iir  ao-d  die  lo-tre  of  an  lunerald, 
having  a vulture  hv  n;-.  e*a,ri  an:-  an:  J It  h. Ml  i- armed  with  a lance, 
bow  and  artoe:.  an  ! 'hr  T m*'-  •.*!!;  in  'h*-  ot^tnrM  -.f  giving 

blessings,  -h. 

Tim  image  of  h-hn  ..i.d  . . . i '•  h m j a u ri Ihii-  numth  or 

appearanee,  setifed  on  :i  lyhe-o'  iw;  - i ho;  . h.f.  jn-.f  h nr  l!ai»*!s,  armed  with 
a sword,  a leather  a -P'Mt,  an!  t!io  !'  »;rti»  Imnd  raised  in  the 

posture  of  giving  Mo-dn  h'l.H  l-.,  ].o  made  of 

smoky  color,  with  a vu'' I are  f.jr  Hi-  f .nvry.inet-  .•oi  l having  two  hands- - 
one  hand  holdirtg  a nirji*e  *111 1 ih»*  nh'  i-  rai--'H  In  the  posture  of  giving 
blessings,  and  having  a di•^^<'^:^•d  Tao.-  -7  e 

All  the  planets  shonid  h*  me.  i witi?  a mown  on  their  liead,  and  the 
images  sltould  ho  two  (ingf*r-  high  or,  *1'  the  lieigijt  of  one\  (nvn  finger). 
The  mantras  relating  to  tlm  p!an»-:-  s’lonld  lx*  n*riied  on  the  rosary 
108  times  each.  (It  may  also  tnejui  tlial  liie  si/e  of  the  planets  sliould  be 
108  fingers  or  digits  in  lieight.  if  the  afiguli  ho  ont‘  inch  in  l('ngth,  the 
images  will  be  nine  feet  high  ; if  lie-  measure  of  tlif*  afiguli  bo  :}th  of  an 
inch,  then  the  lieight  will  l)o  h'J  f(?et.  The  sen.se  is  obscure;,  — !l. 

Here  ends  the  ninety-fovvlh  chapter  den*)  Hdny  the  iconofjraphy 
of  the  Ptauels 


CHAPTBR  XOV. 


259 


CHAPTER  XCV. 

Ndrada  said  :—0  Lord,  presiding  over  the  Past  and  the  Future ! 
pray  tell  me  about  some  other  ordinance  that  may  be  the  giver  of  happiness 
and  emancipation. — 1. 

Hearing  the  above  words  of  the  sage,  Lord  ^iva,  the  knower  of  all 
things,  understood  the  inelimition  of  Narada,  and  said  : NSrada ! this 
sacred  bull,  wlio  is  my  prijicipal  attendant  and  who  has  become  unified 
with  me  on  account  of  his  a.sceticism  and  knowledge  of  the  l^ruti  and 
the  Pur/inas,  will  explain  to  you  the  rituals  connected  with  my  ordinance 
(Maherfvara  Dharina).”— 2-3. 

Lord  Matsya  sai^l : — Having  said  .so,  that  Lord  of  the  God  of  gods, 
vanishod  then  and  tlicve.  Xarada  also,  being  anxious  to  hear,  asked 
Nandikeivaia  thu<:  - O Nandi keiivara,  thou  hast  been  ordered  by  ^iva, 
therefore,  t(dl  me  tlie  ^^dhe^tvaril  vrata. — 4. 

Nandikes^vara  saiti  : — Hour  with  jittontion,  O Bnlhmana  ! I shall 
tell  you  the  Mihojlvaia  vr  ila.  It  is  well-known  in  all  the  three  worlds 
by  the  name  of  fjiva  (JhatJirdasii.— o. 

In  the  montli  nf  M/irgajlira,  on  tiic  Lhirloenth  day  of  the  bright  fort- 
night, the  devotee  slmuld  take  his  meals  once  a!id  pray  to  ^iva  with  this 
SaAkalpa  mantra,  ‘‘Of^m-d  of  all  the  Deities!  I take  refuge  in  Thee. 
To-morrow,  the  Chaturdasji  day,  I shall  observe  a complete  fast,  without 
eating  anything,  and  worship  Siva.  I shall  also  giveaway  a bull,  made 
of  gold,  and  then  take  my  meals  the  next  day.  ’ — d-7. 

Having  inad(!  this  Safikalpa,  the  devotee  should  go  to  bed  and  then 
rise  early  on  the  next  morning  and  worship  rfiva  along  with  His  Consort 
(UiTUiJ,  with  white  lotus  llowors,  sandal,  etc.— 8. 

(l)  Tho  feot  shouM  ho  worshipped,  after  recitiug  * .Siviya  namah.'  (2) 

the  head,  after  rocitini;  ^Sarv&tmaue  n.iinah.  (S)  tho  eyes,  after  reciting 

WtPlW  ^ : ‘ Triiiotnij’a  naoiah.’  (4;  tho  forehead,  after  reciting  * Uaraye  namafci.' 

(5)  the  mouth,  after  reciting  ‘ Indumukhfiya  naraah,’  (6)  the  throat  after  reciting 

iW»sni  TC  *srikunthdya  nauiali.’  (7)  llte  oars,  after  reciting  'Sadyojfttiya 

namah.'  (8)  tho  anus,  after  reciting  • VAmadev&ya  namah.'  (9)  tho  heart, after 

reciting  W ' Aghorahridayaya  namah.’  (10 1 the  breasts,  after  reciting 

WMJWW  »ni;  ‘Tatpuni.sAya  namah.'  (ll)  the  stomach, after  reciting  4WHU|  ^ ‘IsBnftya 
(12)  the  ribs,  after  reciting  * Auantadharinfiya  iiauiah.*  (18)  the  waist,  after 

reciting  nn:  • JfiAnabhutfiya  namah/  (U)  the  thighs,  after  reciting 

* Ananta  Vairigyasiiihdya  namah/  (15  the  knees  should  bo  worshipped,  after  reciting 
^H;  ‘AiKUitaiavaryan&thfiya  namah/  (16)  the  legs,  after  reciting  vmm  « 

‘ PradhAndya  namalb*  (17)  tho  ankles,  after  reciting  * Vyom&tmane  nama^. 

(18)  the  hair,  after  reciting  W:  * VyomakesAtmarApiya  namah.’  (18)  the 

bMk,  ttbw  Molting  Jff  ‘Pu^tyal  n»ui»b*'  («*)  5»^  'Tn^tyoyi 


THE  MATSYA  PURANAM. 


m 


Then  the  devotee  should  give  to  the  Br&liuianas  . a golden  bull, 
along  with  a pitcher,  full  of  water,  white  garment.s,  Par  diuratna,  various 
kinds  of  eatables, — 14. 

Really  good  Bnihinanas  should  be  invited  and  well-fed,  after  which 
curd  mixed  with  clarified  butter,  saved  from  the  sacrificial  offerings,  should 
be  taken  by  the  devotee,  whosliould  sleep  on  the  ground,  with  bis  head 
towards  the  north.  On  the  full  moon-day,  he  should  feed  the  Brkbmanas 
end  then  take  his  own  meals  in  silence.  Similarly,  he  should  do  on  the 
fourteenth  day  of  the  dark  fortnight.*— 15-10. 

The  worship  should  be  performed  in  the  same  way  all  the  four- 
teenth days  of  each  fortnight  of  every  month.  Now  the  especial  mantras  to 
be  recited  in  each  month  will  he  explained. — 17. 

Commencing  with  the  month  of  Margiulira,  tin*  mantras  hereafter 
mentioned  ahouhl  be  pronounced  one  by  one: — (1)  Sankaniya  namal.i, 
(2)  Karaviraknya  naniah,  1Vyainvak;iya  iiamah,  (4;  Maliesvaniya  iiainah, 
(5)  MahAdevuya  nauiah,  (ti-  .Sthanavt*  nainati,  7 ra.4npataye  luiruah,  i8) 
NAthaya  nainah,  Sarnbhave  ininial.i,  iPn  Nuuinste  Paranninunda,  (ll) 
Nftmali  Somardhadh;iriiy‘.  Blnniaya  natnali.  I am  at  Thy  Mercy. 
These  immos  .should  bo  reoOeil  ono  by  one,  #'ach  niorjlli,  IVoni  M;irgajfira. 
The  devotee  should  as  iVasana  , ' I)  ^ uriii(\  (.••/vv-dung,  (3i 
milk,  (4)  cunls,  io.ciarified  butter,  -b.  wat('r  nnxctl  with  ku«<i-grass,  (7) 
panchagavya,  (8:  w<joda[‘pIo  vbacb,  caiuphur,  agarii,  (11)  barley, 
(12)  black-sesamian,  on  the  Chaturdasi  of  each  month. -- 18-22. 

.Vote.— The  mantras  to  ix-  rrciicd  in  tsvolvo  inuiilhs.  wiili  AgratiAyaiia,  are 

giveu  below 

(1)  ainw  Hfl;  " .Sulut'vMioii  to  >atukara.  I laka  refuge  in  Tbee." 
This  should  ho  proixiunt-od  in  tin*  in-jiith  «)i  Mart^asira 

(2)  WP  •'.Salutation  i.o  Karaviraka.  1 take  refuge  in 

Thee,”  This  should  b«"  jirououiu;ed  in  tin.-  inuiilh  <jf  Pansa. 

(3)  ^ w.  '•  ro  rryaiut^aUa;  in  MAglia." 

14)  4|)l«W.ra  VKPf  Malu*»var:i  ; in  PhAlguna." 

(5*  WP  Wi  *171:  ••  To  MaliAdova  : in  Uliaitra.” 

(C)  ?!nr  iit«t  »i7t:  •'  To  Stlifinu  ; in  Vai.-^'aLliu." 

(7)  ait«?  «w:  •*  To  J';isiip?4ti  ; in  .lyaistha.”  ^ 

(8)  W-  -To  .ViUha;  111  Asaija.  ■ 

(0>  wj  SIVV  •!?!:  ••  To  •Sainhiiii  ; in  .SrAvana." 

(10)  wt  sren  *is:  ‘‘  To  Paramananila  ; in  niiadra.'* 

(U)  «nv«RY:  **ToSoitiardhadh&rin  ; in  Asvina.” 

(12)  ntm  wi  TOT  «ct:  “ To  Uhima  ; in  KArtik  u” 

Tlie  worahip  of  f^iva  aiiould  Ijo  conducted  I'roui  tlic  iiiontli  of  M&rga- 
dira  oil  ward,  by  uHeriug  tbc  following  ilowura,  luru  by  turn,  vis. : — (1^ 


CHAPTER  XGV. 


m 

M.-iiidSra,  (2)  jasmine,  (3)  Dbatfira,  (4)  Sambh&lfi  (Sindulvara),  (5i  A4oka, 
(G  MallikA,  (7)  PAtala,  (8)  Arka  flower,  (U)  Kadainba,  (10)  lotus  (^atapatri), 
fJ  1)  Kamalini  (Utpala).-  23-24. 

Again,  when  the  month  of  KArtika  arrives,  the  Brahmanas  should  be 
ft.d  with  various  kinds  of  eatables  and  offered  garments,  ornaments  and 
garlands.— (25). 

Afterwards,  the  devotee  should  let  loose  a black  bull,  in  conjunction 
witi)  the  Vedic  rites.  A golden  image  of  Siva  and  Parvati  sliould  be  made 
and  given  away  to  a BrAhmana,  along  with  a bull  and  a cow.  A bedstead, 
with  the  following  things,  should  also  be  given  away  : Eight  white  pearls, 
sheets,  pillows,  and  a vase,  full  of  water.— 26-27. 

The  images  of  l^iva  and  Parvat!  should  be  placed  in  a copper  vessel, 
full  of  rice,  and  then  located  on  top  of  the  pitcher  of  water,  after  which 
they  should  be  given  away  to  a Brahmana  versed  in  the  Vedas,  observing 
ordinances  and  having  a calm  disposition. — 28. 

It,  is  liest  to  give  it  to  one  acquainted  with  Saniaveda  : it  should  never 
and  on  no  iiccouut  bo  given  to  a hypocrite.  Only  one  vereed  in  the  Vedas, 
knowing  the  Vedic  principles,  is  fit  to  receive  such  an  ollering.— 21). 

A finihmana,  free  from  deformity  and  of  simple  habits,  should  be 
worshipped,  along  with  his  wife,  with  garments,  garlands  and  ornaments. 
These  things  might  be  given  to  the  preceptor  (Guru),  if  there  be  one ; 
otherwise,  to  a really  gooil  Brahmana,  free  from  all  feeling  of  miserliness ; 
for  such  a feeling  leads  one  to  the  lower  region. — 30-31. 

One  who  observes  the  ^iva  Chatiirda^f  ordinance,  according  to  these 
cites,  gets  the  benefit  of  a thousand  Advamedha  sacriiices. — 32. 

And  the  sius  of  killing  a Brahmana  and  also  against  the  parents, 
committed  in  this  or  in  the  previous  life,  are  destroyed  in  a moment. — 33. 

'I’he  devotee  gets  long  life,  health,  domestic  prosperity,  and  promo- 
tion in  his  husbandry,  lie  then  eventually  goes  near  the  Lord  of  four 
hands,  whose  chief  attendant  he  becomes  ; and  then  after,  passing  crores 
of  kalpas  in  the  heaven,  he  becomes  unified  with  l^iva. — 34. 

Even  the  sage  fifihaspati,  the  Deras,  like  the  mighty  Indra,  and 
BrahuiA,  can.not  adequately  describe  the  glories  of  this  ordinance.  Even 
I cannot  do  so  with  a crore  of  tongues.— 35. 

One  wlio  roads,  hears  or  thinks  about  this  ordinance  becomes  liber- 
ated from  all  his  sins.  The  Divine  Consorts  also  venerate  it ; therefore,  a 
devotee  should  always  observe  it,  free  from  all  feelings  of  despise: — 36. 

The  woman  who  observes  this  ordinance  with  the  permission  of  her 
husband,  son  or  the  preceptor  also  attains  bliss  by  the  glory  of  l^iva.— ^37. 
Here  ends  the  ninety-fifth  chapter  describing  the  Chaturdasi  Vrata. 


262 


THE  UAT8YA  PUBAEAM. 


CHAPTER  XCVI. 

Nandikedvara  said  : — 0 Ntirada  ! also  hear  the  benefits  that  accrue  to 
the  devotee  in  his  next  life,  by  his  relinquishing  the  fruits  of  this  ordi- 
nance.—!. 

0 Sage  ! the  ordinance  vvrata)  should  be  commenced  on  any  one  of 
the  following  days,  in  the  month  of  Mlrgaiir:  the  third,  the  twelfth,  the 
eight  or  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  bright  fortnight,  after  invoking  the 
Brfthmatias.— 

0 Narada  ! hi  other  auspicious  months  also,  the  devotee  should,  to 
the  best  of  his  ability,  fee  I tlie  Brahmanas  with  rice  cooked  in  milk  and 
mixed  with  sugar,  and  then  satisfy  them  witli  Daksina.— 3. 

The  prohibited  grains  of  eighteen  kinds  and  fruits  and  roots  should  be 
avoided  for  a period  of  one  year  : hui  there  is  no  harm  in  taking  anything 
in  the  form  (d  a medic  ine.  A g(ddcn  image  of  l^iva  ainl  a bull  should  be 
made.  The  image  of  Dharmaraja  should  be  made  similarly. — 4. 

The  followingsixteen  i;lnd-»  •>[  fruits  should  bo  imule  in  gold,  accord- 
ing to  the  means  of  the  devotee,  r/?  • —[Hmipkins,  (jitrmis,  egg-phinis,^ 
bread-fruits,  mangoes,  liog-plums,  woodapples,  Itidra  grains,  cucumbers, 
cocoamits,  the  holy  figs,  the  juiiibes,  the  lemons,  ilu’  plantains,  saffron, 
and  pomegranates.— -j-tl. 

The  following  should  be  made  of  silver,  airording  to  the  means  of 
the  devotee,  iu5:— Muti  a kind  of  root  ' egetabl'",  Kniblica  officinalis 
rose  apple,  tamarind,  Kaiaunda.  Kanlvdaberry,  cartlamom,  eottoji,  bamboo, 
Kutaja,  i^arnl,  Udumbara.  coeoanut,  grape.s,  two  kinds  of  egg-plants. -7-8. 

The  fruits  of  the  following  "iliMuld  be  made  of  copper,  according  to  the 
means  of  the  devotee  Palms,  Agasti  gramliflora,  Kayaphala,  (laipbharl, 
esculent  root,  the  red  esculent  root,  a bulbous  root,  svarnakhhiri,  cucumber, 
chitravalti,  Salrnali,  mango,  iicjnoritx*.  kidney-bean,  fig  tree,  patola 
(a  species  of  cucumber).  - -0-11. 

Two  pitchers  (d  water,  covoicmI  with  cdoih,  should  be  placed  on  grain, 
and  a bed  should  also  be  arranged  and  covered  with  cloth. — 12. 

On  some  sacred  day,  the  devotee  should  give  away  ufl  these  things 
as  well  as  three  food  plates,  the  images  of  IJharinaraja,  iiiva,  with  that  of 
the  sacred  bull  and  a cow,  to  a peaceful  Unihinana  couple  who  may  have 
a big  family,  having  first  worshipped  thein.~-13. 

**  As  the  numberless  Devas  dwell  in  all  kinds  of  fruits,  so  let  my 
devotion  be  to  l^iva,  as  a consequence  of  my  performing  this  vrata  of 
relinquishing  the  fruits  of  my  actions.''-  14. 


OH  AFTER  XOVIL 


268 


“ Siva  and  DharmarAja  aro  known  to  be  the  great  Givers  of  boons  ; 
let  Them  therefore  confer  boons  on  me  for  giving  away  these  likenesses, 
together  with  those  appropriate  fruits  in  charity.” — 15. 

“ As  in  the  devotees  of  l^iva  are  always  (to  be  found)  endless  fruits,  so 
let  me  also  have  fruits  endless,  in  life  after  life.”-- 16. 

“1  do  not  make  any  (invidious)  distinction  between  l^iva,  Vi§9u, 
Sun,  Brahma  ; let  the  Lord  f?iva,  the  soul  of  the  universe,  bless  me  with 
eternal  happiness.” — 17. 

Tho  articles  (to  l)o  given  away)  nhonld  he  given  fo  the  Brahmana, 
having  first  decorated  him.  The  devotee  may  alsr)  give  a bedding,  with 
all  its  requisites,  if  ho  Imd  tiie  means  to  do  ^o,  otherwise  he  may  only 
give  away  the  fruits  mentioned  before.  Tlie  golden  images  of  jJiva  and 
DharinarAja  being  given  to  the  Brahmana,  with  the  pitchers  of  water,  he 
should  feed  liimself  on  food  devoid  of  oil,  by  oKserving  the  vow  of  silence, 
and  should  also  feed  tho  BrAhmanas,  according  to  his  means. — 20. 

This  is  the  way  of  a devotee  of  Vihnu,  Sun  or  a Yogi  or  a Bhagwat 
to  rclinqiiisli  the  fruits  of  their  actions,  as  laid  down  by  the  BrAhmanas 
versed  in  the  Vedas.— 21. 

” 0 Sage  Narada  ! this  ordinance  should  be.  observed,  to  the  best 
of  their  ability,  by  the  womenfolk,  too.  There  is  no  ordinance  like  this 
that  can  give  such  everlasting  boons  in  this  world,  as  well  as  in  the  next. 
-22. 

0 Sage  ! the  devotee  remains  in  the  region  of  ^iva  for  as  many 
thousand  Yiigas  as  tl)ere  arc  atoms  of  gold,  silver  and  copper,  in  this 
world,  when  these  latter  arc  ground  to  a powder.— 23. 

Thi.s  ordinance  washes  off  all  tho  lifelong  sins  of  the  devotee.  He 
never  has  the  pain  of  losing  his  son,  and  he  attains  the  region  inhabited 
by  Gods. — 24. 

The  poor  man  who  liears  or  reads  this,  either  in  some  sacred  place 
(place  (^f  a Goil;,  or  in  tlic  house  of  a pious  man,  goes  to  the  region  of 
i^iva  whore  he  gets  into  the  place  of  Deities  and  enjoys,  after  being  liberated 
from  all  his  sins. — 25. 

Here  ends  the  ninety-sixth  ehnpter  describing  the  Vrata  of  Relinquishment 
of  nil  results  {of  one's  actions', 

CHAPTER  XCVII. 

NArada  said  : — Nandikerfvara  ! Pray  describe  to  me  the  ordinance 
.hat  may  be  the  giver  of  peace,  health  and  everlasting  benefits  to  the 
>eople."-l. 


m 


THE  MATS7A  PURANAM. 


Nandike^fvaia  said:— Tlmt  which  is  the  eternal  abode  of  the  soul 
of  the  universe,  is  known  as  tlie  Sun,  the  Fire  and  tlie  Moon,  in  this  world  ; 
by  the  worship  of  these  a man  attains  happiness  The  devotee  observing 
it  should  always  take  his  meals  at  night  time  only  on  Sundays.— 2-3. 

In  the  case  of  the  asterism  flasti  falling  on  Sunday,  the  devotee  should 
take  his  meals  only  once  on  Saturday,  purging  his  heart  of  all  vanity. — 4. 

tbi  Sunday  Jiight,  the  devotee,  after  feeding  good  llrAhinanas,  should 
draw  a lotus  of  twelve  petals  with  red  sandal.  To  the  east  ot  it  he 
should  place,  after  salutations,  the  Sim  (Surya\  to  the  south-east  IVivakara, 
to  the  south  Vivasvilna,  to  the  soutli-west  Bhaga,  to  the  west  Varuria,  to 
the  north-west  Maliendra,  to  the  north  .^ditya,  to  the  nortli-east  f^anta. 
In  the  forepart  of  the  lotus,  the  horses  of  the  vSiiri  should  be  inscribed, 
in  the  south  the  Aryama  Hovas,  in  the  west  Martaeda,  and  on  the  northern 
petal  Ravi  Bhaskara  on  tlie  periearp  of  the  lot  ns. — o-O. 

Afterwards,  red  flowers,  red  sandal,  sesainum,  mixed  with  water, 
should  be  poured  on  tlio  loins,  and  the  following  mantra  should  be  recited 
at  the  time  10. 

Divakara  Ohe  giver  of  day^ ! Yf>u  are  the  soul  of  time,  creating 
and  the  Vedas.  You  liavo  your  faee  turned  to  each  direction.  You  are 
of  the  form  of  ludra  and  Agnl ; therefore  sheltiU’  me.’'  — 1 1 . 

**  Agnimilo  namastuhhainisorvdrjc  (dia  hliAskara.”  “ Agna  ayahi 
varada  na  asto  jvotisnm  pare,  " Wiiii  tliis  mantra  Argliya  should  be 
offered,  and  tlie  IVlly  dismissed,  lie  ‘•liould  lake  lli^  meals  at  night  free 
from  oil.  When  a yeaj’  has  elapsed  in  this  way.  lie  should  make  a lotus  of 
gold  and  au  image  with  two  ha?ids.  •'  12-13. 

lie  should  then  give  away  in  cliarity  u milch  cow,  with  her  horns 
covered  with  gold,  the  hoofs  with  silver,  along  with  her  calf,  and  a milking 
vessel  of  bell  metal,  while  tlie  lotus  ami  image  sliould  be  placed  in  a pot  of 
copper  completely  full  of  molasses.  — 11. 

Tlie  devotee,  after  worsliippiug  the  BrAhmana  with  red  cloth,  sandal^ 
garland,  incense,  etc.,  should  bestow  his  gifts,  vh — the  lotus  and  the 
image,  etc.,  on  him,  ho  having  a large  family,  and  being  free  from  deformity 
and  pride,  and  able  to  restrain  iiis  passions  and  tiio  object  of  charity  in 
many  other  vratas. — lo. 

At  that  time,  the  devotee  should  utter  tlio  following  words 
“ Nam&  namah  pApavinA.'Janfiya, 

“ ViivAtmanc  saptataratigam&ya, 

“ S&margyajnrdliAmidhe  Vidhatre, 

" Bhavabdhipataya  jagatsavitre.” 


OUAPTER  XCVin. 


265 


“ 0 Diapelicr  of  ftiriH,  the  Soul  of  the  univerae,  your  chariot  drawn  by 
seven  horses,  the  vase  of  liika,  Yaju  and  S&rna  Vedas,  the  boat  of  the  ocean 
of  universe,  1 salute  Thee  oft  and  often.” — 16. 

One  wJ»o  observes  these  rituals  and  keeps  up  this  vrata  for  a year,  is 
freed  from  all  sins  and  goes  to  the  solar  region  fanned  by  cliamara. — 17. 

On  the  consumption  of  his  store  of  piety  he  becomes  the  sovereign  of 
the  seven  Dvipa.s,  and  never  gets  pain,  suffering  or  disease.  fJe  becomes 
most  powerful  and  virtuous.  — 18. 

0 Narada ! the  woman  who  is  devoted  to  her  husband,  God  and 
preceptor,  and  observes  this  ordinance,  and  cats  at  night  only  on  Sundays, 
undoubtedly  reaches  the  solar  region,  which  is  honoured  by  the  Devas. 
-19. 

The  person  who  reads  or  hems,  or  approves  of  the  reading  of  this 
ordinance,  also  goes  to  the  region  of  Indra  where  he  is  served  by  the  Devas, 
and  remains  there  for  innumerable  kHlpas.—iO. 

Here  ends  the  ninety-seraith  chapter  describing  the  Sunday 
ordinance  (Vrata,) 

CHAPTER  XCVIII. 

X and ikejj vara  said  : — Narada ! I shall  now  describe  to  you  the  way 
how  the  ordinance  of  Sankrauti,  which  in  the  next  world  gives  everlasting 
boons  of  all  kinds,  is  to  be  brought  to  a close.— 1. 

Tlic  Sankrdnti  ordinance  shouhl  he  observed  on  the  day  of  equinoxes 
or  solstices.  The  day,  prior  to  Sankrauti,  the  devotee  should  have  his 
meals  only  once ; ami,  on  the  following  ilay,  he  should  bathe  in  water 
mixed  with  sesanium,  after  brushing  his  teeth. — 2. 

On  the  (lay  of  the  Sankrauti,  the  devotee  should  draw  on  the  earth 
a lotus  of  eight  petals  with  sandal,  in  the  centre  of  which  pericarps 
should  be  made,  whore  tiie  presence  of  the  Sun  should  be  invoked. — 3. 

The  Sun  sliould  be  located  in  the  perierap,  Aditya  in  the  east,  and 
salutatieThs  should  be  made  in  the  south,  after  reciting  ‘ O^narchise  namah, 
Uifiginan(]alaya  naninh'  ” Savitre  namah  ” in  the  south-west,  “ Tapanaya 
namah”  in  the  west,  Bhnga  in  the  north-west  should  be  located  and 
worshipped  constantly.  Martanda  should  be  located  in  the  north  and 
Visnii  in  the  north-east.  These  should  be  adored  with  incense,  liowers, 
fruits  and  eatables,  on  an  altar. — 4-6. 

A golden  vessel  of  clarified  butter,  with  a pitcher  of  water,  should 


84 


TUB  UAT8YA  PUBAUAM. 


2Qb 

be  given  away  to  the  Brahiiiaua ; and  the  lotus  ehoulci  also  be  made  of  gold, 
according  to  the  means  of  the  devotee,  and  given  away  to  the  Brahmana. 

Afterwards,  the  Arghya,  eoiisistihg  of  water,  sandal  and  flowers, 
should  be  placed  on  the  flour  as  an  oblation  to  flic  Sun,  by  nciting  the 
following  mantra  : “ Vijfvii}*;!  Visvanlpfiya  Visvadliainiie  Svayainbhiibe 

Xamananta  naino  dhatre  Riksam  ^'aju.Vnnpati/’  Tliis  ritual  sliould  be 
observed  oadi  inunth,  .»r  at  llio  end  of  the  viar.  All  the  twelve  vralus 
should  be  done  at  the  j^aine  lime.  -b-O. 

Then  libations  of  rict^  cooked  in  milk  uml  sugar,  sliould  be  poured 
into  the  tire  and  HiAlmianas  should  be  saiislied  with  eatables  (hi  tliat 
oceasitJii,  12  piteliers  of  water,  with  a few  gems,  12  golden  lotus  flowers 
and  12  mileli  eo\v>  of  gentle  disposition,  or  only  8,  7 or  4 such  cows  dii 
the  la.sl  ease,  the  cows  bein.u  ‘Ire-M**!  and  garlanded’*,  aeemding  lo  tlie 
means  of  the  devoter,  diould  be  given  to  a ponr  and  deserving  Hrrdimana, 
after  their  horn>  being  I'overed  with  g»»!d,  their  hoofs  with  silver,  along 
with  milking  pots  of  l^ell  metal.  In  the  devnteo  lie  a very  poor  man, 
he  may  give  only  .me  mileh  1“-!  1.  ^ 

Afterwards,  an  imago  of  (-arth,  ahing  with  that  wf  the  serpent  t^esa, 
.should  be  made  in  gold,  silver.  <’o|.per  oi‘  evr-n  (d'  kneaded  flour,  aeeord- 
ing  to  the  means  of  the  devott  e.  ;md  gi\eii  away  to  IIk*  IJralimana,  along 
with  a golden  image  of  the  Sun.  A'<  far  as  po>>ibl(*,  no  miserliness  should 
lie  exerc.isetJ  in  tliis  ritual  : hw  lia-  man  vh,ing  -o.  in  spite  of  having  riches 
undoubtedly  goes  to  iicdl.-- 12 

Xarada!  ‘n.ewiiM  ihl-  .»niiiiajiee.  eiijoys  in  heaven  the 

liononr  and  resj  crl  by  all  the  vbindliarva.s.  for  a>  Jong  as  Indra  ainl  otlter 
gods,  eartli  and  tin*  .-(’vi‘n  •.(•cans,  ilie  Himalayas  and  otlier  mountains 
.survive.-- 1 ‘h 

His  piety  being  < oi].^un.u*d.  llio  dovfHce  is  boiai,  in  the  begijining 
creation,  a sovereign  ol  good  family,  f ridowed  with  all  kingly  virtues  and 
blessed  with  liandsoine  forui  Mov(»i<l  of  delV)rmity)  and  many  a child,  wife, 
friend  and  relation.— M.  ^ ^ 

( die  who  reads  alMnil  this  »Surya  i^ankranti  with  devotion,  or  hears 
or  advises  others  to  road  it,  is  liomnired  by  flie  Devas  in  the  realm  of 
Indra. —lo. 

Hei^e  mds  the  Hiapfer  deftcrihvKj  Lite  mode  of  hrimjivfi 

the  Sankrfhili  vrata  to  a close. 


CHAPTER  XaiX. 


; m 


CHAPTER  XCIX. 

Nandikeifvara  said  : — NArada  ! J shall  now  relate  to  you  ViRuu  vrata, 
known  as  the  Vtbhflti-DvAdatJi  vrata,  which  is  held  in  veneration  by  all 
the  DovSs.” — 1. 

On  the  tenth  day  of  the  brighi  fortnight,  in  the  inontlj  of  KArtika, 
Chaitra,  VaiiSAkha,  Margarfirsa,  Phfilguna  or  Asadha,  tlie  derotee  should 
have  a light  meal ; and  in  the  day  time,  after  performing  his  evening 
prayers,  make  the  following  resolatif)n  : — 2. 

“ Oh  God,  on  the  eleventh  day  1 .'*hall  keep  a rigid  fast  and  worship 
JanArdaiia.  I shall  break  the  fast  on  the  twelfth  day,  in  company  of  the 
Bnllimanas. — 3. 

0 Keiava!  let  there  be  no  hindrance  in  theohservanee  of  iny  fast/’ 
He  should  utter  ‘*Orn  namo  N/miyanaya  namah  ” ^Oni,  Salutations  be  to 
NarAyanah  before  retiring  to  bed. — 4. 

(hi  getting  up  in  the  morning,  he  should  recite  f iriyatri  lOS  tiine<, 
and  then  woi-ship  Lord  Visuu  with  wliite  sandal  and  flowers.— 

The  feet  should  ho  w'orshipped  after  reciting  Vihhntaye  namah,” 
the  knees  after  reciting  **  Asfokaya  namah,”  the  thighs  after  reciting 
* Sivaya  namah,”  the  waist  after  reciting  “ Visvamfirtaye  nainah,”  the 
male  organ  of  generation  after  reciting  “ KandarpAya  mnmah,”  tlte  hands 
after  reciting  ‘‘  Adityaya  namah,”  the  stomach  after  reciting  “ Damoda- 
raya  namah,”  the  breasts  after  reciting  ” VAsudevai^a  namah,”  the  chest 
after  reciting  “ Madliavaya  namah,”  the  neck  after  reciting  Ctkanthine 
namah,”  the  mouth  after  reciting  “ Sridharaya  namah,  ” and  the  liair  after 
reciting  “ Kerfavaya  namah,”  the  back  after  reciting  “ ^arafigadharAya 
namah,”  the  ears  after  reciting  ” Varadaya  namah,”  the  head  after  reciting 
“ Sarvatinane  namah,”  with  His  other  names,  nV,  “ l^afikapanye  namah,” 
” ChakrapAnye  namah,”  ” Asipanaye  namah,”  ” OadapAnaye  namah,”  and 
” PadmapAnaye  namah.” — fi-0. 

A golden  fish  should  be  made  and  also  a lotus  of  gold,  according  to 
the  means  and  wishes  of  the  devotee  ; and  a pitcher,  full  of  water,  should 
be  placied  in  front  of  it. — 10. 

Afterwards,  a vessel,  full  of  molasses  and  covered  with  a white  cloth, 
together  with  some  sesamum,  should  be  placed.  The  devotee  should 
keep  up  the  night  with  the  recitation  of  Itihasas. — 11. 

On  the  following  morning  the  golden  fish  and  lotus,  along  with  the 
pitcher  of  water,  should  be  given  away  to  some  good  Brrdnnana  with  a 
large  family, — 12, 


268 


THIS  MAT8YA  PVRANAM. 


At  that  time,  the  devotee  should  pray  • “ As  Tl)on,  0 I/)rd  Vi^nu,  art 
never  devoid  of  any  prosperil}’  (Vihluiti\  so  plo<ML4o  extricate  me  from  the 
meshes  and  manifold  calamities  of  this  world/’ — 13. 

The  devotee  should  pvo  away  one  in  each  month  of  the  year  tlie 
golden  images  of  the  ten  incarnations  M>f  the  snprenn  0o(h  as  well  as  of 
Dattutreya  and  Vedavvasa,  along  willi  a lotus  of  gold.  During  tltis  period 
the  devotee  shonltl  avoid  the  (‘(‘uipany  of  rogues  and  the  wicked.  —14. 

After  observing  the  fast  like  this  for  tw(dve  months,  on  each  Dvfidarfi, 
the  devotee  at  the  eonelnsion  the  year,  slj(»uhi  give  away  t‘>  his  precep- 
tor a bedding,  a mount  of  salt  and  a cow.  - 15. 

A man  of  means  may  also  give  away  a village  or  a lionst  and  honor 
his  preceptor  with  diverse  raime?ils  and  ornom(*nts.  -1(5. 

Other  Bivilimanas  slioid  ! be  feasted,  luvording  to  the  tneans  of  the 
devotee  and  satisfnMl  by  being  given  ehnhe'^.  j(‘\v»  Is,  money,  (‘rnainents 
cows,  &c.  A man  with  limited  irn'iins  should  givj'  only  as  mueh  as  lie  can 
afford.  —17. 

A very  poor  man.  hut  having  siner-n'  dev«»ti(ui  to  Lord  Madliava,^ 
may  worship  Lonl  Vishnu  f<>r  a e *np]('  of  y*  iom  wiili  tlowf'rs  alone.  — IS. 

One  who  (ibserves  the  Vibhuri-d v.ola.'ti  ordinam^e  like  tbi.s,  liberates 
himself  from  all  sins  and  alhu  ]inihlit<K  of  hi*^  aiM  Csioix  lie  is  n«»l 
oppresseil  with  grief,  diseasfM*r  |>ovri ty  diiri.ig  tliousai'ds  id  births.  lie 
is  always  born  as  a «ic‘Votee  of  Vivjju  ^r  Siva,  and,  alter  >.j>(‘nding  ]08  thou- 
sand yngas  in  heaven,  is  Ijorij  a-  a kin*,;  - - 

Here  eufh  tit f niuf'ty-vlnlli  vJtaitii  v 1 rratn, 

(dIAPTEIt  (■ 

Nandikoj^vara  said  In  tiie  dayj^  gon(‘  by,  during  the  Uulhantara 
Kalpa,.  there  lived  a miglily  king,  as  illusirions  a-  the  Sun.  who  was  known 
by  the  name  of  Pus]>avrdiana.  — 1. 

0 Nfirada  ! Ihahma,  being  pleaseil  with  liis  asceticism,  presented 
him  with  a lotus  of  g<dd  that  could  move  abmit  at  will.— 2.  * 

(With  its  help)  the  king  began  to  wander  about  at  bis  pleasure  in 
the  seven  dvtpas  as  well  as  in  the  abode  of  tbe  gods,  in  company  of  Itis 
citizens. — 3. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  kalpa,  tlie  kingilom  of  this  king,  who  lived 
in  the  lotus,  was  the  seventh  dvfpa:— on  account  of  the  great  praise  and 
honour  given  to  it  by  the  people,  it  came  to  be  known  as  Puskara.— 4. 


OHAPTBR  a 


m 


The  King  was  called  Pii^pavi^hana  by  the  Devas  and  the  DAnavaa  on 
ncoount  of  his  having  received  the  lotus  for  his  conveyance. — 5. 

Owing  to  his  powers,  acquired  by  the  practice  of  penances,  no  place 
in  the  three  worlds  was  inaccessible  to  him,  seated  on  his  lotus  given  by 
Lord  Bralirn/i.  His  queen,  I.Rvanyavati,  was  worthy  to  be  honoured  by 
thousands  of  ladies.  In  beauty  and  womanly  virtues,  she  had  no  equal. 
She  was  like  tlie  Ooddess  Par\Mti,  the  noble  (-V)n8ort  of  the  rx>rd  Siva, — 6. 

The  king  becjune  the  father  of  ten  thou.sand  virtuous  princes,  who 
all  were  renowned  in  archery.  The  king  began  to  wonder  at  Ids  in- 
comparable prosperity.  One  day,  seeing  the  great  sage  Pracheta,  appro- 
aching, ho  addressed  him  thus  : ~7. 

"OSage!  how  is  it  that  tliero  is  «!uch  an  abundant  e of  prosperity 
ininybo\ise?  How  have  I got  a queen  who  is  venerated  oven  by  the 
Devas,  and  who  has  no  equal  even  among  the  goddesses?  Why  has 
BrahinA  become  so  much  pleased  with  my  little  asceticism  as  to  present 
me  with  such  a lotus,  (vast  wonderful),  that  when  myriads  of  kings,  wuii 
ministers,  elephants,  people,  and  chariots  entered  into  it,  they  appear 
small  indeed,  like  so  many  galaxies  of  t^Yinkling  stars  with  the  moon 
herself  in  the  imineasureable  expanse  of  the  firmament.— 8-0. 

“ Hence,  0 Lord,  wliat  is  the  use  of  being  born  in  the  separate  womb 
of  the  motlier?  To  obtain  endless  (good)  results,  1 liave  performed  many 
a religious  rite.  Now  please  tell  ns  what  is  of  ultimate  good  to  me,  ray 
wife  and  sons.”  -10. 

Hearing  the  above  words  of  the  king,  the  sage,  after  meditation, 
spoke  the  following  ^YOl■(ls,  about  the  wonderful  former  lives  of  the  king : — 

“ King  ! Previously  you  were  born  in  the  house  of  a hunter,  and  you  led 
a life  of  sin  from  day  to  day. — 11. 

Your  body  was  hard,  rough  and  also  offensively  stinking.  Snakes 
(‘oiled  all  over  it.  You  had  no  fnend,  mu*  sons;  neither  kinsmen,  nor 
sisters,  nor  parents.  All  were  abused  and  cursed  liy  you.  This  beloved 
consort  of  yours  was  also  against  you. — 15. 

“ 'riioii  the  land  was  visited  by  a terrible  drought,  when  you  were 
over-whelmed  with  hunger,  but  could  not  get  grain,  fruits,  flesh  or  any  kind 
of  eatables  to  queneli  it,  though  you  searched  for  them  everywhere. — 13. 

“ On  that  occasion  you  came  to  a tank,  full  of  muddy  banks,  but 
which  was  abundantly  full  of  lotus  flowere.  You  culled  a heap  of  lotuses 
out  of  that  tank  and  carried  them  home  to  Vaidirfa  the  city  in  which 
you  lived.)*— 14. 


870^ 


TEE  UATBYA  WEAEAU. 


**  You  wandered  about  the  whole  city  to  sell  those  lotnses,  but  could 
not  6n(l  a purchaser.  Eventually  yon  wore  overpowered  with  hunger^and 
fatigue,  —la. 

And  you  went  and  mi  with  your  wife  in  the  courtyard  of  aonio  one 
whence  in  the  night  you  heard  some  nice  and  auspicious  souinl.  — 10. 

**  You  went  to  the  spot  wdience  tlio  sound  wfis  heard  with  your  wife. 
There  you  saw  the  worsliip  of  fiord  Vinun  conducted  in  u pandal. — 17. 

‘‘ The  worship  in  question  uas  llio  concluding  chapter  of  Yihhftti' 
dvadasti  ordinunce,  in  tlic  mcuith  of  Afagha,  wliicli  was  kept  up  hya  comic- 
zan,  named  Aiiaipgavati.  At  that  time,  she  was  giving  away  the  mount  of 
salt,  the  bedstea«l  along  witli  other  things,  the  flecoratc<l  image  of  the 
merciful  f.«or»l  \ isnu  and  the  golden  Kalpa  tree,  to  her  prccoj)for.  t Mi 
seeing  all  that,  yon  said  to  yourself.  ‘What  would  I now  do  with  these 
lotus  llowers  I should  better  ^ffer  them  \o  \'isnu  ~lS-20. 

“ O King  1 thus  devotion  came  t'»  the  hearts  of  Ivith  of  ymi  ; and 
you  worshipped  (lie  f/)rd  as  well  a-  tin*  nionur  of  salt,  the  hodding,  and 
even  the  earth  with  vour  lotus  llower^  * iM. 

“ The  courtezan  was  very  much  t»leased  witii  your  devotion  and 
iiifered  you  oOO  gold  ('oins  which  both  of  you  did  not  accept,  as  yon 
were  both  then  filled  witli  sart\aguna  w.e.,  your  hearts  liecamc  imre, ) at 
vviiich  the  courtezan  liocame  still  more  jdoased  with  yon,  had  four  kinds 
of  delicious  foorls  hivjnghl.  arnl  a^kru!  you  r > cat.  Yon  again  dcidined  to 
partake  ol  her  hospitality,  and  <aid,  ’ \\  c shall  liavc  fo(»d  at  sf)me  other 
time.  W c arc  exceedingly  glad  to-day  with  your  acijuainiancc  and  the 
keeping  la‘<t.  Hitherto  we  have  been  <'iirrying  a vicious  life  and  have 
been  sinners  all  along.  Hy  Jicr  •'ontaLM  yon  liad  llien  acrpiired  some 
virtue.  ~ 22-20. 

“ In  that  way,  you  keju  up  all  the  night  with  that  courtezan  and,  on 
the  following  morning,  she  gave  the  mount  rd  salt  and  the  bedding 
as  well  as  villages  to  her  preceptor  and  t<»  a dozen  Hnllnnanas,  garments, 
ornaments,  kamandalu  and  cows, — 20-27. 

After  that,  she  fed  her  friends,  poor  men,  blind  men,  misei’s,  com- 
peers and  kinsmen,  and  at  the  same  time  she  also  honoured  in  the  same 
way  and  dismissed  you  both.  —28. 

“ King!  owing  to  this  worship  of  Kt»i4ava  by  lotns  Hower,  the  same 
hunter  and  his  wife  have  been  n»)w  born  in  the  persons  of  yourself 
and  your  consort.  You  have  been  freecl  of  all  your  sins  by  the  virtue 
of  your  little  self-denial  and  purity  of  heart.  Hence  this  wonderful  lotus 


CBAPfBB  QL 


• 271  ^ 

moving  at  ivill.  Tliis  has  boon  given  to  yon  by  Janardana,  the  Iyn*d 
of  creation  in  the  person  of  fourfaced  Brahmi,  becausd^he  was  pleased 
with  you.  — 2(J-3I. 

**  Tliat  courtezan  is  now  the  rival  of  kali,  the  wife  of  Cupid,  and  is 
known  as  kriti.  She  is  the  giver  of  happiness  to  the  woinaufolk,  aiKl  is 
venerated  by  the  Devas.— 32. 

“ King  ! Even  now  abandon  tliis  l*urfkara-dvipa  and  observe  the 
vibhuti-dvadai^i  fast  on  the  banks  of  tlie  Ganges,  s-i  that  you  may  attain 
Nirvana.*’ — 33. 

Nandikciivara  said  : N nada  I That  sag*.*  vanished  then  and  tliere, 

after  telling  all  that  to  the  king,  and  the  latter  observed  the  ordinance, 
as  dictated.— 34. 

“ Narada ! the  devotee,  observing  this  ordinance,  should  keep  up 
the  penance  and  perforin  the  rites  with  nioljfSst‘S  of  any  kind  whatsoever, 
as  prescribed,  for  12  months,  and  give  alms  to  the  Brahmaiuis,  without  any 
feeling  of  miserliness.  Kerfava  is  pleased  with  devotion  alone. — 35-30. 

“ One  wlu)  reads,  listens  to  or  produces  in  others  a desire  to  observe 
this  ordinance,  which  dispels  all  sins,  remains  in  the  heaven  for  a hundred 
crores  of  years.” — 37. 

Hare  ends  the  hundredth  chapter  de-wihimj  the  Vihhuti-dvddasi-iTatam, 

CHAPTER  Cl. 

Nandike4vara  saiti  : -Narada!  Hear,  lam  now  going  to  tell  \ on 
about  the  sixty  ordifiances,  as  explainoil  by  the  Lord  ^Jiva  ami  which  di^-pel 
great  sins. — J. 

The  onlinance,  known  as,  i U Deca-Vruta,  is  the  dispeller  of  all  sins. 
Tlie  observer  of  it  should  have  his  meal  only  iu  the  night  for  a year,  after 
which  he  should  give  away  one  cow,,.t.pioit  and  tritlent,  all  made  of  gold, 
along  with  a pair  of  clothes,  to  a llrahinaua  having  a large  family.  t>ne 
who  does  so  becotnes  unified  with  Siva  ami  li\es  in  flis  region. — 2-3. 

The  (levfit.ee  keeping  up  the  '2)  lindra-Vrata  should,  for  a year,  have 
only  one  meal  a day,  after  which  he  should  give  away  one  bull  of  gold  ami 
a cow  of  sesamum.  This  observance  is  also  the  destroyer  of  ills  and  helps 
tlio  devotee  to  go  loathe  region  of  Siva,  and  raises  him  t(»  the  rank  of 
i^iva. — 4. 

One  who  gives  away  a bull  and  a blue  lotus,  made  of  gold,  as  well  as 
a vessel  full  of  sugar,  and  lives  on  nightly  meal  only  for  a year,  eating  in 


‘ THE  MATSVA  PURAiJAU. 

a secluded  place,  obtains  the  rank  of  Visnu.  'Phia  is  known  as  (3)  Lila- 
Frata.—o.  * . ' 

He,  givin/4  up  of  all  unguents  and  giving  away  of  nice  and  clean 
cooking  utensils,  in  the  four  niontiis,  beginning  with  A^adlia  leads  the 
devotee  to  the  realm  of  Visnn.  Thi?  observance  is  known  as  (4)  Pnfi- 
Vratat  because  it  pleases  everybody. 

One  who  observes  the  l5>  Oaiiri-V rd:t,a,  in  the  mmUh  of-Oliaiira,  by 
invoking  the  pleasure  of  the  gotldoss,  witli  the  wor»ls.  “( rnnri  me  priyatam,” 
and  by  giving  up  honey,  milk,  curds,  clarified  Initter,  molasses,  and 
similar  articles,  gives  hue  cloths,  and  the  vessels  full  (»f  sngarcaiio  juice, 
Ac.,  and  worships  the  Hrulimana  with  his  wile,  goes  to  the  realm  of 
JMrvati. — 7-S. 

'Phe  i<)‘  Kihnti-\' nila,  the  destroyer  of  all  woos  dioiihl  be  obs-  rved  on 
the  thirteentli  day  of  Pau-.a.  'Pho  ihn«>te«'  ^luaihl  lal.i*  his  mt'al  at.  iiiglil  aral 
give  away  to  a Bnihmanii.  a g 'lden  !n nf  Asoka,  icn  linger,s  in  height 
after  covering  it  uilli  a cloth  and  [/lecch  ol  Migarcuiie.  lie  sluHiid  invoke 
the  pleasure  of  Pradynnnia,  with  1j«c  word'* : “ Piatlynmiiah  priyatAm"  at 
the  lime  of  giving  it  away.  By  doing  .so,  the  devoteii  resides  without  • 
care  and  anxiety  in  the  region  of  Vi.snn.  till  the  end  nf  tin'  kalpa. — 1^-10. 

(7)  Hiva-V raid  hoob.'^orved  dnringllje  four  montlis  of  Asadluy. 

&c.  in  course  of  which  the  devoie*’  >In*uM  lel  get  hi^  nail.-.  tVe.,  trimmed. 
He  should  avoid  the  U'si'  -'f  l»rinjal>  and  give  away  to  a BrAInnana  a 
pitcher  fell  of  honey,  (‘huiliecl  ii.iln-i  and  golden  briiijal  in  tljc  inontli  of 
Kartika.  By  doing  so.  he  goes  to  the  realm  of  Iludra.  -1 1-12. 

One  who  abstains  from  tlowers  during  winter  ./.c.,  the  seasons  of 
lleuianta  and  l^ijJira;  and  in  the  montli  of  i’halgiina,  and  gels  three  Howers 
of  gold  made  accordin.g  to  his  me.oj- and  give.s  them  away  in  charity  at 
dusk,  after  invoking  the  idcasun  of  ^iva  and  Visun,  widi  the  words 
PriyataTp  biva-Keiiavam,  attains  linal  beatitude.  Pliis  is  known  as 
(8)  SaimyarVrata—V^Ai, 

(0)  Sauhhiyjfd'Vrala  should  be  kept  up  by  avoiding,  on  the  third  day 
of  every  month,  beginning  from  lliaignnu,  the  use  of  salt  for  a year.  At 
the  conclusion  of  tiuMU’dinunce,  he  should  give  to  a Bra limana  couple  «a 
properly  equipped  bedstead,  ii  house  with  all  its  ni'cessary  appurtenances, 
after  showing  due  honour  to  them,  and  should  invoke  the  pleasure  of  the 
goddess,  with  the  words,  “ Bluiviuii  priyuiam.’’  By  doing  s(r,  he  resides  for 
a hundred  kalpas  in  the  realm  of  Barvati.— lo-lO. 

The  devotee  who  maintains  the  vow  of  silence  in  the  evenings  for 
a year  and  at  the  end  of  it  gives  a jar  of  clarified  batter,  a pair  of  clothes, 


273 


ghapter  Cl. 


sesamum,  and  a bell  to  a UrHlimami,  goes  to  tlic  domain  of  Sarasvati—tlie 
Goddesa  of  letters— and  is  liberated  from  the  cycle  of  birth.  This  is 
known  as  (10/  Samsvata  ordinance  — the  giver  of  beauty  and  learning. — 
17-18. 

One  who  worships  Luki^ini — the  Goddess  of  wealth — and  keeps  the 
fast  oil  the  fifth  day  of  a month,  for  a year,  and  at  the  end  of  it  gives  away 
a cow,  along  witli  a lotus  of  gold,  goes  to  the  kingdom  of  Vi.-jiiii  and  is 
always  bom  in  good  circunislanccs.  This  is  called  the  11,)  Sampada-Vrata 
and  is  the  destroyer  of  all  ills. — U)-20. 

One  who  washes  llic  door  in  front  of  Vi>uu  or  Sjiva  for  a full  year 
and  then  gives  away  a c{)\v  with  a pitclier  of  water,  is  bori^  a king  on  this 
earth,  ten  thonsiind  liifies,  and  at  the  end  goe?»  to  the  realm  of  ^iva.  This 
is  known  as  ;12i  Ayuv~V)a(a,  and  is  the  giver  of  all  desires.  - 21-22. 

One  who  takes  his  meal  once  a day,  in  silence,  bereft  of  vu?e  for  a 
full  year  and  saliitt's  the  peepiii  tree,  the  sun  and  the  Ganges  together, 
and  at  tlie  end  of  the  ordinance  adoies  the  Bn'diinfina  witli  his  consort, 
having  given  them  a golden  tree  with  three  cows,  attains  the  benefit  of 
AiJvamedlui  sacrifice.  This  is  called  tiic  (13)  Klrti-V mta-^xhe  givev  of  every 
fame  and  prosperity.  — 23-21. 

The  observer  of  the  {li)  Sdma-V rata  should  make  an  altar  of  cow- 
dung  bathe  l^ivaor  Visnn  with  clarified  butler,  worship  them  with  uncook- 
ed rice  and  floivers,  for  a year.  At  the  end  of  the  year,  the  devotee  should 
give  away  a lotus  of  eiglit  fingers  in  height,  with  a cow  of  sesamum 
to  a Bnihmaiia  versed  in  tlie  Sama-Veda.  As  a result,  the  devotee  is 
respected  in  ^iva  loka.— 

One  who  takes  only  one  meal  a day  on  the  Dili  day  of  a month  and 
then  gives  to  a virgin,  after  feasting  her,  according  to  his  means,  a pair  of 
clothes  embroidered  with  gold  and  raiments  of  silk,  and  a lion  of  gold  to  a 
Brahinaua,  gets  a handsome  form  and  he  never  defeated  by  his  foes  and 
lives  for  a considerable  time  in  'the  realm  of  iSiva.  Tliis  is  known  as 
(15)  Vlra-Vmta — the  giver  of  all  prosperity  to  women  kind.-  27-28. 

One  whp  takes  milk  only  on  each  full  moon  day,  for  a .year,  and  at 
its  conclusion,  after  performing  l^raddlia,  gives ’away  five  milch  cows, 
along  with  pitchers  of  water  and  cloths  of  tawny  colour,  goes  to  the  domain 
of  Vi^iiu,  where  he  saves  liuiulrcds  of  his  ancestors  and  becomes  the 
King  of  Kings  at  the  end  of  a kalpu.  This  is  called  (16)  Pitri-Vrata. — 
29-30. 

One  who  voluntarily  gives  drinking  water  to  the  needy,  from  the 

beginning  of  Chaitra  for  four  months,  and  after  it  gives  away  a big  water 

86 


274 


THE  MATSYA  VUUAEAM%'  ' 


jar  (Manika),  with  grain,  cloths,  gold  and  a pot  conlainiji^  sesamuni,  goes 
to  the  region  of  Bralnnn  and  becomes  a king  at  the  end  of  a kalpa.  This 
is  called  the  (17)  Anandn-V mta. — 31-32. 

One  who  bathes  in  PancliAmrita  for  a year,  and  tl)en  gives  aw^ay  a 
conch,  Panchainiita  and  a cow  to  a BrAhmana,  goes  lo  tlio  realm  of  l^iva 
and  becomes  a king  at  the  end  of  a kalpa.  This  is  called  the  (IS)  Dhriti- 
Vvaia, — 33-34. 

iVotc. — M^^i;jn=Consi«ting  ol’  fivt*  ingredients  Di^r.,  5^  ^ ^ i,«\,  milk, 

sugar,  clarifled  butter,  Curd  and  Honey. 

One  \y1i()  gives  up  meat  for  a year  and  at  the  end  gives  away  a 
cow  or  a deer  of  gold  gets  tlic  benefit  of  Asllvamcdha  sacrifice,  and,  after 
reaping  the  fruits  of  liis  virtue  for  one  full  kalpar  is  born  as  a king. 
This  is  (11*)  Alrlwsd-V rafa.  - oo. 

(.hic  wlio,  in  the  iiumtli  uf  .Maglia,  Imllus  in  (he  small  iioius  of  the 
morning  and  then  w<;rshii.»fi  a lirahmana  and  hi;-,  wdfe  with  garlands, 
ornameiHs  and  clothes  and  llien  feed>.  them  to  their  satisfaction,  resides 
ill  the  region  of  the  Sun  for  a kalpa.  This  is  (20)  Snnja-V rnift. — 30. 

thic  who  bathes  early  in  tlie  monuiig  and  feeds  the  Brahmanas  for  ‘ 
a period  of  four  montlis  frt'in  AsAdha,  and  gives  away  a cow  in  the  month 
('t  Kfirtika,  goes  to  tlie  realm  Vismi.  This  is  '21)  V ist.w-Vrala. — 37. 

One  who  abstains  from  flowers  and  chiriliod  buttor  from  one  solstice 
to  another  and  at  the  end  of  that  t»eri'»d  gives  garlands,  clarified  butter, 
and  cows  to  a lirahmana,  and  h’ods  tln'in  on  clariliiMl  butter,  rice  cooked 
ill  milk  and  sugar,  to  the  ivgion  of  !^i\ a.  fiiis  is  [22)  Sila-V rala, 

the  giv^er  of  in(»desly  and  goo<l  liealth. — -IS-oO. 

One  wdio  vnlnniarily  provides  light  tto  the  needy)  every  evening  hir 
a year  and  ab.stains  fnnn  oil  and  then  give.-s  a lamp,  a quoit  and  a 
trident  of  gold,  along  with  a pair  of  cloths  lo  a Bralimana,  is  born  as 
a man  of  greatness  ami  power  in  lliks  world  and  ultimately  goes  to  the 
domain  of  ^iva.  This  is  (23)  I)ipti-Vra!<t. — 40-41. 

One  who  takes  for  a year  barley  soaked  in  the  cow’s  urine  at 
night,  on  the  third  day  of  the  month  of  KArtika,  etc.,  and  then  gives  away 
a eow,  resides  in  the  realm  of  the  (ioddess  iVirvati,  and  is  afterwards 
born  as  a king  on  this  land.  This  is  (24)  Undra-Vra(a,  the  giver  of  everlast- 
ing happiness— 42-43. 

One  who  does  not  use  sandal,  incense,  etc.,  in  the  month  of  Chaitra 
and  gives  away  mother-of-pearl,  full  of  scent,  along  witli  a pair  of  white 
cloths,  goes  to  the  region  of  Varuna.  This  is  (25)  T)ri4ha-Vvata, — 44. 


275 


' GEAPTEROL 

. ’ ' • ' -'V,  " * 

One  who  "jfiVes  up  flowers  and  salt  during  VaisSkha,  and  gives 
away  a cow,  goes  W the  kingdom  of  Visnu  where  he  resides  for  a kalpa, 
and  then  is  born  a king.  Tliis  is  ('20)  Kdnti-Vrata,  the  giver  of  lustre  and 
fame. — 45. 

One  who  makes  a golden  globe  of  the  universe  weighing  more  than 
12  tolas,  (3  palas),  according  to  his  means,  places  it  on  a mound  of  sesa- 
mum,  and  offera  the  latter  to  the  Brahinanas  for  tlirce  days,  and  libation 
to  lire,  honours  the  Brahnianii  couple  with  clothes,  garlands,  ornaments; 
etc.,  after  reciting,  ‘ 0 Lord  of  the  Universe,  be  pleased  ’ (VirfvatmA  priya- 
tam),  liberates  himself  from  the  cycle  of  birth  and  becomes  unified  with 
Brahma.  This  is  (27)  Brahma-Vrata,  the  giver  of  Nirvana. — 46-48. 

One  who  lives  on  milk  in  course  of  the  day,  and  gives  away  a two- 
faced  (flbhainiukhi)  cow  (z.e.,  half  delivered  of  horcalf*  made  of  a big 
lump  of  gold,  attains  the  highest  bliss.  This  is  '2S)  Dhemi-Vrata,  which 
makes  re-birth  almost  impossible. — 49. 

One  who  lives  on  milk  for  three  days  and  then  gets  a kalpa  tree  of 
gold  made,  weighing  more  than  4 tolas  (one  pala),  according  to  his  means, 
and  then  gives  it  away  witli  a heap  of  rice,  becomes  unified  with  Brahma. 
1'his  is  (29)  KaJpa-Vrala.'—iiO. 

(^ne  who  fasts  for  a month,  gives  away  a beautiful  cow  to  a Rrah- 
maua,  goes  to  the  realm  of  Visnu.  This  is  (36)  Bhilmi-Vvata. — 51. 

One  who,  after  living  on  milk  on  the  day,  gives  away  an  image  of 
earth  made  of  gold,  weighing  more  than  20  palas,  resides  respected  in  the 
domain  of  t^iva  for  700  kalpas.  This  is  (31)  Dham-V rata. — 52. 

One  who  gives  away  a cow,  made  of  molasses,  on  the  third  day  of 
JiAgha  or  Chaitra,  having  observed  the  Guda-Vrata  on  that  day,  ^goes  to 
the  realm  of  Gaiiri.  This  is  (32)  Maha-Vrata. — 53. 

Gne  who  gives  a pair  of  tawny  colour  cows  (kapilA)  to  a Brahmana, 
after  fasting  for  a fortnight,  goes  to  the  Brahmaloka  honoured  by  Devas 
and  Asuras,  and  at  the  end  of  the '‘kalpa  becomes  the  monarch  of  kings. 
This  is  (33)  Vrahha-Vvf^ta, — 54.  . 

One  who  lives  upon  only  one  meal  a day  for  a j^ear,  and  then  gives 
away  a pitcher  of  water,  along  with  various  kinds  of  eatables,  resides  in  the 
dominion  of  Siva  for  a kalpa.  This  is  (34)  Prapti-Vrata, — 55. 

One  who  has  only  one  meal  in  the  evening,  on  the  8th  day  of  a 
month,  for  one  year,  and  then  gives  away  cows  in  charity,  goes  to  the 
region  of  Indra.  'Phis  is  (35)  Sugati-Vrata.  --56. 

One  who  gives  fuel  to  the  Brahmanas  during  the  rainy  season  and 


276  TUB  MAT8YA  PURANAM. 

at  the  end  of  the  year  gives  away  a cow  of  clarified  butter,  becomes 
unified  with  the  supreme  Hrahma.  This  is  f36)  the 

destroyer  of  all  ills.  ~57. 

The  devotee  wlio,  on  the  lltli  day  of  each  month,  has  his  meal  in  the 
night  and  then  gives  to  the  Vaisnava  a qiioil  made  of  gold,  goes  and 
resides  in  the  realm  of  Visuu  for  one  halpa,  at  the  end  of  whioli  ho  is  horn 
a great  king,  'fhis  is  (37)  /{rirjft-yra/'t.  -oS. 

One  who  gives  away  n pair  of  eoivs  after  living  on  milk  for  a year, 
"goes  to  the  kingdon  of  Laksmi.  This  is  (3S»  /Wi-Fnfa.’-illl. 

One  who  gives  away  a milcli  cow  at  the  end  of  a year,  after  living 
only  on  milk,  on  the  iiiglit  of  every  seventh  day  of  each  month,  goes  to  liie 
domain  of  the  Sun.  This  is  '30  S/nun-Fni/'f.  - 1*'^- 

(hie  who  has  his  meals  at  night  of  the  ith  day  uf  each  mcntli,  and 
at  the  end  of  the  year  gives  away  an  elephant,  made  of  gedd,  goes  to  the 
realm  ot  iSiva.  This  is  'lOj  T'a?7/  */;/n/M-rrn/a.-~‘r)l. 

One  wlio  abstains  from  larger  fruits  > MaiiA-plmla  during  the  (fiiatnr- 
inasa,  and  gives  away  tlic  same  fruits  made  of  goltl,  along  with  a pair  of 
COAVstoa  Bnihrnana,  goes  to  the  realm  nf  Vi:  en.  ITis  is  ' 1 1 ^ Phila-Vrnta} 
-02. 

[iVotc.— Chatiirma.sa'=A  pon’»Hl  of  louv  nn*ni!is  rockoued  from  tho  clovontii  day  in  the 
bright  half  of  As&dha  to  tho  llth  day  in  in'ight  half  of  KArtika.] 

One  who  keeps  a »tu(id  fa-^i  on  the  sownlh  day  of  each  month  for 
a year,  and  theti  gives  away  a ;t  goMen  v.ise,  full  of  grain, 

and  cows,  according  Ui  liis  nutans,  to  the  i|-‘mai)i  of  llie  Sun.  'I'liis 

is  (42/  i^uryd-Vrain.—  ii'}. 

One  who  keep/'  a (total)  fa'll  <»n  tin'  I2i!:  day  -d'  earli  mont.h,  and  tlien 
at  the  endtjf  the  year  give^.  away  to  the  lir.’d/nim.as,  accoiding  to  his  means 
cows,  cloths  and  gold,  attains  l/eatinide.  This  is  (43]  F/;fan-l''7-ata.--64. 

One  who,  after  performing  Vrisotsarga  in  the  month  of  Kaitika,  lives 

on  only  one  meal  a day  and  tiiat  at  night,  fur  :i  full  year,  gc^es  to  tho  realm 

of  Siva.  This  is  (d4)  — Oo. 

* - 

[Not*?,— Vi’isotsarga=Settii){?  free  a bull  on  the  occaHioii  of  a funeral  rito,  or  as 
a religious  act  generally.] 

One  who,  on  the  eonclnsiou  of  Chaiidrayana  for  Krichhra)  observance 
gives  away  a c(»w  and  feeds  tlio  Brnhnianas,  according  to  hivS  means  goes 
to  the  realm  of  J^iva.  This  is  45)  Vrajilpalya-Vrata.  — OO. 

Ono  who  lives  only  on  the  nightly  meal,  on  the  14th  day  of  each 
month,  for  a year,  and  tlien  gives  away  cows,  goes  to  the  region  of  iSiva. 
This  is  (46)  l^rayamhaka-Vrata.-  07. 


on  AFTER  01, 


277 


Ono  who  keeps  a contiiious  fast  for  seven  nights,  and  then  gives  a 
pot  of  clarified  butter  to  a Rrahinana,  goes  to  the  region  of  Brahma. 
This  is  (47)  Ohrita-Vrata.—GS. 

Ono  who  sleeps  in  ^karfa  during  the  rainy  season,  and  then  gives 
away  a milch  cow,  goes  to  tlio  region  of  Indra.  This  is  f48‘  Indra-Vraia, 
-09. 

Akdsa.^Etlior,  V'acaity,  Place  in  general,' Lighti  Hole,  in  the  air,  etc.] 

One  who  takes  tlie  uncooked  eatables  on  the  third  day  of  each  month, 
and  then  gives  away  cows,  goes  to  the  realm  of  ^iva,  after  being  liberated 
from  the  cycle  of  birth.  'I'lii-  is  <40;  Kaljfdtja  (or  ^rcyo)  Vjv/M,  the  giver 
of  happiness.— 70. 

Oue  who  gives  away  a chariot  with  the  liorses  made  of  gold  weigh- 
ing more  tlian  8 tolas  (2  palas),  after  fasting  in  course  of  the  day,  resides 
in  the  heaven  for  a linndred  kalpas,  and  tlion  becomes  the  King  of  Kings. 
Tliis  is  (oO)  Aira-V^'rafa, — 71. 

And  one  who,  similarly,  observes  the  fast  and  gives  away  a chairot, 
willi  a pair  of  elephants  made  of  gold,  resides  in  the  Satyaloka  for  a 
thousand  kalpas,  and  is  then  born  as  a King.  This  is  i oil  Uasti-Vrata, — 
72. 

( )ne  who  gives  away  a cow  at  the  end  of  his  yearly  fast,  becomes  the 
Lord  of  Yaksas.  I'liis  is  (52)  Siikha-Vratn,-~lo. 

One  who  gives  away  a cow  in  the  morning,  after  passing  the  night 
in  water,  goes  to  the  realm  of  Varuna.  This  is  (o3)  Varntia-Vrata. — 74. 

One  V7he  gives  away  a moon  of  gold  at  the  end  of  the  ChandrAyana 
ordinance,  goes  to  the  realm  of  the  moon.  This  is  (^i)  Ohandra-Vrata,--75» 

Ono  who  gives  away  cows  in  the  evening,  after  warming  himself 
with  five  fires  (paficliatapa),  on  the  Stli  and  the  14th  day  in  the  month  of 
Jyai.stha,  goes  to  heaven.  This  is  Rudra-Vrotar-  76. 

Note.— A modlAcation  Vrata  No,  2.  ^ 

- One  who  makes  a canopy,  in  a temple  of  iSiva,  on  the  third  day  of  a 
month  and  giv^s  away  a cow  at  the  end  of  the  year,  goes  to  the  region  of 
^iva.  This  is  (55)  Bhav/lm-Vrata.—  n, 

In  the  month  of  Miigha,  one  who  wears  wet  garments  in  the  night 
and  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  month  gives  away  cows,  goes  and  resides  in 
the* heaven  for  a kalpa,  after  whicli  he  is  born  as  a King.  This  is  (56) 
Pavana-V  rata, — 78. 

One  who  maintains  a fast  for  three  nights  and  gives  away  a good 


278 


TflE  MAT8YA  PUR  AN  AM. 


house  in  the  month  of  Plialguna,  goes  to  the  domain  of  ilio  Sun.  'rins  is 
(57)  Dh&ma-Vrata,—7i). 

One  who  adores  the  Brahmana  and  his  wife  with  ornaments  and 
gives  away  cows  along  with  grain,  on  three  evenings,  after  observing  a 
fast  in  the  day,  attains  beatitude.  This  is  (58)  Indra-Vrata, — 80. 

One  who  gives  away  a vessel  of  salt  in  the  name  of  the  moon,  on 
the  second  day  of  the  bright  fortnight,  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  gives  cows 
to  the  BrAhmanas,  goes  to  the  realm  of  l^iva,  and  at  the  end  of  the  kalpa 
becomes  the  King  of  Kings.  This  is  (59)  Soma-Vrata-Sl. 

One  who  has  only  one  meal  a day  on  each  Pratipada  (first  day  of 
a fortnight),  and  at  the  ond  of  the  year  give.s  away  a tawny  ^^ol()ured 
cow  (kapila),  goes  to  the  domain  of  Agni.  'I'his  is  called  «S2. 

One  who  has  only  one  meal  a day  (»n  tho  tenth  clay  of  the  month,  and 
after  a year  gives  away  ten  cows,  along  witli  the  images  of  ten  directions 
made  of  gold,  becomes  the  lord  of  the  universe.  This  is  c*alle<l  lhe(r)(); 
Vika-Vmta,  the  destroyer  of  all  ills. 

One  who  rends,  or  relates  al)0!i<  tlipsn  sixty  ordinances,  remains  tht* 

lord  of  OHiidharvaf^,  for  a period  of  nuo  Iiiuulred  Mnnvnntnvu^.'-Hi 

^Jfwadal  I have  relavo<\  U)  you  about  d.e  sixty  ordinances;  now  let 
me  know  what  more  you  desire  to  liear,  which  is  for  the  benefit  of  the 
world.  I shall  tell  you  all.  What  may  1 not  .'^ay  to  my  favoured  ones? 

flpve  enda  die  one  Inmdred  and  idi-iplev  de^H’rifdnfj  the  dit  V vninH 
and  their  ve.vtJts. 


cnAiTEi}  on. 

Nandi kerfvara  said  : — Narada  ! There  cannot  be  purity  of  body 
and  mind  without  balliing,  iherofor**  to  keep  the*  mind  refreshed  it  is 
essential  to  bathe  first  of  all.-~l. 

“Oin  Namo  Narayauriya"  is  the  principal  mantra,  by  the  recitation 
of  which  the  tirtlia  should  be  couceived  in  the  water  in  which  hath  is  lo^ 
be  taken,  whether  that  water  is  taken  (>ut  from  the  main  souyee  iejj,,  river), 
or  well,  tank,  etc.  '-2. 

\Sote.~-{a)  Tirtha.— A holy  place.  A place;  of  water. 

(h)  iXamo  N{iriiyaii{iy:i.— Salutations  to  NArriyaiiu, 

(c)  This  means  that  a |H*rsoii  hathinf' at  a woii  or  risuwhoro- other  than  in 
tho  sacred  waters,  Z'b.— the  Ganges,  Iho  Narmada,  &f.— if  one  rocitos  tho  above  formula 
with  devotion  and  philosophically  conceives  and  invokes  tho  presence  of  some  sacred  tfrtha 
in  his  bathing  water,  his  fervent  devotion  fulfils  his  object.  A good  bath  in  a pure  and 
running  stream  is  essential  to  refresh  tho  mind  thoroughly.  Tho  Ganges,  tho  NarmadH, 


GHAPTEIi  Oil.  279 

iVt*'.,  arc  iindoiiiiledly  the  bcftfc  of  the  rivers  for  the  purpose  from  many  points  of  view,  and 
<'  Mi.se(xiieiifcly  so  mnch  sanctity  is  uttaehed  to  such  invigorating  streams.  A true  Aryan 
is  expected  to  batJie  daily  in  such  streams,  but  every  one  is  not  so  situated  as  to  liave 
< he  benofit  of  such  a bath  daily.  Those,  therefore,  who  are  not  so  placed,  may  bathe  as 
stated  above  which  w'ould  fulfil  their  duty  of  (mthiiig  unavoidably  in  a place  other  than  a 
lirtha,  fur  under  the  influence  of  a fervent  devotion  they  will  feel  as  If  they  were  bathing 
in  some  sacred  waters ; and  tlio  fooling  of  Sdiictity  that  attaches  in  the  mind  of  an  Aryan 
to  invigorating  8tr«*ams  would  lie  kept  evergreen  wdiicli  would  take  him  oftener  to  such 
tirthas. 

Briefly  speaking,  therefore,  a man  should  bathe  daily  to  refresh  his  mind.  He  should 
inithe  ill  a pure  and  fresh  stream,  as  far  as  jiossible,  iiarri.ig  wiiich  he  should  work  op  his 
devotion  to  help  hini  in  not  breaking  the  ride  and  in  keeping  ids  mind  refreshed  and  his 
desire  fixed  on  some  sacred  stream.] 

iJe  shonlcl  put  on  the  rings  of  kussla  grass  and  rinse  his  mouth  with 
a little  water — according  to  the ‘jiresoribiui  form — and  tlien  witli  a calm 
mind  he  should  (;uncei\c  within  a square,  measuring  four  hands,  the  sacred 
tianges  and  invoke  Her  there  thus:  (hinges  I Thou  art  born  from 

the  foot,  of  Vi.-nu,  tlion  art  a Viwnii  force,  and  loved  by  Visiiu,  Thou  art 
Vi^nu-devatii  ; ward  my  sins  oiV  from  tiie  time  of  my  birth  to  death.  The 
3^  orores  of  firthas  of  heaven,  earth  and  sky  are  absorbed  in  Thee,  as  stated 
by  Vnyu  — 3-0. 

0 Ganges  ! the  Devas  call  Thee  Xandiiii,  Xalini,  Daksha,  Prithwi, 
Vihaga,  Vitfvakaya,  Amriti,  Siva,  Vidyadhari,  Suprasfanta,  Vis^va-prasudini, 
K.senia,  Jahnavi,  fJ.inta,  Santipradayani ; these,  too,  are  lliy  epithets;  and 
one  who  recites  these  sacred  names  with  true  devotion,  at  the  time  of  liis 
bath,  linds  TripathagAmini  'going  three  ways)  Ganga  there.’' — (5-8. 

jAolr.— Nandiiii.— Lit.  gladdening.  An  epithet  i»f  the  (hinges,  for  Her  waters  arc 
so  refreshing  and  iier  How  .so  pleasing. 

Niiliiii.— Lit.  a lotus  plant.  A place  abounding  in  lotuses.  The  intoxicating  juice 
of  the  cocoainit.  The  Ganges,  for  Her  waters  aie  so  invigorating. 

Daksa.— Lit.  one  who  moves  or  acts  quickly.  The  Ganges.  I»fcaiise  Her  stream 
is  so  rapid  and  Her  w'atorslinfusc  freshness  .and  vigour  so  quickly. 

l»rithivi.— Lit.  Iiartli,  one  of  the  five  elements.  The  Ganges,  because  She  is  so 
invigorating.  There  can  be  no  life  witliout  tive  elements,  and  the  life  cannot  be  sustained 
without  there  being  some  vigour. 

VihagA.— Lit.  a bird.  An  arrow.  The  Ganges,  because  she  flows  so  swiftly. 

Vis va-KiiyA.— This  is  a eompouud  word  inado  up  of  Vi-i'va  universe  and  Kfiya 
-=GapiUl,  abode,  Principal,  Body.  The.  expression  Visva-kaya  ^Capital,  abode,  body 
or' principal  (tirtha)  of  the  nni  verso,  and  is  an  epithet  of  the  Ganges;  for  she  is  the 
Capital  of  ail  the  Aryan  tirtiias.  She  is  the  abode  of  pious  Aryans,  who  in  their  lifetime 
liass  their  days  in  contemplation  on  Her  banks  and  thoir  remains]  ultimately  And  an  abode 
ill  the  sacrod  waters.  She  is  tho.principal  tirtha  oMlie  universe.  She  is  the  body  of  the 
universe, 'in  the  sense  tliat]water  is  one  of  the  6 elements  in  the  body  : and  the  water,  as  ^ 
such  an  element, >eans  purest  water.'  The  Gauges  water  being  so  best  can  lie  compared  " 
with  the  purest  water  as  one  of^tlio  elements. 


280 


THE  MAT8YA  PUBANAM. 


VisvakAya,  as  one  wonl,  may  also  mean  produced  from  the  body  of  tiivA : A f9r  Vlnva 
is  and  epithet  of  >.)iva  also.  It  is  said  that  the  Ganges  fell  on  the  hoad  of  i^iva  from  tho 
heaven,  and  thence  she  moved  on  to  the  w«)rld  below,  whieli  is  a simple  fact,  for  tho  clouds 
hang  about  in  the  heavens  and  discharge  themselves  in  form  of  snows  on  the  lofty  poiks 
of  mountains.  The  KaiiAsa  peak  in  tho  IJiiti.iIa^'as  is  the  region  of  perpetual  snows>  whore 
the  snow  being  crushed  by  its  own  weight  tiows  downward  -,  and  roaehiiig  n certain  level 
is  converted  into  water  which  in  its  turn  flows  onwards  in  form  of  a river.  Now,KailAsn 
Is  tho  abode  of  ‘Siva,  and  the  Ganges  has  its  source  in  the  Ilimalyas  near  it.  The  snows  of 
KailAsa  being  the  chief  feeder  of  the  rivor. 

Ampita,— Lit.  irapcrishablc,  bonntiful,  agreeable,  flnal  boititude,  nectar  of  im- 
mortality, beverage  of  the  Gods,  sweet  An  epithet  of  the  Ganges,  beeanso  she  is  imperish- 
able, beautiful,  agreeable  in  tho  sense  of  refreshing.  She  is  considered  by  the  Aryans  to 
bo  the  giver  of  Unal  beatitude.  Her  water  is  sweet  and  is  often  compared  with  I he 
Xcetar  and  tho  beverage  of  tho  gods. 

yiva.— Lit,  flnal  beatitude.  Born  of.  iva 

Vidyadhari.-”Lit.  a class  of  doini-gods.  The  Gauges,  on  ."Comit  of  her  purilic 
properties,  is  regarded  as  such. 

SuprasAiitA— The  giver  of  traiupiiliiy.  Serene. 

Visv.1  Prasadini.— The  ]nirifter  of  the  universe. 

Ksenia.— The  giver  of  liappinos  and  comfort. 

JAhnavt.  -The  Gauges,  when  brought  down  trom  U}  tbt!  aiistoHtie.'s  of 

Bhiigirathai  Wins  forced  telliw  over  earth  lo  follow  him  lo  the  lower  n^giops.  In  its 
course  it  inundated  the  sacrifici.'il  ground  of  the  King  Jahim  who  got  very  much  vo seek 
and  swallowed  tho  stream  ; but  his  wrath  wms  appeas  *d  by  rhe  prayers  of  the  Gods, 
sages  and  BhAgiratha,  and  ho  discliargod  the  current  Irom  fiis  ca'  s.  TIkj  Ganges  i.s 
therefore  regarded  as  Ills  duugliter  and  is  called  Julmvi, 

'iaiiti-pradayiui=Tho  giver  of  peace. 

Nflnta=The  poaceful, 

< ino  slioiiltl  linlfi  water  in  ilie  iia!]*i.<,  ;iinl  aller  7 liniois  reeitiri^^ 
rlie  mantra^  inoiitinnefl  .sprinLIc  ii  on  liis  -I,  .1  an>l  7 times 

and  then  bathe,  after  nihhino  some  earth  on  liis  body  ^vitll  proper  invoka- 
tion  thus; —9. 

. “()  Kartli  I irofhlcn  by  the  .VrfvalvMiiti.  and  the  chariid 

{liath.akrauti' and  belonging  l<i  rhe  liase  of  the  temple  of  \'i.smi  i^Vksiiu- 
kranti)  dispel  my  sins  stored  from  generations.”  -IG. 

“OKarth!  Kvi>na  hast  dn^-  Thoc  out  by  assuming?  the  form  of 
the  wild  boar  with  a Imndred  hands.  Thou  art  tlio  (doinent  employed 
wlien  empowered  by  tlie  mantra  of  Kurfyapu  in  tho  creation  of  all  beings, 
by  BrahniA.  By  your  contact  (as  yon  oncirclo  my  body)  purify  my  body 
of  all  sins.—  11. 

0 Kai'th,  in  iboe-  are  all  things.  Thou  givest  us  nourisIiinoMt. 
Thou  art  the  source  of  all  lokas  (worlds'-.  I salute  Thee.”--!!?. 

After  thus  taking  his  bath,  one  should  again  rinse  his  mouth  and 
change  his  clothes,  putting  on  white  garments  and  present  libations  of 
water  as  folloAvs  13. 


on  AFTER  on. 


281 


•“Pevas,  Yakgas,  NAgas,  Ganrlharvas,  Apsarsis,  Aaiiras,  ferocious 
.Herpents,  auparnaa  {a  class  of  bird  like  beings  of  a semi-Divine  characteiM, 
trees,  jackals  Ac.,  the  beings  living  in  the  air,  the  beings  living  in  "^valer. 
the  beings  traversing  in  the  sk}',  the  beings  without  any  one  to  offer 
them  libations,  the  pious  ones,  I offer  you  all  these  libations.”  Libations 
to  the  Devas  should  be  made  with  the  sacred  thread  on  the  right 
shoulder. -^13-15. 

Then  libations  should  be  oUerod  with  devotion  to  the  manes,  sons 
of  Brahma  and  the  Riijts.  “Sannka,  Sananda,  San^itana,  Kapila,  Bodhn, 
Pancharfikha,  receive  and  l)o  gratified  with  the  libations  T offer  you.”- 
16-17. 

Afterwards,  i\fari(‘]]i,  Alri,  Angira,  Pulastya,  Piilaha,  Kratu,  Prachelfi, 
Vaiistha,  Bhrigu,  iS'.bada,  Devarsis  and  Brahmarsis  shoiTld  be  offered 
libations  with  uncooked  riee  and  water. — 18. 

'I'lien,  with  the  sacred  thread  on  the  left  shoulder  and  reclining  on 
the  left  knee  the  Pitris,  Agnisvata,  Sanmvit,  Havismanta,  U^mapa, 
Suk&lina,  Barhisada,  and  Ajyapa,  should  be  offered  libations  with  water, 
seRamnni  and  sandal,  &c.~l9-2(). 

After  reciting  the  names  which  are  synonyms  of  Yama,  ?'?>.,  Dhanna- 
raja,  Mfityu,  Antaka,  Vaivaswata,  Kala,  SarvahhQtaksaya,  Audunnbara, 
Dadhna,  Nila,  Paranie^thi,  Vfikodara,  Chitra  and  Chitragupta  libations 
.should  be  offered  to  him  ; and  then  after  holding  the  Kiirfa  in  hand  as 
jirescribed,  libations  to  the  manes  should  be  otiered  by  the  wise.— 21-22. 

After  reciting  the  names  and  the  gotras  of  fathers  and  maternal 
grandfathers,  libations  should  be  otiered  to  them,  after  which  the  following 
mantra  should  be  uttered  with  devotion  : — 23. 

“ Those  who  may  be  my  kith  and  kin,  those  who  may  have  been  my 
kith  and  kin  in  some  other  previous  birth,  may  feel  gratified  by  the  libations 
that  1 offer  them.” — 24. 

After  this,  the  devotee  should  again  rinse  his  mouth  and  draw  the 
figure  of  a lotus  in  front  of  him  on  which  libations  of  water  (arghya), 
mixed  with  imcooked  rice,  flowers  and  red  sandal  should  be  offered 
to  the  Sun,  after  which  His  (Sun'sj  names  should  be  recited. — 25. 

1 salute  Thee,  0 Sun  ! Thou  art  Visiui.  Thou  art  the  mouth  of 
Vi^uu.  Thou  hast  thousands  of  rays.  Thou  art  full  of  lustre  and 
potency.” — 26. 

” 0 iSiva ! 0 Lord  of  all,  0 Father  of  all ! I salute  Thee.  0 Lord 
of  the  univerae,  whose  body  is  painted  with  sandal,  I salute  Thee.” — 27. 

86 


282 


TRli  ytAT?iYA  milARAM. 


“ 0 Thou,  soalefl  on  a lotus,  salutniions  he  lo  'I'hee,  tulonu'd  witli 
ear-rings  and  bracelets,  i In*  Lfml  of  all  tlie  worlds  ’ Th-  m briuiifest  ligld  lo 
the  worlds  ! I salute  Thee.”— 2S. 

“Thou  soest  good  and  had  deeds  of  oy('ry  <>  .»■,  always.  Thou 
porvadest  all.-  O Satya  Deva  ! salutations  bo  to  I'heo.  'I  iiou,  • ‘ Rhaskara  ’ 
be  propitious  to  me.— 29. 

0 dajMiiaker ! 1 salute  Thee.”  After  thus  saluting  the  Sun,  the 
devotee  should  oircumanilndate  three  limes,  and  then,  after  touching  a 
BrAhtnaua,  cow  and  gold,  should  go  to  the  temple  of  Vismi. — ?»0, 

Rove  Biids  the  one  Iniuflvofl  n))fl  ftceoml  ehapler  rlnscvilnvn  the  vtofliod 

i\f  hnthivf/. 


CHAPTRIt  (‘III 

Nandike>(\'ara  said  : — Narad?}  ' I shall  n-^.w  ndafe  (o  you  vdiat  the 
sage  Markandeya  nariated  Vudihi-tldra  Jih-Mit  I'^rayaLM,  in  the  day^ 
gone  by. — 1. 

Yudlii-nthira.  the  -'•!]  nl  ICniui  hee;u;/»  ;]<«'  l.^^■^ I n|  ih**  w««i’l'l  affei-  the 
great  .Vah/ih/iaratn  wni.  IL'  '.jy  /niich  h/.ir  • ..-d  l>\  »hf‘  gi'i  rd’ ..f  I lio 
death  of  his  kin'-’iieu,  Ih’  - d 1 odiii-elf  ‘ Kh,-:.  h»iry.vllian:i,  tlie 
master  of  armies  of  ele\‘'ij  nK‘ mlih-,,':  i!;-!  \'U'  ■il.er  kini^s  win)  were 
Ills  allies,  are  slain,  ('an-siiii;  me  Jirneii  utdi  and  uiguiNh  , and  wo,  live 
brothers,  .'^ons  of  IVindii,  are  a'dr. e nudor  ti}*'  -!]o!|r'r  n\'  l/.-)rd  Kri'^na.--  2-1. 

‘‘  1 have  killed  TVnisma,  lU<a»a.  \ho  niiglity  Karna,  llio  King  Duryo- 
dhana,  our  kinsmen  .and  ralitT  king'^,  whf>  oi-ji-^idered  l.iiemselves  hravo 
soldiers  and  lioroe^.  “ ^lovinda  ! uliai  \:<  n.>w  tlie  gtjnd  o>f  my  life,  aiid 
how  and  why  sl)Oulil  1 rnhi  the  eij)]>ire‘^  .la*. 

“ Fie  to  me  I ' 'riin-  oppo-ssod  with  Ijis  ilnuigliis,  the  mighty  King 
Yudliistliira  became  very  much  d^'^Hpraidnut,  and  liis  head  l)endin.g  down- 
wards ho  fainted.  Wlien  he  eanu'  b.n*-k  to  his  senses,  he  fell  into  thouglit, 

“ Which  eould  be  the  best,  religions  act  that  wouhl  wash  oIT  all  my  sins,  and 
which  could  be  the  .sacred  jdacc  of  pilgrimage  that  would  purify  me 
aud  enable  me  to  go  and  reside  in  the  world  of  Visiiu.-‘-8dt. 

“ How  possibly  can  ] make  enfjniricson  siudi  points  from  S^ri  Krisna, 
because  he  has  been  so  much  instnimentul  in  the  groat  war.  How  can 
1 ask  Dbritarastra  about  these  things.  I liave  slain  all  his  sons  to  the 
number  of  one  hundred.” 

Being  tliua  overpowered  witli  .grief,  Vudltisihira  began  to  weep  bitterly 


OU AFTER  CIV, 


283 


and  tlio  yood  men  that  wore  there  also  fell  down  on  the  ground,  along 
with  JJniiipadi  and  Kuuti,  and  began  to  weep. — 11-12- 

At  that  time,  the  great  Kiigo  ilarkundeya  was  in  K/irfi  and  he  knew 
how  lunch  the  king  was  upset  with  grief.  lie  tliereforc  instantly  went  to 
flastinapura  and  appeared  at  the  gate  of  the  palace  of  Yudhi^thira. — 13-14. 

The  gate-keeper,  on  seeing  the  great  sage  ildrkaiujoyu,  ininiediately 
reported  Ids  arrival  to  the  king,  who,  witlioiit  the  least  delay,  repaired  to 
the  door  to  accord  him  a fitting  reception,  and  said  “0  Sage  ! you  are 
most  welcome,  fly  your  having  so  kindly  graced  me  with  your  presence, 
1 feel  that  the  mission  of  my  life  has  been  fulfilled  and  that  my  family  has 
been  liberated  from  all  sins.  0 Sago  ! the  manes  of  my  deceased  ancestors 
have  also  become  gratified  by  your  presence,  and  I feel  myself  purified 
in  yoiir  presence.”  -15. 

NandikeiJvara  said  : - Xaradu  ! After  thus  aec«»rdiiig  him  a 
welcome,  the  king  \vu;ilied  hi^  feet  and  seating  him  on  his  throne, 
ho  worshipped  the  great  sage. 

Markainleya  said  : -King  ! what  ails  your  mind  so  inucli  Pray  tell 
ino  at  once  wiilioul  the  least  reserve  the  cause  of  your  mental  agony. — 10. 

Yiulhisthira  said: — “ O great  sago  ! my  thoughts  over  my  doings 
for  the  gtiining  of  this  king<lom  haunt  me  and  choke  me  with  intense 
grief.”— 20. 

Markai.ideya  sahl  ; — ” King  ! hear  the  duties  of  an  ideal  Ksatriya. 
It  is  no  sin  lor  a wise  man  to  light ; and  for  a king  there  is  absolutely 
)io  sill  to  wage  war  to  accpiire  his  kingilom.  Do  jiot  therefore  allow 
yourself  to  be  carried  away  by  any  such  feeling  that  you  have  committed 
a sin.”-  -21-22. 

thi  hearing  these  worvls  of  the  sage  Markuudeya,  Viulhisthira  fell 
prostrate  at  his  I'cct  and  begged  him  to  toll  something  that  would  wash 
olf  all  his  sins,  — 23-24.  , 

Markandoya  said: — King  tell  you  the  way  how  to  destroy  all 
your  sins.  Hear  it  with  attention.  It  is  very  great  merit  for  pious 
people  to  go  to  Prayaga. — 25. 

Here  ends  llu^hnndrcd  and  third  eliapler  describing  the  greatness  of  Pray&ga, 

CHAPTER  OlV. 

Yudliistliira  saiil : — llrahmaria  ! I am  desirous  of  hearing  what  Lord 
Brahma  had  said  in  the  days  gone  by.— 1. 

How  should  people  go  to  the  sacred  place  of  Prayiiga  ? Pray  also 
tell  me  what  benefits  do  they  reap  who  die,  bathe  and  live  there  ? — 2. 


THE  MATSYA  PD  BAN  AM. 


M4 


Mftrkandoya  sJiid  ‘Son  ! I shall  tell  you  the  chief  benefits  from  a 
pilgrimage  to  PrayAga,  as  I have  heard  them  from  the  good  sages  in  the 
past.— 3. 

From  the  site  of  the  ^^lcred  Prayaga,  in  the  town  of  Pratirf^hana  up 
to  the  deep  pool  of  Vilsuki,  tlio  Kambala,  Arfvatara  and  Bahu  Mulaka, 
consecrated  to  the  Naga.^,  form  the  Prajapati-ksetra,  which  Is  renowned  in 
the  three  worlds. — 1. 

People  who  bathe  there  go  to  hea\cn.  People  who  die  there  are 
liberated  from  the  cycle  of  birth.  Those  who  live  there  are  guarded  by 
the  Devas,  BruhniA,  Ac.  0 Iviug!  there  are  several  other  sacred  tirthas 
that  drive  away  sins  which  I would  not  be  able  to  oinimcrate  oven  in 
the  course  of  centuries  : coiisoiiuently,  1 shall  hrieHy  confine  myself  to  the 
narration  of  the  virtues  of  Prayaga.  — o-G. 

The  Ganges  is  guarded  l)y  Gi>,i>00  the  iainuna  'Jumna)  by  the 
.Sun  drawn  by  liis  sov'cn  l^urses,  liio  sacivd  place  Prayaga  by  lndra,aiid  the 
•drciimfereucc  of  it  by  Lord  Vi>nu,  dlong  with  ^‘liior  Devas. -•  7-8. 

The  Akijayavata  trea^  i•^  gUcirdrd  l»y  Si\a,  anJ  I lie  Devas  protect  the^ 
^-acrod  places  that  ilispcl 

0 King!  the  sinuerH  i-»  that  sacred  place.  All 

minor  sins  arc  waslnd  ..ff  mcrclv  b‘  ‘h.'  o hictahranco  r,r  that  sacred 
place.— 10, 

All  the  sms  oi  a inaii  d»-c.|.j.c.n  by  iiic  sighi.  I'l'mcmbrance,  or  the 
rubbing  on  tht;  bo<ly  i.i  ibc  c!u>  uf  ilial  phu-c.  - U 

OKing!  ilicrc  an-  ii\**  d'Ct-  < Irnn.iK  ii.  Prayaga.  The  Ganges 
Hows  in  tho  inid'llc  of  ifU'in  the  iri'MicnP  one  enters 

the  boundary  of  Pray  ga,-  -I  J 

The  mer«3 1 of  lif*’  in»m  (fio  of  a thousand 

yojanas,  niells  away  all  {iio  J’lio  tin-  evil  deeds  oven  attain 

emancipation  by  lin;  meie  niehtion  of  the  sacred  iiarno  of  the  (langos. — 13. 

The  sins  disappear  by  the  iittoranco  ^.f  the  naino  of  the  Ganges, 
the  sight  of  Her  leudrt  iC)  [)rosperity;  aiid  the  bal.liing  in  ainl  drinking  of 
' Her  sacre'l  walcj^  purifier  one'-  soni  along  witli  tle*se  of  his  ancestors,  for 
7 generation.^  — 14. 

Those  who  Spoil’s  Tne  irnth,  keep  tlnnn.sidvos  free  from  anger  and 
the  vice  of  killing  or  eausing  pain  to  living  beings,  are  wise  and  learned, 
are  the  lovers  of  the  cow  and  Pirahniiina  are  libeiated  from  their  sins  and 
attain  the  fruits  of  their  desire  hy  bathing  at  the  confluence  of  the  Ganges 
and  the  Yamuna.  ‘lo-lG. 

Those  who  maintain  their  sexual  purity  for  a month  in  that  sacred 


OBAPTBU  GV. 


285 


place,  protected  by  the  Devau,  and  offer  libations  of  water  to  the  inanca  of 
the  deceased  ancestors  and  to  the  Gods,  always  attain  what  they  desire, 
wherever  they  are  born. — 17. 

Tiie  Goddess  Yamuna — the  daughter  of  the  Sun,  renowned  in  all  tlu' 
three  worlds — is  present  in  Prayuga,  and  the  place  where  she  meets  is  the 
abode  of  ^iva. — 18. 

The  merit  of  a pilgrimage  to  the  Ganges  at  the  saered  place  of 
Prayuga,  does  not  fall  to  the  lot  of  every  one,  0 King!  The  Devas,  the 
Dd.navas,  the  fiisis,  the  Siddhas  and  the  Oharanas — they  all  go  to  heaven 
by  bathing  at  Prayfiga.  — 19. 

Here  anfh  the,  one  hundred  and  fourtlt  eliapfer  deserihinfj  the  'jveatneBx 

of  Prayofja. 

CHAPTER  CV. 

✓ 

Alarkamloya  baid  : — King  ! Besideb  tliis,  I bhall  now  tell  you  about 
dio  great  virtues  of  Prayuga ; by  the  niero  bearing  of  it  one  is  rescued 
from  all  sins. — 1. 

Tho  sacrod  place  of  Prayuga  is  highly  beueiicial  to  the  distressed, 
tlie  poor  whose  faith  is  firmly  fixed.  No  one  should  raise  any  controversy 
about  it. — 2. 

Tho  good  sages  say  that  the  diseased,  the  meek  aud  the  old  who 
give  up  their  lives  at  the  confluence  of  the  Ganges  and  the  Yaraunti  go 
in  a vimaiia,  of  the  lustre  of  the  gold,  or  that  of  the  Suu  surrounded  by 
the  celestial  nymphs,  aud  all  his  desires  are  fiiltilleJ.  The  departed 
spirit  till  it  thinks  of  rc-birth,  is  honored  in  tlie  heaven  wearing  pre- 
cious stones  and  seated  in  a vinuiiia,  streaming  with  myriads  of  buntings 
and  flags,  surrounded  by  the  celestial  nymphs  singing  beautiful  songs 
melodiously.  -3-6. 

On  consuming  his  store  of  virtue  he  is  ic-boru  in  the  house  of  a 
wealthy  man  where,  too,  ho  recolleG.ts  the  greatness  of  Prayuga  and  goes 
there. — 7. 

One  who  thinks  of  Prayuga  in  his  own  country,  in  the  forests,  in 
some  foreign  land,  or  even  iu  his  own  house,  on  the  point  of  one’s  death, 
goes  to  tho  world  of  Brahma,  fliis  is  the  saying  of  the  good  sages. — 8. 

He  goes  to  such  regions  where  the  earth  is  full  of  gold,  where  he 
would  obtain  all  the  fruits  of  his  desire,  where  reside  tlio  liisis  and  the 
sages.  There,  in  their  company,  he  enjoys  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges, 
surrounded  by  thousands  of  beautiful  women,  sages,  pilgrims  aud  tho 
Gandharvas.  Leaving  the  heaven,  ho  is  born  as  a King  of  -Tambiidvlpa. 
-9-11. 


286 


TUhJ  MAT8YA  PURANAM. 


Then,  coustantly  thinking  of  good  deeds,  he  undoubtedly  bccouieis 
wise  and  wealthy. — I-. 

One  who  is  devoted  to  virtue  with  all  Ids  mind,  sper  di  and  deeds, 
iiiul  makes  gifts  of  cows  at  the  conllucnce  of  the  Ganges  ami  the  Yaniuiui, 
and  makes  gifts  of  gold  and  jewels,  Ac.,  in  course  of  Deva  or  Titi'i  worship, 
attains  great  merit  and  virtue, — lo  l I. 

A Brahmana  slnndd,  hf)wevf  a*  »iil.  as  fur  as  pos-^ible,  the  aceci>tiug 
of  any  gift  at  sacred  places.  IK-  dicold  !»•  on  his  guanl.  that.  is.  shonhl 
not  yield  to  temptation. — 1.“>. 

t tne  who  gives  away  a palc>rcd  milch  row  alicr  griLing  her  horn^ 
plaited  with  gold,  her  hoofs  with  silver,  along  wiili  a milking  t>or  heli 
metal,  cloth  aihl  jewels,  to  a virluoiC'  and  di>|M'-sio.ii,iie  IJr.d.mana,  well 
vorsud  iu  tlie  Votla.-,  at  the  *•. .ullaoju'c  of  tlu-  < .orl  t.iu  \ aiuuii.t 

goes  to  and  resides  in  ihc  heaven  i'a  a-  many  U'.ars  a>  ihrie  are  liairs  oi 
the  body  uf  that  cow, 

At  tijc  lime  ol  ills  r<‘-hirili  fii*’  .•  iv  ".(JU'’  uiu  lum  ll'•m  licli. 

lie  is  born  in  l/ttara-Kuru,  and  tajjoy^a  < hi  * wlm  •nakcf'a  gift 

only  one  milch  cow  of  his  m,inv  ilmusands.  that  -.inc'  e>ov  helps  tin'  <loiiior, 
his  son,  wife  ami  kinsr.a  n,  to  evti^s  t:)o  ^f  n-ouhlt'*-  with  ease.- — 21. 

I’or  llms  I'cason  tlu*  gill  oi  a r m\  is  -ai*!  It*  he  i!n*  hcsi  i>f  all  cliarilie^ 
because  a single  e.jw  [)l'uU'eis  lli:  -{mim  .•  lo-  n .m1i  gliMl  -111-.  .\  eow  shoule 
bo  given  lo  a good  Ih.ilimaea  -22. 

Hert^  VfK/c:  tuf  ii'i ml o..*'/  //////  »//  u'dh  the  inert 

rC8uUi)ifj  j'r  ^ui  ihe  •>/  'he  ^ o/  rvnin.jn 


ciiAl'Tid;  rv\ 

\ mlhisiiiira  sai'l  : Sagt- ’ I led  I wui  gra'iually  i)cnig  1 reed  Iron 
my  sins  by  l!i.*  \irtues ‘'f  lha\Mga  linii  you  lia\e  been  pleased  !<»  reJat 
to  me.  (),  blessed  sainl.  uoiv  be  ph\i>etl  (n  twplain  t'>  im.;  Inov  t.iit'  slmuh 
go  to  Ihayfiga.- 

Markaudeu a said  ; -Iviiig  I I rthuil  now  ri.‘hilci  it)  you  whai  vuu  wis 
to  hear,  exactly  ti'-  I lia\<  heard  from  the  sages  and  have  s(’eii  thci 
doing  on  such  an  uecusion.-  - .*V 

line  wlio  drives  to  I hayfigu  r>u  a eoji\'eyaije(‘,  drawn  by  bullock 
makes  him.solf  lial)lc  to  a fearful  hell,  ami  his  !lba(ii*ns  arc  not  acceplc 
by  the  manes  of  his  ancestors,  'l-o. 

The  bathing  of  his  chiMreu  there  and  llieu  tirinking  the  saero 
water,  does  nol  do  them  any  good.  dl. 


CHAPTER  CVL 


281 


One  who  gives  alms  to  the  Br&hmanas,  with  any  feeling  of  conceit, 
<loes  not  derive  any  benefit.  It  is  not  therefore  wise  to  visit  a sacred  place 
on  any  conveyance. — 7. 

One  who  gives  away  his  daughter  (in  marriage),  according  to  the 
prescribed  rites,  between  the  Ganges  and  the  Yaiiinna,  according  to  his 
means,  never  goes  to  tlie  fearful  hell.  Ho  is  born  in  the  fJttara-Kuru  and 
gets  a good  wife  and  dutiful  sons,  and  enjo^ys  long  life.— (S-0. 

O king ! ' on  account  of  these  things,  the  giving  away  of  charity  at 
sacred  places,  according  lo  one’s  means,  enhances  his  merits  and  makes 
him  entitled  to  live  iu  Iieavcn  till  the  rlissolulioii  of  the  worhi. — 10. 

( )nc  who  departs  fiom  his  body,  near  the  Aksayavata  in  Prayaga,  goes 
straight  to  the  region  of  f^iva.—l  I. 

It  is  the  very  same  Aksayavata  which  does  not  ])erish,  in  spite  of 
the  combined  fury  of  all  tlio  sttns  that  reduce  the  rest  of  the  world  to 
aslie.s.--'12. 

'Pile  Lord  Vibiiu  is  present  there,  and  worships  (‘onstantly  near  the 
Aksayavata,  oven  when  the  world  becomes  exiinct.'-Lj. 

()  King!  The  sacred  place  lying  between  the  Ganges  and  the 
Yamuna  is  venerated  even  by  the  Devas,  Asuras,  Sages,  Pl^is,  Gandltarvas. 
Olio  should  therefore  go  there  with  devotion,  for  Rrahina,  Devas,  Rieis, 
Sagos,  liOka])Alas,  Sfidhya  Devas.  Pitris,  Sanatknmara,  etc.,  Ihe  greatest 
of  the  sages  Aingira,  cic.  Brahma  Risis,  serpents,  suparnas,  oceans,  rivers, 
mountains,  vidyAdliaras,  T.ord  Visnu  Himself,  along  with  Brahma,  are 
present  there. — IJ  IS. 

It  is  said  tlnit  die  site  of  the  condnence  of  the  Ganges  and  the 
Yamnna  fonns  the  middle  or  the  waist  of  the  earth.  This  PrayAga  tirtha 
is  known  throughout  the  three  worlds.— 19. 

d'he  remembrance  of  this  sacred  place  or  the  hearing  the  name  of 
it  or  the  touch  of  ils'soil,  liberates  one  from  his  sins  : so  also  from  bathing 
tliere.  One  who  sprinkles  the  wah?r  of  that  place,  has  the  benefit  of 
pevforTiiing  Arfvamodha  and  RAjasuya  sacriJices. — 20-21. 

You  should  not  be  dissuaded  from  going  io  Prayaga,  my  son  ! 
even  by  the  praichiugs  of  the  Devas. — 22. 

At  the  sacred  Prayaga,  there  are  sixty  cvorcs  and  ten  thousand  holy 
places,  all  gathered  there. — 23. 

Tlie  mean  dying  at  Praj^aga  derives,,  the  same  benefits  as  one  does 
by  truly  devoting  himself  to  yOga.— 24. 

Tliose  who  do  not  go  to  PrayAga  are  like  the  living  dead,  O 
Yudhisthiral— 25. 


288 


THE  MATSyA  PDBANAM. 


Those  who  go  to  PrayAga,  in  accordance  witli  the  rules  laid  down,  aro 
freed  from  tlwir  sins  ns  the  Moon  liberates  Himself  from  Rfihn.— 26. 

He  who  bathes  in  and  drinks  the  water  of  the  Yamunfi,  at  the  liigh 
banks  presided  by  the  NagAs,  Kambala  and  Aivatara,  is  freed  of  all  his 
sins.— 27. 

The  mail  by  going  to  ilie  shrine  where  reside^  fjonl  Siva,  liberates 
from  bondage  his  ancestors  and  j)o.sterity  fuv  ten  generations. — 28. 

By  the  sprinkling  of  the  Jioly  waters  over  his  body  on  that  spoi, 
iio  gota*  tlie  merits  of  au  Aivnmodhn  and  resides  in  the  heaven  till 

the  end  of  the  wor/d  cycle.— 

On  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Ganges,  there  is  a well,  by  (lie  name  of 
Samndra-Kiipa.  and  tlie  place  PratistliAna  (modern  Jlinsi;  which  is 
renowned  in  llie  tlireo  worlds.  If  one  resides  there  for  three  nights, 
observing  sexual  purity  and  koe]>ing  himself  dispassionate,  he  is  freed 
from  all  liis  sins  and  gets  the  merit  of  the  performance  of  .Advamedha 
sacrifice. — 30-31. 

A’ot^.  — The  mention  of  .samudra-Kapn  in  modern  Jhii*.!  flvea  tho  date  of  thi«  portion 
of  the  POr&na.  Tho  well  callod  Samndri-KOpa  wa^  sunk  >iy  Samndra-Giipta,  Hud  so  this 
Mah&tmya  must  have  hoeii  written  after  tho  Onpta. 

The  Ifamsaprapatnna  tiriha  titc  shrine  wliere  swans  alight'/,  that,  lic*}^ 
oil  the  north  of  Pratis^hAna  find  on  the  ('ast  hatdv  of  (lio  Ganges,  is 
lonowned  in  all  the  three  worlds.  By  batliing  them  ti  e devotees  gets  tin- 
benefit.  of  Aiivamedha  saerifiee  and  ic'^idc.s  in  ins-ivei^  as  long  as  the  the 
sun  and  llie  moon  shino  iji  tlie  Jinunmcnt.  -32-3*>. 

One  wlio  dies  at  the  saen3d  rrvarf/ramana,  v lioso  iiigh  bauh  iireomes 
white  by  the  swans  that  dwell  ihem,  gor-,  lo  heaven  and  rnjf"  - with  the 
Pitfis  for  a period  of  -^ixty  ihou-and  ami  six  eenlniiea.- * 1 

And  t'King!  Ijo  is  always  in  company  of  tliat  famous  celestial 
nymph,  Urvni^i,  and  i-  .'cnoratofl  bv  tlm  lii^is.  Gandhnvvas,  and  tlie  Kin- 
naras,  &c. — 30. 

After  consuming  liis  store  of  virtue,  ho  hecomes  the  lord  of  ten 
thousand  towns  and  of  hnndre<lK  of  maids,  like  UrvaeJi,  in  whose  midst  he 
revels  as  their  husband.—  37-‘>8. 

He  wakes  from  his  lied  by  the  music  of  the  sweet  jingling  of  the 
waist  chains  and  ankl(?ts  of  the  ladies,  and,  after  enjoying  fully  all  his 
luxuries  retires  to  that  shrine  again.— 39. 

One  who  wears  white  raiments  ainl  has  liis  meals  only  once  a day 
and  preserves  his  sexual  purity,  becomes  a king  and  gets  hundreds  of 
beautiful  wives,  adorned  with  fine  ornaments.  He  rules  over  n vast  terri- 
tory. whose  boundary  reaches  to  tlie  seas. — 40-41. 


GEAPTBB  OVL 


289 


And,  after  enjoying  the  result  of  his  wealth  and  of  the  practising  of 
his  charities,  he  again  retires  to  that  spot. — 42. 

One  who,  presei’ving  his  sexual  purity,  observes  a fast  till  the  even- 
ing, at  the  Sandhyfi  Vata  , attains  Bralirnaloka. — 43. 

One  wlio  (lies  at  Koti-tirtha,  remains  in  Svarga  for  crorr-s  of  years. — 
44. 

And,  on  coining  back  to  (lie  world  after  exhausting  his  virtues,  is 
born  a very  hnndsfnno  person  in  a most  wcaltliy  family.  *-  4o. 

One  wIjo  g(j(‘s  and  sprinkles  waler  over  liiiri  at  the  J.)aj^as'vamediia 
tirtha  in  the  Blingavati  ]iun,  to  thc'  north  of  tlio  ab(jde.  f»f  Vasnki,  attains 
the  benefit  of  Aflvainedha  sacrifice,  and,  in  his  n(‘xt  biith,  born  a very 
rich,  pious,  liandsume,  wise  and  generous  nifin.  —40-47. 

The  merits  aeiu  iiing  from  truth  speaking  and  abstentiem  from  inflict- 
ing injury  to  atiother.  arc  obtaijied  by  a pilgriningo  to  Pray^iga  — JS. 

The  place  wiune  the  (iinigos  alone  flows,  is  as  >acred  as  Kumk.-erra, 
and  the  place  where  she  (lows  touching  the  Vimlhya  range,  is  tenfold 
more  sacred. — 4U. 

The  spot  wliere  the  (langes  flows  touching  jnany  lirthas  is  un- 
doubtedly a moat  lioly  place.  -‘o(t. 

The  Oanges  exc'rcises  Ifer  elevating  intluence  over  maiikiml  (»n  earth, 
over  the  serpents  iii  the  lower  regions,  and  over  llie  Devas  in  Svarga  : 
oouscqucntly,  she  is  also  known  as  Tripathagamini. — ol. 

Those  wIkjsc  hones  arc  deposited  in  the  (Ganges,  remain  in  JSvarga 
foi  as  many  thousand  years  as  there  are  bones  deposited. — ^>l^ 

The  Oanges  U the  most  sacred  of  all  the  Tirthas,  the  best  of  all  the 
rivers,  and  is  the  giver  of  emancipation  to  the  vilest  sinners. '—53. 

'Pile  Oanges  is  easily  accessible  everywhere,  excepting  at  Oangc- 
dvAra,  Prayaga  and  Oanga  S.igara.  Those  who  bathe  at  the  above  men- 
tioned 3 places,  go  to  heaven  and  are  never  ro-borii.~-54. 

There  is  no  other  source  of  bliss  to  tlie  sinner  as  the  Oanges.— 55. 

The  Oanges  has  fallen  from  the  head  of  Lord  !^iva,  who  is  the  sacred 
of  the  most  sacred  and  propitious  of  the  most  propitious. --5d 
llerc  ends  Ihc^one  Inuidred  and  sixth  ehxpter  denliw/  with  the  'ireatuess 

of  Prayana. 


CHAPTER  evil. 

Mrrkandoya  said  ; 0 King  ! 1 shall  now  relate  to  you  further  the 

greatness  of  the  holy  Prayaga  by  listening  to  wbicli  a man  undoubtedly 
gets  liberated  from  all  sins  — 1. 

87 


290  TEE  MAT&YA  PURANAM, 

On  tbo  banks  nf  the  Ganges,  towards  the  west,  lies  the  sacred  Miinasa- 
tirtha,  wliere  by  keeping  up  a three  days’  fast,  the  man  gets  freed  from  sins 
and  attains  all  his  desires. — 2. 

Tlie  merits  ac(tiiired  by  the  giving  away  of  cows,  land  and  gold  arc 
attained  by  the  mere  remcMiibrance  of  this  tirtha. — 3. 

One  who  resides  on  tlio  banks  of  the  Ganges,  with  or  without  any 
object  in  view,  and  dies  tlicre,  goes  to  heaven  and  remains  far  away  out  of 
the  sight  of  hell.— 4. 

Such  a man  sits  in  a viniAna,  adorned  by  decent  birds,  like  swans  and 
tlamingoes,  where  celestial  nymphs  sing  lovely  soiigs.  Thus  he  enjoys 
long  life  in  lioaven. — o. 

On  coming  back  iroiii  heaven,  ho  is  bom  in  the  house  (>l  a \cry 
wealthy  maii.  ~*(). 

Ouring  the  iiinnili  of  Aliiglia,  sixiytlunisaiid  tirtlias  and  sixty  crores 
ul  saerod  streams  are  be  foiin<!  a!  ilie  enj.dmniei'  of  the  Ganges  and  lie* 
Yamuna  - -7. 

'riie  merits  ul  gi\ing  away  a lac  ol  ccjw^  ari‘  attained  l)y  l)athiiig  at 
Ih'ayaga  for  3 daj^  s.  - 

One  whu,  at  the  e'uiillncnu  -d’  thetianges  and  tljc  Yamuna,  lights 
cowdung  iiics  all  round  ami  '-its  in  the  ndeUi  of  t!it‘in.  enjoys  hoaltliy 
body,  with  all  his  limbs  in  tin  br^i  i*v)nduioiL 

He  rojnaiiis  iji  heaven  f a a-  tnany  y»*ais  as  there  are  liair  on  his 
ljody.“*  lo. 

And  when  i-  arnan  d .;vUlh,  lie  b^  ixaiics  the  emperor  ol 

the  world.  Aftej  <. j-j'-yjoL.  tin  — ',  in-  again  leiaemljci-  tlie  very  same 
tirtha. -'-11. 

UiK?  wiio  intvJ  iIju  saciod  waUis  a!  tin;  junction  ol  llic 

(iangcsajjfl  ihc  Vainnin:,  InjiiJg  ihr  turn.  <1  llir  lunar  relit>se,  goes  to  the 
World  of  the  AIo  j-!  wiien-  i!<  onj  w-  in  Ills  -Muons  ijompany  and  remains 
in  heaven  lor  sL\lyl!ioii-.aiid  yi  ai-,  and  freed  I'lom  all  liis  sins  - -12-13. 

At  th(;  end,  he  leaves  ili.’  \v*nhi  e*f  liidra  where  he  was  venerated  by 
the  Uisis  and  Gandhaivas,  eli  . and  i-^  born  in  a rich  family.  - 14. 

One  wIjo  njjlifls  his  legs  and  l»aianee.:)  ijiiiis(‘lf  on  lihs  head,  swings 
over  the  liamesof  fire.  lesi-Ies  in  heaven  fora  hnndrcdtlmnsand  years. — In. 

And,  on  being  bm  ii  again,  lie  Ikcoiik's  Agniholri  wdicn,  after  various 
cijjoyraent.s,  attuin^j  the  same  tirtlia  again. Hh 

One  who  cuts  and  nders  his  flesh  U»  the  biiils,  giK's  and  resides  in 
the  domain  of  (Jhandra  <Moon»,  ami,  on  lH*ing  born  again,  becomes  a very 
pious  king,-  17-18. 


GliAPTBR  CVIIL 


201 


Full  of  wisdom,  knowled^o,  beauty  and  swoetiiesa  of  speeoli.  After 
(Mijoyiiig  life,  lie  again  goes  to  that  Tirtlia.  -Kh 

On  the  northern  bank  of  the  Yamuna,  to  the  south  of  PrayAga,  then* 
is  the  most  sacred  Rinamochana  tirtha,  ~2. 

Where,  by  resi<ling  for  a night  and  by  bathing  there,  one  remains  no 
more  liable  to  pay  any  debts,  and  goes  to  heaven  and  never  runs  into 
debts.  — 21. 

flere  rnch  the  one  hundred  and  aecenth  chapter  dealinq  nnth  the 
fjreatnesH  of  the  Pray^gu  tirtha. 


OflAPTKR  CVIII. 

VadhisthiiM  said  : •“  BhagavAn  ! my  miiirl  has  lieeome  purified  I»y 
hearing  the  greatness  of  PrayAga  narrated  l)y  you  — 1. 

0,  Risi ! now  bo  good  enough  to  tell  me  that  great  virtue  that 
may  lend  one  to  some  highci'  world  and  he  tlie  souree  of  eveilasting  bliss 
after  washing  olT  all  his  sins. — 2. 

MArkaudeya  said: — King!  Now  hear  how  one  can  attain  ever- 
lasting bliss  by  going  to  Prayaga.— o. 

Me  enjoys  the  full  bloom  of  his  healtli  and  attains  tlie  benefit  of 
A'tvameila  sacrifice  at  every  step  in  his  pilgrimage  to  Prayaga. — 4. 

Such  a man  gets  emancipation  from  bondage  fnr  his  manes  ami 
posterity  for  ten  generations.—/). 

Yndhisthira  said  : — 'Pho  way  of  getting  everlasting  happiness  just 
explained  by  you,  is  very  simple  It  is  the  .source  of  so  many  blessings. — (i. 

“ The  merit.s  of  an  Arfvamedha  .sacrifice  arc  acquirefl  with  very  great 
ditficulties.  Mow  can  one  attain  similar  merits  in  such  a simple  way? 
Pray  remove  my  doubts,  0 blessed  one.  —7. 

Markaiide^m  said: — King!  I have  heard  what  Brandni  first  said  to 
the  sages.— 8. 

'Phe  circumference  of  Prayaga  is  live  yojanas  in  extent,  and  by  the 
treading  on  its  ground  one  acquires  the  merits  of  A.*lvamedba  sacrifice  at 
every  step. — 

One  who  passes  away  at  Prayaga,  liberates  seven  generations  of 
his  ance8toi*s  and  fourteen  of  his  coming  generations  from  bondage. — 10. 

King!  Knowing  this  greatness  of  PrayAga,  you  should  devote 
yourself  unflinchingly  to  that  sacred  Tirtha,  because  those  devoid  of 
devotion  and  leading  a life  of  sin  cannot  attain  the  benefits  of  this 
holy  tirtha  which  is  guarded  by  the  Devns.*’— 11. 


2{)2  THE  MATSVA  IVliANAAL 


Viidliistliira.  -“()  Sire  ! liow  Jo  lliey  gel  llio  beuelits  of  t.lie  sacred 
tirtlia  who  yield  to  tlioir  desires,  whetlu'r  siieli  he  feelings  of  affection  or 
greed  of  worldly  ohjeets.  lL\ 

And  what  is  the  fate  of  the  niiiii  who  n«)l  knowing  the  dilToience 
between  proper  and  inipicipiT,  (*nrries  on  a trade  V Pray  explain  all  this  to 
me.— 13. 

MArkandiwa  said  King  ! hear  tlu*  rare  greatness  of  tin',  holy  place. 
The  man  who  has  restraiiied  all  his  passions,  attains  emancipation  by 
bathing  for  a month  at  Prayaga.  • 1 J. 

Hoar  what  Pray:'* ga  does  to  a man  whn  ir(‘a('heroMsIy  Kills  another. 
He  undonbtedy  frees  himscll'  i'j  jn.  hi-  ^ins  hy  living  on  adms  and  haihing 
3 times  a day,  for  a period  of  i)ire<'  months,  if). 

(bic  who  repairs  to  a h<»ly  j-lace  nninlenlionalb , y.oes  to  hra^'en,  and, 
after  spending  all  his  store  <>1  \irini*  ilnn-o,  1-  boj'n  in  a well-to-do  family. 

-IC). 

One  who  goes  to  a saiTtd  ]ilaef  inlcniionally,  always  r(‘nnrnis  liappy 
and  rescues  all  his  ancestors  from  hell. — 17. 

O incarnation  ol  niiavnia  and  knower  of  al!,  in  r‘on)])Iianeo  with 
yoi.ir  repeated  mKiuirio-.  i liavc  niif-'ldod  io  yon  iln'  aneitnit  virtue  for  yonr 
benefit. — 18. 

Yndhistilira  sai-l  . O Sa.ge  ' I wa.-  ii‘*t  b -rn  m.  vain,  my  family  lias 
been  redeemed,  I have  ])<v'onfc  doligl.ird  l,v  niecfin.e  yon  fndeed,  yon 
liave  sliown  me  veiy  gieat  Kin'jm'ss  -l'> 

O Pioi!-,  one  ! 1 Inave  liO,  rai'-.l  lo'ii.  la.v  '’•iii'.  i,y  meeting 

yon  ; ami  I now  f(-/'l  my.'^elf  .-inlets  --  j') 

Mavkan‘leva,  --aid  . !>;  y**-  r yo]ir  -nid  has  ])«'eom<* 

elevated,  and  y^-nr  himily  has  br«  n,  n,  loi-mpd.  Hy  the  nari'ation  of  the 
greatness  of  PrayAga  one’s  sion*  n|  ' irtue  i-.  inmoased,  and  his  sins  are 
decreased  by  listening  in  it.  -gl. 

^'ndliisthira  .'-aid  (>,  trrent  Sage  : ihay  tell  me,  as  seen  or  beard 
by  \on,  ilie  greatness  of  the  \ amunA.-— 

MArkanileya  said  : The  ^’annniA,  tin  danghlc  r of  the  S\ni,  renowned 
in  all  the  three  worlds  is  known  asthc-grral  river  of  that  name. — 23. 

The  VamuijA  lias  conn-  fjom  the  same  source  as  the  (Janges,  and  She 
also  dispels  all  sins  by  ibe  mere  utterance  of  Her  name,  from  a distance  of 
1,000  yojanas.— 24. 

The  virtue  is  attaiiuid  hy  hathing  in,  drinking  the  waters  and  relat- 
ing the  greatness  of  the  VamunA.  Tlie  sight  of  Her  gives  happiness. --’2;). 


CHAPTER  CJX. 


293 


fiis  seven  venerations  arc  purified  by  once  plunging  into  and  sipping 
tlio  lioly  wat(?rs  ; and  emancipation  is  olitained  by  dying  there.— '20. 

On  the  south  of  the  Yamuna  lies  the  Agni  tirtha  and  Dliarmaraja 
(irtha.  Naraka  is  situate  on  Her  western  bank  — 27. 

One  goes  to  heaven  by  bathing  tliere  ; by  dying  there  Ijc  not  bnrn 
again.  Similarly,  there  arc  tlioiisands  of  tirthas  on  the  southern  bank  of 
the  Yamuna.  I am  ncuv  describing  the  Tirtha  on  the  nortliern  bank 
known  as  the  Niranjana  tirtha  of  Aditya,  where  the  Devas,  along  with 
Indra,  perform  sandhya  throe  times  a day  and  worship  the  tirtha  ; other- 
wise men  do  the  same. — 28-30. 

You  shoidd  also  get  yourself  devoutfully  sprinkled  witli  its  holy 
water  Tliere  are  many  other  tirthas,  by  bathing  into  which  a man  goes  to 
heaven  Those  who  die  tliere  are  nn\  re-liorn.  The  Y‘amiinM,  too,  has  been 
described  to  be  ^aored  like  the  (Tanges,  but  the  latter  is  held  more  in 
veneration  as  the  older  of  the  two,  by  all  classes  everywhere. — 31-32. 

Yudhisthira!  you  should  sprinkle  yourself  willi  the  holy  waters 
of  eaoli  tirtha,  by  doing  which  all  tlie  sins  of  life  will  be  oonsumeil. — 33. 

One  who  reads  or  hears  tliis  MalnUmya,  in  tlie  morning,  is  freed  from 
all  liis  sins  and  goes  to  heaven.  — 3-J. 

Here  end  the  one  hundred  and  eighth  chapter  descrihhifj  the 
tjreatness  of  Praydfja  t!rtha. 

CITAFTER  CIX. 

Markaudeya  said  . --The  thousands  of  tirthas  that  1 have  heard 
de.scribeil  in  the  Hrahma  Purina  by  Ijrahin/i,  are  sacred,  purifying  and 
givers  of  emancipation.  'fliero  is  one  Soinatirtha  which  is  the  most 
sacred  and  tlie  dispeller  of  all  sins,  where  by  mere  bathing  one  gets  the 
deliverance  of  hundreds  of  his  ancestors  ; one  should,  therefore,  unavoid- 
al)ly  batlie  in  it. — 1-2. 

Yudhisthira  said  :--Naimisaranya  tirtha  on  earth,  Puskaraiii  Akasa, 
and  Kuriiksetra  in  the  three  worlds  are  the  most  famous.  How  do  you 
then  extol  the  greatness  of  Prayjiga  only  and  leave  the  rest.  I feel  it  difB- 
ciilt  to  put  my  faitii  in  your  words,  which  seem  to  me  to  be  not  good  with- 
out any  proof.  How  does  one  attain  emancipation,  virtues  and  various 
kinds  of  happiness  by  residing  there  for  a few  days  only  ? Pray  do  re- 
move my  doubts,  from  what  you  have  seen  and  heard. — 3-5. 

Milrkandoya  said  : — Anything  in  which  faith  cannot  be  put,  should 
not  be  uttered,  even  if  it  is  based  on  the  direct  perception  of  a person 
without  faith  and  whoso  mind  is  vitiated  by  sin. — d. 


294  THE  tiATSYA  PURANAM^ 

Those  who  are  faithless,  unchaste,  evil  luindod  and  wickpd,  are 
jLjreal  sinners.  (You  must  have  some  sin)  that  is  why  you  have  said  so. 
Now  hear  the  <^roatiiess  of  Prayaga,  wliich  I shall  tell  j’’ou  as  i have  heard 
and  seen  it  direetly  or  indirectly.  Whatever  else  is  seen,  heard  or  not 
seen  should  be  clear  to  you,  if  yon  nieditat('  on  them  with  eoneentration, 
taking  the  iSastras  as  vonj-  ^romul  t>f  evidence.  - 7-'.). 

'riierefore,  a man  inclined  to  doubt  gets  y>ain  and  not  Yoga.  The 
latter  is  attained  in  thousands  of  lives.  pt. 

\ man  attains  itrue)  Yoga  after  i>erforming  thousands  of  Yogas,  and 
not  by  giving  away  thousands  of  gems  to  the  liralimans,  but  one  <lying  at 
Pray/iga  undoubtedly  gets  all  tlie  benelits.- -1  l-li\ 

King  I Xow  hear  this  main  reason  in  good  faith.  Though  llrahma 
is  omnipresent  in  every  i)eing.  He  deemed  to  l)e  paitieularly  t resent  in 
Bnllimana,  other  tilings  being  (‘ailed  He  is,  5. ow('ver,  worshipped 

in  all  tlie  beings. — jd-1 1. 

Tlierehu’e,  n,  Vndhisthiia  ! ihe  h'arned  ad>»re  the  holy  Ihayiiga 
among  all  other  tirtlia^.  Tl-i^  Prayega  is  indeed  to  be  worshipped  as  tlie 
King  of  all  tiithas. — lo  * 

Because  r>rahma  aP(*  tiunk-  ihe  ■^unh*  hnly  plju:e-  evfwyday. 

that  is  why  wise  men  lifter  attaining  die  -aeivd  Prayaga  do  not  feel 
inclined  for  anything  eHe.  -It' 

(,),  Yudhisthira  ! who'ceer  w i'^lie- i j bo  rl:i->>rd  anieng  the  mortals 
after  becenning  '‘iie  with  die  Von  will  -mely  nnder.siand  1>\ 

these  examples  why  ! hav"  h‘-,crih(' i Ih'ay.iga  lu  yon  tin*  m »sr  sacred 
and  a ready  dispeller  of  >ius  am*Hig  tiio  various  tinhns.  -I  7. 

Yudhisthira  said  : —1  have  jic.nrd  rlu-  greatru'-'-  of  Prayaga  and  am 
wondering,  by  what  virtu-?  the  li*>ly  tirtha  is  obtained  and  how  one  goes 
to  reside  in  heaveti  ? — 

1 venture  to  oiujuu e ipiij.  v.'.i  lia*  in(*an'  by  whicli  the  giver  of 
charity  enjoys  tln>  v/odd.  v.  itha  store  • ! hay^pinoss,  by  constantly  being 
born  in  it. — Mb 

MArkandeya'said  —King!  Ihahina  has  viid  that  the  wicked  wln> 
despise  ihe  earth,  the  cow.  tlie  lire,  rlu*  Brahrnauo,  tho  SAstras,  the  gold, 
the  water,  the  women,  tin*  nu^tlMa-  and  the*  father,  do  not  roach  to  the 
higher  regioni^.  — 20-2 1 , 

Similarly  the  attainment  (/f  Yoga  has  bwm  .^aid  t(j  bo  very  difticnlt. 
Those  who  follow  a sinful  life  go  to  tho  worst  region  in  hell.-- 22. 


CEAPTER  GX. 


205 


'Uie  one  who  steaU  elephants,  horses,  cows,  bullocks,  jewels,  pearl 
aud  gold,  and  then  gives  them  in  charity,  never  goes  to  heaven  where  the 
giver  in  good  faith  enjoys  himself.  They  become  addicted  to  many  a 
(sinful;  act  and  go  to  hell. — 23-21. 

Similarly  I am  telling  yt)U  about  Yoga,  Dhaiiua,  chief  traits  of  a 
donor,  the  trutli  and  the  untruth  and  good  and  evil  fruits  ; as  enunciated 
by  the  Lord  Sun  in  ancient  times.— 25. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  ninth  diajAer  describing  the  greatnesfi 
of  the  Pi^aydga  tirtha. 

CHAPTER  CX. 

Markaudeya  ^aitl  : — King  ! Hoar  from  me  froiucthiiig  further  about 
the  greatness  of  Pray/iga.  The  .sage.'^  have  sai<l  that  Naimisa,  Pu§kara, 
(fotirtha,  Sindliusagaru,  Gaya,  ( liaitrakatirtha,  (.hiiigasagara  and  other 
sacrod  hills  A'c.,  along  with  30  croies  of  oilier  tirtlias  are  present  there.- - 
1-3. 

In  their  Jiiidst  are  the  tliree  Agniknnda.s  and  the  Ganges  runs  in 
I ho  middle  of  them.  The  daughter  of  the  Sun,  the  Vamuna— venerated 
by  all  the  tirthas,  has  appeared  in  Prayaga  and  meets  the  Ganges  at  the 
eonlluence. — 4-5. 

The  middle  of  the  waist  of  the  earth  is  said  to  be  between  the 
Gauges  and  the  Y5imun.i  and  no  other  tirthas  are  even  equal  to  of  its 
greatness.  Jt  is  saidj.)y  Y5\yn  .or  in  \V»yu  piiranca  ? that  the  .*>}  crores  of 
tirthas  of  Heaven,  Aka^a  and  the  earth  are  to  be  found  in  the  Ganges. — 
b-7. 

Prayaga  is  the  place  where  both  Kambala  and  Asvatara  reside, 
lliis  place  of  enjoyment  is  ileseriheil  as  tlie  altar  of  Prajapati. — 8. 

There  the  incarnate  Vedas  and  yajiias  (sacrifices),  (.),  Yiulhisthira  !, 
adoie  Brahuni,  as  do  ascetics,  the  sages.  The  Hevas,  and  the  kings  adore 
Prayaga  by  performing  sacrifices.  There  is  nothing  more  sacred  than 
Prayaga  in  all^the  three  worlds.-  'd-lO. 

The  tirtha  of  Prayaga  i.s  by  its  own  virtue  sacred  of  all  the  tirthas. 
The  place  having  the  Ganges  along  \yth  3 crores  aiul  10,000  tirthas  is 
the  holiest  of  all.  The  whole  of  Prayaga  is  sacred  owing  to  its  being 
situated  on  the  banks  of  tlie  Ganges. -—1 1-12. 

Know  tbis  to  be  the  truth.  The  good  should  din  it  into  the  ears  ol 
their  friends,  pupils  and  tlie  servants,  that  Prayaga  is  blessed,  is  the  giver 


THB  MATSYA  PURANAM, 


2!)6 

of  heaven,  is  the  veiy  personification  of  bliss  and  truth  ; is  sacred^,  and  is 
the  giver  of  Dharnia,  the  dispeller  of  all  sins,  and  is  not  (fully)  known  even 
to  the  great  sagos.  The  twice  born  by  reading  this  Mahutyma  become 
purified  and  go  to  heaven. — 13-13. 

One  who,  with  a pure  heart,  listens  everyday  to  the  greatness  of  this 
tirtha,  remembers  his  past  lives  and  enjoys  heaven. — Hi. 

The  good  only  attain  this  tirtha,  therefore,  0,  Viidhisthira,  you 
should  also  bathe  in  these  tirthas  after  discarding  all  misgiving.  0,  King  ! 
I have  explained  all  this  as  asked  by  you,  yon  have  saved  yonr  ancosbus 
by  putting  all  these  questions  to  me.— 17-18. 

(),  Yudhistliira ! The  tirthas  ennmeialod  before  do  not  reach  even 
i^gth  the  Sanctity  of  Prayaga.— 

//ere  ouls  the  one  hniuhrd  aiul  (cntli  chujtler  the 

threat of  Prinj/iijit  flvth<i 


CilAPTKIt  CXI 

Yudhistliira  said  O'  S:ig(‘  ’ lluw  is  ii.  Iliai  y«M(  have  heeii  tellinn 
me  only  all  about  Prayaga  V Prav  rxplain  ii  to  nit'  so  that  iny  I’amily  may 
get  salvation.-  - i. 

llarkandt'ya  &aid  -King’  'i-ai  d:onld  Ix'ar  in  mind  w liat  has  jiisr 
been  told  you  aljoni  Miayana,  f.-r  lhahmi.  \’ivj|ti  and  v^iv.i,  the  Lord  of 
Devas  are  eternal.-  - - . 

Brahma  creates  ilie  nr,i\.'i  m-.  \ k ami  at  the  end  oi  tin- 

kalpa,  fi^jva  destroys  it.  At  die  lim.-  d'  ilm  dr.-drueiion  of  (lie  univt  rse, 
Prayaga  is  saved.  < bie  \y1k»  lo.)k'^  upon  die  saerf-tl  Li*ayaga  as  tin'  Ltird 
of  all  erealiire<,  l)eeomes  omni^'CMO  and  blessed 

Ymlhisthija  said  - Seri  ! I'ray  lell  me  why  is  it  that  Prahme, 
Visnii  and  Siva  are  presenl  in  Praydga  ? (i. 

MArkandeya  said  : — Yudliislhira  ! I shali  tell  yon  the  leason  ol 
Brahma,  Vi.Mui  and  v^ivu’s  residing  there."’ — 7 

The  circumference  of  J'rayAga  is  live  yoyanas  ; owing  lo  the  absence 
of  bin,  Brahma  resides  towards  the  norlliern  portion  of  the  tirtha  to  guard 
it,  Vihim  stands  personified  in  Ventmudhava,  and  ^iva  has  fi.ved  Himself 
in  the  form  of  the  sacretl  bau3nin  tree.  Besidi.'s  fliem,  the  Dovas,  the 
Gandharvas,  the  ascetics  and  the  seers  guard  the  boundary  of  the  holy 
place  after  driving  away  sin  from  there.  It  is  tln^  place  where  a man 
alter  getting  rid  of  his  sins  does  not  see  Iiell  at  all. — 8-11. 


OHAPTER  OKU. 


297 


Bral)m&,  Visnu,  ^iva,  tlie  seven  Dvipas,  the  ocean  and  the  mountains, 
safoly  there  dwell,  and  besides  Uiem  other  Devas  also  dwell  there  till  the 
end  of  the  world. — 12-13. 

* 

King  ! Brahm&  and  other  Devas  have  created  the  universe  by 
placing  tliemselves  under  the  protection  of  Prayfiga.  Prajapati  Inrlra- 
ksetra  is  known  as  Prayaga.  — 14. 

0 Yudliisthira  ! tliia  Prayaga  is  most  sacred.  Now  you  should  rule 
over  3’our  empire,  along  with  your  brothers,  after  being  cleansed  of  all 
your  sins. — 15. 

Here-  ends  the  one  hundred  and  eleventh  chapter  describing  the  great- 
ness of  Prayaga. 


CHAPfER  CXII. 

Nandi  kerf  vara  said  ;~-Nara(ia  ! Having  placed  full  belief  in  the 
words  of  the  Sage  Markandeya,  Yudhisthira  along  with  the  other  Pandavas 
went  to  Priiyaga  where  after  saluting  the  Bivihinaims  they  offered  libations 
of  water  to  the  Pit|is  and  the  Devas  &c.— 1. 

'inhere  in  a few  moments,  ^rikfi&na  also  turned  up,  when  He  and  other 
Pandavas  annointed  Yiidhisthira  and  proclaimed  In'm  Emperor. — 2-3. 

At  the  sanio  hour,  the  Sage  Markandej^a  also  appeared  there,  and 
returned  to  his  hermitage  after  pouring  liis  ble.'-sings  on  Viidhi-sthira. 
After  that  the  virtuous  Yudhisthira,  with  an  easy  mind,  began  to  rule  over 
his  empire  after  bestowng  great  clririty. — 4-5. 

One  who  reads  this  Maliatmya  in  the  morning,  and  remembers 
Prayftga  every  day,  attains  bliss  and  goes  to  the  world  of  l^iva,  after  being 
free  from  his  sins.—  6. 

Vusudeva  said  : -0,  King  ! hear  what  I say.  You  will  undoubtedly 
rise  to  heaven,  if  you  will  remember 'Prayaga  every  day, — 7-8. 

One  who  goes  to,  or  reisdes  in,  PrayAga  goes  to  the  world  of  Ritdra, 
after  being  freed*  from  all  his  sins.— 9. 

The  Br/ihraana  who  is  contented  and  does  not  accept  gifts,  and  is 
chaste  and  devoid  of  conceit,  attains  the  merits  of  a pilgrimage  to  this 
tirtba. — 10.  , 

One  Hi^.#Jree  from  the  feeling  of  anger,  is  truthful  and  regards  all 
the  beings  like  Himself,  also  attains  the  merits  of  a pilgrimage  to  this 
tirtba. — 11. 

88 


'M.  ' TUB  MAT8YA  PUBABAM. 

0,  Kifig  ! Tlie  Yajfias,  defined  by  the  Seei*s  and  the  Uevaa,  cannot 
he  peiformed  by  a man  ut  limited  moans.  Consequently  the  boiietits 
.accruing  I'rom  such  sacrifices  are  attainnblo  only  to  the  well-to-do  and 
not  to  the  pwjr. — 12-13. 

I’herefore,  0,  Vudhisthiva  ! also  hear  from  ine  the  means  by  vvhieli 
tlic  poor  attain  the  benefits  of  such  sacrifices.  -14. 

The  sages  have  said  that  it  is  liighly  henelicial  to  go  to  the  sacretl 
places.— 15. 

King  ! ten  fliousaml  tirthas  aiul  three  erorcs  of  rivers  go  and 
dwell  in  the  Oanges  iliiring  the  month  of  Magha.-  1(1. 

King!  you  will  al^o  repeal  visiting  Piuyaga,  alter  performing 
sacrifices  and  nding  f»ver  your  domiiiions  with  a balanced  disposition.--  17. 

Naiulikesjvaru  >aid  : -Afier  having  dc'scrila  d the  glory  i f Prayaga, 
that  great  Seer  Markandeya  ilisappedird  iljeu  and  (lien*  ; then  the  Kifig 
Vudiiisthiia  attained  great  liap[>inc^s  iw  going  I >,  and  batliing  at.  Prayaga 
along  witii  his  rtuiinio  following  tin*  pre-Miil)ed  rules. --IS-HI. 

t),  Nara<la  I you  are  ais.i  in  Prayaga.  Sanetily  yourself  by  si>rink- 
liiig  the  Jioly  walers.— 

Suta  saiil  ’ Mier  nariaiing  iIh-  whole  thing  !<» 

Niiradu,  NandikeJ^vara  ^allislu‘d  ai  ilie  no.-i.  ;ohl  ihe  loinier  instantly 
went  to  Prayaga. LM. 

riierea! n-r,  bathing  a:,-  i g'Mni:  I Irdmian-'.  Ik^  i‘i‘tni'iie«l 

lo  his  abofle.  ' -2. 

Here  enfii  flii'  n.,’l  !.rf>}}i,,  rh  iffh'r  I*  sr rthi ng  llm  greatjfms 

ijf  Prdyaga. 


.\oTK 

Then*  H U"  bf'in  r :u‘o«.nnl  Pray.'ga  in  iln‘  lOnglisli  language 
lliafi  the  handbook,  named,  "/•  Xllafhjhnd^  published  by  the 

Modern  I'iccieu:  olliee  uf  Calcutta,  in  P.tpt.  If  is  iiidisptuisabh;  to  visitors 
to  that  holy  «*ity  'Hie  following  pa-suges  are  ivprocluced  from  that 
brochure  beaiing  on  the  aiitigifity  (d  Prayagii. 

The  jnime  by  wliidi  nifidern  Allahabad  was  known  in  ancient 
PrayAg:  Itaotyrno-  Hindu  writings  and  wliich  i.s  usually  in  use  among 
lo^oal  moaiiiDg.  present  day  Pnmjits  and  pilgrinis  is  Prayag.  It  was 

so  called  because  i lie  god  lirahmA  of  the  Hindu  Trinity  had  perfonneti 
many  sacrifices  here. 


CUAri’BH  XGll. 


Prayfig  bears  the  title  of  Tirtha-rAj — the  holiest  of  Jioly  placoK. 
Why  Praytg  in  culled  ft  ne<iuire'l  thU  title  bccaiiso,  acconliii'' to  a'legoiid, 
rirthniNj,  wlicii  all  the  Iioly  shrines  were  placed  on  one  scale 

of  the  bahtiico  and  Prayag  on  the  other,  I he  former  kicked  the  beam. 

'I’ho  coiiflnence  of  the  Ganges  and  the  •rniniia  finds  appreciative 

Prayila  montioned  in  mention  in  the  Hig-Wla—flie  earliest  sacred  record 
the  Rlgt-veda  and  other  . i^i  n.*  'i. 

anotont  wdrka  nfSana-  fhe  Aryan  race.  In  the  UaiTiayana  and  the 

krit  litcratnro.  .Maliabli-.iriitii,  (lie  two  great  epics  of  tlie  Hindus. 

Prayag  has  attained  an  establislicd  sanctity  in  the  eyes  of  the  saints  and 

heroes  whose  clee<ls  have  been  celebrated  in  those  natiunal  encyclopsodic 

citron  ides. 


.Several  of  the  Piiriinas  -es)>ocially  f!io  Malsya  ami  T’adiua  Par'intH, 
speak  onlogistienlly  of  the.  merits  of  a pilgrimage  to  Prayag. 

The  Prayag  MAInitiiiya  ‘‘the  greatness  of  J’rayAg  " — a popniar 
Tlio  Pr»y«g  MdhAt*  work  which  wholly  dwells  on  the  merits  that  the 
pilgrim  gains  by  his  pilgrimage  to  Prayag,  is  a 
portion  of  the  ilatsyji  Punina.  It  is  in  twelve  chapters.  Another  and 
bigger  work,  bearing  the  same  name,  daiins  its  origin  to  tiie  Padma 
Parana.  It  is  in  one  lmndre<l  chapters.  But  the  genuineness  of  this 
latter  compilation  is  doubteil . 

'I’hc  Prayag  Mahntmya  of  the  ilatsj'a  Purapa,  on  the  otlier  hand,  is 
accepted  as  authentic.  It  is  the  scriptural  hand-book  of  the  pious  pilgrim 
to  I’rayag.  It  is  his  guide  on  the  oecasion  of  his  visit  to  Prayag.  If  he 
can  not  read  it  himself  in  the  original  Sanskrit,  it  i-  read  to  him  and 
exphained  in  tlie  vernacular,  by  a professional  Pandit,  who  h-as  daily 
audiences  of  groups  of  men  and  women  who  listen  to  liis  Knthdf^  -recita- 
tions with  expositions— that  ho  delivers  from  his  platform.  Most  of  the 
i-eligiotis  observances  practised  by  the  pilgrims  have  their  authority  in 
that  hook.  And  so  long  as  the  Prayag  JfilhStmya  will  hold  sway  over  the 
Hindu  pilgrims,  Prayag  will  continue  to  be  their  Tirtha-raj. 

The  following  from  the  Prayftg  MAh&tmya  is  a favourite  versa 
deMriptive  of  the  paraphernalia  that  attends  that  august  si^vereign  of  tho 
holy  shrines : — 

« ^ snm:  H 


•800 


TBB  MATSYA  PUR  AN  AM. 


• ‘'Sbinefl  ^ his  glory  the  King  of  shrines.  Two  noble-born  maids— aaiig&  and 
Yamnnii-^daughtera  of  the  sscetlo  Jnhnn  and  of  the  .*ian— wave  their  white  vad  blue 
ehuurii  (the  woolly  tail  of  tho  yak).  Fho  imperishable  holy  banyan  tree  serves  as  the 
aaure^oloured  royal  nmbrella  over  I'rayaga's  head.” 

To  undevfttaiid  this  conceit  of  the  PnuiVinik  bani,  one  has  to  bear  iu 
mind,  that  in  the  winter  and  summer  montiis,  the  two  streams  are  clearly 
distinguishable  by  tiieir  colours— the  fair  stream  of  the  Gauges  mingling 
with  the  blue  waves  of  tho  dumna. 

In  some  Hite  stanzas  ;C.inio  XIII,  sUn/, is  i)l-57)  of  the  Uaghiivairufai 
the  poet  Kiiliilasa  dwell>  on  this  jiiicMiointMion  These  stnnza.s  may  bo 
'translated  as  follow.^ ; 

[R&inA  ad(lrC8-sitig  his  spouse  Sita.say^:]  Lo!  >f  y ilaiMIni;' of  fjuiltless  how  tho 
Gauf^il  mingled  in  curwnfc  with  the  wavos  of  tho  Vamuiifi  looks ! At  ono  place  it  looks 
like  a string  of  pearls  infcr<peiNt*d  with  .sapphires  besfno.ir:.ig  n«MghiM«rIng  Mitngs  with 
their  bine  Instre;  while  at  another  place,  it  looks  like  a girland  of  white  lotusc.s,  tho 
Interstices  of  which  are  studded  with  Hloo  outs.  At  one  place  it  looks  Uko  a tlighi  of  Iho 
white  swans,  fond  of  tho  Manama  like,  in  (Mtunanv  wlUi  tin*  Chiii;i  gee-ie  of  dark  colonrs; 
while  at  another  place  it  looks  like  a paiiitin;;  nf  the  fariti  orn  auiented  with  white  snndal- 
pasto  wherein  the  oruamonal  leaves  of  the  fringes  are  made  id  l»I;iek  aloes.  At  one  place, 
like  tho  moonbeam  variegated  by  dirl%'iie‘<s  atf.aelieil  t»  shade,  at  another  plaee  like  a 
white  streak  of  autumnal  elomls,  wlrh  narts  "f  Ihe  hln  ^ sky  slighUy  visilih*  Ihreiig  thc^ 
chinks;  and  at  yet  another,  like  the  body  ol  the  (iod  >iva  anoinied  with  C'^smetica  of  ashes 
and  adorned  with  the  ornauiciu  of  hlauk  «^nakes. 


Tli(^  antiquity  <»f  tlip  jus  prni’ti»‘'*os  observed  ;it  I'rnyA^,  enjoined 

TheChlnes^travollor  '">;«•  b-cti  to  by 

Hlonen  Ts.ing's  narra-  },  fnreisn  <’iirni!i(*!m‘  >•!  a dilTt'ront.  fiiitli.  The 
five  of  his  visit  to  . ti  rr  i i 

Prayig  in  the  7th  Cen-  lln.Miii.^tic  (.  tiav(';li--i  IIkhicii  I sail;;,  w1>o  ha« 

tury,  A.  C.  left  a rcc' -rd  of  Ids  fiaveb  in  India,  visilcil  J'rayag 

in  tlie  middle  of  llic  fsovenlli  centniy  of  ilic  ('Ini.-iian  arc.  His  ob.sprvntions 
confirm  tbe  fact  of  lie  oxisfoiiia'  of  tla*  .Ak'iJiyavaia  flmperislialilo 

Banyan  Tree;  that  was  .“'till  standini;  and  fium  tlm  branelies  of  wliicli  some 
pilgrims  leaped  down  I'l  dif,  it  ijoiiii'  llir  privilogi*  ot  I'rayug  to  impart 
impunity  froju  ibo  sin  of  suicide.  Tin-  viclims  of  st'lf-slanghter  clierislied 
the  belief,  that  tliey  would  attain  in  llndr  next,  mnn.lano  e-tsifence,  tbe 
object  they  desired  at  tlip  lime  of  ibeir  voluntary  ending  of  their  lives. 
Tho  bathing  at  the  c-inflnoime  of  the  rivers  and  tlie  alms-giving  to 

Br&hmanas  were  noted  by  him,  thirteen  hiimlied  years  ago,  as  it  is  by  tbe 
modern  tourist. 


OUAPTBB  XOllL 


301 


CHAPTER  CXIII. 

riio  Uisis  said  : — Sir,  How  n\any  sphere?*  (dvipas)  are  there  of  the 
vvorki,  as  well  as  how  many  oceans  and  mountains  are  there  ? How 
many  zones  (varsas)  are  there,  and  what  are  the  rivers  mentioned  as  Bowinjs; 
in  them  ?— 1. 

What  is  the  extent  of  the  Great  Earth  and  of  the  Lokaloka  moun- 
tains ? What  are  the  circumference  and  size  of  the  moon  and  the  sun. 
and  what  is  their  course  ? — 2. 

Pray  be  good  enough,  O knower  of  truth,  to  explain  all  this  to  us 
at  full  length,  because  we  are  always  anxious  to  hear  all  tliis  from  you. — 3. 

Suta  said  : —The  Dvipas  are  several  thou^ands  in  number,  and 
out  of  them  soven  are  important  oue^,  T*.  describe  them  all,  in  this  place, 
in  their  entirety  is  not  possible.  — !. 

I shall  explain  to  you  something  about  ll)e  m‘>oii,  the  sun,  the 
planets,  /dong  with  ilio  seven  mdy  of  the  imporUrit  livipas,  giving  their 
dimensions  :i<  established  hy  hiunan  calculation —."i. 

The  things  wliicli  ar*'^  illc<^n('eivable  ' sliimhi  be  established  by 
reasoning.  I'ho  delinition  of  “ iticoneeivable  ’’  is  this,  **  a thing  not 
nnder.stor)d  by  common  people  by  their  common  sense/’  . —6. 

I shall  now  proceed  to  tell  you  something  about  the  seven  varsas 
(//ones)  and  about  Jambudvipa  Xow  listen  to  the  entire  extent  of  Jam- 
Irelvipa  in  terms  of  Yojain'w.  — 7. 

I t.s  bread  ill  <liameter}  is  lOtjK)*^  yojanas.  and  many  coiinlrie^i  an«l 
beautiful  cities  are  to  bo  found  in  it. — 8. 

It,  is  full  of  Siddlms  and  ChAranas  and  is  adorned  by  mountains, 
full  of  ores  of  all  metals  streaming  out  :as  lava  from  (he  different  sides 
t'f  rocks. — 1). 

Resides  these,  it  is  beautifully  embellished  by  varifms  river.s  llowing 
from  the  moiintains.  There  are  fliese  six  ranees  of  mountains,  running 
from  oast  tx>  we.st,  demarcating  the  six  varsas. — 10. 

Stretching  to  the  sea  on  both  sides,  east  and  west  btaud(l;tbe 
Himalaya,  full  of  snow  (hima)  and  2)  Hemakuta  full  of  gold  ihema).— 11. 

Then  comes  the  great  (3)  Nisadha  mountain,  which  is  beautiful  to 
look  at  on  all  sides.  Then  there  is  the  golden  mountain  (4)  Merit,  with  its 
four  colours  on  its  four  sides,  said  to  be  bleak  and  barren.  Its  extent  is 
24,000  yojauas  on  four  sides. — 12, 

It  has  a circular  form,  divided  into  four  quadrants.  Its  sides 


THE  MAIWA  PUHANAM. 


^quadrants)  arc  of  various  uniform  colours,  with  properties  conferred  upon 
it  by  Bralimi  the  Tionl  of  tu-eatures).  - 13. 

On  its  navel  peduncle  (oast  quadrant’  spnui#4  fi’oni  the  s6lM>om 
uiimanifestcd;  Brahma  there  is  white  oolnur.  ('<nise<|nently,  it  is  said  lo 
have  BrAhinanical  properties.  —M. 

On  its  southern  quadrant,  dtero  i.s yellow  colour,  on  account  of  which 
it  is  said  to  Inive  ilie  properties  of  tlic  Vaitlya  i*aste.  Ou  its  wc-storn 
quadrant,  there  is  the  colour  of  the  win*;  of  a hlaek  hoc,  owin^  to  whieli 
it  is  said  to  possess  tlie  properties  of  J^Odra's.  -15. 

Its  northern  quadrant  is  naturally  of  jcd  (•  .lour,  ihcrefore  il  has 
the  properties  of  Ivsatriyas.  rims  tla*  four  c. iIoniN  and  castes  have  been 
enumerated  - 1<». 

'rhe  mountain  Xala  is  stii.hlcd  with  lapis  lazuli.  'The  mountain 
i^veta  is  yellow  and  full  '>f  icoM.  'Phe  mountain  .^rihgin  is  made'  of  ;;old 
fsatakumblia  and  Ita^  the  colour  (d  llie  t.*ui  of  a peacock.  -17. 

These  luouniatns  arc  tin*  kin^-  amoci;  tlicir  kind,  and  arc  tlie  abode 
of  Siddhas  and  ( ’hArnnas  'riicir  inner  diatueter  is  P.tKio  yoianas.--  IS. 

The  var^ha  Ih'ivrata  srands  in  the  tniddlc  and  eticirolcs  the  Maine 
.\Ieru  nn  all  sides.  Its  expansr*  is  21.t»oO  yojana-.  lit.^ 

Ill  the  centre  oi  this  Hluvrata.  standi.-^  tlic  Ciirai  .Mcru,  .-»hinin;;  in  its 
majestic  ^lovy,  like  liie  nrehlaze^  l•'^'•i^l  ot  r^moki  . It-s  Miutitern  portion 
is  called  ti>e  Oaksina  Mem  an  l (»«*  tcutinT?)  tlc'  rttani  Mem.  •«<». 

Each  of  these  seven  *.ar>a*»  J/o5to«>  ha-  a boundary  mountain  of  its 
own,  wliirdi  from  north  to  -outlj  cxt’UcU  i*»  2,t»0o  y,»janas,  and  the 
southern  ones  are  t?,0drt  rojanas  in  circumfcivLicc.  2). 

The  -^om  of  tlse  breadth’-  of  ihe^*  vaisa>  tind  mountain  ranges  is 
breadth  of  the  Jambmlvipa,  us  metiiioticd  above.  ‘M  tlu'^^e  Nila,  Niaadba 
are  the  longest,  and  those  that  c<»me  after  them  diminisli  in  iength,— - ifc?. 

Ho  are  ^veU,  !I»?ma  KiHn.  Himavnn  ainl  i^iifigavnn  Hisibha  iMeru 
is  said  to  have  the  .same  extent  ;is  Jambudvipa.  “-23. 

ilema-Kflta  is  sliortcr  ahua  Meru)  by  12/)<J0  yojanas,  ftud  Hinmvan 
is  sheorter  (than  Meru’  by  2< »,000  yajanas.  The  great  Hema-Kutsi  is  88,0()() 
yojanas.—  24. 

The  Mouni  Hinni-vAu  is  yoyana**,  IVotrt  east  to  wont.  'I'ht* 

(lv!pa  (Jainbddvipa-  lierng  sphericBl.  this  difference  in  extent  of  the 
monntaiDB  has  sprung  up.  25. 

or  etmtrofitHinsat,  in^teiul  af  ffhatiirTlmwt, 


Aa  there  is  a dlstributioji  of  thd  IQOUOtBIOf^p  BO  ^ 
tjf  ihe  Viirsas  (along  with  tliem)  one  after  another.  J/any  peopled  diulr^ts 
are  in  them.  These  varsas  are  seven  in  number.  20. 

They  (the  var^as)  arc  Hurrounded  by  precipitous  and  iiiburmount- 
able  mountains.  All  (lie  seven  aiv  iuutually  inaccessible  by  diJIerent 
rivei-s. — 27. 

Ill  those  regions,  various  .sjjecies  of  aniinals  are  found  everywhere. 
This  var^a  of  the  Hiinavat  is  known  as  Bharata.-  -2S. 

Beyond  that,  up  io  llenia-Kuta,  is  the  land  (varsa)  of  the 
Kiippuriisas,  anrl  fnan  the  honlers  of  lleina  Kiita  up  to  Xisadha  is  the 
ilarivari^a. — 20. 

iVoU*. —Kiippuru^a— Low  iiKin.  A mythical  lioiiijx.  with  a human  head  aud  tho  form 
of  a horse. 

Ni^adha -‘■Hat'd.  .Vauio  of  a moitiitaiii.  .Name  trf  a count ry  crovcnifd  i>y  XaJa. 

JIarivaraa—Oiie  of  tlio  nine  (livisjon.s  of  Jaiiibddvipa. 

The  other  liinii  of  Ihiri-varsa  is  Meru.  and  further  uu  is  Jluvrata. 
beyond  which  exiends  Itainyaka  to  the  Nila  mountain. 

Next  to  l/aniyal<a  .stan<l>  tlie  i^veta  niountaiii  in  whuse  region  \< 
Hiranyaka  (varsa'  and  next  to  ii.  i>  i^ringaslfika,  wliich  is  also  known 
as  Kuril. 

Oil  the  Dorili  and  south  liicre  are  two  Ihuv-sljaped  cuiniiients,  extend- 
ing tjver  lUO  yojanas,  and  llavrata  stands  in  llie  middle  i»f  them.-  -32. 

Half  of  it  is  Diiksina  lluvi  ita  and  iii«"  rest  (/f  it  i.s  I'ttara  JIavjita. —33. 

Between  llieiu  is  Meru  in  ilavrifa,  to  the  south  of  Nila  mounlain 
ami  to  the  nortli  of  Nisadlui.-  *34. 

The  Mount  Malyavaii,  suelching  north  to  south,  which  i&  32,000 
yojanas  in  length  enters  the  sea  on  the  west.  —35. 

Malyavaii  is  a ihousaiid  yojanas  from  Nila  to  Nisadlia  and  Liaiidlai 
.M-idana,  is  32  yojanas.  -Sti. 

Within  their  eiicumferences  is  ilie  square  and  lofty  golden  Suineni 
uioualuiu,  which  is  of  fomfold  e«>lour,  like  the  four  castes. — 3". 

There  are  tlifforeni  eolours  on  its  sides  : on  the  east  it  is  white. 
<»n  the  south,  it  is  yellow,  mi  the  west,  it  is  like  tiie  wing  of  the  blaek-bees, 
oil  the  nortli,  it  is  rod.  These  are  the  different  colours..— -38. 

Aotr.— Hhringi — A poisonous  plant,  a Ug  tree. 

The  Mount  Mem  shines  out  like  the  rising  sun  (»r  the  hlaae  of  fire 
without  suiokoi  in  tlie  heiu*(  of  those  Alounlflinsj  like  a f]i\ine  kiog.”^39. 


SM  THE  UATBYA  PVBAVAy. 

That  Sumeru  is  84,000  yojaiias  high,  16,000  yojnuas  deep  under 
ground  and  28,000  yojanaa  broad*— 40. 

Its  circumference  is  double  its  breadth.  It  is  a great  divine 
mountain,  abounding  in  celestial  •iiedic!nes.—45. 

it  is  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  lands  of  golden  effulgence.  On  thin 
king  of  iinmntains,  the  Devas,  the  Gandlinrvas  ami  the  Rak^asas  nnjo\ 
and  cany  on  their  pastimes  in  the  company  of  Apsaras.*-'l2?. 

TJiat  Sumeru  is  adorned  by  the  lihuta  and  Blnivana  worlds,  ami 
has  four  realms  on  its  aides,  — Bhadnisva  (in  tlio  east),  Bhu rata  \ in 
the  southjand  Ketunnila  in  the  west  am!  the  sacred  Kuril  on  the 
north."43-44. 

The  subjacent  hills  are 

Mamiara,  Gandhamfulana,  Vipula,  and  Suparsva,  all  full  "f  precious 
stones.— 45. 

And  on  these  mountains  riit-n-  dif  hmr  lakes  and  loie^ts  known 
Arunoda,  Mauasa,  Sitoda  ami  Bhadni  *46 

And  there  are  big  trees  of  tunnorie,  ruse -app!*’.  Arfvatllm  on  iho^ 
(.Tiimlhamfidana  and  banyan  on  the  Vipnla.-  47. 

Amaragandaka  is  west  of  Gandhmir'oh'ina  which  is  yojanas. 

equally  on  all  .sides.  - 4'^. 

There  reside  the  wcli‘kh(nM*  KciumAln^.  tiic  dons  of  blessed 
deeds: — there  everybody  lih»  Hm'  'iostructivc  Kir(^  of  hioli  Rp‘n‘il  and 
great  strength.— 49 

The  ladies  of  that  place  are  hcciuiifu!  liko  tho  lotus  and  lovely,  ( hi 
that  mountain  there  is  a diviiie  jackfniit  tree,  looking  efFulgent  through 
its  leaves  —50. 

The  people  of  that  region  live  up  to  l(\0fK»  years  by  drinking  the 
juice  of  those  fruits  To  tlie  east  of  MnlyavAn  flf»ws  the  river  Gnndaki 
which  is  32,000  yojanas  in  length.— ol. 

The  inhabitauis  of  Bhadraiva  'khandiO  always  remain  liappy  and 
the  BhadraroalA,  forest  lies  in  the  same  elime,  wheir  there  is  a Jiuge  and 
black  mango  tree.  52. 

The  people  of  that  place  are  white  in  comph-xioii  and  very  stuidy 
aucl  strong.  The  womenfolk  are  tho  most  beautiful,  like  white  lily,  and 
very  agreeable  to  look  at. — 53. 

They  possess  the  radiance  and  colour  of  the  moon,  their  faces  are 
like  the  full  moon,  and  their  body  cool,  os  the  moon,  smells  like  lotus.— 54. 


OBAPTBB  OXnl 


They  live  up  to  10,000  years  in  good  bealth:  By  drinking  the  k&la- 
inango  juice,  they  always  remain  in  full  bloom  of  youth. — 55. 

Sdta  said  r—rtifia!  Brahmil  has  thus  described  the  nature  of  the 
continents  to  the  Bifis,  and  the  same  BrahtniV  who  had  previously  favoured 
mo  (with  describing  the  same).  Now,  what  am  1 to  narrate  to  you 
next  ? — 56. 

All  the  self-restrained  seers,  hearing  these  words  of  Sdta,  becan^  ^ 
curious,  and  said  with  great  joy  ; — 57. 

“ Sage ! Be  pleased  to  say  all  about  the  two  countries,  ea.stern  and 
western,  which  have  been  already  mentioned  by  you  and  of  the  northern 
var^as  and  mountains,  besides  which,  we  are  also  desirous  of  hearing  the 
account  of  the  men  living  on  those  mountains.”  On  being  thus  urged  by 
the  seers,  Sdta  again  resumed  the  string  of  his  narration. — 58-59. 

Suta  said  : —Listen  to  (tlie  account  of)  the  vai^as  whiclj  have  been 
already  referred  to  by  mo  to  tiie  soutit  of  tlio  Xila  an  l to  the  north  of 
Nisadha. — 60. 

That  is  Ramanaka  (varsa),  and  the  inhabitants  of  that  place  are  very 
handsome  and  given  to  amicable  delights,  and  of  pure  birth.— 61. 

There,  too,  is  a huge  banyan  tree,  and  llio  people  of  that  place,  live  by 
drinking  the  juice  of  the  fruits  of  it — 62. 

These  best  of  men  of  great  parts  live  happy. —63. 

To  the  north  of  l^reta  Aloiintain  and  to  the  south  of  j^rihga  (Srihgin) 
is  the  Hiranyavat  continent  (varsa)  where  flows  the  river  Hiraiivati— 64. 

The  people  of  Hiranyavat  are  very  strong  and  of  high  spirit. 

They  are  of  pure  ami  noble  birth  and  avo  a good-looking  and  happy 
lot.~65. 

Theso  first  class  men  live  up  to  the  age  of  11  thousand  and  1,500 
years. — 66. 

In  that  continent,  there  is  a great  bread-fruit  tree  of  nice  foliage,  by 
drinking  the  juice  of  the  fruits  of  which  men  live  on. — 67. 

The  Moftnt  l^iAga  (SriAgin)  has  three  lofty  peaks.  One  of  them  is 
full  of  precious  stones,  the  other  one  is  studded  with  gold  and  the  third 
one,  full  of  all  gems,  is  adorned  with  Uie  worlds. — 68. 

The  country  situated  to  the  north  of  this  SriAga,  to  tho  south  of  the 
aea,  ig  the  renowned  Kuru  var^a  where  the  saints  (siddfaas)  have  fixed  their 
abode. — 69. 

It  also  has  trees  producing  sweet  fruits,  and  the  water  of  the  rivei-s 


89 


306 


TEB  UAT8YA  PUBAVAM. 


is  like  divine  nectar.  Those  beautiful  trees  produce  raiments  and  ornaments 
by  their  fruits. — 70. 

Some  of  t\io8c  beautiful  trees  are  the  givevft  of  all  the  fruits  of  Ohe*8 
desires,  and  the  others  nro  called  Xsirina,  always  beautiful  to  . look  at, 
produce  milk  (juice)  with  the  six  tastes  and  sweet  as  paficliAmfita  (the  five 
best  products  of  cow’s  milk),  productive  of  ncctarlike  milk.— 71: 

The  whole  land  of  tliat  place  is  full  of  ^'ems  and  is  . inlaid  with 
ifne  gold  dust.  There,  the  wind  is  most  pleasant  and  salubrious  and  noise- 
less.— 72. 

The  people  falling  down  from  Dcvaloka  arc  born  there.  They 
are  of  pure  and  noble  descent,  having  permanent  yoijth. — 73. 

There,  the  daughter  and  the  son  are  born  as  twins,  and  husband 
and  wife  like  the  manifestations  of  Gandharva  and  Apsara.  'riiere,  they 
drink  nectarliko  milk  of  trees  overflowing  with  tlicm  — 74,  . . 

The  twins  are  boni  in  a day.  They  grow  together  and  arc  possessed 
of  like  beauty  and  character.  They  die  togetlicr. — Tf). 

They  are  attached  to  each  otlicr  witli  the  fonrlncss  of  the  ruddy 
geese.  They  are  healthy,  without  boreavmcnt.  and  happy. — 70. 

These  great  souls  live  for  1.1,000  years,  and  are  ever  devoted  to  tlieir 
own  wives. — 77. 

Suta  said  :—0  Ri§is  ! 'Flic  nature  of  tlicsu  (’onlincnts  of  the  Bharata- 
varsa  has  been  brought  to  your  notice  < > greatly  ])ious  ones  ! what  more  do 
you  wish  to  hear  now  78. 

The  [li8i.s,  being  thus  ask*  d by  the  enliglitcned  son  of  f?uta  again 
questioned  him,  being  dcsirou-!.  of  hearing  homelhing  more  in  answer. — 71). 
Rere  ends  the  one  hundred  and  thirteenth  ehofitev  dcaUntj  xcith  J amhudvipa 
and  its  mountains  and  varw. 


CUAPTEff  CXIV. 

The  sages  said  : — We  wish  to  hoar  from  you  an  account  of  tliis 
BhAratavar§a,  wliich  was  peopled  by  SvAyambhuva  and  the  rest  of  the 
fourteen  Manus.  0 Blessed  one  ! do  tell  us  about  their  creation. — 1-2. 

On  hearing  these  words  of  the  seers,  Sfita  of  tlie  Puranas  and  son  of 
L6maharsana  after  a deep  consideration,  began  to  answer  the  queries  of  the 
seers  of  thoughtful  mind.— 3-4. 

Sfita  said  T shall  toll  you  about  the  people  of  BhAratavarsa.  Manti 


CBAPTEB  CXIV. 


307 


caine  to  1)e  known  dH'DiiArata  hy  liin  creation  and  protection  of  tlio  people 
(of  Db&rata). — 5. 

« 

According  to  Nirukla,  tliat  place  in  Bharatavarsa  where  human  beinga 
caii  obtaiiv, heaven,  einaricipation  and  a middle  course  of  the  two, — 6. 

•'  There  is  no'  field  of  action  for  mankind  without  Bbaratavarsa. 
Bhflratevarsa  has  nine  divisions ; Viz. — Indradvipa,  Karfera,  Tamraparnl, 
Gabhastihifiiia,  Njigadvipa,  Sauinya,  Gandliarva,  Vanina  ; and  the  ninth 
is  this- place,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  the  ocean.  The  whole  of  the 
dvip'a  is  a thousand  yojanas  in  extent,  from  nortli  to  south.  It  is  graducally 
broader  from  Kumar!  (Cape  Comorin)  ft)  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges, 
whence  it  has  risen  to  a height  of  ten  tliousanfi  yojanas  in  an  oblique 
direotion.-  7-10. 

* " The  Mlechluis  live  on  its  outskirts.  The  KinUas  and  the  Yavanas 

iirhabit  tl^  east  and  thfe  west  of  it.  — IJ. 

iCote.— Kirflta^A  degraded  mountain  tribe. 

Yavana= Foreigner,  especially  the  Greeks. 

The  BrAbmanas,  the  Ksalriyas,  the  Vaisfyas,  and  the  Madras  inhabit 
in  its  centre  and  carry  on  d.e.,  inside  this  boundary}  their  occupations  of 
rituals  (sacrifice,  &c.)  trade,  commerce,  &c- — 12. 

They  air  pursue  their  respective  duties  by  adhering  to  the  varna- 
dharma,  Arthaand  Kama. — 13. 

..  Here  exist  tl>c  asramas  in  their  due  order  in  which  the  five  fold  de- 
sires of  men  are  fulfilled  ivh.,  nisknmadharma  as  well  as  the  four  ordinary 
desires,  consisting  of  dharma,  artha,  kdma  and  moksa'.  Here,  men  engage 
in  activities  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  Heaven  and  emancipation. — 14. 

The  Mnnavadvtpa  is  also  called  Tirj’ag-yaina  (i.e.,  obliquely  situate). 
One  who  conquers  it  entirely,  is  .called  Samrata. — 15. 

This  loka  is  known  as  the  conqueror  of  Antariksa  which  in  its  turn 
is  known  as  Svarat.  1 shall  explain  this  at  full  length.— 16. 

There  are  seven  principal  mountains  in  this  continent,  viz.,  Mahen- 
dra,  Mala3'a,  .Sahya,  Saktiman,  Riksavnu,  Vindhya  and  Pariyatra  ; and 
there  are  thousands  of  smaller  ones  adjacent  to  each  of  these. — 17-18. 

Some  of  these  are  known  to  have  fine  peaks  and  tablelands,  covered 
with  many  kinds  of  trees;  &c.  The  smaller  ones  are  less  productive,  and 
arc  distinguished  from  the  bigger  ones  by  contrast. — 19. 

The  Mlechhas  and  the  Ai^an  reside  there  mingling  with  each  other 
without  distinction,  and  they  drink  the  waters  of  many  rivers,  such  ss 


308  Tllli  MATSYA  PUBANAM, 


the  Ganges,  tbe  Sindhu,  the  Sarasvat),  the  Sutlej/ the  Ohandrabhftgft, 
the  Yamuun,  the  Sarayu,  the  Ainivali,  the  VitatsA,  the  DevikA,  the  Kuhu, 
the  Goinati,  the  DhantapnpA,  the  Vahuda,  the  Dri^advali,  the  Kaiiflikl,  the 
Tritiya,  the  NisJchala,  the  Gaudakt,  the  Iksu,  the  Lauhita  (all  these  having 
their  source  in  the  snow-clatl  mountains  of  the  Himalayas), 

The  Vedasmfitt,  tho  Vetravati,  tlio  Vritragbni,  the  Sindhu,  tbe 
Parnasa,  tlie  Narmada,  tho  Kaveii,  the  Mahi,  tho  Para,  the  Dhanvatl,  tho 
RupA,  ilic  A^idusA,  the  Venuinati,  tho  SiprA,  tlio  Avanti,  the  Kunti  (all 
these  rivers  having  their  source  in  the  Pdriydtra  mountain). 


The  Mandakini,  tho  ihtsAriiA,  ilm  ChitrakutA,  tlie  TamasA,  the 
Pippali,  tlio  SJyeiii,  ll\e  ChitrotpalA,  tho  VimalA,  tlio  Chafieluila,  the 
Dhutavjiliini,  the  f^aktiniaiiti,  tlie  Suni.  the  T.ajjA,  the  MukutA,  the  (Iradika 
(these  liaving  their  source  in  the  Rhyaenu  mountain). 

The  Tapi,  the  Payosni,  the  NirvindhyA,  tho  KshiprA,  tho  RisabhS, 
the  Vemi,  the  Vaitanini,  ilie  Vi^vamfilA,  the  Kiimudvat?,  the  Toya,  the 
Mahagaiiri,  the  DurgamA,  the  iiilA  these  rivers  of  cool  water  having  their 
source  in  the  Vindhya  mountainsl  ^ 

The  Godavari,  (lie  Pliiiuarathi,  itio  Krisnaveid,  tho  Banjuhi,  the 
TungabhadrA,  Uic  Supra vGgA,  tho  VAhya,  the  Kaveri  ‘these  rivers  in  the 
south  having  their  >ourc.?  in  the  uiuuniains  . 


Tlie  Kritiii'iAlA.  ilie  TAjaraparn-,  tlu-  PnspajA,  the  IJlptdavali  (these 
rivers  of’  tiie  e-jfii  water  ha'ing  their  -.<ai!Cr  in  iIk  AltilayAehala  mountain). 

Tin*  i’rlhhAg.:,  rl.t*  , tie*  Iks’.d  , the  'rri'li\A,  the  CMuila- 

tAmrapariji,  ilic  Mnii  -he  *^at vA.  tie  Vimal..  ila  .-^e  having  come  from  the 
Mahcndra  mountain',  the  Ka.sikA,  tlie  SukuinfUi,  tlio  Mudunga,  the 
MandavAhini,  tlie  Kripi,  the  Pasint  .these  having  come  from  (iakti- 
ma7ita'\  — 20-31^ 


All  tho  rivets  named  above  are  .-acunj,  and  iaii  into  the  sea,  and 
their  waters  are  pure  and  sacreil  ; and  every  one  drinks  from  them. 
They  are  the  mothers  of  tho  univoise  and  piiigo  the  sin  of  the  world,— 33. 

From  these  rivers  thousands  of  rivers  arc  branched  off,  and  into  thorn 
thousands  of  tributaries  fail. 

On  their  banks  are  situated  the  following  (janapadaa)  places: 
PaBcbSla,  Kuril,  J5alva,  JSngala,  Surasena,  Bhadrakasa,  VAhya,  Pa(tachara, 
Matsya,  KirAta,  Kulya,  Kuntala,  KfiiJi,  Kowala,  Avanti,  Kiilinga,  Muka  and 
Atidhaka.  Thus  I have  described  almost  all  the  countries  of  Madhyadeia. 

]N'ofe.«-Madhyade£(ii  tho  central  region,  the  country  lylog  between  tho  Himalaya 
and  the  VIndhyh.  Tho  aangettc  doab.  ^iir«9enas=yaino  of  country  .about  Mathura. 


309 


oiiAmn  cxiv. 

MatsyftjvAaotL^  nittno  for  Yirftta— tho  country  lying  to  tho  west  of  Dholpur.  Kuntala-= 

8.  l^rtloo  of  Dcccan.  Avanta  Country  to  tho  N.  of  Narmada.  Kalinga^ 

Northern  Sirdars.  Andhaka^Tclangana. 

♦ 

^ Now  the  following  are  between  the  Sahya  mountain  and  the  Qod& 
Tar!,  most  charming  lands  in  the  whole  world,  where  there  are  (the 
mountains)  Gobardhana,  Mandara  and  Gandhannidana  as  well  as  the 
celestial  trees  and  herbs,  for  iUma’s  benefit.— 37-38. 

These  were  brought  down  by  BharadvAja  .Muni,  for  KAma’s  good, 
and  by- him  was  created  a pleasant  country  decorated  witli  flowers.— 39, 

BAhlika,  VAtadhana,  Abhira,  Kalatoyaka,  Purandlira  ^uflra,  Pallava, 
Atta  Kliandikn,  GandhAra,  Yavanas,  Sindhu,  8auvira,  Madraka,  S5aka, 
Drubya,  Pulinda,  Ptirada,  Hannmtika,  Kainatha,  KantakAra,  Kaikeya, 
Da^anamaka,  Praslhala,  Daseraka,  I.ampaka,  Talagana,  Sainika,  JAngala, 
and  other  places  peopled  by  the  Bharadvaja  Br.ihniapas,  Ki^atriyas,  Yaiiiyas, 
ands^Sfldras These  places  (janapadas)  are  on  the  north.  Now  bear  of 
those  on  the  east. --40-43. 

A'ofo.— Bfthlikft=:Balkhii.  *SinclIiu=iTlio  country  of  flic  Upper  Indus.  ft^aka-=iThe 
countries  on  the  N.-W.  Frontier.  Kaikoy:i-. Bordering  on  the  Sindhu  Dcs^'a. 

wImkij  tin?nwR  i 

will?  ^ fiNqfld  awftwr:  II 

Abhira South  of  bri  Kohknna  and  on  the  Western  bank  of  the  T&pti  is  tho  land  of 
the  Abhiras  on  the  Yindhya  iiillM. 

Aftga,  Vahga,  Madguraka,  .\ntaragiii,  Vahirgiri,  Plavafiga,  Matafiga, 
Yamakn,  Mallavarnaka,  Suhnia,  rttara  Pravijaya,  Mnrga,  VAgeya,  MAlava, 
Pragjyotisa,  Piiddra,  Videha,  Taniraliplaka,  I^Alva,  .\fagadha  and 
Gonardla. — 44-45. 

Note.— Anga^Xcar  Bhagalpur.  Vanga=Al80  called  Samatala;  Eastern  Bengal. 
Vidilia^Couutry  lying  to  tho  N.=E.  o(  Magadba.  Magadha^Blhar. 

Those  lying  to  the  south  (or  in  tlic  Dakfinapatha)  are  -Pandya, 
Kerala,  Chola,  Knlya,  Setukn,  Sutika,  Kupatha,  VAjivAsika,  NavarAftra, 
M&bifika,  Kalihga,  KAru^,  Ai$ika,  Atavya,  l^vara,  Pulinda,  Vindbya, 
Pufiika,  Vidarbha,  Dandaka,  Kuliya,  Sirala,  Rnpasn,  TApasa,  Taitirika, 
KAraskai'a,  VAsika  and  the  countries  on  the  banks  of  the  NarmadA, 

Note.— EersU— Modem  Matebsr.  The  strip  of  land  between  Western  Ohants  and 
the  sea  north  of  the  KSvert  Ohola=T»nJore.  PAndya^Tinnevelly.  VidsrbhaaBentr. 
A dtstrlet  in  the  Deccan  between  the  NamadI  and  the  Oodtrart. 

The  following  countries  lie  on  the  west  i-^-BhArnkacbba,  SamAheya, 
S&raevata,  Kfichtka,  SanrAstra,  Anartn  and  Arbuda. — 46-51. 

Note.— i^nmftra  or  AnartasKathlawar.  Arlrads=Aha. 


310  THE  MATS? A PURAtAJh.  ''^ 

The  following  countries  are  on  the  westefn  extremit/ 
ehala : — MAlava,  Karuga,  Mekala,  Ulkala,  Au^^ra/jlfiisa,  ^9^]^ 

KiikHindhaka,  Torfala,  Kosala,  Traipura,  Vaidirfa,  Tiimura/ 
^Padgama,  Naisadha,  Arupa,  ^aundikera,  Vitihotra,  Ayanti.-— 52<55"  '*  ; 

Note. -M&lava= Mai wa.  Utkala:=Orissa.  KiskindhA^A  in  the  Decpan.  DaliArna^s 
The  country  throug:h  which  tho  Daean  flows.  Ko^]a=The  country  along  the  banks^of  the 
Sara>u.  Tripara=Tevur.  Avanti=Conntry  to  the  north  of  tho  NaruiadA. 

The  following  countries  are  situated  on  tlio  mountains: — NirdhAra, 
Sarvaga,  Kupatlia,  Apatha,  Kuthupranirana,  IJrna,  Darva,  Samudgaka, 
Trigarta,  Mandala,  Kirata  and  Ainara. —.K).  " 

There  are  four  ages  of  tho  world,  viz. — Satj’a,  Treta.  Dwapara  and 
Kaliyuga.  I am  now  going  to  give  >ou  an  account  of  each. — 57. 

Note. -The  duration  of  oacli  a;?c  respootively  is  1,728.000;  1.296,000,  864,000  and 
432,000  years  of  men  , the  four  n^gotlier  eomprisiiig  1,3*20, OOa  years  which  i.s  equal  to 
a MahAyiiga.  The  regularly  descending  length  of  the  Vtiga.s  reprostuits  a corresponding 
physical  and  moral  doterioration  in  tho  people  living  in  each  age,  tho  prosont^ii'age 
being  Kaliyuga -tho  Iron  Age. 

The  Lord  said: — King  ! Hearing  this,  the  sages,  desirous  of  hearing 
the  narration,  began  to  ciuiuire  from  Suta,  the  son  of  liOinaliarsana. — 58.  * 

The  seers  said  : — Suta!  You  have  told  us  about  Bharatavarsa,  now 
be  pleased  to  tell  us  something  about  Kiinpnrusa  Varsa  and  llari  Vaiva  ; 
besides  this,  be  good  eiiuugli  to  tell  us  about  tlie  Jambudvipa,  Ac.,  as 
well  as  about  their  people  and  the  trees  that  grow  there. -59-00. 

Tims  exhorted  by  the  Brahinanas,  Suta  began  to  rtdatc  to  them  what 
was  in  accordance  with  llie  Puvana<  and  approved  by  the  Rii^is.— 151. 

Suta  said  Rihis  ! As  you  desire  to  hear  those  things,  listen  to  me 
attentively.  The  Kinipurujja  of  dambudvipa  is  as  great  in  magnitude  as 
the  Nandana-Vana.— 02. 

iVotc.— Nandana-Vana— Thu  garden  of  Indra. 

Kirripuru^a: — The  people  of  Kirnpurusa-Khanda  have  a complexion 
like  that  of  heated  gold,  and  they  live  up  to  10,000  years.— 03. 

A stream  of  honey  flows  from  a Plaksa  tree,  in  that  sacred  Khanka, 
which  the  Kinnaras  residing  there  drink.—  04. 

On  account  of  which  they  remain  so  healthy,  without  any  grief  and 
happy,  and  cheerful  in  their  minds.  The  people  have  a yellow  complexion 
like  shining  gold,  and  the  womenfolk  are  known  as  ApsarAs.— 65. 

Hari  Var^a  Beyond  Kiippuru^a  is  IIarivar§a,  the  inhabitants  of 
which  are  silvery  white  in  complexion.  They  are  tho  fallen  people  of 
Pevaloka.  They  all  drink  the  juice  of  the  sugarcane.— 66-07. 


^^EAUTBR  CXIV.  311 


• ; and  consequently  they  live  for  a very  long  time, 

ayej^j^e  a^e  is  1 1^00  years.  -—68. 

V 'tl&yflia-^Khanda  is  in  the  middle,  where  there  is  no  strong  sunshine 

gf  .whicli  men  have  little  knowledge  — 6ff. 

, Jhe  sun,  the  moon,  us  well  a.s  iJie  stars  are  seldom  seen  in  Il&vrita. 
The  people  of  that  place  are  handsome  like  the  lotus  and  their  eyes  are 
like*  the  same,  and  their  body,  too,  emits  a scent  like  that  of  the  lotus; 
They  seldom  get  excited  and  drink  the  juice  of  the  roseapple,  ^jambuphala}. 
They,  too,  are  the  fallen  people  of  Svarga  and  wear  silvery  white 
garments,  and  live  up  to  13,000  yeai*s.— 70-73. 

To  the  south  of  Meru  and  nortli  of  Ni§adba  stands  the  roseapple  trep 
(jambuvriksa  , which  is  called  Sudairfana.  It  is  a huge  tree,  and  always 
abounds  in  flowers  and  fruits,  and  is  frequented  by  the  Siddhas  and  Cha- 
ramls. — 74. 

« Jambudvjpa  is  so  called  after  this  huge  tree.  It  rises  to  a height  of 
tliousaiuls  of  yojanas.— *75. 

The  tree  is  so  high  and  big  that  it  sreins  to  cover  all  the  heavens, 
and  llie  juice  of  its  fruits  flows  in  the  form  of  a river. — 70. 

It  flows  round  Sumoni,  and  then  waters  the  root  of  the  tree,  and 
people  of  Ilrivrita  drink  it  with  great  pleasure. — 77. 

By  drinking  it,  they  neither  get  infirm,  nor  ilo  they  ever  feel  hungry, 
tired  or  miserable.  — 78. 

There  is  to  be  found  a kind  of  gold,  called  the  Jambunada,  which  is 
the  ornament  of  the  Devas  ft  is  red  like  the  Indragopa  (insect).  The 
fruits  of  this  tree  produce  the  best  juice  of  all  the  fruits  of  trees  of  other 
Varaas.  This  tree  exudes  a gummy  sap,  like  gold,  which  is  also  the 
ornament  of  the  Devas. — 79-80. 

By  the  grace  of  God,  the  soil  of  that  place  swallows  the  excreta 
of  the  people  and  the  dead*— 81. 

The  Uak^asas,  and  the  Pisiachas  live  (iu  the  dales)  of  Himavata. 
The  Gandliarvas  and  the  Apsaras  are  the  inhabitants  of  Hemakflta. — 82. 

^e^a,  Va6uki,»Taksakas  and  the  Nagas,  all  haunt  the  Nisadha  moun- 
tain, and  the  33  blessed  Yajilyias  (Devas)  sport  on  Mahilmeru.  On  the 
Ntla  mountain,  where  sapphires  abound,  live  the  Siddhas,  Mahar$is  and 
Dftnavas.  The  ^vota  range  is  said  to  be  the  resort  of  Daityas. — 83-84. 

l^riAgavtln,  the  best  of  the  mountains,  is  the  haunt  of  the  Pitfis. 
These  are  the  nine  continents  in  the  world.  The  changeable  (plains)  and 


312 


THE  MATSYA  PUBANAM. 


fixed  (monataias)  are  inhabited  by  variona  croadbri:)^  iiaa  Daevas 
aee  numerous  increase  in  thoni.  They  cannot  < be  counted, ^Jl)ut.8b<i^d 
be  taken  on  trust,  by  one  who  wishes  his  own^good.->85*86. 

* Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  fourteenth  chapter  in  BhuvanafiOfa^  • 

describing  the  Koea  Var^.  , * • ' . 


ClfAPTER  CXV. 

Manit  said  Janardnna ! I have  heard  tlio  ddinqs  of  (ho 'son  of 
Bndiia  and  have  also  hoard  the  waj-s  of  performing:  sacred  rfrrithllia  that 
dispels  all  sins.  I have  hoard  (he  benefits  of  Riviiif:  away  a milch  cow, 
a black  deer  skin,  and  the  ways  of  lettiiiR  loose  a l)ull  iat  (he  end  of  fnneral 
rites);  but  O Kojlnva  ! my  curiosity  is  awakened  on  lioarin^  about  the 
beauty  of  (ho  son  of  Bndlia.  I’ray  now  toll  me  what  J ask.  By  virtue 
of  what  acts  did  he  become  so  handsome  ami  prosperous?  How  is  it^liat 
Urvarfi  became  so  much  attached  to  him  in  preference  to  all  tlio  Devas 
of  the  three  worlds  as  well  as  the  beautiful  tiaudbarvas  ?-~l-5. 

Hearing  those  Words  of  Maun,  the  Lord  said: --King!  Hoar  the 
actions,  in  virtue  <'f  which  the  Kin"  Pururava  became  so  handsome  and 
happy.  In  his  previous  life,  the  King  Pururava  was  the  lord  of  Madra, 
known  as  Pururava.  — 0-7 

At  the  cdose  of  the  IJln'iksusa  .Mun\:iut;mi.  the  king  was  in  the 
Ch&ksusa  dynasty,  endowed  with  all  the  royal  (pialities,  except  beauty 
alone. — 8. 

The  Ri^is  asked  Suta  liow  tin  Madia  King,  PururavA,  became  Lord 
of  the  Earth,  and  what  act  of  iiis  deprived  liim  of  his  beauty. — U. 

Suta  said. — Seers  ! In  the  village  of  Ifvija,  on  the  bank  of  a river, 
there  was  a Bnihmana  named  Pururava,  who  in  his  after  life  became  the 
King  of  Madra,  named  Pururava ; because  in  his  former  life  of  a Bra- 
hmana,  he  always  observed  the  Dwadarfi  fast  and  worshipped  Janfirdana, 
with  the  desire  of  getting  a kingdom.  But  though  he  kept  the  fast,  ho 
bathed,  with  his  body  rubbed  with  oil. — 10-12. 

He  obtained  the  kingdom  of  Madra  by  tlio  virtul^  of  his  fast,  but 
became,  ugly  on  account  of  his  rubbing  his  body  with  oil,  before  bathipi' 
on  fast  days.— 13.  ’ , 

Hence,  one,  who  observes  a fast,  should  not  rub  his  body  with  oil 
on  that  day  before  bathing,  and  if  he  bathes  after  rubbing  his  body  with 
unguent,  he  becomes  ugly  in  his  next  life.— 14. 


OHAFrER  GXVI. 


313 


This  is  aboat  the  previous  life  of  the  King  Purdrava  of  Madra. 
Now  I shall  tell  you  something  about  him,  after  he  became  the  lord  of 
Madra.— 15. 

In  spite  of  his  royal  qualities,  be  was  not  loved  by  his  subjects, 
on  account  of  his  ugliness. — 16. 

He  then  decided  to  go  and  practise  penances  for  the  attainment  of 
personal  beauty,  in  the  Himalayas,  after  making  over  charge  of  his  realm 
to  his  ministers.— 17. 

That  far-famed  king,  with  his  own  enterprising  spirit  as  the  only 
companion,  went  on  foot  to  that  home  of  all  the  lirthas  (i.e.,  Himalayas), 
and  at  the  end  saw  the  renowned  and  beautiful  river  Airavati. — 18. 

The  king,  whose  fame  was  like  that  vast  icy  region,  saw  that  river 
of  the  mighty  IlimSlayan  torrent,  whoso  waters  are  cold  like  the  rays  of  the 
moon  and  white  like  snow. — 10. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  fifteenth  chanter  descrihinfj  the 
Ilermitafje  iTapocana), 


CHAPTER  CXVI. 

Suta  said  : — 0 llisis  ! The  King  saw  the  glorious,  blessed  and 
sacred  river  of  Haimavali  wliere  the  Gaiidharvas  abound  and  which  Indra 
worshipped.— 1. 

The  King  Pururava  was  greatly  charmed  to  see  that  beautiful  river, 
the  waters  of  which  were  intermingled  with  the  rut  of  the  celestial 
elephants,  the  middle  of  which  was  shaped  like  the  bow  of  Indra. 
It  was  the  home  of  many  ascetics,  was  worshipped  by  a multitude  of 
Brahmans,  and  was  of  golden  colours.  Its  surface  is  covered  with  a row 
of  snow-wliite  flamingoes,  and  seemed  to  be  fanned  by  kaela  cbiimara. 
Many  a pious  one  sprinkled  its  wat^*  on  his  head.  It  appeared  to  the  king 
to  be  beautiful,  and  subject  to  waxing  and  waning  like  the  moon,  and  the 
giver  of  great  joy.— 2-5. 

The  rapid  running  stream  of  cold  water,  the  best  of  daughters  of  the 
Himalayas,  full  of^ipples  and  tasteful  like  nectar,  full  of  birds,  honoured 
by  the  T&pasas  and  Br4hinaQas,  the  sacred  river  destroys  all  sins  and 
raises  men  to  heaven. — 6-7. 

She  is  the  senior  consort  of  the  ocean,  adored  by  the  seers,  the 
producer  of  ardent  zeal  in  all,  the  most  beautiful,  the  giver  of  univei-sal 
happiness  and  relief,  the  guide  to  heaven,  the  waters  of  which  flow  up 

40 


m 


THE  MAT8YA  PUBAEAM. 


to  Gokula,  most  pleasing,  devoid  of  moss  and  reeds,  and  decorated  with 
lotuses,  the  geese  and  the  cranes  throwing  out  their  melodious  notes  at 
rapid  succession,  having  deep  whirlpools  as  her  navelpit,  having  little 
islands  hither  and  thither  looking  as  her  thighs,  the  blue  lotus  flowers 
looking  like  her  eyes,  the  blooming  lotuses  supplying  her  mouth,  the 
crystal  waters  her  dress,  the  cranes  her  beautiful  lips,  the  train  of  Balilkiis 
(cranes)  her  row  of  teeth,  the  restive  shoals  of  fish  her  eyebrows,  the 
elephants  of  her  waters  (water  spouts)  her  breasts,  and  adorned  with  the 
singing  geese  and  the  lotus  flowers  that  looked  her  jingling  anklets 
and  bracelets  respectively. — 8-12. 

Charmed  with  the  beauty,  the  Gandharvas  sport  every  noon  in  her 
with  their  Apsaras.  Her  waters  are  highly  perfumed  by  the  mixing  of 
the  sandal  and  other  scents  (kunkuma),  u.sed  by  the  Apsaras,  air  ( also  with 
the  various  aroma  of  the  trees  on  its  bank,  they  are  so  constantly  rippled 
with  the  wind  that  tlie  rellectinn  of  the  sun  is  difliindt  to  be  seen  ; while 
her  banks  are  broken  here  and  tliero  as  llie  eh'phants  of  the  Devas  strike 
them  with  their  tusks  -13-15. 

Such  a magnificent  stream,  in  which  flows  the  iclior  of  the  .Airavata, 
the  elephant  of  Indra,  and  the  sandal  perfume  of  the  consorts  of  the  Devas, 
is  swarmed  by  a train  of  sweetly  buzzing  bees.— -16. 

The  ascetics,  the  seens  and  the  Devas,  in  company  of  the  Apsaras, 
derive  happiness  on  her  banks,  wliere  llie  hnniniing  bees  were  attracted 
by  the  aroma  of  sweet  flower.s  of  the  trees  licr  banks  and  where  the 
intoxicated  deer  gratify  their  passions.— -17-18. 

The  celestial  women,  witli  I heir  face  like  the  lotus,  ami  the  moon, 
become  sanctified  by  a bath  in  her  water  and  are  honoured  by  the 
Devas. — 19. 

The  water  of  this  river  is  not  disturbed  by  the  Devas,  Pulindas, 
(kings)  and  tigers,  Ac.,  is  decked  with  lotus  flowers,  illumined  by  the 
reflection  of  the  moon  and  stars.  The  king  continued  his  journey  while 
seeing  this  river,  which  satisfies  the  desire  of  the  sages.  On  her  banks, 
the  groups  of  Devas  and  Brahmanas  were  sitting  under  the  branches  of 
trees,  whose  k^sa  flowers  look  like  the  rays  of  the  moon. -^20-22. 

Vhe  king,  who  is  famous  like  the  moon,  saw  that  the  river  was 
inundated  with  many  rivulets  and  was  the  dispcller  of  sins  of  the 
devotees  and  worahipped  by  many  sages,  which  gives  nourishment  to 
the  people,  as  a mother  does  to  her  sons,  and  which  is  surrounded 
by  the  Devas,  and  by  other  people,  seeking  their  own  benefit,  which 


CHAPTER  CXVIL 


315 


is  sported  by  the  lions  and  • the  elephants,  whose  waters  are  full  of 
PdrijAta  trees,  and  which  is  never  increased  or  decreased  by  the  heat  of 
the  sun.  —25. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  sixteenth  chapter  describing 
the  celestial  river  Airdvati. 


CHAPTER  CXVIL 

Sflta  said  : — Risis  ! when  tlie  king’s  fatigue  was  removed  at  the  sight 
of  the  holy  water  of  that  river  and  by  the  contact  of  its  wind,  he  trudged 
along,  and  someliine  after  had  a view  of  the  majestic  Himiilayas. — 1. 

That  mountain  touching  the  skies  with  many  of  its  gray  (white  ?; 
peaks  was  accesible  to  the  sages,  although  not  accesible  to  bird8.~2. 

Besides  this  the  IlitnalAyas  resounded  with  the  thundering  sound  of 
the  rivers  falling  down  in  cascades  and  which  rendered  all  other  sounds 
inaudible.  They,  the  HimAlayas,  looked  charming  with  their  reservoirs  of 
cold  water. — 3. 

The  blue  forests  of  Devadaru  trees  looked  like  its  lower  garment, 
clouds  formed  its  upper  garment,  the  white  cloud  the  turban  ; while  the 
moon  and  the  sun  tlie  diadem.  Its  body  was  covered  with  snow,  (which  serv- 
ed the  purpose  of  an  unguent),  while  the  presence  of  minerals  here  and 
there  seemed  to  paint  it  with  sandal.  It  gave  out  coolness  even  during  the 
hot  weather.  It  was  decorated  with  massive  rocks,  at  places  imprinted 
red  with  the  foot-prints  of  the  nymphs  (Apsarus),  with  places  lit  up  by  the 
sun,  enveloped  in  darkness  at  others,  drinking  water  somewhere  through 
its  deep  chasms,  adorned  elsewhere  by  the  multitude  of  playful  VidyA- 
dharas,  and  the  chief  Kinnaras  at  places  looking  beautiful  with  the  flowers 
of  Heaven  (SantAna,  &o.)  fallen  from  the  Ctandbarvas  and  the  nymphs’ 
(ApsarAs),  while  they  were  busy  in  drinking,  and  elsewhere  covered  with 
the  beds  of  flowers  pressed  down  by  the  Gandharvas  rising  from  their 
slumber,  and  thus  looked  beautiful.— 4-10. 

At  places  it  was  covered  with  blue  grass,  without  a breath  of  wind, 
and  spots  abounded  with  pretty  flowers.  This  mountain  I's  the  refuge  of 
the  ascetics  and  most  inaccessible  to  lovers.  Herds  of  deer  graze  at  the 
foot  of  rocks,  whose  trees  are  broken  down  by  the  tusks  of  elephants  who, 
bewildered  by  the  roars  of  the  lion,  were  making  uoisy  uproar,  and  could 
not  be  seen  to  be  at  rest.— 11-13. 

In  whose  valleys  and  bowers  were  enshrined  meditating  seers,  and 
preoiouB  stones  from  whose  stores  adorn  the  three  worlds. — 14. 


316 


THE  MATSYA  PURANAM. 


It  is  the  refuge  of  tlie  great,  and  always  served  by  the  great.  The 
great  see  this  mountain  great  in  jewels  and  precious  stones. — 15. 

The  hermits  accomplish  thoir  course  of  asceticism  in  short  duration. 
All  the  sins  vanisli  merely  hy  the  sight  of  this  mountain.  The  wind 
makes  the  landscape  pleasant  by  blowing  the  sprays  of  water  of  its  water- 
falls.—16-17. 

(It  is^  decorated  Roinewhere  with  summits  bristling  with  waterfalls; 
at  other  places,  with  peaks,  which,  owing  to  lu>l  sun  shining  are  inaccessi- 
ble, except  by  the  wind.— -18. 

At  places  it  looked  hfiautiful,  with  clusters  of  the  groat  overshadow- 
ing Devadarus  which,  owing  tv»  their  thickness,  looked  like  clusters  of 
bamboos.  At  other  places  were  huge  icicles,  hundreds  of  thundering 
waterfalls  and  fountains,  as  well  as  caves,  with  their  mouths  scaled  with 
snow. — 19-20. 

The  great  King  of  Madra  roamed  about,  seeing  that  beautiful  valley, 
and  (after  a time)  sat  down  for  a time  at  a certain  place. — 21. 

ft 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  awl  ser^enteenth  chapter  dealing  with  the 
description  of  the  ELimalayas  in  Hhnmna  Kns<i. 

CHAPTER  CXVllI. 

Suta  said  Sagos ! King  Pururav;\  suddenly  came  to  one  of  tlie 
beautiful  places  in  that  mountain  inaccessi))lc  to  ordinary  human  beings. 

The  country  where  tlie  Airavati  river  has  its  Hourcc,  is  also  somhre 
in  appearance,  like  the  clouds,  on  account  of  its  plentiful  trees  ami 
thickets. — 2. 

It  abounds  with  the  following  varieties  of  trees,  llowers,  grass,  creepom 
and  plants:  — 

^ala,  Tala,  Tainfila,  KarnikAra,  J^amala,  Nyagrodha,  Arfvattha,  i^iritta, 
iSiniiapa,  Slesmataka,  Amalaka,  Ifaritaka,  FVibhitaka,  Chflrja,  Munjaka, 
BAna,  Saptachcliada,  Arahanimba,  Nimba,  Nirgund!,  Han,  DevadSru, 
KA^leyaka,  Kadmaka,  Cbaiidana,  Vilva,  Kapittha,  Haktachandana,  Md.ta, 
Ainra,  Ariij^a,  Aktaota,  Abdaka,  Arjuna,  Hastikarna,  Sumanasa,  Kovidftra, 
Pnlchinllmlaka,  Dhanaka,  Samarataka,  Kharjura,  N4rikola,  Priytlla,  AmiA- 
taka,  lAguda,  Taiitumala,  Hhava,  Bhavya,  Kasralraparni,  Jattphal,  P6ga- 
phala,  Katphala,  Lavalfphala,  MandAra,  Kimrfuka,  Kusumuiprfiika,  YavAsa, 
rfominsirnAfla.  Vetasa.  Ainbuvetasa,  NArahgi  (of  deep  red  color),  Hiftgu, 


OBAPTER  CXVIfL 


317 


Priyafign,  Arfoka,  and  (Red-flowered)  Adoka,  Akalla,  Avicb&raka,  Muchu- 
kunda,  Kunda,  Atarfi^a,  Par(i^ka,  Kir&ta,  Ki/ikirata»  Ke taka,  Svetake taka, 
Sobh&fijana,  Anjnna,  SukaliLga,  Nikotaka,  Asana,  Sahak^ra,  YutbikA 
(yellow  and  white),  Jfi.ti,  CbaippakajSti,  Tumbara,  Atunibara  (?),  Mocha, 
liocha,  Lakucha,  Tila,  Ku^e^aya,  Chavyaka,  Bakula,  PAribhadra,  Harid- 
raka,  DhAra-Kadamba,  Kutaja,  Kadainba,  Adityainustaka,  Kumbha, 
Kuqikuma,  Katphala,  Badara,  Nipa,  Palirata,  DAdima,  Charppaka,  Ban- 
dhuka,  Subandlinka,  Kunjakajati,  Patala,  Malliki,  Karavira,  Kurabaka, 
Jambu,  Nfipajambu,  Bijapura,  Karpura,  Agurn,  Bimba,  Pratibimba, 
Sant&naka,  Vitauaka,  Guggiila,  Hintala,  Jksu  (of  white -color),  Karavira 
(without  thorns),  Cliakramarda  (relieving  pain  , Pilii,  Dhataki,  Chiribilva, 
Tintidika,  Lodha,  Vida6ga,  K^irika,  Ajimantaka,  Jambira,  ^vetaka,  Bhal- 
l&taka,  Indrayava,  Valguja,  Nagakesara,  Karamarda,  Kasamarda,  Ari^taka, 
Vari^t^ka,  Kudrakaa,  Putrajivaka  (having  seven  synonyms),  Kaipkolaka, 
Lavafiga,  Parijdtaka,  Pippali,  Nagavalli,  ^Maricha,  Navamallika,  Mfidvika, 
Atimuktaka,  Trapusa,  Nartikapratana  (Creepers^  Ku§manda,  AlAbii, 
Chirbhi{a,  PatolikAra,  Karkotaki,  Vartaka,  Bphati,  Kanjaka,  Mulaka,  and 
various  kinds  of  edible  roots.  Kalhiras,  Vidari,  Jlurfita,  (having  tasteful 
thorns),  Bhundira,  Vidusara,  Itajajambuka,  Baliika,  Suvarchala,  Sarsapa, 
KStkoli,  KsirakAkoli,  Chhattra,  Atichhatra,  K^samardi,  K^ira^aka,  Kfila- 
iSaka,  Sirabldhanya  and  various  other  kinds  of  grain,  and  medicinal  herbs 
which  prolong  life,  procure  fame,  give  strength,  and  remove  the  fear  of 
old  age,  deatli  and  hunger  ; and  give  every  kind  of  happiness.  There  are 
also  VenulatA,  Kfchaka  Venn,  Karfa,  ^ara  clusters,  Kusn,  Iksu,  KSrpasa  of 
various  species,  Kadali  groves,  as  well  as  grassy  plots  (lawns)  known  as 
Marakata.  There  are  also  flowers  of  Ira,  Kumkuma,  Tagara,  Ativi^a, 
MArpsagranthi,  »Suragada,  Suvarna,  Bhilmipuspa.  There  are  also  Jambira, 
Bhustn^a  and  Saiuka,  Srifigavera,  Ajamoda,  Kuveraka,  PriyAlaka,  as  well 
ns  sweet  smelling  lotuses  of  various  colors. — 3-39. 

Some  of  the  blooming  lotuses  looked  like  the  rising  sun,  some  like 
the  moon  and  the  sun.  Some  looked  like  bright  gold,  and  some  resembled 
the  San  [hemp,  or  Crotalaria  jiincea]  flower.— 40. 

The  placb  was  full  of  growing  lotuses,  of  which  some  looked  like  the 
leaf  of  a Sirirfa  (Suka),  some  having  five  colours,  others  many. — 41. 

There  were  Kumuda  flowers,  too,  pleasing  to  the  sight  of  the 
observer  and  looking  like  the  moon  lotuses,  resembling  the  glow  of  fire, 
and  like  mouth  of  an  elephant  were  there  also. — 42. 

The  species  of  blue  lotus,  KnhiAras,  the  Ounj&taka  berry,  KaserO, 
dring&tak&,  Mrinlila  (a  snenies  of  ^ . 


318 


THE  UATSYA  PUBAEAM. 


various  kinds  of  frnits,  flowers  and  roots  thriving  in  water  as  well  as  on 
land,  various  species  of  rice  6t  for  the  use  of  the  abounded  on 

that  mountain.— 43-44. 

King!  Tliere  is  no  sucli  grain,  grass,  pot-herb,  fruit,  berry,  and 
herb  that  did  not  tJirive  on  that  mountain. — 45. 

The  varieties  of  berries  and  fruits,  grown  in  tlie  world  of  the 
serpents,  in  the  world  of  men,  and  the  products  of  water  and  of  forest, 
all  flourished  on  tliat  mountain. — 46. 

The  King  of  M.'idru,  riiruravii,  tiy  virtue  of  his  asceticism,  thus  sow 
all  those  fruits  and  flowers  of  the  season  there. — 47. 

He  also  saw  the.  following  birds  and  animals  living  there: — The 
peacock,  the  wood-pecker,  the  sparrow,  tlie  cuckoo,  the  goose,  the  .swan,  the 
lapwing,  the  wagtail,  the  osprey,  the  K A lakfita,  the  civet  cat.  thegok^a- 
vaidaka,  the  kumbha,  the  paiTot,  the  crane,  the  Dhatukn,  the  ruddy-goose, 
the  Katuka,  the  'Htihlia,  the  Bhata,  the  Putra-priya,  the  heron,  the 
Gocharma,  the  Girivartaka,  the  i>igcon,  tlie  Kamula,  the  Sariktl,  the 
Chikora,  the  quail,  the  duck,  the  Uuktavartma,  the  I’rabhadraka,  the  cock,  » 
the  blue  jay,  the  fowl,  the  Kumkumchuraka,  the  large  bee,  the  porpoise, 
the  Bhulinga,  tiio  Dindima,  the  crow,  the  gallinule,  the  Datyflha,  the  sky 
lark,  the  bees,  and  several  other  birds,  etc. — 48-54. 

The  king  also  beheld  the  following  wild  beasts -The  dog,  the 
deer,  the  leopard,  the  lion,  the  tiger,  the  elephant,  the  rhinoceros,  the 
wolf,  the  bear,  the  ape,  the  monkey,  the  rabbit,  the  agile  cat,  the  bnifalo, 
the  cow,  the  bull,  the  Chaniara,  the  .Sriwara  (a  species  of  deer),  the 
white  mule,  the  Urabhra,  the  ram,  tlie  antelope,  the  blue  ox,  the  doe,  the 
4Ambara,  the  wild  boar,  the  horse,  the  ass,  the  donkey.  Besides  them,  he 
nlao  saw  the  beasts,  which  are  naturally  hostile  to  one  another,  living  in 
mutual  friendship.  Tie  was  very  much  amazed  to  see  this.  Sometime  ago, 
the  sage  Atri  had  his  hermitage  there. — 55-61. 

On  account  of  the  glory  of  that  sage,  the  place  was  full  of  plants, 
and  animals  which,  though  naturally  hostile,  did  not  exercise  hostility  to 
one  another — men  and  Haksasas. — 62. 

There  all  carnivorous  beasts  lived  on  fruits  and  milk.  In  such  ways 
their  character  was  built  up  by  the  influence  of  the  Great  sage  Atri. — 63. 

King  Pflruravd,  himself  passed  several  days  on  the  slopes  of  those 
mountains,  where  cow-buiTaloes  and  she-goats  gave  out  milk,  and  where 

tliA  thorns  had  the  flavour  of  ambrosia.  Everywhere,  0 king, 

- I AR 


OHAPTEB  CXIX. 


319 


The  King  Pururavft  was  charmed  to  see  that  mountain.  There 
also  he  saw  the  beautiful  rivers  and  streams. — 66. 

There  were  hot  and  cold  water  springs  and  cosy  caves  at  every  turn, 
worth  being  made  use  of. — 67. 

Snow  did  not  fall  within  a radius  of  ^five  yojanas),  and  valleys  were 
not  visible  neai'  the  peaks,  for  the  thick  clouds  incessantly  pour  forth 
perpetual  snows  there.— 68-66. 

Close  to  it,  on  a different  peak,  thick  clouds  pour  out  diurnal 
showers  of  rain.  Its  rocks  are  extremely  beautiful.  The  laud  of  this 
enchanting  hermitage  (of  Atri),  was  the  giver  of  all  desires  and  the  trees  of 
which  place  bore  fruits  successfully,  for  they  were  worthy  of  being  eaten 
by  the  Devas. — 70-71. 

That  mount  is,  indeed,  the  dispeller  of  all  sins,  and  is  adorned  by  the 
Devaiigantis  and  the  buzzing  bee.s.— 72. 

The  spot  shines  white,  like  the  rays  of  the  muon,  on  account  of  heaps 
of  uugathered  ice  ; while,  here  and  there,  the  frolicsome  herd  of  the  white 
monkeys  played  about.— 73. 

The  hermitage  of  Atri  is  almost  impassable  to  a human  being,  owing 
to  the  pile  of  snows  and  inaccessible  mountains  surrounding  it.— 74. 

The  King  Pururavtl,  by  virtue  of  his  devotion  and  by  the  grace  of 
God,  reached  the  sacred  hermitage.— 75. 

That  Lord  of  Madra  saw  that  exquisitely  enchanting,  blessed 
hermitage,  which  is  beautified  with  hundreds  of  dowers,  and  which 
removes  all  fatigue,  and  which  was  built  by  Mahnrsi  Atri  himself. — 76. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  eighteenth  chapter  deserihing  the 
Hermitage  {of  Atri). 

CHAPTER  CXIX. 

Sflta  said : — There  were  two  great  snowclad  peaks,  shining  with 
variegated  colours,  and  in  their  midst  was  a huge  summit,  covered  with 
perpetual  snows,  never  warmed  (by  the  sun’s  rays)  and  where  there  is  no 
cloud.  Below  on  the  west  are  trees  also. — 1-2. 

The  king  entered  the  hermitage,  his  curiosity  awakened  on  seeing  a 
picturesque  cave  encircled  by  creepers. — 3. 

About  400  cubits  (palva)  of  that  cave  was  enveloped  in  darkness,  and 
further  off,  it  was  full  of  light  of  its  own,  where  there  was  a dome-like 
round  place,  very  high  and  sombre.  The  sun  and  the  moon  did  not 
shine  there. — 4-5. 


322 


TEE  MATSYA  PUEANAM. 


CHAPTER  OXX. 

Siita  said:- -Then  that  king,  giving  up  all  food  and  the  nso  of 
raiments,  saw  the  pastimes  of  the  Gandbarvas  and  the  nymphs  (apsarfts). — 1. 

lie,  after  offering  the  garlands  made  of  various  flowers  to  Vifnu, 
presented  them  to  the  Gandharvas ; and  he  saw,  but  did  not  take  any 
notice  of  the  pastimes  of,  the  nymphs  (apsanis),  while  gathering  flowers 
in  the  gladness  of  the  heart. — 3-4. 

Some  of  the  nymphs,  while  gathering  flowers,  became  entangled  in 
the  creepers  and  were  forsaken  and  left  behind  by  their  companions 
and  lords.— 4. 

Some  of  them,  oilialing  lotus-scent,  had  their  faces  surrounded  by 
the  buzzing  black  bees  and  were  freed  of  them  by  their  lowers;  wliile 
others  had  their  eyes  moistened  with  the  juice  of  (lowers  which  was 
removed  by  the  breath  of  tlieir  hwds. — 5-6. 

Some  offered  the  heap  of  |](nvers  collected  by  them  tr>  their  husbands, 
and  some  decorated  their  luiir  with  the  garlands  of  flower.s  woven  by 
their  lords. — 7,  » 

Some  apsarfis  (the  very  sight  of  whom  produces  love  in  men)  collected 
the  flowers  an<l  wove  garlan«ls  of  them,  and  then  by  their  lords  had  their 
tresses  of  hair  decorated  with  them  ; and  considered  themselves  very 
fortunate. — 8. 

Some  were  called  away  by  their  lords  to  dabble  into  amorous 
pastimes  with  them,  to  a solitary  hou’er,  full  of  beautiful  flowers. — !). 

Some  culled  the  flowers  out  fd  tlio  branch  bent  by  tlieir  lords  and 
looked  upon  themselves  exceedingly  fortunate  and  happy. — 10. 

Some,  while  enjoying  tlie  company  of  their  lords,  undisturbed  in 
the  grove  of  lotuses,  cast  shlelong  glances  towards  the  King  Pururava.— 11. 

Some  of  the  nymphs  overpowered  their  lords  by  sprinkling  water 
on  them,  and  then  became  pleas0<l  when  they,  in  their  turn,  were  overcome 
by  their  lords.— 12. 

When  the  maidens  ran  down,  their  lords  became  sad,  and  it  was 
seen  that  as  they  heaved  sighs,  their  breasts  rose  and  fell. — 13. 

Some  looked  as  liandsome  as  the  lotus  surrounded  by  black  bees,  as 
their  tresses  of  long  hair  streamed  on  their  faces  after  being  loosened  by 
their  lords  in  course  of  the  pastime. — 14. 

Some  of  them  became  concealed  in  the  lotus  groves  that  resembled 
tlieir  eyes,  and  were  found  out  by  their  lord.s  after  a long  search. — 15. 

Some  kepi  their  lords  in  a close  embrace  for  a long  time,  on  the 
pretext  of  feeling  cold  after  their  bath. — 10. 


OHAFPBB  CXX. 


323 


Some,  of  an  enchanting  smile,  thrilled  the  observer  (lord,  with 
amorous  feeling  by  wearing  the  finest  wet  garment  on  her  person. — H. 

Some  apsara  was  laughing  at  her  lord,  who  fell  down  into  the 
water  as  the  garland  was  torn  which  he  was  pulling.— 18. 

With  their  knees  having  been  scratched  by  their  companions,  some 
bent  low  and  modestly  took  shelter  for  a long  time  in  the  company  of 
their  lords. — 19. 

Some  began  to  dry  her  wet  hair  by  turning  her  back  on  the  sun 
and  was  seen  from  a rock  by  her  lord  with  eyes  full  of  love  and 
desire. — 20. 

At  that  time  the  lake  with  its  water  full  of  garlands  of  the 
nymphs  fallen  in  it  and  mixed  with  tlie  saffron  washed  out  of  their  breasts, 
looked  beautiful  like  a maiden  after  amorous  enjoyment  with  her 
lover. — 21. 

Pururavfi  saw  the  group  of  Devas,  Gaiidbarvas  and  the  consorts  of 
the  Devas  worshipping  Visnu  after  their  bath. — 22. 

Tie  also  saw  some  of  the  nymphs  sitting  in  the  bowers  of  the  creepers 
and  dressing  and  decorating  themselves,  their  minds  being  engrossed 
with  (the  thoughts  of)  their  lords. — 23. 

Some  while  looking  at  the  mirror  heard  the  news  of  their  lords 
through  their  maids  with  rapt  attention. — 24. 

Some  at  tho  hint  of  the  maid  began  to  put  on  their  ornaments 
hurriedly  without  being  conscious  that  they  put  them  wrongly,  tlieir  mind 
was  BO  engrossed  with  passionate  desire. — 25. 

Fururavu  also  saw  some  of  the  nymphs  sitting  on  the  blue  grass 
amidst  nicely  smelling  flowers  and  drinking  wine  there;  some  of  these 
beautiful  nymphs  made  their  lovers  drink  from  their  own  bands,  while 
others  drank  the  wine  offered  by  their  lords. — 26-27. 

Some  whilst  drinking  water  saw  the  reflection  of  her  lotus  eyes  in  it 
and  afterwards  began  to  enquire''  from  her  lord  where  her  two  lotuses 
disappeared,  and  on  being  told  by  him  that  they  were  undoubtedly  drunk 
by  herself  became  bashful  as  she  realised  with  pleasure  his  meaning. — 
28-29. 

Some  of  them  (with  beautiful  eyebrowsl  drank  with  great  relish 
the  desire  producing  wine  offered  by  their  lords  after  they  had  drank  of 
them. — 30. 

Tire  king  also  heard  in  that  drinking  place  the  songs  of  the  nymphs 
with  stringed  accompaniments. — 31. 

Those  nymphs,  0 King,  dauce  on  music  before  Lord  Vipmi  in  the 

evenings.— 32. 


TBB  iimtA  WMBAV. 


m 

% 


And  as  tbe  night  cdvanoed  they  oomitig  <Mt  of  that  esvs  bsgsn  to 
retire  into  th^r  benutifal  oavenis  whire  thojr  pass  tiw  nii^l  m the 
pleasant  oompaap  of  their  hosbands,  reolining  on  As  plnidiy  OHrtlreaaea 
strewn  with  varions  kinds  of  sweet  flowers  and  deoorafsd  with  leeidy  sweet 
I scented  cre^ra '-33-34. 

King  PurursvS  thus  saw  all  the  pastimes  of  those  nj'mphs  on  that 
mountain,  went  on  with  his  doA'otion,  his  mind  firmly  fixed  on  Vi;nu. — 33. 

The  train  of  the  Gaudharvas  in  company  of  their  consorts  went  to 
the  king,  and  said  ; — " King ! You  have  come  to  this  region  resembling 
the  heaven,  we  shall  grant  you  the  boons  of  your  desire  after  which  it 
would  be  left  to  your  pleasure  either  to  stay  her  or  to  go  I)P(  k to  your 
country."— -36-37. 

The  King  PururavA  said  : — “ .All  of  yon  Ijnve  suporlminon  powers, 
your  presence  is  never  in  vain,  1 therefore  beseech  you  to  give  me  the 
boon  that  I may  please  Visnu,"— 38. 

They  all  unanimously  gave  the  desired  boon  and  the  king  Btaye(| 
there  for  another  mouth,  worshipping  Jan&rdana  in  a happy  mind. — 39. 

He  became  a great  favouiite  of  the  Gandhar\*as  and  their  consorts, 
who  were  pleased  with  his  firm  devotion  {to  Vt«nu).— 40. 

After  a month,  that  king  entered  a lovely  hermitage,  decorated  with 
innumerable  gems,  where  ho  lived  on  water  alone  till  the  end  of  the 
bright  foj  might  in  the  montb  of  Phfliguna,  when  he  heaid  the  following 
words  of  Vispu  in  a dream  : — " At  the  close  of  tlie  night  you  will  find  the 
Sage  Attri,  in  whose  company  you  will  get  yonr  desire."— 41-43. 

That  king,  powerful  as  Indra,  having  tluis  dreamt,  got  up  early  in 
the  morning  and  with  bis  senses  under  control,  had  bis  batb,  and  having 
performed  daily  duties  worshipped  Janardana,  after  which  he  came  across 
the  great  sage  Attri.— 44-45. 

He  then  told  him  of  his  dream  and  heard  tlie  following  words  of  the 
Devas. — 46. 

“King ! It  is  just  what  it  should  Ije  ; there  is  not  the  least  doubt 
about  it,"  Thus  getting  the  boons  of  his  desire  fiom  Lord  Vifpu,  he 
worshipped  tlie  1/ord  and  poured  hie  oblations  iu  the  Fire  and  attained 
his  object. — 47-48. 

Here  endt  the  One  hundred  and  twentieth  chapter  dealing  with  the 
deaerijition  of  Aila  hermitage. 


gems.  Jiuvera  also  resides  there  with  bis  Guhj’akas. -1-2, 

KoU  -*-Gahyalca-=:^A  elan  of  demigods  who  an  the  attendants  of  Kuvera  and  the 
goardlans  of  his  untold  treasures, 

Kuvera  the  Lord  of  Alakdpuri  enjoys  the  company  of  tlie  nymphs 
tliere.  Here  is  a lake  shining  like  the  Devas  and  is  covered  with  the 
aroma  of  Mandara  flowers,  and  watered  by  the  cold  and  sweet  springs  of 
Eail&sa.  From  this  source  runs  the  sacred  Mandakini.  On  it  stands  the 
picturesque  Nandana  forest  of  vast  dimensions.  To  the  N.  E.  of  Kailaaa 
is  ilje  CliandraprabliA  ]\Iountain  shining  like  gems  and  full  of  metal  ores 
and  tliickets  of  sweet  smelling  flowers. — 3-6. 

Tiie  famous  Achhoda  lake  is  situated  near  It  from  which  flows  the 
sacred  river  AchchliodA  on  whose  banks  is  the  Chaitraratha  forest.  Ala^i* 
bhadra  resides  on  that  mountain  with  his  attendants. — 7-8. 

Ma^ibhadra  is  the  formidable  general  of  the  army  of  the  Yaksas 
3xid  is  always  followed  by  Lis  retinue  of  Guhyakas.  The  sacred 
Maiidakini  as  well  as  the  Achchhoda  flowing  through  the  earthly  plains 
enters  the  sea.  Towards  the  S.  E.  of  the  Kailasa  is  the  Sarvau^adhi 
(full  of  every  kind  of  herbs)  Mount  of  red  arsenic  (manahslild;  facing  the 
Chandraprabha  ]\rountain.  The  Mountain  Hemarfringa  (near  it)  shines 
red  like  the  sun,  below  which  there  is  a large  lake  of  red  water  out  of 
which  comes  a big  river  called  the  Lauhitya  on  the  banks  of  which  is  the 
great  heavenly  forest  known  as  Vi^ka.  Mai^idhara  Yak§a  resides 
thera — 9-13. 

iVottf.— >LauhityaaThe  Brahmaputra. 

He  remains  with  his  well-b^iaved  and  pious  attendants.  To  the 
N.  W.  of  Kail&su  is  the  Mount  Kakudm&ii  where  the  herbs  are  plentiful 
(so  called)  because  of  tlie  birth  of  the  great  bull  of  Gudra  there. 
In  front  of  this  Trikakuda  Mount  is  the  mount  of  Aiijaua  of  three 
peaks.— 14-15^ 

There  is  the  Mount  Vaidyuta,  full  of  all  kinds  of  ores,  below  which  is 
the  most  lovely  MSnasarovara  lake  which  is  resorted  to  by  the  siddhas. 
The  sacred  Sarayfl  runs  from  that  lake  and  purifies  the  people.  On  its 
bank  is  the  VaibhrSja  forest. — 16-17. 

In  that  forest  resides  the  most  valiant  demon  (Raksas),  Brahma* 
dhdtt,  the  attendant  of  Kuvera  and  the  son  of  Prphita  — ift 


324 


TEE  EHrSTA  PUBAEAM. 


And  as  the  night  advanced  they  coming  out  of  that  cave  began  to. 
retire  into  their  beautiful  caverns  where  they  pass  the  night  in  the 
pleasant  company  of  their  hnsbands,  reclining  on  the  plushy  mattresses 
strewn  with  various  kinds  of  sweet  flowers  and  decorated  with  lovely  sweet 
, scented  creepers.— 33-34. 

King  PururavA  thus  saw  all  the  pastimes  of  those  nymphs  on  that 
motmtain,  went  on  with  his  devotion,  his  mind  firmly  fixed  on  Vi§nu. — 35. 

The  train  of  the  Qandharvas  in  company  of  their  consorts  went  to  > 
the  king,  and  said  : — “ King ! You  have  come  to  this  region  resembling 
the  heaven,  we  shall  grant  you  the  boons  of  your  desire  after  which  it 
would  be  left  to  your  pleasure  either  to  stay  hero  or  to  go  back  to  your 
country.” — 36-37. 

The  King  PururavA  said  : — “ All  of  you  hnve  superhuman  powers, 
your  presence  is  never  in  vain.  I therefore  beseech  you  to  give  me  the 
boon  that  I may  please  Visnu." — 38. 

They  all  unanimously  gave  the  desired  boon  and  the  king  stayed 
there  for  another  mouth,  worsliipping  JauArdana  in  a happy  mind.— 39.  ^ 

He  became  a great  favourite  of  the  Gandhan’as  and  their  consorts, 
who  were  pleased  with  his  firm  devotion  (to  Vtsnu). — 40.  ■' 

After  a mouth,  that  king  entered  a lovely  hermitage,  decorated  with 
innumerable  gems,  where  ho  lived  on  water  alone  till  the  end  of  tho 
bright  foitnight  in  the  month  of  PhAiguna,  when  he  heard  the  following 
words  of  Vispu  in  a dream  : — “ At  the  close  of  the  night  you  will  find  tho 
Sage  Attri,  in  whose  company  you  will  get  your  desire.”— 41-43. 

That  king,  powerful  ns  Tndra,  having  thus  dreamt,  got  up  early  in 
the  morning  and  with  bis  senses  under  cuntrol,  had  his  bath,  and  having 
performed  daily  duties  worshipped  Janurdana,  after  which  he  came  across 
the  great  sage  Attri.— 44-45. 

He  then  told  him  of  his  dream  and  heard  tiie  following  words  of  the 
Devaa.— 46. 

“King ! It  is  just  what  it  should  be ; there  is  not  the  least  doubt 
about  it.”  Thus  getting  the  boons  of  his  desire  fioiu  Lord  Vi^pu,  he 
worshipped  the  Lxird  and  poured  his  oblations  in  the  Fire  and  attained 
his  object. — 47-48. 

Here  ends  the  One  hundred  and  twentieth  chapter  dealing  with  the 
description  of  Aila  hermitage. 


CHAPTER  CXXt. 


325 


CHAPTER  OXXI. 

SAta  said  : — To  the  north  of  that  hermitage,  on  the  back  of  the 
Himalaya,  in  the  centre,  stands  the  Mount  KailAs  the  residence  of  Siva 
^hich  is  full  of  Kalpa  trees  and  the  peaks  of  which  are  studded  with 
gems.  Kuvera  also  resides  there  with  his  Ouhyakas.— 1-2. 

Note  ^Guhyaka-=-A  class  of  demigods  who  are  the  attendaDts  of  Kuvera  and  the 
guardians  of  his  untold  treasures, 

Kuvera  the  Lord  of  AlakApuri  enjoys  the  company  of  tlie  nymphs 
tliere.  Here  is  a lake  shining  like  the  Devas  and  is  covered  with  the 
aroma  of  MandAra  flowers,  and  watered  by  the  cold  and  sweet  springs  of 
KailAsa.  From  this  source  runs  the  sacred  Mandakinl.  On  it  stands  the 
picturesque  Nandana  forest  of  vast  dimensions.  To  the  N.  E.  of  Kailaaa 
is  the  Chandraprabha  Mountain  shining  like  gems  and  full  of  metal  ores 
and  thickets  of  sweet  smelling  flowers. — 3-6. 

The  famous  Achlioda  lake  is  situated  near  it  from  which  flows  the 
sacred  river  AchchhodA  on  whose  banks  is  the  Chaitraratha  forest. 
bhadra  resides  on  that  mountain  with  his  attendants.— 7-8. 

Maj^ibhadra  is  the  formidable  general  of  the  army  of  the  Yaksas 
.and  is  always  followed  by  his  retinue  of  Gubyakas.  The  sacred 
MaudakinI  as  well  as  the  Achcblioda  flowing  through  the  earthly  plains 
enters  the  sea.  Towards  the  S.  E.  of  the  Eailasa  is  the  Sarvau^adhi 
(full  of  every  kind  of  herbs)  Mount  of  red  ai'senic  (manahslildj  facing  the 
ChandraprabhA  Mountain.  The  Mountain  Hematfringa  (near  it)  shines 
red  like  the  sun,  below  which  there  is  a large  lake  of  red  water  out  of 
which  comes  a big  river  called  the  Laubitya  on  the  bauks  of  which  is  the 
great  heavenly  forest  known  as  Vi^oka.  Ma^idhara  Yak§a  resides 
there.— 9-13. 

Note.— Lauhityas The  Brahmaputra. 

He  remains  with  his  well-behaved  and  pious  attendants.  To  the 
N.  W.  of  KailAsa  is  the  Mount  KakudinAii  where  tiio  herbs  are  plentiful 
(so  called)  because  of  the  birth  of  the  great  bull  of  Rudra  there. 
In  front  of  this  Trikakuda  Mount  is  the  mount  of  Anjaua  of  three 
peaks.— 14-15.^ 

There  is  the  Mount  Vaidyuta,  full  of  all  kinds  of  ores,  below  which  is 
tbo  most  lovely  MAiiasarovara  lake  which  is  resorted  to  by  the  siddhas. 
The  sacred  Sarayfl  runs  from  that  lake  and  purifies  the  people.  On  its 
bank  is  the  Vaibhrfija  forest. — 16-17. 

In  that  forest  resides  the  most  valiant  demon  (Raksas),  Brahma^ 
dhAtA,  the  attendant  of  Kuvera  and  the  son  of  Prehita. — 18. 


326 


TUB  UATS7A  WRABAU. 


The  Aruna  Mountain  to  the  West  of  KailSsa  is  the  most  important 
one.  It  is  full  of  efficacious  herbs  and  gold  and  shines  red. — 19. 

Mount  ^rim&n,  of  golden  colour,  is  the  favourite  of  ^iva  and  is 
covered  with  lines  of  gold  quartz. — 20. 

Next  comes  the  great  inaccessible  i^ringavan  (full  of  peaks)  Mount. 
Hundreds  of  its  lofty  golden  peaks  touch  the  sky.  It  is  the  abode 
ot  Dlidmralochana  lord  of  the  mountain  and  below  it  is  the  lake 
iSailoda. —21-22. 

Oat  of  which  flows  the  sacred  river  iSailodaka  which  is  also  known 
as  Chaksusl  and  flowing  between  these  two  mountains  falls  into  the 
Western  Sea. — 23. 

To  the  North  of  KallS,sa  is  the  blessed  Mount  Sarvausadha  near 
which  is  a majestic  snow  clad  mountain  full  of  yellow  orpiment 
(Harit&la). — 24. 

There  is  a mountain  with  golden  peaks  teeming  with  herbs  below 
t^hich  is  the  lake  of  gohlen  (coloured)  sand  and  known  as  beautiful 
Vindu  lake.  Here  King  Bliagiratha  remained  for  a long  time  for  the 
advent  of  the  Ganges. — 25-26. 

He  said  : — “ May  my  ancestors  attain  heaven,  their  bones  being 
drenched  with  the  Ganges  water.*'  The  Ganges  which  goes  three  ways 
made  her  first  appearance  on  that  very  spot. — 27. 

The  Ganges  coming  out  of  Somapada  divided  Herself  into  seven 
streams.  There  are  sacrificial  posts  (yflpa)  of  precious  stones  and 
viindnas  (heavenly  cars)  of  gold. — 28. 

Indra  attained  bliss  by  performing  sacrifices  on  that  spot  along  with 
the  Devas.  Here  is  the  milky  way  of  heaven,  the  centre  of  the  starry 
nebulae.  The  Ganges  appears  to  shed  splendid  lustre  there  at  night. 
iShe  has  descended  on  the  earth,  having  purified  the  Heaven  and  sky 
( Antar  i ksa). — 29-30. 

She  first  descended  on  the  head  of  the  mighty  Lord  l^iva,  Who 
curbed  Her  force  by  His  glor3^  Her  waters  falling  on  the  PJarth,  owing  to 
^iva*s  anger,  formed  the  Bindu  lake.  When  slie  was  thus  suddenly 
stopped  by  l^iva,  she  became  angry  as  she  understood  his  unkind 
motive  and  made  an  attempt  to  force  Herself  into  the  lower  regions,  having 
engulfed  iSiva  in  her  tumultous  current. — 31-33. 

Realising  this  proud  attitude  of  the  Ganges,  the  Lord  thought  of 
absorbing  Her  within  Himself.— 34. 

But,  at  the  same  moment,  He  perceived  King  Bliagiratha  standing  in 
front  of  Him.  He  appeared  lean,  his  veins  becoming  vibible,  troubled  and 
hungry.— 35. 


CJJAPTBn  CXXL 


327 


The  Lord  then  remembered  that  the  king  had  first  pleased  Him  by 
his  austerities  to  get  the  sacred  river — Ganges — which  boon  He  had  already 
granted  to  him.  He  therefore  suppressed  His  wrath. — 36. 

Moreover,  as  He  was  absorbing  the  sacred  stream,  He  heard  the 
entreaties  of  BrahmA.  He,  therefore,  freed  the  current  from  His  hold. — 37. 

Being  pleased  with  the  devotion  of  Bhaglratha,  the  Lord,  for  his 
sake,  let  the  river  loose  into  seven  branches,  three  of  which  went  to  tlie  East, 
three  to  the  West  (and  one  near  Himself),  thus  the  three-wayed  Ganges 
become  flowed  in  seven  streams. — 38-39. 

Nalini,  HlAdin!  and  Pavant  flow  in  the  East,  SitA,  Sinclhn  and 
Chaksu  in  the  West,  and  the  seventh  followed  the  King  Bhaglratha  to 
the  South.  Hence  the  name  BhAgtrathi  which  falls  into  the  Dak&ina 
Samudra  (southern  watera)  washing  the  Himavar§a.  Seven  holy  rivers  trace 
their  origin  from  the  Bindu  Sarovara. — 40-42. 

Those  seven  rivers  having  pierced  through  the  HimAlayas  fall  into 
the  Dak§ina  Samudra  (southern  waters)  after  flowing  through  the  Mlecchha 
countries  of  the  mountains,  viz.,  Kukur,  Randhra,  Barbara,  Yavana,  Ehasa 
Pulika,  Kulattha  and  Angalokya. — 43-44. 

Note, — Eakur  ^ DaruAha. 

Khasa  or  KliaM=A.  mountainous  country  in  the  North  of  India. 

The  Chaksu  stream  of  the  Ganges  before  entering  the  sea  waters  the 
following  countries: — Vlra  (Cliina?),  Marn,  Knlika,  Pulika,  fCliulaka?),  Tu- 
^ftra,  Barbara,  Pahlava,  PArada,  and  ^aka,  while  Darada,  Urja,  Gn()a,  Gan- 
dhfira,  AOrasa,  Kuhd,  f^ivapaura,  Indramaru,  Vasati,  SamtaijA,  Sindha, 
Urva^a,  Barva,  Kulatha,  Bhtinaramaka,  ^unamukha,  and  Urdhamaru  form 
the  basin  of  the  Sindhu  stream.  The  abodes  of  the  Gandliarvas,  Kinnaras, 
Yak^as,  the  Rak^asas,  VidyAdharas,  Sarpas,  the  countries  of  Eimpurusa 
Naras,  EirAtas,  and  Pnliudas,  Enrn,  (BhArabal,  FAnchAlas,  Eainfikas, 
Matsya,  MAgadlia,  Anga,  Brahmottara,  Banga  (Bengal)  and  TAmralipto, 
these  Aryan  janapadas  are  watered  by  the  sacred  Ganges,  which  striking 
against  the  Vindya  Hills  falls  in  the  Southern  Waters. — 45-51. 

The  HlAdint  Ganges  nine  eastward  into  the  sea  after  passing  through 
the  following  countries : — the  countries  of  Upaka,  Ni^adha,  Dhivara, 
Ntlamnkha,  Eeksra,  Ekakar^a,  EirAta,  EAIanjara,  Vikarna,  Eu^ika 
and  Svargabhaumaka. — 52-54. 

The  Nalin!  stream,  too,  runs  to  the  east  to  the  sea  through  the 
following  countries : — Eupatha,  Tndradynmna  Sarovara,  Eharpatha,  Eetra 
Baukupatha,  UjjAnaka,  Mnru,  Eutha,  PravArana. — 55-57. 

The  swift  running  PAvani  Ganges  passes  eastward  through  Tomaro, 
HansaraArga,  SamAhaka,  various  mountains  and  other  eastern  countries ; 


388 


THE  UAfSTA  POBAmM. 


ud  then  through  Karm,  Pravfira9*»  Advaiaukho,  Sumera  Mountain,  th 
land  of  the  Vydy&dharAa ; whence  the  mighty  etream  has  entered  th 
^mimandala  Koa(ha  a big  ]ake.'->58^0. 

Tbonaands  of  tributaries  and  rirulets  spring  from  the  main  streams 
The  (Jod  of  rain— Indra — draws  out  His  store  of  rainwater  from  there. — 60 

The  Surabhi  forest  stands  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Vanifsnkasarft 
There  resides  Hiranyaiiringa  the  most  powerful  and  learned  follower  ol 
Kuvera  who  has  been  forbidden  to  take  any  part  in  the  sacrifices.  Sur- 
rounded by  the  learned  ^progeny  of  Attri)  and  the  Br&hinarak$asas,  the 
four  attendants  of  Kuvera  reside  there.  The  residents  of  the  hills  and 
the  mountains  attain  double  powers  (by  piuctico  os  compared  to  otlier 
folks.— 6-1G4. 

At  the  back  of  the  Heuiakdta  is  the  liiko  of  the  snakes  (.arpa)  out  of 
which  fiotv  the  two  rivers,  Sarasinatt  and  Jyo(i$mali  falling  to  the  eastern 
and  western  seas  respectively. — 65. 

A little  furtiier  on  is  the  lake  Vi^nupada  on  the  Nisadha  Mount.  Both 
these  lakes  (lidya  and  Visnupada)  are  the  favourite  resorts  of  the  Gandhar- 
vas. — 66. 

The  lake  Chandraprabha  and  the  sacred  Jambd  river, — the  bed  hf 
Jamvanada  gold,  have  their  source  in  the  Siimeru  Mount.  The  two  blue 
water  lakes,  the  Paydda  and  the  sacred  Pundarika,  are  the  mothers  of  two 
sister  lakes  one  of  which  is  called  the  Uttara  Mnnasa  from  which  the  rivers 
Mrigy&  and  MrigakSnta  trace  their  origin.  In  tiie  Kurn  country  there  are 
twelve  lakes  under  the  name  of  Vaijaya  that  are  full  of  lotus  beds  and  fish, 
&c.  They  are  all  like  the  ocean  (in  exteutf?).  The  rivers  ^&att  and 
M&dhvi  spring  from  them.  There  is  no  rainfall  in  the  eight  lakes 
Kimpuru§a,  &c.  They  are  full  of  water  and  (aquatic)  vegetables. — 67-72. 

The  Mounts  YaMhaka,  Rii^abha,  Ohaki’a,  Maiuaka  pervading  in  all 
directions  merge  into  the  sea. — 73. 

The  Mounts  Chandrak&nta,  Drona  and  SumahSn  are  spreading  in 
the  North  till  they  have  merged  into  the  Groat  Northern  ocean, — 74. 

The  Mounts  Chakra,  Vadbiraka  and  N&rada  spread  in  the  West  till 
they  have  also  merged  into  the  Great  Western  Ocean. — 75. 

The  Mounts  Jimhta,  Dr& vans,  MainSka  and  Chandra  are  spreading 
towards  the  South  till  they  have  submerged  in  the  Dakshica'Samudra. — 76. 

Between  the  Mounts  Chakra  and  Mainftka  in  the  southern  portion  of 
the  heaven  is  the  Samvartaka  Agni /volcanic  mountain)  which  drinks  the 
water  of  the  seas.  Tlie  Agui  (volcanic)  mountains  Aurva,  Bafavfi  mukha 
too  are  submerged  into  the  Lavana  Samndra.  These  four  mountains  merged 
into  the  ocean  (for  safety)  when  Indra  began  to  destroy  their  wings 


OfliPTBB  OXXIL 


329 


(by  His  thanderboU)  and  they  are  still  visible  on  particular  days  in 
the  bright  and  dark  fortnights.— 77-79. 

The  divisions  of  the  Bh&ratliavar^  are  thus  described.  Those 
named  nithin  the  limits  of  BbSrathavarsa  are  visible  there  and  the  rest 
are  described  elsewhere. — 80. 

The  more  northern  (one  of  those  mountains)  the  region,  the  better  it 
ia  The  people  residing  there  are  healthy,  pious,  ionglived  and  possessed 
of  the  sterling  qualities  (Dharma,  Arthy,  ICAma,  <S;c.).  Various  classes  of 
people  live  in  those  khancjas.  The  universe  thus  holding  the  various 
regions  on  her  is  known  as  Frithvi  or  Jagat  (Earth). — 81-82. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  twenlif-first  chapter  deserihing 
the  Jamhttdeipa. 

CHAPTEft  CXXII. 

Sflta  Said.  — Now  hear  from  me,  0,  holy  twice  born ! tlie  description  of 
l^kadvipa.  Its  width  is  twice  tliat  of  the  Jambudvipa,  while  its  perimeter 
ia  thrice  its  breadth.  The  K^ara  Samndra  is  surrounded  by  this  Dvipa. 
It  has  many  sacred  janapadas  and  the  people  live  for  a long  number  of 
years.  The  people  are  full  o(  power  and  forbearance.  How  can  there  be 
any  famine  then.  Tliere  are  seven  white  mountains  full  of  precious  stones. 
Other  three  Dvipas  have  each  seven  mountains.  These  RatnAkara  mounts 
are  broad,  extend  in  all  directions  and  have  most  lofty  peaks.  All 
the  mountains  maintain  a sort  of  uniform  length  in  each  direction. 
I^kadvlpa  has  KsAra  Samudra  and  Khira  Samudra  on  its  either  sides 
respectively.  Now  1 shall  tell  you  something  about  the  seven  mountains 
of  ^akadvtpa. — 1-7. 

The  first  of  them  is  the  Mount  Meru  inhabited  by  the  Devafsis  and 
the  Gandharvas.  It  stretches  out  long  in  the  East  and  has  a mine  of  gold 
and  is  called  the  Udaya  Mountain  there.  Clouds  gather  there  to  give  rain 
and  then  disappear.  Parallel  to  it  stands  the  Mount  JaladhAra  which  ia 
described  like  the  moon  and  is  full  of  various  kinds  of  herb  and  the  God 
of  rain  draws  out  his  store  of  rain  from  it  in  plenty. — 8-10. 

Further  to  it  is  the  inaccessible  NArada  Mountain  whore  were  in 
ancient  times  the  two  hills  of  Narada  and  Parvata. — 11. 

Beyond  it  is  the  Mount  ^yAnia  the  inhabitants  of  which  were  dark  in 
complexion. — 12. 

(Not  far  from  it)  is  the  Dundubhi  Mountain  similar  to  ByAma 
Mountain  and  here  the  Devas  first  placed  a Dundubhi  (drum),  whose 

sound  brought  about  death. — 13. 

4S 


530 


TEB  UAfSTA  PDBABAM. 


The  mighty  Motint  l^flhnala  is  full  of  procioiu  stones  and  near  it  is  the 
big  mountain  of  silver  which  is  known  as  Somaka,  on  aocoant  of  the  Devas 
int  drinking  the  draught  of  ambrosia  there.  It  was  there  where  Gara<]a 
stole  the  nectar  for  his  mother.  - 14-16. 

Adjacent  to  it  stands  the  Mount  Ambikeya,  also  known  as  Sumantt, 
where  the  demon  Hirapyilkea  was  killed  by  the  Lord  Var^ha.  Near  it 
stands  the  Ciystal  Mountain,  VibhrAjs,  which  is  full  of  herbs  and  gems. 
It  is  a volcano,  that  is  why  it  is  called  VibhrAja  (lire  agitalor)  i it  is  also 
cMled  Kedava.  The  wind  there  is  voiy  strong. — 16-18. 

I. shall  now  name  the  luoun tains  with  the  divisions,  0,  holy  twice 
boms ! and  hear  it  attentively.— 16. 

Those  khapdas  have  double  names  like  the  mountains.  The  moun- 
tain as  well  as  Varsa  o£  Udaya  is  known  as  Udnya  and  .TaladiiAra. — 20. 

Udayakbanda  is  called  the  Qatabhayakbanda  and  the  Jaladhara 
khapd^  18  known  as  the  SnkumAra. — 21. 

That  is  called  the  (^aidira)  Sitala  khapda,  and  Eanmftrakhanda  is 
in  the  Nftrada  Mountain  which  is  also  known  as  Sukhodaya. — 22. 

Anichaka  is  the  name  of  the  khapda  on  which  is  the  l^yAma  Mountain 
which  has  also  been  called  the  Anandaka  by  the  sages. — 23.  * 

Kusuraotakara  is  the  khanda  on  which  lies  the  Somaka  Mountain 
which  is  also  known  as  Asita. — 24. 

Mainnka  is  the  khanda  of  tlic  Mount  Ambikeya.  It  is  also  called 
Kpemaka.  The  khanda  of  the  VibhrAja  Mountain  is  called  Dbruva 
as  well  as  VibhrAja.— 25. 

Of  the  same  dimensions  as  Jambndvipa  is  the  huge  i^Aka  tree  in 
the  centre  of  the  Dvlpa  itself,  frequented  by  the  people.  Those  regions 
were  frequented  by  the  Devas,  the  Gaudh.arvas,  the  Bards  (chAranas), 
and  the  Siddhae  (anchorites),  who  freely  enjoy  the  beauty  of  the  place. 

It  contains  many  janapadas  peopled  by  tho  four  varpAs. — 26-28. 

There  are  seven  rivers  in  each  one  of  these  mountains  which  fall 
into  tho  sea  and  each  one  has  a duplicate  name ; of  which  the  Ganges  is 
an  exception,  being  sevenfold. — 29. 

First  one  is  the  SufcumArt  Ganges  whose  waters  are  clear  and  blessed. 

It  is  also  called  the  MunitaptA. — 30. 

The  secon<l  one  is  called  the  SukuraAri-TapsidhA  and  Salt,  the  third 
one  is  the  NandA  which  is  also  known  as  PAvanl. — 31. 

The  fourth  one  is  called  the  ^ibika  and  DvividhA,  the  fifth  (me  is 
known  as  Ik^u  and  Kiihfl. — 32. 

Tho  sixth  one  is  known  as  VepukA  and  Amritfi  and  the  seventh  one 
is  called  the  SukritA  and  Gabhasti.— 33. 


OB  AFTER  CXZll 


331 


Of  tbe  above-mtotiooed  seveo  rivors  one  flows  in  each  sub-division 
of  the  ^Akadvipa,  and  they  all  purify  the  people  of  ihose  regions  widi 
flieir  sacred  waters.— 34. 

There  are  myriads  of  other  rivers,  and  rivulets  as  well  as  laken 
formed  by  copious  supply  of  rain  water  let  &U  by  VSsaba  (Indra) 
into  these.— 35. 

It  is  very  difficult  to  enumerate  and  give  proper  measurements  of 
all  those  rivers  and  rivulets.  They  are  all  sacred.  The  people  of  the 
janapadas  who  drink  their  waters  get  happiness.  I^ntabhaya,  PramAda, 
l^iva,  Ananda,  Sakha,  K$emaka,  and  Kava ; such  are  the  seven  janapadas 
situated  there,  where  all  the  rules  and  customs  (Auhfira)  of  Varna  and 
A4rama  are  observed.  -36-38. 

The  people  are  healthy,  robust,  and  free  from  tbe  clutches  of  death ; 
neither  are  they  prone  to  growth  and  decay.  There  the  four  ages  do  not 
prevail  in  succession.  The  age  of  Tret>t  is  eternal  there. — 30-40. 

Almost  similar  is  tbe  condition  of  age  in  the  other  fire  Dvipas, 
regard  being  had  to  the  superiority  and  otherwise  of  the  kbapdos.  There 
is  no  confusion  in  the  varpas  there,  and  the  people  of  that  place  are  happy, 
as  they  seldom  deviate  from  the  path  of  virtue.  There  arc  no  such  things 
as  fraud,  greed,  jealousy,  fear  and  malicious  fault  finding.  The  country 
is  free  from  vices  and  is  truly  natural.  There  is  none  to  indict  punish- 
ment there,  nor  on  whom  punishment  should  be  indicted.  The  people 
being  virtuous,  get  mutual  protection  from  their  own  virtuous  deeds. — 
41-44. 


Kuia  Dvtpa. 

The  Kurfadvtpa  is  very  great  in  circumference.  It  is  full  of  rivers, 
lakes,  and  snowclad  mountains,  in  wliich  are  to  be  found  various  kinds  of 
minerals,  gems,  trees  and  countries  (janapadas). — 45-46. 

The  dowers,  fruits,  various  varieties  of  trees,  grains  and  wealth  are 
in  plenty  there.  The  trees  are  always  full  of  dowers  and  fruits ; gems  of 
every  kind  are  there. — 47. 

It  is  also  full  of  domestic  and  wild  animals.  Now,  hear,  by  degrees, 
a brief  description  of  the  Kmia  Ovipa.  I am  going  to  give  you  an 
entire  description  of  the  third  Varpa, — Ku^fa  Dvlpa.  It  is  surrounded  on 
all  sides  by  the  Kpirasamudra. — 49. 

It  is  double,  in  its  dimensions,  of  l^kadvtpa  and  there  are  seven 
mountains  containing  various  kinds  of  precious  stones. — 50. 

The  number  of  rivers — the  home  of  innumerable  gems, — is  also  seven 
and  the  mountains  have  double  names  as  in  ^kadvipa,  eie.— 51. 


332 


TEB  MATSTA  PURANAM. 


The  first  is  the  Mount  Kiimuda,  shining  like  the  Sun  and  is  also 
called  the  Vidruniochchaya.— 52. 

The  second  mountain,  containing  all  the  metals  and  rocky  peaks,  is 
known  as  the  Unnata  or  Hema  and  is  covered  with  the  yellow  orpiment. 
The  third  is  the  Valahaka  or  the  DyutiinAn,  full  of  black  pigment  or 
antimony.  —53-55. 

The  fourth  is  the  Drona  Mountain,  also  known  as  the  Puspavfin,  on 
the  summit  of  which  there  are  medicinal  herbs  efficacious  in  curing 
the  wounds  caused  by  the  arrows  Virfalyakarani),  as  well  as  the  herbs 
that  give  new  life  (Mritasanjivani).  The  fifth  one  is  the  Kanka  or  the 
KutJairfaya  Mountain.  It  is  also  full  of  choice  herbs,  fruits,  flowers  and 
creepers.— 56-58. 

The  sixth  one  is  the  Mahiaa  or  the  Hari.  It  is  black  like  the  clouds ; 
and  Mahisa  Agui  (volcano?)  begotten  from  tlie  water  (rising  from  the 
sea?)  lives  there  (in  the  form  of  fire).  And  the  seventh  one  is  the 
Kukudmfi,na  also  known  as  the  MandAra.  It  is  full  of  all  kinds  of 
minerals  and  precious  stones,  guarded  by  Indra  Himself.  The  root 
*manda’  means  water  and  since  it  soattors  water,  it  is  called  Mandara,  in 
company  of  Brahma,  for  the  good  of  the  people.  The  internal  dimeii-^ 
sions  of  these  mountains  are  double. — 

These  are  the  seven  inounlaiiis  of  Kurfadvipa  and  now  their  sub- 
divisions will  be  enumerated. — 64. 

Svetadvipa  is  the  name  ol  the  region  whore  lies  the  Kuinuda  Mountain. 
It  is  also  known  as  Hnnata,  The  second  one  is  the  Loliitakhamla  also 
called  the  Venumandala,  where  lies  the  I’jiuala  Alountain.  Jimuta  or 
SvairathakAra  is  the  kliandaof  the  V’alahvaka  Mountain.  Marika  or  Lavana 
is  the  khanda  of  the  Drona  Mountain.  Kakuda  or  (fiiritimat  is  the  khanda 
of  the  Kanka  Mountain. — 65-67. 

Mahiaa  or  Prabhakara  is  tlie  khanda  of  the  Mahiaa  Mountain  and  Ka- 
kudmAna  or  Kapila  is  the  khanda  of  the  Mountain  Kakudman. — 68. 

Thus  in  every  dvipa  tijere  are  sevon  kliadnas  with  an  equal  number 
of  rivers  and  mountains. — 66. 

There  are  seven  rivers  in  each  khanda.  Their  waters  are  pure 
and  sacred  and  each  one  has  a duplicate  name.  I'ho  fijst  one  is  DhutapApd 
which  is  also  known  as  Yoni.  Situ  or  Nirfa  is  the  second.  The  third  one 
is  PavitrA.  also  called  Vitrisnft.  The  fourth  one  is  HlAclini  or  Chandramft. 
The  fifth  one  is  Vidyuta  or  ^uklA,  the  sixth  one  is  Pundrft  or  Vibhavasl. 
The  seventh  one  is  Mahati  also  callocl  Dhriti.  There  are  thousands  of 
their  branches  that  run  where  Indra  pours  down  rains.  Thus  I have 
described  the  Kui^a  Dvipa.  its  measurement  has  been  described  while 


on  AFTER  OXIU. 


333 


describing  the  measurenient  o{  likkadvtpa.  It  is  surrounded  by  the 
Qbrita  Ma^^a  Samudra. — 70-76. 

This  huge  dvtpa,  thus  surrounded,  looks  like  the  moon  and  is 
twice  as  great  as  the  K§ira  Samudra  in  its  magnitude. — 77. 

Krauneha  Dotpa. 

Now  I shall  speak  of  the  Krauuchadvlpa  which  is  double  the  size 
of  Kuiadvipa.— 78. 

It  surrounds  the  Ohritoda  sea  like  the  tyre  of  a wheel. — 79. 

The  people  of  this  Dvipa  are  of  a superior  class.  Devaua  is  the 
first  mountain  beyond  which  stands  the  Govinda. — 80. 

Further  on,  from  Govinda  is  the  beautiful  Krauneha  Mountain,  after 
which  is  the  Pfiranaka  and  beyond  it  is  the  Andhakiiraka. — 81. 

Next  to  Andhak&raka  is  the  Devftvrita  Mountain,  after  which  comes  the 
mighty  Puodarika.  All  these  seven  mountains  of  the  Krauneha  Dvtpa 
are  full  of  gems,  each  being  twice  the  size  of  that  preceding  it. — 82-83. 

The  sub-divisions  of  that  dvipa  are,  vut. — Kusala,  Manonuga 
Vftmana,  Us^a,  P&vanaka,  Andhakaraka,  Munideda  and  Dundubhisvaua. 
-84-86. 

Dundubhisvaua  Kharida  is  full  of  fair  complexioned  men,  and  peopled 
by  holy  persons,  and  siddhas  and  chfirauas.  There  is  a sacred  river  in 
each  khaiiija.— 87. 

They  are  : — Gaurl,  Kumudvatl,  SandhyA,  R&tri,  ManojavA,  Khyatt, 
Pun^arikA.  They  are  known  as  the  seven  Ganges.— 88. 

Tiiousands  of  rivers  arising  out  of  them  flow  close  by.  All  of  them 
are  very  deep.  Nobody,  even  in  course  of  centuries,  would  be  able  to 
describe  fully  all  the  countries  through  which  these  rivers  pass,  with  the 
rise,  growth  and  decay  of  the  people  inhabiting  them.— 89-90. 

I shall  now  describe  to  you  the  Salmaladcipa,  which  is  double  the 
size  of  Krauneha,  and  is  surrounded  by  the  Dadhi  Ocean. — 91-92. 

Sdlmala  Dvtpa. 

The  people  residing  in  the  sacred  janapadas  of  that  region  are  very 
long-lived.  There  are  no  visitations  of  famine  there,  and  the  inhabitants 
of  that  place  are  very  forbearing,  merciful,  and  illustrious. — 93. 

The  following  are  the  mountains  of  that  region: -The  SumanA, 
shining  like  the  sun,  and  of  yellow  colour.  Kumbhamaya,  the  central  one  is 
also  called  Sarvasukha.  It  is  full  of  herbs.  The  third  is  the  great  Rohitjt, 
of  red  hue  (like  that  of  Bhringa  patra)  and  full  of  gold.  The  Kinfala  is  the 
VarpA  of  the  SumauA  Mountain,  while  SukUddoya  is  that  of  Kumbhamaya 


TRW  RATSVA  PVRARAM. 


and  Rdbina  of  the  JRdhita  Mountain,  the  precious  stones  of  which  are 
under  the  direct  watch  and  ward  of  Indra,  who,  with  PrajApati,  gladly 
performs  his  duty  there.  Clouds  do  not  rain  there,  there  is  neither  summer 
nor  winter.  There  is  no  prevalence  of  the  Var^a  or  Adrama  in  those  regions. 
No  stars,  planets  or  the  moon  shine  there,  nor  is  there  any  such  thing  as 
jealousy,  hatred  or  fear.— 93-99. 

There  are  fountains  in  the  mountains,  other  sources  of  water,  as 
well  as  the  vegetable  world.  The  people  of  this  region  obtain  the  best 
victuals  of  all  the  six  flavours,  without  making  any  efforts  on  their  part. — 
100. 

The  people  there  are  all  of  equal  rank,  neither  high  nor  low ; they  are 
not  greedy ; nor  do  they  store  things.  They  are  all  healthy,  powerful  and 
happy,  attaining  all  siddhis  of  the  mind,  fur  a period  of  30,000  years.  The 
next  three  Dvipas  enjoy  the  same  happiness,  life,  beauty,  virtue  and  pros- 
perity. Thus  I have  described  all  the  sacred  Dvipas  up  to  ^Almala  (i.e., 
five'i.  The  ^Almaladvipa  is  encircled  by  the  Sur&  Ocean,  which  is  twice 
its  size. — 101-10-t. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  twenty  second  chapter  describing  the 
Dvipas  {of  Sdka,  Kusa,  Krauheha  and  ^(Umala.) 


CHAPTER  CXXIII. 

Gomeda  Dvlpa. 

Sflta  said  ; — Risis!  Now  hear  about  the  sixth  dvipa,  known  as  die 
Qomeda.  It  surrounds  the  Surodaka  Ocean.  Its  size  is  double  that  of  the 
j^lmaladvtpa.  It  has  two  beautiful  mountains. — 1-2. 

The  fii'st  one  is  SamanA,  full  of  antimony  (Aujana),  and  the  second 
one  is  the  Eamada,  full  of  all  kinds  of  herbs.  Tt  is  very  lofty  and 
full  of  gold.  The  Gomedadvipa  is  surrounded  by  the  sixth  ocean, 
lk§urasoda,  which  is  double  the  size  of  the  Suroda  Ocean.  The  Moun- 
tains DhAtakt  (or  SumanA)  and  Kumuda  are  the  sons  of  Havya.  They 
are  of  vast  dimensions.  The  first  sub-division  is  Saumana,  also  known  as 
.Dh&takt  Khapdn,  after  Dhataki,  the  first  mountain.  Gomeda  Khapda  is 
also  called  Sarvasukha.  The  Khanda  of  the  Kumuda  Mountain  is  called 
under  the  same  name — Kumuda. — 3-7. 

Both  the  mountains  are  round  in  shape,  spreading  from  one  end  to 
the  other,  and  are  very  lofty.  To  the  east  of  the  dvtpa,  stands  the  Mount 
SumanA,  while  Mount  Kumuda  is  on  the  west ; both  extending  to  the  sea 
by  means  of  offshoots,  stretching  from  the  east  to  the  west.  -~8-9. 


mAVTEn  cxxni. 


m 


That  region  is  divided  into  two  parta  by  the  feet  of  these  mountains. 
Half  of  the  southern  portion  is  known  as  the  Dhfttakl  Kha^da*  while 
the  northern  half  is  called  the  Kumada  Khanda.  Both  these  countries 
(janapadas)  belong  to  the  Gomedadvipa,  and  they  are  of  gigantic  dimen- 
sions.— 10-11. 

Puykara  Dvipa. 

I shall  now  speak  of  the  seventh  dvipa,  the  Great  Puekara,  which 
surrounds  the  Ik^urasoda  Sea,  which  is  double  of  Gomeda.  It  is  itself 
surrounded  by  the  Pu^karas  (lakes  or  lotuses?).  Chitras&nu  is  the  chief 
mountain,  and  it  is  full  of  lotuses  and  adorned  with  the  rocks  of  won- 
derful gems.  The  Mount  Chitraafinu  stands  on  the  eastern  half.  Its 
circumference  is  27,0  X)  ydjanas,  and  height  is  24,000  ydjanas.  The 
western  half  is  covered  by  the  M&nasa  Mountain,  which  looks  like  a full 
moon  rising  near  the  sea  coast.  Its  height  is  5,500  yojanas.  The 
Mount  Mali4vita  is  its  son  which  guards  the  western  portion  of  this  region. 
The  half  of  the  region  lying  east  of  this  mountain  is  divided  into  two 
parts.  The  Puskaradvtpa  is  surrounded  by  the  sea,  the  water  of  which  is 
tasteful.  Its  dimensions  are  double  of  the  Gomedadvipa.  The  people  of 
this  dvipa  live  up  to  30,000  years.  There  are  no  exceptional  changes  there 
to  this  natural  rule  and  the  people  are  healthy,  happy  and  have  attained 
perfection  in  all  the  qualities  of  the  mind.  The  people  of  the  three 
superior  dvipas  are  all  equal  in  happiness,  life,  beauty  and  bravery. 
There  is  no  air  of  superiority  or  inferiority  in  them.  Besides  this, 
there  is  none  to  kill  or  be  killed  there,  and  there  is  a total  absence  of 
hatred,  envy,  fear,  greed,  pride,  hypocrisy,  enmity,  &xt.  They  are 
free  from  the  differoutiation  of  troth  and  untruth,  virtue  and  vice. 
The  order  of  Varna  and  A^rama,  the  practice  of  rearing  up  domestic 
animals,  trade,  husbandry  are  also  not  in  existence  there. — 12-23 

The  three  kinds  of  knowledge,  criminal  laws  and  punishments  are  also 
not  known  there.  It  does  not  rain  there,  neither  there  are  rivers  in  that 
region.  The  climate  is  also  not  influenced  by  beat  or  cold.  The  water 
supply  and  plant  life  of  the  country  depends  on  the  hill  waterfalls.  The 
seasons  are  the  same  as  in  Uttara  Kum.  Happiness  pervades  all  round. 
The  troubles,  of  old  age  are  also  unknown  there.  Such  is  the  life  in  the 
Dhfttaki  and  Mah&vlta  Khan^as. — 24-26. 

Thus  the  seven  dvipas  are  surrounded  by  the  seven  oceans.  The 
dimensions  of  a dvipa  tally  with  the  dimensions  of  the  sea  preceding  it 
surrounded  by  it).  Both  the  dvipas  and  the  oceans  have  thus 
gradually  grown  in  magnitude,  a vast  store  of  waters  being  called 
the  ocean.-— 27-28. 


336 


TBEMATB7A  PUB  AN  AM. 


The  root ' Ripi  ’ means  to  wander  about  in  happiness ; hence  in  these 
Varsas  all  the  four  classes  of  people  live  happily.— 29. 

The  Tides. 

When  the  moon  vises  in  the  East,  the  sea  begins  to  swell.  The  sea 
becomes  less  when  the  moon  wanes.  When  the  sea  swells^  it  does  so  with 
its  own  waters  (and  not  with  additional  water),  and  when  it  subsides,  its 
swelling  is  lost  iu  its  own  water  laud  does  not  actually  lose  any  water)* 
On  the  rising  of  the  moon,  the  sea  increases  as  if  its  waters  have  really 
increased.  During  the  bright  and  dark  fortnights,  the  sea  heaves  at  the 
waxing  of  the  moon  and  becomes  placid  at  the  wane  of  it,  but  the  store 
of  the  water  remains  the  same.  The  sea  rises  and  falls,  according  to  the 
phases  of  the  moon,  and  loOangulis  fthree-forths  of  inches,  or  112J  inches) 
is  the  measure  of  its  rise  and  fall,  on  the  two  parva  days  (i.e.,  full  moon 
and  new  moon  days  respectively).  The  place  between  two  seas  is  called  a 
dvipa.  The  sea  is  called  Udadhi,  on  account  of  its  containing  water. 
-30-34. 

The  mountains  are  called  (tiri  because  they  swallow  («.e.,  hide  every-^ 
thing  Nigima) ; and  because  they  fill  up  (space),  therefore  they  are  called 
Parvata. — 35. 

The  Mount  ^aka  is  in  Sakadvjpa,  and  is  named  as  such. — 36. 

Thus  is  Kurfastaraba  in  the  mi<lrit  of  the  janapada  in  Knrfadvipa. 
The  Mount  Krauilcha  stands  in  Krauijcliadvipa,  and  is  named  after 
it. -37. 

A gigantic  SAlmali  tree  stands  in  l^almalidvlpa  and  there  is  the 
Mount  Gomoda  in  the  dvipa  of  that  name  — 38. 

There  is  a banyan  tree  in  the  shape  of  a lotus  in  Puskaradvipa.  The 
banyan  tree  has  sprung  up  from  the  potency  of  Urahmri,  and  is  adored  by 
all  the  Devas;  but  really  its  origin  is  hidden  in  mystery.  PrajApati 
Brahin  i resides  in  Puskaradvipa  in  company  of  the  SfUlhyas.  He  is  adored 
by  the  33  Devas,  along  with  tlio  Brahmar§is.— 39-40. 

Thus  all  the  great  Rihis  and  the  Deva.s  worship  Brahrnd  there.  Various 
kinds  of  jewels  are  produced  in  Jainbflclvipa,  and  circulated  therefrom 
•to  other  clvipas.  The  people  of  these  dvJpas,  in  order  of  their  precedence, 
excel  one  another  twofold  in  simplicity,  cliastity,  truthfulness,  self- 
control,  health,  and  long  life.  In  all  the  sub-divisions  of  those  dvipaa 
the  inhabitants  are  protected  by  their  own  natural  learning.  They  all 
get  their  food  without  any  care  to  obtain  it. — 41-44. 

They  eat  the  wholosonie  food,  of  the  six  flavoum.  Beyond  Pu^kara- 
dvipa  is  the  sea  of  sweet  water  surrounding  it,  behind  which  is  the 


CHAPTER  OXXIII. 


337 


Mount  Lok«11oka,  both  dark  and  bright,  and  at  some  part  it  is  lighted  up, 
while  the  other  part  beyond  it  is  full  of  darkness.  It  takes  up  the  out^r 
half  of  the  populated  land  and  is  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  the  sea. 
—45-48. 

The  water  is  ten  times  land  and  it  protects  the  earth  from  all  direc- 
tions. The  fire  is  ten  times  water  which  is  upheld  by  the  former  every 
whore.— 49. 

The  air  is  ten  times  fire  which  it  holds.  It  spreads  itself  at  an  angle 
in  the  space  where  it  encircles  and  holds  the  beings. — 50. 

The  Akasa  which  is  ten  times  tlie  air,  holds  all  beings  ; and  ten  times 
greater  is  Bhut/ldi  ("AliafikAra)  which  surrounds  the  Akfiifa,  and  ten  times 
the  Bhutadi  is  MahakMa  which  stands  holding  them  in  turn,  while  it  is 
itself  held  by  the  Unmanifested  eternal.  The  mahatativa,  &c.,  are  called 
vikara  and  vikari  'producer  of  change  and  that  in  which  the  change  is 
produced)  in  turn  in  relation  to  the  support  each  gives  and  takes  from  the 
other. — 51-53. 

The  Vikaras,  such  as  earth,  &c.,  are  circumscribed  and  limited,  and 
each  is  greater  than  one  preceding  it  which  it  permeates : each  is 
produced  from  tlie  other  and  is  upheld  by  it.  They  are  held  together  by 
their  mutual  attraction.  They  are  really  separate  (molecules),  but  by 
mutual  contact  look  welded  into  one  homogenous  whole. — 54-55. 

Of  these,  the  elements,  earth,  water,  fire  and  air,  are  well  defined 
and  limited.  The  higher  elements  are  only  seen  as  lights. — 56 

Tliese  liglits,  I’.e.,  Akasa  and  other  elements,  too,  are  well  defined. 
But,  like  smaller  leaves  which,  though  separate  are  not  separately  seen, 
being  concealed  in  a larger  vessel,  these  higher  light-like  elements,  though 
separate  and  each  supporting  the  other,  are  not  visualized  as  such.  They 
too  excel  each  other,  in  the  order  of  their  precedence.  The  creation  of  the 
universe  depends  on  their  existence.  T.ie  origin  of  life  is  in  these  Tattvas; 
hence  without  them  there  cau  bo  no  life  and  action. — 57-GO. 

Thus  we  understand  that  these^elements,  Mabat,  &c.,  partake  of  two- 
fold characters,  viz,,  cause  and  effect.— 61. 

The  position  of  the  Earth  and  its  circumference,  with  seven  Dvipas 
and  their  extent,  circumference  and  other  measurements  have  thus  been 
described.  Such  is  the  situation  of  only  oue  part  of  the  universal  Pradhana 
Tattva,  0 King ! this  much  is  to  bo  heard  of  the  position,  &c.,  of  the 
Earth.  I shall  next  tell  you  about  the  movemouts  of  the  Sun  and  the 
Moon. — 62-65. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  twenty  third  ehaptcr  dcaUny  with  the 
jMsiiionof  the  seven  Dcipas  in  Bhuvanakofit, 


48 


388 


TEE  UATSTA  PURANAIi. 


CHAPTER  CXXIV. 

SAtfi  said  :'~-I  shall  now  tell  yon,  0 Risia .!  aotnething  about  the 
movements  of  the  snn  and  the  moon  and  the  area  illumined  by  these  two 
moving  bodies,  eta.  (the  sun  and  the  moon).  This  includes  the  space 
occupied  by  the  seven  dvlpas  and  the  seven  oceans,  compnsing  (at  a time) 
the  half  of  the  Eartli,  as  well  as  many  parts  of  the  universe  outside  the 
Earth.— 1*2, 

The  snn  and  the  moon  shed  their  lights  on  the  circumference  of  the 
Earth.  The  learned  believe  the  heaven  to  have  a similar  ciroumference. 
The  snn  ordinarily  lits  up  tlie  tliree  worlds  in  a moment.  He  is 
called  Ravi,  for  giving  instantaneous  (7=  at  once)  light  and  thereby 
protecting  protect)  the  creation.— 3-4. 

1 shall  again  and  again  impress  on  you  the  vast  magnitude  of  the 
sun  and  the  moon.  On  account  of  the  vastness  of  their  magnitude,  the 
expression  mahat  (Great)  has  been  used  in  their  connection.  The  circum- 
ference of  the  sun  is  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the  Bharatavarsa  (?).  It  is 
9,000  yojnas  in  diameter  and  three  times  as  much  in  circumference. — 5-7. 

The  moon  is  twice  as  much  bigger  in  circnmferenco  and  diameter 
than  the  sun  (?).  I shall  now  repeat  the  measurements  in  y6jana8  of  the 
terrestrial  globe,  comprising  the  seven  dvipas  and  the  seven  oceans,  as 
enumerated  in  the  Puriinas.  I shall  now  speak  of  the  Silmpratas  and  the 
Abhimanls  (?)  The  abhiniant  Devas  of  past  ages  are  equal  (in  number  ?) 
to  the  Sampratas,  in  form  and  name.  Therefore  1 shall  describe  the  surface 
of  the  Earth  and  the  Samprata  (present  ?)  Devas.— 8-11. 

The  Divyas  are  similar  to  the  Sampratas  in  their  entire  distribution. 
The  complete  magnitude  of  the  earth  is  50  crore  (yOjanas). — 12. 

The  half  of  the  terrestrial  globe  lies  north  of  the  Mount  Meru,  while 
inside  the  Meru  every  direction  oxten'ls  to  a croie  of  yujanas.  The  extent 
of  the  half  terrestrial  orb  is  80,50,000  <'y6janas  ?)  The  extent  of  the 
world  is  8,79,00,000  ydjanas.  This  is  the  length  of  the  seven  dvtpas  and 
the  seven  oceans.— 13-16. 

The  magnitude  of  the  interior  orb  is  thrice  of  its  whole  extent,  and  is 
11  orores  and  37  lacs  (ydjanas  ?).  This  is  the  internal  magnitude.— 17-18. 

The  space  in  the  firmament  studded  with  the  stars  is  equal  in  circum- 
ference to  the  magnitude  of  the  entire  earth  below.  In  other  words,  the 
Earth  has  the  same  measurement  as  the  Heaven.  To  the  east  of  Mem,  on 
the  Mftnasottara  Mountain,  is  Sdstvoka-STirA,  the  city  of  Mahendra.  It  is  full 
of  gold.  To  the  south  of  Meru  is  the  city  of  Dhsrmarftja,  called  the  Saipya- 
mana,  on  the  back  of  the  M4nasa  Mountain.  Vaivasvata  Dharmar&ja 


OBAPTBR  CXXIV.  SSB 

resides  there.  To  the  west  of  Satneru,  on  the  top  of  the  MAnasa  Monntsio, 
is  the  fair  city  of  Varona  named  Sui}4.  North  of  the  Mem,  on  the  top  of  the 
MAnfisa  Monntain,  is  the  Vibhavari  city  of  Moon  (Strnea).  It  is  like  the  city 
of  Muhendra.  To  the  north  of  the  MAnasA  Mountain,  are  the  LokapAlaa  in 
the  four  directions,  for  the  propagation  of  virtue  and  the  protection  of  the 
universe.  At  the  time  of  the  Dak^inAyana,  the  sun  travels  over  the 
LokapAlaa.  Now  hear  about  it.  This  sun,  with  the  Jyotirfchakra  (circle 
of  light?)  travels  south-wards,  at  the  speed  of  a swift  arrow  let  loose 
from  the  bow. — 19-26. 

ffote.->-D»kfi9ftyuasThe  Ban’s  progresB  aontb  of  the  equator. 

When  He  reaches  the  centre  of  AmarAvatl  then  He  is  seen  to  be 
rising  in  the  Dharmaraja’s  Samyammaptiri,  to  be  setting  in  VibbAbari. 
That  is  the  midnight  time  in  Sa^purl* — 27-28. 

When  it  is  midday  in  Dharmara’jAs  city  of  SamyAminA,  it  is  dawn  in 
the  Su^Apurt  of  Varuna.  When  there  is  midnight  in  'VibhAbart,  it  is 
sunset  in  the  city  of  Indra.  When  it  is  midday  in  the  SnsApuil  of  Varana, 
the  sun  rises  in  VibhAbart.  When  the  sun  rises  in  the  Amaravati  of  Indra, 
it  is  midnight  in  the  Saipyamana  of  DharmarAja  and  sunset  in  the  city  of 
Varana.  Thus,  like  a fiery  wheel,  the  sun  moves  with  great  rapidity  and 
even  visits  the  pleiades  (the  Great  Bear).  He  th\rs  goes  round  the  (MAnas) 
on  four  sides. — 29-33. 

The  sun  goes  regularly  to  his  two  abodes,  UdayA  (rising)  and 
Astamaya  (setting),  and  his  rays  fall  on  three  cities  of  the  Devas,  in  the 
morning,  at  noon,  and  in  the  afternoon  respectively.  The  rays  of  the  rising 
sun  grow  stronger  and  stronger  until  at  noon  they  reach  their  greatest 
intensity.  After  noon  time  He  trudges  along  with  subdued  rays  until  He 
sets  down.  The  sunrise  and  the  sunset  create  east  and  west  respect- 
ively.—34-36. 

The  sun  gives  out  beat  equally  in  all  directions,  in  the  front,  sideways 
and  backward.  He  is  said  to  rise  at  a place  where  He  is  first  seen  and  set 
where  lie  (finally)  disappears.  Tim  Mount  Meru  is  northernmost  place, 
though  south  of  the  LokAloka  Mountain.  He  is  at  a vast  distance  from 
the  Earth  and  His  rays  too  in  their  passage  here  (are  obstructed  by)  go 
to  other  things ; consequently.  He  is  not  visible-at  night.— 37-39. 

The  sun  appears  high  (on  the  horizon)  when  He  reaches  the  centre 
of  Pu^karadvlpa.  He  travels  over  the  ^th  of  the  world  in  one  muhfirta 
(a  period  of  48  minutes).  That  is  to  say,  the  speed  of  the  sun  in  one  muhfirta 
(48  minutes)  is  31,50,000  yOjanas  of  9,45,('0,000).  Thus  gradually  He 
marches  to  the  south.  In  His  southward  course  (Dak^inAyana),  He 


340 


THE  MAT8YA  PUEANAy. 


travels  in  ilie  space  beln’een  MAnasdltara  and  Meru  thrice  as  mtich  as  in 
the  centre  of  Puskara.  Now  hear  of  his  southward  course,  lie  covers  the 
whole  circumference  of  the  earth,  9,4<),0(),0U0  ydjaiius,  in  course  of  a day 
and  night.  After  finishing  his  soullnrard  course  when  he  comes  at  the 
equator  (Visava  rekliA',  he  travels  over  lights  up)  the  north  of  the  K^tra- 
sAgara,  as  well  as  the  Vi^juvauiaiujala,  whose  extent  all  of  yon  now  hear. 
It  is  3,21,00,000  ydjuuas.  In  the  month  of  Sravapa  the  snn  in  his  northern 
course  travels  over  Piiskaraclvipa,  which  is  beyond  tho  Gdmedadvtpa. 
Tlie  extent  of  the  northern,  southern  and  the  middle  of  this  journey  should 
be  noted  ns  below.  Jaradgnva  is  in  the  middle,  Airavata  in  the  north  and 
Vai^vAnara  in  the  south.  Nagsivithl  is  the  UttarAvithi  (i.c.,  northern  course 
begins  with  Nagavithi  ?}.  Ajavithi  is  the  Dak^iiiAvUhl,  with  Ajavttbl 
begins  the  southward  course  ? The  asterisms  P.  AsAdba  and  U.  AsAdha, 
as  well  as  the  MulA,  Asvini,  Bharani,  and  KrittikA  form  the  NAgavlthi. 
Rohint,  ArdrA  and  Mriga^ira  arc  also  NAgaviihi  (or  fhijavithi). 

In  the  text  qaotod  by  Mr.  Wilson,  this  sIh>uI<1  read  Oajuvithi  instead  of  Nfigavlthu 

The  two  Asadhds  ami  ilie  Mula  (constiuiliii^  tl\e  vithi  called 
Vaidv&nara,  along  with  the  two  vUhis  west  of  it,  namely,)  hoginning  with 
Ajavithi  (that  is,  Ajavithi  ami  M|*igaviihi)  or  the  two  villiis,  Kast  of 
Abhijit  and  ending  with  SvAti  are  the  throe  vithis  nortli  of  tlie  Nagavillii. 

In  other  word-s,  the  thr(?e  vithis  of  which  Abhijit  is  the  East,  namely,  Ajavithi, 
Mrigavithi  aud  VaUvauaravillii  form  the  southern  ci  urso.  While  tho  three  vithis  begin- 
ning with  Nflgavithi  Jorm  the  Norlliorn  course.  This  is  ropoati  d later  on.  Tho  present 
verses  5S  and  51a  are  evidently  corrupt  readings.  Tho  translation  of  the  above  two 
verses  is  tentative  on'y. 

And  when  tho.  snn  paeses  on  to  tho  nstorisms  Pnsya,  Arflc^a  and 
Punarvasn,  then  lie  is  said  to  iio  on  tho  AirAviitivilhi.  Tliese  three  Vithis 
comprise  the  Uttaramarga  (noil1»oin  oonrse).  ^^’llon  the  sun  is  in  l^iirva 
and  Uttaraplifilguna  and  Magha,  tho  Vitlii  is  eallocl  Ar^ablii.  Purva  and 
Uttarapr8.;(|]iapada  and  l{f*vati  are  tho  (.hiviihi ; wliilo  l^ravana,  Dhaiii^thS 
and  Varuial  arc  the  Jaraflgavaviilii.  Tliese  three  Vithis  form  llio  middle 
course  of  the  sun.  flastn,  SvAii  ami  Chiira  arc  the  x\jiivithi ; Jyes(hA, 
ViiJakha  and  Maitra  are  the  Mrigaviilii ; Mula,  l^urva  and  Uttara  A^fidha 
are  the  Vaillvanara^ilh^  1'hese  three  Vitlhs  form  ihesoiUhern  route  of  the 
sun;  now  the  (chordal)  distance  between  the  extreme  pojnts  of  these 
(Viilils),  each  should  bo  noted.— 40-00. 

This  is  31 ,03,300  yojanas.  Now  bear  of  this  distance  along  the  course, 
south  and  north  of  the  erjuator.  Such  distniico  between  the  ecliptics  and 
the  equators  in  tho  centre  is  1,025  yojanas  between  the  solstices  and 
the  equator)*  Tho  sun  tiavelliug  nonli  and  south  of  the  (equatorial)  lino 


GRAPTER  GXXIV. 


HX 


has  a course  ol  8,000  mandalas  during  iJttar&yapa ; hut  its  southern  course, 
called  also  the  outer\7ar(l  course,  is  similarly  traversed  by  the  sun. — 61-06, 

Now  bear  of  the  magnitude  of  tlicse  mandalas.  Each  niandala  is 
18,058  yOjanas  in  extent,  being  obliquely  inclined  to  the  equator.— 67-68. 

In  the  nave  (or  centre)  of  tlic  mandala,  the  sun  completes  one  rota- 
tion in  a day,  like  the  potter’s  wheel ; such  is  the  case  with  the  moon 
also.— 69, 

In  His  Dak^inliyana  march,  the  sun  travels  very  fast,  like  a wheel, 
and  that  is  why  he  traveraes  over  a vast  area  within  such  a short  dura- 
tion.— 70. 

In  other  words,  the  sun  in  his  southward  course  lapirlly  goes  over 
thirteen  and  a half  asterisms  in  12  muhfirtas  'in  day  time  ? , and  in  18 
muhfirtas  at  night,  in  travelling  comparatively  at  a slower  speed,  like 
the  lump  of  clay  in  the  centre  of  the  potter’s  wheel. — 71-72. 

In  TIis  Uttarftyan.a  couise,  the  sun  moves  on  slowly,  and  con.5equently, 
lie  is  only  able  to  cover  a short  distance  during  a long  time. — 7.3. 

Then  He  goes  over  only  13  (and  a half?;  asterisms  in  IS  imihiirtas 
in  day  time,  and  at  night  He  goes  over  the  same  number  of  asterisms  in 
12  rauhdrtas  —71. 

>1n  other  wordn,  the  total  length  of  the  day  and  night  boing  30  mnhurtai!.  a 
muhOrta  is  equal  to  J of  an  hour.  The  longest  day.  i.e.,  Jlst  Juno,  is  said  to  be  of  18 
muh Ortas,  or  14  hours,  24  minutes,  when  the  shortest  night  will  bo  of  12  mnliOrtas,  or,  9 
hours,  and  86  minutes.  The  longest  night  will  be  14  hours,  24  minutes  on  2 1st  neeomber. 
and  when  the  day  will  be  the  shortest,  }>.,  of  0 hours  and  S ) minutes.  This  in  true  for  the 
latitude  of  Looking  to  tho  map  of  Indi.a,  it  is,  somewhere  in  Kfismir.  This  portion, 

OP  the  original  from  which  this  was  copied,  must  have  boon  composed  near  the  region  of 
modorii  Gilgit  or  Ghltral,  where  tho  longest  day  and  night  is  of  18  raiihOrtas. 

Like  tho  mound  of  cloy  on  potter’s  wiieel,  the  pole  star  moves  more 
slowly  than  cither  of  them.— 75. 

The  pole  star  completes  one  day  and  night  of  3Q.mnhurtas  in 
revolving  on  the  orbit  between  the  two  extremes. — 70. 

When  the  sun  is  on  His  Uttar^yana  course,  His  movement  in  the  clay 
is  slower  and  in  the  night  it  is  faster. — 77. 

And  in  His  Dak§inAyana  course.  His  movement  in  the  day  is  faster 
and  in  the  night  it  is  slower. — 78. 

With  this  different  speed,  the  sun  creates  day  and  night  (of  diffei-ent 
length)  in  Ajavlthi  in  the  south  and  on  the  north  the  Lokfiloka  moun- 
tain.— 79. 

Outside  tho  Vai^vtlnara  path  Ohc  Solstice  of  Cancer),  the  light  comes 
on  the  world  from  the  Loka  mountain.  It  is  day  time  when  the  light  of 
the  sun  spreads  from  the  ruskura.— 80. 


342 


THE  SiATSYA  PVRAEAM. 


The  Mount  LukAIoka  is  10,000  ydjanaa  high  and  extends  sideways 
and  outwards.  The  Mountain  is  partly  illumined  and  j artly  dark,  and  is 
round  in  shape ; the  inner  portions  of  the  LokMuka  Mountain  are  illumined 
by  the  sun,  the  moon  and  the  stars.  This  is  the  Aloka  Mountain,  and  the 
Mount  Nir^loka  is  beyond  it. — 81-83. 

The  verb  (^)  15ka  means  to  see ; aldka  («rih«)iB  opposite  of  Idka. 
The  sun  in  his  journey  creates  this  16ka  (light)  and  aldka  (darkness) ; 
bence  this  time  is  called  sandhyd  (joining  light  and  darknessX  t.e.,  twilight 
Ufli  is  the  night  and  Vyfleti  is  the  day  according  to  the  wise. — 84-85. 

One  muhOrta  consists  of  30  kalits,  ami  a day  has  15  rauhfirtas.  The 
day  increases  or  decreases  as  the  twilight  muhdrtas  increase  or  decrease, 
owing  to  difference  of  three  muhflrtas  in  the  course  of  sun’s  journey 
through  the  lino  (equatorial),  etc.  (The  day  is  divhiod  into  five  parts,  each 
of  three  muhartas).  The  first  three  niuhfirtna  is  PrAtah  (morning),  the 
next  three  muhfirtas,  is  known  as  .‘^aing.iva.  Three  muhflrtas  after  that 
is  called  the  Madhynhna  (noon)  and  a similar  number  of  muhflrtas  after  it 
bring  about  the  afternoon  called  apara  by  the  sages  ; this  is  folhuml  by 
evening  (SAyam)  of  the  hist  three  muhflrtas.  The  day  is  of  fifteen 
muhflrtas  on  the  equator. — 81-01. 

The  days  vary  in  duration  when  the  sun  is  travelling  south  or  north 
of  the  equator.  When  the  days  are  long  the  nights  are  sliort  (i.e.,  in 
Dak§inAyana),  and  when  the  nights  are  long  the  days  are  short  (in  Uttarfl- 
yana). — 92. 

The  equinoxes  (Visuva)  come  in  the  autumn  and  spring,  i.e.,  the 
days  and  nights  are  of  equal  duration  at  the  autumn  and  vernal 
equinoxes.  Beyond  darkness  is  light,  and  beyond  light  is  darkness.— 93. 

The  TiOkapiilas  are  located  in  the  centre  of  the  liokftloka  Mountain. 
Of  these  MahfltmAs,  four  are  there  till  the  annihilation  of  the  world. — 94. 

The  first  is  VairAja  Rndhama  ; the  second  one  is  the  Prajapati  Karda- 
ma ; the  tliird  one  is  the  fliaranyorflmA  Parjanya,  the  fourth  one  is  Rajasa 
KetumAna.  These  four  are  free  from  the  feeling  of  opposites  (e.y.,  pleasure 
and  pain,  etc.),  of  conceit,  sloth,  of  grasping.  Eacli  one  of  the  four  quarters 
is  occupied  by  each  of  them  on  the  Mount  Lokfdoka. — 95-90. 

The  Northern  peak  of  the  Agastya  Mountain  which  is  inhabited  by 
the  Devarfis  and  which  lies  outside  the  VaidvSnara  path,  is  the  way  of  the 
Pitfis.— 97. 

On  this  pitriyAna  reside  the  AgnihotrJ.'.(li»i8,  desirous  of  progeny  and 
procreators  of  the  people  of  tlie  univoree.— 98. 

0 King,  these  Uiijis,  who  originate  progeny,  begin  the  works  of 
creation  and  uplift  humanity.  They  move  about  iu  .OaksinApatba.— 99. 


CHAPTEn  CXXIV. 


343 


They  establish  the  order  of  duty  in  each  yuga  (Dliarma),  when  it  is 
disturbed,  with  their  learning,  I'iety  and  asceticism. — 100. 

The  previous  LokapAlas  are  bom  in  the  house  of  their  late  compeers. 
In  their  absence,  the  latter  take  their  place  in  this  way ; by  mutual  succes- 
sion they  continue  till  the  destruction  of  the  world.  88000  of  these  Pi^is, 
who  live  the  life  of  a householder,  remain  on  the  Dak^ina  (south)  path  of 
the  sun  till  the  end  of  the  world.  I have  thus  enumerated  those  fii^is 
whose  funeral  ceremonies  have  been  performed.  According  to  the 
usages  of  the  world  (to  stand  as  examples)  these  (tifis  (fiiddbas)  have 
passed  through  the  experience  of  birth,  feelings  of  like  and  dislike, 
lustful  passions,  sexual  and  other  worldly  enjoyment,  and  death. 
-101-105. 

The  seven  Ri^is  desiring  progeny  took  birth  in  the  age  of  DwApara 
and  conquered  death,  as  they  despised  the  work  of  propagating  children. 
88000  Iti^is  have  gone  into  the  path  of  those  seven  Ki^is  by  becom- 
ing Ordhareta  (perpetual  celebates).  They  will  live  till  the  destruction 
of  the  world  on  the  northern  path  of  the  sun.  They  became  immortal 
as  by  their  example  they  taught  the  people  the  sacrifice  of  lust,  passion, 
likes  and  dislikes,  abstaining  from  procreation,  and  other  worldly  enjoy- 
ment, by  showing  their  worthlessness.  Those  who  remain  till  the  end  of 
the  universe  are  called  immortals.  They  exist  so  long  as  the  three  worlds 
exist.  Not  so  the  mortals  who  follow  the  path  of  the  Mara,  such  as 
lust,  great  sins  like  the  slaying  of  embryonic  cells  and  great  virtues  like 
the  performance  of  Aifwamedba  yajna  (Horse  sacrifice).  The  immortals 
or  the  tTrdbaretas  go  into  unconciousuess  at  the  time  of  the  dissolution  of 
the  universe,  and  not  before.— 106-110. 

Note.— The  three  lights  of  the  world  are  )irit,  the  light  of  the  Fathers  (Pitrli^, 
second,  the  light  of  the  drdharetaa  (solitaries)  and  third,  the  light  of  Viynn  or  the  Bhaktas, 
who  perform  duties  for  the  sake  of  doty. 

Dhrava  (pole-star)  is  north  of,  or,  above  the  region  of  the  seven 
Hipis.  It  is  the  illustrious  foot  of  VisQu.  It  is  third  Lightgiver  of  the 
world.— 111. 

Tliose  who  reach  that  highest  seat  of  Vi^n,  transcend  all  sorrows, 
so,  all  those  Wlio  desire  to  reach  the  world  of  Dhruva,  remain  in  the  paUt 
of  virtue.— 112. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  twenty  fourtii  chaffer  dealing  with 
extension  of  sun,  moon  and  the  icorld  in  Bhiivanakosa. 


m 


cuAPTEn  cxxur 


NOTE. 

The  following  extracts  from  Oolebrooko.’s  OBsays  will  show  that  the 
Ilindns  knew  tlie  true  dimensions,  of  the  earth  and  so  the  description 
in  the  u\)ove  cliaptor  must  be  taken  in  allegorical  sense  in  several  places. 

It  appeura  ali^o  from  a |ia»23n^o  of  Bratmia^^tipta*!?  roftifcution  of  tho  supposed  errors  of 
that  author,  and  from  his  commentator's  quotation  of  Aryabhatta's  text,  that  this  anoiont 
astn>uomer  inaiutaincd  the  doctrine  of  tho  earth's  diurnal  revolution  round  its  axis. 
‘The  sphere  of  the  .stars.' ho  aiVirms,  * is  stationary ; and  the  earth,  making  a revolution, 
produces  the  daily  rising  and  sotting  of  stars  and  phnefs.''  HrahmagnpU  answers,  * If 
the  earth  move  a minute  in  a peduo,  then  wlicnco  and  what  route  does  it  proceed?  If 
it  revolve,  why  do  not  lofty  objects  fall  But  his  commeiitat-or,  Piitluldaka-swAmi, 
replies,  * Ary  abb  at  ta*  a opinion  appears  iievei-lheless  satisfactory ; since  planets  can- 
not have  two  motions  at  once : .and  tlie  objection,  that  l»>fty  things  would  fall,  is  con- 
tradicted; for,  every  way,  tho  niulor  )'art  of  the  earth  is  .also  the  upper  : since,  whorovor 
tho  spectator  stand.s  on  the  earth's  surface,  ov^en  that  spot  is  (he  iippi^most  point.' 

Wo  here  find  both  an  ancient  .astronomer  and  a latter  commentator*  maintaining, 
against  tho  sense  of  their  countrymen,  (ho  rational  tliudrine  wliieh  Tloradidos  of  I’ontus, 
the  Pythagorean  Bcphnntiis,  and  n fow  ethers  nmo  g tlio  Greeks,  had  allinnod  of  old,  but 
which  was  abandoned  by  the  astrounmons  both  of  the  «asb  and  of  tho  west,  until  revived 
and  demonstrated  in  comparatively  modern  limes."  ^ 

Brahmagupta  is  more  fortunate  in  his  reasoning  whore  he  refutes  another  theory  of 
the  alternation  of  day  and  night  bnagiiied  by  tho  Jainus,  who  account  for  tho  diurnal 
change  by  tho  pas.sago  of  two  suns,  and  as  many  mooii.s,  and  ii  double  set  of  stars  and 
minor  planets,  round  a pyra-nidical  rnonutain.  at  tlic  foot  of  which  is  this  habitahlo  earth. 
His  confutation  of  that  Hi»surdity  is  copied  by  BhAsk.irn,  who  has  added  to  it  from 
Pfithudaka’s  gloss  on  a dilTorent  passage  of  Brahiiugupra,  a refiitation  of  another  notion 
ascribed  by  him  to  the  sjime  .sc!ct.  respecting  tho  ir.inslation  of  tho  earth  in  space. 

This  idea  has  no  other  origin  than  the  notion,  that  the  earth,  being  heavy  and 
without  support,  must  perpelunlly  «h»scond:and  has,  tluTofore,  no  relation  whatever  to 
tho  modern  opinion  of  a proper  m (ion  of  the  sun  and  slars. 

Part  of  the  passage  of  Bhiiskara  ha.s  been  fpioted  in  a former  essay/  What 
regards  tho  further  subject  now  noticed  is  here  subj*nnod. 

* The  earth  stands  firm,  hy  its  own  power,  without  other  support  in  space. 

* If  there  be  a inatorial  .support  to  tho  earth,  and  another  iiphoidor  of  that,  and  again 
another  of  this,  and  so  on,  there  is  no  limit.  If  nnally  self-support  must  bo  assumed,  why 
not  assume  it  in  the  fir.st  insfaneo  V Why  not  recognize  it  in  this  inultiforiii  earth  ? 

‘ Aryabhatta  cited  by  PriUn'idaka. 

snssRt 

JUTBIH  I 

fpgppiyt  i Brihma-sphuta-siddhanta. 

* The  common tat.0F  wrote  at  least  seven  ooiiturics  ago  ; for  he  is  quotiod  by 
JBh&skara  in  tlie  to\fe  and  iioten  nf  the  t:iiroiiiaiii. 

‘ Kor  ail  outline  of  Aryabbatta*.s  sy.stom  of  astronomy,  see  a note  at  tho  oIOBO  of 
this  Essay. 


OnAPTBB  CXXIV. 


345 


*As  heat  is  in  tho  sun  and  flro,  coldness  in  the  moon,  fluidity  in  water,  hardness 
in  iron  ; so  mobility  is  in  air ; and  immobility  in  tho  oartli,  by  nature.  How  wonderful  at4 
tho  implanted  faculties ! 

* Tho  oarth,  posscssinji^an  attractive  forco,'  draws  towards  itself  any  heavy  snbstanco 
situated  in  tho  surrounding  atoiosphore,  and  that  substance  appears  as  if  it  foil.  But 
whlthor  can  tho  earth  fall  in  ethereal  space  which  is  equal  and  alike  on  every  side  ? 

'Observing  tho  revolution  of  the  stars,  the  liaiiddhas*  acknowledge,  that  tho  oarth 
has  no  support ; but  as  nothing  heavy  is  seen  to  remain  in  tho  atmosphere,  they  thenco 
coiicludo  that  it  falls  in  ethereal  space. 

* Whence  dost  thou  deduce,  O Bauddha,  this  idle  notion,  that,  because  any  heavy 
substance  thrown  into  the  air,  falls  to  tho  oarth,  therefore  the  earth  Itself  descends  ? ’ * 

lie  adds  this  farther  explanation  in  his  notes  : ‘ For,  if  the  earth  were  falling, 
an  arrow  shot  into  the  air  would  not  return  to  it  when  the  projcctilo  force  was  expended, 
since  both  would  descend.  Nor  can  it  be  said  that  it  moves  slowt^r,  and  is  overtaken 
by  tho  arrow ; for  heaviest  bodies  fall  quickest,  and  the  earth  is  heaviest.' 


Prom  tho  (|iiotations  of  writers  on  astronomy,  and  particularly  of  Brahmagupta,  who, 
in  many  instances,  cites  Aryabhatta  to  controvert  his  positions  (and  is  in  general 
contradicted  in  his  oerisuro  by  his  own  scholiast  Pj'itbdditka,  either  correcting  his 
quotations,  or  vindicating  tho  doctrine  of  tho  earlier  author),  it  appears  that  Aryabhat^ 
allirmoil  tho  diurnal  revolution  of  tho  earth  on  its  axis,  and  that  lie  accounted  for  it  by 
a wind  or  current  of  aerial  fluid,  tho  oxtonfc  of  vrliich,  according  to  tho  orbit  assigned  to  it 
by  him,  corresponds  to  an  elevation  of  little  more  than  a hundred  miles  from  the  surface  of 
the  earth  : that  he  possessed  the  true  theory  of  the  causes  of  lunar  and  solar  eclipses,  and 
disregarded  tho  imaginary  dark  planets  of  the  inythologists  and  astrologers,  anirmiiig 
tho  moon  and  primary  planets  (and  even  the  st;irs)  to  be  essentially  dark,  and  only 
ilinmined  by  the  sun : that  ho  noticed  the  motion  of  tho  r^olstitial  and  equinoctial 
points,  but  restricted  it  to  a regular  uscillation,  of  which  be  assigned  tho  limit  and 
tho  period : that  ho  ascribed  to  the  epicycles,  by  which  the  motion  of  a planet  is 
represented^  a form  varying  from  tho  circle  and  nearly  elliptic : tint  ho  recognized 
a motion  of  tho  nodes  and  apsides  of  all  tho  primary  planets,  as  well  as  of  the  moon  ; 
though  in  this  instance,  as  in  some  olhors,  his  ceusurer  impntos  to  him  variance  of  doctrine. 

Tho  magnitude  of  the  earth,  and  extent  of  tho  encompassing  wind,  is  among 
the  instances  wherein  he  is  reproached  by  Brahmagupta  with  versatility,  as  not  having 
adhered  to  tho  same  position  tiiroughoutk  his  writings ; but  ho  is  vindicatod  on  this, 
as  on  most  occasions,  by  tho  scholiast  of  his  ccnsiircr.  Particulars  of  this  question, 
leading  to  rather  curious  matter,  dcsorvo  notice. 

Aryabhatta’s  text  spoelllos  tho  earth's  diameter,  1050  yojanas;  and  tho  orbit  or 
ciroumferonoo  of  tho  earth's  wind  [spiritus  vector]  SSOS  yojanus  ; which,  as  tho  scholiast 
rightly  argues,  is  no  dlscrepaucy.  Tho  diameter  of  this  orbit,  according  to  the  remark  of 
Brahmagupta,  is  1080. 

' As.  Hes.,  vol.  lx.  p.  822. 

* Like  tho  attraction  of  tho  loadstone  for  iron.  Marichi  on  BiiAskara. 

* Meauliig  tho  Jainas ; as  appears  from  tlio  author's  own  aimotatioii  on  this  passage. 

* Biromani,  QolAdhyAya,  o.  i.  v.  2,  4,  7 and  0. 

44 


340 


THE  ilATSYA  PUTtANAM 


m 

CIIAPTEU  GXXV. 

Tlio  Riftis  after  hoarin/;  snch  an  iiitoreKting  narrati  ni  alxnit  the  sun, 
moon  anti  the  planets  asked  the  Sago  Suta.  How  do  the  phuiots  move  about 
in  the  Solar  system  ?.  Are  they  connecteil  with  one  another  or  do  they  move 
about  independently  ?.  What  causes  them  to  move  on  ?.  If  they  move 
about  by  themselves,  how  do  they  do  so  ?.  Wo  wish  to  hear  all  about 
these  things.  Pray  explain  these  to  us.— 1-3. 

SQta  said  : — I shall  tell  you  about  these  deceptive  things.  People 
are  deceived  about  them  even  when  they  see  them  with  their  own 
eyes.— 4. 

Among  the  fourteen  stars  is  the  planetary  por[)oise  <Si4umrira>. 
The  sou  of  rttamapjila  has  taken  this  ^l^ape  of  a saerilieial  post 
(Medhi)  in  the  sky  ami  is  known  hliniva.  It  u'v«>lvos  and  causes 

the  sun,  moon  and  planols  to  rcv.jlvo  al<  ».  d'ho  stars,  loo,  follow  it  in 
its  wheel — like  motion.  These  iiiminarios  revolve  owing  t^)  the  will  force 
of  Dhruva  being  tied  to  it  by  iho  aerial  chord.  Their  separation  aiid^ 
union  period;  rising  and  setting;  disturbances;  journey  southwards, 
northward,  and  in  the  central  region ; and  eclipse,  are  directed  by 
Dhruva,— 5-9. 

Tho  clouds  Jiinuta  beget  life.  Tliosc  clouds  remain  suspended 
on  the  air  Abahana.  They  change  sha]>c  ii.e.  condensed),  and  on  going 
up  a Yojana  from  there  form  into  rain  henco  they  arc  called  tho 
source  of  rain.  The  clouds  ruskanibartaka  have  hcon  born  from  the 
wings  (of  the  mountains).  These  wings  arc  named  Puskara  and  hold  a 
huge  volume  of  water  henco  tlicsc  clouds  arc  known  as  Puskaravaiia. 
The  valiant  Indra  cut  down  the  wings  of  the  mountains  tliat  used  to 
fly  at  their  will  and  cause  ruin  and  destruction  to  tho  ri.sing  generation 
(of  tho  univ'erse).  These  clouds  assume  various  forms,  give  out  tlnm- 
dering  noise,  produce  deluge  of  rains  at  tho  ejul  of  the  kalpa  and  ciucnch 
the  destructive  blaze  of  fire  at  the  same  time.  Tlicy  support  tho  air, 
are  full  of  immortality  and  causes  the  end  of  the  Kalpa.  The  burst- 
ing of  the  Brahma’s  egg  out  of  which  came  forth  tlio  four  headed 
Brahmd  Himself,  produced  other  clouds ; they  are  tho  outer  crust  of 
egg,  and,  are  called  Megha  (clouds).  Without  distinction  their  chief 
source  of  nourishment  is  smoke.  Tho  most  important  of  thorn  is  Par- 
janya.— 10-17. 

There  are  four  elephants  too,  (Diggaja).  There  are  two  divisions 
rif  ftlonliants  (Uasti),  mountains  (Parvata),  clouds  (Mogha),  and  serpents 


CnAPTER  GXXV. 


347 


(U.'iogi).  They  originally  sprang  from  the  same  common  stock.  Their 
01  igin  lies  in  water.  The  Parjanya  clouds  and  Ilasti  wax  during 
J I uinaiita  season  and  pour  out  showers  of  snow  born  of  cold,  to  promote 
tlio  growth  ot  grain. — 18-19. 

The  sixth  air  Parivaha  is  their  chief  support.  The  same  air  holds 
the  Akasa  Ganges,  whose  waters  are  holy,  nectarlike  and  pass  in  three 
directions.  The  elephants  hold  down  (Diggajas)  her  sacred  waters  in  their 
bulky  trunks  and  throw  them  diffused  by  the  air  and  the  same  is  styled  dew. 
The  Mount  Ilemakiita  is  in  the  south  (of  Mcru?) ; to  the  north  and  south  of 
the  snow  clad  Mounts  (Himavata)  is  the  Pundra  cloud  which  greatly  in- 
creases the  stock  of  rain.  All  the  rain  formed  there  converts  itself  into  the 
snow.  The  wind  on  the  Himavata  draws  by  its  own  force  these  snow  flakes 
and  pours  them  on  the  great  mountains.  Beyond  the  Himavata  there  is 
little  rain.— 20  25. 

Next  to  it  is  another  cloud  named  Iva  that  helps  the  growth  of 
beings.  These  two  clouds  enhance  the  amount  of  rains. — 26. 

Thxrs  I have  described  to  you  the  clouds  and  how  they  are  fed.  The 
Sun  is  said  to  be  producer  of  rain.— 27. 

Rain,  heat  and  cold  ; night,  evening  and  day ; prosperity  and  adver- 
sity, all  originate  from  Dhruva. — 28. 

The  sun  from  his  position  draws  water  of  Dhruva  in  molecular  form, 
remains  in  the  bodies  of  various  beings,  and  goes  out  in  every  direction  in 
the  form  of  smoke  when  they  burn  the  Sthavara  (imiuox'eables)  and  the 
Jaugamas  (moveables). — 29-30. 

This  (smoke)  forms  itself  into  clouds.  The  sun  is  the  centre  of 
clouds.  Ho  absorbs  the  water  by  Ills  bright  rays.  His  rays  with  the 
help  of  air  draw  out  water  from  the  ocean.  But  by  means  of  white  raye 
he  obtains  rain  from  the  clouds  in  duo  seasons.  The  waters  from  the 
(vapours)  of  the  clouds  when  brought  into  contact  of  the  wind  fall  in  the 
shape  of  rain.  Such  rain  falls  for  six  months  for  the  good  of  the  creation^ 
Wind  roars  and  electricity  is  produced.  Fire  is  said  to  be  the  source 
of  lightning. — 31-34. 

Meghas'are  called  so  on  account  of  their  sprinkling  the  land- 
scape (with  water.)  This  expression  is  formed  from  the  root  Miba  (to 
sprinkle.)  That  which  does  not  throw  down  water  is  called  Abhra.  Hence 
Abhra  is  stationary.  Tlie  sun  established  by  Dhruva  is  the  creator  of 
rain. — 35. 

The  air  from  Dhruva  drives  away  the  rain.  The  circle  of  stars 
comes  out  of  the  suu  and  the  planets  and  moves  away  from  them ; in 


m 


THE  MATSYA  PVRANAM, 


the  eiul,  it  re-ontors  the  sun  established  in  Dhruva.  Hence  the  chariot 
o!  the  s\in  is  seen  iK^av. — r»lU37. 

It  rests  on  a wlieel  with  five  spokes  and  three  naves  (or  triple  nave.) 
It  lias  eight  wlioels  under  the  same  circumference.  They  have  a common 
axle  (lotted*  with  the  particles  of  gold.  The  sun  moves  in  such  a glorious 
chariot.  It  extends  to  a lac  of  yojanas.  Tho  pole  (IwUlaiuhi)  of  tlio  chariot 
is  double  in  its  loiigiiudo*. — 38-3‘d. 

That  cliarii>t  of  tln^  sun  lias  b('cn  cieatod  by  Hrahnia  for  necessity. 

It  is  made  of  gold,  pure  and  uiimixinl  drawn  by  most  liandsomo  linrsos 
theft  run  with  tlie  spo»?il  <‘f  wind.  TIji'  vedic  mct2*os  are  the  stt^cd  to  whom 
the  wheel  is  attaelievl.  'J’he  chariot  resembles  the  vehicle  of  Varuna 
in  all  details.— 4U- 11. 

The  sun  moves  al)  »ut  in  the  heaven  every  day  oii  that  ohaiMt.  Now 
the  various  parts  of  tlie  sun  as  well  as  of  his  charicjt  denote  the  various 
parts  of  the  y(‘ar.— 

Day  is  oiu*  oi  tli.‘  navos  of  His  eliariots  wliecd.  Years  ar(^  the  spokes 
of  tlie  wheels.  Tlic  st  asruis  an‘  its  perij'Inn'ies.-- 43. 

Night  is  its  fondir  ; l^hanna  is  tlie  liiirli  banner  ; tlio  yngns  of  the  ^ 
axle  and  pins,  tin*  kalTis  .r^arts}  \vlii*-]i  carry  lln*  .Irtas  (r’l  [This  lino  seems 
to  be  a corrupt  reiidjngJ.  Knstlia^  arc  the  nostrils  r\'  the  horses  ; monionts 
(ksanas)  are  their  r<)\\’  of  tcrlh  ; Niinrsa  is  t!io  (anukarsa)  lloor  : IvAhi,  the 
pole  (Vi)-  Artha  Mi:<l  K.in-a  are  the  pins  of  liie  yoke  and  axle.  The  ved.ic 
metres  are  the  seven  ]»f>r.*3es  liiat  like  tht'  aii  swiftly  glide  with  tlio 
chariot.  GAyatri,  rri':«Uip'^»  Jagati,  .\riastupa,  l^mkti,  Vriliati,  Usnik 
tlie  seventli  — 41-i7. 

The  wlieel  i.^  attached  to  the  axle  and  tlie  a.xlo  to  Dliruva.  I'ho 
axle  revolves  with  tlio  wlieel  am!  JJliruva  revolves  with  the  axle.  Tho 


* Wo  arc  to  nriflor.«tan(1,  horo,  l)oth  in  tlio  a\Uj  and  yoko,  two  Iovor.s,  one  horizontal, 
the  other,  perpend icnlar.  Tiie  horizonlal  arm  of  tho  axle  ha.s  a wheel  at  one  end; 
tho  other  extremity  is  eonneoted  with  tlie  perpendicMilar  arm.  To  the  horizontal  arm  of 
the  yoke  art?  harncsstvl  the  horses;  ami  its  inner  or  right  oxtremity  is  scciirod  to  tbo 
perpendicular.  Tho  upper  omls  of  Iwtii  porpoudi Calais  ore  Bup)>o8od  fco  bo  attached  to 
Dhruva,  tho  poleslar,  by  two  aori-il  cords,  which  aro.  lengthened  in  the  Ban's  sonthem 
course,  and  .shortened  in  hi.s  northern  ; and,  retained  by  which  to  Dhruva,  as  to  a pivot, 
the  wheel  of  tho  car  traverses  the  sammit  of  tho  Xlilnasottara  mountain,  on  I^Hhkara- 
dwipa,  which  mns,  like  a ring,  round  the  several  continents  and  oceans.  The  contrivanoo 
js  commonly  compared  to  an  oil-mill,  and  was,  prohalily,  Huggosted  by  that  machine, 
AS  constructed  in  India.  As  tho  Mfinasrd.tara  moniilain  is  but  50.000  loaguos  high,  and 
Mem,  84.000,  whilst  Dhruva  i.s  1.000.000,  both  Icvcph  are  inclined  at  obtuse  angles  to  tho 
navo  of  the  wheel  and  each  other  Jn  images  of  the  sun,  two  oi|iial  and  somi-circnlar  axles 
connect  a central  wheel  with  tho  sides  of  tho  car.  Wilson's  Viijiin  Pnrftna.  Vol.  11.  p.  280 
(2nd  Edition). 


CIJArTER  CXXV. 


m 

iixlo  iiDvos  jilon^  wifJi  tlio  whool  prop^llo  l l)y  D’lriiva.  Tlio  cliariot 
Jias  been  Uiiu  designed  owing  to  some  special  rertson. — 48-19. 

Tlie  success  of  the  sun’s  chariot  is  due  to  the  conjunction  (with 
Dhrinui.)  Thus  this  divine  solar  chariot  moves  about  in  the  heaven.  The 
pins  of  the  yoke  and  axle  are  on  its  south.  The  pair  of  reins  of  the  yoke 
and  the  wheel  of  this  aerial  cliariot  revolve  round  and  round  in  all  direc- 
tions like  the  potter  s wheel.  The  pins  of  the  3’()kc  and  tlie  axle  travel siTig 
about  tlie  four  (piarters  revolve  round  Dhruva  hy  tlie  force  of  tlie  wind. 
The  reins  of  that  travelling  chariot  shorten  on  the  Xortliern  orbit 
and  lengthened  on  the  Soiitliern.  The  pair  of  reins  are  fastened  to*tho 
pins  of  the  ^mke  and  axle  and  arc  held  by  Dhruva,  who  thus  attracts 
the  sun.  When  the  reins  are  <lrawn  in  by  Dhruva  the  sun  covers  on 
cither  si<le  of  the  line  (diameter)  .s()UO  yojanas.  When  the  reins  are 
released  by  Dhruva  tlie  sun  begins  to  move  on  most  swiftly  the  outer  orbits. 

— 5()-rxS. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  tiventfj  fifth  chapter  describing  the  motion 
of  the  sini  and  moon  in  Bhiirauaho^a. 


ClIAPTEU  CXXVL 

Suta  said:— -Tlie  chariot  of  the  Sun  is  occupied  by  the  several  (1)  Devas 
montli  after  month,  by  turns,  in  regular  succession  ; tliey  carry  Him  on 
in  Ilis  path  together  witli  a host  of  (2)  Ri-is,  [o)  Gandharbhas,  (4) 
Apsaviis,  (5)  NAgas,  serpents,  (G,  charioteers  and  (7)  Raksasas.  Tliose 
Risis,  etc.,  dwell  there  in  the  solar  orb  for  a couple  of  months,  turn  by 
turn,  and  then  make  room  for  others. — 1-2. 

During  the  inontlis  of  Chaitra  and  Vaisi'ikha,  BralimA.  and  AryamA, 
the  two  Devas ; Pulastjm  and  Pulaha,  tlic  two  Prajapatis ; Vasuki  and 
vSiinkirna,  the  two  Nagas  ; the  chief  singers— Tumvaru  and  Narada, — the 
two  Gandharvas  ; Kritasthala  anTl  Punjikastbali,  the  two  nyinpbs  ; the 
two  charioteers,  Ratbakrit  and  UatUauja  ; the  two  demons,  ITetiaud  Praheti, 
resort  to  the  solar  region.  During  the  two  months  Jyaistha  and  Asadha, 
in  the  summer,  Mitra  and  Vanina,  the  two  Devas,  go  to  live  tliere. — 3-6. 

Besides  thorn,  the  following  others  also  go  there  during  the  two 
months  in  the  summer  :—Atri  and  Vasistha,  the  two  Risis;  Takgaka, 
Rambhaka,  the  two  Niigas ; MeiuikA  and  Sahaclhan}^!,  the  two  Apsaras; 
Ilabd  and  IIuhA,  the  two  singoi’s;  Uathantara  and  Rathakrit,  the  two 
cliarioieers  ; PiirusAdaand  Vadha,  the  two  Demons.  Then  the  otlicr  Devas 
come  in.  During  the  moutlis  of  Sravna  and  BliAdrapada,  the  following 


TIIK  MATSYA  PVRANAM. 


o 

«) 


50 


live  there ; —The  Devas  Iihlra,  V^ivasvun  ; tlie  Uists  An^'i:  1,  ; iluj 

Nadyas  Ehipartra,  SaukhapAla  ; the  tSumllmrviis,  V^isviu'a.'-  i,  Summmi  ; the 
charioteers  JVata  and  Hatha;  the  nyinpl»s  IVainhxjha,  Nimloohn  and 
the  demons  lleti  and  Vyaghrn.— 

The  Deviis  Parjanya  and  Vm>\ ; tlie  sages  Bharadvaja  and  (laiitama 
reside  there  for  tu'o  months  in  autumn.  The  (jamlharvas  Oliitrasena  and 
Suruchi;  the  hoauliful  nyniplis  Vi^vavnchi  and  OhritAch! ; tlio  serpents 
Ain\vata  and  Bhananjaya;  the  two  charioteers  Seiiajit  aiul  Snsona  ; the  de- 
mons Chfira  and  Vata  reside  in  the  sun  during  the  inonth.s  of  Asvina  and 
Kartika.  Fur  llio  tw(^  inotiths  of  the  tlcwy  season.  Agralinyana  and 
the  Devas  Aqk^^u  and  Hliaga  ; tlie  Iiisis  Kasyapa  and  Kratn,  resid*'  there. 
As  well,  the  serpents  Mahajiailrna  an  1 Karkutaka;  llie  (Ian  Ilia:  vas 
Chitrasena  and  Purnayu  ; ihe  nymphs  IMrvaehilti  and  I'rvasi,  ihe 
charioteers  Taksa  and  Ari^t  iiKMoi ; and  the  terriMe  ilemuns  V’idynt  and 
Surya.  Daring  the  two  winter  in-)nllisuf  M.igini  and  Plialr^una,  the  Ik'vas 
Ta§at1.  anvl  Vii^nu;  the  Uisis  Vamadai'ni  and  Vir^'vnmlf.ra  ; the  two  sons  of  the 
BCvpent  Kadru,  Kauwaia  and  A'^vatara  ; tlio  ^landharvas  Dhritarastni 
and  Suvyavarcha  ; the  nymphs  Tiloitama,  and  Kumbha  ; the  charioteers 
Ritajita  and  Satyajita;  tlie  detnons  Brahni  )pota  and  Yajnupeta  live  there. 
In  this  way  the  Devas,  etc.,  inhabit  the  s jlar  realm  for  the  two  months 
in  tlicir  respective  turn. — I'hLH. 

The  group.s  of  the  seven  eonpics  (]'  Ik-vas,  (2*  l?isis,  ^3)  CfandharvaH, 
(4)  Apsaras,  (o' Nngas,  chani^t^'ers  atjd(7'  It‘iks]Kisa.s,  tliat.  reside  tliore 
for  two  months  in  tliei]’  tiirfi,  arc  call'jd  the  Sih/m  i}>liinianis  (the  oeeupants 
of  the  place  for  tlio  time;,  Of  tlus.^  the  Iw^dvc  Devas  (six  couples  for 
six  seasons;  lend  their  tituy  lustre  to  the  Sun.  ddie  Kisis  adore  Him  by 
reciting  pleasant  liymns  of  p^al.'^e  ; tie*.  (Jandiuirvas  ami  the  Apsavas  show 
their  devotion  by  ilieir  ^in".'ing  and  daiicing. — 2o-2r>. 

The  cliariotoers  ho!  1 tlio  ivins  <»f  the  Itor^'^s ; the  serpents  niovo 
to  and  fro;  and  tlie  demons  follow  Him  in  His  tn»ek. — 27. 

Besides  these,  the  Valakliillya  Uisis  salute  tlio  Sun  and  accompany 
Him  from  Ilis  rise  till  He  sets.  Tlu',  Sun  shines  and  sheds  heat  and 
lustre  with  increased  brilliancy  witli  the  powerful  blaze  of  the  gigantic 
bonfire  of  the  potency,  asceticism,  A"oga,  Dliarma,  knowledge,  power  and 
valour  of  these  Devas, — 28-2'J. 

Note,— ‘The  Vftlakliillyas  arc  a cla.sfl  of  divino  personages  of  the  size  of  a thumb  and 
produced  from  the  Creator's  body  aud  said  to  precede  the  Sun’s  chariot  (their  uumbor  is 
said  to  bo  sixty  thousand). 

The  Sim  drives  away  all  tlio  troubles  of  the  beings  l)y  His  radiance. 
The  sins  of  men  arc  reduced  to  ashes  by  His  fire.  He  also  takes  away  the 


on  AFTER  CXXVL 


351 


siMH  of  tlioso  wliose  conduct  is  good  ; and  they  roam  about  in  the  heavens 
al  )ng  with  Him.  Those  Dovas  out  of  mercy,  protect  all  the  beings  in  their 
every  walk  of  life,  and  make  them  perform  asceticism,  mutter  japams  and 
lill  their  hearts  with  joy.  During  the  several  manvantaras,  the  seats  of 
the  Abhimant  Dovas  are  thus  changed.  Tliis  order  is  always  the  same ; 
whether  in  the  future,  or  in  the  past,  oaat  present.— 30-33. 

Thus  the  seven  sots  of  two  dwell  respectively  in  the  fourteen  man-* 
vantaras  respectively.  They  all  are  fourteen  in  number  and  change  their 
places  thus  in  course  of  14  manvantaras. — 34. 

The  Sun  in  Ills  diurnal  course  as  He  moves  on,  sheds  His  strong 
heating  rays  during  the  summer,  causes  cold  during  ihe  winter  and  rains 
during  the  monsoon.  lie  brings  about  night  and  day  and  spreads  His 
rays  far  and  wide  as  He  travels.  Thus  by  Ills  rays,  He  brings  in  peace  and 
satisfaction  to  all,  the  Devas,  Pritis,  and  human  beings  alike.  The  days 
and  nights,  as  they  revolve,  cause  the  bright  and  dark  fortniglits.  The 
Sun  stores  up  nectar  every  iuouth  in  Jlis  rays.  This  nectar,  pure  and 
agreeable,  the  Devas  drink  in  their  appropriate  fortniglitly  seasons.  The 
Devas,  the  Pitfis,  tlie  Sauniyas  and  the  Kdvyas,  after  having  drunk  this 
nectar  in  tlio  shape  of  the  Sim’s  rays,  and  replenished  themselves,  cause 
tlioreby  good  rain  on  this  earth  and  make  the  plants,  ordinary  and  medi- 
cinal, grow  and  satisfy  the  hunger  of  all  beings. — 35-37. 

The  Devas  tiro  satisfied  with  ambrosia  by  the  sacrificial  oblations 
once  offered  into  the  Pire  every  fortnight  and  poured  after  the  recitation 
of  tlie  prescribed  fornnila'  suffixed  by  svaha.  The  Pitfis  are  satisfied  by 
the  libations  of  water  olTcred  to  them  once  every  month  (*.  e.,  monthly 
oblations  are  offered  and  they  get  satisfied  for  one  month.)  The  men 
live  day  and  night  on  tlicse  grains  and  herbs.  The  Sun  is  the  sustainer  of 
all  beings  and  He  nourishes  them  by  His  rays.— 38. 

Thus  the  Sun  moves  on  in  His  one-whceled  chariot  swiftly  drawn  by 
Ills  horses  and  at  the  end  of  a day  returns  to  His  abode.  lie  always  has 
(tawny)  greenish  yellow  horses  yoked  to  His  chariot.  He  drinks  water 
through  thousands  of  His  rays  and  ceases  to  draw  it  when  it  passes  the  point 
of  saturation.  ^Thcn  lie  discharges  them  again  in  the  form  of  rain. — 39-40. 

The  Sun  in  course  of  one  single  day  and  night  goes  swiftly  over 
the  world  consisting  of  the  seven  oceans  and  the  seven  islands,  seated  in 
Ilis  one-wheeled  chariot  and  drawn  by  seven  horses.  The  seven  horses 
yoked  to  tho  Sun’s  chariot  are  no  other  than  the  seven  chhandas  metres); 
they  can  assume  forms  at  their  will ; they  go  as  they  like  ; their  speed  is 
swift  as  wind  ; their  colour  is  tawny  ; and  being  once  yoked  they  go  ou 


362 


THE  MATSYA  PURANAM^ 


incessantly;  tliey  never  get  tired  a bit  They  are  the  gods  declaring 
the  glory  of  Brahma.  Ascending  on  such  a chariot  the  Snii  travels  the 
earth  in  course  of  one  day  (21  hours.)  The  horses  were  yoked  at  the 
beginning  of  Kalpa  and  carry  on  the  Sun  till  the  eml  of  the  (Iroat  Disso- 
lution iMah^  Prahiya).  Thus  lie  g*)ea  on  round  and  jound,  day  and  night, 
surrounded  by  the  Vrilaklililya  M^iiis.  The  great  Uisliis  recite  praises  to 
Him  in  the  chosen  wunls  composed  by  them  ; the  tiiimlarljlias  and  ApsarAa 
sing  and  dance  round  Him.  Thus  the  Sun  is  carried  on  by  tlic  horses 
flying  like  birds.  Siiuilaily,  the  Moon  moves  on  in  the  several  aslerisms 
that  are  divided  into  several  ^ iihis.— 41-ld. 

The  Moon  has  als(j  l)een  described  to  u axand  wane  according  to  liis 
positions  with  respect,  to  the  Sun.  There  are  tliree  wheels  in  tlie  chariot 
of  the  Moon  and  the  horses  are  yoked  at  both  the  ends. — 17. 

The  Moon  lius  lieen  born  from  waters  alon/:  witli  Ilis  chariot,  horses 
and  the  charioteer.  'J’hat  cliavint  is  ilrcorated  wiili  tine  garlands  and 
yoked  with  excellent  while  lior-es,  re>ts  oji  iliree  wlicels.—lS. 

The  swift  running  diviiu*  lanse-  yola  d to  the  -M«  (!n’s  chaiit-t  are  ten  in 
numbev  ; they  run  as  swift  as  wind  mid  ihey  are  \\l;la  ul  any  attaehment; 
once  yoked,  tliey  carry  the  eaj  till  da;  iial  {>i  ihe  Hrcal  I Jl.'Soluiioii. — W. 

The  fair  Cliakf.usj;svA  i->  lli*'  cLiirl-ai'er  : and  the  horses  looking  white 
like  shells  and  of  om*  cohair,  d.'av-'  (he  cleni.g.  — ."D. 

Aja,  Tjipalha,  Xaia,  l!«  \a,  An.ioimrina,  Sapladhatu, 

Hamsa,  and  Vcfninm-iiga  aro  tliC  iiane?  *4  tin  hm  !MjrM»s  altacdied  to  the 
chariot  of  the  Mo-'»n.  Tim-  lie  goe.- .^uri-iuidudi  hy  the  Devas  and 
the  Pitris.  — 

In  the  bright  foittiighl  tlie  n gels  ahead  uf  theSnu  and  wliatover 
of  Him  waned  diuing  the  dai  k I'orinight  btV'iine.'.  tilled  up  again,  digit  by 
digit,  by  thf^  S dar  ray,  day  alier  day  Thus  lie  becomes  nourished  by 
tlio  one  seed-ray  of  tlie  Sun  iiaim  d Sii.^unnni  wlicii  lie  becomes  full  and 
circular  on  the  full-moon  night.  Similaily  in  the  dark  fortnight,  the  Moon 
wanes  daily  from  thc^ecofi^l  day  till  tlie  (dialn? daj^i  lillii  vlhe  fuurtoiaitli  day 
after  the  fuIl-Moon)  wliui  (lie  lAuui.s  drink  iij^  the  .soft  and  exccdlcnt  n(?ctar 
of  the  Moon,  sweet  like  hon(‘y  and  consisting  of  the  essence' «^f  the  watery 
juice.  For  half  the  month  the  nectar  becomes  stored  up  in  tbo  Moon 
by  the  Sun’s  ray,  so  tliat  the  Devas  woulfl  be  able  to  drink  it;  and 
the  quantity  of  tliis  nectar  becomc.s  maximum  on  the  full-moon  niglit  wliou 
the  Devas  adore  the  Moon  fr.r  aiioftjcr  su])ply  of  the  same,  gatlicred  from 
the  Sun’s  radiance  in  course  of  a fcitnight.  - bO. 

Note.— Sojumna— A principal  ray  of  the  Sun. 


OEAPTER  GXXVL 


353 


For  one  niglit  the  Devas,  the  Pity  is  and  the  Riyis  worship  the  Moon. 
From  tho  boginning  of  the  dark  fortnight  the  Moon  turns  back,  wanes 
and  becomes  dull  ; His  digits  decline  owing  to  His  nectar  being  drunk  up 
day  by  day.  33330  Devas  drink  the  lunar  ambrosia.  The  Moon  thus 
declines  during  the  dark  fortnight  and  waxes  until  He  becomes  complete  in 
the  bright  fortnight.  Thus,  drinking  the  nectar,  the  Devas,  at  the  end  of 
tlie  fortnight,  go  away  elsewhere  on  the  Arnavasyil  (dark)  night  when 
tho  Pitfis  come  to  Him.  When  the  still  small  portion  of  the  loth  part  of 
the  Moon  is  left,  they  drink  that  in  the  afternoon  on  the  next  day  for 
a brief  period  of  two  kalas  and  go  away  after  the  completion  of  this  dark 
fortnight.  The  Saumyas,  Vahri^adas,  Agnisvattas  and  KavySs,  are  the 
Pitris.  Those  who  preside  over  the  year  are  known  also  as  Kavyas.  So 
also  the  Dvijas  performing  good  works  can  become  Kavyas.  The  Saumya- 
pitfas  are  rigid  ascetics.  Vahrisada,  Saumya  and  AgnisvStas  are  the  well- 
known  threefold  Pitri  creation  who  arc  recognised  as  twice-born  (Brah- 
inanas). — 61-70. 

The  15th  portion  of  the  nectar  of  the  moon  is  drunk  by  the  Pitfis. 
The  sixteenth  part  of  the  Moon  is  recognised  as  the  junction  of  the  two 
(dark  and  bright)  fortnights,  when  the  final  waning  takes  place  and 
fresh  waxing  begins.  Thus  the  waxing  and  waning  of  the  Moon  under 
the  inlluenco  of  the  Sun  have  been  described. — 71-72. 

Kote  ;>-lt  is  highly  probable  that  tho  car  festival  of  Sri  Sri  Jagannath  in  Puri,  Orissa, 
might  have  its  origin  on  tho  movements  of  tho  chariot  of  the  Sun  which  are  again  tho 
reflections  of  tho  Soul  residing  in  tho  body. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-sixth  chapter  on  the  courses  of 
the  Sun  and  the  Moon, 

CHAPTER  CXXVII. 

Sdta  said  : — I shall  now  relate  to  you  about  the  chariots  of  the 
stars  and  planets  and  Rfiliu  (the  ascending  node).  The  chariot  of  Budha 
(Mercuiy,  the  son  of  ^Mooii)  is  brilliant  and  white. — 1. 

It  is  drawn  by  ten  hoi-ses  as  swift  as  wind.  The  horses  are  of 

the  following  colours,  respectively,  viz, — White,  reddish  brown,  spotted, 

dark  blue,  black,  purple,  white,  greenish,  dark,  and  of  variegated  colours. 

The  horses  are  noble  and  execellent  and  born  of  wind. — 2-3. 

» 

The  huge  chariot  of  Mars  is  made  of  gold.  It  is  eight  wheeled. 
It  is  drawn  by  eight  red  horses  bom  of  lire,  with  tlags  and  banners.— 4. 

Young  Mars  moves  on  in  this  car ; his  inotK)ii8  are  direct,  ami  retro- 
grade and  very  retrograde.  Vrihasputi  (Jupiter),  the  son  of  Angird  and  tho 


'354 


TTIE  MATSYA  PVRANAIil. 


learned  preceptor  of  the  Dovus,  moves  in  a golden  chariot  with  Hags 
on  it.  The  chariot  is  drawn  by  8 fair  coloured  homos  born  of  firo. 
Jupiter  remains  for  one  year  in  each  of  the  twelve  signs  of  the 
zodiac ; thus  He  moves  on  in  liis  cliariot  and  goes  to  his  destination.  The 
chariot  of  Venus  (^ukva)  is  brilliant  like  fire  and  decorated  witli  flags  ; 
He  goes  on  in  this  swift-going  chariot.  Next  comes  Saturn.  His  cliariot 
is  made  of  iron.  Ascending  on  this  chariot  drawn  by  horses  as  swift 
as  wind,  Saturn  moves  on.— 5-8. 

The  dark  coloured  chariot  of  IMlm  is  drawn  by  8 swift  liorses  of 
smoke-colour.  The  horses  move  as  swift  as  wind,  and  they  arc  well 
covered.  He  dwells  close  to  the  Sun,  but  Ho  travels  on  in  the  dark 
fortnight  towards  the  Hoon  ; and  returns  to  the  Sim  after  that  fort- 
night. The  8 horses  cd  Ketu  (the  desccinling  iioch:)  aro  slou  ler  and 
thin,  of  the  colour  of  smoke  ; but  they  are  hideous,  very  fiery  and  as 
swift  as  wind.— 0-11. 

Thus  1 have  described  tii  you  ab^ut  tlic^  cliariots  and  liorses  of  ibo 
planets.  These  are  all  atlacdiod  to  tin'  Polo  by  ropos  of  wind  ^air).  These 
cords  are  invisible  and  in.'ide  of  air  These  moving  duly  iiiako  tho  * 
several  chariots  move. — 1--13. 

All  these  stars  are  lied  to  hluuva  ; and  iliey  move  ou  ju*o]^tdlod  by 
the  wind.  The  Motm  and  tin  Su!i  ukvo  on  in  tlm  etd<'slial  llnnamont, 
prompted  by  ciinvi)tr>  of  strong  wind.  Tliey  glidv^  on  lied  tf)  the 
Dhruva.  Their  motions  rjund  iiu*  j^de  are  brougln  about  by  these  ropes 
made  of  wind. — 1 1. 

These  stars  and  luminous  .-pheu  stmidoil  in  tlic  lirinamciit,  are  the 
abodes  of  the  Devas  (Devagrihas,*:  ihoy  iloat  in  tho  celestial  atmosplioro 
as  boats  float  in  rivers. — lo. 

The  rays  of  the  J*oIe  star  cxU-i.d  t«»  the  farthest  limit  where  tho 
stars  are  visible  and  they  all  nio\e  on  tied  to  the  Pole  and  thus  cause 
others  to  move  ou. — PJ. 

The  stars  and  planet-  ih.Ml  to  tin'  l)hniva  fl*olc)  revolve  and  make 
others  revolve  as  f>ii  mill  while  revolving  itself  makes  others  revolve. 
The  air  tliat  causes  thorn  to  move  and  makes  them  look  like  a liery 
circle  (made  by  a lirc-brand  bcdiig  waved  round  in  tlio  air)  is  known 
as  Pravaha.  Jn  this  way  the  stars  move  on,  attached  to  the  Polo.  TJicso 
stars  arc  situated  on  the  bndy  of  f^WuiuAra,  who  lies  (.sleeps  as  it  wcrcj  on 
the  celestial  firmament.— 17-P.). 

NJi.- .Siauiririrn  i.M  known  j.s  /Oiliju’  |.^'rso^jll<•t1  and  is  no  oUior  than  Ihn  chiUl 
Visfiu, 


OEAFFEU  OXXVm. 


355' 


The  siiiR  committed  in  the  day  are  swept  away  by  the  sight  of  this 
^idumAra  chakra  in  the  night.  The  man  who  sees  the  stars  fixed  on  tl»e 
^ii^umiira  chakra  lives  for  as  many  Jinmber  of  years  more  than  his  proper 
life  period  as  the  stars  he  sees;  and  one  should  know  therefore  the 
form  and  the  location  of  the  different  limbs  of  this  Sitfum^ra  chakra 
fully.-20-21. 

Thus  is  llis  form  : — Uft/lna-pada  is  the  chin  of  ^irfumara,  Sacrifice  is 
the  lower  lip,  Dharma  is  the  forehead.  NAr.'iyana  and  the  Sadhi’as  are 
enshrined  in  the  heart ; the  Asvins  form  the  two  feet  on  the  eastern 
side  (the  right  foot'.  Varuna  and  Aryaind  form  the  two  logs  towards  the 
west  (the  left  foot). — 22-23. 

The  nev’a.s,  Sanj-varsa  and  Mitra,  form  respectively  the  fore  and  hind 
private  parts ; and  Agni,  Indra,  Marichi,  IC:efyapa,  and  Dliruva  form  Ilis 
tail.  There  is  no  rising  nor  setting  of  these  stars.  They  i-emain  fixed  at 
one  place.  The  Moon,  the  Sun,  and  other  stars  and  planets  are  situated 
in  the  form  of  a circle  facing  this  f^isfumara  chakra  in  the  firmament.  All 
the  stars  are  presided  over  by  Dliruva  and  circiimbulate  Him.  This  Polo 
star  is  the  support  and  .sacrificial  pillar  of  these  stars.  The  Dhruva  is 
the  best  amongst  the  Agnidhras  and  Kaifyapa-s.  He  moves  singly  above 
the  summit  of  Sumoru  with  His  head  downwards  round  the  summit  of 
Sumeru,  as  it  looking  at  it,  dragging  at  the  same  time  along  with  Him  tho 
zodiac  and  the  clu.ster  of  stars. — 24-29. 

Here  ends  the  one  hundred  and  tiocntij-sei'enth  chapter  on  the  praises 

of  the  Pole  star. 

CHAPTEll  CXXVIII. 

Tho  Ilisis  said  : — We  have  hoard  what  you  have  explained,  0,  Sfita? 
But  what  are  those  abodes  of  tho  Devas  ? Kindly  explain  more  at  length 
on  tho  luminous  splicres  (the  stare,  etc.) — 1. 

Sfita  spoke : — 1 shall  now  tell  yott  about  them ; about  the 
motions  of  tho  Sun  and  Moon,  about  the  abodes  of  tho  Devas,  tho 
S\in  and  the  kfoon.  In  the  beginning  of  (be  Kalpa,  tlicie  was 
neither  d.ay'nor  night  in  this  Universe:  it  was  all  covered  over 
by  darkness.  Brahmil,  born  from  Avyakta,  tho  IJnnianifested,  di<l  not, 
till  then,  manifest  any  elements.  Four  elements  were  left;  and  Brahrafi 
pi'Csided  over  thorn.  Then  Bh.agavAn  Svayambliu  desired  to  create  the 
diiferont  [x)kaB  (worlds)  and  assumed  Himself  the  form  nf  a fire-fly  and 
wandered  about.  Ho  then  thought  within  himself  and  came  ti’  kuow 


356 


TUB  UATBYl  PITRABAli. 


that  Agni  (fire)  liad  hidden  himself,  in  the  beginning  of  Kalpa,  in 
waters  and  in  the  earth.— 2-5, 

lie  collected  water  and  earth  in  the  hope  of  getting  fire  out  of  them  ; 
and  He  ultimately  obtained  three  kinds  of  fires  of  tvpial  amount,  viz.  —the 
Pachakagni,  employed  in  cv>oking  things,  was  begotten  from  the  earth  ; tho 
Sneha  Agni,  or  the  heat  dominant  in  the  sun  ; and  the  Jatharagni  or  (iro  of 
the  belly,  in  the  shape  of  beautiful  eleotrieity  and  not  proilueed  by  the  com- 
bustion of  any  fuel,  Ac.  Some  electrical  fire  is  increased  by  (ire  residing  in 
itself ; whereas  some  others  kindle  even  without  any  fnel.  'rhe  lire  pro- 
duced by  rubbing  two  pieces  of  wood  together,  is  called  Nirmathya  Agni 
and  is  quenched  by  water. — 0-8. 

The  electrical  fire  in  tho  belly  is  resplendent,  with  no  llamcs,  and 
beautiful  ; this  is  tlie  ligljt  in  tho  white  disc  of  tho  sun  ; it  is  dcvi  id  of  heat 
and  not  manifest.  When  tlio  sun  sets,  one-fonvth  of  his  l\istro  entoi’s  into 
lire.  Therefore  lire  looks  so  l)right  in  tho  night. — fl-lO. 

When  the  sun  rises,  onc-fourth  of  the  heat  of  lire  enters  into  Him; 
therefore  lie  imparts  heat  in  the  day.  The  mutual  infusion  of  tho  heat 
and  lustre  of  the  Vhre  and  Sun  into  eaeh  other  causes  the  days  and* 
nights  to  have  their  ahovo  meTiti«med  propc'rties. — 11-12. 

When  the  ^uii  rises  uu  tlie  nortliern  li.'ilf  ami  south  of  llie  world,  tho 
night  merges  into  the  waters:  iherefojo  water  looks  of  a copper 
colour  during  tho  day.-  III. 

When  th(‘  sun  sot-^,  the  day  morg«.*r^  in  ilm  walurs  ; hence  tlie  waters 
look  bright  in  tlie  niglit ; in  this  W!i\  owing  to  the  rising  and  setting  of  the 
sun,  tho  night  and  day  merge  in  tlif*  watc-r.s  respect! vel3^  Tho  fire  in  tho 
Sun  is  like  a red-coloured  jar  an  i it  lias  tlioiisiiid  l(*g.s.  Wlion  tho  sun 
shines,  He  draws  wati^r  liy  the  rays  of  this  fire.  Jt  is  this  (ire  that  draws 
in  waters  of  the  rivers,  wells,  oceans,  tanks,  lakes,  etc.  through  Ills  thousand 
rays. — 14-18. 

These  thousand  rays  cause  heat,  rains  and  cold  ; of  those,  four  hundred 
rays  look  like  nadis  (tuhular  veins  and  arteries)  and  tire  of  variegated 
forms  ; these  cause  rain.  C/ljandana,  iMedhyrt,  Ketana,  Ohetaim,  Amritaand 
JivanA  are  all  rain-produr;iug  rays.  Three  hundred  rays  produce  cold; 
and  they  are  drunk  fabsr)rI)od)  by  the  moon,  stars  and  phmets.  These 
are  the  middle  rays. — 19-20. 

The  other  rays  are  all  wliitc  and  gladden  the  hearts  of  beings.  Tliey 
cause  heat.  Tliey  arc  three  hundred  in  number  and  known  by  tho  names 
Kukubh,  Go,  Vi8\fisrir,  Siikla  and  others.  They  sustain  and  protect  the 
Devas,  Petris,  and  human  beings. — 21-22. 


OHAPTBR  CIXIII. 


ssr 

Tho  8im  always  satisfies  men  by  producing  herbs,  the  Pitris 
tlirougli  the  libations  of  water  svadhfi  and  the  Devas  through  the  sacrificial 
ofi’orings  svAlitt.— 23. 

During  spring  and  hot  weather  the  sun  imparts  heat  by  his  three 
hundred  rays  ; during  the  rainy  season  and  autumn  causes  rain  by  his 
four  hundred  rays;  during  the  dewy  and  winter  season  imj^arts  cold  by 
his  three  hundred  rays.— 24-25. 

He  imparts  strength  in  tho  herbs  and  plants,  bestows  nectar  to 
svadha,  and  imbues  immortality  in  tlio  nectars  of  the  Devas.  Thus  He  bene- 
fits the  three  worlds  by  liis  tliis  tliree-fold  action.  Ilis  thousand  rays  thus 
perforry  dilToront  functions  in  the  dilTcrcnt  seasons,  causing  good  to  half 
the  Lokaa. — 2f>. 

Such  is  the  white  shining  solar  orb  known  in  the  worlds.  From  Him 
emanate  the  stars,  planets  and  the  moon,  and  they  are  preserved  by  Him. 
27-28. 

It  is  by  the  ^usjumnA  ray  of  the  Sun  that  the  Moon  waxes  again,  day 
by  day.  Tlie  stars  are  born  from  the  eastern  ray  of  the  Suu,  named  Hari- 
kejia.--20. 

The  VisSvakarmA  ray  of  the  sun  is  in  the  south  ; He  is  the  sustainer 
of  the  planet  Mercury.  The  VisJvavasu  ray  of  the  Sun  is  in  the  west ; and 
Ho  is  the  originator  of  the  planet  Venus. — 30. 

Tlio  Samvardlian  ray  is  the  origijiator  of  Mangala  (Mars) ; the  Advabhff 
ray,  the  sixth  one,  is  tho  producer  of  Jupitar.--31. 

The  Surata  ray  noiirishcs  Saturn.  Because  these  never  fade,  there- 
fore they  are  called  Naksatras  (stars). — 32. 

These  are  the  fields,  the  regions  of  the  sun  ; their  rays  fall  incessantly 
unto  Him ; and  tho  Sun  accepts  them  also  as  Tlis  ; hence  they  are  named 
Nakshattras.  (The  Sun  pervades  all  these  by  His  rays).— 33. 

Those  persons  who  perform  good  and  meritorious  worts  in  this 
world,  go  to  these  planets  and  stars  (the  Naksattvas)  after  they  leave 
their  inortid  coils  and  these  are  saved ; hence  these  Naksattras  are  called 
T»lraki1s.  Aivi  as  they  are  white  in  colour,  they  arc  named  Sukli- 
kas— 34. 

Tho  Sun  is  called  Aditya  oft  account  of  His  having  the  lustre  of 
the  fire  and  asceticism  of  the  holy  kings  of  this  earth  as  well  as  those  of 
Heaven.  Tho  root  ‘ Srav  ’ moans  “ to  pour  out,  to  ooze  ” and  the  Sun  ia 
called  “ Savita  ” because  ho  sheds,  pours  out  tejas,  fire. — 


3S8 


TRE  MAT8YA  PVHAVAM. 


The  root  Vliauil*  has  various  meanings ; it  connotes  whitenoss,  nectar, 
cold  and  pleasaie.  The  word  Ohandraiml  (the  moon)  has  come  out  of  this 
root.— '37. 

The  shining  manclalas  of  the  sun  and  the  moon  in  the  divine  firma- 
ment are  luminous,  wliito,  full  of  water  and  lire.  They  look  haiidsorne 
like  white  pitchers. — 38. 

All  those  llisliis  who  attained  Devahood  by  their  karmas  in  tho 
several  Mauvantaras  have  become  the  above  liuuinnus  sphcM*cs.  Their 
abodes  in  tlio  firmainonl  are  termed  •*  Devagtilias.”  Tlie  Sun  has  got  his 
abode  as  the  Sun  ; so  the  Moon  has  his  “ Sauinyu”  aUxle  ; the  planet 
Venus  has  got  his  Saukra  abode.  'I'liis  Saukia  abode  is  shining  and  has 
sixteen  spokes  lb  potalled  lotus.)  Jupiter  has  atlaiiied  Ids  “ V'rihat  ** 
(big)  abode.  Mars  has  got  his  red  ah.ide.  — 3‘J*4l. 

Saturn  enters  into  the  '‘Saturn*’  mandala  ; the  Ihnlha  into  tho 
Budha  and  the  Uahu  'ascending  node)  into  the  solar  abodes.  All  the  stars 
enter  into  tlieir  nmudalaM  resprerivtdy  : so  tlioso  hnninous  spheres  in  the 
firmament  are  kn-iwu  a<  i) oagriiia';  of  ihfMj  persons  wlio  performed 
highly  nieritorions  works  in  this  wnrl<l.-' •I--I0. 

The  Devagrihas,  mcnii  nn.  d exist  in  onoit  Manvantara  till  tlio 

time  of  dissolution. — 1 1, 

Tho  Devas  occupy  tlie.-e  ]l.  \agri;nis  again  and  airaiu  by  their 
** xVbhiinaiia  ” tpivsiding;  eap  i 'iin’S  ; sli*'  t < u'cnpied  llioir  places 
along  witli  others  wil!j  ilirir  pa.-i  piv-.iditin  cMparitios ; the  present 
ones  witli  tlieir  present  ]n'(  I11114  ; t.ie  {uiiii'e  ones  will  reign 

with  their  future  piv-i  liug  faj.-ndtle-;.  tlltii  all  of  thorn  preserve 
their  respective  clniractej  isiic  h-alu/es  of  ili.dr  diPierent  abodes).  Vivasvari 
the  Sun,  is  tho  eighth  son  of  Aditi.  --- 11- bi. 

Tlio  luijiin.on^  ,\I  /on  is  known  :t-  Va'»u  ; fli*  is  qualified  with  Dliarma. 
Suki’a  or  lihtrgava  is  the  priest  *jf  liie  d(\*rioti.s.  --47. 

Vrihaspati,  of  great  liery  is  the  [)rie.st  tho  Devas  and  is 

tho  son  of  Angira  ; tho  Imndsomo  Ihidlia  is  the  son  of  the  Moon. — 48. 

Tho  ugly  Saturn  was  bom  of  iho  womb  of  Sarngyu  by  tho  Sun. 
Mangala  was  born  of  tho  womb  of  \dkesi  by  Fire. — 49. 

x\ll  those  stais  urff  born  from  lli^‘  wginh  (of  the  finnament'  and  aro 
the  prt>geny  of  Daksha.  Raliu,  ilic  dostniycr  of  beings,  is  llie  demon  born 
of  Sirphika.— 50. 

These  arc  the  Abliiimtiii  l>eva.'>  iihe  .Masters;  tho  presiding  J)eltics) 


CHAPTEB  CXXIU. 


359 


in  the  spheres  of  the  inooQ,  the  sun,  the  stars  and  the  planets.  Thus  the 
above  abodes  of  the  Dovas  are  described.— '51. 

The  abode  of  the  thousand-rayed  Sun  is  divine,  fiery  and  of  white 
colour.  The  abode  of  the  iloou  is  thousand-rayed,  bright,  energetic,’- and 
full  of  vraters.— 52. 

Budha  Mercury)  lives  with  the  Sun.  The  abode  of  ^ukra  iVenus)  is 
sixteeii-rayeJ  and  wateiy. — 53. 

The  abode  of  JIaiigala  (Mai-s)  consists  of  nine  rays  and  is  red  in 
appearance;  water  i.s  also  there.  Vriliaspati  (Jupiter)  has  12  rays  and  the 
colour  is  turmeric  yellow  ; His  abode  is  big. — 51. 

The  abode  of  Saturn  is  eight-rayed,  black,  and  is  made  of  iron. 
Radliu’s  abode  is  ako  made  of  iron  an<l  He  caiisf  pain  to  all  beings. — 55. 

All  the  asterisijis  are  the  refuge  of  tie  virtuous.  Their  raj^s  are 
silvery  and  as  they  arc  the  rodcomers  of  all  the  beings,  they  aro 
called  TArakas;  also  called  Suklikas  on  account  of  their  white  colour.— *56. 

Tbo  diameter  of  the  Run  is  nine  thou.«5an(l  yojanas  and  its  circum- 
ference is  three  times  that  (27000  yojanas). — 57. 

N.  n.— According  to  Surya  .SidUhanta  the  diameter  of  the  Sun  is  6500  yojanas  and 
tlio  diainetor  of  tho  Moon  is  4S0  yojanas. 

The  diameter  of  the  Moon  is  twice  the  diameter  id  the  Suii ; its 
circumference  is  thrice  its  diameter. — 58. 

The  stars  are  situated  above  all  and  their  diameter  is  onc-half* 
yojaiia. — 59. 

The  size  of  R ihu  is  tho  same  with  the  stars  ; He  travels  below  them. 
Ilis  place  is  made  up  of  tho  shadow  of  the  earth  by  Brahma ; it  is  full  of 
Tamas  (darkness.)  Uahus  enters  into  the  Sun  in  the  bright  fortnight ; 
in  the  dark  fortnight  it  emerges  from  tho  Sun  and  enters  into  the  Moou. 
It  is  luuned  Svar-bhaiui,  because  He  urges  foi  ward  by  Ills  own  rays  — 60-62. 

Tho  diameter  and  lliecirciimtcrpiice  of  Venus  are  one-sixteenth 
of  those  of  tho  Moon  in  yojanas  (03). 

Sukra  is  the  16th  part  of  the  ^loon.  The  diameters  and  circumfer- 
ences are  measured  all  in  Yojanas. — 63. 

The  diailictor  and  the  circumferonco  of  Jupiter  are  one-fourth  less 
tlian  those  of  Venus ; Mars  and  Kotii  tiro  one-fourth  loss  than  those  of 
Jupiter.  Rain  and  Mercury’s  ilimcnsions  are  one-fourth  less  than  those  of 
Mtirs  and  Kotu  (tho  descending  nodoi.  - 6 1-05. 

Tho  diameter  and  circumference  of  each  of  the  stars  are  the  sarno 
as  tliose  of  Mercury.  Some  stars  also  have  dimensions  of  five  hundred, 


^60 


TEE  MAT8YA  PURAEAM. 


four  liuiulred,  three  hundred,  two  hundred,  one  hundred  y oj anas  ji. there 
are  some  also  havin^j  dimensions  of  one-half  yojanas.  No  stars  exist  less 
than  these.  Now  I will  describe  those  nielctic  and  bonefic  planets  that  are 
situated  above  them.— -GO-OS. 

Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  aro  slow-going  planets  (superior  planets.) 
Below  them  tlie  Moon,  Sun,  Mercury,  and  Vonus  aro  the  quick-moving 
planets  unterior  planets.)  There  aic  as  many  crores  of  Tarakus  as  there 
iEtiksas  (asterisms).— Cl)-7t). 

The  Sun  moves  lowest  down  of  all  the  planets.  Above  Him  the  Moon 
travels.— 71. 

The  stars  travel  abov*'  tlie  ; above  Ab'ori,  travels  Mercury ; 
above  Mercury,  travels  Venus  ; above  V(*niis,  travels  Mars;  abovi..  Mars, 
travels  Jupiter;  above  Jupitc'r,  travels  Saturn.— 7--73. 

The  Saptarsis  (the  great  Hear)  exist  above  Saturn  : and  above  tlie  groat 
Bear  exists  the  Polo  (DhruvaJ  'riic  three  worlds  arc  tied  on  to  this 
Dhruva. — 74:. 

The  stars  in  the  finnament  aro  two  lakh  yojanas  apart 

from  each  other.  Tlio  planets  above  tliein  are  also  ])lacod  similarly  apart. 
The  Sun,  Mooii,  and  ilio  planet-^  run  towards  llm  stars  and  got  merged  in 
them.  They  remain  ill  their  rdjelia  and  Xidia  houses  hiph(dioa  and 
perihelion);  and  while  entering  into  or  eomlrjg  i>nt  (1k\v  look  on 

. the  beings.  So  tlicse  arc  .-sitnalt'J  with  n'gard  to  eaeli  other. — 7o-78. 

The  learned  shonhl  know  exactly  their  various  conjunctions.  Thus 
have  been  described  all  alvout  this  earth,  Dvipas,  oceans,  mountains,  years, 
rivers,  and  the  inhabitants  tlicreof.-— 7t>'S0. 

The  several  locatioiis  of  iho  Inminons  spheres  of  tlje  firmament  aro 
brought  on  by  the  influ<nie<'  of  tlie  Sjui.  In  its  central  i)arl,  there  exists 
the  wind  termed  Avarta.  Tlii.-  pervades,  in  tiro  form  of  a circle  all  the 
Nakfihattra  rnandalas.  Tliisiias  Ijcen  so  ordained  by  the  Almighty  God  for 
the  use  of  ITis  several  beings. — 

The  stars,  the  earth,  etc.,  were  located  tlius  by  BrahinA  in  their  proper 
places  at  the  beginning  of  the  Kalpa.  — 83. 

All  these  locations  aro  assigned  by  the  Supremo  Being  ; no  one  can 
exactly  describe  the  vast  ness  of  the  iidiniio  naUiro  of  lliks  Universe.  No 
butnan  being  with  his  fleshy  eyc^s  can  know  exactly  its  true  nature.— 84. 

Here  ends  the  one-hundred  and  tirenifj  eiffhth  ehnpler  on  the  dofcription 
of  the  Dcvafjrihn-i  (fhe  hrijlit  fiplicrc;^  of  ihc  Jh  nuimcni,) 


-i^ENDIX  I 


THE  CHARAOTEB  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  PURANAS.*^ 

The^tivord  * PurA^ia ' means  * old  * in  all  the  Sanskritic  languages  oi 
India.  In  its  use  as  a noun  this  word  means  the  branch  of  religious 
literature  which  records,  or  rather  once  recorded,  the  deeds  of  gods  and 
men  of  very  olden  days.  The  name  * Pur&na  * as  a special  branch  of  the 
sacred  literature,  ocours  in  the  Atharva-veda.  The  very  Kiks  in  which  we 
meet  with  the  word  * Purftna,’  should  be  discussed  to  get  a clear  concep- 
tion of  the  character  of  the  Pur&paditeraturc  of  the  Vedic  times.  In  tran- 
slation, the  24th  Rik  of  the  7th  Sukta  of  the  XI  K4nda  of  the  Atharva* 
veda  stands  as  follows : **  From  the  residuum  (uchchhii^ta)  of  the  Riks,  the 
8&mas,  the  Yajua  and  the  PurAna  (the  ancient),  the  gods  and  the  pitfis 
were  born.”  1 have  followed  here  the  remarks  of  Prof.  Deussen  in  adopt- 
ing the  translation  of  it  by  Prof.  Laiiman.  Prof.  Deussen  rightly  remarks 
that  ‘ uebchhi^ta  ’ does  not  mean  'remnant  of  the  offering  ’ ; but  it  means 
such  a residuum  or  remainder  that  one  may  think  that  one  can  get  after 
subtracting  from  the  universe  all  the  forms  of  the  world  of  phenomena. 
The  learned  editor  of  the  Harvard  Oriental  Series  is  not  correct,  when  ha 
translates  the  woixl  PurAna  by  the  phrase  ' the  ancient  The  use  of  this 
word  here  being  in  conjunction  with  the  three  Vedas,  it  must  mean 
a specific  branch  of  the  sacred  literature.  The  4th  Rik  of  the  6th  ParyAya 
of  the  XV  KAnda  of  the  Atharva-veda  may  be  referred  to  to  clear  up  the 
misoonception.  The  Rik  says : 

**  gfe  (the  PrajAsstI)  laoved  oat,  ete.,  After  him  moved  oat  both  the  Itihftae  (the 
narrative)  * * * and  the  Parflna  (the  story  of  eld)  and  the  Gathas  (songs)  and  the  Narasanais 
(eulogies).  Verily  both  of  the  Itihasa  and  of  the  Pnr&na  and  of  the  G&thAs  and  of  the 
Narssansis  doth  he  become  the  dear  abode  who  knoweth  thus." 

1 give  here  also  the  translatioii  of  Prof.  Laninan.  The  learned  pro- 
fessor has  translated  the  word  ' PurApa  * by  ' story  of  the  eld  ' though  in 
the  previous  Rik  referred  to  he  has  translated  it  by  the  vague'phrase  ' the 
ancient.'  lliat  this  'story  of  eld  ’ bad  a sacred  character  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Bard  of  the  Sukta,  has  not  been  noticed  by  the  great  ATuerican  scholar. 
Biti  we  shall  presently  see  that  the  PurAna,  as  a branch  of  the  Vedic  iiter- 
atufe,  is  as  old  and  as  sacred  as  the  Vedic  mantras  themselves  are,  in  their 
SerobiW  form,  

•We  reproduce  this  ariiole  on  the  Part  tins  which  was  written  as  an  introduction 
to  the  prepesed  trsnsUtlen  of  the  VAyu  PurAiia  by  Mr.  B.  C.  Msznmdar  of  Sarohalpur,— 
Vditor.  « 


ii  . APPENDIX  1: 

Jl  ire  refer  tboee  poet-Vedio  tmtiMS  in  the  BiDti^muuip  nbi 
were  composed  with  the  distinct  object  ol  explaining  jJie  epiriu 
Bigiiificaiice  and  utility  of  the  Vedic  ritusli  we  get  many  practical  dire 
tions  aa  to.  how  the  sacri/icial  rites  should  be  performed  in  order  to  secu. 
the  highest  spiritual  benefiL  Generally  epeekiog,  the  Sdma-Veda,  th 
Rigvede  and  the  Atharvaveda  Sainhit&s  contained  only  the  m^nlra$  whic 
bare  to  be  recited  at  the  YajAos*  The  Yajur*veda  SarnhitA  takes  parth 
the  character  of  Biahmana,  in  that,  the  directions  regarding  the  sacriiicia 
Ceremonial  have  been  given  in  it  in  some. detail.  But  the  post- Vedic 
literature  devoted  mainly  to  furnish  exphinations  and  to  point  out  the 
religious  importance  of  the  Vedic  m/jntras  gives  us  clearer  ideas  as  to 
how  and  for  what  object  the  Yajnas  should  be  performed.  U has  been 
elaborately  given  in  the  Bribaddevala  as  well  as  in  other  works  of  similar 
nature,  that  in  order  to  perform  a Yajna^  the  sacrificer  moat  know  (1) 
which  devatd  is  to  be  invoked  on  what  occasion,  (2)  what  mantra  has  to 
be  uttered  to  suit  the  occasion,  (3)  the  name  of  the  Risi  who  saw  or  dis- 
covered the  mantra^  (4)  the  eircumitancee  vndei*  which  the  mantmi  having 
been  uttered^  a special  object  was  secured  and  the  rittialistic  method  ol 
form  in  which  the  mantras  have  to  be  uttered  (See  Brihaddevata.  Prof. 
Macdoneirs  edition).  The  collection  of  the  mantras  in  (he  SamhitA  form 
is  of  no  use  even  to  the  learned  priests,  if  they  do  not  know  (1)  the  proper 
god  (2)  the  proper  mantra  and  (3)  the  pioper  ritual  suiting  each  particular 
occasion.  1 am  inclined  to  suppo.se  that  the  Brahmans  priests  were  called 
* Trayi,*  or  ‘ Tebijja  ’ (Pali  form,)  because  they  had  to  learn  the  three  things 
mentioned  above,  to  be  able  to  perform  (lie  priestly  functions.®  There 
were  details  under  each  head  of  the  above  knowledge,  and  there  were 
many  practical  directions  or  Vidhi  regarding  the  forma  of  sacri&cial 
ceremonial. 

Leaving  many  details  out,  I can  state  on  the  authority  of  such  works 
as  the  BrAbmanas  and  the  BrihaddevatA  that  on  every  ceremonial  occasion 
it  had  to  be  naiTated  by  a special  priest,  that  the-  particular  mantra,  which 
was  being  chanted  by  another  priest  to  invoke  a god,  once  proved  efficaci- 
ous, when  in  olden  times  a certain  Risi  uttered  the  self-same  mantra.  It 
was  absolutely  necessary  for  a priest  to  know  the  history  of  the  origin  of 
mafttra,  and  the  success  which  the  mantra  once  attained  in  pbviating 
worldly  damages  and  difficulties.  As  to  the  fitting  occasions  of  the  man- 

* It  itt  not  the  place  whore  1 can  dIsoiiM  the  question  that  the  appelladim  * Trayi ' 
had  originally  no  reforonce  to  the  three  colioctlona  of  the  Vedic  mantraSf  bat  referred 
wholly  to  I ho  throe  ridyan  the  Brahtnanaa  bad  to  acquire,  to  perform  a Yajna^  be  it  accord- 
ing lo  Sama'or  Rik  or  Yajiih  or  Atharvana  nto.<». 


™ CHAnAOTBH  ANl^  ORIGW  OP  TSE  PORAI^AS.  tii 


(MM^UMnara  detailed  direetione  in  the  BrahmanaK  The  reade%maf 
refer  to  the  ezcdlent  editbn  of  the  Atharv»>veda  Samhitd  by  Profeeeor 
Lanman  wherein  the  special  pnrpnee  for  which  a Sckta  is  to  be  chanted, 
has  been  prefixed  to  each  and  every  Snkta.  As  to  the  practical  ndlity  or 
jihaloiruti,  a particular  eucceesful  case  of  olden  times  bad  to  be  cited  and 
sung.  The  Bribaddevati  abounds  with  these  examples.  I cite  here  only 
one  example : How  Dirgliatama  waa  born  blind,  has  been  stated  in  a 
story  form  in  the  4th  Chapter  (eer$et  11—15).  It  has  then  been  stated 
{verse  16)  that  some  hymns  nr  mantras  {viz.,  Rigveda  I,  140—56)  were 
revealed  to  Dirghatama,  and  he  got  back  the  use  of  his  eyes.  Thus  it  is 
very  clear  that  at  the  time  of  the  performance  of  the  yajfias,  recitation 
of  the  history  of  the  mantras  was  an  inseparable  part  of  the  ceremony. 
The  stories  that  had  to  be  cited  in  connection  with  the  Rig>veda  mantras, 
have  all  been  related  in  the  Brihaddevati.  This  story-literature,  abso- 
lutely necessary  for  the  performance  of  the  yajnas,  was  designated  as 
Purttna  or  Purfinetihftsa.*^ 

We  get  it  even  in  the  introductory  chapter  of  the  Mababhirata  that 
the  custom  of  reciting  PurSpa  to  the  priests,  who  were  initiated  and  ready 
to  perform  a holy  sacrifice,  was  not  forgotten ; for,  the  Paurftpika  Ugrasravl 
asks  the  Risis  in  the  following  words  to  ascertain  whether  they  were  in  a 
fit  state  to  listen  to  the  narration  : — 

“ KritAbhi$ek&h  rfuchayah  kritajapyft  hutftgnayab. 

Bhavantah  /isane  svasthfi  bravime  kimaham  dvijSh  ? (15). 

As  to  the  fact  that  the  Vedas  have  to  be  explained  by  the  Itihfisa 
and  the  PurSna,  a line  occnra  in  the  very  introductory  chapter  of  the 
Mahfibhfirata,  namely,  “ ItihftsapurAn&bhyAm  Vedam  samupabrimhayet  ” 
(267). 

We  can  thus  see  that  the  Pur&pa  literature  is  as  old  as  the  collection 
of  the  mantras  themselves.  The  orthodox  tradition  is,  that  VyAsa  divided 
the  Veda  in  the  early  years  of  the-Kali  yuga,  and  Iiecame  the  progenitor 
ol  the  Pur&na  literature.  We  need  not  concern  ourselves  here  with  the 
question  as  to  when  and  under  what  circumstances  the  different  Vedic 
Samhitte  were  compiled.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  once  it  became 
BSCessary  to*  divide  (he  Veda,  or  more  properly  to  classify  the  Vedie 
mantrosand  rites  from  the  ritualistic  standpoint  of  view.  When  this 
division  or  classification  had  to  be  made',  PurftpetihAsa  could  not  but  form 

• The  eaatom  of  the  present  day,  that  at  the  tioM  ot  the  Sradiiha  or  other  eetenraniee 
a Paurantka  haa  to  skt  apart  and  reeite  soma  Pauranlka  text,  la  after  the  oldMt  tmdiUoa  oC 
the  'Vedio  rltoaL  Now  the  Pnnuiss  are  'not  rend  to  explain  or  glorify  the  iShntroa,  lilB 
twrely  beOSMe  It  is  a long  staadinc  easton  to  do  an. 


it  APPXmiX  T. 

a sejjiprate  brailtfh  under  the  Vedas.  The  aooottnt  we  get  by  tradition  it 
tilterefore  not  wrbftg  that  the  Pur&ea  as  a literature  arose  out  of  the  work 
olaseifie&tion  or  diVisioA  of  (he  Vedas,  no  matter  whether  the  auUior  el 
tiiat  ttOrk  Of  Olaseificatioo  <»:  division  be  called  Vy&ea  or  not.  Since  the 
frord  * vyas  * means  in  Sanskrit  (to  divide  into  parts  or  to  arrange),  the 
sOge  of  the  oldeh  times  who  was  principtdly  instrumental  in  bringing  about 
the  aforesaid  diatributinn  knd  arrangementt  can  be  safely  said  to  be  tha 
]^rogenitor  Of  the  PorA^a  ae  a Bt)ecinl  branch  of  the  sacred  literature. 

That  the  PurApa  aO  a sacred  literature  was  both  taught  and  learnt 
hy  ihs  Sr&hraapas  along  with  the  Vedic  rnsnlrM  and  the  other  tfoTfeleted 
eeienees,  is  distinctly  mentioned  in  the  Satapatha  BrAhmapa  (XI.  V.  7.  I ; 
XIV.  V.  4.  10).  There  is  similar  mention  also  in  the  Taittiriya  Aranyakft 
(II.  9*10).  The  Upanisada  have  referred  to  ItihAsa  PurAnatii  aS  4 snbject 
studied  by  tlie  orthodox  Vedic  scholars.  The  old  ChAn<logyn  Upanisad 
of  the  S&ma-veda  school  states  tliat  the  ItihasarPurAnnm  is  the  Fifth  Veda 
in  the  division  of  tlie  Vedas : “ Rig-veda  Yfijtirvedah  SAinaveda  Athw^ 
tanechatnrtba  Itihasa  Purdiiali  pancharao  vedAnAm  vedah  ”,  Gh.  VII.  1.  4. 

From  the  remarks  made  before  regarding  the  PurAna-Iiteratiire,  it 
ife  clear  beyond  any  doubt  that  the  PurAna-literatiire  was  bound  to  be 
lecognieed  as  tho  Fifth  Veda,  when  the  Atharvana  cnllectinn  was  recog»^ 
nised  as  the  fourth  division  of  the  Veda.  When  the  MnhAbhArata  was 
compiled  as  a SaipfaitA  with  the  nnclens  of  the  HhArsti-kathA,  all  the 
stories  that  ekisted  st  the  time  of  the  compilation  in  tlie  name  of  PurAne- 
tifaSsa  wets  included  in,  or  intertwined  with,  the  Knru  Plpdcva  story. 
It  is  for  that  mwon  that  MahAbhArata  SarohitA  claimed  for  itself  thC  till# 

‘ the  PAnohAma  Veda  and  that  the  people  considered  that  title  to  be  quit# 
legitimate. 

We  haVe  noticed  that  the  PurApa  has  been  in  asscointioti  with  the 
ItibAsa  from  a remote  past.  There  are  many  instances  in  the  MahAhliAmt#, 
where  the  PntAna  has  been  spoken  of  as  a depository  of  Vedic  Sruti 
(NAnAArutisamAynktam).  We  meet  also  with  such  paesagee  in  the  MabAw 
bbAratA  wbAre  in  narrating  some  legends  or  * VaniAAnuciritem  * it  h## 
been  sthted  by  way  of  an  introductory  renrark,  that  “ IfayA  ^rutam  id«#l 
pArvAm  PiirApe  purusarpabha,”  or  “ AtrApyadAharantimam  ItihAaask 
paMtananV,”  m*  “ l^rUyatefai  PurApe’pi  Jatila-nAma  Gautami,”  ete.  Umb# 
MMtanCes  draw  that  die  PurApa  handed  down  the  ' VapiAiitiucharitiim ' #nd> 
ether  historical  accounte  from  generation  to  generation  and  its  obaraotw  - 
Ml  yte  btbtdry  hbt  bnly  df  the  gbdtt,  but  alsA  of  msfi,  waa  sMtAbliahAid  Ave# 
in  the  da|[S  of  the  later  Atliarvaiia  SGktas.  Being  the  history  of  the  gods' 
and  the  Risis,  the  PurApaditeniture  had  to  deal  with  the  origbal  eig 


TUFj  ORARAGTER  AED  ORIQIE  OF  TEE  PURA^AS. 


r 


primary  oreatioli,  the  eecoodarj  ereatioii  or  the  oieation  of  the  world  nj^en 
Were  liring  in  and  the  Manvantafa  revointiona.  Again,  aa  assooiated 
With  TtihAaa,  it  bad  to  liarrate  the  stories  of  the  ideal  epoch-making  rnrera 
and  to  maintain  the  records  of  many  Raj  families  of  note.  In  this  com- 
bined character,  the  Fiira^a  of  the  olden  tidies  did  not  much  differ  from 
the  modem  Parapas ; since,  for  the  definition  of  the  Pniena  we  get  it  in 
almost  all  the  PutApas  that  the  subjects  referred  to  shore  must  be 
delineated  in  a Purfi^a.  I quote  the  definition  here  of  the  Vfiyu  ParSgi 
which  has  a special  significance  in  this  introduction  : — 

Kirtannm 

Svargnscha  pratisvargarsca  vamso  manvantarlnlcha 

Vamsanucharitam  cbeti  Puranam  pancba  laksauam. 

— (Ch.  IV.  lO-ll). 

Though  I could  not  cite  any  proof  from  the  oldest  Vedic  literature 
in  support  of  the  statement  that  Pur&na,  as  associated  with  ItihlSa,  bad 
tlie  character  of  a history,  as  we  now  understand  it,  I think  the  evidence 
of  the  MahfibhArata  goee  to  some  extent  to  establish  my  view.  That  the 
history  of  the  mighty  kings  from  the  remotest  antiquity  was  maintained 
in  the  very  work  in  which  the  history  of  the  creation  was  preserved,  is 
pretty  clear  ftom  the  accounts  of  Megastbenes.  We  get  it  recorded  in  the 
fragments  of  the  accounts  of  Megastbenes  that  when  he  came  to  India, 
the  Indians  narrated  to  him  their  previous  history  aa  well  ae  the  history  <rf 
the  creation  of  the  world.  Arrian  records  in  his  Indiea  that  MegaethenM 
reported  that  the  Hindus  reckoned  6,042  yean  from  the  esrlieet  day  to 
the  time  of  Chandra  Oupts.  It  must  also  be  noticed  that  Arrian  had 
remarked  in  hie  Indiea  that  it  was  a matter  of  wonder  with  him  how 
IfegaethenCe  could  give  an  accurate  account  of  116  trihea  and  58  rireis 
of  India  without  visiting  most  parts  of  that  country.  This  points  to  the 
fact,  aa  has  been  nodcSd  by  Mr.  A.  M.  T.  JAckson  in  hie  inetruotive  essay 
—■The  Epic  and  the  Puranio  Notes  JJ.  R.  A.  S.  (Bomd  Extra  1905  and 
p : 67],  that  Megastbenes  must  have  got  before  him  a regular  catalogue 
of  riven  and  tribes.  Non-mentiod  of  the  character  of  the  PurAna  and 
ItihAaa  in  the  oldest  literature,  does  not  prove  that  the  PurApa  did  not 
MBOrne  the  character  of  a history.  It  is  curious  to  note  that  tbongb 
Pnr&pa  is  found  mentioned  an  the  Atlmrva-vcda  and  in  the  SatopntlMi 
BrAhmepa,  this  word  doSa  not  occur  in  any  Sdtm  of  Panini.  It  niay 
however  be  axtentioned  that  the  VArtikn.  and  the  MahAbblaya  lUMitkHi  H 
in  nesooiAtioA  widi  the  llihAeai,  The  readets  can  rawly  nee  bow  nnaafe  it 
11  to  establish  any  propaeitiOh  od  the  evidence  of  PAdini’a  aarntiodiiig  UP 
«et  mwatichinc  any  word  in  hie  work. 


vi 


APPBmiX  t. 


In  what  form  and  state  the  PurftpetihAaa  of  oiden  times  continned 
to  exist  till  its  complete  absorption  by  the  Mah&bh&rata  Samhilft,  cannot 
be  definitely  stated.  It  appears  to  me  highly  probable  that  as  for  each 
'Veda  there  are  Br&hmaiias,  Anukramanis  and  Upanisads,  the  Purfina  (the 
story  cum  history  of  eld)  for  each  Vedio  school  was  also  separately 
organised.  The  Puranas  given  in  the  Brihaddevatfi  fail  to  explain  many 
allusions  of  the  Atharva-veda.  As  such,  a separate  book  of  allusions  for 
the  Atharva-veda  must  be  presumed  to  hare  existed.  1 adduce  one  fact 
in  support  of  my  supposition. 

We  get  it  in  the  Satapatha  and  the  Aiteraya  Br&hmanas  that  the 
Rig-veda  proceeded  from  Agni,  the  Sftma-veda  from  Sfirya  and  the  Yajur- 
▼eda  from  Vayu,  when  the  Prajapati  perfotmed  tapa»  to  get  the  Vedas 
(Sat  Br5.  XL  5—8,  1 ; Ait  Bra.  V.  32—34).  The  Chfindogya  Upanisad 
also  gives  os  the  same  story  : — 

Praj&patih  lokfin  abhyatapat,  tes&m  tapyamAn&nftm  rasAn  prAbrihat 
agnim  prithivyA  vAyum  antariksAt  adityam  divah  (1)  Sa  etastisro  devata 
abhya-tapat ; tAsAm  tapyamAnAnAm  rasAn  prAbrihat  agiieh  rico,  vAyoli 
yajfimsi,  sAmani  Adityat  (2j  [Ch.  IV.  li.  1-2],  * 

The  names  VAyu,  Agni  and  Sfirya  for  the  three  extant  PurAnas  seem 
to  have  their  origin  from  the  Vedas  to  which  their  once  existing  originals 
belonged.  The  use  of  the  word  * PurApa  ’ in  singular  form  in  the 
Atharva-veda  does  not  show  that  originally  there  was  but  one  collection 
of  the  story-literature.  The  use  in  the  singular  points  to  the  reference  to 
e class  of  literature  considered  collectively.  Similarly  the  plural  form 
* ItiliAsapurApAni  ’ in  the  TaittirSya  Aranyaka  does  not  also  support  the 
view  that  there  were  many  treatises  on  the  subject ; this  use  in  the  plural 
is  intended  to  signify  many  stories  that  might  have  been  collected  in  a 
single  work. 

It  is  quite  true  that  the  extant  PnrApas  did  not  exist  previous 
to  the  time  of  the  collection  of  the  PurApas  in  the  MaliAbhftretaSsmhitA ; 
for,  the  present  Puranas  differ  in  many  cases  from  the  PaurApika 
stories  given  in  the  MaliAbliArata.  1 have  thrown  out  this  suggestion 
that  the  pre-MahAbhArata  PurApas  might  have  existed  with  the  names 
VAyn,  Sfirya  and  Agni  PurApas  to  signify  the  Vedas. to  which  they 
were  attached.  - It  is  true  that  references  to  the  PurApas  in  Chapter 
191  of  the  Vana  Parva  and  in  Chapters  5 and  6 of  the  last  Parva  of 
the  MahAbhSrata  are  to  the  PurApas  now  extant.  But  that  these  chapters 
are  very  late  additions,  can  be  detected  by  even  a superficial  reader. 
The  MaliAbliArata  SamliitA  postdates  itself,  when  it  refers  to  the  poli- 
tical condition  of  India  of  a time  when  the  name  of  the  SamhitA  became 


THE  CHARAOTBE  ATSD  OltlOIN  OF  THE  PURAFA8.  vii 


ividely  known  (vide  Vana  Parva,  Chapter  188,  35-36 >.  Again  it  may 
be  observed  that  though  Yndhisthira  had  the  fullest  advantage  M 
hearing  from  M&rkandeya  what  would  happen  in  the  Kali  Yuga,  he 
asked  Mfirkandeya  over  again  the  same  question  regarding  the  future 
events  of  the  Kali  Yuga  at  the  commencement  of  Chapter  100  of 
the  Vana  Parva.  The  facts  stated  in  Chapter  190  are  mere  rcpititions  of 
old  facts  with  additions  of  things  which  make  the  chapter  bad  from  a 
chronological  point  of  view.  The  ' Rti tfi-chakra  * or  the  Zodiac  unknown 
to  the  whole  of  the  Ifah&bhArata-literature,  is  mentioned  in  verse  91. 
Chapter  191  is  only  a continuation  of  Chapter  190.  In  this  chapter 
occurs  the  following  verse : — 

Btat  te  aamunakh^atam  atitanagatsm  iiiaja 
Vayuproktam  anaanritya  pnransni  rlsiaamatatam. 

It  may  be  that  this  reference  is  to  an  old  Pur&pa  of  the  Yajur-veda 
school.  But  as  the  Mahfibhfirata  Sanihitd  absorbed  all  the  Pnr£pas  and 
assumed  the  title  of  the  Fifth  Veda,  it  is  not  likely  that  consistently  with 
its  character  it  would  cite  the  authority  of  any  other  book.  In  the  next 
place  tlie  quotations  made  from  the  V&yu  Purfipa  show  that  a careless 
man  inserted  some  new  chapters  at  a very  late  date,  to  speak  with  some 
vehemence  of  the  evil  effects  of  the  time  he  lived  it  For,  on  the 
authority  of  the  VAyu  Puritpa  it  has  been  stated  in  the  49tb  verse  that  the 
girls  will  bear  children  at  the  age  of  5 or  6,  while  in  reality  it  has  been 
stated  in  the  Vdyu  Purfipa  (Chapter  58,  verse  58;  that  in  the  evil  days 
of  Kali  the  girls  will  bear  children  before  attaining  the  sixteenth  year. 
There  are  two  different  readings  of  this  sloka,  and  1 quote  it  with  both 
the  readings : — 

Pranasta  chetanSh  pumso  muktakesAstu  chfflik4h. 

Unasodasa  varpAdcha  prsjiyante  yiigak^aye. 

In  the  second  reading  of  the  sloka  we  get  '*  dfaarsayisyanti 
rnknavAn  ” for  the  words  “ prajAyanteLyugak^ye.” 

The  second  reading  appears  to  me  to  be  correct,  as  the  last  words 
of  this  reading  are  quite  in  keeping  with  the  meaning  of  the  first  portion 
of  the  sloka,  where  capturing  men  by  female  charms  has  been  spoken 
of.  But  practically  both  the  readings  indicate  the  same  thing  that  the 
girls  were  not  married  before  they  became  16  years  old  by  those  who 
adhered  to  the  ideal  rules  of  the  Brfihmapas.  That  this  was  the  custom 
in  olden  times  can  also  be  known  from  a passage  in  Susrnta  which  could 
never  recommend  any  rule  which  was  not  in  accordance  with  the. 
orthodox  Smriti  rules.  The  sloka  runs  thus : — 

Unasodasa  ■ - varsfiyAmaprAptah  • panchavimsatim^adA  dbatte  pua&n 


Appsmjx  i 


l^bbam  kukiistba  m vijMidyate  JatovA  na  djiram  jirat,  jived va,  durva* 
teadrijra. 

Taam&t  atyanta  b&lftyfim  garbhAdhSnata  na  k&rayet.  (X.  13). 

The  mention  of  the  18  Pur/tnaa  in  the  laat  two  obapten  of  the  very 
laet  Parva  ia  quite  singular ; for,  the  MahftbhArata  SaoihitA  does  not 
diseloae  tbia  knowledge  elsewhere,  even  where  there  has  been  special 
enumeration  of  different  branohea  of  knowledge  and  of  different  EUlstrik 
treatises.  The  last  or  the  sixtii  chapter  may  lie  easily  disregarded,  as  the 
Mahkbhfirata  is  said  to  have  ended  with  the  fifth  chapter.  The  fifth 
chapter  also  seems  to  be  a late  addition ; for,  in  the  firal  place  the 
“ svarg&rohana  ” concluded  with  the  fourth  chapter,  and  in  the  second 
place  the  fifth  chapter  has  been  improved  by  quotations  from  other 
previous  chapters  of  the  book.  For  example,  the  slokas  68  and  69  are 
the  same  as  39fi  and  396  of  Chapter  11  of  the  Adi  Parva.  From  the  vei-y 
fact  that  many  Purft^as,  including  the  V.lyn,  name  the  MahabhArata 
Sambitfi,  it  is  proved  conclusively  that  neither  the  group  of  the  18  modern 
Purfinaa  nor  the  VAyu  Purfina  could  exist  at  the  time  of  the  compilation 
of  the  MahAbhArata. 

I have  shown  that  (1)  the  PnrAna  as  a branch  of  sacred  literature 
did  exist  in  the  Vedic  days  bearing  exactly  that  charaeter  which  is 
attributed  to  it  in  the  extant  PurA^nas,  and  (2)  that  till  the  time  of  the 
compilation  of  the  Mahdbharata  as  the  Fifth  Veda  Sainhitfi,  the  extant 
PurAnas  were  not  in  existence  at  least  in  their  present  shape  and  form. 
Again  on  reference  to  the  mythology  of  the  Hind  us  as  it  was  by  about 
140  B.  C..  It  can  be  stated  that  the  modern  PurAnas  with  their  pantheon 
of  new  gods  could  not  come  into  existence  in  the  second  century  B.  0. 
Oods  like  Durgi,  Ganesa  and  the  PuurAnika  Siva  were  not  known  to 
MaliAbliAsya  of  140  13.  C.,  or  to  modern  ManusainhitA.  which  has  not  got  a 
gi^ater  antiquity.  Of  my  essays  fm  Siva-^pujA,  Gancda  and  DurgA,  1 may 
refer  the  readers  only  to  the  last  essay  (J.  R.  A.  S.,  lOOO,  p.  365)  and  my 
paper  on  * Phallus  worsliip  in  the  Malmblmrata  ’ ( J.  R.  A.  S.,  1007,  p.  337). 
The  other  essays  having  been  published  in  Bengali  magasinee,  I eouM 
not  refer  the  readers  to  them. 

Besidee  setting  up  the  above  highest  limit,  no  definite  ohronolojgp 
can  he  fixed  in  respect  of  the  extant  18  MahA-Puranas.  On  oemparing 
iiilh  the  Pauranika  stories  of  the  Yedie  days,  it  may  be  asserted  without 
any  fear  of  contradiction  that  many  stories  in  the  modern  Ptirfipae, 
though  based  on  Vedic  basis,  have  not  only  been  changed,  but  have  been 
given  quite  new  and  incousistent  (briiis.  New  stories  unknown  to  tlie 
Vedic  literatuie  are  often  met  with.  The  scope  and  the  character  of  the 


mu  CEAEACTER  AND  OEIOIN  i)F  TEE  PDBAI^AS.  it 


Purina  or  the  Pard^as  made  it  ineTi table  that  new  lists  of  kings  should  be 
introduced  with  the  progress  of  time.  As  the  Purdnas  had  to  be  recited 
to  the  people  throughout  all  ages  to  communicate  to  them  the  ^ory  of  .the 
gods  and  the  noble  deeds  of  the  ideal  sages  and  kings,  the  language  of 
the  PurSna  of  one  age  could  not  but  change  at  a subsequent  lime.  With 
the  expansion  of  Aryan  influence  in  India,  the  new  geogaphical  names  of 
countries,  rivers  and  mountains  were  required  to  be  introduced.  When 
we  notice  such  changes  wrought  at  a particular  time,  we  cannot  say  that 
such  and  such  a book  bearing  evidence  of  such  a time  was  really  corn* 
posed  at  such  a late  date. 

Since  the  modern  Puripas  radically  differ  from  the  Vedic  Parftnaa, 
both  in  mythology  and  in  the  narration  of  the  stories,  they  may  be  said 
to  be  altogether  new  in  their  origin  and  compiled  long  after  the  second 
century  B.  C.  But  the  modern  Pur&pas  having  once  been  compiled,  do 
not  seem  to  have  much  changed  in  essential  matters,  in  subsequent  times. 
The  additions  or  accretions  of  subsequent  ages  are  to  be  regarded  merely 
as  additions  and  accretions.  The  old  lists  of  kings  banded  down  from 
the  Vedic  times  must  have  been  preserved  in  the  new  Pur&nas.  When 
giving  a genealogy  of  the  Iksaku  Rajas,  the  Matsya  Pur&na  states 

Atrnnu  ramifa  iflokoyam  vipi-airgitah  puratanaih 

Ik^akundinayam  vamilah  Sumitranto  bhavisyati. 

Similar  statements  occur  in  all  the  Purdpas,  wherein  old  genealogies 
have  been  given.  That  the  Paurlipika  lists  of  kings  of  very  olden  times 
are  not  fanciful,  and  that  old  chronology  can  be  roughly  established  with 
their  help  have  been  very  ably  shown  by  Mr.  F.  E.  Pargiter  (Retired 
Puisne  Judge  of  the  Calcutta  High  Court)  in  his  masterly  paper  on  ths 
“ Ancient  Indian  Genealogies  and  Chronology  ” (J.  R.  A.  S.,  1910,  pp. 
1—56).  1 cannot  resist  the  temptation  of  quoting  the  remark  of 

Mr.  Pargiter  that  " these  old  genealogies,  with  their  incidental  stories, 
are  not  to  be  looked  upon  as  legends  or  fables,  devoid  of  basis  or 
substance,  but  contain  genuine  historical  tradition,  and  may  well  be 
considered  and  dealt  with  from  a common-sense  point  of  view.” 

Those  who  are  in  favour  of  the  opinion  that  the  principal  modem 
PurSpas  were  compiled  during  the  time  of  the  Imperial  Guptas  because 
of  the  fact  that  the  Royal  genealogies  do  not  go  far  beyond  the  limit  of 
their  time,  ignore  the  fact  that  when  after  the  Huna  invasion  the  Gupte 
Empire  was  practically  dissolved  towards  the  end  of  the  fifth  century 
A.  D.,  the  bards  or  chroniclers  could  not  get  any  particular  Royal  House 
which  could  be  designated  as  Imperial.  The  downfall  of  Hindu  Indie 
commences  from  this  date.  Petty  kingdoms  commenced  to  grow  ell 


APPENDIX  I. 


over  India  like  mushrooms.  In  olden  dnys  when  the  Indian  Empire  was 
not  establislied  under  one  overlord,  the  kingdoms  and  principalites  of 
Korthern  India  had  such  interrelation  amongat  themselves  that  d}*nastical 
genealogies  and  ballads  o[  Royal  exploits  could  be  inseited  in  the  time- 
honoured  Pur&netihAssi. 

But  when  after  the  fall  of  the  Imperial  Guptas,  a considerably  large 
number  of  small  kingdoms  were  established,  no  unity  could  bo  preserved, 
and  no  interrelation  could  exist.  I cannot  deal  with  this  political 
question  elaborately  here  beyond  menlionii^g  what  actually  took  place. 
Every  Ruja  bad  his  own  bard,  and  he  never  failed  to  keep  a fairly 
accurate  Royal  /genealogical  list  of  his  master's  house,  us  is  known  to  all 
scholars  who  deal  with  the  epigraphic  literature. 

In  this  dark  peiiod  of  Hindu  India,  the  rnvanas,  nay  even  the 
Mahfibharata  Samhita,  received  interpolations  to  record  the  glory  of  the 
new  tribal  gods  and  the  new  local  tiithus.  At  clifTeront  centres  of  impor- 
tance several  Puranas  received,  additional  books  of  considerable  bulk. 
Thus  it  was  that  the  Brahma  Purana  swelled  in  bulk  in  Oiissa,  the  Agni 
Purana  obtained  some  new  cbnpters  at  Gaya  and  tlie  Padma  Pnrfina 
besides  singing  the  glory  of  Puskara  followed  the  poet  Kaliil&sa  of  ids 
own  country  in  narrating  the  stories  of  Sukunlala  and  of  Raghu’s 
progeny. 

Beyond  noticing  these  local  additions  or  changes  necessitated  by 
the  change  of  time,  we  cannot  say,  unless  proved  otherwise,  that  the 
Puranas  have  not  retained  their  general  form  and  character  since  their 
compilation.  *l1jis  time  must  he,  as  I have  already  stated,  long  after  the 
second  or  even  first  cenliny  B.  C. 

1 have  slated  it  above  lhat  the  PurAnas  originated  when  the  Vedas 
were  classified  or  divided  to  secure  ritualistic  convenience.  Tliis  does 
not  imi>ly  lhat  Vyriaa  tvas  tlie  author  of  the  PurAretihasaditerature.  The 
llahAbliArala  also  docs  not  assert  it.  It  iias  been  only  stated  in  the 
MahAbhArata  that  Vyasa  taught  the  Purana  to  some  disciples  of  his, 
and  in  the  Lands  of  those  disciples  the  Puranas  were  developed.  But  if 
we  separate  the  Bharati-katlia  from  the  Puranas,  we  find  that  the 
MahabliArata  favours  this  opinion  tliat  the  Puranas  owed  their  origin  to 
Romaharsana  IXII,  3l‘J.  21),  wliile  the  BhArnti-katha  was  promulgated 
by  the  other  disciples  of  Vyasafl  I et  seq.).  The  name  'Romaharsana* 
is  extremely  interesting.  A very  good  derivation  of  this  name  has  been 
given  in  the  VAyu  Purana  itself  (I.  IG) : — 

Lomani  hanayam  cliakro  Brotriaam  yat  subbasitai 
Kar/nans  prathitastena  loke'atnla  LonaiiarBauab. 


TUB  CEABACTER  AET>  ORIGIN  OF  TEE  PDRAt^AS.  xr 


Tills  shows  clearly  that  it  was  not  a particular  person  to  whom  the' 
authorship  of  the  Puriinns  is  to  be  attributed.  Loinaharaana  is  a class 
name  to  represent  those  persons,  who,  by  reciting  some  wonderful  and 
exciting  stories  to  the  people,  made  the  hair  to  stand  on  the  bodies  of 
the  audience.  That  the  IS  Pur&^as  were  composed  at  diffeieut  times  by 
different  sagos,  has  been  clearly  stated  in  many  Furunns.  The  order  in 
which  the  Puruoas  were  compiled  is  also  given  generally  in  the  Puriii^as. 
This  order  is  as  fullowa:  (1)  Brahma,  (2j  Padina,  (3;  Vijnii,  (>i)Vayuor 
diva,  (5)  Bhdgavata,  (6;  Nuradi}'a,  (7)  Markandeya,  (8)  Agni,  (9y  Bhavisya, 
(lUy  Brahinavaivarla,  (11}  Li/iga,  (12>  Varaha,  (13)  Skaiida,  (14)  Vamana, 
(15)  Kurina,  (16}  Alatsya,  (17)  Garucja,  (18)  Bralimanda.  That  this  list 
was  inserted  after  the  compilation  of  the  Puranas  is  apparent  on  the 
face  of  it ; for,  all  the  Puri^as  could  not  manage  to  copy  one  another. 

The  narrators  of  the  Purdnas  have  been  designated  generally  by 
the  class-name  ‘ Suta.’  The  Sutas  and  Magadhas  are  held  to  be  of  low 
origin  in  the  modern  Smritis.  In  the  Vayu  Pura^a  also  (I.  32  et  aeg.)  a' 
Suta  is  said  to  hare  no  right  or  ‘ ndhaiira  ’ to  study  the  Vedas.  Some 
passages  of  the  Mahabhurata  Samhita  also  support  this  view.  It  is  how* 
ever  to  be  noted  that  the  solemn  introduction  of  * Sauti  ’ in  the  ‘ Nai- 
misdranya ' as  described  in  the  introduction  of  the  Mahibhdrata,  shows 
that  the  narrator  of  the  PurAnetihdsa,  was  rot  a member  of  any  degraded 
caste,  but  was  one  who  could  be  honoured  by  the  Br&htnanas.  Many 
Puranas  also  show  that  venerable  ‘ Munis  ’ like  Markandeja  and  Narada 
were  the  narrators  of  the  Pur&nas.  That  in  the  Vedic  times  very  respect- 
able Brsihmapas  recited  the  Puranas,  cannot  be  doubted.  It  may  be 
owing  to  the  fact  that  the  PaurSnikas  commenced  to  earn  money  by 
singing  the  ballads  to  the  common  people  that  they  lowered  themselves 
in  the  estimation  of  others.  Another  reason  for  this  degradation  may  be 
supposed.  It  may  be  that  when  the  kings  of  Magadha  became  supreme 
in  India,  men  other  than  Bruhmanas  were  employed  as  chroniclers  and 
ballad -singera,  and  as  such  the  Patu:Ai.iikas  were  regarded  to  belong  to  a 
non-priestly  class,  though  in  reality  they  discharged  some  functioosof 
the  priests  on  ceremonial  occasions.^ 

It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  Low  once  long  after  the  Vedic  times 
and  previous  to  the  time  of  the  compilation  of  the  Mnltablidrata  and  ths 
modern  FurSpas,  the  PurAna  literature  became  non-Brahmanical  in  the 

* Now*a*day8  thoro  ftro  many  degraded  Brahtnanas  who  ItaTO  to  discharge  some  iin* 
portant  functioDS  in  conneotlon  with  tho  Sradd/ia  ceremony  of  the  high  class  Uindna.  It 
r must  be  mentioned,  however,  that  vory  reapeotablo  Brahmanas  now-a-daya  rooite  PmnM 
Ib  on  ooceauNiial  ^ ^ degraded  beeeiiae  oi  this  pioCeitiOA  efidht 


APPENDIX  I. 


lii 

ttrict  sense  of  the  word.  When  the  true  Vedio  priests  extolled  the  Rajas, 
they  chose  only  the  ideal  Icings  from  the  priestly  point  of  view.  For  this 
reason  many  Rajas  of  real  note  were  not  included  in  the  old  Brahmanical 
lists  of  the  kings,  and  many  otherwise  insignilicant  rulers  were  lauded  in 
the  Br&hmanas.  Many  instances  of  it  will  be  pointed  out  in  my  notes  on 
the  genealogical  sections  of  the  V&yn  Purapa.  This  is  what  led  the 
powerful  kings  to  employ  their  own  bards  to  sing  their  glorious  exploits, 
and  to  record  their  family  history.  This  K^triya-Pnranetihftsa  was 
bound  to  be  incorporated  in  the  modern  Brahmanic  Pur&nas  when  the 
Brahmapas  had  to  depend  upon  the  favour  of  the  Royal  houses.  In  his 
paper  refeired  to  above,  Mr.  Pargiter  has  made  the  following  remark 
touching  this  point • 

^ This  Ksatrijra  literature  grew  up  in  virtnal  independence  of  Brahmanical  literature« 
and  only  when  it  had  developed  into  an  imposing  mass  and  had  attained  great  popular 
appreciation  was  it  taken  over  by  the  Brahoianas  as  a not  unworthy  branch  of  knowledge. 
It  was  then  that  it  was  arranged  and  augmented  with  stories  aiid  disconrses  fashioned 
«ftef  Brahmanical  ideas." 

B.  C.  Maxcmoab. 


APPENDIX  n. 


THE  DATE  OF  THE  MAHABHARATA  WAR. 

{Various  Views.) 

I.  The  most  important  question,  in  Indian  Panrftnic  Chronology  is, 
as  to  the  period  of  the  Great  Bh&rata  War,  for,  if  that  period  is  fixed,  the 
chronology  of  other  kings  who  reigned  before  and  after  that  war,  can  be 
easily  determined  from  the  materials  to  be  found  in  this  Parana  and  to  which 
alone,  we  shall  confine  our  attention  at  present.  The  reign  of  Chandra 
Gupta  Maurya  has  been  the  great  landmark  in  Indian  History.  He  has 
been  identified  with  the  Sandracottus  of  the  Greeks.  “ His  accession  to  the 
throne  of  Magadha  may  be  dated  with  practical  certainty  in  322  B.C.," 
says  Mr.  V.  Smith  “ The  fixed  point  from  which  to  reckon  backwards  is 
the  year  322  B.C.  the  date  for  the  accession  of  Chandra  Gupta  Maurya, 
whicli  is  certainly  correct,  with  the  possible  error  not  exceeding  three 
years.”  {Early  History  of  Indian  3rd  Ed.,  44). 

There  are  two  fixed  points  from  either  of  which  chronological 
calculations  in  ancient  Indian  History  may  be  made.  Both  of  these 
methods  have  been  employed  in  the  Pur&oas. 

I.  Nanda’s  Installation. 

The  first  starting  point  taken  in  all  the  Purftpas  is  the  date  of  the 
installation  of  Mah&padma  Handa.  This  date  is  fixed  at  422  B.C.  And 
the  interval  from  that  point  backwards  to  the  birth  of  Parik§it,  who  was 
born  in  the  year  of  the  Great  War,  and  forward  upto  the  modern  times  w 
calculated.  This  may  be  called  the  Nanda  Era. 

II.  The  Cycle  of  2700  years  or  Saptar^i  Era. 

The  second  method  of  calculation,  or  rather  of  checking  the  first 
method  by  the  second,  is  the  cycle  of  2700  years  in  which  period  the  Great 
Bear  is  supposed  to  make  one  complete  circle.  One  complete  cycle  of 
2700  years  elapsed  between  the  time  of  King  Prattpa  in  the  Paurava 
line,  (No.  88  App.,  Table  of  Mr.  Pargiter)  and  the  end  of  the 
Andhra  dynasty.  This  may  be  called  the  eyelio  era  or  Saptar$i  era. 
From  Mah&padma  Nanda  to  the  last  Andhra  King  Pulom&vi  the  intervid 
which  elapsed  was  836  years  according  to  the  Pur&nas.  From  Mahapad* 
ma  Nanda  to  the  birth  of  Parikeit  in  the  year  of  the  Orest  War  was  1018 


APPENDIX  11. 


Xif 


years  (or  rather  1050  according  to  the  printed  text  of  the  Matsya):  836 
togetlier  \riih  1050  when  taken  from  2700  give  us  836.  Fratipa,  the 
Fanrara  King,  reigned  tiierefore  814  years  before  the  MaliSblifirata  War. 

If  wo  take  1015  as  tlie  years  elapsed  between  Nanda  and  Parikfit,  then 
Fratipa  reigned  840  j'eurs  before  the  birth  of  Pariksit. 

TbU  period  is  calcnlatod  thus:—'*  The  Groat  Bear  was  situated  eqnally  with  regard 
to  the  lunar  constellation  l^usya  while  Prutipa  w^as  kiiigr*  At  tho  end  of  tho  AndhraSy 
who  Will  be  ill  the  27th  century  afterwartU,  tho  cycle  repeats  itself.  In  the  circle  of  the 
lanar  eoii8tellati(»ns,  whet e in  thoQre.it  Bear  revolves,  and  which  contains  27  constella- 
tions in  its  circumferoncc,  the  Grctit  Bear  remains  100  years  in  (I'.e.,  conjoined  with;  each 
in  turn.  This  is  the  cycle  of  the  Great  l]car»  and  is  remembered  as  being,  according  to 
divine  reckoning,  n divine  months  and  7 divine  years.  According  to  those  constellations 
divine  time  proceeds  by  means  of  the  G oat  Bear,  The  two  front  stars  of  tho  Great  Bear, 
wh  ch  aroseon  when  risen  at  night,  tho  lunar  constellation  which  is  scon  situated  cquilly 
between  them  in  the  sky,  tho  tlroat  Bear  is  to  bo  known  as  conjMned  with  that  constel* 
lation  100  years  in  tho  .sky.  Tliis  is  tho  exposition  of  tho  conjunction  of  tho  lunar  contel- 
latlons  and  tho  Great  Bear.  The  Greit  Bear  was  conjoined  with  tho  Magha's  in  Parlksit’s 
time  100  years.  It  will  be  in  (f.c,  conjoined  with)  tho  2Uh  constellations  100  years  at 
the  termination  of  tlio  Andhras.  " (Pargitcr.) 

All  Extarct  from  “ King^  of  Maqadha  " by  Cof.  Wilford  in  the  Asiatic  Researches  ^ 

VoL  9,  (1805  A D,) 

Tho  Hindus  have  thought  proper  to  connect  their  chronology  with  an  astronomical 
period  of  a most  strango  nature.  It  U that  of  tho  seven  Uisis,  or  soven  stars  of  tho  wain, 
which  are  supposed  to  go  through  tho  Zidiac,  in  a rotrogrado  (?>  motion  in  tho  space  of 
270')  ycara.  They  aro  at  present  in  tho  Lunar  mansion  of  Swatika,  according  to  tho  most 
famous  astrologers  of  Benares,  who  cautioned  me  ag-iinst  tho  erroneous  opinion  of  othei 
astronomors,  in  variou.s  parts  of  India,  wbo  insist  that  they  arc  now  in  Anur.^dhd. 

1 reque.stcd  an  ablo  astronomer  to  gi\o  me,  in  writing  an  account  of  this  wonderful 
revolution.  This  period  says  ho,  is  not  obvious  to  the  sight,  but  it  does,  however,  really 
e.xist,  being  montioned  in  old  isastcas,  and  by  holy  Munis  ; an.l  cortainly  tho  seven  {tisis 
preside  in  every  Lunar  man.sion,  a hundrod  \ears,  and  their  presence,  or  lather 
influence,  over  it  is  sufflciontly  olivious  : ani  according  to  l^flkalya  Muni,  their  yearly 
notion  is  of  eight  liptn.s,  or  rniniitos. 

In  tho  YfliAhi  SumliitA,  the  A'isnu-PnrAna,  and  al.*!0  in  tho  Bhfigavata,  I believe  it  It 
declared,  that,  at  the  birth  of  Pari k.s it.  the  seven  Xl'tsiK  had  been  in  MagU&  for  four 
years,  or  4005  year.'^  ago,  and  they  wero  in  PurvfisAra  in  tho  time  of  Nanda. 

But  in  tho  Brabma-Siddh;int:i,  it  is  dec  ared,  that  thov  were  then  In  ^ravanfl,  which 
makes  a difference  of  nftitcii  Lunar  man.sion.s.  or  1600  years:  so  that,  according  to  that 
anllior,  tho  Kaliyug.i  bogm  2105  years  ago,  cr  1600  years  UC.,  supposing  tho  seven  Gifls 
to  bo  now  ill  Swjitika,  ill  which  they  are  to  remain  ton  years  more,  but,  if  they  aro  in 
Anur6dhfl,  the  Kaliyuga  began  1400  years  B.C.  Tho  author  of  the  G flrgi -811111  hica, 
according  to  Bhaitotpala  in  his  comincninry,  scorns  to  bo  of  that  opinion,  when  he  snys^ 
ibat  tho  seven  UinIs  woro  in  iilagha,  in  tho  twilight  between  tho  DvApara  inid  the 
Kaliytiga.  In  tho  LaJlokUd'UUvriddTii,  it  ia  dclared,  that  they  wore  then  In  Abhijit#  Or 
^,the  first  of  hravaufl. 

Tho  names  of  the  sevon  H'i^iSt  shining  in  the  wain,  are  Polaha,  ^ratn,  Atrit 
Pnlastysi  Anglras,  VasUtha,  and,  close  to  It  Is  a small  star,  rcpresotlng  Arandhatl  his 
tto  aeventh  is  Mariehi,  My  Criends  iasist  that  their  motion  W paroepUlxM, 


TUB  BATE  OF  THE  IHABABHAllATA  WAR. 


and  they  shewed  them  plainly  to  me  in  Swatlka.  Of  this  they  wanted  to  convince 
mo,  by  drawing  a line,  from  that  mansion  through  the  stars  B and  A of  the  Great 
Boar.  When  they  are  In  Magh&  then  the  line  passes  through  this  astcrism  and  thesfnrs 
Band  A.  By  these  means  they  could  see  them  In  every  part  of  the  starry  heavens. 
When  Nanda  was  born,  they  were  then  in  Purvnsailhn,  or  about  400  3*cais  IlC..  and  he 
died  827  before  the  GhrisMan  era.  Astrologers  watch  carefully  their  motion,  breanse 
their  influence  is  variously  modified  through  every  m-uisioii ; nud  wimtever  new  married 
couple  see  them  in  a fortunate  moment,  thoy  are  sure  to  live  happy  together  for  a hiindied 
years.  Hence,  says  the  ingenious  Mr.  Bailly,  we  may  safely  conclude,  that  nobody  ever 
saw  them  in  that  propitious  moment. 

The  pciiodof  the  seven  Hisis  begins  to  be  neglected  in  the  more  northern  parts 
of  India,  becaii  o they  are  not  always  to  be  seen  at  the  lucky  moment,  and,  in  their  steadt 
use  Dhruva,  or  the  polar  star:  This  star  is  often  mentioned  in  the  sacred  boots  of  tbo 
Hindus,  and  it  is  connected  with  their  mythology,  but  his  not  long  been  near  enough 
to  the  pole,  to  be  thus  denominated  after  it:  and  for  a long  series  of  years,  before,  there 
was  no  Dhruva  or  ImmoveabJu  star.  Bo  this  as  it  may,  Dhruva  with  his  relations,  shines 
in  the  Lesser  Bear.  In  the  Yantra-ratna-valyam,  this  constellation  is  called  the  fish  of 
Dhruva- Brahmanad*hikara.  It  consists  of  thirteen  stars:  Dhruva  is  in  the  mouth,  and 
Uttanapada  his  father  la  the  tail.  The  mouth  is  turned  towards  Bharani,  and  its 
revolution  is  the  same. 

The  method  of  calculation,  adopted  by  the  Purflnas,  however,  is  to  take 
Nanda  as  the  starting  point.  The  last  of  the  iSiilunaga  was  MahAnandin, 
who  had  a son  by  a iSudra  woman.  He  was  known  as  Mahapadma  or  the 
famous  Nanda,  whose  eiglit  sons  succeeded  him.  This  Nanda  family  was 
brought  to  an  end  by  the  Indian  Mucliiavelli,  Xautily'u  or  Chanakya. 
Chandra  Gupta  was  placed  on  the  throne  of  the  Nandas  by  this  king-maker 
Chanakya.  About  this  event  Mr.  V.  Smith  saj’s  : — 

**  Maliaiiand in,  the  last  of  the  dynast is  said  to  have  had,  by  a 
iSudra  or  low  caste  woman,  a son,  named  MahApadma  Nanda  who  nsniped 
the  throne,  and  so  established  the  Nanda  family  or  dynasty.  This  event 
may  be  dated  in  or  about  372  B.C.  ^ ^ ^ 

**  The  Greek  or  Roman  historians  ® ® * ranking  as  contemporary 
witnesses  throw  a light  on  real  history.  When  Alexander  was  stopped 
in  his  advance  at  the  llyphasis,  in  326  B.C.  he  was  informed  ® ® that 

the  king  of  the  Prachhei  &c.  ^ ® ♦ was  Xandraines  or  Agramis.  ” 

The  reference  to  this  king  is  evidently  to  one  of  the  Nandas. 

The  dale  of  the  accession  of  Nanda  is  calculated  from  that  of 
CIiandraGupta  Manrya,  who  ascended  the  tlimne  in  322  DC.  Tlie  Nanda 
dynasty,  according  to  Mr.  Vincent  Smith,  lasted  for  50  years,  when  it  was 
replaced  by  the  Maurya.  So  adding  50  to  322,  tlie  above  figure  372  B.C# 
is  arrived  at  by  Mr.  V.  Smith  as  tlie  date  of  the  accession  of  MaliHpadina 
Nanda.  But  all  the  Pur&nas  are  unanimous  in  stating  tKat  the  nine  Nau« 
das  reigned  for  100  years,  and  we  have  taken  that  in  our  calculations; 


APPENDIX  11. 


vri 

The  date  of  acceesion  of  Mah&padma  Nanda  would,  therefore,  be  422  B.O. 
instead  of  372  B.O. 

This  422  B.O.  is  the  starting  point  baehmrds  and  forwards  in  Purdrtie 
ealeulations. 

Chandra  Gupta  Maurya  displaced  the  Nanda  family.  The  nine 
Nandas  reigned  for  100  years.  Before  that,  there  was  tlie  Si4unuga 
dynasty,  and  before  which  was  the  Pradjota  dynasty,  and  before  that  the 
Bi'ihadratlias.  The  following  table  shows  the  periods  of  the  reigns  of 
these  dynasties  : — 

(1)  Chandra  Gupta'a  accesaions  823  B,0. 

(2)  Nauda  dynasty  100 

(8)  SiaiinAga  ...  ...  860 

(4)  Pradyotaa  ...  ...  152 

(6)  fiarhadrathaa  from  the 

time  of  Chaidyauparl- 
Ohara  ...  ...  1000 

Total  ...  1612 

Deduct  from  Chaidya  to  Sa- 

hadova  ...  171 

Balance  ...  1441,  and 
adding  ...  822 

=r  1768  B.O.,  the  year  of  the  Great  War. 

The  Miihabliarata  war  took  place  when  vSaliadeva  of  Bdrhadratha  family 
was  king.  From  Vasa  Chaidya  TJparichar  upto  Saliadeva  there  were  13  kings 
namely,  (1)  Vasu  Chaidyauparichara,  (2)  I3rihadratha,(3)  Kusagra,  (4)  Vpi- 
§abha,  (5)  Punyavnn  or,  PuijpavAii,  (6)  Punya  or  Pusya,  (7)  Satyadhriti,  ^8) 
Dlianusa,  (9;  Sarva,  ^10;  Sambliava,  {II ) Brihadratha,  (12,  JarAsandha,  (13) 
Sahadeva.  After  Saliadeva  there  were  19  or  32  kings  (or  22  according 
to  Mr.  Pargiter)  upto  Uipuhjaya,  the  last.  The  Great  War,  therefore,  took 
place,  on  the  above  as-sumption,  one  thousand  four  hundred  and  forty-one 
years  before  the  accession  of  Ghandra  Gupta  in  322  B.C.  or  in  other  loordi 
that  the  Great  War  took  place  in  or  about  1763  B.O. 

11.  But  says  a Western  writer: — “Duncker  in  his  History  of 
Antiquity  (Vol.  iv,  pp.  74-7)  gives  four  calculations  for  the  beginning  of  the 
Kali  age,  that  is,  aj>proxiniately  for  the  date  of  the  great  battle,  viz,,  1300, 
1175,  1200,  and  1418  B.C.”  (as  quoted  by  Mr.  Pargiter  in  J.  R.A.S. 
for  January  1910.) 

Onr  figure  does  not  correspond  with  the  figures  of  Duncker.  But 
the  last  figure  of  Duncker  corresponds  with  the  following  terse  of  the 


THE  DATE  OF  TEE  MAHABEAEATA  WAE. 


XV  It 


Matsya  Parkna  (Chapter  273,  verse  36)  as  we  find  it  in  ordinary  printed 
text;  — 

flc#  5 II” 

**Now  from  Mahapadma*s  inauguration  to  Pariksit^s  birth,  this 
interval  is  known  as  1050  years.” 

Now  M'lhdipadma,  called  also  Nanda,  the  founder  of  the  Nanda 
dynasty  was  crowned  one  hundred  years  before  Chandra  Qupta,  according  to 
the  reading  of  all  the  Puranas.  Consequently,  the  coronation  of  Mahapadma 
took  place  in  422  B C.  or  100  years  before  tlie  accession  of  Chandra  Gupta 
Maurj^a  in  322  B.C.  Ad<ling  this  figure  422  to  1050  we  get  1472,  That 
was  the  time  when  Pariksit  was  born  (during  the  Mahabhdrata  war)  as 
the  posthumous  son  of  Abhimanyu  who  was  killed  in  that  war,  if  we  taka 
the  above  verse  as  correct,  which  it  is  not  as  will  be  proved  later  on. 
According  to  this  calculation  the  Great  War  took  place  1472  years  before 
Christ.  Our  previous  calculation  gave  us  1763  B.C.  as  the  year  of  the 
Great  War,  while  this  gives  us  1472  B C.  as  the  year  of  that  war.  Thus 
there  is  a difference  of  291  years. 

irr.  But  in  the  Visnu  P.  also  occurs  a similar  verse  (Book  IV. 
ch.  24  V.  32). 

“From  the  birth  of  Pariksit  up  to  the  inauguration  of  Nanda  the 
interval  is  1015  years.”  Adding  1015  to  422  we  get  1437,  which  is 
similar  to  the  figure  just  obtained.  The  Great  War  took  place  in  1437  B.C. 

Shall  we,  therefore,  take  1437  B C.  as  the  year  of  the  Great  war,  in 
preference  to  1763  B.C.  a figure  ^arrived  at  by  adding  the  periods  of 
reigns  from  Somadlii  up  to  Chandra  Gnpta’s  322  B.C.  ? This  is  the  ques- 
tion that  we  liave  to  consider  next. 

IV.  The  next  question  that  naturally  arises  is  what  kings  reigned  after 
this  Great  War.  Some  of  the  Puranas  contain  list  of  kings  that  reigned  in 
various  parts  of  India,  at  the  time  of  the  Mahabharata  war.  Three  such 
dynasties  are  important,  though  only  one  of  them  is  useful,  as  fi.King  the  date 
of  the  Great  War.  The  first  dynasty  is  that  of  the  Pauravas,  whose  capitsrl 
was  Indraprastha,  subsequently  removed  to  Kau^itmbi,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Yamuna,  thirty  miles  to  the  west  of  Allahabad.  The  second  dytuiaty  is 
that  of  the  IkfivAkus,  whoso  capital  was  Ajodhya  and  in  later  tiikito 


APPENDIX  IL 


xnii 

was  also  included  in  its  sphere.  The  third  dynasty  is  that  of  the  Barhadra- 
thas  of  Magadlia,  and  their  succeasors  the  Pradyotas  and  ^irfnnSgaa.  Thia 
laat  ia  the  dynaaty,  the  hiatorical  exiatence  of  which  ia  put  beyond  all 
reasonable  doubt,  by  the  rise  of  Biiddhiam  at  a time  when  Bimbia&ra 
a ^idum^ga  king  waa  reigning  in  Magadha. 

The  Mataya  Purana  givea  a aomewhat  complete  list  of  these  kings 
of  Magadha  in  chapter  271.  Thus,  it  aaya 

“ When  tlie  Bharata’s  battle  took  place  and  Sahadeva,  the  king  of 
Magadha,  waa  slain,  his  heir,  Somddlii,  became  king  in  Girivraja.” 

He  and  hia  auccessors  are  named  below  together  with  their  periods 
of  reign. 

Namf,  Period  of  reign. 

1,  Som&dbi 

3.  firntasravaa 

S.  Ayntnjns  or  Aprafipi 

4.  Niramitra 

E.  Siik^atpa  (or  Pnraksa) 

5.  Bvihatkarmlt 

7.  Bennjit 

2d0  yoars 

The  V&yu  PurAna  then  adds  to  the  above  list  “ Semljit  Sanipratam 
chfipi,  etfi  vai  bhoksj-ate  samnh  “ Seuajit  is  now  enjoying  the  earth  the 
same  number  of  years.”  It  waa  thus  in  tlie  reign  of  tliis  Senajit,  that  the 
Great  sacrificial  session  took  place  in  Naimi^aranya.  At  that  time, 
Adhisima  Kriijna  of  the  I’aurava  dynaaty  was  reigning  in  Indrapiaatha. 
About  him,  the  Matsya  PurAna  in  chapter  50  says  : — 

“ Adhisima  Kri^na  dharmAtmA  Stimpratam  yo  niahnya§ah  ” that  ia 
Adhisima  Kri^na  was  tlie  leiguing  king,  when  tliis  original  of  the  Mataya 
PurAna  waa  recited  by  Suta. 

Thus  this  Adliisiina  Kriana  of  the  Paurava  dynasty,  and  SenAjit  of 
BArahadratlia  dynasty,  were  conteaiporariea,  and  they  flourished  several 
years  after  the  Great  War. 

Next  arises  tlie  question  : — When  these  two  kings  w'ere  reigning 
in  Indrapi-astha  and  Girivraja  (Magadha,)  respectively,  who  waa  their 
contemporary  in  Ayodhya  ? The  answer  is  tliat  DivAkaraof  the  TkpwAku 
family  was  the  contemporary  of  iSensjit  and  Adhisima  Kriana.  Ab(Dlt 
this  DivAkara,  tlie  Matsya  PurAna,  in  chapter  271  aaya 

“ Tasyai^a  MadhyadesJetu. 

Ayodylia  iiagari  ^ubliA. 

Div&karaaya  aabita”. 


2« 

40 

5« 

38 

23 


TEE  DATE  OF  TEE  MAEABBAEATA  WAR. 


and  VSyu  Purfina  makes  it  clearer,  by  saying 
Yadcba  sdmpratam  adhy&ste. 

AyodliSm  nagaiim  nripah”. 

Thus  these  three  kings,  Adhistma  Krisna  in  Hastindpur  of  the 
Faurava  dynasty,  Divfkara  at  Ayodhyd,  of  the  Iksv&ku  dynasty,  and  Sena  jit 
in  Oirivraja  of  the  B&rhadratha  dynasty  were  contemporaries. 

The  list  of  the  successors  of  Sen^jit  with  the  periods  of  their  reign 
as  given  in  the  Matsya  Purana,  chapter  271  may  now  be  resumed,  viz  : — 

1.  Sratanjaya 

2.  Vibhu 

8.  Saohi 

4 Ksema 

6.  Suvrata 

6.  Sunetra  ... 

7.  Nirvritl  ... 

8.  Trinetra 

9.  Dridasoiut ... 

10.  ^fahinetra ... 

11.  Siicli.'ila  ... 

12.  Sunetra 

13.  Satyajit  ... 

14.  VUvaJlt  ... 

16.  Uipunjaya ... 

650  or  502  excluding 
the  three  not  men- 
tioned in  our  text. 

The  Matsya  PurAna  according  to  one  text,  tlien  adds  that  these  six- 
teen kings  inclading  Seuajit  are  to  be  known  as  the  fiirture  Brihadrathas, 
sixteen  others  had  preceded  him  and  their  kingdom  will  last  723  years. 
Bnt  there  is  another  reading  which  says  that  these  32  kings  reigned  for 
10t)0  years.  That  reading  is  in  harmony  with  the  text  of  the  Vi§nu 
PurAna. 

In  the  Matsya  Parana  chapter  271,  verses  29  and  30  say  that  these  32 
kings  will  be  the  future  Brihadrathas  and  they  will  reign  for  full  1000 
years.  The  list  given,  however,  enumerates  only  22  kings.  The  word 
" DvAtrimdat  ” is  perhaps  a mistake  for  “ Dvavimdat  ” which  appears  to 
be  the  correct  reading  as  given  in  the  BrahmApdi^  PurAna.  Both  readings 
are  given  below 

3 Tm'  H” 

" And  these  32  kings  will  be  the  future  Brihadrathas.  Their  king- 
dom will  last  full  1000  yeajs.  ” 


40  years  of  reiga. 

78  >1  >1 

^8  »»  n 

78  „ „ 

8^  ff  n 

86  „ 

88  „ ,, 

78  „ H 

77  „ 

40^ 

W V Vu  out  toxta 
60 


XX 


APPENDIX  II. 


But  the  BrahmSn^a  Parana  reading  is  ; — 

^ 3 ^ ’059'  «” 

" These  22  kings  are  the  future  Bfibadrathas.  Their  kingdom  will 
last  for  full  1000  years.  " 

This  latter  reading  appears  correct,  because  it  corresponds  with  the 
reading  of  the  Vii^nu  Purina  and  the  total  of  the  reigns  of  these  22  kings 
comes  up  very  nearly  to  1000  years.  Or  the  fact  may  he  that  there  were 
really  32  kings  who  ruled  for  1000  years,  tliough  only  22  have  been  enu- 
merated by  name,  the  names  of  otlier  ten  forgotten  as  being  insigniheant. 

The  Vi§pu  text  is ; — 

fraw:  ?rbs^ 

^1613,  ^ssra;,  tr?li  ^sr:,  ^ gsr:  wft^qfcT  1 areml*! 

1^5,  er?!^  g2Rn?^«r^5,  aar:  gsnr:,  ?icr: 

area  «f^i  i fRf:  cr<gn(t>  ftipra: 

SSTJ,  11 

“ JarSsandhi’s  son  was  Saliadeva,  his  son  wasll)Somapi,  his  son  will 
be  (2)  l^rutavat,  his  son  will  he  (3)  Ayutayus,  his  son  will  be  (4>  Niramitra, 
his  son  will  be  (5)  Suksaftra,  his  son  will  be  (6;  Brihatkarman,  his  son 
will  be  (7)  Senajit,  his  son  will  be  (S,/  ^rutanjaya,  his  son  will  be  (9) 
Vipra,  his  son  will  be  (10)  ^uchi,  his  son  will  bo  (11)  Kseniya,  his  son  will 
be  (12)  Suvrala,  his  son  will  bo  (l.‘))  Dhanna,  liis  son  will  bo  (14)  Surframa, 
his  son  will  be  ,15;  Diidhasena,  his  son  will  be  (10)  Sumati,  his  son  will  be 
(17)  Subala,  his  son  will  be  (18)  Siinita,  his  son  will  be  (19)  Satyajit,  his 
son  will  be  i20)  Visivajit,  his  bon  will  bo  (21)  Itipuiijaya.  I'heso  are  the 
Barahadrathas,  who  will  reign  fora  thousand  years.’* 

Note : — 'I'he  opinion  of  Mr.  Pargitter  that  from  the  accession  of 
Senajit  to  the  end  of  this  dynasty  there  were  16  kings  who  ruled  for  723 
years  does  not  seem  to  be  borne  out  by  our  text.  If  thirty-two  kings  ruled 
for  1000  years,  then  16  kings  before  Senajit  ruled  for  1000-723  or  277 
years.  'Plus  would  give  an  average  reign  of  17  years,  a very  much  shorter 
period  than  the  average  of  forty-five  years  per  reign  according  to  the 
previous  reading.  The  total  figures  of  the  reigns  of  the  16  kings  from 
Senfijit  to  Ripunjaya  does  amount,  however,  to  full  700  years.  The  verse 
“ trayo-vinis-adhikam  te^fim  rajyam  cha  ^ata-saptakam  ” may  be  k 


TEE  DATE  OF  TEE  UAEABEAEATA  WAR. 


#• 
XZI 

wrong  reading.  The  Barhadratha  dynasty  was  founded  by  the  father  of 
king  Bribadratha. 

**  This  dynasty  was  founded  by  Bribadratha,  son  of  Vasu  Chaidyoparichara,  and  he  and 
his  nine  successors  reigned  down  to  the  great  battle.  From  the  battle  to  SenAjit  6 kings 
are  named,  excluding  SeiiAjit  who  is  spoken  of  as  the  then  reigning  king,  and  fronf  and 
including  him  to  the  end  16  kings  are  mentioned.  There  were  thus  82  kings  altogether, 
10  before  the  battle  and  twenty-two  after,  or  from  the  standpoint  of  benAjit's  reign  16 
past  and  16  future.  Lines  **Sodas-aite  nripa  jneya  &o."  of  Matsya  Purftna  take  the 
stand-point  of  his  reign  and  speak  of  him  and  his  succQssors  as  the  16  future  kings,  and 
say  ^rima  facie  their  total  duration  was  723  years. 

Lines  Davatrimsac  oha  Ac.,  of  Matsya  Purdna  which  are  not  in  some  manuscripts  of 
Matsya  Purdna  reckon  (in  a way)  from  the  beginning  and  speak  of  all  the  thirty-two  kings 
as  future  since  most  of  them  wore  posterior  to  the  Battle,  and  thus  they  say  the  whole 
dynasty  lasted  1000  years.  These  two  statemonts  are  not  contradictory  but  are  hardly 
compatible,  because  taken  together  they  assign  723  years  to  the  last  16  kings  and  only  277 
to  the  first  16.  The  total  of  1000  years  for  32  kings  is  excessive,  and  that  of  723  years  for 
16  kings  is  absurd.  But  if  we  can  read  linos  **Sodas-aito  nripa  jneya  &o.,  as  two  independent 
sentences,  and  treat  tesam  as  applying,  not  merely  to  those  Id  future  kings  but  to  the 
Brihadrathas  generally,  their  purport  stands  thus  : — Those  16  kings  are  to  bo  known  as 
the  futtnre  Brihadrathas  :—and  their  kingdom  ithat  is,  the  kingdom  of  the  Brihadrathas) 
lasts  723  years.  " The  total  duration,  then  723  years,  would  be  within  possibility,  for  the 
average  reign  would  be  about  2)  years.  This  rendering  would  of  course  discredit  lines 
Dvatrimsacli  cha  nripa  Ao,,  If  we  read  VAyu  according  to  another  manuscript  of 
Matsya  Purfina  with  that  construction,  the  total  period  would  be  700  years  and  would 
give  an  average  reign  of  just  under  22  years,  which  would  be  vims-adhikam.  ** 

Tliia  opinion  of  Mr.  Pargiter  ia  however  not  borne  out  by  our  text  of 
the  Matsya  Pur4pa  A nanda^iMm  series.  In  chapter  50  of  that  PurSna  we 
find  the  dynasty  of  Brihadrathas  given  in  verses  26-33  namely,  (I ) Vasu 
Chaidyauparichara,  (2)  Brihadratha  (3)  Kuilfigra,  (4)  Vri$abha,  (5)  Punya- 
vau  or  Pu?pav4n,  (6)  Punya  or  Pusya,  (7)  Satyadbriti, 

JVotr.— According  to  some  mannsoript  there  was  no  king  like  Pnnya  or  Pnsya. 

(8)  Dhanu§a,  (9)  Sarva,  (10)  Sambhava,  (11)  Bribadratha,  ^12)  Jara- 
sandha,  (13)  Sahadeva. 

Aotr.— This  xras  the  king  who  was  killed  in  the  great  war  mentioned  In  this  chapter. 

(14)  Soinadhi,  (15)  Srutasarvas,  (16)  Ayutayus  or  Apratipi,  (17)  Nira- 
xnitra,  (18)  Suksatraor  Puraksa,  (19)  Brihatkarma,  (20)  Senfijit,  (21)  Sru- 
tanjaya,  (22)  Vibhu,  (23)  Suchi,  (24)  Ksema,  (25)  Suvrata,  (26)  Snnetra, 
(27)  Nirvriti,  (28)  Trinetra,  (29)  Dridasena,  (30)  Mahinetra,  (31)  Snchala, 
(32)  Riponjaya. 

Thus  from  Senfijit  np  to  Ripunjaya  there  are  only  19  kings,  (and  not 
16  as  held  by  Mr.  Pargiter),  while  from  Vasu  Chaidya  Uparichara  there  are 
19  kings  up  to  Senlijit,  and  not  sixteen  kings  as  mentioned  by  Mr.  Pargiter. 
This  arose  very  likely  from  an  oversight  of  the  learned  author:  Excluding 
the  three  kings  (Snnetra  40  years,  Satyajit  83  years,  and  Visvajit  25  years 
or  altogether  148  years),  we  find  that  Senijit  to  Ripunjaya  there  ruled  16 


Appsmix  u. 


kings  for  502  years,  while  from  Chaidya  Upariohara  to  Brihalkarma  the 
predecessor  ol  Sen&jit,  there  ruled  19  kings  for  the  remaining  period  of 
1000  years,  namely,  for  498  years.  We,  however,  think  that  the  text 
giving  1000  years  to  32  Brihadratha  kings,  from  Somadhi  to  Ripunyaya 
is  preferable  as  consistent  with  chapter  50  of  this  Pur&na.  Though  it 
gives  the  average  period  of  31  years  for  each  reign,  yet  that  period  is  not 
excessive,  reineinboring  tliat  men  were  longer-lived  then  than  now  or  that 
the  names  of  some  insignificant  kings  hi.ve  dropped  out,  though  the  total 
regnal  period  1000  years  has  been  correctly  reinemborod  and  repeated. 

Pulika — a mimster  of  Ripunjaya  assassinated  his  master  and 
installed  ids  sou  as  king,  uIhcIj  gave  rise  to  the  Pradyota  family.  There 
were  five  kings  in  this  family,  viz  : — 


1.  Pradyota 

...  ...  28  years  of  reign. 

1 Pftlaka 

...  88 

3.  Viti&khayupa  ... 

...  ...  58  „ „ 

4.  Ajaka  (or  Huryaka) 

21 

6.  NaDdivardhana 

...  ...  80  „ „ 

t82  „ „ 

This  dynasty,  however,  lasted  152  years,  according  toother  texts. 

The  IVadyotas  weie  followed  by  tlie  SirfiinAgii  faoiily.  ^i^untlga 

put  an  end  to  the  last  Pradyota  king  and 

was  succeeded  by  nine  kings 

mentioned  below  : — 

1.  SiiiunSga 

...  40  years  of  reigu. 

2.  K^kavarina 

...  28 

8.  Kflomadharman 

...  ...  88  „ „ 

4.  Kflatranjas  or  Esemajit  ... 

...  ...  24  „ ,, 

6.  Vimbisara  or  yiodbySsoiia 

...  ...  28  ,t  f. 

5a.  Kanvftyfina  ... 

...  9 „ 

6b.  Bliumitra 

U 

S.  Ajdtasatru  ... 

...  ...  27  ,,  „ 

7.  Dartiaka  (or  Vansaka) 

...  24  „ 

8.  Udasin 

...  ...  88  „ „ 

8.  Nandivardhan ... 

...  40  „ 

10.  Mah&nandin  ... 

....  ...  48  „ ,, 

844  ,. 

Our  PnrAna,  however,  gives  the  total  period  as  360  years.  If  how- 
ever we  take  the  above  reigns,  as  given  by  Mr.  Pargiter,  and  other  PurA- 
nas,  viz,  as  40+36  + 364’40-f- 28+27+- 25+33-h42-|“43  the  total  comes 
to  350,  still  a deficiency  of  ten  years.  The  Matsya  wrongly  inserts 
two  Kanvfiyana  kings,  viz,^  KfinvAyana  9 years  and  Bhnnnmitra  14  years 
in  the  above  list,  between  Vindhyasena  and  Ajatasatru.  Even  then  the 
figures  of  the  Matsya  will  come  up  to  344  +23=*  367  yeate  and  not  360. 


THlEfDATJ!  OF  TBB  MABABHARATA  WAR. 


With  these  kings  we  come  upon  solid  historical  names.  It  was 
in  the  reigns  of  Vimbis&ra,  ilie  fifth  king  in  the  ahore  list  and  of  his  Son, 
Ajfttaijatro,  that  the  great  Founder  of  Buddhism  flourished.  From  the 
date  of  Buddha's  preaching  in  Magadlia,  in  the  court  of  Vimbisara  and 
Aj&tadatrn  up  to  the  Great  War,  the  period  that  elapsed  can  be  easily 


calculated  from  the  figures  above  given. 

Namely  from  flomadhi  ap  to  fiendjit 

• •• 

...  827  yesn. 

Srutanjaya  up  to  Ripunjaya  ... 

...  602  „ 

' Pradyota  family 

• •• 

...  132  „ 

Sisnndga  „ 

• 99 

...  821  „ 

1282 

Thi^  however  does  not  tally  with  the  statement  that  1050  or  1015 
years  elapsed  between  Nanda  and  the  Great  War.  There  is  a difference 
of  more  than  two  hundred  years. 

If,  however,  we  take  the  figures  from  Mr.  Pargiter’s  dynasties  of 
the  Kali  age,  as  given  below,  we  find  that  from  Somadi  to  Ripunjaya, 
there  were  22  kings  who  reigned  for  920  years.  The  Pradyotas  after 
Ripunjaya  were  5 kings  who  reigned  for  138  years.  The  Sisunagas  who 
came  after  the  Pradyotas  were  10  kings  and  reigned  for  330  years,  the 
text  however  says  that  the  reign  of  the  SiSuuagas  was  for  360  years. 
Adding  up  the  above-mentioned  three  figures,  viz.,  920  plus  138  plus  330, 
(or  360)  we  get  the  sum  1388  years  or  1418.  Thus,  1388  or  1418  years  was 
the  interval  between  the  installation  of  Mahfipadraa  Nanda  and  the  birth  of 
Parik^it  or  the  Great  War.  Adding  422  B.C.  the  year  of  the  installation 
of  Mahapadma  Nanda,  ice  come  to  the  figures  1810  or  1840  B.G.  as 
the  date  of  the  Mdhdbhdrata  War.  Thus  there  is  difference  between 
1810  B.C.  or  1840  and  1472  B.C.  of  388  years  or  418. 

Whether  we  take  Mr.  Pargiter’s  figures  which  gives  a difference  pf 
388  years,  or  the  figures  based  on  the  Matsya  Purfiua,  wliich  gives  the 
date  of  the  war  as  1736  B.C.  and  apcording  to  which,  the  difference  is 
291,  it  is,  no  doubt,  a large  one.  How  are  we  to  reconcile  this  ? The 
printed  text  of  all  the  Purfinas  gives  the  interval  between  the  inauguration 
of  Mab&padma  Nanda  and  the  birth  of  Pariksit  as  1050  years  (with  the 
variants  1015  or  1U5),  while  the  total  of  the  reigns  given  in  detail  makes 
this  figure,  1741  in  our  case,  and,  1388  in  that  of  Mr.  Pargiter.  What 
figure  are  we  to  take  ? Is  there  any  mode  of  reconciling  the  difference  of 
about  300  years  ? What  is  the  more  reasonable  alternative  to  take  ? Is 
it  the  aggregate  arrived  at,  by  adding  the  reigns  of  different  kings  or  the 
total  given  in  the  printed  texts  of  the  Purfinas  ? Or,  does  this  verse  of 


APPENDIX  IL 


xxit 

the  Par&uae  refer  to  some  other  Parik^it  than  Pai'ikfitv  the  aon  of  Abhi- 
tnaitiyu  ? Or,  is  Paiaksit  a misreading  for  some  other  king  who  reigned 
about  300  years  after  the  Great  War?  It  is  a curious  fact  worth  noting, 
that  when  the  Ptinina  was  recited  in  the  Naimis&ranya  by  the  Suta, 
Sendjit  was  the  reigning  king  in  the  Barlmdratha  family  and  from 
6omadi  to  Senajit,  six  kings  reigned  for  a period  of  267  years,  or,  accord- 
ing to  our  figures  277  yeara.  If,  instead  of  calculating  from  the  period 
of  the  birth  of  Pariksit,  the  Puranas  calculated  from  the  time  of  Senajit, 
or,  his  coiiteinporary  Adhisima  Krisna,  in  whose  reign  the  Parana  was 
composed,  then  the  above  figure  of  1050  years  becomes  reasonable,  but 
this  is  merely  conjectural,  and  there  is  no  authority  as  yet  discovered 
by  us,  for  Iiolding  tliat  the  Pariksit  of  the  above  verse  is  not  the  Pariksit, 
son  of  Abhiinai\yu,  or  that  Pariksit  is  a misreading  for  Senajit  or  Adhi- 
sima Krisna. 

V.  Varaha  Mihira,  quoting  Garga,  fixes  the  date  of  the  Great  War 
at  2526  before  ^aka  era,  whicli  commenced  in  78  A. I).  According  to  him 
the  date  of  the  Great  War  is  2448  B.C.  (Bribat  iSainhita,  Ch.  XIIL,  v.  3). 
But  he  or  rather  Garga  gives  no  clue  how  tliis  figure  was  arrived  at 

VI.  It  may  also  be  noted  here  that  though  the  Visnu  Pur^ina  repeats 
the  traditional  verse  that  1050  years  was  the  interval  between  the  inaugu- 
ration of  Nanda  and  the  birth  of  Pariksit  yet,  the  total  given  by  it,  are 
approximately,  the  same  as  those  given  by  the  Matsya  Purana.  It  sa}-.? 
the  Barhadrathas  reigned  for  1000  years  from  Somadi  (our  figure  is  920 
years  from  Somadi  to  Uipunjaya).  It  then  gives  the  reign  of  Prad3^ota8 
as  138  years  which  coincides  with  our  figure.  The  Sisunagas  reigned  for 
362  years,  according  to  the  Visnu  Purana.  Thus  the  total  of  these  three 
figures,  is  (1000  plus  135  plus  362)  1500  j^oars.  This  would  give  the 
year  of  the  Mahabharuta  war  as  1922  B.C.  Thus  whether  we  take  1922 
B.C.  of  the  Visnu  Ihirana  or  1763  B.C.  according  to  one  calculation,  or 
1810  B.C.,  accor(ling  to  Mr.  Pargiter,  we  can  fairly  say,  that  the  figure 
1477  B.C.,  given  in  the  datum  of  the  above  verse,  is  untenable.  There- 
fore, we  repeat  that  for  the  present,  we  take  1922  B.C.,  as  the  year  of  the 
Great  War. 

xVnother  method  of  reconciling  the  discrepancy  is,  that,  instead  of 
reading  the  verse  as  given  in  printed  text,  if  we  read  it.  as  then  it 

would  mean,  that  the  interval  between  Nanda  and  Pariksit  was,  in 
round  numbers,  1500  years,  instead  of  1050  or  1015  years-  This  appears 
a more  reasonable  reading,  and  in  this  view,  the  figure  of  Mr.  Pargiter, 
namely,  1388  (the  interval  between  Nanda  and  Pariksit)  is  nearer  the 
figure  of  the  Visnu  Pur  Ana,  with  a difference  of  112  years.  ‘ As  a 


TiB  DATB  OF  TBB  MAUMaBATA  WAB.  • . xx» 


matter  of  strange  ooiooidence,  there  is  such  a reading,  aa  Js  evident 
from  Mr.  Pargiter’s  footnote  given  on  page  58  of  his  Dynasties  of  the 
Kali  Age.  He  aays  on  verse  ^ 9 w'v  l9W»jW**in  his  note,  No.  21 

on  the  word  panchaiiaduttaram.  “So  Matsya  generally,  V&ya,  Brah> 
manda,  Matsya,  marked  0,  e,'  and  j,  the  reading  is  pauchailntottaram, 
In  Mss.  marked  1 and  m of  Matsya  and  b and  1 of  Vi^nu,  the  reading  is 
pancliadatottaram.” 

This  last  reading  removes  all  difficulties.  According  to  it,  the 
reakling  would  be,  "qtf  ( or  tps*  ) w* «tfeP9  and  the  verse 

would  then  mean  “ Now  from  MaiiiLpadtiia’s  inauguration  to  Pariksit’s 
birth,  this  interval  is,  indeed,  known  as  loUD  years.” 

We  shall  take  tlierefore,  this  reading  of  the  verse  and  in  all  that 
we  have  said  above,  this  is  to  be  understood.  Thus  according  to  it,  the 
date  of  the  Great  War  would  be  1600  plus  422  equal  to 
1822  B.C. 

Here,  in  passing,  we  may  mention  a point  noted  by  Mr.  Pargitcr, 
regarding  the  two  readings  of  the  Matsya  Cliapter  271  verse  30.  That 
verse  according  to  one  text  is ; — 

That,  22,  Birhadratha  kings  in  future  will  enjoy  the  kingdom  for 
full  one  thousand  years.”  The  other  reading  is  that  “ sixteen  Brihadratha 
kings  in  future  will  enjoy  the  kingdom  for  723  years.” 

In  the  face  of  it,  these  two  versions  appear  to  be  inconsistent,  but, 
there  is  really  no  such  inconsistency.  The  first  verse  takes  its  standpoint 
from  the  reign  of  king  Parik^it,  who  was  contemporary  of  king  SomAdi 
and  counts  the  future  kings  from  that  point,  as  the  Vi^^u  PurAna  has 
done.  From  8omSdi  upto  Ripunjaya,  the  aggregate  of  the  reigns  is 
1,000  years  and  the  number  of  kings  is  22  (or  rather  32)  though  ten  names 
have  dropped,  three  of  whom  however  have  been  supplied  by  Mr.  Pargiter, 
and  others  may  be  found  if  further  search  be  made.  The  second  verse  takes 
its  standpoint  from  Senajit's  reign,  consistently  with  its  assertion,  that  ttte 
Pur&pa  was  recited  towards  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Sen&jit,  or,  to  use  its 
own  words  “ Sentijit,  had  just  passed  away,"  and  the  total  number  of  kings 
is  really,  sixteen,  from  that  date  and  their  aggregate  period  of  reign  is 
723  years.  Thus  both  the  figures  1000  and  723  years  are  correct,  the 
starting  points  of  counting  being  different. 

VII.  I'he  Siddkdnta  view,  therefore,  is  that  the  Great  War  took  place 
in  1920  B.C.  In  this  we  are  supported  not  only  by  Sridhara  Svfimi  the 
learned  commentator  on  the  Vipim  Bhtlg&vata  Purllna  but  we  are  corro- 
borated by  the  Saptar^i  Era  also.  All  the  Puranas  (as  a rule,)  say  that 
tlie  Saptarpis  were  in  Maghfi  at  the  time  of  the  birth  of  Pariksit ; some 


xxn  APPEmiXIT. 

of  them  say  that  they  will  be  in  the  Kiittikfi  or  the  twenty  fourth 
MaghA  at  the  end  ot  the  Andhra  dynasty,  see  VAyu,  Vol.  11., 
(Bibliotheca  Indica]  Adhy  37,  «.  417,  and  Mateya  Ch.  273,  v.  44. 
That  dynasty  lasted  for  460  years.  So  deducting  from  24C0 
(one  hundred  for  each  asterism)  we  get  2400—460= 1940.  That  is  to  say, 
that  there  were  1900  years  roughly  between  the  birth  of  Parik^it  and 
the  rise  of  the  Andras  in  28  B.C.  As  the  Saptarfd  calculation  is  in 
centuries,  this  gives  also  19  centmes  B.C.,  for  the  year  of  the 
Great  War. 

^Ris  Chandra  Vidyarnava. 


APPENDIX  m. 


[Note.— Here  we  give  the  translation  of  three  ohapterSp  namely  of  271-278  of  the 
Matsya  ParAna,  which  give  an  acoount  of  the  Dynasties  of  the  Kali  Age  after  the  War,  in 
order,  to  complete  the  chronology  of  the  Indian  kings  and  to  elucidate  the  points  dis- 
cussed in  Appendix  11.] 

CHAPTER  CCLXXT. 

Ijtifiis  said 0 Sdta,  you  have  described  to  as  the  dynasty  of  Font, 
along  with  the  future  kings  in  that  dynasty.  Now  tell  us  about  those 
kings  who  will  be  in  the  Solar  (Sdrya)  dynasty.  So  also  tell  us  here  about 
those  illustrious  kings  in  that  Y&dava  family,  who  will  exist  in  the  Kali- 
yuga.  And  when  those  dynasties  (Sdrya  and  Yfidava)  will  come  to  an  end, 
then,  tt^ll  us  brieily  about  those  pious  kings  wlio  were  kinsmen  of  these 
families  and  who  will  obtain  the  kingdom  after  them,  in  due  order  as 
far  as  possible.— 1-3. 

.Vote.— Tbe  fottue  Kings  ot  Paunva  dynasty  bave  been  described  in  Obapter  60. 
See  p.  168. 

Sdta  said Now,  after  this,  1 shall  toll  you,  of  the  highsouled 
Ikov&kus. 


Post  Mahdbh&rata  Aik^oSkus  or  Solar  Dynasty. 

(1)  Brihadbala's  heir  [was  (2)  BrUiatkfaya,  his  heir]  was  the  heroic  king 
(3)  Drvk^aya,  The  son  of  Urukfaya  was  the  famous  (4)  VatsadroJia 
(Vatsavyuha). — 4. 

[According  to  Mr.  Pargiter,  the  verse  ought  to  be  : “ Brihadbala’s 
heir  was  the  wairior  king  Brihatksaya  his  son  was  Dnikpaya.] 

(5)  Prativyoma  was  after  Vatsadroha.  His  son  is  (6)  Diodkara 
to  whom  in  the  Madbyadeda,  belongs  the  beautiful  city  of  Ayodhyft.— 5. 

Note.— According  to  Y&yo,  the  reading  is  “who  now  mles  the  city  ot  AyodhyO  in 
Madfiyadesa,”  showing  that  Divdkara  was  the  rating  prince,  when  this  Pardpa  was  recited, 
DivAkara’s  (successor)  will  be  the  illustrious  (7)  Sakadeoa,  whose 
(successor)  will  be  (8)  DhvwoiAwi,  the  high-minded. — 6. 

His  (successor)  will  be  the  most  lucky  (9)  Eh&eya  (BhAnuratha  or 
BhAvyaratba).  And  his  son  will  be  (10)  PreUipdsva.  The  son  of  Pratl- 
pAdva  will  be  even,  (11)  Suprattpa. — 7. 

(12)  Mamdeoa  will  be  his  (Supratipa’s)  son,  after  whom  was  (13) 
Sunokpatra.  After  Sunakeatra  will  be  (14)  KinnaroAea,  the  harasser  of 
his  foes. — 8. 


APPEWIX  lit 


xzviii 


After  Kiniiarfiiiva  will  be  the  high-minded  (15)  AntaHh^a.  After 
Antarikfis  will  he  (16)  Sueena,  and  (17)  Sumitra,  the  conqueror  of  his 
enemies  {Amitrajit] — 9. 

A'ote.-AooordingtoauoUiorreadiDg,  Siueua  wsB  the  aon  of  Antartki^  whose  eon 
was  Snmitnk-Ainitrajit.  Or,  after,  Antarihsa  will  be  Bupama  (Snsooa),  and  after  him 
Amitrajit, 

{18*  BnhaiJnlja  will  be  tlje  son  of  Sumitra.  BrihadrAjas  (son)  will 
be  (19).F/77/araM  <D  ariiiavAn\  AiCfaii)  (20)  by  nsiine,  (will 

be)  tJie  virtuous  /l')harnilka^  son  of  Vir3'avAn. — 10. 

The  son  of  Kritanjaya,  will  be  the  wise  (21)  Ranejaya,  (22)  Sanjaya, 
the  warrior  king  will  eorne  after  Rfinejaya. — 11. 

[Sahjaya’s  son  will  be  (23!  f^Akj’a.  After  Sak^-a  will  he  the  king  (24) 
Sudhandana.  The  son  of  Sudhaudana  will  be  (25  SiddhArtha,  the  eminent 
(26)  PuRhala  or  Rtilinla  will  be  the  son  of  Siddhartha]  — 12. 

After  him  will  be  v27)  Prafiemjit  After  him  will  be  '28^  K^ndroha. 
After  Ksudraka  will  be  (29)  Kulaha.  After  Kiilaka  is  remembered  (30) 
Surathn. — 13. 

From  Snratha  was  born  *?*])  Sumitra.  lie  will  be  the  last  king. 
These  AiksvAkus  have  been  declared,  wlu)  will  exist  in  the  Kaliynga. — 14. 

These  will  be  in  the  line  fd’  Brihadl)a1a,  they  will  be  the  glory  of 
their  family.  Here  the  following  geneologieal  verse  is  sung  by  ancient 
poets.— 15. 

“This  dynasty  of  the  Iksvalcus will  end  with  Sumitra.  On  reaching 
King  Sumitra  if  will  come  to  its  close  in  the  Kaliynga.’' — 16. 

This  is  thus  the  dynasty  of  ifanii,  oven  as  declared  before.  Hereafter 
I will  relate  the  Barliadratliii  (dynasty  of  Magadha. — 17. 


Pont  MahahMrata  Bdrliadrathaa. 

Listen  about  the  kings,  those  past,  those  present,  and  those  to  come 
in  future,  from  (the  stock  of)  Jarasandha  (and)  in  the  lino  of  Sahadeva. — 
18. 

After  I'l'  Snhadcra  was  killed,  when  the  great  war  of  BhArata  took 
place,  (2)  Soniadhi  succeeded  him  as  his  heir,  and  became  king  in  Qiri- 
vajra.— 19. 

He  reigned  for  fifty-eight  years  : and  then  (3)  ^rutasravd  in  his  line 
reigned  for  dxfy-foiir  years. — 20. 

^4)  Apvatipi  reigned  for  thirty-six  years  and  (5)  Niramitra  after 
reigning  for  forty^years  went  to  lie.aven. — 21. 

Afterwards  (O')  FvrnIfRa  got  the  earth  for  fijty-six  years  and  (7) 
BvihaikaymA  reigned  for  Ixeevty-three  years. — 22. 


UATSYA  PURANA,  GHAPTEIt  27L 


xxix 


(8)  Sendjit  has  just  passed  away  after  enjoying  the  earth  for  fifty  years. 

JVot0.— Another  reading  according  to  the  Ydyu  Purftna  is  “ Sentjlt  is  now  enjoying 
the  earth,  the  same  namber  (28)  of  years.*' 

He  will  be  succeeded  by  (9)  Sruton;o;/a  T^ho  will  be  for  forty  years. 
Afterwards  (10)  Vibliu  will  obtain  the  earth  and  will  reign  for  twerdy-eicflit 
yeara,  and  then  (11  fluc/ii  will  rule  the  kingdom  lor  fifty-eight  plus  six 
years  (i.e.  61). — 23-24. 

The  king  (12)  K^ema  will  enjoy  the  earth  for  twenty-eight  years. 
After  whom  the  powerful  (13)  Anuorata  will  reign  for  sixty-four  years. — 
25. 

(14)  Su7ietra  will  enjoy  the  earth  for  twenty-five  ^another  reading 
thirty-five)  years.  (15;  Nirvriti  will  enjoy  it  for  fijly-eight  years.  -26. 

After  that  (16  Tinnetra  will  enjoy  the  kingdom  for  twenty-eight. 
years.  (17)  DyumatHena  Dridhasena)  will  be  for  forty-eight  years. — 27. 

(18)  Mahinetra  will  be  resplendent  for  thirtydhree  years  (19)  Achala 
or  (Suchala)  will  be  king  for  thirty-two  years— 28. 

(20)  Ripunjayt  will  obtain  the  earth  for  fifty-years,  and  these  32 

kings  will  be  the  future  Brihadrathas.— 29. 

Note.— Tho  following  throe  lines  are  omitted  in  our  text  of  the  Matsya  Purftna,  bat 
supplied  l),y  Mr.  Pargitor. 

“ Gtiatvarim  sat  sama  p5 jft  Rnnetro  bhoksyato  tatah 

Satyajit  prithivira  rfija  try  asitim  bhoksyate  samah 

Prapyaemain  VH'vajichchapi  pahcha-vinisnd  bhavisyati.” 

Ring  Suuctra  will  next  enjoy  the  kingdom  for  forty  years.  King  Satyajit  will  enjoy 
the  earth  for  eighty-threo  years,  (eighty  years).  And  Visvsajit  will  obtain  this  earth  and 
be  king  for  twenty-flve  years.-— 29A. 

iVotr. -Our  reading  is  dvfttrirnsatttt  nripft  hyeta.  Another  reading  is  “Sodas-aite 
nripftjiioyft  bhavitftro  Brihadrathfth.”  And  then  the  verse  will  moan these  sixteen 
kings  are  to  be  known  as  the  future  Brihadrathas.*'  Then  there  is  further  this  lino  in  the 
same  manuscript Trayo-vims-adhikain  tesftm  rftjyam  cha  sata*saptakani.’*  And  it 
moans “and  their  kingdom  will  last  sovon-hunclred  twonty-^h^ee  years.*'  According  to 
this  reading  the  sixteen  future  B&rhadrathas  will  reign  for  723  years.  Of  coarse  this 
includes  Scnftjit  also. 

Tlieir  kingdom  will  last  full  1000  years  indeed.  Then  Balaka  (son 
of)  Pulaka  will  be  tlie  conqueror  of  Ksatriyas.— 30. 

— The  translation  is  according  to  the  I'oading 

swfdiawftmhTOW.  I 

^ g OR?  ii 

But  the  kings  emimopated  are  22  only.  The  reading  of  the  Brahmanda  Purina  is 
irAqf  wn  “ These  22  Kings.”  This  is  more  accurate. 

Here  ends  chapter  271  dealing  with  the  genealogies  of  future 
Ilt^vuhns  and  Brihadrathas. 


zzx 


APPBmiX  111. 


CHAFTBB  COLXXU. 

Pradyota  or  Bdldka  Dynasty. 

Sdta  said Wlien  Bfibadrathas  and  Vitibotras  and  Avantis  itave 
passed  away,  Pulaka,  after  killing  bis  master  will  instal  his  sou  (Pradyota 
or  Bftlaka)  as  king.— 1. 

He  wiU  instal,  Biilaka,  born  of  Pulaka,  in  tbe  very  sight  of  the 
K^triyas  (by  assasinating  his  master,  Ripunjnya).  That  son  of  Pulaka  will 
subjugate  the  neighbouring  kings  by  force  and  not  by  right,  and  will  be 
devoid  of  royal  policy.— 2. 

That  {Pulaka''  the  best  of  men  will  reign  for  23  years,  (2)  PAlaka  or 
B&laka  will  be  king  for  28  years  (or  24  according  to  the  Vfiyu). — 3. 

(3j  King  VisdkhayApa  will  reign  for  53  years  (50  according  to  VAyu) 
(4)  and  SAryaka  will  be  king  for  21  years.  (5)  Nandimrdhana,  his  son,  will 
be  king  for  30  years  (20  years  another  reading).  These  five  kings,  after 
enjoying  the  earth,  for  52  years  (evidently  a mistake  for  155  or  152) 
will  perish. — 4-5. 

Note.— The  Visnu  m well  aa  the  Bhuguvata  Pnr&iia  gives  the  aggregate  as  188 
years. 

^isundka  Dynasty. 

Then  SikAniiha  destroying  all  tlieir  glory  will  place  his  son  in 
Benares  and  himself  go  to  Girivraja.  The  King  ^i^Quaka  will  reign  for 
40  years.— 6. 

His  son  Kdkavarna  will  obtain  the  earth  for  2G  years,  K§emadharma 
will  be  king  for  36  years. — 7. 

Kfemajit  will  obtain  the  earth  for  24  years,  Vindhyasena  will  be 
king  for  28  years. — 8. 

Kanvayana  will  be  king  for  9 years,  his  sou,  Bhumimitra  will  be 
king  for  14  years.— 9. 

JVote.— This  verso  0 is  evidently  misplaced  hero.  Its  proper  place  is  in  the  Kftnva 

line. 

Ajatasatru  will  be  king  for  27  years,  Vaimaha  will  be  king  for  24 
years. —10. 

Plis  son  Ud&st  will  be  king  for  33  years,  Nandivardhana  will  be  king 
for  40  years.— 'll. 

Mahdnandi  will  be  king  for  43  years  Tliese  will  be  the  kings  in 
the  l^isunaka  dynasty.— 12. 

The  Sirfunnkas  will  bo  kings  for  full  360  years,  and  the  kings  will 
be  low  born  K^atriyas  (Ksatrabandini). — 13. 

Note,— According  to  the  Visim  and  V&yu  the  agf*rogato  is  862  years.  But  adding  the 
above  figures  wo  get  821  only. 


MATS7A  WBA'^A,  OHAPTBU  m.  xxxi 


Early  Contemporary  Dynaetiea. 

Contemporaneous  with  all  these  kings  will  flourish  in  Ealiyuga 
other  kings  also,  andlthey  will  endure  an  equal  time.  There  will  be  24 
Ik^T&ku  kings,  27  Panch&las,  24  kings  of  Xftii  and  28  Haihayas  kings. 
—14-15. 

Then  there  will  he  32  Kalinga  kings,  25  Asmaka,  36  Kurava,  28 
Maithila,  23  Surasonas,  and  20  '\^tahotra  kings.  All  these  kings  will 
endure  the  same  time  and  will  be  contemporaries. 


The  Nandas.  422  B.C. — 322  B.C. 

Then,  as  an  incarnation  of  Kali,  will  be  born  Mahdpadma,  a son  of 
MahSnandi  fi-om  a i^ddra  woman  and  he  will  be  the  exterminator  of  the 
K^atriya  kings. — 16-18. 

Afterwards  all  the  kings  will  be  of  the  l^ddra  origin.  That  Mahdpadma 
will  be  sole  monarch  and  a universal  Emperor.  He  will  reign  for  88 
years  on  this  earth.  He  will  uproot  all  E^atriyas,  through  his  ambition. 
His  eight  sons,  beginning  with  Snkalpa  will  be  kings  for  12  years.  They 
will  be  kings  in  succession  to  Mahdpadma  one  after  another.  Eautilya  will 
uproot  all  these  sons,  during  the  course  of  12  years.  Then  the  empire  will 
pass  on  to  the  Mauryas,  after  being  enjoyed  by  (Eautilya  ?)  for  a hundred 
years  (or  then  Eautilya,  after  enjoying  the  earth  for  hundred  years,  will  go 
to  heaven). — 19-22. 


The  Mauryas. 

His  son  ^atadhanva  will  be  the  kmg  for  6 years.  His  son  Brihadratha 
will  reign  for  70  years. — 23. 

For  36  years  A4aka  will  be  king.  His  grandson  will  then  be  king 
for  70  years. — 24. 

His  son  Dadaratha  will  be  king  for  8 years.  His  son  Saptati  will 
reign  for  9 years  (or  his  son  will  be  for  79  years). — 25. 

These  are  the  ten  Mauryas  who  will  enjoy  the  earth  for  full  137  yem, 
from  whom  she  (the  Earth)  will  pass  to  the  Sungas. 

Mots,— The  text  mys  that  there  are  ten  Ifaarya  king8,bnt  its  ennme^tion  ia  short 
of  that  number.  The  following  note  from  Mr.  Pargiter  is  appropriate  This  dynasty 
is  given  by  all  i&ve  PurApaSybut  the  account  of  it  has  suffered  more  than  that  of  any  other 
dynasty.  Three  versions  exist  hero,  the  earliest  in  the  Matsysi  the  second  in  e Vftyn,  and 
the  third  In  the  Yayn  generally  and  the  Brahmftpda.  They  agree  in  general  purport,  but 
have  many  differences.  The  second  forms  a stage  of  recension  intermediate  between  the 
flrat  and  the  third,  and  is  the  only  copy  that  has  preserved  the  names  of  all  the  kings. 
Tho  Matsya  version  in  all  copies  is  incomploto  and  has  one  of  its  verses  misplaced,  thus 
only  5 MSS  mention  Ohandragupta,  tho  second  king  always  omitted,  and  tho  account 


f>***»Oy  be|^  Witt  tt«k  vmm  M,  potUng  tto  two  Mop  anti 
Aibto  «Qd  bia  thvee  sncaeaaoni.'* 


and  thon  montioos  only 


[Thoiigli  the  Matsya  mentions  only  seven  kings,  and  that  also  in  a 
contused  manner,  the  full  list  of  tan  kiiigs  is  given  in  the  Vi^m  Purana 
iBook  IV.  Chap  24.  verses  7-8i. 

The  yeara  of  accession  noted  against  their  names  are  taken  from  Mr.  V.A. 
Smith’s  IlistOTii 


(1)  Chandra  Gupfca 

(2)  Bindus&ra  Amitragli&ta 

(3)  Attoka 
Asoka  died 

(4)  Buy  as  as 

(5)  Dasaratha 

(6)  Sangata 

(7)  S&lUuka 

(8)  Somasariiian  ... 

(0)  Satadhanva  ... 

(10)  Bfibadratha  ... 


Date  of  aecension. 
322  B.C. 
208  B.G. 
273  BC. 
2ii2  B.C. 

232  B.C. 
224  B.C. 
213  B.C. 
206  B.C. 
100  B.G. 
...  101-185  B.C. 


Snvfjas, 

Pusyamitra  the  commander-in-(jliief  will  uproot  Brihadratha  an^ 
will  rule  the  kingdom  as  king  30  years. — 27. 

After  him  Vasnjyesiha  will  be  king  for  seven  years.  After  him 
Vasuniitra  will  be  for  ten  years. — 28. 

A'ote.— Oar  text  omits  Aguimitr.'i  >vhu  was  tho  iminodiatc  successor  of  Pusyamitra  and 
who  rcignod  for  8 years,  as  in  tlio  VAya  P. 

Then  his  son  Antaka  will  be  (reign)  for  2 years.  Then  Pulindaka  will 


be  (reign)  for  3 years. — 21). 

Then  Vajiamitra  will  be  king  for  9 years.  Then  SamAbhaga  will 
reign  for  32  years.  Then  after  him  his  son  Devabhunii  will  reign  for  10 


years.  These  ten  petty  kings  will  enjoy  this  earth  for  full  112  years.  And 
then  the  earth  will  go  to  the  Kanvas. — 30-32. 


Note.— The  PurAna  ouusiioratcH  only  8 kings  while  there  ought  to  bo  ten.  This 


omission  is  snpplied  by  the  nauien  of  Agnlmitra  and  Ghoflav.asu  as  given  in  the  Yi^nu  Pur&ua 
The  ten  kings,  therefore,  are  the  following  i'- 


ll) Pusyamitra 
(2)  Agniinitra 

..  (3)  Siijyestha  or  Vasnjyosiha 
(4)  Vasuniitra 
(5 1 Antaka 

(6)  Pulindaka 

(7)  Ghosavasu 

(8)  Vajramitra 

(9)  Bbilgavata  or  SamabhAga 
(10)  DevabliOti  or  DevabhOmi 


...  185  B.C.  (36  years). 

...  149H.C.  (Byears). 

...  141  B.O.  (7  years). 

...  184B.C.  (10  years). 

...  124  B.C.  (2  y«‘.»r8). 

...  122  B.C.  (3  years). 

...  119  B.C.  (.n  years). 

...  U6B.C.  (9  years). 

...  107B.C.  (82  years). 

...  76  B.C.  (10  years). 

Assasiiiatcd  in  65  B.C. 


Total  ...  120  years. 


UATB7A  PDBAJ^A,  OHAPTBB  272. 


xxxiii 


[The  aggeregate  of  the  reigns  is,  however,  130  years  and  not  112, 
but  all  the  Parfi:^as  agree  in  giving  113  years  as  the  duration  of  Sunga 
dynasty.  This  discrepancy  might  be  explained  by  omitting  Agnimitra 
from  the  list.  He  perhaps  never  reigned  as  a king  apart  from  his  father 
Pu^yamitra,  who  though  defaeto  king  always  styled  himsef  Senfipati 
or  Commander-in-chief  and  so  Agnin^itra’s  name  is  not  mentioned  by  the' 
Matsya  Purina.  There  is  much  uncertainty  about  his  reign  as  pointed 
out  by  Mr.  Pargiter.  Or  may  it  be  that  Agnimitra  was  practically  a king 
during  the  life-time  of  his  father  on  certain  parts  of  the  vast  empire.  And 
the  verse  “ tat-suto  ’ gnimitr-astau  bhavi^yati  samd  nirph  ” may  be  read  as 
“tat-suto’  ganimitrastu  bhavisyati  sami  nripah.”  According  to  this 

calculation  Sunga  dynasty wmdd  appear  to  have  come  to  an  end  not 

in  65  B.  C.  but  in  73 The  Matsya  Purana  verse  33  is  rather  inaccurate. 

It  says : — 

I tlRT  av:  SfFRiSr* 

I 

“ These  ten  K^udra  kings  will  eujoy  this  earth  full  100  and  200  (total 
300)  years.  Then  it  will  go  to  the  Sungas.”  This  is  evidently  a mistake. 
The  earth  could  not  have  gone  to  the  Snngas  after  the  Sungas.  Nor  did 
the  Sungas  reign  for  300  years.  Instead  of  tatah  SungSn  gamisyati, 
another  reading  is  tatali  svargam  gamisyati,  which  may  refer  to  the  last  king 
namely,  Devabhumi  who  will  go  to  heaven.  This  reading  is  more  appro- 
priate than  Sung&u  gamifyati.  Moreover  who  are  these  petty  kings 
Ksudi  arSjanah  which  the  text  mentions.  It  only  mentions  8 kings  and  not 
10  for  it  does  not  mention  Agnimitra  and  Ghosavasn.  We  have  therefore 
adopted  Mr.  Pargiter’  reading : — Dailaite  Sunga-iAjtino  bhok$yant-tm&m 
vasundhardm  l^tam  phrnam  daiia  dve  cha  tatiih  Ranvan  gamisyati.”  This 
is  in  accordance  with  Visnu  pur&^  also  which  in  IV.  24.  11  says. 

W I (RT: 

i] 


The  Kanvdyanas. 

The  minister  Vasudeva  forcibly  overthrowing  the  dissolute  king 
Debhabdmi  will  become  king  among  the  Sungas.  He  the  Ranvdyana, 
will  be  king  for  9 years. — 33. 

His  son  Bhhmitra  will  reign  14  years.  His  sou  Ndrdyana  will  be  fox 
12  years. — 34. 

B 


nwT' 


APPmmzui 


Suisrma,  his  son,  will  be  for  10  years  only.  These  are  recorded  as 
Sangabbrityas,  or  Kanvfiyana  kings.— 35. 

These  40  (fonr;  Kanvas  are  BrfthmaQasand  they  will  enj(7  die  earth 
for  45  years.— 35. 

They  will  have  the  neigbbonring  kings  respect  them  and  will  be 
virtuous.  At  the  time  of  their  period  of  reign  coming  to  an  end  the  earth 
will  go  to  the  Andhras.— 37. 


Note^-^Tbe  four  Kftiivijaiia  kings  are  shown  in  the  following  tabular  form 

(1)  Vasucleva  Kanva  ...  (9  years)  78  B.C. 

(2)  BhUmimitra  ...  (14  yoars)  69  B.C. 

(8)  Nftrhyana  ...  (18  years).  47  B C. 

(4)  Susarma  ...  (10  years)  37  B.C. 


Total  ...  46  years. 

[The  last  king  Susarma  was  slain  by  the  king  iSisuka  about  27  or 
28  B.C.] 

Here  ends  chapter  272  describing  the  Pradyota^  Sisundga^  the  Nanda^ 
the  Uauryat  the  Sungas  and  the  Kdnvdyana  dynasties. 


CHAPTER  CCLXXIII. 

Andhras. 

The  Andhra  Simnka  (^iiuka)  with  his  fellow  tribesmen,  the  servants 
of  Su&rman,  will  assail  the  KanvSyanas  and  him  (Snrfarman,)  and  destroy 
the  remains  of  the  Mangas’  power  and  will  obtain  this  earth. —1-2. 

Note The  above  translation  is  accordiog  to  Mr.  Pargiter's  text.  According  to 
our  text  the  reading  is 

"wo^rasireRTl  Jjjir;  smif 

d 3 II 

This  would  mean :— **  Then  KhQvfiyana  nobles  of  Susarma  having  assailed  her  (Earth) 
and  putting  to  an  end  what  remained  of  the  Sungas  will  become  powerful.”  This  shows 
that  the  chieftains  of  the  last  Ea^va  King,  Surarman,  revolted  against  him  and  put  an  end 
to  the  Sitnga  power. 

Their  tribesman  (a  kinsman  of  these  KAnv&yana  chieftains  (bhdp4s) 
who  had  revolted  against  Sutfarmani  called  (1)  ^i4uka  Andhra  will  get 
this  earth.  For  23  years  ^Muka  will  be  the  king. — 2. 

His  younger  brother  (2)  Kri^pa  will  be  18  years.  His  son  (3)  ^rl« 
mallakarpi  (^ri  ^takarpi)  will  be  10  yean.  Then  (4)  Ffirpoteanga  will  he 
king  18  years.  —3. 

Parglter  interto  (S)  “SkandhastMnbhi  wUl  be  king  It  yean”  after 

Pamotaanga. 


UATSYA  PORIVA,  OBAPTER  273. 


s'  ■ 

xtw 

(6)  l^takBiQi  will  be  66  years.  Hie  son  (7)  Lambodara  18 
years.'Hl. 

His  son  (8)  Apttaka(Aptlaka)  will  be  12  years.  Then  (9)  Meghasr&ti 
will  be  18  years. — 5. 

Then  (10;  SrAti  will  be  king  18  yean.  (11)  Skandhasvftti  will  then 
be  king  7 yean. — 6. 

Then  (12)  Mrigendra  Srfitikaroa  will  be  3 yean.  Then  (13)  Kuntala 
SvfitikarQa  will  be  king  8 yean.  Then  (14)  Sv&tivarpa  will  be  king  for 
one  year. — 7-8. 

Then  (16)  Ariktavarpa  will  be  25  years.  After  him  (17)  H&la  will 
be  king  for  5 yean. — 9. 

Note.--<BeforG  this  verso  and  as  part  of  verse  8 Mr.  Pargiter  inserts  **  fa^rimsadeva 
varyAni  PulomAvi  bhaviyyati/*  ^hich  means  then  (15)  Polom&vi  will  reign  88  years. 
Instead  of  Ariktavarua  another  reading  is  Ariftakarna. 

Then  (18)  Mandulaka  will  be  king  5 yean  (another  reading  Manta- 
laka.)  Then  (19;  Purindrasena  (Porikasena)  will  be  king.  After  him  (20) 
Saumya  will  be  king.— 10. 

Aote.— The  number  of  years  of  the  reigns  of  Pnrlndrasenaand  Saumya  are  not  given 
in  onr  edition.  Moreover,  it  is  doubtful  whether,  Saumya  is  the  name  of  a king.  Mr. 
Pargiter  says  Saumya  cannot  well  be  a king,  fhough  the  line  says  so  on  its  face, 
because  in  this  dynasty  two  kings  are  never  put  tosether  in  a single  line  without  any 
mention  of  their  reigns,  * Saumyo  bhaviyyati ' is  probably  a corruption.  Mr.  Pargiter  also 
points  out  that  instead  of  the  above  the  following  verse  is  in  the  YAyn  Pancha 
Pattalako  rAj&  bhaviyyati  mahftbaUh.  ‘‘BhAvyAh  Pnrikasenas  tu  samAh  so'py  eka- 
vimAatfm."  Thus  according  to  this  reading  Purikssena  will  reign  21  years. 

Then  (21)  Sundara  ^ntikai-^a  (i^atakarni)  will  reign  1 year.  Then 
(22)  Chakora  Svdtikar^a  (l^takarni)  will  reign  for  6 months. —11. 

Then  (23)  l^ivasvftti  will  be  28  years.  Then  (24)  King  Oautamt- 
putra  will  be  king  next  21  years.— 12. 

His  son  (25)  PulomS  will  be  king  28  years. 

[Then  (26)  I^Atakar^i  will  be  king  29  years  ] 

This  is  a very  doubtful  lin&as  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Pargiter  and  it  is  not  in  onr  text. 

After  Pulomft  (27)  divarfri-Pulomft  will  be  king  7 years.— 13. 

Then  (28;  diva  skandha  after  Sdntikarna  will  be  king  as  his  son 
for(?)  years. 

Note Onr  text  is  Hawn:  am:  i But  Mr.  Pargiter  would  amend 

itthtts  niam  vAr:  aai:  i 

Note.— Wo  number  Is  given.  Mr.  Pargiter  would  read  it :— **  BbavitAsmAt  trays 
samali,”  and  then  the  verse  would  mean  **Sivaakandhaaintikarna  will  be  king  3 years*"' 

Then  (29)  Yajnairi  dftntikar^ika  will  be  29  years.— 14. 


APPmUDlX  111 


npcvi 


Then  after  him  (30)  Vijayamll  be  king  6 yewrs.  Then  (31)  Chtqi^iufrl 
^ntikangia;  hie  son  will  be  10  years.— 15. 

Then  (32)  Pnlomft,  anotlier  them,  (vie.,  Pulomk  II)  will  reign  7 
yew;?.— (16a.) 

Tliese  19  Andhras  will  enjoy  the  earth  for  460  years.  On  the  king- 
dom of  the  Andhras  coining  to  an  end,  there  will  be  kings  belonging  to 
the  lineage  of  their  servants. — 16-17. 

If ote,— The  PnrAua  mentions  at  the  end  that  the  niiiubor  of  kiiij^  will  t)o  10,  but  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  itonumorates  80  kiiiga,  and  the  number  would  rise  to  52  if  the  kings 
Inserted  by  Mr.  Parglter  bo  taken  into  account. 


[We  give  in  a 
their  reigns 
(1)  SisokaAadhn 

(3)  Efis^a 

(8)  l^rimiliakarni 

(4)  POrnotsanga 
[(5)  Skandhaatambhi 

(6)  6&takarnl 

(7)  Lambodara 

(8)  Apitaka 

(0)  MoghasT^ti 

(10)  Syftti 

(11)  SkandbasTati 

(12)  Mfigendra 
(18)  Kuntala 
(14)  Sv&tiYarfia 
[(15)  Pulom&vi 
(10)  Arlktavarna 


tabular  form  the  list  of  the  names  of  the  Icings  with 


...  28  years. 
...  18 


10 

18 

18 

56 

18 

12 


..  18 
..  7 
..  8 
..  8 
..  1 
..  86 
...  25 


,tl 


ff 

»] 


(28) 

(29) 

(30) 

(31) 

(82) 

Various  Local  Dynasties, 


(17)  H4la 

(18)  Mandnlaka 

(19)  Pnrindresona 

(20)  Sanmya  (a  wrong  name 

with  no  years). 

(21)  Suudara  ' ... 

(22)  Chakora 
(28)  bivasvAti 

(24)  Gautamiputra 

(25)  Pa1oni& 

[(26)  bWkarni 
(27)  bivasri 

biyaskandha 
Yajnasri 
Yijaya 
ChandaSfi 
Poloma  11 


5 years. 

6 
21 


6 months. 

28  yc»n. 

21  „ 

28 

29(dou11)tful).] 

7 » 

S >. 

29  I. 

< .) 

10  ., 

7 


>,] 


On  the  kingdom  of  the  Andhras  coming  to  an  end,  there  will  be 
kings  in  the  lineage  of  their  servants  who  would  be  called  Sr!p4rvaUya 
Andhras. — 17. 


There  will  be  7 (kings  in  the  line  of  the  servants  of)  Andhras, 
10  Abhtra  kings,  also  7 Gardabhilas  and  18  ^Akas. — 18. 

There  will  be  8 Yavana  kings,  and  14  Tunitlra  kings  and  13  Garup(|a 
kings  and  19  (or  11  Mauna)  Huna  kings.— 19. 

The  8 Yavana  kings  will  reign  for  87  years.  The  7 Gardhabhilas 
will  enjoy  this  earth  again  (no.  years  given.  72  according  to  Vayu.) — 20 

The  earth  is  recorded  to  have  belonged  to  the  TuQ&ras  for  7000 
ye^rs.  And  18  kings  for  183;.yoar8  as  well  [printed  text  corrupt.  Ought 
tolbe “ Eighteen  fiakas  for  183  years.”]— 21. 


iiATSVA  WBA1^A,  CEAPTEn  m. 


xzzvii 

For  half  low  hondred  years  there  will  reign  the  13  Oora^das 
of  Mlechohha  along  with  l^ddra  kings.  (Or,  the  13  future 

Garavdas  abng  with  low  caste  men,  all  of  MlflohchTia  origin,  will  enjoy 
it  half  four  hundred  years,  i,e.,  200  years. — 22. 

For  103  years  the  11  kings  will  enjoy  the  earth  (no  name).  (The 
word  Hfina  should  be  supplied  to  complete  the  verse,  and  it  would  then 
mean  “the  11  Hfinas  will  enjoy  the  earth  for  103  years”).  The  (seven) 
^ripkrvatiya  Andhras  will  endure  52  years. — 23. 

The  10  Abhira  kings  will  be  for  67  years.  When  they  are  over* 
thrown  by  time,  then  there  will  be  Kilakila  kings. — 24. 

Note.— Those  local  dynasties,  with  their  periods  of  roign,  may  be  thus  shown  in  a 
tabular  form 

Dynasties  Periods  of  Reign,  No,  of  Kings^ 

(1)  Andhra-Bhfityas  (8ri-pftryati-  52  years  or  twice  50  or  100  years...  7 


yas). 


(2)  Abhiras 

...  67  years  ... 

10 

(8)  Gardabhilas 

...  72  years  (as  in  YAyu) 

7 

(4)  SAkas 

... 

...  183  years  ... 

18 

(5)  Yavanas 

• •• 

...  87  years  ...  ... 

8 

(6)  Tu^Aras 

• •• 

...  7000  years  (107?) 

14 

(7)  Gurundas 

...  200  years  ...  ... 

18 

(8)  HAnas 

f ■ i 

...  108  years  ... 

11  or  19 

(9)  Kilakilas 

• Si 

Note.— The  account  of  these  dynasties  consists  of  three  parts,  the  first  of  which  sum- 
marizes the  nnmber  of  kings  in  each  dynasty,  and  the  second  states  its  duration,  while 
the  third  adds  certain  subsequent  kings.  In  the  first  part,  the  Matsya,  Yfiyu,  and 
Brahmftndaagreegenerally,  but  in  the  second,  the  Matsya  has  one  version  and  the  two 
others  another.  Here  the  dynastic  matter  in  the  Matsya  ends. 

« These  local  dynasties  are  all  classed  together  as  more  or  less  contemporaneous; 
The  nnmber  of  years  assigned  to  them  must  be  considered  according  to  the  remarks  in 
Introduction  Sec.  42  ff.,  and  with  reference  to  the  middle  of  the  8rd  century  A.D.  When 
the  account  was  first  compiled  as  preserved  in  the  Mt,  for  the  revised  versions  tn  YA 
and  Bd  did  not  revise  the  periods.  If  those  remarks  be  sound,  the  bVipArvatiya 
Andhrabhfityas  had  at  that  time  reigned  *^2  years,  or  (if  we  read  dvipanchasatam) 
possibly  too  roundly,  according  to  Mt,  while  the  Ya.  and  Bd  reading  is  no  doubt  corrupt 
and  should  perhaps  be  112  or  102  years.  The  Abhiras  had  then  reigned  67  years,  the 
Gardabhilas  72  years,  the  Sakas  188  years,  the  Yavanas  87  or  82  years,  and  the  TufAras 
7,000  or  500  according  to  the  proper  construction  of  the  sentences  but  perhaps  107  or  105 
Is  really  meant.  The  18  Gurundas  or  Murundas  had  then  reigned  half  of  the  quadruple 
of  100  years,  that  is  200,  according  to  Mt,  or  350  according  to  YA  and  Bd,  but  the  latter  is 
probably  a corruption  of  the  former  reading,  for  Y9  and  Bh  say  precisely  199  years. 
The  11  Hfinas  or  Mauuas  had  then  lasted  108  years. 

**  Mention  of  thoso  races  is  found  in  the  inscriptions,  thus  Abhiras  in  Lndors’  List  of 
BrAhm!  Inscriptions,  Nos.  963,  1187  (Epig.  Ind.  3^  Appondi^)  and  Fleet's  Gupta  InscriptioiB^,^. 
P*  14,  b'akas,  Lnder's  list,  Nos.  1128,  1185,  1187,  1148,  1149,  il62,  and  perhaps  1001-2,  and 


xxtfin  Appmntx  tit. 

VaTp.l4,TaTtiMa.£nder’«lis(,  Nw.  ««9,  MS,  lOM,  ItSS,  1140,  llH  1160,  Hnnuiduin 
VGI,  p.  14.  and  lInrandadeTi,|ld.,  pp.  ISO,  ISO,  IM  Bunas.  BQl.  pp.  80, 148,  SOO,  A Vakataka, 
prince  Vindhyasakti  is  mentioned  in  Kielliorn’s  Inscriptions  of  Norfetiem  India,  No.  OSS 
(l^Ig:  Ind.  V,  Appendix).”  (PaiglWs  Erii  Dynasty  p.  44.) 

THE  EVILS  OF  KALI  AGE. 

There  will  be  Yavanas  here  for  the  sake  of  religious  feeling  rpilgrim' 
age  or  propaganda)  or  pleasure  or  profit.  The  Aryas  and  the  Mlecbchhas 
(will  dwell)  mixed  up  in  all  provinces  (janapadas).— 25. 

The  people  will  steadily  deteriorate  by  adopting  a contrary  course 
of  life,  so  also  the  kings  will  be  greedy  and  speakers  of  untruth. — 26. 

All  will  be  overpowered  (killed)  everywhere  by  Kalki  whether  they 
be  Aryas  or  Mlecbchhas.  They  will  be  irreligious,  avaricious,  and  hereti- 
cal and  cruel  hypocrites  everywhere. — 27. 

When  the  royal  family  will  be  destroyed,  and  the  close  of  the  Kali 
Age  will  come  and  righteousness  will  perish,  there  will  remain  few 
good  people  not  given  to  coveteousness. — 28. 

The  people  will  be  unholy,  unrighteous  and  oppressed  with  disease ' 
and  sorrow ; and  goaded  by  failure  of  rain  they  will  be  eager  to  destroy 
each  other. — 29. 

Unprotected  by  anyone,  always  living  in  terror,  surroimded  by 
deep  difficulties,  the  entire  population  will  begin  to  live  on  (the  top  of) 
mountains  and  on  the  banks  of  rivers. — 30. 

When  the  royal  families  will  be  destroyed,  the  people,  will  desert 
their  homes  ; and  devoid  of  affection  they  will  abandon  their  brothers 
and  fi'iends,  and  will  have  no  one  to  protect  them.—  31. 

They  will  not  observe  the  rules  of  caste  and  order  of  life,  and  be 
addicted  to  unrighteousness.  They  will  subsist  on  fruits,  roots  and 
leaves  of  trees,  and  will  be  clothed  in  tattered  garments,  barks  and  skins, 
and  thus  they  will  wander  over  the  earth  in  search  of  livelihood. — 32. 

Thus  the  people  having  suffered  (innumerable)  miseries  during 
the  close  of  the  Kali  Age  will  become  totally  extinct,  along  with  the 
extinction  of  the  Kali  Age. — 33. 

When  the  Kali  Age  will  be  exhausted,  after  having  been  on  earth 
fdr  full  1000  divine  years  together  with  the  Sandhi  periods,  then  on  its 
end,  the  Kfita  Age  will  come.— 34. 

Chronological  Particulars. 

Thus  have  I declared  in  due  order  the  entire  series  of  genealogy — 


UATSYA  PURINA,  CSAPTBR  m. 


zxxix 


the  kings  who  have  passed  away»  and  those  who  exist  now  and  those  who 
have  not  yet  come  to  existence. — 36. 

Now  from  MahSptidma's  inaogimtioii  up  till  the  birth  of  Parikfit,  this  interral 
is  indeed  known  as  1060  years  (1016  according  to  and  1600  according  to  our 

wading.)— 86. 

Note.— In  manuscripts  of  Matsya  Pnrdna  marked  c>e»J  the  reading  is  Sat-ottaram* 
fiimilarly  in  Mss.  1,  n of  Matsya  and  V,  1,  of  Vi^nu  the  reading  is  Pancharsat-ottaram, 
meaning  1600.  This  period  of  1600  is  the  true  interval  obtained  by  adding  up  the 
periods  of  reigns  of  the  BArhadrathas,  Pradyotas  and  SisunSgas  as  given  in  the  Yif  pn 
Pnrd  na  and  other  PurSnas.  Thus 

Bflrhadrathas  from  Somipi  to  RIpuSjaya  ...  ...  ...  1000  years. 

Pradyotas  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  188  ,, 

b'isunigas  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  862 

mo  „ 

Therefore  the  Mss.  of  the  Matsya  referred  to  by  Mr.  Pargiter  are  more  correct  t^an 
the  printed  text.  This  verse,  therefore,  should  read 

vmsm  i mi  TOggr  g h 

This  is  the  reading  we  prefer  to  adopt  as  being  in  harmony  with  the  text  of 
Tifpu  PurApa.  Mah&padma  Nanda  was  anointed  in  422  B.C.  Therefore,  Parik$it  was 
born  in  1922  B.O.  which  was  the  year  of  the  Great  War. 

Now  from  Mahfipadma’a  inauguration  to  Pariksit’s  birth,  this  interval 
is  indeed  known  as  1500  years. — 36. 

Moreover  in  the  interval  which  elapsed  from  the  last  Andhra  Xing 
Pulomfivi  to  Mahftpadma— that  interval  was  836  years. — 37. 

77te  Cyde  of  2700  years  or  Saj^rfi  or  Laukika  Bra. 

The  same  future  interval  of  time,  beginning  from  Parikeit  till 
the  end  of  the  Andhras,  is  thus  expressed  in  the  Bhavisya  (Pnrflnal  regards 
ing  those  (kings)  enumerated  by  the  j^rutar^is  who  know  the  ancient 
stories  (in  these  terms). — 38. 

“ When  again  (there  will  be  end)  of  27  future  Andhras,  (the  Great 
Bear)  will  be  in  a line  with  the  towering  brilliant  Agni  (the  presiding  deitj 
of  EfittikS  asterism).’’ — 39. 

An  equal  space  of  time  is  stUl  future,  subsequent  "kings  beginning  from 
the  end  of  ike  Andhras  (tW.  Parikdt*  are  declared  therein.  They  have  been 
etvumerated  in  the  Bhavi^  Pur&rfa  by  Srutarsis  who  knew  the  ancient 
Holies. — S8.  {Pargiter.  i 

Note.—’Sba  tMdlng  in  the  Anandt^ms  edition  of  the  vene  >9is:— 

It  is  evidently  corrupt  according  to  Mr.  Pargiter.  Pradlptena  in  the  above  he  would 


xl 


APPENDIX  III. 


amend  into  Pratipena  and  samftii  should  become  samam.  The  Terse  therefore  should 
read 

Another  reading  is 

as  given  by  the  editor  of  Yisnu  Ptir&na  in  Bk.  IV,  Ch.  24,  p.  285. 

The  Seven  Bi^is  were  then  {at  the  t\me  of  the  birth  of  Parikifit)  on 
a line  with  the  towering  brilliant  Agni  (the  presiding  deity  of  Kvittihi.) 
At  the  end  of  the  future  tiveniy-seven  Andhras  the  cycle  repeats  itself. 
iJPargiter.) 

Saptarshi  or  Laukika  Era  appears  to  be  a contrivance  of  historians  and 
is  still  in  use  in  EAsmir  as  first  pointed  ont  by  the  late  Dr,  Riihler,  as  will  appear  from  the 
following  extracts  from  the  Encyelopedia  Britannica— Article— “Hindu  Chronology  " and 
Dr.  Biihler’s  Kftamir  Reports  pp.  59  ot  scq. 

“ The  Saptarshi  reckoning  is  used  in  Kashmir,  and  in  the  K&ngra  district  and  some  of 
The  Saptarshi  reckon-  the  Hill  states  on  tho  south-east  of  Kashmir;  some  nine 
ing.  centuries  ago  it  was  a1s(»  in  use  in  the  Punjab,  and  apparently 

in  Sind.  In  addition  to  being  cited  by  such  expressions  as  fcjaptarshi-saifi vat,  “they^ac 
(so-and-so)  of  the  Saptarshis,"  and  8Astra-$am  vatsara,  “ the  year  (so-and-so)  of  tho  scrips 
tures,”  it  is  found  mentioned  as  Lokakdla,  “the  time  or  era  of  the  people,”  and  by  other 
terms  which  mark  it  as  a vulgar  reckoning.  And  it  appears  that  modern  popular  names 
for  it  are  Paliftri-samvat  and  Kachcha-satfivat,  which  we  may  render  by  “the  Hill  era,** 
and  “ tho  crude  era.”  The  years  of  this  reckoning  are  lunar,  Chaitrftdi ; and  tho  months 
are  purtjimdvta  (ending  with  the  full  moon).  As  matters  stand  now,  tho  reckoning  has  a 
theoretical  initial  point  in  8077  ux. ; andiihe  year  4076,  more  usually  called  simply  76, 
b<)gan  in  a.d.  1900 ; but  tJiere  are  some  indications  that  tho  initial  point  was  originally 
placed  one  year  earlier. 

The  idea  at  the  bottnn  of  this  reckoning  is  a belief  that  the  Saptarshis,  “ the  Seven 
Rishis  or  Naints,”  Marichland  others,  w^erc  translated  to  lioavcn,  and  became  the  stars  of 
the  constellation  Ursa  Major,  in  8976  B.c.  (or  3077);  and  that  these  stars  possess  an  inde- 
pendent movement  of  their  own,  which,  referrod?to  tho  ecliptic,  carries  them  round  at  the 
rate  of  K O years  for  each  nakshntm  or  twenty-soveiith  division  of  the  circle.  Theoretic 
cally,  therefore,  the  Saptarshi  reckoning  con.sist8  of  cycles  of  2700  years:  and  the  numbering 
of  the  years  should  run  from  1 to  2700,  and  then  commence  afresh.  In  practice,  however. 
It  has  been  treated  quite  differently.  According  to  the  general  custom,  which  has 
distinctly  prevailed  in  Kashmir  from  tho  earliest  use  of  the  reckoning  for  chronological 
purposes,  and  is  illustrated  by  Kalhana  in  his  history  of  Kasmir  tho  Rfl'ataraihghiif 
written  in  A.D.  1148—1160,  the  numeration  of  tho  years  has  been  contlnnial;  whenever 
a century  has  been  complotod,  tho  nnrohering  has  not  run  on  101, 102, 108,  d;o.,'bat  has 
begun  again  with  1,  2, 8,  &c.  Almanacs,  indeed  show  both  the  figures  of  the  century  and  the 
full  figures  of  the  entire  reckoningjwhich  is  treated  as  running  from  8076  B,a,  not  from  676 
B.C.  as  tho  commencement  of  a new  cycle,  the  second;] thus,  an  almanac  for  the  year  begin* 
ning  in  a.d.  1798  describes  that  year  as  *‘tho  year  4869  according  to  the  course  of  the  Seven 
Blsbis,  and  similarly  tho  year  09.”  And  elsewhere  sometimes  the  full  figures  are  fonnd« 
sometimes  tho  abbreviated  ones ; thus,  while  a m.*inii3crfpt  written  in  a.d.  1648  is  dated  in 
the  year  24”  (for  4724),  another,  written  in  a.d.  1224  is  dated  in  “the  year  4800/*  But^ 


iiATSYA  PUEA^A,  CnAPTEB  273.  xli 

as  in  tho  Rd/atararkgiriit  so  also  in  inscriptions,  which  range  from  a.d.  1204  onwards,  only 
the  abbreviated  figures  hive  hitherto  been  found.  Essentially,  therefore,  tho  Saptarshl 
reckoning  is  a centennial  reckoning,  by  suppressed  or  omitted  hundreds,  with  its  earlier 
centuries  commencing  in  8070,  207^0  u c.,  and  so  on,  and  its  1 ater  centuries  commencing  in 
A.D.  26,  125,  225,  &0., ; on  precisely  the  same  lines  with  thoso  according  to  which  wc  may 
use,  e,g.  08  to  moan  a.d.  1798.  and  57  to  mean  a.d.  1857,  and  0 to  mean  a.d.  1909.  And  the 
practical  dillicnlties  attending  tho  use  of  such  a system  for  chronological  purposes  aro 
obvious ; isolated  dates  rocorded  in  such  a fashion  cannot  Ije  allocated  without  some 
explicit  clue  to  the  centuries  to  which  they  belong.  Fortunately,  however,  as  regards 
Kashmir,  wo  have  tho  necessary  guide  in  tho  facts  that  Ealhatia  recorded  his  own  date 
in  the  Saka  ora  as  well  as  in  this  reckoning,  and  gave  full  historical  details  which  enable 
ns  to  determine  unmistakeably  tho  equivalent  of  the  first  date  in  this  reckoning  cited  by 
him,  and  to  arrange  with  certainty  the  chronology  presented  by  him  from  that  time. 

Tho  belief  undorying  this  reckoning  according  to  the  course  of  the  Seven  Hishis  is 
traced  back  in  India,  as  an  astrological  detail,  to  at  least  6th  century  a d.  But  the 
reckoning  was  first  adopted  for  chronological  purposes  in  Rasmir  and  at  sometimes  about 
A.D.  800 ; tho  first  recorded  date  in  it  is  one  of  tho  year  89,"  meaning  3889,=:a.d.  818—814, 
given  by  Kalhana.  It  was  introduced  into  India  between  A.D.  925  and  1025.  (Encyclopedia 
Dritanirica,  Eleventh  Edition,  Yol.  13,  pp.  499-500). 

**  Tho  beginning  of  the  Saptarshi  era  is  placed  by  the  Rasmirians  on  Ghaitra  sudi 
1 of  the  twenty-fifth  year  of  the  Kaliyuga,  and  the  twenty-fourth  year,  in  which  Ralhana 
wrote,  is  consequently  the  Saptarshi  year  4224.  For 

Tho  distance  between  Kali  25  and  the  beginning  of  the  Kaka  ora  is  ...  3,154 

Tho  distance  between  8aka  sam vat  1 and  Kalhap*s  time  ...  ...  1,070 

Hence  results  a total  of  Saptarshi  years  ...  ...  ...  4,224 

My  authorities  for  placing  the  beginning  of  the  Saptarshi  era  in  Raft%  are  the 
following.  First,  F.  Dayftrfim  Jotsi  gave  me  the  subjoined  verso,  the  origin  of  which 
ho  did  not  know 

Kaler  gataih  sayakanetravarshaih  saptarshivaryfis  tridivam  pray.^tah. 

Lokehi  samvatsar«ipattrik&y.4in  saptarshimftnam  pravadanti  santah. 

**  When  tho  years  of  the  Kaliyuga  marked  by  the  ' arrows  and  the  eyes  ’..(i,  e.  tho 
five  and  the  two,  or,  as  Indian  dates  have  to  bo  road  backwards,  25  ■ had  elapsed,  the  mesh 
excollont  Seven  Hisliis  ascended  to  heaven.  For  in  the  calendar  (used)Tn  tho  worM*  the 
virtuous  declare  tho  computation  of  tho  Saptarshi,  (years  to  begin  that  point).*' 

Pandit  Dfimodar  explained  the  verse  as  I have  done  in  tho  above  translation,  and 
added  that  each  Saptarshi  year  began  on  Ghaitra  sudi  1,  and  that  its  length  was  regulated 
by  tho  customary  mixing  of  tho  clifindra  and  saiira  mftiias. 

The  correctness  of  his  statement  is  confirmed  by  a passage  in  P.  Sfibebrftin's  ^ 
Rfijataranginisamgraha  (No.  176),  where  the  author  says  that  tho  Saka  year  1780  (A.D. 
1804),  in  which  ho  writes,  corresponds  to  Kali  4965  and  to  Saptarshi  or  Laukika  sam  vat 
4940,t  of  tho  copyists,  too,  who  copied  the  Dhvanyfitoka  (No.  255)  for  mo  in  Septeiu- 
bor  1876,  gives  in  tho  colophon,  as  the  date  of  his  copy,  the  Saptarshi  year  4951.  These 
facts  are  sufficient  to  prove  that  P.  D4niodar*s  statement  regarding  the  beginning  of  the 

* Tho  word  loko,  * in  tho  world,'  alludes  to  the  appellation  Lokakftla,  Laukika 
samvatsara. 

t R&JatarADgiinsamgrnha,  fol.  4b,  1.  7:  tatrAdya  sfiko  1780  kaligatc  4905  saptar- 
shichftrftnumatona  sam  vat  4940. 

P 


APPENDIX  TII: 


x\u 

Saptawhi  or&  is  not  an  invention  of  his  own,  bat  based  on  the  general  tradition  of  the 
oonnlry.  1 do  not  donbt  for  a moment  that  the  calculation  whifeh  throws  the  boginiiing 
of  the  Saptarshi  ora  back  to  h07(l  11.  C.  is  worth  no  moro  than  that  which  fixes  the  begin* 
Ding  of  tho  Kaliyuga  in  8101  B.  C.  But  it  seems  to  me  cprtjiin  that  it  is  mnch  older  than 
Ralhana's  timoi  because  his  equation  44:=  1078  agrees  with  it.{  It  may  thoroforo  bo  safely 
used  for  reduoing  with  exactness  the  Saptarshi  years,  months,  and  days  mentioned  in  his 
work  to  years  of  tho  Christian  ora.  The  results  which  will  bo  thus  obtained  will  always 
closely  agj^o  with  those  gained  by  General  Caiininghaiii,  who  did  use  tho  right  key.’* 
Dr.  Buhler’s  Kasmir  Report  pp.'59  and  80. 

A'ote.— Mr.  Pargiter,  reads  “ saptarsayAs  tacT8  Piisye  Pratipo  rajili  val  samam  " and 
ho  translates  it  thus  The  Great  Bear  was  situated  oriually  with  regard  to  the  lunar 
ooustellation  Pusyft  while  Pratipa  was  king.  At  tho  end  of  tho  Andhras,  who  will  be  In 
the  27th  century  afterwards,  the  cycle  repeats  itself.” 

“ 111  tbe  circle  of  the  lunar  constellatums,  wherein  the  Great  Bear 
revolves,  and  which  contains  27  constellations  in  its  circumference,  the 
Great  Bear  remains  100  years  in  (con joined  with)  each  in  turn.”  (40),  (accor- 
ding lo  Pargiter.) 

This  is  tho  cycle  of  the  Great  Bear,  and  is  remembered  as  being, 
according  to  divine  reckoning,  O divine  months  and  7 divine  years.  , 
According  to  those  constellations  divine  time  proceeds  by  means  of  the 
Great  Bear.  (41a).  {Pargiter.) 

The  two  front  stars  of  flic  Great  Boar,  which  are  seen  when  risen 
at  night,  the  lunar  constellation  which  i-^i  seen  situated  finally  between 
them  in  the  sky,  tho  Great  Bear  is  to  bo  known  as  conjoined  with  that 
constellation  100  years  In  the  sky. — 42-13.  (Parijitev), 

This  is  the  exposition  of  the  conjunction  of  the  lunar  constellations 
and  the  Great  Bear.  The  Great  Bear  was  conjoined  wdth  tho  Maghas  in 
Parlk§it’s  time  100  years.— 44.  /Pargiter). 

The  Brahraanas  (tho  Seven  Seers)  will  be  in  tho  24th  constellation 
100  years  (when)  at  the  termination  of  the  Andhras  Pargiter. — 45. 

JVofc.—Tho  24th  constollafcion  from  Maghri  counting  retrograde  is  Cliitril. 
According  to  this  calculation  tho  interval  between  Prikiait  and  tho  termination  of  Andhras 
18  2400  years.  Subtracting  886,  wo  get  1584,  or  tho  interval  between  Nanda  and  Pariksit. 
Or  in  round  number  the  Groat  War  took  place  1500  years  before  Nanda's  time. 

If,  however,  tho  24th  No.  in  tho  order  of  reckoning  tbe  nak^atras  be  taken,  then  tho 
line  of  the  Saptarisis  will  be  in  SAtahhi§fa  or  1,400  years.  Deducting  886  wo  got  564  tho 
Interval  between  Nanda  and  Pariki^^jt— evidently  incorrect.  But  836  is  tho  interval 
botw«3en  Nanda  and  tho  termination  of  tho  Andhras.  If  however  wo  read  AiidhrAinrfe 
instead  of  Andhr&nto,  and  this  is  tho  reading  of  Brabm&uda  then  it  will  mean,  the 
commencement  of  the  Andhras.'*  Tho  Andhra  dynasty  lasted  for  460  years  or  the  interval 

{ Tho  use  of  the  Saptarsiii  era  in  Rasmlr  and  tho  adjacent  hill  states,  which  continues 
even  in  the  present  day,  has  first  been  pointed  out  by  General  Cunningham. 


UATSYA  PUBA^A,  CHAPfSB  273. 


zlili 


)3ofcwoen  Nanda  and  the  commonoemeat  of  tho  Andhras  was  836— 460=878  yoars.  Deduc- 
ting 876  (instead  of  836)  from  1,400  wo  get  1,024  years,  tho  interval  between^ Pariksit  and 
Nanda.  This  figure  is  approximately  correct,  according  to  some  texts. 

The  Evils  of  the  Kali  Age  {Resumed,) 

Thonceforvvard  all  this  world  will  fail  upon  very  bad  times.  Men 
will  bo  liars,  greedy,  and  destitute  of  righteousness,  allection  and  wealth. 
TJie  religion  of  l^rutis  and  Sinritis  will  become  very  lax,  and  so  also  will 
be  destrq^yed  the  orders  and  castes. — 46. 

The  people  will  be  of  mixed  origin,  weak  in  body  and  will  bo  led 
astray  and  deluded.  Brahmanas  will  sacrifice  for  l^fidras  (or  will 
study  under  i^udras)  and  Sddras  will  take  to  teaching  Mantras. — 47. 

Those  BrAihmanas  will  adore  such  i^Qdras  anxious  to  acquire  wealth 
from  them  (or  anxious  to  get  tlie  meaning  of  the  Mantras  from  them). 
And  gradually  there  will  be  seen  all  the  causes  which  go  towards  the 
removing  a man  from  his  own  caste. — 48. 

Tims  towards  the  end  of  the  age,  the  few  weaklings  that  will  remain 
on  earth  will  also  go  to  extinction. — 49a. 

The  duration  of  Kali. 

On  that  very  day  and  in  that  very  moment  when  Krisna  went  to 
heaven,  the  Kali  Yuga  arrived  on  earth.  Now  listen  to  its  duration 
from  me.  The  wise  say  that  its  duration  is  400,000  years — 50. 

Together  with  four  times  eight  (32)  thousand  years  according  to 
human  calculation  (i.e.,  400,000 +32,000= 432, 000,‘.  Or  in  other  words 
its  duration  is  1000  divine  years  together  with  the  twilights 
1000+200=1200  divine  years= 1200x360 =432, 000).— 51. 

When  the  Kali  Yuga  comes  to  an  end  the  Kfita  Yuga  will  again 
come. — 52a. 

The  Alla  and  the  Iksv6.ku  dyitasties  have  been  described  along  witli 
their  branches.  Tho  dynasty  of  tho  IksvAkus  (tho  Suryavaipsa)  is  remem- 
bered to  have  come  to  an  end  with  Sumitra  when  Iksvaku  Ksatriyas  will 
cease.  The  Aila  Ksatriyas  (Chandra-vamsfa)  were  contemporary  with 
these  (or  the  last  of  the  AilA  Ksatriyas  was  K§emaka, — Vayu,)  so  the  knowers 
of  the  Somavaih^  understand  it. — 53. 

Note Tho  text  in  verse  52  b is  : 

sifiHnu:  n 

It  apparently  gives  no  moaning.  Tho  translation  follovvs  the  reading  of  the  Vdyu 


xliv  ^APPENDIX  in. 

All  these  are  ileclared  to  bo  the  glorious  desceridaiits  ot  Viviisvat 
those  who  are  passed,  those  who  exist  now  and  those  who  will  be  in  the 
future. — 54. 

The  Brahinanas,  the  ICsatriyas,  the  Vairfyas  and  the  ^Hdras  are 
remembered  to  exist  in  this  Vaivasvata  manvantara  i.e,,  all  are  sons 
of  Vaivasvata  ilunu).  Thus  ends  the  genealogy  of  dynasties. — 55. 

A Prophecy.  ^ 

Devapi  the  Paurava  king,  and  ilarii,  a king  of  IkavAku  dynasty, 
arc  both  existing  in  tlic  villago,  Kalapa,  through  the  force  of  their  great 
Yoga.— 5C. 

In  the  20th  Maliayuga  tlieso  two  will  be  tlie  lenders  of  Ksatriyas  and 
will  restore  Ksatriyahood.  Suvarchas  the  son  of  Mann  (Mara?)  will  be  the 
founder  of  the  (future)  Aiksvaku  lino. — 57. 

In  the  2!)th  Mahayugu  he  will  bo  the  first  founder  of  that  dynasty. 
Similarly  Satya,  the  son  of  Devapi,  will  be  the  (first)  king  (and  tlio  foun- 
der) of  tlie  Aila  dynasty— 58. 

These  two  (Devapi  and  Marn)  will  l;o  the  restorers  of  Ksatriya 
chivalry,  in  the  beginning  of  that  Mahayuga-  Thus  should  l.>o  umlerstood 
the  characteristics  of  the  dyna::^ties  in  all  tlie  Viigas.--51J. 

Even  after  tlio  close  of  the  Ivili  Yuga,  the  Seven  Sagos  wlio  continue 
to  exist  along  witli  these  two  throughout  the  Krila  Yoga,  then  will 
incarnate  in  the  middle  of  tlio  (future)  Troti  Vnga.  They  will  lake  birth 
in  order  to  bo  the  seeds  of  Braliinanas  and  Ksatriyas  {t)f  Brahmanic 
parentage)  again.  Tims  at  the  end  of  the  Pnsya  iisterism  (when  the 
Great  Bear  is  in  a lino  with  that  asterism)  the  Seven  Sages,  along  with 
those  kings  (take  birth  on  earth)  foi  the  sake  of  procreating  cliildren  in 
every  Y'uga.  Thus  the  Bnilunanas  know  the  close  relationsliip  of  the 
K§atriyas  with  the  Brahinauas  (and  how  several  Ksatriya  dynasties  had 
Brahman  paternity;.— 

Thus  at  the  close  ot  each  Manvantara,  these  (two)  immortal  Ksatri- 
yas  and  (seven)  Brrdimanas,  wlio  cross  over  from  one  Yuga  to  another  (iu 
their  full  consciousness^,  are  called  Santanas  in  tlio  {^rnti  or  foundei’S  of 
future  human  races.  They  become  the  origins  of  (the  future)  Brahmanas 
and  Ksatriyas.— fill 

The  Seven  Sages  know  thus  the  rise,  and  fall,  and  the  longevity  of 
these  founders  of  dynasties,  as  well  as  the  decline  and  rise  of  the  dynas- 
ties.— 64. 


MATS7A  PDRAIJA,  CE AFTER  273.  xh 

Thus  in  their  due  order  the  Ail^  and  the  Iksv&ku  kings  take  their 
birth  in  the  TretA  and  come  to  an  end  in  the  Kali  age. — 65. 

Note Thus  in  the  Efita  or  Satya  Yaga  and  upto  the  middle  of  TretA  there  exists 
no  four-fold  caste,  or  only  ono  caste  that  of  the  lighters  or  warriors  (Esatriyas  who  are 
tho  piotiuota  of  emigration  and  open  up  now  lands.  It  takes  4,000 -)-li600  =5,600  yo.ir3  to 
settle  fully  and  oompletly  for  a now  race.  After  that  tho  four-fold  dirislon  takes  place. 

These  kings  will  follow  in  due  succession  (through  Treta  and 
Driipara  and  Kali  according  to  the  characteristics  of  the  age  till  the 
Manrantara  comes  to  an  end.) — 06o. 

When  Paradur&ma,  the  son  of  Jamadagni,  annihilated  the  Ksatriyas, 
then  the  whole  world  became  destitute  of  Ksatriya-born  world-rulers. 
They  all  belonged  to  mixed  dynasties  (Bnlliman  and  Ksatriyas  or  Ila-aiid 
— Ik^vaku  kings.)  All  tho  kings  owed  their  origin  to  double  paternity, 
Briilimanas  and  Ksatriyas.  I shall  declare  that  now  the  cause  of  double 
dynastic  paternity.  Hear  it  from  me. — 67. 

The  dynasties  of  Aila  and  AiksvAku  are  said  to  bo  the  origin  of  all 
kings  who  belonged  to  a certain  class  (who  ruled  in  dynastic  succession), 
as  well  as  other  Kfatriyas  on  earth  who  were  not  rulers. — 68. 

The  descendants  of  the  Aila  family  were  numerous,  not  so  however 
the  kings  of  the  Aiksv&ku  dynasty.  They  gave  rise  to  full  100  famous 
dynasties. — 69. 

Similarly  the  extent  of  the  Bhoja  dynasty  was  double  that  of  the 
above,  and  double  of  the  Bhojas  wei'e  tho  other  K^atriya  dynasties,  who 
spread  on  all  quarters,  and  the  Bhoja  clan  became  divided  into  four 
branches. — 70. 

Now  those  who  are  past  and  those  who  were  their  contemporaries 
together  with  their  names  1 shall  declare.  Listen  to  me. — 71a. 

There  will  be  100  kings  of  the  dynasty  of  Prativindhyas,  100  Nagas, 
IPO  llayas,  101  DhUrtasastras  and  80  Janamejayas.  100  in  the  family  of 
Brahmadattas  and  100  hero  kings  in  the  Kaurava  family  (or  100  Siri  and 
Viri  kings  or  Siri  and  Kai'na  kings). — 72. 

Then  100  were  P&nchiHa  kings,  100  Kfidi-knila  kings,  then  2000  Nipas 
and  l^atlavindus. — 73. 

All  these  were  performers  of  sacrifices  and  all  of  them  were  givers  of 
myriads  of  gold  coins  in  feasts  to  the  Brilhmanas.  Thus  hundreds  and 
thousands  of  royal  Risi  kings  have  passed  away.  They  belonged  to 
the  family  of  Lord  Vaivasvata  Manu  and  they  exist  in  the  present  day  also. 
Their  births  and  deaths  are  for  the  sake  of  the  maintenance  of  the 
world.  — 74-75. 


xlvi  APPENDIX  in. 

Even  in  one  hundred  years  1 cannot  finish  the  recital  of  the  descend- 
ants of  these  kings  and  the  mutual  co-relationship  to  each  other. — 76. 

In  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  27  Mahayugas  have  passed  away  and 
the  current  one  is  the  2Sth  Mahayuga,  Those  Sistss  (the  Holy  Seeds) 
along  with  the  Devas  wJio  are  their  companions  aro  now  to  be  declared. 
Listen  to  that. — 77. 

In  the  remaining  poitiou  of  the  Mahayuga  of  the  Vaivasvataman- 
vantara  there  will  bo  (or  there  are  existing)  43  Mahatmas. — 78. 

Thus  have  I declared  to  you  fully  and  briefly  the  whole  history  and 
I cannot  repeat  it  in  its  entirety  on  account  of  its  being  too  large. — 79. 

I have  declared  all  the  Riljarsis  who  have  passed  away  along  with 
the  passing  away  of  the  Yugas.  as  well  as  the  kiTigs  belonging  to  tlie 
dynasty  of  Yayati  and  those  belonging  to  the  dynasties  of  the  Lord  of 
the  Visas.— 80. 

All  these  illustrious  ones  have  been  declared  to  you.  Ho  who  hears 
the  recital  of  this  history  obtains  all  the  live  worldly-blessings,  so  dillicult 
of  attainment  here, — SI. 

He  gets  long  lif<;,  fame,  wealth,  heaven  and  progeny.  By  hearing 
and  coimuitting  to  laemny  tUib  genealogy  of  kings,  one  verily  goes  to 
the  highest  heaven.*— 

Uerc  ends  ChaiAer  ":!7S  dealing  with  the  ch7vnology  of  future  kings. 


NOTE. 

' Bvahmanda  111, — 74,  Verses  220,  et  seq. 

Whon  the  moon  and  the  sun  and  the  (con.'itollatloii)  'J'isya  and  iJrihaspati  shall  come 
together  in  the  same  zodaical  sign,  then  may  the  Kjdta  age  be.— 225. 

This  is  the  entire  scries  of  dyiustici.s  which  luiS  been  doclared  to  you  in  due  order— 
the  dynasties  which  have  passed  dvruy,  and  those  which  exist  now,  and  thoso  which  are 
in  future.— 226. 

From  the  birth  of  Pariksit  up  to  the  end  of  the  inauguration  of  MahAnanda— this 
period  is  to  bo  known  as  10.10  y(!ars.--227. 

Similarly  to  speak  of  the  duration  which  felapsed)  after  Mahdpadina,  eight  hundred 
and  thirty  six  years  are  remorab..*red  to  be  the  interval.*  -228. 

This  future  interval  of  time  is  declared  to  be  the  year  beginning  with  the  end  of 
the  Andhras,  and  ouuinoratcd  in  the  Hhavisya,  by  the  ISrutarsi  (versed  in  the  Vedas) 
knowenrs  of  the  Pur&niis.  *-  221i, 

iVofe.— 8216  years  is  tliercfurc  the  interval  beginning  from  the  end  of  the  Andhras 
to  MahApadma  reckoning  backward. 

(At  the  time  of  the  birth)  of  Pariksit  the  Seven  Ulsis  had  obtained  (entorod)  them 
(into  the  beginning  of)  the  hniidred  years  in  the  constellation  sacred  to  the  Pitris  (f.c., 
MaghA).  (And  after  tiuishiiig  their  cycle)  by  2700  years  with  the  enduf  the  Andhrat, 


UATSYA  PVBA^A.  CHAPTER  273.  xlvii 

thoy  (the  Seven  Rials)  iaoiiiinenoe  again  their  fntnro  revolntioii.— 280. 

In  the  entire  oirole  consisting  of  the  27  lunar  constellations,  tho  Seven  Seers  ;ctnain 
for  100  years  in  each  in  turn.— 281. 

This  is  tho  Cycle  of  the  Seven  Seers  (consisting  of  2700  human  years).  And  reckoned 
in  the  terms  of  Divine  years  (800  human  years  equal  to  1 Divine  year),  this  period  is  equal 
to  8 divine  months  together  with  7 divine  years  (i.e.,2700  divided  by  800  equal  to  iS 
divided  by  2 equal  to  7)).— 282. 

According  to  those  (constellations)  Divine  time  proceeds  by  moans  of  the  Seven 
Seers.— 288a. 

Tho  two  front  stars  of  tho  Seven  Seers,  which  are  seen  in  the  northern  region,  the 
lunar  constellation  which  is  seon  situated  equally  between  them  in  the  sky,  tho  Seven 
Seers  are  to  be  known  as  conjoined  with  that  constellation  100  years  in  tho  sky.— 2386<284. 

This  is  tho  length  of  the  period  of  enjoyment  of  tho  (Seven)  Seers  with  each  lunar 
constellation.  —236a. 

The  Seven  Seers  then  yet  disunited,  after  enjoying  for  100  years  in  tho  epoch  of 
Parik^it,  (and  moving  on)  thoy  will  be  for  hundred  years  in  the  24th  (lunar  constellation) 
at  the  beginning  of  tho  epoch  of  the  Audhras.— 235b-236a. 

lAotc,— The  Andhra  epoch  commenced  when  the  line  of  the  Great  Bear  was  in  tho 
24th  Naksatra  or  SatabhisA. 


Bhdgavata  Pur  Ana,  XII.,  II.,  26-32. 

**  From  your  birth  (Parikfit  is  addressed  by  Suka)  to  the  inauguration  of  Nanda^ 
1115  years  will  elapse. 

Of  tho  Seven  Rii^is  two  are  first  perceived  rising  in  tho  sky,  and  the  astorism  which 
is  observed  to  bo,  at  night,  even  with  the  middle  of  those  two  stars  is  that  with  which 
tho  Rifis  are  united,  and  thoy  remain  so  during  a hundred  years  of  men.  In  your  time, 
and  at  this  moment,  thoy  are  situated  in  MaghA. 

Whon  the  splendour  of  Vif  nn,  named  Krisna  departed  for  heaven,  then  did  tho  Kali 
age  during  which  men  delight  in  sin,  invade  the  world.  So  long  as  ho  continued  to  touch 
the  earth  with  his  holy  feet,  so  long  the  Kali  ago  was  unable  to  subdue  the  world. 

When  the  Seven  Risis  were  in  MaghA,  the  Kali  age,  comprising  1200  (divino)  years  , 
(432,000  common  years),  began,  and,  wben,  from  MaghA,  they  shall  roach  PfirvAsAdbA,  then 
will  this  Kali  age  attain  its  growth,  under  Nauda  and  his  succossors.’' 


Yisnu  PnrAna,  Book  lY.,  Chap.  XXIY, 

As  it  is  said  Whon  tho  sun  and  moon^  and  (the  lunar  asterism)  Tisya,  and  the 
planet  Jupiter  are  in  one  mansion,  the  Krita  age  shall  return." 

Thns,  most  excellent  Muni,  the  kings  who  are  past,  who  are  present,  and  who  are  to 
be,  have  been  enumerated.  From  the  birth  of  Parikfit  to  the  coronation  of  Nauda  it  is  to 
bo  known  that  1016  years  have  olapsod.  Whon  tho  two  first  stars  of  tho  seven  Risis  (the 
great  Bear)  rise  In  heavens,  and  some  lunar  asterism  is  seen  at  night  at  an  equal  distance 
between  them,  then  tho  seven  Risis  continue  stationary,  in  that  conjunction,  for  a hundred 
years  of  men.  At  the  birth  of  Parikfit,  they  wore  in  MaghA,  and  tho  Kali  ago  then  com- 
menced, which  consists  of  1200  (divino)  years.  When  tho  portion  of  Yif nu  (that  had  been 
bom  from  YAsudova)  returned  to  heaven,  then  tho  Kali  age  commenced.  As  long  as  the  earth 
was  touched  by  his  sacred. jeet,  the  Kali  age  could  not  affect  it.  As  soon  as  tho  incarnation 
of  the  eternal  Yisnu  had  departed,  the  son  of  Dharma,  Yudhisthira,~-with  his  brethren, 


xlviii 


APPENDIX  in. 


abdicated  the  sovereignty.  Observing  nnpropitloas  portents,  conlidquont  upon  K 
disappearance,  ho  pUood  Parik^it  upon  thp  throne.  When  the  seven  are 
va»&ah/i,  then  Nauda  will  begin  to  reign,  and  thouooforward  the  Indnonce  of  tho  Ki 
augment,  * . 

The  day  that  Kri^na  shall  have  departed  from  tho  earth  will  bo  tho  first  of  tli 
age,  tho  duration  of  which  you  shall  hear : it  will  continue  for  880,000  years  of  mi 
After  twelve  hundred  divine  years  shall  have  elapsed,  tho  Kpita  ago  shall  bo  ronewc 

A'ote.—lntorval  botwooii  tho  Birth  of  Parikslt  and  tho  Accession  of  Nanda. 

Wo  have  nientionod  above  that  this  impotant  period  tho  interval  betwoon  Pa 
and  Nanda  is  absolutely  necessary  to  dotormino  accurately  tho  chronology  of  I 
History.  Tho  Purauas  are  not  absolutely  uhauiinous  on  this  point.  They,  tho  most  of 
mention  that  this  interval  was  1015  years  or  1050  years,  and  tlio  Visiiu-BliAgavata  sayt 
it  was  1115  years.  But  most  of  those  Puranas  give  also  tho  aggregate  periods  of  rci( 
the  dynasties.  But  tho  sum  of  theso  aggregates  docs  not  generally  coincide  witl 
figures  given  above.  Thus  tho  Visnu  Pur&iia,  Bk.  IV.,  Ch.  24.,  verse  S2,  says  that  frou 
birth  of  Parikslt  to  tho  coronation  of  Nanda  1015  vtiars  havo  olaps«>d.  Yot  accordi. 
the  duration  of  tho  dilTercnt  intermodiato  dynasties  as  enumorated  by  it  in  Chs.  2: 
and  24  tho  duration  conics  to  1500  yoars,  namely. 

Magadha  kings  ...  ...  ...  1000  yoais 

Pradyota,  «&c.  ...  ...  ...  ...  188  years 

bisuiiaga,  &c.  ...  ...  ...  ...  382  years 

1500  years.  * 

Similarly  though  the  Dhagavata  in  Bk.  12  Ch.  2,  vorso  28,  says  that  this  intorvi 
1U5  ycar.s,  yot  in  the  dynasties  given  by  it  tlio  total  comes  up  to  a larger  figure.  ' 
point  struck  the  coraiueiitator,  bridhar,svami,  and  ho  says “ Vastutas-tu  Parik 
Nandayor-autaram  dvribhyilni  nyQuam  varsftnatu  sardlia-saliasram  bhavati.  Yatali  Pari, 
samakalam  Miigailliaiii  Mftrjarini'arabhya  llipunjayantii  vimsati  rajfinah  sabasrasamvatsa 
bhoksyauti'ityuktam  Navainaskuiidhe.  Ye  BarhadralhabliOpAld  bli&vyali  sabasravatsar. 
iti.  Tatah  param  paiicba  Pradyotan&  astatrimsottara  .Satani.  6i.sunrigas-cha  sasthuytts 
sata-trayam  bhyoksyauti  pfithivini-iti  atra-eva-uklatvat.” 

* Asa  matter  of  fact  the  interval  between  Pariksit  and  Nanda  is  1500  years  less  2 yci 
that  is,  1498  years.  Uocause  beginning  with  Marjari,  king  of  Magadha,  who  was  contc 
porary  of  Parik.?it,  up  to  the  end  of  Jtipunjaya  20  kings  will  enjoy  the  earth  for  1000  yej 
has  already  boon  montioned  in  tlio  Parana  in  its  9th  Book  in  the  following  verses  “ The 
Bahradralha  kings  of  tho  future  will  endure  for  lUOO  year.s,  and  after  them  tho  five  Pj 
dyotas  will  enjoy  tho  earth  for  138  years  after  whom  the  Sisunagas  will  enjoy  it  for  8 
years.” 

Thus  wo  have  thon  tlio  authority  of  b'ridharasv&min  for  holding  that  1500  years, 
more  accurately,  1498  yoars  is  the  interval  betwoon  Parlksit  and  Nanda.  Tho  great  W! 
therefore  took  place  1498  plus  422  yoais  in  all  1920  yoars  B. C.  according  to  bridharasvAm. 


APPENDIX  VI, 


TABLE  No.  1. 

THE  SORYA  VAM^A  or  THE  SOLAR  DYNASTY. 

fPre*Mah&bhArata  War). 

!•  KasyapasAdiM. 

2*  SOrya  (Vivaavat). 

S*  Vaivaavata  Manu. 

4.  Iksvaku 

I , 

5.  Viknk^i  (tiiaskda). 

6t  Kakatstha. 

I 

7.  fiuyodhaua  (Anenas). 

8.  Pyithu. 

8.  Viavafpi  (Aava). 
lp«  Indu  (l^rdra). 

11.  Juvaii&sva  I, 

18.  b'r&vasta. 

18.  Bfibadaava. 


14.  Kuvallava  (OliundliumAra). 


16.  Dfidhasva.  Danda.  EapilAsva. 

16.  Pramoda, 

17.  Haryasva. 

I 

18.  Nikumbha. 

19.  Samhat6av& 

I 

20.  Akpitftava  RanAsya. 

(KpisAava).  * | 

81.  YuvaiiAava  IT.  (married  Gauri  of  the  Paurava  family). 

I 

82.  MAndhAtpi. 

1 \'  i Ti 

28.  Purukutsa.  Dharmasena.  Macbukunda.  Satrujit. 

84.  Vasada  (Trasadasyii). 

26 . Sambhttti. 


lir 


AVVmiDIX  VI. 


26»  Tridhanyan. 

27.  Trajjimpa. 

28.  Satyayrata. 

29.  Satyftratha  (Tri&nku)* 

80.  Harisohandra. 

81.  Kohita. 

82.  Yyika. 

88.  BAha! 

84.  Sagara  two  wiyes  Bhlnamati  and  PrabhA  (d.  of  Yadu  ?)  PrabhA  produced  60,000 
sons.  * 


84.  Sagara=BhAnumati. 

86.  Asamafijas 

86.  Am^umat. 

‘I 

28.  Dillpa  1. 

89.  Bhagripatha. 

40.  NAbhAga. 

44.  Ambariaa. 

! 

42.  SindhndTipa. 

48.  AyntAyns. 

44.  Ititnparna. 

45.  KalmfisapAdac 

45.  Saryakarman. 

I 

46.  Anaranya. 

47.  Nighna. 

48.  Auamitra.  48.  Ragrliu. 

60.  Dilipa  II. 

I 

51.  Aja— (ka). 

62.  DirghabAhu. 

52.  AjapAla. 

58.  Dasaratha. 

I 

64.  BpI  Rama  Chandpa. 


68.  Ku|(a. 

57.  Atithi. 
I 


I 

Laya. 


TABLE  No. 


It 


60. 

eo. 

61. 

62. 

68. 

64. 

66. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

70. 


Nala. 

I 

Nabhas. 

Pofidarika. 

EfemadhanTan. 

Devlnika. 

I 

Ahi^agn. 

Sahaarfldva. 

I 

Ghandrlvaloka. 

Tlilpito. 

Chandngiri. 

Bhlnnichandta. 


SrutSyn  (killed  in  the  Bhinta  War). 


(several  (cenerations  omitted  by  the  Matsya). 

75.  Bpihadtoala. 

(killed  in  the  Bhliata  War  aoootding  to  Home). 


Ivi 


APPEh^DIX  VI. 


TABLE  No.  n. 

THE  CHANDRA  VAMSA  or  THE  LUNAR  DYNASTY— Mataya,  Cliap.  24. 

(Pre  MahftbiiArata  War), 
i.  Dakfa 

B.  E&ayapa-Aditi 

I . 

8*  Vivasvat-'SamjAa 

I 

4*  Vaivasvatii  Maun 

6.  IIA-Budha  (son  of  Chandra  by  T&rft,  wife  of  Bfihaspati 
6.  Pnruravaa-Urvasi 


I 


I I . 

(i)  (i)  (8)  (4)  (5)  («)  (7)  , (8) 

7,  Ayns  Driilbftyu.  Asvfiyu.  Dbautyiis  Dhfilimat  V.sn  Sucbivldya  battyus 

I ^ 


8. 


I 

(i) 

Nahusa 


(2) 

Yfiddhasarman 


I 

(3) 

Raji 


(4) 

Dainbha 


(ro 

Vip&pman 


100  sons,  bocamo  followers 
otJiua  and  latterly  des- 
troyed by  Indra. 


(i) 

9.  Yati,  became 
ascetic  in 
youth 


(2) 

Yayati 
(Afu  fried) 

I 

I 


IS) 

SaroyAti 


I 

(4) 

rdbbava 


(5) 

rachi 


- 1 . 

(C)  (7) 

Baryfiti  Megbay&ti 


and 


(2) 

Sarinistha  (d.  of 
Vrisaparvan) 

' i 


I 

(0 

DcTay&nl (d.  of 
SnkrAchdrya 


(3) 

Druhyn 


(4) 

Anu 


(5) 

10.  Puru= 

Eausalyd 


(1) 

10.  Yadu 


(2) 

Turvasu 


11.  JanameJaya=Ananifi,  d.  of  Madbu 

12.  Pracbitvat-:=:  Annilki  of  the  Yadn  family 

18.  Manasyn  (Sarnylti::^Var&hgi,  d.  of  Dpisadvata), 

14.  Pitayudha  (V&tayudha  or  Ahamy&ti)~Bhftnuroatj,  d.  of  Eyitavirya). 

i 

15.  Bbundhu  0Sftrvabhauma)^8onandft  (of  Kekaya  family) 

I 

16.  Bamyftti  (Samprati  or  Jayatsena)=Sasruv&  (of  Videba) 

17.  Hahamavarchas  rAvftcbina)^Maryftd&  (of  Videha) 

I 

18. . BbadrlMva 
(ifarrted) 


TABLE  No.  11. 


JvalanI  (d.  of  Takfaka) 


Gbritichi 


10.  Antin&ra 
{Manried) 


sllina  (d,  of 
Yama) 

I 

20.  Ailind 


I 

(1) 

Amdrtarayas 


:==Mana8vIni 

I 

I 

Trivanam 


^8) 

Qanrj,  mother  of 
MandhAtri 


(4) 

Anagha 


(1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  I 

21.  Rifyanta  Da^yanta  Pravira  Anagha 

{Married) 

SaknotaU  (d.  of  Visv&mitra) 

22.  ^hapata 

I 

Rons  died  through  a curse. 


I 1 ; I II  I 11 

(l)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  (9)  aO) 

Ancheyu  Hrisoyu  Eak^eyu  Uaneyu  Dhfiteyu  Vineyu  Saleyu  Dharmeyu  Samnateyu  Punyeya 

22.  Ir^hapata. 

I 

(Adopted  son)  Bhfiradvfija  (son  of 
Bfihaspati,  named  subsequently) 

28.  Vitatha 

1 

24*  Bhuvamanyu 


I 

0) 

26.  Brihatkfatra 


(2) 

Mahftvirya 
(or  Aharya) 

I 

Uruksava 
=ViafiU  26. 


26.  Sankriti 

! 

Mah&ya8as= 

Satkriti 


(1) 

27.  Tryusana 


(2) 

Pufkari 


26.  Sivl 


26.  Hastin 


28.  Gurundhi 


28.  Rantideva 


(1) 

27.  Ajamidha  (four 
wives) 

I 

I 

(1> 

Dhumini 


(2) 

Dvimfdha 


(8) 

PurunAdha. 


28.  Riksa,  100  28.  Yavinara 

others  i 

89»  Saniyarana  29.  DhrHimat 
I I 

I 80.  Satyadhriti 


(2) 

BhOmini 


Byihadann  28.  Kanva  28.  Nila 

I I i 

29.  Brihanta  29.  MedhAtithi  29.  S^usAnti 

I I I 

80.  Brihan-  80.  KAnvAvaua  80.  PurujAnn 
mauas  I I 


Iviii 


APPENDIX  VL 


I I Became  81.  Pfithu 

8it  Dridhancml  8i»  Bfihaddhanua  Br&hmanas  8ee  page  LX 

82.  Sudharman  82.  Brihadi^u 

88.  SArvabhauma  88.  Jayadratha 

84. <^MahApaara-  84.  Asvajit. 

vanadana  See  page  LX 

85.  Rukmaratha 

86.  SupAraava 

87.  Sumati 

I 

88.  fiamaatimat 

'I 

89.  .rita 

I 

40.  UgrAyttdha  (KArti) 

41.  Esoma 

42.  Sunitba 
48.  Nripanjaya 
44.  Viratha. 


80.  Kuril,  the  founder  of  Eurukfetra 

I _ ! . 

(1)  (2)  (3) 

81t  Sadhauvan  81.  Jahuu  rarikait 

82#  Suhd'tra 

! 

88.  Chyavana 

i 

84.  Krimi  (Rfiti  from  Uiksa) 

I 

86.  Vasa  (Chaidyoparichara - 
Girika. 

. i „ 

r ' '■  c '”1  V T' 

(l)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5) 

86.  MahAracha  Pratyasravas  Kusa  UarivAliaua  Yajn 
or 

Brihadratha 
(founder  of 
Magadha  line) 

87#  EuAAgra, 

(The  line  of  Jabnu.) 

81.  Jabnu. 

82.  Suratba, 

38.  ^Viduratha. 

84.  SArvabhauma, 

I 

86.  JatyatsAna. 


TABLE  No.  TI. 


lix 


a) 

46.  Devapl 

(passed  over). 


86. 

87. 

88. 

89. 


40. 


41. 

42. 
48. 
44. 


Rnchira. 

1 

Bhanma. 

Tvaritaya. 

Akrddhana. 

DevatithK 

Daksa. 

Bhimasena  (fihimatejas). 
Diiipa. 

Pratfpa, 


I ( 

, (i)  (3) 

filntana.  Blhlika. 

(married) 


* I 

(a)  Jllinavi.  (b)  KlH,  d.  of  Dlsa. 

I I 

46.  Dovavrata  (Bhisma)  46.  Vichitravirya. 


47.  l)hritarA§(ra  47.  Konti  Panda. sMldri.  Vidura^ 

^GAndhftri  1 * I 


I I ! I f 

48.  DurytV  99  brothers.  i 48.  Nakala.  Sahadeva 

dhana.  | 


48.  Yadhisthira  48.  Bhima  Ariona 

sDraapadi.  =Draapad). 


48.  Yudhifthira. 

48.  Bimasena.  “* 

1 

Ut  wife  2fid  tet/e 

Drau|>adi.  No  name. 

40.  Prativindhya.  Yandhoya. 

* 1 1 

Draapadi.  3rd  wife.  HidimbA. 

Srutasena.  Sarvaya.  Ghatolkacha. 

48.  Arjuna. 

48.  Haknla. 

. 1 

48.  Sahadeva. 

1 

L 1 

viife  wife 

nraujiadi.  SnbhadrA. 

49.  8'ratakfrti.  40.  Abhi- 
manyu 
(=UtharA). 

50.  PaplLslt. 

„ 1 - 1 
Draapadi.  2nd  wife, 

40.  eJinlka.  40.  Niralitra 

1 • 
Dranpadi.  2Dd  \rife, 

40.  S'rata-  40.  Inkotrs. 
karman. 

BARHADHATHA8. 

86.  MahlrathaCBPihadPathaof  Magadha). 

87.  KusAgra. 


Ix 


APPENDIX  IL 


88.  Vpl9abha.Iil 

89.  Punyavat. 

40.  Punya. 

41.  Batyadbfiti. 

42.  Diianufa. 

48.  fiarva. 

44.  Sambhava. 

45.  Bpibadratha  II. 

I 

46.  Jar  ft  sand  ha. 

47-  Sahadeva  (killed  in  the  Mahftbhftrata  War).  1920  B.C. 

48.  Somavit  (Bomftdhi). 

49.  Hrutasravas. 


THE  LINE  OF  ASVAJIT. 

84.  Abvajil. 

I 

85.  Sonajit. 


(i) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

86. 

Ruclilras'va. 

36.  KSvya. 

i 

Dpiilharatha, 

Vatsa. 

i 

1 

87.  Samara. 

87. 

Ppithusena, 

1 

88. 

i 

Paura, 

1 

(1) 

1 

(2) 

1 

(8) 

89. 

J 

38.  Pftra, 

Saropftra. 

Sadasiva, 

Nipa. 

1 

1 89.  Ppithii. 

(LOONipas).  I 

, 1 40.  Sukrita. 

Brlmat.  i 

41.  Viblirftja. 

42.  Anuha  (married  Kritvi,  daughter  of  Buka). 

43.  Brail  madatta. 

I 

44.  Yugadatta  or  Visyaksena  (Vibhrftja). 

45.  Ddak^ena. 

46.  Bhallftta. 

j 

47.  Janamejaya. 


THE  LINE  OF  PRITHU. 


31.  Prithu. 

82.  Bhadr&.Tu  (Uve  «oo»,  foau(l«r8  of  PaAobAla  lino). 


TABLE  Eo.  II. 


Ixi 


88. 


I 

(1) 

Mudgalo. 


(i 

Jaya. 


I i I 

(3)  (4)  (5) 

Bribadi^u.  Jabiuara.  Kapila. 


Maudgalftyanas, 
booamc  Brahmanas. 


84.  Krahmistha  or  VasiAtba, 
86.  Indrasona. 

86.  Bindhyasva  {married  Menakft). 


87. 

(1)  . (2) 

Divoddsa.  d.  Ahalyd^Saradvata  (Gautama). 

1 Gautama  clan  of  Brdhinanas, 

88. 

Mitrdyu  (married  Maitrdyand.) 

1 

Satdnanda  (a  Risi). 

1 

89.  Maitroya  (founder  of 
Bhdrgava  Brdhinanas). 

Satyadhriti, 

40. 

1 

Chaidyavara. 

I 

Two  twins  (adopted  by  bantu), 

41. 

1 

Suddsa. 

1 

[42. 

/ 1 

Nabadeva]. 

1 

43. 

1 

Somaka. 

1 

44. 

1 

Jantu, 

Founders  of 


LINE  OF  YADAVAS. 

10*.  Yadu  (son  of  Yay&ti). 

! 

I I I I I 

11.  Sahasraji,  Krostu.  Nila.  Antika.  Laghu, 

. 1 

12.  ^sataji. 

I 

I * • u 

18t  Haibaya.  Haya*  Venuha. 

14.  Dharmanotra. 

I 

16  • Kunti. 

( 

16.  Samhata. 

[ 

17.  Mahi^mat. 

13.  Rudrasronya. 

19.  Dnrdama. 

I 

20.  Kanaka. 

J 

III) 

21.  Kritavirya.  Erltlgni.  Eritavarman.  Erltaujas. 

22*  Arjuna. 

, I 'T,  I I --I  I 

28>  Sdrasoua.  Bura.  Eroftn.  Jayadhvaja.  Avanti  and  05  olbers. 


Ixii 


APPENDIX  11. 


24.  VriJiniTat.  24.  Ttlajanghs. 

I I 

I 25»  STtha. 

25.  Vttihotras.  25.  Bhojas.  25. 

I 

26g  Anarta. 

27*  (Dorjeya)  Amitra  Karsana. 


I 

Kandikerav 


26.  Ufftngu. 

27.  Chitraratha. 

28.  i^a^avinda. 

I i i i i TH" 

29.  Pfiihu-  Pfithu-  Pfithudhar-  Pfifchufi-  Pfithu-  Prithnroanas 

dravaa.  yasas.  man.  Jaya.  kirti.  aud94otLoraa 

80.  Snyajfia. 

81.  tJsanas. 

82.  Titiksn. 

88.  Marntta. 

84.  Kambalabarhiaa^ 

I 

8B.  Bukmakavacha. 


86.  Bukmc^u.  Pfitharukma.  Jydmagha- 

Cliaitrd. 


87.  Vidarbha. 

! 

I i I 

88.  Eratha.  Kaisika.  Loinap^da. 

I i ! 

89.  Chedi.  39.  Maua. 

89.  Eaoti.  40.  Chaidyas. 

i 

40.  Dhri^ta. 

41.  Nirvriti. 

42.  Viddratha. 

48.  Dasftrha. 

I 

44.  Byoma. 

46.  Jimdta. 

46.  Vimala. 

47.  Bhlmaratha, 

48«  Navaratha. 


Parigha.  Hari. 

^ 


EstabliKlJCMl  in  Yidoha 
and  founded  the 
Vidoha  line. 


TABLE  No.  11. 


Ixiii 


49i  Dfidharatha. 

50t  6akimi. 

61«  Karambha. 

I 

62*  Devarfttha. 

58»  Deyakaatra. 

I 

54.  Madhn. 

I 

56«  Paravasa. 

66.  Puradvat=Bhadra8eQt  of  Vidarbha. 

I 

57.  Janta=lk8v&ki. 

I 

58#  Sfttvata=::Kausalyfl. 


59*  Bhaji  (?}.  Bbajamana.  Oeyftvfidha.  Aadhaka.  Vyisai. 


60#  Babhru.  Kukura.  60.  Bhajm&na#  Baaa.  Eambala- 
I I barhl§a. 


61#  61#  Vidftratha.  Bons  to  contlxmaw 

62#  Dbfiti.  62.  Adhideva, 

I J I 

68#  Kapota-  68#  Son&sya.  Sveta, 
roman.  bfthana. 

1 I I t ! L 

I 64.  Sa-  Deva-  NiKnn-  Sakra#  Satror 

64#  Taittiri.  min.  aarman.  ta.  lit» 

65#  Samin. 

I 

66#  Pratiksatra# 

I 

67#  Bhoja. 

68#  Hridika.  « 

! 

63#  Erita-  Sata-  DcUr-  Nft-  Bhisa-  Mahk-  A]&-  Bana-  Kani-  Earaaa* 
varman.  dhanvan.  ha.  bha#  na.  bala.  ta,  Jftta.  yaka.  bhakaL 

69.  KainbalabarhlfH. 

70.  Asftmanjas. 


72#  Sadamstra.  Sanftbha.  Krisna# 

65#  Nala. 

I 

66#  Panaryaan# 


67#  Ahuk  a=:d.  of  Kftaya. 


Ihnki  (d.)=EiDg  of  Ayanti 


APPENDIX  VI. 


Ixiv 


68.  Devaka.  68.  Dgrasoua. 


09a  Dovavat.  Upadova.  Siuleva.  Dovarakfita  Dovaki.  Nrutadovi. 

70.  BPiKplsna. 


Mitradevi.  Yasodharfi.  Sudevi.  Satyadcvi.  Sutapa, 


69t  Kamsa.  Nyagrodha.  Sunfiman.  Kanka.  Sainku.  AJabhA.  llastrapfila. 


Yudhamusti.  Sumuftida.  Kamsd.  Eamsavati,  HiinaiitO.  Rdstrapali.  Kamkd. 


TABUS  No.  in. 


IXT 


Post  Mahabharata. 

TABLE  No.  III. 

« 

Post-MahabMrata  Aik.^vAkus  Mats^ja  Param  (Ch.  271.  v,  4-17.) 

(a)  Brihadbala  (killed  in  the  Great  Battle  in  1920  B.C.) 

1.  BribatkHaya. 

2.  Uruksaya. 

3.  Vatsadrolia  (or  Vatsavyfiha). 

4.  Prativyoma. 

5.  Divakara  (contemporary  of  Adhisima  Krisna  of  Pauravas,  and 
of  Senajit  of  Ma^adha,  1 640  B.C.  to  1590  B.C.) 

6.  Saliadeva. 

7.  Dliruvaelva  (or  Bribadaiiva). 

8.  Bliiiniiratlia. 

9.  Pratitasjva  or  Pratiparfva. 

10.  Supratipa. 

1 1.  Mariideva  or  Saliadeva. 

12.  Suiiaksatra. 

13.  Kiiinararfva  or  Puskara. 

11.  Antaviksa. 

15.  Susciia  (Suparna  or  Siivarna  or  Sutapas), 

16.  Siimitra  (or  Aiiiitrajit). 

17.  Brihadraja  (bhraja,  or  Bharadvaja). 

IS.  Dliarma  (or  Viryavan). 

19.  Kritafijaya. 

19a  Vrata. 

20.  Ranenjaya  (Dliaiiastraya). 

21.  Safijaya. 

22.  ^akya. 

23.  ^udhaiidana  (Kruddhodana). 

24.  SiddliArtha. 

25.  RA.hula  (or  Riitula,  Bahula,  Lilngala,  Pusk'ala). 

26.  Praseiiaj it  (or  Senajit). 

27.  Ksjiidraka. 

28.  Kulaka  (Kaulika,  KuQ4aka,  Kudava,  Ranaka). 

29.  Suratha. 

30.  Sumitra. 

A'ote.—Tho  last  king  apparently  killed  in  the  Great  Revolution  of  Mahftpadma 
Nanda  in  422  B.C.  The  Pur  Ana  says  there  were  24  Aikfvakos  ch.  272,  (verse  15),  but  ik 
enumerates  80. 


Ixviii 


APPEmiX  VI. 


years,  but  720  years  only.  The  periods  of  reign,  where  they  differ  from 
Matsya,  are  taken  from  other  Puranas  or  Mss.  as  in  Mr.  Pargitor’s  Hook 
“ The  Kings  of  Kali  age.” 

II.  Ppadyota  Dynasty.  Began  in  92(^  B.  C.  when  Pradyota 
killed  Ripunjaya  in  that  j'car  and  ended  in  782  B.  C. 

1.  Pradj’ota  23.  d.  897  B.  U. 

2.  Palaka  24  : d.  73  B.  C. 

3.  ViiJiikbayupa  50  : d.  823  B.  C. 

4.  Ajaka  (or  Bh.  llajaka  or  Vs.  Janaka.  Or  Mt.  Suryaka)  21 : 
d.  802  B.  C. 

5.  Nandirardhana  (or  Va.  Vartirardliana)  20 : d.  782.  B.  0. 

Note.— 5 kings.  Total  poign  188  years.  Ended  in  782  K G. 

HI.  Slsunasa  Dynasty  (782  B.  C.--A22  B.  0). 

1.  ^iiJunAga  40.  d.  742  B.  C. 

2.  Kakavarna  or  V.  Sakavarna  30  d.  700  R.  C 

3.  Ksetnadliarman  30  d.  070  B.  C. 

4.  K§atraujas  (or  Bh.  Ksetrajna.  Mt.  Ksoinajit)  40:  d.  030 

B.  C. 

5.  Vimbisara  : Bd.  38.  d.  3'32  Jk  C.  ^ 

6.  Ajataiiatru  : Mt»  27.  d.  505  B.  C. 

7.  Dariiaka  (or  Bd,  Vs,  Bh  Jhirbhaka,  or  VaihiJaka).  25.  d.  540 

B.  C. 

8.  Udayin  (or  W fJdaya.'iva,  Or  Mt,  Udiisin.  Or  Bh.  Ajaya)  33. 
Founder  of  Kusumpura  : d.  5o7  R.  C. 

9.  Nandivardhaiia  Va,  12  d.  4(»r)  B.  (:. 

10.  Mahanandin  fBd.  Sahanandi)  Hi.  cl.  122  B.  (j. 

Note, — 10  8ifii'uuAga.s  SCO  years,  or  362.  accoriling  to  VAyii  and  Vi.snu.  This  dynasty 
ended  in  422  (i,  C.,  when  Mahapadma  Nanda  killed  xMalulnandin  tiint  year. 


Years. 

B&rhadrathas 

...  1,000 

Pradyotas 

138 

Bisimagas 

360 

The  grand  total  ...  1,498 

Nanda’a  abhi§eka  or  inauguration  took  place  in  1,498  or  roughly 
1,500  years  after  the  bii  tb  of  Parikijit. 

Post-NANDA  Magadha  Dynasties. 

L Nanda  Dynasty  cfunmenccMl  in  422  B.  0. 

1.  Mahapadina  Nanda  88  (28,  d.  334  B.  C. 

2.  Sukalpa  /vSaludya  or,  Vs.  Sumatya,  or,  RIi.  Smnalya  and  7 
otherfi)  12,  d.  322  R.  0. 

Note,— 9 Xandas  100  years.  Extormiuatod  by  Chandragupta  Maurya  in  822  B.  0. 


TABLE  No.  V. 


Izix 


(1)  Haupya  Dynasty  (according  to  Vfiyu). 

1.  Chundragupta  24.  Ascended  322  B.  C.  d.  298  B.  C. 

2.  VinduB&ra  25.  asc.  298  B.  C.  died  273  B.  C. 

3.  Aifoka  36  (26).  asc.  273  B.  C.  died  247  B.  C. 

4.  KuiiSla  (or  Daiiaratha  Vs.  Suyaas;  8. 

5.  Bandbnp&lita  (or  Sangata)  8 (Va.  B.  d.  10). 

6.  Da^na7(10). 

7.  Dadaratba  8. 

8.  Samprati  9. 

9.  ^llli^^^ka  13. 

10.  Devadbarman  7. 

11.  Satadbanvaii  or  •’e  Va.  Satamdhanus)  Mt.  6,  8. 

12.  Bribadratha  e Va.  87  70.  (B.  d.  7). 

Note.— 10  Mauryas  187  yean.  Ended  in  165  B.  C.  Bat  the  regnal  periods  added 
together  are  100. 

The  Maupya  Dynasty. 

Note.-  The  Matsya  PurAna  gives  a very  mutilated  list  of  this  family,  as  sho«m 
bolow 

1.  ^atadbanvan,  6. 

2.  Bribadratba,  7. 

3.  A^oka,  36. 

4.  His  grandson,  70. 

5.  Dadaratlia,  8. 

6.  Samprati  or  Saptati,  9.  • 

Then  it  adds : “ These  ten  Mauryas  will  enjoy  the  earth  for 
137  years.”  It  names  only  6 kings,  and  the  total  of  tbeir  reigns  comes 
to  only  136. 

(2)  The  Vftyu,  Bibliotheca  Indica  Edition,  gives,  however,  the 
following  list  in  Ch.  37,  v.  425  et  seq  : — 

1.  Cbandragupts,  24  years. 

2.  Bbadrasura,  25  years. 

3.  Asoka,  26  years. 

4.  Kuudla,  8 years. 

5.  Bandhupdlita,  8 years. 

6.  IndrapMita,  10  years. 

7.  Devavarm&,  7 years. 

8.  ^atadhara,  8 years. 

9.  Brihadarfva,  7 years. 

Then  it  adds  ” these  nine  kings  should  enjoy  the  earth  for  full  137 
years,”  but  the  total  comes  to  123. 

I 


APPENDIX  VI. 


Ixx 


Mr.  Vincent  Smith,  in  his  chronological  table  of  the  Maiirya  4y nasty, 
gives  the  same  list,  and  then  adds,  The  names  ol  the  successors  of  Asloka 
are  taken  from  the  Vis^u  Parana,  omitting  Suyasias,  for  the  reasons  given 
in  the  text.  Other  names  are  given  in  Jain  books  and  the  Buddhist 
Asokavad&na.  The  Vayu,  which  is  one  of  the  oldest  of  the  Purfinas, 
gives  only  nine  names  for  the  dynasty,  as  in  brackets,  and  also  states 
the  duration  of  each  reign.  The  approximate  dates  given  are  assigned 
accordingly,  on  the  assumption  that  the  reign  of  Arfoka  lasted  for  about 
forty  or  forty-one  years.  Its  duration,  according  to  the  Vayu  Parana, 
was  thirty-six,  and,  according  to  the  Mahavamsa,  thirty-seven,  years, 
both  of  which  periods  probably  should  be  reckoned  from  the  coronation. 
The  PurAnas  agree  in  assigning  137  years  to  tlio  Alaiirya  dynasty,  but 
tbe  total  of  the  lengths  of  reigns  according  to  the  Vayu  Punino,  is  only 
133.  The  difference  of  four  years  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  interval 
between  the  accession  and  coronation  of  A^oka.  For  further  details  see 
Pargiter,  “ Dynasties  of  the  Kali  Age."  The  variant  readings  are 
numerous.” 

The  Matsya  Parana,  however,  is  incomplete  and,  moreover,  it  has « 
misplaced  verse  23,  wliich  ought  to  conic  after  verse  21  and  not  before  it. 
Therefore  the  Matsya  list  should  stand  thus : — 

1.  Arfoka. 

2.  His  grandson. 

3.  Dasaratha, 

4.  Samprati. 

5.  Satadhaiiva. 

6.  Brihadratha. 

The  names  in  the  Visnu  PurAna  are  — 

1.  Chandragupta  24  years. 

2.  Vindusara  2»o.  ,, 

3.  AjJokavardhana  26  „ 

4.  SuyasJas  (Kunala)  8 ,, 

5.  Daiaratlia  (liandhupalita)  8 years. 

6.  Sangala  !lndrapalita;  10  „ 

7.  Palirfnka  13 

8.  Soma.«larman  (Dovavarinan)  7 „ 

9.  ^atadhanvan  (isatadhara)  8 „ 

10.  Brihadratha  (or  Brihadaiiva)  7 „ 

The  names  within  brackets  and  the  regnal  periods  given  above  are 
taken  from  the  Vftyu  P.  The  Visnu  PurAna  ends  by  saying  these  tea 


TABLE  No.  V. 


Ixxi 


Manryas  will  reign  for  137  years.**  It  is  the  only  Parana  that  gives  the 
correct  ten  names  neither  more  nor  less.  The  total  of  reigns  (taken 
from  Vayu),  comes  up  to  136  years. 

Comparative  Table  of  Maurya  Kings. 


Yisnu 

BrahmAnila 

V&yu  Mss, 
marked  e. 

.■j*  " 

Vayu  generally 

1 

Chaiidragupta  ... 

Ghandragupta 

24 

1 Ghandragupta  24 

1 

1 

Ghandragupta 

24 

2 

Bindasftra 

Bhadrasfiras 

25 

NandasAra 

25 

Bhadrasara 

25 

8 

ABokavardhana  ... 

Asoka 

86 

Asoka 

86 

Asoka 

26 

4 

Snyasas 

Kiin&la 

RulAla 

8 

Kun&la 

8 

5 

Dasaratha 

Batulliupftlitas 
of  Klin  ala 

8 

Dasaratha 

8 

Bandhupftlita 

8 

e 

7 

Sangata 

SfilisOka 

Indrapalita 

... 

10 

Sampratip 

Sdlisiika 

9 

13 

Indrapdlita 

10 

8 

SomasartnA 

Devavarman 

7 

Devadharma 

7 

Dovavarma 

7 

9 

^atadhanva 

Satadhanus 

8 

Satamdhanu 

8 

Satadhara 

8 

10 

Bfliadratha 

Bfihadratha 

7 

Brihadratha 

7 

BrlhadasVa 

7 

Total  10  Kings  187 

0 K!ni;»  137 

actual  133  years 

9 Kings  137 

actual  total 
145  years. 

9 Kings  187 

actual  total  128  yrs. 

The  above  comparative  table  requires  a little  explanation.  The 
Visnii  Parana  gives  the  names  of  ten  kings,  but  not  their  separate  regnal 
periods.  It  gives  the  total  as  ten  kings,  who  ruled  for  137  years.  The 
Blifigavata  PurAna  agrees  with  the  Visnu,  generall}’',  but  omits  Dasaratha. 
It^ays  at  the  end  tliat  there  were  10  kings  who  ruled  for  137  years.  As 
it  is  exactly  like  Visuu  it  lias  not  been  shown  in  the  above  table.  Brah- 
niAncJa  gives  9 kings,  omitting  ^alisuka.  It  saj^s  at  the  end  that  these  9 
kings  ruled  for  137  years.  But  the  aggregate  of  the  actual  regnal  periods 
comes  up  to  133  jmrs.  The  Vayu  Ejiames  all  the  10  kings,  with  two  more, 
as  given  by  Mr.  Pargiter,  but  which  are  really  misreadings.  It  gives  the 
last  king  Bfihadratha’s  reign  as  87  years,  which  is  evidently  a mistake  for 
7 years.  The  table  is  given  with  these  emendations.  It  also  says  at  the 
end  that  these  9 kings  reigned  for  137  years,  tiiougli  the  actual  total  comes 
up  to  145  years.  The  “ VAyu  generally’*  requires  no  explanation.  The 
actual  total  here  is  123  yeare. 

Now,  all  the  Piirapas  agree  in  giving  137  years  as  the  total  period 
of  this  dynasty.  They  agree  also  in  giving  the  same  regnal  periods  for 
the  first  three  kings  and  the  last  three  kings.  It  is  only  with  regard  to 


Ixxii 


APPENDIX  VI. 


ihe  middle  three  or  fonr  kings,  that  there  is  a diderence  of  opinion  among 
them.  To  reconcile  this  is  not  very  easy.  One  may  take  it,  however,  as 
a fact  that  Adoka  really  reigned  for  40  years  and  not  36.  The  diderence 
is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  4 years  between  his  coronation  and  accession 
have  been  omitted.  Or,  it  may  be  explained  on  another  ground,  that 
Kunftla  or  Suyd^as,  tlio  son  of  A^oka,  never  actually  reigned  on  account 
of  his  blindneas.  If  8 years  of  his  alleged  reign  be  deducted  from  145 
years,  then  the  text  of  the  Vftyu  becomes  harmonized,  and  then  the  revised 
list  would  stand  as  follows  : — 

1.  Chandragupta  24  years  (322-298  B.C.) 

2.  BindusSra  25  years  (298-273  B.C.l 

3.  A4oka  36  years  (273-237  B.C.) 

4.  Daiiaratha  S years  (237-229  B.C.) 

(Bandhup&lita) 

5.  Sampratipa  9 years  (229-220  B.C.) 

(Saiigata  or 

ludrapdlita) 

6-  I^li4uka  13  years  (220-207  B.C.) 

7.  Devadharma  (Devavartna  or  Soma'larma)  7 years  (207-200  B.C.) 

8.  ^atadhanva  8 years  (200-102  B.C.) 

9.  Brihadratha  7 years  B.C.) 

This  last  king  was  killed  by  Pusyaiuitra,  who  ascended  the  throne 
in  185  B.  C. 


Sung^a  Dynasty. 

1.  Pnsyamitra  36  yrs.  (Va.,  Bd.,  (iO)  >'185  B.C.-149  B.C.) 

2.  (Agnimitra  8 years.) 

3.  Vasujyestha  {or  Va.  Bd.,  Vs.,  Bh.,  Sujye^tha)  7 years  (149  B.C.- 
142  B C.) 

4.  Vasumitra  10  years  (142  B.C.-132  B.C.) 

5.  Andhiaka  (Antaka),  or  Bd.,  Bh.,  Bhadraka  or  Vs.  Ardraka)  2 
years  (132  BC.-130  B.C.) 

6.  Pulindaka  3 years  ( 127  B.C.-124  B.C.) 

7.  Ghopa  (or  Glioaavasu,  or  Mt.  crp  Yomegha)  3 years. 

8.  Vajramitra  9 years  (Bd.,  7 years)  124  B.C.-ll.*!  B.C.) 

9.  Samabhnga  or  Bh.dgavata  Mt.  32  years  (115  B.C.-83  B.C.) 

10.  Devabhfimi  (or  Va  K^mabhOmi)  10  years  (83  B.C.-73  B.C.) 

Not«.olO  Sangas  foe  US  years.  Ended  in  7t  U.C.  ■» 


TABLE  No.  V. 


Ixxiii 


Kanvayana  (Sungrabhpitya)  Dynasty. 

1.  Vasudeva  9 years  (Bd.  5)  (73  B.C.-64  B.C.) 

2.  Bhumimitra  14  years  (Va.,  Bd.,  5 years)  (64  B.C.-50  B.C.) 

3.  NSritya^a  12  years  ^50  B.C.-38  B.C.) 

4.  Su4arman  10  years  (Bd.,  5 years)  (38  B.C.-28  B.C.) 

Kote.-i  Kings  for  46  yean,  from  78  B.C.  to  28  B.C. 

Andhpas. 

1.  Si jnka,  or  Simuka,  (Va,  Bd  Sindlmka  Vs  Sipraka),  23. 

2.  Kri^na,  10  (Mt,  18). 

3.  ^ri-^&takarpi,  10. 

4.  FQrnotsanga,  18. 

5.  Skandliastambhi,  18. 

6.  ^atakariii,  56. 

7.  Lambudara,  18. 

8.  Apllaka,  12. 

9.  Meghas\4ti,  18. 

10.  Svdti  (or  Ali),  18  (or  12). 

11.  SkandasvAti,  7. 

] 2.  Mrigetidra  Svatikarna,  3. 

13.  Kuntala  Sv&tikarpa,  8. 

14.  Sviltivarna,  1. 

15.  Palomftvi,  36  (Va,  Bd,  24). 

16.  Ari§takarpa,  25. 

17.  mia,  0 (Va,  Bd,  1). 

18.  Mantalaka  (or  Pattalaka,  Bh  Talaka,  Va  Saptaka),  5. 

19.  Pariksena  (Mt  Purindrasena),  21. 

20.  Sundara  Satakarpi,  1. 

21.  Cliakura  Satkararni,  6 tno. 

22.  i^ivasviiti,  28. 

23.  King  Gautamipulra,  21. 

24.  PulomA  (Pulomavi),  28. 

25.  (^atakarni,  29). 

26.  Slva4ri  Puloma,  7. 

27.  ^ivaskandha  Satakarni,  3. 

28.  Yajnatfri  ^takarpika,  29  (Va,  Bd,  19). 

29.  Vijaya,  6. 

30.  Chandn4ri  Satakarpi  (Va,  Bd  Dandasri),  10  (3). 

31.  Pulom&vi,  7. 

Notr.~Thesc  thirty  Andhra  kings  'wSIl  enjoy  the  earth  460  yean  (Bd,  454).  Or  from 
88  B.C.  to  482  AJh 


APPENDIX  VL 


Ixxiv 


It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  the  PurApa  statea  that  l^irfuka 
(Simuka)  was  the  first  Andhra  king,  who  wae  the  slayer  of  ^utfeirman,  the 
last  of  the  Kanvas,  in  28  B.C.  But  from  tlie  evidence  of  coins  it  appears 
tiiat  Simuka  reigned  long  before  that  period,  not  of  course  in  Magadba, 
but  in  Andhra.  The  slayer  of  the  last  Kanva  was  very  likely  one  of  the 
tlu'ee  kings,  nos.  11,  12,  or  13  in  the  list  of  the  Andhrns.  Tho  reasons  for 
differing  from  tho  Paurdnic  accounts  may  be  found  in  Mr.  Vincent  Smitli’s 
The  Early  Ilistory  of  India,  3rd  edition,  pp.  2(1(5-208. 

"We  make  only  this  short  extract  fnnn  pago  207—“  Tho  Udayngiri  op  nathigiimplia 
Inscription  of  Rharvola,  the  Jain  king  of  KaliugA,  has  boon  tho  siibjnct  of  much  diHCUssioii, 
iiiid  archaeologists  used  to  believe  erroneously  that  it  was  daU'd  in  tho  year  106  of  tho 
Maiirya  era.  «The  latest  and  most  authoritative  account  of  tlio  mutilated  dociiiiicnt  is  tho 
abstract  translation  published  by  Prof.  Ludors  in  Kp.  Ind.  vol.  x,  App.,  p.  lOQ.  We 
learn  that  Kharvcla,  surnamod  Maha  Meghavahana.  tho  third  of  the  Ctiet-a  dynasty  of 
Kalinga,  was  anointed  as  Maharaj  when  twonty-four  years  of  ago,  having  boon  already 
Crown  Prince  (Yuvaraja)  for  nine  yoars.  In  his  second  year  he  dolled  Satakariii.  by 
sending  an  army  to  the  west.  Tn  his  llflU  year  he  repaired  an  luiuodiict  which  had  not 
been  uswl  for  103  years  from  the  time  of  king  Naudu,  and  in  tho  same  year  harassed  tho 
king  of  Riijagriha  i.  o , of  Magadha.  In  his  twelfth  year  he  watered  his  olojihants  in  tho 
GangeSi  and  compelled  the  king  of  Magadha  to  l>ow  at  his,  feet,  lu  his  thirteenth  year 
he  erected  certain  pillars.  * 

“ The  roforenco.  to  king  Nanda  givi.»s  the  approximato  date.  The  latest  date  for  the 
last  Nanda  king,  according  to  my  chronology,  is  322  li.C,  Deducting  1(i:J  w'o  get  219  11  C. 
for  the  fifth  year  of  Kharvela,  and  comscquenlly  223  HC.  for  hi.s  accession,  soino  nino 
years  after  tho  close  of  Asoka's  reign.  The  Andhra  king  alluded  to  can  only  bo  Sri 
Satakarniy  No.  3 of  the  Puranic  list,  who  is  commemorated  by  a defaced,  but  happily 
inscribed,  relief  image  at  Nanagliat,  a pass  leading  from  the  Konkan  to  tho  ancient  town 
of  Junnar  in  tho  Poona  District,  Rombay  (A.  S.  \V.  1.,  v(d.  v,  p.  r»9). 

“The  synchroni.sm  of  Satakarni  I with  Kharvela  proves  conclusively  that  tho  Andhra 
dynasty  cannot  have  begun  with  tiie  death  of  the  last  Kanva  king.  The  date  assigned  to 
Gatakarni  I is  in  full  accord  with  the  sevipt  of  the  Nariaghat  inscriptions,  which  include 
similar  records  of  the  first  and  second  Andhra  kings,  Simuka  and  Krisna  (Luilcrs,  op.  cit., 
Koa.  11  13,  1114,1144).  The  king  of  Magadha  whom  Kharvela  defeated  was  one  of  tho 
lator  Mauryas,  probably  Salisuka  (c.  223-211  in  or  al)i)ut  212  13.0." 

bKlSA  CHANDKA  VIDYAUNAVA, 

LALIT  MOHAN  KAVVATiUTDA.  M.A.,  RL. 


APPENDIX  VII 


(Pre  Muhahliarata  War  Kings.  (Extract  from  Mr.  Pargiter’s 
paper  in  J.R.A.S.  January  1910). 


I. 

Tadavm. 

II. 

Haihayas. 

III. 

Paobavas. 

V. 

ELlNYAKUfiJA. 

1 

Manu 

Mann 

2 

Ila 

Ila 

S 

Pururavaa 

Poruravas 

4 

Ayus 

Ay  ns 

Ainavasn 

ft 

6 

Nahu^a 

Nabusa 

6 

Ymjati* 

Ytiijdii* 

7 

Y;idu 

Paru 

8 

Ero^tu 

Saliasrajit 

Janamcjaya  1 

Bhima 

9 

Prachinvat 

10 

Vfijinivat 

b'afcajiti 

Pravira 

ii 

Manasyu 

12 

Hailiaya 

Abhayada 

18 

Svahi 

Sudhunvan 

Kanchanapra- 

14 

Bahn^ava 

bba 

15 

Dbarma 

bamyati 

16 

Uusadgu 

Ahamyatl 

17 

Dliarmanotra 

Kaudrasva 

18 

liicheyu 

Bubotra 

10 

Ghitraratha 

Kunti 

20 

Matindra 

21 

Sasavindu* 

Sahaujl 

Tamsu 

22 

Pflthuyasas 

28 

Pfitliukurman 

M. 

Jahnu 

24 

Pfithnjnya 

Mahismat 

Bnmantn 

26 

Pfithukirtti  , 

fSI 

Ajaka 

26 

Pfithudilna 

BaifikaaVa 

27 

Pfithnsravafi 

Bhadrasrenya 

• f. 

Kusa 

Braroava 

28 

Prithusattama 

Eusariva 

BRAHMANS. 

29 

Durdama 

Kusika 

SO 

Antara 

Kanaka 

'Qddhi 

81 

Suyajfia 

Kpitavirya 

• •• 

! Richika 

82 

Ur anas 

Ar/uita* 

Viivdmitra 

jamadaqni 

88 

Sineya 

Jayadhvaja 

tit 

84 

Marutto 

Ttilajaiigha 

As  taka 

Rdma 

85 

Eambalabarhis 

Yitihotra 

Paravasn 

86 

Hukmakavaoba 

Vpiga 

87 

Paravpit 

Miidha 

«f  ■ 

88 

JijfnnagJia 

Vfiijpi 

89 

40 

Vidarbha 

• tt 

41 

Kratha 

Ailina 

42 

Euiiti 

43 

Dhpi^ti 

Dusyanta 

44 

Nirvfiti 

Bharata* 

45 

Viduratha 

46 

Dasdrha 

Vitatha 

47 

Vyoraan 

Bhumanyu 

48 

JImuta 

Bfihatksatra 

49 

Vikriti 

Snbotra 

50 

Bhlmamtha 

Hastiii 

Ixxvi 


APPENDIX  Vll 


VI. 

Kasi  limb. 

VII. 

Solar  linb. 

VIII. 

VlDEHA  LINB. 

IX. 

Dista*s  line. 

X. 

Anu’s  line. 

Mana 

Maun 

Maun 

Afaiiu 

1 

11a 

Ikfvaku 

Diata 

11a 

2 

Pururavas 

Pururavas 

8 

Ayoa 

bafiada 

Niml 

Nabhiiga 

Ayufl 

4 

Kahusa 

Kukutalhu 

Nahusa 

5 

K^atravrdha 

AiLOiias 

Bhalaudana 

Yd  yuU* 

6 

Tfithu 

Mithi-Janaka 

Aiiu 

7 

8u(na)hotra 

i 

Viavagasva 

i ! 

i 

8 

Ardra 

! Vatsapn  j 

1 Sabhaiiara 

0 

Easa 

Yuviiuariva  1 

Udavasn 

j 

I 

10 

ISruvasta 

1 1 

Kftlduala 

i 

Easlpa 

lirihadasva 

t 1 

1 Prainsn 

12 

KuvnlaHva 

Naudivardhaiia  ; 

k8 

DIrghatapas 

Dj'idliusva 

1 

Sfifijaya 

14 

Frainoila 

1 Prajani 

15 

Ilaryaiiva  I 

Suketu 

10 

Dhanva 

Nikumbha 

Purafijaya 

17 

Saiuhata.sva 

Khanitra 

18 

Dhanvantari 

Kl'isusva 

, Devaruta 

lit 

! 

Janaiuojaya 

20 

Vut'aiidsuo  ll 

1 

• Ksupa 

22 

Kotamat 

Mundhutr* 

: Dfihaduktha 

Ma  basil  I a 

21 

Purukutna 

i 

23 

Trasadas\ n 

1 Virnia 

24 

SambUilta 

MuUavirya 

i 

1 

Maharnanas 

25 

Bhimaratha 

Anaranya 

! 

1- — -- — ■ 

20 

P/'isad<i^’va 

; VivimSa 

Csmara 

27 

Divoddsa  I 

HaryasVa  11 

!'  Sndbriti 

' Tlliksu  , 

28 

(AsUratba) 

Vasumanas 

1 

! EJiauIif^ra 

tiivi* 

20 

Tridhanvan 

i 

Kekdya 

SO 

Trayy.Truua 

Dhristakotu 

Karandhama 

Ruaadrabba 

31 

Trisdhku  ’ 

» 

i 

32 

Hurisciuindra 

Avlldfit 

33 

Itohila 

! Uarvaava 

Maruita* 

Uema 

34 

... 

Uarita 

i 

85 

(HarjasVa) 

Chaiicha 

: Nari^yaiita 

30 

i 

Vijaya 

Maru 

Danm 

87 

(Sudeva) 

linruka 

fciutapas 

88 

Vrika 

i 

i Rajyavardhana 

30 

Divoddsa  II 

Udiiu 

' Pratindbaku 

1 Sudli|lli 

40 

Pratardana 

tiafjam* 

i 

41 

Vatsa 

AHamarij.is 

. Kara 

Bull 

42 

Alurka 

1 Aiiisumat 

, Efltiratha 

: Kuvala 

48 

Dilipa  I 

Aliya 

44 

Sannati 

Biiagiratlia*  | 

Ba!idlHiiiiafc  i 

45 

^jruta 

Devamldha 

Vcgavat 

40 

Sanitha 

Nabhaga 

47 

Arabar'i^a* 

Budha 

DadhivShana 

48 

Kfema 

Sindbudvipa 

Vibadha 

Trinumndu 

48 

Ayutayna 

50 

APPmDIX  VII. 


Ixxvii 


I. 

11. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

Yadavab. 

Dvimidhas. 

Paoaavah. 

N.  PANCALA. 

6.  Panoala. 

61 

Navaratha 

Vikanihana  ? 

62 

Dabaratha 

Dvimidha 

Ajaiiiidba 

umii 

68 

Hakim  i 

Yavinara 

... 

Nila 

Brihadisn 

64 

Karambha 

Saiiti 

55 

Dovarslta 

Dhfitiinat 

... 

Susaiiti 

Bfihadvasa 

56 

Dcvaksatra 

Purujati 

Bfihaddhanas 

57 

Madhu 

Satyadhriti 

... 

Arka 

58 

Kuril  vasa 

Driithaueroi 

Bh|*imyasva 

5U 

Anil 

... 

Mud^ala 

... 

60 

Pur ud vat 

Brahiuistha 

61 

Piiriihotra 

Sudhanvan 

... 

Vadliryasva 

Brihatkarman 

62 

Amtiu 

Pik^a  1 

Divodum 

68 

Mitrayu 

Jayadratha 

64 

Batvat 

Sarvabhauma 

... 

(Dovavata) 

Visvajit 

65 

Satmta 

Sriii  ayu 

66 

... 

67 

Aiidhaka 

Chyavana 

Senajit 

68 

... 

Bouiadatta 

69 

Kukura 

(Pijavana) 

Rnchiruava 

70 

tti 

Sudusa 

71 

Vrsiil 

8aAivara\ta 

Sahadeva 

Pyithuaena 

72 

• a. 

Somiika 

Para  I 

73 

Dbpti 

Kuru 

Jantu 

71 

... 

Parlksit  1 

Nipa 

75 

Eapotaroman 

Mahat  Paurava 

Janame,'aya  II 

... 

76 

Suratha 

Samara 

77 

Yilomau 

Kukmaratha 

Viduratha 

... 

78 

Barvabhauma 

Para  II 

70 

Tittirl 

Suparava 

Jayatsena 

... 

80 

Taittiri 

Aradhi 

Pfithu 

81 

Sumati 

Maliasattva 

... 

82 

Nala 

Ayiituyiis 

Sukriti 

88 

Sanaali 

Akrodhana 

... 

84 

Dcvatitlii 

Vibhraja 

85 

Krita 

lUkaa  11) 

... 

86 

87 

Abhi|Lt 

1 Bhimasoiia 
Dillpa 

Pratipa 

Anuha 

88 

89 

Pimarvasu 

...  1 

Brfihnuidatfa 

Visvakscua 

90 

Ahuka 

(Itisiiaena) 

Klpu  (Xila) 

rdaksona 

91 

Saiitciuii' 

Blmllata 

92 

98 

Ugmaena 

KatUaa 

Ugrdijudha 

KacMiiya 

Suvira 

rB5T?ma] 

vichitravirya 

Pri^ata 

Jdiutmc'aya 

94 

Dhritara^fra 

Drupada 

05 

Kr^'ta 

Npipailjaya 

Pu'fdavas 

Dhriftadyumtia 

96 

Bahuratha 

Abhimunyu 

Dhri^iaketu 

THE 

BATTLE  BE 

I TWEEN  THB 

Parikfiit  If 

Janamojaya  III 

et<?. 

IxxTiii 


iPPBmix  vii 


VI. 

Kah  um. 

m 

Sour  tc«B. 

VIII. 

ViDRHA  UNL 

IX. 

Dnrr A’8  unb. 

X. 

Amu’s  umr. 

Ketmnat 

Rituixir\ta 

Visala 

Anapana 

5t 

Barvakama 

Mahadhfti 

Hctnachaiidra 

5S 

Snkefca 

Sndasa 

53 

Kalmfiaapada 

Buohandra 

Diviraiha 

64 

Dbarmaketii 

Aa.naka 

Eptirata 

Dhunirasva 

55 

Muiaka 

55 

Batyaketa 

bataratha 

Sf  in  jay  a 

.M 

67 

Vflddhasarman 

Maha  roman 

Hah ad ova 

58 

Vibhu 

Visvasaha  I 

59 

Dllipa  11* 

svarnaroman 

K ;*isTi«va 

Cbitfuratha 

50 

Ruvibha 

Dirghabahu 

Homadatta 

51 

tiaghu 

Hrasvaromnn 

53 

Bukumara 

Aja 

Jan.imojaya 

58 

Dasuratha 

S’lradht*a/a 

Prumati 

Lomapdda 

54 

DhriaiaVetn 

liCima* 

Hhaiuimat 

65 

Veouholra 

batadynmna 

. . _ ■ ■' 

Cliaturanga 

55 

Bharga 

Kiiiia 

Suchi 

57 

Atithi 

Crjavaha 

Pfithulak^a 

58 

' 

Kisadba 

Sanadvaja 

59 

; Nala 

Kuni 

Champa 

70 

Magapha  llne 

j Nabhas 

j Aujana 

i 

71 

Pundarika 

! Kulnjit 

! 

Haryauga 

72 

Kuril 

! Esomad  hail  van 

I Anstanomi 

i 

78 

Budhanvan 

1 Dovanika 

•Sruiayiis 

1 

lihadraratha 

74 

Buhotra 

1 Ahinagu 

' •'‘>up;ip.*»va 

I 

76 

Chyavana 

1 Paripatra 

••  > a ft  jay  a 

! 

Bfihatkarinan 

75 

1 Dala 

j Ksemari 

77 

Erita 

! 8aia 

1 A 1 eiias 

Brihadratha 

78 

Vasu  Chaidtja 

• Uktha 

i Sn  mar  at  ha 

79 

i Vajranahha 

; Ratyarat.ha 

Brihadbhann 

80 

Bfihadratha 

I Bankhana 

' Rfityaruthi 

81 

j Vyn.sitasva 

j Tfiagupu 

1 Hfihanmanas 

82 

Knsagra 

Visvasaha  II 

. Upngiipta 

88 

Bisabba 

Hira'iyuuubha 

; Hviigata 

Jayadratha 

84 

Pijsya 

: bvariara  1 

85 

Puspavat 

Dhruvnsandhi 

1 Snvarehas 

Vijaya 

85 

fiatyabita 

Rudarsana 

1 Bubhiisa 

87 

Agnivarna 

1 Susruta 

Dhriti 

88 

tlrja 

BIghra 

! Jflya 

89 

Jahnn 

Alaru 

1 Vijaya  j 

Dhritavrata 

Prasijsruta 

1 Uita  1 

! 

91 

Bambhava 

fiiiBSTidhi 

^nnaya  i 

; Satyakarman 

m 

JardsandJta 

Amarsa 

Yitahavya  i 

Adhiratha 

lil 

Mahasvat 

Dhriti  | 

[J] 

Sahadeva 

VisT-ntavat 

Bahol^va 

Karna 

Brhadbala 

Kfiti  j 

96 

PAIfjyVAS  AND 

KAURAVAS, 

Bomadhi 

Brhatksana 

(^rataaraTas 

Urnksopa 

etc. 

oto. 

APPENDIX  VIII. 

paurAnik  chronology. 

Tt  is  said  that  Indians  have  no  history,  and  that  they  do  not  possead 
any  historical  instinct.  This  erroneous  opinion  about  the  Hindus,  owes  its 
ori^jin  to  the  fact,  that  the  first  literature  to  which  the  West  came  in 
contact  was  either  the  poetical  or  sacerdotal  literature  of  India,  in  which 
one  would  not  naturally  expect  much  of  historical  knowledge.  Though  the 
Purtlnas  were  also  before  the  public,  yet,  owing  to  their  popular  character, 
they  never  attracted  much  attention  to  the  historical  treasures  buried  in 
them.  The  literature  of  the  Briilimanas  was  always  supplemented  from 
the  earliest  times  by  the  literature  of  the  K^atriya  Kings  or  the  Court 
literature.  Every  prince,  worth  the  name,  had  his  court  bard  or  Suta  or 
Milgadlia,  to  commemorate  the  events  of  his  reign  and  of  his  ancestors. 
These  were  compiled  in  VamilAbalis,  which  were  popular  with  the  public, 
though  not  of  much  interest  to  the  sacerdotal  class.  The  existence  of 
these  Vaiptfiibalis  or  chronicles  is  proved,  beyond  doubt,  by  Kalhana  in 
his  Introduction  to  Rt\jatarahgioi,  wherein  he  says  that  he  drew  his 
materials  from  the  Vaius.ibalis  of  Katfmiriau  Kings  extending  over  a 
period  of  3,000  years.  Now,  where  historic  periods  were  of  such 
great  lengths  as  thousands  of  years,  it  was  necessary  to  fix  an  epoch 
in  which  calculation  would  pi-oceed  not  by  years  or  decades,  but 
by  centuries.  One  such  fixed  epoch  was  already  in  existence  in  the 
astronomical  era,  called  'the  beginning  of  the  Kali  age,  which  was  fixed 
on  astronomical  grounds  at  a point  3,100  years  B.  C.  It  was,  however,  not 
convenient  for  historical  purposes,  as  it  was  u.scd  mostly  by  astronomers 
and  by  sacerdotal  classes.  Moreover,  it  was  not  an  historical  era,  because 
its  starting  point  was  not  any  memorable  historical  event.  Its  epoch 
depended  on  an  event  which  took  place  in  the  heaven,  in  the  conjunction  of 
certain  planets  observable  only  by  the  initiates  in  astronomy.  It  was, 
therefore,  neces.sary  to  fix  the  popular  epoch  in  some  historical  event, 
which  was  welLknown  to  the  public  and  even  to  the  ignorant  masses,  and 
which  was  preserved  in  legends  and  traditions  of  all  Hindu  nations  through'* 
out  India.  That  memorable  event  was  the  battle  of  Mababharata,  between 
the  Kauravas  and  Panidavaa  which  lasted  for  eighteen  days  After  the 
end  of  this  battle,  which  was  short  but  sharp,  Yudhi^thira  was  anuoiut* 
ed  as  King.  And,  it  was  during  this  battle,  that,  Uttard,  the  wife  of 
Abhimanyu,  sou  of  Arjuua,  gave  birth  to  a still-born  child  after  six  mouths’ 


APPENDIX  Vllt. 


Ixxx 

gestation,  owing  to  the  sliock  sho  received  on  hearing  (lie  sad  news  of  her 
husband’s  death  wlio  had  been  killed  by  fonl  means,  by  the  combination  of 
seven  chiefs  against  him.  This  tragic  death  of  Abhiinanyu  was  the  subject 
of  popular  legend  with  the  Hindus.  Tims,  these  twoimpoitant  events— the 
still-born  birth  of  Pai-ik^it — who  was  resnscinted  by  the  ilivine  powers  of 
^rl  Kfifipa,  and  the  coronation  of  Yndhisthira,  were  naturally  most  appro- 
priate for  fixing  the  starting  point  of  the  liistorical  epoch.  This  epoch, 
is,  therefore,  called  the  Lankika  or  the  sotmlar  epiwh,  to  distinguish  it 
from  the  religious  or  astnmomioal  op>eh.  This  st.'irting  p-'int  is.  indiffer- 
ently, c.alled  the  epoeli  of  the  birth  of  I’ariksit,  or  the  epoch  of  the  corona- 
tion of  Yndhisthira. 

When  was  this  opo<*li  ronlly  slarlofl,  if  is  oasy  fo  doft  rniin^  ; and 
Varaliamillira,  who  llonrislied  in  tin' sixth  f‘ontnry»  A.  D,  in  his  Bphat 
Satnhita  says,  that  this  Saj>iar-i  or  f«ankilva  ora  was  noto*!  hy  an  astroiHanor 
before  him,  called  (Jnrira.  This  <Mtnventi*^na1  era  supposed  tlial  Sapfarsis 
were  in  the  ifairhn  astcrism,  nn  the  tlatc  nf  tlio  coronation  of  Yndhisthira 
which  coincided  witli  the  hirth  t»f  I'ariksit.  ^J'h(‘  t]ic»*ry  is  fliat  th^ 
Saptarsis  slowly  move  thronch  fhensterism>  at  tlic  rate  of  S niinntes  of  the 
arc  of  a ciicle  in  one  year,  tlins  comph-tini;  fuic  asterism  in  a century*  or, 
the  total  circle  <'f  tlic  27  rislus  in  yours.  Thus,  in  this  conven- 

tional method,  was  started  a convenifuit  mode  of  indicating  lar^'C  times. 
The  asterisins  bcin^'  -7  in  nninher—each  27tli  yiart  c)f  a circle  represented 
a centurj’.  'rims,  or.  <1e;ire(‘S,  or,  x GO  minutes -"8^K)  minutes. 
An  asterisni  hoinc  e(jnal  to  a hundred  years,  llins,  a part  of  a circle 
measuring  8 mi  miles  hecomes  e(|u:d  to  fuie  year.  This  w'^as  a brief 
and  convenient  method  of  indicating  years  in  an  abbreviated  way. 
Each  hiindredtli  part  of  an  astcrism,  called  an  arnrfa,  or  a part,  rep- 
resented a year.  So,  if  one  said,  24th  anis^a  of  Purva  Phalguni,  it 
Would  mean  that  the  full  qsterism  of  Maglni  was  passed,  and  24th 
year  in  Piirva  Phalguni  was  the  time  indicatcfl  ; or,  in  other  words, 
124  S.  E.  (Saptar^i  or  secular  ora).  Similarly,  24th  ainrfa  of  Rovatt,  will 
mean  1,724  secular  era.  This  Saj)Uirsi  era  is  the  historical  era  of  the 
Hindus.  The  commentator  of  Varahamihira,  named,  Bliattotpala,  quoting 
Garga,  gives  tlie  following  rule  for  converting  any  l^aka  era  into  Saptar§i 
era.  Hesa^^s:  — 

“ Add  2,520  to  the  J5;ika  ora,  and  divide  it  by  100,  the  quotient 
will  represent  the  number  of  asterisins  fully  crossed  by  the  Saptarsis, 
and  the  remainder  wijl  be  the  number  of  years  spent  in  the  asterism  in 
that  centur}\  This  remainder,  deducting  from  100,  will  represent  the 
number  of  years  still  remaining  up  to  the  end  of  the  centujy.” 


PAVnAniK  cnnoNOTMor. 


Ixxxi 


A want  of  knowledge  of  this  rule  led  to  curious  interpretation 
of  the  following  verse  of  the  Vfiyu  FurSpa 

titlWf  IKIT^fVCn  VI9  V9  I 

spilid  d wQfId  lift  im  n 

(Bibliotheca  Indica  Series  VoL  II,  Oh.  37  V.  417.) 

One  sucli  curious  explanation  is,  that  it  means  that  in  the  24th 
year  o(  the  century,  in  the  commencement  of  which  the  Andhra  dynasty 
was  found  reigning,  that  dynasty  will  come  to  an  end,  and,  after  finishing 
that  century,  a new  cycle  of  2,700  years  will  commence.  Remem- 
bering that  the  Saptar^i  cycle  begins  with  the  first  point  or  Amda  of 
Aifvini  and  ends  with  the  last  point  or  Atp^a  of  Rerati,  which  is  the 
last  of  the  27th  asterisins,  for  Ahhijit  is  liever  counted,  it  means  that 
the  Andhra  dynasty  came  to  an  end  when  the  line  of  the  Saptar^is 
Vi’as  in  the  24th  Amsfa  of  RevatS.  Therefore,  from  the  date  of  the 
coronation  of  Yudhistira  or  the  birth  of  Pariksit,  both  referring  to  the 
same  epoch  or  time,  npto  the  end  of  the  .Andhra  reign,  the  Saptar^is 
travelled  through  the  following  asterisins  in  their  due  order.  Maghft, 
Pfirva  Ph&lguni,  Uttara  Pln'ilguni,  &c.,  up  to  Revati,  24  points  or 
Anisas,  or  1,724  years,  after  the  birth  of  Pariksit,  which  we  have 
previously  fi.xed  at  1,020  B.  C.  This  Saptarsi  calculation,  therefore,  is  a 
check  on  that  calculation,  for,  according  to  it,  1,724  }-ears  elapsed  after 
Pariksit’s  birth.  According  to  our  calculation,  the  Andhra  dynasty  came 
to  an  end  in  414  A.  D.  or  1920+414=2,-334  years  after  Pariksit’s  birth. 
The  difference,  between  these  two  calculations,  is,  therefore,  a very  large 
one.  How  is  this  to  be  reconciled  ? 

This  can  be  done  by  applying  the  rule  given  above.  The  Andhra 
dynasty  came  to  an  end  in  414  A.  D.,  corresponding  to  414—78=336 
l^&ka  Era.  Add  to  this  2,526,  and  we  get  2,802,  which  means  tliat  one 
complete  circle  of  27  asterisms  was  mailo,  ami  the  first  asterism,  namely, 
Aifvini,  was  also  crossed,  and  the  Saptar^is  were  in  the  second  asterism, 
where  they  had  passed  62  years  already ; for  2,862  means  one  full  revo- 
lution of  2,700  years,  and  162  yeare  over  and  above  it.  The  correct 
interpretation  of  this  verse,  therefore,  is  that  at  the  time  of  the  end  of  the 
Andhra  dynasty,  the  line  of  the  Saptarsis  was  in  the  24tli  asterism  calcu- 
culated  from  Magh&.  In  other  words,  that  24  centuries  had  elapsed 
between  the  birth  of  Pariksit  and  the  end  of  the  Andhras  in  414  A.  D. 
This  would  thus  give  the  date  of  the  birth  of  Parikfiit  as  19  ceuturiea 
before  Christ. 


Ixxxii 


APPEmiX  VIIL 


Ka^riifatt,  the  protjenitors  of  the  BMhmanas. — Another  Btartling  state* 
xnenl  made  by  the  Matsya  Pnrftna  (Ch.  273.  V.  57  et8eij.)h  that  in  the  next 
cycle  (Mahayuga)  the  progenitors  of  the  human  race  will  bo  the  two  great 
yogis — both  Ksatriyas — naniod  llevApi  ami  Mani«  who  are  still  existing  in 
their  physical  bodies  in  the  village,  Kahlpa.  From  them  will  arise  the 
future  Solar  and  Lunar  dyjiaaties.  Throughout  the  Satya  Yiiga,  all  the 
people  of  the  earth  will  be  Ksatriyas,  (or  fighters  and  warriors).  la 
other  words,  the  beginning  of  every  new  race,  is  with  Ksatriyas  who  go  to 
a new  country,  colonise  it,  and,  settling  there,  start  a new  civilization.  It 
is  in  the  middle  of  the  TretA  Vuga,  that  the  seven  llisis  take  their  birth 
in  these  Ksatriya  fiunilies,  iiiul  start  the  Hrilnnana  class,  wlieii,  theocracy 
begins.  Something  like  this  happened  in  th?  present  cycle  also.  The 
history  of  the  Pauravas,  given  in  tliis  Pur  ina,  as  well  as  in  others,  shows 
clearly  that  many  Bralunana  clans  Iiad  Ksatriya  origin.  This  will  appear 
clear  from  the  genealogical  table  of  the  Ptiurav*is  given  in  a separate 
appendix.  The  Matsya  PurAna  uses  tho  icnn  Hraliina — Ksatriya  generally 
in  this  sense  of  Brahinanas  having  a Ksatriya  urigir»  ; and  not  that  of 
BrahinaUas  who  have  become  Ksatri5’as  as  given  by  ifr.  V.  Smith  in  his 
history  3rd  Ed.,  pages  419  — 42(>. 

As  a matter  of  fact,  most  of  the  Bralunanasare  the  spiritual  descend- 
ants of  Ksatriyas,  They  learnt  the  Brahma  V’idya  ^Theosophy;  from  the 
Ksatriyas,  as  the  UpanLacls  distinctly  <leelare  it.  The  daily  prayer  wliicli 
they  recite — tho  noble  Gayatri — owes  its  crmnciatiori  to  the  Ksatriya 
prince,  V^jivaraitra,  The  .Matsyii  Purana,  therefore,  states  a natural  law 
of  the  growth  of  civilization,  namely,  tiiat  new  races  begin  with  warriors, 
and  that  the  intellectuals,  that  is  Bralimanas,  come  after  the  age  of  the 
warriors,  namely,  in  the  middle  of  the  Treta.  It  is  liinted  in  the 
M&fi(Jukya  Upaniyid  11 1.,  also  that  the  Brnlimariism  arose  in  the  Treta 
Yuga. 

In  this  connection,  it  should  be  remembered  that  tlie  four  Yugaa, 
for  historical  purpo.ses,  should  not  be  coafuuiuled  with  tho  astronomical 
Yugas.  The  four  Iiistorical  Yugas  are  : — 

1.  The  Ksatriya  Yuga,  or  tlie  Warrior  age. 

2.  Tho  Brahniana  Yuga,  or  the  Iniellcctnal  age. 

3 The  Vais'ya  Yuga,  or  the  Commercial  or  tho  Capitalist’s  age. 

4.  The  ^udra  Yuga,  or  the  age  of  Laborers. 

These  distinct  ages  may  have  definite  periods  during  which  they 
flourish,  but  about  the  length  of  which  we  have  found  no  distinct  state- 
xneut  iu  the  Purapas.  As  the  aslrouomical  ug^s  are  based  upou  diviue 


PADIIAKIK  OnRONOLOOT.  * Ixniii 


years,  one  year  being  equal  to  360  human  years,  so,  by  analogy,  we  may 
Oome  to  the  followiiig  periods : — 

1.  The  Labour  Age,  1,200  years. 

2.  The  Capitalist’s  Age,  2,40^)  years. 

3.  The  Intellectual  Age,  3,600  years. 

4.  The  Military  Age,  4,800  years. 

Total  life  of  a race,  12,W.)  years. 

If  this  surmise  of  ours  be  correct,  the  Aryan  civilization  will  come 
to  an  end  after  it  has  flourished  on  Earth  for  twelve  thousand  years,  and 
the  post-Aryan  civilization,  the  seed  of  which  has  already  been  sown, 
will  last  the  same  number  of  years. 

That  the  four  ages  were  not  always  astronomical,  even  in  our 
Hindu  books,  will  be  found  borne  out  from  the  statement  as  quoted 
by  Mr.  Bentley  in  the  Asiatic  Researches,  and  as  is  reproduced  in  this 
Appendix,  and  which  shows  considerably  smaller  number  of  years  for 
each  Yuga,  than  the  astronomical  figure  4,32,000  and  its  multiples. 


Manns  and  Manvantaras. 

Constant  Reference  is  made  in  the  Purftnas  to  Manus  and  Manvan- 
taras. It  is  desirable,  therefore,  to  have  a general  idea  about  Indian  cosmic 
chronology.  A universe  comes  to  an  existence  by  the  birth  of  a Brahmft, 
from  the  cosmic  egg,  called  BrahmAuda.  Our  present  universe  came  into 
existence  from  our  BrahmA,  called  the  Chaturmukha,  or  the  four-faced. 
There  are  other  univerees  which  owe  their  life  to  other  Brahmds,  having 
larger  number  of  faces.  The  life  of  a Brahma  consists  of  a hundred 
years.  50  such  years  of  his  life  have  passed.  We  are  in  the  1st  day  of  his 
fifty-first  year.  The  year  consists  of  360  days  or  12  months.  Each  month 
consists  of  30  days.  Each  day  is  called  a Kalpa.  Tlius  a month  consists 
of  30  Kalpas.  A different  name  is  given  for  every  one  of  these  30  Kalpai^ 
or  days  of  a month  of  Brahinft.  They  are  given  below  ; — 


1. 

fivota  kalpa. 

16. 

NAraaimha. 

2. 

Nilaloliita. 

17. 

Kanifina. 

8. 

VAmadeva. 

18. 

Agncyab. 

4. 

Rathantara. 

10. 

86ma. 

6. 

Ranrava. 

20. 

MAnava. 

6. 

PrAna  or  Deva. 

21. 

Puiudna. 

7. 

Bpiliat  kalpa. 

22. 

Valknntha. 

8. 

Kandarpa. 

23. 

Laksmi. 

9. 

fiadya. 

21. 

BAvitr!. 

10. 

KAna. 

2.*). 

Ghora. 

11. 

Taiiiah  or  VyAna^ 

26. 

VarAh. 

12. 

8Ara9Tata. 

27. 

VairAja. 

18. 

UdAna. 

28. 

Gaiiri. 

14. 

QAruda. 

20. 

M Abes vara. 

16. 

Kaurma. 

80. 

Pitri  kalpa. 

ATpmDiz  vm. 


, (j.Eaob  Kialpa  consists  qf  1,000  qhfitnrytig«B  or 
If ab(ftqga  consists  iqljaar  ' 


Mdt 


.'aS£  Kfita  Satiya  yaga  eonsiatingof  4it. 
-p  Treti.  ft  8»i! 

.!»  DyApara.  «,  2fi. 

i.  Kail.  In. 

Total  lOn 

^where  n h equal  **•  i:V?,0nn 
consists  of  tile  following  luinuiii  yt  ar^ 

“ 1.  Satya  yiiga 
1 Tr^tAyuga 
8.  Ovapara  yuga  .*• 

4.  Kali  yi*ga 


human  years.  Thus  a Mah^yuga 

1,728^000. 

1.2D6.000. 

8C4.0»0. 

4»2,0()0. 


Total  ...  ...  ...  ...  4,;i20.000, 

Or  4n2  X 100. 

A kalpa  has  1001  such  Mihayiigas,  or  4.12  'v  100. 

A kal pa  is  also  diviiiod  into  14  Maiivantaras.  Eudi  Mativantara,* 
therefore,  consists  of  10’ Hj  dividetl  liy  li  .Maii.iyugas.  liicdi  ilanrautara 
therefore  has  713  .Muhayngas. 

The  names  of  these  14  Manus  arc  : — 


1.. 

Svayarnbliii. 

8.  Savapiiya. 

2. 

Svarochisa. 

0.  Uaiu-'li.iya. 

8. 

Autiamiya. 

10,  Bhaiitya. 

4. 

Tatnasa. 

11.  Mcrusavarnya. 

6. 

Raivat. 

12.  Uita. 

8. 

Chakfiusa. 

13.  JiitacliiAma. 

7. 

Vaivasvata. 

14.  Visvakesna. 

We  are  in  the 

7tli  or  Vaivasvata  ILuivantara.  Of  the  71  odd 

Mah&yugas,  of  wliich  each  ilanvaiitura  eoiisisis,  wo  aro  in  the  28th 
MahAyiiga.  We  are,  therefore,  in  the  28th  Kaliyiiga.  When  tliie  Kaliyuga 
will  expire,  the  29tli  Maluiyiiga  of  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  will  commence. 
A different  system  of  yugas  prevailed  before  this  as  mentioned  by  Mr. 
Bentley,  as  given  below. 


The  Ten  Avat&ras.  See  also  p.  1 26  of  the  of  English  tranlation  of 
the  Matsya  PurAna. 

Tfaa.Matftya  Parana  gives  a different  list  of  the  ten  AvatAras.  See 
p.  138.  Each  Avatara  or  king  is  always  accompanied  by  the  Avatdra 
of  a priest.  The  king  and  his  priest  aro  thus  the  two  founders  of 


PAmAUIK  OHRONOL007. 


Ivor 


a race  and  the  miers  of  the  world, 
below : — 

The  Kivg  or  the  Avatara. 
AvatarM  Dharma. 
in  deva{(2)  Ni'isihma. 
evolution, 

^(4)  battfttreya. 
g a I (6)  MftndbAtri. 
n ^ § I (6)  Paraau  RAma. 
i S 'g  { (7)  fiir!  RAma  Chandra. 

I (8)  Veda  VyAsa. 

® ' (0)  Buddha. 

1(10)  Kalki. 


This  is  shown  in  a tabular  form 

The  Priest  or  the  Teacher. 

(1)  BrahmA. 

(2)  Rndra. 

(8)  Dliarma. 

(4)  MArhandeya. 

(5)  UttAu^ra. 

(5)  VisvAmitra. 

(7)  Vaaialha. 

(8)  JAtukaroya. 

(9)  DvaipAyana  VyAsa. 

(10)  PArAaarya  (MaitrAya  ?). 


In  addition  to  these,  there  were  others,  as  at  page  126,  viz.^  (1,) 
VarAha,  '2)  Indra,  (3,  again  India,  (4)  l^iva,  In)  l^iva,  (6)  Vritrari,  etc., 

We  have  mentioned  above  that  a kalpa  or  a day  of  BrahmA  consists 
of  1,000  MahAyugas.  We  are  in  the  VarAha  Kalpa,  which  is  the  26th  day 
of  the  month  of  BrahmA.  In  this  VarSha  Kalpa,  six  ilanvantaras  have 
already  passed  away  and  seven  more  are  in  future,  when  this  Kalpa  will 


come  to  an  end,  and  the  next  Kalpa  called,  Vairaja,  will  commence.  In 
chapter  0,  vei-se  37  of  the  Matsya  Purana  we  find  that  994  yugaa  have 
already  elapsed.  


Two  ancient  systems  of  Yugaa.  Asiatic  Researches  Vol.  VIII  iBentley) 

Most  of  the  Etintern  nations,  and  the  Hindus  in  particular,  appear  to  have  employed, 
from  tfine  immemorial,  artificial  systems,  not  only  in  astronomy,  but  also  for  chronological 
purposes.  Therefore,  to  form  a just  idea  of  the  Hindu  history  aud  its  antiquity,  a know* 
ledge  of  these  systems,  and  of  the  various  changes  that  have  taken  place  from  time  to 
tioio,  is  absolutely  necessary. 

Two  of  the  most  ancient  Hindu  systoma  now  known,  and  which  in  early  times  wero 
applied  to  the  purposes  of  chronology,  are  contained  in  an  astronomical  work  entitled  the 
Qralia  Mnnjari,  This  work  is  extremely  valuable,  as  it  enables  us  to  fix,  with  precision, 
tho  real  periods  of  Hindu  history,  with  their  respective  durations ; and  to  shew  from 
thence  the  alterations  that  have  since  taken  place  by  the  introduction  of  new  systems. 

The  first  system  mentioned  in  this  work  consisted  of  2400000  years,  which  was  called 
the  K’nZpu,— This  period  was  divided  into  Manwantaras  and  Yugas*,  as  follows  : 


A Satya  Yaga  consisted  of  ... 

... 

... 

...  960  years. 

A TretA, 

... 

720 

A Dwapara, 

480 

A Kali,  ... 

««• 

240 

A MahA  Yaga,  ... 

...  2400 

71  MahA  Yugas,  ... 

... 

... 

...  170400 

with  a Batya  Yaga 

... 

■ •V 

060 

A Manwantara,  ... 

... 

... 

• •• 

...  171860 

14  Manwantaras, 

... 

... 

ta« 

...  2809040 

whloh,  with  a Satya  at  beginning, 

... 

• •• 

060 

Form  the  whole  Kalpa, 

... 

... 

... 

...  2400000 

* The  Kalpa  is  also  divided  into  1000  MahA  Tugas,  of  2400  years  mb. 


Lcxxvi 


APPsmix  VIII. 


The  years  expired  of  the  aboye  ayatotn,  at  the  era  of  Tikramtdityai  were  1180037; 
which  being  reduced  into  Manwaiitaras  and  Yugs,  we  shall  have 

A 8atya  at  tho  beginning,  ...  ...  ...  ...  s=  060 

6 Manwaiitaras  complete,  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1028160 

67  Mah&  Yugs  of  the  7th  Manwantara,  ...  ...  ...  ...  160800 

Thence  to  the  era  of  Vikramfidltya  ...  ...  ...  ...  707 

Total  years  expired,  ...  ...  ...  ...  1100627 

Hence  it  appears  that  tho  Kali  Yuga,  of  tho  07th  Mahft  Yuga,  of  tho  7th  Manwantara 
of  this  system,  ended  707  years  before  tho  era  of  Yikramftditya,  or  764  years  before 
Christ-- Therefore. 

Tho  Satya  Yuga,  or  golden  age,  began  B.  C.  ...  ...  ...  8164 

The  Tretft  Yup,  or  silver  ago,  ...  ...  ...  ...  2204 

The  Dwftpar  Yuga,  or  brazen  age,  ...  ...  ...  ...  1184 

The  Kali  Yuga,  or  iron  age,  ...  ...  ...  ...  1004 

And  ended,  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  764 

Making  in  all  2400  year.s. 

During  the  first  period  of  060  years,  called  tho  golden  age,  tho  Hindus  have  no  real 
history ; tho  whole  being  fabulous,  except  what  relates  to  the  flood,  which  is  allc  gorically 
represented  by  the  fish  incarnation. 

With  the  second  period,  or  silver  age,  tho  Hindu  empire  commences,  under  tho  Solar 
and  Lunar  dynasties  ; and  from  Budlia,  tho  son  of  Soma,  tho  first  of  tho  Lunar  lino,  they 
reckon  about  fifty  roigns  down  to  the  end  of  tho  Dwapara,  which  make,  at  an  average, 
twenty- four  years  to  a reign’. 

Tovards  the  close  of  the  fourth  period,  this  system  appears  to  have  been  laid  asido, 
as  the  repeating  the  same  names  over  again,  would,  in  time,  cause  a confusion  in  history. 

Tho  next  system  mentioned  in  tho  Graha  Munjari,  consisted  of  887600000  years,  which 
was  called  tho  term  of  Brahma's  life.  This  period  is  divided  and  subdivided  in  tho 
following  manner : 

A Kalpa  is  called  a day  of  Brahma,  which  in  this  system  contains,...  5000  years. 
And  his  night  is  of  the  .same  length,  ...  ...  ...  5000 

A day  and  night  therefore,  ...  ...  = 10000 

80  of  such  days  ami  nights  make  a month,  ...  .,.  ^ SOOOOO 

And  12  such  months  a year,  ...  ...  ...  - 8600000 

And  107  such  years  and  eight  months  nmko  the  full  period  of 

Brahmd's  life,  ...  ...  ...  = 88700000 

The  Kalpa,  or  day  of  Brahmd,  is  divided  into  Manwantaras  and  Y'ugas,  in  tho  follow- 
ing manner : t 

Years.  Months, 

A Satya  contains,  ...  ...  2 0 

ATreta,  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1 6 

A Dw 4 para,  ...  ...  . ..  ...  1 0 

A Kali,  ...  ...  ...  0 6 

AMahAY^uga,  ...  ...  ...  ..  ...  ...  5 0* 

71  Mahft  Yugas,  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  855  years 

With  a Satya  of, ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  2 

Make  a Manwantara  of,  ...  ...  ...  ...  857 


^ Tho  Tret4  and  Dw4para  together  make  1200  years,  which,  divided  by  50,  give  24 
years  to  a reign.  It  is  somewhat  reniarkabJf*,  that  the  principal  Kastorn  nations  date  the 
eommencemetit  of  their  empires  from  nearly  tho  sanu>  lime.  Thus  w*6  find  tlio  Chineso 
smpire  fiegaii  under  the  dynasty  of  Hia,  according  to  Playfair,  ...  ...  B.  0.  2207 

The  kingdom  of  Egypt,  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  — 2207 

The  kingdom  of  Assyria,  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  — 2221 

Tho  empire  of  India  under  tho  solar  and  lunar  lines,  ...  2204 

t This  Yuga  of  five  years  is  to  bo  met  with  in  many  books* 


PAVRANIK  CHEOmLOQT. 


hxxix 


14  such  Manwantaras,  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  4908 

Which  with  a Satya  at  the  beginning,  ...  ...  ...  2 

Make  a Ealpa,  or  day  of  BrahmO,  ...  ...  ...  ...  6000  years 

The  years  expired  of  this  system,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Satya,  or  golden  age  of  the 
former  system,  were,  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  212600000 

Add  thence  to  the  Christian  era  ...  ...  ...  ...  8104 

Total  years  expired  at  the  Christian  era, ...  ...  ...  ...  212503104 

After  183799280  years  had  been  expired  of  Brahm&'s  life,  he,  for  the  first  time,  created' 
the  Earth,  and  ordained  that,  at  the  end  of  every  Ealpa,  or  6000  years,  it  should  be 
destroyed,  and  again  reproduced. 

Therefore,  from  the  years  elapsed,  ...  ...  ...  ...  212563104 

Take  the  years  at  the  first  creation,  ...  ...  ...  = 198799280 

Remain,  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  18703878 

The  years  from  the  first  creation  to  the  Christian  era—  which  being  divided  by  5000, 
the  quotient  will  bo  the  number  of  times  the  world  has  been  destroyed  and  created,  and 
the  remainder  will  show  the  years  expired  since  the  last  creation. 

18703878 

Thus  =8752  times  destroyed  and  created,  and  8878  years  from  the  last 

creation  to  iho  Christian  ora.— Now  since  there  are  857  years  in  each  Manwantara,  we 
have  the  date  of  the  commeucoment  of  each  as  follow : 


Tho  first  Manwantara  ... 

... 

... 

RC. 

8878  years. 

The  second  ... 

.%• 

8521 

1* 

The  third,  ... 

• •• 

... 

8164 

M 

Tho  fourth,  ... 

... 

•ee 

••t 

f> 

2807 

tl 

Tho  fifth, 

$$* 

*f 

2450 

» 

The  sixth,  ... 

... 

ft 

2093 

ft 

The  seventh, 

... 

n 

1730 

If 

Tho  eighth,  ... 

• •• 

... 

tt 

1879 

If 

Tho  ninth,  ... 

• •• 

... 

1* 

1032 

ff 

The  tenth,  ... 

ft 

605 

ff 

The  oleventh. 

... 

... 

ft 

808 

ff 

The  twelfth, ... 

... 

... 

A.  0. 

. 49 

If 

Tho  thirteenth, 

• ■ • 

««• 

•It 

... 

»» 

406 

•* 

Tho  fourteenth. 

.*• 

ft 

768 

ft 

and  ended, 

... 

If 

1120 

ff 

Making  in  all  about  5000  years,  with  the  flundhi  of  two  years. 

Having  tlius  exhibited  the  periods  of  ancient  history,  according  to  both  systems,  the 
annexed  table  will  now  shew,  at  ono  viow>  tho  cominoiicomout  of  oach  period,  by  which 
the  corresponding  times  in  each  system  may  bo  more  easily  scon  and  understood. 

By  this  table  it  will  appear,  that  tho  Hatya,  or  golden  ago,  as  we  may  call  it,  of  the 
first  system,  began  on  the  same  year  that  tho  third  Manwanhira  of  tho  second  system  did ; 
that  is,  tho  year  before  Christ  3164.  And  that  the  ninth  Manwantara,  of  the  second 
system,  began  the  year  b.  C.  1022,  only  eighteen  years  after  tho  commencement  of  the 
Kali,  or  iron  agOi  of  the  first  system. 

The  Saptar^i-Era  (Col^rooke,  As  Re.,  Vol,  IX) 

I have  purposely  reserved  for  separate  consideration  the  seven  Rifi  *,  who  give 
name  to  seven  stars  in  Ursa  Major ; not  only  because  their  positions  are  not  stated 
by  Brahmagupta,  Bhdskara*  and  the  SOryasiddhfinta  but  also  because  the  authors,  who 
give  their  positions,  ascribe  to  them  a particular  motion,  or  variation  of  longitude, 


xc 


APPEVIDIX  VIIT, 


different  from  other  stars,  and  apparently  unconiioctod  with  the  procession  of  the 
equinoxes. 

Varftha  Mihira  has  a chapter  in  the  VArAhisanhitd  expressly  on  the  subject  of 
this  supposed  motion  of  the  Ri^is.  ITe  bep:ins  by  announcing  the  intention  of  stating 
their  revolution  conformably  with  the  doctrine  of  VridiVha  Oarga,  and  proceeds  as 
follows:  **  when  king  Yudhisthira  ruled  the  oarth.  the  Munis  wore  in  Maghft,  and  the 
period  of  the  ora  of  that  king  is  2520  years.  They  remain  for  a hundred  years  in  each 
asterism,  being  connected  with  that  particular  Nak^iatra,  to  which,  when  it  rises  in 
the  east,  the  line  of  their  rising  is  directed.’^” 

Tho  commentator,  BhattOtpala,  supports  the  text  of  his  author  by  quotations  from 
Vridd’lia  Oarga  and  KOsyapa.  “ At  the  Junction  of  tho  Kali  and  Dwii para  ” ages,  says 
Garga,  the  virtuous  sages,  who  deliglit  in  protecting  tho  people,  stood  at  tho  astcrisin, 
over  which  the  Pitris  pi'cside.’*  That  is  at  Maghd.  “ The  mighty  sages,"  says  Kfisyapa, 
‘‘abide  during  a hundred  years  in  each  asterism,  attended  by  tho  virtuous  Ariind’Jiati," 

The  author  next  states  the  relativo  situation  of  tho  seven  Risis,  with  AruiKVhatl 
near  her  husband,  Yasistha : and  tho  remainder  of  tho  Chapter  is  devoted  to  astroiOgy. 

The  revolution  of  tho  seven  Hisis,  and  its  periods,  are  noticed  in  Pur  Anas.  The 
following  passage  is  from  the  Hhagavata  rf 

“From  your  birth  (Pariksit  is  addressed  by  Sdka)  to  tho  Inauguration  of  l^ando, 
1116  years  will  elapse. 

“Of  the  seven  Ilisis,  two  are  first  poroeivod,  rising  in  tho  sky;  and  tho  asierisra, 
which  is  observed  to  bo  at  night  even  with  tho  middlo  (»f  those  stars,  is  that,  with  wliich 
the  Rishis  are  united,  and  they  remain  so  during  a hundred  years  id  men.  In  your  time, 
and  at  this  momont,  they  aro  situated  in  MaghA. 

“V/hon  tho  splondoiir  of  named  Kfisna,  departed  for  heaven,  then  did 

the  Kali  age,  during  which  mou  delight  in  sin,  lnvat’.o  tho  W’t>rld»  So  long  jw  ho  continued 
to  touch  the  eaith  with  his  holy  feet;  so  long  tho  KaJi  ago  was  unable  to  subduo  the 
world. 

**  When  the  seven  Hisis  wore  in  i\fagha,  Iho  Kali  age,  comprising  1*200  [divine]  yoars^ 
began  ; and  when,  from  MaghA,  they  siiall  reach  Purvaslifid’ha,  thou  will  this  Kali  ago 
attain  its  growth  under  Nanda  and  his  snccosstirs." 

The  commentator  Srid’hara  Swami  remarks,  tfiat  I ho  coiiHtellation,  coiiHistrng  of 
seven  sinrs,  is  in  the  form  of  a whe^’ded  carri.ig^'.  Marichi,  ho  observes,  is  at  tho 
extremity;  and  next  to  him.  Va.'si.vt  ha,  in  tho  ar.*hed  part  of  tin?  yoke;  and  beyond 
him  Angiras : next  to  w hiun  arc  four  stars  in  a i|iiaclrangl«» : Atri  at  the  northeast 
corner;  sontli  of  him,  Ihtbistya;  next  to  whom  is  Pulalia  ; ami  KraMi  is  nortli  of  tho  last. 
Such  being  their  relative  position,  <lio  two  stars,  w'hich  rise  firsl,  are  Pulaha  and  Kratii; 
and  whichever  aHt(?rism,  is  in  a line  south  from  tli«  middle  of  those  stars,  is  that  with  which 
tho  sovon  Risis  are  united  ; and  they  so  roinain  for  100  years. 

# h 

?i?r  5RT  !T  ii 

siTg^5?rT^rfr^3????rsr  ^rgrRi: 

According  to  a di/fen*nt  reading  noti(*od  by  tho  commentator,  tho  concluding 
bemistich  signifies  “they  constantly  rise  in  the  uorlh-cawt ; together  with  Anuid'hati/' 

t Book  12.  0.2. 


PAUHAVIK  CnPONOLOOY. 


xci 


A similar  passage  is  found  in  the  Vi^nn  PnranS,*  and  a similar  exposition  of  it  is 
given  by  tho  commentator,  Ratnagarbha : but  the  period,  tbore  stated  to  elapse  between 
tho  birth  of  Pariksit  and  the  inaugaration  of  Nanda,  is  1016  yoars  only. 

The  Matsya  PuranA  contains  a passage  to  the  like  effect ; but  allows  1050  years 
from  tho  birth  of  Pariksit  to  tho  inauguration  of  Mahftpadina ; and  the  seven  Rishis  are 
stated  as  being  in  a lino  with  the  constellation  saorod  to  Are  (that  is  Krittika),  836  years 
lator,  in  tho  time  of  tho  Andhra  kings. 

In  tho  Brahma  sidd'hftnta  of  8&kalya,  denominated  from  its  reputed  author,  SAkalya 
sanhitft,  the  supposed  motion  of  the  seven  Hisis  is  thus  noticed  t : **  At  the  commencement 
of  the  yaga,  Kratu  was  near  tho  star  sacred  to  Visnn  (SravanA),  at  the  boginning  of 
tho  astorism.  Three  degrees  east  of  him,  was  Piilaha ; and  Pulastya,  at  ton  dogroes 
from  this ; Atri  followed  at  three  degrees  from  the  last ; and  Angiras,  at  eight  degrees 
from  him ; next  came  Yasi^'ha,  at  the  distance  of  seven  degrees ; aud*  lastly 
Marichi  at  ton.  Their  motion  is  eight  liptas  (minutes)  in  a year.  Their  distances 
from  the  ecliptic,  north,  were  respectively  65®,  60®,  60®,  66®,  57®,  60®  and  60®.  For, 
moving  in  tho  north  into  different  positions,  tho  sages  employ  5700  yoars  in  revolving 
through  the  assemblage  of  asterisois : and  hence  their  positions  may  be  easily  known  at 
any  particular  time." 

Lalla,  cited  by  Mnniswara  in  his  gloss  on  tho  Siromani,  says:  “ If  the  number  of 
yoars  of  the  Kali  ago,  less  fourteen,  be  divided  by  100,  the  quotient,  as  the  wise  declare, 
shows  tho  astorisms  traversed  by  Marichi  and  other  colostial  sages,  beginning  from  the 
astorism  of  Viriiichi  (BrahmA). 

ITcro  Lalla  is  generally  understood  to  moan  Rohini,  which  is  sacred  to  PrajApati 
(or  Brahmfi).  But  Muniswara  has  remarked,  in  auathor  place,  that  Lalla  may  intend 
Abhijit  which  is  sacred  to  VuVhi  or  Brahma;  and  consequently  may  mean  8ravanA, 
of  which  Abhijit  forms  a part : and  thus  Lalla  and  SAkalya  may  be  reconciled. 

Most  of  the  commentators  on  the  b’urya  sidd'liAnta  and  Siromani  are  silent  on  the 
subject  of  the  seven  Ri^is.  But  Nrisinha,  in  bis  VArtika  to  the  VAsanii  BhAsya,.  or 
gloss  on  the  Siromani,  quotes  and  expounds  the  SAkalya  SanhitA.  and  rejects  VarAUa’s  rule 
of  computation,  as  disagreeing  with  PurAnas.  Mnniswarn,  in  his  commentary  on  the 
Siromani,  cites  some  of  the  passages  above  noticed,  and  remarks,  that  BhAskara  has 
omitted  this  topic  on  account  of  contradictory  opii*ions  concerning  it,  and  because  it 
is  of  no  groat  use, 

Tho  same  author,  in  his  own  compilation  entitled  Sidd'hanta  SArvabhauraa,  has 
entered  more  fully  into  this  subject.  Ho  observes,  that  tho  seven  Risis  are  not, 
like  other  stars,  attached  by  spikes  to  the  solid  ring  of  the  ecliptick,  but  revolve  in 
small  circles  round  tho  northern  polo  of  tho  ecliptic,  moving  by  tholr  own  power  in 
the  ctliorial  sphere  abovo  Saturn,  but  bolo^  the  sphere  of  tho  stars.  Ho  places  the 
Risis  ill  tho  same  ret.ative  positions,  which  SAkAlya  had  assigned  to  them  ; states  in 
other  terms  tho  same  distancos  from  the  ecliptic,  and  tho  same  animal  motion  ; and 
directs  their  place  to  bo  computed  by  deducting  600  from  the  years  of  the  Kali  age, 
doubling  the  remainder  and  dividing  by  fifteen  : tho  quoMont,  in  degrees,  is  divided 
by  30,  to  reduce  it  into  signs.  Muniswara  supports  this  mode  of  calculation  on  the 
autJiority  of  FtAkalya,  against  VarAhamiliira  and  Lalla ; and  alllrins,  that  it  agrees  with 
tho  phenomena,  as  observable  at  the  period  of  his  compilation.  It  appears,  however, 
to  be  a correction  of  bdkalya's  rule, 

KamalAkara,  in  tho  Tatwavivoka,  notices  the  opinion  delivered  in  the  Sldd*hanta  Sarva- 
bhauma;but  observes,  that  no  such  motion  of  tho  stars  is  perceptible.  Remarking, 

- - -----  r r — n m 1 — — ■ ■ ■ ■ - 

* Part  4.  Ch.  23.  ▼.  82.  Ac. 

i Prasna  2.  ch,  2, 


xcii 


APPENDIX  VIIL 


however,  that  the  authority  of  the  Pur&nas  and  Sanhltas,  which  affirm  their  revolution,  la 
incontrovertible,  he  reconciles  faith  and  experience  by  saying,  that  the  stars  themselves 
areflxed;  but  the  sovoii  Rishis  are  invisible  deities,  who  perform  the  stated  revolution 
in  the  period  specified. 

If  Camalftkara’s  notion  be  adopted,  no  difficulty  remains  : yet  it  can  hardly  be 
supposed,  that  Yarftharaihira  and  Lalla  intended  to  describe  revolutions  of  invisible 
beings.  If  then  it  be  allowed,  that  they  have  attributed  to  the  stars  thouisolves  an 
imaginary  revolution  grounded  on  an  erroneous  theory,  a probable  inference  may  be 
thence  drawn  as  to  the  period  when  those  authors  lived,  provided  one  position  be 
conceded  : namely,  that  the  rules,  stated  by  them,  gave  a result  not  grossly  wrong  at 
the  respective  periods  whoa  they  wroto.  Indeed,  it  can  scarcely  be  supposed,  that 
authors,  who,  like  the  celebrated  astronomers  in  question,  were  not  mere  compilers  and 
transcribers,  should  have  exhibited  rules  of  computation,  which  did  not  approach  to 
the  truth,  at  the  very  period  when  they  were  proposed. 

If  this  reasoning  be  admitted,  it  would  follow,  that  Varrihamihira  composod  the  Yarahi 
Banhita  about  2800  years  after  tho  period  assigned  by  hiui  to  tho  comineucomont  of  the 
reign  of  Yud'hist'hira,  or  near  the  close  of  tho  third  century  after  the  expiration  of 
Yud’hist'hira’s  era,  as  defined  by  him.  For  tho  circle  of  declination  passing  between 
Eratu  and  Piilaha  (the  two  first  of  tho  seven  Rishis),  and  cutting  the  ecii|)tic  only  2** 
short  of  tho  beginning  of  MaghU,  was  the  solstitial  colure,  when  tho  equinox  was  near 
the  beginning  of,  Krittika  ; and  such  probably  was  the  reason  of  that  lino  being  noticed 
by  ancient  Hindu  astronomers.  It  agrees  with  the  solistitial  coiuro  on  tho  sphere  of 
Eudoxus,  as  described  by  Hipparchus  * <V  similar  circle  of  doellnatiou,  passing  between 
the  same  stars,  intersected  tho  ecliptic  at  tho  beginning  of  Maglia  when  the  solstitial 
colure  was  at  the  middle  of  Aslo.^ft  ; and  a like  circle  passed  through  tho  next  nstcrism, 
when  the  equinox  corresponded  with  the  first  point  of  hJnghu.  An  astronomer  of  tliat 
period,  if  he  wore  apprized  of  the  position  assigned  to  the  same  stars  by  Garg.i  reputed 
to  havo  been  the  priest  of  Krisna  and  tho  Psuulus,  might  cuiicliido  with  Var.^hainihira, 
that  one  revolution  had  been  completed,  and  that  the  stars  had  passed  through  one 
Naksatra  of  the  second  revolution.  In  eorwboratioii  of  this  inferonco  rospoctiiig  the 
age  of  Yarahamihira’s  astrological  treatise,  it  may  bo  added,  that  lit'  Is  cited  by  nanio 
in  the  Panchatantra,  the  original  of  the  fables  of  PiJpuy,  wdiich  woro  translated 
for  Nushirv&n  more  than  1200  years  ago.[ 

Tho  theory  being  wholly  unfounded,  Varahmihira’s  rule  of  computation  soon  ceased 
to  agree  with  the  phenomena,  aud  other  rules  hnvo  been  successively  introduced  by 
different  authors,  as  Lalla,  Sakalya  and,  lastly.  Munisw'ara  ; whoso  rule,  devised  less 
than  two  hundred  years  ago,  does  not  yet  gros-^Iy  liolray  its  iiisaflicioiicy. 

This  ppetendod  roviilution  of  tho  stars  of  Ursa  M.ajiir  is  connected  with  two 
remarkable  epochs  in  Indian  chronology  : the  ctminicnocmcnt  of  t ho  Kali  yiiga,  or  sinful, 

♦ Hipparchus  tells  us,  that  Eudoxus  (lr»'w  the  colure  of  tho  solstices,  through  tho 
middle  of  tho  Great  Hear;  and  the  middle  of  Caiicr^r;  and  tho  nock  of  Hydrus;  and  the  star 
between  the  poop  and  mast  of  Argo;  hnd  the  tail  of  the  South  Fish;  and  through  the 
middle  of  Capricorn,  and  of  Sagitta  ; airJ  through  the  nock  and  right-wing  of  the  Swan  ; 
and  tho  left-hand  of  Gephous  : and  that  lie  drew  the  oquinoctial  coiuro  through  tho  left- 
hand  of  Arctophylax ; and  along  the  middle  of  his  body  ; and  cross  the  middle  of  Chehn ; 
and  through  tho  right-hand  and  forc-knoo  of  tho  Centaur;  and  through  the  flxure  of 
Eridanus  and  head  of  Cotus ; and  the  back  of  Aries  across,  and  through  the  hoa  l and 
right  band  of  Perseus.”  Sir  I.  ffowton's  Chronology,  §,  29.  Hipparch.  ad  Plilnom  in  Petavi 
«AQ  ftftniv.  AsL.  Anc.  p.  506.  Costard,  p,  136. 


PAURAVIK  QEmmiOQY. 


xciii 


age,  in  the  reign  of  Yud’hist'hira;  and  its  prevalence,  on  the  failure  of  the  succession  of 
Ksbatria  princes,  and  establishment  of  a different  dynasty,  1015  years  after  the  birth 
of  Paricshit,  according  to  the  Vi^nu  Parana ; or  1116  years,  according  to  the  Bhflgvata ; 
but  1408  years,  if  a correction,  which  has  been  proposed  by  Srid'hara  SwAmi  and  some 
other  commentators,  bo  admitted.  Tlio  subject  has  been  already  noticed  by  Capt. 
Wiiford  ill  his  essay  on  VikramAditya ; and  it  is,  therefore,  unnecessary  to  enlarge  upon 
it  in  this  place. 

S'RlhA  CHANDRA  VIDTaRJ^AYA. 


APPENDIX  IX. 

paukAnik  geography. 

Another  subject,  which  the  present  part  treats  of,  is  about  /jeopfraphy 
and  cosmography  or  Bhnvanakoifa.  Tho  last  few  chaptera  of  this  part  treat 
exclusively  of  this  subject.  If  tho  literal  sense  of  the  verses  bo  taken,  the 
whole  subject  is  open  to  the  strictures  passed  upon  it  by  unfriendly  critics 
of  Hindu  scripiuies.  There  are  certainly  no  seas  of  “ viilk  ” or  of  “ honey  " 
and  " »cinc  ’’  on  this  earth,  as  e.vplorcd  by  tlie  labours  of  the  geographers. 
No  more  are  there  lions  and  eagles,  bears  and  porpoises,  (‘hairs  and  tables 
in  the  starry  firmament,  as  revt'aled  by  the  telescope.  But  astronomer’s 
are  never  confounded  with  mythologists  when  they  speak  of  the  c nistolla- 
tions  of  the  nun  and  the  bull,  the  crab  and  the  goat,  of  the  fish  and  the 
water-jar.  May  not  therefore  (lie  Hindu  Pauraniks  be  credited  with  coiuinon- 
sense,  when  they  speak  of  the  seas  of  milk  and  honey,  of  sugar  and  wine. 
May  not  these  be  merely  technical  names  of  certain  seas  and  ocoaus,  like  the 
Red  Sea  and  Black  Sea  <.f  tho  modern  geograph er.s  ? The  latter  are 
certainly  not  flowing  with  blood  or  with  ink.  Taking  this  rational  view 
of  the  Pauranik  geography,  Col.  Wilford  tried  to  identify  llie  seas  and 
rivers,  more  thaua  huudre  1 years  ago.  No  doubt  someof  his  idem ificat ions 
may  appear  P)  be  fanciful,  but  a large  mas.s  of  them  weno  based  upon 
traditions  pre-erved  by  the  Pa’i  lits  (jf  Henares,  who  conimunicated  them 
to  him.  Some  of  his  maps  pul/lishod  iir  the  volumes  of  the  Asiatic  Ro- 
eearches  are  reproduced  here. 

It  may  be  objected,  atid  rightly  objected,  that  the  figures  dealing 
with  the  size  of  the  earth  are  pre['o:strou.s.  The  Hindu  astronomers  ('er- 
tiauly  knew  the  true  size  of  the  earth,  and  its  diurnal  motion  on  its  a.xis, 
and  on  its  being  suspended  in  spa('o  by  its  own  force  and  that  it  does  not 
rest  on  soine  mythological  tortoise  or  elephants  of  (juarters,  a.s  will  appear 
from  the  extract  from  Mr.  Colobiookn’s  essays  given  cIscwIkto. 

But  are  these  figures  really  prepostroms  ? Does  the  word  “ Earflt  ” 
really  mean  this  earth  only,  or  is  it  not  a symbol  for  tho  whole  solar 
system,  and  do  not  the  vast  figure.^  given  in  tho  Puranas  represent  the 
distances  between  the  earth  and  the  other  plamds  ? or,  may  it  not  be  that  the 
seven  dvipas  mentioned  in  tlic  Puranas  arc,  what  tho  Modern  Mystics  profess 
to  have  seen,  the  seven  spheres  wliich  surround  this  earth  os  a nucleus  ? 
One  such  sphere  wo  know,  namely,  the  atinosidjoro.  Tho  other  spheres 
cuDsist  of  still  more  rariflod  matters,  represented  by  the  words  " milk  ” 


pAURimK  owooBAPnr. 


and  **  honey  ” “ sugar  ” and  “ wine,”  Ac.  The  spiritualists  and  mystics 
affirm  the  existence  of  such  spheres  surrounding  our  earth,  in  which 
dwell  beings  of  different  orders  of  existencoi  than  those  on  earth.  These 
beings  are  certainly  not  incarnate,  like  terrestrial  beings  ; but  their 
existence  cannot  now  be  denied,  after  the  researches  of  the  Psychical 
Society,  and  the  writings  of  scientific  men  like  Crookes  and  Lodge.  Man 
passes  a very  large  portion  of  his  disincarnate  life  in  these  spheres  cw 
dvipas,  before  his  re-birth  on  earth. 

Whenever  the  Puranas  speak  of  the  earth  in  general  terms,  it  is  not 
always  to  be  taken  as  co-extensive  with  the  pliysical  earth.  The  latter 
they  always  denote<l  by  the  word  Bh^ratavarsa  or  the  region  of  gravity 
(“  BhArata  the  same  word  etymologically  as  the  English  word  burthen 
or  weight).  The  other  Vardas  are  spiritual  and  beyond  the  region  of 
BhSrata  of  gravity.  It  is  only  Bhfiratavarsa  where  souls  do  acquire  good 
or  bad  karma,  and  therefore  it  is  called  harmdbhumi  or  the  land  of 
responsible  actions.  The  otlier  “ lands  **  are  not  karmabliumi  but 
bhogabhumi  or  the  land  of  enjoyment  and  suffering,  where  the  soul,  after 
death,  as  a general  rule,  reaps  the  fruits  of  its  actions  done  on  earth,  and 
where  it  does  not  generate  any  new  karmas.  When  the  force  of  the 
accumulated  karmas  is  exhausted,  the  soul  falls  down  from  the  higher 
regions  to  gather  a fresh  store  of  karmas  on  earth.  In  this  mystic  view, 
the  4vetadvipa  or  the  White  Island  is  the  highest  sphere,  or  the  seventh 
heaven,  where  the  Lord  himself  dwells,  and  which  the  purest  souls  only 
can  reach. 

As  regards  the  ordinary  Bh&ratavarsa,  it  certainly  means  India,  and 
its  mountains  and  rivers,  as  given  in  the  Puranas  have  been  ably  identi- 
fied, to  a very  large  extent,  in  his  edition  of  the  Marka^deya  Purina,  by 
Mr.  Pargiter  to  whom  the  Hindu  community  is  deeply  indebted  for  his 
sympathetic  treatment  of  the  Purfinas. 

The  attention  of  the  readers  may  also  be  drawn  to  the  Theory  of 
Great  Men  as  expounded  by  the  Pur&nas  and  Hindu  law-books  as  Yfijna- 
valkya  Bmpiti.  The  modern  view  is  that  great  men  and  geniuses  are 
products  of  their  age  ; but  opposed  to  this  is  the  Paiiranic  theory  that 
these  are  the  creators  of  their  age.  All  great  men  have  been  divided  by 
the  Pur&nas  into  two  great  classes,  men  of  actions  and  men  of  contempla- 
tion, grihamedhins  and  urddharetas,  men  who  look  upon  their  family  life 
as  a sacred  duty  done  for  the  sake  of  humanity,  and  the  celibates  who 
devote  the  whole  of  their  physical  life  to  the  uplift  of  humanity  in  different 
sphere  of  activity.  The  number  of  these  souls,  whether  householder  or 
celibates,  is  limited.  They  are  88,000  in  number  in  each  class.  They 


xcvi  APPmUDlXlX. 

ordinarily  dwell  in  higher  planes,  bat  a stream  of  them,  without  any 
break,  flows  down  on  this  earth  and  incarnates  as  kings,  warriors,  states' 
men,  poets,  artists,  sages  and  saints.  When  the  first  class  of  soal  comes 
down  on  earth,  they  act  like  ordinary  men,  with  all  human  weaknesses 
and  frailities,  but  with  extraordinary  powers  in  some  particular  department 
of  human  activity.  The  second  class  of  souls,  the  celibate  souls  are  born 
as  great  spiritual  teachers,  the  Bhaktas  and  the  Bhftgavatas.  The  same 
idea  is  expressed  in  tl)e  verses  186  et  seq  of  the  Yajfiavalka,  Prftyaschitta 
Adhy&ya,  with  the  commentary  of  Vijnftnesvara  which  elucidate  the 
somewliat  brief  account  of  these  two  classes  of  souls,  as  given  in  the 
Matsya  Gb.  124. 

EXPLANATION  OF  FIGURES  1 to  10.* 

Colonel  Wilford  published  in  the  Asiatic  Researches  a series  of 
papers  on  the  Sacred  Isles  in  the  West.  These  were  illustrated  with 
maps  which  are  reproduced  on  the  plate  facing  this  page.  Regarding 
the  map-making  of  the  Hindus,  he  wrote 

“ Besides  geographical  tracts,  the  Hivdus  have  also  maps  of  th^ 
world,  both  according  to  the  system  of  tlie  Pauravtlts,  and  of  the  astrono- 
mers: the  latter  are  very  common.  They  have  also  maps  of  India,  and 
of  particular  districts,  in  which  latitudes  and  longitudes  are  entirely  out 
of  question,  and  they  never  make  use  of  a scale  of  equal  parts.  The  sea 
shores,  rivers,  and  ranges  of  mountains,  are  represented  in  general  by 
straight  lines,  The  best  map  of  this  sort  I ever  saw,  was  one  of  the 
kingdom  of  Nepal,  presented  to  Mr.  Uabtikgs.  It  was  about  four  feet 
long,  and  two  and  a half  broad,  of  paste  board,  and  the  mountains  raised 
about  an  inch  above  the  surface,  with  trees  painted  all  round.  The  roads 
were  represented  by  a rod  line,  and  the  rivers  with  a blue  one.  The 
various  ranges  were  very  distinct,  with  the  narrow  passes  through  them : 
in  short,  it  wanted  but  a a scale.  The  valley  of  Nepal  was  accurately 
delineated  : but  toward  the  borders  of  the  map,  oveiyt  hing  was  crowded, 
and  in  confusion.” 

Colonel  Wilford’s  explanation  of  the  figures  on  the  plate  is  repro- 
duced below. 

No.  1,  represents  the  worldly  Lotos,  floating  upon  the  waters  of  the 
Ocean,  which  is  surrounded,  and  its  waters  prevented  from  falling  into 
the  vacuum  by  the  Suearna-hMmi,  or  laud  of  gold,  and  the  mountains  of 
LoMlokas. 


* those  figures,  the  letter  C should  be  pronouaoed  m K. 


TAVRAIJIK  QEOQRAPEY. 


zcrii 

No.  2,  represents  the  globe  of  the  Earth,  according  to  the  Hindu 
astronomers.  It  is  projected  upon  the  plane  of  the  equator,  and  ihe 
Southern  hemisphere  expanded  in  such  a manner,  that  the  South  pole,- 
instead  of  a point,  becomes  the  largest  circle  of  this  projection.  They 
also  represent  the  two  hemispheres,  separately  upon  the  plane  of  tha 
equator. 

No.  3,  represents  the  same,  projected  upon  the  plane  of  8 
meridian.  These  two  projections  are  against  the  tenor  of  the  context  of 
the  PurdvMs : a Southern  hemisphere  being  then  absolutely  unknown. 

Here  I have  placed  the  three  ranges  of  mountains,  according  to  the 
documents  of  Hindu  astronomers:  but  not  according  to  their  usual 
delineations;  for,  accordining  to  these,  the  three  ranges  should  ba 
represented  by  three  concentric  half  circles,  parallel  to  the  meridians 
of  the  projection.  It  is  acknowledged,  tliat  these  ranges  are  in  the  direc> 
tion  of  as  many  parallels  of  latitude.  In  that  case  the  outermost  ranges 
must  be  the  longest : and  this  is  the  opinion  of  the  J ainas,  as  I observed 
before,  in  the  sixth!  paragraph  of  the  first  chapter  of  an  Essay  on  the 
Saered  Isles  in  the  West  in  the  Asiatic  Researches,  Vol.  VIII, 

No.  4,  exhibits  the  old  Continent,  projected  upon  an  imaginary 
circle  passing  through  the  North  pole,  and  just  grazing  the  equator  in 
tlie  South.  Instead  of  a circle,  it  should  be  an  oval,  with  the  longest 
diameter  East  and  West.  But  as  the  tracing  of  an  oval  would  be  attended 
with  some  difficulty,  the  indolent  Paurdntks  have  adopted  the  circle  in 
its  room ; and  seldom  use  the  other.  As  such  a delineation  would  be 
useless,  1 have,  of  course,  omitted  it. 

The  chasm  in  the  North-West,  through  the  mountains  surrounding 
the  world,  was  made  by  Krisma,  when  he  went  to  see  his  prototype 
VisNU,  or  the  great  spirit,  the  Paramdtmd  of  the  world,  whose  abode  is 
among  waters,  in  the  land  of  darkness.  Several  heroes  have  passed  since 
through  this  chasm. 

No.  5,  explains  the  true  system  of  the  known  world,  according 
to  the  Purhnas,  and  the  Jaims,  reconciled  with  that  of  the  astronomers 
of  India. 

Here  the  lUiru  of  the  Paurdniks  is  brought  back  to  its  proper  place, - 
whilst  the  Meru  of  the  astronomers  remains  under  the  North  pole.  The 
zones  between  Jamhu  or  India,  and  the  Miru  of  the  astronomers,  are 
obviously  our  seven  climates ; and  the  points  where  the  astronomical 
j zones  intersect  the  zones  of  the  Paurdniks  round  their  respective  centres 
4 equally  called  Miru,  shew  the  true  situation  of  the  diotpas  or  countries 
^ from  which  these  zones,  according  to  the  system  either  of  the  astrmromeri 


XCVII 


APPENDIX  IX. 


or  of  the  Paurdniks,  are  equally  denominated,  whether  they  are  reckoned 
relatively  to  the  North  pole,  or  to  a centrical  point  in  Uie  elevated  plains 
of  Tartary 

No.  6,  is  a delineation  of  the  country  of  BhUvaia^  in  the  fullest 
acceptation  of  that  denoiniimtion.  Its  nine  divisions  with  ATi/ni,  or 
Siberia,  and  the  Northern  parts  of  Europe,  making  in  all  ten  districts, 
were  all  destroyed  by  a violent  storm,  and  inundation,  except  one.  Thus 
the  ten  divisions  of  tlie  Atlantis  were  all  destroyed  by  a flood,  except 
one,  called  Gndcs,  which  probably  included  Spain, 

Some  also  are  of  opinion,  that,  out  of  the  seven  dwipas,  six  were 
likewise  overwhelmed  by  a flood.  This  circuinslance  is  also  noticed  in 
the  third  volume  of  the  Ayhxi-Akhan,  But  I believe  that  this  notion 
originated  with  the  Pauraniks,  who.  unable  to  point  out  these  womlorful 
countries,  described  in  so  extravagant  a manner  in  their  sacred  books, 
found  that  the  best  way  was  to  swear,  that  they  had  disappeared. 

In  the  figures  7,  8 and  9,  the  map  of  Jnmhii  is  represented  under 
three  different  projections.  The  first  is  according  to  the  ideas  of  the  Paxi^ 
rdrfiks,  in  which  one  half  of  the  equator  is  obviously  coinliincd  with 
another  half  of  the  nieridi«nn,  on  the  plain  of  which  tlie  map  is  projected. 
I have  marked  tlie  degrees  of  longitude  upon  the  equator,  and  the 
degrees  of  latitude  north,  upon  an  arch  of  the  first  Tiieridian.  No  notice 
is  ever  taken  of  these  particulars  by  tlie  PaimirLiks;  but  a little 
reflection  will  show  the  original  design  of  this  diagram,  though  tlie 
projection  be  over  so  disfigured. 

The  true  projection  of  it  .'^liouhl  be  in  the  shape  of  what  the  ancients 
called  the  bottom  part  of  a sling  ; and  tliis  was  admitted  by  Dionysius 
Periegetes.  Posidonius  before  him  admitted  of  it  also;  but  lie  insisted, 
that  the  greatest  lengtli  of  this  projection  was  in  a north  and  south 
direction.  This  sort  of  projection  is  represented  in  the  figure  9.  Number 
8 represents  the  same  portion  of  the  globe,  that  is  to  say,  the  northern 
part  of  the  old  continent,  as  projected  in  the  usual  form,  upon  the  plain 
of  the  first  meridian. 

In  the  seventh  andeiglith  numbers,  the  tX7o  Tri-hitddris,  or  islands, 
abounding  with  Kirom  or  resplemlence,  are  represented  diametrically 
opposite,  with  all  due  symmetrical  arrangement  in  every  part,  to  which 
the  Hindus  will  always  sacrifice  truth.  There  are,  however,  some  general 
outlines,  which  are  strictly  true.  There  are  really  three  islands,  or  dwipaa 
in  the  south  east  and  as  many  in  the  north  west  quarter  of  the  old  continent, 
corresponding  exactly,  or  nearly  so,  to  each  other ; and  they  have  also  the 
same  names.  The  rest  of  the  superstructure  owes  its  origin  to  the  fertile 


PAVRAmK  OEOOBAPnr. 


xci% 


and  inventivp  genius  of  the  Hindun.  The  idea,  however,  is  by  no  meanf^ 
a modern  one  ; nor  was  it  confined  to  India  : for  ancient  writers  in  the 
west  acknowledged  two  islands,  called  Cerne^  one  in  the  east,  and  the 
other  in  the  west : tlie  latter,  called  also  Gyrene^  was  placed  near  the 
straits  of  Hercules  \ and  was  said  to  consist  equally  of  three  islands.  The 
eastern  Gerne,  it  is  true,  was  said  to  be  near  the  eastern  shores  of  Africa^ 
This  mistaken  notion  arose,  through  the  infonnation  of  the  Hindus^  who 
will  have  it  that  the  dwipa  of  Lnnkd  really  joins  the  shores  of  SanihOf 
Zeng^  or  Africa.  The  Nubian  geographer  adopted  this  idea,  as  well  as 
Arabiaii  writers  in  general. 

In  explaining  the  figure  10,  Colonel  Wilford  quoted  the  following 
from  the  Ilari  Vamsa  : — 

“Viijnu  tor  the  good  of  mankind,  having  assumed  the  shape  of  a 
boar,  rescued  the  earth  from  the  waters,  and  secured  it  on  all  sides.  Upon 
it  he  made  fl/era  of  solid  gold:  towards  the  east  he  placed  the  Udaya 
mountain,  with  others.  He  then  went  towards  the  south,  and  there  framed 
beautiful  mountains  of  gold  and  silver ; these  are  the  gold  and  silver 
peaks  or  islands  of  Lanka^  Malaya^  and  Sumatra.  In  the  west  he  made 
a mountain  100  ydjanas  high,  quite  beautiful,  with  large  and  variegated 
peaks,  abounding  with  gold;  with  golden  caves,  with  trees  beautiful  and 
resplendent  like  the  sun  (that  is  to  say,  they  were  of  gold  : ) there  are  the 
Tri-Vedika^  or  the  three  mountains,  with  seats  for  the  three  gods.  There, 
in  the  west,  is  Varaha-dwipa  : there  Vai'dl^a,  or  the  Boar,  made  60,000 
mountains,  like  Meru,  of  gold,  and  dreadful  to  behold.  Among  them  is 
another  Mem,  from  which  flow  a thousand  streams.  There  are  all  sorts 
of  Tirthas,  or  holy  places.  Tliis  mountain,  called  Vardha,  is  60  yojanas, 
long  and  high,  or  about  300  miles ; and  it  is  like  VarAha  himself.  He 
made  also  Vaidurya  {Scotland),  Rajata  (England),  Kdnchana  (Ireland), 
high  and  divine  mountains.  He  then  made  the  Gluikravdn,  or  ChakramAn, 
a very  high  mountain  ; (this  is  Pu^kara,  or  Iceland,  like  a ring,  or  quoit,  as 
implied  by  the  appellation  of  Ghakrd).  Like  a shell,  and  abounding  with 
shells,  with  a thousand  peaks,  is  Rojata,  or  the  silver  peak  ; hence  it  is 
called  Sankha-parvata,  or  the  mountain  of  shells.  The  trees  there  are  all 
white  : the  juice  of  the  Pdrijdta  tree  is  like  liquid  gold.  There  is  the 
Ohrttadhara  river  : its  waters  ar  like  clarified  butter.  Prabhu,  or  Visnu, 
made  many  rivers,  called  arahasarita,  or  ihe  streams  of  the  boar;  and 
these  are  moat  holy.  Thus  he  made  a mountain,  the  name  of  which 
is  omitted,  but  it  is  obviously  6iceta,  with  a thousand  peaks,  abounding 
with  jewels  ; the  Tamra,  or  Vaidurya,  peak  of  copper ; and  a mountain 
of  gold,  Kdnchana,  according  to  rule.  Thus  in  the  north  he  made  the 


APPENDIX  IX. 


Saumyagiri  {Sdma  or  Chandra),  towering  to  the  skies:  the  mountain 
of  gold,  Kineham,  has  a thousand  peaks,  with  many  places  of  worabip. 
Thus  he  made  the  Tristram,  or  mountain  with  three  peaks,  and 
the  Pufkara  mountain,  with  many  rirera,  prrxiucing  everything  good  and 
desirable.”  The  north  quarter  is  again  omitted,  because,  as  my  learned 
friends  Inform  me,  the  north  pole  is  inaccessible,  and  by  no  means 
a place  of  delight.  The  word,  north,  mentioned  in  this  legend,  relates 
to  the  situation  of  Soma-giri,  or  the  White  Island,  in  the  northern  parts  of 
the  White  Sea : an  e.'cpreeaion  very  common  in  the  Purdnat  ■ every  legend 
relating  to  the  Whitt  Island,  and  adjacent  parts,  generally  beginning  thus, 
KfirdiU-uttara-tirame,  in  the  north  of  the  White  Sea,  &c." 

MAHISMATI. 

In  ancient  India  Mahismati  was  said  to  have  been  an  important 
town  and  so  its  identification  has  taxed  the  ingenuity  of  many  Sans- 
krit scholars  and  Indian  antiquarians.  The  first  European  to  study  the 
Paurri^ik  history  and  geography  was  Colonel  Wilford.  According  to  him, 
it  was  to  be  identified  with  Chauli  Mahoilwara'’*  on  the  Narmada  (Asiatic 
Hesearches  Vol.  IX  p.  105  ) 

General  Cunningham,  in  his  Ancient  Geography  of  India  (pp. 
drSS-ASQ)  is  inclined  to  identify  it  with  .Mahesmatipura  on  the  Upper 
Narbada. 

Mr.  Pargiter  (Introduction  to  his  translation  of  the  Mtlrkapdeya 
PurSpa,  p.  IX.)  writes:— 

“ The  modern  town  of  Mahesar,  some  fifty  miles  lower  down  the 
river,  claims  to  be  the  ancient  M&hismati,  but  docs  not  satisfy  the  allu- 
sions. M&hinmati  was  situated  on  an  i.sl3nd  in  the  river  and  the  palace 
looked  out  on  the  rushing  sti-eam  (Raghu.  V.  vi.  43;.  This  description 
agrees  only  with  MSndhfiU.” 

There  would  have  been  little  difficulty  experienced  by  scholars  and' 
antiquarians  in  identifying  this  place,  had  they  turned  their  attention  to 
the  description  of  Milhismatl  as  given  in  the  Matsya  Purfipa,  Chapter 
XLIIF.  verses  26-36  (see  the  translation  pp.  113-114).  There  it  is  stated 
iJiat  KArtavlrya  Arjuna  “ founded  the  city  of  Mahismati  after  conquering 
the  Nlrga  King,  son  of  Karkotaka.  That  eily  was  laved  by  the  waves  of  the 

* J)r.  Fibs  Edward  Hall  saj^a  that  ho  “ aaoortained  on  the  spot,  that  the  place  la  now 
invariably  called  Msheswar  simply."  (Wilson's  trauslatloii  oltho  Vifim  Purftna,  Vol. 
n.  p.  167). 


nVUAVlK  QEOQRAmY. 


oi 


ocean  during  Ote  rains  wherein  the  king  'fiayed  in  the  waves,  as  it  ebbed  and 
flowed  in  the  beach.  • * • 

*'  He  alone,  with  bis  thousand  arms,  swelled  it  (the  river  N8rin8d&) 
by  putting  the  water  of  the  sea  into  it  and  increased  it,  as  it  increases 
in  the  monsoon ; and  the  ocean  being  thus  agitated  by  his  thousand  arms 
became  subdued  by  him,  and  he  extended  his  sea  power,  so  that  the 
residents  in  Patdla  (antipodes)  became  inoffensive  and  quiet.” 

From  the  above  description,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the 
ancient  Mahismatt  was  the  modern  town  of  Broach,  where  Aijuna  built 
dockyards  and  by  establishing  his  sea-power,  was  enabled  to  subdue 
Itffvana,  the  ruler  of  LankS  and  made  his  iuffuence  felt  in  the  F&tftla 
(antipodes)  which  some  consider  to  be  Australia. 

The  ancient  name  of  Broach  is  Bhrigu-kachchha.  This  may  be 
explained  by  the  legend  mentioned  in  the  same  Pur&pa  as  Parana 
B&ma,  the  descendant  of  Bhrigu  defeating  Arjuna  and  capturing  his 
dominions.  He  seems  to  have  changed  the  name  of  M&hismati  to 
Bhrigu-Kachchha  to  glorify  his  ancestry. 

^HISA  CHANDRA  VIDYARNAVA. 


APPENDIX  X. 

TUB  DATE  OP  THB  MAT8YA  PORAljrA. 

The  Sacrificial  Sesaion. 

The  Great  War  had  come  to  an  end  and  the  militarism  of  India, 
too,  came  to  a close  with  it.  The  legends  say  that  out  of  the  eigiitecn 
ak^auhinis  or  army  corps,  engaged  in  this  internecine  war,  ton  chieftains 
only  survived— seven  on  one  side  and  three  on  the  other.  The  flower 
of  Indian  manhood  perished  in  this  war.  Though  the  militarisni  was 
crushed  for  the  time  being,  and  the  Ksatriya  lay  prostrate  at  the 
feet  of  the  Bruhmana,  anotiier  militarism,  and  that  not  of  India,  but 
of  outsiders  i.bahiiloharasj  or  foreigners,  soon  made  its  appearance.  India 
lay  open  to  them  as  an  easy  prey.  Barbarians,  like  Abhiras  and  otiiers, 
overran  the  country,  and  the  BrAhmanas  who  had  expected,  that  with  the 
downfall  of  K^atriyadom,  intellectual  classes  would  come  to  the  front,  were 
disappointed,  au;l  the  servile  Stidras  and  the  hated  Mlecbchhas  were  in 
power  on  all  sides ; the  intclleutual  BrAhmurtas  retired  from  the  courts  of 
the  Ilajas  and  started  a long  sacrificial  session  in  the  holy  places  of  India* 
After  YudhiftUira  had  abdicated  his  throne,  to  which  be  had  ascended 
through  the  sanguinary  war,  Parik^it,  the  grandson  of  his  brother,  Arjuna, 
became  king,  lie  lost  his  life  at  the  bauds  of  the  barbarian  invaders  of  tlie 
N&ga  race  led  by  their  chief,  called  Tak^aka,  and  the  central  power  of  the 
Pauravas  at  Uastinapuia  really  passed  to  those  Tak^tka-Ied  Niigas,  and 
the  kings  of  Delhi  were  merely  nominal  severeigns,  as  wore  the  Moghul  em- 
perors after  Shah  Alam.  Long  before  Parik^it  bad  ascended  the  throne, 
Yudhi^tbira,  in  bis  lifetime,  hud  tlie  luoriificatiou  to  see  ids  famous 
brother,  Arjuna,  defeated  by  the  outsiders,  Abhiras ; and  to  witness  the 
delicately  brought  up  ladies  of  the  household  of  Kfis^a  taken  away  in 
captivity  by  these  Abhiras.  The  weak  sonof  Pariksit,  Janamejaya,  tried 
to  stem  the  tide  of  the  Tuksaka  invasion,  whose  totem 'was  a snake.  He 
killed  many  of  them,  but  he  had  not  the  diplomacy  or  the  wisdom  to 
please  the  BrAhtnapas.  He  quarelled  with  the  heredita)7  priest  of  his 
family,  Vai^ampayana,  and  favoured  a stranger,  in  the  person  of  Yajuar 
valkya— a person  who  posed  as  a reformer  and  said  that  he  had  got  a 
revelation  from  the  Sun,  and  who  promulgated  a new  recension  of  the  Yajur 
Veda  called  the  VAjasanOyi  Samiuta.  Seeing  JanamSjaya  taking  sides  with 
this  new  reformer  (YAjnavalkya;,  VaiAumpAyana,  with  other  BrAhmapas, 
left  his  court.  But  Janamejaya  was  uut  allowed  to  live  in  peace.  Whether 


TEE  DATE  OP  TEE  UATSTA  PUBJLtJA.  eii2 

it  was  through  the  fresh  inroads  of  the  NAgas,  helped  by  the  intrigues  of 
the  Br&hma^,  or  whether  Janamejaya  was  disgusted  with  his  kingdom, 
he,  like  his  great  grandfather,  Yudhi^thira,  abdicated  his  throne  in  favonr 
of  his  son,  SatAnika,  and  went  to  the  forest.  It  was  in  the  reign  of  hia 
grandson,  Adidsimakrisna,  that  BrAhmanas  started  the  great  sacrificial 
(‘ongrpHS,  which  was  moving  about  from  one  seat  of  pilgrimage  to  another. 
Three  years  of  the  session  of  this  congress  were  passed  at  Puskara,  near 
Ujjain.  Two  sessions  of  this  congress  were  held  at  Naimisaranya,  in 
Sitilpur  district.  It  was  at  the  fifth  or  sixth  of  this  session,  when  the 
Rrahnianas  had  finished  the  labours  of  their  deliberations,  in  the  long 
drawn  sacrifice,  that  they  relaxed  their  starin  and  asked  the  bard,  Sfita, 
to  rehearse  the  stories  of  the  past  kings.  It  was  then  that  the  original 
Parana  was  recited  which  expanded  into  18  Puranas,  amongst  which  the 
Matsya  Purdna  is  not  the  least. 

The  original  Puram. — The  original  Purina  is  one  which  exists  in 
the  Devaloka,  and  contains  ten  millions  of  stanzas,  as  mentioned  in 
Cliapter  III.  A portion  of  it  is  revealed  from  time  to  time,  as  necessity 
arises.  In  other  words,  the  real  Pur&na,  which  would  contain  a full 
account  of  the  cosmogony  of  the  universe,  and  a history  of  all  the  rulers  of 
the  world,  must  be  a very  concisely  written  work  to  be  finished  within 
the  scope  of  ten  millions  of  stanzas.  But  we  have  not  to  deal  with 
the  history  of  the  universe,  but  only  of  India  and  of  Vaivasvata  Manu ; 
hence  our  Puranas  are  smaller  in  bulk. 

What  is  a Puram  ?— In  the  beginning,  there  was  only  one  Pur&iia, 
which  may  be  called  the  original  Purana.  It  treated  of  five  subjects,  viz. : 

(i)  Sarga,  or  Creation,  or  Evolution  of  the  world,  or  Flux. 

(ii)  Pratisarga,  or  Destruction,  or  Involution  of  the  world,  or  Reflux. 

(iii)  Vaiprfa,  or  Genealogy  of  Devas,  patriarchs  and  kings. 

(iv)  Manvantaras,  or  cosmic  chronology,  or  history  of  Manus. 

(v)  Vaipi&nucharita,  or  the  chroliicles  of  dynasties  of  rulers. 

The  ReveaJ^r  of  the  Matsya  Puram- — This  Puriina  was  revealed  by  the 
Lord  Vignu  himself  to  Vaivaswata  Manu.  A great  deluge  was  to  destroy 
the  whole  creation,  and  the  Lord  wanted  to  save  Manu  for  the  future  race. 
He  assumed  the  form  of  a fish,  and  the  story  of  the  deluge— the  original 
account  of  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  l^atapatha  BrShmana  given  below — 
is  made  the  opening  thesis  of  this  Purana. 

In  the  beginning,  they  brought  to  Manu  water  for  washing,  as  men 
are  in  the  habit  of  bringing  it  to  wash  with  the  hands.  As  he  was  ihuB 
washing,  a fish  oame  into  his  hands  (which  spake  to  him),  * Preserve  me ; 

M 


APPENDIX  X 


oit 

I shall  save  thee.*  ^Ifanii  enquired)  * From  what  wiIt4hou  save  ? * (The 
fish  replied)  ‘ A flood  shall  sweep  away  all  these  creatures ; from  it  will 
I rescue  thee.*  (Maim  asked)  ‘ How  (shall)  thy  preservation  be  effected  ? * 
The  fish  said  : ‘So  long  as  we  are  small,  we  are  in  great  peril,  for  fish 
devours  fish  ; thou  ahalt  preserve  mo  first  in  a jar.  When  1 grow 
too  large  for  the  jar,  then  thou  shalt  dig  a trench,  and  preserve  mo 
in  that  When  I grow  too  large  for  tlie  trench,  then  thou  shalt  carry 
me  away  to  the  Ocean.  I shall  then  bo  beyond  the  reach  of  danger.’ 
Straightway  lie  became  a large  fish  ; for  lie  waxes  to  the  utmost. 
(He  said):  ‘Nowin  such  and  such  a j’car,  then  the  flood  will  come; 
thou  shalt  therefore,  construct  a ship,  and  resort  to  me  ; thou  shalt 
embark  in  the  ship  when  the  flood  rises,  and  I shall  deliver  thee  from 
it.’  Having  thus  preserved  the  fish,  Manu  carried  him  away  to  the  sea. 
Then  in  the  same  year  wliich  the  fish  had  enjoined,  lie  constructed  a ship, 
and  resorted  to  him.  AVhen  the  flood  rose,  Manu  embarked  in  the  ship. 
The  fish  swam  towards  him.  Ho  fastened  the  cable  of  tlie  sliip  to  the 
fish’s  horn.  By  this  means  he  passed  over  this  northern  mountain.  The 
fish  said,  * I liavo  delivered  thee  ; fasten  the  ship  to  a tree.  But  lest  the 
water  should  cut  thee  off  whilst  thou  art  on  tlic  mountain,  as  much  as  the 
water  sulisides,  so  much  shalt  thou  descend  after  it,’  Ho  accordingly 
descended  after  it  as  much  las  it  subsided)  Wherefore  also  this,  m., 
‘Mann’s  descent  ’ is  Mlio  name!  of  the  northern  mountain.  Now  the  flood 
had  swept  away  all  these  creatures  ; so  ilanu  alone  was  left  here.  Desir- 
ous of  offspring,  he  lived  worshipping  and  toiling  in  arduous  religious 
rites.  Among  these  lie  also  sacrified  with  tlie  paVra  offering.  lie  cast 
clarified  butter,  thickened  milk,  whey  and  curds,  as  an  oblation  into  the 
waters.  Thence  in  a year  a woman  was  produced.” 

The  Chronological  Periods. — The  cliron(;logy  of  the  Purfinas  may 
be  conveniently  studied  under  iho  following  heads  : — 

1.  The  period  from  Vaivasvata  Afanu  up  to  tlic  Malifibliarata  War. 

2.  The  period  from  the  Mah^bliarata  War  up  totbo  Inauguration  of 
Mahapadma  Nanda,  i.e.,  422  B.  C. 

3.  From  Mahapadma  Nanda  up  to  the  end  of  the  Andlira  dynasty, 
836  years. 

4.  The  modern  period,  from  the  end  of  Andhra  dynasty  to  the 
present  age. 

The  Matsya  Purina  does  not  give  a list  of  kings  after  the  Andhra 
dynasty,  and,  therefore,  it  may  be  safely  inferred  that  thief  Purupa,  in  its 
present  form,  could  not  have  been  composed  after  the  Andlira  dynasty. 

In  this  Purina,  the  express  statement  made  is  that  it  was  recited 


TEE  DATE  OF  THE  MAT87A  POEANA. 


CT 


by  S&ta  in  Nairai9&ra9ya,  in  the  reign  of  king  Adhitfimakfi^na  of  Magadha, 
who  waa  contemporary  of  Divftkara.  That  was  the  original  Pur&Qa.  The 
present  Punipa  was  composed  much  later.  Very  probably  it  was  composed 
in  the  reign  of  king  Yajnaarfrl  of  Andhra  dynasty,  in  about  193  A.  D.  We 
quote  from  the  introduction,  p.  Xlllof  Mr.  Pargiter^s  valuable  book.  “The 
Dynasties  of  the  Kali  Age”: — “There  is  an  apparent  indication  that 
a compilation  was  begun  in  tlie  latter  part  of  the  2nd  century  in  the  Andhra 
king,  YajnajSri’s  reign,  for  5 JlSSof  the  Matsya  (of  which  three  appear  to  be 
independent,  namely,  b,  c,  and  I)  apeak  of  him  as  reigning  in  his  ninth 
or  tenth  year.”  In  chapter  273,  verse  14,  there  is  found  the  following 
reading  of  the  text,  instead  of  the  ordinary  reading  found  in  printed 
books.  In  Mt.  bceln,  the  line  reads:— “nava  varsapi  Yajilarfrih  hurute 
l^&takarnikah,”  which  means  “Yajnarfrl  is  reigning  for  nine  years.” 
While  the  ordinary  reading  is  “ nava-vimrfati  var^ani  Yajnarfrih  ^atakarni- 
kah,”  which  means  “ Yajfiasiri  reigned  for  29  years.”  The  Andhra 
kingdom  fell  about  A.  D.  236,  and  it  may  be  said  that  the  Matsya  account 
brings  the  historical  narrative  down  to  about  the  middle  of  the  third 
century  A.  D.  and  no  further.”  yajharfrl’s  reign  commenced  in  184  A.  D., 
according  to  Mr,  V.  Smith,  and  the  first  compilation  of  the  dynastic  account 
was  made  in  193  A.  D.,  though  it  was  carried  up  to  the  end  of  the  Andhra 
Dynasty  up  to  236  A.  D.,  or  43  years  further.  The  Matsya  makes  no 
mention  of  the  Guptas. 

As  the  clironology  of  the  Matsya  Parana  does  not  go  beyond  the 
Andhra  dynasty,  so,  in  its  present  form,  it  cannot  be  posterior  to  the 
year  225  A.  D.,  if  that  date  be  taken  as  tho  termination  of  the  Andhra, 
according  to  Jilr.  V.  Smith.  It  would  be  432  A.  D.,  according  to  the 
Matsya  Parana.  It  is,  therefore,  one  of  the  oldest,  if  not  the  oldest,  of 
the  Puranas.  The  Vayu,  tho  Visnu  and  other  Puranas  mention  the  Gupta 
and  other  dynasties,  that  came  into  existence  after  the  Andhras,  and 
so  they,  in  their  present  form,  are  later  than  the  Matsya. 

Albirtini  » manuscript  copy  of  the  Matsya  Pur&pa  in  his  time, 
so  it  must  havM^sted  then. 

The  date  of  the  recital. — All  PurSnas  (except  the  Vi§nu)  are  said  to 
have  been  recited  by  Siita  at  the  great  sacrificial  session,  held  by  the  priests 
and  sages  in  the  forest  of  Naimisa,  during  the  reign  of  Adhisimakfisna 
of  Magadha,  who  was  a contemporary  of  Div^kara  and  SSnajit.  By  cal- 
culating the  date  of  the  reign  of  SSnajit,  from  the  figures  given  before,  it 
would  appear  that  he  flouFished  277  years  after  the  Great  War. 

Therefore,  this  Purapa,  in  its  original  form,  was  recited  on  or  about 
1160  B.  0.  According  to  the  Visnu  PurApa,  it  was  in  the  reign  of  Parik^it 


: ^ 

AVVEmiX  X. 


that  the  Par&nas  were  recited,  and  the  future  kings  are  taken  from  that 
date. 

Regarding  the  Matsya  PurA^a,  Professor  IT.  II.  Wilson  writes  : — 

Matsya  Parana.  **That  in  which,  for  tho  sake  of  promalgating  the  Vedas, 
Vishnu,  in  tho  beginning  of  a Ealpa,  related  to  Manu  the  story  of  Narasimha  and  tho  events 
of  seven  Kalpas ; that,  O sages,  know  to  bo  tho  Matsya  Purftna,  containing  twenty 
thousand  stanzas.*'  * 

Wo  might, it  is  to  be  supposed, admit  tho  description  which  tho  Matsya  gives  of  itself 
to  be  correct ; and  yet,  as  regards  the  number  of  verses,  there  reonis  to  be  a misstatoinont. 
Three  very  good  oopios'-'ono  in  my  possession,  one  in  the  Company's  library,  and  one  in 
the  Radcliffe  library— oonenr  in  all  respects,  and  in  containing  more  than  botwoen  four- 
teen and  fifteen  thousand  stanzas.  In  this  caso  .the  BhAgavata  is  nearer  the  truth, 
when  it  assigns  to  it  fourteen  thousand. 

The  first  subject  (in  the  PnrAna)  is  tho  creation,  which  is  that  of  BrahmA  and  he 
patriarchs.  Some  of  the  details  are  the  usual  ones  ; others  are  peculiar,  especially  those 
relating  to  the  Pitfis  or  progonitors.  The  repal  dynasties  are  next  described  ; and  then 
follow  chapters  on  tho  duties  of  different  orders.  It  is  in  relating  those  of  tho  hou.seholdor, 
in  which  the  duty  of  making  gifts  to  Br.'ilimanas  is  eomprehended,  that  we  have  tho 
Specification  of  tho  extent  and  suljjects  of  the  PurAnas.  It  is  meritorious  to  have  copies 
made  of  them,  and  to  give  these  away  on  partieular  occasions.  Thus,  it  is  said,  of  tho 
Matsya:  “ Whoever  gives  it  away  at  either  equinox,  .along  with  a gol<len  fish  and  a milch 
cow,  givos  away  tho  whole  earth  ; " th.at  is,  lie  reaps  a like  reward,  in  his  next  migration. 
Special  duties  of  the  householder —Vratas  or  occasional  acts  of  piety— are  then  desc  '>ed 
at  considerable  length,  with  logondary  iilustratlon.s.  The  account  of  the  universe  is  given 
in  the  usual  strain.  4^'aiva  legends  ensue  : as  the  destruction  of  Tripur&siirft ; tho  war  of 
the  gods  with  Taraka  and  the  Dnityas,  and  tho  consequent  birth  of  Kfirttikoya,  with  tho 
various  cireurastanecs  of  Vina ’s  birth  and  marriage,  the  burjiing  of  Kfimadeva.  and  othoP 
events  involved  in  that  narr.'itive;  the  destruction  of  tho  .\snras  Maya  and  Andhaka;  tho 
origin  of  the  Mat-riis,  and  the  like ; interspersed  with  tho  Vaisnavii  legends  of  the  Avat&ras. 
Some  M&bAtmyas  are  also  intrrxluced ; one  of  which,  the  Nannadu  Mdhutmya,  contains 
some  interesting  particulars.  There  are  v.irb»u«  cha]>tcr«  on  law  and  morals,  and  one 
which  furnishes  directions  for  building  bouses  and  making  imagos.  We  then  have  an 
account  of  the  kings  of  future  periods  ; and  tiio  Pur  Aria  concludes  with  a chapter  on  gifts. 

The  Matsya  Purfina.  it  will  be  seen,  even  from  this  brief  sketch  of  its  contents,  is  a 
miscellaneous  compilation,  but  including,  in  irs  contents  the  elements  of  a gcniiiiio  Piirftna. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  of  too  mixed  a <‘h.aracter  to  be  considerod  as  a genuine  work  of 
the  Paurft^ik  class;  and,  upon  examining  it  carefully,  it  may  bo  sospoctod  that  it  is 
indebted  to  various  works,  not  only  for  its  matter,  but  for  its  wor4«.  ^*1 

Although  a baiva  work,  it  is  not  exclusively  ho  ; and  it  has  ; 'h  'notarial  absur- 
dities as  tho  Kfirma  and  Linga,  It  is  a composition  of  considorablo  Interest ; but,  if  it 
has  extracted  its  materials  from  the  Padma,— which  it  also  quotes  on  ono  occasion,  tho 
specification  of  the  Upapnrfinas,-'it  is  subsequent  to  that  work,  and,  therefore,  not  very 
ancient. 

But  modern  scholars  consider  this  Purfina  as  otic  of  the  oldest,^ 
ia  the  Padma  PurAna  seems  to  have  borrowed  from  the  Matsya 
and  not  the  reverse. 

Sriba  Chandra  Vidyarnava. 

•-a  nn.  ll.  fil^Sfi. 


