===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.45858.The-Matsya-Puranam--Pt-2_djvu.txt =====




THE 


SACRED BOOKS OF THE HINDUS 


Translated fliiiVifeit Scholars 


EDITED BY 

MAJOR B. D. BASU, I.M.S. 


VOL. XVII.-PART II. 


PUBUSUBD BY 


TBK PAI^IMI OFVlCa BHUYANBSWARi ABRAMA, BAHADUROANJ 

BUababaO 

Printed by Apurva Krishna Bose, at the Indian Press 


1917 




THB 


MATSYA PUR AN AM 


Part 4^^^ 


TRAKSlATBD BY 

A TALUQDAR OF OtJDH. 


^CBLlSBfeO BY 

SUDHiNDRA NATHA VABU 

mtOM THB Pi^NI OFBlCfi. BHXJYANB^WABi As'RAMA, BAHAdUROANJ 

BllababaD 

Printed by Apurva Krishna Bose, at the Indian Press 

1917 




OM. 

Ho Ufon’ble ^ame^ H^orgie ^e^ton, 

K.C.S.I., LL.D., V.D., 

LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR OF THE UNITED PROVINCES OF 
AGRA AND OUDH. 

IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED THIS TRANSLATION OF THE SACRED MATSYA PURANAM 
WITH HIS HONOUR’S KIND PERMISSION 

AS A TOKEN OF THE TRANSLATOR’S SINCERE ADMIRATION FOR HIS HONOUR 
WHO BY HIS UNRIVALLED SYMPATHY 
FOR THE PEOPLE OF THESE PROVINCES 
WHOM PROVIDENCE HAS CALLED HIM TO RULE 
HAS ACQUIRED THEIR EVERLASTING GRATITUDE AND AFFECTION 
AND WHOSE BENEFICIAL ADMINISTRATION 
THEY WILL ALWAYS COMMEMORATE 
BY THE FOLLOWING SONG- 

am 

fzRzq 

II 




PREFACE. 


The PurS^as are indispeasable to stiidents of comparative my- 
thology, sociology, Folklore, and religions. But these being to many 
Eneydopedias Indica, not only a thorough knowledge of Sanskrit is nec^ 
sary to understand them, but an acquaintance with several branches of 
human knowledge, such as Astronomy, Botany, Zoology, Engineering, &c., 
is necessary for one who wishes to critically study them. Very few 
possess such knowledge. It is, therefore, that the study of the PurS^as 
has been neglected by. Sanskrit scholars. 

The translation of the first part of the Matsya Pur&pa published 
by Pfipini Office has been very favorably received by renowned Sanskrit 
scholars. . It is hoped that the present part also will meet with their 
approval. It would have 'been better to have added to this part 
Appendices on Paurfinik Astronomy, Botany, Zoology, Engineering and 
other subjects, but alas, the scholar whose desire it was to do so and who 
was competent to have performed that task satisfactorily, is stricken down 
with paralysis brought on by overwork. My brother, Rai Bahadur 
^risa Chandra Vidyfirnava, not only studied Sanskrit very critically and 
for which he is well-known to Sanskrit scholars all over the world, 
but has been an earnest student of Mathematics, Astronomy, Zoology, 
Physical Sciences, Engineering and other useful branches of knowledge. 
A great mathematician of our time has very truly observed that 
“Novel ideas are more apt to spring from an unusual assortment of 
knowledge not necessarily from vast knowledge, but from a thorough 
conception of the methods and ideas of distinct lines of thought.’’^ 

It is this “ unusual assortment of knowledge ” and “ thorough con- 
ception of methods and ideas of distinct lines of thought ” which have 
enabled my brother to form novel ideas on many subjects. 

A volume in the series of the Sacred Books of the Hindns will be 
soon published dealing with the Devatas or Gods and Oodesses of the Hindu 
Pantheon, and other topics of interest to students of Hindu mythology, 
epics and classics. This is from the pen of a distinguished Sanskrit 
scholar of versatile talents. This volume will also serve to a great extent 
as an Appendix to the Purftpas. 

The importance of the Matsya Purdna to students of Indian Archi- 
tecture is evident from the extract given below from one of the essays of 
the late litljfi Hdjendra Ldla Mitra — 


* P. 188 “ An introdiiutiou to Mathematics," by A. K. Whitehead, Sc. 1).,F . R. S. 



ii 


PREFACE. 


** The Parftfias afford directions regarding the seasons and stellar oonjanotions most 
favorable for oommenoing the building of temples and honses, and the ceremonies to be 
observed on such occasiona Thus the liataya Purd^a : *‘The man who commences a building 
in the month of Chaitra, earns ill-health ; he who does so in Vald&kha gains wealth and 
jewels, bnt in Jais^ha, he encounters death. Should he begia it in the month of Af ftdha, he 
will obtain slaves, jewels, cattle and a good complexion. In ordvana, he will secure friends, 
and in Bhddra lose them. A house begun in Asvina brings on the death of one’s wife, in 
K&rtika, the gain of wealth and corn, in M&rgadir^a, abundance of food, and in Paufa, 
the fear of thieves. It is ordained that the month of Mftgha ensures gain and learning, 
but it also brings on fire ; while Phdlgupa gives offspring and gold. Such are the effects 
of seasons.”* 

Of lunar constellations the following are described as the most appropriate, viz., 
Asvinf, Bohini, Mfila, Uttara A9ft<jha, Uttara Bh&drapada, Uttpra Phalgupf, Mrlga-sirigia, 
Svfttf, Haatft, and AnuFfidha.*'! Of the days of the week, Sundays and Tuesdays are 
injurious, the rest are appropriate. X Much weight Is also laid on particular conjunctions, 
1^ as these cannot be made intelligible to European readers without entering into 
teSions details, I shall not quote them here. The Hayaitr^ Panchardtra^ a Tantra of 
the Vaif pavite class has also some rules on the subject ; bnt they are scarcely worth 
noticing. According to it the rainy season is the most inappropriate, and no building 
should be commenced in it. The first ton days of the wane, the second fiVe days of the 
waxiog moon, the 4th the 9th, and the 14th of both, the wane and the waxing moon, are 
also said to be reppehenaibla§ It differs from the last authority, however, in rejecting 
only Sunday, and not also Tuesday, and approving of some of the Nak^atras which the 
former condemns. 

The Matsya Purfina affords detailed instructions for the selection and examination 
of the ground for building. Earth is divided by it into four 
Ground fit for building, classes according to its colour ; the white is called Brahmaua, 
it is said to have a sweet taste ; the red is Ksatriva, and it 
produces an astringent taste in the mouth ; the yellow is Vaisya, it is hot and astringent 
to tho taste ; and the black is Bfidra ; it is also astringent and hot. The merits of these 
different kinds of earth as substrata for buildings, eras materials for brick-making, ^ are 
reckoned according to their caste, tho Brfihmana being the best, and the Sudra 
the worst. 

Before commencing a building, the proper course is to dig a hole, measuring in every 
direction an aratni, or a cubit from tho elbow to the end of the little finger. This being 
afterwards carefully plastered with mud, an unbaked saucer is to bo filled with ghi, 
provided with four wicks on four sides, and placed on the bottom of tho hole. Tho wicks 


g f i^r* wsprl fwr ll 

I 

OTi w* II 

ii 

t II 

OTift f«ignvn ^ i 

t ^ II 

§ *r w«i* i 

• I 


PEBFACE. 


Ill 


beinsnov lighted, if they bun nnitoniily and brightly, the ground is fit for building; 
otherwise it u bud. Another and more piaobioal and intelUgible method is to press into 
the hole the earth exearated from it ; if the earth shouid All up the hole and leave a 
snrplu. the ground is good; if it snonld barely All it up, but leave no suqilns, the 
ground is indifferent ; but if it should prove Insuffieient, the ground is positively bad.* 

The translation of the Matsya PurA^a by the learned Talnqdar of Ondh 
is not quite literal but close to the original. While it is necessary to 
have literal translations of the Vedas, Smritis, Upani^ads and Dars&pas,' 
it is not so of the Pur&pas. The present translation is readable and will 
enable its readers to understand the contents of tiiis important Pur&na. 

Professor Lalit Mohan Kar, E^yatirtha, M.A., B.L., of Ripon College 
Calcutta, and Mr. E&medvar Pras&d Bh&rgava have been good enough 
prepare the analytical Table of Contents placed at the end of this volume. 

Editoe. 


^ dm iflm f mir ii 

i 

nfnmim «mm w ii 

«fRT i 

I im il 




mqg: mu m 11 

IW: »Tig w 1 

nw qmr^ II 


qiRril ftimnniRir gifit* mi 1 
i[Ri I 




m?»:tsya puranam 


r>AE.T II. 


CHAPTER CXXIX. 

The Risis said :—T 9 ll us, 0, Sdta ! bow in ancient days did Lord 
diva attain the name of Tripur&ri and how did He reduce the fort Tripura 
to ashes. Pray, be pleased to tell us all about it in detail. How the 
fortified town of Tripura was built by the mysterious power of Maya, and 

how was it, reduced to ashes by one arrow of ^iva. Pray, tell us how 
all this happened. We all ask you, reverently, again and again. — 1-2. 

Sfita said : — 0, Ri^is ! Hear from me how the fort Tripura was 
consumed by the mighty Lord ^iva. In ancient days, there lived a 
Dfinava named Maya ; he was endowed with extraordinary powers and be 
was the originator of wonderful artifices and extraordinary devices generally 
known as M&ya. Once conquered by the Devas in a battle, Maya devoted 
himself to hard penances. Two other demons also joined him and 
began to practise severe austerities with the same object in view. The 
name of the one was the powerful Vidyunmfili ; and of the other was 
T&rakSsura. Both of them were very powerful and strong. — 3-5. 

These two began to perform their penances by the side of Maya 
and caught his fire and energy. They began to look like the three Fires 
or like the three worlds personified. They remained engaged in their 
penances, burning, as it were, the three worlds. They lived in water 
during the winter, warmed themselves with a ring of fire lit up around 
them during the summer with fierce sun overhead, and stood on their 
legs in the open space during the rains and began to waste their dear 
bodies. They lived only on roots and fruits and water and they 
woi-shipped with flowers, etc. They used to lake their simple fare after one 
day’s interval and the bark of wood that they had on their bodies was 
besmeared with mud. They practised austerities, half irameised in the 
mud of aquatic plants and thus their minds became freed from all 
dirt. Their bodies became devoid of all flesh ; they became lean and thin ; 
the veins became visible all over their bodies. Owing to their severe 
austerities, the whole universe became devoid of any lustre, powerless, 
and began to look dull. — 6-11. 

The three worlds were about to be consumed by the fire of their 
asceticism, when the Lord Brahma appeared before them. The bold 
adventurers, those D&navas, then, chanted the praises of the Supreme-Being 



THB MAT87A PUHANAU. 


Brahmiiji* >appe^ there Budddolv, end {^leased Him with their 
devotioq^^ln:ehm&, . thee, pleased^ w^a t^cree ascetics who looked 

1^ owing !. to their glance on them, 


spi “ 0 children 1 ' .sl^fakij^iid with, j^onr 
pile (»me to gnoit boons Aw ,ni»"^)ii^t yon wish.” Hearing 

.. Ibese fofdsoF Bra]un&,- w^ wIb tiiw Hb|«C oapnbis W bnild 

anytldbag jfejoibed said Id d^ys got!#"b]r, in the great 
Ot^rak&maya war that ensued between the Devas apd tpe Haityas, the 
• former were Tiotorioas Md meiCihSady k1|Ied the latter with their 
weapons. The Devas always oppmsa ns on. account of 'former enmity. 
We then fled away with terror. l!n cm* hour of trial and misfortune 
we could not rely on any one for help and protection. Finding no source 
of solace, we have now resorted to this .practice of penances and now 
with the help of our asceticism and through Your Grace, we wish to 
ereot a most solid and impregnable fort which would defy the Devas. 
The' name of this would^ be Tripura. Now, 0, Lord ! grant me this 
boon that when the fort is completed it will be quite safe from the 
attacks of those residing on land and in water as well as from the curses 
of the sages and Munis and from attacks of the Devas.” Hearing those 
tvctds of Maya, capable to build another universe by bis M&yS, Lord 
Brabmh said smilingly : — " O, Maya', leader of the demons ! It is im> 
possible to become immortal, where everything is not everlasting; 
knowing this, you can build your fort with mud.” Maya again addressed 
Brahm& with folded hands If this fort be not quite impregnable, 
then let it be that it would be destroyed by one arrow only, shot once 

by j^iva, in the course of warfore.” BrahmS said, " Be it so ” and then 
went away. — 11-25. 

The Lord disappeared from the spot as vanishes the wealth obtained 
in draSms. Having obtained the boon, those powerful Daityas, then healthy 
and shining like Sun, began to look more brilliant with their power 
of asceticinn. — 20-27. 

The highly intelligent and powerful Maya then began to prepare 
plans for building the Tripura fort. — 28. 

He said to himself : — “ I, alone, should live in that Tripura fort. It 
ought to be built in such a way as no one amongst the Devas might be 
able to destroy it with a single arrow.” He thought also “ I should make 
each of the three fortresses, 100 yojanas in length and breadth. The 
building would be commenced and completed under the Yoga of the 
asteri^ Fo^yS, when the above three cities would rise and meet the 
celestial firmament and whoever would get hold of and attack the 
above cities under this Pu§yfiyoga would be able to destroy them by 
means of only one arrow shot by him. The lowest fort, that on earth, 
is to be made of iron ; the one in the celestial firmament is to be 
ihade^ of silver ; and the topmost one is to be built of gold. These three 
Combined would be known as the ' Tripura ’ fort. The length and 
breadth of this is to be one hundred yojanas each ; and it will be 
itn'pregnable to all. It will be decorated with many palatial buildings, 
Various instruments, various weapons, sataghnis, chakras, spears, upalas, 
katnfpanas and various other arms. Hundreds of towers and turrets would 



0B4^m Of XX. 


be built to make tho .oitiea ]o(A Hka tbe .gceat . Mondata and Ke]c«. 
Who can destroy, save tha>thvee>eyed B^gavhn (l^i^a), tbese three- oitieis, 
touching the Heaveiui 4uid sp ^ethgiiardad , Tftraka and 

Vidyunmfll ?”— 29^. • ' ’V . ' ; ! 

NJB^Pi|CTiyogaa'«ti«ltl>eMobattheata>nf(^ «j^tlwl(^eomela one Km ' fin 
•eajimejltoi. 

. U*in^0in3ft<&ie 'onit ^itdv^ a^ ^pUr on tJu 

anudofo of Tnpuodoura. 


GEIAPTER eXJCX. 

Sdta said : — ^Thus thinking in his mind, Maya built the Tripura 
fort according to his designs with materids brought out by divine 
means. He located the fort where he had conceived and the principal 
entrance gates, the other ornamental gateways, the upper^torey with their 
doors, court-room, sitting-room, seraglios, broad pmhways, high roads, 
lanes, bye-lanes, quadrangular-marts, temple of Siva, the tank with 
banyan trees round it, another tank with steps, wells, fruit and flower 
gardens, assembly-rooms, pleasure gardens, resting-places, deUghtfnl 
pathways for D&navas, etc., were all laid and built according to the pre- 
conceived plans. This is how the town of Tripura was built by Maya 
versed in all the sciences about building and town-planning, as I am told: 
The town, so built by Maya, is known by the name Tripura ; so we have 
heard. The fortress of iron, built by Maya, was fixed as the abode of 
T&rk&sura and Vidyunm^li settled, down in the beautiful fortress of silver 
shining like Moon. Maya resided in the fortress of gold built by himself. 
The width of both the cities of TSrkfisura and Vidyunmfil! was lOQ 
yojanas. The great city of Maya shone like the Mount Sumem.-— l-ll. 

It was built during the interval occupied by Pueyfiyoga (when 
the Moon, Pusy& and the forts w^ in one line in combination). Maya 
built his Tripura, as Siva had built his Puspaka-Vim&ns (celestial car). 
The paths of Maya leading from one fortress to the other were lined with 
beautiful vases full of wine. The iron, gold and silver-plaited houses of the 
Daityas were also built in hundreds and thousands on either sides of the 
pathways. The three cities, then, of the Asiiras, with hundreds of palatial 
buildings and decked with various gems rose highaecording to their will 
and transcending all the worlds, looked very beautiful, as apartments 
on the top of a house. The fort could be made to go anywhere where 
Maya would wish. It contained pleasure gardens, wells and tanks full of 
lotuses. It abounded with the groviM of A4oka trees with cuckoos .and 
nightingales singing in them. Thme were many painters' sthdios, 
quadrangular spaces enclosed by buildings, rows of seventeen -.or 
eighteenstoreyed houses, with various flags, banners, and {glands, ^ 
bmlt by Maya. — 12-17. 

The palatial buildings resounded with the sounds of hundreds of 
small tinkling bells ; they were filled with the perfumes of various 
sweet-scented flowers. The houses were neatly plastered and locked 
beautiful .with various flowmrs and ofierings to :the Deity. The white 



TEE MAT87A PURAEAM. 


houses of the fort Tripura were all covered with smoke arising from 
sacrifioial offerings ; jam full of water were arranged there in rows thus 
making Uwm look like rows of swans. The rows of pendant garlands, 
pearls and jewels on the several buildings made them defy the splendour 
ot ihiB Moon.— 18-20. 

The houses decorated with flowers, Mallika and JSti, etc., and 
scented with nice perfumes and dhffpas made them look like good 
persons, endowed with five senses, and looking on all with equal sight. 
Round the three fortresses, were built three enclosure walls that looked 
like mountainous structures. These walls were built respectively of gold, 
silver and iron and ornamented with gems, jewels and collyrium. Hun- 
dreds of Gopuras (entrance gates) existed there in every fortress, decked 
with flags and banners and looking like mountain tops. The inner 
compartments for women resounded with the sounds of tinkling bells on 
theis anklets ; and these were more beautiful than tlie Heavens. 
In these compartments, there were many resting-places, Vih&ras 
(places of enjoyments), tanks, banyan trees, quadrangular-marts, pools, 
lakes, gardens and forests. All sorts of excellent divine objects of 
enjoyment were tliere ; and they were decorated with various gems and 
jewels. The outlets of the three fortresses were rendered beautiful with 
various flowers and they were surrounded by hundreds of deep ditches and 
moats. These moats were equipped with various weapons to defeat 
enemies’ designs. — 21-26. 

When the sons of Diti, of unrivalled valour, and the great enemies 
of Iridra lieard tl)at the DAiiava Maya, of wonderful valour and deeds, had 
built such a fortress, they came in Imndreds and thousands and took 
refuge tliere. That Tripura fort, then became quite full of the Asuras, 
the tormentors of people and the destroyers of their enemies ; and it 
looked gigantic like elepliants and mountains as if tho sky had been 
overcast with dark clouds about to shower rains. — 27-28. 

Here ends the one hundred and thirtieth chapter on the laying 
of the fort Tripura, 


CHAPTER CXXXI. 

Suta said : — Maya the great Asura architect designed the Tripura 
fortress so ingeniously that it was impervious to Ijis enemies, both 
the Suras and the Asuras. Then, by the order of Maya, the Asuras who 
looked like Yama, the God of Death, gladly entered the houses within the 
fortress, with their wives and children, arms and weapons. It looked 
then, like lots of lions entering a forest ; or a liost of sharks and crocodiles 
entering the ocean and when the powerful enemies of the gods began to 
dwell there, it seemed that a body was occupied all over with intense rage. 
That Tripura fortress became quite full of those enemies of the Uevas. 
Millions and millions of Asuras came to dwell there. They all flocked 
there in great multitudes, from the lower regions and mountains, like the 
banks of clouds gleaming with Hashes of lightning. — 1-5. 

The residents of that fortress got whatever they desired, for their 



OBAPTBB OXXXL. 


Sovereign Maya ministered to their wants by his^ M&y&ik (supernatural) 
powers and produced then and there all these thin^. They, with their 
bodies covered with sandal-paste, perfumes and wearing beautiful 
garments, moved about freely like infuriated elephants to amuse them- 
selves in the beautiful mango groves and on the banks of the lakes 
shining white with moonbeams falling on them and full of beautiful 
lotus flowers. They enjoyed themselves in the company of their enchanting 
consorts, and found every happiness in abundance at the spots designed 
and laid out S ) skilfully by Maya. Their ornaments, garments, garlands 
and scented pastes began to look exceedingly beautiful. Living there in the 
beautiful and secure fortress built by Maya they directed their attention to 
Dharma, Artha and Kd.ma. They passed their days in Tripura as happily 
as the Devas do in Svarga. They looked after their parents, and the 
wives paid eveiy attention to their husbands. They all passed their days 
in perfect peace and harmony. No signs of quarrels were visible amongst 
them. Irreligion could not become so strong as to affect the residents 

there ; they all were the worshippers of ^iva. They loudly chanted the 
Vedic hymns and played on the VinS and flute in unison with the tinkling 
of the anklets. They always enjoyed in company of their consorts and 
their hearts were always gladdened by the pleasing peals of laughter of 
the ladies. In this way they passed their days in the worship of the Devas 
and BrAhmanas and in the enjoyment of Artha, Dharma and Kama. I’hus 
a very long time passed away. Sometime after befriended by evening, 
poverty, jealousy, greed, disunion and the kali simultaneously 
entered the fortress of Tripura and settled down in the bodies of the 
Dfinavas like so many diseases. Maya saw all these very dreadful things 
in a dream. — 6-19. 

In the morning when the sun arose with all his glory, Maya came 
to his audience hall and in company of the two other O&navas looked 
beautiful like the cloud between two suns and took his seat on the beauti- 
ful throne, bedecked with gold and looking like the peak of the Mount 
Meru. Taraka and Yidyunin<^U took their seats on eacli of his sides as the 
two young elephants appear by the two sides of a big elephant. — 20-22. 

When the three Asuras took their respective seats, it seemed that 
the clouds rested on the top of the summit of the golden mountain. 
Then, one by one, all the Asuras, with their strong armours and military 
dress, very violent, came there to Maya’s assembly. And when everyone 
sat down on his seat, Maya the maker of M&y& addressed them as 
follows : — 23-24. 

“ Hear, 0, sons of DS.ksA,yani ! wanderers in the air ! you, that roar 
in the celestial regions ! the dreadful dream that I dreamt last night. I 
saw in my dream four women, three of them very terrible and belong- 
ing to this earth, raging like fire, enter the Tripura fortress. 
On entering this city, they began to torment the people thereof. 
Their valour is indomitable ; they entered with rage into the city and 
divided themselves into many forms and entered into the bodies of the 
demons. This whole city, it seemed, was covered over with darkness. 
You all, with your houses and everything were drowned in the ocean. 
I saw one owl and a fair naked woman on a donkey ; 1 saw also a man 



TEE MAT8TA PUEJillAM. 


with a mark of redpowder on his forehead / he ww four-footed and threa- 
ded. l^e woman, seen before, was chased by this man. 1 awoke then. 
.0, sons of Diti ! '^hus this dreadful woman append. Thus the 
dream was dreamt by me. I do not know whether this dream portends 
future disasters to the Asuras ? Whatever this may be, if 1 be fit to be 
your Emperor and if you consider my words beneficial to you, then, 1 advise 
you not to be jealous of each other. Avoid lust, anger, jealousy, envy 
snd hdd fast to truth, self-restraint, Dharma and behave yourselves 

like Munis. Spread peace everywhere and worship l^iva. Who knows, 
that by observing these, all the forebodings of evils would be averted ! 
'From the dream, it appears that the three-eyed Rudra, the Deva of the 
Devas, is angiy with us ; for, 0 Asuras, I see clearly what will befall this 
Tripura castle. So you all should avoid quarrels, acquire sincerety, and 
see how this dream fares with us. — 29-3U. 

Hearing these words of Maya, they looked agitated with anger 
and hatred which predicted their downfall. Overcome by misfortune, 
they looked on one another with eyes reddened with anger, though they 
were thoroughly convinced of their impending ruin and destruction. 
Those demons, thus overcome by destiny, abandoned the path of truth 
and their course of virtue and started on the path of vice.— 37-39. 

First, they began to hate the holy BrS.hmanas ; they gave up their 
daily course of worship ; they ceased to pay their respects to their 
preceptors and began to be angry with one another. They became 
addicted to habits of quarrelling with one ani»ther ; they mocked their 
religion ; they abused one another ; and every one of them played the 
master. They began to insult their elders, and despise the objects of their 
everyday adoration. They ceased to perform good deeds and were vexed 
at mere trifles and their eyes overflowed with teai-s. They ate at night 
curds, barley porridge, milk and woodapple ; slept with their unclean 
bodies ; they left off washing their feet and hands after answering calls of 
nature ; they retired to bed without cleaning themselves. They began to 
fear cats like mice and never cleaned their persons after enjoying them- 
selves in company of their consorts and never observed the rules of 
decency in dallying with their women folk. Thus, they became a corrupt 
lot, though they had led virtuous lives before ; and they now began to 
trouble the Devas, sages and hermits. — 40-46. 

Though prohibited by Maya, they began to commit acts incurring 
the displeasure of the Br^hmanas and thus went on in their path of des- 
truction. In their anger, they devastated, Vaibhr»lja Nandanavana, 
Chiti-arathavana, Adokavana, Varadokavana, which gave fruits and flowers 
in all the seasons, and they destroyed groves of hermits though they were 
masters of these places. They destroyed the abodes of the Devas, hermits 
and devotees. The whole universe looked devastated like a field infested 
with locusts.— 47-50. 

Here ends the one hundred and thirty- first chapter on Maya's dreaming 
bad dreams in the anecdote of three castles. 



CHAPTER CXXXII. 

SAta saidl — When the vicions D&navae began' to destiny pities full 
of habitation, and also the hermitages, the whole world . was ^dismayed 
with horror. ' The DAnavas traversing the skies and roaring like lions, 
thus frightened living creatures, plunged the world into darkness and 
despair. — 1-2. 

Seeing the chaos thus created by them, the Adityas, Yasns, SAdhyas, 
Devas, Pitris, Maruts, shuddered with terror and went to BrabmA for 
protection. They all saluted the Deity with four heads seated on His golden 
lotus throne and said : — “ O' Lord of Lords ! O Sinless One ! the DAnavas 
residing in Tripura castles protected by your blessings, are causing us 
great pain ; pray, therefore, be pleased to give them good counsels. O 
PitAmaha ! we are flying from them like the geese at the approach of 
clouds and the deer at the approach of a lion. 0, Pious One ! we are so 
much confused by our troubles that we have forgotten even the names 
of our better halves and sons, etc. The DAnavas blinded by greed and 
delusion have broken the dwellings of the Devas and the hermitages of 
the anchorites and are travelling all over the world. If you do not 
come readily to the rescue of the distressed, all this universe will become 
devoid of habitation, as well as of men, Devas and Risis.” — 3-9. 

Hearing the above words of the Devas, BrahmA addressed India and 
others as follows, while his face beamed with radiance of joy like the 
Moon. The boon granted to Maya by me, has now come to its end and 
now his destruction is not far distant. This famous Tripura fortress 
ought to be destroyed by only a single arrow. It cannot be annihilated by 
showers of arrows. 0 Devas ! I do not find a single one amongst you 
who can destroy Tripura along with Maya and the DAnavas by a single 
arrow. That fortress of Tripura cannot be destroyed by one of weak 

calibre, ^iva alone, the Lord of all beings can do so. If yon all go and 
pray to Him who upset the sacrifice of Daksa, He will undoubtedly destroy 
Maya and his castle Tripura. Because, each of the three castles of Tripura 
are 100 yojanas in diameter and all three of them were constructed 
during the conjunction of the asterism Pu§yA with the Moon, you should, 

therefore, devise that plan which may lead l$iva to destroy them in one 
arrow. — 10-16. 

Then the Devas all proclaimed at once with sorrowful minds : — “ We 
will all go to Him." BralimA also accompanied them to get their object 
fulfilled and they all went to the abode of l^iva. They beheld that 

supreme and glorious i^iva, the lord of the past, present and future in 
company of His noble consort, PArvatl, and the high-souled Nandikeilvara. 
In other words, the Devas were bedazzled with the sublime glory of the 

mighty i^iva. He was of a fiery colour, unborn, of three eyes resembling 
the three pits of fires, with the splendour of one thousand suns, decked 
with five-coloured ornaments, having the crescent Moon on His forehead, 
and his face looking sweet like the Moon. The Devas considered them- 
selves blessed by seeing the Lord, the Unborn One, the Nllalobita (of 
blue and red colour), ready to grant boons, the Lord of PArvati, the Lord 



TJ±t! UATISrA tUttANAU. 


S 


of gods, tbe Deva Swayambhu Whom they now began to adore with their 
devotional hymns. — 17 - 20 . 

They then said “ 0, Master of all ! 0 Bhava ! 0 iSarva ! 0 Rudra ! 
the Qiver of all boons, 0 lK>rd of all creatures ! 0 Eternal One ! 0 Thou 
terrible ! 0 Thou, wearing braided and matted hair ! we bow down to 
Thee again and again. - 0, Great Beva ! Bhima Triamvaha, the Image of 

Peace, IdSna, the Destroyer of all ills,, the Annihilator of Andhaka ! we 
salute Thee. 0, blue-necked, 0 Penetrating One ! 0 Destroyer of the 
enemies of Kum/ir KSrtikeya ! 0 Begetter of Kum&ra ! 0 Red One ! O 
Dhumi-a ! 0 Vara ! 0 Krathana ! 0 Eternal One ! 0 Niladikha^da ! 0 
Trident-holder! 0 Dixyajlilyi ! we bow down to Thee. We salute Thee! 
O Uraga, Three-eyed, O Hiranya ! 0 VasuretA. ! 0 Unthinkable ! The 
Lord of the Mother of the Universe, adored by all the Devaa. 0, 
Vri^adhvaja ! O Munda ! Having long hair, O Brahraachuri ! O Ascetic ! O 
Brahmanra ! we all salute Thee Our salutations to Thee, 0 Unconquered 
One! 0 Thou, the Soul of the Universe! the Creator of the Universe! 
the Pervader of the Universe ! Who assumes Divine forms, the Supreme 
Lord ! the Divine Swayambhu, 0 Thou who art the worthy object to he ap- 
proached ! the worthy object to be desired ! to be adored and worehipped. 
0 Thou, wlio showest mercy to the devotees ! 0 Thou Eternal One, the 
Giver of one’s desired objects ! we bow down to Thee again and again.” 
—28-29, 

Here ends the one hundred and thirty-second chapter 
on adoring the Great Siva. 


CHAPTER CXXXm. 

Shta said ; — Siva, thus entreated by BrahmA and other Devas said : — 
“ Wliere lies the cause of your great danger? Welcome to you all ; tell me 
your object plainly and 1 will give you all that you desire ; I feel there is 
nothing that I cannot grant you. I always cherish in my mind the great- 
est good of you all ; the great asceticism that I practise is always for your 
welfare. 1 shall always protect you and ray devotees. I shall destroy 
those who may be your and, therefore, my enemies and thus bring about 
your happiness. Who is so very powerful that has become your great 
enemy ?” — 1-4. 

Hearing the above words of f^iva, the Devas said, “ Lord ! Your power 
is great, a few very strong and ferocious Asuras have practised severe 
austerities and are now causing us pain. We have, therefore, come to You 
for rescue. 0, Three-eyed One ! Maya, the son of Diti, is always 
quarrelsome and is our great enemy. He has built the castle named 
Tripura with yellowish white ornamental entrance gates; and other 
DAnavas being sheltered there and being fearless on account of boons 
granted to them, have become a source of great trouble to us. They 
treat us like menials as if we have no supporter. They have destroyed 
Nandanavana, etc., and other famous gardens in the Heavens ; and have 
forcibly carried away the Apsarns, liambha, etc., as well as the elephants 
Kurauda, Anjana, Vamana, and AirAvata belonging to Indra. The chief 



GH AFTER OXXXIII. 


9 


horBoa of Indra are stolen away and now yoked by the Asuras to their 
chariots. Our chariots, elephants, horses, women and riches have all been 
carried away by them and we do not know how we can win them back. 
Our lives are now in danger.’* — 5-12. 

J'he three-eyed Lord ^iva whose carrier is buffalo, thus appealed by 
the Devas said : — “ 0 Devas ! Cast aside your great fears caused by the 
D&navas«; I ehall reduce the castle Tripura to ashes, but you should do 
now what I wish you to do. If you want me to destroy that fortified town 
along with the demons, you should fit out my war chariot.” — 13 15. 

Accordingly, BrahmA and others in obedience to His orders equipped 
at once an excellent chariot. They fixed the earth as its basis, the two at- 
tendants of Siva as tlie two poles of the chariot (to which the yoke is fixed), 
the Mount Meru the seat in the chariot ; the Mandara, the axle ; the Sun 
and the Moon as the two silvery and golden wheels, the dafk and the 
lunar fortnights as the two fellies of the wheels, all the Devas for the 
machinery of the chariot, the serpents Kamvala and Arfvatara as the 

tying rope of the chariot, l^ukra, Vrihaspati, Budha, Mangala, and Saturn 
as the conveyors of the chariot and the firmament as the fender (with 
which a chariot is provided as a defence against collision). The eyes of 
serpents became the golden piping instruments (made of bamboos) of the 
chariot ; tho cheerful Devas bedecked the chariot with gems, pearls and 
sapphires. — 16-22. 

The sacred rivers, the Ganges, the Indus, the Satadru, the Chandra- 
bhaga, the Iravatl, the Vitasta, tlie Vipasa, the Yarnuiia, the Gandaki, 
the Sarasvati, the DevikS, and the Sarayu, were utilized in place of the 
bamboos in the chariot. The Nagas (women) of the Dhritarastra family 
became tho prostitutes in the chariot ; and the descendants of Vasuki, 
the various haughty serpents became the arrows of the bows and lodged 

themselves in the quivers. Surasd, Sarma, Kadrfi, VinatA,, l^uchi, 
Trisa, Vubhiksn, Sarvogra, Mrityu, Sarvaiama, Brahmavadhya, GobadhyA, 
Valabadhyft, Prajabhiti, etc., w'^ent to the chariot of Siva in the form of 
darts and javelins. The four Yugas took the place of the yoke, the four 
Hotras and four Varnas became the golden ear-rings, capable to do great 
works. That yoke illustrious like the ages rested on the fore of the 
chariot and was tied to it by means of the serpent Dhritarastra that served 
the purpose of a rope. — 23-30. 

The four Vedas, viz., Rik, SAma, Yajuh, Atharva became the four 
horses of the chariot. The various forms of charities w'ere the ornaments 
of those horses and the serpents Padma, Mahapadma, Tak^aka, Karko(aka, 
and Dhanahjaya were utilized in tying the hair of the horses. — 31-33. 

The sacred mantras originating from Om and the various sacrifices, 
viz., the remedying of evils, the tying of beasts, etc., became the jewels, 
pearls and corals, of the chariot. The most holy Orxi was the whip 
and Vasata formed its tip-knot. SinivAlt, Kuhfi, AmAvasya, RSkA and 
Anumati were employed as the reins of the horses ; there were also the 
black, yellow, white, red, brown banners of the chariot. The year made 
up of six seasons became the bow and the deathless AmbikA formed its 
fast string. — 34-39, 

2 



10 


THE MAT87A PURANAM. 


An exclamation used on making an oblation to a Deity, 

R4ini^=^The day preceding that ot the new moon, or on which the moon rises with 
scarcely visible cresent. 

^=The last day o( the lunar month when the moon is invisible. 

^jsa-=The full moon day. 

wn^^The 15th day of the moon’s age on which she rises one digit less than full 
when the gods and the manes receive oblations with favour. 

Lord Rudra became tlie great Knla (time) and this Kala is the year ; 
and His consort UmA, the Kdlaratri became the deathless bowstring. — 40. 

Kote.—m is same as P&rvati. 

dark night. Yama’s sister. The night of destruction. 

wm^lrnperishable. 

The arrow with which ^iva consumed the castle Tripura was forged 
with the potency of the three Devas :—(l) Malia Visnii, (2) Soma, and (3) 
Agni. Agni was the month of the arrow, and tlie Moon the dispeller of 
darkness, located Himself in the main portion of tho shaft and Visnu 
presented Himself in the form of its violence and strength. The snake 
V&suki discharged his terrible voiumi into that arrow to make it more 
mortal. — 41-43. 

The Devas, having thus prepared the chariot, went to l^iva and said : 

“ 0, Conqueror of the demons and tho enemies ! we have got this 
chariot ready for Thee which will help to drive away the troubles of Indra 
and other Devas and thus preserve them.” — 44-45. 

The Lord l^iva then said ; — Well done ! and then began to examine 
that huge divine chariot looking like Mount SLimeru and was highly pleased 
with it. He praised the skill of the Devas and said to them : 

‘‘ 0 Devas ! You should soon provide this chariot with a skilful 
driver as well.” — 40-48. 

The Devas were very inncli confused to hear tliose words of the 
Lord and looked as if they had been pierced by arrows. They began to 
think deeply on this point. They said to themselves : — “ Who can loe the 
worthy charioteer of Mahadeva save Visnii ? So let us go and take His 
refuge.” — 49-50. 

Thinking thus, they looked like buffaloes with yokes on their necks 
and obstructed by mountains on their way, and they heaved a deep sigh, 
saying : “ Alas ! how can we accomplish this ?” — 51. 

BrahmA seeing the Devas overpowered with anxiety and ready to go 
and stand on the pole of the chariot said, “ I shall be the charioteer,” 
and with these words He took the reins of the horses, when all the Devas, 
assembled there, expressed their unbounded delight in a loud chorus of 
exclamation. ' BrahmA started the chariot and Ijord Siva jumped into it 

saying: ‘‘Yes, He is the worthy charioteer of Mine.” When iSiva seated 
Himself in the chariot, the horses through His weight knelt down to the 
ground until their faces were covered with dust. At that time, Lord Siva, 
finding those horses — the manifestations of the Vedas — falling down 
to the ground, lifted them up, as a dutiful son up-lifts his distressed 
manes. — 52-56. 



OBAPTBR OXXXIV. 


11 


Again a loud exclamation arose and all ""the Devas shouted fre- 
quently,' “ Victory, victory to Hara,*’ which seemed like the roaring sound 
of the billows of the ocean. Then BrahmS, the giver of boons, made the 
steeds go faster by smacking the whip of Om. The horses with their 
heads lifted up into the air and their mouths open, galloped away, hissing 
like ferocious serpents as if they would devour the Heavens. The horges, 

goaded by Brahmfl. and directed by ^iva, flew like the wind blowing at the 
time of the destruction of the world. — 57-60. 

By the injunctions of the Lord l^iva, Nandikeivara sat on the bull 
holding the stem of His illustrious banner. iSukra and Vfihaspati, of the 

lustre of the sun, anxious to win the pleasure of i^iva, began to look after 
the chariot wheels. The serpent, Se.-a, the destroyer of all evils, used to 
guard the cliariot and Brahma’s bed on the chariot, with arrows in 
hand. Dharmanija appeared on His fiery buffalo, Kuvera came on His 
serpents, and Indra came on His elephant Ainivata ; and they all guard- 
ed the chariot. S\yamikjirtikeya, the grantor of boons, came to guard His 
father’s chariot, riding on His Kinnaradike-resounding peacock, whose 
beauty defied that of hundred Moons. — 6L65. 

NandWvara held the bright trident and looked like Yama, the des- 
troyer of all Lokas. He protected the back and the two sides of the 

chariot. Pramatlias, the attendants of l^iva, like volcanic mountains, ablaze 
like fire and robust like tlie snow-clad peaks of the mountain, followed the 
chariot of the Lord. They all looked like formidable sharks in the 
deep. Bhrigu, BliaradvAja, Vaeiistba, Gautama, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, 
Marichi, Atfi, Afigira, Parasara, Agastya, etc., pleased the Unborn and 

Indomitable Lord ^iva with their nicely composed devotional hymns. At 
that time the chariot of the unconquerable Lord began to march towards the 
castle Tripura, as the mountain with wings flies in the Heavens. — 66-69. 

The attendants of Siva, the Prainathas, gallantly escorted the chariot 
protected by the Devas. They roared like lions and looked then like 
elephants, or like mountains or like Sun or like clouds. Like the ferocious 
occean at the time of the destruction of the universe, full of crocodiles, 
Timis and Timingalas, the extremely brilliant chariot of the Lord glided 
onwards full of radiance, rumbling deep, like the sound of thunder-clouds 
and lightnings. — 70-71. 

Here ends the one hundred and thirty-third chapter on the marching of the 
chariot towards the Tripura castle. 


CHAPTER OXXXIV. 

Suta said: — When Lord l^iva took His seat the universally 
venerated divine chariot. His attendants, the Pramathas, .began to shout 
loudly and exclaimed, ‘‘ Sadhu,” “ sadhu.” The bull, the carrier of the 
Lord, also began to bellow on hearing the voice of his Master. The sages 
resounded all quarters with their shouts of “ victory.” The horses began to 
neigh loudly. At the same time, the sage Narada, illustrious like the Moon, 
hurriedly ushered himself into the presence of the Daily as at Tripura. 



12 


THE MAT8YA PVRANAM. 


Here, on the other hand, various ominous signs and misfortunes began 
to be visible in the castle of Tripura. Just then Ndrada came .there. 
Seeing the Devarsi Narada, who looked like cloud, all the DShavas stood 
up to salute him. — 1-5. 

They washed his feet and offered him green Durba grass, rice, 
honey, milk, etc., and worshipped him as Brahma worshipped Indra of 
yore. After being thus adored, the Sago Narada took his seat on a 
golden throne. When all the demons, along with their sovereign Maya, 
took their respective seats, tlien Maya, with a pleasant face, asked Narada : — 

0 Sage, the knower of the present ! Many terrible, ominous 
signs are now being manifested in our castle ; we never experienced such 
before. What is the cause of all these evils ? 0, Seer ! what to say, 

I dream many terrible dreams in the night. I dream -of the flag posts 
breaking and the banners falling down without any gust of wind and 
the courtyards, doorways, and buntings shaking, as if there was an 
earthquake. I also hear the grim and hoarse exclamations of ‘kill, kill’ 
‘cut, cut’ pervading all over the town. O Narada! I am not afraid of 
the Devas, India and others ; if 1 am afraid of anyone, lie is Lord Siva, 
the Merciful to His devotees who removes all their fears. Nothing is 
concealed from von. Your vision can see past and future occurrences in 
all the three worlds ; therefore, O, Seer ! explain to me the reasons of 
such ill-forebodings.^ I am under your protection.’’ — 0-15. 

Hearing such words of Maya, Narada said : — 

“Hear the cause of such ill-bodings. The word ‘Dharma’ is 
derived from a root meaning to “ hold up ” and “ to express the glories 
of the Creator ; ’* therefore, Dharma is the practice of virtue and tho 
propriety of being magnanimous. The good and tlie great have described 
‘Dharma ’ to be the cause of attaining one’s desired object and happiness, 
and, therefore, they have advised Dliarma lo be practised. Adharma, which 
is contradictory to ‘ Dharma,’ is said lo be tlie cause of all misfortunes 
and, therefore, ought to be avoided. The knowers of the Vedas have said 
that those coining to the path of virtue from the life of vice and again 
launching on the track of evil, perish. Therefore, you, in spite of being 
firm on your Dharma, are helping the Devas, who are your evil wishers ; 
and you will be despised on account of these haughty Danavas that form 
your following. Tlioy will bo of no help to you, and the misfortunes 
passing before you in course of your dreams arc all indications of your 
coming evils. In other words, they indicate your annihilation along with 

j^our paraphernalia. The Lord J^iva is advancing towards your town on 
his great chariot embodying all the T.okas, and fie will destroy you all. 
If you wish well, you should throw yourself, along with your followers 
and the members of your family, on His mercy, Who is eternal and of 
great strength. Thus you, with your sons and relatives, will go to His 
abode.”— 16-23. 

In this way, the sage Narada, after warning them of their coming 
misfortunes, returned to Mahadeva, tho Deva of the Devas. — 24. 

After the departure of the sage, Maya, the leader of the Danavas, 
advised his followers not to fear and said, “ O, Brave Danavas I we are 


OBAPTER GXXXV. 


13 


born heroes ; sons and grandsons are born to us ; we have now done 
wbat oughti^to be done by us. Now quit all fears in this hour of crisis 
and fight with the Devas. We will all attain heaven after conquering 
the Devas and will enjoy all the realms after killing Indra and other 
Devas. Go up to the terraces of your houses with all your arms and 
await the hour of battle after putting on your armours, Dfinavas ! go 
up to your respective spots in all the three fortresses ; for the places 
should not be left vacant. This will soon be attacked by the Devas. 
You will know the advance of the indomitable Devas in the aerial 
regions, and I am confident of your being able to keep them at bay with 
your arrows.” — 25-30. 

Maya, after thus haranguing his followers, entered suddenly into 
his castle, full of the women folk, with a very heavy mind. After 

purifying himself, he performed the worship of the Lord i^iva, the 
Digamvara, who is white like silver, and praised Him with well-chosen 
words, and placed himself under the refuge of the Deva of the Devas, who 
is the enemy of passion, and the killer of Andhaka and the destroyer of 

Daksa’s sacrifice. The three-eyed ^iva, holding Moon on His forehead 
and Ilis third eye effulgent, did not take notice of the evil intentions of 
Maya, who took His protection and wanted freedom from fear. I^iva 
granted to Maya his desired boon who then became quite free from any 
cares. — 31-33. 

Here ends the one hundred and thirty-fourth chapter 
on the coming of Ndrada to the Tripura castle. 


CHAPTER CXXXV. 

Suta said Thus the Muni Narada went away from the Tripura 
castle and joined the Deva army. He took his seat in the assembly of the 
Devas. The place where Bali, the king of the Daityas, performed sacrifices 
is known as the wide Ilavfita Varsa. This is famous as being the birth- 
place of all the Devas. All the ceremonies of the Devas, their yajiias, 
marriages, natal ceremonies are performed here. The Lord of Uma enjoys 
Himself here daily in company with his Pari§ads, and all the Lokapalas 
(the Regents of the several quarters) live here like the Mount Meru. 
Stationed at such a place, Siva, whose eyes are beautiful and of tawny colour, 
addressed Indra and the other Devas, thus: — “ 0, Indra! the Tripura 
of the enemies is visible. It is decorated with Vimanas, bannem and 
buntings. This castle shines like fire and greatly torments peoples ; 
see there are other Danavas standing on terraces and gateways, wearing 
coronets and ear-rings, looking like mountains and banks of clouds. 
They look hideous and are holding arms in their hands and have 
angry faces. They seem to be very eager for victory and are trying to 
advance ; you should, therefore, drive them away by your weapons 
and take my retinue to help you. In the meanwhile, I shall take my 
seat on this excellent chariot and remain here like Mount Meru and 
reconnoitre the entrance of the fortified town, and then try to gain 
you victory. I shall reduce the fortresses to ashes by means of.ona single 



THW UATSYA PVRANAM. 




arrow as soon as all three of them come under Pusyfi asterism yoga.” 

% 

Hewing those words, Indra, followed by his army, marched to con- 
quer Tripura. The Devas and the attendants of Siva consisting of that 
huge army began to roar like thunder clouds; they marched on in the 
firmament and appeared tlien like huge masses of clouds risen in the 
sky. Hearing which the demons, eager to fight, emerging from their 
strongholds, dashed against the Devas in the air. Most of them became 
infuriated and began to thunder and roar and by their noise drowned 
the martial music of the Devas, as the Moon is enveloped by the clouds. 
As the ocean swells under the in/luence of the Moon, the aspect of 
Tripura became awfully grim by the influx of the .Asuras. Some of them 
were playing the music-of-war on the terraces of the palaces, on the tops 
of enclosure walla and on the gates Some, wearing garlands of gold, 
roared like thunder-clouds and began to play the mnsic-of-vvar. Some 
began to nin about, waving tlieir clotli in excitement, and some, remain- 
ing in their houses, began to enquire into tlie reason of that commotion. 
Others replied they did not know the cause of it, their sense of right 
understanding being nuublled ; in lime, the whole thing would be revealed. 
Others said, “ f^iva, seated like a lion in TIis chariot on the summit 
of Meru,ha8 made His appearance to torment Tripura, as a disease cropping 
up in the body torments the system. Tie wliatevcr it may, why should we 
fear ; what is the hitch, you come out witli your arms, what do yoti wish 
to enquire from us? Our prestige in this war must be kept up.” 
The Danavas of Tripura thus hurriedly conversed among themselves ; 
and, soon after, tlieir compeers residing in the Tarkasura fortress emerged 
out of their stronghold, like infuriated serpents from their holes, under the 
generalship of the valiant TarakHsura. — 13-2H. 

Those advancing TJaityas were kept at bay by Pramathas, the 
followers of Siva, as a herd of wild elephants is obstructed by multitudes 
of lions. At whicli the haughty Daityas in their oxcitemout began to 
blaze like fire. And the archers c>f liolh tlie armies discliarged their 
deadly arrows upon one other. The Danavas, who took pride on their 
own beautiful faces, began to laugh at the faces of the attendants of 
^iva. Some of whom looked like cats, some like deer, some were 
distorted and others looked torrible.— 27-3(». 

The arrows discharged by the valiant arms penetrated into the 
warriors like the fishes getting into water and the birds in midst of the 
foliage. “ Whore will you fly and hide, wait ; make room for us, we shall 
Ifill you ; you will soon see us again ! ” with such hai-sh words the Danavas 
addressed the attendants of Siva. They pierced the attendants of Siva 
with their barbed arrows, as the sun disperses the masses of clouds with 
His rays ; and the valiant Pramathas, with their lion eyes, also in their 
turn, paid the Danavas back in tlieir own coins by piling on them 
huge rocks and trees, etc. The inmates of Tripura became dispersed 
and it appeared, then, that the sky was overspread with clouds or witli 
pack of geese. — 31-34. 

The Daityas drawing their bows shot multitudes of arrows. It 
looked ominous as clouds marked with rainbow indicate stormy days. 



OHAFTBE GXXXV. 


15 


The leaders of the attendants pierced by the arrows lost good deal of blood 
and looked like secretions discharged fronn mountains. The Daityas in 
their turn, were crushed to deatli by the trees, rocks, thunderbolt, trident, 
battle-axe and other weap.ons thrown by the Devas, as the glass is pow- 
dered by the weight of stone. — 35-37. 

The Tripura swelled with the influx of the Asnras, as the ocean does 
at the sight of the Moon. The Daityas cried out “ Victory to TarakSsura !” 
and the leaders of the Deva hosts cried out “ Victory to Indra ! Victory to 
^iva !” The brave warriors of both the armies mortally wounded with 
the arrows were breathing like the clouds full of rain. The battle 
field looked fearful with the heap of chopped Lands, heads, yellowish 
white banners, umbrellas and with flesh and blood. — 38-41. 

The aerial fight then went on ; tlie soldiers of the Lord iSiva and 
the Daityas clapped their hands, jumped in the air and took out their 
choice weapons and when the combatants fell down like the Tala fnrit 
falling to the ground. At the sight of this, the Siddhas, Oharanas and 
celestial nymphs became gladdened and danced in tbe heavens with glee 
and cried “ Bravo, Bravo.” Tlie celestial drums sounded without being 
beat. That hour it looked as beautiful as does when the dogs bark at 
the thunder of clouds. The remaining Daityas retreated into the 
fortresses, like the rivers falling into the sea and the serpents retiring 
into their holes. The powerful Devas, then clad with their arms fell on 
the Tarak&ksa fortress as the mountains fall on their wings. — 42-46. 

The array of Siva divided into three divisions, marched on Tripura 
and started warfare at tliree places when Maya and Vidyunm^li also 
appeared on the scene. Vidyunmali looking like an elephant inflicted 

a severe blow on Nandi (the bull of the T^ord l^iva) with his huge Parigha 
weapon, which made him reel about like the demon Madhu by the blov/ 

of Nilriiyana. After Nandikeivara’s retreat, the valiant attendants of ^iva 
made a vigorous dash on Vidyunmilii. They were Ganapatis, GhantA- 

karana, i^ankukarana and MaliakAla and others. They were all pierced with 
the arrows of Vidyunmali, who, after harassing Ganapati, and others, began 
to roar like thunder clouds most hoarsely. Hearing the thundering growls of 
Vidyunin&li, NandikaWvara, shining like Sun, again, confronted him. He 
hurled the powerful fiery bolt, named VajrAstra at the Danava, given to 

him by the Lord ^iva, which hit him in the chest, by the force of which 
that stalwart giant fell to the ground like a mountain blasted by the 
thunderbolt of Indra. — 47-56. 

Seeing, Vidyunni&li rendered senseless by Nandiketfvara, the DAnavas 
raised a hue and cry which made the other leaders fly. The Ganapatis, 
then, pursued the DAuavas. When the general Vidyuninfili was thus 
rendered senseless, the demons seething with wrath showered on the army 
of ^iva, rocks and trees as the clouds send forth rain. This utterly con- 
fused tlie Ganapatis and rendered them helpless for the time being, as tbe 
irreligious cannot understand the essence of the Bi’ahnunnas and tbe 
Devas. — 57-59. 



16 


TUB MATS7A PUBANAM. 


Then the general Tarakasiira, most valiant and poworful, came to 
tlie scene, looking like a high mountain and huge tree. ^ The soldiers of 
Siva, with their lieads, arms and legs separated from their bodies, looked 
like snakes brought under the influence of spql Is. The (lanapatis were 
seriously checked by the powerful Maya, the knower of MTiyft. Some of 
them began to reel about by the delusion of Maya as the singing birds 
hover about in their cage. Tarakasura began to consume the army of f$iva 
as lire consumes dry wood. The soldiers in the J^iva’s army became dis- 
tressed, like the trees blown by a blast of wind, by the violence of arrows 
showered on them by Maya and Tarakasura. — 57-155. 

Maya afterwards produced fire by his power of Mnyfi and lot that loose 
on the army of ^iva and also cast crocodiles, snakes, lions, tigers, moun- 
tains, trees, deer, locusts with biirjjt wings, the eighteen-footed Sarablia, 
water and air.— Gf5-C7. 

The soldiers of l^iva, inspite of their keenness to fight with the Danavas 
could not adequately do so owing to their being influenceil by Maya's 
delusion, just as the objects of senses become useless to the liisis who 
practise self-restraint. They were exceedingly bewildered by the force 
of water, fire, elephants, serpents, lions, tigers, bears and the demons ; as 
a drowning man in the ocean gets confused. The IVinavas raised a tumult 
of victory on finding their foes over-powered by them. Then, the follow- 
ing attendants of l^iva advanced to the van to protect the Devas. — 68-70. 

DharmarAja armed with Ilis club, Vanina, Surya, Swamikartika 
surrounded by his Koti J3eva.s, Jndra seated on Ainivata and armed with 
his thunderbolt came and joined the battle. Then the Sun, Moon, 

Saturn, Yama, and the highly brilliant a, became excited and entered 
into the army of the Dcinavas. Like mad elephants making their way 
Into thick forests by uprooting trees, and like the brilliant Sun shedding 
Uia radiance in midst of the clouds charged with rains, like the lion 
making havoc on cows in a solitaiy plai*e, the l>cvas began to pursue 
the Danavas and harass tliem.- 71-7.3. 

Then the DAnavas became much distressed by the blows inflicted 
by the attendants of ^iva and they fled in great disorder. The Devas 
threw the Asuras away to a great distance like the Sun dispelling the 
darkness. As the rising Sun drives away the nooturnal darkness, as the 
Moon also takes away the darkness, similarly, the effect of the weapons of 
the Daityas was melted down by the grace of the Mighty i^iva, and the 
power of the divine weapons made manifest, when the Dikprdas, the Loka- 

p&las and the attendants of J^iva rai.sed a chorus of victory. Many of 
the DAnavas were lying deprived of their head, arms and legs. Their 
bodies i^ere pierced through and through by arrows. — 74-76. 

The Danavas wounded by the Devas suffered the agonies of an 
elephant entangled in a swamp. At the same time, India used His 
thunderbolt, SwamikArtika His l^akti, Dharmarftja His terrific club, Varuna 
His formidable noose and Kuvera His deathlike trident Sakerfa, the 
attendant of Kuvera by his sheer strength, and the Devas, like Ganapatis, by 



their wonderful fiery valour, like the fully blazing fire offered in Purnahuti, 
began to crush the Daityas. It seemed, tlien, tliat the thunderbolt of 
Indra had fallen amongst rho Danavas, and were tearing them to pieces. 
Then Alaya overpowering Swainikartika, the guardian of the Devas spoke 
to Tarak^sura. — 77-80. 

I shall now enter Tripura after inflicting rny blows on our foes; 
and take some rest. After which we shall resume our fight with "the 
Devas. I feel belaboured by the enemy’s blows. My weapons, banners 
and conveyance are all injured. And the Ganapatis, having gained victory 
are moving triumphantly, and look briiliant by this defeat of ours. 
^-81-82. 

Hearing the above words of Maya, the red-eyed Tarakasura instantly 
retired from his position in the sky to his stronghold in company with his 
army. Seeing this the Devas, the sons of Aditi, became very glad. They 
pursued Maya and resounded the air with their shells and drums, etc., 
which looked like the thuiider of roaring lions and elephants in the 
HirnSlayas. — 83-84. 

Here ends the 07 ie hundred and thirty- fifth chapter on the^ first attack 
of the Tripura castle by the Devas. 


CHAPTER CXXXVr. 

Sflta said Maya the most skilful of all the demons, after inflicting 
his blows on the Devas entered l)is castle Tripura as a patch of blue cl^ud 
merges into the blue sky. And when he saw the demons there, he breathed 
heavy sighs and began to think ; he looked then like a second Kala, as if 
going to destroy all the worlds, lie thought : — “ Alas ! Even the valiant 
Vidyunmali is slain before whom even Indra, desirous to fight, would have 
trembled with fear”. — 1-3. 

He also thought in his mind “ There is no fortress so impregnable 
as this'^rripura fort. So this was thought of by all. But even this fort is 
now invaded. So no fort anywhere can be said to be a place of safety. 
All the forts are subject to the Great Time (Kfila). Wliea the Kala itself 
is our enemy and has become angry, how dare we expect that we would 
be saved; for, all the beings in the three realms are subject to Kala. 
This is the law ordained by Brahma. So who can exert his influence 
over this immeasurable K?ila whose ways are inscrutable ; save Mahadeva 
who can evade the laws of K?ila ? f dp not fear Indra, A^uuiaa, Yama, 
or Kuvera, etc. But I find it extremel}^ difficult to conquer Siva who is the 
Lord of these. I shall now demonstrate before my demon folks my great- 
ness, splendour and valour and will show it well. I shall ^ now make a 
well with steps leading into it, full of ambrosia and medicinal plants by 
tasting which all my dead Daitj^as will be alive again. — 4-10. 

Maya the valiant and most skilled in Maya (extraordinary powers) 
with these conceptions, created such a well 16 miles long and 8 miles 
broad with beautiful steps leading into it, pure like the rays of the Moon, 
full of sweet and agreeably perfumed water like ambrosia and possessing 

a 



18 


TBE MAT8YA PUBANAM. 


all the refreshing and sorrow-removing qiialities of a dutiful and virtu- 
ous lady. He made it with as much skill as Brahm4 made RambliA. — 1 1-13. 

It abounded with lotuses of various kinds, like the Sun and the 
Moon ; many flowers and rows of swans were there. It had a host of sweet 
singing birds of golden colours and seemed as if filled with beings eagerly 
wishing for their desired objects. Maya produced such a wonderful well 

as ‘Cord ^iva brought the Ganges. Afterwards he washed the corpse of 
the general Vidyunmali in this tank. — 14-16. 

That greatly powerful enemy of the Devas was instantly ro-called 
to life like a flame getting ablaze wh<>n clarified butter is poured over 
it. The demon Tarakfteura caice and s-alutod Maya with folded hands ; 
and Vidynnmtili, getting up, said, “Where is ^i\a? Where is Nandi 
surrounded by his jackal followers, the Pnmu.lhns ? Where are the followers 

We shall fight, and crush our enemies ; we will attain victory. 
JSitlier we shall become tlio sovereign of the tiniversc by figltting f.ice to 
face with them ; or, we will go to the realm of Dlnirmaraja (IVath) after 
being killed by His folhnvers 7-20. 

Hearing those heroic words, Ma 3 'a delightfully embraced Vidyun- 
mali and said : “ 0 Vidj’uninAll ! without j'ou, 1 do Jiot want kingdom, nor 
life even ; what of other petty things ? (), hero ! this ])ooI of nectar made 
by me is life-giving to all the demons, I’o my great good luck, 1 consider 
it a matter of utmost gratification to find you return from the city of 
Yama. All my treasures plundered in my hour of misfeutune will now be 
recouped and we shall enjoy them.’’ — 21-21. 

The chief Daityas then saw that well again and again, so well-de- 
siped by Maya, and rejoicingly said: “() Demon folks! Now fight 
with the enemies withont the least fear for this well will restore the 
dead to life.”— 2,o-26. 

Afterwards the demons sounded their terrific war-dnnns like the 
roaring billows of the ocean. Hearing which all their comj)eers came out 
of Tripura instantly to resume liglit. -1!7-2(S. 

They all were decorated vvitli bracelets of iron, silver or gold studded 
with precious stones, the ear-rings, gat lands, and fearful eorouels ; and 
armed with weapons glitteri tig like Ihishes, they became greatly excited. 
Thus aiTayed, they came out powerful like acrobats, tltondeVing like 
clouds and sounding like elephants with their tusks raised ; and fearless 
like lions. — 29-31. 

pie demons steady like the deep re.servoirs. and powerful like the 
scorching Snn, and stalwart like the huge trees, began to terrify and inflict 

jiain on the Devas. The followers of ^iva, on the other hand, also jumped 
like theGaruda and appeared before their foes to fight.— 32-33. 

Repeated battles were fought between Nandiketfvara followed by 
the attendants of Siva and 'J’Arakusura accompanied by the demons. 
They hit one another with swortls shining like Moon, the tridents 
glittering like flashes of fire and with the liarbed arrows. The falling 
arrows and the flashes of the swords looked like falling meteors.— 34-36. 



CHAPTER CXXXVI. 


19 


The soldiers of both the armies falling on the ground under the 
blows of weapons, groaned with their last moans, which sounded like the 
cries of beings condemned to hell. The heads bedecked with coronets 
and the ears with ear-rings, falling on the ground looked like the 
mountain peaks rolling down on earth. The demons struck with the 
battle axes, swords, spears and hit with clubs, etc., fell on the ground 

like elephants. The soldiers of Siva rejoiced and roared. The Siddhas 
also joined in the Gandharva fight. — 37-40. 

‘‘ 0 Prarnathas ! you are most valiant. 0 Demons ! you are most 
haughty.” Thus the Charanas uttered on the battlefield. — 41. 

The soldiers of iSiva crushed by the clubs of the demons vomited 
blood and looked like mountains ejecting gold. Whereas, other followers 

of ^iva killed and wounded the demons with their arrows, trees, and 
rocks. — 42-43. 

The cleiuoin deputed by Maya took away those Daityas that were 
killed and tlirew tlieni in the life-giving well constructed by their lord. 
The dead demons riistored to life rose like the devas from the heavens 
with bright l)odics adorned witli l^eautiful ornaments on their handsome 
and radiant forms. Tims, in numerable deaf I demons were recalled to life 
and instantly repaired thumlering to the great battlefield. — 44-46. 

Those demons shouted out, “ O comrades ! fight the enemy fearlessly. 
Do not tarry, the well will recall you all to life if you lie dead.” 

I^a/ikukarafia, l^iva’s attendant of formidable shape, hearing those ener- 
getic words of the demons hurried to the Lord and said ’ 

“ 0 Lord ! The demons are being killed again and again by the 
Prarnathas but they are revived again like the parclied crops after 
being watered. There is, undoubtedly, a well of ambrosia in this fort where 
the dead demons aie being tlirown and regain their lives.” — 47-50. 

After ^afikukarana had narrated this to the Lord, there was a great 
commotion in the army of the demons. The demon Tarakasura with 

terrific eyes, ran towards the chariot of i^iva with liis mouth wide open 
like an irritated lion with liis gaping mouth. — 51-52. 

The great drum was soumled and the conch shell was blown 
ill Tripura ; the demons emerged from Tripura and beheld the Devas 
in the chariot of Lord fc^iva. — 53. 

At that time the earth quaked ui\(ier the pressure of the armies, and 

the chariot of ^iva wont down and got stuck in the earth. At this, i^iva 
and BrahmS. became much distressed. The cliariot containing those two 
Devas began to go down and down without finding any support, like a 
learned man without finding au adequate place of his liking. — 54-55. 

It became supportless and looked dull, like the body devoid of 
potency, the small quantity of water during the hot weather, and love 
shewn by a twice-born Brahmin. Then Brahma descending from the 
chariot made an attempt to raise it and became successful by His 
great power; and Lord Janardana, dressed in yellow garb, assumed 
the form of the bull and placed the yoke on his neck and lifted up the 



20 


THE MAT8YA PUUANAM. 


chariot by his horns, as an illustrious scion elevates his falnil 3 ^ The 
demon Tarakasura also jumped out like a winged mountain and dealt a 
heavy blow to Brahnnl. — oii-dO. 

Brahma pxitting aside liis wliip on the yoke began to gasp, seeing 
whicli the demons sent forth a shrilling yell and thundered like clouds to 
please Tarakasura. — 61»62. 

Lord Visnu, the holder of the disc and revered by jjiva, trampled 
over the demons and entered the Tripura, in the form of a bull and 
destroying the lotus beds, drank up all the nectar of the well to the bottom 
and emptied it as the Sun drives away the darkness. After drinking this, 
Lord Visnu bellowed and came again before Siva. — G3-65. 

The Asuras, then began to be killed by the deadly attendants of 
Siva and rivers flowed tinged red with blood of the slain Daityas and 
all the Clemons took to their heels like the ignorant fool, getting illumined 
by the teachings of the learned. — tiO. 

Afterwards, TnrakAsura, Vidyiininuli and Maya being overpowered by 
the showers the arrows of the lhainathas went, inside tlie 'Pripiira. 
When the principal attendants of Siva, riz. — iMahendra, NandWvara 
and Svainikartika, etc , laughed a hearty laugh and ciied out we shall 
conquer along with the Moon and the Dikpalas.*’ — t)7-l)8. 

Here en/Js the one hinnlrvd and thirl ij-ti.vtli (diapter on Vmius drinhimj 
the life’diving tcell in the Tvtpara fort. 


CHAPTER CXXXVIl. 


Sflta said : — All the demons of the fort Tri))ni'a became overpowered 
by the army of Siva ; their bodies u ere severely injured and with teiroj* 
they entered into their castle. The JVamallias, tlum, hrcdce down tiieir 
entrance gates. By tlie pi’essiii(» of the Ik^vas, they looked powerless 
like serpents without fangs, tlie bull deprived of its Ijorns, the bird bereft 
of her wings, the river devoid of its waters. They spoke disconsolately 
to themselves as to what they should do, si'cing wliieli their Lord 
Maya with his eyes looking like red lc)tus tnidressed them thus, so very 
unmindful. — 1-4. 

“ O Demons ! Have you reliicd liere after onc(»untering the enemy in 
a tough battle,- or hav»' you come here after paying your homage to the 
Devas on being bewildered by their army ? Undoubtedly tlie Devas 
have committed outrage on us as far as they could. Though you 
are highly fortunate and exceedingly powerful, you are now prepared to 
retire into a mountainous forest. Alas ! How great is the power of Kala ? 
Time is certainly unconquerable. See ! this our fort, so very impregnable, 
has been beseiged today ” — 5-8. 

The demons at the time of their being thus addressed by Maya in 
a deep voice like that of rumbling cloud, became still more pale like the 
stars becoming dull under the radiance of the Moon. At this time, the 
demons posted to guard the well of nectar approached their sovereign 
Maya and with folded hands said. — 9-10. 




CHAPTER GXXXVIL 


21 


“ 0 Demon King ! Some f^eva in the form of a bull has quaffed 
the contents of tlie nectar well, constructed by your grace with lotus 
beds and the buzzing bees all round it and where fishes used to play at 
bottom in its rnud. It now looks like a senseless ugly woman.” — 11-12. 

Hearing the report of the guards, Maya exclaimed “ what a 3ire 
misfortune! I constructed that well through my power of Maya. If, 
it be true, that it has been emptied in this way, we are undoubtedly 
ruined and the Tripura fort will be in ruins. The Devas killed the 
Dailyas again and again. But they were all restored to life by this 
well. If it be true, that the well has been drunk off, surely it is the 
work of the yellow-robed Hari. Who other than the unconquerable Hari 
can drink up the nectar well, built by ray extraordinary powers? 
Whatever secrets exist with the ])ait 3 ^as, are not left unknown to Hari. 
The boon that I asked for and obtained, no far sighted man could ever 
ask like that. But all this is now of no avail. Hari knows *all my 
counsels and my mind. This is a beautiful level country ; no trees, 
or mountains exist here ; all obstacles are removed. But the Prama- 
thas and the Devas have come to this place and are harassing me. 
(), Demons ! if you approve of iny plans, I should go over the sea where 

we shall be able to bear the violent attacks of the force of l^iva and 
Ills army like that of the wind ; 1 think that their progressive strength 
wdll be quite checked by the ocean and they will feel cut off from their 
ambitions. The track of their charict will bo blocked. There we 
shall fight and kill our enemies. And in case we are compelled to retire 
from fear, we need not be anxious, for, this ocean shining and expanding 
like the firmament will be our source of protection.” — 13-21. 

Maya, after addressing those words immediately repaired to the 
ocean with his fort Tripura ; which was fixed there with its gateways, 
etc. When the fort Tripura was thus removed, IS^iva said to Brahma 
“ Father of the Universe ! the demons being afraid of vie have moved 
on to the ocean ; therefore, take my chariot there where they have 
shifted with Tripura.” — 22-26. 

Then, the Devas roared with mirth and carried the chariot and 
all the arms and ammunitions to the western ocean. In other words, the 

Devas along with the attendants of Siva followed their Lord to the 
ocean where the demons liad shifted. And when thej" reached there, 
they saw the fort Tripura with nice banners streaming and with drums 
beating and with conch shells being ^blown, they gave out sounds of 
victory and roared like thunder clouds. — 27-2v) 

Later on, the demons also made a response from their fort by 
beating their tabors and uniting their chorus of thunder with the roars 
of the swelling ocean. Then, Lord ^iva, the protector of the Devas readily 
thought out what ought to be done and found out how to destroy the demons, 
and seeing them hovering about in Tripura, He spoke to Indra : — 30-31. 

“O Indra! the Danavas have now entered within the Tripura fort, 
now go there and attack the ocean and destroy it with the co- 
operation of Yama, Varuna, Kuvera and SvamikArtika, and other Gan&dhi- 
pas. Understanding that Bhagav^n Bbava has come, in His supreme 



22 


TUB MATSYA PURANAM. 


chariot to destroy tlie fort Tripura, see ! those sons of Diti are now 
resting on the salt ocean. 0 best of the Dovas ! 1 am also following you, 
seated in iny chariot, to cv)iiqaer and destroy the 'J'ripurii fort along with 
the whole host of demons with arrows, clubs and thunderbcits ; J will make 
all ^arrangements for the comforts of our troops wdio are nmly to 
kill the enemies.” — 32-35. 

Thus addressed and encouraged by Siva, Indra with his tliousand 
eyes full of joy, marched on to conquer Tripura. — 36. 

Here ends the one hundred and thirty-seventh chapter on the 
attack on Tripura fort in the ocean. 


CHAPTER CXXXVIII. 

Suta said : — Indra, then, the Lord of the Devas, wont with tlie 
LokapPdas and tlio atteu lants of i:^ivato kill those 'lemons. They, encour- 
aged by Siv’a, began to fly in the atmospliore like tho wingnl mountains 
They started to destiMy Tripura like a <lisease setting out to attack 
the human body. The demons saw them a*h^•lncing towards them 
blowing their conches and heating their (/rums. — 1-3 

Then after exclaiming ‘ Siva has cofue,” tliey all hec^ame inmd! 
agitated like the ocean swelling and being disturbed at the time of the 
dissolution of the worhl. Tho fearful <lomons after lu\‘iring tho music of the 
Devas, began to play their music, and shouted out roaring sounds. -4-5. 

Keen fighting then ensued, with greater vigour between tlie Devas 
and the Danavas ; and eac^h one tried to kill tho other of tli(^ opposite 
party. Both sides exhibited tlie same dash and 1>i‘avery ; tho same feedings 
of bitter enmily. Tliey stnicdv each otiiei* viohnitly and their bodies were 
cut to pieces; severe fighting ensued. As they wt'n* (ijditiiig together 
steadily tliey looked like the falling Suns, like a blazing* mass of fire, 
like the elephants heaving (h^ep breaths, like the birds liovoriiig about 
hither and thither, like the (juakiiig mountains, like the tliundering 
clouds, like tlie roaring lion, iike tlie liigh wind blowing and tlie highly 
agitated tough seas, like tlie lightning .penetrating into the rocks with 
thundering noise. In course of tho eonllict the lio^vstrings twanged 
and made the thundering noise.— 7-1 1, 

Roth the Devas and the Danaxas cried out and said to each 
other, “Do not fear! whore will you Hy ! wait; you will soon go to the 
doors of Death; we are standing here; if you Iiavo strength show your 
valour by fighting ” Como in front, shew your strength, lake up 
your arms, inflict cuts, break tlie foe, devour them, kill them ;~-iittering 
these words the heroes fought and fell dead. — 12-13. 

They sucenmhed to the blows of the sword, the battle axe, the club, 
the trident, the fist ; and they with arrows looked like forest mountains 
and fell down into the (^cean filled with big fishes, the terrible crocodiles, 
and Timingala fishes. — 14-15. 

When the dying strong-bodied demons fell into the ocean there was 



GE AFTER OXXXVlll. 


23 


a terrible noise like tlie thundering of clouds. Hearing which and attracted 
by the gusli of blood the crocodiles and other huge monsters pervading 
the dee]> agitated deeply the ocean. And they fought among themselves 
for the flesh and the Iflood of the fallen heroes on which they* lavishly 
feasted with satisfaction. Huge whales devoured the bodies of the 
demons with their (jhariots, horses, weapons, ornaments, etc., after driv- 
ing away the smaller monsters who had also collected there to have their 
share, Tlie sea monsters fought among themselves for the sole monopoly 
of the flesh and the blood as toughly as the Devas and the demons did 
between themselves. So there was fighting going on in the sea as there 
was between the Devas and the Asuras above. They ran about scouring 
the ocean to pick the dead heroes, as did the fighting foes on the 
battlefield above; and the monsters bit each other with tlie same excite- 
ment as did the warriors in course of the battle. — 10-21. ' 

The ocean turned red by the stream of blood flowing from the 
bodies of the dead and the wounded heroes of both the armies, the Devas 
and the Danavas above, and the aquatic animals below. The ocean also 
swelled up, due to the blood falling in it from above. — 22. 

Indra, tlie lord of the Devas, and a very terrible one, with innumerable 
army resembling like high mountains and big masses of clouds, be- 
soiged eastern gate, and remained there. Tlie bright Skanda, the son of 
Hara, and resembling like the risingSun anfl the Jambii river, beseiged 
the nortliern entrance gate wliich looked like the setting Sun on the 
Asta peak, witli his big army, Yama and Kuvera with club and noose 
respectively in their hands held the western entrance gate with great 
force. The three-eyed liOrd ^iva seated on his bright Deva chariot shining 
like ten thousand suns and the destroyer of Daksa’s sacrifice, took charge 
of the southern exit. — 23-20. 

Tlie attendants of J^iva held under their subjection the various 
other golden entrance gates and the high turrets of Tripura, the Kailasia of 
the Daityas, shining like the Moon, as tlie hailstone showering clouds hide 
the stars and the firmament above. — 27. 

The Pramatlias dismantled the abodes of the demons resembling 
like the rows of mountains and decorated with sacrificial altars, and threw 
them into the ocean, thundering ferociously like the dark thundering 

clouds. The attendants of ^iva also began to drown into the sea, the 
houses of the demons decorated with the trees and the foliage abounding 
with the chirping birds which made the women of the demons cry out “ O, 
Son ! O, Brother ! O, Lord ! ” “ O, Father! ” 0, Dear ! 0, Beloved ! ** and 
they began to curse the Pramathas. — 28-29. 

Thus a fierce battle ensued in that town of Tripura in course of 
which the boys and women folk began to perish, seeing which the demons 
angrily came out like the ocean to fight the foe and fought hand to hand 
with them. As soon as they made their appearance, the aspect of the war 
became more furious in wliich axes, rocks, tridents, spears and thunder- 
bolts were freely used and the bodies of the warriors were crushed to 
pieces and fell down dead on the battlefield. The Devas and the Danavas 
began to crush each other and pursued and attacked each other ; it seemed 



24 


TEE MAT'SYA PURANAM. 


then, that tumultuous roars were heard liking the thundei ing noise of the 
ocean at the time of univeraal dissolution. — 30-32. 

The Devas and Asuras bled profusely and roared loudly with 
their reddened eyes. Tims fighting went on and loud uproars were heard. 
The thoroughfares of Tripura that were covered with golden and marble 
pavement became now in an instant covered with iho stream of 
blood ; and in the twinkling of the eye, tliose demons breamo still more 
hideous with their heads, arms and limbs separated fn m them ; then, 
the infuriated Taraki'isura came out uprooting the trees and was instantly 
checked at the entranee by the all-powerful Lord f^iva. That valiant and 
wonderfully powerful demon came out of the town after killing those that 
were on the rampart wall and began to roar most furiously. — 33-36. 

That demon shining like the mountains though resisted like fin 

elephant, made an attempt to catch the chariot of i^iva and rushed out 

violently as an ocean floods the beach. Then the three-eyed Siva with 
bow in hand, Bliagavan Ananta Deva, and Brahma came out to meet 
Tarakasura. They were infuriated as a sea gets infuriated by the force 
of wind. — 37-38. 

Sesa, Giriska, and Brahma began to pierce the limbs of tlie enemies 
from the air and thundered loudly, ^iva, then with His eyes fixed on 
Tripura rested His one foot on the Rigveda personified as a horse and the 
other one on His Nandi ; He drew His bow with arrows. By the weight 
of the feet of ^ivfi, both the horse and the bull became oppresRe<l 
and respectively the breasts and the teelh of the horse and the Nandi bull 
fell to the ground. It is since then that the teeth and the breasts of the 
bull and the horse are not seen and fixed in a way as to make them 
invisible. — 39-4 j!. 

The awful red-eyed TArakAsura made a tiash f»)\vards J^iva but 
Nandi held him at bay. .\s a perfumer wlu'ts his saruhdwood, .so Nandi 
sharpened his battle axe and bit the demon Taraka with it. d'hns struck 
by battle axe, the powerful TdakAsura, with sword unsheathed, dashed 

against Nandi like a Sarablia of a mountain hin ciglifeen foot animal 
stronger than a lion). Then Nandi attacked him and severed liim from 
his body as one tears away one’s sacred tliroad, and roared aloud. When 
Tarakasura was thus killed, the Devas blew the heavy conch shells and 
shouted out loud thundering noise. — 43-16. 

Hearing this tumultuous uproar of tlie Prainathas, and the sounding 
of the drums, Maya asked Vidyuimiali who was (dose by : — “O Vidynn- 
mali! What is this sound tliat we hear, uttered by so many mouths, like 
the roar of the ocean ? What is the cause of this sudden uproar? The 
Devas are fighting and the Asuras are fleeing. What is the cause of this 
-47-48. 

Vidyunmiili who resembled Sun, hearing such words of Maya was 
oppressed in his heart and said ; “ O great hero ! He who was powerful 
like Yama, Varuna, Mahendra and Riidra, who used to shine like a moun- 
tain in every battle, he who crushed his enemies, he who was the gem of 
your name and fame, that Tarakasura, the crusher of the enemy, after 



G 11 AFTER C XXX IX. 


25 


lighting valiantly with the Pramathas and the Devas, has been killed by 
them ;it last. Hearing that Tarakasura, terrible like fire and the Sun with 
widely extended eyes, has been killed, the Pramathas have become very 
glad, their mind and heart filled with joy and are now roaring like 
thundering clouds.*’ — 49-51. 

Afaya hearing those words of VidyunmSli, who used to behave himself 
like tiie white mountain in the battlefield, said : “ 0, Vidyunmali ! Now 

we ought not to carelessly while away our time. 1 will shew ray valour 
and make this city safe.” — 52-53. 

The enraged Vidyunmali and Maya in company with the powerful 
demons went out and began to destroy the retainers of !^iva. — 54. 

Wherever Maya and Vidyunmali went, the Pramathas were severely 
beaten and they fled in great disorder, making those passages free of 
Devas. Afterwards Yama, Varuna and the other Devas prayed to Siva. 
They played on their tabors, Mridangas, Panavas, clapped their hands, 

roared and worshipped Siva. — 55-56. 

Siva thus adored by the high-souled Devas of immeasurable lustre 
like the Sun, the sons of Diti and praised by the truthful ascetics looked 
like the Sun in full splendour on the summit of Astachala. — 57. 

Here ends the one hundred and thirty-eighth chapter on the killing of 
Tdrakasura in the great T&rakdsura war. 


CHAPTER OXXXIX. 

Silta said : — When Tarakasura was killed in battle, Maya drove away 
the attendants of Siva and repeatedly spoke to the terrified Danavas. — 1. 

He said “ O, A-uras ! Hear what I say. Realize, O, brave ! What 
Xpu and I ought to do now. 0 Danavas with beautiful moonlike faces ! 
the moment the JMoon and the asterisin Pu§ya unite, this fort Tripura will 
come for a moment in one line with them. I wanted and got this boon for 

such a moment when this fort can be destroyed by Siva with only one 
arrow. You should all sing fearlessly. The destruction of Tripura can 
only be worked out in Pusya. If any Deva comes at that time arrayed 
in battle and can destroy these three forts with only one powerful arrow, 
then and then only this will fall ; otherwise, this fort is indestructible. 
O, heroes ! Now shew your war-tactics,' strength, enmity to the Devas 
and do your best to protect this Tripura with all your might and 
main till Piisyayoga occurs and gets over. If you can turn away the 
chariot of Siva in such a way as He may not be able to discharge His fatal 
arrow, then and then only we need not fear. If we are able to guard 
our Tripura in this way, the Devas will, in vain, await the advent of 
Pusya.”— 2-8. 

The Danavas, residents of Tripura hearing such words of Maya 
roared and said : “ We shall all do as you direct us and shall resort 

to that stratagem that would not give a chance to Siva to discharge his 
deadly arrow. Now we shall go to kill ^iva.” — 9-11. 

4 



26 


THE MATSYA PURAl^AM. 


They all became elated with joy ; their hairs over tht ir bodies stood 
on tlietr end with their ecstaoy ; and they said 

“ Either this Tripura fort will remain as it is, quite independent, till 
K^lpa lastson these three worlds — Heaven, Earth and PAtala (lower ro^iojis) 
— covered by the three feet of Narayana, or, we will become free of the 
DSnavas ; but we shall never deviate from the path of virtue that 3^)11 direct 
us to do. Men shall see the three Lokas cither free from the Devas or free 
from the Danavas. The demons after thus rejoicingly conversing together 
went to their abodes and passed the night gladly in the indulgence of 
amorous pastimes.-— 12-14. 

They said “ Tlie moon has made His appearance in the firmament 
dispelling all darkness, as if a great jewel is travelling in the sky. 
Lo ! the moon ill\iinining the landscape with His splendour looks like 
the goose in a beautiful big reservoir adori'ed with h)tnses, or the lion 
sitting on a rock of Idpifila^uli, or the garland of glittering jevvfds adorn- 
ing the breast of Tjord Vi^nn.” Thus risen in the blue firinanenf, the 
Moon, born of the e 3 "cs of Atri, began to shed powerfully the nretar of 
beautiful moonlight and bestow noiii ishnient and beauty to all the 
worlds. The demons began f(j iK^antifv their hous(»s and boflies wlien 
the Moon emitting flis eooJ ra^'s began lo smile on them. — Jo-LS. 

The (Urn oil lamps in the thoroughfares, palaces, squares looked 
like the budded Champaka flowers. Hut the lamps within the Afathas 
began to burn more vigorously. The palatial buildings of tljo Drinavas 
were full of jewels and valuables ami, tlieiefore, did not shine so well under 
the moonlight as tlie-^^tars dwindle away in (he linnamenf. Tin* darkness 
of that town was driven away by the lustre of the Afoon above and 
the lights burning in the rooms Itelow as feuds and chaos destroy a 
good family'. — lib^l. 

In the lirst part ol (lie niglit wlnm On^ Moon b('gan to laugh, as it 
were, very hmdiy ./.c., slnnc on th;it town in full sj^lcndour,, tin* demons 
started their amorous pastinu's with their ladies. At that moment 

the five arrows of Cupid, ihrewn before <,n Lord l^iva, now themselves 
became afraid when tln\v saw the aiufu'ous dLiiliances of the Danavas. 
Both the sexes perspiring ami getting tired. — 

They under tlieir influonee began to sing and nielorlionsly play Alurcli- 
chaufAs in tbeir lutes ; the (uickor> began to coo ra\ ishingly^ his notes and 
it seemed, then, that the God of love armed witli His bow and arrow began 
to be much agitated and distressed. 4'hc Aloon instutitlv driving away the 
noctural darkness and diffusing His rays all ovuu* the landscape, reigned 
in heaven in company of His Ixdovctl Hohini. — 

Some of the women sitting at the feet of their lords and placing 
tlieir palm of hand on the checks began to shod tears of love which 
made their faces look more beautiful. Someone looking her face in the 
mirror exclaimed “how lovely is my face “ became quite pleased 
at the prospect of getting fit reply from her husband. Some 
being enamoured by the hive of their husbands hurried straight to them 
as the darkness makes its appearance at the close of the day. The 
lords of some made their better-halves drink and some of the women folk 



QHAFTER CXXXIX. 




27 


rejoicod by the convei'Ratioii of their lords. The breasts of those women 
paint (*d with sandal, incense and other perfumes looked handsome like 
the ^iolden pitchers full of ambrosia. That night the Daityas played 
in the hands of their beloved and felt quite intoxicated by the 
sweet notes of Vin^ played by their consorts. Some women threw the 
arrow of Cupid by their enchanting notes and sang highly captivating 
songs from some sequestered nooks. Some of the demons pleased their 
helpmates and then enjoyed with them after singing to them the songs 
sung by other ladies. The sweet aroma of mango flowers pervaded 
all over Tripura when the tinkling of the anklets and the jingling of 
the girdle of bells worn by the women, put to blush the sweet notes of the 
nightingale Some women tiglitly embraced by their lords looked exqui- 
sitel^y beautiful with their liairs standing on their ends like the earth 
smiling with fresli verdure sprouted by the showers of rain. — 26-35. 

The women folk reposing at beautiful places looked highly charming 
under the influence of the moon. They, with their sweet and gentle voice, 
repeatedly said to their lords “ Do you not see my cheeks, come and throw 
3H)urself oji my beautiful and liigliwaist adorned with the girdle of 
small bells.’' 'J'lio group of the Daitya ladies looked exceedingly 
beautiful like the stars when the tliorough fares of the town were lit .up 
bj’^ the radiance of the moon. The^^ looked like so many stars twinkling 
before the brilliance of the rays of the moon. — 36-37. 

Sojne of the women laughing and burning with pa.ssion infused by 
i]m chiming of bells on the girdle of their waists began to tinkle their 
anklets in course of tlieii* amorous gambols and give suitable replies. 
The speech of the charming women wearing unfading beautiful garlands 
was as attractive as the notes of the geese in a reservoir. Their surpassing 
beauty, the sweet jinglingof their girdle bells, and their attractiveness 
were the sources of their rediof from the tortures of Cupid. They with 
their beautiful garments, decorated hair, the beautifully ornamented form, 
looked haiidsonie like the moonbeams beautified by the stars. — 38-41. 

Many of them enjoyed themselves in the see-saw wlien the strings 
of their ornaments broke and made their girdle of little bells fall down 
and the jewels to scatter on the ground which began to emit lustre 
on account of the scattered gems, thus it looked like the Moon surrounded 
by stars. The nightingale began to sing seated in its cosy foliage on the 
night lit up by the moon. The God of love exhausting His store of 
arrows, began to walk about in the town of the demons. Tlie moonbeams 
turned to the west and the night of 'enjoyment was brought to a close ; 
as if the demons would meet shortly with their discomfiture. The moon 
first turned red like tlie Kunda flowers ; then looked like the garland 
of gems ; then lost his light ; then looked like clouds till at last he became 
invisible, just when the good luck fades awa}^ a sick man looks pale. 
At last Aruna, the charioteer of the Sun defeated the Moon. The 
golden Sun, like a disc began to shine full}^ on the Udayachala, as if 
He is going to overcome the army that was then in the ocean. — 42-40. 

Here ends the one hundred and thirty- ninth chapter on the 
moonlight night in Tripura, 



28 


THE MAT8YA PURAEAM. 




CHAPTER CXL. 

Sfita said : — The Deva armies collected and thundered as does the 
ocean at the end of the Yuga, when they saw the Sun dawning on tlje 

summit of Sumeru. Afterwards, Lord l^iva accompanied by Varuiia, Kuvera 
and the thousand-eyed Indra marched towards the town of Tripura. 
The attendants of the Lord, the Prainatlias and tlie Ati Pramathas, with 
their various forms also roared and followed Him, playing on their 
music-of-war. The army of the Devas, marching with umbrellas raised 
and with music played, looked beautiful like the big trees and the murmur 
thereof of a forest. — 1-4. 

Seeing the vast army of t^iva advancing towards them as if a forest 
was moving, the D^navas became agitated and swelled together like the 
ocean. And like the clouds pouring forth rain, they with their eyes red 
with anger began to inflict their blows on Indra with their swords, 
spears, bows and arrows, javelins, tridents, clubs, battle axes, bolts and 
various other weapons. The demoiis looked like mo'uitains clad with 
wings. — 5-7. 

The Sons of Diti headed by Vidyuninfili and ]\laya advanced towards 
the Devas vviih jovial minds. The army of the demons looked as if, 
they were prepared to face death and very doubtful of victory moved 
like bodies void of strength. They, all expert in war, thundered and 
exchanged words with their enemies, looked like the roaring clouds 
and showed marvellous prowess in their encounter with the Devas. The 
two parties, emitting smoke, as it were, powdered many of their enemies 
by their weapons, blazing like fire and moon. Some of the demons 
fell down by the blows of clubs and others cleaii cut into two by the 
quoits and the arrows fell into the ocean. — cS-ll^ 

The garlands, dress and ornaments of the Deva armies and the 
Pramathas were torn asunder and .scattered. Jfany of the .soldiers fell 
into the ocean infested with sharks, crocodiles and Timingahis. — 13. 

At that hour, there was a tremendous noise ma(l(3 by the blows of 
the clubs, the battle axes, the bolts, the tride/its, the javelins, bright as sun 
and emitting smoke, the big rocks hurled by the au^ry demons as missiles 
and the falling of the wea])()ns and the dead soldiers into the ocean. 
The violent and powerful weapons projected by the Devas and Dfinavas 
looked beautiful like stars in the firmament, and began to make havoc 
on both the parties. The alligators and the fishes were crushed to death 
by the great war between the demons and the Devas as small beings 
suffer owing to the conflict between two elei)hants. -14-17. 

Vidyunmali dashed towards Nandikesvara like a flash of lightning 
from the clouds. The eloquent i\sura, shining like lightning and roaring 
like the ocean said to Nandikeslvara whose face looked pleasant like 
Moon.— 18-19. 

“ Nandikeeivara ! Vidyunm/ili anxious to light has now appeared 
before you. You will never be able to get back with your life. Vidy unmall 
' cannot be killed merely by a mere array of words in a battlefield.” 
. The eloquent NandikeeJvara dealt a blow to him and said “Demon ! 



29 


CHAPTER GXL. 

This is not the place for displaying virtne, can yon escape me on account 
of your sins? When you can he destroyed by me like a lower animal, 
should I not kill yon, O, destroyer of sacrifices ! I shall kill you. One 
may swim across the deep and bring down the Sun from the zenith to 
the nadir, but bone can raise his eyes to see me fully (t.e., one is so^ 
terrified by my name).” — 20-24. 

The Daitya shot a powerful airow at Nandikeivara which sucked 
the blood of his breast as the Sun by His rays evaporates, water of 
rivers.— 25-26. 

Nandikesvara surcharged with wrath uprooted a gigantic tree and 
hurled it at his formidable adversary ; which went on in the air, showering 
flowers on its way ; but Vidyunm ill cut it into pieces by many arrows ; 
the tree then fell on the ground like a big bird.— 27-28. 

Nandikefivara became still more enraged to see his huge missile 
thus cut by the powerful arrows of Vidyunmali. He then got enraged, 
shouted out gravely and raising both his hands that looked like the Sun 
and the Moon dashed against that fierce and cruel demon as an elephant 
falls upon a buffalo.— 29-30. 

On seeing Nandi come towards him with great force, the powerful 
Vidyunmali hurled quickly on him hundreds of arrows and covered him 
with them. Nandikesivara thus pierced with the arrrovvs, valorously 
approached the chariot of Vidyunmali, and began to push it back with 
great force, which in course of its revolutions tumbled to the ground and 
the heads of the horses lowered down into the ground, as if the Sun’s 
chariot had fallen down with its occupant by the curse of some sage- Tlie 
demon then came out of his chariot by virtue of his Maya and hit 
Nandikesvara with a javelin. —31-34. 

Thus struck, Nandi took that javelin out of his breast and 
struck it besmeared with blood, with great force against his opponent. 
Vidyuiimrdi, hit by it in tho armoured chest, fell down to the ground 
like a mountain rolling down by the blow of the thunderbolt. Un the 
death of Vidyunmrdi, the Siddhas, and the Kinnaras adored iSiva and 
cried out “ Victory ! Victory ! ” — 35-37 

On Vidyunmali being killed by Nandikesvara, Maya consumed the 
army of fJiva by his strategem as the fire consumes the forest. They fell 
into the ocean with their limbs dismembered by the trident, their heads 
pounded with the clubs and perforated with the showers of arrows. 
Afterwards, Indra, DharinaiTvja, Kuvera, 'Nandikesvara, and Sv^.inikartika 
attacked Maya, the great warrior, with various kinds of weapons. Maya 
roared like the clouds and quickly shot arrows after arrows and pierced 
Airavata — Indra’s elephant — and also Kuvera and Yama. — 38-41. 

At that time, the IMnavas, though strong and vigorous, suffered 
greatly from the weapons of the Devas and at last fled to take shelter in 
the fort Tripura, as Siva once had to retire on being shot by the arrows of 
Visnu. When the news spread, that the Sons of Danu had retired, then, 
the Devas sounded their conches, tabors and cymbals and the sound thus 
echoed was like that of the thunderbolt.— 42-43. 

In the meantime, the asterism Pusyfi came in course of conjunction 



TEE MATSYA PURANAM. 


ao 


with the Moon over the Tripura fort when it was doomed to destruction. 

Then the three-eyed l^iva quickly shot the destructive arrow, of the 
potency of the three Devas and the three fires (tejas), on the fort Tripura. 
The sky turned red like the burnt gold and of the colour of the red 
cochineal with the radiance of the arrow mixed with theSays of tlie Sun. 
-44-46. 

Lord ^iva, after discharging that invincible arrow from His bow, cried 
out in agony “Wliata pain ! Fie tome ! ’’ and began to weep. Nandikeivara, 
seeing the Lord repenting like that asked Him the reason of it. — 47-48. 

i^iva, overburdened with grief, said “ Alas ! my devotee, Maya, will 
today perish.” Hearing this, Nandikeiivara darted like a gust of wind and 
entered the Tripura fort before the dt^striu'live arrow reached it. And 
seeing Maya the lord of demons, he said: — “O Maya! the time of 
Tripura’s destruction has come ; so you sliould now quit it with your 
quarters.” Hearing those words of Naudikejfvara, that earnest devotee 
of ^iva went out together with his abode. — 49-5l\ 

The anwv burnt the three cities as (ire burns heaps of straw. 
The fire within tliat arrow divided into three parts, viz., liutAf^a, Soma, 
and Narayana and began to ]>urii. 'J'he Tripura fort looked then like 
a good family brought to ruin hy a wicked son.-- 0*1-04. 

Afterwards, the houses of Tripura looking like tlie peaks of Sumerii, 
Mandaraeliala and KailAsa, the beautiful place's with gateways ancl 
perforated works and balconies, the jjleasure ivndi'/vous full of lovely 
ponds, the abodes of the demons di^eorated wiili banners, l)untings and 
wreaths of gold wore eaten up by the thoiisand-tongued (iie. — oG-f)?. 

The women folk in tlic amorous embraces of tlioir lords in their 
residences and pleasure groves, wen^ also redii(‘ed In ashes. No women 
could go away elsewliero. Tliey w('re also consumed by (in', in the 
company of their lords, rSome of them (’ri<'d out witli r<dded liands and 
with tears in their eyes ‘H) Agni ! lam the wife of another; O Tlioii, 
the holy witness of all the things in the three worlds! Vou ought not 
to touch me. O Deva ! my husband and mysi'lf arc aslecj) ; I liave not 
done any thing vicious and sinful ; ilu'rcfoie, g(j away by another path 
leaving my home with my l)eloved.” — 5H-n2. 

One woman holding her infant stood, facing tin? fire and said “ Agiii ! 
I have obtained this infant after great privathms and it tloes not behove 
thee to burn this darling of mine.”-- bo-bl. 

Some of the women folk threw theiu.selves iiito the waters of 
the ocean after forsaking their husbands. Many of the women shivered 
under the destructive influeueo of lire and exelMinied with bewildering 
excitement, *'0, father ! 0, husband! O, mother! 0, maternal uncle! 
•etc.” As the heat emanating from the houses withers tlic lotuses sj^ringing 
in the ponds thereof, so consumed the liie at Tripura tlie lotus-like faces 
of those women along with their bodies. As the snow during winter eats 
up the lotus flowers, so did the fire burn the lotus eyes and faces of the 
beauties in Tripura. , There was a great uproar when the women 
flew with their jingling ornaments and cried out in great consternation, on 
account of the fire produced from the destructive arrow of Siva.- -65-69. 



OHAPTER GXL. 


31 


The beautiful abodes of the demons picturesque like half moons, 
with altars and gateways, broke down and fell into the sea. — 70. 

The waters of tlie ocean became heated by the burning fragments of 
tlie houses, etc., falling there, as a wealthy and good family becomes fused 
owing to the ignbnimy of a wicked and vicious son. The ocean got over- 
heated and swollen ; its inmates, the fishes, the crocodiles, etc , became 
awfully distressed. Then, the whole fort Tripura that looked like the 
Mountain Mandar fell ilown into the ocean. — 71-72. 

There was a tremendous noise when the gates, the compound wall 
and th(f various buildings inside Tripura, tumbled into the ocean with 
great violence. That Tripura was majestic like the mountain with 
thousands of peaks. The very same Tripura with all its habitations be- 
came the morsel of fire and remained only in name. — 73-74. 

The whole universe together with the Patalas became heated by 
the burning of Tripura but the quarters of Maya were rescued with great 
difTiculty and found j^lace within the sea. Afterwards, Indra hearing 
of the escape of Maya an<l his great palace saved under the sea, by 

tlie grace of the Lord ^iva pronounced the following curse on his 
house : 

“ The abode of Maya along w^ith him will not be safe. It will always 
be subject to perils and it will not be fit to be resorted to like fire.*' 
-75-77. 

Whichever countries will bo defeated, the people of those perishing 
countries will there see this remnant of Tripura and even today that abode 
of Maya exists free from disejise and sickness. — 78. 

The Risis said : — “ O Sage ! pray tell us the fate of the house through 
which Maya made good his escape.” — 79. 

Sutasaid : — The abode of Maya was visible at the place where 
Dhvuva is seen, but llie Deva-hating Maya shifted to another Loka 
for his safety where he could remain without any hindrance. — 80. 

There also the Aryama Devas reside ; so Maya could not go there. 
Maya then prayed to ^iva for a quarter where he could reside ; and the Lord 
^iva created another quarter for Maya. Seeing this, Indra became pacified 
and praised f^iva and went to his realm peacefully. And the Lord ^iva 

was worshipped h}^ all the Devas. The Devas and the attendants of Siva 
all then caught hold of each other’s hands and began to dance with joy. 

Afterwards when the fort Tripura, burnt by Siva’s arrow, fell down 
into the ocean, the Devas alighting from their chariots saluted Brahmft 

and tlie Lord i^iva, took up the bow of i^iva and went to Heavens with all 
their attendants. — 81-84. 

One who reads an account of this victory of the conquering Lord 

^iva gets victory and success in all actions by the grace of ^iva. One 
who will repeat this at the time of the offerings made to the manes 
(Sraddha) before the Brfihmanas, will reap the betfefits of all the sacrifices 
and endless merits. The narration of this sacred account is the best 



32 


THE MAT8VA PUBANAM. 


SvastAyana (the way to safety) and causes the birth of a male-child, one 
■who will read or hear it will go to the realm of J^iva wiiere he will have 
everlasting happiness. — 8o-87. 

Here ends the one liuudved aiid fortieth chapter on thp dcEtrnctiou of 
the Tripura fort and on MaipTs retreat. 


CHAPTER CXLl. 

The Risla said : — “ 0 Silta ! we wisli to know wliy the king Aihi 
of the Pururavii dynasty goes to Heaven on the AniavAsya day every month 
and how the peace-offerings to the Pitris ought to be perfoi mod.” — 1. 

^'‘Sfltasaid: — 0 Munis! I shall relate to you in detail the glory 
of the king Aihi as well as his union with the Moon in heaven, also, 
about the getting of the nectar from the Moon and performing tarpana 
to the Pitfis. The following Pitris, viz., Saiimya, Vahirsada, Kavya and 
Agnisvata are satisfied by the ambrosia produ(*.cd from the Moon. When 
the Moon and the Sun are in conjunction with one asterisin, the Amavasya, 
i.6., when it is new-moon, the king Aihi goes to see his grandfather and 
grandmother, the Sun and the Moon in the Heaven (on every Amavasya 
day). There, after saluting both (the Sun and the Moon , he takes rest 
for sometime and then proceeds on his journey afior worshipping the 
Moon in the proper time. d'he learned kiiig, Aila of the Pururava 
dynasty, thus spends his time every nnmth in worshipping the Sun, for the 

brief period of Sinivali with the object of performing t^rArldha ceremony. 
He then worships the Pitris I n' the brief period of two Laras, ’ the period 
of Kuhu (the new moony. That Mie worship of the Pitris ought to be done 
ill Kuhfi period was known to lii/n. For this reason, wailing for a short 
period before the Sun and the Moon, he us*' ! to coani to Soma wlnm the 
Kiibd time appi'cmcluni. 7V/rro, ho >a//s//»^</ the with tho liftoonih 

ray of the Moon, that used to p<»rir o^f Svadlr» nra tar. 'The [h’tris, who 
eat in the dark fortnight, get pleased with this Svadh.Y nectar. Tllns, with 
oblations of beautiful honey, til ‘seed of Scsammri>and Niva pa he grati- 
fied with Svadlia nectar the Pili'is Saumya, Vahirsada, Kavyas and Agnis- 
vA-tas. — 2-12. 

The Brahmanas say that Ritu (season) is considered as the fire, 
Ritu is known as Samvatsara, and that Ritns arc produced from the 
Saravatsara (year). Artavus (fortnightly seasons) are begotten from 
Ritus. — 13. 

Note. • — Season, light, splendour. year’s course. The first year 

in a cycle of 5 years, w. — Year, rain. — Seasonal, Vernal, a section of the year, 

combination of several seasons. 

Pitaras, Artavas and Ardhamasas (fortnights) are the offsprings 
of the Ritus. The grandfathers, Ainrivasyas and Seasons are all of the 
nature of Ritu (seasons). The great-grandfathers and the five years, 

♦ The Anand&sram edition of the Matsya Puranain adds the following : — “ Manu asked 
Madhu Sfidana this question. The reply he gave to him I shall narrate.” Then, instead 
of SQta, Matsya is made to relate the story. 

f A minute disvision of time the 60th of a twinkling, half a second, a moment. 



CHAPTER CXLL 


33 


the SODS of Brahmd are the Devas. Saumya, Vahirsada and Agnisv&td 
pitfis liave been thus defined. Those that are Artavas lead householder’s ^ 
life and perform sacrifices and accept the sacrificial offerings and are 
known as Vahirsada. Agnisvata pitfis also lead houseliolder’s life and 

perform sacrifices. They are also known as Artavas. The Kdvyd pitfis 
are known as tlie husband of Aslakas. — 14-16. 

Now hear about the 5 years. Agni is the Sainvatsara, the Sun is 
the Parivatsara, tlie Moon is Idvatsara, the Wind is the Anuvatsara, the 
Rudra is the Vatsara. These are the cycle of 5 years. The Moon presid- 
ing over them, in due time, sheds ambrosia. — 17-18. 

Note. — full year. = The rainy season. 4th year in a 5 

years’ cycle ; the 5 tli of 6 cycles of 12 years, in Brihaspati cycle. year. The 

month of Mdrgsirsa. = A brace of years. 

Wherever, Purflrava stays and for whatever period, Soma satisfies 
for that period by his rays, Somapas, Usnapiis and all the other Devas. 
The Moon sheds ambrosia every month and the Pitfis get satisfied 
by drinking it. Thus is described about the nectar and honey. — 
19-20. 

The Sun acts daily (in the bright fortnight) as a feeder through 
His Susumna ray when the store of lunar ambrosia is all drunk out by 
the Devas and the Pitfis. The Moon waxes in his phases day by day by 
thus being fed through Susumna ray in the bright fortnight. The Moon 
wanes in the dark fortnight and waxes in the bright fortnight. The 
moon is nourished thus by the Sun. The Moon looks full and white on 
the full moon night (Pfirnamfisi). In this way, the Sun by means of his 
single ray increases the Moon and makes it full of nectar. The Devas 
first drink the nectar of the Moon ; then the Sun drinks. The Sun 
drinks every day one digit and does so for fifteen days ; He, again in the 
bright fortnight, fills it up by Ilis Susumna ray. — 2l-2o. 

The phases of the Moon that wax in course of the bright fortnight 
fed by Susumna, wane during the dark fortnight. In this way the Moon 
continues to wax and wane, consequently, the full-moon is called the 
receptacle of nectar. He is luminous with the fifteen nectar-giving phases. 
He is, therefore, called Pitriimin. — 26-28. 

Now the periodical junctions, Parva Sandhis will be described. 
These are like the knots of a bamboo or a sugarcane joined to one another 
in a circle. The year, the months, the dark and the bright fortnights 
and the full-moon night are the knots and junctions and the Tithis, 
the second, third, and so on, form the parvas of the fortnight. The 
AgnyadhAn or the maintenance of the sacred Fire ought to be done in 
this Parva Sandhi. The periodical junction of the Anumati or RAkS 
with Pratipada lasts for only two Javas tin the afternoon). The PratipadS 
of the dark fortnight occurs in the afternoon and if it occurs in the 
evening it is called the period of Puriiaimtsl. — 29-33. 

When the Sun is on Vyatipata, the Moon is above the line of equator 
and is situated in the Yugantara position. The Purnam&sa and Vyatipata 
then see each other. The Sun, Moon and the Pratipadfi, tithis remain, 
then, in this state. Endless merits result if salutation be done to the Sun 
5 




34 


, TEB MtSYA PURAhUM: 


at Jhis time. This period is known as the sixth Satkriy4-kala. (It is 
Jknown as the 6th period.) — 34-37. 

On the co|nplction of tho phases, Pflrnima occurs during the 
periodicar junction of the Moon in the night when thq^. Moon is full ; hence, 
that night is called the full-moon night when the Moon is greatly pleased. 
When, ‘ by the mutual opposition of the Sun and the. Moon, the 
Parpima takes place in the afternoon, then, the evening is said to be 
the Purnimft when the Moon shines with all Jlis phases completed by the 
Sun. The Devas and the Pitfis adore Him (the Moon) ; therefore, He is 
called Aiiunmti, and, on account of tho full-moon it is called Pflrpimft. 
The' Moon is highly luminous on tlie night of Purnimri and tlievefore, 
He is called Riika. — 38-41. 

The iSun and tin' Moon live together on tho same asterism on 
the loth titlii (lunar day), therefore, it is kmnvn as AmavAsya during 
the dark fortniglifc. Tho Sun and the Moon during Vin:ivasya face each 
other, therefore, it is also known as l)ai\4a.*— 42-4o. 

After the AmavAsya (la}’ tlie junction with the Pratipada nir^t day) 
lasts for two hivns ainl this perio*! is kn-nvn as Kuhn for two h It'Ts in 
the w^ord ICuhu correspo/nl with the two lavas (the duration of Kuliu.) 
When the Moon is visible on any Anii vAsyA, Ih' unites willi tin' Snn 
in the afternoon ami on the following morning in the Pjalipada of tin' 
bright fortnight He rises along with tho Sun. .\ ddTeronee t)f a jx’riod of 
two lavas is seen at tlic noon time between the Sun and th(^ Moon. — 41-15. 

When 'the Sun and Moon separate, that period is termed AnvAhuti 
and is known as tlie time for VasatkriyA when tin' pcrforjuance of Vasat 
Las been ordaim'd. d’l:is j^eriod \\\ the AmavnsyA is known as l{itumuklja 
or the face of the st'asou wlien f^raddlia sliould he performed, Wlien 
the crescent ]\Ioon unites with tlie Run during tho da}', that is the 
time for the ahovememioiicd ]*arva. I’lie time when tin' v(>ice of 
the cuckoo “ C'oo ” ceases, is eallcd Kuhn ” When tlic wanijig ^loon 
of the ArnavAsyA enters i?ito the Sun, that pehiod is known as SinivAii. 
The periods Anumati, RAkA, Si?uvAh and Kuliu last for only two lavas. 
Kuhu lasts as long as “ Kuliu is uttered. The union of all the Parvas 
lasts for two lavas and both the unions, before and after, are equal. 
The sacrifices and Va. 7 at I'itc s should be [performed as pnsciribed during 
those periods. The VyalipAta yoga the Run and the Moon ‘/c., tlieir 
conjunction) and tlie J*urnimA (their opposition) are j>roductive of the 
same fruits. The union in the Pratipada tithi lasts for a period of two lavas. 
Kuliu and Sinivfili last for tw'o lavas. — 4()-5o. 

When' the Moon separates from the Sun, one kahi is kiunvn as the 
Parva period. Every day the Moon waxes by one digit when on the 
fifteenth day He becomes full. Ileuce, tliat day is termed PurnimA., 
Then the fifteen digits of the Moon are visible. For this reason, it \vas 
stated that after tlie fifteenth tithi, the Moon wanes ; tliere is no sixteenth 
digit of the Moon. These Devas and IMt|is are the drinkers of Soma (Moon) 

and the nourishers of Soma (Moon). Artavas, Uitus and Ahda, Pit|ia are 
the nouriahers. — 54-56. 

Now I shall narrate about the Pitiis wlio eat the libations offered to 



GHAPTEB exit; 35 

them daring the SrAddlia ceremony ; how the libations reach them ; what 
are their ways and future existences? and how great are their powers?* 
Whore the departed souls go ,and where they do net go cannot be 
ascertained even by rigid tapasya (austerities). What to speak about those 
things being seen by these mortal eyes? The Laukika Pitfis, by their 
severe peixancps in this world have been able to go above and join tlie 
Deva Pitfis, other Pitfis get satisfied when the people in this life, perform 

their Arframadharma and are wise and perform with iaitli their Sraddha 
.ceremonies. Celibacy, asceticism, sacrifice, begetting progeny, perform- 
ing ceremonies witli good laith, learning, and the giving away of food are 

the seven kinds of Afirainadharrnas. Those who practise these things 
for the whole of their Jives, go to heaven, wliere they live in the company 
of UsnapM, iScmapn, Pitfis and the Devas, and they enjoy bliss there. 
This ^ is current amongst men that he who* has got a son and who 

performs rfraddlia with honey, til and water, reap the above results. 
The Pitfis of tlie family get satisfied. These human Pitfis reside in 
the region of the Moon and eat tlie flesh olTered in fc^raddha. — 57-64. 

Blit, those, vvlio on account of their narrow minds have fallen in their 
orders in course of their life of actiem, an<l have not uttered vSvfXha and 
Svadha, go to the realm of Dharmaraja in various forms and repent for 
their past deeds. These beings, with their long and thin bodies, having 
beards and void of gartrnents, prowl about hither and thither oppressed 
by hunger and tliirst. Being thirsty, they go about in search of rivers, 
lakes, tanks, wells, canals, etc., and being liiingiy, they go to various 
places in search of food. Hut they fail to get their desired objects, 
^riiej’' are driven away from every place and the messengers of 
Yama throw them in various tormenting places, such as, : — SJalamali, 
Vait.arani, Kumbhipaka, Ardbavaluka and Asipatravana. Thus they 
suffer all sorts of pain as results of their karnias — .65-70. 

The oblations of three balls of rice offered in the name of the 
friends that are suffering in hells reach them and are taken by them 
which give them relief and satisfaction. The kinsmen and sons, while 
offering oblations should offer them on the Kuiia grass strewn on the 
earth ; they are to recite their names and gotras and have their sacred 
thread on their right shoulders. — 71. 

Oblations should also be offered, for those who are not suffering in 
the hell, but w.ho are born as animals and birds, etc., (five lower animals 
and trees, etc.). The Sraddha oblations reacli the Pitfis corresponding 
to tl'-ose births, as their foods and give them satisfaction, wherever and 
whatever they may be. The gift* of grain and food, earned honestly, 
given to a deserving person at a good hour is attained by the manes in 
the form of their food wherever and wliatever thej’* may happen to 
be. As a calf recognises her mother cow in a herd, in the same 
way, the charity given after reciting the proper mantras in the prescribed 
way unmistakenly reaches the manes. It is the power of the mantra that 
carries the oblations to the manes. — 72-75*. 

The giving of food with good faith is equivalent to the perfonnance 
of Sr&ddlia. SoManusays: The SrSddha thus performed with devotion 



36 


TEB MAT&YA PUEABAM. 


reaches the manes in every domain ; this is what Manu has said and 
Sanatakumftra corroborates it after realizing the passages of the departed 
souls with His supernatural vision. The dark fortnight forms the day of 
the Pitfis and the bright one their night. In this way,ithe Pitp-Devas 
and the Deva Pitj-is are mutually their begetters. These and the human 
Pitfis live in the firmament and drink Soma.— 76-78, 

The fathers, grandfathers, great-grandfathers are the human Pilps. 
Thus, I have described to you their greatness and about the ^raddha. 
I have now described to you how the king Aihl conjoins with the 
Sun and the Moon ; how he attains his Pityis and performs t^rfiddha with 

devotion ; the Pitri tarpanas, how the oblalions offered in ^raddha reach 
the manes. I have thus explained to you about the Parvas and the hells 
that form the part of tlie ereatitm. Eveything has, tlius, been summarily 
described. It is very diflicult to enumeratt? them adequately. The 
person desirous of liis well-being should devote himself to all these 
things with good faith. I have thus briefly stated this chapter of 
creation b}^ Svayambhuva Deva, now tell me, O, Uisis ! wliat more do 
you wish to hear ?— 79-84. 

Eere ends the one liuiidred and chajAer on Sraddha ceremonies. 


CHAPTER CXLII. 

The Risis said 0 Suta ! we are now desirous of liearing in detail 
the nature and the measurements of four yugas during the time of 
Svayambhuva Manu. — 1. 

Suta said : — Although I narrated about them in course of my 
description of the earth and celestial firmainent, 1 shall still tell you 
something more in detail about them. I shall first state about measure- 
ments. Human years are determined by ordinary ex])cricnce of men. 
x\nd this is the unit. The ineasurcmenls of the four yugas will be 
expressed on this unit. Fifteen twinklings of the eye form one kAstlni ; 
thirty kasthas make one kahi A muhurta is made up of thirty kalas 
and one day and night consists of thirty muhurtas. The Sun divides 
the day and night ; the night is for sleep and tlio day is for work. — 2-5. 

One month of the liuinau beings is equal to a day and night of 
the Pitp‘s. Its division is like this : — the dark fortnight is the day of the 
Pit^is and the bright one is the night. Thirty liuman months make one 
month of the Pitfis. The year of the Pitiis consists of three hundred and 
sixty human months. One hundred human 3 "ears is equiv’alent to (3-J-) 
three and one-third years of the Pitris. (Three Pitfi years and 120 i.e., 
(100 + 10x2) human inontlis.) One human year is equal to one da}^ and 
night of the Devas and its division is like tliis ; — Uttarayana (six months 
when the Sun moves towards the north) forms Their day and Daksinayana 
(six months when the Sun moves towards the south) Their night.— 6-10. 

Thirty years of men is one month of the Devas. A century of men 
is 3 months and some da^^s of the Devas. 360 human years make one 
year of the Devas. 3,030 human years make one year of the Sapt*Iiii^is. 



CHAPTER GXLIL 


37 


9,090 human years make one year of Dhruva, called, Dhruva Samvatsara. 
36,000 human years make one thousand Divine years. — 11-17. 

The duration of the ages have been laid down on the Divine units. 
The Bharatakhanda notices four yugas or ages, t'is;., Kritayuga, Treta, 
DvSpara, and Kaliyuga. Of these Krila or 8atyayuga is the first, Trejia 
is the second after which come Dvapara and Kaliyuga. Satyayuga consists 
of 4,000 Divine years. Its Sandliya co»)sists of 400 Divine years and 
the SandhySrnsia of the same number of years. Treta consists of 3,000 
Divine years. This is what has been said about it by those well-up 
in calculations. Its Sandhya is made up of 300 Divine years and the 
iSandhyamrfa is also of similar duration. DvApara consists of 2,000 
Divine years and its Sandhya and Sandhyamsia of 2()0 years each. 
Kaliyuga is,of 1,000 Divine years and its morning and twilight are each 
of 100 years. —18-24. 

Note.— #5HT= Union, morning, evening, twilight, the period preceding a yuga. 

= Twilight, the period at the end of each yuga. 

Satyayuga, Treta, DvA para and Kaliyuga taken collectivdy last 
for a period of 12,000 years of the Devas. Now I shall tell you their 
ago in the years of men. Tlie age of Satyayuga in the years of men 
is 1,728,000 years ; of Treta 1,296,000 years; of Dvapara 864,000 years 
and of Kaliyuga 432,000 years. The period of the four yiigas along 
with the duration of their Sandhyas and Sandhyamrfas have thus been 
described in the years of men. The four ages passing for 71 times make 
one Manvantara. — 25-29. 

I shall now explain to you the period of a Manvantara in the years 
of men. One Mann takes the place of another in 311,032,980J(?) years 
(it should be 3i 6,720,000 years.) — 30-31. 

Now I shall give you the duration of a Manvantara in the Divine 
years. It is 140,000(?) years in course of which the four ages come and 
go 71 times when one Mann takes the place of another. At the comple- 
tion of the Kalpa which is 14 times one Manvantara, the great dissolution 
of the World takes place wliicli lasts for a period twice as much as one 
Kalpa. The age of the four yugas has been thus described. — 32-37. 

Now I shall tell y^ou the creation of Treta, Dvapara and Kaliyuga. 
I told you before about Satyayuga and part of Tretayuga. 1 did not tell 
you anything about the remaining portion of Tretayuga, Dvapara and 
Kaliyuga, on account of my having been engaged in the narration of the 
generations of the Risis. I, therefore, 4ell you, now, about the Tretftyuga 
that was left unsaid. There was Mann in the beginningof the TretA. age 
and the then Risis dictated tiranta and Srnarta dharma by the light thrown 
on them by Brahma. They wrote on marriage, x\gnihotra, and other 
i^rauta dharinas according to the Rik, Yajiih, and Sama Vedas. They 
also gave out the injunctions of the Srnritis, truthfulness, Brahinacharya 

(celibacy), Varnas'rama and other Achara dliarmas. — 38-43. 

In the beginning of the Tretayuga, the Seven Risis and Manu 
by their hard tapas got the knowledge of the motions and places of 
the planets and stars. Also all the mantras were seen by them 



38 


TRE MaTSYA WRAtJAM. 


and perceived in tlieir hearts, by thinking about them once only. 
In the beginning of the first Kalpa, those mantras (or laws of the Universe) 
arose of themselves in the minds of the Uevas, in testimony whereof, 
those who areSiddhas iperfoot) and others also can have the knowledge of 
the Mantras. In the past Kalpa there were one hundred thousand mantra 
yogas ; by the power of the sages, even those who follow them, can realise 
them ; and those mantras now lie ludden in the Pratimas or images of the 
Devas.—44-46. 

The Sapta-ri^is enunciated the Rig, Y ijuh, Sama and Atharvacu 
mantras very accuralel}-, aiid the sage Manu similarly dealt with his 
Smriti. In the Tretaynga, the four Vedas, the bridge of dharma, were all 
embodied in one. Tn tlie Hvaparayuga, owing to the short life and 
intellect of men, rho Vedas wore divide(l into four separate treatises. 
In days of 3 "orG, the Itisis, by virtue of their tapas, could study 
the entire Vedas i?i one day and niglit. The Vedas taught tlie duties of 
the people* in each yuga. In ancient da\'s, Svavamf)liu Bjahi)>a gave 
out the divine immortal Wdas with various Afigas an*! containing die 
Svadharmas pertaining to eveiy 3 ’»iga. Under the inlliienco of rime, »>y 
and by, the dharmas deviated from the Vedas and liecaine perverted.- - 
47-49. 

The duty of fCsatriyas is to perfoim saeriliees, that of U»e Vaij<yas 
is to perform haviryajua, the Madras to perform the sacrifu'O of service 
and the brnhmanas to perform the sacrliioo of Ja])am (repeating the 
mantra* and understanding tlieir meanings. The peojile and the Vanias in 
the Treta age thus performed tlieir duties and pros[)e]e(l with children 
and wealth and were ]iappy.--r)(Wjl. 

The Brahmanas liy tli(.*ir kind beliaviour should enligliten the 
Ksatrlyas and the lattc-r siiould cducaU" the Vaij^yas and they shouhl, in 

their turn, lovingly mould up the STulras in their diilies. Their liearts were 
directed to Varnasrauia Uhaiina. 1’lieir dharma was not fruitU^ss and, 
therefore, all tlieir a(*tions were atlended with sue(*('ss, merely hy tlieir 
Safikalaps or intentions. ddie peoph^ in tlieir orjlinary course wine 
longlived, healthy’, hand-some, sturdy, n ligious and modest. Brahma laid 
down the orders of varna and j.iiramii, etc., with gnsit accuracy, ddie sons of 
Brahma framed the vSamhitas (or books) f)ii medicine (how their health 
should be kept up), and [»ractices of dharma, and other mantras. — 52^-55 

The Devas set on foot the perha-maiice of sacrifices from tlie very 
day when the Risis, the sons of Bialima enunciated the Saiiiliita, Mantras, 
etc. At the end (jf Sv;'yambl}uva Manu, India was the first to propagate 
the performance of sacrifice’s willi vari«>u8 olTorings in tto-ojieraiion with 

the Devas, Yama, J^iikla, Ja^’a and Vijlvasrika. — 5(3-07. 

Truthfulness, meditation, asceticism and cliarity an* tlie extant 
dharmas. When tliey decline, adlianna becomes dominant. When to 
drive it away and make dharma revive, most valiant and longlived heroes 
take their births. They award just punishments, are great yogis, 
performers of sacrifices, Brahma vadis, have their eyes like lotuses, broad 
forehead and big faces, well-formed limbs, lion-like chests, strutting like 
elephants and highly powerful and virtuous. Thus in the TretAynga, 
the chakravarti kings were great archers and endowed with all auspicious 



GHAPTER OXLIIL 


39 


signR. Their regal splendour and prowess extends far and wide like the 
branches of the banyan tree. By Nyagrodha is meant arms ; VyAsa means 
the extent of the arms outstreUdied. That is their growth and height 
measured as above. Cfiakra (discus), chariots, Queen, jewels, horses, 
eleptianis and gold formed their treasure and were counted as Ratnas 
(jewels). These gems were first attained at the end of Svayanibhuva 
Marm. Emperors in tlie world in all the Manvantaras (past, present 
and future) are horn with the parts of vi^nu inherent in them. They 
are extraordinarily endowed with power, dharma, comfort and riches. 
Emperors Juid a vast store of Artlia, Dharma, Kama, fame, and 
A^ictory without any of these going against another. Thus the kings, 
endowed with power, defeated even the Uisis in their eight SiddJjis, such 
as, Animfi, IjaghirnA, etc., in their knowledge of the J^astras and in their 
asceticism. They were endowed with divine marks and signs and they 
defeated the demons and hnman b^dngs by their extraordinary strength. 
Tliey seemed to be very fortunate. They were horn with diandsome 
forms bearing all the lucky signs according to palmistry, vh., fine 
lines on the forehead and lijie tongue, sombre radiance of tlie teeth, 
Jong ea?-s, liands touching the knees, slioulders like that of a bull 
and a lion, with tlndr f(»et marke<l with qin)its and fish and the hands 
with conches, etc. They lived up to 85,000 years and did not know 
the troubles of the old age, and had accesses to the heaven, oceans, lower 
regions, and mountains. Saciilices, asceticism, charity and truthfulness 
were the four-) imbed dlia-mas of the Treta age and were, unscrupulously, 
observed by tliem, — 58-73. 

Thougli in that age ilharma reigned according to A^arnasrama, yet 
there was also a criminal procedure code to justify and maintain the 
order of Varnafiiama. All the people were healthy, wealthy, happy and 
contented. In this Tretayuga one A^nla was divided into four. The 
people livcil uj) to 3,000 years and they were all blessed with sons 
and grands )ns an<i then they departed. Now, lieav of its characteristics, 
d'lie characteristic of the Tretayuga in Sandhya is one foot; and in the 
Sandliyanisia one-fourth of that of Sandhya. — 74-77. 

Here ends the one hundred and forty-second chapter on Manvantra. 


CHAPTER GXLIII. 

Tlie Risis said : — O Suta ! Pray, explain to us how the performance 
of sacrifices was propagated at the beginning of the Treta age during the 
sway of Sva 5 uimbhuva Manu? AA^ien the Satyayuga with its Sandhya 
ends, the Treta age begins, (^wing to good rainfall, many kinds of plants 
and medicinal herbs grow. Cities and villages flourish ; the inhabitants, 
thereof, begin to perform good deeds. Communications are established. 
A^ariuisirama dbarmas are laid down. The people of all class collect 
togetlier and pour sacrificial oblations into the Fire after reciting Vedic 
mantras and secure sacrificial materials and proper food and know proper 
methods of living. How did they do all these things? — 1-4. 

Sfita said 0 Risis ! the Lord Iiidra, the partaker of the sacrificial 


40 


THE MATSYA PURANAM. 


offerings, collected all the mantras leading to the liappines.^ in this world 
as ill the next and started the performanco of sacrilices ; tl en lie, along 
with the other Devas performed Aiivamodha Yajfia, after colleciing all 
the sacrificial materials. Many clever sacrificial priests (liitviks) came and 
took charge of their respective duties. Various oblations of ghee were 
offered in Fire in honour of the Devas. — 5-7. 

The Devas were exceedingly pleased ; the Bralimanas versed in the 
S4maveda chanted hymns loudly, Adhvaryus and other Bralimanas were 
busy and went hither and thither and performed their alloted rituals. The 
animals for sacrifice were sprinkled with sacrificial mantras and the 
Devas, invoked, came there and partook of their share of sacrificial offer- 
ings. The Devas are those that preside over the senses and it is they that 
are partakers of sa(?rifice. Thej- are born at the beginning of a Kalpa. 
The Devas are worshipped in sacrificial (‘eremonios. — 8-10. 

When tiie Adhvaryus became ready to immolate tlie animals for 
sacrificial purposes, the great Ifi^is were attacked with pity on seeing those 
helpless animals and addressed tlius to Indra, th(»> chief partaker : — “Vv^fia: 
are all these in your sacrilices ? To destroy life and (;ause pain are great 
sms, and O Indra ! this is not a goo I thing in the rituals of your sacrifice. 
You have started tins sin to kill animals. There is no benefit in such 
a sinful sacrifice. On the (»ther hand, they beget sin. ddiis is not dliarrna ; 
rather this is ad liarina. Killing animals cannot be dharnia. If you wish 

to perform virtuous deeds, act according to tlic fcJistras and make the 
sacrifices free of any sin in Vija.stseed materials ». linira ! Yon have started 
the vilest form of saerilice by introdneing such a sinful elemeni as killing 
and injuring, into its rituals which will destroy 1'riv'arga (Dluirimi, Artha, 
Kama). O Indra ! Tliis great Yajha was establislietl in ancient times by 
Svayainbhuva Brahma. 'Idje haughty Indra in^pile of Ijeiiig tljus advised 
by the learned sages did not heed their eou/i-el. —1 l-lo. 

At that time, a great discus it)M ensued l)(‘twcen the sages .and Indra 
as to whether the sacrificos shoidd be performed by offering llie libations 
of the movable or the iinmovable tilings, aninvds oi' ve getables, niots 
and fruits. Those all powerful sage.s wcuf much ])anied by the discussion 
and asked the king \ asu who li\e<l in the sk\Mc) give liis opinion on 
this point. -10-17. 

The Risis said ; — 0 King ! 0 great wise one ! How has the method 
of performance of sacrifice (yajilavidj; heen witnessed by you ? O son of 
Uttanapada! 0 Lord ! Remove onr doubts, O, learned one ! — 18. 

Sfita said: — King Vasu, without taking into consideration the 
relative significance and the strength of the two parties began to explain 
the truth of the sacrifice^ in acc.mlance with the injunctions of the 
Vedas.— 19. 

He said : — The ^Astras say that tlie sacrifices should be performed 
according to the prescribed rites and with the offerings of good animals 
or roots, fruits, etc. It. is my experience, that the slaughter of animals is the 
nature of sacrifices. Ratlier tlie sacrificial mantras all advocate killing of 
animals. And wliat those great Ri^is have laid down as the result of their 
long tapasyfi and experience of the bright l)odie8 in the Heaven, ought to 
be taken as Pramanas or proofs, and I give out my opinion on those 



CHAPTER GXLIII. 


41 


autliorities. If you take those mantras as proofs, then, accordingly, perform 
the sac rifices ; else what is tl)e use of vain argumentation. — 20-23. 

< )n hearing the reply of Vasu the sages foreseeing his future destiny 
cursed him to fall down. King Vasu, of higher regions, by the 
curse, went to Rasatala — the lower region. That virtuous king inspite 

of his being very wise, in removing the doubtful points of iSastras, 
went to the lower region for the fault of his plain speaking ; it is not, 
therefore, wise for one individual though he is very learned, to pass 
a decided opinion on any subject having many phases ; for, the 
analysis of dharma is extremely delicate and is very hard to be tlioroughly 
known and more dilTicult to express it. No one except the Devas, Ri^is, 
and Manu, should, therefore, assert regarding any dharma with certainty. 
What the Risis said of 3 '^ore, about non-killing animals in sacrifices, that is 
then the best course. Risis never perform any act of hinrisa in course of 
a sacrifice and many millions of them attained heaven by virtue of their 
penances. Taking all thirigs into consideration, the great sages do not 
praise any act of hirnsa. ddie ascetic sages have gone to heaven by offering 
in sacrifices, roots, fruits, leaves, water and vessels that they collected by 
unchhavritti (gathering in handfuls). The absence of greed, attachment, 
the prfictice of celibacy, compassion on beings, doing good to others, 
tranquility of mind, Brahmachaiya, cleanliness, abhorrence from anger, 
forgiving others, firmness are said to be the firm roots of the eternal 
dharma.— 24-32. 

Sacrifice consists of mantras and materials ; and tapasyA consists in 
viewing all with equality. Sacrifices lead one to the Devas ; asceticism 
leads one to Virat Pur ii^a (t lie cosmic soul). Renouncing the fruits of 
karma (works) leads one to Brahmapada (the state of Brahma). Having 
Vairagyam (dispussion) enables one to be dissolved in Prakfiti (the 
Universal Divine Mother). And tlie knowledge, i.e., realization of the 
glory of Brahma leads to Kaivalyam (absolute independence or the state 
of b(3ing Alone). These are the five-fold paths of beings. — 33-34. 

Ill days gone by there had been serious differences between the Devas 
and the Risis at the time of Svayaiubhuva ]Manu, on the subject of sacri- 
ficial rituals. Afterwards, when the Risis saw that virtue was being 
forcibly set aside, they paid no heed to the words of the Vasiis and 
returned to their hermitages — 35-36. 

When the Ri§is went away, the Devas completed the sacrifice. I have 
also heard that many Brahinanas and Ksattriya kings became perfect by 
their tapasya and went to the Heavens. The king Priyavrata, UttanapAda, 
Dhruva, Medhfitithi, Vasu, Sudhama, Viraja, i^ankhapAda, Rajasa, PrAchina 
varhi, Parjanya, Ilavirdhaiia and others. The famous Rajarsis of high 
renown went to lieaven by virtue of their asceticism. The glory of the 
BAjarsis is still renowned in the world ; consequentlj^ asceticism is 
superior to sacrifices. In days of yore, Brahma created the Universe by 
the power of His asceticism. But no such powers can be attained by 
sacrifice. So tapasyA is the underlying root in this Universe. In this way ; 
the sacrifices were performed at the time of SvAyambhuva Manu and 
since then, they are in vogue during ail the ages. — 42. 

Here ends the one hundred and forty-ihird chapter on Manvantara, etc. 




42 


THE MATSYA FURANAM. 


CHAPTEli CXLIV. 

S&ta said : — 1 shall now relate to you about Dvapara age which 
dawns on the decline of 'FretA,. In the beginning of Dvapara, }>(>oplo attaiii 
siddhis as they do. in the age of Treta, biit when the age becomeH per- 
fectly settled, the siddhis of the Tretayuga disappear. They beget greed, 
fortitude, trade and warlike tendencies, that are antagonistic to eacli 
t other. They become doubtful of the true realities of things. — 1-3. 

The Varnas become extinct and the. actions become deteriorated, 
the vehiefe of usage is spoilt; and vanity, anger, travelling, killing, false 
self*^steem, unforgiving and rnan}^ other Rajasic qualities spring up. 
There is an increase of Rajo and I'amo gunas. The sins that were 
unknown in Satyayuga crop up in Treta ; they become strong in Dvapara 
and people get troubled. Dhaima wanes in Dvilpara and becomes 
extinct in Kaliyuga.* The Varna ilharnias and Atsraina dharmas get 
weakened and doubts aie raised in the interpretations of the ^rutis and 
the Sinritis. By the uncertainty of the purport of the Srutis and tlie 
Smritis, the real intent of dljarma becomes oi)scuro which causes a differ- 
ence in the opinions of men. People become dividetl on account <;f tlieir 
diversity of views and a chaotic condition ai ises. 

Before, tliere was only one Veda, haviuL^ four feet (parts). That 
got changed on and on, duo to the slan t lives of tiio pt'ople, until 
at last in Dvapara the one Veda wa^v al))i(lged ami eom[)leteIy (livided 
in four Vedas. The sons of Risis, again, due to their respe(‘tive 
faulty understandings explained them in various ways. 'Fhey inserted 
Brahmana portions within the Sanddt/i ]>ojfi<»jis of Hik, V.ijuh and 
S^ma Vedas. Tliev’ oven chang«‘d the Svar.m or mn.'^ieal tones in tlu' soiigs 
of the Vedas. Tliey did not fully giasp tlie nu imings, j>arlly owing to 
their habits and faulty iniderstandiug'^ and partly owing to many m)rnij)- 
tions and interpolation.'^ in the Vedas, of the Biahmana portions, of the 
Kalpa Siutras, of the Hlnmyasand of varicam other things. Some parts were 
correctly explained. It is in this iJv.' parayuga that poisons adopted 
various customs and rites and began to hold dilTeree.t opinions. — 10-11. 

At first, the Advharyu’s work was one; afterwards, it was divided 
into two. Owing to distortions and twistings in the meanings, the 

Sastras have been much transformed. Therefore, tlie Adhvaryn’s works 
are performed in different ways. Fhe Sarna and Atharva Vedas also 
were turned and twisted owing to the want of knowledge of the Munis 
and their want of confidence. Thus the state of things in the Dvapara 
age was in a chaotic condition. And in the Kali age, tlie Vedas became 
extinct. Owing to the want of the i)roper knowledge of the Vedas, the 
various diseases and disorders and deatlis, theieof, became visible. The 
people could not thwart tliem off liy their minds, words and deeds ; then, 
they became disgusted and disappointed.— 18-lSi. 

When they became disappointed, they sought means to get rid of 
their distress. As a consequence, they began to find faults with worldly 
things. Ont of this fault finding, true knowledge arose. Of the 
wise Munis in the Svayambhuva Manvantara, some turned out in the 



CHAPTER CXLTV. 


43 


DvApaiayuga as the opponents of the Vedas. Then Ayurveda (medicine), 
astronomy and the other limbs of the Vedas, political economy, logic, 

metaphysics, the ceremonies of the Kalpa i^iitras, the glosses, the Srnritis, 
and various other ^Astras became filled with doubts. No effort was 
crowned with success, unless the whole body, mind and deed were set 
to work. — 20-24. 

In the DvApara age, people were generally in trouble and there was an 
increase in greed, ambition to trade and to possess worldly things, tendency 
to fight and inability to realize principles, the obscurity of the Vedas and 

the l^Astras, the destruction of the order of Varnajiramaand the increase of 
lust and anger ; the people, at this time, lived up to a period of 2,000 years, 
when some time of Dvnpara was passed, tlien the Sandhyfi set in, in which 
period the dregs of tlie people are left. Then the Sandbyamrfa set 
in. After this comes Kaliyuga. At the end of Dvapara and by the begin- 
ning of Kaliyuga, Kali became very strong — 25-29.‘ 

During Kaliyuga, people indulge in himsa, theft, falsehood, deceit, 
vanity, etc., ami delusion, liypocrisy, vanity overshadow the people. 
And dharma becomes very weak in Kaliyuga and people commit sin 
in mind, speech and actions. And works doiif) witli whole heart and body 
sometimes become successful and suinetimos not. Quarrels, plague, fatal 
diseases, famines, drought and calamities appear. Testimonies and proofs 
have no certainly. There is no criterion left when the Kaliyuga settles 
down. Some die in tlie womb, some in childhood and some in youth and 
sotne in old age. People become by and by, poorer in vigour and lustre. 
They are wicked, full ol anger, sinful, false and avaricious. — 3(^-3 1. 

Bad ambitions, bad education, had dealings, bad earnings excite 
fear The whole batcli becomes greedy and untruthful. The Brahmans 
become demoralised. They have base ambitions. TJieir knowledge and 
learning are mostly defective. Their character is exceedingly’' low and 
by such ignoble conduct they prove very disastrous to the people. The 
people become saturated witli jealousy, anger, vindictiveness, cowardice, 
greed, attachment. Lust increases during tliis age. — 35-37. 

The BrAhmanas do not read the Vedas nor do they perform sacrifices 
and tlie Ksatriyas deteriorate with the Vaiiiyas and become w^ell nigh 

extinct, l^udras sleep with the Bnlliniaiias, sit with the Brahniapas, eat 
and perform sacrifices with them and hold relations of mantrahood with 
them. Many Sadras.will become kings and many heretics will be seen. 
There will arise various sects, Sannyasis wearing red coloured clotlis, 
KfipAlis and various others liolding themselves folloWei*s of some Deva 
or other and there find fault with religions. Many with them profess 
to be Brahmajuanis, because, thereby^ they will easily earn their livelihood. 
Some hypocrites w\\\ mark tlieir bodies witli Vedic symbols also. 
In the Kaliyuga any body will study the Vedas; Sudras will be ex- 
perienced in the Vedas. So tliere will be many’ false religionists. — 38-42. 

The l^fidra kings will perform Aslvamedha sacrifices and the 
people serve their ends even by’ killing women, children and cows. They 
will cheat each other, kill each otlier to serve their ends. The 
country will become desolate by repeated calamities, short lives and 



THE MATSYA PVBANAM. 


U 


various kinds of diseases. Every one will be miserable and addicted to 
adharma. Owing to the dominance of vice and Taraoguna, people will freely 
commit the sin of abortion on account of which tlu^re will be a dci line 
in the longevities and strength of the people. The people will live up 
to one hundred years at most. Inspite of all the Vedas being in existence, 
it would become as if there were no Vedas and the practice of performing 
sacrifices would be stopped tS 1 7. 

This is about Kaliyuga; now hear about its Sandhya and Sandh- 
In every age every three stages become void of siddhi, and 
during the Sandhya period only one part of the usages of the age exist 
wliich becomes thus one part; in Sandhy/\mJ<a, one pAda of that of 
SandhyA exists. In (liis way, in ih ; ilnu! Sandliyarnsa of the Kaliyuga, 
one governor amongst the irrelegioiis subjects arises. IS-oO. 

King Pramati of tlie Bhpgu family and CliAndramasa gotra was 
born at the end of Srfyamldinva Alanu in the SandhyamfJa period, to 
inflict proper punishment oji the sinners. That king i ’uvelled all ov''‘r 
tlie earth for oO years and collected arms and amnmnitions, elephants, 
horses and chariots and marched with a vast army consisting of horses 
and elephants ainl accompanied by 100,000 BrAhmana soldiers armed 
with various kinds of weapons, agaiiKst the Mlecchas and destroyed 
them. After killing all the Sudra kings lie annihilated all the hyporcrites. 
After destroying all tlie sinners and subduing tlu^ people living in 
the North, central regions, the mountaineers, the inhaliitanls in the East 
and AVest, the residents on the Vi/idhyas, the Deccauis, the Dravidians, 
the Singhalese, the inliabitants of tlic Alh cclia countries i Kabul and 

Kandhara), the Paradas, the Pahlava.s, iIjc Yavanas, the J^akas, the 
Tusaras, the Ivetas, the l^ulindas, tlie ihirbaras, tlie Khasas, the Lampakas, 

the Andhrakas, the Oaradas, the 1 (Alikas, lu^ exterminated the Siulras. — 
*51-58. 

King Pramati was born of Visnu’s ])ait in Mann’s family and was 
famous as Chandrarnasa. Ho roamed about earth for twenty years 
and killed all the vnekeJ men in liis 3lhid year. After annihilating the 
greater portion of the world with violence when only a few survivors, 
the propagators of the future race, romaiue<l, the king with all his army 
attained final bliss in Samudlii between the sacred rivers Ganges and the 
Yamuna. — 5lt-63. 

When, thus, in ilie SandhyamsJa iicriod, all acts of violence ended 
all the wicked potentates were slain, only a few survived liere and there 
who, overwhelmed with greed, liogan tcy plunder one anotlier and caused 
great consternation to the peoyilo without a king. They all left their 
homes and household good.s, and fled hither and thither to protect them- 
selves. When the duties enjoined by the J^rutis ami tlie Smritis came to an 
end, the people gave themselves up to lust and anger and became 
devoid of greatness, pleasure, love, and shame.— 04-69. 

After the disappearance of dharma the remainder of the people were 
plunged into deeper misfortunes. Men and women became short statured 
and began to lose their lives at the early age of 25. They were all 
overpowered with distress. They quitted tlaeir wives and sons and even 



OHAPTBR OXLIV. 


45 


quitted their towns and went to mountains to find a shelter there. They 
built their houses near rivers, oceans, mountains and various other places. 
There was no rain and the people had to cover themselves with rags and 
deerskin. They left off karma, deprived of their possessions, and void of 
Varn&srama and thus became very greatly oppressed; at last very few 
people remained. — 70-72. 

Animals oppressed by hunger wandered far and wide and at 
last took their abodes close to the above men. The people also, 
being very hungry, became flesh eaters. They all began to eat flesh of 
deer, boar, bull, every thing whether allowed or not. They lived on 
all sorts of things witliout pausing to enquire under the influence of 
hunger whether it was worthy of being eaten or not. Those who lived 
close by rivers or oceans maintained their lives by taking fish, 
Tims by eating flesh and forbidden food, all the people became of one caste 
Varna. As there existed only one Varna in Satyayuga, similarly, all the 
people became of one caste at the end of Kaliynga. In this way, the 
Divine century, z.e., 3fl,0<K) years of men passed away in course of which 
the liungry people devastated all the birds, fish, etc. — 73-79. 

After eating up all the birds and fish, etc., that were left during the 
period of Sandhyam^Ia, people began to eat roots and fruits <Kanda- 
iniila, etc.) I'hey did not build their houses but covered themselves with 
barks of trees, ^i'hey had no treasures and they slept on ground. 
They all polished in that plight and only a handful of them who survived, 
struggled on for a century. Tliey got suflicient food and got nourished. 

The period of Kali’s Sandhyurnjla lasts like that fora Divine century. 
After this period, the men and women that were left began to produce many 
children. With the advent of these children, enters again the Saty^^ayuga. 
All the previous people, the remnants of the Kali pass away. As the 
people reap the fruits of their actions in heaven and hell, similarly, the 
persons in Satyayuga enjoy happiness or suffer pain. Thus Kaliyuga 
disappears and Satyayuga steps in.— 80-87. 

The remaining people in Kaliyuga gradually begin to discriminate 
and they get dispassion (vairagya). Thence, they realise their knowledge of 
self and they become religious. So Saty^ayuga comes in to fulfil that which 
is to be done in future. The people thus become happy and enjoy things 
with their equality’ of sight which they did not enjoy in the past Kali 
nor which they’^ would enjoy in the future 'IVeta. Thus I bow down to 
Svnyambhuva and 1 have narrated to y^oif in detail all the characteristics 
of the several yugas in due order. — 88-91. 

When the Satyayuga comes in, its people are procreated by those 
who remained at the end of Kaliyuga. The good and perfect pei'sons 
that remained unnoticed amongst the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaieiyas 
and i^iidras, they and the Saptarsis now give instructions in dharma to 
the new people. In that way, the doctrines of the Risis based on l^rutia 
and Smritis are propagated. They promulgated Varnasrama Dharma and 
other rituals on the lines of Srutis and Smritis. The Saptarsis hold the 
dharma of the Srutis and Smritis. For promulgating dharma, the 
Saptarsis are ever ready in every Satyayuga. These Risis are now 
existing for the period of one Mauvantara. As the roots of plants and 




46 


THE MAT&YA PVRANAM, 


trees vigorously germinate after being consumed by fire, siinil irly, there is 
a growth in the generation of people at the commencement of the Satya 
age. In this way, generations of the ages go on for ever. The ideas 
appear and disappear. Comforts, life, power, beauty, dharma, Artha 
and Kftmia lose onefourth their quantity in every Yuga. — 92-100, 

0 Dvijas ! I have told you about the sandhis which pertain 
to the yugas only. One Manvantara is seventy-one times these four yugas. 
The four yugas make one cycle, and each yuga in every cyc^e is of one 
and the same nature. So the fourteen Manvantaras revolve. — lOl-lOk 

In all the yugas, the Asuras, evil-spirits, demons, Yaksas, the 
Piifdchas and the UAksasas and various others are born. All these persona 
are endowed with characteristics in accordance with wliat they had in 
previous yugas. As the characteristics of yugas change, so the ch.irac- 
-teristics of the several Manvantaras change. These worlds of the jivas are 
always liable to change ; they do not remain constant even for a moment. 
Thus I have described to you the characteristics atid changes of the yug:?s. 
J will tell you about Alanvantaras at the time when ^ deal with 
Kal pas. — 1 05- 1 ( 

Here ends the one hnndreil and forlif-foarlli chapter on the several Utajas. 


CUAPTKR CXl.V. 

Suta sard : — I shall now rehilc to row at i'uli length about the past 
and the future Manns numbering fourteen, tliat ilonrished one alter tlte 
other, during each Kalpa. During i!ie respective* sway of the fourteen 
Manus, the world with its creation of men, lower animals, birds, trees, 
, their preservation and destruction, remains in conformity to the times of 
the Yuga. The ages of the l)eingH forming part of the creation, arc, also, 
in co-ordination with the definei] cliaiacteristic of tliat Yuga. In the 
fourteen Manvantaras, some lived up to one Yuga, wliereas, others lived 
only for a very sliort time Taking tlie nnsetdcnl state of tilings during 
the iron age, the maximum ago of inf*n has been laid down to a period of 
hundred years. — 1-5. 

During Satj^aynga, the Devas, llie demons, tlie men, the Yaki^as and 
the Gandharvas were all symmetrical in their lioight and girth. The. eiglit 
varieties of Demigods are 1)0 fingers in height. The other eight Deva 3 ’o- 
nis are nine fingers high. This is llic natural measurement of tliem. 
The Devas and tlie Asuras are 49 (ingei*s in heiglit h)r seven 
fingers ( ?) — 6-9. 

During the Sandhya of this YXiga the man’s measure is eighty-four 
fingers (the fingers being those of the men of Kaliynga) and ho who is 9 
lals in height from head to feet with his hands reaching his knees is 
adorable even by the Devas. The cows, tlie elephants, the bulTalos and 
the immovable beings like the trees, etc , all undergo variations in their 
respective stature during the different yugas. 'J’he animals, such as oxen 
etc., measure 76 fingers right up to the hump. — JO 12. 

Note.— -11111= A particular measure of height. 



GHAPTBR GXLV. 


47 


The ^ephant measures 800 fingers in height and the maximum 
heiglitoof trees is said to be 1130 fingers. The Divine and the human 
forms are both alike ; as they are born of one parentage. The former is 
endowed with more intellect. The human forms are not so endowed with 
Buddhi or intellect The Divine and the human bhftvas are, thus, both 
similar and dissimilar. Birds, animals, things, movable and immovable 
(ideas) are all built in the same way. Cows, goals, horses, elephants, birds, 
'deer, these- are all for work and are fit in every way for sacrificial 
purposes. The animals are for the use of the Devas. All things, 
movable, and immovable, are created as regards their form and measure, 
after the several Devas; they become all the more. gratified when they 
get all these beautiful things — 1.3-19. 

Now something will be said about good men and Sadhus. The Brah- 
manas and the Vedas are considered as the Pa4u mtirtis or animal forms of 
the Devas. Brahma resides within their hearts ; hence, these are Sat or good. 
The Brahinanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaitlys, all of them direct 
their actions in aecordanee with the ^rutis and the Sirifitis and are 
busy in ordinary or in special functions. — 20-21. 

The dliarma of the people devoted to Varna^rama in accordance with 
the i^rutis and Smritis and leading to Heaven is named jnana dbarma. 

The Brahmachari given to good conduct and Achara and to do good 
to the preceptor (guru) perforins divine functions; hence, the householder 
is known as ‘*.SA(iliu.” Tliose ascetics who reside in the forestand are in 
the third order of religiou.s life are known also as Srulhus. — 22-24. 

< 

One, wlio restrains liis passions and practises Yoga, is known as Yati. 
By (lliarnia is meant practical work and feeling. Tlie Lord Bhaga- 
van lias denominated the good and bad actions both*as Dharma. But the 
Devas, kisis, and men, freely support their views and say “Tliis is not * 
dliarma,’* Dharma is derived from a root which means to hold up and 
also eonnoles greatness. The Aeliarytas advise on that dharma which 
leads to one’s Ista (desired object). Tliey do not advise adharma 
which leads one to evils. Tliose, who are hoary, free from avarice, self- 
restrained, not haughty, endowed with Divine knowledge, having a clear 
conscience and humility and following the path of virtue every day, 

are known as Acharyaa. Such Brahinanas versed in the doctrines of 
dharma, SJrauta and Smarta, have enunciated the path of virtue. — 25-30. 

I^ruti enjoins that a man should marry, perform Agnihotra and other 
sacrifices in company of his consort, and the Sm|iti says that a man should 
practise Yajna and observe the rules of varna and a^rama.— 31. 

After hearing from the learned, Acharyas have said that the three 
Vedas, viz. ttik, Yajuh and Sama are the part and parcel of Brahma. — 32, 

What the Saptar^is heard from the Ri^is of the preceding Kalpa, that 
they narrated in the next Kalpa. Therefore, it is called Sruti. Manu 
remembered Uik, Yay uh, Sama, the Afigas of the Vedas, iSrutis, practised in 
the preceding Kalpa and then said those things. Hence, the i^Astraof Mann 
is called Smfiti ^Astra. SmArta dbarma is that which enunciates Manu’s 




48 


THE MATSYA PUBAHAM. 


dbarma of the Smptis ; laying down variia and fieJramaon the ‘retrospective 
bodies of the past Maavantara for the guidance of the coining one.'«^33. 

In this way, the two hinds of dharnias are called the i^i^t&chara. 
The expression i^ista is made of the root rfvi§ and 8»iflix kta. Those who* 
remained in the preceding Manvantara, Manu, the propagator of the race 

and the Saptar^is are called the The pious men during tlie 

Manvantaras and the Saptarsis along with Manu are said to be the pro- 
moters of the universe. These persons, /.e., Vistas establish dharina, which 
changes in Yuga after Yhiga, by giving out the Vedas, message, 
livelihood, the criminal procedure code and Varnasiraniiicliara. At the 
end of a Manvantara the i^ista pnrusas establisli the Vedikdliarnia by 
means of VarnatJraina and authoriiy. Tlius eoining down from to 

i^istas. This is the eternal S^istachara.-' 34-37. 

These are the eiglit cliaraeteristies of the r{z\ (1) Charity, 

(2) truthfulness, (3) asceticism, (41 learning, (f)) sacrifice, (ii worship, (7) 
Dama or self-restraint, >8) want of greed. In all the ^fanvanlaras those. 
iSi§ta Manus and Saptarsis practise the above-mentioned eiglit cliarac- 
teristics of dharma ; lienee, tliey are called ^istadniras. S^rauta is derived 
from hearing ; and Sinarta from remembering. -- 38-10. 

^rauta dharma is that which contains the Vedic mantras and the 
sacrificial rituals. The one dealing with tlie Varnairamas is the Smarta 
dharma. Now the different parts of the <lharma will ho dolined.'— 4J. 

One who explains the dharma just as ho knows and feels about it 
on being questioned is said to possess the fumlainental attribute of truth- 
fulness, The BrahmacliArya, Japam, silence and fast, these very hard 
practices are called tapasya or penances. Yajha is tin* hriii^ing together 
of wealtli, animals, sacrificial olfering, Rik, iSaina and Yajiih Vedas, and 
the sacrificial pi esents. Dealing with otliors as if with one's own self, 
always for the well being of all with gladne:^s ol heart is termed dayd or 
kindness and is the best of all acts. —42-40. 

One who dees not feel upset and show wrath by mind, speech or 
demeanour, even on being provoked by oiliers is really the ideal forgiver. 
This state is called Titiksa or forgiveness, d’he servant wlio, does not mis- 
appropriate his cliarge loft to his care by liis master, sets an example of 
the absence of greed. Noii-acceptance of otliors’ things is alobha. 
One who does not feel inclined to indulge in sexual pleasures by body, 
mind, and deed and practises Bnihmacharya shows signs of* sarna. 
One whose passions are not brought into i)lay eitlier for his own sake 
or for the sake of others shows signs of dania or self-restraint. One 
who does not get perturbed by five olijects of senses and eight kinds 
of amorousness is known as tlio great subduer of self. One who gives 
away in charity to tlie /leserving what is prized by him after storing 
it in a righteous way sets the example of an ideal charity. The best 
dharma is the one which is prescribed by the Sjruti and the Smriti and 

approved of ^isja (pious) persons. Indifference to the good and evil 



OBAPTEB CXLV. 


49 


and tbe non-attachment to object is mrdkta or dispassionateness. The 
renouncement of kj ita and akrita karmas or acts done or not done is 
Sannyasa ; abanoonment of ideas of cleverness or non-cleverness is termed 
Nypsa.* When he knows all the Tattvas from Avyakta (unmanifested) down 
*to parj^iculiirs, the animate and inanimate objects, he is called Jnani or 
wise. These are the characteristics of dharma which were first enunciated 
the learned Itisis during the Svayambhuva Manvantara. — 46-56. 

Now something will be said about the Manvantara, Chaturhotra and 

the ways of the four varnas. During each Manvantara, fresli i^rutis 
occur, but the Rik, Yajuli, and Sama Vedas, rules, Devatas, Stotras 
(hymns), Ilomas, etc., remain the same as in the preceding Manvantara. 
Vidhistotra and Agniliotra remain as before. Dravyastotra, Gunastotra 
Karmastotra, and Kulastotra^^' originate from the Vedas during every 
Manvantara. From these the Brahmastotra, i.c., the four Vedas, Rik, 
Yajuh, SAma and Atharv'ana, spring the fourfold mantras (formula?) as 
described in the four wa 3 ^s, — 57-61. 

The mantras of the preceding Manvantaras flashed in .the hearts of 
the Rihis wlio performed very hard tapasyas. Being roused by the 
feelings of fear, trouble, moha (delusion), grief, discontent, when the 
Risis began to practise tapasya with great effort and enthusiasm, the 
mantras came of themselves to them for their deliverance. — 62-63. 

1 shall describe to you the characteristics of the Risis. Tbe Ri^is, 
past and future, are of five kinds. Now, hear about the Risis and the 

Arsas. Wlien the tiniversal Dissolution takes place, when Prakriti's three 
qualities (giinas are in a state of equilibrium, the division of the Vedas 
does not exist. y\ll are in an undefined state of darkness (Tama'. At that 
time the springing up of the animate objects unconsciously and of . 
the embodied souls consciously, are both termed Arsa. This is like 
fish and water ; both exist like tlie container and the thing contained. 
The universe made up of qualities spring.^ up, presided by conscious- 
ness. It flows on as cause and effect. It is kala (time) that brings 
about the differentiation of the Prime Cause, the Mahat. Senses and 
objects of senses are denominated as arthas. — 64-69. 

From mahat evolves ahanikara (egoism) ; from ahamkAra evolve 
the five subtle elements, the 'J'anniatrns ; from the TanmatrAs come 
the five gross elements. These five gross elements, make up these varied 
forms by their permutations and combinations. Just as many trees are seen 
all at once by a torcli, so by kala, all these souls are all at once manifest- 
ed. When these Ksettrajiia Jivas (souls) involve into the unmanifested 
state, they appear like fireflies in darkness. That high-souled K^ettrajna 
is shining in this world, assuming bodies and again it exists on tbe other 
side of the intense darkness. Tliat state on the other side of darkness 
is the goal of tapasyA. — 70-74. 


* ftfwtR.=Code of rituals. of matorials. ^iwlm^sCJode of politics. 

wWhw -Code of businoss. ^9R?h?ii_-Ck)de of domestic usages. 

HuSk«~Oodo relating to the knowlodge of Brahma. Tho Srutis. 
sacrifice condactod by four priests. 




50 


TUB MAT8YA PUR AN AM. - 


When at the time of creation, he begins to grow, His fourfold 
powers JnSna fknowledge), VairSgyam (renunciation), Superhuman^ powers, 
and Dharma are manifested. These powers are natural for Him ; 
they are not newly invented. His body is all consciousness. Because, 
He resides in the heart of every Jiva, He is called Purusa ; and because, 
He knows all the Ksettras (fields), He is called Ksettrajna. Because, 
He creates this world through dlianna, i.c., His nature, He is called 
dharmika. The unmanifested conscious Ksettrajfia does not become manifest 
by means of Buddhi. He, without any object in view, enters within the 
Ksettras (Prakriti) and seeing this old unconscious Keettra, thinks 
*‘all this is to be enjoyed by Me'’ and becomes thus endowed with 
consciousness. — 75-80. 

The tj lii&i denotes Ilimsa and movement. lie wlio has acquired 
Brahmajn&na, truthfulness, learning, tapasya, and the knowledge of the 
Stetras is a Risi. When this Uisi goes back and dissolves in the Highest 
Unmanifested by Buddhi yoga, be is called Parainarshi, the great 
Risi.-- 81-82. 

The V Risi denotes movement, and signifies the ultimate place of rest 
of all the Jivas. It signifies, also, that the Hisi has come (is born) of his 

own will. The mind-born sons of Brahma were born of Tftvara Himself. 
They took the path of Nirrifi irenunciation of action and took refuge of the 
mahat (i.e., dissolved themselves in the Universal Clause.) — 83-H4. 

The word Uisi means supreme excellence. Tlie sons of Irfvara, 
both bom from His mind and tliose bcgolton by I Jim, took refuge of 
that great mahat ; hence, they were oallc'd Paramaivis. And as 
the mahat tattva comes after, it is also tcrnic<l Risi and those who are 
bom of it arc also termed Risis, The sons Risis are also oalleil 
Risis. They are born from sexual union. They rJso took refuge of tlie 
Mahat ; hence, they are called Risikas, 'flic s{»ns of Ri.'^iKas are called Risi- 
putrakas. Those, who hearing fiom others lealise mahat tattva, are known 
as i^rutarsis. The Risis are of five kinds- Avyakta-.Rma, Maljafina, Aham- 
k^ra-atmd, lihuta-atma and indriya-atma. 'riie.so difTcrent names are 
due to the difi'erences in the natures of their knowledge. — 85-81). 

JVote.- sages. self. Subtle solf. Primary golf. 

^im=Sapreine spirit. Illustrious, Solf-conscioiisncss. «nn?*n,^Ek>mci»tal self] 

«l|WU(^l:=Organic self. 

Bhfigu, Marlchi, Attri, .Afigira, J’ulalia, Krafn, Mann, Daksa, Vat(is- 
tha, Pulastya, are the ten mind-horn sons of BralimA, powerful like 

Itivara. They are styled Paraina-Risis mi account of Their being llisis ever 
since their coming into existence and their recognising the mahat as the 
Supreme Excellence (Param). They are the sons of Jrfvara. — 90 91. 

Now hear about Their sons who are also Risis. They are : — 
(^ukrAchAryH, Brihaspati, Ka^yapa, Chyavana, IJtatliya, Vnmadeva, Agastya, 
VidvAniitra, E^ardama, Balakhilya, Vidrava, Saktivardhana who are Rivis 
by virtue of asceticism. Now hear of their sons begotten from 
women. — 92-94. 

They are Vatsara, Nagnahfl, the spirited BharadvAja, DlrghatamA, 


GHAPTER GXLVI. 


51 


Vrihadvak§S, l^aradvdna, VAji^ravd, Suchinta, ^Sva, ParA^ara, l^ringi, 
SaftkhapAda, the king Vaidravaijia and tliey attained Risihood by virtue 
of truthful HOBS This is the progeny of lAvara and Ilisis. Now hear about 
the raantra-krita Risis. Tiiey are : — Blifigu, Katlyapa, PrAchetS, DadW- 

chi, Crva, JAmadagni, Vedah, Sarasvata, Arsj Sena, Chyavana, Vltahavya, 
Vedhasa, Vainya, Prithu, IlivodAsa, Brahmavan Gritsa and i^aunaka. They 
are 19 in number and of the family of Bhrigu. — 95-100. 

Now, listen to the chief ones of the family of Angirasa. They are : — 
AfigirA, Trita, Bliaradvaja, Laksmapa, KritavAk, Garga, Smriti, Saftkriti, 
Guruvita, MAndhatu, Ambarlsa, Yuvanatfa, Purukutsa, Svaifrava, Sadaeya- 
vAh, Ajamidha, AjfvahArya, CJtkala, Kavi, Prirfadarfva, Virfipa, KAvya, 

Mudgala, Utathj'a, i^aradvAna, Baji^ravA, Apasyausa, Suchitti, VAmadevaj 

Risija, Vrihachukla, DirgliatamA and Kakslvana. These are 33 in 
number, and are the Manti-akrita Rteis. — 101-105. 

The Risis of the Ka^yapa family are : — KA^yapa, SahavatsAra, 
Naidliruva, Nitya, Asita and J)evala. These six are BrahmavAdi Munis. 

Attri, Ardhasvana, I^Avasya. Qavisthira, Karuaka, and Purvatitbi, are the 
six Mantrakrita Risis. Vasistlia, ^aktfi, ParAiiara, Indra Pratima, Bharada- 

vasfl, Mitravnruna and Kundina, these hcven belong to the VAsistha clan 
and are Maharsjis. VidvAinitra, the son of Gadhi, Devarata, Bala, Madhu- 
cbhanda, Aghamarsana, As^aka, Lohita, Bhritaklla, Ambudhi, DevaifravA, 
Devarata, PurAna, Dhananjaya, ^iibia, Mahateja and ^AlatpkAyana, 
those thirteen* belong to the Kausfika clan. Agastya, Dridhadyumna, 
Indrabrihu are the three Risis of the Agastya clan devoted to BrahmA. 
They are very illustrious. Vaivasvata Manu and king Aila of the Pumra- 
va dynasty are said to be the great framers of the Mantras. Bhalan^aka, 
Vasai^va, Sabkila are the chiefs of the Vaisfya elan and are the great 
Mantrakrits. In this way these 92 beings have been said to be Mantra- 
kritas or founders of the mantras. They l)ave yevealed various mantras. 
These are the sons of Ri!>.ikas and are known as i^ruta-Ri§is. — 106-118. 
Here ends* the one hundred and forty-fifth chapter on the 
Manvantaras and Kalpas. 


CHAPTER CXLVl. 

The Ui^is said; — Tell us, O Sdta ! the history of the destruction 
of TArkAsura as narrated by the Bhagavan Matsya. Pray, also tell us in 
what period it happened. Our ears, inspite of drawing in the nectar of 
the sweet narrations emanating from your mouth so constantly, do not 
feel sufficiently gratified. 0, Sage ! do gratify us by acceding to our 
request — 1-2. 

Sflta said : — Manu, the son of Sun first asked the God Matsya about 
the birth of SwAmikArtika in the thicket of white gi'ass or reeds. — 3-4. 


* These are sixteen and not thirteen. Translator. 



52 


TUB MAT8YA PURANAM. 


In reply, Bhagavaiiti Matsya said that in ancient tiinos there was a 
demon by the name of Vajrafiga whoso son was the hi^^hly powerful 
Trirkasura. That valiant Tarknsiira drove away all the D ^vas from their 
respective dwellings wlio, instilled witli consternation, W( nt to seek the 
shelter of Brahma. Brahma, on seeing those tenor-strickcn Devas said : — 

**Devas! cast oil your fears. Swamikartika, the son of ^'Jiva, born of 
the daughter of the IliniAlaya, will destroy the Danava ” Sometime aftei, 
^iva, on seeing IVirvati, dropped his semen-virile for some reason in the 
mouth of Fire whicli gave satisfaction to the Devas. Afterwards, the semen- 
virile came out undigested from the stomach of the Devas and fell into the 
celestial river whence it was carried to a tliicket of reeds. Out of which 
was brought forth Swrimikartika shining like the sun. That seven days* 
old baby killed Tarakasura. — 5-11. 

On hearing that, the sages cried out: — “(), Suti! this is highly 
intei’esting. Pray, relate it to ns in detail. From whose parts was 
Vajra/iga honi who liegot the most valiant IVirakasura ? Tlow was tlie 
latter killed ? Pray, alst3 tell us at full length about tlie bbth of tlio hero 
Swiiwikiirtikeya. — 1?-14. 

Suta said : DakbU PrajApati was \]\c mind-born son of BralunA. 
He aUer war (Is begot sixty daughters from li’s wife Vaiiini, out of wlmin lie 
jffHve ten to Dharnia, thiitcon to Kn*tynj>n^ r\\ i'lity-^cvnn to the Moon, 
four to Aristanomi, two to tlie sojj.s ol Vuhnki)^ two to the sage i'Wjgira 
and two to the learned Kris,\f^va. — 15-1 7. 

Aditi, Diti, Danii, Vij^vA, Ari^^tA, SurasA, Surabld, VinatA, 'lanira, 
Krodhavasa, JrA, Kadru and JInni ; tlu^-e tliiileen were boin of tlio 
consorts of I\aj^ya]*a who wen* llm motlieisof llio lliree. worlds and the 
cows. Through lliem all tilings^ j»’*»ving and non-moving, various Jivas 
and embodied beings were born.- -l8-::?(). 

The Devas, Iiidra, tJ[)('ndra, ( te., were born ni Aditi and Diti gave 
birth to the demons lliianyakaftyapa, etc. Dann begot tlie Daiiavas, 
Surablii the cows, VinatA produced (hiriidaand other l)irds e.r/ , peacocks, 
etc. Kadru brouglit forth sen-pents like Mesa, etc., besides these (^tlier 
lower animals were given birth to by them. The demon Hiranyakajiyapa 
ruled the Universe aft(*r compiering the three worlds along witli 
Indra, the Lord of tlie Devas. Vi<nu, tlien, in time, killed tlio demon 
Hiranyakasiapa and the remaining Danavas were destroyed l)y Indra. 
When all the scnis of Diti Avero destroyed, she felt grieved and 
sought from her [jord Kai^yapa tlie boon of begetting a most power- 
ful son who would annihilate Indra in l)attlf! ; which Kaiij^apa granted 
on condition of her following certain prescribed rules with a pure 
mind for a thousand years ; lioariug wliich Diti regulated her life 
accordingly. — 21-27. 

Indra began to serve Diti vigilantly on licr observing such severe 
austerities. When only 10 yeaivS remained to complete the (1,000 years) 
period of her austerities, Diti was pleased and said to Indra :—‘LSon ! I 
have well nigh completed tlie term of my vow ; you wdll have a brother in 
conjunction with whom you may enjoy the riches of the universe undisturbed 



CHAPTER OXLVI. 


53 


and reign over the three worlds.” Saying this, Diti went to sleep and her 
long tresses of hair fell on her legs. As ill-luok would have it, Diti went 
over i<> sleep and liulra taking advantage of that loop-hole, entered into 
her ciijbryo. Tie divided the womb into seven i>arts by his bolt. After- 
wards out of rage ho divided each part into seven. Diti awoke and said 
angrily : — “ India ! do not destroy my progeny.” — 28-34. 

Hearing those words, Indra came out of the embryo and stood with 
folded hands before his mother, shivering with fear. He said You 
went to sleep in course of the day with your hair unkempt. I have, there- 
fore, divided your womb into 49 parts. I shall allot them places in the 
Heavens coveted by the Devas even.” — 35-37. 

Hearing that, Diti said : — Be it so ” and afterwards went to her 
Lord and said Prajapati ! Grant me a powerful son who may have 
access to Heaven, may conquer Indra and be invulnerable to the Devas’ 
weapons.”— 38-39. 

The sage said to his grieved consort that she would beget such a 
progeny after practising penances for Icn thousand years. “ You will 
beget Vajrafiga whose body will be as massive as thunderbolt and iron, 
so no weapons would balHo him.” — 40-41. 

Diti, after being tliiis blos>ed, repaired to the forest where she 
practised severe austerities for Ion thousand years. At the close of her 
period of austerities, slie begc>t a son who was of wonderful deeds, uncon- 
queral)!© and invnlncral)lo even by the thuii(Ierl)olt. He became thoroughly 
conversant in all the Sjrstras as soon as ho was born and devoutly said to 
his mother : — “ mother ! direct me wdiat I should do for you.” — 42-44. 

Diti rejoicingly said : — ‘‘ Son ! Indra lias killed several of my sons, 
you should go and take revenge and kill Indra.” That valiant demon on 
hearing those words said “ very well ” and soon proceeded to Heaven. 

G(nng there that invulnerable demon tied Indra by his infallible 
noose weapon (Pasiastra) and brought him before Ids mother as a lion 
carries away a small deer. At that time Brahma and the great sage 
Kaiyapa went where the mother and the son were sitting fearlessly. — 45-48 

On seeing the Daitya both Brahma and Kaeiyapa spoke : — “ Son ! 
release this Indra. What have you to do with Idin? Disgrace is worse 
than deatli for an honourable man. He will get his release through our 
intervention which will be like Ids death. O Son ! one, who gets his 
release through the intervention of others, bears on his head a crushing 
load. Although alive, he is really dead on account of his being conquered. 
The enemy ceases to be so, the moment he comes under the shelter of a 
magnanimous man.”— 49-52. 

Hearing such words the demon Vajnifiga humbly said : I have 
nothing to do with Indra. I have only followed the injunctions of rny 
mother. O Dev a ! you are the Lord of the Devas and the Asuras and 
you are my grand father, T shall, therefore, abide by your commands. 
I hereby release this Indra. O, Deva ! let my mind be eager to practise 
austerities which bo gracious enough to let me pursue unmolested. 
Lord ! let there be happiness unto me through your grace.” After making 
this speech he became silent. — 53-55. 



54 TBE MAT8YA PUUAl^AM. 


Brahmft said : — Son ! following our advice you have practised 
rigid austerities and your heart is purified and you have reaped the fruits 
of your truth.” Saying so, BrahmA created a damsel with beautiful eyes 
and gave her to him ifor his wife. She was named VarAfigi by 
Brahinfi and afterwards the lattet returned to His abode. VajrAAga 
went with his wife to practise penances. That valiant Daitya 
practised penances for a thousand years with his hands uplifted. For 
another 1000 years, he practised penances with his head cast downwards ; 
for another 1000 j^ears, he warmed himself with the fire burning all 
round him and observing complete fast. For another 1000 years, he 
practised penances sitting in water and at the saiiio time his wife seating 
herself on the bank of that lake also practised austerities by observing the 
vow of silence. She did not take any food and became deeply merged in 
tapasyA. In the course of her austerities Indi a appeared in the form of a 
very big monkey and terrified her. — 56-03. 

He began to make a noise by beating pi tellers and broke down 
cucumber gourds and jars, etc., and afterwards began tu terrify lier ii the 
form of a sheep and caused disturbances in the hermitage. Later on, he 
coiled round her legs in the form of a serpent and dragged her away to a 
great distance and made her go about at several places all over the 
world. The powerful lady was strong with lior tapasyn, so India could 
not kill her. Indra next assumed the form of a jackal foi a frog) and 
began to pollute her Ajlram. Indra, then, assumed the form of a cloud 
and drenched the monastery with rain and when India did not cease 
to cause her annoyance, the consort of the Daitya Vajra/iga thinking 
it to be the mischief of the mountniii slie made up her mind to curse 
him (the mountain) when the latter appeared before her, in liiirnan form, 
and said fearfully : — G4-G9. 

“ VArafigi ! I am not wi(rkecl. 1 am worthy of being adored by 
everybody. It is Indra who out of wratli is trying to terrify you and bring 
you under various delusions.”- 70. 

At this time, the period of tliousaml years was compleie ; Brahma 
being pleased with tlieir austerities appearofl before them on the banks 
of the lake and said to Vajrafiga : “ O, son of Diti ! get up from the 

water ; I shall grant you everything.” Hearing those words, that Daitya 
ascetic got up from the water and with folded hands said to BrahraA, 
the Father of the Universe : — 71-73. 

“ Father ! free me from the Asuric tendencies ; ami grant me eternal 
region. Let me always practise austerities and lot my body be sustained.” 
Hearing which Brahma said : “ It will bo so ” and then He returned 

to His abode. Afterwards Vajrafiga also fiiiislied his course of austerities. 
He felt hungry and went to his monastery with the intention of 
taking some food ; but he did not see his wife ; he entered into the thick 
hill forest and came across his wife who was crying in a very distressed 
condition. He consoled her and addressed Imr thus : “ O Dear ! who has 

injured you? He will soon go to the region of Death. What desire of 
thine shall I fulfil, tell me instantly without reserve : — 74-77. 

Here ends the one hwidred and forty-sixth chapter on the narrative 
of the Daitya Vajrdfiga. 




OBAPTBB OXLVL 


55 


CHAPTER CXLVIL 

Var&ftgl said : — ** The terrible Indra has caused me consteruation. 
He has beaten me and subjected me to great privations and feeling myself 
unequal to bear them, I have now mshed to put an end to my life. 
Lord ! now grant me a son who may drive away all my sufferings.” — 1-2. 

Hearing all that, the Daitya was surcharged with wrath and his 
eyes became bloodaliot with anger. Inspite of his being able to take ven- 
geance on Indra, he, however, decided to practise austerities when Brahma 
appeared before him, knowing his fierce intentions and addressed him with 
the following sweet words. — 3-5. 

Brahma said : — “ Son ! what makes you resume your rigid austeri- 
ties again ? Why do you not take your food ? Tell me plainly. The 
benefits derived from a thousand years’ fast have already accrued to 
you by forsaking the victuals that are at your disposal. The renun- 
ciation of achieved objects is greater than the abandonment of things 
unachieved.” — 6-8. 

Hearing such words of Brahin/i the Daitya after pondering, addressed 
him with folded hands. — 9. 

Vaji’^figa said : — “ Leaving my Sainadhi at your behests I got up 
and found my wife beneath a tree standing horrified and crying in a very 
distressed condition. 1 questioned her the cause of her grief and asked 
her to let me know what she wanted. In reply she spoke out with great 
fear and altering accents that she was horrified by the cruel Indra who 
also beat her and subjected her to great troubles as one would do unto a 
helpless woman without a lord. She also added that not being able to 
bear her sufferings she would give up her life unless blessed with a son 
who might drive away all her sufferings. In order to fulfil her desires 
I am determined to practise further penances so that we be blessed 
with a son who would conquer the Devas.” — 10-15.' 

The four mouthed Brahma hearing those words of Vajr&figa spoke 
out cheerfully 16. 

Brahma said “ Son ! consider the fruit of your intended austerities 
as accomplished. You need not undertake to practise any more rigid penan- 
ces. You will be blessed with a most valiant son named Tarak&sura.” The 
hair on the head of the Deva women will always remain untied. — 17. 

The lord of Varafigt hearing the benediction of Brahma cheerfully 
returned to his consort after saluting Him. They then both joyfully 
returned to their hermitage. — 18-19. 

Afterwards Varafigi boro the child through the grace of her lord 
and held the babe for a thousand years in her womb. She then brought 
forth the valiant child ; at the time of his birth the whole world with 
all the oceans and mountains trembled with fear and a strong wind began 
to blow. Worthy sages recited their ista mantras, snakes and the deer, 
and other ferocious animals began to hiss and howl. The Sun and the 
Moon lost their lustre and all tlie quarters were enveloped in smoky 
shadows. On the birth of that valiant Asura all other Asuras and their 
wives repaired there with great glee. Asura women began to dance and 



56 


THE MAT8YA PURANAM. 


sing with joy and there were great rejoicings and festivities in their 
houses. — 20-25. 

Jndra and other Devaa were sorrow-strieken, and p tssed their time 
with a grievous lieart and B.irAftgi felt rejoiced to si o lier nevvliorn 
babe. At that moment she did not consiilcr it a diflioult feat to conqtier 
Indra. Tarakasnra proved himstdf to be most valiant fiom the moment 
of his birth. Afterwards, the Asuras Knjambha and MahisAsura who 
were so powerful as could uplift tbe world, annointed TArakaaura and 
acknowledged him as their suzereign. Sages ! TarakAsura after being 
thus annointed addressed the valiant demons. — 20-29. 

Here ends the one hundred and forty-seoenth chapter 
on the birth of Tdrakdmra. 


CHAPTER CXLVTir. 

TarakAsura said : — “ Hearken, valiant Asuras ! every one sliould 
direct his intelligence to his well being. D.inavas ! all the Hovas are the 
annibilators of onr race. 'I'lioy are our ancic’it enemies. Onr family religion 
is, therefore, to estahlifih lirnily our ricniii] fnuiily with them. 'I'otitty ive 
shall certainly make a move to check (lie advance of the Devasand conquer 
them by tbe stength of our arms. Hut I do not consider it proper to fight 
with the J_)cvas without practising iio'.tt'j'if ies, J slndl, thort^Iore, fij'st practise 
severe austerities ; then we will comim r tlie I'evas and enjoy the three 
worlds. ^Yhen one’s plans arc .-ettlod, his welfare is certain. lie 
who is unsettled, caniu t keep the changeful (ioddess of Forlun • rrnder 
control.” Hearing such words of '1 •' rak.isura ail the Di.navas cried out 
‘‘Sadhu, Sadhu (excellent, excellent .” Afterwards 'lYiiakAsura repaired 
to the nortliern cave of the PAriyatra monntiun.— 1-7. 

That demon T.ord on n-aching the cavern blossi.ming with flowers 
of all the seasons, teeming witli various kind.s of herlw and ores, having 
several caves in the viciniiy, adorned with various kinds of trees and birds, 
full of pools and waterfalls, began to piactisc his severe austerities, by 
observation of fasts, ligliting fire all round him, and living on leaires 
and wafer. He went on like that for centuries. — 81]. 

Afterwards, he began to oiler to the lire 1 { tolas of bis flesh by 
slicing it from his body. When no flesh was left on him. he looked 
an image of asceticism. At that time all tlie beings seemed to be burnt 
by bis fire. All the Devas shivered at his aseetieism and Brahma on being 
pleased, appeared befoie him from la'iivcn to grant liim a boon. Standing 
at the mouth of the cavern in the mountain, He addressed the demon with 
the following sweet speecli. — 12-15. 

Brahma said : — “ Son ! now your penances are over, nothing further 
is left for you to accomplish. Ask for a boon what thou desirest.”— 1C. 

Hearing those words of the Ixird Biahma, TarakAsura saluted the 
Great Lord, and with his hands, joined together, said as follows. — 17. 

Tfaraka said : — “ Lord ! you know what is in the mind of everyone. 
Every one wishes to conquer his enemy in revenge. Natural enmity exists 



CHAPTER GXLVTII. 


57 


between the Devas and ourselvcB. For the former have driven away the 
latter fioin everywhere and well^ wigh anciliilated them ; I, therefore, long 
to be able to be the solo deliverer of the Asuras through your grace. 
That 1 should not die at anybody’s hands and by any kind of arms is 
the desire tliat is uppermost in my mind. I do not want any other thing. 
O, Lord of Devas ! grant this boon to me.” — 17-21. 

Hearing those words of Tarakasura, Brahma said : — ” 0 Great Daitya ! 
no living thing can escape death, so you might seek your death from some 
one whom you do not fear.” — 22. 

Then that Asura thought a while and becoming haughty said : — 
‘‘ Let me die then from the hands of a babe of seven days old ” Granting 
him the boon Brahma went to heaven and the demon returned to his 
abode. — 2^24. 

When TtlrakS returned after completing his penance, the other 
Daityas came and surrounded Jiim. It seemed as if the Devas had 
surrounded Indra. When Tarakasura began to rule ; the seasons, by his 
terror, seemed to be endowed with their qualities and became incarnate 
before him; the LokapAlas acknowledged his sovereignty, and became his 
servants; lustre, beauty, intelligence, wealth and authority all began to 
serve openly the Dariava lord and fixed their abode in him. The nymphs 
incessantly began to wave chowries over the head of tlie sovereign, seated 
on his throne with scent rubbed on his body, head decorated witli a lofty 
crown and arms adorned witli armlets. The Sun and the Moon served the 
purpose of lamps, wind that of fans and Dliarmraja acted as his foremost 
herald in all his actions. Having thus reigned for many years, 
Ttlrkasura haughtily said to his ministers: — 20-31. 

Taraka said : — ‘‘ What is the use of this empire without reaching 
heaven. I liave no peace without waging war with the Devas. Even 
now do the Devas enjoy tlie sacrificial olTerings in heaven and Visnu is not 
leaving Laksmi. He is sitting fearlessly ! The lotus-eyed consorts of the 
Devas are enjoying tlie company of Tlieir Deva lords in the celestial pleasure 
nooks! Even now they are enjoying by drinking wine and playing in 
play-rooms. Even now the lotuses are seen in their hands. He who, being 
born a man, does Jiot show his strength in this world, is useless. It is 
better for such a man not to be born at all. One who does not fulfil 
the desires of his parents, does not drive away the troubles of his kinsmen, 
or does not earn fame, is, indeed, like u dead man inspite of his being alive. 
Consequently, I shall presently wage \var and fight with the Devas 
to acquire the treasures of tlie three worlds. Make a chariot of eight 
wheels ready for me, and O, unconquerable Daityas ! let the powerful 
Daityas join my army to give me support. Prepare my banner of golden 
cloth and make my umbrella with Iiangings of pearls.” — 32-37. 

Hearing these words of Tarakcasura, the Danava named, Grasana 
who was commander of the Daitya raja carried out the orders of his lord. 
He mobilised instantly all the forces of the Daityas by beating his 
drum. Afterwards wherever Tarakasura made his appearance seated 
in his magnificent chariot of eight wheels, drawn by a thousand horses, 
draped in white and extending in 4 yojanas, there were various kinds of 
songs and ceremonies ; and it was provided with various amusement courts. 

8 



58 


THE MATSYA PURANAM. 


The chariot of the Daitya king was as majestic as the vira&na of Incira. 
It was followed by an army of 10 crores of chief Daitya warriors who were 
very valiant. — 38-41. 

The army was under the command of the following ten chief Daityas 
viz,, Jambha, Kujambha, Mahisa, Kunjara, Megha, Krdanemi, Mathana, 
Jambhaka, Nimi and Siimbha. Besides them there were otlier valiant 
Daitj^as to work as their lieutenants. Tims tlie huge army moved on. 
Besides these, hundreds of other ferocious and violent chiefs of the Danavas, 
looking like mountains marched with the forces. The ferocious demons 
were armed with various kinds of Aveapons ; and they were very skilful 
in using them — 42-44. 

The golden banner of TarakAsura was highly awe inspiring ; that of 
Grasana bore the symbol of alligator and fish, that of Jambha was made of 
iron faced PijilAcha ; the symbols of an ass witli a moving tail was on the 
banner of Kujambha, and then was a lofty iron crow in the banner of 
Kumbha. Similarly there were various kinds of symbols on the banners 
of other Daityas. A hundred swift running tigers adorned with golden 
garlands, were yoked to the chariot of Grasana ; Jambha also ocxmpied 
a similar invincible chariot carried by a hundred lions. Many asses 
were yoked to the chariot of Kujamhha ; camels to that of Mahisasnra and 
horses in the chariot of Kunjara (GajAsura). — Jo-ol. 

The chariot of ^legha drawn by many terrible rbinoceros, 
that of Krdanemi by innumoralde elephants and that of Nimi, by many 
mountain-like mad elephants. The Daityas aseended their respeetive 
chariots. The elephants were emitting juices from their temples, 
four-teethed, one hundred liands in measurenumt, well-trained, and 
terrible like clouds; the Iku’sCvS were brightly decorated with golden 
ornaments. The demon Mathana seated liimsidf on the south side with 
a noose in his liands in a charit»t d<'coj*ated with a white ilytlap and 
beautifully perforated work and floral garlands ami his body decked in 
the swcct-scented sandal paste. Jamlihaka took his se'at on a camel 
decorated with liells and gailands. Kumbha seated birnself on a big 
sheep coloured white and black. Besides them many other valiant 
warriors marched, seated on their respective conveyances. Those great 
Asuras were all furious, daring, and of wonderful deeds. ---o2-o(). 

In front of that awfully arrayed army wearing earrings, various 
kinds of upper garments, liighly perfumed garlands, followed by bards, 
exquisitely invigorating music began to play, 'riio army excited by 
heroic words and \mCie inspiring songs of tlie bnrds relating the deeds of 
their ancestors, assumed a most formidable aspect. The Daityas were 
foremost and all were “Maharathas” (great warriors). That army of the 
demons agitated with chariots, ferocious Jiorsos and elepliants and banners, 
got ready to fight the Devas and looked terrible. — o7-59. 

Afterwards, the celestial messenger of the Devas, seeing the army of 
the Daityas went to give this information to India. On reaching the divine 
court of Indra, he delivered his message to the assembly. — fiO-Cl. 

Indra, on hearing the news, closed his eyes for some time, and then 
said to Bfihaspati ‘•■—62. 




GIl AFTER GXLVIII. 


59 


Inclra said : — ‘‘ 0 Preceptor ! the time for the Devas to fight with 
the demons has come. Pray, therefore, enlighten me as to what we should 
do now.” — 63. 

Hearing those words of Indra the wise- Bfihaspati, the master of 
speech, replied “ Lord of the Devas! those who want to conquer the 
enemy having four fold armies as chariots, horses, elephants and infantry 
should resort to either of the four policies beginning with Sama (peace 
overtures). This is the eternal i3rocedure. Peace, dissension, gift, and 
war are the four policies in the Niti Sastra (war politics). These four 
means are to be applied after due consideration of the time, place, and 
the strength of the enemy. Friendship and peace cannot be made with the 
Daityas. For they are well-established. You cannot sow dissension amongst 
them, for they are one intact body. You cannot give them gifts for they 
are endowed with wealth. So the last resource, t.e., war is inevitable. 
If you, therefore, agree, to crush them would be the best thing, 
because, one who makes overtures for peace with the wicked, works in 
vain. When magnanimous men out of their liberal understanding and 
kind disposition inakcs overtures for peace, the wicked think that they do 
it out of fear. The good do not misunderstand and come round when 
persuaded to make peace but the case of the wicked is otherwise. 
Tlie wicked always take it for granted that proposals of peace originate 
from fear ; it is, therefore, best to fight with them and subdue them ; then 
you can apply other means. Persuatiou for peace is best in connection 
witli tlio good ; tljc wicked can never turn out good. The good may persu- 
ade themselves to change their natures on certain occasions but the 
wicked never do so. This is my advice, but you should also consider 
over the matter.” Indra after a long pause, thus addressed the Devas. — 64.-74:. 

Indra spoke: — ‘‘ 0, Dwellers in heaven I hear my words with great 
attention. You are the partakers of the sacrificial offerings and of 
Sattvik natures, you are peaceful, contented and good. Always installed 
in your greatness, you carry on the work of this universe. The Danavas 
are causing you unnecessary pain. They can not be approached with the 
three policies of Sama, Dana and Bheda. They deserve being subdued in 
war. We should now lay down our plan^. Arrange my army. Due 
reverence should be shown to the presiding Deities of arms and they 
should bo worshipped. Get ready all the vehicles of war and conveyances. 
March on quickly after making Dharmaraja the commander of the army.” 
—75-77. 

Hearing that, the principal Devas began preparations for war. They 
then made ready an invincible chariot drawn by 10,000 horses, decorated 
with golden bells and endowed with extraordinary powers. The chariot of 
Indra was brought out by the charioteer Matali in which he took his 
seat. Dharmaraja advanced forwanl on his buffalo, flis followers, of very 
violent temper, surrounded him. The eyes of Yama began to burn as if 
flames wtre rising towards the sky at the end of a Kalpa. Agni sat on 
a goat armed with His Sakti weapon. Pavana came with all His force 
and armed with a goad. Varuna came riding on a serpent and the god 
Kuvera presiding over the demons came armed with a sword and seated 
in a chariot drawn by men. Kuvera came armed with a shagrp sword and a 




60 


TEE MATSYA PURANAM. 


terrible club, roaring like a lion. The Sun, tlie Moon and the Aiiviniku- 
maras came out with Their chaturafigini® army and the GandharvSs 
shining like gold came along with their leaders and on their backs were 
hanging golden badges. They wore golden garments, peculiar armours, 
jewels ; they were seated in chariots and armed, appeared in the field of 
battle with their banners bearing the symbols of fish, etc. — 78-87. 

The valiant Rakijasas came wearing red apparels of tlie colour of 
Javd flowers with their red hairs streaming in the air, clad in iron and 
with banner bearing the symbol of vnlture. 'J'he ferocious Nagas with 
their head dresses hissing like the clouds, appeared seated in chariots, 
wearing armour, holding torches, and armed with bolts, clubs, swords, 
etc The terrible Yaksas came wearing black dress, armed with for- 
mridable bows and arrows, decorated with gold anil jewels, and having 
the symbol of a copper owl on their banner. 'J’he Raksasas came wearing 
tiger skins and ornaments of bones with their banner streaming with the 
wings of vulture. They had Alusalas in their hands and they remained 
unseen by any. The KumAras came armed with cli.’is, clad in white 
and bearing a white banner having the symbol of a biid K>ran(.w?). 
They were all riding on infuriated elephants and iiad keen sw-ords with 
them. A silver crane bedecked with hangings of pearls was put on the 
banner of Varuna, and the banner of Kuveia was decorated with a 
jewelled tree ornamented with precious stones, rubies, etc., and seemed to 
reach the heavens. The huge banner of Vamu was dicorated with the 
symbol of a wolf made of wood and iion. 

The banner of the Lord of Raksasas was adorned with a demon’s 
head, and those of the Sun and the Moon with golden lions. 

Jewelled pitchers adorned the lianner of Advinikumaras and that 
of Indra with golden clejihant, uhite chAnnras and bedecked with 
wonderfully variegated jewels and ])e,irN. The army of the Devas con- 
sisting of serpents, Yaksas, Gandharvas, Isdsncliaras swelled to 33 kotis 
and looked invincible. The thousand-< jcd India clad in line raimants 
and wearing beautiful oruanicnls witli his arms adorned with aimlets 
and attended by thousands of bards looked grand in heaven when he look 
his seat on his elephant Airfivai.i, white like the Himalaya, adorned with 
a golden garland and marked with red vermilion and salTron on the 
teuiples and surroundeil by a swaim of black bees. 

Thus the army of the Devas consisting of horses and elephants and 
various other arms and having dilfercnt kinds of wea[)onB, shone with 
white umbrellas and white banners, etc.— ‘.)(i-101. 

Uere ends the one hundred and forly-ehjhOi chapter on the 

* preparations for war. 


CHAPTER CLXIX. 

Sfita said In that terrible war between the Suras and the 
Asuras, there yvas a fierce conflict between the two armies. The Devas 
and the Daityas roared and blew thoir conches and boat their 

♦ Note. — Chataraiiga=:A complete army consisting of elephonts, cavalry, iufantrv 
aud chariots. . .> j 



GBAFVER GL. 


61 


drums, and a great noise was made by the yelling of infuriated elephants, 
neighing of horses, rattling of chariot wheels, and the twanging of 
bowstrings adding to the fierceness of the conflict. The warriors of 
both the armies not caring for their lives and excited with the desire 
to gain victory, fought with each other in Anuloina and Viloma methods 
(directing in direct ways or many with many or many with a smaller 
number), at some places the infantry faced with chariot warriors ; 
at other places cavalry fought with chariot warriors ; at others, 
elephants fought with infantry ; elephant men fought with elephants ; 
at others one elephant man with many horses and at other places 
many mad elephants fought with one soldier on foot. Then clubs, battle 
axes, tridents, quoits, pointed goads, swords, scumitars, knives 
spears, etc., etc., were freely used. All those weapons were showered 
in the atmosphere 'and darkness began to pervade in all directions. 
It grew so dark in the course of the severe fighting that none could recognise 
one another ; the infuriated forces shot their arrows without seeing, and 
weapons only were visible in both the armies. The severed banners 
umbrellas, heads with earrings, elephants, horses, infantrymen fell 
down from above of both armies. It looked beautiful as if the earth 
was strewn with lotuses falling from the aerial lake. The elephants 
with broken tusks and trunks and stream of blood rushing out, fell 
down on the ground likle huge mountains. The chariots were crushed to 
atoms by the breaking of wheels, axle, rod and yoke, etc. ; thousands 
of horses fell down and were divided into pieces. The earth, every- 
whei’e, became full of pools of blood and rivers began to flow red 
with blood of animals and men. The flesh-eating animals were delighted 
and the VetAlas, the evil-spirits, began to dance with glee. — 1-17. 

Here ends the one-hundred and forty-ninth chapter on the eonfliet 
heticeen the Devas and the Astiras. 


CHAPTER CL. 

Suta said : — Afterwards, Uharmarnja seeing Grasana became over- 
whelmed with rage and showered arrows after arrows like flames of fire 
on him. Then the demon pierced with many arrows took up his Bhairava 
bow to take revenge and shot five hundred arrows at DharmarAja and 
made him feel his power. The latter also realizing the power of this 
bow directed his more formidable arrows towards the enemy, but the demon 
Grasana cut that volley of arrows by his own, on their way in the atmos- 
phere. Dharmarfija finding His arrows ineffective thought of many other 
arrows, and hurled His fearful club in front of the demon’s chariot with 
velocity. But the latter, seeing it coming towards him in the air, jumped 
and caught hold of it with his left hand. And with the very same 
missile, he hit the buffalo of Uharraaraja with great rage which instantly 
fell down on the ground. Yaina at once jumped down from that falling 
buffalo and hit Grasana with a javelin named Prasa weapon. By the blow 
of that the demon fell down senseless. Seeing which the valiant Jam- 
bha appeared on the scene. — 1-10. 




62 


THE MAT8YA PURANAM. 


He instantly bit Yania in the chest with BhindipAla weapon which 
caused the blood to gush out through His mouth. At that lime, seeing 
Yania so belaboured, Kuvera armed witli a club, turned up with an 
army of hundreds of YaksAs and angrily went towards the demon. 
Then Jambha also angrily advanced with his army of the demons and 
seeing Kuvera, addressed him gently like a wise man. 11-13. 

In the meanwhile, the demon Grasana also came to his senses 
and hurled a very heavy club studded with jems on J)harmai "ja ; 
at which the Latter also hurled angrily Ilis most formidable all -destroying 
blazing Danda I rod) to rend tlie club of his adversary. Yama’s rod and 
the Demon’s club struck other in tlie air and a tumultuous sound, 

like that of the thunder, arose. Tho two weapons looked like two moun- 
tains in their encounter wifi) each other. Ily their collision, the beings in 
all directions ^vere roidered senseless Tho universe trembled with the 
fear of being annihilated. Tlieir friction ]no(luccd a Maze and the sky 
looked terrible at that moment, as if moteoi's wme g(/mg \ . fall. Somet mio 
after, the missile of Dharmarnia breaking tho clul) of the demon liit him 
on the head. Just as the ills of the wieked deprive them of pelf, simi- 
larly the demon was struck with tho blow of tliat chib. He fell down 
blinded by its force and was rolling in dnsi. After this there was a 
great uproar in both the armies. 1 l-iH. 

Oncoming back to his senses after a moment, Cirasana finding himself 
so badly hit, his ornaments and elotli being scaflered, dctc'rmined to take 
revenge and thought : — ‘‘My master’s victory or defeat rests on a wortliy 
man like myself. All these demon forces are under me. If 1 bo defeated, 
all my army shall become extinct ami my foe shall ))e(u)nie independent. 
An unworthy man may act as recklessly as ho desires ; l)Jit a trustworthy 
man ought not to be reckless when time comt:s ; lie oiiglit to do liis 
duty.” With these thoughts that valiant demon li\(‘d liis determinations 
and dashed against his enemy with full force, (irimly resolved and armed 
with a ponderous club, gaiashing his teeth with angm*, and sealed in a 
chariot, Grasana appeared insiantly in the l)attlefu*hi brandishing his club 
and began to fight with Dharmaraja. 22-21. 

He hurled that fearful club at the lieail of Dharmaraja with great force, 
seeing which tlie Latter evaded its blow, h, however, crushed several of His 
brave followers, seeing which Dharmaraja got grcatl}^ vexed and took up 
His formidable weaixuis to protect His followers. Tbe demon Grtisana, 
seeing the numerous followers of Yama, tliought that tlie army was raised 
by the Maya of Dharmaraja and began toshowcT arrows. He got enraged 
like the ocean getting ferocious at the lime of the aiiniliilation of tho world 
and pierced some with tlio trident and some witli his arrows. He powdered 
some with his club and destroyed others with liis fonnidablo spear. Many 
^ were crushed by tlie blow of liis arms. Whereas some of Yania’s fol- 
lowers attacked with huge pieces of rocks and trees and very long tridents. 
Other follwers of Dharmaraja began to bite the body of Grasana and 
inflict blows on his back. — 2t5-30. 

Then the infuriated demon, thus made to retreat by his adversaries, 
pushed several of them and crushed them by his weight He inflicted 



CHAPTER CL. 


63 


blows with his fists on many ^hH after a ti^e, got qnite exhausted 
with fighting the army of Dharmaraja. Seeing ^e repulse of His army 
and the exhaustion of that demon, Dharmaraja armed with a mace 
appeard on the scene riding on his bulIalo.~37-39. 

Seeing Yama coming, the demon Grasana struck his two legs. 
Yama, taking this lightly, hit the tigers yoked to the demon’s chariot! 
The tigers thus belaboured by the mace could not advance with the chariot! 
The demon’ll chariot was then in a state of suspense like the mind of a 
doubtful person. Grasana thus anxiously left his vehicle and took his 
stand on the ground ; and started wrestling with Dharmaraja. The 
Latter also casting away His arms faced the foe. As the idea of prestige 
agitates a peaceful man, so the haughty Grasana holding the lower 
garment of Dharmaraja whirled Him round most violently. The 
Latter also holding the neck of the demon by his arms lifted him 
up in the air and whirled him violently. They both beg.an to 
fight with blows. Tlie demon was huge and bulky ; Dharmaraja, therefore, 
got tired. He, placing His arms on the shoulder of the demon, began 
to take rest. The demon, finding Dharmaraja done up, threw Him down, 
gave him blows after blows, anil kicked Him several times when blood 
ran out of His mouth. Afterwards, the demon taking Dharmarfija for 
dead, left Him and raised a cry of victory.— 40-49. 

He then returned and stood like a mountain before his army. 
The infuriated demon Jambha shot fierce arrows at Kuvera, and 
checked llis advance in all directions and annihilated much of His army. 
Kuvera, also getting vexed, shot a volley of thousand fiery arrows 
on the chest of the demon and pierced the charioteer with one hundred 
arrows. He pierced his hands with 75 arrows, cut his bow by ten sharp 
arrows and pierced his lion with a single arrow and another straight ten 
arrows, steeped in oil and marked with leaves, penetrated the demon all over 
his body. The demon was terrified somehow at this wonderful deed of 
Kuvera, mustered up his presence of mind and took fearfully sharp 
arrows to subdue his foe ; and drawing Ids bow angrily to his ears he 
discharged his arrows on the chest of Kuvera, and killed His charioteer 
with a sharp arrow and cut Kuvera’s bow-string by another steeped in oil. 
Afterwards, he pierced the chest of Kuvera by another ten violently 
sharp arrows. — 50- 58. 

Kuvera was rendered senseless for a while, and then He picked up 
courage and drew His big bow, and let out thousands of arrows which 
pervaded every direction and descended on the soldiers of the demons. 
The sun was eclipsed by those myriads of flying arrows. The demon 
Jambha also discliarged his shower of arrows cutting down those shot by 
Kuvera. In a very short time, he rendered the valour of Kuvera void, at 
which the Latter was enraged and thinned the army of the demon by pour- 
ing out another volley of His fearful arrows. The demon then took up his 
ponderous club mounted witli gold and powdered many of the followers - 
of Kuvera with its blows. — 59-64. 

The attendants of Kuvera being horrified, shouted out furiously and 
rallied round the chariot of their Leader. Seeing His men in such an 


64 


THE MATSYA PUBAEAM, 


awful consternatioi), He took up Hi^ Eighty trident aiv I killed quickly 
thousands of denious. — 65 -00. 

The demon, seeing the annihilation of hiaanny, be lled with rage, 
and took up his huge battle axe. That keen-edged battle-axe divided the 
chariot of Kuvora into pieces, as a rat nibbles at a piece of glossy cloth and 
cuts it into many parts. — 67-08. 

Then Kuvera, alighting on the ground, took up His enemy-destroying 
dreadful club w'hich noonecouhl wield and which was rnad^f heavy iron 
and mounted with gold and was being worshipped with uncooked rice 
and sandal fora long time and scented with perfumes of flowers. He 
hit the forehead of the demon with it. The demon Jambha, seeing the 
dreadful club luminous like lightning by approaching towards him, 
discharged, with his hands decorated with bracelets, quoit, spear, Pn\sa, 
Bhusundi, Pattisa and various other missiles, in order to save himself 
from its blow. Inspite of the club l)eiug resisted by the missiles of the 
demon, it struck him in the chest as a great Hash of li^;ht comes out of the 
cavern of a moii/itain. . lly the f«)ree of tliat blow, the demon foil close 
to the yoke of the chariot and a stream of blood fiowed out of his 
mouth, ears, etc. — 09-75. 

The demon Kujambha, considering hiseomrailo killed, sent forth an 
echoing shrill and became (uiraged with Ivuvera’s taunting remarks. By 
his Alayd, he spread in an instcinf, a network of arrows in all tlie directions 
and shot many sharp Ardhachaiidra .semi lunar) arrows and cut to pieces 
all the arrows of Kuvera, —70-77. 

On the other liaiid, Kuvora slunverod a volley of arrows on the 
demon which tlie latter cut down in return, (hi tiu^ arrows being thus 
rendered useless, Kuvora took uf) His javelin (l^akti/ bedecked with 
golden bells and lioiding it in Ills hand, decke(l witli pearled bracelets, 
hurled it with grear violence at Knjamblia. That t^akti of Kuvera rent 
the chest of His adversary and after fuUilling its mission, the javelin 
entered within the gn)nnd. After a muliurla '.momentj tlie demon came 
back to his senses and pierced tin* chest of Kiiveia with Ids sharpened 
spear (Pattisastra), as a wicked man’s words pierce throngh the heart. 
Kuvera,, like an old ox, fell down senseless on iJis chariot. — 78-85. 

Seeing the fall of Kuvera Nirriti, th(» lord of the JiAksasas, followed 
by his army with great violence, rushed towards Kujambha with sword in 
liand. The latter directed his army to encounter tliat of his foe. The 
lord of the Raksasas, illumined by tlie lustre of his ornaments, saw the 
army of Kujambha, armed with various kinds of weapons, became enraged, 
and contracting hia eyebrows, jumped from his chariot and severed 
violently with his unsheathed bright sword, the heads of many warriors 
of Kujambha, as if, he was cutting lotuses. He then advanced forward 
biting his lips with rage, and cut down many heroes. At that time, the 
demon Kujambha seeing his army reduced to small numbers, left Kuvera 
and dashed towards Nirriti, the Uaksasa lord. — 86-92. 

Afterwards, the demon Jambha also got some relief and he captured 
thousands of his foes in his noose and took away their lives ; the Danavas 
at that : time, took many gems, Viraanas and conveyances of the enemy. 



CnAPTER GL. 


65 


'JL 

Kiiver:i came to liis senses and, seeing the atrocities of the demons, heaved 
a dec]) sigti and ITis eyes turned red with anger, and He took the 
Oarudastra and let it out of His bow and threw it on the forces of the 
l)ana\ as. A huge mass of smoke issued from that arrow which was followed 
by billions of fiery sparks. Afterwards that arrow pervaded all over the 
sky with its lustre and gradually became an unconquerably missile. All 
the space was covered with darkness. Then tlie^ lustre of the weapons 
ascended hi^up in the atmosphere and became revealed. The Celestial 
Beings begalPko admire its potency. — 93*99. 

Seeing all that, the demon Kujambha rushed yelling towards 
Kuvera on foot, Who seeing the demon approaching towards Him took to 
His heels. At that hour, the highly-jewelled crown of Kuvera fell on the 
ground like the shining sun. — 100-102. 

When the commander of the brave, takes to fliglit the warriors born 
of noble families consider it their duty to give their lives in defend- 
ing the head ornament of tlieir general ; therefore, the Yaksas circled 
round tlie fallen coronet armed with various kinds of weapons. The 
haughty warriors took the course that Kuvera liad taken. — 103-104. 

The demons, seeing those haughty Yaksas of Kuvera, angrily 
rushed at them and killed those that were guarding the crown of their 
Master, with terribly heavy Blmsnndi weapons. After killing them, they 
took hold of the crown and, placing it in chariot, were greatlj^ delighted 
witli tlieir victory over Kuvera. They captured various gems, pearls, 
jewels and otlier riches — 105-107. 

Afterwards, the demon Jambha taking the wealth of the dead 
Yaksas returned Avitli his array and Kuvera meekly presented Himself 
before India with His hair streaming in the air. — 108. 

On the other hand, Nirriti was engaged with Kujambha and by his 
infallible Tiimasi Maya created darkness all over and bewildered Kujam- 
bha. Ho blinded Kujambha by the darkness pervading everywhere. 
The whole Daiiava force could not see anything. The demons could not 
advance even a step on account of the prevailing darkness, when he began 
to destroy the army of the demons by showering many kinds of weapons 
on them. The charioteers of the demons began to die of extreme cold. In 
that way, the demons were killed and Kujambha was rendered senseless. 
Then the demon Mahisasura looking like the ferocious banks of clouds 
that gather to pour out volumes of water at the time of the dissolution 
of the world, shot the Savitri arrow shining like flashes of lightning. The 
radiance of tlie all-powerful excellent Savitri arrows dispelled darkness 
from the battlefield. That fiery missile drove away the darkness as the 
autumn season makes the sky clear and render the lotuses on the tanks 
bright with the rising rays of the sun. When the darkness was driven 
away the demons began to see and then fought with the Devas in a moat 
wonderful manner. They angrily let out their bhujaftgdstra and poisoned 
arrows from tlieir ponderous bows. — 109-117. 

The demon Kujambha took his exceedingly terrible bow and dashed 
straight towards the army of the Ruk^asas, The lord of the Raksasas, 
seeing Kujambha making an advance, pierced him with the arrows pois- 
9 




66 


TEB MATS7A FfJRANAM.^ 


oned with the venom of shake and no ^ace of rescue was feft for 
The enemy could not make out what Nirriti was doing, he was placing and 
shooting his arrows so quickly. That Rak^asa cut down the arrows of his 
adversary and also his banner. Afterwards he killed the charioteer and 
knocked him down with his spear (Bhalla), seeing wliich Kujainbha got 
fearfully vexed and his eyes grow rod with anger. He jumped from his 
chariot and *took hold of his keen sword and shield mounted with 
ten iron pieces looking like rising moons. He tlien made wav towards the 
lord of the Ihlksasas. — 118-123. ® 

Then Nirriti hit Kiijamblia on his approacdi with the blow 
of his club which made him faint and swagger round. He remained still 
and motionless. Inspite of that, ho did not lose liis presence of mind and 
stood up like a mountain and in a couple of hours, on l)eing fully composed, 
he jumped on the chariot and caught ludd of tlie left arm of the Ilaksasa 
and putting it under his feet he }»ulled liis long liair. — 1.24-120. 

When the demon was about to severe Nirriti's head with the sw ad, 
Varuna instantly appeared on the spot and tie<l dounbotli the demon’s 
hands with his noose and so all the power of tlie demon was rendered void. 
Afterwards, Varuna, forsaking all compassion, })ogan to beat him with 
His club on account of which that demon began to vomit blood. — 127-129. 

At that time, the demon assumed tlie form of clouds cliarged with 
electricity. Seeing Kujambha in tliat plight, MaliisAsnra opened liis lingo 
mouth containing pointed rows of teeth with tin' intention of devouring 
both Kuvera and Nirriti tlie lord of the Raksasas. Rotli of them, realizing 
the intention of ^Mahisasurn, juinp(*il (h)wn from tlie cliariot and took to their 
heels and went to their res[)eetivo (piai ters. 4'hny were awfully horrified 
and flew into dilTchent directions. The lbik':J»j-a h)rd instantly went to take 
shelter with Indra. The infuriated MahisAsnra ran afun* Vanina and the 
Moon, seeing Him to he a prey of death. <larted His somAsira, the store of 
chill. He also let Jlis vriyavyAstra for a '^eC'Uid tiim*. 130-1 on. 

Then, all tlio demmis were ballh-d by tlie chill of tlic liimastra, 
and vayavyAstra of the Moon, ddiey eonhl not walk on nor conid liohl 
their weapons in hand. The demons were fi-ozon with cold and began 
to feel unbearable i)ain all over th(*ir body muh'r the inlluence of the arrows 
of the Moon. Mahisasura also could imt do anything. His body also 
began to shiver through cold. He sat down holding liis chest (or chariot ?) 
with Iiis hands and with his head cast flownwards. All the demons could 
not do anything. Thus overpowered by tlie Moon, the Daityas could not 
take any revenge. Tliey all abandoned the ambition of war and stood 
up to save their lives wlieri the furious Krdanemi addressed them as 
follows.— 136-140. 

He said “Brave wairiors ! you are skilled in warfare, expert in 
enjoying pleasures ! Every one of you can singly uplift the world in 
the palm of your hand. You can devour the world if you like. Tlio whole 
heaven cannot encounter T^jth of anyone of you. You, witli your renowned 
prowess, are standing liere in the great field of battle to attain victory. Why 
are you then taking to your heels ? WJiy are you sitting thus, defeated 
by the Hevas ? This is extremely unworthy to you ! TArakfisura is your 



OHAPfBR GL. 


m 


and he’cati alone annihilate the universe^ He is now sitting quiet. 
He will kill hveryone of us if we turn our back on the battlefield.# At 
that time, the demons were shivering with cold and they could not hear ; 
they could not speak. They were simply making noise by grinding their 
, teeth. They coul^l not hear Kalanemi*s words. Seeing which Kalanemi 
thought what he would do and magnified his body by His May^. He 
extended himself in all the directions and through his spell created 
thousands of suns. All the directions pervaded uith heaiand the universe 
began to suffft- from it. That heat drove away the effect of the Moon and 

the freezing wind also ceased. — 141-150. 

# 

* The Sun on realizing the increase of the power of the demons by 
Krdaneini angrily commanded His charioteer Aruna to take Him to 
the spot where Kalanemi was. Now there will be a tough fight ” said 
the Sun, “ and many lieroes, will be killed. Behold ! The Moon has been 
conquered by the Sun.” 

Hearing those words the charioteer Aruna instantly drove swiftly the 
chariot yoked with horses wearing white chainaras. The Sun took up His 
huge how and shot two divine arrows having the lustre and properties of 
serpents. The first was the sanchara-astra thrown amongst the enemy’s 
forces and the second huhajala-astra having the properties of magic. By 
the influence of the sanohfira-astra the faces of the demons and the Devas 
were changed into those of the Devas and Danavas. In other words, the 
faces of the (lemons looked like those of the Devas and the faces of the 
Devas looked like those of the demons. — 151-157. 

Under such circumstances, the demons taking their comrades to be 
the Devas began to slaughter one another. Krdanemi began to annihilate 
them like the angry Dharmaraja at the time of pralaya. He killed them 
with swords, arrows, clubs, battle-axes; severing the heads of some, the 
arms of others and crushed the chariots and the charioteers by the force of 
his chariot. Ho killed several with his fist. Thus Kalanemi killed his 
own armies. The demons on thus being fatally attacked by Kfilanemi, 
and being horrified of the Devas began to yell and assume their proper 
forms. The angry KMlaiiomi could not recognise them when the demon 
Nemi said to him : — “ I am Nemi ; recognise me. You have killed 
ten lacs of valiant demons through ignorance, whom the Devas even could 
not have killed. You should, therefore, discharge your Brahinastra, without 
delay that defeats all the other weapons.” — 158-164. 

Hearing his words Krdanemi Jet out the Brahmastra arrow which 
pervaded every nook and corner of the universe. The whole of the army 
of the Devas was petrified with horror and the effect of the sanch«ara-astra 
of the Sun also ceased and at the same time, the Sun became dull. At that 
hour, the Sun through His power of magic astra assumed billions of 
forms. Ifis strong rays penetrated the three regions. The army of the 
demons was scorched. All the blood and marrow of the soldiers were 
dried up. Thus, they were much tormented. Afterwards there was a 
shower of fire which blinded the demons. — 165-170. 

The huge elephants were ablaze and fell down charred. The hoi-ses, 
horribly oppressed by the heat, began to pant and the warriors sitting 



6S 


THE MATSTA PUltAVAM. 


in chariots also began to perspire an^ breathe hard. They all began 
to run abont with thirst and felt inclined to sit under the shade of a tree 
or in a cavern of the mountain. The trees began to burn with conllagra- 
tion of fire and the demons pereecuted with the long tongues of fire could 
not reach the water that was in front of them close by. ,0n thus failing to 
get water they died gaping. Everywhere the dead carcasses of the demons 
were visible and innumerable elephants and horses yoked to chariots also 
began to fall. — 171-175. ^ 

A stream of blood ran out of their mouths and thousands of demons 
were found lying dead. When those demons began to be destroyed like 
that Kalanemi, with his eyes turned red with rage, created masses of clouds 
like’ those at the time of the dissolution of the world and raised a most 
thrilling yell. There flowed hundreds of rivers. The sky was thus overcast 
and dispelled the glory of the Siin ; a downpour of cold showers fell on the 
ai'micH of the demons. This gave comfort to the demons, just as sprouts 
come out of the ground on getting rainwater.— 17t)-18(). 

Kfilanemi, at the same time, poured out a shower . f missiles on Hie 
Devas just as clouds shower rain. The Devas, oppressed with the shower 
of fearful missiles, could not cope with the demoiis and h.okcd like the 
cows oppressed with cold. 'I'hey left their arms and cmbracecl one another 
and throw themselves behind their horses, chaiiots, etc. They all bid 
themselves and most of them contracted their bodies and covered their 
faces with their hands. Others took to their heels.— 181-181. 

Afterwards, the Devas wandereil hither and thither in utter dismay. 
In course of such a fearful conflict, a large number of the Devas were lost. 
Most of them were seen scatteied on the ground with their limbs, arms, 
thighs severed and their heads smashed and legs broken. Tlio train of 
banners was broken, the chariots -vere smashed and turned upside 
down and the horses and elephants with tluii seveied bodies fell to the 
ground. The blood of the fallen \ielims of wai spread all c.vcr the ground 
which presented an awful appearanec. In that way, the. valiant Kiilaiiemi 
showed his strength in the field of liatlle. In the twinkling of an eye 
100000 Gandhaivas, 5 laes of Yaksas, I'.O.tK'O R.-ik.sasas, 8 lacs nio.st 
poiv’crful and swift Kinnaras, and 7 ha s of I’iuielias were killed by the 
brflve Kalanemi.. 185-100. 

Besides these, that valiant demon also killed innumerable kotis of 
Deva warriors. In that way, when the Devas were greatly defeated and 
almost annihilated, the two AlvinikuniAms, wearing a wonderful white 
armour, came out boiling with indignation ; and each of tlicm began to send 
forth a volley of 00 arrows at a time; on that demon shining like fire. 
When the Atfvinikumaras began to hit tlie demon with their arrows and 
pierced his chest, he was in great pain and took up the eight-edged keen 
auoit and with it pierced the yoke of the Asvinikurnaras’ chariot and 
picking up his bow, he shot poisoned arrows on the forehead of the 
physicians and let out innumerable arrows in the air. The sky became 
overcast. Then Aivinikuniaras also cut down the arrows of tlic demon by 
their own which amazed the hitter. Ho gfit fearfully vexed and took liis 
formidable club of iron, and brandishing it with great force hurled it at 



CHAPTER CL. 


69 


the chariot of Arfvinikum^ras, seeing which they vacated the chariot, and 
the ponderous club powdered the chariots and cruslied the earth. Seeing 
such heroic feat of the demon’s weapon, the A«ivinikuniaras let out 
their terrible vajrakhya-astra on the demon and over it bolts were 
showered . — 19 1-202. 

The shower of those bolts unnerved the demon. His chariot, banner,^ 
bow, quoits, golden armour were Idown to atoms. In that way, he was 
subdued in presence of the army and at that instant, tlic demon discharged 
his njxrayanastra which lulled the vajrAstra. Then the demon wanted to 
kill the Arfvinikumaras at which the Latter fled to take shelter with Indra. — 
203-207. 

The fearful demon then pursued and came close to the chariot of 
Indra followed by his army ; seeing which, everyone was horrified and 
thought that Indra was about to be defeated. Mountains and meteors 
began to fall from the sky. Clouds begfin to tliunder in all the quarters ; 
the oceans also swelled. Then Lord Visnii, seeing the universe 
in such an agony, left off His yogic slumber and awoke and sat on His 
couch of Sejla Naga. Tlio Coddess Laksmi began to shampoo His legs by 
Her hands. He looked like blue autumnal sky and like blue lotus. He had 
a beautiful armlet and on His forehead, He wore Kaustubha gem and His 
arms adorned with ai’inlets shining like the snn. The Lord awoke and 
seeing the ati-ocities of the demon summoned Garudaaiid shining with the 
lustre of weapons ‘took His seat. Instantly, Garuda appeared before 
1 liin. Visnu then rode on Garuda and came to the Devas. He saw that the 
violent and powerful .Demons, looking like fresh rain clouds, had attacked 
Indra ; and the Dova forces looked like persons surrounded by their 
unfortunate descendants. — 208-215. 

Afterwards, the demons saw the lustrous halo of the Lord in the 
sky as if the glory of the rising Sun xvas making itself visible on the 
Udayilchala Mountain. All the (lemons were anxious to know what was 
that light. They all beheld tlie (^loud-lmed Lord seated on the Garucla 
shining like the desti’uctive fire prevailing at the time of the dissolution 
of the universe. Seeing Him, all the demons felt highly gratified and they 
said “ He is the Lord Visnu and the all in all of the Devas. By defeating 
Him we will conquer the Devas. He is the annihilator of the demons. 
All the Devas, under Ilis protection, partake of Their shai-e of sacrificml 
offerings.” Saying so all the demons took their stand round Him and 
began to shower various kinds of weapons on Him. — 216-222. 

Ten valiant demons like KAlaneini,'^etc., known asMaharathas, began 
to fight. KAlanemi shot 60 arrows ; Nimi shot 100 arrows; Mathana, 80 
arrows; Jambhaka, 70 arrows; Sambhu ten arrows and the rest of the demons 
a single arrow each, on Visnu and with ten arrows they pierced Garuda. 
Visnu, the destroyer of the Danavas, thinking of the impetuosity of 
the demons, pierced everyone of them with six arrows. He drew again His 
bow and pierced Kalanemi with three arrows. — 223-226. 

Then Kalanemi, with eyes red with anger, put arrows on his bow 
and drawing the string up to his ears let them off on His chest. Those 
golden arrows on the chest of the Lord looked beautiful like the rays of 
Kaustubha gem. Visnu, somewhat mortified with them, snatched His 



70 


TBB MAT8YA PUBANAM. • 


terrific cjub and after brandishin^r it, whirled and hurleH it at the demon. 
The demon, seeing it approaclung, divided it into pieces by his 
arrows and, thereby, showed the force of his arms.— 227-230. 

Then Vi§nn angrily took up His spear, the terrific Pnisnstra, and 
pierced his chest. K^lanemi, regaining consciousness, took up his sharp 

trident, the sharp ^akti ringing witli golden bells and hurled it on Visnu. 
It chopped off the left arm of the Lord and on that wounded arm the 
blood stains looked beautiful like the armlet studded with rubies. After- 
wards Visnu became very angry and took up 11 is heavy bow and put seven- 
teen deadly arrows to its strings and hit ti^e demon’s chest witli nine 
arrows, killed the dvarioteer with four, cut the banner with one arrow, his 
bow with two and pierced his left arm with one arrow. The demon felt 
great agony on being tlius wounded. J^lood gushed out of his chest and 
took the appearance/)f the rising sun. lie began to shiver like tlie Kinsuka 
tree blown by the wind. Visnti seeing him shivering like that took up His 
club ; and threw it with great violence at tlio chariot of KAlancmi which 
struck his forehead and smashed his coronet to pie(?es. large volume of 
blood gushed out of liis body wliieh looked like vermilion coming one of 
the mountain and ho fell down senseless in liis brokem chariot, lie was 
only heaving liis last breath. The Lord then lauglied a little and addressed 
Kalanemi : — “ Lemon ! retire from liere fearlessly, save your life for the 
present. You are destined to die at my bands after a short time.” Hear- 
ing those words, Krdaiiemi’s cliariotoor took liim away in liis chariot 
to a great distance. — 231-243. 

Here ends the one hundred and fiftieth chapter on the defeat of Kdlanctni. 


(lIAV'rER CLI. 

Sfita said : — Then the demoijs all fell angrily on Visnu like a swarm 
of bees flying towards the destroyer of the honeyemul). At that time, the 
powerful demon Nimi appeared on his impetuous (‘h'phanl, gushing with 
rut and adorned with black fly-flap and wonderfully variegated live lian- 
ners and looking like a moantain and ferocious, owifig tf) the sjunbol of 
a distorted crow on the banner. 27000 fearful Daiiavas, wearing head dress 
on and coat of armour, followed that elephant. Mathana eanic on ahorse, 
Jambhaka an a camel, and ^anibliu on a big sheep. — 1-5. 

Besides them, various oth(‘r Danavas also armed with various kinds 
of weapons, came fully determined and with vioh'nt rage and began to 
fight with Ilari, Who never gets tired in working, Nimi used liis club, 

Mathana his mace, t^ambhu his sharp trident ; Gmsana, his spear ; Jarn- 
bha, his ^akti ; and the other Uanavas shot sharponecl arrows at Visuiu 
All those missiles penetrated Vihnu just as the words of a preceptor penet- 
rate into the ears of a dutiful disciple.— 6-0. 

Then Lord Vi.snu also took up liis bow not at all bewildered and, 
drawing it to His ears, discliarged straight and poisoned arrows on the 
enemy. Armed with liis bow and arrows, the fjord fell on the demons and 

shot 20 fiery arrows at Nimi, ten at Mathana and five at Sambhu. The Lord 




CE AFTER GLI. 


71 


shot one arrow at Mahi^ftsura, 12 at Jambha and eight arrows at each 
of the rest of the demons.— 10-13. 

Seeing the valour of the Lord, the Danavas began to yell and fight 
with caution. They were all blind with rage. At that time, the O&nava 
Nimi cut off the bow of Visnu with his spear and Mahi^suracut the arrow 
that was on the string. — 14-15. 

Jambha tormented Garuda with sharp-pointed arrows and the moun- 
tain-like l^ambhu pierced the arm of Visnu by his airows. When the bow 
of Visnu was torn asiinder, He picked up His club and, after brandishing it, 
struck Mathana with it. But Nimi smashed the club to pieces on the mid- 
way by his arrows and it was shattered like the prayers made to a destitute 
person. — 1(3-18. 

Seeing this, Ijord Visnu took up His dreadful club studded with 
precious stones and violently struck Nimi with it. At that time the three 
demons smashed that club while in the air. Jambha threw his club at it, 
Grasana his sharp-edged spear and MahijjAsura his trident. They shattered 
the club like the entreaties m ide to the wicked. Vi§nu, seeing the destruc- 
tion of His club, threw his trident bedecked with bells at the demon 
Jambha.— 19-22. 

The Danava Gaja, seeing the trident coming flying into the air, caught 
hold (jf it as a righteous person grasps a piece of good advice. Then the 
Tjord enraged took His pondrous bow and shot Raudnistra at him. All 
the universe pervaded with the power of that weapon and the whole sky 
was ftdl of arrows. — 23-25. 

When all the quarters and space of the earth were covered with 
arrows, then the general Grasana came and discharged his Brahmastra 
which drove away the effects of the liaudrastra. On the Raudrnstra being 
thus rendered useless, Lord Visnu let out His formidable KAladanda 
weapon, the terror of the whole universe. A terrific wind began to blow 
and the earth began to quake and all the demons were at their wits’ 
end.— 26-29. 

Seeing that invincible missile the haughty Danavas discharged 
various kinds of weapons to thwart that Kaladanda weapon. Grasana 
used his Niirayauustra and Nimi his chakra, and Jambha used his Aislka 
weapon of arms. The army of the Daityas with billions of elephants and 
horses was destroyed in the twinkling of an eye before the Daityas could 
use their arms. Wlien the Daityas made use of their arms, the KAladan- 
dastra was pacified which furiously enraged Visnu. He aimed His famous 
quoit of the lustre of 10,000 suns, hard like thunderbolt and of sharp 
spokes, at the neck of the demon Grasana. Then all the demons, seeing 
the quoit dashing through the air, tried their best to thwart it, but could 
not clieck it, as the decree of fate cannot be evaded. That unconquerable 
fiery quoit violently fell and severed the neck of that demon ; it went back 
to the hands of Visniu besmeared with blood. — 30-36. 

. Here ends the one hundred and fifty-first chapter on the killing 

of the general Orasam, 



72 


THE MATSYA PUEANAM. 


CHAPTER CLIL 

Silta said : — When Grasana the (icneral af the J^aitya army was 
kille(h all the demons he^an to light with Visnu i'l a diu)r(lerly manner. 
Tliey diseUarged their clnhs, maces, nooses, sliarp-pointed arrows, tridents 
and other weapons on the Lonl flan.-lrdana. The Loul, s{*(‘ing those 
missiles flying at Him. ent them all into hundred pie(‘< s with Ifis liiuy 
arrows. The Daiiavas found that all their wcaj>ons and ..mnmnitions had 
run short. Then the armless demons were greatly bewiidert*d and none 
of them were capable of taking up their arms. They oegaTi to pelt iho 
Lord with the carcasses of elephants, horses, ete. Yi:-iiu tium fought for a 
long time valiantly in the groat battlefield, (hi His anus getting tireil 
He said to Garuda: “Are you tired? If you do not feel jaded take 
me in front of the demon Mathana. But if you feel quite done up, then 
go aside from the field of battle fora ecmple of hours.'’ On hearing 
the behests of the Lord, Garuda went to Mathana. The demon, seeing 
the Lord holding conch, quoit and club making an advance, shot at his 
chest his fearful arrows and sharp spear Hhindiprdaiia, but the Lord 
did not mind them and liit him with lUs ten sharp-pointed arrows in the 
chest. — 1-11. 

On his being hit with those arrows tlio nemon began to tremble 
but after a couple of hours’ rest, he hit the Lurd again with liis fiery 
iron club (Parigha) which caused Him some pain, but afterwards He 
angrily took up His club a id daslicd it on Mathana. By tlio blow of that 
club, the Diinav^a fell down like a monmain at tlie time of the ^lissolutioii 
of the world. By his fall, all tlio Daityas ivtuv fearfully dismayed. Most of 
the proud iMnavas got dept\^ sed like' eh'phants stuck in a quagmire 
swamp ; then the terrible Mahir-isnra ind'gnanlly (*am(‘ to the battle- 
field depending on the strength of his < wn arms.- li^-17. 

He began to inllu't (Ui Vi-nu tlie bl()U'«3 f)f hi.-- keen trident and hit 

Garuda with his i^akti. Afterwnn!.^, with his m.'Utli wide open like the 
cavity of a mountain, lie wanti'd P) swallow u]> \'isnn alojig with ( laruda. 
The Lord, also realizing the intention of that Danava, lilleil liis mouth 
with Ilis divine arrows. Ho discliarged His divine weapons electrified 
with mantras on Mahisasnia which km^dvod liim down to the ground ; he 
fell like a huge mountain ; but he did not di(\ — 

Then, Visnu said to the fallen Mahi^^asura. “ Mahisasura, you are not 
destined to die at iny liands, Ijecause, JajmI Braliina told you before that you 
would die at the hands of a woman. Stand up, therefore, and save your 
life. You should instantly retire from this warfare.” — 

When Mahisasura tlius retired from the war, the demon t^ambhu, 
biting his lips with wrath and contracting liis angry eyebrows, rubbed 
his hands and took his bow. He put on the poisoned arrows and pierced 
Visnu and Garuda. — 25-2(5. 

Afterwards, that brave Daitya began to send forth hard volleys of 
fiery arrows. Then, Vi.snu, agitated with innumerable fiery infallible arfows 
of that Daitya, cut down his arrows along with his carrier, the sheep, 
by His bhurfundl missile. Then that Daitya Jumped from his dead sheep 



GH AFTER OTJII. 


73 


and becjan to figlit standing on the ground. The Lord began to shoot 
liim wiili deadly arrows. He drew His bow to his ears; with eyes wide 
open arid pierced his arms with three arrows, his head with six and bis 
banner with ton arrows. — 27-30. 

1’lie Daitya got troubled and became restless. Then a stream of 
blood .i^mslied out of liis body on being wounded by Vibnu. He lost 

his presence of mind, then the Lord said to him; — “^ambhu! why do 
you figlit witli me in vain? you are not destined to die at my hands. 
You will die shortly at the hands of a maid.” — 31-32. 

Hearing those words of Vi^nu, both Jambha and Nirni came 
forward ; Nimi took up his pondrous clubs to kill Him. He ran and hit 
the head of Garuda. Jambha inflicted his iron club studded with bright 
gems on the head of Vi^nu. Afterwards, the two Danavas knocked down 
both Visnu and Garuda ; when both of them fell down on the ground 
like cloud and lightning ; seeing which all the demons raised a cry of joy 
and got up their bows and, putting on fine raiments, sounded conches and 
other instruments with great glee. Afterwards when Garuda came to his 
senses, He instantly flew away with the Lord Vi§nu from the battle- 
field,— 33-36. 

Here ends the one hundred and fifty^seeond chapter 
on the fight loith the Demons Mathana and others. 


CHAPTER CLIII. 

Suta said : — Indra, on seeing Vi§nu flying away from the battlefield 
with His banner and bow broken, acknowledged His defeat and thus of the 
party of tlie Devas. Seeing the Dnityas dancing with joy, lie could not make 
out what ought to be done next. So India approached Vi^nu, and uttered 
sweetly the following encouraging words : — “ Lord ! why are you making 
plays with these evil-intentioned Danavas. What can a good man do 
wlieii the wicked become aware of his weak points ? when the powerful 
people ignore the low and weak, the latter consider themselves brave ; 
consequently, a wise man should never let go the low who is not in 
difficulty. You ought not to say “ The big warriors attain victory with 
the aid of their army.” At the destruction of Hiranyaksa, who helped 
you? The powerful and proud Daitya- Hiranyaka^ipu lost his memory 
on seeing you. Those old Asuras, the enemies of the Devas, were 
destroyed by you like a swarrn of locusts consumed in the fire. Hari ! 
It is Yoxi who annihilate the Daityas in all the ages, similarly, O, enemy 
of the demons ! obviate the sufferings of the dying Devas at the present 
moment also.” — 1-9. 

Hearing such words of Indra, the long-armed Lord Visnu, 
the destroyer of the enemies of the Devas, the refuge of all, looked 
full of all glory and becoming pleased, said to Indra ” All the Daityas 
will not be killed unless their predestined means of death occur. The 
unconquerable Daitya T^rakAsura will be killed at the hands of a seven- 
10 



74 


TEE MAT8YA PURANAM, 


days’ old baby and by none else. Some demons deserve being killed by a 
woman. Some by a virgin^ but the wicked demon Jambba is destined 
to meet with death at your Ininds; yon sliould, therefore, destroy liiin, the 
terror of the world, by j^our own prowess ; no one else can kill liim. 
Guarded by me, you go and kill Jainbha the thorn of the universe.”— 10-14. 

Hearing those words, Indra direele 1 the Dovas to array Ilis army. 
Vi.snn put the eleven Itudras, ('omprisitig all (he power and asceticism of the 
three regions, iihctui of At tliat time, the eleven temhie Iihidias with 

their throats j'cllow, by wearing wreaths of serpents, holding skulls, beauti- 
fied with the crescent moon on their forehead ami with tufts of hair on their 
head, looking ferocious with their trklenls am! wearing lionskins, with their 
tawny matted hair, those eleven, named, Kapali, Pingala, Bliima, Birfip'lksa, 
Bilohita, Ajesa, Sasana, J^ainhhu, Clianrla, ami Dliruva--- began to 

kill the demons who were attacking Vi.'^nu and r'ml)()]d(‘ncd the Devas 
by roaring like tlnu.dc’riiig clonds. India nlso made Jjjs appearance 
riding on Ins big Air" vata elephant, having four tasks ami rut flowing 
all round him, looking like the lofty sr.owelad Ilimfiaya with golden 
bells tinkling, on his sides bi isk ch onaras 11 wing, ami asssuming any 
form at will. At that instant, Imiui looked like the rising »Snii on the 
Udayachala Mountain.— lo'1^8. 

Marut, of unequalled prowe.'-s guarded die left ftiiartorof Jiulra and 
the riglit was guarded by Agni tlial tills all tlie directions witli His 
blazes. Visnu with llie army siij.poited the r(‘ar ol India, Aditya, Vasn, 
Vitiv’edeva, Marudgauii, Astviin kumara, Garni ha i vas, 1^* ksasas, Vaksas, 
Kiiinaras, Serpents all armed witij various kimis of wea] ons, having- 
various symbols and adorm d with many golden oinamenis collecting 
together in billions, and talking of their past glorious th^ods, marched 
on to tlie front to kill the I).dty<i;^. hard.s wa re singing in front 

of the Pe>’as. At tliat time, ihe a.s rcli^lud die destruction (f die 
demons. — 

That ai'iny of die Hevas uiMhu* the cummaud of India and adoi-ned 
with many hor-e';, (‘lephants am! whin- umhreljuv; ;ni/l banners, became 
the cause of the grief to the Haitya^. 0;i se('ing the ad\aiu*(' of the army of 
the Devcis, Gajasura (;ame out Ida' a hng,^ (depliaut, as if. great masses of 
clonds were moving. Armed with a batl‘e-a\e and bitiiii; his lips with 
rage he began t<> trample over the Hevas and pu^iied man^y of them aside 
with his hands. He killed seveial of tlaun willi his battle-axe. When 
he fonglit like tliat, the Yaksas, ( iandharvaM, and Kinnaras, usi»d tlieir 
no(»ses, axes, clubs and various oilier weapons. Jhit the demon began to 
move on in the liattlefichl after panying easily all those blows with 
his mighty arms. He devoureil the weapons as an elo])hant eats away 
the big bundle of grass. \Vherever the demon rushed there was a huge 
uproar and confusion, Gaj'sura, becoming invisible, caught liold of 
Devas by his long arms ami laifl tljcm down. Afterwanls seeing the 
the Devas taken to flight, the Itndras, burning like tire, said to themselves 
“crush this demon; kill this demon l)y hiltijig him with a sharp trident 
on some weak spot.” — 28-37. 

Hearing their words Kapali picking up a sJiarp trident and knitting 



(jHA^tER GLUT. 


75 


his eyebrow.^ and with eyes wide open through rage, ran before the 
demon and hit it on the foreliead of the Daitya. Afterwards the remain- 
ing ten Hudras also iiit his mountain like body with their tridents. 
Blood ran out of tlie demon's moutli on being wounded by those sharp tri- 
dents. At that lime, the Daitya looked beautiful like the clear pond 
during winter teeming with swans and blue and red lotus flowers. Sur- 
rounded b}^^ the Uudras covered with ashes, the Daitya looked beautiful, 
like a black mountain adorned with white geese. The Daitya thus 
injured, moved liis ears and bit f^ambhu Rinlia on His navel and 
began to tight severely with two other Riidras at which the remaining 
Rudras started piercing tl)e body of tlie demon fearlessly with their 
weapons. Tlie fearless Rudras surrounded Gnjasura on all sides. — 38-44. 

They then lookral like a group of jackals preying on a bnfTalo’s 
carcass in a jungle. Afterwards, Xunjara leaving the two Rudras — who 
were engaging him in tlie conflict — fell on the rest and began to bela- 
bour them with his hands, feet and teeth. When tiie demon, fighting with 
the nine Rudras, got fatigued, then Kap'di, taking him by the hand, 
wheeled him round furiously. When little life was left in liim. He hurled 
liim on the ground willi great foiee and peeled off his formidable skin 
and used it for his gariiuml ; blood began to flow fi*om the Daitya's 
body. Seeing the fall of the valiant demon t}ajasnra in that way, the 
rest of them rushed forth in dismay and man}’' of them fell on the ground. 
Afterwards Kap*"di covering Himself with the Demon's skin looked most 
fearful to <*very one. Then the Itaityas saw the terrible form of that 
Rudra. — 45-52. 

When Chajasnra was killed like that, Nimi, riding on his elephant, 
boating his kettle-drnm and roaring furiously, appeared in the field of 
battle. He looked like* cloud at the time of tlie great dissolution and was 
attended by Duidliaia Dinava. In wbieliever direction Nimi appeared,; 
tlie l)(»vas began to (lee with horT(;r foi’saking all their arms and' 
weapons. All the elepliants ran away on getting the unbearable scent 
of the demon’s elephant. — 53-56. 

When the army of the Devas fled, Indr*a took His stand supported 
by ilie eight Dikpalas and Kes^ava. When the elephant of Ninii faced 
Indra’s Airavata, oven tlic latter sent out a thrilling cry and took to flight 
with horror. It did not stop inspito of Iiidra’s efforts. At that time 
Indra, whoso elephant was retreating backwards, began to fight in that 
condition and hit the chest of Nimi with his thunderbolt; and inflicted 
a blow on the head of tlie denion’s elephant. But Nimi. not minding 
the blow, dauntlessly struck Airfivata with a club when it knelt on its 
hind legs. Getting up immediately, it fled in horror when a thick dust 
storm was created by Vayii. — 57-03. 

Nimi’s elephant stood like a mountain before that intensely strong 
blow of wind, and at that time, the blood flowing from his body looked 
like a streamlet of vermilion flowing from a mountain. — 64. 

At that very instant, Kuvera came forward and threw His pondrous 
club at the elephant’s liea<l and liy the blow of that, the elephant fell down 
senseless on the ground when a loud cry of victory was raised by the 



THE MATSYA PURANAM. 


76 


Devas. The horses began to neigh, the elephants sounded, the bows were 
twanged, and Niini, seeing his elephant dead, retreated from the battle field. 
Then, hearing the joyous cry of the Devas the demon was ablaze with rage 
like the burning of fire at the time of pouring in of (he clarified butter. 
After drawing his bow and with his eyes turned red with anger, he 
thus addressed the Devas: — “Wait, wait, for awhile.” Saying so, he 
directed his charioteer to drive his chariot forward. At that time, when 
his chariot glided on nimbly, it looke<l as if tliousands of suns were rising 
on UdaySchala. The demon made his advance, seated in a chariot be- 
decked with banners, small bells and inoonlike wliite umbrellas and looked 
beautiful. His advance on his chariot broke the heart of the Devas. 
At that time, the undepressed Indra, seeing the demon advancing 
armed with a bow and arrow, took up His bow and put on a very sharp- 
pointed arrow to its string; and by the shower of His arrow^s cut down 
the bow and arrows of the demon. Then tlambha, easting away the 
broken bow, picked up another and sent forth a sliarp vollo'y of poisoned 
arrows. He shot ten arrow\s at the collar-bone of India, tr.ree at bis lieart 
and two arrows at liis shoulders. — 1)5-77. 

India also began to discharge his arrows similarly when the demon 
cut down his arrows into ten pieces in tlie air by Ins own sharp and 
fiery arrows. Afterwards, India covered tlie space with his arrows as (he 
sky is covered by the banks of clouds din ing the rainy season. T3ut 
Jambha drove away the arnAvs of Indra, as the wind drives away the 
clouds, at which India felt excited and resortiMl tc; more severe measures. 
He discharged His wonderful (landliarvastra on the demon which covered 
the sky. The sky was illumiiunod and hundieds of (Jandharva towns 
were called into being in the lirmamenl by virtue of that missile and a 
shower of arms began to pour in from those towns. Tlie demon army 
began to be destroyed when all of them went for succc)nr to dainblia, 
who, ’ftlso being pierced by the CJandharvastra, was horritied to hear the 
sufferings of the demons. — 78-85. 

Afterw^ards, the demon discharged Ins Musalastra whiidi Hooded the 
universe with iron clubs and began to knock down the towns of the 
Gandbarvas and smashed all the horses, (dephants, chariots and the Deva 
armies. India then di&cliargod the 1'vastra-astra ; whicli gave out very 
strong weapons full of mechanism that like sparks of fire, and a 

canopy also ; and a severe conflict cnsiiCMl Ix^tween the sparks and the 
missiles of the demon. The Musahustra was then destroyed. The demon 
then let out his Sailastra wlien blocks of stone measuring bands began 
to fall.~80-92. 

Afterwards, the missiles created by tlie Tvastra-astra and all the 
mechanisms, thereof, were destroyed by those stones. After tlius destroying 
all the mechanisms, the SailAstra began to powder the heads of the enemies 
and ravage the earth. Then, Indra hurled his Vajrastra which started a 
downpour of stones in all the directions. — S).VJ5. 

The demon’s J^ailnstra became futile and he used the violent Aisika- 
astra which became radiant and inadeJndra’s Vajrastra useless, ft 
spread on all sides when chariots, elephants, etc. and the army of the Devas 
began to burn. Seeing his army being thus consumed, Indra used His 



CHAPTER can. 


11 


Agni-astra which extended itself, tliwarted Aisik&rftra and began to 
consume Jambha along with liis chariot and charioteer. He then discharged 
his Varun&stra. Huge clouds with lightning suddenly rose in the heaven, 
thundering like Muragu tune and began to pour out rain, every shower of 
rain looking like the leg of an elephant. The liuge torrents of rain coming* 
down like the trunk of elephant filled the land with water. — 96-103. 

Then, Indra discharged Vij’avyastra which drove away all the clouds 
and the sky came out clear like a blue lotus. By the terrific force of that 
wind, the Danavas could not make a stand on land. Jambha extended his 
body to ten yojanas, made himself very huge like a very high mountain, 
in order to check the force of the Vfiyavyastra, and from his body 
various kinds of weapons shone forth like white trees. This cut down 
the force of VayavyAstra. Indra then used his great VajrAstra which 
at once destroyed the spell of the demon. His mountain with all 
its streams and caves, etc., were destroyed. — 104-111. 

The Danava, who had taken the form of a MayS, mountain, vanished ; 
then, he masqueraded as an elephant wliich also appeared huge like a 
mountain, lie started killing the army of the Devas some with his tusks, 
some with his trunk. He powdered the back of some and killed others by 
dashing them by his trunk. Indra, seeing the destruction of his army, 
applied his Harasingha-astra out of which came out several hundreds 
and thousands of roaring lions of black colour and of ferocious teeth 
and with long sawlike nails. — 112-115. 

Those lions rent the body of the magic elephant, at which, Jambha 
discarded the appearance of an elephant which he had put on and trans- 
formed himself into a monstrous serpent with hundreds of hoods. He 
began to scorch the Devas with his poisonous hi.sses at which Indra dis- 
charged darudastra out of which hundreds of Clarudas were produced 
and they all swarmed on the serpent like Jamblia, and divided his body 
into pieces. Then, J wambha cast off that form and extended himself, 
obstructing the pathway of the Sun and the Moon. He then opened 
his mouth wide and wanted to swallow up tlie Devas. Instantly, the 
troop of the Devas and their warriors went inside his mouth. — 116-121. 

In that way, Jambha devoured the army of the Devas and the array 
and the Devas were quite done up. They could not do any thing. Indra 
came to the spot direct on his elephant and without seeing any remedy 
said to Visnu “ O Devadeva ! what would be now proper for us? I 
donot see any way by which we can resilt. Tell me what you consider 
best in your judgment.” Visnu replied ; — “ Indra ! It w'ill not be meet 
for you to abandon the warfare inspite of your being so overwhelmed 
and horrified. You should instantly muster your strength. O Indra ! 
the Daitya is now making his mark at me. In the meantime, j’ou 
better remember at once what weapon you will throw. Do not be perplexed.” 
Hearing that Indra composed himself and threw Ndrayauastra angri- 
ly at the chest of the demon. — 122-127. 

But in the meantime, Jambha swallowed up another thi’ee lacs of 
Gandharvas and Kinnaras. Then his chest was shattered by the dread- 
ful missile of Indra and he began to bleed profusely and left the battle- 




THE MAT8YA TUtiAHAhL 


78 


field. By the virtue of the missile the liorrible appearance (>f the Daitya 
was also destroyed. — 128-130. 

The Daitya afterwards remaining unseen in the heavens began to 
shower arms on the Devas. He sent down a shower of spears, axes, quoits, 
arrows, clubs, ^ Swqrds, iron clubs, and vaiioua other invulnerable 
weapons. By their fall, the arms and the heads of the Devas decorated with 
ornaments began to fall down and the earth became covered, as it were, 
with their thighs and various other limbs Besides them, Inigo eleph ants 
also fell down. Many l)roken arrows, cliai iot wheess., axles, chariots and 
many charioteers fell down. — 131-13i>. 

The earfli was covered with blood and Hesh and pools of 
blood were forme<l with the huge piles of dead bodies looking like 
rocks. The headless forms of many Kavamlhas liogan l() dance about 
here and there. In that way, the battle l)e{*ame extremtdy fierce and no 
one could take his staiul. 'fhe threi' worlds, it. appoait'd. vonld Ix' dost' ry- 
ed and all the beings were terrilieil. .lackals. crowds tiijd vniiuros \ mc 
delighted. At some places the crow l)cgan to rai^e a cry afti'i* picking 
out tlie eyes of the dead heroes, — !;>() l‘^>7. 

At some other spot, jackals began toihwcsn fin* intestines of flie 
dead and at cert;:in spots, vtihiin^s were binsily ( n-agcil in eating the 
flesh with their beaks, at (>tlier places <h)gs l}cg.“.n to cat ll(\sh. Wolves 
feasted themselves on the dead elephants after dragging tliom 
aside and drank (jut the iilood after gelling out tlu'ir intestines. 
'Fhe dogs and other carnivorous animals aNo feasted on tin' dead 
liorses. 'The Pi^aclias and Pii^achis drank tin' b'ood w hicdi servial to tliem 
as wine and roamed ab'Uit in glee ; at other place's soni(' Pijfafdii spoke 
to her husband “ Ihing that face h'l hk*. ’ d'hat lu)of will 1)0 of iny 
favourite use ” That, lotus-like arm will mio w’cll as my ('arring.’’ 
Some Pij^lclii not being ablo t > cad dead ^*()rp^es, lirgnn to look angrily 
on her husband. Some of the Itck^asa women seeing their lords agitated 
with thirj??t offered them the w-arm blood alti'r taking it out from the 
corpses. — 1 38-14t). 

Some Yaksa woman to )k fo» her d('ar liiisbaml’s sake tlio tusks 
of an elephant after euttiTig that w’ith an axle a> run' cuts tlic I r('f' wdth 
an axe. Some Yaksa rlravving oil tlie skin of the ele|^hant’s head presented 
the pearl, soaked in blood, to his wdfe. In that w^a 3 ^ the Vaks.is and the 
Raksasas in company of their wives feasted on tlii' llesli of the dead and 
drank their blood — 141 . 

Some Kinnara wdunan, cat<*hing hold of lu'r husband’s hand, said : — 

‘‘ 0 Beloved ! bring tlie blood of those wdio are just (h ad with their eyes 
and hairs all intact. The lilocd juices of tlic eareasses of the burning 
ground do not taste so well,” and thus made the Kinnara go away. Some 
woman again said : — “ Though the elephant is dead, yet it terrifies me 
I cannot look even at a d(^ad elephant.” Thus the Yaksas’ women 
addressed their liusbands and so forth. The fiends, tlie Yaksas and the 
Rak^asas holding the skulls of men in their hands asked for something 
to eat. Many of tlicrn batlied in the river of blood and offered libations 
to their Pitj’is and then they worshipped tho Devas with offerings of 




79 


CHAPTER GLllL 


flesh. Some Raksasas riding the boat-like earcasses of the elephants 
were t hinking of crossing the river of blood. Wlien the battle between 
tbe l.)evus and the DAnavas grew so grim, the warriors began to fight 
fearlessly with all their might and main. — 142-144. 

Afterwards, the Dikp&las India, Kuvera, Vamna, Vfiyu, Agni, 
Dharmar&ja, Nirriti, etc., let out the best of their weapons which pioved 
fruitless while in the air. None of the Devas could mark the whereabouts 
of the Daityas though they fought furiously. — 145-147. 

The bodies of the Devas began to be shattered by the arms of the 
demons at whicli they hid themselves like the cows drawing themselves 
together in the herd when oppressed wdth cold. — 148. 

Seeing this plight of tlie Devas, Vismi said to fndra : — “Use the 
BrahmAstra. It is invineible.” Following the advice of the Lord, Indra, 
for the destruction of the enemy, ‘after performing the prescribed worship 
and reciting llie sacred inantia with a concentraled mind put on the 
exceedingly powerful Rralounstra arrow to Ids bow ; and after drawing 
the stiing to his ears discharged the exceedingly luminous arrow with 
his face tiirnod tovvaids llie heaven. The supreme weapon, tlius dis- 
charged, took the form of a lialf-moon and defied the rising Sun by 
its lustre ami brilliancy. That demon on seeing the discharge of that 
missile throw off his ]\raya and shivering with dismay, his month being 
dried up, became motionless and void of all strength. Afterwards the 
ndssile of Indra, tlms electrified with mantra, became like a red crescent 
and then the head of Jambha adorned witli coronet, with his long 
luxuriant tawny hairs waiving about in tlie air and perfumed xvith higli- 
elass scents and with the ears adorned wiili eai rings, fell on the earth. — 
149-154. 

Now on eTambha being thus kill'^d, all the Danavas fled broken hearted, 
from tlie field of battle and wont to IVirakAsura. He seeing them running 
away from the battlefield and hearing the news of Jamblia’s death heeame 
imicli enraged and assumed an indescribable appearance, out of sheer 
wrath and hatred. Boiling wdtli rage, he got into l.is victorious cliariot 
and appeared in the field. That Tarakasura, armed wdth various kiiidsof 
w'eapoiiS, loid of the riches of the tliree worlds, having a huge mouth 
wide open, seated in a chariot drawn by thousand Garudas, and followed 
by a largo army, instantly, made his appearance in the field. Indra then left 
his AirAvata elephant, wounded by Jainbliasura and got up on the chariot 
driven by the charioteer Matali. — 155-lGl. 

The chariot of Indra, wdiieh was of the colour of burnished gold 
extended to four yojanas and bedecked with precious jew^els, shining with 
tlie glory of India, controlled by Matali and guarded by the Siddbas 
It was furnished with all sorts of weapons and wmiidrously variegated 
with many pictures, and filled with Gandharvas, Kinnaras and Apsaras 
who were ready for dancing music. Then all the Lokapalas with Vi^nu 
amongst them, armed with bows and arrows and other weapons came 
and took their stand in battle At that time the earth trembled, high 
winds blew, the sky was covered with clouds, the ocean swelled, the 
Sun became void of lustre, it became dark and the stars were also 
eclipsed. — 162-165. 




80 


THE MAT8YA PURANAM. 


Afterwards there was a flash of arras and the Devas b^gan'to shiver. 
At that time TArakasura was on one side and the array of the Devas, 4he 
protectors of the world, on the other. All the beings in the Universe, then, 
anxiously watched the results of the battle. The two armies, then, also, 
had their eyes turned towards the result and seemed, as if one, in this 
respect. All the beings in the thive worlds became hampered in their 
dealings with one another. Tliere became, tlien, a strange combination 
of the weapons, arms, energy, wealth, fortitude, valour, strength, array of 
forces, the fire and spirit of the Devas ami iho Asuras that they had 
acquired by their Tap«asyjKs. — lbO-lC9. 

Afterwards Iiidra came face to face with 7YirakAsuia and hit him 
with nine arrows blazing-liko fire in his chest. Tlie latter, Jiowever, did 
not mind them arid pierced eacli 1 leva with nine nioiiiitainlike arrows 
capable to destory the world. — 170-171. 

The Devas, then, hurled volleys of arrows continuously, like 
women folk shedding tears coiistaiitly, but, the 1 nrakAstira cut these 
arrows while in the air like a great family bein ', ruined by a vicious 
8011.-172-174. 

The demon king after driving away the arrows of the Devas covered 
the earth and sky in all quarters with liis own. He shot his sharp-pointed 
arrows after skilfully mounting them on Ins bowstring and drawing it 
right up to his ears glittering wliite with the ear-ornaments, and made the 
weapons of tlie Devas futile, just as the arguments of the Sastras 
are rendered futile by counter-arguments. He hit Imlra with 100 arrows, 
Visnu with 70, Agni with 90, the head of Vayu with 10, Kuvora with 
70, Varuna with 8, tlie Haksasa Nirriti with another 28, and Yama’s 
head with 10 arrows. He again liit tliem eacli with another ton arrows. 
Then he wounded Matali the charioteer of liidra with three arrows and hit 
Garuda with 10. Afterwards he cut the arrows and broke the quivers 
and the bows of the Devas into [)ieces, when the Latter bceame bereft of 
their bows and quivers. The Lokapfdas and the Devas, afterwards, 
angrily came out armed with fish liows and arrows and Iiegan to shower 
innumerable arrows on Tarakasura. At that time the demon with 
his eyes turned red wicli wrath let out his arrows like fire, on the 
volleys sent forth by the Devas, he then shot violeiitly one arrow like the 
lire at the time of dissolution on tlio chest of Inclra. When Indra 
was hit on the chest, he began to shiver and sal down in his chariot. 
Afterwards, Tarakasura shot two arrows on the shoulders of the 
most valiant Lord Visuu shining like thousands of suns. The Sarangabow 
of Visnu dropped. Then the Vasus and Yaina to the left of Visnu were 
hit with arrows like fire. He tiien liit Varuna, the Lord of waters and 
began to dry him ux^. Afterwards Tai-akasura caused the horrified 
RAksasas to fly about in each direction and caused alarm also to Vdyu 
with his very hard arrows.- 175-187. 

Then, after a. short time, Visnu, Indra and Agniy on coming to their 
senses conjointly, began to fight severely with sharp-pointed arrows. 
Tarak&sura looked like the great K&la at the time of the great dissolution 
at the end of a Kalpa. Visnu picking up His bow killed the charioteer 
of the demon king with his pointed arrows. Agni blew away his 



OHAPTBB CLIIl. 


banner and I^dra smashed his coronet, Yama broke the rod in his hand, 
V&yu broke' away the chariot wheels, Kuvera broke his bow and quiver 
plated pn the back with gold and Nirriti, the Lord of the Rak^asas, broke 
his arrows. — 188-189. 

Tarakasura, seeing the valour of those Devas, threw his terrible club 
with great force at Indra who seeing it coming towards him in the air at 
once jumped down from his chariot. The club, falling on the chariot, 
broke it into pieces but the charioteer M^tali escaped his death. After- 
wards the demon King hit Vi^nu’s chest with club and Garuda as well. 
And the Lord and Garuda fell down senseless ; lie fell down on the 
neck of Garuda ; he cut down the VAhana of Nirriti, the Lord of the 
RAk^asas with his sword, knocked down DharmarAja with Bbuiundt 
(missile) and Agiii by the point of bis bow and knocked down to the 
ground Lord Vayu with his two arms and Kuvera with bis bow and arrow, 
lie then attacked and wounded severely the other Devas. — 190-197. 

Visnu, afterwards, revived and He took up His invincible quoit of the 
splendour of the Sun and threw it at tlie chest of the demon. It seemed 
that the chakra was anxious to devour the flesh, fat and marrow of the 
demon. That quoit sinning like the sun dashing against the chest of the 
demon became smashed like a blue lotus falling on a bed of rock. After- 
wards Indra threw his thunderbolt but the missile by means of which he 
thought of conquering tlie demon was also blown to pieces on hitting the 
demon. Then Vayu hit the chest of the demon with his goad burning like 
fire which was also rendered futile ; then He uprooting a mountain along 
with trees measuring five yojaiias hurled at the demon who on seeing it 
advancing towards him caught it like a ball in his left hand. — 198-205. 

Then, Dharmaraja, also wrathfully brandishing His mace with great 
violence, hit the demon on his head. It also did not affect him in the 
least ; and then, Agni discharged His formidable Sakti, blazing like 
a fire at the end of a Kalpa, at him which also struck his chest 
like a flower, without causing him any pain, when Nirriti unsheathing his 
keen sword inflicted blows on the head of the demon, which was also 
divided into pieces. — 206-210. 

Vanina threw His fearful snake noose hissing with venom to tie the 
arms of the demon. That, too, became distressed on getting round the 
arms of the demon. The saw-like teeth and lower jaws of the snakes were 
broken. Then the powerful ArfvinikumSras, the Manits, the Sadhya Devas, 
the Serpents, the Yaksas, the UAk^asas, and the Gaudbarvas taking 
up their arms of various kinds began all at once to inflict repeated blows 
on the demon. Even then no appreciable effect was produced and could 
not penetrate his rock-like body. — 211-214. 

Afterwards, Tarakasura alighting from his chc^riot belaboured 
billions of the Devas with his fist and blows and lieels. 7'hen the 
remainder of the army of the Devas abandoning the field flew in every 
direction with horror. The demon, then, captured Indra and the 
LokapAlas and tied down Vispu, etc., as a hunter takes hold of the wild 
beasts.— 215-217. 

TArakftsura mounted on his chariot with his prey and returned to 


11 



«2 - TEE UAT8YA PUBlEAM. 

' » ■ , — ' — ' — ' , 

Jiis abode. TheSiddhas, the Gandbarvas, the Daityas, the. Nymphs, etc. 
■aug the praises of the demon king. The demon king in company of all 
those entered into his city ; it seemed, then, that the Goddess Lak^ml, in 
full possession of the riches of all the three worlds was entering there. The 
city looked like the summit of a very high mountain.Going there he took 
his seat on a throne studded with lapis-lazuli and other precious stones. 
His coronet and earrings looked highly beautiful when the Kinnara 
and the Gandharva began to please him. — 218-2^0. 

Here ends the one hundred and fifty-third chapter on the 
• victory of Tarakasura. 


CHAPTER CLIV. 

SAta said : — Afterwards the porter dressed in a tieat white and blue 
attire came and eat on his knees with his mouth covered by the palm of his 
hand. He coipmenced with a short, but fully .significant, speech and then 
said to the King Tarakdsura, who was sitting brilliant as if hun- 
dreds of suns were blazing; — “ Ijord ! Kftlaneini is waiting at the gate 
with the Devas, whom he has captured aiul wants to know where tliey 
should be sent.” — 1-3. 

Tarakdsura commanded that they should be sent to any place in the 
three worlds where they like to go. He said: — “All the three worlds 
are now my Kingdom. Take off their chains and liberate them instantly.” 
The Devas, thus subdued, were much tormented with pain and repaired to 
Lord Brahmd. Indra and other Devas after making salutations by putting 
their head on the ground spoke. — 4-G. 

The Devas said : — Thou art Omkara, the causal root of this universe 
with its endless varied manifestations. Thy ancient form Omkara is the 
germ of this tree of Universe. Thou assmnest the Saltva form for the 
preservation of the Universe and it is Thou again tluit a-ssumest the Rudra 

form for its destruction. J^o salutation, to Thy Rudra form ! — 7. 

0 Inconceivable one ! Thou hast manifested Thy body into the 
diape of an egg by Thy glory ; and Thou hast again divided that egg 
into upper and lower portions, thus creating tlio Heaven anti Earth. — 8. 

Thou givest life to human beings ; the Devas owe their existence 
to Thee. 0 Deva ! Thou art eternal ; Thou art birth less. The sky is Thy 
head ; the Sun and Moon Thy eyes ; the snakes Thy hair ; the quarters 
are Thy ears ; the ocean is Thy navel ; and the earth is Thy feet. Thou 
art the cause of delusion, the Vedas declare Thee as calm, quiet, peaceful 
and not quarrelsome. The old sages have declared Thee as the ancient 
Puru§a residing in the lotus of the heart. The S&nkhya Yogis describe 
Thee as the AtmS, the great Self. — 9-11. 

Thou residest in all the seven subtle substances and also in their 
cahsal substance, the Tamas, the eighth one, in all the eight cities what 
the Saftkhyas say. Again, Thou art beyond these. In primeval times 
Thou didst divide, owing to some indescribable cause. Thy form into 
various subtle and gross forms ; the Devas and other bodies have come 



GEAFTER GLTV, 


83 


put of Thee and their desires arise out of Thy will. Thou art shrouded by 
endless M&y& and Thou art beyond all the numbers. Thou art KSla 
and Thou art of the form of Megha (cloud). 0 Bhagavan ! 0 great Self, 1 
Thou art the cause of destruction of all the things, real and unreal, (Sat and 
Asat). Thou art the creator of the endless Universe ! Whatever is subtle 
, and whatever is comparatively gross and whatever again is the coveror of 
that gross. Thou art more gross than that ; and Thou appearest as eternal. 
Thou permeatest everything by Thy Sa/ikalpa (will) and again when 
Thou coinost out of them, then all those manifested forms, disappear. 
Thou art of infinite forms ! Tliy nature is so. 0 Thou, the shelter *of 
Thy devotees ! Be Thou our Protector and Saviour ! — 12-15. 

The Devas thus chanted the praises of Brahmtl and waited there to 
get what they desired. Thus greatly pleased by their addresses, BrahmS 
spoke to the Devas, raising His left hand : — “Indra! How is it that you 
are bereft of all splendour like a woman who has been suddenly deprived 
of her husband, has given up all ornaments, is pale and whose hair 
is rough. This Agui, though free, is devoid of smoke and He is not 
radiant. He looks like a forest burnt and covered with ashes. He looks 
like cinders embedded in ashes. Dharmanija! in spite of your being 
armed with Your mace. You are also deprived of lustre and seem to be 
diseased. You seem to come with great difficulty. 0 Nivriti, Indra of 
the Itaksasas, the tormentor of the enemies ! How is it that you, being the 
loi’d of the Rak-sasas, are speaking so timidly as if you are pained by the 
enemies, the Demons. — 18-21. 

0 Vai'una ! Your body looks dried up as if consumed by lire. The 
serpents in Your noose are vomiting blood. 0 Vayu ! You also appear 
to be quite senseless as if subdued by oily substances. 0 Kuvera! Why 
are you so much afraid ? and given up your office of Kuverahood. O 
Rudras ! You are all armed with tridents but seem to have been pierced 
by many tridents. Who has snatched away all Your splendour ? It 
appears as if nothing has been accomplished by You. 0 Visnu ! How is 
it that your hands have become useless. W’^hat is the use now in your 
holding the disc, of the lustre of blue lotus. 0 all-faced one ! why 
are you absorbed with closed eyes in looking at the worlds, in your 
own belly? — 22-26. 

On Brahinfi thus addressing all the Devas, Visnu, &c., prompted the 
garrulous wind to answer ; who said to Brahm& the Lord of All : — 27-28. 

O Bi'ahm& ! Thou knowest the wishes of all and even then Thou 
dost ask us to tell you the object of our coming here. Thou dost create 
the U'.iiveree including the Devas bj’ the division of the thr^ Gunas^ 
Satva, &c., in duo proportion. Thou art the Father of all, inspite' of 
this is there doubt in Thy mind ? Thou art great and art pl^ed in the 
highest office But it seems Thou keepest veiy little information of the 
Universe. However, when Thou art now anxious to hear our troubles 
it indicates that there is curiosity in Thee. Devas and Asuilis 
are equal before Thee, for Thou art the Father of them all, yet a father 
feels differently for them according as they are weak or strong, or with or 
without possessing special merits. — 29-30. 



84 


THE MATSYA PUBANAM. 


The Demon T^rak^sura is grinding the world after being favored by 
Thee. Hast Thou made that treacherous being so lofty, fearless and 
omnipotent?~31. 

0 Deva ! Thou hast created the Devas endowed with special 
qualities to maintain the universe and to fulfil its missions. — 32. 

. The celestial world is ordained by Theo for the Devas wli(f partt^ke 
of the sacrificial offerings ; but now it has been laid waste like a great wilder^* 
ness by TArakasura. The mountain that was made by Thee as the Kingbf . 
mountains, on account of its possessing all the good qualities, is now. 
looking lofty and has touched the sky ; it has become now the habitation' 
of the demons; TarakAsiira has broken down its summits by Lis thunder* 
bolt, and has ma<le it as his resitlence. Its caves filled with precious jewels ^ 
have been plundered. Many demons live there. O Deva ! Our old moun- 
tain has, out of fear, accepted his supremacy. He has now lost eveiy 
thing of his former grandeur. Whatever wealth we had, the mountain 
has given that away to the Demon. Now the ten quarters are being 
illumined by the spliMidour of his lustrous jewels. In the beginning of 
the Yuga, Thou gavest us weapons and missiles ; they were not used 
before. Now those weapons broke into hundreds of pieces on their coming 
in contact with the Demon’s body, just as the mind of a weak-brained 
person becomes distracted into luindreds of directions. — 33-37. 

We are able to enter into tlio city of that lialer of the Devas with 
great dilficulty and after great humiliation when our bodies are covered 
all over by the shower of dust tliere.— 38. 

0 Deva ! We (‘an not help speaking before them. That demon allots 
us low seats in liis as'-i nibly and repriiminds ns severel)’ after holding a 
cane in his hand. fi(' cliaffs us by saying ‘ Devas ! You are held in very 
high esteem and you liavo aecmnplishetl all your objt'cls. So you speak 
little.’ When the IVvas, out of fear, converse with the Daityas in flattering 
tones they chide us again saying : “The Devas are talking too much.” 
Sometimes, out of sport, they engage us in some work or otlier. Why are 
you now afraid of Turakfisura. What is the fear when you are silling so 
close to Indra. ? Tarakasura belittles us in these ways and O, Deva! all 
the seasons are dancing attendance, w^ith their forms incarnate, on him and 
do not, out of fear, al^andon him in spile of his committing so many sins. 
—39-42. 

The Siddhas, the Kinnaras and the Gandharvas sing melodiously in 
his house without any remuneration. He does not give alms to beggars 
and he does not consider who is high and who is low and thus does not 
reward rnerits. He is the destroyer of wellwishers and friends and 
deserts him who seeks shelter under him and is the refuge of him who has 
abandoned Truth. Thus we have described some of his wickedness. None 
can describe fully his misdeeds. Only the Creator knows it in full. 
On hearing such words of the Devas Brahma said smilingly : — 43-46. 

Brahma said ; — O Devas ! This Tarakasura is not destined to die 
at the hands of any one in the world. His destroyer has not yet been 
born in the three worlds. I’hat demon has been granted a boon by virtue 
of his asceticism, but I have skilfully managed it. He is a most 



CHAPTER CUV. 


85 


powerful Lord and can consume all tbo three worlds. He loogbt bis 
death at the bands of a seven days’ old infant. This babe> illustrioiu 
as the Sun, will be born of Sankara and when he will be of seven days, he 
will kill the Demon. The son of Siva shining like the son will be the 
anuihilator of TSrakAsura. At present, I^rd Siva is without any consort. 
I'spoke #> you before of the Devi with raised bands. This Goddess 
will be the daughter of the Himalaya. Her hands will always be rafsed 

grant boons to others, and the son born of Her by l^iva like a fire from 
meces of wood, will destroy the demon king. I have formed the plan. 
The demon has yet to enjoy a little store of his splendour, you should, 
Iherefore, be patient for some time to come. — 47-54. 

V. Oh hearing those words of BrahmS, all the Devas returned to Their 
.regions after which Brahmfl, re-called into His memory Ratri (night) that 
had emanated from Him first. At that instant, the Goddess Ratri appeared 
before Him and the Lord thus addressed Her: — 5.5-57. 

Note,—Ritri one of tho four forms of the bodies of Brahma. 

BrahmA 8ai<l ; — 0 Ratri ! the great work of the Devas is 
pending and 0, Goddess ! Thou, alone, art able to do it. The demon 
Tarakasiira cannot be subdued by the Devas and lias now become a 
source ot torment, like a comet, to the Devas. I^iva will beget a son 

to destroy him. Sati the daughter of Daksa was the consort of i^iva 
who consumed Herself out of wrath, for some reason. She will be 
born in tlie house of Ilimachala from his wife Menaka, and Lord Siva, 
feeling the pangs of separation from His noble Consort, looks upon the 
three worlds as deserted and is practising austerities i]i the caves of 
the IliinAlayas where He will wait for soinetiine in expectation of 
Sati and wliere by Their united glory, a valiant son will be born who will 
undoubtedly kill Tarakasura. 0, beautiful faced one! Sati, soon ^ter 
Her birth, will, by Her previous Sanskara, be in the expectation of Siva 
and will practise severe austerities, when they will be united. There 
will be no differences between Them at tliat time. Even then, the destruc- 
tion of Tarakasura looks improbable. When, after tlieir marriage, both 
will practice again severe Tapasya and after that when by their union, the 
son will be born, tliat will be able to destroy TArakSsiira. Thou shouldst, 
therefore, interfere with their amorous enjoyment ; after a short quarrel, 
the Devi will go to perform tapasya. Therefore, get into the embryo 

of Sat!*s mother and make Sati’s colour black, l^iva will, then, after 
marriage, chide Sati out of joke when the latter will angrily go to 
practise austerities. After this, when'^they unite, the son, born of Her 

from i^iva, will be the destroyer of demons. — 58-70. 

0, Goddess RStri I Thou shouldst also kill the invincible demons in 
this world but Thou shalt not be able to do so unless Thou shroudst the 
body of PArvati, and Her qualities penetrate within Thee ; Thou shouldst, 
therefore, do exactly what 1 have just told Thee. When this will be done, 
that Devi after Her asceticism, will be known as UmA. Afterwards when the 
course of PArvati’s asceticism is complete she will assume her fair com- 
plexion. Thy form will be known by the name of EkAnamrfa, on account of 
some of Her qualities being imbibed in Thee. 0 Granter of boons ! The 



86 


THE MAT8YA PUEANAM. 


people will worship Thee aa EkfinamiA. Thou shalt travel all over the 
world and will be worshipped under various forms and Thou shalt gratify 
the desires of all persons. Thou shalt be worshipped as the GSyatr! pre- 
fixed with Om/* so the knowers of Brahm& will worship Thoe. The 
Kings will worship Thee as UrjitA Akntnti. The Vaiiyas will worship 
Thee as Bhfimi, t.e., mother like the mother earth ; the ^udras #rill wof- 

ship Thee as i^aivt, i.e., the better half of l^iva and the sages know Thee 
as Forbearance and Clemency to those who follow rules. — 71-77. 

Thou art the great path to logicians and moralists ; Thou are theT 
great Siddhanta in all the objects in question and art perfect. Thou art 
the desire in the hearts of all beings. Tliou art tlie salvation of all the 
beings and the way of all. Ihoii art the Fame of the renowned and Thou 
art the forms of all tlie embodied. Thou art like Rati to the sensuous, love 
to the happy, splendour to those who wear ornaments and tlie subduer of 
wicked deeds. Thou art the delusion of all intollects, the soul of those 
who perform sacrifices, the tide of the ocean and the pastime of the 
sportive men. Thou art the essence of all tilings, the protreclress of all, 
the destroyer, the Knlar^tri of all the worlds, the night, the giver of 
satisfaction to the embracing friends. 0 Devi ! Tl)ou art thus adored in 
the world under various dilTerent forms. 0, giver of boons! those who 
will adore Thee or sing Thy praises will get all tlieir objects fulfilled 
without the least doubt.— 78-84. 

The Goddess Ratri thus adored by Brahm/i went, without any delay, ^ 
toHim^chala, saying, ** I will do as you order,” where She beheld the hand- 
some Mena sitting on the side of a wall shining with jewels. Her face 
looked pale and smiling and her breasts were high. — 85-80. 

A serpent shaped neclclaee, wdth a g(ddeu amulet, containing within 
it high class drugs and electrified with mantra was hanging round iier neck ; 
the room where she was sitting was illumined AYith the light of gems ; 
various medicines capable to satisfy one’s desires were scattered there ; 
the bedding of fine cloth and plushy cushions were spread there and the 
room was scented with high class perfumes. When the Sun set, night 
gradually set in in Mena’s blissful room. By and by, the persons felt 
sleepy ; their beds were spread ; the Moon began to shine distinctly ; 
the birds made a rustling noise and tlie public squares were haunted 
with gliosts and goblins. When tlio favourite couple embraced each 
other and Alena felt sleepy, the Goddess Ratri entered into Her mouth. 

By and by, Ratri entered within her womb and coloured the embryo black 
and remained there till delivery. — 87-95. 

MenA; gave birth to Parvati the dear one of ^iva, the Lord of the 
nniverse, at a very auspicious moment. The universe rejoiced at the birth 
of PArvatl. Even the dewellers in the hell felt the celestial comforts at that 
hour. The wicked beings, the venomed serpents became peaceful and 
well-behaved. 'J'he stars and the planets became more brilliant. The 
Devas felt exalted. The flowers and the lierbs of the jungle became sweet 
and tasteful. Pleasant wind began to blow. The sky became quite 
clear in all directions ; and through the glory of Parvati the whole cultiva- 
tion of the universe blossomed and the asceticism of the pious sages, carried 




CBAPTER GUV. 


87 


on since ages and ages, was fructified with their desired objects. The 

forgotten ^astras (weapons) made their appearance by being recalled to 
mind and. the Saifbtity of many sacred places was enhanced.— 96>103. 

Thousands of Devas began to roam about in the firmament seated in 
their Vim&nas. Brahmd, Vispu, Indra, V&yu and Agni also felt extremely 
delighted'snd began to shower flowers on the Mount Himalayas. The 
chief Gandbarvas began to sing and the groups of nymphs began to dance. 
The great mountains like the Sumeru, &c., manifesting themselves in 
human forms presented themselves to the Himalaya with offerings of 
various articles and all the rivers and the oceans did similarly. The 
Mount Himdilaya became adorable and pleasing and the Devas after ador- 
ing him returned to their abodes. — 104-108. 

Piirvatl, the daughter of the Himalaya, endowed with the good qu- 
alities and the modesty of the Devas, the Gandbarvas, &c., began to thrive 
and conquered the three worlds and adorned them with Her beauty, intelli- 
gence, fortune and good qualities as the Laksmi (fortune) of the ever- 
vigilant sages thrives. At this moment, the clever Indra thought of NSrada 
for the accomplishment of His ambitions who suddenly appeared in his 
mansion, when Indra, instantly, leaving his throne, stood up and received 
NSrada befittingly by offering him water and washing his feet. The 
sage also duly accepted his hospitality and then inquired after his wel- 
fare. — 109-115. 

Indra said : — 0 sage ! now the germ of the welfare of the three 
worlds has sprouted ; so you should cast off your lethargy for the fulfil- 
ment thereof. Altliough you know everything, still I beg of you, for one 
feels gratified after making his object known. Pray, devise means so that 

the daughter' of HiinSchala may, without delay, be united with Siva. — 
116-118. 

On hearing those words of Indra, N&rada bade farewell to Indra and 
instantly went to the Himfilayas. The latter received and saluted the sage 
at the gate adorned with creepers. He then took Him inside his mansion 
and seated Him on a throne of gold. — 119-120. 

On NArada’s taking his seat, HimAchala adored him after offering 
him water and washing his feet. The sage accepted the host’s offer of 
hospitality. Then Hiinnchala very gently enquired after the sage’s 
welfare and the latter also did the same. — J 21-124. 

NArada said : — 0 Himachala ! You are the store of all goodness. 
Your caves are of wide expanse like mind. You are the mightiest of all 
the immoveable things and ifcold the crystal water more clear than the 
mind. I do not see the end of the belly of your caves and I do not see 
a store of riches elsewhere. There is not the same charm and Laksmi 
even in Svarga as exists here. You are always sanctified by the ascetics 
practising various kinds of penances and shining like fire. The Devas, 
the Kinuaras and the Gandbarvas scorning their vimAnas reside in your 
realm making themselves quite at home. O King of mountains ! you are 
indeed blessed, for in your cave, MahAdeva, the lord of the universe, is 
practising austerities, and is now in SamAdhi. — 125-130. 




00 


' TBE UATS7A PVRABAU. 


fixed, immoveable and is never born. He is not subject to old age and is free 
from all diseases. Rather from Him spring all things. Such Mahddeva, the 
Lord of the universe, will be the husband of your daughter. — 175-186. 

Now hear why I said that she — PSrvati — was void of marks. The 
marks on the body .indicate longevity, wealth and good fortune. She is 
full of everlasting infinite good fortune and therefore, no marks can express 
that ; therefore, Her body is void of marks. The reason of my saying that 
hands will remain aloft is that this Goddess will always keep Her hands 
raised to grant boons to the Goddesses, Devas, demons and sages. The 
reason of my having described Her feet as astraying is that Her lotus like 
feet will shine with the radiance of Her toe nails where will be reflected 
the shadow of the crowned heads of the Devas and the demons. She will be 

the Consort of MahAdeva, the Lord of the universe. This ^iva is born as 
the mother of the virtues of the worlds and the progenitor of the beings, 
and is shining like fire in your lap. You should do exactly what would 

facilitate Her union with ^iva. Himachala ! a most important work of the 
Devas is pending at present. — 187-194. 

Sfita said : — On hearing all that from Narada, the mighty llima- 
chala considered Himself as if born again. Afterwards, making His 

salutations to ^iva, ho very delightfully said to Narada : — “ 0 Sage ! you 
have, indeed, rescued me from an awful hell. You have lifted me up from 
PAtAla and made me king of all the seven realms. O, good sage ! now my 
name is famous as UirnAchala — but you have made me possess all the 
moveable good qualities. Now I have bec(»iue the store of good qualities 
and my heart is dancing with joy. I do not know now what to do and what 
not to do. The divisions of duty are inconceivable Even Biihaspati 
cannot describe your virtues. Sage! to have the privilege of meeting the 
sages like you is very rare and propitious. Your conversation is highly 
beneficial and soothing to me. Through your favour 1 am blessed. I 
am guilty ; yet you all have made me the abode of the sages and the 
Devas ; now be pleased to conunaml mo thinking me to be your most 
devoted and obedient servant.” — 195-203. 

When Himachala said all that cheerfully, Narada replied ; — “ Yon 
have done everything and the work of the Devas tliat I told you before is 
also a great work to be done by you also.” Having said so, the Sage 
immediately returned to tlie Heaven where He met Indra in his mansion. 
On Narada’s taking his seat, Indra said : — ” What is the news,” in reply 
to which the sage related the whole history. — 204-2(iG. 

N&rada said “ 0 Indra ! 1 have done what was necessary, now, 
the rest has to be accomplished by the God of love.” — 207. 

At the same instant, indra thought of Cupid whose banner is fish; 
he instan ly appeared with His Consort Kati to whom Indra said fondly 
“Manobhava! what shall I tell you particularly because you orginate 
from the mind and, therefore, you know what is in every body’s mind. You 
can fully espouse tlie cause dear to the gods. Bring about the union of 

l^iva and Parvatl without any further delay. Array yourself with Madhu 
the Vernal Season, the king of all seasons. — 208-211. 





OHAPTER CLIV. 


91 


When Indra thus besought Cupid to fulfil bis desires, the latter 

said : — “ Lord of the universe ! Lord Siva is unconquerable by my 
resources which are terrifying to the Munis and D&navas and do you not 
know this ? You know the glory of the mighty Siva very well. Perhaps 
the blessings and wrath of the great are also great, there is always 
greatness in the great. You have thought of your advantage in the 

enticement of Siva. This is not right, for, such schemes against 

Irfvara, launch one into utter ruin. It had been witnessed many 
times before that. The intentions of the beings become known and those 
who are overanxious to gain their ends, do not attain their ambi- 
tion.”— 212-216. 

Hearing those words, Indra said to Cupid : — “ Lord of Rati I we 
are your Superiors here. No doubt, the ironsmlth has no other power 
than to make weapons. Every man has some particular capacity ; but 
no one can possess all the capacities.” — 217-218. 

Hearing those words, Cupid instantly went to HimSchala in company 
with His wife Rati and the companion Spring Season. Ai riving there,^ 
He began to think of the means for the accomplishment of His mission. 
He thought to Himself that the minds of the great who are engaged with 
immoveable determination in doing great works and who are energetic, 
are hard to be shaken. He also thought that it would be 'better to 
move His mind first, and thereby victory would be certain, the work 
of the mission would be achieved by the shaking of his firm resolution. 
Before, many persons accomplished their ends by changing the minds of 
the opposite party. Unless jealousy be aroused, anger does not come 
in ; and without anger, envy, the roof of all attachment, does not set 
in. He said to Himself, “ How should I direct fickleness, jealousy and 
anger to disturb His mind ? Those, who are enduring and contented, do 
not know my influence, but a doubtful mind is sure to be changed. 
A doubtful mind is always restless, then the beginnings of success are 
seen and great obstruction is placed. I shall, therefore, interfere with the 

asceticism of that fixed-minded ^iva. I shall place tempting things before 
the Lord.”— 219-226. 

With that idea, Cupid went to the hermitage of ^iva. This hermitage 
is the essence of the universe. It was surrounded with tall trees ; altars 
were there ; peaceful beings occupied that place. It was adorned 
with flowers and creepers. All sorts of moveable beings reigned 
there. There, the Ganas, the attendants of ^iva were moving to and fro. 
The bull was bellowing on the green verdure of the tableland on the 
peak. Cupid saw the three-eyed Siva as the incarnate of the Beautiful. 
He also noticed that the Lord ^iva had matted hair on TIis head, of the 
lustre of saffron and was adorned with terrible serpents, and with cane 
in His hands. He was sitting there as the great hero. Kama Deva, the 
god of Love, gradually advanced and saw His lotuslike eyes half open 
and intently gazing on the tip of His straight nose. He saw that the 
lion skin was hanging from His shoulders. It was oozing watery juice. 
The snakes, with their hoods raised, were curling round His ears and 



92 


THE MAT8YA PURAh^AM. 


wero broatluna: like fire. His matted liaircamo down to the jBcround to the 
cup consisting of skull and liis Turnbi vessel. Ho was seated on tlio coils 
of the VAsuki, navel deep, and was holding the tail by Ilis hands. The 
snakes were ornaments all round His body.— 227-234. 

He approached the Ijord silently where Tie was sitting on the peak 
with trees all round and black bees buzzing, lie then went through His 
ears inside the Lord who, afterwanh under Kaniadeva’s influence, be- 
came enamoured of the daughter of Daksa and tlien involuntarily 
His Saraadhi vanished. lie tried to collect His mind but Cupid 
began to throw obstacles. Then the Lord, knowing Himself to 
be betrayed by Cupid, most angrily summoned up llis Yoga- 
MayA and His presence of mind and despised the Cod of Love and again 
plunged Himself in His Yoga. Cupid began to be consumed by Yoga- 
Maya, the cover of Lord’s asceticism and Cupid who was full of anger, 
came out of Ilis body. — 235-241. 

Cupid, taking Ilis stand with His friend the Spring Season, made an 
enchanting arrow of a cluster of sweet smelling ilouers over which the 

gentle breeze was blowing ; then Tie hit it at the heart of Siva. At that 
hour, tlie Lord was deeply struck with this greatly enchanting rough 
arrow and Ilis pure mind was sliaken. Tliougli He was firm like a 
rock, yet He felt somewhat distracted. But by Ilis great wdll force 
He restrained Himself and seeing the groat obstacles outside, shouted out 
with anger a loud sound “Hum.” Afh*r\vanls the third Eye of the 
Lord became ablaze as if it w’as going to consume the w^orld and a 
terrific fire of wrath was produced. — 2 12-2 IS. 

By the opening of that Eye, sparks of fire began to fall in slunvers 
and Cupid was instantly burnt and reduced to ashes wdien tlio Dovas 
cried out ‘'Alas! Alas! Wliat is tliis.” d'ho lire of the tliird Eye then 
appeared terrible as if it wonhl burn tlio lliroo Avorlds. Afterwards, tlie 
Lord distributed the fire of (hipid amongst tliO mango ti’ecs, tlic month 
of Chaitra, the moon, tlio lh»wers, the blc.ck bees and tlu» niglitiiigale 
alloting them each dill'erent places. — 240-252. 

lie also consumed the arrows of Cupid wdtich ruslied to and fro in 
the form of fire and occupied the xdaces v.du rc the remains of Cupid 
were distributed before and heeamo soveioly tormenting to tlio people. 
It also occupied the hearts of sensuous people and began to burn tliero 
day and night violently and witliout any liope of remedy. — 253-25.5. 

Seeing the destruction of Kainndeva, Ilis wife Rati, along with her 
brother the month of Chaitra, began to weep. After a long period of 
waiting she ovontunlly wont to the Lord hy tlio advice of lier brother; and 
getting hold of the blos’-OTning creepers and the mango twigs and rubbing 
over her body the ashes of her Lord, slie spoke to Siva with bended 
knees : -250-259. 

Rati sai<l : — T salute 55iee, that art free from all diseases. I salute 
Thee wh.o x)ervadest the universal mind. 1 salute Thee, Lord who is all 
mind and wlio art worshipped by the gods and who art always merciful 
to Thy devotees. 1 salute Thee, Bhava, Bliavodbhava, Cupid, the God of 
Love, has been defeated Thee. 'Phy vow is very firm ; Thou residest 



OnAPTER CUV. 


93 


in the forest of MayS. Salutation to Thee ! My salutations to Thee, 

0 i^arva, 0 ^iva, 0 ancient Siddha, 0 Thou who art great KA.la, who art 
all the Digits, who givest highest knowledge, Salutations to Thee. My 
salutations to Thee, who art beyond Kala (Time) and Kala (digits) ; pure 
nature is Thy ornament, the groat annihilator, the destroyer of Andhaka, 
the great Protector and without attributes. Thy attendants, Thy Ganas 
are very terrible ; I bow down to Thee. Thou hast created different uni- 
verses ; salutations to Thee. Thou art the Creator of various worlds ; Thou 
awardest rewards to [good] deeds ; Salutations to Thee. Thou art the head 
of all ; salutations to Tliee. Thy eye is never destroyed. Thou art 
the enjoyer of sacrifices ; Thou fulfillest the desires of the devotees and. 
Thou reinovest away the attachment of this world ; Salutations to Thee. 
My salutations to Thee of infinite forms, the most Wrathful, the One 
decorated with the crescent of the Moon and the magnanimous. Thy glory 
is immeasurable and Thou art adored by all ; salutations to Thee. My 
salutations to the Rider of tlie bull, the Destroyer of Tripura, the Ful- 
fil ler of the devotees’ ambitions, the great remedy of everyone’s troubles, 
the Lord of the Creation, the Greatest of tlie great, I am at Thy mercy. 

Thou art the Great Acha.rya, that is, teacher of tlie rules of conduct of all 
the beings, animate or inanimate ; Thou art tlie Creator of all the beings; 
Tliou art great, dear, and imnieasurable ; Thou boldest the Moon on Thy 
forehead ; 1 take refuge in Thee. Lord ! Grant me back the life of Kama. 
None in the three worlds, excepting Thee, can restore Cupid to life. 
Thou art the Lord of the dear ones ; Thou producest the dear ones ; 
Thou hast created all the objects high and low. Tliou art the only 
Lord of the Universe. Thou dost seem to me the only Aferciful. Thou art 
the Lord of the three worlds and Thou drivest away tlie fears of the 
devotees. — 2(50-270. 

Sflta said : After Rati, the wife of Cupid, liad thus prayed the Lord 
Siva, the latter was greatly pleased and sweetly said 271. 

Sankara said : — “ Your husband will be born after a short time when 
He will bo known as Ananga.”— 272. 

Hearing those words of the Lord, Rati saluted Him and then went into 
the enchanting groves of the Himalaya, There, in that beautiful spot, for a 
long time, she wept bitterly over the destruction of Her Lewd. She desisted 

from committing suicide only by the words of Siva. — 273-274. 

Afterwards, Ilimachala, prompted by the words of Narada, gladly 

took his daughter at an auspicious hour to the hermitage of Siva, after per- 
forming all the necessary ceremonies aiiTl dressing Her nicely, making Her 
put on handsome ornaments, decorating Her hair with flowers, and follow- 
ed by a train of maids. Crossing through the dense forests, he found 
a weeping damsel in a beautiful grove on the Himalayas. Seeing 
such a lady of unsurpassing beauty and of extraordinary lustre, weeping 
BO bitterly. He was astonished and being curious went to her, and said 
“ Kalyanina ! Who are you ? Wfiose wife are you ? Wliy are you weep- 
ing ? It appears that your grief is great.” — 275-280. 

On hearing such words of Hiniachala, the crying Rati explained 
to Him the cause of Her wailings. — 281. 



94 


TEB MATSYA PORANAM. 


She said : — I am the wife of Cupid. Mahadeva is practising aus- 
terities in this mountain and He has reduced my Lord to ashes by open- 
ing His third wrathful eye. Afterwards, 1 sought His shelter through fear 
and began to pray when the Ijord said tliat He was pleased with me and 
that my husband would be restored folife and one who would repeat the 
prayer uttered by me would get his objects accomplished and advised me 
to desist from death, lielying on His words 1 shall keep my body anyhow 
till then.” -^282-286. 

Hearing those words of Rati, Himachala began to shudder with fear. 
He thought of returning to his city ami became ready to carry his 
daughter in his arms when Parvati said through Her maids. — 287-288. 

Parvati said : — ” What have I done to win a good liiiaband. What 
is the use of having this unfortunate body ? Desired objects are obtained 
by asceticism and there is nothing impossible for an ascetic. The world 
Buffers pain in vain when tliore is such a way to fulfil one’s desires. 
Death is i)referable to living tiie life of the unfortunate and not practising 
asceticism. I shall, certainly, consume my body l>y an ferities. 1 Inive no 
doubt, that by this practice of Tapasya, 1 shall attain my desired object 
and so, I shall certainly practise penances.” -~281b2^,)2. 

Hearing such words of Parvati, Himachala stammered out with 
emotions “Daughter! Uma ! Cliapahx! Vour body is too delicate to 
bear the brunt of asceticism. Do not make such an attempt Tapasya 
is very hard and painful indeed. What will bo done will surely come 
to pass without fail. Even without any attempt, future things suddenly 
come to pass. So, 0 daughter I get up ; h^t ns go home. Wo will then 
think what ought to be done. Even at this, the dauglitor did not agree 
to return home. He was then plunged in anxieties and at that very 
instant, a voice from the welkin was heard “ Him jchala ! Your daughter 
will be known in the world under the name of Uma and Chapala. Your 
daughter shall attain by her mere tldnking, all the desires.” — 293-299. 

Hearing that, Himachala gave Her permission and returned to Ilis 
abode, after taking leave of his daughter. — 300. 

Sflta said: — Parvati went to practise austerities to a beautiful 
part of the mouiitaiii impas.sable even to the Devas. Parvati aecoin- 
panied by Her maids wont to that peak of the Himalaya that was 
very beautiful and resplendent with various ores, blossoming creep- 
ers, Siddlias, Gandliarvas herds of deer, and various birds, buzzing of the 
black bees, cascades, trees, smelling with the aroma of flowers, having beauti- 
ful caves, groups of chirping birds, adorned with kalpa trees, gay with 
the flowers of all the seasons, loaded with various kinds of fruits, illu- 
mined by the rays of the Sun and full of different kinds of animals. 
She saw a big tree with many laige branches, having yellow leaves, 
flowering in all the seasons, adorned with all sorts of flowers, and various 
fruits and bright as Manoratha. The Sun’s rays fell on the tree and it 
seemed that the Sun was also overpowered by the brilliancy of the tree. 
There, Parvati discarding Her ornaments and dress, donned the bark of 
tree, and began to bathe thrice daily. She passed a century living on 
the leaves of trees, another century on the fallen leaves of trees ; and 




CHAPTER GLIV. 


95 


observed a fast for another century. She thus continued Her penances 
observing similar ordinances. — 301-310. 

Then the creation began to tremble by the power of Her asceticism 
when Indra thought of the seven Ri§ts. They appeared before Indra with, 
great pleasure and were adored by him when They asked him the reason of 
his having thought of them. Indra said “ Risis ! hear my object. P&rvatl 
is practising severe austerities on the peak of the Himfilaya, and I want 
you to fulfil Her object. — 311-313. 

Hearing which They repaired to the spot where PSrvati was practis- 
ing asceticism and said to Her: — “Daughter! what is your wish?” 
Then Parvatl bashfully said : — “ It is wise to observe silence before the 
great sages like you. Those who salute sages like you are purified by you 
and you question me right in the face.” She, then, offered them a seat 
and said : — “ After you have rested and when the toil of your journey has 
disappeared, you better question me.” — 314-319. 

Then she worshipped them according to the prescribed rituals and 
though Ura& shining like the Sun, cast off Her vow of silence for a while, 
she again held her peace of mind : when the sages began to question 
Her with regard to Her object, She putting on a smile, bashfully said in 
a gentle voice. “ You know the hearts of all beings. It is pleasing to 
hear words when they express what one wants most dear and sweet to 
one’s heart. The beings are always eager to attain what they hold dear 
and love it most. Some clever persons resort to divine means ; others 
resort to various pleasant deities and ceremonies as ordained in the 

^astraa. But my mind always rushes to attain my dear wish, like 
a barren woman desiring a son ; or, one longing Heavenly flowers. I am 

now making earnest attempt to have Lord l^iva as my husband who is 
naturally very diflicult to be attained and who is moreover at present 
engaged in His tapasya. This is a very diflicult thing indeed, for how can 
!^iva devoid of delusion and passion, devoted to asceticism. Whose actions 
cannot be discerned even by tlie Devas and the demons and Who has con- 
sumed Cupid not very long ago, be attained by a girl like me?” — 320-328. 

Hearing those words the sages controlling Their mind and realizing 
Her object said : — “Daughter! 'I’liere are two kinds of comforts in the 
world and the first one is tlie gratification of the body ; the second is the 

peace of the mind. Lord ^iva is, by nature naked, ferocious. Dweller of the 
cremation ground, the carrier of skulls, -a hermit, statue-like in action, a 
beggar, mad, fond of collecting ugly and terrible things, and inauspicious- 
ness incarnate. What advantage will you get in having Him as your 
husband ? If you, perchance, wish the gratification of carnal desires how 
can it be gained ? He is the source of fear and an object of aversion and 
censure. He is the wearer of a necklace of gory heads, adorning Himself 
with terribly hissing snakes, living in the cremation ground, moving 
about with His ferocious attendants. How then can you expect to derive 
comfort from Him? Why do you not marry one of These, viz . — Vig^u, 
the protector of the Universe, the deytroyer of enemies, adorned by the 
Devas and the Lord of Lak^mi and sacrifice, Indra, the Lord of the Devas, 



96 


THE MATSTA PUBANAU. 


Agni the giver of every thing, Vayu the soul of every being, and Kuvera, 
the Lord of riches. And if you desire the happiness in the next world in 
another body, oven then the Devas are capable to give you that. There 
is no chance of getting any happiness* in this world or in the next from 

^iva. Again what the Devas do not possess, your fatlier has got 
that ; so by the grace of your father, you can get happiness without 
any trouble- So it is useless for you to undergo so mucli tiouble. You 

will have to undergo sufferings for the attainment of ^iva and no good 
will result. Even a trifle sought with great eagerness becomes unattainable. 
Only Brahma can fulfil your desire.”— 329-341. 

^uta said : — Hearing such words of tlio Hisis, Parvati got very angry 
with them and with red eyes and trembling lips said. “-342. 

Devi said : — “ How can Those who lianker after unreal objects and 
are subject to vices, be devoted to a high J)eva ? What pleasure is there 
in getting an unreal object ? and wliat pain is there when one is devotedly 
attached to an object? You arc on the right path and yet how do you come 
to such a contrary conclusion. Y'ou should know that 1 am a fool 
and 1 want to get an undesired object. You all are like Prajiipati and 
see all things ; but it is quite certain that you do not know that eternal 
Waiia, the Lord of the world, unborn, unmanifested, of immeasurable glory. 
The Devas Vi^nu, Brahma, etc., do not know Him ; then what use 
is tliere in judging of Ills essence. But arc yon not aware oven of 
His glory that is manifest in all the beings, and all the Universes ?** 
Whose are tliese forms;— Sky, fire, air, (^arth and watm*. Whom do 
they manifest? Who has got the Sun and the Moon for His Eyes? 
Whose phallus <lo tlie Devas and the demons worship devoutfiilly ? Do 
you not know Ilis glory who is called ]\[aha Deva by Brahma and 

Indra, etc. ? Whose mother is Adlti and who has given birth to Visnu? 
Narayana and other Devas have been Ijxan of Aditi from Karfyapa. 
Kajiyapa has been born of Marichi. Aditi is the daugliter of Daksa. 
Marichi and Daksa, botli of them, were boin of Bralima and by praying 
Whom did Brahma get IJis birth from the golden egg? By whose 
meditation, the part of Prakriti was agitated and Avas turned into the golden 
egg? From whose tliird Biakriti, tlie slayer of Madhu was born? Whose 
Buddhi has created tliese six vargas out of their own Karinas? — 353-355. 

~ Third Prakriti, i.e., Taraasa. — Tho six classes of objects ot 

worldly existence. 

“Bralima, of umriani Tested birth is not born ; by Ills power He 
disequilibriates the Gunas and creates tliis material universe. BrahmS 
is the Lord of the universe and has extraordinary powers. Vi^nr 
and other Devas assume different shapes by their extraordinary powers 
Visnu also enters others’ bodies through His Maya and does thi 
uttama (excellent), inadhyaina (middling), and adhaina (inferior) karma 
of the world. The world is liable to perish and to be re-born 
The fruits of Karma arc also various. Many classes of men are born ii 
it by virtue of their deeds. Nfirayana relying on and propelled by Hi 
shadow takes various kinds of births and that shadow iminfla people ui 
consciously to actions. Being thus impelled people, like lunatics, conside 



OBAPTBB 0U7. 


97 


what is good to he bad and what is bad to be good. So Vi^^u is the sole 
cause of the so*called Dharma and Adharma seen in these created customs 
and usages. Though this Karma, Dharma and Adharma is beginning- 
less, yet in ordinary bodies, it is not seen of long duration. You 
also have not seen the beginning nor the end of Vifnu. Coi-poral bodi^ 
perish somewhere and are re-born at another place. Sometimes they die 
in the womb, sometimes, they live up to old age, sometimes, they go on up 
to a hundred years, and sometimes they are nipped in the bud in their 
early ages. — 356-366. 

“ One, who lives a hundred years, is said to enjoy a full life and is said 
to live for an infinite period with regard to a short-lived man. One, who 
is bom first and does not die early, is said to be Amara (immortal). 
In this way, the Devas like Vi§nu etc., are said to be immortal. Who 
can attain such pure bliss and powers in this universe so full of various 
wonderful things ? 1 do not, therefore, feel inclined to marry the Devas 
predomment with trifling transient glories like Satva, etc. I shall only 
marry Siva who is the most supreme among the Devas and all the beings. 
This idea of difference is the special characteristic of the worldly people. 

1 take refuge unto Him, the Lord ^iva whose intelligence, strength, extra- 
ordinary power and excellencies are greater than those of the j^at ; 
beyond whom nothing exists, from whom all this Universe has originated 
and whose good qualities have neither beginning nor any end. This is 
my determination; it is very strong and seems to be contrary, and 
the sages offering me advice may go or stay.” — 367-372. 

Hearing such words of P&rvati the sages were overcome with 
emotions and spoke to the ascetic Parvati in very sweet words : — 373. 

The Risis said : — “ O daughter ! It is highly astonishing. You are 
the incarnation of pure undefiled wisdom ; be pleased with us. We are 
very pleased to see your firm, unshakable faith in Mahadeva ; at this, our 
inner natures are highly purified. Indeed, we could not realise the extra- 
ordinary glory of that Mah&deva. We have come here to see only how 
firm are you in your Tapasy&. Your object will very soon be accom- 
plished. As the radiance of the Sun and the jewels is inseparable from 
them and as the purport of w^ting is inseperablo from the letters, 
similarly you are not apart from Siva. This belief is firmly implanted 
in our hearts. When you, who are full of intelligence and morals, have 
made such an attempt to get Siva, then He will certainly see to it. 
Siva will undoubtedly accomplish your object.” — 374-379. 

F&rvati again adored those sages on Their having said so. The 
Saptarsis, then, went to Siva. They arrived at a beautiful tableland on 
the top of the Him4lay&s. There, they saw that the tableland had 
put on the yellow matted haira and were shedding showers of the 
knowledge of Self; and the mountain was holding the garland of 
Mand&ra in its hands composed of the swarms of bees. There, They saw 

l^iva’s hermitage and the Lord with His conscience purified by the 
sacred waters of the Ganges, with His yellow plaits of hair, wearing the 
garland of Kalpa flowers and surrounded by a swarm of black bees. 
There they found all the animals in a peaceful disposition. The 

18 




S THg kA* r^A puravam. 


cascades 6! trater were Idso not agitated. The ktte&datit Viraka was 
fikading at the door with a cane in his hand and adored the seven sngesi* 
when the latter said that They had come there to meet the Lord Siva dii 
some great business of . the Devaa. They said that they wanted to aw 
Sita for ^e fulfilment of thd purposes of the Devas, He >vaa to ho their 
iiitermediary, so that they might hot bo put to unhecesSary delay. He was 
to kindly^inform Hiin of their arrival. — 3S0-38G. 

Viraka gave them seats and replied : — “ O’Br&hmnns ! You can 
meet the Lord after He luia finislicd His bath in the waters of the 
Mandfikini and finished His Sandhvil. Vandauani; wait for a while.” 
—387. 

The Risis waited an ! remained fixed on the spot like Chutaka 
bird during the rainy season to got drops of rainwater. — 388. 

After a Bhort while, Lord ^ira after finishing Ilis batJi, took His 
seat on a deer skin when the atteiid.nnt Virabhadi a bowed down and inceiJy 
said : — “ Lord ! The seven illustrious sages have come to see you on tho 
errand of the Devas andTliey are eager to he ushered in youraugut u pre- 
scuco.” At that, the Lord made a sign to Virahliadra to let I’liom rome. 
Then Virabhadra beckoned to the sagos Rtaiuling at a ciisiaiicc lo come 
in.— 389-31)4. 

The sages, with their matted hair lied np into a knot and with 
long deerskins hanging on them, appealed before the Lord, with folded 
hands, and approaching Him, removed tin' celestial bowers presented lo 
His feel by the Devas, and bowed down and toiicliod His feet. Lord i^iva 
cast an affectionate glance towards them when they gladly chanted His 
praises — 395-390. 

Tho Munis said: — “ 0 Lord ^iva ! WO are highly gratified, ro is 
India. The Lord of the Devaa is sitting before us. What better 
fruit can, one, practising a hard Tapasya, expect tlian one’s getting Thy 
favour? This Itimacliaia is blessed whose daughter is practising dovoiit 
asceticism to get Thee. Tarakasura, tho annihiJator of the Devas, is also 
blessed for he will leave his body through Tliy son. Brahma and Visnu, 
who are now' being highly tormented by tho power and inlluonce of 
Tarakasura, are also blessed on account of Tlicir contemplating on Thee tho 
Destroyer of ills. Thou art ilescribed to he the Doer of many things under 
many forms. The stupid persons chant Thy name on!}’' under various words. 
Thou art the only one who kiiowest all about tho Universe ; else Thou 
wouldst be known as pitiless. Or, it can be said 1''1 k)u knowest nothing 
of this painful world. For Thou art actionloss. And if Thou dost remain 
indifferent, seeing all these pains and troubles, then, liow can wo call Thee 
merciful. Thou dost rest on Thy Vogu Maya ; Jicncc, Tlioii art pure and 
undefiled and Thou dost take no pride in good deeds, powers and bibhu- 
ties. Wo aro blessed among the corporal beings, otherwise, liow could 
we have met Thee ? Now this is our prayer : — That our desires may be 
fulfilled by meeting Thee. Nov/ it behovest Tliee to act in such a way 
that this universe which is now in trouble may come to peace. We aro 
the messengers of the Deva Indra. Wo, conseouently, bow down to 
Thco.’ -397-403. 



mAPTE^ OLIV. 


09 


The seven saprog expressed Their prayers sweetly as a good far> 
mer scatters his seeds in a wellrplonghed ^eld and then howed dpw:^, 
Him,-— 404. 

Hearing the prayers of the the Lord smilingly said lik^ 

Bfihaspati.— 405., 

Sankara said.— “ I know the excellent work that has cropped up 
for the preservation of the world, and that a daughter has heett horn in 
the house of Him&chala. You are also doing your best to promote the 
cause of the Devas. True ! Every one is anxious to fulfil God’s purposes; 
but though one desires quickness, yet there is some delay here. It ip 
necessary, that the wise should follow the rules and customs ; for the 
ordinary people will follow that.” — 406-408. 

^ Hearing those words of Siva tlio seven sages saluted Him and went 
to Tliniricliala where they were adored by Him with great hospitality and 
endearment after which the sages uttered a few words hurriedly. — 409. 

Tlie sages said : — “ 0 Him4chala ! Mahtideva, the Lord Himself, asks 
for Your daughter. You should, therefore, make over your daughter to 
Him ill the presence of Fire. The great work of the Devas is pending 
long since, and you should fulfil it for the salvation of the Universe.”— 
410-41 1. 

Hearing those words, Himfichala tried to speak, but could not givo 
a reply distinctly, being overcome with emotions. ^ He mentally approv- 
ed of it. The clever Meu4, then saluting the Munis, began to speak out 
Her mind, deeply affected by her love towards her daughter. — 412-413. 

Men/l said : — Though the birth of a daughter is highly meritorious, 
yet, what people do not like, has just taken place with regard to my 
daughter. One ought to marry one’s daughter to a man who is well-quor 
lified as regards his family, birth, age, beauty, good qualifications and 
wealth and who does not himself seek for a bride. Ilow, then, can I give my 
daughter to one whose only qualification is his asceticism. Now do ac- 
cording to the wishes of my daughter. The Munis then replied in words 
suited to please women. — 414-417. 

The Munis said : — Hear now abont the qualifications of i^ankara. 
The Devas and the Asuras worship, with great devotion, ITis feet. Who- 
ever wants anything, gets that from Him. Therefore, this girl has prac- 
tised severe austerities long since to attain Him. She, tlie Devi, will 
be greatly pleased on any btKly w'ho will enable Her to attain the fruits 
of Her vow- Having said so, the Saptarsis took Himiichala with them 
and repaired to Ptlrvati. — 418-421. 

The sages sweetly addressed the auspicious PArvati who was 
radiant like the Sun with Her fire of asceticism. Tliey said, ” 0, Beauti- 
ful one! do not consume yourself an 3 '_ more witli sucli a rigid asceti- 
cism. Early in the next morning Lord Siva will accept your lotus hands. 

We had first gone to praj' to Thy father and Thou shouldst now 
return homo with him.” — J 22-424. 

Hearing those words Pnrvatl exclaimed Oh ! Tapasyfi yields 
fruit, ” and instantly went to Her fatJier’s home considering Her asceticisra 



100 


TUB UaTSYA mBiVAM. 


as accomplished. There she felt a single night like a long period of 10,000 
years and became greatly eager to meet Siva. — 425-426. 

Aftervirards in the auspicious moment in early morning (Brdhma 
muhurtah the dear friends of the Devi performed various auspicious cere- 
monies, adorned Her body with various ornaments and took Her to a 
temple filled with auspicious things, where the seasons, incarnate in their 
proper fofms, worshipped Him&chala.— 427-428. 

The wind accompanied by clouds came and began to work as 
sweepers and the Goddess Laksm! came Herself in all Her riches. 
Lustre and afiluence pervaded eveiywhere. Fortune and success reigned. 
Chintamani and other gems, Kalpa trees and trees yielding all desires, 
appeared in Himalaya’s room. All the mountains and Divine herbs 
presented themselves there personified. The Rasas and tlie ores also 
turned up there and acted as servants. The rivere and the oceans and 
all things, moveable and immoveable, also went tliere personified and 
the whole Sthilvara and the Jahgama worlds added to the lustre of that 
mountain. — 431-433. 

Wote.— frsPift=Philosophor’8 stono. w=8ap, Potion, taste, delight, Pathos. They are 
six in point of taste, vig . : — 

SFW, sm, fihs and ann. They aro eight in point of sontinaont, viz, sjnut, fiw, 
swvr, iK, »nnwt: t tsi; But somotimos their number is ’‘me by the 

sgin XV being added and sometimes qirv^ is also added making them ten. 

The seers, the serpents, the Yaksas, the Gandharvas, the Kinnaras, 
and the Devas, all, came to the Gaiidhamadaft mount, well arranged and 
became the attendants of Siva and assuming beautiful forms, began to 
arrange the pandal. BrahmA, very lovingly decorated the plaited hair of 
the Lord with the moon and infused love and generosity int(j the fire of the 
Third Eye of the Lord. The Goddess Cliamundu tied several garlands 
of heads on Her neck and said to Siva, “ Pray, beget a son who may be 
the destroyer of TarakAsura and thus I may be gratified with the blood 
of the demons. — 434-437. 

Vi|nu, then, stood before the Lord liolding tho crown decorated 
with fiery serpents. — 438. 

Indra held before Him the elephant skin, VAyu nicely decorated the 
sharp horned Nandisvara and the Sun, the Moon and Fire inherent in the 
eyes of the Lord and the witness of the actions of all beings enhanced 
His lustre. — 439-440. 

Yama, the Lord of the departed, waited, holding mace in one hand 
and the silvery ashes of the funeral pyre in the other ; he put on the 
wreath of skulls on his neck and arms. Kuvera presented to Lord Siva 
various kinds of ornaments studded with precious stones. Varuna pre- 
sented an excellent wreath. But ^iva did not mind it ; he put on the 
bracelet made of furious snakes and His two ear-rings were made of 
the snakes VAsuki and Taksaka. In that way, all the Devas went and said 
to Virabhadra “ Pray announce us to Siva. Now let Him be decorated. ” 
Afterwards the seven oceans became ready to serve as mirror. When Lord 
Siva saw His self there, the Lord Vi^nu bowing down on His knees said to 
Siva “ 0 Deva ! Thou dost look exceedingly beautiful in this Thy Jaga- 
dftnanda form, the form that gives great bliss to the Universe.” — 441-448. 




CB AFTER GUV. 


101 


At this time, all the Devas sent the Divine M&trikSs to Eati, the wife 
of Cupid, who brought Her to Siva and said “ Rati is standing in your 
presence ; but she does look well in that Cupid.”— 449-450. 

Note.— VRn:=The DiTlne mothers said to attend on l^iva but nsnally on Bkanda. They 
are generally said to be 8 in number, »fa.— IW i troO ^s 
efiiitve BRR: n but sometimes they are said to be only 7 in number, vis.— sn^ ^ 

tnrti mn i ^ wjrsi %s Wtn: u and sometimes their number is increased 
to sixteen. 

Hearing those words, ^iva gave Her hopes, raising His left hand and 
felt anxious to see the face of P&rvatt. — 451. 

Then riding on His lofty bull He made a sign to His ganas to march 
slowly and made a move towards the abode of IlimScbala. The earth 
trembled under the weight of the followers. The road became very dusty 
and Visnu’s ornaments became all covered with dust. He felt fatigued 
and sat down under a tree to take rest. He began to say: — “IVay move 
on quicker, do not tarry in way, ” when Viraka, the son of Siva, said 
frowning : — “ 0 reamers in the sky ! What beautiful thing is there that 
you are delaying ? 0 mountains ! Go at a distance, 0 oceans ! Convert 
your waters into stones. 0 Demons and Pretas ! Clear out the mud 
in the streets. Gane^vara, and others do not be restive. The patient 
Devas are watching. Devas ! You should also move on calmly. Bhritigi, 

the attendant of ^iva, is taking the broad mouthed skull for l^iva ; 
he is so much absorbed that he does not mind his own body. 0 Yama ! 
It is useless for you to hold a club instead of a human skdeton. Being 
encumbered with the horses of chariots and M&trik^s, Siva is going 
slowly. The Devas, attended by their own follower, are marching 
separately. The Pramathas, the favourites of Siva, have already marched 
twice the distance. 0 Devas ! go on your own vahanas, with chtlmaras 
and banners streaming in air. Why are you not paying heed to the 
tunes in your songs. The Einnaras, oranaments are making noise too 
much. The Gandakas are moving swiftly playing quite in three respec- 
tive tunes harmonious to each other. Why do not the singers, the 
S&mgavadis go in front, singing harmoniously. These pleasure loving 
NSga men are singing various songs illustrating the praises of the Lord. 
Why are the voices of the celestial ladies heard on this side so often ? 
Various tunes* ** are being played : — Muriya, etc. ; but why not even 
one MQrchchand,t is being heard here ? Play on your tambourines and 
Vipas directed by the Gandharvas. Play your various kinds of drums.”— 
452-464. 

Hearing those words the Devas, enjoined by Virabhadra, drowned 
the Universe with their music and joy. The oceans and the clouds both 


* W^oi^The fourth or first of the seven primary notes of the Indian gamut so 
called because it is derived from the six organs itervw i 
( ffu ^u: n It is said to resemble the note of a peacock. 

w«i:=:iMean time in music. 

t '5;ii»!f=A duly regulated rise and fall of sounds 'conducting the air and the 
harmony through the keys in a pleasing manner, changing the or passing from one key 
to another. It is thus defined iwnj wwf im; einw n 




TUB MAT87A PUBABAS. 


m 


be/^an to roar. At that time, Him&chala was agitated by the quick mai'ch 
of ^iva.— 465-466. 

Afterwards, the Lord i^iva and the Devas entered in a moment the 
mansion of Himdchala, which was conspicuous with thousands of golden 
gateways and streamers, having many houses studded with vorious kinds 
of precious stones, floored with Vaidhrya gom, trickling with showers and 
cascade waters, the squares looking charming witli Kalpavriksa trees, 

f learning with white, black, and red ores, the patliways shining white like 
.akemi, pervaded with the odour of flowei’s diffused all round by tlio 
wind. — 467-469, 

All the citizens became very eager to see the Lord l^iva on His 
entering the town. The elderly matrons became anxious; the people 
thronged and rushed to and fro. The streets were over-crowded. — 470. 

The Divine ladies peeping through the air holes were looking on 
the huge crowd ; and hidden in their own garments and ornaments 
witnessed the lotus-like eyes of the public. Some were showing off 'J’licir 
beautiful ornaments. Some, putting on beautiful ornaments, abandoned tbo 
company of tbeir maids and began to look at Siva, Some maid said to 
her mate “ Companion, do not be restive in having a glimpse of the Lord. 
He Himself consumed Cupid and has now of Ilis own accord felt inclined 
to enjoy the company of woman.” Some w’oinan knocked down during 
the bustle said to another burning with the pangs of separation from her 
husband. “What are you looking? Do not speak, out of mistake, any 

love expressions to ^iva.” Some woman conM not see ^a/ikara on account 
of distance ; but said after some reasoning “ Siva is hero wliere Indra and 
other celestial Devas are standing. Ollier ladies began to salute Lord 
iSiva, taking their respective names and praying for desired olijects. 'I'lic 
■worship of Siva bears fruit. Some lady exclaiiuod ; — U ! There is jJiva 
whose forehead is adorned with the Crescent Moon. India, the Lord of 
tho Devas is perspiring and is going aiiead of the lAud making way for 
Him. O ! Tlioro is lirahma, vritli matted baiv r.iid wcariii" <leor skin. 
ITo is w fiomoUiin^ in l^iva’s onrs.” WliPii the iiord Toached 
tlie Ilirn.day.'*!, IIk^ Hivine women rai.scd the followin/d: chorus “ TJirou^li 

llie union with tlic l)irtli of .Parvati lias heenmo fniitrnl.” — 471-478. 

Afterwards, llie J")o\as saw tlie house of FTiinnhiya and were gratified 
to SCO the imiMMifU dr.-si and built hy Vi*ivakarnin looking majestic 
with its n[ while oiJ[)phire, decorated with golden chairs and pearl 

hangings, rr-i.lciidrnt with hcrh.s and beantifiod with many pleasure 
gardens and lakes. Tm-v rhougiit Unit their minds and eyes had become 
blessed with that womh rl’nl — 4711-481. 

Hari then wont and ntocrl at the gate, so that any body might not 
enter. Thernsli, in consoquonce, was tremendous ; bis armlets were broken 
and powdeied to pieces. Tiien liiniacliala, meekly and appropriately, ador- 
ed the four-faced Brahma, who repeated all tho mantras and performed all 

tlie marriage ceremonies, making lire as witness, ^iva, then married 
Parvati. Everything was performed without any hitch. At that instant, tho 
King Himachala began to bestow lavish charities on the deserving. In 




OnAFTME GLIV. 


103 


this mairia^e, Hithftliijra We» thd giver. The fotir-faced Brahmfi performed 

the part of Hot4, the Lord ^iva was the bridegroom and tFml., the represent* 
ative of the universe, the bride, and all the beings, along with the Devas 
and the Rfiksasas became fixed with attention. At the same time, the 
Earth also brought forth new produce and herbs. Varuua appeared before 
iSiva holding various gems. Kuvera brought ornaments of gold, pleasing 

to everyone, for the Lord ^iva. Vftyu began to blow gently to soothe every 
one. Indra with garland round his neck and with arms decorated with 
many ornaments spread an excellent white umbrella shining like the 
moonbeams, over the Lord. Then the Deva i^ankara adorned with all 
ornaments, enhanced the delight of all the beings. — 482-490. 

The chief Gandharvas began to sing and the nymphs started dancing. 
The Gandharvas and the Kinnaras danced and sang exquisite music. The 
six seasons appeared incarnate to participate in the universal rejoicings 

and danced and sang. The sportive attendants of Siva paused on the 
HiinAl.-iya, after being exhausted by their pastime. At the same time the 
Jjord Jlahiideva fulfilled duly all the rites of the marriage in conjunction 
with His noble consort PArvatt. — 491-494. 

On the ooinidelion of marriage, the Lord stayed in the mansion of 
Iliinachala along with His Consort for that night. The Gandharvas enter- 
tained them by singing and the nymphs by dancing. He got awakened 
early in llie morning by the praises of the Devas and theDaitya.s. — 495. 

Then the Lord Siva with His father-in-law’s permission started to 
llio Haudun'ichal mountain in company with His Divine Consort, riding 
on 1 lis bull swift like the wind. — 496. 

After the departure of Mahadeva and Um&, HimAchala felt very 
lonely and dejected in the absence of VArvatl as often is the case with the 
father of the bride. — 497. 

Then HiraAchola bade adieu to the Devas and entered into His city 
naturally resplendent, and adorned with Go-purams made of jewels, and 
beautified internally with diamonds, gold and other precious gems. — 498. 

Here, on the other hand Mahftdeva with PArvatl sauntered about for 
a long time in the charming groves and solitary forests of the mountain. 
In course of sucli pastimes, Piirvati felt inclined to have a son. She made 
several dolls and began to play with them in company of Her maids. 
Sometime Parvatl rubbed scented oil mixed with powder over Her body 
and made with the dirt of Her body a human form with an elephant’s 
head on his shoulders. Ptlrvati sportively threw that son into the Ganges 
wliere he became enlarged in body. So much so that he extended himself 
as big as the world, when Parvatl addressing him as son called him to 
Her. The Goddess Ganges also, at the sametime, addressed him similarly 
“whence he is known ^ GAngeya ; then the Devas worshipped him and 
BrahmA named him VinAyaka and made him the head of all the attendants. 
Qaneia was thus born from PArvatl. — 499-505. 

Again, Parvatt longed for a son and began to play similarly. She 
planted a sapling of Adoka for the pleasure of Her son and took very 
good care of it. The tree soOh grew up by being watered -and looked 



m 


TBB UATSYA PVBANAM. 


after so carefully. Then once on an occasion, Brihaspati, the Devas, the 
Br&hmanas, the sages came there and said to Pftrvatl : — “ BhavSnl ! You, 
have been born for the beneht of the world and all desire the birth of a 
son. Mrat of the creation seems eager for progeny. The people con- 
sider their births successful by seeing sons and grandsons. 0 Devi ! 
What object can be gained by creating and rearing up trees like sons ? 
Those who have no issue usually become dispassionate to the world and 
try their best to obtain Devahoods. Now you ought to set a value on 
actions like this.” — 506-510. 

P&rvati said ; — “ One who makes a well in a place where there is 
scarcity of water, lives in heaven for as many years as there are drops of 
water in it. One large reservoir of water is worth ten wells. One eon 
is like ten tanks, and one tree is worth ten sons. This is My moral and 1 
am prepared to protect the universe to the same end.” — 511-512. 

Hearing such words, Brihaspati and other Brkhmapas returned to 
their places after saluting PSrvatl. — 513. 

When all of them returned to their abodes, Mahildeva geutly took 
P&rvatl by Her hands and made Her enter slowly in to His palace. She 
went inside the mansion which was pleasing to the mind, the doors of 
which were decorated with hangings of pearls, the walls were of gold ; it 
was full of pleasure courts and looked most enchanting by tho buzzing 
of the black bees over the floral wreaths. — 514-516. 

There, the Kinuaras were singing, the whole place was well scented » 
and the peacocks were sporting, the cranes were throwing out their notes, 
the pillars of gems were dazzling with lustre, the parrots w'ere sporting 
on the walls of lapis lazuli. At some places the ladies of Yak^as were 
playing on lutes and sporting. The Kinnaras were constantly singing 
and dancing at various places ; cranes and S^rasas were moving at other 
places ; at other places the peaiis were reflected on the flooi s made of gems ; 
and Suka birds thinking them to be pomegranates were striking them with 
their beaks. Within such a mansion, l^iva and Parvati began to play dice. 
When both of them were engaged in play on a floor made of Indranila 
pearl, there was a tremendous uproar all at once and the delicate Parvati 
enquired out of curiosity from ^iva the reason of it. — 517-523. 

Siva replied : — “ My dear attendants, the Gane^varas, are sporting 
on this mountain. It is their voices. Those human beings who have 
won my pleasure and appreciation by observing austerities, fasts, celibacy 
and pilgrimages to sacred places have now acquired my Ganatva (oflice of 
attendants) and they can assume any form at will. They are full of enter- 
prise ; they are highly energetic and endowed with great forms and virtues. 

I am also astonished at their deeds. They are powerful enough to annihi- 
late the universe including the Devas. I may forsake Brahm&, Vi^nu, 
Indra, Gandharva, Kinnara and the serpents but I cannot live without 
these attendants. They are all enshrined in my mind and they always 
play in this mountain.” — 524-529. 

Hearing that P4rvatt felt astonished and leaving oil play began 
to peep at them through the air holes. Some of them were lean, 
others corpulent, some tall, others short with big stomachs, with 



OBAPTBB ClIV. 


105 


their faces like those of tigers, lions and elephants. Some of them 
were like sheep and goats. Some had variegated features. Some 
were blazing like fire. Some were dark, others yellow. Some were^ 
gentle, others grim. Some were of smiling disposition. Some had black 
and some brown hair. Some were like birds in appearance. Some had 
faces like those of t,he various kinds of deer. Some were dressed in the 
kiuia fibre and skins ; some naked and some of deformed appearance ; 
some with their ears like those of the cow. Some had ears like those of 
elephants, many of them had many faces, many eyes, many bellies, 
many hands and many feet. They were armed with various kinds of divine 
weapons, wearing various kinds of divine ornaments of flowers and 
serpents, endowed with various kavachas (amulets), pervaders in the heaven, 
players on the Vina, dancers at many places. Seeing such attendants, 
Farvati said to ^iva. — 530-536. 

The Devi said : — “ How many attendants have you got ? What are 
their names ? Pray, mention one by one to me.” — 537. 

^iva said : — “ These Ganas of various name and fame are a Koti in 
number i. e., in all, they are innumerable. They are most valiant. They 
pervade the universe. They become pleased with and enter into the sacred 
cities, roadways, old worn-out gardens, abandoned houses, bodies of 
demons, infants and mad men, and the cremation grounds. They indulge 
in various kinds of sports along with these and drink steam, froth, smoke 
and honey and eat all kinds of things. They also inhale air and drink 
water and are addicted to singing, music and dancing. They are numer- 
ous and cannot be counted.” — 53^541. 

PArvati said ; — “ Lord ! What is the name of that attendent who is 
covered with buck skin, clean in person, wearing the girdle of muiija, 
with a loop thrown on his left shoulder, looking so sweet, wearing the 
wreath of stone heads, with handsome form, beating his arms with slabs 
of stone and following the Kumaras. His tuft of hair on the head is wav- 
ing a little towards his left. He is frequently attentive to the songs of 
other attendants. What is his name.” — 542-544. 

Siva spoke : — “ Devi ! He is Viraka, i. e., Virabhadra He is my 
great favourite. He is full of many astonishing qualities. The other 
Ganerfvaras pay him great respect.” — 545. 

Parvati spoke : — “ I also long to have a son like him. When shall I 
be blessed with such a pleasing son ? ” — 546 

Siva said. — “ This son is the giver of comfort to your eyes. Let him 
be your son. Even this Virabhadra will be blessed by calling you 
‘ mother.” — 547. 

Hearing which Pdrvati sent Her maid Vijayfi to call Virabhadra in. 
The maid hurriedly coming down from the upper story said. — 548-549. 

Vijaya said : — “Come here Viraka. You have incurred the dis- 
pleasure of MahAdeva by your restiveness ; and what will PArvati think of 
your sports ;” hearing which, Virabh.adra, c.asting away the pieces of 
stone and wiping his face gently, accompanied Vijaya to enquire into real 
cause and went slowly and took his seat near PArvati. — 550-562. 

14 



TEE MAT87A PVBAEAM. 




^ing him oome, the Devi Girij& got down. At the sight of Vtra- 
the Oevt shone like ^e petal of a red lotus, milk began to flow 
.from her breast and She most lovingly said in a gentle voice : —553. 

“ Vlrabhadra ! come ; come ; you have attained My son>ship ; MahA- 
-deva has given you over to me as son.” With these words She seated him 
in Her lap and kissed his cheeks and smelling bis forehead, caressed that 
sweet speaking Vlrabhadra. Afterwards, She decorated him with nice 
ornaments, such as girdle of bells, armlets of gems and garlands. Then 
she put on him peculiar kinds of leaves, flowers, herbs, white mustard 
Ac., as prescribed to ward off evil sight. — 554-557. 

Alerwards, She put a mark of Goi'uchana on his forehead and a 
garland of ornamental leaves on his neck and said; — “ Now go and gently 
play with your fellow*attendants but do not be rasii. Remain for some 
time putting on a necklace of serpents and remain dirty. May you be ever 
victorious on mountains, tablelands, over trees, elephants and your com- 
panions. You should never enter into the swift running stream of the 
Ganges nor should you go in a forest infested with tigers and lions. 
May the Goddess Gurga be pleased with this Viraka as Her son, out of 
the innumerable' attendants. The welfare asked by one’s own father 
and mother is obtained after some time, it is sure to bear fruit in some 
future time. Vlrabhadra, the lord of the Ganas, overpovveroil with the idea 
of being the child of PSrvati began to say to his playmates. “ My mother 
herself has decorated me with all these ornaments ; She has put on my 
neck, the garland of MAlati flowers with Sindliuvara flowers interspersed 
with grey dots. Who is that most skilled musician among the attendants 
with the musical instrument in his hands whom I may give this toy that 
is in my hand.” — 558-565. 

Afterwards, PArvatl, in company of Her maids, began to peep at 
Vlrabhadra whilst he was at play, through tlxe air holes from south to west, 
from west to north, from north to east. — 566. 

Sffta said “ It is highly astonishing that even Parvatl, the mother of 
the universe, was also deluded like that ; then what mortal being would 
not be entangled in the bonds of filial love with his son ? ” — 567. 

After that the Devaa and Lokapfilas entered within to meet the 
Lord Siva when the attendants of Siva ride on the Vahanas and made a 
parade with their arms and weapons. Viraka, also took up one axe 
and exclaimed, “ who will be cut into two by this axe ? who has 
called the cruel Yama into his memory ? Say. If you remain silent 
then I understand that you all are afraid of this terrible weapon. 
When I, of terrific appearance, am here, no one can effect anything 
with any of these weapons.” W'hen Viraka was expressing thus, the 
Devas desisted him from his purpose, saying “It is quite useless to 
wound the feelings of the Lokap&las.” Seeing Viraka to be so much 
attached to the I)eva-Deva, Parvati advised Viraka to bathe in spring 
water, to walk in the Devi mountain and gardens, to sleep in the house 
covered with flowers and not to go on the tops of high peaks where wind 
blows very violently. The high golden peaks, the golden low lands, and 
the caves of the Gandhamfidan mountain are full of many valuable 




(MAPTtrn OLit 


' to/ 

things. All the Ga^e^varas used* to dwell there. Its various places were 
well'bedecked with manddira flowers, leaves, and lotuses and the pleasure 
resorts of the celestial beings. Vlraka used to roam at those placeej.. 
The ladies of the Siddhas used to drink the nectar of his face. If P&rvatt, 
could not see Vlraka for a moment, she used to beconie impatient and 
constantly thovight of him. Vlraka, too, then remembered his good for> 
tune. It is this Vlraka that became the real son of the Devi on some future 
occasion. The creator of the coming world created Vlraka out of fire. 
Vlraka was very fond of Divine singing and dancing and was, therefore, 
respected by the Ganetlvaras. Sometimes, he used to play in mountains, 
where lions roared ; sometimes, he remained in the mines of jewels, some- 
times, he played in S&lat&la forest ; sometimes, the pleasant-blooming 
Tamfila forest ; sometimes, under the trees, sometimes, in waters full 
of lotuses and having a little mud ; and sometimes, he used to remain 
in the pure auspicious lap of his mother. Thus he spent his time in 
childish pastimes. Sometime, like i^iva, Vlraka the lord of Gapetfvaras 
used to sing with Vidyadharas in the groves, with all paraphernalia and 
amusements. At this moment the Sun, after illuminating the half 
world, went down below the horizon to some other distant land, the As* 
t^chala mountain. — 568-578. 

The UdaySchal and the Astficbala which are the mountains on which 
respectively rises and sets the Sun, the former helps in the beginning, and 
the latter in the end ; but in the heart of the AstSchala really lies imbed- 
ded firm friendship. The Sumeru Mount which is daily worshipped, 
whose base is wide and which is very lofty does no help to the Sun, the door 
of real service, at this time. This sort of behaviour is also present in the 
waters. So the intelligent beings should make use of everything. The 
Sun, too, at the end of a day, entered into waters; but He did not feel 
any need for those when He had considered his own a short time pre- 
viously. — 57 9-581 . 

In the evening-time, the Munis feeling the absence of the Sun, 
suppressed their grief and looking towards Him prayed for His speedy 
return . Then the veil of darkness spread more and more over the 
Universe just like the mind of the wicked becoming enshrouded in sin. — 
582-583. 

Then, Lord ^iva went to sleep with His noble consort Pdrvatl in 
His mansion, the walls of which were shining with gems on the hoods of 
snakes and over the bed was a beautiful canopy ; and on the floor 
was spread a white cloth shining like moonbeam ; the border of the 
canopy decorated with various kinds of gems and p>earls. It was moving 
to and fro by the gentle breeze; on account of the lustre of gems, it 
seemed as if there arose a rain-bow. — 584-.586. 

When Siva began to sleep with Bis neck touching the arms of 
Pfirvati, His white lustre looked extremely charming and the goddess 
P&rvatl, gleaming like the petal of a blue lotus, looked dark under cover 
of night. At tliat time the Lord jokingly said to Parvati : — 587-588. 

Here ends the one hundred and fifty-fourth chapter on the birth of 
Kumdra Kdrtikeya. 



108 


THE MATSYA PUBANAM! 


CHAPTER CLV. 

i^iva said : — ‘‘My body is resplendent with lustre and you look 
black and your embracing me looks like a serpent coiling round 
a sandal tree. With apparel white and with the moonbeams falling on 
you, you look like the new moon-lit night.” — 1-2. 

Having being thus addressed, PArvati leaving the neck of the 
Lord and with Her eyes turned red with anger and knitting Her eyebrows, 
said : One despises others tlirough one’s own faults. 0 Lord ! He is 
surely to meet with misfortunes. Constant despise is the reward that I am 
now getting on attaining Thee after the performance of rigid austerities, 
^iva ! I am neither mysterious nor wicked. O, one with streaming 
hair ! you are well-known to have become vicious by contact with evil 
things. oi\^a ! I am not the teeth of Pusa, nor am 1 the eyes of Bhaga. 
Bhagavan Aditj^a knows Thee well. Thou art to be blamed, Thou 
art now causing Thy own trouble by chiding me thus due to Thine own 
fault. Thou cal lest me black ; but Thou ait well known as very b' ick 
(MahA-Kala), what shall I do ? I am going to the mountains to practise 
austerities and will give up my life. What is the use of my life under 
the subjugation of a cunning liusband ? — 3-9. 

Hearing Her such angry words, ^iva said lovingly and meekly : ” O 
GirijA ! I have not blamed you on account of your being the daughter of 
Himachala ; 1 have called you by that name simply to test your Bhakti. 
Do not indulge any doubts for nothing. Girija ! those whose conscience is 
clear are not led astray. 1 shall no more joke with you if j"ou are so much 
annoyed. Pray, remove away your anger. O beautiful one ! I bow to 
Thee and join my hands before the Sun. None should ever joke with 
one who gets offended with what is spoken in affection, and jest.” — 
10-14. 

^iva thus coaxed Parvati in many ways but Her wrath did not 
abate. She snatched flcihelf away from the embrace of t?iva ami pro- 
pared to start immediately,— 15- IG. 

The Lord seeing Her mind ffxed on going, angrily said ” Tt is true, 
you are in every way like your father. Tiie several limbs of your body 
appear like unreacba])le tall peaks of the Himalayas with clouds embrac- 
ing in the middle and trying to reach the Heavens. Your heart is 
hard to attain, as tlie unfathomable interiors of the Ilimalyas are hard 
to be traversed. Your body is very hard, owing to the of 

the rocks in the Himalayas ; you are present at many places and that 
is derived from the hilly forest laud ; and your crookedness is from the 
zig-zag lanes thereof, and you are hard to be served as the cold and 
snows of the Himalayas are hard to bo borne. In short, all the qualities 
of HimAcliala are imbibed in you.” — 17-19. 

Pf'rvaU, thus addressed, shook Her head with fury and grinding 
Her teeth said. — 20. 

Uina said : — “ Pray do not despise other worthies by trying to find 
fault with them. Thou art also fuU of faults on account of Thy bad 
company. Thy crookedness is derived from Thy contact with serpentsu 



CHAPTER CLVI. 


109 


Thou art void of affection like Thy ashes. Thy heart is more vilified 
than Moon by Her spot. Thou art inferior even to this bull in under- 
standing. What is the use of talking more. Thou art fearless by living 
in tho cremation ground. Thori art shameless, because, Thou art naked.. 
Thou dost not dislike disguishing things on account of Thy constantly 
wearing skulls and mercy has left Thee once for all.” — 21-23. 

Sfita said : — With these words, P&rvati left that place. At that time, 
the attendants of Siva made a noise and Virabhadra running up to her 
said, crying, 0 Mother ! where are you going leaving us alone ? Saying 
so, he threw himself round Her feet and said : — “ 0 Mother ! what has 
happened ? Where are you going so angrily ? If you go away so ruth- 
lessly I will follow you ; else, forsaken by you, I will throw myself down 
from the peak of the mountain where you may practise penances.” — 
24 27. 

On his having thus spoken to P&rvati, She said after fondling him 
with her right arm, “ Son ! do not be sorry. You should not throw your- 
self down from the mountain nor should you accompany me. Son ! I tell 
you what you ought to do. ^iva has despised me by calling me KrispS 
(black), so I shall practise austerities in order that I may become fair 
complexiniied. This f^iva is desirous of women. After 1 go away you 
should keep guard at the gate so that no other woman might come. Son ! 
If you find any other woman coming in do report it to me and I shall at 
once arrange about it.” — 28-33. 

Hearing that, Virabhadra said “ I shall do as you say ” ; and then 
he cheerfully set himself to caiTy out the injunctions of his mother, 
after duly saluting Her . — 34-35. 

Here ends the one hundred aad fifty fifth chapter on Kumara 
Sambhava {the birth of Kdrtikeya). 


CHAPTER CLVI. 

Sfita said : — Afterwards P&rvat! beheld the mountain Goddess, 
Kusumamodini, the comrade of Her mother, coming to Her. — 1. 

Tho Goddess also seeing P&rvati lovingly embraced Her and said ; — 
” 0 Daughter ! where are you going?” — 2. 

In reply to that qiierry P4rvati narrated to Her, all about the agony 
that was inflicted on Her by Siva and looking upon Her as Her own mother 
She said : — 3. 

” O Pleasing one ! You always remain here as the Goddess of this 
mountain. You tire most dear to Me, consequently, you should do what 
I tell you. Pray, inform me if any woman comes in private to the abode 
of Siva ; you should also try not to allow any woman enter in private to 
Siva. On receiving your information, I shall arrange what ought to 
be done.” Pfirvati went to the presiding goddess and said “ 1 will act 
accordingly ” and went away. — 4-7. 

UmA, on the other hand, entered Her father’s pleasure gardens as 
clouds wander in the sky. In that way. She left all the ornaments and 



THE MAT8YA PVBAHAM. 


m 

dWnned barks of trees on Her body, • Daring the hot wfeather, She warmed 
Herself in the fire burning around Her She remaiiied in water during 
the rainy seison. Sometimes She lived on the jungle fruits and some- 
times observed fast. She slept on the floor. Thus She carried on Her 
penances. Her body became dried op and lean and thin.—8-lO. 

Afterwards the son of the demon Andhaka, named' Adi, coming to 
knew about Parvatfs resolution and practice of Tapasyfi^ remembered 
the destruction of his father ; and he turned up to take mvenge. Adi, the 
son of Andhaka, and brother of Vaka, was trying to discover weak points 

of ^iva ; and he now went to ^iva after conquering the Devas in battle. 
Going there he first saw Vlrabhadra standing at the door and became 

anxious. In by — gone days when Andhaka was killed by i^iva, the d< non 
Adi practised severe austerities when Brahmfi., being pleased with hi de- 
votion, appeared before him and said “ Demon ! what do you ( jsire 
as a fruit of this asceticism ? ” The demon said : — “ That 1 be immortal 
is my wish.” — 11-16. 

Brahma said; — “There is no one exempt from death; every 
embcKiied being is siire to die. You should, therefore, seek your death 
through some means.” — 17. 

The demon said : — “ I may only die when there occurs a change 
in my form, otherwise, I may live for ever hearing which Brahmd said 
“ You will die when your form undergoes a change.” — 18-20. 

Getting that boon, the Daitya considered himself immortal and 
afterwards in order to hide himself from Virabhadra he transformed 
himself into a serpent and without being noticed by Virabhadra, crawled 

inside where ^iva was. Then, that great Asura, leaving off the disguise of 
the serpent, masquedered as Parvati in order to tempt ^iva. After making 
his form exquisitely alike Parvati by his spell, ho put on sharp and strong 
teeth, and made up his mind to kill ^iva. He went near ^iva in the form 
of P&rvatt putting on neat dress and ornaments. — 21-27. 

Then, seeing the horrible demon in the form of P&rvati, lie became 
greatly pleased and said : — “ Parvati ! thou art well-dispositioned. I hope 
there is no false appearance in thy love. Thou hast come to me after 
realizing my motive. 'I’he wliole world is blank to me owing to thy 
separation. Thou hast done well in coming to me. It is well worthy of 
thee.”— 28-30. 

The demon thus addressed by ^iva and not knowing His glory 
smilingly said by slow degrees: — 31. 

“ I had gone to practise severe penances to gain Thy affection, where 
I could not find myself well owing to my being away from Thee and that 
is why I have returned to Thee.” — 32. 

^iva became suspicious and smilingly began to think seriously on 
the affair.— 33. 

“ Umfl. had become angry with me and had gone away with the fixed 
resolution. How has She now come back without fulfilling Her object ? 
This is my doubt.” — 34. 



GH AFTER CLVII: 




biva now noticed the marks on her body in course of His speech and 
did not find the mark of a lotnp on the left region of the ribs. Instead 
of which, there was a bundle of hair, — 35. 

Then, the Lord came to know it to be a devlish freak and keeping 
His form bidden, took the yajra>astra and hit it on his private part 
and thus killed that Dfinava. Virabhadra did not know the destruc- 
tion of the demon in that way and the Gnddess of the mountain seeing 
the demon thus killed in the form of a woman and not realizing the full 
situation, sent the news by the messenger V&yu to P&rvati, when She 
began to seethe with wrath. Her eyes turned red with auger and She felt 
fearfully agitated in mind and pronounced a curse on Virabhadra. — 36-39. 

Here ends the one hundred and fifty-sixth chapter on the hilling of the 

demon Adi. 


CHAPTER CLVII. 

PSrvati said : — “ 0 Virabhadra ! as you did not care for me and 
showed less affection and regard for me and as you allowed a woman to 
appear in private before Siva, I curse you for this offence so that your mother 
shall be a salty piece of stone without any heart, inanimate, rough, 
and rugged.” — 1-2. 

This curse was the cause of Virabhadra’s evolution from the rock. 
While Parvati pronounced that curse, wrath came out of Her mouth in 
the form of a powerful lion. — 3-4. 

Parvati, on seeing the ferocious lion with his long manes, long tail, 
fearful fangs, slender waist, standing before Her, in the twinkling of an 
eye, with his mouth wide open and long red tongue flapping out, began 
to think of entering within his mouth. Lord Brahm& realizing what 
was in Her mind made His appearance before Her and addressed Her in a 
very clear tone. — 5-7. 

BrahmH said : — “ 0 child ! what is your wish ? What rare boon 
can I confer upon you ? Now desist from your rigid austerities. 1 advise 
you so.” — 8. 

Hearing that, P&rvati revealed to Him what she had thought of since 
a long time. — 9. 

P4rvati said : — “ I had attained ^iva after a course of hard penances 
and He addressed me as dark-complexioned, so now I wish that My com- 
plexion may become like that of gold in order that I may adorn Myself 
in the arms of the Lord.” — 10-11. 

Hearing that, BrahmS said : “ It shall be so, and you shall also form 
a part of half of His body.” — 12. 

After that, the complexion of Parvati instantly turned into a golden 
hue from that of a blue lotus colour. Her dark skin was separated from^ 
Her body and transformed itself into the original form of the Goddess RStri 
who stood aside, dressed in yellow and red, three-eyed, with bell in Her 
hands, and adorned with various ornaments. BrahmS then said to R4tri 




112 


TEE UAT8YA PURAEAU. 


who was shining like the petal of a blue lotus ** Rftrti ! you have become 
blessed by the contact of P&rvat!, and the lion, produced by the fury of 
Pcirvatl, shall be j^our conveyance and it will be marked on your banner 
also. Go to Vindhy'ichala where you would do the work of the Devas. 
You will be known in future by the name of EkavamrfA. Goddess ! 
This Pafichala Yak$a is given to you as your attendant. He is well 
up in various kinds of Mayd. One hundred thousand of Yakga attendants 
are following him.” — 13-18. 

The Goddess Kautiik!, thus enjoined, went to VindbySchala and 
Parvati also went to i^iva after fulfilling Her object. Vtrabhadra, who was 
standing at the entrance with a golden rod in hand, challenged P&rvati and 
taking Her to be an ordinary one addressed Her angrily. He said : “you 
have no business here. Go away. A demon had come in the appearance 
of P&rvati to deceive ^iva whom I could not see sneaking inside. He 
was, however, killed by the Lord. — 19-22. 

After that the Lord reprimanded me severely and said : “ Do you not 
keep watch carefully ? you will not be able to guard for a long time.” 
Since then I am very alert and will not admit you in. You had better 
retrace your steps.” 

Here ends the one hundred and fifty-seventh chapter on the curse 

on Vtraka, 


CHAPTER CLVllI. 

Vlrabhadra continued, “ Lotus eyed ! My loving mother had also 
gh^en me the same order. She told me not to allow any other woman 
to get inside.” — 1. 

Hearing that, Parvati began to reflect and said to Herself “ Ah ! 
concerning him, Vilyu told me he was a demon and not a woman. 1 
have cursed Virabliadra in vain. In anger, fools, no doubt, do ignoble 
deeds. Reputation is lost by anger. It also destroys riches. 1 have cursed 
my son witliout knowing the real trntli. Men with perverted minds 
easily get into trouble,” With such thoughts Pdrvati remorsefully said 
to Vlrabhadra. — 2-5. 

The Devi said : — “ Vlrabhadra ! I am your mother and you need not 

entertain any doubt. 1 am the beloved of l^iva and the daughter of Himfi- 
chala. Son ! do not be deluded by my appearance. Brahma, becoming 
pleased with My asceticism, has granted me this fair complexion. Son ! 
without knowing the full details of that demon, I have cursed you which 
cannot be now obviated but I assure you that you will soon come back 
after being liberated from its effects in thy man-birth.” — 6-9. 

Sflta said Afterwards Virabliadra began to pray to his Mother 
shining like the Moon. — 6-10. 

Vlrabhadra said : — “ O daughter of Hirn/lchala ! 0 compassionate 

to those who seek Thy slielter, the nails of Whose feet are rendered 
more lustrous by the reflections of the swords of the bowing Devas 
and demons adorned with crowns studded with jewels, I salute Thee. 



OBAPTBB CLVlll. 


113 


0 the Destroyer of the troubles of the afflicted ! shining like the 
Sun,^ Instresorne like the mountain of gold, with the curved eyebrows 
looking like serpents ; I am at Thy mercy. Parvati ! there is no one 
who can confer boons on devotees so readily as Thou canst. oiva does not 
yearn for any one else in the^ world excepting Thyself. — 11-13. 

“ O great one ! by great yogic power, Thou hast converted Thy body 
into another unconquerable body like that of Mahe4vara and hast become 
His ornament. It is Thou who being praised by the Devas, hast killed the 
friends and relations of the demon Andhaka. Thou ridest on the great lion 
with long white manes rising from his shoulders. Thou destroyst the great 
Asuras by Thy extended hands, reflected with the fire emitting from 
Thy sharp weapons. 0 Mother ! the inhabitants of the earth call Thee by 
the name Chandikd, the Destroyer of l^umbha and Nirfiimblia. Thou art the 
only Deity to be meditated by the people of the world who bow down to 
Thee. It is Thou who art earnest in destroying the demons who create 
great riot and disturbance. Devi ! I bow down to Thy manifestations in the 
heaven, on the aerial track, in the blazing fire and on land, O unconquer- 
able one ! O unequalled one ! O dear one to ^iva! 1 salute Thee. The 
ocean full of waves, the fire and thousands of serpents cannot cause me 
any harm when 1 utter Thy name. I am at Thy mercy and have no 
craving. Devi ! calm down and be clement to me. I saluate Thee. 
0 shelter to Thy devotees of firm devotion ! 0 Bhagavati 1 1 take refuge 
at Thy feet. May Thy unending shower of mercy fall on my head. 
Forgive me. Now assume Thy peaceful form.” — 14-19. 

Silta said : — When Virabhadra prayed like that, Parvati became high- 
ly pleased and clieerfully entered the apartment of Her Lord Siva. — 20. 

Then Virabhadra sent back the Devas, who had gone there to make 
Their obeisance to Siva to Their respective realms. He said to Them 

“ Devas ! this is not the time to meet Siva ; the Lord is enjoying the 
company of His noble consort.” Hearing that the Devas returned to 
Their respective regions. — 21-22. 

A thousand years passed away thus when the Devas deputed Agni 
to make enquiries about Siva. — 23. 

Agni assuming the form of a parrot saw through an opening the 
Lord enjoying the company of Parvati when getting annoyed, Siva said 
“ This hindrance has been caused by you and the essence will, therefore, 
get within you.” Agni thus addressed, swallowed the semen-virile of 
MahA-deva holding it in Ills palms. — 24-26. 

Agni gratified the Devas with this in return when the semen-virile 
of tlie Lord gushed out of Their stomachs and flowed close to the residence 
of Siva where it formed into a pool of melted golden colour where the 
golden lotuses sprang up and birds of numerous varieties began to chirp 
there. Parvati, hearing the renown of that pool extending to many Yojaiias 
and its crystal waters shining like gold and beautified with lotus beds, 
went there in company of Her maids and began to sport in it and took up 
lotuses and made head ornaments. Afterwards, she stood there and felt 
inclined to drink its water when the Kfittikas having finished their bath, 
15 



114 


mB UAT!8YA PVBABAM. 


took its water oa a lotus leaf and came there. PArvatt cheerfully said “I 
will see this water resting on lotus leaves.” — 27-32. 

Hearing such words of Parvati, the KrittikAs said to Her “ 0 beauti- 
ful-eyed one ! If by virUie of drinking this water You bear a child, then 
he would be renowned in the universe after our name. If you agree to 
this proposal we shall give you this water.” Piirvati asked how the son 
born of Her coulil be theirs? — 33-35. 

When Parvati said that, Krittikns spoke “if you a^ree to this, we 
would then make liis limbs beautiful aud perfect/' IVirvati said Alright, 
let it be so." Tlien tlie Krittikfis joyfully offered water to IMrvati wliich 
She quaffed. Afterwards, by virtue of that drau^lit, a son was born to Her 
out of the right side of Her abdominal cavity who was a lustre of all tlie 
realms. He was resplendent like the Sun, armed with a sharp trident 
blazing like gold He liad six heads and was sliining like gold. He shone 
as the destroyer of the Daityas. Thus Svfimikartika was born. Ho was 
known by the name of Ivuuuira. — 30-41. 

Here etuis the one hundred and fifitj-eirj^d chaptc^' on the t.ivlh cf 
K u mUra Kd rt ikeya. 


CHAPTER CLIX. 

Suta said : — Before the fair-faced rvuniura, tin' dfv-itroym’ of tlio foes, 
was born, he was effused in the form of semen in the mouth of the fire, 
afterwar<]s lie Ciimo out of the hdt l>el!y of tlie IK*vi. ffffie Kritik is joined 
together with him after his birth and the six Ik'jhU wmi* fixed to the six 
trunks ; for thesi- reasons he is known as Skaiida, Vi.-^akha, Sanmnkha, 
and Kartikovu. — 1-3. 

Notp:.— T he stars. Tho PU'.iados r«‘proii:,oiitea as nyniph.s and acting 
as nurses to IvartilMiya, the God of war. 

On the mwv moon night of the month of (Minili-u, two iioworful sons 
of the hrilliancy of th(‘ Sun, w^ere born in tlie thicket (»i reed fori'st ; and 
on the lil'fli (lay of t.ho hriglit-fortniglil, tln^y wf're joindl logt'lhor by Iixira, 
for the welfare of the Itevas. Oii the sixlh dav of tlic s^inu' lorliiiglit, 
Kurtikeya wax duly installed Ijy BrahniA, India, I 'pendra, Adilyas and the 
other Devas with bccnl, garlands, e.\cellcnt Hhupa, play things, umbrella, 
chflmara, ornaineiils and nnguonts. — 4-ti. 

Then, India gave his daughter J^evasona in marriage to Svami- 
kArtika after adoring Him with incense, flowers, nmhrella, flyflap and 
ornaments. Visnn gave Him arms, Knvora phu'ed a million of Yaksas 
at Ills disposal, Agni bestowed His lustre on Him, Vayu gave Him a 
conveyance, Twasla gave Him a beautiful cock who could assume any form 
at will to play with. — 7 — 10 

In that way, all the Devas gladly gave some sort of present to RvAmi- 
kartika who was like another son to them and kneeling on tJie ground they 
all recited the following prayer: — 11-12. 

The Devas said : — “We salute Thoo, O Saclmukha! highly radiant 
and illustrious like tho rising Sun and lightning. W() salute Thee, San- 
mukba ! decorated with many kinds of ornaments. Fearful amongst the 


OSAPTEB OLIX. 


115 


fearful in fighting and our Protector from the perils of war. 0 mysterious 
Giiha ! 0 Dispeller of the fears of the three worlds ! Clement to the babies 
having beautiful and clear eyes, highly resolute ; we salute Thee 0 One 
of high resolves ! The enchanter of the mind ! 0 Thou art irresistible in 
fighting ; Itider of the beautiful peacock in war ; we salute Thee. The 
keeper of the lofty banner ! the best among the blessed, the fulfiller of 
the aims of the good ; we salute Thee. O mighty one ! Thou art the 
present and the future forms of those beings who are devoted to karmas ; 
we salute Thee,” — 13-17. 

On being thus adored by Indra and the other Devas, Svamikfirtika 
looked towards Thorn and said “ Devas ! do not be afraid of anything, I 
shall kill your enemies. Be free from all your cares and anxieties. 
O Devas ! also toll me what object of yours I may fulfil. I shall fulfil 
your wish even if it may be difficult to accomplish.** — 18-19. 

The Devas tlius addressed by Svamikartika, bowing Their heads 
before Him saitl : —20. 

“ The demon Tarakasura has destroyed all the Devas. He is most 
valiant, unconquerable, wicked and wrathful. Pray, destroy him. He is 
our terror, tids is our only desire.’* Fearing such words Svamikartika 
said “ 1 will kill him *' and at once accompanied the Devas and marched 
to kill Tarakj'isura. — 21--3 

Then Indra, getting his refuge, sent his messenger to deliver his 
hluTit message to tlie demon king ; the messenger went to him dauntlessly 
Sind said. — ^4. 

The Messenger said : — Tarakasura ! Indra has told mo to inform 
you that he is the lore! of heaven, and, 0 Demon ! I am his messenger. I 
have told you what he ilireoted me to do. Besides this, Indra has al'^o told 
me to inform you that ho is the king of the three realms, and as you have 
tormented the world, he will now punish you.** Hearing those wonls the 
demon, whose prospc'rity was about to vanish, said with great fury ; — 
“ Messenger ! tell Indra that I have seen his valour hundrc?ds of time in 
warfare. Is he not ashamed of himself? He is veritably a shamelss 
creature !*’ — 2^-28. 

Hearing those words the Messenger returned and Taraknsura began 
to ponder. Ho said to himself “ Indra would not say so without having 
got support of some powerful ally, for I have several times subdued 
him in war. We have conquered him thoroughly ; now all on a sudden 
how has 1)0 got another’s protection?” — 29-30. 

Afterwards, the vicious minded Tarakilsura experienced the following 
inauspicious signs. He saw the shower of dust, the fall of blood from the 
sky, felt the throbbing of the left eye, the drying up of the mouth, delusion 
of mind, the turning dull of the lotus faces of the ladies, the ferocious beings 
making inauspicious sounds. Afterwards, he saw the army of the Devas 
advancing in chariots with tinkling bells, streaming with lofty banners 
and fly flaps, having a multitude of singing Kiuuaras in its force, with the 
warriors wearing garlands of celestial flowers, armour and weapons, playing 
on various kinds of music- He saw the armies getting dusky-coloured on 
account of the dust rising from the hoofs of the marching horses. The 



116 


TUB UATS7A PURAVAM. 


banners were flying on their running chariots. The wonderful chariots and 
chamaras over them were looking brilliant The bards were singing praises 
of the Devas. lie saw that army from the terrace of his mansion and 
anxiously said to himself : “ Who can be such an extraordinary warrior 

whom 1 did not subdue in war previously.’’ Afterwards, the demon 
king heard the following sharp words uttered from the mouths of the 
bards.— 31-39. 

He heard the bards of the Devas saying “ 0 Kumara ! You are 
shining with the lustre of unequalled prowess. By Yoiir mighty valour 
you are well-skilled in the arts of warfare, victory to You ! You are pleasing 
like the Moon, the Destroyer of tlie demons like the fire ! Victory to 
You ! O Rider of the chariot drawn by a peacock. 8vAmikartika ! the 
fingernails of Your feet are being rubbed, by the coronets of tho kotis and 
kotis of Devas, victory to You. You are the lord of the pure groups of 
the lotus-like heads of the Devas ; It is You only who are the unbearable 
conflagration fire destroying the whole family of the demons, victory to 
You. 0 VijJakha ! 0 Lord ! The Redeemer of all the realms, may You 
be victorious. O Skanda ! O son of Oanri, Vibhr-, wearer of i^oldon 
ornaments, conquer. You are the only one who can uproot the enemies 
by Your mere sport. May you conquer. Skanda ! liAla, seven days’ 
old, the Dispeller of the grief of the three realms, conquer. You are 
the destroyer of Tarakasura, the Lord of tho demons, eouquer. You are 
the Destroyer of the sorrows of tho world ! may you conquer in every 
way.” — 40-43. 

Here ends the one hundred and fifty-ninth chapfer on the preparation 
of war between the Devas and the Ddnavas 


CHAPTER CLX. 

Silta said : — Hearing that TArakAsura rcnieinborod the words of 
BrahmA that he would be killed by a cliild. With his artny fie mourn- 
fully set OTJt on foot witlioiit any coat of armour to meet the foe when 
Kalanemi, and otliei s also came to him. — 1-2. 

Taraka said : O Kalanemi and other Daityas ! why arc you con- 
founded. Take up youi arms ; collect your arjiiy and rush on the foe — 3. 

Seeing SvAmikartika, the terrible TarkAsura said “ Cfiiild ! do you 
wish to fight ? Y"au ought to play with a ball. You have never seen 
ferocious demons. Is your understanding so limited on account of your 
infancy ?” — 4-5. 

Hearing those words, that Kumara also said words which were 
gratifying to the Devas : — Tarakasura I now hear the meaning of the 

^astras. During war time, the learned do not umlerstand the real meaning 
of the writings of the scriptures. You should not look down on Me, 
as a mere child. A cobra may be a very young, one ; see the Sun, 
though he may be small yet cannot be looked at. O Demon ! have you not 
seen how a mantra of very few syllables contains wonderful force ?” — G-S. 



CHAPTER CLX. 


117 


After the Kumara had said so, the demon hurled his club at Him 
which He destroyed by His unfailing vajra. — 9. 

Afterwards, the demon adjusting a ball of iron to his javelin flung 
it at Svamik&rtika which He caught by His hand and hit T&rakasura with 
liis awful club by the blow of which the demon began to shiver and he 
said to himself that the Kumara was unconquerable and that his end was 
come. At that time Kfilanemi and other demons seeing the rage of 
Svamik&rtika began to shower their weapons on Him. — 10-13. 

Those blows did not, in the least, affect SvAmikiirtika ; and all became 
futile. Then the chief demons all clever in warfare began to strike Prksa 
and ^iiltnukha weapons on Kum4ra. Kum&ra, though struck, did not feel 
any pain. That battle destro3'ed many Devas when SvamikSrtika seeing 
them in distress angrily took up His arms and began to cause disaster 
to the demons which made Kalanemi and others turn their backs on the 
battlefield. Many demons were killed and many fled. At that instant, 
Tarakasura seeing what was happening, turned up with a club decorated 
with the network of gold; and violently struck Sv&mikSrtika with it ; His 
peacock struck by this, fled away. — 14-20. 

Svamik&rtika seeing Ilis peacock flying away and vomiting blood 
turned on the battlefield, rushed at TarakSsura, holding a ^akti javelin in 
llis hand adorned with a bracelet and shining like gold, said “ O wicked 
one ! stop, stop. See this weapon and today count jmurself among the 
dead. If you know of any better weapon, think of it now.” Saying so. He 
threw Ilis Sakti which, making a jingling sound, rent open the rough 
lieart of the demon who fell down like a mountain blasted by thunder- 
bolt.— 21-25. 

The coronet fell down from the head of the dead demon, his turban 
was scattered and all the ornaments were strewn. The Devas were 
jubilant to see the fall of such a formidable demon. At that time no one, 
not even one in the hell, became sorry. The Devas were entirely free 
from sufferings. The Devas along with M’heir consorts prayed to 
Svamikartika and returned to Their regions after showering blessings on 
Him.— 26-28. 

The Devas then said with glee “ The wise who would read or 
listen to this narration relating to Sv&mikfirtika will be illustrious, long- 
lived, prosperous and handsome. Besides this, they will have no fear from 
any one and will be void of suffering. One who will read this after his 
morning sandhya will be liberated frorfl all his sins and become exceed- 
ingly rich. The recitation of this is specially beneficial to the young one 
suffering pain and to one connected with state craft. This narration 
yields to all the fruits of their desires. Such devotees at the end are 
corporaWy united tor ever with Svft,inikft.rtika.” — 29-33. 

Here ends the one hundred and sixtieth chapter on the destruction of 

Tdrakasura. 



118 


THE MATS7A PURANAM, 


CriAFrER CLXT. 

The Risis said : — “ 0 Suta ! we now wisli to hear about the destruction 
of the demon Hlranyakailyapu and also the glory of Narasiinha (Avatara) 
which is the dispeller of great sins/’ — 1. 

Suta said: — 0 Bnihmanas! The demon Hiranyakarfyapii was 
the most ancient progenitor of the Dailyas during the Satyaynga (the 
golden age\ He practised severe austerities for 11,000 years, taking his 
bath regularly and then plunginghimself in water neck-deep and observed 
the vow of silence. He led a life of continence restrainirig and controlling 
his passions and was V(3ry humble, lirahma was highly pleased with his 
devotion. 

ItMing on His white swan illustrious like the sun and followed by 
twelve Adityas, Vasus, Siidhyas, Siddhas, Maruts, Rudras, Yaksas, Raks- 
asas, Demons, Serpents, Dircc'tions, Vidijias, liivers, Oceans, Stars, 
iluhurtas, Planets, Devas, seven Risis, Brahmaibis, Iiajarsis, Oandharvas, 
Nyini)!is, Brahma, the Lord of the universe, went tlioro and addressed the 
demon : — 5-9. 

‘'OSuvrata ! I am pleased witli your aseetieism ami you may ask 
for a boon tliat may suit your wish. You shall attain all yonr desires 
through ^ly kindness.” — 10. 

Ilirnnyakasyapu spoke : — () best of the Devas! Make me invulner- 
able from the Devas, (h'uion^, Gandharvas, ^"al^sas, Seipents, IMksasas, 
men, Pisiachas. The (uirses of the Risis also may rmt adecjt mo. If yon 
are pleased with me, tlien also grant me O, Lord ! the boon so that 1 may 
not die of any wea.pon, missile rock^, trees, w(‘t and dry iliings. 1 may also 
not die during tlu' day or night. Let me lu' lilu'j ilu' Sim and the Moon 
and perform the functions of the wind, iin*, w'al<‘i, sky, >>lais, the ton 
directi(ms. May I be Anger, Gnjdd, Ijidra, Yinunt, Varna, Idhanapaii, 
Kuvera, Yaksa, I\im])nri]sa, — 1 L15. 

Brahma Said Soil I | grant yon all tliese ( \l raordinary Ix'Ons 
sought by you. Von tdiall attain them all that you dn ^,ire without any 
doubt.” — U). 

A,ftcr that, Ib'ahma reluna'd lo [Ii>7eabu Vairijii^, tluongh theaerial 
track accompanied by the IJralnnarsis. — 17. 

Then the Dc\as, tin* ^er[)en1s, the Gandliar'as, and the Ri^is, etc.,, 
hearing the nature of the boons eonfeued on the demon by Brahma wont 
to Him and said “<) Bi-Ahmana ! By' virturo of l our I)oons, the demon 
will kill ns all ; so Yon should devise some means of his destruction. 
Bliagavaua ! You are tlio ])rimo cause of all, Yen are Supremo, You 
arc the Creator of the Devas and the Pittris. The Kavyas and Ravyas, 
offerings to the Devas and the J^ittris, are ordained by You. You are the 
uumanifested Prakriti. You are wise and you are self-born.” — 18-20. 

Hearing those words of the Devas, Brahm4 consoled them with 
His nectar-like words. Ho said : “ The performance of asceticism is bound 
to bear its fruits ; and wlien liis merits will be exhausted, the Lord Visnu 
will kill this demon.” — 21-22. 




CHAPTER CLXI. 


no 


Hearing those words, the Devasand the Brahmanas joyfully returned 
to Their realms and Iliranyakaiiyapu on getting those boons became prond 
and began to oppress the people. He greatly disturbed the peace of the 
honourable Munis who were practising austerities and following the true 
Dharraa, remaining in their Aiirama. — 23-24. 

After conquering the Devas residing in heaven he brought the three 
worlds under his thumb and directed his engines of oppression towards 
those living in the hermitages and persecuted those who led virtuous 
lives. He then began to interfere with the rights of the Devas by going to 
heaven and monopolizing their share of the sacrificial offerings. — 25-27. 

Tiie Adityas, Sadhyas, Virfvedevas, Vasus, Tndra and other Devas, 
Yaksas, Siddhas, Dvijas, Maharsis went to Lord Visnu and jointly offered 
Their prayer to Him the great Protector of the refugees, liighly powerful ; 
the Deva of the Devas, the Eternal, the Yajnapurusa, Vasudeva. — 28-29. 

They said “Nnrayana! Mahabhaga ! We liave come to seek Thy 
shelter. Lord ! do kill the demon Hiraiiyakarfyapii and save ns. Thou 
art Our Protector, Ourfi, Thou art the adorable of the Devas like Brahma, 
ititc. ’’—30-31. 

Hearing sucli a pra.yer, Visnu said “ Devas ! Cast aside Your fears. 
Go back to heaven, do not delay. 1 shall kill this lia'igliiy demon witli 
all liis attendants and give the Kingdom of Heaven to You. With such 
words, bade adieu to the Devas and resolved to kill that 

demon. — 32-34. 

Tlion the mighty armed iindecaying Visnu took the assistance of 
“ O/ikara ” and then witli bis assistance went to llie demon’s place. IShin-* 
ing like the Sun and tlie Moon, He assumed the form of Narasiriiha (the 
lower half of human form with the uppei half .of the lion). — 35-30. 

At that instant, Narasiriiha chanced to see the most beautiful assembly 
of that valiant demon. It was full of every blessing, divinely beautiful, 
100 yojanas in length and 50 in breadth. It had all the desires and wealth; 
it was mrial ; it could go wdierever it liked. It was free from the sufferings 
of iulinuity, grief and decay. It was full of lustre and prosperity and 
firm. It was lo(*ated amongst enchanting surroundings such as beautiful 
gardens, &c. There were beautiful pools of water within its precincts 
designed and executed by Viiivakarma and the trees of gold studded with 
precious stones. Besides all that, there were charming awnings of blue, 
yellow, white, black colours and hundred of creepers loaded with clusters 
of blossoms tliat looked like the wavir;g of rows of clouds of various 
colours. In that place full of light and pervaded with the stupefying 
odour cf unsurpassing sweetness, there was a total absence of grief and 
it was full of comforts. There, the sun, cold, hunger, thirst and decay 
were not visible. The demons were sitting at such a place of beauty and 
comfort. — 37-44. 

It had various and beautiful architectural forms and was supported 
on wonderfully extraordinary bright pillars. Tlie self-luminous Sabha 
eclipsed the sun and the moon by its radiance. The Devas and the men 
were supplied in abundance with their objects of desires there. Nice and 
tasteful victuals were also in plenty there. — 45-47. 




120 


THE MAT8YA PURANAM. 


Sweet scented garlands were in abundance. It was full of trees bear- 
ing flowers and fruits. It was ornamented with handsome floral wreaths. 
The water was nice and cool during the hot weather and warm during 
the cold weather. Various kinds of trees laden with sprouts, flowers, 
fruits, leaves, creepers, and clusters were circling the wells and the 
tanks. Narasimha saw many such scenes there. There were sweefr-sinell- 
ing flowers, juicy fruits, beautiful pools and Tirthas. — 48-51. 

He also beheld many reservoirs smiling vitli nice smell ng blue 
and red lotuses and beautified with the lustresome swans, K&randavas, 
Chakravakas, cranes, Kuravas, etc., and various kinds of other birds echo- 
ing with the notes of cranes. Besides those, He saw nice creepers with 
highly smelling blossoms embracing the mountain tops. — 52-55. 

He also noticed the following plants and flower trees there, viz.^ 
Ketaki, Ailoka, Sarala, Punnaga, Tilaka, Arjuna. Amra, Nipa, Kadaraba, 
Vakula, Dhavam&la, Ratala, Haridraka, Salniali, S/.H, Tala, Tam» la, and 
beautiful Champaka. Similarly He saw in that assembly \rariou other 
kinds of flower plants and the dazzling lustre of Druinas (Trees of Para- 
dise) and Vidruinas (Coral trees)— 56-58. ^ 

Very many tall trees of various descriptions were there. Besides, 
many kinds of other trees such as Arjuiia, AsJoka, Vanina, Vatsyanabha, 
Panasa, Nila, Sumanasa, Chandana, Aswatha, 1'iiidiika, i^kijata, Nimba, 
Mallika, Bhadra DQm, Anialaki, Jamhii, I^akiicha, Sailavaluka, date tree, 
Cocoanut tree, Ilaritaka, Vibhitak, Kaliaka, DrukAla, Ilingn, JViriyatraka, 
Mandara, Kundalata, Patanga, Kutaja, red Kiinintaka, blue Aguni, 
Kadamba, Bhavya, Pomegranate, Vijapiiraka, Sai)taparna, Bel ami 
various other trees were there. Sweetly^ huniiniiig l)eos were there. Ai*<oka 
Tamala, Madliuka, Saptaparna and various other trees were covered with 
shrubs and bushes and enhanced the beauty of the garden, tanks and wells. 
Besides, various other creepers and forest trees vvitli heaves, flowers and 
fruits were on all sides. The branches of some trees laden with flowers 
and fruits weie hanging on other trees and various birds Cliakora, 
Satapatra, intoxicated cuckoos, SarikAs and otlier binls of red, yellow 
and various other colours were cooing sweetly there. The couple Jiva 
and Jivaka were looking at each other with great joy and satisfaction. — 
59-G8. 

The demon Hiranyakajiyapu was enjoying there in the company 
of hundreds of women. His garments and ornaments were wonderful. 
He was seated on a seat covered with cloth shining like the sun 
measuring ten hands. lie was wearing wonderful ornaments and his 
earrings were sparkling with diamonds, etc. A gentle and soothing 
breeze laden with perfume was beating at the place wliere the demon was 
seated. — 69-72. 

Various Gandharvas attending onbim were singing beautiful songs 
to him and he was adored by the following nymphs: — Vidvachi, SahajanyS, 
Paramlocha, Saurabhaiyi, Samichi, Punjikasthall, Mirfrakesi, Itambhfi, 
sweet-smiling Chitralekha, Charuke^i, Gliritiichi, Menaka, and Urvasi and 
thousands of other Apsaras, experts in singing and dancing, were in atten- 
dance on their lord, King Hiranya-KajJipu. — 73-76. 



OUAPTm CLXll. 


121 


The sons of Diti who were all famous, were also waiting on Hiranya- 
kadyapu. — 77, 

They were hundreds of thousands, such as: — Bali, Viroohant^ 
Pri-thivisuta, Narakfisura, Prahlfida, Viprachitti, Mahasura, Gaviatha, 
SurahantS, BunSmS, Pramati, Vara, Ghafodara, Mahfip&rrfva, Krathana, 
Pithara, Vidvardpa, Surdpa, Sva^la, Mah&bala, Da^grlva, £Sli, Megkdr* 
tSsA, Ghatdsya, Akampana, Prajana, IndratSpana. They were seat^ in 
groups wearing brilliant earrings. — 78-82. 

They were also wearing garlands ; and they were great speakers 
and had attained boons. They were raliant and free from death. They 
were clothed in nice divine dresses and all of them had chariots blazing 
like fire ; their bodies were like Mahendra ; and their arms and bodies 
were ornamented with various armlets and ornaments. They looked like 
mountains, and were of golden colour. They, along with other demons, 
were adoring Hiranyakadyapu. — 83-84. 

They, all seated in various kinds of Vim4nas, looked splendid. They 
were gleaming like gold. Narasiihha thus saw the great Hiranyakadyapu, 
the Lord of the Daityas who was shining with uncommon lustre like a 
mountain. His body was radiant like the sun. His like in wealth, in 
splendour, in everything elsa, has neither been heard of nor seen. His splen- 
dour was in keeping with his greatness. The valiant demon king was 
seated on a throne of gold with a necklace round his neck like a lion with 
perforated work of silver and gold all round him. The hall of assembly 
was decorated with variegated roads adorned with altars and studded with 
gems and nice windows. He was attended by thousands of demons shin- 
ing like the sun and wearing garlands of gold. — 85-89. 

Here ends the one hundred and sixty-first eha-pter on Riraryyakayaipvt, 
and NarasiThha. 


CHAPTER CLXn. 

Sfita said : — Mah&tma Prahlfida, the son of Hirapyakatfyapu, saw 
with his supernatural vision that, hidden within Narasimha, who came like 
the cycle of death, there was Lord Vi§nu as cinders are embedded in the 
ashes. He was not the natural lion but Hari, the Lord of the Devas. Other 
demons, along with Hirapyakarfyapu, were highly astonished to see Nara- 
siihha, whose body was very extraordinary and who looked like the moun- 
tain of gold. — 1-3. 

Prahl4da said : — " 0 valitmt king ! the progenitor of the Daityas ! 
I have neither heard nor seen this divine Narasidiba form. How wonderful 
this mystic form is ? Whence has it come ? his formidable lionform seems 
to indicate to me that He will annihilate the demons. — 4-5. 

The Devas are all within this form and so are the oceans and the 
rivers. Huge mountians like the Himav&na, P4rip&tra, etc., the Moon, 
the stars. Sun, Vasus, Euvera, Varupa, Yama, Indra, the Maruts, the 
Devas, the Gandharvas, the Risis, the NAgas, the Yakipas, the Pi^chas, 
16 


122 


TUB MATSYA PVBABAM. 


the terrible Rtiksas, Brahma and ^iva, etc., all animate and inanimate are 
revolving in his head. Yourself, with Jambha and all the Daityas, myself, 
hundreds of your assemblies with hundreds of aerial chai iota and in fsict 
the whole of the three worlds are visible to me in his form. The whole 
universe is within this form, — 6-11. 

Prajapati, the high-souled Manu, planets. Yogas, tret'S, destruction, 
stability, intellect, pleasure, truth, asceticism, Dama, Sanaikumnra, Viave- 
dev&, the Risis, wish, anger, glee, righteousness, delusion. Pittris, are all 
confined within this form.” — 12-13. 

The king Hiranyaka^yapu on hearing those words of Prahlada 
addressed the other Danavas, He said “ This wonderful lion should be 
caught and in case there be any difficulty in its being captured, kill him 
outright.” — 14-15. 

Hearing those words, those powerful D&navas began to ill treat Him 
in all sorts of vicious ways and became ready to torment that Narasimha 
with their weapons. — 16, 

Then Narasinha after sending forth a loud roar, opened wide 
His mouth and began to breah down that assembly. After the assembly 
was devastated, Hiranyaka^yapu boiling with rage attacked Narasiihha 
with his arms. — 17-18. 

Like the pouring of the sacrificial offerings in the fire the demon 
showered the following missiles on Narasimha ; — The deadly club, Kala- 
chakra, Vi^ijuchakra, Brahmastra, the consumer of the three realms, the 
wonderful Vajrastra, the two other sorts of Vajrastras (dry and wet), the foi- 
midable trident, club, Mohanastra, Sosanustra, Santapanustra BilapanA.stt'a, 
VAyavSyastra, MathanAstra, Kapalastra, Kainkarilstra, f^akti, Krauhclulstra, 
Som&stra, Brahinailirastra, ^irfirastra, Kampaiiastra, SatanAstra, Tvastastra, 
deadly club, Tapanlstra, Samvariamastra, MAdanastra, ^lAyAdhara, Gau- 
dharvAsti’a, I)aita-x\siratna, Nandaka, Prasavanastra, PrainathaiiAatra, 
tJttamavArana, Pasupatastra, IlayaslirAstra, BrAhina-astia, NarayAnAstra, 
Aindrasti’a, SarpAstra, PaijfAchastra, Ajitastra, ^osauAstra, Saraanastra, 
Bhavanaatra, PrasthApanAstra, BikampauAstra. — li)-28, 

NoTB.— Visnu-astra, Brahm&stra, &c. were all different arrows that were used after 
reciting the prescribed mantras. Most of them have been described in previous chapters 
so only tho few new ones are explained in this note. 

sncraii =Lit. tho wheel of time. Deadly quoit, A particular kind of missilo, vgiwi 

=A destructive weapon of the thunderbolt. missilo whicli bewitcheh the person 

against whom it is used, particular kind of missilo. t^uwr:=A missile which 

and subdues the adversary. fiiRiu«=A missile that produces chill to kill tho foe. st wnua 
=A missile that shivers the foe. rswi^=Tho missile composed of the bright disc of sangyft 
trimmed off. tnmrai — The missile that produces heat. e’^S’litd=The missile that pro- 
duces destructive clouds. ^npiTW=The missilo that causes intoxication to tho foe. numnwi 
=Tho missile that divides into many. RSHSH^iziTho missile that causes excessive torture 
^nd destruction. particular kind of missilo. %v3iwi=.The missile sacred to Indra. 

qnrsiWi=A missile that creates fiends who fight and devour the foe. 9i*m<R=A particular 
fissile. Misni^=A missile causing a deluge. iwinniret=A missile causing the enemy to 
retire. ftsuRnWB— A missile causing palpitation and unsteadines to the foe. 

As the sun overshadows the Mount HimAchala by his rays daring the 
hot season, similarly did the valiant demon Hiraqyakai^yapu overpower 



OHAFTBB CLXIII. 


123 


Narasiihha witli the weapons. The angry demons drowned Narasiihha 
with their missiles as the Mount Main&ka is buried in the sea. — 29-30. 

Spears, nooses, swords, clubs, huge fiery trees, javelins, bolts, rocks, 
staffs, burning Sataghni and various other weapons were piled on Nara- 
8imli:i, one after the other. They did not wave a bit ; rather, they remained 
firm I ike the thunderbolt of Mahendra. — 31-32. 

The demons circled round Narasiihha like an encircling fire, holding 
their nooses and massive bolts, etc. They with their bodies and arms 
straight looked like Tristrsa Nftgap&sa (noose formed by three-headed 
serpents) — 33. 

Those demons looked like a multitude of big- winged white cranes 
with their gold and pearl garlands hanging on their handsome forms 
dressed in yellow robes. The armlets and earrings of those agile demons 
shone like the rays of the rising sun. All the demons were inspired like 
Vfiyu with vigour and energy, — 34-35. 

Narasiihha covered with the dangerous burning missiles of the 
demons looked dark like a mountain covered with big trees and clouds 
showering incessant rains, and with dark caves; but like the mighty 
Himalaya He did not move, inspite of so many blows ; He remained firm 
and steady.— 36-37. 

At which, the demons began to shiver with fear of Narasiihha blazing 
like fire ; they were agitated as the waves of the ocean become by 
blast of wind. — 38. 

Here ends the one hundred and eixty-seeond chapter on the power and 
glory of NarasiThha {Man-Lion.) 

CHAPTER CLXm. 

Sfita said : — A hoard of demons had various appearances, viz., like 
that of an ass, alligiitor, fish, serpent, deer, swine, rising sun, comets, half 
Moon, swan, blazing fire, cock, lion, with mouths wide open, crow, vulture, 
jackal, meteors ; some of them had two tongues ; others had faces like big 
sparks, some looked like mountains ; they were all very proud of their 
strength. They began to shower «rrows incessantly on Narasiihha, but 
He was not affected in the least. — 1-5. 

Afterwards, they became angry like furious hissing snakes and sent 
forth a volley of various kinds of terrible weapons which were all destroyed 
in the air and became invisible like a firefly in the mountains. — 6-7. 

The demons blinded with rage threw their mighty quoits at Nara- 
simha which illumined the sky as the sun and the moon at the time of the 
destruction of the universe. — 8-9. 

Narasiihha caught bold of and devoured the quoits shining like fire 
and thus their dazzle was lost as the sun and the moon are eclipsed by the. 
clouds; then Hiranyakaiyapu hurled his formidable bolt shining like 
lightning. — 10-12. » 

Narasiihha broke the flying bolt with His roar, Humk&ra, which fell 
clattering on the ground and looked like a shooting star falling from the 
heaven. — 13-14. 



124 


TRB MATSVa pmX'tiAU..- 


Tbe rows of arrows pierced into Narasidiha looked like the garland 
of the petals of the blue lotus. — 16. 

Afterwards Narasiihha with a loud roar tore up the demons as wind 
does with the leaves ; when the chief Daityas flew up to the sky and 
showered rocks from there and the whole space became full of them and 
they fell on the head of Narasiihha and gleamed like so many fireflies. 
Then the demons covered Narasiihha with the rocks as the mountains 
are covered with rain. But even then the demons could not move Nara^ 
sidiha as the violent ocean cannot move the Mandarfichala mountain.—* 
16-20. 

After the shower of rocks, rain poured in on all sides to kill Naia- 
siihha. The whole space pervaded with those fearful torrents but they did 
not touch Narasiihha. After the showers of rocks and |rain proved ineffec- 
tual, Hiranyakarfyapu let out fire conjoint with wind which Indra warded 
off by rain after which the demon created pitched darkness. — 21-27. 

The universe pervaded with darkness under the cover of which 
the demons again began to array themselves with arms, when Narasiihha 
shone forth like the Sun, and the demons saw the three wrinkles on the 
forehead of Narasiihha which were the trident mark looking like the stream 
of the Ganges flowing in three directions.— 28-29. 

, When all M&yas raised up by the Daityas were annihilated, the 
demons went for shelter to Hiranyakasiyapu with a heavy heart who burnt 
with rage and determined to destroy everything. At that Iioiir, the whole 
universe was covered with darkness (Tamas); and the following very 
strong, fearful winds began to blow as ominous signs: — Abaha, Pravaha, 
Vivaha, Ud^vaha, Parfivaha, Saipvaha and Parivalia ; and all tlie planets 
and asterisms visible at the time of the destniction of the world began to 
be seen in the sky. — 30-34. 

The Sun turned pale. The evil spirits, headless Tvavandhas, began 
to haunt in the sky and the full moon along with the stars began to be 
eclipsed. — 35. 

The Sun went below the horizon and seemed to spread his rays and 
He was visible also frequently in the sky.— 36. 

Seven fearful suns of the smoke colour were visible in the firmament. 
The planets were seen to reside in the horns in the Moon, ^ukra and Bfi- 
haspati were situated on the left and the right sides respectively there. 
Saturn and Mars and all the stars at the time of dissolution of the 
universe arrived at their places in the horns respectively. The Moon 
also did not welcome the asterism Rohini, indicating, as it were, the destruc- 
tion of the universe with planets and other stars. Rahu began to shadow 
the Moon, and meteors began to fall on Him as well as on the Moon. 
Devendra began to shower blood and meteors began to descend from the 
heaven and there was a fearful clattering noise. — 37-43. 

The trees blossomed and fructified ont of their seasons. The creepers 
also did the same to contribute to the other inauspicious signs for the 
demons. Fruits were produced from fruits and flowers from flowers. The 
.grave appearances of images of the Devas began sometimes to wink, 



CEAPTER GiXllt. 


125 


Rometimes to laugh, cry and shriek. Smoke came out of Them and They 
began to burri. — 44-46. 

The wild deer and birds mingling with the tame ones started a fear- 
ful noise in that fight. — 47. 

The water of the foul rivers flowed upwards and the particles of 
blood were diffused all round in the several quarters of the sky. — 48. 

The adorable trees were neglected and not worshipped. Huge trees 
were knocked to the ground by wind. — 49. 

In the afternoon the shadows of persons did not change. In the 
store*rooms and arsenal of Hirapyakadyapu, honey began to drop from the 
upper floors and at the same time many signs indicative of the victory of 
the Devas and the destruction of the demons were visible. — 50-53. 

Along with that valiant demon, the whole universe trembled ; the 
multitudes of the powerful serpents and high mountains began to tremble. 
The four, five and the seven-hooded serpents agitated and exhausted, 
hissed out their fiery venom. — 54-55. 

VSsuki, Tak^aka, Karkotika, Dhananjaya, Ail&mukha, KSliya, Mah&- 
padma and the mighty i^e@a and Ananta with thousand hoods began to 
shudder with fear, though they were very firm. The luminous beings 
within the waters supporting the universe, began to tremble with rage. 
Besides, the fiery serpents in the F&t^la regions trembled frequently. 
The wrathful Hiranyakatfyapu at that time biting his lips with rage 
stood up like the Adivar&ha the Boar incarnation, and caused the Ganges, 
the Sarayfi, the Kau^ik!, the Yamunfi, the KAveri, the KrignavenJ, the 
Suvaini, the Godavari, the Charmanvati, the Sindhu, the oceans, the 
Sonatirtha, the NarmadS,, the Vaitravati, the Gomatl, the Sarasvati, the 
Malii, the K&lamah!, the TamasA, the Puspavfthini, the Jambudvipa with 
the golden banyan tree, the gold producing Mahanada Lauhitya, the city 
Paftan inhabited by many of the Ri^is, and inhabited by the brave, 
Magadha, Mundi, Sunga, Sumha, Malla, Videha, Malava, KAsikosala, the 
realm of Garuda created by Vi^vakarmd and looking like Kailasa peak, all 
to quake. — 56-67. 

He also stunned the fearful Lauhityas&gara full of red water, the 
Mount Uday&chala 100 yojanas high encircled by clouds looking like golden 
altars ; the Ayomukha mountain adorned with golden trees, Sala, Tala and 
Tamala plantations ; with beautiful flowers and trees and bristling with all 
the ores ; the mount Malayachala diffusing strong perfume ; the countries 
of Saura§tra, Vfilhika, i^Qra, Abliira, Bhoja, Pjinidya, Vanga, Ealinga, Tdm- 
raliptaka, Ondra, Paundra, Vamachflda, and Kerala. He made the groups 
of the nymphs with the Devas tremble ; the mount Vidyutman, 100 yojanas 
wide, shining like lightning where there was the inaccessible hermitage 
of Agastya Ri^i inhabited by the Siddhas and Ch&ranas, echoed by the 
cooings of various birds, decked with flowering trees, with its high peaks 
soaring high into the Heavens like the Sun and the Moon ; the wonderful 
Risabha mountain, the mounts Kunjara, the irresistible Yi^al&kfta mount 
the river Bbogavati, the mounts Mali&sena, PSriyfltra, Chakrav&ha, Uttama- 
vSr&ha , the golden town of Prdgyotii^&pur inhabited by the wicked Naraka, 



126 


TEE MAT8YA PUBANAM. 


the mountain Megha, and other sixty thousand mountains all to tremble. 
-68-82. 

The Mount Sumeru glittering like gold, the cave^^ of which are 
incessantly full of the Yaksas, RSlki^asas and the Gandharvas ; the 
mounts Hemagarbha, Hemasakha, Kail&rfa, were all shaken by Hiranya- 
katiyapu. The lakes Vaikh&nasa with golden lotuses, the M&nsarovara 
surrounded by swans ; the mount Trieifinga, the river Kumari, the mount 
Mandarachala, the mounts Uslravindu, Chandraprastha, Prajapati, Puskara^ 
Devabhra, Renuka, Krauncha, the mount of the seven Risis, the smoky 
mount ; all these and other countries, rivers and oceans and all the realms 
were shaken. Kapila, VyAghravan, the son of Maht, the sons of Sati 
residing in the skies, the dwellers in the lower regions ; the Raudras, 
Crdhagas, Bblmagaa and other attendants of ^iva were also shaken by 
the demon. Afterwards Iliranj^akajJyapn took the club and the trid» nt and 
assumed a ferocious appearance. — 83-91. 

The demon, shining, moving and roaring like the clouds, the enemy 
of the Devas, rushed at Visnu when Narasimlia supported by “ Om,’' jninpod 
and tore the demon with His pointed nails. At the time of the destruction 
of the demon, the Earth, the Time, the IMoon, the sky, the stars, the Sun, 
the planets, the directions, the mountains, the rivers, the oceans were all 
delighted.— 92-94. 

Afterwards, the gratified Devas, tlie liislsand tlic Oandlnirvas, jointly 
praised the Eternal Visnu “ 0 Deva ! Your Narasiiidia form is adored by 
the learned, knowing the highest and the lowest. ” — 95 96 

Brahma said: — “0 Lord! Thou art Brahma, Rudra, Alahendra ; 
Thou art the foremost among the Devas. 'I'liou art tlie Creator, the Destroyer, 
the ultimate source of power to all the beings. The sages declare Tliee 
the Paramasiddha, Parama Deva, Paramamantra, J^aramahari, Parma- 
dharma, Parama ^arira, Parama Brahma, Parmayoga, Parama-vani. Thou 
art Pararaarahasya, Parmagati, Paramapada, Parma Deva. Tliou art 
ParAtpara, Parama Pada, ParAtpara Dova, Paiutpara Parama Bliuta, 
ParStpara Parara a Rahasya, Paratpara Parama Maliatva, Paratpara Parama 
Mahat, Paratpara Parama NidliAna, J^aratiiara Pavilra, Paratpara Parama 
Danta, the great Ancient Puruha.**— 97-102. 

Thus praising Narayana, Brahma went to Brahma-loka and after- 
wards various kinds of music began to l>e played, tlic nyjnphs began to 
dance. Vi^nu then went to the northern coast of the ocean K§irabdhi, 
whereafter establishing His Narasimlia form, He assumed Mis old form and 
returned to His realm riding on Garuda and seated in a magiiilicent 
illustrious chariot of eight wheels. — 103-105. 

NoTB.—irni highest attainment, ^=The highest God. ’•iwi=:The 

highest formula, vr'i ffi-=The highest sacrifice, \i^=The highest Dharma. 

The highest yoga. JUV old man. An epithet of Visnu. n^^The highest 

element, qq sr<p=:The highest Brahma. The Supreme Being. qnfi=Tho highest speech, 
^:f^=The supreme secret. •rfSi=Tbc chief refuge. ^’>1 q?j— Final beatitude, 
vftw:=sSupreraely chaste. — The supreme. q^umr^-Highor than the highest. 

Here ends the one hundred and sixty-third chaj)ter on the destmetion of 

Hira rtyakasyapu. 



quapteh clxiv. 


127 


CHAPTER CLXIV. 

The Rifis said : — “ 0 Sflta ! You have .described in detail the gloiy ol 
Narasiihha ; now tell us something more in detail about His other glorious 
works. How did this universe become the golden lotus ? What was 
the nature of Vi^^u’s creation inside the lotus ? ” — 1*2. 

Shta said : — Vaivasvata Manu was astonished to bear the glory of 
Narasiihha ; his eyes expressed great joy and he again asked the Lord. — 3. 

Manu said : — “ 0 JanSrdana ! During the P&dma Mah& Ealpa how 
was the universe first created in the lotus springing from Thy navel when 
Thou wert reposing in the ocean ? Thou art named Padmandbha ; how 
were the Devas and the Seers born first in the lotus springing up in 
the navel of Visnu? Yogavid^impate ! pray explain the whole of this yoga 
for I am not sufficiently satisfied by listening to an account of His glory. 
When did Visnu repose ? How long did He remain asleep ? What was 
the length of that period ? When did He awake fropa His sleep ? How 
did He create the universe after awakening ? Who were the Prajfipatis 
at the time of creation? How was created this wonderful eternal creation? 
On the annihilation of the moving and non-moving worlds, only a 
wide expanse of water remains. The Devas, the demons and the men 
were all destroyed. Fire, air, earth and Aka^a did not exist ; all were 
extinct. The whole universe seemed a big cave ; void as it were. How 
did then Jamlrdana rest ? What mode did He adopt ? That Lord of 
the great Bhhtas, that great form highly energetic, that knower of yoga, that 
Bhagavfin, the best of all the Devas. O knower of Dharma ! 0 Brahman ! 
I wish to hear all this with great devotion. Kindly describe in detail all 
this to me. Lord ! I am veiy eager to hear about these things.” — 4-14. 

Hearing such words of Manu the Lord Matsyasaid : — “0 Manu, the 
flower of the solar race ! It is very satisfactory indeed that you feel inclined 
to hear about the glory of Narayana. Hear about it as stated in the 
Pur&nas and the Vedas and as heard from the BrShmanas. I shall tell you 
what VedavySsa, the son of ParSifara, illustrious like Bfihaspati saw, by 
virtue of his great asceticism, in his vision.” — 15-17. 

(Veda Vyfisa said : — ) 0 Rigis ! There is no one other than me and 
the chief Risis, who can comprehend and adequately realize the Highest 
Nar&yana and 1 shall tell you as I have been able to form some idea about 
Him by the help of ray limited intellect and from what I have heard about 
Him. Even Brahmft, the Creator of the Universe, is not able to know His 
essence ; N4rayana is the mystery of all the Vedas ; He is what is proved 
there. He is the mystery of the Mahar^is, that for which all sacrifices 
are made ; the Tattva of all the seers, the Aim of the Thinkers, and the H e ll 
of the Wicked ; the Adhidaiva, the Daiva, the Adhibhfita, and the highest 
wisdom of the ideal Ri§is He is the Yajua as described in the Vedas 
Tapas as described by the poets. He is the Doer ; He is the Agent, He is 
the Buddhi, He is mind. He is K^ettrajua. He is OfikSra, He is the 
Pui’u^a, the Great Instructor, the Great Governor, and He is the only One, 
He is the five Pr&^as, He is the Eternal undecaying One. He is K&la, Pfika 
(friction), PaktS (awarder of fruits), the seer, and the study of the Vedas, 
He is this N&r&yapa Deva and there is absolutely nothing beyond ^m. 


123 


THE MATSYA VDRAI^AM. 


He is the Doer of eveiything. He is the Annihilator of all. He is 
the Creator of us all. He makes all work. He remains above all things. 
We are all in quest of Him and we all adore and worship Him. — 25-26. 

All the narrations, l^rutis, etc., tend towards Him. He is the Universe. 
He is the Lord of the Universe, Who is also known as Nftr&yana. He is 
Truth and Immortality ; He is Eternal, Past, Future and the Present, 
the Pur&na-Puru^a and Brahma.” — 27-28. 

Noes.— T he Supreme Lord. uf^=The highest saerifloe. «f^=The highest 
element. «its=])oer. %ii=Plaoe of orij^n. as «sn=:An epthet of Vifpu, 

Here ends the one hundred and ai«ty-fourlh chapter on the creation from 

the Lotus. 


CHAPTER CLXV. 

Matsya said : — O Manu ! The age of Satyayuga is foui thousand 
divine years. Its twilight is of eight hundred divine years. During that 
age the four feet of Dharma are complete and there is one part of adharma ; 
the people devoted to their own dhannas are born in that Yuga. 
All the Brahmanas are engaged in the pursuit of high class dharma. 
The K^atryas rule the Empire and are ready to please their subjects ; the 
Vairfyas take to agriculture, and the Sddras render menial service to the 
three castes. In that age, truth, cleanliness, and dharma increased and 
eveiy one followed and propagated the dharma practised by the high castes.* 
King ! The people in that age lead such a virtuous life and the low also 
keep themselves on the track of their dharma. — 1-5. 

The Tretfi, age lasts for a period of three thousand divine years and 
its twilight is of six hundred years duration. Two ptldas of adharma 
exist during that age and there are only three pAdas of dharma. There 
is truth and Satvagu^a in that dharma. The castes become vitiated 
with regard to their functions in that age and the disturbance weakens 
the Varnas. This is the cycle of TretA age, now I shall describe Dv&para 
and hear about it. — 6-9. 

O Manu ! the age of Dv&para is two thousand divine years and its 
evening is of four hundred years. In that age, all the beings are stupefied 
by Rajoguna and are jealous and mean. Dharma exists only twofold and 
adharma is , threefold. In Kaliyuga, the twofold dharma becomes extinct 
by and by. The BrA-hmanas lose their spirit and become lukewarm 
in their duties at the close of Dv&para and the fasts and vows become 
abandoned. — 10-13. 

Kaliyuga remains for a thousand divine years and its evening lasts 
for a couple of centuries. There are four feet of adharma during that age 
and dharma consists of only one. Men are overpowered by Tamoguna ; 
and they become sensuous during that age. The people of Kaliyuga are 
full of vanity and egoism and do not feel any love towards Jivaa 
None of them is predominent with iSatvaguna. None is truthful. The 
Br&hm an as become athiests, conceited, void of attachment and follow 
the duties of the Sfidras. During Kaliyuga the &rframas are upset and 
at the end of the age, the Vardas also become mixed.— ‘14:-18. 



6BAPTEn GLXVt 


129 


The pbribd of the aforementioned four yugas is 12,000 years, ’<yhe“ 
that pbriod elapses it makes one day of Brahm&. On the lapsbdf 
Brahinft’s one day, lilvara feels inclined to annihilate the creation on 
finding it apathetic. He destroys all the Devas including Brahmfl,, the 
demons, the Yakshas, the birds, the Gandharvas, the nymphs, the serpents, 
the mountains, the rivers, the creatures like scorpions, etc., and various 
kinds of insects. He also destroys the five elements. — 19-23. 

The destruction of the universe starts like that when Vipiju in the 
shape of the Sun absorbs thb eyes of all the beings, dries up everything 
in the form of wind, consumes every thing in the form of fire and sends 
forth heavy rain in the form of clouds.— 24. 

Here ends the one hundred and sixty-fifth chapter on the creation 

from the lotus. 


CHAPTER CLXVI. 

Matsya said : — Nfirfiyana, of Satva guna, in the form of the Su‘n 
absorbs the ocean by ^His piercing rays. After drying up the ocean He 
also similarly dries up rivers, wells, tanks and the mountains by His 
ra 5 ’’s. Then He penetrates the lower regions and dries up the moisture 
there and afterwards He dries up all the moisture produced by filth, 
secreta, saliva, etc., that exist in the bodies of all beings. Later on the 
liord in the form of the wind shivers everything and draws in all the 
airs such as Prnna, Apdna, Samana, etc. The Devas, and all the elements, 
are annihilated. — 1-6. 

The organ of smell, and the body become dissolved in earth. 
The organ of taste, and relish merge into water and the organ of 
vision, the power of seeing and forms dissolve into fire. The organ of 
touch, Frdna, and activities all mingle in air. Sound, the organ of hear- 
ing and sky dissolve in Akatfa. — 7-8. 

The Lord destroys the whole strncture of the universb in a mombnt 
when the minds, intellects and souls of all the beings get intp Vi^nU. 
Afterwards by virtue of the blowing wind, the trees and branches rub 
against each other and a big fire crops up and coiisumes evsrythingt. 
This fire is named Baipvartaka fire. This fire reduces everything to' a'sfaes 
during that period of annihilation. It consumes all the mountains, ' trees, 
bowers, creepers, reeds, vimdnas, divine cities and all the resting pladbB. 
Visnu, after consuming all the universe, requencheS the fire with con- 
tinuous downpour, divine rain and ghee at thb end of the age. 
The land then becomes full of auspicious water sweet like milk. It 
spreads all over the landscape and no living creature exists. — 9-17. 

Every being is destroyed, all the great essences merge in the body of 
Vi$ 9 tt'. Tha Suta, the Wind and the space becoming subtler disappear. 
The 'Whole universe exists in a very subtle state. At that time, Visnu 
drying up the oceans and the being therein by His ^lory reposes all 
by Himself. He sleeps ih that wide expanse of water for niUiiy thousands 
of yhgsS Whrtr nbae cttn corfr^yfAheiid the' Avyakta Vi^riit. — 18-21. 

17 



130 


TEE MATSTA PJJRAEAU. 


None can know at that time His manifested or unmanifested state ; 
who is that Purnsottama ? What yoga He resorts to ? Why does He resort 
to yoga ? What for and how long does He remain in that water and what 
shall He do in future ? No one can fathom all these truths. He is not 
seer, nor goer, ^ nor knower, nor remains with any body. He alone 
knows about His ownself or His desires. No one knows anything of 
Him. After thtis absorbing within His body, earth, water, fire, air, ether, 
the creator Brahmfi and the Great Munis, He goes to great sleep. — 22-24. 

Here ends (he one hundred and sixty-sixth (diopter on the creation 

from the lotus. 

CHAPTER CLXVII. 

Matsya said : — When there is one vast expanse of water. Lord Vi§nu 
covers the earth with water and sleeps on it in the form of a swan (Hamsa). 
One who thus sleeps in midst of this mass of waters and Rajas is known 
as the undecaying mighty armed Purfi§a named Brahma. That Lord 
Visnu dispels the Tamoguna by His glory and infuses the mind with 
Sattvagunas. This is the real supreme truth, and His true Jn&nmfirti (true 
knowledge). He is the goal of the Upanisadas and the mystery of the 
Aranyakas. He is the Yajnapuru§a (the sacrificial Lord) ; He is next to 
Him and He is again the Highest excellent person (parama puru?otlama). — 
1-5. 

The Ritwika Br&hmanas who perform and direct the performance 
of the sacrifices were first bom of Visnu. He created BrahmS first from 
His mouth, and then from His arms He created U<lgat&, Samaga, HotS, 
and Adhvaryu (the sacrificial priests). From His back came MitrSvaruna, 
Brahman&chhamsi, PrastotH, and Prati Pmslota. The PratihartA and 
the Potfi, Brahmanas were produced from the stomach ; AchAvSkas and 
Ne$t^ were born from his thighs ; Agnidhra BrAlnnanas from His 
hands ; Subrahamanya Brahmanas from His knees ; the UnnetA and JAtusa 
BrAhmanas were born from Ilis feet. Thus the Lord created sixteen 
excellent priests who performed the functions of all the sacrifices. 
Xiord Visnu, the very incarnation of the Vedas, rests in sacrifices. 
The Vedas along with the six ahgas which dictate karmas are also this 
Supreme Puru§a and nothing else. — 6-12. 

1 shall tell you the wonderful scene beheld by the sage MArka^- 
deya at the time of Lord Vi§nu’s repose in the vast speck of water all by 
Himself. Swallowed up by Lord Vi§nu, the sage MArkandeya remained 
within His belly by His glory for many thousands of years and began to 
wander about there. There he made pilgrimages to many places ; and 
he saw the sacred places, the holy hermitages, and the divine realms. 
He also beheld the wonderful countries, empires, various kinds of 
cities, etc. Then the sage devoted himself to meditation, to the perform- 
ance of sacrifices, Japams and Homas, and asceticism by virtue of which 
he slowly came out of Vi^pu’s mouth. He did not know at all when he 
entered in His belly or when he came out of His mouth. This was due to 
Lord’s MAyA. He saw the whole universe under the cover of Tamoguna 


CHAPTER GLXVIL 


131 


and that vast expanse of water. He was afraid. The sage was then 
bewildered and lost all hopes of life. On seeing Vis^u he seemed to 
have remembered N&r&yana and became glad. He became ^tonished 
and standing in that vast expanse of water did not know whether ha 
was dreaming or deluded. — 13-20, 

He said to himself “ What wonders have I seen ! surely this universe 
would not be so much fraught with troubles.” With such thoughts tha 
sage saw that there was no Sun, Moon, wind, mountain nor earth. What 
world was that ? While he was thinking thus, he saw a man sleeping, and 
floating like a mountain as if a cloud, half submerged on that water. He> 
was brilliant -like the Sun and even in that night He was luminous b^ 
His own splendour as if He was awake. No sooner the Muni MSrkandeya 
came to know who He was, then he immediately went again into 
His belly. — 21-25. 

Getting inside the belly of the Lord, Mdrka^d&ya thought of what 
he had seen outside as a dream, and like before went to many sacred 
places full of many hermitages and having many pools and streamlets- 
flowing in them. — 26-27. 

He also saw many people performing various sacrifices and hundreds 
of Bralmianas. The Brahmanas were all pursuing the highest path of 
duty and he also found the four orders well-established. In that way, the 
great sage Markapdeya passed a divine century within Vi§nu. But he 
could not find the end of the belly of Nardyana. — 28-30. 

Koth.-> A ll this is allegorical. It simply means that at the time of the dissolution 
of'the universe, everything becomes extinct, only the Lord remains with everything ab- 
sorbed within Himself and at the recreation of the universe, Ho gives birth to one after 
the other till the universe becomosQcompleto. 

Then after sometime coming out of Vignu's mouth, the sage saw a 
boy sleeping on the branch of a banyan tree. He was seen playing all 
by himself without any anxiety in the universe bereft of creation. The 
sky was covered with mist and the down below was a vast expanse of 
water There were no beings nor lives there. The sage was much 
surprised and tried, out of curiosity, to see the boy satisfactorily, but could 
not look at Him on account of His dazzling brilliancy. Then he thought 
to himself while floating on the water, 1 undoubtedly saw him before, but 
am doubtful as I might be deluded by Deva MayS. Then being amazed 
and struck with horror, the sage approached that boy swimming in the 
water. Then the Lord, in the form of that young boy, thundered to 
Mdrkan.<j6y^ Markandeya ! donot be afraid. Come near me. ” 

Hearing those words the tired sage said : — 31-37. 

“ Who is it that despising my asceticism summons me by name ? 
Who is despising my age of a thousand divine years? Even if you are 
Devas you ought not to behave with me in this way ; Brabm& even calls 
me longlived. Who is it that after practising rigid penances and leaving 
all hopes of life courts his destruction by addressing me by my name ?” — 
38-40. 

When M^rkandeya finished his wrathfiil speech, the Lord Madhu- 
sfidana said : — “ Son ! I am Purinapuruoa, Your progenitor. Why do 
you not come to me ? 1 am your father ; Your Guru. In former times 



TEE ^AT$7A PDEAmM. 


your father the sage A/igirasa o,^ored Me with great devotion and asceti- 
cism with the intention of begetting a son. Then, at the close of liis 
asceticism, he sought a most illustrious son which boon I granted 
and by virtue of the same he was blessed with you as a son. 0, 
M&rkandeya who can by his Yogic power see me dabbling like a boy at 
a period like this, unless He is blessed by me ? ” — 41-45. 

Afterwards, the great ascetic, the longlived sage Markandeya with 
folded hands and with eyes struck with wonder most devoutfully saluted 
Lord Visriu after reciting his name and Gotra. — 4647 

M&rkandeya said : — “0 Sinless one ! I am eager to know Thy this 
M&yS in truth. Thou art reposing in this expanse of water. Thou art 
in the form of a boy. By what name art Thou known in this universe ? 
Thou must be a very great soul, indeed ; else who can remain in this 
state. ** — 48-49. 

l^rf“Bhagavana said : — “ 0 BrAhmana ! I am N&r&yans. I am the 
Creator and Destroyer of all. I am known as xVnanta, SahsrasirsA, Sesa, &c. 
in the Vedas. I am that golden PoT*son, illustrious like the Sun. I am 
Brahmam&y& yajna among the sacrifices. 1 am Agni carrying oblations. I 
am the father of waters. I am Indra in his place. 1 am tlio Parivatsara of 
the years. I am the yogi, the cycle and the end of the cyle. I am present 

in all the beings including the Devas. 1 am the ^esa among the serpents 
and the Garuda among the birds. T am die end of all in the shape of 
Dharmar&ja. I am the dhavma of all the Aiiramas. I am the asceticism 
of all the dewellers in tlie hermitages. 1 am the divine river. 1 am the 
milk ocean Ksiroda. I am the suxn'eine truth. 1 am PrajApati. 
I am the Safildiya and Yoga, lam the liigliest place, the sacrifice, the 
Presiding Deity ov'^er learning. 1 am the Sun, tlie wind, the earth, the 
sky, the water, the ocean, tlie stars, the directions, the years, the moon, 
the clouds; I slqepin the milk ocean ; I am the conflagration tiro in the 
salt ocean. I drink up all the llavihs in the form of waters by means of 
saipyartaka fire. 1 am the Parama PurAina. 1 am the Creator of the past, 
fi:^turQ and the present. Brahmuna ! Avhalover you see or hoar about or 
think about, I am all those, I created this ut»i verso before and 1 am 
creating it now. MArkandeya! I create this whole universe at the end 
of each yuga and then support it. Hear about my dharmas by joyfully 
entering within My belly. Brahma along with the liisis and the Devas 
rests in My body. I am the Avyakta Yoga, again 1 am Vyakta, the enemy 
of the demons. You attain to me. 1 am the one-lettcrecl mantra and again 
the three-lettered mantra. J give dhanna, artlia, k&ma ; and again 1 am 
the giver of Mukti. I am the giver of salvation, 1 am “ Oiii ” the symbol 
of the sacred Trinity. ”—51-65. 

When Lord Visnu thus spoke to that sage, He suddenly swallowed the 
sage. Then the sage rested there in His belly in peace and was desirous 
of hearing about the. truth of eternal Vishnu. Ho lieard the sound 
“ Haibsa ” there, thus • — 1 am known as the eternal Uarfasa. It is 1 that 
remains in this great ocean bereft of the Sun and Moon and roam about 
slowly and again create the world by assuming various bodies. — 66. 

Here ends the one hundred^ and sixty-seventh chapter on the creation 
fxom the lotus. 




OBAfTWn GLXIZ. 


133 


CHAPTER CLXVIH. 

Matsya said : — That High Soul living in water began to practise 
asceticism there. Since then, the species of aquatic animals began to 
appear. Then that highly powerful Soyl wanted to create worlds and 
thought of the universe that is made up of five elements. In course of 
that conception, that ocean, void of air and space, became disturbed and 
by that disturbance the womb of the subtle universe was created, which 
being again agitated, begot mnall subtle holes and sound and it gave 
birth to air which found space and thus expanded. — 1-5. 

When wind ai^eared, there arose waves in the ocean } and when 
the waters of the ocean became agitated, the great VaitfvSnara fire appeared. 
This fire dried up the waters. By the lose of water there was an expan- 
sion of the space in- the small holes and the firmament appeared ; then 
the water, born of the fire of the Lord, beaame tasteful like nectar. The 
space in the holes <neated the sky oat of which came forth the wind and 
by thsir concussion, fire was produced. Then the Lord thought of Brahinfi 
and various other things for the creation of the cosmos.—- 6-10. 

The Lord selects, out of the Jivas on the earth, a qualified one for the 
post of Brabmti for tlie creation of the cosmos after the expiry of one thous- 
and Mahayugas (a MahSyuga-consists of four yugas). He who is a pure 
Soul, endowed with the powers of asceticism and highest knowledge, with 
the yogic powers and equipped with all the Aiilvaryas (.the powers and high- 
est excellencies), who is established in his self and purified by many births, 
is made such a Brahm&. In tliat great ocean, the great place of pilgrim- 
age, the infallible Hari, the creator of all the worlds, plays for some time 
and brings forth out of his navel a wonderful lotus of a thousand petals 
shining like the sun. That beautiful lotus, looking like the hairs of that 
High Soul was brilliant like fire and bright like the autumal Sun. That 
lotus of extravagant beauty began to shine. — 11-16. 

Here ends, the one hundred and sixty-eighth chapter on the creation 

from the lotus, 

CHAPTER CLXrX. 

Matsya said : — Afterwards Vianu, out of that golden lotus, begot 
Brahm^, the Creator of the Universe. The lotus was many yojanas wide, 
endowed with the qualities of the earth, full of all Gunas and all Tejas 
and of a golden colour. Brahma was highly energetic, the Greatest Yogi 
and the Creator of all the worlds, — l-S; 

The lefiTh^d describe the, very same lotus as the terra-firma, the 
Maharfis call it the. lotus horn of H&rlyapa. Rasd,, also known as Padm& 
Devi, is the, earth. The weighty portions of the lotus are the moun- 
tains. — 3-4. 

The mountains Himavfina, Suraeru, Nila, Ni§adha, KailSsa, Munja- 
vanta, Gandhamfidana, Punya i^ikhara, Mandarachala, Udayflcbala, 
Pinjara, Vindhyfichala, are the rendezvous- of the groups of the. Devas, 
Siddhas, Mah&tmfis and the pioua. — 5-7. 


134 


THE UATSTA PUElEAM. 


countries within these mountains form the Jambfldvlpa. The 
best distinguishing feature of Jambddvlpa is the performance of a great 
many sacrifices there. — 8. 

The nectarlike streams of these mountains give birth to many rivers 
which form places of hundreds of pilgrimages. — 9. 

'Ihe numerous ores, with which the mountains are full, are the best 
part of the lotus ; and the Mlechchha countries in the impassible mountains 
form on the petals of the lotus. The lower portions of the petals form 
the habitations of the demons, serpents and birds. — 10-12. 

The oceans near the residences of the demons are the sap of the 
lotos where the great sinners are drowned. — 13. 

Round the lotus-shaped earth exist four oceans on the four sides. 
By the mere contemplation of N&r&yapa, this lotus-shaped earth appears 
in existence. So this springing up of the earth is termed Pu^kara. 
Consequently lotus is called Puskara and for the same reason the high 
seers have enjoined the use of drawing the lotus before the performance 
of any sacrifice. — 14-16. 

In this way, Lord Vig^u has created the universe with mountains, 
rivers, lakes. Afterwards the infinitely powerful Vi^nu again begins to 
sleep in that great ocean. — 17-18. 

Here ends the one hundred and sixty-ninth chapter on the treation 
from the lotus. 


CHAPTER CLXX. 

Matsya said ; — When BrahmA. was practising austerities in the lotus, 
the gi'eat Asura Madhu appeared to cause him obstacles and the Asura 
Kaitabha full of Uajoguna also put on his appearance. They full of Rajo 
and Tamogivnas began to torment the universe. Wearing fine dress, having 
white, pointed and fearful teeth, adorned with coronets, armlets, those 
most valiant Asuras with bloodshot eyes, bloated chest, mighty arms, 
gigantic like the mountains, shining like the clouds, with faces like the 
sun, holding clubs like lightning, agitating the ocean with their feet, made 
an attempt to arouse Vi§nu from Ilis sleep. — 1-6. 

They, traversing through that lotus, saw the four-faced BrahmA, 
who was the best of the yogis, and who had a bright body— 7. 

BrahmA as directed by NurAyana was carrying on the work of the 
creation of the universe by His mental power. He was creating the 
people, the Devas, the demons, the Yaksas, the Risis, the MAnasa Ri^is, 
in course of which both the demons, wishing their death and agitated with 
anger, addressed the following sullen words to BrahmA : — 8-9. 

“ 0, lotus born one ! wearing white coronet and white dress, having 
four heads, void of grief ! How are you sitting here quietly ? Get out of 
it and fight with us, we are very powerful and if yon cannot face us, 
then speak, Who is your Creator ? Who has located you here ? Who is 
’your protector ? And what is your name ?” — 10-12. 



OBAPTBR CLXXI. 


13S 


Brahm& replied : — “ You ought to know the name, deeds and 
means of that one Supreme Being who is adored by the whole universe, 
who ha^) thousands of eyes and who is the unit. I see you are two ; 1 
wish to know your names and your object ; what do you do ?” — 13. 

]\[adhu Kai(abha said : — “ O wise one ! there is none superior to us 
in the universe. We envelope the universe with Kajo and Tamogunas. 
We are full of Rajo and Tamogunas. The Risis cannot transcend us. 
We are inviolable, we enshroud the dharma and nature of all the beings. 
Consequently, we cannot be overpowered by any being. The whole 
uiverse trembles with our fear. We are the givers of artha, kSma and 
svarga in course of the sacrifices during each Yuga. Those who attain 
comfort, pelf, happiness and fame, always adore us. We are happiness, 
pleasure, beauty, fame and every other thing what can be desired” — 14-17. 

Brahmfi spoke : — “ I have acquired Yoga with great practice 
and am full of satvaguna ; but the Supreme Being, the incarnate of 
Sattva, the great controller, the author of satva, rajasa and tamas gu^as, 
the Creator of the universe who only begets satva-bhfttas, will destroy 
you.” — 18-20. 

At that time the powerful Visriu stretched his arms by His MSyfi 
while asleep and both the demons were caught and drawn in and they 
looked like two monstrous birds hanging on His bands. — 21-22. 

Then both the Asuras saluted Vifnu and said “ we know Thee to be 
the Great cause of the universe. Thou art Purusottama, protect us. We 
are ignorant. Thou art the image of sattvaguna. We have come to see 
Thee. Deva ! Thy sight is not fruitless. We are eager to seek a boon 
from Thee, and we salute Thee.”— 23-25. 

^ri Bbagvdna spoke : — “ What for do you seek a boon ? You have 
completed your lives. Do you wish to live longer ?” — 26-27. 

Madhu Kaitabha said : — “ Deva ! let our death be at your hands, 
at such a place where others did not before experience their deaths. 
Grant us this boon ? ” — 28. 

l8ri-Bhagavdua said: — “ I speak this truly that both of you will be 
born great in the future age. Do not be doubtful about this.” — 29. 

Having said so, the Lord killed under His thighs both the demons 
who were the originators of Raja and Tamogunas. — 30. 

Here ends the one hundred and seventieth chapter on killing of 
Madhu and Kaitahha in the creation from the lotus. 


CHAPTER CLXXr. 

Matsya Mid :~The highly energetic BrahmS, the chief of the knowers 
of BrahmS, with His arms uplifted, began to practise severe austerities 
within the above mentioned lotus. Driving away all darkness with His 
lustre. He shone forth like the Sun. Afterwards, Vif^u, in another assum- 
ed form of a Yogfichfirya, appeared before Brahmfi as the Spiritual guide. 
The sage KapUa — the great Preceptor of S&hkhya — also appeared along 
with Him. Both of them went to Brahmfi singing His praises. Afterwards 




TUB MAT8YA PVBANAM. 


m* 

both the Professors oE the S&prhme kttowlerige and atloted by tho Risis 
spoke to Brahmst of immeasurable lustre, tlius It is BialmiA, who resides 
embracing the whole universe, who is tied fast witlx the knowledge of 
Brahnii and self, and who is worshipped by the three w'orlds, that is the 
Creator of all the Bhhtas; when the latter absorbed in Ills contemplation 
hearing their words, created by His yogic power, tho tlirce realms on the 
basis of the Brahinit Sruti. Brahma created a son from His desire who, 
immediately on being born, went to Him and said “ In What way shall I 
assist you ? ” — 1-9. 

Brahmk said : — “ O highly intelligent one ! Do as Nftr5j*ana, the 
Brahma incarnate and the Muni Kdpila instruct yoh.” — 10. 

Then that son of Brahm4 stood with folded Hands before those 
Br&hmanas and said “ Give me orders what to do.” — 11. 

Bhagav&na said : — “ Think of what is I'ruth, Eternal, and emancipa- 
tion. What is said to be true and undecaying is of eighteen varieties. 
What is true, that is Highest, follow that.” — 12. 

Hearing those words, that son of BrahraS, went to the north where 
helped by His intellect He attained, by degrees, Brahmahood. — 13. 

I'hen Brail nit\ created Bhuva a second son from His mind who also 
asked Him what assi.'itaiice he could render Him. Brahma told him to 
follow what the two Preceptors said and by their command he went down 
to the earth and began to study the Vedas from them. In time he 
attained the highest position. Brahma again created Ilis third son Bhur- 
bhfivah — the knower of Satikhya — in tho same manner, who also with tho 
directions of Brahma went to tho two Preceptors and obtaining knowledge, 
acquired the highest position like his two elder brothers. -14-18. 

Then the conditions of the three sons of Brahma are described. 
Nar^yana and Kapila both I’eturned to their abodes after taking with them 
the three sons of Brahma. — 19. 

Brahma commenced again His rigid penances, after NarSyana and 
Kapila had left Him. Then Brahma, in course of His practices, did not 
feel any comfort and happiness, for those [whom be liad created] were 
single. He created a beautiful woman from His body by virtue of Ilia 
tapasya. — 20-21. 

She, by virtue of Her austerities, equalled Brahma and was gifted 
with the faculty of tho creation of the universe. Brahma thus engaged 
in creation, first created the three-footed Gayatrl, adored by the Vedas 
and then the Prajapatis and the oceans. — 22-23. 

He also created the Vedas from the same Gayatri. Then, He created 
those Prajapatis who were like Him and through whom this universe and 
all the beings have been created. — 24-25. 

The highly ascetic and the most illustrious soil, named Virfveda 
Dharma was begotten first who was followed by other sons named, Dak^a^ 
Marichi, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Vasiijta, Gautama, Bhpgai Afigir&, 
and Mann. The highly wonderful liit^is have followed thirteen paths' of 
dharxtta.— 26-28. 

The* twelv^-daughtUrs, Diti, Dsira, Kalfi, AnH;^, Sbfahi&ll, 



CHAPTER OLtKL 


137 


Mnni, T4mrft, KrodhS, Surad^l, Vinata, and Kadrfl were born of Dak^a. 
Tlie s;igo Marlchi produced Kadyapa from liia lustre and Dak§a gave his 
tvvelvi' daughters in marriage to Karfyapa and gave twenty-seven daughters, 
that is, the twenty-seven asteristns beginning with Rohi^i, to the Moon. 
Brahiiiti created tlie five maids named Laksrui, Marutvati, S&dhya, ViiveilS, 
and Sarasvati who were married to Dhartnaraja : the Consort of Brahm& 
of great beauty and having the form of K&ma, stood before Her Lord as 
Sariil>hi, when He with the view of producing cows for the benefit of 
the world enjoyed in Her company when she gave birth to many smoke 
coloured progeny of huge bodies. — 29-36. 

All those sons, dark like the night and sombre like the evening 
clouds, began to cry and despise BrahmA ; and in consequence of their 
crying and running away, they were named Rudras. They are : — Niifiti, 
Sambhu, Aparajita Alrigavyadha, Kapardi, Dahana, Kbara, Ahirabradhnya, 
Kapali, Pihgala, and the most illustrious Senfint, these are the eleven Rudras. 
Yogai^vari cow was also born of that Surabhi cow as well as the lower 
animals, goats, swans, high class drugs. Dharma produced Kdma from 
Lak$imt, the Stldhya Devas were born of the lady of the same name 
SadhyS.— 37-42. 

Bhava, Prabhava, l4a, Asurabantd, Arucia, Aruni, Vis’vfivasu, Bala, 
Dhruva, Ilavisya, Vitana, VidliSna, Samita, Vatsara, Bhuti, and Suparva 
were all born of Sadhya through Dharma ; and, similarly, the Devi Sudevl 
gave birth to the eight Vasus, viz. — Dbara, Dhruva, Viivavasu, Soma, Apa, 
Yama, Vayu, and Nirriti. It is also heard that dharma begot from VHva 
the Viilvedevas. — 43-48. 

Visveia gave birth to the mighty armed Daksa, Puskaravana, Chftk- 
§u8a, Mann, Madhu, Mahoraga, Vibhrantakavapuh, Vala, Viskambha, and 
Garuda, illustrious like the Sun.Marudvati gave birth to the Marut devas. — 
49-51*. 

Agni, Chak§u, Ravi, Jyoti, Savitra, Mitra, Amara, Saravristi, Sukarsa, 
Virfit, Vati, Vitfvavasu,-Mati, Asivamitra, Chitraraiimi, Ni§adhana, Hily- 
anta, Baj-aba, Mandapannaga, Brihanta, Brihadrfipa, and Pfitananuga are 

the Maruts. Aditi Devi gave birth to the twelve Adityas from Ivasfyapa. — 
52-55. 

They are Indra, Visiiu, Bhaga, TvastA, Varuna, Arj^ama, Ravi, Pu§a, 
Mitra, Dhanada, Dhata., Parajanya. These are the best of the dwellers in 

Heaven. Aditya begot from Sarasvati two sons who were gifted with 
highest attributes and were great ascetics. Danu gave birth to DAnavas 
and Diti brought forth the Daityas. — 56-58. 

K&la gave birth to Kiilakeya Asuras. AnAyusfi gave birth to fearful 
diseases. Siihhik& begot Grahas ; Munis gave birth to the Gandharvas, 
T4mrfi was the mother of the Apsaras, Krodha gave birth to the Pifi'ichas, 
Yak^as and the llAksasas. — 59-61. 

Surabhi begot quadrupeds and cows ; VinatS produced Garu4a and 
other birds. — 62. 

Kadrfi was the mother of the mountaius and the -serpents, and in 
such a way the universe multiplied. — 63. 

18 



138 


TIIB MAT87A PURAtJAM. 


0 King ! In such a way the lotus Puskara was produced by Visnu 
and the creation emanating from it is known as Padmasristi. 1 have thus 
described the glory of the Ijord Vi§nu — the Purfinapuj nsa — before you, 
and the Rl§is, all pray to Visnu the Prime cause of all. — (. 1-05. 

One who heai's this Pur&na, specially on the days of the festivals, 
goes to heaven after enjoying all the best comforts in the world. — GO. 

One who pleases Lord ^rikri^^a by sight, words, and mind is shown 
kindness also by the Lord. — 67. 

And, as fruits (of devotion). Kings acquire Kingdoms ; poor men get 
riches, a man of short life gets longevity and people desirous of sons are 
blessed with sons. — 68. 

Devotion to Visnu begets the benefit of sacrifices and of the reading 
of the Vedas, all desires and the benefits of asceticism, various kinds of 
riches and other virtues. — 09. 

He attains what he desires. King ! one who listens to the glory 
of the lotus, forsaking everything, never gets any pain. Such is the des- 
cription of the lotus creation which I have described to you as narrated by 
Vedavyasa and the Srutis. — 70-71. 

Here ends the one Immlrcd and setcnty-fivst chapter on the 
creation from the lotns. 


CHAPTLil CLXXri. 

Matsya said : — Now hear how Visnu attained Vismihood in Safya- 
yuga; how he attained Vaiknntha amongst the Dovas; and how ho attained 
Krisnahood amongst the human beings. The deeds of tlio Lord are indeed 
impervious, king! now hear about the past and the future manifestations 
of Vi§nu.— 1-2. 

The mystic Visnu is known as N:lr:1ynna through discernahle mani- 
festation. He is also called Anant-utma and Avinaili Pralthu. When tlie 
eternal Hari became engaged in the form of Nnr.ayna in creation, lie 
manifested Himself as Brahma, Vayu, Soma, India, liharma, Bfiliaspati, 

^ukra, etc., Visnu was also born as the son of Aditi in consecpience of 
which He is also called Upendna, the younger brother of fndra; He 
manifested Himself to destroy the enemies of the Devas such as the 
demons, the Daityas, the Rfdc^asas. — 3-0. 

The Supreme Spirit Ntlrfiyajia first became the Pradh&nfitmfi. and 
created Brahmil and the latter created the worthy Prajapatis in the 
previous kalpas who contributed to tho great multiplication of the men 
and other beings. The eternal Akhanda Brahma was divided by the 
Prajftpatis in many parts. The doings of Visnu have been thus described. 
Now listen to llis mundane glory. — 7-9. 

Wlien Vritrasura had been killed in the Satyayuga, the Tilrak&maya 
war renowned in all the three realms took place ; in course of which the 
demons showed marked valour and began to destroy the groups of the 
Devas, tho Yaksas and the Rfiksasas. — 10-11, 



OHAPTBli CLXXIL 


139 


“I’lie Dovas and the Riik^asas, acknowledging themselves vanquished, 
wont t') seek the help of the Lord Ndrayana ; whilst those demons, burning 
like cinders, after eclipsing the Sun, the Moon, the clouds and other stars 
began to spread in the sky. The clouds, highly charged with electricity, 
began to thunder and rain, when all the seven kinds of winds began to 
blow. At that time the deafening din created by thunder, rain and wind 
was most fearful, and it appeared as if the whole firmament was going 
to be consumed. Thousands of meteors began to fall. The Divine chai’iota 
also fell down on the ground after being tossed in the heavens. It looked 
as if the annihilation of the universe was in progress. In course of that 
terrible, calamity the lustre from every one’s face was gone. It was pitch 
dark, and the ten directions were under cover of dense darkness. — 12-18. 

The Goddess Kdlt wandered about in the sky, when even the Sun was 
entirely covered with the massive folds of darkness. At that time. Lord 
Visnu, dispelling the huge piles of darkness by His arms, shone forth 
witli His glory and Ills blue appearance. — 19-20. 

The Lord shone like the sombre clouds, soot and the mountains ; His 
body looked like cloud and collyrium. Even the hair (on his body) looked 
like clouds ; by Ilia lustre and appearance lie looked like a blue mountain. 
He was dressed in yellow and wearing ornaments glowing like burnished 
gold, His complexion resembling the colour of the smoke arising at 
the time of the destruction of the universe ; He had four arms ; hence, 
Ilis shoulders looked moro yellow. Ilis shoulders were broad, wearing 
a diadem, armed with high class weapons bright as Heavens, majestic like 
the mountain, having serpentlike arrows in His quiver, and Handaka axe 
and ^akti ; holding conch, quoit, club and the lotus, He looked like 
a mighty mountain, Forgiveness is the base whereof ; Prosperity its tree ; 
the Sarafiga bow is its peak. — 22-25. 

The celestial ladies formed its leaves and various chariots, trees and 
rainwater, its oozings ; and in such a way, it became the illuminator of 
all the realms and the source of rejoice to all. — 26. 

Knowledge and egoism formed its essence ; the chief elements formed 
its sprouts. 'J'he numerous variegations were the loaves, the stars and 
planets formed the flowers, the world of the demons formed the trunk of 
the tree. The Visnu mountain thus appeared in the world. — 27-28. 

It looked like a huge reservoir resembling the ocean resting on 
the Rasatala. It was covered with the massive network, even difficult 
for the lion to seek his rescue and adorned with birds, animals and 
various beings, thus conducing to the common welfare of all the Lokas. 
Adorned with the aroma of modesty and wealth, the unspeakable endless 
Bhavas (feelings) formed the waters thereof. The manifested Ahafikfira 
formed the froth ; the planets and stars formed the bubbles. — 29-30. 

The elements were the crests, the asterisms were the bubbles, the 
Vimfinas were the bix’ds, it was agitated by the clouds. All the men and 
beings were its fish ; the rows of mountains formed the couches ; the three 
gunas were its eddy, the regions were its alligators, fishes, etc., the warriors 
were its creepers and saplings, the snakes were its reeds, and the twelve 
Suns were its great islands. The eleven Rudi-as were its cities, the eight 



140 


mB MAmi wmbam. 


Vasns, its mountains ; the Sandhyas formed its waves ; and birds 
formed the air thereof. The demons were the crocodiles. The Yaksas 
and the serpents were the huge fishes, BrnhmA was the supreme valour, 
the women were the gems, Sri, Kirti, Kanti and Laksmt were the 
rivers. The Yogas and the great festival occasions found their origin and 
end in Him. The Devas became consoled at the sight of such a 
Ndrayana. — 31-36. 

Tlien Narayana, looking like such a vast ocean, the Lord of the Devas, 
the Giver of the boons, the Most Clement on the devotees, the Giver of 
peace, seated in a chariot streaming with the banner with the symbol of 
Garuda, became visible in the firmament. — 37-38. 

In other words, the stars, the Moon, the Sun, gleaming like the 
Mount Suineru bedecked with the starry flowers, the Dispollcr of fear, 
seated in an excellent divine chariot, the Lord Visnu was visible to Indra 
-and the other Devas on the aerial track. — 39-41. 

Seeing Him, all the Devas with folded hands ?houtcd out victory, 
took Ilis refuge, and explained to Him the whole situation ; when tho Lord 
determined to put an end to all the demons in the war and said to tlie 
Devas : — Devas ! be calm and do not fear. I sliall now conqiier all the 
demons and you shall possess tho Empire of the three realms.” Being 
pleased with such nectar-like words of tho truthful Lord, the Devas return- 
ed to Their regions, and after that all the darkness w^as dispelled and tho 
clouds were dispersed. Pleasant wind began to blow, calm reigned 
in each direction, and all tho stars, regaining their brilliance, began to 
circuinbulate the Moon. The celestial fight of the planets ceased, the 
oceans became calm, the dust storms subsided, and peace in all the realms 
was restored. The roads became clear and the threefold Devas looked bright 
and cheerful. The agitation from tho rivers disappeared, the devotees 
came to their senses, the hearts and senses of the townsmen became jolly. 
Maharsis started the chanting of the Vcdic hymns loudly, without any 
sorrower grief, and the fire began to accept, the saiuificial oITcrings. The 
Universe became peaceful, and the Dhurmas wcio again established. All 
the beings became elated, and all the Oevas hearing the resolution of 
the Lord Visnu to destroy tlie demons, became highly delighted. — 42-51. 

Ilere ends the one hundred and seventy-second chapter on 
Tdrakaiiiaya fujht. 


CHAPTER CLXXIII. 

Matsya said : — The demons liearing those fc^arful words of Visnu 
made great preparations, and left no stone unturned to gain the battle. 
At that time, the demon Maya took his seat in an imposing golden 
chariot, measuring 1,200 cubits, gliding on four liuge wheels, its extensive 
yoke jingling with little bells and covered with the tigerskin, with birds 
worked out in precious stones, full of various weapons, rumbling like the 
thunder of clouds, decorated with lofty turrets touching the sky, teeming 
with clubs, plaited with gold, streaming the golden banner shining like 


CHAPTER GLXXIII. 


141 


the Sun, and the Mount Mandar&chala, painted black like the snake and 
tiger spots, drawn by gigantic bears, the breaker of tlie enemy’s chariots. 
Seated in sucli a majestic chariot the valiant demon looked like the sun 
rising on Mandanlchala. — 1-8. 

TarakAsura seated himself in a lofty chariot of gold, looking likfe a 
mountain and making terrible noise, having its motion unimpeded, which 
was plaited with Iron, having wheels of the same metal, dispelling dark- 
ness by their glitter, rumbling like the clouds, decorated with ina^JIMve 
net work of iron over the windows, full of clubs, spears, nooses, axes etc., 
all made of iron, yoked by a thousand asses, and shining like another 
mountain Maiidara from a distance. — 9-13. 

The demon Virochana came furious with anger, armed with a club, 
looking like the Mount Achala in that army. The demon Jla^’agriva came 
in his own chariot, with a following of thousands of demonsand chariots. 
The demon Vanlha, immensely extensive in bidk, with his bow drawn 
measuring thousand kiskus, came to the field like a mountain pushing 
on his chariot. TIio demon Khara came cliarged with great conceit 
and wrath, his lips and eyes throbbing. — 14-17. 

The valiant demon Tvasta, riding on a chariot drawn by eight ele- 
phants, went round the army to see that all the phalanxes of the demons 
were ready. Viprachitti’s son, the demon 6veta, also came with his white 
earrings, Arista, the son of Bali, came armed with rocks, and began to use 
them as missiles. — 18-20. 

The demon Kiiora came with his fresh energj^ and looked like the 
sun in the midst of dark clouds. And so did many other demons, wearing 
armours. The demon Laraba, fully bedecked with hanging pendants, 
shone forth like the Sun, through the mist in his army. Rahu also came 
biting his lips, gnashing his teeth and with eyes disturbed with anger. — 
21-23. 

Rahu stood before all the demons smiling and many other demons 
came riding on horses, several others came riding on elephants. — 24. 

Many came riding on the lions, sheep, bears, mules, camels, boars, 
several ferocious looking demons came on foot. At that time, the demons 
with only one or half a leg, in their eagerness for war, began to dance and 
began to terrify the Devas, shewing their hands and holding clubs, pari- 
ghas, stones, musalas and other terrible weapons in their hands. Several 
roared like happy lions, and came waving their arras with glee.— 27. 

Those demons armed with clubs, Pas a, Prasa, Parigha, Tomara, 
Ankusla, Patti4a, Sataghnls, SatadhA,ras, GandasJaclas, iron Parighas, 
discus, etc., began to cheer up their own armies. — 28-30. 

Thus the demon army, full of conceit and perseverance, looked 
furious like clouds, and assembled before the Devas. The thousands of 
the infuriated demons looked shining like the wind, fire, mountain, 
water and clouds, and became mad for war. — 31-32. 

Here ends the one hundred nnd seventy-third chapter in the 
Tdrdkamaya battle. 



142 


TUB UAT&YA WHABAM. 


CHAPTER CLXXIV. 

Matsya said : — 0 son of the Sun ! You have heard about the force of 
the demons ; now liear about the strength of the army of the Devas. 
The twelve Adityas, the eight Vasua^ the eleven Rudras, the two Ajivinik- 
iimaras, wearing their annoui-s and followed by their men, appeared in the 
fieM. The thousand-eyed Indra — the lord of all the Devas — came on his 
great chariot, and marched himself before the Devas, to kill the enemy of 
the Devas. His chariot was also placed in the centre of the army. Indra 
then took his seat in that illustrious chariot going swiftly like Garuda, 
gliding on beautiful whcch. hdaid with gold and gems, containing his 
famous weapons, such as thunderbolt, ek\, surrounded by the Devas, the 
Yaksas and the Gandharvas, adored by the Bralnnarisis, conjoint with 
lightening clouds, going at their will. At tlial time, he was adored by the 
Brahmanas. Riding on such a chariot, when Indra goes round the earth, 
the sacrificial priests chant various hymns to him . — 1 7. 

Various kinds of music wore pla 3 ’e(l in tlie heaven, hundreds of 
nymphs began to dance. In their midst the chariot looked beautiful like 
the rising ‘Sun on the Udayacliala mount. It was drawn hy a thousand 
horses, swift like the mind ami wind. At that linjo, the chariot controlled 
by Matali look-jd handsome like the Mount Smucru illumined by the Sun. 
Dharmaraja came armed with his formidable club, and took his 
stand in the army of the Devas, causing terror to the demons by llis 
roars, — 8-11 

The handsome Varuna also appeared in the field, along wdth tlie four 
oceans, serpants lashing their tongues, wearing garlands and jewelled 
ornaments, armed with liis deadly noose, riding on the horse shining 
like the moon-beams, dressed in variegated coloured robes ; and awaited 
the hour of war. He then appeared like the oceans agitated with billows. 
Kuvera, the Lord of the Yak.^as, the iMksasas, Kinnaras and tlie 
riches, armed with a club, made His appearance seated in his Pnsiiaka 
Vimana, wdtli Yaksas, Rtiksasas, Guliyakas and conch shell and lotus etc. 
His carriers wore men. — 12-18. 

The liOrd Siva came then riding on a veiy big bull. India took his 
stand in the east, Dharmaraja in tlie south, Vanina in the west and 
Kuvera in the north. Tlie valiant Dikpalas guarded their respective 
directions as well as the army of the Devas. The God Sun also came 
in His chariot, drawn by seven swift horses having beautiful reins, moving 
round the Meru, illumining the TJday^iicliala and Astachala mountains, and 
giving light to all the realms, adorned witli many rays, shining with His 
own lustre, the Lord of the twelve Adityas thus graced the battlefield. 
-19-23. 

The demons behold the Lord Moon who came to the battle, mounted ou 
a chariot drawn by white horses, adorned with white and cool raj^s, pleasing 
to the worlds, followed by all the Naksattras, the Lord of the Brahmanas, 
the Dispeller of nocturnal darkness, the receptacle of thousands of 
herbs and nectar, looking like a portion of the universe ; and riding on 
white horses and holding in his hands weapons causing cold, — 24-27. 



OHAPTBR GLXIV. • US 

Yftya, the creator of fire, the Lord of all, the omnipreseat in .all 
'the seven tunes and the sounds, the foremost of all the eIem^nts, the 
formless, the easily -accessable to heaven, the producer of sound, ^and five- 
fold Pr&na of all the beings, the life of all, bursting with his own force ; 
also joined the army of the Devas, followed by clouds and caused great 
pain to the demons by His violence. — 28-31. 

The Devas with the Gandharvas and the Vidy&dharas waved their 
swords, which looked like serpents that had lately cast off their skin, 
and thus began to play. The gigantic serpent Lords, infusing their venom, 
into the arrows of the Devas, made the smaller of their species to bodily 
merge into the arrows. Many other Devas armed with huge rocks, trees, 
etc., became ready to hurl them at the demons.— 32-34. 

The highly powerful Lord Visnu, from whose navel sprang the lotus, 
who assume s the form of fire for the destruction of the world, the eater of 
the sacrificial oblations the cause of the entire universe, the giver of Peace, 
armed with the club, also adorned the great field of battle with His garucla, 
like the rising Sun on the Mount Uday^chala. — 35-37. 

Visnu held his lustrous chakram in His right hand ; the discus looked 
like the rising Sun, as if ready to destroy the enemies.— 38. 

He held in His left hand the huge club of a black colour ready to 
annihilate the enemies; and Ho held other weapons such as Saranga bow, 
etc., in His other hands. — 39. 

Lord Nartiya^a rode on His illustrious Garuda the son of Ka^yapa, eater 
of snakes, going more swiftlj”^ than the wind, agitator of the sky, roaming 
in the air, looking beairtiful with snakes in his mouth, looking like the 
lofty klandara mountain after the churning of the ocean, who had shown 
his valour many times in the fight between the Asuras and the Devas, 
with his body having the mark of the thunderbolt of Indra hurled on him 
for stealing nectar, having crest on the head, highly powerful, ornamented 
with golden ear-rings, having garments of variegated leaves, looking like a 
golden mountain, shining with the splendour of the gems on the hood of the 
snakes that he held in his mouth with his wings, looking like clouds with 
rainbows, overspreading the heavens, and with red, yellow and blue banners 
streaming in the air, of huge body, the brother of Aruna, and the best of 
those who roam in the air. Riding on such a Garud.a, Vi§nu made His 
appearance. The moment Lord Visnu appeared riding on His mighty 
Garuda, all the Devas and sages followed Him and began to sing His 
praises with verses, all Mantras. •- 40-48. 

Kuvera, Yama, Indra, Dharmardja and the Moon went ahead of the 
Lord, illumined by the rays of the Moon, and at the same time Brihaspati 
blessed all the Devas saying “ Let good come to the Devas ” and 
Sukrfichfirya blessed also the demons, uttering their welfare. — 49-50. 

Se?'e ends the one hundred and seventy-fourth chapter on 
Tdrakdmaya fiyht. 



lU 


TliB hfATSYA PVnA^AM. 


CnAETER CLXXV. 

Matsya said: — A tremendous battle ensued b( Uvecn the Devas 
and the demous and every one, eager for victory, took up his arms and 
iJtood like a mountain in the battleliold. The haughty warriors, repre- 
senting the forces of dharma and adliarma, respectively, waged a fierce 
battlei where they displayed both vanity and modesty. — 1-3. 

Afterwards the sky was covered with moving chariots, advancing 
herds of elephants, and warriors leaping with sword in hand. The falling 
of arrows and clubs, and the twanging bows created a din like the thunder- 
ing of clouds at the time of the annihilation of the universe, causing a 
great terror to the creation. — 4-6. 

The demons began to hit the Devas by hurling clubs and huge rocks 
at them, which caused the valiant Devas, eager for victory, a great 
suffering, and the Dovas hurt with the weapons, with their heads powdered 
with clubs and their chests smashed by the demons, began to vomit blood. 
The Devas could not do anything when they were entangled in a 
network of arrows by the demons. Thus overpowered by tho 
demons they couhji not do anything. The3'^ could not use their arms and 
appeared like the dead acknowledging themselves beaten by their foe, 
-7-11. 

Seeing that, tho tcousaml-eyed Indra dispollcd those huge piles of 
dreadful arrows by his thunderbolt and ellcctcd his entrance in tho 
ranks of the demons. Devastating the army of tlio dcmr'ns, he created 
darkness bj* letting out his d’amus astra when the demons could not see 
one auother. Tlie J,)cvas bccamp free'! of tlio i\J'y;i of tin' Dmnnus whicli 
Indra drove away by lus lustre, and llimi llifv hugun to kill tlio demons 
with great caution. Tliou the demons iif bluish lia/o begiiii to fall down 
like mountains with tlioir wings seveued. — ll'-Id. 

When the demons began to be anriihilaf»-(l in great nHin])ers, Maya 
spread tho M.'iya of Drvi ami dispelled the darkness, and created fearful 
fire like tho one fliat prevails at tho time, of llio destruction of the world, 
which started tlie devastation of the Devas, whilst the demons again took 
up a firm stand. Tlie Devas seriously belaboured by Orvils fire, went 
to seek the protection of India and the Moon. The Devas, burnt by 
Urva fire and tlioir souses benuined roiiorted tho whole matter to Indra. 
—17-21. 

Seeing such a fearful chaos, Vanina prompted by Indra said : — 22. 

“ Indra ! Aurva has been created by^ tlio Braliraarisi’s sou Drvfi in 
ancient times. The Brahmarisi became like Brahma by means of his asce- 
ticism. — 23. 

Note Anrva. A celebrated Ri.si, Tho sons _ot Kflrtavirya with the desire of des- 
troying tho family of Aurva killed even tho children in the womb. Quo of iiio women 
in tho family, however, in order to proHorvo her embryo secreted it in lier thigh (Orn), 
whence tho child at its birth was called Aurva. Beholding liim tho sons of Kfirtavirya 
were struck with blindness and his wrath gave rise to a flame which threatened to 
consume tho whole world, had he not at the desire of the Pi Iris cast it into the ocean 
whore it remained concealed with the face of a horse. Anrvftnftla is also known as 
Vaaav&gni or Vadavanala. It is tho submarine fire. 



CHAPTER CLXX7. 


145 


Then the Mahar^is and the Devas began to pray to the sage Crva 
who was shining like the Sun by virtue of his asceticism. — 24, 

The demon Hira^yakaiiyapu &l 80 appeared there. The Brahmar^is 
then said ‘ Bhagviin ! this Your attempt is to root out the race 
of (he Bi^is. You are the only survivor and there is none in your 
family and you are devoting yourself to rigid austerities in the flower 
of your life. So many sages are all by themselves without any off- 
spring and in the same way the families of the Risis have died out 
ated in the absence of any progeny. The Ri^isis look_ entirely cut off 
from the world. You have become illustrious like Praj&pati by virtue 
of your asceticism, but you should also beget a son for the continuance of 
your family. You have renounced householder’s life ; therefore create 
another body by getting another soul out of your owp.’ — ^25-30. 

Those words went deep into the heart of tlrva who despising these 
Ri^is said ‘ the highest duty of the Ri^is/'as enjoined by the Sistras, is to 
pass their days in the forest, living on the produce of nature, for a BrSh- 
ma^a ought to strictly observe Brahmacharya. In that case be can shake 
the position of Brahm4. The householders have threefold duties 
to discharge, but those of them living in the forest ought to follow our ways. 
The Risis living merely on water, air, grain and dn things powdered 
by stones, simply warming themselves in the fires burning all round them, 
practising Dasatap&h and Panchatapdh, all of them thus pursuing the 
course of rigid asceticism, seek final emancipation by leading a life of 
celibacy.— 31-36. 

A true Brfihmapa becomes as such only by virtue of Brahma- 
charya, and others, knowing what Brahmacharya is, also say that fortitude 
is established in Brahmacharya. And asceticism is also established in 
the practice of Brahmacharya. The BrShmana fixed in his austerities is 
really enshrined in heaven. There is no Siddhi without Yoga, and there 
is no fruit without Siddhi. There is no higher name and fame than 
Brahmacharya which is the root of all. — 37-39. 

There is no greater ascetic than the one who strictly follows 
Brahmacharya by subduing all his passions. — 40, 

It is hypocricy to grow long hair without asceticism, to pursue any 
vow without any resolution, and to practise TapasyS without Brahma- 
charya. These three are simply signs of vanity. — 41. 

Where is wife ? and where is Yoga ? and where is the perversion of 
thought ? Great differences lie betweSn these. — 42. 

Brahmd. has created all these by His mental power. If one has the 
seed of asceticism within him, he can create a son from his mind. Verily 
you are the knowers of selves. Then why do you not create such children 
by the force of mind alone ? — 43. 

The ascetics ought to beget progeny out of the embryo created by 
their mind, and your address to me is bereft of dharma, and is like the 
speech of those who are not good. By the power of my innerself, 
1 shall create a son, without the help of a woman, after illumining my 
mind with the glory of asceticism. 1 shall create such a son out of my 
soul, who would be ready to consume the creation.” — 44-47. 

19 



ue . m MtTSTA PUBAIiAM. 


Aftonrards the si^ t^^nra, absorbed in his asoetioism, throwing his 
thighs into the fire rubbed them with a kfi^ grass. Then the son in the 
form of Fire, desirous of consuming the universe, was produced from his 
thigh, by its own force without the help of any firewood. In such a way 
the fearful fire Aurvft was begotten &om the thigh of the seer Crva. 
- 48 - 50 . 

That son of tirva said with a feeble voice, to his father, immediately 
on being born “ Father ! I am oppressed by hunger, pray direct me to 
consume the universe.” Saying so, the .'Ire Aurva ascended to heaven, 
and with the intention of consuming everj'thing all round, increased itself 
in bulk, and spread itself in all directions. — 51-52. 

Afterwards BrahmS said to Orva ‘ Pray save the universe from the 
fury of your son. — 53. 

' firahmana ! I shall assign a very good place to your son. Have full 
confidence in my words.’ — 54. 

Hrva said : — “ To-day I am blessed. You have shown me a great 
kindness by promising a place for my son, Bhagavan ! what oblations 
will my son get when he feels hungry in the morning ? What will be 
the place of his siay and what arrangements will be made for his food ?' 
Those things should be arranged in a manner be-iitting the position of 
my son.”' 55-57. 

Brahmd said : — ‘ This son of yours will stay as the submarine fire in 
the ocean and 0 Brdhmana ! I am also born of water. He will be gratified 
to drink it. I am giving the same butterlike water to your son which 
I also drink in course of my stay in it. — 58-59. 

‘ At the end of the yugas, your son and I will wander about in mutual 
company ’ when we will repay the debts of those who are sonless. Later on, 
the same fire will dry up all the waters. Besides he will burn up all the 
Devas, Asurs, Yakias, Raksasas, etc., and all other elements.’ — 60-61. 

Hearing those words of Brahma, Hrva said ‘ Be it so.’ When the 
fire merged into the ocean, after throwing his lustre into his father. 'Phen 
Brahmd and other Risis resumed their pursuits undisturbed, on realising 
the glory of fire, the sou of Orva. — 62-63. 

The demon Hiranyakarfyapu beholding that wonder of Orva pi^i 
spoke, after making a series of salutations. “ 0 Ri^i ! It is indeed highly 
, surprising that Agni the witness of the universe has merged into you and 
Brahmd has also become pleased with your devotion. Great sage ! I have 
come to you as your and your son’s slave. Pray look with a favourable eye 
on your devotee. Sire ! If I suffer it will be like your defeat.” — 64-67. 

t)rva said : — ‘ I am gratified, because I have now become your pre- 
ceptor. I have now no fear of danger on account of my asceticism. 
You should also embrace the Mayd created by my son, who, though 
" without any fuel is more violent than Pdvaka the ordinary fire. This 
Mdyd will protect your family and destroy your enemies and will be un- 
bearable to the adversary.’ Hearing those words the demon Hiranyakati- 
yapu embracing her (M&yd) went to heaven after bowing to Orva Muni 
very much gratified.— 6^71. 


OHAPTBR CLXXVL 



The mighty M&yA, created by Aurva the son of the sage tTm, was 
unbearable even by the Devas.— 72. 

Now Hiranyakatiyapu being dead, this MSy& had become compara* 
tively weak. Also the sage, who was the author of that M&ya, cursed him. 
1 have narrated this all to you, said Yaruna to Indra ; so that in case 
you want the Md.y£ to be destroyed, you should let the Moon go with me 
to render me assistance, and 1 shall undoubtedly destroy it, with his co* 
operation, by means of water. — 74-75. 

Here ends the one hundred and seventy-fifth chapter on th^ Tdrahd 

maya fight. 


CHAPTER CLXXVL 

Matsya said : — Indra on hearing what Yaruna said gladly directed 
the Moon to go to fight. — 1. 

He said “ Moon ! go and help Yaruna ; thus carry out the rescue of 
the Devas and the destruction of the demons. You are more powerful 
than me. You are the Lord of the heavenly bodies and you pervade all 
the realms with your elixir which like the ocean, waxing and waning exists 
in you. You bring about by your diurnal motion the day and the night. 
Your spot, in the form of a hare, is indicative of youi giving shelter to the 
universe and even the Devas and the celestial bodies do not know the full 
significance of your power.You are located above the Sun and the other 
heavenly bodies. You by your glory dispel the universal gloom and 
make it bright and luminous. Your rays are white ; your body is 
made up of cold ; you are eternal, you are the manifestation of sac- 
rifices, the Lord of the herbs, the source of actions, begotten from 
water, producer of lotus and other aquatic plants, most cool, the recep- 
tacle of nectar, nimble, having white conveyance, the Illuminor of all 
things, the giver of nectar to those who are privileged to have it, the 
dispeller of darkness from every thing ; therefore be good enough to 
dispel, by your co-operation with Varuna, the delusion caused by this 
demon. You are the beauty of the beautiful ; you are the Soma of the 
drinkers of Soma ; you are the most beautiful of all ; and you are the 
Lord of stars. We are all tormented in the battlefield ; now go and re- 
relieve us by destroying this Asuri Maya.*’. — 2-9. 

The Moon said : — “ The Lord of the Devas ! I shall pour down a heavy 
dew destructive to the demons. See the Demons void of their conceit and 
the store of their delusion exhausted. I will envelop the Daityas with se- 
vere cold ; I will burn them with chill and I will make the Demons void 
of their pride.” Thus saying, the Moon showered torrents of cold, while 
Yaruna hurled his noose. The demons under the influence of these 
began to lie inert and dead. — 10-12. 

Thus Yaruna and the Moon both started the annihilation of the 
demons by showering cold on them. Both those Lords of the waters, 
fighting by the store of their freezing resources, roamed about in the 
field like the ferocious oceans. Yaruna and the Moon pouring down 



TEB MAT87A PUBANAM. 


eliowers of rain, like those that descend at the time of the annihilation of the 
universe, totally destroyed the delusive fire. The demons, benumbed by the 
cold showers of the Moon and entangled in the noose of Varu^a, could not 
move their limbs any way, and they all looked like the mountains with 
dismantled crests. The Moonbeams and the cold showers of Varuna 
entirely unhinged the demons. Their chariots deprived of all lustre 
fell down tossing from the heaven. — 11-19. 

Maya saw the demon folks so belaboured by the Moon. He then 
introduced his Parvati MayS which suddenly pervaded all space with 
rocks, swords, shields, dense forests teaming with yawning caves 
and roaring lions and elephants, full of herds of deer and wind, con- 
taining huge trees and moving by the force of wind in the heavens at 
will. The Ch^ndri and Vdruni May/is of the Moon and Varuna dis- 
appeared. And the moment such a delusion was introduced, swords, 
rocks, trees began to pour down upon the Devas, who began to be destroyed 
and the demons regained a safe footing. All the strategems of the Moon 
and Varuna were made useless. The Devas began to die of the heavy sword 
blows. There was a huge shower of rocks, trees, &c., which filled the uni- 
verse like the heavy rain. At that time many Devas were powdered by 
the rocks, several were divided into pieces by tlieni, a good many wore 
covered with trees. The bows of many were broken and they were all 
bewildered and helpless. No one excepting Lord Visnu remained power- 
ful. The other Devas disappeared. — 20-28. 

That demon waved the rocks over Lord Visnu, but tlie latter shewed 
His perseveraiKje and did not sliovv tlie least auger. The Lord like the 
clouds that bank up at the time of the anuiliilatioii of tlio universe, kept 
on looking at the conflict, in the expectation of the befitting hour, when 
to hit the demons. — 29-30, 

Afterwards Visnu saw both Agni and Vayu, and at the request of 
India asked them both to dispel the delusion, at wliioh they annihilated 
that all pervading Mayd. Vayu with Agni consumed the demons, 
just as beings are reduced to ashes at the destruction of the universe. 
The wind blew fiercely and was followed by fire. In that way the 
two Devas started their play of havoc in the ranks of the demons. They 
consumed the Vimanas of the demons with everything all round. Agni 
in company of the wind burnt the shoulders of the demons, and Maya 
could not kill any one. The Parvati Maya disappeared. At that time 
Visnu was praised by the Devas. — 31-36. 

The Devas cried owt “ Victory ! Victory ! ” and all the plans of the 
demons were frustrated. The three realms were liberated from bondage. 
The Devas were gratified and the din of “ Bravo ! Bravo ! filled the 
space. Indra was victorious and the demons were defeated. All the 
directions were cleared. Dharma increased and the Sun and the Moon 
returned to their respective realms, and the three realms were restored 
to their equilibrium. — 37-38. 

Every one began to perform sacrifices, sins were subdued, death 
was curbed, sacrificial oblations began to be poured into the fire, the 
Devas ascending to heaven began to survey the glory of the sacrifices and 
all the Lokapfilas returned to their quarters.— 39-41, 



OBAPTBB GLXJK7IL 


149 

Ascetics floiirished, the sinners declined. The followers of the Devas 
were pleased and those of the demons became sad. DhaiTna reigned over 
three-fourths of the world and adharma existed in only one. The path of 
virtue flourished and the people became righteous. Every one began to 
follow his order of life and the kings began to devote themselves to the 
protection of their subjects. The sins of the universe were subdued by 
the subjugation of the demons by the Fre and the Wind. — 42-45. 

The whole universe became radiant with the lustre of Agni. 
KSlanemi hearing about the violence of Agni and V4yu appeared on the 
field. He was wearing a coronet shining like the Sun and was bedecked 
with tingling armlets and ornaments. He looked tall like Mandara 
mountain ; golden coloured ; he bad hundred arms, hundred faces, hun- 
dred heads and appeared like a mountain with hundred peaks. He ap- 
peared like a blazing fire, measuring the sky with his massive arms, kicking 
the mountains with his feet, driving away the heavy banks of rain clouds 
by his breath, with his eyes knitted, persecuting the Devas, covering all 
the directions, looking like the messenger of death. He, stretching his 
arms clustered with heavy fingers, addressed the demons, saying “ Demons 1 
you should all get up now.” He overepread all the quarters with arrows 
and seemed ready to burn the Devas. He looked like death at the time 
of the dissolution of the universe. All the Devas were bewildered to 
see Kfilanemi. All the beings looked upon that persevering Kfilanemi 
as NAi-aya^a ; he began to roam on the battlefield pacing bis very tall 
legs to and fro and thereby raising wind and rolling as it were the fir- 
mament. The Devas were all very much terrified. Maya, the lord of the 
Asuras then embraced him. Kalanemi then with Vi^nu looked beauti- 
ful like the Mandara mountain. Indra and the other Devas were deeply 
pained to see the demon Ealanemi advancing as if the death of all. — 
46-61. 

Here ends the one hundred and seventy-sixth ehapter on 
Tdrakdmaya fight. 


CHAPTER CLXXVII. 

Matsya said:— That highly energetic Asura K&lanemi, in the 
midst of the demons, appeared growing in strength like the heavy 
rain clouds gathering in strength after excessive heat. Then the 
chief Danavas, like Maya and TArakAsura and other’s, seeing Kalanemi 
were encowraged as if they had drunk the nectar ; and stood up and made 
an advance ; and all the demons casting off their fears and knocking 
off their fatigue, cherished TArakSsura’s victory and they all congregated 
in the field to resume fight, after duly holding a council of war. 
They arranged their phalanxes and the principal demons forming 
the vanguard of TArkAsura also turned up dauntlessly. All were pleas- 
ed to see KAlanemi. The chief generals of Maya came off gladly from 
Maya’s side and joined EAlanemi, Maya, TArakAsura, VarAha, Hayagrlva, 
Sveta the son of Vipracbiti, Khara, Lamba, Arista, Kiifora, SvarabhAnn, 
ChSmara, and Vakrayodh!, versed in warfare and learning and tapasyS, 



m THE HATSYA PUBAEAM. 


also came armed with clubs, quoits, axes, discs, rochs, javelins, spears, 
nooses stoves, ^le terrible Ganddaila, Patticfa, Bhiudip&Ia, iron ParighM, 
heavy Ghatani, iSatagui, Yugasyanties, etc., to render assistance to K&la- 
nemi. — 1-12. 

They were also armed with arrows resembling the mouths of the 
serpents bolts, keen swords, tridents, bows, and many other luminous 
weapons. The army of the demons, under the leadership of Kalancnni, 
looked awfully striking, as if the whole sky was covered with blue clouds. — 
13 - 15 . 

The army of the Devas, guarded by Tndra, looking white and bla(!k, 
extreme!}" joyful, having the Sun and the Moon with tliem, with asterisms 
as banners, swift like the wind, located close to the heavenly bodies, under 
the protection of Tndra, Vanina, and Kuvera, gleaming like tire blaze, 
under the chief leadership of Narayana, like the mass of ocean, swelled 
by the Yaksas, and the Gandliarvas armed with various kinds of weapons, 
shone forth and looked particularly splendid. Both the armies eiKounterod 
each other, like the heaven and earth at the time of universal dissolution, 
and a fearful conflict ensued. — 1(5-21. 

The Devas and the demons showed their valoui% and arrogance. 
They fought furiously like the clouds emerging from the roaring eastern 
and western oceans. They began to tear down each other, as the infuriat- 
ed elephants rend the mighty mountain trees. They also blew several , 
kinds of conclies and trumpets. The din of their conches filled earth, 
sky, heavens and the space all round, and so did the noise of tlie twanging 
of the bowstrings, clashing of swords, clap of the i)an(ls, etc. In the 
midst of the tumult raised by the kettle-drums, etc., tlie roars of the 
demons vanished ; they began to break the heads of each otlier ; some of 
them fought duels ; some br(»ke otlier’s arms, etc., many of them wrestled, 
the Devas used their heavy clubs and iron bolts, etc. — 22 - 27 . 

Many warriors fell down with their limbs seA^ered by the clubs and 
arrows. Several of them fought from their chariots and horses, biting 
their lips with rage. There was a tremendous uproar, when tlie infantry 
and the chariots started face to face fighting. They smashed the 
chariots of each otlier, fighting like two clouds in the months of Sravaiia, 
and Bhadra rushing into each other. Many were killed under the pressure 
of the chariots running over them. Most of the warriors were unable to 
guide their chariots, being impeded by other chariots ; and several of 
them threw down their foes by the arm. — 28-33. 

Some of them killed their foes by pushing them by their shields. 
The warriors wounded in the battle vomitted blood like the clouds pour- 
ing out rain. A fearful onslaught raged between the Devas and the 
demons. The dense volleys of arrows shot from both the armies covered 
the sky like clouds, and the weapons looked like rainbows in the 
heavens, afterwards KManemi came charged with wrath like the surging 
ocean. Tlie clouds charged with lightning and making a thundering 
noise, began to be dispersed when they struck Kalanemi’s luminous 
coronet and his body hard like a mountain. When he began to breathe 
in his wrath, and with his twisted faces and wrinkled eyebrows sweats 




CE AFTER CLXXVIIL 


151 


came out of his body and sparks of fire emitted. Sparks emitted from his 
mouth and his arm stretched towards the sky and the sides, and grewdn. 
magnitude, and looked as if five-hooded serpents bad emerged from the 
mountains, and various kinds of weapons such as clubs, bows, etc., held 
by him looked beautiful like the mountain peaks touching the skies. 
When his garments were blown by wind, it seemed as if, the top of 
mount Meru was struck with the evening rays of the Sun. He knocked 
down many Devas by his violently striking them with mountain peaks 
and trees, and cut down many of them by his sword, who felt unable to 
move about. He killed a good many by his blows. The Devas, the 
Gandharvas and the serpents, thus belaboured by Kalanemi, became 
lustreless and utterly helpless, and even the mighty Didra of a thousand 
eyes was entangled in his network of arrows. — 34-47. 

At that time Indra, riding on his AirSvata, could not move about. 
Varuna was bereft of his noose and looked like the clouds and the 
oceans bereft of water. Afterwards, he belaboured Kuvera with his 
club, and subdued Dharmardja, who shuddering with fear, ran away 
abandoning His glory. He also overpowered the Lokapfila and divided 
himself in four parts and located them in four directions. These parts 
did all bis works. Then going up to the path of the stars, he took the 
splendour of the Moon and his kingdom what is so anxiously coveted by 
Rtihu. He then dispelled the light of the Moon, and also drove away the 
shining Sun from the gates of heaven, and took under his charge His 
Slyana (procession of the equinoxes) and the diurnal functions. Knowing 
Agni to be the mouth of the Gods, Kalanemi swallowed Him also. He 
also conquered Vdyu by his valour and controlled and swallowed all the 
heavenly and mundane streams along with the ocean. In such a way 
that demon after bringing under his control all waters of heaven and earth, 
shone forth like BrahmA. and became the terror of the universe ; and as- 
suming the forms of Lokapalas and the Sun and the Moon, he controlled 
the affairs of the universe in a well-ordained manner. Then enthroning 
himself in the heavens in the place of BrahmA., that demon, highly ener- 
getic like wind and fire, began to rule himself the celestial and terres- 
trial kingdoms. All the demons then prayed to him as the Devas do unto 
BrahmA. — 48-60. 

Hei'e enda the one hundred and seventy-seven chapter on the 
TdraJtdmaya fight. 


CHAPTER CLXXVIII. 

Matsya said : — The Vedas, Dharma, Forbearance, Truth, and Lak?mf, 
these five things were not attained by KAlanemi on account of his ignoble 
' deeds, contrary to the laws of dharma ; other things came under his 
possession. In not being able to attain these five things he became angry, 
and wanted to enthrone himself in place of Vi?nu and appeared before Him. 
He saw the Lord riding on His (5aruda and holding conch, quoit, club, 
lotus, wearing white appardl and brandishing His club to destroy the 



152 


THE MATSYA PUBANAM. 


demons. His garment appeared like lightning. He himself appeared like 
rain clouds. His carrier was Garuda, Kailyapa’s sou having crest and 
golden wings. Seeing Him thus appearing in the battlefield with a calm 
composure, ready to destory the demons, that demon angrily said ; — 1-5. 

“ He is my enemy. He is the Destroyer of my elders. He lived in the 
oceans, destroyed the demons Madhu and Kaitabha. It can be said that as 
long as He lives, the war between us will not end. There will be a most 
fearful fight between Him and me. He has killed many demons in tUs 
battle. He is very cruel. He has not shown His clemency even to the 
children and the women of the demons killed. He is shameless. He is 

Viapu. He is the heaven of the Devas. He sleeps on the ^e^a serpent. He 
is the Prime Soul. He is the Lord of Brahm& and the Devas and our 
Tormentor. Hiranyakaifyapu was the victim of His fury. The Devas 
under His guardianship enjoy the sacrificial oblations ami the offerings 
of clarified butter poured into the lire by the Eiais. He is the Destroyer 
of all the enemies of the Devas. Our race is annihilated by Hib quoit. 
For the benefit of the Devas He has no regard for Ilis own life and throws 
His quoit shining like the Sun in midst of the demons. He is Bhagav&n 
Kedava — the Destroyer of the demons. He is Bhagavan Visnu — our 
Destiny. He has now come to light. Now this Vibnu subdued by me will 
make His salutations to me. In this battle I shall kill Vi§nu — the terror 
of the demons — and will then kill all the rest of the Devas. Thus I will 
free myself from the debt of my ancestors. This Vi§nu in all forma 
causes anguish to the demons. I have heard that this very same Vi§nu 
bears enmity to the demons even after he gets other births ; and lie 
has killed the demons Ifadhu and Kaitabha, when a lotus sprouted from His 
navel, and when there was only one vast expanse of water all over the 
universe. I have also heard of His having torn Hiranyaka^yapu my father 
in the form of Narasinha (half man and half lion). He had measured the 
three realms by His three strides, when Aditi held Him auspiciously in 
Her womb. Now the Turakainaya war has commenced and He will be 
destroyed by fighting with me.” Having uttered such words, he got 
ready to encounter Vi§uu. — 6-22. 

Lord Visnu, inspite of such harsh words, kept Himself quite calm, and 
only said with a smile : — “ Demon ! you are somewhat conceited and that is 
why you are addressing Me so impatiently. The strength of conceit is no 
strength indeed ; whereas the strength of angerlessness is more stable and 
really strong. Filled with conceit, in My opinion, you are void of valour. 
Fie to your words. Verily, women pose at a place where there are no men. 
Demon ! I see you are ready to follow the footsteps of your ancestors. I shall 
do unto you as I have done with your compeers gone by, for who can 
remain in comfort after breaking the bridge of dharma made by Lord 
Brahmfi ? 0, one eager to destroy the Devas ! I shall kill you without 
doubt, and shall instal the Devas in their places” — 23-27. 

When Vi^nu, the holder of ^ri Vatsya, spoke like that, the demon 
laughed with anger, and holding missiles in hundreds of bis hands, began 
to hit the chest of the Lord. Maya and other valiant demons also ran after 
Vi^^u with their keen arms and Histrinda weapons. — 28-30. 


CHAPTER GLXXVni. 


158 


Lord Vi^nn was not moved in the least by tibe blows of the demons. 
He kept Himself firm like a mountain. — 31. 

KSlaaemi taking up a ponderous club hurled it {^t Garuns, which 
indeed astonished the Lord. When Garuda felt exhausted, the Ix^ 
feeling Himself also troubled, become angry, took up His Sadaraana, quoit^ 
and exhibited His majestic glory. At that time Vi^^u began to grofT 
with Garuda ; and covered all the directions with His arms, and the Lord 
pervading all over the universe rose to heaven, and started His da' 
Btructive campaign against the demons. — 32-37. 

The Ei^is and the Gandharvas began to chant hymns toVisnu, and at 
the same time the Lord rose so high that His coronet touched the clouds. 
His feet covered the earth and His stretched arms spread in all directions. 
Then He look His mighty Sudaraiiana chakra, shining like the rays of the 
Snn, containing a thousand edges, the destroyer of the enemies, looking 
like a blaze of fire, its ends adorned with golden work and its middle be- 
decked with diamonds, having garlands on it, going and assuming forms at 
will, terrible to all the enemies, the eater of the blood, bone and marrow of the 
demons, made by BrahmS Himself, conjoined with the fury and fortitude 
of the Bilahar^is, by the throwing of which the moveable and immoveable 
objects become burnt up, by virtue of which the goblins and the R&k- 
fasasa get satisfaction (by getting blood and flesh to live upon). — 38-45. 

Raising such a Sudartfana chakra, unmatched in accomplishing its 
objects and looking violent like the burning rays of the Sun, Vi§nu took 
away all the Dilnava’s energy and cut down the arms and the hundreds of 
the heads of KSlanemi looking like fires. But the demon still remained 
unmoved, and his headless form like the trunk of a tree stood op in the 
field, when Garuda threw him down on the ground by the force of his 
wings, and by his breast. His body fell down with great violence and he 
expired instantly. Then the Devas rallying together cried out “ Bravo I 
Bravo ! ” and adored Visnu. Then all the demons took to flight ; but they 
were all resisted by the stretching arms of Visnu who caught hold 
of their hair and necks. He powdered the faces of many and broke the 
waists of several. A good many were cut down by the quoit and the 
club blows of the Lord. Several died falling from the heavens. When all 
the demons were thus destroyed, the Lord stayed there after doing 
the work of Indra. On the termination of the Tkrakkmaya war, 
Brahm& along with the Risis, the Gandharvas and the nymphs went there. 
-46-56. 

After adoriijg Vi^nu, He said “ Devadeva f You have done a great work. 
You have removed the source of pain to the Devas. You have gratified us 
all by killing these demons. The demon K&lanemi destroyed by You 
could not have been killed by anyone else. He was a source of utmost 
sufferings to the Devas and the three realms. He caused a great pain to the 
Ri^is and was bent on doing me harm as well. You have, therefore, done me 
a peiBonal favour by killing K&lanemi. May You be blessed. Pray move 
on to the north where the Brahraarisis will behold You. Devs I what boon 
can I confer on you, for you Youriself are the giver of boons to all. You 
have destroyed the thorn of the three realms. Now hand over the fulleak 
kingdom of the three realms to Indra.” — 57-63. 

20 



154 • TBE UATSYA PURAMM. 


Visnu thus praised by Brahm&, said to Indra and the other Devas : — 
Devas ! Hear with attention what I say. In this warfare 1 have killed 
a demon taore valiant than Indra, but two have escaped from this great 
war. They are Virochana and R&'iu, consequently Indra and Varnna 
should guard the eastern and western quarters respectively. Dharmar&ja 
and Euvera should keep guard on south and north respectively. The 
Moon along with His sateliets should return to His realm. 0 Sun ! enjoy 
Yourself with Your northern and southern Ayauas and seasons throughout 
the year. The daily oblations of clarified butter, &c., poured into the 
sacrificial fire may now be resumed. 

Nots— Ayanas— The northern and sonthern paths of the Snn. 

“0 Brahmanas ! Resume Agnihotras and other sacrifices according to 
the Vedic injunctions, and oblations be offered in Fire. The Devas may be 
gratified by sacrifices, the Pitris by the performance of l^niddhas, and the 
Mahar§i8 by the recitation of the Vedas. The wind may freely roam 
in His realm and blow from there. The three fires may now gratify 
the three realms and the three varnas. The sacrifices may be .'esumed 
through the Brahmanas, and the Yfijnlkas may accept their sacrificial fees. 
The Sun may nourish the earth, the Moon may foster the Rasas, and the 
Wind may refresh all. Let all in this way resume Their allotted functions. 
Let the mother rivers rising from the mountains Mahendra, Malaya, etc., 
flow to the oceans. 0 Devas ! cast aside your fears of the demons, be 
calm, may you be prosperous. I am going to Samitana-Brahmaloka. 
Do not ever be afraid of the demons either in your realms or in battlefield. 
The demons are mean and whenever possible will attack the Devas. They 
have no fixed abodes. You should remain careful in your abodes, in the 
Heavens and in battlefiled. You are simple and good. Gentleness and frank- 
ness are your wealth.” — 6-1-79. 

Lord Visnu after thus speaking to the Devas retired to Ills realm in 
company of Brahma. Such was the wonder of the Tarakamaya war 
that waged between the Devas and the demons and 1 have related all that 
to You. — 80. 

Here ends the one hundred and seventy-eighth chapter on 
TdraMmaya war. 


CHAPTER CLXXIX. 

The Risis said ; — “ 0 Sfita ! we have heard the creation from the lotus 
and the glory of Lord Vi^nu narrated by you at such a full length ; pray 
now tell us about the glory of the Lord Bhairava Bhava. (Siva) ” ? 

, SQta spoke : — I shall relate the glory of ^iva the Lord of Devas, 
which please hear with attention. 

In ancient times there was a demon, as black as soot, who was 
known by the name of Andbaka. He was invulnerable of the Devas 
and was constantly engaged in bis asceticism. Seeing one day the Lord 
Siva and Parvati enjoying in each others company, he wished to 
snatch away the latter from the Lord, when a most fearful battle ensued 




OBAPTEB CLXXIX. 


155 


between Him and the demon. That battle was fought in the MahSkfila 
forest, in the district of Avanti. The Lord was very much oppressed by 
the demon when the Lord, Uudra discharged the weapon called Pasupata. 
Out of the blood that gushed from the body of that demon by the blow 
of that formidable arrow, thousands of Andhaka demons sprang up, and 
the gore of those demons also similarly multiplied itself into hundreds 
of demons. — 2-7. 

When they were killed the blood from them again gave births to 
hundreds of Andhakas of formidable appearances. In such a way innumer- 
able demons spread all over, when the Lord created the following Divine 
Mothers to drink their blood : — Malierfvari, BfaJimi, Kaumari, Mfilint, Sau- 
parni, V&yavya, Ssikri, Nairitti, Sauri, Saumyd., SivA, Dutl, ChamundA, 
VSrunl, Varaht, Narasinhi, Yaisnavi, Chalachhika, l^atananda, BhagAnandA, 
Pichhilla, BhngamAlini, Bala, AtibalA, RaktA, Snrabhi-MukhamandikS, 
MatrinandA, i^unanda, Vidalt, Sakuni, Raivati, MahArakta, PilapichikA, 
JayA, VijayA, JayantJ, AparAjitA, Kail, MahakAli, Dflll, SnbhagA, DurbhagA, 
Karali, Kandini, Aditi, Dili, Miirl, Mrityu, Karpamotl, GramyA, Ulookl, 
(ihatodart, KapAli, Vajr.ahastA, Piiiachl, RAksasi, Bhuilnndi, SAnkArl, 
ChandA, LAngali, Putabhl, Klieta, Sulochana, DhflmrA, EkavirA, Karalini, 
Vi^^aiadan!^trin^, SyamA, Trijaf-l, Kukuri, VinAyaki, Vaitani, Umattu- 
dumbari, Sidhi, LailihAna, Kaikarl, Garadabhi, Bhrnkutl, Bahuputri, 
PrcvaynA, Vidambinl, KraunchA, ^ailamukhi, VinatA, SurasS, Danu, Dsa, 
RambhA, MenakA, SalilA, Cliitrarupini, SvAhA, SvadhA, Va§tkAra, Dhriti, 
Je§tha, Kapardini, MAyA, Vicbiti’arQpA, KAmarApA, SangamA, MukbevilA, 
MangalA, MaliAnAsA, MabAmnkhl, KumAri, RochanA, Bhima, SadAhAsA, 
MahoddhatA, AlainvAkshi, KAlaparni, Kumbhakarni, MahAsuri, Kosinl, 
Sankhin!, LainbA, Pingala, Lohitamukhl, GhantaravA, DanstrAla, RochanA, 
KAlajanghikA, GokainikA, AjamukhikA, MahAgrivA, MahAmukht, UlkA- 
mukhi, DhAmaihkhA, Kainpinl, Parikampini, MohanA, KampanA, KhelA, 
NirbhayA, BAhusAlint, Sarpakar^t, Ekaksi, ViilokA, Nandinl, Jyotsna- 
mukhl, RabhasA, Nikumbha, Rakta-kampanA, AvikAra, MaliAchitrA, 
ChandrasenA, ManoramA, Adardana, HaratpApA, MAtangi, LarabamekhalA, 
AbAlA, VanchanA, EAH, PrainodA, LAngalAA’^ati, Chifla, ChittajalA, KonA, 
SdntikA, Aghavina^inl, Lambastani, Lambasta, VisatA, Vnsachflrninl, 
Skhalanti, Dirghake^i, SucliirA, Sundarl, i^ubbA, Ayomukhi, Katumukhl, 
Krodhinl, Arfani, KutumbikA, MuktikA, ChandrikA, Ilalamohini, SamanyA, 
HAsini, LaipbA, KovidArJ, Samasavi, Kankukarnl, MahAnAdA, MahAdevi, 
Mahodarl, IluipkAri, RudrasusatA, R^dreili, BhAtadAmarl, KundajihvA, 
ChalajjvAlA, SivA and JwAlAmukhl, and several others. — 8-32. 

They looked very terrible. They all drank the blood of those demons 
and were exceedingly gratified. After they were quite full and could not 
drink more blood, the demons again began to multiply by leaps and bounds, 
when Lord Siva went to seek the succour of Vi§qu.— 33-35. 

Then Lord Visnu, with great wrath, created Buska-Revati who in 
a moment drank the blood of all the Andhaka demons. She became more 
withered and dry as she drank their blood, and when all the blood was 
drunk, the demons were completely annihilated.— 36-37. 

When Biva with His valour was ready to pierce Andhaka the primary 
Asura,. with His trident, the demon prayed to. the Lord and He being pleased 


156 


THE MATSYA PURANAM. 


with His devotion, bestowed GaneijatTa to him, and also made him the 
attendant-in-cliief, and allowed him to remain in His company (granted 
SAmtpya).— 38-39. 

Then all the Divine Mothers said to Siva “ Bhagavftn ! We shall 
through your favour eat up all the Devas, demons and men residing in all 
the three realms. Pray order us accordingly.** oiva said : — “ You should 
all undoubtedly protect the creation ; so you should abandon this ignoble 
desire of yours.** But they unmindful of the words of the Lord, started 
their campaign of destruction, assuming terrific appearance. Then oiva 
thought of Narasinha, bixthless and deathless and the creator of all 
the Lokas, Who instantly appeared then and there with His claws be- 
smeared with the gore of lliranyakasJyaipu, His tongue flapping out like 
a spark of electricity, with His formidable fangs and long teeth, full of 
mighty energy and roaring like that of the rambling clouds, agitated by 
the fearful wind that blows at the time of the destruction of the world, 
thundering like the oceans, with His mouth wide open, with His nai!>^ hard 
like thunderbolt, with His eyes gleaming red like the Sun, burning with 
the fire of fury, wearing a crown, garlands, armlets, girdle of bells, fine 
garments, spreading His lustre all over the universe, shining like the 
fire blaze; having majestic hair, and wearing garlands of various kinds of 
beautiful flowers. Ills appearance looked like the mountain Meru, and 
His two eyes looked like the Suns. His fearful rows of teeth, though 
formidable yet beautiful, illumined His face. His colour was blue like 
blue lotuses. — 40-51. 

Narasinha appeared before ^iva in the same form as was thought of by 
Him. He was adorned with a pair of garments. 'J'he whole universe was 
overpowered with Ilis lustre. The waving of the hairs on His body looked 
like so many rays of fire moving in wind. The Lord saluting Him said : — 
“ Lord of the universe ! Devadeva in the form of Narasinha, my salutations 
to Thee. I^ooking handsome with Thy claws dyed in the gore of the 
demons, shining like gold, Tadmanabha (from whose navel sprouted the 
lotus) tlie superior of the universe, my salutations to Time. Thundering 
like the clouds at the time of the dissolution of the universe, illustrious 
like the thousands of suns, cluirgcd with the fury of a thousand Yamas, 
powerful like the thousands of Indras, prosperous like thousand Kuveras, 
the soul of a thousand Varuna and Kala, calm like a thousand earths, 
lustresome like thousand Moons, glorified like a thousand Rudras, valiant 
like a thousand heavenly bodies, having a thousand arms and eyes, the 
destroyer of many weapons, the liberator of thousands, such you are. 
Deva ! the Divine Mothers that 1 had created for the destruction of 
Andhaka are now ready to devour the whole universe with utter disgard 
of My orders. 1 have created them, but 1 cannot destroy them now 
Myself. Ilow can I, being their Creator become their Destroyer. — ** 
-52-61. 

Hearing such words of f^iva, Narasinha created VSnlrfvarl from His 
tongue, M^y& from His mind, Bhavamalini from His hinder private parts, 
Kf li from His bones who drank the blood of the high-bodied demon 
Andhaka. She is known in this world by l^uska Revatl. — 62-64. 

1 shall also name to You the thirty-two Divine Motheie oreaUKl by 



OBAFFBR CLXXX. 


157 


Vifna from His body. They are all prosperous and fortunate. Tlieir 
names are : — 65. 

Clhantakaral, Trailokyamohini, Sarvasattvavailamkarl, Cbakrahridays, 
Vyomacharipl, oaukhini, Lekbant, K&masankar^inl, are the maids of honour 
of Vaniilrari ; and Sankarsipi, Arfvath4m&, Bijabh&vS, Apar&jitS, Kaly&nl, 
Madhudanflri, Kamalotpals^astikS, are the maids of M^y& ; and AjitA, 
Sdk§inahridayd, Vriddh4, Vedd8madan(lan&, Nrisinhabhairav4, Vilva, Gar- 
utmahriday&, Jay.^, these eight the maids of Bhavam41inl ; and Akarnanl, 
Sabhat4, Uttaram4lik4, PadmakarS, Jw4l4mukhi, Bhi9amk4, K4madhenu, 
Balik4 are the maids of llevati. — 66-72. 

• All of them are most powerful and have been created from the body 
of Visnu. ITiey are powerful enough to create and destroy the whole 
universe. The Divine Mothers created by Vi§nu subdued those created by 
Siva, because none can stand the flash of wrath beaming from their eyes. 
The Matrikas who were ready to destroy the world, now took refuge of 
Nrisingha Deva who then explained them the whole situation. 

He said : — “ You should also foster and guard the universe with 
My command ; as the men and animals look after their off spring, and as 
the Devas protect the creation so do ye also, and work in every 
way like the Devas. Let the Devas and men worship the Deva TripurSrl. 
Hever cause pain to the devotees of oiva ; and you should also protect 
those who contemplate on Me. Those who will offer you sacriflces every 
day. You should give them all their desired objects. You should also 
guard those who recite the praises uttered by Me, and you should protect 
My seat. Lord Siva will give you His RaudrS Dev!. You all would 
occupy the position of the highest Dev! and protect Her also. You should 
guard the universe in conjunction with Her. The Divine Mothers created 
by Me will remain with Me, and will attain the oblations made by the 
devotees along with Me. Those who will adore you separately, you should 
give them all their desires^ Those desirous of progeny will get children 
no doubt, if they worship Suakadevi.” — 73-84. 

Saying so Lord Vi§nu disapj>eared from that spot with the Mfitrik4s ; 
and the sacred Kritatfaucha tirtha sprang up there. And here Mah&deva 
the Dispeller of all the troubles gave His Divine RaudrS form to the 
MStrikSs created by Him. And He remained enshrined there amongst 
the MatrikSs. — 85-86. 

Siva, half man and half woman, after installing the seven MStrik^s 
there in tlmt Raudrasthana disappeared. And whenever the MStrikSs 
created by Siva approach the form of Him, the Lord Siva, the Desrtoyer of 
Tripurfindhaka, then that enemy of Tripura and Andhaka pays honiage 
ani pujS. to the Lonl Vis^u in His form of Man-Lion, (and thus Stva 
worships Vi§nu). — 87-90. 

Here ends the one hundred and seventy-ninth chapter on the killing 

o/ Andhaka. 

CHAPTER CLXXX. 

The Risis said:— -‘*0 Sflta ! we have heard an account of ^e destruc- 
tion of Andhaka and now we are eager to know the glory of the sacred 



158 


TEE MATBYA PURANAM. 


KSjii (Benares city). How did Bhagavrm Pingala be( oine Ganetivara 
and the giver of food to all within the precincts of Kasi ? How did he 
attain the K^trap&Iahood and how did he attain the Pingalahood ? 
We wish to hear about all these things.”— 1-3. 

Sflta said : — '* Hear from me how Pingala came to be tlie QaneiJvara 
and ihe giver of food to all and how he got his residence in the city of 
Benares ? There was one Yak§a, the son of Pdrnabhadra, who was renown-, 
ed by the name of Harikeila. He was very devout and righteous and 
beautiful also. — 4-5. 

Ever since his birth he was devoted to i^iva n;d thought of ti 3 Lord 
at all hours. He saluted Siva ; his whole heart was in Siva ; sitting, 
sleeping, walking, standing, drinking, eating, he thought of Siva and Siva 
alone.— 6-7. 

His father Purnabhadra said to his righteous F(.n “ Son ! I do not 
recognise you as my son. Your birth is unforfntiatc and leploral, le. It 
is not meet to lead such a life in tl>e family of a Yak§a. You are 
Guhyakas and they are naturally fierce .and cruel. We are hard-hearted. 
We are addicted to hunting and flesh-eating. Brahma has not ordained us 
to follow the life that you pursue. One ought not to follow the life of a 
different order abandoning his own. You should, therefore, forsake your 
human feelings and pursue the course of your family, otherwise I should 
think that you have been born of men. i\Iark my w.ays, who am born as 
a typical Yakija and who also perform various works pertaining to 
my class of being.” — 8-13. 

Suta said : — That illustrious Purnabhadra after thus speaking to his 
son, went out quickly and asked Ills son to leave his home and go away 
wherever it pleased him. — 14. 

On being thus addressed by his father, he left his Isome and rela- 
tions and went to Kadi, where he devoted himself to rigid asceticism. His 
eyelids did not fall ; he curbed Ida passions and stood motionless like a 
dried up piece of wood or a piece of stone. — 15-16. 

By continuing his austerities like that, for one thousand divine years, 
be was surrounded by ant-hills on all sides. White ants and insects began 
to feast on him. After sometime all the flesh and blood were almost con- 
sumed, and that devotee of ^iva with his bones, began to shine like a white 
shell.— 17-19. 

Sometime after, the Goddess Pfirvatl said to f?iva ‘‘Lord ! I wish 
to see the woods, gardens and bowers and also feel desirous of hearing 
the glory of Kaiii which please rebate to mo. As Kaifi is your dearest 
resort, it must bear excellent results”. — 20-21. 

When Pdrvatl made such a request to l^iva. Ho took Her out of 
KSdi to show Her the sylvan beauties and explain to Her the glory of the 
sacred KSii.— 22-23. 

^iva said: — ‘‘ O Dear ! Look ! bow nice is this garden ! How beautiful ! 
See this forest smiling with many kinds of flower clusters, creepers, 
lowers of Priyangu, Ketakt, sweet-scented Tamfila, Karpikrlra, Vakula, 



GRAFTER CLXXX. 


259 


Aibka, Punn&ga, and various sweet-smelling flowers swarmed by the 
buzzing blackbees.— 24-25. 

In this forest, the sweet singing birds are throwing their melodious 
notes on the blooming lotuses ; somewhere beautiful swans and enchant- 
ed blackbees are creating a bustle, at some places oh&kravSkas are 
echoing notes ; at others k&damba kadambas are roaming ; at other places 
again Karandavas are sounding notes. Somewhere the celestial ladies 
are enjoying the aroma of flowers, somewhere the creepers circling round 
the delicious flavoured mango trees are looking so beautiful in such a 
way the Lord Siva pointed out the attractions of that spot. — 26-28. 

Somewhere the Vidyddharas, Siddhas and Ch&ianas were singing 
beautiful songs, somewhere the nymphs were' dancing, somewhere the 
joyous birds repeating their captivating notes, somewhere the green 
pigeons were echoing notes, at some places the roars of the lion were being 
heard ; the deer were running away with fear at other places, some- 
where the lakes flourished with full blown lotuses, somewhere a swarm of 
blackbees buzzed over the plants laden with flowers, somewhere the new 
foliage bedecked the branches. — 29-31. 

Some portion looked beautifully blue by the dense Nichula reeds. 
Some,where the creepers were broken by being trampled by the walking 
elephants, somewhere were seen the beautiful trees embraced with 
creepers, somewhere the gamboling peacocks and the Yak^as made a 
show of their strutting ; some^vhere cooed the pigeons, at some places 
Kimpnruifas were walking along. Such a beautiful wood adorned with' 
white flowers and the Devas were pointed out to Pdrvatl by Siva. The 
peaks of the mountains where sports and amusements are held are being 
echoed by pigeons. They look white and exceedingly beautiful and were 
shining with the beauties of all sorts of flowers. The sight of them made 
one fancy that many inhabitants of the heavens were resorting there. 
—32-33. 

The thorough fares with the blooming trees looked beautiful like the 
Divine pathways. The various kinds of birds were chirping on the 
branches of those trees. The Aioka trees with their branches bowing down 
to the ground by the weight of flowej’s looked highly beautiful. The 
beautiful blossoms, pervaded with the swarm of singing blackbees, were 
indistinguishable from the silvery moonbeams playing on them during 
the night. The herds of deer standing in thickets overshadowed by the 
trees were grazing on green meadows and exhibited a different kind of 
beauty. The wings of swans rubbing against the water and flowers 
enhanced their beauty. The beautifid spots on the peacock feathers 
dazzled by the reflection of the moonbeams, when those majestic birds 
danced at other places. H4rita trees looked exceedingly beautiful. Some- 
where the Saranga birds added to the beauty of the sylvan splendour, 
somewhere the air resounded with the melodies of the enchanted Ivinnara 
ladies, somewhere the Munis squatted themselves on the floor of their 
hermitages strewn with flowers, somewhere the Panasa and mango trees 
looked beautiful with their plethora of fruits, somewhere the jingling of the 
anklets of the Siddha ladies filled the space, somewhere the bees swarming 
on the Kadamba trees made it look sombre, somewhere the air loaded with 



leo TEB PVBlEAM. 


the perfume of Ambu and Kadamba flowers diffused a madenning smell 
all round, somewhere the deeC4|tanding among the cluster of trees looked 
exceedingly charming, somewhere w^re the flowers as white as the moon* 
beams, somewhere they were of the coloiir of verraillion and saffron, 
somewhere flourished the smiling lotuses and somewhere the groups of 
Adoka trees were pointed out to P&rvati by Siva. — 34-41. 

Somewhere the trees blossomed with the flowers of the silver, coral 
and gold colours. The garden land some where looked silvery; somewhere 
looked golden, and somewhere looked of Vidruma (reddy precious gemlike) 
colour. — 42. 

The birds sitting on the FunnSga trees were singing, the wind was 
beating against the red flowers of Asoka, the blackbees buzzed on the 
smiling lotuses. Tlie Lord l^iva, in company of Parvatl, beheld the bearity 
of such a forest. — 43-44. 

Seeing that PArvati said Deva ! You have shown the majestic 
grandeur of this forest, now be pleased to relate to me the ghiry of KA^t, 
the Aviinukta Ksettra, because I am not suflicientl^’ gratified to hear the 
glory of this sacred place and so I wish to hear it again.” — 45-4(1. 

MahAdeva said : — This sacred city of KA^i is My best place. It is 
always the giver of emancipation to all. It is the most mysterious place 
of all. Dear ! this place is full of My devotees. There are many Siddhas, 
who have taken up vows and there are various orders of saints and 
SAdhus, with variotis Lingas or signs, practising highest yogas and 
wanting My regions. — 47-48. 

By virtue of their yoga practises they subdue their passions and 
become free. — 49. 

The reason of My presence in this saeretl, auspicious and beautiful 
place, adorned with lotus be<l3, various frees and always frequented by 
nymphs and Gandharvas; I shall now explain to you. My devotees con- 
stantly meditating on Me and dedicating all their deeds to me, attain 
emancipation, which they would not got anywhere else. — .50-52. 

This my city is more mysterious than all other mysteries. The 
Lord BrahmA and other Devas, the Siddhas, wishing emancipation, also 
reckon this sacred place as supreme. Consequently I feel so much 
attached to this place. — 53. 

I never leave this sacred place Kaifl, nor will I ever leave it. Hence 
its name is Avimukta Ksettra. — 54. 

One bathing at NalmisAranya, Kuruksetra, GangAdvAra, and Puskara 
or devoting his self there and not getting highest fruits there, gets it here, 
and, therefore, it is so superior to all the sanctified places. There is no 
doubt in this ; this is the speciality of the place. — 55-5C. 

The people get Mok§a (freedom) at PrayAg (Allahabad). If the 
people take My refuge, they get Mok§a ; yet in spite of Allahabad being 
the best of all places of pilgrimage, this Benares is the chief of all, and is 
reckoned to be superior to Prayag. — 57. 

There was a great ascetic Ri^i named Jaigl^avya, He attained the 



CUAVTER GLXXX. 


161 


highest siddhi in this KStii Ksettra by his Bhakti and devotioh towards 
Me. — 58. 

Tills Jaigl§avya desired to reach the goal of the yogis. He daily 
meditated on Me in this place. By his meditation, the fire of yoga was 
kindled in him, and he attained Kaivalyarn (Independence) so very rare to 
the Devas. — 59. 

The clear conscienced seers also attain such a bliss here as is rarely 
attained by the Devas and the demons. — 60. 

Here I grant excellent enjoyments and powers, union with Me and 
my devotees, the place that they desire. Knvera the Lord of the Yaksas, 
has become like My attendant, by dedicating all his deeds to me. And 
dear ! the devotee Sarnvartana will also attain in future the highest siddhi 
here, by adoring Me with devotion. — Gl-63. 

The son of Paniiiara the great Yogar^i, ascetic Veda Vyasa, who 
will be the propagator of tlie Vedas, and the Dliarrna, will also ^live in 
this sacred place. Bralonn, Visnu, Vayn, the Sun, and Indra along with 
tlie Devar^is, Indra and tfio other Devas and other Mahatmas, also adore 
Me in this sanctilied place. Other Siddha Yogis, with great vows and 
under disguise, live here and worship Me. — 64-67. 

King Alarka, also through My favour, will attain this sacred place, 
and will cause it to thrive like before, when there will be a great increase 
and prosperity among the four castes. IJe will well protect it and will 
then attain Ale after dedicating all his deeds unto Me. — 68-69. 

All the householders and Sanjulsis residing here will be devoted to 
me, and by My grace will attain the highest Moksa, so very rare. They 
will attain the difficultly obtainable emancipation through My favour, and 
even the most sensuous people, unheedfiil of dharrna, dying here will not 
be born in this world ; and those who are free from all mundane cravings, 
liave patience, and have stationed themselves in satvaguna, with their 
passions subdued and devoted to Me, dying here will undoubtedly attain 
liberation through M}^ grace Tlie final rest attained by the people, 
tlirough the continual practice of yoga in course of thousands of lives, is 
attained merely by dyiiig here. Devi ! I have related to you the glory of 
this sacred place, this Aviinukta Ksettram, thus concisely. — 70-75. 

0 Mahesivari ! there is no better place than this that could give siddhi, 
and the knowledge of the mysteries. All the Yogis and the Lords of the 
yogas, consider this place to be the foremost giver of siddhi. This is the 
Parmastliana, Paraniabiahma and P^?ainapada ; this is Paramaifiwam. 
Tliis Kiirfi is the essence of all the three realms. It is always pleasing, 
enchanting and beautiful. The sinners, resorting to this place, are also 
liberated from their sins. Devi ! this place is always dear to Me. It is 
splendid with various kinds of creepers, bowers, and flowers. People 
dying here are liberated from the cycle of birth and death and attain the 
highest place. There is no doubt in tliis. — 76-79. 

Sfita said : — Afterwards Mahadeva explained to Parvati about the 
granting of boons to the^Yak^a, heretofore mentioned. — 80. 

He said “ Dear Yak§a, this devotee of Mine is now sinless, after 
his asceticism and be will now get from Me some boon.” — 81. 

21 



102 


THE MAT8YA PURAEAM. 


After saying so, Mahadeva the Lord of the uuiverse, repaired to tliat 
spot in company of Parvali, where the Yaksa was practising austerities. — 
82. 

There, seeing the devotee’s bones shining white as lie was reduced to 
a mere skeleton, IVuvati said “Verily the IVvas describe You to be so 
stiff; it is quite right because you do not grant boon to oven sucli of jwir 
devotees, in such a sacred place, it is not proper that this son of a Yaksa 
should be subjected to such hardships. Tray grant him a boon quickly. — 
83-86. 

“ Deva ! the Risis, like Mann, have said that blessings are always 
attained from Siva wliether he be pleased or displeased. — 87. 

“ All beings seek comforts and enjoyments and kingdoms during 
lifetime and emanciyiation after death.” Hearing such words of IVirvati 
the Lord approached the Yaksha who saluted him. The Lord then granted 
biru Divine vision, when lie was able to behold the T^ord with all llis at- 
tendants and was highly pleased. Then the Lord said “ 1 am grantingyou 
a boon, by virtue of which you will see the tlirce realuis, and your body 
will also become like Mine. Look at Ale, being free from any grief or 
trouble.” — 88-lK). 

Sflta said : — On attaining sucli a form, he stood np and throwing 
himself at the feet of tlie Lord said “ Bo kind on me, ” wlien the Lord 
said “ 1 have granted you a boon.'’ At wliich lie again said “ liord ! grant 
mo such a boon so tliat 1 may Inive nnllinching dovotiou for You and I may 
be called everlasting Ganapati and the giver of food to the World. — Ul-94. 

“ Besides this I also want that Your this avimuktatirtha may always 
be before my eyes.” — 95. 

Alahadeva said : — “Yaksa! he free fnnn the snfFerings of infirmity, 
diseases and death, you will be the (lana])ati, the loid of attendants, tho 
giver of wealth, adoralile by all, ini(M)nqu('ral)lo. Y(;u will lie j)rosi)er- 
ous and giver of f jod to all. You will bo Kshctrapala, you will have all 
the yogic poweis. — 90-97. 

“ Besides this yon will 1)0 most valiant, rightecnis, tho knower of 
Brahma, dear to mo, having tlirce e}es, hohling a mace and gifted with 
supreme yoga.” — 98. 

“ Udbhrama and Sambhrama will bo jamr attendants, and they will 
always obey j’ou. By your onh-r ilioy w \\\ get respect for you from all the 
people ; and they can create delusion in their peoples.” — 99. 

Sflta said : — In this way, Lord Alahadova, after appointing that Yak- 
sa, as Ganef^vara, went back in his company. — 100. 

Here ends the one hundred and eiyhtieth, chapttr on the glory of 
Vdra 7 :^asty and the granting of boon to a Yahqa by Lord Siva, 

CHAPTER CLXXXI. 

Sflta said ; — “ Hear you, O, pure souled holy Risis ! with attention, 
this righteous narration which is the dispeller of all ills, and tho mother 
of all good merits. — 1. 



OBAPTER QLXXXL 


163 


Once upon a time, Bhagavan Sanat-Kumara aaked Nandikesvara : — 
the Lord of the ganas anc^. as powerful as Rudra. — 2. 

He can assume ter -ible forms that the Devas and Dd.navas cannot 
assume. And in this terrible form He remains firm and stable, like 
a pillar, till Pralaya. He asked : — “Now kindly describe to me the sacred 
places, where Alaherfvara always resides — this great mystery of all.” — 3-4. 

Nandikesvara said : — “ I shallr elate to you, after saluting, the Lord 
the most ancient event which Mahadeva Himself narrated first. — 5. 

The Lord narrated it first to Parvati, for Her satisfaction, and after- 
wards it spread over the universe. — 6. 

Sometime ago the illustrious Consort of l^iva — Parvati — on the 
summit of the Mount Meru, asked the Lord after making salutations to 
Him : — 7. 

“ 0 Bhagavan ! 0 Lord of the Devas ! 0 one with orescent of the 
Moon in His forehead ! Ih’ay explain to me the duties of those men, living 
ill the world, as well as of those, who have subdued tlieir passions. How 
do the charities, sacrifices, well-practised asceticism, meditations and 
recitations give everlasting fruits ? And how are the sins of ages thereby 
destroyed ? What are the ways, ordinances and duties and sadacharas, 
by the observance of which, you remaining there, become pleased with your 
Bhaktas and grant imperishable position to them ? Pray explain all 
these to me, for 1 am very curious to know all these.” — 8-12. 

Mahruleva said : — “ 0 L/evi ! Hear with attention. I shall relate to 
you the glory of the aviniuktatJrtha, which is the best among all the 
sacred places, and so dear and near to me. I am telling you a great secret. 
Sixty-eight sacred places have been already described, and the one wliere 
Rudra is Omni])resent and never absent from there is called the avi- 
muktatirtha and is the first best of all the rest. I never forsake avi- 
niuktakscttra (Kj'ijii) ; hence it is called Avimukta Ksettra. Emancipation 
is readily obtainable here, and the charities, meditations, sacrifices, recita, 
tions and other similar deeds performed there beget everlasting benefits, 
and the sins of thousands of ages are destroyed the moment one enters the 
sacred place. The sins are consumed like cotton in the fire. — 13-18. 

0 Devi ! the BrJilnnanas, Ksatriyas, Vaiiiyas, i^iidras, bastards, sinners, 
animals, insects, flies, deer, birds, ]\lloehhas, dying in course of time in 
aviinuktatirtha, go to My realm (of i^iva) and become Rudras, who wear 
a crescent on their forehead, and get eyes^on their foreheads, and become 
like Me.— 19-21. 

Whether they aspire or not, but in every case they attain My realm, 
by dying in avimukta, no matter whether they be men or lower animals. 
— 22 . 

Far better it is for one when he goes to Karfi, to fix himself down 
to the earth, by tying a piece of stone on his legs, and never leave this 
place, and thereby enable him to go to My realm. — 23-24. 

He who never goes out of the precincts of Kasii, attains My realm ; 
there is no doubt in this. Vasraprada, Rudrakoti, Sldhesvara, Ookarna, 
Rudrakar^a, SuvarjgL&k^a, Amara, Mahdkala and Kdyavarohana, are all 



m 


TUB UAT&YA WRAUAU. 


sanctified places, and I am present at all those places, in both tbe morning 
and evening Sandhy&s. — 25-26. 

Besides them, the Kfilanjaravana, {^ankiikarna, Sthalerfvara, are 
all sanctified by my presence, hut Dear ! My presence in Aviirmkta is un- 
doubtedly on »all the occasions. Besides tliese llarijiohandra Tirtha, Arnrata- 
keiivara, Jalej^vara, ^trlparvata are also most sacred. They all are mys- 
terious and secret. — 27-28. 

Mahaliij^a, Kritnichando^vara, Kcdaranath, Abdinbliairava, arc also 
highly sacred. As I am prcvscnt at the aforcinv^nt.ioned eight places always. 
Thus I arn present at Aviniukta at all times. — 29-‘)0. 

Deal ! tlie other snored ])Iaeoq, tint exist in the throe Tankas, always 
remain at the feet of Avimiikfa. Vonr sun, SvAmi KArtika will relate the 
glory of Aviraukta and tlie ghnies of the Risis, who will come in fnturo 
—31-32. 

Here-endii the one hundred and ehjlitu first chapter on the Main' fmya 
of Aviinukta k^etiram. 


CHAPTER CTAXXIL 

Sfita said : — Once on a time, the Risis Sannka, f^anandana, t^e. and the 
devotees of jliva asked vSvAmi K'lrtika, th<Mtlii<*l’ *)!* thn knowers of Brahma, 
on the snininit of KailAsa : — BrAlinmna ! Ihay explain lo ns about the 
abode of Siva in the earth where BliagavAn iSiva always dwells.” — 1-2. 

Svami Kartika said : S'.nl of all, the* Eternal Lord Tvlahadeva, 

the High Soul, remains in histevrlhle form, ran* to the Dovas and Danavas, 
at Aviinukta like a pillar, motitailess and stable, till prahua. This is 
the most mysterious plaeo.— 3-1. 

The Siddhas always retnain tl.'cre owing to the ]>resence of the Lord. 
I^iva has described Aviinukta to excel all tljt^ sacred ]>laef.‘s, nor is there 
any other place more sacred than it. Every part of it is holy and endowed 
with a holy tirtlia. There exists a divine abode, over tlie cremation 
ground there, and it is not visible to all. Yet it is connected with the earth. 
There the abode of ^iva l£5iv{dip\ai is situated in tlic space. Unworthy 
people, who are not yogis, cannot behold the Isold’s abode ; but the Yogis, 
the Brahmacluiris, and the knowers of the Vedas, can see it. Those who are 
Brahmacharis, the Siddlias, tlie Vednntis, and do not leave this place till 
death, they attaining idl tlio benefits of sacrilices and waslied olT from all 
their sins, attain tlio liigln^st positiun. The Ib'Alimarias living thereon 
three meals a day, and without any Yoga or their mind under control, 
attain virtues, like the one living merely on air, and get the highest posi- 
tion that an ascetic would got. — .o-10. 

Tlie one who leads a calm life, after subduing all Ids passions, in this 
place even for a moment, begets the fruits of highest ascotieism, and the one 
who remains there like that for a rnontli, begets the benefits of having 
observed the Pfniupata ordinance. In other words, he attains bliss after 
being liberated from the cycle of births and deaths. lie attains the posi- 
tion of yoga and the final beatitude. The fruits derived here by the 



CHAPTER CLXXXIII. 


365 


X 

glory of ^iva and of this Avimnkta ksettram, are not obtained even by the 
practice of yoga for ages. The one who goes there is purified of the sin 
of even killing a Brahinana. One who continually resides there, for all his 
life, unmoved in mind, is not only purified of his sin committed in this life, 
but also of his Bralunahatya sin in his previous birth, an^I attJiitis l^iva and 
does not get any other births. He gets the favour of ^iva and all his 
desires are fulfilled, and lie gets the same end as the knower of Samkhya 
does. He remains there all liis lives and never quits it. — 11-18. 

Mahadova resides in Avimukta with all His attendants, consequently 
one begets highest attainments and renunciation there. Emancipation is 
attained by living there permanently, and lie is never re-born. Avimukta 
is the liighest kHcttram ; it is the highest goal. One may be able to de- 
scribe the seven islands round the iMoiint Mem and all the oceans, but I 
cannot adequately relate tlie glory of Avimukta. People at the point of death 
suffer agonies, and do not remain conscious and lose tlieir meinories, Imtthe 
devotees of l^iva, giving up life at Avimukta, arc lilessecl by being whispered 
into their ear tlio most sacred formula “ Taraka Brahma” by the Lord Siva 
Himself. If one dies at Manikaraika ghat he attains his desired 
goal. — 19-24. 

He is always blessed by the favour of ^iva, find attains that goal, 
which uumeritorioiis persons do not get. People should realise the un- 
realities of life, and tliat it is full of all sins, and in order to free 
themselves from the troubles of tlie world they ought to devote them- 
selves to Avirnukta-tirtha, which is the giver of yoga, peace, and the dis- 
peller of fears of this world and of all other obstacles. One who remains 
at Avimukta, even bearing all troubles and dilliculties, attains emancipation, 
in course of his life, being liberated from the cycle of birth and death. 
He attains union with ^iva. — 25-27. 

Ilere ends the one hundred and eighty. second chapter on the 
Mdhdttuya of Kdsi. 


CHAPTER CLXXXIII. 

Sri Parvaii said Mahadeva 1 What is the cause of your giving 
preference to Avirnukta-tirtha over the mounts Himaviin, ^ Mandarachala, 
Gandhamiidana, Kaihisia, Nisadha, Sumeru, TrisJikhira, Manasa, the Nan- 
danavana of the Devas, as well as other'* sacred places ? What invisible 
liigh sanctity attaches to it, that you in company of 3 ^our altendants, remain 
there? What favours do you show to the people residing there? Pray 
explain all that to Me. — 1-5. 

MahAdeva said : — Dear charming Lad.y, this question of yours is in- 
deed very interesting. I shall explain everything to please listen with 
attention. A very sacred stream, adored bj'^ the Siddhas and the Gandhar- 
vas, flows through Kasii and the Ganges merges into the same. 1 hat stream 
feels gratified by being devoted to me, consequently, this place Avimuktia 
(ever blessed with my presence) is sacred of all and, therefore, I also hold 
it so dear and 1 am present in the Linga located in that sacred place. — 6-9. 



166 


THE MATS7A PURANAM. 


I shall now relate those virtues of this sacred place, by merely hear- 
ing which, a man undoubtedly is washed of all his sins. — 10. 

A false man or an irreligious one, though he be full of deceit, irre- 
ligion and sin, is washed of all hia sins by pilgrimaging to that sacred 
place. — 11. 

When all the immoveable and moveable creation are destroyed, 
even then I do not forsake it, and reside there with hundreds of my 
attendants. — 12. 

At the end of the C3^cle, all the Devas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, Nagas 
and R/iksasas, A'c., enter my month on this very spot and I accept their 
worship. This place is best a]] my secret retreats and is most 
dear to me. — 19-14. 

Blessed are the devotees who resort to this place, tlie twice-born wlio 
breathe their last hero, remaining devoted to me, get emancipation. I am 
alwaj'S pleased with one wlio offers ol)lations to tlio- fire, chanti g the 
Rudra mantra and bestows charit\^ One who gives away everytliing in 
charity, and performs sacrifices, and bathes in the sacred waters of all tlio 
tirthas, attains Me on this spot. Those who reside liore, and those wlio 
are devoted to you, go to heaven where thnnigli My favour tlioy enjoy peace 
and are free from all sins, ily devotees, on coming here, become purified 
and liberated from all sins.’’ '-lo-2L 

P&rvati said: — “You destroyed the sa(‘rifico of Daksa for your 
regard of Me such is \oiir kiialne.>s on Me. I am not sufliciently 
satisfied with this narration of the glories of Avijnnkta-tirtlia, pray therefore 
be pleased to tell Me somclliing more about it.” — 22. 

Mahadeva said • — “O most beloved lady of auspicious luck. Yes, it 
is true that out of great regard for you, 1 angrily deslroyc'd llie sacrifice of 
Daksa. My devotees who adore i\lc with devotion are not liable to re-birth 
for hundreds of cycles” — 2l\-24. 

Paravati said; — “ Deva ! The gh)nes of tliis f)la(;e that you have 
related to mo pray be good enough to ri‘]>cat in greater detail. 1 wish 
to know all about it, for 1 am so full of wonder.” — 2o. 

Mahadeva said- — “Tliose who reside at A vimnkta-tirtlia acquire 
immortality and finall}^ merge into Me. What more do j^ou wish to 
Iiear?”--2G. 

Paravati said : — “ '\raliridcva ! indeed the glories of Avimukta-tirtha 
are very great and 1 am never satiated of heaj iug them. Pray tlioreforo 
tell me something imu'e about it. ” — 27. 

Mahadeva said Paravati ! jon are supremely dear to Me, I, 
therefore, again continue the relation of the glories of Aviniukta. Listen 
then with attention. It has endless glories. Those who reside here are 
superior to tliose who live on mere salads and have subdued their passions, 
live on raw grain, siiiping only as much water as remains on the tip of the 
kujla blade and that too after a month, seated on the root of trees, sleeping 
on the slabs of stone, refulgent like the Sun, free from anger and thus vir- 
tuous in many ways. In other words, those practising austerities elsewhere, 
do not get so much perfection, and those living here are like those en- 



OE AFTER CLXXXUI. 


m 


shrined in heaven. 0 PSrvatl ! as there is no one of the male being like Me, 
and no one of the female sex like you, similarly neither there is, nor will 
there be, any place sacred like the Avimukta-tirtha. Paramayoga, Paramagati 
and Paramamok^a are obtained at Avimukta-tirtha, consequently there 
is no such place like this. Devi ! now liear the most secret thing. One 
attains this Avimukta-tirtha, by virtue of the yoga practised during 
hundreds of lives. My devotee at this place attains yoga and emancipa- 
tion, in course of one life. Devi! People coming here with unshaken 
devotion attain final beatitude. There is no such place, nor will there be 
any like it, on the earth. Dharma is always inherent there in its full form. 
People of all the four varnas (castes) attain emancipation here.” — 28-41. 

Paravati said ; — “ I have heard the glory of this sacred city of yours, 
pray also tell me whom do the Brahmanas worship through sacrifices. - 
42. 

Mahudeva said : — “Beautiful lady ! They all worship Me, by reciting 
sacred mantras and by performing sacrifices. Those who worship Rudra 
and Mahiideva have no fear in this world. Devi ! There are two kinds 
of worship, cw., with mantra and without mantra. There are two kinds 
of yogas, viz. — Stinkhya and Yoga. Those who regard Me omnipresent 
are Yogis. Those who see Mo as the soul in all the beings and never 
separate Mo from themselves never perish .Nirguna and Saguna are two 
kinds of yogas. Saguna yoga is comprehensable but Nirguna yoga can- 
not even bo. comprehended Devi I 1 have told you what you asked 
Me to explain.” — 43-48. 

Paravati said. — “ ^iva ! I wish to know the three kinds of devotion 
mentioned by you. ” 

Mahfldeva ; — “ 0, Paravatt thou who art attached to thy devotees t 
A man reaches the end of all his troubles by Safikhya and Yoga ; and 
one who clings to Me even by living on alms merges into Me. Those who 
are deluded by seeing dilfereut things in theSastrasdo not see Me. Those 
who are contented by being possessed with the supreme knowledge, and 
incessantly think of Me by being blessed with clear conscience, through 
Divine knowledge, they get felicity and bliss. — 49-54. 

A learned man sees me endowed with the three Gnnas, Devi ! 
I have explained everything before you, now let Me know what you feel 
desirous to hear. — 55. 

I shall again relate to you even Jibe most secret thing for your satis- 
faction, pray hear with attention.” 

Para vat! : — “ Which form of youi-s do the Yogis see ? I beg you to 
remove My doubt.” 

Mah&deva : — The true nature of mine is really formless. But 
that which is manifested as my form is mere light — consisting light, to 
realise which a learned man ought to make groat efforts. The Lord of 
the universe in his formless condition cannot bo described. It can only 
be described, if at all, by the presisteut efforts of hundreds of yekrs. 

Paravati : — Mah&deva ! What is the extent of that shrine where 
you dwell endowed with atoms ? Pray explain all that to Me.” 


168 


TTIE MATfiTA PUr^ANA^f, 


Mabadeva It is two yoj anas in extent between the East and 
the West. — 50-61. 

Within that space Aviinukta-tfrtlia is situated liavin^ a width of half 
yojana extending from North and South ; and the sacred Ganges flows 
by it. — 62. 

The attendants of ^iva, some having faces like those of infuriated 
lions and wolves, have their abode there between BliisrnachandikA. and 
Parvatetivara. Some of them have hunch-backs, some are dwarfs, and some 
crooked. On the same spot Mahakala, Chandaghanta, Dandachandeivara, 
Ghantilkarna, and others, having huge stomaclis, gigantic forms, armed 
with clubs, tridents, &c., stand and guard the Avimukta-tapovana. Many 
of the attendants armed with tridents, clubs &c., stand at the gate. — 03*67. 

0 Pdravati ! one who gives away a cow, that gives good quantity of 
milk, in charity, with its horns mounted with gold, its hoofs covered with 
silver, having three colours, to a Bnihmana well-'*ersed in Vedas, on the 
banks of Varanasi, undoubtedly liberates seven gonoratior'.s of hi- ancestors 
from bondage. So also one who gives away in charity to a Brahmana, gold, 
silver, cloths, and grain, Ac., in that Aviinukta-t irtha acquires everlasting 
merits. People become free from diseases ])y bathing at that tirtha and get 
the benefit of ten asivamedha sacrifices. Any virtuous man who gives some 
sort of charity to the Braliinauas after his ablulion attains felicity and 
shines like fire. One wlio giva^s away grain in (diarity at the conQiienc^' 
of the VaruiiA. and Asi with the Ganges, according to the prescribed rites, 
is not re-born. Devi ! I have narrated to you the glory of this sacred 
place. One who fasts ami then feeds tl»e Br/dnuanas in this tirtha 
attains the benefit of Sautrainani saerifiee. J)ear IViravati, one who lives 
on only one meal a day for a month washes olY all his lifelong sins. 
One wlio enters llu'' lire ae(‘urdjng K; the prescriixal rFlt^s undoubteilly 
enters My mouth. Ibio wlio givms away uni gnld (‘oins in charity gets 
the benefits of Agnihotra saciiiirc, and om* who gives a^vay incenso, Ac, 
derives the benefit of liaving given auay land in (‘harity. One who 
gives awa}^ a broom gets tin) benefit of liaving given away 560 gold coins. 
The giver of sandal gets tlio beneiit of having given away 1,000 gold 
coins, — f8-S0. 

The charity of flowers and garlands is equivalent to the giving 
away of 1,00,000 gold coins. riie one who sings Jiynuis aiicompanied by 
music begets everlasting benefits.’' 

Paravatl : — “ Mahadova ! you have indeed told me wonderful things, 
but please let me know the reason of your not leaving this unique place.*^ 

Alahadeva : — “ In the days of yore Lord Brahma had five heads 
and the fifth one was shining like gold. On(*e Brahma said to Me ‘ I know 
thj^ genesis,’ when I angrily cut oil’ His fifth liead with the nail of my 
left toe. Then Brahma said ‘’riiou hast beheaded Mo without any faidt, 
and through My curse thou shalt bear a skull as the badge of the 
sin of iiiflicting injury on Brahma. Thou shalt roam about in the sacred 
places.’ — 81-80. 

Hearing His curse I went to the Hirnrilaya mountain where I 
begged Narayana to give me alms, lie on his side dug His fingernail 


GB AFTER GLXXXIV. 


169 


and a volume of blood rushed out, and it spread itself to the length of 
50 yojanas, but the skull was not filled. — 87-89. 

After that, that stream of blood ran for a thousand Divine years; 
Lord Visnu said to Me ‘ How such a skull was brought into existence. 
Explain it to Me to drive away My doubts. ’ I replied, ‘ Dova ! hear about it. 
In ancient times Bralim^ was endowed with Divine form after thousands 
of years asceticism and through His asceticism He got a fifth head shining 
like gold. I cut it off in anger. It follows Me wherever I go.’ — 90-94. 

Hearing such words of Mine the Lord Paru§ottama said * go back 
and please Brahmil and by His glorious power this skull will become 
fixed in your holy abode (k§ettra). Dear Paravati after hearing that 
I went to all the sacred places, but nowhere did this skull leave Me. 
But when I came and settled Myself at My Avinmkta-tirtha the effects of 
the curse instantly disappeared, and through the favour of Visnu the 
skull also fell down there and was divided into a thousand pieces. It 
disappeared like the riches a man obtains in bis dream. — 95-99. 

This place I have made the dispeller of the sin of killing a BrAhmanft 
(Brahrua-haty4) and it is the cremation ground of all the Devas including 
Myself. — 100. 

I annihilate the universe by manifesting Myself as the Destructor 
and also create everything. Devi ! this sequestered place of Mine is most 
dear to Me. — 101. 

My devotees us well as the devotees of Visnu and the Sun, who come 
and die hero merge into Me.” — 102. 

Pdravatt said: — “ Deva ! This place is indeed most wonderful as 
described by you. This is your place as pointed out by Visnu. Yoi* 
reside here, and for these reasons other sacred places cannot equal it. 
The places where Visnu and Mahadova dwell are worth a thousand sacred 
places. O Deva ! You are My salvation and you are said to be the eman- 
cipation of Brahma and all others.” — 703-100. 

Bere ends the one hundred and eighty-third, chapter on 
the Mahdtmyd of Kdsi. 


CHAPTER CLXXXIV. 

Mah4deva said — Those who reside here, with the desire of winning 
emancipation, to them this sacred place is like a wood of penance 
(tap6vana). People residing here are never re-born. The dwellers of 
this place get the same end as those who are eager to acquire beatitude by 
means of Divine Knowledge. This place is extremely dear to Me. It gives 
everlasting fruits and immortality. This Avimukta-ththa is also called 
the cremation ground, and is most mysterious. Those who do not feel 
attached to it are really the losers. The dust of this place falling on the- 
sinners bestows on them beatitude. The piles of sins, huge as the 
mount Sumdru and Maudar&chala, become annihilated there. — 1-7. 

There is Avimukta temple which is renowned by the name of ” The 
cremation ground.” It is the “ cave of retreat and wood of ascetism” and 
22 



170 


TUB MATBYA PURAJfJAM. 


the tap6vana of the Lord ^iva. There NarSj^apa, Brahmft, etc., the S&dhya 

Devas, the Yogis etc., carry on Their worship of SanStana l^iva and My 
devotees worship Me. Those who die at Avimukta-tirtha get the same 
benefit as those who perform sacrifices and devote themselves to asceticism. 
Brahmfi the Creator, the Destructor of the universe, the Virata manifesta- 
tion o£ Bhagavan, tlie seven realms, — they all originate here ; ano Mahara- 
loka, Janaloka, Tapaloka, Satyaloka, the great Yoga of the mind, all the 
immoveable and moveable creation upwaids to Brahiiia, the origin of 
beings, — they all appear here.— 8-13. 

Those who never forsake this place remain in peace. This is the 
best and holiest of all the places. It is tiu host place among tlie Kshetras. 
the foremost of the cremation grounds, it is the best of all the streams, 
mountains and lakes ; and, tliereforc, this Avimukta-tirtlia is adoicd by the 

pious devotees of iJiva. This Aviinukta-tirtha is tlie great seat of Unihma 
also. Brahma resides hero. It is inhabited and gu.^. ’ded by Bjah ua. It 
is as if all the realms are located hero. The golden Mount Ale* u ami 
the hard asceticism practised by Brahma are inherent here. Bralinui 
remains merged in the imago of ^iva. It is the holiest of tlie holy. It is 
inhabited by all the hoary people. — M-19. 

The Brahmanas worshipping the sun have attained tlie position of 

Devas in this place. Those who remain firm in tlicir devotion to t^iva and 
die at this Avimukta-tirtlia. attain emancipation. Th(;he \v1k> reside there 
for eight months and sulidue their passions or stay there oven for four 
months in sexual abstinence, also attain emancipation. — 20-24. 

How far may I describe its glory? Even tlic uncliaste women dying 
there attain blis.s. AIoii attain hero Yoga and bliss, imattainablo by men 
elsewhere. Those wlio stick to Avimukta-tirtha and do not go clscwliere, 
undoubtedly become adorable by Brulnnanas. t)iie who resides in Avimukta- 
tirtha becomes undoubtedly like Ale. — 25-27. 

It is called Avirnukta-Urtliu on account of My lioing present in it at 
all times. Those who dv) not resort to Avimukia-tirtha arc idiots, full of 
the darkness of ignorance, Tamoguna. Such men always pass through tlio 
ordeal of birth and rebirth. Licentiousness, anger, greed, attacliinent, 
hypocrisy, drowsiness, sh^th and backbiting, — these obstacles created by 
Indra are always present hero and many liindrancos overpower a man. 
In spite of all that, this sacred place is tlie most holy for the devotees. 
All the Risisand Devas have also called it to be the most sacred place. — 
28-32. 

Tbe body made of clay and fat becomes purified at. Aviniukta-tirtlia, 
because Lord ^iva keeps guard there. Consequently, the learned do not 

bury there. The devotees who w()rship J^iva, tlion merge in Him, like the 
offering of clarified butter in the fire. They ci^nsidor tluur souls blessed 
on merging in the Lord, and tlie Itisis, Devas, Yatis, Rjiksasas, reside 
in Avimukta-tirtha and devote themselves to meditation and sacrifices, etc. 

No one dying there goes to hell. There, by the favour of ^iva, every 
being gets his final bliss. This tirtha is two-and-a-half yojanas in extent 
towards the east and the west. The rivers Varanasi, etc., at the 




CEAFTER GLIXXV. 


m 


distance of half a y6jana from each other are situated there, and the ^ukla 
river flows alongside. — 33-40. 

Mabddeva has thus described this K§etra. People desirous of 
supreme felicity attain knowledge and yoga ; and those who devoutfully 
always reside there are free from all cares. This place of asceticism always 
remains full of the Siddhas, the Qandharvas, etc. There is no river or 
mountain equal to this Avimukta-tirtha. — 41-43. * 

All the sacred places located on the earth as well as in the heaven 
are second to tliis place. It is the supreme of all. Those who, after 
renouncing the world and subduing their passions recite the Rfidra 

Mantra a hundred times, such devotees of l^iva undoubtedly enjoy in the 
company of the Lord Mahadeva. Those who have forsaken all desires 
and are Arm and fixed in devotion, become free from fear after attaining 

Siva and are never born. — 44-48. 

They are not born even after hundreds and billions of Kalpas. As 
the ocean is full of various kinds of gems, so is Avimukta full of many 
attributes. This place is the giver of delusion to the non-devotees, and 
devotion to those who are staunch adherents of ^iva. The fools, regarding 
this as cremation ground, do not consider it to be the foremost of all the 
sacred places, and the learned do not abandon it, in spite of hundreds of 
obstacles. They go to such a place, whence they are never reborn and are 
liberated from the pangs of old ago, death, etc. They go direct to the 

realm of ^iva. — 49-53. 

Those who are desirous of beatitude beget such as causes them the 
utmost gratification. The end attained by the mere residence at Avimukta- 
tirtha is not obtained even by charities, asceticism, sacrifices and Divine- 
Knowledge, etc. — 54-55. 

The best ren«5dy for all sinners is their attainment of Avimukta- 
tirtha. The various classes of people dying at Avimukta-tirtha in their 
attachment for ^iva are never re-born. The meditation, sacrifices, asceti- 
cism and charity performed at Avimukta-tirtha beget eveidasting fruits, 
and those who die there attain supreme bliss. The sinner, repenting on 
thousands of his sins, going there attains felicity. Those who die there 
need not think of Uttarfiyana or Dak^inilyana ; for every hour for them is 
equally auspicious. There is no occasion for thinking of auspiciousness or 

inauspiciousness there, for that place, owing to the glory of ^iva, is always 
sacred. Thus all the Risis hoai'd the glory of such a sanctified place 

and of l^iva from Svfimikartika, and began to meditate over them. — 56-63. 

Eere ends the one hundred and eighty- fourOi chapter on the 
Avimukta-tirtha. 


CHAPTER CLXXXV. 

Sfita said : — “O Risis ! tlio godly devotees, seers, and the pious resid- 
ing at Avimukta were filled with astonishment and overcome with delight. 
They again said to Sv8.mikartika : — ‘ You have been born of the glory of 



172 


TUB MATB7A VVRA^JAU. 


l^iva and Brahma. You are dear to the Bnihmanas and are the knower of 
Brahma. You liave attained the realm of Brahma and are kind to the 
Br&hmanas. — 1-3. 

Like Brahma, you are the Creator, we all salute you ! We have all 
become purified by listening to this narration We have realized the 
liighes|^ secret. May you be blessed ! We arc now going to that mundane 
region of the Lord !^iva whore He, the Lord of all, is practising austerities 
unmoved, for the benefit of the Universe. — 4-6. 

By the virtue of His asceticism Ho merges Himself in the formid- 
able form and remains adorned with all His attributes along with His 
attendants. The Devas, Brahmft, devotees and the Siddhas are eager to 
see the Lord, through your favour. Wo are, therefore, eager to pass our 
days at Avlmukta ; for blessed are those who reside there. — 7-0. 

Those who are righteous, devoid of anger and Just, having their 
passions under their control, devoted to the practice of yoga, attain eman- 
cipation there. There the devoted yogis adore the Lord Siva, the Giver 
of beatitude, and attain bliss. It is the most mysterious of all the crema- 
tion grounds ; and no one attains bliss in this world without the help of 
yoga. — 10-12. 

People residing at Avimukta beget both yoga and bliss. In other 
words, they attain sublime felicity in this life. J.)('va ! the inhabitants of 
Avimukta get bliss daring their lifetime, such is its glory. C)nco upon a 
time Vedavyasa could not get any alrjis tliere, and, agitated with the pangs 
of hunger lie felt inclined, to jironounee a curse. He passed a i)eriod of 
six months with great privations, — 13-16. 

He sai<l to himself, ‘ llow has tliis ]daee ])ecome cursed and doles mo 
no alms. The Brahmanas, tlio Ksatriyas, the willows, tlio mai ricd ladies, 
none of them give mo any alms— whieli is most strange. I shall pronounces 
my curse on all of them and on the whole city to the cflect that this sacred 
place may become devoid of its sanctity and that there be no pelf and 
learning left among the pO(.)plc of all ll.o three classes residing here. No 
friendship sliould exist among tlicm. 1 shall also create such troubles for 
those icsiding at Avimukta us tlioy may not attain their eiids.^ — 17-21. 

Bealisi»}g the intentions of Vedavyasa, the Lord ^iva became terrifi- 
ed and said to Parvati : — 22. 

‘ Devi ! hear Me. Now Vc<lavyasa is i)repared to pronounce his 
curse.’ — 23. 

Paravali enquired Why is VyAsa so angry ? Who has annoj^ed 
him ? What harm has been done to him that lie is disposed to pronounce 
a curse ?’ —24. 

Malifl-dcva said: — ‘ Dear Parvati ? He has practised glorious asceticism 
for a long time. He has lived in contemplation 1)y observing the vow of 
silence for a period of 12 years. He begged for alms when he felt hungry, 
and no one gave him even half a morsel. IIo has tlius passed six months 
under serious privations ; consequently, he has now made up his mind to 
pronounce a curse. ^01110 plan should bo devised to obviate the situation 
before be pronounces liis curse. Vedavyasa lias attained supernatural 


GUAPTEU CLXXXV. 


173 


powers, and everyone 5s afraid of his curse. He has the power to bring 
about what is not destined and to mar the efieots of destiny. I shall 
assume tlie form of a human being and engage him in conversation, when 
alms sliould be given to him.’ — 25-30. 

Piirvati, thus instructed, also assumed human form and said to 
Vedavyasa, ‘ Bhagavana ! come hero and receive alms. Seer ! you never 
blessed iny home.’ — 31-32. 

Hearing which, the sage cheerfully accepted the alms that contained 
savoury victuals. He did full justice to it, and was completely satisfied. 
Afterwards the seer made his salutations to llie Lord Mahi'«deva and 
ParvatJ, and said to the latter : “ 0 one with beautiful eyes ! This is the 
residence of the Lord Mahadeva and Parvati, and the Ganges flows tlirougli 
this place. Ihdicious eatables are also obtainable and emancipation is 
begotten. Wlio would not therefore reside in such a Kai^i ? ” — 33-3G. 

Having said so, Vedavyasa looked at the sacred Kiidi and began to 
think of the delicious aims that he was given. Mahadeva and Parvati 
were standing before liiin. Lord said to him : — “ Seer ! you have a very 
choleric temper, and you should not therefore reside in Karfi ” — 37-39. 

Vedavyasa said : — ‘‘ Deva ! Be pleased to permit me to come here 
on two days, viz., the eighth and fourteenth clays of the fortnight, that is, 
Astaini and ChaturdajJi,” to which the Lord replied in the affirmative. — 40. 

Then the I.ord disappeared then and there, and so did the Godtless 
Parvati. In that way, in the days gone by, the illustrious Vedavyasa, 
knowing the glory of Karfi, fixed his abode in its vicinity ; and consequently 
all the learned men sing the praises of this sacred place. — 41-42. 

0 Ilisis ! The blasphemers of the Devas and the Brahnianas, the killers 
of the Brahinauas, those ungrateful and other sinners, the scoffers of the 
preceptors, sac red places, and temples, the instigatore, do not reside in 
tlie sacred Kn!<i, as Dariclanayaka, one of the attendants of Si\a, is posted 
there to oust them, DancJaiiayaku’s duty is to guard the place, so He ought 
to he adored with incense, flowers etc. He should be reverentially 
saluted, and his mantra should also be repeated and counted on the bead. 
Various classes of peoi.)le reside in the sacred KTisii, and all kinds of snakes, 
Bcoipions, etc., also abound there. They also become the attendants of 
^iva. The Devas, devoted to J^iva and residing there, also attain the 
everlasting realm, according to Their choice. The sacnjcl KArf! is superior 
even to the heaven of the Devas. It is like Brahmaloka. It has been laid 
out by tlie Yogic power of the Lord, and there is no other region like 
it.— 43-50. 

The sacred KSeJ? is the fulfillor of cherished desires. It is free from 
diseases and the place of asceticism and yoga. Lord Siva, enshrined there 
is shining in His full glory. Those who practise asceticism there, attain 
the benefits of sacrifices, of bathing at sacred places, and of giving charities. 
The past and the present sins committed through ignorance are dispelled by 
mere sight of Avimukta. Men of calm disposition and those who keep 
their passions curbed, whatever charities they perform at Avimukta, get 
a huge return. Those who worship iS^iva at Avimukta are not reborn 



174 


TTIE MATSYA PURANAM. 


in this world for crores of cycles. Thousands of Devas enjoy the company 
of l^iva and, therefore, this place is tlie best of all. Those who adore 
Mah&deva there, are liberated from their sins and become like * Devas. 
All the sacrifices performed with a motive are liable to ordain the 
re-birth of a man, but those who die at Avimukta are never born. 
The sjars and planets perish at a certain fixed period, but those dying at 
Avimukta are not liable to it. Those who die there are not re-born even 
after crores of cycles (knT.pns). Blessed are those who reach the sacred 
Manikarpika at their last hour, after having undergone the trials of 
life. They are also blessed who do not forsake Avimukta realizing the 
grim pinch of the Kali-yuga. The inhabitant of Avimukta, when ho 
goes elsewhere, is ridiculetl by every bod}’. — 51 -Cl. 

Those who succumb to the influeuco of Inst, anger, and greed, go 
away from that sacred place for fear of Dandainiyaka. Ignorant people, 
devoid of meditation, also those oppressed with ]>iis» ries, attain (iiiiinci- 
pation there. There are five principal jdaees there, I'h : Diu^Asva. lodha, 
Lokfirka, Ke^ava, Viuduinfulhava, Matdkarnikil. 1 have related to you 

the glory of Avimukta, as narrated by Lord Siva to IVirvati. — ()5-G9. 

Here ends the one hundred and ciijhty- tijtli chapter on the Mahdtmya 
of AviinukLa Tirlha. 


CHAPTEU CLXXXVI. 

The RIsis said “ J^uta ! you liavo \ve11-(leRcrii)od to hr the calory of 
Avimukta. Now we arc ea^^er to hear the ^lory of tlio sacred Narmada 
which be good enough to dcscrilio to u.s. (hnknra, the coidluenco of 
Kapila, and the dispcllcr of all sins, tlie Lord Aniare.^a, are also said 
to be situate there. flow was the saerrd Narina«la saved from 
annihilation at the time of the deslrnclion of the nnivtuse ? How was Mai- 
kanddeyasaved from annihilation ? liavo told ns something about them, 
but we wish to liear more of them in <l(4ail.’^ — 1-3 

^ilta said : — Once before, the King Y'udliisthira asked the sage 
Marakanddcya the glory of Narniuda, when the kiijg was practising aus- 
terities in the forest. — 4-5. 

Yudhisthira said “ Virtuous one ! through your grace, I liavo heard 
about various kinds of Dharmas, hut I feel eager to hear more about them 
which please narrate to me. First of all, please explain to me how the 
Narmada came into existence.” — 0-7. 

M&rkandcya said : — “The Narmada is the foremost among all the 
rivers, it is the dispeller of everybody’s sins. King Yudliisthira ! the 
glory of the sacred Narmada as [ have read in several Puranas, I shall ex- 
plain to you. Sacred is the river CSaiiges at Kankhala, sacred is Sarasvati 
in Kuruksetra. The sacred Narmada is supreme everywhere — in the 
forest as well as in places of habitation. The waters of the Sarasvati 
purify one in course of five days, those of the YamuiiA in seven days, of 
the Ganges instantaneously, and of the Narmada at the mere sight of it. 



GHAPTEB CLXXXVI. 


175 


The NarmadA is most charming and attractive of the country of Kalinga, 
the forest of Amarakantaka, and of all the three realms. — 8-12, 

King ! the Devas, the demons, the Gandharvas, the ascetics, the 
Risis — they all attain emancipation on the banks of the NarmadA. One 
who follows the prescribed order of religion and observes a complete 
fast for a day, after bathing in the Narmada, liberates his seven genera- 
tions from sin. The manes of those who offer them libations at Jalesvara, 
after bahting in it, remain happy till the end of the cycle. — 13-15. 

Lord Siva becomes pleased with one who bathes in the NarmadS, 
near the hill abounding with the group of Rudras, and worships Them 
with sandal, flower and incense. The Lord is enshrined close to that 
hill, to the west, where one ought to offer libations to the manes with 
devotion and by keeping one’s passions under control. Libations of 
water mixed with barley should be offered to the Devas, and water mixed 
with sesamum should be offered to the rnanes. One who does so makes 
his seven generations go to the heaven, and he himself enjoys in heaven 
for 60,000 years with the celestial nymphs, the Gandharvas and the 
Siddhas. Afterwards ho is born as a wealthy man ; and, after a life of 
charities ho returns to the very same sanctified place. — 16-22. 

Then he goes to tlie domain of l^iva, after liberating his seven 
generations from sin. The length of the Narmada is 100 yojanas, and 
its breadth is 16 miles. There are 60,00,60,000 of tirthas round the 
Narmadih One who is calm and has his passions under his control, free 
from anger, and the sin of causing pain to others, and is a benefactor of 

all the beings and a devotee to the Lord ^iva, if he happens to die at 
the banka of the Narmadil,, resides in heaven for a century, consisting of 
the length of days of the gods. There he is in the company of the 
nymphs, and is adored by the Siddhas and the Gandharvas with incense, 
flowers, &c. Ho has also the privilege to live in the company of the 
Devas of all classes ; and, on being re-born, becomes a most illustrious 
king ! There, he is the owner of a majestic palace, studded with jewels 
and supported on mighty pillars of precious stones, surrounded by a 
large retinue of servants and maids. Majestic elephants and a multitude 
of neighing horses adorn his gateway. — 23-31. 

His gateway is also illustrious like that of Indra. In such a place 
he is the beloved lord of beautiful ladies, and enjoys liimself for a divine 
century, without being oppressed with any kind of disease. — 32-33. 

One who dies at Amarakantaka gets many blessings and never perisbee 
by fire, poison drowning. He gets the power of moving about in the 
space with tlie rapidity of the wind. The man who dies at Amaresa is 
blessed with all kinds of enjoyments including 3,000 maids who are at his 
command for a considerable length of time. One who offers flowers, in- 
cense, &c.y to the Rudras enshrined round the hill, after having his ablution 
in the river, undoubtedly wins the pleasure of all of Them. — 34-38. 

To the west of the hill is enshrined Lord Maherfvara, where one 
who offers libations, according to the prescribed rituals to the Devas and 
the Pitfis after his bath, is the bestower of heaven on his seven generations^ 
and he himself resides in heaven for sixty divine years, where various 



176 


TUB MAT&YA PUliAB^\M. 


comforts and enjoyments fall to his lot. On coining down from heaven, he 
is born in a Tvealthy house, and is moat charitable and righteous. He again 
remembers the sacred Narmada and goes there, where ho again works out 
the salvation of his ancestors of the past seven generations, and then 

attains the abode of ^iva. When he is reborn, he becomes a matchless 
sovereign. Such is the glory of Amarakantaka. Now hear of the tirthas 
situated to the west of the hill. The lake dales vara, situated there, is 
renowned all over the world, where, by perfo-ming the daily jrayers and 
by offering libations to the manes, the Pitris remain satiated lo their fill, 
for a period of ten years. — 39-46 

The river Kapila ts on the right bank of the Narmada which is 
covered with Arjuna and various kinds of trees. This river is renowned 
as the most sacred in all the three realms, and there are millions of tirthas 
round it. — 47-48. 

It is said in the ruranaa that the trees on its ])anks . Iso attain 
emancipation after they decay. The Vis(.‘ilyakarani is <ho second river; liy 
bathing in it one becomes ])uiifuMl instantly. All tlie Devas, the Kiimarns, 
the Gandharvas, the mighty serpents, tlie llAksliasas, the Yaksas and 
the ascetics, reside on the Mount xVmurakantaka. The Ui^is, going 
there, liave sanctified tliat river. I'liis river is also the dispolhu* of all sins. 
One who passes a night there in celibacy and oliservesa fast after bath- 
ing in it, liberates his seven generations. In ambient times, both thd 
Kapila and the VijiAlyii were laid out by the God to fulfil their missions. 
The people bathing there derive the benefit of Ativamodha sacrifice. Only 
he who dies there is liberated from all his sins and attains ltudral6ka. — 
49-57. 

In fact, the devotee liatliing in any tirtha situated on llic banks of the 
Narmada gets tlic benelit of xVsvamedha sacrifice. Those residing on the 

northern bank of this river attain Uiidrahska. Sankara has said that by 
bathing in and giving eliaritics at (he vSarasvati, the Ganges and the 
Narmada, one begets equal btmefils. '1 he resident of Amarakantaka 
remains in Rudraldka fora 100 oroicsof yenr^. ^fhe waters of the NarmadAi 
adorned with froth and rip]»les aie worthy of being sainted. The sacred 
waters dispel all the sins. The holy Narmada dispels all the sins, includ- 
ing those of killing Br/ihmanas, and bestows sublime lustre. This 
great river is held saered in all the three worlds. The people residing at 
Vateivara, Gaugadvara, and Tapovana, are said to bo great ascetics. By 
bathing in the Narmada and at its continence with the sea, one gets tenfold 
merits. — 58-05. 

Here ends the one liuiidrcd and cujhiysixlh chapter on the NarmadA 

MahiVmya, 


CHAPTER CLXXXVIl. 

Marakandeya said ; — The Narmada is most sacred and renowned 
and the sages desirous of emancipation liave made numberless divisions, 
each of the measure of a Braliimin’s sacred thread. By bathing in them 
one is liberated from all sins. The sacred Jaleiivara is renowned in the 



GEAPfER OLXXXVII. 


177 


three worlds. la the days gone by the sages, the Maruts, and Indra, etc., 
shivering with fear spoke to l^iva ** Protect us.** — 1 « 4 . 

The Lord said Devas ! what is the fear in your mind which has 
brought you here ? whom dot you fear ? what are your troubles ? Tell me 
all about yourselves.’* — 5-6. 

Risis said : — “ 0 Mahftdeva ! the most illustrious and valiant demon 
V&nfisura is the owner of Tripura whicli moves about in the firmament. 
We have come to seek your protection, being afraid of him. You are 
our salvation ; pray, therefore, rescue us from the oppressions of that 
demon. Deva ! be pleased to do what may be good to the Devas, the 
Gandharvas and the Risis, etc. — 7-10. 

^iva said : — “ Do not be anxious. I shall do everything. You 
will attain peace ere long.’* — 11. 

After thus consoling them, the Lord went to the banks of the Nar- 
madii and began to devise plans for the destruction of that demon. — 12. 

He said to himself ‘‘How shall I kill the demon ? ’* He then thought 
of the sage Narada who appeared then and there ; and said “ Mah&deva ! 
what are your behests ? Why have you summoned me ? 1 shall carry out 
your commands.” — 13-1 4. 

i^iva said : — “ Narada ! virtuous women reside within the Tripura of 
VAnasura and by their virtue the Tripura moves about in the space. You 
should, therefore, go and delude those ladies in Tripura.” — 15-17. 

Hearing those words of the Lord, the sage went and did what be 
was directed to fulfil. That Tripura was decorated with various kinds of 
precious stones, was 100 yojanas broad and 200 yojanas in length. The^ 
sage saw Vanasura in such a magnificent place. — 18-19. 

The demon king who was seated on a majestic throne with the brilli- 
ance of the twelve suns, wearing earrings, coronet, garlands and armlets of 
gold studded witli precious stones ; stood up to receive the sage Narada ; 
and said “ Devarisi ! you have come here of your own accord. I offer 
you an oblation and water for washing your feet.” He then saluted the 
sage and said “ Let me know your commands and I shall carry them 
out. You have come here after a long time. Pray take your seat.” — 20-23. 

Afterwards AnaupamyS queen said: — “Narada* what dharma 
pleases the Devas ? wliich ordinance is most gratifying to them ? — 24-25^ 

Narada said : — One who gives away a cow and sesamum to a Brah- 
mana well-versed in the Vedas gets the benefit of having given away lands 
beyond the seas. He enjoys himself in a Vimfina shining like crores of 
suns for a considerable period. The lady who gives away after observing a 
fast the following trees: — Woodapple, roseapple, Kadamba, Ohampaka, 
Arfoka, Aeiwattha, plantain, banyan, pomegranate, Neein and Maliufl ; her 
breasts take the form of the woodapple, her thighs become like the trunk 
of the plantain tree. She becomes adorable like the sacred Actwattha tree 
and sweet smelling like the Neem, illustrious like the Champaka, grietlese 
like Arfoka, sweet like the Mahud, soft like the leaves of the banyan. She 
always gets prosperity. The giving of pumpkins and creepers is not 
considered high, and the husband of a lady who worships the Devas 
23 



TllB MATSYA PVRANAM. 


irs 


with "Kadamba blossoms discarding the food cooked and uncooked as 
well as fruits, obseiwing the vow of silence in the evening and worship- 
ping K§etrap&1a first ; remains in happiness. The ladies who keep a 
fast on A§tami, Chaturthi, Panchaml, liwAdaill, Safi l.rAiiti ; undoubtedly 
go to heaven. They are liberated from the ills of the iron age and 
Dbarmaraja does not admit such ladies in his town. — 26-37. 

Anaupamya said:— “It is owing to the virtues performed in tho 
past that you have graced our home with your august presence and I 
venture to enquire about other ordinances from jrou. Vindhy&bali the 
renowned queen of the king Bali is my mother-in-law. She is never 
pleased with me, and same is the case with my father-in-law. The 
vicious Kumbbivast is my lord’s sister who always treats me with con- 
tempt. How can I be happy under such circumstances ? Fray let me 
know by what ordinance they would turn friendly to me for which 1 shall 
remain very grateful to you.’’— 38-42. 

N4rada said : — “ By observing the ordinance just explained to you, 
Pdravatl became so dear to oiva, and similarly Lak^mi has become so dear 
to Vii^nu, and Sarasvati has become endeared to Brahma and Arundhati to 
Vasi^tha. Your lord will also become beholden to you by keeping up the 
very same ordinance and your father-iu-law and mother-in-law will also 
be silenced.” — 43-45. 

Hearing such words of Nfirada, that queen determined to observe 
that ordinance and said ; — “ Be pleased upon me, 0 sage ! 1 shall oITer 
you presents of gold, jewels, garments, which he pleased to accept. Let 
Lords Vi§nu and Siva be pleased upon me.” — 40-48. 

Nfirada said : — “ Lady ! you should bestow these presents on some 
Br&hmana who may be poor and in need of support. I am blessed with 
everything and you ought to show only your devotion to roe.” — 49. 

In such a way Ntlrada after having softened the minds of all the 
ladies in Tripura returned to his abode and a breach was thus created in 
Tripura. — 50-51. 

IZci’c ends the one hundred and eight) f- seventh ehap,ev 
on Narmadd vmhdtmya. 


CHAPTER CLXXXViri. 

M/irakandeya said: — Hear from me, Yudhisthira! what you have 
asked me to explain. Tho spot on the banks of the NarmadA where 
the Lord is enshrined is renowned as Mahefivara in all the three 
worlds and at the very same place lie devised His plans of annihilating 
Tripura.— 1-2. 

The Lord seated there lifted up the mount Mandarftchala to serve 
as His G4ndliva bow. He then put the snake V&suk! in place of the 
bowstring and Sv^mik^rtika in place of tbe quiver. Vi^nu in place of the 
arrow and the fire at the tip of it (the aiTow), Afterwards the wind was 
made to propel the aiiow. The four Vedaa took the place of the horsea 



GUAPT^n CLXXXVIII. 


179 


of the chariot. Ai^vintkumSra was employed in place of the reins and 
Indra in place of the axle. Kuvera formed the banner. — 3-5. 

Yama put himself to the right-hand of the Lord and K4la to the 
left. The groups of the Devas and the Gandharvas formed the wheels of 
the chariot. Brahmd. was the charioteer. In that way, Siva waited for 
thousands of years after making such preparations. When the three 
Furas (cities) fell in one line the Lord let out His arrow on Tripura when 
the inmates of Tripura became helpless and many kinds of destructive 
omens occurred there. The wooden horses began to neigh and painted 
ones to wink. All the demons saw themselves dressed in red in course of 
their dream. One who dreams of things hostile to him becomes void of 
power and intellect by the glory of the Lord. Then the wind Sfimbar* 
taka that blows at the close of a cycle commenced. — 6-14. 

It produced fire on account of which the trees of Tripura began to 
crumble down. There was chaos everywhere. All the gardens were 
burnt down in an instant. The huge storm devastated the bouses and 
trees that were on fire which furiously pervaded in all the directions. 
The dreadful tongues of fire gave a gory appearance to the whole of 
Tripura. Owing to the dense folds of smoke the demons could not go 
about from one house to another. The Tripura was thus agitated by the 
fury of the Lord. Thousands of palaces fell down in all directions and 
the inmates rushed towards the temples and thousands of demons were 
reduced to ashes groaning and moaning piteously. Various kinds of 
VimArjas and picturesque places were consumed by the fearful lire. — 
15-24. 

The pleasure gardens smiling with lotus beds were also burnt 
down along with the swans and cranes. The lofty palace tops looking 
like the mountain peaks, adorned with gems and lotuses, fell down on 
being burnt up, like a heap of clouds. The fire of the Lord’s fury burnt 
down quite unspai’ingly several children, cows, birds, horses, women, and 
many people sleeping as well as awake. — 25-28. 

The nymph like beauties of Tripura fell down burnt with their 
young ones hugged to their breasts. Some ladies wearing garlands of 
pearl and gold fell down on the ground consumed by flames and suffocated 
by smoke. Some beauties seeing their Lord lying on the ground jumped 
down from the upper storey of their mansion and wore instantly eaten up 
by the flames. The belaboured demons lying on tho ground got up with 
their sword but were soon consumed by the raging fire; Some ladies of the 
cloudy hue wearing garlands and armlets, some fair-coraplexioned beauties 
giving milk to their dear litle ones were also consumed by fire. Some 
ladies seeing their children eaten up by the fire sent forth shrilling wails. 
Some ladies wearing diamond and emerald necklaces and shining like the 
moon with their children in their lap, fell down on the ground after being 
charred. Some moon-faced beauties waking up from their sleep found 
their mansion on fire and began to lament on realizing their children 
being burnt. Some ladies adorned with golden ornaments fell down on 
the ground holding their consumed children in their arms. Some fainted 
away by the fumes of smoke and fell down grasping the hand of their 
maids. — 29-40. 



180 


TEE MATS7A PVRAEAM. 


Some overcome by the fury of the fire with their hands folded and 
uplifted began to pray as follows : — 

“ Agni ! if thou art angry with male population hostile to thee ; what 
is the fault of the women confined in the bouses like so many domesticat- 
ed Kokilas pent up in cages ? 0 sinner, merciless ! why art thou enraged 
with the women. Thou art devoid of right understanding, shame and 
heroic virtues and truth. 0 sinner ! hast thou not heard commonlj’’ 
said in the world that the women of the enemy should not be killed ? 
To consume is thy attribute but thou hast no mercy and right under- 
standing* Even a Mlechchha is moved to compassion to see a burning 
woman. This attribute of consumption is also useless in thee. It is 
simply thy vice, for what is the good of thy killing women ? O sinner, 
wicked, merciless, miserable wretch Agni ! thou art indeed most unfor- 
tunate. Thou burnest us by force.” — 41-48. 

She was rendered senseless after thus wailing and thinking of her 
children for a long time. The fire like an old foe of the preciou^ lives also 
dried up the wells and the tanks. — 49-50. 

“Mlechchha! what will be thy faith after burning us? Hearing 
such speech of the ladies the Agni said “ 1 am not consuming you 
of my own will. I have been born to cause destruction. I liave no 
mercy. I make my way everywhere freely througl\ the glory of Siva,” 
Afterwards Vaiuisura also saw Tripura burning. — 5153. ^ 

He said from his throne “ The wicked Devas of little valour have 
worked out my ruin which is decidedly due to the glory of i^iva. The 
Lord is consuming me without any examination of the reasons for his action. 

No one can kill me without the aid of l^iva.” — 54-55. 

Saying so the demon king abandoned his sons, friends, &c., and set 
out of the town with the idol of Siva placed on bis head putting many 
women and various kinds of jewels in front of the idol. lie stood up on the 
serial track and after making liis salutations to the Lord of the three worlds 
said “ Deva ! 1 have given up this town and you should not kill me. Deva ! 
if you, however, feel disposed to kill me, do not consume this idol of my 
worship which I have always adored with great devotion. Deva I I have 
been a slave of Thy feet in every past life and now I offer iny prayer to 

Thee, composed in these Totaka stanzas. O S5iva, i^aukara, ^arba, Tiara, 
Bhima, Maherfvara, the Destroyer of Kama, the Annihilator of Tripura, the 
wielder of the Trident ! I salute Tliee. O Pramadapriya, the one saluted 
by the demons as well as by the Devas, having a most illustrious face wider 
than that of a horse, a monkey and a lion ; I salute Thee. The Devas and 
the demons cause me pain. Deva ! 1 am always engaged in my devotion to 
Thee. I have not the wealth in shape of sons, wife, horses, &c. I only 
depend on my attachment to Thee. 1 am greatly oppressed and feel as if 
I were in hell. My inborn vice does not show signs of decline and my 
understanding leaves off virtues. The vices can only be abandoned by Thy 
grace.” — 56-66. 

One who would recite this prayer will be granted some handsome 
boon like the one granted to Vanasura by the Lord. — 67. 


CUAPTEIt CLXXXVIU. 


181 


Mah&deva, on hearing the above beautiful prayer said joyfully 

68 . 

“ Son ! Be not afraid. Get into the golden Pura and carry your 
family and relations with you. VanSsura ! you will not be killed 1>y 
the Devas from now till the time of your doom.” The Lord thus again 
granted such a boon to that demon ; and told him to roam about in the 
world fearlessly and also quenched the raging fire. — 69-71. 

“ For this reason the Lord did not consume his third Pura, which is 
sailing about the sky by the power of ^iva. The other two Puras fell down 

to the ground after being reduced to the ashes. I^ri^aila mount was formed 
on the spot whore the first city fell and similarly Araarakantaka sprang up 
on the spot where the second Pura fell down.” — 72-74. 

“ RAjendra ! On the top of those Puras the groups of Rudras were 
enshrined. The spot where the burning Pura fell down is marked by the 
famous Jwfiletlvara. When the tongues of fire flashed into the sky from 
the btirning city, there was a tremendous uproar among the Devas and the 
demons when the Tjord took down His arrow from His bow. All this 
happened on the Mount Amarakantaka. — 75-77. 

Consequently, the people observing fasts, &c., are born as sole mo- 
narchs in this world after a period of 30 crores and a thousand years when 
they have enjoyed the pleasures of the fourteen worlds.” — 78-79. 

O King Yudhi^thira ! in this way the sacred place Amarakanfaka is 
the most sanctified and therefore one who goes there on the occasion of a 
solar or a lunar eclipse and gets tlie merits ten times more than that of the 
A^vamedha sacrifice. One attains heaven by worshipping Maheifvara 
there. The sin of killing a Brahmana is driven away by going there on 
the occasion of a solar eclipse. This is the glory of the sacred Mount 
Amarakantaka. — 80-82. 

One who thinks of this Mount Amarakantaka with devotion 
undoubtedly gets the benefit of a hundred Chandraya^a ordinances. — 83. 

Amarakantaka is renowned in all the three worlds. It is adorned by 
the Siddhas, the Gandharvas, &c. — 84. 

It abounds with various kinds of flowers, creepers, deer, Siddhas and 

the Lord ^iva is enshrined there in pompany of His noble consort Paravati. 
It is pervaded by BrahmA., Visnu, Indra, Vidyadhara, Risis, Kinnaras, and 
Yaksas. The serpent Vdsuki loiters there. One who circumambulates that 
sacred Amarakaptaka gets the benefit of the Pundarika sacrifice. — 85-88. 

The Lord JwAletfvara is also adored by the Siddhas there. People 
dying there after bathing in the sacred waters attain heaven. King 
Yudhiip(hira, hear the benefits attained by those who die there on the 
occasion of an eclipse — solar or lunar. — 89-90. 

Such blessed one after being liberated from all actions and endowed 
with supreme intellect go and reside in the region of Rudra till the end 
of the cycle. — 91. 



Tm MATBYA WBltHAU. 


m 


Otores of Ri^is practise asceticism on the either side of Amareilvara. 
This Mount Amarakan(aka is one yojana in extent all round. Those who 
bathe in the sacred Narmadi with or without an object in view, are 
liberated from all their sins and go to the realm of Rudra. — 92-94. 

Here ends the one hundred and eighty-eighth cdiapter on ihe 
Varmadd mdhdtmya. 


CHAPTER CLXXXIX. 

Sflta said : — The king Yudhifthira along with the Risis asked MSrakan- 
deya. “ BhagvS,na ! be pleased to relate to us about the junction of the sacred 
Kaverl. We are desirous of hearing from you the account of the sacred 
E.4veri by bathing into which the vilest of sinners get emancipation.” — 2-3. 

Mdrakandeya said : — 0 Yudhisthira and 0 Risis ! hear with attention 
that even the illustrious Knvera the Lord of the Ya'<?as got his position 
by oblations in the sacred Kilveri. Now hear from me how he acquired 
ail his glory.— 4-5. 

At the confluence of the Kfiverl and the NarmadA, Kuvera practised 
asceticism after bathing in the sacred waters, for a divine century when 
the Lord f^iva on being pleased with him said “ Kuvera ! ask for what 
you wish.” — 6-8. 

Kuvera said : — ” Devadeva ! if you are pleased to grant me a boon, 
I wish to become the king of the YaLsas.” — 0. 

Hearing those words of Kuvera, the Lord said “ Bo it so ” and 
vanished then and there. — 10. 

Afterwards Kuvera by virtue of that boon became the liord of 
the Yaksas. — 11. 

Such is the glory of the confluence of the sacred Kslveri with the 
Narmada. It is the dispeller of all sins. Those wlio do not know about it 
are undoubtedly deluded. One should, thernfore, bathe there according to 
the prescribed rites. Both the sacred Kaveri and the Narmada are 
the most sacred. One who worships oiva after bathing there begets 
the benefit of A^lvaraedha sacrifice and goes to the realm of Rudra. 
One who is burnt there or keeps up a fast there, gets access everywhere. 
Mahd.deva has said that such a person after getting access everywhere 
enjoys the company of beautiful ladies in Rudraloka for 600060000 years. 
Afterwards he is born as a most illustrious king. One who driuks the 
water of the Kaverl and the Narmada gets tlie benefit of Chandrayana. 
He gets the benefit of havdng bathed in the confluence of the Ganges and 
the Yamunk and attains heaven. King! such is the glory of the junction 
of the Kfi.veri und the Narmada where, to bathe and perform charities is to 
dispel all ills and sins.” — 12-20. 

Here ends the one hundred and eighty-ninth chapter on 
the Harmadd mdhdtmya. 



OEAFFER OKC. 


188 


CHAPTER 0X0. 

M&raka^^oya said : — To the north of the NarmadA there is the sacred 
Mantrei^rara extending to one yojana. One who bathes there goes to 
heaven and remains with the Devas for 5000 years. The sacred GarjanA is 
quite close to it which has originated from the clouds. By virtue of 
the same the son of RAva^a was named Indrajlta. Here it is the 
MeghanAda-tlrtha by going where MeghanAda attained great glory. — 1-4. 

Further on is AmrAtaka by bathing where one gets the benefit of 
having given away a thousand cows. — 5. 

To the north of the NarmadA is Vitfruta. By bathing there and 
offering libation to the manes and the Devas one gets his desires fulfilled. 
Afterwards the devotee should go to the BrahmSvarta-tIrtha. — 6-7. 

BrahmA resides at BrahmAvarta-tlrtha almost every day. By bathing 
in it one goes to the realm of BrahmA. — 8. 

Then an advance should be made to the sacred AgAredvara after 
observing the prescribed ordinances. By going there one attains Budra- 
loka after being liberated from all bis sins. — 9. 

KapilA-tirtha should be visited afterwards. By bathing in it the 
devotee gets the benefit of having given away a milch cow in charity. — 10. 

One who goes to the sacred Karanja and bathes there attains the 
Goloka.— 11. 

Then the devotee should proceed to Kunderfvara where MahAdeva is 
in residence with Purvatl.— 12. 

One who bathes there is invulnerable even by the Devas. The 
picturesque Yimaletlvara should then be visited where the Lord has 
consecrated the DevatfilA. Dying there one attains the realm of 
Budra. — 13-15. 

Then he should go to the river Puekarin! by bathing into which 
the devotee becomes entitled to take his seat on the throne of Indra by 
his side. — 16. 

It is for these reasons that the sacred NarmadA coming out from 
the Lord l^iva is the best of all the streams and the giver of bliss to the 
animate and the inanimate world. This NarmadA has been described to 
be the most sacred by Siva the Lord of all the Devas before the Bisis. 
This river is adorable by all the Devas and is the dispeller of all sins and 
is venerated by the Devas, the Gandbarvas and the nymphs. 1 make my 
salutations to the sacred and peace-giving NarmadA that falls into the 
sea. — 17-21. 

I make my salutations to the sacred NarmadA adorned by the Siddhas, 
Bisis, born of i^iva, and the giver of boons to the virtuous. — 22. 

One who recites the foregoing prayers with devotion becomes well- 
versed in the Vedas if he is a BrAhmana, and becomes victorious in war 
if he is a E^atriya. The Vaiilys becomes wealthy and the i^fidra attains 
bliss. One anxious for wealth gets pelf. The sacred NarmadA is daily 
resorted to by the Lord Siva in consequence of which it is the most sacred 
and dispeller of all sins. — 23-25. 

Here ends the one hundred and ninetieth chapter on the Earmadd mdhAttnya. 



184 


TEE MATSYA PDRANAM, 


CHAPTER CXCI. 

M&rakan^eya said : — 0 king ! since that time the Devas, the Ri^ia 
and the Mnnis resort to the banks of the NarniadA and become free from 
anger and passions. — 1. 

Yudhii^thira said : — When did the trident of ^iva fall on this earth 
and what is the virtue of that spot where it fell ? Pray explain it to 
me. — 2. 

M&rakan4eya said : — The place where the trident fell is known by the 

name of ^dlabheda and one who worships there after bath gets the benefit 
of having given away a thousand cows in charity. One who remains there 

for three days and worships ^iva is liberated from the cycle ^of birth. 
Afterwards the devotee becomes blessed by worshipping Adityetfa, 
Nandikesfa at Bliimeifvara and Naradetlvara tirthas. Then Varuneda 
and Svatantreslvara sliould bo worshippe«i. By going to these five tirtbas 
the devotee gets the benefit of visiting all the sa.-rcd places. — 3-6. 

Then a visit should bo paid to Koti-tirtha where there was a great 
battle between the Devas and the demons and wliere the latter were 
deluded. There the heads of the valiant demons have been severed by 
the Devas and the latter have enshrined ^ulapani Malnldeva. By worship- 
ping Him one ascends to heaven even when he has not parted with 
his life. The portals of heaven have been shut by Indra by means of 
Vajrakilaka out of the narrowness of his mind. One who having eatdti 
a Bilva fruit and clarified butter carries a burning lamp on his head and 
perambulates Koti-tirtha becomes a most flourishing king. One who dies 
there goes to the region of Uudra and is born as a king iji his next life 
after which he goes to heaven. — 7-13. 

On the thirteenth day of a fortnight the devotee attains the benefits 
of all the sacrifices by bathing at the Bahunetra-tirtha. — 14. 

After that the beautiful Agastcsvara-tirtha should be visited. By 
bathing there one goes to the region of Brahtnii. One who bathes the Ix)rd 
in clarified butter on the fourteenth day of a dark fortnight and devotes 
himself to meditation observing perfect celibacy, resides in the realm of 

^iva along with 21 generations of his Pitris and never falls from there. On© 
who gives away a cow, a pair of shoes, umbrella, clarified-butter, blanket, 
etc., in charity and feeds the Brahmanas derives manifold benefits. — 15-18. 

After that Vilcivara-tJrtha should be visited. By bathing there one 
becomes the Lord of a throne. — ID. 

The Indra-tirtha on the right bank of the Narmadfi is renowned. 
One who fasts there for one night and then worships Janfirdana after 
bath gets the merit of giving away a thousand cows in charity and goes 
to the region of Yisnu. Then the devotee gets the benefit of giving 
away a thousand cows merely by bathing at Uisi-tirtha. — 20-22. 

Afterwards a visit should be paid to the tirtha of Brahmd. By bath- 
ing into it one attains the realm of Brahm4. — 23. 

Then merely by bathing at the shrine of Lord Amaraka^laka en- 
shrined by the Devas one attains the realm of Rudra. — 24. 



OBAPTER QXOI. 


185 


Afterwards the shrine of Riva^e^vara should be visited by whose; 
grace the sin of killing a Brfthma^ is cleansed. — 25. 

Then a visit should be paid to Ri^i-tirtha which exonerates tbs' 
devotee from all his debts (of duty) after which by going toBate^vara'b& 
is blessed. — 26. 

Bhlmerfvara Mah&deva should be visited next. By bathing there 
one is freed from all his troubles. By worshipping ^iva at the Tur&sanga- 
tirtha after bathing there one earns nis emanicipation. — 27-28. 

Afterwards the devotee should go and adore the moon at Soma-tirtha. 
By bathing there with devotion one gets divine form and remains in bliss 
for a considerable length of time like ^iva and enjoys life in the realm 
of Rudra for 60000 years. Later on a visit shonid be paid to the Lord 
Pingale^vara where by observing a fast for 24 hours one derives the 
benefit of having observed it for three nights. One who gives away a 
milch cow in charity goes and enjoj^ in the realm of Rudra for as many 
years as there are hair on the body of that cow. One who dies there 
remains iu the realm of Rudra till the existence of the Sun and the Moon. 
Those residing on the banks of the Narmadd. remain in heaven like 
the pious. The devotee should also visit the shrines of Sureilvara and 
Karkotaketlvara. — 29-35. 

There, undoubtedly the sacred Ganges appears on an auspicious day. 
By bathing at the Nandt-tirtha, the Lord Nandfi^a becomes pleased with 
the devotee and he ascends to the world of the Moon. Lord Dipe- 
livara should be visited next where there is the tirtha of Vedavy&sa in a 
beautiful forest. In the days gone by, the sacred NarmadS for fear of the 
sage Vyfisa flowed in the opposite direction and her course was turned to 
the south only when the sage forced her with a roaring cry. — 36-38. 

One who circumambulates that sacred place remains in the region 
of Siva till the existence of the Sun and the Moon. — ^39. 

There, VedavySsa becomes pleased and fulfils the desires of the devotee. 
One who lits up a wick on a platform after tying it round with thread 
remains in the region of Rudra till the end of the cycle. Afterwards 
the devotee should go to the Airandi-tirtha and bathe at the junction 
of rivers which liberates him from all sins. The river Airandi is 
revowned in all the three worlds and is the dispeller of all sins. The 
devotee should observe a complete fast after bathing there on the 8th day 
of the bright fortnight in the month of Aiivin and then he should feed 
a Br&hmapa. He gets the benefit of feeding crores of Brfihmapas. One 
who dives in the sacred stream after rubbing on his head tlra earth of 
that place is freed from all his sins. One who circumambulates that sacred 
plac e gets the merits of circumambulating idl the world along with 
theseven oceans. Afterwards one who gives away gold in charity after 
bathing in the water mingled with gold enjoys in Rudraloka seated iu a 
Vim&na of gold and is born as a king. Afterwards the devotee should go 
to the junction of the river Hikeu. That l^autiful ttrtha is renowned in 
the three worlds and the Lord ^iva resides there. — 40-48. 

The person bathing there becomes one of the chief attendants of 

u 



186 


TUB UATSYA PUBANAM, 


^iva. Then the Svfimik&rtika-tlrtha — the dispeller of all sins — should 
be visited. Merely by bathing there the devotee is purified of three kinds 
of sins. Then the devotee should bathe at Lingas&ra-tirtha by doing 
TThich one gets the merit of having given away a thousand cows in charity 
and he resides in the realm of Rudra. Bhanga-tlrtha is the dispeller of 
all sins. By bathing there the sins of the seven generations are annihilah 
ed.— 49-52. 

Then Batedvara the foremost of all the sacred places should be 
visited. By bathing there one gets the merit of having given away 
thousand cows. — 53. 

San^me4a-tirtha is venerated by all the Devas, by bathing there one 
becomes like Indra. — 54. 

By bathing at Koti-tirtha one undoubtedly becomes the ruler of a 
kingdom. One who gives any charity there gets manifold blessings. 
Any woman bathing there becomes the queen of Indra after becoming 
beautiful like Pirvatl. — 55-57. 

Angare^a-tirtha should be visited next. By doing it one remains 
in bliss till the destruction of the universe. — 58-59. 

One who bathes at Ayonisambhava-tirtha never experiences the 
sufferings of birth after which the devotee should bathe at P&ndavefla. — 60. 

By bathing there one gets lasting happiness and becomes invulner- 
able even by the Devas and goes and enjoys in the realm of Vispu and on 
being reborn he becomes a king. Then the devotee should bathe at Kathe- 
4vara tirtha and his desires are fulfilled by remaining there during the sum- 
mer solstice. Afterwards he should bathe in the river Chandrabh4g3. — 
61-63. 

The devotee bathing in the Chandrabhngfi goes to the region of the 
Moon. Afterwards he should visit the ludra-tirtha where Indra performed 
his worship. One who gives away gold in charity after bathing there 
or a black bull, remains in the realm of ^iva for as many years as there arei 
hair on the body of that bull and on its calf. He is afterwards reborn as 
a valiant king and is the master of thousands of white horses. — 64-68. 

Then the devotee should bathe at the Brahmfivarta-tirtha and offer 
libation to the manes and the Devas and observe a fast for the night. One 
who offers the balls of rice to the manes on the Kany4-Bankr&.nta gets 
innumerable blessings.— 69-70. 

One who gives away a milch cow after bathing at Kapila-tirtha gets 
the benefit of having given away the whole world in charity. The sacred 
place Narmadeffa is unparalleled. — 71-72. 

The person bathing there gets the merit of having performed Aifva- 
medba sacrifice. Sangamei^vara-tirtba is on the northern bank of the Nar- 
inadi. By bathing there the devotee gets the benefit of all the sacrifices. 
There the man doing even the smallest act of virtue becomes free 
from all ills and attains kingship. On the same bank of the Narmadfi 
is the Parmaifobhana-tirtha which is the best place of Aditya and Lord 
^iva has said that any charity performed there begets everlasting merits. 



OBAPTEn CXCt 


isr 


The ill-doers and those suffering from jaundice bathing there are 
freed from all the sins and go to the region of the Sun. — 77. 

On the seventh day of the bright fortnight in the month of Mftgha, 
he who remains there after observing a fast, is free from the effects of 
the old age, sufferings and is never dumb, blind and deaf. He is hand- 
some and the beloved of women. — 78-79. 

In such a way is the most sacred place and those who do not 
know about it are undoubtedly deluded. — 80. 

Afterwards one should go and bathe at Gangerfvara by means of 
which one attains heaven. — 81. 

He enjoys in the heaven till the conclusion of the sway of fourteen 
Indras. Nagerfvara-tapovana is close to that tirtha. One who bathes 
there attains NSgaloka and enjoys there for a long time. — 82-83. 

The devotee should also go to the shrine of Kuvera. There the 
Lord K&leilvara is enshrined and there Kuvera was blessed. The devotee 
bathing there attains all kinds of bliss. Afterwards a visit should be 
paid to M&rutSlaya-ttrtha. One who gives away gold in charity after 
bath with an easy mind, goes to V^yuloka, seated in the Puspaka-vim&na. 
A visit should be paid to Paya-tirtha, during the month of MSgha. There 
the devotee should break his fast in course of the night after bathing 
there on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight. Such a man does not 
experience the sufferings of birth. — 84-88. 

Then bathing should be performed at Ahaly4-t!rtba, and such a 
devotee enjoys intercourse with the nymphs. — 89. 

It was there where AhalyA attained emancipation after practising 
asceticism. One who worships Ahaly^ there on the I4th day of the lunar 
fortnight in the month of Chaitra, is always born as a male and is the 
beloved of women and handsome like Cupid. In the sacred Ayodhy& 
lies the tirtha of Sri RSmachandra where merely by bathing all the sins 
are dispelled after which, bathing should be performed at the Soma- 
tlrtha. — 90-93. 

By bathing there all the ills are dispelled. The Somagra-tlrtha 
is renowned all the world over. It is the dispeller of all sins. It has 
manifold virtues. One who observes Ch&ndrftyana fast there, attains the 
Cbandraloka after being liberated from all the sins. One who enters 
into the fire there or plunges himself into the water or lives only on fruits 
till the time of his death, and giyps up his life at that sacred place, 
is never re-bom. Afterwards the devotee should bathe at Subha- 
tiitha by means of which one attains Goloka. Then a move should be 
made to Visnu-tlrtha. There Yodhinlpnra is renowned where Lord Vi§nu 
fought with millions of demons. — 94-99. 

Lord Visnu is pleased by observing a full-day’s fast at i^uka-tirtha 
and the sin of killing a Br&hmana is dispelled there. — 100. 

Afterwards T&pasedvara-ttrtha should be visited where a deer fell 
down for fear of a hunter and dying in the sacred waters she ascended to 
the heaven which highly amazed the hunter. Such is the glory of that 
TApase^lVara-tlrtha. There is no such tirtha. Afterwards a visit should be 



18$ 


TE^ UATSTA VUn&SAU. 


paid to the sacred Brahma-ttrtha, which is also known as Amohaka where 
libations should be ofEered to the manes and ^rSddha should be performed 
on the fall moon- day or the Am&v&syS. There a huge-piece of rock like 
an elephant is lying in the water on which the balls of rice should be 
offered to the manes and there is very great merit in giving the balls of 
rice to the manes on the full moon-day daring the month of Vaii^kha by 
which the manes remain gratified till the end of the world. — 101-106. 

Afterwards a visit shoald be paid to Siddhedvara-tlrtha. By bathing 
here one becomes the chief attendant of ^iva. — 107. 

Then a visit should be paid to the shrine of JanSrdana. By bathing 
there one attains the realm of Visnu. — 108. 

l^bhana-Kusametfvara-tlrtha is on the right bank of the Narmad& 
where the sage V&madeva practised great austerities. He continued his 
austerities for a thousand years of the gods and on the same spot, 
f^vetaparvS, DharmarAja and Agni also practised penances and they were 

all overcome by the arrows of Cupid. At that time, Lord l^iva and PSravatl 
became pleased and blessed them. After that the Lord weaned them 
from their asceticism and located them on the banks of the NarmadS. By 
virtue of that asceticism they all became Devas again. — 109-113. 

They all said to MahAdeva : — “ Let this place become most sacred 
by Your blessing.” Afterwards that tirtha became four square miles in 
urea. One who bathes and fasts there becomes handsome like Cupid dbd 
•attains the realm of i^iva. — 114-115. 

Agni, DharmarAja and VAyu have attained emancipation by practis- 
ing asceticism there. — 116. 

There is a tree of Alangium hexapetalum and the devotee bathing 
there, performing charity, feeding the Brahmanas, offering balls of rice to 
the manes, entering into fire, living on meals of fruits and giving up life 
there gets access everywhere in his next life. One who offers balls of rice 
according to the prescribed rites at the root of the tree and pours libations 
into the fire after reciting Tryamvaka mantra, gratifies his manes till 
the existence of the Sun and the Moon. A man or a woman who bathes 
there at the time of the summer solstice gets a most sacred place to live. 
One who worships the Lord Siddhorfvara in the morning attains the benefit 
which is not otherwise obtainable even by performing sacrifices. When 
such a man is bom he becomes an emperor of vast dominions. — 117-123. 

Without visiting Karna-kundala-tirtiia the whole pilgrimage remains 
incomplete and void of fruits. Such is the glory of the sacred place. 
The Kusumeiivara is so called because the Devas showered flowers on 
knowing its great glory. — 124. 

Here ends ike one hundred and ninety-one chapter on the 
Narmada mdhdtmya, 

CHAPTER CXCII. 

MArakarwJeya said : — ^BhArgavc^a-tirtha should be visited where the 
Lord Siva destroyed the valianti«demons when they proved troublesome to 




ouAfTBn oxen. 


189 


JanArdana. By bathing there one becomes free from all ills. Bon of 
P&qdn ! I shall now relate to you about the Sukla-tirtba. I saw the Lord 
^iva sitting along with P&ravati, SvSmikArtika — the well-wisher of the 
aniverse— and other attendants like Nandt on the beautiful summit 
abounding with the flowers of the golden hue, shining like the rising sun, 
having steps studded with precious stones and beautiful rocks all round ; 
and 1 asked Him: — ‘Devadeva! adored by BrahmA, Vi^pu and others, 
I am oppressed with the troubles of the world, be pleased to point out 
to me some way leading to happiness. BhagavAn ! Bhflta ! Bhaveda ! the 
Dispeller of all sins ! pray tell me the best of all the sacred places.’ — 1-8. 

Biva said : — Hear, 0 learned Br&hmapa ! you should go with the 
Ri^is to bathe at tlie sacred places. — 9. 

Bear in mind^that Manu, Atri, Kai^yapa, Y&jnavalkya, Bukra, 
AhgirA, DharmarAja, Apastamba, Sambarta, KAtySyana, Brihaspati, NArada 
and Gautama, etc., venerate the Ganges, KaAkhala, PraySga, Pu^kara 
and Gaya, etc. They go to the most sacred Kuruksetra at the time of 

solar eclipse, but Bukla-tirtha is said to be sacred on all occasions. By 
seeing it, by touching its sacred waters, and thereby performing charities, 
practising penances, performing sacrifices, keeping up fasts, and by 
observing other similar austerities, the devotee gets the greatest of 
the boons. — 10-13. 

The l^ukla-tlrtha in the NarmadA is the giver of the greatest boons. 
There RSjrisi Chfinakya attained Siddhi. This sacred place — the dJspeller 
of all ills — is most charming. It extends to a yojana in a circle. By the 
sight of the branches of the trees growing there one becomes cleansed of 
the sin of having killed a BrAhmana ; and by the sight of its sacred land 
one gets freed from the sin of infanticide. -14-16. 

0, good Risis ! on the fourth day of the dark fortnight in the months 
of Vaiiiakha and Chaitra, I go to reside there in company of my consort 
PArvati after leaving KailAila. There also the demons, the Devas, the 
Siddhas, the Gandharvas, the VidyAdharas, the nymphs, the serpents, they 
all seated in their VimAnas stay on the aerial tract for the fulfilment of 
their aims. — 17-19. 

The devotees going there with a right frame of mind become purified 
like the cloth washed by the washerman. The Bukla-tfrtha washes off all 
the sins of one’s lifetime. 0 MArakandeya ! by bathing at that sacred 
place and by performing charities there, one gets the highest of boons. 
In fact, neither there is nor will there ever be a sacred place to match 
with it. The sins committed during the first period of life are con- 
sumed by observing a fast of 24 hours. The merits that accrue there, by 
feeding BrAhmapas, by performing sacrifices, charities and by worship ; 
cannot be acquired by doing similar things at hundreds of other sacred 
places. There one who bathes Lord Siva in clarified butter on the 14th 
day of the dark fortnight during the month of KArtika and observes a 
fast for the night, goes to the domain of ^iva along with his ancestors 
of 21 generations and also becomes liberated from the cycle of births. 
- 1 — 20 - 25 . - 5 * • 



190 THB MATari WBAmM. 


This most sacred i^akla-tirtha is adored by the Ri^is, one who bathes 

there is not re-born. There after bathing one should worship ^iva. The 
ardh&fiLga image of the Lord and the Goddess should be inscribed on a 
slab of wood and worshipped, accompanied by the music of conches and 
cymbals and the recitations of the Vedas. The devotee should not sleep in 
the night. He should observe festivities and get sacred songs sung. On 
the following morning he should bathe at the iSukla-tirtha and worship 

iSiva again. — 26-29. 

iVote.— iRjg[^:=Lit. Half-body. The composite image consisting of half fsiva and half 
PAravati blended into one form. 

Afterwards he should feed the devotees of Siva and give them 
presents according to his means without stint.— 30. 

Then he should after circumambulating that sacred place go to 
Siva’s temple. One who does this goes to heaven where he resides till the 
destruction of the universe in company of the nymphs seated in an aerial 
chariot. — 31-32. 

The lady who gives away gold in charity at Sukla-tlrtha, and bathes 
Siva devoutfully with clarified butter and also worships SvdmikSrtika, 
resides in the realm of the Lord during the sway of 14 Indras. — 33-34. 

One who gives away charities after bathing on day of the full moon, 
the fourth day of a fortnight, and Sankntnti, according to his means, pleases 
Lords Visnu and Siva. In such a way the charities performed there be- 
get manifold blessings. — 3.5-36. 

One who participates in the marriage of a poor or a wealthy Br/lhmana 
at that sacred place, remains in the realm of Siva for as many years as 
there are hair on the person of that Brahmana or even on the offspring 
begotten by that married couple. — 37-38. 

Here ends the one hundred and ninety-second chapter on the 
Narmada mahatmya. 


CHAPTER CXCIIL 

MSrakandeya said Those who go and bathe at the Anaraka-tirtha 
do not go to hell. The one whose bones are deposited in that sacred tirtha 
becomes purified of all his sins and is re-born as a most handsome man by 
the glory of that tirtha. Those who go to Go-tirtha are liberated from 
their sins and those who go to Kapil^-tirtlia get the benefit of having 
given away a thousand cows in charity. One who observes a fast there 
chiefly on the fourth day of the month of Jaistha and gives away a milch 
cow adorned with bells and cloth, with devotion, and lits up a wick in 
clarified butter and bathes Mahadeva in clarified butter and eats cocoanut 
and clarified butter, becomes valiant like the Lord Siva and resides in His 
realm and is never re-born. — 1-7. 

On the 4th day of a fortnight falling on Tuesday, one who feeds the 
Brfthmanas after devoutfully worshipping the Lord Siva, and one who 


mAjpfM cxciii. 


191 


bathes ^iva in clarified batter oh the 9th day of a fortnight and on the 
Am&v6.By& day falling on a Tuesday, and then feeds the BrShma^as, goes 

to the domain of ^iva seated in the Puspaka chariot where he enjoys like 
Itudra, and on the completion of his virtues is re-born as a virtuous, haad~ 
some and powerful king. Such is the glory of the Go-tirtha. — 8-12. 

Besides these one should go to the sacred Riei tirtha. In ancient 
times the sage Tripavindu overpowered by his ills fixed up his 
abode there. By the glory of the tirtha he was liberated from his 
ills as well as from the effects of the curses pronounced upon him. 
Afterwards Gangeilvara-tlrtha should also be visited. Those who bathe 
there on the 14th day of the dark fortnight during the month of 

^r4vana go to Rudraloka. One who offers libations of water to the 
manes is liberated from all the three debts. The most beautiful Gang&- 
vadana tirtha is close to Gangerfvara where by bathing one is undoubtedly 
freed from all his sins. — 13-17. 

iVote.— ^fnm:=Eyerjone that is born has the following three debts to pay, vis.— (1) 
to sages, (2) to gods, and (8) to the manes. One who learns the Vedas, offers sacrifices to 
gods, and begets a son, becomes free from these debts. 

One who bathes there goes before the Lord l^iva. One who bathes 
and offers libations to the manes on the occasion of each festival, at that 
sacred place, gets the benefit of Arfvamedha sacrifice. The devotee gets 
all the benefits that accrue at Prayftga as detailed by i^ankar&ch&rya. To 
the west of Gang&vadana is the sacred Da^a-^vamedbajanana-tirtba which 
is known in all the three realms. One who observes a fast for a night in 
the month of BhSdra and one who bathes there on Amav&syfi goes to the 
realm of ^iva. One should bathe there on all festivals. — 18-22. 

One who offers libations to the manes there gets all the benefits of 
having performed the Arfvamedha sacrifice. The sage Bhfigu practised 

austerities to the west of Dad&tivamedba for a thousand Divine years. He 
was covered with anthills and nests of birds which amazed the Lord ^iva 
and His consort Parvati. P&rvati asked the Lord as to who he was. 
—23-25. 

She said : — “ Is he Deva or demon?” Lord said “ DearPSrvati, He is 
the great sage Bhrigu who is absorbed in contemplation.” The Goddess 
smilingly said “ His top-knot has become like smoke and even then you 
are not compassionate on him. Indeed you are very hard to be moved.” 
-26-28. 

The Lord said : — “ Devi ! you do not know. This sage is full of 
wrath which I shall show you practically.” — 29. 

The Lord then thought of Dharma in the form of a bull that appeared 
then and there, and spoke in human speech “ Lord ! what are your 
commands for me ? ” — 30. 

The Lord said : — “ Remove the anthills and the nests and then 
throw this Br&hmana down on the ground.” — 31. 

Afterwards the bull threw down the sage on the ground when the 
latter overcome by anger pronounced the following curse on him : — 32. .. 



192 


TUB UATSfA PVBABAM. 


‘'Bull! whither are you gbisqgt now? I shall destroy you by my 
fury.” Having said so the sage'^Bhfiga rose to heaven, on seeing; it the 
Lord stood in front of the sage and brought him down by opening His 
third eye on him. — 33-35. 

Then the sage after making his salutations to the Lord adored Him 
thus Thou art Divine, I am at Thy mercy. 0 Lord of all ! I devout- 
fuUy pray to Thee. Indeed none can enunciate Thy glory adequately. 

Even the thousand-faced iSe^a cannot do so. — 36-37. 

“ Therefore, O Lord ! I cannot adequately offer my prayers to Thee, 
but T throw myself at Thy feet. Thou be kind to me. liord ! Thou 
fillet yourself in with Satoguna, Rajogupa and Tamoguna on the occasions 
of Sthiti, Utpatti and Saqihara, respectively. There is no other Lord than 
Thyself.— 38-39. 

“ Yoga, sacrifices, charities, study of the Vedas, cannot compare oven 
in the smallest measure with devotion for Thee. Thy devotees attain 
various kinds of Svddhis. Although Thy devotee does not bei .)ine meek 
in his ignorance, still Thou blessest him. Only devotion for Thoe, can 
carry one across the sea of troubles and lead to final beatitude. — 40-42. 

“ 0, Lord of Devas ! be merciful to me in spite of njy conceit, wicked- 
ness and viciousness. Protect this humble devotee of Thine in spite of his 
being full of lust for the women and pelf of others ; overcome by contempt, 
pain and sufferings. O, Lord of the Universe ! desires are killing thi^ 
ignorant devotee of Thine. Pray, do drive away ray cravings by granting 
me accomplishment. O, Mahtideva ! cut the noose of conceit and delusion 
and work out my salvation.” — 43-46. 

The above prayer is the giver of great benefits. One who reads it 
with devotion, pleases the Lord Mahadeva. — 47. 

Md.rakandeya said ; — On hearing the above prayer the Lord said “ I 
am pleased with you. Ask me what you wish.” — 48. 

Bhfigu said : — “ Deva ! if Thou art pleased with me and wishest to 
confer a boon on me, let me be the knower of Eudra, and let this spot be 
sacred after my name.” — 49. 

^iva said : — “ Be it so. Son ! now you will be free from anger. 
You will have harmony with your father and sons.” — 50. 

Since then all the Devas including Brahmd and the Kinnaraa 
adore that Bhrigu tlrtha. Sins disappear by the mere sight of that 
tirtha. Those who give up their lives there attain bliss. This Urtha is the 
most extensive and the dispeller of all sins. — 51-53, 

Those who bathe there go to heaven, and those who die there are not 
re-born. Those who give away shoes, umbrellas, grain, gold and edibles 
in charity according to their means, get manifold blessings, l^ose 
who give charities on the occasion of solar eclipse, also get many benefits. 
The benefits that accrue at Amarkant on the occasion of solar and lunar 
eclipses, are obtained without doubt at Bhrigu-tlrtha. All the stores of 
austerities and charities decline in process of time, but the penances 
practised at Bhrigu-tlrtha are never exhausted. The Lord Mah&deva on 


OHAPTBB OXGIII. 


m 


acoouBt of His having become pleased with Bbriga stays at that ■ tirthdr 
and so it is renowned in all the three worlds. — ^59. 

Devi ! in spite of all this, people^ db not know the foil glory of Bhfigu- 
tirtha owing to the delusion caused by the Lord Vif^u. — 60. 

The sacred Urtha is on the banks of the Narmadk. One who hears the- 
glory of this place, goes to the realm of Rudra on being liberated from aU 
sins. Beyond it, is the famous Qautameiivara-ttrtha where by bathing 
and keeping up fast one goes to Brahmaloka seated on a golden chariot.— 
61-63. 

Afterwards the devotee should go to Dhauta-p4pa tirtha where 
Vrisabha washed off his sins. One who bathes there is freed from the 
sin of having killed a BrShmana. One who gives up his life there 
becomes valiant like i^iva and gets four hands and three eyes,, and 
remains in the realm of iSiva for ten thousand years of the gods. On 
being re-born he becomes a king.— 64-66. 

The devotee should go to the sacred Airandi-tirtha. It brings the 
same benefits as are obtained by bathing at PraySga. One who bathea 
there on the 14th day of the bright fortnight during the month of 
Bhfidrapada after observing a fast for a night, is not persecuted by the 
attendants of Yama and goes to the realm of Rudra. — 67-70. 

Then the sacred Hiranyadvipa should be visited. It is also the 
dispeller of all ills. Those who bathe there become wealthy and hand- 
some. — 71. 

Afterwards the most sacred Kafikhala should be visited where 
Oaruda practised austerities. Yoginis reside there and they please them- 
selves in the company of the Yogis, and dance with ^iva. This tirtha 
is renowned in all the three worlds. Those who bathe there go to the 
Rudraloka. Afterwards Hamsa-tirtha should be visited where the 
liberated Parmahaipsas undoubtedly ascend to higher realms. The place 
where Lord Janardana has been worshipped in His V^rSha incarnation is 
known as the VurA.ha-tirtha. One who bathes there on the 12th day of 
a fortnight goes to the region of Yisnu and does not go to helL Then 
the most sacred Chaudra-tirtha should be visited. — 72-77. 

An asoetio of tho bigheab order. 

There one should bathe chiefly on the full nK)on day by doing 
which one goes to the Lunar region.— 78. 

On the right bank of the Chandra-tirtha is the Kanytt-tlrtha where 
one should bathe on the third day of the bright fortnight. If salutationB 
are made to Lord i^iva there the demon Bali becomes pleased. When 
the people are fast sleep during the night, then sometimes a rainbow 
inakes its appearance in which the city of the king Haridchandra is 
visible. The trees are drowned in the waters of the NarmadS. In ancient 
times Lord Yi^nu said to ^iva that, the place should be fixed as His 
residence, since then Dipeifvaran-tlrtha exists there by bathing where one 
gets plenty of gold. — 79-82. 

26 



194 


TEE UATSYA WRAEAU. 


One who bathes at the confluence of the Kany&-ttrtha goes to the 
realm of the Goddess P&rvati. — 83.^ 

Then comes the Deva^ttrtha which is the most sacred of all, bathing 
where one goes and enjoys in the company of the Devas.— 84. 

. Then the Mcred SikhbUrtha should be visited where the charities 
performed^ multiply Infinitely. One who feeds a single Brfihma^a there 
after bathing on the Am&v&syft day gets the benefit of having fed a crore 
of them. — 85-86. 

A group of ttrthas lie near Bhflgu tirtha where one shotild bathe 
with or without motive. By bathing there one gets the benefits of per- 
forming Advamedha sacrifice and then goes and enjoys in the company of 

the Devas.^ Lord i^iva assumed His form there when the sage Bhfigu 
attained his siddhi. — 87-88. 

Here ends the one hundred and ninety-third chapter on the 
Narmadd mdhatmya. 


CnAPTER CXCIV. 

MArakandeya said : —King ! the devotee should next visit the Aftku- 
tierfvara-tirtha, by means of which he becomes freed froin all sins. Then 
Narmade^vara-ttrtha should be visited by batliing where one goes to 
heaven. Afterwards a visit should be paid to Asva-tirtha by bathing there 
one becomes handsome and full of lustre. — 1-3. 

The PitAmaha-tirtha made by Brahma where the merits accruing from 
the libations to the manes performed devoutfully with sesainum and Kusfa 
become infinitely multiplied. One who bathes at the Savitri-tirtha goes to 
the domain of Brahma after being liberated from his sins. — 4-6. 

Those who bathe at the sacred Manohara-tirtha go to the realm of 
the Pitris. — 7. 

Afterwards Manasa-tirtha should be visited, by bathing there one 
goes to Rudraloka. — 8. 

Then Kufija-tlrtha should be visited which is .also renowned in all 
the three worlds as the dispeller of all ills. There one gets live stock, son, 
wealth and in fact anything that he desires for. — 9-10. 

Then Tridasfajyoti-tirtha, where the daughters of the Ri§is practised 
severe austerities, should be visited. By the pleasure of the Lord MaliAdeva, 
all those girls were blessed to have Lord Krisna as their husband. Beyond 
it is the Iii§ikanyA-ttrtha where once upon a time some one was asking for 
a girl from a Risi where he was ultimately married to her. One who 
bathes there is freed from all sins. Further on is the Svarnavindu-tirtha 
by bathing where one does not undergo any reverse of fortune. Then 
comes the Apsareifa-tirtha where one should go and bathe ; by virtue 
of which he goes to Nagaloka and enjoys there in company of the 
nymphs. Then the Naraka ttrtha should be visited where by bathing 
and worshipping ^iva one docs not go to hell. One who observes a fast 



.OMAPTER CXOIV. 


105 


at Bh&rabhiltitlrtha and* theu yi^liips l^iva,' goes t& Badraloka. Those. 

who bathe at BhSrabhdti bbcome the attendant of ^iva after their 
death,— 11-20. . f. 

On the 14th day . in the month of KSrtika one who worships l^iva 
thei'e gets ten times the merits of having performed the Ativamedha saeiifice. 
Those who lit up a hundred wicks in lamps filled with' clarified butter 
ascend to the realm of l^iva seated in a chariot shining like the sun, — 21-22. 

One who gives away a couch and a bull goes to Rudraloka seated in 
a chariot drawn by bulls. One who gives away a cow in charity and feeds 
the Br&hmaaas with rice cooked in milk and sugar accoi-ding to his means 
gets incalculable benefits. — 23-25. 

One who worships iSiva and drinks the water of the sacred NarmadA 
never fares ill. Ho goes to Rudraloka seated in a VimSna, and resides in 
heaven till the existence of the Moon, the Sun, the Himalaya, the ocean, 
and the Ganges. One who keeps up a fast there is never subjected to the 
trial of births. Afterwards Asa<jhi-tirtha should be visited, by bathing 
where one becomes entitled to occupy half the throne of Indra by his side. 
Then Stri-tirtha the dispeller of all ills should be visited, by bathing where 
one undoubtedly becomes Ganc^vara. The confluence of Airandi and 
the Narmada is renowned in all the three worlds where by bathing and 
observing a fast one becomes freed from the sins of having killed 
a Brahmana. Then the sacred Jamadagnya at iho confluence of the 
Narmada and the ocean should be visited. There Lord Jandrdana attained 
siddhi and Indra became the Lord of the Devas by performing a series of 
sacrifices. One who bathes there gets three times the benefits of having 
performed the Asvamedha sacrifice. — 2U-35. 

On the western boundary of the ocean lies the Svargadvara-tirtha 
where the Devas, the Siddhas, the Gandharvas, the Ri^is and the Charapas 
worship the Loid Vimaleivara. Those who bathe there go to Rudraloka. 
There is no higher tirtba than Yimaleslvara. Those who keep up a fast 
and then adore Mahadeva at Vimaletlvara are freed from the sins of 
the past seven lives and go to heaven. Then the sacred Kau^iki-tirtha 
should be visited where one should keep up a fast for the night after 
having a bath. By the power of this tirtba the sin of having slain a 
Brfihmana is dispelled. By the mere sight of Lord Sdgareifa one gets the 
benefit of having sprinkled himself with the sacred waters of all the 
tirthas. There the Lord Mahadeva resides within an area of a yojana. 
Merely by the sight of Him one gets the merit of having visited all the 
sacred places. — 36-42. 

After being freed from all sins the devotee goes to Rudraloka. Ten 
crores of tirthas are said to lie between the confluence of the NarmadS 
and the Amarakaptnka, and Ri^is reside in each of them. — 43-44. 

The Narmadfi has been resorted to by the Agnihotris and learned 
men. This river is the giver of one’s wishes. One who would devoutfully 
read or listen to the glory of it would get the merit of having sprinkled 
on him the sacred waters of all the tirthas, and would please the Narmad&, 
M4rakandeya and Mahfideva. — 45-47. 

By listening to its glory a barren woman begets children, a maid 




^ta a haivdsome husbaa^' vtnied in the Vedas, the 

nnlacky becomes luoky^ tbe: K^ati^^'bo^pmes In war victotious, the 
Vaitfya becomes wealiby, the emancip^ion from bond- 

age, and the idiot becomes leai*nea.^*X)ne^nd hears it never suffer? the 
pangs of separation , and helL7-48-90. • ‘ • 

ends the one hundr^ and ninety^four^ chapter on the 
'Naemaddmdhdtmya. ‘ 

CHAPTER CXCV. 

'> 

. '^ffta said : — Yudhisthlra ! hearing the glory of Che NarmadS and 
Omk&redvara, king Vaivasvata Manu put these questions to the Lord 
Matsyain that vast ocean, viz. — “ Relate the gotra 'clan), vamila 'dynasty), 
avatSr'(descent), and pr^vara (family) of the lii^is. \lso explain die exist- 
ence of the Vaivasvata-manvantara as well as about the curse that the 
Lord Siva had pronounced on the Risis during Sv&yambhuva-manvantara. 
Enumerat^lhe progeny of Daksa and also the Ri^is 'who are the pro- 
moters of Bnriguvamsa. — 1-4. 

Matsya said : — King ! firet hear the doings of Brahmfi. during the 
Vaivasvata-manvantara. — 5. 

First, all the Ripis went to heaven after casting away their corporeal ^ 

bodies by the curse of ^iva. There they were born of BrahmA when the 
mothers and the consorts of the Devas saw the dripping of the 
semen-virile of BrahmA and caused it to bo poured as oblation into the 
fire which produced the most illustrious sage Bhrigu out of the fire. — 6-8. 

The sage AfigirA was born out of the cinders, Attri was begotten 
from the flame, and Marichi came out of the tongues of fire. Kapiifa and 
Pulastya were born of the hair of BrahmA. The most illustrious Pulaha 
came out of the long tresses of hair. — 9-10. 

The lustre of fire produced Vasistha. The sage Bhfigu was married 
to the daughter of PulomA ; and they gave birth to tlie following twelve 

YAjnika Devas : — Bhuvana, Bhauvana, Sujanya, Sujana, ^uchi, Kratu, 
MfirdhA, TySja, Vasuda, Prabhava, Avyaya and Daksa. They are known 
as the twelve BhArgavas. The same Paulomi gave birth to the Vipras. — 
11-14. 

They are ; — Chyavana, ApnuvAna. ApnuvAna gave birth to Aurva 
the father of Jamadagni. The sage Aurva was the chief promoter of the 
BhArgava Risis. Now 1 shall describe to you the illustrious Ri?is who 

promoted the BhArgava clan. They are : — Bhpigu, Chyavana, ApnuvAna, 
Aurva, Jamadagni, VAtsya, Dandi, NadAyana, VaigAyana, Vltahavya, 

Paila, iSaunaka, l^aunakAyana, Jtvanti, Avaida, KArpina, Vaihaniri, 
VirfipAk^a, .RauhityAyani, Vaisvfinari, Nila, Lubdha, SAvarnika, Visnu, 
Paura, BalAkirailika, AnantabhAgl, Bhrita, BhArgaiya, MArkanda, Jab!, 
Bit!, Manda, MAndavya, MAndfika, Phainapa, Tanita, Sthala, Pi:^a, oikhA- 
var^a, ^ArkarAk?i, JSladhi, Sandhika, K^ubhya, Kutsanya, Maudgal^ 
yana, KarmAyana, Devapati, PAndurochi, QAlava, Saipkritya, ChAtaki, 






197 


Sfirpi, Yagyapia^&yand.^'SAtflKjwa^iQajriuij, G&ralyaha, GQ 9 tfaSyaiia, 

Yaby&yana, Vai[[(amp&yi^a,.*''VwbW}ni,, ^ftrabgarava, YAjneyi, Bl^r&^takft- 
yani, L&lAti, N&kulX*.Iiaak^|l;|^im^ndali, Alaki, Saucbaki, Kautss, 

Paingal&yani, SAtySyani, MAllyapfi Ktottli, Kapcbabaatika, Sauba ^okCl, 
Sakauv&kfil, Eausi, Oh&ndrAntasi, ^aikajibva,’ Jibvaka, Vy&db&jya,*Lau- 
ha^irt,,S^advatikB, Netif^ya,- LoUlkk^i, Cbalakap<Jala, BAligAyani, Anumati, 
PArpima, Agatlka, and Asakfltii,'. ordinarily each of tbeae Riijis of tbe 
Bbriguvaqiiia.'are said to Have five Pravaras. — 15-28. 

Bbriga,' Cbyavana, ApnuvAna, Aurva, 'Jamadagni are tbei five Pra- 
varas. — 29. 

Now listen to .the other descendants of Bbriga, which I shall relate. 
(These are) Jamadagni Vida, Paulastya, Vaijavrita, Riiji UbhayajAta, 

Kftyani, l^aka(/iyana, Atirveya, and MArata, are of all the most excellent 
Pravaras. Bbriga, Chyavana, and Apnuvana caAnot intermarry among 
themselves — 30-32. 

Bbrigadnsa, Margapatba, Gr&myAyani, KatAyani, Apastambi, Bilvi, 
Naikasfi, Kapi.^Aratigena, GArdabhi, KArdamAyani, AivSyani, roid Rfipi, 
are known as Areeya. — 33-34. 

Bln-lgu, Chyavana, ApnuvAna, Arfii|thi§ena and RApi are the five 
Pravaras. — 35. 

They also cannot intermarry among themselves. YAska, Vitivyaya, 
Mathita, Dama, JaivantyAyani, Maunja, Pili, Chali, BhAgili, BbAgavitti, 

Eaui^api, Kailyapi, BAlapi, ^ramadAgepi, Saura, Tithi GArglya, JAvAli, 
Pausnyayani, RAmada, are the Areeya Pravaras. Bhfigu, Vitahavya, 
Raivasa, Vaivasa also cannot intermarry among themselves. ^AlAyani, 
SakatAksa, Maitreya, KhAn(Java, DraunAyana, RaukmAyana, Api4i, EAyani, 
Eamsajihva, are the Ar^eya Pravaras. Brigu, Baddhrya^va, DivodAsa, also 
cannot intermarry among themselves. — 36-42. 

AikAyana, YAjnapati, Matsyagandha, Pratyaha, Sauri, Ank^i, ElAr* 
damAyani, Gritsamada and Sanaka are the Ar^eya Pravaras. — 43-44. 

Bbriga, Gritsamada are the two Ar^a Pravaras and they cannot 
inter-marry . — 45. 

All these Ri^is of the Brigu vain^a are most illustrioas. They are 
the promoters of the clan. By the mere mention of their name all the sins 
are dispelled. — 46. 

litre ends the one hundred and ninety-fifth chapter on the Bhrigu family. 


CHAPTER CXCVI. ’ 

Matsya said : — Eing ! the sons of Marichi are known as SurfipA 
and the wife of the sage AhgirA gave birth to ten sons who became 
the Devas. They were: — AtmA, Ayu, Damana, Dak^a, Sada, PrApa, 
Havi^mAna, Gair§(ha, Rita, and Satya. These Ahgirasaa are known 



108 


TRW 

t' /yij-,*'! , - - ■ 

as tlie SomapAyi DSvas. The fdlipwin^ Bi§is : were born of SurflpA : — 
Bfiliaspati, Gautama, Saqcivarta, VAmadeva, Ajssya. They 

are all the propagators of the gotra; ;,i^(^^pther Rijjjis of the same gotra 
who propagated other go tras are/ enumerated. Utathya, Gautama, 

Tauleya, Abhijita, Ardhanemi, LaiigAk^i, K^ira, Kau^tiki, RAhukar^}, 
Saupuri, KairAti, Samalomaki, Pau§ajiti, BhSrgavata, Airidava Ri^i, 
KArotaka, Sajivi, Upabindu, Surai^ina, Vahiiiipati, Vaisali, KrosthA, 

AmnAyani, Soma, Atrayani, KSsoru, Kanrfalya, Parthiva, Uauhinyayani, 
RaivAgni, Mdlapa, PAndu, KsapA, VitJvakara, Ari, ParikAri. They are 

the Ari^eya Pravara of the foregoing Risls. Now hear their Pravaras, via., 
Afigira, Suvachotathya Urfija. They canuot intermarry among them- 
selves. — 1-11. 

Atraiyayani, Sauvaisthya, Agnivai§ya, i^ilasthali, Baliiifiyani, Aikepi, 
BArahi, BA^kali, Saiiti, Trinakarni, Pravahi, AjJvalayani, BarhisAcli, i^ikliA- 
grivi, Karaki, MahukApi, Udupati, Kaucliaki, Bhainita, J'uspAnvesi, 
Soraatanvi, Brahraatarivi, SAladi, Baladi, Uevarfiri, Devasthani, llarikarni, 
SAridabhi^, PrAvepi, Sadyasugrivi, Gomedagandhika, Matsyacliadya, 
MOlahara, PhalAhSra, Gangodadhi, Kaurupati, Kauruk§etri, NayAki, 

Jaityadroui, Jaihvalayani, Apastambi, Maunjavristi, Marsta, Pingali, 
Paila, ^alamkAyani, Dvadhyakhaiya, Mariita. Tliey are all llisis and 
AgigirA, Vrihaspati, Bliaradvaja are the three Pravaras, they cannot 
intermarry among themselv'es. — \ 2 - 20 - 

KAnvayana, Kopachaya, VAtsyataraj^ana, Bhrastrakilta, Rustrapindl, 
Laindrani, SAyakayani, Krostaksi, Balniviti, Talakrit, Madhiiravaha, 
LAvakrita, KAlavita, Gatlii, MArkati, Paulikayani, Skandasa, Cliakrf, 
GArgya, ^yamayani, Bfdaki, Sahari liave tlio following five Arseya Pravaras, 
vis., ArpgirA, DevAcharya, Vrihaspati, Bliaradvaja, tJarga, and Saitya. They 
do not intermarry among themselves. Kapitara, Svastitara, Daksi, i^akti, 
Patanjali, Bhhyasi, Jalasandhi, VindurmAdi, Kusidaki, tTrva, RAjakairfi, 
Vai§adi, i^ansapi, Sali, KalaeJikantha, KAriraya, Katya, Dhanyayani, BliavA- 
syAyani, BliAradvaji, Saubudhi, Laglivi, Devamati, have Amgira, Daina- 

vAhya and Uruksaya for their Arseya Pravara and the Ri.sis of these 
Pravaras also do not intermarry among themselves. The above-mentioned 
Risis are said to have Laiiksi, GArgyahari, and Galavi for their Pravaras 
and also AngirA, Sanikpiti, Gauravili as well as Afigira, Vrihaduktha, 
VAmadeva, who do not marry among themselves, and with those boi’u in 
the Kutsa-gotra with Kutsa Pravara. — 21-32. 

A/igirA, VirApa, Rathitara are the Arseya Pravaras of the Ri§is of 
the Rathitara clan. They also do not intermarry in their gotra, Vi§nu- 

vridhi, l^ivamati, Jatrina, Katrina, Putrava, VairapArAyana also have three 
Pravaras. — 33-35. 

AfigirA, Malsyaclagdha, and Mudgala are also the three Pravaras 
who also do not intermarry among themselves. — 36. 

Hainsajihva, Devajiliva, Agnijibva, Viradapa, ApAgnaiya, Ai^vaya, 
Paranyastuvi, Maudgala also have three Pravaras, vi.5?., AipgirA, Tandya, 



OBATTSB OXGVIII. 19S 


Maudgslya who also do not intorm{nrry«mong themselves. Atpgird, 
Ajaqii^ha, Kaova are the Prftva!)^ of'.— Apl^du, Qaru, l^iikatftjwna, 
Pr&g&thamS; M^rkanda, llifan^i^v,1^i^ Katu, Markatapa, NadSyaaa, 
^y&m&yana.— 87-41. •* 'P . 

They sliould not also interipai|5^ among themselves. Titira, Kapibhfi, 
Gdrgyt^ are the three Pravarasj' so are AqigirS,, Titira, Kapibhu. They 
should .not intermarry among themselves. Itiksa, Bharadvaja, RisivSna, 
M&nava, Maittravara Ri§i, are also' known as the Arseya Pravaras, and 
Amgir4, Bharadv/ija, Vrihaspati, Mittravara Risi, Ei^ivana, and Mdnava 
also cannot intermarry among themselves. — 42-46. 

Bharadvaja, Huta, ^aunga, * ^liiiraiya belong to the Dvadhyftmus- 
yftyana-gotra and they have the following five Ar§eya Pravaras, viz,-— 
Amglr4f Bharadv&ja, Vrihaspati, Maudgalya, and I^Wira. — 47-48. 

“ King ! I have enumerated to you the Risis of the Aipgirfi-gotra. 
By the mere mention of their n,ame one becomes freed from all ills and 
attains bliss. — 49. ^ •« ^ .* 

Here ends the one hundred and minSt/i^sixth chapter ortthe Afigird familjf, 

. CHAPTER CXCVII. ' ' 

Matsya said ‘VKing ! I shall now name to you the of th^ 
Atri clan. ^arSyana, Udvrdaki, ^ona,^arniratha, i^aukratu, Ganrtlgtlyg/ 
Gaurajina, Chaitrayftna, Ardhapanya, Biimarathya, Gopana, Takivindu,^ 
Earnajihva, Harapriti, Naidr&ni, l^kalSyani, Tailapa, Bailaiya, Atri, 
Gonipati, Jalada, Bhagap4da, Saupuepi, Chandogaiya of the K&rdamayana 
^4kh& (branch) have ^ySvailva, Atri, Archanavada for their Pravaras. They 
do not intermairy among themselves. Dak§i, Bali, Parpavi, Crnabhii' 
Bilftrdani, Bljabapl, l^hirika, Manuja, Kai4a, Gavi§thira, Bhalandana have 
Atri, Gavisthira and Pflrvfitithi for their Pravaras, and they also do not 
marry among themselves.”— 1-8. 

Kulaiya, Bfilaiya, Vfisarathya, Dhdtraiya, Maitraiya, are the sons of 

the daughter of the sage Atraiya. They have Atri, Vdmarathya and Pantri 
for their Pravara, and they do not intermarry among themselves. — 9-10. 

“ King ! I have described before you all the Brahmanas of the Atri 
family by the mere mention of whose" name one becomes liberated from 
all ills.”— 11. 

Here ends the one hundred and ninety-seventh chapter on the Atri family. 

CHAPTER CXCVIII. 

Matsya said : — “ King ! I shall now relate to you other descendants 
of Atrf. ^ Chandramd has been born in the house of Atri in whose family 
Virfv&mitra took his birth. By virtue of his asceticism Virfvdmitra became a 
Brfihmana from-Ksatriya. I shall now tell you about the family of Viit- 
vamitr§.”— 1-2. ^ 



TEB 






yiivftimtra, Daivar&ta, VaikiSilJ^ Gftfava^ Vatauda, lanka, Abhaya, 
, .. . *. i& 3 »na, Y&gyavalk«^;6^^ Sain^havayana, Babhravya, 

]Eari$a, 8aqxi|ratya, Uloopa, Aupagf^ilfi^lpayoda, Janapadapa, K^hjMraTS^ 
cha, Halayama, Sadhati, Vastakaodik^'^'llEieysdiaTe three Iriia Brayaras, 
vi»., VWvamitra, Devarata, and ITd<^||»ka.-^3-6. 

They also do not intermarry aipfing themselves. Daivatlrav^ Deva- 
rata ; Viijvamitra are the three Pravaras of Daivadrava, SajataiyS, Shnsuka, 
Karukaya, Vaidaiharata, Kuilika. TH^'also do not intermarry. IJhanan- 
jaya, Kapardaiya, Parikdta, Parthiha, Panini have ViavSmitra, Madhnch- 
.%<^bhanda, Aghamar ja^a for their Pravaras. They also do not intermarry. 
Eatnalayajiha, A^marathya, BAnjuli, are also tho three Pravaras. They 
too do not intermarry. — 7-14. 

Vi^vAmitra, Lohita, A^taka, PArai^a have VitlvAmitra, and PArapa 
for ^eir Pravaras. The Risis of the PArar»a-gotra do not intermarry. 
VievAmitra, Lohita and Astaka are the three Arseya Pravaras of Tx)hita 
and Aijtaka, and there is no iutertpairiage between A§(aka and Lohita 

Udt^inu, Krathaka, UdAvafl(ii»!**^AtyAyani, KarirAsi, ^alankayani, 
L^vaki^ ManujAyani, are also known to have throe Ar§oya Pravara, 
KKilah^ila, Vidya, Vi^vAmitra. They do not intermarry.— 18-19. 

“®!ing ! I have named the Risjis of the Vi^vAmit'ra clan before yo^, 
l^&y the mere mention of whoso nameg one becomis liberated from his 


Here ends the one hundred and ninety-eighth chapter on the 
Vi'sv&mitra family. 


\ 

' CHAPTER CXCIX. 

Matsya said : — Martchis sons were known as TCasSyapa and the follow- 
ing Rigis were tho descendants of Kailyapa : — Arfnijmni, Rigigana, Mai- 
§ald, Ritakayana, Udagrajii, Mathara, BhojA, VinayalaksanA, SalA, .Halai- 
ya, ^auri&tA, kanyakS, SunlyanS, Mandakint gave birh to MrigayA, i^rutaya, 
BhojayApanA, DevayAnA, GomayanA, AdhaichAyA, KAtyayanA, ^AkrAyanA, 
Barhiyoga, GadAyana, Bhavanandi, MahAchakri, DaksapAyanA, YodhayAnA, 
KArtivaya, HastidAnA, VAtsyAyana, KritajA, AtlvalAyani, PragAyapA, Paula- 
mauli, AiJvavAtAyana, KanvairakA, ^yAkarA, AgniilarmAyana, Mai^pA, Kai- 
karasapA, Vabhru, PrAchaiya, Gyanasarngaiya» AgnAprAsaivya, SyamodarA, 
VaivarfapA, UdvalAyanA, KAstSharina, MAricha, AjihAyana, HAstika, Vai- 
karpaiya, KAdyapaiya, SAsisA, HAritAyanA, MAntagina and Blirigava. 
Th% have Vatsara, KAirfyapa, Nidhruva, for their Pravara. They do not 
^intermarry. — 1-10. 

I shall now tell you the Bi? is of DvyAmusyAyapa clan, viz. — AdasAya, 
NAkuraya, SnAtapa, RAjavartapa, iSaidira, Davahi, Sairandhrl, RopasaivakA, 
YAmuni, KAdrupingAk^i, JAtamvi, DivAra^tAdva who have Vatsara, KAd- 
yapa, Varfi^lha for their PravAnf They do not intermarry. SaipyAti,,Nabhs 



• ' mi. 



^piilya, Jalaudhara, Bhtij|;tBp^,;*Faiy£l, Kardama, GardaldilffttiWia, 
Mtlinita, Kmiyapj^fcbH^a, Kulalia, Vri|ik:au<3a, 2li-igftike^ 
JJltara, Nidfiglia, J\la!?rma’, Krvain, .^audily/i DanSra, 

ai'c all 1*1 avaiwi'-iiaiylp^ 4 ^iFK}la, l)pvala niid Iva'^vapa fov tlicii* 
Fl-aviims anil conseimoiilly they alSl^lipowu aa TjTai sjeyiv FiWava*- Th<^ 
(jo not iiiterjnarry. — il-1!). - ’• 

^ * “ Manu ! 1 have told yon thoitileHcendaTits of the chief UiKi Ksi^ynpa. 

From litks'i.yitni, ho hcgot ti (0 aiuveifie and liuw can it l)o dts<;ijhod- afie* 
^ately.*' — ::*(). ^- 

Uen’ ends Ihc i>iic hniidind and vinchj-ninth chuitlcr on l^ahyaiia fiWKS&l^ 


ClfcM’l'Eli CC. 

^J\iatsya said :”-lIciirfioin me about the Bnlhinanasof ihasistlui Anfilly; 
They are Ekrti>eya J.’j;uara. 'J’liogp of the Vasistlia-goda are knotV^ 
as Vasisihii. They do Jiut iiitev^avry among themKi'lvps. this 
it is one Pravara. VViglirapru^, .. Anpayav;,, Taiklava, ^vaVayfcpit 
Kapiijthiil.'!, Aupalomii, AiubdhiiA*|fctha, Katha, Gaupayan.V hodha|||, 
Bftkavyfi, Vrthyaka, I'.dii^aya, Vagrant haya, Ajiasthunu, 

Bld^apureyaka, Ijomayana, Sv.istikara, fsiipcjili, Gatrdinij VAdohali, 
Sitmaad; 0pavriddlii,<Chauli, Vauli, Brahmabala, Pauli, i^rayasa, rau^hvBj 
Y&jnavalkya, are all Ekarseya and Vasistha is their Pravara, Tl^e^ dd 

not intermarry. ^ailAlaya, Mahilkarpa, Kauravya, Krodhina, Kapifijald, 
‘V&lkhily&, lihagavittayanil., Kaulayana, KAladikha, Korukri^^fi,, Sur&yina, 

^AkabSrya, ^akadliiya, Kanvfi,, ITpalapa, ^aki^yanS, Uhaka, Ma§a^arAvayai 
Dak&yana, BCdavaya, Vakaya, Goratha, Tiambfiyana, ^yainavaya, Krodo* 
dar&yanli, Pralarabayaml, Aupainatiyava, Sankliyayana, Vedasferaka.Palafi'* 
k&yana, Udgalia, Balakhcva, Muteya, Brahniamali, PannagS, have three 
Pravaras, vix . — Bhigivasu, Vasist-lia and Indrapramadi. They do not 
intermarry. Aupasthala, Svasthali, Biilo, Halo, llala, Madyandiol, 
fataya, Paipahuli, Viohaksusa, TraisJriiigayana, Saivalka, Kupdina, have 
Vasistlia, Mitravaruna and Kunclina for their Pra%’ara. — 1-16. 

All these Risfis do not intermarry. Sivakarna, Vaya, Pddapa have 
Jktflkarnya, Vasistha, and Atri for their Pravara, 6 king ! and they also 
cannot intermarry. — 17-18. 

“Manu! I have named to you all the Risis of the Varfisiha clan. 
Ey reciting their name one is freed from all ills.” — 19* 

Here ends the two hundredth chapter on the Vasi^fha family. 

" CHAPTER CCI. 

,Matsya said : — 0 best of sovereigns, when the illustrious sage 
vasistha became the preceptor of king H inn, the latter performed a series 
of saorilices. The sage on' the conclusion of those sacrifices fee lin g' 
tired, took rest for a while. The illustrious king Nimi went and said to 
loBa.— :l-2, 



THE MATSrA PDEANAM. 


m 


Lord ! I wish to perform more sacrifices, pray therefore do help 
ane without delay.*** 

The sage Vasi§tha of great lustre replied 

“ King ! wait a while, I have-* become, quite tired by attending to 
5the performances of your sacrifices, and shall got your further sacrifices 
performed soon after 1 feel recouped.”— 3-4. 

Having been thus spoken to, the king said to Vaai§tha : — “ Sage ! 
no one is dear to the messenger of death, nor has any one a hold upon 
him. There is no certainty of life, therefore virtuous acts should be 
•performed without a moment’s delay. — 5-C. 

The soul engaged in righteousness is in a stale of enjoyment within 
me. Virtuous deeds li-vod to be performed on the morrow should be 
accomplished to-day ; for death does not take into consideration that 
man has yet to accomplish certain things. Those who pin their interests 
to shops, houses, and other similar things, perish in a moment. Death is 
neither friendly nor hostile to any one. The moment one exhausts his 
store of Pi^abdha karmas, Death lays its hand on Iiirn then and there. 
The^reatnmf life is so transient winch you know very well. — 7-10. 

%aliinana! one should indeed wonder at his momentary existence. 

I look upon my life as lasting when I am in my j)nrsuit of knowledge and 
virtue, but consider it fleeting in the performanco of idgliteous acts. I am 
overwhelmed witli these ideas and feel that there is a heavy burden on* 
me. I have therefore come to you to relieve me of rny load. — 11-12. 

If thou wilt not help me in the performance of sacrifices, I shall 
havx to got them performed through some otlier llmhinana.'^ Hearing 
those words of the king, the sage pronuuncod the following curse on 
him: — “ 0, virtuous king! thou wishes! to discharge me wlien I am 
feeling so tired and proposest to appoint atn'lnor preceptor; become 
devoid of thine form/' The king also prononuci.Hl the following curse 
on the sage : — “ Twice-born priest, thou art an obstacle in the path of 
my righteousness, thou wilt also thcreforo become devoid of thino form/’ 
—13-16. 

On account of tljose curses both tlio sago and tiie king were bereft 
of their forms, after uhich tlicir souls went to Lord Brahma. — 17. 

* Seeing those souls approaching Him, Lord Brahma said : ‘‘ King Nimi ! 
henceforth I shall gi e I liee a foremost place. Tlioii shalt now be ever 
present in tlie eyes of all tlio creatures and they shall open and shut their 
eyes by virtue of thy glory.” By the ordinance of Brahma, Nimi 
accordingly orcame ever present in the eyes of all the creatures. After- 
wards, Brahma also said to VasisUia : — “ Vasistha, thou shall be the son of 
Mitra and Vanina where thou wilt be known by thy present name. — 18-22. 

Thou wilt have a recollection of your previous existence.” After- 
wards, once upon a time, Mitra and Varuna were practising austerities in 
Badrikasirama. During spring when the balmy breeze was beating 
against the flower-plants of tlie season, the most enchanting Urvasl 
adorned herself with llowors. — 23-25. 

That nymph dressed in a fine spun thin attire of red colour ap- 
peared before Mitra and Varuna and on seeing her enchanting face, with 



OEAPTER COIL 


203 


eyes like the blue lotus, they both were moved aud dropped their 
semen-virile. — 26-27. 

Seeing it, both the Risis for fear of a curse threw the semen-virile 
in a beautiful pitcher full of water ; and out of it were born the illustrious 
sages . Vasistha and Agastya. — 28-29. 

Vasistha married Arundhati, the sister of Nurada, who became the 

mother of Sakti. J^akti became the father of Paraj^ara in wlmse family 
Lord Vishnu in the form of Vedavy^sa was born. The very same family 
will now be enumerated. — 30-31. 

Vedavyasa produced the moonlike Bbarata in the world. The 
following is the family of Parasiara, ota?., Kaudasapa, Vahanapa, Jaihyapa, 
Bhaumatapana, Gopali, these five are known as the Gaura Parajiara.. 
—32-33. 

Prapoliaya, Vahyamaya, Khyataiya, Kantu race, Haryaiiva, are 
known as Nila Parasara. — 34. 

Kiirsy;iyan/l, KapisukhA, Kakaiyastha, Jap&taya, Puskara, are known 
as Krisna Paraciara. — 3o. 

Avisthfiyana, Valaiyd, Svaya§t^, UpayA, Isikahasta, are the five 
Sveta Pararfaras. — 36. 

Piitika, Btldari,. Stambfi, Krodhanayana and Ksaumi, are the five 
oydraa Paraj^aras. — 37. 

Klialyayana, VarsniiyanA, Jailaiya, Yuthapil and Panti, are the fiv^e 
Dhumra Pararfaras. — 38. 

“ King ! I have related to you the chief Risis of the Parasara 
family illustrious like the Sun. One who recites their names dispels all 
his sins.'’ — 39. 

Here ends the two hundred and first chapter on Parasara family. 


CHAPTER CCir. 

Matsj^a said : — Now hear about the Brahmanas born in the Agastya 
family. They are : — Agastya, Karambha, KauisiHlya, S.ikata, SumedJia, 
Mayobhuva, Clfindharakriyana and tliose born in the Puirstya, Pula/ia and 
Kratu families are known also as Agastyas, all of thorn liave three Pravaras, 
Agastya, Paurnaimisa aud Pai'ana. ^'hese Ribis do not inteniiarry amongst 
each other. Those of tlie Agastya, Paurnaindsa and Parana families do 
not also intermarry. — 1-4. 

The Paurnamdsas particularly do not marry the Piiranas. I have 
described to you the families of the renowned sages, now let me know 
what more do you wish to hear." — 5-6. 

Manu said: — “Pray let me know the origin of the families of , 
Pulaha, Pulastya, and Kratu ; how they came to be recognised as included 
in the family of Agastya." — 7. 

Matsya said : — “ King ! at the end of the Vaivasvaata-manvantara 
Kratu was without an offspring when he adopted as his son Idhmav&ha, 



S04 


THE MAT8YA PURAEAM, 


the virtuous son of Agastya ; consequently those belongii g to tlio family of 
IdhmavAlia are called Agastya and Kratu. Pauhilu luul throe sons. 
Afterwards I will tell you of their origin. He w^as not p eased with them, 
— 8 - 10 . 

He therefore adopted Dridhftsya, the son of Agasty,(, on account of 
which those born in the family of Dri^hasya are known as Agastya and 

Paulaha. — 11. 

The Rishi Pulastya finding his sons becoming Rakshasas became 
very sorry and adopted as bis son the promising son of Agastya. — 12. 

For this reason those born in the Paiilastya family are known as 
3tya. They being of the same gotra do not intermaiTy. — 13. 

I have described to you the originators of the families and the 
Pravaras of the illustrious Bruhiuanas. One who recites their names is 
liberated from all sins.” — 14. 

Here ends the two hundred and seco^id chapter on the reciting 

of the Pravartii<, 

CHAPTER CCIII. 

Matsya said : — ** 0 King ! 1 shall relate to you now the families born 
of the daughters of Daksa from I)}iarmairiia at the beginning of the 
Vaivasvata-manvantara. J ‘lease liear.” — 1. 

Arunclliati tliroiigli Pharma l>e‘:ot t!i(‘ ei::f])! Vasns aiul the Somapa 
Devas who were most mi^jility and stalwart. Pjjara, !)}irnv*u Soma, Apava 
Anila, Anala, Pratya^a, and jhaldi: sa wcu' ihe eight \'asus, Pravina 
was the son of Phava, and K;ilu v. f Lduiivu - 1^-4. 

Years, etc., came into cxi'^lom'o om of Ka!a : tljesc were His sons. 
Soma begot the ilh^-tiiuus Vuroha ; ^^rimap. was the soti of Apa. 
Anala became the latlier of Aiu'k-ijmima j.mana and 1‘nrojava was the son 
of Anila. Pratyasa wa,s the jath< r of I)(>valtt and Idalihasa was ilie father 
of Viilvakarnui who is tin: anddteca of the Peva-^. Nagavitliis, etc., the 
nine sons, acted accord in^; to tlu^ wishes of ollno's. I.amba’s son was 
Qho§a and his sous were knc/wn as flic UhauuMls. — 0 8 . 

The stars and planets and IMarutvan were born of Marutvatt and are 
known as Marutvanuia. — b, 

Samkalpa gave birth to Samkalpa, ALihurta to Mahftrtas, and 
SSdhya gave birth to Sadhyas. — 10. 

Bhanu, Mann, Prana, Rosa, Niclia, Viryaviuia, Chillaharya, Ayana, 
Harnsa, N^rayana, Viblui and lha})liu wcjo the twelve Siidhyas. These 
were the sons of Sadliyas. Visva ^avp hirtii to Vifivedevas. — 11-12. 

Kratu, Daksa, Vasu, Salya, Kalaloiina, Muni, Karaja, Mazinja. 
Vlja, Rochamaua, were the ten Vijfvetlevas. — 13. 

King ! 1 liave briefly narrated to you tl)e family of Dlinrma and no 
one but VySsa can describe it at full length for want of suflicient tinje.” — 
14. 

Here ends the two hundred and third chapter on the farnilies of Dharfua. 



G RAFTER GQIV. 


205 


CHAPTEIi CCIV. 

Matsya said : — “ 0 King ! the linlhtnanas belonging to the families 
of Oharma are worthy of being feasted on the wcasion of i^rSddha as the 
gifts and food given to them with free will please the manes. OKing! 
1 siiall now tell yon what the manes desire in their realms and thus sing 
songs there. They wish that some one of their family should offer them 
libations of water and balls of rice in some cool running stream ; they 
thus say : — ‘ Oh ! will any one be born in our families who will offer us 
simple handfuls of water in memory of us ; especially offer us libatiops of 
water in some sacred rivers ! Would any son be born in our families ,who 
offer us daily libations of milk, roots and fruits along yrith, other victuals 
and til (sesamuni) and water ? — 1-4. 

‘ Oh ! will there be born such a son amongst our families who would 
offer us libations of Payasa (cooked preparation of rice and milk^an^ 
sugar) with clarified butter and honey on the thirteenth day of the lunar 
month in the rainy season under Magha asterism ? — 5. 

‘Who would also offer us the flesh of the rhinoceroB .or black 
herb according to the prescribed rites even for one day ?’ — 6. 

The pittris say that the offerings of kala-8a.ka, mah&-^&ka, honey, 
Ac., and the appeasing grains used by the sages, the flesh of the rhinoceros 
that had not developed its horns keep them satisfied as long as sun 
exists. — 7. 

‘ One who appeases us by making offerings of the rhinoceros 
flesh and feasting the yogis at GayA during the solar and lunar eclipse or 
who will perform ^riiddha and offer gifts during the Gajaohchaya yoga 
so that we would be satisfied till the end of a kalpa, and the one who 
performs ^nlddha and make gifts will no doubt enjoy all pleasures in all 
the Lokas till the end of a kalpa and can go anywhere free at his 
will.— 8-9. ’ 

Such a man undoubtedly gets the right of enjoying in every realm 
according to his ploasiire till the end of the kalpa ; and one who performs 
any of the above-mentioned five l^raddh.ns to the manes gives them satis- 
faction, for an infinite period. And if Sx’addlias he performed with full 
ceremony they obtain unbounded pleasures. The pittris also say that 
if some one of their familj’^ gives away a skin of black deer in their name 
or a cow big with a young one to a Brahmana versed in the Vedas, or per- 
forms Vri§ot8arga, i.e., sets free a bull in their name particularly a bull of 
white or bluish tint, or gives away gold or a cow with devotion, or a piece 
of land or a well, a tank, or a grove or attaches himself to Vishnu, or giv^ 
away Dharmai^Sstras to the learned Brahmanas causes them unbounded 
satisfaction. — 10-17. 

King ! I have narrated to you what the sages have said in the l^r&d- 
dha kalpa. The rituals pertaining to l^raddha drive away sins and bring 
virtue and comfort.” — 18. 

Rere ends the two hundred and fouiih idwpter on the songs 

of the piUris. 



206 


THE MAT8YA PURAEAM. 


CHAPTER CCV. 

Manu said : — “ 0 Knower of Dharma ! pray tell me how tinder 
wliat prescribed rules, should a calviiifc cow be given to a Brahmana and 
what are the benefits of such a charity ? ” — 1. 

Matsya said ; — “ King ! Its horns should be covered with gold, hoofs 
with silver, tail end with pearls. It shouhl be given away along with her 
calf and utensils made of kiinsA, bcll-inetal. Tlio giving away of such 
a cow begets immense good merits. The cow is like the earth with its 
mountains, forests, Ac., till it bears her calf in her womb. One who gives 
it away at that time undoubtedly gets the benefits of having givmu away 
the land girt with four oceans.- "-f». 

0 King ! the donor remains in heaven with great respect for as many 
years as there are hairs on tlie body of the calf and the cow. — 6. 

Lots of fees (gifts) should be paid in tliis case. Tims tin donor 
undoubtedly liberates his father, grandfather and great-grandfather from 
hell. He goes to the region where flow the rivers of clarified butter and 
milk and the land abound.^ with the mud of curds and milk and there 
are trees that give the desired fruits. He easily gets access to Coloka and 
Brahmaloka.— 7-8. 

lie gets a lady who.se face is like the moon and who.so colour is like 
burnished gold, her breasts are bloated, waist slender, and eyes are like 
lotus.” — 9. 

Here ends the two hnndred and fifth ehafter on the (jiving aioay 

of eowe ns ni ffs 


('ll.MTF.K C(H'l. 

Manu said ; — “ Deva ! [''ay ti‘1! me, Imw to m ike n gift of a black 

deer skin. Also explain to me wh., is the most wortliy Brahmana of such 
a gift; and wliat is the proper time to vlo so; .so that my doubts may he 
removed.” — 1. 

Matsya said : — “ ( )n the full moon day in the month of Vaiifakha, 
MSgha, Asadha, and Kartika on tlu; twelfth lunar day of the sun’s progress 
in the northern path, the giving away of the black deer skin begets 
incalculable benefits. It should be given to a Aguihotri Brahmana. — 2-3. 

Now listen bow it should be given away, king ! First a cloth made of 
good goat wool should be spread on the floor waslicd with cow-dung. Over 
it should be spread the skin of a black deer containing its horns and hoofs. 
The gold mounted horns, silver mounted teeth and the tail-end decorated 
with pearls sliould be covered with sesatnurn. Then everything should 
be cov^ered with a piece of fine sacred cloth. Oold is to bo placed on the 
navel. Afterwards it should also be decorated with jewels according to 
the means of the devotee and then incense is to be burnt round this. 
At all its four corners vessels of bell-mctal (kfinsS.) should be placed and 
the clay pots on the eastern side should be filled in with clarified butter, 



CUAPTER COVt. 


m 


milk, curd and honey Another beautiful entire jar without any holes in 
it should be placed for the sprinkling of water. It should be placed 
in a quiet corner after putting a Cliampaka twig on the east side of 
it. -4-10. 

There shoula be placed also a fine yellow or wliite cloth for 
wiping or cleaning. The vessels made of metals should be placed at 
both the hoofs. — 11. 

The following formula should be recited: ‘ Whatever sins I might have 
committed through avavuie, be consumed by the giving away of this iron 
vessel.* Then the vessel is to be given over. — 12. 

Afterwards the Queen’s metal vessel (i.e., k/irnsya vessel; filled with 
sesanium should be placed near the left foot ; and the following form ulm 
should be uttered : ‘ Whatever sins I may have committed through hearing 
be vanished by the gift of this vessel of Queen’s metal (white copper).’ 
Thus repeating the mantra, the vessel is to be given over. Then the vessel 
filled with honey should be placed at the right foot.— 13-14. 

Then the following forrnuho should be recited: — ‘Whatever sins 
I may liave committed through insinuations, backbiting, or eating flesh 
not offered to the gods, be destroyed by the giving away of this copper 
vessel.’ Then tlie vessel is to be given over. — 15. 

‘ Wliatever sins I may have committed through false speaking in 
connection with a c<)w and a virgin and through lust for the women of 
others be vanished by the giving away of this silver vessel.’ Then the 
vessel is to bo given over, — 10. 

Afterwards the copper and silver vessels should be placed at the 
fore-feet of the deer skin. Beautiful leaves containing gold, pearls, corals, 
pomegranates, citrons, etc., should be placed at the ears and (Sringatoka) 
pastry or dough is to be placed on the hoofs. Then various kinds of herb- 
vegetables and fruits should be placed and then the following formuhe 
should be uttered : ‘ Janardana ! the sins that T may have committed 
through ignorance in thousands of my lives, be destroyed by the giving 
away of this vessel of gold.* — 17-19. 

In such a way the Agnihotri Brahmana accepting the gift should 
take his bath, wear the pair of garments and he is to be bedecked according 
to the means of the devotee. He is then to accept the gift. The gift 
should be accepted at the tail-end and the following formulae should be 
uttered on tliat occasion : ‘ Lord MaUadeva who wears the black-deer skin 
and who has a beautiful blue neck, therefore by the gift of this black deer 
skin He may be pleased. So Krisna be pleased.’ — 20-22. 

After thus giving away the gift to the Brahmana the devotee should 
not touch him for he becomes like the wood of a sacrificial post at the 
burning ceremonies not fit to be touched. — 23. 

That Brilhmana should be avoided on the occasion of other gifts and 
SrAddha ceremony. After sending him away the devotee should bathe. 
He should pour over him the water full to the brim of the vase having 
a Champaka twig. The preceptor should first be called and the pitcher 
should be placed on the head. Then bath should be performed by the 



TBE MATSYA PURANAM. 




i-ecitation of the sixteen Vedic hymns, as prescribed, viz., Apyi'iyasva^ 
iSainudrajai^tha, etc. He is purified by putting on a pair of garineuts. and 
making ftchaman after reciting ‘ Ahtaivusasirita.’ — 24-26. 

Then the jar along with the cloth should be lifted op and taken td 
a square where it should be dashed. The benefits accruing by the 
performance of such a charity cannot be fully described even by the Devas; 
To be brief the devotee gets the benefits of having given away the whole 
world in charity. — 27-28. 

He conquers all the realms and moves about everywhere as he wills 
like a bird ; and is paid great respect and undoubtedly remains in heaven 
till the annihilation of the universe. — 29. 

His father and sous, etc., do not perish, nor is there a sepai ation from 
his wife and he does not lose liis wealth, realm, etc. — 30. 

In this way the devotee gets such benefits and attains all ! is wishes. 
He is void of the cares of death". — 31. 

Here ends the two hundred and sixth chapter on the giving away 
of a black deer skin. 


CHAPTER CCVII 

Manu said : — “ Lord ! 1 am desirous of knowing the qualities of a 
bull that ought to be set at lil)f‘rl.y as mcniioned in tlic previous chapters 
as well as the great merits n'sulling ihcreriom I’ray also tell me the ways 
of performing Vrisotsarga.”— • 1. 

iVote.—^^twin= Setting free a Imlt (1) on the occasion of h funeral rite, or as a religi- 
ons act generally, 

Matsya said : — “ King ! fiist. of ail the (vnv is to ho exatnined ; there 
should be a cow of geiidt' tO!iip('r fioe from ailment .and disoaso, strong, 
of nice colour, having boautiru! iionf-s and Jiorns, well-built, of middle 
height, giving good milk, having curls rm the body fospocially curls ttirning 
to the left on the right sidtt ami turning to the riglit on the left side) 
having all the lucky signs, with oxttMisivo thighs, red lips, neck and 
tongue, with eyes clear and beautiful (not rod or having many hair) and 
hoofs large, liaving eyes of the lustre of Vaidurya, with lovely eye 
corners, having seven and seven teeth and bright palate, with lovely sides 
aaid thighs with six parts elevated, five parts levcd ami eight parts capacious 
and wide. A cow having these qualifications is said to have auspicious 
signs.” — 2-8. 

Manu said : — “Which six parts should be elevated? which five 
parts should be level? and which eight parts are to be capacious and 
wide?”-9. 

Matsya said : — “ The following six parts of the cow’s body should be 
elevated, chest, back, head, belly, loins.” — 10. 

“A cow with the following level parts of the body is said to be 
a fine one, viz. — ears, eyes, forehead, and the following eight parts should 



CHAPTER COVll. 


209 


eapacions »£»., — tail, dewlap, adders, thighs j and extensive head and 
neck are also desirable. — 11-12. 

The calf of such a cow should be also examined. It should have 
also auspicions signs. It should have elevated shoulders and hump, with 
a sqft and straight tail, having tender cheeks, broad back, eyes shining 
like VaidOryagem, sharp horns, and long and thick hairs on the tail 
having nine, nine, ie. eighteen nice teeth and eyes like Atallikd. flowers. 
If such a fine bull is set free, it increases the domestic pelf.— 13-lfl. 

The Br&hmaniis should set free the following class of bulls, viz. — 
red, tawny or reddish, white or black in colour, tawny reddish back, of 
variegated colours, with long ears and shoulders, with glossy hair, red 
eyes or having nutbrown colour near the horns, with white stomach, or 
black sides. The Kijhatriyas should set free a bull of red and beautiful 

colour ; the Vaislyas of golden colour and the ^udras of black colour. 
The bull with its horns pointing forward towards the eyebrows, ought to be 
set free by men of all classes. The bull having its feet like those of the 
white cat, with tawn)' or reddish in colour, with eyes shining like a 
jewel having white feet or with only two feet white, or of the colour of a 
pigeon or a partridge, is also said to be a good one. It is called Karat. — 
16-22. 

The bull whose face is white or reddish up to the ears and whose 
body is especially of red colour is called Nandimukha cow. — 23. 

The bull whose stomach and back are white is called Samudra and 
increases the progeny of the family. The bull of the colour of jasmin or 
havitjg variegated circular spots is considered to increase the wealth of 
the donor. — 24-25. 

The bull having circles like lotus increase the fortune; the 
one of the colour of Atasi flower increases prosperity. All these 
kinds of bulls are good. Now I shall tell you the kinds of bulls that are 
of bad signs and should neither be set at liberty nor kept in the house. 
Those are the bulls that have black palate, lips and mouth, and rugged 
horns and hoofs, indistinct colour, mouth resembling that of a wolf or a 
tiger, and colour like that of a crow, vulture, or a form like that of a rat,' 
weak, having no teeth, squint-eyed, one-eyed, lame, with half of the white 
feet, and having restive eyes. — 26-29. 

I shall also tell you the kind of bull^ that ought to be set at liberty 
or kept in the household. Those sliould be well-built, roaring like the 
thunder clouds, high in stature, walking like an infuriated elephant, 
with brdad chest and very powerful. — 30-31. 

The white bull having its head, ears, forehead, tuft of hair at the- 
tail-end, feet and eyes black, is described to be very excellent ; — 32. 

Similarly a black bull having all those things white is said to be the 
same. The bull whose tuft of hair at the tail-end may be long enough 
touching the ground, and the hairs of the tail long and thick, such a Nila 
bull is said to be specially good. The bulls having the signs of a pearl, 
a banner, etc., are exceptionally good. They are the givers of wonderful 
Siddhis %nd victory. The bulls when obstructed in their motion stop, 

I 



210 


TRE MATSYA PUBANAM. 


and whose head and neck are elevated, are excellent. Those that 
have tlieir forepart of the horns and the eyes re(i, body white, hoofs 
resplendent like coral, are said to be the best of all. These are to be 
kept in the house or set at liberty. These increase grains and wealth. 
The bulls should always be examined before being set at liberty or 
kept in the household. The bull whose four feet, face and tail are 
white, and whose colour is red like the juice of lac or red dye is known 
as !Nila vri^abba. It should be set free ; it should never be kept in the 
houseiiold. It is a saying amongst the household that one should desire 
many sons for even if one son out of a many goes to Gaya or offers a 
Gauri (virgin) or sots a JNila-Vrisabha at liberty his family is blessed. 
—33-41. 

King ! the qualities of the bulls have thus been described. One 
who sets at liberty such a bull as described lieretofon , should not worry 
himself about sorrow or death. lie is bound to attain emancipation.” — 42. 

Here ends the two hundred ami seventh chapter on the signs 

of a bidl. 


CHAPTER CCVIII. 

Sflta said : — ” King Vaivasv.ata !\rami requested the Lord to explain * 
to him the glory nf tlio rativrafa ladies tcliaste and virUious ladies) and 
on other subjects.” — 1. 

Manu said : — ” Among the chaste ifidies who is the best ? Who 
has subdued death? Wlio-^e name slioulil the people recite every day ? 
Pray tell me all this, their glory is tlio ili'.iK'ller of all sins.” — 2. 

Matsya said : — “ Even the Diiarm.'ir.tj.i does not dare to do anything 
against the wislies of the virtuous and cliuste ladies who are worthy of 
being venerated by Him.” — 3. 

“ I shall now relate to vou on this point a story which drives away 
all sin as a virtuous lady saved her lord from the meshes of death. 
Hear.” — 4. 

“ In the country of Madra there was in ancient times a king named 
^kkala Asvapati. \Vith the object of begetting progeny he began to 
adore Savitri. The Brahmanas began to pour offerings of white sesainums 
into the fire dail}% wlien ten months passed and Savitri Devi became 
pleased and appeared before the king ; and said : ‘ King ! yon are ray 
constant devotee. I shall give jmii a progeny. A beautiful daughter will 
be born to you by My favour.’ fSaying so She vanished, and afterwards 
M&lati, the virtuous queen of that king, gave birth to a daughter hand- 
some like Savitri. The king then said to the Br4hmanas : This daughter 
has been born by the favour of Savitri and she should therefore be named 
SSvitrl.”— 5-11. 

“ Afterwards the girl grew young and she was promised to SatyavAna. 
At the same time Karada came and told the king : ‘ King ! SatyavAna 
with whom you think of marrying your daughter will die within a 


CHAPTER GGIX. 


211 


year.' The king then said to himself : ' I liave already resol v'ed to give 

my daugiiter lo one particular person and under the circumstances I shall 
not change my determination.* With that mind he gave her away to 
SatyavAiia, the son of Dyumati Sen. Slvitri on becoming his wife became 
anxious on the recollection of the verdict of Narada and began to devout- 
fuUy serve her lord and her father-in-law and mother-in-law. Her blind 
father-in-law was deprived of his kingdom and resided with his son and 
his son’s wife in the forest. Savitr! served them with great care and they 
were greatly satisfied. — 12-16. 

In the meantime only four days remained for Satyavana to die when 
Sdvitri with the permission of her fatlier-in-Iavv kept up a fast for three 
nights. On the fourth day Satyavana went to fetch flowers and fruits 
from the forest with his fatlier’s permission, when Savitri also with her 
father-in-law’s permission followed him there. In the forest oppressed 
with the overwhelming grief of her lord’s approaching death, she in order 
not to disclose her mind, began to ask lier hud the names of the various 
trees and flowers. Satyavana began to point out to his distressed consort 
the principal forest trees, birds and animals.” — 17-21. 

Here ends the two hundred and eighth chapter on the anecdote 

of Saviti'i. 


CHAPTER CCIX. 

''Satyav&na said : — Dear ! look at the forest smiling with verdurd 
and nice trees. Tlie whole atmosphere is so pleasing to the eyes and the 
nose. It indeed fills the mind with amorous feelings. Look at the Asfoka 
trees laden with flowers. O, one with beautiful eyes ! the spring is really 
smiling on us. Lock at the Ki/iiluka blossoms to the south of this beautiful 
forest. The Kifirfuka flowers look like a blaze of fire and are fragrant. 
Dear ! in this forest flows the wind laden with the sweet aroma of flowers 
which is so soothing to me. To the west are visible the Karnikara flowers 
of the golden hue. Most of the thoroughfares of this forest are choked with 
luxuriant blossoms. Indeed the whole place abounds with flowers and 
looks charming. — 1-6, 

Listen to the buzzing of the passionate black bees. In the midst of 
such surroundings the god of love with liis arrows on the bow is about to 
make me His target. The place is resounding with the chorus of the 
cuckoos that are tasting the jungle fruits. Their notes are indeed 
beautiful like the speech of the good. These peacocks fired with love 
are following their females that are soaked in the aroma of flowers. 
Indeed the whole wood looks charming like you. — 7-10. 

These young cuckoos are enjoying themselves on the branches of 
the sweet smelling mangos. Their bodies are besmeared with the dust 
and aroma of the sweet smelling flowers and are in pursuit of their females 
and are going from one branch to anotiier. See ! though there are many 
{towers in this forest, the male cuckoo has taken the flower stalk of Saha- 
k&ra flower and is enjoying it like bis wife. — 11. 




TEE UAT&YA WBAEAU. 


m 


See this crow sitting on the branch of that tree. She is shielding 
her young ones with her wings and the male crow is feeing her after 
her delivery by his beak. — 12. 

This Chataka bird with his wife has come down to the ground but 
being enamoured does not pick up his food. — 13. 

Look at this crane that is enjoying himself in the company of his 
female and surcharged with passion is constantly making love to her and 
exciting passions in others. — 14. 

This parrot sitting on the branch of that tree in company of his 
female is binding down the twig so that it seems that the twig is loaded 
with fruit. — 15. 

This lion is also having his rest after a full meal and the lioness is 
lying in his embrace. — 16. 

Look at this wolf with his female in this cavern. See how their eyes 
are gleaming. — 17. 

This rhinoceros is licking his female constantly and being licked 
in return by the female and is feeling pleasure thereby. — 18. 

How is the she-monkey making her monkey asleep by placing his 
head on her lap and what pleasure is she giving to the male when she 
picks up insects from his body ? — 19. ^ 

How is this cat scratching her female who is lying on the ground 
with her belly visible without causing her pain. — 20. 

See that pair of Imres are lying clasping each other inclose embrace 
hiding their bodies and feet. But they can be marked out by their 
ears that are seen. — 21. 

This enamoured elephant after plunging itself into the water in the 
tank is playing with his female with a lotus stem. —22. 

See this sow is following her boar with her pigs on the track and is 
feeding on mice raised up by the nose of the boar. — 23. 

This thick-skinned buffalo besmeared with mud is frisking after 
his female, — 24. 

Dear ! look at this winking deer. It looks amazed at our sight. — 25. 

Mark this female deer ; it is scratching her husband by her horns. 
It is sometimes going behind, again it is scratching his face. Turn your 
eyes towards that Chamarl cow. The passionate ox is after her. He is 
haughtily staring at me. Look at that ox ! How is he basking under 
the sun with his wife and ruminating ? How is he also driving away the 
crow sitting on its hump ? Also look at the goat jumping on that huge 
tree with his female. Ilesting themselves on their legs they are both 
eating the plums. — 26-29. 

See this crane walking about with his female on the banks of that 
pool, and mark his colour resplendent like the moon emerging out of 
the clouds. — 30. 

This Obakravfik is wandering with his female in the tank and his 
female appears as if Padmini. — 31. 




OH AFTER COX. 


21S 


Dear ! I have collected fruits and you have picked flowers but we 
have not yet gathered the firewood. You wait under the shade of this tree 
and I shall fetch fuel.”— 32-33. 

Hearing all that SSvitri said : “ I shall do accordingly, you should 
not go beyond my sight ; for I feel nervous in this thick forest.” — 34. 

Matsya said : — .Afterwards Satyav&na began to collect the wood in 
the presence of Siivitri when the latter remaining at a distance on the 
banks of the tank took him as dead. — 35. 

Here ends the two hundred and ninth chapter 
on the anecdote of Sdoitrt. 

CHAPTER OCX. 

Matsya said : — When he felt suddenly a pain on his head at the time 
of collecting firewood, and being restless Satyavina said to his wife 
SSvitr! : — 1. 

” Dear ! I feel a pain on the head on account of this exhaustion. My 
vision fails me and 1 canno#Bee anything. I wish to sleep and rest my 
head on your lap.” Afterwards she made him go to sleep accordingly. 
Then that highly virtuous lady saw Dharmar&ja coming to that spot. 
She saw Dharmar&ja of blue complexion like blue lotus, wearing 
blue robes and with crown and earrings glittering like rain clouds 
illumined by flashes of lightning, adorned with garlands, armlets. He 
came followed by Death and Kala and took out the subtle soul from 
Satyavana’s body and taking possession of it and fastening it by a noose 
started on His destination. — 2-8. 

SSvitrl saw Satyav&na lifeless and gently followed Dharmarfija who 
was going away with the subtle soul of her I^ord and going to some 
distance with folded hands said while her heart shivered ; “ By devotion 
to the motheY' one gets happiness in this world, by devotion to father in 
Madhyaloka (the mid-region) and by devotion to (3uru, the preceptor, in 
Brahmaloka. — 9-11 . 

“ But the master of the house in which these three are honoured 
honours all the Dliarmas ; where they are not revered all works become 
futile. Till these three are alive and when devotion is paid to them, 
no other Dharma is necessary. They should daily be served most 
devoutfully. — 12-13. 

They should be informed duly when one wants to do some act 
out of one’s free-will. So that their hearts be not wounded. Thus 
everyone should behave towards his mother, father and precep- 
tor.”— 14. 

DharmarAja said : — “ Good one ! abandon the object with which you 
follow me. True ; there is no other duty than serving mother, father 
and preceptor. Now better desist from your purpose and do not detain me. 
I am getting late and you are feeling oppressed with grief by staying here. 
I therefore enjoin you to go back. You are a chaste #oman and a great 
devotee. Go and serve your Gurus.” — 16-16. 



214 


TRB UATSYA WHAN AM. 


SHvitr! said : — To women, Husband is their God, Husband is their 
great Refuge. Husband is their all in all ; therefore a virtuous woman 
should follow her Lord. — 17. 

Father, brother and sons are the givei-s of limited things but the 
Husband is the giver of things unlimited ; who is there who does not 
adore her lord ? — 18. 

It is proper of me to go to the place where my Husband is taken or 
where he goes himself. 1 ought to follow him by all my power. — 19. 

Deva ! when 1 shall not be able to follow my lord in your custody 
I shall give up my life.- 20. 

Where is that intelligent lady fit to be adorned wlio wants to live 
even for a moment as a widow whicli makes her unadorned and look low 
in the eyes of the people ?— 21. 

Dharmaraja said: — V^irtuous one! I liave become pleased with 
you, ask for a boon save Satyavaii’s life ; do not delay.*’— 22. 

Savitri said : — Grant me a boon by virtue of which my father-in-law 
may get hack his lost realm and vision. — 23 

Dharmaraja said:— “You have traveMid very far, now return to 
your place. Your wishes shall be fullilled. I am getting very late and you 
are feeling more and more pain by staying here. — 24. 

Here ends the two hundred and tenth chapter on the anecdote of S&vitrt. 


CHAPTER CCXI. 

SS-vitrt said : — Wlien a saint comes to a saint, who then of these 
feels pain and trouble? O l)efsl of the Devas ! 1 do not feel any worry 
in remaining in your company. The saints are the refuge of all, 
whether they be saints or sinners. And the wicked are not of any good to 
the wicked or got)d, to an}' body. Tltero is no such fear from poison, fire, 
snake, weapons as it is from the nian who is inimically disposed towards 
the rest of the world without any cause. The good give up their lives 
for the sake of otliers and tlie wicked are ever ready to cause pain to 
others even at the sacrifice of their lives. The wicked and mischief 
making people go against the next world and those who hold the view of 
the after-life give up their lives like straws. Brahma the Lord of the 
Universe has created therefore kings all over the w^orld for the destruction 
of the wicked. — 1-6, 

For the same reason a king should always examine his city and his 
people and respect the good. The king who chastises the wicked is the 
conqueror of the world. He should always control the wicked and 
support the good. This is the duty of a king who is eager for a place in 
Heaven. Besides this there is no other paramount duty for the king. 
Whom the kings cannot control, you control them also. You are the chastiser 
of the wicked, therefore you seem to me superior even to the Devas. The 
ivhole Universe is supported by the good. You are the crown of the good. 
I therefore follow you without feeling any pain. — 7-lX. 


CHAPTER COXTL 


215 


Dharmar&ja said : — 0^ one with beautiful eyes ! I have become 
pleased with thy words of righteousness. Ask for anything excepting 
Satyav&n’s life, do not delay. — 12. 

SSvitri said : — I wish to have a hundred brothers ; let my father 
who is without any son be blessed with a son. — 13. 

Dharmaraja said: — “It will be so. Now you should return and 
perform the funeral rites of your husband. He has gone to the other 
realm, you cannot follow him there. You are chaste, therefore you can 
follow to a little distance. The great virtues collected by SatyavSna by 
his devotion to his Guru have piodnced this result that 1 myself am 
taking him away. Indeed a wise man should always devote himself to his 
parents and preceptor.- 14-17. 

Satyav&na has pleased them all by his devotion and consequently 
you also along with him have conquered Heaven. — 18. 

A man goes to Heaven by means of asceticism, self-restraint and 
Brahmacharya, preserving the fires, and devotion to Guru. Preceptor, 
father, mother, elder brother and specially a Brahmana should also be 
revered. They should not be hurt even when one is afflicted. Preceptor 
is like Brahma, father is like Prajapati, njother is like the earth, brother 
is another form of one’s own soul. The sufferings undergone by the 
parents in begetting progeny cannot be repaid even in thousands of 
years, therefore the parents and preceptor should always be respected. 
The serving of these three is the highest asceticism. Asceticism is fully 
accomplished when these three aie pleased. 1 o seive them is the highest 
form of asceticism. Nothing sliculd be done without tlieir permission. 
They are in fact the three realms, the three orders, the three Vedas, and 
the three fires. Father isjhe Garhapatya Agni, mother is the Daksinagni 
and the preceptor is the Ahvaniya Agni. One who devotes himself well to 
them, conquers the three realms and enjoys in Heaven all the pleasures, 
having a bright body. Now abandon your desire. You have fulfilled your 
mission and all that you asked you will get. Now you should return home* 
You are feeling tired. So 1 ask you had better go home. — 19-28. 

Here ends the two hundred and eleventh chapter 
on the anecdote of Sdvitri. 


CHAPTER CCXIT. 

SAvitrl said : — There is no suffering in the pursuit of Dharma, 
especially to adore your feet is the highest virtue. — 1. 

A wise man should acquire Dharma by all means, for its attainment 
is superior to all achievements. — 2. ’ 

Dharma, Artha and K&ma are to be acquired by taking a human, 
birth ; to one who is bereft of Dbaima, Kama and Artha are like pro- 
geny to a barren woman. — 3. 

From Dharma is obtained wealth and from Dharma again Us, 
obtained K&ma, the fulfilment of desires ; it is through Dharma that this 
world and the next are enjoyed. — 4. 


£16 


THE MATSYA PUB AN AM. 


It is Dharroa only that accompanies the embodied aonl wherever it 
goes, friends and relatives do not follow. All other things excepting 
Dharma perish with the body. The soul comes into existence by 
itself and leaves the body similarly. It is only followed by Dharma. 
It is not followed by any brother, friend, wife, son &c. Fortune &c. are 
begotten by Dharma. — 5-6. 

Cleverness in works, fortune, beauty, all spring from Dharma. The 

prosperous realms of BrahmS, Indra, Upendra, Siva, Cbandramfl, Yama, 
Sun, Agni, Vayu, Water, Vasu, Advanikuni&ra, and Kuvera &c. are all 
attained by means of Dharma, and by virtue of it men are born amidst 
comfortable surroundings. — 7-8. 

Men attain Swarga, beautiful islands, pleasant Varsas, heavenly 
Nandan etc., by means of Dharma. Handsome Virn/inas and nymphs 
are also attained through Dharma. The virtuous alwa 3’'8 get resplendeiA 
complexion like gold. They attain kingdoms and r.i'complisli their desires 
by means of Dharma. — 9-11. 

High attributes are the fruits of Dharma, kingdom, kingly worship, 
success of one’s will, and especial rise are seen in the virtuous. The regal 
sceptre of gold and silver studded with vaiddrya gem is in the hands 
of the righteous and their faces always shine like the moon. — 12-13. 

Only the righteous become kings and are entitled to sit on the throne 
under a canopy, looking like a full moon, have garments studded with • 
jewels and fanned by chowiies bright as the sun. It is they who are 
aroused from their slumber by the chorus of ‘ victory ’, the blowing of the 
conches and by the praises sung by the bards. — M. 

High class seats, golden vases, good food and drink, music, servants, 
smell, grain &c. seek the virtuous persons only. — 15. 

Jewels, fine garments, handsome form, generosity, high attributes, 
beautiful wife, these are all attained by virtuous persons. The virtuous 
are blessed with palacial mansions that are decorated witli the perforated 
work in gold. They also get beautiful steeds to ride upon. Asceticism, 
sacrifices, charities, control of passions, forgiveness, celebicy, travelling 
in sacred places, the reading of the Vedas, the service of the good, worship 
of God, devotion and service of the GurQ, veneration of the Br&hmanas, 
humility, these are all the signs of virtue. The learned should always 
follow them. For Death never waits whether one has done such things 
or not. — 16-21. 

This body and life are quite uncertain, therefore one should begin 
to accomplish virtue from childhood. Who knows when he is going to 
die?— 22. 

Death comes to all, defying every body. Ip it not so very strange 
that man although he foresees death, leads a life as if he was immor- 
tal?— 23. 

Children see young persons and young persons see aged ones and 
may consider death far distant ; but old ones do not see any body before 
them. — 24. 

All are afraid of Death ; nowhere there is fearlessness. But the 
virtuous saints never fear death and the state after death. — 25. 




dBAPrm Goxni. 


217 


Dharmar&ja said : —I am very mach pleased with yoti. <- Ask for 
any other boon excepting SatyarSn’s life.” Do not make sny delay.— 
26. 

SSvitri said : — Deva ! I wish to beget a hundred sons through 
Satyav&n by your favour as there is no relief in the next world without 
sons. — 27. 

Dharmar&ja said : — You will have your desires fulfilled, but do not 
follow SatyavA.na. You are feeling worry and fatigue. Therefore 1 am 
saying so. Go back. — 28. 

Here ends the two hundred and twelfth chapter of the Matsya 
Puranam on the obtaining of the third boon by SavitH 
from Dharmardja. 


CHAPTER CCXIII. 

Savitri said : —You are the knower of Dharma and Adharina, you 
are the jiropagator of all the virtues. You control all the people of the 
Universe. You are Yauia, the great Ruler of the people according to their 
Karmas. — 1-2. 

You give pleasure to everyone by Dharma, consequently you are 
called Dhannaraj. — 3. 

All the people doing either good or bad deeds go unto you after 
death and place them at your disposal, therefore you are known as 
‘ Death.’— 4. 

You count and remember the time of every one’s existence, conse- 
quently thinkers call you K4la. — 5. 

Noth.— L it Time. 

You are the annihllator of all beings, therefore the Devas call yon 
Antaka. — 6. 

Note.— L it That which brings end. 

You were the first son of Vivasvana, therefore you are renowned as 
Vaivasvata in all the realms. — 7. 

When the numbered days and their Karmas are over you drive away 
the subtle bodies of all the beings, therefore you are known as Sarva 
Pranahara, Lord. The Vedic Dharma does not become extinct through 
your favour ! therefore the people remain in the path of Dharma and you 
are the Emancipation of the Virtuous. — 8-9. 

Note.— ^ iihmv^=That which takes away every one’s life. 

Through your grace no intermixture of blood occurs. 0, Lord of 
the Universe ! you are the protector of the pride of the Univense, there- 
fore protect me who has come to your mercy and refuge and my husband 
and his parents are helpless ; so save us. — 10. 

Dharmar&ja said : — O, Virtuous one ! I have become quite pleased 
with your prayer and hereby liberate your lord. Now your wishes are all 
fulfilled and you better return home quickly. — 11. 



218 


rU'tJ MATSYA JtfUliANAM. 


This husband of yours will rci^^n.with 3^011 for 3'(‘ar8, a\u\ will 
enjoy 3’our company. 1 lo will attain Heaven alon^ illi you whore ho 
wull onjo3" the company of the (Jods. The hundred sons horn to you 
of SatyavAn, will also n^i^^n and will ho illustrious lik * the Devas. 

All your sons will ho renowned as true soi s of yours and the 
hundred sons born of your father will be renowned after their niotlnu*. 
Your mother i\lalavi will he^ei eliildren who will he known as Malavas. 
All 3’’our brothers wdll bo Kiiii^s, illnstrious lik(» tlu' Deivas." 

Jiighteous one ! one who reads this prayer in tli ‘ morning wdll he 
blessed with lon^ lif^. — l(k 

Mats3’^a said ; — Saying so Dharmaraja disap}»eared from there 
leaving Sat3’avAn on the spot. — 17 . 

Here ends tiro hundred and tJiirteenth (duiptcr dcsf^.rihiinj the rc\*ni'<eiation 

of Salijardna. 

CITAHTER CCXIY 

Matsya said ■ — Afterwards tlie chaste Savitri returned to the spot 
where w\as lying the body of Sat.vavana, and sat down plaeing her lord’s 
bend on her lap as before. In the meantime the sun W'as going btdow llie 
horizon. Shortly after ilio soul of Sat3^av}ina liberated l)\" iJharmarAja 
entered into his body wlien tlie prine'e began to move slow^ly ami ('[)en(‘d 
his oye^ and said to his wife- : Dear ! who was dragging me away ? Where 
lias he gone? I cannot make out an\ tiling clearly. The day has boon 
past hert' in tliis w’ood in mv .>Ie(‘|>. Von w^ore engagivl in the ))nrsui( of 
your fast^ hn* nv‘ end to-day you had to ]>nt nj) wdtli Iiardshij>s on my 
account Aly mother and father must be pain at our sepaiation^ 

for so long a time, 1 therefmr want g , ami meet them without delay. 
So get up and be quick.’’ -i-t*, 

Savitri said : — ‘‘ I.oTd ^ d lie -mu jias gone down. If von like wc 
might go to the liormitage wlieie are m\ hllml father-in-law^ a.])d mother- 
in-law\ ddiero J shall relate Iw yi>u my liistory in detail.” With fheso 
wmrds she a<*com]»ariie(l lier lov<l. Wlum tiuyv r(*ached tlic liormitage 
they found the blind King Dynmatsain wdio \va.^ restored to his sight 
getting very anxious along with tlio qu^en about his son and daughter- 
in-law'. ' He \vas overjovr* 1 P) s('e them return at the same lionr. The 
sages wore consoling him at llie time. ddHui Savitri along witli her lord 
paid her respects tolicr fatlicr-in Ijuv. Ihinct' Satyavana also j)aid his 
reveraiioc to the sages arto,r meeting his father. That niglit tluiy all 
spent witli tlie liisis and Savitri narnit(’d evm-ytliing lad’ore lliosc present 
there ; and she also broke her fast that very night. Afterwards, when 
the niglit came to a close, all tlio citizens ami tlie army of King Dynmat- 
sain gathered tliorcand said to the King : — “The King who usurped your 
throne wdiou became blind has been slain by your ministers. Pray 
come and occupy your throne.” — 7 - 17 . 

Hearing that the King lollow^ed by liis four-fold army entered his 
Capital and occupied his throne. Similarly in due time Savitri was 
blessed with hundred sons. In that way that chaste lady also fulfilled 
all the ambitions of her father. So the chaste lady delivered both tlie 
families of her husband and father and saved the life oE lier luisbaud from 



QtiAPrm otLXv. 


210 


tho har»d8 of Death. People should' therefore revere and worship chaste 
ladies. Tlie whole Universe is hold up and by* the virtue of the righteous 
ladies. Tlie words of the chaste ladies never go false ; therefore, the people 
who a e expecting their desires to be fulfilled should always revere siicli 
ladicf^ .—18-22. 

Here ends the two hundred and fourteenth chapter of the Matsyd 
Purdnam on the anecdotes of Sdvitri. 


CHAPTER eeXV. 

King Vaivasvata Manu said : — Lord ! You are the knower of all, 
1, tlioi'ofore, beg you to please toll me what a king should do on asceiiding 
his throne. — 1. 

Matsya said ; — A king succeeding to his throne should pick out 
worthy men for his assembly as his advisors and helpers on various 
subjects to work on his staff in order that his rule may be prosperous, for 
the prosperity of his kingdom depends solely on the men in his council 
and in various other departments. Even the smallest function cannot be 
successfully performed by one single man not helped by any body. Now 
then can a state be well administered without the assistance of competent 
ministers and helpers P—2-3. 

A king should, therefore, choose his ministers and helpers from 
a respectable family who should be valiant, strong, imposing, capable 
of bearing hardships, ambitious, handsome, having Satva-guna and 
forbearance, good, virtuous, used to gentle speaking, able to give friendly 
advices, loyal, knowing to act in the proper time and place, eager for 
a good name. Such men should bo employed by a king to discharge 
res])oiisible and good functions. People unsuited to particular oHices 
should be given places according to tlieir respective merits where they can 
make themselves useful, after they had been duly examined. — -1-7. 

A king should appoint a Bnihinana or a Kshatrya to be his 
Commander-in-chief, He should be of a good family, modest, having 
g(X)(i manners, skilled in arclieiy, expert in examining and managing 
horses and elephants, used to polite speaking, able to uiiderstaiKl the 
science of omens and medicine, grateful, able to appreciate tlie prowess of 
the brave, valiant, used to bear hardships and having a knowledge of 
disposing troops in battle and of military affairs in particular. — S-IO. 

A king’s door-keeper should be a man of long stature, clever, hand- 
some, humble, accustomed to sweet speech, able to inlluence the minds 
of the people. — 11. 

A king’s spy should be conscientous enough to submit true and 
accurate reports, obedient to the king’s injunctions, have a knowledge of 
dialects of many countries, veable to speak lluently and put up with rough 
life, of quiet disposition and capable of discharging his functions adequately 
according to the circumstances. — 12-13. 

The personal guards of a king should be men of long size, robust, 
brave, firm in loyalty, free from uneasiness, used to bear always hardships, 
woll-wishers of their lord. — 14. 



220 


THE MATSYA POBAEAM. 


The betel bearer of the king, it may be he or Mhe, should be free 
from avarice, immune from all outside influences and most loyal. 15. 

The man with full knowledge of king’s six-fold expedients in foreign 
politics Sandhi (peace), Vigraha (war), Yfina (morals), Asana (halt), 
Dvaidhibli&va (duplicate) and Asaraya (seeking shelter) and the languages 
of the country should be employed as minister for war. — 16. 

The provincial rulers of the king should be men able to know the 
doings (merits arid demerits) of the subordinate officials, the income and the 
expenditure and the produce of crops and many languages. — 17. 

The men who will bear swords should be handsome, young, long in 
size, very loj'al, of good family, brave, and able to bear hardships. Tliose 
who will be archers should bo powerful, having a knowledge of riding 
on elephants, horses, chariots, most righteous, and skilled in archery and 
able to bear all sorts of hardsliips. — 18-19. 

The charioteer of .a king should have a good kitowlec.ge of the 
principles of the science of omens. Tie should be able to train and treat 
horses, know the divisions of the country, he aware of the power of 
warriors, firm in sight, used to gentle speech, learned, and versed in all 
the arts. —20-21. 

A man immune from avarice and o\itside influences, handsome, 
plucky, knowing the sciences of medicine and cookery, generous, particular 
about clipping his hair and finger nails should be employed as a cook in 
a royal kitchen — 22-23. 

The members of his assembly should he Koolin Br>ihmanas equal in 
their dealings to friends and foes, be vei'sed in the Dhanaawistras. — 24. 

The writers of a king should write neatly and legibly. The letters 
are to be full and placed at equal intervals. He should be clever in 
devising means, and in the use of stray expressions versed in all the 
Sdstras and capable to express many meanings fully in short phrases. 
O king ! Those people ought to be placed in religious services, or in the 
Judicial Services who are expert in knowing the hearts of people, of long 
stature, free from greed, and of a charitable disposition. Such men should 
be engaged also as gate keepers. — 25-29. 

King’s Treasurer should know the ways of disposing of iron, cloth, 
doer-skin, and jewels. Ue should be able to value things, and be wise, 
clear in mind, and free from laziness and avarice. All his assistants 
should also be like him. — 30-31, 

The officials in charge of disbursements should also be of the same 
type as in the excliequer. — 32. 

One who is skilled in the eight-fold medical science by heredity, 
incapable of being won over by anyone, free from avarice, virtuous, 

' belonging to a good family, should be employed as a physician on whom 
a king should look as the preceptor of his life. The king is to obey like 
ordinary persons, the words of his physician : for he deals with his 
life. -33. 

Note,— vgi|f.sEight parts of medical science, via., ^ siw Rliirv, 

swHpwi' vsmwiil’ sw ftsi wiri w ' h 


CBAPTER GCXV. 


221 


A king should appoint different class of men in different departments 
according to requirements. One who knows the art of training elephants 
and is aware of the races of wild beasts, and is accustomed to bear hardships 
should be made the superintendent of royal elephants. Similar should be 
the elephant driver who should also be of the above qualifications and firm 
in his seat and clever all round. The groom of a King should know 
about horses and how to treat the horses when ill. The Commander of 
the royal fort should be a man who cannot be easily led away by any 
intrigue. He should also be brave, learned, of high family, and persever- 
ing and energetic in all actions. The Engineer of a King should know 
engineering, and be able to prepare plans and hardy and energetic and 
have nimble hands, keen foresight and should not get tired. Similar 
men should be employed in the art of using weapons who know the 
various ways of throwing weapons etc.^ — 34-39. 

The custodian of the ladies’ apartments in a royal palace should be 
a man free from uneasiness, skilful, humble, advanced in age, belonging 
to a respectable family, devoted to his ancestois, chaste, meek and modest. 
Thus a King should appoint his retainers in these seven different depart- 
ments after examining them fully. Tliey should all be careful and 
thoroughly expert in the different works. — 40-42. 

The Controller of the arsenal should be wise, energetic and perse- 
vering. A King should always appoint men to bold offices after examining 
the responsibilities of different situations. Excellent, middling and mean 
are the three kinds of works. Improper discharge of duties leads to the 
extinction of a sovereign. A King should thei'efore always properly scru- 
tinise the manliness, devotion, learning, courage, family status and gentility 
of a man as well as take advantage of expert advice before appointing 
him to hold an office of state. — 43-46. 

A King should consult his Councillors over a matter individually 
and separately and the advice of one Councillor should not be divulged 
to the other, for every one cannot be taken into full confidence. Therefore 
consultation in chief should be held with the prime minister but by 
seeking the advice of more people one very often gets confused. 
Therefore many men’s advice should not be taken. A king used to act on 
the counsel of others should always place confidence in the advice of his 
Councillor in chief. — 47-49. 

A King should always have by him and revere the Brfihmanas 
versed in the three Vedas and should never encourage the votaries of 
unreal learning for their contact is always thorny and uncongenial to the 
learned. He should always venerate the learned in the Vedas, respect 
grey hairs and holy persons and imbibe from them meekness and states- 
maaship. Such a King undoubtedly influences the world, and many ill- 
behaved Kings without humility and modesty had gone to rack and 
ruin. — 50-52. 

Many well-behaved Kings had regained their empires even when 
exiled. A King should read the Vedas from those who are learned in 
them. He should also master politics, logic, philosophy, and temporal 
science ; he should collect information from ordinary people and keep his 
senses under control, for a King who can subdue his passions fascinates 



222 


THE UATSYA PURANAM. 


all his people. A King should also perform a series of sacrifices in which 
liberal gifts should be given to the BrA-hinanas. — 53-55. 

Besides this for the sake of righteousness he should give various 
kinds of gifts to the BrAihmanas and should collect revenues from his 
subjects annually. He should propagate the study of the Vedas in his 
state and should be like a father and brother to his subjects. He should 
especially revere the members of his preceptor’s family. — 56-57. 

This eternal rule to be observed by the Kin^ is established by 
Brabmii. The King following it does not perish. Ho is amiable to all. 
The wicked, thieves, and emunies cannot lloui isli. — 56. 

King’s prescribed course of conduct. 

And so he sliould always direct his actions according to Brahiiia- 
bidhi which is known as Aksliyal)idhi. A King should look upon all 
classes of his subjects according to their merits and nnplo}- tlicnii accord- 
ingly.— 59. 

A King should recollect his Kshyatr\’a dliaima and never retreat 
from war. Not to retire from battle-field, to ])roteet liis siii)je(*tR, to serve 
the Brahmanas are the foremost duties of a King, lie should also protect 
the distressed, the inlinn, the widows and providi^ tlumi with boarding and 
lodging and endowments and adjust rho VaniAsrama ndes, should roclaim 
and restore the fallen ones in their respective religions, should give grain, 
cloth, oil, utensils, etc. to the good of all orders ; slionld fullil tlio objects 
of the ascetics and worship them liketlie Devas. ami never disrespect tlioso 
who have done good to him. lie should interest hinisell' in these things 
in such a way as to sacrifice lus life and Kingdom for their sake in case 
of necessity. — (iO-Gl. 

Men arc said to have two kinds of lainds r?V:. hom\^t and ('rpni'ocaL 
He should know’ wliat is ni(‘ant h\ duj«liealo mind bui ^lumld ni.*! hear 
it in ])ractise. When he is induenced by the lahej- he shoidd supjui'ss 
it and should not let any one know of hi^^ weakness, hut should try and 
realize the failings of otlnns — bd-tjf). 

He should guard Ids limbs of l)ody and kee]) them secret just as a 
tortoise does actions. He should also take euro of his weaknesses and 
not get them divulged. The man who has ni» dofijied religion should 
never be trusted nor should a man of allinnod religion be t;iken into 
confidence indiscriminately. Jf trust begets fear, tlien total destruction 
ensues. Confidence should how^ever be inspired into others with 
tact. — G7-G8. 

He should tlilnk of acquiring wealth with the eyes of a crane, and 
ho should shew valour like that of a lion, he sliould take to his heels 
like a wolf, collect money like a hare, strike hard on others like 
a boar, he should be of variegated nnanners like a peacock, devoted like a 
dog, be afraid like a crow, speak sweet like a cuckoo. Ho should fix liis 
residence in a quiet unknown place, and should not take his meals, go to 
bed or use ilowers, clothes and ornaments without due observation and 
scrutiny. He should not without pre-examination go to a public scene or 
in the midst of a crowd, nor should ho plunge into unknown waters. The 
horeos and elei:>hants not tested by experts should not be ridden by 



ciiAPrisii coxv. 


223 


hiin. He should not interfere with a snake nor indulge with an unknown 
woman. He should not stay at a festival of a God. — 69-74. 

He should always remain in the midst of his regal paraphernalia. 
He should protect the distressed and practise self-restraint. Besides all 
this, a king eager for conquests should have worthy and stalwart 
assistants. He should always feed the Sfidlrfis and servants and respect 
them. -75-76. 

He should appoint the virtuous to conduct acts of righteousness, the 
brave to carry on warfare, the intelligent to control the revenue depart- 
ment, and persons of good character to all posts suited to them. Eunuchs 
should be employed in the female apartments of the palace, strong-minrled 
men should be employed to fulfil difficult missions. A king slioiild 
examine whether a man is of good cliaracter or not by privately making 
liim presents through Dharma, AriJja or Kama and then engage him. lie 
should send as spies his trustvvortliy servants in the garb of Sanyasins as 
residing in forests to enquire privately into the truth. — 77-80. 

A king sliould regulate his affairs like this. A king should not 
always administer justice witli a strong hand. The unpleasant duties of 
a king cannot be j)erforined tlirougli virtuous people, consequently a king 
should avoid the use of repressive measures, otherwise subjects become 
dissatisfied. JMon should be appointed to hold offices to which they are 
best suited. — 81-83. 

Tlie liereditary servants of the state may be employed in all depart- 
ments without any liard and fast tests. One’s own friends should also be 
placed in charge of works wliore a king’s relatives are not placed. Thus 
the good results are seouj’ed by the king. TJie wicked and the good 
emigrants from other empires should be accommodated with respect in 
liis cloininions l)y a king. The wicked wlieri known should not however 
be trusted but to promote tlie fecundity of mankind they should also be 
provided witli means of sustenance. Tlie emigrants from the other em- 
pires should be well-treated on the uiulerstaiHling tliat they have come 
under his protection. Thus they would remain under obligation. The 
king should not himself bo ready to collect liis servants; nor should he 
allow dissensions to crop up amongst his servants. — 84-81). 

The servants not satisfied with the king should be kept under close 
watch and ward and the sovereign should keep himself well-informed about 
their conduct through his reliable spies. They are to be treated as he 
would behave towards enemies, fire, poison, serpcmls and swords. — 90. 

A king should award his capable servants and punish the wicked 
ones. He should keep himself informed about everyone through his 
spies. The spies are the eyes of the king. —91. 

A king should secretly depute four spies in his country as well as 
in foreign countries to Avork out the’ policy of divide and rule. They 
should be intelligent, learned, free from avarice, able to put up with hard- 
sliips, incapable of being recognised by others, simple in habits, able to 
mix with people, i^killed in commerce or medicine. He should not pin his 
faith in one spy alone. The spies must recognise each other and be of 
gentle manners. — 92-94. 



TUB MATSYA PURANAM. 




T\ie should roam in the garb of merchants, ministers, as- 

trologers, physicians or Sannyasis. When at least ivjo of sach spies corro- 
borate each other, the king should act accordingly. If tliey contradict 
each other then spies of more superior talents should be deputed to find 
out which of his actions are appreciated by liis people as well as the causes 
of their dissatisfaction. The spies should be checked in return. He 
should then abandon for good what may be against the wishes of the 
people. — 95-98. 

0 King of the Solar race ! the beauty and prosperity of a king 
always lies in the contentment of his subjects, he should therefore act in 
such a manner as their love toward their king might be increased.— -99. 

Thus ends the two hundred and fifteenth chapter of the Matsya 
Pardnam on the duties of a King. 


CHAPTER CCXVL 

Matsya said : — OKing of Manus! I shall tell you now what a 
servant of the State sliould do. Hear. — 1. 

A servant of the State should carefully listen to what the king 
says and never interrupt liiin in his speech. In an assemblage, lie 
should speak sweet and a^jfreeable words to the king, and unsavoury 
things that may bo unavoidable and necessary lor his well being should 
be communicated to him privately. When a sovereign is of a peaceful 
disposition he may tlien 1*e approached with a prayer of conferring 
any favour upon some one, but no prayer should bo made for one’s 
ownself. Such a prayer shoultl always be nia<le through some friend. 
He should be specially carefiil that one’s duty should not bo neglected. 
He should not f)verwork any i>ne?, nor sliould he inisappropriato 
any money. He should never sliow any indin'orenco to the honours 
conferred by the sovereign and should always try to keep himself 
in his good graces, lie should never imitate the king in his dress, mode 
of talking nor any other aetions. He should avoid wdmt is not pleasing to 
him and sliould not equal or excel him in dress.— -2-7. 

In course of gambling and at the game of dice one should show his 
skill to the king but make the latter win. — 8. 

Wirliout the king’s permission he should not go about with the 
custodians of the ladies’ apartments of tlie, royal palace, nor sliould he do so 
with the spies of the enemies and the dismissed servants of the State.— 9. 

He should keep secret the kindly or unkin<ljy feelings of the king 
toward him. He should not utter before any one a thing that is private 
to the king. - 10. 

Any thing roproacliable or irreproachable communicated by the 
king should not be disclosed to any one for if one docs so one loses the 
favour of the king. — 11. 

When a king orders any one to perforin any service one shoulc 
readily volunteer himself to do it.— 12, 



OH AFTER OOXVI. 


225 


Of course this should be done knowing the hours of business, other- 
wise if one does so at all times, one becomes an object of hatred and 
ridicule. — 13. 

One should not repeatedly lepeat the favourite words of a kiitg. 
One should always remain very moflost and never knit his eyebrows in 
his august presence or laugh too much.— 14. 

lie should not talk too much in the presence of the king, nor should 
he remain silent. He should not be artful or proud, nor should he speak 
too much of himself. — 15. 

Pie should not say anything about the unjust deed of the sovereign 
and should put on the garments, weapons, and ornaments presented to 
him by the king on momentous occasions. lie should not give awa.y any 
of the royal gifts and sliould not sleep during of the day. He should 
not pass through a foi bidden thoroughfare and should not meet the king 
at an iinproper place- He should take his scat to the right or the left of 
the king according to his warrant of precedence and not behind or in front 
of him. — 16- H). 

He should not yawn, show signs of weariness, cough, assume angry 
demeanour, rest himself against, anything, knit his eyes, vomit and belch, 
in the presence of the sovereign.*- 20. 

He slioiihl not indulge in self-praise but he should get others to do 
it for liinj. — 21. 

All the servants of the Estate should most loyally serve the sovereign 
with a clear mind and free from laziness. They should always shun craf- 
tiness, wickedness, bnckl)iting, atheism and low morals. — 22-23. 

Tliose versed in the Vedas, possessing modesty should always serve 
the king well for their welfare. — 24. 

Tlie sons, friends, and councillors of the king should be saluted 
every da}^ neither the king nor liis minister should be trusted. — 25. 

Nothing should be said without beung asked ; and if one says so, 
that ought to be true and lead to the general welfare. One should always 
take a measure of the king’s mind by his speech and then it is easy for 
him to act so as to please him ; he is to worship the king. — 26-27. 

One who wants one’s own welfare should mark carefully whether 
the king is pleased or displeased with him and should act accordingly. 
—28. 

If a king goes against any body, his party will be ruined and bis 
opposite party will lise. The king if disgusted gives hopes but does not 
confer benefits accordingly. He appears angry though there is no cause 
of anger and though he remains pleasant, he speaks unpleasant high 
words. The king may deprive him of his subsistence for his insane 
speeches. — 29-30. 

The disgusted king shews his goodwill towards others but hates him 
with whom he is disgusted. He finds fault with bis words and speaks other 
wonls not having any concern with the business. The king turns away his 
attention from the piece of work of his subordinate with whom he is 
disgusted. These signs shew that a king is disgusted. — 31-32. 

4 



226 


TEE MATSYA PURANAM. 


On the other hand when a king becomes plessed he always asnmes a 
pleasant aspect towards him, accepts his words with gentleness, offers 
seat and asks about his welfare. Km-w that the king is pleased with him, 
seeing whom in private place he does not become afraid, hearing whose 
words his face becomes jolly ; even whose unpleasant words he hears and 
whose humble offerings the king accepts and whom he remembers 
with a cheerful expression of his face. — 33-36. 

A devoted one should serve the king in the ways spoken by me. 

The retainers of the king who do serve others not only in times of 
adversity but always and who adore the king in spite of his l)eing ig- 
norant, go to the domain of ludra that is inhabited by the Devas. — 37. 

Here ends the tivo hundred and sixteenth chapter on the 
king's servants. 


CHAPTER CCXVfl. 

Matsya said *• — A king should have liis resi<lence in a central place 
which should be beautiful, with abundance of grass and trees. Jt sliould 
be inhabited by a number of people and \Yliore the tributary kings, 
princes and subjects arc loyal and submissive. It should also have some 
Brahraanas skilled in various rituals and many artisans in its vicinity. — 1>2. 

It should be surrounded by sweet smelling flowers and fruits. 
It should be impassable to the h)roigner’s army. Tliere sljould be no 
tigers, scorpions, snakes, lions, thieves round about it. The place 
should be beautiful and should be elevated ajid well-supplied with 
water and should not be heavily taxed. A king hhould live with his 
assistants in such a place of liappiucss wliere there should bo absolutely 
nothing to agitate him. — S-5. 

Amidst such surroundings ho sljould have his fortress. There 
are six different kinds of forts viz. — Dhanusadurga, Mahidurga, Naradurga, 
Vriksadurga, Jaladurga, Oiridurga, and of the.se the last-named Oiri- 
durga is the best. — 6-7. 

Note. — castle surrounded by do.sert. ,r=An earth fort. place 

of safety formed by placing the army in a particular position. ’Wjn^A place dcn.sely 
surrounded by trees which make it impassable, ^ f<irt surrounded by water. fhRjn 

=;A hill fortress. 

The castle should be surrounded by a ditch and ramjjarts. The 
buildings are to be in the centre. It should have abundance of weapons. 
«.g., Sataghni and others. Its doors should be beautifully made. 

Its main entrance should he handsome and big enough to enable the 
king to pass through it riding on an elephant with Ids banner streaming. 
Four roads should be laid out to form squares. There should bo a 
temple in front of one road, the king’s mansions in front of the second 
road. Facing the third one should be the houses of judicial and military 
officers and the gateway of the city should be in front of the fourth. In 



CHAPTER GGXVIL 


227 


such a way a royal city ahould be laid out no matter if it is oblong, square 
or circular. Circular one is the best or it may be triangular or drum- 
shaped, or semi-circular or of other suitable shapes (in the form of military 
array, diamond-shaped, etc.). — 8-13. 

The palace on the banks of a river should be of the shape of a ore- 
scent ; this is the best. Treasure should be kept in the southern portion 
of the palace, to the further south of which should be the place for the 
elephants. The elephaiityard should have its doorway to the east or the 
north. The arsenal should be made south-east. — 14-16. 

In the same direction should be the kitchen and houses for other works. 
The Jiouse of the royal priest should be to the left of the king’s mansion 
where should also be the places for ministers, Vedic professors and 
students, physicians, stables and cow-sheds and store-houses. The 
stables should face the north, or the south. It is not well if it faces any 
other direction. — 17-18. 

All night there are to be lamps burning in the stables. The horses 
should stay there. Cocks, monkeys, slie-goats and cows with calves should be 
kept near the stables. She-goats should Jilso be kept for the benefit of the 
horses. Dung should always bo cleared away from the stables, elephant 
and cow yards before sunset The quarters for the grooms and elephant 
drivers and charioteers should be near the stables and the elephant yard. 
Besides them, soldiers, artisans, those versed in formulae, veterinary 
doctors (about horses and elephants, etc.), guests should also be best 
accommodated within the fortress. For diseases are likely to prevail 
much in tlie fortress. Brahmanas and Charanas should also be accom- 
modated. — 21-26. 

A large number of people should not be allowed to enter the fortress. 
There should be various kinds of cannon and weapons in the fort as well as 
those who can use them, for weapons that can destory thousands of people 
protect the king. There are to remain warriors also close by. Besides 
all these things there should be secret doors as well as other doors within 
the fort protected by those wlio killed thousand warriors or are skilled in 
shooting bows and arrows and throwing various other weapons. A number 
of bows, clubs, spears, arrows, swords, sticks, maces, big pieces of stones, 
tridents, battle-axes, quoits, etc., should always be kept ready within the 
fortress. Shields, skins, pharoas, ropes, caries, various things of artisanship, 
husks, loads of straw, wood, coals, etc., should also be kept. The tools 
of all the artisans, musical instrumeiits, various kinds of medicines, drums, 
weapons, various clothings, gems, iron, etc., should also be kept ready. — 
29-34, 

A good quantity of grass, firewood, molasses, oils, milk, fat, sinews, 
cowhides, hides for drums, all kinds of grains, silk cloths, barley, wheat, 
jewels, other kinds of cloths, all kinds of irons, all kinds of pulses 
such as Moth, Milhga and Urada, gram, sesaraiim, cowdung, grain-dust^ 
hemp, resinous exudation of SAla-tree, bark of the birch-tree, wax, borax, 
etc., should also be kept in stock in abundance, — 35-39. 

Poisons of snakes should be kept ]o('.ked up in jars and similarly 
lions, deer, birds, etc., should also be kept confined separately. Animals 




228 


THE MATSYA PUEAHAM. ' 


unfriendly to each other should be carefully kept in secret spots, and 
apart from each other. — 40-41. 

Besides these thias^s a king wishing the well-being of all should 
also keep in stock well-preserved all the various arth^les of the state. 
The following medicinal plants and artitdes of purest quality should also 

be kept, Jivaka, Risabhaka, Kakoli, Anialaki, Vasaka, 6}rilaparni, 

Prianiparni, Mudgaparni, ilasaparni, Sarivadvaya, Vahitraya, Vara, J^asantl, 
Vpisya, Vrihati, KantaUnri, ^ringi, iSringntaki, Proni, Varsjl, Darbha, 
Reftueka, Madhuparni, VidAridvaya, Mahlksira, Malnitapa, Dhanvana, 
Sabadeva, Katuka, Eranda, Visa, Pariii, Satalia, Mridvika, Phalgu, 
Kharjura. Yastiinadlni, Sukra. Ati.4nka, K.'smofya, Olihatia, Atiohhatra, 
Virana, Iksu, Ikusviknra, Phanitndi, Sinihi, Sahadevi, Madlmka, Ihispaharnsa 
Satapuspa, Madhnloka, Satavari, ]\Iadl)uka, Aj^vaftlin, Tala, Atniaiiupta, 
Katphala, Pfirvika, Raja8^ii>aki, Itajasarsapa, Dhafiyaka, It ir^yapmkta, 

Utkata, KrdasJaka, Padniavija, Oovalli, ]\la«llnivalli, i^itap; ki, Kaluigaksi, 
Kakajihva, Urupu'^pika, Parvata, Trapusa. Guiya, ihinarhhava, Ka'^eruka, 
Kasmirt, Villa, Saluka, Nngakesara, all s(U*tK of huNks, grains, Sainidhanya, 
milk, honey, curds, oils, fat and marrow, A asa, ghee, Nipa, Ap^taka, 
Aksota, Vatnmra, Soma, Vanaka, etc. — 12-31. 

The following things sliould also be stocked in a king^s castle, viz . — 
Pomegranates, Amrataka, tamarinds, h'mons, omMunbers, I > read fruits, 
Karamardaka, Rusaka, Vijapura, Kaiulnra, Alalaii, bnjal)andhuka, Kolakad- 
vaya, all sorts of Parna, Amratadraya, Pan^vata. NAgaraka, l^rAcldiiaruka, 
Kahittha, Amalaka, Clmkrapluila, J^anta^atha, dainhu, Navanita, Sanviraka, 

Rusodaka, all sorts of wines, AI mda, Takra, imrd and all sorts of white 
things, and other sour thiiigs. “~33-3ik 

The following things sliould aPo be kept : — all tlie various kinds 
of salts, viz. — Saindhava, iSaml)hara, sea salt, salt made out of well water, 
Ksara, MapiyAri, black salt, re<i sail, Sanvarchula, Udvida, Valaklya, 
Yavakhya, Aurva, K.sara, Kalabliasma. — (JOd'il. 

The following pungent things should also be kept: — sacred figs 
and the root of sacred fig-tree, Jbppali, Pippaliinula, Ohavya, Chitraka, 
Nagara, Kuvera, black pepper, Sigru, marking-nuts, mustard, Kustjia, 
Ligisticurn, Ajowfin, asapholmda, Alidaka, DlianyAka, Karavi, ])amboo 
shoots, Yajya, Susuklni, KAlam; likA, Fanijliak, garlic, Pliustriiia, iSiirasa, 
KayasthA, Vayastha, Haritahi, AIanah^^iia, Amriui, Rudanti, Rohisa, Kan- 
kunia, Eranda, Kandira, J^allaki, llanjikA, all sorts of Pitta and 

Mutra, Haritaka, various other fruits, Suknuili 1, IJingupatnka, and other 
pungent things. — 62-67. 

The king should collect the following things in his own city ? — Musta, 
Cliandana, Hrivera, Kiitamaluka, DAniharidra, Haridra, Nalada, U^ira, 
NaktamAla, Kadambaka, Diirva, PA-tali, Katuka, Danti, Tvakpalri, Vacha, 
Chireta, Bhutumbo, Vi^a, Ativisa, Tnlisapatra, Tagara, Saptaparna, Vikan- 
kata, Kakodumbarika, Divya, SurodbliavA, Sadgrantha, Rohini, JatAma/isi, 
Parpata, Oantt, Ras&uyana, Bhringar§.ja, Patangi, Faripelava, Duspariift, 



CHAPTER CCXVIIL 


229 


Ajumdvaya, Kainft, SyArnfika, Gandbanaknli, Rupaparni, Vyas[hranakha, 

Obaturangnla, Rambba, 'Ankura, Aspboin, Taliispbofa, HarenukS, 
VetHgra, Vetasa, Tumbi, ViHani, Lorlhrapuspint, MyJatl, Karakri^nd, 
Vritfchika, Jivitd, Parnika, Gudclii. — 68-74. 

The following things should also be kept : — Haritakl, Amalakt, 
Bhiimyainalaki, Vibliitaka, Priyangu, DhTitakipujjpa, Mocha, Arjuna, Asana, 

Ananta, Kamini, Tuvarika, Syonaka, Katphala, Bhurjapatra, l^ilapatra; 
Patahlpatra, Lomaka, SamangA,, Trivrita, Mula, KnrpAsa, Gairika, Anjana, 
Vidruina, Madhuchhista, Kancjika, Kuinuda, Utpala, Nyagrodha, Udum- 
bara, Asvattha, Kinsuka, Sinasapa, Sami, Priyala, Piln, Kasnri, Sirisa, 
Padtnaka, Vilva, Agnimantha, Plaksa, Syainaka, Vaka, Ghana, Rajadana, 
Karira, Dhanyaka, Priyaka, Karankala, Aiioka, Vadara, Kadamba, Kha- 
diradvaya, the leaves, essence (resin), roots and flowers of all these. The 
king is to collect all sorts of poisons very carefully. Also he should 
collect various things of wonderful variegated properties that can destroy 
poisons, also that can destroy angadas, Ilak^»aaas and Bhutasand Pitjaehas, 
that can destroy sins and prevent draught. The bacilli, the poisonous 
gases and fumes and similar destructive things should also be preserved 
by a king for the destruction of his enemies.— 75-8i. 

The king should also keep within his fort people versed in dancing 
and music and versed also in the Kalasastras (various arts). He should 
notallow the timid, the infatuated, the intoxicated, those addicted to 
drugs, the angry dispositioned, the disgraced ones, the sinful ajid bad 
persons to remain in his stronghold.. The monarch should always remain 
in a well-guarded citadel protected by charms, warriors, balconies, and 
well supplied with all kinds of grains and medicines and inhabited by 
the merchant classes. — 85-87. 

Here ends the two hundred and seventeenth chapter on how to 
protect a fort and a city of a king. 


CHAPTER CCXVIII. 

Manu said : — Pray tell me, 0 Lord ! the medicines that destroy 
the demons and dispel the effect of poisons and that ought to be kept 
in a king’s fort. — 1. 

Matsya said : — The decoction of the following things dispels the 
poison, viz., Vilva, Ataki, Yavaksara, Patala, Vahlika, Usaua, S^riparnt and 

i^allaki. By drinking and sprinkling the poisoned yava, salt, drinking 
water, bedding, clothes, seat, water, armour, ornaments, umbiella, chamara 
and fans with the decoction of the above materials, the effect of poison 
disappears. The decoctions of the following materials also readily drive 
away poisonous effects, viz. — H^elu, Patala, Ativisa, f^igru, Murva, PunarnavS, 
Samanga, Vriijamula, Kapittha, Vri^jironita, Mahadarnta, Satha. — 2-5. 

Laks&, Priyafigu, (long pepper, saffron or a particular kind of creeper 
said to blossom at the touch of women; Manjistha, Ela, Renukft, Yasti- 
madhu, Madhura, should be mixed with Nakulapitta and buried into the 



230 


THE MATSYA PURANAM. 


earth for seven nights in a vessel made of horn. Then it nhould be placed 
in a golden pendant studded with precious stones which should be used 
on the hand. It will dispel the poison from everything it touches. 

MAnalivyA, ^amipattra, TurnvikS, the white mustard, woodapple, Kuda, 
Manjistha, should be well-powdered and mixed with the bile of a dog and 
a KapiU cow. This great medicine prevents the effects of poisons. Besides 
these, there are various gems and pearls, Mfl^ikS and J/ituk& which ought 
to be held in the arm. They also prevent the effects of poisons. - 6- 10. 

By mixing Renuka, Jatrimaftst, turmeric, Madhuka, h'^ ney, the 
bark of Ak§a, Surasa, Laksa, and the bile of a log into a pi ste and 
applying it over the drama, sounding instrunxcuts, and banners; by 
hearing the sound of such drums and by seeing and smelling such 
banners on© is freed from the effects of a poison. — 1-12. 

Tryusana, five kinds of salts, ManjisthA. bo. kinds of t rmeric, 
cardamuina, Trivrita leaves, Vidaniga, colooyntli, Mndhukft cane, 
Ksandra, should be depositeddn a horn and then they should be mixed 
and boiled in hot water wlien they will dispel all poisonous effects. — 
13 - 14 . 

The white resinous exudation mixed witli muslnrd, ElavrdnkA, Siivega 
Taakara, Sura, and Arjuna ilowers and powdcuod together and used as 
incense in the fire drive away the poisonous efiVels from everything move- 
able and immoveable in tJie household. — lo-lO. 

Where the above-mentioned incense is burnt wornm, lizards, frogs, 
poisonous and creeping animals, or Krityas can not thrive?. — 1 7. 

When the bark of Palasa is mixed witlj the exudation of sandal- 
tree, milk, Murva, the juice of lifivAla, Xakuli, Tauduliyaka, and Kaka- 
machi and a thin decnetion is ]u-e|>ared, it prevents all .^Jorts of poisons. 
Gorochanapatra Nepali, Kuiukuma ami 'l ilaka, if field in the arm, make 
one from all sorts of poisons and he beofunes tin* favt>nrite of kings. 
Turmeric, ManjisthA, Kinihi, Jhppidi and Niniba well grc»un‘i{Ml togellier 
and made into an ointment massagf*d all over lije body take awa^" all the 
effects of the most deadly poison from tl»e body, ddie fruits, f]ow(u\s, loaves, 
bark and root of tlie 5?irisa-treo grounded in cow's mine and rubbed over 
the body also takes off all poison. Now Itcar about the most mighty 
medicines, O King ! viz, — 18-22. 

Bandh}^a, Karkotaki, Visnukn1mt*s TItkatA, Satamuli, 8ilA, Anamda, 
Vala, Mocha, Patolika, Sorna, Panda, turmeric, DagdharuliA, Sthala-Kainala, 
Vi^rdi, ^amkhamulikA, CUiamdAli, llastiinagadha, (lojAparna, KararnbhikA, 
Rakta, Mal^AraktA, Varliisikha, Ajaparni, KosAtaki, Naktarnala, Priyalarna, 

Sulochant, Varuni, Vasugamdha, Gandha, Nakuli, Irfvari, ^ivagamdhA, 
^yamala, Varp^anAlika, JatukAli, MahA'lveta, »^votA, Madhuyastika, Vajraka, 
Paribhadra, Sindhuvaraka, Paribhudra, JivAnamda, Vasuharidra, NatauA- 

gara, KamtakAri, Nala, Jali, Jati, banyan leaves, Suvarna, MahanilA, 
Kunduru, Hansapadi, Mamdukaparni, Varalji, Sarpakiji, Lavali, Brahin!, 

VhJvarfipA, SukhakarA, Rujapaha, VridhikAri, J^alyadA, Rohiijil Patrika^ 
Raktamdrla, Amalaka, Varpdkka, i^yamA, Chitrapbal&, Kakolt, Kslrar 



CHAPTER CCXIX, 


231 


K&koli, Piluparnl, Ketiinl, Vrirfcliik&ll, MahftnAgA, ^at&vdri, Oarudl', VegA, 
water lotus, land lotus, MahabhOmi creeper, UnmAdini, Somarajl, and all 
kinds of jewels especially Marakatamarii and other gems obtained from 
various creatures should be carefully preserved by a sovereign forihe pre- 
vention of bad influences from R&k^sas, poisons, and Krityas. — 23-35. 

The various things obtained from ' men, elephants, serpents, cows, 
donkeys, camels, partridges, jackals, lions, bears, tigers, cats, rhinoceros, 
monkeys, pigeons, horses, buffalos, deer should be most carefully pre- 
served by the king. A sovereign should have his residence full of such 
things when he should build a most beautiful mansion for himself.— *36-38. 

Here ends the two hundred and eighteenth chapter on the 
various things to be preserved by a king in his fort. 


CHAPTER CCXIX. 

Maiiu said : — Lord ! pray tell me wfiat other things are to be 
kept by a sovereign in his fort for his safety. Kindly reveal to us the 
secrets. — 1. 

Matsya said : — The fruits of ^ri§a, figs, ^aini and Vijapura should be 
prepared in clarified butter and taken at an interval of fifteen days which 
is known as Ksudyoga. — 2. 

Note.— Device of keeping hunger satisfied. 

Kaieru, its fruits and roots, Ik^urnula, Bisa, DflrvA, should be 
cooked either in milk or claiified butter and made into a ball and eaten 
at an interval of a month. By using these medicines a man regains 
Ills life if wounded by weapons. The place where black bamboos are 
burnt, and circuinambulation is made thrice towards the right is, 
no doubt, immune from other fire. By burning a snake’s sheath in 
the cotton fire and using it as incense, all the serpents of the household 
fly away. By washing the liouse with sea salt, Sambhara salt, barley 
water mixed with tlie earth of the place struck by lightning, the place 
becomes absolutely fireproof. Fire shouhl well be placed in a fortress 
in coarse of the day when a strong wind blows. Now the means of 
protecting a sovereign from poisons will be described. A sovereign should 
keep a number of birds and deer. Fii*st of all the cooked food should be 
tested by fire or 8on)e other method. A sovereign shouhl never touch his 
food, clothes, flowers, ornaments wirtiout testing them. The person who 
administers poison in king’s food, etc., turns pale and very much confused, 
and uneasy when examination is being made. — 3-11. 

His sight becomes restless ; be becomes absent-minded ; he will drop 
his upper cloth in confusion, will turn speechless like a wall, agitated, 
nervous and will try to conceal his person, scratch the floor, shake his head, 
rub his mouth and scratch his forehead and will be hasty in every thing 
where haste ought not to be done. The king should find out by these 
signs the men who administer poison. — 12 14. 

The food mixed with poison wijl exhibit rainbow colour, look rough, 
with bubbles^ give out bad smell, make an explosive noise and cause 



232 


TUB MAT^YA PLIKANAAI. 


headaclie to a person by its fume ; when put info the fire. A fly will not 
eit on it and if it does, it will instantly die. — 15-17. 

By seeing poisoned food the sight of Chikore becomes fixed and 
the CUCKOO loses its melody, the crane moves abrupt; biackbees begin 
to buzz, Kraurpcha becomes stupefied, c^cks begin to cry, parrots shrill, 
the female parrots begin to vomit, Oliarnfkar goes to another place, 
Karaudci instantly dies, monkey begins to nnikr water, Jivajivr’:a becomes 
morose, mongoose shoots up its hair, Prisata deer begins to cry, peacocks 
beco*ne pleased, the poisoned stuff in a somewhat long time becomes 
rancid like anj^thing kept for a fortnight. It begins to slink and ooze. 
Then it becomes juiceless and seemtless. — 18-23. 

S.ika wlien poisoned dries up and watery dislies begin to bubble and 
the stuff prepared with Saindhava salt, begins to froth. — 24. 

Poisoned grain becomes c(>ppereol(unod, milk turns bine, wine and 
water become of the colour of cuckoo, ri(‘e boc<'nu\s blarkisb, K »dao turns 
brownish, and curds become blackish, hbiisU or yellowish, clariiied butter 
becomes wntci\v, and poisoned matter ht'comos of the colour of a pigeon, 
fly turns green, oil gets red, and raw fruits by coming in contact with 
poison become untimely lipe, ripe ones go stale, garlands get faded, 
hard fruits become soft, soft ones turn hard, small fruits become 
disfigured. — 25-20. 

Poisoned dollies lose tlipir flush an<l become covered with black 
circular spots and iron and gems turn palo.--3(). 

Poisoned flnwcTs and sandal give most, disagreeable smell and 
the bark of tin* toolbsti(d< becomes black and gets thin. These arc the 
signs of poisoned stuff. — 31-32. 

A sovereign should llicrrfore peacefully live in his fortress, alwaj^s 
guarded by all the mantias, m<Mlicincs. ami jcwf ls as mentioned heretofore. 
—33. 

A sovereign is tlie soiirco of wolblKu’ng to Ids subjects; under the 
royal pniteetion tlie wlndc country ilourisbes ; every one sliould therefore 
guard the king by all means. — 34. 

Here enda the tiro hundred and nineteenth chapter 
on the protection of the kinr^. 


CHAPTER eeXX. 

Matsya said : — O King ! a king should well-guard his own son. 
A number of trustwortby servants sliould be retained to guard and 
a faithful teacher as well to give liiin instruction. lie should bo grounded 
in Dharma, Kama, Artha, arcboiy, the use of charriot, elephants and horses, 
and mechanical arts, and various other physical exeicises. A prince 
should not be so very truthful^ should speak sweet words according to 
necessity that need not be rigorously true. Such instruction should be 
given to him. Men should be employed to guard him under the pretext of 
guarding his person. A prince should not be allowed to mix with men of 



ClkA'PTB'R aoxt. 


tuigry or dvarioious disposition, nor with persons who had heeh insulted 
' and looked down upon. His custodians should train him up so that he 
may he gentle and may not abandon the difficult path of virtue and befod 
'away by passions during his youth. The prince who cannot be easily 
trained up in all such good qualities by good instrnctions should w 
w^ll-guarded in a secret place where he should have all his comforts. A 
prince devoid of politics and humility soon perishes. Persons well-trained 
'should be employed in different departments of State. First they 
should be given small offices and then their sphere of work should be 
gradually widened. — 1-7. 

They should bo kept away from the vices, of drinking, hunting 
expeditions and gambling, for many kings addicted to them have been 
ruined and their number is legion. A sovereign should also not let the 
^princes slaep in course of the day, nor should they be allowed to travel 
with no purpose in view. — 8-9. 

A sovereign should not inflict severe punishment, nor should he use 
hai’sh words and speak ill of anyone at his back. — 10. 

A sovereign should avoid the two evils arising out of wealth, vtz . — 
the evils arising out of not being used properly and of being used 
improperly. — 11. 

Not to guard well the enclosure walls, not to repair , the forts, 
not to collect wealth from various places, to give out wealth to unfit 
countries, and to unfit persons in improper times, are regarded as not using 
wealth properly ; whereas to use wealth in vicious and bad works is 
regarded as using wealth improperly. — 12-13. 

A sovereign should factfully drive away lust, anger, pride, avarice 
and too much pleasure. After conquering them he should win his re- 
tainers and afterwards he sliould endear himself to his country and city 
and his subjects. — 14-15. 

Then he should conquer the external foes. These outside enemies 
are of various classes according as they are equal to him or under hia 
control or quite accidental and so artificial arising out of needs ; and they 
should be treatctl with greater or less caution as they belong to the former 
or latter class. — 16. 

The friends are of three kinds : (11 as they are the friends of the 

father and tlie grandfather, '2) the enemy’s enem}', and (3) an acquii’ed 
friend arising out of uecessit}'. Amang them the previous kinds of friends 
are superior. — 17-18. 

(1) King, (2). ministers, (.3) country and subjects, (4) fort, (o) penal 
laws, (G) treasure, and (7; friends are the seven component parts of an 
Empire. — 19. 

Of these seven, king is the root of the Empire, therefore he should 
be chiefly protected. A king should also guard the other six complements 
bf his Empire, if any of tl)ese components rise in rebellion, the king 
should in no time take away the life of that fool. A sovereign should 
not be mild and simple hearted. A mild sovereign is despised ; nor 
ikhbukl a sovereign be hard aqd grim that he may instil a thrill of dread 
6 



234 


THE UATSYA PUHiHAM. 


in his people. A king who is both mild and strong according to circum- 
stances is prosperous in this life as well as in the next one. A sovereign 
should never joke with his retainers. — 20-24. 

For the latter begin then to despise him. Besides this he should 
give up all passionate habits. It is however meet for him to have his 
hobbies for the acquirement of realms. The subjects of a haughty 
sovereign are not amiable, he should therefore speak to everyone with a 
smiling face.— '25-27. 

He should not show his temper even to those wlio may bo fit to be 
condemned to death. He should ahvajs be dignified. — 28. 

Such a king always makes liimself dear to liis subjects and he sliotild be 
bountiful and generous for a generous king conquers the whole world. He 
should not give way to laziness, l)ut he sliould be quick in doing everything ; 
all the works of a procrastinate king suffer. But where too much affec- 
tion, haughtiness, sellisliness, quarrel, vicious and unpleasant acts are 
concerned, a king should he slow ; he is tlion pt'aiscd. lie should 
always keep his policy confidential; one who makes it known brings 
ruination on him. 'rijc sovereign whose pnliev is not known to any until 
it is accomplished, conquers all the w’orM. Kmpires always depend on 
the basis of sound poliev, the latter should thcrefoie always be well-guard- 
ed.— 29-33, 

A sovereign should solve liis po!i(‘ 3 ^ through wise and sound states- 
men for there is always a risk of its leaking out wlmn placed in unreliable 
hands. The solution vff a policy thiongh desiralde channels therefore 
is a source of incalculable benefit. -Many kings are ruined owing to 
bad advices from ministers. — 34. 

Many sovereigns have been ruined by tlie iinsoundness of theii 
policy. Appearance, signs, hearing, features, speech, eyes, and face 
indicate the inward feelings of a Uian, A kiiig sound in politics has 
the world at his command. A king sliould neither hold council with 
one man nor with too ma]i\ . He vshoidd not get into a boat without 
knowing its lew^er. He should also deal wotli the robbers that accost 
him according to the nilt's of Saina, etc. lie should, by all means, 
pursue the course that majr not be against the wdsbes of his subjects and 
may not weaken them. — 35-3(L 

He should minister to every ones comfort in his state. The king 
who brings about weakness of his Bubjects out of delusion goes to rack and 
ruin and he is deprived of his kingdom and his brethren. As a nourished 
calf becomes fit to carry loads so is a voiy- well looked after State able to 
bear the weight of regality. The king who is kind to his subjects assures 
the permanency of his rule and achieves great objects. The King should 
carefully protect by all means gold, grains and land in his Empire and 
bring them under his control. As a father and a mother well-guard their 
sons, so a king should well guard his senses from his own persons and 
from others. He should always enjoy by his senses kept well under 
control. — 40-44 . 

All the things in this world are under the control of Daiva and 
the exertions of men. Daiva cannot be clearly recognised, but the 



OEATTBR CXCn, 


235 


exertions aro seen to bring about successful results. He should also keep 
all his passions under bis control which should be applied to achieve some- 
thing useful when there is an occasion for that. Such a king is univep' 
sally loved which brings him great' wealth name and fame from hi» 
Empire as well as from outside.— 45-47. 

Here ends the two hundred and twentieth chapter on the duties 

of a king. 

CHAPTER CCXXI. 

Manu said : — “ Lord ! which is superior, fate or one’s own exer-* 
tion and effort? I have got doubts on this ; kindJy solve them.”— 1. 

Lord Matseya said': — The actions of the past life are known as 
fate or Daiva ; consequently tlie wise have always held one’s own effort 
and perseverance as superior. A man who every day performs righteous 
and auspicious deeds turns even his ill-luck into a good one. Those 
who have performed good deeds, and ai-e filled with Satvaguna do not get 
the desired fruits without their personal efforts and exertions. — 2-4. 

Rajoguna class of men get fruits according to their perseverance and 
efforts. A, man, by perseverance gets wliat he wants. Those who have 
performed Tarnoguna deeds attain their desires with great difficulty. 
Those who are incapable of persevering regard fate alone as supreme. 
Know, 0 King ! that men get all their desired ends by their energy and 
efforts. — 5-6. 

Consequently fate conjoint with the present, the past and the futuro 
gives fruits while perseverance in most cases bears fruit in .the present. 
Fate, perseverance and time all three conjointly bear fruit to a man. — 7-8. 

Agricultural prospects thrive by rain which again depends on fixed 
time and not otherwise. — 9. 

A man should therefore persevere righteously he then gets high 
fruits during adversity even. Even if he does not get fruits in this life, 
he is sure to get them in the next world. — 10. 

Lazy people and those that only depend on fate do not ever gain 
their objects, so one should always persevere in the path of righteous- 
ness. — 11. 

Prosperity forsakes those who always dream of fate and favoura 
those who persevere, one should therefore always be active and alert. — 12. 

Here ends the two hundred and twenty-first chaplet' on Fate 
and one's own Effort and Energy. 


CHAPTER COXXII. 

Manu said: — “Lord! be gracious to explain to me the policies 
of Skma, etc., along with their characteristic and applications.” — 1. 

Matsya said : — A sovereign should resort to the following seven 
policies or expedients at the time of necessity, viz., (I) S&ma. (2) Bheda, 



m 


THE MAtaVA PERAIJAU. 


(d) Dnna, (4) Dao(Ja, (5) Upeksfi,. (6) Mhyt, (7) Indraj&la. S4niarii> of two 
kinds, viz . — SatyasSma and Asatyaanma. — 2-3. 

i\oic.— (l), (2), (8) and (4) have been explained In previons chapters. Upek^ft 
Pblicy of overlooking or cndorance, M4y& .«inw)= Policy of diplomacy. Indrajaia 
s=The use of some stratagem in war. SatyasAma =s Policy of genuine conciliation. 

AsatyasAma z:l*erfcdlous policy of coticiliation. 

The policy of Asatyasaina should never be employed in the case of 
the righteous and the saints for they can only be won. over by Satyasiiina. 
If Asatyasaina be applied to them, then hiiter and aggressive feelings 
are aroused virtuous and true and 8elf-restraine<l saintlike sovereigns of 
high pedigree should be endeared by praising their lineage and by relating 
to them their deeds of virtue to make a good impression on them never 
should Atati! 3 ’asrima be applied to them. — 4*7. 

The following is the rule: — Tathj-asama is to be applied in the 
following manner : — narration of tlie high pedigree and description of 
the deeds done for one’s benefit and acknowledging one’s grai.tude, etc. 
Thus the religious persons are brought under subjection* Though it is 
heard that iUksasas are brought over by the use of SAina, yet it be remem- 
bered that it should never be applied in the case of the wicked. For no 
benefits will be derived thereby. The policy of conciliation wins all, but 
it should never be employed in the case of the wicked for tliey l(;()k upon 
a conciiiatoiy sovereigri as one afraid of them. Therefore it should nevei; 
be applied in the case of Avicked persons. — 8-9. 

Those born in a good family, nol)le, simple, virtuous and truthful 
and modest, are the persons with whom Sama principle is to be 
applied.— 10. 

Here ends the two hundred and ttrenty-serond chapter on the Dharma 
of the kiy^rjs and the policy of conciliation. 


CHAPTER CCXXIII. 

Matsya said : — With the class of people who are hostile and wicked 
to one another, wlio become afraid and feel themselves insulted, the policy 
of divide and rule should he employed ; foi' the}" can best be conquered 
by creating disunion among them so the politicians say. — 1. 

The vices and the weaknesses on account of which a certain class 
of people become disagreeable to others, should he imputed to the latter 
in order to bring about a disunion among tliem. This is the rule. — 2. 

They should be explained about their own faults and defects and 
they should be frightened by the opposite party. Thus that class of men 
can be gradually and easily be divided from their party and then brought 
under submission. — 3. 

When many kings are bound in alliance, one single king cannot 
conquer them without creating disunion among them, therefore to create 
disunion among them is the best policy. Even Indra is unable to bear 
the influence of tJie united ones. Therefore the policy of divide and rule 
is so much praised by the politicians. A king should hear either 



OEJtBTBn exoiv, ■' 


directly from perrans who are to be divided or through otbem; the^,he 
to test it and if be be satisfied that he is to take up the Bheda 
Such a policy shoulii however not be launched personally by a sovereigUf .: 
it should be given effect tp through another agency for then it proves 
more effective. — 4-5. 

A sovereign siiould not believe in the efficiency of liis men employed 
in working out a policy of divide and rule ; for tlio people to be disunited 
may be mostly found anxious to serve their respective ends.— 6. 

In an Empire there are two sources from which bitter feelings of 
anger and enniiiy crop up ; one is internal ami the other external of these, 
the internal faction is most to be dre.-uled ; for it is this internal faction 
that brings about the ruin of kings. Tlie source of anger and enmity com- 
ing from outside, from otijer kings i.s known as external source of danger. 
The queen, prince, commander-in-chief, ministers, prime-minister, the 
princes, the wrath and discontent of these are known as the internal, 
source of wrath and danger. To a king this is indeed terrible. If the 
internal condition of the Empire be good and satisfactory, then the external 
source of danger however great, can be easily conquered by a king. He 
easily wins victory. — 7-10. 

On the other hand the sovereign who is beset with internal danger, 
perishes in spite of bis being like Indra in power ; consequently such a 
danger and wrath ought to be very carefully guarded against.— 11. 

A sovereign using the policy of divide and rule in case of his 
compeers should first try and create disunion among their communities, 
and kith and kin ; but he should very cautiously prevent a similar tiling 
happening amongst liis brethren, for distressed kith and kin bring 
suffering on their overlord ; they should therefore be kept intact by gifts 
and royal regards as a dissension among them is so dangerous to a 
sovereign. — l<i-14. 

A wise ruler ought to conquer his foes by creating a division among 
their kinsmen whom tlie foreign king does not trust. — 15. 

The greatest of the enemies when disunited are vanquished 
by a small force therefore it is meet to create disunion amongst the 
enemies. — 15. 

Here ends the two hundred and tioenty-third chapter on Rdja Dharma — 

the policy of Bheda. 


CHAPTER CCXXIV. 

Matsya said : — “ King ! ” The policy of winning over another by 
gifts (Dana) is the best one. There is scarcely any one who cannot be 
wou over through gifts. Even the Devas also are brouglit round by 
mortals through gifts. The gifts are indeed highly beneficial to the 
people who live thereby ; and one who confers gifts on others is beloved 
of all. Such a sovereign readily wins over his enemies as well as a multi- 
tude of enemies conjoint together. Men free from avarice and grave 
like the ocean although they never accept preseuta, still they side with 



238 


THE MATSYA PURANAM. 


such a sovereign through gifts. Gifts and presents given elsewhere 
influence others and bring these people round. Therefore this policy is 
the beat of all. Those who give gifts are known to be the best men in 
the world. They are always guarded by others like tlieir sons. Such a 
king does not conquer only tliis world but he also wins the realm of 
Indra — the abode of the Devas. — 1-8. 

Here ends the two hundred and twenty-fourth chapter on Rdja 
Dharma — the policy of Dana. 


CHAPTER CCXXV. 


Matsya said ; — Those who cannot bo subdued by the three expedients 
above mentioned should be conquered by the unfailing Danda.— 1. 

A wise sovereign should conquer the people by launching his policy 
of Danda in conjunction with his ministers, according to Dharraa^astra. 
In his country as well as elsewhere he should use this policy according to 
the prescribed politics and after knowing hi.s men for all things are 
established in Danda. He should first scan the race of those who have 
renounced the world, the VAnaprasthas, the sagp-like jieoplo before resorting 
to his artifice of Danda. Tlie aliuve people do not come under the power 
of Danda. The people of the dilTercut orders in life, as well as tliose void 
of them, the worthy, tlin great, the preceptor in fact any of them foun^ 
deviating from their prescribed order and duties shonhl be adequately 
punished by a sovereign. A sovereign however who iidlids punishment 
on the innocent and lets off those who are guilty, loses his realm in 
this world and goes to hell in (he next.. — 

A sovereign shoul-1 theiefore he most cautious in inflicting punish- 
ments. He must not go against the Dharmasasirii and politics. — 7. 

The subjects of a king in spite of Ids being of a very simple disposition 
do not get spoilt wlierc the pliantom of a penal code grim in appearance 
freely moves about and casts its hloidshot eyes on the people. — 8. 


If a sovereign floes not use his rod, tliero the children, aged persons, 
the saints, the BrAhmunas and widows become severely oppressed by 
the powerful ones as a younger fish i.s swallowed up by a bigger fish.— 9. 

Even the Devas, the demons, the serpents, the birds ; they all 
transgress their limits leaving their prescribed tracks ii they be not made 
to fear the king’s rod, Danda is always seen to exist when a Brahmana 
curses; when all kinds of blows are jn/licted, when all sorts of powers are 
exhibited, when an^er is manifesicd and when serious doAerttii nations 
are made. A sovereign in/licting pnnishnwnta disc.riminatoly is revered bv 

peaceful Devas are not so much revered and worshiDDed aa nSlIt a 
Devas are worshipped. It is Dapeja that governs afl tha 
protects all, it is always alert when everything else is asleen^^^ff ** 
known « Dharma by the learned; througfr turtle nil 


Bln 



OHAPTEB GXCIL 


m 


Some do not commit sins for fear of Dharmar&ja and others do not 
sin for fear of the king’s rod ; whereas others again do not commit sins 
for fear of both ; others again not being punished, commit sins. So every 
thing is established on Danda. — 16. 

The royal rod of punishment inSicts punishment on the wicked 
and guilty and also prevents others who have not committed sin from 
committing fresh sins. So the object is two-fold. It is out of the fear of 
Dauda that the Devas assembled in the Daksa Yajna (sacrifice of the 
Prajfipati Daksa) gave the share of sacrificial oblations to Mah&deva and 
gave the post of commauder-in-chief to K&rtikeya and Vala granted boons 
to children. — 17-18. 

Here ends the two hundred and twenty fifth chapter on Bdja 
Dharma — the Danda. 


CHAPTER CCXXVI. 

Matsya said : — A king is created by BrahmS, for the preservation of 
all the beings, for awarding to the Devas their respective shares of 
sacrificial oblations and for inflicting proper punishment to tlie guilty. — 1. 

A king is like the Sun for none dare look at him with hostile eyes. 
Everyone is pleased at the sight of him, he satisfies all eyes, therefortj 
he is like the Moon. — 2-3. 

A king like Dharraaraja bestows his affection and inflicts his 
punishment on the people according to circumstances. He has therefore 
the attributes of Dharmaraja. — 4. 

Just as the God Varuna flings His noose round the enemy’s neck 
similarly a king also throws his fetters round the feet of the wicked. This 
is the king’s Varunavrata (vow). — 5. 

People are satisfied to look at their king as they are at the sight of 
the Moon. He is always rigorous and strong to curb the sinners and 
he should burn as fire does, all his enemies who are envious and 
wicked. This is his Agneyavrata. — 6-7. 

He should always observe this Agneya vrata. As the earth holds 
up all the beings so a king nourishes all his subjects. This is his 
Ptlrthivavrata. As all the subjects of a sovereign are steady in their 
devotion to him so is he in his devotion to Tndra, Sfirya, Vayu, Yama, 
Yarupa, Cbandram&, Agni and Prithvl. He sustains his subjects as 
Indra pours forth rain for four months during the rains. This is Indra- 
vrata. He takes revenues from his subjects as the Sun draws in moisture 
by his rays for eight months. This is Sflryavrata. — 8-10. 

As air pervades through and through all the being so does the 
king know the hearts of all his subjects through his spies. This is 
VAyuvrata. — 11. 

Here ends the two handred and twenty sixth chapter on Bdja Dharma. 



THE UAT8YA PVBAVAM. 


240 


CHAPTER GCXXVIL 

Matsya said : — One who has misappropriated anything placed under 
his custody should be fined by a king which should be equivalent to tlia 
value o£‘the thing misappropriated. A king will not thereby lose his 
religion. — 1. 

One who does not return anything placed in his custody to the * 
person who placed it with him, and one who mischievously asks for a 
thing from a person on the mere allegation of having placed it in his 
custody; are both guilty and should be punished for theft or fined twice 
as much the amount of the value of the thing placed in custody. — 2. 

One who defrauds another of any valuable thing should be punished 
with death along with hia accomplices or should be sentenced rigorously as 
the king considers fit. — 3. 

One who does not return a thing within a promised time which he 
took as a loan from another person should be chastised and forcibly made 
by Purva Sahasa, to return it to its owner and fined by the sovereign. — 4. 

One who sells away the property of another through oversight, is 
not guilty but one who does so knuwdngly should be punished for 
theft.— 5. 

One who does not impart knoxvledge or mechanical training to hia 
students after l)aving received his fee for the same should be fined thA 
whole amount of his wages.— 6. 

One who does not feed his neighbour and BrAhmanas earns 
sin instead of virtue and he should be fined also one inAsa gold, hut if he 
omits to invite any sinful Bnihmana ho is not guilty. If a Brahmana be 
invited to join a feast and wlien he has come to the house of one who 
invited liim and is made to go back without any food and without any 
due cause, then the icivitor should be fined 108 Damas. — 7-8. 

One who does not confer a promised gift on someone should be 
fined of gold. A disobedient servant should be fined 8 rattis of gold 
along witli his unpaid wages. The master who does not pay his servant 
at the right time and dismisses him without a fair cause, should be fined 
100 Krisnalas. One who pmmi.ses to give away a village, country or grain 
fields, etc., and afterwards goes back upon his word and tells false sljould 
be banislied from his kingdom by a sovereign. If anyone <loes not pay or 
get balance of the value of a thing that he bought or sold, within ten 
days of the bargain then the s(dler or purchaser should be fined six hund- 
red Krisnalas by the king, — 9-13. 

One who marries a girl to another without telling her faults should 
be fined 96 Panas and one who mischievously and falsely declares a girl 
to be not good (a eunuch) should be fined 100 Panas. One who shows 
one girl and then marries a different one should lie fined 1,080 Panas 
(Uttam S^hasa fine). The man who ludi ng his faults marries a girl 
is con-sidered not to have married at all and should pay 200 Panas to the 
king. A man who weds liis daughter to one and then again marries 
her to another should be fined 108(3 Panas, (Uttam S4hasa fine). Similarly 
one who sells a thing to another after promising to sell it to some parti- 



OBAPTBR aoxlvn. 


241 


cular person should be fined 600 Panes. One who demands more money 
than agreed upon and promised at the time of a girl’s marriage should be 
fined twice the sum agreed upon. This is the rule of Dliarmarf&strs. 
A man who after paying earnest money for a thing does not purchase 
it should be fined 540 Panes (Madh3-am Danda) and the king should 
mgke him return the earnest money. One who 'after accepting his fee 
steals the milk of a cow under his charge or does not properly look after 
it should be fined 100 mfi-sas of gold and he should also be tied in iron 
chains and made to work in fetters. — 14-22. 

Notr.— qnf=A Coin equal in value to 80 cowries. 

The prison should be erected out of a city, it should be 100 Dhanu§a 
wide and in big towns, the prison should be twice or thrice the above 
dimensions. Those prisons should be circled by a wall so high as a 
camel may not look into them. — 23-25. 

Note.— >«ijq-One dhanusa is equal to 4 cubits. 

And no inlet for a dog or a swine should be left in the wall. If an 
animal gets into a field without any inclosiire, and eats some of the grass 
etc., stocked there, then the man in charge of such tresspassing cattle 
should not bo punished. Maim has laid down in his code that if a cow 
that has calved only ten days ago or a bull set free at the time of Sraddha 
consecrated to the Deity eats away corns of a field, though enclosed, the 
keeper of such animals should not be punished. Other cattle besides 
them, if found grazing in the fields of others, should however be punished 
by a line ten times the damage done, being levied from the owner of 
the cattle, and if the above crime be done wilfully, twice the above fine 
should be levied.— 26-28. 

If a K^batriya’s fields be harmed by a Vaisi^Vs cattle the former 
should be compensated by the latter ten times the damage done. One 
who usurps any one’s house, tank, forest, garden and fields should 
be fined 500 Panas. One who does so unknowingly should be fined 200 
Panas. One wlio annihilates the boundary mark at the time of its laying 
it out, or one who gives a wrong advice or is a councillor of liars should 
be deprived of his tongue or should be fined 1,080 Panas. This is wliat 
Manu has enjoined.— 29-33. 

If Brahraanas, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas do a thing contrary to their 
prescribed orders they should be made to perform the usual purificatory 
rites. A woman if she kills any 43ody should keep up the SudrahatyS 
ordinance. — 34. 

iVotc.— ordinance observed to purify oneself from the sin of h&ving 
killed a Sudra. 

If a BrAhmana cannot afford to spend as much as required for the 
performance of a purificatory rite in killing serpents he should keep up 
Krichhravrata for the purificatiou thereof. — 35. 

Kote , — ordinance causing bodily mortification. 

A twice-born is purified by chanting one hundred Vedic hymns if 
be cuts a fruit-bearing tree or flower creepers. — 36. 

The sin of killing a thousand beings having bones is similar to 
that of killing a crore of boneless insects such as mosquitoes, lice, etc. 

6 



ut THE MAT8YA PURAUAM. 


To purify himself of such a sin one should observe the ^udrahaty& 
ordinance and should also make some gift to a Bnihinaua in case of killing 
animals having bones. One becomes purified of the siu of killing boneless 
insects, etc., merely by rranfiyama. — 37-38. 

The sin of killing the worms existing in grains, molasses and fruits 
and flowers is purified by eating clarrified butior. — 39, 

By cutting the medicinal herbs of a jungle without any necessity 
one commits a sin of which ho is purified l)y living on milk for a day. — 40. 

Such sins are cleansed b}’’ the observance of the ordinances mentioned 
above, now the ordinances wliich ought to bo observed by a thief will be 
enumerated. — 41 . 

By observing the Ardha^kriolilira ordinance a Brahniana liocomes 
purified of the sin of having committed a thoft of corn, money, etc., in the 
house of another of his own caste. — 42. 

By observing ChandrAyana onp is purified of tlie sin ol liaving taken 
a woman, house, well, tank, etc., belonging to another.- 43 

A man who steals trifles is purifietl by the observance of Sarpvapana 
Krichhra ordinance. — 44. 

The stealing of eatables, conveyance, bedstead, flowers, berries, and 
fruits is purified l)y drinking Pamcliagn\ ya.— 45. 

One who steals liay, wood, tro(', diicd corn, molasses, cloth, hVlo, 
fish and flesh becomes purified by ke(*ping a fast for three days.— 4()-47. 

One who steals peails, gems, IVubala, copj)er, silver, iron, KArpsya 
and stones becomes purilied if one ears Ibi* l\\clv(‘ days tl)o jofuse of rice. 
A thief of cotton, silk, animals of l)i^ccted hoofs, horses, birds, scents, 
medicines, rope, becomes puri(!c(l b\ living oji milk for ibree days. — 48. 

The ordinance iiionti(»no^i alx»ve purify the twice-born on(^Sf)f the sin 
of committing a theft, now tiie or<iiiiance.s for the purification of illict 
connections ivill be enumerated. — 49. 

One who is guilty of an illiou cointce.tifm witli his preceptor’s wife 
should observe the ordinance ]»reBcribed for tin* sin of committing adultery 
with a lady of one’s own (‘oiumunity. For the purification from the sin 
of having an illicit conne(»iion with one’s mother’s maid, sou’s wdfe, 
virgin, Chandfili, futhor’s-sister’s daughter, sister, mother, molhcr’s-sister’s 
daughter and rightcoirs lady, or l)rother’s respected wife, Cliandrayana 
ordinace should be kept up. — 50 51. 

A wise man should not indulge with the above mentioned class of 
ladies nor should he marry one/s relation, a fallen woman, a woman in 
menses. He sliould also abstain from unnatural ofTence and indulging 
with lower animals. One who does so should keep up KrieblirasantajDana 
penance to purify himself of the sin. If one discharges one’s semen in 
water, one is to perforin Krichlirasantapana vrata.“-52>53. 

One who looks at a sexual intercourso or makes discharge in course 
of the day is purilied by bathing with his clothes on. — 54. 

A Brfdimana who indulges wdtli a Clhaudrda woman* or a woman of 
a different caste or eats their food or accepts a gift from them unknowinglj 




GR AFTER GGXXVIL 


243 


falls from Iiis position. If he does so knowingly he becomes of that 
caste himself. — 55. 

A woman defiled by a Brahmana should be kept confined in the house 
by her husband and so should a woman be kept up who desires for 
another man. — 50. 

If even then she remains the same she should be made to keep up 
Krichhrasantapana ordinance which purifies her. — 57. 

A twice-born should have only one meal a day and turn the sacred 
Gayatri on his beads for full tln*ee years to i)urify himself of the sin of 
having indulged with a girl of twelve years in whom menstruation has 
not commenced (or a barren woman) for a night. These ordinances purify 
one for having illicit connections now the ordinances prescribed for those 
wlio associate with the fallen will be mentioned. — 58-59. 

A man who associates with a fallen lot for a year also becomes 
the same. One becomes fallen even by helping them in the performance 
of sacrifices, by teacliing them, by making them his relation, by interdining 
w'ith them. A man becomes i)iu*ified of it by the ordinance prescribed 
for it. But he will remain like a Preta. — CO 01. 

A fallen person should be taken outside the village limits by his 
brethren and made to drink the water of the inaid*s house. If a fallen 
man dies the sin tliat devolves thereby lasts for a whole da 3 ^ and night. 
One should not talk to a fallen man, nor should one sit on his seat. 
Ho should only get enough for his sustenance. On the evening of an 
inauspicious day, the near kinsmen of the fallen man would perform 
before the Ouru his Udaka Kriya. His maid then would throw in the 
south-west corner one pitcher full of water. His friends are to fast thef 
whole day and night and tliey would not accept the A^aucha of that Preta. 
The friends of the fallen man should not address liim or sit with him or 
travel witli him. Nor should they express that he is their near relative. 
This is the social rule. Tie should only get enough for his sustenance, 
lie should not bo made to entitle himself to his share as an elder brother 
in spite of liis being senior, but the bigge.st share should go to the most 
dcserviug among the remaining ones. — 62-65. 

One who injures the prestige of a man should be fined Prathama 
Sahasa (270 Panas).— 66. 

A Ksatriyii who abuses a Brnl)inana should be fined 100 Panas, 
a Vaisiya doing so should be fined 260 Panas, and a Sfidra if he does so 
should be sentenced to capital punisliment. — 67. 

A Brahmana who abuses a Ksatriya should be fined 50 Panas, if he 
absuses a Vai*iya, he should be fined 25 Panas and if ho abuses a Sfidra 
the fine should be 12 Panas. — 68. 

A VaitJya abusing a Ksatriya should be fined Prathama SAhasa ; if 
a J^fidra abuses a Ksatriya his penalty should be that his tongue would be 
severed. — 70. 

If a Ksatriya abuses a Vaiiy.aho would be fined 50 Panas ; and if 
lie abuses a ^udra, he should be lined 25 Panas. If a tundra abuses 



244 


. THE MAT8YA PURAKAM. 


Vairfya he should be fined 1080 Panas (Uttama S&l asa), but a Vairfya 
abusing a oudra should be fined only 50 Panas. — 71. 

People abusing men of their own community should be fined only 
12 Panas and those who indulge in most foul abuse should be fined twice 
the amount prescribed. —72. 

A ^udra should be deprived of his tongue if Ik abuses violently 
a twice-born, if his offence be moderate ; if his offence bo highest, he is to 
be fined Uttama Sahasa. — 73. 

A king should put a red, hot iron si)ike twelve Angulas long in the 

mouth of a i^udra who vilifies violently one, taking his name, caste and 
house. — 74. 

A Sudra who teaches Dharma to tlie twice-born should also be 
punished by a sovereign by getting hot oil poured into liis ears and mouth. 

—75. 

The person who speaks a lie with regard to his country, caste, Veda 
and corporeal duties should be fined 2,160 Panas (twice the Uttama 
S&hasa). — 76. 

A sinner who abuses a high class man ought to be fined 1080 Panas 
(Uttama S«ahasa) one who violates the ordinance of a king should pay 
double the amount of fine for lie is really a man who tries to upset the 
determination of the king. — 77-78. 

If a man wlio abuses another and then says tliat he did so in a 
joke, through love or intoxication and would never do so again, should be 
fined only half of the amount codified. — 79. 

The man who speaks ill towards the one-eyed, the blind, the 
bald-headed, and the crippled by addressing ihein as such should be 
fined one tola of silver (Karsapana Uanda. 80. 

One who uses harsh words towards his preceptor, motlier, father, 
elder brother, father-in-law and does not make room for his preceptor 
should be fined 100 Panas (hundred Karsa panas). -'-81. 

One who does not make room for another sageliko person oilier than 
his preceptor should be fined one ratti of silver (one Xri.Nnala). — 82. 

A king should get that limb of a ^udra severed from his body 
which he uses in cau.sing pain to the twice-born. — 83. 

The lips of the man who haughtily spits on another should be cut 
down. One who mischievously mak(,*s water facing another should be de- 
prived of his organ, and similarly tlio hind part of the man should be 
dealt with who maliciously makes wind in the face of another. — 84. 

The lips of a low class man occupying the seat of a liigh class man 
should be chopped off witii a mark sealed on his hip. — 85. 

The hands of the one who extends them to catch hold of the hair, 
feet, nose, neck, scrotum of a high class man should be lopped off by a 
king. — 86. 

The one who makes another bleed by his blows should be fined 100 
Panas, and the one who pricks into the others flesh should he fined 24 



OHAPTER GCXXVIL 


245 


lol.'H of gold or silver according to the seriousness of the offence. The 
one who breaks anyone’s bone should be exiled from the country. — 87. 

The king should get that limb of one’s body annihilated by which 
he breaks another’s bone ; he should also be fined as much as wotdd be 
neccssai'y for the aggrieved person to spend in getting himself released 
from the court. — 88. 

One leg of the man who kills a cow, goat, elephant and camel 
should be chopped off. The man who kills small animals, and deer should 
be fined twice Damas ; and the man who kills insects and worms 
should be fined one rnasd of silver and the owner of the animals should be 
paid his price. — 89-90. 

One who fells his master’s or other’s .tree should be fined gold pieces 
and double the fine should be imposed on thr)se who cut a tree near a 
tank, a thoroughfare or a boundary line. — 91-92. 

Those who break fruit trees, arbours, creepers, and floral plants 
should be fined one m4sfi of gold. — 93. 

Even a man chopping grass unnecessarily should be made liable to 
pay a fine of Kafsnpana ; one who beats another should be fined three 
rattis of Kri§nalas. — 94. 

Out of the fines levied for cutting trees, the king • should use bis 
own discretion ; he must pay the owner of the trees the price for them and 
the rest should go to the royal exchequer. — 95. 

If any harm accrues through an untrained driver of a conveyance 
the fault lies with the master, but if any such thing occui-s through a 
skilful man the fault lies with the driver for which he should be punished. 
If perchance anything happens through sheer accident none is to blame. 
—96-97. 

One who knowingly or unknowingly usurps the property of another 
should appease the man whose property he usurps and pay a fine to the 
sovereign. — 98. 

One who steals away a rope from a well or breaks away the place 
where drinking water is supplied to the passers-by should be fined one 
mksA. of gold and the stolen articles should be made good, and he should 
satisfy the master of the well. — 99. 

A person stealing more than ten jars of grain should be killed and 
the one who steals less than that should be fined eleven times more the 
value of the stolen grain. — 100. 

The man stealing more than 10 jars of eatables should also be fined 
eleven times the value of the stolen things ; but he should not be killed, 
and a man stealing gold, silver, fine raiments, wife of a liigli class man, 
oxen, arms, medicines and principal jewels slmuld be subjected to death. 
A king should adequately punish one who steals curds, milk, water, 
juice, bamboos, utensils, clay pots, powders, according to the gravity of 
the offence. A man stealing cows, buffalos, and horses of a Br&hma^a 
should have half his leg cut off immediately. — 101-105. 

Those who steal cotton bales, cotton, wines, cowdung, molasses, fish. 



246 


TEE MATSYA PtJRAtiAM. 


birds, oil, clarrified butter, flesh, honey, salt, rice and cooked food should 
be lined twice the amount of the price of these articles. — 100-108. 

A man who steals ^rain out of a iitdd, flowers, creepers, and rice 
should be fined five masas <)f gold or silver and the tlieftof ripe crop, ifilka, 
berries, and fruits, should be punished witli a line of lOO I’anas if the thief 
has no sons and if tlie thief has son then ^00 Danilas. Tlio limbs of a thief 
einjjloyed in the accomplislnncnt of his mission should bo cut off. There 
is no sin if a Brahinaua who is not carrying anything, through hunger 
plucks a couple of sugarcancs or berries tn his way.— 100-111. 

Mann has said that there is no criino in taking a couple of cucumbers, 
two melons in fact anj' two fruits, tw'o handfuls of grain, as well as 
the taking of ilaka in an eijually small cpiantity, the fruits growing on 
forest trees, forest berries, a small quantity of liaMvood, grass, the plucking 
of flowers from elsewhere in the ah.setico of a flower garden for Divine 
worship. A man found doing any of tiiese things shonld not he [unished. 
One w’lio kills any animals having daws and fangs sneh as lions, 
snakes, etc., does not commit any sin. Ncitlier then; is any sin in killing 
an Atatuyl a man who has come to attack and kills, be he a llrfilimana, 
a preceptor, a child, a learned man, and an unknown man. — 112-117. 

/Vote.— For the dellnUion of an AtatfiyU seo 

People who doprivf' of iheir who indulge with 'fc 

the class of women wliom they ought to avttid, tlu.’se who set fire to others 
property, tliose who pt)is(»n, tho'^r who treaclnutnisly kill another wdth 
a w^eapon, llutse who art iiuMT'iJf*s-:ly ugainsi a Iving are known by tlie 
knowers of Dharma as Atatayi. If a b<‘ggar, a woman, or a vicious person, 
though prohibited, oiitern a place, iio should bo lliunl twice. Tliose who 
are found talking to anoihor vv<»man in a sacred plac(\ forest, or in their 
own house, those who are dnt(^f*1ctl in bn aking a ri v(*r dam should be 
punisbed by tiie sentence named Sangiahana.— 1 

If sucli a person is again hminl talking to women iie should be lined 
a tola of gold or silver, but tiune is n.i st-i Ituis eiimo in talking to rictresses 
in private or walking \\ilh tlirm in pii\ciLc for it is their }>rorcsHion and 
they bhould theroffire be jine.i sonietliing for doing so for they earn 
their liveliliood by prostituting their boilies. — 

One wbo forcibly violates the modesty of an unwilling maid in 
•the household should be killed outright. — llM. 

If one does so with her consent lie shuidd lie fined 200 Danda and 
the person taking share therein, cither inducing oi assistjjig should also be 
punished with a sluiilar line U.e , death). — 125. 

One who allows another to cfunniil such a thing in his house is also 
worth}'' of being punished similarly. Phe ])er.so]i wlio forcibly commits 
such an act with atiother woman is worthy of ladrig killed outriglit, but 
the woiTian so outraged is faultless. If a virgin after getting menses for 
the third tiiiie in her father’s Inii^sc, seeks a husband for herself, should 
not be punished by a sovereign. One who takes the girl away to a foreign 
land after marrying her in his own couiUry is a thief and Should be 
killed.— 126-129. 

If one is carrying away a girl who is without any ornaments or 



CHAPTER GCXXVII, 


247 


property, then he is not guilty ; but if one carries away a girl with 
money he is liable to be punished instantly. A girl who desires to marry 
a high class man sliould bo given to him in marriage ; and after marriage 
if the girl be confined in the house, she would remain all right. — 130. 

If a low caste man wants to marry a high caste girl and does SQ 
would be punished with death ; similarly a liigh class woman marrying 
a low caste man should be punished with death. — 131. 

The woman who is disobedient to her husband on account of 
being proud of her brothers, etc., should be driven out of the house by 
the king. — 132. 

She should be deprived of her authority and given dirty clothes, 
and food just enough for her to live upon wlien defiled by a man of 
her Varna (caste). She should be lodged in ones own house in that 
condition. — 133. * 

The head of the woman defiled by a superior man should be shaved 
and ton looks of hair left on her head and she should be given dirty clothes 
to put on. — 134. 

A Bralimana, Ksattriya, and a Vai4ya who indulges with a Ksattriya, 
Vaifiya and fijudra woman in lower order should be fined Uttama Sabasa 
1080 rarias ; and if a Bralimana indulges witli a VaI4ya woman, or 
a Ksattriya with a v^fidra woman, they should bo fined Madbyaina Sabasa 

and if a Vaiiiya indulges with a i^iidia woman, he would be fined 
Pr a t h ama Sa h asa . — 130-137. 

A ^ftdra who indulges with a w^oinan of his own community should 
be fined 100 Panas, double the amount if a Vaijiya does so with a Vairfya 
woman, treble the amount if a Ksattriya does so with a Ksattriya woman 
and four times the amount in case of a Bnihniana when he goes to a BrPdnnana 
woman. This amount of fine is in case of only such woman as are without 
any guardianship ; and if the crime committed is in connection with 
a woman who is under guaidiaiiship, the amount of fine levied should be 
increased . — 137-138. 

One who indulges with the sister of his fatlier or mother, mother-in- 
law, maternal uncle’s wife, uncle's daughter, aunt, sister, wife of a friend 
or a disciple, a brotlier’s wife, should be lined twice the amount of fine as 
above mentioned. The daugiiter of a sister, tlie wife of a king, the exiled 
woman, and a high class woman ai^ not lit to be approached. He who 
indulges with these, must have his penis cut oil and killed. — 139-140. 

One who indulges with a donkey, etc., sliould be punished by his 
head being shaved. — 141. 

One who indulges with a Chand ala’s wife, who eats dog’s flesh, 
should be killeil ; and that animal should be fed. One who indulges with 
a cow should be fined a gold piece and a twice-born indulging with 
a whore should be made to pay her wages. — 142. 

If a concubine after getting his wages goes to another person she 
should he made to pay double the amount of it to the man who paid her 
the wages in advance.- -143. 



248 


TBE MATSYA PVRANAM. 


If a mart takes a prostitute to another person on the pretext of taking 
her to some particular individual should be fined a niasA of gold. — 144. 

If a man after bringing a harlot does not indulge with her, the king 
should make him pay her twice as much and should levy a similar amount 
of fine for himself. Dharma will not ther^y be upset. — 145. 

If a number of people forcibly indulge with a concubine, the king 
should make each one of them pay her dolible the amount of her wages. 
—146. 

Fallen father, mother, wife, preceptor, priests should not be aban- 
doned, but a man doing so otherwise should be fined GOO gold pieces. — 
147. 

Fallen Gurus are not to bo abandoned and mother si mid not be 
forsaken, even if she does a great vicious crime, for she is s\ perior to all 
on account of her bearing the son in Iter womb anthnoiirisliing him. — 148. 

A pupil wlio roads at forbidden times should be made n pay a fine 
of 3 Kahaipas and the master should be fined twice the amount. If one 
quits one’s mdiara, one would have to pay also three Ka lianas, where no 
fine is spcciiically mentioned, gohi Kiisnalas ouglit to be inferred. Wife, 
sons, servants, disciples, brothers shouhl bo beaten on their back with a 
rope or a cane when they commit u fault. They should never be beaten 
on their beads One wIjo does so sliould be punisla'il like a thief. If a 
person sets animals to figfit with each other or gambles lie should 
be punished by the sovereign accortling to his discretion. A washerman 
should very carefully and cautiously wash fine clothes, on a wooden- 
plate or on a good stonepiece he should bo fined a masa of gold if he 
does not do so. If a thing is fonnd missing under the custody of its 
custodians, they should be made to make it goo»l. — lIO-loG. 

If the revenue obtained by a servant from the cultivators be not paid 
to the king’s cofier or to the jjropriet(>r, his ])roperty is to be forfeited and 
he should be exiled. Tf a landlonl realizes more rent from bis tenants 
and gives less to the king should be banished from the Empire after all 
his wealth being forfeited to the crown. — ir>7-158. 

The officials of any estate who spoil the interests of the subjects 
and who arc found to be void of sympatliy and full of wickedness should 
be deprived of all their wealth. Those wlio persecute the subjects by 
misrepresenting the mandates of the sovereign should also be similarly 
dealt with. — 159- 1(51. 

Those who govern intricately who kill women, children, Br&hmana 
and who eat fishes, should be hanged and the minister or any other official 
of the state be he a luinister or a Pradirvaka if he is wfuking contrary 
to the policy of the crown should be banished after being deprived of 
all his wealth. TlK)se who kill Braliinana, indulge in drinking, thieves, 
and tliose who indulge with preceptor’s wife should be killed. If such a 
man be a Brahmana he should be banished ; with a mark on his body ; — 
162-163. 

Or they might be branded with different marks, and then exiled. 
These who indulge with preceptor’s wife should be branded with a mark 



CHAPTER CCXXVIL 


249 


re ^enabling the female privacy, those who drink should be branded with 
tlie sign of a flag hung at a tavern, a thief should be branded with the 
sign of dog feet, and a man killing a Brahmana with the sign of a head- 
less human body. Men branded with such marks should not be taken in 
society. None should speak, interdine or live with Ahem. — 163-164. 

Those who speak irrleviSitly, eat forbidden things and marry one 
who ought not to be married should be outcasted by their brethren 
and the sovereign should take all their wealth and plunge it in the waters 
in the name of Lord Varuna. If a man having a wife is proved to have 
committed a theft he should be punished, when he is caught with all 
the stolen things. Those also should be punished who harbour thieves 
by providing them with food and utensils. The officials of the state who 
may have created a vice among the subjects should also be punished 
like a thief. Those who do not go and rescue according to his might where 
there is a danger, in a village sa}^ a house fallen or when a woman is 
attacked on the way, should be deprived of all their wealth by the sove- 
reign and then exiled- Those who plunder a royal treasure or assist the 
enemies of the sovereign should also be killed. Those who commit thefts 
by housebreaking or other similar devices in course of the night should 
be punished by their hands being cut and they should be hung on a 
trident. ()r they shouhl bo punislied by being drowned, or by any other 
means thus punished. — 165-1 7{h 

Those who stop the course of water in a tank, &c., should also be 
similarly punished. — 171. 

Those who break into a royal arsenal or a temple should be killed 
outright. — 172. 

Those who, iu times of no danger, throw unholy things on the royal 
road, should be fined one Kahanas and the king shoud make them clear 
off the road. — 173. 

If these be crupple, old persons, pregnant women and children, 
a lame man, they will be chastised by mere speech. A physician who 
purposely spoils the treatment of a patient should be lined with 1060 Panas. 
Those whose treatment is blameable should be fined iladhyama Sahasa 
and the false ones should be fined Prathama Sahasa. — 174-175. 

Those who break a state umbrella, banner or an idol should be 
fined 500 gold pieces and made to repair them. — 176-179. 

Those who break pure articles and also those who break jewels* 
should be fined Prathama SAliasa. — 180. 

One who increases or decreases unjustly the value of anything 
should be fined accordingly. The prison and tlie place of capital punish- 
ment should be made on a public road at such a place as to enable the 
sovereign to have an eye on the culprits. — 181-182. 

Those who break the city walls, ditches or gates should be exiled^ 
as well ; those who plough not well and instruct the vicious should bd^ 
exiled. — 183. 

One who practises Varfikarana and Abliichdra practices, etc., should 
be fined 200 Panas. One who sells bad seeds calling them to be good 

7 



2oO 


THE MaTSYA PUnANAM. 


no'l ako one who i«teiT(M-es with the aulhorify of tlu sovenMgn slionll 
be killed, afrer heini: di-fii:nred. 'I'lie ^oMsmiili " 1 o adnlteiates tho 
articles of in np.ihi '.rare wirlj inis^diief il l Im (mU d«'vvii to |>it*oes hy 
weapons and one who takinp; tliintrs from a trailer does not pay the price 
or Sells piivately tlii>Ro thinca should be (ineil Madliyania S.ihasa. A 
min fon:i 1 sellin" tilings by speaking a lie bIuuLI alsj be similarly 
dealt wiih. — 1S4-1S7. 

]f a man finds fault with and blames weapons, saorifiees, asoetieism, 
country idol, clni^te woman shonld be fined 1IK)>> Paiias (Ultama S iha>a , 
arul if a similar ofTenee is Oinrunitted by si gnnip of pmsons, each one oE 
tliem sltonld be S‘'ver:dly fined twice as much v d Oiie who gi\ s rise to 
quarrels sin. nld ciKo he punislicd. — 18818lh 

A llr.'iinnana who eats fi:arlic, onions, ham, chicken and animals oE 
five nails and otiier iincatahles should he hanislnnl by a soveicign ; and 

n i^Qilra d oin so slniidd \)v fined one rati i ( K li-rrO 0 of rrold — 10-lJ)^. 

AVIiOjeas nirlnn.imis, IC'^^atlriyas and Vaisya.ii j.»ino are 1 he fined 
fourfold, tlM’(‘(do]d and iwef tld rcspecliv'ely gieatcr than i^hvdra ; the 
one n ho exiMtc-s t iiem should he finiMl twi(*(' as nmeli. if Mie volini- 
teeis to (liiaMcc ami i.hus lielp tiieiu to eat ninaOahlos slmidd be firn-ci 
four times, one win) iloes nc^t pay where ordered 1)3’ a donor t(»do so and 
one ivlio hr:?aks open a lock or crosses an ocean should he lined 50 Panas. 
— 103-191. 

C^ne wlio is }n)l\’ and of a superior (dass if lie touehos nnyfldng whu li 
lie ought not, or attem[)ls to do a haid tiling, whicdi he is unable to di\ or 
gelds aniinai^, oi* procures abr)rtion to a maid, or eats in a Sudra’s Daiva 
and Pittii Kai ma-i and does not attend tho iii\ iialiun after accepting it 
shouid l)p fined It*’.) Kaijanas. — 195-11)7. 

(me w’lio thr.Avs about stoucs or thorns in tlic liouse of a good niau 
should bo fined Ki-i-nahi g‘dd and <nu' '.\lio £;! vt‘s (*vidtMic,e in a 

dispute ]>et'afcn f.illicr ami kmu -.honid Ix' fined :.M0 l>amas, and if lie 
be a hom)ni-ab!(> man, lit3 slemM lie lined on ) iMmj is and one who gives 
a evid'Uiee in to of his heing aware of flu* lavvs ^h mhl he fined 

8‘‘f) aijo one who uses false weights sliuuKl be lined lUbJ Paaus, 

(Uuama Sahasa:. --llhS 1U9. 

One wlio ];i!!^ his wife, son, ])us])and, preceptor with poison or fire, 
etc., slionh! he pum^lied by his nose biding cllppeil ami eais and lips being 
chopjied am! then kilhxl neai a cow yard. One who siUs (ire to the farm, 
rroj)S, stoidvs (Ji !;muv* or indulges with a queen hhoiiLI be burnt in tli0 
fire of straw.— L^oO 1:^01. 

A king's writer, if he !)>’ some defects more and less, in his writing 
on a stamp-paper frees a thief, would be fined Uttaina Saluisa (lUdO 
Tanas. — -O'J. 

If he bo a T\rfattrl 3 ’n, ho would bo fined Madhvama Sahasn ; if a 
Vaisya, he would be fined Praihama Salnasa and if a tJhdra ho would bo 
fined lialf of it. One who defiles a Brahmana b\’ making liim eat any- 
tiling nnworth 3 ’ should also be fined 1069 Panas, if lie Hoes so with a 
Ksattj'iya the fine should be 405 Panas, if he does so with a Vaisya the 



criAPTEn ccxxviii. 


251 


firxi should be 270 Punas and in case of a S>udra it should be 135 Panaa. 

— 203. 

The seller of tlie cover of a corpse, the one ivho henffi another, 
the one who sits on the roysil coiivej»ance and throne should be fined 1060 
Panas (Qttaina Slliasa). — 201. 

One who a^ain fdes a suit that lie has lost should be fined twofold, 
bis appeal bein^? dismissed. — 205. 

One who does not present him<5elf in obedience to a writ-royal or 
comes unasked and the man who being sentenced elTects his escape from 
the and those who are without any manhood should he made liable 

to a fine of silver or gold as iLc case may he. A messenger for his fault 
shonld l)(" fined half of the ahovementioned fine. ()f»e who e-^capes from 
the lock-np where he is confiuetl to meet liis de'Crfs or leceive the award 
of his quota of punisliment as codified, shonld be punished witli eight 
times I lie i)nMishinent above prescribed.— 2()f?-2()8. 

One who gets anodier's hair or nails clipped in course of harmless 
discussions should he fined Panas. — 200. 

One who sets at liherty a man kept in confinement or a culprit 
worthy of being sent to the gallows should be punished twice as much as 
prescribed for the real culprit. — 210. 

If the courtiers of a king do anytliing unmimlfnlly tliey shonld 1)6 
fined thirty times the amount prescribed which ti e king should oiler to 
God Varnna.-2U. 

If a servant of the state inflicts less or more fine tlian prescribed, 
he should be nuule to recoup the shortcomings out of ids own pocket. — 
212 . 

The sin that a sovereign commits in taking tlie life of an innocent 
prison is just the same as is accrued in protecting a man worthy of being 
condemned to death. — 213. 

A IhAlimana guilty of any crime, liowsoover serious it may be, 
sliould not be ctnulcmned to death, lie should only be deprived of his 
wealth and banished. — 214. 

A Bralnnana should never be killed for there is a great sin in doing 
BO, one should therefore avoid doing that. — 215. 

The king wlio does not punish a man worthy of being condemned 
and punishes an innocent man merits enormous discredit and goes to 
bell.— 216. 

A king should always punish a guilty person after thinking over 
duly the gravity of the offence, in consultation with a BrAhmaiia. — 217. 

Here enflathe tiro hmulred and tirenty-seroifli chapter 
on the king's Dharma — his inflicting punish me nts^ 

CIIAPTEIl CCXXVIll. 

Manu said: — “Lord! pray tell me bow peace-offerings {S>,"infi) are 
made to avert the omi 11 ious signs seen iu the celestial, iuteiiuediute aud 
terrestrial regious.” — 1. 



262 


THE MATS7A PURA'EAM. 


The Lord Fish replied : — “ King ! T shall now mention to you 
the ceremonies that one ought to perform to appease the three classes of 
evils. Out of them those relating to the terrestrial region should be 
attended to without delay.” — 2. 

The Abhaya cereriioiiy appeases the evils of the intermediate region. 
The Saumya^'^^ ceremony averts the evils of the celestial region. An ambi- 
tious man persecuted by another and desirous of prosperity and of conquer- 
ing his enemies should perform Abhaya rites to obtain liis desires and 
annihilate his enemies. Wlien one becomes afraid in hisabhichara practises 
(magic or charm for a malevolent purposes^ or wlieii one wants to destroy 
enemies, or when great, danger comes up, Abhaya ]>eace-offering should be 
performed. Saumya-l^anti should l)e performed l)y tlie people suffering 
from pthisis and other similar diseases. People used to the porforinance 
of sacrifices and those wouudetl should perform also Ranmya-oaiUl. 

Vaisnavi-i^dnti is to be performed when there is an eartliquake, or scarcity 
of grain, famine, excessive rain, drought, visitation of locusts or raid by 
daring thieves. — 3-7. 

When lower animals and men begin mostly to die and when terrestrial 
ominous signs become visible, Ilamlri-l^anti should he performed. — 8. 

BrAhmi-S«*inti should be performed wlien the Vedie lore begins to 
decline, atlieists begin to multiply and tiie unworthy om's begin to occupy 
the position of the worthy. -0. 

Randri-l^aJiti should also l)e be^t perhumied when a sovereign ascends* 
his throne, when there is a fear from any hostile mouandi, when the 
country is disunited and when the di'^tmeahm of enemie^^ is intended.— 10. 

Vayavi-Jjanti sli' uld be peifonnofl wIm n (ui uncornmoidy high wind 
blows for three days and all the eata}»les go bad and diseases arisjug from 
wind crop up. — 11. 

Vayavi-^nnli should be perf n-nied when the rains bold off, agricul- 
tural prospoct.s get rninf-d or whtni the tanks run foid."-12. 

Bhargavf-i^anti should hr })erfor!iiefl when one has to obviate the 
effects of a curse or .spell. .\n I Piajapatva-i'^auti is to Ik* performed when 
there is any irregularity in tho delirf*ry (af cliildien. TaNh-brfjuiti' should 
be perforrried when the venorjible^ l)eeMrne j)o)iule(l. Kaumari-J^anti^^d is 
very beneficial for tliey(>upg ones, Agmdyi-S.int i* ^ is ncTessaiy to subdue 
fire, and when conuTiarMls aie m»t duly e.xeenled by tlio servantfl, when 
servants begin t(; p^-rish. (iandharvi-Santi is ])erf(n-me(l when horses 
begin to g(*t unruly an<l wlien hoises aio desired. — i'bU). 

When there is an epidemic aimuig the elephants or when elephants 
are desired, then Afigirasi-t^.iiiti should be j>erf«»rm(Ml. — 17. 

Nairitya-i^anti sliould be performed wlien evi!-sj)irits cause danger, 

Ytimya-i^anti should be performed when there is a fear of an untimely 
death, when one lias bad dreams, and when there is a fear of hell. 
■Kauverl-Santi sliould be performed when riclies begin to decline. — 18-19. 

Parthivl-Santi should be performed wlien the trees and their fruits 
begin to decline, when rielies begin to decline and when prosperity 
is desired. — 20. 



G'HAPTER ooxxix. 


253 


Agneyl-Santi sliould be performed when any untoward things happen 
before daybreak or during the night time in the first Y&ma when 
Ilasta, Svati, Chitra or Arfvini aaterisms are seen with the Sun in the north- 
western corner; or when in the second Yania of day * or night Pu§y4, 
Viiakha, and Bharani star go with the Sun and ominous signs are seen in 
the south-eastern corner. — 21-23. 

Aindri-^anti should be performed when any ills occur in the third 
Yama of night or day when Rohini or Jye^tha star is seen with the Sun 
and ominous sign occurs in the south-east corner. — 24-25. 

Maha-Santi should be performed \yhen any ills happen in the fourth 
Yama, night or day wlien Arfle^a, Ardra, Pu§ya or Mula star is seen with 
the Sun and ominous signs appear in the west. — 26-27. 

When any ills occur at noon during day two propitiatory rites should 
be performed. Rites performed when there are no disturbances beget 
no consequence. — 28. 

The prescribed propitiatory rites avert the ills as an armour saves 
one from a volley of arrows. — 29. 

Hej^e ends the tico hundred and twenty-eighth chapter 
on the propitiatory rites or Sdntis. 


CHAPTER CCXXIX. 

Manu said : — ‘‘ Lord ! be gracious enough to tell me about the chief 
and peculiar ominous signs, the consequences thereof and the ways of 
averting them, for you are the knower of all things.”—!. 

Jilatsya said 0 King ! I shall relate to you what the hoary sage 
Garga told to Atri once upon a time sitting on the banks of the river 
Sarasvati when the fiery sage Atri asked the most illustrious Garga.— 2-3, 

Atri asked : — “Sago ! pray tell me how men, cities and kings look 
before their destruction.” — 4. 

Garga said : — “ The gods become angry at the incessant evil doings 
of men and then untoward things crop up. They are of three kinds, viz, ills 
pertaining to (1) Celestial, (2) Intermediate and (3) Terrestrial regions. 
When stars and planets are malefic celestial and intermediate portents 
become visible, e,g , the shooting of stars, the preternatural redness of the 
sky, modifications in the halo of the Sun and Moon the sight of the city 
of the Gandharvas in the sky, the Ttunatural rains, etc., are the portents in 
the intermediate regions. Disturbances among the movable and the 
immovable, earthquakes, changes in the waters of the rivers, etc., are 
the portents of the terrestrial region. The terresti ial portents show a 
little result and get fructified within a short time. — 5-9. 

The celestial portents produce middling effects ; and get fructified 
within a comparatively longer time. If there is a good rain within sev^ 
days of the liappening of any kind of portent the latter becomes void of 
all effects. All the ills should be averted by the performance of the pro- 
pitiatory rites, otherwise they are bound to produce their effect ; the very 



£54 


TUB MATSYA VVTlAVIAM. 


terrible ones last for three years by endangering the king, his preceptor 
and city, — 10- 12. 

Their frnotifioation fakes place on the body of th*^ kings, ordinary 
men, in the entrance of the city, in the sons or in tlie tre asury. — 13. 

I shall also explain to 5’ou the influence of the vari»>iiR seasons of the 
year on the various portents, ihat really turn their ills into go al-luck, as 
for instance, the falling of a tiiunder-bolt, earthquake, the thunder in the 
evening, loss of agricMiltnral prospects, the Sun and Moon being circled 
by a halo, the sky being covered with dust, or smoke the directions assum- 
ing a red hue at the time of sunrise or sunset, the gush of myrrh from a 
large number of trees, tlie increase of cattle, birds, and honey are all very 
lucky signs during the vernal season, the months of Chaitra, Vairfikha. 
The appearance of a comet or a malignant star, the falling of meteorites, 
the Sun and sky in the evening turning tawny, the sky gettingdark, tawny, 
red, or oceaidike, the loss of water in rivers, during tlie summer mcnulis are 
very lucky. The appearance of a rainbow, the falling of a thunder holt, 
lightning and meteoirs, tlie peal of langlifer, the crackings in the earth, the 
shaking of bridges, eartliqiiake, tlie overflow of rivers and tanks, the 
excitement among the horned animals and lainrs during the rainy seas(m 
are very lucky. Cold winds, frost, the loud speaking of deer and liinis, 
the sight of apparitions and spirits and voice speaking in the Heavens, tlie 
pervasion of smoky darkness in llie directions, tlie blowing of high wind, 
the sunrise and sunset at great altitmles are very good signs during tlie 
Hemanta season. The sight of Divine ladies, Candharvas, extraordinaiy 
things seen in the Vitnanas, stars, planet‘s, the DaivavTuii (celestial voice) 
the sound of music coming from the hills and wood, th(» inerease in agri- 
cultural produce, the production of juices, in crops aie very lucky signs 
d'.iring the autumnal ^eason. Frost, wind, the ]>n)du( tion of young ones 
by the she-goats, birds and males, the •-pioiiting of leavr’S in the tiers, 
the shooting of meteors, the sight of ext raonlinary forms, the sky 
looking black, the falling of stars are good signs (lining Siiiira, ilie cold 
season. — 14-25, 

Tliese are the Incky signs if they ocenr during flic periodsmenlioned 
above, if anytliiiig otherwise happens, a king should at once take mea- 
sures to avert those ills — 20. 

Here enda the two Intndred and IwcYitij-ninth chapter 
on Sa)iii offerinif$. 


CHAPTER CCXXX. 

Garga said : — Where the idols of the Devas begin to dance, sliiver, 
shine like fire; vomit smoke, l)Iood,aiiy unctuous substance, fat ; weep, 
laugh, perspire, stand up, walk, breathe, terrify, eat, throw away the 
biiitiier, etc., at a long distance, cast their head down ; or move from one 
place to anolher one should not stay there fur the king with his Empire 
where such things occur, or sins increase, are ruined. Such things forebode 
ill o£ the country where they happen. Such portents manifest through 



CHAPTER CCXXXL 


255 


Lit'.ffns of tho Uevaa or tlirongh flie temple where the Deva is installed or 
lluonoli the Bralirnapas in tlie temples. Know that flie country is in danger 
where evil pigtia are seen when the Devas march in procepsion in iJeva 
Y/.trAs. One would quit that place even if it be the p'lace of the grand- 
faiheiR. 'riie inischiers amongst animals are caused by Itiulra ; the 
mischiefs amongst kings are caused by Ix)kaprdaR; Rvainikarfika 
causes them amongst the commanders of an army and Vi^nu, Vasn, Indra, 
ami ViiJvakarm& cause the miscliiefs among tho rest of the creation.— 1-7. 

Oanetia causes them amongst (ho chieftains; the Divine spies oanse 
mischief among the spies of a sovereign; and the Divine ladies cause 
mischief amongst the ladies of a sovereign. — 8. 

These evil portents by tliegralias are caused by Vasndeva. When the 
Divine images and idols undergo such uncommon changes, the learned in 
the Vedas, the preceptors of a sovereign should worship the Divine images 
with incense, flowers, m idlnif>arl<a, etc., and then decorate them withorna* 
ments and shotdd sacrifice and offer oblations in the Fire for a week willi« 
out giving way to laziness. — U-1 1. 

They shonlrl al«o fee<l the BnHimanas with sweets and other things 
for a week and on the eighth <hiy give away cows, laud, gold, etc., whicU 
then averts the effects of all such omens. — 12, 

Here ends the tico hundred and thirfy-ei ,hfh chapter on propitiations 

for the bad omens. 


CHAPTER CCXXXI. 

Qarga said : — The countr}^ where the burning takes place without 
fire ami fuel and where fuel fails to produce it, is sure to be harassed by 
some foreigners — I. 

Where flesh is cooked only in water ; where a part of a kingdom ia 
burnt, where forts, gateways, palaces, temples, catch fire or be struck by 
lightning; the sovereign is in danger. — 2-3. 

Where darkness pervades during tlie day, the sky becomes covered 
with dust without a duststorm, smoke pervades without fire; great 
calamity befalls there.-- 4. 

Where flaslies of lightning are visible without clouds, stars are 
visible during the day time, great ills are sure to happen.— 5. 

When stars, planets become mortified and lose their colour or 
positions ; where the stars become unusually inortifie<I, where qumlriiped 
deer and birds are seen in cities, Viihanas and conveyances ; where fiery 
weapons become pale; where w^ealtli is being taken away from the 
Treasury, one sliould infer that great battle is sure to ensue.— 0*7. 

Where without fire, sparks appear an 3 ’where, where arrows are fixed 
in bows in an unusual waj*’, where weapons get derange<l, war is sure to 
ensue. When these bad omens appear, the roj^al priest should fast for three 
days and pour offerings of sesamiim and ghee into the fire kindled up by the 



THE MATSYA PVRANAM. 


wood of milky trees and afterwards the Br&hmajpaa should be fed and given 
golS, cloths, lands, which will then avert all the Calamities that befSl by 
the rage of fire. — 8-11. 

Here ends the two hundred and thirty-firet chapter 
on SAnti. 


CHAPTER CCXXXIL 

Qarga said : — The cities wliere the trees, inhabited by the Devas, 
begin to cry, laugh, eject sap, drop their branches witliout any cause or 
high wind ; the plants tliatare only three years old bear fruit ; trees begin 
to overflow with milk, oily oiibstiinces, blood, honey, or water ; they sud- 
denly dry up without disease ; the dried onesiiegin to sprout ; the fallen 
ones stand up, the stan<ling ones fall down ; all such things forebode ill of 
them. The weeping of the trees indicates the approach of some epidemic, 
and the country becomes anniliilated by their laughing. — 1-5. 

The breaking down of their branches foretells a war, the bearing 
of fruits by the three years’ old plants means tlie death of babies ; plethora 
of fruit and flowers means the ilisuniou in the empire, the flow of milk 
indicates the loss of milk in cows, and that of oil forebodes a famine. — 

6-7. 

The flow of wine means the d(‘structioTi of conveyances, the flow («f 
blood foretells war ; the flow of honey means difl’usion of great diseases, 
and the flow of water means drought.— 8. 

The drying up of trees without disease means famine ; the sprouting 
of the dried up trees means the loss of vitality and grain. — 9. 

There is danger of disunion foretold by the fallen trees standing 
up and the standing ones falling down, and their moving from one place 
to another means the annihilation of the country. — 10. 

There is loss of wealth where tlie tre(;B begin to weep or laugh and 
their barks are burnt. Those are the portents which transpire through 
adorable trees. — 11. 

Where the fruits and flowers of trees undergo change tlie sovereign is 
sure to die. Such ill-forebodings should be averted. The tree in which 
the above signs appear should be covered with clothe and adored with 
sandal, incense and tlien an umbrella should be stretclied over it. Then 
Lord i^iva should be worshipped and an animal should be sacrificed near 
the tree. — 12-14. 

Then the mantra “ Rudrebliyoh, etc.” sliould be uttered and oblations 
offered unto Fire and the Kudra Mantra is to be muttered. Afterwards 
Brkhmanas should be worshipped and fed with clarified butter, rice 
cooked in milk and sugar, sugar, etc., and then give them presents of 

land. Then rejoicings should be held in tlie house and Lord l^iva should 
be worshipped with music and dancing. — 15. 

Here ends the two hundred and thirty-second chapter 
on Oraha Sdnti, 



OHAPTBB COXXZIV. 


257 


CHAPTER COXXXm. # 

II • — There is always fear of a famine by excess of rain as 

drought or want of rain. Copious rain at an improper time 
(other than the rainy season) is dangerous. Rain without clouds means 
death of a sovereign and the weather getting warm and cold at unusual 
times means danger to the sovereign from his foes. — 1-2. 

Where there is a downpour of blood, there is always fear from 
weapons and war, and the city where there is a rain of dust and cinders 
perishes. — 3. 

Showers of marrow, bones, oily substances mean the increase in the 
death-rate of men. Showers o£ fruits, flowers, grain mean a great danger 
and a downpour of dust, stones and small beings indicate the approach of 
an epidemic and a shower of bored grains foretells the loss of agricultural 
prospects.— 4-5. 

If there be no shadow seen while the sun shines brilliantly, there 
being no clouds or dust in the sky, it means ill-luck to the country. — 6. 

If a rainbow is visible towards the north-west during the night 
in the absence of clouds, if meteors shoot, and the directions become 
unusually red, and the Gandharva regions are visible and the Sun and 
Moon surrounded by halos ; then there is sure to happen some unrest in the 
land and fear from some foreign power. — 7-8. 

To avert these ills, sacrifices should be performed in the name of 
the Sun, the Moon and the Wind and money, cows, and gold should be 
given to Brahmanas. 

Here ends the two hundred and twenty-third chapter on S&nti. 


CHAPTER CCXXXIV. 

Garga said : If rivers, lakes, or cascades advance close to the 
town or recede to a great distance away from it, and if the waters of the 
tanks and streamlets, etc., become tasteless and if the water of the rivers 
turns warm, dark, of an unnatural colour, and full of froth and sand if 
It turns milky, oil}^ winy, or bloody ; the empire where such things happen 
IS bound to pass into the hands of another sovereign within six months 
from the time of such happenings. When reservoirs make unusual 
noise, and kindle up, or look as if smoke, fire and dust are coming 
out of them or water suddenly springs up, without there being dug a 
ri? multitude of beings plunge into water, and when 

an the reservoirs begin to produce musical sounds ; there is always a great 
danger of dreadful epidemics. To avert the calamity, Ganges water 
or other holy water, clarrified butter, honey and oil should be poured into 
the waters and the head should be turned on the mantra sacred to Lord 
Varupa and sacrificial offerings should be performed in the water. — 1-6 

0 * 1/1 Brdhmapas should be fed with clarrified butter, honey, 

given cows covered with white cloth and jam full of water. — 7. 

Here ends the two himdred and twenty-fourth chapter on the extraordinarv 
peace offering when reservoirs of water go bad, ^ 

S 



m TEE iiATSTA PmiJfAM. 



CHAPTER COXXXV. 

Garga said : — The bringing forth of children by women at tinusual 
J)eriodB, their giving birth to twins, tlie birth of otlier beings from human 
foetus, the birth of mouthleps offspring as well as of those liaving more 
than ordinary limbs, or of the lower beings, birds, scorpions, snakes 
mean the destruction of that country and laniily in wliicli such birth, 
takes place. — 1-3. 

The women giving birth to such progeny should be sent out of the 
countr}^ by tlie sovereign and he should llicJi adore the women and the 
BiAhmanas aie to be fed satisfactorily.— 4. 

Here ends the tico hundred and thirty-Jifth chapter on the extraordinary 
Sdnti on the delivers/ of women. 


CHAPTER eeXXX^T 

Garga said : — It is a most unlucky sign wlien first class horses and 
other similar conveyances do not move in an orderly maiinor, when made 
to do so while they go regularly when not intended so. A geat danger 
is sure to come, — 1. 

The drums nn<l other s^mnding instruments not giving any sound 
when beat or struck or emitting sounds without being struck,^ the 
moving of the immovables, the m>t going of the movable objects 
when made to move, the somul (jf tlm dnims, etc., coming from the 
sky as well as the singing of the (daiidharvas, the \vo( (lcn ljulles, axes, etc., 
undergoing unusual changes, cows tighling among themselves with their 
tails cocked up and womtm kill women and changes occur in young 
ones ; these indicate a war, — ^-4. 

Brahmanas sliould be made to worship T.omI Vuyu with barley meal 
and the head should be turned on the formula sacrod to VAyu. Afterward? 
presents should be given to Ibalimanas and they should be fed wit! 
Paramanna and be given fees in abumhince. — 5. 

Here ends the two hundred and tliirt tpsixLh chapter on unusual 

peace offerings. 


CHAPTER CCXXXVIT. 

Garga said : — The emigration of wild deer and jackals from th' 
jungles into the town is a bad omen ; so is the emigration of village bird 
and deer from village into the jungles. The inauspicious howlingoi* jackal 
fearlessly in front of a royal mansion and tlie entrance gate of the city i 
most unlucky. When the land animals go to water and when the aquati 
animals come over to land, the time is very inauspicious. — 1-2. 

The roaming about freely of the animals in course of the night, thf 
usually prowl in the day and rice versa as well as the desertion of the: 
usual habitation by the village animals forebode the desolation of il 
place where such place where such things occur.r-3. 




at(t 

The sauntering about of the dogs and other anirnala of habitatiM 
m a circle in the evening, and their waiting in an unpleasant chwi&s, alaC 
forebode the desolation of the place where they do so. -^4. 

The crowing of the cock in the evening hoarsely, the laughing of the 
cuckoos and the howling of the she-jackal facing the rising sun are also 
most inauspicious signs. — -5. 

The swarming of pigeons in a dwelling-house, the coming down 
of fire on a man’s head, the laying of the honeycomb by the bees within 
the house, foretell the death of the owner. — 6. 

If fire occurs on an enclosure entrance gate or within a house or on 
any entrance, or on a shop, mart, banner or weapon and if any such plaqc^ 
or things be covered witlj an anthill or if the honey flows out of a honey- 
comb in their places, the desolation of the country and the death of 
ruler are certain. — 7-8. 

If a place be infested with too many rats and locusts, disease arises ou.^ 
of hunger or when there are seen charred pieces of wood bones, and dogfii 
with horns, the diseases of the monkeys occur, where crows are seen with 
grains in their mouths and those who are skilled in the arts of warfare fear-- 
lessly subdue all people tlieii a dire famine is sure to occur ; and th^ 
people are doomed to bt'ur the sufferings of a great war. If a monaich 
chances upon a white crow in course of his amorous pastimes he is eithei^ 
destined to die or his country ami wealth are on the verge of ruin. — 9-11. 

The king in front of wliose gateway or in whose palace an owl is visible, 
is doomed to die or lose his treasure. — 12. 

To drive away the ill-effects of such unlucky foreborlinga a sacrifice 
should be performed, and terrestrial t^antl is to be performed ; and fee® 
presents should be given to the Brahinanas, and five Brahrnauas should be 
made to turn their heads on the prescribed formula3 ria., Dev4- 
kapotah, etc.” 

Afterwards some cows adorned with gold and cloth should be given 
away to obviate the impending disaster. — 14. 

Here ends the two hundred and thirfy-serenth chapter on extraordinary, 
Sdntis due to birds and deet\ etc^ 


CHAPTER CCXXXVIIL 

Garga said : — There is a fear 5f sovereign’s death when his palace, 
gateway, balconj’', fort, etc., fall down abruptly — 1. 

The directions being covered with dust and smoke, the waning of 
the Sun, the Moon and the stars foretell the iinpendig danger of a 
sovereign — 2. 

When Rak^asas put on their appearance, when Brahmanas become 
void of their duties, when seasons are subverted, the unwoithy ones are 
worshipped when stars fall, know these are the signs of death. When the 
Sun and Moon are eclipsed, when the lialos of the Sun and the Moon 
appear poroua ; wImh ]&etu rises and when the stars and planets look pain 



TEB MATSYA PVBANAM. 


they forebode ills and great danger. Where women are quarrelsome where 
^ys kill boys, where prescribed religious are not practised, where fire 
in course of propitiatoi-y offerings does not shine well ; where the 
marching of ants from the north into fire takes place, where jars full of 
water become empty or where the loss of charrified butter occurs or where 
there is the absence of propitious formulse, the waning of the voice of the 
Br&hmahas, the dimness of the musical instruments in the temples, the 
hatred towards the preceptors and friends and the worship of the enemies, 
the loss of the prestige of the Brahmanas and friends, and honoured 
persons occur, where atheism prevails as to the auspicious effects of Homs 
and other sacred ceremonies and the destruction of the country or the 
death of its sovereign is at hand. — 3-11. 

Now hear the signs that are seen on the impending min of a king. 
The finding of faults of the BrAhmanas by the king, the harassing 
Brfihmanas and usurping their wealth, the wish of killing Brahmanas, 
the disregard of Brahmanas in the performance of religious rites, the 
presence of anger when anybody asks for cutting, the love f.U’ decrying 
them, the disinclination to praise them, the causing of pain to them out 
of avarice ; not paying attention to one’s own duties, the levying of fresh 
taxes out of avarice, are also most unlnckj' signs to obviate the consequence 
of which Indra with Indrvini should bo worshipped, Brahmanas should 
be fed and sacrificial offerings should be made to the Devas. The 
Brfihmanas and good men should bo worshipped and given pre- 
sents. — 12-15. * 

High class Br&hmanas should be given cows, gold and lands, 
sacrifices should be i)erforraed, and Devas should be worshipped. Thus 
sins will be destroyed and order restored again. — 0. 

Here ends the] two hundred and ihiriy-ei^htJi chapter on extraordinary 

Sdnlis on unJnekij siyns. 


CHAPTER CCXXXIX. 

Manu said: — “Lord ! How should a king perform Griha-yogya, 
Lak^a-homa, and Kot-i-homa the disjxdler of all evils ? pr.ny tell me all 
about them.’’ I want to hear in details the methoils how these sacrifices 
are to be done by a king wanting to avert the danger and desirous of 
^nti. — 1-2. 

Lord said: — “King! T shall answer your question fully, please 
listen to me.” A sovereign who has the well-being of his subjects at 
heart should always perform Griha-yajfia and Lalsa-homa. Griha-yajna 
should be performed at the confluence of rivers as well as before the 
Divine images and on the plains. First a king- should find out a 
suitable spot in company of his preceptor and Ritvikas which should be a 
level piece of ground. A sacrificial jrit measuring one hand in length and 
breadth should be dug then. The sacrificial pit for a Laksa-homa should 
be of double the size (t.e., two hands in length and breadth) and that 
for a Ko(i-homa, four times (i.e., four hands in length and breadth).- -3-6. 


ORAFTER CCXXXtK.-' 


2 ^ 


There should he two Ritvikas and eight Br&hraa^as well-versed in 
the Vedas who should live on fruits or curds and milk before they perform 
the sacrifice. Various kinds of gems should be thrown by them on the 
pit, the enclosure of sand should be made and afterwards sacrificial fire 
should be lit. — 7-8. 

Ten thousaiW sacrificial offerings should be made by reciting the sacred 
GAyatrt, 6,000 by reciting the formulae ‘ rnanastokenau,’ 30,000 by reciting 
the prescribed formulae of the Navagrahas (nine planets), 4,000 by reciting 
the formula sacred to Visnu, 5,000 by reciting the Kfi^mfindda richas, 
16,0(X) by reciting the KusumSdi formulaj, and 1"),000 by reciting the 
Badana formulae, and 14,000 by reciting the formulae sacr^ to Lak^mi, 
SjOGO by reciting the formulae sacred to Indra. Thus 1,00,000 offerings 
should be made after which one should bathe out of the sixteen pitchers 
of the consecrated water containing a piece of gold. Such a bath brings 
peace to the devotee and then presents given to the Brabmanas avert 
all the ills of the household. The sacrificial fees given on such dccasions 
are considered of high merit. — 9-14. 

Elephants, horses, chariots, lands, clothes, oxen, and 100 cows and 
buffaloes should be given to the Ritvijas (priests). — 15. 

Presents should be given according to the means of the devotee, and 
he should never be miserly here. Laksa-hoina should be concluded 
within a month. — 16-17. 

Koti-homa should be performed on the banks of the Ganges, on the 
confluence of the Yamun& and the Sarasvati or on the confluence of the 
Narmadil and Devika. — 18. 

There should be 16 Ritvijas in this Lak§a-homa and presents should 
be given to Brflhmanas on the occasions of each sacrifice. — 19. 

A devotee should first commence the preliminary rites in the 
month of Chaitra, especially in the month of Kartika ; then he should 
remain initiated for one year with Ritvijas and AchSryas and then 
sacrifice should be performed or he should perform it .once every year. 
The devotee should live on fruits or milk. — 20-21. 

Barley, rice, sesamum, mustard, Masakalui, and PalS^a fuel are best 
for the sacrificial fuel, and streamlets of clarrified butter should also be 
run on walls. The priests should be fed with milk during the first month 
and rice and pulse cooked together, which helps one in Dharma, E&ma, 
and Artha, should be used during the next month. — 22-23. 

During the third month they should live on barley gruel and in 
the fourth month laddfis should be given to the Bi4hmana priets. — 24. 

During the fifth month they should be given curds and rice, Sattfl 
during the sixth month, m&lapuas during the seventh month, ghevara 
during the eighth month, Saipthl rice during the ninth mouth, barley 
during the tenth month and urada during the eleventh month. The 
Rivijas should thus be fed. — 25-26. 

During the twelfth month they should be given all the various kinds 
of eatables and fees should be given to them every month. The Br&h- 
mapas should put on pure clothes (never torn clothes) and perform sacri- 



imS MATSrA PURANAM. 


fice in the noon and the devotee should always reWin with the Br&h- 
manas which pleases lurlra and other gods, and for the satisfaction of the 
gods animal sacrifice should also be made. Afterwards Agni$(oma 
sacrifice should also be performed ; afterwards Purnrdiiiti is to be duly 
performed. In one hundred Homas two hundred Purnrihutis are to be per- 
formed ; in one thousand (1,()60‘ Homas twice that {i.e.) 2,000 Purnjihutis 
are to be performed ; thus up to one lakh Ilomas, this rule of doubling 
is to be followed. The Bralimanas sliould then oiler the sacrificial 
offerings for the Purodaia for the satisfaction of the Devas. Afterwards 
the devotee should adore the manes, ami offer libations as prescribed. 
Thus the ceremony is completed. — 27-33. 

A king should give handsome Daksinas on the conclusion of this 
sacrifice. He should give his weight in gold and queen’s weight in silver. 
He should not be led away hy avarice. lie should give one Inkh umbrellas 
of gold or silver. In fact if anyone gives away every tiling in this sacri- 
fice, he will get the benefits of the Rajsiijui sacrifice. The liitvijas should 
then be dismissed. — 34-37. 

Then the following is to be recited. Let the Ln^ns eyed Hari, the 
Lord of sacrifices be pleased. When llari is pleated, the whole world 
becomes satisfied. — 38. 

Thus I have described to 3’^ou all the ills due to Dovns, men or other 
beings and show they ought be appeasefl ami the devotee the performer of 
these three sacrifices beeoines virtuous wlien lie does not grieve even <n 
death. In fact nothing more is hd't for him to accomplish. Ho gets the 
benefit of having bathed in all the sacred tlrtlias. — 3‘.)-40. 

Here ends the two hundred and thirtif-nhdU chapter on Graha-yajiias, etc. 


CHAPTEU CCLXI.. 

Manu said: — I^ord ! now be pleased to tell me when and how a 
king should marcli lor war? -1. 

Mats3^a said ; — A king sliould marcli wlion he finds his enemy 
pressed by some valiant King or his tributary cliiefs. lie should first see 
that he has ubumlance of strength and fighting men and materials and 
then he should leave a jjowerfu I guard to protect fiis stronghold before 
starting to face his emuny, wuthont which lie should never set out. To 
protect his own country, the base of all operatitms, there should be many 
more fighting persons and generals than the other kings and chiefs 
engaged in conquering liis enemy. He should never start when his tribut- 
ary chiefs and the neiglibouring kings aiv not. subject to him. It becomes 
very hot during the inontli of Chaitra, so Chaitra should be chosen for an 
expedition as far as possilile; or the month of Agralifiyana when rains 
cease might be chosen otherwise he should take every advantage of his 
enemies’ adverse circumstances. — 2-0. 

A king should take every advantage of the planets and celestiab 
intermediate and terrestrial influences that completely harass for bia 



CHAPTER 00X€ 



^netny ; or when his enemy has broken his hands or legs or is bedoxne 
defective in any of his organs.— 7. 

He should sot out to tlie direction that gets unusually red wheye 
there are myriads of falling meteors, or thunderbolts when tliere has been 
an earthquake, and meteors come out of the earth, when a comet is visible. 
He should also go to fight against the country when people lead a vicious 
life, where there are too many flies and insects, where the king is addict- 
ed to some particular hobby and is oblivious of his affairs, where the 
people are atheists and disrespectful, the country that is under the rage 
of diseases, plague or famine. He should certainly encounter foe upset 
with rage. A king is undoubtedly victorious when he invades the 
country of the infidels, of the thoughtless and of those who have bad 
generals in the army. Where the people are divided against themselves. 
—8-13. 

A king is to start against his enemy whose soldiers have no weapons 
and fighting materials, whoso bodies tremble, and who see bad dreams. 
A king wlio is full of ambition, hilarity, and has valiant generals in 
his army and his soldiers energetic and glad ; should face his foe. He 
should at once set out against his foe when his auspicious limb vibrates 
and when there are other similar auspicious signs, when the sweet 
peacocks echo, etc. — 14-15. 

He should start to conquer liis foe when he is under the influence of 
the six lucky stars presiding over Janma, Sampat, Ksema, etc., when 
the planets are auspicious and when the astrologers predict auspicious 
times. — 16. 

A king should be blessed by tlie Devas, after worshipping them and 
he should consider the time, place, and circumstances and he should feel 
himself sufficiently powerful. An ambilious king should not lose the 
opportunity of vanquishing his foe who is under unlucky stars and has 
his country and times against him. As a crocodile is subdued by an ele- 
phant on land, an elephant by a crocodile in water, a crow by an owl 
during the night, an owl by a crow during the day; so should a king 
start against liis foe taking a measure of the current circumstances. — 
17-19. 

He should march with a good force of infantry and elephants 
during the rainy season ; of cavalry and chariots during the dewy and 
cold season ; he should march with camels and mules during the hot 
weather ; and with forefold forces during the vernal season. A king whose 
infantry is strong can attack his foe with great vigour. — 20-22. 

An elephant corps can win a foe situated in a muddy surroundings 
or in a woody country, and a cavalry and chariots can vanquish a foe on 
even land. If the king be helped by a number of allies, he should respect 
them by presents and kindness. If a king who has a strong mule and 
oamel corps should be subdued during the rains and taken prisoner, he 
should still fight on as there is chance of his recovery. — 23-25. 

During the winter season a king should have a good store of istraw 
and fire wood to enable him to vanquish his foe. Vernal season is known 



. rah UATSYA purAnam. 



as Ihe best time. A king should set out in the summer season against 
a country that is wetty and covered with snow. — 26. 

A king should always think well over the present circumstances, 
past and future and take the advice of his minister and Br&hmanas before 
setting out against his enemy. — 27. 

Hers ends the two hundred and fortieth chapter on the mardi of a King, 

CHAPTER CCXLL ** * . 

** *“ I. . 

Mann asked : — “ Lord ! jmu are the knower of alf, so be pleased to 
tell me the auspicious and the inauspicious omens.” — 1. 

Matsya said : — The vibration of the right limbs is said to be gener- 
ally auspicious. The left sides of the back and heart are also auspicious. 
— 2 . 

Menu asked: — “Ijord! How should one know what is going to 
happen on the vibration of the several limbs of the body ? Pray ex- 
plain all that to me fulh".” — 3. 

Matsya replied : — The vibiation of the head in dreams means the 
acquirement of another empire ; that of the forehead means acquisi- 
tion of further lands ; that of the eyebrows and the nose means tlie pros- 
pect of meeting some dear friend. — 4. , 

The vibration of the eye means death ; near about the eye begets 
wealth, if the centre of th^ eye throbs one becomes very anxious ; the 
closing of the eyes begets an early victory, and of the outer corner of 
the eye means the enjoyment with a handsome lady. The vibration of 
the ears makes one to bear good thing, that of the nose brings happiness, 
of the upper and lower lips beget.s proyony, of the neck bring enjoyments 
and pleasures, of the shoulders means tlte increase of enjoyments. — 5-7. 

The vibration of the arm means the Jfjvo of a friend, of the hand 
brings in wealth, of the bade nioaiis defeat, of the che.st means speedy 
victory. — 8. 

The trembling of the belly means affection, the vibration of the 
breast means the impregnation, that of tlie navel means the loss of one’s 
position, that within the navel ]»egets wealth, that of the knees means 
the union with some powerful enemy, and that of the ankles forebodes 
the destruction of some portion of the country — 9-10. 

The vibration of the f^et begets good situation, that of the soles 
gets wealth and other dress and presents. — 11. 

These are meant for men ; that of the women are contrary. If 
the above mentioned right limbs of a woman vibrato, the results are 
contrary, but in the case of men they are most auspicious, — 12. 

Vibrations of the limbs contrary to those mentioned above are un- 
lucky. Gold should be given to Brahinanas to avert the evils arising out 
of their throbbing. 

Here ends the two hundred and forty first chapter on the vibration 
of different limbs and their effects. 



OEAFTBR COXLIL * 265 

CHAPTER CCXLII. 

Manu asked : — '* laprd ! be pleased to tell me all about the effects 
of f be dreams that a king may see as well the auspicious signs when h& 
goi‘S out on some purpose. Hot? 'should those different dreams be- 
interpreted ? •” — 1. 

Matsya said : — “ Now listen to the effects of the various kinds of 
dreams,. Jf dreams Hiat grass has grown all over his body excepting 
on the or that pieces of belbrnetal have been pasted on the head^ 

or that w bead- is cleanshaven, or that he is naked or that he has 
put on ppor clothinj^ or that he has fallen down from a height, or that 
he’ is besmeared with mud or oil, or that he is collecting molten 
iron, or sees the carcass of horses, red flowers, red trees, red halos, 
or that he is riding on a boar, bear, donkey or a camel, or that ho 
iseating cooked flesh, oil or kichari (rice and pulse cooked together), 
or sees, dancing, merry-making, marriage, hears songs, etc., or the playing 
of musical instruments other than the Vina pr the guitar, or that he is 
plunging himself in the source of a river, or that he is bathing after 
rubbing- himself in waters dirty with CO wdung, or that he is bathing in 
muddled water, or that he is in his mother’s womb, or that he is on a 
burning pole, or that the banner set up in honour of Indra has fallen, or 
the fall of the Sun and the Moon, or the various ills that arise in the 
Celestial, Intermediate or Terrestrial regions, or that the gods, the twice- 
born, the king or the preceptor are angry, or that he is embracing virgins, 
or the males committing unnatural offence^ or that he has lost a limb of 
his body, or that he is besmeared with vomit or stool, or that he is going 
towards the south, or that is laid up with some disease, or that the fruits 
and flowei-s are on the decline, or that the houses have tumbled down, or 
the houses are being swept, or that he is playing with demons, monkeys, 
bears or men, or that he is discarded by his enemies, the sight of one 
wearing gerua (red) cloth, or that he is drinking oil or bathing in it, or that 
he is wearing red garlands ; or his body is besmeared with red paste are all 
unlucky signs. It is always good to tell such bad dreams to other people.. 
Also it is advisable to go to sleep again after seeing such dreams. — 2-15. 

By bathing after rubbing over his body some grain paste, performing 
a sacrifice with sesamums, or worshipping the BrShmanas, worshipping 
Vi§nu, and by listening to the story of the liberation of the elephant by 
the Lord (Gajamoksan) the evil effects of bad dreams are driven away. 
A dream dreamt in the first part of the night gives its fruit in the first 
.year ; if it is dreamt in the secomJ part of the night it gives its fruit in 
six months ; if it occurs in the third part of the night it gives fruit in 
three months and if it comes in the fourth part of the night, it undoubt- 
edly gives its fruit within a month. — 16-18. 

If one gets a dream just before sunrise, it gives fruit within ten 
dajrs. If one gets a couple of dreams in the night, the last one beam 
fruit consequently one should not go to sleep after he has dreamt a 
good dream. — 19-20. 

If one rides on a horse, an elephivnt or an ox or climbs a hill or a 
palace or on a tree bearing white flowers ; it is very auspicious. — 21. 

9 


266 


TEE MAT&YA PUBAEAM. 


It is also equally auspicious to see in dream that a tree or some 
grass has grown in one’s navel, or that he has several arms, heads, or the 
hixuriance of fruits, or that he is wearing white raimants and withered gar- 
lands, or that he sees the eclipse of the Sun, the Moon or the stars or that 
he catches hold of the rainbow, or that he sweeps a floor or so, or that the 
heaven and the earth are under his subjugation, or that he has killed his 
enemies. The seeing of these dreams brings victory in battle and gambling. 
When a man dreams that he has eaten raw flesh, fish or rice 
cooked in milk and sugar, or he sees a flow of blood, or that he is bathing 
in blood, or that he is drinking wine, blood, or milk, or that he is intwined 
in the intestines, or sees a clear sky, or the lioness, the she-elephant, 
and the mare or cow yields milk from their mouths, or that he is getting 
favours from the Devas, Bnihmanas or his (juru or spiritual teacher, all 
these are auspicious dreams. When a man dreams that he is being 
anointed with waters from the cow’s horns or moon, he will have chance 
of getting a kingdom. When a man dreams th.it ho is being installed 
in a throne or that he is beheaded, or that he is burnt in a file and dead, 
or that his house or person is on fire, or that he has been blessed with 
the regalia of kingship, or that he is hearing the playing of guitar these 
also indicate the getting of sovereignty. The dream of crossing the water 
by swimming, or that he is crossing an uneven country, or that 
a mare, a cow or a she-elephant is giving birth in his house, or that he is 
riding on horses, those are auspicious ; or that lie is weeping, or th^t 
he has obtained good women, or that he is embracing beautiful women, 
or that he is fettered, or that he is besmeared with filth, or is being visited 
by a living king or friends, or the sight of the Devas or crystal waters, 
these are auspicious. — 22-34. 

One who sees such dreams readily gets wealth without any effort 
and if a sick person gets such dreams he is sure to be cured ere long. 
—35. 

Here ends Ihe two hundred and forty-second chapter on dreams and 

murehing. 


CIIAPTEll CCXLTIT. 

Manu asked : — ‘‘ Jjord ! be gracious enough to toll mo the good omens 
that are pi-opitious at the time when a king marches on his journey. — 1. 

Matsya .said; — The following are the bad omens at the time of a 
journey, viz., the sight of useless medicinal herbs scattered, black grain, 
cotton, hay, dried up cowdung, firewood, ciudeis, molasses, <ill, dirty men 
covered with oil, naked men, poor head dress, men with loose-hair, diseased 
men, hermit clad in rod, coloured robes, tnad m.-vn, distressed perSOH, 
eunuch, Ohftnd<»la, iron, mud, hide, refuse, fowler, sinner, pregnant 
women, husks, ashes, skulls, broken utensils, utensils stained with blood. 
Jast before sunrise, Bt the BrAbma Muhfirta if an indistinct sound is 
heard in front ora loud sound of a broken vessel letting waters flow in a 
stream he beard, it is auspicious ; but if the sound be heard from the 
back, it is inauspicious. “ Go ” if such a sound is heard in front it is auspi* 




OEAPTEH GGXLIV. 


267 


cious, “ go ” on the other hand is most inanspicious, if it comes from the 
baok. “ Where do you go. ” “ Do not go ” “ Stay ” “ what use in going 
there, ” these are all inauspicious words and indicate danger. — 2-10. 

If a R&ksasa sits on a banner it is unlucky and so are the*falling 
down of tlie conveyances, the overlapping of the dress, the striking of the 
head against the door, the falling down of the banner, umbrella, cloth at 
the time of departure are unlucky signs. — 11-12. 

If there is thus seen one bad omen at the time of departure one 
should adore Vispu and praise Madhushdana and then resume his' 
mission, but if there is another one for the second time, he should return 
home.— 13-14. 

The following are good omens, vis., the sight of white flowers, 
pitchers full of vvater, aquatic animals, bird’s flesh, fish, cows, horses, 
elephants, goats, Devas, idols, friends, Brethmanas, blazing fire, dancing 
girls, green grass, wet cowdung, gold, silver, copper, all the gems, all 
the medicines, barley, sesamum, bhadrapttha, sword, umbrella, banner, 
clay, weapons, emblems of regality, clarrified butter, curds, milk, various 
kinds of fruits, the eddy of a river, Kaustubha gem, melodious music, nice 
and deep songs, the tunes QSipdhflra, Sadaja, Ri^abha, pot marked with 
Svastika sign. — 15-21. 

If a dry dust storm blows against at the time of departure it is 
unlucky. — 22. 

On the other hand if a gentle and pleasing wind blows favourably 
it is very auspicious and so is the chorus of kites, etc., as well as the 
mild thunder of glossy clouds resembling elephants, and the sight of 
rainbow. — 23-24. 

The sight of Sun’s and Moon’s halo is inauspicious as well the rains ; 
the good influence of stars particularly the rising of Vrihaspati, (Jupiter) 
in anuloma, mind full of devotion, the adoration of the worthy, the sight 
of the things very dear to one’s mind are all lucky things at the time 
of departure. — 25-26. 

The hilarity of mind at the time of journey is the indication of 
victory and in fact it equals all the good omens in point of good luck. — 27, 

The king whose mind is full of joy is sure to win and so is the 
case with the one who hears auspicious words at the time of his departure 
and when all his conveyances are very eager to start. — 28. 

Here ends the tico hundred and forty-third chapter 
071 auspicious signs at the twie gomg out. 


CHAPTER OOXLIV. 

The Eisis asked : — SQta ! you have related to us the duties of a 
sovereign and also about the various omens and effects of dreams ; now 

we are desirous of hearing the glory of Lord Visiju. Pray tell us why 

the Lord in Hia YfLinana incarnation, made great, demon Ymg a 

captive? How did He make His Bwarhsbi iorm increase a\\ over the 
tiuee woWds?” — 1-2. 



268 


TE^ MAT8YA PUBANAM. 


SAta said:— Rifis! the rome question was put by ^rjuna to the 
Muni Saunaks in VAmanAyatan in days gone by when the former was on a 

f }ilgrimage. When Arjnna violated bis promise with Yudbi$thira about 
iving with Draupadi, he went on pilgrimage for the expiation of his 
ein. The image of *Vdmana was installed in Kuruksettra. Wlien Arjnna 
saw the image 'of VAmand, he asked ISaunaka why VAmana, was wor- 
shipped ?*and why (lid He assume the Dwarfish form? "Why Lord Vi§nu 
incarnated Himself tgs Y&r&ha and hojr this K§ettra became so dear to 
*Vfim8na ?” — 3-7. 

I&unaka replied : —I shall relate to yod in brief the glories of 
Vftmana and Var&ha.” In the past decade, when Indra was vanquished 
by ^ the Devas, then Aditi the mother of the Devas began to practise 
tigid austerities for sous again. — 8-9. 

For one thousand years she worshipped Lord Kri§pa by living on 
air alone, and on seeing Her children oppressed by the Devas she said to 
Herself that Her sons were born in vain and she then saluted Lord Vi^pu 
and became very distressed. — 10-12. 

Aditi said: — 0 Lord ! the Dispeller of all the troubles of the 
devotees on mere remembrance, the one who wears a garland of lotus 
flowers, the Prosperity of all beings, I salute Thee. — 13. 

O Lotus-eyed one ! Thou art the Prime Deva ; Thou art more 
auspicious than the most auspicious. From thy navel sprang the lotus ; 

0 Lord of Lak§mt, the One, armed with a quoit, I salute Thee. — 14. 

My salutations to the One from whose lotus, navel has sprung * 
Brahmil ; 0 Thou, the self-manifested ! the One armed with a conch, 
sword, etc.. Thy essence is goldlike ; salutations to Thee. — 15. 

0 Atmayogin ! 0 Avi^osa ! 0 Yogachintya ! 0 AtmajilAn ! 0 Vijnana- 
sampanna ! t) Nirgun ! my salutations to the One within whom the 
universe exists but whose majestic glory the universe does not realize. 

I salute that Being, the Deva Hari, who is the gross of the gross and the 
subtle of the subtle. Who hold conch in His hand. — 16. 

I salute Him whom ordinary eyes do not see in spite of their seeing 
the universe, who although enshrined in every heart is not accessible 
to the mind of the wise even, in whom exist the grain, milk, rivers, an(i 
in fact the whole universe, the sustainer of the whole universe, who is the 
very first Prajapati, the Lord of all the creation, the Lord of all things, the 
Lord of all the Devas, who is Krishna, the ordainer, who is adored both 
in the Pravritti M&rga and Nivritti MArga by one’s own karmas, who is 
the giver of heavenly joys and emancipation, who drives away all the ills 
by a mere devotional meditation of Him, by realizing whom the soul is 
liberated from the cycle of births and deaths, the Deva worshipped in the 
form of sacrifices,the One Who is said to be inherent in all the Devas, the 
One from whom the universe emanates, the One in whom the universe ulti- 
mately merges, in whose infinite glory the whole universe from BrahmA 
downwards is sustained, the Supreme Lord Who sustains the universe in the 
form of water, by devoting to whom with all heart and soul people cross over 
all ignorance. Who exercises His influence in the minds of all beings by 
dancing in forms of dismay, contentment, anger, etc., the Great Deva who 




CmPTEn GOXLIV. 


269 


like the Sun destri^s the demons, who destroys in the shaiw o£ wisdom 
and knowlege of Kapila, the darkness of ignorance, Who witnesses ^ith 
His eyes the Sun and the Moon, all the actions of the beings ,of .the 
universe, the Lord Vis^u Who is true to all my sayings. In Vispu, the. 
Lord of all, all the truths that I have expressed aie existing ; nothing 
false is there. I adore that Unborn, Undecay ing Hari.— 17-33. . * 

If what 1 have said in my prayer be true as I believe it to be, 
let all my wishes be fulhlled. — 34. . • 

l^auitaka said : — Lord Vii^u, unseen by all, instantly appeare<f 
before Aditi, and said ‘‘*0 Virtuous Aditi ! you shall certainly have your 
desires fulfilled ere long. Ask for a thing that you may wish without 
delay, you will prosper for my sight never goes fruitless.”— 35-37. 

Aditi replied : — “ Lord i if you are pleased at my devotion, I wish 
my son Indra to become the Lord of the three regions, which boon 
be pleased to grant. The demons have deprived him of his realm and 
share of sacrificial offerings. Let all that be restored to him through 
your favour. Lord ! I am not so much grieved at the defeat of my son 
in the hands of the Asoras as 1 am grieved at the loss of his realm and 
rights and that he has been driven out of Heaven. — 38-40. • 

Lord Vi§nu said : — “ 0 Devi ! I am quite pleased with your devotion ; 

I shall therefore be born of you through Ka4yapa when I shall kill all 
the demons.” — 41-42. 

Aditi replied : — “ Lord ! be pleased ; how can I bear you in my 
womb ? You in whom is established this universe ; you are the Lord of 
the creation.” — 43-44. 

Vi§ 9 u said : — “ What you say is true. Verily all the universe rests 
in Me. Even the Devas, Indra, etc., cannot bold Me ; I hold you along 
with the universe, the Devas and Katlyapa, etc. Do not be anxious ; you 
will be blessed. You will feel no trouble when 1 will enter within your 
womb. The favour of Mine that is so very difficult for others to get, you 
have got that. — 45-47. 

“ When I am in your womb I shall deprive by My glory those who 
dare to despise your progeny. Do not be sorry.” — 48. 

I^aunaka said : — Saying so Lord Vi^nu vanished from sight and 
Aditi bore Him in Her womb in due course. — 49. 

When Vi§nu entered Her womb the universe began as if to go down 
in that direction where Aditi walked on the mountains began to quiver, 
and the oceans receded and all the^demons began to decline. — 50-52. 

Here ends the two hundred and forty-fourffi chapter 
on the Vdmana incarnation. 


CHAPTER CCXLV. 

^unaka said : — Afterwards the demon king Bali on seeing the 
demons bereft of their fire and energy asked Prahldda, his own grand- 
father, thus : — “ 0 Sire !— 1. 



270 THE MAT87A PURAHAM. 


All the demons have become "suddenly void of thoiv gloi-y and look 
^Ikf ' coals charred - in fire. ' They therefore ' appear as if visited by 
providential calamity, liow is this ? Are these the symptoms of their 
approaching death ? — 2. 

. Have the enemies raised up a kritya for their d.'struction. Will 
they now fall on account of having thus lost their glory — 3. 

. "• Prahl&da after a long pause said to Bali : — “ All the mountains are 
being gbaked, this eSrth has become unstable, the dem )n8 have become 
'day by day, void of their lustre ; the planets do not follow the Sun. 1 
believe the lustre of the demons has been eclipsed by the glory of the 
X)evas. The Devi Lak^ini has become pleased with them. Lord of the 
demons ! great calamity is going to befall us ; do not consider this to be 
any ordinary sign of coming misfortune. — 4-7. 

^unaka said : — Saying so, Prabl&da concentrated his mind devout- 
fully and meditated on Hari, the Lord of the Devas. — 8. 

He brought to his mental vision where the Lord Visnu was then. — 9. 

He saw Hari, in the form of Vfimana (dwarf) in the womb of Aditi 
and saw within Him the seven regions, Yasus, Rudras, Aifvani Kumflras, 
Maruts, Sidhyadevas, Vi^vedevas, Adityas, Gandharvas, Uragas, Rilkiasas, 
Virochana (his own son), Bali, Jambha, Kujarablia, NarakAsura, VAna and 
other Asuras, his own soul, the seven oceans, sky, earth, air, water, fire, 
trees, Nandi, lower animals, deer, all the mankind, serpents, scorpions, 
BrabmA, ItfSna, the planets, stars, mountains, Daksa and other PrajApatis 
and became amazed ; he then came back to his senses and said. — 10-13. 

PrahlSda: — “ I now know the reason of these demons turning so 
lustreless ; heai- it from me.” — 14. 

“ The Deva of the Devas, the source of the univei-se, the Unborn, 
the eternal, the beginning of the universe, the most best, the greatest 
of the great, the authority of the authorities, the tluru of the Guru of the 
seven realms, the Lord of Lords, the one without beginning, middle and 
end, the Lord of the three regions, the Infinite, l.ord Visnu, has been 
born of Aditi by His one Anrufa. — 15-17. 

Tjord of the demons ! He whom e\ en Brahma, Rudra, Tndra, Silrya, 
CbandramA, and the sages like Marichi, etc., fail to know sufficiently ; 
that Lord VAsudeva has thus manifested Himself by llis one Amsfc- — 18. 

The very same Lord killed my father in His form of Nrisimha in the 
past days, it is He who has now come down, the knower of all yogas, the 
Great Time and the Refuge of all, — 19. 

He is eternal Brahma, the k no were of whom through their knowledge 
are liberated from their sins and merge into Him. Those who merge 
into Him are not reborn, I salute the same VAsudeva every day. — 20. 

As the surges emanate from the ocean, so do all the creation, and 
the infinite beings spring from Him. 1 salute the Lord Vasudeva in 
whom all the universe is ultimately absorbed. — 21. 

I every day salute Lord VAsudeva, the Supreme Being whose form, 
glory and desire are not properly known even to the Devas like BrahmA 
and Siva. — 22. 




GIIAPTEn COXLV. 271]. 

* ■■«■■■■■ ■ ■■■■■ v t I I ■» ■— ■ ■■■* II m W *iii m ■ ■* \ J. 

I salute the One who has given' eyes to all the beings 't® See,^the ^„;*' 
akin to feel the tongue to enjoy the taste, the ears to hear, the iigse-to ■; 
stiiell, the One who brought the land from P&taia on His one tusk in the!r 
form of Vfiraha for the good of mankind, in whom all the universe 
rej loses, the eternal Vi^nu, "Who cannot be felt through the organs ' 
likt) the nose, and the ears, etc., and can only be discerned by the 
mind.— 23-}34. , . ‘ 

I salute Him who has made the demons void of their lustre by 
coming into the womb of Aditi. He is endless, and is the hewer of the 
worldly tree (by ending there worldly phantasmagoria). — 25-26, 

He is the great cause of the universe. He has entered the womb 
of the mother of the Oevas by His one-sixteenth part and He has taken 
away all your splendour and fire.”— 27, 

Bali said ” Who is Haii who has caused us terror ? There are 
demons more valiant than this V&sudeva,— 28, 

Look at Viprachitti, l^ivi, Satpku Ayah, Saqaku, AyahatiirfI, Arfvadirft, 
Bha^makSri, Mah&tanu, Pratfipa, Praghasa, Saipbhu, Kukura, and several 
other demons are the most valiant. They can lift the world even. Vi^^u 
is not powerful like one of them even. — 29-31. 

^aunaka said : — Prahalada the most virtuous, hearing such words 
from his grandson, exclaimed : — “ Fie, fie unto you.” — 32. 

Bali ! when there is a king like you, void of discrimination, vicious, 

I think all the demons will no doubt come to their end. Who else than 
you, so vicious, can utter such words regarding that Unborn illustrious 
Leva of the Devas, the Lord Vasudeva. — 33-34. 

Which other sinner than yourself can blaspheme the most Supreme, 
the Eternal, Lord Vasudeva ? — 35. 

All the demons named by you, the Devas like BrahmS, etc., the 
Daityas, the world, the movable, and immoveable, the oceans, the penin- 
sulas, yourself, myself, the rivers, the trees, all the seven regions cannot 
become equal to the Lord Vi^nu. — 36. 

Who else than you, who are on the road to destruction, indiscrimi- 
nate, vicious and disrespectful of the sayings of the noble-minded old 
persons, can use such words of Ijord Vispu who is highly adored, all 
pervading, the Highest Self and on whose one foot this whole universe is 
establ ished. — 37-38. 

I am awfully ashamed of youf having been born in my house for 
yon profane the name of Lord Vi§uu. — 39. 

The devotion towards Vi^nu is the dispeller of all the mundane sins. 
Nothing is dearer to me than the devotion to Eri^na and every one 
knows about it ; but you wicked do not know it. Hari is dearer to me 
than my life. You have the audacity to show me disrespect by despising 
Hari.— 40-42. 

Bali ! Virochana is your father and I am his father and Nfir&yana 
who is my Guru is the Lord of the universe whom you despise. You shall 
therefore lose your kingdom ere long. — 43-44. 



272 


TEE MAT8YA PURlEAU. 


■ ■*' ' ' ■ .1 - - ' i i . iM 

; Loi^ Vi 99 ii, Janfiidana ia my Geva. He is my Guru. 1 have abam 
^ Soned you for having despised £Km and I pronounce my ourse on you 
“"in consequence (A it. Tteto Hari will be pleased with me — 45-46. 

i feel ah if you }iave wounded me more than if you had severed my 
head*^by.^tt8ing such words about the Lord. You shall now be soon bereft 
..of 'your r^m and I may see that. — 47. 

■»' I do not know of any one else excepting ^rikrisna who could be my 
protector in Ais ocean of the world. And as you have blamed Hari, the 
Lord of the three worlds, I curse you thus. Ijove your kingdom and be 
fallen. — 48, 

^aunaka said :~That demon king hearing such words of Prahl&da 
bowed down again and again and made repeated attempts to please 
him. — 49. 

Bali said ; — “ Be pleased. 1 uttered such wyrde through oelusion, 
ignorance and cenceit. — 50. 

Delusion clouded my intellect. I am indeed a sinner. You have 
done well in cursing me. — 51. 

I shall certainly not be sadder to lose my realm than I am by being 
disowned by you.— 52. 

It is not difficult to attain the realm of the three worlds nor is it 
difficult to acquire even more than that, but it is indeed very difficult to 
get a Guru (spiritual teacher) like your worthy self in this world ; there- 
fore be pleased upon me and shake oil your anger. I am tormented by 
your wrath.” — 53-54. 

Prabl&da said ; — I have no anger. It has sprung up by your 
ignorance and consequently 1 have cursed you. — 55. 

If my sense had not been over8hadowe<l by your ignorance, how 
could I, the knower of Hari, the all-pervader, have cursed you in whom 
Hari too resides ?— 56. 

Demon king ! the curse that I have pronounced on you is bound to 
take its effect, but do not be sorry for from tliis time forward your 
devotion in Lord Vignu will take place and lie will be your protector.— 
57-58. 

Under the influence of this curse you will always remember me and 
I shall always seek your welfare. — 59. 

Saying so Prahlftda held his peace and later on in due time Lord 
Vippu was born as Vamana. — GO. 

After the birth of the Lord, Aditi the mother of the Devas, was 
freed from all her troubles. — 61. 

Bracing and balmy breeze began to blow, the sky became quite 
clear of its dusty layer, and all the beings were fixed in the path of right- 
eousness ; — 62. 

And all the Devas, even the Demons, men, earth, heaven, sky became 
peaceful. — 63. 


4 " 


OBAPTBB GOXLV. 


273 


• On the birth of V&mans, BrahmA performed the prei^ribed natal . 
ceremonies, etc., and began to pray. — 64. * 

^Brahma said: — “Victory to you Eternal- Lord. 0, Omnipn^n^ 
free from birth, old age &c., endless, Achyuta, etc., O UnconqneraB^ . 
One ! 0 dtotroyer of all ! let victory attend on yon 1 Thou art, the suprenid . 
object, the Supreme Knowledge, Victory, the Infinite, the great beholder 
'of the universe, the Gum of the nniverse ; Thou art immeasurable, un> 
manifrated. Thou art the highest reality. Thou art knowable through 
knowledge ; Thou always roamest in self. Victory to Thee. — 66-67. 

Thou art the witness of the universe ! Thou art the Lord of the world 1 
Thou art the world Teacher ! Thou art endless. Victory to Thee. Thou 
art the p”Otector of the world. Thou art limit ; Thou art limitless, the 
beginning, the middle, the end, the ocean of supreme intellect, the 
incomparable, the giver of emancipation to Yogis, seated in the hearts of 
all, having thy ornament the virtues like Dama, &c ; the most subtle, the 
incomprehensible, tlie image of the universe ; victory to Thee. Corporeal, 
most subtle, the Cognizance of the senses, beyond the senses, fixed in the 
Yoga of the great illusion caused by the Self, the Imperishable, the up- 
lifter of the earth by the tip of a single tusk ; victory to Thee. — 68-71. 

Thou art all this universe ; Thou art resting on Thy MayA ; Thou 
sleepest on Sesa serpent O Aghora ! Victory to Thee. The opener of the 
hearts of the enemies, Nrisiipha, the Soul of the universe, Vamana, 
Kc^ava ; victory to Thee. — 72. 

The unconquerable, covered by the Maya of Thyself, Jandrdana, 
Prabhu ; victory to Thee. — 73. 

Hari, thou growest infinite by the evolution of the attributes of 
May& ; all the virtues are centered in Thee ; victory to Thee. — 74. 

Hari ! even ^iva, Indra, Devas, Seers, Sanaka and other Risis, 
ascetics cannot amply comprehend your nature. — 75. 

Deva ! the whole universe is covered by Thy illusion ; who can 
therefore penetrate this veil and realize you without Thy grace ? — 76. 

Deva ! the one who only thinks of Thee and loves Thee can know 
you. None else can realize you. — 77. 

Thou art sprung of Thyself for the creation of this universe, mayst 
Thou grow ever. Victory to Thee ! Nandirfvara, T^iina, Lord, Vamana 
grow prosperous and sustain the universe. — 78. 

I^aunaka said : — Vdmana thus prayed by Brahmd, smiled and 
gravely said : — 79. 

“ Brahipnna ! Kaifyapa had prayed to me along with you and the 
Devas like Indra, etc., and I knew your object. Later on when Aditi 
prayed, then I also said that Indra would be the Lord of the three realms 
free from any foes. — 80-81. 

Again I say this truly unto you all, that I will keep my promise by 
making Indra the Lord of the three realms." — 82. 

Then Brahmfi gave V&mana a deerskin, Vrihaspati invested Him 
with the sacred thread, Marichi the son of Brahmft gave him Dai^da (mace), 
10 



274 


THE} MAT8YA PVRANAM. 


the sage Vatil^tha gaye him Kaman()nla, Aqigira ga\o Him Ku^fa grass 
and the Vedhs, the sago Palaha gave Him Ak^ashtra, Pulnstya gave Him 
white raiments ; then all the Vedas with the most sacred Omkiira; the 
iSfinkhya and the Yoga S^stra and the SakhSs of the Vedas hegau to 
worship Him. — 83-85. 

.^11 the ^ilstras such as S^nrkhya Yoga, etc., were also attained by 
Vkmana. Afterwards Yaraana with his long hair, danda, kamanciala and 
umbrella isisited the sacrihce of the demon king Dali. The portion of 
the* land on which VSmana put His feet in walking sank down and a 
d^p hole appeared there and He made the whole world with all its moun- 
tains to oceans, and earth with island quiver though He walked slowly. — 
86-90. 

Here ends the two hundred and forty- fifth chapter on the 
incarnation of VAmana. 

CHAPTER CCXLVI. 

i^aunaka said : — The demon king Bali on seeing the land quaking 

with all its forests and mountains, bowed down to his preceptor l^ri i^ukrA- 
chSrya and said : — 1. 

“ Preceptor ! why does this land with all its oceans, forests and 
mountains shake and why does Agui not accept the offerings made in 
the name of the demons?” — 2. 

On being thus questioned by Bali, Sukra said after a deep 
meditation ; — “ Lord Hari has been born as VAmana in the house of 
Kaiyapa and He is coming to your sacritice. T])is earth is trembling 
on account of the thumping of His feet. Foi- the same reason the planets 
are quivering, the oceans are being agitated. This land cannot bear His 
weight. The Devas, the Gandbarvas, the demons, the Yak.sas, the 
Kinnaras united cannot liear the weight of Visnu. He is holding 
this earth ; therefore this earth is sustaining fire, tvater, skj’, air, all the 
Manus, etc. He is the sustainer and the sustained ; Ho is now tormenting 
this earth; it is the thick MdyS of Srikrisna that is the cause of this 
world.— 3-8. 

The earth is so much agitated on account of its becoming the 
holder instead of remaining the held. The sacrificial fire refuses to accept 
the offerings owing to the Lord being in such a close proxmity.” — 9. 

Bali said : — “ I am indeed blessed for Lord Vi§hu the lord of sacrifices 
is coming to grace my sacrifice with His presence, who can be really 
more blessed than myself. The Lord whom the Yogis wish to acquire 
through their asceticism will come to my sacrifice, which other man than 
myself will have the good luck of attaining the Lord whom the Hotas 
give a share in the sacrificial offerings and whose praises are sung by the 
UdgAtas. Preceptor ! be pleased to advise me as to what would be meet 
for me when Sri Kripna the Lord of all comes here.” — 10-13. 

^ri SukrAchArya said Demon ! on the authority of the Vedas 
only the Devas are entitled to the sacrificial offerings, but you have given 
that privilege only to the demons. — 14. 



CHAPTER GOXtVL 275 


Lord Vi^nu, pervades the universe and sustains it through Satva and 
the very same Lord annihilates the creation in His manifestation of l^iva. 
Now the Lord Vi$nu is engaged in sustaining the creation, so you should 
be on your guard. Demon king! if Visnu finds a place, in yoip: 
sacrifice, He will grow stronger. So you should not commit yourself to 
Him. You should put Him oil.— :15-17. 

You should simply say that you are not’iu a position to give Hint 
anything for Lord Kri^na is coming here to fulfil the object of the 
Devas.” — 18. 

Bali said : — “ Deva ! I never refuse the. prayers of anyone,' how can 
I possibly do so in case of the Lord Visnu who is the dispeller of all 
ills?— 19. 

Lord Vi^pu is worshipped by means of various ordinances, whdt 
can be more to me than the asking of the Lord for something ?— 20. 

'VYhat can be the greater fruit of an asceticism to me than the asking 
of the Lord for something from me ! It indeed means my uncommon good 
fortune that the Lord for whose sake various asceticisms, gifts, sacrifices, 
etc., are performed will accept my gift in person ? Oh ! certainly I did 
lots of good work in my previous births, I performed severe asceticism, 
and I did many sacrifices ; therefore Hari will take gifts from my hand 
in my sacrifice. — 21-24. 

If 1 refuse to comply with the requst of the Lord I shall indeed 
render my life fruitless. — 23. 

If Lord Visnu the Lord of sacrifices asks me to give him my head 
even, I shall not hesitate to comply with His request. — 24. 

How would it be possible for me to say ‘ No ’ to the Lord when 
I do not do so with any other person ? It is not my habit to tell “ No 
when anybody asks anything from me. — 25. 

It is said to be good even if one invites adversity on him through 
charity. The charity in the performance of which hitch arises is said 
to be void of good fortune. —20. 

There are in my kingdom no poor, unhappy suffering, agitated, angry 
people nor those void of ornaments, garland, etc. All my people are 
contented, strong, and happy. I am happy in every way. Through your 
favour I have got such an opportunity of giving a gift to such an worthy 
personage ! If I sow the seed of my gift in the receptacle of the Lord 
Visnu, what will remain for me tonchleve ? If the Devas prosper by virtue 
of my gift, even then I shall have tenfold benefit. This is indeed an 
opportunity to win eternal fame. All the objects are attained by the 
sight of Lord Visnu, what can be greater bliss to me than the acquirement 
of the Lord’s grace ? — 27*32. 

Deva 1 if the Lord comes to me in fury for my having stopped the 
sacrificial offerings of the Devas and even if He kills me in His wrath, 
that too would be best for me as my death at the hands of Lord Vi^^u 
would lead me to Emancipation. — 33. 

It is indeed exceedingly kind of Lord Visnu who has everything- 
at His command to come and ask me for something. — 34. 



27B 


THE MATSVA PVRANAM. 


Ho\ 7 would Lord Yif^u who creates and sustains the uniyerse and 
annihilates it at His pleasure, deyise means to kill me ?•— 35. 

Noble Preceptor ! keeping tdl this in yiew, you should not stand 
in the waylof ipy charity Sr! Qovinda, the Lord of the universe, and you 
should alro present yourself before Efim when He comes.” — 36. 

^unaka said : — As the discourse between the preceptor and the 
pupil was going on, Lord Vi?ou the great incomprehensible, appeared 
there in His (dwarfish) V&mana form. — 37. 

At His sight all the demons present at the sacrifice lost their lustre 
and all the sages present there began to pray the Lord and mutter Japam 
and the demon .king Bali also thought himself blessed. — 38-39. 

The demons did not speak anything to any one and all present 
there adored the Lord mentally with great devotion. — 40. 

Lord V&mana. the witness of all, the Lord of the Deva of the Devas 
seeing the demon king Bali so meek and mild and looking at the seers 
assembled there ; began to praise sacrificial Agni, Yajamana, Ritvijas, 
sacrificial articles and the courtiers engaged in the performance of 
sacrifices. — 41-42. 

After a few moments all assembled there became highly pleased 
with V&mana and Bali the demon king also shared the feelings of all 
present, said ; — “ Sfidhu ! Sfidhu!” and got up to offer Argha to the Lord, 
and said : — 43-44. k 

” Lord Vamana ! you look so dear and charming. 1 shall bo pleased 
to give jmu heaps of gold, gems, elephants, horses, fairest women, clothes, 
ornaments, villages, the land of the seven oceans. Ask for anything 
out of these that you may like best. I will give that to you.” — 45-40. 

When Bali uttered such words with so much feeling. Lord V/i.aiana 
smiled aud gravely said ; — “ King ! give Me simply laud measured by My 
three feet. Give gems, gold, villages, etc., to those who ask for them.” 
—47-48. 

Bali said : — “Why do you ask for three feet of land only? What 
purpose of yours will be served by that ? You are most welcome to take 
hundred or thousand feet of land.” — 49. 

Vamana said : — “ I shall be amply satisfied with this much land. 
I only want this much. The rest of your gifts you may confer on other 
people who ask for them”.— 50. 

Hearing those words of Vamana, the demon king Bali gave three 
feet of land to the Lord. — 51. 

After the Lord had received the promise that Bali would make the 
required gift. He instantly began to grow, who is composed of all the 
Devas. — 52. 

He had the Sun and the Moon for His eyes, the heaven was His 
forehead, the earth became His feet, the demons were the fingers of His 
feet, the Guliyakas the fingers of His hand, the Vidvedevas in His knees, 
SAdhya Devas in His ankles, the Yak^as in His fingernails, the nymphs 
in His streaks, nil the solar rays in His hairs of the head, stars in His eyes 




OBAPTER OCXLVl. 


277 


and hairs, the Rifris in His jsmall hair over the bod^. Similarly Ma ams 
were the intermediate directions, tors were the directions in which wm 
enshrined Arfyant KumArs, the wind tms located in &e nose : the Mdhn . 
in His cheerfulness, Dharma in His mind. Truth io Hia speech, the Qod-. 
dess Sarasvatt in His tongue, the Divine mother Aditi in his neck, the 
knowledge in His wrists, Maitra on top of the skull, the door to^ Heaven ; . 
Tva9(d and PusS in His eye-brows, Agni was the mouth, Praj&pati the 
testicles, Para-Brahma the heart, the sage Kadyapa His manliness, Vasus 
the back, Marudgaua in all the jointe^the SQktes and the Richas the teeth, 
planets and stars in His lustre. Lord Siva was in His chest, the ocean was 
the forbearance, the valiant Gandharvas were the stomach, the Goddess 
Lak§mt, Intellect (Medha), Steadiness (Dhriti;, Lustre, (K&nti), and all 
Knowledge (VidyS) were in the waist. Then supernatural strength and 
energy came to that Being and the Munis saw that in His belly, breasts 
were the Vedas ; in His belly, the great sacrifices and the loins were the 
eyes. The demons also saw that Form composed of the Devas and 
they were also blessed. They all were attracted to Him like the insects 
in the fire of His glory and Lord V&mana assuming the huge form rubbed 
the sole of His feet, as if He was bringing the destruction of the race of 
the demons. — 53-65. 

Thus, to protect the Devas, He spread His vast Form and He mea- 
sured the earth in the twinkling of an eye. Then the Sun and the Moon 
came in a line with His breast, and when He brought out his third foot, 
they fell in a line with His thighs ; when He started measuring the still 
more higher regions. They reached His knees. Thus the mighty Divine 
form of Visnu spread all over and conquered all the three realms and 
killed the great Asuras for the benefit of the Devas. He triumphed over 
all the demons and bestowed the three realms on Indra, and gave the 
lower region of Sutala to Bali to live in and said “ King Bali ! since you 
have given Me a gift which I have accepted therefore you will live a good 
long life for a Kalpa. After Vaivasvata Manu is succeeded by Sfivarni 
Manu, you will become Indra. — 66-72. 

Now as I have given the three realms to Indra, I shall keep him 
here for a period till the four Yugas come and go 11 times. Bali in 
ancient times you had worshipped me most devoutfully, so I will always 
destroy your enemies. You go and live in Patala at My behest. You go and 
enshrine yourself in the region abounding in excellent gardens, palaces, 
luxuriant flowers, lakes, rivers, beatified by the dancing of dancing girls, 
where you will have various kinds of eatables at your command. — 73-79. 

You will have all these enjoyments at your pleasures for a Kalpa as 
ordained by Me. You will prosper as long as you do not molest the 
Devas and the BrahmapSs and the moment you do so, you will be un- 
doubtedly entangled in the noose of Vanina, knowing which you should 
never go against the Devas and the Br&hmanas.” — 80-81. 

Hearing such words of the Lord, king Bali saluted the^ Lord and 
most cheerfully said : — “ Lord ! be pleased to tell me how I will be able 
to get all the things of enjoyments in P&t&Ia”.- 82-83. 



878 THE MATSY A PdilAEmi, 


, 

' 3d Bha^Yfina said :>-**Bali ! yoa shall attain lull snoh good things 
through misguided charities, through tl^ Siadna ceremonies void'of BiAh- 
maiias, obl^ons on the Fire withoot any Biith, siorifices without any fees, 
works without following any rule, tiirottgh studies without any vow-~« 
performed by various per»}n8. *—(84-35. 

Sauuaka : — Having thus conferred the kingdom of the three realms 
on Indra and that of Patala bn Bali, the Lord vanished then and there. — 
86 . 

Afterwards Indra also began to sustain the three realnis under his 
sway and similai-ly king Bali enthroned in PSt4la began to enjoy the best 
of the luxuries and comforts. — 87. 

Thus the Lord had tied the demon king Bali for the benefit of the 
'Devas, in the P&tiila who is there unto this day. OArjunn. ! your 
kith and kin, Lord 3ri Kri^na Who is enshrined at DvArikd, is also there 
with the object of vanquishing the demons. He will be your charioteer. 
O Arjuna ! as you wanted to hear the history of Lord V&mana, I have 
narrated to you all about Him. 

Arjuna said : — O Lord! I have heard from you all about the glory 
of Visuu. Now permit me to go to GangftdvarA. SAta said: — Thus 
saying Arjuna wentkway ; and Saimaka went to the forest of NSimi^aranya. 
One who reads or listens to this piece of glory of Lord Vigim will be 
liberated from all sins.”— 88-02. ’ ^ 

One who thinks of the discourse of Bali and Prahlada, or that of 
Bali and Sri 3ukrachArya, or tiie dialogue of Bali and Lord Vi^nu ; will 
be freed from all the doubts arising in his minds and will never belaid up 
with any dangerous illness nor will he even be deluded. — 1)3-94. 

A king who has lost his realm regains it by hearing this narration 
and one who is separated from his dear and near ones get them back. — 95. 

Here ends the two hundred nnd fifty-sixth Chapter on the 
incarnation of Vdmana. 


CHAPTER CCXLVII. 

Arjuna said : — " In the Puranas are narrated the glorious deeds of 
the Omnipotent Lord Vi§nu but I do not know the doings, virtue, intelli- 
gence, of His VSr&ha manifestation. Which form did the Lord assume 
in His VarAha manifestation ? What Deva was He ? What did he do in 
that manifestation ? Pray be pleased to tell me all about Him in detail, 
especially before this assemblage of Brdhmanas.” — 1-4. 

3auna said : — ” Arjuna ! I shall relate to you all about the 
VArkha manifestation of the wonderful Krishna. Hear the most interesting 
history of Varkha as sung in the Vedas. Hear attentively how He raised 
the earth from the oceans, assuming the form of a boar, and lifting the 
earth on His tusks. It is most sacred and you should listen to it attent- 
ively. It should never be related before an athiest but before one who 
believes in the Vedas, the Purk^as, the Skipkhya, the Yoga etc. — 5-9. 



GRAhfEB OQXLVIL 


m 


’VMve^evfid, SA3hyas,JEliidrM, Adityas, Arfvftst-KiimdrMr, 

Sapt&rifig, other seers born out o'! mind and thought, .Yasfis, Maradtesv** 
Gandharvas,* Ya^as, RSk^Sas, demons, evil spirits, serpedts, aji iii« 
dividual souls, BrShmapas, KfiatHyas, Yaidyas, Shdras, Mlechcbhas, lower 
animals, birds, other moveables, and bnmoveables ; all go toNirvftna after 
thousand yogas' pass and a day of Brahmd elapses, when Yri^&kapi 
manifests Himself like. Fire and consumes the three worlds by His three- 
fold flashes. Then all the things and persona above mentioned become 
burnt and discoloured by the rays coming put of that Fire. At that moment 
the Upaniaadas, Vedas, Purkpas, ItibSsas, entire knowledge,, Dbarmas, 
the 33 crores of Devaa with Brahmk merge into N&rSyana the Supreme 
Being having mouths on . all sides that high-souled. Supremely imperish- 
able soul, the Lord Harasa. This is known as their death as the Sun rises 
and sets continually ; so the creation and re-absorption again and again,* 
of all these worlds which I am relating to you. When the thousadd 
yugas forming a kalpa expire, all the karmas of all the Jivas get finished. 
Then the universe sleeps within the Supreme^ Brahma. In other words 
Lords Vignu after annihilating the Devas, demons, men and all the 
regions remains all by Himself. He then begins to create the universe 
in the beginning of the next kalpa and destroys everything at the end jof 
it. He is AvikSil, (eternal) Dhruva and the wholeKuniverse belongs to 
Him — 10-23. 

* 

When the Sun loses his lustre, the Moon and the planets vanish, when 
wind emits fire and smoke, when the sacrifices and Vasat become weak and 
powerless, when the roads become ^oid of birds and other beings, when 
the Raudra become void of their honour, when all the quarters become 
covered with darkness, and when all the regions or Lokas disappear flue 
to the want of any work, then there being no enmity everything 
assumes a peaceful aspect and this universe rests in Ndr&yana. When He 
goes to sleep He looks beautiful with His red eyes, yellow garments and 
cloud-like colour, and with his thousands of black rays resembling 
matted hairs. A garland of one thousand lotuses hangs on his breast ; He 
becomes anointed with red-sandal paste ; Lakgmi Devi rests on Him. Then 
He goes to wonderful yogic sleep, that peaceful Soul, bringing good to 
all the worlds, till the completion of a thousand yogas. Then discarding 
His yogic contemplation He gets up, becoming the Lord himself. He 
thinks to create the world and through the perseverance of Brahmi, He 
creates the universe with the Devas, men, insects, etc. The very same 
NSiAya^a is the Creator, Abstainex from business, Annihilator and PrajA- 
pati. Verily NArfiyana is the supreme truth, final beatitude, the Highest 
region, the highest sacrifice, the self-manifested ; He is Sarva, the All ; 
worthy of being known by the Devas, etc. He is the sacrifice and PrajA- 
pati. — 24-37. 

What is worthy of being comprehended by the Supreme ^rd of 
the universe, cannot be known by anyone. Prajapati along with the 
Devas and Ripis contemplate and do not get the end of the very same 
supreme spirit. His highest form cannot be seen by the Devas. BrahmA 
and the Devas only adore that form of His which He manifests Himself and 
which the Devaa see. — 38-40, 


280 


TRE MATSYA WRAVAU. 


And if he does not like to show His form, His form then cannot he 
seen by any. He is the strength inherent in the Devas, Agni, Vdyu and 
all the beings of the village. — 11. 

He is the repository of fire, asceticism and immortality, the ruler of 
the Dharmas of the four Alramas, the enjoyer of the sacrificial fruits of 
Chfiturhotrs, the grantor of salvation up to the four oceans and the 
originator and mover of the four yugM. He withdraws Himself the 
whole universe and places it within His comb for one thousand years. 
He then brings forth the great egg of the universe. Tliat Lord then 
ci^ted the whole universe with all the Devas, demons, lower animals, 
birds,^ serpents, Siddhos, Chftrapas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, nymphs, 
mankind, mountains,^ trees, medicinal herbs and Guhyakas ; by means of 
His glory. At that time the Vedas did not exist. — 42-44 

Rere ettds the two hundred and forty-seventh chapter on Vdrdha 

incarnation. 


CHAPTER CCXLVIII. 

Saunaka said ; — In olden days, this world was is in the form of a 
golden egg ; and this egg was in the form of Prajapati. This is the 
Vedic iSruti. — 1. 

This very egg was ripped open on its upper side by Ix)rd Vi§pu al 
the end of a thousand years ; O king ! The Creator then pierced the lower 
end of the egg, for the creation of Lokas. — 2-3. 

Again it was divided by Vis^u, the Creator and the great Divider, 
into eight parts. The hole in the upper half of it became the sky, and that 
in the lower half formed the Patala. K&tnchanagiri was formed by the 
water that came out first of the egg created by Yisnu for the formation of 
the Lokas. — 4-5. 

Then thousands of mountains sprang up, and these extended to 
many thousands of yojanas wide ; the earth was overweighod with 
them and, becoming unable to bear the load, the earth became very much 
tormented. She became viod of the golden tejas (energy) of the all- 
powerful Divine Nar&yana, and being oppressed with the weight of the 
above energy became unable to bear the weight and sank down. Seeing 
the earth sinking down, Vienu wanted to raise Her for Her welfare, and 
He said : — “ This Universe, unable to bear my glory, is going down like a 
cord sinking in a swanp.” — G-11. 

Hearing those words of the Lord, the Universe began to pray to 
Lord Vi^nu : “ I salute you, 0, the most valiant one, in all the three realms, 
the most illustrious MahAvarftha, the most powerful of all the Devas, the one 
armed with sword, quoit, club, &c. This world has come out of you, and 
the Puskara land is born of you. Brahmft, the Creator of the Universe, 
has been born out of your body and has acquired sempiternity amongst 
the beings. — 12-13. 

Tlirougb your glory alone. Lord Indra enjoys the pleasures of heaven, 
0, Lord Jauftrdana ! the demon king Bali, has been conquered by your 



CHAPTEB COXLVIIL 


281 


wrath. You aro the Sustainer, the Creator and the Annihilator. The 
whole creation rests in you. The Manus, the DhaimatAja, Agni, VAyUf 
Clouds, Var^fiilramadharinaB, oceans, trees, rivers, Dharma, KAma, sacri- 
fices, with rituals, are all the component parts of your supreme person.— • 
14-16. 

You are knowledge and that which is to be realised through knowledge. 
You are all these beings, Modesty, Lakshmt, fame, stability, forgiveness, 
Purfipas, Vedas, VedArpgas. Saipkhya, birth and death, immoveable objects, 
the three periods ; these all are the products of your glory. — 17-18. 

You are the giver of higher fruits to the Devas, you are the winner 
of the hearts of heavenly ladies, you are the mind of all, yon captivate, 
you are the great, forest-like, wide expanse of ether (mahAkAsa), the minds 
of all ; of which the rain clouds are the shoulders ; satya loka is the 
branches ; the oceans are the juice extracted ; the nether regions are die 
basins for water dug round the tree. Airavata is the foot of the tree, all 
the beings are the birds, and you are the great tree, consisting of all the 
Lokas, with goodness, gentleness and the other best qualities forming 
the sweet scent ; you are the great ocean in the form of the three Lokas ; 
the twelve Adityas are the islands thereof ; the eleven Rudras are the 
the foundations and towns ; the eight Vasusare the mountains, the Siddbae' 
and the Sadhyas are the billows ; the birds are the winds ; the Daityas 
are the crocodiles ; the Ui'agas and Raksasas the fishes ; Brahmfi is 
the great patience ; the heavenly ladies are the gems ; Buddbi Lak^mi, 
modesty and fame, are the rivers. Time is the great knot ; sacrifices are 
the moments thereof. 0 NArfiyana ! you are mighty by your yoga ; you 
are the great time and become delighted by the clear waters of your 
own. — 19-26. 

The three regions created by you are annihilated again by your 
fury. All the yogis, impelled by you, again merge into you. You are 
the fire that is ablaze at the end of each yoga, you are the time, the clouds, 
and you manifest yourself in all the yogas to bring deliverance to the 
universe. — 27-28. 

You assume white appearance during ’ Satnyuga, like cbampaka 
during Treita and red in DwApara, and black in Kaliyuga ; and you get 
discoloured and pale in the evening of the yngas, and the Dharmas also get 
pale. You are shining, you are walking, giving heat, protecting, trying, 
becoming angry, getting fame, illumining, giving rains, laughing, 
remaining quiet, waking, and annihilating all the beings at the end of a 
yuga. — 29-32. 

You mark the time of progress, cessation, unconsciousness, and the 
end of the age ; you annihilate everything. You are Se^a, for you alone 
are left, when all else is destroyed by the fire that burns at the end of the 
age. You do not fall even when BrahmA, Indra, Varupa and other Devas 
fall ; therefore, you are known as Achyuta.— 32-.34. 

Note =>The rest. 

You control BrahmA, Indra, Yama, Rudra, Varuna, and other Devas, 
and ^ then attract them to you ; and that is why you are known as 
Hari. You are known as SauAtana, for you give body, fame and pros- 
it 



m THE matsyapubanau;' 


perity, etc., to all the beings ; yon are Ananta, for the De^; Brahma, etc., 
and sages do not find your end. — 35-38. , 

You do not wane or perish, even in course ■ of crores of Kalpas ; 
consequently, you are called Akshaya Vi^nu ; you are Vi§jm, for you per- 
vade the universe, moveable and immoveable. You are omnipresent in 
the three Iiokas iu the immoveable objects ; and the Yakshas, Gandharvas, 
serpents and the Universe rest in you ; hence Brahm& calls you Vi^nu. The 
philosophers call the waters NAra, and you first reposed yourself in the 
Waters; therefore, you are called NarAyaua. You revive at the end of every 

? !»ga the lost Vedas ; that is why you are known by the Risis as Govinda. 

ou are the master of the senses (l lrisis) ; therefore, you are known as Hriifi 
Ke§a. — 39-44. 

You are VAsudeva, for at the end of the ages BrahmA and other Devas 
rest in you, as well as on account of yiuir Omnipresence in all the 
beings. You absorb everything by drawing them unto you at the end of each 
Kalpa, that is why you are named Sainkarsana You are Pradyutnna, 
for the Devas, the demons are sustained in their respective orders and 
taught duties by you. You are Aniruddha, for there is none other in the 
creation that can act as a brake on all the beings. You bear the whole 
* universe, you annihilate it ; 1 only hold what is held by j'our glory. 1 can 
never hold anything which you di) not hold yourself. — 45-51. 

NArAyana ! You give deliverance to the world at the end of each 
age, when it is opi^ressed heavily.— 5-. » 

Supremo One ! come to iny rescue. 1 have gone down on account of 
my not being able to coi)e with your glory. 1 am at your mercy. — 53. 

I am greatly oppressed by the demons and RAkshasas ; and 0, SanA- 
tana ! I am at your mercy since eternity. — 54. 

Deva ! You arc the Bull ; and 1 had all fears till I do not seek men- 
tally your support from my heart, and now wliat is the fear when I 
have placed myself under your shelter. Lord of the Devas ! when the 
Devas, like ludra, etc , are not in a position to sing your praises adequately 
how can I do so ? ” 'I'liere is no other equal to you. You alone are your 
equal, and you know only who is your equal.— 55-56. 

^uunaka said Hearing such a prayer of the Earth, Lord Vi^nu was 
pleased to meet its wishes, and said : — “ Devi ! One who repeats the 
prayer just uttered by you will never he overtaken by any misfortune. 
He will also attain the pure loka of Vaisnavas. Its repetition will give the 
benefit that one attains by reading tlic Vedas. — 57-60. 

Dharani ! Kalyani ! do not fear. Be in peace I shall situate you 
nicely.” — 61. 

Afterwards Lords Vi§nu thought of all Ilis Divine manifestations as 
to which would be most apprf)priate to enable Him to relieve the sufferings 
of the Earth at tliat moment — 62-63. 

Then the Lord manifested Hijnself as a boar that He might enjoy 
the playing in waters. That miglity Ix)rd, incomprehensible by mind and 
speech of all the beings, that Brahma extended Himself to hundred 
yojanas in length and twice that in height. Shining and thundering like 



OBAPTBB OOXXjI^: 


283 . 


the blue clovitli, looking, like a ihoiintain, with white sharp tusks^ full o£ 
lustre like the sun, lightning and fire, with a high waist; with such 
a formidable * form, adorable by' all, He sank down into the RawStaljr ta 
lift the world. The Lord, in that mighty manifestation, having the VedM 
for His fifeet, the sacrifjcial post for His tusks, the sacrificidl pit, for his 
mouth, the fi|-o for His .tongue, the Kuifa grass for His hair, Brahmfi for 
His head, night and day for His eyes, Vedarpgas for jHis ears, sacrificial 
clarified butter for His nose, the sacrificial ladel for his snout, the chant of 
the Sdmavedd for His breast, truth, virtue and deeds for His courage 
and effort, purificatory rights for His claws, sacrificial beings for His knees, 
all the sacrificial emblems as the seed, medicines, for the results; the 
sacrificial altar for His inner self, sacrifices for^His bones,, soma for 
His blood, the Vedas for His shoulders, Sakalya for His aroma, conjoint 
with the divisions of havya and kavya, the sacrificial fees for His heart, 
the Vedas as His passages, Upavarmas for His lips, Pravargyas for his 
ornaments, with mysterious Upanisadas for His seat, the protector of Hi» 
shadow like better-half, majestic like the mountain ; He raised up the earth 
on His tusk from the Uasatala, and located it in its proper place. In other 
words. He let the Earth drop that was sticking to His tusk, though holding 
Her mentally, after which She felt blessed and made Her obeisance to the 
Lord. Thus Var4ha came to the rescue of the Earth for the welfare of all^ 
and then wished to make partitions on Her. — 64-78. 

The Lord Vrisakapi, of unequalled valour and prowess, has thus 
brought deliverance to the Earth in the most excellent Boar-form, by means 
of His single tusk. — 79. 

Here ends the two hundred and f ortij-cighth chapter of the Matsga Puranam 

on the incarnation of Vardha, 


CIIAPTEU CCXLIX. 

The Risis asked : — We do not feel amply satisfied by listening to tfie- 
glory of N irayana tliat you have been pleased to relate to us. We feel 
keen to hlear more and more about it. Pray toll us how the Devas became 
immorta. VVliat kanuas they til l, what tapasya they practised, or whose 
favor they gained, or whose energy they imbibed, that they obtained 
immortality in ancient days. — 1-2. 

SQta said : — They became immortal when NarAyana and l^iva helped 
the Devas in ancient days. — 3. 

In days gone by, when war ensued between the Devas and the' 
Asnras, hundreds of Devas used to be killed ; but amongst the Daityas,^ 
when they were killed, they were restored to their lives by SukrAcliarya^ 
the son of Bliriga, with the help of Sanjivani mantra Lord Siva was 
pleased with BliArgava and gave him this wonderful Mrita Sanjivant 
mantra. Knowing that SukrAcbarya was acquainted with the above MAlies- 
varl Vidya, direct from the mouth of Lord l^iva, tlie Daityas began to fight 
with the Devas, when Siikra restored to life the Daityas that were killed. 
Sukra obtained from Sankara that knowledge, which all the worlds, the 
Devas, liAksasas, NAgas, Risis, Brabmd, Chandra and Vi^nu could not get ; 



THE diATSTA PURlEAM. 


2H 

so Sukra became very pleased. Thus^ when the great war ensued again 
between the Devas ana the DSnavas, the Danavas ” army, when killed, 
were early oaUed to their lives. Then Tndra and Vrlhaspati, and the 
other Pevas became powerless and greatly depressed. It disn^ayed the 
Devas, seeing which, Brahma addressed them thus on the summit of the 
Mount Meru.— 4-12. 

“ Devas ! You should follow My advice and make peace with the 
distracted demons ; then you should make an effort to churn the ocean of 
milk for nectar. You should win the sympathies of Ijord Varuna, and then 
appeal to the mighty Visnu for help. You should in churning the ocean 
employ the Mount Meru as churning-stick, the SSaa serpent as the string 
of the churning-stick. For the time being you should appease Bali, the 
king of the demons, so that he may be the supervisor in this work and 
pray to Kffrma, the tortoise- incarnation of the eternal Visnu, in the 
PSt&la, as the base, and the Mount Mandara also for help. -13-16. 

Hearing those words of Brahm&, all the Dov.as went to Pfitala and 
said to the demon king Bali : — “ Bali ! Do not be hostile to us now, we are 
your slaves. Endeavours should be made to churn the milk-ocean for 

nectar, for which purpose SSsa has to be utilised as the string of the 
chuming-stick. Demon-king ! we will undoubtedly become immortal by 
the nectar obtained through your grace.” Bali said : — “ Devas ! I shall 
do what you say. I can alone churn the milky ocean. I shall certainly 
acquire nectar to help you to become immortal, because one who does not 
oblige his enemies that come from fur, is ruined in this life as well as in 
the next. I shall therefore give you my full support.” — 17-22. 

Saying so, that demon-king Bali, accompanied the Devas, and they 
all prayed to Mandar&chala as follows 23. 

“ Mandar&chala ! the king of the mountains, be pleased to help us in 
churning the milk-ocean for nectar. Befriend us, for this is a groat work 
for the Devas and the demons.” — 24. 

In accepting their prayer, the lord of the mountains said : ” I shall be 
the churning-stick, and let some one who may be strong enough to volunteer 
himself to act as a receptacle, on which I can revolve, then I will be able 
to churn the ocean ; also the Sesa serpent to coil round the stick. 
Afterwards the most valiant turtle and Sesa, endowed with J of Vi^nu’s 
power, went to support the Earth, and haughtily the Turtle said : — 
“ When I can easily hold all the three regions on n>y back, how can I feel 
the weight of this Mandara mountain ? ” — 25-28. 

^6sa said “ I can coil round the three regions, what difficulty can 
therefore, be in my coiling round this Mandara mountain? ” — 29. 

Afterwards all the Devas and the demons hurled Mandar^hala into 
the milk-ocean, after which ^6fa coiled round it, and kOrma (turtle) 
placed Himself underneath it as the support of the mountains. When 
the demons and the Devas could not manage to turn the ffoating MandarS- 
chala, all the Devas with Bali went to the abode of the Lord Vifpn, in 
Vaikuntha, that was shedding its lustre like a white lotus, where the 
mighty Lord was lying absorbed in deep meditation, wearing yellow 




OHAPTSn OGXLII. 


m 


olothee, adorned with armlete, Ac., ahatnpooed by the Gk>ddeas Lakehmf/^ 
fanned by the wings of Garuda and prayed for by th% Siddhas and OhSnnaa 
and the Vedas incarnate, reclining on His left hand, placed under Hia 
head. ^ the Devas and the demons prayed to the Lord : — 30-36. 

By surrounding Him with folded hands, they all saluted Him, and 
said : Lord of the three regions, overpowering by your lustre more than 

the myriads of the suns, the enemy of Kaitabha, the Great Cause of .the uni- 
verse, the Protector of the creation, we all salute you. — 37-38. 

0, Annihilator of all, invincible even by the trident, enemy of and as 
it were a conflagration of the demons, we salute you. — 39. 

From your navel-like lake, the lotus-wombed great mountain has 
sprung up ; you are the creator of Brahmft ; we salute you. 0, one who 
measured the universe with three strides, the Creator of the three regions, 
the destroyer of the formidable demons, the originator of the highest 
attributes, shining like a great blaze, the Creator of the universe out of 
the lotus stick springing up in your navel, the most dear one to all, we 
salute you. — 40-41. 

Lord of all the realms, the cause of deeds and all causes, the destroyer 
of the enemies of the Devas, Participator in the great war, we salute you. 
The one who draws in the honeyed aroma of the Goddess Lakshmi’s lotus- 
like face, the receptacle of fame, we salute you. Pray, do churn the ocean 
by holding the mountain by one of your valiant arms to make us immor- 
tal. Hearing this prayer. Lord Visnu shook off His yogic repoee, and 
said 42-45. 

“ Devas and others ! Hope you had no inconvenience in the way ; 
Pray tell me the object of your having come here.” — 46. 

The Devas said “ Deva ! In order to obtain nectar to make 
Ourselves immortal, we all are churning this ocean, but without your 
assistance we are helpless. We will be successful, if you lead us.” Hear- 
ing those words, Lord Vi§nu followed the Devas to that spot where 
Maudara was floating. The great mountain was then encircled by the 
SSpa and the Devas and the Asuras took hold of the string. The Devas 
took hold of the tail end of the and the demons, R4hn and others. 
took the head ends. Lord Vi§nu caught Wd of the summit of Meru with His 

left hand and Bali held the thousand heads of l^d^a with His left hand, and 
with his right hand he caught hold of his body ; S6§a firmly coiled 
round the Mandar&chala, after which the Devas and the demons started 
to churn the ocean for a hundred Divine years. — 47-54. 

When all the Devas and the demons were overcome with fatigue 
in churning the ocean, Indra caused the rains and cool wind to 
refresh them. But, in spite of all that, when the Lord Brahm& found 
them giving way to fatigue. He shouted out : “ Go on churning. Those 
who persevere are undoubtedly blessed with the highest prosperity.” 
-55-57. 

The Devas, thus encouraged, applied themselves heart and. soul to 
the task of churning the ocean, when the motion of the Mandar&chala 
1,000 yojanas high, caused herds of elephants, wild boar, Sarabha, other 



288 


THE MATSYA PVnAHAJl. 


animals residing on that mouiitaiD. trees benan to fall down into the 
ocean.-58-59. ^ / 

Afterwards the juice of the fruits; flowers, the sap of the medicinal 
herbs, falling into the ocean, was churned along with it, wh^ all the 
contents of the ocean assumed a curdy appearance.— 60,. 

Innumerable beings were powdered in that violent churning, the 
fat and marrow of whom, coming in contact with the waters, produced 
wine, the smell of which pleased all the Devas and the demons, and the 
taste of it recouped the vigour of the lattei*. 'I’hey then churned the 
ocean most vigorously and the Mount Mandarachala became fixed. — 61-63. 

Vignu came forward, and with his arms, holding the lotus and 
as loi^ as Brahm&uda, caught hold of the Mandara mountain, placing 
His hand on the hood of Vdsuki. Visnu turned black on account of His 
having covered the mouth of iSosa. Then emitted from the oceans sounds 
like thousands of thunders, linlra, Murya, Rndrn and Vasus, Guhyakas 
placed themselves at the second end of Vasuki. — 64-66. 

At head of them, Viprachitta, Namuchi, Vritra, fjamvara, DvImfirdhA, 

Vsgrudaip9tr.4, Ufihu, Bali, <Sc., facing the moutJi of t'e':ia, applied them- 
selves to the churning of the ocean. — 67-68. 

Now here, then, was a thundering din caused by tho churning of 
the ocean, thousands of tho aquatic beings fell dead by the blow of the 
Mandara mountain. — 69-70. 

Many of the aquatic beings living in Patala also met with the same 
fate. — 71. 

Later on, the trees on MandarAchala fell down into the ocean along 
with birds on them rubbing against one another. — 72. 

The rubbing of the trees produced a blaze of fire like lightning 
which enveloped all that mountain and also consniuod all the elephants, 
lions, &c,, residing on it, which al.>.o fell charred dead into the ocean. 
Afterwards Indra quenched the fire by bringing down rain. --73-75. 

When myrrh of the various trees and the juice of several plants 
trickled into the ocean. — 70. 

Through the potent sap of those plants the Devas of golden colour 
felt themselves immortal (?) 

Then the occean turned like milk and clarified butter came out of 
it by admixture of the various saps- — 78. 

The Devas, then said to Brahtnu : — “ We all feel quite exhausted 
and the nectar has not yet cotue out. Excepting NarAyana, the Devas 
aud the Daityas won t get nectar, even if they go on churning for a long, 
long period.” Hearing which Brahma prayed to NArayapa : ” You are the 
supporter of them all, therefore, be pleased to impart them strength.” 

Vi^nii said : I am imparting strongtli to those that are exhausted ; 

now move the Mandarachala carefully and steadily.”— 82. 

ends the two hundred and forty-ninth chapter of the Mutsya 
Purdnam on the churning of Ainrita. 



OEAPTBB COL. 


287 


. CHAPTER CCL. 

Sfita said Hearing such words of NA^rSya^a, the Devas and the 
demons began to churn the ocean with great force. — I 

Then the ^eantiful Moon with its refreshing rays came out of the 
ocean. — 2. 

Next came out the Goddess Lak^ini, wearing white raiments follow- 
ed by SurA Devi'; after whom was obtained the horse Uchaidrava ; later on 
came the precious divine 'Kaustubha gem, necktarlike, cheering which 
Vi^pu took it and placed on His chest. Afterwards came out the charming 
PSrij&ta flpvyer shrub with bunches of golden flowers. Shortly after 
the Devas and the demons found the sky covered with smokeuwhich 
gradually spread in every direction and caused terrible headache to everyr 
one making them senseless and lie down. They all sat down on the coast 
holding their heads. In the meantime that smoke turned out to be the 
unbearable BurabAnala (conflagration) by the the heat of which many 
Devas and demons were singed and began to run about in all directions ; 
after it Dundubha snakes, various kinds of red and black snakes, living on 
air alone, came forth. Also came out serpents with long teeth, led- 
coloured snakes, snakes living on air alone, also white, yellow and 
variously coloured snakes, also snakes came out of Gnasa class. — 3-10. 

Next came forth mosquitoes, flies, centipedes, and innumerable 
kinds of venomous insects and terrible beings. — 11-12. 

Then came out most deadly poisons by the mere fumes of which the 

mountain summits were consumed as well as i^aruga, HalShala, Muata, 
Vatsa, Kangaru, Bhasmaga, and Nilapatra and hundreds of other 
poisonous things. — 13. 

Shortly after the Devas and the demons beheld in that vast ocean 
a terrible form of blue colour, like Bhringa Anjana and mountain, shining 
like golden clouds, full of precious gems and roaring like clouds; the most 
deadly poison — Kalakflta — strong like fire. It is throwing off awful 
breath ; and enveloping all the Lokas by its body ,* its hairs blazing like fire. 
Its body was decked with golden gems ; it was dressed in yellow robes ;* 
a crown on the head and adorned with various flowers. It began to make 
dreadful noise in the ocean. Its fumes pervaded all round and caused 
an awful consternation among those present there. Under its deadly 
influence, many became petrified", most of them began to vomit froth. 
They all were awfully terrified and most of them were rendered sense- 
Iess.—14-17. 

By its fumes Vi§nu, Indra, demons, etc., became burst and other 
divine beings turned into cleaned coals. Lord Vi^nu addressing this 
form said : — 18. 

“ Who are you of this death-like nature and what is your object? 
Whence have you come ? How will you be pleased ?” Hearing those 
words of Lord Vienu, EAlakfi(a thundered out like a huge ketUe-drum.— 
19-20. 



888 TBS MATSTA POUiBAi^ 

- - • -.- - -— n .. wr; I II■^.II H I I I I ■... i »i 

“I am K&!akO|a poison born out <^aming of the obean. 

I am born to kill the DbVaa and the demons for theix^avinipi churned the 
ocean so furiously .-^21,-22. 

I shall now destroy them in a moment. They should agir either 
swallow me or go to Lord Siva.” — 23. 

Hearing those fearful words, the Devas and the demons placing 
BrahmS and Vimu in front of them repaired to the abode of Lord Siva 
and stood at His gateway. They were announced to ^e Lord by His 
attendant Gariesa and with His permission went inside His cave in 
the golden Mandar&chala the steps of which were studded with precious 
stones, having pillars of Vaidflrya gem. Then they knelt down and 
prayed to the Lord under the leadership of Brahmd. — 24-27. 

The Devas and the demons : — “ Virdp&k^a ! having divine eyes, 
armed with bow, thunderbolt and FinSka, we salute you. — 28. 

O, One armed with trident, the Lord of the three realms, the recept- 
acle of all the beings, we all salute you. — 29. 

O, destroyer of the enemies of the Devas, having for your eyes, the 
Sun, the Moon and the fire, the one who manifest yourself as Brahm&, 
Vifpu and Eudra, S&ipkhya Yoga, ordaining welfare to all the beings, 
we salute you, — 30-31. 

Annihilator of Cupid ! destroyer of the Lokas and time ! the Lord 
of all the Devas, our salutations to you, Ekavlra ! ^arba, the one with 

S laited hair, the Lord of Pirvatt, the destroyer of the sacrifice of Dakya and 
'ripura, the cause of the universe and giver of bliss and freedom to all, 
of the forms of Indra, Agni, Varuna, the three Vedas, Rifc, Yajur, S&ma ; 
you are the Puru§a, you are t^fvara, Vipra, having ^rutis for your eyes as 
weU, you are Sattva, Eajo and Taraognnas, eternal, we salute you. You 
are the foremost ; you ai’e the formidable. — 32-36. 

2Vote.— ^z=Pre*eminent warrior, hero. 

^z=:Aii epithet of 6iva. 

The darkness is also Your Form ; you are eternal and changeful ; 
you are manifested ; you are unmanifested ; you are both manifest and 
unmanifest ; you are dear to N&rayapa ; we salute you. — 37. 

Beloved of the Goddess PSrvati, residing in the mouth of Nandt, 
. you are the seasons, the Manvantaras, the Kalpas, fortnights, months, 
days ; the one who manifests himself in many ways ; you are Mu^dl (with 
shaved heads). Rath!, Dhanv! Yati, and Brahmachir!. Holder of the lotus, 
having directions for your garments, we salute you.” — 38-40. 

After that prayer the Lord ^iva became pleased and said : — “ Devas 
and demons ! why have you come here ? Why do you look so helpless and 
suffering ? What shall I do for you ? Tell me your object outright.” Hear- 
ing such words of the Lord the Devas and the demons said : — 41-42. 

“ We have churned the mighty ocean for nectar, out of which has 
come out the most deadly Kfilakfifa poison which threatens to destroy us 
all, if we do not gulp it down. — 4^4. 

We are unable to devour that poison. We have come to you 
being overpowered by it. It sends up its fumes powerful like the 


OBAPTm OOM. 


2i9 


fluiriieBof lightning and has blackened Vif^n, dismayed Dhanvarftja, 

’ rendered many nnconscious and killed severed.— 45^6. 

Lord ! as the pelf of the unforttinate becomes the source of miafoiy 
tnne, and as in misfortunes the objects of the weak are not fulfilled, 
similarly this deadly poison has come deadly to us. We have, therefore, 
come to you for succour and be pleased to give your helping hand to 
us.-— 47-48. 

You are clement on your devotees, knower of all motives, the re- 
cipient of the first share of sacrificial offerings, the most Supreme Lord, 
the annihilator of K4ma ; you are Soma, and Saumya and doing well to 
the Devas; yon alone are our strength, you are the protector of the 
attendants ; pray be pleased to swallow it and thus rescue us from the 
danger of our being destroyed by the formidable poison.” — 49-50. 

Mahddeva said : — ” I shall swallow the Kfilakfita ; and shall also 
fulfil if there is any other difficult mission to be accomplished by you.” — 
51-52. 

The Devas and the demons were filled with extraordinary delight 
on hearing those words of the Lord ; their eyes were moist with tears of 
joy and their voices got choked. — 53. 

Afterwards Lord Mahadeva set out on his quick-going buffalo as 
swift as wind on the aerial track when the Devas and the demons also 
followed Him on their respective conveyances, favouring the Lord with 
chowries. — 54. 

The Lord’s knotted hairs, standing up on high became tawny coloured 
by the fire of His third eye. Then the Lord saw Kalakuta on getting to 
the coast of the ocean. — 55. 

He went to a shady place and quaffc.d it holding it in His left 
hand. The Devas and the demons thundered out with glee when they 
saw the Lord drinking it. They akso danced and sang, and Brahm.^ and 
other Devas began to pray. When the venom was deposited in the 
throat of the Lord, Bali along with tlie Devas and the demons said : “ O 
Lord ! white like the lotus, the venom looks awfully beautiful like bees 
in your throat. — 55-59. 

It looks as if you are wearing a garland of black bees. Let this 
remain in your throat.” The Lord replied tliat if that be the case He 
would let it lie there and not allow it to settle down, ^iva thus returned 
home after quaffing the poison and the Devas and the demons again 
resumed the churning of the ocean. — 60-61. 

Here ends the too hundred and fifty-fifth chapter on churning 
the milk-ocean. 

CHAPTER CCLl. 

Sfita said : — When the ocean was churned again the great physician 
Dhanvantari, the author of Ayurveda, came out. — 1. 

Next came out the broad-eyed Madirfi, the nectar and the cow Sura- 
bhi, the dispeller of the fears of all beings. — 2. 

IS 


290 


TEE MATSrA PUBlEAM. 


Lord Viftnu took Lak^ml and Kaustubha gem. Later on came out 
the famous elephant Air&vata ; and they were taken by Indra and Dhan^ 
vantari, the giver of health to all the beings, was taken by the yun.— 2-3. 

Dhanvantari, the great professor of Ayurveda, brought relief to the 
sufferings of the creation. The famous umbrella that came out of the 
ocean was taken by Varuna. Then came out two earrings which were 
taken by VAyu.— 4. 

P^rijdta tree was taken by Indra. Then Dhanvantari assuming a 
charming form and taking a Kamandalu came out with the pot of nectar 
in his hand. At that time the Devas and the demons shouted out for 
nectar “ It is ours, It is ours,** when Lord Vi§nu assumed the appearance 
of a bewitching damsel.-— 5-7. 

And He fascinated the demons, who, being deluded, placed the 
pitcherof nectar into the hands of the Lord and then ran towards the Devas 
to fight with them, with various arms in their hands. In the meantime the 
Lord most ingeniously brought the pot of nectar before the Devas and the 
demons, when the Devas began to drink it. The demon Rahu, assumed 
the form of a Deva took his seat along with the Devas and was going 
to drink the nectar. — 8-12. 

The Sun and the Moon drew the attention of the Devas to this for 
their benefit. When the nectar had gone into the throat of Rahu, Lord ^ 
Vi^nu severed his head by His quoit ; but the severed head of the mountain 
like demon, that fell down and shook the earth remained alive and 
became immortal which is known as Rahu. Thus Rahu became the enemy 
of the Sun and the Moon and lie takes vengeance on them even up to the 
present day at the time of their eclipses. — 13-16. 

Afterwards Lord Vi§nu leaving His form of that enchanting damsel 
began to inflict blows on the demons with his various weapons.*— 17. 

Hundreds and thousands of powerful sharp Parfastras then began to 
fall. The Asuras got pierced with Chakra which made them vomit 
blood.— 18. 

Most of them fell on the ground by the blows of sword, trident, etc., 
and the skulls of many were ripped by the terrible Pattirfastra and fell 
down with garlands round them.— 19. 

Then most of the mighty demons, soaked in blood, shining like 
burnished gold fell dead on the ground.— 20. 

The battle went on till evening. They fell down like the moun- 
tains of red chalk and a huge din was made by their fight and fall. — 21. 

In that terrible fighting all the arms were dyed in gore and the 
universe resounded with the war cries ** Cut them clean into two, break 
them, run away, throw them down, etc.** — 22-23. 

When the universe was filled with that din then Nara and NAr&yana 
resorted to the battlefield ; Lord Vi§nu, seeing the bow in Nara’s hand 
remembered His Sudarrfana quoit; and at that very instant Sudarrfana, the 
destroyer of the enemies, descended.from the heaven and seeing that mighty 
weapon, the annihilator of the enemies, shining like the Sun, burning 



OBAPTBR COLL 


m 


like fire ; Lord Vi^qia violently hurled the terrible Chakra at the demone 
which repeatedly struck them.— 24*28. 

Then that quoit shining like the brilliant form of fire, mercilessly 
killed thousands of demons> At some places it burnt them like fire aided 
by wind ; it cut them into pieces ; then it rose into the air .and hurled 
flames of fire on the demons and drank their gore. The demons began 
to hurl mountains after mountains on the Devas and crushed them. But 
by the force of that quoit many mountain chains looking like the banks 
of clouds fell down with mighty trees when the world began to quake 
and rumble. The mountain tops were also shattered by the arrows of the 
Devas and the demons. Then Nara hurled his great arrow, decked at its 
fore-end with gold, and covered the atmosphere. The Devas were friglilened 
when He cut assunder all the tops of the mountains by arrows. Then 
the demons harassed by the Devas entered into the ocean, and others 
down into the bottom of the earth. — 29-34. 

The power of the fiery weapon Sudartfana then subsided. And 
the mount Mandarachala was put back into its original position through 
the glory of Sudaratfana. The Devas worshipped tlie mountain Mand&ra 
duly before refixing it and uttered sounds of joy. The J)evas then 
returned to their abodes with joy and stored the nectar most carefully 
and kept it under the charge of Vi§nu. 

Here ends the two hundred and fifty-first chapter on the 
churning of the ocean. 


CHAPTER CCLII. 

The Risis asked : — “ Sfita ! bo gracious enough to tell us how 
royal palaces and other houses are constructed. Also explain to us what is 
V&stu Deva.” — 1. 

Sfita replied:— (1) Bhrigu, (2) Atri, (3) Varfistha, (4) VidvakarmS, 
(5) Maya, (6) Nftrada, (7) Nagnajit, (8) ViflAlfiksa, (9) Indra, (10) Brahmft, 

(11) Svfimikkrtika, (12) Nandi^vara, (13) l^aunaka, (14) Garga, (15) l^ri 
Kri$na, (16) Aniruddha, (17) i^ukra, and (18) Vrihaspati are the chief 
eighteen preceptors of the Vastu^fistra. Lord Matsya had explained 
briefly the VSstut(&atra to the king Vaivasvata Manu ; — 2-4. 

Which I will now relate to you. In days gone by, perspiration 
(water) trickled from the forehead of Biva at the time of His fighting fiercely 
with the demon Aipdhaka in course of which the latter was killed ; and 

out of this sweat of the fatigued ^iva was born an attendant, grim in 
appearance, who looked as if to swallow the whole universe with seven 
islands and the sky. He then began to drink the blood of the 
Aipflhska demons that lay scattered on the ground ; but he was not 
satisfied with it. Then that hungry attendant began to practise tapasyft 

with the object of devouring the three regions, in honour of l^iva. The 

Lord idiva in due time was highly pleased with the devotee and asked 
him to select a boon. — 5-10. 



m TEE MATS? A EVEtEAU. 


The devotee said : — “ Lord ! be pleased to permit tne to eat of the 
three realms ” and the Lord said : — “ Be it so. ” Then that devotee beseiged 
and brought all the three regions, under his clutches and then fell down 
(m this earth. — 11-12. 

The terrified Devas, BrahmH, ^iva, demons, R&k^asas got rdund and 
captured him from all sides ; the being, thus imprisoned, remained 
there and since then, owing to all the Oevas remaining there and living 
round him, he came to be recitguised as V&std Deva. — 13-14. 

Seeing the Devas thus predominant and finding himself thus besieged 
the being, that sprung from Siva’s sweat, said “ Devas ! you have now 
madei>me motionless ; be pleased ; how can I stay, thus imprisoned, with 
my head downward ? ” The Devas replied, “ You will enjoy the sacrificial 
offerings of the Visfvedeva sacrifice and (he offerings that will be given 
within any dwelling-house and one who will perform sacrifices without 
the prescribed method will also be your food. — l.o-l7. 

You will also enjoy the sacrificial offerings made in course of other 
ordinary sacrifices. That V4stn Deva then becanio liiglily pleased to hear 
those wQrds and since then the VAstu worship became extant to appease 
Vhstu Deva.” ’ — 18-19. 

Here endf the two hundred and fifty-neeond chapter on Vdstu Deva. 

CHAPTER CCLIIf. 

Sflta said: — “I shall now tell you about the different auspicious 
periods of building a house. One should always select an auspicious time 
to start a building.” — 1. 

If the foundations of a bouse be laid in the month of Chaitra, the 
owner of it gets ill ; if in Vaiiiukha, he gets cows and gems ; if in Jye^ha, 

he dies ; if in A^&dha, he gets good servants, gems and domestic animals ; 
if in i^rSvana, be gets good servants ; if in BhAdra, he becomes a loser 
of something ; if in Arfviu', be loses his wife ; if in Kartika, ho gets wealth ; 
if in M&rgamra, he gets plenty of grains and eatables ; if in Pan^a, be has 
a fear of thieves ; if in M&gha, he gets good lots of various things but 
there is a risk.of fire also ; if in PliAlguna, he begets a son and gold ; such 
is the influence of time, of these different months. Now I shall tell you 
about tbe influence of different asterisms. Aiivini, Rohinf, Mfiia, Uttar&- 
9fidh&, Uttar& Phklgunl, and Mrigaiiira, Sv&ti, Ilasta, and Auur&dh& are 
said to be the auspicious asterisms. — 2-6. 

Barring Tuesday and Sunday all tbe other days are said to be 
auspicious. The following are known to be the evil Yogas for building 
a- house, viz., Vy&gh&ta, Sdta, Vyatip&ta, Atigamda. The following Yogas 
are beneficial : — ^Vi§kambha, Gaipda, Parigha, and Vajra. The following 
aresaid to be the bestMuhflrtas, viz., ^veta, Maitre, M&hendra, G&rpdharva, 
Abhijita, Rohini, VairA.ja and SSvitra. First see that the Sun and Moon 
are benefic ; and fix an auspicious Lagna ; then leaving all other work, 
fix a pillar within tbe ground. This is the rule to start a building, well 
or tank. — 7-10. 


dSAPTBR cotm. 


M 


m 


^ ^ Id laying the foundations of a building or digging a tan^ or well first 

it 18 necessary to test the nature of the soil before commencing the 
operations and lying Vdstua. White eaith is lucky for the Br&hmai^, red 
is good for the Ksatriyas, yellow earth for th*e Vairfyas, and black earth is 

auspicious for the Sudras. This can be ascertained by digging. The earth 
tasting sweet is good for the Br&hnianas, pungent one is suited for the' 
K^hatriyas, the bitter earth is fit for the Vaiifyas ^nd the astringent earth is 

good for the ^fidras. After the earth is examined a hole is to be dug onS 
foot and a half square and it is to be leeped with cowdung ; melted butter 
is then to be placed on a kuchcha earthen pot «nd four wicks should be 
placed in it, ode in each direction. If the eastern wick burns more bright 
than the rest, it means the plot of land is good for the Br4hmana8, 
similarly if the southern wick is more bright, the land is good for the 
Ksatriyas, if the western wick is more bright the land is good for the 
Vaitfyas, the brightness of the northern wicks shows that the land is good 
for the ^fldras ; and if all the four wicks are equally bright the land is 
good for all the four class of people. Such is the test of the land dugged 
in one and a quarter cubit of land. — 13-16. <, 

The hollow is then to be filled with excavated earth; if the ex- 
cavated earth be greater than the hollow filled, then the buildings re- 
constructed on that ground will bring in riches and influence ; if the 
earth be insufficient it means loss and if it be just equal, then the result 
will be normal. The second test is to get the land ploughed and sown 
with some seeds ; if the seeds sprout and become big in three, five or 
seven days the land should be known to be best ; if the sproutings are 
small, that land is to be avoided; if the sproutings are tolerably high, that 
land is middling.— 17-18. 

After thus testing the land one should ^ash it with Panchagavya 
and sprinkle with the water of all the medicinal herbs ; then lines should 
be drawn in gold forming 81 squares (a square containing eigbty-one 
smaller squares in it). Then the lines should be encircled with a thread 
dyed in lime or any other mixture of colours. Ten lines should be 
drawn tbw.ards the east, ten towards the north and on the nine divisions on 
each side 9 x 9=81 divisions are known to be 81 ■ feet or rooms of Vflstu 
Deva (ten lines are to be drawn to have nine divisions within them) and 45 
Devas should be worshipped there and out of these 32 DeVas should be 
worshipped outside (the smaller squares lying on the eastern, southern, 
western and northern sides) and ^13 inside. The 32 Devas outside 
should be worshipped with ghee in the north-east (Is&na) comer. The 
following are the 32 outside Devas : — (1) l^ikhi, <2) Parajanya, (3) Psyanta, 

(4) Indra, (5) Sflrya, (6) Satyfi, (7) Bhriifa, (8) Akatfa, (9) Vfiyu, (10) Pd§pa, 
(11) Vitatha, (12) (^fihaksata, (13) Yama, (14) Gandharva, (15)LMnga, 
(16) Bhriogarfija, (17) Pitris, (18) Dauv&rika, (19) Sugrtva, (20) Puspa- 
daipta, (21) Pal4dhipa, (22) Asura, (23) ^sa, (24) Papa, (25) Boga, (26) 
Ahi, (27) Mukhya, (28; Bhallata, (29) Soma, (30) Sarpa, 31) Aditi, (32) 
Diti, these 32 Devas (31?) are worshipped outside Vastu in the north- 
east corner and the following are worshipped inside the Vftstu. Ap%. 
Sfivitrt, Paya, Rudra and BrahmA and the other eight Devas close by 



29A 


THE MATS? A POBlNAM. 


these 13 Devas are worshipped in the nine feet of VSstu and around Him 
are eight Devas, the S&dhy as in their respective stations, vias., 
AryamS, SavM, Vivasv&^a, Vivudh&dhipa, Mitra, RAjyakf&, Prithviil* 
vara, Apavatsa ; these are to Ke worshipped in the eastern side and the five 

Devas, sis., &pa, Apavatsa, Parajanya, Agni and Diti are to be worshipped 
in south-eastern corner. This is the mode of worship of the Devas at several 

comers. Aryam&, Vivasv&na, Mitra, Prithvidhara, these are worshipped 
Htnongst the twenty and on the outside ; and on the eastern and southern 
side are worshipped the Devas presiding over tliree feet. Brahm& 
is in the centre of all. In such a way 45 Devas are present in VSstu. — 
19-33. 

N. B.— Draw the figure Yftstuma^dalam of 81 Padas and put the Deraa and colours in it. 
Then everything will be clearly understood. 

Now the Vaqi^as are being stated in due order, viz., from Vijyu lo 
Roga, from Pitris to Agni, Mukliya to Bhrisa, ^esa to Vitatha, Sugrtva to 
Aditi, Mpga to Parjanya ; at certain otlier places from Mriga to Jaj'^a is con- 
sidered one family or Vam*ia. The smaller squares where the Devas are 
located are termed Pada, Madhya and Sama ; they are named also Madhya, 
Trisula and Konaga These are always to be avoided in the ceremonies 
StambhanySsa and TuUdividhi f where gifts are made in gold equivalent 
to the weight of the performer of the ceremonies'). The Vaatu is always 
to be fixed on the lines of Pitris and Vaisv&nara. Impurities (Uchhi^jta) 
and UpaghStas, etc., are to be carefully avoided. — 34-38. 

Agni is on the head of Vaatu, Apa on the mouth, Prithvidhara and 

Aryamfi on its breast, Apavatsa on the chest, Diti and Parajanya on the 
eyes, Aditi and Jayainbhaka on tlie ears, Sarpa and India on the shoulders, 
the Sun and the Moon on the two arms, Rudra and llajayaksma on the 
left hand, Savitra and SavitS on the right hand, VivasvAna and Mitra on 

the stomach, PflsS and Aryama on the wrist, Asura and ^osa on the left 
side, Vitatha and Grahaki^ata on the right side, Yama and Varuna on the 
thighs, Gandharva and Puspadanta on the knees, Sugriva and Bhriifa on 

the shanks, DauvSrika and Mpiga on the ankle.s, Jai and Sakra on the 
organ, manes on the feet, Brahma in the heart and on the ninth feet in the 
centre. — 39-46. 

Brahmfi. has said that Viistu with 04 feet should be worshipped in 
the Prfisfida fverandah or outer yards). There Brahma is located in the 
4 feet or smaller squares in the centre ; the Devas with half feet are in the 
corners, the Devas with H feet are in the outer corners, 20 Devas are with 
2 feet. VSstu thus has 64 feet. — 47-48. 

N. B.— Draw the figure Vftstumandalam of sixty-four smaller squares In a bigger 
square to mark the rooms and the Devas'and their colours. 

At the commencement of a building if the owner feels an itching 
sensation on his body, it is to be inferred that there is a nail or some 
foreign matter under the ground. And he should remove the nail from the 
portion of V&stu in which corresponding part of his own body he feels 
itching. — 49. 




45. Brahm& 



muos 





CHAPTER CCLIV. 


295 


For a nail in the vital part of Vfistu is dangerous it is very auspici- 
OTi:4. If there be any part defective or part in excess then it should be 
avoided. — 50. 

Now hear the names of VAstu with four jd.las, three li&las, two rfdlas 
and one if&las. — 51. 

Here ends the two hundred and fifty-third cJiapter on the ascertaining 
of Vdstu {site) for buildings, etc. 


CHAPTER CCLIV. 

SOta said : — “ I shall first tell you the names and the details of 
cbatuhdfilfis.” The building (chatuhifald.) has four doorways, one in each 
direction and it is encircled by an enclosure wall. If the palace or temple 
made into a chatuh^&Id, it is known as sarvatobhad^a. Such a mansion 
built for a king or a god is very auspicious. The house having three 
entrances, i.e., if the western doorway does not exist, it is known as NandyA> 
varta. — 1-2. 

The mansion that has three entrances, i.e., if there be no southern 
gateway, it is known as vardhamana; the one without any gate towards the 
east is known as svastika, the one v^ithout any gate towards the north is 
known as ruchaka. If the houses be slightly unsymmetrical, the building 
is known as tri^fild, or as known as dhanyaka. It is auspicious and 
brings prosperity to the owner and gives him a good many sons. The man> 
sion having no wing to its east is known as sukfetra. — 3-5. 

It is known to be the giver of longlife and destroyer of woes and 
delusions. The mansion without any wing to the south and whose rooms 
are big is known as the annihilator of the family and causing all sorts of 
ill, and the one that is without its western wing is known as pak^aghna. 
It is the destroyer of the sons and friends of the owner and causes many 
fears. The mansion having only two rooms on the west is very auspicious. 
It gives lots of wealth and grains and sons to the owner. — 6-8. 

The mansion having rooms on the west and the north is known as 
Yamasfirya. It has fear from king and fire and is the destroyer of the 
family. The one having rooms on the north and east is known as Daqida. 
It is inauspicious for the owner of it has a danger from other kings and 
untimely death. The one having rooms on the east and south is known as 
Dhan&khya. It is also inauspicious as the owner has danger from arms 
and of dishonour. The one that has fireplaces built for cooking purposes 
on the east and west causes the death of the owner and widowhood to the 
womenfolk and causes also many fears. The mansion having two rooms 
on the south is also the cause of fear to the owner. Such mansions 
forebode ills and should not be built by the wise. The big rooms known 
defective as Siddh&rtha and Vajrayukta are always to be avoided by the 
intelligent ones. Now the ways of building a royal mansion are describ- 
ed.— 9-14. 

A royal palace is of five different classes in descending order of 
merit. The best one is 108 hands in breadth, and the remaining of the 



296 


TBB SiATSYA PtIBANAH. 


four classes are each 8 hands less respectively. The length of -idl of these 
is 1^- of their breadth. — 15-16. 

Similarly the mansion of his heir-apparent is also of - five different • 
classes, niz., the first best is 86 hands broad, and the remaining. fonr are 
each six hands less respectively. They are in length 1} of their breadth 
Now the dimensions of the Commander-in-Chief’s mansion will he de- 
soiihed. — 17-19. 

His best house should be 64 (sixty-four) hands in breadth and the 
remaining four are each six hands less respectively. Their length is 1| 
(one and one-sixth) of their breadth. Now the mansions of the other chief 
servants of the sovereign are described. — 20-21. 

The Prime-minister’s house should be 60 sixty hands broad and the 
remaining four are each 4 hands less respectively. Their length is If- 
(one and one-eighth) of the breadth. — 22. 

The houses of captains and other ministers ; —48 (forty-eight) hands 
wide and the remaining four are each four hands less respectively. Their 
length If- (one and one-fourth i of the breadth. The houses of the architects, 
artisans, sentries, concubines .are also of five kinds. The best one is 
28 (twenty-eight) bands in breadth and the remaining four are each less 
by two hands. — 23. 

Their length is twice their breadth. Now the quarters of the maids, 
etc., will be described— 24. * 

Their best house is 12 hands in length, the remaining four can be 
made 2i hands less each respectively. Their length should be li of the 
breadth. — 25. 

Now the five kinds of houses of the Astrologer, Preceptor, Physician, 
Councillor and Priest will be described. The best of their houses are 40 
hands in breadth and the remaining are each four hands less respectively. 
Their length is IJ- of the breadth. — 2(3-27. 

Now the dimensions of the houses of. the men of the four castes are 
described. The best house of a Brahmana should be 32 hands in breadth, 
of the remaining four each should be less by four hands respectively. The 
house of a Ksatriya should be 28 bauds in breadtli, that of the Vaiiya 24 
hands and of the ^udra 20 hands. The length of a BrShmanas house should 

be li\jth times of Ksatriya l|rtli tiipes, of Vairfyas IJth times, of ^udras 
and l^-th times of their respective breadths. The houses of the lower castes 
are to be upto (sixteen) haiuls wide. A srjvereign should have ‘his own 
residence between the capital and the house of the commander-in-chief and 
at the same place should be built the store-room. The houseit '.of the 
Br&hmapas, etc., those revered always by the king should be roupd the 
mansion of the cobimander-in-chief Besides these, the. sleeping-rooms 
of other lower men and those residing in the forest are to be fifty hands 
long. Similarly the sleeping-rooms of the king and the commander-in- 
chief are to be seventy hands long. Within 35 hands from that, the outer 
verandah is to be laid; Thus are related the arrangements of houses. 
— 28-33. 

The honse of a Btihmana should be 36 hands and seven angulas 



GBAFTEU GGLV. 


297 


long. He ought never to discard the above figures and follow other 
dimensions) Similarly the length of the house of a K^atriya ought 
to be-3d hands and 10 ahgulas and that of a Vaidya ought to be 35 bands 
aiid l3 ahgulas. The measurement of a Sddra’s house ought to be as'^re- 
vioualy mentioned and fifteen aAgulas more. If the building be divided 
into three parts where there is a road-way in the first (front) part and 
whose back side is elevated and beautiful, it is* named Sosnlsa. Where 
there is a road- way on one side, thAt is named Sd,vastambha and where there 
are road- ways all round the building that is named Susthita ; all these . 
buildings are auspicious to the Br&hamanas and three other classes. The 
height of the ground-floor of the building erected on small areas is to be 
one-sixteenth of its breadth together with four hands breadth .-f 4 
hands). The heiglit of the upper-floor (on the ground-floor, i.e.,' the first 
floor) is to be ijth of the height of the first floor ; that of the second floor 
is to be ||th of the first floor and so on. The foundations should be of 
well-burnt bricks and its width is to be one-sixteenth* of the breadth of 
the house ; the foundations may be of timber or it may be of mud also. 
In the latter case its dimensions is to be the same as that of the middle of 
tlie house. The width of the door-way is to be in a certain ratio to the 
width of the room and the height of the door-way to be twice the width. 

The thickness of the jambs of a door [two inside pieces (vertical)! 
should be as many fingers as many hands there are that will give their 
height and the thickness of the lower horizontal piece (the sill) is l|th of 
the thickness of that of the jambs. — 34-44. 

Here ends the two hundred and fifty-fourth chapter V&stu vidya. 

CHAPTER CCLV. 

Sflta said : — “ Now 1 shall tell you the measurements of the pillars." 
Multiply the alitude of the house by 7 (sev^n) which divided by 80 (eighty) 
will give the breadth of the pHlars. If the pillars be square, they, aro 
known as ruchaka and if they be octagonal they are called Vajra. — 1-2. 

A sixteen-sided pillar is known as Dvi-vajra and the one with 32 sides 
is kiioWn as Pralinaka and the one that is circular in the centre is called 
Vtittu.— 3. 

These five pillars are mahfi-stambas (huge pillars) and are auspicious 
for all the buildings. Paintings and beautiful carvings should be made in 
all these pillars. Lotimes, creepers,' leaves, earthen pots and jars, are to 
be nicely carved. Divide all the pillars into nine parts and the lowest one 
for car.vihg should be made the base of the pillar. Above it in one part 
should be made ghata and in the other one lotus. Then in the other part 
beautiful- carvings should be made and the rest of the parts should be 
left in a clean polished squhre. The weighing balance (sutft) is also to bq 
carved equal to dimension of the pillar ; I or | of that can also be 
done ; and then it is called upatula. — 4-6. • 

Now the ways of locating the doors in a bouse will bo described. 
The eastern doorway shouhl be named Indra and Jayanita, the southern 
ones should be named ySmya and vitathn. — 7-8. 

18 



THE UAT&YA PURANAM. 


^ m 


The western Hoorways should be named Puspadaipta and V&runa and 
the northern ones should be named Bhall&ta and saumya. Thus the 
experts say. — 9. ^ ^ ^ 

The doorways should never be blocked with ^ythlng. The exits 
and entries should not be hindered by anything. These being blocked 
by a thoroughfare, tree, corner of another house, are inauspicious. By its 
being blocked up by a lane means the annihilation of the family ; by being 
blocked up by raised earth it brings joalohsy, by being blocked up by moist 
soil or mud, it brings misery ; by being blocked up by a well it gives 
epilepsy ; by being blocked up by a waterfall, it brings in some evil ; 
by being blocked up by some nails, it brings in danger from fire, by 

its being blocked by any Deva there is danger of destruction. If there is 
the corner of another house in front of it, it means the death of the master. 
The doorway being blocked by a filthy drain or other impurities 
causes sterility to women. * If there be anj" obstruction in the shape of 
pillar it indicates difficulties to the wife ; and if it be obstruc .^ed by the 
house of a lower caste, it indicates the fear from weapons. No obstruc- 
tion is recognised at a distance greater than twice the height of the 
house.— 10-14. 

The family of the houseowner whose doors open by themselves 
becomes mad and whoso doors shut by themselves, become extinct. — 15. 

The houseowner whose doors are higher than (he specified heiglut 
has a danger from a king and if they be lower tlian the fixed standard 
then he has a danger from thieves. If the doors be above one another 
the house is know»i as the den of death. -lf>. 

A very big house, impregnablo and situated on an open roadway 
is like a vajra ; it brings in rniji of the owner of the liouse within a short 
period. — 17. 

The house the doors of which interlap wiili other doors get and ob- 
struction with other things is very inauspicious. Other doors of a house 
should not V)e made like the tnain enlraneo door and the latter should be 
decorated witlrtlie ornauiental work containing pitchers, flowers, leaves or 
the images of Lord i^iva’s attendants. Every day the main entrance gate 
should be attended to with water and durva grass. — 18-19. 

A banian tree to the east of the bouse is auspicious and all desires 
are fulfilled and a fig tree to tiie south, a pipul tree on the west, and 
Plaksa tree (wobleaved fig tree) to the north of it brings fortune to the 
owner. If Kautaki trees, milky trees. Asana tree and the straight trees 
be X)lanted in the house in tljo above mcntifiiied directions respectively 
then it means misery to the lady of the house and her children. If one 
does not cut down such a growth, he sJiould plant auspicious trees near 
them. A house with the following trees in its vicinit}^ is very auspicious 
viz. Puii-naga, Arfoka, Bakula, Samt, Tilaka, Champaka, Pomrnegranate, 
Pippali, DrAksa (grape) Kusumamandapa. The following trees bring 
prospei’ity and increase riches, viz. Jambira, Puga, Maltika, cocoanut, 
kadali, P^^ali.— 20-24. 

Here ends the two hundred and fifty- fifth chapter of the Matsya 
Pardnam on V astu-vidya. 



CHAPTER OGLVL 


29d'^ 


CHAPTER CCLVL 

said : — A wise man should first of alKexamine the site well and 
then construct the pillars as above mentioned and the building with spe- 
cified }]eightB and having downward slopes towards the north with the 
turrets level and gradually ascending heights — 1. 

A dwelling house should njpt be made close to a temple, or near a 
wicked man’s house or near a minister’s house or near a square where four 
ways meet. By doing that one invites grief and misery on himself. — 2. 

Some space should be left all round a building. The front of a 
building should not be covered with trees ; rather the back of the house 
should he so covered in the trees. If the house be built on the southern 
side of the ground, then ruin ensues ; for the south is the place where 
the head of the V/istn deva remains so it is best to construct houses on the 
left side for thus all the desires of persons are fulfilled. After choosing a 
good and lovely site one should lay its foundation in an auspicious hour 
ascertained by an astrologer after putting some jewels underneath it. Over 
the jewel is to be placed u stone and on the stone all sorts of seeds are to bo 
kept ; then a pillar is to be erected and worshipped by the Brahmanus. 
Then that pillar is to be bathed with all medicinal plants by the Brahmans 
wearing white clothes and versed in the Vedas. Then that pillar is to be 
fixed by the artisans after putting round it clothes and ornanents, when the 
vedas are chanted and the auspicious musical instruments are sounded 
next the Brahinanas ai e to be fed. Lastly Homa ceremony is to be per- 
formed with ghee and honey with the mantra “ vastospate Pratijanthl 
etc., ” after the Brahinanas are feasted with Pfiyasoniia. The fixing of tho 
pillars, the laying out of threads, placing a pillar at the entrance gate and 
doing the ceremonies and \vorshij)s above-mentioned at the time of entering 
the house are to be performed. — 3-10. 

If there be any defect, then to make up for the deficiency the V^stu 
Deva should be appeased by performing five fold Viistujajna a string 
should be drawn in the N. E pillar is to be then fixed in S. Fi. ; the house 
should be circumbulated, and foot-prints of Vastu should be written 
by the forefinger, thumb, middle finger with young sho^jt gems and gold 
waters. This is tlie best. — 11-13. 

Vastu should never bo designed by nails, weapons, leather ashes, burnt 
wood, bones of horns skulls etc. It is most, inauspicious to do so with 
these things. It brings in grief and calamities. At the time of entering 
the house the artisan is to make these especially things all the auspicious 
ceremonies laying out of thread and fixing of pillars etc., is to be done. 
—14-15. 

VThen an evil omen occurs e,gr. a vulture shrieks, facing the sun or it 
touches some part of the body of the owner ; it is to be understood that 
on the corresponding portion of VSstu, underneath it there is the bone of 
an elephant or of a^terrible carnivorous animal, indicating danger. — 16-18. 

If a dog or a jackal jumps over the thread spread out or an ass starts 
braying hoarsely when the line is stretclied, it shows that there is some 
salya or foreign matter underneath and great misfortune in store for the 



300 


THE UATSYA PURANAM. 


owner. If a crow be crowing not harshly in the N.-E. corner it shows that 
treasui'e is buried there at one 'of the four corners. If that string is cut, 
it means the death of the owner and if the nail is . curved downwards it 
shows that illness is in store for the owner. If at the time of digging the 
ground coals come out, it means the owner is to run mad and if skull 
comes out the owner is to get confused. — 19-21. 

If a conch is unearthed the lady of the house is to turn loose and 
the confusion of the artisans indicates the'end of the owner or of the house 
itself. — 22. 

If the pillar or the pitcher falls down the owner gets some disease 
in the head and if the jar be stlon the family of the owner is perished. 
The breaking of the vase of water means the death of the artisan and if 
the computation on the fingers goes wrong it means the death of the 
Owner. — 23-24. 

There is a fear of evil spirits in the house in which seeds and medi- 
cinal plants are destroyed. The pillars should be circumambnalated from 
right to left otherwise there is a fear of misfortunes. The prescribed 
propitiatory rites should be performed to drive away the ills arising from 
fixing up the pillars wrongly and not circumambulating it. — 25-26. 

The ceremony “ Pnlkudakravan ” is to be performed with regard 
to the pillar ; but one should be careful not to make error as to direction ; 
on the top of the pillar is to be pla<!ed a young twig with fruits attached* 
to it. If there are confusions and errors as to Iho directions with reference 
to pillar houses, rooms or dooia or dwelling room, it means, the extinction 
of the family. — 27-28. 

Such a flaw should be carefully avoided in fixing up the pillars 
making the doorways and akso in the dwelling places for if it is allowed to 
remain in them, it means the ilestruction of the household. The house 
ahould not be extended in one direction only. If extension is to be made, 
it should be made uniformly and symmetrically in all directions. If it 
is to be extended towards the east it creates enmity. — 28-29. 

It it is go to the south it means death ; if to the west it means the 
loss of wealth, if it is to the north it means misery, if to S.-E. it means the 
danger from fire. — 30-32. 

If it is to S.-W. it means the loss of children, if it towards the N.-W. 
it means maladies and gout ; if it is so to the N.-E. it means the loss of 
grain. In the north east corner of the house the place of worship should be 
made as well as the sAtiti grihas, kitchen should be made. In the S.-E. 
corner, close to the north should be made the water godown, and the 
general godown of the household should be S.-W — 33-34. 

Bathing place and Badhasthan (place of killing) should be made out- 
side the house ; granary should be made in the N.-W. corner and the office 
is to be located outside. Such a house is lucky to the owner. — 35. 

Here ends the two hundred and fifty sixth chapter of Matsya 
Purdnam on Vdstu Vidyd. 



CHAPTER GGLVII. 


301 


CHAPTER CCLVII. 

Sflta said : — “ Now I shall tell you the ways of hewing trees for 
the supply of wood for a building.” Dhani^tH, and the four Nak^attras 
following it, (viz., Satavisfi, POrvabhidrapada, Uttarabhadrapada and 
Revatl) and Vi§ty9< and the following E&ranas should be avoided. On 
an auspicious day one should go to the -forest and first he is to offer 
the sacrifices and worship to the trees proposed to be cut. — 1-2. 

If the tree falls towards the north-east it is very lucky and it is 
unlucky if it falls towards the south. — 3. 

The wood of bo-tree and of other milky trees should not be 
used for a building nor should the wood of trees inhabited by a large 
number of birds, or one burnt up by fire, be used. Nor the tree cut and 
torn by wind is auspicious. — 4. 

The wood of the trees broken by elephants, struck by lightning, 
semi-dried up, or dried up of itself or those growing near a chaitya or 
sacrificial place, temple, confluence of two rivers, burial ground, well and 
tank should in no case be used for house building by one desirous of 
great influence and wealth. These trees are to be specially avoided. — 5-6. 

Neep, Neera, Bibhitak, Slesmatinak, mango and Kantaki trees should 
be avoided. Asana, Aioka, MahuA (inadhuka), Sarja, Stvla, are the aus- 
picious timber-trees. — 7-8. 

It is very auspicious, to use sandal, and Panasa wood for a build- 
ing.— 9. 

IleodSr and Haridra are auspicious when used in the building in 
one, two, or three pieces. But if more pieces are used, it is, dangerous 
Sinsfapa, Sriparni or Tinduki are auspicious in house building when only 
one of these is used ; but the mixture is inauspicious. Similarly 
Syaiidana, Panasa, Sarala, Arjuna and Pa<linaka trees alone are auspicious, 
but when mixed are inauspicious. A ti’ee cut and brought down 
to the ground is named Godha. If the colour of the tree at the time of 
cutting down a timber-tree is that of a Bengal madder, the tree is termed 
Bhika ; if the wood is of the blue colour, it is named Sarpa ; if it is red, 
it is termed Sarata ; if it is of the colour of the pearls it is termed Sukddi ; 
if it is of tawny colour it is termed IMusiika ; if the wood is of the shape of a 
sword, it is known as Jalachheda; one should avoid the use of such timber 
for building purposes.— 10-14. 

If the wood of an auspicious tree previously cut be lying some- 
where, one should fetch it and use it, multiply the length of the tree by the 
circumference in hands and then divide it by eight, if the remainder is 
1 it is dhwaja, if the remainder is 2 it is Vri§a, if the remainder is 3 it is 
Sinha, if the remainder is 4 it is Vrisabha, if the remainder is 5 it is 
Gardhava ; if the remainder is 6 it is Hast! and if the remainder is 7 it is 
K4ka.^ Of these dhwaja is auspicious in all directions and is good. 
Especially it brings all sorts of happiness when used in towards the 
western door in direction. — 15-17. 

Sinha is auspicious towards the north, Vri§abha, towards the east, 



.^02 


THE MATSYA PURANAM. 


and Hast! is auspicious towards the south. This is what the Ri^is have 
said and all these are lucky. The other trees face the corner directions 
and they should be avoided —18*19. 

Similarly multiply the remainder above obtained by eight and 
divide by twenty-seven ; whatever remains is known as Vyaya ; iE this 
figure be in excess, it means inauspiciousness. Therefore the excess in 
Vyaya is to be avoided. Bhagiv^n Hari says : — Peace comes in 
Ay&d hi kya (excess of incomes or profitor). — 20-21. 

After building according to the above prescribed forniulm the brick- 
work one should place a vase full of water, curds, uncooked rice, fruits, 
flowers', gold along with the BrAhinanas. Then gold and clothes should be 
g'ven to the Br&hmanas ; and then entry into the auspicious house should 
be made on Tuesday. ITonia and sacrifices shntild be maile according 
to the Vedas for the expiation and appeasing of any defects or faults that 
may arise to the Vnstu Deva ; the Brahmana-s arc to be feasted with 
various delicious food ; then the r>wner, wearing white dross should enter 
and take his seat in the house incensed with Dhdpa, etc. — 

Here ends the two hundred and fifty seventh chapter 
ov Vdstu ridya. 


CHAPTEH DCT.YIII. 

The, Rihis said : — How do the hoiiMdioldem attain success through 
karma-yoga ? It is said that kanna-yoga is superior to thousands of jiuma- 
yogas.— 1. 

Sfita spoke: — “ 1 shall explain to you the karma-yoga of Divine 
worship an<l reciting the name of God for there is nothing like it in the 
three realms to bestow enjoyments and Mnkti (frctulom).” — 2. 

Know that as the karma-yoga wliich severs the bondage to this 
world which is the installation of the Devas’ images, the worship of the 
Devas, reciting their names and holding sacrifices and Utsabs (festivals) 
in honour of them. — 3. 

The ways of making the imago of Lord Vifjiiu that is highly bene- 
ficial will now be described. It should be made holding conch, quoit, club 
and lotus, having a canopy over the head, with neck like a conch, beautiful 
eyes, raised nose, ears like the shells of mother of pearl, peaceful and 
serene in appearance. — 4-,'). 

Eight, four or two hands should be made and the image is to be in- 
stalled in the abode by the priest. — 6. 

The image with eight hands should bo made to hold a sword, a club, 
an arrow and a lotus in the right hands ; ami a bow, a shield, a conch and 
a quoit in the left hands. The imago with four hands should be made to 
hold a club and a lotus in the riglit hands and a conch and a quoit in the 
left hands. Thus persons desirous of wealth and opulence should follow 
with regard to the four-armed Vi§nu. — 7-9. 



CnAFl'ER GGLVIU. 


303 


Tlie image representing the incarnation of Lord ^rl Kri^na should be 
iiiade to hold a club in the left hand ; this is better ; and the conch and 
(iuoit may be placed high or low if so desired by the devotee. — 10. 

Earth .is to be located below between His legs. Qaru^a is to remain 
in a bowing posture on His right side. — 11. 

The Goddess of wealth and prosperity — Lak^mi Devi with auspi- 
cious face and lotus in hand is to be placed on the left of the Lord. Those 
who desire prosperity should place Qaruda in front of Him and Sri and 
Pu9(i adorned with lotus on either side of the image. The temple and the 
entrance gate should be made with an ornamental arch containing the 
image of VidyAdhara, sounded with Deva Dundubhis (sweet sounding 
musical instruments) furnished with Gan<]harva couples, ornamented with 
leaves, floral works, lions and tigers and kalpa latikas fcreepers). — 12-14. 

The figures of the immortal Devas in praying posture, and chanting 
hymns should also be made close by. The pedestal of the image should 
be divided into three parts. — 15. 

The heights of the Devas, Danavas and Kinnaras are 9 talas (1 tSla= 
the space between the thumb and the middle finger stretched respec- 
tively). — 16. 

Now a table of measurement is being enunciated. The particle of 
dust that is seen dancing in a sunbeam is called a trasarenu. Eight 
trasaremi8 = l bAlftgra ; 8 bAlagras=l likhyA, 8 likhyas = l yuka, 8 yakas 
= 1 yava, 8 yavas=l anguli (finger), — 17-18. 

and twelve Angulis (as for as one’s own finger goes)=l mukhya. 
The several parts of the body of the image shou.ld be made of proportion- 
ate dimensions to be in this Mukhya measurements. — 19. 

An image may be made of gold, silver, copper, gem.s, precious stones, 
stone, wood, iron, brass, compound of copper and bell-metal, sandalwood 
or other beautiful wood. — 20-21. 

A household image should not be bigger than one cnbit, the long 
span measui’ed by the extended thumb and little finger. — 22. 

But an image in a temple in a royal palace should be 16 cubits or 
vitastis and not more. One may make madhyaraA (better), uttamA (best), 
and kanisthA (good) images according to his means. — 23. 

The height of the temple gateway should be divided into eight parts, 
out of which one should be left blank and out of the remaining seven two 
parts should be taken to indicate the. installation of the image ; the remain- 
ing five divisions should be divided into three parts and in the first part 
thereof should bo made a pedastal of the carved images. That pedastal 
should neither be too high nor too low. — 24-25. 

Then the attitude of the face of the image should be divided into nine 
parts ; the neck is to be made of four fingers and the breast should be 
located below it, measured by one part.— 26. 

Below it, should be beautifully made the navel, one finger in measure- 
ment. The measurements of all the parts above and below are to be in 
Angulis (fingers). — 27. 



304 

\ . I ■>■ r i V . M .. 

The organ should be made ofpnei finger below the navel and then 
two thighs should be made oE two fingers, and then the knees* should 
be of four fingers in dimensions, then ankles should be made of two fingers 
and feet should bo of four fingers. The head of such an image is of 14 
fingers. This is the length (heightl of the image. *' Now listen to the 
breadth or thickness of the several limbs of the image.” — 28*30. 

The forehead is of four fingers and the jaws should be made of two 
fingers. The lips one finger in tliickness. — 31. 

The temples sliould be eight fingers in thickness and the eyebrows 
should be half a finger in breadth. The eyebrows should however be made 
sharp in a curve of small rise resembling the curvatxire of a bow. — 32. 

The eyes shouhl be raised with corners acute. The length of the 
eyes should be two fingers. The height to be lialf of that. The centre of 
the pupil should be raised and they slmidd be reddish in colour. The 
pupil should be one-fifth of the eye. — 33-34. 

The space between the two eyebrows should be of two fingers. 
The bridge of the nose should be one finger and similar sluiild be the 
lower part of it. The nostrils should be half a finger in circumference, the 
cheeks should be two Angel’s in thickness and the front of the jaws sliould 
be of two fingers, the lips upper and lower should be symmetric and of half 
the finger and the eyebrows sliould be of I finger ; the nose should be 
straight and even.— 35-38. 

The corner of the mouth should of a fiery shape ; the roots of eys 
should be of six fingers in length and the ears should be like the eyebrows 
and of 4 fingers and the flanks should bo two fingers. The part of the 
bead above the ears should be of 12 fingers in extent. The extent 
from the forehead to half of the back is to be of 18 fingers and from that 
up to the head should be 36 fingers. The hairs are to be of 42 fingers 
and that from the end of the hairs to the cheek is 16 fingers. — 39-42. 

The measnremont of the middle of the neck should be 24 fingers 
and its height 8 fingers ; and between tlie chest and the neck it. should be 
1 t&la. The space between the two Ineasts should be 12 fingers. — 43-14. 

The breast nipples should be. two fingers in circumferenee and 
the central point of the nip])le should be I yava in height, the breasts 
should be two talas and that from the shoulders to the breast should be 
6 fingers. The feet sliould bo 14 fingers in length and the toes should 
be 3 fingers. The ends of the toes should be raised and of fingers in 
breadth. The- forefinger of the feet should be like the thumb and the* 
middle finger should be greater by of it. — 45-48. 

The little finger should be less by Jth of the ring finger. The 
ankles should be 1 finger high and of three fingers in circumference, 
and contain three knots. — 49. 

The heel should be two fingers. The back thereof also of two fingers 
and one kalfi. greater than the heels. Two joints should be made in 
the thumb and three in the forefinger. Tlie height of the thumb should 
be 1 finger and of the other fingers should be } a finger. The breadth 
of the ankles is 16 fingers in the middle and 14 fingers in the 


CRAPTSR VCim. 


305 ^ 


front and the breadth of the centre of the knees is 21 fingei*s, their height 
is 1 finger and their circumference should be three fingers. — 50-54. 

The middle of the thighs should be 28 fingers and ab^ve 
of that they should be 31 fingers, the scrotum should be three fingers and 
the organ two fingers and 6 fingers in circumference and the marhi of the 
hair should be made near the root of the organ. The pedastal of the 
organ should be 4 fingers in length. The length of the waist is 18 fingers, 
but if the Divine image be female it should be 22 fingers and the space 
between the breasts is to be of 12 fingers and the circumference of the 
portion at navel should be 42 fingers. If it be of a male the girdle should 
be made of 55 fingers. The shoulders should be six fingers, and the thick*-^ 
ness of tlie neck should be 8 fingers and the length eight kaks and the 
length of the arras should be 42 fingens. The length of the arms should 
be 16 fingers, the top of the arm is to be of 12 fingers and the palm 
of the hanrl should be 5 fingers and the middle finger is to be of 
5 fingers. The naineless finger is to be Itli less; the little finger ytU 
less than the middle finger and the ring finger, one-fifth less than 
the middle finger. The thumb is to be of four fingers. The joints of the 
middle finger are two fingers long. The joints of the thumb are like those 
of tlie ring finger and the upper joint should be made greater by two 
yavas. Nails should be made in half of the top joint which should be 
smooth, reddish and glossy. The back of the fingers should be some- 
what round and the corners should be raised by one kala. The hairs 
of the head hIiouIcI hang on the shoulders by 10 fingers. The limbs of 
tiie Goddesses should be made slender and shorter. The breasts, the thighs, 
the hips and loins, should be made bulky. The abdomen should be 
in a space of 14 fingers. All the images should be adorned well with 
the various kinds of nice ornaments in their arms, etc. Their necks 
should be somewhat longer and curved with excellent curls of hair. 
The neck, nose, and forehead are to be three fingers and a half, aud the 
lower lip is to be of half a finger. The eyes should be more than ^th of the 
lips. The ridge of the neck should be a little more than i a finger in 
height.— 55-70. 

Thus about the images of the goddesses. These signs of the 
images are destructive of sins.— 71. 

Here ends the 258 th ehipter of the Matsya Purdnam on the 
measurements of limbs of the images of the Devos, etc. 


CHAPTER CCLIX. 

i^flta said : — “ Now I shall tell you more minutely about the forms of * 

the images of the different Devas. The image of l^ri Ramachaiidra, Bali, 
the sou of Virochana, Varaha and Narasinha should be of ten (10) talas and 
that of VAmana is to be of 7 t^las. The images of Matsya and Kfirina may 
be made of the dimensions that may appear fit to the devotee to make 
the image look beautiful. -1-2. 

14 





THE MATSYA PURANAM. 


“Now hear about the conetruction of the images of The 

thighs of the images should be bulky apd the arms and the shoulders should 
be of the colour oE burnished gold. They should possess lustre like 
gdid ; His matted hairs should be like the rays of the Stin ; His forehead 
is to be marked with the crescent of the Moon. He is to have a crown 
^nd His form should be like a youth of 16 years of age. — 3-4. 

The anus should be like the hands (trunk) of ah elephant, the thighs 
and ankles should be beautifully round, the hairs should be straight, 
the eyes should be broad and extended, the image should be represented 
to be wearing a tiger skin, and a girdle of three strings should be 
miade round the waist. Then the image should be decorated with garlands, 
necklaces, armlets and serpents. The cheeks sliould be represented fatty, 
and earrings should be placed in the ears. The hands should be made long 
enough to reach the knees and the general appearance should be serene 
and peaceful. Khetaka (sword) should be placod in the left aand and axe 
in His right hand ; trident, Sakti, staff should be placed on His right side. 
To the left of the image should be placed a skuU, snake, and Kliatvafiga. 
When lie is about to dance on Ilis bull, He has two hands. With 
His one hand he bestows boons ; with the other he holds, armlets 
(or Rudnik^a should be placed in the otln r handj. The image should 
be made in the peculiar postuie to appear as if the Lord was witnessing a 
dance. -5-10. 

The image of liOrd ^'iva in the dancing posture should be ntade 
with ten arms wearing the liide of an elephant. His image representrtig 
the scene of the destruction of Tripura should be made with sixteen hands. 
Conch, quoit, club, bow, Dhanus, Pinak and Visnu Sara (arrow) in Flis 
eight hands when He presents a form liaving eiglit hands. — 11-12. 

The image of the Lord with 4 or 8 hands represents His Jilana 
Yogesivara form. The image of His Bhairava form should be made wiili 
an aquiline nose, sharp teeth and formidable appearance and can be 
placed in every lioiise. The images of Bhairava, Narasii.iha and Vaniha 
are also formidable ; and these should never be placed in the Milla- 
fi,yatana (main dwelling-house). — J3-15. 

No image is to be made with lesser or greater number of limbs 
than usual. An image with some limb missing or one with a formidable 
appearance brings ruination on the owner ; the one with limbs in excess 
destroys the sculptor ; lean images devastate the riches the one with a 
lean and thin abdomen brings about famine ; the one with less fleshy 
appearance ruins wealth ; the one with a crooked nose brings about 
^misery ; the one willi sparse limbs are terrible causes of misfortune and 
fear.— 16-17. 

The one with flat face and eyes causes grief and anguish, the blind 
"^image causes injury to the eyes, the one without a mouth or with decrepit 
limbs causes misery. — 18. 

The one with defective limbs, especially without thighs, causes fear 
and madness, the one with a dried face or without waist troubles the king, 
the one void of hands and feet brings some ej^idemic, the one bereft of 
ankles and knees causes joy to the enemies.— 19-20. 



GH AFTER GGtX.: 


aoir 


The one without a chest destroys sons .and friends. The image 
complete in every way brings prosperity and long life. So the image of 

Lord Siva should be made -in full as described heretofore and all ,|bo 
Devas, Indra, Nandikerfvara, eight liokapalas, Gane^vara, should be locat- 
ed surrounding the image in a praying posture so that oue*!can have a ’^iew 
of the Lord. The devils, fiends and Vetalas should also be made in a danc- 
ing posture and praying before the Lord. All these images should have 
the appearnce of infinite joy and absorbed in their devotion to the 
Lord. The image of the Lord should be made with three eyes, surround- 
ed by the praying Gandharvas, Vidyftdharas, Kinnaras, nyniphs, Guhyakas, 
attendants, sages etc., etc. — 21-2&. 

Here ends the two hundred and fifty-ninth chapter of the Matsya 
Purdnam on the eharaeterislies of the images of the Devas. 


' CHAPTER CCLX. 

f^tita said ; — “ Risis ! I shall now tell you about the ArdhanAriilvara 
image.” — 1. 

Sotf.— The image of Lord Siva with half male and half female form 

blendud into one. 

In the one-half of the image, in the plaited hair of the Lord, a 
crescent should bo made and in the other half-portion of the body 
the imago of the Goddess Parvati should be beautifully made. Here a 
partition is to be made in the hair of the head and the tilaka (a sectarian 
murk on the forehead) is to be marked on the forehead. — 2. 

In the right ear the serpent Vasuki should be made and in the 
left one an ear-ring should be put on. In the right hand should be 
placed the skull or trident and in the left one, a mirror or a lotus. 
Garlands are to be suspended from His neck. — 3-4. 

The left arm should be adorned with armlets, etc., and a sacred 
thread of pearl string or gems should be put iu the proper place. A 
chubby breast and a bulky lip, should be made on the left baud side 
and a girdle should be put on the half part of the waist. — 5-0. 

Then in the half-portion of the body covered with tiger skin an 
organ should be made and the left part is to be covered with hanging' 
cloth decked with various jewels and the right side is to bo covered 
with serpents. The right foot of the Lord should be made to rest on 
a lotus and a little above that the left one should be adorned with 
gems and ornaments worn by ladies. — 7-9. 

The feet of the Goddess Parvati should always be made to appear' 
dyed in myrtle (red lac dye). Such should be the image of the I^ord 
and the Goddess blended into one. “ Now hear about the location 
of their several limbs iu their Leelu (sportive) forms. ”-^1.0-11. 

The image of the Lord and Umd should be made either‘with 4 or 2 
hands ^ the matted hair on the head are to bo adorned with a crescent 
of the Moon ; having three eyes, with one hand resting on the' right. 



508 


TRB MAT8YA PVRABAM. 


shoulder of PdrTatt^ having trident and lotus on the right side ; placing 
tlie left hand on .the breast of the Goddess, wearing the tiger skin, 
decked with various jewels. The situation is charming and pleasant 
and half the face is adorned with semi-moon ; the right band of the 
Lord lies on the thigh of Umfi. The Goddess lTm& should be seated 
on the left side of the Lord. The bead of the Goddess should be 
decorated with the usual ornaments, and having nice tresses of hair, 
with Alak& and Tilakit, adorned with the beautiful ear-rings, armlets, 
and fondly looking at the face of the I.ord. — 12-1 6. 

Sportively touching the left side of the Lord, with Her left arm 
* stretched out and touching the abdomon of the Lord with Her fingers. A 
looking glass and a beautiful lotus, are to be placed on Her left side and a 
girdle is to he hung on the waist. On both the sides of the image of the 
Goddess should be placed the fornjs of Jaya, VijayA, SvSmi h.Srti](a, 
and Gane^a ; near the gateway should be placed the images of Guhyakas. 
The images of the A^idyadharas wearing garlands and the nymphs holding 
guitars in standing postures. — 17-20. 

A man eager for prosperity should make such an image of 
Um& and Mahesvara. Now hear about the form of Sivanarayana, 
destructive of all sins. — 21. 

Note. -fiH*iUi<Wl.=The forma of Lords Siva and N&rftyana blended into one single 
image. 

Nflr&yana should be made in the left half of the body and LoihI 
^iva in the right. Both the arras of Lord A^isnu should be decorated ' 
with jewels and armlets holding con-.h and quoit. 'J'ho fingers should 
he reddish. Instead of quoit, club can be placed or conch can be placed 
on the opposite side. In the waist yellow clotli studded with white gems 
should be made to be worn. Tlie feet should be adorned with the 
ornaments, and gems. — 22-24. 

The half of the right side of the body should be adorned with 
plaited hair and crescent, the right arm with urmlots of serpents should 
be made in the posture of making a gift, tlie other one should be decorated 
with a trident, putting on a serpent in place of the sacred thread, wearing 
a tiger-skin, and the two feet adorned with jewels and serpents. Such 
should be the imago of Siva and Ntirayaua blended into one. — 25-27. 

Now I am describing to you the form of tlie Afali& A/^arAha. TjOtus 
'and club should be placed in the hands of A’^ar&lia, the teeth should be 
sharp, and at the left elbow (knee) should be placed the world uplifted 
by the teeth from the IVitala and which bears calmly everything on 
Her. His teeth are very sharp and face full of joy and wonder. Thus for 
the upper part. The right foot should bo the turtle, the left foot on the 

hood of the Sesa and his right hand is to be locate on his left ^akti. All 
round the image should be made the images of the Lokapitlas in praying 
postures. Now about the image of Nura Si tpha. The image of Nrisiipba 
should be made with eight hands. — 28-31. 

The ajtar or seat of Nrisiipha should be made formidable, his face 
terrible, the eyes should be split, the mane should be raised, and the scene 
of ripping the breast of the demon lliianyakatfyapu with blood gushing 



OHAPTER CGLX. 


309 


from it, as well as the angry looks of the Lord should also be 
depicted. — 32-33. 

The fight of the Lord Mrisitpha with the demon with His nails 
and His terrible form and the attacks of the latter made repea^dly 
should also be shown. — 34. 

At the same place the image of the demons armed with swords 
should also be made and the Lord is to be represented as frequently 
chastising the demons, and the images of Indra and the other Devas in 
praying posture should bo made near Nrisitpha. — 35. 

How about the Vamana form of the 1/ord striding the three worlds, ,, 
as if pervading all the Universe. The upper portion of the image of 
V&mana should be made with arms by the side of His legs raised upwards, 
and the form of Vamana holding a goblet in the left band and a small 
umbrella in the right. This is to be represented in the lower part of 
the figure. The face of the Lord should be extremely meek and 
appealing. — 36-37. 

Near by should be made the image of Garuda holding the BhringSra. 
The image of Matsya should be in the form of a fish and that of Kfirma 
in that of a turtle. — 38-39. 

The itnage of Lord Brahmfi. should be made with four heads 
holding a kamaiulalu in one hand. He should be made riding on a swan 
or seated on a lotus, as the case may be. — 40. 

The complexion should be reddish, like the bed of the lotus, with four 
hands, five faces, holding a kamandalu in the left hand, sacrificial ladle 
in the right and a stall and Sruva in the left and right of the other set 
of hands, and with the Devas, seers, Gandharvas praying all round Him. 
He should be represented as engaged in the work of creation, wearing 
white raiments, deer skin, and a sacred thread. — 41-43. 

To the right of the image should be located the site for Homa with 
ghee, etc., and tlie four Vedas, and to the left should be placed the image of 
Savitri, and on the right that of Sarasvatt. The Ri§is siiould be placed 
in front of the Lord. Now about the image of Kartikeya. The 
image of Sv4mi Kartika should be made with a youthful appearance 
illustrious like the newly risen sun, of the hue of a lotus, holding a stafiE 
and a deer-skin, having a peacock for His conveyance. — 44-46, 

The image of Svdmi K&rtika with twelve hands should be placed in 
His newly chosen city, with 4 hands in a small town and the one with 
2 hands in a forest or a small village, — 47, 

In the right hand decorated with a golden armlet should be placed 
a javelin, a noose, a sword, an arrow and a trident and the other hand should 
be left blank, but in the posture of offering some gift, and holding out 
the idea “No fear.” — 48. 

All the arms, arrow, and legs, fist, pointed ring-fingers and 
other ornaments and a sword should be made in the left hand. The 
two-armed figure is to have a Sakti in His right hand and the 
left hand resting on the peacock. The one with 4 hands should be 
made with a noose and a javelin in the left hand and Var&bhya in 
the right hand. — 49-51. 



310 


THE MATSYA PVRANAM. 


Now about tW, irtikge of Ganesa ; the face of Garieaa should have 
the trunk of an elephant, with three eyes, four arms, huge stomach, 
earn like those of an elephant, wearing a sacred thread, one large and 
long tusk holding with his right hand, a lotus and above a ball of sweet 
and with his left hand a battle axe and a ball of sweet, with extensive 

* shoulders and huge arms and feet full of bliss, riding a mouse. lie is the 
owner of Riddhi (success, prosperity) and Buddhi (intelligence). — 52-55. 

The image of the Goddess Katyayaiil should be made of ten 
hands and as holding the weapons that are seen in the hands of Brahma, 

Visnu and ^iva ; with matted hair on Her head and a crescent with 
three eyes, face like the iiKion, shining like the atasi flower, having 
beautiful eyes, yonthfnl in appearance, adorned with all the ornaments, 
liaving fine teeth and full breasts; standing with Her body curved 
in three directions. — 57-58. 

The Destroyer of Mahi^asura, armed with a quoit, a trident, sharp 
pointed arrow’’a, a javoJin, holding a sword, a bow, a noose, a goad, a bell, a 
battle axe in the left hands. Below Her image slioul l be made figure 
of the monster Mahisasura with his severed head, holding a sword in one 
hand, soaked iir blood, ferocious looking, tied in the noose, ejecting l)Iood, 
his breast being pierced by the javelin of the Devi and liis intestines 

• coming out. The conveyafioe of tiie Goddess in the form of a lion should 
also be made. The right foot of the Goddess should be placed on the 
back of the lion and the toe of tlie left foot should be made toncliing the 
body of Mahisasura. Maliisa is made as encircled by a snake anJ 
Durga Devi as holding the hairs of the Demon with Her left hand. Such 
a form oi the Goddess should bo made and Devas should be placed all 
round in praying posture. — 

Now about the image of Indra : the image of ludra should bo made 
with a thousand eyes riding on an infuriated elephant witli extensive 
thigh, chest, and face, sliouldors broad like those of a lion, having long 
and mighty arms, lioldiug a thuiidcr})i)lt and Iotas, wearing a coronet and 
a couple of ear-rings, having beautiful eyes, armed witli a club, adorned 
witli various ornaments, adore I by the Dovas, tlie Gandharvas, and the 
nymphs, surrounded by a retinue of lady attendants, each holding an 
umbrella and waiving chfiinara, seated on a throiie ivitli Indrani on liis left 
holding a lotus in Her hand. — 06 CO. 

Here ends the 260th (Jhapier of the Malsya Piirdnam on the forms 
of the images of tlie several Devas and their characteristics. 

CHAPTER CCLXl. 

Stlta said :~-TLe image of the Sun should he made with beautiful 
eyes, seated in a chariot and holding a lotus. — 1. 

There should be seven horses and one chakra (wheel) in the chariot 
of the Sun and a coronet beaming red should be placed on His head. — 2. 

He should be decorated well with ornaments and the two hands 
holding blue lotuses, the latter should also be placed on His shoulders 
as if in a sport. His body should bo shown covered with a bodice and two 
pieces of cloth. The feet should be made brilliant. 



CHAPTER GOLXL 


m 

Two other figures named Dan^i and Pingali^ aWuld^be placed as 
guards with sword in their hands. — 5. 

Somewhere close to the image of the Sun ay image of Brahm& sbotild 
also be made holding a pen. The image of the Sun should be surrounded 
by a number of Devas. Aruna, the charioteer of the Sun, is resptendr 
ent like the lotus leaves and the horses nice and with long necks and well 
decked are to be on His either side. They should also be properly held by 
reins of snakes. The seven horses yoked to the chariot of the Sun should be 
tied together with the string of the serpent. The image of the Sun should 
thus be made either seated in the chariot or on the lotus and holding a 
lotus. The image of Agni, the besto-ver of all desires, should be made 
shining like gold seated on a throne looking like crescent, having the face 
like that of the Sun, wearing a sacred thread, and holding a pendant kurcha 
(bunch) with broad slioulders, holding a Kamandalu in the left hand and 
a rosary of beads in the right. A shining canopy [over its head] should 
also be made, and also the conveyance of goat. — 6-11. 

Or he is to have seven heads with seven burning rays and He is to be 
placed in the kiinda (sacrificial pit). The image of liharmaraja should be 
made holding a mace and a noose, riding a huge buffalo black like soot 
ami seated on a throne, with eyes sparkling like fire. Round His image 
sliould be made the images of Chitragupta, some formidable attendants, 
groups of quiet and formidable Demons and the great buffalo. — 12-14. 

The image of Nairita Lokapala, the Lord of the Raksas, should be 
made riding on a human being followed by a band of demons, armed with 
a sword, resplendent like a mountain of soot, wearing yejlow robes decked 
■with ornaments arul having a chariot drawn by men. The image of Lord 
Varuna should be made bolding a noose in his hand, looking courageous, 
having a colour white as a crystal, wearing white apparel, riding^ 
a fish, peaceful in appearance, adorned with armlets and a coronet. 
The image of Vayu should be made seated on a deer, smoky in com- 
plexion, nicely dressed looking quite young, with knitted brows, adorned 
with banners, granting boons. The image of Kuvera should be made 
wearing ear-rings, with a huge form, and a huge abdomen having a 
huge store of pelf and eight Nidhis surroumled by a number of attendants 
Ouhyakas adorne i with armlets, &c., wearing white dress and a coronet, 
seated on a Vim&na drawn by men and giving wealth. He is holding 
a club in one hand and with the other hand He is holding out the 
idea of “ No fear.”— 15-22. 

The image of Tjord W/lna shcmld be made white with white eyes, 
armed with a trident, having three eyes, riding on a bull. 23. 

The images of the different Matiikas should be made according to 
the forms of their respective Lords, viz , — the image of BrahmAni should be 
seated on a crane having a Kamandalu and a rosary with four heads and 
four arms, Mdhesvari should similarly be made according to the resem- 
blance of Mdhesvara. — 24-25. 

She should have matted haii-s, seated on a bull with Her forehead 
adorned with a crescent, armed with a sword and holding a skull, trident, 
kliatvanga, having 4 hands. — 26. 



312 


THB MATS? A PUBAUAU. 


The image o{ Katimfirl should be made of the form of K&rtikji riding 
on a peacock, dressed in red, armed with a trident and a javelin, adorned 
with armlets, garlands, holding a cock in Her hand. — 27. 

The image of Vaisnavi should be made with 4 hands, riding on 
Garuda boiling a conch, a quoit, a club, &c., seated on a throne, having a 
child.-28-29. 

The image of the Goddess Varaht should be made riding on a buffalo, 
armed with a club, a quoit with a chowrie over Her head. 

The image of I ndrAni should be made like Indra armed with a bolt, 
a club, and trident riding on an elephant, having many eyes, holding a 
keen sword, adorned with various divine oniaraents, and of the colour of 
burnished gold.— 30*32. 

The image of JogSsvari should be made with a long tongue, hair^ 
standing on their end adorned with pieces of bones, having a set of ferocious 
teeth, slender waist, wearing a garland of skulls aud heads covered wixh 
flesh and blood, holding a head in the left hand, soaked in a fatty liquid, 
holding a Sakti in the right hand, riding on a vulture or a crow, lean, 
with a scanty stomach. Laving a ferocious appearance. She has three 
eyes.— 33-36. 

When she assumes the form of Sri Ch&mundd she is to wear tiger 
skin having a bell in the hand. When slie assiunes the form of KalikS she 
is represented as ridihg on an ass, holding a skuli, undre83e<l, adorned 
with red flowers and banners with Vardhani. The image of Ganesas 
should be made near the images of these llitrikAs. — 37-38. 

The image of Bhagavan Yiresvara should bo placed in front of the 
images of the Matrikas, it should be on a bull, having plaited hairs, 
holding Vina and trident in a standing posture.— 39. 

The image of ^ri Devi Laksmi should be made with a very youth* 
ful appearance, having thick cheeks, red lips, knitted brows, with thick 
and raised breasts, adorned with jewels and ear-rings, with a round face, 
wearing head ornaments and lotus, having conch, and beautiful separated 
tresses of hair, adorned with garlands, armlets, having arms like the trunk 
of an elephant holding a lotus in the left hand, the fruit of an wood apple 
tree in the right, agorued with a lotus, a svastik, a conch, earrings and 
Alaka ; breast covered with a bodice and wearing a necklace ; with a 
girdle of bells, shining like gold, dressed in fine robes. Close by the 
image should be made the images of two female attendants holding 
chamaras in their hands. The Goddess should be seated on a lotus-bed 
surrounded by the buzzing black bees and bathed by a couple of 
elephants with vases, prayed by the Gandharvas, Quhyakas. Similarly 
should be made the image of Yak^ini prayed by the Gods and placed 
close to the Laksmi Devi. — 40-47. 

Near Her image should be placed vases. The images of the Gods 
and the demons armed with swords as well as of the serpents should be 
made close by.— 48. 

The lower parts of the serpents should be like (Prakriti) those of 
the natural serpents and the upper part is to be represented Paurusi and 
hoods on the head. They have each a pair of tongues.— 49. 



OHAPTSn CCLXIL 


313 


aemons, Mksasas, Bhdtas and Vetdlas shottld be ioade to 
reside at the gateway of Laksmi Devi. They are without flesh, terrible/ 
and hideous looking. — 50. 

The images of K^etrapftlas should be made with plaited hair, for- 
midable in appearance, undressed, surrounded by dogs and jackals, 
holding a head covered with the hair in the left hand, and a javelin in 
the right to destroy the demons. — 51-52. 

Afterwards the image of Cupid with two hands should be made and 
close to it should be placed the head of a horse with the sign of a 
Makara (crocodile). — 53. 

A floral arrow should be placed in the right hand of Cupid and 
a floral bow in the left one. To the right should be made the image of 
Prtti holding all kinds of victuals and to the left should be made RaU in 
a reposing posture having a bed and a crane. The drums and the figure of 
a donkey passionate with sexual desire, wells and Nandana garden should 
also be made. — 54-55. 

Near by should also be made a pleasure grove with a pool of 
water reached by nice steps. The god Cupid is very well dressed and his 
posture is somewhat bent. — 56. 

Sflta. — Risis ! I have j ust given you a rough idea of the cons- 
struction of the different images. It is indeed very difficult to explain all 
the broad details which even Vrihaspati cannot do.” — 57. 

Here ends the 261st Chapter of the Matsya Puran on the forms 

of Oods, ete. 


CHAPTER CCLXIL 

Sffta said : — ''Now I shall tell you about the pedestals of the different 
idols.” The pedestal should be divided into 16 parts. — 1. 

The first part should be put underground. Above that, the earth 
should be taken in 4 parts. Afterwards the round part should be 
covered with a coating. Then the neck of the pedestal should be made 
in three parts and the throne should be made in the other three parts. 

The next four parts are known as Jagatt ; the next one part is 
termed Vritta ; the next one is Pa(ala or Vrita ; above it three parts are 
denominated Kantha ; next two parts are named Crdhapatta ; and the last 
part is Pattika. — 2-3. 

The first five parts up to Jagati are imbedded within the earth ; 
the other parts up to Pat(ika are above the ground and on the uppermost 
part Pattika, a passage is to be made for the outlet of water. — 4. 

This is the general characterstic of all the pedestals.— 5. 

The following are the ten different kinds of seats for different Devatas 
ow.— (1) Sthapdila, (2) VApi, (3) Yakel, (4) Vedi, (5) Ma^dnlA, (6) Pffrpa- 
chandrA, (7) VajrS, (8) Padm&, (9) Ardhaiaiit, (10) Triko^A. — 6-7 

15 



314 


TUB MATS7A PVBAVAM. 


Stb.an4il4 is tbe one that is \ 7 ith 0 ut any girdle or circular bd^ndftry 
and is square-shaped. Yftpt has two girdles, Yak§t has three girdles. 
The Vedi is rectangular. — 8-9. 

Pfirnachandrfi. has two girdles variously coloured, Vajri^a has six 
corners and three girdles. — 10. 

Padm^ has sixteen corners and it is shorter below. Ardhaila^i is^ 
like a how. — 11. 

Trikonfi. is triangular in shape like the upper part of a trident. 
The one that is lower towards the east and the north is said to be some- 
what sloping, and extended and endowed with auspicious signs. — 12. 

The three parts of the circumference should bo outside and outlet 
for water should also he made there and at the base, front and top, there 
should be space equal to that amount and there a good outlet for water 
should be made ; and half of the Phallus should be made thick. — 13-14 

Then the girdle is to be made of a dimension of the three parts of 
the Lihga or the girdle sliould be without any foot. Only the prescribed 
liniit*sliould be dug or it should be artistically made without any 
division. — 15. 

To the noi*th a channel should be made a little bigger than the pre- 
scribed dimensions. SthandilS is the giver of much health grain and 
wealth. — 16. 

Yaksi is the giver of cows, Vedi of prosperity, MandalS of fame, 
Purnachandriktl good boons — 17. 

Vrajtt, of life ; Padma, of good luck ; Ardhachandra, of sons ; 
TrikonS is the destroyer of enemies. — 18. 

Ten such thrones have liocn described for Divine worship. If the 
Devata be made of stone, then llie pedestal is also to be made of stone. If 
the Devata is made of earth, tlien the pedestal is to be also made of earth ; 
and if of wood, then the pedo.stal also of wood ; and if the Deva be of a mix- 
ture, then the j^edestal should be also of both mixed. The persons desirous 
of auspicious results should not deviate from the above prescribed rules. 
Round the idol a big platform should be ujado and the Consort of the Lord 
should be located with TIis image. — l'J-21. 

Thus is described, in brief, about the pedestals. 

Uerc ends the 2G2nd Chapter of Matsya Puranam on the pedestals on 
ichich the Devatas are placed. 


CHAPTER CCLXIII. 

Sflta. — “ I shall now explain to jmu the good points of the Phallus 
of Siva.” A wise man slrould make it of gold and agreeable look- 
ing.— 1. 

The size of the Phallus should be according to the size of the 
temple or wtce-f ersa. — 2. 



OEAPTER CGLXIII. 


315 


On an even square pit tiie Brahma Sdtra (sacred thread) should be 
placed and left to it should be located an image or the Phallus of ^iva that 
is to be worshipped. — 3. 

The eastern entrance should be mado towards the other side of 
the city ; it is to point towards the north-east (and south). — 4, 

The MAhendra entrance door should be made in the southern or northern 
part of the town. The eastern entrance should be divided into twenty one 
parts.— 5. 

The Brahma Sfitra should be put in the centre and its half should be 
divided into three parts, and the northern portion should be left out. — 6. 

Similarly the southern portion should also be left out and then 
Brahmasthana should be determined and the Phallus should be located 
in the half portion. — 7. 

If the Phallus be located in the 3rd or 5th part, it is called Jyestha. 
If it be divided into 9 parts, the fifth part is the central one. This 
central part is to be divided again into nine parts and the phallus is to be 
placed in it. Thus the central part is divided equally into three 
parts ; these are termed Jye§tha, Kauistha and Madhyaraa. There are 
again three sorts of .lyestha, three sorts of Kanistha, and three sAts of 
Madhyama parts. Thus nine sorts of Lingas are to be known. — 8-11. 

• Eight divisions should be made below the navel and three should be 
discarded and the rest should be mtide into a square. The centre of the 
Lifigam should be made octagonal and the upper part of the Phallus 
likewise so. The head should be made round. The navel of the ' 
Phallus is to be made into a circular knot. The upper poertion of 
the Phallus of ^iva is round and the lower portion of BrahmS 
should be made square and the central one, Vaisnava portion should be 
octagonal. Such an image is known as the giver of ever-increasing 
prosperity. “ Now I shall explain to yoii other forms (GarbhamAna) of the 
Phallus and their measurements.” The Phallus (its height) should be 
divided into four parts. One part of this is to be made the diameter 
of the Phallus of ^ilfc. Divide by means of threads the Phallus into 
three parts. The lower portion should be mado into a square, the cen- 
tral one should be made of an octagonal shape. Tlie upper third 
porion of which is worshipped and is called Nabhi, It shouhl be made 
circular. The base is to be made samksipta (compressed'. The square 
portion should be buried in the ground, the central one should be kept 
in water. —12-21. 

The Phallus with a slender base and thick in the part under water 
is known as Jyestha ; its lower pari and its head is to be mado always 
somewhat low, beautiful, and endowed with good qualities. The Linga 
that looks elegant is the giver of prosperity. — 22-23. 

The Phallus which is even at the base as well as in the middle is 
also the giver of all desires. The one that has not such a construction 
brings bad luck. One may make a PJiallus acconliug to the prescribed 
dimensions of ruby, diamond, crystal, clay, wood according to one’s 
choice and means. — 24-25. 

Eere ends the 2QZrd Chapter of the Matsya Pur&xsam on the dimentione 

of the Phallus. 



316 


TEE UATBYA PUBANAM. 


OHAPTEE COLXIV. 

The Ri^is said ; — Pray now tell us about the consecration ojE the 
different Divine images and idols.” — ^1. 

Shta said “ Risis ! now listen to it and I shall relate it to you. 

I shall also tell you the dimensions of ku^4^s (sacrificial pits), mapijapas, 
altar8.”~2. 

Mfigha, Phfilguna, Chaitra, Vaiii&kha and Jyai^tha are the most 
auspicious months for the consecration of the images. — 3. 

In the Uttarayapa season, the second, third, fifth, seventh and tenth 
days of a bright fortnight, the full moon-day, especially the thirteenth 
day of a bright fortnight are most auspicious for the consecration of 
idols. — 4-5. 

Pfirv&s&dha, UttarSf&dha, Mula, Pflrvabh&drapada, Uttarkbhfidra- 
pada, Hastfi, Aiivint, Revatt, Pusyd, MrigadirS, Anur&dhft, and Sv4ti are the 
best asterisms for the consecration of idols. — 6-7. 

Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus are the auspicious planets for the 
cons^ration of an image, and the asterisms and Lagnas under the 
inflvdfttce of these three are also auspicious. — 8. 

At such a conjunction of auspicious planets and stars avoiding the 
influence of evil stars, one should consecrate an idol in an auspicious place 
after worshipping the planets (doing the Graha pdjit). Good omens are 
to be watched for ; evils, e.g., adbhuta, etc., are to be avoided. And on an 
auspicious day and in an auspicious place, when the Lagna (rising* 
asterism) is free from malific planets and under an auspicious star one 
should consecrate an idol. — 9-11. 

Installation is best when it is done according to the rules pre- 
scribed for Ayanas, Yisuba and Sadasiti. The installation is to be 
performed in the Brahma Muhdrta at the time of Prajiipatya Sayana and 
Sukla Utth&panam. — 12. 

The Mandapa should be made on the east or north of the temple. It 
should be of 16, 10 or 12 hands in length. — 13. 

An altar should be made in the centre of the Mandapa which should 
be 5, 7, or 4 bands long. The altar is to be neat and clean. 

There should be 4 doors with archways round the Mapd^pt^ aiicl of 
those the eastern door should be of Plak^ tree, the southern one of the 
fig-tree, the western one of arfvattha tree and the northern one of Nyagrodha 
tree. The Mapdapa should be buried 1 hand in the ground and it should 
be 4 hands in height. — 15-16. 

The earth should be washed well and cleaned and then the interior 
should be decorated well with various kinds of cloths, flowers and 
leaves. — 17. 

After making such a Mapdapa* eight jars full of water and containing 
a lump of gold should be placed at each doorway on either side. Those 
vases shoidd not be leaky.— 18. 

They should be covered with mangoe leaves and should be filled in 
with medicinal herbs, flowers, sandal, water, and covered with white 
cloth.— 10. 




OUAPTEU OCLXIV. 


317 


After thus placing the vases within the Mapcjapa, flags and bantings 
should be hung all round the pandal and incense and fragrant gums 
burnt before tho idols. — 20. 

Mandapa is a temporary building created for performing a ceremony. 
The banners of the Lokap&las should be hung all round and in the centre 
of the pandal a banner of the shape of the clouds should be hung. — 21! ^ . 

Afterwards offerings should be made to the Lokap&las and worship 
offered to them by repeating their prescribed mantras and giving Balis 
(making sacrifices) in honour of them. — 22. 

The offerings to Brahmfi above should be made by reciting the first 
part of the mantra, to V&suki below by reciting the middle portion of the 
mantra and then to the Lokapalas in all directions. The mantras given 
in Samhitd and Sruti are to bei repeated. — 23. 

Preliminary ceremonies (Adhivfis) of images should be observed 
for three nights, one night or 5 nights, or 7 nights as the case may be.— - 
24-25. 

Thus finishing the gateways and Adhivks ceremonies the bathing 
ceremony of the Mandal should be performed in the second, thlfd, or 
fourth period. — 26. 

Then the wise should bring the Phallus or the image and worship 
the sculptor with cloth, jewels and ornaments. Then “ excuse me 
should be said by the Yajamfin (the sacrificer or worshipper) and the 
sculptors, &c., dismissed.— -27-28. 

Then the idol is to be placed on the seat and his eyes are to be 
imparted. The following, in brief, is the way First_ offerings 
should be made all round with sesamum, clarified butter, rice cooked 
in milk and sugar. Then after decorating the Brahmanas with white flowers, 
guggula, incense with clarified butter should be offered to the image and 
then gifts to the Brahmanas should be offered according to his means. 
—29-30. 

Cows, land, gold, &c., should be given to the priest who officiates 
at the consecration of the image, and the Brkhraana should name the 
image after reciting the mantra contained in the following couplet. — 31. 

Salutations to the Lord Visnu, l^iva, Thou art the Supreme Being, 
the Hiranya-ret4 ; Salutation to Thee ! 0 Vi^^u !— 32. 

The above mantra is generally used to impart light in the eyes of 
all idols. After invoking the Divine spirit into the image, the eyes ^ould 
be given sight to with a bar of gold- — 33. 

Pleasant music should be played and sweet hymns should be sung, 
and Vedic hymns chanted. To win prosperity and dispel ill-luck the 
Vedas should be recited. — 34. 

The image should be divided into three parts and afterwards three 
lines at a distance of eight Yavas from one another should be drawn which 
should be broad, thin and crooked. They should not be broken (<•«., 
should be continuous). — 35-36. 

In the Jai§tha Phallus, the lowermost line should be of the dimen- 
sion of one Yava, the middle one is to be finer still. — 37. 




318 


TRB MATHTA PUMIJAM. 


Then eight divisions should be made and three of them should be 
discarded. Then seven lines should be drawn on either side and four 
divisions are to be noted. Afterwards the lines should be allowed to 
meet at the top of the fifth line. 'This is the union of the lines; on the 
back of these lines, two divisions are to be made. These are, in brief, the 
Lak^anas (characteristics). Thus the Laksanoddh&ra of the Lingam is 
described. — 38-40. 

Rere ends the 264th Cliapter of the Matsya Puranam on the 
consecration of the idols. 


CHAPTER CCLXV. 

Sdta said : — “ I shall now tell you about the persons who should 
consecrate and worship the idols.” — 1. 

jJj[ow, in brief, about the qualifications of the Sthftpaka (who places 

the idol). The Sthapaka or AcliArya should be well-vorsod in the Vedas, 
PurSnas, SSinkhya, free from avarice, born in a country abounding with 
black deer, handsome, of full limbs, of clean habits, free from hypocrisy, 
making no difference between friend and foe, having equal devotion for 
^iva, Vi§nu and Brahmfi, accomplished in Logic, having no vices, belong- 
ing to a good Kuli'n family and versed in the building science or Vftstu 
^astrd. The Murtipa Brahmanas should conseci’ato the images according 
to the prescribed rites. Thirty-two, 10 or 8 persons should be employed 
for consecration. These three distinctions indicate as superior, middling, 
and ordinary. There should be great I’ejoicings at the time of consecrating 
the idols, which should first be taken to the bathing mandapa and washed 
with Panchgavya, Pahehakasaya, earth, ash, and water while reciting the 
four Vedic mantras, viz., (1) Samndra jye^tha etc., (2) Apodivya, (3) Yastlqi- 
r&j4 (4) Apohi|thS,. Then the idol should be purified with Panchagavya 
and other three substances and then bathed ; it should then be adored with 
sandal and incense after which it should be covered with two pieces of 
cloth by reciting “ Abhi Vastre ; then after reciting the mantra “ Utti^tha 
BrShmanaspate” the idols should be placed in stauding posture. By 
reciting the two mantrams ” Amuraja and rathetistha, ” they should be 
placed in the chariot and conducted into the temple. — 2-12. 

Later on it should bo placed flat on a bed after strewing Kuifa grass 
and then by turning the face to tlie east flowers should bo strewn and at 
the head of the idol should bo placed a vase full of water, with gold 
also and then the imago should be covered with a piece of silk cloth 
after reciting the mantra “ Apodeve aposmfina mfitarapi” or the silk cloth 
may be put upon the head of the idol. The Deva is then to be bathed with 

honey, ghee, mustard and then worshipped with the mantras “ Apy4sva” 
and “ Yate rudra ^iva ” and with incense and flowers also. — 13-17, 



CHAPTER GGLXV. 


310 


By reciting “ Bftrbaspataye ” mantra a white thread should be tied 
round the wrist of the idol,) which should then be covered with various 
kinds of fine clothes ; and umbrella, chamara, mirror, awning with flowers, 
should be placed close by as well as jewels, various kinds of medicinal 
herbs, utensils, bed, seats. All these should be placed after reciting Ihe 

mantra “ Abhi twfl. I^ura “ and then gradually make offerings of milk, 
honey, clarified butter, other eatables, rice cooked in sugar and milk. 
Then after reciting the mantra “ tryamvakam yaj^mahe ” a number of Valia 
(sacrifices) are to be offered in all directions and then the image is to be 
installed. Then four gate keepers should be placed at the gates ; and the 
Brahman priest Bahvriclia is to recite in low voice Srisukta, P4chamSna 

Sfikta, auspicious Soma ^ukta, ^antikadhyaya, IndraSfikta and Rakgoghna 
Sfikta (facing towards the east.) — 18-25. 

The learned Adharyu seated to the south should recite Raudra 
Puru§asflkta, ^lokadhyaya ^ukriya and Mandaladhfiya. — 26. 

The Chhandoga Brahmanas sitting in the west should recite Vama* 
devya, VrihatsAma, JycftthasAma, Rathantara, Purusasfikta, Rudra> 
sfikta withSixntika and Bharunda Sama. And in the north, the Atharvans 
should recite Nilaraudra, AparajitA, Saptasfikta and RudrasfiktaAntikA- 
dhyAya — 27-29. 

Towards the head of the idol the priest who consecrates it, should 
perform H6raa ceremony with Vyarhiti and Santik and Pau§tik 
mantras. — 30. 

The wood of PalAila, Udurabara, Asvattha, ApAmArga and Sami should 
be used as sacrificial fuel in the Homa ceremony and a thousand offer- 
ings should be made, taking at each time a stick and every time the feet of 
the image should be touched and when the thousand offerings are over 
the navel, chest and head should be similarly touched. Afterwards the 
four priests officiating at the consecration ceremony should perform Homa 
ceremony over the Kunda (pit) with a girdle and a Yoni measuring one 
hand with the gi’eatest care. Next a Youi is to bo made on it one cubit long 
and resembling the lips of an elephant. It should have a hole and be ex- 
tended and ornamented on both sides with beautiful ornamental workman- 
ship. This Yoni is to be 4 fingers higher than the level of the sacrificial 
hollow (Kupda.) This part should be square and be made to look beautiful. 
At a distance of thirteen A'ngulas from the foundation of the Vedi (altar), 
nine other Kundas are to be similarly made. — 31-36. 

Then the priests shoidd perform Achman and with a calm mind 
perform Homa ceremonies by reciting the mantras sacred to Agni in the 
East and Indra and the other LokapAlas in the South. Afterwards rites 
to propitiate the several Devas should be performed. — 37. 

Afterwards the sacrificial offerings should be made to the presiding 
Deity of the idol. (Earth) VasudhA, VasuretA (Agni), YajamAna, Sfirya, 

Jala, VAyu, ChandramA, AkSda are the eight Devas to be remembered in 
the Kunda. — 38-39. 

Prithvl is protected by Sarva MahAdeva, Agni by Pai^upati, Yaja- 
mAna by Ugra, Aditya by Rudra, Jala by Bhava, VAyu by IdAna, Chandra- 
mA by MahAdeva, AkAda by Bhima Murti. In this way at the time of 



330 


Tm UaTSYA PtJRlSA% 


i. i ..■ n —. ■ i<hii»ii»0 HW iii 1 1 w i Wtf l 

the conseration of any idol these eight are the lidrtipas, «.«•, proteetora 
of the component parts of the idol.*^0-43. 

Htana ceremonies should be performed according to one's means 

by reciting the prescribed Vedic mantra and a vase (^Antighafa) should 
be placed in each Kunda.->-43. 

PdrnHhuti should be offered after 100 or 1,000 Homas. These offer- 
ings are to be poured on the Pfir^a Kumbha (jar filled with water^ The 
base, middle and head of tiie Devatft are to be sprinkled with water, also 
the several Devas there are to be bathed also with the water frequently. 
At e^h prahara incense, sandal, etc., should be offered and Homas 
(libations of ghee) should be offered and the deovtee should repeatedly 
make gifts (offer sacrificial fees) to the priests. — 44-47. 

The priests should be given white garments, golden ear-rings, girdle, 
rings, etc., as well as a bedstead with all the necessary things. As 
long as they officiate, they should be provided with food. — 48-49. 

Offerings should be made to the Bhfitas in all the three parts of the 
day. The Brfihmans should be fed first and afterwards the members of 
all the castes are to be fed. — 50. 

In course of the night festivities should be observed. Dancing, 
singing should be performed. Till Chaturthl Karnia Bn^hmanas should be 
fed. AdhivSsa should be observed for 3, 5, 7 or 1 nights. On some occa- 
sions Adhivftsa may be observed at once. The Adhivftsa ceremony 
performed on such occasions gives the benefit of having performed all the 
sacrifices. — 51-52. 

Here ends the 265th Chapter of Matsya Purdnam on Adhivdsana 

ViJhise. 

■*' CHAPTER CCLXVI, 

Sfita said : — After performing the Adhiviisa ceremony of the Devas 
the dimensions of the Lingarn are to be determined in proportion to those 
of the temple. It is to be sprinkled with clean water and flowers after 
uttering mantras over them and a string should be spread in front of 
the door to the side and N. E. should be determined, for the Devas 
adore the Deva of the North-eastern corner. — 1-3. 

The idol of Siva when located facing the North, gives long 
life, health, prosperity. Other directions are not auspicious and bring 
ill-luck. — 4. 

The Kfirma-^ild should be put under the Lingarn ; above the Kfirma* 

dilfi should be placed theBrahmadila and above it the idol ^iva mentioned 
before which should be bathed with Paiichagavya. The mantras prescriljed 
for the Divine worship should be recited and then the idol should be 
taken to the pedestal by reciting the mantra “ Utti^tha-Brahmapa.” 
Then water should be offered and afterwards Madhuparka. After one 
muhfirta one should place precious stones, viz,, pearls, Vaidfirya, crystal 
lapis laeuli, sapphire, according to one’s means, in the directions, 
according to the presoribed rites. — 5-10. 



OEAPTER OCLXVl. 


321 


Afterwards yellow orpiment, l^ilavajra, soot, yellow clay, lead, red 
chalk, wheat, barley, sesamum, mflnga, NivAra, SamA, mustard, Vrih!, 
rice, sandal, red sandal wood, aguru, an j ana, TJjJira khas, Vai§mavt, 
Sahadevt, Lak^ana, should be placed after rejyeating their Devas and Oip, 
in all the directions. Then after reciting the name of Svarga and the 
prescribed mantras conjointly with the sacred Orp, all sorts of seeds, metals, 
jewels, gold, Padamaruga, mercury, lotus Padmdka, and the images^ of 
turtle ox and earth should bo placed duly in all the directions commencing 

from the east. In the consecration of Brahma-rfila, gold, coral, copper 
boll metal, brass, silver, nice flowers, iron, and harital should be placed 
in due order. T[ all these are not available then only gold and yellow 
orpiment should he put and in the place of seeds and herbs sahadev! 
or barley should be substituted. — 11-18. 

The following are the Nyasa mantras for the consecration of the 
Lokapfilas, : — The most valiant Indra is the Lord of the Devas. Ha 

is armed with a tliunderbolt and is always illumined by His fire. 
I salute Him every day. Agni is red, is the emblem of all the Devas, 
conjoint with Hashes, has smoke for His banner, unbearable to all, 
I salute Him, the presiding Person in the fire. — 19-21. 

Salutations always to Dharmaraja who is shining like the blue lotus, 
adorned with a coronet and sceptre. He is the witness of all actions, and 
righteousness. Salutations always to Niritti who is black in appearance, 
the Lord of all the Raksasas, armed with a sword and endowed with 
glory.— 22-23. 

Salutations always to Varuna who is white in appearance, the image 
of Visuu, the Lord of waters, armed with a noose, having sturdy arms. 
Salutations to Vayii who diffuses all the aromas, has a banner in His hand. 
I salute ChandramA, who is fair, simple, presiding over all h^bs, the Lord of 
all the stars and planets. My salutations to IjJana Purusa is white, the 
master of all the lores, armed witli a trident and of three eyes. I always 
salute Lord Bralima born of a lotus, with four faces, dressed in the 
garment of the Vedas, the Lord of sacrifices. My salutations to Visnu of 
infinite form who holds the whole universe, and who holds this earth 
as if she were a flower. At the time of sacrifices and of making gifts 
these mantras should be recited and the mantras should be prefixed 
with the sacred Om. They are the givers of prosperity and progeny. 
After finishing the Nj^’fisa with these mantras the consecrated idols should 
be rubbed with clarified butter and then they should be dressed in white 
cloths and devoutfully worshipped.— ^•4-32. 

Then raising the Deva with the mantra “ DhruvA Dyau,” it should 
be placed on the desired l^vabhra, fully ornamented. Then placing 
one’s hand on the head of the Deva, one should recite Soma and Rudra 
SQktas. At that time one should make himself Divine like by placing 
himself under the influence of ^omasukta or Riidrasfikta mantras and 
should then meditate on the Deva according to His form. — 33-34. 

He should say : I consecrate Lord Visnu the holder of conch and 
who has the lustre of dtasi flower after making myself Divine. — 35. 

16 



322 


THE MAT8YA PUUANAM. 


I conspcralo t\i6 llircc pycil ^'iva riding ou a bull, adorned witb a 
crescent, having ten hands, and the inaslcv ot the atlondanle. — 36. 

T consecrate Lord Brahma born from the Lotus prayed by the 
seers, having four faces, plaited hair, and mighty arms.— 37. 

I consecrate Iho I.ord Jsun having thousand rays, peaceful in 
appearance, surrounded by nymphs, ha\ iug a lotus in llis hand. — 38. 

In consecrating ^iva the mantras sacred to Him, the Dova mantra 
and Rudra Mantra shordd be recited ; and similarly in the consecration of 
Visnu mantras sacred to Him, the Vaisnava and Brahma mantras should ' 
be recited. — 30. 

In the consecration of tlie Sun, the mantras sacred to the Sun should 
be recitud ; and similarly in the consecration of the, other Devas mantras 
sacred to them shonld he iccilcd, fur one gets everlasting benefits by 
consecrating tlie Divine idols by reciting the \ edic mantras of the respec- 
tive Devas.— 40. 

The Deva consecrated in a temple should be looked npoi. as the 
chief God and other images idaced close by should be treated as 
secondary Deities. Tliey are also to be worshipped. — 41. 

All rouml ]\Iahadcva should bo Icoatofl the attendants Nandi bull, 
Mabakiila, Bhringi, liiti, (Uiha, the (huldess iMrvati, Gancfia, Visnu, 
Brahma, Itudra, Iiidra, Jayanta, liukaiv.lu, nymphs, Gandharvas, and 
Guhyakas. — 42-13, 

The meditation of tlu* particular Deity should bo made ou the 

spot where His image is hiratcil and the Lord Siva bliould bo invoked 
wdth the mantra inontioued beiow : -i 1. 

invoke Lord f^iva in wlios^-^ fliari''t are y^Led iion«, dduoris, serpents, 
Beers, LolcaprdaSj Sv.oniivm lika, jiMendaiils. ^latarn, Soma, Visnu, 

BralimA, NAga, ’iffak^a, (uindltaiv.i, and ii;o oiiicr cfdcstial inhabitants. 
I invoke Him with Hi.s (Vn^-u-t and attendants, l/ud ! be gracious 
enough to come. I saluti' you. Le ].]< .;,^('d to aeco])t my Avursh ip. —-45-48. 

0 Bliagavau ! Rudra ! kimdiy /rrant my Awdfan'. (> Bhava ! j^ou 
are the eternal Puj-usa : n 'cv-pt si.y wor-liiji. I .-aluie ymt. t) Bliagavan ! 
welcome to you ! t) Soma ! L.c plrarv'd i > aec‘e|>t along with your attendants 
and relations this mantra imi died Pmlya, Vrghya, Achmaniya and Asana. 
I salute you.” — 41). 

Afterwards Vedic liymij-, shfHil 1 !>.* recited for a long time and then 

the idol of f^iA’a Kliouid lie baliied in curds, milk, clarilied butter, Avater, 
sugar, honey, flower;-', arid ineem^e along Avith sweet music. Then Lord 
^i\ua shouUl be doAoutfuliy Avor.sbii)peil and the following mantras should 
be recited ; — 5b-5L 

“ Yajclgraloduraj muda,” ' vinidajfiyata, Sahasrasi?\sa pnrusa, abhit- 
va^uranonuina pnrusaevedam, lri)>riduidh\ii,’ \ encdaiiialihutama, &c., natvS 
v^inanya.” "J’hesc mantras should l)o constantly repeated in the installation 
ceremonies, and then tlie middle, tlio l)ase and the itoad of the idol 
should be touclied four times with Avatcr. After the idol has been duly 
consecrated, the devotee shotild give with due respect dresses and orna- 
ments to the officiating priest, Murtipa, Achurya, — 52-53. 



GBAPTER CCLXVII. 


323 


Then the blind, the poor, tho miser, etc., assembled should be 
dismissed with clothings, ornaments, etc.. At the time of adhivAsa the 
installed JJeva should be rubbed with honey, the first day, with turmeric 
and mustard the second day, with sandal and barley on the third day. — 
54-55. 

With red arsenic and Priyangii (a kind of creeper, long flapper) ou 
the fourth day. By performing these ceremonies, one gets x)rosperity, 
happiness and health, and the diseases are all cured. The idols should be 
rubbed with krisnaujan and sesamum ou the 5th day and with clarified 
butter, sandal, lotus-dust, saffron on tho Gth day, and gorochana, agurnu 
flowers on tho 7th day. — 50-58. 

These things should ho used all at one time when the period of 
adhivusa is instantaneous. The image once installed and fixed should not 
be removed again from the spot ; for it is a sin to do so. The holes should 
be fillcil in with sand, lime, etc., Tho Lokapala in whose direction 
tho image leans should be appeased and the followi)ag offerings should 
be made, vis : — 5!1-01. 

Ornaments should bo offered to Indra ; and gold to Agnt ; buffalo to 
Bharmanija ; goat and wealth to Nairita-Baksasa ; — 02. 

Pearls and mother of pearl to Vanina ; brass and cloth to VSyu ; 
cow to ChandramA, ; bull and silver to l^iva. — 03-G4. 

I’lic Lokaptilas towards whom tho iilol is drawn, should bo appeased 
with Sflnti. And if tho prescribed worsliip be not performed under 
such circumstances tliere is always a fear of destruction of the family ; 
so tho chinks round the i<lol should be well filled in wdth sand, in order 
to make it fixed and immovable. — 05. 

I’ostivitics slionld bo held for 3, 5, 7 or 10 days at the time of the 
consecration of the itlol when grain, cloth, etc., should be freely distributed. 
The Kirtau (singing the name of Hari), reciting lluiuayaifa,' Kathakatd and 
other meetings should bo performed. — GG. 

At the end of the fourth day, one should perform the Chaturtht- 
karma after having his bath and gifts should be made accordingly. — G7. 

1 have explained to you tho ceremonials of consecration that 
drive away all ills as described by the learned and performed by the 
Vidyadharas and Devas. — GS. 

Here ends the two hundred and sixtij-sixth chapter of the Matsya Puranam 

on installing an image, etc. 


CHAPTER CCLXVir. 

Siita said : — “ I shall now tell you briefly how an image is installed 
and the best way of offering Arghya. — 1. 

Ai'gliya consists in tho offering of eight things, vis., of curds, 
uncooked rice, milk, DurvA-grass, honey, barley and musthrd 

(Siddhdrathak). Fruits should also bo offered. Tho earth of the stable, 
elephant yard, chariot house, anthill, earth dug out by a wild boar, that of 



B24 


TUB MATS7A PURABAM. 


a sacrificial hollow, o£ the cowshed and of the beds of the sacred rivers 
like the Ganges, etc., should be placed in the jar (kumbha) by reciting 
the mantra “ Udhrit&si, etc., ’’ and afterwards the jars should bo filled 
with water by reciting the mantras “ ^a luoclevi, etc.” and “Apohi^thil, etc." 
—2-4. 

Cow’s urine should be placed after reciting ibe sacred Gilyatrf, 
cowdung by reciting “ GandhadvarA,,” milk after reciting “Apyuyasva,” 
curds by reciting “ l).adbikravna,” clarified butter after reciting “ Tejost, 
etc.,” water a.fter reciting “ Tad Devasya—tva etc.” All these are mixed 
and then Kuifa is thrown therein. Thus ranchagavya is prepared. The 
idol should bo bathed with this Pauchagavj'a of the jar thus filled in. — 5-6. 

Afterwards they should be bathed with curds, and then with water 
repeating the mantra “ JJevasya tviim ” and then again witli the Dadhi 
Kravn, etc., with the juice of fruits by reciting the mantra “ Agua- 
Syahi,” and then water should bo sprinkled with Kiisfa grass after reciting 
the mantra “ Devasyatva,” and then again with perfumed wate • after 
reciting the sacred Gayatri. Then the idol of Lord ^iva should be 
bathed with 1000, 500, 12.3, 6-1, 32, 16, 8 or only with 4 jars [of water]. 
Those jars should be made of gold, silver, cojiper, brass, bell-metal 
or of earth if one oauuot afford the more expensive ones. The following 
medicinal herbs slioidd be mixed with the water in the jar, viz. — (1) .Saha- 
devi, (2; VachA, (3) VyAghri, (4) Vala, i3) Ativala, (6) iSaiukliyapuspi, (7) 
Simhi tSj Suvarchaht. Thc-se eight arc necessary in the Mahasuana. The 
powder of barley, Nivara, sesaimmi, Syainaka, S:ili-riee, Priyangu, Vribi, 
should be rubbed on the idol before bathing it. — 7-16. 

The following substances viz. — Svaslika, Padinaka, ^ankha, Svetapad- 
ma, Kamala, ^rivatsa, Darpaua, and Nandyavarta and cowdung, auspicious 
earth, five colours, etc., live colonred i)t)wdor8, Dtirva grass and black 
Sesamum should* be used in NirAjana ceretuony after which should be 
offered water for rinsing the mouth ami then Ganges water should bo 
offered. Then two pieces of dress should be j)ut on after reciting the 
following mantra : — 17-20. 

Note fii^n=adoratLou of llio idol by waving lights, perfuuioM, fans, &c. 

“ Be gracious enough to put on the clothes of variegated colours 
woven with Deva sutra and conjoint with sacrifice and gifts. These are 
very nice. Accept them.” — 21. 

Afterwards taking ku^a grass in the liand camphor sliould be offered 
mixed with saffron, when tlie following mantra should be recited, viz. : — 

“ Deva! J do nut know j’our bodj’and form ami your luovemeuts, bo graci- 
ous enough to accept this iiiceji.so offered by me.” — 22-23. 

Then 40 lights should he lit up and offered after circumainbulation, 
by reciting the following mantra ; — “ Yon are the light of the sun and the 
moon. You are the flash of lightning and fire. You are the light of all. 
Be gracious enough to accept the light offered by me.” Then incense 
should be offered by reciting the following mantra, viz. : — 24-25. 

“ Deva ! bo pleased to accept this incense made of herbs and choice 
ingredients full of delicious odour.” — 26. 


CnAPTEIi GCLXVIII. 325 


Then after reciting the mantra “ Mah4bhfls4ya te namah,*' ornaments 
should be put on. Thus after keeping up rejoicings for seven nights, the 
devotee sliould get himself sprinkled with the remainder of the Abhi§eka 
water. — 27-28. 

Tlie sprinkling should be performed out of the water of 8, 4, 2, or 
1 jar or from Paficliaratna jar wrapped up in a white piece of cloth after 
reciting tlie mantra “ Devasyatva.** The other mantras of the occasion 
have been mentioned in Atliarvana mantra of Navagraha-sacrifice which 
might also bo recited. Afterwards he should bathe, put on white clothes 
and worship the idols and give to the oiliciating priest gifts of money, orna- 
ments, dresses witli groat devotion ; and should send all the utensils 
employed in the snorilice, marulapa, &c., to the house of the priest for the 
Devas are satisfied by the satisfaction of the Guru. — 29-32. 

'J'lie consecratif)n of an idol should not be performed by men of 
angry disposition, hypocrites, Li/igis who put on some peculiar garb, &c. 
It should always be performed by a virtuous householder who is well 
accomplished in the Vedas and is a Brahniana. — 33. 

lie who discarding a man versed in the Vedas gets a hypocrite to 
officiate at the consecration ceremony, surely brings ruination on his house- 
liold or an evil spirit gets hold of the temple and no one worships the idol 
thus consecrated. But wliore Brahmanas officiate there is always pros- 
perity in that house ami the idol thus consecrated is worshipped for a very 
long time to come. — 34-33. 

Here ends the 2(j7th chapter of the Matsya Purdnam on the bathing 
of the idoL 


CHAPTER GCLXVIII. 

The Risifl said : — Suta ! of what dimensions and how should the 
temples be made by those eager for prosperity ? Kindly describe in detail 
their measurements and characteristics. — 1. 

Suta replied : — The one well versed iu the an and the science of 
housebuilding should first examine and select a site. — 2. 

Afterwards propitiatory rites as prescribed should bo performed to 
appease the Vastu Deity and sacrificial oblations should be offered. Such 
rites and preliminary propitiation of the Vastu Deity slioidd be performed 
at the time of repairing a temple, laying out a garden, or a door entering 
a new building, and erecting a now building. As stated before in previous 
chapters Vastu mandalain of 81 squares should be drawn in the middle of 
Vustu and then a sacrificial pit (kiinda) measuring one liand and having 
three girdles should be made. Wood of milky trees should be employed 
as sacrificial fuel and lloma ceremony and libations of black sesamum and 
barley should be offered mixed with chips of Butea frondosa, catcheu, 
honey and woodapplo. At the end of the lloma ceremony, valis (offerings) 
are to be given with five vilva (Bael) twigs or the seeds thereof along with 
other eatables. Afterwards other sacrificial offerings should be made, viz. — 
clarified butter and grain should be offered to Agui in the N-E., boiled 



326 


'TUB ilATBYA VVBA'UAU. 


rice and fruits with clarified butter to Parjanya, yellow flag, ground corn 
and turtle to Jaya, Paucharatna (five jewels), ground corn and bolt to 
Indra ; smoke colour awning and barley-meal to the Surya. — 3-11. 

Clarified butter and wheat to Siitya, fish to Bhrisa, fried cakes to 
Antariksa, barley meal to Vayu, fried rice lo Pilsa, gram to Vitatha, honey 
and grain to Grihaksata, powered meals to Yama, incense and food to 
the Gandharvas, green leaves to Bliringaraja, barley to Mfiga, rice 
and pulse boiled together to the manes, Dantakastha and powdered 
grain, and flowers to Sugriva, golden coloured cakes and wine to 
Asura 12-10. 

Pdyasa to Puspadanta, lotus with Kusastamba to Varuna, rice and 
clarifield butter to tJosa, barley to Pa[)a-yaksaina, balls of clarified butter 
to Roga, fruits and flowers to NAga ; — 17. 

Clarified butter to Mukhya, clarified butter and milk to Soma, cooked 
mfinga to BhallAla ; — Iri. 

Powdered rice to Bhaga, friec] cakes stufTod with powdered grain 
to Aditi, fried cakes to Dili. All these olTcrings should be made outside 
the Mandal. — 19. 

Milk should bo offi‘rod to Yama, curds to Apavatsa, balls of sweet, 
chillies and Jvus^x to SAvifra ; — 

Fried cakes of flour and re<i sugar lo SiivilA, (darlfi(*d butter aiici 
sandal to Jaya, red sandal and lieo cooked in milk and sugar to Vivaa- 
vau ; — 21. 

Yellow orpiii)e]it, rice, elaiilied butter lo Indra; tdarilied butter 
and rice to ilitra ; plaiji rice and jAce cooked in milk and sugar to Riidra ; 
22 . 

Cooked and raw meat lo l^Aja yak^imo moat and pumpkin to 
Prithvidhara ; — 23, 

Clarificfl butter and sugar in AiyamA, l^incliagavya, sesainum, rice, 
and other victuals to BralunA, The Devas resivling in Vastu thus ^vor- 
shipped gdve peace and prtJ-peiity. — 2U2o. 

Gold is t<) bo given to all and a milch cow and gold should bo 
given to BiahinA in llio riamo of ail tlu -o Doilies. Now liear about the 
offerings that (Higdjt to be juado to the k;dv‘;iasis, 

Flesb, rice, ehaifical Ijiittcr, lotus, bh.od, and tlu'se should bo offered 
to Chavaki in llie N.-E., llcsh, rice, bIo(,d, turmeric and cooked grain 
Bhouhl be given to Vidai i in the S.-M ; - 27*28. 

Curds, rice, blorK], (*hips bones should be given to Pflfana along 
with her liaksasa ; fish, wine, rice cooked in luilk and sugar to IVipa in 
the N.-W. and all round. At every sacrificial offeriiig one should mention 
his name and use the sacred expression ( )in. Afterwards tlio devotee should 
bathe in the water mixed wdth lierbs.— 29-31. 

Tlie Bralimanas who come to Ujc Imusc sliould ho well lionoured and 
in such a way VdsLu should be worshipped. — 32. 

At the time of starting the building of palaces, temples, gardens 
and entering newly laid cities and houses, festivities should be hold, 



OEAPTBR GOLKIX. 


327 


dancing should be given, music should be played and Raksoghana and 
Pdvam&na Sdktas should be recited by the Br&hmanas. — 33-34. 

One who observes these ceremonies in his liouse and temples every 
year never gets any calamity, nor does he get any serious illness and hia 
brethren and riches do not perish. He lives for a hundred years and w- 
maiuB in heaven for a kalpa after death. — 35-3G. 

Here ends the two hundred and sixty-eighth chapter in Matsya 
Purdnam on propitiating the Vd&tu Deity. 


CIIAri’ER CCLXIX. 

Sfita said : —After thus making sacrificial offerings to Vdstu the 
site of tlio temple should bo divided into 16 parts. In the centre, the 
Clarbha consisting of 4 parts should be thought of and this again is to be 
divided into 12 parts and a half. A wise man should then plan the door- 
ways on tho four sides of the temple. — 1-2. 

The depth of tho foundations should be one-fourth of the room and the 
dome (or top) should be double the height of that of the foundations. The 
height of the passage for circumambulation shoidd be a quarter of that of the 
dome and in front of tlie two Garbha Sutras, tlie Mandapa should be deter- 
mined ; and in one third part of the Hapdapa, Bhadrasan (one’s house) 
is to be built. After dividing the Garblia Hana into five parts, one 
part is to be taken and in that tlie eastern doorway (Prrikgrlva) is to be de- 
signed ; then the front Mancjapa of the Garblia Sutra is to be located. 
Those are the ordinary characteristics of the temple. Kow other charac- 
teristics are being mentioned with reference to the measurement of the 
Lingam. — 3-7. 

The pedestal should bo symmetrical to the size of the Phallus. In 
half of the pedestal, the foundation is to be laid ; tho heiglit should be 
in accordance with tho height of tho outer foundations. The height of the 
temple top should bo twice that of tho foundations and the (height of the) 
circumambulating passage a quarter of that of the top, the front Mandapa 
should be as high as tho passage for circumambulation , and the entrance to 
the IMaridapa may be half of its height. The corners of the door-way 
should be made projecting outside the temple and on the wall above it 
should be made the maujart (the top-most part) and in half of it should 
be made the ^ukanSsA (looking like tho aquiline nose) and above it should 
bo made a quadrangular spot in the dome and above it the top of the 
dome. — 8-14. 

Now another set of measurements with reference to Garbhamana. 
The Vastu Garbha should bo divided into 9 parts and the phallus should 
be located in the centre ; the side of the pedestal is to comprise eight 
pfidas and should bo artistically finished. The width of the wall should be 
of eight pddas aud the height live times that. The top shoidd be twice 
the height of the walls, which should be divided in two parts and 
£$ukan&sa should be made in one of them and a quadrangular spot 
(Vedika) in the third part of it.— 15-18. 



32a » 


THE MATSYA PURANAM, 


The Amalajiara Kantha (top-most part) sliould be made in the 4th 
part and the projecting parts (Kapftla) should be made twice the length ; 
it should be decorated with floral designs. Such is the plan of the 3rd 
kind of temple. The other characteristics of the temple are now being 
mentioned. — 19-20. 

SOta said Twice born! Now hear about the dinionsions of the 
other kind of temples. Divide the place whore the image is to located 
into 3 parts; and in the outer portion of tfio above dimen /ions the 
Rathafiga is to be designed ; and tlic Neini is to bo one-fourth wide and 
the temple (or buildings) to be built all around. Tlie Uarbha i.s to bo made 
twice the size of the Nemi. The walls are to bo of the dimensions of 
Garbha intinas. And the lop sliouUl bo twice the height of the walls and 
in the 5th part of the teni]>lo a door-way slionld b ; made. Now about the 
outlet. In the 3rd part of the louiid walls tlu, Sus a (hole) is to made. 
In- some particular cases in the liftli part rn\kgrivit is to U. loi’uU 1. In the 
fifth part at the Kanianiula the two Ihakgrivas arc to be located. And 
golden pieces should be put at the base of the door. Tlie (enipii.j are of 
three sorts, Jyestha, Ma<lhya (middling* aiul Kanis(;.ha (small) according to 
the dillereiicos between the <i'/.es of the temples and Juingams. Now hear 
the names of the different kinds of temples. - 1^1-27. 

They arc: — 'bho Mem, Mandara, Kai];\sa, Kumbha, Sirnha, Mriga, 
Vimruia, Clilianduka, CMiaturasra, AstAsra, SoduJsAsra, Vartula, Sarvabhad- 
raka, Simhasya, Nandana, Nandivardhamika, Ifainsa, Vrisa, Suvarnerfa,^ 
Padmaka and Samudgaka. Now h(‘ar about llieir descriptions: — 28-30. 

A temiflo with hundreds of toj)s, liaving four doors, 10 flats, 
lofty, imposing and beautiful looking is called Mem. —31. 

A temple with 12 flats (Pihumikas) is ]\landara ; with 9 flats is 
Kaihisa ; one with several toi>s and doors is called Viiuana and 
Chbandaka. One that lias 8 flats, (u- 7 flats is Naudivardhana ; one with 
several tops is Nandaiia, one wiili 10 petals (or corners) and various 
tops and 5 flats and with (Jhitrairda is Sai vatoliluidra. One with many 
faces is Balabhichliaudaka ; one like a bull and void of petals is 
Mandala. — 32-35. 

One with the a]'>peftrauf‘e of Sirnha and having figures of lions is 
the Siniha. One wuth tlie apj^earanco of an elephant is called Oaja. 
One with !) flats and of tl:o apjjoarancc of a jiitcher is known as the 
Kumbhaka. One w-iili .10 petals all round ornamented with Pan- 
chdndakas is called Samudgaka, and it lias tw'o ChandrafiAIas measuring 
two flats on either side and two flats; such is also l^admaka. One 
with 16 petals and nice tops is called Sodasiasra. Its height is three 
flats. — 36-39. 

One adorned with Cliandrafirda and big Pnlggriva is called 
Mrigaraja ; one with many Cljandrarfalas is Gaja. The Garuda class is 
superior to Gfiharaja; its height is seven Hats, and it has three Chandra- 
sSdlas ; outside this there are 8-0 flats. — 40-43. 

Another class of Garuda Prasada is 10 flats higli, sixteen petalled, 
and has two flats in addition to those mentioned before. Grikrikijaka 
Pras&da is like Padma. Panchfindaka has two flats and 40 hands square. 



OEAPTEB CGLXX. 


329 


ARt&sra and Chaturasra are octagonal and quarto in shape respectively. 
The one resembling a crane in appearance is called Harpsa. Vrisa has 
one_ flat, one top of 10 hands and round from all sides. It yields all 
desires.— -44-45. 

The other ones like those mentioned above are like Siqihasya having 
Chandratfidas. All these are made of bricks, wood or stone, and flags and 
buntings should be put on to them. — 40. 

Meru is 50 hands in extent. Mandara is 45 hands in measurement.— 
47. 

Kailasa is 44 hands, Vimanaka is 34 hands, Nandivardhana is 32 
hands, Nandana is of 30 liands, and Sarvatobhadra is of 20 hands cir- 
cular and having Padmakas. — 48. 

Ciaja, Siniha, Kunihlia and Valabhliichandaka are of 16 hands, and 
dear to the Devas ; Kaihisa, j\IrigarAja, VimAnachandaka are 12 hands, 
Garuda is 8 hands, Ilamsa of 10 hands. — 49-51. 

All these temides if of these dimensions arc lucky. The hands of 
the Yaksas, Raksasas, and serpents, arc said to bo good and called MAtrika 
hands.— 52. 

It brings goorl lack to locate a big phallus .Jyestha I.inga in each 
of the 7 teini)le 3 such as the Morn, Ac. Alodium sized iihallus should be 
located in the 8 temples such as Sri-Yfik-saka, Ac., and small size phallus 
should be put in tlio 5 temples such as Ifaiiisa, Ac.— 53. 

In the Valabliichandaka temple the goddess with plaited hair and a 
coronet sliouhl bo located. She grants boons, fearlessness ; she holds a 
rosary and a Kamandalu ; she is fair and giver of auspicious things.— 54. 

The Goddess holding a goblet, adorned w-ith a red coronet, lotus 
and goad along with Lord ^iva should ahvays be wwshipped in the 
PrAsAda named C<{ilia. — 55. 

The other kinds of the images of (loddes-s should ho placed in a 
forest and w'orshipped there. Gane^a the son of Garni should be located 
in Valabhichhaudaka temple and is auspicious. — 50. 

Here ends the iico-hundrcd and sixty-ninth chapter of the Matsya 
Purdnam on the dimensions, etc., of temples. 


CHAPTER CCLXX. 

Sdta said : — “I shall now relate to you the characteristics of the 
various Manejapas (halls attached to tho temple) in accordance with the 
dimensions of the temples. — 1. 

Tho Manejapas are of three kinds ; viz. : — uttama, madhj'auia and 
kani^fha. — 2. 

Their names are : — (1) Puspaka, (2) Pu§pabhadra, (3) Suvrata, (4) 
Amritauaudana, (5) Kau^alya, (6) Budhisankirna, (7) Gajabhadra, (8) Jay&- 
vaha, (9) ^rivatsa, (10) Vijaya, (11) Vastu-kirti, (12) ^rutitnjaya, (13) 
17 



330 


TBE UAT8TA WBJtEAU, 


yajfiablmdra, (14) Viiala, (10) Siufli^la, (16) Satrumardana, (17) Bh&ga- 
paocba, (18) Nandana, (19) Manava, (20) Manabliadraka, (21)Sugrlva, 
(22) Harita, (23) KanukOra, (24) ^atardbika, (25) Sitpba, (26) l^yAma, 
and (27) Subbadra. Thus twenty-seven classes of Manclapas are named. 
—3-6. 

Now hear their characteristics. A Mandapa willi ()4 pillars is Ihi^paka, 
one with 62 pillars is Puspabluulrn, one with 60 Pinal’s isSuvrata, one wdth 
58 pillars is Aiuritamanthaua, one with 56 pillars is Kaui^alya, one with 54 
pillars is Biulhisaipliirna, one with 52 pillars is llajalhailra, one with 50 
Pinal’S is Jaj'Avaha, one with 43 iiiilars is fc^rivatsa, one with 4(> jiillars is 
Vijaya, one with 44 i)inai’s is V:\stiikirti, one with 12 jiillars is ^I’ulinjaya, 
one with 40 pillars is Yajiialjliadra, one with 38 pillars is Visjdlaka, one 
with 36 pillars is SuiUista, one with 31 pillars is ^atnnnajnlaua, one with 
32 pillars is nhagapai'cha, one with 30 pillars is Nandaua, one with 28 
pillars is Manava, one with 26 pillars is Manahliatlni, one witli 24 pillars is 
Sugriva, one with 22 piillars is llarita, one with 20 pillars is Karpikara, 

one with 18 pillars is ^atardhika, one with 10 pillars is Siinha, one with 14 
pillars is J^yumabhadra, one with 12 pillars is Subbadra. — 7-14. 

Now the plan of the Mandapah : — Tlu'y shonlil bo made triangular, 
circular, octagonal or with K't sides or they are s<juare. Tliey promote 
kingdoms, victory, longevity, sons, wife and nourislunont i’e.spectively. » 
Temples of other shape than these arc inauspicious. — 15-17. 

In the centre of the hall shoidd be made the doorway measured 
))y sixty-four iVidas (feet). The lieiglit of the temple slu)ui(l be twice 
its breadth, the plinth should be one-third l)jo breadth and llie Garbha 
■ijjsidej should bo half the breadth, and walls should be made all round. 
Taking one-fourth of the (iarbha as ihe unit, three times of this will be the 
.Syata (breadth), twice will be the v. idih of the ejitrance and it will bo built 

of Udumbara wood. The two Jsalvhhs bhoalf-l be 11 quarter ol the width of 
tlie door. There shcjuld be ‘h o, 7 or tiiiio bVikhTts wliich will make up the 
door. The doors are divided into three cla-ses, Kauistlju, iJadbyama, aud 
Jyestha.— 18*21. 

The principal doorway is tt» b<' 1 10^ Afl.Luda^^ hi.qli ; other inediuin 
and good doors are i:'() and lin.e.f'rs high. A (hior IriO lingers in 
height is tlie best for ventilathni, IKb lid, 100, 90, and 80 lingers arc the 
otJjer prescribed heights of doors. Dotin'^ of other buigh Is than these are 
not good. There should bo no (d>s( ruction in front of the doorway. It is 
to be carefully avoided in every case. — 

The obstruction caused by a tree, a corner, a curve, a pillar, a banner, 
a well, a wall and a svabljia are not goofl. — 21). 

Destruction, misery, banishment, starvation, ill luck, imprisonment, 
disease, poverty, quaiTcl, disunion and loss of wealth are caused by the 
obstruction of a dooj-way. Fruit trees to the cast and milky trees to the 
south of it are the best.— 27-’28. 

To the west should be made a cliarming pool of water full of lotus 
flowers, to the noilh shoidd be planted iialin trees and flowers.— 29. 


CHAPTER OCLXn. 


ZZl 

Round the Vdstu there should be flowing waters as well as still 
waters ; this is a good thing; and close to the main temple should be made 
the pagodas of other Deities.— 30 . 

_ To the south should be made the tapovana, to the north the house for 
MutrikAs, to the S.-E. should be the kitchen, to the S.-W. the temple of 
Ganerfa, to the west the resting place of Lakshmt, to the N. W. the platform 
of all the astcrisms, to the north the sacrificial place as well as the place 
for Nirmfilya ; to the west the place for offerings Soma and other Devas, in 
front the place of {^iva should be the place of Nandi, and lastly the place 
of Cupid. — .31-33. 

And to the N.-E. should be the store of water and the resting place 
of Tjord Vi§nu in water. — 34. 

The temple should bo thus decorated with Kundas, Mandapas, flags, 
bells and buntijigs. One who thus makes a temple and carries on rejoicings 
there, gets everlasting riches, and is worshipped in heaven. Thus the 
consecration of temples, etc., are described according to the prescribed 
rites. — 35-30. 

Here ends the two hundred and sevehtieth chapter' of the Matsya 
Purdnam on temples, etc. 


CHAPTER CCLXXr. 

The Risis said :-■() Suta, you have described to us the dynasty of 
Puru, along with the future kings in that dynasty. Now tell us about those 
kings who will be in the Solar (Silrya) dynasty. So also tellus here aboiit 
those illustrious kings in that Yadava family, who will exist in the Kali- 
yuga. And when those dynasties (Sflrya and Yiidava) will come to end, 
then, tell us briefly about tho.so pious kings who were kinsmen of these 
families and who will obtain the kingdom after them, in due order as 
far as possible. — 1-3. 

Note . — The future Kings of Faorava dynasty have been doseribed in Chapter 60. 
Sec p. 163. 

Shta said : — Now, after this, T shall toll* you, of the high-souled 
IksvAkus. 


Post miahdbhdrata Aifi?vdkiis or Solar Dynasty. 

(1) Brihadbala's heir [was (2) Bnhatkpja, his heii'] was the heroic king 
(3) Uruk^aya. The son of Uruksaya was the famous (4) Vatsadroha 
(Vatsavyuba). — 4. 

[According to Mr. Pargiter, tbo verse ought to be : “ Brihadbala’s 
heir was the* warrior king Brihatk§aya his sou was Uruksaya.] 

(5) Prativyoma was after Vatsadroha. His son is (G) Divakara 
to whom in the Madhyadetfa, belongs the beautiful city of AyodhyA. — 5. 

• Note.— According to Yflyn, the reading is “who now rulos tho city of AyodhyH in 
Madhyadoa'a,” showing that Diviikara was tho ruling prince, when this PurSna was recited. 



332 


TEE MATSYA PUBAEAM. 


Divakara’s (successor) will bo the illustrious (7) Sahadem, whose 
(successor) will bo (8) Dhruvdha, the high-minded. — 6. 

His (successor) will be the most lucky (0) Bhavya (Bhiinuratha or 
Bhfivyaratha.) And his son will be (10) Prattpdha. The son ol Pratlp&iJva 
will be even, (11) ISupratipa. — 7. 

(,12) Marudeva will be his (Supx-atipa’sj son, after whom was (13) 
Sunahsatra. After Suuak§atra will be (14) Kinnardiva, the harasser of 
his foes. — 8. 

After Kinnax'fusva will be the high-minded (15) Antarik$a. After 
Antariksa will bo (16) Susena, and (17) Sumitra, the conciuoror of his 
enemies (Amitrajit). — 9. 

— According to anoliu-r reading, Susona was tho son of Antariksa, wlioso .son 
was Snmitra-Amitrajit. Or, after, Antariksa will bo Suparna (Siiscna), and after him 
Amitrajit. 

(18) Brihadrdja will bo the son of Sumitra. Brihadruja’s (son) will 
bo (.19) Virydvdn (Dharraavan). Again (20) Kritanjaya, by name, (will be) 
the virtuous (Dhurniika) sou of Yiryavan. — It). 

The son of Kritanjaya, will bo tho wise (21 ) Tlanejaya, (22) Sanjaya, 
the warrior king will come af tot Iianojaj-a. — 11. 

[Saujaya’s sou be (23) E^akya. After f^akya will bo the king (24) 
^Ut'lbaudaiia, Tlic son of Sudbaiulana will be (L'a) vSnUlliArtlia, llif' eminent ^ 
(26) Pu^haJa or Tialiula will bo (lie s.m of SidtJLartha].— 12. 

After him will ho (-7) Prasenajit. Afior him will be (28) Kmdral^a, 
After K«udraka will bo (2d) KnJaka. After .Kidaka is remembered (30) 
Snraiha,— IS, 

From Siiratha was born (31) Sumitra. lie will bo tho last king. 
These Aiksvakus have been deeiared, wl.o will rxist in tlio Kfiliyuga.~14. 

Ihesc will 1)0 in tho line of Li-ihadbala, they will he tho ghny of 
their famdy. Here the f jllowing genealogical verso is sung by ancient 
poets. — 15. 

J liis dynasty of tlic Tk’^vaku will end with Sumitra. On reaching 
King Sumitra it will come to its rdo^,o in the Kaliynga.” — 10. 

Tliis is tluis the dyinis:ty o( Maim, even as doolarod before. Hereafter 
I will relate the Builiadratha ^dynasty* of ilagadha. — 17. 


Post-Mahahlidvafa Bnrhad ralhas. 

Listen about tho kings, lliose past, those present, and those to come 
in future, from (the stock of; Jarasandha (and) in the line of Sahadeva. — 

18. 

After (1) f^ahadeva was killed, wlien tlic great war of Bhdrata took 
place, (2) So7nddhi succeeded him as his heir, and became king in GirL 
vajra. — 19. 

. He reigned for fi fly-eight years, and then (3) Sriitalfi^ava in his lino 
roagned for sixty- four years. — 20. 



OEAPTER CGLXXI. 


333 


(4) ApraUpi reigned for thirty-six years, and (5) Niramilra after 
reigning for forty-years went to heaven. — 21. 

Afterwards (6) Suraksa got the earth for fifty-six years, and (7) 
Brihatkarmd reigned for twenty-three years. — 22. 

(8) Send jit has just passed away after enjoying the earth for fifty years. 

iVotc.— Another reading according to the VAyu Pur&na is “ Senajit is now enjoying 
the earth, the same number (23) of years.’* 

He will be succeeded by (9) Srutanjaya who will be for forty years. 
Afterwards (10) Vibhu will obtain the earth and will reign for twenty-eight 
years ; and then (11) Snehi will rule the kingdom for fifty-eight plus six 
years (t.e. G4). — 23-24, 

The king (12) Ksema will enjoy the earth for twenty-eight years 
after whom the powerful (13) Anuvrata will reign for sixty-four years. — 25. 

(14) Sunetra will enjoy the earth for twenty-jive [another reading 
thirty-five] years. (15) Nirvriti will enjoy it for fifty-eight years. — 26. 

After that (IG) Trinetra will enjoy the kingdom for twenty-eight 
years. (17) Dyumatsena (Dridhasena) will bo for forUj-eight years. — 27. 

(18) Mahinctra will be resplendent for thirty-three years (19) Aehala 
or (Riicliala) will be king for ihivly-two years. — 28. 

(20) Ripiinjaya will obtain the earth for fifty-years^ and these 32 
kings will be the future Brihadrathas. — 29. 

A’oit'.— The following throe lines are omitted in our text of the Matsya Purdna, but 
supplied by Mr. Pargitcr: — 

“Chalvariiu sat sama rajfi Snnetro bhoksyato tatah ; 

fiatyajit prithvim rdja try asitirn bhoksyatc samah ; 

Prapyacniam Visvajichchapi paiicha-vimsad bhavisyati.” 

King Snnotra will next enjoy the kingdom for forty years. King Satyajit will enjoy 
(ho oartli for cighty-tlireo years, (eighty years.) And Visvsajit will obtain this earth and 
be king for twoiity-fivo years.-— 20A. 

A’otr.— Our reading is dvdtrimsattii nripd hyota. Anothar reading is “Sodas-aite 
nripa jneya bhavitaro nrilft-drathdli.” And then the vcr.so w’ill mean these ’ sixteen 
kings are to bo known as the futuro/l3rihadratha.s.** Thou there is further this line in the 
same manuscript Trayo-vims-adhikam te.sfim rajyam cha sata-saptakara.*’ And it 
means, “and their kingdom will last soven-hundred twen ty- three j’cars.” According to 
this reading the sixteen future Burhadratbas will reign for 723 years. Of course this 
includes Senajit also. 

Their kingdom will last full 1,000 years indeed. Then Balaka (son of) 
Pulaka will he the conqueror of Ksatriyas. — 30. 

Note.— Tho translation is according to tho reading. 

But tho kings enumerated are 22 only. The reading of tho *Brahmdnda Piirdna is 

gqr “ These 22 Kings.” This is more accurate. 

Here ends the two hundred and seventy-first chapter on the genealogies 
of future Ik^vakus ajid Brihadrathas. 



m 


THE MAT87A EDBANAM. 


CHAPTER CCLXXIT. 

Pradyota or BtUaka Dynasty. 

Sflta said ; — When Bfihadrathas and Vitihotras and Avantis have 
passed away, Palaka, after killing his master will instal his son (Pradyota 
or B&laka) as king. — 1. 

He will instal Balaka, born of Pulaka, in the very sight of the 
K^atriyas (by assassinating his master, llipmijaya). That son of Pnlaka will 
subjugate the neighbouring kings by force and not by right, and will bo 
devoid of royal policy. — 2, 

That {Pnlaka), the best of men, will reign for 23 yeai's, (2) Pfilaka or 
Bdlaka will be king for 28 years (or 21 according to the Vayu). — 3. 

(3) King Vimlikayl^pa will reign for .')3 years (50 according to Vayu) 
(4) and Sdryaka will be king for 21 years (2o), N andivnrdhana, his son, will 
be king for 30 years (20 years another reading). These five kings, after 
enjoying the earth, for 52 years (evidently a mistake for 155 or 152) 
will perish. — 4-5. 

Note.— Tho Visna as well as the Bhagavata Parana give the aggregate as 188 years. 

Sisundku Dynasty. 

Then Smindka destroying all their glory will place his son in 
Benares and himself go to Girivraja. The King ^ii^dnaka will reign for » 
40 years.— 6. 

His son Kdhaoania will obtain the earth for 2(1 years, K-icmadhai'ma 
will be king for 36 years. — 7. 

Kqcmajit will obtain the earth for 24 years, Vindhyasena will be 
king for 28 years. — 8. 

Kancdyana will be king for 0 years, his son, BhAmimitra will be 
king for 14 years. — 9. 

Note. Till is verso (0) is evidently mif^placed here. Its proper place is in the Eauva 
line. , • . . 

Aj(Uamtru will b'3 king for 27 years, Varnsaka will be king for 24 

years. — 10. 

His son Uddsi will be king for 33 years, Nandivardhana will be king 
for 40 j’cars. — 11. 

MaMmndt will bo king for 43 years. These will be the kings in 
the Sib'unaka dynasty. — 12. 

Tho SI4una.kas will be kings for full 360 years, and the kings will 
bo low born Ksatriyas (Tv!jatral)andhu). — 13. 

Note. — Accordiug to the Visnu and Vfiyu tho aggregate is 382 years. But adding tho 
above figures we get 821 only. 

Early Contemporary Dynasties. 

Contemporaneous with all these kings will ilourish'in Kaliyuga other 
kings also, and they will onduro an equal time. There will be 24 Iksvfiku 
kings, 27 Panchhlas, 24 kings of Kuiii and 28 Ilaihaya kings. — 14-15. 

Then there will be 32 Kalinga kings, 25 Asmaka, 36 Kurava, 28 
Maithilo, 23 Surasenas, and 20 Vitahotra kings. All these kings will 
endure the same time and will be contemporaries. 


CHAPTER GOLXXII. 


335 


The Handaa. 422 B.O.— 322 B.O. 

Then, as an incarnation of Kali, will be born Mah4padma, a son of 
MahSnandi from a SOdra woman, and ho will be the exterminator of the 
Ksatriya kings. — 16-18. 

Afterwards all the kings will be of the Sddra origin. (That MahSpadma 
will be the sole monarch and a universal Emperor. He will reign for 88 
years on this earth. He will exterminate all Ksatriyas through his ambition. 
Ills eight sons, beginning with Sukalpa, will be kings for 12 years. They 
will bo kings in succession to Mah^padma one after another. Kautilya will 
uproot all these sons, during the course of 12 years. Then the empire will 
pass on to the Mauryas, after being enjoyed by [Kautilya ?) for a hundred 
years [or then Kautilya, after enjoying the earth for one hundred years, will 
go to heaven]. —19-22. 


The Mauryas. 


His son Satadhanva, will bo king for 6 years. His son Brihadratha 
will reign for 70 years. — 23. 

For 36 years Aioka will be the king. His grandson will then be the 
king for 70 years. — 24. 

His son Dasaratha will be the king for 8 years. His son Saptati will 
reign for 9 years (or his sou will be for 79 years). — 25. 

These are the ten Mauryas who will enjoy the earth for full 137 years, 
from whom she (the Earth) will pass to the Sungas. 


Note,— Tho text says that there are ten Maurya kings, but its enumeration is short 
of that number. The following note from Mr. Pargiter is appropriate “ This dynasty 
is given by all five Puranas, but the account of it has suffered more than that of any other 
dynasty. Three versions exist here, the earliest in tho Matsya, the second in the Vfiyu,and 
the third in the Vayu generally and tho llrahmdnda# They agree in general purport, but 
have many differences. Tho second forms a stage of recension intermediate between tho 
first and tho third, and is tho only copy that has preserved the names of all the kings. 
Tho Matsya vorsion in all copies is incomplete and has one of its verses misplaced, thus 
only 5 MSS mention Chandra Gupta, the second king always omitted, and tho account 
generally begins with that verse 23, putting tho two kings first, and then mentions only 
four kings, Asoka and his three successors.’^ 

[Tliough the Matsya mentions only seven kings, and that also in a 
confused manner, the full list of the ten kings is given in the Visnu Purdna 
(Book IV. Chap. 24, verses 7-8). 


The years of accession noted againet their names are taken from Mr. V. A. 
Smith’s History of Ancient India^pago 197. 

Date of ascension. 


(1) Chandra Gupta ... ... ... 822 B.C. 

(2) Bindusdra Amitragh&ta ... ... ... 29S B.C. 

(3) Asoka ... ... ... ... 273 B.C. 

Asoka died ... ... ... ... 232 B.C. 


(4) Suyasas 

(5) Dasaratha 

(6) Sangata 

(7) Sdlisuka 

(8) Somasarman 
(0) Satadhanva 

(10) Bfihadratha 


232 B.a. 
224 B.C. 
216 B.O. 
206 B.C. 
199 B.C. 
... 101-185 B.C. 



336 


TBB MATByA ^DBABAM. 


Sungas. 

Pusyamitra the cominander-in-cbief will. uproot BrihadratUa and 
will rule the kingdom as king 36 years.— 27. 

x\fter him Vasujycstha will be tho king for seven j’cars. After him 
Vasumitra will be for ten ycare. — 28. 

Notc.—Our text omits Aguimitra who ^Yas tho immediate succosyor of Pusyamitra and 
who reigned for 8 years, us in the Vdyu P, 

Then liis son Aiitaka will be (reign) for 2 yeary. Tlica Puliiulaka 
will (reign) for 3 years. — 20. 

Then Vajrainitra will bo the king for 9 years ; tlion Saniabliaga will 
reign for 32 years ; then after him his son Devabliunii will reign for 10 
years. These leu petty kings will enjoy this earth for full 112 years ; and 
then the earth will go to the Kanvas. — 30-32. 

Aotc.— The Purana enumerates only 8 kings while there ought to l>o ton. This 
omission is supplied l>y tho names of Agnimitra and Ohosavasu vs gi vi u in the Visnu Purana. 
Tho ten kings, therefore, are the following * 


(1) Pusyamiiru 

... 185 li.f. (."ie years). 

(2) Agnimitra 

... no !!.('. years). 

(3) .SiijyCvSt.ha or Vasujj^'stha 

... 141 l;.C. (7 jears). 

(4) Va.'aumitra 

... l.‘!4 B.<'. (,1^> .vear.s). 

{u) AnUUa 

... 121 !!.(’. (2 years'. 

(C) Pulindaka 

... 122 I!.C. (3 years). 

(7) Ghosavasu 

J. 

(8) Vajramitra 

.. 116 n(’. (Uyo ir.s). 

(U) niiLigavala or Samaldia^'i 

.. 107 li.C. 

(10) Devabhiili or Devabliumi 

70 n.C. (10.\t‘ars). 


A^sashialed in C5 11. C, 

Tot:il ... I'id y(-ars. 

[The aggregate of the rcigii.s is, however, 120 years and not 112 ; 
but all the Puranas agree in giving 112 years as the duration of Sunga 
dynasty. This di.screpaney might be explained by umitting Aguimitra 
from the list. lie i:>cr]iai)s never reigned as a king apail from his father 
Pu§yamitra who, tliougli de facia king, jdways styled himsof iSeiiApati 
or Commander-in-chief, and so Aguinii Ira's name is not mentioned by the 
Matsya Puraiia, There is nmcli uncertainly about his reign as i)ointed 
out by Mr. Pargiter, Or may it be that Agnimitra was ])ractica]]y a king 
during the life-time of his father on certain parts of the vast empire ? And 
the verse “ tat-suto ’ gnimitr-astau bhavisyati samA nripah ” may be read as 
“tat-siito’ agnimitrastu bhavisyati sama nripah.'* According to this 

calculation the Suiiga dynasty would ai)poar to have come to an end not 

in 05 B. C. but in 73 The ilatsya Jhirana verse 32 is rather inaccurate. 

It says : — 

1 5i?f ^ cr?r: 

w i vrfesir 

I 

“ These ten Kendra hinga will cujfiy (his earth full lOOiuul 200 (tolal 
300) years. Tlien it will go to the Sungas.” This is evidently a mistake. 


ouA^n ccLXxnt 


The earth coaid not have gone to the Sungas after the Sungas. Kor. did 
the Sungas reign for 300 years. Instead of “ tatah Sang&n gamisyati 
another reading is “ tatah svargam gamisyati ” which may refer to the last 
king, namely, Devabhumi who will go to heaven. This reading is mofe 
appropriate than ‘ Sutigiin gamisyati.’ Moreover who are these petty kings 
Ksudrar^janah wiiicli the text mentions. It only mentions 8 kings and not 
30, for it does not mention Aguimitra and Gho§avaau. We have therefore 
adopted Mr. Pargiter’s reading : — “Dailaite Sunga-rajiino bhok^yant-im&m 
vasundharfim ; Satamphrnam daia dve cha tatah Kanv&n gamisyati.” This 
is in accordance with Visnu punina also which in IV. 24. 11 says : — 

I !Rr: 

I ] 

I'he Kanvdyanas. 

The minister Vasudeva forcibly overthrowing the dissolute king 
Debhabflmi will become king among the Sungas. He the KanvSyana, 
^ill be the king for 9 years. — 33. 

His son Bhflmitra will reign 14 years. His sou Narayana will be for 
12 years. — 34. 

Surfarma, his son, will be for 10 years only. These are recorded as 
Suiigabhrityas, or Kanvdyana kings\ — 35. 

These 40 (four Kanvas are Brahmanas, and they will enjoy the earth 
for 45 years.— 36. 

They will have the neighbouring kings respect them and will be 
virtuous. At the time of their period of reign coming to an end the earth 
will go to the Andhras. — 37. 

Note.— The four KUnvfiyana kings are shown in the following table 

(1; Vasudeva Kanva... ... ... (9 years) 78 B.C. 

(2) Bhainimitra ... ... ... (14 years) 59 B.C. 

(8) Nflr&yana ... ... ... (12 years) 47 B.C. 

( 4 ) Susarma ... ... ... (10 years) 37 B.C. 

Total ... 45 j^ears. 

[The last king Susanna was slain by the king Siifnka about 27 or 
28 B.C.] 

Here ends the two hundred and Seccnty-seeond c7»aptcr on the Pradyota, 
Sisundga, the Nanda, the Maurya, the Sungas and the K&nvdyana dynasties. 

CHAPTER CCLXXIII. 

Andhras. 

The Andhra Simuka (^iiJuka) with his fellow tribeseiaen, the servants 
of Sudarman, will assail the KA^v^yanas and him (Sutfarman,) and destroy 
the remains of the Sungas’ power and will obtain this earth. — 1-2. 

18 



^ote :--Tiie at»t« tnind«tt<m is aoeoidiog to Mr. 6u;^ter*8 teit. Aoeordlng to 
onr text tlio reading ia 

Him tnn i 

^ nciw 3 II 

This vonld mean :—“1^1ienKftpvAyana nobles of Buaarma after assailing her (Barth) 
and putting to an end what reipsins of the Snngas will become powerful.” This shows 
that the oMettains of the last Kanva Kingt Sus'arman, revolted. against hiiu and pot an ond 
to the Songs power. 

Their tribesman (a kinsman of.these ICnnv&yana chieftains (bhflpfts) 
who had revolted against Sutfarmau) called (1) ^iduka A)idhra will get 
this earth. For 23 years Sisuka will bo the king.— 2. 

His.youngW brotherd2) Kri§na will be 18 years, his son (3) ^ri- 
mallakarni (Sri ^S,takarni) will be 10 years, then (4) PQrnotsanga will be 
the king 18 yeara—S- 

Note,— ill, Pargiter inserts (5) ” Skaudhastambhi will be king 18 years” after 
Pnrnotsanga. 

(6) Sdntakaroi w'ill be 56 years ; his. sou (7) Lambodara 18 
years. — 4. 

His son (S) Apitaka (ApJlaka) will be 12 years ; then (9) Meghasvati 
will be 18 years.— 5. 

Then (10) Svfiti will be king 18 years; Ul) Skandhasv&ti will then 
be king 7 years.— 6. 

Then (12) Mrigendra Syfitikarna will be 3 years, then (13) Kuntala 
Sv&tikarna will be king 8 years, then (14) Svativarna will be king for 
one year. — 7-8. 

Then (16) Ariktavarna will be 25 years after him (17) Ilala will 
be king for 5 years.— 9. 

iVote,— Before this verse and as part of verse 8 Mr. Pargiter inserts “ sattrirasadova 
var^lSni Pulomftvi hhavisyatl/' which means then (15) Pulomavi will reign 36 years. 
Instead of Ariktavarna another reading is Aristakarnu. 

Then (18) Mandulaka will be king 5 years [another reading Manta- 
laka.] Then (19) Purindrasena (Purikasena) will be king, after him 
{20} Saumya will be the king.— 10. 

Note. —The number of years of the reigns of Parindrasena and Saumya are not given 
in our edition. Moreover, it is doubtful whether, Saumya is the name of a king, Mr. 
Pargiter says Saumya cannot well be a king, though the line says so on its face, 
because in this dynasty two kings are never put together in a single line without any 
mention of their reign. * Saumyo bhavisyati * is probably a corruption. Mr. Pargiter also 
points out that instead of the above the following verso is in the V&yn :— ** Pancha Patta- 
lako rftjk bhavisyati mabftbalfih. ** Bh&vy6h Purikasenas tu samdh so’py ekavimsatim/’ 

Thus according to this reading it means that Purikasena will reign 21 years. 

Then (21) Sundara Sdntikarna (Satakarni) will reign 1 year, then 
(22) Cbakora Svdtikarna v^atakarni) will reign for 6 months. — 11. 

Then (23) ^ivasvdti will be 28 years ; then (24j King Gautamt- 
putra will be king next 21 years. — 12. 

His son (25) PulomS will be king 28 .years. 

[Then (2^) i^atakarni will be king 29 years.] 

This Ul a very donbitul lino as pointed out by Me. Pargiter, and is not in onr text. 


omPTm 

After PulomA (SiTa(iri 7 Paloni& will be king 7 yeare.-^ISr 
Thenv28) Siva ekandha after Sftntikarna will be king aa^ ljason 
for (?) years. ■ . ' ■ 

Note.— Onr text is linwrs: siRinn!;Hlsnwirq«i: ew: i Bat Mr. Pargitoi would amend • 
it thus «ffji uxeni «rti: w » 

Note.— No number ts given. Mr. Pargiter wonid rea4' it f^Bbavttftsmat trayo 
samah,” and then the verse would mean “Sivaskandbadtutikama>vnU be king 8 years.” 

Then (29) Yajnatlri SSntikarnika will be 29 years. — 14. 

Then after bi™ 13^1 Vijaya wilt be king 6 years. Then (31) Cbandatlrl 
SAntikarua, his son will be 10 years.— 15. 

Then (32; PuloniS, another of them, (viz.) Puloma 11) will reign 7 
years., — (l6o). 

These 19 Andhras will enjoy the earth for 400 yeara. On the king- 
dom of the Andhras coming to an end, there will be kings belonging to 
tho lineage of their servants. — 16-17. . 

Note.— The Purina mentions at the end that the number of kings will be 19, bnt as a 
matter of fact, it enumerates 30 kings, and the number would rise to 82 if the kings inserted 
by Mp, Papgitep bo taken into account. 

[We give in a tabular form the list of the names of the kings with 
their reigns : — 


(l) 

b'isuka Andhra 

... 23 years. I 

(17) 

Hala 

... 5 

years. 

(2) 

Krinna 

... 18 

tf 

(18) 

Mandulaka 

... 6 

ft 

(8) 

8riinallakarni 

... 10 

tt 

(10) 

Pnrindresena 

... 21 

tt 

(4) 

PArnotsanga 

... 18 

»» 

(20) 

Saumya (a wrong 

naino 


[(6) 

Skandhastambhi 

... 18 



with DO years). 



(«) 

batakarni 

... 60 


(21) 

bundara 

... 1 

tt 

iV 

Lambodara 

... 18 

tt 

(22) 

Chakora 

... 0 months. 

(8) 

Apitaka 

... 12 

If 

(28) 

bivasvati 

... 28 

years. 

(0) 

Moghasv&ti 

... 18 

tt 

(24) 

Gautamiputra 

... 21 

fi 

(10) 

Svati 

... 18 

tf 

(25) 

Puloma 

... 28 

»• 

(11) 

Skandhasvati 

... 7 


[(20) 

fiatakarni 

... 20 (doubtful).] 

(12) 

Mpigendra 

... 8 

tf 

(27) 

bivasri 

... 7 

If 

(18) 

Kuntala 

... 8 

♦* 

(28) 

b'ivaskandha 

... 8 

ff 

(14) 

Svativarna 

... 1 

ff 

(20) 

Yajuasrl 

... 29 

If 

[(IB) 

Pnlomavi 

... 80 

..j 

(30) 

Vijaya 

... 0 

ff 

(18) 

Ariktavarpa 

... 26 

tt 

(81) 

Chandaspi 

... 10 

ff 





(82) 

Puloma 11 

... 7 

.,1 . 


Fan'oMs Local Dynasties. 

On the kingdom of the Andhras coming to an end, there will be 
kings in the lineage of their servants who would be called Srip&rvatiya 
Andhras — 17. 

There will be 7 (kings in the line of the servants of) Andhras 10 
Abhtra kings, also 7 Gardabhilas and 18 Sakas. — 18. 

There will be 8 Yavana kings, and 14 TusSra kings and 13 Guruipidft 
kings and 19 (or 11 Manna) HOna kings. — 19. 

The 8 Yavanas kings will reign for 87 years. ^ The 7 Gardhabhilas 
will enjoy this earth again [no years given. 72 according to VSyu*] — 20. 



340 TBE MATSTA ^VBANAU, 

The earth is r^rded to have helon|;^ to the To^fcra for 7,000 jpears. 
And 18 kioM. for years as well [printed text cdirrupt. Ought to he ; 

" Eighteen &ka8 for 183 years.’’] — 21. 

For half four hundred years there will reigii 13 Gurupdaa of 
Miechchha origin along with Sudra kings. (Or, 13 future^ Qornndas 
along with low caste men, all of Miechchha origin, will enjoy it halt four 
hundred years, i.e. 200 years). — 22. 

For 103 years the 11 kings will enjoy the earth (no name). (The 
word Huiia should be supplied to complete the verse, and it would then 
mean“il Hfinas will enjoy the earth for 103 years”). The (seven) 
Srtpftrvatiya Andhras will endure 52 years. — 23. 

The 10 Abhira kings will be for 07 years. When thej' are over- 
tTfrown by time, then there will be Kilakila kings. — 24. 

Not**.' -Those local dynasties, \v*ih their periods of reign, may bo thus shown in a 
tabular form ' 



Dynasties 

Periods of Peifjn. 

Si\ of Kings. 

(1) 

Andhra^Bh l ityas (8ri-parvatiya.s) 

52 years or twice 50 or 100 years. 

7 

(2) 

Abhiras 

67 years 

10 

(8) 

Gardabhilas 

72 years (as ia Vayu) ... 

7 

(4) 

Bakas 

lb* 3 yearH 

18 

(6) 

Yavanas 

87 \ears 

8 

(«) 

Tusaras 

7,000 >o?u.s (107?) 

14 

(7) 

Gurnndas 

SOOyeais 

13 

(8) 

UOnas 

103 years 

11 or 10 

(») 

Kilakilas 




Note. —The account of these dynaHlies consists of three parts, the first of which sum- 
marizes the nuuihor of kings in cacli dyna.sly, the second stales its duration, while 
the third adds certain subseqiU'Ut kings. In ihe first pnri. th<‘ Malsya, Vayu, and Urah- 
manda puranas agree generally, hut in the cond, the AJatsya has ono version and the two 
others another. Here the dynastic matter in the Matsya ends. 

“These local dynasties are all classed together as more or less contemporaneous. 
The nuin1>er of years assigned to tinun must be considered .according to the remarks in 
introduction Sec. 42 ff., and with rofcTencc to the middle of the Srd contur}^ A. D. When 
the account was first compiled prosorvod in tho Mt, for tho roviscid versions in Va and 
Bd did not revise the periods. If those remarks be sound, briparvatiya Andhrabrityas hud 
at that time reigned 52 years, or (if we read dvipancliasatam) possibly 100 roundly, accord- 
ing to Mt, while the Va, and Bd reading is no doubt corrupt aud should perhaps be 112 or 

102 years. The Abhiras had then reigned 07 years, tho Gardabhilas 72 years, the Sakas 
183 years, the Yavanas87 or 82 years, and tho Tusaras 7,000 or 600 according to the proper 
constructions of the sentences but perhaps 107 oV 106 is really meant. The 13 Qurundas 

or Murnndas had then reigned half of the quadruple of 100 years, that is 200, according 
to Mt, or 850 according to Va and Bd, but the latter is probably a corruption of the 

former reading, for Vs and Bh say procisoly 190 years. 1 ho 11 Hfinas or Mannas had then 
lasted 103 years. 

“ Mention of these races is found in the inscriptions, thus Abhiras in Luders* List of 
Brahmi Inscriptions, Nos. 063, 1137 (fipig. Ind. x, Appendix) and Fleet's Gupta Inscriptions, 
p 14, sVkas, Ludor’s list, Nos. 1123, 1135, 1137, 1148, 1149, 1162, and perhaps 1001-2, and 
FGI p. 14, Yavanas, Luder's list, Nos. 669, 905, 1093, 1123, 1140, 1154, 1156, Murundas In 
FGI, p. 14, and Muruudadovi, id., pp. 128. 132, 138 Hunas. FQI, pp. 56, 148, 206, A Vakataka 

prince Vindhya^aktf is mentioned in Kielhorn’s Inscriptions of Northern India, No. 622 
(Bpig. Ind,,v, Appendix).** Pargiter's Kali Dynasty p. 44.> 



CHAPTEB>G0LXX1IL 


341 


THE EVILS OF KALI AGE. 

There will be Yavanas here for the sake of religions feeling (|iilgriin- 
age or propaganda) or pleasure or profit. The Aryas and the Mlechclihas 
(will dwell) mixed up in all provinces (janapadas).— 25 . 

The people will steadily deteriorate by adopting a contrary course of 
life, so also the king will be greedy and speakers of untruth. — 26. 

^ All will be overpowered (killed) everywhere by Kalki whether they 
lie Ar 3 ’as or Mlechchhas. They will be irreligious, avaricious, and hereti- 
cal and cruel hypocrites everywhere. — 27. 

When the roj'al family will be destroyed, and tlie close of the Kali 
Age will come and righteousness will perish, there will remain few good 
people not given to coveteousness.— 28. 

The people will be unholy, unrighteous and oppressed with decease 
and sorrow ; and goaded by failure of rain they will be eager to destroy 
each other. — 29. 

Unprotected by anyone, always living in terror, surrounded by deep 
diflionlties, the entire population will begin to live on (the top of) mountains 
and on the banka of rivers. — 30. 

When the royal families will be destroyed, the people, will desert 
their homes ; and devoid of affection they will abandon their brothers and 
friends, and will have no one to protect them. — 31. 

They will not observe the rules of caste and order of life, and be 
addicted to unrighteousness. They will subsist on fruits, roots and leaves 
of trees, and will be clothed in tattered garments, barks and skins, and 
thus they will wander over the earth in search of livelihood. — 32. 

Thus the people having suffered 'innumerable) miseries during the 
close of the Kali Age will become totally extinct, along with the extinction 
of the Kali Age. — 33. 

When the Kali Age will be exhausted, after having been on earth 
for full 1,000 divine years together with the Sandhi periods, then on its 
end, the Krita Age will come. — 34. 

Chronological Particulars. 

Thus have I declared in due order the entire series of genealogy — 
the kings who have passed away, and those who exist now and those who 
have not yet come into existence. — 35. 

Now from Mah&padma’s inauguration up till the birth of Pariksit, this interval 
is indeed known as 1,060 years (1015 according to Visnu, and 1600 according to our 
reading.)— 30. 

Note.— In manuscripts of Matsya Purdna marked c, e, j the reading is Sat-ottaram. 
Similarly in Mss. 1, n of Matsya and V, 1, of Visnu the reading is Pancha-.*»at-ottaraiD, 
meaning 1,600. This period of 1,600 is the true* interval obtained by adding up the 

periods of reigns of the Bdrhadrathas, Pradyotas and Bisuodgas as given in the Yif^u 
Purdna and other Purdiias. Thus 

Bdrhadratbas from Soradpi to Ripuiljaya ... ... 1000 years. 

Pradyotas ... ... ... 138 „ 

Bisundgas ... ... ... ••• 362 „ 


1500 



m 


THE MAT8YA PUBiNAU. 


Therelora the Miw. of tbe Matey* referred to by Mr. Purftlter are noro eorreet than 
the printed text. This verse, therefore, shoald read, 

»r r^clinst we prefer to adopt aa beinjot in harmony with tho text of 

Vifna Pardaa. Mah&padma Nanda was anointed in 42S B.C. Therefore^ Parik^lt was 
bom in t922 B.C. which was the year of the Great War. 

Now from Mahlipadma’s inauguration to Parikpit’s birtb, this interval 
ia indeed known as 1500 years. — .16. 

Moreover in tbe interval which elapsed from the last Andhra King 
Pulom&vi to MahSpadma — that interval was 836 years. — 37. 

The Cycle of 2,700 years or Saptar^ or Laukika Era. 


The same faturtf interval of time, beginning from Parik^it till 
tbe end of the Andhras, is thus expressed in the Bhavi^ya (Purdiia) regard- 
ing those (kings) enumerated by the Brutar^is who know the ancient 
stories (in these terms). — 38. 

“ When again (there will bo end) of 27 future Andliras, (the Great 
Bear) will be in a line with the towering brilliant Agni (the presiding deity 
of Kfittikd asterism).” — 39. 

And equal apace of time is still future, subsequent kings, beginning from 
the end of the Andhras (till Parik^it), are declared therein. They have been * 
enumerated in the Bhavifya Purdva by Srutarsie who knew the ancient 
stories.— 38. (Pargiter.) 

Note , — The reading in tho Anandfisrama edition of tJio vorse 89 is 

It is evidently corrapt according to Mr. Pargiter, Pradipteiia in tho above lio would 
amend into Pratipena and sain&h should become samam. TJie verso therefore should 
read: — 

Another reading is 


as given by the editor of Visnu Parftna in Bk. Ik. IV, Ch. 24, p. 235. 

The Seven Ri§is were then (at the time » of the birth of Parih^it) on 
a line with the towering brilliant Agni (the ^presiding deity of Kritlihl,) 
At the end of the future twenty-seven Andhras the cycle repeats itself. 
(Pargiter.) 

Note . — This Baptarshi or Laukika Era appears to bo a contrivance of historians and 
is still in use in Kasmir as Orst pointed out by the lato Dr. BQhler, as will appear from the 
following extracts from the Encyclopedia Britannica— Articlo<-**Hinda Chronology,*' and 
Dr. Bahler's Edamir Reports pp. 69 et scq. 


** The Baptarshi reckoning is used in Kashmir, and in tho Edpgra district and some of 

The s»ptar.hi reckoning. ***? «>nth-eMt 'of KMhtnir; some nine 

centnries ago it was also in use in tho Punjab, a^d apparently 

in Sind. In addition to being cited by such expressions as Saptarshi-samvat, “the year 
(so-and-4»o) of the Saptarshis," and S&stra-satn vatsara, “ tho year (so-and-so) of tho scrip- 
tures.’* it is found mentioned as Lokak Ala, “the time or era of the people," and by other 
terms which mark It as a vulgar reckoning. And It appears that modern popular names 
for it are PabAH-samvat and KacbchA-sam vat, which wo may render by “ the Hill ora,*'’ 
and “ the crude era.** The years of this reckoning are lunar, ChaitrAdi ; and the montha 



dBAPTEB OOLXXfIl 


m pHr^imdnta (ending with the fall moon). As matters stand now» the reekohing. has a 
theoretical initial point in 8077 B.C, ; and the year 4978, more usually called simply 78, 
bogan in A.D, 1900 ; but there are some indications that the initial point was originally 
placed one year earlier. 

The idea at the button of this reckoning is a belief that theSaptarshis, the Seven 
llishis or Sainto," Marichi and others, were translated to heaven, and became the stars of 
the constellation Ursa Major, in 8978 B.O. (or 8077) ; and that these stars possess an inde- 
pendent movement of their own, which, referred to the ecliptic, carries them round at the 
rate of 100 years for each mkshatra or twenty-seventh division of the circle. Theoreti- 
cally, therefore, the Saptarshi reckoning consists of cycles of 2700 years: and the numbering 
of the years should run from 1 to 2700 and then commence afresh. In practice, however, 
it has been treated quite differently. According to the general custom, which has 
distinctly prevailed in Kashmir from the earliest use of the reckoning for chronological 
purposes, and is illustrated by Kalha]9a in his history of Kashmir the R<i/aUiraiigini, 
written in A.D. 1148—1160, the numeration of the years has been centennial ; whenever 
a century has been completed, the numbering has not run on 101, 102, 103, &c., but has 
begun again with 1, 2, 8, &c. Almanacs, indeed show both the ^gures of the century and the 
full figures of the entire reckoning, which is treated as running from 8076 B.C., not from 378 
H.C. as the commencement of a new cycle, the second : thus, an almanac for the year begin- 
ning in A.D. 1798describeii that 3'ear as ** tho year 4869 according to the course of the Seven 
JEtishis, and similarly the year 69.’* And elsewhere sometimes the full figures are found, 
sometimes the abbreviated ones ; thus, while a manuscript written in A.I). 1048 is dated in 
the year 24 ** (for 4724), another, written in A.D. 1224 is dated in ** the year 4800.'* But, 
as ill the Rdjatarafnginit so also in inscriptions, which range from A.D. 1204 onwards, onljr 
the abbreviated figures have hitherto been found. Essentially, therefore, the Saptarshi 
reckoning is a centennial reckoning, by suppressed or omitted hundreds, with its earlier 
centuries commencing in 8076, 2976 B.C., and so on, and its later centuries commencing in 
A.D. 25, 125, 225, &o., ; on precisely tho same lines with those according to which we may 
use, e.g. 98 to mean A.D. 1798°, and 57 to mean A.L. 1857, and 9 to mean A.D. 1909. And the 
practical difficulties attending the use of such a system for chronological purposes are 
obvious ; isolated dates recorded in such a fashion cannot be allocated without some 
explicit clue to the centuries to which they belong. Fortunately, however, as regards 
Kashmir, we have tho necessary guide in the facts that Kalhana recorded his own date 
in tho Saka era as well as in this reckoning and gave full historical details which enable 
us to determine unmistakeably the equivalent of the first date in this reckoning cited by 
him, and to arrange with certainty the chronology presented by him from that time. 

The belief underlying this reckoning according to the course of the Seven Rishis is 
traced back in India, as an astrological detail, to at least 6th century A.D. But the 
reckoning was first adopted for chronological purposes in Kashmir and at sometimes about 
A.I). 800 ; the first recorded date in it is one of ** the year 89," moaning 8889,= A.D. 818-814, 
given by Kalhapa. It was introduced into India between A.D. 925 and 1025. (Encyclopedia 
Britanuica, Eleventh Edition, Yol. 11, pp. 409-500). 

** The beginning of the Saptarshi era is placed by the Kasmiriaiis on Chaitra sudl 
1 of the twenty-fifth year of the Kaliyuga, and the twenty-fourth year, in which Kalhana 
wTote, is consequently the Saptarshi year 4224. For 

The distance between Kali 25 and the beginning of the Saka era is ... 8,154 

Tho distance between Saka samvat 1 and Kalbap*s time ... 1,070 

Hence results a total of Saptarshi years ... ... ... ... 4,224 

My authorities for placing the beginning of the Saptarshi era in Kali 25 are the 
following. First, P. Dayftr&m Jots! gave mo the subjoined verso, the origin of which 
he did not know 

Kalor gataih s&yakanotravarshaih saptarshlvaryfts tridivam pray&t&h. 

Lokohi sam vatsarapattrik&yftm saptarshimftnam pravadanti santah. 

**Whon the years of the Kaliyuga marked by tho * arrows and the eyes ' (t. e. the 
five and tho two, or, as Indian dates have to be read backwards, 25) had elapsed, the most 
excellent Saven Rishis ascended to heaven. For in the calendar (used) in the world* the 
virtuous declare the computation of the Saptarshi, (years to begin from that point).'* 

Pandit Dkmodar explained the verse as I have done in the above translation, and 


* The word loke, *in the world,* alludes to tho appollation Lokakkla, Laukika 

samvatsara. 




341 mis matbta 


Added th»t eaeH fiapbumlii yeei* begmn on Chnitm sodi It *nd ilint ii/i h^4ii uni regnlnlod 
by the customary mixing of the ohindm and iaum minas. 

The correctness of bis statement is coniinned by a passage lii Pi^ ftibebrim's 
Kdjatarangiuissmgralia (No. 176), where the author says that the Sakayiar 1766 <A i>. 
t664)« in which he writes, corresponds to Kali 4065 and to Saptarshi or Lankfka samyat 
4040.* One of the copyists, too, who copied the DhTanyitoka (No. 21^) for mo in Hoptcni- 
bor 1875, gives In the colophon, as the date of liis copy, the Haptarshi 4051. Th«*No 

facts are satSiclent to prove that P. Dfiroodar’s statement regarding the bogioniug of tiio 
Saptarshi era is not an invention of his own, but baaed on tho general tradition of tlio 
oonntry. I do not doubt for a moment that tho calculation which throws tho beginning 
of the Haptarshi ora back to 8076 B. G. is worth nq more than that which Axes the begin* 
ning or the Kaliyuga in 8101 B. G. But it seems to mo certain that it is much older than 
Kalhapa'a time, because his equation 44=1078 agrees with it.\ It may therefore be safely 
used for reducing with exactness the Saptarshi years, months, and days mentioned in his 
work to years of the Christian era. The results which will bo thus obf ulned will always 
closely agree with those gained by General Cunningham, who did use the right key.’ 
Dr. Biihlor’s Kaamir Report pp. 50 and 60. 

Note.~~Mr. Pargi ter, reads saptarsayas tadft Pnsye Pratipo rajfii vai samam " and 

he translates it thus :~The Great Bear was situated equally with regard to the Innnr 
constellation Pu^yA while Prat i pa was king. At the end of tho Andhras, who will bo in 
the 27th century afterwards, the cycle repeats itself.” 

“ In the circle of the lunar constellations, wherein the Great Bear 
revolves, and which contains 27 constellations in its circumstance, the 
Great Bear remains 100 years in (conjoined with) each in turn.’' (40;, {ac- 
cording to Pargiter ) 

This is the cycle of the Great Bear, and is reineinhered as 
according to divine reckoning, G divine months and 7 divine years. 
According to those constellations divine time proceeds ])y means of tho 
Great Bear, (4la). (Pargiter,) 

The two front stars of the Great Bear, which are seen wlien lisen 
at night, the lunar constellation which is seen situated equally between 
them in the sky, tho Groat Bear is to be known as conjoined with that 
constellation 100 years in tlie sky. — 42-43. (Pargiter). 

This is the exposition of the conjunction of the lunar constellations 
and the Great Bear. The Great Bear was conjoined with the Maglnis in 
Parik§it’s time 100 years. — 44. (Pargiter), 

The Brahmanas (the Seven Seers) will be in the 24th constellation 
100 years (when) at the teimination of tlie Andhras. — 45. (Pargiter,) 

Note . — Tho 24th coiistGllation from Magh& counting backwards is Ghitrft. 
According to this calculation the interval botwoen Pariki^it and the termination of Andhras 
is 2400 years. Subtracting 8.:6 we get 1664, or tho interval between Nanda and Pariksit 
or in round number the Groat War took place 1600 years before Nanda’s time. 

If, however, the 24th No. in the order of reckoning tho naksatras bo taken, then the 
lino of the Saptarisis will bo in Satabhisa or 1,400 years. Deducting 886 we get 664 tho 
interval between Nanda and Pariksit— evidently incorrect. But 836 is the interval 
between Nanda and the termination of tho Andhras. If however w'o read Andhriiitis'e 
instead of Andhr^nto, and this is tho reading of Bralim&niia then it will mean, the 
commencement of the Andhras.” The Andhra dynasty lasted for 460 years or tho interval 
between Nanda and the commencement of the Andhras was 836—460=876 years. Deduct* 
ing 876 (instead of 836) from 1,400 wo got 1,024 years, the interval betwoon* Pariksit and 
Nanda. This figure is approximately correct, according to some texts. 


* Kfijataranginisamgraha, fol. 4b, 1, 7: tatrAdya sAke 1786 kaligato 4965 saptar* 
^liichArAnumatoua sum vat 4940. 

t Tho use of tho Baptarshi era in Kastntr and the adjacent hill states, which continues 
even in the present day, has first been pointed out by General Ounningham, 



OBAPTEB OOLXZIIL 


345 


The BvUe of tiie Kali Age (Reaumed). 

^enceforwud all this world will fall upon very bad times. Men 
will be Imrs, greedy, and destitute of righteousness, affection and wealth. 
The observances of religion of ^rutis and Smritis will become very lax, 
and BO also will be destroyed the orders and castes. — 46. 

The people will be of mixed origin, weak in body and will be led 
astray and deluded. Br&hma^as will sacrifice for ^udras (or will study 
under i^udras) and ^udras will take to teaching Mantras.— 47. 

Those BrShmanas will adore such ^udras anxious to acquire wealth 
from them (or anxious to get the meaning of the Mantras from them). 
And gradually there will be seen all the causes which go towards the 
removing of a man from his own caste. — 48. 

Thus towards the end of the age, the few weaklings that will remain 
on earth will also go to extinction. — 49a. 

The Duration of Kali. 

On that very day and in that very moment when Krisna went to 
heaven, the Kali Yuga commenced on earth. Now listen to its duration 
from me. The wise say that its duration is 400, (XK) years. — 50. 

Together with four times eight (32) thousand years according to 
human calculation (i.e., 400,000 + 32,000=432,000). Or, in other words, 
its duration is 1,000 divine years together with the twilights (t.e., 
1000+ 200=1200 divine yearBi=1200x 360=432,000).— 51. 

When the Kali Yuga comes to an end the Kfita Yoga will again 
come. — 52a. 

The Aila and the Iksv&ku dynasties have been described along with 
their branches. The dynasty of the Ik§v&ku8 (the Suryvaihsa) is remem- 
bered to have come to an end with Sumitra when Ik^vaku Ksatriyas will 
cease. The Aila K§atriyas (Chandra-vanjJa were contemporary with these 
(or the last of the Aila Ksatriyas was K§emaha. — Vayu,) so the knowers 
of the Somavaihi^a understand it. — 53. 

Note, — Tho text in verse 52b is : 

It apparently gives no meaning. The translation follows the reading of the VAya 

jwSHtW) h 

All these are declared to be the glorious descendants of Vivasvat 
those who are gone, those who exist now and those who will be in the 
future. — 54. 

The Br&hmapas, the Ksatriyas, the Vairfyas and the i^udras are 
remembered to exist in this Vaivasvata manvantara, i.e., all are sons 
of Vaivasvata Manu). Thus ends the genealogy of dynasties. — 55. 

A Prophecy. 

Dev&pi, the Paurava king, and Maru, a king of Iksviku dynasty, 
are both existing in the village, Kalfipa, owing to their great Yoga. — 56. 

10 



346 


THE MATSYA PUBAHAM. 


In the 29tli MaMyuga these two will be the leaders of Kfatriyas and 
will restore K$atriyahood. Suvarchas, the son of Manu (Mara ?), will be the 
founder of the (future) Aik^vaku line. — 57. 

In the 29th Mah&yuga he will bo the first founder of that dynasty. 
Similarly, Satya, the son of Dev&pi, will bo the (first) king (and the founder) 
of the Aila dynasty. — 58. 

These two (Devfipi and Manx) will bo the restorers of K^atriya 
chivalry, in the beginning of that Malifiyuga. Thus should be understood 
the characteristics of the dynasties in all the Yugas. — 59. 

Even after the close of the Kali Yuga, the Seven Sages who continue 
to exist along with these two throughout the Kjita Yuga, will then 
incarnate in the middle of the (fnlui-e) Tretfi. Yuga. They will take birth 
in order to be the seeds of Brnhmanas and Ksatriyas (of Drahmauic 
parentage) again. Thus at the end of the Pusya nsterisra twhen the 
Great Bear is in a line with that asterism) the Seven Sages, along with 
those kings (take birth on earth) for the sake of procreating offsprings in 
every Yuga. Thus the Brahinanas know the close relationship of the 
Ksatriyas with the Brftlmianas (and how several Ksatriya dynasties had 
Brfihmana paternity).— 02. 

Thus, at the close of each Manvantara, those (two) immortal Ksatriyas 
and (seven) Brnhmanas, who cross over from one Yuga to anotlie? 
(in their full consciousness >, are called Sautfinas in the Sruti or founders of 
future human races. They become the origins of (the future) Br&hmanas 
and Ksatriyas. — 03. 

The Seven Sages know thus the rise, fall, and the longevity 
of these founders of dynasties as well as the decline and rise of the 
dynasties. — 64. 

When Jamadagua totally destroyed the Ksatriya clans the world 
became devoid of Ksatriya Kings. — 6.5-60 

Hear, I will relate to you the <Iouble origin of the modern Ksatriya 
Kings. Aila and Ikswakn dynasties are said to be the origin of the 
Kshatriyas. -67-68. 

The Kings and other common Ksatriyas wore variously sub-divided 
in the world. Quite a profusion of Ksatriyas were born in the Aila 
dynasty, but there were not so many in the Iki^wAku dynasty. Their 
number is full one hundred. SimiJarlj', by the spread of the Bhoj dynasty 
that number was doubled.— 69-70. 

These Ksatriyas have disappeared with their names. I am relating 
to you about them, please hear. 'J’he number of Pritibindhas was 100, 
Nagas 100, Hayas 100, Dhartarilstras 100, Janmejayas 80, brave Brahmo- 
dattas 100, Kurus 100, Panchals 100, Kasikusa, etc., 100 each, Nippa and 
Sasabindh 2,000 each.- 71-73. 

These K?atriyas were pious-minded and charitably disposed. 
Thousands of similar R&jarshis have disiippeared. In the present Man- 
waotsra the dynasty of Vaivaswatairianu appeared and disappeared and 
with it many races came and wont.— 73-75. 



CHAPTER GOLXXIV. 


34T 


Even in one hundred years it is not easy to describe that dynasty 
fully. Twenty-eight families have disappeared with the Devas. What 
remained I am relating. — 76-77. 

The sages of that dynasty are 43 in number. The rest are known 
as Yagas. I have described some of the dynasties in brief and the rest at 
length. For the sake of their being numerous I am not able to describe 
tliem fully again. Oh King, the Rajar^is of the luminous Yay&ti dynasty 
whose names have been described have all disappeared with the Yuga. 
The man who hears them gets five worldly boons, viz., life, fame, wealth, 
heaven, progeny. By hearing this chapter one goes to heaven. 

Here ends the Two hundred and seventij-seeond Chapter. 
CHAPTER CCEXXIV. 

The RLsis said :—“Sfita ! one should acquire, increase and protect 
wealth by fair means. The acquirement of wealth by a virtuous person 
has been said to be most lucky in all the Sastras. — 1. 

Be good enough to tell by what charity a wealthy and learned 
man feels blessed.” — 2. 

Sfita iSaid : — “ I shall now explain to you abont that great charity, 
(Mahfi Dan) which lias been mentioned to us by Lord Visnu in connection 
with the enunciation of the righteous ordinances. It has been kept so 
secret. It is the dispeller of all the ills and the effects of bad dreams ” — 
3-4. 

The Maha Danas are of sixteen varieties. Among the sixteen kinds 
of MaliA Dilns described by the Lord, the Tula Puru§a Dfinti is the first and 
best of all. It is the giver of virtue, long life, dispeller of all ills, venerat- 
ed by Lords Brahmfi, Visnu and S^iva and other Devas. — 5-6. 

The other Danas are— Tliranyagarbha Di\na, Brahmdnda Dana, 
Kalpap&dapa Dfina, Oosahasraka DAna, lliranyakrnnadheenu Dana, Hira- 
nyiiSva Dana, Hirapyutlvarutha Dana, Hemahastiratha DSna, Panclialaipga- 
laka Dana, Dhar4 Dana, Visvachakra Dfina, Kalpalatfi Dfina, Saptasagaraks 
Dfina, Ratnadhenu Dana, Mahabhutagliata Dana, which were first observed 
byBhagavfiii Vfisudeva, the Destroyer of i^ambara, by Ambari^a, Bhfirgava, 
Sahasravfihu, Prahlfida, Prithu, Bharata and other kings. These Dfinas 
ai‘e always performed for the removal of all obstacles ; and as a result 
of these they were all protected by th.e Devas. — 7-12. 

The Devas ward these observers of ordinances from all ills. — 13. 

If one of these Dfinas be accomplished without any obstacles 
through the favour of Lord Vi^^u then Indra was not able to do any 
injury to the devotee. — 14. 

So a devotee should adore Lords Vi^niu, l^iva and Qaperfa and 
then witli the advice of the Brfihmanas should commence the performauce 
of sacrifices, pertaining to those Malifi Dfinas. — 15. 

“ King Manu had put the following question to the Lord Janftrdans, 
which I heard and now shall try to nmke clear according to my under- 
standing. Please listen to it." — 16. 



340 TBB MATSTA 

Manu said Lord, be pleased to tell me about the MahA LAnas, 
the most auspicious, sacred and mysterious.” — 17. 

Matsya said : — ^The 16 great ordinances that have not been men- 
tioned elsewhere up to now, I shall now explain before to you.” — 18. 

TulA Furufia DAna is the first and best of all, and it should be per- 
formed on the days of Ayana, Vi^uvak, Vyatip&ta, Dinaksyaya, on the 
first day of the Yugas and Manvantaras, SabkrAnti, Sa/ikr&nti Vaidbriti, 
Yoga, Chaturdarfi, Attaint, white Panchada^il, on the Parva days, on the 
Dv&datli, As(akadoga, on the occiisiuns of sacrifices, festivities, marriages, 
after having seen bad dreams or seen wonderful things, on getting 
wealth and Br&hmanas, on the occasion of SrAddha, in desired times, in a 
sacred, place, in temples, cowsheds, near a well or a garden or a beautiful 
tank, etc. Thus in these days, on such occasions and at such places, 
Mahft Danas must be made.— 19-23. 

Life is momentary, wealth is transient and every being 'S in the 
clutches of death. Under such circumstances a man should always follow 
the course of Dharma and righteous actions. — 24. 

On an auspicious day the devotee should make the Brahmaoas recite 
Svastivachana and then make a pandal of 10 or 12 hands or 16 aratnis. 
It should have four Bhadrilsanas and the altar should be of seven hands 
and within this another Vedi of five hands. — 25-26. ^ 

Notb, -«^in=open palm of hand. 

In this central Vedi the doorways of fine wood should be made and 
four sacrificial cavities should be dug, one in each direction. Each 
cavity vkuinda; should have a girdle and a jar filled with water, an 
Asana (seat), two copper vessels, sacrificial utensils, Vi§tara, clarified 
butter, sesamum, incense, lights, flowers, etc., That Kupda is to be 
made of one band and should be made in tlie north-east. In this Vedi, the 
Qraha Devatas (Deities of the planets) are to be worshipped. — 27-29. 

Here the Brahmfi, Visnu and f^iva should be worshipped with 
flowers, fruits, clothings, etc. All round, banners of various colours 
resembling the complexion of the four Lokapalas should be made. In the 
centre a beautiful banner should bo made, decorated with little bells and 
network and four buntings of bo-tree and otiier milky trees should be tied 
on four doorways and then two jars full of water and decorated with 
garlands, incense, etc., should be placed and two pillars of tbe wood 
of any of the following trees, viz. — SSla, Ingudi, Sandal, Deod&r, Sriparni, 
Vilva, and Priya KachanAra — should be made. They should be two 
hands underground and five hands above it. The two pillars are to be 
four hands apart. Another piece of wood, sufficiently strong, is to be placed 
across on the two pillars. — 30-32. 

Then a casteman should suspend the scales and in the middle of it 
should be placed a golden image. A rod of four hands should be put above 
the scales and the latter should be made 10 fingers thick and should be 
decorated with a plait of gold and ornaments. Both tbe scales should 
be suspended to the rod by means of iron chains and then they should be 
decorated with garlands studded with precious stones, flowers and sandal. 
A lotus should also be drawn with powders of different colours, and 


0H4PTBB OOLXnv: . 34#: 


flowers, etc., should be strewn there, and above the beam of the scales a 
canopy of five colours should be erected. Afterwards those versed in ^e 
Vedas, handsome in appearance, of nice disposition, knowing all the 
rituals, born in the BhSratavarsa, should be made the priests, and the 
man accomplished in the Ved&nta, born in an Aryan family, knowing 
Pur&nas, of cheerful disposition, wearing white clothes, earrings, a golden 
girdle, armlets and other ornaments, should be made the Preceptor 
(Guru).— 33-38. 

To the east of the Mandapa two Br^hmanas versed in the Rigveda 
should be seated, to the south should be seated two Br&hmanas accom- 
plished in the Yajurveda, two to the west knowing the Samaveda and two 
to the north versed in the Atbarvaveda. All those learned men should offer 
Hoinas or sacrificial libations four times in four directions by reciting the 
Vedic hymns on their respective altars to Qaneifa, Grahas, LokapSls, 

A§tavasu, Aditya, Marudgana, Brahmfi, Viijnu, l^iva, Sflrya and the 
Vanaspatis. — 39-40. 

Afterwards the mind should be turned to the mantras sacred to 
them. At the close of the sacrifice when the Homas are over, the precept- 
ors should get the music played and then taking the Valis, flowers 
and incense in order and invoke the Lokapals. — 41. 

The following mantras should be uttered at the time of invoking 
the Lokapfilas, viz. — O Indra ! adored by the Devas, Sadhyas, Siddhas, 
come. O, one armed with a thunderbolt and surrounded and fanned 
by the nymphs, I salute you. Pray guard my sacrifice. Om Indr&ya 
Nainah. — 42. 

Agni come, come, be gracious enough to come. You are adored 
by the seers, all the Immortals and carrier of oblations to the gods! 
Be pleased to guard my sacrifice by your power and through your power- 
ful attendants. I salute you. Om Agnaye Namah. — 43. 

0 Vaivasvata ! 0 Divine Personage ! Dbarmar4ja ! be good enough 
to come. You are adored by all the Devas. You are of the Divine form. 
You are the cause of men’s misery and prosperity. Please guard this 
sacrifice for my benefit. I salute you. Om Yamfiya Namah. — 44. 

Raksoganan&yaka ! be good enough to come with your demon 
attendants, Vet&las and Pistchas, be pleased to guard this sacrifice, you 
are the l^rd of Rdk§asas and the Lokas. 1 salute you. Om Nirritaye 
Namah. — 45. 

• ^ 

Come, O Lord ! with the seas and the aquatic animals, come with 
the clouds and Apsarasas. The Vidyadharas and gods will sing praises of 
you. Do you protect us. I salute you. Om Varunaya Namah. — 46. 

Oome, 0 Lord 1 to protect me in my sacrifice. Come seated on a 
stag and in company with the Siddhas (demigods). The lord of the PriniM ! 
the great helper of the author of destruction, do you accept my worship. 
I salute you. Om Vayave Namah. — 47. 

Come, 0 Yajneswava O (Tx)rd of the sacrifice)! Come and save the 
sacrificial ceremony, with the Naksatras (stars). In company with the 
Oshadhis and the Pitris do you accept my offerings, 0 Lord ! Om Somaya 
Namah. — 48. 


350 


THE MAT87A PORAEAM. 


Come, O Viavesvara ! oonie, with the Bearer o( Naetri, i^dla, sknll 
and Kbatvftnga. 0 Lord of the wmrida i Master of the sacrifice ! you 
accept my worship to fulfil my sacrifice. 1 salute yon. OLord! Otp 
l^naya Namah — 49. 

Come, 0 Lord of the P&tdia (netherworlds) and of the mountains ! 
Come you praised in song by the N$ga women and the Kinnaras. O Ananta 
(Endless One)! Save our sacrifice with the great Yakrfas, and tJragus 
and the various gods. Om AnantAya Namah — 50. 

Come you the Lord of the universe ! the Greatest Savant ! Como 
you with the gods and the Pitris. You are the Creator of all-being of 
unparalled might. Come to grace our Sacrifice. 0 Lord ! Om BraJiniaiie 
Namah.— 51. 

All beings that are in the three worUiw moving or fixed — may they 
with Brahman, Vi§mi and Siva protect mo. — 52. 

O Devas, DAnavas, Yaksas, Gandharvas, Serpents, Kaksasas, seers, 
men, Go, DevainStaras, be pleased and come and protect mo in the per- 
formance of my sacrifice. After thus invoking the Deities, offer the 
ornaments o£ gold to the Ritvikas. — 53-54. 

They should be given earritigs, girdle of gold, rings, clean 
clothes, and bedstead and double of these sliould be given to the Pre- 
ceptor. All the BiAhmanas sitting in the different directions should turn 
their heads on SAntikAdhyaya. — 55-56. 

The Br&hmanas engaged for the sacrifice who fast, should follow 
all these things, and the devotee should make the Brahman vAchana 
(svaativAchana) in the beginning, middle and the end. — 57. 

Afterwards the devotee should get himself bathed by the Bi'Shinanas 
and the Brfihma^as should recite the Vedic hymns and then he is to take 
a handful of flowers after circumambulation and wear a garland of wliile 
flowers and cloth. He should then invoke the scale and say “ you are 
the strength of all the Devas and rest on truth. 1 salute you ; 0 Jagad- 
dbatri ! you have been designed by the Ix)rd Brahma as the witness. You 
hold yourself between the Truth and the Untruth. You are the life 
between the virtuous and the vicious. You weigh all- Weigh me then, 
and carry me across the ocean of the world. I salute you. Only in you is 
the Lord of the twenty-five elements inherent. I therefore salute 
you. I salute you 0, Govinda ! in the form of this scale. 0 llari 1 be 
gracious enough to see me taken across this ocean of the world.” — 58-64. 

Then after circumambulating and putting on a coat of mail, sword, 
shield and ornaments the devotee should sit in one of the scales. — 65. 

Seeing the face of Lord Sri Hari and taking the golden image of 
DharmarSja with that of the Sun by botli of his bands. The BrAhina^as 
should then weigh the devotee with excellent gold pieces until the scale 
. kicks the ground. Then the king eager fur his prosperity should place 
more gold than that of bis weight on tlie floor and remaining in the scale 
for sometime utter the following words : — Devi ! you are tlie witness of 
all, I therefore salute you. You were first created by BrahmA and the 
whole of the moveable and the immoveable world is held by you. O VWva- 
dh&riai ! you are the soul of all beings. You are the holder of the universe. 



CHAPTER OGLXXV. 


351 


I salute you." After saying so he should alight from the scale and give 
first of all half of the whole offerings to the preceptor (Ghiru) and the arest 
should be made over to the Ritvijas and with their permission, should 
distribute a portion of that wealth among others also. — 66-72. 

The poor, the helpless, the good, the worthy and the Br&hmanss should 
all be duly honoured. The offerings of the tulSdSna, should not be 
allowed to lie in the house even for some time. One who does so is 
visited by fear, privation and pestilence. By readily distributing it 
among others one gets blessings from superiors. — 73-74. 

Those who observe this Mab& D&na in such a way reign over a Loka 
for one manvantara. — 75. 

He becomes illustrious like the Sun and then goes to the realm of 
Visnu seated in a Viruana deocorated with beautifid perforated work, 
bells, garlands and adorned by the nymphs where be remains for 
crores of kalpas. — 76. 

On the completion of his store of virtues he is born as an illustrious 
emperor on this land and conquers thousands of kings after performing 
sacrifices. The one who witnesses such an ordinance and thinks of it at 
the close of his life, or repeats it to others, or reads about it or hears it, 
goes to heaven adorned by Indra. — 77-78. 

Here ends the two hundred and seventy- fourth chapter on Tuld Pumi^a 

Mahd Dana. 


CHAPTER CCLXXV. 

Matsya said : — “ I shall now tell you about the excellent Hiragya- 
garbha Mahfi Dfinara which is the dispeller of all sins. — 1. 

On an auspicious day the devotee should observe fasting and arrange 
for a pandal, articles, ornaments, canopy, Ritvikas, etc., as needed for the 
tuht.dA.na. He should then invoke BhagavAn Vifnu and the LokapAlas. Then 
after FunyahavAchana and AdhivAsana he should get an auspicious jar of 
gold which should be 72 fingers in height and of the shape of a lotus 
having its third part filled in with clarified butter and milk and also with 
ten weapons, jewels, needles, a sickle, gold, and then the jar should be 
provided with a pedestal and golden stalk of lotus and it should have 
an image of the Sun on their outer circumference and a golden thread put 
round its navel. — 2-6. 

Close to that Hiranyagarbha jar should be placed the golden staff 
and Kamapdalu on either of the sides respectively and then a lotus 
should be drawn on the space all round the jar measuring a few more 
fingers. Then pearl strings and sapphires should be placed, afterwards 
sesamura and an oval wooden vessel should be placed on the altar above 
which should be placed the Hiranyagarbha jar. — 7-8. 

Then after uttering propitiatory words and getting the BrAbmapas 
to read the Vedas, the devotee after bathing in water, mixed with all the 
herbs, is to put on a garland of white flowers, clothes, ornaments and utter 
the following mantras with flowers in his hands. — 9-10. 



362 


TUB MATSYA FVRANAM. 


0 Hiranyagsrbha ! 0 Hiranyakavacha ! 0 Lord of the^ Devas and 
the 86V ea Lokas ! salutations to you. Salutations to Lord Vif^u and the 
Holder of the Universe. — 11. 

Deva i Bhhloka and other regions are contained in you and so are 
Brahmli and other Devas. You are the holder of the universe. I salute 
you. — 12. 

0 Supporter of the Universe, the golden-wombed One ! Creator of 
the Universe is contained in you. Salutations to You. — 13. 

You are the soul of all the beings. Yon are inherent in each being, 
pray, therefore, drive away all my endless troubles of the world.— 14. 

After thus invoking the Lord the devotee should enter the precincts 
of the altar and keeping his face north-wards hold the images of 
DharmarSja and Brahmft in both his hands and take five deep breaths 
after placing his head between his ankles. Then the Brfihmana versed 
in the Vedas should perform the Garbhadhtlna Punsavana and Simanta 
ceremonies of the Hiranyagarbha. Then the Preceptor and Brflhmapas 
should make the devotee to sit up after chanting the V^edic hymns and 
getting the music played. — 15-17. 

Afterwards the sixteen ceremonies such as Yfitakarma, etc., should be 
duly performed, and then the devotee should utter the following mantras 
and make over the needles, etc., to the preceptor. — 18. 

1 salute you Hiranyagarbha and Visvagarbha. You are the Soul of 
the Universe. — 19. 

0 Best of the Devas ! as I was born of you in the mortal world so 
let me be born again of Divine form on account of my being born 
again of you. You have created me virtuous and truthful. — 20. 

Afterwards that Br4hmana should decorate a blessed cow with the 
ornaments and bathe her with four vases. He should seat her on the 
golden seat and bathe her by reciting these mantras, viz . — “ Devasyar- 
tvSn ” and say ‘ I shall now bathe ail the limbs born of you.’ — 21-22. 

May all of you live long and happy, holding Divine bodies. After- 
wards he should make over that golden thing to the Ititvika Br&hniapa 
chosen for the performance of the sacrifice. — 23. 

The Bitvikas who may be few or many in number should all be 
worshipped and the things used in the worship should all be given to the 
Guru. — 24. 

Gift of sandals, shoes, umbrella, chamara, seats, utensils, villages, 
countries and any other thing should also be made according to the 
means of the devotee.^ — 25. 

One who perforins this Hiranyagarbha ordinance on an auspicious 
day according to the prescribed rites will go to Brahmaloka and be wor- 
shipped there and live for koti kalpas, — 26. 

And at the end of the manvantara will reside in the realm of all the 
Lokap4las one after another, after being freed from the sins of the iron 
age and adored by the Siddhas, SSdhyas, nymphs, lie also liberates from 
hell one hundred Pilri Lokas, friends, brothers, sons, grandsons, all by 
himself. — 27-28. 


CHAPTER CCLXXVl. 


353 


One who reads or hears this Hira^yagarbha IMna’goes to the realm 
of Vi^nu and one who advises others to perform this ordinance, becomes, 
like India the Ijord of the Devas in heaven, and the leader of the hosts of 
wise persons. — 29. 

Here ends the two hundred and seventy-fifth chapter the Hiranyagariiha 

Maha Ddnam. 


CHAPTER CCLXXVl. 

Matsya said : — “ 1 shall now explain to you the ways of performing 
the Brahmanda ATah^d^na which is the dispeller of all sins of the highest 
degree and one of the best ordinances ” — 1. 

The devotee should make similar arrangements as before of Ritvika, 
pandal, articles, ornaments, clothings, etc., as required for Tul&dSna and 
then on an auspicious day he should invoke the Lokapalas and perform 
Adhivrtsana, etc. The golden universe (Brahma egg) should be made from 
20 palas to 1,000 palas (one pala is equal to four tol5s) according to the 
means of the devotee which and two jars should also be provided. All 

round the BrahmAnda eight Diggaj&stakas and six Vedkfiga I^Sstras 
should be located. — 2-4. 

The Brahm(in(la should be made with four-faced Brahm.'i in the centre 
and all round it should be made the images of the eight Lokap/ilas, l^iva, 
Visnu, Siirya, Parvatl, Lakt^mi, Vasu, Marudgana and with precious 
jewels. The length of the BrahmAnda should be from one cubit to 100 fin- 
gers and it should bo covered with a piece of silk cloth and located on a 
mound of 32 seers of sesamum. After that the eight sorts of grains should 
be placed all round it. — 5-7. 

To the east should be the Lord Sri Hari lying on Ananta, to the 
south-east Pradyumna. To the south should also be placed the images 
of Prakriti and Sabkar^ana ; to the west should be located Aniruddha and 
the four Vedas. To the north should be made the images of Agni and 
golden Vdsudeva. — 8-9. 

All round the gods should be placed on golden pedestals covered 
with red cloths after molasses being placed over them (in jars), and then 
worshipped. Ten jars filled with water and covered with cloths should also 
be placed. Ten cows should be given away, and the devotee should be 
baiihed along with gold, cloth, milking vessel, sandals, umbrella, ch/traara, 
looking-glass, seats, eatables, sugarcane, lighting-bowls, flowers, garlands 
and sandal, and incense, etc., after the Brabmanas, versed in the Vedas 
have performed Homa ceremonies with Adhiv&sa. — 10-11 

Lord of the universe, Virfvadhfima ! 1 salute you. The devotee, thus 
bathed, would circumambulate and repeat the following mantra : — You are 
the Lord of all of the seven Ri^is, of the Immortals and of this Sarth. Pro^ 
tect me. Deva ! Let the aggrieved and sinners also become blessed by your 
grace on their calamities being cut off by the blade of ordinances and cha- 
rities performed in your name. Let the sins of all the beings moving 
and non-moving be destroyed. Even those who are freed from thier sins by 

20 



354 


TBE MATS7A PURiVAM. 


tlie merit of their MahSd&na, be cared of all their faults and defects. After 

reciting this prayer and saluting !^ri Hari, all the articles of worship should 
be divided into ten parts and then two parts are to be given to the Guru 
and the rest given away to the Brahmanas. In an ordinance in which 
only a small amount is spent by the devotee, only the preceptor should 
offer libations into the sacrificial fire as is done in Agnihotra and be 
should be given away all the cloths, ornaments, etc. — 12-16. 

One who thus performs this Brahmfinda MahSd&na is liberated from 
all sins and goes to the region of Vi^^u seated on a chariot and is adored 
by the nymphs. — 17. 

By the glory of this Brahm&nda ordinance the devotee liberates the 
whole family of mother and father and grandfather, grandmother, brethren, 
wife, son, grandson, friends, acquaintances and guests and gives pleasure 
and happiness to all of them. — 18. 

One who reads this in a temple or in a virtuous man’s premises or 
hears about it or advises others to perform this ordinance goes to the 
realm of Indra where he enjoys the company of the nymphs. — 19. 

Here ends the 27Gth Chapter of the Matsya Purdtiam on Brahmanda 
Dana. 


CHAPTER CCIiXXVII. 

Matsya said ; — " Now 1 shall tell you about the KalpapSdapa MahA. 
DAna which is also the dispeller of all sins.” — 1. 

On an auspicious day the devotee should invoke the LokapAlas of 
the PunyAha-VAchana as prescribed in the TuladAna ordinance. — 2. 

The Ritvikas, pandal, ornaments, cloths, &c., should also be arranged 
as before. A golden tree yielding all desires (Kalpa-padapa) of various 
kinds of fruits should be made ; and also birds sitting on that tree ; the 
cloths and various ornaments should also be made. The tree should be of 
four to one thousand pals according to the means of the devotee. The 
gold used is mixed with alloy. — 3-4. 

It should be located on a mound of molasses of 32 seers, covered with 
a piece of white cloth. — 5. 

Five branches along with the images of BrahmA, Vifinu, i^iva, 
Sfirya and Cupid should be made, on the lower branch should be placed 
Cupid with Rati. SantAnaka tree, I of the golden Kalpa tree, should be 
located to the east of the latter. Mandara tree along with an image of 
Lakshmt should be located on a pot of clarified butter in the south, PAri- 
jAta tree along with the image of SAvitri should be located to the west on 
a mound of cumin seed (Jiraka). Similarly, Harichandana tree should be 
Ipcated to the north along with Surabhi cow on a mound of sesamum. 
^he tree is to be adorned on one-fourth part of it with flowers.-— 6-7. 

All the other trees should be made of the golden Kalpa tree and 
covered with a yellow cloth and decorated with flowers, sugarcane, 



CBAPTER GCLXXVm. 


355 


Then eight jars filled with water and provided with fruits, should 
be placed near the tree with a pair of sandals, cooking-utensils, lamps, < 
shoes, umbrella, chamara, seats, etc. After placing fruits, flowers, and 
buntings over them, 8 or 10 sorts of grains should be put in all the direc- 
tions. Over the tree a canopy is to be stretched, decked with fruits and 
garlands of flowers. — 9-11. 

After Homa ceremony and Adhiv&sa, the devotee should get himself 
bathed by the Br&hmaigias versed in the Vedas with the recitation of the 
sacred Vedic hymns and then he is to utter the following mantra 
after circumambulating the tree thrice : — 12. 

“ Salutations to the Kalpa tree, the giver of the desired objects, the 
protector of the universe and the image of the Creation. — 13. 

“ You are Brahmd, the Lord of the universe. You are the Lord of the 
day. You are the supreme soul ; therefore be pleased to protect me. You 
are the Immoveable, the soul of the universe. You are the Sun ; you are 
the material ; you are the immaterial ; you are the Highest cause. Saluta- 
tions to you. You are the nectar, you are the Infinite, you are the undecay- 
ing Person. In conjunction with Santilnas be gi'acious enough to protect 
me and deliver me from this ocean of world.” — 15. 

After this, the Kalpa tree should be given to the preceptor and the 
other trees should be given to the four Kitvikas. — 16. 

If the devotee cannot afford much money, he should worship the 
preceptor only. He should free himself from feelings of avarice and 
not be miserly in the expenditure of money. — 17. 

One who makes this Mah& DSn in this way, obtains the merits of 
the Asvamedha sacrifice. — 18. 

He is also adored by the nymphs, the Siddhas, the Ch&ranas and the 
Kinnaras. Besides that he liberates bis manes and the members of the 
present and future generations. — 19. 

After being seated in a Vim&na resplendent like the Sun, he goes to 
the realm of Lord Vispu venerated by the Devas. — 20. 

Thereafter residing for hundreds of Kalpas as the King of Kings in 
Heaven and then through the grace of NSr&yana, he becomes His devotee 
and inclined to hear about Him when he goes to the city of NSr&yana. 
- 21 . 

One who reads about it or remembers it also gets himself freed from 
sins and goes to the realm of Indra and lives there for one Manvantara 
happily with ApsarSs. — 22. 

Here enda the 277th Chapter of the Mataya Puranam on Kalpa Pddapa 
Mahad&nam. 


CHAPTER CCLXXVIII. 

Matsya said : — “ I shall now tell you about the Go^hasra Mahft 
Ddna the dispeller of all great sins and the yielder of all desires.” — 1. 

On an auspicious day before carrying out this ordinance the 
devotee should live on milk for three nights or one. Afterwards the 


856 


THIS MATSYA PUBANAM. 


Ix)kp&la8 should bo invoked as is done in TuUddna and Homa ceremony 
and adliivSsa should be performed. Ritviks, Mandapas, articles, ornaments 
and covering cloths all are to be arranged ; and within the enclosure of 
the Vedi, a bull with all auspicious signs is to be brought. Outside the 
Vedi then a thousand cows with their horns mounted with gold and hoofs 
with silver, should be placed after being adorned with ornaments, cloths, 
flowers and garlands. — 2-4. 

Then after decorating ten cows with cloths, .garlands, golden-bells, 
milking-pots of bell-metal, gold plait and red cloth, the devotee should 
arrange a pair of sandals, shoes, umbrella, vessels, seats, etc., these are 
to be worshipped and in their midst sliouhl bo made a golden bull, 
Nandike^vata which should be located on a mound of salt after being 
covered with a silken cloth and decorated with ornaments. Sugarcane 
and fruits should be placed closed by. The b\ill, etc., should not be less 
than one hundred palas in weight ami should go up to three thousand 
palas. In the case of gift of one hundred (100) cows, one-tenth of that 
should be arranged for. — 5-10. 

On an auspicious day auspicious Vedic songs should be sung and 
then the devotee should bathe in water mixed with herbs and medi- 
cinal plants. The Brahinanas accompli.shed in the Vedas slionld bathe 
the devotee after which the latter should iceite the following fornudie by* 
holding a handful of flowers : — “() Kohini.s, the inhahitimts of the liokas ! 
"Vou are the form of the Universe ; vi/u are llie world-mother; salutations 
to you ! — 11-12. 

“ O Cow-Mother ! witliin your body are tlie 21 bhuvans, Devas, 
Brahm^, etc., tlierefore protect me. (> Cows ! be on my front ; be at my 
back and also on ray head. 1 am living in the midst of Cows for you are 
existing incarnate in the form of Vrisa, the efr iiial Bliarma. You are the 
resting place of the eight Mortis. Therefore, o Eternal one ! protect me.” 
Afterwards the golden bull Xandikcsvaiw should be given away with all 
materials to the preceptor and a cow out of the ten should be given to the 
Ritvikas. Then each of the llitvikas and the priests shordd bo given 
100, .50, 20 or 10 co%v8 and with their permi8.si(>n other Brahmanas should 
also be given ten or five cows each. One cow should not be given to 
many. This is sinful. A sensible devotee eager for his health and pro- 
sperity should give many cows to one man. — 13-18. 

After thus giving away one thousand cows, the devotee should live 
again on milk for a day and one eager for a store of wealth should lead a 
life of celibacy on the day of performing this ordinance and hearing the 
glories of this liana and making it heard by others. One who thus makes 
the gift of 1 ,(j 0<) cows is liberated from all sins and honoured by the Siddbas, 
Clikrapas, etc., is venerated in the realm of all the Ix^kpiilas after being 
seated in a chariot shinitig like the sun and decorated with a beautiful 
network of bells, etc. lie remains in those reaJtns along with his sons 
and grarjdsons for a Manvantara in each. Thus he goes beyond the 
seven realms and attains the domain of Siva. — 19-23. 

Besides this he liberates JOl manes and grandmothers, etc. Ho 
reigns as a king for 100 Kafpas ; after that he becomes devoted to l^iva 



CHAPTER CGLXXIX. 


357 


and performing one hundred Asvamedha sacrifices attains the realm o( 
Lord Visnu and becomes liberated from bondage.— 24-25. 

The manes also eagerly look forward to a son who would make la 
gift of 1,000 cows. They wish that a son or a grandson should liberate 
tlien^ 1)y making such a gift. One who does so is ministered to by hifl 
manes in every respect. — 26-27. 

One who reads about this or thinks abcfut it, will go to the realm of 
Indra after leaving his- mortal evil and liberated from all sins.'— 28. 

Here ends the 278th Chapter of Matsya Purdnam on giving away 
one thousand Goivs. 


CHAPTER CCLXXIX. 

Matsya said : — “ I shall now tell you about the K&madhenu D&n 
which fulfils all the desires of the people after driving away all great 
sins.” — 1. 

First the LokapAlas should be invoked and then Homa and Adhivis 
should be performed after erecting ICundas, pandal, and an altar. If the 
devotee cannot afford much money then only the preceptor may offer 
sacrificial oblations as is done in Ekagni ceremony. In this cere- 
mony a cow and her calf are to be made of pure gold. To give away 
K^imadhenu with one thousand fruits is the best ; with 5^'0 fruits 
ii middling ; and with 250 fruits is Kani§tha. The Kamadhenu 
should be made of not less than three tolas of gold, whether the 
devotee is able or not, A black deerskin should be spread on a mound 
of molasses and above it should be placed the cow decorated with various 
kinds of gems. Close to it should be placed eight pitchers full of water 
containing jewels and various flowers. — 3-6. 

Itound it should be placed 8 or 10 sorts of grains, sugarcane, fruits, 
utensils, seats, copper milkingpot, red cloth, lamp, umbrella, chamara, 
oar-rings, bell, golden horns foils, silver hoofs, turmeric, ciiininseed, daniya, 
sugar, etc. An awning of five colours is to be spread over the altar. 
The cow is to be anointed all over well with turmeric, etc. — 7-9. 

Then after the chant of Vedic hymns, the devotee should make three 
circumainbulations, get himself bathed and taking a handful of kusa grass 
and flowers he should invoke the K&madhenu wliile the preceptor recites 
the Vedic mantras. — 10. 

He should say, “ 0, Kfimadhenu ! You on the temple of all the Devas 
are ; you are Tripathag/l ; you are the essejice of oceans and mountains ; 
you are the protector of the universe. I have attained the final bliss by 
making a gift of you and have been liberated from all the sins. I salute 
you. Who is there that undergoes sufferings when he has attained you? 
You are E^madhenu because you drive away all ills and sufferings.” 

One who thus gives away a K&madhenu to a Br/lhmana of noble 
lineage, of good qualities and handsome appearance goes to the realm of 
Indra inhabited by the Devas.— 11-13, 

Here ends the 279 th Chapter of the Matsya Purdnam on Kdmadhenu 
Ddriam, 



358 


THE MATSYA PDBAEAM. 


CHAPTER COLXXX. 

Matsya said : — “ I shall now tell you the sacred HirapyArfva Mah& 
D&na which confers numberless benefits on the devotee.” — 1. 

Ou an auspicious day the devotee should invoke the Lokap&las 
and recite Brfihmana V&chanam as done in Tult\d&na. — 2. * 

Afterwards Ritvikas, pandal, ornaments, cloths, Ac., shouhi be 
arranged for as before. If the devotee cannot spend more money then 
he should get a sacrifice performed by the Guru only according to the 
Ekftgni rite. — 3. 

Afterwards a golden horse should be made and placed on a heap of 
sesamuin placed on the skin of a black deer over the Vedi (altar). It 
should then be covered with a silk cloth. The horse should be made from 
three to 1,000 (one thousand) tolas of gold according to the means of the de- 
votee. Sandals, shoes, umbrella, chamara, seats, utensils, eight (8) pitchers 
full of water, garlands, sugarcane, fruits, bedsfead with all its equipments, 
and an image of the sun made of gold, should be placed near it. Then 
the devotee should get himself bathed by the Vcdic Brilhmanas facccnn- 
panied with the reeitation of the Vedic hymns) with water in which some 
medicinal herbs have been put and then taking a handful of flowers 
recite the following mantra — 4-7. 

” 0, Sarvadeve^a ! O Visnu, the revealer of the sacred Vedas ; please^ 
work out my salvation from tliis mundane ocean. Salutations to you. — 8. 

“ 0 Sun ! You are divided into seven parts, the seven Chliandas 
whereby you illumine all the Lokas. You illumine the universe. Pray 
protect me. 0 Eternal one ! ” —9. 

While reciting this mantra, the devotee is to make over the golden 
horse to the preceptor. One who does so becomes freed of sins and attains 
the realm of the Sun. Afterwards the devotee should give away cows to 
the Ritvikas and various sorts of grains to the preceptor. — 10-11. 

On the conclusion of the ceremony the devotee should not take any- 
thing cooked in oil. He should hear the Puranas and feed the BrSh- 
mapas. — 12. 

One who observes this ordinance is freed from all his sins and 
attains the domain of Visnu, and is honoured by the Siddhas. — 13. 

One who reads or hears this lliranyasva ordinance or witnesses it 
or thinks of it or one who is poor but yearns to perform it, is liberated 
from all his sins and goes to the region of Sun with a bright body 
seated inaVimana shining like the Sun, where he is a worshipped by tlie 
celestial women. — 14-1.5. 

Here ends the 280th Chapter of the Matsya Purdnam on Hiraaydsoa 

Ddn. 


CHAPTER CCLXXXI. 

Matsya said : — “ I shall now tell you about the auspicious Advaratha 
Mah4 Dfin which is the dispeller of all great sins.” — 1. 

On an auspicious day after Svastivdchana the Lokapftlas should 
be invoked by the sacrificer as is done in course of TulM&na. — 2. 



GnAPTER CGLXXXII. 


359 


Afterwards, Ritvikas, mapdapa, necessary articles, ornaments, etc.,, 
should be brought, and then a golden chariot should he put on the 
black deer skin over which the sesamums are scattered. There should be 
four wheels in the chariot and the number of horses should be four or ei^t. 
Aflag-stafE and a pitcher of sapphire should be made and the eight Lokapllas 
should be made of lapis-lazuli. Four pitchers full of water and 18 
kinds of grains should be placed ; and the chariot should be covered 
with silk cloth and there is to be a canopy over the altar. Afterwards there 
should be placed on the chariot garlands, sugarcane, fruits, and Purusas. 
The devotee should consecrate the Deity to whom he is devoted. Then um- 
brella, chamara, red cloth, ghee, cow, bedstead with all the necessary equip- 
ments should be supplied. The chariot should be made of over three palas 
to one bhSra of gold according to the means of the devotee. Eight, four 
or only a pair of horses may be made. The banner should be adorned 
with a lion of gold. The two Asvini Kum&ras riding on horses should 
be made to go to and fro as guards of the chariot wheels. The devotee 
should then bathe as before with the recitation of the Vedic hymns and 
then make three circumainbulations and after holding a handful of flowers 
and putting on garlands of white flowers and white clothes recite the 
following mantras. — 3-11. 

“ 0, Lord Sun ! the Soul of the universe, the Destroyer of all sins, 
the Ocean and Master of splendour or brilliancy, whose chariot is drawn 
by the horses of the Vedas, I salute you. Give me peace. Yon are 
the creator and supporter of the eight Vasus and the Maruts. Dispel 
my sins, and infuse virtue in me.” — 12-13. 

One who thus gives away a golden chariot attains beatitude after 
being freed from all his sins.— 14. 

He becomes illustrious and goes to the realm of the Lord ^iva after 
attaining and going beyond the domain of the piercing Sun where the 
nymphs like the black bees drink the aroma of his lotus-like face and 
live there with Ambuja Bhava. — 15. 

One who reads or hears about this ordinance never goes to hell. 
He repeatedly goes to heaven. — 16. 

Here ends the 28Ist Chapter on the gift of Hirany&roa Hatha Mahd D&nam. 

CHAPTER CCLXXXIl. 

Matsya said ; — ” I shall now-tell you about the greatly auspicious 
Heiuabasti Ratba MahaDanaby performing which one attains- the realm of 
Lord Vi^nu.” — 1. 

On an auspicious day after Svastivnchana, the devotee should invoke 
the Lokapalas as prescribed in coarse of Tultidana. Then he should find 
out Ritvikas, canopy, ornaments, cloth, etc., and observe a fast. He should 
break his fast with the Brahmanas. A chariot of the shape of Puspaka 
(aeroplane) should be made of gold studded with precious stones. It should 
have artistic tiled covering on domes and four wheels. Then a mound of 
sesamum should be placed on a black deer skin and above it should be 
located the chariot. — 2-4. 



360 


ms MATSTA PUUmM. 


Round it the eight LokapAlas, Brahmi, San and Siva should be made 
and in the centre should be made the image of N&riiyana with the Cloddesa 
Lakshmt. — 5. 

Then twelve kinds of grain, seats, utensils, sandal, lighting-bowls, 
shoes, umbrella, mirror, a pair of sandals should be placed. A llag-stalT 
should be made with an image of Qariida on it and in front of the yoke 
should be made an image of Gane«la. Above it should be placed a canopy 
with bunting of various kinds of fruits. — 6-7. 

Five kinds of coloured silk cloths, flowei^s, four pitchers and oigl\t 
cows should be placed next to tlm chariot. Tlien four elepiiants mado 
of gold and decorated with pearl strings should be made and yoked 
to the chariot. Two real elepliants shoud be olTered with four golden 
elephants. The golden elephants should be made from five palais to 
one bh&ra of gold according to the means of the devotee. After 
bathing with the recitation by Bralunanas versed in the Vedas of the 
Vedic hymns the devotee should circumambulate the chariot three times. 
Taking a handful of flowers he should utter the following mantras and 
then should give it away to tlie Brahmaiuis : — 8-11. 

“ (), illustrious chariot! You are made use of by fJiva, IJralim/i, 
SQrya, Vidyadhara, Vasudeva, in Vedas, ruranas and Yajnas. [ Iherefore 
salute you. Your blissful form is the lotus of lieart which tl»e Munis see 
through Yoga, and where is seated Murari ! You bring deliverance tc^ 
those entangled in the [mealies of the] ocean of the world. 0, Madhava ! 
therefore protect me after dispelling all my sins.” — 14. 

One who gives away a golden chariot after thus saluting it, goes to 

the domain of J^iva after being liberated from all his sins and there 
he is adored by the seers and the Vidyadharas, the immorlals and 
Munindias. — 15. 

Even a sinner who gives away this grjidon chariot assumes a good 
form and liberates his manes, brethren, sons, etc , and carries them to the 
region of Vitjiiu, — Ifi. 

Here enrU the 282)ir1 Chapter on the fjiring au:ay of golden chariot and 
elephant knovm as Ilema I fasti Mahaddnam. 

CHAPTER CCLXXXTir. 

Matsya said : — “ T shall now tell you about the Panclia Langalaka or- 
dinance which is the dispeller of all great sins/’ — 1. 

On an auspicious moment, e.g., the commencement of a Yiiga or on 
the occasion of an eclipse, a plot of land measuring five ploughs should 
be given away. — 2 

Any market town or a village at the foot of a mountain, or any other 
village should be given away after making the fields prosperous with 
harvest, or only half the village may be given with its good harvest 
according to one’s means. — 3. 

Five ploughs of good wood should be made and five plouglis of gold 
from five palas to one thousand palas should also be made according to 
the means of the devotee. Then five pairs of oxen should be procured 



CSAPTm GOLXXXIV. 


zni 

and their horns shoahi be covered with gold and tails studded with pearls 
and their hoofs mounted with silver and then a a silk cloth should 
be thrown over them and they should then be worshipped with flor^ 
garlands, sandals, etc., and tied in the devotee’s cowshed. — 4-6. 

Afterwards sacrificial oblations of rice cooked in milk and sugar 
and other things should be made in the name of Prithv!, Aditya,’ Rudra 
in the same sacrificial pit. The wood of butea-frondosa,' clarified butter, 
sesamum should also be used in course of the sacrificial offerings. 
The Lokapalas should be invoked as prescribed in the Tul&ddna cere- 
mony. — 7-8. 

Then, after the recitation of propitiatory hymns, the wise priest 
should put on white clothes and white garlands and call the devotee 
with his consort and give him a girdle of gold, a ring, a piece of redcloth, a 
few gems, a bed with all its equipments and a milch cow. Eigliteen grains 
should be placed all round and then the devotee holding a handful of 
flowers should circumambulate the Mapdap and utter the following : — 

“ All the Devas and all other bei ngs, moveable and non-movable, are present, 
on the harnessed body of this ox, so let them remain devoted towards 
Siva. There is no ordinance like one-sixteenth part of the gift of a plot of 
land ; so let my intellect be fixed in Dharma. — 9-13. 

A plot of land that can hold thirty poles of seven hands each 
is called the Nirvartana. This is told by Praj&pati. One who gives away 
a plot of land of 100 Nirvartanas in area according to the prescribed 
rites, is freed at once of all bis sins. And one who gives away an 
area of land half of that on measuring a Gocharma or sufficient for 
a house to be built upon also frees himself from all his sins. — 14-16. 

The donor of such plots of land remains in the realm of Siva for as 
many years as there are hairs on the body of the oxen or as many 
pores there are in the soil at the time of sowing seeds after ploughing the 
plot. — 17. 

The Gandharvas, Devas, demons, Sid d has, they all wave chamaras 
on him and the devotee goes to the domain of Siva seated in a huge 
Vim&na along with his fathers, grandfathers, friends, etc. — 18. 

By this gift of oxen, lands, and ploughs with yokes, etc., the donor is 
freed of his sins and obtains the position of Indra. A wealthy man should 
therefore give this gift to remove his sins and acquire prosperity for him- 
self. — 19. 

Here ends the 283rd Chapt^ on Pancha L&ngalaka Mahd Ddnam 
{giving away land wiUi five ploughs). 

CHAPTER CCLXXXIV. 

Malsya said ” I shall now tell you about the sacred Dhar&d4na 
that drives away aU the ills and sins of the devotee and promotes his 
welfare.” — 1. 

The Yajam4n (sacrificer) should make an earth of gold in imitation 
of Jambudvlpa. 

21 



362 


TEB UAT8YA POBANAM. 


This jtolden Jambadvtpa, having mountains, with Meru in the centre, 
with eight Lokap&Ias and nine Vardas, with rivers and oceans, full of 
gems, conjoint with Vasa, Rudra and the Sun should be made of 1 ,000 
palas or 500 or 300, or 200 or 100 palas of gold. It should how- 
ever be more than five palas. The Lokap&las should be invoked as in 
course of the Tul/ldAna and Ritvikas, pandal, ornaments, clothings, etc., 
should bo similarly arranged. — 2-6. 

On the altar (Vedi) the black deer skin should be spread and over it 
should be niade a mound of sesamum. Above the heap should be placed 
the image of the earth and round it should be placed salt, etc., along 
with 18 kinds of grains. Then 8 pitchei’s full of water should be placed 
covered over with silk awning as well as various kinds of fruits and 
cocoanuts and clothings. Afterwards the devotee should put on white 
clothes, white garlands and taking a handful of llowers, — 7-10. 

Recite the following mantras at an auspicious moment : — “ 0 Mother 
Universe ! You are the refuge of all the Uevas, 1 therefore salute you. 
You protect all the Jivas ; therefore protect me. 0 Vasundliare ! You 
hold the Vasus, all the beings, pray protect me. 0 Achale ! Even the 
four-faced Lord Brahma does not adequately know your limit. Therefore 
you are Ananta. My salutations to you. O, one without any beginning or an 
end. Guard me from the perils of this vast and fearfid ocean of the world. 
You are with Vi§nu in the form of Lakshnu, with Siva in the form of 
Gaurt, with Brahm& in the form of Savitri. You are the light of the Sun 
and the Moon, intellect in Vrihaspati, Medhfi, t,i>delligonce) retentive 
faculty in the Munis. — 11-15. 

“ 0 mother! You' are fixed, you pervade all the universe, therefore 
you are called Viijvamlihara. Devi I you are known by the names 
Dhriti, Sthiti, KshamS, Kshauni, Prithvi, Vasumati .md RasA. Pray do 
protect me by all your above-mentioned forms.” Afterwards the devotee 
should give away the Devi to the Bn'ihmanas. One-half or one-fourth of 
the earth made of gold should be given to the preceptor (Guru) and the 
rest should be given away to the Ritvikas. Then the Br&hmauas should 
be dismissed after being saluted. — 10-18. 

In such a way one who gives away that golden \iniverse in an auspi- 
cious moment attains bliss and goes to the realm of Narayana seated in a 
VimAn bright as the Sun and decorated with beautiful network and bells 
where he remains for .3 Kalpas and liberates his manes, sons, grand-children 
for twenty-one generations. One who reads this or hears it is also liberat- 
ed from all sins and goes to the realm of jJiva resided by thousands of 
Devas where nymphs yearn for him. 

Here ends the 284i}i Chapter on giving aioay the golden earth. 
CHAPTER CCLXXXV. 

Matsya said : — “ I shall now tell you about the Viiivacbakra Mnhft 
DSnam which is the dispeller of ail heinous sins.” — 1. 

On the day when the Sun enters the point of equinox or on 
any auspicious day an image of golden Virfvachakra (tlie wheels of the uni- 



CHAPTER GGLXXXV. 


363 


verse) should be^ made. The image of 1,000 palas of gold is the best, of 
500 palas is medium and of 250 palas is the Kani^tha. If the devotee oan-» 
not aiford much he should get an image of over 20 palas made. It should 
however not be less than that. — 2-3. 

The wheel should be made of sixteen spokes and eight fellies. In 
the middle of it should be made the image of Lord Vispu in Yoga posture, • 
of four arms, a conch and a disc should be placed beside him. The images 
of the eight Goddesses should also be made to reside within the wheel. 
Another image of Visnu in a lying posUire should be made in the east 
and the images of Atri, Bhrigu, Va^istha, BrahmS, Kasyapa, Matsya, Kflrma, 
VarSha, Nrisiipba, Vamana, Paradurama, Ramachandra, Kri^na, Buddha 
and Kalki should also be made in due order as the secondary attendants. 
In the third row of attendants on the wheel should be placed the images 
of Gauri, the 16 Matrikds, 8 Vasus ; in the fourth one should be placed the 
12 Adityas, 4 Vedas ; in the fifth one the five elements and eleven Rudras, 
in the 6th one, the 8 Lokap^las, the Diggajas ; in the 7th one, all the 
auspicious things, arms and weapons and in the 8th one the Devas. Thus 
the Virfvachakra has 8 ^varanas. Afterwards all the things mentioned in 
the TulAdana should be placed all round the Vidvachakra and then Ritvi- 
kas, pandal, ornaments, etc., should be arranged accordingly. Then the 
Vidvachakra should be placed on a mound of sesamum placed on the skin 
of a black deer. — 4-11. 

Eighteen sorts of grains and salt, etc., as well as eight pitchers full of 
water covered with cloths and adorned with garlands of flowers, sugarcane, 
fruits, gems and awnings should also be placed. The householder should 
bathe as before accompained with Vedic hymns and put on white clothes 
and then commence the sacrifice. After Homa and AdhivAsana he should 
take a handful of flowers and make three circumarabulations and utter the 
following mantras : — “ 0 Visvamaya ! O VitSvachakr&traan ! My salutations 
to you in whom is contained the universe and who is the master of the 
cycle of the universe. — 12-14. 

“ O, one full of the highest bliss, do save me from the mundane sea of 
troubles. The illustrious Tattva which is seen constantly in the hearts by 
the Yogis in meditation is saluted by me. I bow down to the Virfva- 
chakra above all the attributes. 0 Chakra ! you are contained in Lord 
Vignu and vice versa. It is therefore the remover of all sins. — 15-17. 

“ Vitivachakra is the supreme weapon of Visnu. You are the resting 
place of the Lord. Pray therefore rescue me from the sufferings of the 
world.” One who thus gives away the Viivachakra, is liberated from all 
sins and goes to the realm of Visnu where he is blessed with 4 hands and 
eternal form in Vaikuptha and remains there for 300 Ealpas in the 
midst of the Apsaras. One who salutes the Vi4vachakra every day gets 
prosperity and wealth in this life. His life becomes long. — 18-20. 

One who gives away a Viilvachakra of gold with 16 spokes and 8 
fellies, the refuge of the Devas and this world, goes to the realm of Visnu 
and the Siddhas salute him. — 21. 

His appearance also becomes very fascinating to women.^ This ordin- 
ance destroys all the enemies of the devotee and removes all his sins. — 22. 



364 


THE MAT8YA PUBAHAM. 


Most heinous sins vanish by the glory of this ordinance in the name 
of Hari and the devotee never gets into any peril of rebirth and death. — 23. 

Here ends the 285th Chapter on Viavaehakra prad&nam (giving aioay 
the wheel of universe). 


CHAPTER CCLXXXVL 

Matsya said : — “ I shall now tell you about the Mah&kalpa1at&, an ex- 
cellent gift, which is the destroyer of great sins.” — 1. 

On an auspicious Tithi after Svastivftchana, the devotee should 
arrange for the Ritvikas, pandal, articles, ornaments, clothings as before 
and invoke Lokaptllas as is done in the TaUdana. Then Kalpalatds 
(creepers yielding all desires) of gold should be made and they should be 
adorned with various fruits, flowers and kinds of birds, couples of VidyA- 
dharSs, pairs of golden birds, Siddhas culling flowers and fruits. Birds 
should be made along with the images of the ascetics living rnly on 
fruits ; as well as the images of the Devas the attendant of the LokapSlas 
should also be made. — 4-5. 

Beneath the two creeper twigs on a mound of salt should be placed 
the image of the Goddess Brahmi of infinite power and glory holding 
lotus and conch, as well as of the Goddess of i\nauta Sakti. — 6. 

On a mound of molasses to the east should be located the image of 
the Goddess Indrdni on a seat on an elephant holding a thunderbolt in Her 
hand. The consort of Agni should be located iu the S.-E. corner on a 
mound of turmeric holding a sacrificial ladle in Her hand. — 7. 

In the south should be located the image of the Goddess Gadini 
riding a buffalo, in the S.-W. corner sliould be placed the image of 
the Goddess Nairitya on a mound of clarified butter holding a sword. — 8. 

In the west should be placed the image of the Goddess VSrunl 
with her weapon of NSgapfijfa, riding a fi.sh, on a pot of milk and in the 
N.-W. corner should be placed the image of the Goddess Patfikini 
riding a deer, on a mound of sugar. — 9. 

The Goddess ^atpkhini should be located in the north on a mound 
of sesamum and in the N.-E. corner should be placed the image of the 
Goddess Mahesvart riding a bull and holding a trident, on a seat of fresh 
butter. — 10. 

The images of these Goddesses should be made in their girlish forms 
with a coronet on their heads, with Their hand in the posture of offering 
some boon. They should be made of from five palas to one thousand 
palas of gold. — 11. 

Over Them should be made awnings and arches of different colours 
and close to them should be kept 10 cows, 10 vases, and pairs of cloths. 
The central image, and the two cows along with the two vases should be 
given to the preceptor and the rest should bo given to the Ritvikas. After 
a bath with Vedic chants the tlevotee should put on white clothes and 
utter the following formulae after circumambulating thrice. — 12-13. 

“Salutations to the better halves of the Directions and the KalpalatA 




OHAPTER GCLXXXVIIL 


36$ 


Vadbus that dispel all sins ; protect the universe along with the Loka- 
pulas and give the desired objects.” — 14. 

One who thus gives away these consorts of the Directions goes to 
the NSgaloka, the satisiler of all desires, where he remains for 30 years of 
Brabmi. — 15. • 

He liberates one hundred generations of bis manes from this sea of 
troubles and is adored by thousands of nymphs. The Diganganis 
have ordained this Mah&dana. One who reads, listens to or sees the Kalpa- 
lat&d&na and the Dikvadhhd4na goes to the realm of Indra. — 16-17. 

Here end$ the 286th Chapter on Kanaka Kalpalatdpraddnam. 


CHAPTER CCLXXXVII. 

Matsya said : — “ I shall now relate to you Saptastlgara ordinance, 
the dispeller of all great sins.” — 1. 

On an auspicious day after Svastiv&chana the Lokap&las should be 
invoked as is done in TuUdfina. Then Ritvikas, Mandapa, articles, orna:- 
ments, clothings and coverings should be collected and seven sacrificial 
pits should be made of gold. — 2-3. 

They should be of the size of PradfisA (of the span of the thumb and 
forefinger) or Aratui and should be made of from seven palas to one thou- 
sand palas of gold according to the means of the devotee. — 4 . 

[N. B. Aratni — a cubit of the middle length from the elbow to the 
tip of the little finger.] 

Then they should be located on a black deer skin overspread with 
sesamum. The first pit should be filled in with salt ; the second one with 
milk, the third one with clarified butter, the fourth one with molasses, 
the fifth one with cords, the sixth one with sugar, the seventh one with 
the sacred waters of the holy Tirthas. The golden image of BrahmA 
should be put in the one filled with salt ; Eesava in the second one filled 
with milk, Shiva in the third one filled with clarified butter, the Sun 
in the fourth one filled with molasses, the Moon in the 5th one filled 
with curds, ^kshmt in the 6th one filled with sugar, PArvatl in the 7th 
one filled with the sacred waters. Gems and grains (Dhknyam) should 
be put in each one of them and grains all round — 5-9. 

All the ceremonies should be performed as is done in Tulad&na and 
at the end of the V&runa Homa the'sievotee should bathe assisted by the 
BrAhmayas versed in the Vedas. He should then make three circum- 
ambulations and then recite the following formula*. : — “ 0 Eternal Oceans ! 
You are the basis of all the beings. You are eternal. You are the giver 
of life to all beings. I salute you. — 10-11. 

“ You satisfy the three realms with your store of milk, clarified butter, 
water, curds, honey, salt, sugar-cane, gems ; pray therefore drive away my 
sins also. — 12. 

** You dispel the ills of the Devas, the demons in all the regions, be- 
stow nectar unto them and give them gems for their ornaments, pray let 
therefore there be an increase in the store of wealth in my house.” — 13. 



366 


THE MAT8YA PVBANAM, 


One who thus gives away these seven oceans in such a way, attains 
the realm of Visnu venerated by the Devas. — 14, 

He also liberates his sons, wife, father, grandfather, etc,, from sins 
and sends them to heaven from hell,— 15, 

Here ends the 287th Chapter on Saptasdgar Pradanam (giving away 
seven oceans.) 


CHAPTER CCLXXXVIII, 

Matsya said : — “ I shall now tell you about the Rafnadhonu ordi- 
nance the giver of high benefits, and which leads to Go-loka,— 1. 

On an auspicious day the Lokap&ls should be invoked as iu Tuladdna 
and then a cow studded with precious stones should be made. — 2. 

A skin of black deer should be spread on the floor and then a mound 
of 32 seers of sesamum should be placed and above it should be- put 81 
sorts of gems. — 3-4. 

On the head a tilaka should be made in gold and 100 pearls should 
be placed in the eyes, and 100 corals should be placed in tlie brows. 
Mother o’pearl should be placed in the oars and the horns should be made 
of gold. On the head should be placed one hundred diamonds and in the 
neck 100 Gonioda stones should be placed. The eyes are to be lotus-like 
extended. — 5-6. 

One hundred sapphires (Indranila-mani) should be placed on the back 
and Vaidfirya-mauis in place of the ribs, and Sphatikamani in place of the 
stomach. Musk and other scented things should be placed in place of the 
waist. The hoofs should be made of gold, the tail of pearls, nose of Sflrya- 
kfiipta and ChandrakUnta stones. The knee is to bo studded with 
camphor. — 7-8. 

The hair should be of Kufikuma (saffron) and the navel of silver 
and there should be a 100 rubies in place of the arras.— 9, 

Other precious stones should be placed in the other joints. The tongue 
should be made of sugar and molasses should be substituted for dung, 
clarified butter in place of urine, curds in place of curds and milk in place 
of milk. Chamara should be placed in front of the tail-end and a copper 
milking pot should be placed close by the cow. — 10-11. 

Earrings should be made of gold and other ornaments should 
be made according to the means of the devotee. In the same way a 
calf of one-fourth of the cow prescribed according to rule should be 
made. — 12. 

All the grains, sugarcane, various kinds of fruits should be provided 
and an arch of various colours should be made. Afterwards Horna should 
be performed and gifts should bo made to the Ritvikas. Afterwards the cow 
should be invoked and the following mantras should be recited. — 13-14. 

Cow ! 0 Devi ! Your body contains the three worlds ; you are said 
to be the resting place of all the Devas ; so Rudra, Brahm&, and Vfisudeva 
say ; pray protect me from the troubles of the world. — 15. 



CHAPTER OCLXXXIX. 


367 


One is to observe fasting, and after invoking the above mantras, 
should circumambulate and with devotion make the gift, touching tbe 
waters. The cow should bo given away to tlie preceptor. One who does 
so goes to the region of Vi§nu, being freed from sins. — 16. * 

Seated in a brilliant chariot, with his sons, grandsons, <S:c., and freed 
from all sins he goes to Sambhu. — 17. 

Here ends the 228th Chapter on Ratna Lhenu Praddnam. 


CHAPTER CCLXXXIX. 

Matsya said : — “I shall now relate to you about the MahSbhdta-ghata 
ordinance, the destroyer of all sins.” — 1. 

On an auspicious day after Svastivflchana, the devotee should call 
the Ritvikas and arrange for the pandal, ornaments, cloths, etc., as pre- 
scribed for the Tulfipdiina and should then invoke the Lokaptllas. The 
pitcher or kutnbha should be made of gold studded with precious stones. 
It should measure one PradSifa to 100 fingers of gold according to the 
means of the devotee. It should then be filled in with clarified butter, 
milk and made to go hand in hand with Kalpavriksa. — 2-4. 

Images of BrahmS, Vi^nu and ^iva should be made seated on 
lotusps with their Yulianas ; and so those of the Lokap&las seated 
on PadmAsana ; and the Earth along with the lotus raised up by the 
I.ord Varaha. All these images should be made of gold. There should 
also be made the images of Varuna on a seat of golden crocodile, Agni 
riding on a goat, Vfiyu seated on a black deer. All these Devas with the 
Deva Panchakam are to be placed within the pitcher. Ganeifa is to be 
chosen as the Lord of Kosa. Afterwards the images should be invoked with 
the recitations of the prescribed Vedic hymns and then put inside the vase. 
The image of the Rigveda decorated with an Ak^a Sutra (rosary), of the 
Yajurveda with a lotus, SAmaveda with a guitar, and bamboos are to be 
placed on the right side of the pitcher. Atbarvaveda with the sacrificial 
utensils sruk, sruva should also be placed. — 5-9. 

Round the vase should be placed by a wise man holding ak^a 
sutra and kamandalu, and versed in the PurAnas all the grains, Chamara, 
seats, mirror, sandals, shoes, ornaments, bed, vase of water, five kinds of 
buntings. The devotee should then recite the following mantras after 
AdhivAsa both : — 10-11. 

0 thou, the support of all the Devas, and the Universe the Lord of 
the MahAbhfitas, I salute you. Pray bring me peace and prosperity. — 12. 

There is no other thing in this Universe than the elements. The 
whole creation is made of elements. Let there be an attainment of in- 
exhaustible wealth to me by virtue of this ordinance. — 13. 

One who thus gives away the MahAbhfita-ghata is liberated from all 
sins and attains beatitude. — 14. 

In other words he goes to the kingdom of Vif^u seated in a VimAna 
resplendent like the Sun along with his manes and relation and is adored 
by the nymphs. — 15. 




368 


THE MATSYA PUEANAM. 


One who performs the 16 kinds of ordinances mentioned before is 
not reborn. — 16. 

One who hears about them in company of one’s wife and sons, 
etc., in a temple of Vis^u, also attains the realm of the Lord Vi^nu, and 
remains there for one kalpa.*— 17. 

Here ends the 289th Chapter of Matsya Purdviam on MahSbhAtaghata 

Ddnam. 

CHAPTER CCLXXXX. 

•<» 

Manu. — “Lord! be gracious enough to name, in brief, the Kalpas 
mentioned by you in course of your description of the measurement and 
duration of Kalpas. — 1. 

Matsya. — “ I shall now give you the names of all those Kalpas, the 
mere mention of which gives the benefit of having recited the sacred 
Vedas, and destroys all the great sins.” — 2. 

They are : — C) ^vSta (2) Ntlaldhita, (3) VSmadfiva, (4) Rathamtara, 
(5) Raurava, (6) Deva, (7) Vrihat , (8) Kandarpa, (9) Sadya, (10) Itlana, 
(11) Tama, (12) Stirasvata, (13) Udfina, (14) G^ruda, (15) Kaurina, (16) 
N^rasitpha, (17) Sam^na, (18) &gnfiya, (19) S6ma, (20) Mdnava, (21) 
Tatapumfina, (22) Vaikuntlia, (23) Lakshml, (24) S&vitrl, (25) Gh6ra, (26) 
VArAha, (27; Vair&ja, (28) Gauri, (29) Mnhe^vara, in course of whi^ 
Tripura was annihilated, (30) Pittri, at the end of which occurs Lord 
Brahm&’s ParamS. Kuhu. These Kalpas form one month of 30 days of 
Brahmd, each Kalpa forming a day ; and one who hears them is freed 
from all sins. The kalpas have been named by the Ijord BrahmS after the 
names of the significant events taking place in them and after the name of 
who had the highest glorious career in the beginning of each. — 3-12. 

These Kalpas are divided into Samklrna, Tamas, Rajas, Sattvik and 
are classified according to Rajastama. — 13. 

In the Sankirpa Kalpas Sarasvati and the Pittris are glorified ; the 
T4masa Kalpas are endowed with the glories of Agni and i^iva. During 
the Rajas Kalpa the glory of Brahma is prominent. The Purfipas as 
revealed by Brahmd in each Kalpa are glorified in the corresponding 
Kalpa. During the Sfitvika Kalpas the glory of Visnu is most prominent. — 
14-16. 

And in course of the same Kalpas men advanced in the practice of 
yoga attain emancipation. One who reads Brahma Purdna and Padma 
Purdpara on the occasion of each festival, is granted abundance of wealth 
and prosperity and Dharma by the Lord Brahm4. He who hears these 
Purfinas at every festival and gives away things made of gold on the 
occasion of each festival, goes to the realm of Vi^nu or Brahmfi where he is 
venerated by the seers. It drives away all his sins. — 17-19. 

Oue should give away the images the Kalpas in the form of Munis 
O’king ! I have thus described to you the whole of the Purina SaiphiUs, 
which are the dispeller of all sins and the giver of health and wealth. 20 

years of Brahm4 are equal to one day of Siva ; and 100 years of f^iva to one 


OEAFTEB OGXG. 


wink of the eye of Vi§ 9 u. When Vi^nu awakes the universe becomes 
conscious, and when He reposes it is annihilated. — 21-22. 

Suta said : — So saying. Lord Matsya disappeared before all then and 
there. In the present Manvantara, Bhagwan Vaivasvata Maaa the scion of 
the family of Sun, is ruling after creating various beings. His reign is 
going on unto this day. — 23-25. 

Sdta. — “fiigis! I have narrated the Matsya Pur&pa to yon. It is 
the crown of all the iSafitras.” — 26. 

Here ends the 290th Chapter of Matsya Purdaam on the narration of Kalpas. 

CHAPTER CCXO. 

Sflta said : — “ I have related to you, 0, sages ! the whole of the 
Matsya PurS^a according to my intellect, as it was revealed by the Lord' 
before the king Vaivasvata Manu for Dharma, KSma, and Artba. — 1. 

It begins with the discourses of Manu and the Lord, known as 
ManusamvM and deals with the following subjects in successive order, 
viz. — the history of BrShina^da, the ^driraka Sdtpkhya as described by 
BrahinS, the birth of the Dovas, demons and the Maruts. The descriptions 
of the Madanadvddadt ordinance, the ways of the worship of the Lokapdis, 
the description of the Manvantaras, the history of king Vena, the birth 
of the Sun and Vaivasvata and the coming of Buddha. — 2-4. 

Then it deals with the families of the manes, the times of performing 
Srdddha, Pitritirtha Pravdsa, the birth of the moon, the history of Yay&ti, 
the glory of Svdmikdrtika, the history of the Vri^ni and YSdava houses. — 
5-6. 

The curse of Bbrign, the curses of Vi§pu on the Daityas, the glory of 
Lord Puruiic^a, the history of Agni family, the names and the bulk of the 
Punlnas, Kriyd Yoga, the Nekgatva Suinkliyaka Vrata, Martanda Sayana 
Vrata, Kri^ndstami Vrata, the Rohini and Moon’s ordinances, the ways of 
laying out tanks, &o., and of planting trees. — 7-9. 

The descriptions of Saubhdgyatlayana Vrata, Agastya Vrata, Ananta- 

tritiyn Vrata, Rasakalyapi Vrata, Ardrdnandakarl Vrata, Sdrasvata Vrata, 
— 10 - 11 . 

As well as about the Upardgdbhisgkavrata, Saptamisvpana Vrata, 
Bhimadvddf^l, Anaqjgailayana, AiJiinydrfayana Vrata, Amgdra, the seven 
Saptaipls, Vidokadvddaili, ordinances and the ways of giving away the gifts 
of the SumSru tenfold and performing the worship of Navagrahas. — 12-13. 

The form of the nine Grahas, about the l^ivachaturdash, Sarvaphala- 

tydga Vrata, Saipkrdipti Vibhhtidvddaili, l^adtivrata, ordinances, the benefits 
of the 60 ordinances, the kinds of baths, the glories of Praydga, the names 
of all the sacred places, the benefits of Paildi^rama, the description of the 
dvipas and the Lokas ; — 14-16. 

The description of the movements of the Sun and Moon, on the 
chariot of the Sun ; on the celestial luminous bodies, the glory of Dhruva, 
the description of the realms of the Devas and TripurSsura i — 17. 



3T0 


TEE UAT8YA PUBANAU. 


The benefits of offerings of Pbda to the manes, tiie durations of the 
periods of the Manvantaras, the birth and greatness of the demon Vajrftm^ 
ga, the birth of Tarak&sura, the glory of Tarakasura, Divfinumantrana, 

the birth of P&rvati, the aceticism of ^iva, the burning of Cupid, the lament 
of Rati, the going of the goddess Pfvrvati to the place of asceticism and the 

joy of ^iva 18-20. 

The dialogue of P&rvatt and the sage, the rejoicings of the marriage 
of Pfirvati, the birth of Sv^mik&rtika, the conquering of TSrak&sura and 
his death, the description of Nrisiipha, the coming into being of the 
BrahmEnda out of the lotus, the history of the annihilation, the death of 
Andhaka 21-22. > 

The glory of KSifi, Mrmadfi., the description of Gotras and Pravaras, 
the history of the manes, about the giving away of cows, and the skin of 
a black deer, the history of S&vitrt, the duties of kings ; —23-24. 

The times of setting out on a journey, the fruits and effects of dreams, 
the glory of Vftmana, the history if Varaha, the churning of the milky 
ocean.— 25-26. 

The drinking of poison by l^iva ; the fight between the Devas 
and the Asuras, worship of the Devas, on the characteristics of palaces, 
pandak, and housebuilding, the forms of the temples and pandals, thq 
history of Puru dynasty, the narration of the coming sovereigns, the de- 
scription of the 16 gifts such as Tuludana, etc., the names of the Kalpas, 
which completes the index of the Pur&na.— 27-28. 

This the Matsya Purana is most sacred. It is the giver of long life, 
fame, prosperity and dispellor of all sins.— 29. 

One who reads oven one pada of tliis Puranara is liberated from all 
sins and attains the realm of the Ijord Visnu where one enjoys all bliss 
after getting a form as handsome as that of Cupid. 

neve ends the 291st chapter of the Matsya Purdmm on the conclusion 
and narration, w brief, of the contents of the Purdmtn the end. 


Till', I'ls'u 


TABLE OF contents 


PAfR 

/ '• / 

CiiArmi 1,-— BonorticLion. At the end of the Ion Baer ificc, 8annaka and other 

Rhis cnp^afi^ed in holy conversation asked Siita, well versod in 
PanrAnic lores, the cause of the Lord assuroing^ the form of a fish, 
how did MahAdeva becomo Bhairava and PurAri and for what 
reason did ho become a mendicant. At that Silta told Saiinaka 
and other the reason of the Lord assuming the form of 

a fish and the meeting of Matsya and Mann ... ... 1-6 

,, 2. -Then being ordainea by the Lord, Mann tying bis boat to tho 

tentacles of tho divine fish, using tho serpent as ropo, and saluting 
JnnArdana after tlio delngo was over, seated on tho boat asked 
the Lord, wdio was in tho form of tho fish, the origin and tho end of 
tho Universe and the Laws of Gift and Sruffdha and about tho 
division of caste, etc. At that the Lord NArdya^a told him the 
origin of tlio Universe and its end ... * ... 0-9 

„ 9.- Manu’s qnestion to Matsya as to how the Lord Brahmd became 

four-faced and how did he create tho Universe. Then the origin 
from Brahnid of the Veda and the origin of Marichi, tJio ten 
mental ones, and the origin of Dak^a, tho ton corporal ones, as 
told by Matsya, and tho appearance of the five faces of Brahmd in 
order to see tlio beauty of SatarOpdand the narration of tho origin 
of Swayiimblui and others ... ... ... ... 0-12 

„ 4. -The description of tho 1st creation. Absence of sin on tho part of 

Brahmd by going to his own daughter. Mann's question to 
Matsya as to tho advisability of tho marriage relations between 
Sagotras and their children. Matsya’s answer to tho offoot that 
it does not tend to the w'elfaro of mankind in discussing the 
propriety or otherwise of the actions and conduct of gods. Then 
J{r.Tlimd, who was ashamed on account of this incestuous connec- 
tion with his dangliior, cursed KSmadeva tliat he should bo ere long 
turned into nslios by Maluideva. Being pleased with his solicitations 
ho gave him a boon that he would bo born again. Then Manu's 
production of Vam.adeva and others in SatrQpfts. From Vamadeva 
the origin of Brdhniaiias. Then tho production of Priyavrata and 
Uttanapdda in his wife Ananti by Manu of austere penanco. Prom 
Uttanapdda the birth of Dhruva by his wife Sunitd. Tlie attainment 
of tho boon of gett ing a l^xcd place by Brahmd as a result of his 
penances lasting for three thousand years. Dhriia produced 
a virtuous son in tho daughtor of Manu Hhanya. 8istd produced 
Kripddi ihroiigli Siichaya, daughtor of Agni. Tho begetting of 
Uakaa by tho ton Pracholas in Marisa, tho daughter of Moon. 

Then tho narration of tho birth of 80 crores of boings... ... 12-16 

„ 6. — Tho description of tho birth of gods and others. Then Daksa, 

seeing tho final journey undertaken his thousand sons by 
advice of Ndrada, produced on Panchjavi. Ho produced another 
thousand sons known as ftjhavala. They, too, went tho path of their 
brothers at Ndrada's instigations. Then after that ho produced 
sixty daughters and gave them to Pharma and others. Then tho 
birth of Kdrtikoya in tho clumps of rood. And tho description 
of tho birth of all the diPorent gods from those girls ... ... 16-18 

„ C.>-Tho description of Kasyapa's family ... ... ... 18-21 



( ii ) 


Pagb. 

CiiAPTiiK 7 —The birth of eons of Ditis known as Marutaa. Thoro at Siawaut* 
pauohak, on the banks of Saraswati, Ditl, whoso sons wore kill^l 
practising austoro penancos» in order to got sons porforniod in 
duo ritOB the vrata of Madan Dw&datfi. By virtue of tho vrata 
Lord Kasyapa appeared and offered her a boon. At that Diti 
asked for* sons who would be killers oflndra and afllictors of all 
denas. Kasyapa, too, according to his vow, gave her the desired 
boon. Indra, hearing about K^yapa's boon to Diti, feigning to 
servo her mother and finding a looiwiole, vis., that she wont to sleep 
without washing her feet, entered the womb of Diti and cut her 
son by vajra into seven paits and again cut each of those parts into 
seven parts. Then determining that, by tho virtue of tho greatness 
of Krlsna pujdt she cannot bt^ killed, appeased tho awakened 
mother, saying ‘ Don’t weep.* Let the Marutas become tho partici- 
pators of sacrifice and taking Diti on an ferial car wont to Heaven 
along with Maruta and others ... ... ... ... 2126 

8. -Treats of the anointment for kingship. Then Brahma, in tho sover- 
eignty of tho earth, made Ohandramft the lord of medicinal herbs, 
sacrifices, fasts and penances ; stars, planets, Brahinanas, trees, 
thickets and creepers ; Vanina of waters; Knbora of wealth; Vianu 
of all suns ; Fire of all vasus ; Daksa of^ prajdpatf ; Indra of r/ind ; 
Prahlftda of demons ; Yama of manos ; Siva of demons and others ; 
tho Himalayas of mountains ; tho Ocean of waters ; Chitraratha of 
gandluirvas and others ; Vasuka of serpents ; Tak^taka of othor 
siiakos ; Airslvata of olophants ; tho Peacock of birds ; Uchaisravft 
of horses ; tho Lion of other beasts ; tho Bnjl of tho cows ; .'ind tho 
Trees of the herbs. Tho deuas ^adharina, Buukhapada, KotumAnn 
and Hiranyaromana were made kings of all four directions, oast, 
south, we*8t and north respectively, Tlicy still protect tho uni- 
verse by ruling over tho directions by destroying tho onomios ... 2(>2t 

„ U. -Tho description of Maiivantara. The order of namos of those sous... 27-29 

10. The description of Vena family. As Vena, tho son of Sunotha, the 
daughter of Myityu of Anga PrajApati, was engaged in sinful deeds, 
tho sagos in order to bring .about law and order approached liim, 
but when the king did not pay hood to their counsel they killed 
him by their curse and being afraid of anarchy, tho sinless Brah- 
maaas churned his body by force. By churning his body the 
races of Micclihas, came out of his body black as soot being tho 
portion of evil qaalltics of his mother ; and from the portion of 
his father appeared the right hand with groat dilliculty a most 
brilliant heavenly figure armed with bow and arrow and club of 
tho name of Pyithu. Being anointed by tho Brahuianas ho prac- 
tised severe austerities and by the blessings of Vishnu bccamo 
most powerful. Seeing tho earth devoid of all righteous deeds 
Pfithu prepared hirnsolf to burn her by his anger and who trem- 
bling took the form of a cow and began to run. Sho stopped and 
asked what to do. Tho king making Swayambhu Manu as tho 
calf milked tho cow with his own han^ of tho desirod-for grains 
for all the world, moving or fixed. Thon the description of 
how tho sagos milked tho earth using tho moon as the calf. ... 29-82 

Chap FEU II.- -The description of tho mooting, of Bndha in the history of tho lunar 
and solar races. RAjni, the daughter of Vivaswat a Raivat a brought 
forth Raivata, Prabha gavo birth to PrabhAt, Sarajfii, tho daughter 
of ViavakarmA, became tho mother of Manu. She also gavo birth 
to Yama and YamuuA, who wore twins. Thon Samjni, unable to 
boar tho power of the Sun, producing one lacly from her body known 
as ChhAyA and directing hor to stay near him went away elsewhere. 

The Sun mistaking hor to bo SamjilA satisfied his desires. Ho 
produced from hor SAvarpi Manu of tho same Varna and Sani and 
Tapatf and Vifti. Then Yama seeing that sho pays more attention 
to hor sons boebming angry throw a kick on his mother. Learning 
from tho lips of Twastra that this is OhhAya and hearing SaipjilA 
came to was in tho form of VadawA, uncalled and stayed in* tho 
country of Maru ho being passionafco going there in the form of a 
horse enjoyed with her. SaipjuA doubting that ho was some one 



( Hi ) 


Paob. 

cIbo throw bis semen through her nostrils. Tho two Asifiiis wore 
born out of that seed. Vaivasata Mann had ton poworfal soiis» 
Ik^wAku and others, out of whom lla, in order to win tho^ whole 
oarth, visited all tho countries and reached tlio garden of Sambhu 
and was transformed into a woman by tho curse of Siva. Budha, 
the son of the Moon, looks at her while wandering in the forest 
and desires to marry. Sho, too, lived with him for long. ... S2«8<i 

CHAracu 12,- -Tho brothers of Ila sot out in search of tho king and reaching tho 
hormitago of Budha saw the horso ; ‘*tho splendour of tho Mora** 
turiiod into a maro, and hearing tho^causo from tho lips of Vasistha 
began to ploaso Siva. The Lord Biva said that if Iho IkswAku 
performed tho Aswainedha sacriftco ho would become a Kimpurusa. 

They performed the sacrifice and Ila became a Kimpurusa. For 
ono month assuming tho form of a woman and for anot her that of 
man and staying in the house of Budha, Ila becamo pregnant. 
Purhrava became tho increaser of the lunar dynasty. Ila came to 
bo called Suduinna after Eimprusa and from her were born throe 
sons Utkala and others. He crowning Purdrava in Pratisthana 
wont to liavrita to enjoy the glory of tho race of the sun ... SG-SB 

„ 13. - Tho description of tho family of Vairdja Pitpis. In those regions 

there woro a group of throo incorporoal and four corporeal 
beings. The Yir&jas disturbed in thoir Yoga practices attained 
Sandtana (old) regions and at tho end of Brahma*s day will again 
become Brahniviidins. They having attained Sdnkhya-Yoga 
obtained success in which there is no possibility of rebirth. 

Tlion follows the account that yogis should bo fed by offerers at 
srdddlux. Then follows tho narration of tho birth of two sons 
of Mcnakft and Erauilcha of HiraaLaya born of Manasis daughter 
of tho Pitria and of Mon& three daughters wore born, Uma, Eka- 
parna and Aparna, who woro devoted to the practices of Yoga and 
rospoctivcly married to Rndra, Sita and Jaigisavya. Then in tJio 
sacriheo of Dak§a his daughter Sati not liuding her husband 
invited among the hosts of gods asked why her husband was not 
called, was answered by Daksa that ho was not considered 
worthy of being invited in tho sacrifice as ho is tho source of 
all evil being, the author of destruction. Hearing that, out of 
anger desirous of destroying tho body which she owed to liim and 
cursing him, “You will bo tho only son of ten Pitpis and as a 
Ksattriya you will obtain destruction at the hand of Hudra in a 
horso sacrifice.’* Having recourse to Yogic power sho consumed 
herself through her own Fire and Daksa approaching her said 
“What is this’* ? *‘Bo pleased** O omniscient ono You should not 
leave mo.’* Thus requested by Daksa sho said. “ What I have 
begun 1 must accomplish, you should ^practise penance near mo 
after your sacrifice is destroyed by 8iva in order to ploaso mo 
you will bo born of the ton Prajfipatis and then out of my parts 
sixty daughters will bo born to you.’* She then said to Daksa “By 
practising penance near mo you will visit the several manifesta- 
tions named Yisfilfiksi and 107 others in 108 places such as 
V&r&n&si, etc., and by this you will obtain excellent Yoga, Then 
follows the 108 names of Gauri ... ... ... 30-43 

„ 14. Tho description of tho family of AgnisvAtta Pitpis. Then tho birth 

of Am&vasya (Now Moon). Achhod^, tho daughter of tho Pitpis 
practising penance for a thousand divine years saw tho Pitpis 
come to her for granting her boon being pleased with her penance 
and being ovorconio by passion desired Amftvasya. Fallen from 
her poTianco by this sinful desire and being ashamed and with her 
face downcast desired all the Pitpis. The Pitpis thus solicited 
granted her boons in these words. “ Acting unlike tho scion of a 
Fit pi, you will bo born in tho world of the mortals as tho daughter 
of tho King Vasil and marrying Parfisara you will get a son named 
Badrftyana. Ho will divide ono Veda into several parts, and bear- 
ing two*Ksctraja sons Chitrfthgada and Vichitravir^^a, to King 
^jftntanu, a part of tho sea and of tho family of Purus. You will 
be known as Praiisihapadi astaki in tho Pitrl loka and Batyavati on 
earth ... ’ ... ’ ... ... 43-44 



( iv ) 


Pac«. 

Chaviku Vh -Tlio dosoription of tho family of Barhifa Pitpis* Thou thoir 
daughter named Pivari whilo practising penauoo seeing tho 
Lord who being pleased liad como to her to offer a boon wanted 
a husband who would bo possessed of Yoga, beauty and able to 
curb his.passions. Then tho Lord granted her a boon in those 
words “teiuka, master of Vof/o, son of VyAsa will bo your husband 
and from him you will get a daughter) named Kritvi possessed of 
Vogie virtues, and will be the wife of tho King of the Panch&la, 
and tho mother of Brahmadatta. Krisna) Gaura, Prablui and 
biimbhu will bo your sons, you will obtain mol(^a with your hus- 
band after giving birth to those children.' ’ In tho solar world 
there aro tho regions eallod Marichigarblias where reside the 
IlavLsin&was, tho J'itria of kings. Of these Ksatriya Pitpis, 

Yasnda^ was tho M'inuia daughter, sho w.is the wife of 
Ainsuinaua, who was tho son of Panchajana. .She became 
famous as tho mother of Dilipa and gratidmotlier of Bliagirabha. 

Tho doscriiitioii td the Pibris runs on. Then tho description of 
silver plates, otc., which the Pitris Avero fond of. Then the 
moution of Mitsur, hemp and black mustard, etc., which aro to 

bo avoided in a srfjddha ... ... ... ... 44 . |0 

„ 1<».—The ceremony of »rdddha. Then Mann, hearing the description of 

’ the Pitpis, asked kcaava : “ On what day, how and when tho s/vn dha 
is to bo performed and what aro tho different kinds, what 
liPAlimauas arc to bo fed and what are to bo avouh d on tho ardddha 
day” Then tho description of tho duties to bo performed and 
rules to bo observed by tho performers of smdd/ta and tJio guests 
to bo fod according to Matsya. Then an account of tho distribu- 
tion of tho balls of rico to goat, cows and IlrAlimanas... ... 49-5 1 

„ 17.— Then tho account of general auspicious ceremonios. Then tho 

l)urticular days and kinds ot srdddhu to be? perforinod. Then 1 

tiio various liccs and tho flesh of the different animals which 
please tho manes and tho period of timci. Moreover which 
diff.Tonb portions of tho Veda to ho recited at tho timrj of feast- 
ing in sr./ddha. Then tho right to the srdrfdha coromoiiios of 
those who are not invested with tho sacred tiireid. In this 
brdddha tho worship of the Pitpis to follow that of tho MaLris, 
and barley is to bo used instead of sesame. Then the description 
of *ho rights of fciiiclras by tho wonl ‘ numa/t \ Tiion the chief 
light of fcludra is in gift and tho fruition of all thoir desires is 
obtaiuod through gift ... ... ... ... r* 4 -C 0 

„ 1 ^. -'I’ll' t’e -cj'iption of Sapinilikrirana. Then the narration of a^^aucha 

of tlui four castes. Then th’o description of tho duties hogiii- 
nii-.g from tho first day until tho H.ipituliVaiana ceremony. 

Tlii u the account ol Le])a and Bhakta Sa[)in'aas)iip * ... ... (;i),G2 

„ 19. - Tiieii tho (b'SCTiptioii of tho fruition of th ) dllTeronb »mdd/ia. 

ibnv are the hurjjas and kovijitg to f)c offered what huvnas aro 
olfered to vvli.it ac/u/s and what kaz-i/a.s oflored to what Brflhmana 
I'oacJiwhat Bitpis in tlu^ region ui' Also the mention of 

the merits obtained by the porformer.s of irdddha ... ... C2-C3 

20. -The account of the ridicule of tho ant in conneebi- n with the 

merit of .‘swddha ... ... ... 03-60 

„ 21. TJic description of the greatness of Pitpis in ennnection with 

tlio pi-rformanco of srdddha. T1h*h in that town they were born 
as the sens of iStidaridru, the Brahmana and tliey thought of prac- 
ti.slng pen.aiico. Then Sudaridra prevented them by saying that to 
go out to t!jo forest leaving an aged father behind was no virtuo. 

Tlien the narration by the sons of their former births. Then tho 
departure of tho sons to the forest and the arrival of Sudaridra to 
thei'alaco. Then tho worship of Visrui by Vibhrilja, who w\as 
solicitous ot getting a son. Then Vibhrija obtains a boon from tho 
Lord, Then tho iirrival of Brahmadatta, tho son, at Iho place where 
tho ants were united. Then, at Brahmadatta’s smiling, tho conver- 
sation betwe^en him and Sannati. Then Brahmadatta's romom- 
brance of the Lord to put an end to tho quarrel which had ensued, 
and fiiidingof the Lord In a dream. Mooting with iho old BrAhmana 



( V ) 


lUOB. 

next morning and in course of their mutual conversation his 
remembrance of their former birth. Repenting for his fall from 
yoga, giving that Br&hmana some gift, ho dismissed him. Then . ^ 

the installation of Visvaksen, his son on the throne, meotlngof 
all at Manasa, The mention of the merits of hearing the recital 
of the Pitf is ... ... ••• 66-68 

CiiAi*TKR 22.— The end of the description of sr/tddha. Narration ot the time of 
doing irdddha and the result of doing imddha at tho proper 
tioje. Accounts of the greatness of Gaytl and other holy places 
and also about tho gods. Description of Naimlsa ^forest, also tho 
result of performing imddha on the banks of Sarayu, Irivatf, 
Yamuna, Chandrabhaga and Vonumati. The narration ot tho 
greatness of other holy rivers and accounts of gods, also signs of 
tho time. Showing the production of kusa and black sesamun from 
tho body of Visuu, also tho result of hearing and reading of tho 
greatness of holy places ... ... ... ... C8-72 

„ 23.— Tho account of tho fault of the Moon in tho narration of tho Innar 

dynasty. Then the description of the birth of the Moon, his 
gaining superiority over the Brahmanas. Description of the Moon 
getting a boon from Yisnu. In tho Rajashya sacrifices performed 
by the Moon Brahma and other gods became priests. After tho 
conclusion of the sacrificial bath, dcsiious of seeing the Moon’s face 
Laksmi and other new goddesses forsaking their respective 
husbands adored the Moon. Account of the fault of the Moon, and 
the description^ of Tara, also an account of tho battle between 
the Moon and blva. Tho mooting of Tara and Brihaspati ... 72-75 

„ 24.— Beginning of the story of Yayati. Then tho birth of Bndha from 

Tard. Then tho god’s question put to Tdra “ Whoso son is this 
On being answored that he was from tho Moon, the latter ac- 
cepted him ... ... ... ... ... ... 70-79 

„ 25.*— Eacha obtains the knowledge of the elixir of lifo. Eacha goes to 

Sukra in order to obtain tho knowledge of tho elixir of life by 
tho order of Indra and others. Out of spite for Eacha, and in 
order to protect themselves, tho demons killed Eacha, who was 
grazing the cows, and gave its corpse to W'olves and jackals, 
t/ukra brought him back to life and Kacha told him with a bow 
that ho was killed by the demons. Then, again, be was killed while 
gathering flowers and again came to life by tearing the stomach. 

Eacha learns from Bukra the knowledge of restoring one to life. 
Narration of the faults of Brdhmanas taking wiiio ... ... 80-83 

„ 26 - Both Eacha and Dovaydni enrso each other. Then a dobato between 

Kaoha and Dovaydni, Dovaydni curses “ You shall never accom- 
plish this knowledge of safijivani.” Eacha curses ** No son of a 
ri.si will accept you as his wife,” Eacha goes to heaven ... 84-85 

„ 27.— Quarrel between Sarraisthd and Devaydni. Barmisthd puts on 

Devayani’s dross. Sho throws Dovaydni into a we’ll. Mooting 
of Nahusa and Dovaydni and her rescue from tho well. When 
Yaydti has gone, Devaydni speaks^ to Ghurpikd. Qhurnikd com- 
municates tho liistory of forest to Sukra. Bukra comes to forest. 
Conversation between Barmistlia and Bukra... ... ... 85-87 

„ 28.— Talks between Bukra and Dovaydni. Bukra counsels Dovaydni, but 

she refuses his advice ... ... ... ... 87-88 

„ 29.— Slavery of Siarmislhd to Dovaydni, Eayyagoes to Yfisaparvan and 

abuses him. Vri.saparvan says to Bukra as you aro going away 
leaving us, then I shall throw myself into tho ocean. Bukra 
replies “ whether you enter tho ocean or not, I cannot tolerate tho 
insult to my daughter, so try to please my daughter.” Conversa- 
tion between Devaydni and Vfi.saparvau. Devaydni enslaved to 
Barmisthd. Then Bukra goes to the capital with Devaydni ... 88-00 

„ 80.— Dovaydni’s marriage. In this connection sho goes to the forest with 

a thousand of her maids for sporting. Yaydti comes then. Their 
mutual conversation. Dovaydni’s prayer to Yaydti : “ Please, make 
me your wife.” Devaydni is given away to Yaydti by Bukra. 

Yay dti enters tho houso ... ... ... ... 00-02 



( Vi ) 


Pa«k. 

CiupTeii ni, -Mootiuis; oJL Yayiiti and Yayftii Uvea In Asoka i^rovo 

roakiiiK 8armistha, tho daaghtor of Yrifaparvana, ono of hHi 
thousand maid sorvants, at the inatanoo of Dovav toi. Doy nydnl 
gets a son. Convorsatlon between fiarmi^^ha and Yay&ti in tho 
A^ka grovo. Moi^lon of tho apna of wife’s maid servants as 
no heir. Yayftti ge& a son from Sarmtfthft... ... ... 93-94 

„ 82. -8nkra curses YayAtl. Conversation between Sarmisthd and Yayilti. 

Yadii and Turvasxi, sons of YayiitI, bom of Dovayiinu Tho mooting 
of tho sons of Ch^vayAut and thoso of i^armi^thA Convorsation 
between pevay,'^i\i and iSarmiftha. Yay&ti and DovayAni go to 
Hukra. Sukra cursed Yayfitl'that he would bo at once atrickoii 
with decrepit old ago The removal of the curse to Yayftti who 
sought tho protection of 8ukra ... ... ... ... 94 99 

„ 83.^-Puru agrocs to take upon himself his father’s senility. When Yadii 

did not consent to take upon himsolf his father’s senility* Yayfiti 
cursed him, ** You will bo childless.” Then YayAti curses Turvasu 
who is reluctant to take upon himself his father’s decrepit old 
ago. A like ciirso to Druhya* the second son, and Anu* tho third 

sou. Tho fourth, Puru, accepts his father’s ^dd ago ... ... 97 08 

„ 34— Puru installed on the throne. YayAti rules tho country righteously 

on tho removal of his old age. The endowment, of youth fro»ii 
Puru. Yayfiti transfers the kingdom to Puru and goes out to tlio 
forest ill the company of Brahmauas ... ... ... 90-100 

„ 35,— Ysiy&ti ascends heaven. Uis fall. His return to Hoavon in company 

with King Vasiimat ... ... ... ... ... 100401 

„ 8C.— Convorsation between Indra and YayiUi. Narration to liidra of tho 

instructions imparted to Puru ... ... ... ... tOl 

„ 37. Aa^ika siieaks to Yayfiti wlien ho drops from hoavon on tho 

Verniinatiou of his merits. Dialogue between Indra and Yayfiti and 
description of master ... ... ... ... ... 102 

„ 38.— Dialogue between AsUka and Yay&ti. Yay.fiti speaks to Astaka 

about Vedfiiita. Descriptions of tho enjoyments ho had ’ ...103404 

„ 39.- Advice to Yayfiti, Astaka asks Yayfiti why did ho como to enjoy 

the world while he was living in Paradise. Yayfiti’s reply. Account 
of th<i origin of body. Getting a meritorious life througli merits and 
a sinful life through sins. Account of penance and charity as means 
of attaining heaven ... ... ... ... ...104 106 

„ 40. Yayfiti’s account of different Asramas. Distinctive features of 

Munis ... ... ... ... ... ...100 108 

„ 41. - Yayfiti’s refusal to ascend heaven through tho merits of others. 

Account of tho various regions of heaven. Dialogue between 
Pratardana and Yayfiti ... ... ... ...108-110 

„ 42. Salvation of Yayfiti. Dialogue between Yayfiti, Vasnm ala and others 110-U2 

„ 43. -Description of tho glory of Yadii. Kfirtavirya asks four boons from 

Datta. Pacifying tho ocean by his thousand arms. Conflnemont 
of Rfivapa in Mahismati. Curse against Arjuna. Description 
of 100 sons of Kartavirya of whom five were warriors. Tho fruit 
of uttering the birth of Kfirtavirya ... ... ... 112-115 

„ 44 - The story of Kfirtavirya and others. Adilya comes to Kfirtavirya in 

tho form of a Brfihraana. Kfirtavirya gives food to him. Apava 
enters water. Description of the dynasty of King Krostu and 
Vidarbha. Chaitrfi became tho wife of Jayfimagha. Jayfimagha, 
liaving no sons, got a victory in war. Then getting tho daughter 
said to tho queen through fear of her that she was a daugtcr-iii law. 

Then in duo courso she got a son Vidarbha by name. Tho fruit 
of uttering the description of tho dynasty of Andhaka ... 1 15-120 

„ 45.- Beginning of the dynasty of Vrisni. Description of tho Syfimautak 

jewel. Acceptance of 8atyabhfimfi by Kpi^iia. Description of Anl- 
mitra dynasty ... ... ... ... ... 120422 

M 46.- Description of VfisnL dynasty. Tho IdrUi of tlio Panda vas. 


122-123 



( Vii ) 


Ohaptbr* 47.— Sttkra’fl curse on Asuras. The birth of 6ri Efi^na. The names 
of 16,000 wives and sons. The description of Nfisiqiha and^ other 
avatdrs, j^ankara bom to Bhftrgava for his ansteritios. Bukra’s 
praise of Mahddeva. Meeting of Ja^ranti and l^nkra. Bpihaspatrs 
deception of the Asuras in disguise of K&vya. Prabltida’s 
narration before 6ukra of the boon given by Lord, The description 
of the doings of Deva and Asura. ••• 

,f 4S.<-Tho description of the dynasty of Turvasu and its foUowors. 

Birth of Ahga. Meeting of Dirghatama and Bali. The descrip- 
tion of the family of Ahgas. Birth of Rarna. 

M 49. —Description of the family of Purus. Birth of BharadvAja from 

Brihaspati. Description of the Brihatksatra family. Account 
of the origin of Ugranyudha. Account of the dynasty of A jamida 








tf 


»» 


>1 


»> 


»» 


I* 


»» 


»♦ 

V 




50.- Continuation of the description of the family of I’uru and of the 
AjAmida family in this connection. Birth of JarAsandha. Descrip- 
tion of Apadhyata^and Devapi. Description of s'Antanii, Birth of 
Dovavrata from HAntanu and JAhnavi. Birth of tlio progeny by 
Krisnadvaipa 3 'Ana on tho'wife of Chitravirya. Description of tho 
enrsd of VaisimpAyana to Pariksit and of the future family of 
Adhisoma Kfisna 


51. -Account of tho family of Agiii. The origin of Agni and its various 

names. The origin of Dhisnu. 

52. -The greatness ot yoga. Tho excellence of Earmar/ogfa over J/idHU- 

yoga. Ceremony of panchn yajiia. One endowed with the 22 
Propitious marks if without tho qualities of self has no right to 
mok^a. The qualities of Self ... ... ... 

58. -The precedence of PurAnas. Their number. Tho merit of making tho 
gift of a PurAna. The characteristic feature of a PurAna. Tho 
distinctive marks of tho oxcollent Pur A pas. The fruit of read- 
ing and bearing tho precedence of the PurAnas. 

.54. -The vow of Naksatra Purusa. Tho fruit of that vow 
55,— The vow of Aditya Sayana and its fruit. This vow was observed 
even by Yasi St ha and others 

66.— Tho vow of KpisnAstami. In what month Siva is to be worshipped 
by what name.* 0*no fasting on KfisnAftami day is worshipped 
in the regions of Siva being rovorod by tho gods for 2,100 kalpaa..,. 
57. The vow of Roll! fu Chandra Sayana. Discourse between tho Lord 
and NArada. The rules for tho performance of tho different vows. 
The fruit of the vow ... 


58 —Tho rules about tanks. Tho dimensions of sacrificial posts. Tho 
fruit of staying in tho water in tho rainy days 

59. — Tho process of consecrating a tree. Attaining of svarga by planting 

trees. 

60. — The ordinance of SaubhAgya Sayan. Description of SaubhAg^'a 

AstakA. The various ways of worship by married women 

61— Birth of Agastya. Process of his worship. Dialogue between NArada 
and Mahesvara. Birth of Agastya by the curse of Indra on fire and 
water 

62.— Vow of Anaiita TpitiyA, The various ways. The fruits of vows ... 
03.— Tho ordinance of RasakalyAiii tritiyA. In the month of mdgha salt 
must be given up. Tho * narration of tho fruit of a thousand 
agniatotm by giving golden lotuses 

64. — The vow of ArdrAnandakari TritiyA.— The various ways of wor- 

shipping tho goddess along with Siva 

65. -Vow of Ak 9 aya TritiyA. Its result 

66. — Tho vow of SArasvata. Description of Astatava. The process 

of vow and its fruit 

67. — The method of bathing in Solar and Lunar oolipsos 


Pagb. 

124-189 

140-146 

146-150 

150-166 

155-158 

158461 

161-167 

170-173 

170-172 

172- 173 

173- 175 
176-180 
180-181 
182-186 

185-189 

190-103 

193-195 

195-107 

197- 198 

198- 109 

199- 201 



( viii ) 


pAoe. 


ClIAPTKR 


»• 






»1 








») 




»» 


M 




1 * 


>♦ 




»> 


»> 


68, —The ordinance of bftthing on SaptamL The procofts of ablation for 
tho prevention from death of infants and young men. The method 
of the ritual and its fruits ... ... ...201-205 

60.— Vow of Bhimadvddasi. The method and its fruit ... ... 205-209 


70. — Vow of Annngarirm.^. Women question DAlabhya tho duties of prosti- 

utes. The method of worshipping E&ma ... ... ... 209-2 l.‘i 

71. — Tho vow of AsunyasayanadvitiyA. The vow to bo performed to 

expiate sin if anybody goes to another's wife either through 
cupidity or arrogance. Its method ... ... ...213-215 

72. — Tho vow of Ahgfiraka. Dialogue between PipplAda and Yndhisthira. 

The discourse between Virochana and Bhdrgava. Birth of Virhha- 
dra from the sweat of Mahfideva who was enraged and about to 
destroy tho sacrifice of Daksa. After destroying tho sacrifice 
when Virabhadra was going to annihiiato the world ho was prevent- 
ed, He became tho planet Mars. Tho process of this vow ... 215-218 

73. — Tho method of worshipping Briliaspati and 8ukra ... ... 218-219 


74. — Tho vow of Kalya na Sap tarai. The worship is to bo performed by 

calling the sun by different names according to tho quarte?/. East, 
etc. The process and its fruit ... 

75. — -Tho Visoka Saptami vow— Its method ... ... ^ ... 

76. — The Pliala Saptami vow— Its method 

77. — The vow of Sarkara Saptami— Its method 

78. — The vow of KamalA, Bapiami. Its method 
70. — The vow of Mand.ara Bnptami.— Its method 

80.— Tlie vowof *SnbhaSaptnmi.-- Its method and tlio worship of a milch 
cow 


220-221 

221-222 

222-223 

22.3-22.5 

22.5-220 

226- 227 
«• 

227- 228 


81. — The vow of Visoka Dvadasi.— Its method and worship of Ijaksmi 228-230 

82. — The gift of GnOadhonn in tho vow of Visoka nvada.si and iho 

.syml)olioal images of cows. The preparation of tho dhonu and 

its presentation ... ... ... ... ... 231-233 

83. — The gpoatnoss of charity. Discoup.se between NArada and Nambhn. 

The description of ten mountains such as hill of Dhanyasaila, hill 
of gold. Traiso of food ... ... ... ... 233-236 

84. — Tho description of salt hill. —Its i>reseutalion ... ... 237 

85. — Tho de.scription of the hill of raw .sugar— Tho method of presenting 

it ... ... ... ... ... ... 237-238 

86. — The description of tho mountain of gold. Its presentation ... 238 

87. — The mountain of tifti.— Its origin from tho body of Visiiu and tlio 

method of giving that away ... ... *.!. ...239 

88. — Tho description of gift of the mountain of cotton. The fruit of pre- 

senting it ... ... ... ... ... ... 239 

89. — The mountain of Ghfita. The process of making tho gift and tho 

origin of (ihrita ... ... ... ... ... 240 

90. — Tho mountain of gems. Tho ppoccs.s of giving that away ... 240-241 

91. — Mountains of silver.— The mountains to bo made after tho shape of 

Visuu, Bralunft, or the Sun ... ... ... ...241-212 

92. -Greatness of giving a mountain of Sugar and tho story of Lilavati, 

tho prostitute ... ... ... ... 242-245 

93. — Tho method of porforming the hnma Hftnti ceremony of the 0 planets. 

What particular offerings of raw sugar, cooked rice, etc., to what 
particular planets. The measure of fuel. Tho discription 
of the mantras of the difforent planets. Tho moasuromoiit of 
reservoirs for a Iwma with ton million offerings ... ... 245-257 

94. — Description of the form of the nine planets ... ... ...257-258 

06.— The vow ^ of ftiva Chaturdasi. Discourse between NArada and 
Nandikosvara. The method of worshipping Hiva. The fruit of 
reading and hearing tho story of tho vow ... ... 259-261 



( ix ) 


Pagh. 

^liiAPTBR 06.---Thogroatnc3S of giving up all fruits, Tho time when this vrata is 

to coonmeoce and the process of doing it ... ... ••• 102*203 

»> 07.— The Sunday ordinance. The way of worshipping Sunday, and its 

fruits ... ... ... ... ... ... 208*205 

„ 98,— The process of bringing SankrAnti to a close. The fruit of hearing 

and reading it ... ... ... ... ... 205-260 

tf 99.— The ordinance of Vi^nu. The method of VibhOti DvAdasi Vrata ... 267-208 

,, 100,— Tho continuation of the ordinances of Visnu. Discourse between 

PuspavAhana and Prachotasa ... ’* ... ... ...268-271 

„ 101. — Tho greatness of Sasaki vrata (60 ordinances). The narration of gods 

in each vrata. The fruits of each ... ... ... 271-278 

„ 102.— Tlio fruit and tho process of taking bath. Tho narration of the 

number of tirthas. The process of giving water to the manes 
and bathing the body in order to obtain Heaven. Tho process of 
offering water to tho Sun ... ... ... ...278-282 

„ 108.— The greatness of Praydga. Mdrkandeya goes toHastindpur. Tho 

counsel of Markandcya to Yudhisthira for going to Praydga ... 282-283 
„ 104.— ShoAving tho greatness of Praydga. The fruits of remembering 

Praydga ... ... ... ... • ... ... 2S8-285 

„ 106,— Tho result of dying at Praydga. Tho greatness of tho gift of tho 

palc-rod milch cow ... ... ... ... ... 285-286 

„ 106.— The difforcnce between tho result and action at Praydga ... 286-289 

„ 107.— Tho different actions in the greatness of Praydga, Tho greatness of 

Mdnasa tirtha. The holy place on tho north of Vamund and 
south of Praydga where all debts are discharged ... 280 291 

„ 108.— Tho fruit of fasting at Praydga. Dialogue between Yudhisthira and 

Mdrkanilcya. Tho greatness of Yamuod ... ... ... 201-208 

100.— The sacredness of Praydga among holy places. Tho narration of 

Somatirtha ... ... ••• ... 203-205 

„ 110.— Tho greatness of Praydga among all tho tirtlms—llB praise ... 295-296 

„ 111 —End of the greatness of Praydga ... ... ... ...206-297 

„ 112.— The fruit of hearing tho greatness of Praydga. The praise of 

Praydga sung by Ydsudova ... ... ... ..,297-208 

„ 113.— Narration of Dvipa and others. Description of Jambudvipa. Its 

mountains and mr^as— 8howin§ the var.?as of Himalaya and 
others ... ... ... ... ... ... 301-906 

„ 114.~Tho position and situation of Blidrata according to Nirukta. 

Description of the seven mountains, names of rivers and places. 

The description of Kimpurusa and Hari Var§a ... ... 305-312 

115.— Pururava goes to practise penance in forest on account of his 

ugliness due to a former birth. Pururava sees river Irdvati ...312-313 

„ 116.— Narration of Irdvati ... ... ... ... ...813-315 

„ 117.— Varration of Himdlaya ... ... ... ... .. .315-816 

1 18, — Narration of tho hermitage on Himalaya. Description of tho 

hermitage of Atri ••• tti tia ••• ..,316 310 

119, — Its moasurocnont. Length and breadth. Tho imago of Vdsudeva 

established by Atri. Tho austerities of King Pururava ...810-321 

120, — Tho King practised austerities and saw the pastimes of Gan* 

dharvas and nymphs. Dialogue between Pururava, Gandharva and 
Apsard. The King dreams and tells it to Atri ... ...322-324 

„ 121.— Description of Jdmbudvipa ... ... ... ...825-229 

„ 122.— Description b^dkadvipa. Its rivers and mountains ... ...829-334 

„ 123.— Narration of tho 6th and 7th Dvipa— Tho mcasuromont of tho 

rivers, mountains and seas ... ...884-887 

124.— Tho dimensions of tho orb of tho sun and moon in describing 
tho sphere. Tho authority of Mount Mcru. Tho dimensions of 
tho earth. Description of tho Equator. Mention of tho time 
of Nagavithi ... ... ... ... ...338-343 



{ X ) 


Paok. 

Chaptrr 125.— The movements of the Pole star, sun, moon and other planets. 

Mention of Gaja Mountain and the source of the clouds. JDescrip- 
^ tion of the position of the chariot of the sun ... ...346-340 

„ 126.— The course of tho sun. The ])ositioii of the gods and Oan- 

dhapv.as near tho ami. The seasons. Description of tho solar 
horses and of tho lunar horses ... ... ... ...349-3(53 

127.— The description of chariot of Bndha (Mercury) and Mars and tho 

praise of the Polo star. The description of the starry column ...853-355 

„ 1*28.— Tho situation and respective positions of tho planets in tho Polar 

system. The three kinds of flro, ut 2 ., P&chak, etc. Mcuition of the 
rains at the head of the seasons. The places of the planets ...355-860 

Part II, 

„ 120.— Orign of Tripura in the .story of TrIpiitA. M&ya gets a boon 

from Brahmd ... ... ... ... .. 1-3 

130. — The divisions of forts, ramparts, etc. of Tripura. Building of 

Tripura. Descri]) tion of each city ... ... ... 3-4 

„ 13l.-^ The groat pOAver of the three cities. Maya dreams a bad dream. 

Alali^iui enters tho city. Tho Danavas vanquished by thi‘ gods 
give up truth and virtue and take to vicious courses ... ... 4-6 

,, 132.— Tho gods eulogise Hiva. Aditya and others take refuge in 

Brahma, The gods go to tho place of Bhava (Wiva) in company 
with Urahraa ... ... ... ... ... 7-8 

„ 183.— Building up of a strange chariot. ,Brahml and other gods 

descrii)C tho .strength of tho Asuras, iSiva accfq)t.s the position of 
charioteer of tho gods. The horses unable to bear tho weight of 
Mahadeva fall on the ground. Eulogy of Kara by tho Risis ... 8-tl 

., 134.— Narada goe.s to Tripur.l and comes to Maya. Their discour.so. 

Ma^^a in.striiets tlui Daityas how to fight Mahadova ... ... 11-13 

„ 135. — Eight between the gods and Asuras. The leadens of the army 

aro stupefied bj Maya’s euohaatment. Maya strikes KumAra ... 13-17 

136, - First tho itia.ssacpo of the demons, tho dwellers of Tripura by 

tlie lirst army. The death of Vidyutaumali. Maya through magic 
en^ates a lake. fc>ankukara»ia says to tSankara that the lake 
revives the dead. NAnlyaua taking the form of a bull drinks up 
the water of the lake ^reated by Maya ... ... ... 17-20 

137. — The siego of Tripura. The g.iartl of the lake .s.ny.s to Maya 

that the, .lake has been d.-uok up bv .some in the form of a 
bull, Maya goes to The .sea wiih Tripura. Indra eoines there 

to destroy Tripura ... .. ... ... ... 20-22 

„ 138. — Slaughter of Tsiraka. Description i»f tho war between the 

gods and demon.s. \^ hen Sankara wa.s fighting placing one foot 
on the uack ot a bull and the oth<‘r on that of a horso from his 
tromendoii.s weight, tlio bull and the horse lost their tooth and 
breast.s. Since tlien bulls and horses have no breasts and teeth. 
Vidyumu All’s words to tho gods ... ... ... ... 22-25 

I3!j. ' Discourse bctwcou tho demons and Maya. Ratr entered the 

body of Parvati. Tho amorous pastime of tho Danavas ... 25-27 

„ MO.—Burning of TripurA, Nandi kills Vidyunmali, Nandi says to Maya 

“ .since TripiirA has met with such destruction you should leave 
tho city. " Tho sorrow of tho wives and children. Tho fruit of 
reading and listening to this chapter ... ... 28-32 

„ 141.— Tho group of Pitris who take part in SrAddha when VailA and 

Soma moot. The definition of Sinivali and Kuhfi. Praise of SrAddha 33-36 

„ 142 — Tho shorter period of a manvantara, Tho measure of time from 

the shortest to tho longest. The number of tho rptgas and the 
number of tho religions based on tho Vedas and tho 7 precious 
gems. Tho duties of Treta ... ... ... ... 36-39 

„ 143,—The dawn of sacrifice. Vasfi’s partiality to the gods in tho 

discourse on tho and the gods, Tho rtffis curse him. The 
source of the oiernal religion ... ... ... 39'4l 



{ xi ) 


PAQ8L 

Chapter 144. — The duties of the ytigaa — Dw^para, etc.. The profesions of 

people. The duration of their lives. Departure from the path of 
virtue of the future people in Unit ... ... ... 42-46 

V 146.— The moasuro o| the body altering with the different i/Wis. * 

Different duties in the different yugns. The height of animals., '(^.g , 
cows, etc. Definition of Achdrya* and others. Definition of Yajria.s. 
Definition of Ksettra and Ksottrajna. The names of rtflts ... 46-61 

„ 146. — The killing of T4raka described in brief. In course of describing 

that in detail description of Vajra. Birth of Guha in the clumps 
of reeds. Discourse between his mother and Indra. Indra 
divides the worab of Diti into seven parts and hence the birfh of 
Maruta. Vajranga captures Indra and releases Jiim at the request 
of BruhmA. VajrAhga's penance ... ... ... 51-54 

„ 147.— Origin of T^raka. Discourse between Vajra hga and VarSngi ... 65-56 

„ 148. — TAraka obtains the boon. Preparation of the war between the gods 

and demons. Discourse between Brahma and Taraka. BrahmA 
offers a boon to TAraka. Brihaspatl advises Indra on the tactics of 
warfare, such as conciliation, etc. It is decided to punish the 
Dait^ms. The army of the gods ready to fight ... ... 66-60 

„ 149.— Hand to hand fight between gods and demons ... ... 60-61 

„ 150.— KAlnerai defeated in tho groat fight. Visnu gives up yoga-nidrA 

and comos to the fight ... ... ... 61-70 

„ 151.— The wheel killing tho Grasana demon comes to the hand of Visnu... 70-71 

„ 152. — Fight with Mathana and others. Ourntman sent to kill Mathana. 

Guruda (Garutmaiia) files away with Visun. ... ... 72-73 

„ 163.— Taraka wins. Slaughter of Jambha. Visnu slaughters the Daltya 

named Indra VAhaaa. Indra and others* are captured ... ... 73-82 

„ 154,— Indra and tho other gods praiso BrahmA. BralimA’s discourse with 

VAyfi. Night engaged to carry on tho work of the gods. Indra says 
to NArada : ** Try to unite MahAdova with tho daughter of tho 
mountain./' Conversation between Himalaya and Nara^da. The 
counsel of tho gods and burning ol Madan. Rati praises Siva and 
Siva's marriago. Viraka accepted as a son. PArvati practises 
penance ... ... ... ... ... ... 82-107 

„ 165.— KAlikA goes to the place of Gauri's penance for becoming Qauri. 

The mutual censure of UmA and Maheswar ... ... 108-109 % 

„ 156.— The death of Adi. BrahmA gives a boon to Adi. GirijA's discourse 

Avith Eusumaraodini, tho presiding deity of the mountain. Adi 

adopts the form of UmA to deceive Siva. Sankara's discourse 
with the demon in tho form of UmA ... ... ... 109-111 

,, 167.— Curse on Viraka. Origin of the Lion from Devi's wrath, BrahmA 

gives boon to UmA Devi ... ... ... ...111-112 

„ 158.— The brith of Kartikeya. Discourse between Viraka and PArvati. 

Praise of Viraka. ... ... ... ... ...112-114 

„ 169.— Tho gods prepare for tho fight. They eulogizo KArtikoya. Mes- 
senger sent to Taraka. ^fiAraka sees ill omcMis ... ... 114-116 

„ 160.— KumAra deals the (loath blow to TAraka. The fruit of reading and 

teaching this chapter. ... ... ... ... ...116-117 

„ 161,— Hiranyakasyapa practisos penances aud obtains many boons from 

BrahmA. Tho gods como to Brahma hearing tho terrific boons ac- 
quired by Hiranyakasyapa. Brahma says that Hiranyakasyapa will 
be killed by Visnu at tho end of tho penances. Hiranyakasyapa 
growing haughty by his boons oppressed the gods who approach 
Visnu. Visnu comforts them saying “ I will kill him.” Visnu 
adopts the form of a man-lion and goes to the metropolis of Hiranya- 
kas'yapa whoso court is described at length, Visnu sees Uiran- 
yaknsyapa on the lap of Luxury ... *’ ... ...118-121 

,, 162.— PrahlAda describes the lion as tho source of tho universe to 

Hiriiyakasyapu. Hearing that Hiranyakasypa orders the Daityas 
to capture the lion. Accordingly all those demons struck the lion 
with various weapons. Then Lord visnu in tho form Of that lion 
scared those warriors and demons in a trice ... ... 121-123 



( xii ) 


Pa OK. 

CiupTK 108,— The DaLtyas make fraitloss attempts to kill tho lion. Hiranyakasyapu, 
too, made like wiso futile attempts. Site ominous to*Daityas and 
propitious to the gods. Hiranyaksyapu armed with all sorts of 
weapons. Tho lion simply by means of his Claws tore him to pieces, 

Tho lion praised by Brahmfi. and others. Yisnu goes out in his 
own form to his abode ... ... '* ... ... 123«126 

,1 164, Maim asks Vis MU in tho Padmakalpa how was tho world in tho 

form of a lotus on tho navel. Visrui in the .orm of a fish begins 
to reply ... ... ' ... ... ...127128 

,, 165.— Tiie Lord in tho form of a fish relates to Maim in brief tho datosiof 

tho four yugas, krita, etc. The narration of tho final dissolution... 128-129 
166.— lie further rolats to Maim it is Nftr.lyana who adopting ilifToront 
forms, Bibhavasu, etc., reduced tho whole world into one vast sheet 
of water and lived ... ... ... ... ...120-180 

„ 167.— On this vast ocean N4r4yana took tho form of a swan and from crane 

and others he created Brahma, UdgAtri and Sftmaga. Mdrkandeya 
born out of the belly of Bhagaw'iin and seeing tho rosplendant Lord 
asks him who he was. Again he entered the belly and coming out 
of tho mouth saw a boy concealed in tho branches of a banyan tree. 

He approached tho boy and enquired wlio ho was. Ho replied that 
he was tho Lord and his creator ... ... ... ... 130 132 

„ 108.-— Desirous of keeping the univi^rse afresh or agitating the ocean 

and creating the material olomonts— .sound, etc., and sporting that 
war lie created a lotus from His navel ... ... ... 13.3 

„ 169.— The Lord creating tho lotus produced the creator of the universe 

out of it. Tlio masters of the PiirAnas say that that lotus was 
the earth. The .softer parts of this lotus arc this earth and its 
harder parts are mountains ... ... ... ... 133-1'^ 

170.— When BraUmfi was practi.sing pcuaiico in that Lotus Madhu and 
Kaitavas the Daityas, tried to disturb him. Tlie Lord taking them 
on ilis thigh orushotl them ... ... ... ... 135 

„ 171.— When Bralimfi was doing penance again there came the founder of 

Yoga, aud Kajiila, tlie founder of S^nkliya. Prom Brahma are pro- 
duced his mental sons, b'anibhQ, Bhu, Bhuvah and others and also 
of Daksya aiul Nagas. The fruit of hearing tho history of the 
lotus ... ••• •- ... 185-188 

„ 172,— Fight with Taraka and Maya after tho slaughter of Yfitra. Tho 

Lord Yisnu seeing the gods come to him and ask fi)r help, deter- 
mined to kill Danavas. Vmnu promised to deliver them from this 
dilliculty and grant to theni the Lordship of the three worlds. 
Propitious sight seen .. ... ... ... ...1118-140 

173.— 'Hearing this promise of Visnu, Maya, Virochona, Hayagriva and 
other chief demons mustering their armies prepared lor fighting 
tho heavenly hosts ... ... ... ... ... 140-141 

„ 174.-- Tho gods also in order to meet tho Dai tya armies <'irraiigcd their 

own troops under the leadership of Indra. Brihspati pronounces 
blessings on them ... ... ... ...142-143 

175. — Groat war between gods and demons. Praise of celibacy. Durva 

gets a boon from Brahma. Armed with this Durva creates an illu- 
sion to help tho army of Maya and crush that of tho gods. Iiidra 
requests Brahinft to quench the illusory fire of Durva and also rc- 
([ucsts the moon born of the ocean to do tho same ... ... 144-147 

176. — The Moon and Varuna, the lords of water, ordered by Indra consoled 

Maya and scared tho demons a groat deal. Boeing this 
Maya produced tho illusion of PArvati Maya in tho gods. After 
that tho fire and wind ordered by the Lord Yisnu annihilated the 
array of the demons. After that everything became calm and tho 
demons became indiitorent. Then Kftlnomi, assuming the form of 
Trivikrama, pleased the demons and frlghteiiod the gods ... 147-140 

177. — Kalanoroi increased bis .strength, dimmed tho splendour of all tho 
' gods from Indra downward, and, vanquishing everything by his 

prowess, making everything his own, shone like Brahma Prajft- 
patS. All the gods extolled him as if ho were BrahniA Prajfipati, 
and the Daityas, too, praised him,.. ... ... ... 149-151 



( xiii ) 


Paob. 

-When KAlanemi mado overytiiing his own, he, contrary to the laws 
of Dharmaf could not carry out the Vedas, Dharma, Forbearance, 

Truth and Laksmf. In not being able to attain these hvo things, 
he became angry and, wanting to enthrone himself in place of 
Visnu, wont to him. Ho saw the Lord riding on Garu^a and* 
holding conch, quoit and club, and simply to cause destruction on 
himself and of the Danavas brandished his own club and by many 
sorts of words censuring NdrSyapa enraged him. Kdlanomi strikes 
at the chest of Ndrayana. Ho also strikes his club on the head 
of Garuda at which the Lord cut the hundred arms and hundred 
heads of E&lanomi and allowed Garuda to strike him down. Brahmd 
praised Visnu. Visnu reinstates ‘ the gods in their former pos- 
sessions and returns to his own abode along with Brahmd ... 151-154 

/ 

Slaying of Andhaka, the Asura. Sankara, in order to drink tho blood 
of Andhak Asura, creates tho Matris Mdhesvari and others. 
Appearance of Na.Hsimgha at the rotiuesb of Jludra to prevent the 
Matris from devouring tho universci in contravention with the 
order of Sankara. After having drunk the blood of Andhak Asura, 
the Mfltris Mahesvari and others defeat the Rudra. Matris 
Narisiipgha's instructions to Rudra Devata ... ... ... 154-157 

ISC.—Grcatnoss of Vftrftnasi. ^Pihgala got Ksotrap&iahood and its con- 
sequent elevations. Siva and Gauri como to VarAn&si. They 
see a garden in the way. Siva says to Gauri that Kuvora and 
others attain fruition on worshipping me. They visit Hari- 
K§etra and grant him boons ... ... ... ...157-162 

181. — -In tho course of conversation between Sanat Kumara and Nandi- 

koa^ara, some important sacred places are described ... ... 162-164 

182. - Skanda describes tho field of Vimukta ... ... ...164-165 

183. — The greatness of the Avimuktas described in the dialogue between 

PArvati and MahesVd!ra. HrahmA having cut his fifth head commits 
BrahmahatyA and comes to l^ankara for expiation and the sin is 
removed by l^ankara. The skull bursts out into thousand pieces 
and forms the sacred place of EapAla Mochana ... ... 165-169 

184. — Greatness of Avimukta ... ... ... ... ...169-171 

185. — in the discourse between the Rlsis and Skanda, it is described that 

VyAsa, pressed with hunger after having practised penance for 12 
years, gets no alms anywhere, but S^ankara and PArvati in tho 
guise of a relation give him food, Hari says, to VyAsa as you 
are irritable, don't live here. VyA.sa prays to Siva that in the 
Chatiirdasi and Astami days he would be favoured with an 
accommodation. Greatness of Dan dnayak and others... ...171-174 

186. — The greatness of NarmadA described in a dialogue between MAr- 

kandeya and Yudhiathira. Tho greatness of Amarkantaka ... 174-176 

187. ~In tho the topic of the greatnos of NarmadA is described that the 

Rlsis frightened by BAnAsnr came to Siva for protection and help. 

NArada sent to disturb the minds of the women at Tripura. 
AnaupamyA, the wife of BAp Asura, discourses with NArada. A hole 
is made in tho city on^account of the faithful wives of tho city 
becoming faithless and hence losing their virtues at the insti- 
gation of NArada ... ... ... ... ...176-178 

188. — Sankara moves about in order to destroy TripurA, being on his 

own grounds on the banks of NarmadA. Tho piteous cries of the 
inhabitants of tho town when it is being burnt by the fire of 
Hari when BAnA seeing tho TripurA on fire leaving his wife and 
children takes the lihga on his head and praises Siva. Hari 
being pleased grants a boon to him that he will be indestruct- 
iblo to gods. Description of Amarkantaka ... ... ...178-182 

189. — Description of tho coniluenco of tho KAveri and NarmadA. Kuvera 

becomes tho lord of Yakas ... ••• ••• ••• 1^2 

190. — The sacred places Yantresvara, GarjaiiA, MeghnAda, etc. ... 183 

191. -— The sacred places on the banks of NarmadA, SAlabhcdha, etc., num- 

bering more than a hundred ... ... ...184-188 


Ciiafteh 178. 


179. - 



( xiv ) 


Pack. 

Chapter 102, —lii the topic on the greatness of Narmailii is described the origin 

and greatness of the Sukla Tirtha ... ... ...188-190 

„ 103.— Pilgrimage to sacred places like Anarakn. Tlie origin and greatness 

of the held of Bhrigu. The sacred places Aim ncU and Dhauba-pfipa. 
Description of Kankhal and other sacred places . ... ... lOO'lCi 

„ 194.— The sacred place of Anknsosvara and others. The sacred places 

Ri.si Kany& and SvarnAvindu ... ... ... ...104-11)0 

„ 195.— The re-birth of llrahnili, etc. The goncology of tho Bhfigu ... 19rt-l'.)7 

„ 106. — The geneology of Augirft ... ... ... ... !07-l9l) 

„ 197 .—The family of Airi. ... ... ... ... ... 100 

,, 198.— The family of Visv&milra ... ... ... ...199-200 

„ 109,- -Tho family of Kasyapa ... 

„ 200.— The family of VasisUia ... ... ... ... ... 201 

„ 201.-— The family of Pai-dsiira Nimi and Vasi.stlia cnrso each other. IVlitra, 

Varnna begets Vasistha and Agastya. Vasistha begets /b^ikti who 
begets Pai'tlsara, the 'father of Dvaiptiyna. The continuation of 
Prfisara’s line ... ... ... ... 201-203 

„ 202. — The families of Agastaya, Pulaha, Kratu and Pulastya ... ...203-204 

„ 203. — Family of Dliarma ... ... ... ... ... 204 

„ 204. — Description of the S(»ng of Pitris ... ... 205 

„ 205. —Praise of gift of a cow ... ... ... ... ... 206 

206, — Presentation of the skin of an antelojio ... ... ...206-208 

„ 207. — Letting loose a bull. Tho marks of such a bull ... ...208-210 

„ 208. — Origin of ftfivitri. Rhe hoa»*s from N&rada of tlie future death of % 

her hu.sbaiid and goes to the forest in her husband’s company ... 210-21 1 
„ 200. — Showing the beauty of the spring to hi.s wife, Satyavftua leaves her 

in a part of the f<)ro.st and him.seU‘ goes to another part of it ... 2LL-213 
„ 210. Suddenly Satyavftna is overcome avith a pain in tho head and li tvs 

downon tho ground placing his head on his wif<*’s lap. Then 
Dhtirmaraja comes w»ith Kiila and M ritvQ and ensnaring the per- 
son of the size of the thumb from Ratyavfina’s body dcfjarts 
for his own abode. KAvitri finding her lord lifeless follows 
Dharmaraja and he, lioiiig ploa.sed with her devotion to her 
husband, grants her the first boon ... .. ... 213-211 

„ 211.— Again pleased with her dutiful word ho grants her the second 

boon ... ... ... ... ... ... 214-215 

„ 212.— She is likewise granted tho third boon ... ... ... 215-217 

„ 213. — SAvitri’s swoct w’ord.s please DharmarAja who restores lior husband 

to life ... ... ... ... ... ...217-218 

,, 214. — S&vLtri returns to her father-in-law with her husband. His eye 

sight restored and ho is re-instated on his throne. Tho fruit of 
reading and hearing this story ... ... ... ...218-219 

„ 216. “Bhagavftn Matsya describes to Manu tho duties of an anointed 

king. Tho helpmates and wealth of a king ... ...219-224 

„ 216.— Tho maintenance of oflicers of a kingdom ... ... ... 224-226 

„ 217.— Tho collection of naodicinal plants in well-protected forts described 

in course of the resources of the kingdom ... ... ... 226-229 

„ 218. — In tho same topic is described the prevention from different 

calamities ... ... ... ... ... ••• 229-231 

„ 219. — Tho secret recesses for kings, etc., in tho fort ... ...231-232 

„ 220. — Tho protection of tho king ... ... ... ...232-285 

„ 221.— Fatality and human efforts. Activity above predestination. Tho 

effects of Satvika, KAjasika and TAmasika works ... ... 235 

„ 222.— In the topic on king’s duties— Conciliatory policy ... ... 235-236 

„ 22:J.— In tho same— the policy of creating differences ... ... 236-287 

„ 224.— In bte same— the policy of buying off ... ... ...237-288 



( , XV‘ ) 


. Pagb. 

Chaptkr 225.— In the same— the policy of repression' vhich is praised. King’s 

blame in dealing improperly with the innocent and the guilty ... 288>289 

„ 226.— The cause of king's impartiality towards potentates. The 

king's vow of Yama, etc., with respect to his people ... ... 289 

„ 227. — Punishment. SantftpanS expiation in stealing things ot little 

value. Punishment in abhisansftna, etc. Punishment in rude speak- 
ing. Punishment in stealing big animals. Punishment in killing 
women and children ... ... ... ... ^^9 251 


ff 


If 


•f 

»» 

»» 

ft 

ff 

ff 

ff 


228. — Special observance of peace ... ... ... ...251-253 

229. — The characters of kings in former births— of people whoso towns 

aro being destroyed ... ... ... ... ... 253-264 


230. — In the topic on supernatural means of pacification the efiicacy 

of worship ... ... ... ... ... ... 264-255 

231. — In tho same topic— mutilation by fire ... ... ... 265-256 

232. — In tho same— the means of removing dangers to trees ... 256 

233. — Removal of drought and overflow ... ... ... 257 

234. — In the same— dangers from reservoirs of water ... ... 257 

235. — In the same — delivery of women ... ... ...258 

236. — In the same— unusual peace of offerings ... ... ... 258 

2.S7.— In tho same— dangers to animals and birds ... ... 258-259 

238.— In the samo- rerooval of accidents ... ...259-260 


239. — Sacrifices to tho Grahas. A Lakh homas and a koti homas. The 

measure of aikunda. The materials and means, e.p., rltvik. The 
priests to be fed with kaira, etc., in tho first month, etc. Distribu- 
tion of one's weight in gold at the close of the sacrifice ... 260-262 

240. — The discourse on taking a journey. Tho proper time of a 

journey described in the dialogue between Matsya and Manu ... 262-264 

241. — The movements in the difforoiit parts of the body as forecasting 

tho success in a journey ... ... ... ...264 

242. — Dreams as foretelling the success of a journey ... ...265-266 

243. — Sights— propitious aud ominous, at the time of starting ... 266-267 

244. — Visnu’s greatness. Tho manifestation of Vamaiis when b^akra 

and others were vanquished. Aditi practising dilTicnlt penances. 

Plea.scd the Oiniiipresont by sweet words in order to re.storc 
her own children to life. On Yisnii asking her to solicit for 
the boon she liked most, she says ‘‘ Let my son VAsava be tho 
ruler of tho three worlds.” The Lord grants her tho boon saying, 

** I shall be born from you by Kasyapa, and killing tho demons, 
shall fulfil your request.” ... ... ... ...267-269 

245. — The Lord appears in the form of a V&mana (dwarf). Learning 

that all the Asuras became weak through tho proweas of tho Lord, 

Bali asks his grandfather how that could be. PrahlAda replies 
that His true nature isoiot known even by BrahmA and others— 
and He is the source of this entire universe. Tho same VAsiideva 
manifesting himself as the son of Kas'yapa and Aditi will kill tho 
Daityas, the burdens of this world, and make Indra and others 
happy. Bali says, ** who, Graiidsire, is this Hari, who is the dread 
of us all ? 1 have got hundreds of heroes who will relieve this 
world, such as Vipraohiti and others, who excel VAsudeva in power. 

Kfisna is not half of any of them in strength. PrahlAda curses him 
saying—** Since you are abusing Kri$na, the god of your grand- 
father, you will ere long loso your sovoreignty ” At the solicita- 
tion of Bali, PrahlAda says— “ Be you His devotee from this day. 

He will be your saviour.” The Lord takes birth in tho form of a 
dwarf. Propitious signs on the advent of the Protector of tho 
world. Tho gods give up their sorrow. Pleasant breezes blow. 

Praiso to the Lord by BrahmA and the other gods. The Lord 
thus self-manifested speaks of the different vratas and goos to 
tho sacrifice celebrated by Bali ... ... ... ...269-274 



( xvi ) 


Paor. 

OiiAPTBR 240.— At V&manaX tread the whole earth shakos and Bali asks his 
preceptor Snkrfichftryya— why the earth trerablos and why tlio 
fires do not accept the offerings of the Asnras. Ho muses Jong 
and says, ** In Easyapa's house Visnu has taken birth. He comes 
to your sacrifice. The earth quakes at his strides, unable to boar 
his great weight. And on his approach the fires refuse your 
offerings.” At this Bali feels delighted and asks his preceptor 
how the Lord ought to be received and entertained. Bukr&chary- 
ya says— “ The Lord comes in hio ‘ Satva quality ’ to preserve 
creation and to crush yon. Beware of making any promises to 
him, however small. Just say I am unable to give you anything.” 

Bali replies, “How can I refuse the Lord anything when ho 
directly prefers a request ? ... ... ... ... 3C9-870 

„ 24C-~IIow can I say I have nothing to give you? Please do nob 
stand in the way of my charity. Yon know I am his devotee. Ho 
will not kill me. Instantly Ho appears there in the form of the 
dwarf. At his sight the Daityas tremble and the sages worship 
him. Bali is greatly delighted and blesses his stars. All remain 
silent. Visnu pleases everybody. Seeing the modesty of the king 
of the Daityas Bali takes an “ Argha ” and approaching the Lord 
says, “1 shall present you anything you ask for, oven .4 1 my 
wealth or the whole world.” At this the Lord says— “ O king ! 
please give mo throe feet of ground for my worship of fire.” Bali 
gives Him throe feet of land. As tho consecrating waterfalls 
on VSmana’s hands, He displ.ays His true form. Then assigning 
tlic throe worlds to Indra and granting many a boon to Bali, 
establishes him on his throne ... ... ... ...274-278 

„ 247 — Vartlha’s deeds in the dialogue between Arjuna and Baunaka. 

Tho disaolutiou of tho world and its fresh creation ... ... 278-2ii0 

„ 218— Tho earth’s praise of Visnu. Visnu adopts tho form of Varaha. 

Tho Lord relievos the earth ... ... ...280-288 


9f 


tf 


** 


}| 




»» 


» 


9 » 


V 

ft 


2i0— The immortality of tho gods and tho .story of tho Ampita. 
/&?ahkara, iSukra and the BanjivanividyA. Request to tho Mandar^ 

Hill. The gods and the DAnavas praise Visnu. Churning of tho 
milk ocean. Brahmft and the gods praise Visnu and tho gods are 
endowed with strength ... ... ...288-286 

250— Tho origin of Kfila Kiita. The origin of Soma, «ri, Sivft, Ucchai- 

sravas, Kaustubha and PSrfjftta. Tho origin of fire and of the 
serpents JIundubha, etc. Discourse between Visnu and KfiU 
kiita. IVaiso o‘f Siva by tho gods .and tho Drinava.s. Disconr.se 
between tho gods and Asuras and Siva. Mahftdova drinks up 
tho deadly poison- The god and tho Asuras dance and sing 
when the poison is drunk up ... ... ... ... 287-280 

251 — Churning out tho Amrita. Birth of Dhanvantari. Tho holding 

of the gora. The Lord in tho form of a fair woman steals tho 
Amrita from Asuras. R&hfi bciicadod. Tho war between tho 
gods and tho Asuras ... ... ... ...280-291 

252— Blirif?Ui Atri and Vasigtha— tho authors of tho VAstu Hfistras. 

Birth of Vftstubhfita from the sweat of tho brow of Siva in tlio 
fight with Andhaka ... ... ... ... ... 291-292 

258— Tho inlluonco of the different months and astorisms. Tho 

different methods of making houses ... ... ....292-295 


254— Tho measure of a building. Tho nature of Chatuhsata, etc. 

Five sorts of royal palaco.s. Tho shape of the bouse of a prince* 295-297 

255— TJio five kinds of pillars. The effect of having big treos like 

tho banyan to the cast of tho house ... ... ... 297-298 

256— On V&stu Vidyft ... ... ... ... ...299-800 

257— Ditto ... ..• ... ... 300-801 

258— On the measurements of limbs of the images of tho Devas ... 301-306 

259— Tho distinctive marks of an imago. Its shapes and sizes ... 305-807 

260^1magea whore half is a god and half a goddess ... ... 807-310 

261— Images of PrabhfiJrara, etc. ... ... ... ... 310-818 



( xvil ) 


Chaptbu 


»» 

»» 




V 






»» 

M 


»» 

11 


M 


11 


11 

1> 


11 

11 


11 


» 


11 

II 


>» 

♦» 


>» 

II 

11 


II 


l> 


Pagb, 

262— Description of the pcdastal. The mention of the fruit in des- 

cribing the altar ... ... ... ... ...813-614 

263— The distinctive features of the Linga. The nine .sorts of Liuga ...314-315 

264— The measurements, Kuurta etc., The placing of the imago, etc., * 

and their methods ... ... ... ... 315-818 

265— Method of adhivAsaiiu. The definition of an Achdrya.” Fruit 

ofadhivdsana ... ... ... ... ...318*820 

266— The ceremony of Pratisthd. After the ^ establishment cere- 

mony of the image, the* worship of the Ac h dry a. Besmearing 
honey, etc., on succeeding days. The fault ^ of moving an imago 
once established ... ... ... ... ... 320-32.) 

267— The ceremony of bathing the god. The obsorvanetj of the 

“ seven-day festival *' cercjnony ... ... ... 323-325 

268— The ceremony of removing evils from buildings. Special offer- 

ings to special gods ... ... ... .. ...325-327 

269— Palaces— their names and characteristics ... ... 327-320 

270— The signs of a “mandapa.'* Dillorent names for mandapa. 

Their distinctive features ... ... ... * ...329-331 

271 — The future kings of the Iks vakil and Magadha families ... 331-333 

272— The reign of the Pulaka family. The names of the kings of the 

family ... ... ... ... ... .•• 384 337 

273~The reigns of the Andhras, Yavauas and the Mlcchchhas. The 

end of a Yuga. The origin of Kali Yuga ... ^ ... 337*347 

274— The gift called Tuldpurusaddna Mahdddna. Different sorts 

of Tuldpurusaddna ... ... ... ... 347-351 

275— Giftof Uiranyagarbha ... ... ... ...861-353 

276— The moihod of giving away the Brahuidiida, Tho fruit of doing, 

reading or listening to this account ... ... ...353-354 

277— -Gift of a Kalpa tree. The fruit of hearing and reading this 

account ... ... *•* ... •*. 354-85.5 

278— Gift of a thousand cows. Tho fruit of hearing the account ... 355-357 

279— ^Mothod of making gift of a golden milch cow. Tho proper 

Brdhmana for such a gift ... ... ... ...357 

280— Gift of a golden horse. Tho fruit of reading and hearing this 

account ... ... ••• ... ... 358 

281— Method of making gift of a golden horse and chariot ... 358-350 

282 — Gift of a golden olcphaut. The fruit of hearing and reading 

the account ... ... ... ... ...359-360 

283— Gif t of land with five ploughs ... ... ... ... 360-30 1 

284— Gift of tho golden earth. The fruit of hearing and reading 

this account ... ... ... ... 361-362 

285— Gift of tho universal wheel. Tho way of making tho wheel ... 302-364 

286— Gift of a golden Kalpa-crcpcr. Tho fruit of hearing and . 

reading this ... ... ... ...364-365 

287— Gift of tho seven .seas. Its fruit ... ... ...365-366 

288— Gift of tho Katnadheuu. Its fruit ... ... ...306-307 

289— Gift of the pot representing the groat elements. Tho fruit of 

reading and hearing this ... ... ... ...867-368 

290— The account of the Ealpas. Their names and number. TJio 

fruit of hearing and reading tho Br&hma and the Padma 
Purdnas. The disappearance of tho Lord Matsya, etc. ... 368 

291— The subjects described in tho Mats^^a Pitrana. Xlio fruit of 

reading it ... ... ... ... * ... ...369-370 







