===== Internet Archive OCR: The metaphysics of the Saiva siddhanta system-1929_djvu.txt =====

Pablication No- 123. 


Ghe Mefaphysics 


Saiva Siddhanta System 
B 


BY 


K. SUBRAMANIA PILLAI M. A.,M. L... 


ADVOCATE, 
Tagore Professor of Law, Calcutta. 


THE SOUTH INDIA SAIVA SIDDHANTA 
WORKS PUBLISHING SOCIETY, 
TINNEVELLY, LTD, 

TINNEVELLY MAY 1929 & MADRAS 


(COPYRIGHT) 


Printed by 
€. Muniswamy Mudaliar & Sons, 
2/17, Coral Merchant St., Madras, 


VLEL» 


CANAAN 


RAN RARE 


K. SUBRAMANIA PILLAI, M.A., M.L. 


CRASSA AANA 


Z 
Zz 
4% 
vA 
Zz 
Z% LA 
4 
ALLIAAIIASILDIPIADEAL LIPPER LEDEOLYSSLALI APA LS Td wens 


ance OR 


te - 


INTRODUCTION. 


It is not so much the author as the 
subject that needs an introduction. The 
Saiva Siddhanta System, which is the finished 
product of Tamil culture, excels all other 
systems of philosophical thought in two 
respects; (a) There is complete harmony 
effected between the Innovent and the 
Transcendental theories of God which it is 
not possible to find eisewhere (b) great promi- 
nence is attached to the Anavamala inherent 
in the Soul and various methods of Soul cul- 
ture are prescribed cither to eradicate the 
mala or to keep it strictly within bounds. 
The practical effect of these two cardinal 
features of the system on life is something. 
marvellous. There is complete concordance 
between theory and practice on vital matters 
like the path of devotion, the value of service 
to fellow-beings, idol worship, symbol wor- 
ship and the like. 

The process of ratiocination which we 
find in the Saiva Siddhanta System is not. 
merely rigid logic having no regard whatever 


to the actualities of life; it is not merely 
a deduction from the Scriptures having no 
regard whatever to the conclusions of science. 
Tt is on the other hand a happy admixture of 
science and psychology; of ethics and 
theology. One remarkable feature of the 
system is its principle of tolerance of other 
systems which it adopts as graded steps 
leading to itself as the ultimate Truth. 

Faint glimpses of the system are to be 
found in the independent efforts of Western 
philosophers. Pragmatism and Humanism 
bear traces of Saiva Siddhanta thought ina 
crude form, It is essential that the Saiva 
Siddhanta System should be interpreted in 
terms of Western thought to the West at this 
juncture in order that the evolution of their 
new systems may proceed on the right lines. 
All lovers of philosophy will therefore wel- 
come this book on the “ Metaphysics of the 
Saiva Siddhanta System.” It comes from 
the pen of a well-known and talented author 
who is devoting his life-time toa study of 
the system in all its aspects. His  inter- 
pretation of the system to the West will have, 
therefore, a peculiar force. 


a a 


Hitherto the system has been practically 
confined to the Tamil country. Recently 
several scholars have been doing real service 
by publishing it broadcast. Treatises in the 
English language on the system have been 
along felt want. The appearance of this 
book will, I believe, to some extent supply 
this want. 

May I appeal to all students of Saiva 
Siddhanta Philosophy to come forward with 
similar books in English on the various 
aspects of the system so that not only our 
country but all English speaking peoples may 
benefit thereby. May all their efforts be 
crowned with success and may Saiva Sid- 
dhanta shed its lustre far and wide through 
out the length and breadth of the Universe. 


M. BALASUBRAHMANYAM, 


BA. BL, 


THE METAPHYSICS OF 
THE SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 


(AN OUTLINE) 
Seen 


WESTERN OPINION 


6" system has been pronounced by the 

late Dr. G. U. Pope of Oxford “ as the 
choicest product of the Dravidian intellect.” 
The same view has been expressed in greater 
detail by Rev, C. Gowdie, who says ‘ This 
" system possesses the merits of great anti- 
quity ; in the religious world it is heir to all 
that is most ancient in Southern India. 
It is a religion of the Tamil people by the 
side of which every other form is of com- 
paratively foreign origin. As a system of 
religious thought, as an expression of faith 
and life, the Saiva Siddhanta is by far the best 
that South India possesses; indeed it would 
not be rash to include the whole of India 
and to maintain that judged by its intrinsic 


merits, the Siddhanta represents the high 


2 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


water mark of Indian thought and Indian 
life.” 
HISTORICAL SKETCH 


Recent research shows that at a re- 
mote period in the history of the Tamils 
answering to pre-vedic times, a class of high- 
souled seers called Arrivars (2 dat) develop- 
eda rare system of metaphysics and psychic 
science and taught the same to their disciples 
and followers. It appears that originally 
there were four secret sacred books on the 
subject by four great saints of oid and Jater on, 
a group of five saints gave birth to twenty- 
eight mystic works corresponding to the 
‘Sivagamas’ of the day. These two sets of 
books were regarded as the highest authority 
by the ancient Tamils. Superfluous it is 
to refer to countless minor books based on 


them. 


During the Vedic age we have reasen 
to infer that the Tamilians or Dravidians 
inhabited this land from the Himalayas to 
Cape Comorin and beyond, and that several 
of the Tamil princes in Northern India were 
well versed in the philosophy of the Arrivars. 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 3 


Probably it was to one of these rulers that 
the four Brahmins of the Chandokya 
Upanishad resorted for spiritual enlighten- 
ment. It is interesting to note that the 
prince was surprised to see that they were the 
first Aryan priests that approached him for 
attainment of divine wisdom. In process of 
time, it came to pass that many of the ideas 
and words of this system found a prominent 
place in some of the Vedic songs and 
Upanishads, and a cycle of Sanskrit liter- 
ature called Tantric or Agamic came into 
being as adaptations of the mystic lore of the 
Tamil Saints. 

This event is of infinite importance from 
the historical stand point; for it served to pre- 
serve at least in a rough Sanskrit garb frag- 
ments of the traditional system of the Arri- 
vars at a time when violent inroads of the sea 
occuring at two distant landmarks of time 
engulfed a vast portion of the Tamil country 
which now forms the basis of the Indian 
ocean. Not only did these deluges once for 
all hide from human view the glorious cities 
of ‘ golden gates ’ (to which Valmiki refers in 
his Ramayana) wherein Pandian monarchs 


4 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


had treasured up the most splendid products of 
their hoary civilization, but they washed 
away even the last vestiges of the grand libra- 
ries of science, art and literature which the first 
two Tamil academies had reared up through 
ages of culture and development. The last 
corner-stone vouch safed as a foothold for 
posterity is the Tholkoppiam which has been 
almost the only real source of inspiration to 
the student of Tamilian History and Archaeo- 
logy for the past three thousand years. In 
Tiruvalluvar as weil as in this ancient 
grammar we find the first allusions extant to 
the psychic culture of the Arrivars. 

In the post-diluvian age, these great 
men came to be called Siddhars in Tantric 
literature. It was the school of Siddhars with 
Saint Tiramular at their head that kept alive 
the flame of philosophical and mystic learning 
in their enigmatic Tamil songs up to the age 
‘of Tevaram hymnists. Now the ancient 
system came down to the Tamil people with 
the Tantric stamp on it. In other words, its 
terminology became mainly Sanskritic and 
most of the later day writers were content 
with tracing the Siddhanta to Agamic and 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 5 


Upanishadic sources in Sanskrit. About this 
time arose the necessity for a comparative 
study of the system with the doctrine of the 
Tantric creeds and Vedic schools of thought. 
In the days of the Arrivars, this system went 
by the names of ‘the happy path’, ‘the road 
of bliss’, ‘the path of light’, ‘the one way’ 
and ‘the great way’ ete. After the special 
Tamil term for God viz,, Siva (meaning good, 
upright, pure and blissful) was taken up into 
Sanskrit, the religion came to be called 
Saivism. The word ‘Siddhanta’ bears two 
meanings viz, (1) the conclusions of the Sid- 
dhars (2) the final word or the end of ends. 
Needless it is to indicate that the phrase 
Saiva Siddhanta is a combination of the two 
terms ‘ Saiva’ and ‘ Siddhanta.’ 

Although the four great leaders of 
Saivism who flourished before the 8th 
century have given distinct expression to 
the essential principles of the system in their 
sublime devotional Lyrics, an exposition of 
the same in a scientific manner is found only 
in Saint Tirumular’s Tirumantram, Gnana- 
mirtam, Tiruvunthiar, Tirukalituppadiar, and 
2 few other books prior to the age of Sri Mei- 


6 THE METAPHYSIOS OF THE 


kandar, the inspired Vellala boy-saint of Tiru- 
vennainallur who inauguarated the renaissance 
of Siddhanta Philosophy in the 13th century. 
His famoas work called Sivagnanabodham is 
the central gem of Saiva Siddhanta Literature 
and presents in a nutshell the whole system 
of Siddhanta religion and philosophy. Sri 
Arulnandi Sivacharyar, the first of the forty- 
nine disciples of Sri-Meikandar is the author 
of another important work ‘Sivagnana-Sid- 
dhiar’ which is virtually an expansion of his 
master’s production, Another work of St. 
Arulnandi is called Trupavirupathu, A book 
called Unmaivilakam on the same subject was 
written by Saint Manavasakam kadandar; 
about the same time eight other works were 
written by Saint Umapathi Sivam the disciple 
of Saint Arulnandi’s disciple. All these twelve 
works with Tiruvunthiar and Tirukalitup- 
padiar already mentioned, are known as the 
fourteen standard Saiva Siddhanta books at the 
present day. Sivagnanabodham in this system 
occupies the same position as the Brahma- 
sutram or the Bagavat Gita of the orthodox 
Vedic school. Corresponding to the Bhash- 
yams of Sri Sankara, Ramanuja etc, on these 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 7 


there is a grand superb Tamil commentary 
on Sivagnanabodham by St. Sivagnana 
Manivar of Tiravavaduthurai Adhinam, who 
flourished in the 18th century. Sivagra- 
bhashyam is a big sanskrit commentary 
ou the sanskrit rendering of the Tamil 
Sivagnanabodham, Space does not permit 
reference to other treatises on the subject. 
Some of the standard works on Siddh- 
anta Philosophy like Sivagnana Siddhiar com- 
mence with a brief statement and criticism 
of the tenets of other Indian systems of 
thought which are grouped into four divisions, 
each of which comprises six schools of phi- 
losophical opinion. In the first are placed (1) 
materialism known as Lokayatham, (2-5) four 
sections of Buddhism and (6) Jainism. This 
group is called Purapuram. In the second, we 
find the Vedic systems of Mimamsa, Sankya, 
Vaiseshika, Nyaya, Yoga and Ekatmavada 
together with Pancharatram or (Vaishnavam). 
Vaiseshika and Nyaya are clubbed together as 
the Tarka school of thought. This group is 
called Puram. The third and the fourth 
groups are mainly Tantric, the former differing 
from the Siddhanta in respect of its doctrine 


8 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 
about the nature of the soul and the final 
goal; and the latter showing a divergence only 
with reference to ultimate salvation. The 
creeds of the former are named Pasupatham, 
Mavirtam, Kapalam, Vamam, Bhairavam and 
Aikyavadam and those of the latter, Padana- 
vadam, Bhedavadam, Isvara Avikara vada, 
Sivasamavadam, Sankiranthavadam and 
Sivadwaitham. What is called Suddhasaivara 
makes the nearest approach to the Siddhanta 
system, and in the name of Saivavadam, it has 
been put into the fourth category by Sri 
Umapathisivam in his Sankalpanirakaranam, 
All these are looked upon as a gradation of 
steps leading up tothe Siddhantam which 
transcends them ail. It is for this reason that 
it has been called the ‘end of ends’, beyond 
which there is no path, 

No reference is here necessary to the 
traditional six creeds of the Agamic side ; 
Kaumaram, Ganapatiyam, Souram, Shak- 
taism, Vaishnavam and Saivam which claim 
no ‘special system of Philosophy as_ their 
basis. Such of them as trace their origin to 
metaphysics come under the systems above 
mentioned or within the Saiva Siddhantam, 


no 


SAIVA EIDDHANTA SYSTEM 9 


The six ‘end systems’ which Saint Tiramular 
alludes to in his immortal work represent 
different stages in the evolutions of psychic 
Science and are called Siddhantam, Vedantam, 
Bodhantam, Nadantam, Yogantam and 
Kalantam, 
DOCTRINAL SKETCH 

Now we shall consider the doctrinal side 
of the Saiva Siddhantam. The’ phenomenal 
world is divisible into two grand sections 
under the heading of Spirit and Matter. The 
Saiva writers use terms meaning the Intelligent 
and the Unintelligent. The former signifies 
God or the Absolute and other countless 
intelligences known as souls and the latter, the 
world of Nature. It is in respect of these 
three entities God, Soul and Nature and their 
relation to one another that differences in 
doctrine arise among philosophers. Pursuing 
the orthodox method, we shall pass in review 
the views of various schools of thought, 


OTHER SYSTEMS OF THOUGHT 
LOKAYATHAM 


The materialists of this land calied 
Lokayathas or Charuvakas held that in the 


10 THE METAPHYSIOS OF THE 
evolution of the world, four stages were 
perceptible and accordingly believed only in 
the existence of the principles which brought 
about the solid, liquid, fiery and gaseous 
condition of things. For them no soul or 
God existed and they did not even recognise 
what we call ether. They regarded human 
intelligence as a resultant of the combined 
operation of the four material entities above 
mentioned. In the light of this doctrine 
they shaped their ideal of life and practice. 
While condemning thiestic belief and 
practice, they advocated the development of 
agriculture, commerce and industry and 
agitated for the constitution of the Govern- 
ment in the interests of the people. A section 
of them inclined to the view that the five 
senses constituted the soul! another class 
advanced the opinion that the senses de- 
pended for the proper exercise of their func- 
tions on Breath-energy which should there- 
fore be taken to be the real soul.. A third 
section of this school surmised that the 
intellect was the soul. At this point the 
materialists trenched upon the ground of the 
Buddhists. 


eR ee ee 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM WW 


BUDDHISM 


The general Buddhistic doctrine is that the 
soul is the sum total of moments of percep- 
tion and that the continuity of intelligence 
is maintained by every impression associating 
itself with its successor by virtue of its 
retentive force. If this power of association 
snaps once for all, then dawns the final 
salvation. One class of Buddhists hold that 
the annihilation of consciousness itself is the 
glorious end of their faith, With Buddhists 
came the doctrine that the external world 
should be regarded as co-eval and co-existent 
with consciousness. If consciousness is 
renewed every moment, everything in Nature 
similarly appears and dies each second of 
preception, 

There are four schools of Buddhistic 
metaphysics all of whom agree in holding to 
the phenomenon of Universal momentary 
change but differ from one another in the 
interpretation of their master’s teaching with 
teference to the reality or otherwise of the 
external world. Madhyamikas who represent 
the first shade of opinion hold that everything 


12 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


in the Universe including consciousness has 
only an illusory existence, and nothing in 
fact exists. Their argument is that what 
exists will not die, and what is not in exis- 
tence will not come into being, so that there 
is only appearance and disappearance of 
things every moment of experience. 

Yogacharas, the second class of Bud- 
dhistic interpreters question the unreal 
character attributed to consciousness by the 
first school. They choose to hold that 
being the basis of personal experience, 
consciousness should be deemed real, while 
the external world must be regarded as a 
hallucinative or dream-like projection of the 
mind. 

Another school of this system rejects 
this idealistic theory and regards _ the external 
world as well as consciousness as quite real, 
but contends that the former is not directly 
perceptible, Its opinion is that every 
physical object simply touches the focus of 
consciousness and passes off instantly, 
leaving only its impression therein; and it 
is this impression that is perceived as the 
thing itself. The champions of this school 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 13- 


called Sautrantikas ascribed the origin of the 
physical universe to the action of atoms of 
four kinds and analysed the system of inner 
experience into five orders answering to the 
psychological processes of sensation, percep- 
tion, conception, feeling and willing The 
fourth school of Buddhistic doctrine differs 
from this only in holding that it is the 
external world itself that is subject to direct 
perception and not its impression on the 
intellect, 


JAINISM 

The Buddhists thus advanced a step 
above the materialists but failed to penetrate 
te the agency which unifies intellectual and 
emotional activity. In this respect, the Jains 
progressed further and posited the existence 
of a soul of which consciousness was the main 
mark. They too never believed in a Creator, 
but looked upon as God the first of the souls 
that attained perfection in evolution. They 
also adopted the atomic theory of the world 
and held that each soul should work out its 
own salvation by eschewing evil deeds and 
doing good to humanity at large. When by 


i4 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 
dint of merit, the bonds of birth are broken, 
the soul will reside free or rise higher and 
higher in the ethereal firmament. 


VEDIC SCHOOLS OF THOUGHT 


So much about the Purapura group. In 
the Pura group, the Mimamsa is the least 
philosophic and the most dogmatic. The 
Veda is believed to be eternal and the strict 
performance of what is laid down therein 
secures one the attainment of his aims and 
aspirations. While this creed is as athiestic 
as those of the Pura groups, it holds the 
souls and the world to be real just like 
Jainism. 


No doubt the Vaiseshika and Nyaya 
systems admit the existence of an Almighty 
Creator, but have a poor conception of the 
soul, The mind which is the spring of know- 
ledge for the soul is an infinitesimal material 
atom attaching to each soul. Detached from 
mind, the soul would be inert like a stone. 
Final bliss consists ina stage of stone-like 
indifference to pain and pleasure resulting 
from the dissociation of the mind from the 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 15 


soul. With some modification, the Tarka 
schools have adopted the atomic theory of the 
world and hold that the atoms move in pairs. 
But they attribute the action of atoms to the 
energising of them by God, Space and Time 
are considered to be different aspects of the 
same entity. 


Turning to the Sankhya school which is 
also a Godless one, we find the analysis of 
the Universe to be far deeper than in the 
preceding systems. In this system, the 
atomic theory is rejected and the phenomenal 
world is traced to the subtle substratum 
which underlies our psychic and physical 
operations. All forms of matter are reduci- 
ble to an unintelligent something, which is 


not matter itself in the sense of the term as 
used in physical science. This fact has been 
recently recognised by Western scientists. 
Now this something is derived from one of 
the three parts of a subtler entity which vary 
in their nature and form the back ground 
respectively of the activity of the senses, of 
the motor nerves and of pre-matter forms. A 
deeper layer than this is the medium of 


16 THE METAPHYSICS OF THEY 


intellectual or thinking processes. Now, this 
too is traceable toa trifold subtler stratum 
which serves to evolve the good, middling 
and bad tendencies of the soul and goes by 
the name of Gunatatwam. The root of this 
is regarded by the Sankhyans as the primor- 


dial basis of Nature and is styled Mula-~ 


prakria The soul is a being of pure intelli- 
gence, by nature free and actionless whose 
timeless association with Mulaprakriti has 
been productive of pain and pleasure to it. If 
the soul realises its true nature, eg., its 
independence of Nature, its salvation is then 
assured for ever. 


Upon this system of Kapila, the author 
of Yoga-Sutram has improved by positing the 
existence of a God who is the great Instruc- 
tor of the souls. His book deals with eight 
forms of Yogic practice which are of immense 
value for spiritual emancipation. 


The systems hitherto dealt with represent 
the advance of thought from an analysis of 
Nature to its primeval substratum. The idea 
of the soul is common to Jainism and all the 
systems of the Vedic group. The Tarka and 


- 


SATIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 17 


the Yoga schools alone are thiestic in 
character, but even they do not speak clearly 
of the immanence of God in the Universe. 
Only in the Tarka systems God is regarded 
as a Creator, while St, Patanjali, in his Yoga 


Sutram views Him only as a Light-giver, ° 


These dualistic systems perhaps supplied the 
material for the Madhwa school of thought 
at a later day. 7 
Now we shall pass on to Ekatmavadam 
or monism of Sri Sankara, This doctrine. 
appears to be an eclectic combination of some 
of the cardinal ideas of Buddhistic Yoga- 
chara creed and of the adherents of Sankhya 
and Yoga systems, The first of these originated 
the idealistic conception of the world; the 
second spoke of the soul as bondless and 
actionless in reality; and the third spoke of a 
great Soul the fountain of wisdom for others. 
Now the monistic school perhaps sought to 
harmonise all these by holding the world to be 
illusory in fact, and identifying the intelligent 
many of the Sankhyans with the intelligent One 
of the Yogins, since there was hardly any 
difference between the attributes of both. 
But it had to reconcile the multiplicity 
2 


18 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


of souls with the oneness of God, Either 
plurality or unity must be the fact, Since 
unity attaches to the great Soul, they jumped 
to the conclusion that multiplicity must be 
only apparent. Then they had to account 
for such an appearance, This they did by 
attributing it to Mulaprakriti, otherwise called 
Maya, and laying it down that the contact of 
Maya with Brahman (i-e., the one Soul) caus- 
ed its reflection in the form of the unintelligent 
world and intelligent souls. What is this 
maya? Is it an intelligent or unintelligent 
entity? The answer of the Monists is that it 
is something of which nothing can be said. 


According to the orthodox view, the 
monistic theory of the Vedantins has its basis 
on the interpretation of the two terms ‘Ekam’ 
and ‘Adwaitam’ in the Vedic books. These 
terms applied to God and were taken by the 
monists to have av identical meaning in the 
light of the Vedic verse which means ‘One 
without a second’. Accordingly, wherever God 
is described as being Adwaitic with the world, 
it was understood by them that God is the 
world itself in another form. Science traced 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 19 


the world to Mulaprakriti or Maya. Now for 
the purpose of holding to the truth of the said 
Vedic verse, they had to associate God with 
Maya and hold the world to be unreal since 
the Reality is only one, (In fact, the Vedic 
verse meant that there is only one God with- 
out a second, and was intended to inculcate 
the principle of Monotheism). The adherents 
of this school were known as Mayavadins. 


This theory was modified by another 
section of the same school who declared that 
God himself became the Universe, just as 
sweet milk turns into sour curd. Out of Him 
was evolved the intelligent and the unintelli- 
gent universe and ignorance of such evolution 
caused His self-limitation. Removal of such 
ignorance secures one salvation. This theory 
has had much influence on the ideas of 
Vaishnavaites and the adherents of Tantric 
creeds like Vamam, Bhairavam etc. 


There is a third shade of opinion that the 
Universeis God sporting himself by evolution, 
The fourth section of the Ekatmavadins hold 
that God is the Voice of the Silence and His 
form is the primeval sound that gave birth 


20 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 
to the sentient and the non-sentient world as 
a whole. 


VAISHNAVISM 

The Pancharatra Vaishnavas accept the 
Sankhyan view of the material world but 
hold, like the second section of Ekatmavadins 
mentioned above, that out of God sprang four 
great beings who evolved all the universe. 
Hence souls and the unintelligent world are 
really attributes or parts of God Vishnu. 
Many of the Tantric creeds of the third and 
the fourth groups betray traces of the influ- 
ence of the Ekatmavada doctrine. They 
need not be dealt with here, since they are 
not so well known to the world now. These 
two groups are styled Akapuram and Akam 
respectively. 


Even the philosophy of the Christian and 
Muhammadan religions is at bottom as 
monistic as  Vaishnavism. If God has 
created the soul out of Himself, it points to 
the substantial identity of the intelligent 
many with the intelligent One. 

On the Vedic side, it is only the Madhwa 
system of medizval times and that of Swami 


a 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 21 


Dayananda of the present day that have 
escaped the influence of the monistic doctrine 
and are sternly dualistic in their conception 
of the relation between God and the World. 


CRITICISM OF EKATMAVADAM 


From this it may be seen that Ekatma- 
vadam or Kevala Adwaitam is the typical 
system of Vedantic thought. The Agamic 
creed of the Vaishnavites was improved upon 
by Sri. Ramanuja who made it Vedic by his 
interpretation of Brahmasutram. In the Sai- 
vite group, (Akam) the Sivadwaita doctrine 
has been influenced by monistic views, and its 
best exposition is by Sri Kanta who is a great 
commentator on Brahmasutram. This creed 
should not be mistaken for the Siddhanta 
system which has its origin in Tantric 
literature, 


A critical examination of the cardinal 
tenets of Ekatmavadam will take us straight 
to the teachings of Tantric or Tamilian Saiva 
Philosophy. The Vedantins hold that God 
alone exists. Then the question arises 
whether what they call maya exists or not. 


22 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


If its existence be granted, then it would 
lead to the positing of two ultimate entities 
God and Maya, which cuts at the root 
of the monistic theory that nothing exists, 
save Brahmam, If its non-existence be 
assumed, then the phenomenon of the 
universe cannot be explained away in any 
other manner. The next question is whether 
it is intelligent or non-intelligent. If it be 
regarded as a sentient entity, it must be part 
and parcel of the Almighty who is the one 
Intelligence that really exists according to the 
monistic view. This will lead to the conclu- 
sion that the limiting power of Maya or the 
source of all evilisin God himself. Then 
the Power that causes the self-limitation of 
God must be more potent than the better 
parts of God Himself and God would have 
to be viewed as a mixture of good and evil. 


On the other hand, if this Maya be an 
unintelligent something, then the system does 
not explain how the Intelligent God can be 
reflected through this inanimate medium, and 
appear as the world and the souls. 


Then if, casting away the idea of Maya, 


aaa 


-4— ees 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 23 


it be held that God Himself expanded into 
the unintelligent world and the intelligent 
souls, how are we to answer the question 
whether there are two parts in the Almighty 
corresponding to the sentient and the non- 
sentient portions of creation? What is 
exactly the line between the two in God ? Can 
God then be presumed to be a Being of pure 
intelligence ? 

Again, what is meant by saying that even 
the souls which are centres of intelligence 
unreal? If the Jiva is a reflection of one 
Supreme Soul, why should there be so many 
reflections, and how are we to account for the 
multiplicity thereof ? Is it possible to con- 
ceive that God admits of material dimensions 
so as to be cut up into countless souls? If 
the soul is really God Himself, how are we 
to solve the problem of evil? If evil be due 
to finitude and the soul be God under limita- 
tion, how are we to explain the possibility of 
God undergoing such mysterious restriction 
of His freedom? If God be subject to the 
weakness of being self-limited as often as 
possible, then the very idea of salvation would 
be quite an illusion, If souls, as separate 


24 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


from God, are unreal, to whom are they so 
illusory? From a personal standpoint, it is 
our existence and experience that are real to 
us beyond anything else. If the world is only 
in our idea, the idea of God itself is only 
intellectual. Then it would appear that noth- 
ing beyond ourselves would be real to us. If 
the world and souls be unreal to God, what 
is the need for speaking about appearance and 
reality from the point of view of a Being who 
is naturally transcendental? Further, what 
is real to us is our suffering and how is it to 
be explained away in accord with monistic 
tenets? Thus the Ekatmavada and allied 
theories leave us in confusion as respects the 
nature of the Universe, that of the soul and 
of God Himself in relation to these, 

What is opposed to the Siddhanta 
system in these doctrines is the confusion of 
the intelligent with the unintelligent and the 
identification of the intelligent many with *he 
Supreme Being. In sketching an outline of 
the Siddhanta system of metaphysics, we 
may first direct our attention to the un- 
intelligent root-cause of the phenomenal 
world, 


} ne 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 25 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA TATVAS 


The distinctive merit of the Siddhanta 
school of thought in this respect is its 
wonderful progress in the scientific diagnosis 
of Nature, While the Sankhyans pursued the 
analysis of the cosmos downto the substratum 
of Mulaprakriti, the Saivites plunged deeper 
and detected that even behind it, there were 
five subtler strata of the pre-material un- 
intelligent entity and that Mulaprakriti 
was evolved from one of them. Out of these 
five tatwas, as they are called, three serve to 
evolve in a general rudimentary manner the 
faculties of knowing, doing and feeling which 
the tatwas below Mulaprakriti develop, more 
definitely and elaborately; while the other 
two are concerned respectively in limiting 
the enjoyment and experience of finite 
intelligences and directing the re-action of 
thoughts and doings on their agents in due 
time. These two are in ordinary parlance 
called Time and Fate, All these five are 
derived from a subtler substratum called 
Impure maya which is far more refined than 
Mulaprakriti, but which is so designated 


26 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


because behind it there is the ultimate section 
of the unintelligent entity called Pure maya 
which in turn admits of a five-fold division. 


This pure maya provides the medium 
through which the soul in its finite condition 
derives the light of knowledge from God and 
contact therewith does not obscure one’s 
psychic powers like the impure maya and the 
Mulaprakritii The term *‘ Maya’ bears a 
different acceptation in the Siddhanta system 
from what it is taken to mean by the Maya- 
vada school of thought. It does not mean 
illusion, The Tantric or Tamilian view is 
that each syllable of the word has a signi- 
ficant meaning. ‘Ma’ means involution or 
that to which the universe reduces itself and 
*ya’ means evolution or that from which 
everything comes out. This is the way in 
which the term is split by orthodox Sid- 
dhantis. I surmise that the proper way to 
split the term is into Tamil Mai (—ii) 
and 4 (-.4) respectively meaning in Tamil 
“to hide or die’ and ‘to become’. Both 
wri and are pure Tamil words. So, 
Maya means the irreducible, undeveloped, 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM a7 


pre-material unintelligent entity which is the 
beginning of all evolution and the end of all 
involution, (¢. ¢., at once the womb and grave 
of Nature.) The Impure and the Pure maya 
are the two ultimate basic substrata of the 
Universe. What are called tatwas or Mudals 
in Tamil (—gpss) are the material principles 
which help to evolve the different stages of 
the evolution of the world from its primordial 
dual basis. Up to Mulaprakriti the tatwas 
are said to be twenty four in number, All the 
Vedic schools of thought which have not been 
influenced by the Tantric system, posit the 
existence of only these twenty-four tatwas, 
in all, since they have not gone be- 
yond Mulaprakriti, In addition to these, the 
Saiva Agamas speak of twelve higher tatwasr 
seven of the impure maya, and five of 
the pure maya, the whole number of 
tatwas being thirty-six on the whole, These 
thirty-six are sub-divided into ninety-six 
according to one calculation, which we need 
not consider here. All the tatwas are suc. 
cessive variations of the Unintelligent Maya 
which help the evolution and expression of the 
otherwise inexpressible faculties of the 


28 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 
intelligent many, which have to be evolved 
and purified as a condition precedent to final 
salvation. It should be noted that the Al- 
mighty is beyond all tatwas and does not 
require their aid for achieving any end of 
His own. On the other hand, it is He that 
energises the tatwas for the good of the 
souls, The root-cause of the unintelligent 
does not at all originate from the intelligent 
one. It is an entity uncreated by itself, but 
capable of evolution into tatwas by the Sakti 
of the Almighty. 


SOULS 


So much about the Universe. We shall 
now consider the subject of souls. The 
peculiar feature of the Siddhanta lies in its 
elucidation of the nature of the soul ina far 
better manner than any other system. The 
Buddhist speaks of the soul only as a stream 
of consciousness and believes that at the final 
stage of psychic evolution, there would be an 
annihilation of consciousness or at least of the 
force that maintains the unity of moments of 
perception. This view cannot satisfy our rea- 
son since it does not explain how something 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 29 


that exists can turn into nothing. The Jain 
doubtless posits the existence of as many souls 
as there are centres of knowing, feeling and do- 
ing, having certain common attributes, and in 
this respect he is at one with the exponents of 
Vedic systems of thought other than the 
Ekatmavadin, but he does not present us an 
accurate exposition of the chief aspect of the 
soul, It is the Jain view that the soul in its 
primeval stage is bound down to matter, but 
it can by its own efforts achieve its salvation. 
Only the first soul attained freedom without 
any example to follow and chalked out the 
path for others. He is therefore the Guru 
and God of all others, although he is not the 
Creator. If the capacity to free itself from 
bondage is inherent in the soul and no aid is 
required from one supreme Being, how could 
such a soul have been enthralled by matter 
at any time of its existence? Furthermore, 
the Jains believe that the ethereal region of 
Akasa which extends boundlessly beyond the 
cosmic world is the background of the soul’s 
eternal progress even after emancipation from 
material bonds. Now this Akasa is really 
the permanent unintelligent entity which even 


30 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


the freed soul can never get rid of, at least 
for its residence or onward march. Such a 
position cannot be regarded as representing 
the final goal of freedom from the un- 
intelligent ; or dependence of the soul on the 
part of the Unintelligent must be viewed as a 
permanent characteristic of the soul, so that 
liberation of the intelligent from the Un- 
intelligent can never be complete according 
to the Jains. This detracts from the dignity 
of the soul as a purely self-existent in- 
telligence. 

Without examining this doctrine further, 
we shall see what the Vedic schools say of 
the soul. The Mimamsa has little to say, 
save that souls exist. The Tarka schools 
hold that deprived of what is called the mind, 
the soul is practically unintelligent not only 
during bondage but also after its salvation. 
The Sankhyan view is that the soul is a 
changeless intelligence. If so, there is no 
need to speak of salvation. The Yoga school, 
though granting the existence of the supreme 
Being, has more or less the same theory as 
the Sankhyans, and believes that Yogic 
practices will pave the way for realisation of 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 31 


one’s true nature and attainment of salvation. 
The Ekatmavadins, as already shown, could 
see no distinction between the soul and God, 
but view the former as an unreal shadow of the 
latter. The Vaishnavite theory regarding the 
soul as a part or attribute of God, logically 
leads to the conclusion that the soul is God 
Himself. Although the Madhwas hold that the 
soul has a distinct individuality from God, 
their conception of its nature is quite imperfect 
since they classify souls into three classes 
Satvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic by nature and 
view them as being limited in evolution 
by their respective temper. A Tamasic soul 
can never become Satvic, so that there is a 
limit to the spiritual development of the 
second and third classes of souls. Needless 


it is to refer to various systems of thought’ 


on the Tantric side as they are hardly 
known to the world at large. 

The Saiva Siddhantins hold that souls 
are distinct centres of knowing, feeling and 
doing, and are countless in number just as 
the Unintelligent is infinite in extent. Each 
soul is distinct from God as an entity; for 
if it were God himself, it could not have an 


32 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


inclination to the Unintelligent and been 
subject to limitation thereby. But if at the 
same time contact with the root of matter 
were inherent in its nature, the soul could 
never become independent of Nature. Hence 
its inclination to the Unintelligent is of such 
a character that it is capable of being got rid 
of at a certain stage of evolution : otherwise 
all progress should be only an illusion. The 
soulhas been compared to water in this 
respect. Water changes in colour and value 
with the nature of the land on which it flows, 
although by itself it is pure as it drops from 
the clouds. The soul is by itself an in- 
telligent being but a peculiar trait of it is that 
it becomes one with what it contacts. This 
shows that it cannot be its own master. 
Hence it follows that all souls must each have 
a master, and since the orderly development 
and involution of the universe wherein souls 
have to work out their salvation requires the 
presence of a single master, God is the one 
grand leader of all the souls that exist, as 
well as of the Universe. Though God and the 
soul are both intelligent beings, they are not 
homogeneous because it is clear that the 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 33 


nature of Divine Intelligence is fundamentally 
distinct from that of the soul. God is always 
the leader and the soul is always led by Him, 
Hence souls are uncreated intelligent entities 
not originating from God, and though im- 
mortal like Him, ever requiring His guidance 
and control, God knows everything Him- 
self, but the soul requires His heip at every 
step of its knowing or doing. God is to the 
soul what the sunlight is to the eye. While 
the soul can see if made to see, the Un- 
intelligent can never be made to do so, 
Although God is its real guide, the soul 
cannot realise that fact so long as it 
is inclined to and bound up with the un- 
intelligent. Not only is the soul subject to 
limitation by the unintelligent, but when it is 
ignorant of God, it takes delight therein, or is 
at least against its dissociation from it. The 
inclination of the soul to the unintelligent is 
its weakness that has rendered it blind to its 
own real nature and the nature of its Master. 
This renders it finite and is the source of all 
evil. It is neither inherent in the soul nor 
given by the Almighty. It is called Sirumai 
in Tamil and Anavam in Sanskrit. The one 


34 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


purpose of creation is to redeem the soul 
from this its inclination and ignorance by 
helping it to turn away from the Unintelligent 
to the Supreme Intelligence. 

The soul is in its primeval state bent 
towards the Unintelligent and has an in- 
clination thereto—so that from eternity it 
has been just like iron in the ore. If the 
soul is purified of its evil tendency, and has 
its bent made straight and turned towards 
God, it would not return to its original 
condition, being essentially an intelligent 


entity feeling its harmony with its master, 
the self-effulgent Light of Wisdom. The 


Psyche first lies tied down to the Unintelligent 
and feels delighted in thraldom because of her 
inclination to become what she contacts. 
Directly she realises her true nature as 
distinct from the Unintelligent andturns away 
to meet her Lord, she cannot look back to her 
old way. It is in this respect that the Saiva 
Siddhanta differs from the philosophy of 
Dayananda who holds the view that after 
certain millions of years, the soul goes back 
into bondage. 


The soul has got powers of knowing, 


a 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 35 


feeling and doing. These have only a limited 
scope in its unfree condition, but become 
infinite when it is rid of the bonds of the 
Unintelligent. It should at the same time be 
borne in mind that they come into play under 
the guidance of the Divine Will. It is the 
divine will that ecnergises the mayic sub- 
stratum of the unintelligent and evolves the 
universe out of it. Bodies which are the 
tenements of the soul are all bits of the 
Universe. Hence the force of the maxim 
*Whatever is in Andam is in Pindam as well,’ 
(Andam=Universe=Macrocosm.) 
(PindameBodysMicrocosm.} 


It is God that moves the soul to know, 
feel and do. This we may call the energising 
of the soul. For the energising of the soul 
and the universe, God’s powers must be in 
Adwaitic (two less) contact with the souls 
and the world, Just as the soul that guides 
the body is immanent in it, so too God is 
immanent in the universe in such a manner 
that His intelligence and activity are in- 
distinguishably at the back of the whole 
creation, In like manner as the light of the 


36 THE METAPHYSICS OF THE 


sun mingles with the light of the eye to make 
things visible to us, the powers of God are 
in adwaitic contact with those of the soul for 
purposes of guidance and control. This is 
the meaning of the Shastric dictum that God 
is Adwaitic with the world. The saying does 
not imply God’s identity with the world itself, 
so as to lead to the mistaken inference that 
God Himseli is the world in another form, 
For this reason, it is said that the Saiva 
Siddhanta is the true Adwaitic system, and 
not any other. God, the sou! and the world 
are in Adwaitic contact with ome another 
bet God’s contact is free an! arises 
from His self-less love for the souls. God 
is back of the soul which in its unfree 
condition is turned towards the world and 
knows little of God. If the soul loses its 
grasp of the world and turns back, it falls 
into God and is led by Him ever after, 
Although God is immanent in the world. 
He is the free agent of it and is not bound 
down thereto. At the same time, He is by 
himself transcendental as well. Passing into 
the transcendental aspect of God where the 
freed soul enjoys perfect union with the 


SAIVA SIDDHANTA SYSTEM 3 


guiding Intelligence is the final goal of 
salvation in the Siddhanta System. This is 
the far-off event to which the whole creation 
moves and the evolution of the universe by 
God’s Sakti is for the benefit of the soul. 
God's Grace or Sakti or Love is the con- 
necting link that relates God to the souls and 
the universe. It is the mysterious Divine 
force that maintains the harmony of all that 
exist. 
eGage GemisCarr® omrag eggs Cgapa 
SHY oar sor por srerenR erhsk 
SEG ojurha Quaeré srarg Loré@srox Ser 
uGeaG aWGE QserCn uréBer ais oroanGp. 
(Aagrer@ gs Gun) 
His form is Love. His attributes are Love. 
His action is Love. His limbs are Love. 
His tissues are Love. 
All self-less Love of His for the good of souls. 
“KaGohi Ooi Ae. Gate wots BL. 
LGet ops Rat urf wane Ae 
LGarer arias srry gle 
ugear@ner ot ® .wsibyss s7Cor.” 
(AG 25 82-1800) 
Born in Love, Grown in Love, Lost in Love. 
Hid in Love, Suckled with pure Bliss of Love, 
My heart He did enter by Love alone. 


38 


Thus while there are three ultimate 
entities God, soul and the unintelligent root 
of matter or Maya,  substantiai - distinct 
from cne another, God’s Sakti or j ove (i.e, 
Arul) preserves their harmony in a’ Adwaitic 
fashion. This is in brief the gist of the 
Saiva Siddhanta Metaphysics. 


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR 
ie 
A. Note on the Hindu Religious Rs. As. 
Endowments’ Bill 0 8 
A. Short Sketch of the Hindu 
Religions 0 2 


Law. 
Principles of Criminology 2 «(0 
Lectures on the Indian Penal 
Code 6 60 


Can he had of:— 
The S. 1. S. 8. W. P. Society, Tinnevelly Ltd., 
6, Coral Merchant Street, 
MADRAS. 


ENGLISH BOOKS FOR SALE. 


Essentials of Hinduism 
by Jaffna, S. Sabaratna Mudaliar 


The Tamil Mystic Alphabet & Its Chart 
by P, V. Manickanaicker B. E, 
~ Auvaiyar in English 
by C, Sri-Kanta 
Ravana The Great, King of Lanka 
Wrapper Re. 0 12 Calico 
The Age of Gnanasambandhar 
by Prof. P. Sundram Pillai, M. A. 
Pope’s Tiruvachakam in English 
Pope's Naladiar in English 
English English Dictionary (Oxford)  * 
Do. Gem. Dictionary (Pocket) 
A Few Hymns of Manickavachaka and 
Tayumanavar in English 
by G. U. Pope, M, A. 
St. Tayumanavar in English 
by R, S. Subramanyam 
Tiruvunthiar in English 
Pope’s Manimekhalai in English 


ooo 


Can be had of :— 


The S. I. Saiva Siddhanta Society, Ltd., 
6, Coral Merchant St., Madras 


HEAD OFFICE :--TINNEVELLY. 


C, M. & Sons, Madras. 


i oO oe 


CoD Mm aH 


