===== Internet Archive OCR: mysticsasceticss00oman_djvu.txt =====

ma 

If 

^^ 


BKHHiyiilHilliiH : 


illHiiiifJiisHili 


mmr 


mm 


<Hiife»fi: 


LIBRARY  OF 
WELLESLEY  COLLEGE 


PRESENTED  BY 

Lucy  E.   Trli»^ 


THE    MYSTICS,   ASCETICS,   AND 
SAINTS    OF    INDIA 


BOOKS   ON   INDIA  AND   TIBET. 


SAND-BURIED   RUINS  OF   KHOTAN.     By  M. 

AuREL  Stein,  Indian  Educational  Service.  With  over  120 
Illustrations  and  a  Photogravure  Frontispiece  and  large  Map. 
Medium  8vo,  cloth,  21s.  net. 

CLIMBING  AND  EXPLORATION  IN  THE 
KARAKORAM  HIMALAYAS.  By  Sir  William  Martin 
Conway.  With  300  Illustrations  by  A.  D.  M'Cokmick,  and 
with  Maps.     One  Vol.  super  royal  8vo,  cloth,  31s.  6d.  net. 

IN  THE  ICE  WORLD  OF  HIMALAYA.  By 
Fannv  Bullock  Workman  and  William  Hunter 
Workman.  With  4  large  Maps,  and  nearly  100  Illustra- 
tions.    Demy  8vo,  cloth,  16s.  ;  also  a  6s.  Edition. 

THROUGH    UNKNOWN    TIBET.      By   Captain 

M.  S.  Wellby.  With  Photogravure  and  many  other  Illus- 
trations, also  Maps  and  Appendices  of  Flora.  Medium  8vo, 
cloth  gilt,  21s. 

IN  TIBET  AND  CHINESE  TURKESTAN.    Being 

the  Record  of  Three  Years'  Exploration.  By  Captain  H.  H. 
P.  Deasy.  With  Appendices,  Maps,  and  80  Illustrations. 
Demy  8vo,  cloth,  21s.  net ;  also  a  Cheap  Edition,  6s.  net. 

INDIAN  LIFE,  RELIGIOUS  AND  SOCIAL.     By 

Professor  John  Campbell  Oman.     Crown  Svo,  cloth,  6s. 

In    the    "STORY    OF    THE    NATIONS"    Series, 

each  Vol.  large  crown  Svo,  cloth,  with  many  Illustrations,  5s. 

VEDIC  INDIA.     By  Zenaide  A.  Ragozin. 
BUDDHIST  INDIA.     By  Professor  Rhys  Davids. 

MEDIEVAL   INDIA  UNDER   MOHAMMEDAN 

RULE  (a.d.  712-1764).  By  Professor  Stanley  Lane- 
Poole. 

BRITISH  INDIA.     By  R.  W.  Frazer. 


London  :  T.   FISHER   UNW^IN. 


-n 


CO 

< 


I— I 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS, 
AND   SAINTS   OF   INDIA 

A  Study  of  Sadhuism,  with  an  Account  of  the  TogiSy 
Sanyasis^  Bairagis^  and  other  strange  Hindu  Sectarians 


BY 


JOHN   CAMPBELL   OMAN  \ 

FORMERLY  PROFESSOR  OF  NATURAL  SCIENCE  IN  THE  GOVERNMENT  COLLEGE,  LAHORE  ' 

AUTHOR    OF  1 

"INDIAN    LIFE,    RELIGIOUS    AND    SOCIAL"    "  THE    GREAT    INDIAN    EPICS  "  j 

"where    three    CREEDS    MEET  "    ETC.  I 


WITH  ILLUSTRATIONS  BT 
WILLIAM  CAMPBELL   OMAN,  A.R.I.B.A. 


SECOND    IMPRESSION  \ 


LONDON 

T.     FISHER      UNWIN 

PATERNOSTER    SQUARE 
1905 


All  FiiUs  Rtstrvtd]  J 


19 


Biologists  teach  tliat  the  body  i-'ofje very  human  being|is 
an  aggregation  of  various  and  innumerable  protoplasmic 
cells  which  are  ever  undergoing  changes,  constructive  and 
destructive.  And  yet  we  can  plainly  see  that  each  man, 
though  perceptibly  changing  with  the  passing  years,  per- 
sistently retains  to  the  end  a  marked  individuality,  together 
with  corporeal  and  mental  characteristics  peculiarly  his 
own.  So,  too,  is  it  with  each  race  of  men  and  the 
comparatively  short-lived  units  of  which  it  is  made  up. 
Of  the  latter,  some  are,  at  every  moment  of  time,  passing 
away  and  giving  place  to  newer  and  slightly  modified 
ones ;  but  the  race  as  a  whole,  though  thus  steadily 
undergoing  mutation — perhaps  suffering  decay — with  the 
fleeting  centuries,  still  holds  fast  certain  physical  and 
psychological  traits,  its  special  heritage  and  possession, 
wliich  have  in  the  past  differentiated  it  from  all  other 
races,  and  will  continue  to  do  so  as  long  as  it  enjoys  a 
separate  existence. 

Thus  it  happens  that  every  distinct  ethnic  division  of 
the   world's   population   has  its   own   peculiar  ideals   and 


PREFACE 

aspirations,  its  own  philosophy  and  religion,  and  also  its 
own  intellectual  and  moral  limitations. 

Obviously,  then,  nothing  can  be  more  helpful  for  the 
comprehension  of  the  history,  condition,  and  prospects  of 
any  people  than  the  discovery  and  recognition  of  those 
salient  and  persistent  habits,  mental  peculiarities  and 
tendencies,  which  it  has  uninterruptedly  exhibited  through 
a  long  period  of  time. 

Now  the  study  of  Indian  Asceticism  and  Mysticism 
affords,  I  believe,  not  only  an  admirable,  but  the  very 
best  means  of  obtaining  such  desirable  information  in 
regard  to  the  great  Hindu  race.  T  hope,  therefore,  that 
the  present  volume,  which  is  concerned  with  the  results 
of  the  most  deep-seated  and  abiding  ideas  and  sentiments 
of  the  Indian  people,  may,  notwithstanding  its  necessary 
imperfections,  meet  with  appreciation  in  some  quarters  at 
least,  and  help  to  interpret  the  people  of  India  to  that 
section  of  the  English  public  which  is,  more  or  less, 
interested  in  a  little  -  understood  but  most  fascinating 
land,  with  whose  fortunes  are  irrevocably  linked,  for  good 
or  evil,  the  destinies  of  Great  Britain  and  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  race. 

At  the  threshold  I  ought  to  explain  that  a  description 
of  the  peculiarities  and  minor  differences  of  the  innumer- 
able Hindu  ascetic  sects  and  sub -sects  has  not  entered 
into  my  plan,  though  all  the  more  important  sectarian 
divisions  have  been  noticed,  and  such  details  as  seemed 
essential  for  the  comprehension  of  the  whole  subject  have 
not  been  omitted. 

A  great  many  curious  myths,  legends,  and  stories 
about  ascetics  of  various  sects  have  been  included  in  this 
volume  ;  but  I  make  no  apology  on  this  account,  because 
such  myths  and  stories  reveal,  far  better  than  any  disserta- 
tions could  possibly  do,  the  true  nature  of  Indian  asceticism. 

vi 


PREFACE 

as  well  as  the  intellectual  level  and  ethical  ideals  of  the 
Hindus  from  times  immemorial. 

A  word  as  to  the  plan  of  the  book  may  perhaps 
be  acceptable.  In  the  first  place,  I  should  state  that 
throughout  this  volume  the  word  sadhu  stands  as  a 
general  name  for  any  Hindu  ascetic,  monk,  or  religious 
mendicant,  without  reference  to  sect  or  order ;  and  faquir 
as  the  corresponding  term  for  ascetics,  etc.,  who  profess 
Islam.  The  earlier  chapters  (I.  to  IV.)  are  designed  to 
acquaint  the  reader  with  the  leading  or  root  ideas  of 
Indian  asceticism,  or  sadhuism  as  I  call  it,  and  to 
introduce  him  to  the  sadhus  themselves  as  they  appear 
at  the  present  day.  Old  Indian  dramas  and  tales  and 
the  accounts  of  European  travellers  are  drawn  upon  in 
Chapters  V.  and  VI.,  to  show  that  sadhuism  has  been  an 
ancient  and  persistent  feature  of  Indian  life.  And  as 
Hindu  asceticism  is  not  to  be  understood  without  some 
knowledge  of  the  principles  which  underlie  the  philosophico- 
religious  ideas  of  the  Brahmans,  these  are  succinctly  ex- 
plained in  Chapter  VII.,  and  supplemented  with  a  brief 
summary  of  the  modifications  which  Hinduism  has  under- 
gone in  the  progress  of  its  development  through  more  than 
a  thousand  years. 

In  Chapter  VIII.  the  principal  ascetic  sects  and  their 
subdivisions  are  described,  the  Yogis,  commonly  called  jogis, 
and  the  yoga  system  receiving  especial  attention.  In 
Chapters  IX.  to  XI.  the  reader  is  taken  into  the  company 
of  many  sadhus  I  have  known,  and  within  the  precincts  of 
a  few  of  the  monasteries  I  have  visited.  Probably  these 
last-named  chapters  may  help  to  bring  European  readers 
into  actual  touch,  as  it  were,  with  sadhuism  as  it  exists 
to-day ;  and,  if  so,  I  shall  not  regret  the  time  and  the 
trouble,  by  no  means  inconsiderable,  involved  in  collecting 
the  particulars  which  I  have  embodied  in  them. 

vii 


PREFACE 

The  concluding  chapter  is  devoted  to  general  observa- 
tions upon  the  past  effects,  present  state,  and  future 
prospects  of  sadhuism. 

For  all  the  illustrations  and  for  many  of  the  photo- 
graphs reproduced  in  this  volume  I  am  indebted  to  my 

son.  Mr.  William  Campbell  Oman. 

J,  C.  0. 

London. 


1 

i' 

I 


viii 


ll 


CONTENTS 

I 
PAGK  i 

1 

Pkeface  ..••..««         V  I 

'( 
I 

INTRODUCTION  ■ 

Early  Recollections  of  Sadhus  and  Faquirs  —  They  are  and  have  | 

always  been  conspicuous  Figures  in  India — May  be  seen  every- 
where wandering  over  Plain  and  Mountain,  through  Cities  and  ' 
Jungles — Neither  understood  nor  appreciated  by  Europeans —  • 
They  are  of  various  Sects,  hold  peculiar  Opinions,  and  indulge  in  j 
strange  Practices — The  very  Spirit  of  the  East  is  embodied  in  the  j 
Sadhu         ......••! 


CHAPTER  I 

ASCETICISM  :    ITS    ORIGIN    AND    DEVELOPMENT 


Asceticism  a  common  Feature  in  all  Religions  —  Ideas  underlying 
Asceticism — Sinfulness — The  Doctrine  that  Matter  is  inherently 
bad — The  Belief  that  the  Human  Body  is  the  great  Hindrance 
to  the  Attainment  by  the  Soul  of  its  proper  Destiny — Ascetic 
Practices,  and  the  Conditions,  geographical,  political,  and  social, 
which  are  most  favourable  to  their  adoption  by  a  large  propor- 
tion of  any  Community — The  Existence  of  such  Conditions  in 
India  from  the  earliest  up  to  recent  times .... 

CHAPTER  II 

SOME   PECULIAR   AND    DISTINCTIVE    CHARACTERISTICS   OF 

HINDU   ASCETICISM  -. 

Hindu  Idea  of  the  unbounded  Power  over  Nature  attainable  through 
Ascetic  Practices — The  Rationale  of  this  Notion — Examples  of 
Power  acquired  by  Asceticism  cited  from  the  Mahabharata,  the 
Ramayana,  the  Siva  Purana,  and  the  Vishnu  Purana  —  Th© 
Supreme  Being  Himself  practises  Austerities — Rivalry  of  Sects 
gives  rise  to  Legends  of  Conflicts,  based  on  successful  Ascetic 
Practices  between  rival  Leaders — Titanic  Conflict  between  Va- 
ehishta  and  Visvamitra,  also  between  Nanak  and  the  Siddhas — 


Hindu  Asceticism  has  usually  no  relation  to  Ethics         .  .       18  i 

ix 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  III 

SADHUS    BEFORE   THE   PUBLIC   AT   FAIRS    AND    ELSEWHERE 


PAGE 


"^  Sadhus  as  seen  at  Fairs — Their  Dress — Sect  Marks  and  their  Explana- 

tion—  Hairdressing  —  Rosaries — Various  Ornaments  and  their 
Significance  —  Sadhus'  Alms-bowls,  Tongs,  Arm-rests,  Charas- 
pipes,  Bhang-mortars,  etc. — Hermitages — Ascetic  Practices  of 
various  Kinds  and  Degrees — IMinor  Asceticisms — Posturings — 
Strange  Purificatory  Rites  .  .  .  .  .36 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE   WONDERS   THAT   PRESENT-DAY   SADHUS   AND   FAQUIRS 
ARE    SAID    TO    PERFORM 

Visionists  like  the  Sanyasi  Ramakrishna — Sadhus  to  some  extent  what 
the  Magicians  and  Necromancers  have  elsewhere  been — Tales  and 
Anecdotes  of  the  Wonders  performed  by  Sadhus  and  of  Calamities 
brought  on  or  averted  by  them — Transmutation  of  Metals  by 
Sadhus — Story  of  Muslim  Thaumaturgist  who  was  the  Disciple  of 
a  Sadhu — Claims  of  Superiority  over  Sadhus  made  by  Faquirs — 
Strange  Treatment  of  a  Faquir  by  a  co-Religionist — Sadhus  as 
Physicians,  Palmists,  Fortune-tellers,  and  Acrobats         .  .       52 


CHAPTER  V 

SOME   GLIMPSES   OF   SADHUS   IN   INDIAN   FICTION 

Eight  Stories  from  famous  Sanskrit  Dramas  and  other  Sources : 
(1)  Sakoontala  ;  (2)  Malati  and  Madhava  ;  (3)  Disillusionment ; 
(4)  The  Horned  Rishi ;  (5)  The  lost  Son  restored  ;  (6)  A  Kind- 
hearted  Lady  ;  (7)  The  Father  duped  ;  (8)  Woman's  Cunning    .       68 


CHAPTER  VI 

SADHUS   AS    DESCRIBED   BY   SOME   EUROPEAN    VISITORS   10    INDIA 

Greek  and  Roman  Accounts  of  Sadhus  and  their  Practices — Observa- 
tions regarding  Sadhus  and  their  Peculiarities  recorded  in  the 
Works  of  the  Jeweller  Tavernier,  the  Physician  Bernier,  the 
"  Senior  Merchant  "  James  Forbes,  the  Missionary  Ward,  Colonel 
Sleeman,  and  Bishop  Heber         .  .  .  .  .92 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  VII 

A  VIEW  OF  THE  SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM  AND 
OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  MORE  IMPORTANT  HINDU  SECTS,  IN 
RELATION   TO   THE    DEVELOPMENT   OF   SADHUISM   IN   INDIA 


PAGE 


Section  I. — Some  fundamental  Doctrines  of  Hindu  Theology  :  My  a 

— Pantheism — Metempsychosis — Karma  ....     105 


CHAPTER  YlI~continued 

Section  II. — Modern  Hinduism — Principal  Divisions— The  Sivite 
Reformer,  Sankara  Acharya — His  Crusade  against  Buddhism — 
Sakti  Worship — Mahmoud  of  Guzni's  successful  Invasion  of  India 
— Islam  a  stimulating  Factor  in  the  Origination  of  new  and  rival 
Siva  and  Vishnu  Sects — The  Puranas — Ramanuja's  Campaign 
against  Sivaism — Basava  and  his  Doctrines — Krishna  Worship 
preached  by  Madhavacharya — His  Theological  Views — Rama- 
nand  preaches  at  Benares  the  Worship  of  Rama  and  Sita — 
Tendency  towards  Anthropomorphism  in  the  later  Sects         .     109 


CHAPTER  YII— continued 

Section  III. — Modern  Democratic  Reformers — Kabir,  his  peculiar 
and  important  position  as  a  Reformer — Vallabhacharya  sets  up 
the  Worship  of  Krishna  as  Bala  Gopala— Chaitanya  the  Mystic 
preaches  the  Worship  of  Krishna  cicm  Radha — Baba  Nanak  and 
his  Teaching — The  Sikhs — Dadu  and  his  Sect — Ram  Cham  and 
the  Ram  Sanehis  founded  by  him — The  Rajput  Princess  Mirabai 
a  Devotee  of  Krishna — The  Trend  of  Latter-day  Hinduism — Brief 
Summary   .  ...  .  .  .  .  .     122 


CHAPTER  VIII  j 

! 

HINDU   ASCETIC   SECTS  AND  THEIR   SUBDIVISIONS  | 

i 

Section  I. — Introductory  Remarks — The  Multiplicity  of  Hindu  Sects  '> 

by  no  means  Abnormal — Jain  Monks  or  Yatis  interviewed — Their  ; 

Opinions  and  Habits  .  .  .  .  .  .142  • 

I 

i 

CHAPTER  Ylll^continued  ^ 

Section  II.— Principal  Hindu  Sects  :  Saivas,  Vaishnavas,  and  Sikhs 
— Particulars  regarding  Sanyasis,  Dandis,  Paramahansas,  Brah- 
macharis,  Lingaits,  and  Aghoris    .  .  .  .  .152  \ 

xi  I 

i 


,1 


CONTENTS 


CRATTERIYIII— continued 


PAOE 


Section  III. — Yogis  and  Yoga  Vidya — Yogis  attracting  attention 
in  the  West — Philosophico-religious  Ideas  underlying  Yogaisra — 
Emancipation  of  the  Soul  the  supreme  Object  of  Hindu  religious 
Aspiration — Yoga  Vidya  teaches  how  Union  of  the  individual  Soul 
with  the  All-Spirit  may  be  accomplished — Details  and  probable 
Origin  of  the  Discipline  and  Practices  of  Y^oga  Vidya — The  Pre- 
tensions of  the  modern  Yogis — History,  Customs,  and  Rules  of 
the  Yogi  Sect        .......     108 


CHAPTEPv  YIU— continued 

Section  IV. — Vaishnava  Sects  :  Sri  Vaishnavas,  Madhavas,  Raman- 

andis,  Kabir  Panthis,  Ballavacharyas,  and  Chaitanites  .  .     187 


CHAPTER  Mill— continued 
Section  V. — Three  Sikh  Mendicant  Orders:  Udasis,  Nirmalis,  Akalis     194 

CHAPTER  IX 

PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS,  GOOD  AND  BAD 

1.  The  Swinging  Bairagi.  2.  The  Sauyasi  Swami  Bhaskarananda  of 
Benares.  3.  Gareeb  Das,  an  Urdhabahu  Bairagi.  4.  A  Yogi  who 
protected  Amritsar  from  the  Plague.  5.  A  Brahmachari  from  the 
Tamil  Country.    6.  A  Sadhu  of  European  Descent  at  Simla.    7.  A 

Naked  Sanyasi  and  his  Companion,  a  Princess  of  B .     8.  A 

Sadhu  of  Royal  Lineage,  Prince  Bir  Bhanu  Singh.  9.  A  Sadhu 
who  had  found  God.  10.  A  Sun-worshipping  Bairagi.  11.  Yogis 
and  Pious  Women.  12.  A  pseudo-Sadhu  and  his  Adventures. 
13.  Yogi  Guests.  14.  A  Sadhu  as  Restaurateur.  15.  A  Saint  in 
Chains        ........     202 

CHAPTER  X 

SOME    SADHVIS   OR   VBMALB    DBVOTESl 

1.  A  public  Lecturer,  Srimati  Pandita  Mai  Jivan  Mukut.  2.  Shri  Maji, 
the  Recluse  of  Annandgupha.     3.  Premi,  a  young  Sadhvi  who 
embraced  Christianity       ......     242 

xii 


CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  XI 

HINDU  MONASTERIES 


PAGE 


Monasteries  have  existed  in  India  since  the  earliest  times,  and  are  at 
present  to  be  found  scattered  all  over  the  Country — Religious  and 
Worldly  Motives  which  prompt  the  Foundation  of  Monasteries 
— Management  of  Monastic  Properties — Monks  not  expected  to 
labour  in  anyway — Installation  of  an  Abbot  described — A  Visit  to 
the  Udasi  Akhara  of  Santokh  Das;  the  Presence  of  Women  toler- 
ated there — the  Treasures  of  the  place  and  their  History — Respect 
entertained  by  the  Sect  for  Ashes — Interview  with  another  Abbot 
who  had  not  a  single  good  word  for  Sadhus — Visit  to  a  Dharmsala 
of  the  Nirmali  Sect ;  Sanskrit  Literature  read  and  expounded 
there — The  great  Monastery  at  Jogi  Tilla ;  Interview  with  the 
Abbot ;  meet  some  Acquaintances — A  romantic  Story  associated 
with  Tilla — Particulars  about  certain  places  of  Pilgrimage  com- 
mimicated  by  a  talkative  itinerant  Yogi — Sadhus'  Partiality  for 
Nudity        ........     248 


CHAPTER  XII 

CONCLUSION 

National  Ideals  of  Life  as  indications  of  National  Character — Euro- 
pean and  American  Ideals  contrasted  with  that  of  India — A  Life 
involving  Renunciation  regarded  by  the  Hindus  as  the  only 
possible  Holy  Life — Sadhuism  in  its  Religious,  Social,  Political, 
Intellectual,  and  Industrial  Aspects — The  probable  Future  of 
Sadhuism  considered         ......     270 


Index  ..,,,...    285 


xiu 


jj 

g 


LIST   OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 


FIG. 


Hindu  Ascetics.           ..... 

Frontispiece 

1. 

A  Bairagi  and  his  Hermitage           .            .            Facing  page  42 

2. 

Sadhus  at  Home           .           .           . 

ff 

44 

3. 

An  Urdhamtjkhi  Sadhxj            .... 

»» 

46 

4. 

Faqttir  weighted  with  heavy  Chains 

»» 

48 

5. 

Sadhus  in  various  prescribed  Postures     . 

*» 

60 

6. 

Hindu  Ascetics  undergoing  Austerities.     Repro- 

duction OF  AN  Old  It.TiUstration  . 

»» 

94 

7. 

A  Solitary        ...... 

j> 

100 

8. 

Procession  in  Honour  of  the  Veiling  of  a  Jain 

Nun      ....... 

»> 

150 

9. 

Sanyasis  at  a  Religious  Gathering 

ff 

154 

10. 

A  Yogi  from  Mirzapur            .... 

j> 

186 

11. 

The  Sanyasi  Bhaskarananda  of  Benares  . 

>> 

210 

12. 

A  Sadhu  of  European  Descent 

>> 

222 

13. 

A  Sanyasi  and  a  Sanyasin  with  their  Companions 

)> 

226 

14. 

A  Sadiiu  of  Princely  Lineage 

>> 

228 

15. 

A  Sun -Worshipping  Bairagi  .... 

»» 

232 

16. 

The  Sadhvi  Srimati  Pandita  Mai  Jivan  Mukut     . 

>> 

244 

17. 

The  Monastery  of  Jogi  Tilla          .     -      . 

»» 

266 

18. 

Graves    of   Yogi   Mahants  at    Bhairon-ka-Than, 

NEAR  Lahore             ..... 

f> 

268 

XV 


THE    MYSTICS,    ASCETICS,    AND 
SAINTS    OF    INDIA 


•s. 


'^ 


Early  Recollections  of  Sadhus  and  Faquirs — They 
are  and  have  always  been  conspicuous  Figures 
in  India — May  be  seen  everywhere  wandering 
over  Plain  and  Mountain,  through  Cities  and 
Jungles — Neither  understood  nor  appreciated 
by  Europeans — They  are  of  various  Sects, 
hold  peculiar  Opinions,  and  indulge  in  strange 
Practices — The  very  Spirit  of  the  East  is 
embodied  in  the  Sadhu. 


Lingering  in  the  far  background  of  my  memory  is  a  vivid 
picture  of  certain  sadhus,  and  of  a  winter  evening  long 
years  ago  on  the  banks  of  the  sacred  Ganges — a  picture 
which  the  lapse  of  over  half  a  century  has  not  been  able 
to  dim,   much  less  to  obliterate. 

Clear  though  the  picture  is,  I  ^  almost  fail  at  this 
distance  of  time  to  fully  identify  myself  with  it,  and  yet 
I  certainly  took  part  in  the  little  episode  which  is 
enshrined  in  my  recollections.  With  the  mind's  eye  I 
see  two  children,  a  girl  and  a  boy,  rambling  hand  in 
hand  at  some  distance  from  their  dear  old  home  hard  by 
the  sunny  hills  of  Colgong,  and  as  they  wander  back 
together    through    the    fields    in    the    quickly    deepening 

A  I 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

twilight  a  feeling  of  trepidation  seems  to  take  possession 
of  them,  for,  infants  though  thev  are,  they  know  full 
well  that  murderous  thuqs  ^ — a  fearsome  name  in  those 
days — ^infested  the  countryside.  Their  eyes  strain  with 
anxiety  towards  the  dim  outlines  of  a  gigantic  banian 
tree  which  serves  them  as  a  homeward  landmark ;  but 
it  seems  very  far  away,  and  even  receding,  as  a  thin 
veil  of  white  smoke  steals  gradually  over  the  landscape 
in  the  rapidly  failing  twilight.  Suddenly  two  gaunt 
sadhus  appear  not  ten  yards  off  before  the  astonished 
children.  So  unexpected  is  their  presence,  so  unaccount- 
able the  apparition,  that  it  was  as  if  the  unwelcome 
intruders  had  sprung  up  out  of  the  ground  beneath  their 
own  feet.  Clothed  in  salmon-coloured  robes  are  these 
meagre,  sharp -featured  sadhus,  with  clean-shaven  heads 
and  faces.  They  advance,  and  with  soft  words  and 
insinuating  smiles  endeavour  to  entice  the  startled 
children  to  approach  them,  offering,  ^vith  various  alluring 
promises,  to  show  them  the  wonderful  contents  of  the 
ugly  wallets  which  hang  from  their  shoulders.  Good 
Lord  !  how  the  little  boy  and  girl  did  race  towards  the 
river  when  all  at  once  there  flashed  upon  their  minds  the 
horrible  suspicion  that  the  men  before  them  might  possibly 
be  villainous  thugs  disguised  as  sadhus !  How  rejoiced 
were  the  children  to  find  themselves  at  last  safe  amongst 
the  wondering  and  sympathetic  boatmen  on  the  river 
bank,  after  a  breathless  run  across  country,  and  after 
what  seemed  a  hot  pursuit,  though  probably  it  was  so 
only  in  their  own  excited  imaginations ! 

Belonging  to  the  same  early  period  of  my  life  I  recol- 
lect well  the  highly  picturesque  rocks  of  Colgong,  standing 
like  bold  intruders  in  the  noble  river,  with  the  faqui/s 
lone  hermitage  perched  amidst  their  gigantic  boulders. 
Many  tales  of  wonder  were  told  of  the  recluse  who  dwelt 
amongst  those  crags  ;  and  when  every  year,  in  due  season, 
the  rocks  and  the  hermitage  were  completely  cut  off  from 
the  river  bank  by  the  mighty  flood,  roaring,  fretting,  and 

^  The  thiigs  are  a  secret  sect,  votaries  of  the  goddess  Kali,  banded 
together  for  the  purpose  of  robbery  by  means  of  cold-blooded  assassinations 
perpetrated  with  religious  rites  and  under  religious  sanctions. 

2 


i 


INTRODUCTION 

swirling  around  the  unwelcome  barrier,  the  one  inhabitant 
of  those  desolate  islands,  the  isolated  faquify  the  solitary 
wonder-worker,  would  become  to  us  little  folks  an  interest- 
ing subject  of  solicitude  and  childish  speculation. 

Out  of  that  old  India,  so  difierent,  so  remote  in  every 
way  from  the  playground  of  the  present-day  winter  tourist, 
1  recall  to  mind  a  long  journey  by  palanquin  ddJc,  a  halt 
under  some  shady  trees  in  a  straggling  thatched  village, 
an  apparently  dpng  infant  in  my  mother's  arms,  and  a 
white-bearded  faquir  with  many  strings  of  beads  about 
his  neck,  offering  some  medicine,  contained  in  a  mussel- 
shell,  which,  with  Allah's  blessing,  would  save  the  child's 
life.  I  recall  to  mind  also  how  some  hours  later  the 
venerable  old  man,  respectfully  but  firmly,  declined  a 
handful  of  rupees,  and,  indeed,  any  reward  whatever,  for 
the  help  which  Allah  had  graciously  enabled  him  to  afford 
the  distressed  mother  and  her  sick  infant. 

Ever  since  those  now  far-off  days  the  Indian  ascetics 
have  been  to  me  objects  of  special  curiosity  and  interest, 
not  diminished  in  maturer  years  by  more  extensive  know- 
ledge of  them  and  their  strange  beliefs,  practices,  and 
pretensions. 

Sadhus  are  and  have  always  been  too  conspicuous 
figures  in  India  to  escape  the  notice  of  any  intelligent 
European  traveller  in  that  country — from  Megasthenes 
to  Mark  Twain  and  Pierre  Loti — and  their  accentuated 
outward  peculiarities  have  proved  so  attractive  to  the 
ubiquitous  modern  camera-man  that  his  photographs  and 
snapshots  reproduced  in  popular  pictorial  magazines  have 
made  them,  at  least  in  their  more  uncouth  forms,  familiar 
to  the  Western  world. 

Wherever  at  the  present  time  the  tourist  in  India 
may  go,  he  meets  sadhus  and  faquirs  in  the  guise  of  one 
or  other  of  the  many  existing  sects,  orders,  or  fraternities. 
He  comes  across  them  in  the  busy  mart,  in  the  quiet  grove 
by  the  river,  in  the  gay  and  crowded  fair,  on  the  lonely 
hill  track,  and  in  the  dense  forests,  where  many  perish 
miserably,  devoured  by  wild  beasts.  Indefatigable  rovers, 
they  usually  do  not  linger  long  in  any  one  place,  but  are 
ever  on  the  move,  like  their  gipsy  kindred  in  the  West. 

3 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS   OF   INDIA 

From  about  November,  when  the  autumn  harvest 
is  gathered  and  the  seed  for  the  spring  crop  committed 
to  the  soil,  till  March,  when  the  first-fruits  of  the  year 
are  ready  for  the  sickle,  the  Hindus — men,  women,  and 
children — spend  much  of  their  time  in  joyous  pilgrimages 
to  their  innumerable  sacred  places,  sometimes  hundreds 
of  miles  away  from  home.  Hardly,  indeed,  could  it  be 
otherwise,  for  a  cloudless  sky,  a  crisp  exhilarating  atmo- 
sphere, and  bright  genial  sunshine  call  them  forth  with 
a  summons  that  is  irresistible.  During  this  period  every 
year  there  is  a  lively  and  healthy  circulation  throughout 
the  land  of  all  ranks  and  classes,  and  in  these  currents  of 
life  a  large  proportion  of  the  sadhus  fully  participate, 
often  moving  about  from  place  to  place  in  considerable 
parties  under  leaders  and  teachers  of  reputation.  And 
far  beyond  the  boundaries  of  their  own  vast  country  do 
the  Hindu  ascetics  wander,  as  indeed  they  have  done 
since  remote  antiquity,  carrying  to  distant  lands  their 
subtle  speculations  about  the  origin,  nature,  and  destiny  of 
man  and  the  universe  to  which  he  belongs. 

As  a  rule  sadhus  are  cautiously  reticent,  but  they  may 
occasionally  be  induced  to  tell  of  long  wanderings  and 
strange  experiences.  I  have  met  some  of  them  in  Kashmir 
on  their  way  from  Puri  by  the  Bay  of  Bengal  to  the  lone 
ice-caves  of  Amarnath,  and  it  need  not  be  doubted  that 
men  who  range  the  whole  Indian  Peninsula,  as  these  do, 
and  wander  over  the  eternal  snows  of  Himalaya,  find 
food  for  lofty  thought  and  deep  emotion  in  the  mystery 
and  grandeur  of  the  scenes  which  often  meet  their  gaze. 
Indian  poets  early  appreciated  the  aesthetic  charms  of 
nature  and  the  soothing  calm  of  solitude  ;  and  we  may 
be  sure  that  even  the  unsocial  sadhu  in  his  journeyings 
amongst  the  giant  mountains  looks  with  wondering 
admiration  upon  the  vagueness  and  inscrutability  of  their 
wayward  moods,  their  vast  silent  snowfields,  their  whisper- 
ing rills,  and  furious  torrents.  It  is  impossible  for  any 
man  not  to  experience  an  indefinable  feeling  of  elation,  of 
buoyancy,  as  he  breathes  the  pure,  light,  pine-scented  air 
of  the  higher  mountain  ranges,  and  watches  the  rising  sun 
paint  with  rosy  flush  the  icy  pinnacles  around  him  ;  nor 

4 


INTRODUCTION 

can  lie  avoid  a  weird  sense  of  complete  isolation  and  utter 
helplessness  when  the  cloud-wreaths,  surging  up  from  the 
valleys,  blur  and  blot  out  the  fair  world  from  view  and 
wrap  surrounding  nature  in  a  pall  impenetrable  to  human 
vision.  But  not  only  do  the  far-ranging  sadhus  commune 
with  Nature  in  all  her  various  humours  and  aspects,  their 
peregrinations  bring  them  also  into  touch,  in  crowded 
cities,  with  their  fellow-men,  and,  by  winning  the  confidence 
of  people  of  all  ranks,  they  become  a  potent  agency  for  the 
circulation  of  news,  true  or  false,  and  the  dissemination  of 
ideas,  religious,  political,  or  other,  which  might  be  ferment- 
ing in  the  world  with  which  they  come  in  contact. 

Yet  though  the  sadhus  as  they  may  be  seea  have  come 
to  be  familiar  to  European  eyes,  they  are  rarely  understood 
by  the  foreigner,  be  he  temporary  visitor  or  permanent 
resident.  Of  the  beliefs  and  subtle  philosophical  ideas 
of  these  men  the  stranger,  as  a  rule,  knows  nothing,  while 
their  ill-clad  forms,  and  too  often  grotesque  appearance, 
only  excite  his  aversion  and  unreasoning  contempt. 

How  much,  and  how  deeply,  the  Indian  people  have 
suffered,  for  habilitory  reasons,  in  the  estim.ation  of  Euro- 
peans it  would  be  hard  to  say ;  but  of  this  I  have  no  doubt, 
that  the  style  of  their  national  dress,  and  particularly  the 
extreme  scantiness  of  their  garments,  which  in  most 
cases  hardly  pretend  to  cover  the  persons  of  the  wearers, 
reduce  the  intellectual  and  civilised  Indians  to  the  level 
of  naked  savages  in  the  eyes  of  the  majority  of  the  people 
of  the  West.  And  the  Indian  sadhus,  frequently  all  but 
nude,  and  rubbed  over  with  ashes,  undoubtedly  incur  the 
amused  disdain  of  Europeans,  who  commonly  look  upon 
these  ascetics  as  droll  fellows  or  sorry  simpletons. 

The  sadhu,  such  as  he  is,  is  no  recent  importation,  no 
modern  excrescence,  but  has  been  ffourisliing  in  India,  a 
veritable  indigenous  growth,  from  a  time  which  dates  many 
centuries  before  the  advent  of  Christ,  or  even  the  preaching 
by  Buddha  of  the  eightfold  path  leading  to  enlightenment 
and  deliverance.  Alexander  of  Macedon,  in  his  wonderful 
march  across  the  plains  of  the  Punjab  in  the  fourth  century 
B.C.,  saw,  and  took  an  interest  in,  the  Indian  sadhu  ;  but 
sadhuism  in  his  day  was  already  hoary  v/ith  antiquity. 

5 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

Sadhus  as  we  find  them  are  of  various  sects,  hold 
peculiar  opinions,  indulge  in  strange  practices,  and  subject 
themselves  in  many  cases  to  cruel  hardships  and  fantastic 
disciplines.  They  come  from  all  ranks  of  life  and  from  all 
the  hereditary  castes  into  which  Hindu  society  is  divided. 
Amongst  them  we  find  all  shades  of  religious  opinion  and 
philosophical  speculation,  and  dietary  habits  ranging  from 
the  most  fastidious  vegetarianism  to  revolting  cannibalism 
in  the  case  of  the  egregious  aghoris  described  later  on. 

Though  exceedingly  numerous,  the  Indian  sadhus  com- 
mand the  respect  and  even  the  superstitious  veneration 
of  the  vast  multitude  of  their  countrymen,  who  believe 
that  they  are  often,  if  not  always,  possessed  of  almost 
unlimited  supernatural  power  for  good  or  evil. 

The  common  proverb,  Gervi  Kapron  se  jogi  nahln  hota, 
attests  the  fact  that  the  Indians,  quite  as  much  as  Euro- 
peans, are  well  aware  that  the  habit  does  not  make  the 
monk,  and  stories  to  the  discredit  of  the  religious  ascetics 
are  current  all  over  India ;  but  they  have  not  shaken 
the  faith  of  the  people  in  the  sadhus^  at  any  rate  not  more 
than  the  tales  about  the  gaily  immoral  behaviour  of  the 
mediaeval  monks  have  injuriously  affected  the  position  of 
the  Komish  clergy. 

In  the  ancient  legislation  of  India  the  sadhu  bulks  largely, 
and  he  has  a  unique  place  in  the  romantic  tales  of  more 
recent  date.  The  very  spirit  of  the  East  is  embodied  in 
the  sadhu,  and  it  is  perhaps  not  too  much  to  assert  that 
he  is  so  important  a  feature  in  the  life  and  civilisation  of 
India  that  a  study  of  his  characteristics  and  his  relations 
to  the  general  population  will  not  only  afford  considerable 
light  for  the  comprehension  of  the  Indian  people  as  they 
are,  and  have  been  since  the  earliest  historic  times,  but 
will  also,  perhaps,  be  found  to  have  attractions  of  an  even 
wider  and  more  general  nature. 


CHAPTER   I 


ASCETICISM  :    ITS    ORIGIN   AND    DEVELOPMENT 

Asceticism  a  common  Feature  in  all  Religions — Ideas  underlying  Asceticism 
— Sinfulness — The  Doctrine  that  Matter  is  inherently  bad — The  Belief 
that  the  Human  Body  is  the  great  Hindrance  to  the  Attainment  by  the 
Soul  of  its  proper  Destiny — Ascetic  Practices,  and  the  Conditions, 
geographical,  political,  and  social,  which  are  most  favourable  to  their 
Adoption  by  a  large  Proportion  of  any  Community — The  Existence  of 
such  Conditions  in  India  from  the  earliest  up  to  recent  Times. 


SCETICISM  is  a  common  feature  in 
all  religious  systems,  and  is  the 
practical  expression  of  certain 
definite  phases  of  religious 
sentiment  and  philosophical 
speculation.  Probably 
the  earliest  promptings 
towards  ascetic  practices 
came  from  a  desire  of 
self  -  humiliation  before 
the  Unseen  Powers,  in 
order  to  propitiate  them,  and  to  make  atonement  for 
neglected  duties,^  and,  consequently,  in  times  of  great 
national  troubles,  when  the  protecting  gods  seem  to  have 
turned  away  in  wrath,  ascetic  practices  become  more 
common,  widespread,  and  intense,  -  till  sometimes  whole 
communities  seem  to  be  smitten  by  a  mania  for  self- 
abasement,  self-imposed  hardships,  and  severe  austerities.'^ 

^  The  same  feeling  is  manifest  in  "  the  Christian  idea  of  self -sacrifice 
and  the  Christian  doctrine  that  it  is  through  such  sacrifice  that  God  reveals 
Himself  in  man." — Caird's  Evolution  of  Religion,  vol.  ii.  p.  258. 

^  The  causes  which  favoured  the  development  of  asceticism  amongst  the 
Christians  of  the  primitive  Church  are  well  stated  in  Pressens^'s  Histoire 
des  Trois  Premiers  Sitcles,  Quatrieme  Serie,  pp.  523-39. 

7 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS   OF  INDIA 

Similar  results  are  also  sometimes  produced  when  intense 
religious  excitement  has  awakened  thrilling  expectations, 
as  in  the  early  Church,  when  entire  congregations,  believing 
the  end  of  all  earthly  things  to  be  imminent,  gave  up  their 
possessions  and  retired  to  the  desert  to  await  the  second 
Advent  of  the  Lord  ;  and  as,  indeed,  that  peculiar  sect, 
the  Russian  Doukhobors,  have  done  in  the  broad  daylight 
of  our  own  time,  to  the  amusement  of  an  unbelieving 
generation. 

An  ardent  desire  on  the  part  of  religious  enthusiasts 
to  imitate  the  life  of  the  founder  of  their  own  religion  or 
sect,  such  founder  being  almost  invariably  an  aseetic  and  a 
contemner  of  the  things  of  this  vjorld,  has  also  been  a  potent 
influence  in  originating  and  perpetuating  schemes  of  life, 
or  particular  practices  which  savour  of  self-denial  more  or 
less  rigid. 

It  would  appear  that  all  religions  hold  that  in  the 
thoughts,  desires,  and  actions  of  every  individual  there 
are  present  elements  which,  unless  conquered,  modified, 
or  neutralised  in  some  way  or  other,  disquahfy  him  from 
attaining  that  unending  rest  or  that  most  desirable  beati- 
tude in  a  future  state  of  existence  which  the  world-prophets 
have  so  freely  promised  mankind.  The  disqualifying 
elements  above  referred  to  as  hindering  the  religious  in 
the  realisation  of  their  aspirations,  although  difiering  re- 
markably in  the  various  cults,  may  for  convenience  be 
included  in  the  one  term  sinfulness. 

Now,  what  is  the  cause  of  this  sinfulness  so  disastrous 
to  the  highest  interests  of  humanity  ?  That  is  a  question 
which  has  perplexed  the  ages  ;  but  of  all  the  doctrines 
which  men  have  propounded  in  their  endeavours  to  solve 
this  permanent  enigma  of  existence,  probably  none  has  had 
more  subtle  and  potent  influence  than  that  which  holds 
that  spirit  is  eternally  pure  and  matter  inherently  bad. 

These  ideas,  of  immemorial  antiquity  and  far-reaching 
influence  in  the  East,  found  their  way  to  Europe  in  the 
earlv  centuries  of  our  era  in  connection  with  Manichseism 
and  Gnosticism,  and  though  condemned  and  suppressed  by 
the  Papacy,  aided  by  the  strong  arm  of  the  secular  power,  did 
not  fail  to  make  a  deep  impression  on  Western  thought. 

8 


ASCETICISM:    ITS  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

If  the  doctrine  in  question  be  accepted,  it  is  plain  that 
man's  corporeal  frame  comes  directly  under  condemnation, 
and  it  also  follows  that  spirit  being  pure,  the  flesh  and  its 
lusts  are  responsible  for  the  sins  which  man  commits.  Hence, 
for  the  preservation  of  the  soul  and  the  furtherance  of  its 
aspirations,  it  is  necessary  that  the  body,  with  its  senses, 
appetites,  and  desires,  should  be  kept  under  restraint, 
should  be  mortified  and  suppressed  ;  the  logical  outcome 
of  this  train  of  reasoning  being  the  ascetic  practices  so  highly 
honoured  in  all  the  great  religious  systems.^ 

By  the  Hindu  speculative  theologians,  asceticism  with 
a  view  to  the  repression  of  the  animal  passions  is  regarded, 
in  accordance  with  their  dualistic  theories,  as  a  means  to 
the  purification  of  the  mind,  such  purgation  being,  as  they 
say,  an  essential  condition  for  the  attainment  of  a  complete 
knowledge  of  Brahman,  with  its  attendant  freedom  from 
samsara,  that  is,  embodied  existence,^  which  freedom,  we 
shall  find,  is  the  great  aim  and  object  of  Hindu  religious 
life.  And  the  purification  of  the  body  by  ascetic  practices  is 
also  held  by  Hindu  theologians  as  a  necessary  condition  for 
even  that  temporary  communion,  in  this  life,  of  the  human 
soul  with  the  Divine  Spirit,  which  is  the  object  of  the  ecstatic 
hope  of  many  a  religious  man  in  India. 

In  the  East  generally,  and  in  India  particularly,  man's 
corporeal  frame  has  been  for  ages  considered  the  great 
hindrance  to  the  attainment  by  spirit  of  its  proper  destinj^, 
whether  that  destiny  be,  as  the  Buddhists  teach,  a  release 
from  the  evils  of  successive  rebirths  with  ultimate  nirvana, 
or,  as  the  Hindus  hold,  direct  union  with  and  absorption  into 
the  Universal  Spirit.  And  whatever  ofcher  views  may  have 
been  held,  the  human  body  has,  under  religious  zeal,  been 
sacrificed  in  almost  all  countries  to  the  supposed  advan- 
tage of  the  soul ;  and  this  suppression  of  natural  desires, 
often  combined  with  positive  ill- treatment  of  the  body,  for 

^  True,  the  Christian  Church  prescribed  penances  on  other  grounds  also, 
holding  that  even  for  sin  duly  repented  of  a  temporal  penalty  was  still  due, 
and,  in  order  to  afford  a  means  for  the  satisfaction  of  this  obligation,  the 
penitential  discipline  of  the  Church  made  provision  in  the  form  of  fastings, 
flagellations,  pilgrimages,  and  fines. 

"  The  Upanishads  and  Sri  Sankara's  Commentary,  translated  by  S. 
Sitarama  Sastri,  B.A,,  vol.  i.  especially  p.  85. 

9 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

spiritual  ends,  is  what  we  now  usually  call  asceticism,^ 
though,  curiously  enough,  amongst  the  Greeks  it  meant 
that  abstinence  from  sensual  indulgences  which  was  neces- 
sary for  the  preservation  of  the  body  in  a  fit  state  for 
athletics. 

Of  those  who  undergo  mortifications,  the  majority,  what- 
ever their  creed  may  be,  probably  confine  their  austerities 
to  an  occasional  fast  or  a  periodical  abstinence  from  par- 
ticular kinds  of  food  ;  bat  everywhere  a  minority  can  be 
found  of  sensitive  natures,  who,  more  deeply  affected  by 
world-weariness,    and    spurred    on    by    the    uncontrollable 
excitement  of  intense  rehgious  enthusiasm,  wilHngly  exhaust 
ingenuity   in    afflicting    themselves   with    cruel    pains    and 
penalties.      Early    Christian     history    provides     abundant 
examples  of  this  latter  type ;  but  they  are  not  peculiar  to 
Christendom,  as  we  shall  presently  see.     Such  heroic  con- 
tempt of  pain  and  pleasure  as  these  extreme  ascetics  dis- 
play   commands    the    wondering    attention    and    respectful 
homage  of  the  multitude.     The  voluntary  sufferers  become 
objects  of  veneration  ;  fame  makes  itself  busy  with  their 
doings  ;  wonders  are  attributed  to  them,  and,  by  a  curious 
irony,  spiritual  pride  and  vanity  play  no  unimportant  part 
in  encouraging  religious  asceticism.     The  reason  is  obvious. 
The    reputation    for    sanctity    which    accompanies    self-re- 
pression  and   detachment  from  the  world   brings  with  it 
not  only  popular  admiration,  but  often  so  much  substantial 
power  also,   that  many  ambitious  men  and  seekers  after 
pubUcity  are  attracted  into  the  ranks  of  the  ascetics  in 
order  to  enjoy  these  congenial  and  by  no  means  incon- 
siderable advantages. 

It  happens  not  infrequently  that  the  spectacle  is  pre- 
sented of  the  contemporaneous  existence  of  unbounded 
luxury  and  the  most  austere  asceticism ;  one  being  the 
result  of  the  success  of  the  few,  the  other  of  the  failure 
of  the  many.     In  such  times  the  ascetic,  the  renunciant, 

^  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  suffering  in  itself  comes,  in  the  case  of  some 
highly  emotional  natures,  to  be  regarded  as  desirable.  St.  Theresa,  for 
example,  says,  "  Suffering  alone  can  make  life  tolerable  to  me.  My  greatest 
desii-e  is  to  suffer.  Often  and  often  I  cry  out  to  God  from  the  depths  of  my 
soul,  '  Either  to  suffer  or  to  die  is  all  I  ask  of  Thee.'  " — Joly's  Psychology 
of  the  Saints,  p.  168. 

10 


ASCETICISM  :    ITS  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

becomes  the  popular  ideal  of  a  great  man,  the  guide  and 
leader  of  the  people,  the  friend  of  the  poor,  and  the  scornful 
contemner  of  the  exalted.  In  such  times  the  spirit  of 
asceticism  may  penetrate  into  the  very  highest  grades  of 
society,  where  it  could  least  be  expected  to  find  admission, 
though  the  reasons  for  this  would  not  be  difficult  of  com- 
prehension in  most  cases,  could  one  but  get  a  glimpse  be- 
hind the  curtains  of  private  life.  For  it  is  not  only  dis- 
comfiture in  the  open  world -strife  that  brings  men  to 
despondency ;  domestic  disappointments  and  the  ordinary 
disillusionments  of  life  may  drive  even  the  rich  and  highly 
placed  to  seek  peace  in  the  retirement  of  the  cloister  or  in 
philosophical  resignation  coupled  with  contemptuous  indiffer- 
ence to  worldly  advantages.^ 

Even  when  dominated  by  ascetic  zeal  and  the  spirit  of 
self-sacrifice,  the  majority  of  men  are  gregarious  in  their 
instincts.  So  it  happens  that  many  brethren  in  misfortune, 
renouncing  the  world  and  what  they  call  its  hollow  sinful 
pleasures,  gather  together,  for  mutual  improvement  and 
encouragement,  in  religious  communities,  which  later  on 
develop  into  conventual  establishments  or  monasteries 
governed  by  fixed  rules.  Hither  gravitate  the  disappointed, 
the  world-weary.  Here  in  troubled  times  many  seek  peace 
and  protection,  and  here  too  a  few,  attracted  by  the  tran- 
quilKty  of  the  cenobitic  life,  come  from  a  sheer  love  of  God 
and  a  desire  for  silent  and  constant  communion  with 
Him. 

Like  other  ideas  and  other  sentiments  which  have  for 
a  time  obtained  general  currency  or  acceptance,  those  con- 
nected with  practical  asceticism  have  a  tendency  to  languish 
when  the  causes  which  stimulated  them  into  special  activity 
have  died  out.  But  though  the  spirit  of  asceticism  may 
seem  at  certain  flourishing  periods  of  history  to  be  extinct, 
it  can  never  be  quite  so  while  the  tedium  of  existence 
presses  upon  weary  souls,   and  while  sorrow,   want,   and 

^  An  interesting  Indian  instance  of  this  is  the  poet  and  Prime  Minister 
Manaka-Vasagur,  who  in  the  eighth  century  a.d.  gave  up  his  high  position 
to  devote  himself  in  seclusion  and  penury  to  the  worship  of  Siva,  as  the 
supreme  ruler  of  the  universe.  His  poems  preserved  in  Southern  India 
are  said  to  breathe  a  true  emotional  piety. — Journal,  Royal  Asiatic  Society, 
April  1901,  pp.  346-48. 

II 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF   INDIA 

misery  exist  in  this  world.  It  slumbers,  perhaps,  but  is 
ready  to  quicken  whenever  circumstances  happen  which 
make  the  burden  of  life  for  the  majority  too  heavy  for 
patient  endurance.  In  prosperous  times  the  attractions  of 
the  far-off  heavens  lose  something  of  their  force  in  the 
presence  of  the  nearer  and  more  tangible  allurements  of 
the  day,  but,  as  soon  as  the  fierce  struggle  for  existence 
becomes  calamitous  to  the  major  portion  of  any  community, 
the  discomfiture  of  the  many  once  more  revives  from  its 
still  warm  embers  the  dormant  spirit  of  asceticism  ;  and 
then,  new  religions,  or  at  least  new  religious  leaders,  arise 
amongst  the  wretched  and  downtrodden,  to  teach  again  the 
expediency  and  beauty  of  the  renunciation  of  all  worldly 
desires,  and  to  point  the  way,  perhaps  a  new  way,  to  a 
delectable  existence  beyond  the  grave.  Even  the  rushing 
stream  of  modern  European  life  has  its  quiet  backwaters 
into  which  the  world-weary  drift  silently  and  unobserved, 
resigning  themselves,  in  dismal  monasteries  and  religious 
establishments,  to  such  austerities  as  they  believe  will 
enhance  the  heavenly  reward  to  which  they  look  forward 
with  childlike  confidence  or  timid  hope. 

Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that,  when  individuals  or 
communities  are  suffering  from  widespread  calamities  and 
great  national  troubles  of  whatever  nature,  their  thoughts 
turn  imploringly  towards  their  gods  and  longingly  towards 
heaven,  as  surely  as  the  magnetic  needle  seeks  the  Pole. 
For  the  prosperous  this  earth  has  its  attractions  and  its 
rewards,  but  for  the  unfortunate  and  downtrodden  there 
is  only  the  promised  hereafter.  Hence  it  is  obvious  that 
religion  flourishes  best  where  the  conditions  of  life  have 
been  most  unfavourable  for  the  majority.  Now,  India 
has  for  decades  of  centuries  suffered  in  no  slight  degree 
from  certain  depressing  circumstances  most  conducive  to 
the  production  of  individual  and  national  despondency. 
Religion  of  the  gloomy  type  has  consequently  alwa3^s 
flourished  there,  and  with  it  asceticism  also,  exaggerated 
and  intensified  by  the  fact  that  India  is  the  head -centre 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  eternal  antagonism  between  spirit 
and  matter. 

The    most    cursory    consideration    of    facts    will    bear 

12 


ASCETICISM:    ITS  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

out  the  above  statement.  Too  often,  for  example,  have 
the  invasion  and  conquest  of  the  wide  open  plains  of 
North  3rn  India  proved  a  comparatively  easy  operation, 
harmful  to  the  dwellers  there  and  baneful  even  to  the 
conquerors  ;  for,  enervated  by  an  indolent  Kfe  in  those 
warm  productive  valleys,  each  successful  race  of  invaders 
has  had  to  give  way  before  new  and  more  energetic 
conquerors,  destined  in  their  turn  to  a  similar  fate.  Again, 
vast  stretches  of  level  country  like  those  which  lie  beneath 
the  mighty  Himalayan  mountain  range  are  undoubtedly 
suited  for,  are  indeed  the  natural  homes  of,  despotisms, 
under  which  individualism  and  many  of  the  finer  qualities 
of  men  and  races  get  gradually  smothered.  And  despotic 
governments,  whether  native  or  foreign,  have  for  many 
centuries  ruled  over  these  lands.  From  very  early  times, 
too,  a  rigid  system  of  hereditary  castes  was  adopted  in 
India,  by  which  the  spheres  and  occupations  of  all  classes 
of  the  community  were  strictly  defined  and  enforced, 
thereby  limiting  the  ambitions  and  cramping  the  energies 
of  the  entire  Hindu  people. 

Geographical  and  climatic  conditions  have  also  favoured 
the  occurrence,  at  longer  or  shorter  intervals,  of  appalling 
pestilences  and  famines  of  stupendous  proportions,  while, 
as  the  Sanskrit  epics  clearly  show,  for  ages  dense  forests 
and  malarial  swamps  covered  a  considerable  portion  of 
the  land.  Under  such  circumstances  it  necessarily  came 
to  pass  that  in  the  warmth  of  the  steamy  plains  of  India 
successive  generations  of  men  and  women  were  stimulated 
into  early  maturity  and  doomed  to  early  decay,  afflicted 
perpetually  with  a  morbid  fatigue  both  physical  and 
mental. 

It  is  true  we  cannot  recall  details  of  the  prolonged 
night  of  trouble  through  which  the  Indian  people  have 
passed,  for  they  have  written  no  history  of  themselves, 
left  behind  them  no  chronicles.  But  this  fact  itself  is 
the  most  impressive,  convincing,  and  pathetic  proof  of 
their  state  of  depression  and  hopelessness  through  long 
ages,  since  flourishing  nations  endued  with  energy, 
buoyed  up  with  hope,  and  enjoying  reasonable  liberty, 
never  fail  to  hand  down  to  admiring  posterity  the  record 

13 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

of  their  doings  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  in  gloomy 
periods  of  stagnation  and  oppression,  not  only  is  the 
healthy  stimulus  to  the  production  of  historical  writings 
absent,  but  there  is  also  ever  present  a  powerful  deterrent 
in  the  dread  of  offending  the  oppressors  which  paralyses 
the  Land  of  the  would-be  historian. 

Besides  the  already  noted  causes  predisposing  the 
Indians  to  habits  of  despondency  and  rehgious  quietism, 
there  are  others  which  have  also  contributed  towards 
the  same  end.  One  of  these  is  the  strictly  vegetarian 
diet  of  a  majority  of  the  people,  which  diet,  even  if 
always  sufficiently  nutritious,  would  certainly  have,  in  the 
course  of  successive  generations,  a  cumulative  tendency  to 
induce  a  patient,  inaggressive,  and  probably  despondent 
habit  of  mind,  with  physical  indolence  and  apathy  in  its 
train.  Then,  again,  the  Indian  people  have  always  had 
amongst  them  in  profusion  the  soporific  poppy  and  the 
hemp  plant,  whose  narcotic  products  were  discovered  early, 
and  their  drowsy  fascinations  extensively  appreciated.^ 

Finally,  the  study  of  the  psychology  of  the  Indian 
people  reveals  to  us  that,  combined  with  intellectual 
quahties  of  the  highest  order,  their  most  striking  char- 
acteristics are  imaginativeness,  emotionahsm,  mysticism, 
credulity,  religious  fervour  and  impressionability,^  all  in 
a  very  exaggerated  degree. 

^  There  is  a  popular  belief  that  the  habit  of  smoking  originated  with  the 
use  of  tobacco  after  the  discovery  of  America  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth 
century  ;  but,  whatever  may  be  the  fact  as  regards  tobacco,  there  is  ample 
evidence  to  show  that  the  barks  and  leaves  of  certain  plants,  also  sawdust 
and  mushrooms  of  sorts,  as  well  as  opium  and  hemp,  have  since  remote 
antiquity  been  smoked  in  the  East  and  Africa,  and  in  Europe  too.  Some- 
times, as  in  the  case  of  the  Scythians  described  by  Herodotus,  the  smoke 
was  used  simply  as  a  fumigant  in  a  closed  tent  for  producing  exhilarating 
effects,  but  more  commonly  the  pipe,  with  a  bowl  as  we  know  it,  was  used, 
and,  as  might  have  been  expected,  archaeologists  have  not  failed  to  obtain 
an  ample  supply  of  these  articles  from  ancient  tumuli  and  deposits  which 
date  back  many  centuries. — Revue  Encydopidique,  3rd  April  1897. 

2  Dr.  James  Esdaile,  so  well  known  in  India  some  fifty  or  sixty  years 
ago  as  a  most  successful  surgical  operator  under  mesmeric  influence,  came 
to  the  conclusion,  after  certain  experiments  in  Scotland,  that  only  "  the 
depressing  influence  of  disease  will  be  found  to  reduce  Europeans  to  the 
impressible  condition  of  the  nervous  system  so  common  among  the  Eastern 
nations." — Dictionary  of  National  Biography. 


ASCETICISM:    ITS  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

To  sum  up,  then,  it  would  appear  that,  under  the 
combined  influence  of  the  physical,  political,  and  social 
conditions  referred  to,  aided  powerfully  by  the  intellectual 
and  moral  peculiarities  of  the  people,  a  dull  stagnation 
has  been  for  ages  the  unenviable  lot  of  the  masses  of  the 
Indian  people — a  state  very  conducive  to  mental  depression 
and  gloomy  religious  speculations,  leading  naturally  to 
abnegation  and  ascetic  living.  Hence  it  came  to  pass  that 
the  ancient  lawgiver  was  able,  with  a  reasonable  hope  of 
success,  to  model  the  ordinary  life  of  the  Hindu  upon  a 
wide  basis  of  poverty,  renunciation,  and  retirement  from 
the  world.  As  prescribed  in  the  sacred  Shastras  of  the 
Hindus,  the  ideal  life  for  the  three  superior  castes  begins 
with  mendicancy  and  ends  with  asceticism,  according  to 
the  following  scheme,  which  divides  the  ordinary  span  of  a 
man's  existence  into  four  well-marked  periods. 

1.  Early  yoiMh,  which  should  be  passed  as  a  Brah- 
machari  or  reUgious  student  living  on  alms. 

2.  Manhood,  during  which  period  the  "twice -born" 
man  should,  as  a  Grihasta,  devote  himself  to  household 
duties  and  the  rearing  of  a  family. 

3.  Middle  age,  which  should  be  spent  as  a  Bana- 
prastha  or  forest  recluse,  with  or  without  one's  wife.  In 
regard  to  food,  the  hermit  should  restrict  himself  to  the 
spontaneous  products  of  the  earth  obtained  by  himself, 
and  should  abstain,  under  all  circumstances,  from  partaking 
of  anything  grown  in  towns  or  the  produce  of  any  man's 
labour. 

4.  The  closing  period  of  life,  during  which  final  stage 
the  good  Hindu  should  become  a  Sanyasi,  abandoning  all 
sensual  desires  and  Uviny  by  mendicancy  on  the  charity  of 
others. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  what  baneful  ejects 
such  a  scheme  for  the  conduct  of  individual  life,  if  acted 
upon  generally,  would  inevitably  produce  upon  national 
character  and  national  resources,  and  such  considerations 
would,  in  all  probability,  have  been  of  quite  insignificant 
importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  Hindu  lawgiver.  Nor  need 
we  pause  to  estimate  the  extent  to  which  this  ideal  scheme  of 
life  has  brought  about  the  accepted  low  standard  of  comfort 

15 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF   INDIA 

and  the  extreme  simplicity  of  living  in  India.  But  it  is 
necessary  to  draw  attention  to  the  encouragement  and 
sanction  which  the  divinely  appointed  Hindu  ideal  of 
life  gives  to  mendicancy  as  well  as  retirement  from  the 
world,  because  the  inevitable  result  of  this  has  been  that 
no  Hindu  feels  ashamed  to  beg  or  to  abandon  the  duties 
of  citizenship  at  an  age  when  he  might  be  a  productive 
worker  for  the  general  good.^ 

It  has  been  argued  that  the  ideal  scheme  of  life  with 
its  fourfold  division  was  instituted  really  in  opposition  to 
sadhuism,  as  it  postpones  the  adoption  of  the  ascetic  life 
to  a  time  when  a  man  would,  in  ordinary  course,  be  too 
feeble  to  endure  all  its  hardships.  But,  while  it  is  doubtful 
whether  there  is  any  truth  whatever  in  this  contention, 
no  unprejudiced  person  will  deny  that  the  scheme  itself 
countenances  and  enjoins  a  system  of  asceticism  of  un- 
paralleled scope,  for  it  embraces  every  superior  individual 
within  the  pale  of  Hinduism. 

It  may  be  added  that  the  strong  restraint  which  natural 
solicitude  for  the  comfortable  maintenance  of  one's  family 
would  ordinarily  exercise  upon  the  decision  of  a  parent, 
husband,  son,  or  brother  disposed  to  abandon  his  home, 
is  considerably  weakened  amongst  Hindus  by  the  co- 
operative system  which  prevails  amongst  them,  under 
which,  in  ordinary  circumstances,  the  burden  of  supporting 
the  family — this  term  being  understood  in  a  wide  sense — 
would  fall  upon  and  be  shared  alike  by  all  the  male 
members  thereof.  Indeed,  this  joint  system,  although  not 
without  its  advantages,  does  undoubtedly  encourage  un- 
profitable idleness,  leading  in  many  cases  to  the  adoption 
of  a  life  of  respectable  vagrancy  under  the  convenient 
mask  of  religion. 

Without  any  pretence  of  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  the 
various  and  complex  motives  which  underlie  religious 
asceticism,  I  may  before  concluding  this  chapter  draw 
attention  to  what  appear  to  me  to  be  the  more  general 
reasons  which  prompt  men  to  ascetic  practices :  (1)  A 
desire,   which    is    intensified   by   all   personal    or    national 

^  "  The  Power  and  Beauty  of  Beggary  "  is  the  subject  of  an  article  by 
an  Indian  journahst  in  East  and  West  for  December  1901  (Bombay). 

i6 


ASCETICISM:    ITS  ORIGIN  AND  DEVELOPMENT 

troubles,  to  propitiate  the  Unseen  Powers.  (2)  A  longing 
on  the  part  of  the  intensely  religious  to  follow  in  the 
footsteps  of  their  master,  almost  invariably  an  ascetic. 
(3)  A  wish  to  work  out  one's  own  future  salvation,  or 
emancipation,  by  conquering  the  evil  inherent  in  himian 
nature,  i.e.  the  flesh.  (4)  A  yearning  to  prepare  oneself 
by  purification  of  mind  and  body  for  entering  into  present 
communion  with  the  Divine  Being.  (5)  Despair  arising 
from  disillusionment  and  from  defeat  in  the  battle  of  life. 
And  lastly,  mere  vanity,  stimulated  by  the  admiration 
which  the  multitude  bestow  upon  the  ascetic. 

I  have,  I  hope,  made  it  sufficiently  clear  that  the 
political  and  other  causes  which  induce  the  frame  of  mind 
wherein  the  above-stated  reasons  are  most  operative,  have 
for  ages  existed  in  India  in  a  more  than  ordinary  degree. 

What  other  powerful,  and  peculiarly  Indian,  motives 
stimulate  the  ascetic  practices  of  the  sadhus  will  be 
mentioned  in  the  next  chapter. 


B  17 


CHAPTER  II 

SOME   PECULIAR   AND    DISTINCTIVE    CHARACTERISTICS 

OF   HINDU    ASCETICISM 


Hindu  Idea  of  the  unbounded  Power  over  Nature  attainable  through 
Ascetic  Practices — The  Rationale  of  this  Notion — Examples  of  Power 
acquired  by  Asceticism  cited  from  the  Mahabharata,  the  Ramayana, 
the  Siva  Purana,  and  the  Vishnu  Purana — The  Supreme  Being  Himself 
practises  Austerities — Rivalry  of  Sects  gives  rise  to  Legends  of  Con- 
flicts, based  on  successful  Ascetic  Practices,  between  rival  Leaders — 
Titanic  Conflict  between  Vasishta  and  Visvamitra,  also  between  Nanak 
and  the  Siddhas — Hindu  Asceticism  has  usually  no  relation  to  Ethics. 

ENDEAVOURED  to  show  in  the  last 
chapter  that  asceticism  was  fostered  in 
India  by  causes  which  have  given  birth 
to  similar  developments  elsewhere,  and 
that  owing  to  special  circumstances, 
referred  to  in  some  detail,  it  has 
assumed  a  chronic  form  in  the  country 
to  the  south  of  the  Himalayas.  But 
there  are  striking  peculiarities  about 
Hindu  asceticism  which  differentiate 
it  from  that  associated  with  Buddhism, 
Christianity,  or  Islam  ;  and  to  these 
pecuHarities,  and  the  motives  mider- 
lying  them,  I  now  invite  attention. 

All  the  most  esteemed  sages  of 
India  are  believed  to  have  practised 
austerities.  The  great  poets,  too,  even 
the  more  modern  ones,  such  as  Tulasi 
Das,  author  of  the  Hindi  Ramayana,  and  Jayadeva,  author 
of  the  Gita-Govinda,  were  religious  devotees  and  thauma- 
turgists  of  the  highest  order.^    Martial  heroes,  and  demigods 

1  Sketch  of  the  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  by  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson, 
pp.  41-43. 

i8 


SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  HINDU  ASCETICISM 

like  Arjuna  and  Rama,  are  credited  with  ascetic  practices  ; 
but  it  is  decidedly  startling  to  learn  that  the  gods  them- 
selves have  undergone  self-inflicted  tortures  for  the  attain- 
ment of  the  objects  of  their  desires.  Referring  to  this 
point,  the  late  Professor  Sir  Monier  Williams  wrote  as 
follows :  ^  "  According  to  Hindu  theory,  the  performance 
of  penances  was  hke  making  deposits  in  the  bank  of 
heaven.  By  degrees  an  enormous  credit  was  accumulated 
which  enabled  the  depositor  to  draw  to  the  amount  of 
his  savings,  without  fear  of  his  drafts  being  refused 
payment.  The  power  gained  in  this  way  by  weak  mortals 
was  so  enormous,  that  gods  as  well  as  men  were  equally 
at  the  mercy  of  these  all  but  omnipotent  ascetics,  and 
it  is  remarkable  that  even  the  gods  are  described  as 
engaging  in  penances  and  austerities,  in  order,  it  may  be 
presumed,  not  to  be  outdone  by  human  beings.  Siva  was 
so  engaged  when  the  god  of  love  shot  an  arrow  at  him !  "  ^ 
The  genesis  of  these  notions,  so  extravagant  and  far- 
fetched in  appearance,  is,  I  think,  susceptible  of  explanation. 
From  the  accepted  doctrine  that  ascetic  practices,  by  con- 
quering the  evil  tendencies  of  matter — that  is,  the  flesh, 
— purify  the  imprisoned  spint,  and  render  it  fit  for  re- 
union with  the  Absolute  Being,  the  Hindu  thinker  might 
reasonably  argue  that  as  the  austerities  were  increased  and 
intensified  the  probability  of  the  wished-for  reunion  of  the 
ascetic's  soul  with  the  Absolute  Being  would  become 
greater  and  greater,  and  that  by  virtue  of  such  approaching 
reunion  the  power  of  the  soul  over  matter  and  natural 
phenomena  generally  would  also  grow  more  and  more 
effective.  This  being  conceded,  the  next  step  would  be  to 
gauge  a  man's  unknown  supernatural  powers  by  his  self- 
\\  inflicted  tortures  ;  and  conversely,  if  one  desired  superhuman 

I         ^  Indian  Epic  Poetry,  note  to  p.  4. 

[  I  ^  To  the  Indian  notion  of  merits  hoarded  up  for  future  use,  a  curious 
resemblance  may  be  traced  in  the  idea  that  "  the  Church  possessed  a 
'  treasure  '  in  the  merits  of  Christ  and  of  the  saints  and  martyrs,  from  which 
'  treasiure  '  could  be  drawn  upon,  from  time  to  time,  satisfaction  for  the 
|,|  penalties  of  sin  ;  "  an  idea  which  underlay  the  Romish  practice  of  granting 
^indulgences.  See  Canon  Knox  Little's  St.  Francis  of  Assist,  chap.  viii. 
5)Ef  Going  a  step  further,  "  the  friars  took  upon  themselves  to  distribute  the 
5f  surplus  merit  of  their  order." — Social  England,  by  Traill  and  Mann,  vol. 
i!ii.  p.  372. 

19 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

power  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  definite  object,  he 
would  resort  to  austerities  to  gain  his  end.  What  a 
plentiful  crop  of  extravagant  myths  and  legends  could, 
and  did,  spring  out  of  such  ideas,  is  clearly  shown  in  Hindu 
literature,  which  may  now  be  drawn  upon  for  a  few  typical 
examples  requisite  for  the  exposition  of  the  subject. 

In  the  Mahabharata  it  is  related  of  two  brothers, 
daitijas  of  the  race  of  the  great  Asura,  that  they  under- 
took a  course  of  severe  austerities  with  the  momentous 
object  "  of  subjugating  the  three  worlds."  They  clothed 
themselves  in  the  bark  of  trees,  wore  matted  hair,  be- 
smeared themselves  with  dirt  from  head  to  foot,  and  in 
solitude,  upon  the  lone  mountains,  endured  the  greatest 
privations  of  hunger  and  thirst.  They  stood  for  years  on 
their  toes,  with  their  arms  uplifted  and  their  eyelids  wide 
open.  Not  content  with  these  sore  penances,  they,  in 
their  zeal,  cut  off  pieces  of  their  own  flesh  and  threw  them 
into  the  fire.  The  Vindhya  mountains,  on  which  these 
determined  ascetics  had  placed  themselves,  became  heated 
by  the  fervour  of  their  austerities,  and  the  gods  beholding 
their  doings,  and  alarmed  for  the  consequences  that  might 
ensue,  did  everything  in  their  power  to  divert  them  from 
the  strict  observance  of  their  vows.  The  gods  "  tempted 
the  brothers  by  means  of  every  precious  possession  and 
the  most  beautiful  girls,"  ^  but  without  success.  Then 
the  celestials  tried  "  their  powers  of  illusion,"  making  it 
seem  to  the  ascetics  that  "  their  sisters,  mothers,  wives, 
and  other  relatives,  with  dishevelled  hair  and  ornaments 
and  robes,  were  running  towards  them  in  terror,  pursued 
and  struck  down  by  a  Rakshasa  with  a  lance  in  hand. 
And  it  seemed  that  the  women  implored  the  help  of  the 
brothers,  crying,  '  0,  save  us  !  '  "  ^ 

Even  this  harrowing  scene  of  domestic  affliction  failed 
to  shake  the  constancy  of  the  ascetics  to  their  vows,  and 

1  Mahabharata — Adi  Parva,  section  ccxi.     Babu  Protap  Chandra  Roy's 
translation. 

2  This  temptation  of  the  earnest  ascetic,  especially  when  engaged  in  | 
severe  austerities,  is  not  confined  to  Hinduism,  instances  being  easily  ; 
found  in  the  history  of  all  the  religions  of  Asiatic  origin,  not  excluding 
Christianity,  and  is  an  unmistakable  indication  of  the  general  and  wide- 
spread beUef  in  the  potency  of  self-mortifications. 

20 


I 


SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  HINDU  ASCETICISM 

Brahma  was  at  last  obliged  to  grant  them  very  extensive 
powers  and  privileges,  including  complete  immunity  from 
danger  except  at  each  other's  hands.  When  these  suc- 
cessful ascetics  returned  home  they  arrayed  themselves  in 
costly  robes,  wore  precious  ornaments,  "  caused  the  moon 
to  rise  over  their  city  every  night,"  and  from  year's  end 
to  year's  end  indulged  in  continual  feasting  and  every 
kind  of  amusement.  Evidently,  no  thought  of  sin  or 
expiation  nor  any  regard  for  virtue  entered  into  the  con- 
sideration of  the  objects  kept  in  view  by  these  resolute 
daitya  brothers.  The  above  story  shows  clearly  the  exist- 
ence of  an  underlying  idea  that  the  practisers  of  austerities, 
whoever  they  might  be,  appropriate  energy,  as  it  were, 
from  some  universal  store,  and  that  they  are  thus 
strengthened  at  the  expense  of  the  rest.  Consequently, 
when  their  voluntary  penances  exceed  certain  limits  they 
become  a  terror  to  all  other  beings.  Hence  we  learn, 
without  surprise,  that,  when  one  of  these  dangerous  ascetics 
eventually  met  his  death,  all  nature  was  exceedingly  re- 
lieved and  rejoiced  accordingly. 

Another  story  in  the  same  sacred  epic  tells  of  a  king 
who  underwent  ascetic  penances  to  obtain  a  child. ^  It 
is  also  recorded  of  a  certain  monarch  that  he  did  the 
same  to  secure  the  assistance  of  the  god  Rudra  in  the 
performance  of  a  great  sacrifice.^ 

One  rishi,  the  muni  Aurva  of  the  Brighu  race,  influ- 
enced by  a  fierce  craving  for  vengeance  on  account  of 
some  wrongs  suffered  by  his  ancestors,  subjected  himself 
to  the  direst  penances  for  "  the  destruction  of  every 
creature  in  the  world,"  and  was  only  persuaded  to  desist 
from  his  terrible  purpose  by  the  intercession  of  the  Pitris 
or  souls  of  his  forefathers.^ 

We  have  also  the  case  of  Princess  Amva  of  Benares, 
who  practised  the  most  terrible  austerities  for  many 
years  for  the  destruction  of  Bhishma,  and  was  gratified  by 
the  god  Mahadeva,  who  promised  that  in  her  next  life 
she  should  be  "a  fierce  warrior  who  would  destroy  the 
hated  Bhishma.      Upon  this,  that  faultless  maiden  of  the 

^  Mahabharata — Adi  Parva,  section  ccxvii. 

2  Ibid,  section  ccxxv.  ^  ii,id.  section  clxxxi. 

21 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

fairest  complexion,  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  King  of 
Ka9i,  procured  wood  from  that  forest  in  the  very  sight 
of  those  great  rishis,  made  a  large  funeral  pyre  on  the  banks 
of  the  Yamuna,  and  having  set  fire  to  it,  herself  entered 
that  blazing  fire  with  a  heart  burning  mth  wrath,  uttering 
the  words,  '  I  do  so  for  Bhishma's  destruction  !  '  "  i  The 
princess  was  reborn  in  due  course,  and,  needless  to  say, 
was  the  instrument  of  Bhishma's  death. 

The  Ramayana  aifords  us  many  instances  of  exceptional 
powers  and  privileges  acquired  by  ascetic  practices.  For 
example,  the  ten-headed  Rakshasa,  Ravana,  had,  by  long 
and  painful  austerities,  obtained  from  Brahma  the  boon 
that  neither  god  nor  demon  should  be  able  to  deprive  him 
of  his  life.  Protected  by  this  decree  of  the  Creator,  the 
ten-headed  Rakshasa  became  a  terror  to  the  world,  but 
he  had,  in  his  pride,  omitted  to  ask  for  protection  against 
wien.  Taking  advantage  of  this  oversight,  the  god  Vishnu 
became  incarnate  as  Rama,  and,  after  wonderful  adventures, 
eventually  destroyed  the  troublesome  demon-king. 

A  somewhat  similar  story  is  told  in  the  same  epic  about 
the  Rakshasa  Viradha,  who  had  by  his  asceticisms  obtained 
the  privilege  of  being  proof  against  every  kind  of  weapon. 
However,  he  met  his  fate  at  the  hands  of  Rama,  who  over- 
came him,  not  with  weapo7is,  but  with  his  fistSj  and  flung 
him  into  a  deep  pit. 

In  the  Siva  Purana  there  is  a  story  of  a  daiiya  (demon) 
named  Tarika,  who,  by  voluntarily  undergoing  eleven  dis- 
tinct forms  or  methods  of  self -mortification,  each  extending 
over  a  period  of  one  hundred  years,  so  alarmed  Indra 
and  the  lesser  gods  that  they  went  to  Brahma  to  beseech 
him  to  frustrate  the  ambitious  designs  of  this  terrible 
ascetic.  The  Supreme  Being  had  to  admit  that  he  could 
not  resist  such  austerities,  and  was  constrained  to  reward 
them  ;  but  he  told  his  petitioners  that,  after  granting  the 
boon  for  which  Tarika  had  inflicted  so  much  suffering  upon 
himself,  he  (Brahma)  would  devise  a  plan  of  ultimately 
neutralising  the  demon's  long  labours.  What  Tarika  sought 
was,  *'  that  he  should  be  unrivalled  in  strength,  and  that 
no  hand  should  slay  him,  but  that  of  a  son  of  Mahadeva 

^  Babu  Proktp  Chandra  Roy's  translation. 

22 


SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  HINDU  ASCETICISM 

(the  god  Siva)."  This  boon  having  been  conceded,  as 
indeed  it  had  to  be,  the  demon,  in  his  pride  of  power, 
tyrannised  over  the  lesser  gods,  and  kept  the  entire 
universe  in  terror,  himself  feeling  perfectly  safe,  as  he 
reckoned  confidently  that  the  austere  Mahadeva  would 
never  be  the  father  of  a  son.  In  this,  however,  he  mis- 
calculated, and  in  the  fulness  of  time  his  destruction  was 
accomplished.^ 

The  above  three  legends  of  Ravana,  Viradha,  and  Tarika, 
besides  being  good  examples  of  privileges  wrung  by  ascetic 
practices  from  the  reluctant  gods,  illustrate  the  appreciation 
which  the  Eastern  has  always  felt  for  the  crafty  overreach- 
ing of  a  dangerous  foe. 

It  is  related  in  the  Vishnu  Purana  ^  that  a  certain 
King  Uttanapada  had  two  wives,  each  of  whom  bore  him 
a  son.  One  day  the  king,  seated  on  his  throne,  was  fond- 
ling on  his  knee  the  son  of  his  favourite  wife,  while  his 
other  son,  Dhruva,  a  child  of  only  five  years  of  age,  who 
happened  to  be  present,  attempted,  quite  naturally,  to 
share  the  same  privilege.  The  favourite  queen,  Suruchi, 
who  was  at  hand,  lectured  the  little  one  rather  haughtily 
on  his  unbecoming  presumptuousness,  telHng  him  that  the 
throne  was  a  fit  seat  for  her  son,  but  certainly  not  for  him. 
Abashed  and  indignant,  little  Dhruva  withdrew  to  his  own 
mother's  apartments,  and  there  unburdened  his  bursting 
heart  of  its  feelings  of  anger  and  mortification.  His  dis- 
tressed mother  tried  to  console  the  sulky  child,  and 
recommended,  with  true  Indian  feeling,  the  exercise  of 
patience  and  the  cultivation  of  a  spirit  of  contentment ; 
but  Dhruva  was  too  deeply  hurt  to  accept  his  mother's 
well-meant  advice,  and,  infant  though  he  was,  said, 
*'  Mother,  the  words  that  you  have  addressed  to  me  for 
my  consolation  find  no  place  in  a  heart  that  contumely 
has  broken.  I  will  exert  myself  to  obtain  such  elevated 
rank  that  it  shall  be  revered  by  the  whole  world.  Though 
I  be  not  bom  of  Suruchi,  the  beloved  of  the  king,  you 
shall  behold  my  glory,  who  am  your  son.  Let  Uttama,  my 
brother,  possess  the  throne  given  to  him  by  my  father ;  I 

^  Moor's  Hindu  Pantheon,  London,  1810,  pp.  51-63. 

^  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson's  translation,  bk.  i.  ch.  xi.  and  xii. 

23 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

wish  for  no  other  honours  than  such  as  my  own  actions 
shall  acquire,  such  as  even  my  father  has  not  enjoyed." 
Cherishing  these  aspirations,  the  very  precocious  infant 
prince,  in  quest  of  the  highest  honour  and  glory,  followed 
a  course  which  no  European  child  or  man,  with  a  similar 
object  in  view,  could  dream  of  entering  upon.  Dhruva, 
who,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  only  five  years  of  age, 
left  the  city  "  and  entered  an  adjoining  thicket,  where  he 
saw  seven  munis  ^  sitting  upon  hides  of  the  black  antelope." 
Explaining  to  these  holy  sages  the  circumstances  which 
had  drawn  him  forth  from  his  royal  home,  and  his  ardent 
wishes  for  the  attainment  of  a  lofty  position,  he  respectfully 
asked  for  their  advice.  The  saints  were  good  enough  to 
listen  to  the  child,  to  recommend  the  worship  of  Vishnu 
and  to  instruct  him  in  the  path  he  should  pursue. 
"  Prince,"  said  the  rishis.  "  thou  deservest  to  hear  how  the 
adoration  of  Vishnu  has  been  performed  by  those  who  have 
been  devoted  to  his  service.  His  mind  must  first  be  made 
to  forsake  all  external  impressions,  and  a  man  must  then 
fix  it  steadily  on  that  being  in  whom  the  world  is.  By 
him  whose  thoughts  are  thus  concentrated  on  one  only 
object  and  wholly  filled  by  it,  whose  spirit  is  firmly  under 
control,  the  prayer  that  we  shall  repeat  to  thee  is  to  be 
invariably  recited  :  '  Om  !  glory  to  Vasudeva,  whose  essence 
is  divine  wisdom,  whose  form  is  inscrutable,  or  is  manifest 
as  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Siva.'  " 

To  work  out  his  great  project,  the  little  prince  repaired 
to  a  holy  place  on  the  banks  of  the  Jumna,  and  there 
followed  very  carefully  the  instructions  he  had  received 
from  the  rishis,  with  the  gratifying  result  that  Vishnu 
became  manifest  in  his  mind.  When  this  occurred,  the 
earth  itself  was  unable  to  bear  the  weight  of  the  diminutive 
ascetic.  The  celestials  took  alarm,  and  tried  every  art  to 
disturb  and  distract  his  meditations,  but  all  their  efforts 
were   ineffectual.      Still   more   alarmed   by   their   want   of 

^  "  Muni — a  holy  sage,  a  pious  and  learned  person,  endowed  with  more 
or  less  of  a  divine  nature,  or  having  attained  to  it  by  rigid  abstraction  and 
mortification.  The  title  is  applied  to  the  rishis,  and  to  a  great  number 
of  persons  distinguished  for  their  wTitings  considered  as  inspired,  as  Panani, 
Vyasa,  etc." — Dawson's  Dictionary  of  Hindu  Mythology. 

24 


SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  HINDU  ASCETICISM 

success,  the  lesser  gods  appealed  to  Vishnu,  addressing  him 
thus  :  "  God  of  gods,  sovereign  of  the  world,  god  supreme 
and  infinite  spirit,  distressed  by  the  austerities  of  Dhruva, 
we  have  come  to  thee  for  protection.  As  the  moon 
increases  in  his  orb  day  by  day,  so  this  youth  advances 
incessantly  towards  superhuman  power  by  his  devotions. 
Terrified  by  the  ascetic  practices  of  the  son  of  Uttanapada, 
we  have  come  to  thee  for  succour.  Do  thou  allay  the 
fervour  of  his  meditations.  We  know  not  to  what  station 
he  aspires,  to  the  throne  of  Indra,  the  regency  of  the  solar 
or  lunar  sphere,  or  to  the  sovereignty  of  riches  or  of  the 
deep.  Have  compassion  on  us,  lord  ;  remove  the  affliction 
from  our  breasts,  divert  the  son  of  Uttanapada  from  per- 
severing in  his  penance." 

To  allay  the  fears  of  the  gods,  and  for  the  general  good, 
Vishnu  at  last  came  down  to  earth  in  person  and  granted 
the  boy-ascetic's  wish  to  obtain  "  an  exalted  station,  superior 
to  all  others,  and  one  that  shall  endure  for  ever."  This 
ambitious  desire  was  gratified  by  Dhruva's  exaltation  to  the 
skies,  as  the  fole-star  of  the  visible  universe. 

This  legend  differs  somewhat  from  the  previous  ones, 
inasmuch  as  it  brings  out  very  clearly  the  idea  of  the  almost 
unimaginable  efficacy  of  mental  abstraction  from  human 
affairs  when  coupled  with  profound  concentration  of  attention 
upon  the  Supreme  Being  alone.  This  is  a  decided  modi- 
fication of  the  original  doctrine,  and  will  be  referred  to 
again. 

Myths  and  legends  similar  to  those  already  given  in 
the  preceding  pages  of  this  chapter  may  be  indefinitely 
multiplied,  showing  that,  according  to  the  beliefs  of  the 
Hindus,  if  one  ardently  coveted  anything,  the  most  effectual 
course  to  follow  was  to  practise  rigid  austerities,  self-denial, 
and  suffering,  till,  in  spite  of  the  lesser  gods,  the  Supreme 
Being  would  be  constrained,  by  immutable  and  primordial 
laws,  to  grant  the  desired  boon.  But,  more  than  that,  we 
also  learn  that  even  the  Supreme  Being,  "  the  cause  of  the 
creation  and  its  course,"  endured,  in  the  form  of  a  rauni, 
the  greatest  self-inflicted  penances  for  thousands  of  years 
on  the  Gandhamadana  mountains  by  the  lake  Pushkara 
and  on  the  banks  of  the  Saraswati,  apparently  to  obtain 

25 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

sovereignty  over  all  created  things.^  Fantastical  as  these 
statements  and  notions,  no  doubt,  appear  to  European 
apprehension,  we  may  profitably  pause  to  note  that  if  the 
Hindu  were  to  point  out  that  a  kindred  idea  seems  to  be 
at  the  root  of  the  story  of  the  Crucifixion,  as  well  as  of  the 
motive  assigned  for  that  astounding  voluntary  humiliation 
on  the  part  of  the  Deity,  it  would  be  impossible  for  the 
unbiassed  seeker  after  truth  to  deny  the  validity  of  the 
contention,  since  in  the  *'  cross  and  passion "  of  the  Re- 
demption we  distinctly  find  the  notion  of  the  efficacy  of 
voluntary  hardships,  poverty,  physical  suffering,  and  death, 
for  the  attainment  of  a  great  object  otherwise  imachievahle 
even  by  the  Deity  Himself.^ 

I  have  no  wish  to  labour  this  point,  but  I  may  in  passing 
emphasise  the  fact  that  it  is  upon  faith  in  the  efficacy  of 
self-inflicted  hardships  that  Hindu  asceticism,  with  its 
strange  and  cruel  practices  and  its  marvellous  legends  of 
superhuman  feats,  really  rests,  and  that,  according  to 
Christian  doctrine,  mankind  could  not  have  been  rescued 
from  the  Powers  of  Evil  by  any  other  means  than  the  bitter 
sufferings  and  the  supreme  self-sacrifice  of  the  second  person 
of  the  Triune-God. 

No  doubt,  the  Hindu  has  arrived  at  ideas  of  asceticism 
and  its  fruits  other  than  those  embodied  in  the  legends 
cited  in  the  foregoing  pages  :  as,  for  example,  when 
Sanatsujata  said  to  Dritarashtra,  "  The  words  esteem  and 
asceticism  (practices  of  munis)  can  never  exist  together. 
Know  that  this  world  is  for  those  that  are  candidates  for 
esteem,  while  the  other  world  is  for  those  that  are  devoted 
to  asceticism,"  ^  the  object  of  the  asceticism  contemplated 
in  this  passage  being  spiritual  emancipation,  not  worldly 
advancement  or  the  gratification  of  desires  of  any  kind. 
But  the  value  of  austerities  for  the  attainment  of  practical 
ends,  commendable  or  the  reverse,  and  the  power  for  good 

^  Mahabharata — Vana  Parva,  section  xii.  A  zinc  statuette  in  the  India 
Musenm,  South  Kensington,  figured  in  Moor's  Hindu  Pantheon,  plate  3, 
represents  the  four-headed  Brahma  aa  an  ascetic  with  a  rosary  in  one  hand, 
a  mendicant's  water-pot  in  another,  a  sacrificial  spoon  in  a  third,  and 
so  on. 

^  The  usual  accompaniment  of  temptations  is  also  not  wanting. 

^  Mahabharata — Udyoga  Parva,  section  xli. 

26 


SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  HINDU  ASCETICISM 

or  evil  possessed  by  the  ascetic,  are  the  considerations 
connected  with  asceticism  which  are  most  deeply  graven 
on  the  Indian  mind ;  and  this  fact  enables  as  to  appreciate 
the  standpoint  from  which  the  Hindu  looks  up  to  the 
sadhu  who  has  practised,  or  may  pretend  to  have  practised, 
austerities,  as  one  who  might  help  him  to  gain  his  ends, 
or,  on  the  other  hand,  might  hurl  a  curse  at  him  with  the 
most  direful  consequences. 

Although  I  should  hesitate  to  aver  that  the  possibility 
of  attaining  power  for  good  or  evil  has  at  any  time  been, 
for  the  majority  of  sadhus,  the  sole  inducement  for 
embracing  the  ascetic  life,  yet  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  this  possibility  has  always  had  a  considerable  fascina- 
tion for  Hindus  of  all  classes.  But  there  are,  and  always 
will  be,  amongst  good  Hindus,  many  timid  ones,  weaker 
vessels,  who  shrink  from  pain  or  physical  hardships  of  a 
severe  kind,  and  yet  long  to  attain  and  enjoy  the  sub- 
stantial fruits  of  asceticism  ;  and  others  also,  mystics  and 
dreamers,  whose  fervent  emotionalism  would  discover  a 
ready  method  for  the  reunion  of  the  soul  with  the  Infinite 
Spirit,  without  necessarily  disdaining  the  possession  of  the 
much  -  coveted  power  over  man  and  nature  which  such 
mystic  union  with  the  AJl-Spirit  might  involve.  A  case 
in  point  is  the  Dhruva  myth  narrated  above,  But  the 
aspirations  of  the  less  resolute  or  more  emotional  spirits 
find  most  complete  expression  in  the  yoga  system,  described 
in  a  later  chapter,  its  more  salient  features  being  posturings, 
abstraction,  and  concentration  of  mind. 

Where  all  believe  in  the  efficacy  of  ascetic  practices 
for  the  attainment  of  extraordinary  powers,  it  is  inevitable 
that  the  rivalry  of  classes  and  of  sects  should  be  productive 
of  competing  claims  for  their  respective  leaders  in  regard 
to  superiority  in  supernatural  potency.  A  characteristic 
example  of  this  is  the  more  than  titanic  old-world  conflict 
of  which  Vasishta  and  Visvamitra  are  the  heroes,  between 
whom,  says  the  Mahabharata,^  "  there  existed  a  great 
enmity,  arising  frmn  rivalry  in  austerities?''  At  the  same 
time,  since  the  two  men  named  belonged  to  the  sacerdotal 
and  warrior  castes  respectively,  their  antagonism  illustrates 

^  Gust's  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i.  p.  420. 

27 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

tlie  early  and  vigorous  struggle  for  supremacy  between  the 
castes  they  represented. 

The  marvellous  legend  of  their  enmity  and  warfare 
is  to  be  found  variously  related  in  both  the  great  Indian 
epics,  as  well  as  in  the  Puranas  ;  but  only  the  main  out- 
lines of  the  story  need  be  reproduced  here.  According  to 
the  chroniclers,  King  Visvamitra  had  in  one  of  his  ordinary 
hunting  expeditions  been  entertained  very  sumptuously 
by  the  Brahman  sage  Vasishta  in  his  forest  hermitage. 
Discovering  that  the  hermit  was  enabled  to  thus  provide 
a  magnificent  feast,  and  costly  presents  too,  in  the  midst 
of  the  wilderness,  because  he  was  the  fortunate  possessor 
of  a  wondrous  "  cow  of  plenty,"  the  king  became  covetous, 
and  expressed  a  wish  to  purchase  the  animal,  offering  no 
less  than  a  hundred  million  cows,  or  even  his  entire 
kingdom,  for  her. 

Vasishta,  however,  declined  to  part  with  his  "  cow  of 
plenty  "  on  any  terms  whatever. 

At  this  unexpected  rebuff,  Visvamitra  was  so  offended 
that  he  haughtily  resolved  to  exercise  his  kingly  pre- 
rogative and  forcibly  appropriate  the  object  of  his  cupidity. 
But  he  had  miscalculated.  The  marvellous  cow,  after  a 
wonderful  colloquy  with  her  master,  refused  to  move, 
and,  when  assailed  by  the  king's  attendants,  created  out 
of  her  own  sweat,  urine,  excrement,  etc.,  such  hosts  of 
strange  warriors  armed  to  the  teeth  that  the  royal  army 
could  not  stand  before  them.  In  the  battle  which  took 
place  one  hundred  of  the  king's  sons  rushed  upon  Vasishta, 
but  were  at  once  reduced  to  ashes  by  a  blast  from  the 
sage's  mouth.  Defeated  and  humiHated  by  the  Brahman, 
the  king  turned  to  the  only  resource  open  to  him,  and 
resolved  to  acquire  superhuman  power  by  ascetic  practices, 
solely  with  a  view  to  an  eventual  triumph  over  the  Brahman 
Vasishta.  For  this  purpose  he  abandoned  his  kingdom, 
proceeded  to  the  Himalaya  mountains,  and  there  for  a  long 
period  subjected  himself  to  the  severest  austerities.  As  a 
consequence,  the  great  god  Mahadeva  appeared  to  him, 
presented  him  with  celestial  weapons,  and  instructed  him 
in  the  use  of  these  terrible  instruments  of  destruction. 
Elated  with  pride,  confident  in  his  newly  acquired  powers, 

28 


SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  HINDU  ASCETICISM 

and  thirsting  for  vengeance,  Visvamitra  hurried  ofi  to  punish 
his  victorious  foe.  He  burnt  down  Vasishta's  hermitage,  and 
drove  away,  in  headlong  flight,  all  the  dwellers  in  that  quiet 
retreat.  But  the  Brahman  sage  was  not  to  be  overcome 
even  by  the  wondrous  weapons  of  the  gods.  A  battle 
ensued,  and  once  more  was  demonstrated  the  unapproach- 
able superiority  of  the  sacerdotal  caste,  even  in  the  use  of 
the  deadly  weapons  of  war.  Visvamitra  might  now  have 
been  destroyed ;  but,  at  the  earnest  intercession  of  the 
munis,  the  victorious  Brahman  stayed  his  hand  and  spared 
his  vanquished  enemy.  Taught  by  bitter  experience, 
Visvamitra  now  fully  realised  that  only  the  acquisition  of 
Brahmanhood  could  place  him  on  an  equality  with  Vasishta, 
and  so  once  more  he  resorts  to  that  infallible  source  of 
power,  austerities.  By  self-inflicted  hardships  for  a  thousand 
years  he  earned  a  place  in  the  heaven  of  royal  sages,  but 
was  intensely  dissatisfied  with  this  reward ;  yet,  seeing  no 
other  way  of  attaining  his  object,  he  renewed  and  intensi- 
fied his  mortifications,  which  were,  however,  interrupted  by 
various  episodes,  one  of  them  being  an  exploit  on  the  part 
of  the  royal  ascetic  in  translating  to  the  celestial  regions 
in  his  human  body  one  Trisanku,  who,  banned  by  the 
priesthood,  had  appealed  to  Visvamitra  for  he]p.  It  was 
a  terrific  affair  this  introduction  of  Trisanku  into  heaven, 
for  it  was  actively  opposed  by  the  celestials  themselves,  and 
it  was  not  accomplished  until  Visvamitra  had  terrified  the 
astonished  gods  by  creating  new  stars  and  constellations  of 
stars,  and  had  even  threatened,  in  his  rage,  that  he  would 
create  another  god  Indra,  or  leave  the  world  without  any 
Indra  at  all.  Indeed,  the  masterful  ascetic  actually  began 
to  call  new  gods  into  being,  when  the  celestials  yielded  the 
point  in  dispute,  and  came  to  terms  mth  him.  After  this 
incidental  war  against  heaven,  the  -royal  ascetic  renewed 
his  austerities  for  a  thousand  vears,  when  Brahma 
announced  to  him  that  he  had  attained  the  rank  of  a  rishi. 
By  no  means  contented  with  this  reward,  the  king  con- 
tinued his  self-inflicted  penances,  but  for  a  short  time  fell 
into  the  snares  of  a  lovely  nymph  of  heaven,  Menaka  by 
name,  who  had  been  sent  down  to  earth  by  the  celestials 
expressly  to  attract  Visvamitra' s  attention  and  spoil  his 

29 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

labours.  After  recovering  liis  self-command  and  dismissing 
the  fascinating  nymph  kindly,  the  king  went  through 
another  course  of  penances  for  a  thousand  years,  and  at 
the  end  of  that  period  received  from  Brahma  the  dignity 
of  mahdrishi  (great  rishi).  He  learned  from  the  Supreme 
Being  that  he  had  not  yet  acquired  that  perfect  control 
over  his  senses  which  would  entitle  him  to  the  exalted 
distinction  of  Brahman-rishi  which  he  coveted  and  had 
striven  for.  So  the  indomitable  king,  and  mahdrishi  now, 
put  himself  through  a  more  rigorous  course  of  austerities, 
involving  the  most  painful  bodily  tortures,  the  maintaining 
of  absolute  silence,  and  the  suspension  of  breathing  for 
hundreds  of  years. 

"As  he  continued  to  suspend  his  breath,  smoke  issued 
from  his  head,  to  the  great  consternation  of  the  three 
worlds.  The  gods,  rishis,  etc.,  then  addressed  Brahma. 
'  The  great  muni  Visvamitra  has  been  allured  and  provoked 
in  various  ways,  but  still  advances  in  his  sanctity.  If  his 
wish  is  not  conceded,  he  will  destroy  the  three  worlds  by 
the  force  of  his  austerity.  All  the  regions  of  the  universe 
are  confounded,  no  Hght  anywhere  shines ;  all  the  oceans 
are  tossed  and  the  mountains  crumble,  the  earth  quakes 
and  the  wind  blows  confusedly.  We  cannot,  0  Brahma, 
guarantee  that  mankind  shall  not  become  atheistic.  Before 
the  great  and  glorious  sage  of  fiery  form  resolves  to  destroy 
(everything),  let  him  be  propitiated.'  "  ^ 

Accordingly,  the  gods,  headed  by  Brahma,  approached 
the  mighty  ascetic,  hailed  him  as  "  Brahman-rishi y^^  and 
pronounced  a  blessing  upon  him.  The  Kshatriya  king 
had  thus,  by  thousands  of  years  of  intense  mortification 
and  stern  self -discipline,  attained  the  exalted  rank  of  Brah- 
manhood.  Yet,  curiously  enough,  his  special  and  final 
hope  of  triumphing  over  Vasishta,  for  which  in  fact  he  had 
voluntarily  suffered  and  endured  torments  of  body  and 
mind  through  successive  millenniums,  was  never  gratified  ; 
for,  through  the  mediation  of  the  gods,  he  was  eventually 
reconciled  to  his  still  un vanquished  foe. 

For  us,  the  noteworthy  points  of  this  madly  extravagant 
legend  are:    (1)  the  excellent  illustration  it  affords  of  the 

*  Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i.  p.  409. 
30 


SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  HINDU  ASCETICISM 

firm  faith  of  the  Hindus  in  asceticism  as  a  means  of  obtaining 
superhuman  power  of  the  most  astonishing  kind ;  (2)  the  all 
but  unapproachable  dignity  of  Brahmanhood,  which  was  the 
lesson  the  Brahman  inventors  of  the  story  expressly  desired 
to  impress  upon  their  grossly  credulous  countrymen. 

As  the  above  fantastic  story  relates  to  mytliical  events 
of  an  extremely  remote  past,  it  might  well  be  thought  that 
the  old  world  of  marvels  therein  depicted  has  long  ceased 
to  exist  for  the  Hindu ;  but,  to  show  that  this  is  not  the 
case,  I  shall  now  outline  another  legend  which  purports  to 
record  wonders  of  quite  recent  date,  arising  out  of  the  pre- 
tensions of  the  modern  Sikh  sect,  in  the  person  of  its  original 
founder,  Baba  Nanak  (1469-1539  a.d.),  as  against  the  far 
older  sect  of  the  Yogis} 

During  a  halt  in  one  of  those  extensive  wanderings 
which  Baba  Nanak  loved  to  take  in  quest  of  wisdom,  his 
faithful  attendant  Mardanah  went  about  collecting  fuel 
for  their  dhoonee  or  smoky  fire.  Not  far  from  their 
temporary  camping-ground  there  apparently  lived  some  of 
those  perfect  Yogis  known  as  Siddhas,^  and,  as  soon  as 
Mardanah  had  got  together  a  small  quantity  of  fuel,  one 
of  these  Siddhas  came  up  and  wantonly  snatched  it  all 
away.  Mardanah,  deprived  of  the  fruits  of  his  labour, 
went  back  to  his  august  master  and  related  what  had 
occurred.  Nanak,  without  any  exhibition  of  temper, 
immediately  produced  some  fuel  out  of  the  folds  of  his 
flowing  garments,  and  with  these  miraculously  acquired 
combustibles  Mardanah  kindled  the  vesper  fires.  Baffled 
and  vexed,  the  Siddhas  raised  a  violent  storm  in  order  to 
extinguish  Nanak' s  dhoonee ;  but  its  only  effect  was  to 
scatter  their  own  fuel  and  quench  their  own  hearths. 
Notwithstanding  their  superhuman  powers,  the  Siddhas 
were  now  reduced  to  wandering  about^to  get  wood  and  fire 
for  themselves ;    but  as  Baba  Nanak  had  commanded  the 

1  Chap.  VIII. 

^  Siddhas — a  class  of  semi-divine  beings  of  great  purity  and  holiness, 
who  dwell  in  the  regions  of  the  sky  between  the  earth  and  the  sun.  They 
are  said  to  be  88,000  in  number. — Dawson's  Classical  Dictionary  of  Hindu 
Mythology,  etc. 

The  Siddhas  referred  to  in  the  text  are  some  of  the  eighty- four  perfect 
Yogis  specially  venerated  by  the  Yogi  sect  described  in  Chap.  VIII. 

31 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

spirit  or  genius  of  fire  to  abstain  from  helping  them,  in 
the  end  the  Siddhas  were  obliged  to  come  to  the  Baba 
himself,  and  humbly  entreat  him  to  ignite  their  fuel  for 
them.  However,  Nanak  would  consent  to  their  request 
only  on  condition  that  Goraknath,  their  much-venerated 
chief,  should  send  him  one  of  his  own  ear-rings  and  one 
of  his  wooden  shoes,  as,  presumably,  tokens  of  acknow- 
ledgment of  defeat.  In  order  to  test  Nanak  further,  the 
Siddhas,  smarting  under  their  discomfiture,  asked  him  to 
give  them  milk  there  and  then.  He  did  so  immediately 
by  merely  commanding  the  water  in  a  well  close  by  to  be 
converted  into  milk.  The  transmutation  took  place  in 
obedience  to  the  saint's  behest,  the  milk  thus  produced 
welling  up  to  the  surface. 

Nanak's  next  miracle  in  this  contest  was  bringing  water 
from  the  Ganges,  as  the  Siddhas  had  challenged  him  to 
provide  them  with  fresh  river-water  for  their  morning 
bath.  Mardanah  was  sent  with  a  spade  to  trace  a  con- 
tinuous line  from  the  distant  river,  and  was  instructed  not 
on  any  account  to  look  back.  As  he  drew  the  spade 
along  behind  him  a  stream  of  water  followed  it,  but, 
when  he  neared  the  spot  where  his  master  was  seated, 
his  curiosity  prevailed  over  his  habit  of  obedience,  and, 
like  Lot's  wife,  he  turned  his  head  round  to  look  over  liis 
shoulder.  The  stream  which  had  flowed  so  far  ceased  to 
advance  any  farther. 

"  Now,"  said  the  Siddhas  boastfully,  "  we  shall,  by  our 
own  power,  cause  it  to  come  along,"  but  their  efforts  were 
all  in  vain. 

Chagrined  by  these  displays  of  Nanak's  superiority,  his 
opponents  resolved  to  perform  certain  marvels  of  their 
own.  Some  of  the  Siddhas  began  to  fly  about,  or  make 
their  deerskins  skim  through  the  firmament,  like  ordinary 
denizens  of  the  air.  One  boastful  Siddha  would  ride  on 
flames  of  fire,  and  another  on  a  bit  of  a  stone  wall  as  if  it 
were  a  horse.  Nanak's  stolid  indifference  to  their  displays 
of  extraordinary  power  exasperated  these  thaumaturgists 
greatly,  and  they  openly  challenged  him  to  do  something 
similar  to  the  wonders  they  had  shown  him,  if  only  for 
his  own  credit's  sake  ;    but  the  Baba  protested  that  he 

32 


SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  HINDU  ASCETICISM 

was  a  humble  man,  and  had  nothing  startling  to  show 
them,  adding,  however,  that  if  they  would  hide  themselves, 
he  would  find  them  wherever  they  might  be. 

The  Siddhas  accepted  the  guru's  challenge  to  the  pro- 
posed game  of  hide-and-seek.  One  of  them  flew  up  into 
the  heavens  and  hid  there,  another  sought  concealment 
in  the  recesses  of  the  far  Himalayas,  a  third  secreted  him- 
self in  the  bowels  of  the  earth  ;  but  Nanak  soon  found 
them,  one  and  all,  and  dragged  them  forth  from  their 
hiding-places  by  the  scalp-locks  which  adorned  the  crowns 
of  their  heads.  Then  it  was  Nanak's  turn  to  hide  himself, 
and  that  of  the  others  to  seek  for  him.  What  he  did  was 
to  resolve  his  corporeal  frame  into  its  pristine  elements — 
fire,  air,  earth,  and  water — while  his  soul  was  reunited 
wdth  God.  The  Siddhas^  of  course,  could  not  find  the 
disintegrated  guru ;  but  he  had  told  them  before  his  dis- 
appearance how  they  might  get  him  to  come  back  if  they 
were  unable,  as  he  foresaw  they  would  be,  to  discover  him. 
They  were  to  place  a  small  offering  at  the  foot  of  the  tree 
where  he  usually  sat,  and  to  pray  to  God  for  the  return 
of  Nanak,  when  he  would  reappear.  Utterly  discomfited, 
they  did  so,   and  the  Baba  graciously  came  back.^ 

There  are,  in  both  Hindu  and  Buddhist  story,  no 
end  of  similar  marvellous  contests,  which,  strange  and 
whimsical  as  they  may  appear  to  the  modern  European, 
are,  after  all,  only  the  deliriously  extravagant  Indian 
equivalents  of  the  biblical  contests  between  Moses  and 
the  Egyptian  magicians  (Ex.  vii.  8-12),  and  between 
Elijah  and  the  priests  of  Baal  (1  Kings  xviii.  21-40),  or 
of  the  traditional  struggle  between  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul 
on  the  one  side  and  Simon  Magus  on  the  other. ^     Muslim 

^  Janam  Sakhee.  Guru  Angad  Sahib  received-  the  account  from  Bala 
(another  of  Nanak's  devoted  attendants),  and  had  Piramookha  to  write  it 
down. 

2  In  this  trial  of  strength,  carried  out  in  the  presence  of  the  Roman 
Emperor  Nero,  the  test  consisted  in  raising  a  dead  man  to  hfe  and  in  putting 
to  practical  proof  the  claim  of  the  magician  that  he  could  fly.  In  the  first 
case  Simon  Magus  failed  utterly,  while  the  apostles,  of  course,  succeeded. 
Then  the  magician,  to  prove  his  power  of  sustaining  himself  in  the  air,  leaped 
from  a  high  tower,  and  seemed,  for  a  time,  to  float  in  the  atmosphere,  no 
doubt  supported  by  invisible  demons;  but,  eventually  overcome  by  the 
•superhuman  power  of  the  apostles,  he  fell  to  the  earth,  and,  being  mortally 

C  33 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

hagiography  also  abounds  in  trials  of  strength  between 
rival  leaders  of  the  people,  attended  with  striking  displays 
of  miraculous  power  on  the  part  of  the  opponents.^  It  is 
not  too  much  to  say  that  religious  literature  everywhere 
affords  examples  of  appeals  to  striking  works  in  attestation 
of  the  truth  of  the  mission  of  the  prophet  or  the  holiness 
of  the  saint. ^ 

From  the  myths  and  legends  cited  above,  a  fair  idea 
can  be  formed  of  the  motives  which  the  Hindu  mind  has 
deemed  sufficient  and  proper  for  the  most  protracted  and 
terrible  self-mortifications  imaginable,  and  it  is  also  as 
clear  as  day  that  these  motives  have  no  conscious  or  un- 
conscious relation  to  ethics. 

Moreover,  there  is  no  denying  the  fact  that,  regarded 
from  the  ordinary  standpoint  of  morals,  the  celebrated 
Hindu  sages  do  not  generally  command  especial  admira- 
tion outside  the  charmed  circle  of  their  own  countrymen. 
This,  naturally  enough,  the  Christian  missionary  was  not 
slow  to  discover.  On  this  subject  the  Rev.  Mr.  Ward 
of  Serampore  says — 

"  These  tupushivees  (ascetics)  are  supposed  to  have 
been  the  authors  of  the  most  ancient  of  the  Hindoo  writ- 
ings, in  some  of  which,  it  is  admitted,  sentiments  are  to 
be  found  which  do  honour  to  human  nature.  But  it  is 
equally  certain  that  these  sages  were  very  httle  afiected 

injured,  died  a  few  days  later.  This  story  is  told  by  St.  Justin  (second 
century)  and  several  others  amongst  the  early  Christian  writers. 

It  may  be  added  that  we  learn  from  tradition  that  St.  Matthew  defeated 
certain  redoubtable  magicians  in  Ethiopia,  and  that  his  brother  evangelist, 
St.  John,  came  out  triumphant  from  a  contest  with  the  high  priest  of  Diana 
at  Ephesus. — Lives  and  Legends  of  the  Evangelists^  Apostles,  and  other 
Early  Saints,  by  Mrs.  Arthur  Bell  (George  Bell  &  Sons,  1901). 

^  A  good  example  of  this  is  the  very  wonderful  story  of  Sidi  Ikhlef 
given  in  chap.  x.  of  Colonel  Trumelet's  Les  Saints  de  r Islam. 

-  A  recent  writer  says,  "  The  monkish  historians  pit  their  heroes  against 
each  other.  What  Moschus  tells  us  of  orthodox  monks  is  balanced  by  the 
tales  of  John  of  Ephesus  about  the  Monophosytes,  and  Thomas  of  Marga  is 
not  outdone  by  either  when  he  recounts  the  performances  of  his  Nestorians. 
The  monks  competed  against  each  other  individually,  and  their  achieve- 
ments were  boasted  of  by  the  adherents  of  the  various  parties  into  which 
the  later  Christological  controversies  rent  the  Church." — The  Spirit  and 
Origin  of  Christian  Monasticism,  by  James  O.  Hannay,  M.A.,  pp.  172,  173 
(Methuen,  1903). 

34 


SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  HINDU  ASCETICISM 

by  these  sentiments  ;  and  perhaps  the  same  might  be  said 
of  almost  all  the  heathen  philosophers.  Vushishthu  inflicted 
on  himself  incredible  acts  of  severity  ;  but  in  the  midst  of 
his  devotions  he  became  attached  to  a  heavenly  courtesan, 
and  cohabited  with  her  five  thousand  years.  Purashuru, 
an  ascetic,  violated  the  daughter  of  a  fisherman  who  was 
ferrying  him  over  a  river,  from  which  intercourse  sprang 
the  famous  Vyasu  and  the  author  of  the  Muhabharutu. 
Kupilu,  an  ascetic,  reduced  King  Sagurus'  sixty  thousand 
sons  to  ashes,  because  they  mistook  him  for  a  horse-stealer. 
Brigoo,  in  a  fit  of  passion,  kicked  the  god  Vishnoo  in  the 
breast.  Richeeku,  for  the  sake  of  subsistence,  sold  his 
son  for  a  human  sacrifice.  Doorvasa,  a  sage,  was  so 
addicted  to  anger  that  he  was  a  terror  both  to  gods  and 
men.  Ourvvu,  another  sage,  in  a  fit  of  anger  destroyed 
the  whole  race  of  Hoihuyu  with  fire  from  his  mouth,  and 
Doovasa  did  the  same  to  the  whole  posterity  of  Krishnu. 
Javalee,  an  ascetic,  stands  charged  with  stealing  cow's 
flesh  at  a  sacrifice  :  when  the  beef  was  sought  for,  the 
saint,  to  avoid  detection,  turned  it  into  onions ;  and  hence 
onions  are  forbidden  to  the  Hindoos.  The  Pooranus,  indeed, 
abound  with  accounts  of  the  crimes  of  these  saints,  so  famous 
for  their  religious  austerities  :  anger  and  lust  seem  to  have 
been  their  predominant  vices."  ^ 

Ward's  indictment  of  the  risJiis  partakes  of  the  obvious, 
yet  the  Christian  missionary,  while  right  as  to  his  facts, 
has  entirely  failed  to  understand  the  mental  constitution  of 
the  pantheistic  Hindu,  and  has  consequently  been  unable 
to  appreciate  the  exalted  position  of  the  successful  ascetic 
as  compared  both  with  his  fellow-men  and  celestial  beings, 
or  to  perceive  his  complete  enfranchisement  from  ethical 
laws  which  might  be  binding  upon  ordinary  humanity. 

These  points  will  become  clear  as  we  proceed. 

*  A  View  of  the  History,  Literature,  and  Religion  of  the  Hindus,  pp.  286, 
287.  Mr.  Ward's  spelling  of  the  Sanskrit  names  has  been  retained,  although 
it  differs  much  from  the  modern  style. 


35 


CHAPTER  III 


SADHUS  BEFORE  THE  PUBLIC  AT  FAIRS  AND  ELSEWHERE 


Sadhiis  as  seen  at  Fairs — Their  Dress — Sect  Marks  and  their  Explanation — 
Hairdressing — Rosaries — Various  Ornaments  and  their  Significance — 
Sadhus' /Alms-bowls,  Tongs,  Arm-rests,  Charas-pipes,  Bhang- mortars, 
etc. — Hermitages — Ascetic  Practices  of  various  Kinds  and  Degrees — 
Minor  Asceticisms — Posturings — Strange  Purificatory  Pvites. 

F  the  vast  army  of 
sadhus  who  roam 
about  India,  either 
alone  or  with  com- 
panions, not  many- 
have  any  settled 
home.  There  are,  it 
is  true,  scattered  all 
over  the  country,  sub- 
stantial monasteries, 
but  these  afford  only 
temporary  abodes, 
and,  so  far  as  I  know, 
are  available  as  resi- 
dences only  to  a 
privileged  few,  who 
have  some  hereditary  claim  or  pecuniary  interest  in  the 
establishment. 

As  a  rule,  the  sadhus  adopt  a  life  of  easy,  irresponsible 
indolence  and  mendicancy.  Their  calendar  of  fairs  and 
festivals  is  comprehensive  and  accurate.  They  know 
well  how  to  time  their  devious  wanderings  so  as  to  make 
them  fit  in  with  the  festal  events  of  each  locality  within 
their  usual  annual  round  of  pilgrimages  to  sacred  places, 
where,  on  all  important  occasions,  they  congregate  in  hosts, 

36 


SADHUS  BEFORE  THE  PUBLIC  AT  FAIRS 

and  where  they  may  be  studied  to  advantage  as  regards 
the  peculiarities  of  their  costume  and  external  appearance 
generally. 

Leaving  out  of  account,  for  the  present,  the  thoughts, 
motives,  beliefs,  hopes,  and  aspirations  of  the  sadhus,  let 
us  take  a  superficial  survey  of  these  interesting  representa- 
tives of  Indian  mysticism,  as  they  appear  at,  say,  a  great 
religious  gathering  on  the  Ganges. 

Amidst  the  bustle  of  the  fair,  amongst  the  moving 
crowd  of  ordinary  pilgrims  and  cheerful  holiday-makers, 
in  the  flying  dust  and  round  about  the  booths  and 
tents,  may  be  seen  quaint  figures  robed  in  peculiar 
salmon-coloured  garments.  These  are  usually  sadhus, 
salmon-colour  being  the  prevailing  though  not  universal 
tint  of  the  raiment  worn  by  such  Hindu  ascetics  as  care 
at  all  about  clothing  themselves,  even  in  the  somewhat 
scanty  fashion  of  Brahmanic  India.  It  is  not,  however, 
always  on  foot  that  the  sadhus  are  to  be  seen.  Some- 
times they  appear  in  more  lordly  fashion,  borne  aloft 
on  the  backs  of  tall  elephants  in  company  with,  or  in 
attendance  upon,  the  abbot  of  some  considerable 
monastery  or  the  high  priest  of  some  important 
temple. 

A  great  number  of  sadhus  discard  all  attire  but  the 
scantiest  of  rags  ;  and  amidst  so  much  nudity  one  is  not 
surprised  to  find  that  in  their  case  the  skin,  for  its  mere 
protection  from  the  sun's  rays  and  insect  pests,  is  usually 
rubbed  over  with  ashes,  prepared  by  some  ascetics  with 
the  greatest  care,  being  sifted  repeatedly  through  folds  of 
cotton  cloth  till  quite  as  impalpable  as  any  toilet  powder. 
The  application  of  this  greyish-white  powder  to  a  dark 
skin  gives  a  peculiar  effect,  which,  I  bejieve,  is  not  without 
attractiveness  in  Indian  eyes.^ 

Wherever  many  sadhus  congregate,  close  inspection  will 
soon  reveal  the  fact  that  on  their  foreheads  and  noses 
most  of  them  have  white  or  coloured  marks,  neatly  painted. 
Some  have  symbols  also  depicted  on  the  breast  and  arms. 

^  Some  folk-lorista  suggest  that  Indian  ascetics  rub  their  bodies  over 
with  dust  and  ashes  because  these  substances  are  potent  scarers  of  demons. 
— W.  Crookes,  Popular  Religion  and  Folk-lore  of  Northern  India,  pp.  29,  30. 

37 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

The  tilaJcSj  or  tikas,  as  the  forehead  marks  are  called,  may 

not  be  beauty  spots,  but  they  are  worth  looking  at,  for 

they  serve  as  insignia  of  different  sects.     For  example,  one 

sadhu  bears  on  his  forehead  the  trifalu^  three  lines  drawn 

upwards  from  near  the  meeting  of  the  eyebrows,  the  central 

line  red,   and  the   outer  ones  white,   this  being   the   sect 

mark  of  the  Ramats.      The  red  line  is  painted  with  roli, 

a  preparation  of  turmeric  and  lime,  the  white  lines  with 

gopichandana,  a  calcareous  clay  procured  from  Dwarka  out 

of  a  pool  in  which,  according  to  the  Krishna  legend,  the 

frail    gopis    (milkmaids)  drowned    themselves    in    despair 

upon    hearing    of    the    death    of    their    lover,    the    divine 

Krishna.      The  triple  lines  of  the  trifala  are  not  without 

significance,   being   emblematic   of   the   three   gods   of   the 

Hindu    triad,    the    central   line    representing    Vishnu,    and 

those  on  the  right  and  left  respectively  Siva  and  Brahma.^ 

Thus  the  trifala  suggests  and  recalls  to  mind  not  only  the 

Creator,  the  Preserver,  and  the  Destroyer,  but  also,  at  the 

same  time,   the  amours  of  the  gay  god  Krishna  on  the 

banks  of  the  Yamuna. 

If  for  the  red  line  in  the  trifala  a  black  one  (painted 
with  charcoal  from  incense  offered  to  Narayana)  appears 
on  a  sadhu's  forehead,  he  is  one  of  the  peculiar  sect  of  the 
Madhavacharis. 

Again  the  tripundra^  three  lines  along  the  forehead 
from  side  to  side,  painted  with  vibuti  or  sacred  ashes, 
distinguishes  the  Sivaite  followers  of  Sankaracharya. 
"  The  Kowls  (extreme  saktas)  usually  betray  their  cult  by 
painting  their  foreheads  with  vermilion  dissolved  in  oil. 
The  Dakhinacharis  have  generally  an  urdhapundra,  or 
perpendicular  streak,  in  the  central  part  of  the  forehead, 
the  colouring  material  being  either  a  paste  of  sandalwood 
or  a  solution  in  ghi  of  charcoal  obtained  from  a  horn 
fire."  2 

More  examples  of  sect  marks  need  not  be  given  now ; 
but   it   is    necessary    to    state    that   such   marks   are   not 

1  That  other  interpretations  of  the  trifala  are  also  offered,  and  accepted, 
need  not  surprise  us.  Vide  Mr.  C.  W.  King's  The  Gnostics  and  their 
Remains,  p.  301. 

^  Dr.  J.  N.  Bhattacharjee,  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  pp.  411,  412. 

38 


SADHUS  BEFORE  THE  PUBLIC  AT  FAIRS 

peculiar  to  professed  sadhus,  and  appear  also  on  the  foreheads 
of  Hindus  who  have  not  abandoned  secular  life. 

One  has  only  to  look  in  the  most  casual  way  at  an 
assemblage  of  sadhus  to  find  out  that  amongst  them  ':ome 
have  their  hair  braided  and  coiled  upon  the  anterior  part 
of  the  crown  of  the  head,  and  that  others  have  their 
matted  locks  loose  and  shaggy.  Men  who  wear  their  hair 
coiled  up  carefully  upon  the  head  are,  irrespective  of  sect, 
called  jhuttadarees ;  those  who  wear  their  hair  falling  in 
disorder  about  the  face,  hhoureeahs.  This  latter  style  is 
adopted  by  a  great  number  of  monks,  who,  if  we  may 
judge  by  appearances,  evidently  desire  to  give  themselves 
a  forbidding  and  formidable  look.^ 

Shaven  pates  may  also  be  seen  wherever  Hindu 
ascetics,  particularly  of  the  more  advanced  orders,  con- 
gregate. 

Most  sadhus  wear  strings  of  beads  about  their  necks 
or  carry  rosaries  in  their  hands,  reminding  one  that  it  was 
from  the  East,  probably  during  the  time  of  the  Crusades, 
that  Christendom  borrowed  these  aids  to  devotion.  From 
the  nature  of  the  prayer-beads  worn  by  them  it  is  usually 
easy  to  distinguish  between  the  followers  of  the  gods 
Vishnu  and  Siva  respectively,  according  as  they  favour 
beads  of  the  holy  basil  wood  {ocymum  sanctum)  or  the 
rough  berries  of  the  rudraksha  tree  (elcBocarpus  ganitrus). 
If  they  wear  two  necklaces  made  of  the  wood  of  the  basil 
plant  (the  tulsi  or  tulasi  of  the  Indians),  they  are  probably 
of  the  sect  of  the  Swami  Narayanis,  who  worship  Krishna 
(Vishnu)  and  also  his  mistress  Radha. 

It  has  been  stated  by  the  late  Sir  Monier  Williams  ^ 
and  others,  that  the  rosary  {japa-mdld  or  muttering  chaflet) 
of  the  votary  of  Siva  consists  of  32  or  64  rudraksha  berries, 

^  "  Magistrates  in  Northern  India  are  often  troubled  by  people  who 
announce  their  intention  of  '  letting  their  hair  grow '  at  someone  whom 
they  desire  to  injure.  This,  if  one  can  judge  by  the  manifest  terror  ex- 
hibited by  the  person  against  whom  this  rite  is  directed,  must  be  a  very 
stringent  form  of  coercion.  For  the  same  reason  ascetics  wear  their  hair 
loose  and  keep  it  uncut,  as  Samson  did ;  and  the  same  idea  probably 
accounts  for  the  rites  of  ceremonial  shaving  of  youths,  and  of  the  mourners 
after  death." — W.  Crookes,  Pojndar  Religion  and  Folk-lore  of  Northern 
India,  i.  239. 

2  Modern  India — Art :  Indian  Rosaries. 

39 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

and  that  the  follower  of  Vishnu  affects  one  of  108  beads 
of  basil  wood.  But,  as  I  have  seen  rudraksha  rosaries  of 
108  berries,  I  presume  the  rule  referred  to  is  not  very  closely 
observed.^ 

The  sadhus"  self-adornment  is  not  restricted  to  necklaces 
and  rosaries.  Some  of  them  wear  phallic  emblems  depend- 
ing from  the  neck  by  woollen  threads,  or  fastened  on  the 
arms.  A  few  have  small  bells  attached  to  their  arms. 
Others  wear  great  ear-rings.  Armlets  of  iron,  brass,  or 
copper  may  also  be  seen  adorning  these  ascetics.  Neck- 
laces of  little  stones  glitter  on  the  throats  of  a  small  number. 
Occasionally  one  may  be  met  having  his  hair  embelUshed 
with  a  metalhc  substance  called  swarma  maksh  (golden 
fly).  Again  one  has  a  conch  shell  tied  on  to  his  wrist,  and 
another  various  quaint  figures  and  devices,  painted,  or 
even  branded,  on  his  arms.^ 

"  What  very  queer,  eccentric,  and  barbarous  attempts 
at  beautification  !  "  says  the  European,  with  a  contemptuous 
smile,  as  he  takes  stock  of  these  strange-looking  philosophers. 
Yet,  quaint  and  simple  as  their  adornments  undoubtedly 
are,  the  sadhus  have  evident  pride  in  them  ;  and  with  good 
reason  too,  for  to  them  and  to  their  fellows  they  are,  like 
the  palm-leaf  in  the  hand  of  the  Christian  friar  returned 
from  Palestine,  and  like  the  different  pewter  medals  with 

^  In  the  discussion  which  followed  the  reading  of  a  paper  by  the  Rev. 
Herbert  Thurston,  S.  J.,  before  the  Society  of  Arts  on  "  The  History  of 
the  Rosary  in  all  Countries,"  Sir  George  Bird  wood  said,  "  Nothing  can  be 
simpler  than  the  art  of  the  Hindu  rosary,  the  Saiva  rosary  of  84  beads  and 
the  Vaishnava  of  108  ;  but  when  you  learn  that  the  sacred  number  84 
{chaurasi)  is  made  up  of  the  number  of  the  12  signs  of  the  zodiac,  multipUed 
by  the  number  of  the  7  planets  ;  and  that  the  sacred  number  108  is  simi- 
larly made  up,  the  moon  being  counted  as  three — the  rising,  full,  and  waning 
moon — instead  of  one,  then  you  understand  that  every  Hindu  rosary  sym- 
bolises the  whole  circuit  of  the  hosts  of  heaven ;  and  this  knowledge 
henceforth  transfigures  them  in  your  eyes.  He  was  satisfied  from  the 
numbers  of  the  beads  strung  on  them,  and  their  mode  of  division,  in  12 
groups  of  7,  that  the  earhest  Christian  rosaries,  Uke  the  Baudha  and 
Islamitic  rosaries,  were  originally  derived  from  the  rosaries  of  the  Hindus." 
— Journal  of  the  Society  of  Arts,  21st  February  1902,  p.  275. 

^  "  It  appears,  however,  that  stamping  the  mark  with  a  hot  iron  is 
commonly  in  use  in  the  Dekhin.  A  similar  practice  seems  to  have  been 
knowTi  to  the  early  Christians,  and  baptizing  with  fire  was  stamping  the 
cross  on  the  forehead  with  a  hot  iron." — Professor  Wilson's  ReligiotLS  Sects 
of  the  Hindus,  footnote,  p.  28. 

40 


SADHUS  BEFORE  THE  PUBLIC  AT  FAIRS 

wMch  the  mediaeval  visitors  to  celebrated  shrines  adorned 
their  hats  and  dresses,^  precious  souvenirs  and  legible  signs 
of  holy  pilgrimages  accomplished  by  plain  and  mountain. 
Those   rude   armlets  of  iron,   brass,   and  copper  recall  to 
mind   and  are   well-known   badges   of   visits   to   the   lofty 
Himalayan  monasteries  of   Pasupatinath,  Kedarnath,   and 
Badrinath.      The   necklace   of   little   gleaming   stones   and 
the  "  golden  flies  "  tell  of  far  wanderings  to  the  shrine  of 
Kali  at  Hingalaj  in  distant  Beluchistan  ;  the  white  conch 
shell  on  the  wrist  indicates  a  pilgrimage  to  Rameshwar  in 
the  far  south  ;    and  the  symbolical  marks  branded  con- 
spicuously  upon   the   arm   may   be    the    evidence    of   the 
favour  of  Krishna  obtained  by  a  visit  to  Dwarka  by  the 
sea,  where  the  incarnated  god  ruled   in  the  olden  days.^ 
Having  renounced  the  world,  the  Hindu  ascetics  have 
reduced  their  belongings  to  a  minimum  ;  yet  being  human, 
they   have   not   been    able    to    cast   everything   aside.     As 
wandering  mendicants  depending  for  their  daily  food  upon 
the  charity  of  their  fellow-countrymen,  and  often  traversing 
long  distances  in  the  course  of  their  annual  tourings,  most 
of  them,  though  not  all,  have  in  practice  recognised  the 
necessity   of   possessing   an   alms -bowl   and    a   water -pot. 
These    consist    of,    perhaps,    a    mere    cocoanut-shell    or    a 
calabash,  but  in  many  instances  the  shell,  if  examined,  will 
be  found  provided  with  a  lid,  a  handle,  and  a  spout ;  the 
gourd  will   also   present   evidences  of  improvement,   being 
cut  into  a  convenient  shape  for  easy  carriage,  while  brass 
imitations  of  the  gourd  will  not  be  uncommon.     Some  taste, 
too,   is   often   displayed    in    adorning   these   very  homely 
vessels. 

Amongst  many  races  iron  is  beheved  to  have  the 
virtue  of  scaring  away  demons  and  evil  spirits  ;  it  is 
certainly  both  friend  and  foe  to  evil-doers.  As  a  protection 
against  more  substantial  enemies  than  wicked  spirits — wild 
beasts,  for  example — the  iron  fire -tongs  to  be  found  in  the 

^  Social  England,  edited  by  H.  D.  Traill  and  J.  S.  Mann,  vol.  ii.  pp. 
374,  375. 

2  Marking  or  branding  the  body  with  the  Vishnu  symbols  is  known  as 
bhajana.  Amongst  the  early  Christians,  many  branded  the  name  of  Christ 
upon  their  foreheads. 

41 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

possession  of  a  majority  of  these  ascetics  ought  to  be 
effective,  since  in  many  cases  they  are  so  exaggerated  in 
both  size  and  weight  as  to  become  formidable  weapons 
in  strong  hands,^  especially  when  they  happen  to  have 
been  sharpened  along  the  edges. 

Amongst  the  sadhu^s  impedimenta  will  be  noticed  tau- 
staves  used  as  chin-rests  and  arm-rests,  known  as  hairaguns,^ 
of  different  sorts,  adapted  to  the  various  positions  favoured 
by  the  contemplator  when  silently  engaged  in  his  profound 
and  pious  meditations.  I  understand  that  occasionally  one 
of  these  bairaguns  may  conceal  a  sharp  dagger.  I  have 
not  myself  come  across  any  of  this  dangerous  kind,  but 
have  no  reason  whatever  to  doubt  their  existence,  especially 
when  I  call  to  mind  that  even  the  crucifix  itself  (the 
crucifix  of  Crema)  has  been  sacrilegiously  used  as  a  re- 
ceptacle for  a  cruel  and  treacherous  poniard.^ 

As  narcotic  drugs  are  in  favour  with  Hindu  ascetics, 
charas-smokers  amongst  them  will  naturally  have  their 
chillums  (pipes)  stowed  away  somewhere  about  their  persons  ; 
and  confirmed  bhang-drinkers  will  not  find  a  stone  mortar 
and  wooden  pestle  too  burdensome,  even  when  wayfaring. 
It  would  be  an  interesting  philosophical  study  to  endeavour 
to  trace  the  influence  of  these  powerful  narcotics  on  the 
minds  and  bodies  of  the  itinerant  monks  who  habitually 
use  them.  We  may  be  sure  that  these  hemp  drugs,  known 
since  very  early  times  in  the  East,  are  not  irresponsible  for 
some  of  its  wild  dreamings,*  whilst  there  is  good  reason  to 
believe  that  they  have  often  given  the  user  protection  from 
malarial  and  other  diseases. 

Diminutive  idols  in  stone  and  metal  or  pictorial  re- 
presentations of  the  deities  will  be  found  in  the  miniature 
chapels  which  some  sadhus  set  up  when  they  halt  for  a 
while  at  any  convenient  spot ;    and,  along  with  the  idols 

*  Vide  initial  letter,  Chap.  VII.  Section  II. 

2  An  arm -rest  is  used  as  the  initial  letter  of  Chap.  VIII.  Section  II. 
^  Sketches  and  Studies  in  Italy  and  Greece,  by  John  Addington  Symonds, 
vol.  i.  pp.  219-21. 

*  The  Christian  missionary  sarcastically  remarks,  "  A  great  number  of 
Hindu  modern  saints  live  in  a  state  of  perpetual  intoxication,  and  call  this 
stupefaction,  which  arises  from  smoking  intoxicating  herbs,  fixing  the  mind 
on  God."— Ward's  Hindus,  p.  283. 

42 


•*«w 


A    BAIKAGI    AND    HIS    HEKMITAGE. 


Fig.  1. 


To  face  page  42. 


SADHUS  BEFORE  THE  PUBLIC  AT  FAIRS 

and  pictures,  various  objects  specially  associated  with  the 
divinities  in  the  holy  legends  of  Hinduism.  Of  course  the 
gods  and  the  sacred  objects  present  will,  in  each  case, 
depend  upon  the  particular  sadhu's  sect,  his  beliefs  and 
preferences.  In  this  connection  it  may  be  mentioned  that 
amongst  Saivas  the  following  are  likely  to  be  found  :  a 
lingam,  a  human  skull,  a  tiger's  skin,  a  trisula  or  trident, 
and  a  dameru  or  drum.  Among  Vaishnavas  may  be  looked 
for  the  saligram  stone  (a  kind  of  ammonite),  the  tulasi 
plant,  the  conch  shell  {sanJcha),  and  the  discus  (chakra), 
emblematic  of  the  sun. 

Sadhus   vary   their   extensive   peregrinations   by   halts, 
often  very  long  ones,  especially  when  old  age  is  creeping 
insidiously  upon  them  and  long  journeys  become  fatiguing 
and  distasteful.     A  hermitage  of  some  sort  by  the  river- 
side, or  a  cool  place  in  the  shade  of  a  spreading  peepul  or 
banian  tree  near  a  temple,  may  be  the  sadhu's  quiet  home 
for  months  or  even  years.     Here,  on  the  selected  spot,  he 
maintains  in  the  open  air  the  wood  fire,  whose  soft  smoke, 
most  useful  in  keeping  off  mosquitoes  and  other  trouble- 
some insects,   seems   an   indispensable   accompaniment,   as 
well  as  an  outward  and  visible  sign,  of  the  sadhu's  abode. 
Here  he  usually  sets  up  a  tiny  altar  to  his  favourite  or 
tutelar  deity,  and  is  himself  visited  regularly  by  the  religious 
who  wish  to  earn  merit  by  charity  to  holy  men.     Persons 
desirous  of  securing  his  good  offices  for  the  attainment  of 
more    definite    worldly   ends    also   find    their   way    to   his 
hermitage,  and  here  he  lives  on  the  alms  of  the  neighbour- 
hood till  his  own  caprice,  or  inexorable  death,  puts  a  period 
to  the  sojourn.     Whether  resting  or  on  the  march,  sadhus 
who  are  strict  observers  of  the  rules  of  the  order  or  sect 
they  belong  to  would  have  their  time  well  occupied  from 
sunrise  to  sunset  in  the  performance  of  the  many  detailed 
ritualistic  duties  and  exercises  prescribed  for  them ;  and  as 
most  of  the  present-day  ascetics  are  ignorant  men,  rarely 
under   the    direct   control    of   any    superior,    they   usually 
neglect  or  curtail  their  ceremonial  obligations,  or,  at  any 
rate,  discharge  them  quite  perfunctorily. 

The  illustrations  (Figs.  1  and  2)  will  give  a  fair  idea 
of   the   hermitages   of   Indian   sadhus,   which,    picturesque 

43 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

though  they  may  be,  are  certainly  not  comfortable,  and 
could  be  habitable  only  in  a  warm  climate. 

To  account  for  his  long  rest  at  the  foot  of  the  peepul 
tree  (Ficus  religiosa)  where  he  had  established  himself,  the 
man  depicted  in  Fig.  1,  a  sadhu  of  the  Bairagi  order,  informed 
me  that  he  had  come  there  in  obedience  to  a  gracious 
summons  from  the  goddess  Devi,  whose  temple  was  alongside, 
and  that  he  would  move  on  when  the  divinity,  of  her  good 
pleasure,  should  direct  him  in  a  vision,  as  before,  to  leave 
the  place.  Within  his  shed  he  had  installed  an  image  of 
Rama  Chandra,  before  which  he  was  enabled,  through  the 
kindness  of  friends  and  admirers,  to  heap  up  every  day  a 
small  pile  of  rose  petals.  Outside,  as  the  illustration 
shows,  there  lies  a  rather  suspicious-looking  bottle,  while 
the  hermit  himself  is  seen  busy  grinding,  in  a  stone  mortar, 
some  dried  leaves  of  the  hemp  plant  (cannabis  Indica) 
preparatory  to  infusion  in  cold  water,  in  order  to  enjoy  his 
favourite  appetiser  and  intoxicant  bhang. 

Of  the  men  in  the  group,  Fig.  2,  the  one  with  averted 
face  was  not  actuated  by  any  feeling  of  modesty  or 
self -depreciation  from  facing  the  camera.  He  joined  the 
others  casually  while  the  instrument  was  being  adjusted, 
and,  when  asked  to  assume  a  suitable  attitude,  pompously 
replied  that  he  obeyed  no  man's  behests,  recognising  no 
master  save  Rama  Chandra.  It  required  some  little 
persuasion  on  the  part  of  his  brother  sadhus  to  induce  him 
even  to  take  up  the  ungracious  and  ungraceful  pose  in 
which  he  was  photographed.  He  might,  perhaps,  have 
been  a  shady  character  wanted  by  the  police,  and  might 
have  acted  as  he  did  for  prudential  reasons,  or,  which 
is  quite  as  probable,  his  rudeness  may  have  been  due 
merely  to  an  objection  to  be  photographed,  on  the  ground 
that  any  likeness  taken  carries  away  with  it  some  virtue 
from  the  original — possibly  a  portion  of  the  living  soul — 
this  being  by  no  means  an  uncommon  superstition. 

Lay  Hindus  are  often  subjected  by  the  Brahmans 
to  penances  for  offences  such  as  the  ill-treatment  or 
killing  of  a  cow,  or  for  some  other  equally  serious  breach 
of  the  ethical  or  ceremonial  law.  And  occasionally  sadhus, 
for   reasons    of   their    own    already    indicated,  voluntarily 

44 


m 

73 


SADHUS  BEFORE  THE  PUBLIC  AT  FAIRS 

undergo  inconveniences,  pains,  and  even  terrible  tortures. 
In  doing  so  they  follow  the  traditional  path,  and  do  not 
exercise  any  special  ingenuity  in  the  invention  of  methods 
of  self -torment. 

One  favourite  mode  of  mortifvinoj  the  flesh  is  to  sit 
under  the  open  canopy  of  heaven  girt  about  with  five  small 
fires. ^  Sometimes  only  four  fires  are  lighted,  the  sun 
overhead  being  regarded  as  the  fifth  one  ;  and  an  intoler- 
able fire  he  is,  too,  on  a  cloudless  summer  day  in  the  plains 
of  India.  As  a  rule  this  arrangement  is  devoid  of  sincerity, 
and  is  indeed  a  mere  performance  or  show.  Yet  the  fires, 
insignificant  though  they  be,  serve  the  very  practical 
object  of  advertising  the  sadhu  and  attracting  admirers 
and  clients.  Sadhus  who  follow  this  practice  are  known  as 
fanchadhunis. 

Another  way  of  afflicting  and  subduing  the  body  is 
to  sit  and  sleep  on  a  bed  of  spikes.  I  have  even  seen  a 
sadhu's  wooden  shoes  bristling  inside  with  a  close  crop 
of  pointed  nails.  That  the  discomfort  in  such  cases  due 
to  the  constant  contact  of  acute  spikes  with  some  portion 
or  other  of  the  almost  naked  body  is  real,  there  can  be 
little  doubt,  but  it  need  not  be  very  injurious  to  health. 
Referring,  in  connection  with  this  practice,  to  Bhishma, 
one  of  the  heroes  of  the  Mahabharata,  Mr.  W.  Crookes 
writes  :  "To  the  Hindu  nowadays  he  is  chiefly  known 
by  the  tragic  circumstances  of  his  death.  He  was 
covered  all  over  by  the  innumerable  arrows  discharged  at 
him  by  Arjuna,  and  when  he  fell  from  his  chariot  he  was 
upheld  from  the  ground  by  the  arrows  and  lay  on  a  couch 
of  darts.  This  sara-sayya  or  *  arrow-bed '  of  Bhishma 
is  probably  the  origin  of  the  kantaka-sayya  or  '  thorn- 
couch  '  of  some  modern  Bairagis,  whg  lie  and  sleep  on  a 
couch  studded  with  nails."  ^  To  the  discredit  of  human 
nature  it  must  be  admitted  that  deceptions  and  impostures 
even  in  asceticism  are  unfortunately  inevitable.  An 
Indian  gentleman,  not,  however,  too  favourably  disposed 
towards  the  ascetics,  assured  me  that  he  once  found  out 
that  a  sadhu  whose  practice  it  was  to  sit  in  public  on  spikes 

^  For  illustrations  of  this  and  other  forms  of  asceticism  vide  Frontispiece. 
^  The  Popular  Religion  and  Folk-lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  i.  p.  92. 

45 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

had  cunningly  taken  the  precaution  to  protect  his  buttocks 
with  thin  iron  plates  so  artfully  made  with  irregular  surface 
as  to  deceive  almost  any  onlooker  into  the  behef  that  his 
flesh  was  being  pitted  by  the  cruel  points. 

There  are  sadhus  —  tharasri  they  are  called  —  who 
will  stand  leaning  on  some  kind  of  rest  for  days  or  weeks 
together,  with  what  painful  fatigue  and  hardship  it  is  easy 
to  imagine.  Occasionally  in  this  form  of  self-torture  only 
one  leg  is  used,  the  other  being  drawn  up. 

A  prominent  feature  in  the  ascetic  practices  of  some 
sadhus  is  hanging  head  downwards  suspended  from  the 
bough  of  a  tree  or  a  suitable  framework,  for  perhaps  half 
an  hour  at  a  time.  Such  sadhus  are  known  as  urdhamukhiy 
Fig.  3,  but  must  be  exceedingly  rare,  as  I  have  come  across 
only  a  single  example  of  this  class,  described  later  on  in 
Chap.  IX. 

Severer  forms  of  voluntary  torture  are  also  known,  as 
when  a  man  ties  his  arm  to  a  support  such  as  a  light  bamboo, 
so  as  to  keep  it  erect  overheard,  till,  at  last,  the  disused  limb, 
reduced  to  a  shrunken  and  rigid  condition,  refuses  to  be 
lowered  again  to  its  natural  position.  When  both  arms 
are  so  dealt  with,  the  subject  becomes  a  helpless  cripple 
entirely  dependent  for  everything  upon  the  kindness  of 
others.  Sadhus  who  practise  this  form  of  austerity  are 
known  as  urdhabahus.  A  modification  of  the  last- 
mentioned  practice  is  the  closing  of  the  hand  till  it 
becomes  useless  and  the  long  nails  grow  like  curving  talons 
from  the  cramped  and  atrophied  fingers,  or  even  find  their 
way  through  the  flesh  between  the  metacarpal  bones  of 
the  hand. 

Burying  alive,  or  performing  samadh  as  it  is  called, 
is  a  very  rare  yet  well-known  practice  amongst  Hindu 
religious  devotees.  The  period  of  inhumation  may  be  from 
a  few  days  to  five  or  six  weeks,  and,  if  the  buried  man 
lives  out  the  fixed  time,  he  emerges  from  his  temporary 
grave  an  undoubted  saint  and  an  object  of  popular  venera- 
tion ever  afterwards.  The  advantages  in  view  are  great 
enough  to  tempt  the  more  ambitious  sadhu ;  but  samadh 
is  attended  with  the  gravest  risks,  even  when  undertaken 
by     cunning    and     designing    impostors    for    their     own 

46 


[A.  J.  Coml: ridge  &  Co.,  Bombay. 


AN   rEDHA:MrKHI    SADHU. 


To  face  page  4fi. 


1 


SADHUS  BEFORE  THE  PUBLIC  AT  FAIRS 

glorification  and  profit.  Two  recent  instances,  both  end- 
ing fatally,  are  described  by  Sir  Monier  Williams  in  his 
Modern  India  (pp.  50-53). 

A  well-known  and  well -authenticated  instance  of  a 
samadh  lasting  forty  days  and  ending  satisfactorily  is  the 
case  of  the  yogi  Haridas  in  the  time  of  Ranjit  Singh  of  the 
Punjab  1  (A.D.  1792-1839). 

Great  hardship  attends  what  is  known  as  the  ashtanga 
danddwat,  or  prostration  of  the  body,  involving  the  per- 
formance of  a  pilgrimage  by  a  slow  and  most  laborious 
mode  of  progression, — in  fact,  the  application  of  eight  parts 
of  the  body — the  forehead,  breast,  hands,  knees,  and  insteps 
— to  the  ground.  The  vower  determines  to  traverse  the 
distance  to  his  destination,  a  shrine  or  some  noted  place  of 
pilgrimage,  by  prostrating  himself  full  length  on  the  road, 
then  crawling  along  till  his  heels  touch  the  spot  where  his 
forehead  last  rested,  then  prostrating  himself  again,  and  so 
on,  with  repetitions  on  repetitions,  till  his  goal  is  reached. 
The  performance  savours  of  great  humility,  and  is  not  con- 
ll  fined  to  short  distances.  I  once  met  a  youthful  sadhu  at 
Burdwan  in  Bengal,  on  the  Grand  Trunk  Road  of  Northern 
India,  moving  in  this  leech-like  fashion  from  Juggernaut 
to  Benares,  a  distance  of  about  six  hundred  miles,  and  I 
have  heard  of  pilgrims  thus  measuring,  as  it  were,  their 
toilsome  way  towards  the  sacred  source  of  the  Ganges, 
amongst  the  eternal  snows  of  the  Himalayas,  pursuing  for 
months,  and  even  years,  with  patient  courage  a  journey 
almost  impossible  of  accomplishment  in  such  inhospitable 
regions  under  the  imposed  conditions. ^ 

There  are  others  also  who  cHmb  the  mighty  Himalayas, 
not  to  visit  the  source  of  the  Ganges,  but  to  reach  the  far- 
off  heavens  beyond.  In  the  olden  time,  so  the  story  goes, 
King  Yadhisthera,  weary  of  Ufe  and  its  disappointments, 
journeyed  towards  Mount  Meru,  and,  after  many  painful 
vicissitudes  on  the  way,  arrived  at  the  celestial  mountain, 

^  Described  after  Dr.  Honigberger  in  my  Indian  Life,  Religious  and 
Social  (T.  Fisher  Unwin),  pp.  28-30. 

^  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  ashtanga  is  sometimes  undertaken  simply  with 
the  object  of  collecting  money  for  a  daughter's  dowry.  I  came  across  an 
instance  of  this  kind  in  December  1898. 

47 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

and  was  finally  admitted  into  swarga,  the  abode  of  bliss  ;  ^ 
and  ever  since  then  many  a  sadhu  has  resolutely  directed 
his  footsteps  towards  the  same  goal,  has  gone  alone  upon 
the  same  great  journey  across  the  rugged  mountains,  and 
has  not  turned  hack. 

Fasting  is  too  obvious  a  penance  to  have  been  over- 
looked by  sadhus  as  a  means  of  macerating  the  body  ;  and 
abstinence,  combined  with  vigils  and  meditations,  carried  to 
excess,  must  in  many  cases  have  led  amongst  them  to  those 
hallucinations  and  ecstasies  of  an  enfeebled  constitution 
which  are  as  familiar  in  the  history  of  the  saints  of  Christen- 
dom as  in  that  of  other  Asiatic  religions. 

Vows  of  silence  are  not  uncommon,  and,  however  trying 
in  the  observance,  may  be  very  convenient  under  easily  con- 
ceivable circumstances. 

Once  only  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  an  ascetic  who 
had  afflicted  himself  by  loading  his  person  with  massive 
iron  chains,  weighing  in  the  aggregate  about  five  hundred 
pounds,  and  he  was  a  Muhammadan.  On  the  opposite 
page  is  a  photograph  (Fig.  4)  of  this  man,  to  whom  I  shall 
refer  again  in  a  later  chapter. 

Sadhus  sometimes  mutilate  themselves  cruelly,  as  one 
did,  to  my  knowledge,  in  an  ungovernable  fit  of  temper. 
His  deserted  wife  had  followed  him  to  a  great  gathering 
of  ascetics,  and,  in  the  hearing  of  many,  entreated  him  to 
return  home  with  her.  A  few  of  the  ascetics  within  ear- 
shot made  jeering  observations  in  regard  to  the  new  sadhu 
and  his  predicament,  which  stung  him  into  a  fever  of  rage, 
to  be  cooled  only  by  the  sharp  edge  of  a  knife  and  a  dangerous 
haemorrhage.  I  learned  subsequently  that  the  case  was  by 
no  means  an  unusual  one.^ 

^  The  story  is  retold  from  the  Mahabharata  in  my  Great  Indian  Epics 
(1899),  pp.  194,  195. 

^  Self-mutilation  prompted  by  religious  fanaticism  is  not  even  now  a 
thing  of  the  past  in  Christian  Europe.  As  an  example,  I  may  cite  the 
following  instance  recorded  in  the  Daily  Mail  of  7th  May  1901. 

FANATICAL  SELF-MUTILATION 

(From  our  own  Correspondent). 

St.  Petersburg,  Friday,  "ird  May. 
Ivan  Plotnikoff,  a  peasant,  twenty-eight  years  of  age,  residing  at  Bie- 
lovodsk,  in  the  government  of  KharkoS,  called  at  the  public  library  there 

48 


A    FAQFIK    WEIGHTED    WITH    UEAA'Y    CHAINS. 


To  face  'page.  48^ 


SADHUS  BEFORE  THE  PUBLIC  AT  FAIRS 

At  certain  periods  of  the  year,  particularly  in  the 
month  of  April,  many  men  of  the  lower  castes  observe 
temporarily  the  discipline  of  the  ascetic  sects,  and  may 
then  be  seen  to  cheerfully  undergo  self-inflicted  tortures 
of  a  cruel  kind,  as,  for  example,  passing  thick  metal  skewers 
through  the  tongue,  the  cheeks,  or  the  skin  of  the  arms, 
the  neck,  and  the  sides,^  walking  upon  live  charcoal,  and 
rolling  upon  thorns.  Amongst  the  motives  most  commonly 
ascribed  to  these  temporary  low-caste  ascetics  are  the 
gratification  of  vanity  and  the  desire  for  the  pecuniary  gain 
which  their  performances  usually  bring  them ;  but  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  many  of  them  hope,  and  look  for, 
other  and  less  obvious  rewards  for  their  self-inflicted 
sufferings. 

Not  to  all  men  is  it  given  to  submit  voluntarily  to  the 
more  trying  austerities,  and  therefore,  as  might  have  been 
expected,  we  find  a  number  of  minor  asceticisms  indulged 
in  for  the  sake  of  attracting  attention  and  perhaps  gaining 
some  pecuniary  advantage.  For  example,  a  sadhu  whom  1 
saw  at  a  religious  festival,  a  big  and  powerful  fellow,  had 
a  strong  wooden  framework  erected  to  support  a  huge 
earthenware  jar  provided  with  a  perforation  at  the  bottom, 
from  which  a  stream  of  water  could  flow  out.  Round  about 
there  were  at  least  twenty-five  large  pots  of  water,  to  re- 
plenish the  great  jar  when  in  use.      Under  the   jar  the 

and  asked  for  a  book  which  would  teach  him  "  to  live  in  truth,"  as  he 
expressed  himself.  He  was  given  the  Holy  Gospel.  A  few  days  afterwards 
a  rumour  spread  about  the  place  that  PlotnikoS  had  cut  off  his  hand. 

When  Plotnikoff  had  read  in  the  Gospel  that  popular  text,  "  And  if  thy 
right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out "  (Matt.  v.  29),  he  took  it  in  a  Uteral 
sense,  and,  being  in  a  state  of  exaltation,  decided  then  and  there  to  proceed 
with  the  operation  of  removing  his  own  eye.  Not  finding,  however,  an  awl 
with  which  he  could  do  it,  he  got  hold  of  an  axe,  and  with  remarkable 
coolness  began  to  chop  the  wrist  of  his  hand,  which  he  out  off  after  the 
fourth  blow. 

Plotnikoff  is  now  lying  in  the  Starobielsky  Hospital,  whither  he  went 
on  foot.  It  is  amazing  that  he  could  manage  to  walk  a  distance  of  about 
fifteen  or  twenty  miles  after  having  lost  so  much  blood. 

^  These  piercings,  although  very  real,  and  seemingly  cruel,  do  not,  I 
must  admit,  appear  to  be  attended  with  serious  inconvenience.  I  have 
always  seen  them  carried  out  by  a  master  upon  his  chelas  or  disciples,  and 
on  every  occasion  the  impression  I  received  at  the  time  was  that  the  chelas 
were  under  hypnotic  influence — an  idea  strengthened  by  my  knowledge 
of  the  fact  that  practical  hypnotism  is  not  a  new  thing  in  India. 

D  49 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

sadhu  was  in  the  habit  of  sitting  during  the  night,  par- 
ticularly in  the  small  hours,  from  about  three  o'clock  till 
daybreak,  with  a  stream  of  water  falhng  on  his  head  and 
flowing  down  over  his  person  to  the  ground.  It  was  winter 
time,  and  very  cold  work  no  doubt,  but  the  sadhu  had  his 
reward  in  gratified  vanity ;  for  in  the  eyes  of  his  numerous 
admirers  he  was  Siva  himself  with  the  Ganges  falling  from 
heaven  upon  his  head  and  flowing  thence  to  bless  and 
fertilise  the  earth.^  This  man,  on  account  of  his  peculiar 
ascetic  practice,  would  be  known  as  a  jaladhara  tapaski. 
Sadhus  who  sit  all  night  immersed  in  water  are  called 
jalashayi,  but,  as  my  night  wanderings  have  not  been  very 
extensive,  I  have  not  seen  any  of  these  pecuhar  nocturnal 
soakers. 

I  once  came  across  a  sadhu,  or  pseudo  -  sac^Aw,  who 
would  put  pieces  of  Uve  charcoal  into  his  mouth  and  chew 
them,  pretending  that  they  were  savoury  morsels  and  his 
usual  food.  He  was  an  agriculturist  and  an  ignorant  fellow, 
whose  only  claim  to  notice  was  this  stupid  practice. 
There  are  some  ascetics  who  pretend  to  live  only  on  wheat 
bran,  others  who  give  out  that  the  water  they  drink  is 
invariably  mixed  with  wood  ashes.  Some  of  these  cases 
are  merely  instances  of  depraved  appetite  of  a  kind  not  un- 
known in  the  West.  Some  sadhus  there  are  (known  as 
jarari)  who  eat  fruits  and  nothing  else,  others  (dudhahari) 
who  subsist  on  milk  alone,  while  those  known  as  aluna 
never  eat  salt  with  their  food. 

Amongst  the  devices  for  attracting  attention  which 
take  the  form  of  self-inflicted  penances,  all  are  not  so 
innocuous  or  unobjectionable  as  the  ones  just  referred  to. 
For  example,  lusty  fellows  often  go  about  affecting  to 
keep  a  restraint  upon  their  sexual  desires  by  mechanical 
arrangements  which  they  do  not  conceal.  A  sect  given 
to  this  practice  is  noticed  by  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  under 
the  name  of  kara  lingis}  On  the  other  hand,  certain 
sadhus  (Bairagis)  are  credited  with  effectually  keeping  their 
desires  under  control  by  subjecting  themselves  to  a  cruel 

^  The  story  of  the  descent  of  the  Ganges,  reproduced  from  the  Ramayana, 
is  given  in  my  Great  Indian  Epics  (1899),  pp.  87-90. 
-  Beligious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  p.  151. 

50 


■A 


:5 


•n 

O 

> 


o 


05 


e 


"5 

M 


I 


SADHUS  BEFORE  THE  PUBLIC  AT  FAIRS 

discipline  entirely  destructive  of  particular  nerves  and 
muscles  of  tlie  body.^ 

As  aids  to  meditation,  possibly  also  in  some  cases  as 
means  for  the  mortification  of  tbe  flesh,  a  great  number  of 
dsans,  or  postures,  with  such  fantastic  names  as,  for  in- 
stance, the  padma  dsan  or  lotus  posture,  have  been  de vised. ^ 
Some  of  them  are  really  very  difficult  contortions,  only  to 
be  acquired  by  a  long  and  painful  apprenticeship  to  the 
art,  as  will  be  readily  understood  from  a  consideration  of 
the  attitudes  of  the  sadhus  in  Fig.  5. 

This  chapter  cannot  be  closed  without  a  reference  to 
certain  purificatory  rites,  which  are  practised  by  some 
sadhus  :  for  example— 

1.  Drawing  a  thread  through  the  mouth  and  one  of 
the  nostrils,  with  the  object  of  cleansing  the  nasal  fossae  : 
this  process  is  called  neti  harm. 

2.  Swallowing  a  long  strip  of  cloth,  and  after  it  has 
reached  the  stomach  drawing  it  out  again :  this  process  of 
cleaning  out  the  stomach  is  dhoti  karm. 

3.  Cleaning  the  throat  with  a  long  brush  called  Brahma 
dot  an. 

Two  purificatory  processes  known  as  hrajoli  harm  and 
ganesh  hriya  are,  to  say  the  least,  so  peculiar  that  I  will 
not  particularise  them  beyond  stating  that  the  latter  is  a 
process  of  flushing  the  colon  without  instrumental  aids. 
I  only  allude  to  these  practices,  in  order  to  lay  stress  on 
the  fact  that  the  cleansing  of  all  the  reachable  interior 
portions  of  the  body  seems  to  have  been  nothing  short  of 
a  mania  with  some  sectarians  in  India. 

1  Hindu  Manners,  Customs,  and  Ceremonies,  by  the  Abbe  J.  N.  Dubois, 
part  ii.  chap,  xxxiii, 

-  There  are  dsans  and  dsans  known  to  the  Indian  people,  and  they  are 
not  all  connected  with  sadhuism  nor  with  religious  practices  ;  many  of 
them  quite  the  reverse.  A  book  descriptive  bf  these  latter  exists,  but  it 
is,  I  believe,  on  the  Index  lihrorum  prohibitorum  of  the  Indian  police. 


51 


CHAPTEK  IV 

THE   WONDERS   THAT   PRESENT-DAY   SADHUS    AND 
FAQUIRS   ARE   SAID   TO   PERFORM 


Visionists  like  the  Sanyasi  Ramakrishna — Sadhua  to  some  extent  what  the 
Magicians  and  Necromancers  have  elsewhere  been — Tales  and  Anec- 
dotes of  the  Wonders  performed  by  Sadhus  and  of  Calamities  brought 
on  or  averted  by  them — Transmutation  of  Metals  by  Sadhus — Story 
of  Muslim  Thaumaturgist  who  was  the  Disciple  of  a  Sadhu — Claims  of 
Superiority  over  Sadhus  made  by  Faquirs — Strange  Treatment  of  a 
Faquir  by  a  co-Religionist — Sadhus  as  Physicians,  Palmists,  Fortune- 
tellers, and  Acrobats. 


M  0  N  G  S  T  the 
Indian  ascetics 
of  our  day  there 
are  some  —  like 
the  highly 
emotional  and 
tearful  Bengali 
Sanyasi  Rama- 
krishna,^ subject 
to  hysteria, 
trances,  and 
catalepsy  —  who 
see  visions,  are 
believed  to  have 
been  favoured 
with  personal 
visits  from  the 
very  gods  and 
goddesses  them- 
selves, and  are 
reputed    to     be 


•I..,.. 


^  Of  this  sadhu,  who  died  in  1886,  a  good  deal  has  recently  been  heard 
both  in  Europe  and  America.  Ramakrishna  :  His  Life  and  Sayings,  by 
Professor  Max  Miiller.  - 

52 


WONDERS  SADHUS  AND  FAQUIRS  PERFORM 

able  to  work  miracles,  though  indisposed  to  do  so,  thinking 
that  such  performances  are  hindrances  in  the  way  to  per- 
fection. But  apart  from  such  neurotic  saints,  who  always 
excite  attention  and  sometimes  found  new  sects,  every 
Hindu  knows  that,  though  not  nearly  so  powerful  as  the 
ancient  rishis,  whose  fame  has  grown  with  the  centuries, 
many  sadhus  do,  even  in  our  degenerate  days,  work  wonders, 
and  these  not  always  of  a  beneficent  kind.  What  the 
magician  is,  or  has  been,  in  other  countries,  that,  to  some 
extent,  is  the  sadhu  in  India.  Elsewhere  the  necromancer 
and  the  witch  have  been  in  antagonism  with,  and  under 
the  ban  of,  the  hierarchy,  but  in  India  the  ecclesiastical 
mantle  has  proved  elastic  enough  to  cover  even  some  sor- 
cerers, though  certainly  not  all. 

The  Christian  Church  has  always  admitted,  on  biblical 
authority,  the  existence  of  wizards  and  witches.  It  has 
abhorred  their  dread  power,  and,  when  the  vengeance  of 
Heaven  did  not  directly  overtake  them  for  their  deeds, ^ 
persecuted  them  to  the  death,  in  obedience  to  the  divine 
command,  "  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch  to  live  "  (Ex. 
xxii.  18 ;    Lev.  xx.  27). 

Mediaeval  history  is  painfully  blurred  with  the  smoke 
of  the  penal  fires  which  attest  the  zeal  of  the  Church  in 
the  suppression  of  witchcraft,  whose  successes  were 
attributed  to  diabolical  agency  ;  but  in  India,  since  the 
earliest  times,  magic  and  sorcery,  however  much  dreaded, 
have  not  been  without  a  certain  acknowledged  respecta- 
bility. 

Of  course  there  has  been  in  India  the  inevitable  rivalry 
between  the  hereditary  priesthood  and  the  lay  professors 
of  witchcraft,  but  the  Brahmans,  with  their  wonderful 
faculty  of  adaptation  to  circumstances,  themselves  adopted, 
at  a  very  early  date,  the  role  of  sorcerers  (as  the  Atharva 
Veda  amply  proves),  and  by  so  doing  have  inevitably,  though 

^  The  wicked,  if  we  may  believe  the  chroniclers,  were  sometimes  visited 
with  the  vengeance  of  God  in  a  startling  manner.  For  example  :  "  i\Iatilda 
was  a  great  and  potent  witch,  whose  summons  the  devil  was  bound  to  obey. 
One  day  she  aspired,  alone  of  all  her  sex,  to  say  mass ;  but  when  the 
moment  came  for  sacring  the  elements,  a  thunderbolt  fell  from  the  clear 
sky  and  reduced  her  to  ashes." — Sketches  and  Stvdies  in  Italy  and  Greece, 
by  J.  A.  Symonds,  ii.  179. 

53 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

unintentionally,  dignified  the  calling  of  the  lay  magician  ; 
since  spells  for  the  attainment  of  much  which  is  elsewhere 
stigmatised  as  base,  immoral,  and  impious  have  not  been 
excluded  from  the  sacred  canon  of  the  Hindus. 

"  Even  witchcraft,"  says  Mr.  Bloomfield,  "  is  part  of  the 
Hindu's  religion  ;  it  has  penetrated  and  become  intimately 
blended  with  the  hohest  Vedic  rites  ;  the  broad  current 
of  popular  religion  and  superstition  has  infiltrated  itself 
through  numberless  channels  into  the  higher  religion  that 
is  presented  by  the  Brahman  priests,  and  it  may  be  pre- 
sumed that  the  priests  were  neither  able  to  cleanse  their 
own  religious  beliefs  from  the  mass  of  folk-belief  with  which 
it  was  surrounded,  nor  is  it  at  all  likely  that  they  found 
it  in  their  interest  to  do  so."  ^ 

What  the  sadhu  is  credited  with  doing  or  being  able 
to  do,  what  the  people  think  of  him  as  a  wonder-worker 
and  a  person  capable  of  signally  and  very  unpleasantly 
resenting  any  disrespect  from  worldlings,  will  be  apparent 
from  the  following  characteristic  little  stories  picked  up  in 
my  wanderings  in  India. 

In  the  Deccan  a  certain  sardar,  or  chief,  who  openly 
expressed  disbelief  in  the  existence  of  hhuts  (goblins)  was 
assured  by  a  sadhu  that  they  really  did  exist.      The  sardar 
wanted  some  tangible  evidence  in  proof  of  this  assertion,  so 
the  sadhu  offered  to  give  the  sceptic  ocular  demonstration 
of  the  truth  of  his  statement,  on  condition  of  his  receiv- 
ing one  hundred  rupees  for  his  trouble.      The  offer  was 
accepted.     A  lonely  spot  in  the  jungle  was  selected  for  the 
exhibition.      Here,  at   midnight,    the    sardar   and   two    or 
three  of  his  friends,   together  with  the  sadhu,   assembled 
within  a  space  ringed  in  with  a  conspicuous  line  traced  on 
the  ground.     Outside  this  boundary  or  magic  circle  no  one 
was  to  move  on  pain  of  death  or  the  most  serious  trouble. 
When  all  were  seated  and  were  peering  anxiously  into  the 
darkness  which  surrounded  them,  the  sadhu  kept  repeating 
his  muntras  (spells),  till,  lo  !    in  the  mirk,  at  the  distance 
of  a  musket-shot,  there  appeared  a  lot  of  fantastic  bald- 
headed  urchins,  jumping  about  with  lighted  pieces  of  wood 

^  Introduction  (pp.  xlv,  xlvi.)  to  Bloorafield's  translation  of  the  Atharva 
Veda. — Sacred  Books  of  tlie  East,  vol.  xlii. 

54 


WONDERS  SADHUS  AND  FAQUIRS  PERFORM 

in  their  hands.  In  a  little  while,  however,  the  capering 
hhuts  all  disappeared.  Even  after  this  demonstration  the 
sardar  was  sceptical,  and  challenged  the  sadhu  to  reproduce 
his  uncanny  sprites  again.  The  wise  man  excused  himself ; 
but,  in  consideration  of  the  present  of  a  valuable  gold  kurra 
(bracelet),  repeated  the  performance  the  following  night. 
On  this  second  occasion  the  imps  of  darkness  who  appeared 
were  giil-bhuts,  and  instead  of  lighted  sticks  carried  hghted 
charaghs  (terra-cotta  lamps)  in  their  hands.  These  they 
waved  about  in  the  darkness,  but  no  inducements  could 
make  them  approach  the  spectators  within  the  enchanted 
enclosure  nearer  than  the  distance  of  a  musket -shot. 
Needless  to  add  that,  as  my  informant,  a  learned  pundit, 
assured  me,  the  sardar's  scepticism  on  the  important  subject 
of  the  existence  of  goblins  was  entirely  dispelled  by  this 
second  demonstration. 

The  following  extract  from  an  Anglo-Indian  newspaper 
will  serve  as  another  example  of  what  is  currently  reported 
about  sadhus  in  our  time. 


(( 


Extraordinary  Tale  of  a  Jogi. 


"  The  orthodox  Hindus  of  Trevandrum,  a  correspondent 
writes  to  a  Southern  contemporary,  have  lately  been  much 
excited  about  a  jogi  or  sanyasi  who  for  some  time  past  has 
been  literally  worshipped  and  reverenced  as  a  god  come 
down  to  men.  No  one  appears  to  know  where  this  man  came 
from,  or  to  what  particular  race  or  caste  he  belongs  ;  but  he 
was  supposed  to  be  a  Hindu.  On  his  arrival  he  sat  under 
a  banyan  tree,  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  Padmatheertham 
tank,  and  there  he  remained  for  three  years.  For  the  first 
week  or  so  after  he  had  taken  up  his  arboreal  residence,  he 
partook  of  some  milk  or  a  plantain,  or  two  twice  or  three 
times  a  week.  Then  he  gradually  extended  the  intervals, 
till  after  three  or  four  months  he  took  no  food  at  all,  spoke 
to  no  one,  and  passed  his  time  huddled  up  before  a  fire 
night  and  day  for  three  long  years.  He  looked  no  one  in 
the  face  ;  he  heeded  no  sounds,  no  question,  nothing.  The 
Maharajah  of  Travancore  on  one  occasion  stopped  near  the 
sanyasi  and  addressed  him,  without,  however,  obtaining  the 

55 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

slightest  recognition.  Exposed  to  tlie  cold  and  wet,  to  the 
heat  and  dust,  the  sanyasi,  without  partaking  a  morsel  of 
food,  passed  his  three  years'  existence  in  divine  contempla- 
tion, and,  although  every  morning  and  evening  numbers  of 
people  paid  him  homage,  he  appeared  oblivious  of  all  external 
circumstances.  A  few  days  ago  he  died." — Civil  and  Military 
Gazette,  Lahore,  23rd  April  1895. 

Calamities  are  often  due  to  sadhus.  For  example, 
a  serious  and  extensive  fire  broke  out  one  night  in  June 
1899  in  a  bazaar  at  Amritsar,  causing  great  loss  of 
property  and  of  a  few  lives  too.  It  appears  a  sadhu 
had  been  asking  for  alms  from  one  shop  to  another  in  this 
bazaar.  The  khatri  merchants,  puffed  up  with  the  pride 
of  wealth,  repelled  him  with  sharp  words,  one  of  them 
saying  to  him,  "  You  are  dressed  grandly  enough  !  why 
do  you  pester  me  for  fice  ?  " 

Now  the  sadhu  was  robed  in  a  new  sheet  which  some 
liberal  person,  most  likely  a  woman,  had  kindly  presented 
to  him.  Irritated  by  the  mahajurCs  (merchant's)  taunts, 
he  removed  the  cloth  from  his  shoulders,  and,  having 
procured  a  bit  of  fire,  deliberately  burnt  the  offending 
sheet  to  ashes  in  the  open  street,  and  then  went  his  way. 
Hardly  had  the  mendicant  sadhu  disappeared  from  the 
scene  of  liis  operations  when  flames  broke  out  in  the  shop 
of  the  merchant  who  had  affronted  him.  Realising  at 
once  that  the  calamity  was  the  result  of  the  sadhu' s 
displeasure,  the  khatri  merchant  hurriedly  despatched 
messengers  in  all  directions  to  find  the  offended  man, 
in  order  that  he  might  propitiate  him  if  possible  ;  but  the 
saint  was  not  to  be  discovered  anywhere,  so  the  shop 
of  the  niggardly  hunneeah  and  those  of  his  immediate 
neighbours  were  all  burnt  down  to  the  ground. 

The  person  who  kindly  put  me  in  possession  of  these 
interesting  facts  narrated  to  me  also  another  story  of  a 
past  generation,  one  likewise  connected  with  Amritsar  and 
well  known  to  his  own  father,  who,  at  the  time  to  which 
it  relates,  was  himself  a  dweller  in  that  city. 

A  sadhu,  as  is  not  unusual  with  these  gentlemen, 
entreated  a  pansdri  (druggist  or  herbalist)  to  give  him  the 

56 


WONDERS  SADHUS  AND  FAQUIRS  PERFORM 

wherewithal  to  have  a  good  smoke  of  liis  favourite  charas. 
"  I  am  on  fire,"  pleaded  the  sadhu,  "  do  give  me  a  little 
charas  to  cool  my  tortured  body."  "  Go  and  burn,"  was 
the  shopkeeper's  churlish  reply.  "  No,"  responded  the 
enraged  sadhu,  "  let  the  fire  seize  you  !  "  and  he  left  the 
spot  in  anger.  Within  a  minute  of  his  departure  the 
druggist  found  his  store  on  fire,  and,  realising  that  this 
calamity  was  due  to  the  holy  sadhu^s  curse,  made  no  vain 
attempt  to  combat  the  flames,  but  ran  hurriedly  after  the 
saint  in  order  to  appease  his  wrath.  He  found  the  object 
of  his  search  in  a  crowded  thoroughfare,  and,  falling  prone 
at  his  feet,  entreated  liim  to  extinguish  the  flames  he  had 
caused.  Promising  never  to  refuse  a  sadku's  request 
again,  the  distressed  pansdri  humbly  begged  the  offended 
mendicant's  pardon,  adding,  "  Come,  maharaj,  let  me  give 
you  the  charas  now."  Mollified  by  the  attentions  of  the 
druggist,  the  sadhu  said  to  him,  "  Your  shop  will  be 
burnt  down — that  is  inevitable  now  ;  but  as  you  have 
humbled  yourself  before  me,  and  are  sorry  for  your  unkind 
treatment  of  a  poor  sadhu,  you  may  go  your  way  with  the 
comforting  assurance  that  the  fire  will  redound  to  your 
advantage."  Reheved  of  all  anxiety  by  those  gracious 
words,  in  which  he  placed  the  most  implicit  confidence, 
the  druggist  went  back  to  his  store  and  watched  with  a 
contented  heart  the  fire  doing  its  work  of  destruction — 
though,  as  the  shop  with  its  contents  disappeared  in  the 
flames,  he  was  sorely  puzzled  to  imagine  where  his 
promised  luck  was  to  come  from.  However,  the  mystery 
was  soon  cleared  up.  On  inspecting  what  fit  tie  remained 
of  the  gutted  premises,  a  mass  of  hot  and  almost  molten 
silver  was  discovered,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  pansdri.  How 
it  came  there  was  not  difficult  of  explanation.  It  seems 
the  druggist  had  a  considerable  quantity  of  solder  in  his 
store.  This,  during  the  intense  heat  of  the  conflagra- 
tion, had  been  acted  upon  by  some  drug  or  combination 
of  drugs  also  present  there,  with  the  happy  result  that  the 
cheap  solder  had  been  transmuted  into  fine  silver. 

Not  only  trifling  and  temporary  but  even  widespread 
and  permanent  troubles  may  be  caused  by  the  curse  of 
an  oSended  sadhu.     To  believers  in  these  things  it  is  a 

57 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

matter  of  common  knowledge  that  the  scanty  water-supply 
in  one  of  the  cities  of  Upper  India — Umballah,  if  I 
remember  rightly  —  is  the  result  of  the  curse  of  a 
wandering  faquir.  He  had  gone  from  house  to  house 
asking  for  a  drop  of  water.  No  one  had  attended  to  his 
modest  request.  One,  indeed,  had  said,  by  way  of  excuse, 
"  I  have  only  a  little  water  for  my  own  use."  The 
faquir,  knowing  the  statement  to  be  quite  untrue,  became 
incensed  and  immediately  uttered  this  malediction,  "  Little 
water  shall  you  henceforth  have  in  the  wells  of  your  city  !  " 
and  the  curse  was  duly  fulfilled. 

How  very  advantageous  such  stories  must  be  to  the 
wandering  sadhus  in  their  peregrinations,  does  not  need  to 
be  pointed  out. 

Beneficent  actions  are  also,  though  rarely,  connected 
with  sadhus.     One  case  came  under  my  own  observation. 

When  in  1898  the  bubonic  plague  made  its  appear- 
ance in  the  Jullundar  district  of  the  Punjab,  and  the 
precautionary  measures  of  the  sanitary  authorities,  much 
more  than  the  fell  disease  itself,  created  a  great  excitement 
and  anxiety  amongst  the  people,  a  sadhu  of  the  sect  of 
the  yogis  came  to  Amritsar  and  established  himself  near 
a  great  tank  outside  the  city.  He  let  it  be  known, 
through  his  followers,  that  the  object  of  his  visit  was  to 
avert  the  dreaded  pestilence,  and  to  this  end  he  called 
upon  the  religious  and  charitable  to  afford  him  the  means 
of  carrying  out  that  most  meritorious  of  actions,  feasting 
the  poor.  An  account  of  my  visit  to  this  worthy  yogi 
will  be  found  in  a  later  chapter,  but  I  may  mention  here 
that,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  plague  did  not  appear  in 
Amritsar  that  year,  though  one  doubtful  and  subsequently 
discredited  case  was  reported  to  the  officials. 

The  transmutation  of  metals,  alluded  to  in  the  story 
about  the  herbalist  on  a  previous  page,  is  one  of  those 
mysterious  subjects  which  still  fascinate  the  Oriental 
mind.  A  learned  Hindu  related  to  me,  in  all  good  faith, 
the  following  experiences  of  one  of  his  intimate  friends  and 
a  sa<?/m- alchemist. 

This  friend,  when  a  young  man,  was  most  anxious  to 
become  a  sadhu,  and  attached  himself  to  a  Bairagi  who 

58 


WONDERS  SADHUS  AND  FAQUIRS  PERFORM 

had  come  from  the  solitudes  of  the  Himalayas  beyond 
Hurdwar  and  Rikhikesh.  The  sadhu  seemed  a  very 
holy  man,  and  the  youth  waited  assiduously  upon  him. 
At  last  the  sadhu  noticed  him  so  far  as  to  hand  him  a  piece 
of  silver,  giving  him  at  the  same  time  instructions  to  sell 
the  bullion  and  buy  what  was  necessary  for  their  food. 
From  time  to  time  he  intrusted  the  boy  with  bits  of  uncoined 
silver  in  this  way,  only  requiring  him  to  bring  back,  with  the 
purchased  food -stuffs,  some  copper  coins.  The  regular 
supply  of  silver  never  failed,  and  at  last  the  boy's  curiosity 
was  aroused  to  such  a  degree  that  he  ventured  to  ask  the 
guru  where  the  treasure  came  from.  The  sadhu  thus 
questioned  smiled  and  said,  "  There  is  only  one  man  in 
Hindustan  who  is  my  superior.  I  am  a  Rajah,  but  he, 
indeed,  is  a  Maharajah.  I  can  manufacture  silver  out  of 
copper ;  but  he  can  convert  silver  into  gold." 

The  boy  was  all  eagerness  to  learn  this  valuable  art, 
with  its  glittering  possibilities  of  future  pleasures,  but  his 
ardour  was  rebuked  by  the  guru,  who  told  him  he  was  not 
yet  morally  fit  to  be  admitted  to  so  great  a  secret — one 
indeed  so  fraught  with  mischief  if  intrusted  to  an  unworthy 
man,  that  it  had  better  be  lost  entirely  than  revealed  to 
such  a  one. 

The  youth's  humble  and  assiduous  attentions  to  the 
sadhu  did  not  flag,  but  never  having  been  allowed  to  sleep 
in  or  near  the  master's  abode,  probably  because  it  was  in 
the  hours  of  darkness  that  the  transmutations  were  effected, 
he  had  to  shift  for  himself  in  the  town  ;  and  one  unfortu- 
nate night,  tempted  by  the  meretricious  charms  of  a  loose 
woman,  he  committed  a  very  grave  indiscretion.  When 
he  presented  himself  next  morning  before  the  sadhu,  he 
was  promptly  and  peremptorily  ordered  to  go  away.  It  was 
useless  to  attempt  any  concealment  from  the  omniscient 
sadhu,  so  the  youth  begged  earnestly  for  forgiveness  ;  but 
the  sadhu  spurned  his  unworthy  disciple,  and  with  his 
own  hand  set  fire  to  the  little  hut  which  had  afforded  him 
temporary  shelter  and  contained  all  his  worldly  possessions. 
Carrying  his  huge  chimfta  (tongs)  in  his  hand,  which  had 
been  sharpened  along  the  edges  so  that  it  might  make  a 
very  formidable  weapon,  the  alchemist  strode  away  towards 

59 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND   SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

the  abode  of  the  eternal  snows.  The  cliela  ventured  to 
follow  him  for  a  while,  but  the  Bairagi,  looking  back, 
threatened  him  with  his  keen-edged  tongs,  and  the  fallen 
youth  thought  it  prudent  to  retrace  his  steps,  haunted 
more  than  ever  with  an  unsatisfied  craving  to  know  the 
great  secret  of  making  silver  out  of  baser  metal. 

A  granthi  ^  told  me  of  an  equally  unfruitful  experience  >. 
he  had  with  a  gold-making  Nirmali  sadhu.  This  man  made 
friends  with  the  granthi,  and  insinuated  himself  into 
his  confidence.  He  first  cautiously  hinted,  and  afterwards 
revealed,  under  the  seal  of  secrecy,  that  he  was  acquainted 
with  the  occult  art  of  transmuting  metals.  The  granthi, 
notwithstanding  his  scriptural  knowledge  and  semi-sacerdotal 
functions,  was  much  excited  at  finding  that  his  new  friend 
was  a  potent  alchemist,  and  he  felt  the  bonds  between 
them  strengthen  ;  for,  after  all,  this  sort  of  man  is  not  to 
be  picked  up  in  a  day's  journey.  The  transmuter  of  metals 
seemed  to  live  very  well,  yet  occasionally  borrowed  money, 
showing  special  favour  to  the  granthi  in  this  matter  ;  for 
he  had  no  hesitation  in  placing  himself  under  temporary 
obligations  to  his  most  confidential  friend.  And,  of  course, 
it  was  all  right ;  he  was  a  gold-maker,  and,  when  his 
arrangements  were  matured,  would  resume  his  profitable 
business,  and,  better  still,  teach  the  granthi  the  secrets  of 
his  mysterious  art.  One  day  the  sadhu  showed  the  granthi 
a  common  bronze  double  pice,  or  half-anna  coin,  and  then 
in  his  presence  put  it  into  a  small  furnace  along  with 
various  leaves  and  roots  he  had  collected.  After  an  hour 
or  so  he  produced  from  his  crucible  a  golden  fac-simile  of 
the  double  pice.  The  granthi,  not  to  be  taken  in  even  by 
his  dear  friend,  asked  to  be  allowed  to  have  it  tested  by  a 
goldsmith.  Permission  was  given  and  acted  upon,  with  the 
result  that  the  experts  in  the  bazaar  pronounced  it  gold  of 
the  purest  quality.  The  granthi  was  now  agog  to  learn 
the  important  secret  of  gold-making,  and  many  were  the 
rupees  he  willingly  lent  the  sadhu,  in  the  hope  that  he 
would  accept  him  as  a  pupil.  But  the  saintly  man  of 
science  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  decamped. 

"  Alas  !  "  said  the  granthi  after  he  had  narrated  these 
^  One  learned  in  the  Scriptures  of  the  Sikh  sect. 

60 


WONDERS  SADHUS  AND  FAQUIRS  PERFORM 

circumstances  to  me,  "I  lost  more  than  sixty  rupees  through 
that  impostor.  I  have  since  learnt  how  he  fooled  me,  but 
never  a  Nirmali  sadhu  has,  since  those  days,  had  so  much 
as  a  drop  of  water  from  my  hand  !  " 

Some  thirty  years  ago,  or  thereabouts,  Calcutta  knew 
and  took  much  interest  in  one  Hassan  Khan,  who  had  the 
reputation  of  being  a  great  wonder-worker,  though  I  believe 
only  in  one  particular  hne,  and  his  story  may  be  fitly 
recorded  here,  as  it  was  through  the  favour  and  initiation 
of  a  Hindu  sadhu  that  this  Muhammadan  acquired  the 
pecuhar  and  very  remarkable  powers  attributed  to  him. 

Several  European  friends  of  mine  had  been  personally 
acquainted  with  Hassan  Khan,  and  witnessed  his  perform- 
ances in  their  own  homes.  It  is  directly  from  these  gentle- 
men, and  not  from  Indian  sources,  that  I  derived  the  details 
which  I  now  reproduce. 

Hassan  Khan  was  not  a  professional  wizard,  nor  even 
a  performer,  but  he  could  be  persuaded  on  occasion  to 
display  to  a  small  circle  his  peculiar  powers,  and  this  with- 
out any  pecuniary  reward.  For  example,  he  would  call 
upon  any  person  present  at  such  a  meeting  to  ask  for  some 
ordinary  wine,  and  on  the  particular  one  being  named 
would  request  him  to  put  his  hand  under  the  table,  or 
maybe  behind  a  door,  and,  lo  !  a  bottle  of  the  wished-for 
wine,  with  the  label  of  some  well-known  Calcutta  firm, 
would   be   thrust  into   the   extended   hand. 

Similarly  he  would  produce  articles  of  food,  such  as 
biscuits  or  cakes,  and  cigars  too,  enough  for  the  assembled 
company.  On  a  certain  occasion,  so  I  was  informed  by 
one  who  was  present,  the  supply  of  comestibles  seemed  to 
be  exhausted.  Several  members  seated  round  the  table 
raised  a  laugh  against  Hassan  Khan,  and  jeeringly  challenged 
him  to  produce  a  bottle  of  champagne.  Much  agitated 
and  stammering  badly — he  always  had  an  impediment  in 
his  speech — Hassan  Khan  went  into  the  verandah,  and  in 
angry  tones  commanded  some  unseen  agent  to  bring  the 
champagne  at  once.  He  had  to  repeat  his  orders  two  or 
three  times,  when,  hurtling  through  the  air,  came  the  re- 
quired bottle.  It  struck  the  magician  on  the  chest  with 
force,  and,  falling  to  the  floor,  broke  into  a  thousand  pieces. 

6i 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

"  There,"  said  Hassan  Khan,  much  excited,  "  I  have 
shown  my  power,  but  I  have  enraged  my  djinn  by  my 
importunities." 

A  European  friend  of  mine  happened  to  travel,  quite 
casually,  in  a  railway  carriage  with  Hassan  Khan,  and, 
having  some  acquaintance  with  him,  asked  him  to  produce 
something  to  drink. 

"  Put  your  hand  out  of  the  window,"  said  the  Muslim, 
while  the  train  was  travelling  along. 

His  request  was  complied  with,  and  a  bottle  of  excellent 
wine  thrust  into  the  outstretched  hand  rewarded  this  slight 
exertion. 

Another  of  my  friends,  exceedingly  anxious  to  learn 
the  modus  operandi  of  these  strange  performances,  took  a 
special  interest  in  Hassan  Khan,  and  with  this  important 
object  in  view  cultivated  his  society.  Driving  on  one 
occasion  along  with  him  in  the  bazaar,  the  wizard  expressed 
a  wish  to  alight  at  the  shop  of  a  money-changer.  The 
carriage  was  stopped,  and  Hassan  Khan,  attended  by  his 
companion,  asked  the  money-changer  if  he  had  any  sover- 
eigns. An  affirmative  answer  being  given,  he  requested 
that  they  should  be  produced,  and,  when  they  were  brought 
out  of  the  money-changer's  strong  box,  Hassan  Khan,  after 
asking  the  price  at  which  they  might  be  purchased  (for  in 
those  days  their  value  had  not  been  fixed  by  law),  thought- 
fully passed  the  gold  coins  through  his  fingers,  saying  he 
would  call  for  them  on  the  morrow,  if  he  could  not  make 
a  better  bargain  elsewhere.  The  following  morning  he 
went  to  the  shop,  attended  as  before  by  my  friend — but 
only  to  learn  that  the  sovereigns  which  he  had  seen  and 
handled  the  day  before  had  all  mysteriously  disappeared 
after  being  placed  in  the  strong  box.  Hassan  Khan 
affected  to  disbelieve  the  story,  but,  as  he  did  so,  slyly  cast 
so  significant  a  glance  at  his  companion,  that  the  latter 
prudently  resolved  never  to  be  seen  in  such  suspicious 
company  again. 

Yet  this  incident  only  put  a  keener  edge  upon  Mr. 's 

curiosity,  and  he  assiduously  plied  Hassan  Khan  with 
questions  till  he  obtained  from  him  the  following  story, 
for  the  sake  of  which,  more  than  anything  else,  I  have  set 

62 


WONDERS  SADHUS  AND  FAQUIRS  PERFORM 

forth  in  tliis  narrative  particulars  which,  if  correctly  re- 
ported, are  seemingly  quite  incredible,  and  possibly  not 
explicable  by  even  the  cleverest  legerdemainists.  How- 
ever, not  having  witnessed  the  Muslim's  strange  perform- 
ances myself,  and  not  being  a  wizard,  I  leave  the  matter 
without  further  comment,  to  pass  on  to  the  story  of  how 
Hassan  Khan  acquired  the  wondrous  powers  with  which 
he  was  credited. 

"  When  I  was  a  mere  lad,"  said  this  remarkable  man, 
"  there  came  one  day  to  my  native  village  a  gaunt  sadhu 
with  matted  locks  and  altogether  repulsive  aspect.  The 
boys  crowded  round  him  and  mocked  him,  but  I  re- 
proved their  rudeness,  telhng  them  that  they  should 
respect  a  holy  man,  even  though  a  Hindu.  The  sadhu 
observed  me  closely,  and  later  on  we  met  frequently,  for 
he  took  up  his  abode  in  the  village  for  some  little  time. 
On  my  part  I  seemed  to  be  drawn  towards  the  strange 
man,  and  visited  him  as  often  as  I  could.  One  day  he 
offered  to  confer  on  me  an  important  secret  power,  if 
I  would  follow  his  instructions  faithfully  and  implicitly. 
I  promised  to  do  whatever  might  be  required  of  me,  and 
under  the  sadhiCs  directions  commenced  a  system  of 
discipline  with  fasting  which  lasted  many,  perhaps  forty, 
days.  My  instructor  taught  me  to  repeat  many  mystic 
spells  and  incantations,  and,  after  imposing  a  very  strict 
fast,  commanded  me  to  enter  a  dark  cavern  in  the  hillside 
and  tell  him  what  I  saw  there.  With  much  trepidation 
I  obeyed  his  behests,  and  returned  with  the  information 
that  the  only  thing  visible  to  me  in  the  gloom  was  a 
huge  flaming  eye.  '  That  is  well  —  success  has  been 
achieved,'  was  the  sadhu's  remark,  and  I  began  wondering 
what  power  I  had  acquired.  Pointing  to  some  stones 
lying  about,  the  sadhu  made  me  make  a  particular 
mystical  sign  upon  each  one.  I  did  so.  '  Now  go  home,' 
said  my  mentor,  '  shut  the  door  of  your  room,  and 
command  your  familiar  to  bring  these  stones  to  you.' 
Away  I  went,  in  a  state  of  nervous  excitement,  and, 
locking  myself  in  my  chamber,  commanded  the  unseen 
djinn  to  bring  those  stones  to  me  at  once.  Hardly  had 
my  mandate  been  uttered,  when,  to  my  amazement  and 

63 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

secret  terror,  the  stones  lay  at  my  feet.  I  went  back 
and  told  the  sadhu  of  my  success.  '  Now,'  he  said,  '  you 
have  a  power  which  you  can  exercise  over  everything 
upon  which  you  can  make  the  mystical  sign  I  have  taught 
you,  but  use  your  power  with  discretion,  for  my  giic  is 
quaHfied  by  the  fact  that,  do  what  you  will,  the  things, 
whatever  they  may  be,  acquired  through  your  familiar 
spirit,  cannot  be  accumulated  by  you,  but  must  soon  pass 
out  of  your  hands.'  And  the  sadhu's  words  have  been  veri- 
fied in  my  life,  and  his  gift  has  not  been  an  unmixed  blessing, 
for  my  djinn  resents  my  power,  and  has  often  tried  to  harm 
me  ;  but  happily  his  time  is  not  yet  come." 

This  explanation  brings  out  very  clearly  the  high 
esteem  in  which  the  occult  powers  of  the  sadhus  are 
still  held  even  by  Muslims,  since  a  follower  of  Islam 
could  be  found  to  acknowledge,  voluntarily,  that  his  own 
remarkable  thaumaturgic  abilities  were  conferred  upon  him 
by  a  Hindu  religious  mendicant. 

But  the  Indian  Muhammadan,  as  becomes  a  member 
of  a  once  dominant  race,  usually  loves  to  claim  superiority 
even  on  this  ground. 

A  Mussulman,  speaking  to  me  on  the  subject,  admitted 
that  the  Hindu  sadhus,  by  their  austerities  and  pecuhar 
practices,  acquire  a  strange  mastery  over  the  forces  of 
nature.  "  But,"  said  he,  "  they  are  never  able  to  enter 
the  Divine  Presence,  unless  by  the  favour  of  a  faquir. '^^ 
Persons  well  acquainted  with  such  matters  had  told  him  that 
on  one  occasion  a  sadhu  flying  through  the  air  recognised, 
by  the  aroma  which  filled  the  atmosphere,  the  proximity 
of  some  great  faquir.  He  stayed  his  flight,  alighted  on 
the  ground,  but  was  unable  to  approach  the  MusHm  saint, 
about  whom  was  diffused,  although  invisible,  the  glory 
of  the  Almighty.  The  sadhu  sent  word  to  the  faquir  that 
he  would  Uke  to  meet  him,  but  that  he  could  not  pass 
beyond  the  threshold  of  the  haithak,  or  saloon  where  visitors 
were  received,  for  he  perceived  that  God  Himself  was 
there. 

"  Come  !  "  said  the  faquir  confidently,  and  under  his 
protection  the  sadhu  was  able  to  approach.  When  the 
two  ascetics  met,  the  Muslim  recognised  in  his  visitor  a 

64 


WONDERS  SADHUS  AND  FAQUIRS  PERFORM 

worthy   kindred  spirit,   and    imparted    to  him  freely  the     / 
grace  of  God  which  he  (the  sadhu)  had  not  been  able  to 
acquire  by  all  his  penances  and  ceremonies. 

There  is  a  widespread  behef  that  when  the  faquir  is 
mast  (mad,  or  in  an  ecstatic  condition)  he  is  under  the 
influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  that  what  he  then 
gives  utterance  to  is  of  the  greatest  significance.  Very 
strange,  indeed,  are  some  of  the  practices  of  which  this 
belief  has  been  the  parent.  When,  as  is  usual,  the  mast 
faquir  is  reticent  and  will  not  speak  the  word  that  is 
wanted  of  him,  one  inquirer  will  strive  to  gain  his  favour 
by  patient  service  and  constant  attendance,  while  another, 
more  impulsive  and  imperious,  mil  try  to  bully  the  good 
man  to  answer  his  questions.  It  came  to  my  knowledge 
that  a  native  police  constable  went  to  a  well-known 
faquir  to  browbeat  him  into  promising  something  which 
he  wanted ;  but  the  faquir  would  not  be  hectored,  so  the 
enraged  constable,  accustomed  to  take  the  law  into  his 
own  hands,  struck  the  holy  man  a  blow  with  a  stout 
stick.  The  faquir,  thus  assaulted,  only  said,  "  You  are 
a  zalim  !  "  (a  tyrant,  an  oppressor),  and  not  another  word. 
On  the  next  day  the  constable,  to  his  great  joy,  was 
promoted  to  the  grade  of  Deputy  Inspector  of  Police. 
He  came  without  delay  to  pay  his  respects  to  the  faquir, 
and,  on  reaching  the  saint,  fell  at  his  feet  and  placed  his 
turban  on  the  ground — a  mark  of  the  greatest  deference 
and  humility. 

"  What  have  you  come  for  ?  "  asked  the  faquir. 

"  To  thank  you,  sir,  for  what  you  have  done  for  me. 
By  your  favour  I  have  been  appointed  Deputy  Inspector 
of  Police." 

"  Oh,"  said  the  laughing  faquir,  not  without  a  suspicion 
of  irony,  "  I  see  !  I  called  you  a  zalim,  and  you  have  got 
that  position  conferred  on  you  oflQ.cially." 

"  Even  so,"  responded  the  happy  officer. 

This  story  and  the  one  preceding  it,  far-fetched  and 
trivial  though  they  be,  throw  a  sidelight  on  the  ideas  of 
Indian  Muslims,  and  may  therefore  have  some  interest 
for  students  of  Indian  Hfe. 

Between  the  marvels  wrought  by  the  ancient  Hindu 
E  65 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

sages,  as  recorded  in  the  old  books,  and  those  attributed 
to  their  modern  representatives,  there  is,  as  the  reader  will 
doubtless  have  noticed,  an  immeasurable  difierenoe,  with  a 
sad  falling  off.      But,  as   in  mediaeval  Europe,  the  air  in 
India  is  full  of  marvels  and  mysteries,  and,  if  we  may  believe 
Hindu  apologists,  there  still  live,  even  in  this  sinful  age, 
very  potent  wonder-working  sadhus,  only  they  are  not  to 
be  met  with  in  bazaars  and  the  ordinary  haunts  of  men, 
but  where  Madame  Blavatsky  discovered  her  elusive  Koot 
Hoomi    and    other    mahatmas}    in    the    lone    solitudes    of 
mysterious    Tibet,    or    the    grim    snow-fastnesses    of    the 
unexplored    Himalayas.      However,    since    exhibitions    of 
miraculous  powers   are   necessarily   of    rare   occurrence  in 
these  degenerate  times,  the  abilities  of  many  sadhus    are 
displayed  in  less   striking  ways  :     for  example,   as   physi- 
cians administering,  to  the  sick,  drugs  and  simples  of  which 
they  have  acquired  a  knowledge  in  their  wanderings,  or 
had  solemnly  communicated  to  them  by  perhaps  a  dying 
guru.      Many   remarkable    cures    are   justly   attributed   to 
sadhus,   but   they   make    a    mystery   of   their   knowledge, 
and   jealously   guard    their    therapeutic    secrets    from    the 
common    herd.      Sometimes    their    practice    is    connected 
with    ailments    and  weaknesses  which    call   for    the  exhi- 
bition  of   love-philtres   and   a   resort   to   spells   calculated 
to  influence  a  cold,   impassive  heart.     In  such  cases,   no 
doubt,  the  sadhu's  skill  can  easily  command  a  considerable 
pecuniary  reward. 

Many  religious  mendicants  earn  a  meal  or  a  penny  by 
disclosing,  as  fortune-tellers,  palmists,  and  interpreters  of 
dreams,  the  hidden  things  of  the  future.  Others  astonish 
the  world  by  acrobatic  feats — as  the  following  extract  from 
the  Allahabad  Pioneer  will  show  : — 

"  A  wonderful  faquir  was  in  view  in  the  main  street, 
who  all  the  time  he  says  his  prayers  goes  through  acrobatic 
performances  that  would  earn  him  a  fortune  in  England. 

^  "  Mahatman  means  literally  great-souled,  then  high-minded,  noble, 
and  all  the  rest.  It  is  often  used  simply  as  a  compUmentary  term,  much 
as  we  use  reverend  or  honourable,  but  it  has  also  been  accepted  as  a 
technical  term,  applied  to  a  class  of  men  who  in  the  ancient  language  of 
India  are  well  known  to  us  by  their  name  of  Samnydsin." — Professor  Max 
Muller,  Life  and  Sayings  of  Ramakrishna,  pp.  2,  3. 

66 


WONDERS  SADHUS  AND  FAQUIRS  PERFORM 

As  we  approaclied  lie  was  standing  on  one  leg  with  tlie 
other  curled  round  his  waist ;  in  another  second  he  was  on 
his  hands,  head  downwards,  and  his  legs  round  his  neck ; 
when  we  left  him  he  was  tied  up  in  something  resembling 
a  reef  knot  and  clove  hitch  combined."  ^ 
p)  One  of  these  religious  posturists,  named  Bava  Lachman 
Das,  was  induced  a  few  years  ago  to  come  across  the  ocean 
to  exhibit  himself  at  the  Westminster  Aquarium  to  admir- 
ing thousands.  The  man  and  the  very  strange  attitudes 
he  could  assume  form  the  subject  of  a  well-illustrated  article 
in  the  Strand  Magazine  for  February  1897. 

1  From  "  A  March  through  the  Cow-rioting  Districts,"  Pioneer  (Alla- 
habad), 7th  February  1894. 


67 


CHAPTER  V 


SOME   GLIMPSES   OF   SADHUS   IN   INDIAN   FICTION 


Eight  Stories  from  famous  Sanskrit  Dramas  and  other  Sources :  ( 1 )  Sa- 
koontala ;  (2)  Malati  and  Madhava ;  (3)  Disillusionment ;  (4)  The 
homed  Rishi ;  (5)  The  Lost  Son  restored ;  (6)  A  Kind-hearted  Lady ; 
(7)  The  Father  duped ;  (8)  Woman's  Cunning. 


in  Indian  life,  so  in  Indian 
fiction,  sadhus  and  faquirs  are 
familiar  forms.  It  has  al- 
ready been  shown  (Chap. 
II.)  how  largely  sadhus 
bulk  in  the  sacred  litera- 
ture of  the  Hindus, — 
epics,  Puranas,  etc., — 
but  I  shall  now  draw 
upon  secular,  or  I 
should  perhaps  say 
less  sacred,  sources  for 
pictures  of  the  saints 
of  the  Indian  world.  The  following  eight  stories,  in  which 
sadhus  and  -pseudo  -  sadhus  figure  prominently,  will  serve 
my  purpose,  while  at  the  same  time  affording  some  inter- 
esting glimpses  of  the  inner  world  of  Hindu  ideas  and  senti- 
ments. 

The  celebrated  story  entitled  Sakoontala,  or  the  Lost 
Ring,  may  come  first  on  account  of  its  intrinsic  charm 
and  its  being  chronologically  the  earliest  of  those  selected, 
together  with  the  fact  that  its  very  atmosphere  is  sur- 
charged with  sentiments  of  peaceful  retirement  and  mild 
asceticism. 

68 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

I.    The  Story  of  Sakoontala,  or  the  Lost  Ring, 

BY  Kalidasa.i 

From  the  Ramayana  we  learn,  as  already  stated  in 
Chap,  IL,  that  there  was  once  a  Kshatriya  king  named 
Visvamitra,  who,  for  the  purpose  of  overcoming  a  famous 
Brahman  sage,  Vasishta,  with  whom  he  had  come  into 
unequal  conflict,  underwent,  for  thousands  of  years,  the 
most  terrible  austerities,  which  eventually  led  to  the  un- 
precedented honour  of  his  advancement  to  the  Brahmanical 
caste.  While  the  king  was  engaged  in  the  rigours  of  his 
self-imposed  tortures,  the  god  Indra  became  jealous  of  his 
increasing  power,  and  sent  a  lovely  nymph  of  heaven 
named  Menaka  to  distract  his  meditations  and  to  seduce 
him  from  his  vows.  Visvamitra,  unable  to  resist  her  allure- 
ments, had  the  beautiful  temptress  to  share  his  hermitage 
for  many  years. 

According  to  the  great  Hindu  dramatist  Kalidasa,^ 
the  result  of  this  union  was  a  daughter,  Sakoontala,  the 
heroine  of  his  now  world-famous  play.  The  girl  was 
reared  in  a  picturesque  and  delightful  hermitage,  or  colony 
of  hermits,  under  the  guardianship  of  Kanwa,  the  chief 
of  the  anchorites.  In  this  retired  spot  Dushyanta,  of  the 
Hneage  of  the  renowned  Purus,  king  of  India,  when  out 
on  one  of  his  frequent  hunting  expeditions,  discovered 
Sakoontala,  now  grown  into  a  lovely  graceful  maiden  in 
her  early  prime.  Although  the  king  had  many  royal 
consorts,  he  was  large-hearted  enough  to  fall  desperately 
in  love  with  the  fair  recluse  when  he  met  her  with  two 
girl-companions,  Priyamvada  and  Anasuya,  under  the  most 
charming  and  opportune  circumstances ;  for  Sakoontala  at 
the  moment  was  in  trouble  from  the  too  aggressive  and 
persistent  attentions  of  an  angry  bee  whom  she  had  dis- 
turbed amongst  the  flowers  she  was  gathering.  With  the 
maiden  too  it  was  a  case  of  love  at  first  sight. 

^  SaJcoontala,  or  the  Lost  Ring,  an  Indian  drama,  translated  into  English 
prose  and  verse  from  the  Sanskrit  of  Kahdasa  by  Monier  Williams,  M.A. 
(Hertford,  1855). 

2  Kalidasa  was  one  of  the  "  Nine  Gems  "  of  the  court  of  Vikramaditya, 
a  famous  king,  who,  according  to  the  most  recent  reckonings  or  guesses  of 
European  chronologists,  lived  in  the  sixth  century  of  the  Christian  era. 

69 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

Both  victims  to  Kama's  darts  suiiered  badly  from  love- 
fever,  as  their  emaciated  forms  only  too  clearly  and  too 
quickly  evinced.  Through  the  affectionate,  if  officious,  in- 
terference of  Priyamvada  and  Anasuya,  a  pair  of  delightful 
little  schemers,  it  came  about  quite  casually  that  the 
lovers  were  by  mutual  confessions  of  affection  relieved 
from  all  the  haunting  doubts  that  had  till  then  disturbed 
their  susceptible  hearts. 

It  would  seem  that,  while  the  hermit  colony  was  under 
the  control  of  a  chief  or  abbot,  there  was  also  a  holy  matron 
there,  named  Gautami,  who  had  especial  charge  of  the 
women  and  girls  of  this  rural  settlement.  But,  perhaps 
because  of  her  reverence  for  royalty,  her  watchfulness 
seems  to  have  been  at  fault  in  the  present  case,  for  very 
soon,  by  mutual  consent,  quite  secretly  and  without  cere- 
monies or  formaUties  of  any  sort,  the  king  and  Sakoontala 
were  united  in  wedlock  "  by  the  form  of  marriage  prevalent 
among  Indra's  celestial  musicians."  The  king,  after  a  brief 
honeymoon,  returned  to  his  capital  (Hastinapur),  leaving  his 
new  wife  with  her  friends  in  the  hermitage. 

Naturally,  Sakoontala  was  much  depressed  at  this  early 
separation  from  her  lord,  and,  while  lost  in  absent-minded 
reverie  near  her  cottage,  no  less  a  person  than  the  great 
sage  Durvasas  arrived  to  claim  the  usual  hospitality. 
Apparently,  Sakoontala  did  not  notice  his  coming,  an 
omission  which  so  incensed  the  affronted  and  irascible 
sage  that  he  vented  his  angry  feelings  in  this  terrible 
curse — 

"  Woe  to  thee,  maiden,  for  daring  to  slight  a  guest  like  me  ! 
Shall  I  stand  here  unwelcomed ;  even  I, 
A  very  mine  of  penitential  merit. 
Worthy  of  all  respect  ?     Shalt  thou,  rash  maid. 
Thus  set  at  nought  the  ever  sacred  ties 
Of  hospitality  ?  and  fix  thy  thoughts 
Upon  the  cherished  object  of  thy  love, 
While  I  am  present  ?     Thus  I  curse  thee,  then — 
He,  even  he  of  whom  thou  thinkest,  he 
Shall  think  no  more  of  thee,  nor  in  his  heart 
Retain  thy  image.     Vainly  shalt  thou  strive 
To  waken  his  remembrance  of  the  past ; 
He  shall  disown  thee,  even  as  the  sot, 
Roused  from  his  midnight  drunkenness,  denies 
The  words  he  uttered  in  his  re  veilings." 

70 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

Sakoontala,  too  deeply  absorbed  in  her  own  thoughts, 
did  not  even  hear  the  sage's  malediction  ;  but  her  shrewd 
and  ever -watchful  girl-friends  did,  and,  fearful  of  the 
consequences,  pleaded  with  the  terrible  Durvasas  to  pardon 
the  young  and  inexperienced  offender.  Their  entreaties  so 
far  molhfied  him  that  he  condescended  to  say — 

"  My  word  must  not  be  falsified,  but  at  the  sight  of  the 
ring  of  recognition  the  spell  shall  cease." 

Having  said  this,  he  disappeared.  The  girls  were 
reassured  by  his  words,  recalling  to  mind  the  fact  that 
when  taking  his  departure  from  the  hermitage  the  king 
had  placed  on  Sakoontala's  finger  a  ring  with  his  own 
name   engraved   upon   it. 

"  She  has  therefore,"  as  Anasuya  sagely  said,  "  a  remedy 
for  her  misfortune  at  her  own  command." 

However,  with  wonderful  reticence  the  two  girls  kept 
from  their  dear  friend  all  knowledge  both  of  Durvasas' 
curse  and  the  extent  to  which  he  had  been  prevailed  upon 
to  modify  it. 

While  these  incidents  were  taking  place,  Kanwa, 
Sakoontala's  foster-father,  and  chief  of  the  hermits,  was 
away  from  home,  having  "  gone  to  Soma-tirtha  to  pro- 
pitiate Destiny,  which  threatened  his  daughter  with  some 
calamity." 

When  Kanwa  returned  and  learned  what  had  happened 
during  his  absence  he  fully  approved  of  the  marriage  which 
had  been  consummated,  and,  deeming  it  the  proper  course, 
sent  Sakoontala,  escorted  by  some  hermits,  to  join  her 
royal  husband.  As  became  a  saint,  Kanwa  gave  his  foster- 
child  much  good  advice,  including  such  rules  of  life  as  the 
following — 

"  Honour  thy  betters,  ever  be  respectful 
To  those  above  thee  ;  and  should  others  share 
Thy  husband's  love,  ne'er  yield  thyself  a  prey 
To  jealousy ;  but  ever  be  a  friend, 
A  loving  friend,  to  those  who  rival  thee 
In  his  affections." 

As  Sakoontala  took  a  most  touching  farewell  of  the 
hermitage  where  she  had  passed  the  springtime  of  her 
days,  those  dear  companions  of  her  girlhood,  Priyamvada 

71 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

and  Anasuya,  mindful  of  Durvasas'  curse,  whispered  to  her 
that  should  the  king,  by  any  chance,  have  forgotten  her, 
she  should  on  no  account  fail  to  produce  the  ring,  his 
parting  present  to  her. 

Attended  by  a  few  hermits,  Sakoontala  proceeded  to 
her  husband's  capital  and  was  admitted  to  his  presence  ; 
but,  in  fulfilment  of  Durvasas'  malison,  the  king  had  lost 
all  recollection  of  her,  and,  conscientious  man  that  he  was, 
declined  to  receive  her,  though  he  was  not  insensible  to 
the  personal  charms  of  the  beautiful  woman  who  stood 
before  him  claiming  to  be  his  wife.  Indignant  at  his 
conduct,  one  of  the  hermits  thus  addressed  the  king  in 
lofty  strain — 

"  Beware  ! 
Beware  how  thou  insultjthe  holy  sage  ! 
Remember  how  he  generously  allowed 
Thy  secret  union  with  his  foster-child : 
And  how,  when  thou  did'st  rob  him  of  his  treasure. 
He  sought  to  furnish  the  excuse,  when  rather 
He  should  have  cursed  thee  for  a  ravisher." 

But  Dushyanta's  memory  was  really  clouded,  and  he 
would  neither  acknowledge  nor  receive  Sakoontala.  In 
her  great  sorrow  and  deep  humiliation  the  poor  girl 
referred  to  the  signet  ring  her  royal  lover  had  given  her ; 
but,  on  being  asked  to  produce  it,  discovered,  to  her  inex- 
pressible dismay  and  the  king's  ill-concealed  amusement, 
that  it  was  lost. 

The  hermits  who  had  accompanied  Sakoontala  to  the 
king's  presence  now  refused  to  conduct  her  back  to  the 
hermitage  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  virtuous  king, 
who  had  noticed  her  condition,  would  not  be  guilty  of 
receiving  into  his  house  one  who  was  evidently  the  wife  of 
another  man. 

In  this  most  painful  dilemma  the  king's  domestic  priest 
generously  offered  to  give  the  lady  an  asylum  in  his  own 
house  until  the  birth  of  her  child.  Sakoontala  while  being 
led  away  bewailed  her  cruel  fate, 

"  When  suddenly  a  shining  apparition 

In  female  shape  descended  from  the  skies, 

Near  the  nymph's  pool,  and  bore  her  up  to  heaven." 

72 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

Ii  was  the  girl's  mother,  the  celestial  nymph  Menaka,  who 
had  come  to  the  rescue  of  her  child. 

Of  course  the  ring  was  found  in  due  course,  and  on 
beholding  it  the  king  at  once  recovered  his  memory  of  the 
eveiits  connected  with  his  happy  courtship  of  Sakoontala 
in  the  flowery  glades  of  her  foster-father's  hermitage. 
Between  the  feehngs  of  passionate  love  now  reawakened 
in  his  heart  and  the  bitterest  remorse  for  his  cruel  treat- 
ment of  his  now  lost  darling  he  was  beside  himself  with  grief. 
His  mental  torment  lasted  for  years,  till  at  length,  in  their 
own  good  time,  the  gods  kindly  interposed.  On  the 
pretext  of  requiring  Dushyanta's  help  against  a  trouble- 
some race  of  giants,  Indra's  charioteer  waited  on  him 
and  took  him  away  through  the  air  in  a  celestial  car.  After 
being  received  by  the  ruler  of  heaven,  he  was  carried  to 
"  Golden  Peak,"  the  abode  of  the  attendants  of  the  God 
of  Wealth,  where 

"  Kasyapa, 
With  Aditi  his  ^vife,  in  calm  seclusion, 
Does  holy  penance  for  the  good  of  mortals." 

The  Idng  asks  his  guide — 

"  In  which  direction,  Matali,  is  Kasyapa's  sacred  retreat  ?  " 

To   which    the    charioteer,    pointing    with    his    hand, 
rephes — 

"  Where  stands  yon  anchorite  towards  the  orb 
Of  the  meridian  sun,  immovable 
As  a  tree's  stem,  his  body  half  concealed 
By  a  huge  ant-hill.     Round  about  his  breast 
No  sacred  cord  is  twined,  but  in  its  stead 
A  hideous  serpent's  skin.     In  place  of  necklace, 
The  tendrils  of  a  withered  creeper  chafe 
His  wasted  neck.     His  matted  hair  depends 
In  thick  entanglement  about  his  shoulders, 
And  birds  construct  their  nests  within  its  folds." 

In  this  sacred  region  of  quiet  hermitages,  "  where  the 
holiest  sages  devote  themselves  to  penitential  rites,"  and 
where  mortals,  unless  favoured  by  the  higher  powers,  could 
never  obtain  admission,  King  Dushyanta  was  designedly 
brought  into  contact  with  his  own  son,  a  daring  wayward 
infant,  who,  as  becomes  a  scion  of  Purus'  famous  race,  loves 

73 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

to  play,  not  mth  timid  pets,  but  with  lusty  young  lions. 
The  king  feels  himself  strangely  drawn  towards  the  fearfess 
handsome  child,  and  after  a  little  while,  in  accordance  with 
the  will  of  the  gods,  meets  Sakoontala  herself  arrayed 
in  the  garb  of  a  widow.  To  her  he  now  explains  his 
strange  repudiation  of  her  on  that  memorable  day  when 
she  sought  his  protection  at  Hastinapur.  He  obtains  her 
forgiveness,  and  with  the  permission  and  blessing  of 
Kasyapa  reascends  the  car  of  Indra,  taking  his  wife  and 
son  also,  to  return  to  his  own  capital.  The  pious  king 
leaves  "  Golden  Peak,"  breathing  the  characteristically 
Hindu  prayer — 

"  And  may  the  purple  self -existent  god, 
Wliose  vital  energy  pervades  all  space. 
From  future  transmigrations  save  my  soul." 

How  saturated  with  the  feeling  of  peaceful  asceticism 
this  charming  drama  is,  does  not  need  to  be  pointed  out ; 
yet  I  may  recall  to  the  reader's  memory  that  it  was  the 
terror  of  the  gods  at  Visvamitra's  dreadful  austerities 
that  led  to  the  temptation  of  the  ascetic  and  the  birth  of 
the  heroine,  whose  early  years  were  passed  blamelessly 
amidst  a  quiet  restful  group  of  well-ordered  hermitages, 
a  sort  of  pastoral  monastery  under  an  easy  tolerant  rule. 
The  heroine's  misfortunes  were  the  result  of  the  curse  pro- 
nounced by  an  affronted  ascetic,  and,  when  she  is  rejected 
by  the  king,  it  is  to  the  haven  of  a  celestial  hermitage  that 
she  is  translated  from  Dushyanta's  capital. 

Throughout  the  poem  the  undoubted  power  of  the  ascetic 
and  the  unquestioned  dignity  and  importance  of  his  calling 
are  amply  recognised. 

II.  Malati  and  Madhava.^ 

In  Bhavabhuti's  famous  drama,  Malati  and  Madhava^ 
written  probably  in  the  eighth  century  a.d.,  we  have  a 
glimpse  of  one  aspect  of  Indian  asceticism  wliicli  still  has 
a  great  and  permanent  fascination  for  the  Hindus,  viz.  the 

^  Select  Specimens  of  the  Theatre  of   the  Hindus,  translated  from  the 
original  Sanskrit  by  Horace  Hayman  Wilson,  vol.  ii.  (Calcutta,  1827). 

74 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

exercise  of  superhuman  power  acquired  by  ascetic  practices. 
If  only  to  illustrate  this  important  point,  the  plot  of 
Bhavabhuti's  charming  drama  may  be  briefly  sketched  in 
this  place. 

The  curtain  rises  upon  Kamandaki  revealing  to  her 
disciple  Avalokita  her  desire  to  bring  about  a  union  between 
Madhava  and  Malati.  These  two,  as  mere  infants,  were, 
by  a  solemn  but  secret  compact,  destined  for  one  an- 
other by  their  parents.  The  projected  arrangement  was 
never  revealed  to  the  parties  most  interested ;  and  now 
a  difficulty  arose,  for  the  king's  favourite,  an  old  and  ugly 
fellow  named  Nandana,  had  apphed  to  his  royal  master  for 
the  hand  of  Malati,  and  the  sovereign  had  demanded  her 
of  her  father.  To  frustrate  this  project,  without  giving 
offence  to  his  majesty  the  king,  Madhava's  father  enhsted 
the  services  of  Kamandaki,  priestess  of  Buddha,  nurse  of 
Malati  and  preceptress  of  Madhava.  The  plan  was  to 
bring  about  a  purely  love  affair  between  the  young  people, 
and  effect  a  clandestine  marriage  without  the  direct  inter- 
position of  the  parents,  and  to  all  appearance  without  their 
knowledge.  To  this  end  it  was  artfully  contrived  to  make 
opportunities  for  the  young  people  to  see  each  other ;  and, 
to  help  in  carrying  out  the  plot,  Kamandaki  bethinks  her 
of  a  former  pupil  of  hers,  one  Sandamini,  residing  on  Mount 
Sri  Parvata, 

" where,  won  by  desperate  penances, 

Power  more  than  earthly  waits  upon  her  v/ill." 


The  priestess  and  her  disciples,  though  themselves 
vowed  to  celibacy,  take  an  ardent  and  truly  feminine 
interest  in  bringing  about  the  desired  result.  The  action 
of  the  play  extends  over  only  a  few  days,  but  they  are 
brimful  of  incident. 

In  pursuance  of  the  plot,  it  is  contrived  that  Malati 
should  see  Madhava  from  her  window.  Of  course  she 
falls  desperately  in  love  with  him,  and  solaces  herself  by 
drawing  a  likeness  of  him.  This  her  foster-sister,  who  is 
in  the  plot,  cleverly  makes  over  to  Mandarika,  the  servant 
of  the  convent  (vehara  dasi),  who  naturally  transfers  it  to 
the  hands  of  her  own  lover  Kalahansa,  Madhava's  servant. 

75 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

Thus  one  step  is  gained.  Now,  by  the  advice  of  one  of 
the  female  disciples  of  the  priestess,  Madhava  goes  to 
Kamadeva's  temple,  where  he  sees  Malati  in  all  her  virgin 
beauty,  and  straightway  falls  in  love  with  her.  Her  ap- 
pearance shows  unmistakably  that  she  is  herself  in  love 
with  some  fortunate  youth  or  other ;  but  her  female 
attendants,  when  they  cast  eyes  on  Madhava,  laughing  and 
whispering  amongst  themselves,  seemed  to  say — 

"  The  Fates  have  favoured  us, 
Lady — behold  him  there  !  " 

The  lady  on  her  part  did  not  fail  to  reveal  her  admira- 
tion and  her  feelings  towards  the  young  man  by  expressive 
glances,  mute  yet  eloquent.  As  she  moved  away  with  her 
train  of  attendants,  one  of  them,  her  foster-sister  Lavangika, 
on  pretence  of  admiring  the  garland  of  flowers  Madhava 
was  wearing,  let  him  know  the  name  and  rank  of  the  lady 
he  had  been  admiring  so  passionately.  At  the  maid's 
request,  he  presented  the  garland  to  Lavangika  for  the 
acceptance  of  her  fair  mistress. 

Madhava  relates  these  events  to  his  friend  Makaranda, 
and,  while  he  is  doing  so,  Kalahansa  approaches  and  shows 
them  the  portrait  of  Madhava  painted  by  Malati. 

At  Makaranda's  suggestion,  Madhava  now  draws  a 
portrait  of  his  inamorata.  Mandarika,  the  veJiara  dasi, 
appears  opportunely  on  the  scene,  pretending  to  be  in 
search  of  the  picture  which  Kalahansa  had  carried  off, 
and  is  given,  instead  of  it,  the  portrait  of  Malati  just  drawn 
by  her  ardent  lover.  Thus,  through  the  instrumentality 
of  Lavangika  and  the  others,  the  hero  and  heroine  fall  in 
love  with  one  another,  and  also  have  their  mutual  passion 
revealed  each  to  the  other. 

Thus    far    all    goes    well ;    but    the    proverbial    lovers' 
troubles   have  infalUbly  to   come,   the   Idng  having  duly 
arranged,  ^vith  the  formal  consent  of  her  father,  to  give 
Malati  in  marriage  to  Nandana  without  delay. 

To  frustrate  the  accomplishment  of  this  undesired 
union,  Kamandaki  and  her  disciples  insidiously  instil  into 
Malati's  mind  feelings  of  revolt  against  her  father,  and  art- 
fully suggest  that  Sakoontala  and  other  ladies  in  the  past 

76 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

had  selected  their  own  husbands.  The  conspirators  also 
bring  about  a  meeting,  at  which  Madhava  makes  a  personal 
declaration,  offering  his  lady-love  his  heart  and  life,  an  offer- 
ing which  Lavangika  accepts  for  her  bashful  friend,  saying — 

"  I  answer  for  my  friend — she  deems  the  gifts 
Deserving  her  acceptance." 

Besides  the  king's  desire  to  confer  the  hand  of  Malati 
upon  his  own  favourite,  there  were  other  and  even  more 
serious  dangers  threatening  the  accomplishment  of  the 
union  of  the  two  lovers.     There  was 

" a  skull-bearing  seer,  Aghora  Ghanta, 

A  wandering  mendicant,  but  dwelling  now 
Amidst  the  neighbouring  forest," 

who,  for  the  fulfilment  of  a  powerful  rite  which  would 
terminate  all  his  toils,  had  decided,  in  accordance  with  a 
solemn  vow,  to  sacrifice  to  the  goddess  Chaumandra  "  the 
gem  of  womankind." 

To  fulfil  this  dreadful  object,  he  had  enhsted  the 
services  of  his  disciple  Kapala  Kundala,  herself  a  priestess 
of  Chaumandra.  This  priestess  of  the  dread  goddess  is 
described  as  "  freed  from  all  perishable  bonds,"  and  she 
obviously  possessed  wonderful  powers,  for  she  first  appears 
upon  the  scene  riding  through  the  air  in  a  heavenly  car, 
dressed  in  a  hideous  garb  and  girdled  with  human  skulls. 
The  temple  of  Chaumandra  stood  alongside  a  cremation 
ground,  into  which  Madhava  had  gone  in  the  dead  of  night 
with  a  lump  of  human  flesh  in  his  hand  to  win  the  favour, 
or  compel  the  assistance,  of  the  goblins  who  infested  that 
gruesome  spot.  While  pursuing  his  object  a  cry  of  dis- 
tress comes  to  him  from  within  the  temple,  and,  recognising 
with  horror  the  voice  of  Malati,  he  hurries  thither. 

Inside  the  temple,  dressed  in  scarlet  and  adorned  with  a 
garland,  stands  Malati,  the  destined  sacrifice,  and  round  about 
her  circles  Aghora  Ghanta  with  quick  steps,  addressing  the 
dread  goddess  in  such  prescribed  terms  of  praise  as  would  be 
acceptable  to  her.  Kapala  Kundala  was  in  attendance,  and 
at  the  proper  moment,  facing  the  trembUng  victim,  said — 

"  Fair  maid, 
Think  upon  him  whom  thou  in  life  hast  loved, 
For  pitiless  death  is  near  thee." 

77 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

But,  before  Aghora  Ghanta's  sword  could  fall  upon 
the  unhappy  girl,  her  lover  had  sprung  to  her  side  and 
forcibly  prevented  the  bloody  rite.  Meanwhile,  by  the 
command  of  Kamandaki,  the  aged  priestess  of  Buddha, 
and  quite  unconnected  with  Madhava's  interposition,  the 
fane  was  surrounded,  and  the  exciting  temple  scene  comes 
to  a  close  with  an  unfinished  fight  between  Aghora  Ghanta 
and  Madhava.  However,  we  learn  incidentally,  in  the  next 
act,  that  the  result  of  this  conflict  was  fatal  to  the  wander- 
ing mendicant,  and  we  find  Kapala  Kundala  vowing 
vengeance  against  Madhava  for  the  death  of  her  venerable 
guru} 

The  artful  resources  of  Kamandaki  are  not  exhausted. 
Malati,  dressed  for  her  marriage  with  Nandana,  the  king's 
favourite,  is  conducted  in  state  to  a  temple,  where, 
unknown  to  her,  Madhava  and  his  friend  Makaranda  are 
concealed.  The  girl  is  in  despair,  and,  wishing  to  take  her 
own  life,  reveals  her  purpose  to  Lavangika  and  asks  her  to 
consent.  As  the  fair  and  distracted  lady  kneels  to^iher, 
Lavangika  moves  away,  and  Madhava  takes  her  place. 
The  deception  is  presently  detected,  and  a  pretty  love 
scene  results.  The  priestess  Kamandaki  now  steps  up, 
and,  interposing  as  the  instrument  of  Fate  and  Love, 
confers  Malati  upon  her  enamoured  swain.  Makaranda 
dresses  up  in  the  bride's  attire  and  personates  Malati. 
The  lovers  are  then  bid  to  proceed  quickly  to  the  garden 
of  the  sanctuary,  where,  in  anticipation  of  events,  the 
necessary  provision  had  already  been  made  for  the  per- 
formance of  their  bridal  ceremonies. 

Makaranda  plays  his  part  as  a  woman  so  well  that  he 
quite  deceives  Nandana,  but,  when  installed  as  his  bride, 
handles  the  astonished  bridegroom  so  severely  that  he 
leaves  the  house  in  a  rage.  Nandana's  sister  Madayantika 
comes  to  remonstrate  with  her  dear  friend  upon  her 
unseemly  conduct,  but  to  her  astonishment,  and  secret 
dehght,  finds  in  the  supposed  Malati  the  youth  who  had, 

^  That  Aghora  Ghanta  and  his  disciple  should  have  failed  in  their  object, 
after  propitiating  the  goddess  as  they  did,  is  attributed  by  the  Hindu 
commentator  either  to  their  wickedness  or  their  inaccurate  pronunciation 
of  some  part  of  the  ritual. — Note  to  p.  60  of  Professor  Wilson's  translation. 

78 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

at  tlie  risk  of  his  life,  gallantly  rescued  her  from  a 
ferocious  tiger.  They  were  mutually  in  love  these  two, 
and  their  strange  meeting  in  Nandana's  palace  ends  in  an 
elopement — the  lovers  making  for  the  place  to  wliich 
Madhava  and  Malati  had  already  gone.  Fate,  however, 
had  yet  more  adventures  in  store  for  them.  On  the  way 
they  were  stopped  by  the  town  guard.  Makaranda  singly 
keeps  the  guard  in  check  while  his  bride  and  attendants 
get  away.  On  learning  the  state  of  affairs,  Madhava 
hurries  off  to  help  his  friend.  Malati  thoughtfully 
despatches  a  couple  of  attendants  to  apprise  Kamandaki 
of  the  course  of  events,  and  directs  Lavangika  to  overtake 
her  lord  and  implore  him  to  shun  all  needless  danger. 
Lavangika  does  not  return  as  quickly  as  Malati  could  wish, 
and  after  a  while  the  bride,  unable  to  bear  the  absence  of 
her  lord,  follows  him.  She  is  met,  alone  and  unprotected, 
by  her  arch-enemy  Kapala  Kundala.  Malati,  terrified, 
instinctively  cries  in  an  undertone,  "Ah!  husband!"  To 
which  the  cruel  priestess  of  Chaumandra  replies  tauntingly — 

"  Yes,  call  upon  him. 
Where  is  your  love — the  murderer  of  the  pious. 
The  youthful  paramour  of  wanton  girls  ? 
Let  liim — your  husband — save  you,  if  he  can. 
Bird  of  the  wild,  that  tremblest  to  behold 
The  hovering  hawk — what  canst  thou  hope,  long  marked 
My  prey  ?     I  bear  thee  with  me  to  Sri  Parvata, 
There  to  consign  thee  to  a  painful  death. 
Torn  piecemeal — victim  of  my  just  revenge." 

With  these  taunting  and  menacing  words  the  ruthless 
priestess  carried  Malati  off. 

While  this  abduction  was  taking  place,  the  two  heroes 
who  had  routed  the  town  guard  were  nevertheless  taken 
before  the  king,  charged  with  having  borne  away  the 
Minister's   daughter. 

The  king,  however,  being  rather  pleased  at  the  prowess 
displayed  by  the  two  young  men,  treated  the  matter 
lightly,  and  the  offenders  were  set  at  Hberty,  to  find  on 
their  return  that  Malati  had  disappeared  mysteriously. 

Overwhelmed  by  his  loss,  Madhava  wanders  away  to 
the  mountains  in  a  fit  of  despair  which  knows  no  consola- 
tion, accompanied  by  his  ever-faithful  friend  Makaranda. 

79 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

On  the  breezy  mountains  he  indulges  his  grief  till  both 
reason  and  life  are  threatened.  Makaranda  is  so  deeply- 
moved  by  his  companion's  sad  fate  and  desperate  condition 
that  he  distractedly  contemplates  suicide,  and  is  in  the 
very  act  of  precipitating  himself  from  the  rocks  when  he 
is  arrested  by  Sandammi.  In  reply  to  his  inquiry  who  she 
might  be,  Sandamini  tells  him  that  she  is  a  yogini,  "  the 
mistress  of  supernal  power,"  and  she  shows  him  the  garland 
which  Malati  had  been  wearing  when  she  disappeared. 
A  few  minutes  later  Madhava  learns  from  her  that  Malati 
had  been  carried  off  by  Kapala  Kundala,  that  she  still  lived, 
and  that  for  her  protection  Sandamini  would  exert 

"  The  powerful  knowledge  which  mystic  rites  and  prayers. 
Devout  observance,  and  a  sainted  teacher 
Had  armed  her  with." 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  she  had  actually  rescued  the  girl 
from  the  vengeful  hands  of  her  inveterate  enemy. 

Calling  upon  Madhava  to  accompany  her,  they  both 
instantly  disappeared.  A  little  later,  at  a  most  critical 
moment,  when  Malati's  father  was  about  to  commit  suicide 
on  a  funeral  pyre  on  account  of  her  supposed  death, 
Sandamini,  the  wonder-working  yogini,  conveyed  the  lovers 
to  their  friends,  and,  by  securing  the  consent  of  the  king 
and  their  respective  parents  to  the  union  of  Madhava  and 
Malati,  brings  about  a  happy  denouement. 

Many  are  the  reflections  which  this  charming  drama 
awakens.  We  find  all  the  usual  devices  of  the  modern 
European  romancers  resorted  to  in  the  plots  and  counter- 
plots of  this  old  Hindu  play.  We  have  the  hero  and 
heroine  driven  by  untoward  circumstances  and  fiendish 
conspiracies  to  the  very  brink  of  despair,  and  then  oppor- 
tunely rescued  just  in  time  to  obviate  the  most  serious 
consequences.  Scarcely  do  we  rejoice  with  them  in  their 
safety  and  happiness,  when  they  are  involved  in  new  and 
even  more  serious  troubles  than  before  ;  yet  we  feel  con- 
fident that  all  will  end  well,  and  our  expectations  are  not 
disappointed.  So  far  we  are  on  familiar  ground.  But  as 
we  watch  the  drama  unfolded  we  are  always  conscious  that 
the  framework  of  society  and  the  conditions  and  modes  of 

80 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

social  intercourse  depicted  in  the  play,  as  well  as  the 
religious  sentiments  pervading  it,  are  alien  to  the  West. 
The  weird  scenes  in  the  cemetery  at  night  and  in  the 
temple  hard  by  are  essentially  and  characteristically  Indian, 
and  so  also  are  the  thaumaturgies  of  the  wandering 
mendicant,  the  priestesses,  and  the  yogini,  who  have  acquired 
their  superhuman  power  only  through  the  practice  of  severe 
austerities. 


III.  Disillusionment. 

In  a  certain  village,  within  the  dominions  of  a  famous 
Rajah,  there  lived  a  poor  Brahman  woman  with  her  only 
child,  a  little  boy  of  tender  years.  By  the  labour  of  her 
hands,  particularly  by  grinding  corn  for  her  neighbours, 
the  widow  earned  a  bare  subsistence  for  herself  and  her 
son.  Of  course  their  fare  was  of  the  simplest  and  coarsest 
kind. 

One  day  a  prosperous  villager  who  was  celebrating  a 
happy  domestic  event  gave  the  Brahman  boy  a  hearty  meal 
of  rice  cooked  in  milk  and  sweetened  with  sugar,  luxuries 
to  which,  till  that  time,  the  child  had  been  a  stranger. 
Next  day,  when  his  usual  cake  of  coarse  brown  bread  was 
offered  to  him,  the  boy,  mindful  of  the  dainties  of  the 
previous  day,  refused  to  eat  it.  He  wanted  milk  and  rice 
and  sugar  ! 

"  That,"  said  his  mother,  "  is  more  than  I  can  give  you. 
Devi  alone  can  gratify  your  wishes." 

Now,  not  far  from  where  these  indigent  people  lived 
there  stood  a  temple  of  Devi,  but  in  so  ruined  and 
neglected  a  condition  that  no  one  visited  it.  Its  walls 
were  rent  from  top  to  bottom,  and  even  Devi's  image  was 
cracked  and  mutilated. 

To  this  dilapidated  shrine  repaired  the  Brahman  boy, 
and  prayed  the  presiding  goddess  to  grant  him  rice  and 
milk  for  his  meals.  For  four  days  he  lay  in  the  temple, 
refusing  to  partake  of  the  food  offered  him  by  his  mother. 
At  last,  taking  compassion  on  the  infant  suppHant,  the 
eight-armed  goddess  appeared  before  him  in  person  and 
asked  what  favour  he  sought. 
F  8l 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

"  Only  rice  and  milk  every  day,"  replied  the  child. 

"  You  shall  have  it,"  responded  the  benign  goddess,  "  but 
ask  for  something  more  important  than  that." 

The  little  Brahman,  the  horizon  of  whose  ideas  was 
extremely  limited,  had  no  other  request  to  prefer,  so  Devi 
graciously  handed  him  an  amritphal  or  fruit  conferring 
immortaUty. 

The  widow,  deeming  this  gift  much  too  good  for  one 
in  their  humble  circumstances,  advised  her  boy  to  present 
it  to  the  Rajah,  who  would  doubtless  make  such  a  pecuniary 
return  for  it  as  would  enable  them  to  live  the  remainder 
of  their  lives  in  peace  and  comfort.  Ushered  into  the 
king's  presence,  the  child  handed  him  the  wonderful  fruit 
and  told  the  story  concerning  it. 

After  accepting  the  offering  and  rewarding  the  little 
donor  in  a  suitable  manner,  the  Rajah  put  the  wonderful 
fruit  aside,  thinking  in  his  heart  that  the  cares  of  his  posi- 
tion were  too  great  to  make  it  worth  while  to  prolong 
his  life  indefinitely,  but  he  decided  mentally  that  his 
beloved  Rani  should  be  presented  with  the  amritphal,  and 
having  eaten  it  enjoy  perpetual  youth.  To  her,  therefore, 
he  gave  the  fruit  that  same  day ;  but  she,  consumed  with 
love  for  a  certain  darogah,  secretly  made  it  over  to  that 
officer.  Though  he  was  the  paramour  of  the  Rani,  this 
darogah  really  loved  a  courtesan  in  the  town,  and  that 
same  night  she  was  made  the  possessor  of  the  Devi's  gift. 

To  prolong  her  sinful  life  did  not  seem  a  very  inviting 
prospect  to  this  Rahab,  and  thinking  over  the  matter  she 
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  Rajah,  who  was  a  kind 
and  just  ruler,  and  the  father  of  his  people,  would  be  the 
most  worthy  recipient  of  such  an  important  gift  as  a  fruit 
of  immortality  ;  so,  in  the  morning,  she  carried  it  to  his 
majesty  and  laid  it  respectfully  at  his  feet. 

"  Where  did  you  get  this  ?  "  inquired  the  astonished 
Rajah,  recognising  the  strange  fruit  which  was  raised  in  no 
terrestrial  orchard. 

"  From  the  darogah  of  the  horses,"  was  the  courtesan's 
reluctant  reply. 

In  an  instant  the  whole  painful  truth  flashed  upon  the 
disillusioned  king. 

82 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

"  What,"  mused  he,  "  is  human  happiness  or  kingly 
dignity,  when  my  Rani  can  thus  betray  my  honour,  and 
when  her  plebeian  paramour  can  prefer  the  favours  of  a 
courtesan  to  those  of  a  queen  !  " 

Overwhelmed  by  these  bitter  reflections  upon  that 
well-worn  theme  "  all  is  vanity,"  the  good  king  abandoned 
his  throne,  and,  turning  his  back  upon  the  world,  became  a 
sadhu ;  ^  and  this  step  of  his  is  the  reason  why  the  present 
story  appears  here,  affording  as  it  does  a  characteristically 
Hindu  illustration  of  a  sentiment — cruel  disillusionment — 
which  probably  more  than  any  other  has  driven  men  in  all 
countries  to  join  the  ranks  of  the  discontented  contemners 
of  the  world's  hollow  pleasures. 

IV.  The  Horned  Rishi.^ 

There  was  once  a  sadhu  named  Shringhi  Rikh  (having 
horns).  He  lived  in  a  dense  forest,  worshipping  God  and 
knowing  nothing  of  the  life  of  towns  and  villages,  or  of  the 
ways  of  men.  In  this  manner  the  solitary  hermit  passed 
many  years,  till  at  length  a  dire  famine  visited  the  land. 
When  this  calamity  came,  the  king  naturally  asked  his 
vazir  (prime  minister)  what  was  to  be  done  to  alleviate 
the  sufferings  of  his  people,  and  that  high  officer  prudently 
advised  that  the  Brahmans  should  be  formally  consulted  with 
a  view  to  the  adoption  of  some  suitable  course  of  action. 

They  were  accordingly  sent  for  by  the  king,  and  re- 
quested to  say  how  the  famine  was  to  be  stayed,  and  how 
the  much-needed  rain  was  to  be  obtained  to  fertilise  the 
thirsty  fields. 

The  wise  Brahmans,  having  considered  the  matter,  re- 
pHed  that  the  famine  was  not  a  judgment  from  Heaven 
due  to  any  sins  committed  by  the  king  himself,  and  that 
the  earth  would  certainly  be  blessed  with  rain  if  the 
"  horned  rislii  "  who  dwelt  in  the  forest  could  by  any  means 

^  Substantially  the  same  story,  but  in  a  somewhat  different  form,  is  told 
in  the  Baital  Pachisi. 

2  This  and  the  four  following  stories  are  from  the  Granth  of  Guru  Govind 
Singh,  which  contains  no  less  than  four  hundred  and  four  tales  respecting 
the  wiles  of  women. 

83 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

be  induced  to  take  up  his  abode  in  the  city,  for  so  was  it 
written  in  the  holy  Shastras. 

The  Rajah,  losing  no  time,  sent  messengers  to  induce 
the  ascetic  to  come  to  his  capital ;  but  the  horned  saint 
heeded  them  not,  so  the  sovereign  went  in  person  to  the 
anchorite  ;  but  even  he  could  not  prevail  upon  Shringhi 
Rikh  to  leave  his  forest-home  and  the  asceticisms  in  which 
he  was  engaged. 

In  this  difficult  crisis,  a  harlot,  gaudily  dressed  and 
with  her  lips  reddened  with  the  pdn  she  was  eating,  pre- 
sented herself  before  the  Rajah  and  said  to  him  jauntily — 

"  0  king,  I  will  bring  Shringhi  Rikh  to  you,  on  con- 
dition that  when  I  do  so  you  will  give  me  one  half  of  your 
kingdom.  If  you  agree  to  this  I  shall  make  the  saint 
shave  ofi  his  matted  locks  and  put  on  a  turban,  and,  having 
quite  subdued  him,  I  shall  lead  him  into  your  majesty's 
presence,"  adding  confidently,  "  With  my  beauty  I  can  do 
anything  I  like." 

The  worthy  Rajah,  acting  for  the  benefit  of  his  lieges, 
accepted  these  extravagant  conditions,  and  the  fair  wanton 
went  of?  to  the  jungles  where  the  sadhii  lived.  Taking 
with  her  a  party  of  beautiful  women  arrayed  in  finery  and 
dressed  to  perfection,  she  prepared  a  habitation  for  herself 
in  the  woods,  and  on  the  trees  around  her  temporary  abode 
she  hung  ludoos  ^  and  other  delicacies,  and,  when  all  her 
arrangements  were  complete,  commenced  singing  to  the 
dulcet  accompaniment  of  musical  instruments. 

The  rishi,  seeing  these  unaccustomed  sights,  and  hear- 
ing sweet  sounds,  the  like  of  which  had  never  before  reached 
his  ears,  became  astonished,  and  in  his  perplexity  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  they  must  be  due  to  visitants  from 
another  world.  Feeling  hungry,  he  ventured  to  pluck 
some  of  the  novel  fruits  (ludoos)  he  discovered  growing  on 
the  trees  near  by.  He  found  them  deliciously  sweet  and 
quite  to  his  taste,  and,  wondering  how  such  "  fruits  "  had 
appeared  there,  attributed  them  to  the  god  Indra. 

"  Perhaps,"  soliloquised  the  sadhu,  "  the  god  has  been 
graciously  pleased  with  my  austerities  and  has  come  down 
in  person  to  witness  them." 

^  A  Ivdoo  is  a  well-known  Indian  sweetmeat. 

84 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

While  thus  reflecting,  he  noticed  a  woman  beautifully 
dressed  and  decked  with  costly  jewellery  standing  a  little 
way  off.  So  lovely  was  she  that  the  mere  sight  of  her 
removed  all  his  cares.  He  wondered  who  she  could  possibly 
be,  and  asked  himself,  "  From  what  distant  world  is  this 
enchanting  visitant  ?  " 

Suspending  his  austerities,  he  approached  the  woman, 
and,  filled  with  wonder,  sat  down  near  her ;  then  growing 
bolder  went  up  to  her,  and,  bowing  low,  said  to  her — 

"  Tell  me,  who  art  thou  ?  Art  thou  the  consort  of 
Shiv-ji  or  of  Vishnu  ?      TeU  me." 

She  said,  "  I  am  not  a  goddess,  but  the  wife  of  Oodaluk 
rishi.  Hearing  of  you — for  your  fame  has  spread  far  and 
wide — I  have  come  to  make  you  my  husband." 

Having  thus  spoken,  she  lavished  flatteries  upon  him, 
and  in  a  short  time,  by  exercising  her  seductive  charms 
upon  the  recluse,  she  subdued  him  to  her  purpose,  and 
before  long  brought  him  away,  a  willing  captive,  to  the 
nearest  village.  When  she  conducted  Shringhi  Rikh  into 
the  Rajah's  domains  the  rain  began  to  fall,  as  the  Brahmans 
had  predicted,  and  the  hearts  of  the  people  rejoiced  greatly. 

The  rishi  was  then  married  to  one  of  the  Rajah's 
daughters,  and  continued  to  live  in  his  father-in-law's 
territories,  which  for  a  long  time  derived  the  greatest 
benefit  and  good  fortune  from  his  presence.  However,  it 
came  to  pass  that  eventually  his  residence  in  the  land 
caused  an  excess  of  rain,  and  it  was  thought  desirable  to 
lure  him  back  to  his  old  mode  of  life.  So  the  services  of 
the  courtesan  were  once  again  called  into  requisition,  and 
she  successfully  persuaded  the  sadlm  to  return  to  his  former 
woodland  haunts,  where  he  resumed  his  long-interrupted 
austerities.^ 

^  Faith  in  the  help  of  saintly  sadhus  during  seasons  of  drought  is  not 
extinct  amongst  the  Hindus  even  of  our  own  times, 

"  With  the  progress  of  the  season  the  area  of  crop  failure  in  India  is 
becoming  narrowed  and  defined.  Northern  Bombay,  some  of  the  native 
States  in  Central  India  and  Rajputana,  vath.  adjoining  portions  of  the 
Punjab,  are  involved,  though  it  is  still  doubtful  whether  the  loss  of  both 
harvests  will  be  complete  over  very  considerable  tracts.  There  are  sufficient 
food  stocks  in  the  country,  and  rising  prices  will  secure  economy  in  their 
consumption.     Relief  measures  are  ready.     One  feudatory  State  discovered 

8s 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 


V.    The  Lost  Son  Restored. 

Tliere  was  at  one  time  a  very  great  Raj  all  named  Sukret 
Singh.  His  Rani's  name  was  Jewankala.  To  them  a 
son  was  born ;  but  for  some  reason  or  other  the  infant  was 
not  satisfactory  to  his  unnatural  mother,  so  she  quietly 
flung  the  baby  into  the  sea,  and  informed  her  husband 
that  a  tiger  had  carried  him  off.  The  Rajah,  beheving 
his  wife's  story,  comforted  her,  saying,  "  Permashwar 
(God)  will  give  you  more  sons."  Yet  twenty-five  years 
passed  after  this  event,  and  the  Rani  was  not  blessed 
with  another  child. 

One  day  about  this  period — that  is,  twenty-five  years 
after  the  disappearance  of  her  infant — the  Rani  saw  a 
very  handsome  young  man,  and,  her  heart  becoming  captive 
to  his  beauty,  she  sent  a  hichauliya  (a  female  go-between) 
to  invite  him  to  a  clandestine  interview.  He  came  at  the 
Rani's  request,  and  gratified  her  wicked  desires.  With  the 
cunning  of  the  serpent  she  confided  to  her  new  lover  the 
true  story  of  her  baby's  disappearance,  and  how  she  had 
falsely  stated  that  he  had  been  carried  off  by  a  tiger. 

"  Now,"  said  the  Rani  to  her  paramour,  "  I  want  you 
to  understand  that  you  were  carried  away  by  a  jogi  in  the 
form  of  a  tiger,  that  instead  of  destroying  you  the  sadhu 
reared  you  himself,  and  that,  knowing  you  to  be  a  king's 
son,  he  had  disclosed  to  you  these  important  facts  of  your 
history  before  going  away  on  a  journey  to  a  very  distant 
land." 

The  Rani  thus  taught  the  young  man,  and  he  agreed 
to  act  in  accordance  with  her  wishes. 

A  day  or  two  afterwards  the  Rani  said  to  her  husband, 

a  resource  denied  to  the  British  Government,  and  thereby  secured  a  special 
rainfall  all  to  itself  while  surrounding  districts  remained  drought-stricken. 
A  wandering  Brahman  of  peculiar  sanctity  was  followed  by  crowds,  who 
gave  him  no  peace  till  he  consented  to  apply  his  occult  powers  to  the  relief 
of  their  parched  fields.  Worn  out  by  their  importunities,  the  holy  man  at 
last  sat  down  and  vowed  he  would  not  rise  till  the  water  flowed  over  his  feet. 
In  two  hoiu-s  the  brazen  sky  was  overcast,  rain  set  in,  and  twelve  hours 
later  the  Brahman  was  ankle-deep.  The  situation  was  saved — and  the  man. 
This,  at  least,  is  the  report  semi-officially  furnished  by  the  State  to  the 
political  officer." — Saturday  Review,  7th  October  1899. 

86 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

"  I  have  strange  but  very  important  news  for  you.  Our 
baby  son,  who  was  carried  away  by  a  tiger,  was  really  taken 
by  a  jogi  in  the  form  of  a  tiger,  but  he  did  not  devour  our 
child.  His  chelas  brought  him  other  children  for  his  feasts, 
and  he  spared  ours  because  he  was  a  king's  son.  I  have 
myself  seen  and  recognised  our  lost  child." 

The  Rajah,  Ustening  with  astonishment  to  these  wonder- 
ful assertions,  said — 

"  Send  for  him,  and  let  me  hear  the  story  from  his  own 
lips." 

Thereupon  the  young  man  was  summoned  to  the  palace 
and  questioned. 

"  What  really  happened,"  said  he,  "  how  can  I  possibly 
know  ? — but  what  the  jogi  told  me,  that  will  I  truthfully 
relate."  And  he  proceeded  to  repeat  what  the  Rani  had 
taught  him.  She,  acting  her  part  well,  appeared  to  be 
overcome  with  emotion  at  the  young  man's  statements, 
wept  false  tears  copiously,  and  in  the  very  presence  of  the 
Rajah,  making  her  lover  her  son,  embraced  him  affection- 
ately and,  lamenting  their  long  separation,  kissed  him  on 
the  lips  again  and  again.  She  had  a  bed  made  for  him 
in  her  own  room,  and  could  not  bear  her  lost  darling  out 
of  her  sight,  even  for  a  few  minutes.  During  the  eight 
watches  of  the  day  and  night  she  guarded  him  from  further 
danger,  and  enjoyed  herself  right  well. 

VI.    A  Kind-hearted  Lady. 

In  the  city  of  Sirhand  there  lived  a  jogi  named  Swar- 
ganath  and  also  a  certain  woman,  Sri  Chhah  Man  Mati, 
who  fell  desperately  in  love  with  him. 

One  day  the  jogi  was  in  her  house  when  it  was  made 
known  to  her  that  her  husband  was  ^on  the  point  of  return- 
ing home — in  fact,  was  quite  close  at  hand. 

Grasping  the  decidedly  serious  situation,  she  thus  hastily 
addressed  her  lover — 

"  Take  up  your  sword  at  once  and  shout  angrily,  '  The 
thief  who  has  robbed  me  has  entered  here.  You  have  con- 
cealed him  ;   drive  him  away  ;   I  will  certainly  kill  him  ! '  " 

At  the  same  time  she  actually  hid  upon  the  premises 

87 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

the  jogi'^s  chela,  a  fellow  who  used  to  come  with  his  master 
as  his  bodyguard  and  had  been  appointed  to  the  post  of 
door-keeper  and  sentinel  during  his  guru's  surreptitious 
visits  to  the  frail,  if  fair,  lady. 

While  matters  were  being  thus  hastily  arranged,  the 
husband  arrived  at  his  home.  The  jogi,  with  much 
simulated  wrath,  repeated  the  words  he  had  been  taught, 
but  after  a  short  yet  furious  howl  of  rage  he  went  away, 
brandishing  his  sword  in  a  menacing  fashion. 

"  Dear  husband,"  said  the  lady,  explaining  the  situation 
to  her  bewildered  lord,  "  that  jogi  was  burning  with  anger 
owing  to  some  mistake  made  by  his  chela.  He  was  going 
to  kill  him,  and  would  have  done  so  but  for  the  asylum  I 
have  afforded  him.  I  permitted  the  poor  fellow  to  hide 
himself  in  our  house,  and  thus  avoid  the  consequences  of 
his  guru^s  wrath.  Now  let  us  release  him.  He  is  hidden 
in  that  corner,"  pointing  to  the  place  of  concealment. 

The  husband  was  very  pleased  with  the  thoughtful 
kindness  displayed  by  his  charming  wife.  So  the  man 
who  had  been  concealed  in  the  house  was  quietly  hurried 
off  the  premises,  and  went  away  joyfully  to  rejoin  his 
worthy  guru — the  amorous  jogi,  very  gratified,  indeed,  that 
matters  had  in  the  end  turned  out  so  satisfactorily  for 
himself. 

VII.  The  Father  Duped.^ 

There  was  a  Rajah  named  Nilkate  of  Popeewutee  city. 
Mangubechater,  his  wife,  was  like  an  incarnation  of  the 
goddess  of  love,  and  their  daughter,  named  Sri  Algun- 
jamuttee,  so  beautiful  that  it  might  be  said  of  her  that  she 
excelled  the  moon  in  brilliancy  and  appeared  to  have  been 
fashioned  by  the  hand  of  Brahma  himself.  There  was  a 
neighbouring  Rajah,  Srimantilk  by  name,  too  handsome  to 
be  described.  So  incomparable,  indeed,  was  he  that  the 
sun,  seeing  his  perfection,  became  ashamed  of  himself. 
Once  Sri  Algunjamuttee  went  to  a  garden  to  while  away 

^  In  this  and  the  following  tale  the  text  of  the  originals  has  been 
rendered  more  literally  than  in  the  preceding  stories,  though  the  giossness 
of  language  which  is  characteristic  of  so  many  of  these  productions  has  been 
avoided. 

^2> 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

her  time  with  other  girls  of  her  own  age.  There  she 
happened  to  see  Rajah  Srimantilk,  and  became  enamoured 
of  him.  She  was  so  afiected  by  this  sudden  passion  that 
when  she  went  home  she  was  like  a  gambler  who  had  lost 
all  he  ever  possessed.  By  a  signal  from  her  eyes  she 
summoned  to  her  side  one  of  her  young  and  trusted 
companions,  and,  giving  her  gold  and  jewels,  entreated  her 
to  bring  about  a  union  between  herself  and  the  young  Rajah 
who  had  so  completely  captured  her  susceptible  heart. 

"  If  I  do  not  get  him,"  said  the  love-sick  princess,  "  1 
shall  turn  a  yogini,  and,  flinging  away  all  my  jewels  and 
finery,  fly  to  the  lonely  forests  ;  or,  taking  a  beggar's  gourd 
in  my  hand,  I  shall  wander  about  the  world,  living  upon 
the  alms  of  the  charitable.  I  want  him  to  be  the  very 
apple  of  my  eye,  and  failing  that  I  shall  kill  myself.  Alas  ! 
why  have  I  lived  so  long  to  suffer  all  this  torture,  all  this 
burning  pain  ?  " 

When  the  girl- companion  saw  her  distress,  she  came 
close  up  to  her  and,   laughing,   said  in  her  ear — 

"  Don't  fret ;  I'll  send  some  clever  woman  to  him." 

These  simple  words  seemed  very  sweet  to  the  love-lorn 
princess  in  her  great  trouble. 

In  accordance  with  her  promise,  the  girl-friend  sent  a 
clever  hichauUya  to  Rajah  Srimantilk,  the  princess  herself 
merely  saying — 

"  Do  what  is  necessary,  but  save  my  life." 

The  hichauliya  followed  after  the  Rajah,  who  was  out 
hunting.  She  dressed  herself  in  costly  garments,  and 
decked  herself  out  with  jewels  of  rare  beauty  and  value. 
When  the  Rajah  saw  such  a  lovely  creature,  a  being  like  a 
real  peri,  in  the  midst  of  the  jungle,  he  was  astonished. 

"  Is  this  resplendent  creature  of  the  race  of  the  Devtas, 
Gandharbas,  Daityas,  or  Nagas,  or  is  she  really  human  ? 
Let  me  inquire  why  she  has  come  here.  Is  she  not 
lovely  ?  " 

Thinking  thus,  the  Rajah  approached  her,  and,  viewing 
her  beauty  at  close  quarters,  fell  in  love  with  her  at  once. 

The  hichauUya,  on  her  part,  handed  him  a  pearl  neck- 
lace and  a  letter  from  her  mistress,  and  while  doing  so 
said — 

89 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

"  You,  sir,  I  can  see,  have  fallen  in  love  with  my 
beauty  ;  but  she  who  has  written  this  is  a  thousand  times 
more  lovely  than  I.     Come  with  me  and  feast  your  eyes." 

The  Rajah,  enticed  by  this  glowing  description  of  the 
charms  of  the  princess,  agreed  to  accompany  her  faithful 
messenger.  He  forgot  all  about  his  own  affairs,  and,  filled 
with  the  idea  of  the  lovely  princess,  he  put  the  handsome 
bichauUya  into  his  chariot  and  drove  where  she  directed 
him  to  go.  The  way  was  long,  but  at  last  they  arrived 
near  the  palace  of  the  love-sick  princess.  The  Rajah  now 
disguised  himself  as  a  sadhu  and  lit  his  fire  within  sight 
of  her  window.  Daily,  with  the  permission  of  her  father, 
used  the  princess  to  come  and  piously  feed  the  good  sadhu 
with  her  own  hands.  At  night,  when  everyone  was  asleep, 
she  would  visit  him  also.  In  this  way  the  princess  was 
very  happy.  No  one  recognised  the  disguised  Rajah  or 
suspected  what  was  going  on.  One  day  Sri  Algunjamuttee 
went  to  her  father  and  deliberately  said  things  which  she 
knew  would  excite  his  anger.  She  succeeded  well  enough, 
for  the  king  became  so  enraged  that  he  ordered  his  vazir 
to  turn  her  out  of  doors  into  the  jungle.  When  she  heard 
this  royal  command  Sri  Algunjamuttee  pretended  to  be 
very  unhappy,  and  cried  bitterly,  though  secretly  rejoicing 
in  her  heart.  The  incensed  and  implacable  father's 
peremptory  command,  "  Take  her  away  at  once,"  was  of 
course  obeyed  implicitly,  and  the  princess  was  conveyed 
to  the  forest,  and  left  there. 

But  in  a  very  short  time  her  lover  came  and  joined 
her,  and,  after  they  had  enjoyed  themselves  to  their  hearts' 
content,  he  carried  her  off  to  his  own  city. 

VIII.  Woman's  Cunning. 

Jogsain  was  the  name  of  a  certain  Rajah,  and  his  Rani's 
name  was  Sri  Sanyaspati.  She  had  a  son  born  to  her, 
who,  when  he  grew  up,  was  very  beautiful.  In  the  city 
over  which  Jogsain  ruled  there  was  a  Jat  woman  who  fell 
desperately  in  love  with  the  young  prince,  and  though  she 
used,  on  one  pretence  or  another,  to  see  him  every  day, 
yet  she  found  no  opportunity  of  attaining  her  wishes.     To 

90 


GLIMPSES  OF  SADHUS  IN  INDIAN  FICTION 

gain  her  object,  she  disguised  herself  as  a  jogi,  and  went  to 
the  Rajah's  palace,  giving  out  that  she  was  well  versed  in 
janter,  manter,  tanter  (tahsmans,  spells,  and  magic  rites). 
Seizing  a  favourable  opportunity,  the  pretended  jogi  said  to 
the  Rajah's  son — 

"  If  you  will  come  with  me  to  a  lonely  place,  I  shall 
show  you  some  wonders  that  will  astonish  you." 

The  prince  and  jogi  talked  over  the  proposal ;  the  prince's 
curiosity  was  greatly  excited,  and  he  said — 

"  I  have  never  been  out  alone  at  night,  but  I  will  accom- 
pany you,  since  you  are  a  jogi,  if  you  promise  to  raise  the 
spirits  of  the  dead  in  my  presence." 

The  pretended  jogi  engaged  to  perform  this  great  miracle 
to  pleasure  the  king's  son,  and  the  two  started  out  together 
on  their  strange,  unholy  business.  When  they  had  pene- 
trated, side  by  side,  some  little  way  into  the  lonely  jungles, 
the  jogi,  turning  suddenly  towards  the  prince,  and  taking 
him  entirely  by  surprise,  said  sharply — 

"  Now  do  as  I  bid  you,  or  I  will  kill  you  on  this  spot." 

The  prince,  quite  unprepared  for  such  a  contingency, 
became  alarmed  and  lost  his  presence  of  mind. 

The  -pseudo-jogi  thereupon  stated  her  wishes  without 
any  circumlocution,  and  her  companion  willy-nilly  yielded 
to  her  wicked  desires. 

The  depth  of  woman's  cunning  is  unfathomable  !  God 
created  her  ;  but  Himself  repents  it. 

The  foregoing  tales  speak  for  themselves,  and,  while 
throwing  some  Hght  upon  the  conduct  of  love  affairs  in 
the  East,  show,  amongst  other  things,  that  although  the 
Indians  feel  that  sadhuism  is  honourable  and  respectable, 
they  are  none  the  less  quite  alive  to- the  great  convenience 
of  the  sadhu's  habit,  as  a  disguise,  for  the  successful  conduct 
of  amatory  intrigues. 


91 


CHAPTER  VI 

SADHUS   AS    DESCRIBED   BY   SOME   EUROPEAN 
VISITORS   TO   INDIA 


Greek  and  Roman  Accounts  of  Sadhus  and  their  Practices — Observations 
regarding  Sadhus  and  their  Peculiarities  recorded  in  the  Works  of  the 
Jeweller  Tavernier,  the  Physician  Bernier,  the  "  Senior  Merchant " 
James  Forbes,  the  Missionary  Ward,  Colonel  Sleeman,  and  Bishop 
Heber. 


ISTORTION  arising  from 
ignorance  and  prejudice 
is  unavoidably  present 
in  all  pictures  of  an 
alien  civilisation  drawn 
by  visitors  coming  from 
countries  remote  both 
geographically  and  in- 
tellectually ;  yet  these 
pictures  have  their  value, 
affording  as  they  often  do 
important  facts — wrongly 
interpreted,  perhaps,  but  still  facts — for  the  formation 
of  a  judgment  in  respect  to  the  growth  and  development 
of  customs  and  institutions.  For  this  reason  it  seems 
desirable  to  recall  to  mind  such  particulars  and  impres- 
sions in  regard  to  sadhus  as  European  travellers,  or  residents 
in  India  of  a  bygone  age,  have  placed  on  record  for 
the  benefit  of  their  contemporaries  and  succeeding  genera- 
tions. 

With  what  admiring  wonderment  the  Greeks  and 
Romans  regarded  India  and  its  strange  people  after  the 
Macedonian  invader  lifted  the  veil  which  had  for  ages 
separated  from  the  Western  nations  that  mysterious  land 

92 


SADHUS  DESCRIBED  BY  EUROPEAN  VISITORS 

and    its    tranquil    civilisation,   classical    literature    amply 

testifies. 

Amidst  the  many  unaccustomed  objects  and  institutions 
which  attracted  the  attention  of  European  visitors  beyond 
the  InduSj  the  ascetic  philosophers  (Brahman  and  Buddhist) 
and  their  peculiar  ways  were  not  the  least  interesting. 
Appreciative  stories  of  the  wisdom  of  these  philosophers — 
gymnosophists  the  Greeks  called  them — have  come  down  to 
us,  with  descriptions  of  some  of  the  curious  penances  to 
which  they  subjected  themselves.  From  these  narratives 
we  learn  that  the  ascetic  sages,  who  were  held  in  the  very 
highest  honour  by  both  the  people  and  their  rulers,  lived 
an  austere  life,  often  in  communities  ;  that  they  studied 
self-control,  spent  much  of  their  time  in  serious  discourses 
and  in  imparting  wisdom  to  others,  teaching  "  that  the 
best  doctrine  was  that  which  removed  pleasure  and  grief 
from  the  mind."  ^  As  to  their  self -mortifications,  the  Greek 
and  Roman  accounts  show  that  in  their  nature  they  were 
very  similar  to,  though  probably  not  so  severe  as,  those 
practised  in  India  at  later  periods.  For  example,  one  of 
these  ascetics  would  lie  naked  on  his  back  in  the  open  air, 
enduring  all  the  vicissitudes  of  scorching  sunshine  and 
chilling  rain ;  another  would  stand  for  hours  on  one  leg, 
supporting  with  both  hands  above  his  head  a  beam  of  wood 
some  three  cubits  long  ;  a  third  would  fix  his  gaze  upon  the 
rising  sun,  and  stare  at  the  great  luminary  all  day  till  he 
disappeared  below  the  western  horizon.  And,  when  afflicted 
with  disease  or  tired  of  life,  these  wise  men  of  India  would 
sometimes  erect  a  pyre  and  voluntarily  perish  in  the  flames 
in  the  presence  of  the  multitude. 

Having  satisfied  ourselves,  from  Greek  and  Roman 
sources,  of  the  antiquity  of  the  ascetic  practices  of  the 
Indian  sages,  we  may,  passing  over  many  centuries,  profit- 
ably take  stock,  even  cursorily,  of  the  facts  and  impressions 
regarding  sadhus  which  some  of  the  comparatively  modern 
European  visitors  to  India,  and  official  or  other  residents 
there,  have  recorded  in  their  published  works. 

When  M.  Ta vernier  travelled  in  the  Mogul  Empire  as 
a  dealer  in  precious  stones,  about  the  middle  of  the  seven- 

^  Strabo,  M'Crindle's  Ancient  India,  p.  71. 

93 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

teenth  century,  the  land  he  saw  was  very  different  in  many 
important  respects  from  that  which  had  met  the  eyes  of 
the  Macedonian  hero. 

Many  and  striking  changes  had  naturally  occurred 
during  the  two  thousand  years  which  had  elapsed  since 
the  fourth  century  before  Christ.  New  world-religions  had 
arisen  since  then,  and  the  followers  of  the  latest  born  of 
these  creeds — ahens  from  Central  Asia — were  masters 
of  a  great  part  of  India  when  the  Frenchman  travelled 
there.  Yet  the  sadhu  was  still  a  prominent  figure  in  Indian 
life,  and  Hindu  ascetics  were,  as  in  Greek  times,  much 
in  evidence  everywhere,  for  M.  Tavernier  speaks  of 
the  "  infinite  multitude  of  faquirs  that  swarm  all  over 
India,"  generally  moving  about  in  large  parties  and  quite 
naked. 

These  faquirs — for  so  he  designates  sadhus  of  all  sects 
— were,  he  tells  us,  followers  or  imitators  of  Ravan,  the 
demon-king  of  Lanka,  who  abducted  the  fair  Sita  from  her 
hermitage  in  the  woods  of  Dandaka.  This,  of  course,  is 
incorrect ;  for  though,  according  to  the  legends,  Ravan  had 
been  a  great  ascetic  in  his  time,  and  acquired  superhuman 
power  by  his  austerities,  none  of  the  ascetic  sects  set  up 
for  being  his  followers.  But  though  Tavernier's  knowledge 
of  the  origin  of  the  sadhus  was  on  a  par  with  that  of  most 
European  visitors  to  India  up  to  and  including  our  own 
time,  still  he  certainly  took  intelhgent  note  of  what  came 
under  his  own  observation  in  regard  to  the  severe  aus- 
terities practised  by  some  of  them.  In  the  English  version 
of  his  travels,  published  in  London  in  1684,  there  is  a 
curious  engraving  illustrating  some  of  these  self-inflicted 
tortures.^ 

This  plate  appeared  to  me  so  interesting  for  many  reasons 
that  I  reproduce  it  (Fig.  6),  together  with  the  following 
explanatory  notes  by  our  author  : — 

No.  1  is  the  part  where  the  Bramins  paint  their  idols  ;  such  as  Mainaniva, 
Siva,  Madedina,  aud  others,  whereof  they  have  a  great  number. 

No.  2  is  a  figure  of  Mamaniva,  which  is  in  the  pagod. 

No.  3  is  another  pagod  near  the  former.  There  stands  a  cow  at  the  door, 
and  within  stands  the  figure  of  their  god  Ram. 

^  Travels  in  India,  part  ii.  book  ii.  chap.  vi. 

94 


a 

o 

-*^ 

rt 

U 

■*^ 

■SI 

'■w 

1— 1 

H 

"« 

'w' 

o 

< 

§ 

1 

o-l 

1^ 

o 

p 

a 

"z, 

o 

— < 

-1-s 

MM 

c 

r3 

o 

u 

^ 

w 

Dj 

O 


SADHUS  DESCRIBED  BY  EUROPEAN  VISITORS 

No.  4  is  another  pagod,  into^  which  the  faquirs  that  do  penance  often 
retire. 

No,  5  is  another  pagod  dedicated  to  Ram. 

No.  6  is  a  hut  into  which  a  faquir  makes  his  retirement  several  times  a 
year,  there  being  but  one  hole  to  let  in  the  light.  He  stays  there 
according  to  the  height  of  his  devotion,  sometimes  nine  or  ten  days 
together,  without  either  eating  or  drinking  ;  a  thing  which  I  could  not 
have  beHeved  had  I  not  seen  it. 

No.  7  is  a  figure  of  another  penitentiary,  over  whose  head  several  years  have 
passed  ;  and  yet  he  never  slept  day  nor  night.  When  he  finds  himself 
sleepy,  he  hangs  the  weight  of  the  upper  part  of  his  body  upon  a  double 
rope  that  is  fastened  to  one  of  the  boughs  of  the  tree  ;  and  by  the 
continuance  of  this  posture,  which  is  very  strange  and  painful,  there 
falls  a  humour  into  their  legs  that  swells  them  very  much. 

No.  8  is  the  figure  of  two  postures  of  two  doing  penance,  who,  as  long  as 
they  Uve,  carry  their  arms  above  their  heads  in  that  manner ;  which 
causes  certain  carnosities  to  breed  in  the  joynts,  that  they  can  never 
bring  them  down  again.  Their  hair  grows  do-woi  to  their  wasts,  and 
their  nails  are  as  long  as  their  fingers.  Night  and  day,  winter  and 
summer,  they  go  ahvays  stark  naked  in  the  same  posture,  exposed 
to  the  heat  and  rain  and  the  stinging  of  the  flies,  from  which  they 
have  not  the  use  of  their  hands  to  rid  themselves.  In  other  necessi- 
ties they  have  other  faquirs  in  their  company,  always  ready  to  assist 
them. 

No.  9  is  the  posture  of  another  penitent,  who  every  day  for  several  hours 
stands  upon  one  foot,  holding  a  chafing-dish  in  his  hand,  into  which  he 
pours  incense,  as  an  offering  to  his  god,  fixing  his  eyes  all  the  while 
upon  the  sun. 

Nos.  10  and  11  are  the  figijres  of  two  other  penitents  sitting  with  their 
hands  raised  above  their  heads  in  the  air. 

No.  12  is  the  posture  wherein  the  penitents  sleep,  without  ever  resting  their 
arms  ;  which  is  certainly  one  of  the  greatest  torments  the  body  of  man 
can  suffer. 

No.  13  is  the  posture  of  a  penitent  whose  arms,  through  weakness,  hang 
flagging  down  upon  his  shoulders,  being  dried  up  for  want  of  nourish- 
ment. 
There  are  an  infinite  number  of  other  penitents,  some  who,  in  a  posture 

quite  contrary  to  the  motion  and  frame  of  nature,  keep  their  eyes  always 

turned  toward  the  sun ;  others  who  fix  their  eyes  perpetually  upon  the 

ground,  never  so  much  as  speaking  one  word  or  looking  any  person  in  the 

face.     And  indeed  there  is  such  an  infinite  variety  of  them  that  would 

render  the  further  discourse  of  them  more  tedious. 

True  it  is  that  I  have  hid  those  parts  which  modesty  will  not  suffer  to 

be  exposed  to  view.     But  they  both  in  city  and  country  go  all  as  naked  as 

they  came  out  of  their  mothers'  wombs. 

Although  the  worthy  gem  merchant  evidently  did  not 
understand  the  motives  or  ideas  of  these  "  penitents," 
as  he  styles  them,  his  testimony  is  conclusive  as  to  the  fact 
that   sadhuism  was   flourishing  in  his   day.     And   strange 

95 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

to  relate,  the  contagion  of  sadhuism,  indigenous  to  the 
soil,  seems  to  have  so  affected  the  Muhammadan  rulers 
of  India,  that,  besides  the  peripatetic  Hindu  ascetics, 
Tavernier  met  bands  of  almost  naked  Mushm  dervishes 
wandering  over  the  country,  sometimes,  as  became  members 
of  the  dominant  race,  exceedingly  haughty  and  overbearing 
in  their  demeanour.  One  such  band,  consisting  of  about 
forty-seven  persons,  all  well  armed,  including  a  few  who 
had  held  very  high  positions  in  the  Imperial  Court,  is  specially 
mentioned  by  our  traveller.  Although  proceeding  on  foot, 
this  band  of  Mushm  ascetics  had  many  fine  horses  led 
before  them,  their  saddles  and  bridles  adorned  with  gold 
and  silver  ornaments,  and  they  had  also  ten  or  twelve 
oxen  to  carry  their  sick.  Arriving  at  the  spot  where  Tavernier 
had  pitched  his  camp  in  the  most  convenient  position  he 
could  find,  the  armed  and  wealthy  dervishes  desired  him 
to  vacate  it,  as  they  needed  the  place  themselves,  and  the 
Frenchman  thought  it  prudent  to  yield  to  their  request 
without  demur. 

Notwithstanding  their  pomp  and  self-assertion,  these 
wandering  ascetics  lived  upon  alms  obtained  by  begging, 
for  were  they  not  faquirs?  However,  in  aU  probability  it 
was  fear  which  made  the  people  comply,  as  did  Tavernier 
himself,  with  their  demands. 

This  picture  of  truculent  Muslim  faquirs,  affording 
as  it  does  a  striking  contrast  to  that  of  the  mild  Hindu 
ascetics  known  from  the  earliest  times  to  our  own  day, 
has,  as  an  index  of  the  inwardness  of  Islam,  an  obvious 
value. 

The  physician  Fran9ois  Bernier,  who  during  the  reign 
of  the  Mogul  Emperor  Aurangzeb  travelled  extensively 
in  India,  and  met  M.  Tavernier  there,  does  not  fail  to 
mention  "  the  vast  number  and  endless  variety  of  faquirs  " 
he  encountered.  Of  these  the  jogis  seem  to  have  made 
most  impression  upon  him,  not  by  their  religious  or  philo- 
sophical professions,  but  by  their  repulsive  appearance. 
From  his  narrative  it  is  evident  that  the  practice  of 
holding  the  arms  perpetually  above  the  head  was  a 
common  one  with  the  sadhus  in  his  day, — much  more 
common,  I  should  say,  than  it  is  at  the  present  time, — but 

96 


SADHUS  DESCRIBED  BY  EUROPEAN  VISITORS 

the  only  feeling  which  this  cruel  self-torture  seems  to 
have  awakened  in  the  mind  of  the  French  physician  was 
one  of  disgust ;  for.  alluding  to  those  who  adopt  this 
unnatural  attitude,  he  says,  "  No  fury  in  the  infernal 
regions  can  be  conceived  more  horrible  than  the  jauguis, 
with  their  naked  and  black  skin,  long  hair,  spindle  arms, 
long  twisted  nails,  and  fixed  in  the  posture  I  have 
mentioned."  ^ 

Bernier  was  so  far  correctly  informed  that  he  realised 
that  the  object  of  the  jogis  was  union  with  God  ;  and  he 
relates  that  one  of  the  jogis^  evidently  a  man  of  some 
reputation,  assured  him  that  he  could  at  pleasure  fall 
into  a  trance,  during  which  he  would  be  blessed  with  a 
ravishing  vision  of  God  and  transports  of  holy  joy  beyond 
description.  Bernier  understood  that  penances  were 
commonly  endured  for  the  attainment  of  some  definite 
advantage  in  a  new  birth, — for  example,  reappearance  on 
earth  as  a  Rajah, — and  he  was  also  acquainted  with  the 
fact  that  many  sadhus  set  up  claims  to  the  possession  of 
magical  powers,  and  that  such  claims  were  readily  admitted 
by  the  people. 

The  testimony  of  this  enlightened  traveller,  corroborat- 
ing that  of  his  contemporary  Tavernier,  leaves  no  doubt 
that  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  Hindu  rehgious 
devotees  abounded  in  the  Mogul  Emperor's  dominions ; 
that  they  wandered  about  freely  in  considerable  bands,  and 
walked  through  large  towns  stark  naked, — "  men,  women, 
and  girls  looking  at  them,"  says  Bernier,  "  without  any 
more  emotion  than  may  be  created  when  a  hermit  passes 
through  our  streets." 

In  the  course  of  time  a  Christian  power  from  beyond 
the  seas  supplanted  the  Muhammadan  overlords  of  India, 
yet  the  sadhu  still  held  his  own  under  the  new  and  un- 
sympathetic regime. 

That  sagacious,  intelligent,  and  quaintly,  perhaps 
unctuously,  pious  Christian,  James  Forbes,  who  spent 
seventeen  years  in  Western  India — from  a.d.  1766  to 
1783 — ^in   the   Honourable   East  India   Company's   service, 

iBernier's  Travels  (a.d.  1656-68),  pp.  316,  317  (Archibald  Constable 
&  Co.). 

G  97 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

and  having  attained  the  rank  of  "  senior  merchant "  in 
the  employment  of  that  famous  corporation,  retired  at 
the  early  age  of  thirty -three  years  with  a  disordered 
liver  and  an  ample  fortune,  did  not  fail  to  observe, 
during  his  exile  in  the  East,  the  sadhus  and  faquirs  of 
his  da  v. 

From  his  valuable  Oriental  Memoirs,  published  in  1813, 
we  learn  that  in  the  latter  portion  of  the  eighteenth 
century  the  wandering  sadhus  were  in  great  force  through- 
out the  western  country.  "  These  gymnosophists,"  he  says, 
"  often  unite  in  large  armed  bodies  and  perform  pilgrim- 
ages to  the  sacred  rivers  and  celebrated  temples  ;  but  they 
are  more  Hke  an  army  marching  through  a  province  than 
an  assembly  of  saints  in  procession  to  a  temple,  and  often 
lay  the  country  through  which  they  pass  under  contribu- 
tion "  (vol.  i.  p.  68). 

Our  author  was  also  aware  that  in  their  pererrations 
these  peripatetics  went  "  from  the  confines  of  Russia  to 
Cape  Comorin  and  from  the  borders  of  China  to  Malabarhill 
on  the  island  of  Bombay  "  (i.  286),  that  they  had  many 
marvels  to  relate  of  the  men  and  places  they  had  seen, 
and  were  especially  lavish  in  their  praise  of  beautiful 
Kashmir  {ii.  459).  Mr.  Forbes  found  these  travelled 
ascetics  more  liberal-minded  than  the  stav-at-home 
Hindus,  and  confesses  that  he  "  spent  many  a  pleasant 
and  improving  hour  with  religious  mendicants  both  Hindus 
and  Mohammedans  "  (ii.  461). 

One  of  these  men,  a  venerable  Brahman,  informed 
Mr.  Forbes  "  that  he  had  lived  under  different  govern- 
ments and  travelled  in  many  countiies,  but  had  never 
witnessed  a  general  diffusion  of  happiness  equal  to  that 
of  the  natives  under  the  mild  and  equitable  administra- 
tion of  Mr.  Hastings,  at  that  time  Governor-General  of 
Bengal." 

"  I  cannot,"  adds  Mr.  Forbes,  "  forget  the  words  of  this 
respectable  pilgrim  ;  we  were  near  a  banian  tree  in  the 
durbar  court  when  he  thus  concluded  his  discourse  :  '  As 
the  burr  tree,  one  of  the  noblest  productions  in  nature, 
by  extending  its  branches  for  the  comfort  and  refreshment 
of  all  who  seek  its  shelter,  is  emblematical  of  the  deity, 

98 


SADHUS  DESCRIBED  BY  EUROPEAN  VISITORS 

so  do  the  virtues  of  the  governor  resemble  the  burr  tree  ; 
he  extends  his  providence  to  the  remotest  districts,  and 
stretches  out  his  arms,  far  and  wide,  to  afford  protection 
and  happiness  to  his  people.  Such,  sahib,  is  Mr.  Hastings  ! '  " 
(vol.  ii.  462). 

According  to  our  author,  it  would  seem  that  the  roving 
propensities  of  the  sadhus,  however  beneficial  to  themselves 
intellectually,  were  not  conducive  to  right  living,  for  many 
of  them  led  a  by  no  means  chaste  hfe,  being  veritable 
terrors  to  husbands  wherever  they  went  (ii.  234),  and, 
though  they  had  professedly  renounced  the  world  and  its 
vanities,  the  wandering  religious  mendicants  often  contrived ^ 
to  the  great  annoyance  of  the  officials,  Mr.  Forbes  included, 
to  carry  on,  for  their  own  profit,  no  Httle  illicit  trading  in 
valuable  objects  (ii.  214,  215). 

We  also  learn  from  Mr.  Forbes  that  "  many  yogees  and 
similar  professors  "  subjected  themselves  to  cruel  penances 
and  mortifications.  "  Some  of  them,"  he  tells  us,  "  enter 
into  a  solemn  vow  to  continue  for  life  in  one  unvaried 
posture  ;  others  undertake  to  carry  a  cumbrous  load  or 
drag  a  heavy  chain  ;  some  crawl  on  their  hands  and  knees 
for  years  around  an  extensive  empire ;  and  others  roll  their 
bodies  on  the  earth  from  the  shores  of  the  Indus  to  the 
banks  of  the  Ganges,  and  in  that  humihating  posture 
collect  money  to  enable  them  either  to  build  a  temple,  to 
dig  a  well,  or  to  atone  for  some  particular  sin.  Some 
swing  during  their  whole  life,  in  this  torrid  clime,  before 
a  slow  fire  ;  others  suspend  themselves,  with  their  heads 
downwards,  for  a  certain  time  over  the  fiercest  flames " 
(vol.  i.  p.  69). 

In  his  travels  Mr.  Forbes  came  across  the  sadhu  who 
carries  his  useless  arms  above  his  head,  and,  reduced  to 
utter  helplessness  by  his  voluntary  asceticism,  is  fed  by 
pious  Hindu  women  even  of  good  position.  He  also  saw 
the  men  who  swing  round  a  lofty  pole  suspended  from  a 
cross-beam  by  means  of  iron  hooks  fixed  in  the  muscles 
of  the  back. 

A  far  rarer  and  more  curious  form  of  austerity  is  thus 
described  :  "  I  saw  another  of  these  devotees,  who  was  one 
of  the  phalhc  worshippers  of  Seeva,  and  who,  not  content 

99 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

with  wearing  or  adorning  the  symbol  of  that  deity,  had 
made  a  vow  to  fix  every  year  a  large  iron  ring  into  the  most 
tender  part  of  his  body,  and  thereto  to  suspend  a  heavy 
chain,  many  yards  long,  to  drag  on  the  ground.  I  saw 
this  extraordinary  saint  in  the  seventh  year  of  his  penance, 
when  he  had  just  put  in  the  seventh  ring ;  the  wound  was 
then  so  recent  and  so  painful  that  he  was  obhged  to  carry 
the  chain  upon  his  shoulder,  until  the  orifice  became  more 
callous  "  (vol.  i.  p.  70). 

Mr.  Forbes,  intelhgent  observer  and  inquirer  that  he 
was,  ascertained  that  the  Hindu  devotees  were  recruited 
from  all  classes  of  the  community  "  except  the  caste  of 
Chandala."  He  did  not  fail  to  realise  that  a  high  standard 
of  abnegation  and  self-repression  was  theoretically  demanded 
of  the  professed  ascetics,  and  he  was  prepared  to  admit 
that,  though  the  majority  of  the  sadhus  fell  far  short  of  the 
requirements  of  the  rules  of  their  sects,  there  were  at  least 
some  enthusiasts  who  in  solitude  and  meditation  passed 
blameless  lives  and  were  credited  with  the  possession  of 
miraculous  powers. 

About  a  hundred  years  ago,  the  well-known  Christian 
missionary  Ward,  visiting  Saugor  Island  at  the  head  of 
the  Bay  of  Bengal,  came  across  certain  Hindu  ascetics  in 
the  extensive,  dreary,  and  tiger  -  haunted  jungle  which 
covered  that  place.  Two  of  these  were  Bairagis  from  the 
"  Upper  Provinces,"  who  lived  in  the  wilderness  in  separate 
log  huts.  When  Ward  saw  them  their  customary  fire  was 
burning  on  a  sandy  ridge,  and  before  it,  seated  on  a  deer 
skin,  was  one  of  the  ascetics,  all  but  quite  naked,  preparing 
some  ganjah,  which  he  presently  smoked  in  his  chillum. 
The  Christian  missionary  entered  into  conversation  with 
the  hermit,  and  learned  from  him  that  he  had  adopted  a 
life  of  abstraction  and  isolation  from  the  worJd  neither  to 
expiate  any  sin  nor  to  secure  any  reward.  He  averred 
that  he  had  no  desires  and  no  hopes,  but  that  being  re- 
moved from  the  agitations  of  the  worldly  life  he  was  full 
of  tranquil  joy. 

Near  a  neighbouring  temple  Mr.  Ward  discovered  two 
other  almost  naked  ascetics  covered  with  ashes,  each  one 
having  his  long  matted  hair  tied  in  a  knot  upon  the  top 

100 


o 


H 
i-i 

o 


^* 


SADHUS  DESCRIBED  BY  EUROPEAN  VISITORS 

of  his  head.  One  of  these  sadkus,  quite  a  young  man,  was 
holding  up  one  of  his  arms ;  as,  indeed,  he  had  been  doing 
for  no  less  than  three  years.  "  The  nails  of  his  hand," 
says  Ward,  "  were  grown  long  like  the  claws  of  a  bird  of 
prey."  Inquiry  elicited  from  the  devotee  the  statement 
that  he  was  indifferent  to  future  rewards,  and  that  the 
whole  of  his  time  was  spent  in  a  succession  of  religious 
ceremonies  and  in  repetition  of  the  name  of  God.  He  had 
to  bathe  at  least  once  a  day,  and  a  single  meal  at  midday 
was  all  that  he  might  partake  of.  The  conspicuous  fresh 
footprints  of  a  tiger  becoming  the  subject  of  remark,  the 
sadhu  mentioned,  without  displaying  the  sUghtest  emotion, 
that  within  the  preceding  three  months  six  persons  had  been 
carried  off  by  tigers,  before  his  eyes  as  it  were,  adding,  with 
apparent  indifference,  that  he  would  himself  probably  suffer 
the  same  fate. 

The  other  ascetic  by  the  lonely  temple  in  the  jungle, 
who  it  appears  held  little  if  any  communication  with  his 
neighbours,  evinced  no  desire  for  intercourse  with  the 
inquisitive  strangers,  but  remained  absorbed  in  his  own 
devotions.  A  sohtary  of  this  type  is  depicted  in  Fig.  7. 
Referring  to  the  physical  state  of  these  ascetics,  the  Christian 
missionary  remarked,  "  It  appears  almost  impossible  for 
human  beings  to  manifest  a  greater  disregard  of  the  body  " 
than  was  shown  by  these  men  ;  and  we  may  add  that, 
whether  indicative  of  wisdom  or  folly,  their  painful  austerities 
in  a  remote  fever -and -tiger -haunted  swampy  jungle  were 
plainly  above  any  suspicion  of  imposture. 

That  remarkably  well-informed  and  agreeable  writer 
about  the  India  of  the  early  decades  of  the  last  century, 
Colonel  Sleeman,  who  in  his  rambles  met  a  great  many  sadhus 
of  various  sects,  formed  a  correct  appreciation  of  their 
position  in  the  Hindu  social  system,  ^nd  was  fair-minded 
enough  to  recognise  their  good  qualities  as  well  as  the  service 
they  could  at  that  time  render  to  the  British  Government 
by  carrying  a  good  report  of  it  all  over  the  country  in  their 
extensive  wanderings  through  the  remotest  districts  of  the 
independent  native  States.  At  the  same  time,  Colonel 
Sleeman  did  not  overlook  the  curious  fact  that  the  very 
excellence    of   the   British    organisation,    under   which   the 

lOI 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

soldiers'  work  was  being  efl&ciently  carried  out  by  one-tenth 
of  the  number  of  men  formerly  employed  by  the  rival  native 
rulers,  was  the  cause  of  swelling  very  considerably  the  ranks 
of  the  religious  mendicants. 

Colonel  Sleeman  records  from  personal  knowledge  some 
very  interesting  incidents  connected  with  faquirs  and  sadhus, 
which,  however,  need  not  be  reproduced  here  ;  ^  but  one 
peculiar  feature  of  sadhuism  of  which  he  affords  us  a  glimpse 
is  too  instructive  to  be  overlooked. 

"  The  Mahadeo  sandstone  hills,"  says  Colonel  Sleeman, 
"  which  in  the  Sathpore  range  overlook  the  Nerbudda  to 
the  south,  rise  to  between  four  and  five  thousand  feet  above 
the  level  of  the  sea  ;  and  in  one  of  the  highest  parts  a  fair 
was  formerly,  and  is  perhaps  still,  held  for  the  enjoyment 
of  those  who  assemble  to  witness  the  self-devotion  of  a 
few  young  men,  who  offer  themselves  as  a  sacrifice  to 
fulfil  the  vows  of  their  mothers  !  When  a  woman  is  with- 
out children  she  makes  votive  ofierings  to  all  the  gods  who 
can,  she  thinks,  assist  her,  and  promises  of  still  greater  in 
case  they  should  grant  what  she  wants.  Smaller  promises 
being  found  of  no  avail,  she  at  last  promises  her  first-born, 
if  a  male,  to  the  god  of  destruction,  Mahadeo.  If  she  gets 
a  son,  she  conceals  from  him  her  vows  till  he  has  attained 
the  age  of  puberty  ;  she  then  communicates  it  to  him,  and 
enjoins  him  to  fulfil  it.  He  beUeves  it  to  be  his  paramount 
duty  to  obey  his  mother's  call,  and  from  that  moment  he 
considers  himself  as  devoted  to  the  god.  Without  breathing 
to  any  living  soul  a  syllable  of  what  she  has  told  him,  he 
puts  on  the  habit  of  a  pilgrim  or  religious  mendicant,  visits 
all  the  celebrated  temples  dedicated  to  this  god  in  different 
parts  of  India,  and  at  the  annual  fair  on  the  Mahadeo  hills 
throws  himself  from  a  perpendicular  height  of  four  or  five 
hundred  feet,  and  is  dashed  to  pieces  upon  the  rocks  below  ! 
If  the  youth  does  not  feel  himself  quite  prepared  for  the 
sacrifice  on  the  first  visit,  he  spends  another  year  in  pil- 
grimage, and  returns  to  fulfil  his  mother's  vow  at  the 
next  fair.  Some  have,  I  believe,  been  known  to  postpone 
the  sacrifice  to  a  third  fair ;    but  the  interval  is  always 

^  The  reader  may  consult  Colonel  Sleeman's  Eambles  and  Recollections, 
vol.  i.  chap,  xiii.,  vol.  ii.  chap.  xxvi. 

102 


SADHUS  DESCRIBED  BY  EUROPEAN  VISITORS 

spent  in  painful  pilgrimages  to  the  celebrated  temples  of 
the  god."  1 

Bishop  Reginald  Heber,  who  made  an  extensive  tour  in 
India  during  1824-26,  records  his  surprise  at  finding  that 
the  Hindu  devotees  were  not  so  common  as  before  his 
coming  to  India  he  had  expected  to  find  them  (vol.  i. 
p.  111).  Of  those  the  Bishop  did  actually  come  across  he 
has  little  if  anything  to  say,  and  his  narrative  is  singularly 
deficient  in  just  appreciation  or  reasonable  comprehen- 
sion of  sadhuism.  From  the  missionary  point  of  view  he 
certainly  recognised  the  importance  of  the  Hindu  ascetics 
as  hindrances  to  the  conversion  of  the  jjeople  to  Christianity, 
and  in  this  connection  refers  to  one  nearly  naked  man, 
"  walking  with  three  or  four  others,  who  suddenly  knelt 
down  one  after  the  other,  and,  catching  hold  of  his  foot, 
kissed  it  repeatedly." 

Amongst  other  cases  which  came  under  his  own  observa- 
tion, the  Bishop  mentions  a  man  who  had  vowed  to  use 
only  one  leg,  the  other  being  shrunken  from  disuse  ;  a 
devotee  who  held  his  hands  above  his  head  till  he  had  lost 
the  power  of  bringing  them  down  again  (vol.  i.  110,  111) ; 
and  a  hermit  "  sitting  naked  with  his  hands  joined  and  his 
eyes  half  shut  "  (i.  266). 

The  Bishop  was  told  about  two  yogis  who  lived  apart, 
yet  quite  safely,  in  a  tiger-haunted  jungle,  and  was  assured 
that  one  of  these  men  was  visited  every  night  by  a  formidable 
tiger,  who  came  to  lick  the  ascetic's  hands  and  be  fondled 
by  him  (vol.  ii.  265-68) ;  but  the  story  did  not  make  much 
impression  on  the  prelate. 

Heber  was  also  shown,  but  evinced  no  great  interest  in, 
"  a  small  college  ...  of  religious  mendicants  or  viragies  " 
(ii.  373).  Once  he  came  across  "  a  holy  yogi,  his  naked 
and  emaciated  body  covered  over  with  white  powder,  and 
an  iron  implement,  like  a  flesh -hoOk,  in  his  hand,  which 
is  frequently  carried  by  devotees  in  this  part  of  India 
(Baroda) "  (vol.  iii.  p.  55). 


^  Colonel  Sleeman's  Rambles  and  Recollections  of  an  Indian  Official  y 
vol.  i.  chap.  XV.  The  practice  referred  to  has,  of  course,  died  out  or  been 
suppressed. 

103 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

The  foregoing  brief  references  to  the  recorded  experiences 
and  impressions  of  travellers  and  others  show  that  the 
sadhu,  who  is  at  the  present  time  too  prominent  a  feature 
in  the  Indian  world  to  escape  attention,  has  also  occupied 
an  honoured  place  in  his  native  land  through  all  the  many 
and  often  painful  vicissitudes  of  fortune  which  it  has  ex- 
perienced. 

Yet  the  sadhu  of  to-day  is  not  necessarily  the  sadJm  of 
former  times.  It  is  true  that  nakedness,  austerities,  and 
roving  habits  have  been  persistent  outward  characteristics 
of  the  Indian  sadhu  through  at  least  five  -  and  -  twenty 
centuries  ;  but  it  has  to  be  noted  that  these  peculiarities 
have,  by  reason  of  their  very  obviousness,  helped  to  conceal 
from  the  casual  observer  the  fact,  which  will  be  established 
in  the  next  chapter,  that  the  religious  ideas  of  which  sadhuism 
is  the  outward  expression  have,  in  the  progress  of  time,  been 
undergoing  many  important  changes. 


104 


CHAPTEK  VII 

A  VIEW  OF  THE  SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN 
HINDUISM  AND  OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  MORE 
IMPORTANT  HINDU  SECTS,  IN  RELATION  TO  THE 
DEVELOPMENT   OF   SADHUISM    IN   INDIA 


Section  I. — Some  fundamental  Doctrines  of  Hindu  Theology — Mya — 
Pantheism — Metempsychosis — Karma. 


T  is  necessary  for  a  full  cora- 
prehension  of  sadhuism 
that  the  student  should 
approach  the  subject  with 
some  knowledge  of  the 
fundamental  doctrines 
evolved  in  India  by  the 
early  Brahmanical  theo- 
logians ;  and  of  such  doc- 
trines we  are  happily  not 
left  in  ignorance. 

In  presence  of  the  mys- 
terious worldngs  of  the 
phenomenal  world  and  the  incomprehensible  tragedies  of  life 
around  them,  the  bewildered  Hindu  tMnkers,  being  human 
and  intellectual,  were  driven  perforce  to  conceive  some 
plausible  explanation  of  the  mighty  riddle  of  existence — 
of  being,  suffering,  decay,  and  dissolution — which  confronted 
them  in  its  appalling  and  majestic  silence.  To  solve  their 
profound  difficulties  for  themselves,  they  naturally  fell  back 
upon  their  imaginations,  and,  thus  far,  did  not  differ  much, 
except  in  the  nature  of  their  fancies,  from  their  brethren 

105 


[E  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

of  otlier  creeds.^  But  it  has  to  be  noted  that  in  their  un- 
bounded confidence  in  their  own  dream-world  the  Hindu 
sages  pronounced  the  senses  to  be  the  misleading  cause  of 
man's  ignorance,  and  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the 
world,  as  revealed  by  the  senses,  was  all  pure  deception, 
illusion  (Mya),  and  that  consequently  the  real  world,  true 
knowledge,  could  only  be  reached  by  neglecting,  suppressing, 
and,  as  it  were,  getting  behind  the  senses.  To  this  verdict 
of  Hindu  theological  philosophy  may  be  traced  the  pre- 
ponderance of  introspective  contemplation,  which  we  find 
favoured  by  the  various  schemes  of  religious  life  adopted  by 
Hindu  sectaries.  Subtle  pliilosophical  speculations  about 
the  origin  and  destiny  of  the  world,  about  spirit  and  matter, 
could  hardly  coexist  with  the  joyous  physiolatry  of  their 
earlier  cult,  and  this  consequently  became  gradually  con- 
verted into  an  abstract  nebulous  pantheism,  which  fascinated 
the  Hindu  mind,  and  has  coloured  all  its  subsequent  ideas 
— so  much  so,  that  even  the  very  recent  and  delicate 
scientific  researches  on  what  he  calls  the  "  response  of 
matter,"  carried  out  by  a  clever  and  well-known  Bengali 
Professor  of  Science,  Dr.  J.  C.  Bose,  have  very  appropriately 
led  him  to  sav — 

"  It  was  when  I  came  upon  the  mute  witness  of  these 
self-made  records,  and  perceived  in  them  one  phase  of  a 
pervading  unity  that  bears  within  it  all  things  ;  the  mote 
that  quivers  in  ripples  of  light,  the  teeming  life  upon  our 
earth,  and  the  radiant  suns  that  shine  above  us, — it  was 
then  that  I  understood  for  the  first  time  a  little  of  that 
message  proclaimed  by  my  ancestors  on  the  banks  of  the 
Ganges  thirty  centuries  ago  :  '  They  who  see  but  one 
in  all  the  changing  manifoldness  of  this  universe,  unto 
them  belongs  Eternal  Truth,  unto  none  else,  unto  none 
else  !  '  " 

F^|-  This  pantheism,  recognising  only  one  indefinite  substance 
or  Being  from  which  everything  came  and  into  which  every- 

^  Guessing  at  the  origin  and  constitution  of  the  material  universe  in  its 
wonderfully  various  aspects  is  a  process  by  no  means  confined  to  the  theo- 
logians and  philosophers,  but  may  be  traced,  with  important  differences 
no  doubt,  in  the  host  of  theories  and  hypotheses,  most  of  them  long  since 
discredited,  which  science  has  presented  to  the  world. 

1 06 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

thing  would  return,  has,  naturally,  not  found  favour  with 
Christians.  Professor  Caird  characterises  it  as  "a  gulf 
in  which  all  difference  was  lost,"  adding  that  "  the  ethics 
which  could  spring  from  such  a  faith  was  only  the  negative 
ethics  of  an  asceticism  which  renounced  the  world  and  with- 
drew from  it  as  an  empty  illusion."  ^ 

Long  centuries  prior  to  the  Christian  era  two  important 
tenets  had  taken  firm  root  in  India,  and  they  are 
flourishing  there  to  this  day.  One  of  these  is  behef  in 
metempsychosis  {samsdra),  the  other  what  is  known  as 
karma.  According  to  the  former,  death  does  not  release 
the  soul  permanently  from  its  connection  with  matter, 
for  it  may  have  to  return  again  and  again,  even  an  endless 
succession  of  times,  animating  other  bodies,  human,  bestial, 
and  even  vegetal ;  ^  while,  according  to  the  doctrine  of 
karma  (the  Sanskrit  word  for  action),  it  is  upon  a  man's 
actions  in  this  life  that  will  depend  the  condition  or  state 
in  which  the  soul  will  be  reincarnated.  After  the  death 
of  an  individual  his  soul  may  pass  for  a  time  into  a  place 
of  enjoyment — a  heaven  of  bUss,  in  fact ;  but,  unless  its 
purification  has  been  complete,  it  will  in  the  fulness  of  time 
be  inevitably  reincarnated  for  a  new  mundane  existence. 
In  a  word,  the  present  state  is  the  result  of  past  actions, 
and  the  future  depends  upon  the  present.  Now,  the 
ultimate  hope  of  the  Hindu  should  be  so  to  live  that  his 

^  Caird's  Evolution  of  Religion,  vol.  i.  p.  263.  In  connection  with  this 
subject,  the  following  will  not  be  without  interest : — "  As  we  read  in  the 
Katha  Upanishad,  '  The  self -existent  pierced  the  openings  (of  the  senses) 
so  that  they  turn  forward  ;  therefore  man  looks  forward,  not  backward,  into 
himself.  Some  wise  man,  however,  with  his  eyes  closed  and  wishing  for 
immortahty,  saw  the  Self  behind,'  .  .  .  '  The  wise,  when  he  knows  that 
that  by  which  he  perceives  all  objects  in  sleep  and  in  waking  is  the  great 
omnipresent  Self,  grieves  no  more.'  '  As  the  sun,  the  eye  of  the  whole 
world,  is  not  contaminated  by  the  external  impiu-ities  seen  by  the  eyes, 
thus  the  one  Self  within  all  things  is  never  contaminated  by  the  misery  of 
the  world,  being  himself  without.'  '  There  is  one  eternal  thinker,  thinking 
non-eternal  thoughts,  who,  though  one,  fulfils  the  desires  of  many.  The 
wise  who  perceive  him  within  their  Self,  to  them  belongs  eternal  peace,  not 
to  others.'  " — Caird's  Evolution  of  Religion^  vol.  i.  p.  355. 

^  The  doctrine  of  the  transmigration  of  souls  was  held  by  the  ancient 
Egypti^iis.  It  found  a  footing  in  Greece  and  amongst  the  Jews — the 
Kabbalists.  The  Manichseans  recognised  it,  and  some  heretical  Muslim 
sects  also  adopted  it. 

107 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

soul  may  be  eventually  freed  from  the  necessity  of  being 
reincarnated,  and  may  in  the  end  be  reunited  to  the  Infinite 
Spirit  from  which  it  sprang.  As,  however,  that  goal 
is  very  remote,  the  Hindu  not  uncommonly  limits  his 
desires  and  his  efforts  to  the  attainment  of  a  "  good 
time  "  now,  and  in  his  next  appearance  upon  this  earthly 
stage. 


1 08 


CHAPTER  Y II— continued 


Sectio]!?  II. — Modern  Hinduism — Principal  Divisions — The  Sivite  Reformer, 
Sankara  Acharya — His  Crusade  against  Buddhism — Sakti  Worship — 
Mahmoud  of  Guzni's  successful  Invasion  of  India — Islam  a  stimulating 
Factor  in  the  Origination  of  new  and  rival  Siva  and  Vishnu  Sects — 
The  Piu-anas — Ramanuja's  Campaign  against  Sivaism — Basava  and  his 
Doctrines — Krishna  Worship  preached  by  Madhavacharya — His  Theo- 
logical Views — Ramanand  preaches  at  Benares  the  Worship  of  Rama 
and  Sita — Tendency  towards  Anthropomorphism  in  the  later  Sects. 


e    present    time    Hinduism    proper — 
which  I  mean  the  practical  rehgion 
the  Hindu  people,  not  the  specula- 
tive opinions  of  Hindu  philosophers — 
s  represented  by  a  bewildering  variety 
of  sects,   of  which  the    more  im- 
portant   ones    at    least     may    be 
classified  with   tolerable  accuracy 
under    the    following     main 
groups  : — 

1.  Saivas,  worshippers  of  the 
god  Siva. 

2,  Saktas,  worshippers  of  the  female  energy  and  especi- 
ally of  the  goddesses  Devi,  Durga,  and  Kali,  all  consorts 
of  Siva. 

3.  Vaishnavas,  worshippers  of  the  god  Vishnu. 

(a)  In  his  incarnation   as   Rama  Chandra  with  his 

wife  Sita. 

(b)  As  Krishna  with  his  wives  Lakshmi  and  Rukmani 

and  his  favourite  mistress  Radha.^ 

^  It  was  a  pecuUarity  of  the  Egyptians,  that,  like  the  present  Hindus, 
they  were  divided  as  it  were  into  sects,  each  of  which  adopted  some  one 
deity  out  of  the  Pantheon  for  the  exclusive  object  of  worship,  paying  no 

109 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

Towards  the  close  of  the  eighth  or  the  beginning  of  the 
ninth  century  a.d.  Siva  worship  attained  a  prominent  position 
and  considerable  success,  mostly  through  the  exertions  of  an 
unmarried  Brahman  named  Sankara  Acharya,  who  carried 
on  a  vigorous  crusade  against  Buddhism.  It  would  seem 
that  he  countenanced  every  form  of  Hinduism,  but,  "  what- 
ever Sankara's  own  faith  may  have  been,  his  followers  are 
practically  Sivites."  ^ 

Of  the  reUgious  peculiarities  of  this  transition  period 
we  have  fortunately  many  interesting  particulars  in  a 
work  entitled  Sankara  Vijaya,  by  one  Ananda  Giri,  a 
reputed  disciple  of  Sankara  himself.  The  broad  divisions 
of  Saivas,  Saktas,  and  Vaishnavas  can  all  be  recognised 
as  existing  at  that  time,  but  the  sects  described  by  Ananda 
Giri  can  hardly,  if  at  all,  be  identified  with  those  of  the 
present  day ;  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  in  no  portion 
of  the  Sankara  Vijaya  "  is  any  allusion  made  to  the  separate 
worship  of  Krishna,  either  in  his  own  person  or  that  of  the 
infantine  forms  in  which  he  is  now  so  eminently  vener- 
ated in  many  parts  of  India,  nor  are  the  names  of  Rama 
and  Sita,  of  Lakshmana  or  Hanuman,  once  particu- 
larised as  enjoying  any  portion  of  distinct  and  specific 
adoration."  ^ 

Siva,  regarded  by  his  special  followers  as  the  Supreme 
Being,  commands  their  adoration  in  many  different  and 
even  seemingly  contradictory  characters  ;  but  he  is  usually 
worshipped  under  the  impersonal  symbol  of  the  phallus  or 
lingam,  an  undoubtedly  very  ancient  Oriental  cult,  though 
not  confined  exclusively  to  the  East.  The  spiritualisation, 
exaltation,  and  even  deification,  of  natural  desire,  of  the 
sexual  instinct  in  fact,  has  been  in  the  East  from  the  earliest 
times  an  object  of  certain  sect  founders,  impressed,  no 
doubt,  and  fascinated  by  the  mystery  of  generation.  And 
so  it  has  come  about  that  this  mystery,  which  the  West 

regard  to  all  the  rest.  As  in  modern  Hinduism  Vishnu  and  Siva  have 
engrossed  the  religion  of  the  country,  so  in  Egypt  of  the  first  Christian 
century  Anubis  and  Cnuph  had  become  the  sole  objects  of  Egyptian 
veneration, — King's  The  Gnostics  and  their  Remains,  pp.  101,  102. 

^  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  by  Dr.  J.  M.  Bhattacharjee,  p.  375. 

^  Sketch  of  the  ReUgious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  by  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson, 
pp.  11,  12. 

IIO 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

has  regarded  with  the  greatest  suspicion  and  dread,  has  been 
invested  by  the  subtle  mysticism  of  the  Orient  with  the 
sanctifying  garment  of  rehgion. 

In  connection  with  the  cult  and  practices  of  the 
Sankarite  ascetic  sects,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that 
although  Siva  is  regarded  by  the  Hindus  as  the  Destroyer, 
yet  throughout  India  he  is  worshipped  under  the  symbol 
of  the  lingam,  because  in  the  endless  round  of  births  and 
deaths  to  which,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  metempsy- 
chosis, all  sentient  beings  are  subject,  it  is  easy  for  the 
mystic  to  see  in  destruction  only  the  precursor  of  renewed 
existence.^ 


I. 

I  am  the  god  of  the  sensuous  fire 

That  moulds  all  nature  in  forms  divine ; 

The  symbols  of  death  and  of  man's  desire, 
The  springs  of  change  in  the  world  are  mine  ; 

The  organs  of  birth  and  the  circlet  of  bones. 

And  the  light  loves  carved  on  the  temple  stones. 

IL 

I  am  the  lord  of  delights  and  pain. 

Of  the  pest  that  killeth,  of  fruitful  joys ; 

I  rule  the  currents  of  heart  and  vein ; 
A  touch  gives  passion,  a  look  destroys ; 

In  the  heat  and  cold  of  my  lightest  breath 

Is  the  might  incarnate  of  Lust  and  Death. 


V. 

And  the  strong  swift  river  my  shrine  below. 

It  runs,  Uke  man,  its  unending  com-se. 
To  the  boundless  sea  from  eternal  snow ; 

Mine  is  the  Fountain,  and  mine  the  Force 
That  spurs  all  nature  to  ceaseless  strife ; 
And  my  image  is  Death  at  the  gates  of  Life. 

(From  Sir  Alfred  LyaU's  "  Siva.") 

Under  the  influence  of  the  Hindu  admiration  of  the 
ascetic  life,  Siva,  the  Great  God  (Maha-dev),  stands  forth 
in  the  later  Hinduism  of  the  Puranas  as  the  great  ascetic 
(Mahatapah,  Mahayogi),  a  fact  of  especial  significance  in 

^  For  the  modern  lingam  worship  the  principal  authorities  are  the 
Skanda,  Siva,  Brahmanda,  and  Linga  Puranas. 

Ill 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

connection  with  the  subject  of  the  present  work.  "  In 
this  character  he  appears  quite  naked  (digamhara),  with 
only  one  face  like  an  ordinary  human  being,  with  ash- 
besmeared  body  and  matted  hair  (whence  his  name 
Dhurjati),  sitting  in  profound  meditation  under  a  banian 
tree,  and  often,  like  the  contemplative  Buddha,  under  a 
canopy  formed  by  a  serpent's  head.  There  he  is  supposed 
to  remain  passionless,  motionless,  immovable  as  the  trunk 
of  a  tree,  perhaps  rooted  to  the  same  spot  for  millions  of 
years."  ^ 

With  Siva  are  also  commonly  associated  his  consorts 
and  his  bull  Nandi. 

Siva,  as  Professor  Wilson  points  out,  is  stated  to  have 
"  appeared  in  the  beginning  of  the  Kali  age  as  sweta  for 
the  purpose  of  benefiting  the  Brahmans.  He  resided  on 
the  Himalaya  mountains  and  taught  the  yoga^  Now  the 
word  sweta  means  white,  and  all  images  of  Siva,  as  well 
as  pictorial  representations  or  living  presentments  of  the 
god,  are  always  coloured  white. 

The  legend  referred  to  will  account  for  the  fact  that 
Siva  is  especially  the  god  of  the  Brahmans. 

Sankara  Acharya's  crusade  against  Buddhism  originated 
in  Southern  India,  but  Sankara  himself  preached  his  doctrines 
far  and  wide,  travelling  from  Malabar,  where  he  was  born, 
"^  to  the  valley  of  Kashmir  in  the  Himalayas,  where  he  died 

at  the  early  age  of  thirty-two.  He  has  been  raised  by 
his  followers  to  the  dignity  of  an  incarnation  of  Siva.  "  His 
sanctity  was  in  such  repute  that  he  was  held  to  have 
worked  several  miracles  —  amongst  others,  transferring 
his  own  soul  for  a  time  into  the  dead  body  of  a  King 
Amru,  that  he  might  become  the  husband  of  the  king's 
widow  for  a  brief  period,  and  so  learn  by  experience  how 
to  argue  on  amatory  subjects  with  the  wife  of  a  Brahman 
named  Mandana,  who  was  the  only  person  he  had  never 
conquered  in  argument.  This  is  described  in  a  poem 
called  Amaru-Sataka,  to  which  a  mystical  interpretation  is 
given.    ^ 

^  Brahmanism  and  Hinduism,  by  Professor  Sir  Monier  Williams,  p.  83 
(third  edition). 
-  Ihid.  p.  56. 

112 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

Sankara's  aim  in  life  seems  to  have  been  to  destroy 
Buddhism  in  India  and  to  revive  and  establish  an  old 
Brahmanic  cult.  His  chief  doctrine  was  the  essential  unity 
of  the  Divine  Spirit  and  the  human  soul.  He  held,  indeed, 
that  ail  nature  is  but  a  manifestation  of  the  Universal  Soul, 
takes  its  origin  from  that  soul,  and  is  eventually  absorbed 
therein.  In  order  to  impress  this  doctrine  upon  his  mind, 
"  the  Sivite  is  required  by  his  religion  to  assert  every 
now  and  then  that  he  is  Siva " ;  ^  Sivoham — I  am 
Siva. 

For  the  attainment  of  final  emancipation,  muJcti, 
Sankara  held  that  realised  knowledge  of  the  oneness  of 
the  Atman,  or  self,  with  the  Absolute,  or  Brahman,  was 
essential. 

The  nature  of  Hindu  views  on  this  subject  may  be 
somewhat  elucidated  by  the  following  dialogue  from  the 
Nadir  unnikat^  a  book  in  Persian,  written  in  the  middle  of 
the  seventeenth  century,  explanatory  of  the  tenets  of  the 
sect  known  as  the  Baha  Lalis  : — 

"  Are  the  soul,  life,  and  body  merely  shadows  ? — The 
soul  is  of  the  same  nature  as  God,  and  one  of  the  many 
properties  of  universal  life — like  the  sea,  and  a  drop 
of  water ;  when  the  latter  joins  the  former,  it  also  is 
sea. 

"  How  do  the  Paramatma  (supreme  soul)  and  Jivatraa 
(living  soul)  differ  ? — They  do  not  differ,  and  pleasure  and 
pain  ascribable  to  the  latter  arises  from  its  imprison- 
ment in  the  body — the  water  of  the  Ganges  is  the  same 
whether  it  run  in  the  river's  bed  or  be  shut  up  in  a 
decanter. 

"  What  difference  should  that  occasion  ? — Great ;  a  drop 
of  wine  added  to  the  water  in  the  decanter  will  impart  its 
flavour  to  the  whole,  but  it  would  be  lost  in  the  river.  The 
Paramatma,  therefore,  is  beyond  accident,  but  the  Jivatma 
is  affiicted  by  sense  and  passion.  Water  cast  loosely  on  a 
fire  will  extinguish  the  fire  ;  put  that  water  over  the  fire  in  a 
boiler,  and  the  fire  will  evaporise  the  water.  So  the  body 
being  the  confining  cauldron,  and  passion  the  fire,  the  soul, 
which   is    compared    to    the    water,    is    dispersed    abroad. 

1  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  by  J.  N.  Bhattacharjee,  M.A.,  D.L.,  p.  371. 
H  113 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

The  one  great  supreme  soul  is  incapable  of  these  properties, 
and  happiness  is  therefore  only  obtained  in  reunion  with  it, 
when  the  dispersed  and  individualised  portions  combine 
again  with  it,  as  the  drops  of  water  with  the  parent  stream  ; 
hence,  although  God  needs  not  the  service  of  His  slave, 
yet  the  slave  should  remember  that  he  is  separated  from 
God  by  the  bod}^  alone,  and  may  exclaim  perpetually,  Blessed 
be  the  moment  when  I  shall  lift  the  veil  from  ofi  that 
face.  The  veil  of  the  face  of  my  beloved  is  the  dust  of  my 
body. 

"  What  are  the  feelings  of  the  perfect  faquir  ? — They 
have  not  been,  they  are  not  to  be,  described  ;  as  it  is  said, 
a  person  asked  me.  What  are  the  sensations  of  a  lover  ?  I 
replied,  When  you  are  a  lover  you  v/ill  know."  ^ 

Sankara  founded  at  least  four  important  monasteries,^ 
and  established  various  orders  of  wandering  friars,  to  be 
referred  to  later  on  ;  but,  unlike  Buddha,  he  did  not  admit 
nuns  to  his  orders. 

Sakti  worship,  that  is,  the  worship  of  the  female  energy 
in  nature,  having  the  yoni  and  yantra  for  its  accepted 
symbols,  is  not  perhaps  as  old  in  India  as  the  phallic  cult 
of  Siva  ;  but  we  know  it  was  flourishing  there  in  the  eighth 
and  ninth  centuries  a.d.,  and  has  a  verv  considerable  follow- 
ing  at  the  present  time.  The  written  authorities  upon 
which  this  cult  is  based  are  certain  Puranas — for  example, 
the  Brahma  Vaivartha,  Skanda,  and  Kalika  ;  but  the  most 
important  Scriptures  of  the  Saktas  are  the  Tantras,  which 
they  regard  as  a  fifth  Veda. 

As  worship  of  the  goddesses  Devi,  Durga,  and  Kali,  the 
Sakti  cult  prevails,  sometimes  combined  with  the  grossest 
immoralities,  mostly  in  the  eastern  portions  of  India, — 
Behar,  Bengal,  and  Assam, — where  emotionalism  and 
mysticism  are  very  prominent  features  of  the  national 
character  ;  the  instance  under  consideration  being  a  good 
example  of  the  fact  that,  where  these  mental  quahties  are 
found  in  excess,  they  usually  coexist  with  a  deficiency  of 
self-control  which  may  lead  to  sexual  depravity.     However, 

1  Wilson,  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  pp.  225,  226. 
-  At  Sringiri  in  Mysore,  Badrinatli  in  the  Himalayas,  Dwarka  in  Katti- 
awar,  and  Jagganath  in  Orissa. 

114 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

as  the  Sakti  cult  naturally  produces  no  ascetics,  it  is  outside 
the  scope  of  this  book. 

Since  as  far  back  as  636  a.d.  successive  waves  of 
Mussulman  invasion  had  been  beating  with  more  or  less 
effect  against  the  western  boundaries  of  India.  In  a.d. 
1024  Mahmoud,  the  Muhammadan  ruler  of  Ghazni,  after 
eleven  successful  invasions  of  India  as  far  as  Gwalior  and 
Kanauj,  returned  once  more,  attracted  this  time  by  an 
avaricious  desire  to  secure  the  enormous  wealth  of  the 
famous  temple  of  Somnath  in  Guzerat.  Mahmoud  had 
already  destroyed  the  temples  of  Thaneswar  and  Nag- 
arkote,  but  Somnath,  on  account  of  the  fame  of  its  sanctity 
and  riches,  was  a  prize  which  excited  his  fanaticism  as 
well  as  his  cupidity.  Situated  by  the  Arabian  Sea,  close 
to  the  sacred  land  where  Krishna  ruled  and  died,  the 
temple  of  Somnath  appealed  to  the  most  cherished 
reUgious  feelings  of  the  Hindus ;  but,  though  desper- 
ately defended,  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  invader, 
who  contemptuously  shattered  in  pieces  the  object  of 
worship  there — a  gigantic  lingam — and  carried  off  in 
triumph  the  hoarded  treasures  of  centuries  of  Hindu 
piety. 

"  The  linga  worship  of  Siva,  we  know,"  says  Professor 
Wilson,  "  was  everywhere  the  predominant  form  of  the 
Hindu  faith  when  the  Mohammedans  first  invaded  India,"  ^ 
and  anyone  at  all  acquainted  with  the  extensive  and  rest- 
less rovings  of  the  Indian  sadhus  can  easily  imagine  how 
quickly  the  news  of  that  terrible  and  striking  catastrophe, 
the  destruction  of  Somnath,  must  have  been  carried 
throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  India  by  the 
wandering  Sivite  friars  and  other  peregrinating  ascetics 
of  the  day.  The  news  as  it  spe(J  through  the  land 
must  have  struck  dismay  everywhere,  and  awakened 
painful  doubts  in  milhons  of  hearts,  as  when  the 
sack  of  the  Eternal  City  by  Alaric  and  his  Goths  in 
the  fifth  century  gave  a  shock  to  Roman  pride  and 
the  pagan  cults  of  the  empire  from  which  they  never 
recovered. 

An    ominous    storm-cloud    was    gathering   over    Hindu 
^  Preface  to  his  translation  of  Malati  and  Madhava. 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

India,  throwing  a  dark  shadow  of  distrust  over  old 
cherished  behefs.  It  was  indeed  just  one  of  those  critical 
periods  in  the  history  of  a  nation  when  universal  search- 
ings  of  hearts  give  rise  to  revisions  of  long-established 
faiths  and  to  the  formulation  of  new  rehgious  hopes  and 
aspirations.  In  the  gloom  of  those  troublous  days  the 
Vishnu  Puranas,  with  their  extravagant  legends  for  the 
glorification  of  their  chosen  divinity,  seem  to  have  been 
compiled,  somewhere  about  the  middle  of  the  eleventh 
century,  from  old  traditions,  coeval,  no  doubt,  with  Sivaism 
and  Buddhism. 

During  the  hundred  years  which  followed  the  com- 
pilation of  these  Puranas  the  Muhammadan  power  was 
being  consolidated  in  the  Punjab,  and  a  feehng  of  unrest  at 
the  imminent  peril  which  threatened  Hinduism  must  have 
been  experienced  tliroughout  the  remainder  of  India.  Such 
political  conditions  are  always  favourable  to  the  advent  of 
prophets,  reformers,  and  new  religious  systems.  In  due 
time,  therefore,  appeared  a  rival  to  Sivaism  in  the  form  of  a 
Vishnu  cultus. 

Sivaism,  as  already  stated,  had  received  a  great  im- 
petus from  the  teaching  and  preaching  of  Sankara  Acharya, 
but  had  no  doubt  been  discredited  in  men's  minds  by 
recent  events. 

The  prophet  of  the  new  Vaishnava  (Vishnuvite) 
religion  was  Ramanuja,  a  Brahman  of  Southern  India,  who 
about  1150  A.D.  commenced  his  campaign  against  Sivaism, 
teaching  a  monotheism  hardly  distinguishable  from  pan- 
theism. Instead  of  the  much  venerated  lingam,  symbol  of 
Mahadev,  he  presented  to  the  Hindu  world,  as  objects  of 
special  adoration,  Vishnu,^  Krishna,  and  Rama  ;  also  their 
respective  wives,  Lakshmi,  Rukmini,  and  Sita.  Contrary  to 
the  views  of  Sankara,  he  taught  that  the  human  soul  was 
distinct  from  the  Supreme  Spirit,  and  retained  its  identity 
and    separate    consciousness    even    when    absorbed   in  the 

^  The  god  Vishnu,  according  to  the  Puranas,  has  appeared  on  the  earth 
in  nine  different  incarnations,  one  of  these  being  Rama  Chandra,  and  he  is 
to  appear  once  more  as  Kalki  "  at  the  end  of  the  present  age  of  sin  for 
rescuing  the  land  of  the  Aryas  from  their  oppressors." — Bhattacharjee's 
Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  p.  415. 

Ii6 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

Supreme  Being.  "  As  a  matter  of  fact,  he  believed  in  three 
distinct  principles,  namely — 

1.  The  Supreme  Spirit,  *  Para-brahma  or  Iswara.' 

2.  The  separate  spirits  of  men,  '  Chit.' 

3.  Non-spirit,  '  Achit.'  "  i 

And  it  may  be  added  that  he  recognised  the  merit  of  good 
works  for  the  attainment  of  final  exemption  from  further 
transmigrations . 

Ramanuja's  conflict  with  the  worshippers  of  Siva  was 
carried  on  with  a  great  deal  of  vehemence,  and  he  was  him- 
self obliged  to  seek  refuge  from  his  enemies  in  the  court 
of  the  Jaina  King  of  Karnata.  Two  distinct  sects  claiming 
to  be  his  spiritual  descendants,  styling  themselves  Vada- 
galais  and  Ten-galais  respectively,  are  to  be  found  at  present 
in  Southern  India.  Ramanuja's  followers  affirm  that  their 
prophet  was  an  incarnation  of  the  divine  serpent  Sesha. 

Like  other  Indian  reformers  or  heresiarchs,  Ramanuja 
established  ascetic  orders  in  connection  with  his  sect 
known  as  the  Sri  Vaishnavas,  and  founded  a  large  number 
of  monasteries. 

Lingam  worship,  as  organised  and  extended  by  Sankara 
and  his  immediate  followers,  was  not,  however,  to  be  yet 
ousted  by  its  rival.  Within  a  century  of  the  promulga- 
tion by  Ramanuja  of  his  Vishnu  cultus,  a  new  movement 
in  favour  of  Sivaism  was  set  up  by  Basava  in  the  southern 
Mahratta  country.  Though  a  Brahman  by  birth,  Basava 
"  denied  the  superiority  of  the  Brahmans,  and  tried  his  best 
to  aboHsh  the  distinction  of  caste."  ^  He  also  opposed 
many  ancient  orthodox  practices — cremation,  for  example — 
and  even  questioned  the  inspiration  of  the  Vedas. 

According  to  his  followers,  Basava  was  an  incarnation 
not  of  Siva,  but  of  Siva's  bull  Nandi,  who  was  sent  down 
especially  to  revive  the  Sivite  cultus.^  To  Basava  are 
attributed  many  remarkable  miracles.  After  his  work  on 
earth  was  accomplished  he  disappeared  into  the  Sangames- 
wara  lingam,  and  thus  returned  to  the  heaven  whence  he 
came. 

^  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  by  Dr.  J.  N.  Bhattacharjee,  p.  435. 

2  Ibid.  p.  396. 

2  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson's  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  p.  143. 

117 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

Basava  established  an  ascetic  mendicant  order  in  con- 
nection with  his  sect,  named  Jangamas  or  Lingaits  because 
they  wear  a  lingam  enclosed  in  a  metal  casket  suspended 
from  the  neck  by  a  cord.  The  order  referred  to  is  well 
known  in  Southern  India,  but  representatives  of  it  are  rarely 
met  with  in  the  country  north  of  the  Vindhyahs,  although 
some  are  established  at  Benares. 

But  the  poUtical  clouds  continued  to  gather  overhead, 
the  danger  to  Hinduism  still  increased.  Islam  was  steadily 
triumphing.  What  better  course  was  open  to  the  Hindus 
than  to  forget  their  sectarian  differences  and  unite  together 
in  the  worship  of  the  divine  Kjishna,  the  central  figure  of 
that  great  Hindu  epic,  the  Mahabharata,  ^  and  the  very 
god  Vishnu  ^  himself,  in  whom  all  Hindus  could  find  their 
ideals  satisfied.  And  so  in  the  thirteenth  century  Mad- 
havacharya,  a  Kanarese  Brahman,  born  in  a.d.  1199, 
vigorously  preached  the  special  worship  of  Krishna,  but, 
unhke  Ramanuja,  without  displaying  any  hostility  what- 
ever to  Sivaism,  his  object  being  to  effect  a  union  of  Sivites 
and  Vishnuvites  under  a  new  rehgious  banner. 

To  this  end  the  images  of  Siva,  Durga,^  and  Ganesh  * 
are  worshipped  along  with  those  of  Vishnu  in  the  temples 
of  the  sect  established  by  Madhavacharya. 

As  in  the  present  time  the  Krishna  cult  seems  to  be 
in  especial  favour  amongst  the  Indian  people,  and  as  its 
spread  in  certain  forms  must  affect  the  practice  of  aus- 
terities, it  seems  desirable  to  consider  the  popular  beliefs 
respecting  this  god. 

In  the  Mahabharata  he  is  a  warrior  king,  wise,  subtle, 
and  full  of  guile.  He  is  also  the  Supreme  Being,  and 
unmistakably  reveals  himself  as  such.  Some  of  the 
earlier   Puranas   represent   him    in    the    same   light.     But 

*  An  epitome  of  the  Mahabharata  forms  a  portion  of  my  Great  Indian 
Epics  (George  Bell  &  Sons). 

2  "  Krishna  is  regarded  by  some  as  the  eighth  incarnation  (of  Vishnu), 
but  according  to  the  more  orthodox  view  he  was  Vishnu  himself,  and  wai 
not  a  mere  incarnation." — Dr.  Bhattacharjee's  Hindu  Castes  and  Sicts, 
p.  416. 

^  The  wife  of  Siva. 

*  The  god  of  wisdom,  son  of  Siva  and  Parvati,  represented  as  a  short 
corpulent  man  with  four  hands  and  the  head  of  an  elephant. 

Ii8 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

later  and  more  favourite  legends  devoted  especially  to  his 
youthful  years  dwell  upon  the  dangers  to  which  in  infancy 
his  life  was  exposed  from  the  jealous  fears  of  his  royal  uncle, 
expatiate  upon  his  personal  beauty,  and  revel  in  the  sensuous 
details  of  his  various  amours  with  the  gopis  (milkmaids), 
amongst  whom  the  most  favoured  was  Radha,  a  married 
woman  passionately  devoted,  body  and  soul,  to  her  divine 
lover.  Their  loves,  not  unmixed  with  jealousies  and  tears, 
as  sung  by  the  poets  of  India,  have  met  with  ecstatic  apprecia- 
tion, while  an  attempt  has  been  made  by  the  more  sober- 
minded  to  cover  their  unblushing  carnahty  under  a  diaphanous 
veil  of  devotional  mysticism.^  Whither  all  this  dallying 
with  warm  voluptuous  passions  and  sensuous  images  would 
inevitably  lead  the  frailer  devotees  does  not  need  to  be 
explained. 

When  the  Krishna  cult  originated  is  very  doubtful. 
Its  roots  may  be  very  ancient,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  it  was  in  a  new  form  that  it  appeared  in  India  in  the 
thirteenth  century. 

Madhavacharya,  the  prophet  who  preached  Krishna, 
believed,  like  his  predecessor  Ramanuja,  in  the  independent 
existence  of  the  human  soul,  and  denied  the  possibility  of 
its  absorption  into  the  Universal  Spirit  either  in  this  life 
or  after  death.  He  held  that  there  is  one  Eternal  Supreme 
Being,  Vishnu,  and  that  Siva,  Brahma,  and  all  the  ocher 
gods  are  subject  to  decay  and  dissolution  ;  that  there  are 
two  eternal  principles,  God  and  the  Human  Soul,  or  rather 
souls,  the  former  independent,  the  latter  dependent.  "  With 
regard  to  the  visible  world,  he  taught  that  its  elements 
existed  eternally  in  the  Supreme  Being,  and  were  only  created 
by  Him  in  the  sense  of  being  shaped,  ordered,  and  arranged 
by  His  power  and  will."  ^ 

The  sect  established  by  Madhava  has,  like  the  rest,  its 
own  mendicant  orders  and  its  own  monasteries. 

The  success  of  Vaishnava  doctrines  in  Southern  India 
led  to  their  promulgation  in  the  Gangetic  valley,  princi- 

^  With  this  process  we  in  the  West  are  familiar  in  the  very  far-fetched 
interpretation  which  "has  been  put  by  Christian  theologians  upon  the  glow- 
ing sensuousness  of  the  Song  of  Songs. 

^  Professor  Sir  Monier  Williams,  Brahmanism  and  Hinduism,  p.  131. 

119 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

pally  through  the  preaching  and  teaching  of  a  Brahman 
named  Ramanand,  who  lived  at  Benares  in  the  thirteenth 
or  fourteenth  century.  It  is  said  that  Ramanand,  one  of 
Ramanuja's  successors,  having  travelled  extensively  over 
India,  returned  to  one  of  the  monasteries  of  his  sect,  when 
some  priest  or  other  raised  the  objection  that  in  his 
wanderings  he  could  not  possibly  have  observed  the  rule 
of  the  Ramanuja  sect,  requiring  meals  to  be  strictly  private. 
On  these  grounds  Ramanand  was  required  to  eat  apart 
from  the  rest  of  the  brethren.  In  resentment  he  founded 
a  new  sect,  and,  to  show  his  contempt  for  caste  distinc- 
tions, freely  admitted  into  it  men  of  all  castes,  even 
the  lowest ;  and  this  was  probably  a  prudent  or  even 
necessary  concession  to  popular  feeling,  more  than  ever 
unwilling  to  accept  the  old  yoke,  since  Islam  was  pre- 
pared to  receive  all  into  its  communion  on  a  footing  of 
equality. 

Ramanand's  followers  were  taught  to  pay  especial 
reverence  to  Rama  and  his  wife  Sita  ;  for,  mth  political 
dangers  looming  on  the  horizon,  what  more  natural  than 
to  turn  one's  thoughts  to  the  faultless  prince  who,  while 
an  incarnation  of  deity,  had  been  in  his  human  character 
a  wandering  ascetic  in  the  forests  of  Central  India  for  no 
less  than  fourteen  years,  and  withal  a  successful  warrior, 
capable  of  avenging  a  wrong  even  when  the  evil-doer  was 
the  terrible  ten-headed  demon-king  of  the  Rakshasas.^ 

Again,  what  more  charming  and  more  admirable  char- 
acter could  be  found  to  arouse  the  love  and  homage  of 
all  good  men  than  that  ever-faithful  and  tender  wife,  the 
peerless  Sita. 

The  cult  instituted  by  Ramanand  was  an  example  of 
the  worship  of  God  incarnated  in  human  form,  similar  to 
that  which  we  have  in  Christianity — a  religion  which  had 
already  become  familiar  to  the  Indian  people  ;  for  Roman 
CathoHc  missionaries  had  long  been  established  amongst 
them. 

If  Sivaism  was  to  be  superseded  by  Vishnuism,  surely 

^  The  story  of  Rama  is  the  subject  of  the  famous  Sanskrit  epic,  the 
Ramayana,  of  which  I  Lave  given  an  epitome  in  my  Great  Indian  Epics 
(George  Bell  &  Sons). 

120 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

the  object  of  adoration  should  be  a  god-man  like  Rama, 
a  model  son  and  an  exemplary  husband,  but  above  all  a 
redoubtable  warrior  and  a  leader  of  avenging  hosts. 

There  are  both  monks  and  nuns  connected  with  the 
sect  of  the  Ramanandis,  who  have  flourishing  monasteries 
throughout  Northern  India. 


121 


CHAPTER  y II— continued 


Section  III. — Modern  Democratic  Reformers — Kabir,  his  peculiar  and 
important  position  as  a  Reformer  —  Vallabhacharya  sets  up  the 
Worship  of  Krishna  as  Bala  Gopala — Chaitanya  the  Mystic  preaches 
the  Worship  of  Krishna  cum  Radha — Baba  Nanak  and  his  Teaching — 
The  Sikhs — Dadu  and  his  Sect — Ram  Charn  and  the  Ram  Sanehis 
founded  by  him — The  Rajput  Princess  Mirabai  a  Devotee  of  Krishna — 
The  Trend  of  Latter-day  Hinduism — Brief  Summary. 


P  to  this  time  all  the  heresiarchs 
— for  such  they  really  were — 
mentioned  in  this  sketch,  from 
Sankara  Acharya  to  Rama- 
nand,  were  Brahmans  and  men 
of  education. 

Although  they  belonged  to 
the  privileged  caste  of  the  here- 
ditary priesthood,  democratic 
tendencies  became  more  and 
more  apparent  in  the  sects 
which  successively  arose  under 
their  guidance,  the  latter  of  these 
exhibiting  a  very  marked  disre- 
gard for  caste  distinctions.  At  the  same  time,  anthropo- 
morphic leanings  are  plainly  manifest  in  the  extensive 
and  popular  worsliip  of  the  Kshatriya  warriors  Krishna 
and  Rama. 

In  Kabir  we  have  a  low-caste  man  unacquainted  with 
Sanskrit  literature,  and  a  reformer  of  such  a  strikingly 
new  type  amongst  Hindu  religious  leaders  that  he  calls 
for  more  than  a  passing  notice.     This  man,  there  is  reason 

122 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

to  believe,  may  be  numbered  amongst  the  principal 
disciples  of  Ramanand,  thougb  he  was  no  slavish  follower 
of  the  master.  It  is  related  that  Ramanand  lived  at 
Benares  in  the  strictest  seclusion.  He  stayed  all  day  in- 
doors, and  only  at  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  went 
down  to  the  Ganges  to  have  his  bath  and  perform  his 
devotions.  Kabir,  the  low -caste  weaver,  could  never 
obtain  access  to  the  great  teacher,  because  the  master's 
followers  and  disciples  drove  him  contemptuously  away. 
He  knew,  however,  that  Ramanand  went  nightly  to  the 
sacred  river  for  his  bath,  and  so  he  used  to  lie  in  the  path 
and  watch  him  as  he  passed.  One  night  Ramanand,  on 
his  way  to  the  Ganges,  stumbled  against  Kabir,  and  instead 
of  asking  who  he  was,  or  making  any  apology,  merely  said, 
as  he  passed  along,  "  Goth  !  Ram  ko  Ram  bolo  !  "  (Rise  up  ! 
say  Ram  to  Ram  !). 

Kabir  was  delighted,  and  went  about  telling  every- 
body he  met  that  Ramanand  had  accepted  him  as  his  chela^ 
and  had  communicated  the  initiatory  mantra  to  him.  The 
disciples  of  the  great  teacher  questioned  him  about  this, 
and  not  mthout  sundry  reproaches.  Ramanand  denied 
all  knowledge  of  the  man.  Kabir  on  his  part  maintained 
the  truth  of  his  statement,  and  desired  to  be  confronted 
with  his  guru.  He  was  conducted  before  Ramanand, 
and  related  what  had  occurred.  The  master  was  pleased, 
and  said,  "  Yes,  he  is  my  chela !  What  greater  mantra 
is  there  than  the  name  of  God  ?  "  This  is  one  story,  and, 
though  not  identical  with  the  one  given  in  the  Dabistan, 
does  not  differ  very  materially  from  it.  But,  according 
to  the  Bhakta  mala,  Kabir' s  mother  was  at  her  own  request 
brought  by  her  father  to  see  Ramanand,  who,  without 
taking  note  of  the  fact  that  she  was  a  widow,  saluted  her 
with  a  benediction,  to  the  effect,  that  she  might  be 
favoured  with  a  son.  Of  course  the  saint's  words,  once 
uttered,  were  irrevocable.  The  virgin  widow  in  due 
time  gave  birth  to  a  male  cliild,  and,  overwhelmed 
with  shame,  secretly  abandoned  the  infant,  who  was 
found  by  a  weaver  and  his  wife  and  reared  as  their  own 
offspring. 

Judging  from  the  works    attributed    to    him    and   his 

123 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

immediate  disciples,  lie  was  a  pronounced  mystic,^  gifted 
by  nature  with  a  great  power  of  emotional  influence.  But, 
mystic  though  he  was,  Kabir's  worldly  wisdom  led  him  to 
advise  his  disciples  to  conciliate  all  men. 

"  Shabse  hiliye,  sliabse  miliye, 
Shabka  lijiye  nam  ; 
Han-ji  han-ji  shabse  kijiye, 
Wasa  apna  gam," 

which  jingling  couplet  may  be  sufficiently  rendered — 

"  Mix  with  all,  with  all  associate. 
Each  man's  name  borrow  free ; 
Let  '  Yes,  sir  !  '  on  your  lips  be  ever, 
But  bide  'neath  your  own  roof-tree." 

Kabir,  though  a  monotheist  after  the  Indian  fashion, 
did  not  deny  the  existence  of  the  Hindu  deities  ;  but  he 
considered  that  their  worship  was  not  necessary,  and  he 
was  clearly  anti-idolatrous  in  his  views.  What  was  a 
new  thing  in  Hinduism,  Kabir  insisted  that  purity  of  heart 
was  all-important,  and  ceremonies  or  modes  of  worship  of 
little  accoimt. 

Thus  said  the  teacher  :  "To  Ali  and  Kama  we  owe 
our  existence,  and  should  therefore  show  similar  tender- 
ness to  all  that  live  :  of  what  avail  is  it  to  shave  your 
head,  prostrate  yourself  on  the  ground,  or  immerse  your 
body  in  the  stream  ?  Whilst  you  shed  blood  you  call 
yourself  pure  and  boast  of  virtues  that  you  never  display. 
Of  what  benefit  is  cleaning  your  mouth,  counting  your 
beads,  performing  ablutions,  and  bowing  yourself  in 
temples,  when,  whilst  you  mutter  your  prayers  or  journey 
to  Mecca  or  Medina,  deceitfulness  is  in  your  heart.  The 
Hindu  fasts  every  eleventh  day,  the  Mussulman  during 
the  Ramazan.  Who  formed  the  remaining  months  and 
days  that  you  should  venerate  but  one  ?  If  the  Creator 
dwell  in  tabernacles,  whose  residence  is  the  universe  ? 
Who  has  beheld  Rama  seated  amongst  the  images,  or 
found  him  at  the  shrine  to  which  the  pilgrim  has  directed 

^  Mysticism,  Dr.  Max  Nordau  says,  "  is  the  expression  of  the  inaptitude 
for  attention,  for  clear  thought,  and  control  of  the  emotions,  and  has  for  its 
cause  the  weakness  of  the  higher  cerebral  centres." — Degeneration,  p.  536. 

124 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

his  steps  ?  Tlie  city  of  Hara  is  to  the  east,  that  of  Ali 
to  the  west ;  but  explore  your  own  heart,  for  there  are 
both  Eama  and  Karim."  ^ 

A  charact'eristic  story  told  of  Kabir,  extracted  from 
Shea  and  Troyes'  translation  of  the  Dabistan,  may  not  be 
out  of  place  here. 

"  Kabir  showed  always  great  regard  for  the  faquirs. 
One  day  a  number  of  dervishes  came  to  him.  He  received 
them  with  respect  in  his  house.  As  he  possessed  nothing, 
to  show  his  generosity  and  munificence  to  them,  he  went 
from  door  to  door  to  procure  something  ;  but,  having  found 
nothing,  he  said  to  his  wife,  '  Hast  thou  no  friend  from 
whom  thou  mayest  borrow  something  ?  '  She  answered, 
'  There  is  a  grocer  in  this  street  who  threw  an  eye  of 
bad  desire  upon  me  ;  would  I  from  this  sinner  demand 
something,  I  should  obtain  it.'  Kabir  said,  '  Go  im- 
mediately to  him,  grant  him  what  he  desires,  and  bring 
something  for  the  dervishes.'  The  woman  went  to  the 
lewd  grocer  and  requested  the  loan  of  what  she  required. 
He  rephed,  '  If  thou  comest  this  night  to  me,  thy  request 
is  granted.'  The  woman  consented,  and  swore  the  oath 
which  he  imposed  upon  her  to  come,  after  which  the 
grocer  gave  her  rice,  oil,  and  whatever  these  men  might 
like.  When  the  faquirs,  well  satisfied,  went  to  rest,  a 
heavy  rain  began  to  fall,  and  the  woman  wished  to  break 
her  engagement ;  but  Kabir,  in  order  to  keep  her  true  to 
her  word,  having  taken  her  upon  his  shoulder,  carried  her 
in  the  dark  and  rainy  night  through  the  deep  mud  to  the 
shop  of  the  bad  grocer,  and  placed  himself  there  in  a 
corner.  When  the  woman  had  entered  into  the  interior 
part  of  the  house,  and  the  man  found  her  feet  unsullied, 
he  said  to  her,  '  How  didst  thou  arrive  without  thy  feet 
being  dirty  ?  '  The  woman  concealed  the  fact.  The  grocer 
conjured  her  by  the  holy  name  of  God  to  reveal  the 
truth.  The  woman,  unable  to  refuse,  said  what  had  taken 
place.  The  grocer,  on  hearing  this,  shrieked  and  was 
senseless.  When  he  had  recovered  his  senses,  he  ran 
out  and  threw  himself  at  Kabir's  feet.     Afterwards,  having 

1  Sabda  the  56th,  quoted  in  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson's  Sketch  of  the 
Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  pp.  52,  53. 

125 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

distributed  among  the  poor  whatever  he  had  in  his  shop, 
he  became  a  viragi.^^  ^ 

The  cardinal  precepts  of  Kabir  are  the  obhgations  of 
humanity  and  truth,  the  desirabihty  of  retirement  from  the 
world,  and,  above  all,  "  implicit  devotion  in  word,  act,  and 
thought  to  the  guru,  or  spiritual  guide."  This  last  precept, 
which  did  not  originate  with  Kabir,  and  is  by  no  means 
pecuhar  to  his  sect,  has  taken  strong  hold  of  the  Indian 
mind,  and  has  led  to  g'l^rw-worship  of  a  decidedly  objection- 
able type. 

Much  of  Kabir's  teaching  was  so  greatly  to  the  taste 
of  his  Muhammadan  countrymen  that  they  actually  claimed 
him  as  a  true  Muslim.  It  is  narrated  that  after  his  death 
both  Hindus  and  Muhammadans  contended  for  the  possession 
of  his  body,  each  desiring  to  do  honour  to  the  saint ;  but, 
while  they  disputed,  Kabir  himself  appeared  in  their  midst, 
and  directed  them  to  look  under  the  cloth  which  was  supposed 
to  cover  his  mortal  remains,  and  after  saying  this  instantly 
vanished.  When  the  coverlet  was  lifted  a  heap  of  sweet- 
scented  flowers  was  discovered,  and  nothing  more.  The 
contending  parties,  astonished  and  awestruck,  shared  the 
blooms  between  them,  and  dealt  with  them  according  to 
their  respective  funeral  ceremonies. 

One  half  of  the  flowers  was  burnt  by  the  Hindus,  the 
other  half  was  buried  by  the  Muslims,  and  a  cenotaph 
erected  over  it. 

It  is  impossible  to  overlook  the  fact  that  Kabir  stands 
out  in  prominent  contrast  with  the  Hindu  sect-founders 
who  had  preceded  him,  being  a  low-caste  man  and  un- 
educated, and  that  in  him  the  influence  of  Islam  and 
perhaps  also  of  Christianity  are  clearly  traceable.  The 
importance  of  Kabir  in  the  more  recent  religious  history  of 
India  is  not  to  be  gauged  by  the  number  of  his  professed 
followers — the  Kabir -fanthis — for  they  are  not  a  very 
considerable  body ;  but  Kabir's  teaching  has  largely  in- 
fluenced that  of  subsequent  sect-founders — Guru  Nanak, 
for  example. 

The  books  recognised   by  his   followers  as  embodying 

^  The  Dabistan  of  Mosun  Fani,  translated  by  Shea  and  Troyes,  vol.  ii. 
pp.  189,  190. 

126 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

the  teachings  of  Kabir  are  known  collectively  as  the  Khas 
Grantha,  and  consist  of  some  twenty  works  in  Hindi  verse, 
some  of  them  of  considerable  size. 

The  followers  of  Kabir  regard  him  as  an  incarnation  of 
the  deity,  and  pay  him  divine  honours,  and  of  course  many 
miraculous  circumstances  connected  with  his  life  and  doings 
are  narrated. 

Monasteries  for  the  accommodation  of  Kahir-'panthis 
exist  in  many  places,  and  their  mendicant  friars  may  be 
met  with  all  over  Northern  India. 

The  age  of  Martin  Luther  was  a  time  of  considerable 
religious  activity  in  India,  for  there  were  no  less  than 
three  founders  of  leading  Hindu  sects  who  were  contem- 
poraries of  the  great  European  reformer,  all  three  belonging 
to  northern  parts  of  India — viz.  Vallabhacharya  preaching 
at  Benares,  Chaitanya  at  Nadya  in  Bengal,  and  Nanak  in 
the  Punjab. 

Vallabhacharya  (or  Ballavacharya)  was  born  at  Benares 
in  1479  A.D.  of  Brahman  parents,  and  in  his  mature 
years  set  up  in  his  native  city  the  worship  of  Krishna,  not 
as  he  is  represented  in  the  Mahabharata — shrewd  statesman 
and  brave  warrior — but  as  Bala  Gopala,  the  cowherd  boy 
who  indulged  in  amorous  dalliance  with  the  frail  milk- 
maids of  Bindrabun.  Philosophically,  Vallabha  held  that 
the  human  soul  was  a  spark  of  the  Divine  Essence,  and 
though  separated  from  was  yet  identical  with  it.  His 
system,  which  has  attained  great  popularity  and  has  led 
in  practice  to  the  grossest  profligacy,  is  of  great  interest, 
because,  unlike  his  sect-forming  predecessors,  Vallabha 
discountenanced  all  mortifications  of  the  flesh,  maintaining 
that  the  body  should  be  reverenced  and  not  ill-used.  His 
revolt  against  the  old  ideas  and  deeply  rooted  sentiments 
of  his  own  people  curiously  resembles  the  recoil  from 
sacerdotalism,  and  particularly  asceticism,  which  occurred 
contemporaneously  in  Europe  under  the  stimulus  of  the 
spirit  which  led  to  that  great  epoch  known  as  the 
Renaissance. 

At  Nadya,  the  chief  seat  of  Sanskrit  learning  in  Bengal, 
Chaitanya  (a.d.  1484-1527),  a  high -caste  Brahman,  ini- 
tiated a  religious  movement  of  considerable  importance. 

127 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

At  the  time  of  Chaitanya's  advent  the  political  state 
of  Bengal  was,  from  the  Hindu  point  of  view,  gloomy  in 
the  extreme,^  and  the  religion  of  the  people  seems  to  have 
been  for  the  most  part  nothing  but  undisguised  licentious- 
ness. Surely  a  reform  of  morals  was  essential  before  any 
amelioration  of  political  conditions  could  be  hoped  for. 
"  The  bacchanalian  orgies  of  the  Tantrics,"  writes  a  Bengali, 
"  and  their  worship  of  a  '  shamefully  exposed  female,' 
provoked  the  abhorrence  of  Chaitanya  and  roused  his  energy 
to  remove  the  deep  blots  upon  the  national  character.  He 
commenced  his  labours  by  holding  meetings  of  his 
immediate  friends.  At  these  meetings  he  expounded  the 
life  and  acts  of  Krishna.  Passages  in  Bhagbut  which 
everyone  understood  in  a  literal  sense  he  construed 
figuratively  ;  and,  by  striking  upon  the  emotional  chord 
of  our  nature,  he  thought  of  putting  down  sensualism 
by  sentiment.  In  a  little  time  his  enthusiasm  affected 
hundreds,  and  gathered  round  him  a  body  of  disciples."  '^ 

We  have  ample  biographical  details  of  Chaitanya,  and 
from  these  it  is  evident  that  his  was  one  of  those  highl}^ 
neurotic,  emotional  temperaments,  bordering  upon  madness, 
which  are  characteristic  of  what  it  is  the  present  fashion 
to  call  the  "  higher  degenerates."  More  than  once,  indeed, 
the  border  line  of  sanity  seems  to  have  been  passed  by 
him,  and  he  met  his  end  by  walking  into  the  sea  at  Puri 
in  a  fit  of  mental  aberration.  The  essence  of  the  Nadya 
reformer's  teaching  has  been  thus  summed  up  by  a  Bengali 
Brahman  :  "  Chaitanya  taught  that  hhakti,  or  fervent  devo- 
tion, was  the  only  road  towards  God,  and  that  bhakti  was 
of  the  following  kinds  : — 

1.  The  devotion  of  a  servant  to  his  master. 

2.  The  devotion  of  a  friend  to  a  friend. 

3.  The  devotion  of  a  parent  to  a  child. 

4.  The  devotion  of  a  lady  to  her  lover." 

^  "  About  the  time  when  Sree  Gaiiranga  {i.e.  Chaitanya)  appeared, 
Bengal  had  nearly  lost  its  independence.  The  ruler  was  a  Mohammedan, 
and,  though  the  Hindus  succeeded  from  time  to  time  in  occupying  the 
throne,  they  were  obliged  to  embrace  Mohammedanism  in  order  to  retain 
their  sovereignty." — Lord  Gauranga,  or  Salvation  for  All,  by  Shishir 
Kumar  Ghose  (Calcutta,  1897),  vol.  i.  Introduction,  p.  ix. 

2  Travels  of  a  Hindu,  by  Bholanath  Chunder,  pp.  29,  30. 

128 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

Cliaitanya  recommended  Radha  worship,  and  taught 
that  the  best  form  of  devotion  was  that  which  Radha,  as 
the  beloved  mistress  of  Krishna,  felt  for  him.^  The 
reformer  also  inculcated  the  necessity  of  strict  vege- 
tarianism and  total  abstinence  from  intoxicants.  He 
prohibited  animal  sacrifices,  and  even  communication  with 
all  who  performed  such  sacrifices.  The  remarriage  of 
widows  found  favour  with  him. 

Men  of  all  castes,  even  the  lowest,  and  Muhammadans 
also,  were  admitted  into  his  sect  by  Chaitanya.  "  Three 
of  his  principal  disciples,  namely,  Rup,  Sanatan,  and 
Haridas,  were  Islamites."  ^ 

An  innovation  made  by  Chaitanya  was  religious 
musical  processions  known  as  sankirians.  How  powerfully 
music — dreamy,  sensuous,  subtle  music — may  sway  the 
emotions  of  men,  even  to  ecstasy,  is  well  known  in  the 
history  of  all  religions,  even  Islam  ;  so  it  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at  that  the  sankirtans  of  Chaitanya,  appealing 
strongly  to  highly  impressionable  natures,  aided  the  spread 
of  his  teaching  very  much,  and  have  become  an  exceedingly 
popular  feature  in  recent  religious  movements  in  India. 
Chaitanya  was  fond  of  theatricals,  and,  once  playing  with 
other  amateurs,  took  the  part  of  Rukhmini,  the  chief  wife  of 
Krishna. 

The  history  of  religion  shows  how  readily  in  all 
countries  emotional  natures  import  the  ideas  of  sexual 
relationships  into  their  mystical  longings  for  union  with 
the  Divine  Being — a  tendency  which  even  the  strong  hand 
of  a  guiding  central  authority  has  not  always  been  able 
to  restrain  from  developing  into  objectionable  practices.^ 

1  Bhattacharjee's  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  p.  469. 

2  Ibid.  p.  464. 

^  Christian  Mysticism,  by  W.  R.  Inge,  pp.  159,  140.  Writing  of  St. 
Catherine  of  Siena,  "  the  spouse  of  Christ,"  Mr.  John  Addington  Symonds 
says,  "  '  Cristo  amore.  Cristo  amore.'  The  reiteration  of  the  word  '  love ' 
is  most  significant.  It  was  the  keynote  of  her  whole  theology,  the  main- 
spring of  her  life.  In  no  merely  figurative  sense  did  she  regard  herself 
as  the  spouse  of  Christ,  but  dwelt  upon  the  bliss,  beyond  all  mortal  happi- 
ness, which  she  enjoyed  in  supersensual  communion  with  her  Lord.  It 
is  easy  to  understand  how  such  ideas  might  be,  and  have  been,  corrupted, 
when  impressed  on  natures  no  less  susceptible,  but  weaker  and  less  gifted 
than  St.  Catherine's." — Sketches  in  Italy  and  Greece,  iii.  p.  53. 

I  129 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

Now  Chaitanya,  unhampered  by  any  controlling  authority, 
preaching  earnestly  in  a  warm  climate  to  a  highly 
emotional  people,  commended  with  success  the  worship 
of  Krishna  cum  Radha  ;  and  such  a  combination,  in  spite 
of  subtle  hermeneutists  explaining  it  as  a  mystical  union, 
has  not  failed  to  lead  to  extravagant  profligacy  amongst 
the  more  ardent  followers  of  the  cult.^ 

Chaitanya,  it  may  be  mentioned,  was  anticipated  by 
another  leader,  Nimbaditya,  who  founded  a  sect  known  as 
the  Nimats,  with  headquarters  at  Muttra.  It  is  almost 
unnecessary  to  say  that  the  prophet  of  Nadiya  was  in  the 
eyes  of  his  disciples  nothing  less  than  an  incarnation  of 
Vishnu,  and  even  in  his  lifetime  a  temple  was  erected,  in 
which  his  image — an  almost  naked  mendicant  painted 
yellow — was  the  object  of  worship. 

The  sect  founded  by  Chaitanya  nearly  four  hundred 
years  ago  is  still  flourishing,  and  seems  latterly  to  have 
been  making  great  progress.  Bindrabun,  on  the  banks  of 
the  Jumna,  identified  as  the  spot  where  Krishna  carried 
on  his  intrigues  with  the  gofis,  owes  its  existence  and  its 
present  flourishing  state  to  Chaitanya  and  the  sect  which 
originated  with  him.  The  prophet  himself  left  no  issue, 
but  he  had  two  Brahman  coadjutors  in  his  life's  mission ; 
and  their  descendants,  now  known  as  gossains,  are  the 
acknowledged  and  venerated  spiritual  heads  of   the   sect. 

Writing  with  reference  to  the  Vaishnavas  of  Bengal, 
and  the  Chaitanites  in  particular,  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson 
says — 

"Of  all  obligations,  however,  the  guru  padasraya,  or 
servile  veneration  of  the  spiritual  teacher,  is  the  most 
important  and  compulsory.  The  members  of  this  sect  are 
not  only  required  to  deUver  up  themselves  and  everything 
valuable  to  the  disposal  of  the  guru,  they  are  not  only  to 
entertain  full  belief  in  the  usual  Vaishnava  tenet,  which 
identifies  the  votary,  the  teacher,  and  the  god,  but  they 
are  to  look  upon  the  guru  as  one  and  the  present  deity, 
as  possessed  of  more  authority  even  than  the  deity,  and 
as   one  whose   favour  is   more   to   be   courted  and  whose 

1  An  account  of  the  more  disreputable  Chaitanite  sects  of  Bengal  is  given 
in  Dr,  Bhattacharjee's  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  pp.  480-83. 

130 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

anger  is  more  to  be  deprecated  than  even  that  of  Krishna 
himself."  1 

The  Chaitanites,  who  have  long  manifested  a  marked 
hostility  to  the  Brahmans,  have  their  own  mendicant 
orders  and  their  monasteries,  many  of  them  flourishing 
institutions. 

In  the  wake  of  the  successful  teaching  of  Chaitanya 
we  have  the  Radha  Ballabis,  who  afiord  a  curious  and 
instructive  instance — not,  it  is  true,  confined  to  Hinduism 
— of  the  manner  in  which  worship  is  gradually  transferred 
from  the  principal  divinity  to  others  associated  with  him 
even  in  a  distinctly  subordinate  capacity.  The  sect  referred 
to  was  founded,  it  is  said,  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
with  headquarters  at  Bindrabun  in  Northern  India,  the 
object  in  view  being  to  concentrate  attention  upon  the 
worship  of  Radha,  even  in  preference  to  that  of  Krishna 
himself ;  the  faithful  and  devoted  human  mistress  thus 
superseding,  as  it  were,  in  men's  veneration  her  divine  but 
fickle  lover. 

Nanak. — A  spiritual  descendant  of  Kabir  was  Baba 
Nanak,  a  Hindu  of  the  Kshatriya  caste,  who  was  born  in 
the  Punjab  in  a.d.  1469,  and  died  there  in  1539.  From  his 
earliest  youth  Nanak  displayed  a  strong  leaning  towards 
the  society  of  sadhus,  a  disincHnation  for  regular  work  of 
any  kind,  and  a  passion  for  a  wandering  life.  He  is  said 
to  have  travelled  extensively  over  India,  and  to  have 
visited  Persia  and  even  Mecca. 

Needless  to  say,  many  miracles  are  attributed  to  him.^ 
His  opinions  and  teachings — vague  and  mysterious — are 
embodied  in  the  Adi  Granth  ("The  First  Book"),  a 
collection  of  prayers,  or  rather  rhapsodies,  compiled  some 
fifty  years  after  his  death  by  one  of  hia  successors.  Guru 
Arjan  Dev.  From  these  it  may  be  gathered  that  Nanak 
acknowledged  the  existence  of  the  Hindu  divinities,  over 
whom,  however,  he  placed  a  Supreme  Being,  Akal  Purkh, 
the  Formless  One. 

From  passages  in  the  Japji  composed  by  Nanak 
himself,  it  may  be  gathered  that  his  philosophical  ideas 

*  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  p.  103.  ^  Vide  supra,  pp.  31-33. 

131 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

differed  little,  if  at  all,  from  ordinary  Hindu  pantheism, 
his  Supreme  Being  having  no  separate,  conscious  existence. 
But  so  much  was  Nanak  under  the  influence  of  Islam  that 
he  often  refers  to  God  in  terms  which  might  be  appropriately- 
used  by  a  Muhammadan  or  a  Christian.  And  he  was  so 
far  emancipated  from  the  power  of  Hindu  traditions  and 
practice  that  he  dissuaded  his  disciples  from  the  worship 
of  idols  and  the  observance  of  Hindu  religious  ceremonies. 
Born  and  reared  under  a  powerful  Muhammadan  govern- 
ment, Nanak  endeavoured,  like  his  predecessor  Kabir, 
to  assimilate  his  doctrines  to  those  of  his  masters  without 
abandoning  the  faith  of  his  fathers  ;  and  he  strove  to  con- 
ciliate the  dominant  class  by  maintaining  that  there  was 
no  material  difference  between  Hindu  and  Muslim,  this 
syncretism  being  only  too  natural  on  the  part  of  the  religious 
Hindu  in  the  face  of  the  powerful  bigotry  and  proselytising 
energy  of  the  Islamic  rulers. 

Nanak  claimed  that  the  Supreme  Being  was  his  guru, 
and  had  appointed  him  the  guru  of  mankind.  All  castes 
were  admitted  into  his  sect,  now  well  known  as  the  Sikhs 
of  the  Punjab.  One  of  his  earliest  disciples,  Mardana,  was 
a  Mussulman  by  birth. 

Nanak  was  succeeded  by  nine  gurus,  and  under  the 
last  of  these— Govind  Singh  (a.d.  1675-1708),  who 
compiled  a  second  Granth  known  as  the  Granth  of  the 
Tenth  Reign — the  peaceful  reHgion  of  Nanak  was  trans- 
formed into  a  militant  creed.  Stimulated  by  this  new 
cult,  the  Sikhs  developed  later  on  into  a  powerful  political 
organisation.  This  remarkable  metamorphosis  was  due  to 
resentment  at  the  religious  persecutions  and  oppressive 
exactions  carried  on  by  the  Muhammadan  rulers  of  India, 
and  was  powerfully  aided  by  the  favourable  opportunity 
for  revenge,  loot,  and  self -aggrandisement  afforded  by  the 
very  palpable  decay  of  the  Muslim  power  in  India  during 
the  eighteenth  century. 

The  Sikhs  of  Govind  Singh  are  permitted  to  eat  flesh, 
though  not  beef,  and  may  drink  ardent  spirits  and  bhang, 
but  are  prohibited  from  using  tobacco  in  any  form. 

On  the  whole,  Sikhism  seems  to  have  been  an  effort, 
prolonged,  but  by  no  means  quite  successful,  to  do  without 

132 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

the  gods  of  the  Hindu  Pantheon  and  their  Brahman 
priesthood,  to  discard  idolatry,  and  to  shake  off  the  fetters 
of  caste.  At  the  period  of  its  greatest  divergence  from 
Hinduism,  the  Sikh  sect  stands  forth  as  a  democratic 
brotherhood,  beheving  in  a  sort  of  vague  Indian  pantheism 
disguised  as  monotheism.  Now,  however,  many  shades 
of  opinion  prevail  amongst  the  Sikhs,  and  many  very 
Hindu  practices  find  favour  amongst  a  large  proportion 
of  the  brotherhood, 

Sikhism  has  given  rise  to  several  mendicant  orders, 
and  a  goodly  number  of  flourishing  monasteries  known  as 
Akharas,  belonging  to  the  sect,  exist  in  the  Punjab  and 
Northern  India. 

Dadu  (a.d.  1550-1600). — Within  a  few  years  of  the 
death  of  Baba  Nanak,  a  very  low-caste  man  of  the  name  of 
Dadu  founded  in  Rajputana  a  new  non-idolatrous  sect  of 
Rama  worshippers,  and  after  his  mission  on  earth  was 
completed  he  ascended  to  heaven  from  the  hill  Naraina  in 
Jeypore  territory,  where  stands  the  principal  monastery  of 
his  sect,  known  as  the  Dadu  Panthis. 

Ram  Cham,  belonging  to  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  was  another  reformer  who,  resolutely  opposing  idol 
worship,  embroiled  himself  with  the  Brahmans,  and  was  in 
consequence  subjected  to  much  persecution  at  their  hands. 
The  Ram  Sanehi  sect  founded  by  him  is  of  austere  habits, 
and  freely  admits  to  its  fellowship  Hindus  of  all  castes. 
All  members  of  the  sect  are  vegetarians,  and  are  required 
to  abstain  from  intoxicants  as  well  as  from  narcotic  drugs 
and  tobacco. 

Rama  is  the  special  god  of  the  sect.  Both  men  and 
women  take  part  daily  in  his  worship,  though  the  two 
sexes  are  not  permitted  to  do  so  at  the  same  time.  The 
religious  services  of  the  Ram  Sanehis  are  said  to  have  a 
strong  resemblance  to  those  of  the  Mussulmans. 

Two  mendicant  orders  belong  to  the  sect,  which  has 
its  principal  monastery  at  Shahpur  in  Rajputana. 

In  addition  to  the  number  of  examples  of  Hindu 
heresiarchs    already    given    in    this    volume,    one    female 

133 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

sect  -  founder,  the   Rajput   princess   Mirabai,  may   also   be 
mentioned. 

Of  this  lady  it  is  related  in  the  Bhakta  mala^  that 
on  account  of  her  refusal  to  abandon  the  worship  of  Krishna, 
at  the  command  of  her  husband,  the  Rana  of  Udaypur,  she 
was  expelled  from  the  royal  palace,  but  in  consideration  of 
her  rank  was  allowed  a  separate  residence.  The  worship  of 
Ranachor,  a  form  of  the  youthful  Krishna,  was  the  one 
which  had  captivated  the  imagination  of  the  princess,  and, 
as  a  reward  for  her  devotion  to  the  divine  object  of  her 
adoration,  she  was  eventually,  in  a  miraculous  manner, 
received  into  the  image  of  her  especial  deity,  and  thus,  in 
appropriate  fashion,  disappeared  from  the  world. 

An  idea  of  the  transcendental  views  held  by  this 
lady  (and  by  Krishna-Radha  worshippers  generally)  may 
be  gathered  from  the  following  anecdote  told  of  her  : — 
"  AVhen  Mirabai,  the  Rajput  princess,  who  left  everything 
for  her  love  for  Krishna,  visited  the  renowned  Rup 
Goswami  of  Brindaban,  one  of  the  chief  hhaktas  of  Sree 
Gauranga  (Chaitanya),  Rup,  an  ascetic  of  the  highest 
order,  refused  to  see  her  on  the  ground  that  he  was  pre- 
cluded from  seeing  the  face  of  a  woman.  As  a  fact,  Mirabai 
was  a  most  beautiful  young  princess,  and  he  had  not  much 
faith  in  her  pretensions.  Hearing  the  message  of  Rup, 
Mirabai  replied,  '  Is  he  then  a  male  ?  If  so,  he  has  no 
access  to  Brindaban.  Males  cannot  enter  there,  and,  if 
the  goddess  of  Brindaban  comes  to  know  of  his  presence, 
she  will  turn  him  out.  For  does  not  the  great  Goswami 
know  that  there  is  but  one  male  in  existence,  namely,  my 
beloved  Kanai  Lai  (an  endearing  name  of  Krishna),  and 
that  all  besides  are  females  ?  '  Rup  now  understood 
that  Mirabai  was  really  a  staunch  devotee  of  Krishna, 
and  so  agreed  to  see  her."  ^ 

What  peculiar  religious  customs  spring  from  such 
opinions,  the  following  extract  shows  : — 

"  Sukee-hJiava. — These  mendicants,  born  in  the  western 

^  See  Profeseor  Wilson'B  Sketch  of  the  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  pp. 
85-87. 

^  Lord  Gauranga,  or  Salvation  for  All,  by  Shishir  Kumar  Gliosc,  vol.  i. 
Introduction,  p.  xl.  (Calcutta,  1897). 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

provinces  and  composed  of  Bramhuns  and  other  castes, 
are  followers  of  Krishna,  and,  though  men,  put  on  the 
dress  and  ornaments  and  assume  the  manners  of  women, 
professing  the  same  attachment  to  Krishna  as  the  milk- 
maids are  said  to  have  had  when  Krishna  was  on  earth. 
They  paint  and  adorn  with  flowers  an  image  of  Krishna, 
and  dancing  around  it,  in  imitation  of  the  milkmaids, 
worship  it  daily."  ^ 

A  small  sect  called  Mirabais,  acknowledging  the  leader- 
ship of  the  Rajput  princess,  is  said  to  be  still  in  existence 
in  Western  India. 

Taking  a  retrospective  survey  of  Neo-Brahmanism  as 
sketched  in  the  foregoing  pages,  one  cannot  help  being 
impressed  with  the  following  facts.  Although  the  worship 
of  Vishnu  under  the  forms  of  Krishna  and  Rama  spread 
far  and  wide,  although  the  primitive  phallic  cult  of  Siva 
also  flourished  contemporaneously,  although  men  in  their 
anxiety  paid  homage  impartially  at  the  shrines  of  both  these 
gods  of  the  Hindu  triad,  and  in  Eastern  India  invoked, 
with  many  strange  rites,  the  goddesses  Durga  and  Kali, 
yet  the  Muhammadan  Empire  went  on  extending  irresistibly, 
until  at  length  it  became  paramount  in  India.  Islam, 
indeed,  with  its  uncompromising  monotheism  and  its  abhor- 
rence of  idolatry,  made  itself  powerfully  felt  throughout  the 
land,  while  numbers  of  the  subjugated  became. converts  to 
the  vigorously  proselytising  creed  of  the  conquerors,  under 
which  invidious  distinctions  of  caste  were  not  maintained. 

Amidst  the  wreck  of  Hindu  States  the  question  of  the 
preservation  of  Hinduism  itself  became  of  vital  importance. 
Diverse  methods  of  achieving  this  great  object  naturally 
suggested  themselves  to  differently  constituted  minds. 
Hinduism  might  be  made  softly  alluring,  by  some  means 
or  other,  so  as  still  to  retain  the  allegiance  of  a  disillusioned 
race,  no  longer  confident  in  the  support  of  its  gods  and 
its  arrogant  priesthood  ;  or  the  national  rehgion  might  be 
reformed  to  suit  the  new  order  of  ideas  awakened  by  the 
presence  and  claims  of  Islam  ;  or  it  might  be  modified  so 
as  to  resemble,  outwardly  at  least,  the  Muslim  faith,  and 
thus  avoid  contempt  and  evade  persecution. 

1  Ward's  Hindus,  p.  296. 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

Three  distinct  effects  arose  from  the  circumstances  and 
conditions  to  which  attention  has  just  been  drawn. 

1.  The  rise  of  sects  combining  the  worship  of  Radha, 
the  favourite  mistress  of  Krishna,  with  that  of  her  divine 
lover — a  combination  too  naturally  suggestive  of  sensuality, 
and  one  lending  itself  readily  to  the  establishment  of  prac- 
tices calculated  to  attract  followers  by  their  veiled  or  open 
immorality.  To  this  class  belong  the  sects  of  the  Nimats, 
the  Radha  Vallabhis  (sixteenth  century),  and  the  Chaitanites 
(sixteenth  century)  of  Bengal. 

2.  The  appearance  of  conciliatory  syncretic  Hindu 
sects  intended,  at  any  rate  by  their  original  founders,  to 
bridge  over  the  differences  between  the  religions  of  the 
Hindus  and  their  Muslim  rulers — to  reconcile  them,  in 
fact.  In  this  category  may  be  placed  the  sects  formed 
in  Northern  India  by  Kabir  (sixteenth  century)  and  by 
Guru  Nanak  (sixteenth  century),  though  the  latter  sect  was 
under  subsequent  spiritual  leaders  developed  along  very 
different  lines  from  those  adopted  by  the  founder. 

3.  The  formation  of  Hindu  sects  opposed  to  idolatry  : 
for  example,  the  Ram- worshipping  Dadu  Panthis  (a.d. 
1550-1600)  and  Ram  Sanehis  (a.d.  1718),  both  of 
Rajputana. 

During  the  decay  of  the  Muhammadan  and  the  rise  of 

the  British  power  in  India,  the  process  of  sect-formation 

has  been  as  active  as  ever.     New  and  potent  factors,  such 

as    Western    education    and    aggressive    Christianity,  have 

come  into  play  in  the  disintegration  of  immemorial  beliefs 

and  practices  and  the  formation  of  new  ones.      None  of 

all  the  main  t3^es  of  post-Buddhist  Hinduism  can  be  said 

to   be    actually   dying   out ;     indeed,  under   the    complete 

religious  freedom  of  British  rule  they  all  appear  to  give 

signs   of   renewed   vitality.      Many   recent   sects   are   of   a 

decidedly  objectionable  type  ;    but,  whether  respectable  or 

otherwise,   nearly  all   furnish   a   contingent   of  mendicants 

to  swell  the  hordes  of  the  privileged  itinerants  who  swarm 

over  the  country. 

Under  the  new  conditions  of  life  obtaining  in  India, 
and  in  response  to  intellectual  stimuU  of  European  origin, 
there    have    recently  appeared  in  our  own    time    certain 

136 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

small  theistic,  non-idolatrous  sects,  like  the  Brahmo-samaj^ 
whose  chief  prophet,  the  eloquent  Keshub  Chunder  Sen, 
was  a  sudra  ;  and  the  Arya-samaj,  founded  by  a  Mahratta 
Brahman  named  Dayanand,  a  man  of  commanding  talents 
and  personality.  The  former  of  these  sects  is  well  known 
in  Europe  and  America,  through  its  founder  and  some 
of  its  prominent  apostles  having  visited  the  West  and 
lectured  there ;  but  the  Brahmo  cult  has  still  a  quite 
insignificant  following,  perhaps  because,  by  denying  the 
authority  of  the  Vedas,  it  has  practically  drifted  away 
from  Hinduism.  The  Arya-samaj,  though  hardly  a 
purely  religious  sect,  adhered  to  the  Vedas,  as  interpreted 
by  Dayanand ;  but  it  favours  certain  practices  which  are 
certain,  in  the  course  of  time,  to  undermine  its  morals, 
though  possibly  these  very  practices  might  prove  an  attrac- 
tion and  help  to  swell  the  numbers  of  the  new  sect. 

It  remains  to  note  the  fact  that  political  circumstances 
and  national  aspirations  have  also,  in  recent  times,  called 
into  being  the  dangerous  sect  of  the  Kukas  in  the  Punjab, 
and  have  led  quite  lately  to  the  very  significant  deification 
in  his  own  country  of  the  Mahratta  chieftain  Seva-ji 
(a.d.  1627-80),  famous  for  his  successes  against  the  Mu- 
hammadans,  and  for  the  establishment  of  the  practical 
supremacy  of  the  Mahrattas  in  Southern  India.^ 

And  so  the  kaleidoscope  of  Indian  religious  sects 
presents  at  every  succeeding  period  new  groups  and  com- 
binations. For  each  sect,  old  or  new,  it  is  an  absolute 
necessity  that  it  should  have  its  own  temples,  to  accommo- 
date the  material  representations  of  its  chosen  divinities 
and  to  lodge  the  priests  who  conduct  the  worship  of  the 
idols  and  accept  the  gifts  presented  to  them.  Moreover, 
if  the  sect  is  to  spread  and  flourish,  it  must  have  its  own 
missionaries,  who,  in  conformity  with  immemorial  Indian 
traditions,  should  be  wandering  ascetics.  Nor  could  it 
have   been   difiicult,   at   any    time,    to    find    such   men   in 

^  Under  the  auspices  of  certain  Indian  politicians,  the  Sivaji  festival 
was,  for  the  first  time,  celebrated  in  Calcutta  in  June  1902,  and  was  the 
occasion  for  many  significant  speeches  by  no  means  calculated  to  promote 
harmonious  relations  between  the  rulers  and  the  ruled  in  India. — Vide 
The  Englishman,  Calcutta,  26th  June  1902. 

137 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

abundance  owing  to  the  many  causes  predisposing  to  world- 
weariness,  renunciation,  and  abstention  from  labour  which 
have  been  ever  present  in  India. 

Hinduism  is  certainly  very  old,  and  its  foundations  lie 
deep  down  in  the  hearts  of  the  Indian  people,  but  even 
my  brief  sketch  of  its  history  must  have  made  it  abun- 
dantly clear  that,  contrary  to  the  prevailing  impression, 
it  has  undergone  vast  changes  in  the  course  of  time,  and 
that  it  is  still  as  plastic  as  of  old,  because  neither  now  nor 
at  any  previous  stages  of  its  development,  especially  since 
the  Buddhist  revolt,  has  it  been  subject  to  that  organised 
control  of  a  centralised  authority  which  circumstances 
rendered  possible  in  Europe  ;  hence  new  sects  have  arisen, 
and  have  expanded  in  a  way  which  was  not  tolerated 
by  the  strong  arm  of  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  in 
Christendom. 

The  Aryan  nature -gods  have  certainly  long  ceased  to 
be  worshipped.  Indra,  Kuvera,  Yama,  Varuna,  Garuda, 
and  Soma  have  likewise  fallen  into  the  background  of 
oblivion.  It  is  true  that  the  Brahmans  have  managed  to 
secure  long-continued  veneration  for  their  tutelary  deity 
Siva,  but  the  people  have  enthroned  two  Kshatriya  heroes, 
Krishna  and  Rama,  as  the  especial  objects  of  their  venera- 
tion ;  the  former,  for  many  reasons,  being  the  more  popular 
of  the  two,  and  likely,  in  one  aspect  or  other,  to  maintain 
his  place  for  ages  to  come  in  the  hearts  of  the  Hindus. 

With  the  striking  changes  which  the  religion  of  the 
Hindus  has  steadily  undergone  there  have  been  concomitant 
mutations  in  the  attitude  of  the  worshippers  towards  the 
unseen  powers. 

Within  the  pale  of  Brahmanism  the  worshipper  relied 
on  complicated  rites  and  ceremonies,  on  sacrifices,  spells, 
pilgrimages,  and  almsgiving — all  these  being  conducted  by 
or  under  the  strict  guidance  solely  of  the  Brahman  priest- 
hood, who  practically  controlled  his  destinies,  and  without 
whom  there  was  no  possible  salvation.  Buddhism,  reject- 
ing such  sacerdotal  aids,  required  its  followers  to  trust  to 
complete  detachment  from  the  world  as  the  safest  and 
surest  means  of  securing  happiness  here  and  spiritual 
deliverance  hereafter ;   and  Buddhism  expected  each  man 

138 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

or  woman  to  work  out  his  or  her  own  emancipation.  In 
modern  Hinduism,  which  succeeded  Buddhism,  the  Brah- 
mans  never  recovered  such  an  ascendant  position  as  they 
had  enjoyed  in  earher  days,  for  the  ascetic  saints  and  sages 
had  acquired  too  much  consideration  and  authority  to  be 
suppressed  or  set  aside.  And  at  the  same  time  new  ideas 
had  taken  hold  of  men's  minds,  causing  them  to  place  less 
rehance  than  of  yore  in  the  old  ceremonial  rites,  and  leaving 
them  to  place  their  trust  and  hope  in  passionate  devotion 
to  or  faith  in  a  chosen  god.  A  great  and  mighty  change 
this,  a  momentous  revolution.  But  since  for  most  men 
the  divinity  is  too  high,  too  remote,  too  transcendent  for 
this  devotion,  the  Hindu  has  in  many  cases  accepted  as 
substitute  for  the  chosen  deity  his  supposed  representative, 
his  very  incarnation,  the  living  guru,  the  saintly  sadhu 
to  whom  he  actually  pays  his  adoration.^  Only  the  wilfully 
blind  could  fail  to  see  the  parallelism  between  these  develop- 
ments and  those  which  have  occurred  in  other  more  familiar 
creeds. 

In  respect  to  that  most  important  subject,  caste,  it  may 
be  said  that  the  appearance  of  each  new  sect  has  been 
signalised  by  a  renewed  struggle  against  the  disabilities 
imposed  by  caste,  but  with  little  practical  result  beyond 
the  formation  of  new  castes  or  sub-castes  ;  which  is  by  no 
means  to  be  wondered  at,  since  the  time-honoured  system 
has,  naturally,  the  unflinching,  whole-hearted  support  of 
the  superior  classes,  and  particularly  of  the  still  powerful 
Brahmanical  priesthood. 

Recently  that  most  intellectual  of  rulers,  the  German 
Emperor,  was  reported  to  have  said  "  that  the  germ  of 
every  sectarian  movement  is  political,  so  is  the  germ  of 
every  political  movement  a  question  of  the  material  welfare 
of  the  people  ;  "  and  there  is  profound  truth  in  this  state- 
ment. How  frequently  in  Europe  and  elsewhere  unfavour- 
able political  conditions  have  led  to  general  despondency, 
and    thereafter    to    religious    revivals    and    the    birth    of 

^  How  completely  even  a  highly  educated  and  practical  man  can  sub- 
ordinate himself  to  a  living  guru  is  well  exemplified  in  the  case  of  an  ex- 
Postmaster- General  of  the  North-West  Provinces,  cited  in  Professor  Max 
Miiller'8  Life  and  Sayings  of  Bama  Krishna,  pp.  20-22. 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

heretical  sects  or  new  monastic  orders,  is  a  matter  of  history. 
The  fact  being  admitted  that  the  poHtical  background  of 
each  period  cannot  but  colour  the  minds  of  the  populace 
and  its  leaders,  it  becomes  a  factor  of  too  much  importance 
to  be  passed  over  entirely  ;  hence  the  place  given  to  it  in 
the  foregoing  brief  outline  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  modern 
Hinduism  seems  to  need  no  special  justification. 

As  supplementary  to  the  above  condensed  account  of 
the  appearance  from  time  to  time  of  new  gods  and  novel 
conceptions  in  Hinduism,  and  of  the  genesis  of  the  more 
prominent  sects  under  the  leadership  of  religious  reformers, 
the  important  fact  must  not  be  overlooked  that,  whatever 
the  doctrinal  views  and  ultimate  hopes  of  subtle  theologians 
and  earnest  religionists  may  have  been,  there  have  never,  at 
any  period,  been  wanting  multitudes  of  Hindu  people  indis- 
posed to  undergo  austerities  or  personal  discomforts  of  any 
kind,  and  yet  none  the  less  desirous  of  securing  a  prosperous 
time  in  this  life,  a  better  time  in  the  next  mundane  existence, 
and  eventually  also  eons  of  bliss  in  the  various  heavens  of 
the  gods.  And  this  worldly-minded  class  has,  on  account 
of  its  wealth  and  influence,  been  too  important  and  useful 
a  factor  in  the  community  to  be  really  slighted  by  the 
prophets  and  the  priesthood,  however  much  such  professors 
of  religion  might  rail  against  riches  as  such.  Renunciation, 
as  preached  by  most  founders  of  sects  or  religions,  if  univer- 
sally practised,  could  obviously  only  end  in  national  ex- 
tinction ;  hence  it  follows  that,  to  preclude  such  a  disaster, 
there  must  always  be  a  class  of  workers  whose  special  function 
it  is  to  produce  and  provide  the  necessaries  of  life  for  them- 
selves and  also  for  those  who,  abstaining  from  all  labour, 
desire  to  live  on  alms. 

And  indeed,  wherever  religion  recommends  or  enjoins 
renunciation,  it  also  proclaims,  with  no  uncertain  voice,  that 
liberality  to  the  poor — meaning  more  particularly  the  re- 
ligious poor — and  the  priestly  classes  will  be  unstintingly 
rewarded  here  and  hereafter.  Mendicity,  on  the  colossal 
scale  in  which  it  has  existed  in  India  time  out  of  mind, 
could  only  be  possible  on  the  condition  of  widespread  and 
whole-hearted  charitableness  on  the  part  of  laymen  of  all 
classes ;   hence  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  charity  lauded  in 

140 


SUCCESSIVE  PHASES  OF  MODERN  HINDUISM 

the  Hindu  Scriptures  as  the  special  virtue  of  this  present 
age,   known  to  Hindus  as  the  Kali   Yuga. 

"  In  the  Krita  Yuga,''^  says  Vrihaspati,  "  the  prevailing 
virtue  is  declared  to  be  religious  austerity  ;  in  the  Trita, 
divine  knowledge  ;  in  the  Divapara,  sacrifices  ;  and  in  the 
Kali  Yuga,  charity,  compassion,  and  restraint  of  passions. 

"  Manu,  however,  beginning  with  the  use  of  almost 
identical  words,  constitutes  charity  alone  the  supreme 
virtue  in  the  degenerate  Kali   Yuga — 

"  '  In  the  Krita  Yuga  the  prevailing  virtue  is  declared  to 
be  rehgious  austerity ;  in  the  Trita,  divine  knowledge  ;  in 
the  Divaparaj  sacrifices  ;  in  the  Kali  Yuga,  charity  alone.'  "  ^ 

^  The  Hindu  Law  of  Endowments,  Tagore  Law  Lectures,  1892,  by 
Pandit  Prannath  Saraswati,  M.A.  and  B.L.,  p.  15  (Thacker,  Spink,  & 
Co.,  Calcutta). 


141 


CHAPTER  VIII 


HINDU    ASCETIC   SECTS    AND    THEIR   SUBDIVISIONS 

Section  I. — Introductory  Remarks — The  Multiplicity  of  Hindu  Sects 
by  no  means  Abnormal — Jain  Monks  or  Yatis  interviewed — Their 
Opinions  and  Habits. 


HERE  are,  as  might 
have  been  expected, 
a  large  number  of  Hindu 
sects.  Professor  Wilson 
gives  a  list  of  forty-three 
of  them,  and  adds  that  in 
popular  works  on  the  sub- 
ject ninety-six  heresies  are 
ordinarily  recognised.  It 
is  needless  to  say  that  even 
this  figure  would  not  nearly 
represent  1 1  the  actual  num- 
ber existing  at  the  present 
time.  Amongst  the  sects 
studied  and  described  by 
Europeans  are  some  whose"'tenets  and  practices  have  filled 
pious  Westerns  with  supercilious  wonderment  or  holy 
horror  ;  but,  if  we  are  to  be  just,  it  must  be  admitted  that 
such  abnormalities  may  be  found,  if  looked  for,  in  the 
by-paths  of  every  religion,  not  excepting  the  Christian. 
All  religions  in  the  course  of  their  existence  give  rise  to  a 
multitude  of  heretical  separatists.  In  the  case  of  Chris- 
tianity, heresies  appeared  from  apostolic  times,  and  some 
sects  holding  opinions  entirely  subversive  of  morality  as 
we  understand  it  came  into  existence  very  early  indeed  : 

142 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

for  example,  the  Antinomians,  wlio  held  that  the  moral 
law  was  not  binding  upon  Christians.  Sects  possessed 
of  little  inherent  vitality  died  of  natural  exhaustion,  but 
many,  both  in  the  early  centuries  and  in  the  Middle  Ages, 
such  as  the  Gnostics,  Manichseans,  Nestorians,  Albigenses, 
Hussites,  and  others,  were  forcibly  and  relentlessly  sup- 
pressed by  Church  and  State  authority.  Since  the  successful 
revolt  against  the  power  of  the  Papacy  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  a  very  considerable  number  of  dissenting  Christian 
sects,  some  with  ideas  in  regard  to  political  and  sexual 
morality  far  removed  from  those  ordinarily  accepted  by  the 
established  Churches,  have  appeared  and  secured  a  footing 
for  themselves.^ 

Similarly,  Hinduism  in  its  long  history  has  produced 
a  great  variety  of  peculiar  sects,  and,  as  it  differs  from 
Christianity  in  not  having  had  a  powerful,  well-organised, 
and  resolute  central  authority  to  guide  for  centuries  its 
theological  development,  the  heresies — often  characterised 
by  great  freedom  and  originality  of  doctrine  and  much 
latitude  in  practice — ^have,  in  most  cases,  been  able  to  run 
a  normal  coarse,  and  have  sometimes  grown  to  be  almost 
semi-independent  religions. 

It  seems  superfluous  to  state  that  the  foregoing  remarks 
and  comparisons  are  merely  intended  to  remove  the  erroneous 
impression  which  prevails,  rather  widely,  that  there  is 
something  abnormal  in  the  multiplicity  of  religious  sects  to 
be  found  in  India. 

Amongst  the  still  existing  Indian  sects,  the  Jains,  so 
interesting  in  themselves,  and  also  as  a  link  with  Buddhism, 
claim  precedence  of  attention.  This  ancient  sect, — ^it  is 
hardly  an  independent  religion  now, — whose  origin  is  perhaps 
antecedent  to  that  of  Buddhism,  and  therefore  may  date 
back  earlier  than  the  sixth  century- B.C.,  exhibits  much  of 
the  spirit,  the  precepts,  and  the  discipline  of  monasticism 
as  established  or  organised  by  Gautama  Buddha,  a  full 
description  of  which  may  be  read  in  Mr.  Spence  Hardy's 
comprehensive  work  entitled  Eastern  Monachism.    As,  how- 

^  Amongst  sects  of  quite  recent  date  originating  in  Protestant  countries 
may  be  named  the  Swedenborgians,  Mormons,  Shakers,  Irvingites,  Darby- 
it-es,  Sandemftnians,  Perfectionists,  Agapgjaonites,  and  Christian  Scientists. 

H3 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

ever,  I  do  not  desire  to  deal  with  the  Jain  system  in  any 
detail,  may  I  invite  the  reader  to  make  the  acqiiaintance 
of  the  Jains — monks,  nuns,  and  lajnnen — by  following  me 
as  I  describe  for  him  my  impressions  of  certain  religious 
meetings  of  that  most  ancient  sect  held  in  the  autumn  of 
1898,  at  which  I  had  the  privilege  of  being  present. 

Jain  Monks  or  Yatis. — A  few  high  steps  rising  from 
the  mud  of  the  narrow  overcrowded  lane  brought  me  into 
a  dark  hall,  which  gave  access  to  a  straight  and  steep 
flight  of  brick  stairs  not  a  yard  wide  between  its  bounding 
walls.  I  ascended  these  stairs,  and,  after  passing  through 
a  low  restricted  doorway  at  the  top,  found  myself  on  the 
flat  terrace  roof  of  the  main  building — an  ordinary  house 
such  as  may  be  found  in  the  native  quarters  of  any  city 
in  Upper  India.  This  flat  roof,  however,  had  been  partially 
built  upon  along  three  sides,  the  rooms  thus  formed  being 
all  doorless  and  practically  open  towards  the  central  un- 
covered space.  The  effect  was  as  if  three  verandahs  opened 
upon  an  ample  central  hypsethral  court.  For  privacy  and 
convenience  in  a  hot  tropical  climate,  nothing  could  be  more 
admirably  conceived.  In  one  of  the  rooms,  or  verandahs, 
which  might  have  been  eighteen  or  twenty  feet  long  and  eight 
or  ten  feet  wide,  there  were  assembled  a  number  of  weU-to-do 
persons — merchants,  shopkeepers,  and  others — sitting  upon 
cotton  carpets  and  floorcloths.  At  one  end  was  a  raised 
platform  made  of  rough  planks,  and  on  it  was  seated  an 
elderly  Jain  monk  of  some  importance,  with  two  or  three 
others  in  attendance.  I  had  been  expected,  so  a  small 
cane  chair  covered  with  a  white  cloth  had,  with  thoughtful 
kindness,  been  placed  for  me  near  the  senior  monk,  on  his 
right  hand,  neither  on  the  platform  nor  under  the  roof, 
but  just  outside. 

The  whole  of  the  platform  was  not  of  uniform  height ; 
the  part  where  the  principal  monk  sat  was  higher  by  a 
few  inches  than  the  part  occupied  by  the  juniors.  There 
is  no  equahty  in  this  world  ;  there  never  was,  and  there 
never  will  be  !  No  furniture  could  be  seen  in  the  room, 
but,  as  a  concession  to  the  imperious  demands  of  the  new 
age,  a  big-faced  clock  occupied  a  conspicuous  place  on  the 
wall.     Behind   the   monks,   and   partially   concealed   from 

144 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

view  by  the  platform  on  which  they  sat,  was  a  group  of 
women,  amongst  whom  were  at  least  forty  nmis.  The 
monks  presented  a  peculiar  appearance.  Clean-shaven 
were  they  all — head,  face,  and  eyebrows.  Each  man  wore 
a  sort  of  bib  of  three  or  four  folds  of  white  cloth,  not  under 
his  chin,  but  over  his  nose  and  mouth,  held  in  place  by  strings 
passed  above  the  ears  and  tied  behind  the  head.  These 
were  characteristic  outward  symbols  of  the  most  important 
of  Jain  tenets,  —  absolute  respect  for  life  in  all  its 
forms,  —  and  are  worn  in  order  to  obviate  the  possible 
accidental  and  unintentional  destruction  of  even  the 
minutest  organisms  by  being  drawn  into  the  nose  or 
mouth  in  the  ordinary  process  of  respiration.  Hence 
they  are  really  life  protectors.  But  an  inconvenient  article 
like  this  could  be  used  by  ordinary  people  only  on  purely 
ceremonial  occasions,  and  not  always  then,  for  several 
men  in  the  room,  instead  of  wearing  their  bibs,  carried 
them  in  their  hands.  A  picture  of  a  Jain  yati  appears  at 
the  commencement  of  the  chapter. 

The  nuns,  of  course,  had  their  mouths  and  noses  covered, 
and  were,  besides,  so  completely  veiled  as  to  show  little  of 
their  faces  but  a  pair  of  eyes. 

Only  the  principal  monk  spoke,  and  fortunately  he 
was  by  no  means  disinclined  to  be  communicative.  He 
interested  me  greatly  by  his  serene  yet  pathetic  gravity 
and  a  gentle  dignity  which  seemed  to  pervade  his  every 
word  and  movement.  He  sat  cross-legged  on  the  platform, 
clothed  in  two  white  cotton  sheets — one  round  his  loins 
and  the  other  about  his  shoulders.  No  beads,  bangles,  or 
armlets,  nor  marks  of  any  kind,  either  ornamented  or  dis- 
figured his  person.  The  two  cotton  sheets  were,  as  he 
told  me,  all  the  clothes  he  might  wear  or  possess,  with  the 
exception  of  half  a  blanket  in  the  winter  time.  Many 
other  interesting  particulars  about  his  order  did  the  vener- 
able yati  communicate  to  me  ;  and,  though  these  may 
be  found  in  European  books  on  Jainism,  1  was  pleased  to 
receive  them  from  him,  and  I  reproduce  them  here. 

During  the  four  months  of  the  rainy  season  known  as 
the  chamasa,  the  Jain  monk  may  seek  shelter  and  repose 
in  a  dharmsala  of  his  order,  which  is  a  guest-house 
K  145 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

established  by  lay  Jains  for  tbe  accommodation  of  the 
monks ;  but  for  eight  months  in  every  year  he  must 
wander  over  the  country  barefooted  and  bareheaded,  as 
friars  of  his  order  have  done  since  at  least  five  hundred 
years  before  the  birth  of  Christ.  He  may  on  no  account 
avail  himself  of  any  mode  of  conveyance,  whether  horse, 
carriage,  boat,  or  railway  car  ;  nor  may  he  ever  sleep  in  a 
bed.  And  year  after  year  they  wander  about,  these  gentle 
monks,  without  staff  or  scrip,  armed  only  with  soft  besoms 
of  cotton  threads  to  tenderly  brush  away  minute  insects 
that  might  happen  to  be  in  danger  of  destruction  under 
the  pressure  of  their  persons  whenever  fatigue  necessitates 
some  rest  for  their  wearied  limbs.  Many  of  these  besoms 
were  in  evidence  amongst  the  audience,  and  each  monk 
present  was  provided  with  one  for  his  own  especial  use. 
The  only  other  property  any  of  these  men  may  possess 
is  a  wooden  alms-bowl  in  which  to  receive  food.  Monks 
who  can  read  may  carry  about  with  them  their  sacred 
books  in  the  Prakrit  character.  Some  of  these  books  were 
shown  to  me,  beautiful  specimens  of  caligraphy,  all  in 
detached  leaves  protected  by  a  couple  of  thin  wooden 
boards.  Metal  must  on  no  account  be  touched  by  the 
monks,  except  perhaps  in  the  form  of  a  needle,  which  may 
be  borrowed  when  required,  but  must  be  returned  the  same 
day  before  the  sun  goes  down. 

Since  the  most  important  guiding  principle  of  their 
lives  is  to  avoid  hurting,  leave  alone  killing,  any  living 
thing,  it  is  obvious  that  they  do  not  partake  of  flesh  meat 
of  any  kind  whatever  ;  but  they  carry  their  self-denial 
further,  for  they  never  taste  fruit  and  drink  no  wine  of  any 
sort.  From  sunset  to  sunrise  they  must,  on  no  pretext 
whatever,  eat  or  drink  anything.  Jain  sadhus  should  never 
bathe,  for  if  they  draw  water  from  tank  or  well  they  are 
sure  to  be  the  cause  of  death  or  suffering  to  hving  creatures. 
They  may  not  drink  any  water  but  what  has  been  used  for 
culinary  purposes  :  for  example,  water  in  which  rice  or 
vegetables  have  been  boiled,  or  warm  water  used  for  rinsing 
out  cooking-pots.  Such  water  was  not  drawn  for  them,  or 
stored  for  them ;  it  had  been  iised  already,  so  the  act  of 
drinking  it  could  bring  no  sin  to  them.     They  may  even 

146 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

use  such  water  for  sponging  themselves.  That  is  the 
nearest  approach  to  a  bath  that  is  permissible  under  any 
circumstances. 

Jain  monks  are  not  to  Hght  a  fire,  for  fear  of  kiUing 
any  living  thing  that  may  be  lodging  in  the  fuel. 

When  engaged  on  their  annual  tramp  the  monks  go 
to  the  houses  of  Hindus,  but  preferably  to  those  of  their 
own  sect,  generally  known  as  Bhabras,  where  they  ask  for 
a  bit  of  bread  which  may  be  over  from  the  last  meal  and 
about  to  be  thrown  away. 

The  lay  members  of  the  sect  loyally  support  the 
wandering  monks  and  nuns,  some  curious  rules  regulating 
the  intercourse  between  them.  One  of  these  ascetics 
visiting  the  house  of  a  lay  member  may  enter  boldly 
without  announcing  his  or  her  presence,  and  may  help 
himself  to  what  food  is  available ;  but  if  the  fire  is  ahght 
in  the  room  the  ascetic  should  take  nothing,  and  so  also 
when  the  pots  and  pans  happen  to  be  in  contact  with  one 
another. 

Women  must  on  no  account  be  touched  by  Jain  monks, 
nor  even  may  their  garments  come  in  contact  without 
serious  defilement,  only  to  be  atoned  for  by  fastings  and 
penances.  And  of  course  the  same  rule  appHes,  mutatis 
mutandis,  to  the  case  of  Jain  nuns. 

When  the  Jain  monk  dies,  his  fellows  apprise  any 
members  of  their  sect  who  may  be  near  at  hand  of  the 
event ;  but  they  themselves  pass  on.  It  is  for  the  stranger 
to  cremate  or  bury  the  corpse,  or  leave  it  to  its  fate. 
What  matters  the  body  when  the  soul  has  deserted  it  ? 

There  was  a  suspicion  of  vanity  in  the  manner  of  the 
old  monk  as  he  stated  and  explained  to  me  these  facts 
about  his  order,  and  I  felt  that  he  needed  this  sustaining 
spiritual  pride  to  help  him  along  his  difiicult  way,  not  less 
difficult  for  being  voluntary.  His  personal  appearance 
gave  the  impression  of  great  suffering,  and  his  attendants 
all  had  the  same  appearance,  contrasting  y&tj  much  indeed 
with  the  ordinary  sadhus  of  other  sects.  And  wherefore 
this  austere  rejection  of  the  world's  goods,  wherefore  all 
this  self  -  inflicted  misery  ?  Is  it  to  attain  a  glorious 
heaven  hereafter,  a  blessed  existence  after  death  ?      No  ! 

147 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

It  is,  as  the  old  monk  explained  to  me,  only  to  escape 
rebirth — for  the  Jain  believes  in  the  transmigration  of 
souls — and  to  attain  eternal  rest. 

"It  is  sin  in  this  life,"  said  the  yati,  "  and  the  conse- 
quences of  sin  in  previous  existences  that  clog  and  disj&gure 
the  pure  spirit.  These  have  to  be  got  rid  of  if  the  soul  is 
to  be  set  free.  Suppose,"  he  went  on,  "  we  have  a  pot 
of  impure  butter  :  how  do  we  purify  it,  how  do  we  separate 
extraneous  stuff  from  the  pure  substance  ?  We  heat  the 
fot  which  contains  it,  and  then  the  ghee  and  the  impurities 
part  asunder,  the  latter  falling  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel. 
So  we  must  heat  {i.e.  affiict)  the  body,  which  is  the  pot 
containing  both  the  pure  spirit  and  the  attendant  impurities, 
till  on  the  furnace  of  asceticism  one  is  completely  separated 
from  the  other.  Hence  our  fastings  and  our  self-denials, 
all  to  secure  exemption  from  future  rebirths  and  to  attain 
blessed  narvana.^^  And  as  he  said  this,  the  serenity  of 
the  old  monk's  countenance  and  his  placid  eyes  seemed 
an  assurance  that  he  himself  was  well  on  the  way  to  the 
longed-for  goal. 

After  courteously  answering  my  many  questions,  the 
old  man  read  to  the  assembly  some  selections  from  the 
Jain  sacred  books  and  expounded  the  same.  He  then 
addressed  his  audience,  and  in  the  course  of  his  sermon 
plainly  indicated  his  disbelief  in  the  existence  of  God.  A 
discussion  afterwards  arose  between  him  and  a  pandit  who 
accompanied  me,  with,  as  might  have  been  expected,  a 
resultless  display  of  Sanskrit  learning  and  subtle  dialectics. 

I  am  quite  sure  that  the  uncompromising  atheism  of 
the  yati  was  not  shared  by  all  his  hearers  ;  for  a  day  or 
two  afterwards  a  Jain  layman,  who  had  been  present  at 
the  meeting,  came  to  me  and  explained  what  he,  and 
probably  a  majority  of  the  sect,  understood  to  be  the 
functions  of  God  in  the  universe.  He  said  that  the 
Creator  (evidently  accepting  His  existence)  was  by  no 
means  the  cause  of  or  responsible  for  the  wickedness  and 
suffering  in  this  world.  Each  individual  soul  received  the 
reward  or  punishment  due  to  its  own  acts.  God  through 
His  sacred  law  warned  all  men  against  the  consequences  of 
evil-doing,  and  showed  them  the  right  way ;   hut  He  did  not 

148 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

interfere  in  the  affairs  of  the  world}  Yet  the  more  He  and 
His  commandments  were  remembered  the  better  for  each 
separate  soul.  It  was  like  this  :  A  man's  house  is  on  fire, 
and  he  asleep.  A  stranger  comes  and  wakens  him  up. 
It  is  for  the  owner  now  to  see  to  the  safety  of  his  own 
property.  So  through  life  it  is  God's  warning  voice  in  the 
sacred  books  that  informs  us  that  our  house  is  on  fire.  Each 
man  must,  however,  look  to  his  own  safety  and  comfort, 
here  and  hereafter,  and  expect  no  divine  interposition  in 
his  favour. 

ReUgion  amongst  Jains  who  accept  these  views  would 
therefore  seem  to  exclude  the  idea  of  prayer  for  help.  It 
would  resolve  itself  into  a  constant  recollection  of  the 
divine  commands  and  warnings,  and,  I  have  no  doubt,  of 
appreciation  of  the  goodness  of  God  in  having  given  these 
warnings  for  the  benefit  of  short-sighted  mortals  in  their 
earthly  pilgrimage.  Still,  as  few  men  would  be  content 
with  such  a  religion,  the  Jains  have  come  to  regard  some 
twenty-four  of  their  own  saints  ^  practically  as  principal 
deities,  and  nowadays  many,  perhaps  the  major  portion 
of  the  sect,  venerate  also  the  higher  gods  of  the  Hindu 
Pantheon. 

Whatever  point  of  view  we  may  take,  it  is  still  a 
matter  for  wonder  that  the  impulse  which  set  the  Jain 
sadhus  in  motion  has  lasted  for  five-and-twenty  centuries  ; 
that  yatisj  bareheaded  and  barefooted,  naked,  or  with  just 
two  cotton  sheets  to  cover  them,  have  wandered  through 
India  for  eight  months  every  year  for  two  or  three 
thousand  years,  not  seldom  without  any  reliance  upon  or 
even  belief  in  God,  mortifying  the  frail  flesh,  and  all  this 
in  order  to  ensure  a  cessation  of  the  evils  of  rebirth — wander- 
ing ceaselessly  to  attain  rest  and  final  annihilation  ;  wander- 
ing blamelessly,  generation  after  generation,  while  dynasties 

^  It  is  not  without  interest  that  in  this  twentieth  century  the  well- 
known  surgeon.  Sir  Henry  Thompson,  has,  after  twenty  years  of  study, 
arrived  at  much  the  same  conclusions  as  my  Bhabra  friends,  viz.  that  the 
omniscient  and  omnipotent  Power  which  rules  the  universe  does  not  interfere 
in  the  affairs  of  mankind.  Only  the  great  modern  surgeon  goes  further  still, 
affirming  that  the  Omnipotent  has  left  mankind  without  the  guidance  of  any 
revelation  whatever. — The  UnTcnown  God  (Frederick  Warne^&  Co.,  1902). 

^  Known  as  Jinas  or  Tirthankaras. 

149 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

have  come  and  gone,  and  nations  have  risen,  decayed,  and 
vanished. 

And,  while  the  men  have  taken  up  the  task  of  working 
out  their  own  emancipation,   the  women  have  not  been 
backward  in  the  same  cause,  but  since  times  immemorial 
have,  always  in  couples,  wandered  Hke  the  monks  over  the 
country,  resting  like  them  during  the  chamasa  in  the  nunneries 
of  their  sect.     Many  of  the  women  who  join  this  mendi- 
cant order  have  no  doubt  done  so  in  middle  age,  disillu- 
sioned and  tired  of  life.     But  quite  young  girls  also  follow 
the  path  of  asceticism.     For  example,   I  learned,  on  the 
very  best  authority,  of  a  married  girl  of  only  sixteen  years 
of    age,   who,   having    a    strong   religious    bent,    told    her 
husband  a  short  time  previously  that  henceforth  he  would 
be  to  her  as  a  brother — a  very  significant  expression  in  the 
mouth  of  an  Indian  woman.     Her  husband  accepted  her 
decision,  and  with  her  consent  arranged  a  second  marriage. 
When   the   new   wife   arrived,    the   first   one,  prepared   to 
renounce  the  vanities  of  this  life,  sold  her  jewels  to  the 
value  of  two  thousand  rupees,  gave  a  feast  and  presents  to 
the  Brahmans,  and,  adopting  the  life  of  a  Punjni,  left  her 
home    for    ever.      The    ceremony   of    entering    the   ascetic 
order    was    attended    with    a    good    deal    of  personal    in- 
convenience.    The   girl's   luxuriant   black   hair   had   to   be 
plucked  out  by  the  roots ;    not  a  vestige  of  eyebrow  or 
eyelash  was  left.      After  that,  she  tied  a  cloth  over  her 
mouth    to    prevent    the    possible    destruction    of    minute 
organisms,  and,   armed  with   a   besom  of  cotton  threads, 
started  with  some  others  of  her  sex  on  a  round  of  pilgrim- 
ages or  wanderings. 

I  have  often  met  these  nuns  on  the  road,  and  once 
quite  fifty  of  them  marshalled  in  order.  They  must  have 
been  coming  from  or  returning  to  a  nunnery  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. 

Sometimes  the  adoption  of  the  monastic  life  is  made 
the  occasion  for  a  special  demonstration,  which  always 
includes  a  procession.  The  postulant,  or  perhaps  more 
properly  the  novice,  is  decked  out  in  the  best  of  clothes 
and  the  costliest  jewels,  and  carried  through  the  town 
in  whatever  mode  of  conveyance  he  or  she  may  select. 

150 


o 


•5. 

o 


t-l 

IZi 


1=1 


E3 

O 

o 


o 

O 
03 

P4 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

When  the  round  is  made,  the  candidate  is  taken  to  some 
appointed  place,  and  there,  after  being  disrobed  and  clad 
in  the  simple  vestments  of  the  order,  takes  the  prescribed 
vows,  and  receives  from  the  senior  sadhii  present  the 
mantra  of  the  order.  The  illustration  (Fig.  8)  represents 
such  a  procession  in  Ludhiana  on  the  occasion  of  a  Grihasti 
woman  becoming  a  Jain  nun  or  sadhui. 

The  Jains  are  divided  into  two  principal  sub-sects — 
one  called  Sivetambara  (white-robed),  the  other  Digambara 
(sky-clad — i.e.  naked).  A  yati  or  monk  of  the  latter  de- 
nomination does  not  attach  any  particular  importance  to 
the  chamar  (the  besom)  or  the  puttiJca  (mouth  veil),  and  is 
not  permitted  to  carry  an  alms-bowl.  He  must  receive 
his  food  in  the  palm  of  his  hand.^  The  Swetamharis  and 
the  Digamharis  are  each  subdivided  into  four  orders.  The 
Jain  laity  belong  almost  exclusively  to  the  trading  com- 
munity and  the  Baniya  caste. 

1  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  by  Jogendra  Nath  Bhattacharjee,  M.A., 
D.L.,  pp.  553-55  (Calcutta,  1896). 


151 


CHAPTER  Y lU— continued 


ASCETIC   SECTS   AND   THEIR   SUBDIVISIONS 


Section  II. — Principal  Hindu  Sects  :  Saivas,  Vaishnavas,  and  Sikhs — 
Particulars  regarding  Sanyasis,  Dandis,  Paramahansas,  Brahmacharis, 
Lingaits,  and  Aghoris. 


lUlfUIMJiat 


HE  Hindu  ascetic  sects  which 
make  up  the  great  bulk  of  the 
wandering  sadhus  of  India, 
more  particularly  Northern 
India,  and  which  I  propose 
to  notice  as  typical  examples, 
are  the  following  : — 


Saivas, 
Siva — 


or    worshippers    of 


1 


followers  of  Sankaracharya.^ 


1.  Sanyasis 

2.  Dandis 

3.  Paramahansas 

4.  Brahmacharis 

5.  Lingaits,  followers  of  Basava. 

6.  Aghoris. 

7.  Yogis. 

Vaishnavas,  or  worshippers  of  Vishnu — 

1.  Sri  Vaishnavas,  followers  of  Ramanuja. 

2.  Madhavas,  followers  of  Madhavacharya. 

3.  Ramanandis,  followers  of  Ramanand. 

4.  Kabir  Panthis,  followers  of  Kabir. 

5.  Ballavacharyas,  followers  of  Ballavacharya. 

6.  Chaitanites,  follov/ers  of  Chaitanya. 

^  Acharya  means  teacher,  or  more  properly  religious  teacher. 

152 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

Sikhs,  followers  of  Nanak — 

1.  Udasis. 

2.  Nirmalis. 

3.  Nihangs  or  Akalis. 

The  petty  sects  known  as  Dadhu  Panthis,  Ram  Sanehis, 
and  Mirabais,  referred  to  in  the  last  chapter,  do  not  call  for 
any  further  notice  here. 

1.  The  Sanyasis.^ 

The  followers  of  Sankara,  while  pajdng  special  honour 
to  Siva,  do  not,  as  a  rule,  reject  the  other  gods  of  the  Hindu 
Pantheon,  nor  do  they  deny  the  truth  of  the  Shastras 
generally.  Hence  the  order  is  a  rather  mixed  one,  con- 
taining many  Vaishnavas  and  even  Tantrics.  It  is  never- 
theless a  pretentious  sect,  claiming  that  its  members  are 
alone  the  true  sadhus  of  India,  probably  because  the  closing 
and  strictly  ascetic  period  in  the  lives  of  the  "  twice-born  " 
castes  (as  laid  down  in  Manu's  ordinances)  is  known  as  the 
sanyasi  stage. 

It  is  generally  held  that  the  Sanyasis  are  divided  into 
ten  sub-orders,  the  Dasnamis,  named  as  follows  : — 

(1)  Giri.  (6)  Parvat. 

(2)  Puri.  (7)  Sagar. 

(3)  Bharti.  (8)  Tirath. 

(4)  Ban.  (9)  Ashram. 

(5)  Auran  (Aranya).  (10)  Saraswati. 

But  it  would  seem  that  the  last  three  names  on  the  list  belong 
properly  to  the  order  of  the  dandis. 

All  Hindus,  even  Sudras  and  outcasts,  may  join  this 
order,  though  it  is  generally  held  that  some  of  the 
sub-orders,  such  as  the  Ban,  Auran,  and  Saraswati,  admit 
Brahmans  only.  At  the  annual  spring  saturnalia  low- 
caste  men  actually  become  Sanyasis  temporarily  during  the 
continuance  of  the  festival.     At  such  times  they  undergo 

^  It  would  appear  that  in  Benares  the  Sanyasis  are  commonly  known 
as  gosains. — Hindu  Tribes  and  Castes  as  represented  in  Benares,  by  the 
Rev.  M.  A.  Sherring,  part  iii.  chap.  ii. 

153 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

a  variety  of  self-inflicted  tortures,  sucli  as  passing  thick 
metal  skewers  through  their  tongues  or  the  flesh  of  their 
arms  or  sides. 

Such  facts  prove  conclusively  the  democratic  character 
of  the  order  and  its  freedom  from  the  caste  prejudices  of 
Hinduism.  Granting  this,  it  was  still  quite  startling  to 
read  in  the  Pioneer  of  Allahabad,  early  in  1899,  that  an 
elderly,  educated,  and  well-to-do  American  lady  of  French 
extraction  had  come  to  India  as  a  sanyasin  under  the  name 
of  Swami  Abhayanda,  having  been  admitted  to  the  Puri 
sub-order  by  Swami  Vivikananda,  the  Bengali  sadhu  who 
went  to  the  Congress  of  Religions  at  Chicago  as  the 
representative  of  the  Hindus  of  India.  The  lady,  it  would 
appear,  had  studied  the  Upanishads  and  been  converted 
to  the  pantheistic  doctrines  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy. 
"  Her  original  intention,"  says  the  Pioneer,  "  was  to  beg 
her  way  through  India.  She  had  a  basket  for  the  purpose 
instead  of  the  customary  bowl.  But  she  has  been  per- 
suaded to  relinquish  this  intention.  She  wears  a  high- 
necked  dress  of  the  plainest  possible  cut  and  of  a  yellow 
colour." 

All  Sanyasis  may  eat  together,  and  the  majority  accept 
food  from  any  Hindu.  They  may  not  partake  of  flesh 
meat  or  spirits.  They  rub  ashes  over  their  bodies,  wear 
salmon-coloured  robes,  and  a  tiger  skin  when  they  can  get 
one.  About  sect  marks  on  the  forehead  they  affect  in- 
difference, though  some  paint  an  eye,  like  the  central  eye 
of  Siva,  just  above  the  nose.  All  wear,  as  a  distinguishing 
badge,  a  necklace  of  rudraksha  berries,  or,  failing  that,  at 
least  one  such  berrv.  The  hair  of  their  heads,  and  their 
beards  also,  are  allowed  to  grow  freely.  In  their  hands 
they  usually  carry  a  conch,  or  a  pair  of  iron  tongs — the 
latter  a  very  useful  article  indeed  ;  for  whenever  they  are 
seated  they  light  a  fire  and  proceed  to  smoke  ganja} 

Sanyasis  pointedly  discard  those  outward  symbols  of 
Hinduism — the  jeneu  (sacred  thread),  and  the  chundi  or 
shikha,  a  tuft  of  hair  ordinarily  worn  on  the  crown  of 
the  head. 

When,  after  a  period  of  probation,  the  postulant  wishes 
^  The  dried  hemp-plant,  used  for  smoking  like  tobacco. 


-^ 
-Jl 

o 
O 

■o 


o 
-(J 

o 


"5 


S5 


© 


d5 

M 

W 

O 


i^ 

m 
« 


M 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

to  be  received  as  a  chelay  lie  must  bring  an  offering  including 
a  lingam  and  a  rudraksha  berry  to  the  Sanyasi  whose 
disciple  he  wishes  to  become.  Four  Sanyasis  are  required 
for  the  initiatory  ceremony.  In  their  presence  the  candi- 
date has  to  make  a  declaration  of  his  determination 
to  observe  the  rules  of  the  order,  to  renounce  the  world 
and  its  vanities — ^in  fact,  to  abandon  all  worldly  affec- 
tions and  desires ;  for  the  Sanyasi,  as  the  Bhagavad- 
gita  says,  is  one  who  "  does  not  hate  and  does  not  love 
anything." 

The  chief  of  the  four  officiating  Sanyasis — the  selected 
guru,  in  fact — whispers  into  his  ear  the  mantra  of  the  order  ; 
another  confers  a  new  name  upon  him,  together  with  a 
surname  selected  from  the  first  seven  distinctive  appella- 
tions of  the  sub-orders  given  on  a  previous  page  ;  the  third 
rubs  him  over  with  ashes ;  the  fourth  breaks  his  sacred 
thread  if  he  have  one,  and  cuts  off  his  scalp-lock,  thus 
symbolising  his  complete  severance  from  worldly  life  and 
ordinary  Hinduism. 

After  his  initiation  the  new  chela  is  expected  to  serve 
his  principal  guru  (preceptor)  for  a  time,  in  order  to  learn 
wisdom  from  him,  to  make  certain  pilgrimages,  and  to 
follow  the  rules  of  the  order.  When  the  period  of  proba- 
tion has  expired,  more  ceremonies  have  to  be  performed, 
including  the  shradh,  or  post -funeral  rites,  of  the  new 
Sanyasi. 

The  rules  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  the  Sanyasi 
have  been  variously  stated  to  me  ;  but  the  following  six 
prohibitions  and  six  commandments,  as  learned  from  one 
of  the  order,  may  be  regarded  as  a  fair  specimen  of  the 
injunctions  they  are  expected  to  observe. 

Six  Prohibitions. 

1.  Do  not  sleep  on  a  couch,  under  any  circumstances. 

2.  Do  not  wear  white  clothes. 

3.  Do  not  speak  to  or  even  think  about  women. 

4.  Do  not  sleep  during  the  daytime. 

5.  Do  not  at  any  time  ride  on  a  horse  or  other  animal, 

or  in  any  vehicle  whatsoever. 

6.  Do  not  allow  your  mind  to  be  agitated  in  any  way. 

155 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

Six  Commandments. 

1.  Leave   your    abode    only   for    the    sake  of    begging 

necessary  food. 

2.  Say  your  prayers  every  day. 

3.  Bathe  every  day. 

4.  Contemplate  daily  the  likeness  or  image  of  Siva. 

5.  Practise  purity  and  cleanliness. 

6.  Perform  the  formal  worship  of  the  gods. 

When  death  overtakes  him  the  Sanyasi  is  buried  in  a 
grave  like  a  pit,  with  a  side  receptacle  in  which  the  body 
is  made  to  sit  up  facing  east  or  north-east  with  its  arms 
supported  on  a  wooden  rest  (byragun).  Sanyasis  have  no 
after-death  or  burial  ceremonies,  no  shradh  ceremonies  like 
ordinary  Hindus,  these  having  been  performed  when  the 
Sanyasi  was  finally  admitted  to  the  order ;  and  even 
the  formal  feasts  which  are  given  on  such  occasions  by 
the  other  ascetic  sects,  such  as  Bairagis  and  Yogis,  are 
omitted. 

One  morning  at  about  ten  o'clock  I  overtook  a  strange 
procession — strange  even  for  India — wending  its  way  slowly 
along  the  Lahore  Mall  between  the  Chief  Court  and  the 
Cathedral.  A  loud  brass  band  led  the  way,  discoursing 
music — European  music,  too  ;  for  it  was  not  difficult  to 
make  out  the  tune  of  the  once-popular  song — 

"  Just  before  the  battle,  mother, 
I  was  thinking  most  of  you." 

Behind  the  musicians  came  some  three  or  four  men  carrying 
smoking  censers  of  sweet  incense.  They  were  marching 
in  front  of  a  litter  borne  on  the  shoulders  of  a  few  men. 
It  was  a  very  unusual-looldng  litter,  the  front  being  in 
the  form  of  a  moresque  arch.  There  was  a  cloth  hood 
over  it,  but  it  was  open  on  three  sides,  so  that  the  occupant 
could  be  plainly  seen  except  from  behind.  And  the  occupant 
was  a  dead  sadhu,  sitting  in  vacant  contemplation  with 
his  legs  crossed  in  the  approved  manner.  He  was  tied 
to  the  upright  back  of  the  litter  and  was  covered  with 
strings  of  flowers,  which  formed  a  sort  of  floral  veil  over 
his  face  but  could  not  conceal  the  hideousness  of  death, 

156 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

as  the  unconscious  head  rolled  helplessly  from  side  to  side, 
keeping  time,  in  a  sort  of  grotesque  mockery,  to  the  measured 
step  of  the  bearers  as  they  marched  slowly  along  the  wide 
road. 

On  one  side  of  the  litter  was  a  hired  landau  with  some 
respectably  dressed  natives,  who  may  or  may  not  have 
been  part  of  the  procession,  and  on  the  other  a  slovenly 
policeman  in  yellow  trousers  and  blue  tunic  lolling  in 
a  one-horse  carriage  known  as  an  ekka.  A  little  confused 
crowd,  in  which  the  female  element  predominated,  brought 
up  the  rear ;  while  a  number  of  urchins,  stimulated  by 
curiosity,  accompanied  the  cortege  and  pointed  out  the 
dead  man  to  one  another.  I  ascertained  that  the  party 
was  on  its  way  to  a  selected  spot  where  the  sadhu,  a  Sanyasi, 
would  be  buried  in  a  circular  grave,  sitting  upright  and 
covered  over  with  salt.  This  funeral  procession  brought 
to  my  recollection  a  similar  one  I  had  seen  many  years 
previously  at  Rajamundry,  in  the  Madras  Presidency. 
On  that  occasion  the  dead  sadhu  was  placed  in  a  sitting 
position  in  his  grave,  a  quantity  of  salt  was  piled  up  about 
him,  and  earth  thrown  in  till  the  body  was  nearly  covered  up. 
Then  upon  the  top  of  the  shaven  head,  still  exposed  to 
view,  a  large  number  of  cocoanuts  were  broken  in  order 
to  crack  the  skull  and  afford  the  imprisoned  soul  a  means 
of  exit  from  the  now  useless  body.  The  fragments  of  the 
cocoanuts  which  had  been  used  for  the  liberation  of  the 
dead  man's  soul  were,  I  remember,  eagerly  sought  for  by 
the  bystanders.^ 

It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  practice  of  burial 
rather  than  cremation,  in  the  case  of  these  and  certain 
other  sadhus,  is  due  to  the  sentiment  that  the  bodies  of 
such  sainted  personages  do  not  need  to  be  purified  by  fire. 

Nearly  every  sadhu,  however  ignorant  he  may  be  of 
letters,  or  however  regardless  in  practice  of  what  are  usually 
held  as  the  essentials  of  a  moral  life,  is  aware  of,  and,  on 
occasion,  can  parade  wise  maxims,  instructive  stories,  and 
pithy  parables  intended  to  point  the  way  to  virtue  or  dis- 
suade from  \dce.     Amongst  Sanyasis  there  is  not  found 

^  The  funeral  ceremonies  of  a  Brahman  Sanyasi  are  described  in  part  ii. 
chap,  xxxvi.  of  the  Abbe  Dubois'  Hiyidu  Manners,  Customs,  and  Ceremonies. 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

any  dearth  of  such  ethical  guides ;  as,  for  example,  the  so- 
called  "  twenty-four  upa  gurus  "  or  assistant  gurus  of  the 
famous  muni  Dattatreya,  which  I  learned  from  the  mouth 
of  a  Sanyasi,  and  which,  although  quaint  and  artless,  seem 
sufficiently  interesting  and  characteristic  for  partial  repro- 
duction here. 

Out  of  the  twenty-four  upa  gurus  I  select  the  follow- 
ing: — 

1.  The  Earth. — The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  this  gur^i 
is  patient  endurance.  As  the  uncomplaining  earth  suffers 
injuries  and  affronts  without  any  sign  of  resentment,  so 
should  the  sadhu  be  unperturbed  by  any  ill-treatment  and 
indignities  he  may  be  subjected  to. 

2.  The  Heavens  (Sky). — Into  the  serene  sky  ascend  the 
glad  sounds  of  mirth,  the  fierce  roar  of  battle,  the  beating 
of  drums,  and  the  clash  of  swords ;  but  it  retains  none  of 
them :  the  sadhu,  in  the  midst  of  the  turmoil  of  life,  should, 
in  like  manner,  retain  no  impression  of  the  events  about  him, 
be  they  joyous  or  mournful. 

3.  Fire. — As  flame  always  tends  to  rise,  even  if  the 
lighted  torch  be  reverted,  so  should  the  aspirations  of  the 
sadhu  always  be  to  higher  things  ;  and  as  the  pure  flame 
feeds  indiscriminately  on  all  sorts  of  fuel,  the  living  timber 
of  the  forest  as  well  as  the  refuse  of  the  dung-heap,  so  ought 
the  sadhu  to  accept  wdllingly  whatever  food  is  given  to 
him,  never  reflecting  upon  its  value,  nor  whether  it  is  stale 
or  fresh. 

4.  The  Pigeons. — Dattatreya  once  watched  a  pair  of 
pigeons  build  a  nest  and  rear  a  couple  of  young  ones.  When 
the  young  were  tolerably  grown  they  used  to  make  short 
excursions  on  the  wing,  but  one  day  were  ensnared  by  a 
fowler.  The  mother  bird  returning  saw  the  fate  of  her 
brood,  and  in  her  anxiety  to  help  them  got  caught  in 
the  net  herself.  Her  mate,  coming  on  the  painful  scene, 
lost  command  of  himself,  and  seemed  from  his  excited 
flutterings  as  if  he  too  would  get  ensnared,  and  so  it  soon 
happened. 

Now,  this  incident  should  be  a  warning  to  the  sadhu 
as  to  what  he  should  not  do.  Family  ties,  however  tender, 
are  only  transient,  and  should  not  affect  him,  lest  they 

158 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

bring  him  to  the  unfortunate  end  of  the  miserable  pigeons 
in  the  net  of  the  fowler. 

5.  The  Ocean. — The  ocean  does  not  rise  when  the  rivers 
flow  into  it,  nor  diminish  if  water  be  drawn  from  it,  so  the 
sadhu  should  not  swell  with  pride  if  a  number  of  disciples, 
attracted  by  his  fame,  gather  round  him  ;  nor,  on  the  other 
hand,  should  he  be  concerned  in  the  least  degree  if  they  all 
depart  and  leave  him  companionless. 

6.  The  Harlot. — A  courtesan  was  sitting  one  evening 
decked  in  her  best  clothes  waiting  for  a  visitor.  She  was 
all  the  while  wishing  that  someone  would  come  to  her  who 
would  pay  her  with  a  liberal  hand.  A  stream  of  people  passed 
by,  but  not  one  called  in.  Midnight  at  last  arrived,  and 
now  the  disappointed  woman  pondered,  "If  I  were  only 
to  give  as  much  thought  to  God  as  I  do  to  unprofitable 
wickedness,  what  blessings  might  He  not  vouchsafe  to 
me  !  "  From  that  moment  the  harlot  changed  her  mode 
of  life,  and,  turning  from  evil  desires,  adopted  a  religious 
life  ;  a  fact  from  which  the  sadhu  should  learn  that  even 
the  most  depraved  of  mortals  may  seek  God,  and  become 
entirely  changed  in  heart. 

7.  The  Brahman  Girl. — There  was  once  a  Brahman 
who,  as  required  by  Hindu  custom,  had  given  his  daughter 
in  marriage  to  a  man  of  his  own  caste.  The  girl  was,  how- 
ever, still  residing  in  her  father's  house  when  a  member 
of  her  husband's  family  arrived  unexpectedly.  The  child- 
wife  was  alone,  and,  having  requested  the  visitor  to  be 
seated,  retired  modestly  into  the  inner  apartments  to 
prepare  some  food  for  him.  There  was  no  flour  in  the 
house,  so  she  proceeded  to  pound  some  wheat  in  an  oklee 
(mortar).  Her  choorees  (bangles)  made  a  clatter  as  she 
pursued  her  labours,  and  she  felt  ashamed  of  thus  seeming 
to  attract  the  stranger's  attention.  She  removed  some  of 
the  bangles,  but  still  the  clatter  went  on  ;  she  took  off  a 
few  more,  but  the  tinkle  of  the  metal  rings  did  not  cease, 
until  she  had  only  one  left  on  her  wrist.  Then  there  was 
peace  and  quietness.  Thus  it  is  in  life.  The  sadhu  should 
live  alone  if  he  desire  serenity  and  contentment  of  mind. 

8.  The  Bhringhi. — This  creature  is  said  to  carry  dead 
insects   to   its   nest,   and   then,   by   humming   persistently 

159 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

into  their  ears  for  a  day  or  two,  to  bring  them  back  to  life 
again.^  "  What  a  lesson  for  the  sadhu  ! "  thought  Datta- 
treya.  Surely  he  should,  by  persistent  teaching,  bring 
men  who  are  dead  in  sin  and  worldliness  back  to  God  and 
spiritual  life. 

2.  The  Dandis. 

This  sect  is  recruited  exclusively  from  the  Brahman 
caste,  yet  it  discards  the  sacred  thread.  It  derives  its  name 
from  the  danda,  or  staff,  which  each  member  is  required 
to  carry. 

Theoretically,  dandiwallahs  should  not  settle  down  in 
one  place  for  a  single  day,  and  even  the  danda  should  not 
be  allowed  to  rest,  but  should  be  stuck  erect  in  the  ground 
or  be  suspended  from  a  tree.^  In  practice,  however,  these 
rules  are  neglected,  and  large  numbers  of  dandis  are  to  be 
found  at  any  time  in  Benares,  where  an  important  ghdt 
or  bathing  place  on  the  Ganges  is  named  after  them.  The 
dandis,  I  have  been  assured,  do  not  worship  Siva,  but  only 
their  own  danda.  If  this  be  correct,  the  explanation  is 
probably  that  the  danda  is  regarded  by  them  as  the  phallic 
emblem  of  the  god. 

Dr.  J.  W.  Bhattacharjee  says  the  dandi  is  not  required 
to  worship  any  god,  and  that  after  initiation  "  he  is  supposed 

^  My  inquiries  respecting  the  very  interesting  insect  referred  to  have 
not  met  with  success.  Indians  have  not  been  very  careful  observers  of 
nature,  and  it  appears  to  me  that  the  habits  of  some  of  the  solitary  wasps 
may  possibly  have  given  rise  to  the  belief  which  gives  Dattatreya  an 
opportunity  for  a  lesson  in  holiness  to  the  sndhus.  These  solitary  wasps 
{ammophila,  for  example)  are  known  to  sometimes  sting  their  prey  into 
unconsciousness  before  carrying  them  to  their  nests  to  serve  as  food  for 
the  family,  and  it  may  well  happen  that  some  of  these  victims  revive  in  the 
nest  and  might  seem  to  have  been  restored  to  life  by  their  captors. 

2  In  regard  to  the  danda,  Sir  Monier  Williams  in  his  Buddhism  (Preface, 
p.  xiii)  says  :  "  Finally,  there  is  the  danda  or  staff  held  in  the  left  hand, 
and  used  by  a  Sanyasi  as  a  defence  against  evil  spirits,  much  as  the  done 
(or  vajra)  is  used  by  Northern  Buddhist  monks.  This  mystical  staff  is  a 
bambu  with  six  knots,  possibly  symbolical  of  six  ways  {gati)  or  states  of 
life  through  which  it  is  believed  that  every  being  may  have  to  migrate — a 
belief  common  to  both  Brahmanisra  and  Buddhism.  The  staff  is  called 
sudarsana  (a  name  for  Vishnu's  cakra),  and  is  daily  worshipped  for  the 
preservation  of  its  mysterious  powers." 

1 60 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

to  pass  into  the  condition  of  a  god,  and  he  himself 
constantly  expresses  his  belief  in  such  transformation  by 
repeating  the  Soham  formula,"  which  is  Sevoham,  signifying, 
"  i  am  Siva." 

The  dandis  wear  salmon-coloured  clothes,  which  may 
be  dyed  once  only.  Some,  however,  go  about  the  jungles 
quite  naked.  They  are  not  allowed  to  touch  fire,  money, 
or  metal  in  any  form.  Their  food  may  be  obtained  from 
the  houses  of  Brahmans,  but  they  may  ask  for  it  only  when 
there  is  no  smoke  or  fire  in  the  house  and  the  grinding  mill 
is  still ;  in  other  words,  when  the  family  has  already  taken 
its  meal.  The  dandiwallah  should  not  ask  for  food  when 
anyone  else,  even  a  dog,  is  waiting  for  it. 

Initiation.  —  The  shagird  (postulant)  who  wishes  to 
become  a  chela  is  first  obliged  to  fast  for  three  days, 
living  only  on  milk.  On  the  fourth  day  there  is  a  grand 
hawan  (a  ceremony  in  which  ghee  and  other  combustible 
substances  are  consumed  in  the  fire  as  a  sacrifice  to  the 
gods).  After  this  he  is  shaved,  head  and  all,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  hairs  on  the  crown.  Then  the  candidate 
has  to  stand  waist-deep  in  water — a  river,  a  tank,  or  any 
deep  reservoir  will  answer  the  purpose.  With  his  own 
hands  the  postulant  then  plucks  out  the  few  hairs  which 
had  been  allowed  to  remain  on  the  top  of  his  head.  His 
sacred  thread  is  removed  and  burnt,  the  ashes  thereof 
being  eaten  by  the  neophyte.  While  in  the  water  he  receives 
the  mantra  of  the  order  from  his  guru  or  preceptor,  and 
also  a  new  name  with  one  of  the  following  surnames  :  Tirtha, 
Assama,  Bharati,  or  Sarswati. 

When  he  steps  out  of  the  water  he  is  handed  a  staff 
and  a  gourd,  and  is  robed  in  five  bits  of  salmon-coloured 
cotton  cloth,  one  piece  being  wrapped  round  the  head. 
Rules  for  his  guidance  in  life  are  explained  to  him  :  for 
example,  that  he  must  not  touch  fire,  may  take  but  one 
meal  a  day,  must  get  his  food  from  the  houses  of  Brahmans 
only,  and  so  on.  He  is  admonished  not  to  possess  any 
property  at  all,  to  use  either  a  gourd  or  an  earthen  vessel 
for  his  water  and  food,  and  to  cling  to  the  banks  of  the 
Ganges.  He  is  further  enjoined  to  preach  to  the  people 
and  to  practise  virtue. 

L  i6i 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

Dandis  as  a  rule  bury  their  dead,  or  commit  the  body- 
to  some  sacred  stream.^ 

On  receiving  news  of  the  death  of  any  relative,  the 
dandiwallah,  who  must  be  fatherless  and  motherless,  wife- 
less and  childless,  before  he  can  join  the  sect,  has  only  to 
bathe  and  to  wash  his  clothes  and  danda.  No  further 
ceremonies  or  observances  are  required  of  him. 

3.    P  ARAMAEANS  AS. 

A  learned  Indian  Sanskritist  explained  to  me  that  the 
name  of  this  sect  is  derived  from  the  words  paraina,  meaning 
much  or  great,  and  hansa,  a  certain  (mythological)  animal 
which  can  separate  water  from  milk  ;  whence,  as  my  pandit 
said,  it  would  seem  that  the  Paramahansa  is  one  who  can 
distinguish  truth  from  falsehood.^ 

Sanyasis,  dandis,  and  other  ascetics  who  have  under- 
gone a  probation  of  usually  not  less  than  twelve  years, 
may  be  admitted  to  this  superior  order,  in  which  both 
Sivites  and  Vishnuvites  merge  their  religious  differences 
in  a  comprehensive  self -worship,  based  on  the  presumption 
of  each  Paramahansa' s  identity  with  the  Divine  Spirit. 

Such  high  pretensions  have  of  necessity  to  be  supported 
by  some  visible  proof  of  superiority  to  physical  discomfort 
and  the  weaknesses  that  flesh  is  heir  to ;  and  so  it 
happens  that  some  members  of  this  sect  go  about  naked 

^  These  practices  would  seem  to  be  a  necessary  consequence  of  the 
strict  prohibition  of  the  use  of  fire  by  these  sectaries. 

2  Ordinarily  hansa  means  a  goose,  a  signification  which,  in  view  of  the 
pretensions  of  the  members  of  the  sect,  may  at  least  be  noted.  Kabir  the 
mystic  says,  "  The  goose  and  the  paddy  bird  are  of  one  colour  and  frolic 
in  the  same  pool ;  the  goose  extracts  the  milk  from  the  water,  and  the 
paddy  bird  drinks  the  mire." — Wilson's  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  p.  55. 

A  more  fanciful  interpretation  of  the  word  hansa  is  to  be  found  in  the 
following  extract : — 

"  In  the  science  of  breath  the  technical  symbol  for  inspiration  is  sa,  and 
for  expiration  ha.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  these  symbols  are  connected  with 
the  roots  as  and  ah.  The  current  of  the  life- wave  spoken  of  above  is 
technically  called  hansachasa,  that  is,  the  motion  of  ha  and  sa.  The  word 
HANSA,  which  is  taken  to  mean  God,  and  is  made  so  much  of  in  many 
Sanskrit  works,  is  only  a  symbolic  representation  of  the  two  eternal  pro- 
cesses of  life — ha  and  sa." — The  Science  of  Breath,  by  Rama  Prasad,  M.A., 
F.T.S.,  London,  1890,  p.  22. 

162 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

in  all  weathers,  some  affect  to  live  without  eating  food  of 
any  kind,  others  observe  strict  silence  and  do  not  indicate 
even  by  a  sign  any  physical  need  or  suffering.  There 
may  be  impostors  among  them,  but  honest  ascetics  are 
certainly  not  wanting ;  and  so  great  is  the  respect  and 
admiration  which  the  self-denial  of  these  sadhus  com- 
mands from  the  Hindus,  that  they  are  seldom  if  ever 
allowed  to  experience  the  full  measure  of  the  physical 
evils  which  would,  in  ordinary  course,  be  attached  to  their 
voluntary  asceticisms. 

Amongst  the  Paramahansas  are  scholars  well  versed 
in  Sanskrit  learning.  These  are  usually  to  be  found  in 
monasteries. 

Paramahansas  bury  their  dead,  or  float  their  bodies 
away  upon  some  running  stream. 

4.  Brahmacharis. 

In  the  ideal  scheme  for  the  conduct  of  life  prescribed 
by  the  Hindu  lawgiver  Manu  and  summarised  on  p.  15, 
it  will  be  found  that  the  period  of  early  youth  is  to  be 
devoted  to  vedic  study,  the  student,  living  on  alms,  being 
known  as  a  Brahmachari.  But  Brahmacharis  of  this  sort 
have  practically  disappeared  from  India  ;  those  who  now 
go  by  the  name  belong  either  to  an  inferior  ministering 
order  created  by  Sankara  to  serve  as  helps  and  companions 
to  Sanyasis  and  Paramahansas,  or  they  form  a  class  apart 
amongst  the  Tantric  sects  of  Bengal. 

5.  Ling  AITS. 

Being  strongly  opposed  to  Brahmanism,  the  dis- 
tinguishing badge  of  this  sect  is  a  lingam  fastened  to 
the  neck  or  arm  by  a  thread  which  "  is  called  the  linga 
sutram,  as  opposed  to  the  yajna  sutram  or  sacred  thread 
of  Brahmans."  ^  The  mendicant  monks  of  tlds  sect, 
known  as  vaders,  meaning  masters  or  lords,  go  about 
with  smaU  beUs  attached  to  their  arms  or  carried  in  the 
hand  to  advertise  their  presence.  They  receive  from  the 
1  Dr.  J.  N.  Bhattacharjee's  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  p.  397. 

163 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

lay  lAngaits  the  most  extravagant  veneration  and  even 
worsliip. 

The  Jangamas,  who  are  occasionally  seen  in  Upper 
India,  are  stated  by  Dr.  Bhattacharjee  to  be  "  the  priestly 
Sudras  of  the  sect."  They  are  married  men  not  given  to 
austerities,  and  go  about  well  clad,  as  will  be  seen  from 
the  illustrations  at  the  commencement  of  the  Preface 
and  at  p.  52  of  this  volume.  In  regard  to  the  name 
of  the  sect,  "it  is  said  that,  when  Shiv  (Siva)  at  his 
marriage  desired  to  give  alms  to  Brahmans,  no  Brahmans 
appeared  ;  the  god  thereupon  tore  open  his  leg  (janga)  and 
produced  therefrom  a  man  whom  he  called  Jangama,  to 
whom  he  gave  his  alms,"  ^  and  this  man,  no  doubt,  was 
the  father  of  the  sect.  At  Kedarnath  in  Garwal  they  have 
a  temple  and  monastery  of  their  own. 

In  Southern  India,  especially  in  the  Malabar  and 
Coromandel  districts,  the  Lingaits  are  very  numerous. 
According  to  the  Abbe  Dubois,  they  abstain  from  animal 
food,  bury  their  dead,  and  "  do  not  recognise  the  laws 
relating  to  defilements  which  are  generally  accepted  by 
other  castes."     They  practise  no  post-burial  rites.^ 

6.  Aghoris. 

Regarding  the  existence  and  practices  at  the  present 
day  of  this  ancient  and  repulsive  sect,  the  following 
extract  from  a  newspaper  conducted  entirely  by  Indians 
affords  information  : — 

"  The  loathsome  story  of  a  human  ghoul  from  Patiala 
shows  that  the  influence  of  the  Aghorpanthi  has  not  yet 
completely  died  out  in  this  country.  It  is  said  that  for 
some  time  past  human  graves  have  been  found  robbed  of 
their  contents,  and  the  mystery  could  not  be  solved  until 
the  other  day,  when  the  poKce  succeeded  in  arresting  a 
man  in  the  act  of  desecrating  a  child's  grave  some  forty 
miles  distant  from  the  capital  (Patiala).  The  ghoul  not 
only  did  not  conceal  the  undevoured  portion  of  the  corpse 

*  Report  on  the  Census  of  the  Punjab,  by  E.  D.  Maclagan,  I.C.S.,  p. 
116. 

2  Hindu  Manners,  Customs,  and  Ceremonies,  part  i.  chap.  ix. 

164 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

he  had  with  him,  but  told  his  captors  the  whole  story  of 
his  gruesome  career.  He  is  a  low -caste  Hindu  named 
Ram  Nath,  and  is,  according  to  a  gentleman  who  saw  him, 
*  a  singularly  mild  and  respectful-looking  man,'  instead  of 
a  '  red-eyed  and  ravenous  savage,'  as  he  had  expected  to 
find  him  from  the  accounts  of  his  disgusting  propensities. 
He  became  an  orphan  at  five,  and  fell  into  the  hands  of 
two  sadhus  of  his  own  caste,  who  were  evidently  Aghor- 
panthis.  They  taught  him  to  eat  human  flesh,  which 
formed  the  staple  of  their  food.  The  meat  was  procured 
from  the  graves  in  the  villages  they  passed  through. 
When  Ram  Nath  was  thoroughly  educated  in  this  taste 
the  sadhus  deserted  him.  Since  then  he  has  been  living 
on  human  carrion  only,  roaming  about  the  country  like  a 
hungry  vulture.  He  cannot  eat  cooked  food,  and  therefore 
gets  two  seers  of  raw  meat  from  the  State  every  day.  It 
is  also  reported  that  Sirdar  Shamshere  Singh,  private 
secretary  to  the  Maharajah,  has  now  forbidden  to  give  him 
anything  but  ordinary  jail  food,  with  a  view  to  '  reforming 
him.'  The  ghoul  is,  however,  determined  to  starve  rather 
than  eat  what  he  has  not  been  accustomed  to."  ^ 

Strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  disgustingly  repulsive 
habits  of  the  Aghoris  are  a  direct  and  legitimate,  if  horrible, 
outcome  of  a  desire  to  push  the  pantheistic  doctrines  of 
the  Vedanta  philosophy  to  their  logical  conclusions  in  a 
certain  direction.  "  If  everything  in  existence  is  only  a 
manifestation  of  the  Universal  Soul,  nothing  can  be 
unclean !  "  So  argues  the  Aghorpanthi,  and  he  proves 
the  uncompromising  sincerity  of  his  convictions  by  his 
repellent  acts. 

Cases,  few  and  far  between,  of  necrophilism,  anthro- 
pophagy, and  coprology  are  not  unknown  to  mental 
pathologists  in  Europe  ;  but  it  is,  perhaps,  only  in  India 
that  such  perverted  instincts  could  be  made  the  basis  of  a 
religious  sect. 

The  Aghorpanthis  can  date  back  to  a  considerable 
antiquity,  but,  though  never  at  any  time  of  importance 
numerically,  have  not  escaped  the  notice  of  Europeans  in 
India.     Of    these    cannibal    sadhus,    Moor,    who    identifies 

1  The  Tribune  (Lahore),  29th  November  1898. 

i6s 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

them,  no  doubt  incorrectly,  with  the  Paramahansas,  writes 
as  follows  in  his  Hindu  Pantheon  : — 

"  However  difficult  it  may  be  for  an  English  reader  to 
believe  the  hitherto  unrecorded  story  of  the  flesh-abhorring 
Hindus,  not  only  do  other  castes  of  the  Hindus,  but  even 
of   the  Brahmins   themselves,  eat   flesh,  and  one   sect  at 
least  eat  human  flesh.      They  do  not  kill  human  subjects 
to  eat,  but  they  eat  such  as  they  find  about  the  Ganges 
and  other  rivers,  and  near  Benares  they  are  not  unusually 
seen  floating  down  the  river  on  a  corpse,  and  feeding  upon 
its   flesh ;    and    the    human    brain    is    judged    by   these 
epicurean   cannibals    to   be   the   most   delicious  morsel  of 
their    unsocial    banquet.      They   are   called   Paramahansa, 
and  are  by  no  means  a  low  despicable  tribe  ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  are  esteemed,  at  any  rate  by  themselves,  a  very 
high    one.      Whether    the    exaltation    be    legitimate,    or 
assumed    by    individuals    in    consequence    of    penance    or 
holy  and  sanctified  acts,  I  am  not  prepared  to  state  ;   but 
I  beheve  the  latter,  as  I  have  known  other  instances  where 
individuals    of    differing    sects,    by    persevering    in    extra- 
ordinary piety,  or  penance,  have  been  deemed  incapable 
of  sin." 

The  present  headquarters  of  the  Agliorpanthis  appear  to 
be  at  Mount  Abo.  Some  of  them  claim  to  acquire  magical 
power  by  eating  human  flesh.  "  The  fact  is,"  says  Dr. 
J.  N.  Bhattacharjee,  "  that  as  Brahmanism  inculcated 
cleanhness  and  the  eating  of  wholesome  food,  the  Aghoris, 
who  formed  one  of  the  sects  setting  up  '  opposition  shops ' 
as  it  were,  insisted  on  the  utmost  degree  of  filth,  and  hoped 
to  gain  alms  by  horrifying  the  people  and  not  by  gaining 
their  respect."  ^ 

I  am  not  prepared  to  say  how  much  truth  there  may 
be  in  this  opinion,  but  certainly  there  is  no  denpng  that 
the  Aghoris  are  only  too  successful  in  extorting  money 
from  people  who  have  a  supreme  dread  of  them,  and  would 
much  rather  accede  to  their  demands  than  see  them  carry 

1  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  pp.  393,  394.  On  the  subject  of  these 
Aghor'panthis  the  reader  may  refer  to  Ward's  Hindus,  p.  296,  and  Mr. 
W.  Crookes'  Popular  Religion  and  Folk-lore  of  Northern  India,  vol.  ii. 
p.  172. 

1 66 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

out  their  threat  of  eating  in  their  presence  disgusting  offal 
or  foul  carrion. 

Women  known  as  Aghorinis  are  often  associated  with 
these  ghouls,  and  are  as  filthy  as  and  even  more  shameless 
than  their  male  companions. 


167 


CHAPTER  Y 111— continued 

Section  III. — Yogis  and  Yoga  Vidya — Yogis  attracting  attention  in  the 
West — Pliilosophico-religious  Ideas  underlying  Yogaism — Emancipa- 
tion of  the  Soul  the  supreme  Object  of  Hindu  religious  Aspiration — 
Yoga  Vidya  teaches  how  Union  of  the  individual  Soul  with  the  All- 
Spirit  may  be  accomplished — Details  and  probable  Origin  of  the  Dis- 
cipline and  Practices  of  Yoga  Vidya — The  Pretensions  of  the  modern 
Yogis — History,  Customs,  and  Rules  of  the  Yogi  sect. 


UDGING  from  current  literature  of  a 
certain  class,  the  Yogis  ^  and  their 
doctrines  have,  in  recent  years, 
somehow  attracted  attention  in  botli 
Europe  and  America,  and  yoga 
teachings  have  come  to  be  regarded 
as  the  highest  expression  of  tran- 
scendental Hinduism.  In  the  United 
States,  notwithstanding  their  super- 
lative industrialism,  there  is  a  grow- 
ing class  of  publications  in  which 
prominence  is  given  to  such  subjects  as  the  rationale  of 
concentration,  psychic  breathing,  subHminal  conscious- 
ness, the  perception  of  the  Self,  rapport  with  the  Uni- 
versal, and  also,  without  disguise,  the  Raja  Yoga  system 
of  India. 

The  Yogi,  moreover,  has  been  accepted  in  the  West  as 
the  type  or  representative  of  the  religious  ascetics  of  India. 
It  is  therefore  very  desirable  that  the  ideas  and  practices 
of  the  Yogis  should  be  set  forth  here  as  fully  and  clearly 
as  may  be  consistent  with  brevity. 

Hindu   philosophico- religious    ideas,    involved    as    they 

^  The  Yogis  are  in  the  vernaculars  of  Northern  India  ordinarily  called 
jogia. 

1 68 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

are  in  a  tangled  labyrinth  of  mystic  speculations,  present 
very  serious  difficulties  to  the  student,  particularly  as 
there  are  naturally  many  systems  of  Hindu  philosophy 
and,  of  course,  a  multiplicity  of  teachers  to  be  reckoned 
with.  Yet  there  are  some  more  or  less  widely  accepted 
fundamental  notions  which  when  stripped  of  confusing 
details  are  not  beyond  ordinary  comprehension,  and,  as 
they  serve  to  elucidate  the  practices  of  the  Yogis,  will  now 
be  noticed.  At  the  same  time,  it  may  be  added  that, 
amongst  the  many  fantastic  dreams  which  have  been 
presented  to  mankind  as  authoritative  explanations  of  the 
universe,  these  Hindu  speculations  are  not  without  dignity, 
beauty,  and  originality. 

According  to  the  fundamental  notions  of  Hindu 
philosophy  to  which  I  refer,  every  living  man  is  made  up 
of  an  individual  soul,  a  subtle  invisible  body,  and  a  gross 
body.  The  soul  is  of  the  same  essence  as  the  All-Spirit, 
although  temporarily  detached,  as  it  were,  from  it  in  some 
mysterious  way.  It  is  by  its  nature  incorruptible  and 
unchanging.  The  subtle  body  {sukshma-sarira),^  however, 
is  not  so,  and  while  in  connection  with  the  gross  body  is 
influenced,  affected,  and  modified  through  the  senses  by  the 
play  of  the  primal  forces  of  nature.  The  impressions  thus 
made  upon  the  subtle  body,  the  dispositions  engendered  in 
it  by  the  influences  to  which  it  is  exposed,  affect  its  nature, 
so  that,  even  when  separated  after  death  from  its  grosser 

^  "  In  the  Samkhj'-a-philosophy  this  sdJeshma-sarira  appears  as  linga- 
sarira,  or  the  sign-body.  SthUla-sarira,  or  coarse.,  material  body,  consists, 
according  to  some  Samkhya  teachers,  of  the  five  or  four  coarse  elements 
{hhiUas),  according  to  others  of  the  earth  only,  and  is  made  up  of  six 
coverings — hair,  blood,  flesh,  sinews,  bones,  and  marrow.  The  subtle  or 
inner  body,  sometimes  called  the  vehicle  or  the  dtivdhika- sarira,  is  formed 
of  eighteen  elements  :  of  (1 )  Buddhi,  (2)  Ahamkara,  (3)  Manas,  (4-8)  the 
five  Tanmitras  or  sdkshma-bhtltas,  and  (9-18)^ the  ten  senses.  This  body 
is  of  course  invisible,  but  without  it  the  coarse  body  would  be  useless.  It 
forms  what  we  should  call  our  personality,  and  causes  the  difference  in  the 
characters  of  individuals,  being  itself  what  it  has  been  made  to  be  by  former 
works.  All  fitness  for  reward  and  punishment  attaches  to  it,  not  to  the 
Purushas,  who  are  all  alike  and  unchanging,  and  it  likewise  determines  by 
means  of  its  acquired  dispositions  the  gross  bodies  into  which  it  has  to  enter 
from  life  to  life,  till  final  freedom  is  obtained  by  the  Purusha  ;  and  not  only 
the  gross  body,  but  the  subtle  body  also,  is  reabsorbed  in  Prakriti." — The 
Six  Systems  of  Indian  Philosophy,  by  Professor  F.  Max  Miiller,  p.  395. 

169 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

counterpart,  it  still  retains  the  taint  of  its  corporeal 
existence — tliat  is  to  say,  the  affinities,  proclivities,  and 
tendencies  developed  in  it  during  its  earthly  sojourn. 
Now,  in  the  ordinary  but  eternal  interaction  of  the  com- 
plex forces  of  nature — the  pranas  and  tativas — these 
acquired  qualities  bring  about  the  reincarnation  of  the 
subtle  invisible  body  along  with  the  soul  to  which  it  is 
united.  But  for  the  soul,  rebirth  is  a  most  undesirable 
event,  a  most  terrible  hardship.  Escape,  however,  from 
this  dire  calamity  is  fortunately  possible,  provided  the 
subtle  body  be  only  freed  from  the  influence  of  the  senses, 
so  that  it  may  lose  all  attachment  to  things  mundane — all 
earthward  tendencies,  as  it  were.  But  who  is  to  accom- 
plish this  ?  Who  is  to  set  the  sukshma-sarira  free  from 
the  trammels  of  worldly  affections  ?  It  is  the  soul  alone 
that  can  do  it ;  it  is  the  soul  which  must  work  out  its 
own  salvation. 

Before  it,  then,  lies  the  task  of  weaning  the  subtle 
body  completely  from  the  hopes  and  fears,  the  affections 
and  desires,  of  earthly  life.  To  regain  its  freedom  it  must 
succeed  in  effacing  the  impressions  made  upon  the  subtle 
body  during  its  earthly  life,  in  annulling  the  attractions  of 
carnality  and  destroying  the  forces  which  make  for  rebirth. 
It  may  take  ages  and  strenuous  efforts  in  many  successive 
lives  to  accomplish  this  ;  but,  when  it  is  finally  attained, 
the  sukshma-sarira,  after  the  dissolution  of  the  gross  body, 
will  have  no  tendency  to  return  to  this  earth,  but  will  be 
merged  in  the  soul,  and  that  again,  released  from  every 
hampering  impediment,  will  become  reunited  with  the  All- 
Spirit. 

A  presentment  of  the  relations  of  the  soul,  the  body, 
and  the  Great  Spirit,  which  evidently  appeals  to  the  peculiar 
voluptuous  sentimentalism  of  the  Bengali  nature,  deserves  a 
passing  notice — 

"  The  soul,"  says  a  recent  writer,  Babu  Shishir  Kumar 
Ghose,  "  is  attached  to  the  body,  and  naturally  feels  a 
great  attraction  for  it.  But  its  real  partner  is  the  Great 
Spirit  of  the  universe.  The  soul  of  man  is  likened  to  a 
woman,  whose  lover  is  the  body,  but  whose  husband  is 
the  Great  Soul,  viz.  God.     But  she,  the  soul,  undutifully 

170 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

forsakes  her  wedded  husband  and  cleaves  to  Iter  gallant, 
the  body.  The  object  of  the  practice  of  yoga  is  to  detach 
the  woman  (the  human  soul)  from  her  lover  (the  human 
body),  reunite  her  with  her  lawful  husband,  the  Great  Soul, 
Brahma,  or  the  Great  Spirit.  ... 

"  One  way  of  attempting  to  detach  a  faithless  woman 
from  her  lover  is  to  reason  with  her;  another  way  is  to 
make  her  gallant  disagreeable  to  her.  The  Advaitahadees 
follow  the  methods  mentioned  just  now,  in  order  to  detach 
the  soul  (woman)  from  her  gallant,  the  body.  (1)  They 
reason  with  their  souls  ^  and  persuade  them  to  beheve  that 
their  undue  attraction  for  the  body  cannot  conduce  to 
their  happiness,  for  the  body  does  not  endure  for  ever. 
And  (2)  they  practise  all  sorts  of  mortifications  upon  their 
bodies,  and  thereby  prevent  the  soul  to  derive  any  pleasure 
from  its  union  therewith.  The  soul,  thus  driven  to  detach 
herself  from  the  body,  is  slowly  and  gradually  led  towards 
the  Great  Spirit,  for  the  purpose  of  being  united 
thereto." 

The  accomplishment  of  the  supreme  object  of  Hindu 
religious  aspiration,  as  explained  in  the  foregoing  para- 
graphs, may  give  occupation  to  the  soul  in  many  successive 
transitory  lives  ;  but  if  a  struggle  in  the  right  direction 
be  steadily  maintained  in  any  one  Kfe  here  below,  it 
makes  the  task  in  succeeding  lives  all  the  easier,  since 
the  tendencies  cultivated  in  one  embodied  existence  are 
more  easily  trained  in  the  next  one,  and  so  on,  till  they 
are  finally  established. 

Evidently  the  endeavour  towards  perfection,  that  is, 
towards  the  emancipation  of  the  soul,  involves  the 
cultivation  of  apathy  (vairagya),  with  the  crushing  out  of 
all  human  affections,  desires,  and  lusts,  and  the  complete 
detachment  of  the  mind  from  all  earthly  things. 

This  conclusion  gives  us  the  key  to  much  of  the 
higher    rehgious    ideas    of    the    Hindus,    and    also    makes 

^  "  They  reason  with  their  souls  !  "  There  is  a  queer  confusion  of  ideas 
here,  a  new  third  party  intervening  between  the  soul  and  the  body  to 
reason  with  and  persuade  the  former.  Yet  the  above  extract  is  not  with- 
out value,  illustrating  as  it  does  the  very  sensuous  imagery  by  which  alone 
even  philosophical  doctrines  can  be  brought  home  to  the  comprehension 
of  minds  steeped  in  the  ideas  of  the  Sakta  worshippers. 

171 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

intelKgible  their  universally  accepted  doctrine  of  karma, 
according  to  which,  as  explained  in  a  previous  chapter,  all 
actions  good  or  bad  must  bear  their  fruit  at  some  time  or 
other  in  the  present  or  in  future  lives  ;  a  doctrine  which 
certainly  makes  for  morahty,  and  accounts  intelligibly 
for  the  striking  and  apparently  unjust  inequalities  which 
human  society  and  individual  history  present. 

After  the  foregoing  explanation,  it  will  be  easily 
understood  that  everyone  desirous  of  effecting  the  final 
emancipation  of  his  soul  and  its  reabsorption  into  the 
All-Spirit  should  follow  practices  calculated  to  wean  the 
mind  from  the  distractions  and  seductions  of  its  earthly 
environment. 

These  general  principles  being  accepted,  some  eager 
minds  impatient  of  delays,  some  emotional  natures  in 
love  with  the  Infinite,  have  deemed  it  possible  to  effect 
a  mystical  union  between  the  individual  soul  and  the 
All-Spirit,  even  while  the  former  is  imprisoned  in  its  corporeal 
frame ;  and  for  the  attainment  of  this,  the  highest  of 
desirable  objects,  is  the  system  devised  by  Patau jali  and 
accepted  as  authoritative  by  the  Yogis. 

The  word  yoga  means  union,  and  first  occurs  in 
the  later  Upanishads.^  Yoga  Vidya  is  a  complex  system 
of  philosophical  doctrines  and  practical  exercises  for 
promoting  or  effecting  union  between  the  individual  soul 
and  the  All-Spirit. 

"  As  described  by  Svamin  Rama-Krishnananda  in  the 
Brahmavadin,  p.  511  seq.,  it  consists,  as  practised  at 
present,  of  four  kinds  :  Mantra,  Laya,  Raja,  and  Hatha- 
yoga.  Mantra-yoga  consists  in  repeating  a  certain  word 
again  and  again,  particularly  a  word  expressive  of  deity, 
and  concentrating  all  one's  thoughts  on  it.  Laya-yoga 
is  the  consecrating  all  one's  thoughts  on  a  thing  or  the 
idea  of  a  thing,  so  that  we  become  almost  one  with  it. 
Here  again  the  ideal  image  of  a  god,  or  names  expressive 
of  the  Godhead,  are  the  best,  as  producing  absorption  in 
God.  Rdja-yoga  consists  in  controlling  the  breath  so  as 
to  control  the  mind.  It  was  observed  that  when  fixing 
our    attention    suddenly  on    anything    new   we  hold    our 

^  Weber's  Indian  Literature,  p.  239. 
172 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

breath,  and  it  was  supposed,  therefore,  that  concentration 
of  the  mind  would  be  sure  to  follow  the  holding  back  of 
the  breath,  or  the  prdndydma.  Hatha-yoga  is  concerned 
with  the  general  health  of  the  body,  and  is  supposed  to 
produce  concentration  by  certain  postures  of  the  body, 
by  fixing  the  eyes  on  one  point,  particularly  the  tip  of  the 
nose,  and  similar  contrivances."  ^ 

Yogi  properly  means  one  who  practises  yoga  with  the 
object  of  uniting  or  blending  his  soul  with  the  Divine 
Spirit  or  World-Soul. 

Very  curiously,  however,  the  practice  of  ijoga  is  not 
undertaken  by  all  Yogis,  nor  is  it  confined  to  the  professed 
Yogi.  The  efiicacy  of  the  system  is  an  article  of  faith  so 
universally  accepted  throughout  India,  that  other  sectarians, 
including  laymen,  even  married  men  and  householders, 
resort  to  it  when  so  inclined,  and  it  may  be  added  that 
the  founder  even  of  the  quite  recent  theistic  sect  known 
as  the  Brahmo  Samaj,  Babu  Keshab  Chundra  Sen,  practised 
yoga. 

Now  union  with  the  All-Spirit,  if  accomplished  by  any 
individual  soul,  must  surely  enhance  its  susceptibilities 
and  powers.  Hence,  as  I  have  explained  in  another 
book,  the  Yogis  naturally  claim,  and  the  Hindu  world 
readily  concedes  to  them,  a  far-reaching  knowledge  of  the 
secrets  of  nature  and  almost  unlimited  sway  over  men 
and  natural  phenomena.^ 

"  When  this  mystic  union  is  effected,"  says  Professor 
H.  H.  Wilson,  "  the  Yogi  is  liberated  in  his  living  body 
from  the  clog  of  material  incumbrance,  and  acquires  an 
entire  command  over  all  worldly  substance.  He  can 
make  himself  lighter  than  the  lightest  substances,  heavier 
than  the  heaviest ;  can  become  as  vast  or  as  minute  as  he 
pleases,  can  traverse  all  space,  can  animate  any  dead  body 
by  transferring  his  spirit  into  it  from  his  own  frame,  can 
render  himself  invisible,  can  attain  all  objects,  become 
equally  acquainted  with  the  past,  present,  and  future,  and  is 
finally  united  with  Siva,  and  consequently  exempted  from 
being  born  again  upon  earth.      The  superhuman  faculties 

^  Professor  Max  Miiller's  The  Life  and  Sayings  of  Bamakrishna,  p.  8. 
2  Indian  Life,  Rdigious  and  Social  (T.  Fisher  Unwin,  London). 

^7Z 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

are  acquired,  in  various  degrees,  according  to  the  greater 
or  less  perfection  with  which  the  initiatory  processes  have 
been  performed."  ^ 

A  recent  Indian  exponent  of  Rdja-yoga  has  summed 
up  the  object  of  the  system  in  the  following  comprehensive 
statement :  "  The  Yogi  proposes  to  himself  no  less  a  task 
than  to  master  the  whole  universe,  to  control  the  whole 
of  nature."  ^ 

Every  Yogi  does  not  set  up  for  being  a  thaumaturgist, 
since  such  a  pretension  might  easily  be  tested  to  the 
confusion  of  the  pretender.  The  claim  and  the  concession 
are  rather  in  favour  of  the  system  and  of  any  who  act 
up  to  its  rules.  There  are,  however,  some  sceptics  who 
maintain  that  "  yoga  cannot  be  effective  in  this  kali  yuga, 
or  age  of  sin."  ^ 

The  apparent  origin  and  development  of  the  practical 
system  or  method  of  the  Yogis  is  deserving  of  attention. 
Starting  from  that  obviously  most  important  vital  function, 
respiration,  some  Hindu  sages  appear  to  have  observed 
and  reasoned  somewhat  in  the  following  way.  The  air 
inhaled  is  evidently  the  life,  or  at  least  contains  the 
vital  principle  in  some  subtle  form ;  for  deprivation  of 
air  means  death,  and  with  the  last  expiration  the  living 
body  becomes  a  corpse.  Now  this  air  penetrates  the 
corporeal  frame,  and  is  easily  discoverable  in  the  chest, 
the  stomach,  the  bowels,  and  elsewhere.  But  this  life- 
breath  is  apparently  not  stagnant.  It  possesses  some  sort 
of  motion,  being  drawn  into  the  chest  through  the  nostrils 
and  exhaled  through  the  same  apertures.  Some  of  the 
larger  and  more  ob\dous  structural  details  of  the  lungs  with 
its  branching  tubes  may  have  been  noticed,  and  possibly 
also  the  chambers  of  the  heart  with  the  great  connected 
vessels  suggesting  channels  for  the  movements  of  prana, 
the  vital  air,  and  of  centres  for  its  concentration. 

Reflecting,  in  their  own  peculiar  way,  on  the  mysterious 
process  of  respiration,  which  was  supposed  to  be  a  law  of 

1  Sketch  of  the  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus y  p.  131. 

2  Rdja-yoga.     Lectures  by  Swami  Vivekananda,  p.  11  (Longmans  & 
Co.,  London). 

2  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  by  Dr.  J.  N.  Bhattacharjee,  p.  402. 

174 


( 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

t'le  entire  universe,  on  the  undoubted  presence  of  air  in 
many  parts  of  the  body,  and  on  the  meagre  stock  of 
anatomical  facts  known  to  them, — possibly  also  guided  by 
some  dim  conception  of  fluid  circulation  in  the  body, — the 
founders  of  Yogaism  have  concluded  and  taught  that  along 
with  the  air  the  primal  forces  of  nature,  represented  by 
subtle  ethers,  circulate  in  the  human  body  in  a  multitude 
of  \^essels  (nadis)  springing  from  the  navel. 

The  uses  and  functions  of  these  imaginary  nadis  con- 
veying the  subtle  ethers  through  the  material  system  are, 
as  sve  might  expect,  confidently,  if  somewhat  indefinitely, 
described.  If  we  are  to  believe  these  purely  speculative 
anatomists,  the  nadis  divide  and  subdivide  as  they  pro- 
ceed, till  the  sum-total  of  them,  of  different  degrees  of 
magnitude,  number  just  72,000.  According  to  other 
equally  competent  authorities,  the  number  of  these  nadis 
com-os  up  to  727,210,201,  and  they  have  their  root  in  the 
heart  and  not  the  navel.  Intersecting  at  various  points, 
these  ramifying  vessels  form  plexuses  known  as  padmas 
or  kamalas  (lotuses),  which  act  as  centres  of  force  for  the 
performance  of  the  physiological  functions.  Centres  of 
/moral   and  intellectual   powers   also   exist  in   the   system. 

Thus  we  read  in  the  Vishram-opnishat — 

''1.  While   the   mind   rests  in  the  eastern   portion  (or 

petal),  which  is  white  in  colour,  then  it  is  inclined  towards 

patience,  generosity,  reverence. 

"  2.  While  the  mind  rests  in  the  south-eastern  portion, 

whicl   is  red  in  colour,  then  it  is  incHned  towards  sleep, 
tc-^rpor,  and  evil  inchnation."  ^ 

Upon  this  foundation  of  pure  assumption  is  built  a 
science  for  regulating  and  guiding  the  currents  of  the  pranas 
and  tatwas  at  will,  along  the  multitudinous  nadis  of  the 
hum -an  organism,  so  that  they  might  produce  the  least 
harm  ful  effects  upon  the  mind,  minimise  the  evil  done  by 
the  fact  of  the  soul  and  the  subtle  body  being  sojourners 
in  a  fleshy  tenement,  and  thus  bring  the  soul  to  a  reahsa- 
tioi  1  of  Self  ;  or,  in  other  words,  to  perceive  its  identity  with 
the  J  Supreme  Self.^ 

^  The  Science  of  Breath,  by  Rama  Prashad,  M.A.,  pp.  42,  43. 
2  ]V[ax  Muller's  Ramakrishna,  p.  46. 

175 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

The  practices  actually  described  in  conformity  with  th  ■ 
science  above  referred  to  for  the  attainment  of  samadhi  ^ 
are  such  as  tend  to  abstract  the  mind  entirely  from  sur- 
rounding objects  or  events,  favouring  thereby  a  condition 
of  self-hypnotism  or  trance. 

With  what  insight  the  exercises  have  been  devised  by 
the  adepts  who  prescribed  them  will  be  apparent  when  it 
is  stated  that  these  involve  long- continued  suppressions  of 
the  breath,  and  the  performance  of  the  functions  of  respira- 
tion by  peculiar  and  minutely  prescribed  modes  of  inspira- 
tion and  expiration  through  the  right  and  left  nostrrls 
respectively ;  that  they  include  posturing  in  no  less  tnan 
eighty-four  different  attitudes ;  also  the  frequent,  even 
millionfold,  mental  repetition  of  the  mystic  syllable  om, 
the  prolonged  concentration  of  visual  attention  on  near 
objects — for  example,  the  navel  or  the  tip  of  the  nose — 
combined  with  an  equally  severe  strain  imposed  upon  the 
auditory  nerves  in  protracted  efforts  to  listen  to  sounds  in 
the  ears  themselves. 

Then  there  is  meditation,  the  nature  of  which  may  be 
illustrated  by  the  following  example  : — 

"  Imagine  a  lotus  upon  the  top  of  the  head,   several 
inches  up,  and  virtue  as  its  centre,  the  stalk  as  knowledge. 
The  eight  petals  of  the  lotus  are  the  eight  powers  of  the 
Yogi.     Inside    the    stamens    and    pistils    are    renunciation. 
If  the   Yogi  refuses  the  external  powers  he  will  come  to 
salvation.     So  the  eight  petals  of  the  lotus  are  the  eight 
powers,    but    the    internal    stamens    and    pistils    art    the 
extreme   renunciation   of   all   these.     Inside   of   that   lotr^s 
think  of  the  Golden  One,  the  Almighty,  the  Intangible,   He 
whose   name   is   Om,    the    Inexpressible,    surrounded    with 
effulgent  light.    Meditate  on  that."  ^ 

There  is  no  reason  to  deny  that  by  such  meditati' ons, 
and  by  the  practices  referred  to  above,  carried  ou  t  in 
soHtude,  a  state  of  self-hypnotisation  might  be  attain  ed, 

^  In  Professor  Max  Muller's  Indian  Philosophy  (p.  141)  samadh  i  is 
defined  as  "  meditative  absorption."  According  to  Swami  Vivekanai  ida, 
it  means  super-consciousness.  By  Sir  Monier  Williams  it  is  used  as  th  e 
equivalent  of  trance. 

'^  Rdja-yoga,  by  Swami  Vivekananda,  pp.  91,  92. 

176 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

dth  mental  hallucinations  more  or  less  permanent/  and 
that  even  an  ecstatic  state  might  be  induced.  Now  ecstasy, 
particularly  religious  ecstasy,  is  a  well-known  phenomenon, 
and  is  associated  with  many  Christian  saints :  as  St. 
Theresa,  St.  PhiHp  of  Neri,  and  others.  It  means  such 
?  suspension  of  consciousness  as  to  cause  obhteration,  tem- 
porarily, of  all  sense  relations  with  the  material  world,  and 
is  iccompanied  with  beatific  visions  in  which  pain  is 
curDusly  blended  with  unutterable  bliss. 

''VTiat  modern  science  has  to  say  in  elucidation  of 
ect^asy  may  be  judged  from  the  following  extract  from 
r)r.  Max  Nordau's  well-known  work  Degeneration,  and 
suJi  light  as  it  throws  upon  the  subject  will  doubtless 
be  ^ welcome  to  the  reader  in  connection  with  the  claims 
which  we  are  now  considering  of  the  disciples  of  Yoga 
Vidya. 

"  '".'he  degree  of  exclusiveness  and  insistence  in  the 
prf  ..ominance  of  any  presentation  is  in  proportion  to 
the  degree  of  morbid  irritabihty  in  the  particular  tract  of 
brain  by  which  it  is  elaborated.  Where  the  degree  is  not 
excessive,  there  arise  obsessions  which  the  consciousness 
recognises  as  morbid.  They  do  not  preclude  the  coexist- 
ence of  healthy  functioning  of  the  brain,  and  consciousness 
acquires  the  habit  of  treating  these  coexistent  obsessions 
as  foreign  to  itself,  and  of  banishing  them  from. its  presen- 
tations and  judgments.  In  aggravated  cases  these  obses- 
sions grow  into  fixed  ideas.  The  immoderately  excitable 
portions  of  the  brain  work  out  their  ideas  with  such 
livel'ness  that  consciousness  is  filled  with  them,  and  can 
no  longer  distinguish  them  from  such  as  are  the  result  of 
senee-impressions,  the  nature  and  strength  of  which  they 
acci  rately  reflect.  Then  we  reach  the  stage  of  hallucina- 
tions and  dehrium.  Finally,  in  the  last  stage,  comes 
ecstasy,  which  Ribot  calls  '  the  acute  form  of  the  effort 

^  Amongst  the  weird  tales  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe  is  one  entitled  "  Berenice." 
in  .v^hich  the  unhappy  mental  disorder  associated  with  the  habit  of  attentive 
and  continuous  contemplation  of  some  trifling  object  or  unimportant  subject 
leacis  to  consequences  replete  with  the  most  painful  horror.  This  strange 
strjry,  displaying  rare  insight  into  a  certain  unhealthy  phase  of  mental 
fictivity,  is  aptly  suggestive  of  the  abnormal  results  which  certain  Yogi 
practices  must  often  lead  to. 

M  177 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

after  unity  of  consciousness.'     In  ecstasy  the  excited  par 
of  the  brain  works  with  such  violence  that  it  suppresses 
the  functioning  of  all  the  rest  of  the  brain.     The  ecstatic 
subject     is     completely     insensible     to     external     stimuli. 
There  is  no  perception,  no  representation,  no  grouping  of 
presentations  into  concepts,  and  of  concepts  into  judgments 
and  reasoning.     A  single  presentation  or  group  of  presenta- 
tions   fills    up    consciousness.     These    presentations  are  of 
extreme   distinctness   and   clearness.     Consciousness   is,  as 
it  were,  flooded  with  the  blinding  hght  of  mid-day.     Tiere 
therefore  takes  place  exactly  the  reverse  of  what  has  bt/3n 
noticed  in  the  case  of  the  ordinary  mystic.     The  ecsta+^'c 
state   is    associated  with    extremely   intense    emotions    in 
which    the    highest    bliss    is    mixed     with    pain.     Ihese 
emotions  accompany  every  strong  and  excessive  function- 
ing  of   the    nerve -cells,    every   extraordinary   and   violent 
decomposition  of  nerve-nutriment.     The  feehng  of    volup- 
tuousness is  an  example  of  the  phenomena  accompan^'ing 
extraordinary  decompositions  in  a  nerve-cell.     In  healthy 
persons  the  sexual  nerve-centres  are  the  only  ones  which, 
conformably  with  their  functions,  are  so  differentiated  and 
so  adapted  that  they  exercise  no  uniform  or  lasting  activity, 
but,  for  by  far  the  greatest  part  of  the  time,  are  perfect!} 
tranquil,  storing  up  large  quantities  of  nutriment,  in  order, 
during  very  short  periods,  to  decompose  this  suddenly  and, 
as  it  were,  explosively.     Every  nerve-centre  which  operates 
in  this  way  would  procure   us  voluptuous    emotion  ;  but 
precisely   among    healthy    persons    there    are,    except   the 
sexual  nerve-centres,  none  which  are  compelled  to  act  in 
this  manner,  in  order  to  serve  the  purpose  of  the  organism. 
Among  the  degenerate,  on  the  contrary,  particular  morbidly 
excited  brain-centres  operate  in  this  way,  and  the  emo  ions 
of   dehght  which  accompany  their  explosive   activity  are 
more  powerful   than  sexual  feelings,  in  proportion  as  the 
brain-centres  are  more  sensitive  than  the  subordinate  and 
more    sluggish    spinal    centres.     One    may    completely    be- 
lieve the  assurances  of  great  ecstatics,  such  as  St.  Theresa, 
a  Mohammed,  an  Ignatius  Loyola,  that  the  bliss  accompany- 
ing their  ecstatic  visions  is  unlike  anything  earthly,  and 
almost  more  than  a  mortal  can  bear.      This  latter  state- 

178 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

ment  proves  that  they  were^conscious  of  the  sharp  pain 
which  accompanies  nerve-action  in  over-excited  brain-cells, 
and  which,  on  careful  analysis,  may  be  distinguished  in 
every  very  strong  feeling  of  pleasure.  The  circumstance 
that  the  only  normal  organic  sensation  known  to  us  which 
resembles  that  of  ecstasy  is  the  sexual  feehng,  explains 
the  fact  that  ecstatics  connect  their  ecstatic  presentations 
by  way  of  association  with  the  idea  of  love,  and  describe 
the  ecstasy  itself  as  a  kind  of  supernatural  act  of  love,  as 
a  union  of  an  ineffably  high  and  pure  sort  with  God  or  the 
Blessed  Virgin.  This  drawing  near  to  God  and  the  saints 
is  the  natural  result  of  a  religious  training,  which  begets 
the  habit  of  looking  on  everything  inexplicable  as  super- 
natural, and  of  bringing  it  into  connection  with  the  doctrines 
of  faith."  1 

Taking  all  the  facts  into  consideration,  I  should  be 
incKned  to  conclude  that  from  a  remote  past  many  of  the 
phenomena  now  classed  under  the  general  term  hypnotism 
were  known  to  the  Indians,  and  that  the  more  ardent 
emotional  religionists  amongst  them,  stimulated  by  powerful 
neurotic  impulses,  experienced,  more  frequently  perhaps 
than  in  other  lands,  the  indescribable  joys  of  the  ecstatic 
state,  and  lost  themselves — lost  their  very  identity — ^in 
the  marvellous  world  conjured  up  in  their  trance-visions. 
Once  discovered,  once  experienced,  these  mysteries,  and 
these  strange  voluptuous  enjoyments,  would  be  so  peculiarly 
congenial  with  the  character  and  psychology  of  the  Indians, 
that  the  more  emotional  amongst  them  would  be  power- 
fully attracted  towards  these  occult  phenomena.  In  their 
ardour  to  gain  admittance  to  the  unknown  world,  whose 
echoes  reached  them,  eager  men  would  set  themselves  the 
task  of  systematically  overcoming  the  intervening  obstacles, 
and  out  of  such  strivings,  doubtless;  arose  the  science  of 
Yoga  Yidya.  If  in  ecstasy  the  Christian  saint  believed 
himself  to  be  in  mysterious  communion  with  Christ  or  the 
Virgin,  it  is  only  natural,  and  in  accordance  with  his 
behefs,  that  the  pantheistic  Hindu,  when  he  reached  the 
state  in  which  he  became  "  insensible  to  external  stimuli," 

'^  Degeneration,   hy   Max   Nordau,   pp.    63,   64   (William   Heinemann, 
London,  1895). 

179 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

should,  in  the  inner  glorious  world  of  his  own  imaginings, 
-find  himself  (that  is,  his  own  soul)  in  complete  union  with 
the  Universal  Spirit. 

Thus  far,  at  any  rate,  Yogaism  is  quite  intelUgible  ; 
but  the  pretensions  of  the  Yogis  to  superhuman  power 
have  no  justification  whatever,  and  have  for  ages  been  a 
fertile  source  of  profitable  imposture  most  detrimental  to 
the  healthy  development  of  the  Indian  people.^ 

Since  all  religions,  philosophies,  and  sciences  which 
have  secured  wide  acceptance,  need  for  their  continual 
existence  in  each  succeeding  age  to  be  interpreted  as  far 
as  possible  up  to  the  level  of  the  new  ideas  and  increased 
knowledge  of  the  times,  we  may  expect  that  the  same 
service  has  been  performed  for   Yoga   Vidya, 

What  can  be  done  by  an  ardent  advocate  to  explain, 
in  the  phraseology,  and  by  the  light  of  modern  scientific 
facts  and  theories,  the  extremely  crude  and  visionary 
notions  of  the  Yogis,  may  be  learned  by  a  perusal  of  the 
lectures  of  Swami  Vivekananda  on  Bdja-yoga,  delivered  at 
New  York  in  1895-96.2 

In  these  lectures  are  given,  with  the  aid  of  the  modern 
conceptions  of  vibrations,  wave  motions,  electrical  currents, 
and  so  forth,  a  statement  of  the  rationale  of  Yoga  Vidya, 
which  is  ingenious  if  not  convincing.  In  this  contem- 
porary elucidation  of  yoga  science  we  find  the  Susumna 
nadi  identified  with  the  spinal  cord,  and  that  the  two 
other  most  important  organs  of  the  body  are  the  brain 
(sahasrdra,  the  thousand-petalled)  and  the  mulddhdra 
plexus,  the  latter  triangular  in  form  and  situated  at  the 
base  of  the  vertebral  column,  being  the  seat  of  the 
kundalini,  a  mysterious  reservoir  of  pent-up  force,  which 
is  thus  defined  :  "  the  coiled  up,  the  sleeping  Divine  power 
in  all  beings."  The  aim  and  object  of  all  the  yoga 
practices  is,  according  to  the  Swami,  to  successfully  tap 
this  reserve  of  force,  through  the  susumna  (which  is 
naturally  closed  and   can  be  opened  by  the   Yogis  only), 

^  In  another  book  I  have  described  the  complete  discomfiture  and 
exposure,  to  my  knowledge,  of  one  of  these  Yogi  pretenders  to  super- 
natural power, — Indian  Life,  Religious  and  Social,  pp.  36-41. 

2  Longmans  &  Co.,  London. 

i8o 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

causing  tlie  stored-up  energy  of  the  kundalini,  thus  set 
free  by  the  Yogis*  practices,  to  flow  into  the  brain.  When 
this  difficult  feat  is  accomplished,  samddhi,  or  a  super- 
conscious  state,  is  reached,  in  which  "  no  more  will  you 
need  to  go  to  books  for  knowledge  ;  your  own  mind  will 
have  become  your  book  containing  infinite  knowledge." 

However  edifying  Swami-ji's  explanations  may  be,  it 
is,  to  say  the  least,  rather  curious  that  the  Yogi  should 
derive  his  transcendent  enlightenment  from  an  organ  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  coccygeals. 

Leaving  these  purely  imaginary  anatomical  and  physio- 
logical details,  we  may  profitably  tui*n  our  attention  to  a 
consideration  of  the  actual  results  of  the  working  of  the 
system,  known  as  Yoga  Vidya,  and  in  doing  so  shall  find 
that  however  profound  may  be  the  desire  of  the  Yogi  for 
the  union  of  his  soul,  hereafter  or  in  the  present  life, 
with  the  xill-Spirit,  his  own  nature  craves  importunately 
for  advantages  less  remote,  less  transcendent,  and,  in 
response  to  this  desire,  the  "  science  of  breath,"  i.e.  the 
regulation  of  the  circulation  of  the  pranas  and  tatwas,  has, 
in  the  hands  of  the  teachers,  resulted  in  the  usual  childish 
developments  and  gross  irrationalities  of  which  Hinduism 
affords  such  ample  evidence. 

"20.  A  knowledge  more  secret  than  the  science  of 
breath,  wealth  more  useful  than  the  science  of  breath, 
was  never  seen  or  heard  of. 

"21.  An  enemy  is  killed  during  the  power  of  the 
breath,  and  also  friends  are  brought  together ;  wealth  is 
got  during  the  power  of  breath,  and  comfort  and  reputation 
during  the  same. 

"52.  Any  charity  given  by  the  wise  while  the  breath 
is  in  the  left  nostril,  multiplies  krores  upon  krores  ^  of 
times  in  this  world. 

"53.  Let  the  Yogi  look  into  his  face,  with  one  mind 
and  with  attention,  and  thus  let  him  know  entirely  the 
motion  of  the  sun  ^  and  the  moon.^ 

^  A  krore  equals  ten  millions. 

2  The  sun  and  moon  here  referred  to  are  certain  subtle  currents  in  the 
human  body  influenced  by  the  luminaries  named,  and  are  also  referred  to 
as  positive  and  negative. 

i8i 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

"  54.  Let  him  meditate  upon  the  tatwa  when  the 
prana  is  calm,  never  when  it  is  disturbed ;  his  desire 
will  be  fulfilled,  and  he  will  have  great  benefit  and 
victory. 

"55.  To^ those  men  who  practise,  and  thus  always  keep 
the  sun  and  moon  in  proper  order,  knowledge  of  the  past 
and  the  future  becomes  as  easy  as  if  they  were  in  their 
hand. 

"  225.  In  distant  warfare  the  moon  is  victorious,  in 
near  places  the  sun.  When  the  foot  raised  first  in 
going  belongs  to  the  flowing  nadi,  complete  success  is 
the  result. 

"  226.  In  beginning  a  journey,  in  marriage,  in  entering 
any  town,  etc.,  in  all  auspicious  acts,  the  flow  of  the  moon 
is  good. 

"  227.  Putting  the  enemy's  army  towards  the  empty 
nadi,  and  one's  own  towards  the  full,  when  the  tatwa  is 
congenial,  one  might  conquer  the  whole  world. 

"  228.  Let  me  give  battle  in  the  direction  towards 
which  the  breath  flows,  victory  is  certain  even  if  Indra 
be  in  front. 

"  306.  Going  to  a  lonely  place  and  standing  with  the 
back  towards  the  sun,  let  a  man  look  with  attention  into 
the  neck  of  the  shade  he  throws  on  the  ground. 

"  307.  Let  him  see  this  for  as  long  a  time  as  he  can 
calmly  repeat  the  words,  '  Om  Kram  parahrahman  namah,^ 
for  108  times.  Then  let  him  look  up  into  the  sky.  He 
will  thus  see  Shankara  (the  figure  of  a  being  capable  of 
appearing  in  many  colours).^ 

"  308.  By  doing  this  for  six  months,  the  Yogi  becomes 
the  lord  of  those  who  walk  on  earth  ;  by  two  years  he 
becomes  absolutely  independent  and  his  own  master. 

"  309.  He  obtains  the  knowledge  of  the  three  times 
and  great  bliss.  There  is  nothing  impossible  for  the 
constant  practiser  of  yoga. 

"  328.  When  the  mouth,  nose,  eyes,  and  ears  are  stopped 
by  the  fingers,  the  tatwas  begin  to  take  their  rise  before 
the  eyes. 

^  This  point  has  been  referred  to  in  my  Indian  Life,  Religioiis  and 
Social,  pp.  41,  42. 

182 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

"  329.  He  who  knows  their  colour,  their  motion,  their 
taste,  their  places,  and  their  signs,  become  in  this  world 
equal  to  Rudra.^^ 

These  extracts  from  a  book  entitled  The  Science  of 
Breath  and  the  Philosophy  of  the  Tatwas}  are,  I  fancy, 
quite  as  much  as,  if  not  more  than,  the  patience  of 
ordinary  readers  can  endure,  and  they  are  certainly 
amply  sufficient  to  illustrate  how  even  the  finest 
speculations  of  the  Hindu  mind — those,  for  example,  with 
which  we  commenced  this  chapter — may  become,  in  prac- 
tice, mere  fatuous  puerilities. 

The  superhuman  power  claimed  by  the  modern  Yogi 
who  dares  to  court  public  attention  is  naturally  something 
very  limited,  indeed  modesty  itself,  when  compared  with 
the  pretensions  of  the  sect  as  a  whole.  The  following 
few  instances  will  probably  satisfy  the  curiosity  of  the 
reader  on  this  subject. 

In  his  Sketch  of  the  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus, 
Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  quotes  from  the  Asiatic  Monthly 
Journal  for  March  1829  an  instance  of  a  Madras  Yogi 
who  used  to  give  exhibitions  of  what  was  described  as 
"  sitting  in  the  air,"  and,  as  already  stated  in  Chap.  III., 
Dr.  Honigberger  furnishes  authentic  details  of  the  burial, 
without  any  harmful  results,  for  no  less  than  forty  days 
of  a  Yogi  at  Lahore  in  the  time  of  Maharajah  Ranjit 
Singh.2  What  stories  circulate  in  India  at  the  present 
day  about  Yogis  and  their  doings  will  be  understood  from 
the  following  extract  from  an  Indian  newspaper  : — 

"  Great  excitement  is  being  caused  amongst  the  simple 
hill  folk  in  some  of  the  villages  to  the  south  of  Simla  by 
a  certain  wandering  Yogi.  The  man's  last  reported  feat 
is  really  something  beyond  the  ordinary.  He  is  said  to 
have  burnt  himself  alive  on  a  large  pyre  in  front  of  a  whole 
wondering  village,  and  then  ten  days  later  to  have  appeared 
in  the  same  village  alive  and  unhurt.  The  hill  people 
firmly  believe  this  story,  which  they  say  must  be  true, 
as   the    Yogi   can   give    them   a   detailed   account   of   the 

^  Translated  from  the  Sanskrit  by  Rama  Prasad,  M.A. 
2  Thirty -five  Years  in  the  East,  by  Dr.  Honigberger,  Physician  to  the 
Court  of  Lahore,  pp.  126-130,  London,  1852. 

183 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

topography  of  heaven.  This,  of  course,  settles  the  matter. 
It  is  manifestly  impossible  for  any  man  to  describe  heaven 
unless  he  has  been  there  to  see."  ^ 

The  instances  above  cited  were  all  public  performances ; 
and  1  may  add  that  Yogis  have  always  been  given,  more 
than  other  Hindu  sectarians,  to  exhibitions  intended  to 
impress  the  people  and  win  their  admiration. 

So  strong  has  this  tendency  been  that  it  will  be 
within  the  memory  of  many,  that,  as  mentioned  in 
a  previous  chapter,  a  few  years  ago  a  Punjabi,  one  Bava 
Lachman  Das,  professing  to  be  a  Yogi,  gave  a  number 
of  exhibitions  at  the  Westminster  Aquarium  of  his 
wonderful  skill  as  a  posturist,  eliciting  a  good  deal  of 
attention  on  account  of  the  strange  and  seemingly  im- 
possible feats  he  performed  in  contorting  his  arms  and 
legs  into  most  grotesque  and  unnatural  positions. 

We  have  thus  far  considered  the  doctrines  and  pre- 
tensions of  the  Yogis  ;  it  remains  now  to  give  some  par- 
ticulars about  the  origin  and  working  of  the  sect  as  such. 
Of  the  Yogi  sect  as  it  now  exists  one  Mahandranath  was 
probably  the  real  founder,  though  the  fame  of  his  disciple 
Goraknath,  who  is  identified  with  Siva  himself,  has 
eclipsed  that  of  the  master.  Of  Goraknath  nothing 
authentic  is  known,  though  his  name  is  associated  with 
legends  dating  from  a  remote  past  to  comparatively 
modern  times.^ 

1  Civil  and  Military  Gazette,  Lahore,  May  1895. 

2  "  And  here  mention  may  be  made  of  a  modern  deified  Hindu  teacher 
or  sage,  named  Gorakh-Xath,  who  is  said  to  have  gone  from  India  into 
Nepal,  and  is  worshipped  there  as  well  as  at  Gorakh-poor  and  throughout 
the  Punjab.  Very  little  is  known  about  him,  and  he  belongs  more  to 
Hinduism  than  to  Buddhism.  Some  say  that  he  was  a  contemporary  of 
Kabir  (1488-1512),  and,  according  to  a  JanamsdTclii,  he  once  had  an 
interview  with  Nanak,  the  founder  of  the  Sikh  sect.  Such  legendary 
accounts  as  are  current  are  wrapped  in  much  mystery.  One  legend 
describes  him  as  born  from  a  lotus.  Others  describe  him  as  the  third 
or  fourth  in  a  series  of  Saiva  teachers,  and  the  founder  of  the  Kanphata  sect 
of  Yogis.  The  remarkable  thing  about  him  is  that  he  succeeded  in  achieving 
an  extraordinary  degree  of  popularity  among  Northern  Hindus  and  among 
some  adherents  of  Buddhism  in  Nepal.  His  tomb  is  in  the  Punjab,  and 
he  is  to  this  day  adored  as  a  kind  of  god  by  immense  numbers  of  the 
inhabitants  of  North- Western  India  under  the  hills." — Sir  Monier  Williams' 
Buddhism,  pp.  193,  194. 

184 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

"  The  most  flourishing  epoch  of  the  Samkhya-yoga 
belongs,"  says  Professor  Weber,  "  most  probably  to  the 
first  centuries  of  our  era,  the  influence  it  exercised  upon 
the  development  of  Gnosticism  in  Asia  Minor  being  un- 
mistakable ;  while  further,  both  through  this  channel  and 
afterwards  directly  also,  it  had  an  important  influence 
upon  the  growth  of  the  Sufi  philosophy."^ 

The  Yogis  as  we  find  them  at  the  present  time  pay 
especial  respect  to  Siva,  who  is  regarded  by  some  of  them 
as  the  first  Yogi,  and  they  also  honour  Bhairon  or  Bhairava, 
a  god  or  demigod,  usually  represented  pictorially  with 
a  club  in  one  hand,  a  bottle  in  the  other,  and  a  dog  in 
attendance  at  his  heels.  Members  of  all  castes  mav 
become  Yogis,  There  are  several  sub -orders,  but  the 
more  prominent  of  these  appear  to  be  the  Jogeeshurs 
or  Kanphatis  and  the  Augars  or  Oghars.  All  Yogis  wear 
rosaries  of  rudraksha  berries.  They  eat  meat,  and  drink 
ardent  spirits  ;  it  is  indeed  required  of  them  to  do  so,  and 
the  result,  in  many  cases,  is  the  formation  of  habits  of 
inebriety.  Yogis,  when  clothed  at  all,  wear  orange-yellow 
garments.  They  have  their  hair  plaited  with  threads 
of  black  wool,  and  coiled  on  the  top  of  the  head.  They 
do  not  cremate,  but  bury  their  dead  in  a  sitting  posture 
facing  the  north.  The  Kanphatis  wear  ear-rings  (mundra), 
often  huge  ones,  made  of  jade,  glass,  or  even  wood,  by 
which  token  they  may  be  readily  recognised.  Their 
sect-names  end  in  ndth. 

The  Augars  or  Oghars,  whose  sect-names  end  in  dds, 
are  usually  recruited  from  the  lowest  castes,  and  do  not 
seem  to  command  the  respect  of  the  people.  The  Augar 
does  not  wear  ear-rings,  but  usually  carries  a  nddh  or 
small  wooden  pipe  suspended  from  his  neck  by  a  black 
thread.  This  pipe  he  sounds  in  the  morning  and  in  the 
evening,  and  also  before  eating  or  drinldng  anything. 
Yogis  often  keep  dogs. 

A  Yogi  is  shown  in  the  illustration.  Fig.  10,  lightly 
clad,  smeared  with  ashes,  and  wearing  the  nddh  suspended 
from  his  neck.  Besides  the  gods  Siva  and  Bhairava, 
Yogis    pay    especial    honour    to    nine  ndths    or    immortal 

^  Indian  Literature,  p.  239. 

i85 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

saints,  wlio  dwell  at  ease  in  the  inaccessible  fastnesses 
of  the  Himalayas.     Their  names  are — 

1.  Gorakniith.  6.  Gopinath. 

2.  Machandernath.  7.  Prannath. 

3.  Charputnath.  8.  Surathnath. 

4.  Mangalnath.  9.  Chambanath. 

5.  Ghugonath. 

They  also  hold  in  special  veneration  eighty -four  Siddhas 
or  perfect  Yogis,  some  of  whom  are  beheved  to  be  still 
upon  the  earth.  "  The  distinctive  emblem  of  the  Siddha 
worshippers  is  a  silver  singhi  or  cyhndrical  ornament 
worn  on  a  thread  round  the  neck."  ^ 

Yoga,  with  its  practices  and  pretensions,  has  recently 
been  attracting  attention  outside  India,  and  the  Ndths 
and  Siddhas  just  referred  to,  the  immortal  men-gods  of 
the  Yogis,  have  probably  been  the  prototypes  of  the 
wonderful  Mahatmas  of  certain  European  and  American 
theosophists  of  our  day. 

There  is  no  denying  the  fact  that  yoga  is  practised 
by  many  earnest  men  of  unquestionably  high  character, 
yet,  unfortunately,  it  cannot  be  affirmed  of  a  majority  of 
the  twentieth-century  Yogis,  who  in  the  guise  of  ascetics 
peregrinate  the  country,  living  on  the  pious  creduHty  of 
the  masses,  that  they  are  anything  better  than  ignorant 
worthless  impostors,  and  even  dangerous  characters. 

*  Census  Report  of  the  Punjab,  1891,  by  E.  D.  Maclagan,  I.C.S.,  p.  115. 


1 86 


oo 

1-» 

« 

*-» 
o 


o 


CHAPTER  Ylll— continued 


Section  IV. — Vaisbnava  Sects  :  Sri  Vaishnayas,  Madhavas,  Ramanandis, 
Kabir  Panthis,  Ballavacharyas,  and  Chaitanites. 

HE  sects  now  to  be  noticed  all 
devote  themselves  specially  to 
the  worship  of  Vishnu,  but  differ 
from  one  another  primarily  in 
paying  adoration  to  him  in  his 
human  incarnations  either  as 
Ramachandra  or  as  Krishna.  As 
a  rule  they  are  all  vegetarians, 
and  abstain  from  spirits. 

Rama  worshippers  may  or 
may  not  associate  his  consort 
Sita  with  their  god.  Krishna  worshippers  usually  adore 
his  consorts,  or  his  mistress  Radha,  along  with  their 
chosen  deity. 

1.  The  Sri  Vaishnavas,  as  followers  of  Ramanuja 
are  called  because  they  worship  Sri  or  Lakshmi  as  the 
consort  of  Vishnu,  are  found  almost  exclusively  in  the 
Deccan,  where  they  have  flourishing  monastic  establish- 
ments. 

The  most  marked  peculiarity  of  these  sectarians  is 
their  scrupulousness  in  regard  to  food.  Nothing  must 
be  eaten  by  a  Ramanujite  that  has- not  been  prepared  by 
himself  and  in  strict  privacy.  When  actually  taking  his 
meal,  the  householder  of  this  sect  must  be  clad  either  in 
woollen  or  silk  but  not  cotton  garments.  There  are  two 
sub-sects,  the  Vadagalas  and  the  Tengalas.  On  the  fore- 
head the  Ramanujas  have  painted  certain  white  lines, 
which  in  the  case  of  Vadagalas  resemble  a  W,  in  that  of 

187 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

the  Tengalas  a  Y.  They  also  paint  a  red  streak  up 
and  down  between  the  white  lines.  Members  of  this 
sect  also  adorn  themselves  with  patches  of  gopi-chandana 
and  red  lines  on  the  breast  and  arms.  These  patches 
are  intended  to  represent  the  conch,  discus,  club,  and 
lotus,  emblems  of  Vishnu,  while  the  red  line  stands  for 
Sri,  or  Lakshmi,  the  wife  of  Vishnu. 

Not  uncommonly,  members  of  both  sexes  have  these 
emblems  branded  on  their  persons  with  red-hot  metal 
stamps. 

The  necklaces  and  rosaries  of  the  mendicant  orders 
are  made  of  tulasi  wood  or  of  lotus  seeds,  their  robes  are 
dved  of  a  reddish  colour.  Some  call  themselves  dandis, 
and  habitually  carry  a  staff,  but,  unlike  the  Sivite 
dandis  already  described,  they  do  not  throw  off  the  sacred 
thread. 

2.  Madhavas. — This  sect,  founded,  as  already  stated,  by 
Madhavacharya  (a.d.  1199-1278),  is  confined  to  Southern 
India.  The  monks  are  celibates,  and  live  in  monasteries. 
They  wear  a  single  orange-coloured  wrapper.  Like  the 
Sivite  dandis,  they  discard  the  sacred  thread,  carry  a 
staff  and  a  water-pot,  and  shave  their  heads.  They  also 
brand  upon  their  breasts  and  arms  the  symbols  of  Vishnu, 
The  sect  mark  on  the  forehead  is  composed  of  two 
perpendicular  lines  painted  with  gopi-chandana,  and  one 
black  line  between  them  traced  with  the  charcoal  of 
incense  burnt  before  the  image  of  Vishnu.  The  black 
line  terminates  in  a  round  yellow  spot  of  turmeric.  All 
castes  may  be  admitted  to  this  sect,  but  their  gurus  or 
preceptors  are  always  Brahmans. 

3.  The  Ramanandis. — This  flourishing  Vishnuvite  sect, 
which  is  spread  all  over  Northern  India,  is  known  also 
under  the  name  of  Ramaivat  or  Ramat.  It  was  founded 
by  Ramanand  somewhere  about  the  end  of  the  fourteenth 
or  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century.^ 

All  Ramanandis  bear  on  their  foreheads  the  distinguish- 
ing Vishnu  sect  mark,  the  trifala,  which  consists  of  three 

^  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson,  Sketch  of  the  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus, 
p.  31. 

i88 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

upright  lines — the  centre  one  red,  and  the  side  ones 
white.  They  also  wear  necklaces  and  rosaries  of  tulasi 
beads. 

The  Ramanandis  have  large  and  wealthy  monasteries 
in  Upper  India.  There  are  four  sub-sects  or  orders,  all 
celibate.  (1)  Achari,  (2)  Sanyasi,^  (3)  Khaki,  (4)  Bairagi, 
The  Acharis  wear  silken  and  woollen  garments,  the  Sanyasis 
salmon-coloured  cotton  clothes,  while  the  Khakis  usually 
go  about  naked,  their  bodies  powdered  with  dust  and  ashes 
and  their  hair  and  nails  undipped.  The  Bairagis  are 
probably  the  most  numerous  order  of  this  sect ;  their  name 
is  commonly  applied  to  all  Vishiiuvite  mendicants,  hence 
they  seem  to  deserve  special  notice. 

The  name  is  derived  from  bai,  without,  and  rdg,  attach- 
ment, i.e.  without  attachment  to  the  world,  and  is  appHed 
even  to  the  Bengali  followers  of  Chaitanya.^ 

Hindus  of  all  castes  are  permitted  to  become  Bairagis, 
and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  sect  is  recruited  from  all  castes, 
including  the  Brahmans.  Evidently,  Ramanand's  sectarian 
movement  was  one  opposed  to,  and  no  doubt  intended  to 
be  subversive  of,  the  established,  rigid,  and  immemorial  caste 
system. 

Bairagis  do  not  wear  coloured  clothes,  they  allow  their 
hair  to  grow  long,  and  paint  upon  their  foreheads  the 
trifala,  consisting  of  three  upright  lines  radiating  slightly 
from  the  top  of  the  nose,  the  central  line  being  of  a  red 
colour,  and  the  other  two  white  or  yellow.  As  stated  in 
a  previous  chapter,  the  central  red  line  is  said  to  typify 
Vishnu,  the  lines  on  the  left  and  right  respectively 
Brahma  and  Siva.  Bairagis  wear  necklaces  and  carry 
rosaries  of  basil  (tulasi)  beads.  They  do  not  eat  meat  or 
drink  spirits,  but  are  commonly  addicted  to  bhang.  All, 
whether  of  the  three  "  twice-born  castes  "  or  not,  put  on 
the  sacred  thread  and  wear  a  tuft  of  hair  on  the  crown 
of  the  head — practices  which  would  seem  intended  as 
assertions    of    the   equality  of    all  Hindus,  effected   by   a 

^  The  use  of  this  name  to  designate  quite  distinct  sects  or  orders  is,  to 
say  the  least,  somewhat  confusing  to  the  inquirer. 
2  Travels  of  a  Hindu,  by  Bholanath  Chander,  p.  35. 

189 


THE  xMYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

process  of  levelling  up  to  the  higher  strata  in  the  caste 
system. 

As  a  head-covering  the  Bairagi  often  uses  a  Ram  nam 
Tea  safa,  which  is  a  piece  of  cotton  cloth  with  the  names 
of  Kama  and  Sita  stamped  on  it,  and  usually  obtained  from 
Muttra  or  Bindrabun. 

Bairagis  are  supposed  to  be  celibates,  but  the  *'  monks 
of  this  order  have  generally  a  large  number  of  nuns 
attached  to  their  convents,  with  whom  they  openly  live  as 
man  and  wife."  ^ 

A  most  elaborate  ritual  has  been  laid  down  for  the 
guidance  of  Bairagis  in  the  daily  routine  of  the  indispensable 
business  and  duties  of  life,  prescribing  in  minute  detail  how, 
for  example,  the  ascetic  should  wash,  bathe,  sit  down, 
perform  pranayam  (stoppage  or  regulation  of  respiration), 
purify  his  body,  purge  his  mind,  meditate  on  Vishnu,  repeat 
the  Gayatri  as  composed  for  the  special  use  of  members  of  the 
sect,  worship  Rama,  Sita,  Lakshman,  Bharata,  and  Satringah, 
together  with  Rama's  bows  and  arrows,  and,  lastly,  the 
monkey  god  Hanuman.^ 

So  many  observances  are  prescribed  and  so  much 
repetition  is  enjoined  that  it  is  evident  that  the  object  in 
view  was  to  give  the  Bairagi  enough  to  fully  occupy  his 
thoughts  and  his  waking  hours.  Of  course  the  mystic 
union  of  the  worshipper  with  his  deity  is  an  object  kept 
prominently  before  him  in  these  religious  exercises,  especially 
in  his  meditations,  and  he  is  required  to  realise  that  Rama 
and  himself  are  one,  not  two.  The  Bairagi  is  expected  to  pay 
at  least  one  visit  to  Dwarka  in  order  to  be  branded  on  his 
right  arm  with  the  Vishnu  symbols — the  discus,  the  conch, 
the  club,  and  the  lotus. 

4.  The  Kahir  Panthis. — Kabir  having  practically  re- 
commended his  followers  to  be  all  things  to  all  men,  and 
to  concihate  the  world  at  large  by  outward  conformity  with 
prevailing  customs,  it  has  come  about,  quite  naturally,  that 

^  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  by  Dr.  J.  N.  Bhattacliarjee,  p.  445. 

2  The  history  of  these  personages,  as  narrated  in  the  famous  Sanski-it 
epic  the  Ramayana,  has  been  epitomised  in  my  Great  Indian  Epics  (George 
Bell  &  Sons,  London). 

190 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

the  Kabir  Panthis  have  no  distinctive  dress  or  ceremonies. 
As  far  as  they  do  affect  peculiarities  of  any  kind,  they 
follow  those  of  the  Ramats,  wearing  tulasi  beads  and  having 
the  trifala  painted  on  their  foreheads.  Monks  of  this  sect 
may  be  met  with  all  over  Northern  and  Central  India. 
It  would  seem  that  the  Kabir  Panthis  hold,  in 
opposition  to  the  generally  accepted  Hindu  ideas,  that 
the  Creator  "  has  body  formed  of  the  five  elements  of 
matter,  and  that  He  has  mind  endowed  with  the  three 
gunas,  or  quaUties  of  being— of  course  of  ineffable  purity 
and  irresistible  power ;  He  is  free  from  the  defects  of 
human  natures,  and  can  assume  what  particular  shape  He 
will  ;  in  all  other  respects  He  does  not  differ  from  man,  and 
the  pure  man,  the  Sadh  of  the  Kabir  sect,  is  His  living 
resemblance,  and  after  death  is  His  associate  and  equal."  ^ 

5.  The  BallavacharyaSy  well  known  in  Western  India, 
worship  Bala  Gopala,  the  cowherd  boy.  All  Hindus, 
Sudras  included,  may  join  the  sect,  but  men  of  the  lowest 
castes,  such  as  dhohis  (washermen),  mochis  (shoemakers), 
darzis  (tailors),  and  napits  (barbers),  are  not  received 
into  it. 

Asceticism  is  practically  unknown  amongst  the  Balla- 
vites,  since  they  hold  ''  the  doctrine  that  the  spiritual 
progress  of  the  soul  is  possible  only  by  keeping  the  body 
and  its  powers  in  a  sound  condition."  ^  This  being  the  case, 
a  consideration  of  their  peculiarities  lies  outside  the  scope 
of  the  present  book. 

6.  The  Chaitanites. — Even  the  lowest  castes  are  ad- 
mitted into  this  sect.  Chaitanite  mendicant  monks  are 
generally  called  Bairagis.  Both  males  and  females  are 
admitted,  the  former  being  addressed  as  Babaji  and  the 
latter  as  Mataji.  These  Babajis  and  Matajis  commonly 
live  together  as  husbands  and  wives,  though  the  former 
affect  the  usual  garments  of  ascetics  and  the  latter  those 
of  widows. 

In  all  religious  systems  the  celibate  state  has,  with 
good    reason,     been    looked    upon    as    one    of    supreme 

^  Wilson's  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  p.  51. 
2  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  by  Dr.  J.  N.  Bhattacharjee,  p.  458. 

191 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

self-sacrifice,  and  therefore  as  a  holy  state  ;  but  it  is  so 
entirely  unnatural  that,  when  embraced  as  a  rule  of  life  by 
sects,  orders,  or  professions,  it  has  never  been  lived  up  to. 
What  steady  and  protracted  opposition  was  experienced 
in  the  Christian  Church  before  celibacy  could  be  enforced 
amongst  Christian  ecclesiastics,  and  what  gross  immoralities 
and  scandals  compulsory  celibacy  led  to,  are  well  known. ^ 

"  The  Chaitanite  nuns,"  says  Dr.  Bhattacharjee,  "  are  re- 
cruited chiefly  from  the  superannuated  unfortunates  of  the 
town.  The  order  is  joined  also  by  some  of  the  unchaste 
widows  of  the  lower  classes."  ^ 

There  are,  however,  some  of  the  Chaitanite  Bairagis, 
the  so-called  Brikats  (men  disgusted  with  the  world),  who 
profess  celibacy  and  live  in  monasteries,  of  which  a  great 
many  have  been  erected  by  the  liberality  of  the  richer  lay 
members  of  the  sect. 

The  dress  worn  by  the  Chaitanite  monks  is  generally 
white,  but  a  yellow  colour  is  sometimes  adopted.  Like 
other  Vaishnavas,  the  Chaitanites  paint  perpendicular  lines 
on  their  foreheads,  generally  with  gopi-chandana  ;  they  also, 
by  means  of  engraved  stamps  dipped  in  moist  gopi- 
chandana^  print  upon  their  arms  and  breasts  the  names 
of  their  deities  and  often  the  word  gora,  which  is  a 
corruption  for  goura,  one  of  the  many  names  of  their 
prophet.  Their  rosaries  and  necklaces  are  made  of  beads 
cut  from  the  tulasi  plant,  which  is  held  in  high  venera- 
tion by  them. 

The  Chaitanites  are  strict  vegetarians,  and  avoid  the 
use  of  all  intoxicants.  They  are  required  to  abstain 
from  communion  with  those  Hindus  who  offer  animal 
sacrifices.^ 

There  are  amongst  the  followers  of  Chaitanya  various 
sub-sects  well  known  for  their  immoralities.  For  example, 
the  Spashta  DayaJcas.  amongst  whom  the  monks  and  nuns 
live  together  in  the  same  monasteries,  with  results  which 

^  On  this  subject  Mr.  H.  C.  Lea's  full  and  learned  work,  Sacerdotal 
Celibacy,  is  probably  the  best  one  in  English. 

2  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  p.  467. 

3  \Vard's  Hindus,  pp.  125,  126. 

192 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

may  well  b.e  imagined  ;  the  Sahajas,  who  hold  that  every 
man  is  Krishna  and  every  woman  Radha,  and  consequently 
approve  of  promiscuous  intercourse  ;  and  the  Bauh,  who, 
going  one  step  further,  maintain  that  "  sexual  indulgence  is 
the  most  approved  form  of  religious  exercise."  ^ 

^  Dr.  Bhattacharjee's  Hindu  Castes  and  Sects,  p.  483. 


N 


193 


CHAPTER  Y III— continued 


Section  V. — Three  Sikh  Mendicant  Orders  :  Udasis,  Nirraalis,  Akalis. 


N  the  last  chapter  I  noted  the  more 
essential  characteristics  of  Sikhism, 
and  also  the  fact  that  at  the  present 
time  it  is  manifesting  a  tendency, 
real  if  hardly  perceptible,  to  re- 
adopt  many  of  the  practices  of 
Hinduism,  out  of  which  it  gradu- 
ally emerged  in  the  fifteenth,  six- 
teenth, and  seventeenth  centuries, 
under  the  stimulus  of  poHtical 
conditions  which  have  long  since 
ceased   to   exist. 

Of  the  mendicant  orders  which 
sprang  out  of  Sikhism  I  have 
selected  the  Udasis,  Nirmalis,  and 
Akalis  for  notice  here,  more  especi- 
ally on  account  of  the  peculiar  and 
picturesque  circumstances  to  which 
the  latter  two  owe  their  begin- 
nings. 

The  Udasis} — This  order  of 
sadhus,  which  is  an  extremely 
numerous  one  in  the  Punjab,  was 
founded  bv  Siri  Chand,  eldest  son 
of  Baba  Nanak.  Siri  Chand  lived 
to  see  the  sixth  Sikh  guru,  Har 
Govind,  and,  when  he  was  over  a 
hundred  years  old,  he  adopted 
1  Udasi  =  grief,  dejection. 

194 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

Gurditta,  a  son  of  the  last-named  guru,  to  succeed  liim  as 
abbot  of  the  order  of  the  Udasis.  But  Gurditta,  being  a 
sporting  character  and  a  married  man,  was  disqualified 
from  being  a  proper  head  of  the  brotherhood.  He  there- 
fore made  over  the  spiritual  leadership  of  the  order  to 
four  men  who  were  to  act  as  his  mosands  or  deputies,  and 
these  four  became  the  founders  of  the  four  principal  sub- 
orders, called  dhuans,  or  hearths,  into  which  the  Udasis 
are  divided. 

It  is  stated  that,  when  Siri  Chand's  claims  to  succeed 
his  father  Baba  Nanak  in  the  guruship  were  passed  over 
by  his  venerable  parent  in  favour  of  Angad,  one  of  his 
most  devoted  followers,  the  disappointed  son  threw  ashes 
on  his  head  and  person,  in  token  of  his  grief  and  abase- 
ment ;  and  to  this  day  the  Udasis  hold  ashes  in  great 
esteem  in  memory  of  this  painful  event,  the  ashes,  for 
ceremonial  purposes  mixed  with  calcareous  earth,  being 
sometimes  made  into  large  balls  several  inches  in 
diameter. 

Udasis  are  usually  decently  clad  in  salmon-coloured 
clothes.  They  wear  a  pointed  cap  on  the  head  and  a 
black  cord  known  as  a  sdlee  round  the  neck.  They  carry 
a  jholi  or  bag  hanging  from  the  shoulder,  and  a  toomba 
or  dried  pumpkin  which  serves  as  a  water-pot.  A  black 
dsan,  or  small  carpet,  often  forms  a  part  of  their  travelling 
outfit.  Some  wear  a  mass  of  matted  hair  on  their  heads, 
others  go  almost  clean-shaven,  there  being  apparently  no 
general  rule  on  this  matter.  The  use  of  flesh,  spirits,  and 
tobacco  is  denied  to  the  Udasis.  Many  members  of  the 
order  are  good  Sanskrit  scholars.  When  a  chela  is 
admitted  into  the  order,  he  is  adjured  to  avoid  those  two 
deadly  temptations :  gold  and  women.  The  initiatory 
ceremony  is  brought  to  a  conclusion  ^by  the  chela  drinking 
the  water  with  which  his  guru's  feet  have  been  washed. 
He  is  then  taught  certain  portions  of  a  hymn  known  as 
the  jap-ji,  and  dismissed  with  this  final  admonition — 

"  Charan  sadh  ke  dho  dho  peyo 
Urap  Badh  ko  apna  jeyo." 

(Drink  the  water  with  which  the  sadhu  has  washed  his 

195 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

feet,  and  give  up  your  soul  and  body  to  the  sadhu,  i.e.  the 
guru.) 

The  Nirmalis  (the  pure). — The  circumstances  under 
which  this  order  originated  are,  I  should  say,  unique.  In 
A.D.  1691,  or  thereabouts,  Govind  Singh,  the  tenth  and 
last  guru  of  the  Sikhs,  celebrated  with  unusual  pomp  at 
Anandpur  the  gay  Hindu  saturnalia  known  as  the  Holi. 
Visitors  were  attracted  thither  from  considerable  distances, 
and  amongst  others  came  a  young  and  beautiful  Hindu 
widow  named  Anup  Kaur,  a  Khatrani  by  caste,  and  a 
resident  of  Lahore.  Guru  Govind  Singh,  who  was  only 
twenty-five  years  of  age  and  a  particularly  handsome  man, 
captivated  the  susceptible  heart  of  the  young  widow,  and 
she  resolved  to  try  her  arts  upon  him.  It  appears  that  at 
this  period  the  chief  object  of  Govind's  life  was  to  induce, 
I  might  almost  say  compel^  the  goddess  Devi  to  appear  to  him 
and  promise  him  her  assistance  against  the  Muhammadan 
rulers  of  the  land,  who  were  carrying  on  a  bitter  religious 
persecution  of  the  Hindus.  For  the  attainment  of  the  end 
he  had  in  view,  Govind  had  gathered  many  Brahmans 
together, — for,  like  all  Hindus,  he  believed  that  if  the 
appropriate  religious  ceremonies  were  correctly  carried  out, 
the  goddess,  however  reluctant,  would  be  constrained  to 
make  her  appearance. 

It  is  well  known  to  the  Hindu  that  besides  the 
Brahmans  there  are  others  who,  by  the  practice  of  painful 
austerities,  have  become  possessed  of  great,  sometimes 
unlimited,  power.  These  thaumaturgists  are  to  be  found 
only  here  and  there,  it  is  true,  amongst  the  sadhus  of 
various  sects  who  abound  in  India.  To  the  sadhus, 
therefore,  Govind  frequently  resorted  for  advice  and 
assistance  in  his  endeavours  to  propitiate  the  goddess 
Devi.  Having  come  to  know  this,  a  happy  idea  entered 
the  head  of  the  love-sick  Anup  Kaur.  She  would  person- 
ate a  sadhu,  enter  into  close  relations  with  Govind,  and, 
in  the  end,  attract  and  ensnare  the  object  of  her  passion. 

In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  she  disguised  herself  as  a 
sadhu,  and,  being  possessed  of  ample  means,  she  easily 
secured  accomplices  in  her  scheme.  She  took  up  her 
abode  at  a  spot  within  a  short  distance  of  Anandpur,  and 

196 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

her  satellites  soon  let  it  be  known  through  the  countryside 
that  a  most  holy  and  learned  Sanyasi  had  favoured  the 
neighbourhood  with  his  presence.  It  was  also  given  out 
that  this  most  saintly  Mahatma  had  a  special  key  to  open 
the  heart  of  the  goddess  Devi.  The  important  news,  of 
course,  reached  Govind,  for  whom  it  had  been  specially 
prepared,  and  he  forthwith  instructed  a  confidential  ser- 
vant to  arrange  an  early  interview  with  the  new-comer. 
The  youthful  sadhu,  however,  betrayed  no  eagerness  to 
meet  the  guru,  and  merely  sent  word  to  the  effect  that  if 
Govind  wished  to  come  he  might  do  so,  but  on  condition 
that  he  came  without  any  pomp  or  following,  in  an  ascetic 
garb,  at  midnight  and  alone. 

These  conditions  excited  the  imagination  of  Govind 
Singh,  and  enhanced  the  importance  of  the  sadhu  in  his 
eyes.  So,  ha\dng  donned  the  orange-coloured  vestments  of 
an  ascetic,  he  sought  the  saintly  Mahatma  in  the  stillness 
of  the  night  at  the  appointed  hour. 

He  was  graciously  received,  and  the  usual  exchange  of 
compliments  and  ideas  took  place.  After  a  little  while, 
on  some  pretext  or  other  the  sadhu  retired,  and  then  re- 
appeared before  the  astonished  guru  decked  in  silks  and 
jewellery,  a  young  and  fascinating  woman,  with  every 
attraction  that  could  lure  an  ordinary  mortal  to  her 
embraces.  But  Govind,  like  Joseph  under  somewhat 
similar  circumstances,  kept  his  virtue,  and,  after  rebuking 
Anup  Kaur,  made  good  his  escape  ;  not,  however,  before 
the  disappointed  temptress  had  raised  the  cry  of  "  Thief  !  " 
Govind,  who  was  never  at  any  time  deficient  in  artfulness, 
joined  in  the  cry,  and,  seizing  Anup  Kaur's  brother  in  the 
darkness,  added  greatly  to  the  confusion,  in  which  he 
managed  to  shp  away  safely. 

When  Govind  Singh  returned  home  he  gave  the  ascetic 
garb  he  had  assumed  for  the  memorable  occasion  to  one 
of  his  followers,  Bir  Singh,  a  very  holy  personage,  and 
authorised  him  to  found  a  new  sect  of  sadhus,  to  be 
called  Nirmalis,  or  the  pure,  in  commemoration  of  the 
event. 

This  adventure  of  Govind's  bore  fruit  of  another  kind 
also.      The   wiles   of   Anup   Kaur   had   made   a   deep   im- 

197 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

pression  on  liim,  and  he  wrote,  or  more  likely  collected,  no 
less  than  four  hundred  and  four  stories  on  the  wiles  of 
women,  for  the  timely  warning,  it  is  said,  of  his  simple 
followers. 

The  Nirmalis  are,  on  the  whole,  a  learned  order  much 
given  to  Sanskrit  studies,  and  are  followers  of  the  Vedanta 
philosophy.  There  is  a  tradition  amongst  them  that  five 
original  members  of  the  order  went  to  study  Sanskrit 
theology  at  Benares,  but  were  denied  the  privilege  of  such 
studies  by  the  Brahmans,  because  they  happened  to  be 
Sudras  by  caste.  However,  Guru  Govind  Singh  cheered 
the  disappointed  students  by  the  prediction  that  their 
order  would  be  famous  for  its  learned  men,  from  whom 
the  Brahmans  themselves  would  be  glad  to  receive 
instruction. 

Nirmalis  wear  their  hair  long,  and  dress  themselves  in 
reddish-yellow  garments. 

The  Nihangs  or  Akalis} — The  circumstances  which  gave 
rise  to  this  sect  are  connected  with  the  flight  of  Govind 
Singh  from  Cham  Kor,  famous  in  Sikh  annals.  At  this 
place,  in  a  little  fortified  enclosure,  some  forty  Siklis 
defended  themselves  against  a  large  number  of  the 
Mogul  soldiers  sent  against  them  by  the  Muhammadan 
governor  of  Lahore.  When  hard  pressed  by  the  Imperial 
troops,  Govind  Singh  dressed  up  one  of  his  men  in  his 
own  clothes,  and,  leaving  him  in  charge  of  the  defence, 
escaped  secretly  and  alone  from  the  beleaguered  post. 
The  place,  though  stoutly  defended,  was  eventually  cap- 
tured by  the  Moguls,  but  a  few  of  the  brave  defenders 
managed  to  get  away,  and  went  at  once  in  search  of  their 
revered  guru.  They  found  him  not  far  from  the  village 
of  Machiwara,  asleep  near  a  well,  quite  overcome  with 
fatigue. 

In  this  village  Govind  had  some  Muslim  friends,  to 
whom  he  appealed  for  help  in  order  to  conceal  himself 
from  the  pursuit  of  the  Mogul  soldiery,  who  would  no 
doubt  be  scouring  the  country  in  search  of  him.  These 
good  friends  helped  him  to  disguise  himself  in  the  blue 
dress  of  a  Mushm  faquir,  known  about  those  parts  as  an 
*  iVt^a?tg'= humble.  ^A^»  =  immortal. 
198 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

Uch  ka  fir  (a  saint  of  Uch),  so  named  from  the  village 
of  Uch  near  Multan,  where  lived  numerous  Sayads  or 
descendants  of '  the  prophet  Muhammad.  To  make  the 
disguise  more  effective,  Govind  Singh  was  placed  on  a  light 
bed,  known  as  a  chdrpdi,  and  carried  along  the  road  as  an 
Uch  ka  fir  would  ordinarily  be  carried.  Of  the  men  who 
shouldered  his  chdrfdi  two  were  Sikhs,  and  two,  whose 
names  are  remembered  to  this  day, — Nabi  Khan  and 
Ghani  Khan, — were  Muhammadans.  A  third  Sikh  was  in 
attendance,  fanning  the  pseudo-;p*V.  They  had  not  gone  far 
when  they  were  overtaken  by  the  Muhammadan  troops, 
who  looked  upon  Pir-ji  with  some  suspicion.  To  test  the 
case,  the  soldiers  requested  the  fir  to  prove  that  he  was 
what  he  professed  to  be,  by  eating  with  them.  In  reply, 
the  attendants  said  that  the  holy  man  never  ate  anything 
at  all,  except  perhaps  one  grain  of  barley  in  the  month, 
but  that  they  themselves  would  willingly  eat  with  the 
Moguls  ;  and  they  did  so,  the  three  Sikhs  along  with  their 
two  Muslim  friends. 

When  the  party  reached  a  village  inhabited  by 
Govind's  own  people,  he  burnt  a  portion  of  the  blue 
clothes  he  had  assumed  by  way  of  disguise,  and  the 
remainder  he  presented  to  one  Man  Singh,  a  favouite 
follower  of  his,  to  be  worn  by  him  as  the  distinctive 
garb  of  a  new  order — Nihangs  or  Akalis — which  he  was 
authorised  to  found. 

The  Akalis,  in  consequence,  wear  blue  garments,  but 
the  dress  they  have  adopted,  in  which  their  veneration  of 
warlike  weapons  finds  exaggerated  expression,  is  grotesque. 
At  the  commencement  of  the  section  is  the  likeness 
of  a  present-day  Akali,  in  all  his  war  paint,  which 
speaks  for  itself.  During  the  Sikh  raj,  the  Akalis 
were  the  most  fanatical  followers  .of  the  cult  of  Guru 
Govind  Singh,  and  their  weapons  were  steeped  in  blood 
on  many  a  fierce  battlefield ;  but,  redoubtable  though 
they  were,  their  reckless  fanaticism  was  hardly  a 
match  for  the  steady  courage  of  the  Purbia  sepoys, 
who  taught  them  and  their  Maharajah  Ranjit  Singh 
the  supreme  importance  of  training  and  discipline,  a 
lesson    which    the    astute    Maharajah    laid    to    heart,  and 

199 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

turned  to  good  account  in  the  later  years  of  liis  strenuous 
Hie} 

The  manners  and  customs  of  these  sectaries  are  as 
peculiar  as  their  personal  appearance.  When  an  AJcali  is 
going  to  eat,  he  is  required  to  shout  with  a  loud  voice, 
"  Is  anyone  in  want  of  a  meal  ?  "  and,  in  the  unlikely  event 
of  anybody  coming  forward  in  response  to  this  inquiry,  he 
is  to  satisfy  the  hungry  stranger  before  touching  food 
himself. 

At  Sikh  dharmsalas,  which  are  chapels  and  rest-houses 
combined,  it  is  the  common  practice  of  the  AJcalis  to 
gather  idly  and  expectantly  round  a  large  stone  mortar,  in 
which  one  of  the  party  busies  himself  in  bruising  bhang 
(hemp  leaves)  with  a  stout  wooden  pestle.  When  the 
leaves  are  reduced  to  a  green  pulp,  this  is  mixed  with 
water  and  sugar  and  drunk  with  great  appreciation  by 
these  fantastically  clad  immortals. 

Many  Akalis,  wandering  about  the  country  in  comfort 
with  horses  and  camels,  do  not  hesitate  to  ask  for 
pecuniary  assistance.  The  leader  of  one  of  these  bands 
once  paid  me  a  visit,  sending  in  the  following  visiting- 
card  : — 

PREM  SINGH 

(NiHANG  Singh) 
Vahiriya. 
(Of  the  party  of  Nihangs  that  travel  about  and  have  no  fixed  abode.) 


I  began  this  sketch  of  the  mendicant  orders  with  an 
account  of  the  harmless,  unobtrusive  Jains  wandering  over 
the  country  on  foot,  carrying  merely  a  besom,  not  of 
destruction,  but  of  ultra-tenderness  for  the  lowly  life  of 
insects  and  lower  organisms.  I  have  concluded  my 
account  by  introducing  to  the  reader  the  truculent  bhang- 
drinking  Akali  roving  about,  often  on  horseback  or  camel - 
back,  bristling  all  over  with  weapons  of  war. 

Although  the  armed  Akali  may,  by  an  obvious 
association  of  ideas,   recall  to  mind  the  famous  military 

'■  Memoirs  of  Colonel  Alexander  Gardner,  chap.  xi. 

200 


ASCETIC  SECTS  AND  THEIR  SUBDIVISIONS 

orders  of  the  West, — the  Templars,  Hospitallers,  and 
Teutonic  knights  of  the  Middle  Ages, — the  resemblance  is 
too  slight  and  trifling  for  even  a  moment's  consideration. 
However,  the  immense  interval,  both  chronological  and 
pyschological,  between  the  Jains  of  the  fifth  century 
B.C.  and  the  Akalis  of  the  seventeenth  century  of  our 
era,  may  well  serve  as  an  emphatic  illustration  of  the 
wonderful  dissimilitude  of  some  of  the  ideals  which  under- 
lie the  practice  of  asceticism  and  mendicancy  in  India. 


201 


CHAPTER  IX 

PERSONAL   EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS,  GOOD  AND   BAD 

I.  The  Swinging  Bairagi.  2.  The  Sanyasi  Swami  Bhaskarananda  of 
Benares.  3.  Gareeb  Das,  an  Urdhabahu  Bairagi.  4.  A  Yogi  who 
protected  Amritsar  from  the  Plague.  5.  A  Brahmachari  from  the 
Tamil  Country.     6.  A  Sadhu  of  European  Descent  at  Simla.     7.  A 

Naked  Sanyasi  and  his  Companion,  a  Princess  of  B .     8.  A  Sadhu 

of  Royal  Lineage,  Prince  Bit  Bhanu  Singh.  9.  A  Sadhu  who  had 
found  God.  10.  A  Sun-worshipping  Bairagi.  11.  Yogis  and  Pious 
Women.  12.  A  pseudo-Sadhu  and  his  Adventures.  13.  Yogi  Guests. 
14.  A  Sadhu  as  Restaurateur.     15.  A  Saint  in  Chains. 

IFE-WEARY  as  well  as  light- 
hearted  sadhus,  professional 
anchorites  both  good  and  bad. 
are  to  be  found  all  over  India 
to-day  just  as  in  times  past ; 
and  if  in  the  previous  chapters 
I  have  succeeded  at 
all  in  awakening  the 
reader's  interest  in 
Indian  sadhus^  he  will 
not  object  to  a  closer  and,  as  it  were,  more  personal 
acquaintance  with  these  ascetics,  such  as  is  afforded  by 
the  following  narratives  of  actual  interviews  with  them, 
and  of  trustworthy  accounts  of  their  doings  carefully  sifted 
and  punctually  noted  down  by  me  as  soon  as  the  facte 
were  placed  in  my  possession. 


1.  The  Swinging  Bairagi. 

Near  a  large  tanlc  known  as  Ratan  Chand's  talao,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  a  group  of  Hindu  temples  in  Lahore, 
and  under  some  fine  old  peepul  trees,  two  or  three  hundred 

202 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

people,  mostly  Hindus  of  both  sexes,  were  assembled  one 
fine  evening  in  November,  most  of  them  attentively  watch- 
ing a  palanquin  which  had  been  placed  on  the  high 
platform  of  a  samadh  or  cenotaph  erected  to  the  memory 
of  a  Hindu  lady  by  her  wealthy  son.  The  screens  of  the 
palanquin  were  drawn  back,  but  I  could  see  nothing 
within  until  I,  approached  quite  near,  when  I  discovered 
the  emaciated  figure  of  an  almost  naked  man  sitting  with 
his  knees  drawn  up  against  his  chin  in  an  attitude  common 
enough  in  India,  but  one  which  the  European  would  find 
it  rather  difficult  to  imitate. 

Down  the  length  of  the  palanquin  was  a  board,  closely 
studded  with  blunt  iron  nails,  and  it  was  upon  a  portion 
of  this  most  uncomfortable  bed  of  spikes  that  the  Bairagi 
was  seated,  and  was  supposed,  perhaps  quite  correctly,  to 
sleep  at  night.  Above  the  bony  shins  and  exaggerated 
knot-like  knees  of  this  seated  figure  appeared  a  human 
head  with  an  immense  shock  of  hair  like  a  chignon  hanging 
heavily  behind  it.  Its  hollow  eyes,  peering  over  a  pair  of 
green  glass -and -wire  goggles,  had  a  queer  hunted  look 
about  them,  and  its  nostrils  seemed  strangely  misshapen, 
one  being  apparently  distended  with  some  sort  of  plug  or 
other.  From  this  repulsive  figure  there  proceeded,  from 
time  to  time,  sundry  guttural  sounds  and  hollow  coughs. 

A  faithful  disciple,  conveniently  at  hand,  explained  to 
me  that  his  master  in  the  palanquin  was  more  than  one 
hundred  and  thirty  years  of  age,  and  had  resolved  to 
undergo  certain  penances  until  he  should  succeed  in 
collecting  enough  money  to  feast  one  hundred  thousand 
Brahmans  and  to  give  each  one  of  his  guests  the  present 
of  at  least  one  rupee,  apparently  for  being  good  enough  to 
partake  of  the  banquet  provided  for  him. 

As  I  stood  near  the  palanquin  a  succession  of  men  and 
women,  mostly  the  latter,  mounted  the  platform,  approached 
the  ascetic,  and,  bowing  down  before  him  so  that  their 
heads  touched  the  very  floor,  placed  their  offerings,  con- 
sisting for  the  most  part  of  pice  or  of  small  silver  coins, 
before  the  holy  man.  This  done,  they  passed  on  without 
an  audible  word,  though  some  silent  wish  or  prayer  was 
no  doubt  in  each  one's  heart.      The  saint  did  not  con- 

203 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

descend  to  notice  anyone,  but  merely  looked  absently, 
with  those  queer  hunted  eyes  of  his,  at  his  admirers  as 
they  approached  his  presence  and  added  their  contributions 
towards  the  considerable  sum  necessary  for  the  fulfilment 
of  his  vow. 

Presently  a  stir  took  place  amongst  the  ascetic's 
attendants.  The  usual  time  for  him  to  perform  his 
ablutions  had  arrived.  A  pair  of  wooden-soled  sandals 
studded  with  spikes  were  placed  beside  the  palanquin,  and 
upon  their  prickly  surface  the  poor  fellow  was  helped  to 
place  his  bare  feet.  With  the  assistance  of  his  men,  the 
emaciated  Bairagi  was  brought  forward  and  allowed  to 
subside  on  to  a  low  wooden  stool  about  four  or  five  inches 
high.  When  he  emerged  from  his  palanquin  the  onlookers 
took  up  what,  according  to  Indian  ideas,  is  a  most 
respectful  attitude,  all  present  facing  the  ascetic  with 
slightly  bowed  heads  and  palms  joined  together  before 
their  breasts.  Anyone  who  may  have  seen  a  picture  of  a 
Rajah's  durbar,  painted  by  an  Indian  artist,  will  at  once 
comprehend  what  I  mean.  All  faces  turned  in  one 
direction, — the  direction  of  the  Rajah, — each  man's  feet 
set  close  together  side  by  side,  his  palms  accurately  joined 
one  against  the  other  and  the  fingers  slanting  upwards 
at  an  angle  of  about  forty-five  degrees — all  beautifully 
regular,  all  uniformly  respectful. 

The  saint  reputed  to  be  one  hundred  and  thirty  years 
old,  though  certainly  very  rickety  and  worn,  was  probably 
not  more  than  half  that  age.  He  coughed  a  good  deal  and 
seemed  very  weak. 

When  about  to  perform  his  ablutions  in  public,  he 
requested  the  people  nearest  him  to  stand  back  a  little, 
lest  the  water  should  reach  and  inconvenience  them.  A 
slight  backward  movement  was  the  result,  and,  when  an 
attendant  poured  some  water  on  the  Bairaq^s  hands,  it 
was  seen  that  his  wrists  were  united  by  an  iron  chain  not 
more  than  six  or  seven  inches  long.  Now  came  the 
important  operation  of  dislodging  the  huge  plug  from  his 
right  nostril.  As  the  sadhu  removed  it,  not  without  a 
little  effort,  it  was  followed  by  a  loosely  tmsted  cord  of 
unspun  cotton  about  eight  or  nine  inches  long,  which  had 

204 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

apparently  been  hanging  in  the  pharynx  at  the  back  of 
the  nose.  No  wonder  the  poor  fellow  coughed  so 
frequently  and  so  painfully.  Two  cotton  cords,  similar 
to  the  one  described  but  somewhat  longer,  were  handed 
to  the  Bairagi.  Their  ends  were  pointed  and  perhaps  a 
little  stiffened  with  wax.  With  an  unpleasant,  almost 
painful,  grunt  or  moan,  he  passed  them  both  up  his  nostrils, 
and  then,  opening  his  mouth  as  wide  as  possible,  fished  up 
with  his  long  skinny  fingers  the  pendent  ends  of  the  two 
cords.  All  four  extremities  were  now  in  his  hands,  and 
he  proceeded  to  draw  the  strings  to  and  fro  through  liis 
nose  and  mouth  five  or  six  times.  When  Maharaj,  as 
they  called  him,  had  thus  cleansed  his  nostrils  and  throat, 
two  narrow  bamboo  tubes,  each  about  eighteen  inches  long, 
were  brought  to  him.  One  had  a  small  funnel  at  its 
extremity.  The  Bairagi  having  held  his  head  aslant,  the 
small  end  of  the  fmmel  tube  was  appHed  to  his  right 
nostril  and  one  end  of  the  other  tube  to  his  left  nostril, 
the  latter  being  lower  than  the  former.  Water  was  now 
poured,  from  a  vessel  with  a  spout,  into  the  funnel,  and 
came  of!  in  a  continuous  stream  at  the  end  of  the  other 
and  lower  tube — a  rather  difficult  performance  this,  I 
should  fancy.  It  remained  to  plug  the  left  nostril  for  the 
night  as  the  other  had  previously  been,  for  they  were 
stopped  turn  about.  This  operation  was  accomplished  by 
passing  a  long  wick,  or  cotton  cord,  up  the  nose,  and  finally 
introducing  its  other  and  knotted  end  with  a  little  force 
into  the  much  distended  nostril.  As  the  stiffened  end  of 
the  cord  disappeared  up  the  ascetic's  nose,  a  veracious 
disciple  assured  us  that  it  had  gone  straight  up  into  the 
brain.  He  repeated  this  statement  many  times,  and  the 
Bairagi,  who  heard  it,  and  knew  it  was  not  true,  did  not 
contradict  it. 

These  operations  duly  accomplished  in  the  public  gaze, 
the  holy  man  was  helped  back  once  more  into  his  un- 
comfortable lodging  in  the  palanquin.  1  learnt  that  twice 
a  day,  morning  and  evening,  Maharaj  repeated  this  disgust- 
ing and  unedifying  performance,  and  that  twice  a  day 
people  assembled  to  see  and  admire  it,  although  it  is 
neither  original  in  its  conception, — for  other  Bairagis  do 

205 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

the  like, — nor,  I  should  think,  specially  agreeable  for  any- 
one to  behold. 

Had  this  worn-out  ascetic  so  assiduously  devoted  to 
the  regular  cleansing  of  his  nostrils  and  throat  ever  had  a 
romance  in  his  life  ?  Had  he  been  deceived,  disillusioned, 
driven  to  despair  ?  Had  that  uncouth  figure  ever  been 
acceptable  to  the  fair  sex  ?  Had  those  strange  hunted  eyes 
ever  gleamed  with  rage  or  melted  with  passion  ?  Possibly  ; 
but  these  are  questions  more  easily  asked  than  answered. 
The  Bairagi  himself  did  not  speak  ;  and  the  motive  assigned 
for  all  his  severe  penance,  the  desire  to  feed  a  hundred 
thousand  Brahmans,  could  be  accounted  rational  only  on 
the  supposition  that  he  desired  to  expiate  some  sin,  or 
more  likely  to  acquire  merit  and  power  through  his 
austerities,  the  feeding  of  one  hundred  thousand  Brahmans 
being  set  before  himself  as  a  definite  object  to  limit  the 
duration  of  his  self-imposed  hardships. 

I  had  leisure  now  to  study  my  company  and  surround- 
ings. At  the  foot  of  one  of  the  peepul  trees  I  found  three 
sadhus  sitting  round  a  small  fire,  all  of  them  young  and 
healthy.  They  had  no  connection  with  the  Bairagi  who 
was  attracting  so  much  attention,  and  rather  aSected  to 
turn  their  backs  upon  him.  Two  of  these  men  were  so 
scantily  clothed  that  their  united  garments  would  have 
hardly  made  a  decent-sized  pocket-handkerchief ;  the  third 
was  absolutely  naked,  sky-clothed  (digamhara)  he  would 
himself  have  said,  under  broad  daylight,  in  a  public  place, 
and  amidst  a  mixed  crowd  of  both  sexes.  The  shy-clothed 
one  was,  I  have  no  doubt,  an  abandoned  scamp.  He 
looked  it.  A  grave  and  well-dressed  man  ventured  to 
suggest,  in  my  hearing,  the  desirability  of  a  rag  in  the 
interests  of  decency,  to  which  the  religious  man  made 
some  flippant  observation  about  the  trouble  of  keeping  it 
tied. 

Before  I  left  the  spot  I  learned  that  the  sadhu  of  the 
spiky  bed  had  yet  another  mode  of  drawing  the  wondering 
multitude  to  visit  him  and  to  contribute  their  portion 
towards  the  accomplishment  of  his  vow.  Once  a  day,  in 
the  afternoon,  he  used  to  have  himself  suspended,  head 
downwards,  from  a  sturdy  branch  of  a  great  tree,  before 

206 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

the  admiring  gaze  of  a  large  concourse  of  people.  On  tlie 
first  STiitable  opportunity  I  came  to  see  this  part  of  his 
performance. 

It  was  a  lovely  day.  A  crowd  of  about  five  hundred 
men  and  women  had  assembled,  and,  in  Oriental  fashion, 
were  meekly  and  quietly  sitting  down  on  the  ground 
awaiting  the  great  man's  convenience.  A  few  persons, 
mostly  women,  pressed  on  to  the  platform,  and  I  noticed  a 
girl  of  about  sixteen  in  bright  red  clothes  sit  down  and 
peer  into  the  palanquin  with  wondering  curiosity.  Most 
likely  she  was  from  the  country,  and  had  come  to  Lahore 
from  some  neighbouring  village  on  purpose  to  see  Maharaj. 
A  female  companion  pulled  her  roughly  away,  but  dis- 
engaging herself  she  came  back  again  to  stare  with  wide- 
open  eyes  at  the  wonderful  sadhu,  until  she  was  pushed 
aside  by  others  who  did  not  approve  of  her  monopoUsing 
the  best  position  for  viewing  his  saintship. 

At  about  one  o'clock  an  attendant  came  forward  and 
set  to  work  preparing  a  space  about  ten  feet  square,  under 
a  large  peepul  tree,  by  smearing  it  over  with  a  mixture  of 
clay,  cow-dung,  and  water.  This  done,  he  placed  a  pile  of 
dried  cow-dung  cakes  upon  it  and  applied  a  light.  A  cloud 
of  white  smoke  was  quickly  diffused  all  around.  When 
the  fuel  happened  to  blaze  up  the  attendant  moderated  its 
energy  by  sprinkhng  a  little  water  on  it,  thus  bringing  it 
back  to  the  desired  smoky  condition.  The  Bairagi  now 
came  forth,  helped  as  before,  and,  after  washing  his  hands, 
had  his  hair  firmly  tied  up  in  a  cloth  which  also  covered 
his  face.  He  next  put  one  foot  into  a  loop  of  thick 
cotton  rope  depending  from  a  branch  of  the  tree,  and  was 
hauled  up,  head  downwards,  till  he  hung  suspended  about 
three  feet  above  the  smouldering  fire.  With  one  hand  he 
grasped  the  free  foot,  and  with  the  other  he  manipulated 
a  rosary  concealed  in  a  bag  called  a  gomukhi.  By  a  slender 
string  passed  round  his  body  one  of  his  disciples  kept  him 
swaying  over  the  smoky  fire,  into  which  a  Brahman  was 
throwing  grain,  ghee,  and  other  things.  For  seven-and- 
twenty  minutes  by  my  watch  the  Bairagi  was  swung  head 
downwards  over  that  smouldering  fire.  When  he  had 
counted    his    beads    he    dropped    the    bag  and  was  then 

207 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

immediately  taken  down,  looking  perhaps  a  slight  degree 
more  exhausted  for  his  half -hour's  constant  fumigation  feet 
upwards. 

Never  a  word  was  spoken  throughout  the  entire  per- 
formance about  right  or  wrong,  not  one  syllable  about 
duty  or  worship.  There  was  the  dumb  show,  and  nothing 
more. 

As  the  emaciated  figure,  resembling  a  skeleton  rather 
than  a  man,  swayed  to  and  fro  like  the  pendulum  of 
some  strange  old-world  clock — the  clock  of  Indian  ideas — 
I  tried  to  read  on  the  living  dial  before  me  what  time  of 
day  it  was.  The  circle  of  onlookers  was  a  large  one, 
composed  of  Orientals,  whose  thoughts  and  ideas  are  very 
inscrutable,  yet  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  face  of  the  very 
complicated,  but  interesting,  dial  I  was  studying  indicated 
that  dawn  was  approaching,  though  the  daybreak  had  not 
yet  appeared. 

A  few  generations  hence  the  Bairagi  clock  I  have 
described  will  be  unknown,  at  least  in  the  great  cities  of 
India. 

2.  The  Sanyasi  Swami  Bhaskarananda  op  Benares. 

In  the  holy  city  of  Benares  there  lived  for  many  years 
a  famous  Sanyasi,  Swami  Bhaskarananda  Saraswati,  who 
died  in  1899,  being  then  sixty-six  years  of  age. 

This  interesting  old  gentleman,  who  was  more  than  a 
local  celebrity,  resided  in  excellent  quarters  in  a  fine 
garden  placed  at  his  disposal,  known  as  Anundabagh, 
belonging  to  the  Rajah  of  Amity.  There,  at  the  end  of 
1895,  I  paid  him  a  visit,  having  been  informed  that  he 
was  always  pleased  to  receive  strangers  who  cared  to  make 
his  acquaintance.  When  I  was  announced,  the  Sanyasi, 
who  had  been  sitting  stark  naked,  wrapped  a  loin  cloth 
about  him  as  a  polite  concession  to  my  narrow  conventional 
prejudices,  and  stepped  forward  to  welcome  me  with  a  most 
engaging  smile.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  there  was  un- 
deniably something  refined  and  attractive  about  the 
personality  of  this  naked  ascetic  with  his  transparently 
benevolent    countenance,    rather    light  brown  complexion, 

2o8 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

clean-shaven  head   and  face,   toothless  mouth,   and  keen, 
bright,  impressive  eyes. 

A  very  learned  Sanskrit  scholar,  and  deeply  versed  in 
the  Vedanta  philosophy,  this  sadhu  was  well  known  to 
and  venerated  by  his  Hindu  countrymen  throughout 
Northern  India. 

The  old  man  asked  me  many  questions  about  my 
occupation  and  the  object  of  my  visit  to  Benares,  and  in 
my  turn  I  ventured  to  inquire  whether  his  practice  of 
going  entirely  naked  at  all  times  was  not  rather  trying  in 
the  winter.  "  No,"  he  said,  smiling  pleasantly  ;  "  by  long 
habit  my  entire  person  has  become  accustomed  to  being 
exposed,  just  as  your  face  and  hands  are.  I  really  feel  no 
inconvenience." 

Though  a  recluse,  Swami  Bhaskarananda,  for  whom 
the  world,  which  after  all  is  only  an  illusion,  had  no  attrac- 
tion whatever,  kept  a  visitors'  book,  and,  having  directed 
an  attendant  to  produce  it,  turned  over  the  pages,  pointing 
out  in  it  with  evident  pride  the  signatures  of  two  or  three 
British  M.P.'s.  After  we  had  conversed  for  some  time  on 
various  subjects,  he  courteously  gave  me  some  Sanskrit 
pamphlets,  written  by  himself,  on  rehgious  and  philosophical 
matters.  I  told  Swami-ji  that  I  had  some  idea  of  publish- 
ing a  book  about  Indian  ascetics.  He  expressed  his 
pleasure  at  this,  and  was  almost  childishly  delighted  when 
I  said  that  I  should  probably  mention  him  in  my  book. 
Apparently  to  help  me  in  this  matter,  he  presented  me 
with  a  short  biography  of  himself,  written  in  English  by 
one  Gopal  Chander  Chatter jee,  to  which  was  prefixed  a 
lithographed  likeness  of  Swami-ji.  After  a  pleasant  hour 
with  the  ascetic  I  took  leave  of  him,  but  had  barely  left 
the  premises  when  an  attendant  came^  after  me  to  call  me 
back.^    I  retraced  my  steps,  and  Swami-ji  most  courteously 

^  Prince  Bojidar  Karageorgevitch  visited  a  sadhu  at  Benares,  who, 
though  he  does  not  name  him,  was  no  doubt  Swami  Bhaskarananda.  The 
prince  says  with  reference  to  this  event :  "  As  I  was  leaving,  the  faquir 
called  me  back,  asked  me  to  think  of  him  sometimes,  and  gave  me  one  of 
the  splendid  yellow  roses  that  hung  about  him  like  a  glory." — Enchanted 
India,  p.  163.  I  wonder  if  Swami-ji  had  a  well-thought-out  habit  of  thus 
courteously  recalling  his  visitors  with  the  object  of  impressing  himself  more 
strongly  upon  their  memories. 

o  209 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

said  he  felt  he  must  have  at  least  one  more  word  with  me 
before  we  parted,  perhaps  for  ever  ;  and  he  then,  with  many 
good  ^vishes  for  my  welfare,  Idndly  handed  me  a  photo- 
graph of  himself  for  my  hook,  as  he  said,  and  I  have  much 
pleasure  in  reproducing  it  now  (Fig.  11),  as  I  have  also  in 
calling  to  mind  the  serenity,  cheerfulness,  and  urbanity  of 
this  famous  and  highly  venerated  Hindu  ascetic. 

In  a  Httle  lodge  or  chapel  near  the  gate,  and  within 
the  walls  of  the  hagh  where  he  resided,  I  noticed  a 
life-size  marble  statue  of  the  saint.  It  was  a  good  like- 
ness. Later  on  I  saw  for  sale  in  the  idol-shops  in  the 
bazaars  of  the  city  many  stone  and  brass  statuettes,  which 
appeared  to  be  faithful  copies  of  the  statue  I  have  just 
referred  to. 

From  the  biographical  sketch  which  he  gave  me  I 
derived  the  following  characteristic  particulars  regarding 
the  Sanyasi^s  past  history  : — 

His  real  name  was  Matiram  Misra.  He  was  born  in 
1833  of  a  good  Brahman  family,  was  invested  with  the 
sacred  thread  at  the  age  of  eight,  and  married  four  years 
later.  From  his  eighth  to  his  seventeenth  year  he  was 
a  diligent  and  most  successful  student  of  the  Sanskrit 
language  and  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy.  A  son  was  born 
to  him  when  he  was  but  eighteen  years  old.  By  this 
event  he  was,  in  his  own  opinion,  freed  from  any  further 
social  obligations,  "  he  realised  the  unreality  of  this  world 
and  its  pleasures,"  and  resolved,  contrar}^  to  the  wishes  of 
his  parents,  to  renounce  the  world  and  become  a  wandering 
ascetic. 

So  one  day  he  disappeared  from  his  father's  house  and 
went  on  foot  to  Ujjaini,  where  he  put  up  in  a  temple  of 
Siva.  Here  he  continued  his  Vedantic  studies  and  began 
to  practise  yoga.  But  the  spirit  of  unrest,  which  in  India 
drives  so  many  to  embrace  the  callinor  of  the  ascetic,  took 
imperious  possession  of  him.  He  accordingly  left  his 
temporary  abode  and  visited  the  various  sacred  places  of 
Malwa  and  Gujrat.  At  the  latter  city,  however,  he  settled 
down  for  a  period  of  seven  years,  which  he  devoted  to  a 
further  study  of  the  Vedanta  philosophy. 

When  Matiram  had  reached  the  age  of  twenty-seven, 

2IO 


THE    SANYASI    BHASKARANAXDA   OF    BENARES. 


Fig,  11. 


To  face  page  210. 


ii 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

"  he  resolved,"  says  his  Bengali  biographer,  "  to  enter  the 
austere  Asram  of   Sanyas.     The   true   knowledge  of   gnan^ 
had   dawned  in    his    mind.     He   saw   through  the   unreal 
nature  of  the  world,  and  felt  the  existence  of  one  Supreme 
Soul  all  through  the  universe.  .  .  . 

The  world,"  continues  the  philosophical  biographer, 
is  not  real.  It  never  existed,  it  does  not  exist,  and  it 
will  not  come  into  existence  in  future.  We  all  dream, 
and,  while  sleeping,  we  think  that  the  things  we  see  in 
the  dream  are  real,  but  as  soon  as  we  wake  up  we  perceive 
the  mistake.  In  the  same  way  we  are  sleeping  in  the  lap 
of  ignorance,  and  as  soon  as  true  knowledge  will  dawn  on 
us  we  shall  be  able  to  know  that  the  world  is  but  a  dream, 
a  shadow  and  not  a  substance." 

On  the  occasion  of  his  admission  to  the  sect  of  the 
Sanyasis,  Matiram  Misra  received  the  new  name  by  which 
he  was  to  be  known  in  after-years,  and,  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  sect  he  had  joined,  discontinued  wearing  the 
sacred  thread,  which  was  the  proud  symbol  of  his  Brah- 
manhood. 

After  some  time  spent  "  in  the  contemplation  of  the 
Jibatma  (or  the  human  soul)  as  being  one  with  the  Paratma 
or  the  Supreme  Essence,"  he  started  upon  a  round  of 
travels,  in  the  course  of  which  he  visited  his  native  village 
once  more. 

There  he  saw  his  parents,  his  long-neglected  wife,  and 
the  associates  of  his  youth,  but  the  ties  which  had  once 
bound  him  to  his  relatives  and  friends  had  been  dissolved 
for  ever.  To  such  as  would  listen  to  him  he  explained 
the  utter  worthlessness  of  the  world  and  its  hollow 
pleasures,  and  then,  the  spirit  of  unrest  having  again 
seized  upon  him,  he  took  his  departure  to  make  an  ex- 
tensive tour  of  the  tirthas,  or  holy  places,  of  a  land  of 
shrines.  Alone,  without  any  money,  clad  in  a  single 
garment,  did  the  Sanyasi  roam  from  end  to  end  of  India, 
visiting  Bengal,  Behar,  Orissa,  Madras,  Bombay,  Central 
India,  and  the  Himalayas,  experiencing  on  the  long  and 
weary  way  many  dangers  and  hardships,  such  as  floods, 
snow-storms,  and  starvation.  While  on  his  round  of  travels, 
he  received  unmoved  the  news  of  the  death  of  his  only  son. 

211 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

For  thirteen  years  Swami  Bhaskarananda  travelled 
about  India,  always  practising  tapasya  (penance),  and  then 
feeling,  after  his  long  probation  and  constant  striving,  that 
he  had  obtained  the  ineffable  knowledge  he  had  desired,  he 
settled  down  for  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  the  sacred 
city  of  Benares. 

Here  he  enjoyed  the  greatest  consideration  and  dis- 
tinction. Pilgrims  crowded  to  adore  him.  Princes  from 
afar  came  to  consult  him,  and  bowed  their  royal  heads 
down  to  his  holy  feet.  Miracles,  particularly  of  healing, 
were  attributed  to  him,  and  temples  were,  even  during  his 
lifetime,  built  in  his  honour,  and  his  eJBSgy  worshipped  in 
them.  Images  of  the  saint  were  also  set  up  for  private 
worship  by  the  Rani  of  Barhar,  the  Maharajah  of  Ajodia, 
the  Maharajah  of  Nagadh,  and  other  important  personages, 
and  no  doubt  in  many  humble  Hindu  households  also, 
since,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  likenesses  made  of 
stone  and  metal  of  Swami-ji  were  plentiful  in  the  idol-shops 
of  Benares. 

In  recording  the  above  particulars  of  what  is  indeed 
a  typical  case,  I  have  stated  enough  to  show  the  honoured 
position  and  unstinted  veneration  with  which  the  ascetic 
life  in  India  may,  even  in  this  materialistic  age,  reward 
the  successful  sadhu. 

I  will  conclude  with  the  following  extract  from  a 
newspaper  conducted  entirely  by  Indians  : — 

"  DEATH   OF   SWAMI   BHASKARANAND   SARASWATI. 

"  The  death  is  announced  from  cholera,  on  last  Sunday 
night  at  Benares,  of  Swami  Bhaskaranand  Saraswati,  the 
celebrated  recluse  and  devotee  of  the  holy  city.  He  was 
buried  in  a  sitting  posture  in  his  garden  at  Durga  Kund, 
and  a  monument  will  be  raised  over  his  grave.  The 
funeral  was  attended  by  a  large  concourse  of  people,  among 
whom  were  the  Maharajas  of  Benares  and  Ajodhya,  the 
Rajas  of  Mainpuri  and  Nagod,  and  a  large  number  of 
Indian  gentlemen.  The  last  time  that  we  wrote  about  the 
Swami-ji  was  when  the  Hon.  Mr.  La  Touche,  then  offici- 
ating Lieutenant-Governor  of   the  North -West  Provinces, 

212 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  Sx\DHUS 

paid  a  visit  to  the  venerable  recluse  and  had  some  con- 
versation with  him.  Mr.  La  Touche  presented  the  Swami 
a  nazar  of  a  gold  mohur,  which  was  at  once  handed  over 
to  the  Swami's  dependants.  Swami  Bhaskaranand  was 
a  most  remarkable  and  attractive  personality,  and  every 
distinguished  visitor  to  Benares  paid  him  his  respects. 
Tourists  from  America  and  Europe  always  tried  to  see  the 
Swami,  who  was  frequently  accessible,  and  all  who  saw 
him  were  struck  by  his  wisdom  and  holiness.  The  Pioneer 
writes:  'The  personaKty  of  the  venerable  Swami -ji 
Bhaskaranand  Saraswati,  who  died  at  Benares  shortly 
after  midnight  on  Sunday,  was  one  which  interested 
Enghshmen  no  less  than  it  dominated  the  Swami's  own 
countrymen.  This  ascetic  of  ascetics,  who  had  long  ago 
passed  so  far  on  the  way  to  Nirvana  that  no  human  con- 
tamination could  any  longer  touch  him,  who  was  as  far 
above  considerations  of  caste  as  the  pariah  is  below,  and 
who  has  sat  for  years  at  Benares  squat,  hands  crossed  and 
clotheless,  waiting  for  his  deliverance  from  mortality,  was 
a  man  of  high  intellectual  powers,  who  took  a  keen  interest 
not  only  in  the  affairs  of  India,  but  in  the  politics  of 
Europe,  and  from  whom  an  English  visitor  always  received 
a  cordial  welcome.  Among  the  higher  classes  of  the  native 
community  the  Swami  was  regarded  with  the  utmost 
respect  and  veneration,  his  advice  on  all  matters  mundane 
and  supramundane  being  eagerly  sought,  while  among 
the  lower  classes  he  was  already  looked  upon  as  a 
divine  being,  and  would  have  been  worshipped  as  such 
had  he  not  always  sternly  forbade  any  manifestation  of 
the  kind.' 

"  Swami  Bhaskaranand  was  greatly  appreciated  and 
respected  by  a  large  number  of  Englishmen,  and  this  was 
his  special  advantage.  Before  his  appearance  in  Benares 
the  most  revered  name  in  the  sacred  city  was  that  of 
Trailangya  Swami,  who  also  sat  clotheless  for  years  on  the 
bank  of  the  Ganges.  He  was  profoundly  learned  and  a 
Paramahansa  of  the  highest  order  ;  but,  as  he  had  imposed 
upon  himself  a  vow  of  silence,  he  was  not  much  known 
among  Englishmen.  But  so  long  as  holy  men  of  this  type 
appear  in  India — and  it  is  in  this  country  alone  that  the 

213 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

race  has  never  become  extinct — we  need  not  despair  of  the 
future."— The  Tribune,  15th  July  1899  (Lahore). 

3.  Gareeb  Das,  an  Urdhabahu  Bairagi. 

Adjoining  the  famous  Golden  Temple  at  Amritsar  is  a 
grove  known  as  Guru  Bagh  ;  and  here  a  sadhu,  conspicuous 
on  account  of  having  both  arms  rigidly  uplifted  above  his 
head,  took  up  his  temporary  abode  attended  by  a  few 
disciples.  This  was  in  the  month  of  October,  at  the  time 
of  the  Divali  festival,  which  annually  attracts  a  large  multi- 
tude of  people  to  the  holy  city  of  the  Sikhs. 

When  I  saw  the  sadhu,  his  emaciated  arms  were 
apparently  quite  rigid,  and  the  clenched  hands,  which  were 
about  six  inches  apart,  were  particularly  painful  to  look  at 
— wasted  and  shrunken,  ^vith  great  curved  nails  growing 
like  bird's  claws  out  of  the  thin  fingers. 

He  had-  his  person  rubbed  all  over  with  white  ashes, 
and  he  wore  a  small  loin  cloth  and  a  neatly  tied  turban. 
His  features  were  long,  and  the  expression  of  his  face 
agreeable.  What  he  looked  like,  and  his  utter  helplessness, 
the  portrait  of  him  in  the  frontispiece  will,  I  think,  make 
quite  clear. 

In  conversation  with  him  I  ascertained  that  he  was  a 
Bairagi,  that  he  came  from  Ajudya,  and  had  been  the  chela 
of  a  famous  guru  formerly  attached  to  the  Hunaman  Gari 
monastery  in  that  city,  but  now  deceased.  I  had  visited 
Ajudya,  and  could  talk  about  it  and  the  sacred  Surayu 
(Gogra),  which  flows  by  that  ancient  town  ;  and  so  the  sadhu, 
touched  by  old  associations,  became  communicative.  His 
native  place,  he  told  me,  was  Bas  Bareilli  in  Oudh,  and  his 
name  Gareeb  Das. 

What  I  wished  particularly  to  ascertain  from  the 
Bairagi  was  what  motive  could  possibly  have  induced  him 
to  subject  himself  voluntarily  to  such  terrible,  such  almost 
inconceivable  personal  hardships  as  were  plainly  involved 
in  the  penance  he  had  adopted.  Not  only  had  he  deprived 
himself  of  the  use  of  both  his  arms,  but  by  the  awkward 
unnatural  position  which  he  had  forced  them  to  assume  he 
had  made  them  a  source  of  constant  trouble,  weariness,  and 

214 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

inconvenience  to  himself,  both  waking  and  sleeping.  His 
repHes  to  my  inquiries  were  evasive  and  unsatisfactory, 
probably  because  he  was  an  ilhterate  man.  At  first  he 
said  that  from  the  Scriptures  he  had  received  his  mandate 
to  perform  this  penance — which  cryptic  statement  he 
subsequently  elucidated  by  saying  that  from  several  pen- 
ances recommended  in  rehgious  books  he  had  selected 
this  one,  as  it  had  been  adopted  by  several  members  of  his 
own  sect  and  monastery.  His  object  in  thus  afflicting 
himself  was  to  have  communication  with  Permashwar 
(Ctoo.),  or,  as  he  also  said,  to  obtain  mukti  (salvation). 
An  unsympathetic  and  ill-mannered  bystander,  on  hear 
ing  the  sadhii's  statement  of  his  spiritual  aspirations, 
contemptuously  cited  a  Sanskrit  distich  which  meant, 
"  From  penance  comes  a  kingdom,  and  from  the  kingdom 
comes  hell " — in  allusion  to  a  common  belief  that,  by  such 
mortifications  of  the  flesh,  sadhus  really  strive  for  raj  or 
power  and  position  in  the  next  mundane  life,  that  they  gain 
their  end,^  and  then  fall  into  the  hell  whither  power  and 
dominion  inevitably  lead  one,. 

Gareeb  Das  the  ascetic,  when  I  saw  him,  had  had  his 
arms  up  above  his  head  for  eight  long  years,  and  desired  to 
make  no  change  for  a  further  period  of  four  years,  at  the 
end  of  which  time  he  hoped  to  restore  them  to  their  former 
state,  firstly  by  presents  and  feasts  to  the  Brahmans,  whose 
intercession  would  thus  be  secured,  and  secondly  by  the 
apph  cation  of  certain  emollients  with  peculiar  stimulating 
properties  known  to  the  sadhus.  "If  it  be  the  will  of 
God,"  added  Gareeb  Das,  speaking  on  this  subject,  "  then 
my  arms  will  be  restored  to  their  proper  use  when  the 
appointed  time  comes." 

Referring  to  such  cases,  the  missionary  Ward  says : 
"  When  a  person  wishes  to  bring  the  arm  to  its  former 
position,  he  anoints  the  joints  with  clarified  butter  ;  and 
in  about   two   months,    by   degrees,    the   arm    obtains   its 

^  As  indeed  did  the  Brahman  Muconda,  who,  by  undergoing  the  severest 
austerities  and  a  voluntary  death  by  fire,  with  the  view  of  being  reborn 
in  the  purple,  actually  succeeded  in  coining  back  to  this  world  as  no  less 
a  personage  than  the  famous  Mogul  Emperor  Akbar. — Wilford's  Essays, 
cited  in  Forbes's  Oriental  Memoirs,  vol.  iii.  pp.  149,  150. 

215 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

former    position,    and    in    time    becomes    as    strong    as 
before."  ^ 

As  there  are  European  thieves  who  do  not  hesitate  to 
rob  a  church,  so  there  are,  it  would  seem,  Indian  repre- 
sentatives of  the  same  ancient,  if  disreputable,  fraternity, 
who  have  no  scruples  about  appropriating  the  property  of 
even  a  helpless  sadliu.  This  was  illustrated  when  Gareeb 
Das  was  deprived  by  impudent  thieves  of  all  his  portable 
property,  including  a  hook,  which  rumour  declared  was 
actually  a  bank  pass-book,  testifying  to  cash  deposits 
mounting  up  to  as  much  as  a  lakh  of  rupees.  The  dis- 
gusted sadliu  promptly  removed  himself  from  the  Guru 
Bagh  where  he  had  been  robbed,  and  some  of  my  servants 
met  and  conversed  with  him  near  the  railway  stadon, 
waiting  for  the  train  which  was  to  take  him  away  to 
Jeypore  on  his  homeward  journey.  Such  was  the  tale 
which  was  current  in  Amritsar,  and  which  I  noted  down 
on  the  26th  of  October.  What  was  my  surprise  on  the  7fch 
of  November  to  find  my  friend  Gareeb  Das  once  again 
established  in  the  Guru  Bagh,  the  story  of  the  robbery 
having  been  in  all  probabihty  a  mere  invention  got  up  to 
stimulate  public  interest  in  sadhuji.  On  this  occasion  the 
ascetic  had  a  small  private  enclosure  of  his  own,  made  up 
of  bamboos  and  cloth  screens.  People  were  crowding  in 
and  out  of  this  enclosure  in  goodly  numbers.  When  I 
went  in  I  noticed  great  heaps,  literally  heaps,  of  flour,  salt, 
sugar,  and  such  things — ^in  fact,  sacks  and  sacks  full.  It 
appeared  that  a  few  days  previously  the  sadhu  had  given 
notice  in  the  city  that  he  would  not  eat  anything  until  he 
had  entertained  five  hundred  unmarried  girls  at  a  feast. 
He  hoped  to  accomplish  this  before  the  end  of  December, 
but  contributions  had  come  in  so  quickly  that  the  feast- 
day  had  been  fixed  for  the  9th  of  November.  While  I 
was  learning  these  particulars  the  sadhu  rose  and  walked 
a  few  paces  with  his  arms  above  his  head,  and  as  he 
did  so  the  poor  fellow  looked  so  utterly  and  painfully 
helpless  that  I  could  not  but  experience  a  feeling  of 
the  greatest  compassion   for    him,  not  unmingled  with  a 

^  A  View  of  the  History,  Literature,  and  Religion  of  the  Hindus^  p.  297 
( Madras  Edition,  1863). 

2l6 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

certain  admiration  of  his  steadfastness  and  prolonged 
endurance. 

Before  I  took  my  leave  of  the  ascetic,  an  attendant, 
making  a  very  polite  speech,  offered  me  a  couple  of  hand- 
fuls  of  raisins  and  almonds.  I  took  just  two  raisins 
and  dropped  a  rupee  on  the  remainder.  The  money  was 
removed  and  the  raisins  and  almonds  given  to  the  police- 
man who  was  in  attendance  upon  me,  in  accordance  with 
the  rule  v/hich  prevails  at  the  Golden  Temple.  The 
Punjabi  policeman  willingly  accepted  the  gift,  carefully 
tying  up  the  dried  fruits  and  nuts  in  a  very  dirty  hand- 
kerchief. 

The  sadhiCs  feast  to  the  unmarried  girls  came  off  in 
proper  time,  and  was  a  complete  success,  for  a  great  many 
Hindu  ladies  of  good  position  came  on  the  appointed  day 
and  helped  to  cook  and  distribute  the  food  amongst  the 
invited  guests.  In  this  way  Gareeb  Das,  without  spending 
a  single  rupee  out  of  his  own  pocket,  and  himself  a  cripple, 
was  enabled,  through  the  hberal  contributions  and  helpful 
courtesy  of  his  admirers,  to  play  the  host  munificently  to 
five  hundred  youthful  maidens  of  Amritsar. 

4.  A  Yogi  who  protected  Amritsar  from  the  Plague. 

Evil  days  had  come  upon  the  land.  The  plague  had 
made  its  appearance  in  the  Punjab,  and  with  it  stringent 
orders  for  the  compulsory  segregation  of  all  real  and 
suspected  cases — a  measure  dreaded  by  the  people  far 
more  than  the  fell  disease  itself.  Rather  than  have  the 
privacy  of  their  homes  invaded,  rather  than  have  their 
loved  ones  forcibly  separated  from  them  in  the  hour  of 
their  dire  need  and  committed  to  the  unsympathetic  care 
of  hirelings,  the  people  had  risen  in  armed  opposition  to 
the  authorities,  and  several  lives  had  been  sacrificed  in 
the  conflict. 

"If  it  be  the  will  of  God  that  we  should  die,  let  us 
die  together  as  we  have  lived  together,"  was  the  feeling 
which  animated  the  hearts  of  a  people  not  yet  civilised 
enough  to  appreciate  the  highly  prudent  sentiments 
which    elsewhere     enable    men    to    unmurmuringly    give 

217 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

up  their  dearest  to  the  hospitals  for  infectious  diseases, 
and  save  their  precious  selves  from  danger  for  the  'public 
good. 

Well,  in  the  evil  days  I  refer  to,  a  Yogi  visited 
Amritsar,  and  it  was  rumoured  that  his  object  was  to 
avert  from  the  city  certain  impending  calamities. 

I  found  him  near  the  fine  tank  known  as  Durgiana, 
in  a  large  space  enclosed  by  canvas  walls.  He  was 
seated  on  a  slightly  raised  platform  of  beaten  earth,  over 
which  a  cloth  had  been  spread.  He  was  enveloped  in  a 
clean  white  cotton  sheet  of  good  quality.  Only  a  portion 
of  his  face  was  visible,  one  eye  and  cheek  being  concealed 
by  his  matted  locks.  His  nose  was  bold  and  prominent, 
but  the  eye  on  the  visible  side  of  his  face  was  half  closed. 
Although  supposed  to  be  practising  yoga,  he  kept  his 
ears  and  half- closed  eyes  about  him.  By  the  Yogi's  side 
there  were  within  easy  reach  two  plates,  one  contain- 
ing rose-petals  and  the  other  cardamums ;  there  were 
also  a  brass  lotah  and  another  brass  water-pot  shaped 
to  resemble  a  gourd.  A  woman  with  a  young  child 
was  prostrating  herself  in  adoration  before  the  saint 
when  I  first  approached  him,  but  seeing  me  she 
timidly  withdrew  to  some  little  distance,  and  then,  spell- 
bound by  curiosity,  kept  her  eyes  fixed  upon  me.  While 
still  in  apparent  meditation,  the  sadhii  was  good  enough 
to  give  me  a  handful  of  rose-petals  and  some  carda- 
mums, and  in  return  I  put  a  rupee  into  a  brass  salver 
just  in  front  of  him,  where  already  lay  some  eight  or 
ten  rupees,  together  with  a  lot  of  small  silver  and  copper 
coins. 

My  companion,  a  pandit  who  could  speak  Sanskrit, 
asked  the  Yogi  in  most  respectful  terms  to  tell  me 
something  about  yoga,  as  I  was  much  interested  in  the 
matter  ;  but  all  the  saint  vouchsafed  was  some  Sanskrit 
verses  on  the  importance  of  truth.  I  inquired  how  long 
he  intended  to  stay  at  Amritsar. 

"  Who  knows  ?  "  was  the  reply.  "  I  am  a  bird  {perind)  : 
here  to-day,  gone  to-morrow." 

However,  his  Brahman  attendants  were  more  com- 
municative.    The    Yogi^s  mission,   they   explained,   was  to 

218 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

avert  a  threatened  calamity,  and  with  this  end  in  view  he 
proposed  to  feast — 

(1)  The  unmarried  girls  of  Amritsar. 

(2)  The  sadhus  who  might  be  there. 

(3)  Muslim  faquirs. 

Why  these  last  I  could  not  understand.  Of  course  the 
feasts  were  to  be  given  at  the  expense  of  the  inhabitants 
of  the  endangered  city  ;  that  is,  out  of  their  contributions. 

As  a  preliminar)?'  step,  the  Yogi  determined  to  carry  out 
daily  the  bloodless  havan  or  horn  sacrifice  in  the  orthodox 
style,  and  in  this  was,  of  course,  mlHngly  assisted  by  a 
number  of  Brahmans.  When  I  visited  the  Yogi,  prepara- 
tions for  the  day's  havan  were  going  on  under  a  fine  peepul 
tree  a  few  yards  away.  A  canopy  raised  about  nine  feet 
above  the  ground  was  stretched  over  the  spot  where  some 
fuel,  kindled  but  not  suffered  to  blaze  up,  was  quietly 
smouldering.  Two  huge  iron  tongs  stuck  upright  in  the 
ground  gave  a  ceremonial  appearance  to  the  place.  The 
chief  officiating  Brahmans  were  away  in  the  tow^n  investing 
many  twice-horn  youths  with  the  sacred  thread,  as  it  was 
the  festival  of  Baisakhi,  and  their  services  much  in  demand 
for  this  purpose.  For  several  days  the  havan  had  been  per- 
formed regularly,  and  presents  of  food-stuffs  for  the  pro- 
posed feasts  had  been  gradually  accumulating.  However, 
the  results  had  not  been  as  satisfactory  as  the  Brahmans 
had  hoped,  so  proceedings  on  a  larger  and  more  attractive 
scale  were  to  be  undertaken,  and  for  this  purpose  a  big 
trough-like  receptacle  lined  with  bricks  some  six  or  eight 
feet  square  was  being  constructed,  where  the  flames  of  a 
really  imposing  havan  might  attract  the  attention  and 
liberality  of  the  public. 

My  visit  was  a  matter  of  gratification  to  the  Yogi, 
even  though  he  had  turned  his  back  upon  the  world  and 
its  foolish  vanities,  for  the  following  day  he  mentioned, 
with  ill-concealed  pride,  to  some  college  students  that  a 
sahib  had  been  to  see  him.  He  also  informed  them 
incidentally  that  he  had  inflicted  certain  burns  upon  his 
own  arm  as  a  qurhani,  or  sacrifice,  for  the  safety  of  the 
city,  which  was  threatened  with  serious  trouble. 

219 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

The  Yogi^s  feasts,  I  believe,  came  off  satisfactorily,  and 
it  is  worth  mentioning  that  the  plague  did  not  invade 
Amritsar  that  year.  To  a  majority  of  the  ignorant 
populace  these  two  facts  were  plainly  cause  and  effect,  and 
the  claims  of  sadhuism  justified  once  more  by  irrefragable 
results. 

All  Yogis  are  not  as  public-spirited  as  this  self- 
constituted  tutelarv  saint  of  Amritsar.  I  knew  one  man 
who  sojourned  in  a  big  shed  usually  occupied  by  members 
of  the  sect,  and  there  he  passed  his  time  pretty  contentedly, 
toping.  He  was  always  pleased  to  see  me  was  this  thirsty 
soul,  for  my  visits  flattered  his  vanity  and  brought  a  rupee 
or  two  to  his  scanty  exchequer.  Once  I  saw  a  Sanyasi 
with  him,  apparently  on  the  best  of  terms,  and  learnt  that 
the  two  lived  together  and  ate  together.  Whether  this  was 
quite  warranted  by  custom  I  do  not  know,  but  I  think 
not.  There  was  also  a  hoj-Yogi  in  the  company,  of  about 
twelve  years  of  age,  with  the  usual  yogi  emblems,  in- 
cluding the  large  ear-rings.  I  ascertained  that  he  had 
been  dedicated  to  the  order  by  his  parents.  While  I 
talked  with  them,  the  guru,  to  refresh  himself,  poured  out 
a  small  cup  of  ardent  country  spirits  and  tossed  it  off 
with  evident  relish.  I  was  afterwards  told  that  the  old 
fellow  drank  pretty  freely,  but  never  became  quarrelsome. 
Of  food  he  partook  very  sparingly.  In  the  shed  which 
they  inhabited  temporarily,  the  Yogis,  wild-looking  fellows, 
were  grouped  in  small  parties  round  two  or  three  fires. 
Many  lay  visitors  were  there  too,  squatted  about  and 
respectfully  watching  the  saints.  Sunset  being  the  hour 
for  the  adoration  of  the  guru,  his  own  three  or  four  chelas 
gathered  round  my  inebriate  friend,  just  as  the  solar 
orb  was  on  the  horizon,  and  bowed  their  heads  down 
to  their  guru's  feet.  They  blew  their  little  whistles 
as  if  they  were  sounding  trumpets  in  the  presence  of 
a  king,  and  then,  placing  their  open  hands  side  by 
side  to  form  a  sort  of  bowl,  waved  them  before  him  in 
small  circles  as  if  performing  the  Hindu  rite  of  artee 
in  honour  of  a  god.  There  were  no  lights,  it  is  true, 
but  the  ceremony,  in  its  artless  imitation,  was  quite  un- 
mistakable. 

220 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

5.    A  Wandering  Brahmachari  from  the  Tamil 

Country. 

A  young  sadhu,  about  twenty-five  years  of  age,  good- 
looldng,  well  clad,  and  in  robust  health,  who  said  he  was  a 
Brahmachari  and  a  bachelor,  visited  me  at  Amritsar.  He 
spoke  broken  English,  but  could  make  liimself  understood 
fairly  well.  On  his  forehead,  just  above  the  nose,  a  bright 
red  spot  was  painted.  Round  his  neck  he  wore  a  necklet 
of  rudraksha  berries,  and  in  his  hand  he  carried  a  thin  book 
or  pamphlet  in  the  Tamil  language.  It  was  illustrated 
with  the  quaintest  woodcuts  imaginable — showing  the 
difficulties  awaiting  and  the  punishments  inflicted  upon  the 
viicked  after  death.  The  last  picture  in  the  book  was  a 
by  no  means  inviting  representation  of  Swarga,  or  the  regions 
of  dehght,  which  looked  very  like  a  bad  imitation  of  some 
portions  of  Benares. 

With  his  little  book  to  remind  him,  both  by  text  and 
picture,  of  the  evils  attendant  upon  misconduct  in  this 
world,  and  to  guide  his  footsteps  to  the  joys  of  heaven,  the 
young  sadhu  was  cheerfully  earning  the  merit  to  be  de- 
rived from  a  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  places  of  India, 
depending  upon  such  knowledge  of  English  as  he  could 
command  to  carry  him  successfully  on  his  way.  This 
appeared  to  me  a  most  interesting  and  noteworthy  fact — a 
sadhiL  wandering  over  India  with  the  aid  of  the  English 
language.  He  told  me  he  was  from  the  extreme  south  of 
India,  "  near  Cape  Comorin,"  and  that  Tamil  was  his  native 
tongue.  However,  his  appearance  showed  me  he  was  no 
Dravidian,  and,  on  my  questioning  him  a  little,  he  admitted 
that  he  was  a  Guzrati  by  race,  but  was  born  and  reared  in 
the  extreme  south  of  India.  Our  sadhu  felt  the  import- 
ance of  his  little  book  so  much,  that,  uninvited,  he  exhibited 
and  explained  some  of  the  quaint  illustrations  to  me.  One 
represented  a  curious  river,  the  Vitarni  (difficult  to  be 
crossed),  barring  the  way  to  Swarga,  through  which,  how- 
ever, a  passage  could  be  successfully  made  by  the  spirits  of 
such  men  as  during  their  earthly  life  had  prudently  made 
gifts  of  cows  to  the  Brahmans,  this  meritorious  act  en- 
titling the  generous  donor  to  take  hold  of  the  tail  of  one  of 

221 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

the  sacred  cows  in  the  river  and  to  be  towed  across  to  the 
other  bank  of  this  terrible  Hindu  Styx.  On  my  suggesting 
that  under  these  circumstances  he  should  not  fail  to  pre- 
sent cows  to  the  Brahmans,  the  sadhu  laughed  pleasantly 
and  said,  "  You  will  give  to  me,  and  I  will  give  to  them," 
a  view  of  the  case  with  which,  needless  to  say,  I  did  not 
quite  fall  in.  The  Vitarni  river  is  a  favourite  subject  with 
the  Hindu  artist,  who  loves  to  impress  upon  the  worldly- 
minded  the  dangers  of  its  swollen  flood,  and  the  best,  per- 
haps the  only,  way  of  reaching  its  farther  side. 

Another  picture  in  the  sadhu's  precious  book  made 
evident  how  pindas  offered  to  the  souls  of  the  dead  supply 
materials  for  the  gradual  reconstruction  of  the  body  in  nine 
consecutive  months,  the  head  being  the  first  part  to  be 
re-created.  The  nine  stages  of  reconstruction  were  all 
separately  and  successively  depicted  upon  the  same  page. 

The  Brahmachari  said  he  had  come  from  the  south 
especially  to  see  the  far-famed  Devali  festival  at  Amritsar, 
and  intended  going  on  to  Hardwar  in  order  to  be  present 
there  at  the  eclipse  of  the  moon  on  the  27th  of  December. 
He  dreaded  nothing  in  his  pleasant  wanderings  except  the 
officers  on  plague  duty,  who,  he  said,  gave  a  great  deal  of 
trouble  to  innocent  travellers. 

Sanyasis  were  not  held  in  much  esteem  by  this  young 
Brahmachari.  He  considered  them  "  bad  men,"  because 
they  did  not  perform  the  prescribed  ceremonies  for  the 
dead,  and  practised  interment  instead  of  cremation.  An 
Indian  gentleman  who  was  present  during  the  interview 
said  that  he  had  seen  Sanyasis"  bodies  disposed  of  by 
simply  sinking  them,  wdth  stones  or  bags  of  sand,  in  a 
flowing  stream.  He  laughed,  and  so  did  the  Brahmachari^ 
when  I  remarked  that  in  this  way  the  rivers  were  polluted 
and  rendered  insalubrious.  They  deprecated  this  notion, 
holding  that,  as  the  sacred  water  furified  all  things,  it 
could  not  itself  be  polluted  by  anything. 

6.  A  Sadhu  of  European  Descent  at  Simla. 

Exceedingly  rare  indeed,  as  one  may  well  imagine,  are 
non- Indian   sadhus^    yet    such    are     not     quite    unknown. 

222 


A   SADHU   OF    EUKOPEAX   DESCENT. 


Fig.  12. 


To  face  fage  222. 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

Some  years  ago  at  Simla,  tlie  summer  capital  of  the  Indian 
Government,  I  interviewed  one  Charles  de  Russette,  a  young 
man  of  French  descent,  who,  although  brought  up  as  a 
Christian  and  properly  educated  in  Bishop  Cotton's  school 
in  that  town,  had,  while  a  mere  boy,  embraced  the  life  of  a 
sadhik  I  understood  that  he  had  inherited  some  property, 
which  he  made  over  to  his  sisters,  reserving  nothing  for 
himself.  Why  he  abandoned  Christianity  for  Hinduism  I 
did  not  find  out,  as  he  was  disinclined  to  talk  about  the 
matter  ;  but,  whatever  the  cause  which  severed  him  from 
European  life  and  thought,  it  was  evident  that  he  did  not 
regret  the  step  he  had  taken,  and  that  he  was  well  satisfied 
with  his  condition  and  mode  of  hfe  as  a  Hindu  devotee — 
a  Sanyasi,  I  think. 

Judging  from  outward  appearances,  the  man  had  not 
suffered  any  such  physical  inconveniences  as  would  affect 
his  health,  and  he  was  particularly  well  clothed,  though  not 
in  any  sadhu  style  that  I  have  ever  seen.  He  informed 
me  that  he  Hved  his  solitary  life  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Simla  throughout  the  year,  even  in  winter,  when  the  snow 
lay  deep  upon  the  mountains.  Of  his  fellow  sadhus  he 
spoke  in  terms  of  high  praise,  and  assured  me  that  he  had 
seen  Yogi  adepts  perform  many  most  wonderful  acts.  Of 
virtue  and  vice  he  discoursed  in  the  usual  way,  maintain- 
ing that  it  was  not  necessary  to  be  a  Christian  in  order  to 
lead  a  virtuous  life.  De  Russette's  intellectual  capac  ty 
seemed  of  a  very  ordinary  kind,  but  I  have  no  doubt  he 
commands  the  highest  respect  from  the  natives,  and  lives 
idly,  happy  and  contented,  without  any  anxiety  about  the 
morrow. 

The  photograph  reproduced  here  (Fig.  12)  is  an 
excellent  likeness  of  the  man  as  I  saw  him  at  Simla  in 
1894. 

7.  A  Naked  Sanyasi  and  his  Companion, 
A  Princess  of  B . 

Information  that  an  interesting  group  of  sadhus  was 
encamped  on  the  maidan  (open  plain)  near  the  Lahore  Fort 
having  reached  me,  I  went  there  one  morning  to  make  the 

223 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASGETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

acquaintance  of  the  visitors  and  increase  my  stock  of 
knowledge  about  sadhuism. 

The  leaders  of  the  party  were  a  naked  Sanyasi,  and 
an  almost  naked  Sanyasin  who  let  people  understand  that 
she  was  a  widowed  and  childless  daughter  of  the  Rajah  of 

B .     Not  many  minutes'  conversation  with  the  sadhu 

were  needed  to  satisfy  me  that  he  was  at  best  a  shameless 
reprobate,  but,  as  I  thought  his  portrait  would  enrich  my 
collection,  I  expressed  a  wish  to  take  a  photograph  of  him 
and  his  followers.  This  suggestion  tickled  his  vanity,  and 
he  had  the  effrontery,  though  I  am  sure  he  did  not  wish 
to  be  impertinent,  to  offer  to  have  himself  taken  in  a  most 
objectionable  and  unseemly  attitude,  which  would  demon- 
strate his  viriHty  to  the  greatest  advantage.  His  female 
companion  was,  I  should  say,  under  twenty-five  years  of 
age,  and  not  particularly  attractive.  She  wore  her  hair 
cut  short  and  bleached  a  sort  of  yellow-brown,  while  the 
Sanyasi  wore  a  respectable  beard,  and  had  his  long,  neatly 
plaited  hair  wound  round  his  head,  and  kept  in  place  by 
a  bit  of  a  turban  of  dark-coloured  cotton  cloth.  Both  of 
them  had  ashes  rubbed  over  their  persons.  Three  or  four 
sadhus,  one  of  them  a  Kanphata  Yogi,  had  joined  these 
worthies  as  travelhng  companions.  A  boy  devotee  of 
about  twelve  years  of  age  also  belonged  to  the  company, 
and  seemed  devoted  to  the  Sanyasin. 

While  I  conversed  with  the  sadhus  under  a  group  of 
trees,  there  was  a  small  and  ever-changing  gathering  of 
about  two  hundred  persons  round  these  queer,  though 
evidently  much  respected,  wanderers.  Most  of  the  visitors 
had  dropped  in,  as  it  were,  to  pay  their  respects  to  the 
sadhus  after  having  had  their  morning  bath  in  the  river. 
The  naked  mendicant  and  his  companion,  the  almost  nude 
Sanyasin,  were  not  edifying  sights  ;  yet  women,  girls,  and 
children  of  respectable  families  were  all  gazing  at  them 
reverentially,  without  any  sign  of  shame  or  bashfulness. 
They  were  holy  privileged  people  these  sadhus,  and  not 
to  be  regarded  with  ordinary  eyes  or  judged  by  customary 
standards.  Yet,  whilst  I  was  present,  a  protest  was  raised 
by  some  Aryas — sectarians  of  a  new  school — against  the 
Sanyasi^s  nudeness.     Angry  accusations  and  bitter  retorts 

224 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

were  exchanged,  and  in  the  course  of  the  altercation  the 
Sanyasi  tried  to  turn  the  tables  upon  his  censors  by 
asking  them  significantly  what  they  gained  by  deserting 
the  rehgion  of  their  ancestors.^ 

Meanwhile,  as  a  sort  of  practical  reply  to  the  Arya 
objectors,  offerings  were  accumulating  near  the  sadhus — 
wheat,  flour,  rice,  lentils,  ghee,  and  also  copper  and  silver 
coins.  It  was  plain  that  the  Sanyasi  and  his  companions 
were  in  favour  and  hot  faring  badly.  As  we  conversed,  the 
leader  of  the  party,  followed  by  the  woman  and  then  by  the 
others,  indulged  in  the  luxury  of  pipes  of  charas,  exhaling 
wonderful  volumes  of  dense  white  smoke  from  their  lungs. 
Just  a  pull  or  two  was  quite  enough  for  each  one,  for  the 
smoke  was  so  pungent  that  it  had  to  be  drawn  through 
a  wet  cloth  applied  to  the  bottom  of  the  tall  chillum  or 
pipe   which  is  used  in  charas-smoking. 

At  this  visit  it  was  arranged  that  the  group  should  be 
photographed  by  me  the  next  morning.  When,  at  the 
appointed  time,  I  came  to  the  camping-ground  with  my 
camera,  I  found  to  my  surprise  that  the  sadhus  had  all 
disappeared,  leaving  not  a  trace  behind  them.  However,  I 
was  bent  on  having  their  portraits  if  possible,  and,  after 
patient  inquiries  and  no  little  discouragement,  followed 
them  up  to  a  little  temple  of  Siva  near  one  of  the  city 
gates.  They  were  dismayed  when  they  saw  me,  for  the}' 
had  been  artfully  told  I  was  a  police  officer  and  wished  to 
have  their  photographs  in  order  to  get  them  into  trouble. 
I  learned  also  that  the  principal  sadhu  had  been  forced 
by  the  Aryas  to  put  on  a  rag  about  his  loins.  He  and  a 
number  of  Hindu  men  who  were  present  at  the  temple — 
710  women  visitors  were  there — informed  me  that  the  ascetics 
had  been  very  badly  used  by  the  Aryas,  who  had  scattered 
and  spoiled  all  the  offerings  which  had  been  made  to  them, 
and  even  caused  their  plates  and  utensils  to  be  looted. 
How  much  truth  there  was  in  these  allegations  I  cannot 
say,  but  the  Aryas  knew  me  very  well,  and  no  doubt 
surmised  that  I  was  in  quest  of  materials  for  a  book,  and, 
possibly,  it  did  not  suit  these  sectarians  to  have  the  naked 

^  An  account  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  the  Aryas  will  be  found  in  my 
Indian  Life,  Religious  and  Social. 

V  225 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

sadhu  described  for  European  readers,  hence  their  opposi- 
tion and  interference.  However,  the  soothing  influence  of 
two  or  three  rupees  enabled  me  to  dispel  the  suspicions 
aroused  in  the  minds  of  the  Sanyasi  and  his  supporters 
and  to  secure  the  photograph  I  wanted.  This  I  have  now 
much  pleasure  in  reproducing  (Fig.  13),  as  it  is,  I  am 
inclined  to  tiiink,  unique  in  its  character. 

8.  A  Sadhu  of  Royal  Lineage — "  Prince  Bir 

Bhanu  Singh." 

On  the  21st  of  May  1899,  at  the  Sankalwalla 
monastery,  alongside  the  Golden  Temple  of  Amritsar,  I 
interviewed  a  young  sadhu  of  about  thirty  years  of  age,  who 
had  aroused  my  interest  by  claiming  to  be  a  son  of  Maharajah 
Duleep  Singh.  Now,  Duleep  Singh  was  the  infant  King 
of  the  Punjab  when  that  country  was  annexed  by  the 
British  in  1849.  He  was  removed  to  England,  embraced 
Christianity  there,  lived  the  hfe  of  an  English  gentleman, 
and,  in  his  old  age,  offended  by  what  he  considered  the 
parsimony  of  the  Government  towards  him,  tried  to 
foment  sedition  in  the  Punjab  with  a  view  to  his  own 
restoration  to  the  throne  of  his  father,  the  famous  Ranjit 
Singh. 

The  sadhu  who  claimed  to  be  Ranjit's  grandson  said 
he  was  born  in  England,  and  stated  that,  a  few  months 
before  his  arrival  at  Amritsar,  he  had  met  another  son 
of  the  late  Maharajah  Duleep  Singh.  The  young  man, 
who  had  a  weak  face,  mild  grey  eyes,  and  did  not  look 
particularly  robust,  was  under  the  surveillance  of  two 
policemen  not  in  uniform.  My  advent  was  the  excuse  for 
a  number  of  idlers  to  congregate.  A  chair  was  brought 
for  me.  Two  men  who  accompanied  me  squatted  with 
the  sadhu  on  his  mat  under  the  roof  of  a  long  vaulted 
arcade — a  cloister,  in  fact. 

My  host,  if  I  may  so  designate  him,  informed  me  that 
he  had  been  brought  to  India  when  very  young,  and  had 
been  educated  at  Benares.  Who  his  mother  was  I  did 
not  like  to  inquire.  I  had  a  pandit  with  me  who 
conversed    with    the    sadhu,    and    afterwards    assured  me 

2Z6 


ri^-»£'^'i. 


wfcl^         1  ^S  V  .#' 


o 

-=5 


O 


V3 


wim  «j<ft*f^«^'?^  ■■»^«'T^»*r*(|^^^ 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

that  he  had  some  tincture  of  Sanskrit  learning,  and  that 
his  pronunciation  was  that  of  a  native  of  Bengal.  I 
ascertained  for  myself  that  he  had  a  very  imperfect,  or 
perhaps  I  should  rather  say  a  very  elementary,  knowledge 
of  English.  He  affirmed  that  he  was  in  faith  a  Sikh  (pro- 
nouncing the  word  seek  as  the  Bengalis  do),  though  he  had 
not  adopted  Sikh  customs  and  outward  symbols.  As  to 
philosophy,  he  was  a  Vedantist  of  very  liberal  opinions, 
but  belonged  to  no  sect ;  that  is,  he  had  not  been  initiated 
into  any  particular  order  or  brotherhood.  He  read  to  us 
in  Sanskrit  from  a  sheet  of  ordinary  letter-paper  the 
religious  views  he  had  formed,  and  these  were  expounded 
to  me,  bit  by  bit,  in  Hindi  by  the  pandit  who  was  my 
companion. 

All  the  while  the  sadhu  was  clearly  very  nervous, 
his  hands  trembling  visibly  as  he  stated  and  explained 
his  ideas.  Lying  on  the  mat  near  him  was  a  portion  of 
a  copy  of  the  New  Testament  in  English,  and  when  I 
made  some  reference  to  it  the  sadhu  spoke  of  Nanak  and 
Christ  with  equal  reverence ;  but,  a  minute  after,  he 
somewhat  discounted  his  admiration  by  adding  that  there 
were  thousands  of  Nanaks  and  Christs.  According  to  his 
opinion,  everyone  should  have  a  guru  ;  but  he  admitted  that 
it  was  not  necessary  for  Christ  to  have  had  one.  . 

The  princely  ascetic  hinted,  somewhat  darkly,  that  he 
too  had  a  message  to  deliver  to  the  world,  and  that  it  was 
connected  with  the  Bible ;  but  apparently  the  time  for 
proclaiming  it  had  not  arrived. 

As  I  was  leaving  he  mentioned  to  me  that  he 
practised  yoga.  "  Do  you  ?  "  I  said.  "  Yes,"  was  the 
smiling  reply  ;  "  that  is  the  only  way  to  love  God  with 
all  your  heart." 

The  well-dressed  sadhu  and  his  official  escort  are 
depicted  in  the  annexed  photograph  (Fig.   14). 

A  young  graduate  of  the  Punjab  University  who  had 
accompanied  me  in  my  visit  to  the  sadhu  entertained  a 
strange  suspicion  (they  are  wonderfully  suspicious  these 
educated  Indians)  that  this  man  was  really  a  Government 
spy,  playing  a  character  and  employed  as  a  sort  of  decoy 
to  test  the  loyalty  of  the  Sikh  community.    For  my  part, 

227 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

I  could  not  help  expressing  a  hope  that  the  poor  fellow 
was  not  a  wretched  tool  in  the  hands  of  unscrupulous 
agitators. 

I  subjoin  without  verbal  alteration  a  curious  printed 
leaflet  in  strange  English  which  the  sadhu  "  Prince  Bir 
Bhanu  Singh "  was  good  enough  to  hand  to  me  as  we 
parted. 

"good  commendments  of  holy  bible. 

"  0  carnel  minded  man  !  thou  better  clean  thy  own  flesh 
and  teach  other  the  same  salvation  said  by  Lord  Christ. 
Who  has  not  enjoyed  this  ;  he  is  not  of  him.  To  whom 
he  hath  said  to  be  child  to  keep  his  sayings. 

"  0  carnel  minded  man  !  not  fail,  to  keep  his  sayings  ; 
believe  him  early.  Be  sure,  he  came  from  Almighty  power. 
Heaven  is  witness  of  this,  therefore  every  Pall,  want  to 
oblige  both  king  to  people  with  this  God  comendments 
if  they  are  without  this. 

"  0  carnel  minded  man !  of  this  world !  believe  my 
pen  that  he  is  above  because  the  heaven  can't  entice  him, 
who  hath  come  to  know  the  best  work  of  Lord  Christ. 

"  0  carnel  minded  man  !  Christ  hath  Bent  closely  well 
all  his  hearts  unto  God.  And  hath  fought  best  against  all 
world.  He  is  found  only  teacher  of  open  heart,  who  is 
not  of  him  ;  therefore  he  can  oblige  them  both  king  to 
people  with  good  comendments  said  by  him. 

"  0  carnel  minded  man  !  beseech  you  !  that  you  have 
done  wrong  all  without  the  best  knowledge  teached  by 
glorified  son  of  Almighty  father.  He  has  nothing  with 
you  but  only  the  same  salvation  as  he  taught  to  his  Pall 
to  purify  first  "his  own  flesh  and  then  love  God  with  all 
hearts  ;  because  without  this,  none  can  caught  the  same 
light  as  they  did  thyself  before  their  advocate  Lord 
Christ. 

"  0  carnel  mind  !  you  are  blind  to  find  out  the  same 
light  told  by  the  holy  tongue  because  you  are  not  cleaned 
after  the  same  manner  as  Pall  learned  with  Christ, 
therefore  you  are  bound  to  follow  the  best  work  of  him. 
If  you  fail  to  do  so,  you  are  obliged  to  keep  his  sayings 
as  child. 

228 


f5 


o 

-/3 


a> 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

"  0  camel  minded  man  !  I  believe  now  that  you  in 
net,  as  the  sun  light  the  day,  and  the  moon  light  the  night, 
but  God  is  only  perfect  to  enlight  the  heart  of  prayer, 
therefore  thou  better  taste  of  this  enjoyment. 

"  0  carnel  minded  man !  he  enjoy  the  same  salvation 
as  the  holy  work  of  Almighty  father  and  glorified  son 
Lord's  Lord  Christ.  Who  spoked  very  boldly  that  I  know 
none.  0  my  beloved  father  give  them  knowledge  to  be 
well  wisher  unto  you. 

"  0  carnel  minded  man  !  his  father  and  he  both  are 
of  one  mind  and  his  Pall  enjoy  the  same  salvation  as  they 
did  themselves,  therefore  ye  be  follower  after  them  ;  you 
shall  see  no  death. 

"  0  carnel  minded  man  !  without  this  enjoyment  you 
better  be  child  to  keep  his  sayings  without  discussion. 
He  can  then  take  you  out  from  the  room  of  death  and  can 
give  you  a  seat  in  the  house  of  Almighty  father. 

"  0  carnel  minded  man !  you  fear  by  every  step, 
because  God  is  creator  of  all  things.  Do  best  for  thyself. 
Be  sure,  that  a  blind  man  can  trouble  other's  face  with  a 
burn  torch  but  can  not  give  road  exactly,  therefore  you  are 
bound  to  follow  the  best  work  of  him." 

Prince 
BiR  Bhanu  Singh. 
An  Advocate  of  Holy 
Enghsh  Bible. 
Songola  Akhara 
Amritsar 
Punjab." 


4.  6.  99. 
Bearer. 
Hor  Doyal  Agni  Hoiri 
of  Kanoos. 


9.  A  Sadhu  who  had  found  God. 

He  had  never  had  occasion  to  do  a  day's  work  in  his 
life,  explained  a  sadhu  who,  in  order  to  make  my  acquaint- 
ance, paid  me  a  visit  in  1895.  He  had  inherited  sufi&cient 
property  in  his  native  village  to  render  any  labour  for  a 
livelihood  quite  unnecessary  in  his  case.  He  had  faithfully 
done  his  duty  to  his  family  and  to  society,  having  had 
sons  and  grandsons  born  unto  him,  and  for  two-and-twenty 

229 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

years  he  had  very  strictly  performed  the  ceremoiiies  pre- 
scribed by  his  religion,  down  to  the  minutest  and  most 
trying  details. 

At  length  one  day  his  steady  and  prolonged  devotion 
to  duty  met  with  recognition.  A  voice  came  to  him 
saying,  "  I  am  with  thee,  thou  art  clean,  refrain  henceforth 
from  all  these  observances."  The  voice  was  a  clear  and 
audible  voice,  Hke  that  of  one  man  speaking  to  another,  not 
a  voice  in  the  heart  or  the  inner  consciousness. 

Convinced  that  it  was  the  voice  of  God  which  spoke 
thus  unto  him,  he  obeyed  its  command  unhesitatingly. 
Some  months  later  the  same  voice  said  to  him,  "  Thou 
hast  nothing  to  do  with  property,  or  with  family  ties.  Go 
forth  from  thy  home.  I  am  with  thee  always."  He 
resigned  all  his  property  forthwith  to  his  children,  distri- 
buted five  hundred  and  twenty-five  rupees  in  cash  amongst 
the  poor,  cancelled  all  debts  due  to  him,  and  wandered 
forth  alone. 

"  I  don't  believe  in  Shastras  or  Vedas  or  Mantras,^^ 
said  the  sadhu  to  me,  "  I  have  God  !  "  Catechised  on 
this  point,  my  visitor  admitted  that  such  things  as  Vedas 
and  the  like  were  useful  for  worldlings,  but  not  for  one 
who  had  found  God.  To  whom  was  he  to  pray  when  God 
was  alvjays  with  him,  guiding  and  instructing  him  ? 

However,  with  all  his  emancipation  from  theological 
and  ceremonial  restraints,  the  sadhu,  I  found  out,  was  not 
prepared  to  eat  food  which  had  been  handled  or  even 
touched  by  me.  He  had  not,  as  yet,  received  God's 
permission  to  do  so  much  as  that.  The  hereditary  caste 
prejudice  was  too  strongly  ingrained  in  him,  too  essential  a 
portion  of  his  very  nature,  to  be  lightly  set  aside  even  by 
this  enfranchised  Hindu. 

My  visitor  boasted  that  he  took  no  medicine  when 
he  got  sick,  and  that  he  recovered  his  health  without 
the  aid  of  any  physician.  "  When  my  appointed  time 
comes,  who  can  save  my  life  ?  "  said  he.  "  And,  till 
the  predestined  moment  has  arrived,  how  can  I  possibly 
die  ?  " 

The  ascetic  was  comfortably  and  cleanly  dressed  in  an 
orange-coloured  dhoty  or  loin   cloth  and   a  long  hurta  or 

230 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

tiinic  of  tlie  same  tint,  and  wore  a  small,  neatly  tied 
turban.  But  for  the  colour  of  liis  clothes,  it  would  not 
have  been  possible  to  recognise  in  this  man  a  professed 
sadhu. 

He  had  discarded  the  sacred  thread  although  entitled  to 
wear  it,  being  a  Kshatriya  by  birth  ;  but  he  had  not  been 
initiated  into  any  of  the  existing  sects  or  orders  of  Hindu 
ascetics. 

He  did  not  speak  of  Siva  or  Vishnu,  but  only  of  God. 

A  few  days  after  the  sadliiCs  ^dsit  to  me,  I  learned, 
without  surprise,  that  he  had  not  been  quite  disinterested 
in  seeking  my  acquaintance.  What  he  really  wanted,  and 
applied  for,  was  pecuniary  help  to  print  and  circulate  a 
pamphlet  or  booklet  of  a  religious  character  of  which  he 
was  himself  the  author. 

10.  A  Sun-Worshipping  Bairagi. 

Not  far  from  the  Shahalmi  gate  of  Lahore  city,  outside 
the  walls,  are  some  fine  peepul  trees.  About  the  foot  of  one 
of  these  a  circular  earthen  platform  had  been  constructed 
about  three  feet  above  the  ground-level,  with  rude  steps 
leading  up  to  it.  Passing  this  spot,  I  noticed  three  or  four 
women  seated  on  the  platform  conversing  with  a  sadhu, 
a  handsome  dark  fellow,  not  over-clothed,  with  his  hair  in 
a  great  coil  upon  his  head.  Another  ascetic  was  standing 
on  one  leg  facing  the  trunk  of  the  tree,  his  head  enveloped 
in  a  loose  cloth  resembling  a  napkin,  and  his  face  uplifted 
towards  the  sun,  which  was  shining  through  the  branches 
of  the  tree.  Well  worth  closer  study  was  this  group  ;  and 
so  I  paused  to  regard  it,  and  to  learn,  if  possible,  something 
about  the  sadhus.  The  man  standing  on  one  leg  was 
going  through  certain  devotions.  In  his  left  hand  he 
held  a  bag  containing  a  rosary,  and,  with  his  right  in- 
serted in  the  bag,  he  counted  his  beads  wliile  he  muttered 
certain  prayers  or  prescribed  religious  formulas.  I  photo- 
graphed him  in  tliis  position  (Fig.  15).  When  he  had 
finished  his  prayers,  he  stood,  still  on  one  leg,  before  a  tiny 
brass  idol  of  Ramachandra  which  had  been  placed  against 
the  tree,  almost  smothered  under  a  profusion  of  marigold 

231 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

flowers.  The  sadhu  now  poured  out  three  shells  full  of 
water  before  the  idol,  made  certain  obeisances,  and  went 
to  the  other  side  of  the  tree.  There,  again  on  one  leg, 
and  facing  the  bright  unclouded  sun,  he  muttered  his 
prayers  to  the  great  luminary.  At  first  he  held  one  hand 
outstretched  towards  Surya  ;  then  he  entwined  the  fingers 
of  the  two  hands  together  in  strange  ways ;  next  held  his 
hands,  with  palms  opposed,  towards  the  sun-god  ;  and,  lastly, 
extended  both  his  hands  appealingly  towards  the  grand 
object  of  his  worship.  Uttering  some  Sanskrit  words  in 
a  loud  voice,  he  brought  his  devotions  to  an  end  by  a 
libation  of  a  conch  full  of  water  to  the  sun.  After  turning 
round  three  times,  he  went  back  to  the  other  side  of  the 
tree  and  sat  down.  He  was  now  free  to  converse  with 
visitors,  so  I  addressed  him,  and  learned  that  he  was  a 
Bairagi  whose  native  place  was  Benares.  He  said  he  had 
been  to  Kashmir  to  visit  Amar  Nath,  that  he  had  been 
favoured  by  the  Maharajah  of  Jummu,  and  was  in  the 
receipt  of  a  subsistence  allowance  granted  him  by  that 
chief.  He  also  spoke  of  the  favours  he  had  received  from 
the  Kajah  of  Baroda.  All  this,  of  course,  to  raise  him  in 
my  estimation. 

The  Bairagi  had  been  a  year  in  Lahore,  living  under 
the  peepul  tree  where  I  found  him.  His  place  of  abode — 
the  raised  earthen  platform — was  smooth,  clean,  and  well 
swept.  On  it  were  piled  in  one  place  a  lot  of  wood  fuel, 
both  dry  and  green.  A  smouldering  fire  declared  its 
presence  by  the  white  smoke  it  gave  off  into  the  breezy 
atmosphere.  There  were  three  or  four  garments  lying  in  a 
heap  together,  which  I  presume  were  the  Bairagi"* s  bedding 
and  covering  during  the  night.  Near  the  diminutive  idol 
stood  a  gourd-shaped  brass  vessel,  which  seemed  to  be 
quite  new,  and  a  huge  peculiar  serpentine  trumpet. 

When  I  opened  conversation  with  the  Bairagi,  my 
attendant,  well  versed  in  such  matters,  offered  him,  very 
respectfully,  a  couple  of  rupees,  which,  no  doubt,  helped  to 
place  us  at  once  on  a  friendly  footing.  It  is  true  the 
sadhu  did  not  touch  the  money,  but  indicated  by  a  gesture 
that  it  might  be  placed  on  a  mat  near  him.  I  could  see 
that  he  kept  a  watchful  eye  on  it  for  a  few  minutes  ;  he 


:3 


.3 


^ 


as 


P3 

5^ 


as 
o 


»o 


2 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

then  quietly  signed  to  one  of  his  chelas  to  remove  the  silver 
coins.  As  to  his  habits,  the  Bairagi  assured  me  that  he 
did  not  smoke  charas  nor  drink  bhang.  Tobacco  was  the 
only  luxury  in  which  he  indulged,  and  while  I  was  with 
him  he  disposed  of  a  chillum  (pipe)  of  it  to  his  own 
enjoyment. 

When  I  first  arrived  at  the  Bairagi^s  platform  there 
were  very  few  people  about — only  the  three  or  four  women 
to  whom  I  have  already  referred,  and  a  small  party  of 
children  playing  under  the  trees  ;  but  my  presence  soon 
brought  a  crowd  round  us,  for  we  were  close  to  a  public 
thoroughfare.  Near  by  was  a  women's  bathing-place  in 
the  canal,  concealed  from  pubHc  view  by  a  sheet-iron 
screen.  From  behind  this  enclosure,  as  I  conversed  with 
the  Bairagi,  emerged  a  woman  in  dripping  garments, 
exposing  a  good  deal  of  her  shapely  person.  Two  elderly 
attendants  waited  upon  her  as  she  changed  her  wet  clothes 
without  much  affectation  or  ceremony,  and  seated  herself  on 
a  stool  in  the  sunshine  to  have  her  long  black  tresses  dried 
and  otherwise  attended  to.  The  woman  was  certainly  fair 
to  look  upon,  and  the  thought  struck  me  that  the  spot 
was  well  chosen  by  the  Bairagis  for  their  sojourn,  if  they 
wished  to  conquer,  and  not  flee  ignominiously  from, 
certain  temptations  against  which  frail  humanity  is  not 
usually  very  strong.  Perhaps,  however,  the  saints  were 
not  quite  so  heroic,  or  so  foolish,  as  I  have  imagined,  and 
were  guided  to  the  selection  of  that  particular  place  for 
their  camping-ground  merely  by  a  keen  eye  to  pecuniary 
results  ;  since,  after  all,  it  is  the  women-folk  who  are  the 
best  supporters  of  sadhuism  in  India  or  elsewhere. 

11.  Yogis  and  Pious  Women. 

A  party  of  half  a  dozen  or  more  Yogis  came  to  Lahore 
and  made  themselves  somewhat  conspicuous  by  occupying 
favourable  positions  alongside  some  of  the  main  thorough- 
fares. One  of  these  sadhus  used  to  sit  at  the  meeting 
of  three  roads,  and  was  the  object  of  a  great  deal  of 
attention,  especially  from  the  women,  who  paid  their 
respects    to    Maharaj    as    they    went    by    him    on    their 

233 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

homeward  journey  after  the  daily  matutinal  bath  in  the 
river  Ravi. 

These  good  creatures  were  much  exercised  in  mind 
at  seeing  the  holy  ascetics  eating  pinches  of  wood  ashes 
from  time  to  time,  and  some,  more  devout  or  more  im- 
pulsive than  the  others,  begged  one  of  the  Yogis  to  permit 
them  to  minister  to  his  wants.  He  haughtily  declined 
their  assistance ;  but  to  one  pious  lady,  more  pressing 
than  the  rest  in  her  offers  of  service,  he  condescended 
to  explain  that  he  had  taken  a  vow  never  to  lift  a  morsel 
of  food  (or  anything  but  ashes)  to  his  mouth  with  his 
own  hand.  "  Permit  me,  Maharaj,"  said  the  ministrant 
fair  one,  "  to  feed  you  with  my  own  hands.  It  will  be 
an  honour  to  me  and  mine." 

The  saint  good-naturedly,  but  still  reluctantly,  yielded 
the  point.  Henceforth  the  favoured  one  fed  his  saintship 
daily,  and  so  did  one  or  tw^o  other  women — amongst  them 
a  beautiful  girl  of  about  sixteen  years  of  age.  Every  day, 
when  the  Yogi  had  partaken  of  as  much  food  as  he  cared 
for,  he  would  bless  the  remainder,  bidding  his  kind  friends 
to  partake  of  it  themselves. 

The  regular  meal-time  of  the  lucky  Yogi  became  an 
event  of  interest  to  the  passers-by,  and  a  certain  man, 
who  probably  lived  or  had  his  place  of  business  in  the 
immediate  neighbourhood,  was  in  the  habit  of  coming  to 
watch  the  proceedings.  Observing,  perhaps  with  a  pang 
of  jealousy,  the  beautiful  young  girl  I  have  alluded  to 
feeding  the  almost  naked  Yogi  with  her  own  delicate 
fingers,  this  discontented  spectator  ventured  to  wonder  in 
audible  terms  whether  she  was  as  attentive  to  her  husband 
as  she  was  to  the  saint.  Of  course  the  young  wife, 
drawing  her  veil  over  her  face  bashfully,  suggested  that 
the  rude  fellow  might  mind  his  own  business ;  but  the 
Yogi,  irritated  by  his  impertinence,  showered  a  volley  of 
abuse  upon  him,  desiring  him  at  the  same  time  to  take 
himself  off  and  not  stand  there  staring  at  his  betters. 
Uncomplimentary  epithets  were  freely  exchanged,  till  the 
ascetic,  losing  his  temper,  threw  his  stick  at  the  intruder, 
but  without  effect.  He  next  hurled  a  piece  of  lighted 
firewood    at    the    man,    and,    more    successful    this    time, 

234 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

struck  his  adversary  on  the  arm,  with  the  result  that  he 
was  sHghtly  burnt. 

In  a  rage — hterally  a  burning  rage  now — the  meddle- 
some fellow  flew  at  the  sadhu  and  beat  him  soundly 
with  a  stick.  Bystanders  in  horror  hastened  to  interfere, 
when  a  new  arrival,  pressing  forward  to  see  what  the 
excitement  was  about,  grasped  the  situation  and  laughingly 
exclaimed;  "  Oh, ,  so  you  have  come  here,  have  you  ?  " 

Noticing  his  familiar  mode  of  address,  several  present 
queried  with  surprise,  "  Do  you  know  the  Maharaj  ? 
Whence  does  he  come  ?  "  and  so  on. 

'''  Who  is  he  ?     Why  ,     the  son  of  ,  a  cJioorah 

(sweeper)  by  caste,  and  I  see  that  there  are  several  of 
his  caste-mates  not  far  off." 

"  A  choorah  ?  Are  you  sure  ?  "  came  from  many 
voices. 

"  I  should  rather  think  I  am  sure — he  is  one  of  my 
own  beraderi.  Have  I  not  known  him  since  he  was  a 
child  ?  " 

This  disclosure  was  like  a  bolt  out  of  the  blue ! 

"  Tola  !  toha  !  "  said  the  horrified  bystanders.  "  And 
these  respectable  ladies  have  been  feeding  chooraJis 
with  their  own  hands  and  eating  their  contaminated 
leavings." 

The  pious  women  victimised  by  the  Yogi  veiled  their 
faces  closely  and  fled  without  a  word,  overwhelmed  with 
shame  and  anxiety.  "  Toha  I  toha  !  "  passed  from  mouth 
to  mouth,  and  the  crowd  was  moved  by  mingled  feelings 
of  merriment,  indignation,  and  disgust  at  the  discomfiture 
and  punishment  of  the  low-caste  Yogi,^  and  at  the  terrible 
— how  terrible  only  the  Hindu  knows — predicament  in 
which  the  women  zealous  of  good  works  had  quite  innocently 
placed  themselves  and  their  families. 

12.  A  pseudo-Sai3hu  and  his  Adventures. 

At    a    public    meeting    I    heard    a    well-dressed    man, 
evidently  a  Sikh,  referring,  not  without  sly  humour  and 
a    touch    of    conscious    pride,    to    the    days    when,    as    a 
^  I  did  not  learn  whether  these  men  were  real  Yogis,  or  only  pretenders. 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

^seudo-sadhu,  he  had  successfully  eluded  the  vigilance  of 
the  police,  living  unrecognised  amongst  many  real  sadhus, 
men  of  true  piety  and  estimable  character. 

Naturally,  I  wished  to  know  something  more  about 
this  man  and  his  experiences.  My  inquiries  eventually 
led  to  my  learning  the  following  story  of  his  adventures 
from  a  Sikh  gentleman,  who  assured  me  that  he  had  heard 
it  from  the  qnondsLin-sadhu  himself.  The  details  may  or 
may  not  be  accurate — most  likely  the  latter ;  but  the  main 
features  of  the  narrative  are  probably  those  accepted  by 
the  public  and  known  in  the  bazaars. 

Being  implicated  in  some  way  in  certain  seditious 
movements  in  connection  with  political  designs  of  the  late 
Maharajah  Duleep  Singh  which  caused  a  flutter  in  the 
Punjab  a  few  years  ago,  the  Sikh  in  question  was  arrested 
by  order  of  the  Government,  and  detained  as  a  prisoner  in 
the  fort  of  Lahore  in  charge  of  the  military  authorities. 

The  cell  in  which  he  was  confined  was  in  an  upper 
storey,  and  opened  upon  the  flat  terrace  roof  of  one  of 
the  buildings.  It  was  guarded  by  British  soldiers ;  but 
nevertheless  the  hope  of  effecting  an  escape  from  his 
jailers  did  not  desert  the  captive.  It  was  the  custom  for 
the  relieving  sentry  to  open  the  door  of  the  cell  and 
satisfy  himself  of  the  actual  presence  of  the  prisoner  there, 
before  he  commenced  his  watch  upon  the  roof-top. 

Day  followed  day,  and  the  hope  of  escape  became  less 
and  less,  when  one  night  the  soldier  who  came  to  take 
over  charge,  being  slightly  the  worse  for  liquor,  care- 
lessly omitted  to  lock  the  cell  door  securely.  The  long- 
wished-for  hour  had  come.  Listening  breathlessly  to  the 
monotonous  tramp,  tramp  of  the  sentry  as  he  walked  to 
and  fro,  the  prisoner  seized  the  most  favourable  moment 
to  effect  his  escape,  and,  moving  rapidly  and  silently  with 
bare  feet  across  an  open  space,  crept  up  to  the  parapet. 
The  night  was  clear  enough  to  show  him  that  a  jump  down 
from  that  position  was  not  to  be  thought  of,  but  the  flat 
roof  of  a  less  lofty  building  was  much  nearer  than  the 
surface  of  the  country  outside,  and  seemed  to  aftord  a 
gleam  of  hope  to  one  prepared  to  take  no  ordinary  risks. 
The  fine  old  fort  of  the  Mogul  emperors  had  long  since 

236 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

seen  its  best  days,  and  was  in  many  places  crumbling 
away.  The  SiT^h  cautiously  dislodged  a  brick  or  two ;  lie 
then  unwound  his  long  turban,  and,  tying  a  brick  to  one 
end  of  it,  flung  it  over  the  projecting  branch  of  a  tree 
which  most  opportunely  was  growing  in  a  very  convenient 
position.  By  the  aid  of  the  bough  and  the  long  turban 
cloth  the  prisoner  reached  the  roof  below.  The  rest  was 
comparatively  easy  work.  From  the  lower  roof  which  he 
had  gained  he  dropped  into  the  courtyard  of  a  small 
temple,  scaled  its  comparatively  low  walls,  and  found 
himself  on  the  roadway  outside  the  fortifications. 

Already  the  prisoner  was  missed,  and  the  hue-and-cry 
had  been  raised  in  the  fort,  while  the  earliest  indications 
of  approacliing  dawn  showing  upon  the  eastern  sky  warned 
him  that  there  was  not  a  moment  to  be  lost. 

With  all  the  speed  he  could  command,  the  escaped 
prisoner  made  for  the  river  side,  and  concealed  himself 
in  the  almost  impenetrable  forest  of  tall  reeds  and  bul- 
rushes which  skirts  the  margin  of  the  Ravi.  All  day 
he  lay  low,  and,  when  night  came  on,  made  his  way  to  a 
small  village  somewhat  off  the  beaten  track.  There  was 
no  serai  or  recognised  rest-house  for  travellers  here,  so,  in 
accordance  with  the  usual  custom  in  the  Punjab,  our  Sikh 
malcontent  sought  the  hospitality  of  the  village  barber, 
who  gave  him  shelter  and  some  food.  The  Sikh  took 
especial  note  of  the  place  where  the  barber  kept  the 
instruments  of  his  craft,  and  during  the  night  quietly 
abstracted  a  razor  and  a  pair  of  scissors.  Provided  with 
these,  he  retired  to  a  lonely  place,  cut  off  his  long  hair 
and  beard  as  well  as  he  could,  and  then  shaved  his  head 
and  face  quite  clean.  No  longer  was  he  a  Sikh,  no  longer 
a  rebel,  but  only  a  poor  sadhu  bound  on  a  pilgrimage  to 
Hardwar  on  the  holy  Ganges.  The  good  folks  he  met 
helped  him  along,  and  he  at  last  reached  the  sacred  river 
and  fell  in  with  many  sadhus  there.  With  some  of  these 
he  fraternised,  and  in  their  company  wandered  about  from 
place  to  place   for  some  months. 

In  the  course  of  his  rovings  he  came  to  Meerut,  and 
at  this  important  town,  by  putting  apparently  casual 
questions  to  various  visitors  who  came  to  pay  their  respects 

237 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

to  Sadhu-ji,  he  learned,  to  his  great  delight,  that  Govern- 
ment had  granted  a  free  pardon  to  all  who  had  been 
concerned  in  the  Duleep  Singh  affair.  Nothing  could 
restrain  his  joy.  He  repudiated  his  sadhuism  forthwith, 
bade  his  kind  companions  farewell,  and  hastened  home 
to  learn  all  that  had  occurred  amongst  his  kinsfolk  and 
friends  during  his  concealment  under  disguise  as  a  religious 
mendicant. 

13.  Yogi  Guests. 

A  pious  Hindu,  desirous  of  securing  the  blessing  of 
Heaven,  went  to  an  encampment  of  Yogis  outside  the  city 
and  humbly  invited  their  reverences  to  partake  of  a  meal 
at  his  poor  house.  They  graciously  accepted  the  invita- 
tion, and  preparations  were  duly  made  for  their  entertain- 
ment. When  the  time  for  their  arrival  was  at  hand,  the 
host  bid  his  wife  retire  to  the  upper  chambers  of  the  house, 
as  he  did  not  desire  her  presence  in  an  assembly  of  men, 
even  of  Yogis.  She  went  upstairs  and  sat  at  a  window,  to 
watch  the  arrival  of  the  guests.  She  counted  them  as 
they  entered,  in  her  anxiety  that  there  should  be  enough 
food  for  them  all.     There  were  twenty  arrivals. 

The  feast  being  over,  and  the  guests  about  to  depart, 
the  hostess  took  her  seat  at  the  same  window  once  more, 
so  that  she  might  know  when  they  were  all  gone,  as  she 
wished  to  come  down  as  soon  as  possible  to  learn  how  my 
lords  had  fared.  Only  nineteen,  as  she  told  them  off  on 
her  fingers,  left  the  house,  and  so  she  remained  upstairs, 
wondering  impatiently  what  the  twentieth  man  could  be 
doing. 

Her  husband  called  her  down  ;  but,  remembering  how 
curtly  he  had  dismissed  her  when  the  holy  men  were 
about  to  arrive  at  the  house,  she  replied  that  she  would 
descend  when  all  the  guests  had  gone.  Her  husband 
assured  her  that  all  had  departed,  and  desired  her  to  come 
at  once  and  look  after  things,  as  he  wished  to  show  his 
respect  to  the  Yogis  by  attending  them  back  to  their  en- 
campment. She  came  down,  explained  the  cause  of  her 
hesitation,  and,  as  became  a  good  housewife,  commenced  at 
once  attending  to  the  pots  and  pans  and  the  brass  plates 

238 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

which  had  been  used  by  the  guests.  Her  husband  then 
went  out  in  a  hurry  to  catch  up  the  holy  sadhus  on  their 
homeward  journey. 

Female  neighbours,  who,  curious  to  hear  all  about  the 
feast,  had  been  waiting  to  visit  the  hostess  as  early  as  the 
proprieties  would  allow,  were  surprised  on  approaching 
the  house  to  notice  a  young  Yogi  coming  out  of  it  after  the 
master  had  gone  away.  He  had  a  pretty  big  bundle  tucked 
away  under  his  arm,  and  was  making  oft  hurriedly.  Some 
women  who  were  intimate  friends  of  the  family,  not  dis- 
inclined for  a  bit  of  gossip,  ventured  to  ask  him  as  he 
passed  along  how  he  happened  to  stay  back  after  all  his 
companions  had  departed  followed  by  the  master  of  the 
house. 

He  explained  that  two  or  three  men  of  his  party, 
though  invited,  had  not  been  able  to  attend  the  feast,  and 
that  his  good  hostess  had  kindly  cooked  a  special  supply 
of  food  for  them,  which  he  was  taking  with  him.  Hence 
the  delay.  "  But,  Maharaj,"  remarked  the  women,  still 
willing  to  have  a  chat,  "  food  is  never  carried  in  a  bundle 
like  that,  but  in  plates  or  baskets.  Your  hostess  should 
have  thought  of  that." 

While  some  were  thus  interviewing  the  holy  man,  who 
seemed  to  be  pressed  for  time  and  anxious  to  move  on, 
others  had  entered  the  house,  and  there,  to  their  horror, 
came  upon  a  ghastly  scene — the  unfortunate  hostess  lying 
dead,  in  a  pool  of  her  own  blood,  despoiled  of  the  better 
part  of  her  clothing  and  all  the  valuable  gold  and  silver 
ornaments  she  was  in  the  habit  of  wearing. 

The  visitors,  shocked  and  terrified,  ran  after  the  Yogi, 
raising  an  alarm,  and  it  was  not  long  before  he  was  appre- 
hended. The  cruel  murderer  had  apparently  managed  to 
cleverly  conceal  himself  somewhere  in  the  house,  till  his 
host's  departure  afforded  him  the  opportunity  of  carrying 
out  his  nefarious  design. 

14.  A  Sadhu  as  Restaurateur. 

Sadhus  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin,  and  yet  they  are 
fed,  and  not  scantily  either,  even  when  they  assemble  in 

239 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

large  numbers,  sometimes  in  tlieir  thousands,  at  the 
rehgious  fairs,  held  periodically  at  sacred  places  through- 
out India. 

Entering  a  much  visited  enclosure  at  one  of  these 
melas,  I  found  a  sadhu,  with  his  chelas  and  some  huge 
iron  cauldrons.  The  sadhu,  I  was  informed,  fed  his 
ascetic  brethren,  and  whoever  else  came  to  him,  twice  a 
day. 

My  visit  was  not  made  at  meal-time,  but  there  were 
in  one  of  the  immense  cauldrons  some  fifteen  gallons  of 
milk  being  gently  warmed.  Thinking  that  the  sadhu 
might  have  pecuniary  resources  of  his  own,  or  that  the 
extemporised  kitchen  was  carried  on  at  the  expense  of  some 
moneyed  persons,  I  inquired  where  the  needful  funds  came 
from,  and  was  informed  pointedly  that  everybody  contri- 
buted towards  it ;  and  so,  after  my  inquisitiveness,  I  felt 
constrained  to  do  likewise.  It  would  seem  that  the  sadhu, 
having  secured  the  use  of  some  huge  cauldrons  and  other 
necessary  cooldng-pots  of  proportionately  large  dimensions, 
together  with  the  services  of  a  few  willing  helps,  set  up, 
advertised,  and  opened,  without  hesitation  or  misgiving,  his 
restaurant  for  the  free  supply  of  food  to  ascetics  and  other 
hungry  souls,  for  he  knew  the  generous  public  would  do 
the  rest  for  him. 

His  confident  expectations  were  fully  realised,  and  his 
kitchen  was  a  great  success. 

15.  A  Saint  in  Chains. 

The  ascetic  whose  portrait  is  given  in  an  earlier  portion 
of  this  volume,  p.  48,  although  a  Muslim,  deserves  a 
passing  notice  here,  not  only  on  account  of  the  unusual 
nature  of  his  self-inflicted  torture,  but  more  particularly 
for  the  motive  which  prompted  it. 

Some  Indian  newspapers  in  1891  drew  attention  to  a 
faquir  who  was  moving  about  the  country  under  a  heavy 
self-imposed  burden  of  massive  iron  chains.  This  ascetic 
happening  to  come  my  way,  I  found  an  opportunity  of 
interviewing  him  in  his  temporary  abode  in  the  native 
quarter  of  Lahore.     He  was  a  tall,  large-boned  man,  under 

240 


PERSONAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH  SADHUS 

fifty  years  of  age,  and,  though  much  emaciated  by  his 
austerities,  retained  ample  evidence  of  a  naturally  vigorous 
physique. 

Accompanied  by  my  son,  I  ascended  to  the  upper  room 
where  Sabit  Alii  Shah,  surnamed  Sankal-Walah,  or  the  man 
of  chains,  was  putting  up,  and  where  he  was  expecting  our 
visit.  We  found  him  stretched  upon  a  mat,  heavily  weighted 
with  iron  chains. 

According  to  the  hasty  judgments  of  some  Europeans 
who  had  referred  to  Sankal-Walah  in  the  public  prints, 
the  ascetic,  conscience-stricken,  was  expiating  his  sins  by  the 
torture  of  his  body  ;  but  I  ascertained,  in  conversation  with 
him,  that  the  object  and  motive  of  his  austerities  were 
something  very  different  indeed.  He  had,  it  appeared, 
suffered  grave  injustice  at  the  hands  of  certain  influential 
persons,  and,  unable  or  unwilling  to  take  vengeance  upon 
them  personally,  he  imposed  this  heavy  burden  upon  him- 
self, in  the  hope  that  God  would  pity  his  misery  and  mete 
out  just  punishment  to  his  enemies. 

After  some  persuasion,  I  was  able  to  get  the  faquir  to 
stand  to  us  for  his  photograph.  He  was  so  weak,  and  his 
chains  so  heavy,  that  it  was  no  easy  matter  to  get  him  on 
his  feet,  or  to  keep  him  standing  for  even  a  few  moments. 
However,  my  son  was  able  to  secure  a  satisfactory  photo- 
graph of  the  ascetic,  as  the  reproduction  in  Chapter  III. 
will  show. 

The  faquir  subsequently  informed  me  by  letter  that  he 
was  raising  a  subscription  for  the  performance  of  a  cere- 
mony at  which  he  would  formally  lay  aside  his  chains. 
These,  I  understood,  would  be  deposited  at  the  shrine  of 
the  famous  saint.  Data  Ganj  Bakhsh.  Whether  the  wished- 
for  vengeance  had  overtaken  Sabit  AUi  Shah's  enemies, 
or  the  time  limit  fixed  by  himself  i6T  carrying  the  chains 
had  expired,  I  cannot  tell ;  but  this  I  know,  that  the 
money  required  for  the  ceremony  was  not  forthcoming,  and 
that  the  unhappy  faquir,  still  burdened  with  his  load  of 
iron,  left  Lahore  in  disgust  and  despair. 


241 


CHAPTER  X 


SOME   SADHVIS    OR   FEMALE   DEVOTEES 


1.  A  public  Lecturer,  Srimati  Pandita  Mai  Jivan  Mukut.  2.  Shri  Maji, 
the  Recluse  of  Annandgupha.  3.  Premi,  a  young  Sadhvi  who  em- 
braced Christianity. 

NCE  only  have  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  listening  to 
an  Indian  woman  lectur- 
ing with  unveiled  face 
to  a  mixed  audience  in 
public,  and  that  woman 
was  a  professed  sadhvi 
or  female  ascetic,  who, 
whatever  her  real  name 
may  have  been,  was, 
since  the  adoption  of 
the  new  life,  known  as 
Srimati  Pandita  Mai 
Jivan  Mukut.  She  was, 
I  understood,  a  native  of  Jummu  in  Kashmir  territory, 
and  a  widow.  She  had  studied  some  Sanskrit,  was  fairly 
well  read  in  Hindi  and  Punjabi  literature,  and  so  great 
was  her  zeal  for  the  spread  of  knowledge  that  she  had 
opened  a  school  for  girls  in  her  native  town. 

Her  appearance  before  the  world  in  the  character 
of  a  lecturer  was  very  distasteful  to  her  people  and  to 
her  late  husband's  family  ;  but  she,  having  quite  emanci- 
pated herself  from  the  prejudices  of  her  countrymen,  cared 
not  for  these  things. 

i'  When  I  attended  her  lecture  in  the  spacious  courtyard 
of  a  house  in  Amritsar,  her  reputation,  appreciation  of  her 
rare  abilities,  or  perhaps  merely  idle  curiosity,  had  brought 

242 


SOME  SADHVIS  OR  FEMALE  DEVOTEES 

together  a  large  crowd,  including  a  great  number  of  Hindu 
ladies  of  the  better  classes,  with  their  children,  all  eager  to 
listen  to  the  words  of  wisdom  which  might  fall  from  the 
sadhvi's  lips. 

At  first  the  ladies  with  their  little  ones  occupied  a 
place  apart,  but,  as  their  numbers  swelled  and  their  interest 
in  the  proceedings  increased,  they  gradually  edged  them- 
selves into  more  favourable  places,  at  the  same  time 
observing  only  a  very  nominal  purdah, 

A  preliminary  speech  was  made  by  the  chairman  in 
the  ordinary  way,  and  then  the  lecturer's  guru,  a  portly 
middle-aged  sadhu,  who,  if  appearances  were  not  decep- 
tive, basked  in  Fortune's  smiles,  made  some  complimentary 
remarks  about  his  very  interesting  pupil.  Other  speakers 
followed  in  the  style  usually  adopted  on  such  occasions. 

When  the  event  of  the  afternoon  was  at  length 
reached,  Jivan  Mukut  took  up  her  position  on  a  raised 
platform,  and,  standing  up  with  unveiled  face  and  a 
remarkable  absence  of  self -consciousness,  proceeded  to 
expound  the  duties  of  women.  To  help  her,  she  had 
a  few  notes  in  the  form  of  couplets  or  verses  composed 
by  herself,  which  filled,  I  think,  barely  a  sheet  of  note- 
paper,  and  served  as  the  texts  of  the  successive  portions 
of  her  speech. 

She  read  out,  in  its  proper  turn,  the  appropriate  verse, 
and  then,  with  reference  to  it,  went  on  to  illustrate  the 
points  she  wished  to  explain  or  emphasise  by  frequent 
allusions  to  stories  in  the  sacred  epics  and  Puranas. 
For  considerably  over  an  hour  she  held  the  undivided 
attention  of  her  audience,  as  with  wonderful  fluency  of 
expression  and  apt  illustrations  she  expounded  the  duties 
of  her  sex  and  strongly  advocated  the  education  of  women. 
Sadhvi  or  not,  unworldly  or  otherwise,  Jivan  Mukut,  clever 
and  self-possessed,  undoubtedly  appreciated  to  the  full  the 
applause  which  frequently  interrupted  her  very  sensible 
speech. 

A  few  days  after  the  lecture  I  made  bold  to  ask  for 
a  copy  of  the  lady's  photograph,  and,  through  some  friends 
of  hers,  was  fortunate  enough  to  obtain  the  one  reproduced 
on  the  opposite  page  (Fig.  16),  which  I  was  assured  was 

243 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

taken  expressly  for  me,   and    the    negative    destroyed  to 
prevent  any  unauthorised  copies  being  printed. 


2.  Shri  Maji,  the  Recluse  op  Annandgupha, 

NEAR  Benares. 

Though  common  amongst  the  Jains,  female  ascetics 
are  rare  amongst  Hindus.  There  was  one,  however,  who 
resided  near  Benares  for  many  years,  honoured  and  re- 
spected by  the  Hindu  community.  I  regret  that  I  did 
not  see  her  myself,  but  the  following  particulars  regarding 
her  were  communicated  to  me  : — 

Shri  Maji,  the  Benares  Yogini,  was  born  in  1826  a.d. 
Her  name  was  Hari  Kuer  Bai,  but  the  love  she  inspired 
earned  for  her  the  affectionate  title  Maji,  by  which  she 
was  known  to  a  large  public.  Her  family  came  originally 
from  Gujrat,  but  as  her  ancestors  had  been  residents  of 
Benares  for  some  generations,  and  she  herself  had  been 
brought  up  there,  her  admirers,  connecting  her  with  their 
sacred  city,  gave  her  the  cognomen  Benarsi.  Maji,  who 
was  the  youngest  of  six  children,  was  but  five  years  old 
when  her  mother  died.  Her  father,  Shri  Eameshwar 
Dev,  was  a  good  Sanskrit  scholar  and  a  man  of  strong 
religious  feelings.  The  youngest  child,  inheriting  his  de- 
votional temperament  and  love  of  learning,  became  his 
favourite.  To  her  he  devoted  much  of  his  time,  teaching 
her  Sanskrit  and  instructing  her  in  religious  duties.  She 
proved  an  apt  pupil,  who  by  her  progress  amply  repaid 
the  fond  instructor  for  his  labours  as  teacher  and  spiritual 
guide. 

When  ten  years  of  age,  Maji  was  married  at  Benares 
to  a  Brahman  youth.  Three  years  after  her  marriage  she 
went  to  the  house  of  her  father-in-law ;  in  other  words,  she 
joined  her  young  husband.  Hardly  two  years  after  that 
she  became  a  widow,  and  returned  to  her  father's  house, 
being  then  only  fifteen  years  old,  fully  resolved  to  devote 
her  life  to  the  study  of  religious  books  and  the  practice 
of  yoga.  Within  a  short  time  Maji  acquired  a  fair  reputa- 
tion amongst  the  learned  pandits  of  Benares.  Her  father 
made  many  pilgrimages  on  foot,  and  she  accompanied  him, 

244 


J. 

M 
I 
fi 

0 
K 
T 

r 


♦  ;#  ♦  i^  ^  :»  -fr  '^  ^ 


><n:-  >^- 


-  *<c 


*  ^ 


THE    SADHVI    SlUMATI    I'ANDITA    MAI    JIVAN    MUKIT. 


Pig.  16. 


To  f<-ce  page  244. 


SOME  SADHVIS  OR  FEMALE  DEVOTEES 

carrying  on  her  head,  in  Indian  fashion,  all  the  simple 
necessaries  for  their  journey.  In  these  pedestrian  pilgrim- 
ages, which  occupied  some  five  years,  the  father  and 
daughter  visited  Jugganath,  Hardwar,  Brindaban,  Badrinath, 
Kedarnath,  and  many  other  holy  places.  When  they 
returned  to  Benares  in  1846,  Rameshwar  Dev's  guru, 
Swami  Sri  Sachda  Nand,  who  used  to  live  in  an  under- 
ground cave  or  cell  known  as  Annandgupha,  situated  some 
twelve  miles  to  the  east  of  Benares,  breathed  his  last,  and 
the  gufha  or  cave  was  left  unoccupied.  So  the  father  of 
Shri  Maji  took  up  his  abode  there,  and  with  him  Maji 
also,  always  studying  the  sacred  books  of  the  Hindus  and 
practising  yoga.  There,  in  the  gupha,  they  lived  together 
for  fourteen  years,  till  in  1860  the  father  died,  and  Maji 
was  left  alone.  But  she  did  not  desert  the  spot,  and 
continued  to  live  her  solitary  life  there  till  her  death  in 
November  1898,  at  the  age  of  seventy-two. 

Thus  it  appears  that  for  thirty -eight  years  this 
religieuse  had  lived  quite  alone  in  the  underground  cell, 
Annandgupha,  where  indeed  she  had  passed  in  calm  tran- 
quillity and  religious  study  no  less  than  fifty-two  years  of 
her  life. 

To  her  cave  came,  year  after  year,  people  from  all 
quarters  to  consult  the  recluse  whose  fame  had  spread 
to  distant  places,  and,  knowing  the  respect  in  which 
Hindus  hold  such  a  character  as  Maji,  we  may  be  certain 
that  she  endured  no  real  personal  want  or  hardship  in 
her  old  age,  but  passed  her  decHning  years  honoured 
by  her  co-religionists,  and  in  as  much  comfort  as  might 
be  consistent  with  her  ascetic  professions  or  her  self- 
denying  simplicity  would  accept.  A  portrait  of  this  lady, 
reproduced  from  a  wood  engraving,-  stands  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  chapter. 

3.  Premi,  a  young  Sadhvi  who  embraced  Christianity. 

Both  the  sadhvis  referred  to  in  the  preceding  pages  were 
widows  when  they  adopted  the  ascetic  profession.  A  Hindu 
widow's  lot  is,  in  accordance  with  the  customs  of  the  country, 
so  supremely  pathetic,  so  full  of  restrictions  and  of  cruel 

245 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

humiliations,  that  it  is  not  surprising  that  such  a  one 
should  gladly  embrace  the  freedom  and  respect  which  the 
religious  calling  would  bring  with  it.  But  sadhvis  are 
not  always  widows.  Miss  Fallon,  of  the  Faizabad  Zenana 
Mission,  has  in  a  little  booklet  of  some  forty-seven  pages, 
entitled  Premi,^  given  a  simple  but  most  valuable  sketch  of 
the  life  of  an  orphan  girl  who,  although  blessed  with  the 
world's  goods  and  betrothed  to  a  young  Brahman,  ran  away 
from  a  comfortable  home  and  an  indulgent  grandmother 
in  order  to  find  God,  for  whom  her  infant  soul  thirsted. 

Ten  years  she  spent  as  the  chelin  (female  disciple)  of 
a  most  worthy  guru,  who,  having  instructed  her  in  the 
right  way,  and  made  her  practise  many  austerities,  duly 
initiated  her,  in  the  presence  of  other  sadhus,  into  the  sect 
or  order  to  which  he  belonged,  conferring  upon  her  a  new 
name,  meaning  "  under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty,"  by 
which  she  should  be  known  thenceforward. 

In  company  with  her  spiritual  guide,  and  other  dis- 
ciples of  his,  she  visited,  as  a  religious  pilgrim,  many  of 
the  sacred  shrines  of  India  and  the  Himalayas.  Lost 
one  day  amongst  the  mountain  forests  of  Nepal,  the  for- 
lorn child  cried  out  in  despair,  "  0  God,  Thou  knowest  I 
have  given  up  all  for  Thee — home  and  friends  and  every- 
thing ;  and  if  it  be  Thy  will  that  this  body  should  be  eaten 
by  tigers,  I  do  not  mind,  only  let  my  spirit  be  -v^dth  Thee  ;  " 
and  there,  in  the  gloomy  sohtude  of  those  terrible  jungles, 
she  distinctly  heard  a  voice  utter  these  comforting  words : 
"  Thou  art  My  servant,  and  no  harm  will  come  to  thee," 
which  effectually  dispelled  all  her  fears. 

This  exceedingly  self-willed  and  highly  emotional  girl 
was  at  the  age  of  eighteen  attracted  towards  the  Zenana 
missionaries,  apparently  in  the  first  instance  by  the  desire 
for  knowledge.  This  is  how  Miss  Fallon  describes  her  : 
"  Among  the  crowd  I  soon  spied  a  wild-looking  bright- 
eyed  girl,  her  forehead  besmeared  with  sandalwood,  very 
little  on  in  the  way  of  clothing,  a  mala  (beads)  in  her 
hand,  her  hair  in  a  loose  knot  on  the  top  of  her  head, 

^  Prevn,  the  Story  of  a  Hindu  Girl,  by  Miss  Fallon,  Zenana  missionary 
at  Faizabad  :  with  an  Introduction  by  Sir  Monier  Williams  (James  Nisbct 
&  Co.,  London). 

246 


SOME  SADHVIS  OR  FEMALE  DEVOTEES 

and  looking  every  inch  a  sadhu  (Hindu  devotee).  One 
of  my  teachers  whispered  to  me,  '  That  is  the  girl  who 
came  to  our  school  the  other  day  and  said  she  wanted 
to  learn  to  read.'  Of  course  my  interest  was  aroused, 
and  at  a  sign  from  me  the  girl  jumped  up  to  where  we 
were  sitting,  as  nimbly  as  a  deer,  and,  smiUng  all  over, 
sat  down  at  my  feet." 

This  was  Bindraban's  first  contact  with  the  missionaries, 
and,  after  a  bitter  and  prostrating  mental  struggle,  this 
wild,  impulsive,  emotional  child  of  nature  embraced  Chris- 
tianity, and  had  once  more  a  new  name,  this  time  Premi 
(beloved),  given  to  her. 

With  what  pain  and  sorrov/  her  guru  saw  the  Brahman 
girl,  his  favoured  disciple  for  so  many  years,  give  up  the 
religion  of  her  forefathers,  we  may  easily  imagine  ;  yet, 
when  she  elected  to  stay  with  Miss  Fallon,  the  old  sadhu's 
message  to  that  lady  was  full  of  a  dignified  resignation, 
convepng  as  it  did  the  promise  of  a  divine  blessing  upon 
Miss  Fallon  for  her  kindness  to  the  young  sadhvi. 

That  the  guru's  teaching  had  at  least  made  for  righteous- 
ness may  be  illustrated  by  the  following  anecdote,  which 
relates  to  the  occasion  of  the  first  meeting  between  the 
wa5rward  impressionable  sadhvi  and  Miss  Fallon  : — 

It  was  growing  dark  before  the  girl  started  for  the 
convent  where  she  was  staying,  and  Miss  Fallon  asked 
her  if  she  was  not  afraid  to  go  alone,  as  there  were  so 
many  bad  people  about  who  might  do  her  harm. 

"  Why  should  I  fear  ?  "  said  the  girl,  drawing  herself 
up.  "  My  guru  said,  '  Child,  sin  can  never  touch  you  unless 
it  is  in  your  heart.'  " 


247 


CHAPTER  XI 

HINDU    MONASTERIES 

Monasteries  have  existed  in  India  since  the  earliest  times,  and  are  at  present 
to  be  found  scattered  all  over  the  Country — Religious  and  Worldly 
Motives  which  prompt  the  Foundation  of  Monasteries — Management 
of  Monastic  Properties — Monks  not  expected  to  labour  in  any  way — 
Installation  of  an  Abbot  described — A  Visit  to  the  Udasi  Akhara  of 
Santokh  Das  ;  the  Presence  of  Women  tolerated  there — The  Treasures 
of  the  place  and  their  History — A  public  Entertainment  at  the  same 
Monastery — Respect  entertained  by  the  Sect  for  Ashes — Interview 
with  another  Abbot  who  had  not  a  single  good  word  for  Sadhus — Visit 
to  a  Dharmsala  of  the  Nirmali  Sect ;  Sanskrit  Literature  read  and 
expounded  there — The  great  Monastery  at  Jogi  Tilla  ;  Interview  with 
the  Abbot ;  meet  some  Acquaintances — A  romantic  Story  associated 
with  Tilla — Particulars  about  certain  places  of  Pilgrimage  communi- 
cated by  a  talkative  itinerant  Yogi — Sadhus'  Partiality  for  Nudity. 


HERE  existed  in 
the  Indian  forests 
in  the  earliest 
ages  communities  of 
hermits,  of  the  type 
described  in  Sakuntala, 
all  the  residents  of  the 
penance  -  grove  being 
under  one  head  or 
abbot ;  and  since  Buddhist  times  there  have  been  through- 
out the  country  regularly  constituted  conventual  establish- 
ments. Most  of  these  are  insignificant  and  likely  to  escape 
the  notice  of  Europeans,  but  every  sacred  spot  or  plain  or 
mountain  and  every  crowded  city  knows  them. 

Sectarianism,  always  active  in  India,  has,  as  we  have 
seen,   been  particularly  so  for  at  least  a  thousand   years 

248 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

past.  Each  new  sect,  as  a  matter  of  course,  has  set  up 
its  temples,  and,  in  connection  with  all  the  more  consider- 
able ones,  monasteries  also,  for  the  accommodation  of  the 
priests  and  attendants,  and  of  the  wandering  ascetics  who 
carry  abroad  the  tenets  of  the  sect  and  bring  recruits  into 
the  sectarian  fold. 

The  monasteries  estabhshed  by  the  founder  of  each 
sect  are  held  in  great  veneration  by  all  his  followers,  and 
it  is  an  object  of  ambition  to  the  wandering  sadhus  to  visit 
them  periodically,  especially  on  high  ceremonial  occasions.^ 

Pious  Hindus  have  been  exceedingly  liberal  in  their 
bequests  for  religious  and  charitable  purposes,  sometimes 
devoting  considerable  property  towards  the  establishment 
and  maintenance  of  temples  with  their  connected  monas- 
teries and  rest-houses. 

*'  The  religious  merit  acquired  hy  the  construction  of  a 
ternfle  and  its  dedication  to  the  worship  of  particular 
divinities  is  extolled  in  numerous  sacred  texts. 

"  Vishnu  Rahasya  :  '  Those  who  in  the  sports  of  child- 
hood create  out  of  dust  a  temple  for  Vasudeva,  even  they 
sojourn  in  the  regions  sacred  to  that  divinity.' 

"  Agni  Purana  :  '  Of  those  persons  who  are  ever  con- 
templating the  construction  of  a  temple  for  Hari,  the  sins 
of  a  previous  hundred  births  are  destroyed.' 

"  Narasinha  Purana  :  '  Whoever  conceives  the  idea  of 
erecting  a  divine  temple,  that  very  day  his  carnal  sins  are 
annihilated ;  what  then  shall  be  said  of  finishing  the 
structure  according  to  rule  !  Beyond  description  is  the 
wealth  of  religious  merit  acquired  by  the  person  who 
makes  an  abode  for  Vishnu  of  eight  bricks.     The  merits 

^  "  The  mafhs,  asthals,  or  akharas,  the  residences  of  the  monastic  com- 
munities of  Hindus,  are  scattered  over  the  whole  country.  They  vary  in 
structure  and  extent,  according  to  the  property  of  which  the  proprietors 
are  possessed,  but  they  generally  comprehend  a  set  of  huts  or  chambers 
for  the  Mahant  or  Superior  and  his  permanent  pupils ;  a  temple  sacred 
to  the  deity  whom  they  worship,  or  the  samadh,  or  shrine  of  the  founder 
of  the  sect,  or  some  eminent  teacher ;  and  a  dharmsala,  one  or  more  sheds 
or  buildings  for  the  accommodation  of  the  mendicants  or  travellers  who  are 
constantly  visiting  the  mafh.  Ingress  and  egress  is  free  to  all ;  and  indeed 
a  restraint  upon  personal  liberty  seems  never  to  have  entered  into  the 
conception  of  any  of  the  religious  legislators  of  the  Hindus." — Professor 
H.  H.  Wilson's  Sketch  of  the  Eeligious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  p.  33. 

249 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

accruing  from  extensive  buildings  can  be  presumed  in 
proportion.  He  who  dies  after  making  the  first  brick  (for 
the  construction  of  a  temple)  obtains  the  religious  merit  of 
a  completed  Yajna.^ 

"  Vishnu  Purana  :  '  A  man  attains  the  regions  presided 
over  by  that  deity  whose  temple  he  erects.' 

"  Vamana  Purana  :  *  The  estabhsher  of  a  temple  for 
Vishnu  procures  the  salvation  of  himself  and  of  eight 
generations  above  his  grandfather  ! ' 

"  Agni  Purana :  '  The  man  who  causes  a  temple  to 
be  built  to  Hari,  carries  to  the  mansion  of  Vishnu  ten 
thousand  past  and  future  generations.' 

"  Skanda  Purana  :  '  On  beginning  the  construction  of  a 
temple  for  Krishna,  the  sins  committed  in  seven  births  are 
annihilated,  and  the  ancestors  rescued  from  hell.'  "  ^ 

Very  important,  then,  are  the  benefits  to  be  acquired  in 
other  existences  by  the  building  of  temples  to  the  gods. 
But  even  worldly  motives  may  operate  in  encouraging 
temple -founding,  since  in  populous  localities  it  is  a  really 
profitable  business. 

When  a  Hindu  has  surplus  money  he  has  rarely  any 
desire  to  purchase  the  shares  of  joint-stock  companies,  or 
even  to  invest  his  funds  in  Government  securities.  If  he 
is  a  man  of  the  old  school,  and  past  the  meridian  of  life, 
he  probably  talks  the  matter  over  with  his  guru,  finds  a 
suitable  spot,  and  erects  a  temple,  small  or  large,  according 
to  his  means.  By  this  act  he  reaps  a  double  reward  :  he 
wins  the  favour  of  Heaven,  and  he  also  nets  a  not  incon- 
siderable pecuniary  gain  for  himself  in  the  present  time, 
and  for  his  family  in  the  future.  The  daily  offerings 
of  worshippers,  together  with  the  alms  (mostly  food)  col- 
lected in  daily  begging  expeditions  amongst  householders, 
soon  provide  sufficient  means  not  only  for  the  support 
of  the  resident  priests,  scholars,  and  attendants,  but 
also  for  a  fair  dividend  on  his  outlay  to  the  owner  of 
the  shrine. 

As  time  runs  on,  suppliants  grateful  to  the  local  deity 
for    favourable    answers    to    their    petitions    make    thank- 

*  The  Hindu  Law  of  Endoivments,  by  Pandit  Prannath  Saraswati,  M.A., 
B.L.,  pp.  43-45. 

250 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

offerings  to  the  temple,  or  endow  it  with  funds  and  lands 
for  general  purposes,  or  perhaps  for  the  feeding  of  a  fixed 
number  of  poor  sadhus  or  other  mendicants.  The  offerings 
of  timorous  souls  to  avert  calamity  also  add  to  the  temple 
chest.  Under  favourable  conditions  or  happy  accidents, 
the  revenues  of  the  estabhshment  assume  by  slow  degrees 
respectable  proportions,  and  its  regular  charities  provide 
food,  and  commonly  shelter  of  some  sort,  for  a  number  of 
both  voluntary  and  involuntary  mendicants.^  Thus  under 
the  stimulus  of  religious  zeal,  cupidity,  charity,  super- 
stition, and  a  love  of  indolence,  spring  up  temples  and 
monasteries,  their  multiplication  tending  powerfully  to 
increase  the  army  of  wandering  mendicants,  since  they 
afford  these  rehgious  wayfarers  harbours  of  refuge,  which 
they  certainly  appreciate,  and  which  they  make  use  of  to 
the  fullest  extent. 

The  object  and  method  of  temple  -  founding  being,  as 
we  have  seen,  not  altogether  unconnected  with  prospective 
dividends,  it  follows  that  the  hereditary  principle  naturally 
plays  an  important  part  in  the  arrangements  for  the 
management  of  such  property  and  the  revenues  derivable 
therefrom. 

The  equitable  partition  of  the  revenues  becomes  a 
fertile  source  of  contention  amongst  the  proprietors.  Dis- 
honesty and  peculation  are  not  unknown,  and  I  have  had 
described  to  me  some  of  the  ingenious  methods  by  which 
on  great  festivals  the  Hberal  offerings  deposited  before  the 
idols  by  the  visitors  to  a  temple  or  shrine  are  cleverly 
purloined  by  the  attendants  employing  literally  both  hands 
and  unshod  feet  for  this  dishonest  purpose. 

Some  of  the  Hindu  monastic  institutions  have,  through 

^  In  some  of  the  large  maVhs  a  contribution  of  not  less  than  one  hundred 
rupees  secures  one  full  meal  a  day  for  life.  Of  course  more  than  the  amount 
just  named  is  usually  expected,  and  paid,  for  the  privilege  in  question. 
But,  think  of  it  !  One  hundred  rupees  paid  down,  and  a  plentiful  dinner 
secured  for  life. 

Amongst  the  Templars,  the  Affiliati,  "  in  return  for  a  certain  sum  paid 
down,  received  their  daily  maintenance  (their  commons)  out  of  the  corporate 
fund." — King's  Gnostics  and  their  Remains,  p.  412.  And  a  somewhat 
similar  custom  obtains  even  now  amongst  certain  lay  orders  in  certain 
Roman  Catholic  countries,  more  particularly  as  a  provision  for  sickness  and 


old  age. 


251 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

the  liberality  of  princes  and  rich  benefactors,  grown  so 
wealthy  that  their  proper  management  has  become  im- 
portant enough  to  claim  the  attention  of  the  British 
authorities,  who,  in  the  interests  of  the  public,  have  some- 
times been  obliged  to  interfere,  with  a  view  to  the  revenues 
being  properly  applied  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of 
the  donors  or  the  requirements  of  the  case.  Yet  the 
Hindu  monasteries  are  on  the  whole  respectable  institutions, 
though,  as  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson  said,  "  there  are,  it  is 
true,  exceptions  to  this  innocuous  character,  and  robberies 
and  murders  have  been  traced  to  these  religious  establish- 
ments." ^ 

Discipline,  restraint  upon  freedom,  and  serious  occupa- 
tion of  any  sort,  are  practically  unknown  in  the  conventual 
establishments  of  the  Hindus,  because  the  existence  of 
rival  sects,  the  absence  of  a  central  authority,  the  practice 
of  daily  alms -seeking,  and  the  wandering  habits  of  the 
monks,  sanctioned  by  immemorial  custom,  have  made  active 
interference  with  the  ascetics  not  only  impolitic  but  very 
nearly  impossible. 

Where  there  is  practically  neither  restraint  nor  dis- 
cipline, systematic  labour  towards  any  end  is  out  of  the 
question,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  no  Hindu  ascetic  is  ever 
expected  to  worh.  He  is  to  live  by  alms,  and  he  does  so.^ 
It  follows  that  the  sadlms  do  not  till  the  lands  that  may 
have  become  the  property  of  a  monastery,  such  lands  being 
always  leased  out  to  lay  agriculturists — a  fact  which  cannot 
fail  to  recall  to  one's  mind,  by  the  mere  force  of  contrast, 
the  laborious  diligence  of  the  monks  of  the  West,  who,  at 
any  rate  in  the  early  days  of  Christian  monkery,  often,  by 
their  untiring  exertions,  reclaimed  the  wilderness  and  con- 
verted it  into  smiling  corn-fields.  At  the  same  time,  it 
should  not  be  overlooked  that  the  time-honoured  encourage- 
ment of  laborious  habits  on  the  part  of  the  Western  monks 
has,  when  stimulated  by  the  powerful  commercial  spirit  of 

^  Sketch  of  the  Religious  Sects  of  the  Hindus,  p.  35. 

2  In  the  Christian  monasteries  of  the  West,  where  the  rule  of  St.  Benedict 
prevailed,  all  the  monks  were  required  to  be  engaged  in  manual  labour  for 
seven  hours  a  day,  as  a  duty  to  God  and  man  ;  though  it  must  be  admitted 
that,  when  these  conventual  establishments  waxed  rich,  the  obligation  to 
%c9rk  with  the  hands  was  materially  modified,  and  often  set  aside  altogether. 

252 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

modern  times,  been  productive  of  those  grotesque  parodies  of 
unworldKness,  the  present  industrial  and  meanly  avaricious 
monastic  institutions  in  France  and  elsewhere,  with  their 
dishonesty  and  their  sweating  of  the  weak — features  which, 
it  would  seem,  are  unfortunately  inseparable  from  indus- 
trialism even  in  a  convent.^ 

In  respect  to  the  devolution  of  religious  trusts  in  India, 
Mr.  John  D.  Mayne  states  :  "  When  nothing  is  said  in  the 
grant  as  to  the  succession,  the  right  of  management  passes 
by  inheritance  to  the  natural  heirs  of  the  donee,  according 
to  the  rule  that  a  grant  without  words  of  limitation  con- 
veys an  estate  of  inheritance.  The  property  passes  into 
the  office,  and  neither  it  nor  the  management  is  divisible 
among  the  members  of  the  family.  Where  no  other 
arrangement  or  usage  exists,  the  management  may  be  held 
in  turns  by  the  several  heirs.  Sometimes  the  constitution 
of  the  body  vests  the  management  in  several,  as  represent- 
ing several  interests,  or  as  a  check  upon  each  other,  and 
any  act  which  alters  such  a  constitution  would  be  invalid. 
Where  the  head  of  a  religious  institution  is  bound  to 
cehbacy,  it  is  frequently  the  usage  that  he  nominates  his 
successor  by  appointment  during  his  own  lifetime  or  by 
will.  Sometimes  his  nomination  requires  confirmation  by 
the  members  of  the  religious  body.  Sometimes  the  right 
of  election  is  vested  in  them."  ^ 

The  election  and  installation  of  a  new  Mahant  in  the 
case  of  the  larger  monasteries  is  a  function  of  great  moment, 
carried  out  with  much  ceremony,  extending  over  several 
days,  and  attended  by  hundreds  and  even  thousands  of 
interested  persons,  particularly  wandering  ascetics  of  the 
order  attracted  to  the  place  by  the  importance  of  the 
occasion. 

Installation  of  a  Mahant.  —  Through  the  kindness  of 
some  Indian  friends,  I  received  a  courteous  invitation  to 
witness  the  installation  of  Pandit  S.  N.  as  Mahant  of  a 

^  I  allude,  of  course,  to  the  grave  scandals  recently  brought  to  light, 
more  particularly  in  connection  with  the  Bon  Pasteur  order. 

2  A  Treatise  on  Hindu  Law  and  Usage,  by  John  D.  Mayne,  chap.  xii. 
para.  364. 

253 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

small  temple  of  Siva,  and  I  learned  that  some  three 
hundred  Yogis  who  had  recently  celebrated  the  Devali 
festival  at  Amritsar  had  come  to  Lahore  in  order  to  take 
part  in  this  function. 

A  goodly  number  of  these  ascetics  had  assembled  under 
a  great  banian  tree,  and  a  stranger  sight  could  hardly  have 
been  seen  anywhere  in  the  world  than  that  group  of  wild- 
looldng  men.  Some  had  but  little  clothing  on ;  some 
covered  themselves  with  dark -coloured  blankets;  a  few 
wore  their  coverings  as  grave-clothes  (kafan) ;  many  had 
their  hair  bedaubed  with  a  light  yellow-coloured  mud ;  all 
were  powdered  over  with  fine  ashes. 

For  all  its  strangeness  and  wildness,  the  assemblage 
was  not  by  any  means  ugly  or  repellent.  Although  their 
bodies  had  been  smeared  with  ashes,  the  Yogis  did  not 
look  dirty  or  squalid.  Many,  certainly,  were  finely 
featured  men  ;  most  of  them  were  in  excellent  condition, 
and  there  was  a  certain  air  of  lofty  indifference  about  them 
that  was  quite  noticeable,  and  easily ,.  raised  them  above 
the  region  of  contempt.  Evidently,  if  they  practised  any 
asceticism  whatever,  it  was  of  a  kind  not  inimical  to 
health. 

At  the  appointed  hour  they  rose  up,  and  in  a  dis- 
orderly procession  followed  a  brass  band  which  had  been 
sent  to  escort  them,  with  sundry  silver  sticks  and  waving 
chowries,  to  the  temple  where  the  installation  was  to  take 
place.  The  brass  band  commenced  with  a  Christy  minstrel 
melody,  and,  after  this  exhibition  of  its  superior  capabilities 
and  European  training,  lapsed  into  strains  of  indigenous 
music. 

■  As  the  procession  passed  along  the  streets,  the  doors 
and  windows  of  the  houses  on  either  side  became  alive 
with  men,  women,  and  children,  who  wished  to  see  the 
tamasha  (show,  spectacle).  They  were  accustomed  to 
processions  of  all  kinds,  and  looked  on  with  their  usual 
apathy  at  the  crowd  of  Yogis,  now  swelled  into  a  goodly 
multitude  by  the  addition  of  a  number  of  ordinary  citizens 
induced  by  curiosity  to  accompany  the  sadhus  on  their 
way.  I  had  on  the  dickey-box  of  my  carriage  a  Yogi  too 
sick  to  walk,  and,  when  he  was  noticed,  eager  faces  peered 

254 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

into  the  carriage  to  find  out  who  the  occupants  might  be, 
and,  on  seeing  sahibs^  could  not  restrain  at  least  a  facial 
expression  of  astonishment. 

As  the  mixed  procession  of  Yogis  and  citizens,  with 
the  noisy  brass  band,  made  rather  a  long,  circuitous  course 
through  the  streets  and  lanes,  I  took  a  shorter  way  in  my 
carriage,  and  reached  the  temple  and  adjoining  buildings 
in  advance  of  the  heterogeneous  crowd. 

At  the  door  of  the  house  Pandit  S.  N.  himself  received 
us  with  Oriental  courtesy,  and  had  us  conducted  to  seats 
upon  the  flat  roof  of  one  of  the  buildings,  in  a  position 
from  which  the  ceremony  could  be  very  conveniently 
viewed. 

When  the  Yogis  arrived  they  crowded  into  the  place 
pell-mell ;  they  filled  the  small  space  before  the  door  of 
the  temple,  and  took  up  whatever  positions  they  thought 
most  suitable.  When  the  available  area  was  occupied, 
a  number  of  them  came  swarming  up  to  the  roof  where 
I  was  sitting  and  made  themselves  comfortable  there. 

The  Mahants  of  several  Siva  temples  were  present,  all 
well  robed  in  white  garments.  Pandit  S.  N.  was  also 
suitably  attired,  and  was  decorated  with  garlands  of  flowers. 
Many  well-to-do  laymen  also  attended,  and  a  small  party 
of  women  and  children  had  a  place  to  themselves.  The 
ceremony  of  installation  was  conducted  with  the  greatest 
decorum.  First  a  large  brass  alms -bowl  encased  in  soft 
white  musHn  was  presented  to  the  pandit  by  the  Mahant 
of  a  temple  at  Amritsar,  who  seemed  to  take  the  leading 
part  in  the  ceremonies ;  this  alms -bowl,  which  had 
belonged  to  the  late  Mahant,  and  his  predecessors,  being 
apparently  the  most  important  badge  of  the  office  of  a 
Mahant,  symbolising  poverty  and  humility. 

The  bowl  was  received  standing,  and,  when  it  had  been 
placed  in  the  pandit's  hands,  he  was  made  to  sit  on  a 
cushion  in  the  window  with  his  back  to  the  street,  and 
various  coloured  or  parti-coloured  clothes  were  presented 
to  him.  A  large  flat  brass  dish  containing  sweetmeats 
was  then  brought  forward.  The  new  Mahant,  standing  up, 
held  it  in  his  hands  for  a  few  seconds,  but  not  without 
assistance,  for  it  was  too  large  and  heavy  for  one  pair  of 

255 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

hands. ''^ It  was  then  passed  on  for  future  distribution  of 
its  contents.  The  several  Mahants  and  other  ecclesiastical 
dignitaries  present  made  their  obeisances  to  him,  the 
temple  bells  rang  out,  the  trumpets  blared,  and  a  shout 
was  raised  in  honour  of  Pandit  S.  N.  Presents  in  money- 
were  now  made  to  the  new  Mahant,  and,  each  time  the 
rupees  were  received  and  counted  by  the  parohita,  or 
family  priest,  he  proclaimed  in  a  loud  voice,  "  So  many 
rupees  have  been  donated  by  so-and-so  !  " 

When  the  presents  made  by  all  the  dignitaries  had 
been  received  and  recorded,  the  followers  of  Pandit  S.  N. — 
that  is,  those  who  regarded  him  as  tlieir  especial  guru — came 
forward  one  by  one,  and  offered  a  rupee  with  profound 
obeisance,  sometimes  a  complete  prostration.  In  return, 
each  one  received  in  his  right  hand  from  the  new  Mahant 
a  pinch  of  something  which  looked  very  much  like  ashes 
of  some  kind.  The  recipients  retired  very  ceremoniously, 
but  almost  immediately  each  one  put  a  little  of  the  white 
stuff  on  his  tongue. 

A  pretty  boy,  nicely  dressed,  was  led  up  to  the  pandit, 
and  received  a  teeka  on  his  forehead.  From  an  adjoining 
roof  several  women  and  girls  in  holiday  attire  bowed  low 
to  the  new  Mahant,  while  many  of  the  Yogis  about  me 
sidled  off  to  have  a  pull  at  the  churrus  pipe,  without  which 
these  habitual  smokers  could  not  get  along  even  for  a  short 
while. 

Having  received  gifts  from  the  heads  of  other  temples, 
it  was  now  the  new  Mahanfs  turn  to  repay  the  compli- 
ment with  interest.  He  had  also  to  honour  the  Yogis,  to 
each  of  whom  was  given  two  pounds  of  the  confection 
known  as  ludoos  and  one  rupee  in  silver.  They  had  all 
been  feasted  at  his  expense  the  day  before. 

I  was  assured  that,  as  a  result  of  this  interchange  of 
compliments,  the  new  Mahant  would,  in  the  end,  have  spent 
three  or  four  hundred  rupees  out  of  his  own  pocket. 

The  akhara  of  Santokh  Das  is  the  largest  monastery 
in  Amritsar,  and  belongs  to  the  Udasi  sect.  Its  founder 
was  a  sadhn  who,  in  the  troubled  times  attending  the 
decHne  and  fall  of  the  Mogul  Empire,  established  himself 

256 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

under  a  jhopree,  or  shed,  within  a  small  enclosure,  where 
he  harboured  Hindu  children  whose  parents  had  been 
murdered  by  the  Muslims,  or  had  fled  before  them.  By- 
degrees  he  rallied  many  followers  round  him,  and  eventu- 
ally, when  the  Sikhs  succeeded  in  emerging  triumphantly 
out  of  the  turmoil  and  disorder  of  the  times,  he  obtained 
a  jaghir,  or  free  grant  of  land,  which  enabled  him  to 
found  the  monastery  which  preserves  his  name.  This  is 
a  typical  example  of  the  circumstances  under  which 
monasteries  may  come  into  existence  and  attain  affluence. 

When  I  visited  the  monastery  the  resident  monks 
were  few  in  number,  and  differed  greatly  amongst  them- 
selves in  outward  appearance.  The  majority  were  wearing 
their  hair  wound  about  the  head  in  a  coil  like  a  turban — 
these  were  the  jhuttadarees  ;  others  carried  loose  hanging 
locks  (hhoureeahs) ;  a  few  had  shaven  heads,  and  were  the 
Paramahansas  of  the  order.  In  regard  to  the  jhuttadarees, 
the  Mahant  informed  me  that  their  hair  was  never  cut, 
and  that  all  the  combings  were  added  to  the  living  hair  in 
a  sort  of  rope  or  plait,  which  was  coiled  neatly  round  the 
head.  He  naively  assured  me  that,  when  the  hair  growing 
on  the  head  becam.e  white  with  age,  the  portion  of  dead 
hair  added  to  the  plait  also  became  white. 

Most  of  the  monks  wore  orange -coloured  clothes  ;  one, 
however,  had  a  green  coat  on,  which  had  been  given  to 
him  by  some  charitable  person.  Only  two  or  three  wore 
malas  of  any  sort. 

The  Mahant  was  not  dressed  like  the  sadhus,  but  wore 
a  bright  pink-coloured  turban,  a  white  long-sleeved  Jcurta 
or  tunic,  and  a  purple  loongee  round  his  loins.  His  feet 
rested  on  wooden  kharanws  or  pattens.  In  his  hand  he 
carried  a  short  rosary  of  large  beads. 

As  far  as  I  could  see,  there  was  free  intercourse 
amongst  the  resident  monks,  and  their  bearing  towards  the 
Mahant,  though  respectful,  was  not  servile.  Yet,  two  or 
three  men  prostrated  themselves  on  the  ground,  and  put 
their  heads  with  great  humility  on  the  abbot's  feet ;  but 
he  took  no  notice  whatever  of  them. 

The  building,  constructed  of  brick  and  mortar,  is  of  con- 
siderable size,  double-storeyed  in  some  parts.     It  has  two 
R  257 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

hypoetkral  courts  of  unequal  size,  and  a  goodly  number  of 
small  rooms  for  the  accommodation  of  monks.  Though 
substantially  built,  the  place  has  no  architectural  preten- 
sions. Its  situation  is  convenient,  being  just  near  the 
Golden  Temple,  which,  with  the  great  tank  surrounding  it, 
is  visible  from  the  upper  storey  of  the  monastery. 

In  one  of  the  open  courts  was  a  cluster  of  four  sa- 
madhs,  erected  in  memory  of  four  Mahants  who  had  been 
the  predecessors  of  the  present  abbot.  These  had  all 
been  cremated  in  the  court  itself  on  a  spot  which  was 
pointed  out  to  me. 

The  four  samadhs  occupied  a  pretty  considerable 
proportion  of  the  court,  indicating  a  want  of  consideration 
for  the  claims  of  posterity.^ 

Near  the  entrance  doorway,  but  within  the  precincts, 
there  was  a  place  where  cattle  might  drink  water,  also 
bathing-places  for  outsiders — one  for  men,  and  another  for 
women. 

This  toleration  of  women  is  in  striking  contrast  with 
the  practice  of  some  Christian  monasteries  under  the 
control  of  the  Eastern  Church.  Writing  about  these, 
Mr.  Curzon,  in  his  interesting  book,  Monasteries  of  the 
Levant,  states  that  he  was  informed  "  that  no  female 
animal  of  any  sort  or  kind  is  admitted  on  any  part  of  the 
peninsula  of  Mount  Athos  ;  and  that  since  the  days  of 
Constantine  the  soil  of  the  Holy  Mountain  had  never  been 
contaminated  by  the  tread  of  a  woman's  foot."  ^  The 
same  author  also  mentions  having  met  a  monk  thirty  or 
thirty-five  years  of  age,  who,  having  been  brought  to  one  of 
the  Athos  monasteries  as  an  infant,  had  no  recollection  of 
ever  having  seen  a  woman,  and  was  anxious  to  know  if 
they  resembled  the  stiff  expressionless  mediaeval  pictures 
of  the  Virgin  which  adorned  the  walls  of  the  cenobitic 
institutions  of  the  little  peninsula  which  formed  his  very 
restricted  world.^ 

What  positive   terror  the   insidious   charms   of  women 

^  Where,  as  at  Buddh  Gya,  the  deceased  abbots  have  all  been  buried, 
the  spot  occupied  by  their  graves  makes  quite  a  small  cemetery. 

2  Monasteries  of  the  Levant,  by  the  Hon.  Robert  Curzon,  Jun.,  p.  306. 
^md.  p.  347. 

258 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

inspired  in  tlie  minds  of  certain  Christian  anchorites,  who, 
with  Chrysostom,  looked  upon  the  sex  as  "  a  necessary  evil, 
a  deadly  fascination,  and  a  painted  ill,"  is  well  known ;  but 
the  circumstances  which  have  operated  in  India  to  make 
women  there  less  objectionable  in  the  eyes  of  the  professed 
ascetic  are  not  far  to  seek. 

In  the  first  place,  in  the  land  of  Krishna  and  of  Sakhti 
worshippers,  the  virtue  of  virginity  or  even  of  continence 
has  never  been  regarded  with  the  respectful  awe  with 
which  it  was  viewed  by  rehgious  men  in  the  West,  and  for 
this,  in  all  probability,  the  influence  of  climate  is  largely 
accountable ;  ^  and  then,  in  the  next  place,  as  the  monks 
are  nearly  all  wanderers,  subject  to  little  if  any  disciphne, 
and  practically  dependent  upon  the  charity  of  women,  it  is 
naturally  undesirable  and  futile  to  impose  rules  prohibiting 
women  from  entering  monasteries  as  visitors,  particularly 
as  some  of  these  conventual  institutions  serve  very  con- 
veniently as  caravansaries  where  travellers  may  obtain 
lodgings  for  payment. 

Having  inspected  the  more  public  portions  of  the 
monastery,  I  was  conducted  to  the  Mahanfs  sitting-room, 
which  I  found  adorned  with  fresco  paintings  representing 
his  predecessors  and  their  doings.  While  seated  here,  the 
courteous  abbot  explained  that  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
monastery  the  chief  source  is  a  jaghir  or  grant,  made  in 
the  first  instance  by  the  Sikh  government  of  Maharajah 
Ranjit  Singh,  and  confirmed  at  a  later  date  by  the  British 
Government,  though  somewhat  modified  and  curtailed. 
My  host  now  had  the  treasures  of  his  reliquary  brought 
out  and  arranged  for  me  to  see.  There  were,  amongst 
other  things,  a  portrait  of  Santokh  Das,  a  book,  a  picture 
showing  the  original  plan  of  the  Golden  Temple,  and  four 
fine  hyraguns,  or  rests — two  of  wood  very  nicely  carved, 
one  made  of  ivory  finely  cut,  and  the  fourth  of  brass.  My 
particular  attention  was  also  invited  to  a  leaf  of  the  peepul 
tree,  which,  by  a  very  great  stretch  of  imagination,  might 
be  taken  to  resemble  a  hand  having  an  exaggerated  palm 
and  dwarf  fingers.  It  was  the  leaf  of  a  tree  which  had 
been  touched  with  his  holy  hand  by  one  of  the  SiJch  gurus, 
1  Montesquieu,  De  V Esprit  des  Lois,  livre  xvi.  chap.  viii. 

259 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

and  consequently  bore  leaves  resembling  in  shape  a  human 
hand.  It  was  preserved  in  a  picture -frame  under  a  glass 
pane,  and  had  been  presented  long  ago  to  the  akhara  by  a 
monk  of  the  order  of  the  Udasis.  Another  much  esteemed 
curiosity  was  a  little  book  written  on  a  number  of  pieces  of 
paper  joined  together  like  the  bellows  of  an  accordion. 

A  pair  of  kharanws  in  the  collection  had  a  story 
attached  to  them.  They  were  made  of  brass  instead  of 
wood  by  some  infdel  or  other  who  wished  to  put  Santokh 
Das  to  the  test.  "  Look  here,"  said  he  to  the  saint.  "  You 
are  a  great  sadhu ;  take  these  from  me  as  a  token  of  my 
profound  respect."  He  had,  however,  just  before  presenting 
them,  maliciously  heated  them  to  a  high  temperature,  with 
the  view  of  amusing  himself  with  the  enhvening  efiect  they 
would  have  upon  the  sedate  ascetic  as  soon  as  he  put  his 
feet  upon  them.  But  Santokh  Das  stepped  on  to  the  hot 
brass  kharanws  without  betraying  any  sign  of  inconvenience, 
miraculously  enduring  the  heat,  or  perhaps  unconscious  of  it. 

Before  I  left  the  monastery  the  abbot  invited  me  to 
renew  my  visit  at  the  time  of  the  Devah  festival.  He 
explained  that  the  permanent  residents  in  the  monastery 
were  few,  that  at  all  times  there  were  some  wandering 
sadhus  receiving  the  hospitahty  of  the  institution,  but 
that  on  certain  festivals,  notably  the  Devah,  the  number 
to  be  entertained  taxed  the  resources  of  the  house  to  the 
utmost. 

Upon  this  invitation  I  came  again  to  the  akhara  in 
November  1898,  and  found  the  place  full  of  sadhus  and 
many  other  visitors,  including  not  a  few  women.  There 
were  sadhus  moving  about  the  courts  and  inside  the 
building  in  a  more  or  less  aimless  manner ;  some, 
particularly  the  nangahs,  who  do  not  or  ought  not  to  live 
under  a  roof,  were  clustered  round  small  fires  in  the 
quadrangles,   attending  idly  to  their  toilets. 

Presently  a  cry  was  raised,  "  Un  ke  pujah  karo,  Nanak 
nirbani "  (Perform  the  worship  of  food,  (in  the  name  of) 
Nanak,  who  has  left  the  world). 

Most  of  those  present  began  to  arrange  themselves  in 
the  smaller  courtyard  in  long  lines,  seated  on  the  floor ; 
others  took  up  places  on  the  flat  roof  of  a  one-storeyed 

260 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

building  assigned  for  the  purpose.  Women  were  present 
in  both  places.  I  was  accommodated  with  a  chair  on  the 
roof  of  a  range  of  rooms,  from  which  I  could  see  the  people 
in  the  court  as  well  as  those  on  the  roof  opposite. 

All  assembled  in  the  most  sober  and  decorous  fashion, 
and  arranged  themselves  in  regular  hnes.  I  noticed 
a  small  hoy-sadhu  of  about  eight  years  of  age  trying 
to  find  a  place  for  himself.  He  was,  it  seems,  devoted 
to  the  ascetic  hfe  by  his  own  parents.  It  is  a  common 
thing  for  childless  people  to  vow  that,  if  a  son  is  born 
to  them,  he  shall  be  devoted  to  a  rehgious  hfe.  And 
this  is  one  way  in  which  the  mendicant  sects  are  swelled 
and   'perennially   recruited. 

When  the  guests  were  all  quietly  seated — and  there 
was  no  unseemly  hurry  about  this — the  cooks  went  round 
supplying  each  person  with  a  sort  of  cup  or  small  basin 
neatly  made  of  dry  leaves.  Those  who  had  brought  their 
own  brass  cups,  or  katorahs,  did  not  of  course  need  the 
more  primitive  leaf -vessels.  After  this  the  cooks  made 
the  round,  with  large  baskets,  distributing  big  flat  cakes 
of  hot  unleavened  bread  which  had  been  freshly  baked  on 
heated  iron  pans.  I  noticed  that  the  bread  was  given 
liberally,  and  that  some  of  the  guests  evidently  took  an 
additional  share  for  an  absent  friend.  Then  the  ddl 
(lentils)  was  brought  round  in  a  large  brass  vessel  with 
two  handles,  carried  by  a  couple  of  men.  A  third,  armed 
with  an  iron  ladle,  helped  the  savoury  yellow  food  into 
the  leaf  or  brass  cups,  as  the  case  might  be.  Yet  no  one 
touched  a  morsel.  I  now  counted,  as  well  as  I  could,  the 
assembled  guests,  and  found  that  they  numbered  about 
two  hundred  persons.  When  the  -  requirements  of  all 
present  had  been  met,  the  order  was  given,  "  Gajo-ji  waha 
Guru,"  which  may  be  freely  rendered,  "Assert  yourselves 
in  the  name  of  God."  Whereupon  those  who  wished  to 
carry  away  the  food  which  had  been  given  them,  rose  and 
withdrew  ;  the  rest  fell  to,  and  ate  their  morning  meal. 

Before  leaving  the  monastery  I  inquired  about  the 
custom  of  worshipping  ashes,  which  I  understood  the 
Udasis  followed.  The  Mahant  smilingly  conducted  me  to 
the  threshold  of  the  room  where  the  Granth  Sahib — the 

261 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

sacred  book  of  the  Sikhs — was  kept,  and  wliicli  miglit  be 
called  the  chapel.  At  the  abbot's  request  one  of  the 
attendants  produced  a  great  ball,  or  rather  a  cylinder  with 
rounded  edges,  made  of  the  very  finest  ashes.  It  was 
coloured  on  the  outside  of  a  reddish  tint,  and  looked  not 
unlike  a  Dutch  cheese.  At  one  end  was  a  small 
depression.  Into  this  the  attendant  who  carried  it  in- 
serted his  thumb  and  brought  out  upon  its  surface  a 
fine  white  powder,  which  he  applied  to  his  forehead. 
Several  others  present  followed  his  example.  The 
Mahant  explained  that  these  sacred  balls  of  ashes 
were  made  with  much  care ;  that  the  ashes  were  well 
washed,  and  only  the  finest  particles  which  eventually 
subsided  in  the  water  were  taken  and  then  mixed  with  a 
white  clay  from  the  hills,  without  which  the  ashes  would 
not  have  sufficient  coherence. 

At  the  termination  of  my  very  pleasant  visit  I  was 
conducted  by  the  Mahant  to  my  carriage,  and  at  the 
moment  of  parting  he  presented  me  with  some  sugar 
candy,  which  he  politely  insisted  upon  my  receiving  from 
his  monastery. 

One  morning  I  presented  myself  at  a  monastery  in 
the  Punjab,  which  I  need  not  name.  Though  my  visit  was 
quite  unexpected,  the  portly  abbot,  who  was  reading  a 
vernacular  newspaper  when  I  arrived,  was  most  gracious 
in  his  welcome,  and  seemed  willing  to  discourse  upon  all 
the  ordinary  topics  of  the  day. 

Being  informed  by  one  of  my  companions  that  I  was 
much  interested  in  sadhus,  he  forthwith  broke  out  into  a 
tirade  against  the  whole  crew.  "  There  might,"  he  said, 
"  be  one  in  a  hundred  who  had  any  pretensions  to  goodness 
or  virtue,  but  the  rest  were  vile  scum  and  unmitigated 
scoundrels." 

What  more  especially  annoyed  him  was  that  men  who 
one  day  were  ploughing  their  fields  as  ordinary  peasants 
would  the  very  next  day,  in  the  garb  of  sadhus,  claim 
the  hospitahty  of  an  akhara,  spend  the  night  with  loose 
women,  and  then  become  transformed  again  into  cultivators 
of  the  soil  as  soon  as  it  suited  their  convenience  to  do  so. 

I  have  no  doubt  the  MahanCs  complaint  was  based  on 

262     • 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

actual  experience,  and  that  it  was  not  without  cause  that 
he  grudged  the  pseudo  -  sadhus  their  board  out  of  the 
moderate  revenues  at  his  disposal ;  but,  for  all  that,  I  felt 
sure  that  my  portly  host  was  well  able  to  take  care  of  him- 
self. He  wished  that  Government  would  enact  that  each 
and  every  sadhu  should  carry  a  certificate  to  show  who 
and  what  he  really  was — a  suggestion  which  might  be 
commended  to  the  consideration  of  the  authorities,  as 
its  adoption  would  certainly  be  convenient  at  seasons  of 
general  unrest  or  political  tension. 

I  was  subsequently  informed  that  this  abbot's  claim 
to  the  headship  of  the  monastery  was  disputed,  and  that 
the  question  of  his  right  of  possession  was  engaging  the 
attention  of  one  of  the  law  courts. 

Two  monasteries  of  the  Nirmali  sect,  both  known  as 
Thakur  Dyal  Singh's  dharmsalas,  were  visited  by  me  on 
the  6th  of  September  1898.  Both  were  of  considerable 
size  though  unpretentious  in  design,  and  could  easily  afford 
accommodation  to  a  large  number  of  inmates,  for  whom 
several  rows  of  small  rooms  were  provided.  Both  monas- 
teries had  their  own  oxen  to  draw  water  and  to  grind  the 
corn  for  the  household.  They  had  their  own  cows  also. 
At  the  time  of  my  visits  to  these  establishments  most  of 
the  rooms  were  unoccupied,  and  only  a  few  monks  visible. 
These,  too,  were  rather  a  puzzle  to  me  as  regards  their 
dress  and  appearance,  for  the  only  external  characteristic 
they  seemed  to  have  in  common  was  long  hair. 

Most  of  them  wore  orange-coloured  clothes  and  malas 
of  little  woollen  balls  resembling  beads,  and  those  who 
were  going  out  carried  chippees  (alms-bowls  made  out  of 
cocoanut-shells)  in  their  hands.  Along  with  the  Granth, 
the  Bible  of  the  Sikhs,  other  books  held  sacred  by  the 
Hindus  were  read  in  one  of  these  dharmsalas  morning  and 
evening.  Indeed,  the  Mahabharata  was  being  read  and 
expounded  while  I  was  in  the  monastery  by  a  Brahman 
pandit,  who  was  neither  a  Nirmali  nor  a  sadhu.  In  the 
other  dharmsala  an  image  of  Ram  Chandra  had  been  set  up, 
though  I  did  not  see  it.  This  ihakurdwara  had  been 
founded  by  a  pious  woman  of  means. 

Amongst  the  sadhus  I  noticed  a  good-looking  boy  of 

263 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

about  fifteen  or  sixteen  years  of  age,  and  asked  him  why 
he  had  become  a  sadhu  and  given  up  the  world,  of  which 
he  could  hardly  have  seen  anything.  He  promptly  re- 
pHed  that  one  was  never  too  young  to  enter  upon  a  good 
path. 

Somewhat  different  from  the  establishments  described 
above  is  the  great  math  of  Jogi  Tilla,  situated  on  the  top 
of  a  conspicuous  hill  in  the  Jhelum  district  of  the  Punjab. 
Proceeding  towards  this  monastery  in  order  to  be  there  on 
the  occasion  of  a  certain  Hindu  festival,  I  fell  in  on  the 
way  with  twelve  or  thirteen  Yogis,  all  young  men  in  the 
prime  of  life,  bound  for  the  same  place.  All  of  them  had 
their  hair  hanging  about  their  necks,  but  not  particularly 
long,  and  bleached  a  yellow-brown  colour.  They  had  the 
least  quantity  of  clothing  on,  and  had  their  bodies 
smeared  with  ashes.  All  wore  the  characteristic  yogi 
whistle  depending  from  the  neck.  Some  carried  huge 
tongs,  others  small  hoes.  Two  or  three  alms-bowls  and 
some  brass  imitations  of  the  gourd  were  also  to  be  seen. 
One  man  was  armed  with  a  formidable  serpent-shaped 
wind  instrument.  None  of  the  party  seemed  disposed  to 
be  communicative  or  even  to  answer  my  questions.  As  I 
walked  along  very  leisurely,  the  Yogis  passed  me  by  on  the 
road  ;  but,  when  I  subsequently  overtook  them  on  horse- 
back, they  were  sitting  beside  a  pool  smoking  charras. 

Farther  on  I  met  a  Yogi  trudging  along  alone,  and 
soon  discovered  that  he  was  not  as  reticent  as  the  men  I 
had  left  behind  in  clouds  of  charras-smoke  near  the  pool. 

My  new  acquaintance  came  from  the  military  station  of 
Jhelum,  and  so  probably  knew  something  about  Europeans. 
I  learned  from  him  that  he  had  served  an  apprenticeship 
to  a  famous  guru  for  four  years  before  he  was  per- 
mitted to  have  his  ears  pierced  to  receive  the  huge  rings 
which  the  KanpJiatti  Yogis  wear  and  to  have  whispered 
to  him  the  sacred  and  secret  mantra  of  the  order. 

As  we  approached  the  mountain — for  such  it  really  was 
— we  passed  many  groups  of  pedestrians  on  pleasure  bent. 
One  party  consisted  of  three  boys,  the  eldest  not  sixteen 
years  old,  who  had  come  from  the  town  of  Jhelum,  several 
miles  distant.     They  were  all  neatly  and  cleanly  dressed 

264 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

in  light  garments  ;  but,  tliougli  it  was  winter,  not  a  scrap 
of  any  sort  of  luggage  did  they  have  with  them,  nor  even 
any  wraps.  Several  groups  of  women  and  girls,  some  of 
them  attended  by  men,  were  wending  their  way  upwards 
from  neighbouring  villages.  None  carried  extras,  unless 
babies  be  reckoned  as  such.  I  ascertained  that  all  these 
visitors  would  be  provided  with  accommodation  and  cover- 
ings by  the  Yogis  at  Tilla,  and  that  the  Hindus  who  visited 
the  fair  would  be  fed  free  of  expense  by  the  abbot  of  the 
Jogi  Tilla  monastery. 

I  rested  for  the  night  in  the  Government  rest-house  at 
the  foot  of  the  mountain,  and  the  next  morning  found  that 
an  excellent,  if  narrow,  road  led  to  the  summit,  whence 
from  different  positions  extensive  prospects  might  be  en- 
joyed of  a  country  rich  in  poetical  and  historical  associa- 
tions, amongst  the  latter  being  the  invasion  of  India  by 
Alexander  the  Great  in  the  fourth  century  B.C. 

The  monastery  on  Jogi  Tilla,  of  which  I  give  a  photo- 
graph, is  a  substantial  group  of  buildings,  and  its  Mahani, 
a  handsome,  well-dressed,  dignified  old  gentleman,  who 
gave  one  the  impression  of  being  a  man  of  authority, 
received  me  with  much  politeness.  After  the  usual  ex- 
change of  civilities,  I  was  shown  all  over  the  place,  which 
was  full  of  visitors  who  had  come  up  from  the  villages  in 
the  plains  in  order  to  be  present  at  the  festival.  I  was 
struck  by  some  dark  subterranean  chambers  which  were 
shown  me,  and  which  I  understood  had  been  tenanted  by 
Yoai  anchorites,  whose  austerities  were  still  remembered 
with  awe  and  wonder.  While  walking  about,  I  came  across  a 
score  of  Yogis  sitting  round  a  great  log  fire,  and  to  my  pleasure 
was  recognised  by  several  of  them,  haying  met  them  the  pre- 
vious year  at  the  installation  of  Mahant  S.  N.  in  Lahore. 

I  obtained  comfortable  quarters  in  the  rest-house 
erected  especially  for  the  accommodation  of  the  Govern- 
ment Civil  officers  of  the  district,  for  whom  this  elevated 
spot  serves  as  a  pleasant  sanatorium  during  the  hottest 
time  of  the  year.  I  had  hardly  got  my  things  in  when 
the  Mahant  sent  over  to  inquire  what  my  orders  were  in 
respect  to  requisites  for  my  table,  as  he  would  have  much 
pleasure  in  supplying  all  the  wants  of  myself  and  servants 

265 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

while  I  sojourned  on  the  mountain,  or  at  any  rate  as  long 
as  the  festival  lasted.  I  did  not  avail  myself  of  this  kind 
offer,  having  already  made  my  arrangements,  but  I  saw 
that  the  crowd,  mostly  of  village  folks,  who  had  come  up 
the  hill,  enjoyed  themselves  right  pleasantly  at  the  fair, 
and  were  well  cared  for  by  the  hospitable  abbot.  "  The 
shrine  of  Tilla,"  says  Mr.  E.  D.  Maclagan,  "  is  certainly 
very  ancient,  and  is  possibly  a  relic  of  a  previous  cult ;  it 
is  mentioned  in  the  Ain-i-Akbari.  There  were  formerly 
large  grants  of  revenue  attached  to  the  monastery,  but 
these  were  aboHshed  some  years  ago,  when  the  Mahant 
was  accused  of  murdering  his  rival  for  the  gaddi.  The 
Yogis  of  Tilla  are  not  an  estimable  body,  but  are  held  in 
considerable  reputation,  even  by  Mussulmans,  and  they  have 
Hindu  disciples  away  beyond  the  Afghan  border."  ^ 

Roaming  about  the  hill-top  with  a  local  guide,  my 
attention  was  directed  to  various  geological  features  of  the 
mountain  formation,  which  told  of  titanic  battles  between 
rival  Yogis  and  other  sadhus  in  the  old  time.  There  was 
also  pointed  out  to  me  a  slab  of  dark-coloured  stone,  on 
which  some  dozen  cowrie  shells  and  sundry  pieces  of  crude 
brown  sugar  had  been  placed  in  memory  of  old  events 
which  are  still  fresh  in  the  recollections  of  the  village  lads 
and  maidens.  It  was  on  this  stone,  they  told  me,  that 
Ranja  sat  and  sounded  his  whistle,  and  on  this  slab  he  had 
been  initiated  into  the  secrets  and  received  into  the  sect 
of  the  Yogis.  The  story,  as  it  was  told  me  on  the  spot,  is 
worth  repeating. 

Ranja,  hearing  the  praises  of  Heer  sung  by  the 
wandering  minstrels,  became  enamoured  of  her,  sought 
her  out,  and  artfully  succeeded  in  obtaining  service  as 
a  cowherd  in  her  father's  house.  A  mutual  attachment 
sprang  up  between  the  handsome  youth  and  the  lovely 
girl ;  but  the  wife  of  Heer's  brother  had  her  suspicions 
aroused  by  the  behaviour  of  the  lovers,  and  secured  the 
cowherd's  dismissal.  To  prevent  scandals  and  trouble, 
Heer  was  married  to  another  man,  and  Ranja,  disappointed 
and  dismissed,  went  off  to  become  a  Yogi,  teUing  Heer  he 
would  meet  her  yet.     To  Jogi  Tilla  he  wended  his  way, 

^  Punjab  Census  Report,  1891,  p.  117. 
266 


o 

O 


03 
H 

< 

O 

» 


^ 


Ph 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

and,  seating  himself  upon  the  stone  already  referred  to, 
blew  a  whistle  he  had  brought  with  him. 

The  Mahant,  who  was  no  other  than  the  great  Gorakh- 
n^th  himself,  came  out  and  said,  in  a  loud  voice,  "  Who  is 
it  that  blows  a  whistle  outside  there  ?  If  he  is  a  Jogi  he 
is  free  to  come  in ;  if  not,  how  dare  he  sound  a  whistle  so 
near  my  premises  ?  "  To  this  Ranja  made  suitable  answer, 
that  although  not  yet  a  Jogi,  he  earnestly  desired  to  become 
one.  His  fine  manners  and  handsome  person  at  once  won 
for  him  the  favour  of  the  great  guru,  who  admitted  him, 
there  and  then,  into  his  sect,  piercing  Ranja's  ears  in  the 
most  approved  manner.  The  new  Jogi  asked  as  a  favour 
that  he  might  be  reunited  to  Heer,  and  the  gracious  guru 
said  that  his  wish  would  be  gratified.  Elated  with  the 
blessing  of  his  superior,  Ranja  hastened  away  to  where  his 
beloved  Hved,  and  lit  his  fire  within  view  of  Heer's  home, 
but  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river.  The  fame  of  his 
exceeding  beauty  soon  spread  abroad,  and  the  women  were 
dying  to  visit  him.  Heer  suspected  it  might  be  her  lover, 
and  winning  over  her  husband's  sister,  on  some  pretext  or 
other,  to  visit  the  famous  Jogi  privately,  she  ascertained 
for  herself  that  her  surmise  was  quite  correct,  and  she  also 
contrived  to  arrange  that  Ranja  should  come  across  the 
river  in  the  darkness  to  meet  her.  Night  after  night  he 
found  his  way  to  her  arms,  and  never  came  without  a  small 
ofiering  in  the  shape  of  some  fish  caught  by  himself  and 
daintily  cooked  with  his  own  hands.  Once  the  river  rose  in 
a  great  flood,  and  in  the  turbid  rushing  stream  no  fish  could 
be  caught.  To  go  empty-handed  to  his  assignation  seemed 
too  dreadful,  so  the  devoted  lover  cut  off  a  piece  of  his  own 
flesh  and  dressed  it  for  his  mistress.  *'  What  is  this  ?  " 
she  inquired  as  she  put  a  piece  into  her  mouth.  "  This  is 
not  fish,  nor  rabbit,  nor  mutton  that  you  have  brought  me. 
I  cannot  eat  this — what  is  it  ?  "  He  displayed  the  wound 
in  his  thigh.  "  Ah  !  "  exclaimed  the  girl  tenderly,  quite 
overcome  with  emotion.  "  You  have  fully  played  your  part, 
my  love ;  it  is  for  me  now  to  do  and  dare.  I  shall  come 
to  you  in  future.  The  river  shall  not  part  us.  I'll  swim 
across  it  on  a  stout  ghurrah  ^  every  night."     And  she  did 

^  A  large  water -pot  of  baked  cla3^ 
267 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

so  regularly,  guided  in  her  dangerous  course  by  the  love- 
light  of  the  Jog€s  fire.  But  her  doings  were  found  out  by 
a  jealous  female  relative,  who  one  night  spitefully  replaced 
Heer's  trusty  ghurrah  by  a  similar  but  unbaked  vessel. 
All  unconscious  of  the  substitution,  Heer,  in  the  darkness 
of  the  night,  entered  the  river,  and,  with  the  treacherous 
aid  of  the  fragile  ghurrah,  swam  out  into  the  stream.  But, 
before  she  had  gone  half-way  across,  the  pot  softened  in 
the  water  and  gave  way.  She  cried  aloud  to  her  lover  for 
help  as  she  felt  herself  drowning.  Ran] a  at  once  plunged 
into  the  stream  to  her  assistance,  but  the  lovers  were 
carried  away  in  the  darkness  and  never  seen  again. 

The  above  story  has  been  reproduced  as  it  was  told  to 
me,  but  it  seems  to  be  a  medley  of  two  romances  well 
known  in  the  Punjab,  "  Hir  and  Ranja,"  and  "  Sohni  and 
Mahirwal." 

The  name  "  Hir  and  Ranja  "  is  strikingly  reminiscent 
of  Hero  and  Leander,  but,  strange  to  say,  it  is  not  in  this 
one,  but  in  the  Sohni  and  Mahirwal  legend,  that  the  lover 
swims  the  river  as  Leander  used  to  brave  the  dangers  of 
the  Hellespont  for  the  love  of  the  priestess  of  Venus. 

On  my  return  from  Jogi  Tilla  it  was  my  good  fortune 
to  have,  for  a  part  of  the  way,  the  companionship  of  a 
young  and  very  talkative  Yogi  who  had  travelled  a  good 
deal.  He  had  been,  he  said,  to  Hinglaj  on  the  mountains, 
and  in  token  of~^s  visit  had  been  duly  branded  on  the 
right  forearm.  This,  he  explained,  was  done  because  the 
Devi  at  Hinglaj  used  to  be  worshipped  by  Muhammadans, 
and  they  enjoyed  her  special  favour ;  so  Siva  directed  that 
Hindus  who  went  there  should  be  branded  with  his  symbol 
as  a  mark  of  his  divine  protection.  With  regard  to 
Amarnath  in  Kashmir,  where  he  had  also  been,  the  young 
Jogi  said  that  till  recently  it  had  been  the  custom  for 
persons  visiting  the  sacred  ice-cave  on  the  mountain-top  to 
divest  themselves  (both  men  and  women)  of  every  stitch 
of  clothing,  as  it  was  thus  that  lord  Siva  wished  them  to 
appear  and  dance  before  him  ;  but  my  informant  added 
that  710W,  owing  to  the  wishes  of  the  father  of  the  present 
Maharajah  of  Kashmir,  the  women  were  allowed  to  cover 
themselves,  but  with  a  single  garment  only.     The  men  enter 

268 


(M 


,•3 


o 

a 


« 
c 

< 

3 


-n 


o 


En 

o 

<: 

5 


00 
fH 


HINDU  MONASTERIES 

the  ice-cave  with  langotis  or  breech-clouts  on  ;  but  each  man 
divests  his  neighbour  of  his  langoti,  so  in  the  end  they 
stand  in  the  cave  stark  naked.  Whether  these  details 
about  the  annual  pilgrimage  to  Amarnath  are  true  or  not 
I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain,  but  they  are  certainly  in 
harmony  with  what  we  know  of  Indian  sadhus,  amongst 
whom  the  tendency  to  run  to  nudity  is  a  very  marked 
characteristic.^  A  few  years  ago  an  application  was  made 
to  the  High  Court  at  Bombay  to  cancel  an  order  of  the 
District  Magistrate  prohibiting  the  Gosavis,  a  religious 
sect  of  mendicants,  from  walking  in  procession  naked,  and 
then  bathing  at  Nasik  as  a  religious  duty  during  the  Sin- 
hasta  festival.  In  support  of  this  appeal,  it  was  urged  by 
the  petitioners  that  bathing  naked  had  always  been  allowed 
at  Hardwar  and  Allahabad.^ 

1  Vigne,  who  visited  Kashmir  in  1835,  states  that  the  Brahmans  at 
Amarnath  divest  themselves  of  all  clothing  excepting  some  pieces  of  birch- 
bark  which  do  duty  for  fig-leaves  {Travels  in  Kashmir,  etc.,  vol.  ii.  chap,  i.) ; 
and  Dr.  Neve  {Picturesque  Kashmir,  1900,  chap,  vii.)  says  that  the  wor- 
shippers throw  themselves  naked  upon  the  block  of  ice  in  the  cave  which 
represents  Siva. 

2  Times  of  India  (Bombay),  12th  August  1896. 


269 


CHAPTER  XII 


National  Ideals  of  Life  as  indications  of  National  Character — European 
and  American  Ideals  contrasted  with  that  of  India — A  Life  involving 
Renunciation  regarded  by  the  Hindus  as  the  only  possible  Holy  Life — 
Sadhuism  in  its  Religious,  Social,  Political,  Intellectual,  and  Industrial 
Aspects — The  probable  Future  of  Sadhuism  considered. 


-4 


•c^_  _*■ 


F  in  the  ideal  of  life  which  claims 
especial  regard  or  is  the  object  of 
the  supreme  ambition  of  any  people 
their  character  is  discernible,  it  may 
be  profitable,  in  connection  with  the 
subject  of  this  volume,  to  pause  for 
a  moment  to  contrast  the  highest 
ideals  of  the  busy  practical  West  and  of  the  tranquil 
dreamy  East. 

Though  Mammon  worship  prevails  largely  in  England, 
the  loftiest  aspirations  of  the  vast  majority  of  Englishmen 
still  tend  towards  aristocratic  ideals,  the  objects  of  highest 
admiration  amongst  them,  after  royalty  with  its  old-world 
glamour,  being  the  hereditary  nobleman  or  landed  gentle- 
man who  takes  a  leading  part  in  public  life,  the  strenuous 
statesman,  and  the  victorious  general.  Royalty  being 
excluded,  the  hero-type  which  in  each  case  attracts  the 
homage     of     the     English    world     is    still    the    aristocrat 

270 


CONCLUSION 

successful  as  a  man  of  action.  In  the  United  States  of 
America,  wliicli  have  no  royal  court  and  no  hereditary 
nobility,  which  until  recently  had  no  foreign  relations  of 
magnitude,  where  the  feehng  is  intensely  democratic,  and 
where  the  best  energies  of  the  people  are  untiringly  de- 
voted to  industrial  pursuits,  the  prosperous  business  man 
sprung  from  the  ranks  of  the  people,  the  clever  accumulator 
of  wealth,  the  plutocrat,  the  self-assertive  millionaire,  is 
the  beau-ideal  of  the  nation,  and  next  after  him  the  wide- 
awake pushing  politician.  Here  also,  it  is  evident,  popular 
admiration  is  given  to  what  is  regarded  as  the  embodiment 
of  success  in  fields  of  activity  congenial  with  the  national 
taste  and  leanings.^  For  the  professedly  religious  life 
there  exists  both  in  England  and  the  United  States — 
perhaps  in  all  Protestant  countries — a  separate  and 
distinct  ideal  of  perfection,  yet  certain  it  is  that  the 
respect  of  the  pious  Protestants  of  Britain  and  the  States 
is  commanded  by  the  vigorous  active  worker  for  the 
good  of  others,  and  not  by  the  retiring  self-contained 
ascetic. 

Verv  different  indeed  from  the  business-born  ideals  we 
have  been  considering  is  the  hero-type  which  for  ages  has 
drawn  the  admiring  homage  of  India  and  the  Far  East. 
The  covetous  Westerns  may  have  their  eyes  riveted  with 
greedy  appreciation  upon  the  bejewelled  Rajahs  of  India 
and  their  barbaric  pomp,  but,  for  reasons  already  indicated, 
it  is  the  ascetic  profession  that  time  out  of  mind  has  been 
of  pre-eminent  dignity  in  the  eyes  of  the  Indian  people. 
The  quiet  inactive  recluse,  the  retired  ascetic  detached 
from  the  world  and  its  petty  rivalries,  has  since  the 
earliest  ages  occupied  the  very  highest  place  in  the 
national  esteem — a  fact  which  speaks  volumes  for  the 
condition  and  psychology  of  the  Hindus,  because,  as 
Carlyle  has  well  said,  "  The  manner  of  men's  Hero- 
worship,  verily  it  is  the  innermost  fact  of  their  existence 
and  determines  all  the  rest." 

That  the  only  possible  state  of  a  religious  (holy)  Kfe  is 

*  It  is  interesting  that,  in  Europe,  lunatics  suffering  from  the  delusion  of 
self-importance  commonly  imagine  themselves  to  be  princes  and  kings,  and 
on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  the  megalomaniacs  are  usually  millionaires, 

271 


.< 


THE  MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF   INDIA 

one  involving  asceticism  and  renunciation  of  the  world, 
has  been  for  ages  such  a  deeply  rooted  idea  in  India,  that 
Hindu  apologists  for  the  more  active  hfe  have  felt  con- 
strained to  devise  apologues  which  might  be  cited  in 
support  or  justification  of  men  of  acknowledged  goodness 
who  did  not  withdraw  themselves  from  the  temptations 
and  toils  of  mundane  existence.  For  example,  Rajah 
Janak,  who  ruled  his  kingdom  with  great  ability,  had  the 
reputation  also  of  being  a  very  religious  man  ;  but  the 
ascetics  scouted  this  notion,  and  it  was  arranged  by  some 
sadhus  that  they  should  have  an  interview  with  the  king 
in  order  to  test  his  pretensions.  Ten  of  them  accordingly 
asked  for  an  audience  and  received  permission  to  approach 
the  king,  but  only  on  certain  prescribed  conditions. 
Each  man  amongst  them  was  to  carry  a  large  earthen- 
ware vase  full  of  water  on  his  head,  and  should  suffer 
death  if  he  allowed  even  a  single  drop  of  the  contents  to 
spill. 

The  stipulations  were  accepted,  and  Rajah  Janak's 
capital  made  preparations  for  the  reception  of  the  holy 
sadhus.  The  shops  and  houses  were  gaily  decorated,  the 
multitudes  were  out  in  their  gala  attire,  and  troops  Hned 
the  streets  along  which  the  visitors  were  to  pass. 

Slowly,  and  very  carefully  (for  their  lives  were  at  stake), 
did  the  king's  guests  wend  their  way  to  the  royal  palace, 
where  they  were  graciously  received  by  the  Rajah,  who 
asked  them,  in  an  affable  manner,  what  they  thought  of 
his  capital,  through  the  best  streets  of  which  they  had 
just  passed  on  their  way  to  the  presence-chamber.  The 
indignant  sadhus,  perceiving  that  they  were  being  laughed 
at,  repUed  with  chagrin  that  they  were  unable  to  express 
any  opinion  on  this  point,  since  through  the  king's  un- 
reasonable tyranny  they  had  not  been  able  to  look  either 
to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  having  to  think  about  the 
brimful  water-pots  on  theii  aeads. 

The  Rajah  very  politely  begged  his  visitors  not  to  be 
annoyed,  as  what  he  had  done  was  only  to  inculcate  an 
important  lesson. 

"  You  most  venerable  sadhus,^^  said  the  king,  *'  have 
passed  along  the  streets  without  any  mishap  ;  your  eyes 

272 


CONCLUSION 

have  directed  you  and  your  limbs  have  carried  you  while 
you  wended  your  way  through  the  streets  of  this  great 
city,  but  your  attention  was  mostly  concentrated  upon 
the  water-pots  on  your  heads.  Just  in  the  same  way 
do  I  pass  along  the  world's  great  highway,  doing  what 
is  necessary,  but  with  my  attention  fixed  on  things 
above." 

After  this  preamble,  we  may  profitably  cast  a  rapid 
glance  at  the  religious,  social,  political,  intellectual,  and 
industrial  aspects  of  sadhuism,  and  also  venture,  but  not 
too  boldly,  to  forecast  its  future. 

Sadhuism  in  its  Religious  Aspect. 

Sadhuism,  whether  perpetuating  the  peculiar  idea  of 
the  efficacy  of  austerities  for  the  acquisition  of  far- 
reaching  powers  over  natural  phenomena,  or  bearing  its 
testimony  to  the  belief  in  the  indispensableness  of  detach- 
ment from  the  world  as  a  preparation  for  the  inefiable 
joy  of  ecstatic  communion  with  the  Divine  Being,  has 
undoubtedly  tended  to  keep  before  men's  eyes,  as  the 
highest  ideal,  a  fife  of  purity,  self-restraint,  and  contempt 
of  the  world  and  human  affairs.  It  has  also  necessarily 
maintained  amongst  the  laity  a  sense  of  the  righteous 
claims  of  the  poor  upon  the  charity  of  the  more  affluent 
members  of  the  community.  Moreover,  sadhuism,  by  the 
multiplicity  of  the  independent  sects  which  have  arisen  in 
India,  has  engendered  and  favoured  a  spirit  of  tolerance  which 
cannot  escape  the  notice  of  the  most  superficial  observer. 

Sadhuism  in  its  Social  Aspect. 

Socially,  sadhuism  has,  in  its  spirit  and  practice,  always 
tended  towards  the  recognition  of  the  equality  of  all 
Hindus,  and  has  therefore  been  inimical  to  the  rigid  caste - 
system  so  dear  to  the  Brahman  priesthood.  The  warfare 
between  Brahmanism  and  Sadhuism  has  been  carried  on 
with  varying  fortune  for  thirty  centuries  ;  but  the  demo- 
cratic leanings  referred  to  have  proved  too  strong  for  the 
opposition  of  the  "  twice-born  "  classes,  and  the  inevitable 
S  273 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

result  was  long  since  grudgingly  admitted,  as  the  following 
prophecy,  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  Vedic  god  India,  shows 
clearly  enough : — 

When  this  krita  (or  golden)  age,"  says  the  god, 
has  come  to  a  close,  innumerable  mendicants  and 
hypocrites  shall  arise  and  the  four  orders  become  dis- 
organised." ^ 

A  noteworthy  statement  this,  the  fulfilment  of  which  is 
amply  attested  by  the  foregoing  chapters. 

That  the  sadhu  as  such  should  enjoy  popular  considera- 
tion has  undoubtedly  been  at  all  times  a  very  sore  trial  for 
the  proud  Brahman,  and  especially  hateful  to  him  when 
it  was  a  low-caste  Sudra  who,  in  virtue  of  being  an 
ascetic,  received  the  respect  and  homage  of  the  people. 
But,  as  already  remarked,  the  Brahmanical  opposition, 
however  strong,  has  proved  unavailing,  and  the  right  of 
the  Sudra  to  the  privileges  of  sadhuism  and  ascetic 
practices,  at  any  rate  during  the  present  age,  has  been 
authoritatively,  if  reluctantly,  admitted  in  the  Rama- 
yana.^ 

^  Mahabharata — Santiparvan,  sec.  Ixv.  Muir's  Sanskrit  Texts,  vol.  i, 
p.  485. 

-  The  curious  legend  which  contains  this  admission  is  as  follows  : — A 
Brahman  youth  died  suddenly  without  apparent  cause.  The  father  of  the 
boy,  bewailing  his  loss,  came  to  the  king's  palace,  and  in  his  lamentations 
accused  the  king,  the  semi-divine  Rama  himself,  of  having,  through  some 
fault  of  his,  as  ruler  of  the  land,  brought  about  the  untoward  event.  The 
imputation  reached  Rama's  ears,  and  he  summoned  a  council  of  sages  to 
consider  the  matter.  Narada  being  present,  explained  that  the  death  of 
the  Brahman  boy  was  due  to  the  presumption  of  a  Sudra  who  was  practising 
austerities  for  the  attainment  of  certain  objects.  Men  of  his  caste,  explained 
the  sage,  were  not  entitled  to  this  great  privilege  in  Rama's  age  (the  Treia 
yuga),  though  he  admitted  prophetically  that  in  the  Kali  yiiga  Sudras  would 
practise  austerities  freely,  and  righteously  too.  Rama,  as  became  the 
guardian  of  his  people,  set  off  immediately  in  quest  of  the  audacious  offender. 
After  searching  in  many  regions,  he  discovered  the  ascetic  near  a  tank  by 
the  Saivala  mountains,  "  performing  the  most  austere  penances  with  his 
legs  upwards  and  head  downwards."  In  reply  to  Rama's  inquiries,  the 
topsy-turvy  ascetic,  still  standing  on  his  head,  said,  "  O  highly  illustrious 
Rama,  I  am  born  in  the  race  of  Sudras,  and,  with  a  view  to  reach  the  region 
of  the  celestials  with  my  body,  I  am  going  through  these  austere  penances." 
On  hearing  this,  the  king  drew  his  sword  and  forthwith  cut  off  the  ascetic's 
head.  After  this  act  of  justice,  the  Brahman  boy  was  restored  to  life. — 
Ramayana — Uttarakandam,  sec.  Ixxxvi.-lxxxix.,  Manmatta  Nath  Dutt's 
translation. 

274 


CONCLUSION 

Sadhuism  in  its  Political  Aspect. 

Politically,  sadhuism,  through  the  perennial  wanderings 
of  the  ascetics  over  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land, 
has  tended  to  preserve  a  certain  homogeneity  throughout 
India,  and,  so  far,  has  been  acting  counter  to  that  tendency 
to  fission  and  disintegration  which  is  natural  in  such  a 
vast  country  of  many  languages  and  races.  At  the  same 
time,  the  detachment  from  human  afiairs  which  sadhuism 
demands  must  have  been  at  all  times  adverse  to  patriotism 
in  any  form,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  largely 
due  to  the  subtle  effects  of  the  spirit  of  sadhuism  upon 
the  character  of  the  people  of  India  that  that  country  is  so 
easily  governed  by  a  handful  of  foreign  ofiicials  and  a  few 
thousand  white  soldiers. 


The  Intellectual  Aspect  of  Sadhuism. 

Intellectually,  the  spirit  of  sadhuism  has  unquestion- 
ably proved  most  baneful,  its  tendency  being  to  regard 
passing  events  —  that  is,  history  in  the  making  —  with 
undisguised  contempt  and  the  study  of  nature  as  useless, 
since  true  knowledge  and  power  over  phenomena  could 
be  acquired  only  by  contemplation  and  austerities. 

Industrial  Effect  of  Sadhuism. 

Many  estimates  have  been  made,  and  at  different  times, 
of  the  proportion  which  the  number  of  religious  mendicants 
in  India  bears  to  the  entire  population.  Mr.  Ward, 
the  Serampore  missionary,  writing  a  century  ago  and  with 
special  reference  to  Bengal  and  Behar,  says :  "I  have 
endeavoured  to  ascertain  the  probable  number  of  Hindus 
who  embrace  a  Hfe  of  mendicity,  and  am  informed  that 
scarcely  less  that  an  eighth  part  of  the  whole  population 
abandon  their  proper  employments  and  hve  as  reUgious 
mendicants  by  begging."  Mr.  Crookes,  in  his  North-Western 
Provinces  of  India  (1898),  puts  the  figure  for  that  terri- 
tory at  two  millions  out  of  forty  millions,  or  one-twentieth 
of  the  population. 

275 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

Naturally,  everyone  who  believes  that  the  chief  end  of 
man  is  to  produce  things  of  various  kinds  grieves  over  the 
deplorable  waste  of  productive  energy  represented  by  the 
sadhu  population  of  India.  But,  after  all,  is  it  of  no 
importance  that  the  country  has  been  able  to  prodiice  for 
a  hundred  generations  whole  armies  of  men  able  to 
practise,  with  a  religious  purpose,  that  contempt  of  the 
world  and  earthly  riches  which  is,  at  least  theoretically, 
one  of  the  most  important  of  Christian  virtues  ?  ^ 

No  doubt,  the  philosophy  and  art,  I  might  say  the 
cult,  of  chronic  idleness  is  thoroughly  understood  and 
acted  upon  in  India  ;  still,  in  estimating  the  extent  to 
which  its  sadhu  population  is  a  burden  upon  the  country, 
several  facts  have  to  be  borne  in  mind  which  the  most 
superficial  analysis  of  the  composition  of  the  reUgious 
mendicant  class  brings  to  light.  In  the  first  place, 
amongst  sadhus  are  included  a  very  considerable  percentage 
of  what  in  other  countries  are  merely  the  destitute  paupers 
supported  by  the  State  out  of  the  proceeds  of  taxation, 
but  in  India  out  of  the  alms  of  the  people.  Again,  sadhus 
are  to  no  small  extent  religious  teachers  (gurus)  of  the 
masses,  and  this  must  be  recognised  in  any  estimate  of 
their  value  or  otherwise  to  the  community. 

In  the  ranks  of  the  sadhus,  too,  there  is  honourable 
room  for  those  men,  present  in  every  community,  who, 
as  Bishop  Creighton  once  said,  "  although  as  good  as 
gold  and  fit  for  heaven,  are  of  no  earthly  use."  Further, 
the  incorrigible  idlers  who  in  Europe  become  intolerable 
and  dangerous  vagrants,  pursue  a  more  reputable  course  in 
India.  They  simply  adopt  the  religious  habit  of  some  sect 
or  order,  and  enter  the  ranks  of  the  peregrinating  sadhus. 

There  are  other  points,  also,  which  in  this  connection 
deserve  attention.  For  example,  sadhus  are  prominently 
in  evidence  on  account  of  their  peculiar  dress  and 
appearance,  while  their  wandering  habits  taking  them, 
often  in  huge  parties,  from  place  to  place  throughout  the 
circhng  year,  seem  to  multiply  them  many  times  over. 
Their  necessary  daily  appeals  for  a  dole  of  simple  food  to 

1  John  ii.  15,  16;  James  iv.   13,  14;  Rom.  xiv.   17;   Luke  xiv.  26; 
Matt.  xiz.  21. 

276 


CONCLUSION 

sustain  life  also  helps  to  keep  them  before  the  public  eye, 
and  to  unpleasantly  remind  the  world  of  their  existence. 
But,  whether  or  not  sadhus  are  too  numerous  for  the 
industrial  well-being  of  the  country,  it  should  not  be 
forgotten  that,  though  there  are  undoubtedly  many 
worthless  sadhus,  the  converse  is  also  not  less  true,  and 
that  to  the  multitude  a  majority  of  these  religious 
mendicants  are  types  and  exemplars  of  a  holy  life,  and,  as 
such,  help  them  to  make  for  righteousness. 

While,  in  connection  with  religious  mendicancy,  so 
much  attention  has  been  bestowed  upon  the  obvious 
withdrawal  of  a  host  of  men  from  contributing  towards 
the  work  of  production,  one  point,  less  obvious  it  is  true, 
but  not  less  interesting  perhaps,  has  been  quite  overlooked, 
viz.  the  influence  which  sadhuism,  by  the  alarm  which 
its  violent  spread  occasioned  amongst  Indian  rulers  and 
legislators,  has  indirectly  had,  and  still  has,  in  keeping  up 
and  maintaining  the  population  of  the  country.  This 
statement  may  seem  somewhat  paradoxical,  but  there  is, 
I  think,  reasonable  foundation  for  it. 

Let  me  explain.  Amongst  the  social  and  religious 
precepts  observed  by  the  Hindus,  perhaps  the  most 
important  in  their  eyes  is  the  rule  which  requires  that 
every  man,  rich  or  poor,  should  have  a  son  or  male 
descendant  to  perform  his  funeral  and  post-funeral  rites. 
Obviously,  therefore,  every  Hindu  should  marry,  and  as  early 
as  possible.  Hence  every  Hindu  father  is  strictly  bound, 
under  the  sternest  social  and  religious  penalties,  to  find 
a  wife  for  his  son,  and  also  a  husband  for  his  daughter, 
even  before  she  attains  the  age  of  pubescence.  To  be 
without  a  son  or  a  male  descendant  is  a  terrible  curse, 
entailing  upon  the  unhappy  defaulter  the  severest  purga- 
torial suffering.  In  the  case  of  Hindu  women,  childless- 
ness is  a  dishonour  so  unendurable  that  it  often  leads  to 
suicide  or  strange  immoralities.^ 

Whence  came  these  ideas  and  ecclesiastical  ordinances 
about  the  all-importance  of  male  issue  ?  They  are  the 
result,  I   am   inclined    to    think,  of    the    worldly  wisdom 

^  Hindu  Manners,  Customs,  and  Ceremonies,  by  the  Abbe  J.  A.  Dubois, 
part  iii.  chap.  iv. 

277 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

of  the  prescient  Hindu  legislator,  seeking  to  counteract 
the  depopulating  effects  of  that  spirit  of  asceticism  and 
renunciation  of  the  world  which  at  its  height  probably 
threatened  to  lead  to  national  extinction.  And  so,  if  I  am 
right,  an  ordinance  aimed  at  asceticism  has  been  power- 
fully instrumental  in  keeping  up  the  population  of  India, 
probably  far  above  the  limit  most  advantageous  to  the 
country.  During  the  period  when  the  spirit  of  asceticism 
was  most  influential  in  the  Christian  world,  laws  were 
passed  and  every  hindrance  put  to  the  spread  of  monachism, 
and  for  the  avowed  reason  of  its  injurious  effect  upon 
population.^  And  so  also  in  more  modern  times,  and  on 
the  same  grounds,  Peter  the  Great  prohibited  the  adoption 
of  a  monastic  Hfe  by  persons  under  fifty  years  of  age. 
The  Brahman  legislator  secures  the  same  end  by  a  very 
different  process.  Unable,  and  in  all  probabihty  unwill- 
ing, to  enforce  repressive  measures  against  sadhuism,  he 
appeals  to  the  religious  feehngs  and  the  fears  of  the  people, 
insists  upon  the  obligation  of  every  Hindu  to  have  a  son, 
and  threatens  punishment  in  a  future  life  to  such  as  fail 
in  this  duty.  As  a  result,  the  numerical  strength  of  the 
nation  is  maintained,  and  at  the  same  time  the  ceremonies 
connected  with  marriages  and  births  help  the  clever 
hereditary  priesthood  to  keep  their  hands  perpetually  in 
the  purses  of  their  lay  brethren. 

The  Future  of  Sadhuism. 

If  with  an  eye  to  the  future  of  sadhuism  we  consider 
its  present  state,  the  conviction  is  forced  upon  us  that 
it  is  not  in  as  much  favour  as  at  many  former  periods 
in  Indian  history ;  or,  perhaps,  I  should  rather  say  that 
the  thoughts  of  men  in  India  are  now  being  strongly  at- 
tracted to  more  worldly  ideals. 

British  rule,  with  its  strong  bias  towards  material 
improvements,  its  encouragement  of  trade,  and  the  facihties 
it  afiords  for  cheap  locomotion  and  for  emigration,  has 
opened  up  a  variety  of  careers,  official  and  other,  to  all 
castes  aUke,  and  also  many  new  ways  to  the  acquirement 
1  Bury's  Later  Roman  Empire^  vol.  ii.  pp.  466-468. 

2/8 


CONCLUSION 

of  riches,  wMle  its  stability  guarantees  the  safe  possession 
of    wealth    by    all    races    alike.      However  enamoured  of 
sadhuism  Hindu   India    may  have    been,   there   were,   of 
course,  at    all    times   good  Hindus  who  fully  appreciated 
the  advantages  of  worldly  possessions  and  were  assiduous 
worshippers  of  Kuvera,   their  god  of  wealth.     Merchants, 
indeed,   are   prominent   characters  in  some   of  the   oldest 
tales  that  have  come  down  to  us  from  Buddhist  times,  but 
under  despotic  rulers  the  accumulation  of  riches  was  not 
an  easy  matter,   and   certainly  their  display  would  have 
been   dangerous.     The   ever-present  proportion   of  wealth- 
seekers  in  the  population  has  its  opportunity  now,  and  is 
reinforced    by  crowds   allured  away  from  their  old  ideals 
by  the  special    attractions    of    the  new  age.     As  in  the 
West,   so  in  India  to-day,   the  possessors   of  the  world's 
goods,   however  their  treasures   may  have  been  acquired, 
are  objects  of  popular  respect,   and  receive  marked    con- 
sideration from  the  ruling  powers,  sharing  with  favoured 
officials  to  an  appreciable  extent  the  honours  which  the 
State  has  to  bestow.     Hence  the  desire  for  affluence  and 
for  the    ostentatious  parade    of  wealth  has  become  very 
pronounced  ;  and  the  more  so  since  outside  the  "  Native 
States  "  most  of  the  old  hereditary  dignities  have  ceased  to 
be  of  much  account  under  the  new  regime.  .  Hindu  caste 
distinctions    necessarily    receive    little,  if    any,  recognition 
under   British   rule,  and   the   pride   of   the    "  twice-born " 
classes    no    encouragement    at    all.     Sadhus  are  not  more 
fortunate ;  for,  whatever  their  merits  or  their  claims  may 
be,    they   are   looked   down   upon   with   contemptuous   in- 
difference by  the  ruling  race,  the  new  twice-horns  of  the 
Indian     world,     now    in     effect     the     predominant     caste, 
exhibiting   all   the   virtues   and   the   vices   of   its   peculiar 
position,  privileges,  and   pretensions. 

Moreover,  while  old  social  landmarks  are  thus  dis- 
appearing, it  cannot  be  denied  that  a  new  national  spirit, 
naturally  opposed  to  sadhuism,  is  beginning  to  awaken 
and  to  manifest  itself  sporadically  in  acts  whose  intention 
at  least  is  unmistakable. 

Another  potent  factor  in  determining  the  fate  of 
sadhuism  is  EngUsh  education,  which,  being  indispensable 

279 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

for  an  official  career,  is  eagerly  sought  for  by  all  the 
ambitious  youths  of  the  country  ;  and  the  alumni  of  the 
Indian  schools  and  universities,  inoculated  with  Western 
ideas,  and  anxious  to  do  credit  to  their  training,  generally 
affect,  though  they  may  not  always  feel,  a  supercilious 
unconcern  about  sadhus  and  sadhuism.  The  sadhus 
themselves,  though  professing,  as  heretofore,  a  hfe  of 
complete  detachment  from  the  world,  feel  in  an  unwonted 
degree  the  effects  of  the  currents  of  modern  activity  which 
are  circulating  through  the  land,  and,  under  this  stimulus, 
are  awakening  to  combined  actions  of  a  very  unusual  and 
noteworthy  character.  For  example,  we  learn  from  the 
Press,  with  feelings  of  satisfaction  not  unmingled  with 
grave  concern,  that  at  a  great  bathing  fair  at  Allahabad 
the  sadhus,  "  sinking  their  animosities,  joined  in  prayers 
for  the  success  of  the  British  arms,  while  their  leaders 
dehvered  speeches  full  of  loyalty  and  devotion  to  the 
English  Raj."i 

Without  doubt,  then,  existing  circumstances  are  tending 
in  many  ways  to  discredit  and  undermine  sadhuism,  and 
the  continuance  of  these  conditions  will  inevitably  affect 
its  position  in  the  future.  Yet,  to  conclude  that  the  desire 
for  wealth  and  position  so  strongly  stimulated  by  present 
circumstances,  that  the  pohtical  awakening  of  these  times, 
that  the  spread  of  education  and  the  general  feeling  of 
unrest  in  India,  will,  all  combined,  prove  the  death-knell  of 
sadhuism,  would  hardly  be  justifiable.  Possibly,  the  very 
reverse  might  happen ;  for  as  long  as  the  common 
standards  of  living  in  India  are  low,  and  the  religious 
ideas  of  the  people  substantially  unchanged,  a  large  part 

^  Saturday  Review,  3rd  March  1900.  The  deep  significance  of  this 
display  of  good  feeling  on  the  part  of  the  religious  ascetics  towards  their 
foreign  rulers,  few,  I  fancy,  have  reahsed.  What  a  shattering  of  British 
prestige,  once  heaven-high,  all  this  reveals.  Think  of  it !  The  mendicant 
sadhus  offering  up  prayers  to  such  gods  as  they  worship  to  come  to  the 
assistance  of  their  defeated  Enghsh  masters.  For  years  to  come  the  story 
will  be  told,  with  many  additions,  by  Yogis,  Sanyasis,  and  Bairagis  in 
every  village  south  of  the  Himalayas,  setting  the  minds  of  many  millions 
of  people  a-thinking  in  unaccustomed  ways.  And  the  presence  of  a  few 
thousand  Boer  prisoners  in  India  will  only  serve  as  a  testimony  to  the 
efficacy  of  the  intercessions  of  the  Hindu  saints.  Little  do  people  know  how 
much  has  been  lost  on  the  inglorious  battlefields  of  South  Africa. 

280 


CONCLUSION 

of  the  wealth  that  under  new  political  and  economic 
conditions  may  be  accmnulated  will  assuredly  be  expended 
in  charity,  in  accordance  with  the  feeling  and  practice  of 
the  country,  especially  in  the  feeding  of  Brahmans  and 
poor  religious  mendicants.  Gifts  and  bequests  to  this  end, 
which  the  stability  of  British  rule  render  easy  and 
permanent,  may  be  looked  for,  and  thus  it  may  come  to 
pass  that  a  goodly  portion  of  the  newly  acquired  wealth 
will  provide  an  unexpected  fund  for  the  further  support 
of  idle  sadhus.  Any  way,  admiration  of  the  ascetic  ideal 
is  so  deeply  rooted  in  the  nature  of  the  Indian  people, 
and  their  devotion  to  quietism  so  completely  in  harmony 
with  the  physical  influences  of  their  environment,  that 
it  will  not  be  easily  overcome  ;  hence,  notwithstanding  the 
present  state  of  things,  a  general  revival  of  sadhuism 
at  any  favourable  moment  is  by  no  means  improbable. 
The  leaven  of  imported  European  ideas  now  fermenting  in 
the  Indian  mind  is  aHen,  unnatural,  and  disquieting,  and 
though  it  produces  some  of  the  results  which  the  Western 
world  admires  and  labels  "  progress,"  yet  there  undoubtedly 
lurks  beneath  this  progress  a  very  real,  if  smothered, 
discontent. 

Well  has  the  poet  expressed  in  the  following  lines  the 
true  sentiments  of  the  Orient : — 

"  The  brooding  mother  of  the  unfiUal  world. 
Recumbent  on  her  own  antiquity, 
Aloof  from  our  mutation  and  unrest. 
Alien  to  our  achievements  and  desires. 
Too  proud  alike  for  protest  or  assent. 
When  new  thoughts  thunder  at  her  massy  door ; 
Another  brain,  dreaming  another  dream. 
Another  heart,  recalling  other  loves, 
Too  grey  and  grave  for  our  adventurous  hopes, 
For  our  precipitate  pleasures  too  august. 
And,  in  majestic  taciturnity, 
Refraining  her  illimitable  scorn." 

William  Watson. 

Thus  would  Hindu  India  wilHngly  live  a  life  of  simple, 
easy,  quiet,  uneventful  days,  steeped  in  dreamy  speculations 
and  indulging  in  wild  imaginings.  But  Fate  has  decreed 
otherwise ;  and    this    stirring,    mechanical    age    finds    the 

281 


THE   MYSTICS,  ASCETICS,  AND  SAINTS  OF  INDIA 

disillusioned  descendants  of  the  risMs  roughly  awakened 
out  of  their  old  dream-world.  Bewildered,  resentful,  but 
unable  to  resist  the  new  stimulation  from  without,  they 
are  galvanised  into  feverish  unhealthy  cravings  for 
material  things  not  always  harmless,  into  new  expensive 
modes  and  standards  of  living,  which  in  their  innermost 
hearts  they  do  not  appreciate,  and  into  enterprises  for 
which  they  have  no  real  vocation.  Some  term  this 
progress  ;  but,  even  if  it  be  so,  the  situation  is  not  without 
a  certain  pathos,  for,  after  all,  man's  highest  destiny  is 
hardly  realised  by  his  being  perpetually  engaged  in 
manufacturing  things  of  various  kinds,  however  useful  in 
themselves,  nor  even  in  helping  to  distribute  such 
productions,  often  with  the  aid  of  quick-firing  guns,  over 
the  face  of  the  inhabited  globe. 

Holding  as  I  do  that  happiness,  virtue,  dignity, 
personal  freedom,  and  reasonable  comfort  are  quite 
compatible  mth  modes  of  life,  political  institutions, 
industrial  systems,  and  religious  creeds  which  are  not 
those  of  England  or  the  Western  world,  the  present 
transition  state  of  India  seems  to  me  a  subject  of  much 
more  than  passing  interest. 

By  no  means  enamoured  of  Indian  sadhuism,  I  feel 
at  the  same  time  no  particular  admiration  for  the  in- 
dustrialism of  Europe  and  America,  with  its  vulgar 
aggressiveness,  its  eternal  competition,  and  its  sordid, 
unscrupulous,  unremitting,  and  cruel  struggle  for  wealth 
as  the  supreme  object  of  human  effort.  But,  whatever 
may  be  the  merits  or  demerits  of  these  two  systems,  they 
are  essentially  antagonistic,  since  the  economic  ideal  of 
Hfe,  being  frankly  worldly  and  severely  practical,  excludes 
imagination,  emotionalism,  and  dreamy  sentimentalism,  and 
consequently  religion  also,  except  of  the  philanthropical  or 
Pharisaical  type.  Hence  a  momentous,  if  unobtrusive, 
struggle  in  India  is  inevitable  under  new  conditions 
between  the  forces  which  make  for  the  renunciation  of  the 
world  on  the  one  hand,  and  for  the  accumulation  of  wealth  on 
the  other  ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that,  as  a  consequence, 
the  immemorial  civilisation  of  the  Hindus  will  undergo 
change,  both  in  its  spirit  and  practice,  under  the  stimulus 

282 


CONCLUSION 

of  the  potent  foreign  influences  to  which  it  is  now  exposed. 
Yet  I  cannot  help  hoping  that  the  Indian  people,  physically 
and  mentally  disquahfied  for  the  strenuous  life  of  the 
Western  world,  will  long  retain,  in  their  nature,  enough  of 
the  spirit  of  sadhuism  to  enable  them  to  hold  steadfastly 
to  the  simple,  frugal,  unconventional,  leisured  life  of  their 
forefathers,  for  which  climatic  conditions  and  their  own 
past  history  have  so  well  fitted  them,  always  bearing  in 
mind  the  lesson  taught  by  their  sages,  that  real  wealth  and 
true  freedom  depend  not  so  much  upon  the  possession  of 
money,  or  a  great  store  of  goods,  as  upon  the  reasonable 
regulation  and  limitation  of  the  desires. 


283 


INDEX 


Achari,  sub-sect  of  Ranianandis,189. 

Agorinis,  female  Agoris,  167. 

Agoris,  Saiva  sect,  152  ;  strange  and 
disgusting  habits  and  explana- 
tion of  the  same  on  pantheistic 
grounds,  164-166. 

Agorpanthis.     See  Agoris. 

Akalis,  Sikh  sect,  153  ;  its  origin, 
etc.,  198-201. 

Akhara  (monastery)  of  Santokh  Das, 
256-262;  of  the  Nirmali  sect, 
263-264  ;  of  Jogi  Tilla,  264-268. 

Alchemy  practised  by  sadhus,  59-61. 

Alexander  the  Great,  acquainted 
with  Indian  sadhus,  5. 

Alms-bowls  carried  by  ascetics,  41, 
263. 

Amarnath  in  Kashmir,  the  customs 
observed  on  visiting  the  ice- 
caves,  268. 

American  lady  becomes  a  Sanyasin, 
154. 

Amva,  austerities  of,  for  destruction 
of  Bhishma,  21,  22. 

Arya-Samaj,  recent  non-idolatrous 
sect,  137. 

Aryan  nature-gods  have  ceased  to 
be  worshipped,  138. 

Asans  (postures)  described,  51. 

Ascetic  Ufe,  the  natural  and  political 
condition  of  India  peculiarly 
fitted  for  the  encouragement  of 
the,  13. 

Ascetic  sects,  not  abnormal  in 
number,  142. 

Asceticism,  a  common  feature  in  all 
religions,  7-9  ;  ideals  underlying, 
7-10,  26  ;  for  the  purification  of 
the  body  from  sinful  desires,  9  ; 
stimulated  by  political  or  other 
troubles,  12 ;  promoted  by  certain 
habits,  14 ;  analysis  of  the  motives 
which  prompt  religious,  16, 17  ;  as 
a  means  of  attaining  power  over 
nature,  18,  19,  27-30,  31-33,  77  ; 
in  Hinduism  has  no  special  con- 
nection with  ethics,  34,  35 ;  an 


essential  of  a  holy  religious  life, 
271-273. 

Ashtanga  danddwai,  a  painful  form 
of  self-mortification,  47. 

x\ugars,  a  sub-sect  of  the  Yogis,  185. 

Aurva,  undergoes  austerities  for  the 
destruction  of  the  world,  21. 

Austerities,  various  forms  of, 
practised  by  sadhus,  44-50  ;  the 
right  of  Sudras  to,  practise,  ac- 
knowledged, 274. 

B 

Bairagi,sub-sectofIlamanandis,189, 
190  ;  description  of  one  who  used 
to  swing  head  downwards,  202- 
208 ;  description  of  an  Urdha- 
bahu,  214-217  ;  description  of  one 
who  worshipped  the  sun,  231-233. 

Bairaguns  (arm-rests)  carried  by 
sadhus,  42. 

Ballavacharya,  founds  a  sect  for 
the  worship  of  Krishna  as  Bala 
Gopala,  127. 

Ballavacharyas,  sect  of  Vaishnavas, 
152;  peculiarities  of  the  sect,  191. 

Banaprasta,  or  forest  recluse,  15. 

Basava,  founds  a  Sivite  sect,117,118. 

Basil  wood  used  for  rosaries,  39. 

Baul,  a  sub-sect  of  Chaitanites,  193. 

Beneficent  actions,  attributed  to 
sadhus,  58,  217-220. 

Bernier,  his  account  of  the  Indian 
sadhus  in  the  seventeenth  century, 
his  disgust  at  the  appearance  of 
the  Yogis,  97. 

Bhaskarananda  (Swami),  a  Sanyasi 
of  Benares,  interview  with,  208- 
210  ;  his  biography,  210-214. 

Bhishma,  Amva's  austerities  for  the 
destruction  of,  21,  22. 

Bhoureeahs,  wear  dishevelled  hair, 
39. 

Body,  the  human  body  the  cause  of 
sinfulness,  8,  9  ;  purification  of, 
by  ascetic  practices,  9. 

Boer  war,  Indian  sadhus  in  relation 
to,  280. 

85 


INDEX 


Brahmachari,  or  religious  student, 
15 ;  Saiva  sect,  152,  163 ;  one 
from  Southern  India  described, 
221,  222. 

Brahmo-Samaj,  a  recent  non-idola- 
trous sect,  137. 

British  rule  in  India,  its  efiEect  upon 
sadhuism,  278-281. 


Calamities  attributed  to  sadhus,  56- 
58. 

Cenobitic  life,  origin  of  the,  11. 

Chains,  an  ascetic  weighted  with,  48. 

Chaitanite  nuns,  192. 

Chaitanites,  Vaishnava  sect,  152 ; 
pecuHarities  and  customs  of,  191, 
192. 

Chaitanya,  founds  a  sect  for  worship 
of  Kjishna  and  Radha,  128  ; 
introduces  musical  processions 
known  as  sankirtans,  129  ;  incul- 
cates guru  padasraya,  veneration 
of  the  religious  teacher,  130  ;  his 
sect  flourishing  still,  130. 

Chakra,  or  discus,  an  emblem  of  the 
Vaishnavas,  43. 

Chamar  (besom)  carried  by  Jain 
monks,  151. 

Charity  lauded  in  the  Hindu  Scrip- 
tures, 140,  141. 

Chippees,  alms-bowls  made  out  of 
cocoanut  shells,  263. 

Christian  rosaries  derived  from 
India,  40. 

Christian  sects,  ancient  and  modem, 
referred  to,  142,  143. 

Christianity,  affords  abundant  ex- 
amples of  extreme  asceticism,  10 ; 
the  doctrine  of  voluntary  asceti- 
cism a  root-idea  of,  26. 
Conch  shell  used  as  ornament  by 

sadhus,  40. 
Conflicts  between  the  founders  and 
leaders  of  cults  or  sects  a  common 
feature  in  all  religions,  33,  34. 


Dadu,  founds  a  sect  for  the  worship 

of  Rama,  133. 
Dadu    Panthis    sect,    founded    by 

Dadu,  133. 
Daityas,  terrible  austerities  of,  20, 

4W    J.    • 

Dakhinacharis,  their  sect  mark,  38. 
Dameru,  or  drum,  carried  by  Saivas, 
43. 


Danda,  a  stalEf  carried  by  Dandis, 
160. 

Dandis,  Saiva  sect,  152 ;  rules, 
customs,  and  beliefs  of  the  sect, 
160-162. 

Dasnamis,  the  ten  sub-orders  of 
Sanyasis,  153. 

Dattatreya,  his  upa  gurus,  or  as- 
sistant teachers,  158. 

Dayanand,  founder  of  the  Arya- 
Samaj,  137. 

Depraved  appetite,  instances  of,  50. 

Dharmsala  (monastery)  of  Thakur 
Dyal  Singh,  264,  265. 

Dliruva,  his  wonderful  austerities, 
23-25 ;  exalted  to  the  skies  as 
the  pole-star,  25. 

Digambara  (sky-clothed),  a  Jain 
sub-sect,  151. 

Disillusionment,  a  story  of  the 
olden  time,  81-83. 

Drugs,  the  use  of  narcotic  drugs 
tends  to  produce  apathy  and 
quietism,  14  ;  favoured  by  sad- 
hus, 42. 

Dudhahari,  ascetics  who  live  on 
milk,  50. 


Early  recollections  of  sadhus  and 

faquirs,  1-3. 
Ecstasy,   scientific  explanation  of, 

177-179. 
Ethics    has    no    connection    with 

Hindu  austerities,  34,  35. 
Extraordinary  tale  of  a  Yogi,  55. 


Fallon  (Miss),  her  account  of 
Premi,  a  young  sadhvi,  245-247. 

Faquirs,  early  recollections  of,  1-3  ; 
claim  superiority  over  sadhus,  64, 
65 ;  importance  of  their  utter- 
ances, 65  -  68 ;  described  by 
Tavernier,  95. 

Farari,  ascetics  who  live  on  fruits, 
50. 

Fasting,  48. 

Father  duped,  a  story  from  the 
Granth  of  Guru  Govind  Singh, 
88-90. 

Fiction,  sadhus  in  Indian  fiction, 
68-91. 

Forbes  (James),  his  account  of 
Indian  sadhus  and  their  asceti- 
cisms, including  some  singular 
ones,  97-100. 

Funeral  of  Sanyasi,  156,  157. 

86 


INDEX 


Gareeb  Das,  an  Urdhabahu  Bairagi, 
described,  214-217. 

Geographical  conditions  in  India 
favourable  to  asceticism,  13. 

Gopichandana  used  in  painting  sect 
marks,  38. 

Gopis,  the  milkmaids  of  Bindrabun, 
38. 

Goraknath,  a  deified  saint  wor- 
shipped in  Nepal  and  Northern 
India,  184. 

Govind  Singh,  tenth  and  last  Guru 
of  the  Sikhs,  132. 

Greek  historians  acquainted  with 
Indian  sadhus,  93. 

Grihasta  or  householder,  life  pre- 
scribed for,  15. 

Guru  padasraya,  servile  veneration 
of  the  religious  teacher  inculcated 
by  Chaitanya,  130. 


H 

Hansa,    its   real   meaning   and   its 

fanciful  interpretation,  162. 
Haridas,  his  samadh  or  interment, 

47. 
Hassan  Khan,  extraordinary  story 

of    his    miraculous    doings,    61- 

64. 
H4tha-yoga  explained,  172,  173. 
Heber  (Bishop),  his  account  of  some 

Hindu  ascetics,   103,   104. 
Heer    and    Ranja,     the    romantic 

story  of,  266-268. 
Hermitages     described    and    illus- 
trated, 43,  44. 
Hindu  lawgiver,  rules  laid  down  by, 

for  the  conduct  of  life  in  four 

prescribed  periods,  15. 
Horned   Rishi,    a    story   from    the 

Granth   of  Guru   Govind  Singh, 

83-85. 


I 

Ideals  of    life,  English,  American, 

and  Indian  compared,  270,  271. 
Idols  sometimes  carried  about  by 

sadhus,  42. 
India,     conditions     prevailing     in, 

peculiarly     favourable     for     the 

encouragement     of     the     ascetic 

life,  13. 
Industrialism  opposed  to  sadhuism, 

282. 
Iron  fire-tongs  carried  by  sadhus, 

41,  42. 


Jain  nuns,  145, 150, 151. 

Jains,  their  doctrines  and  customs, 
142-150  ;  divided  into  two  sects, 
Swetambara  and  Digambara,  151. 

Jaladhara,  ascetics  who  sit  under  a 
stream  of  water,  50. 

Jalashayi,  ascetics  who  sit  immersed 
in  water,  50. 

Jhuttadarees,  wear  hair  coiled  on 
the  head,  39. 

Jinas,  Jain  saints,  149. 

Jogeeshurs,  a  sub-sect  of  the  Yogis, 
185. 

Jogi,  ordinary  term  for  Yogi,  Pre- 
face, vii. 

Jogis  referred  to  with  disgust  by 
Bernier,  97. 

Joint  family  system  favourable  to 
sadhuism,  16. 


K 

Kabir,  founds  a  Vaishnava  sect, 
122  ;  recommends  his  disciples  to 
conciliate  all  men,  124  ;  preaches 
purity  of  heart,  124  ;  story  of  his 
wife  and  the  wicked  grocer,  125  ; 
claimed  as  a  Muslim  by  the 
Muhammadans,  126. 

Kabir  Panthis,  followers  of  Kabir, 
127,  152  ;  peculiarities  and  cus- 
toms of  the  sect,  190,  191. 

Kanphatis,  Yogi  sub-sect,  185. 

Kantaka-sayya,  or  thorn  couch,  45, 
46. 

Kara  lingis,who  restrain  their  desires 
by  mechanical  arrangements,  50. 

Karma  (action),  Hindu  doctrine  of, 
107,  108,  172. 

Keshub  Chundra  Sen,  founder  of  the 
Brahmo-Samaj,  137 ;  practised 
yoga,  173. 

Khakis,  a  sub-sect  of  Ramanandis, 
189. 

Kind-hearted  lady,  a  story  from  the 
Granth  of  Guru  Govind  Singh,  87, 
88. 

Kowls  (extreme  Saktas),  their  sect 
mark,  38. 

Krishna,  worshipped  by  the  Vaish- 
navas,  109;  his  cult  considered, 
118,  119. 

Kukas,  a  recent  politico-religious 
sect,  137. 


Lakshmi,  wife  of  Vishnu,  worshipped 
by  Vaishnavas,  109. 

87 


INDEX 


Laya-yoga  explained,  172. 

Life  of  Hindus  divided  into  four 

periods,  15. 
Lingaits,  Saivasect,  152;  origin  and 

customs  of  the  sect,  163,  164. 
Lingam       (or      phallic      emblem) 

honoured  by  Saiva  sect,  43. 
Lost  son  restored,  a  storv  from  the 

Granth   of  Guru   Govind  Singh, 

86,  87. 
Luxury  and  asceticism  may  exist 

contemporaneously,  10. 

M 

Madhavacharya,  founds  a  Vishnu- 

vite  sect,  118,  119. 
Madhavas  (or  Madhavacharis),their 

sect    mark,    38 ;  sect    of    Vaish- 

navas,    152;     peculiarities     and 

customs,  188. 
Mahabharata,     story     of      certain 

daityas,  20  ;  story  of  Visvamitra 

and  Vasishta,  27-30. 
Mahant  (abbot),  installation  of  one 

described,  253-256. 
Mahatmas,  not  to  be  met  with  in  the 

bazaars,  66,  186. 
Mahavogi  (the  great  ascetic),  name 

of  Siva,  HI,  112. 
Maji,  a  sadhvi  of  Benares,  244,  245. 
Malas  (rosaries)  described,  39,  40. 
Malati  and  Madhava,  the  story  of, 

74-81. 
Mantra-yoga  explained,  172. 
Matter     and     spirit,     antagonism 

between,  8. 
Meditation  as  practised  by  Yogis, 

176. 
Menaka,  a  nymph  of  heaven  and 

mother  of  Sakoontala,  carries  her 

ofi  to  the  celestial  regions,  73. 
Merits,  Christian  idea  of,  hoarded  up 

for  future  use,  19. 
Metempsychosis,  Hindu  doctrine  of, 

107. 
Mirabai  (Princess),  worships  Krishna 

as  Ranachor,  134 ;  and  founds  a 

sect,  135. 
Monasteries,    circumstances    under 

which   they   arise,    11  ;  visits   to 

some,  described,  248-269. 
Monks,  Jain,   144-147  ;  Chaitanite, 

192. 
Morals  and  asceticism,  their   rela- 
tions considered,  34,  35. 
Mount  Meru,  sadhus  journey  thither 

and  do  not  return,  47,  48. 
Muhammadan  power  in  India,  its 

effect  on  Hinduism,  115,  116. 
Mussulman  invasion  of  India,  115. 


Mutilation  by  a  sadhu,  48. 
Mya  (illusion),  Hindu  doctrine  of, 
106. 

N 

Nadh  worn  by  Yogis,  185. 

Nadis,  vessels  carrying  subtle  ethers 
through  the  human  body,  175. 

Nakedness  responsible  for  low 
opinion  of  Indians  held  by  many 
Europeans,  5  ;  tendency  of  sadhus 
towards,  269. 

Nanak,  his  conflict  with  the 
Siddhas,  31-33;  a  spiritual  de- 
scendant of  Kabir,  131  ;  original 
founder  of  Sikhism,  his  teaching, 
132. 

Naths,  immortal  saints  honoured  by 
Yogis,  186. 

Neo-  Brahmanism  reviewed,  135-1 39. 

Nihangs,  Sikh  sect,  153  ;  particu- 
lars regarding  them,  198-201. 

Nimats,  sect  founded  by  Nim- 
baditya,  130. 

Nimbaditya,  founder  of  the  sect  of 
the  Nimats,  130. 

Nirmalis,  tSikh  sect,  153 ;  particulars, 
regarding  the  sect  and  its  origin, 
195-198. 

Nordau  (Dr.),  his  explanation  of 
ecstasy,    177-179. 

Nuns,  Jain,  145,  150,  151  ;  Chai- 
tanite, 192. 


Oghars,  a  sub-sect  of  the  Yogis,  185. 


P 

Panchadhunis,     ascetics     who     sit 

amidst  five  fires,  45. 
Pandita     Mai     Jivan     Mukut,     a 

sadhvi,  242-244. 
Pantheism  of  the  Hindus,  106. 
Paramahansa,     Saiva     sect,     152 ; 

rules,  customs,  and  beliefs  of  the 

sect,  162,  163. 
Patanjali,  author  of  practical  rules 

of  Yoga  Vidya,  172. 
Penances  of  various  kinds,  44-50 ; 

described  by  Tavernier,  94,  95  ; 

by  Bernier,  97  ;  by  James  Forbes, 

99,  100  ;  by  Ward,  100,  101  ;  by 

Heber,  103,  104. 
Plague  averted  by  a  Yogi,  2l7-220. 
Power  over  nature  obtainable  by 

ascetic  practices,  18,  19. 
Prana,  the  vital  air  and  its  circula- 
tion, 174,  175. 


288 


INDEX 


Premi,  a  young  sadlivi  who  em- 
braced Christianity,  245-247. 

Prince  Bir  Bhanu  Singh,  a  sadhu 
interviewed  at  Amritsar,  226-229. 

Pseudo-sadhu,  his  adventures,  235- 
238. 

Psychology  of  the  Indians,  its 
characteristic  features,  14. 

Purification  of  the  body  by  ascetic 
practices,  9. 

Purificatory  rites,  certain  peculiar 
kinds  of,  51. 

Puttika,  the  mouth-veil  used  by 
Jains,  141. 


Radha,  mistress  of  Krishna,  wor- 
shipped by  certain  Vaishnavas, 
109. 

Raja-yoga  explained,  172-173,  174. 

Ram  Charn,  founds  the  austere  Ram 
Sanehi  sect,  133. 

Ram  Sanehi,  sect  founded  by  Ram 
Charn,  133. 

Rama  Chandra,  destroys  Ravena, 
22  ;  destroys  Viradha,  22  ;  wor- 
shipped by  certain  Vaishnavas, 
109,  119-121. 

Ramakrishna,  a  Bengali  Sanyasi, 
52. 

Ramanand,  founds  a  Vaishnava  sect 
for  the  worship  of  Ram,  119-121. 

Ramanandis,  Vaishnava  sect,  152  ; 
peculiarities  and  customs,  188-190. 

Ramanuja,  founds  a  Vaishnava  cult, 
116,  117. 

Ramats,  their  sect  mark,  38.  See 
also  Ramanandis. 

Ramawat.     See  Ramanandis. 

Ramayana,  stories  from,  22. 

Ranachor,  a  form  of  the  youthful 
Elrishna,  134. 

Ranja  and  Heer,  the  romantic  story 
of,  266-268. 

Ravena,  his  austerities  and  his  doom, 
22. 

Re-union  of  the  soul  with  the  All- 
Spirit,  27. 

Rivalry  in  austerities  between  the 
leaders  of  classes  and  sects,  27, 
32 ;  well  known  in  other  re- 
ligions, Judaism,  Buddhism, 
Christianity,  and  Islam,  33,  34. 

Roll  used  in  painting  sect  marks,  38. 

Rosaries,  worn  by  Sadhus,  39,  40  ; 
Christian  rosaries  derived  from 
India,  40. 

Rudraksha  berries  used  for  rosaries, 
39. 


Sadhuism,  antiquity  of,  5  ;  an  em- 
bodiment of  the  spirit  of  the  East, 
6  ;  its  religious  aspect,  273  ;  its 
social  aspect,  273, 274 ;  its  political 
aspect,  274,  275  ;  its  industrial 
aspect,  275-278 ;  its  probable 
future  considered,  278-283  ;  op- 
posed to  industrialism,  282. 

Sadhus,  early  recollections  of,  1-3  ; 
conspicuous  figures  in  India,  3-6  ; 
indefatigable  wanderers,  3-5  ;  at 
fairs  and  public  places,  36,  37  ; 
their  dress  and  adornments,  37- 
41  ;  their  impedimenta,  41,  42  ; 
their  hermitages,  43,  44  ;  produce 
calamities,  56-58  ;  perform  bene- 
ficent actions,  58,  217-220 ;  as 
alchemists,  58-61  ;  as  physicians, 
66 ;  as  fortune-tellers,  palmists, 
and  acrobats,  66,  67  ;  in  Indian 
fiction,  68-91  ;  of  European 
descent,  222,  223  ;  of  princely 
lineage  interviewed,  226  -  229  ; 
who  found  God,  229-231;  as 
restaurateurs,  239-241  ;  and  the 
Boer  war,  280. 

Sadhvis  (sadhuis),  female  devotees, 
242-247. 

Sahaja,  a  sub-sect  of  the  Chaitanites, 
193. 

Saint  in  chains,  description  of,  240, 
241. 

Saivas,  followers  of  Siva,  emblems 
favoured  by,  43 ;  seven  sects 
named,   152. 

Sakoontala,  or  the  lost  ring,  the 
story  of,  68-74. 

Saktas,  worshippers  of  the  female 
energy,   109. 

Sakti  worship,  114. 

Saligram,  a  sort  of  ammonite 
carried  by  Vaishnavas,  43. 

Samadh,  or  burying  alive,  its  per- 
formance often  with  fatal  results, 
46,  47. 

Samadhi,  definitions  of,  176. 

Samsara  (metempsychosis),  Hindu 
doctrine  of,  106. 

Sankara  Acharya,  preaches  Sivaism 
and  founds  an  important  sect,  112, 
113. 

Sankara  Vijaya,  a  work  containing 
valuable  information  about  the 
state  of  Hinduism  in  the  ninth 
century,  110. 

Sankha  or  conch,  an  emblem  of  tne 
Vaishnavas,  43. 

Sankirtans,  religious  musical  proces- 
sions introduced  by  Chaitany a,  1 29. 


289 


INDEX 


Sanyasi,  closing  period  of  Hindu  life, 
15  ;  one  of  the  Saiva  sects,  152  ; 
divided  into  ten  sub-orders,  153  ; 
American  lady  admitted  to  the 
sect,  154  ;  rules  and  customs  of 
the  sect,  154-160;  a  sub-sect  of 
the  Raraanandis,  189  ;  a  naked 
Sanyasi  and  his  female  companion 
described,  223-226. 

Sanyasin  described,  223-226. 

Sarra-sayya,  arrow-bed  of  Bhishma, 
45. 

Sect  marks  described,  37,  38. 

Self  -  mortification,  various  forms 
practised  by  sadhus,  44-50  ;  de- 
scribed by  Tavern ier,  94,  95  ;  de- 
scribed by  Bernier,  97;  described 
by  James  Forbes,  99,  100  ;  de- 
scribed by  Ward,  100,  101  ; 
described  by  Heber,  103,  104. 

Sentiments  of  the  Orient  expressed 
by  an  English  poet,  281. 

Sevaji,  recently  deified  by  the 
Mahrattas,  137  ;  festival  recently 
held  in  Calcutta  in  honour  of, 
137. 

Shringhi  Rikh,  the  horned  saint,  his 
story  from  the  Granth  of  Guru 
Govind  Singh,  83-85. 

Siddhas,  conflict  with  Nanak,  31- 
33. 

Sikhism,  founded  by  Baba  Nanak 
and  modified  by  Guru  Govind 
Singh,  131-133. 

Sinfulness,  the  hindrance  to  spiritual 
aspirations,  8  ;  attributed  to  the 
corporeal  frame,  8. 

Singhi,  ornament  worn  by  Yogis, 
186. 

Silence,  vows  of,  48. 

Sita,  wife  of  Rama  Chandra,  wor- 
shipped by  the  Vaishnavas,  109, 
119. 

Siva,  regarded  by  his  followers  as  the 
Supreme  Being,  110  ;  his  worship 
attained  a  prominent  position  in 
the  ninth  century  a.d.,  110 ; 
associated  with  lingam  worship, 
111  ;  the  great  ascetic,  111. 

Siva  Purana,  stories  from,  22,  23. 

Sleeman  (Colonel),  his  account  of 
Indian  sadhus,  101,  102 ;  de- 
scribes ciirious  religious  suicides 
in  the  Mahadeo  hills,  102. 

Somnath,  destruction  of,  by  Mah- 
moud,  and  its  effect,  115. 

Spashta  Dayakas,  a  sub-sect  of  the 
Chaitanites,  192,  193. 

S]:)irit  and  matter,  antagonism  be- 
tween them,  8. 

Sri    Vaishnavas,     sect    of    Vishnu 


worshippers,  152 ;  customs  and 
peculiarities,  187,  188. 

Sthiila-sarira,  the  gross  body,  its 
nature,    169. 

Sudras,  their  right  to  undergo  aus- 
terities recognised,  274. 

Sukee-bhava,  a  sect  of  Western 
India,  134. 

SAkshma-sarira,  the  subtle  body,  its 
condition,  prospects,  and  ultimate 
emancipation,  169,  170. 

Sun- worshipping  Bairagi  described, 
231-233. 

Supreme  Being,  undergoes  austeri- 
ties, 25. 

Swarga  (Heaven)  sought  by  sadhus, 

^  47,  48. 

Swetambara  (white-robed),  a  Jain 
sub-sect,  151. 


Tangalas,  a  sub-sect  of  the  Sri  Vaish- 
navas, 187. 

Tarika,  his  wonderful  austerities, 
22,  23. 

Tavernier,  what  he  saw  of  sadhus 
and  their  austerities  during  his 
travels  in  India,  his  description 
of  Muslim  faquirs,  and  mistaken 
account  of  the  origin  of  sadhuism, 
93-96. 

Temples,  religious  merit  acquired  by 
the  construction  of,  249,  250. 

Tharasri,  ascetics  who  stand  for  long 
periods  by  way  of  penance,  46. 

Tikas,  sect  marks,  38. 

Tilaks,  sect  marks,  38. 

Tirthankaras,  Jain  saints,  149. 

Tobacco,  its  use  in  India,  14. 

Transmutation  of  metals,  practised 
by  sadhus,  59-61. 

Trifala,  sect  mark,  38. 

Tripundra,  sect  mark,  38. 

Trisanku,  introduced  into  heaven 
by  Visvamitra,  29. 

Trisula  (or  trident),  to  be  found 
amongst  Saivas,  43. 

Tulasi  (holy  basil)  used  for  rosaries, 
39. 


U 

Udasis,  Sikh  sect,  153,  194,  195. 
Urdhabahus,  sadhus  who  keep  their 

arms  uplifted,  46  ;  description  of 

one  of  these,  214-217. 
Urdhamukhi,  sadhus  who  hang  head 

downwards,  46. 
Urdhapundra,  sect  mark,  38. 


290 


INDEX 


Vadagalas,  sub -sect  of  the  Sri 
Vaishnavaa,  187. 

Vaishnavas  (worshippers  of  Vishnu), 
emblems  favoured  by  them,  43  ; 
various  forms  under  which  they 
worship  Vishnu,  109  ;  new  sect  of, 
founded  by  Ramanuja,  116;  six 
sects  named,   152. 

Vallabhacharya,  founds  a  sect  for 
the  worship  of  Krishna  as  Bala 
Gopala,  127. 

Vasishta,  conflict  with  Visvamitra, 
27-30. 

Vegetarianism  conducive  to  indo- 
lence and  apathy,  14. 

Vibuti  (sacred  ashes),  used  in  paint- 
ing sect  marks,  38. 

Virada,  destroyed  by  Rama  Chandra, 
22. 

Vishnu  Purana,  story  of  Dhruva, 
23-25. 

Visvamitra,  conflict  with  Vasishta, 
27-30. 


W 

Ward,  his  account  of  Indian  sadhus, 
100,  101. 


Watson    (William)    expresses    the 

sentiments  of  the  Orient,  281. 
Westminster     Aquarium,     sadhu's 

performances  at,  67,   184. 
Witchcraft,  its  position  in  Hinduism, 

63,  54. 
Woman's  cunning,  story  from  the 

Granth  of  Govind  Singh,  90,  91. 
Wonders  that  present-day  sadhus 

are  said  to  perform,  52-67. 


Yatis,  Jain  monks,  144-147. 

Yoga,  its  meaning,  172. 

Yoga  Vidya,  the  system  followed  by 
the  Yogis,  172  ;  as  explained  by 
Swami  Vivekananda,  180,  181  ; 
actual  results  of  the  system,  181, 
182. 

Yogaism  (the  doctrines  and  beliefs 
of  the  Yogis),  explanation  of, 
168-186. 

Yogis,  Saiva  sect,  152,  153  ;  com- 
mand obtained  over  nature  by, 
173,  174,  183,  184  ;  origin  of  the 
sect,  its  subdivisions  and  their 
peculiarities,  184-186 ;  a  tale  of 
Yogis  and  pious  women,  233-235  ; 
a  tale  of  Yogis  as  honoured  guests, 
238,  239. 


291 


Printed  hy 
MoRHisoN  &  GiBB  Limited 
Edivimrgh 


I 


Date  Due 


MAR  1  0  '% 


;ikji 


-Hi 


5^A- 


i^iu 


-h^ 


V  ^o 


Wi^  ^: 


'C?^ 


^JAtt 


1  8  2007 


s)- 


\      \ 


m  .i.  a 


APrr^^ 


Library  Bureau  Cat.  No.   1137 


I 


W^ELLS   BINDERY 
A:.TMAM,  MASS. 


-  d^  M    «^  ir»    a 


2W,50m 


m 


CLAPP 


5002  00140  6508 

Oman,  John  Campbell 

The  mystics,  ascetics,  and  saints  of  Ind 


BL  1239- 

1 

.  5  . 

Aa2  043 

1905 

Oman,  John 

Campbell 

,     1841- 

1911. 

1 

The  mystics,  asceti 

cs,  and 

saints 

of 

India 

m 


mm 


ij 


''Mil 

mm 


imn 


mmm 


