===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.114952.The-Bhakti-Sutras-Of-Narada_djvu.txt =====


BMAKTI Sl^TRAS OF ^ARADA 


miB 

lc5PIlA^AT0HY NOTES AND AN INTBODDCXION 
BT THE TRANSLATOR 


CBIHBLATBO BZ 

NANDAIiAti SINHA, MA, B^, 

Or inu Faomoiix Citil SiRricz, Buia* amp Okisba 


SECOND EDraON 


FUBLISSBP BT 

THE PaSWI OPHOE BH1JVA^B8VABI ABBAUA, BlHAStlBQABV ' 

Bllababa? 

1M7 



Pnmni? ct I. Is". Mark at inr C'nv Fjuss. Ati uivb\]?- 



PBBPAOB TO THE SECOND EDITION 


In ilna edition we liavo soppliod en authoritative account o£ilie tradi- 
tional Bhakti doctrino We havo also attempted to show numerona qnota- 
tiona from devotees of different olimea and sgos and pnrsning different foitbs, 
Uiat tho religion of Bhakti is a universal religion These quotations will also, 
It IS hoped, throw furthor light on man/ of the Shtnis o! Kuradu For these 
idditional notes we are wholly lodobtod to the Sri Bhft^a of HAm&nuja, its 
translation by Thibant in the Sacred Books of tho East Series, ** Leaves from 
tho Diary of a Hindu Devotoo** puhlishod by the Fapim*OiSco, Allahabad, 
and * The Mystios of Islaio ’ by Hr Beyoold A Nicholson 


S N 




INTBODUCTION 


There is n tradition as to the origin and authorstiip ot this short ticatiao 
O Srimad Bhd^tatamf Chaptera^l i and 5) Mnhurai Voda%’}fts’i yvsii 
staying in his hermitage of Badarihasrama One daj the celcstnl hermit 
KArada tamed up there in the coarse of bis nsnal Tranton rambles The great 
yyt a^ welcomed him with doe rites, and, on his taking scat, asked * Pro* 
phet of Gods I the sonl of man seeks to got free from iho hold of pleasure 
and pain and craves for deliverance from the bondage of tlio world But the 
path of Action (Karma) does not lead directly to the goal Knowledgof«/ffdna J 
of course, does nevertheless, without the leaven of Be\ otion, it can achioi o 
aery little in snbstanco Devotion (BhakttJ is the onh waj of attaining 
salvation nil the others have importance onl} in so far as they aro auxiliary 
to it Thereforo I humbly ask you to explain to me tho doctrine of Devotion 
Tho divine liArada at once nrvoyed the mind of ^ a and replied Great 

sago I you have come down on earth for the redemption of mankind \oiir 

present enquiry has ^beoo prompted desire alono B} your di<c]plo 

Jnimmi you ha^o aircad} in tho di*courscd upon tho 

problem of Action, and have yourself completed tho enquiry into tho problem 
of Knowledge in the Gttura A/fnidmsd And now you Iia^o taken up tho 
problem of Devotion il am going to explain it But its full explanation will 
be given by you in youpibrimod Shdffatatam which will bo of tho nature of a 
commentary upon your Brahma^dtms My <S»tros will be read as such jn 
explanation of yoar very short description of Demotion gnen in tho Vttara 
JUitudmtA 

So saying K&rada dolivorod a discourse on Devotion in 84 aphorisms 
the collection of whicli forms thfs^ short treatise, known as A drada DhakU* 
Sdtram 

The doctrine of Devotion, however, is as old as tho '^^edas w hero it has 
been revealed as the FaficliarAtra (Bkdgavata or ^dtiata) iantra “Tlio 
theory of ^a.Bhdgav<&at is that from Vftsudo\a wh^ is tho highost Brah 
man and the highest cause, there originates the individual sonl called Sankars 
aaa from Sankarsana the internal organ called Fradynmna , and from l^ad* 
ynmna tho principle of egoity called Aoiruddha ** ** W hat it teaohes iS that 
tho highest Brahman, [there called VAsudova, from kindngss to thcc(r devoted 



( w ) 

to it, voluntanly abides in a fouifold form, so as to icndor itseJf aecossiblo 
to Its devotees . . .That highest Brahman, called Vasudeva, having for its 
body the complete aggregate of the six qualities, divides itself in so far as it 
is either the ‘ Subtle ’ (Shkama), or ‘ division ’ (vyuha), or ‘ manifestation ’ 
(vibhava), and is attained in its fullness by the devotees who, according to 
their qualifications, do worship to it by means of work guided by know- 
ledge. ‘ From the worship of the Vibhava-aspoct one attains to the vyhha, 
and from the worship of the vyhha one attains to the ‘ Subtle’ called Vfisude- 
Y&yi.e.y the highest Biahman’ — such is their doctrine. By the ‘ vibhava ’ 
we have to undei stand the aggregate of beings such as Bfima, Krisna, etc , 
in whom the highest Being becomes manifest ; by the ‘ vyhlia ’ the fouifold 
arrangement or division of the highest Reality, ns Vasudeva, Sankarsana, 
Pradyumna, and Amruddha ; by the ‘ Subtle ’ the highest Brahman itself ; in* 
so far as it has for its body the mere aggi egate of the six qualities — as w'hich 
it is called ‘ Vfi.sudeva ” “ The Lord who is known from the Vodanta-toxts, 

t. e.y Vdsudeva, called there the highest Biahman — who. is antagonistic to all 
dvil, whose nature is of uniform excellence, who is an ocean, as it wore, ofc 
unlimited exalted qualities, such as infinite intolligonco, bliss, and so on, all 
whose puipose^oomo true — peiceiving that those devoted to him, according as 
they are differently placed in the font castes and tho'foui stages of life, .no 
intent on the diffeiont ends of life, viz religious observances, wealth, ploasuie, 
and final lelease, and recognising that the Vedas — ^which teach the truth about 
his own nature, his 'glorious manifestations, the means of lendenng him pio- 
pitiousand the fruits of such endeavour — aie difficult to fathom by all beings 
other than himself, whethei gods or men, since those Vedas aie divided into 
Rik, Yajus, SAman, and Athaivan ; and being animated* by infinite pity, tendei- 
ness, and magnanimity ; with a view to enable bis devotees to grasp the true 
meaning of the Vedas, himself composed the Panohaifitia-s'lstra ” (Sii Bh&sy.i 
of RSirndnuja, Thibaut’s translation, S. B E., vol. XLVIII, pp. 524- 
528). 

Narada is a typical bJiaUa or devotee, and m his aphorisms Tie has 
bieathed that enthusiasm of selfless devotion to God, which is all his own. 
Devotion is the highest sentiment that the human soul is capable of, and it 
is evident fiom the aphorisms that Nftrada has dealt with the subject from 
the point of view of sentiment alone. The SJiakti-Mimdmsd of Sfi>ndilya, 
on the othei hand, is, as its name implies, an enquiry into the philosophy of 
Devotion. Accordingly, the two treatises may be regaidod as companion 
pieces, supplementing each other. We give below a summary of their teach- 
ings on some of the principal points embraced by the theme of Devotion. 


( m ) 

Toe Doctwhb or Devotio'T 
(i) lt» phloaopheal bant 

Jira or the Embodied Self and Brabman or the Fare iSoIf are t\TO ditf« 
tinoi reaUiios In the phenomenal world, aa in the case of ordinary morial^i 
they stand apart from each other Fbilosophy seeks to vindicate their exis- 
tence and to aaoortam the nature and attnbntes of each, while Fehgion seeks 
to find ont the wa^ for the Jlva s retnrn to Brahman Systems of thought 
and religion diEEer according os they take different views of the Jiva and Brah- 
man or of their relation to each other Thus the sage K&syapa thinks that 
the Jlva IS absolutely dissimilar to Brahman and that Brahman is higher than 
tho Jiva (S * 29) According to the great Vy&sa, on the other hand, the 
notions of the Jiva and brahman are erroneous, and there is but one reality 
VIZ , the Self in the form of pure consciousness (Brabma-Sfitra IV i 3 > 

30} ^andilya rejects both these extreme theories, and takes the middle coarse, 
thereby reconciling the two to a certain extent His theory is that the Jiva 
and Brahman are two distinct realities, bnt that, nuder the aspect of eternity, 
tho Jiva possesses tho same nature os Brahman, which, however does not be- 
long to it, in a developed form,* in the phenomenal world, in other words, that 
it is capable of attaining to, that is to say, returning to Brahma-Bh&vn or the 
state of Brahman (S 31} He gives reasons for fais theory, and refers to 
aatnoriiative texts, (such as Chhdndogifa Upamtaty Adhpdya III, Khanda 14, 
TaUimya Samkitdt VII i 10 2, TaUUi^tfa Aranyaha, III 11 4, Tatiltrlya 
Upanuat iii 1, the great saying ** Thou art That, ’ ffttd XV 7, etc }, in 
support of it It may be*objected that tho above theory involves a contradic- 
tion m thought, inasmuch as tho ideas of being the Creator of the World, and 
tho like, and of not bemg so are altogether different To this Bftndilya replies 
that there is no such oontradiotion hero, in tho same way as there is not any 
in the act of rocognitien although there too tho objeot present to the senses 
IS different from the objtet recalled Nor does it follow from this theory that 
Brahman also IS subject to the linutations and sufforings peculiar to the Jiva, 
for tho very pomi of this theory is that limitations and sufferings are mere 
accidents and in no way appertain to the nature ofihe Self (S 33} This 
does not, however, apply to tho lordliness of Brahman oharaotensod as the 
Creator, oto , for such lordliness belongs to its very essence (S 34} Ko- 
whoro in the Gratis the lordliness of Brahman bos been denied, while it follows 
from the similarity of na ture hoiweon the Jiva and Brahman that limitations 

ralsn Is tlu apboxlimi of SKD^Uyti tail B to thnt ot Natada, trUla thi Sgatea gtra 
Ihi aonbcii o! the aibatltmti 



( iv ) 


#ncl suffieiiugs aie accidents in the life of the Jiva (S 35). An objectoi may 
aigue that a time may come when, after the dissolution, one by one, of finite 
intellects (buddhi), all the Jivas will return into the state of Brahman, and 
when, in consequence, there will be no further occasion for the exercise of 
lordliness on the part of Brahman, so that lordliness as such cannot bo a per- 
manent and essential attribute of Brahman To this S&ndilya replie sthat no 
such time can possibly arrive, inasmuch as finite intellects, the limiting adjuncts 
of the Jivas, are infinite in number, and creation accordingly is an eternal 
process (S. 36). It may be urged, again, that Brahman being the material 
cause of the universe, it lacks the characteristic of immutability But this la 
not the case It is Prakriti, Mayfl, (Plato’s Matter), which is really the 

material cause of the universe, while the causality of Brahman operates 
* ^ 

through the medium of Prakriti (S 37). Brahman is Pure Existence, Prakriti 

I 

IS its Energy Brahman does- not become transformed under the influence 
of Prakriti, as a magician is not transformed by his own magic. Hence the 
immutability of Brahman remains unimpaired The words of the Irfruti, which 
declare the world to be situated in Brahman, have been used figuratively, as 
a person' seated on a chair within a room, maybe said to bo seated in the 
room as well as on the chair (S 38 ) Both Brahman and Prakriti are indis- 
pensable, mutually dependent, causes of the universe (S. 39) That which 
knows IS Brahman, that which is known is Prakriti, and there is no middle 
term between them (S. 40.) They are, therefore, eternally related. And 
because it is the Energy of Brahman, Prakriti cannot be unreal (S. 41.) 

The Jivas emanate from Brahman, and participate in its existence. This 
emanation takes place by means of its will to be and^its will to do, and is 
guided by its intelligence (S 87 and 88 ) Having, thus, created beings of 
various grades, high and low, it composed the Vedas for then welfare (S. 89 
and 90 ) And according to BadaiSiyana (ride Ved&nta Shtras, I. i 2), it 
dispenses also the consequences of actions to the Jivas (S 91.) Dissolution 
consists in the relapse of ^these minor entities into the Supreme Being ^S "92.) 

Now, ultimately there is but one Self, and not many Plurality of 
Selves is a phenomenon due to the association of upddkts, adjuncts or external 
limitations just as the phenomenon of plurality of suns may be produced by 
means of the application of a* number of mirrors (S. 93 ) It cannot be 
argued that, because there exists a difference of status, that is, because some 
Jivas attain Release, while others remain in the state of bondage, theref oro 
the Jivas must be absolutely dissimilar to one atuother, each possessing m- 
depondont principles and spheres of intelligence and activity , for, in that 



( T ) 

cas 0 » ibero can bo no rokiionsfaip of ibo 8Cor and tbo object seen botwcon iho 
Snpromo Lord and tbo Jiras, and bonco it ironld follow that oniuipotenco 
and offlniscienco do not belong to Him and that Ho is op])ro1icns2b]o b^ fintto 
intelligonecs Iiko any other object of cogntfton (S 94) Hosidost the circnm* 
stances which apparently difforentiato tbo Solf on tbo phenomenal pinnci 
namely, individual oogfiitions, desires, foohngs, volitions cfo , aro not essential 
attributes of tbo Self, bat have thoir origin olsowhoro, and nro merely reflected 
iq it (1^ 95) All the change^ differentiation, that tlio Self nndergoos, is its ap* 
pearanee on, and disappearance from, the field of pbonomonal csistcnco, where 
it comes into association with activity and its conseqnonco (S^lOO) 

Aiuku, Holeaso, then means the return of tbo ^nmsdrl Jira, re, Jira 
as undergoing rovolutions of births and daiths m ovor-clnnging forms of 
existences, into tbo state Of Hrahmin, tlio Pure Solf, charactorisod ns pore 
existence, jinro eonscionsnoss, and pare bliss The cause of Samidra or 
worldly existence is not want 'o! Knowlodgo The argnmont that like tbo 
erroneons apprehension of a snake in a piece of rope, this world nUo has no 
foundation in realitj I IS not ralid For, tn tbo first pheo, thcro is no adequate 
reason in tavonr of tlio supposition , on tlio other hand, wore (lio world a croa> 
tion of tbo imagination, tbo inference of God as the Canso of the world would 
&11 to tlio ground Hor Ins BildarAjana, m any of his npbonsms, (tho Ve> 
dftnta Sfitras), taught tho nnroahty of tlio world , on tbo contrary by ;show 
mg tbo nnrcalUy of tho droam-crcation, lio has csta blishcd (lio rcnlity of tho 
creation of the waking state, and thereby disproved tho theory that tbo world js 
the imagination of ignorance “Wo ndmit, * *a}s in tho ^ri 

Bhdsyaf “ that release consists only m tho eossstion of Noscionco, and tliat 
this cessation rosnltsXrom the knowlodgo of Brahmin Bnt n distinction his 
hero to bo made regarding tho nature of this krowlod„o which ilio Vodtlnta 
teats aim at onjoming for tho purpose of putting an end to Nosoicnco Is it 
merely tlie knowlodgo of tho sonso of sontontos which originates from the 
sentences ? or is it knowledge in the form of moditition (npAsann) which has 
tho knowlodgo jnst referred to as its antecedent f • • • • • Kenco wo 
conelnde tliat the knowlodgo which tho VodAotu texts aim at monlcating is 
a knowlodgo other than the mere know ledge of tho sense of sontoncos 
and denoted by *dhydni*, ^upAsanfi* (i e meditation), and similar 
terms • • * » • 

“ Meditation ’ moans steady vomemboranoo i s , a continuity of steady 
remembrance, nnintorruptod like the flow of oil , in agroemont with tho scrip 
tnral passage which declares steady romomborance to bo (he moans of release, 
on the attainment of rememberanco nil Uio ties are loosened * (Chb Up Vil 
56 5 ) 



( Vi ) 

“ Such remembrance has been declared to be o£ the character of ‘ see- 
ing’, and this character of seeing consists in its possessing the character of 
immediate presentation (pratyaksatS«). ' With reference to remembrance, 
vrhich thus acquires the character of immediate presentation and is the means 
of final release, scripture makes a f uther determination, viz.^ in the passage Ka. 
Up. II, 23. ‘That Self cannot be gained by the study of the Veda (“re- 
flection”), nor by thought (“ meditation ”), nor by much hearing. Whom the 
Self chooses, by him it may be gained ; to him the Self reveals its being.’ 
This text says at first that mere heating, leflection, and meditation do not suffice 
to gain the Self, and then declares, ‘ Whom the Self chooses, by him it may 
be gained. ’ Now a ‘ chosen ’ one means a most beloved person j the relation 
being that he by whom that Self is held most dear is most dear to the Self. 
That the lord (bhagvfi>n) himself endeavours that this most beloved person 
should gain the Self, he himself declares in the following words, ‘To those 
who are constantly devoted and worship with love I give that knowledge 
by which they reach me, (Bha Gi.X, 10), and ‘ To him who has knowledge 
I am dear above all things, and he is dear to mo ’ (VII, 17). Hence, he who 
possesses rememberance, marked by the character of immediate presentation 
(S&kaSitk&ra)} and which itself is dear above all things, since the object 
remembered is such j ha, we say, is chosen by the'highest Self, and by him the" 
highest Self is gained. Steady rememberance of this kind is designated by 
the word “ devotion (bhkati) ; for this teim has the same meaning as upfisan& 
(meditation).” (Thibaut’s tianslation, S. B. E., vol. XL VIII, pp. 11 
to 16). 


The cause of Samsdra accordingly is want of Devotion (S^ 98 j. For, 

the file of Devotion burns up the “ I ” within the Self, i.e., the sense of sepa- 
rate personality, "which is the diieot cause of worldly existence, and the Jiva 
attains to a'state of perfect contentment, entire self-forgetfulness, and absolute 
identification Of itself with Brahman ; wheieas want of Devotion implies the ' 
continuance of Ahamkdra, Egoity, the principle of individual separateness and 

agentship in the performance of acts for the leali ation of desired ends, and 
consequently the statu of feelings, desires, volitions, atti action and repulsion, 
pleasure and pain, and dharma and adkai’ina, i, e , merits and demerits, 
which necessarily lead to re-birth That being so, the path of MuUi 
Self-realizalion, Return of the jiva into the state of Brahman, lies 
through single-hearted Devotion, inasmuch as Devotion frees the Jiva, for 
ever, from the external limitation of the finite intellect which is a product of 
Prakriti (S. 96), Freedom from the limitation of the finite intellect, again, 



( «i ) 

lias no nodessaiy connootioa with freedom from the limiidtion of the pbyai- 
cal organism Snocoss in tho cnltaro of Perotion may bo attained even 
dnnng tho continnonce of Iifo on oarthi and in snch coses tho dostmod 
period of mortal osistenoo has to be completed before 6nal liberation 
can be enjoyed The Jlvaa which attain this state, aro called Jivan’muktat 
tty living, yet released It is their Adntlamy i i*t the potential after* 
effects of acts volantarily performed by them, which stands in the way of 
their immediate release It cannot be contended that similarly thoir other 
Adnttas also, wherein they ha\c reserved for them other oxporionoes of 
worldly oxistenco, mast go on prodncing their effects, so that there con 
be no Release by means of Do\otion , for, with tho disappoarance of Admtam 
determining length of lifo, and of tho finite mtolleot, tho vory foundation of 
those other experiences are taken away from boncatli them, inasmuch os 
experience of passing state is not an attribnto of tho Self, bnt is merolj 
reflected m it from tho flmto intellect (8 97) 

An eni^airy into tho Doctrine of Demotion may be, tboroforo, profltobly 
undertaken (S 1, N 1 ) 

(ii ) Who an adhtkdnt, • e , entitkdy to the Path of J?erotu>n 

Jtldnay Knowledge of tho troth about tho Self and the Kot-Self, and 
Kamtay religions performances, r-y , sacrifices, are not meant for all For 
example, females and Sfldras are oxcladod from tho stndy of tho Vedas ^Bnt 
no spoh restriction exists m tho case of Devotion Tho Path of Devotion 
constsU of a gradation of stops Tho dosiro Cor Aluktiy for release from the coil 
of mortality, and tho suffering attending it, » its starting pomt, and that 
which 19 called Pard BhattT, i e , Higher Devotion, is its goal , for, it is 
Pard Bhahti that immediately leads to hluktt {4 B4) And subsidiary to 
Pard Bhaktiy EkdntOrhhdoay whole-lioarted dovotion, tboro oro various other 
forms of devotional states, oighty-ono in number (vide page siii poetry and activities, 
which in their comprehensiveness reach from the highest to tho lowost of hnman 
beings* Hence females, Sfidnis, Chandftlas, and tho Hko, as well as those who 
are better sitnatod than they, are equally competent to follow tho Path of 
Devotion provided only they have awakened to the sooao of their state as 
sinners and snlferorSi and oonsequently have come to possess an all-absorbing 
desire for release from the painful revolutions of births and deaths Artfmuib> 
gutvay Desire for Release, is the mmimnm qualification which entitles one to 
the Fath of Devotion (1$ 78, 79, 80, 81, 83. K 33, 73} 



Till ) 

* (Hi). The Object of Devotion. 

People worship minor deities, such as Indra and others, for the realization 
of particular objects of desire, e,g.^ learning, prosperity, relief from pain, etc., 
and these deities, being so worshipped, giant the piaycrs of their worshippers. 
Such worship is an act of Devotion But the Devotion that is manifested in 

these cases, is of a lower kind. It is called A-/)ard, the lowci, oi Gaum, the 
secondary, form of Devotion, as distinguished from ivhat is called Pard, the 
highei, or Mukhyd, the primary, form of Devotion ; for, not only is MuUt, 
Release characterised as return into the state of Biahman, not attainable by 
A~^ard Bhakti, but it also fails to bring abiding peace to the soul, whereas, 
while "Multi is the handmaid of Pard Bhakti, the lattei also produces perfect 
peace of mind and constant enjoyment of pure bliss (N. 59, GO, Gl). It has 
accordingly been taught that the Almighty alone should bo worshipped, always 
with the whole heart, and with implicit faith (N. 80), and that, being invoked. 
He at once mainfests Himself, and fills His devotees with His influence (N. 81). 

The object of Pard Bhakti, then, is Ikvara (S. 2, N. 2), the Supremo Lord, 
Who is the oiigin and life of all created things, towards Whom all creation 
moves, and in whom every thing finally disappears (Taittiriya Upanisat, III. i. 
1), that 13 , Sagunit Brahman, *. e., the Personal Grod, in other words. Brahman 
manifesting its gunas or attributes’as the Creator and Controller of the Cosmic 
System, as distinguished from A^ir^wna-Brahman, i, e., the Impersonal God, in 
other words, Biahman with its attributes inxi quiescent state ; foi, evidently 
Nirguna Brahman can by no means become an object of worship and devotion. 
But, still, another difi&culty here presents itself. Even Saguna Brahman, as 
such, is fai above the power of compi ehensiou of jOrdmary mortals ; how then, are 
they to cultivate devotion towards Him ? It is by worshipping Him first in 

His sensible forms, t. e., as mainfested m Creation, for He is the Virdt-Atmd, 
the Soul of this giand and gloiipus system of the Universe, Visva Rttpa, of 
Whom the Universe is the outward form. For, as explained by R§.mfi>nnja 
in the Srx Bhasya, the highest Brahman called V&sudeva, from kindness to 
those devoted to it, voluntarily abides in a fourfold form (t. e. Vfisudeva 
Samkarsana, Piadyumua^ and Aniiuddha), so as to render itself accessible to its 
devotees Accordingly ^^ndilya teaches that the Woild and the Object of 
Worship are not two different things, inasmuch as He is the inner essence, 
the very Self, of all things (S'. 85) This, however, [does not neces- 
sarily involve pantheism m its bad sense , for while God is immanent in the 
Woild, He at the same time also transcends it, as Loid Krisna declares in the 
Gitd (A. 42) . « I stand, pervading this entire universe by a part of Me.” 



( tx ) 

Bnt the caster and more atlraeiiva form of the srorsliip of Satjuna Bmbntaa 
IS iror«Iiip of Uim m Uis IncamiUons ntaj* lie cuUivaled loimrils 

tlio Incamalion also dC) An ** Jncirmlion of Bralimin ” hoverer, is not 
a mere figment of the iniigmntion , for^ the f^onl Ilim«e!f ticclares in the Gttu 
( 1 \ 9}| that lie undergoes hirih and aetUit} in the midst of morlals lint 
His hirllt IS a dinno event, being doe soleljr lo His ovrn ] nerg> 48) Sajs 
the Ixird also * Allhoogh 1 am tlie Unborn, and of immnfabie estenoe, 
alihongh I am (bo fiord of the created betnf^s, I enter Into Mf i’mfn/i,-«‘put 
fortli ^Ijr rnergf,*— and come into (finite) esisleiiee from ago to age * (tfitii, 
t\ C) fncamitioii, again I* enliretjr an act of eompassion on Jits part , and 
compa«*ion is a pure nnselfiih attrihnte in ilim (b V)) P or, tho purpose 
of divine incamition is thus declared in the i Icrcate Myself, O/IAdmta, 
svhenever then {s decline of Dharmn or ltighteon«ne<s and rtso of A^Dharma 
or unrightcoufoess ] or the protection of the strluoitf and for the desirnctlon 
of (ho wiehed, and for th'* purj>o«e of tifOCstaUidmient of Dharmdt I como into 
(finite) oxutenco, from ttg«* to age, bv m^tns of My MAyA ** (l\ 7 and 6 ) 
Ineamations shonld he, however, diillngmshel from (ho riMdfi or glories of 
thel^rd All excellences, / o*, of (rath, lieautjr, love power, greatness, etof 
srhercsTr found, arc glories of the l^onl and an account of these glories if 
given in (ho GM, \, 19 IJ Hat Vuf/i will not rHuIl from the srorship 
of ony of these gloncs (S* fiO and 51) It may l»o urged Hint srhercas \ Asu* 
dova, Kp'nn, is also enumenifc^l in the aliovo {lortion of (he G(til as a riAAd/i or 
glory of tho Lord, wotihip of Uhn therefore, will got bring about JIfuIti , hut 
tins is pot the c 3 «o, os thero is snflicient esidence tliat \ AsudevA a is a mere 
form, sriitle Kflma Is (ho Lord HnnseU (&/ 02 and 53) The inelusiou ot 
VAsudeva amongst tho vtbhxUit is intended lo show that lie is tho greatest 
amongst tho Krtsms 54} Demotion to tho I«ord Kpsm vrill, therefore, 
lead to Helea«o So also ssiU do Demotion to tho other svell hnowii Inearna* 
tions in tho forms of Ktisiinlia, VAinana, ItAma, Buddha, etc (N 00) 

(ir) T/i< CuUurf 0 / Devotion 

According to some, jRana or hnosWedgo is mstrumontal in tho production 
of Bhalli (N 28), vrliHo others say that tliey arc mutually dependent (N 29) 
But tlio toaohing of KArada Is that BInkti is tho fruit or result ot Itself 
(V 30 ) Noserlheless (hero are soscnl nuxiliar} causosfoit Tims, Bhikti 
arises from tho giving up of tho objects ot tho senses and of nitnohnient to 
them (N 35), from constant vrornhip (N 3C) from listening ( 0 , and singing, 
tho glories of the Lorji in the assomllies of men (Iso 37) lint 'prmoipally 


( X ) 

it is obtained through the kindness o£ the groat ones, i.e., the succossEul devd 
tees, or through the touch oE divine compassion (N. 38). Companionship oE 
the great, however, is difficult to obtain (N. 39). It can bo obtained only 
thiough the mercy oE God (N. 40), .inasmuch as there is no difference 
between God and His good men (N. 41). Evil company should bo forsaken 
by all means (N. 42), as it is the cause oE lust, losentmcnt, bo^\ilderment, 
lapse of memory, loss o£ understanding, loss oE everything (N. 44). These evil 
tendencies, oidinarily playing in ripples under the breeze oE May it, behave like 
the sea by association with the whiilwind oE evil company (N. 45). Who 
crosses over Mfly&? It is he who avoids ovil companj*, attends upon men oE 
large hearts, and becomes selfless (N. 46),— who retires into solitude, roots 
out all wordly attachments, does not yield to the influences oE the three gunas 
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, and gives up both acquisition and pieservation 
(N. 47),— who renounces the results oE his action, consecrates all action 
to God, and thereby rises above the influence oE contraries such as 
pleasure and pain, heat and cold (N. 48), — who puls aside the Vedas also, 
and acquires pure, uninterrupted attachment to the Lord (N. 49). He not 
only himselE crosses over M&yd, but also helps others to cross over their M&yfi,, 
(N. 50). The aspirant should not listen to talks about women, wealth, and 
the conduct oE atheists ^(N. 63). He should give up egotism, pride, etc. (N. 
64.) Having consecrated all conduct to the Lord, ho should make Him the 
object oE his lust, resentment, pride, etc, (N. 65). Argumentation about 
God and about devotion to Him must not bo undertaken (N. 74), as there is 

room for error and uncertainty in it (N. 75). BhaUi SAstray Teachings on 
Devotion, should be studied intelligently, and observances enjoined therein 
should be perEoimed (N. 76). Much oE our time, short as it is, is taken up 
with the experiences oE pleasure, pain, desire, gain, and the like ; not a single 
moment even oE the little that is leEt, which, as it weie, waits Eor our atten- 
tion to them, should be passed in vain "(N. 77). Harmlessness, truthEulness, 
purity, kindness, Eaith, and other excellences oE chaiacter should be obseived 
(N. 78) And after all the Lord alone should be worshipped at all times 
with the whole heart and m 'a EaithEul spirit (N. 79). Foi, being invoked. 
He at once reveals HimselE, and fills His devotees with His influence (N. 80) 
as, with Him, it is Bhakti, that carries the gieatest Weight (N. 81). 

Now, Pard-Bhakti, Parama Pretna, Supreme Love, is the primary 
object to which the devotee aspires There- aie eighty-one minor forms of 

devotion which lead up to it. They are collectively called Gcium-Bliakti or 
^eepndary Devotion. The question may arise whether these lower stages of 



( *1 ) 

Borotion ^aro to bo cnlinatcd simtiltAnconslj, succo«m«o 1}, or nUornatiroly 
To this S&ndilya gncs tlio reply (liai there is no hard and fast rnlo for tfao 
application of these snbsidiar) means, but that their application depends npon 
^ the requirements of each particular case, like the use of vanoos materials in 
tho constmoiion and repair of a bnildtog (6 62) , for every ono of them is 
capable of pleasing tho LonI (f$ 03), and thorcli^ leading to PanUBhakti 

Wo trace here, m broad oullino, tho progress of a ^ni/dn^Jiva towards 
itvlii along tho Bitli of BhalU Hxperieiico of pleasure and pain is a funch- 
mental fact of human existence It falls to tho lotofosoiy mortal Hut it 
IS the fortunate fow who can roalizo the significaneo of it If tho Jtra has 
acquired Sutnta or merits in Ins pro\ions hirtli and if he is discriminatno, 
tho cxporienco of pleasure atfd pain in unending alternation will produce a 
feeling of dissatisfaction and ilisgust In him and will awaken him to the utter 
helplessness of his sitnation Thereafter will dawn in him iira^dhd, I aitli, 
namely, the belief that (hero is a moral Goicrnor of tho U orld, who rules tho 
destinies of tho divas necording to immntablo laws Hero, for tho Hrst time, 
IS made differentiation between the Iteraund tho Uerc-after Tliisis the mo- 
ment of tbohurtli of Ueltgion Now theJtvn a\oids waste of cnerg} m useless, 
though, it may lie, harmless, pursuits ^o#ditra-/ydya,) and coniines his aeti\;* 
ties wiUiin the code of moralitj (SHtlra') which rognlutos conduct by means 
of which tho Sapremo Good ma) ho ntUiined Gradually ho forbears more 
and more from doing prohihiteil acts, and ()a}s o\er-iiiorcasing attention to 
the performance of nets prescribed At tho same timo ho learns to put out 
Abhtndna or Self-assumption, to perform nets not for tho sake of the 

fruits nhich they may produce, but in n spirit of deletion to duty Tims 
JCarma’-ya^at the Path of Action, ends in tho purification of tho mind of 
Abhmdna Tins may ho raid to l>o the first stage of dosolional solf-cuUnro 
Tho second stage begins with tho fcelmg of tho necessity of some Sadbana 
or means of Iteleaso Such a means can bo found in tho company of Sddhut 
or pious men Tho nsjiirant, therefore, should keep company with tho Sddhus 
and render service unto them SddkuSerdt to sor\o pious men, is (ho first 
act of worship, wherein hos tho Seed orDivinoLa\o Companionship of tho 
SSdhus nnd Sddhu Sevd will produce a httlo indifforonoo to w orldly objects, 
and atiacbmont to tho things of the othor world Next will follow occi 
sional contemplation mixed with extraneous tliougliis Tins impurity of ox- 
treneons thoughts is duo to what is called Anartha or o>ils Anartha is 
four fold, according as it arises from (1) dutknta, domorits, (2) suibito, 
merits, (3) ajparddha, failings or faults, and (4) bhaku, doiotion Tlioy aro 
called anartha or evils, becaqso they cause distractioQ Aparddha^ faulty 



( Xli ) 

may bo o£ leu kinds; (a) to ‘•peak omI of Iho Vai^naxos, (h) to trrat Hivn 
and Visnu as different doilio;>, (c) to look upon Ibo Onrn, religious prec^p- 
‘tor, as an ordinary moila', (d) to di'^parago the codes of inorahl), 

(e) to regard the powers attributed to the singing of the nauu^of (ho Lord 
as mere puffs, Cfj to put wiong oi far-fetohed construction upon the mmo 
of the Lord, (ff) to do sinful acta thinking that the pov.cr of the iiorno 'vdl 
save the sinner, (h) to treat the name a*' of Cfjiml polency with any other 
virtuous act, (i) to teach the* name to unboHover*', and ty) to learn (ho power 
of the name and yet not to be attracted to it. Aptiddhn* ari'^ing from 
hhahli aie such as the desire for worldly gum, reputation and the Itl'.c, which 
may be easily acquiicd through do\otion. All this impurity will be, liow- 
ever, washed away by Judna-Toja^ Uollcction upon the Kelt or U^'ilt/alion 
of the Self in Thought, listening to, and singing, the name-, and achievements, 
(Lilfi,) of the Lord, and other moans such as mentioned above And the result 
will bo growing steadiness of contemplation, and constancy in worship. Cons- 
tancy m w’oisbip will give rise to or fooling of enjoyment, or in- 

• • A 

telloctual relish, of the life of devotion, and Ritchi will bo followed b^ AfaUi or 
attachment and consequent depth of contemplation. may bo induced 

either by the peicoption of aisvarya or the majesty ami loidhncsa of God, or b^ tlie 
perception of mddhurya or the giaco and beauty of ‘God. The former is called 
^una-(attribulo) «id/i(itmya-(inajcsty) dialli (nttacbmcnl), and the latter is 
called n'l/Jrt-(grace and beauty) dsaUi (attachment). These aic followed by 
pdjd-dsaUi or attachment to woiship. In those forms of attachment the 
devotee is possessed with the sentiment of awe and wonder, and stands, as it 
were, at some distance from the Lord, feeling his own insignilicanco and sinful- 
ness on the one hand, and the majesty and holiness of the Lord on tlio other. 
But the influence of Love is at work, and, after the intermedia to stage- of 
smarana-dsaUi or atlacliinoiit in the form of constantly rccurriug thinking 
about tiio Lord, thoio succeeds attachment in the foiins of closer and clusci 
personal relationship The first of them to evolve is dd.Nya-(sorvico) usukti 
(attachment) The devotee becomes attached in icndoiing soivico lb the Lord, 
as a servant does to bis master JDdsya-dsaUi evolves into A«A/<ya-(Eriondsliip) 
dsp-lti 'attachment). The dcv'otec becomes attached to the Loid, as is one to 
one*s friend Sakhja-dsakti ovolv'es into o(tf.<;rt/y«-(parenlal love) dsciLti 
(attachment). The devotee becomes attached to the Lord, as is a father to his 
son. And vdtsalya-dsakti evolves into /ttLi/ft-(vvifo) dsakti (attachment). The 
devotee becomes attached to the Loid, as is a faithful wife to hoi husband. 
But the personal element also has to be dropped before the next higher ."tago 
can be reached ; and,^ thus, the fulfilment of kdntd-dsakti, whether it bo con- 
versant about the aisvarya oi the mddhurya of the Lord, is in dtma-(self) 



( 'Em ) 

Hivedana (dedication), dsaKU (attachment), when the clerotoe sacrifices himselt 
to the Lord, completely identifies hia mil with His will loses bis separaio 
oxistenco m the wider oxisieuco o£ the Lord Thereafter he attains to the 
state of tanmayo^absorption m Him) dtaUt (attachment) that is of absolnte 
self forgetfulness Tins is called bhdvCi trance, samddht, deep meditation, 
wherein thero takes place manifestation of the Supremo Being Tins is the 
sprontmg stage of dirlne love Bkdva tlien grows into mdhd hhdvctt tbo higher 
trance which is the state of paiitmo^exiremo) eiraAa*(separation) diaktt*- 
(attachment) As in the case of true lovers daring separation, so hero also tho 
devotee becomes mad after God, realises His presence witlnn himself as well 
as outside him, and a only lives, moves and has his being m Him This is 
pamma-pivma, the consummation of Lovo Horoby the knot of tho heart 
fhnda^a-grantht)^ which hinds tho Jlva to the Samidrat is cut asunder, nil 
donbt is set nt rest, and itarma, the canso of ro-birth, is exhausted Thus the 
Jlvn overcomes MAyd, nad obtains Boleasc If it happens during lifo, ho is 
called jimn^muKUa^ Itvmg yet released if after death, ho is then called udeha^ 
mukla, disembodied and released 

(vy^The Fonm and Sxpratstons o/BfViftton 

Devotion is indicated by (a) smamdn'Xt honour, ns in tbo caso of Arjuna, 
(&) va/tumdran, exaltation as in tho oaso of Iks> Aku ( \ nsimha Pardna^ XXV 
22) (c) prUiy pleasure, as in tho case of Viduru (^Mahdbhdratat Udgotja Paroa 
riX:\XIX 24) (d) rira/m, (pangs oQ separation os in tho oaso of tho Gopis 
(Vitnu Purdnat V xviii 17) (e) itaruTicAilitird, dismohnation to others, 
as m the case of Upamanjn (MaJwbhdralaf Anvaasana-Parva, XIV 18C), 
(/) maJamd»khifdlh glorification as m the caso of Yama (Vtsnu Purdnu,!!! 
vn 10,) (ff) tadartha prdna athdua^ living for Him, as in the caso of HnnumAn 
(JRdmdyanaf Uttara-kdnda GVIl 31) (A) tadi^atd tbo behot that ororything 
belongs to Him, as in tho caso of D|xiriobara Vasu (Alahd Ikdrata, iSdnti- 
Parm Chapters 336 and 337), (0 aaroa'4'id-^hdva, the consciousness that 
Ho is immanent in all things, as m the case of PrablAda (Vttnu Purdna 
I xix 5) (j) a-prdtddlifa non-opposition, as in tho case of BhUma (Mahd- 
hhdrata Bhama-Parvat LIX 97), and tbo hko (S 44, N 19), such as ardour 
in worship, and in constant talk about Him (N 16, 17, 18) 

Before we proceed to describe tho various forms of Dovotion, wo should 
better explain the statement wo have made above namely that there are eighty 
one vanoti os of it And for this purpose wo mako fho follomng quotation 
from the gloss of Aehdrya Sndhara on tho aSrimud Bfidgavatamt HI xxix 



( xiv ) 

8 9 10, 11 ; “ idinasa, and tbo oilier (vh., rdjasa and <tdflvilo) formo 

‘o£ devotion contain three varieties each, o£ Mhich superiority belongs to each 
succeeding one. Accordingly krCf,vana (listening to talks and songs about the 
Lord), kirtana^ singing songs about Him, etc. wc., smarana, (constantly thinking 
about Him,) pdda-sevana, (doing homage to Hun) arcliana, (worshipping Him), 
vandana, (making obeisance to Him), ddvja, (rendering service unto Him;, 
Sakhya, (behaving like a friend towards Him), and dtmanivedana, (dedicating one’s 
self to Him), every one of them contains nine varieties. So that samna-fdtaUi 
{vide below) becomes oighty-one-fold Wheieas wir^rKna-&/ta/.b {vide below) is ot 
one kind only,” 

Now, the means of obtaining Release is the ammlana, pursuit, of the 

Para-Tattva, Supreme Reality, Sri-Krisna, the Lord, and Ho may be pursued 

• • • 

from various motives. For example, addressing Yudhis{,hira, Ntlrada «;ays: 
“By fixing their minds on Isvara, through love, through hate, tin ough fear, 
through friendship, as by devotion, and thereby av^oiding their sms, many have 
found access to Him ; the Gopis through love, Kainsa through fear, Sisupaki 
and other rulers of men through hate, the Vrisnis through relationship, you 
(i.e., Yudhisfhira), 0 great one, through fiiendship, wo by devotion.” (Vide 
Srimad-Bhdgavatam, VII. i. 29, 30). It is also stated in ibid. 26, ‘‘My (i e , 
N§,rada’s) fiiin belief is that a mortal cannot attain tan-matiatd, absorption 
into Him, the sense of His over-bearing presence everywhere, transformation 
into Him in thought, so easily by the,piactice of devotion as by peisev'oranco 
in hostility (towards Him)” Broadly speaking, therefore, it may bo said that 
the Supreme Reality may bo puisued either as an object of love or as an 
object of hatred, the end in view being the same in both, viz , kena api updgena 
manah Krisne nivesayet^^ that is, to set the mind firmly on Krisna by what- 
ever means {ibid. 31). 

The loving pursuit of the Supreme Reality results, at its next moment, in 
the generation of hhdva, sentiment, by means of kriyd, the performance of per - 
scribed acts. This bhdva and this kriyd are the rudiments of Bhakti. At its 
origin Bhakti, except in very rare cases, is sagund, modified, sopddhi, mixed, 
and it gradually evolves into the nirguna nirupddld form, i.e., the form of 
Bhakti unmodified pure and colourless, which is the immediate cause of 
Release Sopadhi Bhakti, again, is either sakdma, containing within it desire 
for objects other than the pleasure of the Lord, or niskdma motiveless. Saldma 
Bhakti is also called gunidilidta, or secondary, because in it karma^ religious 
performances, jfidnai knowledge, and the piactice of yoga are the principal 


( « ) 

elomonis winie hhalti la morcljr aiibsidiiry to thorn Its rcsalis oro siddht, 
success that is, success in religious performances, tbo dorolopment of 
knowledge, and the practice of yoga^ and hkaktu cnjojment, that is, of heaven 
and the like. It becomes throe fold according as it is cultivated b^ dr/a, tho 
afflicted, jtjRdm the laquiaUlvet or artAa-arlhti the needful And each of 
these three kinds is farther subdn ided as idZ/nXi, white, rdjast, red, and tdmaai 
black according as the principles of sattea tajat and /amas, or illnmina* 
tion, attraction, and ignorance are dominant m them (C/ GiUl, di XVIQ 
^^ttldtna Bbakti is also called pradhdni bhutat or primary, beoaoso m it bhaltt 
IS the principal olomont, althongh it is intermixed with Xarma,^/Idna, oryo^a 
Only the wise are competent for tlie cultivation of it fC/ t?i/d, VII 16} 
Bhakti, associated nith religions performances, consists in larma^ 
haranay performance of duties, and p/iala*arpana, dedication of tbo consequences 
thereof to God This is larma-yeya, the Path of Action, tho result of which 
IS CAt//aittddAt, purfflcatioq of tho mind It ts called dropa ttddhd hkakti, , 
hkakti by attribution, masmuch as purification of mind being also producible 
by 6Aal/t, larma is hero attributed os hhallt By moans of purification of 
mmd it loads to the growth of )Rdna mis^ and yq^*m»rd bhakUt t e , those 
forms of mskdma bhakli in which dovclo^mont of knowledge nod practice of 
yoga play ar important part Those forms of MaX/i arc known as aanya^atddhd 
thfiktu bhaku by association, inasmuch as spiritual coguition constitut- 
ing development of knowledge and spiritual praoticos constituting yoga, by 
operating along with bhakti, lead to parama-dtma^dkadUdra, Spiritual In- 
tuition of tho Supremo Self, which is tho proper function of bhaltt Tho onlti- 
vation of mtfaitna bkaXti attended witU^iUtna, constitutes tlio Path 

of Knowledge Its result is aadyah muUt, immediate release, by moans of 
brahma-jfldna, knowledge of Brahman Iftakdma bltaklt attended with yoga, 

IS known os aatdnga-yoga, the eight-limbed } oga Its result is Xarama-mul/i, 
gradual release Thus jRdna ond yoga become moans of roleaso only when 
they are attended with ntalAma bkahu It has been accordingly taught that 
Bhakti, properly so called, , nirupodAt bhaltt ( vide below), or bhaltt pure 
and colourless is superior io karma, ]ftdna,aad yoga (K 25, 2C, 27, 58, 59, 60 
b 22, 23) Theses \arioas forms of hhaUi are characterised os apard, tho 
lower, os distinguished from mrupddhi bhaktt which is called pard, the higher, 
and to which apard bhahtt is subsidiary (N 56 , 1^ 56) 

Ntr^pddht BhaJdi is cbaraotorised os uttamd, tho excellent, kevatd, 
tho simple, auddhd, tho pure, and avarUpa-nddhd, existing by itself It is 
the essence of bhqkU-^<^a, the Path of Povotion, and its results are prema, 



love, and hhagCtvat-sdLdtUra, spnitual intuition of the Lord It is llio patli 
foi ^sraddhdlu or the believers. H'ir-vpddld Bhaldi giadually evolves from 
prema or mere love to parama-prema oi supremo love, and for its evolution 
depends only upon itself (N. 30); tlia.t is to say, c/iwtd, excition of body, 
speech, and mind, prompted by love, at a picvious stage, becomes the means of 
its evolution into the next higher stage. These highei stages of love are of the 
form of mth joyful attachment. Rath again, is diftinguished under the as- 
pects of hUm, sentiment, in which the sense of separate personality still 
remains, and prema, love, in which the sense of separate por;,onality gardually 
disappeais altogether. Rati under the aspect of hhdva successively eioUes 
as guna-mdUtmya<l$akth attachment to the attiibutes and greatnes-* of the 
Lord,* attachment to the beauty of the Loid, attacli- 

ment to the worship of the Lord, and smarana-usaklh .ittachmcnt to constant 
thinking about the Lord In them, it will bo obser\cd, the distance between 
the devotee and the Lord gradually diminishes, but nevertheless no personal 
relationship is established between them. That takes place m Rati under the 
aspect of prema. It begins as ddsga-dsakti, attachment in servantship, in 
which appreciation of, ’and entire sympathy with the will of themastei may not 
necessarily bo present. Those chaiacteristics appear in the succeeding fotm of 
prema-rath saViya-dsalth attachment in friendship, whore, how’ONor, sacii- 
fice of the will in favour of, and subordination of the will to, the w ill of the 
friend may not be pi esent, as they ate in the next succeeding foim of 
rath viz.f vdisdlya-dsaUh attachment in fathership, wlieio the fathoi exercises 
self-denial for the sake of the son. This spiiit of self-saciifico goes on deie- 
loping, and vdtsalya-dsakU is follow'ed first by kdnld-dsakth attachment in 
wife-hood, in which the wife identifies her wdiolo being w ith the being of liei 
Lover, and then by atma-mvedana-dsakti, attachment in solf-conseciation, 
wherein the spiiit of self-sacrifice finds its natuial fulfilment. Consequently 
the next higher foim is that of tat-maya-dsakti, attachment in transtormation 
or absorption into Him. This is. advaita’-siddhi^ tho perfection of monistic 
idealism, the realization of the great tiutb, namely, Vdsudevah sarvanh that 

all IS Vdsudeva, Knsna^ the supreme Reality. As attachment m this form 

« •« 

grows deeper and deeper, it rises into, and culminates in, parama-viraka-dsakth 

attachment in extreme separation, in which the devotee, though he is at tho 
time permanently united with the Lord, still feels as if he w'eie separated fiom 
Him, as, for example, desciibed by the Vaisnava poet, Govindaddsa Rodati 

Eddhd Sydma kari kora, Hari Han kdmhdgeo prdnandtha mora*^ w’hile 

holding Sy§.ma in hei aims, R&dh& still w'eeps, “ Haii 1 Hari ! AYhere is the 
Lord of iny life gone ?” 



( X'U ) 


Hati under ibo aspect cd! doseloping in those forms nny follow 

rid^i the pith of the porfomnncooE datj,or the 

of ttttraotion to the Lord TIio former loads to ^tlio ciijo) mciit of the aisiaryrft 
or the lordliness of God, and is, therefore, mtsrd or mixed, while the htter 
causes the enjoymont of tho mdd/iuri/a or STrcotooss of the beauty of the Lord, 
and IS, therefore, letala or pnro Jt is pure prema-rattf called by S^Arad*! 
parama pnma or Supremo Lorc,whtoh is tho oonsnmmntioo of Devotional Self* 
Culture and the Immediate cause of release 

(ri)‘^What ts t?te naiun of DttoUon ? 

higher Dovotion consists in nttaohmont to Isvnra (S 2) It is of tho 
form of /Kiramo^rema or intense lovo towards Him (N 2), and is tho sonreo 
of eternal freedom from tho coil of mortality (N 2) b} obtaining which man 
becomes perfected, becomes immortal, becomes satisfied (N 4) , by attaining 
which he desires nothing else, grieves not, hates not, rorols not, seeks nothing 
else (N 5) b^ knowing which ho becomes mid, becomes still, becomes solf- 
satisfied (N G) It contains no worldly desires witbm itself , on the contrary, 
it arises on tho inhibition of all worldly desires (K 7-14) Sometimes it 
appears by itself in a fit rocoptaolo (N 53) Tho nature of pamma premot 
howover cannot ho described m words (N 51), Iiko tho natnro of iasto folt 
by a dumb person (K 52) It is attribute less dosiro loss, swelling up moro 
and moro at every moment flowing incessantly in tho form of subtler feeling 
(N 54), and transforming all objects of seeing bearing and thinking into 
itself (N 55) 

*1 vn 5t 3Pt isf^r tn i 

HU H-Hfsr HHnliprt eaRt ii 

crave not for money, nor for men, nor for a be'intifnl woman nor for 
poetic genius, 0 Lord of the orld m every birth of mine may ahattuli 

bhakli, spontaneous dovotion, grow u me towards Ihce, the Lord 6ti 

Chattanifa 




A 


BHAKTl-SDTRAffl 


HARADA'S 


5in^irR?nir n ^ n 

’«rtr Athai tbis word ma^ bo taken at bonedictory or ai merely introducing 
tbe sab]cci vrff Atnb liencc, iboreCoro , bocanso knowledge or approben- 
flion of truth and right conduct are not m themsetres sufiicient to bring about 
salvation but, for tbis, must bo lei^enod with the cntbnsiasm of demotion 
trfwi Bhaktim, (tlio dootrine of) demotion B tf UJ gt g ffTffA V)Akhyfl«>Amah, (wo) 
shall ozponnd 

1 Now, therefore, we ahall expoand the dootrmeof darotion— I 
The philosophy of Dovotiou by SAndilya begins thus Now, 
thereforo, inquiry into Do^otion 

iVotr ^But it might bo at onco said that tho dovotion tThicIi is boro 
sought to supplomont thought and action is not an oltogothor unknown thfng 
and it might os well ho doubted if it will after all solve tho great problem of 
human esistonoe, namoly, tho liberation of the soul from the cod of mortality 
In foot, in their social and domestic relations mon have liod cxporionco of tlio 
dolightfnl influonce of affection lovo, adinimtion rovoronoo, and similar other 
sentiments Bat nobody considers this to bo ndoquaio for tlio supremo pur» 
pose of life All this is however admitted At the same time it is mam- 
tsinod that altbongh thoro certainly is not any difforoneo of kind between devo- 
tion on the one hand, and other cognate sentunonts on the other, still thoro 
is perceptibly a diCEercnce of degree between them WIiHo those various modes 
of fooling nro bat developments of tho root principle of sympathotic response 
of tho human heart to congenial oxoitations from the ontsido, devotion is tho 
consumm ition of them all Further wo notioo another very important clia- 
raetenstio of devotion Tho objoot of all uttaolimoat on oarth is perishable, 
and, thorefore finite , whoroas devotion aspires to something iinporishable and 
infinito It is only when the seal oatouos faint glimpses of tho divino,m 
nature, within or around itself, that it is seized wiUi the oll-consnming 
enihasiBsm of devotion, and forgetting and forsaking everything olso, strives 
to throw itsolf entirely at the sorvioe of its Clod and its Lord, in whioh servioo 
fts ratisfaotiott is infiniio 

Those two points are made clear in the next aphorism which dosertbes 
what devotion is 


2 


BIlAKTl SUTBAS OF FAMADA. 


?5r^!T n 5^ H , 

^rr SS,, it, devotion g Tu, but. This is in leply to the doubt referred to 
above in the notes. Asmin, in or to him. Instead of this some read 

rrf%iT5 or The sense is, in every case, the same, but the i eading in the 

text gives the complete meaning, indicating that God is always neai to the 
jiva. U'sciT Paiama, intense This \yord is intended to convey thiee ideas ; 
1 Devotion is essentially undivided, that is to say, ^t tuins away from eveiy- 
thing except God. 2. It is nevei ovei -shadowed by thought and action. It 
is itself the end. 3. It is not ineit oi idle. It invaiiably manifests itself 

in word, deed and thought. wiT Piema, love ijcfT Riiiia, form 

2. It i3 of the form of intense love towards Him — 2. 

Of SS.udilya’s definition of Bhakli “ as absolute attachment to God ” 

Flote . — This devotional love comes as the climax of a couise of evolution 
Sriifipa GosvS.mi, in his Bhaktirasdmntasindhu, thus traces the development 
of love in the case of aspirants : — 

“ Fust arises faith , then follow attraction, and, aftei that, adoration. 
Adoration leads to suppression of worldly desiies ; and the lesult is single- 
mindedness and satisfaction. Then grows attachment which lesults in ebulli- 
tion of sentiment. Aftei this love comes into play ” 

^ II ^ 11 

Amrita-svaiflptl, of the natuie ofnectai. Like the loputed 
nectar, devotion once for all puts a stop to all painful and unpleasant contin- 
gencies of life, and ultimately secuies fieedom from the uheel of biiths and 
deaths. ^ Gha, and. 

3. And It is of th6 nature of neotar.— 3. 

Note — SAndilya also says that “it has been taught that he attains 
libeiation, who becomes steady in devotion ” 

And in Srmad-Bhdgavatam, III 25 38, it is said that those who luu after 
God, never perish, and that the wheel of the wakeful God, Yama, the God of 
Death, does not strike them who regard God as their deal self, son, fiiend, 
pieceptor, benefactor, and the chosen deity. 

Head also Ibid , X. 82-44, where Lord Krisna says • Devotion to Me 
woiks for the immortality of beings 

In a similar strain sings Jalaluddin Bumi the great Peisian poet — 

“ I died as mineral and became a plant, 

I died as plant and lose to animal, 

I died as animal and I was man. 

Why should 1 fear ? When was I less by dying ? 

Yet once more I shall die as man, to soar 
With angels blest , but even from angelhood 
I must pass on , all except God doth peiish. 


BUAKTI SVTRAS OF NABAD^ 


8 


Whon I have saorificed lu}' angel soul 
^ I sluill become what no mind o er coneon ed 

Oh, lot me not exist t for Non existence 
Proclaims in organ tones, * To him ^o shMl rotarn ’ ” 

The idea in the above two aphorisms is elaborated in the throe following — 

»Tst?srjj^ #rarar staffer ii » u 

ir^ Yat, which, love of Qod Ijabdhvtl, attaining Pnmdn, 

man Stddhah socccssfal Amritnh, immortal Tfiptafa, satis- 

fied iTarf^Bha> ail, becomes 

4 By attaiQiog whioh man becomes SQOoeasfal, immortal, 
and satisfied —4 

This aphorism calls to mind 0*td IX 31 ** Before long ho becomes 
of Tirtnoos soul and always enjoys peace ICnow for cortam, 0 Son of Knnti, 
My devotee never perishes * 

h sat^m 

ST |f^ 5T srafh ii ^ ii 

«r5 Yat, which, Lovo of God wwr Prdpyo, obtaining ir Na, not 
Kifiohit, anything VAfiohhati, desires Sochati, laments g fg 

Brof/i, loathes Ramato, revels Gts&ht, soaloas mriw Bbavati, 

beoomea 

6 On obtaining wfiioh he does not desire anything, laments 
or loathes nothing, revels not, nor bDoomes zealons —5 

« Love ” says Jolftladdtn ** is the remedy of onr prido and solf-oonoeit, the 
physician of all oar infirmities Only ho whoso garment is rent by lovo 
becomes entirely ansolfisb 

Having once foand and loved Qmi, man desires nothing olso to strive 
after, or to avoid, or to take delight in Heroin dovotion is higher than action 
Not only so , it is also higher than thought Xbas ^ 

awfjeett srsrfir sracsirrsTRnft srsim i( \ H 

<r^ Yat, whtob, Love of God vr?vr Jfifttvd, knowing wvn Mattah, over- 
joyed, mod Stavdhah, qniot, still VTPirrcig Atm&r&mah, self-satisfied, 

(One whose sonl is one’s best plooo of rest ) irvFw Bhavati, becomes 

6 By knowing whiob, ho becomes overjoyed, qmet, and self- 
fiati8fied.-^6 

JFote-^lt may be thought that these high ohoraoteristios arc not 
neoessorily involved in the idea of devotion For, devotion u not aftor aH u 
absolutely selfiosa and oolonrlesa as it shonld be Love of God, tho ploosing 
of tho Lord, is the object which tho devotee seems constantly to have m viow 




4 


B'HAKTI SUTRAS OF NARADA. 


Thus, instead o£ welling up spontaneously fi om wiUiin, the flow of dovotoii 
"is directed by an exteinal influence. This, liowevei, is not the case. No doubt 
the grace o£ God is an invariable accompaniment oE the playful course ot devo- 
tion within the soul, but, merely on this account, the one can hardly be posited 
as the cause, and the other, as tho consequence. On the contrary, devotion is 
its own end. That the grace oE God courses along with the stream of devotion, 
is perfectly natural. Immediately as the flower blossoms forth, it cannot but 
gladden the heart of the beholder But it will not be correct to say on that 
score that the flower blooms to beauty with the -object of pleasing man. It 
merely progresses a stage highei in the scale of its natural development. 
Similarly with devotion. 

This IS the text of the next aphorism. 

■^TT S&, it. i^T^vjTKCTrirT^ Nil odlia-iiipatvat,, because of its nature as appear- 
ing in the form of suppression (of all desires) is fully explained m tho 

following aphorisms. qiTJTU’tTT^T KS-mayanutna, selfish. Moved by desire, Na, 
not. 

7, It is not led by desire, Because it finds expression in (the) 
inhibition (of all desires).— 7, 

The “inhibition of all desires” is very often misunderstood to signify a 
total annihilation or extinction of all activity This is not only absurd but is 
simply unworthy of man. This misunderstanding is cleared up in tho next 
aphorism. 

g Tu, on the contrary. fjTTtvr; Nirodhah, inhibition of desires. 
xrrr^iir Loka-veda-vyS,pS,rasya, of customaiy, and scriptural observances 
Ny&sah, resignation or consecration to the Supreme. Cf. Gita, XVIII. 2. 
“ The wise describe resignation as the giving up of the f jruits of all actions ” 

8. On the contrary, ‘‘inhibition' of desires” means the 
consecration of all customary and scriptural observances to the 
Supreme.— 8. 

For the full comprehension of tho import of this aphorism we may cite 
.Glt&, IX. 27 and 34 “Whatever thou doest, whatever thou livest upon, 
whatever sacrifices and gifts thou makest, and whatever penances thou 
practisest, 0 Sou of Kunti, surrender all that unto Me ” “ Set thy min d on 
Me, devote thyself to Me, offer saciifices unto Me, bow to Me, make Me thy 
last resort Thus attaching thy soul to Me, thou shalt come to Me ; ” and 
also XII. 6 and 7. “0 PS,rtha, eie long I deliver from the sea of the mortal' 
woild those who have their minds upon Me and who, surrendering all and 
sundry actions unto Me, run after Me and worship and meditate upon Me with 
undivided concentration of mind.” Evidently, therefore, instead of suggesting 
a cessation of activity, “ inhibition of desires ” implies the full and uniform 
direction of all thought and action towards God. 


BlIAKTl sOjRAS of aAiIADA 


5 


Aixl not only thiSi li ItAs a ncgntn o aspect ako Tbus*^ 


grST ^H i=;s fffi ' gr{|<i f ^rahmr '^r ii « ii 

Tasnim, in hiiii inn^trjrr AnanyatA, Binglo-Iieartodnoss irfjrlBTj’ 
l^d<^irodhisa, m all iliai » antngonisho io Him Uilusinatft, indiftor- 

enco, apathy ^ Chn» and « 

9 (Inhibition also means) single bearteclness towards Him 
and indifference to all that is antagomstio to Him 

Now, singlo hoartedno^? as an imporlint olomcnt in devotion cannot bo 
a more blind passion or a narrow projndico It «1iouId ho arri\od at as the 
resnlt o{ a process ot coitscions discrimination bohxcon tho passing and the 
pormanont, m which iho finitcs natan)l> coino to bo oliminatcd ono by ono 
Honce— 


5i!=JireiqTOnf 


V^’nnnmrr Anyftsn} An Am, of all other supports Firrc TyAgah, ronnneia* 
tion, giving up AnanyaiA, smlge^hcartodnc^s 


10 Single-heartedness (implies) the giving up of all other 
supports *->10 

Tbo o'oUnation of doiotion itti) bo dotiirbed by tlio dpontion of tlio 
varioRs miliioiioci to which humm liEo is oter) moment o'ltMiod Torostoro 
equilibrium the dovotco should on iro nccoiiiit &eoI tho ho^ of other instru- 
monts than those oinplojod iii tho cultivation of devotion it.oif, iiamol), hston> 
itig to talks about tho Ijord, Ringing Ills n imo and so fortli 


u \\ <« 

Loka-vodesa In rospoot of sootil and roligvous ordinances 

S TTSFC^, Tad'anokhln-Achann'im, i*ractico or performnneo which is con- 
toUim howevor must Ira taken in a relative senso Not 

that there aro partiouhr injunctions whioh aro spcoially favoured by tho 
Deity , hut ordin'vnco*, socnl or scriptural, as such, arc prescribed in gonernl 
terms for a hrgo assembly oEIiuin'in beings who, nmongst themsohes, aro m 
different stages of development and degrees of potentiality Ilonco iho quos- 
tion should be decided in each individunl coso, with roforonco only to tho 
would bo agents environment, inhoritod onJ ocquirod capabilitios, tempora- 
mont, and so on !nid virodhisn udAstnatA, mdifforonoo io 

all Uiat conflicts with Him 


II By " indifference io all that oondiots with Him (S 9) 
XB understood the performance of those sooial and Boriptural rites 
and oeremonies whioh are congenial to Bim —11 

In tho eighth aphofism wo hav o boon tanght io direct all onr energies 
of thought and action towards God Now wo aro again enjoined io respect 
to some extent, tho diotatos of religion and morality Here seoms thereloro, 
to arise some confosibn whioh is, howovor, only supqrfioial Tho duo practice, 




/ 


BIIAKTL SilTEAS OF NARADA. 


o£ moral and religious ordinances involves, in most cases, a largo amount of 
bodily distress and tension of mind and an altogether indefinite abstinence from 
the joys of life. This, then, is unsuppor table on merely selfish notions, how- 
ever strong and alluring those may, at first, appear to be. It becomes possi- 
ble only when the innoi Vision, rising above the narrow limitations of its 
immediate sunoundmgs, comes to look upon a ‘ far-off divine thing.’ Except 
in such happy Circumstances, the observance of rites and ceremonies really 
comes to nothing, as Lord Krisna declares in GritS,, XVII. 27-28 — ■“ Per- 
formance of sacrifices, penances and chanties is also Slid to endure as well 
as action which is done for His sake (Whereas) offerings made unto fire, 
gifts given, penances practised, and duty done, without belief (in the existence 
of a divine Providence), is said not to endure. 0 P&rtha, that avails neither 
here nor elsewhere.” 

To this the inquisitive aspiiant may justly reply that once ** the vision 
beatific ” IS realised, there seems to be left no room for pious observances. 
For, these are prescribed simply for the purpose of puiifyiiig the mirror of 
the mind in which the Oversoul may then, and only then, cast its reflection 
* in all its shades and lineaments. Quite so, but this is so in exceptional cases 
only Ordinal ily, however, theie is some need foi the jJeifoimance of rites 
and ceiemomes, as will be evident fiom the next two aphoiisms. We shall 
moreover do well to beai in mind that these two things, namely, faith in Grod 
and observance of saci ed laws and customs, are mutually involved, and that 
they in turn act and react upon each other in the continuous process of gradual 
development of devotional life. j 


Niachaya-d^idhyat, after the deepening of faith (in God), 
cf Bhaktiratnfiivali, IV 36 Urddhvara, above, after. Sastra- 

raksanain, observance of sacred laws Bhavatu, let theie be, 

12. The observance of the sacred laws may be continued 
after the deepening of faith in Qod — 12. 

In the Bhaktirasdmritasindhu it has been observed that “ the aspirant 
who takes to devotion with an ' object (see aphorism 56 below) requires to 
abide by the scriptures aud favourable maxims, till the ebullition of sentiment ” 
which is called Love. St Paul also says ; “ If ye are led by the Spirit, ye are 
not under the law. ’ “ In the lower stages of meditation,” says St. Theresa, 
“ the setting aside <> of material images should not be attempted before the 
soul is very far advanced, as it is clear that till then it ought to seek the 
Creator by means of creatures. To do otherwise is to act as if we were 
angels.” St. Gregory the Great has said ; “ If we wish to reach the citadel 

of contemplation, we must begin by exercising oursefves in the field of labour. 
Whoever wishes to give himself to contemplation must first examine what 
degree of love he is capable of ; for love is the lever of ^he soul. It alone is 
able detach it from this world and give it wings ” 



shakti iaiBAS or j/'ahaba 


vmr Anyatba, otherwise P&tityasankaja, for fear of a fall 

18 (The sacred lawa shotiid be observed even af&er faith in 
God has deepened), lest, otherwise, there may be a fall-^iS 

Some interpret the apiLoraini to mean ** The saor^ hws mast bo observed 
till faith in becomes deepened , for otherwise, there is fear of a fall 

Well then it is understood that onr only oonoern should be to hold up 
Gh>d as onr utmost all, to conseorate oarselvos, body and soul, to His service, 
and never to allow worldly desires and punnits to diatraet and divert Uie oven 
flow of a career of piety and devotion To this high ond wo may even disease 
with the regular observance of saored practices after onr faith ,in God has be<* 
come firm and fixed That their performanoe may still be continued is a matter 
of oonventenoe and caution merely 

And it goes without saying that humdrum routine of tiie ordinary life 
may bo also safely neglected But nevertheless as we aro, we cannot 
clently devote ourselves to the service of God for there seems to be no escape 
from A totally different kind of distraction namely, the perpetual thonght for 
onr backs and bellies Is it then sorioosly saggeatod that we should take no 
^ care of onr bodies, but instead leave them to their own fate ? Not at all We 
can neier lose sight of the foot so graphically stated by K&Jiddsi that w O vw m 
• the body is only the primary requisite for the cultivation of 

Virtue But this consideration instead of causing distraction, fastens our atten* 
tioB all the more upon God m whose service we seek to live move and bavo 
our being St Francis of Assisi used to say We must needs use great 
discretion in the way we treat our brother, the body, if we would not have it 
excite in us a stom of melancholy * 

Therefore id the next aphorism we haye*~ 



viINi* Lokah social customs and usages Api also FfT9W Tfivat to *hn<: 
extent w Hva, only Bbojana-Adi-vyllpArah, oocupation 

of eating (drinking dressing ) etc U To, on the other hand ur mcUvKiui tffir 
A'-sarlra-db&ran&vadhi, to the end of the carrying of the body 

14 Social oastoms and usages also ore to be observed only 
t to tbip same extent (as soriptnral ordinsnoes) Bat, on the other 
hand, the ooonpatioa of eating, drinking, dressing, and so on, 
^ should be oontmoed so long as we hav^to oarry the physloal 
organism — 14 

The purport of the above three aphorisms is tln« *M>The 
of God, which IS innate in every soul, should be first developed and strengthened 
by considerations of theology, which is an enqui^ into ozistence and ottn- 
butes of God and His relation to hlan ond we Irbrld It is only then that a 
manacqnires strength of mmd enough to observe the scriptural and onstomary 
ordinances m thoxr tmo spirit The result of this life of holiness nod piety is 


8 


BJIAKTl SUTBAS OF hi AD A. 


that, besides knowing God, lie now comes to love llitn and to rouli/e his felloiw 
ship with Him. At this stage, when his will has taken ii %\holly moral atul 
religious tuin, ho can ^lately dispense with tlio scriptural and customary in- 
junctions, since piety has come to be a inlo o£ liL'o and a hiboui ot lo\c to him. 
But he will have to take caio of his body as long as he Ii\es. 

ii 

Tal-laksanUni, marks oi indications of dc\otion. 
Nfi,nA-inata-bhedat, accoiding to divoiso opinions. Vuchyanto, .no 

being stated. 

16. ‘The marks of devcfeion are now being stated according 
to diverse opinions. — 15. 

Thinkers agree as to the essential chai.ictcr of devotion; but thoj’ gno 
prominence to one or other ot its various manifestations in older just to indic.il(’ 
its nature from then several points of \ iew 

f m UHTaiw: II II 

PCljadisu, in worship and like poiloimUnces sugrpT: Anurugah 
attachment, aidoui Iti, thus muvittr': PAinsaryyah, the disciple of 

Parksaia 

.6. Ardour in His worship and like performances, is the mark 
of devotion, according to the disciple of Paiasara.—ib, 

KathA-Adisu, in talks of His glory and greatness. Iti, thu«. 
Tin: Gargah, a sage of that name 

17. Qarga thinks that application in talks pf His glory and 
greatness is the sign of devotion, — 17 . 

annt^: )i u 

VTTrFTTrirf^rt'^n Atma-rati-avirodliona, / without hindrance to the enjoyment 
of bliss which the human soul finds in God oi in itself, Iti, thus. 

^Andilyah, a sage of that name. 

18. The mark of devotion is ardour in His worship and 
indulgence in talks ofesf His glory and greatness, provided they do 
not hinder the enjoyment of bliss which the soul finds in God ; 
BO says SAndilya.—lS. 

jy ote . — It will be seen, therefore, that whatever draws the mind away from. 
God can never be favourable to the cultuie of devotion. On the other hand, 
everything which relates to God and holds Him constantly before our mind’s eye, 
has the effect of deepening the flow of devotion. This is the sum and substance 
of the above three aphorisms which are incorpoiated in the following one. 


BUAKTl stjTRAS OF ^XrAD A 


9 




N&radaht tbo ]iea\cnl 7 anint o£ ilmt namO) oE whoso composition 
theso aphorisms aro h Ta, Iiowovor 7nsf^nrRRHr«(KnT l^d*arpita nkliila Ach(l> 
ratft, the condition of having dedicated all obscrMincGS \rhatsooacr to Him 
Tad vismarano, in losing Him from memory nnieaijiHiTr Paronn- 
ry&JculatA, eiitFomo uneasmoss ^rr litt thus 

Ndrada thioba, however, that devotion is mdioated by 
the condition of having dedicated all observances whatsoever to 
Him, and by the feeling of extreme uneasiness in losing Him from 
memory —19 

Bat IS sach a climax over attainablo ? Ves, cortainly It is not at alf an 
impraoticoblo ideal For— 


H II 


Hi'amovaiii such and such Asti exists 


20 'I here are such and aneb instances— 20 


W II 

^ 7ath&, as for instance iritfdrqiRTsn^ Vrajo-gopiktlnilm, in tlio case of 
tho cow*maids of Vraja or Kriflddt<aRa 

21 As, for instance, m the case of the cow maids of Vnndd^ 
vana (who are reported to have dedicated oil their notions to Lord 
Kn^na and to have felt extreme uneasiDoss m losing Him from 
their midat even for a abort while) —21 

In this context the reader may, with profit, tarn to Chapters 29 and 30, 
Far^ X, of l^rmad-Bhdgavaiam 

Notr, IiOYO certainly exercises a lovolhng inilacnco It smooths down nil 
inequahtiei and brings tho lover and tho beloved on the same footing And go 
devotion results m a fusion of personalities, JeaMog only the divine It may 
be imagined, however, that the intiniaoy of lovo may not infrequently load 
one to lose sight of tho magnificence and majesty of God, whioh transcends all 
one 8 snbhmest aspirations Ihis will surely ho a serious drawback to reckon 
with in any system of religions cuUuro Quite so, but fortunately this does 
not necessarily happen On tho contrary, a full and conscious realisation of 
the grandeur and majesty of God enhances, all tho more, Hts supremo impor- 
tance as an objoot of admiration and worship, m tho eye of tho devotee •j^na 
wo have m tho next aphorism— 


?r u II 

Totra, there, in tho absolute fusion of personalities of tho human^ 
with the divine urfv Api, even m^TrnrarwfereTOmnv MAbatmja jfifina- 
vismpli-apavftdah, particular rooson for forgetting tho idea of greatness rof 
God) w No, not, * ' 




10 


BHAKTl SUTRAS OF NARADA. 


22. Even there, in the absolute fusion of personalities, there 
is no particular reason for forgetting the idea of the greatness of 
God. — 22. 

The life of Lord Krisna affords more than one illustration of the truth of 
this statement 

On the contrary, without a vivid awareness of the majesty of God, devotion 
can seldom, if at all, opeiate as a persistent principle of spiritual development. 
Hence — ^ 

ii u 

Tad-vihinam, deprived of that anTTOIT^ Jaian&m, of paramours. 

^.Iva, as. 

23. — Deprived of the sense of divine greatness, devotion is as 
the love of a woman towards her paramours, (which is constantly 
shifting from person to peison, in an indefinite manner, according 
as one appears more desirable than another) — 23. 

Besides, it lacks another great characteristic of pure love, namely . 

Tasmin, in that, therein In illicit love Tal-sukha- 

sukhitvatn, the feeling of happiness in the happiness of him, the paramour. 
5T Na, not. iirftfT Asti, is, exists. VU" Eva, certainly 

24. In illicit love there certainly exists no corresponding feeling 

of happiness (on the part of either) in the happiness (of the 
other) 24. 

It IS now proposed to compare the relative usefulness and excellenco’of the 
recognised methods of realizing the supremo object of human existence, on the 
one side, and the doctrine of devotion on the other. It has been laid down in 
the Mtareya Aranyaka Tun “ This is the way, 

this action, and this knowledge ; this is true.” And the erudite Sayana com- 
ments : “ rR- {jTvf fh ur f% rT^ j 

5nrr^'5 ** ‘ action ’ here is signified performance in the light of 

knowledge about Him, while ‘ knowledge ’ means simply to realise Him in 
the understanding to the utmost limit, so that on the aspirant coming -to know 
Him in all His greatness and glory, all worldly desires may dry up within the 
mind which will then naturally fix upon* the supremely desirable, and become 
absorbed in His blissful contemplation. In Gltd, III. 3, Lord Krisna also 
says : “ 0 spotless one I it has been before declared by Me that the pursuit of 
men in this world is two-fold ; that of the thinkers, by the path of knowledge; 
that of the workers, by the path of action.” These then are the two time- 
honoured paths of salvation, namely, action and knowledge. It will be obser- 
ved, however, that action or ^intentional employment of will and energy may 
take two entirely distinct courses . the one manifesting itself in the perform- 
ance or various sacrifices, penances, rituals, and other ceremonies prescribed 


SnAKTl sOtem of E^ABADA 


11 


L 


In the sacred books or sanctioned by usage, in the hope of atiammg particnlar 
results or rexracds and deriving spiritual benefit therefrom , the other* taking a 
fnndamentally opposite direction, abandons all hope of ever obtaining everything 
desired tn this tray, and gathering together all diffused energy and attention 
from the field of the world, tnrns inward npon the spintnal principle itself and 
proc^mg upon the maxim of » eadflre and abstain,” seeks, by the purification 
of body and mind, and by regelating and rostraming their random workings, to 
bring into active play the latent powers df the soul which will then surmount 
all obstacles conquering and carrying everything before it Aotion in ibe latter 
form IS called by the wellknown name of Yopa or Concentration or Gommnmon 

Tims therefore, we find— 

(i) The votary of knowledge who Aims at keeping himself at a safe distance 
from the reach of human suffering by killing all desires in the mind, remaining 
for ever absorbed in the charming pnrsmt of understanding, more and more, 
in an endless manner, the nature of God and creation, and who from bis empy- 
rean altitude looks down, as it were npon the things of the world , 

(ii) The man who strives to spread his kingdom over the universe, and 
takes Tooonrae to particnlar practices for the realization of deal ed objects, 
thinking thereby to satisfy all his mots and thus indirectly to ensure unbroken 
Imppmess for himself here as well as m the world beyond , 

(lu) The Yoit who stoutly turns away from the attractions of the world 
and concoatratea his attention and energy all npon himself so that the dormant 
possibilities of his divine nature may have unobstructed play and nnbonnded 
scope, la other words, that he may acquire powers * which will make everything 
possible for him and 

(ly) The Bhalta or the votary of love whose starting point is Gh)d Him- 
self and who abnegates himself in His presence and who seeks not the in 
di&cuuc of the wise, the rewards of action, or the ' powers of concentration, 
bat whose only care m life is to serve the will of the Lord 

Kow this path of devotion Jfdrada goos on to say is higher than the three 
other ivays of pious living as described above 


QT SA, it, deiotion ^ To, again Karma jfifina-yogebhyah 

than aotion, knowledge and concentration vfk Api, even AdhikatarA, 

higher 

25 It IS, again higher than aotion, knowledge, and oonoen* 
tration —25 


C/ Gttdi VI 46 and 47, where liord Kfisna saj s “ The Ycpi* is consi- 
dered to be greater than the ascetio greater olso than the man of oontempla- 
tion The is also greater than the man of action ^erefore Arjnna be- 
come a 1 opt And of all the I opms, he who faithfully worships Me with the 
inner self directed ioivards Me, is, in my opinion, the most concentrated” 
^nkora also has said ifhiq r mniwitq r It is Devotion which 


IS the greatest of all the means of lielcose 


The h one wbo eaten into ■ litisg oammossou With Qod and pczlestly realises Bis la 
ntasoee ssd aoklvlty ereiywhete io the ire4d 


12 


SIIAKTI SUTRAS OF NAUARA, 


n w 

Phttlu-iftpaiviit, Eiom ifs rc-appcai.inci' ns il-, rr-.uU 

26 (Devotion is higher than the others), hpcau=:e it is 
its own reward, (whereas the followers of the other piths 
have ulterior objects in view, which necessarily divido them 
from God, and are, after all, finite in their nature, and hence 
fail to secure abiding peace for the soul ) — 26. 

Is\aias}a, Go(l’< ’sufir Api, aho vrfvWTf^firVTH Abhuaani- 
dvesitvat, fiom aversion to egoU-t-, Koto Ihal it i- not aprcitue h-f-hug of 
disfavoni on the pait of God, hut follow-* nt:(*-,>-.nil} fioin tin* tmftno of thing-,. 
Por, m Gitfi,, IX. 29 , Loid Kri-,n.i s.ijh “ I sun rqnnl to .ill cu* it<*d hf*mg- 
There is no object of my particular Isnoiu oi di-*l.uoui ” And in conunmil- 
ing upon tins, Nilkantlia writes “ As the liie. though it i-, dcioid of sittisic- 
tion and othei feelings, still leniovcs the sen'-.ition of cold, onl} oi thn«f‘ who 
are close by, and not of those who keep at a ih-f incc. -o I. though otpial 
to all, romovo the bondage only of tho^e who oome to peek M} iclugc. and 
not of others Thorefoio, avoision and attraction do not belong to Mo.’* U 
follows, therefore, that ogoli>,in and othei alTcctions of the nund scicon Goil 
from the view of men $wrfj?iTr!rT^ Dain)a-pii}atvrit. JiO\c of meekno^^. 
Gf. St. Matthew, v 3 and 5 “ Blessed (aio) the ]>oor in <*pirit , loi theirs is 

the Kingdom of heaven.*’ “ Blessed (aic) the meek ; for the\ ‘-h.ill inherit 

the earth” Also St. Paul; “If any nwn thinkoth that he is wi-e lot 

him become a fool that ho imj’’ bcceine wise, Ulia, and 

27. (Devotion is higher than the others), because of God’s 
aversion to egotists and love of meekness. —27. 

The point is this ; — 

The votary of love throws liiinsolf entuely .at Iho mcrc> of (Jod. while 
the rest stuve to work out then sahation by themselves alone • ‘-oino .isjining 
to kno^^edge, almost as extensive as God’s, and, at the *=.11110 time, killing all 
desiie in tbeir bi easts, others attempting to extend their influcncf oioi tho 
external word, thereby bunging all things within 1 heir easy 1 each ; others, 
again, seeking to multiply theii psychic powers which, they hope, will then 
satisfy all their desiies no soonoi than they arise. In the case of tho deiotce, 
his absolute dependence upon God bungs him into daily and homely contact 
with the divine personality, wdiereas tho otliois, running after their lespectivc 
ambitions, aie removed faither and farther away fiom Him. 

. GuruN&naka reconciles the four Paths in a song in w hicli ho says ; — 
“Make Jnana your molasses, make Dhytlna your dhdwci flowers, make 
Karma your bark . minglo tlioso in tliat distilling vessel— —tho 'uorld, 

and apply the plaster of Prema. In this w'ay the juice of Amnia will filter 
out. My son, he who with intoxicated mind diinks the juice of tho Namo 
tranquilly remains enraptmed in tho joy (of tho Loid). In this song the 


nUAK'il SbTRAB OF JSAJUDA 


18 


reference to ilio process p nctiscd id the dajrs of the Gnra of distilling 
intoxicnting liqnor from molasso«, dfidteu flovrers nnd the bark of the hkat 
troo, mixed together m a \essoI the lid of winch was gonernllj plastered over 

II u 

Jfifinam kno\Uedgo w Ctd olone KCirr [Ihsyahf its Of 
de% otion SAdhannmi source Iti, thns JElke, some 

28 Some say, kaowlodgo is tha souroa o£ davotioa -*-28 

g^riTl'rillvy^lrSlfH^Qs II II 

Anjon^a^Asrajntvnm mutual dopendenco (of knowledge 
and demotion) Iti, so «%£iko, others 

29 Others declare their mataal dependenoa —29 

siftsfnx u ii 

S\*iyam, of itself tRWv<i7n Fh da rhpatA ro appeamnee as rosnit 
orrex^ard ^fklti so Brahma kuuiftrah son of Brahmtl , K&rada 

30 Xbo son of Brahmd observes the resolting devotion as 
the fiuifc of itself — bO 

cTOcl l^irrcn^ II II 

nsysnt^rHifVf Bilji (,riba hhojana ftdisu, m tho matter of foeding, 
(hestoxx mg favours) m tho ro^ nl houseliold hwt TatbA, tho same Bra, 
and nothing else PfisIntrAt, hax ing boon witnessed 

31 (What has been said above bolds good), the same, and 
nobbing else, have been witnessed in the matter of feeding, bestow- 
ing favonrsi etc , in the royal bonsebcld —31 

Tho metaphor imy Ira exphmed at some lengtli The State is the house 
hold of the king Tho members of that honsohohl may bo roughly divided 
into four classes viz the xx*isq men And tlio legislators tho oivil and military 
administrators and 1 copers of internal and external jraace, the chamberlain 
and his staff and tho xraitorc, beggars, and followers m genera] Kow, these 
four sets of people x lew tho royal person from fonr distinct standpoints 
Thns, the first cannot bnt recognise the fact that they are not, at least, in- 
ferior to the king in political xrisdom and capacity for gorernmoni, and may 
imagine that in each partionlar cose ascension to the throno is a bare accident 
Their attitude therefore is likely to become at times haughty and full of 
rivalry , at any rato, it is not always ono of modesty and meekness The 
second again, are aware that aoinal administration of tho affiiirs of tho State 
IS well nigh impossible without tboir active co-operation, and that it is they 
who practically goxem the kingdom Tbo keepers of the inner apartments 
also cannot fail to realize their nnique position behind the onrtam, nnd there- 
fore the} claim a certain amount of power over tho king, becanso they have bn 




14 


BIIAKTl SUTRAS OF KARAT) A 


secrets aud his hououi in their custody. In the^e ciicuin->tanccs, \\hatcver 
they receive fioin the king, in the bliiipo oE salai lo-,, low.iids and ipmiinoia- 
tions, they accept the same as hiwliil demands by them on ac cunt of the 
service they rendei to the king, and not as loving piosenis fiom him Piido 
and egotism are the piincipal ti aits in then cbai .icier and conduct* The 
fourth class of absolute dependants, howevei, have not the lotty ambitionf 
which the wise men have of sailing alongside of the king, nor the ‘•ense oy 
personal worth and impoitance of which the actual .idministi.itois arc so keenly 
aware, nor again the idea of power oi influence ovei the king so naiveoy 
claimed by the managers of the innei household On the contiai}*, tlind 
smceiely recognise their insignificance and iittcily heljiloss condition, acy 
thereupon thiow themselves entiioly at the nicicy of the king whom tlilo 
regard as a loving father bestow'ing Eavouis upon his childicn accoiding 
their fitness 

These foui classes of subordinate human beings may be broadlj likened 
to the votaries of knowdedge, action, concentiation, and devotion, respectii ely. 
And as they sow, so they reap. The well of the king’s loMiig kindne‘«s, .is of 
God, flows iichly andfieely towaids his humble and wholc-he.iited depend ints; 
while the rest, from then egotism, sense of pei‘.onal woith. and idea ot power 
are more and moie entangled in the meshes which they we.ivc loi themselves 
by their knowledge, action, and unique position ; and consequent!} then v I'.ion 
becomes day by day oiicumsoiibed wnth legaid to him in whoso sc i vice they 
do after all live, move and have then being. 

!T 1(51 M u 

^ Tena, foi this. Because the followeis of the othei paths haio their 
minds overshadow'ed with egotism and othei affections. Raja-paii- 

tosah. King’s pleasure, Ksut-santih, satisfaction of hungei Hun- 

ger is here symbolical of desne in geneial. gr Vn, oi Na, not 

32 For this neither the king find? any pleasure, nor the 
recipients any satisfaction of their desires, (in the matter of distri- 
bution of royal favours),— 32. 

Similaily, knowledge and action can neither move God favour.ably nor 
permanently satisfy desnes. 

Tasm&t, therefore. Since devotion is higher than the other paths. 
iST Sa, devotion, gg Eva, to the exclusion of tlie others, Mumuk- 

subhih, by those who desire salvation. ITt^T Gr&hy&, worthy of being adopted. 

83. Therefore, the path of devotion should be adopted, to 
the exclusion of the others, by .those who desire salvation.— 


fiffAKTJ StjT:RAS OF hlPADA 


15 


\\\2 u 

wr^of AchAryj'fth, mnstors fTWr Tosjfth, its , oE devotion ^TWrPT 
S&dban&ni moans Crftjanti, roeiio 

S4 The maatera recite ^aa iollowe) the means (for the cul- 
ture) of devotion ~S4 

ike Adh}/dtmaSdmdjfanam, lU 10 we find 

(Addressing bavnrl, R&ma sa>s) ^Here (in the cnUnre of devotion) 
the first means is it has been taught, the company of the good , the second 
IS conversation about My achievements, tho thira is rcoital of my virtues 
the fourth means wdl be the ooeupaiion of expounding my words , the fifth 
15 0 gentle one constant and sincore worship of the preceptor, thinking 
that I am he , the sixth means has been said to be virtnonsnoss, self restraint, 
observance, eto^ and ever-living attachment to My worship , the sev entb is 
said to be religions service with overj detail reciting the mantra specially 
applicable to Me greater adoration paid to My votaries consciousness of Mo 
in all beings indifference to extornal objects, together with internal peace 
make np the eighth and 0 lad^ the ninth is the consideration of My essence 
0 auspicious one devotion in the form of Love^is produced in any and every 
one wno employs this means in the simpe of the ninefold (secondary or mstrn- 
mental) devotion no matter whether one be a woman or a man or belougmg 
to the inferior creation And as soon as devotional love is produced, one feels My 
essence as it were, and one who becomes accomplished by the awareness of Me, 
attains liberation even m that birth Therefore it is sure that devotion » 
the Source of Salvation * 

TTote— In the 26th and 30th apbonsms it has been declared that devo- 
tion 18 its own means It is not however soggosted tfaereljy that he who 
has no glow of devotion in him to begin with can never hope to enter into n 
life devoted to the Lord, and consequently con never hope to attam salvation 
Far from it , the doctrine of devotion is not a gospel of despair It recog- 
nises and npholds that there is a regular oonrse of trainmg for the cultiva- 
tion of devotion It then sets forth the conditions under which the spark 
of devotion may gradually come to illuminate the entire inner and outer life 
of an ordinary mortal 
Hence-* 

cTg ii ii 

that, love of (Jod 5 To, But ftt'nmnmtj Visaya-tydgit from 
abandonment of sensible objects Mltif Saugo-tydgdt, from abandonment 

of attachment w Gha, and 

85 Bni love of Qod is passible on the ebandonment of all 
sensible objeots and of every attaobmeni to them —H5 



16 


BIIAKTl SUTRAS OF ylRADA 


\\ 11 

’inrsirrf TT>T3r?rr^ A-vyAvritfc.i-bliaj.uiAt, i'lom unrefcaulcd piacfcico; fiom 
cultivation without lemiss. 

3d. (Thab arises also) from ibs cultivation without lemiss, 
or from uufliDohing adoration of God. — 05 . 

Some take the SiXtrani as explaining (ho Coiegoing one Tlioio iho 
teaching IS that love of God may bo developed by Iniimig awaj trom iho 
objects of desue. But how can one overcome their atlraction ? The leply 
is, they say, given in this SdLram, the moaning being : And the tempta- 
tion of woildly desires may be ovoicome by sticking to the woisliip of God 

Loke, in society ’arfh Api, aho Bhagvad- 

guna-sravana-kiittanafc, fiom listening to and singing ot the Mituo-, and attii- 
bufces of the Gieat Gorl 

37. (That springs also) fiom listening to and singing of the 
virtues and attributes of the^ Gieat God in society.— 37. 

Cf. “Ido not dwell in VatLunfha (Ihe Inghe'-t ho.uon. (ho abode of 
Visnu), nor in the heaits of Yogins 0 N.'liad.i, I dwell theie wheic my 
devotees sing ” 

Ff.B — This Sdfram has been othoiwi'«o explained tlni« : “In thib 

world there are found instances which show that loi e ol God m.iy be culti- 
vated by listening to and singing of the attiibutcs of God. ’ 

Cf The saying of Dhu’l-Nhn the Egyptian “ Mu'^ic i& a dii me influence 
which stirs the heart to seek God those w’ho listen to it spiutiiallj .ilt.iin 
unto God, and those who listen to it sensually fall into unbelief ” About 
mystic dance it has been said “When ihe heart tin obs and i.aptuic glows 
intense, and the agitation of ecstasy is manifested, and conientional toinis aie 
gone, this is not dancing noi bodily indulgence, but a dissolution ot the soul.” 

II II 

5??ilrr; Mukhyatah, piincipally g- Tu, but JT^fftrerr Mahat-kripayA 
by the grace of the great ones Eva, surely srr "Va, or, in other words, 
There obtains a community of selves betw'een the gieat ones and their Great 
God. And when these great ones aie moved by compassion towards theii 
mortal brothers, it is their Gieat God who woiks in them. 
Bhagavat-kripA-lesAt, from the touch of divine compassion. 

St. Clement of Alexandria said • " Man predestines God as much as God 

predestines man” — for, as Bossnet explains . “ The soul gives itself as the 

spouse to hei lover : It gives itself to God as actively and freely as God 
gives himself to it. For God raises its power of fiee election to its highest 
pitch on account of the desire He has to be chosen freely.” “ See also Koran 
- XXIX. 69. “ Whosoever shall strive foi Our sake, We shall guide him into 
Our ways.’’ 



BIIAKTI SVinAS ^AnAVA 


17 


88 But that is obtained, prinoipatly and surely, by the 
craoe of the great ones, or, in other words, from the tonob^of 
divine compassion — SS 

“ Thii bolf cannot bo rcnii/od by discour o, nor b^ mielligonco, nor 
1)} (l(.op knrnin,' It c.in bo realized by him only A\hom it ftt\ours him 
tins '^clC favours ^vilh lU inanifcatation * (MwtdaLa Opanuad, 111 ii d ) 

llio bciicficnl tnflm nco o£ |,ood company has been described m iSnmad- 
Jihdgaraiamt 111 25 2’i, in tiic«o ^^ords 

*^In tlio company o! the great prc%nil talks which pcrfcctlj conacy 
inijC'<t\ und \thicli sootho tho hetri und tho car rroin listening to these, 
faith, attichinont and dc\otion will succeed one another towards ilun who 
IS tho wa} to <al\ation 

roiMQ editions this BAtram has been split into ino m, 
*' PrinoijKilh, ho\\c\oi tlirongli the kindness of the groat, and And aNo 
h) tho luoro) of God ’ 

OTiTOjp MnlLit-«.iiif;ah comiianiunalup of tho groat ^ Tu, again, knt gnm 
Durlamh diflicnlt oE ntUinmcnt oimai Agamyah, nnapproohablo inacrnt- 
nUo , oE unassignahlo caoac Amogjiah, inEalliblo ? Cba, and 

119 Oompaoionship o{ tiie great is, again, diffionlt of attain* 
mont It IB hardly possible to assign hocr and vrhen men may 
be taken into the society of the great Jiut once obtained, 
association with the great ones is infallible in its operation -89, 

II U 

Tat«kripnyA, bj Uis (te Gods) grace w£\a,onl^ 
Labli)aiU, is obtained, gamed vfv Api nnd 

40 And companiouBbip of the g»ea6 is gained by the graoe 
of God alone —40 

Bat ho\r can the gnico of God lio followed by tbo response of the good ? 
Tlie scqnoiico docs not appear to bo necc*i«ary >ot so , for God and His 
good men are but one being, so to saj Tins is tho te^t of the following 
iiitram 

fTRJT^fi33i^ ii 2 \ u 

Ta<min in Him Tat-jano, in His man Bhoda- 

ablifi^At, bccan«e there is no distinction 

il Because there is no distiction between Him and Uxs 
man —41 

St FanlM}! **He that is joined -with the Lord is ono«pirit" (X 
Cor \i 18) C/ abo tho saMn^ of Dhn I ^An of £gypt **Theymo\ons 
God causes them to mo\e and their words arc the words of God, which roll 


18 


BHAKTI SUTRAS OF NARAD A. 


upon their tongues, and their sight is the sight of God, which has enteied 
then eyes ” 

Man is what he loves, said St Augustine. 

Jal&l-ud-din, Rhmi, says • 

“ The motion of every atom is towards its origin ; 

A man comes to be the thing on which he is bent. 

By the attraction of fondness and yearning, the soul and the heait 

Assume the qualities of the Beloved, who is the Soul of souls.” 

In another ode he says ; 

“ 0 my soul, I seaiched from end to end : I saw in thee naught 
save the Beloved ; 

Call me not infidel, 0 my soul, if I say that thou thyself art He.” 

And yet more plainly . 

“Ye who in search of God, of God, pursue. 

Ye need not search for God is you, is you ! 

Why seek ye something that was missing ne’er I 

Save you none is, but you are — where, oh, where 

a a 

Tat, that ; love of God. Eva, alone. iarP'UHT?[ S^dhyatS,ra, 
should be cultivated, practised, striven after. 

42. Strive after love of God’alone, strive after love of God 
alone.— 42. 

a 8^ a 

Duh-sangah, evil company SarvathS,, by all means. rU T Sfu; 

Ty&jyah, to be given up. VBf Eva, ceitainly. 

43. Evil company should be certainly shunned by all means. 

—43. 

SRHT Kfi.ma, desiie, lust Krodha, anger, wiath Titf’ Moha, be- 
wilderment, infatuation, Smriti-blnamsa, lapse of memory 

Buddhi-n&sa, loss of understanding or peioeption of truth Sarva- 

n&sa, total rum Kaianatv§.t, being the cause of. 

44. Because it is the cause of lust, resentment, bewilder- 
ment, lapse of memoiy, loss of understanding, and total ruin (of 
piety and liberation).— 44. 

Cf. Tulsiddsa — “ E§,ma and K&,ma cannot go hand in hand ” 

In this connexion compare also Gtid, II 62-63, namely — “ Attachment 
grows in the man towaids objects which bind down, while he turns them 
round and round in his own mind. Attachment begets lust, and lust, resent- 
ment. Resentment gives rise to bewilderment, and bewilderment, to lapse of 
memory. Lapse of memory leads to loss of understanding, and from loss of 
understanding he is finally lost.” 


BHAKTI SIJTBAS OF nIbADA 


19 


Tn^rf^mr* Tarang&yii&h, plajmg la npp!es Apt) eraa ^ Ime, tliesQ » 
lost, etc Sang&t, in cc-operation with evil association Sama- 

dr&yonti, behave ]ike the sea 

4S These evil tendenoies, playing even in npplea from 
nature, nltimately behave as the stormy sea in oo-operation with 
evil asaoQtation —15 


gs^rdh nT£rf?«r eg ^ nframat* 
%g|i fhwfnt wsnhn 

or Kah \ 7 ho (interrogative) rrmr Mayftm, that which conditions the 
primal unconditioned , condition determination , negation , limitation The 
translation of rrmr as * illusion * in the first instanoe, is not satt^aciory It is 
also misleading Cy Spinosa Omna dettrmuiatio nepatto ast^aU determination 
IS negation nvfw Ihrati, crosses over nt Tahi who (relative) wjf Sangam, 
evil association, Attaohment to objeots r<l^fh ^ajaix gives op 
Mnha-annbhAvam, a large-hearted man great men liert Sevate, keeps by 
fwjTTrt Kirmamah, void of * myness, selfieas irelw Bbavati, becomes 

46 Who overcomes all limitation ? Who overoomea ? He who 
holds aloof from unholy assoaiation, keeps company with men of 
large heaita, and beoomea selfless -'46 




tfi Yah who fhfeiWjSiiT*? Ymkta-etb&nam, holy or lonely spot Sevate, 
resorts to H)«w^vr^Loka bandham, worldly desires or bonds g r »^v i qrf< Unmhla- 
3rati roots ont fhw 4J[Vir Ifistraignnyab, Unworldly Uie world of desires being 
tbo composition of the well known principles of illamination, evolntion, and 
mvolation Tlie throe Gnnos are “aspects of one and the same thing, ttz, 
Praknti and are reproduced in every phenomenon * “ Cosmically and indin- 

dnally Sattva is tiie factor of fro^om, insight and bliss, llamas of energy 
J amas of passivity Passivity results m cosmio stabOity and individual inertia ' 
Rajas m cosmio activity and individual passion Sattm in cosmio obedienoe to 
ww and indiv idnal progress by means of snch obedience ' ( » Zero ) 
Bhavati, » Yoga-ksemam, ocqnisition and preservation luni^ 

Tyajati forsakes 


47 Who rewres to a holy, lonely spot, who roots ont worldly 
boods, who X8 nnworldly, and who forsakes both acgmsition and 
preservation of desirables —47 

Of Gitft, II 45, where Lord Kfisna says “Tlie Vedas fm their 
ntnal portions) have the world for their object 0 Arjnna I ^ Become 
-unworldly, nninfiuenced by conirarios or duals always fixed in the prmcinlo 
of iiiumioation, unmindful of acquisition and preservation, and self-controlled ^ 



20 


BHAKTI SUTRAS OF NARAD A 


3r: cr^iiTf7|T 

»raf% II 8« « 

?T.* Yah, who ^rvfvi^ Karnia-phalam. ^he fiivts of action? F^rsrf?? Ijajati. 
gives up Has no eye to. gn^iTTf^or Kaim&ni, actions »-iiinny{i‘^}ati, 

dedicates to God hh; Tatah, then. Theveby Nud\iiud\ah free fiom 

the influence of contiaries, such as pleasuie and pain, good and bad, hot and 
cold Bhavati, becomes. 

48. Who has no eye to the fruits of his actions, who dedi- 
cates all actions to God or who m everything does the will of 
God, and thereby becomes free from the influence of all con- 
traries.— 48. 

^5 Yah, who VedS.n, the sacred books vrftr Api, eien ^frr^fh 

Satnnasyati, lays aside. %6Rf Kevalam, undivided Abichclunna 

anurdgam, uninterrupted flow of affection oi lo\e. Labhate, attains 

develops. 

49. Who lays aside even the sacied writings and who 
develops an undivided and unintenupted flow of love towards 
God —49. 

Says St.John of the Cross — “All the images of the imagination aio 
confined within very narrow limits, and the Divine Wisdom, to which the 
understanding ought to unite itself, is infinite, absolutely puie and absolutely 
simple, and it is not confined ivzthin the limits of any dishnet, paiticular oi 
finite mind. Tbe soul which desiies to unite itself to the Dnino Wisdom must 
necessarily bear some pioportion and likeness to it, and consequently it must 
shake itself free fiom the images ot the imagination which would give it limits 
It must not attach itself to any paiticular farm ot thought, but must be pure, 
simple, w'ltbout limits oi mateiial ideas, in oi doi to nppioaoh in some degiee to 
God, w’ho cannot be expiessed by any bodily likeness, or by any single finite 
conception ” 

’B 5T5:m ^ ii h® ii 

Sa^, ha Htffr Taiati, overcomes, Loh&n, mankiad. rrrwfrt - 

T&iayati, helps to overcome. 

60. He overcomes all limitation, he overcomes all limita- 
tion ; he helps mankind to overcome their limitations — 60. 

Some leaders distinguish between the first and the second ‘he.’ They 
say that men come to love God either by instinct oi by education, and that 
the p^o^ious aphorisms have reference to the latter only How, li these men 
01 ercome limitation, it goes without saying that instinctive lovers of God also 
do so Iheiofore, the second ‘he’ refers to thorn, as also the last sentence. 


miAhJl liUinAS Or^ARAJ)A 


21 


Tho <Sit'ra/» tlionforc ncconlm^ to ihcnv meins ^»JIo ororcomes limita- 
tion ilio mstinotno lo\or of God also overcomes limitation And not only 
so but ho uUo helps others to overcome their hmitition * 

5RRo§'g?fi:si ii \\ 

Promi s^'arAp im tho natnro of lo\o totrards God (f intro- 
dnction P %\i) vprersr«fhr Anir^actiantyam, not capiblo of being expressed in 
V ords 

61 Tiio ziAturo oflovA towards God is not capablo of being 
described in words —61 

Iho S»imad’‘Bfiu<fnnUam in Ilf 25 J2» 1ms ronndl} described it thus — 

“ Devotion to God is the motivele s and spontaneous fanotioii in tho 
divine form of llliiinmition of tho sinning sen>>es vvIiilIi mark out objects 
or of tlioir prosuliiig principles belonging to a mm wboMi mind has become 
frtcidj liv (iin pcrforininoo of seriptuml rites 

rnostiLs” snjs Ibiml \ribl tlio ^.rnt Arab mjstic “cannot impart 
ihoir feelings to other men the) can only indioato tliLin symbolicallj to 
tliovo who ha\o bo{,iin to experience the like 


11*1 II 

31 AI i A vAdiin \it like the tii te of a dumb person 
dJ ( ho natara of lore ts as ludosonbablc) ns the tasto of a 
dumb porsin 

Gno H * ajv n injstic of Ishm is iieir**r to silcnco thun to speech * 

\\ iiut tlion 4 s ociutiou with the j,reit ind kuo <1 will uviiil if tho enthusiasm 
of dovotion is untnnsintablo in vvonls and con cipientlj mcommnnicahlo from 
por<oii to p F'lon ? To this tho reply is that tho operation of dovotion is toJo- 
pithic and not through anj (,rQ er mcdinni 

Ijovo is not to bo Icirnod from men it is ooo of Gods gifts and 
comes of His trace Ifcnto — 

gimi m# ii ii 


vfk Ivva ajA, some whero every thing is fnvourablo to its appearance 
fit trl# X^utro, rccoptiblo Pml^sjnto, is revealed 

63 Jt IS revealed by itself in a fit receptacle >—03 

Cf “ Tis tho sun s self that lots tho snn bo scon * 

“Mans love of God/ sajs IIujw!r!» an Islamic nijstic “is a quality 
virhicb manifests itsolf, in the hcirt of tho pious boHovert in tbo form of venera- 
tion and uia^ni6c*ition, so timt lio scecks to satisfy tho Beloved and becomes 
impitieot and restless in liis desire for vision of Him, and cannot rest with any 
one except Him, and grows familnr with tho rccolleotion of Him, and abjures 
the recollooiion of every thing hcsides” *I fincicd that I loved Him, sud 
BAyazid, another mystic, “ but on oonsidonition I saw that His love preceded 
mine ’ 



22 


BHAKTI SU'JIiAS OF AATiAOA 


W ^8 W - 

apir^Srf Guna-rahitam, devoid ot qualification qiT+T?n7ftfT* Krimsmfi-iahi- 
tam, bereft of desire. Pratikfcana-Miidlianianam, accuimd.iling at 

every moment. Avichcliinnam, of coasclc*!? /low. ^iTrn: S^iksniutaram, 

subtler. 5irg?Tgi5:iT Anubhava-i flpam, ot the foj m of feeling. 

64 Devoid of qualification, bereft of desire, growing in 
volume and intensity at every moment, and having a ceaseless 
flow, it is of the form of subtler feeling.— 54. 

?t|sng#g5Ttm rf ii hh 

H 5 [ Tat, that LovC' Devotion, jttcet Prrip}a, liaMng obt.iincd. Tat, 
that. The object of love, vsr Eia, .alone, ^jraRfieRnfFr Aialok.iiati, looks upon, 
igurtfw Srinoti, hears about. Chintayati, thinks of. 

66. Having once obtained that, (the devotee) looks only upon 
the object of his devotion, entertains talks only about Him, and 
thinks nobly of Him — 65. 

But how does this h.ippen ? Well, men first lo^c God svitli .in ol»3ccf 
Then, in the nature ot things, by a tiun«jfoionco of intoiost they lo\o God 
without any ob3ect, foi loies s.ike, oi, ahul is the sinio thing, foi tho siiko of 
God Who is love In tho next aphorism, Ihcietoie, ^\c lv.ne .i ckissilication of 
those men who wait upon God wilh an ullcnor end in \io\v 

H u 

Gaum, secondary Doiuatno. Dottiio-born Indncvt. Guiia- 

bhed&t, accoiding to the difCoience of tho ]»iinciple<- wc , ol illununution, (‘\olu* 
tion, and involution m Vfi, oi, in othei ^^Olds. VJTriTfq^m^ Aitta-fdi-blirdat, 
according to the distinction of tho worslnppois as the iifHieted. the niqui'-ifio, 
and the entreative or needful i^vrr Tndhfi, tliicofold. 

66. Devotion which is born of desne, becomes threefold, 
according as the one or other of the principles of illumination, 
evolution, and involution dominates the conduct of the devotee, 
or, in other words, according as the worshippers fall into the three 
classes of the afflicted, the inquisitive, and entreative. — 66. 

In Gitd, VII. 16 and 19, it has been said that four sets of fortunate 
men wait upon God, viz., the afflicted, tho inquisitive, tho entvoati\ e, and 
the wise of high soul with whom God is the be-all and end-all of life Of 
this last class Ndrada speaks as the immediate devotees of God in aphorism 67. 

%I15I 5S^^frI H H-s H 

^ UttarasmS,t-Utlaiasmfi,t, than each succeeding one. 

Phrva-Phrvfi,, each preceding one. ■^rn®r Sreyaya, for the better, vierfu 
* Bhavati, is, works. 


BllAI^Tl SUrJlAS OF J ARAB A 


2? 


57 Bach preceding kind cf devotion works for the higher 
good than each succeeding one 67 

u II 

Bhaktau in devotion Anyasinfttp tlinn any other 

Sanlabhyani} cheapness The nature of being easily obtained 

68 In devotion, (the fulfilment of the desire to enter into 
intimate fellowship with God or attainment of salvation, is) easier 
than in any thing else —68 

Tbe path of [devotion is easier than that of either knowledge, or action, 
or concentration Because — 

1 Action and concentration do not directly lead to salvation but only 
help on the progress of knowledge and devotion 

It Again, they are beset with difficnlties and dangers of their own, as 
the followers of them gradually come to aoqnire * powers ' which aro often 
liable to abuse *. 

Ill IndiGEerence to worldly desire is a oondition precedent to the em- 
ployment of knowledge So is also the arrest of all wordly aotivity Bat 
one^may safely and anccessfall^ pursue the path of devotion, proidod only 
that one believes m the existence nature, and attributes of Gh>d, and dedicates 
the frails of one s action to Him, in other words, does tbe will of God m 
o^ery thing 

IT Again the pursuit of knowledge is dry ond not very interesting in 
itself, while that of devotion is sweet and enjoyable 

But it maj be asked, how do jou prove this? Wo replj tliat it does 
not^at’all standjin need of any proof Hence — > 



II II 


srtmmWTtW Framdna-antnrasya, of other proof Anapeksat- 

vftt, because of the absence of the need Svsyam, itself w u mT W r q 

Fram&natv&t, being evidence 

59 Because there is no need of any other demonstration, 
flinoe it 18 proof of itself — 69 




ll II 


s&nti-rdp&t, because it transforms itsolf into the state of 
internal peace Paramftaada rftpftt, beeanse it takes the form of 

high ecstasy w Gha, and 

60 The path of devotiou is easy, because it fills tbe mind 
^f the devotee with peace and high ecstasy — 50 

The devotee then forgets everything, even himself He truly lives 
only for God, nay, he lives m God But, then a very practical question 
arises What with the world ? To this it is said in the next aphorism, 



,■"24 BIIAKTJ SUTJRAS OF kIrADA. 


that Me in God can on no occasion '■enously inteifeio \Mth lif^e on earth, 
and that, theietoio, no anxiety .should be enteibiined on this scoie icgaiding 
the conduct ot social liCe Thus — 

U II 

Loka-hanau, in lespect of ‘social di'soigani'sation f^SrTT Chintu, 
thought, anxiet}' iT Na, not. grrcjrf KaiyA,, should be cherished. jf^r^f^rTTrir- 
^t3i%r3ri5 Nivedita-A.tma-loka-vedatv^t, because of the fact that the self, and 
social and scriptural morality have been dedicated to God 

61. No anxious thoughfc need be entertained in respect cf 
social disorganisation, seeing that the devotee has consecrated 
his self and customary and scriptural morality all to the Lord. 
—61. 

Should then cuetomaiy lules of conduct bo disiegaided altogethei ? By 
no means For — 

U 11 

Tat-Siddliau, in the development of devotion vft3i5tTg’?‘TT: Loka- 
vyavah&rah, social custom and usage. Na, not Heyali, to be neglected 

Kintu, but. WFirTn: PhaU-tyS-gah, suiiendei of consequence's riHnT’oivf 
Tats&dhanam, its pei formance ^ Cha, and, meaning * at the same time,’ togethei 
with. K&iyam, should be attended to E^a, ceitainl} 

62. In the development of devotion, one must not neglect 
to observe social customs and ceremonies, but, on the contraiy, 
< ne should surely attend to their due performance together with 
the’ surrender of all consequences to God — 62 

“Although sacrifices and the like aie enjoined with a view to the oiigin- 
ation of knowledge (in accordance with the passage ‘ They desire to know,’ 
Bri up IV, 4, 22,) it is onlj’- knowledge in the foim ot meditation which — 
being daily practised, constantly iinpioA’^ed by lepetition and continued upto 
death — is the means ot teaching Biahman. and hence all the woiks connected 
with the diffeient conditions of life aie to be peitoimed throughout life only 
for the puiposo of oiigmating such knowledge. This the SfltrakS.ia declaies 
in Ve Su IV, 1, 12 , 16 , III, 4,33, and othei places ’ (Thibaut’s tianslation, 
S B. E , Vol XLVIIT, p. 16) 

tt u ^ u 

’^fvrJTfTTftrr^frErf?:^* Stii-dhana-n&stika-charitiam, woman, Avealth, and the 
conduct of the unbelievers, i e , those Avho deny the authoiity of the Vedas and 
the existence of God. *t Ea not SravanlyaiU, should be listened to. 

63. The aspirant after devotion should not listen to talks 
about woman, wealth and the conduct of unbelievers, — 63. 


liilAK 1 1 SUTIiAS OF A AJ?A P J 


25 


In ibis and the fo)lo^vlnj; as uoH as in ibo 7 Inl niid 7tUi and m tho 4')rd, 
4Ulinnd45t]i aphorism9> tlio niipodintents to (lio ctiltisnfion of devotion ba\o 
been enumerated 

U ii 

VbUuuua iHhuiblu-&dtl na> cgolMiii, or salt is^ertion) 
pride, etc T3 Ajj’oni Mioiild lie forsaken 

64 Self assertion, pride, etc , should be forsaken —64 
Konr It H almost next to iiiiiiosstble to nbindoii tliese natural tendon 
cies of frail Iimnan n itiirc b) an etfort ns it were fho proper remedy is t o 
'disert their courses And where God becomes the objCLt of such passions, 
they lo^c their wickedness and graditall} put on a noblo aspect Therefore it 
is laid down in the next aphorism 

?Bra^-^fiTOTsnf?5aR 

u U 

Tadarpita-aklnln dohtlrnh ono nlio has itorofcd all ono s 
conduct to him Vi San being becoming q;nnilUTr>r>rtni{%;a> Iv&mn hrodbn-abbi 
indna ddikam Desire resentment, solf-assertian ota nfcnq Tnsmin, in him 
V9 JQva, only mrerhr^ Kamni^am, Should bo done or shonii or chorishod 

G6 Having onoe davoted all bis oonduot to Him, ba abonld 
aboiv, (if at all), desira, resentment, self assertoin, oto , only to 
Him —86 



gnd gniiq u \\ \\ 


f^QTCiT^gq’Qt In rftpa bbanga pftrvakam, hn\mg broken ilirongb the tbroo 
forms (see Sdtram 56) of sccondar; demotion modiGed by the principles of illa- 
mmation evolution and mvolntion f^HUplririrrFoqrT^rTiiTsuii^el Nityad&sya> 
nityakAntO-bhajanasAtmakam, having its principle m tboso stages in the dove* 
lopment of doioiion which are known as constant scr^ico as of a servant to his 
master and constant sorvico as of a wifo to her Iiusband ilio interinodiato stages 
(see 8 83) being also included These stages of devotion are not raodiGod by 
the three principles Froma love mv KAryyam, should bo cultivated ^ 
£vb, only 

66 Having kdpfc clear of the three modified forma of aeoon* 
dary devotion, one abonld onltivate love and, )ovo alone, whioh has 
ita principle in those stages of devotion, which are known as oon 
fitant Borvioe and constant wifely oonduot —66 




26 


BtlAKTl SUTBAS OF NAB AD A. 

1 J 1C 22 ^ 


** ■* 

nOTfiWt: Ek&ntmah, smgle-hoi.tod. I’hoso 'Aosj, 'only okjcck ot lovo and ' 
devotion IS God. wnn- BhaktAh, dovotoos. giOT! Mnkhj-dh. imncipal, primary,! 
direct, iminodiate. 

67. The primary votaries are those who have one end only in 

view.— 67. ; 

. Cf BhAgavatam, in.--29, 13-14, where Bhagavan says 

“People do not accept fellowship m residence ^\l<ll Me, prosperity equal 
to Mine, nearness to Mo, appearance in the ‘lanie form as 1 apjicar, or o\en 
unification with Mo, even when these aie offered to them , they only jiray for 
employment in My service. It is this link of devotion which has been said to 
be the absolute, by which ovei coming attachment to the world, they liecome fit 
foi attaining My nature ” 

tnswfi?r 

Na 

a n 

Kantha-aiaiodha-roma-asiubhih, (Marked out) by choking 
voice, hairs standing on end, and tears Parasparam, amongst 6icmscl% cs, 

with one another, Lapamftnah, conversing, Kulfini, families. 

Pyithivim, the earth. Cha, and Pfi\a}anti, puiify. • 

68. Conversing together with a choking voice, with hairs 
standing on end, and with tears flowing, they purify their families 
as well as the earth —68. 

In GitA X, 9, Lord Knsna says . — “ Having their minds fixed upon Me 
and their life directed to Me, enlightening one another, and constantly talking 
about Me, My devotees become satisfied and delighted.” 

U U 

Tirth&ni, places called by the name. Holy sites Tirthi- 

kurvanti, make holy places. Kaimfini, actions. Sukarml- 

kurvanti, make meiitorious actions vn^nfur Sastr&iii, w'ritmgs so called, rules 
of conduct. Sat-sastrikurvanti, make saci ed scripture 

69. They add holiness to holy sites , they give to actions the 
character of meritoriousness ; they raise mere writings to the status 
of the sacred scriptures. — 69, 

H 'S® W 

rr^mn: Tat-mayS,h, full of that Filled with the pi csenco of Grod. Merged 
or absorbed in him. Cf. “ The W'hole w'orld is the manifestation of Yisnu.” 



SBAKTl I^TBAS OP JflsAVA 


S7 


70 In and aionnd them, they realise the piesenoe of God 
Bveajwbeie and at all times — 70 

A fomiliar mstanoe oE snoh nbsolnto ideniificaiion is fonnd m the popular 
tioiiou that the body is the entire iimat-^the identification oE the sonl xnth 
body 

** The Soul (when nmted to God),” says Sfc John oE the Cross, “finllsat 
first into a state o£ great forgetEnlnsss W^th regard to extenor things it 
then shows so great a negligenae and so great a contempt of self that, lost in 
God, it forgets to eat or dnnk, and it no longer knows if it has done a thing 
or not or whether or not it has been spoken to by any one Bnt once the sonl 
has become firmly established in the habit of a nnion which is its sovereign 
good, it no longer forgets reasonable things, and thmgs of moral and physical 
necessity On the contraiy, it is more perfect when engaged in works smtablo 
to its ste^ of life, fllthongh it accomplishes them by the help of images and 
knowledge which G^d ezeites in a special manner in the memory All the 
powers of the seal are, as it were, transformed in God Spinoza also says 
“ Man advances in perfection in proportion to the perfection of that object 
which he loves above all other thmgs, and which loves mm m retnrn ' 

II II 

Pitara^, the departed ancestors forefathers Modsnie, rqoico 

Devatah, the ahmmg ones the celestials ‘ hwP cT Nfityanti, dance 
Xyam, this ^ J3hfih earth w Oha and w^mrr San&thd, provided with 
a lord , seenro wvf^^havati, becomes 

71 (At their devotion) their forelatbers rejoioe, the oelestiala 
danoe and this earth becomes seonre as though m the guardianship 
of a lord ^71 




U U 


^ Tegn, amongst them, within their rank 
Jdti-vidy&>rfipa knla«dhana>^yA &di bhedah, distinctions o£ birth learning, 
appearance, family, wealth, observance etc w Ka, not. Asti, exists 

72 Amongst them there exist no distinctions of birth, learn* 
mg appearance, family, wealth, observance, and the like— 72 


In the HI 10 20, BAma says Sex, bir&, 

repnfaition, stains, etc , do not confer any title to my worship only devotion 
(ndAiMra, or fitaess, competence aooor^ng to a different reading) does ” 
u Gnm K&ni^a {>— “ He alone is low-oaste who forgets the lord ’ As re- 
gards learning “ Piety withont Scionoe, says St Theresa, may fill souls 
with Ulnsions and inspire them with a taste for <diildish and silly devotions,” 
and farther I have fonnd that, ^vided they are men of good morals, they 
are better with no learning at all than with only n little for in the former case, 
at least, they do not trust to their own lights bnt take connsel of really en- 
lightened persons ’ 




.'28 


BHAKTX sifTMAS OF X^^iliADA. 


U U 

zim Yatah, since, Tadtyaii, belonging io bim.liis. 

73. Since they all belong to Him. — 73. 




Vadah, Vain discussion. ^ Na, not. ^irzi^n^sxri Avalambyah, should bo 
undertaken. 


74. Vain disouasion should not be undertaken (by those “who 
aspire to devotion, regarding the existence or attributes of God).— 
74. 

It has been pointed out in the Kdthopanisat — 

“ How else can that be conceived except that it exists ? ” 


II 'Sii. ii 

Bahulya-avakasatvat, because o£ room or occasion for 
futility. ’srfs^UHrSTJrj Aniyatatvat, on account of uncertainty, or regretixu ad 
infinitum. ^ Cha, and. 

76. (Vain discussion about God must not be encouraged) be- 
cause it can go on indefinitely, and there will be still no certainty 
that it will ever arrive* at the truth.— 76. 

usTftiibiTffr tf% ii«vi 

HiWiTrr’Srna Bhaktisastrani, Treatises on devotion. There are quite a lot 

of^ them. The most important ones are ; the Gitd, ^nmadhhdgavatam, 
Visnupurdnam, Adhydtma-Rdmdganam, etc., etc. flvrffhrrfw Mananiyani, should 
be thought over or reflected upon Tatvodhakaimani, observances 

> prescribed in them as binding. SfirnnurfsT Karaniyani, should bo performed. 

76. Treatises on devotion should be studied with attention 
and observances therein laid down as binding should be perfor- 
• med. — 76. 

51 m-SW 11 

Sukha-duhkha-ichchha-iabhfidi-tyakte, left out by 
pleasure, pain, desire, gam, etc. C£. iff^Tar^TfaFr:, without leisure, in Bhaktirat- 
navali, I. 9. Or it might be taken to mean, altogether unoccupied by pleasure, 

, etc. Kale, in time. Pratiksamane, being looked up to. Being 

waited for. '^RTTg Ksanarddham, half a moment, sgifir Api, even, mrl Vyartham, 
in vain, w Na, not. Neyam, should be passed. 


SUAKTI sOtJIAS of 1, Alt ADA 


29 


77. Saif a motnoni o7on ghaulS not bo possod in vsin, as all 
tbo limo 000 baa lor dmao eontomphiioa is the Iittlo that roaawa 
after what u given to the thonght and oxporioncc of ploaearc, pam, 
deeira, gaioi and tbo rest —77 


mSl II 'Se II 

vrfiforsn'iralngirrfvnvjnf^otfrwifij AlmnsA «nl^n miictii dijjl fi^tikja Adi 
ehtrilrjAni, IiarmlcMncn, IrnlliCnInca'i, di!anlmc«, l.iiidiii« raitli in t>od nnd 
roiolalion, and oUior cicelicncoi oC clnndir orrmnoVinfir I’aripelanIjAni, 
shnnld bo atricll} adoptod 

78 Tfaeji should oarofnilj' obssrro baraileaanaaa, irathfolnoea, 
oleanlinesj of body and mind, kindnoie, faith in Sod and lovolation, 
and other ezeollancee of obaraotor-'78 

Cl Sri BIiAajra ot RAmlnnji — 

“Tho VyAkliyAkAni also dooIirM lint dead* remcinbranco rosnUs onlx- 
from abslonlion, and <0 on bu irardr bomf, > Tbn Cur dmdv romombrincii 
madilnlion) H obtained tlirougli abilenlion (ijieU), Crcenesi of mind (xmioka), 
repetition (aUijAsa), worke (kriyAl xrtnoiu eondnot (ka)»Am> frerdoni from 
dojeotion (anarosAd i), iibseneo of cxultaliDn (nniiddliartlia) necetdini, lo ten«i- 
bili] and Scriplurd ntalemcnt TIio taakInrdAm nl <0 enca definition* ot 
nil tb'so term* Abstention (Micka) mean* keeping llio liod> oban from nil 
food, imporo either on mg to species (ancli ns the lie Ii of certain nniinnla), 
nbodo (sneh as food belonging lo a chnpdAfa or tbo Jiko; or ncoi- 

dental cause (snob as food iiilo ssbiclin Inir or the like Ins fnllon) Tlio 
Scriptural passage antberising tins point is { lib Up VII, Jb, ‘ The foodbclni > 
pure, tbo mind becoraef pure tlie ramd being puro tlioro results steads ro 
inembraoco’ rrocness of mind (Mimtht) means n'bsenoo of nllaclinionl lo 
desires Tlio nntliorilutise passage hero is ‘Imt Inin iiiedilnte with n eabn 
mind’ (Clih Up 111,14 1; llepotilion means cantinaed pmetico lor tins 
point the BbAsj-ukAni quotes an niitlioritatiio lest from Snirili, \ia ■ Having 
eonslantlj lieon abwrbod in Ilio Iboogbl of Halt being id1 iadlibAsabliAsilab 
Bh 61 VlII, G) By works (kri;A; is umbrstood tbo pertormancei nceording 
to ones ability, ot the liso great Saonlices Tbo ontlioritnliio passages hero 
are • This person nlio perforins works is tbo best of Iboso who know Brnlimnn ’ 
(Jin Bp 111, I, i), mid 'Him BrUimanas seek to know by recitation of tbo 
Veda, by saeriAco, by gilts, by penanco, by fastnig ’ (Bp Up IV, 4,28) By 
Tirtnona conduct (kalyAnnm) nro meant truthfulness, lionests, kindness, 
Jiberabty, gontloness, absence of covotoiisness Confirmatory lasts ora ‘By 
itrntli lio IS to bo obtained (Mu Up III, 1, 5), and ■ to ibem belongs lliai 
puro Brahman world (IV Dp I, 16) Tiint lownosi of spirit or ^vllnt of oboor* 
falnoss which results from unEnvouroblo conditions of placo or timo and tho 
romombrnneo ot cansos ot sorrow, IS donolod bi tbo term ‘ dejection, tlio con. 
tiaryot this is 'freedom from dojeotlon’ Tlio relevant scriplnml passage is 
‘This solt cannot bo obtained bj 6no lacking in strength ’ (Mu Up/ HI, J, 4) 





30 


BHAKTi Sutras of raraba 


‘Exultation’ is that satisCaotion oE mind which sprinss from circumstancps 
opposite to those just mentioned ; the contiaiy is ‘ absence of OMiltalionf’ 
Overgreat satisfaction also stands m the \say (oC meilibition). The sciipturn^ 
passage £oi this is ‘Calm, subdued, etc.. (Bn. Up. IV, 4, 23). Wliat tho 
Vy&khy&k&ra means to say is theiefoio that knowlctlgo is ic.di'' 0 d only ihrough 
the performance of the duly piesciibed woiks, on the pait of a person fulfilling 
all the enumerated conditions.” (Thibauts tianslation, S. B. E. Vol. XLVIII, 
pp. 17-18). 

But the mind is over unsteady. How then t® steady it in God ? The 
next two aphorisms teach us how to fiv the mind in d^'otion to the Lord. 

Nischintaih, by those who h.no no ‘•crnplc, no hestitalion, no niis 
givings, no care, no anxiety Bhagavan, the Loid. ^TsT E\a, alone. 

SarvadS., always. Sai va-bhavona, with tho whole heart. 

Bhajanlyah, should bo w’oi shipped. 

79. The Lo'd alone ahoul.d be always worshipped with the 
whole heart by the devotees who must repose absolute trust in 
.Him. — 79. 

Cf. Mundaka Upanisad, II, lu 5 — 

“In whom the heaven and tho earth and the intor\al between are woven, 
along with the mind and all tho hfo-broath also, know that one Self alone ; 
give up all other talks ; this is tho budge of immortality.” 

If this is not practicable, tho aspuant should sing the name of the Lord. 

r ^ ^ . 

Sah Ho ^rU'JTTfr: Kiitt^aamfinah, being invoked, 'aftsr^ Sighi.im, with- 
out delay. Eva, Surely Aviiblmati, appeals, lc^eals Himself. 

»rrFrr5 Bhakt&n, the votaiies. 'qrgvnr^^fh Anubhfu.iyati, fills with’ His presence 
or influence. 

80. Being invoked, He reveals Himself without the least de- ' 
lay and fills His votaries with His influence. — 80. 

Cf. GitSi XI. 54, wheie Lord Krisna . — “ But, 0 tormcntoi of 
enemies, 0 Arjuna, by single-hearted devotion alono I c.m, in this maunei, bo 
known and beheld and penotiatcd to My tianscendental essence.” Cf. also 
Bhaltiratndvali^ v. 8. 

sidqqt 

*rf^; Bhaktih, Devotion ^ar Eva, alono. f^nrETW Tri-satyasya, that which 
was, that which is, and that which will bo. Tho unchanging in time. Tho 
eteinal. Gaiiyasi, great. 

81. Devotion alone weighs heaviest with the Eternal, devo- 
tion alone weighs heaviest. Of, devotion to the Lord is the most 
glorious, devotion is the most glorious.— 81. 



BJIAKTI StTRAB OP NARAD A 


31 


The meaning is this — 

£\ea truths may change, for “The oW order ehangoih yielding place 
to new. And God fulfils Him&elf in many ways Bat lovo cannot Like 
God, lore is eternal also 







vscTT Ekadhft, of one kind 

fs:tTr, GanamfthatmyAsakti-R(ip4sakti Pfij&saktirSmampgsakti-D&syAsakti Sakh- 
yAsskti-V&tsalyAsftkti KdatAsakti>AtnuinivBdan&9akti>Tanmayg8akti > Faramavira 
n&sakti rfipd, developing in the forms of love of attributes and majesty, love of 
beanty, lovo of adoration love of lecolleotion, love of a servant, love of a fnend 
love of a parent love of a belovod wife lovo of self dedioaiion love of self- 
absorption and Jove of permanent , seif-offiicement C’^TSpWr EkAJaeadhl, 
eleven fold i rq-fir Bhavati, becomes 

QSr. Devotioiif though one m kind, still appears m ela 
van fonns aoaording as it takes the oourse of attaebment to tbs 
attnbntes aod greataess of God, attachment to His beant/i attach- 
ment to His worship, attachment to His memories, attachment 
to His service, atta«hment to His friendship, attachment to pa 
rental affection towards Him, attachment to him (as) of a beloved 
wifoi attachment to self consecration, attachment to seif absorption 
or Gcdlmesa), and attachment to permanent self efifaoement '->82 

This Sutram requires some explanation Tho aspirant begins by singing 
the namo of God and thereby develops the feeling of delight in the Lord This 
delight in the Lord has principally two aspects It may be excited ei^er by 
the contemplation of the Lord as Bower or by the contemplation of the Lom 
ns Love Tho former, t e , attachment to God as Power is hero colled by the 
name of, “ attachment to the attributes and greatness of God, because it 
generally arises out of contemplation of these things This is wliat the Western 
theologians understand by * natural religion which is an appreoiation of God 
in the study of man and the world Hie latter, i e , attachment to God as 
Love, 18 here dosoribed as “ attachment to His beauty * because it is pnnoipally 
generated by the sweetness of divine beauty These then are the two primary 
co-ordinate stages m the evolntion of sapreme love The next is the stage of 
worship, of quiet selfiess adoration of the Deity, which is followed by attaohment 
to the memories of the Lord This ceaseless contemplation of His power and 
performances ^dually establishes some sort of personal relationship betweio 
the Lord and His Love It is called 'personal love’ and it unfolds itself into 
fonr sncoessivoly higher stages First of all the devotee serves the Lord os a 
servant servos lus master Then he approachraHim n^rer and behave to- 




33 


BHAKTI SIJTRAS OF NAMADA. * 


wards Him as a £iiend does towards a friend. The relationship is then felt to 
be more closely personal and the devotee rises higher and manifests parental 
affection for the Loved One, as a fathei to his son. And lastly, the little le- 
maining remoteness between them vanishes altogether and the two bocome one 
in spirit ; and the devotee develops all the marks of a beloved wife’s love for her 
beloved husband This last, i.e., “ attachment (as) of a wife, ” again has two 
moments, according as the sense of Power or the sense of Love is dominant in 
it, the sense of Love being sequent to the sense of Power. The ‘ attachment 
(as) of a wife ’ under the sense of Love results in the complete conseciation of 
the self to the service of the Loid ; and therefore, it has been here called 

* attachment to self-consecration.’ This in its turn rises into the stages of self" 
absorption or God-vision when the devotee feels the living presence of God 
anywhere and everywhere and permanently loses himself in the Loid. (vide 
Introduction, pages xii, xvi.) 

In the Kitdb-al-Luma, the oldest treatise on Siifiism, the following ten 

* states ’ (spiritual feelings and dispositions) have been enumerated : — Medita- 
tion, nearness to God, love, fear, hope, longing, intimacy, tranquillity, con- 
templation, and certainty. “They descend,” says the author , “tiomGod into 
his heart, without his being able to repel thorn when they come, or to retain 
.them when they go.” 


n-Jana-jalpa-nirbhay&h, fearless of the clamour of the crowd. 
Ekamatah, of one opinion ; unanimous. 

Sanat-Kum&ra, Vy&sa, iSuka, Silndilya, 
Garga. Visnu Kaundilya, Se'^a, Uddhava, Aruni, Bah, Hanumat, Yibhisana 
and others. Bhakty^chary&h, teachers of devotion, Iti, thus. 

?r^* Evam, in this strain Yadanti, say. 

^ 887 Thus, the teachers of devotion, Sanat-KumS-ra, Vy^sa, 

Buka, b^ndilya, Garga, Yi^nu, Kaundilya, Se^a, Uddhava, Aru9i, 
Ball, Hanumat, Yibhisana, and others, declare unanimously, in 
this strain, being fearless of the clamour of the crowd — 88. 


^ ^ ^ f u n 

ir: Yah, who. Narada-proktam, recited by Ffdrada. Idam, this. 

Siva-auusasanam, wholesome teaching. Visvasiti, believes 

in. Sraddhatte, has faith in w. Sah, he BhaktimS-n, possessed 

of devotion, Bhavati, becomes, Prestham, the- dearest, Labhat© 

* obtains. Iti, this word marks the end of the treatise. 

84, He who^ believes and has faith in this wholesome doctrine 
expounded by Ndrada^ becomes possessed of devotion, he reaches 
to the Dearest, reaches to the Dearest.~84. 


The End. 


Index of the Aohonsms. 


wmffl'JnW Miiiureum n 1 
^a«rew5 # 51 

^TiniT urtrtHASijjjUT n 13 •* 

‘l ^w:if »w> n 58 

Vlr^imiJIlUTT H 10 •» 

U 29 •“ 

Pii3<i5 n 64 
^ II 3 

*ufi(iii|tiHM'^i^ n 36 M> 
i i re-O B iIg sr n 20 — 

wf^?frerinr^^5inft7f*itfi[wtft 78 m- 
m fHWft dr^Fs TnSn^^o n 18 

spTsiFfffinprf ilHiUHl 83 
f 1127 > 

n 5imr»wfH57 22 
ih T am^ui^in n mn ^ ii 68 ^ 26 
Hiiiil^Htif a >nr II 17 «. 8 

■ sertfSnireit^ UTTT ir vjf 46 .» 19 

U n 44 «, 18 

jpuclsil lhlil*ir<f4^ 3l^mvi<l^il|IT45^ 22 

!>^aTraiTi?«w«1w«Ri 22 
HW ni<IIIHii||(j Q^fIII<IN4 n 35 « 15 
Hillffcl *r h'22 

TUPrmftreiraiT g mala i ll r ii 65 25 
Hfjitsr uimiiiil<(7 II 23 „ 10 

srornr jt3t m«riTi^ !« 42 ^18 

Bwrai II JO _ 26 

OT^iPiiii »t5 19 

j Ha^’nfSrJ^ifflisft ^mn«i>^ ;i q iilS 

>win’!n!iS»aiwTf«n®9t II 28 13 

st^tx qrgmft^ uiW'KMiiiJi n 34 « 15 

xremgjttirtnisri sgwfip n 33 „ 14 

hRmSHpUHI HlgtlPuj^UllHril 9 5 

TtftndT5?(ft5Wi»I^#41 «. 17 


HV a tyal ^ rf tftirffir 3*11^ ^ 1 7 =17 ll69 ». 

C(f«.;re= it 5 r n 66 ~ 

firanrexT hRk?^ ii 81 — 

5 Hslll WWK I II 43 
sift St tm u Pni ftt ^MkiP-iw? a 32 « 
St tt^ftjf aftraaiTBTd fir a 62 „ 

stir??!! ft?ftmftrar9Km ii 19 _ 

snfetftj w i lftratim a ii|72 » 

stre yftg tiRTi^Htjgiaylgti'gy a 24 «. 

a 8 

gsi7f?*agm tfit arnsri: a 16 „ 

astisaft ytijti titg a 53 

KstrargTQ II 59 
=iiSTOn*gi 3 a 26 


26 

25 
30 
18 
14 
24 

9 

27 
10 

4 

8 

21 

23 

12 

28 

26 


giSwrrt ra i gf gr gfiwa t w ii g a 75 .. 
sttBiniarfsTtsit gtfijT a 69 .. 

stlsasiiTtil^ u-fsOaifft df^alsiMtif^lO 28 
*T»5 ft i n«4 i ail4g arWTBat? a 12 6 

MS5«lf43 5Wif>CTsat>jtitsi7r a 39 _ 17 
gsjTitaij »U5ya9» stsm^fiiiiftanjta 38 16 
gwrea B Mat} a 52 21 

stlgs^x faitt7 snarlrtT Qsttsna 71 27 
'x'Cf sftt^iihii fiwganasf ftrafttfft 
’aj’S « stRamit sw% a 84 32 

St aisarasfpRifftaitnRi dMi^Ifta 48 20 
smetrhti a 73 

us'airtiT sT^ stafft ^tmtj a 6 ^ 

agHiCTst farya^aimr cT a 5 
stsTT jtsnftftaiTsn^ a 21 ^ 

stjiawi 5 sn 3 ft 5 > staraijTil' tttrfft a 4 
sft fftfftsiresrTsf ftaftsf7 anata^vi^a^sT 
srfft TiafTTx * 47 „ 

siJ ft^tstft awia g lft a 49 «. 

TistTsishtsiTfiEj Ttftagjian^ a 31 «. 
waiftjfir iiQ^a a 40 . „ 


28 

3 

3 

9 

3 

'19 

20 

13 

17 



VTrTT II 11 i.. 


fg'PftT 5T g?]^ II 61 


mar^f^jg Htar^rrl^ ii 14... 
yr fc| g fP5ti' .» II 74 


^f5=(T^gT^ 'Trm^^g'haar n 60 ♦.. 
^ grH^JTrJT.* gjR^T^srrfg^a'pa^iar- 
afk »Ttrt^ II 80 •«» ••• 


Jii. T 

Pago. 

^ rlTfk ^H^Ih vTttFT^rTRarfrT H 50 ... 20 
5 fansp^^ narr^ET 

24 JTsr^: n 76 M» ••• 30 

16 9" II 25 ... 11 

7 ’ETT rsrf^^ TrCTWTT^'TT II 2 ... 2 

28 TT anTTa-ffmTf^^'hr^’TrHrrH II 7 ... 4 

23 ^’JTft’t^^THTfeCrETW giT% II 77 «, 28 

'^>Tfrinf5rTgjarK#5T'?raigfta^ II 63 ... 24 

30 sr^giJTKJ 30 ... 13 


Additions and Corrections. 


Page 

Line 

For 

Bead 

Pago 

Lino For 

Bond 

Preface 

8 

Thibaut 

Di. Thibaut 

ft 

25 

sq-r^Trewfarr^.* snrrqR^qrrtf.* 

5. 

9 

Panini 

P&nini 

» 

5 

3 

— -gsTT^rTr 

— ^^^T^fhTrTT 

ft 

11 

S. N. 

N. S. 

7 

18 

thought for 

drndgoiy to 

% 

1 

3 

Srimad 

Srimad. 

9 

37 

1^^3jrHnrgT5[; 

f^^^rzrsrg'T^.* 

If 

9 

(Jfiiina) 

(JuHna), 

10 

18 

rrf^5— 

Hrerf — 

if 

12 

others 

other paths 

11 

44 



ft 

32 

ana 

ana 



^Twsrr: 

rrcnrf 

■ • 

11 

28 

sfi,stra 

s^stia 

12 

12 

ncessarily 

necessarily 

)) 

28 

Sri 


13 

23 

liavc been 

having been 

• • 

111 

ft.n. 

Naiada 

KS,iada 

99 

8 

sense oy 

sense of 

V 

36-) 



'» 

10 

nalvecy 

naively 


38 V 

remomberance 

remembrance 

99 

11 

thud 

they 

99 

39} 



99 

12 

acy 

and 

vi 

13 

bhagvSn 

bhagavdn 

99 

13 

thto 

they 

„ 18 &21 romemberance remembrance 

99 

14 

aocoiding 

according to 

• • 

Vll 

3 

continnence 

continuance 

15 

36 


farimrarrnT^ 

99 

14 

state 

states 

ft 

40 

on 

through 

• •• 

XUl 

19 

smamdna 

sCLmmdnn 

16 

13 

Bliagvad 

Bhagavad 

XV 

28 

larama 

krama 

99 

38 

Bossnot 

Bossuet 

XVI 

7 

diftinguished 

distinguished 

17 

2 

pricicipaily 

principally 

2 

17 

follow 

follows 

55 

19 

Duilavah 

Durlabhah 

3 

8 

HWT 


55 

55 

unapprooh— 

unapproach— 

j> 

18 



55 

25 

grv^rTsIxr 


ft 

19 


gtldH 

18 

30 

gitvr 

^Nr 


20 


— 

21 

7. 

P. xvi 

P.xvii 

ft 

29 

^gavft 

^cToVfi' 

55 

37 

seecks 

seeks 

it 

31 

^5iT3W: 

^FTavr: 

22 

17 

nobly 

only 

it 

31 

Stavdhah 

Stabdhah 

23 

35 

beeause 

because 

4 14&25 — 

- 

24 

19 

Na 

?T Na ' 


Printed by I. N. Mark, at the City Press, Alllahabad. 


THB 


SANDILYA SUTRAM 

• * 


XflTB 

THE COMMENTARY OF SVAPNESVARA, 




Nanda Lai Sinha, M. A , B L 


Prownaal Cml Sermce, Bthar aiid Onssa, 


PeausuBV nr 

SUDHUIDB& B&THA BASU. il B 


Prom tile Panina Office, Bhuvauetwan Aera 


BAHADUBOANJ. AIiLAHABAD, 




OfiDIOATED 


TO Tnr 

SACR&D MSMOR? 

OF 

IRai Bababuv Srfsacbanbra IDaeu IDIbigartiapa 

OTTn 

LOVB AM) BEV£B£NC£ 

BT ms 

HDMBLB imWATB 

TBE 

STUDY AND PEOPAOATION 
or 

THE SAOBED BODES OF THE BINDUS 




PBBPAOfi 

Ihe present work » based on the text edited by Dr Balhniyne and 
pnblubed in the Bibliotheca Indica, new senes, m 1861 Tlie iransJatios has 
been very mach facilitated, and, in many places, considerably improved by 
Itfr £ B Cowells work published in the same series in 1878 Ur 
Oowell’s rendering has been fonnd to be inacenrate in several places , yet w;e 
have not hesitated to borrow liberally from his footnotes which are very faelp- 
^^1, and from his translation of texts of reference where an improvement was 
not called for We are glad to take this opportnnity of acknowledging onr 
great obligation to these two eminent Sanskrit scholars 

Nothing definite is known regarding the anthor or the date of the One 
hundred Aphorisms of hdndilya* ** They are the work of some anonymous 
teacher,** according to Ur Cowell, who ascribed his doctrine to ihe ancient 
ri$i Sdndilya, partly beoinse he wished to conceal its modern origin nnder a 
name belonging to \ edto times, and nlso because the Sdndilya ndyd Bn;^lied a 
convenient ^'antage*ground for his mam doctrine of the necessity of faith * 
This theory mnst be rejected The ** doctrine of flie necessity of faith’* is not 
the anonjmons teacher's own evolntion It has a very mach older origin In 
Btr Cowell’s language, ** The name Sbdndilyn is found lO a well known passage 
of the ^hftndogya Upanifat (ui, 14), which reenrs with a few verbal difference 
in the Safapatha Brfihmapa (X, 1 1 , 3) , the sage is there represented as declar- 
ing that the sonl within ns is Brahman His doctrine is directly referred to in 
Aphorism 31 of the present work, and the Commentary gnotos the passage from 
the Cbhftndogya Upanifat This dootriocT is called the S&ndilya vidyg in the 
Ved&nios&ra, and it is there characterised os consistmg of devotional medita- 
tions directed towards Brahman viewed os possessed of qualities rather than as 
the Absointo The author of these aphorisms apparently acpepts his view as 
the true * * * ’ Farther argument on the point will bo found m onr intro- 
dnotion to tho Nfirada Bhokti Sfitram The doctrine was not originally pro- 
pounded m the B&agavad gitft, ’ as supposed by Ur Cowell, “the historj 
of the Hindu doctrine of faith (bhakti) ’ must bo traced from the Vedic times 

Tiio supposed antagonism of Knowledge and Devojhon is another sefions 
popular tniscoDception Dr Billintme write** “^ilndilya rejects the Hindu 



/ 


i 

IV . - 

I I 

(gnostic) theory that knowledge is the one thing needful, and contends that 
knowledge is only the handmaid of faith'' Upon this Mr. Cowell comments : 
“ Sankaia's view of knowledge is clearly expressed in the following passage of 
his Commentaiy on the Svetasvataia Upanisat, which will serve to bring the 
two views into sharp contrast. ‘When men, disregarding the fruit, perform 
works only for the sake of Isvara, these works become indirectly a means to 
liberation, as being a means for producing that purity of the internal organ 
which IS a means to knowledge, which is the means to liberation.” But 
Sankara, more than any other leforraer of his eminence, has been greatly 
misundei stood. liave made any seiious attempt to study his life and 

work as a whole. Sankara must be studied not only iir his Commentaries on 
the Upamsats and the Brahma-Sutias, but also in his Commentary on the 
Grita, m his hymns, and in his daily life. He himself was one of the gieatest 
bhaktas that evei lived on eaith. A iich vein of the purest and highes't 
Devotion runs through his hymns to the manifestations of Biahman such as 
Siva, etc In his Conimeutary on the Gita, \i, 47, he explains that the 
person V ho woi ships Vasudeva with faith is the wisest of the \Vise. Else- 
where he declares : “ It is Devotion which is the greatest of all- the' means' of 

Belease.” The consummation of Knowledge i& in Devotion. The goal is the 
same, whether described as ‘ Sarvaui kUalu idam B/ahma ” (All this verily is 
Biahman), oi as ” Tasudevahsarvam ” (All is V^sudeva). A^“ sharp contrast” 
is visible only when you do not “fook at the essentials, but at the temporary 
imperfections of the different environments of the begiuuers. One beginner is 
engaged in hearing the tiuths about Brahman from the teachore, in differentiat 
ing and assimilating those truths, and in reflecting and meditating on them 
in the recesses of his heart ; w hile another beginner is engaged in sacrifice and 
in worship with ‘ a leaf, a flower, a fiuit, a handful of w'ater” a contrast 
indeed. Follow' them a little further in their Journey onwards, and you will 
find that saciifice and W’orship are as much enjoined on the former as 
knowledge is on the latter. To the former the teacher addresses as follows i 
“ Be not inattentive to duties towards the Gods and the Pitiis. Regard thy 
mother as a God. Regaid thy itinerant visitor as a God. Acts that are 
blameless ; those should be performed , not others. What are our good examples ; 
those should be followed by thee ; not others ” (Taittiriya Upanisat, xi, 2)» 
A spirit of devotion and woiship is an essential condition for the knowledge' of 
Brahman, and the more one kpows Brahman, the inoio devoted and worship- 
ful one becomes. And thus the “ gnostic disappears in the c-ovotee, Baladera 
in the introduction to his Commentary on the Gitd rightly obseives. * It is 


V> 


knonledgo that, mtb a oertflm qualification, u dcTOtion llhc lodifiEcrencciu like 
that oC seaing mthoat vioking ,qnd leoufg by a flarting qt, the eye ” The 
meaning u that hnoiqlefige oC Brahman, becoming etea^y, la doTCtion This 
point has been cleared np by Rfimfinuja id jus Commentary on the Veddnfa 
Sfitras We admit,'* be there says, **that release consists only m the 
cessation of Nescience, and that this cessation resnlts from the knowledge of 
Brahman Bnt a distinction has ^ere to be made regarding the natnre of this 
knowledge whiob the Vedftnta texts aim at enjoining for the purpose of pnttmg 
an end to Nescienoe Is it merely the knowledge of the sense of sentehces which 
originates from the sentence f or is it knowledge in the form of meditation 
(npfisani) which hasthe knowledge jnst referred to as its antecedent ’ Hence 
we ecnolndo thatdhe knowledge which the Vedfinta texts mm at incnlcatmg is 
a knowledge of the sense of sentences, and denoted by ‘ dhyhna,' 'npfisanll^ 
(i e , ineditation), and similar terms ' Uoditation * means steady remembrance 
I e, a continuity of steady remembrance uninterrupted like the flow ofioil, 
in agreement with the scriptural passage which declares steady romemhmnbe 
tohe the ineans of release * On the attainment of remembrance all the ties 
ara loosened’ (Chh Up VfI,;xn,2J • • • * < (Ihibsnt’s translation) It 
IS theiefore the ignorance of the link between ,HnowIedgo and fierolma that is 
xesponsible^or the popular miscopcepticn of the relation between tben^ 

Now toireturn to our text The One Mumlref Aphonmi of l^findilya 
does not profess to teach an ongmal doptnue of Devotion It is a hlimfimsS 
of ^Bhqktl, that is, a compilation and exposition of illnstratiro autho- 
ritative texts on the main points m the doctrine of Devotion ti explam 
the nature ' of Sllm&msit edatra, we give two examples below ' ( 1 )' The 
Obhtndogys'Opanfsat, IT, xxlli, 1,410010 res “'He who is steady in Brahman, 
attains immortality *' The doubt ansos whether * steadmess ' bore means 
knowledge or devotion The text discusses the point and concludes that 
‘steadmess ’ menus devotion, and not knowledge (S) The Clid, iv, '9, deet 
lares » Uy birtb and My action divme” Here the doubt anses as to the 
meaning of the word * divine ’ Some say that it means' * produced through 
merit others ihmk that it means ‘produced in heavoDi’ The text by smpln 
cation rejects these 'interpretations, and explains that tho word ‘divine* means 
‘ constituted I7 His own m&yft only Tt would be wrong to suppose in these 
two oases, for instance, that the text declares immortality to bo the fruit of 
Devotion land attributes divineness to the body of tho Lord, and then supports 
its teaohlngs by means of revealed texts This character of the work ‘should 
be always borne in mind ' it, 


Tl 

' Ihe xvorkis divided! into throe chapteis oonlaining two Icclaros each, I'jr ’• — 

CHAPTEE I .—Tnh Nature of Devotion. 

Ijeoxube i . Tho Definition oE Devotion. 

Ijeoxdre ii : The Accessories of Devotion. 

CHAPTEE II:— The Means or De\otiois. 

Lecture i : Tho Internal Moans. 

Lecture ii . Tho Extornol Moans. 

I 

I 

CHAPTEE III:— The Object of IVoiisnir 
' Lecture i: Tho Nature of Brahman. 

Lecture ii : Tho Relation of tho Ji\a and Brahman. 

Incidentally it explains Creation and Dissolution, the causes of Sainsilr.a 

A 

and Mukti, the nature and function of tho Atman and Manas, tho relation of 
the World, tho Jiva, and Brahman, and sources and objects of knowledge. 
A complete outline of the work will bo found in tho elaborate table of contents 
which follows; 

Wo beg however to invito special attention to tho following teachings : — 

' ' (a) Tho cause of SamsClra is want of Devotion and not wont of know- 

ledge of Brahman. 

(h) Like tho foulness of the crystal in tho piosonco of a China rose, 

' SamsSrO is foreign to tho nature of tho Jiva, being merely a 
' reflection from the mind. 

' (c) The end of Devotion is not Mnkli but tho pleasure of tho Lord. 

1 ' 

(a) Cause of Samsdra . — Tho distinction drawn hero between Devotion 

and knowledge is more popular than philosophical. Knowledge and Devotion 
have one and the same end in view, namely the removal of tho circumstances 
which in the phenomenal world creates the division of tho Jiva and Brahman, 
Between them there is only a difference of degree and not of kind. Both 
elevate the mind to the highest state of purity ; when tho veil of the mind 
becomes so thin that the light of Brahman pierces through it, and tho Jiva is 
drawn, as it were, by an intense love, of kin to kin, towards Brahman. The 
mind is then immediately dissolved j and “ nothing manifold is hero.” It is in 
this view of Mukti resulting immediately through Devotion that the cause of 
Sams§,ra is want of Devotion and not want of knowledge of Brahman, For, 
otherwise, in tho lower stages of evolution tow ards Mukti want of knowledge 
of Brahman is as much the cause of the prolongation of Sainsaia as is want of 
Devotion. 



(b) I^aiitre of Baaisdra —Take tor example ^ eljli^e'^o! ^lyfian ‘ Xfie 
moon conie3^rn't)yMe£lili& ^rth*an(i^tUt*]ftifi''^n^^'MnW'i£fie' ei&ipse The 
ignoradV ifii^^ne ih^l^A^owor £ESer diVfigtft' of £tie snn is exiin 
gmsfied an^ dafl^d^'^s enreloj^ the iiniversV‘ ^Hafc^th'ejr lire Vrong ^ Similarlj, 
the mind intervenes and skqts oft (he Yiglil^of brahman from theJlra Those 
irho d[o liit ^nWthe’trnth ev^r gfbp^ ih darkness, witlioal making anj effort 
to remove the ohatrnotion This is the'Wliditiott oE the average man He is a 
samsftrt Should he^lhlnli, lot’ shM^d can dishngaish thd 'mm'd'froin 

th& eidbo^d Atm^A thin£:| t^tYhis is tWr permanent state or thai (hi^ state 
IS connate'with the nature oE the Atman, they are ^nnder a ^ravL error 
sftra IS no mote natural to thd AtSnHti thiih darknhss il^‘td£h'b soiJ^ Sams&ra 
IS a temporary echlisf of the lighlf oE ^rahhikn^, itrfiiiiHWiiot to 6e mistaken for 
a peripaoedt sUte appertaining to' (be natord oE the ^mbddieff Atmad 

^£nkof 'DivoUon — Mn^ii consists in the removal of the fonlness’ 
refieoted in the Atman from the mirror of the mind This removal is possible 
only by the abolition oE the mind 'through inUnse Devotion It does not 
donote the accomplishment oE something wliich did^ not extfst before It means 

<111, 101 (n ‘ ioi ®i # ^ j 

merely the development of , the bliss asj^Qct oE the Atman Trhich m the samsArl 
Jlva IS manifested only* m the aspects of existence and conscionsness (Die 
development of bliss IS in the gift o£^ JBrahman, and does not oome to every 
devotee as a matter of coarse So is it declared in the Hatha lypanisst, I, ii, 23 
” Not 13 this Atman by explanation^ to bp gained, no^ by intelligence, 

. _ not bv much learnmg^ 

'* Whom alone it elects, by him it IS to be gained , to bun this Atman 
nnfolds its own nature ** , , 

, i I )r J 

and also m thtdenit I, ii, 20 — . m . 

* * * Ii J ♦17 I 

*^Sabt]er than the subtlest, greater than the greatest the Atman is 
bidden m the cavity ^ this JIva , ^ ^ 

» Him the firm of faith in Vi^nu sees, free from grief, tbrongh the graee 
of the Creator , (he sees also) the supenorify (of the Lord) over 
himself” , 

On the other hand, a trae devotee does not crave for Mukii He finds in 
finite ]oy in the service o£ the Lord Thus, declares tneBhAgavaia, III, xtv, 34 
** Not nnity oE self with Me desire some engaged m seeing 
My Eeet, opd doing acts for My sake, , 

Those jBfadgavaias who, associating among themselves, extol 
My mighty deeds ’ 


• •• 

VIII 


and again (III, xix, 13) 

“ Residence in the same world with mo, lordliness oqnal to, 

Mino, noarnoes to mo, possession of My form, unity with me, 

“ Even if ofEorod, they -do not accept, save the privilege of doing 

service unto mo.” 

“ So dear the path of bhakti, says JHaesvara, “ they despise the great 

Release.” 

3!he end of devotion then is not Mnkti, but the pleasure of the Lord. 

And this Love of Devotion is reciprocated by Him. This is revealed in 

theRig-veda, IV, i, (10), 55. 

Ho alone in the secret by tho humble in spirit is praised. 

His beautiful mind, to tho people, desirous to speak, 

“ The Giver of Blessings tho source of joy becomes to tho adorer, 
when the Giver of Blessings, tho Lord of Wealth, pervades tho 
speech by His power.” 

“ This salutation to the Giver of Blessings, tho soU- 
Resplendent, tho Eternal Powei, for strength is offered. 

May wo, 0 God, in this battlo*fiold (of tho world), become 
all-round victors along with the wise, being blessed 
by Thee.” (Rig-voda, IV, i, (10, 55). 

“ Holding my hand Thou leadest mo. 

My comrade everywhere ; 

As I go on and lean on Thee, 

My burden Thou dost^bear. 

If as I go in my distress. 

I frantic words should say, 

Thou settest right my foolishness, 

And tak’st my shame away. 

Thus Thou to me new hope dost send, 

A new world bringest in, 

Now know I every man a friend, 

And all I meet my kin. 

So like a happy child I play. 

In Thy deai world, 0 God, 

And everywhere,— I, Tuka, say, 

Thy bliss is spread abroad” — (Tukaram) 

s 


TABLE OF OOSTENH^A 


PAOB 

, InTBODUOTIOM r 

Mnkti IS the Jlva*9 attaiaiog the stata ot Brabmao ' ' 1 

Tfae Jlva 18 essentially non^i&rent from Brahman 1 

Irike the fonlness of ueorysta), Samsdra IS foreign to the nainre 
of the Jlrai— being only a reflection from the mm4 1 

Therefore, Samsftra is not to be abolished by Knowledge of 
Brahmoni but by the ahoUtion of the mind I 

Devotion to God is the only means of tbo abolition of the mind 2 
This is established by ih^ Srntis and the Bmfitis 2 

Knowledge of Brahman c^ntnfanies to IhoMcvelopmeni of Devo 
lion by washing away the impurity of onbelief 2 

Ignorance of Brahman is not the canse of Samstlra 2 

Creation does not proceed ont of nothing , nor is the world 
unreal 3 

FJeas^e, eto., are not properties of the Atman hence they do 
no( ^ove its existence 3 

The proof of the Atman is from the manifestation of all being 3 

CHAPTfiR I 
Tn^ KATuns of Dbvotxov 
Zeelure t 

The Definition of Devotion 

An enquiry into the natnre of Devotion is necessary for tbo sake 


of Idakti*— Sfitra 1 3 

The practice of Devotion does not require a preliminary study of 
the Vedas, nor the equipment of self restraint etc 4 

Discussion IS neeessarj for the refutation of false a^ments 4 

Higher Devotion u absolute attachmont to God— s 2 5 

it 18 a particular funotion of tho miod ' 5 

Attachment implies alfectton • 5 

Occasional remembrance of God is not Devotion 5 

Uero &iowiedge of Brahman is not Devotion « 5 

Kiowlodge of Brahman as an object of wonbip is not Devotion 5 
The object of Devotion is a Crascions Being nnaSected by n 
mmd, e 0 an incaroation 6 

Tbo fruit of Devotion is iramortality-*s 3 6 

The word, Bamatbft, in the CfabUndogya (Jpamsat, IX, zxiii, 2, 
means Devotion, and not Knowledge— s 4 7 

Devotion supersedes E^owlcdgo as a means of Mukti— s 5 7 

The words, ati mntyu, in the Svet&svatara Upanifat, iii, 8, *ind 
yajftmabe, in the Rig Veda, V, vii, $9, 12, mean Devotion 8 

V Devotion Is aGteciion, because it IS the opposite of hatred, and 

because the Scriptures speak of it as rasa or 8weetim9s~8 6 _ 9 


• • • 

vni 

and again (III, xix, 13) / 

Besidence in the same world with me, lordliness equal to ^ 

Mine, nearness to me, possession o£ My form, unity with me. 

Even if ofiEered, they -do not accept, save the privilege of doing y 

service nnto me.” r , , , 

/ So dear the path of bhahti, says Jnaesvara, “ they despise the great 

Release. ’ 

The end of devotion then is not Mnkti, but the pleasure of the Lord. 

And this Love of Devotion is reciprocated by Him. This is ' reyealed in 

theBig-veda, IV, i, (10), 55. j ! „ 

“ He alone in the secret by the humble in spiiit is praised,. 

His beautiful mind, to the people, desirous to speak, 

“ The Giver of Blessings the source of joy becomes to the adorer, 
when the Giver of Blessings, the Lord of Wealth,, pervades the 
speech by His power.” , 

j • ^ * 1 * 

“ This salutation to the Giver of Blessings, the self- 

Resplendent, the Eternal Power, for strength is offered. ' ^ 

“ May we, 0 God, in this battle-field (of the world), become 
all-round victors along with the wise, being blessed 
by Thee.” (Rig-veda, lY, i, (10, 55). 

‘‘ Holding my hand Thou leadest ine. 

My comrade everywhere ; 

As I go on and ISan on Thee, ' , 

My burden Thou dost^bear. 

If as I go in my distress. 

I frantic words should say, ' ' ’ 

Thou settest right my foolishness, 

And fak’st my shame away. ' 

Thus Thou to me new hope dost send, 

A new world bringes't in. 

Now know I every man a friend, 

And all I meet my kin. 

So like a happy child I play. 

In Thy dear world, 0 God, 

And everywhere,—!, Tuka, say, 

Thy bliss is spread abroad” — (Tukaram). 


'iCABIiE DF OdNTBNm 

I, FAoe 

, IimODUCTIOV 

Matcii u the Jive's attaining the state ot Brahman 1 

The Jtra is essentially nen^ifferant from Brahman 1 

Like the fonlness of the erystal, Sams&ra is foreign to the naian 
o! the Jtva,— being only a roBection from the min4 1 

Therefore, SamsSra is not to be abolished byKnoarledge of 
Brahman, bnt by the abolition of the mind 
Devotion to Qod is the onpr means of the abolition of the mind 
This IS established by the Srntis and the Brnfitis 
Knowledge of Brahman oOntribntes to itiifdovolopment ot Devo* 
tion by washing away tho imparity of nnbeliet 
Ignorance ot Brahman is not the oanso of Samsitra 
Creation does not proceed oat of nothing , nor is the world 
nnreal 

Pleasnre, eto., are not properties of tho Atman , hence they do 
nof^ove its esistence 

The proof of the Atman is from the manifestation of all being 
CHAPTER I 
Tnr Katdbe of Devonos 
Zteliire I 

Tho DeGniticn ot Devotion 

An enquiry into the nature of Devotion u necessary tor tho sake 
ot Unkti — Sfttra 1 

Tho praotice ot Devotion does not rcqniro a preliminary study ot 
tho Vedas, nor the equipment of self restraint etc 
Discnssion is necessary for tho refutation of false arguments 
Higher Devotion is absolute attachment to Hod— s Z 
It IS a particular function ot tho mind 

Attachment implies affection ■ , 

Occasional remembrance ot Hod is not Devotion . 

Hero Knowledge of Brabman is not Devotion 
Kiowledge of Brahman ns an object of worship is not Devotion 
The object of Devotion is n Conscious Being nnaffeotod by n 


mind, e y an incarnatien 6 

The fruit of Devotion is immortality— s 3 6 

The word, Sarastbd, in tho ChhSndogya [Tpanifat, II, xxiii, 3, 
means Devotion, and not Knowledge- s 4 , 7 

Devotion supersedes Knowled^ as n moans of Mnkti— s 5 7 

The words, nti mrityn, in tho Svolkavatara Dpani^t, iii, 3, and 
yajdmahe, in the Rig Vedn, V, vii, S3, 12, mean Devotion i 8 
s Devotion is affection, because it is the opposite ot hatred, and 
because the Scriptures spenK of it as rasa or sweetness— s 6 9 





X 




10 

11 


11 

12 

12 

13 


14 


J]he argument that Devotion is the opposite o£ hatred, discussed 
Devotion is not a form of volition 

Nor is Devotion action, as it cannot be produced by an effort of 
•will S.--7 ••• ^ ••• ••• ••• 

Hence indeed is the fruit of Devotion imperishable— s. 8 
Devotion is not knowledge of Biabman» even in a secondary. 

sense— s. 9 , ^ ... ' 

The Gits, is a sruti, and 'not a sniriti, and is therefore authori- 
tative |!ihe the Vedas ... ... ’•». 

'^•Leclure ». * 

The Accessories of Deyotion. 

Knowledge of Brahman and Yoga are acc'essbiies of, Devo- 
tion— s. 10 

The Sruti, Chhandogya Dpanisat, VIT, xiv, 2, explained 
—“S. 11, 12 ... ... •" ^ 14-lo 

In ordinary life knowledge is seen to subser\e affection — s. 13 ... - 15 

The milkmaids obtained Mukti by Devotion, without knowledge 
of ]6rahmah— s. 14’ ... ... ... 

The Git^, xv, 55, does not say “ by devotion knows,*’ “ by 
devotion recognises s. 15, 16 ... 16-18 

Knowledge of Brahman is not even an alternative means of 
Mukti— is. ’17 ' ’ ... ' ... ^ ... 

The expression, “ devotion to a God,*’ in the Svetdsvataia Dpa- 
nisat, vi, 23, does not refer to the Loid, but to an inferior 
God— *s. 18 ... ... ... 

Yoga is subservient to both knowledge and Devotion— s 19 
So is also Vairdgya (Disp'assion) • ’ ‘ ' 

" Contemplation” in .the Ypga Siltra, 1, 23, lefers to the lower 
form of Devotion, i. e. the piactice which subseives the higher 

Devotion— S' 20 , , ... . ... , , ... 

The kffection which is Devotion is not an “ affliction ’* (Yoga 
Sfftra, ii, £1)— S..21 

Devotion is superior to Action, knowledge, and Yoga — s. 22, ... 

This is proved b^the argument in. the GStS>/Sii — s. 23 , 

Devotion is notSraddh^ (Faith or Belief)— s. 24,25 ... 

It is a mistake to speak of the latter part of the Veda as a 
JSdna-Kanda, it is really a Biahman di Bhaki-Kanda ... 

CHAPTER II.” 

' > ' 

The Means of Devotion. ; 

Lecture I. 

The Internal Means 

Knowledge of Brahman is to be cultivated till the complete puri- 
fication of the mind— ss 27, 28 

Knowledge, according to Kdsyapa, is knowledge of the lordliness 
of Brahman as essentially diffeient fiom the Jiva— s. 29 
Knowledge j'accoi ding to Bddarayana, is knowledge of the unity 


t • • 

» • t 

• » ■ 


18 


18 

19 

19 


20 

20 

21 

21 

22 

23 


of the Atman — s, 30 


24 

25 
25 



\ 

1 I i 

Eno\rledgc,according{o!3ilndiIj’A, IS knonledgo oC the ilordlincssi < ' 
< as well ns of the unity of die Atman — s 31 25 

Such n conception is not n contradiction in thought— s 32 ' 26 

Snffermg does not belong to Brahman — s 33 ) 27 

Lordliness is tho very nature of Brahman— s 34 ■ 27 

The JiTa’s Samslra and snfforing are adrentitions and temporary 
I— s 35 . 'n I I 1 28 


The lordlmess of Brahman depends upon hlftyfi which is otornnl, 
The lordliness of Brahman is eternal, bceanse Creation is inGnite 
owmg to the infinity of minds— s 36 
Brahman creates tbrongh tho medium of M&yfi— s 37 
The Srnti " on Bim is all founded ’ explained- s 38 
Brahman and JUftyA are both of them canses— s 3'< , — 

Beside the hnower end the knowable there is no third principle 
' — s 40 

Brahman end UAyA are eternally connected together— s 41 
The Knowable is not unreal, as it is thejmergy of Brahman — s 42 
-The complete purity ot Derptlonis to be inferred from its expres 
sions— s 43 

The chancteristio exprc’sions of Devotion are to be learnt from 
theSmritis— a 44 > 

Hatred and the like do not develop these marks— s 45 
The incarnations of Brahman arc also fit obiecls of Devotion 
— s 46 ^ ; ' 

Tor, the ^rnti declares that ho who knows the birth and activity 
of Brahman does not undergo farther birth— s 47 
Knowledge of tho birth and activity of Brahman, however, doeq 
not directly produce immortolii), but only by developing 
Devotion ,, 

The word, divine, in Gltft, ir, 9, explained- s 48 
A'“ body ” in general is the basis or snpport of exertion 
The body of the Jiya is the seat of worldljr experience 
Compassion is the motive of actirit} on the part of Brahman 
— s 49 , I 

Unkti does not result from Devotion to the “ Vibbfttis ,” because 
they are associated with FrApn, and because there is prohibi- 
tion of the worship of the King, for mstanco— ss 50, 51 , 

VAsndevn Kyijna is an exception because He was Brahman itself 
in a human from— as 52, 53 

He has been declared ns a VibhOti tocause of His preminonce 
among the Vfijms- s 54 

Thus Devotion to the Incarnations is also the means of Mnkt^ 
— s 55 j , - 

Lecture u 

The Hxteroral Means , 

The exlernal means are, the secondary forms of Devotion which , 
destory vqces that hinder the develppment of > the higher Devo- 
I tion 


28 


29 

30 

30 

31 

31 

31 

32 


32 

33 
35 

35 

36 

36 
16 

37 
37 

37 

38 

39 

40 
40 


41 



Page 




•« 


XU 


Git&, ix, 14, and ix, 29, refer to the secondary forms of Devo- 

tion““S» 56»»» ••• ••• ••• ••• 41 

They produce affection for Brahman—s. 57 ^ ... ... 42 

They are (i) celebration of names-, (ii) striving for the sake of 
Devotion, (iii) firmness in vow, (iv) bowing, (v) sacrifice of 
knowledge, (vi) thinking on nought besides, (vii) worship, 

(viii) offering, (ix) surrender of everything, etc.—s. 58 ... 411 

They produce purity of mind— s. 59 ... ••• ... 44 

Their efficacy is enhanced in conjunction with the higher 

Devotion— such, according to some, is the moaning of “ offers 
with devotion” (Gitd, ix, 26) and other texts — s 60 ... 44 

Jaimini considers that “devotion” in those te\ts is merely a 
name— s. 61 ... ... .•• ... 45 

The emplo*yment of the external means is to bo according to 
occasion and necessity>"S. 62 ... ... ... 45 

Any one of them may be effectual, if it succeeds in producing the 
pleasure of the Lord — s. 63 ... ... ... 46 

Surrender of actions results in nOn-production of consequences, 
and thus opens the door to the Higher Devotion— s. 64 ... 47 

Non-production of consequences does not promote a sense of 
irresponsibility ... ... ... ... 47 

Meditation need not be confined to the declared foi ms of 
Brahman^^s 65 ... ..• ... ... 48 

“Sacrifice” in Gita, ix, 25, means worship — s. 66... ... 48 

“Water of His feet” in Nr ismha Puiapia, ix, 44, means water 
for washing the feet— s. 67 ... ... ... 49 

Offerings to Brahman may be afterwards appiopriated by the 
devotee himself— s. 68 ... ... ... * ... 50 

Expiation is to be regulated by the occasion and nature of the 
defect in the worship — s. 69 ... ... ... 51 

Offering need not be confined to “a leaf, a flower, a fmit, a 
handful of water ” (Gita, ix, 26) — s. 70. ... ... 52 

,The secondary forms of Devotion are superior to all other acts- 
s* 71 ... ... ... ... ... 52 

The secondary Devotion is threefold only ; (i) affliction, (ii) in- 

, quiry, and (iii) entieaty (Gita, vii, 16) — s. 72 ... ... 53 

The secondaries have independent results also— s. 73 ... 54 

Hemembrance, celebration, and discourse are of the nature of 

expiation— s. 74 ... ...’ ^ ^ ... ... 55 

Their practice is to be continued until life expires ; hence they 
entail the same amount of hardship as the more se\ere expia- 
tion— s. 75 ^ ... ... ... ... 56 

Repentance is a subsidiary of all expiations ... ... 57 

A single practice of the secondary forms of Devotion is competent 
to destioy even great sms— s. 76 ... "... ... 58 

“ Abandoning all duties ” (Gita, xviu, 66) explained ... 58 

Abandonment through fear of pain condemned ... 59 

The secondary f 01 ms of Devotion aie of the nature of expiation 
in that they destroy sm — s77 ... ... ... 60 



ziu 


Katnro of expiation proper explained 

JQven ifae lovresi-bom are entiUcd to the practice of the means of 
Pevotion— 8 7S 

The practice of the moans of DctqIioo can bo continned oven in 
the world of iho l^rd hf those whofo derot/on was sot por- 
feoted on earth— s 79 ^ 

Hnfclx may be attained at a single stop or by enccossivo stages— d 
8 80 • 

The anceessivo stages are the bodies of Anirnddha* Fnydynmna, ^ 
and Samhar^ana 

Tbo distinction between perfected and nnperfeotod Devotion » 
established from tho Gitflj viiii 13 and 24— s 81 
The great sinners are to practise the devotion of “ nfSiotion **— 
s 82 

Tbo Higher Devotion is the highest rebgion— s 83 
Other religions contnfante towards Mnfcti only by prodnoing tho 
Higher Devotion— s 84 t 

OHAPPER III 

Inr Objxct of Wobsiiii ' 

Lttinre i 

Tho Natnre of Brahman 

The kneirable is identical with the object of worship— s 85 '' (1 

Transcendenbl and phenomenal reality distingnishcil 
Brabman is not a snbstratnm of qualities 
It IS supposed to bo the knower by reference to external circnms 
tanoes " 

Mkyk constitntes tbo lordliness of Brahman, and is tho snmmnm 
genus of all insensate things— s 

M&yd is'so called from the Yanoty of its clfeots» and not from 
their nnrealiiy 

The special pnnciples are 'prodneed from the general j^rinoi" 
pies— 8 87 

By existence in all effects Brahman is tho material canso of 
Creation , by its intelligence penetrating all objects of know- 
ledge, Brahman is the efficient or instrnmental canso 
Process of Creation described 

Creation does not procood from the mtelligonoes of living beings 

—HI 88 

Brabman creates tho Vedas for the edncatioo of the creatures 
— s 89 

Injury involved in the Vodio sacrifices does not taho away from 
Brahman's benevolence— & 90 

Xnjnty is nnavoidable , tho dootrino of prati-avamarsa or bearing 
with patience the consequent pain y 

'^Fruits of actions, good or evil, come from iho pleasure or dis 
pleasure of Brahman— s 91 

Dissolutiottis ifae resolution of the spocml into tbo general prin- 
ciples— s 92 




*xiv 


••• 

••• 


Lecixire it.' ' ‘ 

Tho llelatioh o£ the JiVa and Brahman. 

Brahman appears as one or many according to external ciroams* 
tances^^s. 93 ***a *** *** 

The image of- the mind is lefleoted in the Atman ; with' the mind 
the image also goes 

Individnal Atmans are not distinct from Brahman nor from Cne 
another— s. 

The problem of knowledge examined and explained - 
The difEerent situations of bondage and release ai o explained by 
the difference of the piinciplos of intelligence outside the 
A*tman ••• 

Knowledge,' pleasuie, and other modifications ard'of the mind and 
not of the Atman— s. 95 

The higher Devotion causes the abolition of the mind whereupon 
manifests the identity of the Jiva and Brahman— s. 96 
Exercise of desire and effort of will towards Mukti is really fot* 
the abolition of the mind which disguises the tiuo nature of 
the <Atman ••• / ••• *t« 

Merits and dements disappear with the abolition of the mind j 
only life lasts— s. 97 

The cause of Samsara is want of s Devotion and not ignorance of 
Brahman— s. 98 

The sources of certain knowledge possessed by the Jiva are three 
(i) testimony, (ii) inference and (iii) sense-perception — s. 99 .... 
The process of perception explained ^ ... , ... 

Simultaneity and non-simultaneity of cognitions explained 
The twenty-six principles enumerated ^ 

Creation and dissolution, ihciease and decrease and other modifi- 
cations, are changes of form of that which exists and ,is , leal 

- , ( s. 100 ... ... ... ... ^ f ... 

The theory of creation dc 7iovo and of non-existence” .examined, 
Samskaras persist after dissolution and become the causes of sub- 
sequent creations ... ' , ... ' 

Alphabetical index ole aphorisms 
Index of references 
Additions and corrections ... 


90 € 
* 9 * 

« • « 


Paoe. 


72 

72 

} 

73 
73 


73 


74 

74 


iO 


to 

76 

77 

77 

78 
78 


78 

79 

80 
81 
83 
85 



8AMDILYA-SDTRAM 

A Commentary on the One Hundred 

I 

Aphorisms of Sandilya. 


Commentator’s introduction. 


The Lord’s will be done ! 

A coinmontary uu tho Vnt Hnndrtd Afthormu of Samlil^a » DOtr ex 
pounded I13 tho loarncd &\*opne^\an| rel>ini, upon the Supremo Doitj 

Great the inir\c] of the honoj of the two (lotua) feet of Go\inda 
whioh whoso drink are not bcnilderod tho^o uiio drink not are howildercd ' 

11 will bo declared (hereafter, tf introduotion to nphorisni that Mukti 
1^ flio JlvAS nttiinini, Jinihina hood (3Itiktt iiienm loluaso from the nssociiilioii 
of the body and Absolute rolitf from tiie oxporionue of plciauro md pain The 
Jliais are the embodied souls JJrahma hood i* the stnto of Ifrahinan that ts 
the state of piiro oxisieuuo, pure intolli^cnco, niid pure blis<) liio JImi**! again 
are in the cud non different from ifrohnmn Xheir sumsara (01 succession of 
ombodied extsteiicos), thoreforo is not connult (with their nature) It is caused 
h} tho oxternal luAuenco of Ihn internal organ (ef mind) Tho internal orgnn 
is constituted h^ tho three primary modifi&itions of the primordial ranttor, 
called Satha, the luminous itnjas, tho acluo, and ramus, the passive The 
Jlvas «amsdra is produced just in tho same wa> as in the caso of tho crystal 
and the like redness and the like are produced through tho propinquity of a 
China rose and tho like 

And this (sainsara), for tho sory reason that it is oxtornilly caused, is 
not capable of being removed hy JCnowM^e (which iiccordinQ to some is the 
means of Hukii) for not oven b^ tho most skilful obseiraticn there is the 
cessation of tho (optical) illusion of redness m tho crystal, so long as there is 
the conjunction of tho China rose Bat it cun be remoaodby the destruction 
either of the soul embodied in the Jira or of the internal organ, or else by the 
destrnotion of the connection betaveen them 





^SlNDlLYA-SUTlUM 


Now, in the present case, the desk notion of the soul embodied in the 
Jiva is not possible, as the inanifestation of all being depends on its ei^istence. 
,Nor is the destruction of its connection (with the internal oigan) possible, as 
it is of their veiy essence that they should be connected (so long as the internal 
organ subsists). Reasoning by exhaustion, theietoie, the cessation of the error 
(viz. that sams3,ra is an attribute of the soul) can take place only from the des- 
truction of tiie proximate objector adjunct (t<? the internal organ), and not from 
the knowledge of the soul. 

And for the desti notion of 'the mteinal oigan another cause (than the one' 
expounded by the advocates of Knowledge) is to be sought And that cause is 
nothing else than Devotion to the Lord. ^Not being an object of perception or 

of reasoning, it is established by the Srntis (Revelations) and the Smiilis 
(Recollections). Thus, for instance, the Bhag.ivad-Gita contains the passage 
which the Loid opens with the words : — - 

“ Of these, Sattva, by leason of its being free fioin diit, la illuminating 
and healthful ; 

“ It binds, 0 sinless, by attachment to pleasure and by allachmeiifc to 
knowledge. 

“Know Rajas to be of the natuio of passion and arising out of 
attachment and Ihiist j 

“That binds the embodied soul, 0 son of Kunti, by attachinont to activity 

“And know Taraas to be the product of ignorance, and the cause of illusion 
to all embodied ones ; 

“That binds, 0 BliArata, with caiolossnoss, indolence and sleep ” (Gita, 
XIV, 6-9) 

and which He winds up with the ^Yords . — 

“ And whoso serves Me with the attachinont of llnwa^cllng devotion, 

“He, having passed all those guius (modifications of piimul Matter), 
becomes fitfoi realising Biahnian’’ (lOuL xiv, 26). 

In this passage the Lord himself declares that devotion to Him bocomoa 
the cause of Mukti in the form of the attainment of the bliss of Biahman, 
through the dissolution of the internal organ constituted by the three primary 
modifications of the piimoidial Mattel. 

It does not follow that knowledge of the Self is useless ; as it contiibulos 
to (the development of) devotion by washing away tlie impurity of unbelief 
But the text pioves-that Knowledge is not competent to expel the influence of 
the reflection of the adjunct in the shape of the intcinal oigan proximate (to 
the embodied soul) And so the same sense is manifest in such texts as 

“ Whoso realises the Self beyond the gunas, iie attains to Mv’ state” 
(Gita, XIV, 19). 

“ (Act^ do not bind one) whose doubts have been cut awav by know- 
ledge ” (Gita, iv, 41). 

Nor 15 Ignorance the cause of samsivra, so that it might be possible to 
assert that the cessation of samsaia takes place thiough knowledge, because there 
13 no pi oof that this is so , and also because, m the absence of the cause, e,g. 



C0MMBmT0R*b IKTUODUCTIOH 


A 


particle? o! ailrerj li 11 impossiblo ihal PtWer ihould ari«e from a altell nistaken 
for it Moreover) iho ^rnli) “ Hovr 0 geatlo yoath coaid it thus ho that Being 
shonid be prodaced from Non bomg * (0ihtindogyn Upanijat, ^ 1 , 2), winch brings 
ont tho existence of the cause by means of (he existence of the effect declares that 
the world indeed is real A fortiori h tlio reality of the Sopromo Lord s creation 
established by such brafis ns ** R hose will is true ’* {Ihul iiit 14) Neither 
has the great B^darftjain declared to any Si\tra that the world was constitotcd 
by Ignorance , on the contrary, b) refating (tho reilily of) dream creation, 
he has established the roalii} of tho waking world Nor was this rofotation 
meant to serve as an illustration, for thero is no reason for making such an 
assumption 

On the other hand, it Ins not been proted that tbo properties of pteasuro, 
etc are coonato to the soul Plcasuro ana ^he like aro not directly moaificatlons 
of the soul They are merely reflected mor aitribnted to the soul, just as 
are the qualities of fairness of comploxton and tho Iiko (as when a man says 
*,1 am fair,’ meaning (hat it h his bod) that is fair) (They do not tlioreforo 
prove the oxistenco of the soul) Tho poreoption of pleasure, etc, being an 
act or a changd, most ha\c an instrumental cau«o, in this inference, it is 
proper to hold, for tho sake of simplieiiy, that producibihty through an ins* 
trument is by means of co inherence only, just as is tho prooneibility of sound 
through the anneal ar organ ( 1 ^ *tliat portion of tho Indiatsiblo other walled 
off within tho fleshly * car,* in which sound inheres b) intimate relation’) 
Others maintain (bat pleasure and tho like inlioro 10 tho instrumental canso 
by intimate rclaticu, because they arc properties apprehensiblo by au organ 
wbioh is witliout a begmmng (1 e the intoraal organ), just as is tbo case with 
sound (whioh la appreliousiblo by a portion of uncrcatod ether) On either 
view, (producibihty through the instrument is b\ moans of co inhoronce only), 
because (pleasure, etc , on the ono hand and sound, on tho other, aro) proper* 
ties apprehensiblo by an organ whioli 1 $ devoid of touch But (lie oxistenco 
of the soul IS proved from its being the cause of tlio manifostation of all being, 
(for in the absence of a knower, nothing could bo known) All this will 
become dear in the second lecture of tho third chapter 

Therefore, from a dosiro to Know tho oslablished truths on the snbjoot 
of Derotion,>>*ns in tlio case of Duty (m tho Phrva MlinfunsU)— inasmuch ns it 
IS the cause of (ho attainment oT man s highest end, proceeds the following 
aphorism 


Clinptei 1 Lectin e i 

n \ i ^ i ^ u 

sBor Atha, now Atah, therefore wfvBritirT^T Bhnkti jijfihsll, desire 
to know devotion 

1 Now, therefore, (there la) a wish to know DevotiOu — i 



4 


^ANDILYA-ST^TIUM. 


The word ‘ now ’ introduces the suh]ect, and has not the sense o£ sequence ; 
for it is not necessary that the practice o£ devotion should bo commenced 
after a preliminary study of the Veda, because, as \\ ill be declared hereafter 
(vide aphorism 78), even the low born are entitled to the practice of Devotion. 
Nor does the word ‘ now ’ bear the sense of sequence to the pievious attainment 
of the resources of self-restraint, etc. ; because mei e desire foi Mukti entitles 
any one to enter upon the path of Devotion. And so there is the Mantra ; 

“ Who at the beginning created Brahma, 

And who breathed forth the Vedas to him, 

To Him, the Shining Ono, who leveals the Self and the Intellect, 

Do I, desiious of Mukti, fly for refuge ” (Svetasvataia Upanisat, \i, 18). 

Nor, again, has the word ‘ now ‘ the sense of benediction (usual at the 
commencement of a new work for its successful completion) ; as its mere 
utterance (quite apart from its sense) sei ves the pui pose of a benediction. So 
then the meaning of the aphorism is that a discussion of the natuie of Devotion 
ought to be undertaken by one who desires Mukti ‘ Discussion * is implied 
by the phrase ‘ a wish to know ’ 

^ Although Devotion in the foini of attachment to the Supreme Lord is 
not like the Duty and its consequent Meiit (of the Puiva Mimamsu) some- 
thing to be accomplished by action, noi is like the Bialiinan (of the Vedanta) 
something capable of being known ; yet even when devotion has been perfected 
by its own cause, lueiits acquired by one m pre^ious lives, and secondaij 
forms of devotion practised in the piesent life, its destruction is still possible 
by means of such false arguments as that “ this is not devotion,” “the Inchest 
good is not its end,” “ its object is not laudable,” 3 ust ac a wife’s faith in 
her husband (is likely to be shaUen by unfounded calumnies) It is by ua} ot 
the lefutation of these false objections that a discussion contnbutes to the 
culture of devotion This is declaied by the woid ‘ theietoio Because the 
refutation of false objections is to bo looked foi, therefore is theie a wish to 
know the natuie of devotion. Hence thoie is the piuAPi loi the unbioken 
now of devotion m : 


“In whatevei thousands of biiths I may have to moic, 0 Loid, 

“ Through them all may my devotion, 0 Achyuta (Unchanging), lemain 
constantly fixed on Thee” (Visnu Purana, I, x\, 16). 

Because such a prayer is needed (foi the lefuiation ot false aignments). 

hoi the same leason the accessoiies of devotion are also fi nitful : a discu‘<sion 
IS indeed fruitful. — 1. 


Now devotion cannot entei into our Undei standing so long as it does not 
possess an intelligible form; and so long as it does not entei into our undei - 

is (ne^xto’sta\S”'^°^ subject of di«»cus,sioii Hence its definition 


UT H \ ! V ^ 1< 

m * y” ^1'*’ '“gl'M'. pi imaiy. Annraktili, altaoli- 

m«nt, atfeohon, Io^ e. e. the Lo. d. 



CHAPTER I Lecture i 


5 


2 The higher Devotion is (absolute) attaohment to the Lord —2 

In this aphorism, the words ‘ higher devotion ’ indicate the subject to 
be defined the rest is the definition The word * higher ' excludes the secondary 
or lower forms of demotion The words ‘to the Lord* contain the general 
import of the definition devotion is simply of the mture of an affection which 
has for its object one who is worthy of being worshipped But here for the 
purposes of our definition, devotion is nothing but a particular function of the 
inierual organ regarding the Supreme Lord as its object, and its distinctive 
character is easily found bj reference to wordi} attachment, olo As has been 
said by PrahlAda who possessed this higher devotion 

“ May that undacaj mg satisfaction which the unreflecting feel in respect 
of worldly objects, ' 

‘ Ne^er depart from nij heart while I am 6\er remembering Thee** 
(Vifnu PnrAna, I, xx 17) 

In this verse by the word ‘satisfaction it is affection inseparably 
associated with pleasure, that is implied Otherwise, as satisfaction in the 
form of pleasure (being a feeling merely)^ cannot have any object, the 
locative inflexion denoting object (in ‘ m respect of w orldly objects ) would 
he inappropriate because althdligh it appears as the cognition of pleasure 
since pleasure is the objeot of that cognition it is impossible that ‘ worldly 
objects ’ should be the objeot of pleasure Therefore it is attaohment or 

affection together with its proper objeot that is implied Kor can ‘ satisfaction * 
mean pleasure prndnced by ‘ worldly objects for there is no rule of grammar 
for the use of the locative infleoiou to denote the producer or the originator 
Moreoreri in ihej passage “ may my devotion, 0 Achjuta, remain constantly 
fixed on Thee (Visnu PnrAnn I, xx, 16), it is established that devotion has 
the Lord for its object by the word ‘satisfaction (in Ibid, I xx, 17) also 
the same (devotion) is referred to since the two verses convey the same 
sense The distinction between the two aer«es is that in the first there is the 
prayer for devotion in each sncce^siv e birth, while m the second there is the 
prajer, by the example of affection for worldly objects that the same devotion 
might by all ^means bo preserved The idea of affection or attachment is 
necessary because even satisfaction prodneed by worldly objects is not possible 
withont affection or attaclimeot And we have the aphorism of Pafafijah 
“Attaohment or affection is the rnnning after pleasure 
(loga Sfltram ii, 7) 

It 18 this affection or attachment to which the character of devotion 
must belong, because it accompanies all the marks of devotion to be mentioned 
hereafter and also because this is the simplest explanation 

The character of Devotion does not belong to an occasional reniembiance 
of the Lord, nor to occasional hyinn«, etc because they do not always go 
together Neither does the character of Devotion belong to the mere knowledge 
about the liord because such knowledge is possible even in the case of tho«6 
who had aversion etc towards Him Nor even is JDevotion the knowledge 
of the lord us an object of worship hccau«e Devotion is not mvarnbly found 
present III all snch acts of worship as adoration and bowing and moreover, 



foUNDILYA-SUTRAiM. 

« • 


i£ it weie so, then, even in legavd to one who iindei the loice o£ en cuinstances 
01 through fear got the idea that bowing, etc , aie to be done to the Loid, one 
would have to use such expiessions as “ he is a devotee,” “ he is attached to the 
Lord” I£ it IS suggested that Devotion should be defined as the knowledge 
of the Loid as the object which is to be w'Oi shipped with afircction, etc , let us 
lather say that it is affection or attachment that i^ Devo'ion. And so : 

“ Having then minds fixed upon Me, and tholi life directed to Mo, 
enlightening one anothei, 

“And constantly talking about Mo, (My devotees) become satisfied and 
delighted 

“ To these who aie evei attached to Me and woiship i\Ie with affection, 

“ I give that concentiation oE mind by which they attain to Me.”- 
(Gitri7 X, 9-10). 

~in such texts the w or^liip of those whoso life and mind, etc., are devoted 
to Him, has been described, and not only of those who know Him ns the object 
of woiship. Hence also it is lecollected ( Gt. Visnu-Purrma, v, 111) that even 
the young milkmaids whose affection was excited by the sight of the lovely 
form of Krisna, obtained Mukti as the fruit of their devotion. 

The prefix anu (in Anuiakti, affection), however, is not a pait of the 
definition. But devotion has been defined as Anuiakti (anii, aCtei, and lakti, 
affection), because it 13 produced anu, after, the knowledge of the greatness, 
etc , of the Almighty Loid, 

Yoy may ask “ IE this were so, would it not follow that the characteristic 
of devotion pioper belongs also to the affection which has the father, etc , as 
its objects, seeing that the whole world is pervaded by the Supreme Lord ? It 
the reply is that the characteiistic of devotion pioper is to bo predicated only 
in regard to a person who undeigoes no change, then again, the definition 
would be too naiiovv and would not apply to the devotion of such persons as 
the milkmaids towards the Lord in His finite incai nations ’ To this we reply 
that Devotion is only that affection which has tor its object a conscious being 
unconditioned by the adjunct of the Jlva, i e, the internal organ. Thus 
devotion towards an object conditioned by incai nation and devotion tow aids 
the All Full will be equally included -2. 

^ i ^ i ^ u 

Tat'sarnstha-sya, whose devotion is tovvaid** Hun. vgT^cTrTrcftu^rtrTH 
Amrita-tva-upades^lt, from the teaching of immoitality. 

3. (An enquiry into the nature of devotion should not be 
abandoned, on the supposition that devotion is fruitless or produces 
minor lesults only), because theie is the deolaiation tbat he who is 
devoted to the i ord, becomes immortal — 3* 

Tat-samstha is he who has samstha, e i devotion, to tat, i e, the Loid. 
In his case uninoitahty has been dechued as the fiuit (in the GhhSndogj a 
Upamsat, II, xxni, 2) “ He who i*; steady in Biahman, attains immortality.’ 



CHAFTBR I Leoidhe i 


Therefore any pos'ible indiSerence towarib the enquiry on the gronud of its 
being fruitless or bearing only inferior frnitSi becomes avoided ■! 

fTfifiRifH ^ ^ ^ I 8 « 

9r7r^ J&Anam knowledge, Iti, so Chet, i£ ^ ^n| no fgVrr 
Dvisata^, of the hater, of the antagonist vfcr Apt, also J&ilna 8}a, of 

knowledge Tat a aamsthite^, not being steadiness in Him 

4 ( f yoa say, * staadmesa m Brahman* means) hnowledga 
(of Brahman, we reply) no, bsoause the knowledge (of Brahman) 
possessed by one who hates Him, is not (spoken of as) steadiness 
in Him— 4 

Ifjoa sty that ** by the words * steadiness in Brnhmnn knowledge of 
Brahman it is that is meant and not devotion to Him , so that the fruit of 
immortahty belongs to bun only who knows Him,*' (we repl} that) ^bere is 
no snob flaw (in our interpretation of tho text) Steadine«s * is nothing bnt 
devotion it is not knowledge, because one who iiates an object is not spoken 
of as being * steady * in that object even thongh he maj knon nil nbont it 
Xhns for instance the ministers, frioads, oto , who are attached to a king, etc 
are spoken of as being steady in him, bat not also his rival Ivings For, the 
determination of the sense of a word must be madom the caso of Vedio Uterainre 
also in the very same way as it is made in the cose of sei^alar literatore And 
so, m the story of GbirakArika transgression of devotion towards the hnsband 
bos been desoribed in the verse 

“During that time having roileoted on that failnro of samsthri in his wife, 

“ The sage spoke thus distressed, shedding tears in bis sorrow (Cowell) 
(MtthAbbuiata, SAnti Farvao, colxvii, 6526) 

It follows therefore that snm^th^ or steadiness ns used m tho Chhdndogja 
text means devotion And similarly the very ^anio moaning is to be concluded 
’ll 0 in tho case of the aphorism of B idorAjana 

“ (iho Creator of the universe IS Ktrgniia Brahman and not Sagunn) 
beeanse tho devoted to Him att ims e^tvahon according to tho texcbing (of 
tho scriptures) * -^Vcddut’i Sutrara, I, i, 7 -^4 

amqssuTTf II ^ u I H II 

nwrTnjA, bj It, I e devotion DpakiayAt, because of inferiority 

W Chi, and a) o 

5 ('Steadiness' does not mean knowledge), also beoanse 
"Knowledge pales into insignifioanco before Devotion (as a means 
of Alukti)*d 

Because in regard to Mukti Knoieledge is rendered pi/o by it, i e 
devotion Ihe phrase * and also’ u inteudod to show that the argument now 
pat forward should bo taken along with the one given before 



8 


s'Andily A-su rn AM. 

• • 


,C£. such, texts as ; 

“ Those who ofiEei saciifices unto the Gods, go to Gods , My devotees 
likewise go to Me.’l.(Gita, vii, 13). 

C£. also the woids o£ the Loid addressed to Piahlad.i ; 

“ As thy mind filled with £aith in me wavois not, 

“So thou, by my £avoui, shalt even goto INirvAn.i ” (Couoll). 

V 

— Visnu-Puiann. I, xx. 20 

So much is established 

You may say that in the text “ Only by knowing Him one goes beyond 

death , theie is no other path foi going ’ (y^et.'lsvatala Upani‘5at, ni. 8), it i** 
heard that Mukti is the fi uit ot knouing, and that it the Snnitis appeal to 
contradict this levelation, they must be given a di£foient inteiprotalion. We 
leply that such is not the case Hcio also devotion it is that supei cedes 
knowledge Foi thus the woid ati-mntyu, boyond-death, is not a conventional 
synonym ot Mukti, but is a derivatne conventionally used in Hie sense ot Mukti 
according to its deiivation (in the upapada sense') that it is that which being 
present the passing beyond death lakes place. Preleiably to this derivation, 
let devotion itselt be denoted by the w’oid ati-mrit)u deiived (as a ‘caco*; as that, 
i e devotion, by means o£ which the passing beyond death takes place ; m 
accoi dance -with the rule ot giainmai that the sense ol the case-affix is oE supe- 
iior torce to the sense ol the upapada-affix (c£ Panmi, II, in, 10) ; because the 
passing beyond death thiough devotion is obtained t’lom cuch texts as . 

“To thoce, 0 piiiice, Avliose heaits aie fixed on mo, 

“ I shall eie long be the dehveiei liom the sea of the woild and 
death'’ (Cowell) — Gita, xii, 7 

Theie is also the Mantia . 

“We worship the thiee-eyed, ot sw eet £ragi ance. tho'gnci o£ nouiishmont , 

“Like the cucumbei £iom its stem, may wo be leleased tioin inortalit}, 
but not tioin immortality.’ (Rigvoda, V, vii, .50, 12). 

Heie ‘ w'oiship ’ means dcAotion, Mnce the kalpa ot this mantia explainc 
it in the veiy same sense Noi can it be said th.it devotion is loo tar Eioin this 

Sruti (where the woidhas not been used at all), toi the same ol>T3ction would 

equally apply to Mukti also Theretoie £iom the evei-lasting fSinti it is the 
supersession o£ knowdedge (by devotion) that is peiceivod — ,5 

“ But still,” it may be asked, “what is the leason Eoi supposing that 
devotion has the £onn oE affection *•'” Theie being looin tor such an enquiiv, 
the authoi' dedal es 

\ 1 ^ 1 ^ ll 

Dvesa.piatipaksa-bliAv'at, because o£ its being the opposite 
oE hatied. Kasa-aabdrvt, £iom the word llasa, sweetness, w Oha, and. 

Tin; Rfigah, affection, attachment. 


CHAPTER X LscrruRE i 


6 (Devotion is aReotion), because it is the opposite of hatred, 
and from the use of the word Baaa (in ithe Veda m reference to 
devotion) ^6 

PevotioD doserves to bo aa affootion aad ootbiog else, yrhy? beoaaoe it jt 
ibo opposite of hatred For, m soonlar laagoage, the expressioas “ho » a 
hater, “ he is devoted ” are used m reference to persons possessing the two 
mntaallj contradictory attribntes and amongst men it is affection and not 
knowledge, etc, that is tmirersally known to bo the opposite of hatred hike- 
wise, in the Visnn Parana, having first mentioned otsnp&la's persistent haired 
towards the Lord, it is said 

“This Lord, if named or called to recollection oven in the relation of 
hatred, grants a fraft which is hard 
what will he not grant to those whe 
IV, XI, 12) 

So again in the Sinriti of Atn, it is said 

* Remembering Covinda esen through hatred, Sisnp&Ia, the son o! 
Dsmagbo$a, went to beaten, what to say of one who is wholly dependent 
upon Him ^ 

Here too devotion lias been represented as being ilio opposite of hatred 
Similarly also in the GfltA 

Those deiraotora who hate uio (nreseut) m their own and others bodies, 
“ Those fierce haters, the vili»t of meu in their mortal lives, 

“ X oonthioall) throw wicked *10 they are, into the wombs of demon 
mothers 

“ Boro 111 a demon womb, deluded from birth to birth 

* And never hii<ling me O sou of ICimtl they go thence the lowest road ’ 

(Cowell)— CrlW, XVI, 18 SO 

And as the opposite of this hatred it is proper that devotion should be 
described as that affection only whioh has tho Lord for its object 

Horeover, from the revelation “having obtained the rasa sweetness 
ho became full of bliss* (Taittirlya Upani^at,!!, 7) it is known that rasa which 
has Brahman as its object is the Cause of Mukti whioh is the manifestation 0 ! 
the bliss of Brahman And that rasa is affection is well known in such texts as 

“(Objects withdraw from him who withdraws his senses, but) rasa or 
affection or attnehmont romains having seen the Supremo, tho self-centred 
man's rasa or attachment also retires ’ (Gitft, ii, fi9) Here rasa means affeo- 
tiou for worldly objects Hence also, after desonbing tho ascent of Rhma, 
Jjak^mana, and others to the heavenly world, the word annr&ga, nSootion, has been 
directly applied to devotion in the passage 

** Whoso of the residents of the oity of Kosala bad nffeotion tor those partial 
manifestations of the Lord, they too, having iheir minds absorbed in them, 
attained the status of residing toeeibor with them in the same world " (Visnn- 
Pur&na, IV, iv, 4) ** * 

2 


to be obtained by all the gods and demons , 
) possess perfect devotion ’ (Visnu PnrAna, 



10 


^INDILYA-SUTRAM. 

• • 


From this also it follows that it is not knowledge, but devotion in the 
form of affection, that has the highest good as its fruit. 

It may be contended that, that devotion is the opposite of hatred is not 
necessarily the maik of its being affection, because it may as well be the mark of a 
neutral state of mind, and the reasoning will then be inconclusive. To this it is 
replied that the result of hatred is cessation of activity, while the opposite of it is 
activity. And activity does take place on the part of those who are devoted in 
the faithful service, etc., lendeied to the adorable ob]oot, while there is cess- 
ation of activity on the part of those who have the opposite feeling in such 
service, etc. So also the statement that devotion is the opposite of hatred is 
made (in the aphorism) with reference to the opposition between them by way 
of their respective effects. Thus the constiuction of the argument is as 
follows . — 

Devotion must be of the form of an affection which has the adoiable one 
as its object, 

Because it is a particular atiiibute of the soul which is diffeient from 
the knowledge that it is the means foi the .iccomplishment of any particular 
good, and which is the incentive to faithful seivice to the adorable one ; 

Whatever is not ^o, is not so, 

As for example, is hatred ; 

There is also another argument in suppoi t of the definition, namely that 
along with the 'increase of affection a coi responding mciease is seen to take 
place in the faithful seivice, etc. lendeied to the object of worship Moieovei, 
it is commonly known that whoevei IS devoted to a ceitaiu object theie is in 
him the absence of indifference towards that object. This being so, doA'otion must 
be of the form of that attiibute which is the opposite of hatred and which is help- 
ful to such faithful seivice, etc ; because it is a paiticular attribute of the soul 
which 18 the incentive to service , as, for example, is the knowledge that a certain 
thing IS the means foi the accomplishment of a particular good. Next together 
with the elimination of the chai acteristic of its being the knowledge that it is 
the means for the accomplishment of a paiticulai good, it is proved by leasoning 
from exhaustion that devotion has the natuie of affection And again the 
argument a fortiori “what will he not grant to those who possess perfect 
devotion?” contained in the above passage of the Visnu Pur ana, and also in 
such texts as “ For they too who may be of mean births, by taking lefuge 
in Me, reach the highest state " * * What to say of pious Biahmanas,” (Gita, 
ix, 32-33), should be understood to have lefeience only to the opposite of 
hatred. As hatred is the cause of sams&ia according to the text ‘ * Me in 
their own and in otheis’ bodies * * ’ (Git& xvi, 18), so its opposite attribute 
IS nothing but the affection which has the Supreme Self as its object unassooiated 
with the adjunct of the Jiva, ^. e. the internal organ. It is this affection which 
in the form of devotion becomes the cause of the destruction of sains&ra. The 
same idea is contained in the text “ Never finding Me * * * ” (Gita‘, xvi, 20). 

From the expression “ and also ” in the aphorism, it is inferred that 
devotion is an affection, because it develops the marks of affection such as 
horripilation, etc. For such marks are well known in such passages as “ She 

- leveals her affection tor me by her cheek with its down erect ” (SakuntaU, Act 


CHAFTliR Ii LEcrmtt: i 


11 


111) On the oUier hand, were devotion not an affection bnt a diffwent feeling 
there wonld be the fanlt of rednndano^ in the enppoaition that these identical 
marks were the characteristics of a different thing 

And this affection, according to some (i e the Mimfimsakas), is merely a 
form of volition, as it also arises from the knowledge that it is the means for the 
accomplishment of a desired end, as is the case in sacrifice, etc Bat we hold 
that affection is qnite distinct from volition, as is hatred, becanse the intmtions 
of affection are in the form of ** I am pleased,** * I am affected,** and not in the 
form of *' I will ** Horeover Tolitioo is direoted only to an end which has not 
been ocoomplished, while objects both accomplished and nnacoomplished are 
equally the objects of affeotion In fact, to be brief, the snpposition that this 
affection pervades the characteristic mark of volition, etc will be vitiated by the 
fault of rednndancy 

Therefore, onr definition of devotion is not shaken 

It may be apprehended that devotion is essentially an aotion, and that an 
action IS not competent to produce the highest good, aooording to snch re^el- 
ntions as ** not by action nor by progeny, nor by wealth, bnt by rennooiation, 
have some attained to immortality” (Taittiriyn Aranjako, x, 21) To refate 
this apprehention the antbor deolares 

w % i « ii 

wNa not ftnrr Krij ft, action qjwv r gtfm r q Knti-an apekeauftt, beoanse 
of not reqmring an effort of will JSflna vat, like knowledge > 

7 (Devotion is) not an flotion, beoanse, like knowledge, it 
does nbt follow an effort of will —7 

This devotion does not deserve to be ossentially an action, beoanse it 
does not result from an effort of will Whatevei is not coAseqaent on an effort 
of will, 18 not essentially an action, os for example knowledge * For know* 
ledge IS dependent npon the presence of evidenoe and a man cannot, by an 
effort of will, prodnoe it or not prodnoe it, or make it otherwise So (too 
with devotion h or the affection felt bj a man for wife, son and the like, is 
not produced m its different inaniCestatious by the man s own effort of will 
Bnt devotion is dependent for its prodaotion on snob means as merits aoqnired 
in previous births, «econdsrj Forms of de\otion eto ^7 

WcT ^ I ^ I C H 

WTT AtaV, hence w Bvn, indeed Phala ftnantyam, endless* 

ness of fruit 


' TJi«rt ifl »o imporUal teoliDio*! iloka oatciul »in9BS tha Pnaditi, fatal j«ar* bhared 
ieliflhliR lehohba jtorn bb«T«k kntlb krlk< Itapa bbarioh ah«tta, oh«aU jaUja bbaTak ktija 
Krili bara naaaa jakia rolltloo * Froai kaoeldega arlsea dcaire Iron daaiia velHioa 
Ittm vahUeu eentaltmt mrtlon ot tba toxisalftt, aud {«om tbb aatien lOoeaU) 





12 


s'lNDILYA-SUTRAM 


8- Hence indeed is the endlessness of (its) fruit. — 8, 

Since devotion is not essentially an action, therefore, it is established 
that its fruit, i.e the highest good, is endless Otherwise, the non-permanence 
of even immortality would be entailed in accoi dance with the levelation; 
“ Just as heie the world gained by action perishes, so too hereafter the world 
gained by merit perishes ” (Ghhitndogya Upanisat, VIII, i, 6) — 8. 




TT^fT: Tat-vatah, of one who has that, t e knowledge. Pra- 

patti-sabdfi.t, from the revelation of worship. ’9 Cha, also. Na, not, 
JSanam, knowledge. Itara-prapatti-vat, like the other revelations 

of worship. 

9. And 'also from the revelation about worship by one who- 
has knowledge, (Devotion is) not knowledge, as (there is no men 
tioa of knowledge iu the revelations about) inferior worship.— 9. 

For there is the word of the Lord : 

w 

“ At the end of many births he who has knowledge worships Mo. 

“ One who realises that Vflsudeva is all, such a great soul is haid to 
be found ” (Oita, vii, 19). 

In this verse worship by one who has knowledge is mentioned. This 
would be inappropriate, were devotion to be the cause of knowledge, “ as 
there is no mention of knowledge in the revelations about inferior woi ship.” 
Thus immediately after the above decimation, the Gritil proceeds to say . 
“ Having theii knowledge robbed by such and such vaiious desires, they 
worship inferior deities ” ,^vii, 20). Hereby it is by way of blaming the 
worship of other deities that worship is (indirectly) praised. In this verso 
it is the devotion to the deities, and not the knowledge of them, that is des- 
cribed by the word worship ; for worship in the very same sense is that which 
one can recognise as used in both the verses. 

From the word * also ’ in the aphoi ism it is inferred that the mention 
of worship in close sequence to knowledge is yet another reason for devotion 
lacking the character of knowledge For instaiTce, 

” Whosoever thus freed from delusion knows Me to be the Highest 
Person, 


“ He knowing all, 0 Bha-rata, worships Me in eveiy w’ay.” 


(GitA XY. 19). 

And so again, 

(Great souls), having known Me as the oiigin of all being and immut- 
able, worship Me with minds not fixed on anything else” (GitA, 
IX, 13) « 

and again, ' 

Thus having known, the wise worship Jite, filled ivibli r.iptuie * (GltA,, 


CHAPTER It LEcTUfiE i 


13 


Therefore, de>otion is not essentiolly knowledge 

AUhoagb, bj tbo mark of lU being an affection, its difference from 
knowledge bos been alread) established, the present aphorism is intended to 
dispel the apprehension tliai the word do\otioo means, m a secondary sense, 
the knowledge of Brabman 

This however has to be considered, namely that the words of the 
Bhagttvad G2ti\ are not antboriiative in tbo form of a revelation as the Vedas 
are, but as being a Smfiti or recollection recorded in the Uabftbhbrala , and 
that this being so, how is the 6ttA refonred to m tbo aphorism by the eapres 
Sion *' from the rorelation r” Here some explain tbo reference as meaning, 
from the re> elation which is inferred Cos being the original of the recollection 
recorded in the Gitd) Hero we say that what eonstitutos a Veda is the fact 
that it ujm nttcrance of the Lord in reference to nnseen objects, and that 
this characteristic u oqnally present m the OUb texts Hence is found the 
epigraph (at the end ofoaen chapter of the Gitft) **Thns in the Bhagavad- 
Gitb Upanifais ** Those some * rovelations * ha%o only been recorded in 
verse by VjAso. And so declares another PnrAna 

“The Glib is to bo attentively recited, what need is there of ether long 
compilations of sbstraa ^ 

“That Glib, which itself issued from the loins month of Padmanftbha '* 
(Cowell) 

Her Is there m this view the uapkcation that the ^ddros are not to 
hoar the Gltb, flike the Vedas, both being revelations) , because by the general 
permission itself for all castes and all sexes to hear the HabfthhArata, the 
competence of the S'ddras to hear the GitA, as also the proises of tbo sacred 
syllable, is established It oanuot bo iitainUaioed that the permission to hear 
the MahAbliArata is subject to the exclusion of the GitA , as without tbo OttA 
the snm total of 100,000 verses which is the MabAbhArata, cannot bo com 
pleted And so has it been declared by the teachers 

“ Those very mantras of the Vedas inserted m tbo MahAbhbrata and other 
works, they Q«e in a soonlar sense witfaont observing the rules of Vodio 
stndy 9 

Thus ends the fii «t lecture of the 6rst chapter m the Commentary on the 
One ilundnd Aphorumt ofSAnHilya composed by the most learned teacher 
Svapnesvaia 



Chapter I : Lecture n. 

Thus Devotion having been defined as the invariable and unconditiona 
antecedent of immortality, there is the ooinmencement of the sdcond lecture 
in order to discriminate Knowledge^ Concentration (yoga) and Devotion in their 
lelation of being respectively the accessory and the piincipal. 

II X I I ^ « 

Sa, it, devotion. Mukhyil,, principal. ?rrrT$f^rTr!srT?r Itar.a- 

apekgita-tvat, being required, depended on, presupposed, implied, by the others, 
i.e , knowledge, yoga, etc 

1. Devotion is the principal thing, because knowledge and. 
yoga subserve it —10 

The reference, ‘ it,’ is for the recollection of what was stated at.the close 
of the first lectnie. ‘ It,’ the higher devotion or devotion propei, is ‘ principal,’ 
the mam thing, because * by the others,’ t e. by knowledge of soul, yoga, etc , it 
IS regarded as that to which they aie to make their own contribution In the 
Ohhandogya Upanisat, inthe passage (vii, 24) which opens with the vrords, “ that 
which IS immensity is bliss,” it is revealed • “ The Self is all this. He wlio sees 
thus, thinks thus, knows thus, gets affection for the Self, sports with the Self, is 
mated to the Self, lejoices in the Self; he becomes his own ruler.” Heie the 
* seeing ’ alluded to in the phrase “ who sees thus,” becomes an accessory to the 
higher devotion in the foim of affection for the Self, by way of the i ef utation of 
su6heirors as that it is not lovable, etc. Just as in such cases as “ the ascetic 
bearing the staff repeats the mitiatoiy phrase after the pieceptor,” “ he 
causes the cow to be milked, wearing the sacred tin ead leveised,” “knowing 
he offei 3 sacrifice,” “ being wealthy he is happy,” etc, the staff, etc. are the 
acce'isories, so too is ‘ seeing ’ an accessory to affection ‘ Thinking ’ and 
‘ knowing ’ have been i ecited because they logically come in as f urtliei establish- 
ing the point Similarly, the expressions “spoits with the Self,” etc are 
meiely a lepetition occasioneJ by the context, since sporting etc , .ire invariable 
accompaniments of affection Otlieiwise, if “ seeing,” etc , weie (intended to be) 
en]oined m lefeience to ‘affection; oi if ‘affection ; etc were (intended to be) 
enjoined in refeience to ‘seeing,’ etc , the sentences would have been different 
(instead of having been combined into a single sentence as clauses) Theiefore, 
‘ seeing ’ is a subsidiary thing, according to the ma\im ; “ A thing is called 
subsidiary, because it selves the end of another ' (Purva-MlinA.msa, III, i 2) 
Hence the divine aiann also has declaieil that the affection foi the Self is the 
principal thing, in • 

“The Muni who abandoning natuial action, has constant .iffection 
for tW Belt, 

“ C.m realise his identity with the soul of .ill beings, he goes 

the highest load” (Mahabhaiata, sLiti-P.uvan, clxliv, 
71] 1-7112) —] 

\\\ \ M u 

Piakarautit. fiora the topic under discussion, liom the context 

Cha, also. 



CHAPTBK I bHAPTBR 11 


IS 


2 From the context aleo (it follows that ‘seeing’ is 
snbeidiaiy to devotion) —11 

The seotion (Chhindogya Dpiuii|et, vii, 2i) deals mtli affeotiou prinoipal- 
Ijy, hecaose it u a^otum vhioh bears the froit (i s Mnkti) It is proper (hat 
* seeing’ appearing in the same section should be subsidiary —3 

cIst sqsrawra ii x I M <> 

Darsana-pbalam, Eru^t of seeing thus Chet, If 

9r Na, no lena, by the pronoun, he nnoTSTT^ VyaTadhAnAt, becanse of 
interception 

3 If (you say that immorlaiity is) ihe fniifc of * seeing/ (we 
reply), no, because of interception by (the pronoun) *he 

If yon say that it IS of the ‘seeing that immortality charncteiised as 
perpetnul residence in the world of the Lord is the frnit, so that the section 
will hare seeing/ and not affection, the principal theme, and that 
thns the table will be turned against os we reply, fso becanse of interception 
by the pronoun, ‘ he By the word he m “he becomes a dweller in the 
world of the Lord it is the nearest subject, namely the one who * gets affection 
for the Self, that is brought forward and not the remote subject ‘ he who 
sees thus/ since there is no reason why the reference should be to that which 
18 separated If j on say that the section itself would be such n reason we 
reply, No as that would entail the fallacy of reasoning m a circle— '3 


^|5^l 8 u 

JDfislo-trAi from being seen w Olia, also 
4 (That hnowledge is a cause of afieotiou, and uot vice 
vena, follows) also from this being Been (to be so lo ordinary Iile) 
—13 


for it is seen in ordinary life that the knowledge of be'iuty, etc, becomes 
the cause of a young woman a offoction for *1 yonng man bat not that affection 
becomes the cause of knowledge The subsidiarj ohamoter of knowIedf,e is 
ascertained also from the fact that it is scon to subserve affection Ihns 
it IS seen that (at Brst) the knowledge that Natnre in cruel worthless, unlprely 
etc , is the cause of impuritj of mind to living beings that then from the 
knowledge that the Self is all merciful of unlimited majesty, and of infinite 
beanty, takes place the removal of that impurity , and that thereafter arises 
the higher devotion Hence it is recited 

“ They who think of the Supreme, whoso sonis ire bound np m 
Him, who abide m Him and find their refugo in Him, 

They go thither whence there is no return having all their sms 
removed by knowledge (Cowell) —Gitfi, v, 17 
And so too ID the Ayurveda 

“Thought, firmness and knowledge of son], otc, are the best 
m^icine of the mind’s aihngs (Cowell) —Afl&ngahpdaya, X, 




16 


SANDILYA SDTRAM. 


5KT i ^ i st i h ii 

Atah, hence. Eva, venly. Tat-abhavAt, from the 

absence of that, i.e. knowledge.'' VallavJnkm, of the milkmaids 

5* Hence indeed (there was mukti) of the milkmaids in the 
absence of knowledge (in them, because knowledge is merely a 
sub8idiary)-~14: 

Just because knowledge is an accessory seen to be subservient to 
another’s end, hence, rejecting the familial aid of knowledge, since impurity 
of mind, etc , had no place in them, it is recollected that mukti accrued to the 
milkmaids solely by means of devotion to the Lord, which is the principal 
means of mukti For instance. 

“ Viituous, having all her meiits cancelled by fhe intense lapture of 
thinking about Him, 

And all her sins expiated by the agony ol not obbiining Him. 

Meditating on Him, the cause ot ,the woi Id, identical with the supreme 
Biahman, 

Oeasing to breathe, one damsel of the Hopas obtained liberation 

Visnii PuiAnsij V xiii. 13, 

Heie, by the maik of pleasuie and pain, aftection i*. inferied ; wdierebj' 
mukti was attained such is the meaning of the passage Just as the pi educ- 
tion of the fiuit (of the sacrifice) is (by means of the act perEoiined) even with 
hnshelled golden beines (without the exclusion ot shells fioin the hegmning) ; 
so, in the case ot the milkmaids, mukti lesulted from aELeotion (without the 
preliminary opeiatioiiof removing the foulness ot mind by means of knowledge), 
since in them there was no foulness of mind at all. Hence also it is known 
that knowledge is nothing' but a subsidiary means. If it w ei e the pi incipal 
means, there would be ;io truit (t r ^ mukti) m its absence. Noi can the 
‘ thinking about Him ’ be the knowledge of the identity of the soul and 
Brahman, because tlieie were not piesent at the same time the othci causes 
of such knowledge, such as heaiing, pondering, etc . (as laid down in the Biihad 
Aranyaka Upamsat, IV, iv 5), but the thinking was nothing but remembra- 
nce kept up or made constant by affection Noi is this an aitliavada, (t e., an 
inducement to the obsoivanoe of an injunction previously laid down) ; because 
aithavadas have nieuts as the objects they aim at, and also because there 
is no injunction near (£oi the observance of which an inducement might be 
needed j — 5 

ii ^ m t a ii 

Bhaktya,. by devotion Jftnati, know's Iti, thus. 

Chet, if sr Na, no AbhijSaptyA, by the knowledge of the jirevi- - 

oiisly known, by recognition. ^Tyrcin^ SA-hayyat, from the suppoi t 

6. If (you oonfeend fchafe the expression, Gltd,, xviu, 65) “he 
knows (Me) by devotion ” (proves that devotion is the cause of know- 
ledge, and not that knowledge is the cause of devotion, as we hold), 
(we reply). No, relying on the support (lent to onr view) by (the 
phrase) “ recognition 15- 



OHAPriJR I* LroT09E ii 


17. 


Tho atiibor now introdncos (t possiblo objootton and solves it Tho 
objection is that tho nrgnnionts bisod on tho ** seotion * (aphorism 11), 
‘•position of tho word” (aphorism 12), and “mark” (aphorism 14) aro 
proclodod, * faecanso onr viow is (as snggostod) in contradiotion to tho Srniis 
for instance, thoro is the Srntt, 

•‘Bj devotion he (ro)cognisos Me, how great and what I am in Mj 
essence 

“Then having known Mo in Bly es«once, ho forthwith enters mto 
Me” (ait&, svin, 55) 

In ibis tost, jnst as in tho toxt “ho attends to tho gftrhapalya tiro with 
an Aindri aerse ” (Taittirija Samhitd, X« v, 8) (the third case ending m amdryd 
denotes that tho Ainjri ver<e is tho isstrnmont), so, by iho Strati employing 
the cars ending (m bfaakijA, by devotion) which (ns mentioned before) is of 
snporior force, it is determinod that doiotion is tho canso of knowlodgo 
Although by tho aphorism (13) “ (That knowledge is a oanso of atTootjon, and 
not VIM vgrsat follows) also from its being seen (to bo so in ordinary life),” 
no room is leR for calling in tho aid of the b^ruti, stneo tho obsorved anbsor* 
TioncQ of knowledge to demotion is withm the reach of sense porooption, still 
it is not within the rcaoh of sooso*percoption that afFcetion having Brahman 
for its object is (to bo) subserved by knowledge of which tho object is Brali« 
man , bat by the obsorntion of the fact that this is so in tho oaso of tho affection 
of yonng girls, etc , the same is to be loferrcd olso in tho case of tho affection 
which has Brahman as its objeot So that tho reasoning ends in the ostabluh** 
ment of a “ mark of inference * (which, as stated, is precinded by the contrary 
revelation under consideration) 

W e reply that there is no soch defect m our argument The defect 
would have been entailed had the GltA said only ‘hooogmsos* bnt it is 
not so It lias said “ he recognises Kecognition is said to bo the cognition 
of that which had been previouslj cognised Thus prov ions cognition sabserv-* 
mg devotion is the promoter of derolion appearing in tho form of the fruit 
of devotion ** Thereafter, till it becomes firm, devotion requires tho aid of 

* Ibf Uinsaia images tbs proofs tbit ons tblog Is aoDllliTrf to aaother la the toUowtng 

order 1 Srutl or ■ defiolte test, as * let blai offir with esrds where oardf are eleirly to 
sDoniiiy pirt ot the siori6oe 8 Zlnga * tiga or * tbe lease of the words as lesdlog to aa 
lofereaoa is ia tbe test be dirldee bj Iba Iidfe bars we Infer that tbe tbiag divided oiott 
be a llQUld like gbae siooa a ladle ooald aot divide solid Iblage iiko the baked dear eakas 
3 Vabpa • tbe boinir meatioaed la one leoteocs b> Io tba text (I eat) thee tor food, tboa 
saying he eats tbs branob bare tbe words I eat) tbss for food aro anoillarr to the 
aeUos ol oaUlog t i^rakaraa • the aabjeot natter viewed aa a whole iritta an iaterdapandtsoa 
o! Its parts as lo iba datia parNawera saorlfloa where Iba praga^a eereuenlei whioh have 
no ipaoiaUroltiBeationed predaoe as parti, a myitio iDfiosnee fapurra) wbloh helps forward 
that inllaeaoo o! the whole by whioh the wocibippers obtain heaven Bare the pratarana 
proves them to be aneillary 8 AtbaNa relative position* or order as the leeital of the 
hymn tvedadkioaM, eto * be ye rarifled for the divino work In oonneetlon with the mentloa 

of tbe reaaayya veiiels, where this Msltfon prevss tbet the hymn fi aoeiUery to the aotlon of 

BpilokUng those vesisls 6 danakkya title thus Tilarreda is oallsd the epeeial book fox 
tbeadhwiiyn priests henoeinany rite mentlened in It they are pnma faele to be oonaldered 
as tba ^ests employed The order repreieats the relstlve weight attoobed to each the first, 
6ruti being the moat fapexlant, tba tevt raMeftAye , the leut (C( Jalmlni ■ dairai ill 9 
3 14 Ayayastalaviir ,hl S ill J/fMatn/ayariMasa pp 8,0 rsdaNta^Kfraf, Hi. 8 d| 48) 
The objeetor In the test maiatama that (4) (6) and (3) axe precluded hern by tbe rrvti (I) from 
the Bbagavadglla ^ICowell) 

Cempixe Batada Bbaktl Batram aphoriim SO, where It is dislamd that Devotton is the 
fruit of Itself 




18 


SiNDlLYA-SUTRAM. 


knowledge in the form of recognition (i.e. constant i cm emb ranee), just as in 
the case of the shelling of nee which is continued by the shelling of separate 
grains (till the whole rice becomes clean) In order to point out that know- 
ledge aids its efiEect (z e. the effect of devotion), it is said : “ then ” i e. after 
devotion has been made firm by the fiimness of knowledge, ho “ enters into 
Me ” Therefore, this is not a S'ruti, but a recital (anuvftda) which has logi- 
cally come in. — 6 

The author makes the same sense cleai (in the next aphorism). 

TjwRB u ^ i « n 

JTTW Pr^k, before. Uktam, declaied. ^ Cha, and 

7. And (this had been) declared before. — 16* 

Before the passage “by devotion he re-cogniso& Me,” after having 
stated “ he becomes fit for lealising Brahman ” (Gita, xviii, 53), it is declared : 

“Having become Brahman, being contented in soul, he grieves not, nor 
desires. 

“ Feeling perfect equanimity towards all beings, ho obtains the highest 
faith in me ” (Cowell). GitA, xviii, 54. 

But as the devotee mentioned herein, as one who has already known 
Brahman, has no need of knowledge (of Brahman), it is but right that the 
following verse (GitA, xviii, 55) should be taken to be a recital (anuvAda, and 
not the declaration of a new fact) — 7. 

qlft II ^ I *^1'= It 

Etena, by this, Yikalpah, alternative, interchangeable, iufzr 

Api, also. TTrgwr: Piatyuktah, answered, lefuted. 

8. By this (the view that knowledge and devotion are) alter- 
native (to each other as the means of muktj)is also refuted- — 17« 

It should be considered that ‘ By this ,’ i.e. by the ascertainment that 
knowledge is a subsidiary, the view also that heie (t.e. as a means of mukti) 
knowledge and devotion are alternative to each- other (i e. both are equally 
efficient means of mukti), is ‘ answered,’ i.e lefuted For the principal and 
the subsidiary cannot be mutually altei native in regai d to one and the same 
end. The word ‘ also ’ implies that the view that knowledge and devotion 
are conjoint means of mukti is also refuted on the same giound. — 8. 

H ^ i i < u 

Deva-bhaktih, devotion to a god Itaiasmin, in another 

god. SAhacharyAt, because of being associated with. 

9- The (expression) " devofciou to a god (refers) to another 
(than the Supreme), as it is coupled with (the expression ** devotion 
to a spiritual teacher-”)— 18- 



CHAFTKK I Leotdbc ji 


19 


Someiiines it is heard from the S'roti 


'*He Trho has snpreme derotion to a god, and, as to a god, so to a spin 
tual teacher, 

“ To him, venly great of soul all these objects as declared repeal them 
selves ’’(S'vetAsvatara Up'inisai, vi, 23) 

Here ** doiotion to a god” is to be nuderstood to refer to a god other 
than the Lord , vrhf ? because it is assooiated with “ devotion to n spiritual 
teacher,” for there can be no such association m the case of that devotion the 
fruit of which is immortality But IncLa and other gods, being worshipped, 
seoure the fruit, knowledge, to the wor^ipper as they do earthly good Asso 
ciatjon (of one word with another word) also causes oscertaiument , os m the 
case of the word ulhkn (meaning an owl , Indrn , the son of S^nkuni, a warrior 
ju the war of the Jlfahdbhilrata Kandda, etc, the reieteace oivbioh in a 
given place is ascertained) through its association (with the other words of the 
context) 

This explanation to added as conhrmatory of the argomont stated before 
(m aphonsm 17) —9 ~ 


--^lunsjcici II ^ I I II 

Togah, concentration yoga gXn, hut, again tfun riT g Dbbayaar* 
tham, for the sake of both, i e knowledge and devotion ApeksanAt, 

from being looked to, needed, depended on huibuc* PrajAjarat, like the 
ceremony of pray&]a 

10 Toga, iioirerer, is for tha sa^e of boiB (knowledge aocl 
devotion), sinoe both look to it (for aid) , as is the case with the 
praydja oeremony — 19 

Yoga, again, is for the sake of knowledge and is also for the sake of 
devotion , since a oonoontrated state of mind is required by both 

If yon ask that, in view of the uutxim ** there is no oonneotion between 
subsidiaries, as, being equally for the end of the prinoipal, they stand on the 
same level ’ (Pdriai*FllmdmsA, Hi, t 22), how can yoga which is a snbsidiary of 
the principal (t s devotion), bo said to be a subsidiary of the subsidiary (t e 
knowledge)? llie author replies ** us is the cose with the pntyAja ceremony” 
As the prayhja ceremony is a subsidiary of the vftjapoya and other saorifioes, 
and is also a snhsidiary of the dlk^ntya and other parts thereof, so it ts here , 
since the identical reason exists in both the cases to make out the sense of a 
subsidiary having another subsidiary as its own subsidiary ^yhero, (however), 
the practice of yoga » undertaken for the sake of knowledge pure and simple, 
yoga does not subserve devotion 

In the same way dispassion towards wordly objects is to be considered 
as being for the benefit of bo^ -—lO 

But you may say tliat it is liard to gainsay the recollection of PataSjali, 
*‘0r, through the contemplation of God (Yoga S0tram,i 23), where the worship 
of the Lora denoted by the word * contemplation is said to serve the end of pro 
dnoing samhdiii, trance and then yon may ask Miow then can demotion be 
the principal means ? ’ To this the anthoi replies 




20 


s'lNDILYA-SUTiUM. 


jf^TtiTT Gauny^, by the secondary, lowei, (ioim ol^ devotion), g Tu, but. 

Samadhi-siddhili, the piodiiction oL .samadhi, yogic iianco. 

ll- But the production of sam^^dhi is by the lower form of 
devotion — 20. 

‘Contemplation* tlieio (in the aphonsni of Paianpili cited aboie) jmean 
only the loivev form oE devotion, and not the higher By the lower form of 
devotion is the piodiiction ot samadhi. Hence there is also no contiadiction 
with the Sinriti (j e. the Yoga-Siitr.am ol Patanjali). And (to the eame 
purport) theie aie in the veiy •same woik the concluding voids (of the section 
on the Loid) . “ His name is Pranava ” (i. 27) “ Its i epetition. and contemp- 

lation of the obiect (i e. the Lord) denoted b> it (make the mind stead}) 

(i, 28) —11. 

ii X ’ i X*^ >• 

Heya, to be avoided. Raga-tvAf, a«! being an affection. 

Iti, thus. Chet, if ?r Na, no Uttama-aspada-tvat. as halving 

an object which is laudable. Sanga-vat, as association 

12. (If you say that devotion) is to be avoided, since it is an 
affection, (we reply)- No, because it has an object which is laudable, 
as (is the case with) ‘ association-’ — 21. 

This aphorism pioceeds fiom the inti odiiction of the yoga-sAstra (in the 
preceding aphoiism) It may be 'said that devotion also is cert, duly to bo 
avoided by one who desires mukli, because theio is present in it w’lthoiit 
modification the charactei istic of that affection vhich is mentioned mtho Yog.a- 
s&.stra (Yoga-Sfltram, ii, .3, as one of the five ‘ afflictions ’) Thus Iheio is the 
aphorism (Nescience, egoism), affection, avoi Sion, and loie- oE life are the 
afflictions ” If you say so, we reply, it should not be said so, because devotion 
has as its object something which is laudable, that is to say, because it has the 
Supreme Lord as its object. For (according to Patanjali) affection is not to 
be avoided merely on the ground ot its being affection, but only on the ground 
oE its being an affection which chugs to the world. As for example, association 
is not to be avoided merely on the gionnd oE its being associatio , but on the 
ground oE its being an association with wicked people So is the case heie. 
Thus when it is said that devotion to God is to be avoided, b ecciise it is an 
affection, the special conditions that must be piesent will bo that it tends to 
cause attachment to the world and that it is not subserving the end oE mukti. 

Nor is this devotion devoid of the illuminating piesence oEsat tva ; for, 
in such texts as “ those pos'^essing the natuio ot sattva, woiship the gods ” 
(Git&, xvii, 4), it IS declared that it is connected with sattva. — 12 

5i5fdf i X ' < XX >' 

Tat, this, worsip, f devotion Eva, ceitainly EfifiT ?rTf?TUtfhvin 
Karmi-jnani-yogi-bhyah, to the peitoimeis of saciificial act, the followers of 



CHAI^TEK I Lectur> ii 


21 


knowledge and the followers of joga Adhikja sabdat, from the 

revelation of superiority 

IS This certainly (is supreme), since there is the revelation 
about its saperiofity to the performers of saorifioial acts, to the 
followers of knowledge, and to the followers of yoga — 22 

The very same worship is the principal thing or the character of being 
principal belongs to devotion This is ascertained m every way indeed) since 
it IS thus reaealed 

The yogi is higher than the ascetic* he is conntcd higher than 
even those who follow knowledge 

The yogi is higher than those who perform sacrificial nets , 
therefore, 0 Arjnna, be thon a yogi 
* And of all yogis, who*ooacr with his (inner) soul intent on me 
“In full belief worships mo ho is aeconnted by me the most 
devoted * (Cowell) GiiA, vi, 46, 47 
Here it is to be nndersiood that the snperionty of the persons qnalided, 
which is due to tho snporioril} of their respective qnnhfioations such as asceticism, 
etc , IS successive (t e of the one to tho other in the order of their mention) 
(For) snrelr the superiority of a subsidiary to its principal is not established 
Hence it follows that do>otion is the principal <^1 1 

(It might be suggested that the aboao revelation is a mere arthavAda, 
and that what » regarded ns a subsidiary is also competent to produce the 
desired result, t e ,mukti, and as such possesses snporiorit) also) With a view 
to avoid the appearanoe of superiority (m tho snbsidiary) also by means of tho 
lessons of the Iterelation, tho author reads 

1 ^ 1 5^ I u 

Prusna mrApina bhyftm by question and answer anfw- 
Adhikya siddhebi from the proof of superiont} (of desotion) 

^ 14 (The revelation cited above is not an artbavAda), because 
of the proof of the saperionty (of devotion) by means of question 
and answer ^23 

Here the whole of the twelfth chapter (of the GiiA) is an example of 
this method of proof The question is m the form 

“They who in faith worship thee, thus constantly devoted to thee, 
“ And ^they who worship the indestructible and the unmanifesied, 
which of these knows most of yoga ? (Cowell) 

The answer is as follows 

“ They who fixing their mind on me, worship me, ever devoted 
“ Endowed with the highest belief, they are connied by me the 
most devoted 

But they who worship the indestructible, the indescribable, and t(ie 
unmanifested, 




22 


sIndilya-sutram? 


“ The all-pervading, the inconceivable, the unchangeable, the un- 
moved, the permanent, 

“ Restraining all their senses, having equanimity ot mind towards all, 

“ These veiily attain me, being intent on the weliaie o£ all. 

‘ Theii laboui is the gi eater who fix their thoughts on the unmani- 
fested, 

“The path o£ the unm.uiifested with difficult}' obtained b> 
embodied beings 

“But they \Yho aie intent on me, hu\mg transleiied all their 
actions to me, 

‘ And woislnp me, contemplating me with unfalteiing concent t a lion, 

“ To them a deliveier trom the <500 of death and the world 

“ Ishall eie longbe,son of Piitlia, as then thoughts are fixed on 
me ’’ (Cowell) — Gita, a a, 1-7. 

As this question and answer proves the supeiioiity ot devotion, the passage 
cannot be considered to be an aithavada For it is well known that the form 
of question and answer is for the purpose of ascertainment, and not for the 
purpose of commendation. It is only an excess ot laboui and tiouble that i*> 
entailed by the pursuit ot asubsidiar} itselL (apart tiom the piincipal to which 
it is subservient) — 3 4 

The author proceeds to expel the demon in the form of the apprehension 
which may arise from the mention of the wrord * belief * (m the .ibove passage), 
namely that devotion is a kind of belief. 

tsr J5i|r f n \ I 

^ Na, not Eva, by any means. S'laddha , belief g Tn, but 

SadliSianyat, applying it umveisally 

15. (Devotion should) not (be supposed to be a kind of) 
belief, by applying (the term, devotion) universally.— 21 

Devotion should by no means be apprehended to be a foim ot belief, 
because belief is a subsidiary of saciiEcial acts alone Not so is devotion to 
the Lord — 15. 

ei^sri u x h 1 11 

rT^iTT TasyA-m, in this, i e. devotion Tat-tio, that, t <?, the charactei- 

i«5tic of being a subsidiary of belief, being found. ^ Cha, and. 
An-avasthanat, from infinite rogiession. 

16. (Devotion cannot be a form of belief), also because, since 
(in that case) devotion in the form of belief would be a subsidiary , 
of belief, there would be infinite regression. — 2.5 

For, “ He wdio worships Me wdth belief is accounted by Me the most 

devoted ” (Gita, vi, 47). 

* ‘‘ Here ‘ beheE ’ is subsidiary to ‘ faith ' aooording to the rule ' that woioh ohatooteriMB 
the agent la « sabsidiaty part of the ceremony to be porfot.xed ’ ; as in the injunotion “ let him 
who desires heaven offer the saonfioe," where the desire of heaven is oonsidetod to ba subBidi 
ary."— Oowsll, 


CHiPTJBR 1 XjSOTDse n 


23 


Snoh IS tho S'raii Sinco in this ror«o it is found that bolisf is a sabsi 
diary oE dovotion \7h10h is^ yon say, a form of hohef, thoro wonld onsno infinito 
rogression, as boIioE then wonid be withont a sabsidiar^ Otherwise, if >oa 
mamimn that belief also would hi\o a suhsidiar), n. , adilForont bolioft thoro 
would still ariso tho samo inBnito rogrossion (as } ou will ha\ 0 to imagine subs- 
diary belief in turn adtnpniium) Therefore, (if wo are to a> old this infinio 
regression), as (for the samo reason) in the ease of the opening \orsos of a 
ceremony which do not require any opooing versos at ihoir commencement, 
and as also in the case of the nnsiog of tho month (preliminary to a ceremony) 
which does not require a preliminary riasmg for itself, so m tho present case 
belie! would not bo a subsidiary 0! demotion (But this is in contradiction to 
tho S'rnti quoted abo\e which declares belief to bo a subsidnr) of devotion 
Povotioo theroforo cannot bo a form of belief) 

And another reason wh) devotion and belief cannot bo treated as idonii 
cal IS their separate mention m such phrases as ** endowed with boliof and 
de\otion —16 

» » J U 

Brahma kAndam, tho portion of tho Voda treating of 
iBrahman To, bat Bhaktau 10 respect of dovotion Tasya, its 
vgdiWTir AnujfiAnAya, from tho point of knowledge QiUFuitj SAmAny&t, 
being the same 

17 Bat the Brahma kA^da (m directed) to devotion (as its 
end), since, as a scarce of knowledge, *» does not differ (from the 
pflrva kAnda) —20 

The aphorism is addre sed to one who thinks that, if knowledge were 
not superior to devotion, the latter protion of tho Veda would not have been 
universally known as the JHAna-KAnda, I e the protion treating of knowledgo 
(as opposed to the early portion which ircits of Karma, 1 e sacrificial acts, 
etc ) Tlie Brahma kAnda u revealed for the purpose of devotion, and not for 
the purpose of knowledgo sinco tho making known of what was previously 
unknown is the coihmon cbaractaristio of both theKAndas (so that both would 
equally be J&Ana kAnda) Kor is it possible to regard this latter portion as 
laying down rules for the acquisition of knowledge, wherefore, owing to 
knowledge being its principal aim, it might have been described as JfiAna 
kAnda Therefore, tho idea that it » a JHAna KApda is a mistake Bnt li is 
really Brahma kAnda Hence has it been nphori«od "Now then, there is a 
wish to know Brahman ’ (Brahma SAtrom, I, 1 1 ) This therefore is a 
Bhakti kAnda, ns devotion is the objeot it aims at —17 

Thus ends the second leotnre of the first chapter in tho Commentary on 
the One IJfundred Aphorttmi of SAndiiya composed by the most learned teacher 
Svapnesraro 



finished also is tho first chapter 



Chapter II : Lecture i. 

This dovotion is not to ho pioduced direct!}' liy an effori. For it-J 
production other means are to bo looked for Of those means, fho inlimalo 
or intornal one is knowledge ; tho oxtrancons ones are the lower form of 
devotion, etc. For the discrimination of those means is the commencement 
of the second chapter. 

Buddhl-hotn-p^a^^tllh, practice of the means of know- 
ledge. A-visuddeh, till (complete) purification (of the mind). 

Avaghhta-vat, like tho shelling (of rice). 

1. The practice of the means of knowlegde (is to be kept up 
till the complete purification of the mind, as (in the case of) the 
shelling of rice.— 27* 

‘Knowledge’ means certain kno\^ ledge about Brahman. Although 
this cannot be produced by efforts, still the jiractice of the means thereof, such 
as hearing, pondering, meditating, etc , is necessaiy foi its production. Hero 
the doubt aiises whethei one is to evoit once only, following tho maxim “ tho 
meaning of the siistra is fulfilled when once performed,*’ oi whether one is to 
exert till fiimness of devotion is achieved. To this it is replied . Tho 
practice of the Ineans is necessaiy till the complete purification of demotion. 
Just as, for example, it is the intention of the injunction, “ ho shells the rice, ' 
that the act of shelling is to be perlormed 'till the nee is completely cleared 
of its husk, so, its utility having been obseived, one must strive to practise 
knowledge and the othei means till the removal ot all impuritj of mind — 1 

If it be urged that it does not follow that there is to bo the practice of 
those acts which are subsidiaiy to these subsidiaries ot do\otion, — to this is the 
reply . 


Tat-angaiifi-m, ot their subsidiaries, auxilliaries (Jha, also 

2. And of their subsidiaries also- — 28. 

“Of their subsidianes,” i e. of obedience to pi eceptors, iniostigation of 
arguments not in contiadiction to the 5^eda, selE-iestraint, and so foilh, also 
the practice is necessary For, subsidiaries wliibli are disoiganised in then 
subordinate parts, are not able to conhibute to the oauseot the principal, 
just as the geneial is useless w'lthout his army lemaining in peifect 
organisation.— 2. 

Next IS considerd the question of the puiification of the object of 
knowledge. 



CHAPTER n Lfcthiie i 


25 


tR^rg; II ^ I ^ I ^ II 

rrr^ Tdiu it, I 0 knowledge Aisverja pnrAin, directed to 

lordliness or majesty nstmn Kisjapah, a sa^e o£ that nime Fara* 

tvAt, being other 

8 Kdejapa holds that knowledge of lordliness (is the cause 
of the highest good), from its being other (than the knower) 

39 

The teacher considers tbit * it i « knowledge which has 

as its object a being endo\ied with the majesty ot the Supreme Lord and other 
attributes produces the highest good as its frnit Hou so ^ Because ibis 
Supreme Being is other thin the oiiiliodied souls <inoe for the sako of the 
knowledge of one*s own self there is neod Cor (lie knowledgo of another In 
this view there is an absolute difterenco between tho J)\ i and Bnliinan d 

sir^mfo ii » i ^ i i? ii 

AtmiX oka pirAin directed ta tUi pure self 
BAdardyanah the sage of that u.ime 

4 BAdardy&'^A >9 of opinion that knowledge of the self pnre 
and simple (is the cause of the highest good) — SO 

Tho teacher BddarXyaiia again, considers that it is 1 iiowlodge haaiiig 
tho pare self ns its object, which is the o.iuso of tho highest good And so 
there IS the aphorism (Brahma Sdtram IV i }) But the Masters oonteraplate 
on Brahman ns the elf and teach it so to their pupils In this view, 
as the notion that this is Jiva that is Brahman it faWo tattva jnftna knowledge 
of reality is the knowledge that there is but one self which is pare consoions- 
ness and therefore, it is that kno» lege which obtiin* inukti as its frnit— 4 

ajsftqqrawrnj ir i ^ i s( ii 

Ubhaya parXm directed to both, i e both lordliness and tho 
self bAiidilyah sage of that name not tho antlior of onr aphorisms 

babda upapatti bhykra, from Uevehtion and reasoning 

6 SAndilya considers that knowledge of both (lordliness and 
the self, IS the cause of the highest good), lu aooordanoe with 
Bevelation and reasoning —81 

The teacher hAndiljo, on the other hand, considers that it » the 
knowledge of both (winch is the cause of the highest good) How so ? Because 
Revelation, t e tho Veda sajs so After beginning *‘All ibis aenly is 
Brahman thence it proceeds, therein it disappears and therein it moves 
thus let him worship it with a tranquil mind, tho ChliAndogya Upanisat 
(III, XIV, 1—4) disposes of the doubt about the self in the words this is my 
self within my heart, this is Brahman, this shall I obtain, having passed from 
4 




26 


'SANDILYA-SUTRA.M. 


hence,—! who am sure oE this and have no doubt ; -so says fSdndilya, so 

says Sandilya.” It thus declares that he who knows both these objects, 
obtains the fruit oE realising Brahman, which is produced by proma*bhakti, 
that intense form oE devotion called spiritual love oE the Lord, directed to 
Brahman as its object. 

Just as in the case of “ Babaia Pr&vahani dosjred” (Taitliriya Samhit^, 
VII. 1 . 10), there is no contradication (o£ the eternal truth of the Veda) by the 
incorporation oE the non- eternal with the eternal (in the above text where the 

name of SJndilya is mentioned), for the leEereiice is to a foimer Sdndilyn. In 
reality, the Veda has the Lord as its ! maker This is learnt from the Srati 
also : 

“ From that sacrifice univeisil were produced the Riki and the 
SAmans, 

“Theie-Eiom weie pioduced the meties. the Vajus \\ns produced fiom 

it” (Rig- Veda, V x 90) 

• 

Reasoning also pioves the point Biahman is ie\ealcd .is possessing 
supreme lordliness, and also as constituting the essential form of the Jiva. 

Thus there is the Sruti ; 

“ Fiom whom veuly these beings aie bom, by whom, when born, they 
live, whom they appioach, whom they enter, him do thou seek to knon,*’ 
(Taittirlya Upanisat, III, ii, 2) 

' And so the GitA • 

“ A portion oE Me is in the animate woild, become the Jiva, eternal ’* 
(xv. 7). 

This being the case, what can destioy ^^hat''' Theiefoie, it is only that 
interpretation of such sentences as “That thou art,” according to u hi cli both 
Jiva and Brahman aie established, that is leasonable.— 5 

Vaisamykt, on account oE incompatibility, A-sidham, 

not proved, Iti, thus. Chet if ^ Na, no AbhijSdnat-vat, as 

in the case of recognition. A-vaisistyat, in the ab«5ence of distinc- 

tive mark 

6. If (you say that this is) not proved on account of incom- 
patibility, (we reply), No, (this is proved) as is reooguition in the 
absence of the distinctive mark. — 32 

You may say that this itself, namely that knowledge has both lordliness 
and the self together in one act as its object, is not pioved, on account of 
their mcompatibility ; for incompatible is the knowledge that it is an object 
qualified as not being the cieator of the wo^ld, etc, in regaid to an object 
qualified as being the creator of the world, etc. We leply that this is not so. 
i 01 , just as in the case of such lecognitiou as “That is this same Devadalta,” 



CHAPTER ll tiEOTOftE I 


27 


** Thai h I ” its kaowledgfi of bo£ii iogethor is rondorod ^«siMo by ihe (adi 
tbat co-eststenco of two things in the same receptacle (Ihonght) takes cognis 
ance of that portion of them which consists in their essential non dififerenco, 
without the presence of the distinctive characteristic of the one in the other haring 
its own distinctive charooteristics loasmhoh ns the knowledge (for the purpose 
of recognition) of (he distmctive ohnrooterisiics of one thing in another which 
has its own distiDcti\e characteristics, is a general rnle which admits of 
exceptions 

Is it then your theory, }ou may ask, thot tho essential non diGEerenoe 
is brought forward not directly by the objects ns specially qualified, but 
through indirect reference or suggestion by the objects themselves apart from 
their special qualifications ? Wo reply, No, beoanso to make known by jhdirect 
reference is discreditable, and because ^e cause of the bringing forward of 
the thing suggested is not suggestion but the presence of tho oircnmstances 
which determine it If it were not so, there might sometimes be the recollec- 
tion of the thing suggested e^en without tho circiimstancei determining ti to 
be the thing suggested lict this suffice — C 

51 'a cr: ii ^ 1 ^ i « ii 

w Na, nor w again Klifinh, subject to nffiiction ur Parah, 
the other, the Ruprome I/ord Sj fit, would be 'owwir Ao-antaram, imme- 
diately after Vise^At, there being difterence 

7 Kor would (he Supreme liord be, (on our theory), subject 
to affliotiOD, ainoe immediately after (identity) there is a differ- 
ence —88 

Nor IS it possible to say that this (< e the identity of the Jlva and 
Rraliman) being so, the possession of affiiction, etc , appertaining to the adjuooi 
of the Jiva (i e the intern’ll organ) would also bo entailod id tho cose of the 
Supreme Lord Because, immedntely after the aboie knowledge of their 
non-difference, there is the ascertainment of their difference in tho form that 
affliotion, etc fame no cooneotion with the self — 7 

^aiwistiTCr^ ii ^ I ^ l c u 

^Tsr^ Aisviryam, lordliness TTWr lutbft, likewise Tfw Iti, thus CiiCt, 
if w Na, no SvAbh(lv>at, being of bis >ery nature 

8 If (you say that) Jordiiaess wili be likewise (azolnded from 
the hupreme Lord, we reply) No, because it is of His very nature 
-*34 

IE } on say that like affiiotion etc , lordliness elmraoterisod as His being 
the Creator, eto is in the same waj oscloded from the Supreme Lord, whereas 
the character of all pervadingness faai ing been witnessed in the self is not 
(excluded) like affliction etc , wo replj No, because the olianoleristio oE 
being the Creator, etc appertain to the Supremo Lo d s own nature For the 
ebametor of fire to lie hot by nature is noi or altered Therefore, (he being 
not natural is the immediate condition of exolusion Hence although there is 




28 


^ANDILYA-SUTKAM. 


obstruction to the attiibution of the darkne-s, etc detected in the imago, to 
the sun reflected in the minor, etc , (darkness, etc. not being natural to the 
sun), there is surely no obstruction to the attnbution of loundness, biightness, 
and other natural characteiistics — 8. 

AVell, the loidliness of the Supiomo Lord is loal ; liut ho^^ is it, you may 
ask, that affliction, etc. aie adventitious to the di\as? The authoi declaie-) 
the cause of this difference. 

suJlfrlfu^ A-piatisidham, unhindeied. utwT Paia-ai4\a!ynm, loidliness 
of the Supreme, Tat-bhavut, fioin ImMiig llis ‘substance. ^ Cha, [and. 

Tf Na, not. Evam, so, ? natural. Haiesrnn, of the othois, t.r. of 

the Jlvas 

9 The loidliness of the Supreme is unhindered, and because 
the Jivas share His substance, affliction, etc* are not natural to 
them — 36 

For, in no Si uti whatevei the loidliness of the Snpi erne Loid intei- 
dicted , wheieby even that nhich is established should he excluded. Ihithei 
from such texts as “Whose will is truth” (Ohhandog)a Upanisat), it is 
learnt that lordliness is H:s natme Noi is there any leason for .ib.indon- 
ing the attribute that is obseived m Him, as theie is m the case of the Jna ; 
tor He IS eveiy moment the Loid, He is e\eiy moment liee. But to the others 
than the Supreme, i.e. the Jivas, affliction, etc aie not thus natiual ; why ? 
because they shaie His substance Foi this, n i ei ealed by such texts a*! “he 
attains to the supieme light, he is evolved by Ins own toim ’ (L’liliAndog) a Up.i- 
nisat, VIIT, iii, 4) And this nould not be po'-siblc, it affliction, etc. ^^ele 
natural to the Jivas. It might be possible, .iguir, if .iffliction etc v ore the 
natuie of the Supremo; but this is not so Theiotoie, aKo foi the leasoii 
that mukti defined as Biahma-iealisalion uould otheivise be impossible, (it 
follows that) samsai a IS caused to the Jivas by then adjunct, \p the mteinal 
organ Although in the case ot the Supieme also, loi dliness has in.'ijjl as its 
upMhi or special condition, still theie is nevoi .in absolute dissolution of this 
up^dhi, (and thus loidliness lemains unirapaiied) Of the inteinal oigans 
which aie the iip&dhis ot the Jiias, on the other hand, it is the absolute 
fflasolution that takes place when the highei devotion is pioduced But it does 
not follow that the may a, eneigy ot the Loid .ilso at the same time ceases; 
because, as theie is an infinity ot the Jivas, activifj is evci necessaiy on the 
pait ot the Loid toi the sake of theii samsaiaand then woiship. And so the 

Sruti “ he as it weie thinks, he as it weie moies, ’ (Biihad Aianyaka Upanisat.) 

and also the Siuti ‘ now then the declaiation, Not thi': Not this” (7/W'), etc 
have the Jiia as then object — 9 

i ^ i u 

Saiva-aniite, on the dissolution ot all i e, nil the intein.al 
oigan** Klin, what Iti thus Chet, it ?r Na, not Eiani, ‘lo 

Buddhi-anantj at, tiom the infinity ot the internal oigan*! 


CHAPTER II Lrcrnnp i 


29 


10 (H you ask), on tho dissolution of all, wbai (is the use 
of ]ordlme«s)^ (wo ropb), Not so, owing to the inCnity of interna! 
organs —80 

hoWi o^cn if mukti (of llio h gntlaal, when there will Lo the 

«iu9olution of nil internal orgnii* (one after another), the upfldhi of the Supremo 
will ont} ho loft from the abyenco of any purpose to fcrro, there will bo 
’ibsoluto dissolution of this also what ts tho good, then, }ou mn) ask of attri- 
buting lordliness a* the natiiro of the Supreme ? Wo repi), it nc\cr so happens 
Since tho tinmlier of tho internal orgm< which arc tho adjuncts of tho Jtiis 
IS iiihmte, such a tune itself will not er lie Hence it i* right that lordliness 
should be natural to the Supreme 

Nor 18 tho else for suoli a <iinc to come mido out hj the argument that 
all antecedent non oxiatcnoes (in other woitl«, potential existence*, a* of tho jar, 
e if , before its iLlual production) eau*o the production of their opposites (in other 
words emergent or actual existences) from their being antecedent non existences 
(for if thej did not produce thoir opjio^ttex thej would not be antecedent 
nonexistence* hut wonld he nli<oliite nonexistence*) (lor then, however 
infinite the nttmhor of tho ilsoi* inny lie the untecedent non existences of their 
iniikti are bound to proiluce their oppo*ite t r,makti Ihis being so a time 
will sure!} come when all the dims will attain miikti and there will he left no 
neoessitj for the continuance of the fordhne s of (ho Supremo So flm( lord- 
liness cannot be natural to linn) (In this tiet\ li must bo held that nil ante 
cedent non oxHiences had once produced their opposite* or that there was u 
time when none of them ju-odmed aiij cITecl) Now, itjounj that at one 
time they had all produced (heir opi^itcs we roplj No, sinto in that case 
your argnnienl would be iiiapphuiblo ( inco it would then be admitted bj jou 
tint oven after the Tuas had onto attaioeil muKli thoj nio B{,ain, or there 
were others who nro, m » (ate of bondage) On tho other limid, iiiforenco of 
,n time in which none of them produced anj cITcct would bo nbsolutolj desoid 
of reason Otherwise, by (lie inference that all nntooodont non existences had 
at u certain time not produced their op(>o<ite* nn antecedent tune would ho 
established in which there was yet no dc*truction or emergent non existence 

If jotisaj that such nn idea ns ' Maybe Iain the IIwi wlio will not 
attain iiiukti * (which is not imcoininon) will entail an absence of elfort towards 
mukti w( replj , even if there ho imuertaiiitj as to tho fruit, when there is 
certainty ns to devotion being the menus tboroof tlioro should rather bo nofivity 
towards that mean* On the contrary it will bo the cortaintj ns to tho mukti 
of all (by the more opomtion of (he iiutocodont non oxistenoes of mukti), which 
you advocate, that will entail nlisenoe ofnotnitj towards the altatnineni of 
milk ti —10 


If lordliness define J as tho being the material cause bo natural to the 
bupreine, ilien this would lead, jon mij *aj to nothing but His beiii^ subject 
to change, ns is tho case with olaj, etc lo this it ts replied 

ir|rptnffTn”(r^ Prakfiti ant irfilAt, from the medium of Prakpti, matter 



30 


sAndilya-sutram. 

• • 


"itrffOT A-vmkaryam, iiuinutability. f?rr8r?5tfT Chit-satt\ena, by existence in the 
form of the intelligent. ?!rg«nTJTW1H Anu-varttainftnfit, from entering, from being 
piesent. 

II- Since Praki'iti is the medium, the Supreme is not subject 
to change, from entering Prakribi a? a manifestation of the In- 
telligent,— 37 

What is called I’rakriti is the material cause of all insensate effects. 
This IS subject to change ; bat not “jo Brahman. The Supreme’s being the 
cieator, etc , consists in e\istence which is a form of. the nianifcctation of 
Brahman and in Ins entering into Prakriti. Nor is it possible to sa;y that 
Prakriti itself is existence, because this vould entail the iion*oxistonco of tlie 
Jivas, as they aie other than Piakriti. Tliciofoic, the Suptoinc has as His 
nature the being the Cieatoi, etc., through the medium ot inAjA enorg} 
characterised as Prakiiti ; hence He is not ‘subject to oliango. For a magician, 
creating by magic, does not become the effect of his magic (Similarly, the 
Supieine, creating by mayll, does not become an oflecl of inaji'i, and tlieiefoie, 
subject to change). 

Although by le.ison of the idontitj ot cause and oflect, the \eiy fact of 
being an effect means the being changed, and altlioiigli liabilifj to change in 
this sense suiely exists in the Suinemo, yot Ho is not subject to change by a 
change of essential foun as m the cise of milk (becoming ciird-i), etc. 

Or, we may explain that He is not subject to change any more than the 
pottei’s stick is in refeienoe to tlie jai, since it is not the cause ol aiij other 
change than that pi educed m the jui. 

Hence it is said “ through the medium ol Piaknti — 11. 

If then inaya is the raateiial cause of the iioild, the woild is founded on 
niS,yi\ alone ; how then, you iniy a^k, is th3 foundation of the woild on 

Bralinian established by the ^5lutl “on Hun is all lounded, ’ (Taittuiya 
Khila Upanisat) To this tlie leply is as follows 

IM 1 ^ I U 

Tat-piatistha foundation on Hun Giiliapithaiat, 

like a stool m a house 

12 Foundatiou ou Him (is uot iucompatible), as in' the case 
of a stool in a house — 38 

On Him, i , on Bialiinan, oven the toiindation of the changes of inaytl 
is not incompatible, ‘ as in the case ot a stool in a house;’ J ust as e\ en ot a 
man seated on a stool inside a bouse, we say “ ho is •sealed m the house, ’ “ he 
is seated on a stool ” so it is heie also — 13. 

IE so, then, is not, you may ask, Brahm in ofclioi wise eshiblished as being 
Piakiiti itself ? To this it is lephed ; 

M I \ I II 

fjTST! Mithali, mutual ApeksanAt, tioni -loqniiing 

Ubhajam, both, < e, both Biahmau and Piakriti. 


CHAPTER II UoTunE i 


31 


13 As they mutaelly need eaeb other, both (Brahmin and 
Frak iti are oanses) —39 

Brahman and Frakfih} both o( thorn, nre canses Beeanio tho intol- 
li^ont (Brahman) and the non intelligont (Prakpti) are moloall^ needed bj 
each other for the sake of their own knowtedgo and also for being the eubjeot 
of their respective powers, which of them can ororlook the other f— 13 

The author now declares an ennmeration of categories In order to eimplif) 
their use or emplo}ment in his work 

h I ^ I Vi •< 

^ w t lkwl i Chetyfl chifoh, beside Ihe knowable and (he knower ^ Ka, 
no Tfitiyam third 

14 There ts no third beaide the knowable and the knower — 
40 

Knowable m Pmkfiti, knower is llrihman,— beside them there is in this 
treatise no other third principle recognised, such is the inernlng If}0U 
say that the existonco or non e^istencs of n third does not matter, wo ropi) 
that what the author moans is that to be the knower is denied to what is dilTcrent 
from Brahman, and that to ho the knowable ts denied (o what is dilferetit 
from Prakriti— 14 

Kow yon may aa) that If there h no oonneotioii between Pmkfiti and 
Furusa (Brahman) (hero is an end of all effects while on the other hand, if 
there 18 a conneotion, this Itself IS the third (which is domed) lb this the 
anther replies 

^ ^ II 51 ^ ^ I II 

gwD liiktan, united w C ha, and SsinpsrA^af, from begin 

!iinglo«sness 

Id And (both are) united together, because (they are) 
begmningless *-*41 

The word “ mutnall) ’follows from npliorism 7ho}, i e Prukriti 
*ind Purasa under reference nre of the form of correlatives to each other it is 
not that there is between them some extraneous connection wbj ^ * from 
beginninglessnoss i e from the very fact tlml the} are beginninglos*' And 
thus in the GItA (ill 19) * Praknti and also Pnru«*i, know that both of 

them nre bogmningle«s 

Now, if} on say, let there be a different connection whioli is also begin* 
ningless we reply No, boemso as the insensate and non insensate aro the 
alternatives, the} do'not ndmit of a third <—16 

But Prakriti is oerlainiy filso, beoanse, it is of the form of mAyA, as 
appears from such Srntis as “ Lei him know that Prakriti is mAyA, and that 
Jffaliesvarn is ho to whom mAyA belongs ’ (SvetAmfam Upanisai iv 10) how 
IS it therefore you may ask, accinrod as the category of the ** knowable ^ lo 
tins the author replies — 




32 


b^ANDILYA-SUTR A5I . 


aij%5fgraT5j?T* lu 1 ^ I ti 

^f^PsTT^ Salvti-tvat,. from being u po\\ei. sT; X.i, not ^g^ri Anritain 
false. ' Vedyam, the known hie. 

16. The knowable is not false, because it is a power. — 42. 

The “ knownhle,” i e Pradhdna (another name of Prakriti), “ not false/' 
does not deserve to ho false ; why ? because of the very fact that it is a powci 
For a magician, without the powei of magic, has no powci for the creation 

of a given extraneous thing Moieovei, theSiuti “ J3nt how* gentle Touth, 
could it he so that the existent woio pi educed fiom the non-existent? ’ (Chhan- 
dogya Upauisat, VI. ii. 2) which declnies Ihe leality of the cause infeired by 
the reality of the effect le^ e.ils the existence of .ill, atul not f.ihiMies'. There 
is, again, always in the cioation ol Ihe Lord the necessity for a concomitant 
cause coiiesponding (to the thing cieatud, t <». Coi Puiknti which thoreCoie 
cannot he false), because it is Cl eat ion by an intelligent being, just asm the 
creation of the magician (thoie is the ueces'^ity toi magic as a concomitant 
cause conesponding in natuie to the magician's creation) 

Nor IS a ditfeient concomitant cause fill nisliod, as you may suggest, by 
adnsba (meat and dement), etc, because it i<5 simpler toMS'.iimo the necetsity 
for a single pow'er (i e. Piakriti, instead of an indefinite miinhci of udnst.i 
etc.), and because there is no oMdence that adnsta is the cause of anything 
except woidly experience .ind the means theieol Again, as a mimbei ot 
these othei causes will inevitably' w'andoi together m all effects, theie is 
pi oof ot one eternal concomitant j'owei. Un the othoi hand, the •supposition 
of many othei causes subsidiaiy* to this one, opoiating towaids the triiit, 
IS not an offence against the l.iw* ot pai simony An elaboration ol this point 
will be found lu the thud chaptei. — IG. 

The discussion (in aphoiisiii 43) staited as a digie-ssion is thus disnii&so,t 
The authoi now puisue-s the matter under consideiation. 

nFBTT u ^ i ^ u 

Tat-paiisuddhih, the pmity tlieieoF, of deiotioii ’g’ Olia, 

and.nisnT Gamy4, to be inteiied Loka-\at, as m common life fsr^vq-; 

Lingebhyah, by means ot maiks oi sign«s. 

17 And its complete purity is to be inferred by means of 
marks, as in common life —43 

Although devotion is no doubt an object ot seiiso-peiception Of internal 
organ which is mind) thiough such cognitions as “ I w'oiship.'’ “ T have affec- 
tion,” etc, just as thiough such cognition's as “ I know, ‘ 1 will,” etc., 
knowledge and volition aie objects of sense-pe.ception ; still ils complete 
purity, chaiacterised by being mfoimed with deeper and strongei impiessions, 
IS not possible to know through sense-peiception, j'ust as in the case of the 


OHAPTBn IT LEOTunE i 


33 


anthoritatnonoss of knowledge* Thoroforo» its 'isooriaiomont is bj moans 
of marks only, a in common life Just ns in common Iifo tho groiter or less 
degrees of alTeotion are inferred b} meins of its physioil expressions such as 
tears horripilation, etc , when one listens to discourses, etc , nbont tho object 
' of affection , so is it here —17 

Tho author nett declares that not only are lliero marks as in Jifo, but 
that such marks are abundantly obtained also from the recorded recollection 
of groat sage* 

<9 



5iT|5fmgf II I ^ I II 

TOtWTgmTO)fnrTTtnTfirfafiirCni rgM gni t (m;A>TiirCTt H n ^ ir « re f iT;»TTgT 
Sarnmnni bahnmAnn prlti nnlia itariMchikitia mihimakli} A(i 
iadirthaprAnnaUiAnn ta(lt)atA samladliltaia aprAtikill^n adlni hononr, e<tcciii 
delight* forlornnosa* donht ns regards others colohrnlion of glor}, presen ntion 
d£ life for his sake acn<e of belonging to him his omnipresence resignation 
to his mil, elo 7 Clia and ^celiai Smarnnohliph from llio Ifccolicctions, 
tho Snirilis BnhnIfAt, in plant} 

18 And from the Booolleotions (are obtained) in abundance 
each marks as hononr, esteem deligbt. forlornnoss donbt as 
regards others, celebration of glory, preservation of life for his 
sake, sense of belonging to him, his omnipresence, resignation to 
bis will, eto —44 

(i) " Honour, ns in tbo caso of Arjuni 
To ri«o up before Kpsim, ilio winner of wenltb ( Vrjuni), in whatcror 
eircnmstances 

* No^or forgets, being of airtuou^ <oa1, with doiotion and with loro 
(MahAbhArnta Uronn Parian, k 2822) 

(if) “iisteein ns in tho case of IksaAkn 

** Through fondness for hia name to the deer and lotus looking like 
him 

'* F^en to tho cloud ^^hich bad his colour, tho king showed otoom” 
(Nfisimha PurAnn xxv, 22 ) 

(m) ‘ Delight, ’ ns in tho ca«o of Vidura 
" Wliat delight, 0 lotus-ojcd, I fool from thj coming ns its cause, 

** hy should it be told thao who art the inner soul of nil ^ * 
(AlnhAhliArain Udyogn Parvan Ixxxyiu dlH) 


' Ih« Fzsbbikin lobeol of the MiainBi bold tbatfeoewladgoii an objeekef Idtsrail 
peroaptoa and i « earreotesis (oe ankboEitatirenasi pramtapi) iaoesniNdbj the mDsaetof 
eocDltioD as kbe kaowled^ie ilBClf There Ja t tba psreeptlon of the objeok i a 'ihia.lsajar S, 
the ooDaoionanesa of thii peroaptioo la *lpa(oelT« tha jar 8 aimaltaoefloaiy with ('Jtha 
e pnltien of tha trath of tha peteaptloD Tha holda that tha three itapa are sneoanlra 

and tha lait ia salnad hyiafetanoa not hy dltnt eooieiou naas If It irare gaiaed bydltaek 
cooaelouaan tbera could ba no anab tblag aa doubt -^Ootran 




34 


/ 4 


SANDILYA-SUTilAM. 


(iv) “ Foilornness,” as in the case of the milkmaids . 

“ Sayest tUou, we should not talk thuu in the presence of our superiors 

“What can superiors do for us who are buinod with the fire ofc separa- 
tion ?” (Visnu Purnna, V, win, 22). 

(0) “Doubt as regards otheis,'* as in the case ol the inhabitants of 

Svetadvipa, who even seeing that it was Nurada who arrived, felt his presence 
as a hindrance to their worship of Visnu. A** also in the case of Upamanyu : 
^ “ Fain uould I be even a|worni oi a grasshoppei , at JS'ankara’s command, 

“Rathei than deshe even the throe worlds, if given, Indra, by thee*’ 
(Hlahubh^rata, Anususana Paivnn, 1, 7077J). 

(01) “ Celebration of glory,” as in the case of Yama • 

“ Addressed Yama the sinful one, in hell lormeutcd . 

“ Why not worshipped by thee the god Koiiv.i, the killer of sorrow? 
(Nrisimha Purana. viii, 21). 

“ Looking at his emissaiy, noose in hand, whispers Yama in his oar : 

“ Avoid thou those in M.idhusud.ina icposod: lord am I of other men. 
but not of Vaisnavas ” (Visnu Purnna, III, vu, 14). 

■ (an) *• Preservation of lite foi his sake,” as in the case of Hanuman : 

He himself has declared : 

“As long as ID the world shall circulate thy stoiy purifying the hearts 
of men, 

“Shall I lemain on the earth so long, obeying the command of thee ” 
(Ramayana, Uttaia Kdnda, cvii, 31) 

Or, “ preservation of lito for his sake ” may moan the preservation of 
life by Narada and others even after they had accomplished all their ends, 

simply for the sake of worshipping Him. Hence there is the Sruti . “ To whom 
all the gods, those who seek mukti, and also the locitcrs of the Veda do obeis- 
ance ” (NrisimhatSpani, khanda vi). 

(«i«) “ Sense of belonging to him,” as in the case of Uparichara Vasu . 

“ His kingdom and his wealth, his wife and so his chariot too, 

“ Regards he always, all is of the Lord.” 

(MahabhS,rata, Sauti Parvan, cccxxxvii, 12718) 

(xi;) “ His omnipresence ” in all beings, as is well known in the case of 
Prahl^da. Declared also by Prahlada himself 

“Thus in beings one and all devotion which vvnvois not, 

“Should the wise have knowing Han is, all” (Visnu Puifi.na, I, xix, 9) 

(tv) “Resignation to his will,” as in the case of Bhisma, even when the 
Lord approached to kill him. By Bhisma himself it has been doclaiod, 

“ Come, lord of the gods, home of the world, 

“ Adoration to thee, bearing in thy hand bow, club, and swoid, 

“Fell me by foice, 0 ruler of the world, from the chariot with penant 

flying, 



Chapter ii leoturg i 


35 


** Tiion wli9 mirTellons prowess m batUe showest ’ 

(MahAbbAniifl, Bh!?mn Parrftni IWti, 2604^ 

From tbe word '* etc ” the actions ot Uddhara, Akrftra, and others are 
to be nnderstood 

Althoagb this t e reference to marks has been mentioned m ** because 
it IS tbe opposite ol hatred '* (aphorism G)* still the distinction (of the present 
from the prerions declaration) is tbit there it was mentioned as a mark of 
affeotion» whereas here it is mentioned as a mark of the complete purity of deep* 
derotion^lS 

Bot amongst those who hare oSectioo for their mBstar» hatredi jealoosy, 
etc are felt by those who receive a loss degree of his faronr, towai^s those 
who receive a greater portion of it • if you then ask, are these also the signs ^ 
tbe onthor replies, No 

u ^ 1 ^ 1 n 

Bvestt Adayah, hatred, etc,^ Tn, but w No, oof 79^ Evarar 
so 

19 Bat batredi etc are not so *--45 

J t from their very inoompatibility, ns has been declared by the divine 
VyAsa 

<* Neither anger, nor onvy, nor greed, nor any wiokod thonght takes 

f laoe m righteous people devoted to Pumsottamn ** (MahAbbArota, AnnsAsana 
hrvan, cxiis, 7C9) 

In the case of BisupAla, on the other hand, iho order of evolution was 
just as follows from hatred, constant remembrance , thence supreme devotion , 
thence mnkti -»19 

Now, these marks of demotion that are rocollectcd, gonerall) relate to the 
incarnations of tbe Lord as its object, hat demotion beoanso it is, os yon hold, 
to be produced from the knowledge of Brahman, sbonid, yon may say, properly 
have the AlUFulI (i e the Supreme Lord, and not His incarnations) as its 
object The donbt ha>ing been thus raised, the author declares the conclusion 
(of the discussion on this donbt) 

UT im ^ i n 

95 Tat, therefore VAkya sosAt, from the summing up, 

from the concluding sentences, of the section mSsnhg PrAdarbhA\ osn, in respect 
of manifestations Rrfk Api, also wr SA, devotion 

SO Therefore, from tbe eummiog up, (ib is seen that) tbe 
higher devotion (arises) in respeot of tbe manifestations also —46 
“SA” the higW devotion may also ha>o tbe manifested Self as its 
object How do yon know this ^ From tbe summing up For the 
purpose of the subject proposed in * The worshippers of the gods go to the 
gods my worshippers go to mo also ’ (HltA, rii, 23) the argument is logically 
Bummed up m the denunciation of devotion to other gods in 

* Whoever devotee wishes to worship whatsoever form with faith, 

“ To them rcspeotivol v 1 ordain unshaken faith m those forms ” 

(GitA, Tii, 21) 




36 


sANDILYA-SUnUM. 


Heie the object in Mew would htuo lieen t’ullilleJ by bujin;^ this uiucli 
that “ whoevei devotee whatsoiei (deities).*’ But the text has j^ono so 

£ar as to refer to “ form” It is theretoie infeiiotl Lhatdeiotion is also directed 
to the foim (manifestation oi meat nation) as its piopei object. It is also 
devotion that the section treat*’ ot —20 

ti * i ^ i " 

’ 3 FJTgiHerS[ *. Jaiinia-kavnia*\ idah. oi the knoisei oi birth un<l action. ^ 
Cha, and ^T5I“JT A-janm.i, cessation of liirtli Sahdal, troni the 

llevelation. 

21. And of one who knows (His) biith and action, there is no 
farther birth, according to Revelation —47 

“Biith *’ the Loid’s nssuniplion oL a hod} is foi ihc s.ike of such acts 
as the pi eduction of iho Veda, dcsti notion ol the denioiih, shoeing himself 
to the devotees, which cannot bo poiformed wilhont a hod\ And “action’’ 
IS such as the production ot the Veda, etc 'J’he>e «ecurc as then li uit tlie 
non-existence of biith after death to him who knows ihc inith a\>oui them. 
As, for instance, declines the Loid • 

“My hiith and action divine who knows in tiiuh, 

“Leaving body he is bom no nioie, hut goes to Me, 0 Arjuna." 

i\, 0) 


Nor does it follow that immoi tality is tlio diioct fiuit ol the knowledge 
of His biith and action. But tin ough the abolition of the impiiiity ol mind, 
which lesults'tioni it, this knowledge, by producing that highci dciotion which 
has toi its object the Supreme Loid as conditioned h} hnth and action, come'; to 
produce non-existence of biith as the fiuit Xheioloie, it i.. learnt irom the 
Revelation itself that the higher devotion iiiaj ha\e a*; its object the IjOid 
appealing as an incarnation — 21. 

51^ n i x * i> 

rl^ Tat, that, I. c hnth ahd action ^ Cha, and Dm jam, divine 

Sva.sakti-matra-udbhavat, tioni pioduction solelj hj his own 


power. 

. birth and action are divine, as their prcduction 

IS solely by His own power. — 48 

“ My bn til and My action aie divine,’ (•’ays the Gita, iv, 9). Heie 
what does divineness imply 9 Jt cannot imply that these aie pioduced thiough 
mei it, because, theie is in Him an absence ot contact with moiit, as there is no 
pioot that adrista (iiieiit and dement) belongs to Him. Nov can it imply that 
these aie pioduced in heaven, for then the chaiactoi of divineness would not 
apply to His bu th in the woild oL om eaith. But it implies that like the 
emiodiment ot the .Jiva, Hn bodj is not produced liom the (i\o elements as 
IS rai eiu calicos, but is, on the contiaiv, pioduced bi His own uiajA 
p wer enee leie is *he deciai ution ol the Loid to Naiada in tlic j\Ioksa- 


CHAPTBR ir Lbotpre i 


37 


Uharinft (poriton ot ilto Mamblitlrato, cccxU^ 1)909) 

tins IS created b} Me, that ihoD seest Me, ^Arada 

So also III the Gitl (t\, C) 

** Though I am unborii, oE uucliangoahic esseuce, though I am the lord 
of all beings 

let entering My own PraUfitt, I am born b^ tho form of M) mdyA ” 

Nor » its not being composed of tho elements an} bar to its being a 
bod} , for to bo composed of tile elements » mvanah]j necessart onl) in tho 
ciso of a body which ts to be the scat of worldl) oxpenenco (canned by odfista, 
and adfi^la, as stated ahore does not exist in tho case of tho incarnations) 

Now, if you say that its being tlie sent of worldly experience is the >ery 
thing which constitates its being a body, fnnd tint what is not so, is not a 
body), wo rcpl}, No since it is simpler to hold tbit its being a body consists iii 
its being the basis or support of exertion The hcnig on exertion is a particular 
]Ati or gcnorio proporta belongiuj, to the class of action and net that action 
as such IS exerttoii, ns iii that ca c we shall ha\e tonppl} tho term to the action, 
I e , luoiemeiit or chatigo, taking place tn a dead bod} Nor does the being 
an exertion consists in its being nit action producod h} direct \olition, as 
til that case we slnll baie to predicate in tho ca^e of a pot and the hi e that 
the) exert since all notion is produced b} tho direct solitioii of the Supremo 
Lord And thus by the nrganioiit which onibles ns to know tho nature of the 
hod} o«snined h} tho Supremo T ord there is also proof of tho exertion Appear- 
ing in that body and so we lenso the discussion here 

Nor IS the number of tnttras or eleinontnr} principles exceeded by tho 
proof of tho body of the Supremo Lord boennso like n pot and the hko, it will 
not hoan elementnr} principle nt nil, innsmuoh ns it does not oeDO os tho 
material cause of tho unnersc, nor again does it sene as the prDtot}pc of tho 
sense organs*— S2 

But when Uo has no purpose of Hts own to accomplish being all full, 
how does fie engage in nctnit} ? Snch an ciiquir} being possible, the author 
declares 

nen ii i ^ i 

3lttkh}am, primary nmrlas}a his Hi, for K&ronyam, 

kindness, compassion 

23 His compisaion (wUich is) primary, (la tho oauae of His 

activife^) 

* * Ssndllye bolds tfast Krbbaa ft ntilf • fora of tbe Sopreae firtbmaa fteo Ooam 
ea npfa 69) bat hit body It not • npartlt ptlasry prinolpls ((idiot) ftoa tbe tokaowltdgod 
S6 of (be VadtBt* ei It it not a tattwa at ell The taitirsi aa dirided flnt Into two grtai 
elaiait, as latalHgtat (fktt and ooa (ottlllgcnt («7Af(} Ibo fermsrfoeJodei Jtmira and 
tbe lodlvldae) too), (be aeosad all tba ttat Bst tha laeond it la tnxo dinded Into general 
itgvpaktt) and speaial (rg*/)ya> tbe apeolsl eta tba five alameota tbe fire taniDattai and tbe 
alaren MBsea and orgaoi the ceoerel are matter (< * ItTierai ipaye powee), hitelle t and 
egeien (see Comm oa Apb S7) Xbo epeolel eprlng from tba ganerai at tbair material oauia 
and Id tarn th mtalT«a piodttoa all the diffarent lodirldnal asi taneaa fae pots atr ) Is tbe 
world Bat tba dirioa body of Kriahne la not like tbeapeela) tittwaa at oetbiog In tbe grots 
world iprlags from it nor oen It ba like tba gaoaral tettwaa, beeania ibrsa ar# tbe material 
oanaaB ol tbe elemanta eenMt organa ato but tbia diaiDa body ia uat tba materiel eanie of 
anything (Of the Tattwa keomudi in iti Comm on Saokbya karika, aphorism S where it 
18 shown that anoh effaete, as pets ote eanitot bs oiUed (oritoAri* —Cowall 




38 


sandilya-sutium. 


For, in common life nion cal Mihom compassionate wlio exert tliemsohea 
I for the desti action of the sufferings of othois without any ulterior motive. 
' But this application of the word to them is not in its primary sense ; for it is 
not possible that the destruction of suffciing by them should be without an} 
ulterior thought, since their exei tion 13 foi the destruction of the pain caused 
to them by pity, or at any rate, for the sake of attaining merit Nor, again, 
would the primary sense of the word “ compassionate ’* be preserved if it is 
applied to one who Oxerts himself foi the meie destruction of the suffering of 
others (mere destruction, i. <?, desti notion without the qualification of being 
‘ without any ulterior thought because men do not call one compassionate 
who is influenced by the ulterior thought of thcreb} gaining wealth, etc But 
it is to the Lord alone who dcstto}s the afllictions of others without any ulterior 
thought, that compassion belongs in its pnmary sense. Tlie very same applica- 
tion of the w'ord, compassion, that is made to Him, is made in a sccondar} sense 
to those who seek to serve other purposes by their exertion tow aids the destruc- 
tion of the sufferings of others. It follows therefore that His activity proceeds 
from His ow'ii compassion, having regnid at the same timo to the adrista 
that w’lll be produced thereb)’ — 23. 

But since there is by such texts as e. (j., “ amongst men, the king ” 
(Gitfl, X, 27), the declaration that all vibhutis, glories oi prc>cmincnt manifesta- 
tions of the power of the Lord, (as distinguished from His nicai nations), are 
also of the form of the Lord, would not, you may ask, miikti result also from 
devotion to the king, etc ? To this the authoi leplios. 

H 1 X 1 tl 

CX \3> ' 

JTffhTr^TH Prani-tvA,t, from boiiig connected with prilna Oi life-bioatli. qr 
Na, not. Vibhutisu, to the glories or pre-eminent manifestations of the 

powei of the Loid. 

24- (Mukbi does) not (result from devotion) to the vibhAtis, 
because they are connected with the pra«a. — .>0. 

The higher devotion which has a*, its object the being alone which is 
unconditioned by the adjuncts of the Jiva, has miikti as it*? fruit, but not 
affection for the king, etc, who are connected with the adjuncts of the Jiva 
in the shape of the prAna, the internal oigan, etc. — 24. 

II s I ^ i II 

D}tita-rAja-sevayoh, of playing with dice and of woi- 
shipping the king. iTfh^vTiq[ Fratisedhut, from prohibition. ^ Cha, and. 

25‘ And because there is the prohibition of worshipping the 
king as well as of playing with dice, (the king as a vibhfiti cannot 
bo identical with the Almighty) — 51. 

In the Dharma Sastias there is lecollected the piohibition of plajing 
with dice and of vvoishipping the king Theie would have been no such piohibi- 
tion, if the king weio identical wdth the Supremo Loid — 25. 


CAAFT£BII Leoidbe i 


39 


atT|^jqtfe%5iraTCHT5l?a[Tg[^ll ^ I ^ J II 

irrf^if VAsadeve, la regard to VAsadeva, Krisna, who is montiooed 
anODg the vibhdtis A^ii, also tF?T Itii thus Chet, if W Na, no 
Wr^iTnn'^yr^ Akclra m&ira ivkt from being a mere form 

26 li (yon aay that the same ptohibition V7du)d apply) to 
Kri™a Y^aadeva also,' (we reply) No because (Kri’ii^a was not a 
Jiva likp others, but) his was merely the form (in which the Lord 
himself was preBent)~63 

But there is also the revelation among the vibhdtis ns ** I am 
Vdsndeva among the Vrisnis * (Gitd x, 37) , so that like the king, etc , he 
too, you may say, is not to be regarded as identical with the Supreme Lord, and 
therefore is not to be worshipped ui all Wo reply that snoh i s not the case , 
because it is the supreme^ Brahman whioh took the mere form of Krisna, as 
Pardsara declares 

** \ man is deUveced from all sms who hoars the race of Yada, 

Wherein descended the buprene Brahman oilled Visnu in human 
form ” (Vwnn Pardna, IV, xi, 2) 

This would not be so, if Kpsna were a Jlva •--»26 

JrwfVlfTilT^ IM I ^ I II 

nnrfiTvrWT^ Pratt abhijSdndf, from recogmtion w Cba also 
37 And also from reoognitton (of £ri?0a as Brahman in the 
Scriptures, it follows that Krjfna is Brahman, and therefore to be 
worshipped with the higher devotion) 

And the recognition of the Supreme Brahman in the object known ns 
Vdsudora is found in the Sruti (Ndrdyana Upani^at, Atharvasiras vi, 9) 

The son of Devakl is Visnu the destrojer of Bladhn is Vi^nu ” 
“ To Vdrdyana present in all beings, one the oan^o of all, unoansed, the 
essence of the Supreme Brahman * 

Such recognition is also rcoollected in the Smriti For example, Mdr> 
kanileya said to Yndhi^thira from the memory of what he had witnessed at the 
time of a pralaja or world di«solatioa 

** Thai God who was beheld by me of old having eyes long as a loiuspeial, 
Is now, 0 tiger of men ,thinp own relation, Jandrdana ’ 
lUababhdrata, Vana Farvan, olxxXiz, 13002) 

So again, having heard that the Lord is verily not to be seen even by 
menns of penances, Janamejaja sajs 

* Verily the Lord, worshipped the world, is not to bo seen even by 

poiuinces , ^ 




40 


SANDITiYA-SUTRAM 


• • 


“ Him liav’O they soon immodiatol}, luloino'l with Ui»* 8i maik 
Hahubhiiuila, 8An<i Pni van, Mok^a Dliarma, cccvlv, 1*5325. 


Tho woicl ‘also* supplies tlio lurthei loason nli} Krisna V.isiulo^a is fo 
bo woishippod, vie, Uio locollcction in the .Smiiti lh.it (iio tlfyofoos of Kiisia 
have also attained the finit oC itninot t.ility — 37 

IE yon ask, \i'hy then has V.isndoia l»oon celchratod as one of tho 
vibhuus, the' author replies. 

ssfsijq nis II 1 ^ i *<5 11 

C V* -N, ^ ^ 

Vvisnisu, among the Vi isnis. ■itrt;^?T ^rai*-! hyena, hy re.i'.on of 
snpoiiouty, pro-omincnco HH Tat, (hat i e. cclolirafion among llm iihhuti' 

23 Hia celebration as a vibKAti ia by virtue of his pre- 
eminence. — 54. 

The declaration of tho vibhufis is soldi foi (he puipo'o of opening 
tho eyes of tho reader to the fact that it i.. to tho Supromo l^ord to ^ Whom 
belonga all pie-omincnce mentioned i.i such pi^s.ige^ as ‘ Among tie Adityas 
I am Visnu” (Grita, X, 21), etc; and si too in tho c.iso ol Vasudoia : also, 
tho celebration ofc Vasudeva among the iibhutis is lor tho purpose of opening 
the eyes o£ the reader to this fact only that Uo is the most excellent one among 
the Yi isms.— 28. 

^ ’g « R i X 1 ii 

Evam, similarly, Pr.isiddho'.u, in icganl to i\cll-kno\in 

incarnations ^ Cha, and. 

29. And similarly in regard fco well-known incarnations.—SS. 

‘ Similarl)',’ 1 c in tho «amo v’aj as in the case of Vasiuioia, it should 
he understood that devotion to tho other \\ oil-known incavnataion*: <511011 a** 
YarAha, Nrisnnha, V.unana, llama, etc. al<o produces mnkti a^ its tiuil 
owing to these incai nation^ possessing tho chai.icleiistic mark ot JBiahnnn 
Or, the aphousm may moan that ‘similail}',’ / r , b i moan** ol their possessing 
the ohaiacteiisticmaik ot Biahman, the nloa oL excellence only i<; to ho Eoimod 
m regaid to the objects which have boon recited a<! iibhhlis m ‘siich passatTe« 

as ” Among the Radras I am S.mk'ua * (GHA, \, 2o) etc. Foi it is decl.ued 
in the Skanda Purana (Kasikhauda, Piin.ibhaga, ISl) . 

“ Whoever would deoliuo tho diffoioiico of Vjsnu and Rndia. oi between 
Sri and Garni, 

That utterance of the erring Fool is lepugnant to tho Saslia ” 

Tho pi oof of Sankara's possessing tho clmiacteiistic maik of Biahm.in 
is abundantly found m the Smiiti, etc — 29 

Thus ends the fiist lectuio of the second cbaptci in tho (Jommontary on 

the One ^ Hundred Aphorisms ot Sandilyu composed by the most learned 
teacher Svapnesvara. 




Chaplet II Lecture it 


Tho tvro manifest snbsidiirios of Dovotion) nimoly knowledge and yoga, 
have been declared Now tho secondary forms of Devotion arc declared, which 
become frnitfol by wiy of dostrojing vicos which ^hinder tho development of 
tho higher devotion 


HVmr Bhaktya, hj devotion Bhijana npasamharftt, , 


from the conclnsioo of the topic with wonhip l>) devotion Gnnnja, by 


the sooondiry devotion qmr ParAyn, tho hi^^hor devotion 
£tat-faoto tv it, from being tho sabsidury moms of il 

1 Prom the conclnsion (of tho topic of tho higher devotion 
ID the Git»), with worship by devotion, (tho expression must 
mean) “ worship by the secondary devotion (as the seoundnry 
devotion is needed for the higher devotion), since it is the 
Bobsidiary means thereof —66 


After rociting or referring to the higher devotion ostiblisliod in tho 
seventh chapter, by tho expression * They worship Me with nndivortod minds, 
having known Me as the origin of all beings, and ns tho importshiblo ** (Gita, 
IX, 13) it IS next declared in the GUI (ix, 14) 

* Always celebrating My names and deeds m song, and striving, firm in 
their vow, 

**And bowing to Me, with devotion, entering m deep moditntion, they 
serve jlle, variousl} 

Thereafter follows the conclusion of the topic in tho dctlirntion, 


Bnt they who worship Me with devotion, are in Me, and I also in 
them* (Gita, ix, 29} 

Hence here, just as in the easo of Lot onosaenheo vithohitra * (Tiittiriya 
Samhitit II iv, 6), one must contemplate tho fruit (higher devotion) ns 
residing in the same subject ns tho worship of which tho name is devotion, 
such IS tho meaning hor, the nso of devotion is a name for worship is 
obtained from tho fact of the word devotion Imring been applied to devotion to 
the Lord m such teats as he who has devotion to one (i e Me) only, is pro 
eminent” (Gltd, vii, 17), and further the words bhakti and bhajann hare one 
and the same sense (both being derived from the same root bhaj) 


*'ThliaIlad«i to UlmsmBs difooialon 00 tbi isxV * Jst him who deiires ealVIe asoiifioo 
with tba sAitro A diienialoa ii r«it«d (Mrsva usls TliUn I I s ) sb to lbs mBBoioR of 
«Aitr« —Il It merely tbe oima o( ■ BBocIfioe aooilled Iron tbe dx Tstiooa objeeta booay, ghta, 
eto olhcad io it or doei It mean tlM igottad tbs Boa^ whloh la the Asalihomy* Tletim t The 
Ulmimas deeldee tbet tAitra here neiaa the nema ol the laorlfioe aa to thia my lha daaired 
Irait (cattle) tad the preaeribid meani (tba lastlBee) will both belong to (or raalda la) 

tha aaaie aobjaol tba ofiarer II It hid maaot the apottedaba goat niadoa a vlollm lo tha 
AgoiahoiDlya raotlflee than io the worda ' let blm who deiirea eatlle aterlflea with the apotted 
aba goat * the frail wonld hiTa belonged to the laerlSsar bat the epatted aha goat woold have 
baan • ebarieteriatie of the laeilBoa and belonged to It, and thna we aboald hare had raiya^Af 
barenye —Cowell 
6 




sInDILYA'SUTRAM. 


i2 


Nor, again, is the higher devotion heie enjoined as i£ it were a fruit which 
could be pioduced ; because it cannot be so enjoined, as it is not a thing which 
can be produced by an effort of will {mde aphorism 7). Noi even is its being 
the cause of the supreme good herein first revealed, as if it were not known 
before ; because the revelation theieof is also found in the same seventh chapter 
m such ' declarations as My devotees go to Me also ” (GriU, vii, 23). But 
the significance of the text But they who worship Me with devotion, are in 
Me, and I also m them,” Gita ix, 29) is . The necessity for some means tor 
the destruction of the hindrances to the higher devotion, introduces the 
‘ celebration of His names and deeds m song,’ etc.; these are indicated by the 
word, devotion, in the instrumental case (m ix, 14) m a secondary sense, and 
their being the means of the higher devotion is enjoined thereby; and then to 
supplement the injunction by an arthavada or recommendation, a complement 
is added to the sentence in the words “ they are in Me, and I in them also.” 
Otherwise, if you take the word, devotion, as having been used in its primal y 
sense of the higher devotiouj the sense would be split in two viz that worship 
is to be peifoimed with devotion, and that by worship there will be the rest 
in Me, (and the sense conveyed would contiadict the established tact that the 
fruit, mukti, results duect from the higher devotion) 

As celebiatiou of the names and deeds ot the Lord and other acts aie 
only the means of devotion, the secondary application of the woid, devotion, 
to them, as in the case of “ ghee verily is length of life ” (Taittiiija SamhitS, 
II, ill, 2), can be easily grasped by the suggestion of the primary sense. Or, 
by the derivation “ by these is worshipped,” the word devotion is applied to 
them in the same way as is the word udbhid, t e that by which something, 
cgr. cattle, is dug up, applied to the sacrifice so called (vide Asvalajana S'lauta 
Sutia, IX. viii) Or, again, the use of the word is secondaiy, because it is read in 
the class ot wo ids denoting worship by ‘ Four kinds of men worship Me ” 
(Gita, vii, 16), as IS the case with the word, cieation, oi because it is associated 
with the attribute “ generous,” as the Gita declaies : ‘‘ All these aie without 

exception goneious” (mi, 18) — 1. 

Raga-aitlia-prakiiti-sahachary^t, thiou^ association 

with celebration of His names and deeds in song, the object of which is affection, 
'er Cha, and ItaicsAm, of the othei forms of secondaiy devotion 

2. The celebration of His names and 'deeds in song has as 
its object the production of affection for Him ; and since the other 
. forms of secondary devotion are associated with such celebration 
(in the ix, 14), the same is also their object — 57. 

Foi thus IS it revealed . 

“ Well is the woild, 0 loid of the senses, delighted ajad filled with love 
at thy praises ” (Cowell) —Gita, xi, 36 

Here it is directly levealed that the celebiation of His names and deeds 
ha« as its object the stii ring up ot affection for Him Since they are associated 


OHAPTBR II LECTUitE ii 


i'-i 


witb lit the same I ^ the stirring up of affection, is tlio frmi also of the oihei 
forms of secondir) dorotion mentioned bjr such texts ns ** Ahvnj s celebrating 
My names and deeds in song, and striving, farm in their roir ” (Gltft ix, 14) 
etc — 2 

q;Tnsc5rtg.ii r i ^ n 

AntarAie in the inienal 9 Tn, but S'esAh the rest ^ 
Syuhf tviU be UpAs^n Adau, m the texts on the objects of adoration 

sr Cha, and also KAnda trlt, from their beingincluded in the Brabiiin 

KAnda of the Veda 

3 The rest (ol the secondary forms of devotion) will bo 
found in the interval , and also in the tests ou the objects of ador* 
atiODi as they form parts of the Brahma-Kilndn ^58 

Those secondary torms of doiotiou which are revealed in the interval 
between ** The} worship Mo with nndtverted minds, having known Mo ns tho 
origin of all heinga and as imperishable (Q!tA, is, 13) nnd “Those who 
worship Mo with devotion nro 111 Mo and I m them also * (Git), ix, 29), are 
subsidiaries to the higher devotion, jest bocauso they oro held ns bjr nijipors 
between the two declarations about tho higher devotion , such is tho import 
These secondarj forms of devotion areas follows 

“Always celebrating M} names m song, nnd striving, firm m their vow, 
“And bowing to Mo, with devotion, entering in deep meditation, they 
servo Me vnriouslj ' (GltA, ix 14) 

“ And others too serve Mo, sacrificing with tho sacrifice of knowledge, 
Some in nmtj some in plarahtj, some >nnonslj m My manifold olmrnc 
ter ’ (ix, 15) 
bimilnrly, 

“ Those who serve 3Ie, tliinkiii^ on nought bcsidis 
“ To them ever attached to Me, I preserve and secure prosporitv ’ 

(ix, 22)- 

Siroilprly, 

“ Ihoso attached to the gods go to the gods, those nitnehod to the pitps, 
go to tho pitf IS, 

‘ Xliose snorificing to the elements go to the elements, those who sacri 
hoe to Mo go to Me also (ix, 25 ) 

* A leaf a flower, a fruit, or a handful of water whoever olTors to Me 
with devotion 

“ The same offered in devotion I eai from him whose soul is at rest “ 
(IX, JC) 

Simibily, 

“ M Latever thou doosi whatever thou cate«t, wimlevei tliou ofierest in 
saorifico, whatever thou givest, 



44 


SANDILYA-SUTRAM. 


Wliatever peuauce thou doest 0 son of Kuiitt, give it all over to Me ” 
(ix, 27). 

“ Thus shalt thou be deliveied from the fruits, good oi evil, whose stems 
aie in thy acts ” (ix, 28). 

Heie (i) ‘ celebiation’ means the recitation of His names. And (ii) 
striving £oi the sake of devotion, although it is a common thing in life, is 
mentioned here, as the topic is the declaration of the subsidiaries to devotion 
(ni) Firmness in vow consists in the observance of fast on the eleventh day 'of 
the moon, etc in a spiiit of devotion. (i») Bowing is the operation of the raising 
ot the hands to the head, etc. in token of self-abasement And the (u) sacrifice 
of knowledge is twofold : distinguished as the supeiior and the inferioi according 
as it has the unity or the plaiality as its object, (oi) Thinking on nought be- 
sides IS the contemplation and constant leiiieiubrance of Him alone, (yii) 
Saciifice is worship , so is also the (ym) offering of a leat, etc , in the name of 
the Lord. The (laj) giving over of all is the giving over of all actions prescnb- 
ed and prohibited to the Supreme Lord 

Not only are these the only subsidiaries, but those other observances 
which are contained in such revelations about service or adoration as “ Let 
one seive Manas as Biahmaii ” (Uhh5,ndogya Upanmt, in, 18), “ Among the 
Adityas I am Visuu ” (GttI,, x, 21), etc , aie also the subsidiaries of devotion, 
If you ask, why ? We reply, because even the entire Brahma-KJlnda of the 
Veda IS declaiatoiy of devotion and its means. — 3 

u ^ i i 8 ii 

Tflbhyah, by these Pflvitiyam, purity. Upa- 

kiam^t, from the intioduction. 

4. By the secondary forms of devotion purity is produced, as 
18 seen from the introduction. — 69- 

“ By these ” i. e, by the secondary tonus of devotion, is pioduced 
“ pnnty i <>,the desti notion ot sins which aie the cause of the impurity of 
the internal organ This destruction it is which is the doorway to the higher 
devotion How ? because they are declaied aftei intioducing the subject by 
the words » this is pnutying, excellent” (Gita, ik, 2) because devotion is 
an attiibute of the internal organ . because purity is an intimate and not an 
extianeous means of devotion — 4. 

cjra u u i a u 

riT5 Tasu, in them. PradhSiiia-yogat, fiom the conjunction 

of the principal, i. ^ , the higher devotion Phala-adhikyam, excess 

ot fiuit. Eke some. 

6 Some infer an excess of fruit from the conjunction of the 
principal with these —60 

Some teacheis considei that when the subsidiary chai’acter of these veiy 
piactices, e. c., celebiation of His names, etc, is established from the context, 


CHAPTER II Lecture ii 


45 


etc» m such texts as ^‘UliQQrer offers to me with devotion ' (Git&, ix, 2b) 

* Rowing to me with devotion etc , the additional mention of the conjnnc 
tioii of devotion therein is intended to imp))^ an excess of frnit in the per- 
formance of these {Practices bj those in whom devotion has been aroused —5 

i Tn i ^ih wihw ii ^ i ^ i ^ ii 

sncin' Nflmnd, as a name fflT lii tlina Jaimmih tiie sage of that 

name Sambhavdt from possibility 

6 JaimiQi interpreta it as a name, from the possibility (of the 
00 existence of the fruit and the employment of the means in the 
same subject) —61 

The teacher Jaimini considers thaty their subsidiary character having been 
established, since, as in the case of * Let one who is using a spell against on 
enemy sflcrihce with the 8} eaa (Asval&jana Srauta SHtra IX, vii) etc, 
there is the possibility of explanation in the sense of co existence (of the act 
and the end) in one and the same subject, in this way * Let one accomplish 
the higher devotion by the celebration of His names with devotion, by giving 
with devotion,* etc the word devottoxr is intended otherwise, i e, as a name, 
and is not intended to imply a different frnit ns sncli an interpretation would 
violate the law of parsimony —6 

II M I « II 

^ Atra, here xi|fjrdt>TRr Anga prayogAn&m, of the employment 
of the subsidiaries Yath^ kftia sambhavah, according to time 

and necessity Griha &di vat as m the case of a house, etc 

7 Here the employment of these sabsidiaries is to be accord 
mg to time and neoessity ^63 

There are three alternatives, viz the performance of the celebration of 
His names, bowing ^to Him, etc may be simultaneous or it may be of any 
one of them singly or it may be of all of them one after another Of these in the 
drst alternative, the non performance of even any one of them would entail the 
failure of all the rest in the second it would be a law of nature that a 
diversity of causes produced one and the same effect while the third is con 
trary to the meaning of the text and wonld also on the ground of redundancy 
entail the non performance of the others niter one was performed and the higher 
devotion ivas produced thereby Therefore these different subsidiaries wonld be 
the cause of tnutual opposition and futihty Such la the pnma /aetf coBQ}a$ioa* 
^(pQrvopakfa) 

Bat the (siddhanta) established tenth is that all of them witiioui excep 
tioo are the means (towards the higher de^otiony as there exists the eiideuce 
tbnt such IS the case while there exists no evidence to prove the necessity for 
their simultaneous performance There sbonld be simultaneous performance 
of only those, of which rp perfume flo^^er, incense, lamps, oblations etc the 
simultaneous use is enjoined in the t^Astras But of the others the p6rforiu 




46 


sAndilya-sutkam. 



ajrce is to bo aoooidmg to timo and according to nececsity as in the building 
o£ a house, etc , i. just as the collection o£ the niatei lals I’or a house such 
as thatching giass, posts, etc, is made sometimes all at once and sometimes in 
succession ; and it does not follow from tins circumstance alone that the thatch- 
ing grass, etc., are not the mateiial causes of a house It follows tlieiefore 
that the pioduction of the higher devotion takes place tlnough all the subsidiaiy 
means when they have shown their lespective efficacy by causing the destiuc- 
tion of such sms as they aie sevei ally competent to destioy. And so it is 
declared (Gitft, vii 19) 

“ At the end ot many births, he who has knowledge attains Me ’’-—I 

K 1 « U 

Isvava-tusteh, fiom the pleasing of the Loid Ekah, a 
single one sirfk Api, even. Bah, strong. 

8 Thvough the pleasing of the Lord, even one5 being strong, 
may be efieofcual — 63* 

Among these subsidiaiies, wliichevei one becomes strong by exceeding 
performance, that, even though single, pievails towaids the evolution of the 
higher devotion by pi oducmg the pleasuie ot the Supieme Loid. Just as an 
eaithly loid is not pleased even by the caieless services of a numbei ot servants, 
but IS pleased by even a single seivant by whoni the act ot the shampooing of his 
feet IS perfoinied regulaily with iieaity zeal ; so is it heie 

Even by any one oi othei of the subsidiaiies, celebiation of His names 
etc , lesolutely practised, devotion is attained, through the favoui of the Lord ; 
as it is declaied, toi instance 


“Taking up the piactice of knowledge, get thy mind always fixed on Me; 

“ Having thy mind fixed on Me, all difficulties, tlnough My favour, shalt 
thou Cl OSS ovei ” (Gita, xviii, 57). 

Likewise such speciid stiength may be caused in some one of the means 
by a cei tain time, etc As toi instance : 


^ “ By meditation in the Krita, by peifoiming saciifices m the Tieta, by 

woiship m the Uvflpaia, 

What one obtains, that one obtains in the Kali by celebiating Kesava 
m song ” (Biahina Puiana, xcviu 166) 

Noi need any confusion of effects be apprehended, because the celebiation 
ot His^uames and” the othei means aie individually as such the moans tow^ards 
the evolution of the devotion to be pioduced by each of them singly when it 
IS stiong. — 8 


It 3 oil aJv, does eveiy one of the sub&iduiiicb included in the celebration 
of His names, etc , need pui ity (mde aphoiibin 59) as the dooi way* tlnough 
which to cause the appeal ance ot the higher devotion oi do any of them have 
anj othei dooi way *■' The authoi i ephes 


OHAFTBR II Lroionr ii 


17 


H M I ^ I < II 

Na 

A bindhn^, non osistoncc ot bondago ^>7^7 Arpinnsya^ of stir* 
render of aU actions to linn Makhinit ontrnneo 

9 The non esiflfcenoe of bondage as the reanlii of the surrend* 
er of nil notions to Him is the only entrance —64 

The only entnnee for tho nppoarauc*' of dovoiion m the non cxistcnco of 
bondage consisting in the non produation of tboir rospcctno frnits (< nierjt<j 
and demerits} by actions, good and onl, which hare been snrrcndorcd to the 
. Lord As it is declared 

*' Thus shalt thou be delivered from tho frnit* good and omI, ^hoso stems 
are in thy acts (GltA^ ix, 28) 

The formnla for (his surrender of actions i* il o found in another l’urA> 
m 

Volnniurily ure\en inioluntaril} whitoior I do good or eiil 

* Alt tint IS surrendered to Theo I dn a a« impelled b) Theo 

^lor would such surrender ontiil a s netini^ os be pleased without 
an} risk of consequences became b} \trt(j^ bj noting tinder Hw impnNion 
the absence of sinful conduct also shonld form a subsidiary to tho act of snr 
render as says the Smyiti " Kel} mg on tho snppor t of tho Veda, let no ono 
bo 'ittaohod to sinful acts * Therefore, pnnly Din*t hiyo something other than 
pnrity of action as the object of its 

Hero by good action is to be nndorstcod snch action as is prescribed for 
one s particular stage of life for dail} or for occasional performance 
From the tliorongh ohsorvanco of (he atages of Iifo result auch fruits as (he 
world of DrahiuA, etc, on thcnttninmcRt of which deK} lakes place in obtain 
mg mnkli , snch as these are therefore tiondngo But when surrendered 
to Erahnian, they do not, as is well known prodoco their fruits SimilnrK, 
in tho caso also;of optional acts and sinful acts performed whothor aoluntaril} 
or in ignorance, (hero is the same non oxi<toncn of fruit when they are after 
wards surrendered to Him —9 

^lOw, among the second try forms of deaotion them*olvos, their individual 
distinctions are going to bo considered Ihorein, ns regards moditation or 
contemplation (nde aphorism 58), is it to bo restricted onl} to iho<o of the 
charactorislio forms of tho olgoot of deaotion ancii aaaro described in tho Srnti 
and tho biufiti, as for instance 

That golden Furusa who la soon in tho sun, with golden heard and with 
golden hair etc” (ClihAndog}a Upanifat I, vi, b) 
and likewise 

*' Ever IS to be meditated on as reaiilmg m the centre of the orb of the 
sun, 

NArAjana, seated on a lotus scat, 

Wearing bracelets and makara earrings, bearing a crest, 




48 


SANDILYA-SUilUai. 


Decked with a string o£ peails round the neck, having a form of gold, 
and holding a conch and discus ” (Naiada PaHcharStrn, xi 71). 

Or is it to'bo restricted to the full manifestations, etc. of the Siipromo 
as revealed elsewhere ? Hero as a limitation of meditation jmma facie is 
suggested through the revelation of the special forms of the object of medita- 
tion, it is declared by the author . 

H SI 1 5^ i u 

vuTirffrirpr; Dhytlna-niyamah, limitation of meditation. 5 To, but. 

Drista-saukaiyat, on account of the facilitj of the performance of 
meditation on a form which has been seen. 

10* But the limitation of meditation is on acoount of the 
facility of its performance on a form which has been seen* — S5. 

The declaration of the limitation of meditation as regards the form s to 
be meditated on his as its object such foims as have been seen , because were 
the objects manifold, distraction of mind would bo possible. Therefore it is 
to be known that the declaiation of limitation is inorolj' for the sake of facility , 
as, if the objects of meditation were such forms as h.id not been seen, there 
might arise the iisk of an option and othei distractions. It follows therefore 
that meditation may have as its object all manifestations of the Lord, partial, 
full, or formless, according as these have been revealed Hence it is that the 

milkmaids as well as Sisupala and others attained the fruit which is hard to 
attain by meditation, even without observing the above limitation of meditation 
(i e, even without meditating on the forms of the Lord as described in the 

Sruti and the Smnti) — '10. 

11 5 ^ I I " 

Tat-yajih, that yaj-to saciifice Pujay.im, m w'oiship. 

Itaresam, of the other saciifices. 5T Na, not TTfQ Evam, so 

11. The root yij-to sacrifice there is in the sense of worship ; 
(because its sole reference is the Lord ; this is) not so in the case 
of the other sacrifices — 66. 

The doubt is whethei the verb yaj-to saenhee [used in “ those who sacri- 
fice to He, go to 'Me also” (Gita, ix, 35) has reference to such saciifices as 
the well-known jyotistoma, etc , 01 whether it denotes woiship. In regard to 
this doubt we say that this verb yaj-to sacrifice has been used in the sense of 
worship alone How is this known ’ you ask. We re^y that by the injunc- 
tion “Let one worship Visnu, ’ etc daily and optional worship has been pies- 
cribed m which the object of worship as expressly declaied is Visnu, and that 
in the text of the Gita under consideration rll that is enjoined is merely that 
the worship so presciibcd is a subsidiary means of the higher devotion, and 
not that in this worship the object of worship is Visnu In the case of the 
other sacrifices, on the other hand, it is nowhere revealed that they aie perform- 


CHAPICRlIs Lsortmc If 




ed in reforonoo to tho Lord IClheo iboj woro to bo doaotod by tbo verb 
yo] to sacrificQ to (ho text o£ tho G^Uft nro nro disoussiog, wo would faa\o to 
supply both that tfaoy woro porforfflod id roForonco to the Lord and aldo 
that thoy Ind connection with dovotion in which ca«o tho text would have 
spoken in two sontoncos instead of one as it has done 

Now i£ you say that there may bo somo connection with dovotion of the 
sacnfice which is enjoined in “ To Vis^n Uru/kjnma ho brings forth progeny 
or an oblation of milk and bnttor*, oto, (booinso tbo word Vi^nn is oxprosslv 
mentioned there) wo reply, that is so, boeanso optional aots (andertaken with 
a pariionlar end m view, as in this case, for tho birth of a child) aro by their 
fruits themselves rondorad free from desire , while in the case of a daily worship 
tiio occasion or reason tor tho porformanoo of whloh is tho preservation of life, 
there is no bar to the oxistoneo of oonneotion with dovotion therein, and it 
requires no stretch of imagination to see that tho presence of this connection is 
continnal, sinae tho worship is obligatory for daily performance Hence in tho 
ceosoto in the Hokqa JDharma section of the ALih&bb&nta of nets of merit 
attended with injory to living beings it is declared 

** The righteous minded Manu declared avoidanee of injury m all acts 
** Men affected by desires slaughter animals on the enter altar Those who 
** know Ti 9 pn sacrifice only in tho right way, with pnddmgs and flowers Such 
** IS also the sacrifioe recolloofod m tho Smfiti (Sdoti Farvan, celxv« 
C870)«-ll 

Now follow three adhikuranas or sections on the subject of worship 

IK I ^ I M 

FAda udakam, water of His foot. ^ Tn, but. ump? Fddyam, water 
for washing the foot, vear^i A vy&ptoh, on account of non-apphealion to all 
cases 

12 Bat " water of (S 10 ) feat ** is water for washing ths feat,' 
as otherwise it would not apply to all oases whore it ought to 
apply —67 

Thus IS it recolleetod (in Nfismha FurAna, lix, 46^ t 
'* Of tbo CraiigA, FrayAgi, GayA, Pa|kara,aDd Naimisa, 

'* Those sacred waters of Kurajdugala and tbo FamuoA, 

** The waters of holy places sanctify sinners after a lapse of time, 

** The water of the Lord's feet purifies immediately ” 

Now, hero does tho phrase *' water of tho (Lord s) foot " moon water 
connootod with the feet or does it menu water first poured on tho Coot and then 
dropped therefrom 7 Snob being tho doubt, we say that ** water of the foot *" 
means nothing more than water for washing tbo foot How is this known ? 
you ask T/e ri^ly that pthorwjso the phrase would not be applicable to some 
cases wbidb ought to bo mcladed For, thus, direct oonneotion of tho Lord's 
foot with water Is not possible , nor oven through tho inoarnation, beoause in 
the case of the mcaroation also it IS impossible that this should bo always lo 
7 I 




so 


SlNDILYA-SUTlUM. 


the presence o£ the porEorraor o£ the ceremony. But. through coniicclion o£ 
the water with the feet of the imago which is the immediate basis of fho 
worship, there might he, yon may say, a transference of that connection to 
the Lord’s feet ; wo point out that oven in that case, there could ho no such 
transference, inasmuch as images both consecrated and unconsccratcd are 
invoked for the pm pose of w’orship, and further in sucli cases of worship a? tho 

SAligrAma Ammonites, etc., there is a total absence of feet. Regard being 
had to tho application of tho phrase to these cases, lot it mean simplj water foi 
washing the feet, as otherwise you will ha\o to imagine \ery remote connections 
such as, e. g , through tho imago, etc. — 12. 

« ^ I u 

Svayam, himself. ssrPiTf Arpitnm, offered. Grithyam, may 
he taken. A-viaosilt, from absence of distintion 

13. What is offered (by the worshipper) himself may be 
taken (by him) ; as^there is no distinction (intended between wor- 
shippers in general and the Stltvatas).~-68. 

What is offered to the Lord at a worship, c. eatables, garlands, etc., 
is ordained as having to bo finally disposed of by distribution among llio 
votaries, etc., by such texts as ” Visnu-offorings to tho Sfitvatas”. Now' hero 
from the very fact that to be a Sfitvata (t. c., a prince of tho SAtvata clan) 
is not intended to bo a special qualification, tho offerings can bo taken also by 
the devotee of tho Lord himself, i. c., can bo appropriated to bis own nso by 
eating, wealing, etc., Such is tho moaning. Tho injunction about tho final 
disposal of the offerings is fulfilled oven if tho worshipper takes them himself 
But trickery in religious matters IS certainly to ho avoided. Just as oven of 
the cake offered in reference to Agni, etc., there is a final disposal according io 
the latter part of tho mantra “ lie puts tho offering to Agni Svi'itnkrit from 
the upper half ; the four priests, with tho institutor as tho fifth, cat tho cake ” 

A * 

(Apastamha Sranta Sutra, III, i, 2), so also is the final disposal under con- 
sideration quite in accordance with tho injunction. Otherwise, one could not 
finally make over tho offeiings even to tho Sf^tvatas ; ns they are property 
belonging to another. If you say that ono can give them to tho Sfitvatas 
from the injunction ; wc reply, No, for the exclusion of one’s self is not declared 
in the injunction (so that if one could give them to tho Sfitvatas ono could also 
take them for one’s self, but to this yon object). If yon rejoin that there is 
the exclusion of one’s self, as otherwise injunctions such ns “ Let ono give to 
the BrAhmanas ”,etc., would entail giving to one’s self also from one’s being 
a BrAhmana ; we reply. No, because tho giving consists in tho transference of 
the right of ownership to another by tho destruction of one’s own rights of 
ownership in the thing given. Nor is such oxclusion of one’s solf appropriate 
in the final dipposal of the offering at tho close of a ceremony. From seeing 
the final disposal of even the cake to the performer of tho ceremony, we infer 
that, like purchase, the final disposal also truly is a moans of transferring 
ownership. So then where there is an absence of any other sAtvata or dovotoo, 
there the futility of tho injunction is certainly to be avoided ovon by tho per- 



OHAFXEB IZ Leotube ir 


51 


former himself taking the oSermgs Similarly is the injnnction to be onder- 
stood also iQ regard to keeping the water for washing the feet, eto , offered by 
himself Moreover, the deolaration “ He is a thief indeed who enjoys objects 
given by the gods not having offered these to them” (Gitft, in, 12) is m oar 
fovour, as it clearly implies the enjoyment of things previously offered to the 
gods Here the agent being the same in the two clauses, it is perceived that the 
object also must be the same, when the ownership implied in the one clause 
18 lost by the act of givmg implied in the other olaose, since action denoted 
by the negative prefix *not aooompamed by the infinite verbal tormmation^ 
*ing’ m a pradftya, not having offered must have syntactical connection with the 
action denoted by “ enjoys ’ by way of oo existence in the same subject , as 
there is no evidence to show that the things mentioned by ** objects given by 
the gods ’ are other things of the same kind as those mentioned in the remain- 
der of the sentence Therefore it is to be considered that even offerings made 
to the gods may be enjoyed by the offerer in the absence of any hmdrance - 13 

ostct^xit U ^ I ^ I 1^8 H 

Nimitta guna vyapeksanlt, from reference to the 
occasion and nature Aparddhefu, in the case of failings, faults, offences 

Vyavnsthd, regulation 

14 The regulation in the case of 'failings’ is with referanoa 
to their oooasion and nature —’69 

After introducing the subject with the words ” Those failings m the 
worship of the gods are enumerated to be thirty two ” (Var&ba Fnr4na, oxxiv, 
4) the thirty two failings and their several expiations are laid down Here 
the doubt arises whether the abandcnmeDt of all failings is a part of the wor- 
ship, or whether the abandonment of some of them is a part of the worship, 
and of some of them an end in itself In regard to this doubt it is declared — * 

“ Whatever man worships Melwith a flower unfit for use in worship, 

** His fall I declare, which bear thou, 0 VosundbarA ’ 

Varfiha Furdna, cxxiv, 65 

Here flowers unfit for nse having been thrown overboard, they are not a 
subsidiary means of worship But, when they are offered by mistake, eto in 
going through the course of the worship, there is an expiation which has 
reference to that occasion Where, again, one commits the mtling of breaking 
the course of the worship according to the declaration ” Who offers mcense to 
Me not having offered perfume and garlands "(TarAha FnrAnai xxv, 36), as 
the course prescribed in ^e case of ea^ worship is a part of the worship, it le 
to he considered that the expiation thereof is a part of the worship, because 
there is thereby the removal of the worship’s being defective in a part Where 
it IS heard, without the mention of worship, ** Bat whoever approaches Me, not 
havmg chewed the stick with which to brush the teeth ” (VarAba PnrAna, 
I)r there it is manifest indeed that the avoidance of the fa ib ng is an end 
10 itself Such IS then the regulatioa is regard to expiations —*14 




52 


SANDILYA-SUTIUAI. 


Thus the connection o£ worship with dovotion being established, the 
author declares that by “ A loa£, a flower, a £rint, a handful of water” (Gitft, 
ix, 26) it IS laid down that every offering intended for the Lord is a subsidiary 
means of devotion. 

^ ii l si i u 

tr^^: Patra-adeh, of a loaf, etc DAnam, offering. Aii} atliA, 

otherwise, fk Hi, for. Yaisislyain, qualificdncss. 

16. The offering of a leaf and of all else (is meant in the 
above test of the GltA); for, otherwise, the offering mentioned by 
it would be qualified — 70. 

The injunction in the GitA that they arc the subsidiaries of devotion is 
not confined to the offerings of the four articles mentioned Iborcin, but applies 
to all offerings intended for the Loid which have boon dcclaicd by such to\ts 
as : 

“ Whatever is moat desiiod m the woild, whatever else is loved at home, 

That is all to bo given to the discus-holding god of gods, to please 
Him.” (CoW’oll). 

Otherwise the offering mentioned in the GilA would moan only fho 
offeiing which contained the foui things, namely a leaf, etc In that case, 
as the injunction would imply the offering of each of the four things separately, 
the sentence, instead of being one, should have been split into four, Thorcfoio 
it is proper to hold this view only of the text that by the declaration of “A 
leaf, etc ,” it re-enforces the offering elsewhere laid down, and then enjoins its 
being a subsidiary of devotion, just os by the text “Ho wears the sacred thread 
over the left shoulder” (TaittirSya SamhitA, II, v, 11) the obligatoiy duty of 
wearing the sacred thread over the loft shoulder is onjoinod ns a subsidiary of 
the darsa sacrifice.— 15. 

it *1 U i H 

Sukritn-ja-tvAt, from being produced fiom good works, urtj- 
Para-hetu-bhavAt, from being the cause of the higher devotion. ^ 
Cha, and. ifsRqrg Kriyasu, among acts, ISreyasyah, superior. 

16- (These secondary forms of devotion are) superior to all 
otheriacta, because they are produced from good works, because 
they are the causes of the higher devotion — 71. 

These forms of dovotion are really superior to all other acts ; how ?— • 
because they are the causes of tho higher devotion, and because they ore 

produced from’ other meiitorious acts. For example t 

“Many, being purified by knowledge and penance, have attained to 
devotion (bhAva) to Me. 

“Whoso in what manner approach Me, iii the Same mahuer do I attach 
Myself to them.” (Gita, iv, 10 — 11 .) ' 


CHAPTER II IiEOTDRL 11 


53 


The word *bh&Ta * also is applied to dovotioa , as, e la { 

“ Do not 6shes dwoU m ifao water of the QangA ? 

** Do not birds dwell in temples ? 

** Being destitute of bliAva (devotion) they do not got the frmt, 

**From dwelling in the watering place and in the sacred temple 
Similarly 

**Fonr types of men, oil having done good works worship Me, 0 Arjano.” 

(Giih, Tu, 16), 

Here (it is deolarod that) os the secondary forms of devotion are prodneed 
from previous good works, they are superior to these 

The present aphorism (therefore) declares that the discussion is rightly 
directed to a Mtm&msA of Devotion rather than to a Mtm&msA of Karma 
16 

Bat, yon may say, among the devotees the relation of tho higher and the 
lower does not exist, if it existed, why IS mention madoof the tonr classes as 
all standing on the same level ? in 

** Four types of men, nil having done good works, worship Me, 

0 Arjuna 

** The afflicted, the inquisitive, tho ontroativo, and tho wise, 0 chief of the 
Bharatos (OlU, vii, 16) 

To this the author replies 

lu Ui 

Oaunam, secondary Traindhyam, tbreefbldness 

Itarena, with the other Stati>artba tvAt, having praise for its pnr« 

pose Sfthacharyam, ossooiation 

17 The three are eeooadary, their Bssoomtioa with the other, 
(i e , the prmiBxy) is lor the Bake o! doing them honour •—'72 

The secondary are the three only, (viz , Ue devotion of the offlioted, the 
loqnisitive, and the entreative) But tiie Smii’s associating them with the 
principal one (in the above Gttft text) is for the purpose of giving them honour^ 
just as is the mention of tho ministers in conjanotion with the kmg 

And thus the devotion of the afflicted consists in rememberuig the Iiord, 
oolebrating His names etc for the sake of the destruction of sm, doliveranoe 
from calamity, etc The devotion of the mqnisitive consists in such practices 
as are performed for the sake of knowledge And 8gBm,^for example 

*'Him, this Solfi the BrAhmana desire to know by studying the Yoda, by 
sacriBoe, by gift, by penance, by fast ” (Bfinad 4inmyaka DpamsaV 
VI. iv, 22) 

Similarly , , ^ 

** Having worshipped Him by their, respective works, men attain pe]> 
feotion ” (QitA, xvin, 46 ) 



54 


SANDILYA-SUTRAM. 

• • 


, “Who deviates not £rom the duties oE his caste, 

“ Who has equal regard Eor selE, friend, and adversary, 

** Who steals not, smites none down, 

“ Know him, steady in mmd, to bo the dovotoo]]o£ Visnu.” 

(Visnu Puitlna, III, vii, 16). 

— accoiding to such texts the devotion called the desire Eor knowledge consists in 
the porforihance, for the sake o£ knowledge, oE such acts as the studying of the 
Veda, etc , prescribed for the respective caste and stage of life of the devotee. 
(Thus the devotion oE the inquisitive is twofold). The devotion called the 
entreaty Eor objects o£ desire is also oE two kinds. Of these the one which is 
cultivated for the sake oE the higher devotion has been described before ; tho 
other which is cultivated Eor tho sake of kingdom, heaven, etc.,_is in tho form 
of the celebration of His names, etc. For example : 

“ Lovely terrestrial objects oE desire, — a supreme state to bo praised by tho 
denizens of heaven, 

“ Also nirvana excellent does a man obtain, when Visnu is worshipped by 
him.” (Visnu Pttr,\na, III, vii, 3). 

Here the attainment of nirv&na is by means oE tho higher devotion ; 
hence the entreativeness lies in the desire Eor tho higher devotion ; because tho 
text conveys tho same import, as “ And who worship Me, with devotion, they 
are in Me, and I in them also.” (Git^, ix, 19) 

And what is declared in the Bhftgavata (VII, v, 22-23) ; 

“ Hearing, celebrating, remombeiing Visnu, serving his feet, 

“Worshipping, praising, serving, boEiionding, consecrating one’s self, 

“ IE this ninefold devotion is yielded by a man to Visnu.” 

all that is to be appropriately distributed among those very (four) , ’divisions of 
ours. Even though there is thus a plurality of subjects to which these adjective 
ceremonials are (simultaneously) distributed, this is no fault. — 17. 

But it may be asked, when the celebration oE His names, etc., have been 
declared as being the subsidiaries (of the higher devotion in aphorism 58), how 
can the character of being the principal belong to them ■ in the case of tho 
devotions called affliction, etc.? Such an enquiry being possible, tho author 
declares : 

Bhir-antara-stham, standing outside as well as inside. grJnw 
Ubhayam, both, Avesti-sava-vat, like the Avesti ceremony and 

the Brihaspati ofiEering in the sacrifice, V5.japeya. 

. • (The oalebration of Hie namee, eto-) are both ontside 

Ihl KWhi® aevotion), aa is the oaae with the Ave?H 
ana tus Hliaaspati o£Eermg><— 73* 



CHAFIEBII Leotobe ii 


55 


— gt 

The celebrehon oE flu nemee, ots, being snbsidiaries oC the higher 
devotion, are inside it. They also excel in being ontside it, since the Srnti 
declares that they prodnce other frnits ivithont being praotuod os snbsidiaries 
oE the higher devotion Jnst os tho Avejti ceremony inolnded in the IlAjnshya 
saoriBce excels in itselE becoming the principal throngh oonnootion with other 
Emits without bemg perEormed as a subsidiary oE tho B&josftya, or jnst as again 
the Bfihispati oSering, althongb it is sometimes the prinoipal, is a snbsidiary 
oE the Vajapsya sacrifioe, so is it here also, according ns the distinction is ren- 
dered neeessary by the existence or non-existence oE sufficient reason for it 
Similarly, according to tho declaration i 

“Throngh inuttentiveness oE the perEormera oE some rite, lE anything 
Eads in sacriBoes, 

“ Throngh the remembering oE Vignn alone that will be complete, so says 
the l^ruti *’ 

the remembrance oE Tifnn (Ear example) can bo practised as an occasion- 
al subsidiary oE all acts, hence it u a snbsidiary by natnre And thu subsidiary 
character is not opposed to its heing the principal in relation to the Emit oE 
heaven, etc (which it is also competent to prodnoe) —18 

Some spcoial Eeatnre oE the deration oE the afflicted u now considered 

IR I I U 

Siofiii ktrttyolif o£ th9 roroembninco of tbo Lord and the 
oalobrfttiba o^is namos Eatba fldo^, of duoonrses abont Hinit etc v 

Cha, and Ar(tan, in the dorotion of tbo alSIotod PrAjns- 

chiito bbftv&it boiog of tbo natnre of expiation 

19 (The inolaston) of the remembranoo of the Iiord and 
the oelebration of Hie oamea and of disoonrsea abont Him, eto , in 
the devotion of the affiioted i3 on aooonnt of their being of the 
natnre of expiation -^74 

The iDolasion of the remombranee of the Lord, the oelebration of Hia 
nameS| diecoarses aboai Him, bowing to Him, eto m the devotion of the affliot- 
ed is made because they are deolored to be tbo causes of the abolition of suoh 
and such eins to tboso suffering the affliotious of bell produced by those sins 
For example 

Severe in the case of sorious sms, light also in the oaso of light sms, 

‘ ** Expiations, 0 Uaitreya, bavo been declared by Uanu end others 

“ Expiations infinite, wbetbor penances, good works, or tho bke, 

** Whatever they be, superior to them all is the oonatani remembrance of 
^ Kn^na ” (T]$nn Furftna, H, n, 32,33} 

) Again 

' The celebration of wbos^ names, with devotion, is tbo excellent con* 
snmer, 



56 


san-dilyasutram. 


“ O Maitreya, of all sins, as fire is of metals.” (Visnu Parana, » I , 
vii, 9). 

Similarly : 

“ The observance of all the stages of life, bathing m all holy waters, 

“ Is not so fruitful, 0 Sauti, as is the discourse about N3,ra,yana. 

“Purified in body have we become by hearing this discourse^ from the 
beginning, 

“ Whose subject is N4r&yana, which confers merit, and abolishes all sins.” 
MahAbharaia, S§-nti Parvan, Moksa Dharma, cccxlv, 13305-13306. 

Therefore their inclusion in the devotion of “ affliction ” is quite right. 

—19. 

^ l 1 H 

Bhnyasam, of the more severe expiations. An-anust- 

hitih, non-performance, fffl Iti, thus. Chet, if. 5!rTJWra?[ A-prayAnam, till the 
passing away. UpasamhdrAt, from ending. Mahatsn, in the case 

of more serious sins, qrftr A pi, also. 

20. If (you say that this would imply) the non-performance 
of the more severe expiations, (we reply, No), because from their 
(i e- of the suppoesd lighter expiations, s-g- the remembrance of the 
Lord, etc ) ending at death, they are efifioaoious in the case of the 
more serious sius also* or they are included among the more severe 
expiations also. —7 6- 

You may say, So be it ; since the opposite would be contrary to reason, 
it is proper to hold that the above declarations must have reference to very 
light sins only ; otherwise all those expiations which involved considerable 
hardship in their performance would not be performed and would so far have 
become nnanthoritative.” We reply that such is not the case ; since in the acts 
included in the devotion of the afflicted there is also an excess of hardship, inas- 
much as the Smriti enjoins their (coatinuance till and) conclnsion at death. 
For example* 

Therefore, day and night, remembering Visnu, a man, 0 Muni, 

“ Does not go to hell, being purified and having all his sins destroyed.”^ 
(Visnu Pur Ana, II, vi, 29). 

Acco'rding to this declaration the conclusion of the pi actice of the means 
(z 6. remembering the Lord, etc.) is to take place at death in unbroken conti- 
nuity with its commencement, since the commencement and the conclnsion 
must have the same sense (and therefore as no particular time is fixed in the 
above text for the commencement of the praotioe, so no particular time<can be 
fixed for its conclusion). Such is the import. Nor is any time specified for 


CHAFT£)Iit lit IiEOTUBE 11 


St 


ifie commencemeat wliirebyi Ciom oontradiotion to that) Ihe conoln^ion 
ooald haro different sonse'also (add rofof to any partidnlar time) And thns, 
as all aro alike in point o£ hardshipi nnaathofltativenass in the ebapo of nod* 
per^rmanco does notj as snpposedi attach to the other ospiations 

“At morning, at^night, so at sanset, noon, oio, remobbering (Vis^n 
Fnr&na, IX,vi| 35} which divides the pnotioe of the 'means into certain periods, 
IS nothing bnt a repetition (anavAda*) iKor again does this belong to a sooiion 
of the Smnii dealing with one who is repentant as its subject-matter Since 
the {preceding) dechration 

* Sin haring boon committed, m whomsoever mm ropentanoo arises, ^ 

<1 Hts best expiation is the one remembrance of Han ” 


VifnnPnrAna, IX, vi| 34 


also IS a repetition (anavAda) of that repentance which is a snbsidiary ^ 
of all eXpntions, the declaration contains a repetition also of that ** ono 
expiation which is indopondoni of the other expiations and which logically 
follows from the context Othoraviso, the rentonoos would be different, and 
\roald haao each a specified subject matter ct its own** Therefore, the pre* 
ceding^dooHratfons (Vifinu‘ PurAna, II, n, AS, 33, oto ) aio not arthavAdns or 
^coommendatioos inasmuch ns they are comprehended within the referonoo of 
the relative pronoun *wliioh and are accordingly repetitions (annvAda) of tho 
several lojanotions to which they are roapociivoly appropriate Hencoitjis 
that elsewhere also tho continuity of tho praotioo of the moans has been deo- 
jarod by such doolarationa as 

‘ * *'The omfssarios, (of Yuma), their stives and fetters, nor Yama, nor 
I agim tho torments of holl 

I “X^To power against him whoso soul is always dependent on Kesava 
' *<Tho names of tho disous armed lot him celebrate at all times, in all places'', 

impdrity belongs to him, as He is tho purifier ’ 

^ j ^ ^ Vismu PnrAna, III, vii, 34, 35 —20 


‘ wg(IiOg&a, a Iitflo, trifling wFa Apt, ovon wrerfsTur? Biakta adhikflr^ 


\ i arthatnia Is peoptrij a paraabllvi ealSMsmeot ola pre^aaSloJandtioa giVSS 
th« pocpoie of lbs iojonotfoo add fllaitnt«i its poMr by poiitiro or ttegotlra eximplM ' Ibna 
tbsea u aa artkatida fpr tba Sarra;i( aaorllot (Stb^u fir 7, Verily, bv the tatvaUt 

the goda oooqiered all it ia for (faa attalabebt of all lor fheoobqaeat of alt bvtbisamafl 
sttalBi all ooaqtt ra all Tha fa tba rellemtion or re rooaloiiloa of aa iDjooelioa 

16 may bS wftb fukber details but wltbeat dwelllbg oo tbe parpoae of tba iojaaotlon Itaelf 
Thdi altar ibelojaaotioo 'be is to ofiee tba ayaiSelra bare aA^aarerfa %a oflbrS ft with 
•eaeda Mbit la d pwiaaKraSe) or agatd we hare aa iofuaetioa Jatbfoivba deaUea pcoipatlty 
ofiara Triiite goattoVaya folioived fry tbe eaarada >ib» iriad tVaya) Js tba awlftratof soda 
'(Taitt* Bamb lil 4,8) tbiils a aurys lAanavjdo *-»Cowell , 

* < a tba first part elaarly daolarA'what bad baea already sajolaad tf * that rapeaia&ea 
iaoeoasastymemyazpratloo} and It is therefore an aaavada andtbasaoond part moat aba 
beaneaavaaa nnlaai na are to rappoaa that tbe twoparlaof tbaaaDtanea (altheBCb eontiMtad 
{by yet and loO are difietaat, tba pae belog aa aaarsda ot Bimpla teitesatioa and tba other an 

arlAaeada ' — OofreU 





S8 


SlNDILYA-SUTBAM. 


in he case o£ the devotees, where devotees are concerned, Mahat- 

'ksepakam, destructive o£ great sins. Aparn-sarva-hanat, from 

thee abolition o£ everything else. 

21 . Even though it is trifling, it is sufficient to overthrow 
^reat sins, where devotees are ooncernedt since there is therefrom 
the abolition of all other expiations.— 76. 

» Even though trifling, the remembrance oE the Lord, the celobr.ation of 
His names, etc , (practised) for once only, become the overthrowers, t. c., the 
destroyers, of even great sins ; since thence there is the cognition of the aboli- 
tion characterised as abandonment of all the other expiations, where the devotees 
«re concerned. Such is the meaning. As it has been sung : 

“ Abandoning all duties, fly to Me as thy one refuge ; 

I will deliver thee from all sins, grieve not (Gita, xviii, 6 6). 

Eor here the meaning is not that the flying to the Lord is to bo preceded 
by the abandonment of acts which are ‘ optional ’ * ■* and in wliich one may 
-engage from desire ; because, as there is no sin m the abandonment of ‘optional 
acts, what is to bo removed by the Lord ? Now, if you say that thero may 
be a different sin which is to bo destroyed ; wo demur, as the supposition would 
entail that the abandonment of ‘ optional ’ acts would have the object called 
ndrista (demerit, lit. unseen) as its fruit (whereas the very nature of an 
•‘optional’ act is that it is such as one need not perform unless one desires the 
particular fruit which it is to produce ; so that tho fruit of such an act cannot 
be adrista (lit, unseen, merit) hut is always one which is previously known. 

Nor is its meaning that the flying to tho Lord is to be preceded by tho 
abandonment of even ‘ daily ’ and * occasional ’ acts ; for, if there is any 
positive injunction in favour of their abandonment, no sin accrues therefrom ; 
what is to be removed ? Now, if you say that there is no such injunction ; we 
reply. Do not say so, as tho veiy declaration of tho GU& and the like contains 
such an injunction, and consequently the act, (t. e , abandonment) so enjoined 
cannot produce any sin. 


If you say that after desciibing the sannyasin (ascetic) by anuvfi.da by tho 
phrase “abandoning all duties ”, the declaration oE the GitJt has reference to 
him as its object ; we reply. No, for, the Smriti^ays down expiations» etc, for 
the sannyasins, such as that in the case oE their breaking the vow by connection 
with women, etc , and as consequently there would arise the possibility oE the 
alternative performance of the remembiance of the Lord and the other subsidiaries 
of devotion, or of the expiations, etc , prescribed, there would also arise the 
possibility of the non-performattce of the more severe expiations as you feared 


** ‘ Oetetnonial works are of three kinds, * constant * ‘oooaeional,' and ' volun* 
tary *. Ihe ’ oonebant * are those oontinnally en3oined throngh a Brahman’s («ie a twicobern’s) 
life, as the daily and fortnightly oSetinga . the ’ oooaeional ’ ate enjoined on certain oeoasions, 
as recovery from sickness, an eohpsa, etc., the ' voluntary ’ ate direotod to some speoial epd, as 
let him who desires heaven efiee the jyotiBbtoma ’ It le generally held that the first two 
ate poBitiva duties and cannot be omitted without am ; but thaw petlottnanoe doss not ptoduoa 
bondage by oaueing merit in the ofieret. The ‘voluntary’ offerings neoeBSitate a future reward, 
and as they thus ptoduoe bondage, they ehonld be avoided by the devotee. Bandilya, however 
holds that even * constant* and ’occasional * works, as well as ‘voluntary’, produce ‘merit,* 
and BO tend to oanse bondage, anless they ate suttondetsd in faith to,lBWftM ”.~Cowen on 
aphorism 61 . , 


CHAPTER II Lecture ii 


59 ) 


beEoro (ride aphorism 75) ^Nor can this defect bo aroided assoming 
the unbroken continnitj of tbo practice of the acts of romombrancei ota, becansa 
eren a trifling practice (o g , one remembrance) is capable of destroying great 
ains (in this case also), according to each declarations as 

Eren tbongh filled with a groat am, if he meditates on Yisrq for the 
twinkling of an eye, 

** The ascetic becomes again the purifier cron of those who pnri^y the 
company in which they dwell ** (Cowell^ 

Moreorer, by reason of its being nowhere near (in the context), the stage 
of life called sannjAsa or roonneiation of the world, ongbt not to enter the 
mind at oil (in the present discussion) Therefore, ynst as in the world when 
one says to another “ Leaving all others hare faith in me, I will destroy all 
yonr tronblesi” the abandonment of all other means of destroying ironbles is 
understood , so from the declaration itself qnoted abore the abandonment of 
other means of destroying internal sins is onderstood 

Althongh ibis declaration which to a certain extent enjoins sanny&sa or the 
renunciation of the world is read in the same chapter, the chapter as a whole 
has not sannydsa as its snbjeot-maiter, becanse the general snbjaot (prakarana) 
and the context (aannidli&na) are of superior force m detennioiug the sense, 
Moreoreri m this chapter, by soeh possoges as t ^ 

*' The surrender of optional acts the seers know to he sanny^sa ** 

(n ft 

GiTArZMXI, 2 

it u the abandonment of optional oots that has been declared and not the stage 
or order of life called oannyksa Likewise tbo single remembrance, eto ^ bare 
as their only object of reference that person who, along with the resolution to 
abandon all other expiations, desires to pass over nfiliction solely by means of 
the Lord's names, eto 

And thns tliese rarious objections camzot alsosimuItaneOttrly npply to n^ 
as they relate to different aabjeot>matterB 

Eor again can there be non performance of those expiations Which inrolro 
considerable hardships through any fear of pnn , because abandonment like 
that 18 to be avoided oocordmg to i ^ 

** Whatever act a man abandons, throngu fear of bodily pam, for the 
sole reason that U is painful, * 

<* Havmg made ** abandonment of passion, *' he does not get the frnit 
of abandonmoht ** (Glt&, zru, 8) « ^ a. 

Such texts as ^ 

** The very terrible sin of men in the" Eal^ age whioh gives them (ha 
pain of hell, ' 

** At onoe gets dissolved when onoe He is remembered ” ^ 

^ ^ J I Vi?pn PnrAna, VI, vii, 10 

are directed to the remembrance of the Lord as theiV snbject-matier 

‘ Similarly, the reference to deroiion as the sabjeot-matteris made manifest 
by, i I 


60 


sIndily a-sut ram. 

t • 


« Even i£ a man o£ veiy wicked life woi&lnps Mo, noislnpping none 
else, 

1 “ He IS certainly to be esteemed vutuous,foi lie has resolved arigbt. 

“ Speedily he becomes oE virtuous soul| bo attains etei nal peace ; 

» Be assured, 0 son o£ Kunti, My dovotee ncvoi polishes ”, 

QitA, IX, 30,31. 

I , * '' 

and so also by such texts as : 

“The inhabitants o£ hell cried out “ 0 Knsna ”, “0 Isaiasimha „ 

“Thus was Visnu oclebiated by those in boll with devotion; 

All the inEeinal toituios o£ those groat sonlod ones wore do-rlroyod. ” 

Krisimha Puifma, \in, 28, 20. 

'ill " I 

, 1 Here it is peiceived that the celebration consisted in the moio pionuncia- 
tionoE the names , but not that. by a woid m the first casc-onding ( cololiratcd’) 

“ etc,” (e. g. leinembianoo, ^woiship and the lest) is as a rulo implied — 21. 

Hr^tnnr^ Tiit-fethttua-tvfi,t, Ciom standing in its place An-an^-a- 

dharmah, not lequiimg the charactei istics o£ the otheis. Khulo, in a thrash- 
ing floor. Vdli-vat, like the post 

22. Because it stands in their place, it does not lequire their 
characteristics, just like the post in a thrashing floor. — 77. 

' ’ In such declarations as “His best expiation is the one romembianco o£ 
Hari’' (Visnu PurSiUa, II, vi, 34); the characteristics of flie other expiations 
are, however, not to be understood by extending the application o£ llio name 
‘expiation’; because it stands in the place of o\j>iation, i. e , because it is 
enjoined in the place o£ expiation. Such is ,tho meaning Jusj; as, in the 
injunction, “ The post in a tin ashing flow is the saciificial post,” (A4\alayana 
S'rauta Sutia, IX, vii), there is the injunction for tho usq of iho post in a 
thrashing floor as seiving the pui^pose oE the saciificial post in tying up the 
animal, and there is np suggestion that the post in the tin ashing floor to be so 
used should possess the characteristics of a saciificial post, e ff, octagonal shape, 
etc ; so here the characteristics til an 'oxpiatibn such as the cutting of nails, hair, 
etg. do not make their appeal anco. ^ 

Hoi is it to be said that th 0 ,cplohration p£ His names, etc. also aie leally 
expiations, '^s they are the causes of the de^stiuction o£ siu Poritistobe 
considered that the word, expiation, is applicable in its primary sense to that 
which is of the ‘forrh of penance," and' ^hat ‘elsewheie it applies in a secondary 
sense, —according to the declaration ; 

“ Prayas is said to be a name for pehahee, chitta is' said to Bo certainty ; 

“It is recollected that' piftyaschitta (expiation) is an act connected with 
penance, and'^ijertainty ” (Angirfts,.Smiiti).— 23. , , i 

^.Now, as the . subsidiaries are invanably piesent^in ,th 9 pr.oyiuco, of the 
principal, the province thereof is consideredi r f 


C^APTEtt II UcTonr n 


Cl* 



\\^\P.\ II 


a nindya yoni, down to tlio lowest born/ Adbikri> 

jntOt are incladod ip, or are ^niifclod to onior, ibo province of tlie higher 
devotion trrostrnf^ PArampirydt, at socond hand, from one another «aiui»-a9^ 
SAindnja tat, like universal knowledge 

23 (The province of the^ higher devotion) extends even to 
the lowest born, from one to another, like universal knowledge 
78 I t ir ( 


All inclnding the blameworthy Chand&la and other castes are entitled to 
tho^raotioo of dovotioo siiico there is no distmotion in tho universal desire 
tp atoid the alHictions of worldly existence Kow, ifjonask, how aro thosq 
outsido the tbroo casto§Oiititlod to Iho pfticttce of dotation, whop they are not 
entitled to tho study of tho Voda f, to «this the author replies “ from ono to 
another ” According to tho princtplh laid down in “ Eharma or dnt} is the 
object the charaotorisito of whioli instigation * (PArta Mlmomsa Sfitru, I, 
1 ,'S) and m**£ec3nso Bnbman la to bo known only through senpinres,” 
(VodAnta SAtra, 1, 1, 3)( a transcendental object is to be known tbrongh the 
8 rnti alone this we do not dispute Bat in tho case of womoni B Adras, oto , by 
means oC«itihA.a8, purAnas oto,* and in the case of tbo ChandAlas etc, by the 
succession of instruotion, in accordance with tho Snifiti and usago of the 
excellent, knowladgo al<o becomes rcall/ rooted m tho SVnti just as is tlioir 
knowledge of^uch unnersal truths as tho duty of net injuring day living being 
oto, as otherwise it would follow BiUt this univorsal knowledgb Vvould not 


b^jiound in them— 23 f 

wF q 11 r'sj& 'ii 


vn Atah, hence if% Hi, Turily wfvu^lPTnpTT^ A^vipakvo-bhAvAnam, of 
(those of dnperf<|!6iod devotion Api, oven Tat^loke, m Hu world \ 

S4 Hence verily in His world (is the praoUoe of devotion) 
even those whose dhvdtion hal not been peirfeoted *-*79' 

Since it is the province of all, ibereforp verily is rcoolleoted tlie perfor- 
mance of tho tdedns of Bie higher ddVction lo the world of the Lor(I,^t |e , in 
the Sveta dvlpa, by those whose higher devotioo did qoh roach the state of 
perfection in this Vorld^ As for example, ^opening with the words ^ 

To the north of the poean of milk lies the Sveta dt Ipa of great 
^ splendour ^ ^ j ^ 

There intent on HArAya**a live men bright as tho moon , 

^ ^ *j* They ara attached nndividedly, and^ devoted to Furnio^tsma ^ 

** AlabAhbArata, Aloke a^ Hhnrma^ ,,i^f(rAyanlya, 

T , . , , , ccci^xxviii. 12778-12779 » r r ,, 

ihoir paibtioo of the EAddiit of Bib higher d^oiion is ,W6aIe’& lii radh p 


passages 






[62 ' 


,4ANDir.YA-SUfRAM. 


“ Then those men all together quickly ran up, 

Folding their hands, full of joy, shouting salutation only ; 

“ Then I heard a great shout as they weio discoursing together, 

’ “ Lo : offering is presented to that God by those men ” 

Ibidem^ cccxxMiii, 12791, 12792. 

It is clear therefore that the piovmco of the higher devotion oxtende 
everywhere. Hence it has been aphorised. “The meditation 'On Biahman, 
according to the opinion of Badaiaj'ana, must bo admitted with regard to 
those also, who aie above men, in the scale of cvolntion; because of its 
possibility with regard to them also (for they also liiivo an organised body)” 
(Vedanta S^tra, I, in, 26). — 24. 

Now, you may ask, why is not in His world the practice of the means 
of the higher devotion by those also whoso devotion has attained a slate of 
perfection ? With this as an mtroduction, it is declared ; 

ll 1 si I ll 

Krama-eka-gati-upapatteh, from the proof of the successive 
and single stages or states, g Tu, but. 

26. But (there is not in His world the practice of the means 
of the higher devotion also by those whose devotion has attained 
the state of perfection), because there is proof of successive steps 
and of a single’step.—SO, 

And the word ‘ but ’ is for the purpose of pointing to the doubt which has 

arisen. 

A desciiption of successive steps is levealed in tbo same Narayaniya (the 
section relating to the worship of Nftr&yana) ; where, commencing with the 
words “ Those who are exceedingly sinless in the world, devoid of virtue and 

vice” (MahS,bhS.rata, S^nti Parvan, cccxlvi, 13383), and after describing the 
progress, by the door of the solar oib, successil'ely into the bodies of Anirnddha, 
Pradyumna, and Samkarsana, it is declared ; 

“ Whose minds are at rest in contemplation, who are self-restrained, 
whose senses are under control, 

“ Who serve with undivided devotion, they enter Vasudeva.” 

Ibidem, cccxlvi, 13499. 

Similarly, it is declared afterwards : 

But whose merits and demerits have been consumed as fuel, in the 
world, who are devoid of virtue and vice, - ’ 

“ Their progress is, as defined by you, successively from one to another. 

“ It is in the fourth stage that they attain the highest state. 

^ “ Surely this religion of single-aimed devotion is the highest, and is dear 

-to N&r&yana, 

“ ]Whicli_ enables men to attain the immutable Hari, without < passing by 
Jfche three (antecedent) stages.” 

Lbidem, cool, 13548-13550. 



OHAPTISll II Z/ECTcnB ii 


C3 


This declaration of a single stop is rightljr established as having for its 
object of referenco^the devotion which has been perfected as otherwise there 
would be contradiction between the two declarations Therefore the nttaiiiinent 
of those respective worlds has reference to those whose devotion has not been 
perfected —25 



II ^ I ^ I II 


I nTTCifllTm w H u Utkrdnti smnti ^dkya^esAt, from the conolnsioo 
of the declaration with departnre and remembrance w Cba« and 

S6 jCrhis distmotion battreen parfeofc and imperfect devo- 
tion 18 proved) also from the oonolasion of the deolaration with 
* remembrance * at the time of the Java's jonmey upwards —81 

In regard to the jonmey upwards, commencing with " endowed with 
devotion and the power of yoga,” (6it& nti, 10), it is declared 

* Beoiting the single syllabled Brahman, Anm remembering Me, 

“ Who goes forth, abandoning tho body, ho attains tho highest state ” 

(QUA, Till, 13) 

And therein is tho oonolnsion of the declaration 
The snccessive progress is thus declared 
fire, light, day, bright fortnight, sue months of the son’s aorlhern 
journey, 

«( Goiogiforth through those, moo who know Brahman, reach Brahman/* 

(QUA, vui, 2d) 

Similarly, where the conoltfsionof the deolaration is 
All worlds ap to the sphere BrabmA, 0 Arjano, ore of a reonrring 
nataro , 

*^Bat after coming near Mo, 0 son of Ennti, thoro is no ro-birtb,” 

Grits, viu, 16 

there from the inSrodactioa with the ^worlds' and also by the force of the word, 
'npa,* ‘near, m ** after coming near Me,” the attammeni of the worlds near 
to Him is rightly held to be only for those whose devotion has not been per- 
fected. For him whose devotion has reached the state of perfection, even tho 
going to His world as the frnit is not appropriate, becaose the frmt of snob 
devotion is imperishable, and also because it is revealed that in His world 
there is the non performanoe of the means Moreover, if yon were to say that 
&om that world itself a^radaal mnkti woald be seonred to him whose devotion 
( IS imperfect, it would entail the fntiJity of the injanctlon (in GltA, viu, 25) 
about remembrance at the time of the Jtva’s departure Nor is thereby (i $ 
by that injanotion) the addition of the higbor devotion implied, because there" 
IS positive knowledge that the higher devotion is the means of mukti indepen- 
dently of other means , namely ^ 

“That supreme Purusa, 0 PArtha, is to be attamed by devotion udepen- 
dently of any other ” (GttA, viii, 22) , /\ 



64 


SlNDILYA-SUTRAM. 


ThoreEoie, evon mHis woild there is the pi evince oE devotion. But in the 
landoE'tlio BFiar.itas (India) there is the only field £oi the pioduction oE raerit- 
ot ions- works', "according to the deolaiation ' ’ 

“ Uerlainlj' in no other field are works enjoined to mortals.” 

Vi§nu PuiAna, II, iii, 5. 

But it has been declaied before' that devotion is' not essentially a moritorions 
woik (and is theiefcore independent of conntiy), IE yon say that in other 
fields the subsidiaries of the higher^ devotion will not be available; we reply, 
No, because the pnncipal itself being available, the subsidiaries are available, 
just like the subsidiaiy (fire) of the sacrifice of a Nisada king Of the S'ftdias, 
etc , on the other hand, the forbeaiance is fiom woiks arising out of Yedic 
mantras, but not fioni the means of devotion sudh as lomombranco, celeb lation, 
etc When by this much only theii eligibility into the piovince of devotion 
IS fulfilled, it is not right to suppose the application of leaiiiitfg as a preliminary 
condition — 26. 


Let tlien, you may say, even the great sinneis bo entitled to the higher 
devotion itself and also to 'the study of- the Veda, etc which are the subsidiaries 
of the means subsidiaiy to the higliei devotion. To this the authoi loplios . 

II o r I SI'S U 

JTfT^<7TfrRrfTT M ihS,patakin3,m, of the great sinners g Tu, but. Artan, 
in the devotion of the afflicted, ’ ' ‘ ' 


27. Bat of the great sinners (the province lies) in the devotion 
of afifiiction. — 82; 

« 

And of those who are addicted to sins which are the causes of fall, the 
province lies only in the devotion of affliction, as an expiation, and not else- 
where, because the destruction of those sins is of more impoitance than all 
else, according to the texts such as “ JSnjoying, one would incieaso sins.” Bat 
on the removal of those sms their competenbo for the higher devotion is of 
course established. — 27. 


I^w the consideration of the single-aimod (perfect) devotion may give 
I the doubt whether all religion is diffoiont from the higher devotion. 


rise to the doubt whether all relig. 

The author dispels this demon of a doubt ; ' 

RTT?I . II | ^ i U 

/ ^r<Sa, it, the higher devotion. Eka-anta-bh^va^, single- 

<aimed state 01 devotion. Gita-artha-piatyabhij-Sanat, from 

recognition as the meaning of the Grita. ' 

j; 28/ The higher devotion is, the aingle-aimed “devotion,, as 
-this 18 recognised, to be the meaning .of the Gita 83. i , r ' 

. i’hb'' higher devotion,' it is that is' called ekantabhava < or the 

fiingls-^med devotion, and nothing else ; why ? because it is revealed that this 
Je^ecogttised' as- being thei- meaning, of the Gita. For example. in'thoNara- 
yanlya itself there is the question ; ■ . ^ 





CHAFTBfi III Lectubs H 


65 


' Th^e Brftbmapas who, tfaorooghlj obsorrant oE religions practices, the 
Vodas with the Upaaipats, i 

** Bead according to rules, and those also who arc on the path of the 
asoetics , 

** Sopenor to theirs 1 know the destmition of the single* aimed men 

** By whom has this religicn been declared, by a god or by a seer ?” 

, (Mah&bhftrata, 8'ftnti Parvao, Mok(a DImrma, cool, 13551, 52 ) 
to which the answer is 

** When met m battle array the troops of the Ktint and PApdvs hosts, 

* Thu was snog (gltil) by (he Lord Lmself io Arjnoa depressed In mind ** 

Ihd 13554 

It is clear therefore that the state of barmg a single aim u the higher devo*^ 
iiott <—23 

Now, yon may say, let the secondary forms of devotion also direotly 
prodnoe mnkti , what harm is thero in snob an assumption ? To this the 
antbor replies < i 

‘ Tfa fseta srarfrif u ^ I ^ I n 

ntf Fardmi the higher ^err Kpitrft, proddclog Nva, only 
Sarree&m, of all cTST Tath&, so fk Hi, lia env Aha, declares 

39 Only by prodaoing tbe higher (davohoo) (la the oontn* 
batian) of all (towarda makti) , for so He deolarea 

Only by prodnemg the higher derotion u the contribution of all towards 
mnkti For so the Lord doolares, adding at the same time tbe reason t 

** 'Whoerer shall declare ibis exceeding mystery to those who are devoted 
to He, 

** Having prodneed the higher devotion to Ho, bo will withont doubt 
attain to He alone ” (GHft, xvui, 68) 

Here if yon wore to hold tho meaning to be nothing bat this that the 
fmit of instmotmg that religion u also the attainment <01 the state of Brahman, 
then what would ^ the object of the declaration ** having prodneed the higher 

devotion to He *'? seeing that the higher devotion u revealed by the Smti as being 
the means of mnkti For the same reason, in the case of Upariohara YasU; by 
tbe words His own kingdom, wealth, etc” (vide apborum 44, commentary) 
has been (exhibited the mark of devotion m the form of afEection for tlw 
Bnpreme Lord , because such regard cannot have a purpose of its own (but 
mast serve ^ purpose of some^og higher than itself) Therefore the inten- 
tion is inferred that the oontribntion which all those means that have '^een 
revealed as being the causes of mdkii, moke towards mnkti is bi' the prodnotion 
of (he hi^or devotion Kor oonid these means prodnoe both (is, the higher 
devotion and also mnkti), because being acts , they cannot prodnoe mnkti And 
so also the deolaratioa comes io have reference to an object which is visible (i s , 
the* higher devotion and not to an obje«it which invisible t s , mnkti) —29 

Hev ends the second lecture of the second chapter in the Oommentary 
tm the Ofis Bundrtd Aphorttmi of 8'AndiIya composed by the most learned 
ieacher'SvapsesvaiB 

Here ends the chapter also* 




J 


Clinpter III : Lcclnre i. 

Since l/lie'excollcncc o£ devotion depends on Hie excellence of the ohjeci o£ 
■worship, and since the devotee attains to JLIis state, the object of vorsln'p is 
here described. 

vrsTffl^^ Bhajaniyena, bj the object of worship. ’itffgrn^TTj A-d\iti}am, 

Tin-seconded ^ Idani, it, the creation, the object of Icnov. ledge. 
Kritsna-sya, of the vholo Hr«r5:tirtrTH Tat-s\arvipa*t\ut, from being that the 
essential form of Tvhich is that, i. c , the object oL wor-hip. 

1. The object of knowledge is not seconded by the object of 
■worship, because it has this as its essential form. — 86. 

The pi oof or existence of the object to be hnown is dependent on know- 
ledge; this IS the conclusion of all systems (tantra) of self-culture Knowledge 
is 'existence. Existence is not a 3utt ot genus (as the K}ri):i-Vaisc‘iikas hold), 
because theio can bo no genus m a genus, etc., (whereas oxistonen poi\adcs 
all generic as well as specitic piinciplos) Etch if genus could exist 
in genus, there can be no supposition of the desired i elation (of SanuiTri} a or 
‘ combination ’), in mcw' of Ibe fault ot rodundanej. 'Jbcicfore, knowledge is 
the'Supierae Brahman wliioh by itself pervades ovorywheio In over} visible 
object there is , non-difPeionco from it; while the diffcronco of the visible 
ohjects-is m so far as they are other than existent. If jou sa} that thero 
vvonld then be such intuitions as *‘A jar is knowledge,” just as there is the 
intuition “ A jar is existent,” wo reply that this will depend on whether the 
i_dea of its essential form is or is not present, since a jar docs not present itself 
to the senses as being leal (but as having a tiansitoi} existence only). If -you 
say that Brahman possesses knowledge, desire, and efloiL of v\ ill and that 
these are the causes of the material cause ot creation ; w c reply that there is 
great simplicity in the supposition that they arc c.uipos along with and in so far 
as they co exist with the material cause. And this Biahman, co-oxisting with 
the mateiial cause (t. e , may il), is vonly not a substiatum of qualities,* as 
such a supposition is ledundant The supposition of its being the knovver, etc, 
is caused by the upfidhis or external oil oumstancos, ns in the case of time (tho 
division of which into moments, horns, days, nights, olc., is duo to external 
ciicumstances). — 1 . 

ii ^ i X M ii 

rPBglwi; Tat-saktih, its powoi. titttt Mftytl, mdyfv, ignoinnco, limitation 
ST^^rnTTS'siT^ Jada-sflmfi,nya.t, fiom its being tho summum genus of all insensate 
things. 

2. Its power is mayd', from .its being the summum genus, of all 

insensate things — 86. , ^ 


• “ Ho is not the possesBor of knowloflge, n desiio to orentoi anfl wUl bb tho Hyayft vrouW 
maintain , ho fs himself pnto-knovYlodgo.'^— Cowell. 

* ^ - V, 


mifur / 6*8 ^ 


CHAPTER Iir tpcTDHE I 






* Its ' i ^ y of Hrafaamait the- poiver of lordlmoss is snng os , 

** Verily this My m&yft dmno, ooasfcitnted by thd thres gonas, is difiScalt 
H to pass beyond* ' 

** Who taka rafage m Mo alone, thoy cross orer this MAyA ” > ' 

(OSi&y Til, 14) P t 

** With Mo ns the saponoteadent Prakfiii brings forth things movabltf 
f and immorable ‘ 

** Through My ^openoiendonoe, 0 son oi Knnit, the world appears and 
disappears ” (QUA, ix, 10) ^ J 

Its power IS called inAyA, from the Toriety of its effeots, and not from 
their nnreality since the Smti revoahog the existence of Brahman Is for the 
purpose of establishing iho existence of the effect i / , the world It is not « 
proper to hold that they are nnroal, also because their nnroalit} wonld outoil 
tho Qoroahty of their eaose (t e , m&yA) If yon say that the being nnroal 
consists m being liable to- be opposed by tbo knowledge of the pnociplcs O^o 
that only tho prineiplos aro real and their prodoots aro nnreal) , we reply, Ho, 
their unreality itself being ooreal, (as some of yon Vod&ntins hold), their 
reality is only more firmly established * on the other hand, if yon say thai 
fhesr (apparent) nnreality is roa) tlien the reality of visible objoots is obtained 
And (further) since there can bo no manifestation of what is nnreaT, reality 
mast always belong to objects wbioh are to bo manifestod (by Brahman) 
What IS called the manifostntioa of a snake, eto , in u pieoo of rope that is 
nothing bat a mistake (hi tho manifestation of one ihmg as another), since 
this mistake is cootrodicted or u not contradicted by tho existenoo or nono 
existence of the other thing ^ ^ 

That lU&yA ts the sammam geaas of all rnsensate thmgs this genus is 
capable of boiog known and » rc^lr eternal , otherwise there wonld be no 
regolarity or uniformity (i e , the ihmg to be known wonld bo both existent 
and non existent; Bence follows the eternality of tho mtelligont nod the 
non intelligent — ^2 


u ^ I ^ I ^ It 


VyApaka tvAt, from the porradingness mrnanwr? VyApyA 
nAm, of the pervaded 

> 3 !From the pervectingoess^oi the pervaded (piooeede orea' 
tion)— 87, I _ „ 

Suailarljr from the perradmg' or genorni pnnoiploo is the prodnotioo of 
the pervaded or special principles , for tho general principles are regarded 
as being the' material oanscs of the special pnnoiples tbrongh identity with 
them/ and by no means by the relation called samavAya or intimate relahon or 
combination, as in that case there wonld be redondancy in the oonseqnent 
supposition first of ^n diSerenoe and next of a relation between two diSerent 


\ , Qoa of tha oudbu! t«Mts of tlM YtdsaU Is that Ui« fgaorsnoa srhloh MOtss lbs wotM 
|i llssll fslie ss beioxlasglasd bjigQoesBoi bat if so tbs fsliflj of a fililtf Is fniiA ii Mfons 
intonOiwf giTSf'jrnci —Gbirsll 

I 




68 


SANDILYA-SUTllAM. 


things; i. e. tho cause niid the offocl. So too (on our thcorj oF idonlit)) h 
the convention or explanation oE words simpler on the maxim oE * Inkmg by 
the horn ’ (t. e. tho maxim that in controlling an unrul}' ox or tho like joxi should 
first somehow manage to take it by one horn, and then bt iug it under com- 
plete control by seizing it by tho other horn in such texts as “ uktha is 
Brahman,” etc.) By existence in all cftccLs is the (material and not tho 
efficient) causality o£ tho Supremo Loid; For tho cfliciont or instrumental 
causality belongs to His Intolligonco From its penetrating all objects which aro 
to be known. But since it belongs to intelligence (buddhi> which is to bo 
illumined by tho Witness (tho soul) not to bo known by a Function of itself, tho 
instrumental causality will bo po‘!siblo in tho case oF intelligence which is 
capable of being known by itsolE, nlthough tho clmractoi of tho principle 
properly called intelligence (i. <?. tho character oE not being known by itself) 
is absent from it. 


Having slept when tho Lord awakes after a cosmic dissolution, at first 
there is the production of intolligonco , having contemplated (by intelligence) 
1*^® of cause and effect, etc.. Ho, tho Ijord, creates. Although 

mtmligence has (then) no object of its own, still from being tho proxinmto 
condition of consciousness, like tho oil, etc. in Iho lamp, it possesses inaniCcst- 
ation in a particular manner. Then takes place the production of nhaniktlra 
or egoism from tho resolution “I will make,” as appears from declarations 

m the bruti and Smriti such as “ Ho resohod, * I shall bo many ”* (Chhftndogja 
Upanisat, VI, 2). Since ahamktlra ponotratos tho transForinations of biuldhi 
such as desire, etc, it too is a single (original) pi inciplc. But in this as a 
principle resides buddhi^ since buddbi is of a more general character. 
‘I am the^ lord, being produced by an effort of will,’ — such is ahainkrtra ; 
because it is produced by an effort of will and because it is constantly 
determined by this. Ahamkflra also is (in turn) thoroforo tho cause of tho 
subtle element, the gross elements, tho senses, otc. Among those again it is 
principles called tho ‘forms’ of sound, touch, form, taste, and 
sme hat are in turn the causes of tho gross oloments in which sound, otc. 
esi e.^ If you say that in that case there should bo tho apprehension of all 

’ ^® their apprehension takes place in tho 

apprehension of tho genus in tho apprehension of tho 
transformations belonging to tho genus. Such is tho succossixo 
S®”®*'®i principles in tho special ones ; and it is thus 
c a J the principles beginning with Brahman aro tho material causes 

nra Or example. Nor is it proper to say that nlthough the principles 

antecedents of the effect, i. e., ci cation, since there can be no 
liAPanoA ’ out action, theiefore action is tho cause and not the pi inoiplos ; 
effepf . K causality depends on tho identity of tho cause and 

the f ^“0 Principles were not the causes then creation would follow 

nrinnmioc.r “on-identity of cause and effect. Moreover, since tho causal 
etc means of mukti, there is the creation of the intelligence, 

each indivM JT® ^emgs, not identically with one another, but separately for 

taken co^m^nl; f «“y^h®^® ^^ch can take or has 

0 a cosmic dissolution, otc. from tho start of creation in 


OHAPrrn m lEonmE i 




ilio boginiiing of o cosmte oyclo* daring deep sleep tbero is o dissolation of 
the Jlvas, totelligencos m mukii this dissolution is without end —3 

Kow, it IS not right to hold with the non deistio Shmkhjos that creation 
proceeds from the principle, intelhgenco, becanso of ancoession and because of 
absence of proof To tbis olfect is declared the npborism s 


51 H ^ I ^ I 8 H 

sr Na, not m fi itf gyu PrAni bnddhi bhyah, from the intelligences of 
living beings A sambliaT&t, from impossibility 

4 (Creation proceeds) not from the intelligences of the living 
beings, beosQBO this is inapcssible --'88 

The snccosstre creation of gods, seers, etc has been revealed in the 
^ruti From whose intolllgence will ho produced this creation of the gross 
elements ? It follows therefore that there is the Lord endowed with latelli-, 
gence-'4 



II ^ I ^ i ^ 11 


flmfir Nirmdya, having oreatod [Tohoha avacham, high and low 

vifri 8rnti^i srutis, the Vedas w Cba also Nirmimlte, creates 


fq?pr^ Fitn vat, like a father 

6 Having created lugh and low, He also creates the Vedas, 
like a father— 89 


I*' 


Haring created beings high and low aocordmg to their merits and 
dements. He creates the Vedas tbrongh Bis desire for (heir good Just as a 
father, having begotten sons, also by teachings makes known to them what 
was not known to them, «» , the attainment of good and the avoidance of evil, 
so also does He, the Lord 

ii ^ i ^ i ^ ii 

Hisra npadesSt, from mixed instruction w Ha, not. 

111, thus ^ Chet, if w Ho, no So alpa tvat, from the extreme^ 

smallness ^ 


6 (If you say ihat) smoe the instraotiona are of a mixed 
oharaoter, (He is) not (like a father), we reply, No, beoanse the 
imit of the mixed instraotion is altogether insignificant —90 

How, if yon say that this Lord is not really benevolent like a father,' 
'because His instrnotions about saorifices are mixed with acts of injury to living^ 
bemgs which are the means of produoiug sm , wo reply, Ho, for, since m 
comparison with the happiness, eto which are the frmt of the prmcipal portion 
of the saenfioe, the fmit-of the injoiy involved in the subsidiary is insignificant, 
the eujoiner of this IS not on tfaiS' account other than benevolent. /But, you 
may say, sioce injury as the subsidiary^ of the sacrifice has the^same fruit 
as that of the prinoipal (i < , the sacrifice), it does not fall rwlthio the soope' 



70 sandilya-sutram. 

• a 


of the general pioliibition against injury; oth 0 r^^is 0 the two injunctions, 
VIZ , to do injury m special saciifaces and to abstain from doing injury geneially, 
■\\ould bo in the natuie of alternatives and theioby give to the pei former 
the option of doing or of not doing , thoiefoie, the gonoiul prohibition should bo 
held to apply whore theie is no special injunction, as in the case of ^havanija 
(where the general rule is suspended by the special i ulo which is only an anciDaiy 
part of the upanayana, see Jaiminlya-n 3 Aya-mA.liVvistara, VI, viii, 2) To this 
we reply that the non-opposition between the two injunctions consists in this 
only that injuiy as a subsidiaiy is the cause of apurva (or evil desert which 
ripens into activity afterwards) and that injuiy in general is the cause 
of sin. 

Now, if the special injury in a saoiifice is the cause of some de«iiod fruit 
nnmixed with the evil'of predominant pain, tins sense of the special injunction, 
when connected with the negative prefax (as in the general piohibition)^ will 
you may say, bo expressive of the absence thereof (i e. of injuiy in special 
cases being the cause' of some desiied fruit, etc ); so that the injunction “Lot 
one not do injury to all living beings,” will bo the piimai) cause of pain. 
To this we leply that it is tiuo that the pain which aiises fiom the injury which 
is the susidiary of a saciiface, is not predominant; that since it is invariably 
accompanied by the happiness, etc., which are the fruits of the principal sacri- 
fice, it is not an obstacle to the performance of the act of injuiy; otlieiwM«o, 
there would be an illicit extension of the rule, owing to the indeterniinalensos, 
of the idea of predominance Theiefoie ‘ predominance ’ in the case ot pains 
is a particular genus or general characteristic which admits of diftoientiations 
(in individual causes). In the case of death by suicide as an act of expiation, 
etc , or in the case of death by suicide at Prayiig.i (at the confluence of the 
thiee rivers in Allahabad), the pain caused by the act of suicide is light in 
compaiison to the fiuits of such deaths. Hence veiilj" Panchasikha also 
enjoins pratiavamaisa, ie, that this pain is to be home with patience ; this 
injunction is because the pain is altogether insignificant, and not because it is 
predominant Where the pain is predominant, theie the S'rutis themselves 
have shown the exculpatory rites of carrying a firebrand fiom the Ahavanij-a 
fire thiee times round the victim. In the Smritis also it has been declared that 
“ there are five slaughter places foi the householders” (Manu Samhittl, in, 68). 
This is not the declaration of an exception to a geneial injunction^nor does 
it apply to one who has no household, theiefoie, to quote from the Visnu 
PurS.n*a, III, vi 21, “ Whom shall the man who hves by playing and killing 
fly for refuge?” — 6 

♦ ( 

Now, from the mention of the S'ruti, the apurva resulting from the 
rites enjoined in the S'lutis, is being considered . Does it .belong to the per- 
former, does it belong to the enjoyer, or does it belong to the Supreme Lord ? 

I 

u ^ 1 ^ i « « , ' 

I ‘ ^ « 

Phalam, fruit. Asm&t, from Him. Blldar^lyanahr 

B&darS.yana, Yy^sa. Drisia-tv^t, fi’bm being seen. 


f 


CHAPTJiB m I,E<mmc i 


71 


7 The frnili cornea from Him, says £<idarAyana, beoanse it 
la Been (to be ao in common life) — 91 

AsT it IS seen that the frmts of eoitons ooino from iho pleasnro anil dis- 
pleasure of the kingi etc for ^rhom iho notions are performed, so it is from 
this Brahman that, says the lord iBAdarAjana, the frnit of prescribed works 
comes (see the Yed&nto SAira I, i, 2) t 

The frnit does not accrue to the performer, becanso it is seen that the 
frnit of the ceVenfomes performed bj n father after the birth of a son, accrues 
to the son Kow, if ^on saj* that the enjoyment of the fmit acornes to the 
enjojer it is to bo considered who tho enjoyor osaotly is to whom the enjoy- 
ment acornes, for if the two terms (i e enjoyer and enjoyment) wore thns 
wholly dependent on each other forihoir significance, there would ari^e the 
fanli of 'mntnal depenilonce* or arguing m a oirelo Tliorefore, since it is seen 
to be so m common hfo, iho attainment of iho fmit, good or eril, is from the 
pleasure and displeasure of the Snpreme Z^rd and it ti ill accrno to the Inbjeot 
for whom the Ifrmt is intended by Him Nor again need tho acornal of the 
attainment of the fmit to the sobjeot for whom it is intended ontail the suppo- 
sition of a fresh aot producing an additional Dphr%a, if it worn not so, an apfirrU 
wonid be entailed also in iho enso of tho service, oto rendered to the king 
Henoo it IS that works are j’ove'iled m the Ij/rnti only as giving pleasure to 
the Xiord (and not as prodomogan apdrva) iThns 

^ Bat who follow out this ambrosial religion in tbc manner declared, 

1 Fall of foitb, intent on hie, those do> otooa oro exceedingly dear to Me ** 

(Gita, XII. 20) 

Inspite of tho existence of pleasure and displeasure in Him, it does not 
belong to the Lord to be<a saipsAri, f e oho who nndergoes the rovolntioos of 
births and deaths ond experiences of the frmts of works, for Ho is all that 
exists, He is above oil pain, and He is eternally free— 7 



li ^ U l c II 


^ Vyntkram&t, from regression, in the reverse order nmnn Api- 

aya^ gomg away, dissolation rHiT Tathfi, similarly, so Drif tarn, seen 

8 Dissolation is throagli resihenoe, for so is it seon (to be 
^ in 'ordinary life) — 92 

Dissolntioa is jield to be through the resilience of the speoial principles 
into the general ones byednio it is seen that the dissolution of a jar and like 
special forms is tbrongh'^eic resolniion into the general form of earth —8 

' Here ends tho first leoinre of the third chapter in the Commentary 
on the One Hundred Aparfims of S^Andilya composed by the -most learned 
teacher Srapnesvara ^ ^ 


Chapter III: Lecture ii. 

lllukti is descubed as the Jivas attaining Brahma-hood. The determi* 
nation of the object of worship is continued in this lecture also by discrimina- 
ting the nature thereof (i.e. of the Jiva and Brahman). By raising the doubt 
how the one happens to be the othei , the author of the aphorisms declares the 
fitness of the Jivas for the state of the Lord. 

ii ^ i ^ i ^ » 

ri^ipu Tat-aikyam, its unity. snrTTp^^irfir^ JSfknk-tva-eka-tvam, manifold- 
ness or oneness. UpMhi-yoga-hS,n^t, through conjunction or 

disjunction of the proximate conditioner adjunct. Aditya-vat, like the 

sun. 

1. 'Its unity (appears as) manifoldnesa or oneness according 
to the conjunotion or disjunction of the adjunct; as is the case 
with the sun —93 • ^ 

According to ; 

“ All this verily is Brahman, nothing manifold is heie.” 

Chh&ndogya Upanisat, iii, 14. 

“Just as the single sun illumines the whole of this world, 

“ So does, 0 Bh§<rata, the owner of the field (soul) illumine the whole of 
the field (body)” (GUft, xiii, 34). 

“ Know Me also, 0 Bh8.rata; to be the knower of the field .in all the 
fields” (Gita, xiii, 33). 

it is unity that is the nature of Brahman or the Self. The intuition of the 
Self again is bdthways, i.e. both as unity and as multiplicity- This intuition 
caused by the intelligence which is the adjunct of thejJiva is reflected in the 
soul. Aiid so declares the S'ruti : 

“ It is seen as one and also as many, like the moon in water.” 

. “ As the one sky is seen under the diversities of white, blue, etc., 

“So by those whose vision is misguided is the self also^ though it is 
one, seen to be as different individuals.” 

Visnu Purapa, II, xvi, 22. 

Then when the intelligence which is the adjunct of the Jiva is destroyed 
by the higher devotion, the oneness comes out again, and in this there is no 
contradiction. Just as does the oneness of the sun which is of the nature 
of light come out on the removal of the mirror, etc., which are- the external 
causes of its reflections, so is it here.-<— 1. 

H ^ I ^ I H 

Prithak, separate, distinct. ’ ^f?r Iti, thus, ‘xl:^ Chet, if. w Na, 

no. Parena, with the other. A-sambandhat, from want of 

connection. Prakasanam, of the lights, of the souls as self-manifes- 

ting. 



CHAFXKB III XtiEoriuiB u 


73 


3 , If (you say that the sonla should be) distiuot, (we reply) 
No, because (then the souls ae) self^manifesting (would have) no 
oonneotion with the other ^94 , ' 

r: If yon say that the Jlvas must be * dutmot * i # , absolntely different from 
one another, and mast by their very nature manifest tliemselves, became others 
Wise there oonid be no such rule that snch a soul was released and snoh a loni 
Was bonnd, we reply, No, for althongh it might be possible for the non deiatio 
Sftmhhjas to somehow maintain this \iew, it is impossible for the deistic 
SAmkbyas to do so Hou so ? fieoanse, by their being of the nature of light, 
as supposed by yon, they would rei eal themselres by their pwn light, and would 
thus lack the connection with the other* i r, the Supreme JLord, defined as 
that of the seer and the object to be seen, as they would noi require to^fae 
illumined by Him, just as lamps, eto , are not illumined by the snn So that 
tt would accrue to Brahman not to be the X,ord, not to be all knowing, and to 
be an object to be known (by the self manifesting souls) Nor are the souls 
such as are to be illumined from tbo outside, ns in that case it would follow 
that they themselves ore non intelligent (according to the maxim that what- 
ever is illnnined bj another that is non mtelligent) Nor are they to be flln 
mined by the mntnal functions of their lotelligenoes, for their illnminahon takes 
place only by the snbjogation of tamas and not really by the fnootion of the 
sattvB present in the internal organ Nor is illnmmation possible m the ossa 
of a thing which is not suited to illnmination, for certainly one lamp is not 
capable of being illamiaod by another lamp, even on the removal of the rail 
(# y onrtain) between them Thus there is a certain oommon, though non- 
essential, attribute between the external and mternal lights (t e the lamp and 
8onl)| whereby it appears that the word * light is used m a seoondary 
sense in each texts as ** Verily this eoni (pnrnfa) is its own light* (Bpibai 
Arauyaka Upnuifat, IV, iii 9) Therefore it is under the oharooiefistfo of 
being the illuminator of the world tlut the self which is pure oonsoionsnass is’ 
proved io'exist or established henoe there is in this no dependence on anything 
else hZoreovar, incontestable indeed is the proof of the etistenceof the soul 
alio by the fact of its being the reoeptaole (of the reflectioos) of the attributes 
of mind, vie, error cmd knowledge of the principles, while it is in a seoondary 
sense that the fnnotions of the intelligence are spoken of as being knowledge and 
pleasure 

What proof is there that souls are distinot ? Only the diSerepoe of the 
principles of mtelHgenae exists 

* Xo acconnt for the different situations of bondage and release 
** Where are these in the case of the souls that are eternally free ? * 

Now, refuting the \ lew that souls which are existences are certainly 
subject to modifications and that knowledge, desire, eto , are their attributes 
because there are snob intuitions os **lknow,' “I desire,** I am luippy, ' 
eto , the author declares i 

ST II ^ I \ ^ « 

«r Na, not Bnnfkvt Vik&nuab, subjeot to modifioatiou Tu, but 
Barana vikArAt^ from the modification of theiastmmefii v 



74 


SANDILYA-SUTRAM. 

f • 


3. But (the souls are) not subject to modification, because 
the modification is of the instrument (i. e- the internal organ).— 96. 

The souls do not deserve to be possessed of the modifications of know- 
ledge, etc "Vl^hy ? Because, since knowledge, etc , are "explained as belonging 
to that' which is the instrument of the perception of pleasure, etc., it 'follows 
* that the souls are not liable to modification. For, thus, in such inferences-as 
" the perception of pleasure must be through an instrument,” since the connection 
of such an instrument exists by the relation of identity (with the effect), pleasure, 
etc , are not the modifications of the soul This is established also from the 
inference that like fairness, etc , pleasure and the like do not belong to the 
soul but are perceived as reflected in the soul. Similarly, it is by means of 
identity with its cause (ahamkara) that the mind assumes < the character of 
egoism *, there is no such assumption of egoism by the mind when it is dissolved 
during deep sleep. This is just like the attribution of the nature of time 
to the upSidhis or external circumstances which cause the divisions of time. This 
is enough. — 3 

Now, in regard to the possible enquiry, how Brahm.i>hood accrues to the 
Jlva, the author declares;— 

n ^ i ^ i » ii • 

^?rwivrw>®rr An-anya-bhaktya, by single-aimed de\otion. H^^lTat-bud- 
dhih, the knowledge thereof, i.e , of the identity of the J^iva with Brahman. 

Buddhi-layfiit, through the -dissolution of intelligence Atyan- 

tam, absolute, final. . , 

,4. Through the final dissolution of intelligence by means 
of single-aimed devotion, there’ arises the knowledge of the identity 
of the jiya with 'Brahman. — 96 

It has been levealed : 

“By single-aimed devotion is to be attained, 0 Paitha, that Supreme 
Purusa, 

“In whom all created things reside, by whom all this is pervaded” (Grita, 
viii, 22) 

Similarly (in the Nrisimha Purina, it is recollected): 

“ When the ancient Purusa is to be attained by devotion alone, wheiefore 
is not an effort made for mukti ?”• 

Therefore the meaning is that innkti bharacterised as the attainment of 
the bliss of Brahman results when the final dissolution of intelligence takes place 
byithe higher devotion as soon as it arises in the Jiva. By intelligence here is 
meant the adjunct of the Jiva, since it has been declared that the principle, 
Intelligence, belongs to the Lord alone. And thus is indicated the definition of 
mukti in this form that mukti is the attainment of the bliss* of Brahman co-existing 
with the antecedent non-existence of the dissolution of his intelligence. 

IE you say that since the attainment of the bliss of Brahman is a thing 
accomplished (as all souls are identical in nature with Brahman), it cannot be an 
object of volition ; we reply. No, because it is an object of voluntary pursuit 
when accompanied with the knowledge that it is such, as in the case of the 


OHAFTBR III LEonmL n 


75 


Tillage, etc , (Uie mere existence of ^Thlcb does not present their being objects of 
acquisition for which one makes effort not because they exist bat only 
when they are known to be objects worth Boqmriag) OtherwiKt since aacot 
namely, *' This is pleisnre, herein is the being pleasure (i e , the genus of 
pleasure,’’ is knowledge, and since genus is eternal, the thing (i e (pleasure) which 
possessed that genus would also come to be not an object of volition, because 
desire and effort of will do not possess the distinctions of knowledge that 
this 18 pleasure and that herein is the being ploisuro Therefore it follows 
that desire and effort of will take place in respect of even an object which is 
already inexistence, under oolonr of iliat nspect of it which is not yat in ezis* 
ience If yon say that the knowledge that it is not to be nccoinplished by an 
effort of will IS an obstacle to the oxeroise of desire and effort of will , we ask, 
is it contrary to reason to suppose that desire and effort of will oome into play 
by orershadowing by a viofeot passion even the fact that the desired end is not 
to be acoompitahed by an effort of will, just as in the case of the hawk Saorifioe 
the performance of which is possible throngh the oTershadowing of thS know- 
ledge that it will be acoompaned by a predominant eril eon8oqnonce,( by the violent 
anger towards nn enemy , Cf ' Ixet him who desires to kill bis enemy by incan- 
tation offer the hawk sacrifice — Sadvimsa BrAhmana, III 8) ? 

Also from the Agnma t 

** Bliss is the form of Brahman and that is founded in mnkii 
it 11 kno?m for corhm that tho attainment of the bliss of Brahman is an object 
of voluntary pursuit 

You may say that just as, notwithstanding the production of the higher 
devotion, there is still the experience of the adpstn or merit and demerit 
which determine the duration of life, till it exhausts itself, so it is by 
'' experience alone that there can be the dissolution of the other apArvas 
or merits and demerits , ond that therefore there can be nothing bat the absence 
of mnkti To this the author replies > 


Nd 

WTJi Aynh, life Chirain, hisliDg 

9 Tu, bat HAnlii, desiruotion, abolition 

ihrougb^boiDg seailess 


.11 ^ R I K II 

qntvT ItaresAm, of the rest 
An Aspada t\At, 


5 1 liife lasts, bat of the rest there is abolitton throogh their 
becoming site less —97 * 

When affection for the Self is produced. 

Only so long is his duration as ho shall not be delivered then be shall 
be accomplished ’ (ChhAndogja Upanifat, VI, xiv, 2) ^ 

, ** What has he to do with merit wealth and desire ^ Alukii is present 

m the palm of his hand, 

** Whose devotion is firm in Thee, the root of all worlds ” 


Visnu FprAna, I, xx, 27 




76 


sIndilya-s&^ram; • 

• • 


And thus ‘‘life,’ t e. the adrista which determines the duration of h£e, 
fust only so long as it lasts, becomes an obstacle to mukti, even when the higher 
devotion has been produced ; just only so long is the state called Jivan-mukti 
or-mukti in lifetime. As regards the other merits and demerits, since on the 
dissolution of the adrista determining the duration of life there is the final dis- 
solution of the individual intelligence (where the higher devotion has been pro- 
duced) and consequently there is the absence of the site of experience, it is 
the absence of their experience in the individual intelligence that results; 
hence it does not follow that there can be nothing but the absence of mukti, 
because the intelligence also, by virtue of its being so modified, is a cause of 
mukti (in a negative way). Nor do those merits and demerits thereby cease 
to be causes ; because the causality of a thing is not impaired even where 
there is the non-production of the fruit in the absence of other (concurrent) 
causes. (If you say that some adrista will be still left in the form of the 
pleasure and displeasure of the Lord, see aphorism 91, we leply, No, because) 
dissolution also of the adrista in the form of the pleasure and displeasure of 
the Lord will take place either in the course of time oi from the general cause 
of a cosmic dissolution (when it occurs), just as there is the dissolution of 
- the adristas produced by the subsidiaries of a sacrifice when through some flaw 
in any of the subsidiaries they fail to produce the ultimate adrista which was 
the aim of the sacrifice as a whole and to which they were contributing. The 
surrender to the Lord, on the other hand, of works which are the obstacles to 
'mukti, is for the sake of absence or cancellation of bondage by them. Thus 
all is clear It is in a mediate way (i. e. through devotion) that destruction 
of the effects of works takes plaOe by means of the fire of knowledge.— 5. 

Now, you may ask, is the samsd.ia of the Jiva held to be caused by 
absence of knowledge oi to be caused by absence of devotion ^ In regard to 
this proceeds this aphorism : 

^JlToTTf THtU. II ^ 1 si > ^ U 

Samsritih, samsara, transmigration, worldly existence. ^15 Es^m, 
of these wvrf^; A-bhaktih, absence of devotion, Syat,' must be? w Na, 
not AjSS,nat, fiom absence of knowledge. Kftrana-a- 

siddhehi fioin non-existence or non-pi oof as cause. 

6. THeir sama^ra is (from) absence of devotion, and not 
from absence of knowledge, because there is no pioof of it as a 
cause — 98 

, Heaven, mukti in lifetime, and mukti, such is their threefold state 
Mukti in lifetime is the higher devotion ; while its non-existence is samsS,ra. 
It is only from the absence of the desires of devotion that sarasS-ia persists ; 
it ceases, when devotion is pioduced ; and so it has been declared by the 
great seers ; 

\ 

“So long are theie affliction, and that desire, so long delusion as well as 
SOI row, 

“ So long does not a man take refuge in Thee, the abolisher of infinite sin.” 

Vifuu Purina, I, ix, 72-73. 


oflAPlrjEB m 'uoTfiBi! 


71 


Oreatton is catued by the absence o£ the knowledge of the principles 
by knowledge is its abolition desired , beoniise in ihe^*abaence (throngh know 
iMge) of the canses of the mistake of a rope for a snike the mistake is 
impossible Births, the sconrgings of the dreadful attendants of Tama, those 
saffenngs, the sights of the son of the San these are the consequences of the 
creature turning away from the loins of Krisna s feety being led astray 
by the mirage of the ware of the ** I ** and *' Mine ’’ of ahamL&ra —6 ( ^ 


ii ^ i 4 > « ’ii 

Trim, three ^ EfiLtp their Netrftpi, eyes 


Sabda hnga 'ikfa-bhedAt, accordmg to the differences of ' word or authoritative 
deolaraiion, mark of infereoae, and the senses ^^t, like 

Radra , 


, 7 liike- Radra, they have three eyes, distiognished as 

autihontative deolaratioo, mark of mferenoe, and the senses —99 
' fheir*, I e I of the Jivas, there are three eyes as instramente, that is 
to say, sermg as proofs an respect of oertain knowledge of objects Althoagh 
there is no distinotion m the oertam knowledge which they severally prodnoe, 
it IS considered as being threefold according to the threefoldness of the 
instrnments These instraments are as follows The mstrament of certain 
knowledge which is caused by anthoritatire declaration is the word m the form 
of an nhjeot denoted by a word to whioh the word is appropriate and which is 
nnderstood It is mentioned first (m the aphorism) in order to declare its 
inperiority (to the other two) consisting m its being the means, eto , of trans* 
cendental devotion So Ogam the lostrument of certain knowledge which » 
caused by inference is the knowledge of the mark of mferenoe abiding in the 
sobjecb of the mferenoe (< s , the minor term) and accompanied or pervaded 
by a known major term Since according to as an efbct pro exists,^ the 
oanse, the fact of its being known in the process of inference » also not m 
compatible The mairnments of certain knowledge which is cana'ed by sense* 
peroeption (internal and external) ore the sense organs when they are in 
oontaot fWitb objects and they, i e the mmd, and the organs of hearing, 
tonoh, sight, taste -and smell, SIX in number, having overcome the tamas of ihel 
internal organ by their respeotvive contnots, prodnce the fnnction of the 
sattva (of the internal organ) which assames the form of the objeot as illnmined 
by the Gonsoions Self Hence it is declared ^ ^ 

<* lilqmiiiition arises m all the gatewiysjof this body 
I GUk, xir, 11 

But the modifications such ns pam, etc , of the mind whioh has the form ' 
of the 'Jlint’s intelligenoe, do not remain uncogmsed it is by the light of the 
Self therefore that they are illumined Hence to avoid redundancy, we do 
not make the supposition of a fanotion of the sattra in their case Only in this 
sense are they said to be illuniined by the lineis 

Thus then there are only three proofs distinguished as word inference 
and sense perceplioa , jast as Rudra has three seats of sight, neither more nor 




78 


§ANDILYA-SUTRAM. 

• • 


less, so is it here, and their signs are (in both the cases) the characterisitics 
of their being of the forms of the moon, sun, and fire. * 

Comparison, again, is not a separate proof, but is included in the three 
proofs themselves, because it is foi the purpose only of comprehending the force 
cr direct meaning of a word, and this is possible, with the help of the mind 
also together with the inference called sHmanyato dnsta or commonly seen, 
since m this case the word the force of -which is to be ascertained is co- 
extensive with some well-known word, as m the case of the definition of the 
poet and ipoem. 

The investigation of proofs has been discussed by us in our NyAya-tattva- 
nikasa and Ved§,nta-tattva-nikasa ; so it is not elaborated here. 

The intelligence of the Jiva is named the mind ; it undergoes contraction 
and expansion ; whereby the simultaneity and non-simultaneity of cognitions 
are explained. 

Since from the play of the ahamkara of the Lord is the production of the 
intelligences of the Jivas, in intelligence egoism also, like pain, etc.., is directly 
perceived. 

Since the production of the subtile elements, the gross elements, the 
senses, etc., is from the intelligence of the Lord, and since they are to be known 
by the intelligence of the Lord, this is capable of being apprenonded by Con- 
sciousness as well as by the senses. 

The five gross elements, the five subtile elements, the eleven senses (of 
cognition and action), ahamkara, intelligence, the Pradh^na, the soul, and the 
Supreme Lord, such is the collection of the piinciples. These aie the twenty- 
six principles.— 7. 

Avia-tiras-bhilv^, appearaace*! and disappearances. fteiTtn 
VMrah, modifications. Syuh, are, should be. Kriy.Vphala- 

samyog^t, from the conjunction of action and fruit. 

8- Creation and deatruotion are changes of form of that 
i!vhioh exists, because there is conjunction of action with' object. — 
100 . 

^ As a collateral subject, creation and dissolution aie considered. Of these 
creation characterised as appearance or evolution is of the existent alone, and 
consists in i ts capability of undergoing change ^ similarly, dissolution charac- 
terised as disappearance or involution is also of the existent alone, and consists 
in its incapability of undergoing change Likewise inciease, deciease, etc., are 
nothing but changes of form of that whi6h exists. How so ^ Because there 
is predication of the connection with the fruit (i. e. the effect oi the object) 
of the meaning of the veib in such instances as “ He makes a jar,’* “ He 

u* M oyfl 18 the Bun, his left is the moon, and hia third eye in the oentre of his 

forehead le fire. I suppose that the sun properly stands for revelation as being the brightest, 
the moon for inference (from its connexion with pahtha as the ‘ lunar fortnight ' and ' the 
minor term 'land the five fires for the five senses In the text, however, the moon is put first in 
the compound (according to the rule abhyarhttam oha) ab being the monarch of the stars, planets 
and brahmans, see Yishnn Pur, I, xxii."— Oowell 


GHAFTBE III Lfotdre il 


79 


dfflfroys a jart” eto , and theso eonnactions can oconr only m tho case o£ that 
which exis&i and not in the case oC that * which does not exist And so has 
it boon declared ' 

« There is no prodnotioo of that which exists not, there is no destrnction 

' of that which exists iif 16 ) 

Idkewise, in snob instances also as** It is produced , ** It is destroyed,'* 
etc tho object is perceived to be the seat of the change expressed by the verbs, 
and this, t s , to bo the seat of the chants, is possible only in the case of that 
whtoh exists 

Appearance or evolntion, again, means connection with the initial 
moment, the moaning of which is that it is tbo counter opposite of destrnction/ 
because there is no determinato sense in which the word initial can be applied 
to a moment (since the process of creation IS inBnite both towards the begin 
ntng-and toward the end ) Nor can you say that as it is necessary that every 
appearance mast have another (antooedent) appearance the faults of inBnite 
regression and rednodanoy, one or other, moat onsne becanso it is by the 
oollocation of all tho causes of the jar, for instance, that the cbaractonstio of 
being an appearance belongs to its appearance For, otherwise the same fanlfs 
would ensue also on your own theory of creation de noro which would equally 
imply the creation of a creation, and so on ad tnnntlum * 

And so it 18 the series of all pi^vious appeamnoes and disappeiraneos of 
the jar, for example, that is called its ** antooedent non existence " , it » its 
disappearance that is called its ** destruction ' (or emergent non existence ) , 
and this (destruction) sometimes becomes final also as m the case of the body 

* I giv« « traofUtion of my pandit friend a clear note on tine herd pawage t 

\n opponent raigiit ibae argne But if you accept Che idea of manifestation «nd 
reject that of * prodaction, le yonr nunlfestation iteelf continooos or occaelonal f If it {• 
coQtinooQs, why should it not he eternal * If it ie occasional, then the manifestation of 
thie eaid tnanifeetatioo will lie either vonlinnoue or occaaional Dot if it le continaoos yon 
will again bare to concede tlist It IS enteroa] or if it is occaeional, yon will hare again to 
allow a mamfeetatioii of this occasional manifestation and no on Thas yon will be In 
rolred in the fanlt of an r»ffrnt«m \ Or on the other band if, in order to 

aroid tills fault, yon allow that the second or third msnifeetafion woe prodoced not manifested 
yon will be involved in the fanlt of comhroasness, hecanse if the idea of prodaction le 
to be conceded at all it might aa well be allowed at the very first step 

We Jiowever reply 

* We grant that if «e accept the idea tfiat a pot s manifestation was itself manifested 
and then went on to concede • further inamfeetatioii of this second manifestation we ehoald 
be involved in one of the tivo fanlts yon allege hot ne do not concede tins. We hold inde^ 
that the pot is manifested not pnKlnced bat we do not allow a second separate manifestation 
we maintain that this manifestation if the manifestation is only another exprsMion for the 
earn total of the cansca winch are said in yonr phraseology to prodace the effect the pot 
as wherever tins anin total » fonod, tho manifestation takes place This explanation removes 
all fear of an ad *a/(attKn rvy etUon as there la no ountioDcd soccession of supposed 
rasnifestatioDB 

‘Nor again is }oar own hypothesis of prodaction a whit more free from the same 
charge For we may in tarn ask yon whether tins ' prodaction of yours is contmuons or 
oecasions] If it is contiiinons then why is it not eternal ^ If it is occasional, wo ask, 
whether tliere is a prodaction of this prodaction or not ^ and so on thns involving either 
an ad infinitoin regression or tho fanlt of * cambroasness And yon will similarly have to 
snnme aa we did, that the prodaction of the first prodaction is not something separate bat is 
only another expression for the enm total of the causes,, as in oar case * Cowell 
' 1 



80 


SANDILYA-SDTRA'M. 


of Devadatta, or as in the case of the intelligences, etc., of those that have 
attained mukti. And what are called “ mutual non-existence ” and “ absolute 
non-existence ’ are, on the other hand, really nothing but respectively the 
possession of mutually contradictory attributes and the site (where the thing 
in question might have been but is not ) ; as, otherwise, we should have 
to admit another non-existence in the fiist non-existence, and so on ad. infinitum * 
- But in a cosmic dissolution there is merely the non-existence of any change of 
form other than and in addition to the change of form called cosmic dissolution. 
The samskllras, latent influences, impressions, or tendencies, . arising from past 
acts, however, persist in subtile forms, and to this there can be no objection ; 
(and these developing as causes of future births and experiences make subse- 
quent creations necessary) 

Thus closes the investigation of Devotion undei three heads (vie. Devotion, 
its Means, and the Object of Worsh ip) —8 

Clothed in yellow gaiments, resemblmg the (dark blue) cloud (in the 
colour of the body). 

With long eyes like the petals of a lotus, 

Holding the flute, adorned all over the body with the dust raised by the 
cows coming home at dusk, 

May that Effulgence bedecked with the Kaustubha gem abide in your 
hearts. 

In the bracelet of the land of Bengal, there was Vis&iada renowned as 
a jewel on earth, 

The loid of all the earth, holding the title of the overloid of all monarchs, 
the foremost among the wise. 

From him spiang Jaleavara the wisest, the commander of the armies of 
the protectors of lands 

By Svapneaavara born of his body has been made the investigation of 
true Devotion. 

Here ends the second lectuie of the third chapter in the Commentary on 

.the One Hundred Aphorisms ol S^nhlya composed by the most learned teacher 
Svapnesvara. 

Here also ends the chapter. 

Completed is this investigation of Devotion 

® “ My pandit friend thus explains this passage “ Mutual non-existence is not something 
distinct, but only the possession of mutually exclusive properties Thus ‘ a pot is not cloth,’ 
‘ cloth IB not a pot we have here an example of mutual non existence Now the pot has those 
qualities constituting pot-hood (ghatatwa) which are contrary to those which exist in cloth, 
and similarly cloth has those qualities constituting cloth-hood (patatwa) which are contrary 
to those which exist in a pot So too ‘ absolute non-existence ’ (as in the phfase ‘ a pot is not 
there ') 18 not something distinct, but is really the same as' the ground where the pot is not, 
t e the absence of the pot is recognised in the ground (this is the Mimamsa doctrine, see 
Siddhanta muhtavah, p 9 ) This has been accepted in order to avoid the necessity of allowing 
an infinite succession of absences For as we must allow that there is “no pot in the absence 
of a pot, we must perforce concede that there is the pot’s absence in this aforesaid absence , 
and if this second absehce be something existing by itself, a third absence of the pot will 
"similarly have to be conceded qs existing in it, and so on ad infinitum Hence we maintain 
that the absence of a pot is not something existing by itself, but simply the spot of ground 
where we expected to find it and it was not there ’’—Cowell 

Printed by I. N. Mark, at the City Press, Allahabad 


p* > J -J 

Index of Aphorisms 


1 , ^-* 0 ® 

wtw li 16 

wfTw 11 

w a w l a w aHiromtft astSf 79 61 

^aijfipjlmsB tnn«T«reT<(^ 75t 
f^dlj 62 -- 45 

wmft HftnfimrOT 1 3 

^nipUH t jin f f fe g g r ^ w w ^ge- 71 

srswtT% 

WJiJ S» 43 

»i»ffrf^ Trtw» 

’n^ ' SS 28 

64 47 

viT^aiii(i^i^nir<ir - 30 25 

^ fffrnit,; ar- 

78 . . 61 

WSfiWTftBW 
wi 5«97 

w&ferc»»?m from ^ 

too jg 

ixitxg^i^sfk TOt (,3 j j 

ofimn 81 63 

Vlfiriw U^ifTlHWdjf 31* 25 
^fiOTiftiftB?jflr„l7 ' jg 

55 40 

9W tiMt %«r ?»T»rtwrf5„ 34 27 

BWSmUMMTifrJ^SO gg 

rfkvafkii^ mr 

^“72 - « 53 

^20 20 

upfhj^, 40 „ J1 

»twtwfir?»^rawnj«^ _ 47 35 

WTOf tT5 

’Sfeifh-.l „ 7 j 

«»wR«qT«ft W5„48 36 


rAQE 

THff™»ilaT aya w i m i q . 8 b 66 

Hgbftglgw nwTT a laaf wl ^ wi'l 3 «. 32 


>,* •* * — — •• 

nijWtWff 4 ^nr 6 )i)%vi ^«.3 > 6 

W!JfraTa«28 , „ 24 

it4«r af^ifinTRisv viRnor- 

«* 5 i 5 22 , M 20 


fSpiri^- 93 _ .. 

wjafii j[3ninfimiar$tr6r„b6 
w^sri uufiipiiqiq a MMlaoin- 
'fRia^- 9 «. 

?iyiiwainq my r ^a - t a lli ar. 46 
wfhmuT^. 5 m 
nw| fn^ 'aiaq6niaiQm25 
mwi airauyiiibHnjmSOm 
HrAuuvii,qnx>r<n atFsnj. 29 
m® Rvna^aT^ GO 

?W!niwBif?r 'SwftH tiavian^. 12 , 

13 ^ 

anfW^m 18 

wjuiaftabY afn^vmj 51 

E ba1?nr»wrai5[aa®ire nn _ 6 

S'^TEireyaa^mlS 
^iinafinmaj 5BBlaij?5„js5 

a ft n ij iwa Sa au a iH ag, 7 
aar%mT am^sTRT^ firSar^ss 
a mjljswtr^mSS 

afinnfnn55 anr |j ia; » i;„95 

’n»5ltn^fiTf$t anwT^mOl „ »a 

flrfiiT07<iiT84Ma<iiiEM<(dT mnreirr 69m5l 


72 

48 

. 12 
35 
7 

22 

41 

25 

41 


15 

15 

18 

18 

8 

35 

48 

11 

27 

69 

73 

45 


( 


PAGE. 

fq?i- 

«t» 89 •»• *' *** • • • 69 

^T g mvTrc^«rTg„, 24 ... 22 

^gn^<^ g T » T^?T«(T ff 70 ... 52 

Wfr^g^WrrsiT^Tf...84 ...* 65 

trr^T^^ g ’Trantwn^} «. 6 7 ••• «t* 49 

*t* 94 •#• «•» 4«* 72 

Sr«ht<ll T'd^ ««• 11 ««• «*• ««» 14 

STfiFlTSrTnHT^giT^ f^rG^HTgST^- 
msng„.37 ••» «•• ««» 29 

iTyqtoPTTs^...53 «<• ««• 39 

snrfH^n^nTWTTmf^wftrl: ... 23 .;. ' 21 

3rrg^^...l6 «. ... ... 18 

srTf^ir^’5rf^^[fHg...50 ... ... 38 

ti5^JI^m^3[^rswt5HrarTg...91 ... 70 

5f^^^STg»TqiTt%G^^...73 ... 54 

gf|tgjif^^T^|^^iTrr^5...27 ... 24 

arir^T’X¥ g ^ttjtt- 

»mH...2G ... ... 23 

WWJTT sriiTTfftfH %5nf»?5rt;rqT ’GT^’T- 

««• 15 ... «o •#» 16 

VtWtTT 

H|gf=srT^„.56... 41 

¥I3T?Pt^?TT%ci^«rfiT^ fr^G^q-gCigW- 
^ q?efTg...85 ... ... 65 

t^JTJrmrgqGfT- 

TPTTlTr^Gitr «•• 75. « M* ... 56 

WntlTfTflR5lT7GT^^«.82 ... ... 64 

f5isft5$TO5»ni5M.39 ... 30 

... 69 


) 


TAGE, 

PAGE. 

g^5^f H^iT g;T^?T^...49 •«» 37 

^3:^^^T^TTg...41 «. «• 31 

«<» 19 «•» 18 

TT»TTT$ IISR^fHGrT?’’Sr?Tf 5%rI^tTT55 «. 57 ... 42 

?Tfng •»» 76 «•» M» ••» 5 / 

%i5TT9«n:m^Tg«.52 «. 39 

rig... 54 40 

^mitiKfg gfiri w %WTf»T^i5iGcc tf^- 
Euig ««• 32 

••• «•• 26 

OTT’TqirGTg 8lIT«lITGnT«.87 ... 67 

gjjgam ^ q ^ g Hm fgg...92 ... 71 

Tirf^^rffTJTrf ^?ngM.42 „. «. 32 

^RTJraigjrnTnVfHfarcIriTf^fef^GT 
iTf?4iimrrrf7g^iiT»iresirfirr^?Tfn'w 
rr^»TTGTJlTiH|5^e[^f5T ^ 

’^TfI»?TTg 44 *f» •«» M* 33 

I g filfrl ^gg«TRyrtrTg-3 6...2S 

«M ^ •!* * •!• 4 : 

gI5^(=irr^f%rIrg[THM.10 ... 14 

gfHsir^g trtggiTT^r^g fmuTg ^?i- 

... 1 1 «» ... ... 52 

lrgnnWT9t>»ftriTshir^fH?n?iTg«.83«. 64 

jnuf^^T- 

mmg •«* ^ 4 ; •#» ««» ... 54 

^GGufrirf ?n^nf^tt«lTg«.68 ... 50 

rTTiffTGTg gir^- 

^Tf^;...98 ... •«• «*» 76 

t«rT %?(t’fnn?Ti^3Tg 

• ■ • 4t* ... 20 


If 


I 

index op references 


Refeugscf ^ J 
Xngirsu Smnti, p 60 
Atri Smnti, p 9 
A^t&ngnliridaya i, 2% p 15 
Apatamba^Srants Sftfra III, i, 
2, p 50 ^ 

AsralAyana Snnta SOin IX, 
Tii, p 45, 60 IX, Till, p 42 
Rigieda V iii, 59, 12, p S 
V z 90, p 26 

Eatha Dpaiii;at it, 11, p 27 
Git5 II, 16, p 79 11, 59, p 9 
111, 12, p 51 It, 6, p 37 It, 9, 
36 It, 10, 11, p 52 ir, 41, p 
2 t, 17, p 15 VI, 46, p 21 
ti, 47, p 21, 22 Ml 14, p 67 
Ml, 16, p 42, S3 mI 17, p 41 
Til, 18, p 42 Ml, 19, p 12,46 
Til, 20, p 12 Ml, 21, p 35 Til, 
23, p 8, 35, 42 Till, 10, p 63 
Till, 13, p 63 TUI, 16, p 63, 
TUI, 22, p 63, 74 till, 24, p 
63 iz, 2, p, 44 IT, 10, p 67 
IX, 13, p 12, 41, 43 IX 14, p 
41,42, 43 IX, 15, p 43 ix 22, 
p 43 iz, 25, p 43, 48 ix, 26, 
p 43, 45, 52 ix, 27, p 43, 44 

IX 28, p 44, 47 IT, 29, p 41, 
54 IX, 30, p 60 ix, 31, p 60 
IX, 32, p 10 ix 33, p 10 X, 
8, p 12 X, 9, p 6 X, 10, p 6 

X 21, p 40, 44 X, 23, p 40 
T, 27, p 38 X, 37, p 39 xi, 36, 
p 42 XII, 1, p 21 XII, 2, p 21 
XU, 3, p 21 XU, 4, p 22 xii 5, 
p 22, XII, 6, p 22 XU, 7, p 

8, 22 XII, 20, p 71 XIII, 3, p 
72 TUI, 20, p 31 ziii, 34, p 
72 xiT, 6, p 2 XIV, 7, p 2 
xir, 8, p 2 XIT 11 p 77 xit 
19, p 2 TIT 26, p 2 TT, 7, 
p 26 XT, 19, p 12 XVI, 18 p 
9, 10 XVI, 19 p 9 XTi, 20 p 

9, 10 XTii, 4, p 20 xviii, 2, p 
59 TTiit, 8, p 59 XVIII, 46, p 


iReffbesop I 
63 TTiii, 54, p 18 xTiii, 55, p 
17, 18 XTIII, 57, 58, p 46 
xt III, 66, p 58 XTIII, 68, p 65 
*) Cbblndagya Dpamsat I, ti, 6 
p 47 If, xxiii, 1 p 6 III, 
xit, 1—4, p 3, 25, 28, 72 
VI, II, 2 p 3, 32 VI, II 3, 
p 68 VI, xit, 2, p 75 VII, 

I, 6, p 12 VII, III, 4, p 28 

10 Tiindya BrShmanai XVI, mi, 2, 

p 57 

11 Taittriya Aranyaka X, x, 21, 

P 11 

12 Taittriya Dpaaiaat II, tii, 1, 

p 9 III, II, 2 p 26 

13 TaittrlyUiila Dpamaat, p 30 

14 laittrlya Saiiikit& I, v, 8, pl7 

II, III, 2, p 42 It, IT, 6, p 41 
II, T, 11 p 52 III, IT, d, 
p 57 VII, I, 10, p 26 

15 NSrada-Bliakti-S&tra Satra 30, 

P 17 

16 Nftrada FaSohariltra xi, 71, 

p 48 

17 NAr&yana Upani;at AtharnaairTS 

p 39 

18 Nrinmbatftpanl npanigat Elnpda 

TI, p 34 

19 Nfisimba Fardna viii, 21, p 34 ~ 

Till, 28, p 60 TUI, 29, p 60 
XXV, 22, p 33 lix, 46, p 49 
?.P 74 T 

20 NyAyamdlftvist&ra I, iv, 3, 

p 41 III, III, 1—11, p 17 
VI, TII, 2, p 70^ " 

21 FAnini Sfltra II, iii, 19, p 8 

22 FAi vamlmAmsA SAtra 1, i, 2, 

p 61 III, I, 2, p 14 III, I, 
22, p 19 III, III, 1—14, p 17 

23 Brahuia PnrAna tcvii, 166, 

P 

24 Briliat Aranyaka Dpaaiaat _.II, ' 

lu, 6 p 28 IV, III, 7, p 28, 
IV, 111, 9, p 63 IV, It, 5, p 16 
VI, It, 22, p 5d 



[ 84 J 


Befrenoe. 

25 Bh^gavati'; VII, v, 22-7-23, 

^ p. 54. 

26. Manu Samhitii: lii, 68, p. 70. 

■ 27. Mah§,bhara,ta : Vanaparvan : 

dxxxix, 13002, p. 39. Udyoga- 
parvan .Ixxxviu, 3114, p. 33. 
Bhismaparvan : Iviii, 2604, p. 
35. Drbnaparvan ; 1, 2822 p. 

33. S3,ntiparvan ; clxliv, 7111- 
12, p 14. cclxv, 6870, p 49 
cclxvii, 6526, p 7, cccxxxvii, 
12718, p. 34, cccxxxviii, 
12778-7*9, p. 61. ccoxxxvih, 
12791-92, p 62. occxli, 12909, 
p. 37. cccxlv, 13305 — 06, p 
56. cccxlv, 13325, p 40 cccxlvi, 
13383, p. 62. cccxZvi, 13499, 
p 62 cccf, 13548—50 pt 62 
cccl, 13551—52, p 64 ccci, 
13554, p 64 AnusSsanaparvan 

I, 7077, p. 34 cxHx, 769, p 
3.5.'* . 

28. MimS-msS. Paribhftsfi, • page 89 , 

p. 17.* 

29. Toga Sutra • i, 23, p. 19. i, 27, 

> * ■ p. 20. i, 28, p. 20. li, 3, 20, I 

II, 7, p 5. 

29. Bamayana; Uttarakhanda cvii, 
31, p 34 

31 Varaha Pur5,na ; cxxiv, 4, p 51 
cxxiv, 36, p 51 ‘ CXXIV 65, p. 
51 cxxvi, 1, p 51 

32. Visnu P-urS-na ; I, ix, 72 — 73, p 
76 I, XIX, 9, p. 34 I, XX, 16, 
p 4, 5 I, XX, 17, p. 5. I, XX, 
20, p. 8 I, XX, 27, p 75. I, 


Befrence. 

xxii, 2, p. 78. Ilj.iii, 5, p. 64 
II, VI, 29, p. 56. li, iv, 32, 33, 
p. 55, 57. II, vi, 34, p. 57, 60. 

II, vi, 35, p*. 57, II, xvi, 22, p. 

72. Ill, vi, 21, p 70. Ill, "vi, 

34, 35, p. 57. Ill, vii, 3, p. 54, - " 

III. vii, 14, p. 34. Ill, vii,‘ 16, 
p. 54. IV, iv, 4, p. 9. IV, xi, 2, 
p. 39. IV, XV, 12, p. 9. V, xiii, 

22, p 6, 16. V, xviii, 22, p. 34. 

VI, vii, 10, p. 59. VI, Yiii, 27, 
p. 56. 

33. Vedanta Sutra: I, i, 1, p 23. 

. 1, 1, 2, p 71. I, i, 3, p. 61. I, i, 

7, p, 7. I, 111, 26, p. 62 III, 
lii, 44, 4 q . p 17. IV, i, 3, p. 

25. 

34. Sakimtalfi . Act iii, p. 10. 

35 Svetclsvatara Upani§at : iii, 8 p. 

8 IV, 10, p. 31 vi, 18, p. 4. 

VI, 23, p 19. 

36 Sadvimsa Brahmana . in, 18, p* ^ 

'75. '' 

37. Skanda Pui&na . Krisikhand.a : 
xxxvii, 181, p. 40 

38' Samkhya Kaiika • Kaiika 3, p. 

37, 

39. Siddhanta SIuktaA ali Page 9, 

p. 80. 

40 Untiaced ; Agama, p 75. Pur&na 
Pill ana, p. 47 13. Pura'na, 

p 47 Smriti, p 47. Siuti, p. 

72 Sriiti, p 73. Teachers, p. 

13 Text, p 52 Text, p. 53. 
Text, p. 55 Text, p 59. 


‘ . f 


--4 



ADjymoj!, s aHv coRnncTiOi S 


Page 

Line 

For 

Bead 

2 

So 

XIV, 6 9 

XIV, 6 S 

3 

3 

VI. 2 

VI, 11. 2 

ji 

6 

111 14 

III, xn, 2 

4 

42 


1 

6 

16 

^ 13 ^ 

V, sill, 22 


43 

II xxiii 2 

11, ZSlll, 1 

8 

3 

go to Gods 

go to ibe Gods 


3 

13 

23 

9 

31 

11.7 

II, Til, 1 

H 

3 

(footnote) 

lioowldge 

knowlodgo 

14 

1 

tincondiiiooa 

Uneonditionnl 

i« 

IS 

%iii 24 

Vir, XIV, 2 

IS 

top 

Cliaptor ir 

Lccinre n 

16 

18 

13 

22 

17 

13 

as montionod bclore 

ns mentioned before, tinder 

tl 

fa 


I 1, 5 


(footnote) 

mnniioncd 

mentioned 

}r 

22 

(footnote) 

Sairam 

SOtrnm 

19 

17 

17 

15 

30 

31 

a^sociatio 

association 

32 

14 

Ml 

XII 

23 

26,27 

protion 

portion 

24 

8 

mind 

mind 

» 

33 

oinseoE m 

onnso of 

23 

34 

bogiDiiing 

begjoDiog with 

26 

21 

11 2 ... 

1.1 

28 

18 

Cbhftndogja Gpaniait 

Oiibnndogyn Upanisat, III, 

» 

38 

Brihai Aranjxka Upnnifat 

XIV, 2 

Brihat Aranpha Upani§iar, 


39 

JbtJ 

IV, lii, 7 

Jbid ,^1I, 111, 6 

30 

2 



31 

2 

Prak itL — » 

Praknti 

1> 

23 

SamparSjnt m 

Sampar&y^^fc 

}> 

33 

111 19^ 

sill, 20 

32 

29 



U 

7 

51S=aSi ^ 



8 

xiTsriT awsrT 

xretWT 

39- 

23 

\t, 9 

4 

40 

12 

ommonce 

eminence among the 1 fsnis 

44 

19 

111, 18 

III, XTtll, 1 

46 

12 

Tvrx 



27 

57 1 

57 58 



86 


tage. 

Line. 

For. 


Read. 

48 

32 

IX,' 35 

• •• 

ix, 25. 

49 

31 

Nrismha 

t « • 

Nrisimha. 

• f. 

51 

-36 

x\v 

• • • 

cxxv. 


42 

QKXVl 

• • • 

cxxiv. 

52 

33 

wolks, because 

• • • 

works, and because. 

53 

36 

Bi^hmana ... 

• • • 

BiAhmanas. 

• ) 

41 

48 

■ • • 

46. 

41 

21 

19 

* • 

29. 


36 

... 

• •• 


56 

1,2 

I, vii, 9 

«•» 

VT, viii, 27. 

57 

2 

(footnote) 

Thuu 

• • • 

Thus. 


4 

ma 

• • • 

man. 

3 7 

49 

10 

Is 

• • • 

is 

50 

16 

rTr^mnr^m ... 

• • • 

rTr^SITSTrgT^ 

65 

9 

Pindva " ... 

• • » 

Pandava. 

• • 

• 4 

41 

which invisible 


which is invisible. 

77 

67 

^3-34 

Fioin the pervadingness 

From the pervading prin- 

68 

23 

of the pervaded (pi oceeds 
creation). 

VI, 2 

ciples (proceeds ci cation 
of the peivaded. 

VI, ii, 3. 

70 

29 

pratiavainar^a 

• • • 

piati-a\amarsa 

71 

38 

Aphi isms 

• • • 

Aphorisms. 

72 

15-2116 

“ All this veiily is 

Brail- 

“ All this veiily is Brah- 


■iS 


man, nothing maniEold is 
here.” Upanisat, III, xiv, 1). 

ChhSndogya Upanisat, " Nothing manifold is here” 
iii, 14. (Katha Upanisat, iv, 11). 

33 ... ..I 3 


• t • 


* • • 


3 


THE 


BHAKI'I-RATNAViLI 


WITH 

THE COUMENTABY OP VISNO POHl" 


Txanwatsd »i 

A. B 


Fvatasgo BT 

XBE FAIStZSi OFmOSt BSUVANSarfARt ABBiMil SABADVBOAN^, 

BllabsbaD 

PslNTED BT E H UABE, AT THS CSlTT Fltmi Au AHAIUD 

1918 




I N T B 0 D tJ 0 T 1 0 N 


The reader trill ^nd in this book the presentation ot tbesnbjeotoC Bhakti an 
a jpopnlar form The tim^um on Vaisnava Bhakti Sftstm is the Srtmad- 
^oftgaTatii The reader baTiog been initiated into the aubjeot of Bhakti 
in the abstract in the Bdtras, irili here find ate apphoation to £be deroUon io 
Vienn and to His great manifestations (avatiras) and to the VaisnaTa samts 
vho bare become one with Him 

Vi^no means the Pervader Vifnn has many cthaie^—^d Vlsndeva* 
is one of thenu Noir Vdsndeva may be derived from srafH eirsr or vaffer snfkt 
plus ^ vhmmrt that is» the Shining One who pervades 
the nniverse and is therefor^ synonymons with Visnu It also means the 
son of yasadera-^-the avaUra of Vunn in the Dvftparn Vnga-^he friend of 
thePdndavas the Seer (Yogeswara) who revealed tne GIU| the statesman 
who gotded his partv to snccess , the Qmqne fignre who commanded reiereoce 
even from elderly heroes of the Ivamkaetm leaders of the hostile party^ anoh 
as Bhismo, Hrona in whom fnendu placed implicit trust , devotees wholes 
hearted loie 

The Bhaga>ata chieflr deals with the devotion to Vfisudeva as the 
OwAparo mcnniation of Vifna Vet the first^mentioned coDDolaiion of 
VAsndevn finds support in the very Bb&^vata wbioh states that NArada 
imparted the VAsudeva mantra to Hhrarat who lived in the TretA Yaga, 
long anterior to the birtli of VA*ndeva of the PwApara Yoga ; 

'Tsifc k>wa wrxy*^ aV vmimg ^avswsrm *io 'acc^'t Vne 

term to mean both Visna and bis manifestation as the son of Yasndeva in the 
PvApara Yoga, leaving the olioioe to the devotees to worship Him whatever 
aspect they prefer , , 

* Compare Mahaliliaita. 

iBllsw ’nf wtWlT wwrni « lU ii 
> y pn fif anr ; ftwg pw vtmriiftf i 

W «Tf ^ (I 

Tn P mnroht i wmitw n tv, p 
»1S wf iSmBTtr fPTPTfir jtct ptwj i 
PT 




mfnoDucTiOAt ^ 


11 


The Bh&gavata is a bulky work confaining 18,000 versos o£ long and 
short measures. The raison d’ 6tre o£ the Bhfi.gavata "waa according to the 
Vaisnavas that in the j&IahUbhdrata, Vydsa, its author, had omitted 
the treatment of Bhakti, and it was to make up that want that ho brought 
out that, great work for the benefit of humanity. But though the tone and 
subject of Bhakti run throughout prominent the bulk is made up of narratives 
of the several incarnations of.Visnu, of Kings of the Solar and the Lunar lines, 
philosophical disquisitions, geography of the world, and multifarious matter«. 
It IS encyclopediac in its treatment of many subjects Its language and style is at 
places 'uncommonly 'difficult. 'So both on account of its size and its erudite 
character, the work is not suited to the geneial readei who has his worldly 
occupations and has little leisure to go through that bulky tone ‘ 

A Sanyfisin of Tirhut by the name of Visnu Pin i ' made a selection of 
verses from the Bh&gavata and gave to his anthology the name of Bhakti- 
ratnRvali. i He also vviote a commentary on the same and called it Kfinti- 
mfila. The ■'text and commentary in the piescnt edition is based on a 
■ manuscript which bears the date of Sambat 1699.*' It is,,thereEoie. ol'd years 
oldi It is written m beautiful Nfigari dial acter, and the papei and ink show 
how thb caligraphists of those daj'Si prepaied their enduiing materials of writing. 

. All that^^Vianii Pori says of himself is that he was a Sany&bi and that 
he was a native of Tirhut. Wo find mention of him in the Bhaktam&la of 
I^dbhap. Nfi-bli&ji lived in the 17 th century.t Visnu Puri mufet hove lived 
long befoie him so as to have established his name as «in auiho r and Bhuktu 
sufficiently eminent to have seemed a place in the Bhaktamfila. 

’ 5 There is a story ^ current among some ot Bengal Vaisiiavas that (jhaitan}{i 
Leva 'of Nadia and Visnu Puii met at Kasi, while the former was on his v>ay 
b'ack from' his pilgrimage to Vrindftvan. It was natural .they should have 
been charmed with eagh other. Chaitanya by the Bhakti and learning ot 
Vispu Puri and Visnu Puiiby the spiritual grandeur and the personal magnetism 
of the prophet of Nadia. - Chaitanya returned to Bengal and subsequently became 
a permanent resident of Jagannttth PuiS. The" report that has been handed 
down is that a pilgrim, a disciple of Vispu Puri, went from Kfisi to Puri 
and met Chaitanya to whom he communicated the greetings ot , Visnu Puri. 
At the time of the visitor’s departure from Puri for Kfisi he enquired if he had 
any message to impart to, or any request to make of Visnu Puri .In the 
presence of the assembled Vaifnavas, Chaitanya asked the departing pilgrim to 
tell Visnu Pun to send him a Hatnd.v'ali (a necklace of gems). The sfidhus 
present there were astonished to hear this lequest' proceeding from a man who 
had renounced the luxuries of the world. But - they, had not the boldness to 

® Bhakbam&la is a well koowa Hiodi.woik coqtainiog notices o£ Vaisnava 
saintr, and Bhahtas. 

tirfe ir‘«r S WTuI' ' 

^ wnsi; % THrT 1 

- U >TfR mHT H ’ 

t See Du. Gtieraon’g " QUanlags Itow t&e BhaUtiiro^la,” Journsl of the Royal Aiiatic- 
Society of ie09, p. 607, ^ 



l^'Ttt0DV(^10j^ 




qdestion him for Tvliai he had done rime elapsed and then fill of a sudden onco 
again came back tho pilgrim from Kdsi and presented *i packet to Chaitanya 
saying that Visnn Puri had made to him this present of a necklace pf gems 
tbkt he had Viunted ^he pocKut turned oat to be the manuscrept' of, tlie 
Bhahtiratn&valt Xho Vaisnai a assembly who had been before annoyed with 
Chaitimya for Uiia request which was unworthy of a Taisnara leader now found 
eut*iheir mistake Ihe} were o\er]o\ed to find that their Fiopbet had simply 
sentia message of inspiration which yisna Pnrl properly understood and carried 
oni ihe behest of his honoured friend ThislScckHce of l)c^otioa,^Chaitan}*a 
placed at the foot of fTagannltliji ' ‘ ^ 

^ Xbere IS aiiother story It is to tho effect that JaganniUiji had directed 
Visnu Pur! by means of a dream to make the compilation whidi tho learned 
Bhakta did and personal!} presented at tho temple of Jagannfitb * ^ 

If we accept the formci stor} then Visnii Puri lived in the 15th ceiitnry 
of ihe Sftka era, for Chaitanya wi* born in 1407 S&ka era (1407<)>78 A J>) 
The date given at tlie end of the Bengali edition as n footnote that tho writing 
was finished at Kdsi in las') S&ki er*t (25554*78 AD) nny ha\o been (he date 
of the finishing of the cop} of the work by u copyist who, following ihoicustom 
am6ng copyists, ga^e tho date of his finishing the copying That couplet states 
that the work sras w ritten in Kfisl That tho book was composed in Kfisi Bnds 
strength in a personal statement at tlie end of ibe work [sloka Ko 3 at the end of 
tho 13th String, p 142) Here the coinmentitpr who is no other than Visnu Purl 
himselC, says tost he was a that is one far away from his nail} place, 

unknown to ins neighbours he could only Jiaio stated while living in the 

midst of strangers, m n place where he liad protebly newly settled and had not 
yet established a reputation which the BlnktiratnAval! hid latter!} earned for 
him ‘ ; 

It is an laterstiug fact to note that ma} Sao}nA5i8 to who«e names ate 
appended ihe surnames of Purl, Gin, Sonswatv 4o,4c,<^ll belonging to 
the order of Sanyfisis founded by Sanknr&chrr}a and who are generally given id 
ibe study of Veddnia of the Adwaita Sohool-^should have de>oted themselves 
to Bhakti mdrga I And Visnu Fnrl.was not a solitary example of a Sanydsis 
pursuit of ^Bbakii Prakdsdoanda Saras>rati, a oontemporar} of Chaitonya 
0eva, was a zealous follower of tho Path of Bbakti t 

It is also interesting to find that Kdst though renowned among the 
Hindus as ai\a purl (the City oC 8n:a), was the a^lntn of e>en Vaifpaia Saints 
as is evident from the life of the gnat Tulasl Dd^u, the author of the 
Bamd} apa m Hindi, who passed his latter } ears at Kdsi Kdsl for ages past being 
tho seat of learning has attracted scholars and saints of ever} school of thoi^ht 
Kdst bas ever been oosmopolitan and not exolusivel} local or provincial from 
times of yoro ’That' Bnddha should have commenced preaobmg his religion at 
Kdsi takes the oosmpolitan character of Kdst to 2 500 years back 

To resumo ihe question oE ihe date of Visuu Puri Tho learned editors 
of the Calcutta edition have taken pains to show tint ho lived before the time 
of Chaitanya«~nay, tboybave given a gdnealogical table to show that Vigmi 
Puri was the disciple of one Jn }0 Hlnrma who belonged to tho Vannava School 
of M'ldhvachdrv i And tliat Chaltanva wi<* the 7lh m the order i of sneoe^sjoQ 



IV ‘ 


JA'TJWJJUCTIOA\ 


o£ discipleship ' £rom Jay.-^ Dhanna. Tins lakes bun a couple o£ centnrie'' 

“^heEore ChaUanya, roughly speaking. The mention o£ Visnu Puij' by Ka\i 

^Karnapuri, a contemporory o£ ChailanjM also militates against the date given 
m the colophon mentioned above The exact d.ite theiefore remains unsettled. 
Jt raav be safely said that he lived either befoie or at the time oE Chaitanya. 

Abotit his h£e, the tiadition is that he was a learned Bn'ihmaiia who 
first led the h£e oE a householder and had a w i£e and children. But the 
irascibility oE temper oE his wdfo was too much for him and he left home 
donning the garb oE a Sanyasi. All the entreaties of his penitent wife and 
friendly neighbours weie of no avail to bring him back to his home. He 

^ wandered and then settled at a locally tamous sin ino o£ Sivu some sixteen mile^ 
from vthe capital towm ot Mithilfi. Here he had a dream and acting On it 
resumed householdei’s life not by going back to his old home but by marrying 
a'second time and becoming the father of children by this second wife. This 
conduct of Visnu Puri can only be justified by the command he is said to have 
received Erom S'iva in his dream. Hindn STistias and Hindu Society deem it a 
violation of religious injunction for a Sanjusi to legume ihc litc of a householder. 

It is also said that in the same dream in which he was diicctcd to entei 
the life of a householder he leceived the (constituted of tw’elve letter*;) 

Visnu mantia and which was perhaps the turning-point to his Bhaktimarga and 
which resulted subsequently in the piep'aiatiou of this anthology ^rom the 
Bh&gavata 

The Visnu Bhakti teaching, as contained in thi*. anthology may not 
necessarily be confined foi •> exolusii o Vaisnava use INftma (name) and Hfipa 
(fotm) is unessential and changeable Substitute any term denotative of the 
X)ei(y--i-in His many aspects of Father, Mother, Creator, Pieserver and 
Destroyei, the Remover ot daikness, the Reinovci of evils, obstructions, &c., &c , 
and the anthology, wdion the needful changes aie made, will not tail to be of 
use to the Bhakta of anv Coim ol the Dnmitv m monldiii" his mind into , a 
devotional mood , 

Hence the anthology though sectarian in one sense, is catholic in anothei 
as subset ving the end of devotion to the DiMnitj. The Bhakti which the 
Bhigavata inculcates is a sort of A^edfintic Bhakti — to com a now’ phrase. 
That is to say, the Jiva as Bhakta and Vifnu as the goal of the Bhakta to which 
the latter is approaching may not be perpetually distinct from one anothei. It 
he chooses, the Bhakta remains eternally in his status of a devotional Jiva. But 
union w’ith the Divine is also his' privilege and can be realised if he prefers to 
take to it. But, according to the Bli9.gavatas, their saints piefer the other way, 
leading to perpetual devotion and not to absorption. Or, as popularly put, the 
Bhakta wants to be the eater of sugai and not to be sugai itself Opinions 
differ on this point. If to be is to be likened, to the condition o£ ineit 
sugar— sweet to the eater of it but not to itself — then the Veddntist will 
demur to aeqept this interpi etation. The voiy designation of of the 

Supreme Being discards such a notion, that absorption into ‘ It ’ would lead 
the Jiva to be merged into an entity m which there is no consciousness of Anand. 
Like linos of an asymptote that nevei meet — apiiioach though they may 
eternally to meet the other — the Jiva can never get at Brahma is the cult of 
the Dualist But the Srimad Bhtigavata in more than one place quotes the 

Srpti ^ deferentially and loans to the Vedantio teaching ofc 


hs TJioituorjOuS 


tbo Vedto Maha\ak)tts Uu 6 , on the atlioi lundyit rejects (ho putb of him* 
lodge to reach the goal ft preferx (ho (nth of dovotioii And it prefers to 
moulcato that the J!va (the inonid) n ih< hippier uho roiimins eicr distinct 
from the God he norships though the priulogo of idnorption into Him is xMthiii 
Ins power llm pruilegc thodnalnl^ dcii\ to (ho /iimi Hence (he statement 
made nlmo that ihc Bluikti of the llhHga\‘af i !•» Vcdaiitm t e non dn ihstic 
Vaispayn? that out of (ho ocean of ihi milk ol (he >edas the hotter 
of Bhaktijias Lcen churned out h^ them 7 hc Karrriu K undo portion of the 
Vedas containing 'the ritnalutio ordinance'* for i he performance of sacrihcts 
lor the attamiiicnt of particular hocus ht offering icriticc^ to the canons deitiod 
hearing the names of fiidri, \211ana, Ime hceii openly condemned hv the 
S$riniad Bhagaaaita Of conr»u there is the ntion iliitic School of \ edio infer* 
pretations and there is an iinportniit Mict tlmt has reucntl} iiri^eii trbo&e followers 
accept that interpretation, ri« tint tlio xarions gods mcutioncd aro realty the 
naino ofonePaiaincH^aru mid that do\otioii to Him 1 (heir religion 

Tbo Bhfigaiata discards tlio Kariiu KaiidM mid tlio tacriticLS to tlio 
VodiGgods, and says there 1 one Supreme i<*nu or \ nsudmu to whom 

de>otion is to bo given for d< \otion s nkc nnd not for in itor1.1l gams and per- 
aooal hciichtq 

Not content \utli discirding the iiiiuh tic ordinmci of thi \talj , the 
Bbdgaaata gives u lower po itioii to tbe philosophic'il d^qiu itions of the t}|Miiii* 
'Olds, m comparison nith the doutriiie el doofion ltM>s prutticall^ to one 
and nil*-** Accept V(H(in(V(lando^a orati) other mimfo*ta(ioiHol Iliiii)us}out 
Oispon«ei of good and worship Him mtesMiitl) mid tittflmohiiigK Don't nsk 
aiiv reward from Uini— 'if uiu, at ill ask the gift of Doiotion to Uiiii 

This iJ or }ia\mg no «>clli>h end for flio Bluikfi 

tbe devotees offer ut the fuel of Iho land itioro i» no cominorcial spirit 
of barter in which the dootcc giica Bhakti to the Lord in expectation of 
tbo good things of the wairld 

Tbo spmt of ^ gno and lake* )» uondunuul both m the Ctli& and tbo 
Srlmad Bhdga«ala both of wliii,h ha' 0 raised tlioir >oica against tho Karma 
hands of the Vedas, where Aacriflee arcoidaincd foi the attainment of the 
]o' s of earthly and hoai en]> life 

SBCr/OK JI 

BhAMI dllllGA IhDZOLVOO»->*\01 OF hORLlON XlU>O1 1 
Ihe question inai non la* disoussod whether the religion of Bhakti is 
of indigenous growth or imported from outside ‘ 

Ulie ambrosia of the Gita has boon churned out of tho U(janisads So 
ays a panegyrist of tlio i^ritft Ilio Vatfna'ai view also is that tho Bhakti* 
m&rga is the butter churned out of tho ocean of tho milk of tho Veda That 
Bhakti mArga is of indogenous growth is the accepted view of all Hindu 

But s toice has been raised against this aiew So long ago as 187 a 
tbo October issue of the Indian Antiquary ' published a paper with tho 
heading ** Traces m tlie Bhagavad GiU of Cliristian writings and ideas 

* Whs it to intii the table upon M Xitmle JaooUete'a speenUtionB iu liie * 1 a 
B ible Dane L Inde * wbeie the Freaob writer endeavours to prove the Hindu 
orii^lu of Hebrew aud Ghiiatiati UeveUUuut that Dr fjoriueei (lied (o dlsedvSv 

traces lu the Bhegrud 6iU of Ohnsttsa writiugi and ideas ? i 



Jl^TBOJjUCTlChW 


VI 


This papei is a ropioduction oL the .ippeiuliv to 13i Loiiii'-or’*' Bh.iga\a(l (Jiia. 

Therein the learned Geiman Orientalist produced in paiallel columns writing'^ 
i'roin the Bhagavad Gitft and the Now To'stanionl which hoar roniarkablo 
ibseinblanco in sense and ‘^piuL l)i. Loi nisei Ihon ondoa\oui'> lu show tha* 
early Christian apostles and nussionauos MSI tod India and the doclnno of laith 
and monotheistic worship wa< introdiied into India In their agency. Thi** 
view fcound support among •'Onie influential i-ontemporaiy Jhiiopean <)iicntalist''. 

But a nolo oE dissent came Cioni an unexpoctod rjiiaitoi That indofatigahlo 
1 woiker in the lield oL >Sanskiit studies who-o ltihoui«- lm\e done ‘•o much to help 
' European >.cUolar< with ahuiuhnt supph ol mutuiiab to woik on them — the 
ooinpilei ot the fi\o ^olllmC'> of Ouginal .San‘«ki it Texts — Dr. John Muir — 
w’hose .iiiiecodents in In^ia wcio chaiactoiiiCMl 1)\ tho <pint ol a Uhrlstian 
missiohaiy and theiol’oio* not pro-Hindu hi ought out m 1870, a volume of 
‘•Metiical Tianslations fiom iSanskut wiiteis’’ and piclKcd to it a lengths 
and learned introduction Theiein he di5cns«cd the •suhjoct ol Dr. Loriiibors 
p'apci ill the •* Indian Autiquaiy’ lereiied to ahoio To summaiisc w'hat he 
‘said theie wrould not ho adequate licalment ol lii-j learning and labour. Thoic- 
tore it IS desiieablo in the inteiest oL I'liiphn that the an**wer to Dr. Loiinsoi 
he leprodueed and it will bo found iii an appcniJiv to thi-s Introduction. 

Tho gieatoi is the rea‘«oii to neat thi«> suhjet at length hccau-.o oL late, 
Di. Giiorson has i ohow’ed the question and lent tho Mippoitof his repute a-s 
a linguist and antiquaiian to the mow that tho Bliakti-mfii g.i of tho Hindus i« 

- due to Christian apostles and missionai ICS St. Thoma^ in tho early century 
of the Cluistian oia established a bettlcmcnt ot Syiinn Christians in South 
India These Christian settlers made ooiueits and tho path of doiotion took 
firm hold among tho Dravidians Tho gi eat toundors of modem Vai^nai ism 
lose in the South and then teachings -.pread latei m tho North ol India. So 
modem Yaisnavism is due to St. Thomas and hi*, lollowors This is the pith 
of Dr. Giieisoii’s paper 

Not that Di Grioiaoii can quote chaptci and lerse loi the claim ho makes 
toi St. Thomas and his mission. But he points to the missionai y tradition 
based on vague repoi ts ot old Christian winters, and that is enough to build 
upon it the startling thooiy that Bhakii in India is of foreign and post-Chrislian 
origin. 

When 111 India studying the Rfiraayana of Tulsidas, Dr. Giierson’s 
admiiation and leveience foi tho Hindu poet and lus hoi o ot tho Rflmayana 
led his Hindu teaclieis, collaboratours and assistants behove that the great 
European Scholar had become a convert to the teachings of Bhakti of Tulsidas. 
They will he now disillusioned to find it stated that Tulsidas’s Bhakti is onl}* 
a, reflection ot Christian teachings and that thou old Anglo-Indian friend is 
the powerful advocate of this view. They might w'cll exclaim ‘ Et tu BruteB 

Dr Grieison read his paper in a meeting of the Royal Asiatic Society. 
The pioceedings are printed in the (1907) April number of the Journal ol 
the Society. Several members of Jthe Society — Dr. Pope, Me'?srs Kennedy 
and Keith — controverted his views in important points. 

Recent discoveries of ancient insciiptions go to show' that V&sudeva was 
worshipped before the Christian eia.. One lemarkable find is the dedication of 
a flagstaff with an image of Gar uda dt the top in honoui ol Vasudeva w’Hch 


ISmODtOTlON 




was ^reotod by a Greek ambassador of the namo of Holiodoras, a resideiti of 
Toksasila That a. cnltnred Greek holding ihe position of an ambassador, 
should dedicate a (dagsiaS of Gamda) to V&sndeva is oodo^sItc 

evidence of Ae predommant place Bhagavdn Vftsndeva held ;n the second 
century before Christ 

^Worship pre supposes Bhakti The discoveries of such inscriptions whoso 
date precedes the birth of Christ should stop ^e mouth of Dr Gnerson and ’ 
all others who have assigned a Christian origin to the path of Bfaaktis 

There can be no question now that Bhokti m&rga existed in India before 
the religion of Ohnst came in existence To repeat at intervals of short and 
long penods the'old story of 8t Thomas m posting Bhakti m South India 
and its spread towards the North are vain attempts to give life to an exploded 
theory ^ Lei Dr Grierson prove that these disoovenes of insonptions by 
offioids who serve under the Go^rnment of India are so many forgeries of 
Brdhmans or let him accept their genumenoss As he has not yot denied^ 
thoir genuineness, lei him revise his views and mal e a confession of his errors 

The igooianoo which some European Christian missionaries at times betray 
is ridioulous A well known Christum missionary, the head of a great ednoa 
tional institution m the United Provinces affiliated to the Allahabad Umversiiy 
18 reported to have belittled the antiquity of the Gtt& m the be'iring of bie 
pupils saying it was wiitten in the timo of Akbar, the Moghol Emperor of 
Delhi Does he know that the Gitd. is mentioned in the E&dambari (p 90,^ 
Peterson’s Edibon) of V&iui Bhatta who fiourished in the seventh century*' in 
the Court of a Hindu King who patronised the celebrated Ohmese 
Buddhist traveller, Hiouon Tsang, whose stay m India was &om 628 to 648 
AD? Does ho know that Kfemendra of K&so^tr who lived in the lOtb 
century A D has reproduced the prominent portions of the Gltft xn his Bhftrata 
lUafijorl (Epitome of the Bh&raia) ? And if the opinion of that prodigious 
sobolaiv-the late Air Hanoalh Da of the Imperial Library, Oalontia— is o£ 
any account, the age of the G!t& is to be taken to a very early period He 
spoke to the Editor of the Saored Books of the Hindus that toe Glik was 
mentioned in a Cbmeso work which was written two hundred years before 
Cbnst The intended translation into English of the Chinese work has un- 
fortunately remained nnacoomphshed by the lamented death of that great 
’ Bengalee linguist 

But the Hindu pupils of the Cbnsiam Missionary Pnnoipak in iheir 
Ignorance, were misled by bim and until they read me refutation of their 
Principal’s statement, they will carry into their head the incorrect statement 
more to them by that Doctor of Divmiiy 

The poet K&hdCtsa uses the epithet of Krisna os an incarnation of visnn lu 
tho garb of a cowherd * 

A Hindu scholar has to keep a watchful eye upon such Missiouai^ asser- 
bons as given the above belittling the antiquity of their sacred literature and 
tboir religion And let him have the publio spirit to expose their mcorrootness* 
os mnch as he can Misrepresentation had their day The day of refutations 
has come and the history of the Sacred Literature of the Hindus has to be 
re-wntten by Hindus themselves i, 

^Ibe epithef oocnra lu the Meqhadnta TT^TTf^r^T^ tffc 

oooura in Baghuvaosa It is therefore clear that both Bama^ and Krisna wire 
worshipped ae incarnations of Visnu at the tune of K&Iiddsa 



J]^TR0J)VCT10^\ 


4l 

n 


This paper is a repioduction ot the .ippeiuliv to Di Loiiti'or'** Biiaga\ad (ritu . 
Therein the learned Grerman Orieniahst piodiiced m pai.illol columns writing;'- 
from the BhagaAad Hjin ami the New Testamenf winch hear remarkable 
ibseinblanco in sense and ^pna Di. liOiinsoi then ondcavouis to show that 
early Christian apostles ami nnssionarios visileil India and the dootriuo of laith 
and monotheistic worsliip was mtiodued into India In their agcnev. This 
view found support among some influential tontoinpoiary KuropcairOiicntahst- 

But a note of dissent came fiom an um*xp'*cted qnaitoi. That imlelatigablo 
woiker in the lidd ot iSamkrit studies whose lahoui* Iia\e done so much (o help 

European scholais nith abumhiU -upph oi mateiiah to v.oik on them the 

oompilei oh the fi\o \olumcs of Origmal-Saiiskiit Toms— -Di. .lohn IMuir 

wdiosc aiuecedcut:, in Iii^iu wcie eliaractei ised In tlie «piiit of a Ciuisfian 
missionary and theieibio' not pro-Umdiu brongUrout in a volume of 

‘•Metrical Tianslations fioni Sanskrit wiifois'* and piotixed toitalen^tln 
and learned introduction Tlioioin lie di‘;eus<ed the snhject of Dr. Lorintcr s 
papei in tlic •• Indian Antiquary' leleiiod to above To summarise what li“ 
•said theie would not be adequate lieatment ol bn leainmg and labour. There- 
fore it is desneablo m the interest ol I mplav (bat tlio aiuwei to Dr. liOiinsQr 
be leprodueed .md it will be found m an appendix to ibn Intiodnction 

The gi eater IS the leason to neat ihn subjet at length became ol kite, 
Di. Grierson has loflew'cd the question and lent the support of his leputo .i« 
a linguist and .antiquaiiaii to tlie mow that the Bhakti-margu of the Hindus i< 

• due to Christian apostles and missionaues St. Tlioma.s in the early century 
of the Christian era established a settlement oh Syrian Christians in South 
India These Chi i&tiaii settlers made oonveit<! and tho path of devotion took 
firm hold among the Uiavidiaus. The great louiulors of ihodoin Vaisnav ism 
lose m the South and then teachings spread later in the North of India. So 
modem Vaismuism is due to St Thomas and his follow eis. This is the pith 
of Di. Gael son’s papei * 

Not that Dr Griorsou can quote clniptei and veise loi the claim ho makes 
toi St. Thomas and liis mission. But he points to the missionary tradition 
based on vague lepoits oL old Christian wi iters, and that is enough to build 
upon it the startling tlieoiy that Bhakti in India is of Loreignand post-Christian 
origin. 


When in India studying tlie Bamayaua of Tulsidas, Di. Griersons 
admiiatmn and reveieuce foi the Hindu poet and lus lieio of the Bamdyana 
ted his Hindu teachers, collaborateurs and assistants believe that the great 
European Scholar had become a convert to the teachings of Bhakti of Tulsidac. 
Ihey will he now disillusioned to find it stated that Tulsidas’s Bhakti is only 
a - reflection ot Christian teachings and that their old Anglo-Indian fiiond is 
the powerful advocate of this view. They might w'cll exclaim ‘ Et tu Brute'^ 

^ paper « meeting of the Royal Asiatic Society. 

number ot the Journal ol 

an<1KS!h^' Seveial members of ;the Society— Dr Pope, Me-^-^rs. Kennedy 
nd iveith controverted his view's in important points. 

worsWed^ inscriptions go to show that Vasudeva was 

a flawsteffi -with ^ Christian ei a.. One lemaikable find is the dedication of 

aflagstaftwithanimageofGarudaatthe top in honoui ol' Vfisudeva which 



introdVotioa 


was preoiod by a 6reo]>. ambassador of ibe namo of Holiodoras, a resident of 
Xa^sila Thai a onlinred Grook holding* the position of an ambassador, 
shonld dedicate a ’nwnsrr (flagstaff of Gam^a) to Vflsndova is oonolnsiTO 
evidence of fte predominant place Bhagavfln Vftsndeva bold in ibo second 
centnry before Christ 

Worship pre-sapposes fihakti Tho discoveries of snob ineonptions whoso 
date precedes the birth of Christ shonld stop tho month of Vr Grierson and 
all others who have assigned a Christian origin to the path of Bhaktis 

There can be no qncstion now that B&kti m&rga existed in India before 
the religion of Christ came m existence To repeat at intervals of short and 
long periods the old story of St Thomas m posting Bhokti m Sooth India 
and its spread towards tho Korth are vam attempts to give life to an exploded 
theory , Let Dr Gnerson prove that those disoovonos of insonptions \ij 
officials who 8or\o under the Government of India are so many forgeries of 
Brflbmans or let him accept their geuninenoss As ho has not yot domed 
tboir genninoness, lot him revise fais vmn a and in i! o a confession of bis errors 

The ignorance which some Bnropoan Christian missionaries at times betray 
IS ridicnlons A well known Christian missionary tho head of a great ednoa 
tional msiitntion m the United ProMnees affiliated to tho Allahabad University 
15 reported to hivo belittled tho antiqaity of tho Glia in tho hearing of his 
pnpfls saying it was written in tho timo of Akbar, tho Moghnl Emperor of 
Eolfai Poos ho know that tho Gftfl is montioncd in tho IC&dambarl (p 90, 
Ipeterson^a Edition) of V&na Bhatta who flonrishod m tho sovonth contnry in 
ibo Conrt of a Hindu King who patronisod tlio oolobrated Chinese 
Baddtust imvoller, Hionon Tsang, whoso stay m India was from 028 to 648 
A P ? Poes ho know that K^mondra of KAsmlr who lived m the XOtb 
contnry A P has reproduced tlio prominent portions of the Gltii in bis Bhftrota 
Mafljorl (Epitome of tlio Bhdrata) ? And if the opinion of that prodigious 
soholar^tho lato Mr Harmaih Po of tho Imporial Library, CbIoatta~>is of 
any aocount, tho ago of tho Gitft is to bo taken to a vory oarly period He 
spoke to the Editor of tho Sacred Books of tbo Hindus that the GitI was 
mentioned in a Qimeso work which was wntton two hundred years before 
Cbnsk ‘ The intended translation into English of tbo Chinese work has un- 
fortunately remained nnacoomplished by the lamented death of that groat 
^ Bengalee linguist 

But tho Hmdn pupils of the Chnstam Missionary Friooipals m their 
Ignorance, woro misled by him and until thoy read mo refaction of their 
Principalis statement, they will carry into their head tbo incorrect statement 
more to them by that Pootor of Divmity 

The poet KfilidHsa uses the opithet of Epsii’i as an incarnation of visnu m 
tbo garb of a oowherd * 

A Hmdn scholar has to keep a watchful eyo upon snob Missionary asser- 
tions as given the abovo belittling the antiquity of their sacred literature and 
their religion And let him have the public spirit to expose their mcorrootness' 
as muob as he can Misreproseniation had their day The day of refutations 
has come and the history of the Saored Literatnro of the Hindus has to bo 
re wntten by Hindus themselves » t 

* The epitbet sftueliiifu ^nnft oocors lu tlie Megbadota TTffTfJpinsfi’ 
oooars in BagUnvansa It* u Iberefore clear that both Rama^ and Erisna wire 
wonbipped as inoarnaiioDS of Visna at (be time of K&IidAsa 




' APPENDIX I. 

'Xvtracts from the Introduction to * Metrical Translations from< Sanskrit 

writers by DrI J* MtjiBj O.I.E., 'D.G.Di, XfXjiD>} Ps.'D« 

>■ 1,1 1 ( 1 .' 1 > , 

■ 4' no ■ ifr ^ 

i 

II lias bsan aappoBed tliafi ati inflaenoe has been'eseroised ou tbe religlouS'ideas 
of tbe Indians by tbe nitrodactiou of a knowledge of Oiuistianity into India in the > 
earltei centuries of our ei a This' has been argued at length iii regard to tbe 
“ Bbltgavad Git^” (a tbeosopbicul episode of Iba Mab&bliaiata), by Dr. Lorinser 
Triio in Uie Appendix to bis German tianslation of that vvoik/^ presents us with 
n collection of passages from ^be work in question, winch be regards' as borrowed 
from, or influenced by, tbe New Testament, and alongside uf which be places ihe 
texts which be regards as having exercised tins influeuoe, ' - ' 

# , « *!i » ' » 

‘ loiorder, it possible, to reach a solution of the problem propounded by Dr, 
Dorinser, three points.must be consideied ami settled; — tbe age of tbe Bbfl,ga-i 
vad Glt& ; 2ndly, wbetbei, supposing its antiquity not to be such as to gnaiautee its 
originality, any Christian docttiues could, at the date of its composition have been 
imported Into India and promulgated in hu oral or written form so as to be 
accessible, to, tbe autlioi, if bis mind was open to tbe.r reception , and Srdlt/, 
whether bis work, when compaied with the Olnistiaii Scriptuies, or doctrines, 
inapifests any such similar iiy to their ideas as to justify tbe supposition of their 
being borrowed, , 

9 ,,>1 ^ ^ 4^ <!» O * 

I ) 

> lu torraing an opinion on a qsestion of this kind, we should, supposing the* 
alleged reset'ablenoes to be admitted, cousider, flrsb, wiiutber the ideas, sentiments, 
or fjj^ures of speech supposed to be borrowed by the Indians from the West are 
riot such ns might naturally niise lu tbe human, or at least in tbe oriental mind, 
BBOO^idly, whether I bey oannut be traced, at least in gei m, in Indian writers of such 
nnliqnity as to exclude tbe supposition of foreign influmioe, thirdly, whether they 
do nob so peivade tbe Indian wiitiiigs ns lo be cianifesily indigenous and original ; 
foul tbly, whether tbe wiitings of any other countries, known to be independent of 
Obiistinn influences, contain ideas Of sentiments supposed to be exclusively or 
peculiarly Christian, and Bfbbly, what probability there is that tile Brahmans of 
tbe period in question could have been brought into contact 'with foreign ideas, 
and whether they would have beau intellectually aud moiully open to, and suscep- 
tible cf, suoli influences, 

* «■ ^ 

> ' ' I 

I veutuie to make tbe following remaiks on tins subject. Tbeie is, no doubt, 
a general, or perhaps I might say, a sti iking, resemblanoe between (be manner in 
wliioli KriSna asset ts bis oWu divine nature, enjoins devotion to bis person, and 
sets forth the blessing winch will result to bis votaries from sucli^ worship, on tbe 
one band, and, on tbe other, the strain in which tbe founder of Christianity is 
repiesented in tbe Gospels, and especially in tbe fourth, as speaking ot 'himself and' 
bis chums, and tbe redemption wlrjoh will folloW on their faithful' recognition. At 
tbe same time, the BbS.gavad Gila contains much that IS exclusively Indian in its 
Cbaracter, and which finds no counterpart in tbe New Testament doctrine. » 

» ' * It 

, 4 

It is also to be remarked, as another diffeieuce between tbe Christian and 
tbe Indian dcotiines, that while in tbe fourth Gospel Christ asserts bis oneness 
with the father (John x 30), and speaks of tbe Father as being in him, and of 

* Die Bhflgavad Gi*& ueberselzt nud eriSuteit von Dr F Lorinser, Breslau, 1869. 


fljitiiSBU liB being in the Fattier {XIV 10 11} be jst deolaves busseUllo be in somd 
tstoie distiDct from him «e being the Sou (v 19)| aft being sent into tbe world Pf 
the Father (z S6 , Zii 49) as having roseived of the Father the prerogative of 
f having life 10 himseif tv (26) and ae not doiot* onTthingof himSelf bnt doing the 
Father e Will (v SO) Wbereee in the Bhdgavnd Gita we €nd no reference to > any 
iBiRiiler relation eabstsliu^ between Efisna hnd nuj othei pereon in the godhead^ 
or 10 fact any reference to a dietinction Of peiaone in the godhead at all Bale 
represented as bimielf the Supreme Betlj In vit 6C heeaye ofi bimiielf "I am 
xthe generator and the deetioyer of (he entire nniveine Uhan me there Is iiothpig 
higher On me all thta noiverse la woven ne game on a string I am the flavour 
10 water, the light in the euu and moon d.e , and mix 4beBaya ** By^me) 
imperooptible in fori^ this universe le pet vaded for epioad ootP} All existenoee 
abide in me but I do not abide in tbein and yet they do not abide |in me t After 
EriSaaeOwn acoount of lumself Arjnna says X 12 ' Thou art the Supreme 
Brahma the highest eaeeoea (dd^mau) the eteioal divine Poroia tinborut all 
pervading*' ' 

1 * 1 # * e * * 

< Besides the BhAgavad Giiit there is another part of the hCaliAbharta to wblolt 
I wteh to refer as liuloo baa bean adduced to piove that a knowledga of OhriaSa 
mty existed (u India in the early cental lee of onr era—l mean the paesagee la 
Whtob the Sveta dvipa the white island (or eoulmeit) nod ita inhabitants ars 
referred to 

^ I * *' •;* • 

^ On tbe fleet of ihe^a passages legarding Bvela dvlpa Piofessor WeLor (la 
diaobd Stttdien i 400 IToteJ oailds the ooojeotnre that * Brahmans went by eae 
to Alexaudria or Asm Minor at the period when early Ohrietiaulty flouiteheil* 
and that oo their retoro home they itansferred the monotheielio dootrine and 
oeriaio legends oonusoked with it to their own lodigenone sage or bero Syisna 
Bevakl putra (sna of Oevakf the divine) who by Ins name romioded them of 
Obrietf the eon of the Divine virgin and who had perhaps been prevlonsly woV 
shipped a* a god , subatitnting however for the Oluistinn dootrineB the philoso 
pUmal priuciples of the Sflakhya and Toga sohoole aa the latter may, on the other 
diaod, have lofloenoed the formatioa of the Gnostio seels ^ i 

• * * » * > 

The views of Professor Weber above refened to, are disonssed by Professor 
lisssen in tlie second volume of hie Indiscbe AUecthumskunde, second edition pp 
Alls ff (1) He concars in the belief that eomo Brahmans beoame acquainted with 
Ohnstianiiy in some oottiitiy lying to tbe north of Tudia and brought homo some 
Obcietiaa dootriues Tiue he ooneidei e to be snpported (e) by tbe uame of Uie 
white island and tbe eoloar of Its lababitaiils, so different fiom that i of the 
ladiant * (b) by the ascription to ibese people of tbe worship of an nnseeo God, 
while the lodiana of the imme peiiod hod images of their deities (e)by the 
attribution to them o! faith (he efficiency of which la not an anoient Indtaa tenet « 
(d) by ibe value atfribnied to prayer whtohisaless important element 'in Indian 
than in Ohcistian rites utid (eJ by the foot (hat the docliine which they learned is 
described as one only mado known to (he Indians at a late period He holds it 
as the most likely suppositiou that PorUna was the oonniry where the Brahmans 
met with Ohiistian mtssjoiiaries (2l Profeasoi Iiaaseu thinks that (he piQoI d^wU 
ifrora the patsige about diva and bis four disciples referred to by Prof Weber (see 
above) in favonr of Uie sopposition of the presence of Ohristiau miesiooanes in Indie 
^rcste on no firm fonndntion and believes that tliis story owes tbs nrigin to the oilier 

^ * A Udrned Corcespondeat is of opinio<rthat no snoU eonolusion can he dreWn 
, from (his story ^ He MnnVs (hat Sveta Ovtpa beare about the same relation to llie 
Syrian Ohiistinns as Swift’s Bichdigtieg or the Hephelokokkygla of Aiistophanss 



' ’(' X. )'s 

t 

passage in ilie M. &b. alioliii tlie Sveta Dvipa. Prof. Lassen does not think that 
any infinence 'was exercised by Christian missionaries or their disciples on the 
religious views of the Indians because (a) the Christians occupied a very subordi- 
dinate position in India, and were at a distance from th'e centres of Indian science 
and religious life ; (6) because the Brahmans actually peisecuted the Ghristians ; 
and ( 0 ) because both the Biahmaus and other Indians are opposed to the leception 
of anything offered to them by the MIechha (i, e , degraded foreigner). The only 
knowledge of Christianity which the Indians have yet been shown to have possess- 
ed during the first three centuries of our era is confined to the meagre acg^naintance 
with it contained in the narrative of the Mahfi,bhfi.ra(a, to which reference has 
been made. (8) Lassen does not consider that the Pfincharfitra doctrines arose 
from an acquaintance with Ghiistiauity, but thinks that the narrator of the story 
about the White Island employed this name to intimate what he had heard about 
the journey of some Brahmans to a Christian country, and the doctrines there 
prevalent ; but does not correctly represent the religious and philosophical tenets 
of the P|,aoharS,tras, asccibing to them beliefs which are not theirs This he 
proceeds, has been perceived by tiie latest editors of the Muhfibbfiirata, who found 
it necessary to add a true account of their doctiines. This has been done by the 
introduction of N^rada, who is said to have gone to the Sveta Dvipa after Bkata, 
Dvita, and Trita, and to have received from Yfisndeva himself the Pfi,oohrfi>tra 
doctrine. Lasseu is farther opposed to the snpposition (see Weber’s Indisohe 
Sbudieu, i. 423) that the Indian monotheism resulted from an acquaintance with 
Christianity ; for (a) the Panohai d,tras did not adore a single Grod, bat Yfisudeva, 
as the highest, to whom the others were subordinated , (b) the Brahmans had 
already a highest god in BrahtnH,, and the adherents of the Yoga system bad a 
pingle highest god in their Isvara, making Brahmfi a created being. The Indian 
jtendenoy to monotheism was based, he considers, on the, character of the sects, 
which involved an exclusive adoration either of ViS^n or Siva ' Farther, Lassen 
does not consider it permissible to hold that the ideas of tboi Brahmans regarding 
prayer and faith were at all influenced by any acquaiutanoe with Christianity. 
He is farther of opinion that a belief in the incarnations of Yisnu existed three 
cenburies before the Christian era, an opinion which he bases on what Megasbhenes 
relates of the Indian Hercnles ; and thinks that there is no valid ground- for 
admitting that in the early ages of Christianity any Ghrisbiau legends were 
transferred and applied to Kri^na. 

* » * ^ TS'lll 

It is my impression, however, that the seutiments of bumanicy, mercy, forgive- 
ness, and unselfishness are more natural to the ludiau than to the Greek and 
Boman authors, unless, perhaps, lu the case of those of the latter who were 
influenced by philosophical speculation This tenderness of Indian sentiment may 
possibly have been iu pait derived from Buddhism, which, however, itself was of 
purely Indian growth, 

* # ® 

^ As this question whether the ideas and doctrines of the Indian poem are 
derived from, or have been infinenced by the B'ew or the old Testament, is one of 
great inteiest and importance I give below a tianslatioii o’f the latter part of an - 
article by Professor Windisoh of Leipzig on Dr. Lorinsei's book, which appeared 
in the Tuterarischea Oentralhlatt for 15th October, 1870, followed by some remarks^ 
with which Professor Webet, Dr Bfihtiiogk,,and M Auguste Bailh, have favoured 
me on the subject of the dependence ol independence of ludiau writers on Christian 
or other foreign sources for any of their ideas, Piofessoi Wiudisoh says 

^ "We have not as yet spoken of the object which the hook before us has properly 
V?. This 18 nothing less than tp show that all the nobler thonghtS in Bhagaved 
QttA are derived fiom Christianity, or from the * piimaeval revelation.’ It is 
impossible here to examine minately Dr. Loiiuser's piocess of proof, since it is 
based upon a large^ number of paiticular passages. According to the judgment 
pf (hp authpr pf this notice, however, the proof has not yet been adduced that in 


( )'( fa ) 

\ 

ttie Bhagavai Qtii va haYO a piaaa of Obrtaiiaaiey iraDslated into ilia form of Indian 
coBceptioaa i 

** To rafer to ttt laasi some goDoral poinia of viefTi Br ^ Lonos8V*a failnra to 
make nee of Indian oommantariaa Iiaa had 6nit of all| for its resnUs^ that he eonid 
oof aliraya apprebend the Indian thonglita In an Indian apirifc The laatnediate 
iotroduotioo of the Bible info the explaaatioii of the Shaguvod Oitd ib, tlieieforei 
at least prauiatttre Be^ideii the partianlaf Biblioal passages themselves are with 
too great ooufidenoa designated bj Dr liorinser as the soarces of the Indian 
thopght or exptession iCoannotbe denied that he )ias aetoalljr addaeed soma 
surprising pariilled passages » birt the most of the texts ivliiob he has cited oao at the 
utmost claim our oonslderatloo only after it lias bsen proved In another way that 
the Shagoad Qtfd and the Bible etand in a near relation to eiob other if the 
aathor ehonld think to reljr npon the mnUitnde of the passages wbioh he has 
qnoted, it shoald be reoolteoted that a hundred unoertaiD references prove so more 
* than a siogte one of the same oliaraoter Has Dr Iioiiasec noticed that the 
oomparisda of the human anal with aCeam of horses (adduoed by him in p 60, 
note 59) from the iTafha Upatueiiad oorrespouda with remarkable exaotnesa loUbe 
hbaatifal myth m Plato e Pbcadrui? This might be regarded as one of the most 
loterestiog examples of aooldenUl oorrespondenoe For the rest, it Is mnoh to be 
questioned whether Professor Weber to whom the author reneafadly appeals 
shares his oouvintion For Professor Webdt*s assumption that Obristian leaober, 
and dootrines arrived at an early period in India, and that in partionlar theivorsbip 
of Krishna and the legends relative to him were formed under the tnflanedee of 
Obristiaoity, is very widely different from Dr LorinserV eouvietion, ccording 
to whioh the oomposer of the Shagavad Olid mirst have learnt at least the Ifeiv 
Testament direotly by heart Ihis la the oonulusion at whioh every one would 
arrive who believingly reads the lista put together in the Appendix of»(i) pass 
ages whioh vary IQ expression but agree in sense (60 m number), (ii) pnsaaga m 
whioh a oharaoteristio expression of the Kew Tesiament ooonn in a diffeient seosa 
^ (28) 0*0 passages in whioh senSe and expression correspond {16/ Sven (ha idets 
of the Ohristian fathers are aoppoaed not to faav^ been unknown to tbs (ioet(seo 
e g,p 82, note 56, p 179 note 6 p 207, sate 87 Ao) So mnoh the more surprising 
is it therefore, wben Dr lionnser bimeelf (p 211, note 54) finds it ueesBssry to refer 
to the sharp ooutvasfe la which ObrisUaoity and the lodfao oonoepiiODS stands to 
each other in regard to the dootrine of the human eonl, and when he farther (p 
117, note 1) cannot avoid asenbing to the poet no acqnaiotanoe, tbongh a very 
defective aeqaaiatencei with Oliristiaoity It is impossible to combine Dr Iioriu 
sei 8 ideas into one general piotore Fmaliy as regards the tbonghts in whioh Dn 
Lorioser perceives traoos of the primaeval revelation or primaeval tradillon (sea 
0 g pp » 122,231 250/ he ehonld fiist have investigated whether they oan be 
pointed ont in the Veda Had he done ibis, be wonld probably have discovered that 
the oontrary is the case 

*'The book bsfore ns plainly shows how mnoh the lext and explanafion of tho 
Shagavad Odd stand in need of a *liorangh revision on the pait of scholars who 
are familiar Vvtth this branch of stndy Tbs view of whleh Dr Lotinser is a 
representnfcivs mast be sabieoted to a closer examinalion than was beta practicable " 

On the same general subject Dr Bbhiilngk has favoured me with the following 
expression of his opinion fle writes Keitber in the mahdbhSrata nor lo the 
later writers have I found any ntteranoes of moral religions Import wlitoh could 
with any probability be referred bsok to any foreign sonree In this depaitment 
the Indians have themselves reflleoted eo mooh aqd presented then tbonghts lu snob 
elegant forms that with their i lobes they might easily sopply the rest of the world 
The ethics and the reIi|,iott of diffeient peoples are not so diffeient from one another 
that herd and tiiere oolnoideiioea shoald not ba expected to be fonod between them 
Tile line of the Kaiha Opantthad, [1 GJ'^ifaigam marigah tva paehgale. Satgain 
tvdjdga e ] ^ < 



' ( 'I'i ) 

§Uiialt** (like ootii a iiioi'(ial''i'ipene, like coi n tie is produced again) “ souad* as if 
fiom Uie ITew TeHfcamenti, bat is not thorofoie bouowed.” > 

M. Bartli wiites tome as follows • — 

*' I am entirely of your opniiou,iii regard Ip the roseives wLicli you make as to 
tlie seutimeiits alleged to be borrowed, vvliiub Lotinsei. addnoes fiom the Blingavad 
Git4 Tlie same lesemblauoes bad been ludioaled iti a geneinl way long befoie 
bim . . • In uollecljug these passages, and coufioi ling them with the texts wiiieb 
are asserted to be the original, IioiiiiHer njipoaiH to mo latber to liave Hiiueooded in 
proving the contiaiy of IbiH thesis The book is Indian, and Indian tbiongbout^ 
The deolaiatiou of Krishna ‘ Those who ate devoted to me, aio in mo, and I in 
them ; is a reproduction of the Vcduntie dorttmo in a foim ndnplod to the leqnite* 
meats of practical religion. Theto would, peihaps, i atlict be i eason foi inqnitiitg 
what is, the sense whiub the coirespondiiig terras heat in the Jolmnnoaii theology , 
and interpretations of them have not been wanting In any case, they have a 
meaning quite diGforent front that which they bear in Iho Indian poorn , and m 
order to find them again on Gliiisiian ground, invested wilii a meaning akin to that 
of the Tedduta, we shall have to descend to the mystics of the middle ages, and to 
what 18 nearer to ns— the Hegelian theology of Mai'heinecke , by all of whom, 
,aB by the Indian poet, the illiisoiy clmiacter, oi tlie nou'existence, of tiie individual 
being and the exclusive essential leulity of the absolute, is mninlaitiod For them, 
also, whatever ready exists m man, is God ; all the icst is illusion, negation ; or us 
they'‘8ay — employing the same image as the Indians— a mete spoi t of the Divinity, 
whioh is one in many, and in many always the same. Thus Eckart, Tanler, 
Biuysbroeck, and the other Dominican mystics who ptenohed and wiole on the 
hanks of the Bhine in the fouiteenth centuiy, ask themselves ; ' How can man lovo 
God ? And they answei ‘ Why does the buluing coal which you place on your 
hand burn you ? Because this coal is in substance the some ns your hand. In the 
same way God burns you, ujd acts by love within you, hecansQ m substance he is 
identical with you,— because he is in you. and you in him ’ 

“ As legards the Tedic passages,” (sea above, p 8), “ I think that we are not 
to look in them for too much piecision. The locative case does not signify merely 
in, but also with near to for ‘ We are yonis , you ate onis , thou ai t with us, thou 
art for us, thou art near us, as a coat of* mail, as a lamparf, &c We have not got 
the dogmuiio idea of Furuslin = puiestlyin. 

” As legards gati, I agree with you that the essence of the image is rnthei end 
„ way 'It IB sufficient to ohseive how this woid is associated with Kdshthd, e.g , in the 
Katlia IJpanishad, iii, 11 , or is simply replaced by the latter, for instance, in the 
Apastamha-dharma-sfltra, i. 22, 7 (p. 39, Bahlei's edition), sa (atmaii) sarvam, 
paramfi> kfiishthfi, . . sa vai vaiblifi/janam putnni” 

I make a farther quotation on the same 8uh]ect from Prof, Monnier Williams’ 
work, “Indian Wisdom” &c , (pp 143 f note) , “ Di Doiiuser, expanding the 
views of Professor Webei, and otlieis, conceining the luflaence of Ohristianity oii^ 
the legends of Krishna, thinks, that many of the sentiments of the Biiagavad>Gi<a''1i 
have been directly borrowed from the Hew Testament, oopies of which, he thinks, 
found their way into India about the third century, when he believes the poem to 

have been written® He seems, however, to forget, that fiugments of truth are 

to be found in all religious systems, however false, and that tlip^ Bible Ihungh a 
true revelation, is still in legatd to the human raindi through which the tlfonglits.^ 
are transfused, a tliorouglily Oriental book, east in an Oriental mould, and full of 
Oriental ideas and expiessions Some of his comparisons seem mere eoinoideuces 
of language, which might occur qiiite naturally and independently In other cases 
where he draws attention to coincidences of ideas, — as, for example, the division of 
the sphere of self-control into thought, word, p.nd deed, in chap, xviii, 14-16, &o , 

• In a previous page (1 37) Professor Williams says, that the author of the Bhagavad Gita. 

IS supposed to have lived m India dcrihg the first or second oentury of out ora , " and in a ^ 
note he adds > * Some consider that be lived as late as the third oenturyi' and some place bm 
even later, hut with these X cannot agree,” 


( XIU ) 

«ojofg 0 od wolkfl inlo^prayar faaling find alma giving, how OOnld iheas ha 
borrowed from Chnstianitj when th^y «ro nleo found m Uenn whioh few wiU 
piece Iftler then the fifth century a C P Noverthelasv gomelhiug may he aeia 

for Dr Iforinset'e theory * Some further reoierks are made on the eame anhjeol in 
pp 153 if I rbioii are adverse (o that theory ** 


*' But Arieioxenne the moaiuian »aya liipt thw doelrirte |_ol Plato, ihai homad 
things could not be peroeived, unless divine things lull first been seen] comes 
the Indians , for that one of those men fell in with S Lniles in AlheiiM, and asked 
hiiiHwbat Was the Nnbstatioo of Ins pliilueophy and tliet when Sokiatea ensifored 
that itoonsisted of anenquny rouatdtng linman life (he Indian lan^faed and aaid 
no one who waa itnoraut nf divine thinga could unmpiehetid thiu^s relatiu^ to man 
27 o one however oonid very ationglv affirm that this sta^s cent ts true ' ^AriiiohUt 
%n Sntehut Pra-paratio SvanqeUt X' 3 


APPENDIX ir 

Extract from Sir Rdma knsna Gopal Skanddrlar t paper on the onpm of 
the Ehalti School pubUehed m the Indian \snQVAn\ for Jarmarp 191 B 


T7a have epigrapliionl avidenoe of (he exMteiico of the BImkti Sohool dnriug 
the three or four oentunes before OhriHt The n^e of insbiipiious in determined by 
the foim of the oharaoteie in wliiah they are engraved The fiist of the insereptioun 
hidioative of the ezistetica of the Ohiikti Sohool must have been engiaved about the 
beginning ot the second century befoio Obiist If speake of npd;i»etouef5ii4pr4k(fra} 
tor the woreliipof B/iuyaeaf SamkHrebiineand Vfisudeva * Another a few years later 
nien'iiOiie Y^ie eieotioti of a fiagstaff wilb a» iniAge ot Dornda iit (be fop iiiboBour 
ot 'V&sadeva the «od of gods by Heliodoi (Hehadoias) a lesident of TaksliasilA au 
ambaesadai of Aiutalikita (Atifalkidas) who Whs a Shfit.aTatn «e woi shipper of 
Blisgaval or helongini, to llie B1 dgsvafa Siihool } A tbud'inscciplioii of about the 
1 egiumng of (he fiist century befoie Chiist exieting at ^AnAghdt contaius an 
adoration of SamkarHlisna and VAsndeva t Falafijtili the aolhoi of the Uahahhdihytt 
on F&nmi who wiote about 150 before Obiist speake of Vft^udeva and Baladeva 
as tbe deities woiebipped by speoifio secfs 

• V • • • 

The VAvudeva religion or (ha Pdflrharaira sysfem as it wasafterwaids called 
WAS based on the Shagavat g\id Hefcastbenva mentions Hsi uclas as (he god wotsliip 
ped by the Souissanoi in wfjiali p untiy wae situsted Meflioin oi inuthnru end the 
Hiver Jebares or Jamns flowed The Sourasenoi coirospond to Snuraseiuis i e heiw 
(hsSAtvatas and (Ims YAvudeva to Hemolee, and (bus tbe leligion of VAeudeva 
flouiisled on tbe evideute of Hegaetbenes in (be fonitb oeutnry before the 
Gbiistian eia 


* Xheskenelfl new In tbe Victoria Bill Udaipur But it was found et OheefxnJjl (owbloh 
place jl was tsaoved from Nageif where it le tsiuved to beve beeu erlgmslly lying Besy 
A* Vol W, Part I, p 77 il j 

am p'lM / ^ *' ®">| Vol, 

, Arth Sutv tynt Udtg Vol t p O; 

V % 



( x»v ) 

CONTENTS. 


Inthodiiction. 

I’AGE, 

Appendix I ... » ... ... ... I 

Appendix II ... ... ... ... xiii 

First String — S alutations and troatinont o£ Bhakti in a general way 1 
Second String — C auses tliat geneiate Bhakti — Association with good 

men ... ... ... 57 

Third String — Details o£ the path of Devotion ... 64 

Fourth String — Virtue of hearing of the praise of the Lord 77 

Fifth String — Hymning the praise of the Lord ... 95 ♦ 

Sixth String — Remembrance of the Loid ... ^ ... 112 

Seventh String — Shampooing the feet of the Loid ... 121 

Eighth String — Worship of the Loid ... ... 132 

Ninth String — Bowing to the Lord ... ... 136 

Tenth String — Servitude to the Lord ... ... 13 7 

.Eleventh String — ^Intimate companionship and friendship of thcLordl39 
Twelfth String — Consecrating oneself to the Lord ... 140 

Thirteenth String — taking Refuge in the Lotus Foot of the Lord 142 
Alphabetical Index to the Verses I49 



THE BHAKTIRATNAVALl 

os 

THE JfECKLiOt 01 ULVOIIOX VI OEMb, 

SinUNG By SBI VlbNUPLllI 
vnra 

AS Gsausa IBASSUTIOS ASD "OllSi EfPIiASATonX ASD CRIIIOAD AIAtSOV 
BASSO 0'S THE OOSUESTABS SAUBD KaSIIUAOA OF 
Ir( VIASDPUBI 

'XBB FIRST STRING 

5^ sm n 

TCsar<:'5n:f(^pr lafepTcTJ^^ 

awidMrfrfn \ ii 

( w»isrr I fio I «= 3* ) 

«ft BlTOwra s« II 
^ gsBrafqr fi5jet 

snwresipi g gvaTO ^nRa $4ffr n i 
5n?[>raTsPlOT^»ifeBpr3»raiBis«il5fi: > 

5it HPttJTTO^ygfilsrCT ^ ii ? n 

0e«r^^<rgRw«ifaBlf^iWfrifiHBPrPni>fft«i»irftrwwi sfifiwu^lasi 
«<r fr<TvnTt?i:%«f[Hi>T3?T^^ i i srartiitBifiiinferfa* «t!t 5*1© 

msrii flfKiCTEsrt^ »i FwiRr ^ BTOBsreBiF'i 

’n^sralg i sior h fsRBt>i5if5si?r5<it wgicnr i jt tra' 

«rr firsrt^ ?rei ot' gsRraPBftffir bot i Rtto bt^i sawi ^BiFnl^sna i 

fPilcB 1 t^rw 3ifSf^ wisr 

sisiwiu I BfTO iiftqr^ OTi ^Bwrt *[?*t I sranroi^spnnf i ^Fw^fg- 



2 


THE DIIAKTJRATusCiVALL 



3['jdcf ’lETSfOT- 

I ^ra cCiririJ^Wr €cfif^ i 

5RrTTr^n5m%rrq’3r^^rc5K %^^v[: i i 

?^m5 51^ I i%qqra5C^?IT^g’?r ^tof^qq: T.mJ q^^TR^Pt^qifJ. i ^sq?ftf<T 

^fqqqjftfa^l^lfsq* q^^qq; ccq fqfiiis- ^B^cqsqq q^cT 

5?q«rs lu n 

1. Supromo, pic-cininent, is tlio Loicl 8ii Kri^iiui — ll»c (h\ oiler in o^ery 
body wboso being is maiiit'o»i in all tli.it e\i*>ta ; the lelugo ol all In mg being*.. 
Who, though uiibotn, is lepiitcd to luno boon bom oi tlio MOiiib of Dc^uki, 
Whom the mighty Yfid^n, is sonod as liis do\otcd assooialos and comnellois. 
Who overtliiow the Avickod nmUi his aim-*’ Who lemo^od ibo disticss oL 
the inanimate and the animato cic.ituics. And v.bo, iiy the ‘•iiiilo oL bis benign 

oountenance, inflamed the love of the dames ami dainsoK^oF Vi.ija. — Sii 

^ukadeva in Bliagavata, lOtli Skandha, OOtli Adb^aya, dStb ^loka. 

27offl— The iiitrodaotoiy slimza or atuii/.iis mo desif^imtod ns XT^sTrxll’nr P«o- 
pi tiatory verses ill ^rniseof the Oeity, having foi its objeul the wishid loi com- 
pletion of the woik niideititkeii f 

STHf^TSTT^ has been iiitet preled in more than one sense. 

(1) It may mean that KriSiia (Visnu) dwells in all beiugH. 

(2) ile iH the abode and lefugo of all 

(3) Krisna being Viswaiupa, the woild Bsds its mnnifuRlatiun in Him and He 
ie manifeat in the wnild. 

%ct — 'I’he lepntud Imlh of KV'Snu aa son of Deinki (his molhoi) 
and of Vasudeva (ids fatliei) la iiiiieal. The Kleinul and Unuieate is iioior bom 
in the mdiiiaiy sense of the woid 

— This woid may niean h«s own ” Oi it may moan "his allies and his 

frienda,” aaoh as A.ipina with whoie cn oiieiatioo he lanqniHlied eviUdiiots 

The love of Gopls is init uiinal iint spin iial The ideal devotion of Vai^ilava 
votaries is the Hpinlual love of I he Gopis foi KiiSlla 

This jewel seleeted fioiu Ihe afote of®lhe Bhrigavatii has funnd a ntling place 
at the head of the Neuklace of Devotion The ooiiaeoi alion of all that a devoteo 
can pluoe at theseivneof (he Lnid is the key-note that is ui evidence Ihiuughuut 
this treatiae on devuilun. 

1 

Tl^T 

vm: U«^ll 

' (R \ 

. *rhe plnial nambui ih uHeit to denote I hat Krifaiia, as I lie Avalaia «»f V STln 
lad made use of his four hands wheiievei it pleased liiiii Goinpaie Gilfi,, Xj 
Ad by fly a, Sloka 46 

t Compare, giPfSTT gTT%rf II 


‘rkE FIBST STStA 6 8 4 


1 snnrranfjrm^ i umPi wr ^sbOT 

f#eft3iRr«i WTOimaw ^r^qtsraniisfrvimc tfir^fio'et*! i 

gns[ si^ jjsft ’R’l 5Jcft sns^tir «Rt^wT5i>!ir nT^m^isr 3«ir «o 

' gsriRR^il !{ II 

2 Salntatmns unny to Him whose glory sheds blessings to all Whom 
to singf to meditate, to see,^ to hear and to worship, instantaneously removes 
man s sins — Snka, II 4 15 

Sole — In this staasa the adonliun of TAsadevs (Kr snu i e , 7 enn) has been 


deolnied to be higher in effieaoy than offering snerifiLee to the gods beoanse of ite 


bearing lostantaoeooa froils The laboar and cost is smaller 





I 


5fr qR4Tf ^JTSTfJsw s*i-:iR«r?rTfnJTgijpT^T^ ii ^ ii 

( H I a 1 « sff; ) 

sfireiinc a^rffffFffffcqiff i q;!i tfa wfw maitiir ^1^ <nir 

nmjatn sifru^pt f^Rmra ftrfkfe gsnfH* 

s?>»WW(5i sife.5r«t5r3^^ arm ^wsmOTCt'^- 


rHURTK <W Ria 5I«T«TR1!1>1 I a^tixamii Mnw m 

rim ^ TO ^ftpr i sraw ircns^ wji^f^re^ 

WW& mffftmtifrr <im»r3g«f ’isRi wifiifRg’ ereii 

3 I repeat my SsilnUtions to Him who kilU tho wicked demons and 
destroys tlie sins of the righteoas He who i> tho repository of tho pure 
qnality of S'llwa (harmony, goodness) Ho « ho confers on those who Imre 
taken to tho path of tho Pnramahainsas tho knowledge of Self, only attain- 
able by a constant pursuit ifter it — Suk« II 4 IJ 


Jfote IS mrionaly explained by llie comtnenffttors It may 

mean either (be destroyer of the wioked or the n^rionr of the wiolced llieir deaMi 
At Ins hands translates them Irom earthly life fo the regions of bliss 
Embodiment of goodness It mny also mean * He who is mnnifest in all forms 

f^sr qm4fqpT q5rrNiifWqra#'g3qRl|^qm I 

( IJ 1 8 I gff! ) 

«’^Wfi5WfSar«Tff& I JiFei i toiwt RfftPhRi- 

TOlffW II 8 II 


The seeing of the eymlKd of tlie Deify It is not given to every one to 
realise Hie presence withont the help of symbols repiesenting Hitn 



4 


THE DIIAKTIRATNAVALL 


4. Mny the illnstiious Loul, the prelector of flic good, the lord of 
Laksinl, the piesidmg deity of Saciificcs, Iho Piogonilorol created beings 
the Guide of the' intellect, the Loid ofc Iho euilh, of tlie %\orld, the leader and 
refuge of the Andhakas, Vii*»nis and »Sjlt\\atas. — Suka IJ. 4. 20. 

"^ote , — The lepotition of n«o woid erfH in Iho ouKiaal «ddH lo tho iholoricnl 
adorument of the fliyle. In Iho lifinnlnlion vniiona Hhudea of intiining liayo been 
given to it by I he iino of dilTotenl woide. 

^Tr5rrrtrf?IJ — The Ralwalns lilco Iho Andlmkas nnd Vr.*!n e woio a tube of Iho 
Yflidava Ksiittriyas. Si\twata also denotOHU followoi of Vi'^ihi. 

I u 5lUUf5- 

fWTfil p^5IT^H n U " 

^ 5crf|?IT cTf? 1 

sirfoi^r ^r^5i«i^crVr hr 5i?t ^ is ?icr** 

^xtR^fTT^cTT ^ 

I ^crn:?r li yi ii 

5. I approach foi help the ‘^on oL V}n«a, the pioeoplor of BlunI-, vho 
out of compassion toA\aid!3 woildl}’ men dcsiioiis of getting aci os's tho blinding 
darkness ol ignorance, has lovealod this, light of tluS most occult of ancient 
lore containing the essence of all the VciUs, possessing an unique gioatnoss 
inherent to it. — Snta I. 2 3. 

Noifl, — Of all the Puitinasj the Bhi^cfnvafa olainis to rccotd occnlt toaebings 
not revealed in the rest of them. It llius holds a piO'eminent position. The 
reason assigned for the piodaction of this PanifiUilca jnaj/imwi opus by Vjusa nflor 
his composition of the BIalid,blitirata was Ibut I he Blahabi ntula had not supplied 
the spiritual knowledge that the woild needed and ihfs later wotk seived as a 
oomplement to the Mahfi,blirirata Tlio BTahfiblitiiata is designated ns Itihusa, 
(History), the Bbdrgavata coming under the designation of Parana (ancient loio),* 

The antiquity and genaineuess of tho BhAgavnla PuifiUa is a point of dispute 
even among the oithodox Fnndils (Fide SubdaKalpadruma — Devaungri edition, 
article on Bhdigavata). The contioversy as to its date and pnientage bns not yet 
received its final word The einboiate nitiGoinlity of the Inngnnge and stylo 
generally, of the work is its distinct ohninoieiistio, mai king it ns tho pioduction 
of compaii Lively latter-day postPunidnio Sansiciit. But the eiuditioa of the author 
of this Huoyclopiedic woikou VaiSiiavism-onm-Vedanta is woudeifub 

\\ ^ n 


THE FIBST STEIA G 6-8 


5 


IS ^ 35m»w5«Kaf 

iras^ =5 1 *ft*^^I^n^^ i w^jPprasts nfe- 

fSrerotTrosi^eq^l^sTam^^iwrasfsg tifeapft&ll as^sr- 

«rt!t»r,? I f rf\& i ^ai srerl^gjc* i ms sfir?Ji ^ga>r ll \ ii 

6 I Iieird its greatness from afar I then approached it and entered 
in the ocean of nectar of the Bhftgaratn Therein I see trith my mind s 
eye, that has become clear-risioned by the application of the collyrium of 
Kfisna s grace, the jewel deposited in it, vis , tlie devotion of the blessed 
Lord 

>Thi 8 elanzAAnd the Ihiee foUowtng aie Visnapaiie compostloii atid 
personal statement 

?refnftKy;eg<iriT n ® ii 

nfasipftl> afiRfiifir i sRP^rffti il^st shscc*! qftsKfjr el\»i&rif 
jR»it^m5fai«s!n5(.ii ^ n 

7 0»i of the ocean of Bhfiga^ata I bring out this imalnnblo heosore, 
the precions gem of doioiion of the Tjord tor tho delectation of Vaisnavns, 
having been inspired hy command of the Ilnloi of the Lnucr'^e, He who 
dwells in my heart 

i^ote ^iliis 11 a oonfessioti by the oom{ ll I It ires his Daimoo— Iha Gteat 
Inapirai— ^fiu stirred lifm to piepaie a ffeokf ice of the Jewels of Devotion aeleoted 
from the treaenre etore of the Blift^avata 

I 5rrg33si^T 
n c ii 

inntqtafr gijpefi juJl imrafe 

5ra'iBrai<i^3I<!l qsri iR*!! sii%^!i»isrTOrinrtrmro fer era 
c fsa »raaifei ii c ii 

8 This uecklpco, placed ronnd tlio nock, adorns the person of the 
woaror , kopt in hts honso dispels its onis of darkness May the blessed fondly 
clasp it (to their bosom) so boautoons and brilliant 

Aofa — ^iir l-ae the doobla meaning of a ati ing and of excellence |iHr also 
hoe the double meaning of pot lound llie neck ** and “ ooinmiUed to memoiy * 

So alao %lC>lfbl|frT treasured la the heart or depoeited to (be lionse And 
^fnfHpr IS oooslaot application (0 its efndy 




6 


s 

THE BBAKTIRATeIvALI. 


5?fg3«rTT*i5:«rT?fg^tfaiff: i 
3=r5f ?iM« mg f^’s^qCramqg: iku 

>3 ''A '3'0 ^ 

¥ii3T5rci^5nfe ^cf c^icH^r^ifT H c5^r5 i i ?r=T5J’^r ^tPt ^ 

^4^^ 'qf^sqcficq^as II § II 

9. Let this attempt of sUmgmg the jeweL into a necklace by Vi^nu 
Pun be of u'se to those ^^ho cannot apply lhemselve=! to Iieai tlic iiliole ot 
the BhS-gavata OM mg to then -si ant of Icisiuc, because ol theii engagement 
in the vanous afCaiis of life 

Note — Vi^nnpuri in hia onmeutaiy says that he wne a SannjjVi of Tuhut 
(Mithiia) 

g I: uft i 

mT?m w x* n 

( I U I ^ ^JcT: ) 

"srg: ^Tqi!5Er^ 

^eiT fefrn ^ \ ^,cqr Tiqs ^cT^ cItst- 

1 5i5r«3:gT5 i n il 

10. That is man’s supieine Dharraa which genoiatos in him coa‘»tant and 
unfailing devotion to Adkoksaja (Vi^nu). This deiotion has no selfish ends. 

It makes the mind seieiie and liappy. — Sula 12 6 

Z'^ofe — Tt>e aubjeof. miittei of the Bhivktimtiirivali het/ma wllii this veise All 
religion is dependent on devotion It la to emphiiBiae this idea that this stausa 
heads the treatise 

Dharmn — It is so difficult fo give an exact aynonym of the word Dharma. It 
means leligion in its broadest eiguihcation. The duties which man owes to God, to 
Ilia own self, to his fellow-beings (luclnding the lower cieatiou) also come under the. 
teira VTPTT 

^'7; firf ^T?f ^?r ^ Adlioksija is a name of ViSiiu beoaupe 

his knowledge of things is not ircqniied by the physical senses but by a snpei physi- 
cal vision. By a diffeient deiivatiou It meatiR one who IS bevond (he ken of the 
aeuses. Other etymologies have been attempted by lexicogiapheis. 




rilh FlRSl SlBli (7 11-12 


7 


*n^rn Tratfe?i • 

®5rac?n^ fw li <1 

(I |5ll»^ ) 

^15 irScraRmsf {ircr<3T f3fer5<iffT a'raisw^i^’i 

vj*n5»i sroifw nfes*!. 1 acsat flfe|g?srg«i& ?t?ji si^ 

nfeaR^sirar 1 a^re 1 nfefer itn natfaa fia 

fa<J^S aia sncUcnafew stlgiK tsa-a gsTarfoat^oii 

fHPRi I aw ^ ai^aaaa&er swfnfa anr ii ? t ii 

11 TIio Yoga of Demotion (Do\otiontl concciitnition) Iwing fixed on tlio 
Bleeped Vaisodora (Vi<iiu) brings forth iion*a((iclnnciit for wordl) objects 
And acijQisition of knowledge, not throngli tho rc'ttoiinig fncuUios but by 
direct porcopiton os ro\ciIod in tlio Up^nt«iads results from it.-~Suta 12 7 

Aote — 97^^ r 1 an daiivt>d ah h (Mtionjiutu ftvm VamnlevH la the lipi^iia of the 
MahAbliftnitaeiid B1 ft^AvstH, the lucaiuetioii of Vi^nu who flourished at the and of 
the DwApam Yu^a Bat deiired diffeienCty it iiisaus (he Omnipiesent Daily 
and IS synoiiyuioae with V ^na Dhiava who lived anlaitur to Kf'^na, was 
tnitialod by Nnrada in the VA^nidevn llMiitia yA«ailava etf^idflia the ell pervading 
QidVifnu ir^sn igrjjfif xrferai 1 m TOlriunjffifit 1 ing T 

9 fr 11 heie b«tirK n different ineeuiiit, flora ol the 

pi uidiii;, veiee 

<jr(e| |i ra CtT!R 5 Tift I 

^ f ft TIlB%3I^I!IT^%I^'Ei5 IR ^55 

- I ? 5 raTT^ cfsl 

aa at^a aa Pefaft asnia f?iia en^ i ^nafitfa aafa re «»? a<B 
aa R^BafR^maa a^ Bfa aftfa gSagai^ar aaiFa ^aiftr Bicaaal 
" ^awraca^aOagrg^^a 53 wa^t waBnwfai^ i ataaa a- arewrsa 

fain I ?Raica 3 na& aia (fa waagataiaa,! RrfrN' s^at^Pi 
m IsrsaJ^ i waal atsaa ?earq^ 1 areRW^faafta 
at^&wiaiftfan i’ll! 

12 Satwtt Itajis and 1 inias are tlioiliroo qualities of Bi ikrili Pndowed 
with tlio«e quilitics tho Ono Supicmo spirit bears the dilTcrcni names of 
Han (Vienu) ^^rliiclll (Brahinfi) and Hara (iSivn) as lie pre<>idos at tho 


8 


TEE BEAKTIRATEAVALL 


\ 


functions of pieseivation, creation and dosti action, icapoctivoly. Yet the 
iighest good (Moksa) pioceods fioni Him (Vismi) which is constitucd entirely 
of Satwa guna— ^uta, I. 2. 23. 

Note — The Bhri^avaLa. is the sciiptnie of tlie Vuisnavas Nafuiully the 
worship of Yisiia is exalted over that of the ulhei gods of the Htiidu paiitheuu. 

Heie is an open deularation by Sntn (the famous reciter of tiie Puidilas) that 
MukSa can only be attained by one pointed devotion to Vasndeva beuause His 
nature or body IS made of pm e Sahwiica quality. In this uonneutioii it is insfiiic* 
live to compaie the view of E^lidArm. the uelebiated poet, which is vety iiiipai ttiil. 

He has said in one of Ins piinuipal poems 

*' One and the same foim assumed thiee aspects The (.upuiioiify and in> 
feriOLity is common” (mutual), that is to say, theie is no absolute siipeiioi tiy of 
the one aspect over the otlieis hut eaeh has a sepaiate fimution aHsigiied to hiiiinelf 
In his capacity of destiover flaia is oinnipoteiit So ViSiiu as pieseiveiand 
BiahraS, as Oieator. the tlitee functions of f^q-jvT Ojusbi vation, ^fg Bxpan* 

sioui Absorption into self. 

The natural order is aud,si5iirs]hut the BbTigavata, being a sciip* 

Ime of the Vaisuavas specially devoted to VisUu, modifies the older usually adopted 
and mentious o'dy, leaving the other fuuotious uiiuamed to be uudoistood by 

the reader. Satwa bas beeu vaiiously reiideied into English by tLiiuslatois of i 
the Bhagavadgiid, as purity, haimony.^gooduess. Riiiasaa eueigy, motiie, uctivily. , 
Tamasa as lueitia, dullness. 


¥tf^ U5!:frar i 

singfcT u 

( ? I I 

kBt i ^ i 

cT^iicRn^i^fn ?7cf: t^ciTcrc 

13 It IS for this lOcison that poets (sceis and piophets) piactiso constant , 
devotion to Yasudeva with oxcoeding delight ivhioh gives peace and seouiity i 
to the mind. (I. 2 20.) 

ig?gi \ 

*s \ e- I 

sifgr i:w^arg: u fi 

s 

i ^jsrcfrnq: i 

^€rfcri:r i ^ i 

era 55 ^ ti \M II 


TUB FIRST STRIHQ 14-17 


9 


14 Men \rho desire Moksa ^rship N&rAyana in all the benign lorms o£ 
His incarnations in preference to the demonical fierce spirits, withont however 
reviling them -—I 2 26 (Snta) 

IS an exhoriatlou to one sad alt tlmt theyslionid Ulee to Iheexolnaive 
worship of ViBnn which lurolvea ou orneUj aud bluodshed as in the propitiation of 
ternble gods aud (.oddeues 

It IS the Sil yatsuavas of the Sohool of Batufitiuja that stiiolty adhere to this 
lojoDOtion They carry their praoltces, however to au extreme someltmes very 
anuoyiug to Hiudos of oilier pei*saasioufl by openly levihng Siva aud Sakti aud 
their votaries 

II 

cram ^iramt m irt^ram \ 

( I ? I ?■> gr ) 

sreTOpwdtsTtdi JTf wSct twts wsm ifir 

15 Lot the high mindad miin worship the Supreme Spirit with derotion 
desiring nothing , nor praying for anything ho wants , nor with the view of 
attaining to Uoksa — 3 10 (iSnkn ) 

Tlem. ii u 

31^ II 11 

' . ( t I ’t I ’IS ^ ) 

s^&rmmtrwf^mgt^TiS^fiTra «cJireiroi.u?<mijr 

*rtg^?rmii^!T ^ tng^^rmpraw iot i enn 

^ >fttng I $«r i statmn!iitnmf^ctP!il 

cRTOT ^OIOTSnrf^ tRTC^ I tStn^ ctrsp^lR^ 

" acTC rPi <1? BRrrc 

^RTSir^iRTO^ a^wiwraioismPi i sRt »ife g - f« i ?l^ 

«i5Ei Npjt fRTO& acnffTiratwi JistitrtRlsnrar'Ttcir sra rnrenr rw iii^ t«n 

16>17 The Vedas have VAsndovn for their sole objeot The Vodio 
sacrifices are consecrated to VAsndeva The practices of Toga and religions 
performances have VAsudeva for their end The study of VedAnia and SAnkhya 
deals with VAsndeva The performance of Dh*irma is to propitiate VAsndeva 


10 


fllE BtlAKTlRATNAVALl, 


and the goal of man’s journey in his search aftei the 5u>ninrt?n homm of life is 
Vasudeva. — ^I. 2. 18-29 (Siita) 

JiJote ■—This Rtauzn nhows lliafc oUiei* melhods that have hoen in vo^ne lor the 
alfcaiumeni of man’s vrell-beintr lend to the Bhnkii (devotion) ol Yabudeva. 
nTT— Oompaxe ^ -• Gitft 15 15 

3?^ \\ 

jps'^osm fr u ij 

( n ^ ) 

i ^icur 

JTSTJ m'si- 

S^^ani II II 

18. The mind distiacted by desiies leaches not quickly that condition of 
peace by the lestramt of the senses and other pxaciices of Yoga ns by the 
devotion to Mukunda — I. 6. 36. (Ndiada.) 

Note — The petfcimance of sacitSues ns enjoined in tlip Kiumnkaiuia .poition of 
the Vedas ate to be btaekelted with the Yoga piaoiices both being impotent to gi\e 
that peace which the path of devotion gives, Because Yoga and Khiidr Imve 
selfish ends in view they fail to give that pence which is ublamed by Bhukli 
(devotion) 

IS a name of Vi&nu- who confeis final 

and lasting libeiatiou. 

II 

Ufe'fiitST 5UT1% I 

1515 m^ti '9 u k u- 

. \3 C\ ^ X 

( ^ I I « ) 

19. His mind bomg puiified and fixed by devotion, Vy^sa peiceivcd tl e- 

piesence of the Loid, the Perfect Being, and also liib power, Mdyd, in attendance 
on him — 7. d. (Suta ) 

Note — It IS natialed that the bliss of the sight of Visnu was atleined by Vjasn 

who had followed Nfi,inda’s advice after Nduida had conm nnicated to him his own 
spnitnal experieuc^s as the result of hie davotinn to Visnu Mfiya is peisouihed as 
Lakfemi in constant attendtince on NdfiHtsPa. 



THE FJSSl smlm BOSl 


II 


^5nsri ^(graT W t HtTO ifgggrf^iiTq^l 
^651 ^g5frJT%T sf% JEaiwifg# g m li V li 
^RTfrar flnrarft wfe i%|^ctsr^ i 

yi^sicHT^ ?ir ^7 m»1\<Shw^ [ «isrT ii it 

!T ^(^(ci>^ «)Rr qf% si^stnc i 

Rwnmt l^rrsnffife i ii* ?far Jiw q,?rea?Ji at^nrf 

«ir apiifeii^fisgiiRii^r wRrfnw 

HI Hmsieft wfefteipw i to utoi t^nr si5w{^i!<Kwi!ir 
gaTOWHnawRUcuaiirat ^ Ssf'® f^er TOffia Sniawir S'!!! wii- 

TO!ira?ii ?flraf»r3tftfe tg^iTO RreigV hi gRrftfct nfea^^i hi 
HjrBjjlgun^TO^^urfifERinnijpi&qintsTffa^ ntg^iigHOTei^tg 

»rai> n^nTi^TTChRc^q^i Hscnr^fjpftft^ I siCTalfSr^H fenraclc wreui- 
tnsjitiiw ^ I Ppftia stowiBt iror hsi^ sranfesHoifir gwiftiji^a' 
HH^iirerraffqiRaRraT iftsit toiARi it 

SO'Sl Tho single mindedness with wbich ft man diroots towards Visnn 
Ins senses, that hare been panfied bj tbe poiforinanco ol Vnidio sacrifices, 
is designated Devotion to tlie Lord, wbon such an application of tbe mind 
lifts grown natnml in him with no selfish motive m view This demotion 
which goes by the name of Bliagavad Bbukti is superior oven to Jlfok§a 
It qmckly bnrns the subtle bod^ called Linya iSarim jnst as the digestive fire 
in the stomich consumes the food tbit is e^ten< — ^III 25 31-32 

Ifote -»The text uses oertain woi'da in a ieohnical sense for example 

has the meaning of rBl Srrf^nfTI *f I diiecflj and tiieuce has the eetiseof 

^he organs of the aeuses are presided by their fatelary deities 

g?!lfiiSRi— S^' 5:^1^ ^ '*3' ^iffif^ WTOiPr 

The senses^are inferred bj then exeiotaing Uietr respective futiolioBs of 
perception The seeing hem mg, emeUmg, teetiog aftd tonehiug testify to the 
existence of the different organs 

l^%iuDa1ly1iMUii!arase ot tlio elglit extinoraiaary ponera Uila 

are attained by Ilia praclioe of l^n riieaa ponreiado notlead to Uobsa irberaaa 
tbedeTotiontotbetierddoea There la no diBoully to nnderaland tlie meaning 


^ti ftniiFsi suraiPi 1 ih VTiH»raTOTOiDB9!t ac^siRi^i icis^ hto 



12 


TBI! BHAKTIRATB^AVAtA. 


of the stoka Urns interpreted. But tho commonlaiy gives ilio moaning of ttNit 

to the word How can which is a means to ) Ijo supeiior 

to it? Surely the means is nob supetior to the end. But tho diQiuiiUy is solved 
by the commentator, is (bliss) wheieiis the inaii of devotion enjoys 

that bliss. The eater and on joy er of sweet food is supetior to the food eaten. 

Hence is supei ior to 

— The mental application should not bo felt ns a painful task, but 
by habit should grow to become Ins second nuinro. tRr7^=.A tcira for the five 

vestures (sheaths or cases) which successively mako the body. Their names are 
as follows : 

ii 

The gross body is disposed of by oiemalion but tlio eublto body, called tho 

or tsthat vehicle of tho ’^trJTT and this .too should be 

destroyed to free the fiom__iepoatod incaiuntious The fiie of devotion annihi- 
lates this subtle body aud^the devotee is fieod of its inonmbiauco. 

WfnUrTT: FtH %35Umf I 

I q=5rf¥i;' i 

I R^\ k^x %er ^ ^ i erri 

?T(?Wfvrl% 11 II 

22. Some”' theie ate who do not dcsiic to lose thcii individuality by 
entire absoibance in me but wdio find doligbt in tho seiMce ot my toot. They 
are £ond of active seivioo to gratify mo.- They gather togcthci and chant 
my glory in spiiitual unison. — III. 25. 33 (Kapila.) 

Note.— Shampooing the feet. This veise illustrates tho statement 
made that Bhakti is considered supeiior to Siddhi. 

uiuira % ^ 55f%^TUH^UFI5lsra5Wii!!^l*Ufl:Tfh' I 

^5 #: jqs[q: 

H19«T5qi53‘. I) I) 

^ 23. They look fondly, mothei 1 at my divinely beauteous form — my 
enign countenance and losy eyes And they addiess to mo words that^ please 
me —III. 25. 34 (Kapila ) ' ^ 

IS Bpeiikiiig to his mothei Devnhuii. The metamoi phosis of 
^ api g of the godless Sa nkliya philosophy into an Avfitaia of God pieaohiug the 

*0E couibo, the ^umber of such aie veiy few. 



TH^FIRS*£ STRING ^3-86 


13 


Bliftj^avabi dliArma (o Ina in)Uier la tr jnilerfal and makea one donbl Wbelher llie 
&pjla of t|je Bii&i^vata la Ibe verj ^tpiia trlio eoiopoaed tlie aplioriam 
or i8 lie only Ins nameanke P 

^5nrFrift ^5rTO(:rawra5CT5r^5^T^^H*T»rff IR»|| 

gRBg® susrjfloinff i aftfir i a^Sfafn saRWa eaiftf 

sarnmi^ gasrfeftfjpit^ sna; ^ aa afe SR?^ 

jjtgsraajrafa^OT wjqjnar^rawieawgTOarjrflr gfearafgaraLwr^ftftfe 
a-f airHiainwat^ating^ ntqaffeaw i f^gasa 
a'>5it aar atm aar tfga aafa natsc q,® Sg # ii aa n 

24 Bni thoqgli my devoioes may oherish no dosire for the far 
subtle course of Moksa being m^isiiod by the sight of my beautiful form, 
my surpassingly winning smiles looks and sweet voice , thoir 6nal omancipotion 
IS given to them as the reAvard of their de\otion —III 25 35 (ICapi]a) 

jfute *>S) MokSi la after all the iommum bonum of eziatenue foi we see here 
that they are dually traualated luto the oouditioa of oueuesa with Bim 

ftw err I ^ 

a^raa?5t«n'aRi!ara i aatcfa afaarfaiaiaac ar 
a?aa>aif^aat alaa'^fir af^aiaai^sisa a w^a^xrafwqg ?aa 
aa aja am^aTlsra^arftia aifa ?rej 5 a&& a i aafraaift 

a^ jaa na mwa^s^a ii w ii 

25 And these devotees of mine may have no desire for the enjoyment 
of the splendour and riches of VaiLuntha that my Id&jA (power) creates for 
them , as well as for the eight kinds of superhuman powers of nddkx all these 
gifts are served to them —III 25 3 (Kapila ) 

Note The commentary reminds the ronder why BAak/t IS aupaiior to Btddhx 
for by Shakii be enjoys all these ruznries pins Uohta Wheiejs by the ansteie 
path of philosophy and asceticista lie int(»ht have gamed Jdiksi but these many 
rewards of Bhakti woald not lisve been bis poition 

srsBi^f^pneW airPcre:^5Ts:^i?if5nftjftfir^%fe|?^ \ 

fq?T enmr 11 ii 

af^ ar^ aaaff^af at^^atar asjrf^ftara aara;_ 

caro aats i a Tif i latsaaS ara ai'a ga afa?aas^ 
aiaaTO* a-ravaaferata^aafirsaaleaw i aa aasraTfta 


14 


I'Hl!) BllAJCnRATJS'AVALL 


na^cficJir^ I fTpirffn: « m itfer: 

I ?rfg:?rT ?r ^tx i ^crcfrrr-f i ^^rr ^nxxhm, 

f^crr’T^gr r r^‘ 1^ ^ 35 gr- 

q;^ to: toa;?TJ ^*cm^5: ’ETJ'ejR’^mcI, 

cT^tor^i^'^ c?^ftof^^7r^^n:cr k T?f '^isff'T ?rf^?T jt^- 

cftc^w: 1 313 viefi) i^^.s ^ 5*^31 frig; fgf;!?i 

5fj;^flr=sr I qR^(f=3r^n3ig;Y-=^c3^ 1 vi^i;ifnerr-'i* 

j^^?jc5rJg?wi^crf^^5?Ri7fg^gircr ^Ajm srcC^na, >ir^€3f^ 
fgqi^Tff q:^ ¥irr^cf ct^i i * 3 ^ 7 ^ 3 ^ 5 * 35 ^ 1 % 

^s^4if^^^wpr^r7fc?5frrf?r '^rTR! qf^:gcr«:?<:cqn7%icr f%\ n ^ 7 ^ 11 

26 Novel %m 11 my ilovotco-' poii*.!! lunl l»e floprhfil of tlioir jo^'* in 
my poiiceEul aboJc oC Vaikiin^hu. Foi iH} weapon — tlio winkle--* <li-c of 
desti notion — doe*? not touch tlio-c to whom I am dear a^- their owniidie-*, 
and as dear as then sons, uompiiiionN and friend-, anil te.iohei-* and tutela ) 
deity. — III. 25. 37 (Kapila.) 

Note — — A boon cuiiipiiiiiuii m whom Olio coiifuloM his HOeihtH nnil places 
bistiust, A well-wiBhing fiioiid, 5^; — 0110 xvho couumcIs 30U1 x’lcll-bcing. 

ffi ?f§gmprt??iT5rg¥mTrafi*i i 
5ncj?umg ^ ^ 5:ni: qaj^ n ^'S ii 

xjgfjTrxrhc'g \ 

¥}5?J!T m?J5r^Kf?IxiR^ U U 
5n«[5i fr^sinoifr: Ti^wqis^gciri. i 
^Rnfi: *557 w u 

Os 

( ^ i 1 «o ) 

¥if^ cr5:(q^g3r^ 3:T^qm i 

c^iw^in^gflqrto ^cucm^ ^icuig ^ 3 % 

^ 1 ^tofig: { 3^53 t;\ ¥i5ffe *5to:ici 

5r%qrT^:% ?rrcr7r^3rf3^r?:a¥if^7T^?r^?ri^3R gqijficqf^q^qr^: 1 

tofqi^X ^131% 1 ?icft ff %sr7^iTK3gg^¥ixK%5i;i:qf5r%q 

5g3l«lf II RC II 

3 g qx!£if=5rf3t^ 1 ggiq^ger 1 giRi'sr Hct 

¥qin^ 1 351^37^ ¥i?Tcrcr: si?qr7 nf fggi 77333 ^ 3 ^ ^ri^g. 373357 : ^5%?3»4* 

H ^7T3 toq%gc3 511533 313* ^*^K“ 

^ Wl, II H5 II 




THE FIRST STRING B7-32 


15 


27*29 I carry thorn beyond the domain of Benth'^-thoy who care not 
for this life or the life hereafter , nor care for those who next to solf are so dear , 
snoh as wife, children, home, cattle and riches Who having given np all 
other objects of value tako fervently to my devotion That awfnl terror*— 
Death— does not recoil from anyone except me, who am the Lord of Matter 
and Spirit, the Life of a^ beings —III 25 88 40 (Kapih) 


cHH!FT?5R?n W5?*n ii ii 

< a I 'Bftw ) 

«rra; gijn^ nfwar n a° II 

30 Therefore do thou sene the hononrod feot of the Lord in every 
possible way with unfailing devotion such as is inspired by his cxeellences 
—III 32 22 (Kapila ) 

H«ie ends the edvioe giVeii by CMptla to bii mothei The next verse 
is from the speech oi Quean Sai iu to big aou Dbinva 


cl^ 





I 


<w 'st^ nFa g s fl fdgtqawig 

aisijrn. I sR&fe i wi>if «j??i i 

H&ffwwiawi I nm sfw itrc*!! Hftiw i 

af%»ra; i irsiftr B^mcn fejA , 

nirc^r i snnwi i ?? ii 

31 Seek shelter under Him who is fond of bw devotees whose path 
IS sought after by msi desirous of M^kn Fhoiiig your love on no other 
object purify your hoiit with liis devotion Fiaco Him there and servo 
Hun*— IV 8 22(Sunlti) 


5n?=*I cTcT I 


( a 1 C 1 5*^ giftfe* ) 

tasift!! qf^tf iPT^<iRr i i 55^ algigarT- 

cRisTRT m ^3 <11? ’i«tr t «i3 *r,'f 11 ii 

32 1 do not see, my child anyono else than the Lord having lotus 

ej os, who can remove thy grief — Ho who is sought after by Laksm! herself 
sho uho holds a lotjs m her hand , and who is sought after bv others 
(Frahm& and other gods). — ^IV 8 23 (Snniti ) 




16- 


TllE Bn AKT IRATE A vATJ. 


Note , — LikSiiii is said fco carry a lotoR (o cool horself Tfitli ifscoiilacl \y 1 iod 
she 18 left to herself lu His ubsonco and piuiiif; in her {'liof uf sepotaLiun. 


| 

n2> 

snSSLW^iqC^ I cSrf 

I ^?iK?:Tfa^Rifcqr c^r 

\ 5 I 

3t(^ Id# f^cT^^T! ^ 2Rf^tg*/«^'^f^ i ^ 

^ l | sgf^Tji^aqr^fcr ^q: II \\ II 

SWRStflvqi SWl^TlsiiR 55qt^g qcq>l4f% H: \ 

^^fqq55*q^5^qc58P5I: ^sTfST^nsn^f^T^cTeq T^ciqi ll^gU 


( a IRo I ) 

?i^Tfq ^ 1 Relief fq Rc^Rerr- 

q: qts^ii:K ^f^fcT I ^fflqlgJTt^ 1 q;f?3j g=5^qfq 

qidfq?i=ft ^mqc^Tqi. I fq i qq nqr 

H^qfq ^T qiPseq^ I XT^cqq fl^lcRfiq ^sjef 

cHTW^fqifflfcT II || 

33-34. Well, it hko the goddess who cauios a lotus in her hand (Laksmi), 
I chose thee for ray Loid — thon, the foicmost of beings, the abode ot all 
excellences — may thoie not aiise a quairel between me and Laksmi because 
of our rivalry to win the gi eatei favoui of our common Loid to \\hoso foot 
both of us aio intently devoted ? It i& likely that m my attempt to share 
with the mothei ot the univoise thy love, I incui her displeasure. What, 
if I do so ? I, who am intent on the meditation of thy toim. And I know 
thou raisest the lowly to eminence (and am thus confident of thy suiiport). 

— IV. 20. 27-28 (Piithu ) J n J 


Note Tins lust veise is somewhat obsome. It has been diffeieiitly explained. 

The following is an alternative LiiuiRlation • — 

IE in my desiie to be in thy seivite whioh she Hunks is exuliisively her own 
pt eiogalive, site le hostile iuwnids me, thou knrwest to laiee the lowly to a high 
position (and will, I am sure, suppoit me). Foi what raiesl thou for bet, thou 
whose thoughts aie ceutied on thy own self ? 

he atttibutive vriKrSTTTvrrf is suggestive of hei motheily foigiveness of the 
spea ers (Prithua) piesumption to seive her Loid And it is possible sh o may 


THE FJJiST STRING SSSt 


17 


forbear, Bnt if alie dooe not, PfiUm le saro of His protection against ber hostility 
Por Hd knoire His nntnia nliiok defends the weak ogaiust the strong and Will not 
be bowed down by her frowns or yield to her persnasive smiles 


sr: ^ ^ ^f|RrRij 

^ radt ^ ^ ii ii 

( 8 U8 1 51= ) 


«i3T5RrT nd wram «i«rT \ 

5T ^ wnmiiiT ^ 5;f|f%?9c.u u 


(8|518U«>5S.) 

>^3 53^inRr fiiq> jrrrcr 5c39t H%cra 

STfqtHI 3 3 Higtaig^HTO ^ iff CT 33 ^ fS3 

atfipj fffir 3r 1 33 ji 3 ?5g f32^II?^nv^3TS^. a^wisi. 

3t H5i(333^lfH3mif3e33 lUill 

81337 ^3 ^ S(3t I ff?3re 1 81^ I «7f^d^ 3ft H'lft 3!l«353nift* 
3tff I Bg II II 

35-3G Deir to me u ho who lias resigned himself to VAsndova-^-greater 
than subtle PraknU (oonstiiatod of tho tbroo punas) and Pariisa Oolopi 
Jivas) 0 yo dovoioos of NtTruynna ' yon nro ns dear to mo ns is flio Lord 
Kilr&yana Himsolf So al o am I doir to tho do\otoes of KArA}aim as Ho him* 
self IS dear to them —IV 28*30 (Itudra to tho I’rachotus) 

Hots— The ordinary Saivas and Vai^maTas (the followere of tlira and Visna) 
are nsnally at logceiheads with one nuolhei Fnrtionlnrly the 8if Vaienavas of 
the school of Rdoifionja who always eriuoe aepirit of ezulusireoess and lutoleranoe 
So ton the f^tuvtk Imigdyats of the Sootliern Presideuoy of India The olive 
liratiob extended by Bodia lui iiHiialed in the Bh&gavala, has failed to bung peace 
between ll^e combative aectaiiaiis 


5ice^ in^T 5P=Ftf?id«nf i 


( 8 I 3a I 8fi 3K3 ) 

J H I S vlf <rd 3W qrafwistl 333ciTO3 

3®&^31ff I tRWBfeT ^7 8^3!^ 5^) 3^1331 813 tgtftRft 

S R ^ g 3 8 I B R3T i»3t« I 33 tg 333 3718'^ nfift BinSIB II 5« II 

37 That is Karma (aotion^ which pleases Han, that is loarmng by which 
eno understands Him and whereby faith in Him is generated Han is tho 
soni of all and is ihoir Lord He is the canso, depending on no one else ***iy 


29 49 (Ndrada) 
3 


18 


TBE BBAKTIRATNAVAlI. 


37b<e.— This is a very familiar verse of the Bh&gavata in the lips of the 
pious Vaisnavas. “Act, act, act" says the Gilfii ‘“Action is better than laaotion,’ 
But what IS that action which is woithy of being peifoimed ? The answer is 
“ what pleases God is the true action.*’ Beery act of man to which God will 
not take exception is good. This definition lays the foundation and covers the 
vast field of ethical science And that is true learning which gives a knowledge 
of God and establiehes faith in Him. All education that leads to this end is good. 
Any other is indifFeieut, badi A oomprebensive thesis' can be written enlarging 
on this short text of the Bhfi,gavata. 

JRStTT^ I 

5r(|: ii^cu 

( S i 1= I IH— « ) 

5Erer«^5r » 

sift |i ii 

93^1 * it^x# \ 

wn?QT JftiTwf 

iRTHfsd aji ^!55i^ G[g[T ^'TcfRT 

a^cT ^a^fcr fig 

5HTgJ II il 

38-39. The gods dwell in him who has unselfish devotion to the Blessed 
Lord. How can the vii tues of the great find room in him who cherishes no 
devotion foi Han and is hankeiing after pleasures beyond his reach. The 
ever-present Blessed Haii is the very life of all living beings as water is to 
the fish. Though a man be gieat (m other lespects) yet he can only claim 
his snpeiioiity as ineiely due to his seuioiity in yeais such as is the convention 
among householders if he is addicted to worldly pleasures and has forsaken 
hisGod— V. 18 12-13 (Piahlada). 

17o2e.— Id society, the male has ibe supeiioiify over the female, the older in 
yeais over the younger. Tins seniorify is of no value iu the eyes of wise men. 
Saiu|liueBS aud devoliou to God aives title to leal semoiiby. 


^?T«arT^‘?q‘ trTsisfn:^ i 


ms fIRST STblse 40-41 


19 


9 wf ^51 9ficieT qrfH wmg^ sctri^i 

( « U= 1 51® ) 

anai^a nunftqt ^^regratawraaear- 

f^sara^aig ?r ^ afaftfir na ^ 'w anar^aaa ara al aaaftc area 
Biai 5 ,TOiajq^afvT afasS a awWcatrsrtaTaga^a a ^aaaai^aaanjr 
aiat?^ a »}^»a<n!itf*nr feat aa spn^ii 8® ii 

40 Han nlono is the Lord Ho has no tear of any ono Ho gives 
slieUer to all who aro opprosscd by £^r Ho is high abo^e all and does 
not consider anything highor than ilio knowlodgo of self Othorwiso ihero 
IS foar from one another (if there are moro than ono rnlcr) ■— V 18 SO 
(Bam&) 

tfota *— ^ iftrir iT:r^ i** Vonly tliero is fear from danlitj ’*1 is Clio great 
Vedanlio doofciioe. lu* Uiiitj ' alooo there la tho ahseuce of fear Oae catioot 
be afield of hitnaelf 

'gwctjJK sr 

?CTH iTffaii^Rr %h «r ggcrsifnic^Riarw 

(8USIB5SJJIRC) 

sra «iiaaa!^ ^ra' ^af aa ag g555ia«n^« erea ^laftsia 
?gaaaagar5^f?r awarat,! gctjgd i gd ^ wget ^<r act ag^a 
sac agajRsa a ^ifa aft a^a s aa1c*afalnairita’i& fada t agar 
uRiRffe .aareaifimia gfiaa asatacatfa wa^ agatfNsi acreia 
satwraif^at faa saa^il ai ii 

41 Whothor you are n dova or a ilait^’R, wbotlicr a man or lower 
than maO} worship with a wliolo heart Bdmit, wlio is Han m human form 
Ho who translated the people of the Httam ICosala (Ayodh}A) to Heaven « 
y 19 8 (Hannmftn) 

Zfofe *^ara, eyiioQjai of Dera, n olestial befog whoso place is higher than 
maO| who le in perpetnal enjoymaot of celestial liFei not eo mttoh enbjeot Co the 
file that flesh is heir to like mortal man That they are not altogether free from 
ailments la to be inferred fiom the meutioo of their having a physioian, the oele 
hrated DbaDwantari as also the twin Aswiul KnmAraa who too ere deaoiibed 
as adepts in the art of healing Aaniasy eynonymoua of Paityaa, are the 
born enemies of the Davas almoat ae poweiinl bat ever aotnated by feelings 
of maJevolesoo against Ood and mao 

Some aoholara have fonnd ao mnch reaemblanoe in the name of the anoiaut 
kingdom of Assyria and its kings and people with Che Aanras of anolent Sanskrit 
literature that they identify the Vedio with the divinities of Assyrians Tide 
" The Aryan Witness ' by Hr H U Bauerji 

Apparently fa modern Sanskrit is deiived front The prefix gf 

haring the mesaio^ of w But In the Vedas menna a powerful being and 




20 ' THE BHAKTIRAThAvALI. 


is derived diftereotly. Even the Supreme Spirit was termed the mighty ” 

The wold as accepted by modern Hindus is fiom the above point of view 
a notable instance of ibe degeueiacy of woids. The 6isb term of expiession Ahura 
Mazda of the Zorostnan religion signifying the name of 'the Divinity, the Great 
Good Spirit, is identical with ^s»ra, s being changed into h. Such a change of 
8 into h IS seen elsewheie as in Hafta for saptn, Hindu for sindhu, <&c., &o. 

ft 5IWf Sr# ?5g^ 5? ^ 5? 1 

' ( yi J ) 

42. Neither noble biith nor gieat toitune, neithoi eloquence, intelligence 
nor good appeal ance is the cause of his favoui. Rama condescended to make 
. us, the dwelleis of the forest, his companions, void though we aie of all the 
qualifications mentioned above. — V. 19 7 (HaniimS,n). 

No^e — This speech of Hanumfin contains the gieat teaching that devotion is 
the true cause of the favour of the Lord. 



5^* 

( yi ua t R's ) 

gicg cr«nf^ 

^?rigi^^c?ir!0*^t5 1 eff 

^€qf»w<i5:sR g§iT «3icif 

I §5r si553[j i i 

err^ i i 

i i) li 

43. It is true that when petitioned He bestows the object prayed foi*. 
But he does not dold such gifts as would make the receivei desiions of making 
further petitions He, of his own will, bestows on the devote^, though they 
have not asked it, the favoui of his lotus feet which has the power of killing 
all.woildly desiies.-— V 19 27 (Deva.) 

Note , — Dliruva (elevated to the position of the pole star) was given this gift 
though he had made no request for it. The young prince’s ambition was to 
triumph over bis slep-motliei and step biothei by attaining higher woildly posi- 
tion than they enjoyed. 



THE FinST STSIA G 44 AO 


21 


51?^ ?fgT|T!frf^sTTO^55|Tg[, \ 

T^cSfRRqn aj^rre^jq gat ^ H88H 

( « I H I i Hlftq ) 

!i 5 »?5ifatfir !Era^«} f aE»i si & iisra ftg fsmsnitiRsniJt- 
treaigsinfe5fiiesi5iH|[i^^5ig?(5^fet trcaissis^ 1 1 ?^as3®5 sia|iT- 

3fent«Asitnq.i usr nar ?i^ 
SJ5 h?^ w gir q? fEc^r wpbsi ira «ivnn& 

fsift-agu ^ivi^quAstsT^gstnAlKi^rasna^ 
iR5n^ sif^ sfonw^^r icr spmci asnsn w ii5<rf<csti»i sjg agtin 

si3^ ifsismsi gi^w ^ga?3 usisum gii^foinsit ^l^sr ?r 

^ Swr ftp' II B8 II 

44 0 Asnni oliicfi I ilitnk tlio host conrso for men whoso minds nro 
distracted by reason of their beliefs in wron^r \icws, is to abandon their wordly 
homos, ivhich aro so miny pitfalls, and by betaking to tho solitndo of tho 
wroods, to apply themsches to tho demotion of Ilnri -»VII $ 5 Prahhidn 

Note —In Uiii spssoh of PiahlAda to hw fathor BiranyaVasjapn, tho ndvieo to 
resort to (ho vrooda is not to be taken literalty Bolitodo is meioty tho means for 
the aroidauee of nordly diatmotions If a person can apply himself to God id tba 
ttidat of Booielyi ia the hoaom of his family, his onu home is as good as the iroodsi 

ti§; I 

wngjg ti gs^ ti 

( ^ I ^ in’? «mt ) 

Jiat »irw»ci t<it IK?!! aasesf*!.' *1^53 sesenw 
Sciir? TOn H^g fsra<i^ TOaftcui? i naraiftft i nc gifie si^iKg- 
c^gt.1 <t?riin^5r lit flfeiftn iianii ^ 

45 Tins is tho snprouio Dharma enjoined in tho S&sims, nnmoh, to 
olfor devotion to the Lod fccitmg his name and by like do^otiona] motliods 

VI 3 SSYamn 

eifgf^qff g qR^snir ^ naps^ i 

ft^qg^ifqq?: ^ grfgw ii ii 

) 

t «ff( iirfvTW TO! I t >IR»?I TOts'fH^ I 





22 


THE BHAKTIRATNAVALI, 


^ ¥iiT5r?r ^cjk ?rgTq^rcT^?r 

^r^ccHcqT^ sr^JTcffTif^ I qihf cnTr%5^ 

fcTs^f^q^K^q ^gcCcT?:?!? n cfsqf sqrafqi^g^er^^ q 

ii \i% II 

46. He is a £ool ^^ho takes slieltci in any one else than the IjohI, \sho 

is not astonished (by his own greatness), \sho i>» fully sati-ifieJ ^^ilh all ho has, 

who is unconditioned, u ho is void oE passions and (thcreforo) tinnqiii). The 
man who lesoits to any one else foi loCiige wishes to cros'* the sea by taking 
hold of the tail of a dog — VI. 9. 22 (Desa*!). 

gviu'SajfsJfi: u e® ii 

( ^ I I 5t= ) 

?ai^cqr5 I HKiq^iqtr ^ I 5lV 

qr^2[(q^ ^5£rq ?r fqvqf^ ^ mm ttq 

5 f s qfl^T km ^ II M'S II 

47. All those who aie devoted to NriiiLyana arc not nCiaid of anyone. ^ 
They view with equal rogaid Siiarffa, A^iirala and Molsu. — VI. 17. 28 
(Rudra). 

I^ote — Swaiga is heaven, the abode of gods Tlioro go after death men who 
have been righteoas in then earthly life Haiaka is hell to which the wicked uio 
doomed for then iniquities Apavaiga— MukSa is a condition in which the soul is 
above the joys of heaven or the misonea of belli It is absorption lu Visnu from 
the point of view of the Bhdgavatns. 

f cnqusR: n sc u 

(^1 

9a W sitftet II feC II 

48. To men who aie devoted to the Loid and \sdio aie strong in their 
wisdom and mdiffeient to worldly attachments, there is nothing else to ^Yhich 
they would give then adheienoe by leason of its excellence— VI. 17. 31 
(Rudia.) 

Vl^WHvit^T§aj?ri rlUTO 2«T: n!Umf^?l'*3o§i!n«TT15 Hg^ll 


Till: FIRS! STBU’G 60-Sl 


sa 


ShlT 5JgT. H |l 

( « U I ngl^ ) 

afs MnRrsr o^nrnfe^ fi^er «re5r 

walarat «n ^{SnSer !t «<i&«r ^<ir ^ tprasr WTCT?fir fRttfen^ 
sra<Pn?i5#i5'K#»ifRifrfi[^^^ af»T«f sate Rrerar aa afga ^atnif 
^<n aanft^^nr^’a^.aa' a aaa wia ii «s ii 

aw *ilfi«ii5Ji a <:a i a<t»nw ig[,^f^afegt na a^wratf^ana i 

a & fa^ftflr^Snaar i fimaiftraifaTaan 1^ aatg 
ga<i[«ff^&<iTnfir»iwiaw&ftga<r^tllw5 areaf^aalai aftK^areif 
^<n & afttaferi^a gas&a agfdlsf ^ & fsRa feaj«aa!afta«Rnaa 
jaro* I s^aaatamar asat aai jf«na a ^ feg a^aarar aai SPr 
farea asaf alataar ^aa^PJIPJi aafii aiaifif arBRnf^aiatfir atai a?af 
aiaPwaj aa aasatera i aj® fimilaiifWarf&afai^sa ssjea 
arenit fi[<aa a^g ajrtjff fttmaaig,! a?ma aiafaaaarerar araafir 
aiaanwi aaf^aatrg aaat^a aaala t% agaiani || «<> || 

49-50 Tho miods oE men addicted to worldly wnys aro not tornod 
towards Kfiano, either nrged by i ones own inclination or by tlio oonnsol of 
others or as the rcsalt of exchange of thonghts of ono another 6nch mon 
enter the dark regions of hell bcoauso they arc unable to rostmm tho organs 
of sonsua! enjoyment feeding on them like cattle obewing tho end They do 
not know that Viann is the Jiimmum 5e»»m of life Tlieir hairts aro fixed on 
wicked thonghts and notions, sotting n high ^uliio on tho externals of 
worldly objects They are like blind men being led by tho blind bonnd by 
the chain of the iitoalism of tho Vedas— <yil 5 dO 31 (Pmhlftda ) 

Note —Both the Gli& nod the Blifignvati apeak dispRrHKiiii.lf of the Entma 
K&nda (iilpBliBin) of the Vediw OompHre et^ ^TBTT^sr I 

G!t4 n 45 t^sTT^r nnr wr^?ftFfT — Gi»a 11 42 

^iwrw i 

^1*1 TTunsr ia?rT II n 


( a 1 5 1 ? aifta ) 

f^aia t^are ifa i sla ai^rsaaPi awfa sitaia i aa wJ?^aa: i 
aaa^laa:aaacrecr?aj^ a^ ^aanairaa^agf^aniaaaiaf^ 
aiais^agai^narenai aatf^ apiaaiaa a !iinara;i ^tt(a«Rlaa:* 
aroi^faa in^ii 



^4 


TEE BIIAKTI RATE Aval t 


51. Tho wise should take to devotion ol! the IMc^scd Lord t'lom early 
years. It is a raio good fortune to have hninan rc*meai nation. Life is 
epheinoial and its short term ‘•hould bo made to yield a*? much as one can 
extract out of it. — VII. 6. 1 (Prahlnda). 

( « I ^ I ng(?: ) 

cJTSTi: 1 51 ^icJT^5T^ mim ^isrPr ^ ^ i ii ^?,\\ 

25. 0 scions of Asuia'. ! Ihoio is not much haid-hip in tins woik of 
pleasing Achynta: ‘smeo lie is the ^oly soul of o\ciy body and is present 
everywheie. — VII. 6. 19 (Piahlada ) 

Note , — Aoliyafca la a mime of Vjsnu. fr ^irsrrT TTv^fTT t(: 

TCTSfct y ^ £.| He who 18 etui nally fixed 'lu Iiih own natiuu iiiideiKuiii); no uiiiuige. 
He 18 so very iieiir, d'.velliiig in uuuN own beiut, lliut one ims not to go fur in senioh 
of Him. One Bl Sigavata uoiumeulniy expIuiiiH fg^renH to ineau tliat tho ptc* 
pitiation of God is aocoraplished by the moio VMsh to ploaso Him and tUorefoio 
does not involve mach cost or biboiii . 

^ i 

qisisi: 3 j|t i 

uS^^T-HT: ^{?a' =!^brtS8H 

( IS I vS UC «o ) 

cr«rr i i firqr- 

Ig: l) 

f^qT^?ifT?cm5 I ’cpjj'' [f^T I K\m ?i«riJ i gq m 

I vqq ^ l 

5J3r% II y« II 

1 l Ig: ^cTT^f^ I 

5?]r5if^^ >^h3[ 

^cr«335?T5tcr{5:g^qg't%su^rti 5 t xt 


THE FIRST STRING ] 'S3^7 


25 


?a ^ l«wi ftJfta KPR^jr agstn sjsrer 

snsnra ii ns il 

53-55 0 yo soions o£ Asnrul ranch hbonr is not in\olrod in tho 

sdoration of Hon, vho pomdos like Ak&« and is prosonf in iho heart of 
ovory ono Ho is the friend of oacb nod all Whnt is iho good of proenr- 
ing gratification of iho senses knowing ns ono doos that sneh enjoyments 
aro common to all liyjng croatarcs (oren to the smno that rorols in filth) 
Wife, children riches, cattlo, honsos, lands, olophants, hoarded treasure^ 
all worldly prosperity is nshort-lired and can do littlo good to mortal man 
These pleosares of the world (earthly and hoaronly) aro the towards of 
religions sacrifices They are snbjeot to dooay, they aro not free from impurity , 
they create jealousy Thorofore m order to reach the Snpromo Being, 
worship Him whoso blemish no one has soon or hoard, with a devotion such 
as has boon proscribed (in iho ^fistras of tho Bhfigavntas) — VIU 2 38-10 
(Prahl&da) 

-—Tliere fiR Sjealotiflj] nt] llie eigtit of some one poeiessiog an object of 
pleaenie, lliatijoa liAiiker after bnt wbith jron have » ot ^et Bren the gods are 
not fr^a,{from jealonsy Wlieie ia the dtfierenoe liatirean man and the brute oree 
tnre if the former lias no bi|*iier object in new than the Birinish ideal of life-^ 
eat, drink and be merry f 



( « I « I UB ) 

Ji^wn BBftpjT n <i% it 

56 Therefore be unselfishly devoted to tho solfloss Lord ^for on 
Him depend all our virtues the fulfilment of our desires and tho attainment 
of wealth —VH 7 48 (Prahl&da) 

Note —That la to eay, by serving Han joa will obtaio all the material comforts 
and pleaeorea of life It lanO nee labaonog in eeaiob of tliem 

srmiiTcHsiT 

5T IT sipren n ii 

(«i<s ) 

SI w wjhimifir s i ^^f sng i sj^itswr siiftgsir JitsTi* 

II II 

57 0 scions of Asuras I neither brahmanhood nor godhead, nor seership 
suffices to obtam the grace of God , nor good conduct of life, nor wide 
kn^lcdge and expenencOv^YlI 7 51 (Frahl&da) 

4 



26 


THE BliAKTlRATNAVALL 


( vs I I ) 

-i tc^^HTOTT^ sn^if^c^ ^ng^Tsi^ i 

fsi^errf fr5?rjn?cq[,ll «j.c ii 

58. Neither charity, nor asceticism, nor sacrifices, nor purificatory riles, 
nor penances and religions vows please Him. IIo is pleased with pure devotion. 
Everything else is futile, more mockery.— VII. 7. 52 (Prahlhda). 

?I5^ ^strfSisin^qHq: 5stlT3i#3j: jprtoty ^aqi-ijqii feqmr: i 
nro^imv fg q^ v'Ci srsFcvi adiv wrara na- 

^ \a « NS* N. 


U H ( <5 1 a » a ) 

^sr: ^^«T§3?iRT 1 stHt^ol i 

ifej mi 5TtJTtS5TiT: \ q:^^?TT^§[l^^(f*T W- ^(tt'3- 

fin d ^ig'ffcT % 5jf5rj vnrHikgiitsiigri 

ci^lTlc^T^^* il »ia 11 

59. I am of opinion that neither wealth, beauty, learning, strength, 
energy, power and piestigo ; intellect and the transcendental powers acquired by 
Yoga are qualifications to please Haii. Ho wms pleased by the powerful do^ o- 
tion of the elephant, the leader of his herd, — ^VII. 9. 9 (Prahlfida). 

Note — The elephant alladod to was seized by an alliRator and drawn into deep 
water. In his distress and despair he prayed to Nftrriyena for his I'oloaso fioia 
the water monsUr’s grasp. YiSnn took pity oi\ him and snvod him from his petil. 

The story is given m the Mahabharata Saiitiparva, ** The release of 

the elephant,” is a well-known stotra (prayer and piaieo of Visnu) logalarly read 
by pious religions men 




< « I I c ) 

ff If si^^sf i5g[^*5r^?5R5Tt ^rr^¥iR 5 % ^^fcffcTcl flrf^sr- 





THE FIEST STRINO 60-62 


2? 


iBiuRCfPra: ^rrrfifTO* a^fesiRsi asH^n^ 

wco aeafasiaift f5P83i.ii V> ll 

GO 0 how stnngo aro tby doings Tliat thon shonldst scorn to bo 
partial, although thon art tbo seal of all and has an oqnal regard for all 
Tlion art so shilful, having bronght into monifostation tho vorld m&o play*, 
fulness of thy incomprchonsiblo Toga^jliriyd llion art loving towards ib^ 
dovotet^ and bccomcst tlioir colostial tree that knows not to rofnso anybody a 
prayer —VIII 27 8 (Prahl&da) 

iVofe*-'TogA SfdrA IS tlia mystarioai power of tbe Supreme Being that oreatoa 
the iHneion of the plionomenn of this world The osenipation from the charge o| 
partiality is suggested in the verso Hari is compared to the Kalpa iaru the 
celestial tree that does oot refaae tho request made to it. Tho s&itor appioaohea 
tho tree and by his ptoyorrolness qaallGea himself (o obtain what he begs So 
J3haht» IK the qnnlifieation to merit tho Lord e fiivonr Ekowhere the Lord is 
compaied to the file The fire wai ms all who approaoii it lirenpeotive of creed 
eiMte and oolonr And It Is not liahio to the oharf.e of pm tialily for so doing And 
Jnst as men, inimical to one another, eau receive warmth from fiie whioh imparts H 
with an tqaal regard to all witliont any distinotion, so Ban gives Bhahti to all who 
go fo liiffl for it— 'the wolf and the lamb, both dilokiei, Iho iiootai from the fonu 
tain of ills Love 

^e^prTcr RSRmrsmn fgv5re?i5»5Rsga \ 

II II 

U??n§5TT law FRgoPracII I 

51^ II ^5^ II 
( l® I fi I 35! ) 
WR^Wflri i spnng- 

Sift *i5>n 53rc5r^ Sr«r5trr nr ^wwcftflr 
iis«i!r 5itCTnn^f»p5* n M n 

^^sumrarr ii li 

6I-G2 Sooing his naoiher’s fatiguing exertions, her body wot with por- 
' *' spiraiion, her hair dishovollod and tho gardlnnd of fiowors that was tied round 
hor knotted locks unloosed, Kptsna, out of compassion for hor, allowed himsolf 
to bo caught and boundl Thus did Han, who though his own master and 
under whose subjection lay world and its rules, show bu subjection to 
his devoted people— X 9 18-19 (^uka) 

Note —This IS id allueioo to (he very popular and miraoulone moldeot in the 
life of Efisna daring the period of hie oliildbood He was guilty of soifie childish 
prank and Lie foster mother Tssodd tried to get hold of hua and to keep him tied 


5ntsii^l ^ (ir!aR3[5»T5ra'!K«r smt flfiKfiwsSfir pr 
5ra«ifefiralfe !ifs 




28 


THE BHAKTIRATNAVALl. 


to a large wooden moifcar. Ropee weiojproomed but tliey ull fell slioil. In her 
struggles to bind Inm she whs quite exhausted till at last seeing her sad plight 
Rrisna of hiB own accoid nubmitled and allowed himself to be bouud, Heuue oue 
of KfiSUa's names is Damodaia — ** Bopecbamed lound the waist,*' 

3!^ Sit# ^Ttcsnu u 

STR S?|5n itlfU5E5T^?F: I 

O ^ *s. ' ^ O 

( ? 5 1 Ro — ) 
^1o I ^grfcr 

vRi I 51 5Tt«n ^isir^r crciirrsf? 

^^51* CT^: II %% *1 

^5if gi^5Tf ^'i*gTf¥T5Tr5iT5rTrrf^ ^»3T‘T»‘ ^qr fq?rr 

5T 5I^(Sf^?r II li 

63-64. Neither Biahm^ nor Siva nor oven Laksini, who \sas even united 
to his body, obtained the tavour that the milkmaid YubodS, got Irom the Loid, 
the giver of Multi. The son of the milkmaid, (t. e., Krisna) is not so easily 
approached by men of learning or, by men of abstinence and asceticism as by his 

devotees. — X. 9. 20-21 (^uka). 

3^ ^^Tfq ^Tf315T5?I^f§^T fiT5ig5?d?lSW 1 

^ ( to I I a— « ) 

i sm.^ 

^ r5T?s?:T?j!f ^f^erq qi ^qf 

^!{i qqiqfsg^q^ qi5qfi^q?rr ^s^^gqfqmfcrqn?, I ?iq q^r ^rsq- 

^ifq qfeq^q 5icriqiqjTi\qTq: 55^^^qr5qr«i«5risi: k q^cffcr ^qf q 

f^feeq=i^qq 57f^* ^ qq^ ^iqqifq it ii 

qiq s^qiqjqfq i ^ ^fqsrtf^ qt^f 

^TSTTO^q cqf^ ^fq^T ^T^feqqfq fqsrqiWSl^qqT 

^q^fqqf^: cq^rqqt fir ^ fqsnfq qiwff^ ^ q: oi^g^cqci- 

S ^qqi cqcgiqiq^ srrfqqqr cqcfjqmqqjreT^rscq^iqr 

«^qq fqq«q ^Tcfliq ^Rqr ^ q^f qfcf vmH (I %% (| ^ - 



IIlUrjRSi STRlIi G 67 69 


29 


65 GGi^Tboy Tvlio giving up demotion from which flows a stream of 
blc««mgs, tako pains for tho acquisition of mcro learning, got noUimg 
but pains tliat they havo nndorgoiio The) nro like thoso who thresh more 
husks and do not obtain food gnims as tho fruit of tboir 1 ibonr 0 tfion 
who fillcst tlie imincnsitj of space, manj a Yogi, in times of yoro, haring 
consecrated their practices to Tlico speedily readied Thoo->-tlicir goal^by 
means of devotion w Inch comes io them os the result of their Karma in tho 
shape of listening to tho narration of th} glorious deeds (of iliy many incarna- 
tions) "’X 14 4 5 (Brahm&} 


( ) 

ocET SI fpirasrFianict tpisr si^aRr a^uariwg^ifsf^ 

afeiRifIr I sftrarsnsnem tgsr I si^ gsrat srat^iirenr ^ ii n 

67 0 noblo-«onlod hianda 1 when both }OU and \n«odi'l Imo centred 
your devotion on NArA^tinn , \\ ho is tho o\ cr*— soul of each and nil and is tho 
nrst canso of 01 ory thing , lie who has uiearnatud in human form with an ond 
in now , nothing more remains to bo done l>y } ou in tho disohargo of yopr 
dutios^X 46 dd (Dddha^a) 

irtWcU'S?! 5W I 

ll || 

( to I »» I W 3^ ) 

si5i ^ST 5Rr »i^Ris:to fe acimqisst^iT ^ 

gaiftfirwEr lucii 

68 Chanty, obsorvanco of vOws, asooticism, olforing of oblations to flro, 
repoatod nttomneo of mantras, recitation of soripturnl texts and tho withdrawing 
of tho senses from them, objects of ploasuro, and the performance of many 
other acts of riglitoousno^s arc tho moms to load a man to tho devotion of 
Kfiana 47 24 (Uddhava) 

gi tB:tcFr^re:s*rra I 



" » ( t® ' (w ua 35 :ei ) 

EtET snfa9Ti<iK3<.i)^^ w«ra^nt wfeHfeflHtfT m falqw t iiinnc 
sscErara^ i 3»ra*Ef{ ifw nq >it<Afqqq 

aig ?^SEq«t I Eis[t i siqqiEidsun i 

S®" 5 ETigai! *ra^ q&fer « sa li 


I 




30 


TUB TiUAKTJRAT^^^AVALt, 


69. Hero were nislic women impure, Ijocjiuso of (licir moral laxit)', aiifi 
yet they had their love fiimly hxed on Iho Blc-i'^od Lord Kri'<iia and lie was 
choiishing an affection for them. Indeed it is a matter of surpnee that it 
should be so. Vciily the Lord readily lavishes fa^ our on His devotee** even 
if they aie ilhtoiaic and uncultured. I’owciful medicines effect cure on 
patients whoever they may bo — X. 4.7. 59 ( Uddha\a. ) 

Noi<J.— 'Devotion to Krisuiv saveP tlio dovotoo tlioMuh lio bo a BinMor. Jnst hb 
ofEcaoioaH mediciuoFi do Kood fo tlio patient llioufjli liifl ROcml or moral obnractor 

be not uprifflit, Bhiikti la not rofuaod to any one and it is ofiicaotona to all wbo 
seek it, , 

5fTU ^ f5tutvcR%: 

u 'SO II 

( I Uo 1 ijcrgr; ) 

It 11 

70. This favour of Sii Krisna’s aims encircling the nodes of the beauti- 
ful milkmaids of Viaja in the dance on the fcsti\al of Rfisa which conforrod 
^ on them the highest felicity — this was not vouchsafed to Laksmi so fond of 
him, much loss to lessor colostial beauties who wore so attraclivo by tho 
fragrance of tho lotus of paradise that they boro on thoir person. — -X. d?. 60. 

U H ( mo I ?s I ) 

Hj5?n^5if 'sli ^iRiT ^iRofJicm^ i Jim 

,«i¥;TOhr flc^r H vs^ n 

7X- 0 1 that I were tho wild creeper and herbs of Vxindflvana and 
obtain thereby the blessed contact with the dust of the feet of tho milkmaids-— 
they who forsaking their family ties and leaving tho regulai path of social 

® No eompiimant to the Qopis ot Yciud&vaua. This lehection npou Llieir olia- 
raeter makes'it difficult to reconcile a previous statement that the love of the dopis 
was not carnali 



T/IZ: riJ^SrSTHlAG 72-73 


31 


rospociabilliy, cJnng io iho feet of Sfifnai sought after by the Vedas— X d7 
70 (Udd^va) 

/7ofd — This yearning for rosidenoe to VftDdftTAoai as voiced by UddhaTa* is Iho 
pione wish of all VoisnaTaSi devoted io £fisna trorehip Tina ataoca fa on llie 
lips of learned Yaisnavaa and ODO may easily underaland why so many pllgnma 
flock to VyiodAvana and many of lliem choose it ns the reatdoaoe of iheirdhat 
days. Ko wonder that Ohaitanya Deva of Nadiya and hla dlaoiples and followers 
who were devoted atndenta of the Bhdgavalo, took to Iho woik of restoration of 
the eacred Bitea of VpiuddvaDa which tn^ fallen lato decay after the sack of 
UalbnrA and the demolition of templea by the klobamodaus. From Ohaitanya'a 
time VfindAvano has become the rewt of Bengal Vaianava pilgiima and many 
are permanently eettled there After the foiy of liolmirtedan intolerance had 
abated with the downfall of Ifognl ralot the Baipotana Oliiefe and noli Seths SLd 
landboldera of all parts of India boilt temples and endowed oharilies which havo 
oontnhnted to the prosperity of Vpind&vana and Uathnrd 


srsjfnn 5OT:fai i 

(to iisitugaifHt ) 
qO mut i waiB gtagimtfa i 
, sETin: (Rr w wawioit^i sn^srat rfer a^r snfta ®a agttj fita- 
' «n^ I fifrg tinfeaw wana ^roca Pk^ wBna tn i i roi CT 

ftfir >>ra qig JnraiJS awft ■ksi aaia 

si^r^i faTi^^nroraw jnnisipnrn?*! naif^irs^ 

aa^s ii n 

72 Tboa art Brahman, iho sdnl of all, having sd equal oyo upon nil 
niou oxpenencest thino own joys (not doponding for ihy j(^ on oxtomal 
objects) Thoroforo thou makost no distmotion botwoon people as hoing ihy 
own or os being other than thino own Thy favour goes to them who servo 
thee , as is tbo gift of the celestial tree to him who approaclios it with a 
request, their rewards varying according to tlio mensoru ofi ihcir soivico 
There is no distinction in this treatment— X 72 6 (Yndhis(hira) 

Note WUli reference to the oonoinding stalemenl, oouipare Gltg lex/, IV 11 

^ rnn WT ii 





I 



iTCfi’CCT u It * 


( to I I m ) 

ftra' afeanuiiBj^ unwiftfcr spftRr I 

aPi a i m waa ra i ^raataf aft ^5 wreftg 

wRras sa. a^na aaan®! iRfti n 



32 


TUB nilAKTJRA 7W"l VAlI. 


73. Thoii (lovotion to mo cnahlos all l)oings to aitnin (o immoi I ility 
(MolvSa). You aio to bo con^ralulalod «j)on }om alVcction lor mo bec,iu‘-o 
it enables you to reach mo — X. 82. 4.1 (KriMiia). 

Note — TImr (inauiance of KriSibi to Jho Gopln ib iin anMiontaltvo tloclamUon 
that Bhukti IS tlio loyal rond to leiich Him. 


srft ^35^ •pipri^ci i%cf i 

5n 51 uutlf u u 

STHTSPSII^iu 



U W 

( I 3y-3.^ ) 

^ ^ TO ?j=^ f5?iT ?a?5a=ignqLi 1 ^'^- 

TOT^3v:i^ ^ # ;jqpEr(: ¥rTO?n^ D vsa ll 

\ ?r(?Tre5crc^% I TOi^TO ^ nx^ 

^:rr5r3rrq- ^ TO'7^'7% f?Tif\or?f 

TOTO I i ^%REf5?fV qf^c-^TifS^ i fsr^o?: 

^5^r#;fT 5i^;5kHq I f^f^?3^^fa5fr^3T55i3rw=5i5C<Ti to?? cT^stt 

^csrf^ ^ sicJiTOr erm fr 'Si ii 

^xm^x I tit i \ ^ 

^r[f5rf^ ^ 1 H«rr 

I 1 5KWf^"tfrr^5r 5HTO 

5^cng[^5ir^?gc5nf^¥ricng[^ i q?:^& 5TKi??q(- 

^!£iTv^f^ w wx€vtm^i \\ ii 

74. Know ye the methods which the Lord himself has laid down for 
.easily reaching him oven by the unlettered and uncultured — know them to 

be the Bh&gavata Dharma (the religion of devotion to the Loid). — XI. 2. 
34-36. 

*^5. Following these methods, a man does not sworvo^Irom the right 
path. He can run with closed oyej neithe\^slipping nor falling. 


rns FIRST STRISG 77. 1 8 


33 


76 Wliatever a man does mill his bodj, words mind or bj the fores 
of Iiabits, lei him oonscorate it to the Supreme Being bj uttering the formula** 
“ To Narfiynna ? SI 2 34-36 (Knvi) 

^ 

sne»n! ftw »i«i5®nr<^{KtOd«ira?Ji >ic5& inidiam ac^^iatn 

Hutmu ^ I »raiir wr ipn^^R r «r 

fe fet{g q >iw fiife flw II ®s II 

77 Ono ahodid loam to conai^ all doairablo objectst all gifts of ebantj, 
penances, ailont repetition of tho divmo mtntras, good deeds and also 
Trhich IS dear to oneself,— wife, children, bouses, oven lifo— to Godw— 2^ 3 
2S (Probbaddha) 



^ ii «; ii 

( « I ^ 1 3«» nf^ ) 

«« I TwRrflr I wr wottot a^w w i a t a »ia» 

Ti^if ’73 w »isifcr w ^ 

?r'aar«<in9f<3!li7l.fi!*ra Trei wtar warwr?! fer- 

flrg«?u aairain sr^Ri anaa ^STt^^fa aaf 
aal feftaiftf^awg wj aafa afes’wrT’B^’afr amig i agas *ai 
aat I tat i aqaat wi atat atcaar i ar&T & aaapt mar- 
fPcPa & 1 ic^atar aTaat aiaif^arfeiar a^a fea ga taatear f»Bsi 
anfat^Bsr*rea’rat aft Hf^traa* I aaiijatqjiB 57^»mat%*na naan 

78 Man has to fear from his false porooption of dnal^ty One who is 
drawn away from God bolds either tbo false idea of identity with the body or 
IS forgeif al of and does not enro to eoqniro into his true nature , and this is 
dae to MftyA— the Mlnsive power of tho liord Tliercforo man shonld serve 
' the Lord >vith devotion, [bolievuig m tho Buporionty of his Guru , nay, in the 
Gnra s very divinity.— XI 2 37 (Savi) 

Note — ytf la ooly ill osnoealed repiodactlon of the very well 

known and oft q^noled Sroti (B{(litid&t>HXiyka 14 2) Bat 

while ibeVeddntf will prescribe ^tli« pHitnoea of Ituolw^ dKe ooittmued in tbelfahd 
Fdiyds of the Ybda, eaob ae ^ and TFfcnvf^ aod eereral others, all of 

wbioh deolare that there le only one and uo eeooud to fear, the eohool of devotion 
teabhes^that^thie false fear from whioh man saffere, xl it were real, ii dispelled 
5 



34 


THE BHAKTIBATNAVAlI. 


by prayeifol devotion to ibe Supreme. God Ime created tins illusion of dunlily nnd 
He alone can lemove it by rnipaiting to tins enqnuy tlie (tue natiiie of Mait’e 
relahon with God ami Ood’s uatnie. This lemedy >8 safei nnd speediei lu its 
action. 

551 %5l5ri ^lC^5T5l^^l55RTSn: ^^1^115^5^:4 551511 
5^ I ? n? 5 ^ 5 5f|i5 5#H i55¥nviM 5% 55? 

r51 l (55n 51^ 153 ^5 1 ^ W H «<£ H 

( I « ! ) 

H sTJTi^er cr^*T5!g?Q 

ferjTf ^Ci: q?3f ^?IT5nW£r3raT 

iror 5T srr^f7 ^f*TRC 

^ tit ^ 

^ ?ift?rT ^i g<ifcr 

a^rgcTT ftingf q^Fsf spgt gig; fgsffgg qg 

ll ^aa ii 

79. Those who give themselves up to thy devotion have to encounter 
many obstacles thrown on their way by tl^e lesser gods becanse the devotees 
aspire to transcend the abode o£ the gods in order to reach the highest place 
that IS thine. But these obstacles are not raised against him who pays to the 
gods their portions o£ sacrificial offerings. Thy devotee, however, kicks away 
all obstacles, having thee foi his protector. — ^XII. 4. 10 (K&ma.) 

Note . — Niimberleafl inatauces of iiiterfereuce by the gods to spoil the effoitg of 
ambitious mortals to gam lugh Beats in heaveu are narrated in the Purdnas In 

mundane affaiis, the same clashing of interests leads to opposition on the part of 
vested interests against the admission intoj their ranks of those who aie considered 
inferior owing to race, colour, or creed, “History repeats itself” or to state 
more correctly, mythology joins hands with history in mutual exposition of policy 
and events affecting the interests of lower end higher spheres. Notwithstanding 
the attractiveness of compatisou it is not desirable to enter into current politics 
for illustration. Hnougb has been noted here to suggest the details of the compa* 
rison. 



N* ^ \ 

'3P5T^ 51%^ 513! ^ ^ r§a T^ 5 ; H CO u 
5 q5 ^5 ^rTSp9{T5TOW54tX5R35[^ I 
51 *ra 5 ' 555 i( 5 f^ 5 55=5 5 5 ; u c^ 11 

( tl I St I ) 


THE FIEST STRlse 80-84 


35 


gq ^resrcatwnj gfitT Tsreis^wii 'wf 

*i«^ wwjsTT ST ^n aPa & ar atssrtarasna^ & sra* <ia% araiwaig 
W6rrePt?Parafaite^a sra ira 5aaaiaai^ aeiatwra i sirw nwf 
3 if«i awRXRBr 5 %»ira« i taut tfir 

*na* ^aiarapiifOTr^ hw ^avai sfir «raa:r i^fa ara* ti «<» -cj h 

80>81 The four classes— Br&bman, Ksattriya, Yai^e and ^hdra— 
iogoiher wi6h the fonr stages of life, have prodaced from the moaih> ano^ 
thighs, and feet the Sapreme Being Their difference is dne to their oonsti- 
tnent qualities \rhich iraiy in their formation Whoever among these classes 
and orders do not attach themselves to the service of the Lord, their auiker, 
either beoanse of their ignorance or becanse thej are nnmindfal, are hnrled 
down below —XL 5 2-3 (Ghamasa) 

jn$ elsirdfei^% I 

eire^swi i iK 3 Tf 5 % fmm h «s(ni n ii 
e ewifM q fda ^pir*^ i 


nver ^i^m^srngHfft 


II II 

( « I e I «t— 8R ftjR! ) 
qtsraat iw fsaraf t?qis diRi i inmiida 
^OT( sPi ^rt^siTO ocatY i wrbr sfta^ «p«ft 

^•isi T SJg* •6'3r 

aviO«c»i«^»Rt 5airaa^aj5 ll >=^— =? H 

82-83 In the terrible Kali Yaga men will forsake all reli^ons ntes» 
ceremonies and observances Th^ who ore given to the devotion of Vdsndeva 
are assured of their salvation Who else than Vdsodeva can save men who, 
bhnded the attractions of pleasures, have fallenm the deep well of wordl^ life 
and then devoured by that python, Time f— XI 8 41-43 (Fingolft) 


sTTswn^rfq fi§»T 5 §t 


TTRi. iRi 5 >raT »w 5 ?nr ii eg ii 

( « 1 1« ' 1= «ftvwr ) 

•imwi-flifllcf I IOT5W sanrfYi ^r vTO i H tPr sn^nmwfft irti 
8^ I 'wnd'K^fewra n*!8n 




36 


THE BHAKTIRATN^VALf. 


84. My votaries, though attracted by pleasures and unable to contiol 
their senses, do not succumb to them by virtue o£ thorr strong devgtion. — XL 
14. 18 (Krisna). 

WI5P=5lfl^tS35tq:^ ll cH II * 

( U I I ) 

^5T fj I fenrr 1 frif^cT 5TTf%?r 

w^crr ??r. i ^ frKTqr^cncgrg^rsrt^^iiwnsrfcf r^?rT^5wi^iT3[^?j: i 
qeii i fe^ffg[qfiq[rcr 

sncwnim: i f^:S^JTT^ i tw ii II 

85. Who else than the Lord Visnu — the great conti oiler oE senses, firmly 
fixed in his meditation o£ Self — who else can restore the heart that has been 
stolen by a seductive harlot ? — XI. 26. 15 (Aria). 

iVoie —This wns «poken by Pai niavas when his own ev«B weie opened and 

be bad realised that he was (he violitn of the ulminiH of Urtati, the inoyt beanfiful 
Peri of liidra’s Gonit Tiieii love fuiras (he subject of the poet Kaiidtisa’s benutifa 
play called the ** Ytkiamot vast ’* 



\\ ^\\\ 

( U I ) 

^!iTsrc5CR5’TW 

«5T^rRiJ^r 

I Pl§rqtf^ m 

Jif ! 5 «wr^ ^w'\^ 5 r jrT 5 Tl% ii n 

86. It is by constant devotion, 0 Uddhava, that one reaches m6, who am 
Brahm^, the First Cause, the Great Lord of all the world, the Creator and 
Destroyer.— XI. 81. 45 (Krisna). 

Note. — Some commentators make one compound word and explain it as 

the *' Source of the Vedas.” 

uuTriJT: *reJTOTg;^i 

5rUT *TT§«Rn WT%i3^f%fnfs ip^t: II c« u 

____5J^^r*R5rcR5UTJ|[T UUT ll II 

.• N&rada Panohaiatra, XIY. 76 IBiblio, Indioa), ~ 


THE rJRST STBISG S 9-91 


37 



s5ifsn5RT ^ra[rq_ I 


«ra;. TTf^ St^qitRlfliq V=lW5lTg^^ll «;< u 

( « I ?8 ' ?S— ’i? ) 

wtR^if smifewr'trri^F?r sn^cTicms i mraa nw- 
^ »pn 'BiBtRi a«rr itntfiiqt^isnPr toT^ nf®<wf 

^r«ft «tr® II as II 

OT^cTTt'Jisnflr I wmsTfir ^fenfinTP^ asftvra^ i sijt a^&fir 

wr «t5fijjr »<it 5iKc«tarl^5 a tn’iWcftrT i ^ ^ »m( 

flfe" «ra«iRr sraiOT grfSaar sc^ttr ii == n 

ii^tnsRcsrretfealcmir trr^ sracjn Hfe cun i ?Tfl«rii^3iiRt^iTr- 
srfff^TOSTSI^^ Sl^rf^ 5757^^ ^ I^^H|ia£l| 

87*89 As the fire with its bnskl/ kmilod flames reduces fuel to ashes 
so does, 0 Uddhan, devotion to me consomo nil sms Neitlier Yoga (Kartna> 
yoga) nor SAnkhya (Jfl&oa yoga), nor tlio practice of ordinances (Yedio ri- 
tualistic rites) nor recitation of the Vodas, performance of penances nor deeds 
of olmrity wins me so much 0 Uddlmvo, ns does dovotion which is superior 
to all Only by one pointed devotion and huth am I won I who utn the 
very loved life of the saints Devotion t(^ me sanctifies oven the feeder on dog s 
flesh (the Ohd^dnla the lowest of the sooial strata) and purifies him of the stain 
of his birth and vocation ^XI 14 19-21 (Kfisna) 

Koti — InnUnoefi of members of tlie most depreened * olanRea linvinj^ bean 
elevated lilt > tlie milk of ■afnta ooonr m tbe leligione, espeoialljr YaisnaVn, |it«ia 
tore of the Hiadaa 


TSRjiTciT uvaiiri^er \ 



fr f| ik»h 


(?l I Itt 1 54!{ ) 

sraSTTTT^ STSTcWVTar araPTWTS SE7W77JI I OT^fi7 I ftttt 


3TO’77 WTJtfeOT m S7?*7I^ »l<y<h«!J5HlR7!7g?77*7^?n77!&<7fi[eStW liaoii 
90 The religion of truth speaking and of tbe practice of compassion, the 
learning that is associated with asceticism and penance^these do not sanctify 
' the man who is devoid of my devotion— ZI 14 22 (K^isna) 

This may be a bit SKBiuat the atbeislio Banddbae and Jamas whose 
systexae of religion differ Bomnoh in esseatials from tiieistio Blifigavalas 


SB17 s?g5iT %?raT rasn i 


« 



fusim II II 



38 


TIIE BUAKTlRATJS^AVALf. 


3[9(% gii^i * 

^ H5Vn%ar^ qiTTT^ IKRU 

C\i j I wii^t ) 

i f^(,w 

¥r3f5ir f^srr ?5^g[,n n 

3?KJ 55irali??«? I 

^qf^qrn^TST %f^ gc^srr flr?rr ’^f^fgr 1 9i«r 

fsicf fecrfnfe ^ n 

91-92. How can the soul be purified without the devotional emotions, 
without the pleasurable sensation oE horripilation, the melting of the heart, the 
flow o£ tears of joy. Lost m my devotion, my votary has his heart melted and 
his speech choked (with emotion) ; ho sometimes weeps and langhs excessively. 
Such a man o£ devotion sanctifies the woild. — XI. 14. 23-24 (Krisna). 

Note — SSnoii eostatio states ot the body and mtiid aie the auooinpanimeuta of 
leaitfelt devotion to God, 

|fnm 3I^TTU «tltu <g 

viT?fn u fii|ry vcsiru^T 

( 1 I ^yi ) 

5T 5fi?K#q ?ncir^. =qwiRT^f^ i w 

» ^TTcf Iff 5f5Tfrr ft ^FelSTlf^** «5f 

5Pt3l^ m ^fRT^ TTS['Tcniinift^ I) 11 

9^. Just as gold, heated by fire, leaves o£E its dross and regains its own 
appearance, so is the human soul cleared of its Kdrmic impurities by the appli- 
cation of devotion and attains tp mo (by regaining the purity that is mine). — 
XI. 14. 25 (Krisna). 

Note . — The oneness in nature of the human and divine spirit is clearly laid 
down heie The ultimate union is the summum honum of the devotee. 

urn ii <»H 

( I® I 

I xt^ f^j^itgrctct l 

^ t«qsRsngi i ?rt 



rut. Fiiisi SIRING s 5 se 


39 


nwcs r » CTa;a-*m [ sk i a^s faft at- 

gefemaw at gfefrSr ii & n 

94 X solicit one boon oE ihoo*— wbo sboworost all bloasings— ibo boon oE 
derotion to tbe liord, to hts dovotoea und to tboe \1L 10 34 (Mftrknndoyn to 
ViSTeavara) 

g felwg 3^i^|5cT^s5iH ^iirerg^eraT^iKHU 

aa ^55 g?g <B«i gfeia' attroiEiiRfw 

I aar «rt at^Pr faaSa i sicaat aagr gaifa 
ww g tpT ^ a|7&aaf5rOTr n^fa am facar aftf 4 t 

feSaiiaasisi &<n atPrar aaiatfaar atniCTig aaawalrg 
*!hH' a faeg fsn^graaftfa aia ii gi b 

95 Other patient toilers by moans oE tho potior oE tho control oE tfaeir 
mind, snbdning tho mighty Pnkriti, booomo Absorbed in Tboo They can 
obtain the same resolt with little labonr if they choose the path oE doTotion 
m 5 45 (Denis) 

Note x-PmkritissrNatiire cM'the 8|nkl«;a philosophy or SlftyA of t lie YeddnU 
and of the Bh&iraTAUB— timt iIIONorj power thet is iiiliersiit iii Uialima to wliiob 
18 aitrlbated tbe nanifesUtioiia we oell the world and Ite plfeiiomena 


THiaj fw aj5n?TT wiwt 


g^nw w T iq g; ! i 


II II 




(3i« I l»H6rr) 


af^ g«r ftPiPra (a v^niki ^ 

I ^ w g ai t a a cfaa iPr g wiatt^ f ? i ljHmP> 

Wg^lPm^aatfaatferi a<ft ^ aaiar aiar aatgrfsrar 
g ^ ^ qgpsa ^atiar gro nPiaai g ac-a a i gSraal ^ gansr 


SaiJEsraP^t gdM.'ci ggrPgl aaPr gaalft a g a r a i mdigl gr wfir ns^i 

96 All through the day,*bxiay and tronbled with many occnpations , at 
night their sleep disturbed by dreams oE yarions things that formed the object 
of their hopes, meir desires and self-seeking activities being thwarted by &te~- 
all snoh as have turned tbeir &ce from Thee are doomed to repeated births and 
deaths even if they areAfunt# (leamedond deep-thmktttgphil 08 opher 8 ).^IIX 9 
10 (Brabmlt) 

Notsi^lpnf* mika^ nlV Aocordlng lo commentators it nMoi learn* 

«a BUB osutanltj oaonpud nitb tbe eted, of tbe isttnu 




40 


THE Ell A KTIRA TN Al^A LL 


^?:ra5T «in5s%T {grc^iycscgcEt ’^■^r(|cri t^eti eici HtErar % 


(B. I ^«i I :^«3grf ) 

Sgi^r^T^g 5r^s(,^?ra^Wf5 ^qfS?nfrrf^ i ^ 

f^Ker} 5?«T^r: srrerrJ ^ 

giirf^ qBi ^qf \ ^ 

'f{\m\ 55r^rri^T n 5'S \\ 

97. They who have hcon blessed with humanity (human incarnation) 
which is a privilege hankered after by us, in which one may acquiio knowledge 
of the essentials and practice of religion, they, ahi', I aio deluded by the Illusory 
Power of the Lord it they do not betake themselves to the path ot devotion. — 
III. 15. 24 (BrahmrO 

TSiote — 1" mote than one plane it line been declared tliai the eai Ih being Karma 
Bhwni^lUo Held of action — even the Deviis wihIi to he born us men to luqiiuo 
ihoBu apiiitaal blesaingfl which ate the bit ili>i igiit of man. 

fsRcj^ tt: 

^rrra: 1 raETRiETRt ^ ^ ¥HTotT5EJr#ajreei5rRH- ' 


515^’ 5Pi^t ^ gTiqifrf qrd 


11 M 


98. He who is the Fust Cause of the Univ'Prse, — its Creator, Preserv’or 
and Destroyer, whose illusoiy power cannot bo subjugated by gieat Yogis — He, 
the controller of the tliiee qualities, will adopt means for our well being. What 
is the good of troubling ouiseWes with those cares? — ^III. 16. 35 (Brahma). 

^ ^ ^ uKf5Ti%cirq^ il « ii 

( « I ) 

^ qiq** m^qnTff cqxR^fviTTTd ¥iJTqriq( qdt . 

I I ts* 5IToRf^ Hqfe 

¥rT^i ^ jtJh cqsrf^ 

cf ^rsicr d 11 

99. Whenever He shows His grace on any one, that votary being inspiied 
by Him, gives up his wordly pursuits as well as the ritualistic obseivances of 
the Vedas.— IV. 29. 46 (Haidda). 


r//J? srnijs^o 100-102 


41 


Ifbie •~Sao1i a one, faronred Hia graoo, follovs the BhAgarata Dliarma of 
ezolnsire devotion to tiie Iiord ^ 

-51 W!5l^ W3n355t5l^?ra 

( 8 1 ?l U’l sms ) 

13 lOTSTO^i sunsil ^ 1 ^ simpraspftsratsnB: I 

Rniftflr?i33»3lH3i^(!TrfiTO<r?rwiT wiimra: icfl^silfsfiq; 

^sifi il SI sRrfir 51131^18 5^ lamrq’fenjcsrairas^wai'ittasi- 

si^mig I sw wsr i isflctsi fira ostf^si lift ^i^si ^srer araS 
ng ^g^s i g Bsif^ sRier flsra^ wsrrjiai wimi^ tcar^^w^SSRS ' 
S#ig w>g<K337m5 ii ^o«> n 

100 Perfect in the fullness of His own Solty Ilo does not flatter Laksmli 
who is in His somes in constant attondanoo, nor her followers, tho sororoigns 
of the earth nnd heavens Ho prefers the devotion of his saints How can 
they forsake Him, they who appreoiato His graco ?— IV 31 Si (Nftrada) 

5T5t5qf^*^ wgarr frw 5*9 

a[ • I vi^ctgrm wacrr 5t»raj5g«5^i%5 c?s[Tfk 

II \^x II ^ (^i^ussgi: ) 

snrsiRifli I idf^iRr Hgg'ifififtitilt suraf i waiR r 
'^ernmw gfii s^iRr iig^sreifta' ’Rfeilsi si sefn fsisii ^qiir 
sa^cPi 311 II II 

101 0 King Fariksit, Kpsna is ^ our Lord and SaMour and of the 
YAdavos also Ho is yonr woll-^isher, yonr tutelary deity, tho obiof of his 
olan At times, He is also your servant (acting as a charioteer and serving^ 
in other capacities) All these relations he boars to his dovotoes He may also' 
dispense Makii but rarely Bhnkti — V 6 18 (^uka) 

fj5i i 

^ ^ 1 1 1 lis S« ) 

5WiRi®5iRiei«i^ I I HI q«n ^ogifesiPT i nsftqftsR^ 

§3 iTOirsa ler Hfatsi*! iiiftirgqRi .inraii- 

n 3 11 ?o^ n 

lOi^* xfae path ^f -devotion IS excellent beoause it IS attended with wel- 
fare and there is no fear arising out of it In this path will be mot well- 
behaved and benevolent devotees of N&rAyana —VI 1 17 (Snka) 

6 




42 


TiiE bhaktlratnAvatJ. 

^ ^ WT^entr^i: I 

m ^ ^ m: imsm 

U II ^ ^ I ^ I \ 

wfi^qcgr^ ?TOsrm?Tf5 i ^ ^ vm^pcf ^ 

9icT^.=r^tTOi3Cfr crcHrft^TJTfq’ !T 
*1^ ?f I ^ vi^ 3?r ^ms«i^r%«i- 

11 

103. Tho saints wlio have rosigncd thcinselvos to ilio Lord, %\lio have 
tio likes or dislikes, are gloiifiod in the songs ol gods and domigods. Do not 
go near them. They are protected by tho mace ot NurAjana. Neither I 
nor !^Ala (Times) can exercise any autlioiity over tliem. — VI. *3. 27 (Ynma 
to his Myrmidons). 

ST SI ctT ^ I 

ef?nAT vRpt5^«5J^ ?Tm ^s|nt siliqnsadt'S^: n\®8H 

( I I 5131^:: ) 

5T5 1 5T ci5E^% 

^mx t'HiJ 53^ snfer 

11 ^o« 11 

104. No one is dearly lo\ed o£ Him nor is any one a veiy intimate 
friend. Nor is any one unloved oi is an object ot haticd or is negligible. 
Yet he lewaids his devotees accoi ding to their advances. Just as the Tree 
o£ Paradise grants the prayeis of those who seek rotugo under it and beseech 
it to grant a boon.— X. 38 22 (AkiAia). 

#5%si ^ ni%T smi sjur: i 

^ snuT: ^§T snsTl^5iUT 11 n 

Ji \\ • 1.® «fl^* ) 

¥W5t3. 1 1 

5Er?Rir^*>[\^^; ^irt: i ^3X cf^i^V ?j?ucre- 

mx 35m5(t?fnif^ i ct^xk* wt^st i 91^ wfft 

^Ncf qi^RiSf ^ ^rf; CK?iTt?jjql qjJcgqt^R f^s^lffl’CtcIR^cr^'TSc^ 

^gstfjRcfi^ ( ^11® U® 1 1 ) I 9HT\?ii^5T ^fci: igs 

W5* ^ 11 \o\i 11 

105. It was only by their affection that the milkmaids, cows, trees, 
beasts and reptiles and things ot lesser intelligence reached me and were 

12, 8 (Sri Kyisna), 


f 


TBS ST&ma loe-ios 


43 


?IcgsSTO*lHIT SOT* \ 

TSR^mTT^Tic^Ri ^ramm55rrn5iFni,u \^\ ii 

51 frt5ni5r \ 

8iga^gSHi:^ia^ ^ ’grffer ^ 8[ yas6 ff:<gq \\\^n\ 

(^? ml 

g gro^Rr aw i^gtra t iir i 

«Rr^ ^ It? fW>?;an oiwr s«rreral>nr^'7R^ 

<W*lrii to^n 

«if%!!fk ligfe^sJiAins i i few 

Hsr a|^;««i?srig i f«r«5rfmOT wsijf^^sra 

fjrtasr nsr q j a aR r «r arat afo aafAt ^aaasja a ahaJl 
aatiradaia a asTa cto* i aai aiaaa aassai aaar aa as^aia aar 
a>a^aTaafr9 <iia<n^ wnj s’ar aa a asL anar anf aaaranagaapa 
a^Rr aa r ca nat a i aaRr «K*a i {>a%air<nr ^^a ga* o>a& 
a aRa^ccaiamn^ i aaiaat 
a<ia??a staafa n ?«>« i 

106*107 They Trho devote themselves m the semco of the Lord with 
a single mmdedness, and they who intently perform sacrifices as enjoined 
in the Srnti and Smfxti, they who have got rid of tbexr passions and are devoid 
of haired "-they very easily cross over the tronblons sea of life The paOi 
of knowledge of the Absointe Brahmai von! of the emottonal devotion of Visnn 
lacks m attractiveness Mach leas is that path excellent, where works are 
performed with a selfish object in view or which, if performed with no selfish 
end, 19 not consecrated to God — *1 5 12 (I^ftnda) 

eiRRRmnc^ i 


n 11 

(ti«itogS!r) 

ananq i l R r i Rm«n a^r i aga; nhrr^ i av ^ dtgaiRKT 
Kca^aasanfii?a w«r fasiaeaaima ^^a^ i aggwrat fiisin^eqtfa 
Haf^ aa Rs i cw a it ?5agjrgq ^fa a^i^flia na aar afelai aa 
w R BftaraaRr ^ aia* ir ii 

108 Mnnis, who repose in Self, who have no bonds of the world, serve 
ibe mighty Lord with an nnsol&sb devotion So great is the attraottve 
excellence of Ban —I 7 10 (Sfita } 




44 


THE BIIAKTIRA TEAVAht. 


JVofe -“-This IB a very popular quolntion from flio Bhdgaiata in llio lip** o! 
learned Vaisnavns in support oi BhalJt Mdrga (tlio path of devotion), which 
commends itself even to Jivnninulctns. 

ST snspj^ ST 'St ^tIwST ST ST sC^lf^USl^ I 

SI ^^|ls:qsji^ 5tT con iEt^|5zr gsijf n w 

( ?< I u I 1^’ ) 

flc^TI ?lf«l^lftr il II 

109. I have no desiic for (Iiuha’s) hea\cn. nor foi tlu* position of 
BiahmS,; nor foi the soveieigniy ol all the woihls including thcncthci region's, 
nor for freedoms fiom le-incai nations. Nor do I dcMie the jiowors of Yoga 
if, 0 blessed Loid, these invohc abandonment of Thee. — VI. 11. 25 (Vritr.a). 

ct^SST^ufttSVgS^U ^fsi^ t Ft^TcRSi: 1 
ST fXST ST'S! JITU: U U® <' 

sic^^4'5wt3T f Tsrtsirsucnt'u uu; t 

^^St ^TSig^ n \\\ w 

SII^T^sr ST^fit I 

sTfisT uT»?5m n H 

ST STrfiUT ^^Tfcl% TW I 

sn^scuiti nuT ^ f-u^nusi^siij^ u u 

cT^T^RTRlfr « ¥t^g; It \\9 11 

ST fTs^cwgiTSTT 5>!r|T^5Mon: nm: l 
m|Ri ^f^^fSTT g|: tt U 

^^cTTSflUTf^r^ ^ U«r: » 

^ST fa'^fu Hc55«tTST U'TH f5t|: U V{\ II 

( I rL® < ^v9 ) 



THE FIRST STSme 116, 


is 


tRsr flnwsgjT itTO!ni^irar5TS«iremi& i swn^fira^easr 
nft snfm siFt ^ ^ I ^nviir wr ii t?«> ii 
aa ^ I »i5 nffRiftfa I ^ifw 

-^iBi gEag|Bnf^ asraafiifa N XH II 

sisrat siawn&aa i amaqan <st l^a snia na af^r g aat 
a^R a^ aigfa ii ii 

aacalgqiaattafaafiife^featna acftaaaqrfira n^^aififaaasr 
«I8> aat awifa a tisife ft a a®a ar^atca^ i agarfa at^saJ^llU^ll 
aiaifSaaajfir ^sa agaara^a i ^^aafafa ai^aafta a^ffw aia- 
eaa; asg ft w'aa aiaa i afwtaa ar arg d aFatfiftifija aiaat ainapifit- 
^fta^a 5 ^ a^agf & ftiSgta ar aT® mfjutftal a^%^ ll««ll 
w^a qr ncftufmctar agq^anfirraclaaft?regaRntft i aaiTift 
gmtiafaftaaftft^a^at ^ & gair gaaaiaiaa i aigar ftaaaatai^lar 
snr saftraaar saaa a<a1>ac atarar ^ atg^^amii Utf il 

a^ g a wstla aaaia aafirft ^ aa acaregaiaiagf^ fa ^ & %a 
ana aia i t^ a aa ^a ftafa arata agr as ftgt n m n 

tft wlaft^aaaEar itaiiar ^Tfsaaraiainaaa ftiaag ii 

110 1X6 Therefore to tho Togt, who is dovoted to me with Lis heart 
wholly giTea to mo noithor philosophical learning nor reauuoiation is, a« a 
rule, o£ any good Wbatoer may be acquired by aotiMties, by a«cetioisni, 
by learning, by rennooiation, by Yoga, by cliarii) , and by other an«piciors 
aots—'ill these arc speedily acquired by demotion to me, whether it be a place 
in heayen, or freedom from birth *ind death, or the Attainment of the holy of 
holies, my abode Those unswervingly demoted to me, patient and benevolent-* 
they do not long for nbaoluto exemption from bwib ond deith, wliicli I might give 
to them Not to be beholden to anyone or to look for favour to anyone is said to 
be tlie greatest blessing 1 or this reason de\ otion to me is onl^ obtained 
by one who docs not look to anybody for favonr, who does not cherish any 
fond desire Honts and demerits arising oat of the observance or nOn- 
obsor%*ance of ordinances, do not affect iny notaries who are saintly, impartial 
ancLabote Those who pursue the path I ha>c ordumed, uiium the 

welfare and reach (bode and kuoa Bnhina— Xf 20 31-37 (Sr! Kifiia) 
Hero ends tho fir<t string of tho Neoklace of the Jewels of Devotion* 
collected from the ocean of Bh^iguvafn and «trnng b} Vi^nupnri, a 
Parama7tnmta iSannyetii of Tirhut 




THU SJSOONfl SiniStt OF TtiE NECKLACE. 

t|# 5 t u 

5i5^«t«!it35t9:gq5j»k?*i^ 55tf t sc^^g^fir^ra il \ n 

( B » I R« ) 

?l?T fl^T^^rxRKrC^ 

I I ?iTg at: a\a^rf^: i-tE?f:^34t: 

^<a5[t: at^T ' ^Taa: stfa^rfa^acw 

stfa^tra^^R :si: itair ^^scr a^ 

tfa^at ^ftfaj; i flfaRa'icq^i: i a it^ ^ a^r 

w \ w 

1. The association with ono another o£ good men gives rise lo talks 
about me wherein occur narrations oE my poworEul deeds which are a soothing 
balm to their ears. Their hearing begets in them Eaith, affection and dc\ otion 
successively— all leading to the path oE MQL>a.-^lll, 25. 24: ^Kupila). 

Note— ‘HhQ first section tieuted the subject of Bhaldi in ii geiiorui way. This 
second section treats of Uie causes that generates Bha\ti The principal oauso 
^is the association with good men. 

5=rm fST 5RT%: I 

%ciT5t^mH %T# ?r33R^mT% w ^ w 

( ^ I ^ I ) 

«f%‘^c5rt atc^ Jtfa ^taa^t^riaatqlf ^t^qfa i ^c^aar ?fa i 

aif^ ^ar ^ fe^i TtssraaT acw^jaf 

aai% wa: n ^ ll 

2. By the association with the good, even Eor a shoittime, men acquire 
^rong Eaith m me. ^Eter lelease Eiom this body of lepioacliEul origin you 
will go to my abode —I. 16. 24 (Krisna to Narada). 

Note ^N§,rada, to whom the speech is addtesaed, was the son of a slave girl. 
His body thus boie the taint of that stigma 


THE SECOEE STRING 3S 


t1 


fr ^ ft i 

«n9f?«^»re?T ttcstffnffeg^Tsi II ^ II 

( 1 1 1= I « ^ ) 

W{PW a??r«t snf^»q>fir ^ mftfir i gBUi^ wi^ 

ssrfSrat Rrt^gwBt w aCTwa ?snrg^«rgsi- 

»iwi;i5i»r 1 WH sr ^<ran ^mrarJtrar al^i jjfqffli gsgt 
Wfurar SI gasjr&fir fig srasti iiwra>w{i hcbii ^^■^^fiRt sm ii ^ ii 

3 Wo do not hold Siearga ((ho ahodo o^ Sods) nor Molsa (froodom 
from ro incarnations) as equal to tbo small fraction of tho morit arising 
from association tritb tbo doaoteos of tho Lord Mnoh loss shonid ono com- 
jrare it with ilie small things after which nion bankori snob as, Jsingl^ power 
here on the earth —I 18 13 (tho Jlisis) , also IV 30 34 (Pmehetas) 

?Rqt<^55RT fcT gJTET XROTTOn. I 

^St HftftotRW ^2ra['f^l'5\fl%sraT H 8 U 

“ Nd <1 'd "O 

( M 1 UVl ). 

sra §S*n5 1 wnww«n ’reinc ’if’i n>ra3HWi 3 <ii 

?iti<WH^ wmiRff^rSgsni a^iferi 

»iRKiiRniv>^ 5im?fi?<w ?ig5ft>niT ^i^oi wm ac>iwftr^!ig 

alt^ fiiwRr gsre^lfi jslfir sig «si >iir ^iiir cUc 

tnfeiinw^RtTOinRr jransgw wn nan 

4 The MunUj 0 Shta whoso path is that of peace and who repose 
nnder the shelter of the feet of tlie Lord, at once pnrify those tvho go 
jioar them Whereas the heavenly riyer (Gnug&) purges the sms of those ^ 
when its water coitaes in contact wiUi their bodies in ablution <-^1 1 15 
(Risis) 

fTRra3%5r*rr i 

lUH 

( ? 1 51 n' as ) 

?R?n5g »i8?rr ji^sr <w sERs»re»j 
' 9«ifir i fitigyifiR i snnn^ft^ i crar 

fiamsmfi wnt <inl «Rr >ifiRRreraa<<;R>c<r 




48 


TJJE J31IA K riRA TEA VA / J. 


I vnnsr^rnr 

§rH'^> f^sr^r fsrtt'T'iir+TTmci^il v ii 

5. Whon all obstacle's aie jomo\otl by ‘•or\in ;4 the. fie\’ofoc=s of Uio 
Lord tlion aiiscs ruin Bliakli io\\aid*> the Loul. — 1. 2. 18. (Suf.i). 

5i|t sra" ig#tT jitcit: i 

ajVg H^TiFnTrmw'cnfr^m: « \ i' 

( t u= I ?= gjr: ) 

^ f ^fir% ^7f?rrqT i ^?r- 

sTfJTw: ?HcJT5iraT ^si^rr 

fir^juro It ^ li 

G. Happy do I feel to-day that thongb Ibe is*>ue of miv*d mniilago 
(tlio mother m this ca«o belonging to a caste highei than that ot the fathoi, 
the piogeny of such paicutago being cla's^ed vciy low in the social scale) 
yet by leasoii of the kind logaul* that I ha\o icccucd lioin these icvercd 
eldeis, I cougiatulate mjsolf upon my voithino'.s as a* man. The pinilogo 
of conveising w'lth the gieat and good has quickly loinovcd the weight of low’ 
biith that lay heavy on my heait. — I. 18. 18 (Sula). 

Note — Tlieie are two kinds of mixed mariia{(08. One is the other is 

wfh^rtiT (oi as paia|)Iiiased in tins voiso for the sake of uiotie.) lu the fiwt 

kind, the fathei belongs to a highei caste thiui the mother It is not coiisidorod 
80 bad as the olhei ; though the ptogeiiy falls from the rank of the class of the 
father. In the second class of ^nlxod raaiiiago, the raotliot belongs to n higher 
caste than the father. Such nmariiageis deemed veiy repiolioiisihle and dooms 
the progeny to take the lowest gtado in the soLial sliata. Siita, the famous leoiter 
of Puinaas, was the sou of such a paieutage It is a stiiking coincidence that the 
marriage between a Euiopean male and Asiatic or Afiican female is not considered 
^ So bad socially among Euiopeaiis as a Eniopean woman maiiying a man, Asiatic 

or African, especially if be belongs to the subject lace The piido of laoiul and 
political Bupeiioity is wounded much moie deeply by snob an alliance and it is to 
discourage it that the degiadalioii of the issue was the penally of the act, Suoh a 
protest found its expression in the codes of ancient India Perhaps when the evils 
of Euro'Asiatic mairiages realised to its fuller extent there will be statutory pro* 
liibitioDB laid down against such alliauoes, making them liable to severe penalties. 
And one may uot be sui prised at the passitig of such an Act, for human nature ^ 
is human nature whether in olden limes or in modern days, 

^ W SIIT: \ 

, ( 1 1 ts ) 

V. 


fBE SECOJSP SIBING S 13 


49 


w^ awP i t tHifltggrq «aT«c<!piRrgS^gR5irei «ii?- 

^ w<iw«iq »ii^ israa ^ ^ sar ^ 

K sa ac?!Rji5nm ii <s ll 

7 When by the inero ronjombrance of tlioiso poisona^es onr Jiomes nre 
purged of tlioir evils, how much more is the measure of sanctification caused 
by seeing them, touching and Avashuig thoir holy feet, and their taking a seat 
in our homos —I 19 33 (Pariksita) » 

f^rm %ut i 

*raurnhi% vn^ sri^ ii c n 

( 5 1 « I v ) 

arft' asf a waa 55^5 are 1 asqaTO" 

waamsaa’rtfere^jqw' 1 gaw f^<jv 5icifg»n«Tsi&g irefg 

*ra % (I c (I 

3 Hard it is id att'iin the good fortune of serving the saints who are the 
guide to the ways of Heaven and by whom the Lord JanArdana is constantly 
praised in song >-111 7 SO (Vidura) 

crelOTT wnucT i 

w%#5> U € II 

( ? I » I K ) 

eR^mre i aftar aat qreqh: 

&aa ?fta qqunRre reaq aair a?q5ftfir aai ii « ii 

9 By eentag the saints there springs a loo of service to the feet of the 
Lord tint removes the eMls of Jifo •—III 7 19 tViduro) 

ucuHSit tirumeR g=si^ i 
U ^ ^ ^T5t|fT?3Frai|,cfq, II V* II 

ansrr ura^ UT^^qjjrt ii \\ ii 

j^RSTr^jT wT^ wra; ^ i 

*4C2>qJ ^Tt3<«HT«U'Cq«rT:H<:<3^<^SII^T 11 11 

HEpsOTT g?£rnjHT sgiRR ^ I 

sraiH luferai^tiT tgrT? H ~ ^J i ri^d e il ii 




?3‘?I5^'Sf % 3^T«§: f| ^,11 \8 11 

( B I RJ I l£— ®.3. ) 

ffl: |^q;?r I I X3[^*7rf^ i 
^TJy ^tcHJTT cner^’q ^ ncqr ?E=in: m^.K- 

I ’Qc^’TT 5tirr II II 

^g^5rr>J i 

I qq.J^ll || 

f5I5qiT^?t ^5m5!Tr¥I='qTf^?!ff ??c^I- 

W W 

37^151^% t^cTlsj: 5rt>:mrcrrqf:i^^: nITr fT ^ 

I ^ cri^?f^ij5f^ ^ ^T'-q^ %rm- il ? b. ii 
• ^qg%5qf^!afcr i cr q:?T ^rf^ i . 

ni^cq %r^ i viTer** ii ii 

10-14. The piopliols Imve tlosciibed the association A\illM\oihlIy men as 
the chains that bind the soul But tho as'^ociation vith ‘>ainU is called the 
open gateway to il/olsa. Tho saints luu o the following chaiacteiistics. They 
calmly bear tho opposite^ inheient in natuie — heat and cold, i^c , , — they 
aie compassionate 5 they aie woll-wi^jheis of all ; they cieaie no onemie- they 
aie of seiono temperament and endowed with all tho giaccj, that adoin huma- 
nity They conseciato th(Mn>ehos to me with nn&weiMiig dciofton. They 
for&ake all other dulic*!, — theii iclations and liiend- — loi my 'jako They 
dwell on my gloiie-, speaking and heaiing holy wouU conccining me Tho 
various ills of life do not tiouble them, iheii heaits being lo^^t on mo Those 
aie the saints, 0 my good mothei, who haie no woildly attachments As-oci.i- 
tion w'lth them IS Aeiy desnable; thc^* lemove the CMh that aiisc fiom 
association wdth the wicked — III 25. ll)-23 (Kapila's Speech to Ueiahuti, his 
Mothei). 




«Ttb !r|: ng^cn ^ p.^5Tr 

> %ii5%^5S5 
55«niJ?iqT5WTt: II II 

Irt fsisrsTtaj ^ 

I ^ ?^53I^T¥J 

^■sra 51T. II II ( a 1 s 1 H ) 


SUE SECOKb SrnlEG IT 18 


51 


srsr ijni in«^ i hi<S 

? 5 l!jjrT? 5 rf 5 nac^«i$^ari *15 

fefirRr ^ srr^lE’nr are 1 nn ac^nNr aaat a^jair isr a® arasiif^ 
- ’ifew I a ^ iirc nRtsafti *t»rrfg«!r*’^ 7 i^" *0^*1 *ra ^ 

53 ?aatga>nsr ww n li 11 

•aaigOTWCET nrewwre 1 & *1 ^erwifcr 1 ^ w a%atr »Jc 4 
^ agais* tTwf?r * & a wfe ^ 
5=rHer»n % »re 3 fl^i^r«fir?«\ns^ gsa ^ &5 1 afTOftsT bR:«k- 
atgcT «Tt 58 n TOi affl ST ^ireNr 1 g a-^a jftnurnifSffirHm ^ 
fimiftarfi[ffe^»ifeii 1^11 

15 IG 0 Ananta, nia^ T he a«><ocia(Gd witli thoeo jvioat and pare hearted 
saints from whom coiiatann^ Hows dot ohon to Hico bo that full of ]o\ with 
tho drink of tho {inu-io of thj Mrtuos X tn'i\ oaed\ cro a (ho occm of worldly 
life so fall of djiij(or« O Ihon from who o iii\il springs tho Jolii^t O A i^iiu, 
thej* Avho arc n^oociutcd with th} do\otco$ who o hearts aro dnwn h} the 
fragranoo of thy lotus feet tlio^o de\ofcc« do not care for thoir hod) nor do 
they mind fhcir wno« ohtldicn, friend* riolios and homos TItese become 
the objeots of care b) reason of relation hip to the hodr— H 0 11-12 
t, (Dhin^a) 

Iraifif oi|irr{^rafV5«m 

( I 1 8 ? as ) 

are=ir erfan aat^jit^cPr^r w cfejgTT^ftrEi &«rrfj?f!r 1 1 anaf 
at at^ aRrftai wsfiirer ^^3 

S 5 q?iiarg<rfqf!i!i!rRrft; 5 st firsts ftstr fWag aagisir 
aafa vsx ag i i^ire^ a^gtjiaift waflsui ii ii 

17 Good Sirs I sliould lionr tlio dost oE tlio lotos foot o£ His lotaiies 
on inj crown as long ns I li\o Ho nlio does it bis mis dostrojed and all 
OTCollont qnnlilies wait on liiiu to liiKone Ins — IV J1 id (E’rithn) 

'WJifT 'a ?TRgr \ 

( 8 Hist Ufi asRrsHrt ) 
rrfiiH acHH afVwstfe aiigfiTic^^^sn a«tftf»i 3H^tt3^«Tar 
er^t a aflmafErf ^sja ^irturafr ga fq^ctrettf^ aia 

aca>i nt<a ii ?e n 


52 


THE nil A KTIIiA 7 jXA VA U, 


18. The meeting oL good men i*' agicouhlo lo hoih — io him ^^lJO a'iKs 
and to him who nnsweis. The difecom sc an*.ing liom Hk* ion (discussed) 
confers benefit to everyone. — IV. 22-10 (5Sana( Knmui.i), 

1i#5gJl^93^^5cl9jtfe5li t3tr fJJEclHr 11 11 

( « I 1 ) 


^?HJTm5a5T5’T^^rTTrrT 1 

iTr5i4r??f^ fe* a?T 

?f»TT crac f^ItgcTIJ ^ 

^^5 ^*TT5 =3- ti3Tf^.f|a f^xr =3T;a5rTf?[ f3^ ^ 

3^c3^33?: II li 

19 M.ay wo have the company ol s.iinl«. Then he.ir/*» -uc hill ot* 
compassion towards all Ining licmg-» and aic fico horn j)a‘^ion'‘ and ate 
endowed with sincei it}’, stiaightfoi\\aidne>s and oMici good qnalilic'i. Their 
sins are washed away by ablution® peiiormcd botli oviernall} and inloinally 
in the curients of thy prai®c and ol llie celosli.il ii\er that i*.siio- t’lom (liy foot. 
Such association can only come out ol thj C.uoiu. — JV. 21. .lb (Kudia to 
Prachet&s). 


5f5i: 1 

if#< ?i?r «Ti|3Tr ^ra n si® \\ 

«f5t 5TRT*U!i: ^'T^lf??UT%HT ’CRFIT SUW: I 

qJT: q?r: 11 si^ 11 

^ ^ Cv -O NS NS vs » 

fii*qxffT q^l^Sx xrl’-npiT 1 

«itrre?i T%5ir x'T^fr ^rraqjxfXT sufrmtr: ii sisi ii 


( « U® 1 ^y— ) 

I 33 ^5 33? 3(¥3? 

^c^3T^3 g\3^ %T^ II I) 

33T 3^ S»?E^3^ 513 0:3 31? ^cl53l? || '>{1 || 

3^f 3l3?flT 3r3^5^3T g«T3'lc33? | ¥n3^^TOfJ 

3^13^3 f33T ^r?:f3^3T^ 3 ^f3 313? 11 || 

20-22 Who that foais the sufLciings fioni the miseries of the 
woild will not like to have inleicouise with holy men ? These holy 


rilL SECO^ D G 33 25 


5a 


men approciRte intorcliingo oE pure lUought? Ihoj a&suago tlio thirst nfter 
\ am desires They are ne^or iinEricndt^ to an} liMng creatures Di«quictudo 
finds no room in (hem Among them lidrfijana, the final refuge of men who 
1ia\e renounced the world, is the constant subject of discour«o with men who 
ha\e no attachments Tlioj iiuhc pilgrimage-* on foot m ordir to ^anctifj the 
shrines the} \isit — IV *30 17 (Prachetas) 


fi^5%ciT §Krn|fd5#^5OTl[fw 55ti*raT ^ lira nm 


irait^tiT nr^i^T ^ iR^ii 

5^ 5mncFr5WT%ri?=«sT aVieWr iisigii 


( i I « I »— 3 saw ) 

' sp^^afem «««»>« fiw'nrps a *1 ai«4 

nw srercenrea b lisr aft^uS snwji i ^ 

afjftdainfamaae «rer«a ?r: ^iftcn Sat naa, i agar stgts 
atg Hi^i agiar gfiir i arm ^rgiaret aahtt fst sw gsanif 

itai 1 at Jtr^snatii si^ ciwoca I Is Riaaf fa ^ga^i 

f^aaata'a a aaa^af faaat ag a^g ag a ^g nfefta aa at aiasfa 
^aiaf ^aiBiRr avaaag^af aara i a5f3taf?tfaa?j5i5*at ii ^ 3 — II 

23 24 Tlio} say iliat the f>or> icc of the great is the door to Moha and 


that association with men who aie atticbed to women is the deor to darl hell 
They wrho base equal regard for all, who are serene free fiom anger, who arc 
friendly and saintij — they are to bo termed great Tliov also ore termed great 
whoso chief object of life is togno their heart to mo, tlioir loid who take no 
pleasure in the coiiipiny of people who indulge in taIks_of word!} matters only 
or 3\ho take pleasure in their household ufhurs relating to wife children and 
foes riiey who arc gic it are content stith so much worldly fortune as would 
supply their hare needs of life— V 5 i d tlti«4bli.ij 


^ H U 5T n 3=*n55lfi;?t H UT ^1??^ I 


( i I It 11= 55aa ) 

^ 3151^ a5aarc«?aaifiraai5targ gaa ?r aatfaRr i gg^a 
«jli^ gcgi waid ^a a aat aRfiamfat#! ar a ata^^ h gaf^ aaaf- 
51^ I agr aaa al'afcg a !5i7aai3,?raai?a gaffga aaiti, rfa fa^a aa 


54 


THE BIIA KTIRATE Iv ALl. 


?! HtaTrfic^rrf^ a'cTsr ^ fm! ?r m i 

?! q;3rr ?r i n:cTiq?^5f^ 

5«T3^k‘ 5 ^atTn^-7^fiTr?EfHfcr mw> w rh h 

25 He ■s^llo cannot Wv *>piiifual lielp <5a‘\e n man liom fin** \\oiItl of 
mortality IS not a ^rjnvf — a tnio ‘spiritiul gunlc — noi i« lie a tine failior nor 
mothei, noi husbaucl noi a kinsman. Xoi can he l.iy^lann lo bo hi" lutelaiy 
god. — y. 5 18 (llisahha). 

Tum^tnx ^^5irn|5Ti\?r 

( y 1 »= 1 JO ) 

5i§€rT>^ nf i^^r^aTit^ mmkf^ « tit? w?Tr^JTqf?JT^’3^^ ^E^iT^rr- 

r^^ ¥I?T'7fcHa^?n £ITm-7K^UFri3iq *Tr?:p[: 5r>7r JqV ?! 

26. Let me not hold .itl.ichment with wife, ehildion, lionie iiclie': and 
£i lends, so long as I can obtain inteicoiu'-e willi lo\ei» of the Loid The} who 
conti oiling their sen«es aie content with baie li^ing. speodih succeed — not they 
w'ho aie addicted to then -jeiixcs. — Y- 18 10 (Piahlad.!^. 

R ^clf^frr Rf I?RRT 3: RRIRH: Us.®(l 

o'* 

( IJ I V, tgw ) 

?i^ TTfiF^T 

sr|?IT ^^5'Ttrq' ^qif?lfo ?:i,?7?0^’^^?TTf ' ^^t?i:5T?^rcT l 5!f^5! 

3T?IT fi ^^!f^jl?rr¥q; #cfq' 

7{ ^Tf TT^lcfT^T 55sJTI?TFr: 5lf a ?! Tig-f^ 

??jag‘T ^=r: igtf^cr ^jcm crf^rccTiCi^! il R'S •' 

^?TCK5I*n^ ^cI^g»TTfe§^c^cT^^!^r¥ltcfr^ ?TaT^^ _ 

57^cnf^ ^^i|5cf ^5! gi:^?Ti5rfriHrr?f^ ?=!JTT?Tf?Tr!5i!^riT 

7{Jl\ I) ]| 

27-28 Ble-jecd is he who is boinjis a man — the most o\celleiit siiecics of 
cieated beings What good is it to bo bom othei than a man — e^en to be boin 
in Ireaion is no good, it one may not find abundant inteicoiiise wnth gicat-soiiled 
saints whose hcaits aio piiiihed with the piai'^e of Hiisikc'a — (the ina'^toi of 


nil, SkCO^ V snt^^ 0 Z 9 30 


55 




bis seDses-Vi‘<na) wonder that imro demotion to NArAyana conld bo 

attained by one wboso stnsha\e been destroyed by the dtist of iby loins-fcet,. 
i\hon by a momont s intercourse with theo my ignoranco Ins been dnpollcd^ 
tlio ]gnonuce that had fonud n firm footing on fal«o reasonings —V Id 21- 
^ 22 (Hahugana) 

ST II U 

) 

■ II wifnfa II V 3 I *i«rasllRnwl- 

tsar snahnni Ji?ii flasRroiR^iiftit sw* i sr ^la a 

II as II 

29^ rill they do not parify iheiuscUoa by ablution in tho dust of tho 
feet of great saints who lu\o tiken tho aow of poiorty thoir understanding 
will not ooiiiprohond tho gicitnoas of tho foot of tlio Lord of Uighty 
Stride^ And it hy this means that tho oils of hfciiro to bo rciiio\ca— 
VII 5 32 (Fralduda) 

rtia Lofd of Uiglilf Slndaa ** JB Visnu wlio lu bis V&oiaua Avatura 
(Dwaff inearMatioii) euoompaaaed ILe space betr etm tlie Butb, fieureo, iiud PAlAIa 
by hifl tliree stepe ^ 

fgpC'SSng. l % f 5 |i 5 lf^frRT^' 5 l 3 '^S!J cBIWT 5 H^iqS|?t 


m TsrgRT^^^ IM» 11 (<»i4iw«i|[t? ) 

iier ir*ia:<!n«f gww swnrsifit i 

awei. snfisw Hinrac «nf efe^flfro 


° The foMonriii^ saiae le (uund lu oue luuiiueoiipt lu posseesiou ot tbo Kdilora 
of Ontonlta Edition — 


eg a aifa 

a %5aar fasfaaiip: awr ) 
a aa 
faar asa^m^c^sfa^^Hn 

« UH 1 1 *? 1 5 i?«<a’ 1 

I myg ^ l wSit itto 

KiaKH II 


0 RaliDgolin lliia kiiow]edf,e of tb« Sapieme Beiti^ cannot be attained by 
means of aecetio petmiioea 1101 by BaonOue, nut by a life of teuuiiujulioo 001 by that 
of R liouseliolder iieilher by the Vedan uor by ((he deitiea of) emi, 6 re or water 
Tine knowledge is only gamed by ublutioi) lu the dnut of the feet of aaintfi — T 12 
12 (Jedubhaiata) 


56 


TII IS BHAKTJliATNAVALl. 


I ^ 5FC5rtc??fTr fqri^cTiqc 

II H 

30. Knowing, as I do, the poii<hjihle nature oF tiling'^ prized and 
hankered aEfcer by men — such as, length oF liFo, material prosperity, sensuou': 
enjoyments, liked by all ats far as Biahma, T choiisli no wish tor them; tor 
Time of mighty pioness, lediioes them to nothing. 0 Loid, place mo in the 
midst of youi own devotees. — VII. 9 24. (Prahlada). 

Tjg* firqfer^ w- 

♦ ^ CS 

5151 »fc5t%gTq; a 3^ It 

( v9 1 a I ) 

?r£rt 3 ^fq-ciTf^T a:# ^TK^sricTOtcficsri ^ 

fe^srifir Hfl^<3:5r(f5^xK;^q^=rr^?^i?T{5Tf«cT: 

sRraqfltff 5r5f f^«Tflrcr?i3?i^ni?i^irqra35Rtsi i^^^f 

31 How can I foisake the good sfeivicc of yoni devotees ^ For Nfirada •> 
treating me as one of Ins own, took menndei his piotectiou — I who was about 
to fall in the pit of worldly lite, full of dieadful leptiles, like othei men who, 
running aftei worldly deques, had tmnbled into it. — VII. 9 28 Piahlada. 

5T)-?i g|: u 5E>jsfjm f| i 

%r ^ 51 ii 

(1 1 ?=l 1? «in^* ) 

erfsT^ff stmit 3 

%^cfr mk ctt^ I ?t 11 ii . 

«• 32. Who would not attend on saints by whosse coii'stant association men 
have then heaits pmified by the Loid who enteis there w'hile his gloiies are 
sung by the saints His glories have a special saving power. The sacied"" 
Bhinies of pilgrimage merely leniove impiuities ot the boily.— V 18. 11. 
(Piahlada) 

51^ *ifi5cpa^;¥t t|3i i 

¥F§l&TE515lfiui: u II 


rilE SECOEJ} STSIEG 33 38 


S7 


!iS ftrftrei ft sfe 

^ SI aw JiiBTOaJsi?^!^ aangnt^rawRTTftcss?! wi^s satasrasmiK 
qaft lasftcsnftft ilfeisqfa <n:raft a?«ftafercft i ^ 
siwa? asEvftsRTs^rsnftsrsaKq i a^aastffieflftft Hig 

Rw®^ sBiBt n wqrraT ^^^w ii 11 

33 I am, 0 Brahman, subject to the will* of my devotees I am not 
free My heart has been conquered by devoted saints X am so dear to 
them and they are as dear to me — IX 4 63 C 7 (^rl Krisna) 

;Ti ^« T w wmsqfT% i 

<gT?srf5ci^ mt ii ^8 u 


^ ^ R nc^ ^ actTR TTPgrfig^r^ t 
f|c2tT m siK?ff 3ii?rT 5^«ien^e5rag?et ii ii 

eraj m «5?tn erqfir *i«rT ii \\ ii 

st^cT =g > 

q^ ^?qg[, qjT^rat^erJj^ li ii 
?5tT^ ^g;q ?r|j ?5j^ i 

iT5{?q% 5T 3tR^ iTfTrnfq (I ii 


. ^ ( fi 1 8 1 «— W ) 

a SItiat# *t ? JB^tW H 38 II 

siacBqjqft wnsnq; % ^rasiifesftsr i w ^ ^ ftwr ii 38 •* 
aa wftaw sasTuataaiar w w iwn wwraare aalft I ww 
srqari sift qtst. ftta sscaftma i snaat awift sqfaiaHwnftssrf* ii^^n 
ftar Rroai <w a Bfnw i a^^a^fti nifia atsaft w ^agwufft i)3'Sli 
feafat qrra^ swftPf I aa aa awRatqjrf aga? ftar aaawc 
51^ 3ft argqtaia 113C11 

34 1 do not thiok highlj of myself or of Laksmi whose Iu\e is intense 
and constant I cannot feol happy ^nthont my saints who look to me as 
their final goal 

35 How can 1 for»ake thorn who having left their attachments to 
their wives, children, fricuJs, homo, wealth and their ownselves have iakeh 
refngo in mo ? 


8 



58 


THE BHAKTlltA TA^AVA iJ. 


36. Just as virtuous wives win o\ or to thorn Ihoir "ood hushands, so 
my saints conquor mo by thoir do%'otion. Thoi» Ijoai Is nro lo«l in mo, £or- 
gotting thoir likos and dislikes, with an equal 0 }e to all, 

37. Tboy do not chooso the foUr gifis of Salokyn and the lost, tho 
reward oE thoir devotion to me, much le^s would they accept any other 
porishahlo object. They aio fully ‘•atKfiod with thoir sonico-j to mo 

?8. Tho saints are iny hcCtrl and I am the hoait of tho saint.*.. They 
do not approoiale anything except mo ; nor do I appreciate anyone except 
them. — IX. 4. 63-68 (Sri Krisna). 

Note — Sfilolcyn, SfttSii, SA,*uipya, Sm'upya ato tl»o foiii .lioona rofo» red to^ in tho 
(ext Sdilokya is living iii (lie name region wheto Ibo Loid dwelln Sfu^ti is having (ho 
ponseBsioH of all the splundours and ptonpetify to which hm uUcndunlH aio entitled, 
S&mipya is to live near him. SA< npya is to be like him in foim and nppcnrntico. 
S&ynjya is another boon, over and above theie. It is to be iu|con)plcto union with him 

w5ff|«imiTW3iT i 

( I yc I ) 

Rfer^n^r- 

u,n ^^sqrf. cr |?rr ii ii 

39. Worthy mon o£ gloat good f 01 tune like jour-elvch «hould ever be 
attended upon and served by all mon who desire thoir own well-being. Tho 
gods are selE-mteiested, not so tho saints. — X. 48. 30 (^ri Ivrisna). 

5Tf| Hm: u w 

( I 'll 1 51^0 

5ii5nT. "5= i 

^ ^c55f«rat ctI^t 5Tg f^5f^5C 

1 ^^gg^5'’3n^ n«ou 

40. 0 Achyuta (Visuu) 1 association with the good comes when 
the wandering seeker (the monad) is neaiing his salvation from bondage 
o£ the world (re-incarnation) and as soon as he obtains companionship oE 


* JTTFr^mj ti 


THE SECONO STBIEG 41-43 


Eg 


tho saints bo Logins to plnco his nlTootiao on yon, the Iiord of this world and oC 
the nont — '& 51 53 (Miiohnknnda) 

Note —The order is ns follows Erst, the company of saints, then follows llio 
liore of God This brinns Snlvntioo 

sTdFrnirfjT ff qfi^mrr: i 

n li 

( t® I «= U? 'U® I =« 1 tt ) 
sa lidicfr 5fipi& i sr omroifflfa i anwift cftafln ft sift i 
aft g wq^sr a«n ^f aft ftg fii5f<natw^ ffi^naa i gsrfftfcr aw a 
aftinw SsfqnRir gwft n a? ii 

41 ^\ttlor phoci (ri\ era nnd pools) nro not ncrccl places oC ptigriningo, 
nor are clods of cli} or stono gods Thoso tnko long iimo to purtf) 
those thai MSit ilicm But Mints olcanso dinners nt once nt the %ory si^Iit of 
thoin"-X 48 dl and X bl 11 (brtKft*nin; 

iAToie ^Oommoutaloifl Qinbe Rii effoit to bimgoni a meaning opposite to Ui4 
lifetnl Bonae of tlio fltat half of (liia eonplat Their rondorincis as folloira Not 
that holy nraier places are not slitinoi of pilf^rimago , net that oloda of clay ol 
alone do not repreaont geda But Iheso take long time to effect pnriOcation The 
sninte aoooraplial it iiuilnntly at alight This nieanlngp apparently opposite to the 
hteial eenee, is obtained by tlie aid of tho tlieiotioal Cgnre called qn|i vgF^ Nor is 
the invooalioo of (ho aid of qng; oncalled for The DliAgavaU of all wotke of the 
aaored literatare of the Hiiidna was least espeoled to give coaDtenaDce to lalilndi 
nartanism to the esteut of diacnniiiitf nr lieliltliiii, piIgiiniHgea to naeied pools and 
water pfacea and idol worship Tel X 84 81 of the OhAgarala may he compared 
winch dieiinotly condemns those who alitibolo holineBi to pools and ndoro idols as 
gods The text, wlilob IS (he sabjeot of tbiacoiiUoveisy, IS repealed in X 81 11 

m' 5i5iT»3^T i 


^stTstwfq U 8^ II 


( i® I B8 I S I 1® ) 

ft Iff sisf <B«nift qnwf^iqiqfft ^wiraft gsro 

ff;g»nllr tfif w i a ^ ^ fffgsiwfmi qf^ fwftft i sfw;^ qt<f>AcriWH wiRcf 
siwRcf ft wt «Rift»qtn!ir iwi gwiq: qffr wmql wqg 

^ MWiqft g BwsfWPftg^icfqOTq'l^jfWfftgi^fgg’ttgftfiwgwwaftr 



60 


mJa DnAKTJHATJS^AVALl. 


42-43. Blessed aie we who l^u^o ohluined tlic hajipy friiils of life ; — \\c, 
w’ho have obtained the sight of a gicui Yogi; which even llio gods do not get. 
This blobbing of the sight of a Yogi is not gi\en to men whoso stock of pen- 
ances is small ; or to those who look to uloK as I hen gods. The blessing of 
seeing and touching the feet and convoi ding with Yogis is not gi\cn to them 
w'hose store of mciits is small such as can be acquit cd by b.ilbing in ‘-acicd ri\crs 
and pools oi by Msiting and woi ^hipping itlol*. as their gods — X. bd. 0-10 (Sri 
Krisnfi). 

"Koit . — The above confirms the point laisod in llio nofo on (ho trnnelnCion of aloka 
No. 42i V »- 

¥rn^§ ^ ’g???iF.si5T h tw: \ 

n 88 w 

5R®rt5Pi|f|:f ’<0^ »nrr§fa^nat: i 

!5i%?T ^ ^ct n gn n 

I I ) 

sri 

TTTcfn^ic^^ ?r n.Er ^sri'dmail 

^ I ?31^^rTcJT|ife- 

fRQtl ^STcir^fej I 3r^ 

44-45. Neither fiie, nor sun, noi moon, nor stars; neithei tho eaith, water 
or air ; neither speech noi the thought cun lemovo the sins of tliQse wdio enter- 
tain the idea of noii-idontity w'lth tho Supiemo Being. But the saints cun save 
their follow'eis in a moment because they have obtained the knowledge of tho 
truth of Unity. He who thinks that his body formed of the tlneo humouis (of 
wind, jphlegm, and bilo) is lus ‘lelt (soul) , ho who tliinks that his wife and chil- 
dien and othci relations aie his own , ho wdio believes that the idol of clay is his 
god and that riveis and pools aio holy shiines but does not place his faith m the 
holiness ot saints is a veritable ass, the gioatost tool ot a beast — X. 84. 12-18. ' 

* ^ ( a5T,0 « R • -I ) ( IfTO vS R J ^ 



SEdOIi V SThiE G 46 48 


Cl 


^Oompare llie uIioto nilli SSloka No 42 (N 48 131 ) Tlicre ifl no 
Civ«i8i>7 ID llie liiUiprelalion of l)ii0 stoka among eninmeiilatois Jl ^DppottB iko 
plain Niigliali rendeiiiig Ike leziof (ha nnllioi Whethei (oextol (he iileifls of 
Saint worship Ilia anlhuf has beliilled tlia meiits of visidiig aaoiad ahniiea and 
wotahtpping ajnil oIm of diviuilj 18 another qDestion Soch helnndinga of one at 
(he expense of another 18 not nncomnion lu Ilia pBifin «8 It is an accepted canon 
that tne laudation of one at the expense of anoiher IS not seiionslj meant 80 much 
aB ft real hit at lita latter hat h pnCUng of (ha foi mar by contraat 

- an??rT i 

II 8^ II 

( £ I £ I ^ »miw ) 

ns aar ntne? asr nm nfir i -^visr 

I & cnr & ?iT»rer»n<j,efo?J 3 'teTO i fir acsRiamfr !rafnst 
*1^ gsna n n 

46 llio <4iintB mIio hiro ronounccd thoMorld iihonio full of quietude, 
aho ire drml^ fixed in tlicir rcilirntton of Nralima, «iinctifi the iiorld they 
dwell in Ihoj rcinoiothc mro of otliciH h} the more contaot of their hod} 
because Hnri, the destrojer of sin«, lain thcin,*-^I\ ^ h (Bhngirntha to 
GnngA) 

^srnTT I istra 'u i 

ggngs qiH'e^dlicMW t q ^ II II 
irmlf ^ ?i’«rT ^ cTtsr mir i 
- ?srmu\: h 8"5 ii 

( m R I <l—% «ng^9 ) 
arasr^g gaawcefinfir 

an::^ nfir srg^g^sn^ I ^'TwrsnfipiT ^Rtsjfisr fsnsior sire^t 

5l»n^ll w II ' ^ 

s?i ^ fiS iwaif^ $^fir a a«ir 

t?aiW 1 waiftRr tsrr sPr »iafiT <K5 i «a^aiBt« i ewfa 

^i^tr ajrell grera^g Cianist geaai guS 

ififinfiia II «= II 

47 48 The rolntioosbip with gods urn) confoi benefits or iniliot pain on 

men But the dealings with the «imts whose souls are wholly gii on to Vffpu 
confer nothing bat good to men Ilio gods rewurd their votaries ncoording to 
the measure of thoir doiotion of the latter bhnping thomsoh os like i shidow 
(whioh grows more or le«s icoording to the object whoso shadow it i«) But tile 
saints are loving toward* nil who are nooi (bcokcu down )-~Xt 2 5 G (Vwsu 
de>a to bftrada) ^ ' 



62 


THE nriAKTIllATSAVALL 


Nfte The saintfl nvehoio pincoil on a liigtioi* poflostal than the Devns n«nce 
we aae the hitter-ihiy decfuio of VoJiu hium iGouh among the HimliiH wfion tlieie V»u*f. 
nasa tenohings of ofToiing anpoitnr hotiimiA to Suinta pir.dcnunaiod. Saint woinlup 
led to Gum woiehip of the piuMont day Vnisnavatf, the Ginn combining in himself 
the olinractor of the Hiiint and of the Rpintnal guide. It dogeuorated in rnodorn times 
into the abusive influetuin of the Vaislinava ’* MuhiivajaH*' ofIJtiml»ny and other places 
which fonnd its exposuie in the famous defumnliou case in tito Tlomba^ Cotut 

many yeai s ago* 

cT^itfq \\ 

^qr s^q m fqqr ^ ^qf ^rjcrr ’sr qi^q ^r^jqrHqqr 

q ^rqqfq « fliq? 11 u 

49 . OEall the ophemcMl tenoincnt« oi inorl.tl being«, Inininn i»oil) i-« the 
acquisition oC 1 at c good fortune iluch more i sii e .uni blc"*ctl N fh.it Ititinan 
life which cnioys tho •sight oL tho*c hlc<5«oil ijuing*. (-.unt-^ ulio ujc beloicil of 
the Lord ot Vaikuntha — XL 2. 29 (Vidclmh 

n %«rElfu Hi ^THT H '^cl 'g 1 

?T ^cfTVHra^fT'il^cHrJlT H II H® II 

acflTH : ?3^{% hht: I 

?(«rra55?g HlwnuifT i| hth ii ii 
H 9UJPT taHT liHT: 1 

w«i5ihHs:€i Him: f%^iv'eis:»!igfi^T: ii ii 
^I^T^s:t Hgs%g IvatT: s|ET: %qTj?cH3JT: | 
s;s^uh: nffTERrrfeptvuT^Hvnii gh' u ii 

IHngf 5iT^55?«nt huv'^tiu ii nu n 

( 

Srmw H?# 71^ 3J^ I ' 

sm«i: ^5tT>5I^ Hfq?VSRcT??Tq^ « HH II 

N -' ■ ^ __J 

^ fT^ITT|'^WHT$^nT HT'^sTfr 

1 ^f?T TJTSTrrf^ I 



IJIESECOMISTBUG SB 



?R5i?iT ?ijRiTO >n « TT ^m m ii ii 

(^l I t— osft^: ) 

sfir sifSraiRf^mflisng «4aivi^w «f«n!ia!5fn 
33?/ H& WIT3|I€r^3r5 SETSfiT I Ht/vU/aiatft'ff I «I ^tstJrfET 3 g«ft 
q;t»Rr I ^ srajnf^ i ?rr"s»i ^fsrwr i viw wms^ratsfifaifir i 
swpft ^7 3T I !«t(«i I wtti^ re '5^3 srg^e sRr- 

^>ip:tmW3Jifi!l I wm aifl w n d”— ii 

fe >3 fliTEiifV «t5r «B cfqi? I aa/iftfii I sra/ft nw 

^01^ I aflt%373n I ^fftr tg?m3 i sa«f& aJOlT^tflr H itH ti 
3^315 ac?ii/fe I «ngviP(i ti^m ii 'i^ ii 
?5r j TPitaa wiigjs ngt^ ii ua ii 
!E^ aprai^ I 5^ azig t gaimc i an«ft ar^crtvi I 

33155* II n II 

^ wranfa^wmts i ^aralawfaBEji sfir i sraala «fa5i% ^ 

^ 3 BBWii sianBiRT aar i I waai atraro a 

nai*^qraaatiaa3rfet«& ^raar aeerinf^fei wf-R Br*am 
»J^ 1 bRt SEEmi Rt^Tim HEga^g aa B3fa5'«sui3«^ ii >1% ii 

50-56 NaUher the pnctice of Yogi nor SAnkhja» nor tlio poiformofloo 
of righteous aots arrests ni} attention, nor the reading of the A cdns, nor oscoti* 
ct in nor rennuciatiou of worldl/ life Neitliei spending money on public works, 
such as the oxcavation of tank , the erection of temples, aims houses, iLc , &c , 
nor alms-gning Siiuilailj the keeping of religious vows, the performance of 
sacrifices the making of pilgrimages the lostiamt of the senses according to the 
rules of knma and JSiyaina do not arrest mj favourable attention so much as 
the *issociation with the saints that destroys the evils of all other associations 
By associating with saints many Daityas,wffdX/asat feathered tribes of the mr, 
beasts of the forest, Gandhatias Apsarar Suhlhas, Cfutranas, Guhyalas 

(Yaksas), Ktdydd/iarus, and among men many a Vaisya, Sfidra, niomen, low 
born people men in whom the Rajas and lumas aro predominant have m age 
after age readied my lotns feet For example, ViitrAsura, Frabluda, Vfisa 
paravA, Ydl VAna, Maja Vibhisana Sugrhn, HanumAn Juinbnv^n, the bear, 
the clepbaut, the leader of Ins herd, JatAyn, the eagle,- the bnnija (the petty 
shopkeeper), the bntclicr, the wi\cs of the priests and many others They 
wore not learned in ilio Vedas, nor did they attend learned professors, they had 
not observed religious rows nor practised peuanoes They attained me by 
their association w itli tlio good (samts) --»XI 13 1-7 (Sri Kfiena) 



TJIJC nn A KTIRA y’-iV/ll '--f l I 


6i - 


Note — 1 . Stifcwn, HmJhh, Tamns ftio tlio qimliiioH of Ilutmony, Aoluif}', nud 
Inertnesp, of winch ovovy fonn of nmllov iH uouutiluJod. Tlio dilfotoncc in dcgroo 
of the qnahUes being the cause of rniiety of Iho niuiotial pheaoraotm in the 
tnnveise. 

2(a) Vritia 111 the Fuiuims i:) nu Ai,ura, Iciilol i>y Itidin, hence one of the 
many uainee of tlio later is In the Uig Veda, ^ »igmfup, ut ono place, 

daikiieBB*, al ni uthoi the clouds u horn tho Thutuleinr (Indtu) acalttin Tho lofo* 

rencetoVritia is met with in nuoicnt and lutdic^al Suuhluit liUratuto Seo 
Bhilgavala, 6th Skaudliii, 10(h AdlijAjfi.. 

The name “ Veie*khinghna '* ocean ing in the ZnosUmn aciipluice is excee* 
dingly euggcative. Fj'Zc “ Aiyan Witness ” p 47. 

(b) Piahlftda’s stuiy is too well-known lo icquiio mention 
■ (c) Vrisapaivii wnaa Diiilyn, seo Malifihliuiiitn, I, 67. IG 

(d) Vali, another Asura whom Visna ovci poueud in Ins incai i.aliun of Vutna* 
na. The VAiniuia Pniuiia, tho Agnipaifuiii, Uio Bliauavnta Puiuna deal with the stoiy. 
The allusion to ViSlin taking Ihiee stepa occuis in Iho Big Veda iJ’idc Ashtatn 
1, 2 AdhjAya, 7 Vuigal It is lutei^sliug how these PaU' uni ka etoiitb hn\e de\e* 
loped horn the Yodiu inception. 

(e) iVAna, the Aanin. Fornn nccouut of Ins Hglit with Ki isiin, (rirfa fildga* 
vata, 10 th Skandha, 63 id AdhyAya ) 

(^j Maya — He was a DAnava. He was tho architcot of the Daityas. He Imilt 
the Palace and Hall of Yudhi^^diiia in which was peifoiinod the celebrated BAja- 
bAyaTii^nn the coiouation ceicmutneB of that great king. Tiio iuihb of Indiapiustha 
(the name still survives in the coiinpt modem Iiidiirput) nio suit xiHiblo near tiiodcin 
Delin The lecont Coionution Dmhai' of King Geoige V of the United Kingdom 
of 6 i eat Biitaiii and It eland and Emperor of HinduslhAn, which wns celebiated 
with a pomp uneqaalled by any coionatum that bus gone beruio in that cnpitul city 
built by Mitya and lebuilt 111 aflei ages many a time by PjithAn mid Mogul Eiii- 
peiors biiiigs back to luemoiy tho fiiKl ouionuiioii III the now-binlt city some five 
thousand yeais ago, acuordiiig to Iliiidu cnh'nlntioiis A whole book iu the Bnoyclo- 
pedio MaliAbhAiata IS setapait for naiiating what took place ui that coionatiou It 
18 called the SabliA Paivn. The pieseiit inn slation of the lucliopolis ftum Calcntta 
to Delhi after the lattei had fallen inte second-iato impoitauce ne a Pioviuciul town, 
the meie head qaaiter of a Oornmissioiier of a Division of the pioviiice of Uie.PaiiQab, 
shows what tain of good foiluae takes place m the life of a town us in the life of 
a man Believers la astiology would put this tenacity of good foiluno uot forsaking 
Delhi to the induence of (he good slat at ttie moment of laying down its 

foundation by Maya Danava But it seems that Maya was not only the name of an 
individual but of a tube. Pot a Maya is said to have built the tliiee mythological 
towns called “ Tiipiira ” wheio dwelt (lie TiipuiAsuia and winch weie burnt to 
ashes by Mahadeva foi the sake of the Devas, a Maya was the father of Mundodaii. 
the wife of BAviiua, the RAkSas King of LankA. The RAkSusas and DAnnvas weie 
allied tubes, inter mail lage being can led among them When expelled fiom the 
land of the Aryans, (he Daityas and Danavns aie lepiesented to go hack and to 
refuge iu PAtAla. (Vide * Sapta Stiti-Chan'di of (he Maikallcleya Puialla). Tins 
PAlA'a 18 an undefined region but may mean Ameiioa whioh in very aiiciebt times 
might have been oonneoted by land with the Indian continent Foi in the uaiiatives 
ef old America as collected by European soholais mention is made of a tribe 
of Mayas residing lu Peiu and Mexico. That theie was civilization iu these 



TEE 8EC0EE STRlEQ 57 60 


65 


latter ooanlnes fiode evideaed la aroliiteolirat fiods excavated by arabseslpgists 
ArobUeotnral akill and speoiality was ilie oltaraotenslio of Maya or (be Mayae And 
tbeir eexvioes to Aryan kings inlodfa id the oonatraolion of their oiliesi palaoea 
and halls find mention in the Pni&uas and anoieut epics 

Wieber, the veteran ^lerman Saoskntiati identifies the Asara Maya of the 5ar^ 
Siddh&uta with Ptolemy AU these enppositioos go to show that the Mayae were 
foreigners May not they be (?) Phosoloiens, as their name ooonre in Western 
Asia also P 


cl%T I ^3^ 1%*^^ i 

JT^j 5 irnfTORrai»r: ii s( « ii 

( I I ) 

iw ffl;?«q5rffcFcr ^rgfsS aa i 

aat arrern araar sfefn wf^RftjTiHfa'n^aa n>t«n 

57 Therefore should the wise leave mteroonrse with the wicked and 


make friendship with the good It is the saints that can remove the tendencies 
of the mind hostile to Bhakti by their^words in tho praise of devotion to God 
XI 26 26 (Sri Krisna) 


qfET JfT | 

tlfea t| y c II 

>a Cv. ^ ^ 

aj% ^ ^ u 




( 3 I I 33—38 sft*!!!! ) 
515 S<n <rRi 9irf%i^ i 

sra 5t?tfnfe I Hift ^(u^rai 5img[,ii ^siii 
wSgirtvn%% 

^RrotPig 51^ iroi * n 

58 60 If one bocomos associtod with worldly men addicated to sexual 
pleasures and tho pleasures of the palate then he enters the darkness of the nether 
worlds Tmih, purity, compassion restramt on speeocb, nuderstanding, modesty, 
prosperity, reputation forgivonoss, tranquillity, restraint of the senses and gora 
fortnoe undergo deolme by ussociatioo with the wicked One should have no 



66 


TllJil BIlA[CTJRAT^^lVALl 


interoourso with tlioso who aro inaikcd by disfjuiotiulo and ignoranco, w'ho aro 
the sports of female wiles, who choiish sintul thoughts, who suboidinato their 
soul to theii body — III. 31. 32. (tSri Kri^na). 

83ft?rTfu4* 5!3T^i^|5ier^ei«tr i\ %,\\\ 

9ll?clT ^ II 

^ ff HTTOfri' jn?n: i 

'SiW ?PIT Scst 11^(1 

^9jr5T ^11^: I 

^5n ^Tr^gr: ^5 ct: ^?cr ^ ii ^ 8 ii 

( U I ) 

cT«Tr frrf^cT ^?rvfcfc^f^- 'X 

I ^fcr cf^^rr ^nf- 

9iwrf?T^^K¥i4 ^ li %i ii 

5r§?IT iSTcf «3:^ Af^Ic^cr ?IT^ fqJ7^3lt?nc3T5TTf?lfcr 

f5T«^T5rr53i?if \\ 

^5nfe¥?i5r: g lac^jjqt ll 11 

^ ^ ^fcT ifcT i =5r^^ ^^mfk ^r^rif^i %rf3 

?5ft¥lT5rR?iP5cHfsv:r5!5^'t5=PT^r^^- , . - 

6t“64. Just as cold, fear and daikness depait fioin him who approaches 
fire^god (the giver of heat and light) so does spuitual weakness, fear of w'oild- 
liness and ignorance depart from him who keeps himself neai to the saints. 


^ii\rf vnrfirfH ^Tg F rryg i 


THE THIRD STRIKG 66 


^7 


Jnst as the strong bailt ship is the place of security to the drowning tnsn who 
Id struggling in ^Tnter» so are the saints, serene m their knowledge of Brahma; 
ihe refuge of those who are struggling m the troubled ivaters of the ooean of 
life Food 18 the life of the living 1 am the refuge of the distressed Virtu 
oos acts are thewealth that will servo after death The «nints are the refuge 
of those who uro apprehensne of their fall into iho depilis of worldlines« !the 
samts impart the Msion to di«cern our duties The sun when high above tiie 
horizon, helps os to see only outward things The saints are friends and venhiblo 
gods They are the very souls of men Verily the} arc my own Self-— XI 
31-34 <Srl Kfisna) 

Here ends the Second Stnng of the Hcokinco of Devotion 


THE THIRD STRING OF THE NECKLACE OF DEVOTION 

[Note — riiis sflclioQ trenis of the delMtls of the pftlh of devotion J 

II 

y SP!I fenafft \ 

ac^ff ^1^ II \ II 

5‘56rTF5?rT i 

II ^ ii 

( IS I tt I ) 

ara i era ?i?Rraiiit weislin 

eniw^reig irarfniri?^erat?sCTraTH.i sraiaftar iwnseramtfeis^isii 
iKl 8 WT ^ erpn I «sl^!T ^era asrro!W,i ^rwi aateraat^eitii 
mat feraetn .1 qRraqfafem^i arataaii asit% 

siqsf i{(! 3 srejtu(iHirqaqf#iaratm an i ?req mWajui 51^4 eta(» i< l tiiRf 1 
w?tta^ t5aw'ii!i»n,i qqr firalerra nqpqt^ajqiaqti^f^en s fttm 
erat i|5 ereft^rara' erfyenq^aftlH « i « 

^fesRrag^!^fq treat an 1 srert ^ mar^fe Rst^ art# 
anWetf t^efl ng fnr qrareoi^ erf^fUTnler Jif^ sieq^tgareaftef 1 %^ 

at gtnftvi ft SNqgftln nin 11 tt” 

•wiftftst nff^Pr qFw fis^'T ar qfft aeft qaar 



68 


THE BHAKTIRATN AVAIL 

. 1-2. The following are the nine vaiieties in the path of devotion. 

(1) The hearing of the piaise of the All-pervading Supremo Being Visnu ; 

(2) The chanting of his piaise ; (3) The icmembeiing Him in meditation ; (4) 
His personal service, i.e., to his symbolic image; (5) His woiship performed 
by the offerings of water, floweis, fiuits, &c. (6) His salutation; (7) Placing 
oneself at His disposal ; (8) His fnendship, i.e., placing full trust in Him as 
in a friend; (9) Conseciation of self to Him. If one applies himself with 
this nine-fold devotion to Visnu, having leaint it ftom his teacher, I consider it 
as the best lesson he has received from master. — VII. 5. 23-24 '(Pialiluda). 

^ H ^ II 

fiTO ^ ?:^fn ii y ii 

liud I 

gsni ^ 35^5^ 5 ^ gBjFranTsim Ji^rifj^^siftTssniTiT^uimi 

( a • « I IC— ) 

ii \ ii 

?r«ii 9^*^ 1 ^st 

?r%q; i II a ii 

I ^Tjf ^ cfcSI^l8[- 

?r 9 i ?i«rT «l- 

I ^€9 ^?r¥ii^ jjiH 

y n 

3-5. He (King Eisabha) placed his mind on the lotus feet of Visnu, 

applied his hands to the cleansing and adorning the temple, his ears to the 
hearing of the good woids concerning Him He used his eyes to see the symbo- 
lic image of Vis:nu in the many temples of His woiship. He bi ought himself 
into contact with the body of His votaiies while attending to their peosonal 
comforts. He used his organ of smell in enjoying the tiagiaiice of the lotus of 
His feet. He used his palate in tasting the leaves of the sacied Tulast. He 
used his feet in walking to the temples ef Visnu. He used his head m bowing 
to the feet of Hiisikesa. He enjoyed the pleasures of w^eaimg gai lands and the 
anointment w'ith sandal paste moie to leceive the leavings of his Deity than to 

derive personal pleasuies.— IX 4 18-20 (Suka). 




m£ TBIRD STRING fi-9 


69 


!5icpn 'ai^sr ??%• i 

ll^5?ngfr^^a ii \ ii 

( a m ' tl wee ) 

«?<!Iife3iS7 fflene^srfe^f^aRisjfHBcJnswePiifHfe l s^’n i njr 
^ N ^ II 

6 Hearing, praising, remembering, serving, sncnfioing, bowing, obedience, 
fnendship, oonseoration of the bod^ are the nine forms of devotion to the Lord 
—VII 11 11 (Nftrada) 

^ viTci gfacuraif^m SIT 1 

w ^1% JWetR Ic^sJT M ® II 

I 5 I 39! ) 

<CTf q e g m g »er ?fsr i sraa'i^grag?!! sensi} i sn ?i3?i?i.sigt!it^!tf 
tipnne crm«Q ^l%<i){.ii a ii 

7 The Lord who dwells in the heart, expels the sins of myriads of past 
lives of the man that hears His praise, sings His glories, remembers, worships 
and hononrs Him —XII 3 (Sake) 

wroafH sr^fhci^fl'f am. i 

fr^ 5Traa il c ii 

(K l = U%S»!ft) 

H5f «n^ ar^s i jjosRfifEr i ffsEr alar 

aafirrp^ET S arn Ena^if ri^tf3i»j.a qsi^s^a qr 

a^araaroiiri i alfa 3<n:dt aari^ as^ii = ii 

8 Thy ‘rotaries constantly hear, smg pray, remember rejoice in thy 
deeds of glory Speedily do they get tho sight of thy lotns feet from which 
will result the stopping of the flow of tho stream of re incarnations —I 8 36 
(Knnii) 

wf ^ 5ra i 

^errs^qluf »!nfrT en* ^55^ gsCTa ^ ii «s ii 

( S UI 1 qa la ) 

ft: qr waaqa^ir aaiilft a g at^flr ^aqiq^ts i srsFrife i aa 
qi?r^ ^a arsrat ^<n aratar q?i gq grrriftaifat 

aftaift wwtrr 1 agq& 9n7!jnj?ira^g<!fWTgaP»w w 

qpift ar^qr alcfqg i arqatl?r w ii s n 


70 


THE BHAKTIRATIsAVAtJ. 


9. Let me again and again bo the '•bnc ortho \oiario3 ^\ho serve His 
lotus feet. Lot my mind dwell upon 4bc oscellencoi ol the Lord. Let my 
speech praise Him and let my body pciLoim Hi's pe)‘*onal son ice's. — ^VI. 
11. 24: (Vritia.) 


?:S!ST?:f^^q'CT3ll^RT^t?ni5i5'aT W X o » 

( B I O ! Va ) 
i ^- 

\ ^%fT5f^IT?KT5ITi5JaRT ^0^ fTIJU’ I ^Bc<T=5It 

cic^^ sytF.stiH II ir 

10 The 'listening to thonairation of the many ^illuc's of Muifui (Kri'^na) 
removes the innumberable evils of life. Much moic would the Io\o for the 
fragrance of thy lotus face ongcndcied in the hc.n t dispel lifo’.s miseries. — HI. 
7. 14. (Maitieya) 




u \\\\ 

( ^ I 1 « ) 

m 53r|iTt ?? ii U n 

11. They who sing His gloiious deeds, or heai them oi cherish in their . 
hearts the lotus feet of the Lord arc uot ovci come by tear even at the moment 
of death.— I. 18. 4 (8uta). 


51^1 5T^‘55^?5B«IT'^gqsg»§'?T- 
m 5iT5?Tf«T 1%T5r- 

3H5ftTq ll ^ U ( {O I JO I g;o g®! ) 


«^sf 3f\^!3!;gfecrf:JTg?K\ qK^ferw^rf i nc4 ^ i 

N?t=e[( ^^^Fer 

^TvTwrsRf^^xerf^rf i 1 5nHif^ ii^^il ^ 

12i By dwelling with ever inci easing aidoui on the auspicious naiiatives 
of the gloiies ol; the Loid men find abode w'here Ho dwells, hearing and singing 
His piaise They conquei Death who is invincible by otheis and they 
attain Moksa. Even monaichs have llett then homes and betaken to woods 


(freeing themselves fiom the tangle of worldly lile and giving them- 
selves wholly to devotion). — X. 90. 50 t^uka). 


TBE Tnim STRixe la-is 


11 


- i^^ii ‘ " (?o,^sm?L^) 

l%^5g cRgCTfJR’ns i 

tf% Rafefir5ratf^^w»if^iafrHf!praifiifgf^m'te«pS 

sj'm^tnnifiani* a ^ ^ratrg ^Wa «tx« 

13 Nmnborless *ii6 Hi3 gloiioaq acts in connection with the creatiion, 
^ prewntjon end destrootion of the umterso TJiey 0 good king (FonkRlt) 
' sing, hear, or take delight lu His gloitoss deeds, begot in their he'll ts deiotion 

and this devotion leads to thoir Mok'n^.X C9 45 (Snkn) 

53TFrw5r 

\ %f^vn ^ 

(?lWi«sa,r) 

«ra«5ir?«ren3r ftwr^raatRr i aa<ia-«ift(ircfinn*4 

«wt*imaisnfi{wtf<r aannf^KS^fsfilfa «Ta!i;T^aT<{^ai6 qanfirfa 1 1 wt* 
afiia^ Rja'f w^foaPr ararPr i j 

wa^ aer^fea ftwgg^g a<c#5^a at WT il?m« aat aar 

?aifl[.l Pafit 3 a a^at c&a i wfaawr iJK^nfeatmaiPr 

5«9g asfatnsrfaaapa^aRf vifETFiir wtar aiaiwn ar 33 ^ 
5aafNiadaa a'fl% aaiafe at sgt^ af 3 ^& 
g^tg: Tigisr gcHoQ^a gcajfea at^sOwr iftsJa^ 1 m 

aiqtataraTq^a_3<ii«iMil3r ^ sigj^ssrnr Pica^ vram 

*RraQRnrar « ii 

14 What does it matter that we ato doomed to be rom<»irnated or oast m 

hell for our iniquities, if only our heart feels joy in tho Joins feet as does the 
Me take delight m the loins , if our speech acquires sweetno s in being used in 
thy praise just as tho 7w/«^r leaf goius m Joiehne»s bj coming in contact with 
thy feet , if only our ears bo filled vith tbo sounds of th\ many good qualities? 
— m 15 49 (Kuro&ra) ^ 

»W%r ff W |5W!rai^Tra3ns5i?n \ 

«t5i^5few|fnf?psj n u 

^ ( l® 1 «>9 1 af?t^ ) 

»rajj3 T%iiiSa in«^a sra^sita 1 aaar t(a 1 awn 



72 


THE BIJAKTJRATh'AVAU. 


15. Lot oiir Ihoiiglits l)C fixed on the lotus led. of Kri‘<na ; let our }.pocch 
repeat His name, and lot oui body boN\ do^^^ in fcalutation.— X, 47. CO 
(Nanda). 

3 j*sim sg 5 i 5 !?ii > 

^SlTcRT 5?cIIT^W: U \\ H 

i T^WWi ) 

5i?>5r^n2r ^jnf'TTg; 3r?:Tr3^fg4.^dT5 •‘cT^Jirr ^ 

?jiw i i ?2^rrf?7r 

^551 ^Vcn\ ^^:g[=qflr HSiir 5??Tif^T ?r n U ii 

16. The soul IS not so ^^cll puiified b} obspning iobgiou‘> vow-' as by 
devotion developed by con«tan(ly hearing and >.inging the frlorious deeds ot 
Hari.— lY. 3. 32 (Yanva). 

\\\^\\ 

( U I I ) 

- m: \ i ?ncm f^Tr’ - 

Rstrfsrqq gr^: 5r>:rr ii \o ii 

17. The moio is one’s *!Oul puiified b} hearing and singing glories the 
greiter becomes the power oE Ins inmd. He can ken niinuto objects uith his 
•mental vision. Just as the physical eye acquire^ gi eater jiowor by the applica- 
tion o£ collyriuin — XI. 14. 2.S (►Sii Krisna). 

FTc^* * 

( ^ I c I « qt\f%g[ ) 

qqt qqi ^n\ 'K^jTssrfiiqR q^err 'SvTcqg'cR* ^qaqRr 

qq^q pjqqq ffq I qTfqfTq<5 ;{q5^;r i fqjg^ STOTT I 
qTqiqi^-qtS^^qTgcTW'T it u 

18. The Loid enteis hoaifc of him in no time who daily hoars in firm 
faith His paiise or who sings His glories. — II. 8. 4 (Paiiksit) 

sistsHWcf: ^?jR?7T#t if 

n^prafera ?t?rr \\\^n 

( V< 1 1’. • 8S ^! ) 


THE TUIBD SrBlNG 19 22 


78 


qft hR 7 a[Rd I Nw afepi 
wb^ sratr g-ia a^Pr g^Rt anaoRt adtvim tRr 

srcroBRiRnn^ ?®ra situi g sRt^iia sw^ ajg sa iftfli 

19 The Lord Ananta (Endlesa) whoio might is known to ol], enters the 
heart o£ his doiotces and diiros away their misonos as Ho is praised in song by 
them Jnstns the snn drives iu\*Ay darkness and strong wind drives iwiy 
clon^g ^XII 12 48 (SAia) 


^rafcJTT wrarn ^RiftsisR: i 
ijt?rsq #^?i57ispq w^sqstt^cnwim II V> II 

(^I t ) 

spjwr giaraafliRaafsftsiioba jwiafsac 
arcbRr | mcr ntl^a;, wm asiat ssiasRiifer iroII 

20 For tins reason, 0 Parikstt, the Lord Hiiri, the Soul of all, should 
bo made thp sabjeot of narratives to bo praised and heard by moo who desire 
the end of their miseries —II 1 5 (^nka) 


sir ^siiei. > 555iHf|fFsrfq Fiwiwgi. ^i^first- 

ii^i^ ii ( » i s 1 1<> ) 

a?ga^ aen ^Rr wa jaqwsaSW i 

iga I qwnmawreaa aarwr i »r^a i areuj^ 

hstRi atgiawTOaTirqw 1 at Rr^RrafijjT. a aafa af? a?r waw aaa 
iwt% afaba gRrara. aq!£aia.'fa»naTa. atnft aaai staiar ajg^a 
sraalRr Pb ai ^aRitd iri ii 

21 The bliss which men enjoy &oin the meditation of thy lotos feet 
or from hearing the praise of thy glories— that bliss may not be attained by the 
realization of Brahman Hnch loss can that bliss be enjoyed by those who 
are flnng down from the celestial cars which are oot down in their aerial passage 
by the swords of the Destroyer —IV 9 10 (Dhrnva) 

2 {ote — Saoh mortuU as have elevated themselves to the position of eelestials 
are aabjeot to fall from their hiffb plaoee m the ooorse of time Beeanae their eleva* 
tioo from humanit/ to god head is limited 67 time Whereas the happiness of 
votaries of Han who cherish no self sesking luleresls is everlasting 


TTF e od riii "e mfH 1 


FteriF FwiiF e^^fir tiftf i 


fl ^5| II 


(« UUfi'Kft) 


10 




u 


THE buaktirateavatJ 


^ 523jirf^ i sTmT^Rr 

^ftcTiPT mmfjT ?r^jqfjif^ ^?tc- 
?i3^rRT fir=gT?(^s!T5T^gi ?wr^ fcT« - 

f^c^^ I H ^ ?nfrasj ^f^cqif^ src^ii ii 

22. Hearing the au'spicions deeds which the Di‘-c-lioldcr (Hari) has 
performed in His vaiious incai nations and chanting Jlis names which aic 
significant of his heroic achiovoments, lot the dc\oleo inoNO about unatlechcd 
(to earthly objects). — XI. 2. 39. (Ka\i). 

5=f \ 

^1^ ^55(^T fraff II II 

^ ( 1® I ^ I ? 3^0 

^*fcr-g9r 

«n§^«i5 fsjfilcrsr: nfl^Tcftcqsj: n H 

23. Wheio there is no hearing of the sacred nanati\os of the Loid ol the 
Sfi.t\vatas there the demonesses piOAail in their c.ucci of mischicl — X. d. 
3 (Suka), 

f^|T 5=r rfx^- 

: IU9 1 » ( ^ ) 

q;^ ’ST 5T Rfg ???T5r^qt5 I % 1 ^ 

fsigT ^qr ws qqj^iqifgr fln^ficqTf^ fsri^ifq 

:§q; I ^ ^iq’ II H 

24. Bung those w-ho'so tongue doc> not utter the a ii i ucs of the Loi d, 

whose lieaits aie not fixed on His ]otu'> Loot, whose heads do not oven foi 

once bow to Krisna and also those who did not nciloim their woijship to 
Visnii. — VI. .J. 29 (Yama) 

W^etflT^^fT^sBHTST ^ tT S0HI5(?(: I 

wn:: *t i 

ajT^ ^T ^5?r: ^^tr* ax i is^^n 

% st?i% ftvnur ^ i 

Ml^l ^«!ri %T ^!5IrH¥n% ^5lTf3! flWsRS^T IWSII 



tan TBibD sTmx& ssso 


75 


soft ft gng t 

I. 50^ fT ^ fifgjfllVIl 


fS «r aj«ift?«ire' i3t*i<»3i*lsi “agK i 

Br^flr i«r&Rr^!T>sw«r wjpra srew q5^«^& fir^ qw«^ 
sj^sroraRrsRjf faBtsa^ftsstsff afert^i’isEi^wnnr^r^fftw 
I »»at sr waaft ariaatftqt i areRjiY’ra 


tcg<j »i i4 > airsTRt aat ami^tfisxiiPr mat u n 

Ka are aiPiRr i gganr Rreaanhi gjar 

a a^5^af§ ftaa are re7 < aat qa«aicaagc4t i aareft maaar?i?t aat at 


jomaroilR^H 

fea a gffa^f^ t ^aa^ta«itt^aTf^t^aaaiqifj[ggHfSiri>aa a^a& 


& a5fPi& ag<Pragg«a i ^ «n^ gaastat asia rftr sat gg a agga if^qa 
srana sKiCTraw ggtareJ^a sRregfaat msaafa afoetJ^ii a*# ii 

afta^sjaRr i atRm&a afStmaga^tta areata alftagaasmtat 
ggreit ia gat agar a.aa ^afitirRt aaaisaiaaia aiRta^f^cau la 
aSaaa?nftnroff5tfi^g aafaaacara a^^anatftRr aia ii v H 

25-28 The cars of those who do not listen to tho glorious acts oE tbo mightv 
Lord (ire mere holos (in thoir head) Hie wiokoil tongue that docs not siog iho 
hymns o£ iho Lord who is glorified by all is liko that oE a oroaking frog Tho head, 
the highest limb oE tho human body* adorned it may be with n siJk dre^s or 
a jewelled crown, is n mere burden, lE it does not bon down to the SoMonr The 
/hands, adorned though they bo with gold bracelets, are IiEeless like those o£ a 
corpse, that do not engage in the service o£ worship oE Hnri The ojes that do 
not look at the symbols oE Visnu arc like tho ‘^paugles oE tlio peacock s feathers 
The legs that do not walk to tho shriuos of tho Lord aro Iiko the trank oE a 
tree That man is a mere breathing corpoe who never places tho dust of the 
lotns feet oE tho Lord on his head, or who does not inhale the fragrance of the 
Tulasf leaf that had come in contact with the feet of Visnu*— III 3 20 23 
(Sannaka)^ 


nr uwuui Tnaiff ^ cr?^^T i 

>d N 

iu< ii 

Th»aSt Ku?r33isnfn Tam WRtnj^ 

( !<■ I 6 » I \—M 90 ^^) 




THE BHAKTIRATnAvALL 


U 


1 i 

4t ^ ?Sri4wf^RT 1 qfJT^: ^<5fTrft2 

>^Jife^,crfff!T: I 5>2%if^ 5r 9[Rr ii r^ n 

9if«T ^ Tm* ¥i^5:tr ^ sit ?T^?r^€r 

55«qf^’*f =5ri?i?f^ sfmRt f^c%rf sT^ar^rr ct^fit^ qri^- 

¥I5lfcf II I) 

29-30. That is a blessed tongue which i& employed in the praising oE the 
good qualities oE the Loid. Those aio blessed hands uhich are employed in 
His^ service That is the blessed mind which is employed in meditation on Him 
who dwells in all moveable and immovable objects. That is the blessed ear that 
is employed in hearing the gloiious acts oE the Loid which sanctify the soul. 
That is the blessed head which bow's down to his two-folds symbols— Ills images 
and His devotees. That is the blessed eye that eagerly looks at them. Those 
are the blessed limbs wWch puiiEy themselves with ‘^acied water with wdiich the 
feet of A^i?nu or of His devotees haAO been washed — X. 80. 3-4. (Paiiksit). 

si^u'wgui «5E^5^i%n'*?rsiT?m|: \ 

^«rT^JTTfrf¥r*e"ji^J5 ii ii 

^ * ( ^ U I ) 

^ ’a’ I 

^ 5ii¥WT|?Ecr57 ^stm- 

13. It is the greatest gam that human speech can acquire if it gives 
utterance to the virtues o£ the Highest Being wdiich ought to be sung. And it 
is the great privilege oE the Vedas that it should be employed in the narration 
of His glories.— III. 6. 33 (Maitieya). 

^ ?r ii ii 

( c I ) 

I ^^5 ^ ^ 11 Vi. II 

5^??f^crmT «ft¥rTn^rcri^grrf^^5i5v:r??^^gr.^TK^rq-?sTf ?pfw 

5% ST5KI?lf ?Jcn?f f^C^PFU?,! 

, 32., TheieEore should a man sing and lieai the gloiies o£ Govinda. By 

so doing he fulfils his mission and attains his wishes.— VIII. 6, (Haiibhakti- 
'sudhodaya Naiada). 

Here ends the Thiid Stiing of the Necklace of Deyotion. 


THE FOUBTM STKING 

[ffo/e — Tlin Bcclion Jitella on llio Tirtnen of Iieming of Ibo prone of the 
IioTdi being the Brel of the nine polhoot Deeollon ] 

^ {sprafnj i 

n\yy 

( 1 1 B 1 1« ^ ) 

Z9 w agtea 1 m ^ fiagMfsg^l^ 

sprarnfiffe I szfratfT sratstr / wn ^fcfn.i mspjpiT^^ 

»rei slfp% ef^ fttraif!! swfEtfti 5sri«nire<nri!i fii^^ifer nRwftr i >ra 
9icrc«i ear aaifeirsCi^f^ifi^iifatT ii t ii 

1 Epi^na nrho (IneUe mthm the heart, dciici nvn} the omIs (wiokeJ 
thooghte) of those who Eeireatl}’ hear Hu glories The hearing and •inging 
of the praue of Episna, the friend of the good, is sanotif) ing — I ! 17 (SAta) 

^ »r*ra?i ^iTcRfr ^ sF5«rnjrr vitafagSw i 

( ^ I ^ I ^19 ) 

a«i!FnwR5f«f5 1 PiafftPr i ?mf stma w i gnc ^ a Hangjuaw aw 
SRfR tt4«Ntty« gata. wn^fnga Jf f^rafet & faa^jPnr aaRfai* 
a^'bg^stsjana s^%sjhTO^ifrasfaai^wiTaff^finsg>fa5rafeil^ii 

2 Tiiey who fill the cavities oE Uicir ears with the ocotar oE tlio glory oE 
the Lordp the liEo and soni oE the saints, they pnriEy their own hearts which 
are pollnted by the worldly pleasures, and reach the lotus Eeot oE the Iiord —11 
2 37 (Suka) 

firRisB%fi^'arra st i 

O *9 N sO 

sTicqTsi^iyR; ^ ssm n ^ w 

(imicga )' 

ag ^aaritinler W anuRii aRaa^ii^asita 551115 1 y (6 

5feHfe?ci5ra%fir«a5^TOatg ^agf^jf^argM^r 


78 


TViE Bir AKTIEATN AV A tJ, 


«iRJ 1 ^qJTs^J ¥i?nrcfi^^ttfgrgri^ntgq=^^3iqrHTf^cgm^ ?(jrv:i^ ?T wtj 
«l4 5 5T cT^f^ ^?Rff I ?I5 !Ic?If- 

^fqtl5jsn:4?^C5T 1 ^mff^ ^ 

II B, II 

3. IE religious ol)bOr^ance^ of u man t‘\cn when I lie} are ^^oll petformed. 
does not goneiato in him a love foi the heating oE the nnnafi\C'« oE the life of 
Viswaksena (Visuu) then his piaclice-' me lo he conM'l^’rnd as mere \Miste of 
labour. — I. 2. 8 (vSfita). 

f TUFcf wei^- 

siTufe I '55tr% ngenfHHtm ^ jifpit 

H 8 u 

( 1 Vi I B PI^TT ) 

53575T vinsrcSKJirKrcrJiT s*^t 

«iTsr§[ja\^^ii ssTtas^flr sr^^n^F^fTt? i i ^g^R:?rf 

«TclT aiHI ?TJlcr: c^cfl^jr- 

5ft5r?f i «%^Tnf ?Er-5^{^crf 

g<sfR:Eri gtfFTctr^i^ i 

I ^Pi 1 1 ?iflr?r f^^rt^enf^cT ^of#Pi 

1 3:il^ia ^5r?clT?TT II « II 

4. HaMug given up tlieii olforts in the auquiiomont oL Knowledge of 
Thee, they who pass then In c-« at home l.iboiuing '^^ith all their body and 
mind in the service of listening to Thy praise chanted by saints — they conquci 
Thee, invincible though Thou bo in .ill tho three i\oild«. — X. 11. 3 (Brahma). 

rTT^^fersB cc?r 

\\\^\\ ( B I I ) 

i i ?irc^f^^ 3Tt^frf7 si^i^ ^ ^r^u^fer 

51^^ I f^g 1 ^ g-cT ^Kcf 'm 

St»T ^q-RT 31Rf% cT ^JCTeli; I 

^ ’TRc^?T =ar ^sj‘ 11 y: II 


THE FOURTH $TRim 6-3 


79 


5 They vho have taken refnge in Thee and find it very agreeable to hear 
Thy glory— these wise devotees do not attach any importance to the high reward 
of JUoksa mnch less do they care for any other position of eminence snch as is 
liable to be the sabjeot of Tliy displeasure (or expressed literally, that might be 
exposed to the fear of thy frown) —III 15 48 (Knm&ra) 

Note — Bhakti is cevai liable to sofFer frain the displeaanre of the Lord 
Any other paisait ox any high place earned by enoh pnisuit is liable to incnr BiS 
disapprobation 

5^ 5IT I 

iT H \ u 


fii ^ttr^iTORifeiOTW »m?MiW5r«!|Sg?«n? ^ wisrt sfii i 

qinffij ?nfcTOi sr 

srr snjjpftsr ^clIli ii ^ n 

b Who that IS dosirons of purifying himself would not heai the praise of 
the Lord ? It destroys tlio sms of Kali Ynga —I 1 1C (Ilisis) 

^ aKg[, ii « ii 

( ^ I B I a 

<5're»iRr i n&e w a riw- i 

wna Jra i i !tBT(s?cRreD!)ri^r 

^yafRr i si g «ii[RrB'iiit^*iaf i ?i ^ ^ 

5ig 11511 I S15H5 55 ^ I m mft- 

5 ?rim siir iw giftflr i feg i an 5555^^1 
ariCTii^g nirqrniTW Rmdi sisftFa n^irmfSihR 
nRjagu H5r nr 11 « 11 

7 Krisna enters the hearts of His de^ oiee» through their cars (following His 
praise which enters their ears) and washc> off its impurities just as tho »&arat 
season i^autnmn) clears the water of mers and tanL<> of its muddy dirt —II g 
5 (Pariksit) 


5R 5I^?I|?Ta3JnHT fst9T^«l«R^TJT5R 
I ^Rgiw?njjw % gjajf% n|^^|siT ^a^sr- 

ggrsumcTO ^niRi g 55 i<F ^5 1 a/afftfa 1 1 Iw | seto 
5^iait5r iirPniir Rratiqtwir RtarfgRiarii 1 ijtn gjuaiar 



80 


THE BHAicrJlUTNlVAhl, 


^ 

crem^’^Rg^ ^T ?r J^^lf^fcT II c 11 

8. These sullied hearls oL men are not as much piinfiod by moans of 
learning, charity, asceticism and religious piacticos, as they are by their oars being 
filled with the piaise of thy glory, 0 woi shipful Loi d, that the pure «oulcil 
saints listen in firm faith — XI. 6. 9 (Devas ). 

( U « I 

sa^fe^TffJ 1 5 f 5 sfier^gTS. jt ^ ^fvinrifgg- 

ac?f gxKqjrT^^c^gxRf?^! gg^s.RT^iR^Tfrr? i 
ssri^j i Tifn^^istrc^mr^ i ^ f^^^re^rig 

^rtetiTig g^ORt sig^ri^g 

fr 1 {srm ^ ^ 

’^r^r^T ^ i ^r^r i srqf«Tcrr!q,^?i^frTg[^^ ^rq’gs^^er^Egcrt fsTJsSt^ 

9n?in 3f f eftf^ ^^ctotcIt wtcjtI^ ar:! ^sistr i ^ 

’ErbiTcRT ^ I 1 if^ ![f3 i 

2r§[r 5n^r?JKir^^«r: i cr^rr ^ 

«re^^JiTfT,l«rr ^rf^'srwtcTK: ^v:iflrr«T?r wsr: i ?i§[t 

tTjq^^C H if^- 

¥iRj II a II ^ 

9. Who would turn away fioiu heaiing the gloiies of the Loid unless 
he IS a death-dealing butcher of biutes (the lowliest of the low castes). The praise 
of the Loid is sung by saints who have no selfish ends to satisfy. It is the 
leinedy to cure the ills of life and confois joy on the ears and heaits of those 
who heai it.—X. 1. 4( Pauksit). 

?Un fli|^qg51«T<TO«U!!^«l 1 

«TTr5i 3i»«^t5T[555rn ^ n^'*n 

( ^ I I ^ 

5T3 5>2^crc5rwi5ftg?5^^?T ^ ^cigiflTO- 

Ria ^o?5«wsr^?!Iff%iTT5 ^r sTwgc^ftf^ I ?:^r^cr ?Tf. 

’^JTtsrf q?: ?i?^WT«r4v q^cr^q wiqrqf i H(fia?I?U«cf5?i^q 

3<!!rqr ^qt<55<jfrq(qRr ^ q siTg: i qqiqq ffq q qf^q ^ nq f - 

I ^qj f^qi qr^ mn ^qi?^ ii ii 



ins rovRTH sVsiM ii-u 


8i 

10 Who that IS approcintiTO oC <piritnal flaronr \ronld {eel saiinied irith 
the praising o{ the Loi d He who is the only retoge o{ great saints and tho 
depth of whose greatness has not been sonnded even by Siva and BrahmA 
—1 18 14 (Risis) 

U II ( ^ I 3 1 gx ) 

spjnsiPr wtmupiqf i ^rarirfii i aa atg 

3!aig 3rpi i ^gsEt i sii gstsnf^ ^5i3itT^ a nUrfiiTa aror 
g5Ki{f<ilT OTi^lstr ^ ^Tg^awaa^gafmrHt^srJjsrtirgmfT hotse 
tg Rml>t3€nit Itiia a i awa^fe ml imga ^ g^^tta tcW i 
^asaftc^a armr aar at afeatn i afealarar afft nassftsrf i fir? a 
amo g^ wfir?'a> ar ereir^ai^a aig ?fi:*Karg tfir a tin 

11 In the narration o£ the glories of Han one gats thn knowledge which 
enables him to cross the eddies o£ worldliness , the mind becomes serene 

^ and renounces all atiochments —11 3 12 (Snkn) 

«ra[, ^inir ^ gTnT#5F5n^?TT ii ii 
cTcg 5T #stiier 5PR5n i 

5T 5T II II 

!tgi^ifsicT|t^ji^ e 3 E| 5 T 335*1 i 
fT 5RgB3St|^T^^ ffw II ^8 II 

{ =t I 3 ' l«— IS wlmr ) 
safatii fiiaim? i ?ngfi:fir i a# gai aa^j aga«^ w^a a aa 
asga *rg.^a aaa#a>m^r w^aanjat ataarsa sgl a^am 

g&a aamigecfe i agr a aamfit ml i a?a sgl a gg faai a^aiglr:- 
^ata- II 13 II 

aa alaai^ aim amoif^flrgmtar mig mamfta aara i aia j[fir i 
lalmjatmtmftaasnsralrmr i wataaistm^mferaaraiasrafiet 
a ilsfid l?a 3 a ^a a gafia i ft; i aai agHa aat malJslai^! 
aga kRt arai ii ^3 n 
11 


spirast- 


^rrasdm 



TtiB BtiAKTinATNAVALI. 


cT^^Tf 1 I ^?gcr: i 

ii«f ^^erf^r ^ ttct: ?r5r^(^T^t?i 

^fgqRlFt?2n^ft¥ir^?T: ^EgcT %f^ '+JI?r: )) )] 

12-14. The sun, by his lising and setting, reduces the days o£ life *o£ 
moital man. Ho who, Ihei efoi e, passes his momcnfs \Mthout listening to the 
gloiies of the Loid, wastes them m vain. Do not iiceslhe?Do not bellows 
blow the air ? Do not domestic animals eat and paii ? Tlie man within 
whose eais Krisna has not found admission is like a beast, a camel, an ass, a 

dog, an unclean pig, that feeds on filth. — II. 55. 17-10 (Saunaka). 

mn ^^’SBUfn^tusati ^^rrax Tsi^xjun^fi l 

f^poTTu ^ i’sujn^'^usa^jnmjjrhuTR^ u xh a 

( ^ I 1 ) 

ijt=s?icTm i cnq:^=s^f^ i 

^g-^T^if«m«IRf«frTg: 1 ^ftr f%3^3[^t5TRT I 

^!£r ^ sjiT^ I 

^^fTTsitarriTR:! n 

15. I pity them, the ignoiant men who by their sins are disinclined to hear 
the piaise of the Lord. Wmkless Time is lobbing the stiength of those who 
are uselessly occupied in the activities of their body, speech and mind — III. 
5. 14 (Viduia). 

5151 ^fsrfsiw: 

■ nra^: 1 5ji5| mT^u«^^sci'uuT5:T^i^5T %U55R^ 

cfR.U l^rf H U ( ? I I 5^ ) 

51 ^5Rfi ^qf I qsr 5rsr?cn(% i ^ i:q;?iir: 

1 51^ f¥iq«^'T% ^qf^Ti^q rf^qr 515 - 

qrqi^fq^qqt: qjWlf^qicrf iTfg^’%Ki qi^ q?«f^ % s q asifcr 

^qmqsi^ I3: 1 qi^g ^ciq^- ql: fq5:T?5^ 

^5:^5 %if 1 1 ?r 1 qj?i sj;^T ?rw6fK! ^qq qifq^r« 1 

' 51^ If: S q5I?qi% ¥qq? I) II 

16. That men do not find their way to the abode of the Lord is because 
they hear woids othei than employed in the praise of the Loid, that aie wicked 
and destructive of then good undei standing. It is then misfoitune that 

they listen to worldly gossip which lob them of their virtues and cast them in 
the daikness of hell where there is none to save them. — III. 15. 23(Binhmft). 


THU Fouiirs srsisG ii-ia 


83 


^ IIff¥l55qT fgaj^ISfJRT ^ I 

( ? ml 88 ^ ) 

HOTsrt^^ fHf^cst ti^«r *nsr ?7vpifk i 'n^si i ^sn 
JiCT a ’Wi^ '5is«rt sfsftg w53f*i^H.I®s 

shiHt II <• 

17 They easily attain to the abode of Visnn who by drinking the neotar 

of thy praise swell the Tolunie of their d6\otiont and who with their minds 
pnnfied, aoqniro knowledge who<e essence is non-attachment —111 5 44 

(Deras) ^ 

^ cl ^asttr^irasstiaj^rm sB»§T55il ssrf^siT- 

\a • nO 

afllcTH, I tRSn *55 ^ rfl^ fTT^I 

| g;g [t w?if II H 

( 3 I fi I 8 H^r ) 

ft; ^ S<ir ftw nn5Reriftt'att9[snftr agiafiifa agr^i^are I ^ g 
I sif5t<s):at asflnst «;?i ^ faa f gj 

»pi«nft5a>5- 3ft »{,ft aw <w aia ;na 

HfPW ai^ft aiaaiftj i ^ ca5fl:«nwat!I jgaft Sai eft ftsa 

n?a?Rr caa i aar ^ ft; ^anftftrarBift aia ii 1= ii 

18 Thou dost not Jeavo thy place from the hearts of those devotees who 
enjoy the sweets of the praise of the lotos of thy feet which are wafted into the 
cavities of their ears , the devotees who cuddle thy lotus feet m the 
fondness of their demotion— III 9 5 (Brohmft) 

vw g ei g cfe 3 n i ;gM|^ c H<^ - i awTH gf^ajgjigrfw^Kj i 
atu^lenilft ST SSPOTT^ ^Tct rf FT ^TRIW 5Jf( WssT-St^ U^<1U 

( 8 1 T 1 3;4 ftl^vil ) 

ecei^ al^ i i ?nt wnT wJt trroii 

»isra^fti^ >iir ?9c?;^5r gi g® *1^3 cpwft ^sn ire^n «mis afinft 
^rariwgs^ n ^ft ^ 3 ’3 3^ 3 gawja«iti. 3^43 

111333 iwr tnsnjt 3 jq^jraft irat^l w^tPr sajii^tsnvi'ioiraf^TO 
wig 1183^31^ 3 fttiRRcw" 1 gr^gcw sra^jgwftcJtft^fiaaniiT^n 



84 


THE BIIAKTIRATE AV Ahh 


19. Our mind may be compaiod to a \\ild clophant. Just as the latter, 
BGorched by the forest fiie and suffering from intense thiisi, dives into the 
water of a liver and does not like to come out of il, fain to foigot the painful 
experiences of the forest fiie ; so our mind v/hich, having bufficiod fioin the 
miseries of the world, dives into the nectaiean ciuicnts of Thy glory and 
like one who is united in Biahma, does not vish to get out of it, lest the 
remembianoe of liis past woes lusli unto him. — IV. 1. 32 (Siddhas]*, 

^ UFU h *9 H \\ 

q cR;: \\ H 

ail: irru 

??8j: ^ 

( « I RO 1 %%• ) 

esraq^ I 5R\?:aisj; f5r%5r?r aisricTirv 

^ ^¥i5crT?^ ^ 5T ^ 

'srsRK; \\ n 

IT^TTT?rTrcr|^«Tlri^ 5SI^.«r€rqTfg[§?^* 

mf^cT ciTi^r ^ i ciff H ^nr- 

51^^ ?na: ?Tgr<5rq i sr^ ^ ggLcr^ig^ fifU7fqf^*cT?rT 

n R\\\ 

w ’ctiT|qi^r^5iT5jf «i5r^jjg?3iTftT it i ^ 

«T^T^*Tfq^g[?5; | f ^firffl- ^q(TTpT 


lUE lOlRTIl SIRJA G S4 25 


8S 


WEHSist 1 8 ia> ^rwisS atonfs*!!!' 

a?q^ 5 } MTQig^^tr «ra* ii w il 

!ig S!nq gfe<ir!ift 7 <Kti fsicni 4 t»mJi 5 S>?li 5 I 

»TO 5 ftn|asrr mrai^Ef & jnn *rar sf’rft *t Jitfs^jnRr 

jpn^i^cS <TO^ fsTJjtswi <s«i I »ft4>ii 

n? a«5<!i TO ^TOifi I g«!iinr ifa? ^ftnfanist aftc* 

^ II II 

S0-S3 0 Lord, tlio forotnosi of bostowera of boons bow oonM a wjso 

man bog n boon from Tlico ? How can I, 0 bcstowor of 1/o^irft bog boons from 
)ou such as arc Umkcrcd after by ordinary folks who deserve a place in bell 
livon A/olsa is not ilio object of my do iro vvboro tboro is no nectar of tho lotns 
of Th) feet dropping from the lipa of amis Ibo Imon that I pray Cor is to give 
mo a mynnd of cars (to bear Ibo mtmo of Iby prino) 0 glorious Lord, tbo 
breatli of saints wafiing tbo *>prnys of tbo nectar of Iby lotus feet reminds 
nmguulod wi cacrcs of tbo truth that tbty btivo forgottui ^^odonot naiit 
any other boon tlian tlio privilege of bcaniig Iby pniso O Ibon of auspicious 
glory, the man that bears even onco mcidentaily Xby praiso in com^iany of 
Iby worthy votaries would never cci*© from tlio jdeasuro bo dorives 
from it, nnless bo is a voritublo brute oud lia> not tbo cn t to oppreemto 
It— IV 20 23 2b (Pfitbu) 


tlftcT 

H I) 

f%?iT ^»iraf I 

ff gjftm *n^ii ii 

( a I I 80 ;nc^ ) - 

!t5&isrft e^Tiraifil^R mRiiHfi^iw "sTOg was si sri^ir imf 
<51% $11 sraiiigci it rfaifaRr i ^inrs arcTOTOa i 

aftafefer i iRf^g'iaftar (iSfam 

atn ^ *>13 «i«iiiri(nf€ar ggr sigaairgs* rto t wragi wh 

g^pqan aa aia ai afta Fqr!i% i 

siaai^o^ara i sjiigcr^njisr siitoi uw ii S8 ii 


afS aiTOi^^ FsfirFer^ »W 5 fRr a?f? i TOftFa i ^tgRiirraf 
%% aiga ifiFTO 'sOTgidsrsi^iitai^g^aarisrfafe laaitrow mra 
sjafeiTOiafgaia sitm uisiife^ ^ sjiqtfii aiag, ^vnf^firafarer to 
waurai^ft ?iia»:^ snacFa ■mw awa sfa n n 


86 


THE BIIAICTJRATNAVALJ, 


24-25. Ill the conijiany o£ saints floiN the sli cams of ncctnr of the praise 
of MadhusHdaua (Kiisna the killei oL the demon Madiiu). They N\ho drink that 
nectai are not affected by hunger, thii*:!, foai, grief and destruction. Men 
being constantly disturbed by their passions and Mants, have no inclination to 
taste the iieelai of the piaise of llari. — IV. 29. 40-11 (Nuuula). 

fqsiu' u 

( 1° I l I _ 

3rTer^^ mi^w i) 

26. This hunger w’hich is haid to beai and this thiist, docs not oppress 
me much, because I am drinking the nect.u ot the piaise of the Loid Hari 
which is di opping fiom thy lips. — X. 1. 13 (Ikitiksit), 

Note — King Paiiksifc, {•landson of Aijuuaof Mnhiibhilt'ata fame, was wholly 
engaged in heniing tho Bliugavafa for seven days without food and drink and was 
patiently awaiting Ins death. TiUSuka, the serpent, appioaohiug him in disguise, 
hit him fatally. Paiikslt had been cuised bya jRiis sou louud whose father’s neck 

the king, when Imutiug in the woods, had indignantly placed a dead serpent 
because the Pm immeised m his meditation, did nob lespuudtothe call of tho 

king who suffuiing fiom intense tliirat was in need of water which he wanted. 

Timg raw ?iui ^ ^ i 

arr viraer ra^i^w: IR'SII 

crnt’T^fcrfjFfer i a m tit fror sitsfg ^ ^ar- 

^ I ffwiar qsag ar 

nfafe^a i stj i fa«^arar: ii R'S ll 

27. 0 Biahman, know that my heaitis faxed on the Loid in whom I have 
taken lefuge. Let the goddess Gauga .xlso know il. Ye go on piaising the Lord. 
Let tho tieacheious serpent Taksaka, set on by tho Biahuiiiiia, bito mo. I 
do not caie it. — I. 19. 15 (Paiiksit). 

TO II II 

(?i?5 i^ra^fO 




Tfft; Fovbrn stria o s9si 


87 


;i I S'^'n gawfJi 

ARTOftfa Rwignr i »i>T awi'ft'nRr^^qi siisr: ti V ll 

28 One fcol« joj when ho heirs the praise of hol^ and eminent «nints 
Much more wowid ho rejoice in the pnitse of Him (Vimu) who heirs on his 
body the mark of Srivntsa —III 1!) dl (Siita) 

—A vrliite mntlc tjf Ilia aaif at liair wlneli Vifnii bonrs on Ins brenst 



iTTfgjJ^ftaTfjSIHTq^ I 


iT|c5<nis[^# q^tTrs^rcasjqgriR ! ii II (^q; ) ii 

srrgat^ g q t =q6 w g ^ r i 

TT r S ^a ^ l q ^ qsn^ 11 3* It 


( « I ? 1 Pftr ) 

gsaw^Htims^la i aswif^fa i *nsic?nBRf!ma<if gjia^lfa 

»W®pra?ta«ref wr ssaaifir ?<raaJi <rfif^t7.ii u H 

ata awnmst^ 5TC«i{a i aa ?ca i ^erttaraia* 

' ati a^ inpj an?«t Saa gaanSt 5n5?ajtPi 

^ro re a ta gt^ wwiraciaiaif^ ma n ti 

29 30 Listen, 0 king, to tho prai«o ot tlio Idorcl b deeds for it einctiRcs 
ibe bearers (Sake) I am not «ntntcd with (ho nectar o£ (ho prai«o of (ho 
I ord as 1 bear } onr words 1 am afflicted with (ho mi-orios of the world and 
Uis praise is iho balm to (ho nfiliGtions of men — AI 3 2 (Videlin) 



':^»msRr qieqy- 

Tiireq 1 

a^aia i ^rnsra &aif^a?a 

"ftfeaw sia aftrtfrit wia^ »n sftai arar at 'rat «r 
aF%i3ai!!»iai»!itra sia a'at'iiat'ita w%aat ^ aTtaratt9ntni7,i aram* 
aat^iRs Watfiie'n} n 11 


31 There is no other ship to earr} to the other side of tho ooean of life— 
so bird to got aeross — than tho hearing of tho pinjful adionturos of tho Iiord 
Hor IS there any balm like It to soothe the pain otTIio person soorehod bj tho 
forpst fire of life— It II 4 40 (Suka) 

• tRt iinnottt^ i 


88 


?v;7? BiihKTjnArsA va hi. 


Ti5ffi 3!^ w 

( <® I 1 3 ). 

TO % ^HT^f>r?rTr*4^f^ i ^c?j 

^tfrr^f^c^'TT^Tcr^imr ^if f f^'^^^'tfaf ^:rf5i^- 

1 i:4tsf^?rfnrcf i ^^7\\ nn^Hi vT^;i:ai?i 3’^^.(?:cTt 

^>3[^: crfgrqmgtTil^^ gr ii n 

32. How cJin omIs altcct thorn who d jink to their fill tlic neclni of the 
lotus of thy feet thut spiinging fiom Ihc heiuUof ".linls '.lud i‘>«uing Ciom their 
lips puts an end to the igaoriinee oL men that h (he cau-o of then lepoated 
births. — X. 83. 3 (Yudhisvhua). 

TiB31?cigTSJ5T^^\'^g|(f%5I#^SJT: qt^T5?n3R3R:?i: SJ?!- 
3q55^9j^ \\ 3^^ if ( ^ ) 


gtfic4 1 I efST ^ar^s’.’TT ?n ^^arr 

?i5£r( 

55rr5Hf^ f^^-SSTJ 1 ZnZ>AZ 35dTO^^<5 TI5?T^^cr ?cTO- 

5si4t ^^5 fn4 Tri^‘ =5r ^.z 

^t^ngw^TT- TO cTmgr^si^^^jrcf 11 \i 11 

33 . The stream ofc the nect.u ot thy piaisc ami fhe stioam that flows 
from thy feet (the Gangtl , both ot them hu^c the pow'er to destroy the sms 
of the world. This is the leason why holy men make n^c ot these two holy 
streams; the one of piaise of the Loid as sung in the Vedas, the othoi Gangfi, 
that flows fiom His feet, the eais make u^e ot the one, and the otliei washes 
the body m ablution. — XI 6. 19 (Dovas). 


rig sif!^ ';v,m 

cTOt^^ 11 II ^ ^ ’ 

* iTT^; i ^isrTTfBr^grre^T^^Hr: ?tsit ’ra 

?lT5rf^?T i 1 ’ssrf^^; trtgr; II 



TBE FOURTH STBim 35-37 


89 


34 0 Krisnn, th; ijrardro adrontnres are anspicions to men Having 
tasted tlie sweets of thy pmue they lose relish for every other thing.— XI 6 
44 '(Dddhava) 

S|4 T^¥ti|TOtT5T!T WH. t 

5ifttinn5S5rrai|*^ 5 ih. u n 

) 

«KfTO* 

I fw w ft ra remii i H aftoim n \'l ii 

35 0 groat Yogi, wo who havo boon wandormg in tho paths o£ Karma 
will (now) cross the region of darknoss bj hoaring Thj prauo in company 
with Thy derotooSs^XU 6 48 (Uddhava) 

^ wcefei^ fii ST nraciT i 

- wc«w^(ivi i gp q i^ T J5i§T ?ira^ n \\ ii 

( tt I V I fi sflfrujt ) 

stg feraf ssrot ^ an^fanri 

annasnd? ^ a nirlHit ( tic»i>a dindfUif f^rotlSr 

Rriditjj najnfftaTO* I »j?ig 

ara»rat!nf^*Rti srra^ aflcdfvianii,<B»ifRi li n 

36 Lot worldly Tocationa bo pnrsnod so long os ono is not dugnsied 
with the world, or so long as fiuth has not boon goneratod m tho bearing of 
my praises — ^XI 20 9 (^ri Kri?nn) 

*raw \ 

^ ©V •s. 



nrm^qt^^fsprrast u ii 

( 1 1 le U sjl«nn) 

Bcala firrasRi lotetaiaNr ?TO»Rt TOtmftjrfttRr i sftEwas^ fij 

«nn>ai^ wRwaaft ^jupmsa^a <fiafaOTi»iraifi.i ig^a ^ 
wfjir ^ aMffltfnw aRtmi< Kfjrf i toRi aat i »Jrera »iw^ »ig 
«isai.ii ^.9 II 

37 In this sacrifioo whose rewards are nnoortain, yon, sir, haTO feed ns 
to the 6U with the neotar of tho lotas feet of Go7iQda.-*->I X8 2 (Sannaka 
and other Bisls) 

j-The BiSi Sannaka and Ins oompanions gave expresstoo to their Ihankfnl 
nssa to Suta the reolter oE tba Pardn«s The/ rained Han Kalh& (the narration 
oE the adreotnres oE Han) higher than the teligiooa saoriboea in whioh tber wert 
engaged *' 


12 




TBE BBAKTlRATNAVALt 



5fnra?sK«n5W5W3^ msift 5*rf i 

sW^^f^T 9Ivsrq?l^I5OT4: I^RTSf ^f«lcTJ 1 3rcJ[^ WRI? 

38. The fruit of acquiring learning with laborious etudios is the hearing 
the praise of Vianu from men who treasure in their hearts the lotus feet ot 
i^ovinda. Wise men have praised this use of learning.— -III. 13. 4 (Vidura). 

y cqfiif a f I i 

9iwr«ft%ic?i|fsc5^ ?raq3 fsfc'ts? mni^^rfes 

^^5T. ?rr^«T 5r(^g[,^rs§3[ c^qRR^ffcJW^r^^^^CT- 

.^5|j 1 5f^ I 4t*PT^f¥iJ cTT^rirTO: 

I in^gc^fi^ sr ^ci;ht5 ^ ^4t sngt 

\\ w 

39., He had severed the bonds of ignorance which ties man to the belief 
that his body is identical with his ^soul. He had attained the knowledge of 
Self. He had no desire for Siddhis (supernatural powers.) He did not apply 
himselt to thoughts of a controversial nature by which he cleared his doubts. 
The ascetic diligently applies himself to Yoga practices so long as he has not 
developed a taste fOr hearing the praise of Krispa — IV. 23. 12 (Maitreya). 

Note —The above desoribes the condition of the mind of tbeltoyal sage Pfitbu 
just before bis death when he gave preference to the hearing ot tbe glories of the 
Lord to all other pursnits, • 

^ ^ aim: tt 8® H 

( I® ut * s ** ) 

5T3 snflt 

- 1 I ^^ 55 ^ 1 5RC ciHsrW I xrfe!acr5^“ 

> 


FIFTH ^TBIffO il-i3 




awJirfSaii^ i fea’ sraijjJnBriiranpn^ nmin^ 
!t?33apn^afe^»ft»n!;,gai«rni c<irt>yi*4a wart 

TO *BrRt TOS^r ^ & snn* ^ifect* aiH^ratr i aatPwt 

TOi*n?iflcTO I TOsrq MraJi& a?noi5>ft WBt ^Rr TO iiaon 

40 The oeotar ot ihy pntue la lifo to tlie affiiotcd Foots eulogize it 

It destroys sms, it is beneficial to those who hear it They who sing thy praise 
and spread thy glory on the earth, scatter spiritual gifts in profnsiODr-^S, $1, 9 
(Gopls) ^ 

w^sRi q i g t Ti H ^ i 

'*rar*T qtB«i>tgen ! ng^ sFat f q fa g ’sq h ergig^ii 8^ it 

( ^ I t (M ) 

TO tgmg 1 8t^ 1 1 aun<Wi< htq.»»at.yiit wfqwCT top? to* 
swfer SI fisg gar&sr jJtrI«TO & TOit ‘OktobFJ tojiHSW* 
f ^gs T ^ «4cr< srofir ii »i H 

41 0 Lord it u nothing impouiblo that nt thr sight mon should get 

nd of their sins By onee hearing thy name even the Chand&la (an nntonohaofe 
loir casta member ol the Hindu oommnmtyS IS sared. — YI< IS 41 lObitra- 
kotn) ‘ 



J\ 8*1 il 
1 1? ' »fi ^«r ) 

1 SI^YSlfT TO'lTOjq'gpinf UWlIl|4>t>4n(31d WI5 %I Sijir 

rftt I gMwIdi WR®iH3<i wrwl 3^% rHTOirof tohI troirs 
TOtgsir si^iTO 1 qg TzgnTOf 

II 

42 Who that knows the best of the aims ot hte, who that has drank 
the nectar ot the narrations of the glorious deeds ^ the Lord, the hearing of 
wbioh pats an end to the misenes ^ oontinnons incarnat{ons---w1io woidd nof 
prefer it to the many (seoular) narraiiTes obromoled in old writings, or fronld 
cease from hearing it , nnless he is other than a man 0 r , a beast)?— UX 
49 (Maitreya) 


< _ . 


( J 


qruft iITSTS^lT^ d 


92 


THE BHAKTIRATNAvALI 


’sr ^ ^ «i55?rfcr \ 

gsrfjT^i «3r^T?c?c^- I ^ g 9i’55cr«E«ng^r fk^ fijtniTOf* 

3»2?j^flr ^ stfcT^ tefisicrr ^ 

^ wsfc^^sn’w^i^jii^ 

?«i?cr: 11 «^li 

43. Verily are they cursed by the gods who cast aside the nectar o£ the 
praise o£ Achyuta to listen to wicked stories. They are like the swine that 
take delight in feeding on filth.— III. 32. 19 (Kapila). 

'ER^FR^^^nw^: U*Ut5I% ^fts^scsmrsi^: I 

f5r5»‘ FtviT Ff tn?r: iiggu 

¥Prag[^W cT^ TOTTVTfSRft- 

1 3?i!T3^s I 3 ^5^: we^crhrnsiaTsr^- 

I SW»nSET5 ^f5C 5R: 1 cT 

6«^*.ci5irftr i «ijt51t «« ii 

44. Kfisna’s glorious deeds sung constantly, confer well-being to those 
that hear them. If any one is desirous to attain to Krisna’s devotion, lot him 

unceasingly hoar His praise. — ^XII. 3. 15 (Suka). 

gjFdrni g5^«pnT^. 

M I s® ' 8s sw ) 

?Tt¥imcri?2?Ttfiq^5v:ncft¥^^ 

1 5c«rfTr% i ?! : 

9ir^ ^Ictt 5CT?T^mi^crT^r fns^ ^fi^racr: 

?J^1PH1I55I ci^5^t^?rTr^ciK^?:gT^ 913 ^ 51 ^ 

I 9igtzi q 

I H gc^5£ri^ ¥n^j 11 ayi ii 

^f^rrmraf 1) 

45 . Let people desirous of reaching His abode, hear the deeds of the 
Supreme Deity who had assumed the human form in' the person of Krisna for 
thb preservation of true religion (among mankind). By hearing them man 

is freed from the evils of his bad acts (and gets Moksa). — ^X. 90. 49 (^uka).’. 
Here ends the Fouith String of the Necklace of Devotion. 


THE FIFTH STBING OF THE NECKLACE OF DEVOTION 


( Vofe ^Tbis aeolion heatii on lliojlijmnini, of ilio praiae of Iiord ) 


H fanc'gsrq \\ 

( t m i?!! siR^ ) 

sw^aasr^CTftg a< craving 5ft»n^ dafiraiPi-. 

SgnF I i fiB( i M,a loniw^i Rto ^ [ » i i[^<i q > n wf^ ' 

srit sn^boH «n i gfefiraiiJ!i Piama ratq ^ n«t<rf 
lRRJt<S5ifeiiH3^a^TFi jjqrgsrq’ivd^ft^qRr&i rS 
sTOCsmi ^ »nRr«r sr <KT^jrf«cr BraHi^ rw ii t ii 

I Fropliois and pools hfl70 said that tlio unfailing fruit of man s roligioas 
penances, sacrifices, leimtng wisdom and cliantj is bis giving bimsolf up to the 
praising of the ezoelloncos of Him of tho highest name.*^ 5 22 (Kfiroda) 


H3T5I ^ 



I 


»l8t d^c( «j|^C|rHr|^| I 

n ^ II 

^ ^ (i’ll till »s— no qji ) 

^iiwRi ntwirH I >27rf)RRiT(?iiPFqf ^crr^ 
*R««^ «iRaf»ii awreai 

•IURT II s II 

Rw atsift Jurai « tHr wi 

<l!)aPraf5: wg^ ’jrtoi.i aq’ !w »nn Rsfer ?wr hj smiil 

«remnii ? II ' 

^ 2 Those words are uttered m vsin , that talk is wicked which do not 

relate to Adboksaja (Yisnn) That is true, blessed and worthy speech whi6h 
gives expression to the excellences of the Lord 

3 It is lovely , it is ever new , it is the constant festival of tho heart ; It 
dries the ocean of gnef, viz , the praise of t^o glones of the Lord — Xll li f 
49-50 (Sftia) u c ^ 



94 


THE BIIAKTinATEJS^ALL 


\ 

wcq[ W 9 U 

( t U * ) 

5T ?T5mmm gf^K^fr ^tv^rer s[f^ i #s- 

jriHJifer^f^ i ^*^-' t ^ l3* ^ 

.tw^Rt^rqu«u 

' ' 4. Imprisoned in the moshos oE vrorldlincss, the innn is sot frco nl onco if 

he hymns the name o£ the Lord. For terror — Death — ^is Inmfolf afraid of tho 
Lord.— I. 1. 14 (Saunaka). ^ 

H. wqjnki 5Rf|i%?3[^ i 

c^pra' ftT!Wr H ^ra f et 

?r|n[if5ra^ !3ift?iraT^'^^fei?jikt i *h*)^c)c4i fq i Jiim 

3jiM iiyi 

( n yi Uo -“U ) 

a^ 5 » T igi ^ ^ g^gxRpJTcirrf ^ 

rf^' i k^^JOT 5jw^ cfm EHRBgsqRNfcrwisr 

^fRT JiRHT ^Tsrfer im mwi: ^ ?r 

f!Wi^ Jf I ^ ffi^r^T ^ ^ i 

wf wfe^sci c^^r^?fp5rif??g^- 

sr rflE 11 yi II 

' f^if^ q3[^rg«4* wrcJf^n^f* ^“sCific^ I etsctI^ot l «r 
'^vii srT^g’^sT’T; i sf^crr i cr^m^r srrsi^ ^rnsERcftf^ i 

fm ^rTi'7^9r4 «rcr^^?rfr??R^i 

«flFcitf^ Jimtfsf Igj siWTf^ Bvsrm ^R: ^rf^r 

>z^ra% 1 «tcrR i siRT2[r g *TRf^ ii ^ u 

. " 5-6. However picturesque the words and stylo may bo of a piece of com- 

position, the wise compare it to the pool in which crows sport. The swans of 
the MS,nas a lake do not find delight there, being the dwellers in a beautiful 
home. 

That speech is the destroyer of the sin of him who uses it which, though 
not composed according to the rules of poetics, contains the name of the Lord. 
Such a speech the saints like to hear, to utter.and to chant. — ^I. 5. 10-11 (Narada). 

iVote-s-Freed frCm the tangle of figure of epeeoh, the verse fneasa that laioU 
who delijghtJbo d^ell io sacred places amid holy surrouudiugs, fiud iio pleasuie iu 
profane epeeohes and writiugs, hoWever eloquent anjd adorned by^ poetic art, ) 


TBEFJFTtl STBIAO t-O 


9li 




(t»ttiwsn<at ) 

fe^rsftsltnrRrsrr^BnRrfewawrfirgijrsrsw'flf^nT I'aaiwnHSr 
aassrewB^tenasa^SSt «a»c» i - a u t mnrp^arc^;fa^qfra<?ftyw> 
gww OTT l^agi i i fit *S!rra«'5afHR«t s*rmn*ia* 

af^ar ^ nRi ^r^tfir ana a s^a ar dan^ <n^ar 

sftfor II « 'I ' 

7 Tho mmd that dwells not on tho deeds o£ Her! bat desires to narrate' 
other matters and being tlias wrongly employed in the dosonption of scenes and 
names of useless things, gets distraoted and Ends no baTon of rest Uko & ehip 
tossed by a storm I 5 14 (N&rada ) 


juTOcr ^ 5 i#dfqr firamr i 


en|ci ^ ^ ?ni^ %rt% ii e w 

( 1 1 ^ U8 ar<ti ) 

afb^anr aaafa «ro«at aanfet ftro naiftfe 
niaranarqatRrlaWnatnaat^l finwai faantta ^afir qi^aiRr 
wRat am aafacam ii a ii 

8 The Lord whose veiy feet coostitnto a holy sbnno, so lores to hear 
his glories that he makes no delay to make bis oppearanco in my heart when X 
hymn his praise as though he 19 drawn to it by my oall— >I 6 34 (Nftrada) 
No{» — ril4<n< may also mean * He from whose feet faes Issasd the eir^ 
OiinKft * luterpreted either way, the term •IgoiBes Yi^na who ti known by % 
ttiODSand namea (WCfWnwr) 


5 ir « 7 »isrt 


I 


qfw ^ ®» 3 |Si^ U < II 

^ <o 

awis<Jif«a«is I at lar q>afa mrftarfit aaHi amffqamar^ 
fs»ca qaafaasn fa^ftaRigfta^f^ «aam sa aftaS*^ 

W II fi II 

, 9 Thoae'who wish oiemal life ahonld sing tho Tirtaoiand doodsot thf 

Uightjr Lord— n 18 10 (Sftta; 



86 


TH E BIIA KTIRA 'MAVALL 


(5^1 t I U IS*:) 

:^ < B^i y> g ng I naf^lf^gtlWWlfafe 1 ts^f 
1 sss^sf i 5i^} ^iRi 

fipjfef aist iimij aasajftrew: M il 

10. This hymning of the g’ories of thelord is enjoined on all those who 
wish to have no fear from any one ; and who being disgusted with the world, 
desire emancipation from the miseries of life ; and who have taken to the 

path of Yoga.— II. 1. 11 (Suka). 

;r|: i 

II u 

( M ^ i ) 

' ^ g ^ I OCcT- 

l mm f^wr: ^ng^tfq f^'crt^ 

^q^ew:uUH 

11. The hymning of the praise of Hari is the ship to carry across the 
troubled sea of life people whose hearts are oppressed by the hankering after 
the objects of pleasure. — 1. 6. 35 (N5.rada). 

Wri Knim^fciH ih#«ifrrfit srrm^ fsisaiT 

sislm i T|5sn ^*5tF??icrt|jPjn 

H u - 

1 9i§;i^iT^ i srrrsr to h to f% 

TOT?'?!* TO u\^ II 

12. .They who at the moment of death in sheer helplessness utter the 
names of Hari, significant of the deeds of his many incarnations, cast off their 
sins all at once and attain to -the true, the unborn Brahma. In Him do I take 
refuge.— III,. 19. 15 (Brahm&). 


) 


THE FIFTB STRING 13S3 


S7 


STPFT^^JI^^Wfcj I 

^T^ssrigfifR: iiraajt fniT^sg^rgjR ii ii 
^5T 'C*<(e4«(l«i'‘g«i«i^ ( 

sr^fRKRWiT^fcr annsE H \9 H 

§?j3t g^jfr 5^^ I 

! ^< i a i Ii ia »T i ^ r ^<5 ll ll 

^^tTTFRj^rfij^ ^Re gct H^ t 
fniT Slrtll^ f^»iri4d<:df |W fTR- II ll’ 

5rf|?P^ JR ^^i gfai id Q^cm^ i 
? ic*^fHfknwNr?iT ^* ^ ngaT^ ii^kii 

frtqsraRT firn^^j^TKiscr^l 
*R5raPtH WWl^SI H II 

qiR^WSl qr |^S(^ Eit I 

'^Idd Wrf ^»qu^n»d Vii^n I 

5*Tren|R rsri^ ii ii 

ig5|3irT ^ *51 ^ ^1% *9 \ 

TIRf^vraiR qTqtrn ^ TIc ^lf B li^ |l 5^11 || 

^irsi^niir 5Tqi^w5i?rTf^. i 

STT«W^ ripq ?r^Mtaj|(f^5HaqT U W 

f T dl^ ' =dHil^*dR qg[,| 
qw ^TETR^r l| ^i? II . 

13 


, 98' 


THE BHkKTIRATNAVATj. 


^TH^T55ig?a IRHll 

( ^ U I v9~-?§ ) 

^ ^jqf^fer sjcrif^ htot? 

^^^ffi.sq-rsr^K ^Rciert=a: ^rtj 5ffJT^fl:«li^mf^ 
9I5^f ^TOT #5[f^sa: 51 5ifqg 

5a^c?«5f ;ft^55rT>SI?J?rT'\% 11 II 

^3 1 i^lcf5^?ij g CTS? ^x%} \ 

\ 9i^5TJ 51^^: STT 

*“ I snri^ 

9im=3^ 5c^5r f^sDi^^qj i ^ i Tixn?a?f5iTg 

^XRX ^Ti^gm^ifkxr^rrrti i stcxq:^ v ^ \\ 

' sxg ^ixT^Jit ^T »iTcr^5if 5x^!aT5?xf^-^Tfer^i^:f^ 

9l^q?5TX^^^^ JXWfeTT* ^ :1 15l¥qi35^1 5c??T¥^qi 1 

^1* I 5151 Igj ¥nxx aiT^^qig^ cif^^rx fxnrt^T^i^^'i- 

^^4 nm ^cft ?flr ii ll 

5xg ^cT^T^rt J?55«f^ffl^^x?r?j Jxf^m^Tfir ^rs^^’^xfsfx^qtf^gg. 

<i5?rffigf uwl^Rnf^ ^rf^ i x[f^ 5if^sR{ to? 

Sf^ 5^51^ 11 

5i^«r sxr?xfenE«i 

a g^gc^rfa axrr qtf^^^x m qx5> - 

?ax^^qx4t3Ttf^ 5n^^?r i ^ ^ 5iHTqi^^TX3?j 5?TtJT^5:^ 

gqi^xf a g fi^5rs[xa«Jirf^ag 

ca^{ 11 w 

afesfpcf afvTT?ii^f^ 5r^?7^ tx5tV ataf?r 

^^T5it'.f^§f?r 5ncafa^ arsafix^cfr i^'^'iijTg^x^ 

5x^xsj^ ^ ^caflrasr; iKc 11 

^^arri^fixt sisnfw^^gg; ?w|;5n5rr%if?cr 1 5r%5ifef^ l ?r«i 

a^wx^a TTT ^TOiTf aa^jqgr: ^cfa^pgxiramf f^^cf ^?x a^x^^xHc^Eraas^g, - 
H<35Sg^=aTRcraRc wra? 1 feairnu ^r^ifcrxit^fla 

j3*^j I a g 5HJx\'sg't?:xufg^- 

^’sa^shPRrxg^a ^ faf^ fasrr ^55cn^'ta5n??t’5g-r?:q ?iqg?:i^ g qarfex affpif: 

11 ^s n 


THE FJFTB STSISQ SO SS 


99 


>i?!ra sit i iw iagX gi g wrami Eraif i «nft5re«i 'iftst* 

i&!i yr »ftcrraw?j?!inT ^ i tm f^ris^Rr i wsrmPi^^ril- 
«IRKIW.» V II 

!ts !tni ^S!n>nJi5l5. yre^5»it«ra aam i 

«iHier I siTd^iPr cftfems i « «irai»r sirefa smftca^ aia mqfH- 

nii^fij»OTC2ani.iaa?ica^5n5 i«jfaa iiren^if^ i^fea*»nif israt 
HU ntu 1 Hqf ^ am surof^i ats^ ^ g t f<{»n ii ii 

aa nea anrea h 5^ tna&a ^ a g hot a ta a s q aia an- 
aron^a^sgifenciOTag^iams kiott gaq i ftgin w i mi gi^ amaf 
gsRj mafkaiPr 51^ h arona aiaa a-ai^ftre®i&H3?aa 
a^a arreai aflamr g ^ oiaOTlair i raajt> OTt<!iai^ <!I gOT^ araaia* 
IlftRraaat?^ i a a - 1 ' " 

nia^ II 


Rk H SaaialRi ^OTatarnftft aiaiatfaiOTq?r&aOT& waaJatS 
aRfa g hot eaa wag' w ^wmat eaa gsTOraf^amaa a 
aarftaifa^aar nawn^'^a^a gacaateaa i wa aiai agP OTpr aiaiRr 
a(*it awfa w^rsafa&a nnsatatraa i awmrg 
a i Miwm i ^OTfa^a aroa ot arihffOT I aasi aiaaigam eaaa^f^ 
aa a afta aa aat^fataara aiHgaw mrflr aatai wsfialmailiig a|at* 
ar^ gat^W maaiaa aa'ilatfa^a^Rr i «ta)aT aftanSa 
ara^ araaraa^ aaigaaa^iaiRftr aia» ii a? ll 

aa maferefaaafa aRrlataii^iailaRr ^aaiw i waiai^ I araia 
Hjiaiaf? a^>R«aaRTOnfe aaRr aa^tn aa ii 

m^aafa aftaaaafaa siariala nawmafea aSaaia aataa- 
RiRrmraaiaa 4f\aaaaaRr ya«tl tftaaaiJRga! aaagar «iaL(^af<( 
aagas af^ aftaigarama^ aagqaiiinj a^fa amiwa* 
aat ataiOT sal^a aftr aagaiRii H3:ifiEaa^a& ii at ii 

13 This person (A]ftm11a) has oxpmtod and frood himsolf from iho sms 
oE a million incarnations For ho nttorod iho namo oE NArftyana in tho helpless 
condition oE his death And this ntteraDOo not only servod as an act oE ponaneo 
but tho mcans*o£ oEEoeting his final emancipation 

14 When ho niiorod tho four letters ooenrring in his coll H rt in nr ( 0 
Nftr&yana, come) the expiation oE all slos xron made by him * 

Note «The word srrnv^rnr (N& &ynn2yn) lias the 4Ui case termination -and is 
a part of the eight lettered Mantra of the Vaisnavas Bat in ^he caft of Ajftmtfa 




100 


]THE BHAKTIRATNIvALI. 


tbe expression may be analysed in two words and 5lTir, the fijat being the 

vocative^ foim of the noun ^rCFTHT and Uie second sifT?T being a verb in tlie 
imperative mood, second peison, singular number, both together signifying 0 
Iff&idiyana, come. 1 ho story, in brief, is, that AjamSia was a BiAhmaHa of bud 
ohaiaoterand had become a high way robber At the time of hisjtdeath he 
called his son whose name was^Nai Ayana By viitne of the utteianco of this name 
•which is one of the many names of Visnu, he was saved after his death fiom 
falling into the olntohes of Tama's myrmidons. 

15-25. The thief, the wine-diinkei, the betrayer of his fiiend the killer 
of a Bi’dihman, the polliiter of the bed of his (rurw, the killer of a woman and 
of a cow, a regicide, a patricide, and other sinners. The expiation of the sin of 
all of these sinners is made by the nttoring tbe name of Visnn. Because 
Visnn’s attention is drawn towards the caller as one belonging to Him. The 
sinner is not washed of his sins so clean by penances piesciibed by • expositors df 
. the Srnti ; nor performance of leligious iites and ceremonies (as prescribed 
by the Dharma-Sdistras) as by tbe utterance of tbe name of Hari, which are 
significant of his illustrious qualities. Penances cannot effect radical purification. 
For even after the peiformance of the penance it is possible that the mind 
may run after evil ways. Therefoio people who desire to effect complete 
annihilation of their sins shouldj praise the Lord which causes the purifi- 
cation of the heart. Do not, 0 myrmidons of Tama, cairy him. He has effected 
entire purification of his sins j for at the moment of his death he uttered the 
name of Bhagavan. Whether uttered in calling some one who hears that 
name, or uttered in jest, or utteied in filling a stop in a tune while singing, or 
uttered insultingly in disrespect, the name of Haii has been spoken of as * 
destructive of sins. When slipping and falling, when his limbs are fractured, 
when bitten, beaten and otherwise afflicted, the man Twlio ejaculates the name 
of Hari even involuntarily does not' moiit pun ishment for bis sins. The great 
Eisis in their plenary possession of knowledge of all things, have prescribed 
small and great penances for small and great sins propoi tionately . By 

the performance of these penances then sms are washed away. But their hearts 
can only be cleansed by tbe service of the feet of the Lord. Whether uttered 

willingly 01 unwillingly, consciously or unconsciously, the name of Hari consumes 
he sin of man as fire consumes fuel Just as a poweiful drug taken produces 
e ect though its medicinal virtues may not have been known to the 
pa lent, so does a Mantra when rightly uttered produce its effect. — VI. 2. 
7-19 (The Heralds of Visnu.) ^ J 

u tifu: tnuut i 

xiw^ uusRrxu I y 


THE riFTU STiaSQ 27-SO 


101 


arm Pt i 

51 5j5^5i: gsiTO aisali Ha\<<a'^wtwiT ci#(5^«mi^®U 

'* * ( ^ I 54 1 vn—v% g*!! ) 

nsrasnRism^^sigTO^^fir i qsfwRr i ftrjnfemi «prf 

B* iRT w »i»israpi ggx *i antflwiflwwt Sw 

>miii^t m aBmESPgjK wsfejui Batfif ii ii 

■ sR R w re 54W <rcfitfei <»aif^s(i5ii gsaar 

war >w: mfer 5i^inTft«7BWt5in^!nq:.i JW Ig* jraeftjgfn^Big^ i aratsg- 
wjjfsjwsa^; tareareW Bifaiaf ufawfi? fa«fe wi 

apini! II II 

26*27 Tlias \ras AjAtnlla, ilio pavamaor oC lua fcmalo 8la\o, be vrbo 
bad trodden down all religious injunctions* rites and coremonios* wbo bad fallen 
by Ills roproaoliful conduct, who was on tlio point of being cast into boll— ‘tfans 
was ho saved by tho uttoranco o! the nome of tho Lord Ko other instmment 
cuts tho bonds of Knrma *0 woll as tlio singing tho prai^o of Utm who^c feet aro 
0 sacred shrioo For tho mind is not then altaehod to worldly acfiMtics Otlier^ 
methods are soiled with tho qualities of i?a;as and 2amat (I^isiOb and Inert** 
noss),— VI 2 45*46 (bukn) 

igjwTOt i 

^Ti?i^tq 5 n§m 1 %^ sjujq n 54c n 

(^uiosg,* ) 

«rarerflt!Rt iRsf^Rr rsronm i Rwhoo wrrIsi gstwfgiii^Rr I 
*>OT^r% I II ’vB II 

28 Having uttored tho name of Han wbon calling bis eon, AjAmtla 
went to tho abode of H&rAyana Greater is tho title to tho reword of that 
person who smgs Hati'e pniiso in full faith — >V1 2 49 (Boko) 

qspm I 

W 'ji T W^irM II II 

Wd I IM ^^SI^lTSTWrn^l 

^- s w^w ®i^aTW#fq snvra^iir f^pmwra^ 

y*'^**' *' •* ( ^ U 1 545—548 Wt ) 

nalsr ^Rf !»ra»s«H5c?lwif^ i jusi 

^reralw I & 5 Rr B^^Hls^iroipn^^ H 54s ii t 



.102 


THE BIlAICTJUATEAVALf, 


i^qx^ \ ? TT ? rat7irw % 

35111T51T 

' '«i5r Trrfe i 'm sas^s’sji^^rr.^ i ?5nrTf^r?S ^r^r- 

?ntw%% fqrft/,5[ ?T 3 S5f »t g 

wcraOT/^f^ i^tcemiw^msT gf^* 

Vgsj «^T^5T^m?!^mTf^^Tfr?n'?c7.^rnf^ ji® ii 

29-30. See, 0 my cliildreu, the %irliic o£ Iho utlcranco oE llio name 
o£ Hari, by means of \YhicU c\cn Ajainila N%as !-a\c(l from the clutchos of llio 
myrmidons of Yama. It is not enough to say that Ojc singing of the praise of 
Hari’s name, vii tues and deeds dcstioys sin. For the more nttoranco of tlio 
•’•■words, 0 Nfir&yana, by Ajilmila v/hon cnlhng his son icsultcd m tho salvation 
of a sinner like him. — VI. 3. 23-24 (Yama). 

5T 5=JlT3WTs ^ ^3S[t 

- ( ^ u i '<«( ) 

*‘- STfl^TTif^ ?TfSrm’eR^ 

’Tti;5^i=l^^r<?ri?T^5^KqRt’3r5^ ^i^fericc^S^'xapxfKras 

«raif^isx<^^Trf^f^ I sFf^% TTst^rntfiPSTif^j ^{m32^2fm\qf?TT5nfi?crr 
l^r 5=jRf>r cfs-ir 

i ^ ^rt^rar 

3Ttr?cWf^^?j 5r?T: TTg 5fcq-?TTqf 

5nri^“r gtcTT 

^sm{^ 5Ti5 ^ n ? fr % 1 = 5r ^ 

5iis^ gi^gifg gjTf^csqc^ i i ^fv:ftfif^^5a\^=iT?rgT^ 
g w g si^'srt g^rt ^fgg's^irTF'i^^ gf^x:^gr^ ^rorjfgef 
^gfg g ^ircfg i ^ l►g^ggIIrcTg^^^ H%fTf5Ji€*gTf^gr 

^ sif=gj I gg g sm: i ^3[i4fg^R^gHnf^f«ie[T«xf 

^nrg^tgg^r grg^ fg^rscsr gmf^ ST^igrR^t^'^gf gtiggigg \ 

f ^g^hgt^gitgggj* ^ ggr nw- 

. fe%5 gg.!g.ggitg=w^«3T^f^igi^^^^fg g ^mmog g«n gig^* 
^’gRg!g%rt«!?T^f^i; igg^Tg?^ iS^^iegTcT ^giggig^gr 'grt- 

gg^^gxgxftfg I ixi^^fg gg ^rgtutfgQgfg \\ n 

'* ^•^'* The great ordainors of laws (Mann and otheis) were not acgnainted 
wrth this (power of the-namer of Hari). Their understanding was confused by 
the influence of Mfi-yfl. Those ordainers , (of penances) werp engaged in great 


fUE FIFTH STFU 0 32-^S 


100 


saorifioinl ntos faooaiiso thotr iniolloats wore misled by tho swoot and Oowory* 
tests of tho Vedas —VI 3 25 (Ynma} 

Tins rebellion o( the Bli&^ArAle sgalnet tlieKnrnm KAnda of Ibo VedaA 
finds support in the BliOKiiTad Oift (oids Obspter 11| reisea 42 is 45) The iirerer* 
entml tone of the reflection betrays open depnrtnre from tho MiioieHt Bno of holfet 
^ wLtxA aoiion It {s an important subject for researob by sobolers to tiaoe the olisogo 
of belief tbnt bas taken place recalling In the overtlirowing of saoriftoial perlpr 
manoes by tbe Blidgavnlas end the growUi of ibetr religion of Bbakti 


er^Tti ^?a5in?rai25 \\\y\ , 

a^srafejtsn n»nra* 'tErfnRr 

snftn 'fRre *1 *1^ ^HRI Bcnmu isiff 111.11 5*1 il 

82 Having roasoned in this manaor tho wise ploco thoir devotion on 
Ananta (tho Infinito) Those pooplo should not bo pnniahod by mo If thoy 
havo incnrrod any sin it has boon dostroyod by thoir praising of tho glories of 
tho Lord —VI d 23*2G (lama) 


vmifq ^ fiW«r l 

^ u^'fi n ii 

v^?g^lT fyg«na^g « 

i^r w w 

f^gsi gt^ 5i?j^ FPCg^ i 

Kv II 

(^1^1 an— a« «rsnl^ ) 
iratsT jjprf g >nnNn<^^ 

tr^nrefttRi I ?i«irftRr I »rawi?»iP^s5ifuf^ glin 

aRiftw jjgm go^ flfsraw Ji^i jirhi 
nefl^fer il •' j 


*ratg*nTOW5i shi^i swat f^t l^sgiT 
ittpiin II ^«ll 

agiti fatttattRn; tiattt fewswaj- 
smiRraflaRRi *na 11 a\i n 

83-35 There is no doubt that ihoro is an aosptoions cause trhxoh has 
produced this vision of the* SupromO} placed to ono liko mo ^ho am so un- 



m THE BFIAKTIRATNAVALI, 

worthy, a vision which has made my mind so sorenoly happy. Othoiwise 
without previous meiit (acquired in foimei biiths), the tongue oC this para- 
mour of a SAdra slave woman is not fit to uttei the name of NdrS.yana. Vast 
is the distance between me, the shameless, the smne-, the troacheious, the 
murderer of Br&hmanas and the incffiiblo name of the Lord. — VI 2. 32-34 ^ 
(Aj&mila). 

f^T \ 

xsrx^: gxfu u s(\ w 

( ^ 1 I ) 

5irP5?t 1 1 g^rwr* 

STiT^T^T^^firf^ 11 %% II 

36. Even a murderei of a Bifihmana, of his own mother and teacher, 

s 

and of a cow, even the eater of dog’s can ion, e\en a low-born biat of a Sfidra 
mother and Nis&da (a low-boin pariah) fathei becomes purified by singing tho 
praise of the lord — VI. 13. 8 (Risis). 

5^i^=|5ihT * 3yinfh ^ % u ' ii 

(5l«ns^5f&:) 

I ^cT I ^cT 

cT^ 5rm H Icit? sicr 

l i:5r l[c^Rf ?IT5 I 

\ m ^ ^ srm . 

^isri 5?7??cf?Tr 

an^^ll ^v9 I| 

37. It is wonderful that an eater of carrion should be so elevated by 
reason of his tougue uttering Thy name. They who sing Thy praise have vii- ' 
tually performed penances, have poured oblations on fire, have bathed in sacred 
rivers, have recited the Vedas. They have become ennobled.— III. 33. 7 
(Devahutl). 

?l|’ssifas*i?ri gtfq \ 

3 va 

ngirdmcRinTfri 5T 5«rni u.^c u 

, ( a I y I is gftfi'ii!!! ) 

.. .* * 


the fifth string 38-40 


1Q5 


4 t aRB» a»t - 

^ *m3st^!Ti^i ^snfsTJOcrtftffT I sire^f 

wfirfts^Tpnnqir «rcfTC »iat^»n »mpimn!r iRrat^nsir gaf ^ a tow ?rat 

cwn5f^«rai«*jTJnsr>walfcr«fwsrraiioaiftfiria«ir^^ faafaaw - 

38 Whether men be honaeholdera expert m worldly occnpationa, they 
ore not eabjoot to the bondage o£ repeated moarnations i£ they pass ihotr hours 
m the pnuse of my glory 30 19 (Sri Kfisna) 

i^o/e^Tiie privilojfeot prayaff to God bsioDge to ftll—irrespeotive of birth, 
e^, isx proFeuioii tea The rafrard of Mokpa is the portion of all devotees of 
Gd Tins li the VaiSDnvaDliarma It ts the solace of the lowest olasaes beoavse 
!t places within their leaeh the same spintnal rewards as are open lo the Ki^est 
olaffses 

51^1^ fstucrra^^ra wfn 

sEgflmtsr traaa?[i^rafi[& i g w BS S pi O f 

g<ni% feg dt^aw »iaiu’ti‘ ?Rc 

Jiftjng ^swsflqrggiim wggjfjnft «nnggliv 

5RiPc3r 1 waBrwfSreraigqj^^ni s^tr: sg- 
nf^ 3»rRt5:j,^g aa i t^^ sareB ^< hcq w qi g,li ?fi it 

39 1, therefore, though of low Inrth (of the tribe of Daityas) bare no 

hesitation to prmse the Lord with all my heart according to the power of my 
understanding For by so doing even one who is oast into the world of M&yft 
(ignoranoo) becomes purified — YII 9 12 (Prahlftda) ^ 


H8» « (^.aUBRgrg ) 

qSR<Hg I 

«n fggftHgiBflgw I sRt ig* giftnirfgRi Rr^5<!i Hg^ ggagi^ <ig- 
ggdg sttsPTl ^ iTOsm g "w ^ # ^pft Bi^ii gg wi gg- 

gg wir ggnt 1 fgg^gn^ gtm i^^g »ftgi Igg^ gngignggi: 

gg^gg gg gggggg^ WlaM«iclgl ggg^JIIIggg ggBT 

g g’lgti^aggl ggt^ glTOW- II «® II 

14 


10^6 


THE BHAKTIRATNAvAlI 


1 


40. 0 Nrisimha, by praising Thy glorious doods which Biahmd lias sung 
in the Vedas, I shall at once get over my difficulties. I sliall become associated 
with saints who take refuge in Thy lotus foot and I shall be freed from the 
meshes of M&yfii. — VII. 9. 18 (Prahl4dfi.). 

sad fiiH 5ici ii u 

( = I I ) 

I I ^fcf I ngfcTJ 

^ct: ^ersr sitfr: ^ 

r?r f^2i n n 

41. The utterance of Thy name makes up all that is wanting in the invo- 
cation of a Mantra (whether due to wrong pronunciation) or wanting in ' Tantra 
(due to wrong saorifimal arrangement) or wanting in place, timo and materials 
of worship, — all these difEerences are made up by the utterance of thy name. — 

VlII. 27. 16 (Sukia). 

iVofe.— At the end of religions rites and ceremonies snoh ai Si&ddhas, /be. 
the following prayer for forgiveness is generally invoked :— 

W wpn mv^T ^i^^snfRTT i 

^1^* sft I 

«it ifo R::1i 

Wliioh may be rendered into English as follows *'— • 

" Whatever work may have been peifoimed imperfeotly, whether knowingly yir 




unknowingly, may the same be made perfect by the ntterauoe of the name of Bii 
Hari.” 


^ Thrice is the name of Hari repeated with the prefix of the ausipioions honorfio 
Sii.* 


sn|T \ vnnfw 'siirnsRi ^- 

^ni^raiRTt. * U H (^o I sa 1 

qiff HT 5I5Tf^ I 

1 f%Rf !3r55K?T^r?r* 

’qfnf rTT: firT? 5l5r WSfJR^l W’^RW 

42. Blessed are the women of Vraja who with their minds riding on the 
thoughts of Visnu and with their voice choked with the flow of tears, sing His 


* f^5PrWT?T 1C% t?T3TnTTH 1 


THE FIETU STUING 48-46 


107 


praiso with nil their hearis» while going throngh their domesiio work ef milking 
and churning, grinding and poanding, {sweeping and besmearing (the floor with 
cowdnng > swinging and Inllabying crying babies, nndwatering (plants and trees) 
—X 44 15 (Women of Jlthithard) 

^ igT^ ii 8^ u 

( (o I uis 1 8 G »iiar ) 

wr wt? I « I 

enpi *K»i fksHro^jSe^ram^t^TlPi a>fes*RB- 

gtrr wMcc ' tg atPrgg wqtftsrfg^SialRr nB^ll ' 

43 Who wonld like to cease from the talk of K(i;na, to vrhoae ombnioe 
liaksmt clings ihongh he may like it or DOt?'»X|47 48 (Clopls) 

JlTHFel % ^sqt snftf ^ERJfsraHRR- 

>9 1 ^iM^^^iy45naT. fq^Tra 

^ajiOTT era <g u 88 » 

»ra>w i mijr>«3 jRr i sw- 

w^rgfTRi ’OTT ^ fira? ^ Wilts' ^wongsnO trewtH* 

sraeviPtlw 

fra’ HNRrai wflTR^^ftraeflfira firar ntra^fra^ i *rat iftra 
sga^S’sra « ttraRf ^ snfiraTt^ stPraRR* 

qirarat^3fP!n^«ra^i9Rf#'«Bfiq5iq_ ^ f W i t ^gsra 
?nr(ii?*i si^Pt sisvroraii fRRi n an n 

44 The wives of the ebiots (impnsonod by Jnr&sandhn king of Magadha) 

mil singm the midst of their domestic dcties, Thy great semoe, via , thekillmg 
by Theoof their enemy and the release of their hnstonds Likewise do tha,G^pts 
sing of singnlar services of Thy killing their enemy Sankhoohflda and of the 
elephant s release by Thee from the alligator, and of the release of J&nokt (from 
the prison of Bkvana) and of the release (from the prison of Kaipsa) of Thy 
parents (Vssndeva and Sevaki) And so also the Mnnls and we who have fonnd 
shelter in Thee shall smg (of onr release from the prison of worldly life) 

' 71 9 (Oddhavn) ' 

iqi|Tr^^Js«qTfq sr 

_ -^«3Tfq ^ gm ifkf frffer ii gji n 

( BfifllfB B 1 1 UKU* ) 




108 


TUB BTIAKTJRATBAVALL 


f^tf^Pcr i vi--':^irPt 

$tiii\ f^m n 11 

45. Ho who having got a longtio does not prniso Vi**nu — tlml fool docs 
not ascend the ladder of Moksa ^\hich is in his cotnniand. — Vlll. 5. Hnribhak- 
tisudhodaya (Ndrada). 

art ^ ^rmr' ^ TO^H^iTstnra i 

otRSttiwi Ht U9'®U 

( U * U J 1 ) 

*Tf I Kfe ^5: ^^i I I ??^l^=rT ^ 5 PI- 

5lH?rl¥n^ ^lT:|Ir?lf 1 tt 

55? 1 ?rcft«f%?f 35 rm^sf^ mit i 1 333* % 

m\ cr«sn JT^T^uif ^r^ii 11 , - ^ 

f^r^fRr cr^orfirf^ 1 =5rR:?(‘ ^ ^ 

srr h fff;qF;?if -aid n 
l^if^ 11 II 

46-47. It is an infliction and a misfortune to keep a cow that has ceased 
to give milk, to have a wifo that is unfaithful, a body that is another man’s 
slave, children that are wicked, to givo away wealth to an unworthy person, 
and to have a tongue that does not praise mo. Lot not a wise man have a ton- 
gue that is not used in singing my glorious w’orks — the creation, pre-jorvation 
and destruction of the universe, my many incarnations that I underwent in the 
manner I likod.—Xl. 11. 19-20 (Sri Kri^na). 

5»!ifT uwwfnfr: \ 

tR a gq |1 

^f|?rt UTfamm^ 1 

^ ari^’ sxxcqfu 53*^1%: w §< u 

(n I u%— HCTWW: ) 


THE FIFTH sTama sosg 


10 $ 


w 'KfegjJ ?i5ta!T aasiffl?*fi? i «Bfernf5r 

SiftimfiigawiJsralstriniwRf tR^’d 3iui^ ira» wroiw ^u- 
iflRr «roin{»i!i aa 3^ «Rra^^ sratw wffia a gl cro 11 «= 11 
SRI ^afNjnn^ errosim ekt t^isra sSifsnusiRr 

iCT 3c®s aw w«jf *n^ ^«ffs7mCT nr srait aiwai ^saTsufTro- 
w aiwai sif^anraar I aa siWaiqTOnwft 
an i ^a aaaa asssmi aai Dasani matwaii i ^waa r- 
^ i qf a i < ~l a<^ ^l g '- t aRr TOft aw i3a5JTi?a^iJTOatg^*^imsn 

48-49 Thoj who approatato good qoalitiost thej who eliooso the cssontia) 
of things snch worthy mon spoak highly of Kali Yoga For in this ago all 
objects of desir aro obtained by tlio men siging of Han s praiao Ho other 
means is eqnal to it for men lost in tho mazes of worldly lifo For by means of 
It tranqniihty IS attained and snbjeotion to rebirths IS got nd of— XI S 36-37 
(Karabhftjana) 

% ^3wnirr w^% wnrasni i 

^ ^SITH ^ tl i(» il 
«n&inniPlr w+iia'agcufaana i aaapito & aatwt i 
5T qtT^5 wresPa TOg: ii «“ li 

so Ihej are the Eortanaio among men, tboj nn the Uessed — the; vho 
romembor the name of Han and moke others romomber it in this ago of Kali 

sersw ts^ 515. i 

|5wire?i tpc 11 11 

'raw 5ldWI d'ddi I 

§ni^ ^ Sira, H n 

( w I g I tti— ng sa* ) 

fiw guwiRr grwi ^ a f iiaifa ^ 

Rwraa Krwiw.1 a^it^Rsarpam. i ^afa&^fipreresi «ai5 

aa eft^Sta'aila *ra^E»ro* n <«-« n 

51-62 The Kali Yaga is the storehonso of rices. Bat there is one Tiriao 
in it By praisujgeKfifna a man is released of his bonds that enchain him and 
he attains Union with JBrahma That which is obtamed by meditafion'od Visnn 
in the Satya Yoga, and by socnBces m the Tret& Yaga,— and by sernoos in 
Bwftpara,— the same is acqmred by singing fbe praise of Han in the Kali 
Ynga XU 3 51-52 (Buka) 




110 


THE nnAKTIRATNAVALL 


t 


trrf^snftrn? sBfsiiSfr- 

u u 

f^t?5?i|!Fi?fir ?TraT5?5t^ 

in^ 11^9 H (,,^i«o_a^5nm) 

5R 5rf5 Hjqi! ^Icf ?nqrj l 

I TCJinJIJTfT ?ft nf^cTSTRC^rC^^fT 

trqm f^r#- M^n' Hc^Tvftwj ^ f^frrf?r 

5Ei^niri f%to> ^ f^^TTqrw 

cr55JTT^^>'^r sf»qfm?f qw srr i 5rer: 

I !!rtf^Tg^rr% g/ *i-_h^* ^crarf^ 

?q^: 1 q^q 3^1: cr^^n^ferx^crt?:^^ Hjqr 

tfcT li yi^ II 

snJxrfefcT i ^ 5i?fn^nsr5r ci^\F?r5r 

qiC 5T 5T nrsTtcftf^ ¥ii^j il yL« ii 

53-54. Who can count the heroic deeds of Visnu ? Not oven ho who can 
count the atoms of the dust of the earth can count the heroic deeds of Visnu. 
He who covered the worlds moulding the Satayaloka by his unbroken speed 
shaking the entire world of Natuie. Not I nor your eldei brothers (Sanaka, 
Sanandana, Sanatana and {Sanatkumdra) have comprehended the powers of that 
Being. Much less can any one else find his bottom. The god Ananta with 
his thousand heads singing his praise, cannot finish lecountmg all the deeds of 
glory of His many Avataias (incarnations) — II. 7. 40-41 (Brahmd). 

• JTJJUfTHPctTJWgsmwU H 51X^51%: I 

N® \2> 

^3snf% u nn u 

( I « ) 

j ^ g m5n*TTfii^ ’sr ?Tf erif^ ?T5T ^Kr 

snfk I sif^5rg'?^'5riT;it 

' ^^rwRfcR^tcT^i 

G5f«o i v9 1 a 11^ ) 11 y,y: 11 


TBE FIFTH SIRING 65 67 


111 


55 Ho who striroa to Gonnt the virtues of the Infinite a fool He may 
perhaps be able to count the atoi^s of the dost of the earth in the course of time 
but not the glorious acts of Him who 18 Ihe storehouse of all forces— XI 4 2 
( Dmmila) 


>a >3 >3 

iaTPirfir i JiTOii¥er gjrf^cT H 

ajwtwiTFrcn 


, ( !• I U5{ «IW«: ) 

■Jw w i fa iT ti t «P > qw 

3 I q)E<n^raifiiflr i ^ sra'imf? <n<nf^{T 

g^iminileRi^w 3®r ^:si>RininRr 
wmfe d*raRr gsffe S'! gqif^ few ^feir 
srreg cEisi^ai siP^ ^5ttti«i<tiaia'i9«4lfl'ii •nn wir enatt sKaaugnwi 
ll«ll 

56 The words that go to form the ftusptoions narrative of his birth» deeds 
and TirtuoSi having the power of destro/mg all sins, such words animate, adorn 
and sanctify the world —X 38 13 (Akrhra) 


^f^cr<5R(t<5iVg?jgi sn^fgfeirfg *5 
afeantg i ^ 'g wgrfg ^niiT ¥n% 

•*« ^ -a 

'cTCR^entt^^ua.'SU 


ffg fspcggn* - > 

(lll«Ue?5,w) 
TOn afiBftRr HwjjnagTaa^Rr 
^aifir at’jffii aRRfenPr ^rantfir tronf<Ri^ 

wq?i feg g ^n qi jt w wi^Tumt «aiPr nfewf^ torw 

nA gfe afe alasnuw «raf afe Rtk^ feir »iR ii u 
»iS3w.feaaJii 

57 Singing in this manner the narratives of the childhood of Visnn s incar- 
nations chronicled in this and other works, which are so'* agreeable to descant, 
a man acquires the devotion of the Lord, whois the refuge of Parambamsas (pious 
men who have renounced the world) —XX 31 28 (Snka) 

Hero ends tho Fifth String of the Kocklaeo of Devotion, 

I * 




■ THE SIXTH STBINQ. 

Note —This section dwells on the snl^eot of (remerabranoa of the Lord ) 

¥io!RT I 

^ -©N cs. 

JinStTfHRTO* JR: h \ u 

( I «v9 I xr^ ) 

1 f i ^^g;5rm? i ![% ^erfeirsn i 

IPT ^ I ?T^ 4t»TT%i5T^ S?IH- 

I) I 11 

1. 0 ladies, you are happy in the achievement of the objects of your 
devotion. The world honours you because you have fixed your mind on the 
Lord V&sudeva. — X. 47. 23 (Uddhava). 

tgaiToiTrih'u enf^ i . 

3FR eU^R iJRT H ^ u 

( 1 

I *^cTTgrrf^% i ?Tcf : jijtj 5it^^ i?crr- 

2. My disciples, Sanaka and others, have enjoined this much of Yoga 
that having withdrawn the mind from all objects let it be fixed wholly on mo. 
^XI. 13. 14 (Sri Krisna). 

u % usT nwjpjfnR URcufti ^l^:^5rT:n^ii 

( ^ I ^ I ) 

cccT^Kof i i N jqf: ^ fPRjj 

fe? f^^fisRT SRIT^ ^ 55T: ^eft ^ 

^rasTT: XcTRftri fli ^ 

IRTOT^^: II ^ ll 


^ mr^rr^ ii 


TBE SIXTH STJUSe 3 T 


113 


3 Iliojr whosTen once IiAo fisad ihair mmd on iho Joins feet of Epsna, 
placing their affections on His many exeollencca — such men mil never see, oven 
in their dreams, the face of Yama nor of his noose-armed myrmidons Snob 
men have already performed their expiations of sins (hy their attnobmcni to tbo 
Lord)— VI 1 19 (Snkn) 

^ f ^ II 9 II 

( ^ I ^ u« am ) 

^ <Ji5ii!vrfRraRr srgrffnt^ffrff a wrofllff i JwnaL ft ^ q > c^ a»f 
srag^s g?r 5Rw?ff i swr | w ft 
Hsrraf !T g ncHnitt^ g w ii a n 

4 Smco 01 } Iioart Ins \ril£ally lioU Uari within it| my \^onls are not 
uttered m vnin (butlbeara froits) nor (does my mmd act without effect And 
my senses aro never employed m wioked uso —II C 34 (BrahmA) 

iVoje— The porport of BrAhm&s speech ts that the foot of lits ootivUIei of 
tODjjue mfod and aeoflee being naefally employed la due to the loflaeoee of bifl 
fixing hia heart on the Bold and not oo any metit of hla own 



gi(5fr5ii« q^Hwil TTWqqRJjra ii ^ ii 

* ( g H I ^ 3*1 ) 

aro "ssf awff i mai tftf Ssir amta 

nwjfir I sn5>nnf»rPr^ aftiftiarff i»ff&g ffreraagiRr «iean 
ST 5Rg, tfw II n II 

5 The supreme object of life acquired by SAukliyi and Yoga, ond dill* 
gent attachment to one a Dbanna, is ttrat at tbo time of death the mmd may 
remember N&rfiyana —II I b (Snka) 


RiqniiiTi^eii^d qn|« qrr ni^u ^ ii 
5iRfmra Hq?q»i ^rafgqr •f ii ® n 

( lit U I «£— tto gi; ) 


14 


I V" '— . I ■ - 

* tTT5i«?rr^ i 


t I 




114 THE BHAKTIRANIvAlI 


f|[cf: W 1 ^tct: nRf % ii 

swf^ \ 5WcAcqs5j ii « n 

6-7. Therefore, 0 king Pnnksit, let Kesava bo tiea«jurcd in your heart so - 
that at the time of death you are careful as to what you arejabout. It is, then, 
that you 1 each the great God. At the time of death remember the Lord, the 
supreme. He, the soul of all. He on whom all rest, metamorphoses sixch an 
one into his own likeness. — XII. ? . 49*.50. 

t 

fg^nir^swsp TO ^ aj I 

sr3 «i5f f%5iT TO i i «c?rAcr^>sftTOr- 

1 ^<:?d I qtqt^ snio^ V 

•R5«rnii ?riTtf^ i i 

HR f^r^sr ?r3«^«T,f%q^^<il f%«ral?iG(r^fr =gr ii b \\ 

8. The rem'embiance of Krisna destroys mi-i'ortunes and biings foith 
well-being, puriBes the intellect, geneiatos devotion towards the Lord sind begets 
learning, lUtoitivo wisdom and non-attachment. — XIL 12. 55 (tSuta). 

ra^mq: TnqrM^t«i^'^ ^^wqsspiric^Tftsitt: i 
sucqer^fl ^wilfrnng^T si^ri wustrqfrli ii « ii 

( I ^ I «= q^.5 ) 

5^3 HRlg: fe: cisrig f5r?rR<T i 3»ir- 

B^x nrtqf?rdvi; ?icfnwr 

W*. H TOITO hst: 

II $ II 

9. The inner man does not obtain that complete purification b}' learning, 
by ascetic practices, bj’’ restiamt of his breath, by universal friendliness (love of 
all living beings), pilgrimages, ablutions, almsgiving and repeating of mantras, 

which he finds by holding the Lord Ananta in his heart. — XII 3. 48 (Suke). 

^Rigtwngqt^: u ii 

» 

( I ^ I ay 35W« ) 


IBE SIXTH STBlXe iO-U 


3 atfiifir «« feS^tRwpua i ftwratft 

WRm *pr !tsv(fl(fii ansft ^ firS tg;fer«^5i il i" ii 

10 The Lord Parn^ottama present inTthe heart (when remembered), 
drives aTra} all the vices oE men caused the indueoce oE Kali Vuga and by 
the unoleanliness oE offeringSt oE the place tv here olEorings are made, and oE their 
own minds «XI1 3 45 (Saha) 

*i«rT ftxrdt i 

^ H T W i ^ r fae^TfiismT^msouJ^ii ^ ii 

( I ? t a« ) 

■ct| 73<ifa I vat fVicr i 
Icwga'q 

a 3 I a^tRaniTB f^tjw tfir ii U ii 

11 Jast u fire oaues the dieappoarance oE the bad colour oE the gold 
due to the admixture oE atlojr, 90 Vimn bjr hu presenco in the heart oE'^'i^k, 
remorea vricked thoughts — XII 3 47 (Buka) 


Wa'wtsw^xutsRWwiH'SE^SWwIgWtt ^sscw^stism^ 

I ma wt«nta'%aaiift!i aaaRr nfafM^ snasoafa 

anraai^a as^ I aaid I amtJ wtiaaawjsraaTfsi^aa^gamt 
^wanaatafti aaaara spm<ata«(e«ara iigaKt gw alpip}- ii ii 

12 I thuik that the Asnres are the dorotoos of Bhogawan for they 
fixed their mmd tbougbjnll oE anger on the Lord oE the throe worlds Ihey 
saw Han advancing towards them riding on Garndn with the discus hold in H is 
hande^Ill 2 24 (Uddhava) 

?5TH5T ^ ersrat i 

*ra?q!{w^w<ai|?i UHT wTf ff ’eMwi § yt»w4a ii n 

f a I V I ^ ra ) 

air wfVtaare aaaft^ i aaf^ wnaftea)} i agi^at aia^joirar 
^a a ?af aa sai'" a5aa.^P«t*4% a faa| aa ara^ 
w5i II « II 




118 


THE BHAKIRATNA^ALI* 

\ . 

13. Therefore the saints serye Thee who art beyond the powers of M&y^. 
They have no other object in view than the leineinbraiice of Thy lotus feet. 

—IV. 20. 29 (Prithu). 

m Htfx I % 

(I \^\\ 

1 z( ^ 

^ciWfTOvi: 51^ ^ 

3Tqw I f^§ m 

Sl^cTT^f^ II \M II 

14. May the penalty which yon have inflicted on both of ns overtake 
ns. It will remove the sin of disobedience of the commands of onr master. But 
by yonr favour let not the mental distraction that causes foigetfulnessof the Lord 
overtake us even if we descend to lower incarnations.— III. 15. 36 (Jaya'and 
and Yijaya). 

5rar: nftr^sfWT^ ^ li 'g^wnssj^: i 

fi u w 

( |o I I ttsrm: ) 

«i«rf^ ^ ii ii • 

15. Then instruct us the means by which we may not forget your lotus 
feet even though we go round our incarnations. — X. 73. 15. (The Chiefs im- 
prisoned by Jarasandha and released by Krispa). 

ajajlSHTSJU^Tci^iiCTfnajfn^ I , 

51 fij|: ij *' 

( I go I rq^^: ) 

^rgci^iTftr i i la^ssErff^ 

?r fk^i fr M ^- 

Vc^^i II II 

16. The Vrimis Avho weie lost in their thoughts of Krisiia in then inter- 

« « ^ • 

Couise with him as they lay together in their bed or. sat together or walked 


TBE SIXTH STRIXG 17-10 


lil 


with liun and talked md plaj ed and bathed nyid ate together, eiitirolj Eorgot 
their own separate existence —X 90 ^ 4b (bnka) ^ ' 

Jtbte^Tlie rri«»i«--n clan of the Tildara tube to wbieli bil tCfiSni belonged 


8JT?5resr \ 

HHT II XS w 

!T ST «|s=?rasnir ST ST S;sS[Tf^?®tJ^I ' 

ST ^ftfRjsiHsi gr uszTl^gcTT^'^lg mgsn ggg^iiyn 

( I l« I 15— W WifWI ) 

ssa WTStg^sr Igmff i asc^r nftt i wfe- 

»mr 5#gs noV ji?»i »rt« 

5^5»3i39W!W.lU'®ll 

ifrqjSat^is 1 SI iKSB^iRfRr I ctiiF«iic«i iiraiai^CTPiH i agaifii 
n»5raf^uife,?rrmfesif aeiBH aw’ir 

¥IIW II 1= II 

17-18 On all sides is ] 0 } to Iitm \rho pos«c<«cs no propori) Trith tho 
desiro to reap bendSt out o! il « ^rho restrains his sciiseSg who is tranqinK who 
bestows equal regard to all « und who remembering mo feels Inppjr Neither 
tho position of BrnhmO. nor that of Indn, noitlier sovcroigntj of nil tho carth» 
nor of Ftttula, neither tho powers of logo nor Mol «a docs ho wish for -nothing 
b^t me 1 such is tlio man who has conseemtod himself to me ->*XI 14 13-14 
(8ri Kpifnn) 

uarl^fergTST g«i TSR:^s=Rg elg i 
sraTRfrsn ^ «i5?$wf|«iiiT?Rsnsj ii ii 

( ll I ?8 U!I «ft CT ) 
HIT firwgai fe^istjfr^ns mftfiri ?jwi| 

35 ^ TOinis^s^qiciHf ?i!i3n ii is ii 

19 0 Uddha^n, the happiness^ whioh a man feels in me inliiseoul, 

he who has eonsooraied his lifo to me, ho who u not boUolden to any one , that 
happmess cannot bo tho portion of those that are addicted to worldly pleasures* 
^ —XI 14 13 (Sri ICfisna) 


ST sjqfOI %5qTgi%f8Jl5SIt^ sqfg^iura^. 
qsfiT^ I ajgiugsnlT ?rc^grnqs:iT- 

tesf^TasT II 



118 


THIS BHAKTIMAMAVALI, 


fejq’Tisrt^ ^’Tcrtj f^^rr f^T^5?t?TJ ^rnTf^r? 

^?^r: 5f?n^as ^ 15 *. 1 

cic^srn^rurfH^I^'yf^ f¥ gri^s^ii n 

20 . If the Kings SisupS/la, Paundra and othcis vith theii feelings of hos- 
tility towards Krisiia meditated on his figure, either as he lay on his bed or as 
he sat, as he courted or ogled, or sported jand if by dwelling upon such thoughts 
concernipg him they were transformed into his own self, in much more is the 
chance to be one with him for one who in his affection foi himl constantly 
contemplates on him. — XI. 5. 48 (Nfliada'. 

3 ^% Uc?:- 

sRwfq % ’em; \\ 

( I 1 Vljim ) 

cnri^ar^rgRf i f^^fer i ^sm 

Kf^3[^rf<5 ^ f^^TTfsT 1 ^ 

g?r% tTi w^ni^rg: wi 5 : i ^Rmsr* 

^<?Ns?«tn53r^f^5RRf^:n7. ^’5?7fef?rT- 

w ^fri «rf^r ^ 

I ^fsr^sr^vK. m: I SP* ^1^ » 

leader I grgr^^ Tm^- ^ijict: 

^ ^ 11 •• 

21 That true Self of thine which the Munis contemplate having restrained 
theii bieath, senses and mind applying themselves finally in their practice of 
Yoga, the same do also thy foes attain by unceasing thoughts of thee. And the 
nectar of thy lotus feet the Gopis taste as they cling to thy arms, strong as the 
coil of the Serpent-king’s body ; the same sweets of thy lotus feet we too enjoy 
— looking With equal regaid on all. Thy giace is bestowed equally on all.— 
,X 87. 22 (Sfutis). ' 

Abie— The commentary has the followiuff with reference to the attiibutive 
compound 

few* ^WcTJ r^t ^wF^cf II 

wliiok means “ And also those women who out of carnal love meditate on thy con* 
ditioned human form ” Here is a statement that all the Gopis (for the reference js 




rJl£ SiXTJI STRING S3S4 


119 




plainty to (hem) were not the ffelSeAo} lorare Of ^isne aa le oteimed 

/or them by admirara of thafr nnaeldnh devotion Compere also fibagarata X* 47 
59 qooted befoia (69th sloba of the let etHng) 

!a|# ^ SRpww #3 *i«n II H 

(®i ?® i3ssnct ) 

'n'ftapffiwfRt'^fia ?Ra4 ^fcStfiraratRinsj sig 

TO ^ I s?i VBfsjT TO ifte TOW ftsm ^<reiFft 
«n^ ajyraf Jjjfir ii ii 

S3* The enemiea of K^ifim got iid of their aina (by tho constant thonglit 
on him) ]U8i oa the inscot leases its own form and takes to that of the heo on 
whom it nnoeisingly fixed ins thonght<^VII 10 39 (Naroda) 

Note »Tt ta the traditioiMl belief (hat fiti I expreetiou in Y'oga literatnre, (ha^ 
aeeiUin apeolee of iitaeofc ta o.utied bj tbe^ctC (bM) and placed id a hole ih* 
bee hams and baeies inoeReanlly at the dooi of the prison hoQSe of (he loseot nMcb 
II Ifnally traneforoied iii(o a bee 

ra«R5ll I 

*l^cl II II 

m W I R* ) 

TO waf erjyft TOftfir i fer«t Wet t f^q«rS firqw- 

’n*rf fl^Rr nRrsfiiii TOfwt »i?rPr btieu awpj BTHitftRr 

^fro TOBRTOJJll TOEt eEWlftfEt II II 

S3 The mind m thinking of objects of enjoyment becomes niiached to 
tlieni Likewise tho mind of him who thinks on ino becomes lost in me 
U 27 <Srl Kfisna) 


1^^511 fsiasiRt 3RmiM«irfi w^Ti^w|f^ *i*ii'si4^ i 


9si 


II ^ I ^ j 

WEiTO fiEnesnlB *mTOJTO!i HKBET tmcTO^r^imn vvRif^i 
TOTOETOI WTOTSBH.! sRf55I«ETOH?rr^R^«rlcRr !WI 

fa « BfaEnBl ^tlilTOTOTOOT TOqjT Eraffei^ TOR TOt 

fRifKBifai TOfa El? TOwm n^Pi! aTOSit bkj. 

iflRr II II 



120 


THE BIlkKTJnATEAVALf. 




24. T bavo seen tliy lotus feel, tlio (li‘!pcnser ol iMolcsa. J3rabma and 
others full of pi ofoimd kno^^ ledge inoditafo on Ihoin. They uplift Ihose ^vho 
have fallen in the deep of ^^ 0 lldl 3 • life. I go mcdi fating in m 3 ’ porcgrinafioms. 
Havegiace on me so that 1 keep 1113 ’ lotu*! foot e^o^• in my mind, — X. G 0 18 
(Ndrada). 

fer'qicq- 

lumi 

25. 0 thou Padmanribha (f I om whoso na\ol lus Hsiied ioilh the lotUi) 
thy lotus-feet lift those who ha\c lallcn into the deep of the worldly life 

Gi eat Yogis possessed ot pi ofound knowledge' meditate on them. Lot them bo 

ever present in out minds even though w’o aio woihlly houscholdors-^X. 82. 
48 (Gopis). 

HR HHT HfH*T6(HTRcCq^ll \\ 

( U UV? I ) 

wfli^^i35?TT(5 5r5i5 

n^^qjTsa\¥nT^§[^;Tt*T^^^rcr i 5Ei^m?f5rc5r^:T?f gc'Kvf ^ 

55^!TTr^^:5!i?r^^5r^f^T®rTWR cr^irr^flrf Ji^s^sr 

«nsi?FTqf I 

26. Therefore give up ivicked thoughts They ine unieal like dreams. 

Fix your mind on me in youi meditation. — XI 14. 28 (Sii Krisni). 

Heie ends the Sixth Stung of the Necklace ot Devotion. 



THE SEVENTH STRING OP THE NEOKIiACE OF DEVOTION 

(Note-~Tliis seolioo is devoted io ilie sobjeet of (literallji tbe sbam 

pooiag tbe feet of the Lord) 

5?^ ^ I 

srr srs§t ^ \ 

s t-iarec T H T^ II \ II 

(«J SiaoRERC ) 

wi stm f^reaspiii 

SRI sim iRjaqf nRrei^ i 

351 3«rac>iR^'tfJtf3 !:^(^2raMt5 1 i naf&smm 


»n^53^5J’5r II t II 

1 Whether he bo a Dova or an Aanra, a Yaksa or a GandharTo, ho will 
earn his happiness bj serving at the foot of Mokanda ->-VII 7 50 (Prahldda) 

Note ---Deva literally tneaua a abintng being>-a god Ainraa^tbey are ever 
hostile to tbe Devaa and no leas povrerfol (Bee a pievione uoTe (p 10) on tba 
word Aanra) Taksss are lofei lor in rank to ibe Devns They are popolarly snp 
posed to be deuiaene of the higher moantaina in the Himftlayas and have in tbeir 
keeping riiib treasarea QandhnrraS are also a semi celestial tribe, fond of moaio, 
endowed with a mnsical voioe Uaknnda means the bestower of Mnkti — iVisnn) 


q ^»i«a^xT «■ iwt g?n=?Tq i 

ira?ciT?{cR:meira m ii ^ n 


( It I ?«! I wr ) 

35t ^>5^PIJ 5IW‘hrt5$3 I 1 

a<rer:«r& 53(53 wnffn i 3 «nRr ia» ra^ 3 i<n<.i - 

3 >n 3?33(^f3'ITf5I3lf3IJ^^ 5RI3 5fW J 313^ gcfll I 15311 

5113 3r?3<35I»3I3 5!I^gsrf33 <W 3fi’3f3clis} || || 

2 BrahmA, Sxva and other gods m order to obtain my gifts practise soToro 


asceticism but with their hearts fixed on the pleasnres of the souses Bnt they 
cannot wm my grace unless they resort to Thy feet For my heart is given to 
Thee— V 18 22 (Laksmi ) 

Ifote — Lskfmt is the RoddMs of prosperity Only they can oklaie Iier klessinira 
wlio have propiLiated liei Loid {B&iAynna] 


16 


^warsr gfir 13515353 1 



1^2 


TiiM buaktikatnAvatJ 


■JTJ^C^^IS ¥5SITTS^ U S II 

( \ :> 1 30 ) 

^?EcqT5 1 5g«?i55ii%ra 1 m ^.r=ar^sr ^x.n\ ^n 50??ifv:im 

1:4^ 1 ^scp^jt TT^’aTk^f^fii: 

TI5tf% ^ai?T7lT n'^W 

3. The few wlio fi\ their mind on Thee who nrt tlio ahodo of jiviro ‘Safica 
Guna, cioss the sea of w’Didlinois on Iho vos^td of Thy wor-'hlpEiil foot «is easily as 

as they would pass o\oi the foot in.uk ol u e.iU. — XX. 2. 30 (Urahina and 
otheis). 

^^tfq g ^ q^T?g3i|4 sgT^ajwsjftg xj^ ^ i 
giTmfg «wig5n{|r^r g x^i^f an u 8 ii 

( I ^ ) 

5fT3 fsrsiT 'flerik^ct^iD* i 

1 HSSf- 

§ 5ft?nc^^fcf ii a ii 

4, 0 Deva, only 1^ who i-s iavouied hy .i paiiicle of Thy giacc can know 
the m) steiy of Thy gloiy Isot he whoexenithe is imaUachcd and in long 
quest of Thee (piactising Yoga) — X. 14. 20 (Biahmu).* 

xx?^ xjc^xgeiffa: qgna^^ig ax^qTv*5^g,i 

rarnt^Tsa qx^ ai^ax^ ^a^xt: s5^ X55^^m^i% UH ii 

’ ( ^o t ^ 1 ^v9 ) 

® lu tliujpiiiiltid Calcutta edition Hie following veise is insei led liei e, 

5T JraT^^rTVTTn^- 

•g |gT g^eft ststt:- ?^J3[ I 
irtt TwrcifFtT 5*^r- 

r^T nu?! n ’ 

c I HB I 8< ^FUsTFr: 

grfk ’g r^^^nrTTf^ir>xT:n^T^ie?r5*TT5 ?T^sff7T ng f 5 t JT^rftfh ^gfnaR- 

5=qT^?T I trg TTm^dTgrnTT'nFrT^’T ^ 

rXTsfk rrfx^?:^'grT; ^^'rr: gsW^ it ji»Tgfi?rr ii 

I take lefuge in Tliee^ O loid The ten llionsandth pnifc o£ the grace of Thy 
feet tlie gods and llie uldem and preceploia cannot confer on us.— YII1» 24. 49 
(Satyavrata), 


THEBEf'ENTB STBIEG 6-1 


133 


cREWPiei <R5i 5i€ahPif«i?f¥rcPr AwaTt#?? stt^fcT 

;nBHR§ arra «c} a^nt^ltr isn^tHiH aR^f^twi 

wmra sjraruBgs^ar^^smsrraitaaa^it^i EHcTtBtsjT gag^^^sriPi 
wqi^st^arerarinatl wsi i fTOjft laatsremgt, 

I a&er !ii8nEn^?F^t m si sracftRr fe 

i n 

5 Mortal man afraid of tUo Serpoat (<leatb)> takes to flight and finds no 
seonni^ in olllhe worlds fiat he who takes refnge in Thy lotas feet, 0 primeral 
Being, sleeps in ease Death flies away from him 3 27 (Derakt) 

5i5fn5?^Ni I i 

( 4 I js; I ?8 WgR ) 

a ^ f f i ^ nnitg eigirf^g i3i snf?fJra wifirasi^Bw 

aar^SffitatwnjeiiiBasa^ ^raicen ^nuatoi nsima* 5 a aa arertt- 

s Rnradfe sw I stjabro gfesinB hsict 1q 11 

6 Therefore take to the aerrice of the lotos feet of Nf islmho and leave 
worldly life, the home of passion attachment sorrow, anger, pride desire, 
helplessness, fear and mental distresses— leading men to move in tho circle of 
incarnations —V 13 14 (FrahlAda) 

eivim yiT5T5?|^ ii 

wi3gT5is§Rg^^Tn^Hf5R?g¥iTiwrftiii^sTTnftCT n«n 


( 1 =18 ' ? 35^ ) 

SR wiirafc aeRiRsf si hip^ siat asiirat^^tmtlgiiB 
I WOT sfii 1 otsbrir^ot^ssot finl^lsa wira» wa ^ sax' 
wrawafsilsKwgti & g otsis^;^?! t< sr € aisis^ f i : B? ir bbrbsi^b gsi sjot 
srUt hot g Rtfecf ^OTH I wsft g tOTmsnfe 5 cii^«rffii 

51 «Bi& I HOT wsft RgsBr ROTRsir sr ^ai wsrh sihisHfJt ^bot 
snfSlBt 51 OTtPh 1 g SOTOTBOT BtRfHI B5I sftSRr smjwai 

iBSi srfOT^ OTIOTlf^ SI gsiRURSI ||«|| 

7 Therefore 0 Thon possessed of lotos eyes, do the swans gladly take shelter 
^ndcr Thy lotas foot which lavishes happiness on them Those who take to 
'ioga and Karma become proad and being obstrncted, by Tliy inflaence do 'hot 
take the shelter of Thy feet —XI 29 3 (Uddhawi) 



124 


TUB nnAKTIRATJSAVA LI, 


( « I i vjo ) 

5ifr Ef^sr; m^h ^f?cr cTcT.^an??^'? o^ivT 

<9 ^ 

Tr5Tf?T% I 5T 5rg^?r?:?Q|g: im 5l«7r 

W^/ 4i?n%r !rf?^q^g?Tj?itf ?r fecftqfpcr frg 

5# I ^fq m j^^f^fTaqf^Rrcqrvj.- ii c h ' 

8. Great is the dif.tie«:«5 oE lho‘-e\\ho do nof make tko oE Ihc lotus feet 
of Hari as then vessel to cioss.tho ocean of voildl) hfe, «hich is full of the 
sea-monsters, in the shape oE the si\ opponent «. Thcieloic, 0 Kinfr, make 
the lotus feet of Hari thy Aehiclc and cio«s (ho dan*rcious ocean. — IV. 22, 
40 (Sanatkmnfii a). 

Hote— The six opponents are . (1) Kftmn (f-oriml pnsmon), (2) Krodiia (nnger), 
t3)Lobha (oovetousuefas), t4) Molm (dclubious of mind), (5) !Mnda (piide), iG) 
M&tsarya (malice). 

- 5Tra595ifrR^cI5T: I 

^ 9i|%qqi% fi^9^'g||8J 11 < U 

( « I 1 ^vs ) 

a^tn^»iqcqiq^srr ?i fjtcqfee chH^dirfH n^icreri 

sifir I qi^cqcq5[i^rfrrcr i qfecr: erg- 

sqqjim qaa camar- 

I ^ i faiii CT fa ar 

^r^qqf^ f?flr?aT^a ?jaer: ^rs^a ^ ii $ « „ 

9. Who that is a Pandit would loi^ako Thy lotus feet and waste his life 
hy neglecting Thee ? Our Guru (Brahma) w orshipped it in fcai oC Him. 
And the fouiteen Manus implicitly aocepted Him. — IV. 21, 67 (lludra to the 
Praehetas). 

W^t95)f!Tt9T%5f » 

%p5tc959|^^% jjisri 

qm9^nf9fTfr%^'®i%99Tl5 \ 

§55^ SJ9^T II \\ U 

' ( ti t ?si ra-’ ). 
^ qc^i^^fa i 



tSm SEVENTH STRING 12-13 


W 


wtqicn w?sr?Rr sr^pir wcft wrfsar^l i 

ffur^sns I >mr ii ii 

sRTiam? I ifCT fttiijt ^'iferii ^sw asasrt: 

^rf^rero i si^ ’>?<i i ?re^ %««i tre*! ^<t 

argicSR at^r jict ?r ?reg% si mificrlei^ i nqqisti w 

wisren^^^i^Bremt^ njfet si ^isjife«rfii€rfst h n 

10 11 ' The very pnre desire for the service o£ His lotus feet increising 
every day, ^vashos away the impurities of the heart that accumulated m the 
course of nnml^erless incarnations, just asihe holy river Gaiig& issuing from 
the toe of His foot, washes away the sins of men The man whose impurities 
of the heart have been washed away is not subject to the miseries of successive 
births and deaths He is firm in his realization of non attachment He abides 
at the feet of the Lcrd — -IV 21 31-32 ^(ithn) 

5fif^fSfTmT5»nt5 ^ piafiralj i 
5UtfR3i uu ?;ia. 

351 u II 

( ^ U I 3? W‘ ) 

S13 fR sa^fisHwfe awe fWiferlRr i n sft?n!R>i 

ac^^ wot" ^i ^ ataiJnsi Faraai i>g nfisarala 
HatswT^S 'I i:a& I «i«f airaaa 'statiga siiOTa cn 
lla ’Iff 5^ ^ ^crirfa wm II KR II 

12 The bee that sips the nectar of the lotus foot of llri‘in ‘1 does not take 
pleasure m worldly enjoyments which give birth to sin Other people, over- 
come by their longings^ endeavour to clean their impurities with Karma (the 
performance of sacrifices and religious oeremonies) But their notion results in 
the repeated generation of Bajat (passions and desires) ^VI 3 33 (Yama) 

^ fn?! u srrf?i5i g m \ 

¥ni®^T!TTWi^ iTof I) tl 

( I® I li I 3" 5^ I ) 

a^if nsrara^a 1 33^5 ftia 1 ’la 'W agwi^at w 
*n»T a^ ^fiairti mar wm ^isn ' wwnr^^J c w maatrre’r 
irucEprSat?! am »i3 agtitmf^ fttamfir »rs3 jishw «rt ju»^3 
w<m mt srmsn i^rFr 'cfeaPi ^jsri sa it 3 W 5 sispa li? 3 ll 



12(5 


' TBB nBAKtmATN'AVAht 


Then, 0 Loi d, let me have the great good fortune either in this life or in 
any other even if I be boin among lower animals, to sei ve Thee as one of Thy 
devotees — X. 14. 30 (Biahma). 

^Tfs5i?rt ^ i 

q'? q^ q^ qf|q^i ft ^qn?, u ^8 u 

( \ I ) 

\ 1 q:dt q^q H jqq* 

^ =srr^ 5^:rf^5ar ^^q q^q^q qq aq* cf e^qqrflrqf: ^qqrqr fr^qf 
qcpiT«tqH^q5T ocqq^% qq I ^iqTT^fq: qcsqqrnq ^fq I 
^ ’q ^ qq ^fll^ESiqq qq qq^R ^iqfq feq^f qciq fqqq. ^qf 

q^ 5^5 ¥iqfq q qq: ^qtiqqsq n K'a li 

14. They who have taken lofugo in the ship of the illustrious Muiaii, 
that haven of rest of saints, leckon the ocean of worldly life as easy to cross as 
the foot mark of a calf. They attain to the highest plane (Vaikun^ha) and 
do not enoountei any dangei lu their path — X 14. 58 (Suka). 

^s'sqrsi^ ^3^ q5« fq^qnftqsmsfra 1 

qq^w^^ It sratq^jfjTmsf q^Ut q«tT q^: U H 

15 He who having had the I aie good fortune of being boin a man, has 
not the good sense to m orsliip the lotus ieet of the Lord — ^lie falls into the pit 
of woridiliness. He is as though a beast — X. 51. 46 (Muchukunda). 

( 1° I 'll 1 ) 

a \\\\ 

( 'S I ^a' u° ) 

^3 qr ^qqf qqqgqii^ 5eqqTqfq'?:%qq ^qtq’5 qq 
^T^qtf \ fqqifqfq i fqqcqrT qqH?qqqtqqqT?^^'3\[q%gt?iqq?tr- 
q^^Tq^(^«i^qT^ ^SfTqJOSJ^HI^tq^qjrqfq qrqKflrfqrfiig'qR 

^q^ qf^s* qsq I qiqgq i 5r?:rqqqi^ ^f^qr qq ?rRqt ^q i 
tf^q qjilqRlcq Ig: I ^ qqg;qT 9^q=q: ^q^vi gqifq I 
qRt ^ g fqq ?H3rrTqqftr q gqifq ^q: l qqt flqqcqR^qi^lq- 

gqji qqftq qqfpq q l qsgl^sftq: 5q ^"Tq II il 



inn SEVE^ TB SliUBG lt-19 


n1 


16 The cater of (log 8 carrion (I ^ iho lowest of ilio low, n CliAndAla), 
if he 1ms consecrated his mind, speech, desires, wcnltli and Mo to iho scr\ico 
of the Lord, IS superior to tho Ur&hinatia eicnif the latter is possessed of tho 
dozen great menial excellences hut turns iii< Inch to LArAjana hor the former 
sanctifies Ins o\m Mo and the li\os of Ins clns«, hut the litter, full oftho pride 
of birth and accoinphshinciits, caunot sa\e hiin«cir, much less his family and 
tribe— VII ly 10 (PnhIAda) 

Ifo/e — Atcoidiug to the cotnineiiUij (ba twelve ezeoellen^M eie euumei-atod 
AM follows (1) OliHiiiiA (ojipodod to AdiiMiinA^ADle opposed to bAstrlo ordiiiniicee, 
[2) SAtjA(tiatli) (tl) Daiuh ( «lf itAttiniul) (4) Fipa (HNeetiemm) (5) AuiAlSArjA 
(oppostia of luAliee) (C) U t {« sense uf shame whith teeliHins one finiit ouninitltiii{, 
HMitifulHLl) (7) iilikSA (amttti'Hiit.e of hwiiHud ^ohl ale and of tmioral WhiiU), 
l8) AiiesojA (fraudiim liuiu tsnvj) 0 VMjfit (perfitMimuua of aneriRbCS , (10) DAna 
lotiHritjr) lit) Dlifth (rum 10441 furbetninoei (12) brad (Vadus LeAruiugl 


aTssriH II [I 

( ^ I ■? I V «ra ) 

4 tfn WfltffiicnvnPT «r uSebis i arsTJureifSrfjr i 

«i5ra esitgcr asEmfag- 

I 5% 1 S'?! fag'mai witihk 

fsnaarofa ^ aar >•9 11 

17 Dring to me tiioso wicked (icoplo who hiding placed Uioir hopes on 
their worldy homes Iho suro road to hell turn (heir faco from tho swcot iln>onr 
of the lotus of tho feet of ^ArA^nna which is durnk by tho I’animalnmsas (a 
class of holy incu of (ho highest religious order) who huo (akou tl^ \ow of 
po\Qrty andaro uinttaclicd to Uto world— VI d dS (luma) 


?5i?qT^ ^ ii ii 


( to I I Bt 55 ) 

ht & cuts urttfI'i i ^gfufer 1 cr wsta 

fliautn'w: il t» 11 

18 Having obtained this God gn cii liiiinnn incarnation, iho man who has 
not subjugated his pas ions nor worehips Tiiy foot, has simply cheated himself 
Ho IS an objeot of pity —X 6d 41 (Uudra) 

qK ^ ^qtcqvisjriaj^ 


128 


TUIS BllAKTlBATB AV ALL 


^ * 

\ 5TTajT^ gf 

U U ( ^o I l ) 

55r ^nv4 i 

c^7Tf^ 5iS^:^r 'sr^Cfa^f^ sq^3^5rv:iTfr«T^ ^ ’ift^cffcT ^|fr ^sjici^t 
vsrwf^ mm 1 cT’srr ?n:o^ i ^ 

jTt^* ?RiiJgrH^ ^fS ^ f^^f?cr 

lua » 

19 They who constantly woiship Thy feet, who meditate on Thee and 
sing Thy piaise — they attain, 0 Naiayana, to Moksa. If they pi ay £oi woildly 
blessings they obtain them alsov And no other man can get them. — X 72. 4 
(Yndhisthiia) 

rT \\ ^^ [\ 

. ( I® j nT»iqr?5rJ ) 

51 ^ i m^csr; jiqrarr: 

n WTSl^^cflf^ \\ I) 

20. They who have found shelter under the dust of His feet do not hanker 
after the heavenly legions nor the soveieignty of the eaith, noi the position of 
Brahmelnor the domain of PS,tMa, neither the supeihuman powers of Yoga nor 
even Moksa — X IG 37 (The wives of the N0;gas.) 

( ?° 1 1? 1 'i'ji ) 

I 5*^1^ ! 5T I cf5r 5T 

m %;cmi \ il tl 

21. I do notdesue any boon other than the seivice of Thy feet— a boon 
that they intently pray for who aie pioud in not owning any worldly possessions. 
What wise man having adoied Thee, the dispense! of Moksa, would beg of Thee 
any such boon as WQuld enohain him to the world ? — X. 51. 55 (Muohukunda). 

5T m ^T?%55 m^T^'4 \ 

^35? gx ^ q^XJ^ U R ^ H 

qnuqxuf ^5Rq xqhxrqr^scsi: f^: ( 

^'q^^XTxrqxiti 71^XXi?r: II ^ II 

( ?o I I a? — 8!i ) 



TllE SSl'SJrm STRING Z4 2S 


123 


fr3 trera? hi ?^frg fiswrrracfiifir 

ac'n^smfe^i^ ni^i^raf^r ^qt a t feg n 

sciwirat. «>®T3<Rflsiw^ I a aafora i I mtfer crrai^ 
^3a atea asaantnataS i faf^a ^aatfe 

^tiK. aataial ^tjsa sRiaiftfefeTut^raam i arefttsa ngn^ 
waw at^ 6^ aa atat^asi ag aaaaial i aaa 
ftaea aratsaiff ag»iin i fag aaai a?i^a Mtacaroa^niaaRdir 
)jpf sftg aitaaml i a^^^a asgta ^5l^i• i afla: ai^ aa aaw^ vs 
wg* 1 fiw ^saai a^a waa Hsaf^Biai fisaiPf 
anmla aia iia.’i— a,xn 

22-23 ^^odonoi, 0 Mritions Ii(I>, i!e«»o for tho sonorcignty of tho 
earth} or of iho liea\oiiS| of tlio rogiom of Brftlmu\ of FiUfth or ovon Moksa 
Bat vro do dcsiro to bn\ c tho hlosacd dost of iho ftoi of tI)o discns-holdor (Nftrn- 
yama)} tho dost which u fragrant with Uio saffron of LakRini*9 bosom —X 83 
41-42 (Tho Qaccns to Draapidi^ 

sBt 5 i 

H iu» « 

( « 1 51 1 ’i g«» I ) 

a vi ft a iaidan i gaaia5>a ^ g ^nrfwfa i | Trai aOfea 
^f^aarat sfa^^fija* i ^i^af ^ aaaai ^ i a% 

a^ araaairfala *na ii5««n 

24 0 King(FarikiiO>wlint person, Itliiit is in possession oC his sense 

wonid not vorship the ^oet oE Unknndi, adored by the greatest gods? Snr- 
lonnded as that man is by Terror (Death) — ^A.1 2 2 (Suka) 



3f|aiTg|w^ittiy<igif | xgi^wl gar «V u ii 


( « / ^ I 3? 'BTa ) 

aata arfaani^ata itaa a aai a^sa&aatf 

aa 9ra siaaiataiata. swfa ^nOTnaig vaaaia fij?a 
«raar aferf^^ ^r»aieaaT a^tn fit^a aa aara^a^ »ft 

a^ I awfaaagn»iin{qr aaaEata^aa i) ^ g 

I 25 I consider that tho worship o£ Achyhuta (Visnn) should ho tho 
unooasingdntyoE man in this world For distracted by divergent thoughts 
heidenisfies his spirit with his body He gets rid oE bis tears by so doing (i , 
by his devotion to Visnu)— XI 2 33 (Kavi) ^ hV'i 

17 


- 130 


THE HHAKTUUTHAalI 


55^ fi SIT TT??fnH??nssi f^ €t s!i^ fn^ts^ram \vi.\\\ 

( t i «i I l« ) 

5i?^^Rf?r «R5rc’n?[^^^ cc?t 

I cJRcIf^ 1 ^r% fg^sT ^S§[r cT^if^ 

?i?rfi^cRT':q(5 i ^r i 

^j^st 55 ^ 5i^=5Rt?n^r’T ^^fTR-f^r^^^c f¥ l l 

«f^R^5TT I ^cRT ^5>3rHcT: ^T ^ 

?h4s vm* \ fl^UcTlftf^ 5 ’EM^3r05ll^gqT II R?i II 

26. Can there be any fear of evil to hnn who having forsaken the rituals 
enioined by his oaste and leligions ordei, takes to the path of devotion but 
stumbles in the way befoiehe is iipe £oi its fiuit? What would have beon^ his 
gain by the mere obseivance of his litualistic olseivances unaccompanied with 
the devotion of the Lord ? — I. 5. 17 (N&iada). 

Note , — The BliS.gavata oonBtanUy pteaohes the path of devotion and encour- 
ages the Bilthm»]^a8 and others who were halting to accept this dooitine whioli 
relegated their class dnties to a secondary negligible place. The Yedics might give 
up the saoi’iGcial tifces and the Tliutiikas 'their woiships and oetemonies without 
inburiing the penalties of disobeying old regulations. This explains Yaisnavistu 
ui its Iibeial aspect' of rewaidiiig Its votaries, with salvation for their faith m the 
simple proceduie of woiship of the Deiiy uuiacumbered hy scriptural ritualism and 
ceieniontes. Its fuither attractions aie in the facf that the highest and the lowest 
Hie equally pi I vileged to stand on the same platfoim of woiship where the pride of 
hiith and wealth has no place , where supeiioiity is leckoued by the measuie of 
devotion. 

^5WfT3^ W5I^: ihu^tt c=U5c5!TRT¥HU^U %R: u^aj: 1 

lu « u 

5i^r5T5TJ ) 

g ( 515^^ RTsisxrcTi^ ) ff 

f c®rif ?rcr ^ 

cT^f^ 1 ?r3 55T^?mT^«i: 

I 51^ 5;?i 

5i|cr I tiw^^ I 5f3 ggrrf 5fs[_ 

5jf^finis i^5q?i^rq% gq ^crsI: i qf^^q^fq 

^flacqiTl ^ q vigi^q mqfer^fq^qqlfq wq? II 11 


l^eSJSrSNlJl STRING S8-30 . 


isi 


'27 Tho supreme Loril Hun seated in the heart, drives avtny thelnilings and 
Tices of his beloved votary who having given up all other beliefs and persuasions 
worships his feet —XI 5 42 (Kamhhiljuna) 

TJT fsB'gjnin aii?5iT5«T ii sic n 

( lo IB^ I ^^jr|5nw_X 

3?Biis} 3i!i!Fgrw?«f SfOTfe #t g erowiitnBlsirJifir i 

ftnaSg st nfasn m cJrsrg ft fe^irisir egr ftmst 

28 IVho that IS so conversant would forsake Ihy lotus feet’ — Thou who 
oEferest !rhino own self to those saints, who have taken tho vow of peace and 
poverty — X 86 33 (BahnlAswo) 

50^*1 iaq^ira 

TmtvT ^ II w 

(aiSUagrr) 

K trfr agranwnnr i tnqftftt 

Rft>!n^rq<raftsntr»i&t5tu! gw ?j?i afr qRtiq atnft" at«L 
ga OT^ n^aqaiis wifaRer woS ara^ 

tnafT^ a it?qfia ^eaaat aw^a i a^aac 


»na* II as II 

29 Till mnulias not found the refogo of Xliy fdet lio will remain subject 
to the fear of the loss of propertji friends and bis body ,hewill be snbj^t 
to hankerings, tbwartings, groed and gneb TUI then will remain n^so the root 
of all sufferings and distresses, viz , the false belief in ** hlj no*s *’*-111 sT t> 
fBrohmft) 



5qifinft I 


afeisfjrii^ w?ra u 30 u 

^ I ^*1 1 «si ) 

maw tnm ntssf ^ i ^ 5&?isfT ii %•> ii 

30 The Yogis by means of their Bliakii Yoga (dovotionj attended with 
Jilftna and YnirAgya (knowledge and renunciation) approach me for the attain^ 
ment of theu* well-being— III 25 42 (ICapila) 



132 


mE BIIAKTJ RATE AV ALL 




tr- 


( u » i ) 

<t5f I ?5i5'iT^T «3 Tci: 

¥ni^cri ^cr»3Tit% v ^^ x^jh i | ^ctsts?: 

cHJ q?:r ni^f^ i 

^crmf jaistj \\\\ ii 

S[% II 'S 11 

31. ^io those who thus worship the feet of Achyuta and constantly 
attend on Him, comes the spiiit of devotion, i enunciation and divine know- 
ledge. Then, 0 King Janaka, the devotee straightway attains supreme peace. — 
XI. 2. 43 (Kavi). 

, Here ends the Seventh Stiing ot the Necklace of Devotion. 


THE EIGHTH STRING OF THE NECKLACE OF DEVOTION, 

[Note —This section tteats of Arohanam (worship),] 

X 

^«ng*T 1%'nfrq, u 

nm u^rr ftgjc^^'ciainaT: i 

5mtlq|KTf ^raf^unT n^s? ii \ u 

« I ^11 ) 

rfsrtrf?! i 

<1511 ficTf I I g;5Kcir?wf^flmi: Hfe^n^TJgsrr- 

jjqsgt^r: I I ?xc^f?cr i ?ig f^^rr 

S[I?lI5^I<TfT^t ^5J?f H<9ir|iffs[?ir<JlT <sFh% 

«R(^<T5ng[^cr^!ri«gcrr^>5iq^^ 55i^^gK(W5T n ii t n 

1. Just as the tiunk, the branches and twigs aie nouiished hy the wateiing 
of the root of the tree, just as the organs of the body aie fed hy the supply of ' 
food to the life-breath (vital piinciple), so in the same way the saoiifice to Acli- 
yuta (Visnu) serves as the woiship to all the gods. — IV^* 13. 14 (Nfliada). 

n«ai| 5^^jsfjnsiRi i 

fn^: ^^FiT5fins('5i n ii 

( <5 1 »i I ^ ) 


ms SiyEKTB STRING, S3 S4 


133 


TOUwc jsfisi!i.sn5B^lPT ^ ?ng.«i«n^fe suraRr 'jf5i& ?encn^ 
aii^ irfea aw^csja ii ^ ii 

2 Just os tho xvatering of the root feeds the trunk snd branches so the 
worship of Vi<«nn series as tho worship of all including Self '—VIIl 5 49 
(Brahmft) ^ ^ 



qTTWT S 5 lgns 3 BT I 


*5 51 ^ 'g ?T ^ # 1 %^ II ^ II, 

( 8 I !ii I «£f ) 

am ^ wiaaJ^ ^ ^afar a utr Ni«nra5srat i i ^ 
aSatfta &5rm'ialfaa ijaafa a na «>fam a^ 

a a ^pI t g e ^^ ^aasRuiai aPr i aSr wa^ i amjjr mracarwf qjjfsjapa* 

atia sreaaafasaa^ a?i.Pia 55 a i a^m 5 «arr ii 5 11 

3 The Knrma*Yogis whom strong faith worship Him the ruler of the 
elements (of matter) and of the sense organs and the mindi by their many rites 
and ceremonies Cor the attammentoS their dcsires^A only are the} welt vorsed 
tn Veil and Tantra —VI 24 62 (Budra ) 

iVots— The pnrpoit of tins is uot teiy cleaily expressed The staleiaeiit is 
that they who worship Him are credited with tine kDOwIedge Ifot they who 
Bimply pnrsae Jfi&na M&rga (the path of knowledge ) 

fOr l ^dyqstJlHl ? ?r t q 3 fin*l ajl^R^OT I 

^i^?r n ? ii 

nniiEsi??05w i 

IT^g 5 n^O^»T II H II 

( t® I =8 1 5 \s gaa ) 

sa appomi i wafta mn l^am aiJsift amta^a 

Smit I atat II 8 ll 

^€!naa ^a ia^i^afaaar i a a wsar Pt maaat 
waPt%a anataifiraas^ aana aa;!! gta gaa anaa ^sJta i aam^> 

' vt laro- n 8 11 

4 5 That ft man should smceroly offer sacrifioo to tho Deity with the 
moomo earned by fair means is the path to well being of tho twice born honso* 
holder This patli has been perceived by wise men witli their scriptural vision 
It gives peace to the mind It leads to Dharma and is in easy means to ijie 
attainment of Moksa —X 34 36 37 (Munis) 



134 


I 

THE BHkKTl RATE AVAL! 


"O Cs 

|’!rt% l aw CT^1W% awa?3^ 

q«rT a?iP^: 11 6 u 

sd ' 

( I a I U > 

?i5r f§[srrf^trcf ^ ?ifsTat?7\f^ 5Eifi^q«TsiTf¥iP[(^?jj 

c«TSTTqf g H5f55^5rrfk?iK ffer trsTfi: 

Cbl ' ^ 

ST^TcJT^ I ?I^C cTI^l? 5lTcJT^mfT 

^¥iit?f ^i\ k3r5ii^#5r ’rq: i 

I o5(f5 ^Tri5 5i?Tt I ci5r tg: 1 ^ 4 jtr ^§cr i 

’5;fr,k;iT'fl*T5r^ ^m i cn^^r i 

cT^iir ^ JTf q; irkc^fs ^rirfcr ^T^rf^rcT q^ErrfJT^mfer vrrq: i mi 

5^ I srg HTqTxl^q qjg’ I m\ 

^ Viqqcff(5T fqqr ^ET^^lfT fr»5f 5T flqgrlcq^: % I) il 

6. The Lord in the plenitude o£ all he possesses (^^anting in nothing) has 
no wish to obtain honoui fiom the ignoi ant The honour that a man gives to 
the Lord is leflected back to him just as the beauty of the face 'is loflocted in 
the figure on the mil ror. — VII 9. 11 (Prahlfida). ^ 

wa^acTq??rq awm % ^ rsti asnwaraatspiayq 
l^t: 1 fw q55q^?I5 ^q'lqatJam^^cI ?Wl|5qs§l3i 
»n:%fq g«5i?!m a « u 

( a 1 $ I a ) 

nim ^q^5T§t?iTTWi^t ¥iqk g 
aia'‘tcqif I isr^q i gjikk i viqpzi^i crfejit^^. 

^ q5miii5|’ ^ ^^^qffcT ^ g;fi kgijJTcrqt ' 

i c^f ^ifqg^fcrj iiqig^^q 5ncq^|?r 

I qe^qq^r fqqq^qqsr i ci^t ^ 

^qqgjqqc^qrqqiqfq^ ii vs ii 

^ 7. Veiily aie they lobbed of tboii undoistanding by Thy M&yii (mys- 
terious power) — they who woiship Thee for the attainment of objects other than 
(lelease from biiths and deaths) which can be Thy own gift to them 
They desire fioin Thee — ^who ait the desiie-fulfilling tioe ot paiadise — pleasures 
of the body that IS no bettei than a corpse. Such pleasuies boinar common to 
the inmates of Hell —IV. 9 9. (Dhiuva) 



TBE siema siruxg es 


13S 



ferarq ^ 



u c u 

( s I :« I :{5 Rgrr ) 

s» *i»ra?i^sipif flragfe^si ion orasft ng igniifg 0(1 

Hsui^ I ijugntftfn I in an mgit of^smiwRr agti oiKi 
silt mm nfe mifife an gonrat ifti gt> 1 Hgam;^!nf^ in 
wgmg^i aotta^onm fmtn nfmiagojin mramn^ sfa ma 11 b n 

8 Tbo mab oE simplo faith attains to the highest goal as his reward for 
having washed the feet of the Lord and worshipped his feet with offerings of Diirv& 
grass It is impossible that the man who has given away his empire of the 
world without any remorse should be visited with affliotion VIII 22^ 23 
(Brahm&) 


^TJBqtqriiq^ qrrw 1 I 

9l|^HqrI raf| fq || <1 || 

( U 1 I «fi sftya* ) 

\Rr sftmjiilwaoincfiiifiTmirifiirftaftfeafitaatJjimoi- 
aof^'qgOnfiajii iftmuarqaiiimsuiflni^fiR 
wimr mpi famniicji 


11 wnaniai nioqmgosmifa i nfifa n nr iiii^ 

laia ^tifqmfnsir^ arfi^ftfir 

iiiur>0!! ^mnftoraiw feii^ ii $ ii 

?fa^iTir«npr finnn.ii 

9 Tims does a man who worships mo according to Vaidic and T&ntrik 
rites earns his wished forsuccoss in both the worlds ^XI 27 49 (Sri Krisiiu} 
Here ends the Bighth String of the Necklace of DevotioUf 



THE NINTH STIUNG. 

[This section treats of the subject Vandand (bowing to the Lord).'] 

^ vra': I 

*W5ttt U \ ll 

( I I ^ ) 

I ?T^f^ I ^ifETtr^c? 

»Tfr I irrerr H ^ H 

1. This day my ill luck has clisappeai cd, my lilo is blessed' — tori shall 
bow to the teetoE the Lord which is the object otmedilution by Yogis. — X. 38. 
6 (AkiElra). 

u%^qT wnn Tinu^. i 

( U« 1 « 51^1 ) 

^51!^ TiflHT 33'-fiqT 

ct^ ^ 5’5Tw cesT ?rTf^?ir 

^ vrRHint cT^^ JCE^cflcq^J U R II 

2. Ho who lives ever thiukmg o£ Thy iiieicy, enjoying the Emits oE his 
own acts, making obeisance to the Loid with his speech, body and mind — such 
a man earns a title to Moksa.— X. 14 8 (Brahma). 

'?ra5r: f^it j^sr i 

TR '551% [\ f^\\ 

, . , ' ( U-U^I «'S’g?0 

31^ fe^J!i:^gfeq;5?n^ciTf ti%cr i ^ci^: i 

1 3iRrJ 'Sq’ctf^fn i 

sw ?iq|5cRl *Tg •TR^?»lt5^r 
5PmRr ti ^ II 



TBE fEiVTB 61B1NG 12-13 


137 


3 When falling or slipping, when in pnm, when sneezing, if a man volnnfan- 
ly or lAVolnnianly ejaculates the words Harayo Kama ' (salutation to &n), ho 
drives away all evils — 12 47 (S(^ta) 


JS Siraflfisf Uf^Frff <51 f^Tt|FrT^^l 

^ ank 5fr‘ juro^jnssr ii » u 

( ?? I 1 8? ) 


<ar55»n 5 11 

sn 3 S!inig>ra 5 cRf 1 ^flt 1 ^smBRr s^teffRisra- 
sifilScirtfant^sr ?ife«rg!Ei*Hft?ra?rg!fia^rft!Bg! 5 n:isis 

5r^ I wp»i firanitat nat^gi* 

w'h: 5 % pptr wir&a ccua 118II 

wizl^irat (tiwsm 1 


4 Knowing all things to ho the body of Han, makmg no differenoe 
between them and Hon let a man bow down to the sky, the air, the water, the 
fire, the earth, the laminaries, the living beings, the treds, the rivers and seas 
^ KI,2 4I(Kavi) 

Hero ends the Ninth String 


THE TENTH STKINa 

\Th\s teciian tnaU of 8 rviUtdi ( io the Lord ) ] 

sRrmssrraJTT^ 'rnifr warn i 

>P ^ s. 

‘ 515^1 ftsen' ^iei!TT*raTO’s*i% ii ^ ii 

( S I yii W II ) ' 

sw 5ren fTOTfaa feraswrca^ ast ata^aaciat na afes ^arof 
s?ai5 1 I «rea anaat aw waapn^ai sm^fiwai waflr aaa 

arataiawsaaww^iK^ at ft; wa Fgm ^ ?ifa g a ftSftta ai^^a 

1 Nothing is wanting to the seriunts of the Lord whose feet are holy 
shrmos, by the TCty hearing of whoso name a man becomes narired of hts sms<~« 

IK 5 IG (Dorvftsa) ^ 

la 




138 


THE BEAKTlllATNlVAht 



• / >■ 

?r % W R W 

^5T f ^ i crigf^fe i ^®5-' 

f^%^Tf^5Ta?«i?'TfT?:«Kr» ^ wcfi \ 

^■flrf^n^'j ^^51 1 1 ^5m-?iRcf^5r5TtJ ^ cf^ 5f flsffe I caviar a i . 

I ^I^Tt g 55«I^ ^ ^ 

i5nv:r^^ aq^cfiflr 5j^ q;a i ^^fqr a* '7^5 f^JTJ sricr* i 

w f^cT* 1 ^if^HTaa- 

?iJ?T ?f?Ti ^ '^ir 

¥iTaJ I) R it 

2. Until people, 0 Krisna, become tby servunts, passions aie the thieves 
that rob them ; their houses are prisons to them ; their attachment is the chain that 
fetters their feet. — X. 14. 36 (Brahmfi.). ' ' ' 

Note — Before maa becomes the servant of the Loid ]iis paBsionsased to rob him 
of hia right undeiatauding. Bat after he becomes JELm Hervaut bis pasBioue become 
a means of and help to his devotion. Hta hostility towaids his enemies is turned 
against bis sms His house lean asylum and home foi suintly men and is no longer 
tile scene of vain and troublesome labours ^ and his atiaohment to his lelutious be- 
comes a means of Iiim own spiiilual uplift bv reason of his leading them to.tlie path 
of devotion by the loving inQnenoe he exercises over them. 

f^^KTS^ ulcl^iqiu^ ^'i^?lfUaR%5 U^?R* 

\ % ;5sraul^5i5[Ti!n i#Fra:.^^-- 

rrS'^flUUT^S: 11 ^ II 

•* ». 

»i^:5r gr i f¥ f^5rfjT% 1 1 

?iicrrHic5f ^ fef ^nsr^- 

5K'433?f: t»c(?:T?5t erei^ 

5i5{T^ #: ?r3'3ri:frmi^3« *• 

=gr^R ci^ jrS’^rr^jjr ^r^53;fTmT5^^:% \\\\\ 

.3. What wondei, 0 Achy uta, 0 fiiend of one and all, that^Thou identi- 
ficst Thyself with Thy seivants that take refuge in Thee. Thou didst choose 
a monkey (Sugiiva) for thy friend and ally — though mighty kings placed their 
crowned he ids at Thy feet.—XI. 29, 4. (Uddhava). ' 


TkESEVEUftB 6-1 

* 


139 


33 ^Ti^ STTCHTOIl^ 11 8 II 

. ' ‘ (« I) 

fW 555 ^f*RfraT wlHPraatgarifeRts^wns^fe 

^ai95«ii ^a»T llfwa»i.n I® n ' 

aa'qiafwii®! stostRt i i wiarat 

ar waaiat a sata a^naf^ asactfa i wana i a ^asr 
faftta fiaS^flrfitaa smataaift ^ftwiPJaf^fai aai aaa|aTais i 
aeatWteail^ i' astanatalaife «a atfaa cai^wia i sjan^aiagaig;. 
a rsr <! [ ;a i (^t aaiaia aagatlalgaa i afaaa ard»atta awaqi^fa 
?HTa&!r^aai a aaaaiafaaisa aiw faaacftfe aia nan 
t&aaa^caimi 

4 Lot a man consocrate every aotion of his to the Lord nttermg the 
salutation ** N&rAyanAya ’ (this to N&rayBna)»overy action be does with his 
spoeoh, body and mind —XL 2 36 (Kavi) 

Here ends the Tenth String 


THE ELEVENTH STIlING OP THE NECKLACE OP DEVOTION 
{ThxB itclion treat# of tAe intimate comp^monthp and friendship of tk Lord\ 

TSR:*gH»i^ ii 

eift *nT 5 nT|t¥HTsr i 

ST(?H 5 r twiflrR^ ^ pf^fTTcjern^ M ^ 11 / 

(UK«i«asn) 

aa aaa faaaR^ facaanioiS aa aaa^ajana aftar aas, aig a 
??at 5 1 a6lat*afa(& i ^istanaaijlataifeRr aa a ar 

aaat aa^a^aarga! atsprlaa^waitaflr atawa^a aainflaiafa a^ 
jlataft Tatf^^ fa>aTaraW<iRi.i af^W Rr^ot 
aa^ wafirfe aaaiciroTraf^ Rtcfi^g^aa aar a at^afflast 

fiS 3 Sanaa? oSfa ata lai^aRraat Swa^aaSa ^Sajsaaft-aala 
ftit a a^ai? I "^ftifa aar ^ aataar^TftaRt?aa i sia aaf^ 





BB AKTJJIATN AV ALL 


3Tt=crKqrfe?fr r5r^^t7^.‘?5f 5asr^ cr^rrf^ 
frf^OT? fT cf^fa ¥?i5rj J ?fs[T sri^ 

^r ni^crfnsts ^r»T^m fera 

5r visTcnf^ ¥iisr; i «3?§* sigr ^’iTi ^ ^ 

crgr^i^j^sS^imfcr 11 ^ H 

1. Ob ! the good fortuno of Nanda ami of tho inliabilani*: of Via 3 a Iba^ 
they have £oi their intimate companion thectcinal and perfect J3rahma (Krhna)* 
— ^XI. 14. 32 (Bialiina). 

( «i 1 1 ) 

5^r«rcn2if 

5:^(2r52?f ccsRt^Jij fera-fn^^il ii 

fflfe W SflJ tc^ ¥isr% tf^STt 375T}^^‘ 

Sffj ^dflri sftsTfggj^Rssri^c^sfm^i^f^^ i ^rflrap^t- 
cllg' ^4% mi %^i I 

cf%'‘ JTfe Ji55^5r ^n^rsr sfifa? 

if^ftf^r mi «i?r: ii ^ ii 

'3:^T^5ir 

2. Thus the previous Karma influences tho mind ( to be entangled Trith 
fresh Raima). And as long as theie is the influence of AvidyS, (ignoiance) 
and ab. long as theie is no affection foi mo (VSsudeva) theio is no fieedom from 
the bondage of the body (t. e., the soul is subject to incarnations).— V. 5. 6 
(Risabha). 

Here ends the Eleventh String. 

O 


THE TWELFTH STRING! OF THE NECKLACE OF DEVOTIONL 

[^This section treats of the subject oj consecrating one’^elf to the Lord’ll 

i 

fi^i TSK'gJUl, II 

*Tc% sf3ftnR5^ffT^55nf ^ I 

^i^wjrRg 3ii^q^T*Rt fraTfPt^gqm 'q ^ ii ^ ii 


ttiETW ELFTtl STBliG 17-10 


141 


fm fiipiRig fin?5suncH& asr anafe 
asifft swr«tf Jrafe »jaa^!n5 1 ncJtRr i a?ic>raiH»rea'CTf 
aicJn wrfa i »im fiJKVrefi at nwait^qqraaiftfear a feaS am 
mrafetstJ^^'afafeaiaftaBfaarfa^f^iEHtalattt^ faf^faa 
Rtf^ «gPnit aaftT aa sigaar sflg namnnlaaieasj^aat'rnaaja- 
aiag Tsa^alrat »n(a i ^ w^aj^ii i n 

1 ‘Whon A innn hiving renounced nil irorhll} ncti\itic^ con<ccn(es himscl£ 
to the Lord nnd then becomes the sahjoot of 31} spociul grace he itecomes fit 
for oneness with 31c ind Attains iminortaht} — M SU 34 (^rl Kfi^na) 

fftr 5Stmf|ci%2Pc f^rraift sra^r firi^ 

<5 eiraf I ITf^ RJIFTCT ^ ^t cHN l U ?af j|^* 

qscn^if tj^r n ii 

'■a 

( <s I ^ ngi? ) 

Tfa tfunjaaiaamsircRPafiaRHitsifiisf ifl-»ftftra^«:#tgaiiaicar!ia3 
jilnfiTaiar wlainaai^fsaBEawImra^fa: 

\ _ tErnreir aiaar facaRiH.ii la ii 

” aa aawianiiaRara sat a^fMaaRTOiTOTO 5I11H, 

a^ ^l<!jr>iag<f^ g H T Ema^ a i aqWfa i aro^^iaa faw i a^ ^ 
^ wftftat I fail wanfam aal aafawi na^al aifnaalfclai 
Rrfarataiaf alRrata^aaaa fa racwwaitnriraf Faa aagsa atatga 
aaCTi<T <!ig raR ^afS aai aaiatcaiH. warn aaaaida i H5t i ata- 
Hfea faii»Ra ^jtraRtaaca nfaaw asa ai?a gac^saaagai ac^ set 
5 aRai^qfta?aa* i a^ai aaaat agaafaaai am RR^aaal aaig'aRr irII 
Efa sttma ^aaaH. 1 ' 

2 Dharina (religious pnoticcs) Artba (m ttori il gains) and Kama (plci« 

sores of this hod}) arc said to bo the tlirco objects of Jifo As n means to gain 
them there nro the scicnoo of solf 1 nowledgc, tho Knrmnhandi (ritnilistio) 
portions of thoVedis^the soionce of poht} and government, tho man} worl s on 
the snlgcolsof trado and ngrictiUnrc I eonsidorull thoso bniichcs of know lodge 
08 tmo if onl} thoy arc coosocratod to Thoo, their friend nnd Supremo Uoing 
VII 0 2C (Prahlflda; ^ 

Hero ends tho Twelfth String 


I 



THE THIRTEENTH STIUNG OF THE NECKE/VCB OF DEVOTION. 

[27«5 section treats of the subject of Taking JRojuge in the Lotus Feet of the Lord], 

n: 8I*!:<S SfKJpj lt\u 

( U i y I ?K^5f?r5T5i: ) 

i i ^cr> 

g;5?T^^crmj I vih\^\ 

^l^flf ?IP:T«r?I(^ 5T ?? I cf^^RW ^ ^ ^ 

5hPTgr^¥iTR sTcT ^ cr^5jf^ 

^ ^5r(%* ![fcr g?q 3 ^ 1 

isr^feiTSTr m laimmi 1 i f!c?jffif^ 1 1 

^^fcff^rr ^^rfcJTfTctJT IK ir -1 

1 . He who, 0 king, has with a whole heart taken refuge in the Lord 
Mukunda, casts aside all ideas ot difference, is not under obligation to servo the 
Devas, Ri^’is, demons, the manes, and living ones who ai 0 our elders. Ho owes 
no debt to them — XI. 5 41 (Ivarabh&jana). 

iVbfe —Another reodiag is ^iTn for grTr*^ Thislatlor wojd is seldom met It 
means (difference) from |ig to cut. ^et means the duty to offer sactiGees, 
&o., &o. 

^ u€T^?m*i?ii3uj i 

^^TMrr5e^q^??tr SU^TtUU: w ^ u 

( ? I 1 S? ) - 

St ^^i^'tsitn5tfifi4lS!t! ?mg^«isit ^ sRTtft^TO i fis 
«s^ gsistfestsSi 1 3r5OT%tr?rt tfrasijt atast 5?tg5i gfsiRstsft 

swna, 11 H II ' 

1 

2. Nothing is unattainable to those noble-lieaited persons who have taken 
refuge in the feet of the Lord— the holy shnuo that drives away all tioubles 
(from its proximity). — III. 23. 41 (Maitreya). 



IHE i'aiBXEBNfU STJUXG 3 S-iO 


143 


sarCkT JTiiT^ f^sm gtti% ^ *3 i 

^lTflrsl5ra’33ra 3%5(IT W \ W 

i ( ) 

' ^ ai t i a i dwa i ?irerer »%i fl[a« 

sm^'hii »ng<n ?i5i,ii«rn sltfe^Ti idta^nJiifstBfl^rt sSmlera 

a arena Karer i aiteja t firgr ii ^ ii 

3 0 VIdani. bow can tlio tronUca ot tho I>oi!y niid ot tbo mind, tho oiils 
that bornll on man from tlio aklos, thoso that boio thoir origin in tlio olcmonts 
oC matter — how can all those oppress tho man who has takon rclngo m tho LonI 
—III 32 3S (Maiiroya) 

33 Tfrt3ER<?!I RrWHS=3l ( 

’ I] 8 II 

(8 I Wl« 5 !f) 

a<a oiaai ?a<Rwre i i aa ni»a5ii^q;(^ wtsj acta nRnt 
aSsr fiana utal ama iRa rfa aiPm^a^ a"isa nara area? 

fJrejftrfai ar^ftnrar fireia f^rea areraPr ii 8 ii 

^ 4 Tbo mighty Yama >t1io porpoirates ba\oo on tho world cannot boast 

o£ hts cooqnesl of him who takes refuge in tbo lotus feet of tho Lord— IV S4 
56 (Rndra) 

CII3l%Hd 3* 3R^»§3jW ^^3 ^ HajTrcnj I 

Ti 3 if^aj ng^ig^RirafRrrfR nun 

' (^ifiiaa^) 

a^afa ^traratsareji^ ^ (W^aiais i sifaltaa fatcsKic 
S^s^njFa ar sraareaiftifaa 5a aw’a tiail^^Rf 3® 53 
Bt^ aftqjjaw aar 53 Bagaifain^ aa ga irc^sac 

■ faat wre: a BojragaBatcr w ft aiflisjl wsr atitBi ^ Hjg&a 
Y sgsafcifta^ wfmq'faagateaw aat 8a sgstartj a aafe aat 
Fadsacrw^tj araanSaanj a Baaa'ifaa 11 1 11 

5 He IS a fool who takes shelter in any ono else than the Lord, who is 
not astonished (by Iiis own groatnoss), who is tally satisGed with all ho has, Who 
IS nnconditioned, who is void ot passions and (therefore) tranqnil The man who 
resorts to any ono else for refuge wishes to cross tho sea by i^ing hold of the 
tail of 0 dog — ^VI 9 22 (Doras) ,, 



141 


TBE BBAKTlRATA-AVALt 


^ T?i?r6' 

^1 ?o!|^%rn?nH u ^ i( 

( « I s 1 ts a^r- ) 

sw 5!#«5rei afnalajrel <m a^t^cti flfei 

s?f%^T I m\ ja?:?3| i i ^ 

5f5r^5^^?lJlf3rgf^:i?5cIcJtcfT'liT^ If ^ cHnTT^f^cTWt 

Tfm^ 5T f HTTf I ^1^557 lOC^li 5T 

^Nfsniicrfffs grivm^sr i 

za’c^d ffrfr 3ffEr% Ti3*..crJ 5 *^ 

:f^:?3ci^iT TT35rff5[?frTf,^cr55c5r^g' ^7:?ufficW 1 siisrler 357^5 57 wf^- 

If m^Tcitfe^: ^ c^Tf f 9r fif^r fr 1 ^rscr i 

^ ^sT^T I §5rf5r^% g^- 

11 % II 

6. 0 Nri&imha, paiGiits cannot always affoid piotection to their children 

(being eithei helpless themselves or heglecttul). Medicines do not always cure 
the sick.' The ship does not always saccoai a di owning man in the sea. Such 
means as are resorted to £oi the ielie£o£ the distressed are not mvaiiably unfail- 
ing and do not benefit those who have not secuied Thy care. — VII. 9. 19. 
(Prahl^da). , 

'Sflci: ai??S ^i7tiItf*ig5fxi^lT|ctfiu:: sf|^: 

5r 1:5^ H « |( 

' ^ I ac I ) 

^f m m ^ 97^5c^t5F^5T *1%^ 

1% l ccIcT^C fjj • 55r5| 1 

1 5R?ig;^Tci c^i: i ^f. (5n:^^^m?Ricr^4t ¥i^i^ 
H=s[ fitcmfJifV mm cT^r 

'T^ fT 11 vs n ' .. 

.7. He is no wise man who seeks protection of anyone other than thee — 
vthou who ait grateful, fiiendly, tiuthful and_a££ectionate tow.iids'thy devotees— 

> thou who f ulfillest the desires of all who serve thee thou— who offerest^ thy own 
self to' them' — and thou who art ever the same, suffeiing no increase.— X. 48. 
26 (Akrfira). *■ ' 


TBE raittTEE&TnSTRtS« e-Y 


1«5 


gr^NcTT fear am^r aj^ pt^rr vp ii 

«<3 * Nd 

WT& f%r' ' ) 

lc«n? g g«(8nif<li T I sst tfJT I sid sitsni a«iigHnii s^rnsg^nPr bpwI 
injtr fBRt^a JiJi<n»rag *r^ q?f’n arral guPawt ’snsJir q^sdoi 
gl^f ara ^ qni^q q sgnfest^SfC^KTO" 3efUs«J ?i STt »?^ff W 

<n n 6 n 

8 0 forinnato was tlio demonoas PufaDft vho, in her desire to kill hinii 

made him snok her poMoncd breast and got bor reward worthy of a fostor-nnrse 
Who else u ihoro more morcifal wnoso shelter wo shoald seek^^JlI 2 23 
(Uddhsra) « 


tra?nm JiTfJtan?!! ?rarflif5=j<aq5iRpiarw5ndi^ ii c ii 


( « ' ts 1 « 3^*r ) 
gyge niSn i am^rnsaw srana obh- 

awtij 5 a awr B r g ~ s re'Tat <ri<ag n!i t areEftaar i a 4a5i smr- 
aaiet^ aafa >ia aWRi.ii £ H 

9 I do not see in the coarse of iny p’tssago tliroagh tbo world any other 
shelter than the shade of year lotus foot— thou who ramost neoturs —XI 19 9 
(Uddbava) 



saiTO ajR?ir^ tRiRtRmsr- 


qrff nr^rerdtaj ii x> ii 


( l« I it 1 8a 3551^ ) 

a^ SIS gar*^ ?in!i nfagatfBtfa ferftar | staw’ 
ana aifir aa^ agisir agwu wg^a lawtea^lsnwi^Rr 
afiatTnifirTOgalfB ^rent^afifa ■saqi^ saa alfea 81531$; ata- 
a;^ atqan laiaaa af^r afaBm a?.ag»:R^r;ftar aia aana 
eaasRwfa* wrga aaa «a aanaifa 1 sKtf afaaifjr 1 siaaer' 

wdtq3I.ll to II 

10 0 Lord 1 save me who am fhas affitoted I have been long oppressed 
by my remorses My tyrants six in namber, have not yet been satofied with 
19 


146 


THE BHAKTIBATEAVAlL 


their infliction ol! cruelties on me and T lm\ e not found peace anywhere. 0 
Supreme ! I approach Thy lotus feet which confer secuiity fiom fear and immunity 
from sorrow. — X. 51. 57 (Muchukunda). 

^iTote. — With this fitiinzii ends the sfcni»giii<» of the Neclnco of Devotion, made 
of gems selected from the Bhd,<r)i Villa Thu lemuiiiing vcises me fiom Iho pen of 
the compiler ViSUupmi 

wgrfT 

m cg[ca^%t^ ci»ir ^ 

11. Having been encouraged by thee, 0 Loid of Laksmi, thus have I 
performed tlie work (of stringing the necklace) with such intolleci-ual ability as 
I possessed and with the co-operation of my follow -deiotees. It may be put 
down to a wauton intellectual activity or to my endeavoin to deteuninethe tiuth. 
Accept it graciously, thou succourer of thy roLugee’. 

5?srT^ WTEzif^ftr 

'^'511 ssT^T 1 1 

srr^;^ j m ^Tfiiss5K^q!!i^T5KT5iT 

?sfr 911^^ gjf^cwrr^^sNiHiTJTf^ ■¥i^^ i ^ 3 

fkKm- fli 

mi mi ^*1?^ ^ iff 

^T*«i^RjdT^^5r 

¥nt^i II ^^11 



THE ^ THIRTE^EA TH STBIHG 11-12 


147 


12 I bavo ovary hope ibat good people whoso aiin oE life is to get at 
^Bhakti (devohoo} tvil] accprdSvalooine to ibe*Bhaktiratn&va1i And the learned 
having regard to my labonr'of stringing the gems* ‘Will receive the ITeoklace with 
their approbation As regards those persons who nre gi> Mi to captioosness I 
entreat them to look into in} work thoroughly and sp^k ont its fnnlts which 
they discern in it| i£ after tneir stud} of it thcie remains any desire for fault* 
finding ' ' ' 

TT«h «lTE3IfRa »T I 

cwra « w 

*raww i w 

I n<f(5 ssTt 5felir<i^ jru n^tPr fiiaiggf^iftBhifeaRjn 
nisnPr «n^nf?rar5strfi?itf?tf<r i nwft ct wra^fiRft<nn 
JiefifI* v FSsw t rarg *ras«7^ sr wia wbj? ?«ira 

?TOi?ii*>n5, iwstsara sum TigfffasBr ftsflrai w firar>instf 

33Tra55r,Rr «n iftw >KtiR<i >ro<T«[af^ ftr ^ gioi 

51 f%iT<flf5n} I TOTPr a-n^ aifir «rf%a ng €*«aaa ■ g-^ 

aa «iaiw srr^q wirif^ wPr g 5ft5i& i^caa i 

a^a5?l?i:««pra5tdft gggrBt ra^at w u i lqfw Ri ii n 

wi«RR5:?rjasn^'RtTif!aiTrar ?nnm ii gnOTgii 

*tRPO3^a^!^0Haa 

( 11 hatover I aioi of small intoUoctual powers, friendless and utikoowii| 
let not 111 } work be an object of ridicule among the deiotoos of the Lord Whnt 
inlelleot, distingaisbod^hirth (parentage) prowess or qoahtiea can fhe bees boast 
of ^>-'lot do not men drink with zost thelswoot bone} they supply ^ 

Hero ends the ^eokhoe of the (?ems of Dovotion found in the Ocean of 
hectar of the Bhagirata 


In the Odlciiita printed edition the following addiiiouii Ver es ura appended 
separately n a footnote , 

ajaaa atg var sfl*tra! i^tsreft , 
aafic^ a&a wtmtferr ag. ^ifSamaf mn i 
*^nf<Ri! 5ita5ig. , 

gRi^*i|a ??5:^5n gtasa A ii { ii 




148 


TIJE BBAKTJRATNaJS'ASI, 


i 

1^5TO--J3l:-^^^c!^-^aJalg^f^U^ jg^ > 

'Wc# (15, II 

* I have 6ha8 prepnved wtlli much Uboat* the Blinktiratnavali. I hive also 
aupplied a commentary deai^jnaled the “ K&utimhld 

Whatever faalte o£ omieHtott and comtuiestou ihat have occntrod in this com* 
position— in this eulogy o£ X Siiilhurn (V»stTinl, let good men forgive the fickleness 
of one v 7 ho coveted the ]oy aiising out of hie own otringiog (the Gems of the Keck* 
lace of Devotion 

t In Kdsi in a temple of Viann eitnated near Viswanath, was composed the 
Bhaktiratnftvalt along with its commentary the KantirafilA. 

t It was fimshed m the year 1555 of the Saka year in the month of FAIgana on 
Taesday, the second day of the htight fortnight. 

^ Thio sloka is not given in the mauusciipt whioli bears date of Samvat 1699 , 
aOC the couplets that follow. 

, In the Sid Hue of the couplet maybe differently 
Interpreted and may have a reference (o the commentary of the Biiagavata by the 
celebrated Sridhara Swdiml, In preparing a separate commentary Visnupuii 
oBers an apology to the learned public for snch faulte of omiBsion knd commission 
no may have oconrced in the new oonimeutary. 

1* !£ho above statement ao to when and whore the woik was composed 
Ib not to be reckoned as couoluaive evidence. The two couplets embodying this 
deolartion are not found lu all 'manusctipts. Perhaps they are the statement of a 
copyist as giving the date and place of the copy he had transoribed. The learned 
Editora of the excellent Oalontta edition believe that Yjspupnii lived long before 
feha date given above. 


THE ENJJ. 


! 



Alphabetical Index to the Verses 


PiOE 

asm arfsuft gt fl 

afs9^s!t 117 

a g m i ^ qat sima 07 

^ pRijw 8 

sm amaat !5jm, 17 

aanr aisp^ja 123 

aarat g g a ' ^ aa . so 

aqifa^Va ^i*a^g ^ 
a«nPi ft 5rf»rea 103 

awtaft mtRiPr^mam lo 

afta itnmmt 07 

a»ft finjftr aa araatfama 13 
\aPifanTamam 11 

aw f? orRiar awi • GO 

anrot feuawiia 103 

a»fta 5<piS3twpif 80 

aa saa<!aaa 133 

aa fft 07 

ara^aa a aft^wia si, 148 
afaajfat qswiaaife'aat 114 

aftawafta^ ffta% 70 

aitawiioai^ 06 

as ^ aa a^«q;a 69 

ait ?spaifew5wrotaa 64 

ait-awaa^ aaa 180 

ast^ats?iiar 112 

abasia aaasrw^ 143 

ast aa saaatiat atlaw; 104 

agt aa a»^iw sto 48 

ait aa simijst wsa 39 



Fioe 

asai^arastait {ftfig 


faaatar 

so 

aicBinai^a gaat 

43 

ataw arefti atn 

94 

aigsda ft 

- 81 

aiaragt aajjitaiiam 

30 

ar5?a ft aRiaaraa^rcfftss 

120 

sftf jarffttn ftajt 

07 

5fa aim fawafaftiwara 

02 

sea cbftiaift afaaaerrc 

111 

seaagatfsjr asrafrg?ca 

132 

sifta agaERT ?trr 

158 

s«tfea^aeaaw a^ereaat 
sa ^a.etftas 

03 ' 

14 

se ^aatasf 

33 

wwtmwpff await 3 5 air 

70 

aetgaigarwaitaf 

06 

awfwFawnmiai 

06 

amaaRmaFaBmita 5 wt 

lOl 

wenaiftafttftif^ 

21 

osttaigataai^ 

112 

aeitam ang^afttawaj 

113 

"^aa Btatfttiaa 

97 

ataa![^ faea 

67 

aa isa^RT awi. 

110 

aa featitaaftt 

185 

aa wa iftafea waaifftfjft 

56 

aa aa aaa ast wg^^ 

140 

aa ftrgsa gf^iat aaaeaa ft 

103 

asf Mtsftaaai aaa 

146 

•w ar ^^aatsaamf 

lop, 



( iso ) 


Page. 

ntsf ••• 

oc^ f| ^T^tJ •** 24 

ac^^^rq: w^rrf^srsj: ••• 44 

• • • 147 

5K ^C?3|cr ^fc3xR* ••• 107 

^ •A 

^•» •** 144 

^55 ^crr ^5ffTdW5T^aRT *- 5 

^!ST fsm( *•• 37 

••• 89 

Sfif^ OTIsWfeqt?!? — 108 

... 109 

... 121 

5praj ... 71 

5fim«c(fr? *•* 128 

^’srr 32,139 

f^ f^;T*s?icr 138 

o 

f% ^Cff ••• 142 

.. .59 


. 10.9 

357^^5 125 
... 42 

... 24 

nm ^5£iTqf ' • 80 

.. 91 

^c£r^^q(¥4t5fq . 131 

5 5Ct5?f?f^55gTJt . 129 

^ 5fTTr^gr5Rr?ti .. 79 

... 23 

... 133 

«Fsr ^ 5 * WT ... 103 
«i%m g'«TW3^r¥r=srrc . 29 

'. 137 

... 108 

STl^f^cT ^ ag ;|5 ’ ... 107 


* 

Page, 

^ ^E^Tcrm ST ^ 63 


97 


72 

^•j^ifirg^rr^rnr 

104 

mk 37t^^ 

35 

f^'cr^^r*T!ri??tx?i k 

138 

f^sr g-^fecrJTtr^ffTcrm^TiTfsir 

20 

3-fe;irTU?t?f’:^wpTT ... 

146 

T^5ii?JT>'fn:f^mcncJi^r?TfSo^ • • • 

90 

3T«T2ikr — 

IG 

cTSTF^f^rat ^tr^TtSTfJT ... 

1 

fsjiir !?i ^Tn^|3?3I?iw ... 

74 

f^gr BiS’osrrPt m 

107 


75 

mn ..• 

81 

5rR§tTT5raxR rj 

131 

^?5rlHg3[^^?^l 5?WBr .. 

78 

cT cc^ 5i^r^?5r; 

50 , 

cf ?f! 

116 

^ ?nq;siraH,5ifa?i?3 ... 

86 

cr?i 

17 


21 

¥!{%5^Tl;fT 

44 

HcT ¥1*1^3; 

1 ^ 

49. 

1 

65 

f«i>^jr qff^^cTs ... 

95 

i cf^s^i^j'TT 

136 


39 

5rr5!i5T .. 

84 

cr^^§ ^ STTST ^ ?^R:¥n«Tt 

125 


6 

?r|sr w sTqf 5?^* 

93 

^rf*^^sTt* sTnerT^rf^c^^ — 

94 

^B^i^Rijenrcisrsf ... 

15 

!T 3rlsrffcT 

81 ‘ 

^ cf^ ^?r5fT^^ ' — 

90 


'( 161 ') 


TO f^fSET HSRt 

a^g^q t-iIcTO t nasi 
a’W^g^ag^WBmfe'ft 
awi^afro^ watsR 
swi^toIhwito. 
aTO?! fTOafagw 
aTOR(»Ha:wir gaw 
a?Jii^ra>TOW5aTO 
awi'^rta ssifoti 


afta^ aTOrnrfeaien^al 
afta-jnpgiafhn a^fvrerfta 
ai^:Dtga a)sawrj q > 
aiJin«i«urer^ fagsRC g^st 
ania><!itRi?a8ia>^ 
araq nBRifrai js^fa 
ara^iffaq^Si 
arRfinRpi 

(RiaRiai 
gaaia atajpr 
a ta fa gq fofla q IavE aPTt 
TO TOtreafaatr faaal^a 
& arsftas^f^r 
if aaiTO agsSg 
TORiifetj qf g 
Sai firacar a^wr 
SamBti.aiERttfa^Eg 
#?^aiaiTO^5arc 
^^aTOtnft q»r^ 

E»raar araq TOairiaa 
Eaapifaf sif^ qft'jf 
ETOT^snarf^ia^Ra'aifta 
TO #aar s«:|iTr agaf 
qromaafifa ’ < ', 


PiOB 

S8 

16 

118 

SB 

85 

120 

105 

87 

70 

73 

183 

44 

29 

87 

82 

127 

146 

89 

131 

138 

49 

47 

42 

60 

6 « 

109 

06 

62 

61 

IJ 

97 

ISO 

127 

124 

84 

29 


' ^ Pagb 

goarasTTOff 40 

IeWI argaf ^ 62 

fBifaBTO afgatagasa ' 4 

SIT a7rfff,ga5i siaaiaqag, 119 
^aefBifaa asar 137 

^agaiagair Prwm ^43 

^ar gisfaifiaiH. 11 

^*gn agaft ai 121 

ata Hca^a i^t 37 

a»a ^igrpi ^ar 77 

aiawwa gfit atsfafer 141 

a aifif^aafarti waaS 13 

a «taas-a aa aigigaaia: 128 

a r«%g.mvnrr aln 44 

aa'aganaj^a aftaa 20 

aaaaaiftigfaa 42 

a S fag* artwafir ft faaj 23 

a aia a aaf asat 25 

a at«ga a ar ait^taa 128 

a ata:?® a "a ansa»fta 44 

afatfi^Gftaa'eiaiftfa 97 

a an:ft«3a a ata^Riaja liV 

a BTOI arac^aftBaa 31 

a artift dijf ga i a g g a^ 113 

a a*aai«tTO>iar 44 

a TO waanatfa 74 

a aajiaiatgaata&Br 124 

a aaEafWaa^ g^agil 84 

a <laaft at ataf 62 

a aa TOfiar TOiman 128 

a taiaaft at ahit 36 

^ saga nliiiaat 24 

aaa awfatat 108 

a oroaift alafft 69 

atjai^atara ' 47 



( m ) 


5R?f^f?f5rfv:j^?cT^qL 
siTcSlf^ fg?T?pfcqf«T H 

5ti?cr gfi^T 

STIfq cT^: ' 

5!I5?T5I TT^^TEfcr: 

5n?5tsg(?^g)Rt^c??f 
5«4 ^ 

5fw ^rrt ^otr: 
?ira55?5’’t^r. 

5fm 

f^?m=5?rr5Tt^^??^'tn3;5n 

^ t^5T ffr^^ 

^5f F^5^?T?i^g^ JTTq^r ^ 
51 5fi5n 

H^RIcJTcTT 

Jlt|: 

Isrr^^ c5r^t?ur^^^f¥i.* 
^cJRs v(^m f^rsr^Tvi 

T wmvi 

^’SJI ^^WRT^f5Tiq[^ 

3q?i: 

nf^oi gtx?J 

'in^5j ^ ^^rr^^Ffr: 

^ «!n^cr ?^^?ff^r^ 
5‘J?’5R?Tfqixf 


Page. 
... GO 
.. 101 
... 78 
... 8i 
... 110 
.. 16 
... 14 
... 101 
... 30 
... f28 
... 22 
... 25 
... 67 ! 

... 6 j 
... 118 ' 
... C6 
... 80 
... 91 
... 134 
... 28 
... 1^ 
... 97 
... 44 
... 54 
... 134 
... 55 
.. 88 
... 43 
... 70 
.. 97 
... 136 
... 12 
. 68 
. . 85 
. . 77 
. 36 


si5n5i?ri =^5rV^?r?a 
nNr«: 

TtH^JTSR ’TtST 
nR(!j ?rf^ 5f i7^rcT5rti?f 

flcT? vimv 

^TRSEl? TO 
515751 

¥11x5* si5r5c?T csrf^f^ 

¥!feqm5r jTTir^ 

?n^‘‘ 


5f?^^:^?THmr?r557r 
5?Hr?cr ^ «r£iT 



¥r3T5c5[53r c^rnRRT oisr m^:i^ 
m feJ7\5rrf«f^^.’ 


TTfrmm 

¥i?ri'T5r5?? ^^it ¥Rci 

mv ^ »7srF.^'T3%5:’ 
^JfTTSTT ^5f=5tRcf 

5nT' ir5r5rf^^ 

■RfkH ^5% m 

JTc^srat XTcflcI?^ 


fi^cs^qr: ^«rf ^r: 
TTfr^t 5tJ 

W55(3^cI55[3{^^^ 

?r5^fT^sr 

Tlr^ vq^^tfflgr^fj^CRrxT: 

¥F^5:g^T53: 

5R3?I?Il3Tl^q 51^ " 


Page,' 
... 114 
... 28 
... 95 
... 79 
...' 49 
102 
... 62 
... 35 
... 144 
... 104 
... 50 
... 10 
... 37 
... 36 
... 61 
..» 43 
... 116 
... 33 
... 58 
... 58 
... 74 
... 61 
.. 116 
... 3 

... 22 
... 121 
•.. 67 
... 49 
... 71 
... 106 
... 129 
... 26 
... 115 
..>. 136 
.. 57 
... 31 


163 ' 


t 

Faqs 


49 

HwWaTcwr Hw, 

117 

sig ^isrdfsiOTt 

71 

^ 5!ii5t»ihr - - . 

133 

JT^f cjtefwstwwif 

140 

WE^t>i8Eroii^;^g^ 

53 

>nnin:?ta3TsRra»pgS 

64 


63 

gaqigS'itt*^ - 

• 34 

gg^ahsjnsit 

8 

g«nfiroar awe^aswir 

98 


118 

fltiwn<it ^f»i 

101 

*I 3^ ^^151 

34 


17 

sr ?5r^ittraftr5ni^ 

4 

>»gK*iifiitisiaiw» ° 1 

44 

WWt<!R., " 

2 

sRin^AhwOTl ?rf?reig. 

136 

»Rir^««nit 

47 


134 

JTsrsntnwi 

53 

Rfa (i»(<.<UH. 

143 

ii5?!i^'OTr gsET -fc r 

63 

JigairsBsiflc, f5r3Rft«il»i?g. 

' 66 

’TOtflRg, ^nicW 

98 

Ji«nfiT gafJract^^ 

86 

stwtftpJi Iwraw 

88 

»iiit 

132 

»im ^imOTtwftgw^ 

72 

q'snft^nfsuaraiwi. 

132 

wt llfet fej^ srPir 

116 

ipit'TWlJIllIR’J 

68 

»i?i 

40 

nfiigst 

66 

qwH3ife«wfti^ 

-824 



Paob 

q^nHsflraj^ig 

' , lS7i 

r • 

10 

«EO %3' gw s(p 4 ^ r^' ' 

86 

jrawi ^<t3jqita?n^ 

^ 92' 

Sf & <f WWff 1 

1-108 

jrpiifiraufl^e^i.g»jsr) 

1 111 

’S'HfHfflr 5<a^finng“ 

60 


1 ^1 96 

*iR^«ra?^qf%as5n 

18 

»n 

106 

msirewra ^ nsRt 

' 32 


73 

utifiE 

. ,71 

«iT«it wmin^cr ^ 

as 


as 

^ ^lOTRgatimroinc > 

67 


40 

*>g®rafTf^j5i 

.1 


5S 

^ 0 WIWIHt!liI 

,33 

0’Tr MWt’uif’isi 

48 

01 ^ 

110 

ig<r(!( iraTtn it iii& , 

66 


■ 41 

iw ^i5w <i?ra 

24 

5 iiwr suit gwantt aiaa 

126 

Birfw5 tisialPRi 

89 

wii^i ^aiifqr 

- 38 

an^ faat csrg^^siatipa 

86 

S 8i^ attiiir 

- 74 

aiiiiut^i s?3& a^ 

•*• 88 

a^aai-aiif 

9 

argta<rej wi 

At 9 

aaaRraf% 

~ 32 

at^0 aaafa aflsala 

- 7 

faaidamniilHOaSal 

« 114 



( 154 ) 


Page. 
... 62 
. -124 

■■• 126 
... 88 
^ ... 74 


?[: ... 40 


^wrq:«rrqf5(?=^Tf , •• 119 

^cr?ft ... 110 

fe^5?l iEJa^ffTRKqS^ ... 14 

l^q ^ • . 117 

s?rrf^ ••• 62 

^®iTC^5TOTt5rt<W!l?t ••• 116 

f^r ... i43 

76 

^ 3 cT^35« -. 79 

9im^i ... 72 

»Z<r^?r(q[ , 77 

. . 73 

«Tiqf^ Wcq5flft^?3pa- 69 
«W?!f ^«%P ... 67 

«Rr«5 ... 69 

3 

f«’EOT3=^c5i1f ... 41" 

s^cT- ^^lf%cft «rr5r: ... 70 

5Jcr«q 5%T ... 90 

... 28 
.. 81 

^ ^ .N 

^ JTf ... 86 

^ I q%: ••. 19 


^ 1 5‘5rf *id vitS 

Page. 

6 

?r 1 ?55qrr^r^(^f?4t.‘ — 

68 


36 


87 

... 

112 

^^lT55m^ 5fTWw?i!tT.’ 

72 


51 

••• 

46 

37f&3‘?!JT ... 

7 

f^jacqf§?fff f»i^ 

20 

H51 ?ft?f 

65 

f|[ t&«?r. 

62 


46 


41 

ftjafpcT 'sr^Tq . ... 

66 

OTTfwcTT ^ ^.. 

126 


97 “ 

^T ^r^nrar cr55?i /••• 

76 

^lic^ m 

97 

m'Sl^ flTTf^fr.* ^TfcTT 

61 


67 

fsrni^T ... 

146 


62 

igd^igd srd 

19 


106 


97 

«5TcrJ 

130 


27 


18 



‘'A' 


ADDITIONS AJi D COUkMCTlODS 


i»itgo 

Line 

for 

Head 

6 

41 

HiQdo 

Hindus 

7 

39 

^ more ^ 

made 

»> 

43 ‘ 

the nliove 

above ^ 

49 

BagliQTanaa 

(verse 15 2flrdtr ) 

la 

18 

in detennirnd 

18 determined 

ii 

19 

in aoroptions 

in sonptiona 

11 

2 

"rnTtmavni 

vfvsr 

12 

8 


eOTTfr 

19 

13 




16 


HWt> 

20 

3 

uotable 

notable 

21 

16 

Blranva Katana 

Utrtttiyn Ka«ipu 

» 

28 

Lad 

Lord 

24 

la 

vm 


» 

26 



25 

14 

TIH 2 

vu 7 

29 

to 

•rrrrooff 

WTCTO^r 

V % 

ao 

irenwt 


30 

11 


ftrnfiT # 

1 

12 

<»?««> 


k aa 

■* 44 

4 

w^re- 

vrfT 

18 

niw 


48 

10 




34 

marriages relised to its » 

inon lages at e realised to ibeir 

58 

30 

deor 

door 

55 

20 

fWta 


50 

10 

12 

41 


14 

wftsr 

orSt ^ 

61 

1 

42 (x 48 IJI) 

41 (X 48 31) 

62 

3, 

predominated 

predominated 

64 

45 

refage 

take lefuge 

70 

13 

fnco 

feot 

72 

23 


ui?r 

5 

^nWTT 

lenrar 

i> 

28 

enters heart 

enters the heart 

74 

10 

wisnc^r 

vrT»*iw 

78 

7 

does 

do 

79 

86 

10 

16 

lok^ka 

iak«aka 

>« 

17 

Hisi son 

Risi 8 son 

88 

13 

^ fkviTwr 


89 

13 

Wflf- 

*rw 

103 

35 

placed 

graced 

109 

11 

desir 

de ire 


156 


Page. 

Line. 

Por. 


Bead, 

‘109 

11 

siging 

4 «• 

singing. - 

110 

2 




26 



in umm 

116 

4 


« • » 


117 

27 

m his soul ... 

• • • 

within his soul. 

118 

8 

self in much ... 

• •• 

self much. 

119 - 

, 27 




123 

21 

mftrHt 

• • • 

nriRw: 


32 

Thy influence 

• * • 

Thy Mfi-y fi- (mysterioui?^'*' 

121 

1 



fHffknr (v) fm 

125 

14 


• •• 

?l^«¥ n 5pT . * 


27 




127 

4 . 

back to NiLrayana 

• • % 

back upon NArayana. , \ 

135 

12 

remorse 

• « • 

regret. t' 

thee — thou who. 

144: 

32 

thee thou — yt\\o 

• ••• 

31 

53 

tne same) suffering 
crease 

no in- 

the same, and not subjeoi 
to changes o£ growth and 
decay. **■ 

145 

2 

^«rT 

••• 

IF nrT 

7) 

9 

, 0 tortunat 

••• 

oh 1 fortunate. 

147 

27 

e£ „« 


o£. 




