===== Internet Archive OCR: Rajagopalachariar, T. (1917) '01 The Pancharatra and Vaishnava Daily Life (Jan 1917)' in Vedanta Kesari (The Lion of Vedant_djvu.txt =====

01 THE PANCHARATRA AND 
VAISHNAVA DAILY LIFE (Jan 
1917) 


Professor T. Rajagopalachariar, M.A., B.L. 


The Pancharatra Agama of the Vaishnavas forms an important branch of the Tantra literature 
of India. In addition to the Srutis Smritis, Itihasas, and Puranas, each of which constitutes an 
extensive literature by itself, we have a general Tantra literature, in five known forms, the 
Boudha, the Jaina, the Sakta, the Saiva and the Pancharatra. These are all known as Agamas, 
perhaps literally additions, as distinguished from the Vedic literature and the others 
mentioned before which are directly based on the Vedic. The orthodox theory is that the 
Vedic precepts and directions are amplified, explained, and illustrated by the Smritis and 
Puranas including the Itihasas, and that there could be no possible conflict between them. 
Any apparent conflict has to be explained by established rules of exegetics applicable to the 
Vedic literature itself and detailed in the Mimamsas. In this article | propose to say 
something about one of these Agamas, namely the Pancharatra system. 


It is difficult to state precisely when the Pancharatra Agamas came into existence. Such a 
question is utterly repugnant to the belief of the Vaishnavite who holds the Agamas to have 
been revealed by Bhagavan Narayana Himself. Recent researches have merely tried to fix the 
later limits of this literature, and no adequate material is available for fixing any definite 
earlier limit. Of course this Agama, like the others, presupposes the Vedas and the 
Upanishads, at least the earlier of them. It may also be surmised that it is prior to Patanjali, 
(150 B.C.) and Panini (4th cent. B.C.). An inscription of the 2nd century B.C. has been 
discovered which refers to the worship of Vasudeva and Samkarshana, two of the four forms 
of Narayana, called His Vyuha forms. It is clear that the literature inculcating this worship 
must be some centuries earlier than the inscription referred to. In the Mahabharata, the 
Pancharatra is described as a highly respected authority. We read in the Mahabharata, 
Santiparva, ch. 348 (Kumbh. Edn.) 


ad Heluiadagy aqunteaa| 
Gea dleda TARA Faller | 
ARTF ALS MAA Fat: | 


Narada recited (in the Badari Asrama) this great Upanishad, called the Pancharatra, sung 
directly by Narayana, and constituting the essence of the four Vedas, and the Sankhya, and 
Yoga systems. Again (ch. 359) : 


WRIA HAT Th ALAN: KAA 


ad Acealhe ANAT | 
MAHA HTHela MATA II 
Adelle Fal Sut Aare FAT | 
aah FINA: stqehaisad FAT tl 


Also, (ch. 353): 


The Narayaniya of the Santi Parva in which these texts occur, is a story of Narada’s 
exploration of the Sweta Dwipa (the white island), the abode of Narayana, where all the 
residents were Ekantins, i.e., worshippers of Vishnu only. Narada, according to the story, gets 
a view of Bhagavan Narayana, Who instructs him in the truths of His nature, His fourfold 
forms of Vasudeva, Samkarshana, Pradyumna, and Anirudha, and finally teaches him the 
extensive Pancharatra. 


Modern scholars consider that there have been three streams of worship that have 
culminated in the modern Vaishnavism, the ancient Vedic worship of Narayana or Vishnu, the 
worship of Vasudeva and the Vyuhas taught in the Pancharatra, and the so- called Krishna- 
cult, i.e., the deification and identification of Krishna the Shepherd-King with Vasudeva and 
Narayana of the two previous cults. It is no doubt true that Vishnu is a Rig-Vedic God, as 
there are a few suktas referring to him. 


It has to be remembered that the Pancharatra or Bhagavata system is also called the 
Satwata, i.e., connected with the family of Satwata of which Sri Krishna was a descendant. 
This system must therefore have been antecedent to the time of Sri Krishna Himself, and it 
could not be said that the Samkarshana of the system was derived from the name 
Samkarshana of Balarama, Krishna’s brother. It is no doubt curious that there is absolutely no 
direct reference in the Bhagavad Gita to the Pancharatra or Bhagavata system. The name 
Vasudeva itself as the name of the supreme deity occurs once in the passage 


aged: Maia AACA GEoA: (VII-19) 


But this clearly refers to the speaker Himself as Supreme Being and Vasudeva as is obvious 


from the other passage 
qVilat argeaistey (x-37) 


and makes no reference to the Vasudeva of the Pancharatra system. There is no foundation, 
it seems to me, for the suggestion of scholars that the Bhagavad Gita is especially a 
Pancharatra text-book or that the writer was a Pancharatrin bent on extolling Sri Krishna as 


identical with Vasudeva of the Pancharatra. At the same time it would be rash to suppose 
that the Bhagavata doctrines were unknown to the author of Bhagavad Gita or that they 
originated later than the date of the composition of this work. There seems to be a studied 
attempt in the Bhagavad Gita to represent no sharp contrast of views in the matter of 
worship of deities other than Sri Krishna himself. There is only a general condemnation of the 
worship of inferior deities as being futile. The Sankhya and Yoga doctrines are presented as 
each commendable by itself though the attempt to bring them into line with the teaching of 
the Gita is successfully made in the earlier chapters. The only conclusion we can safely draw 
is that the Pancharatra system is of earlier date than the Mahabharata and the Bhagavad 
Gita whether these works are regarded as contemporaneous or as of different dates. 


The Pancharatra Samhitas are numerous, in fact they are said to number over 200. Several 
Samhitas have been printed, (1) Iswara, (2) Kapinjala, (3) Parasara, (4) Padma, (5) 
Bharadwaja, (6) Lakshmi, (7) Vishnutilaka, (8) Satwata, (9) Ahirbudhya. The last of these has 
been recently printed at Adyar and there is a separate introduction by Dr. Schrader. A very 
large number of these Samhitas are referred to and quoted from, in Sri Vedanta Desika’s 
Pancharatraraksha, chapter |. (A list of over 210 Samhitas is given in Dr. Schrader’s work to 
which | would refer the readers). The above work of Sri Vedanta Desika and the 
Agamapramanya of Sri Yamunacharya, an early Vaishnavite Acharya of the 10th century, and 
the Pancharatra Adhikarana, Brahma Sutras II. 2-39 to 42, and the commentaries of Sri 
Sankaracharya, and Ramanujacharya on these Sutras are the main sources of our knowledge 
of the nature and contents of the Pancharatra literature The first named work by the great 
scholar, poet, and philosopher, Sri Vedanta Desika, contemporary with Vidyaranya of 
Vijianagar fame, gives considerable information about the various Samhitas of this Tantra. 
Over 30 Samhitas are referred to by this author and it is apparent that he had access to many 
of these for he quotes from them. These are the Satwata, the Poushkara, the Jayakhya, 
which are called the three jewels as having emanated direct from the Deity, while the others 
were only inspired by Him, the Padma, the Kalottara, Parameshwara, Ahirbudhnya, 
Sanatkumara, the Srikara, the Padmodbhava, the Iswara, and the Naradiya. Others referred to 
by name only are the Bharadwaja, Chitrasikhandin, Jayottara, Satatapa, and several others. 
We learn from the same work that the Samhitas were classified in various ways; one 
classification was into four Siddhantas, the Agama, the Mantra, the Tantra and the 
Tantrantara. It has been said that the Agama Siddhanta is directed to salvation only, the 
others secure this as well as other fruits. Another classification either identical with or 
parallel to this is into Divya, Swayam Vyakta, Saidha, and Arsha, based on the historical origin 
of the shrines to which the several classes of works apply. Another classification is into 
Divya, Satwika, Rajasa, Tamasa, which mean those directly uttered by God, and those by 
Rishis in various degrees of enlightenment. A list is also given of the Samhitas, coming under 
each class for which | would refer the readers to the work itself. 


It may be mentioned that the Samhitas or many of them classify their topics into Gnanapada 
or section on knowledge, Yogapada or section on meditation Kriyapada or section on 


construction and establishment of images, and Charyapada or that about Samskaras. That 
the worship of images was long anterior to the age of the Bhagavat-Gita, the Bharata, and the 
Ramayana in their earliest forms must be considered as very probable in spite of what 
Western scholars may say to the contrary. It is again true that no clear reference to such 
matters is found in the Bhagavad Gita, though the verse (vii. 21) 


A at at at ad wR: seas | 
tea Carat Sat aaa frqarztEr II 


must be considered as referring not merely to faith and worship of Rama, Krishna, etc., the 
avatars, but also to various Bimbas or Pratimas established throughout the land. The 
references to Chaityasi and Ayatanas in the Ramayana and the Bharata in various places 
clearly indicate the worship of images as established in those times. The general rule in 
Panini (iv. 3. 95) prescribing certain terminations when “fh: or devotion is meant has an 
exception when the object of worship is Vasudeva or Arjuna (iv. 3. 98) in which case another 
termination is prescribed. This Sutra has been considered as referring to the worship of 
images of Vasudeva and Arjuna, though this is not absolutely necessary, as the context 
shows worship of various things and persons in the form of mere mental devotion. Similarly 
the preceding quotation from the Bhagavad Gita may be construed as referring not to images 
but to the usual sacrificial worship. And the verse (Bhagavad Gita xvii 4). 


ated Alcatel SAT AAA TST: | 
AAPM Aa sted AAA Se: I 


is similarly one of doubtful application to images, if strictly construed. But in all these verses, 
it is probable that there is an underlying reference to image-worship; and in any case we are 
not justified in assuming negatively that the method of image-worship was unknown in the 
days of the Gita or the Mahabharata. 


A keen controversy has arisen as to whether the Agamas are Vedic or Un-vedic. We can 
perhaps paraphrase the purport of this controversy by asking whether these systems 
originated among the Aryans or non-Aryans in Ancient India. With regard to some of the 
other Agamas, there seems to be evidence to show that the worship inculcated was 
practised among non-Aryan people, at least originally. The worship of Kali, Durga, Tara, Tarini, 
and other goddesses who are now considered to be various forms of Parvati, was probably 
prevalent originally among non-Aryan people and was gradually adopted by the Aryans. A 
similar inference is considered probable with regard to Bhagavata worship also. It is strongly 
asserted by the opponents of the Pancharatra that the Bhagavatas were Sudras or degraded 
Brahmins, that their worship was un-vedic, that they disregarded the Vedic Samskaras and 
substituted others in their places, that their doctrines as to the birth of jivas and of the mind 
from the Jiva or Samkarashana are opposed utterly to the Vedantic truths. Even 
Sankaracharya who accepted the Bhagavata doctrines as to the four Vyuhas and Vasudeva’'s 
being the Supreme Soul, considers that there are objectionable doctrines in the Pancharatra 
which Badarayana wants to refute. Sri Ramanuja, however following Yamunacharya, gives 
another construction of the Brahma Sutras referring to this matter, and holds that the system 


is Vaidic, and unopposed to the doctrines of Vedanta, and is entirely approved by Badarayana 
as the latter is Vyasa himself and cannot therefore be taken to contradict his own statements 
in the Bharata. It would seem that this construction of Sri Ramanuja, anticipated by 
Yamunacharaya, was not generally prevalent before the latter's time, as we are told that even 
Bhashyakara i.e., the Dravida Bhashyakara anterior to Sankara, did not take up this position 
but admitted that the Pancharatra contained some unvedic precepts. However this may be, it 
has been established by the later Vaishnavite Acharyas that the Pancharatras are entirely 
orthodox and sound, consistent with Vedas or at least equally authoritative and that the 
author of the Sutras really meant to approve of this system though he disapproved of the 
Pasupata and other Tantras. 


The essential doctrines of the Pancharatra are (1) its statement as to the Vyuha forms of the 
Deity, (2) its rules as to worship of images of these and other forms in temple worship, with 
other rules as to construction of temples, consecration of images, etc., (3) its regulation of 
Vaishnavite life by the prescription of the Tapa, (branding with the marks of Vishnu’s chakra 
and conch), the wearing of the Urdhvapundra, and the initiation in the secret mantra of 
Vishnu in some form, the Ashtakshara, the Dwadasakshara, the Hayagriva mantra, etc., and 
(4) the division of the day and night into five portions devoted to various purposes, all tending 
to worship, and contemplation of God Narayana. Vishnu’s form in Vaikuntha, His consorts Sri, 
Bhumi, and Nila, His eternally existing companions the Nitya Suris as Ananta, Garuda, and 
Vishwaksena, His four Vyuha forms and twelve other subsidiary forms, are all described in 
these Samhitas. His ornaments, weapons, etc, are all specified and are considered attendant 
Nityas who are His bodyguards and are also representatives of the various Tatwas 
recognised in the Sankhyan system. It may be mentioned that Kalidasa refers to this matter 


in his line 
fat: Aaatake: Tales | 

Raghu. x, 12. 
In fact the Raghuvamsa canto x verses 8 to 82, show unmistakably that Kalidasa like others 
of his countrymen was fully imbued with the doctrines of the Vaishnavite school, and his 
artistic power has presented to us a sublime conception of the abode of Vishnu devoid of all 
crude and discordant ideas. It cannot be said that the forms of Vishnu as detailed in the 
Pancharatra are actually worshipped now. Vasudeva is not the name of the deity in any 
prominent Vishnu shrine. Srinivasa, Ranganatha, Jagannadha, are the more usual names. 
Pradyumna and Anirudha are never worshipped and perhaps were never distinctly 
worshipped. Sankarshana as Balarama is said to be worshipped at Puri, but this is clearly not 
the worship of the second Vyuha form. But though the Vyuha worship is obsolete, there is no 
Vishnu shrine which does not contain the images of the consorts of God or that of His 
attendant Nityas, especially Ananta, Garuda, and Vishvaksena. The only additions to these in 
modern temples are the Alwars and Acharyas of Vaishnavism, and Hanuman who is deified 
and worshipped in many temples. 


With regard to the second matter mentioned above, the peculiar Samskaras of the 
Vaishnavite, these are matters of personal knowledge to all Vaishnavites, at least to the more 
orthodox. Without this initiation the Vaishnavite is not truly such and the details of the 
Samskaras are applied to the Sudras also who are thus brought within the pale of 
Vaishnavism. The earliest recognition of these Samskaras is found in the Bhishma Parva of 
the Mahabharata. (chap. 66. Kumbhak Edn.) 


TEM: araatea: WRAPATAT: | 
sreaaaeaa Mag: HAG Il 
AIRS PrAaed atel HaqEa aI 
arcad faftrareara wet: dawsata a: 1 


Various other texts by which these practices are supported are to be found in the 
Sachcharitraraksha of Sri Vedanta Desika. The very extensive Vridha Harita Smriti printed in 
the Smriti Samuchaya of the Poona Anandasrama series is entirely Vaishnavite in character 
and contains a full exposition of the Samskaras peculiar to the Vaishnavites. 


The last of the matters mentioned above, the division of the day into five parts for worship 
requires a few words. The Pancharatra lays down five periods of the day, which are 
respectively called the Abhigamana, Upadana, ljya, Swadhyaya, and Yoga periods. The 
Abhigamana is morning worship after daily purification ceremonies and extends to 
six nadikas from sunrise, i.e., the first fifth part of the day. The Upadana is the acquisition of 
daily needs for worship, and is assigned to the second period above. The ljya is the principal 
worship of the day and is done at midday or the third portion. The rest of the day after meals 
is to be devoted to Swadhyaya or study of the puranas, the Vedanta or other treatises 
teaching salvation to the Vaishnavite. The period of Yoga is after night meals and before 
sleep when quiet meditation of God is enjoined. This fivefold duty is incumbent on every 
Vaishnavite according to the Pancharatra and is adopted theoretically into the life of all 
Vaishnavites. The more orthodox who are not constrained by worldly duties or employment 
conform to it in all sincerity, but modern life obviously is too busy to allow due performance 
of Vedic, Smartic or Tantric duties of any kind. The faith of the people also in the 
compulsoriness of these duties is largely disappearing. 


There is no doubt that the Pancharatra Agama has deeply affected the Vaishnavite both in 
his philosophical and religious theories and in his practical life. Though the Vyuha worship is 
not very much in vogue now, it has helped to generalise the theory of Avatars, an essential 
part of Vaishnavism, by the establishment of the fivefold Avatar system, the Para, Vyuha, 
Vibhava, Harda, and Archa forms i.e., the supreme spiritual form in Vykuntha, the fourfold 
form of the Pancharatra, the Avatars proper as Rama, Krishna, the inner form in the heart of 


man, and the images throughout the land. The Vaishnava theory as to Avatars is contained in 


AAS AHA FATA AIS Fel 
Thld ARS ARaRATATAT Il 


the Prakriti in this verse is not, according to our interpretation the ordinary Triguna matter, but 
the superior and pure Satwa matter unalloyed, i.e., Iga. It is of this ethereal matter that all 
the forms of God, including the image-forms, are held to be composed. The metallic and 


the Gita verse— 


other images, whatever their original composition, are transformed, according to 
Vaishnavaism, into this {[gqaed by the presence of the deity in them, by the invisible effect of 
the pratishtha mantras and ceremonies at the time of their consecration. | he greatest of our 
saints have revelled in the worship of images, and have not looked upon it as an inferior 
discipline beneficial only to those who are not intellectually high. Says Sri Vedanta Desika in 
his Varadaraja Panchasat, 17. 


feraricentqereg, Fale 
ate Hilarwated dallereated I 


Qaknletea alereagarearat 
Gi aaa aaala aelorLt 


Again, the Bhagavata school has entirely succeeded in substituting genuine, mental worship 
for the elaborate sacrificial worship of the Karmakanda. Without discarding actually the 
efficacy of animal sacrifices, the Pancharatra has brought out the superior efficacy of 
contemplation of God's form, and attributes. This again is not new, but is founded on 
Upanishad and Gita statements. The Chandogya (Ill, 16 and 17) after describing how long life 
may be attained, by construing the periods of man’s life as the morning, midday, and the third 
savana or sacrifices, and meditating on the identity of Vasus, Rudras and Aditya, the deities 
of the sacrifices, with the Pranas or life-principles in the various stages, proceeds to state : 


a aahaarstea aq arate Bara al ste Sea: | 
Fe Tala Aerara AEHAA ATTA | 


FY Taaa TAY Ty AleeqaaAaLs Tafel 
AY DAM SAAT SSA AAT AAA A SST STITT At 


This spiritualisation of material precepts is a common feature of many Upanishads. It is 
interesting to note that the present text refers to Ghora Angirasa as the preceptor and 
Krishna Devaki-Putra as the pupil, who on getting the instruction became sfture or 
‘thirstless. Whether the Devaki-Putra, here is Bhagavan Krishna or some namesake of His of 
an earlier time may be a matter of doubt. But the passage illustrates the reversion to simple 
heart-worship permeating actual life from one of endless ceremonialism. The Gita embodies 
the same idea in the well-known verse (IV. 33.) 


HAle FAAATSMsaleTASI: WAT | 
Ted BAAS TWA sta VATA | 


This Vedantic theory saturated the Bhagavata school and practically supplanted the ardour in 
the vast sacrificial system, which was till then the ruling employment of Srotriyas in the land. 
No doubt our later Acharyas, Sri Ramanuja and Sri Vedanta Desika, have explained the 
subordination of Karma on the principle that all Karma performed without attachment is 
worship of God. This again is supported by the Gita Text: (XVIII. 46). 


TaaHOT amas fae feat Ara: | 


Another important point in which the Pancharatra has affected Vaishnava life is the doctrine 
of prapatti or complete self-surrender as a sufficient homage ensuring salvation. This theory 
of prapatti again is indicated by the basic texts of the Upanishads, and the Gita. Says the 
Swetaswatara Upanishad : (VI. 18.) 


A reat feaanfa ga at 8 aatar sfeonfa aay 
da damargfearat Wage AoA A I 


And the Gita in its crowning verse (ch. XVIII) inculcating the greatest secret of 


all, TAIT says: 
aA AAAS ATA At AST | 
HE A TAMPA eae Ar BA: tt 


And just before this we read: 


SR: Taal Cease fersia | 
BAA Beate Fareed AAT I 
AA ARGt TSS TATA AAT Il 


But it is the Pancharatra that has elaborated this theory of self surrender and has 
supplemented it by the elevation of Lakshmi or the consort of God as the mediator, Yeuatx 
This is but the necessary expedient for reconciling the strict justice of God with the 
aspirations after release by the sinner. God’s Nigraha or desire for meting out deserved 
punishment is modified by the intercession of Lakshmi who is feqaatdPaet i.e., who never 
knows what it is to punish, i.e., is all mercy and kindness. As Sri Vedanta Desika says, 


ata HAlehse Tel Haat Ara: | 
POSTER Hs AAT Il 


The nature and attributes of Goddess Lakshmi and her place in the work of the Almighty are 
described fully in the Pancharatra and are indicated also in the Vishnu Purana. After praising 
the Goddess in words approaching the grandeur of the Upanishads themselves, in the verse 


(I. 9-110) 
AAA Haaren Tera F AaeTA | 
aTcaeen a ala of afar it 


Indra, in the Vishnu Purana, proceeds (I. 9-116.) 


of Ald Gdatarat caeat |ft:frar 
Sa As SHAT ATL It 


The author adds the well-known Verse (I. 9-144) 


TATA HAHA SAAT POTS | 
HAZ AMaracy, peor TATeKT tt 


And the Vedic Suktas which go by the names of Sri Sukta, Sradha Sukta, Medha Sukta, and 
Aditi Sukta, in addition to the references in the better known Upanishads like the Taittiriya 
and the Pancharatra Samhitas named Hiranyagarbha, Kashyapa, Mankana and Dhanada, are 
quoted by Sri Vedanta Desika as authorities for the Hindu theory of mediation embodied in 
the conception of Goddess Lakshmi. The mediator, for us, like the Son of God for Christians, 
is part and parcel of God Himself, but does not mediate once for all for all humanity nor by 
Her undergoing any suffering, as in the Christian Crucification, but is to be specially invoked 
by each mortal, when he reaches the state of mind which leads to self surrender or prapatti. 
Lakshmi Prapatti is a necessary prelude to Bhagavat Prapatti in our system, and has been so 
elaborated by all our Acharyas from Yamunacharya downwards. 


(To be continued) 


