===== Internet Archive OCR: thephilosophyofr00hebb_djvu.txt =====

Snatott  llttteraitg 
(EflUege  of  Eiberal  Arts 
Htbrarg 

The  Gift  of.  .."IheL....f\.uthor  

UrisTa»TS> 


Ideal 
Double  Reversible 

Manuscript  Cover 
patented  Nov.  15.  1898 
Manufactured  by 
Adams,  Cushlng  &  Foster 


28-7 


i 


i 


BOSTON  UNIVERSITY 


GRADUATE  SCHOOL 


Thesis 


THE  PHILOSOPHY  0?  RAMAN UJ A  "7ITH  SPECIAL  REFERENCE 
TO  HIS  THEORY  OF  THE  SELF 


Submitted  "by 
Harold  Willis  HeWblethwaite 

►  i 

(A.B.,  Syracuse,  1923) 


In  partial  fulfilment  of  requirements  for 


the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts 


1926 


BOSTON  UNIVERSITY 
COLLEGE  OF  LIBERAL  ARTS 
LIBRARY 


A.M.  »W 

The  Philosophy  of  Ramanuja  with  Special  Reference 
To  His  Theory  of  the  Self 

Page 

A    Reasons  for  selecting  Ramanuja  for  study   1 

1  Represents  a  period  of  change  in  Hindu  thought....  2 
a    Sankara  (788-850  A.D.)   in  his  "Advaita"  taught 

a  strict  impersonal  monism    2 

b    Ramanuja  set  up  a  theory  called  "Visishtadvaita , " 
or  qualified  monism   2 

2  Ramanuja' s  views  rested  upon  an  old  and  influential 

tradition   2 

a    Others  had  attempted  to  formulate  in  a  systematic 
way  the  doctrines  of  the  Bhagavata  or  Pancaratra 

faith   3 

b    Vaisnavism  "begins  with  the  period  of  the  Bhagavad- 

gita  (about  1  A.D. )  3 

c    The  above  give  evidences  that,  while  he  made  a 

definite  contribution  to  theistic  ideas  as  held  by 
the  sect,  he  was  a  natural  outcome  of  what  had  gone 

before   5 

d    Hence,  a  knowledge  of  Ramanuja  and  his  work  is  im- 
portant for  an  understanding  of  the  progress  of 

Hindu  thought   6 

B    Development  of  religious  and  philosophical  thought  up  to 

Ramanuja' s  time   6 

1  Very  earliest  periods    7 

a    2000  B.G   7 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2013 


http://archive.org/details/thephilosophyofrOOhebb 


2 


Page 

(1)  Earliest  Vedic  hymns  (Rig  Veda)   8 

(2)  Period  of  the  Brahmanas   9 

b    600  B.C.,  Earliest  Upanisads   11 

2  Period  from  600  B.C.  to  the  Bhagavadgita   12 

a    Mahavira  (599-527  B.C.)   13 

lb    Gautama  Buddha  (563-483  B.C.)   14 

c     The  Sutras  (500-200  B.C.)   15 

d    Period  of  the  Ramayana  and  Mahabharata  (400  B.C. 

to  400  A.D. )   18 

e    Bhagavadgita  (100  B.C.  to  100  A.D.)   18 

3  Prom  the  Bhagavadgita  to  Ramanuja   21 

a    Period  of  the  Puranas  ( 500  A.D.)   21 

b    Sankaracarya  (788-850  A.D.)    21 

c    Manikka-vasagar    10th  and  11th  centuries   24 

C    Place  left  for  an  appreciation  of  the  self  in  most  of 

India's  historic  religions   26 

1  In  the  Rig  Veda   26 

2  In  the  Brahmanas   27 

3  In  the  Upanisads   27 

4  Within  Buddhism    27 

5  In  the  Bhagavadgita   28 

D    The  contribution  made  by  Ramanuja  (1017-1137  A.D.)....  28 

1  The  revolt  against  Sankara's  "Advaita"    29 

2  Ramanuja' s  theory  of  "Visishtadvaita"    32 

a    Individual  souls  are  not  essentially  one  with  the 


Page 


(1)  The  essence  of  the  self   35 

(2)  Its  source  found  in  God   36 

(3)  Self  realization  ( satyakamatva)  one  of  the 
experiences  of  the  human  soul   37 

(4)  The  realization  of  self  in  present  and  fu- 
ture life   37 

(5)  Means  of  attaining  salvation   41 

(6)  His  theories  as  compared  with  modern  con- 
ceptions  43 

The  place  of  the  Supreme  in  Ramanuja1 s  system..  43 

(1)  He  is  the  source  of  individual  souls    43 

(2)  Infinite  in  degree   45 

(3)  Is  not  purely  aVstract   46 

(4)  Posse-ses  real  qualities  of  goodness   46 

(5)  Is  omnipresent,  omnipotent  and  personal....  46 

(6)  The  five  modes  of  God's  existence   47 

He  excels  other  thinkers  of  his  time   48 

(l)  He  emphasized  devotion  to  a  personal  God 

(this  opened  the  way    for  the  common  people; 
at  least  made  an  appeal  to  them)   48 


(2)  This  is  a  great  contrast  to  others  of  his 
time  (the  followers  of  Sankara)  who  denied 
the  personality  of  God  and  indicated  that 
the  great  accomplishment  for  man  should  be 
freedom  from  transmigration  and  the  attain- 
ment of  impersonality   48 


Page 


E    Influence  of  his  life  and  teaching   49 

1  His  influence  on  the  Bhagavata  religion   49 

2  His  influence  on  the  bhakti  faith   50 

3  His  influence  upon  the  life  of  the  people   50 

F    Summary   51 

1  Ramanuja  the  outcome  of  a  long  period  of  develop- 
ment in  Hindu  thought   51 

a    The  Vedic  contribution   52 

b    The  contribution  of  the  Brahman  as   52 

c    The  Uprmisads   52 

d     The  period  from  600  B.C.   to  the  Shagavadgita.  52 

e    From  the  Shagavadgita  to  Ramanuja   52 

2  Ramanuja' s  contribution  was  most  valuable   53 

a    The  reality  of  the  individual  soul  was  stres- 
sed   53 

b    There  was  a  new  emphasis  on  the  personality 

of  God   53 

c    God  possesses  qualities  of  goodness  as  op- 
posed to  the  old  idea  of  disinterest   53 

3  The  value  of  Ramanuja' s  contribution   54 

a    It  met  a  need  of  his  day   54 

b    There  was,  however,   still  room  for  progress..  54 

(1)  The  impact  of  Hindu  superstition  made  it- 
self felt   54 

(2)  Ramanuja  never  entirely  broke  away  from 
the  old  religious  systems,  hence  many  e- 
vils  remained   54 


1 


The  Philosophy  of  Ramanuja  with  Special  Reference 
To  His  Theory  of  the  Self 

A  Reasons  for  selecting  Ramanuja  for  study 
The  great  philosopher  and  theologian  of  India  during 
the  twelfth  century  was  Ramanuja  of  Sriperumbudur. Thou- 
sands of  people  in  India  are  familiar  with  his  name,  ad- 
here to  the  faith  he  founded  and  revere  him  as  a  saint. 
But  this  is  not  all.  He  stands  out  in  the  minds    of  the 
students  of  philosophy,  both  in  India  and  Europe,  as 
having  made  a  great  contribution  to  the  learning  of  In- 
dia and  as  being  well  worth    the  consideration    of  the 
students  of  the  West.  But,  despite  this  almost  univer- 
sal recognition  of  his  worth  on  the  part  of  the  author- 
ities, we  are  surprised  to  find  that  the  literature  pub- 
lished about  him,  at  least  in  the  English  language,  is 
very  meager.     Our  histories  of    religion    mention  him 
briefly.  Studies  in  the  ethical  and  theistic  tendencies 
of  Hindu  thought  mention  him  as  a  great    reformer,  but 
universally  deal  with  him  briefly.  Many  of  the  encyclo- 
pedias do  not  even  give  his  name,      whether  English, 
American,  German  or  French,     and  those  that    do,  aside 
from  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  and  the  Encyclopedia 
of  Religion  and  Ethics,  give  merely    a  bibliographical 
paragraph  about  him  and  say  little  about  his  system. 


2 


1  Represents  a  period  of  change  In  Hindu  thought 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  because  of  the  contribu- 
tions he  made,  he  deserves  much  greater    attention  than 
he  has  received,  for  his  name  represents    a  period  of 
change  in  Hindu  thought. 

a  Sankara  in  his  "Advalta"  taught  a  strict  Impersonal  man  ism 
His  great  predecessor  was  Sankara,  who  lived  about 
three  centuries  before  him  (788-850  A . D . ) and  whose  teach- 
ing dominated  the  thinking  of  Southern  India  up  to  the 
time  of  Ramanuja.  Sankara  in  his  "Advalta"  had  taught 
a  strict  impersonal  monism. 

b  Ramanuja  set  up  a  theory  called  " Vlslshtadvaita" ,  or  a 

Qualified  monism 
Against  this  strict  monism  "Ramanuja  set  up  a  theory 
called  ' Visishtsdvaita' ,  or  qualified  monism,  maintain- 
ing (l)  that  Individual  souls  are  not  essentially  one 
with  the  Supreme,  though  he  is  their  source,  and  hence 
that  the  soul  after  salvation  enters  into  a  relation  of 
perfect  heavenly  service  to  him,  and  (2)  that  the  Su- 
preme is  not  purely  abstract  being,  but  possesses  real 
qualities  of  goodness  and  the  like,  infinite  in  degree".  1 

2  Ramanuja' s  views  rested  upon  an  old  and 

Influential  tradition 
But  we  do  not  wish  to  give  the  impression  that  Rama- 

1  Darnett,  L.D.  Hinduism,  page  31 


3 


anuja  created  his  theories  entirely  free  from  prece- 
dents, for  such  was  not  the  case.  As  we  shall  see, 
his  views  rested  largely  upon  an  old  and  influential 
tradition.  Others  had  tried  to  formulate  in  a  sys- 
tematic way  the  doctrines  of  the  Bhagavata  or  Pan- 
carata  faith.  For  instance,  in  the  Mahabharata  we 
find  mention  of  the  four-fold  manifestation  of  the 
Supreme  Being  (indeed,  it  is  one  of  its  distinctive 
tenets)  and  a  similar  reference  in  the  Vedanta  Sutras 
indicates  that  the  theology  of  this  ancient  system 
was  at  least  recognized  and  treated  with  respect  in 
the  highest  quarters.  2 

South  Indian  tradition  seems  to  indicate  that\ais- 
navisra  had  a  continuous  history  almost  from  the  per- 
iod of  the  Bhagavadgita  (about  1  A.D.).  There  is  said 
to  have  been  a  succession  of  twelve  Vaisnavite  saints, 
called  Alvars,  and  a  like  series  of  Acaryas,  six  of 
whom  preceded  Ramanuja.  One  of  the  greatest  of  these, 
supposed  to  have  been  Ramanuja's  immediate  predeces- 
sor in  this  apostolic  succession  of  Vaisnavism,  was 
Yamunacarya.  Some  of  his  works  have  been  pre  served. One 
of  them,  the  Slddhl-traya ,  we  are  told,  has  for  its 
purpose  the  demonstration  of  the  real  existence  of 
the  individual  soul,  while  another,  the  Agamapramanya, 


2     Max  Muller,P.  Sacred  Books  of  the  East. (S.B.E. ) . 

Vol.  XXXIV,  page  xxili 


attacks  the  view  that  the  Sutras  condemn  the  Bhagava- 
ta  teaching,  and  maintains  the  orthodoxy  of  that  teach- 
ing. Another  work,  of  a  different  nature,  is  the  St  or- 
tra  Ratna.  This  is  also  attributed  to  the  same  author. 
It  is  a  brief  devotional  poem  dedicated  to  Visnu.  It 
expresses  a  spirit  of  earnest  piety  that  may  be  taken 
as  indicative  of  the  real  religious  worth  of  this  Vais- 
navism  of  the  South.  "The  emotion  of  which  Ramanujawas 
to  furnish  the  intellectual  expression,  utters  itself 
with  unmistakable  earnestness  in  such  a  cry  as  this:- 

"The  vessel  of  a  thousand  sins,  and  plunged 

Deep  in  the  heart  of  life's  outrageous  sea, 
I  seek  in  thee  the  refuge  of  despair; 

In  mercy  only,  Hari,  make  me  Thine  

But  for  Thee  I  am  masterless;  save  me 

There's  none  to  earn  Thy  mercy.  Since  our  fate 
Weave th  this  bond  between  us,  Master  mine, 

0  guard  it  well  and  cast  it  not  away  

Lord  Madhava,  whatever  mine  may  be, 

Whatever  I,  is  all  and  wholly  Thine. 
What  offering  can  I  bring,  whose  wakened  soul 

Seeth  all  Being  bond  to  Thee  for  aye?"  4 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  when  Ramanuja  arose 
as  religious  leader  of  the  eleventh  or  twelfth  century, 
Vaisnavism  was  well  established  in  the  South  though  It 
was  there  that  the  worship  of  Siva  had  always  been  a 
strong  factor.  Ramanuja  not  only  belongs  to  an  old  and 
well  defined  religious  tradition  that  shows  itself  to 
be  decisively  theistic,  but  his  theology  claims  to  be 


3  Macnicol,  Nlcol,   Indian  Theism,  page  100 

4  Barnett,  L.D. ,  translation  in  Heart  of  India,  page 


5 


a  faithful  presentation  of  the  old  Vedantic  teaching 
and  to  have  the  authority  of  the  ancient  interpreters 
behind  it.  "All  the  schools  of  Vedanta  philosophy  -- 
Advaita,  Visistadvaita,  and  Dvaita  claim  to  derive 
their  teaching  from  three  great  sources  the  pras- 
thanatraya  of  the  Upanisads ,  the  Bhagavadglta .  and  the 
Vedanta  Sutras,"  5  Rarcanuja  wrote  no  commentary,  as 
did  Sankara,  on  the  Upanisads,  but  his  Sri  Bhasya  ex» 
pounds  the  Sutras  and  professes  to  follow  the  ancient 
teachers,  the  purvacaryas,  who  are  supposed  to  have 
handed  on  the  pure  tradition  of  Vedantic  teaching.  A 
complete  list  (so  far  as  it  has  been  possible  to  dis- 
cover from  secondary  authorities)  of  Ramanuja' s  works 
is  as  follows:  Vedantasara,  with  commentaries  and 
notes ,  Vedanta-sutras ,  with  commentary ,  Glta-Bhashya, 
and  Vedartha-sangraha.  The  Vedartha-Prad ipa ,  Vedanta 
dlpa,  and  Vedanta-tattva-sara  are  attributed  to  him 
but  authorities  express  some  doubt  as  to  the  justif- 
ication for  this.  In  all  his  works  the  dependency  on 
traditional  authority  is  maintained.  This  feeling  on 
the  part  of  Ramanuja  taken  with  the  indications  to  be 
pointed  out  in  Hindu  religious  history  gives  evidence 
that,  while  Ramanuja  made  a  definite  contribution  to 
theistic  ideas,  he  was  a  natural  outcome  of  what  had 
gone  before.  This  thought  will  receive  greater  devel- 


5  Macnicol,  page  102 


opment  and  we  shall  see  that  a  knowledge  of  Ramanuja 
and  his  work  is  important  for  an  understanding  of  the 
progress  of  Hindu  thought.  In  order  that  we  may  bet- 
ter understand  Ramanuja' s  position  we  will  follow 
briefly  the  development  of  religious  and  philosophi- 
cal thought  up  to  his  time. 
B  Development  of  religious  and  philosophical  thought  up  to 

Ramanuja* s  time 
When  we  look  for  beginnings  in  Hindu  thought  we 
are  carried  far  back  to  a  distant  and  somewhat  obscure 
period  when  the  page  of  history  was  just  beginning  to 
open.  Perhaps  we  may  know  something  of  the  trend  of 
thought  as  far  back  as  2000  B.C.,  from  inferences  we 
may  draw  from  the  very  earliest  Vedic  literature  dat- 
ing from  1500  to  1000  B.C.  We  find  that  it  is  neces- 
sary to  use  great  caution  in  attempting  to  know  the 
mind  of  the  period  that  the  Vedic  hymns  represent  .'We 
should  not  look  in  the  Vedic  Hymns  for  that  which  it 
is  in  no  wise  possible  we  should  find  there,  nor 
should  we,  therefore,  blame  them  for  its  absence."  6 
In  other  words,  we  must  not  decide  what  we  ahall  find 
there  before  we  look.  We  ought  to  try  to  see  with 
something  of  the  vision  of  an  unsophisticated  age  and 
to  feel  the  intuition  of  seers  to  whom  nature  and  the 


6    Macnicol,  page  7 


7 


unseen  world  was  alike  vivid  and  near,  and  at  the 
same  time  keep  in  mind  that  "the  Vedic  civiliza- 
tion does  not  mark  a  "beginning,  but  the  end  of  a 
long  developing  history  in  regard  to  both  ttee  and 
place."  7  We  discern  now  and  then  glimpses  of 
God  rising  out  of  what  men  have  seen  in  nature  .Now 
He  transcends  nature;  now  He  is  submerged.  Now  we 
have "sudden  vistas"  of  moral  purpose  and  moral 
order;  and  again  the  door  is  closed. 

"Those  who  by  Law  uphold  the  Law, 
Lords  of  the  shining  light  of  Law, 
Mitra  I  call  and  Varuna.  8 

We  find  the  thought  of  the  Vedas  at  one  time  sink 
ing  to  the  level  of  fetichism  and  gross  supersti- 
tion, and  at  another  lost  in  pantheistic  specula- 
tion. Yet,  even  in  this  turmoil,  perhans  half-way 
between  the  two  extremes,  we  find  traces  of  what 
comes  near  to  being  theistic  devotion,  a  tendency 
that  is  never  absent  from  that  early  period  on 
down  to  this  day  in  the  religious  reflection  of 
India.  This  is  especially  true  as  seen  In  the  Ved- 
ic veneration  of  Varuna. 

( 1)  Earliest  Vedic  Hymns 
(Rig-Veda) 

But  there  are  many  difficulties  that  face  us  in 

7  G-rousset,  R.  ,  "Histolre  de  la  Phllosophie  Orientale" 

translation  from  page  14 

8  Rig  Veda, I.  23,5  (Macnicol,  page  9) 


B 


attempting  to  trace  the  development  of    Vedic  thought 
and  most  serious,  oerhaps,  is  the  fact  that  there  are  no 
reliable  chronological  data  by  which  we  may  determine 
the  order  of  the  hymns.  However,     the  following  seems 
to  be  the  concensus  of  opinion,        We  may  suppose  that 
the  Hymns  of  the  Rig  Veda  range  over  a  period  of  seven 
hundred  or  a  thousand  years.  9    Certainly  the  minds  of 
men  during  this  period  did  not  stand  still.  They  must 
have  been  years  of  changing    religious    emotions  and 
reflection.  But  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  find     the  key 
to  the  process  of  their  growth.  We  can  do  little  more 
than  guess    what  may    have  been  the  background  of  ex- 
perience and  environment.  There  must  have  been  many 
things  back  of  them  of  which  at  most  we  get  only  now 
and  then  a  glimpse  --  fetichisra,  ancestor-worship,  the 
dread  of  evil  spirits,  magical  rites,  crude  phiosophies, 
priesthoods    and  sacrifices.     Sometimes  ritual  seems 
to  prevail.  Sometimes  there  are  indications  that  there 
has  been  some  great  outgrowth  of  philosophical  specu- 
lation. Sometimes  the  emphasis  is  on  faith  and  a  per- 
sonal devotion  to  God.  New  deities  come  to    the  front 
to  take  the  place  of  the  old  ones  and  are  themselve  s 
supplanted  by  still  greater  gods.  At  one  time  Varuna  was 
so  great  that  he  seemed  to  fill  the  entire  universe  of 

9    Hume,  R.E. ,  The  World's  Living  Religions,  Page  21 


- 


the  Vedic  poet's  thought  and  even  he  passed  away  to 

be  a  mere  shadow  of  his  former  might.  But  when  the  priest 
ruled,  and  when  the  Gods  came  in  their  succession  or 
when  the  philosopher  was  dominant  we  cannot  know,  We  can 
only  guess  and  at  best  our  conclusions  will  be  of  a 
doubtful  character.  Our  main  guides,  apart  from  the  con- 
tents of  the  Hymns  themselves,  must  be  the  analogy  of 
the  course  of  evolution  of  other  religions  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  subsequent  history  of  Indian  thought  on 
the  other. 

( 2 )  Period  of  the  Brahmanas 
Even  when  we  pass  from  the  Vedic  period  to  what  seems 
to  be  a  later  period,  that  of  the  Brahmanas  ( 800-500 BC), 
we  do  not  leave  our  difficulties  behind.  We  are  still 
dealing  with  a  very  early  period  and  there  is  much  that 
is  vague.  However,  we  do  feel  a  great  change  in  the  at- 
mosphere. We  feel  that  we  have  moved  with  the  people  iron 
the  invigorating  air  of  the  mountains  to  the  heavy  tor- 
pid climate  of  the  plains.  The  mind  seems  to  wander  and 
to  lose  its  way  or  to  go  to  sleep  before  the  journey  is 
finished.  "Certainly  the  contrast  is  vivid  between  the 
rapid,  glittering  stream  of  early  Vedic  thought  and  the 
meandering,  wayward  course, so  difficult  to  trace  in  its 
continuity,  that  is  followed  across  the  plains  of  India 

by  the  Tears  and  hopes  of  the  people  of  a  later 

age."  10 

10    Macnlcol,  page  25 


"The  thought  that  we  find  in  the  Brahman as  is  the 
result  of  a  long  evolution,  the  fruit  of  a  civiliza- 
tion already  very  ancient."  11  These  writ- 
ings, no  doubt,  are  of  aristocratic  origin.  We  may  be 
quite  assured  of  this  "because  they  are  so  completely 
the  work  of  the  priesthood  that  has  become  "de-spir- 
itualized" and  absorbed  in  its  gains.  So  we  read  much 
about  the  rich  and  powerful  and  the  priestly  blessing 
bestowed  upon  them  and  very  little  about  the  common 
people.  Everywhere  we  meet  the  priest,  the  altar  and 
the  sacrifice.  The  traces  of  theistic  aspiration  are 
very  few.  Little  attention  is  given  to  the  desires 
that  fill  the  hearts  of  the  worshippers.  However,  it 
cannot  be  that  all  the  great  number  of  common  people 
who  were  only  fit  to  "'fill  the  spaces'  between  brick 
and  brick"  were  entirely  without  aspiration  or  faith 
in  God.  If  there  had  been  no  basis  of  faith  the  priest- 
hood and  the  sacrificial  system  could  not  have  long 
endured.  We  can  trace  throughout  the  Brahmanas  indi- 
cations that  even  behind  the  screen  of  formalism  there 
was  a  two-fold  process  of  religious  growth  at  work. 
The  fruits  of  this  growth  were  to  declare  themselves 
at  a  later  period.  There  was,  on  the  one  hand,  the  be- 
ginning of  the  more  intellectual  development  from 
which  sprang  the  Upanisads;  on  the  other,  there  were 
hints  of  the  presence  of  that  devout  spirit,  which, 
more  emotional  and  popular  than  reflective,  expressed 

11  Satapatha  Brahmana.  VI.  1.2.25.   (Macnicol,  page  29) 

12  Macnicol,  page  29 


itself  mainly  in  poetry  and  legend,  and  of  which  some 
account  is  furnished  at  a  later  date  in  certain  sec- 
tions of  the  Mahabharata .  It  is  this  second  develop  - 
ment  that  we  will  return  to  consider  as  being  the  very 
remote  line  that  lead  to  the  later  idealists  of  whom 
Ramanuja  was  one. 

b  600  B.C..  Earliest  Upanisads 
Following  the  Brahman  as ,  as  a  sort  of  revolt  against 
the  futile  and  unintelligent  formalism,  we  have  the  _U- 
panlsads .  They  evidently  came  from  a  period  of  great 
freedom  of  thought  and  remarkable  activity.  Their  an- 
tagonism to  the  sacerdotalism  of  the  Brahman as  is  ex- 
pressed with  no  little  sarcasm,  as  when  a  procession 
of  dogs  is  described  as  marching  like  priests,  each 
holding  the  tail  of  the  dog  in  front  and  saying,  "Om, 
let  us  eat  J  Om,  let  us  drink'.  Om,  may  the  divine  Var- 
una,  Pragapati,  Savitri  bring  us  food'.  Lord  of  food, 
bring  hither  food,  bring  it,  Om1. M  13  However,  in 
spite  of  this  reaction  against  mere  formalism  we  would 
be  going  too  far  to  say  that  the  Upanisads  were  en- 
tirely an ti -Brahman ical.  We  would  rather  infer  that  we 
are  dealing  with  a  period  of  great  freedom  to  which 
the  Brahmans  were  forced  to  submit.  Indeed,  there  are 
Indications  that  some  of  the  most  learned  were  not 


13    S.B.E.  vl.5.,  page  21 


12 


Brahman s  at  all  and  that  Brahman s  learned  at  the  feet 
of  non-Brahman  teachers.  However,  the  intellectual  free- 
dom that  the  Upan la ad 3  expreaa  does  not  possess  warmth 
of  feeling  that  would  appeal  to  the  common  people.  It 
is  probable,  therefore,  that  the  Upan 1 sad  thought  was 
confined  to  a  limited  circle  and  that  the  worship  of 
the  personal  gods  was  more  widely  spread.  We  may  even 
conjecture  that  some  of  the  thinkers  themselves  were 
in  their  religious  life  worshippers  of  Visnu  and  other 
gods.  The  colder  atmosphere  of  the  Upan is ads  is  per- 
haps the  almost  inevitable  atmosphere  of  the  reflect- 
ive mind.  They  seem  to  be  the  efforts  of  thoughtful 
men  to  construe  their  religion  in  terms  of  reason  and 
are  not  necessarily  antagonistic  to  the  emotionalism 
of  the  earlier  period  or  the  theism  of  the  later  per- 
iod . 

2  Period  from  6*00  B.C.  to  the  Bhagavadglta 
While  it  is  true  in  the  main  the  course  of  relig- 
ious speculation  in  the  pre-Ohristian  period,  or  the 
centuries  before  the  Bhagavadglta,  was  through  the  U- 
panisads  with  all  the  confusions  and  varieties  of  ex- 
pressions of  devotion  and  superstitions  that  they 
suggest,  yet,  even  at  this  early  date  we  cannot  leave 
out  of  account  those  movements  of  revolt,  the  most  im- 


It: 


13 


portant  of  which  were  Jainlsm  and  Buddhism.  These  two  faiths, 
as  widely  as  they  differed  from  each  other,  were  at  one  in 
their  primitive  state  in  denying  a  personal  Supreme  Spirit. 
And  yet  both  as  we  now  have  them  tell  something  of  the  story 
of  the  long  development  of  Hinduism  and  indicate  that  they 
were  phases  in  this'  development.  A  "brief  consideration  of 
them  is  therefore  desirable. 

a  Mahavlra  (599-527  B.C.) 
Jainisra  is  not  of  great  importance  in  Hindu  thought.  Its 
development  was  not  great  and  the  extent  of  its  influence  has 
not  been  wide.  However,  it  shares  two  characteristics  with 
Buddhism  which  may  have  passed  into  it  from  the  popular  wor- 
ship of  the  period.  In  the  first  place,  it  opposed  the  caste 
system  which  even  then  was  getting  a  grip  on  the  people.  In 
the  second  place,  it  was  missionary  in  spirit.  Its  opposition 
was  not  very  strong,  evidently.  It  has  been  suggested  that 
it  may  have  been  little  more  than  opposition  to  Br?hman  ex- 
clusiveness,  for  early  in  its  history  caste  played  its  part 
in  the  religion.  For  a  time,  however,  it  prevailed  against 
this  social  evil.  The  preacher  of  Jainism  was  Mahavira 
(599-527  B.C.)  and,  while  the  Jainas  have  almost  entirely 
forsaken  the  teaching  of  their  founder,  yet  the  fact  that 
their  original  character  was  of  a  democratic  nature  gives  us 
a  suggestion  of  the  reaction  of  the  time  against  the  Brah- 
manas.  14 


14    Eliot,  Sir  Charles,  Hinduism  and  Buddhism,  Vol.  I, 

pages  I06-I23 


14 


b  Gautama  Buddha  (563-483  B.C.) 
"There  must  have  "been  much  religious  earnestness  and 
much  questioning  at  the  time  when  these  new  ways  of  de- 
liverance were  sought  and  found."  15    About  the  sixth 
century  before  Christ  there  was  a  great  religious  ac- 
tivity in  the  Magadha  or  middle  district  of  Northern 
India.  The  doctrine  of  transmigration  had  by  this  time 
become  firmly  implanted,  and  all,  from  the  king  to  the 
lowest  of  his  subjects  were  seeking  release.  The  'road 
of  works'   or  the 'road  of  knowledge'  were  the  orthodox  ways 
to  salvation,  but  these  did  not  give  satisfaction.  Hence, 
we  have  devout  personalities  trying  to  find  the  truth. 
The  greatest  of  these  was  Gautama  Buddha  (563-483  B.C.). 
He  found  the  'prize  of  immortality'  and  acclaimed  it  to 
the  world.  The  Buddhism  which  developed  from  this  discov- 
ery was  essentially  a  'humanism'.  It  was  not  a  metaphys- 
ic  or  a  theology,  but  a  'vehicle'   to  save  men.  It    was  a 
'path'  which  avoided  the  bloody  ritual  of  sacrifice  on 
the  one  hand  and  the  cruel  asceticism  on  the  other.  It 
see-red  to  the  Buddha  that  others  had  been  spending  their 
time  on  all  sorts  of  unessential  questions  "  as    to  the 
patient's  circumstances,  and  meantime  the  poor  sufferer 
had  died."  He  proceeded  to  direct  the  attention    of  men 
away  from  ritual  to  conduct  and  thus  rendered  a  great 
service,  which,  though  it  was  not  lasting  in  its  purer 
form  in  Buddhism  as  it  developed  into  a  religion,  yet 

15    Macnicol,  page  64 


15 


paved  the  way  for  later  reformers.  Gautama's  method  seeded 
to  express  itself  in  a  sort  of  agnostic  pragmatism.  He  said, 
"i  have  not  elucidated  that  the  world  is  eternal  or  that 
the  world  is  not  eternal,  that  it  is  finite  or  that    it  is 

infinite  and  why  have  I  not  elucidated  this?  Because 

this  profits  not  nor  has  to  do  with  the  fundamentals  of  re- 
ligion Misery  have  I  elucidated  --  the  origin  of  misery 

the  cessation  of  misery  have  I  elucidated  because  this 

does  profit."  16  The  whole  system  is  built  upon  such  prag- 
matism, or  'opportunism',  as  Warren  calls  it.  It  avoids  any 
definition  of  Nirvana  that  would  imply  either  survival  or 
annihilation.  The  Buddha  refused  his  disciples  any  metaphys- 
ical revelation.  It  is  remarkable  that  out  of  this  system 
which  was  realy  an  atheism  grew  one  of  the  great  religions 
of  the  world,  and  in  and  through  which,  even  in  its  origin 
were  elements  that  made  the  road  easier  for  those  who  were 
later  to  teach  a  pure  and  ideal  type  of  theism  in  In^ia. 

C  The  Sutras  (500-200  B.C.) 
The  law  of  conduct,  Dharma,  was  actually  worked  out  in 
the  minds  of  the  Brahman  priests  and  teachers  in  the  per- 
iod of  the  Brahman aa.  But  the  actual  codification  probably 
did  not  take  place  until  some  time  during  the  period  be- 
tween 500  B.C.  and  200  B.C.,  when  the  Sutras  appear.  We  are 
still  considering  a  literature  published  while  authority  was  the  de- 

16    Warren,  Buddhism  in  Translations,  page  122 


termining  law  of  conduct,  Action  Had  a  place  of  pre- 
cedence over  reflection  and  the  great  mass  of  rules 
here  expressed  are  not  ideals  conceived  by  speculative 
thinkers  but  are  more  the  outcome  of  custom,  custom  and 
karma.*  This  does  not  say  that  speculation  had  no  place 
in  the  minds  of  Hindus  of  the  period.  ,<e  merely  wish 
to  emphasize  the  fact  tnat  along  with  the  philosophi- 
cal speculation  of  the  time  and  independent  from  it 
grew  up  tnis  set  of  rules  for  the  common  people.  The 
advantages  of  higner  thought  were  for  the  few.  The 
multitude  had  to  be  content  with  authoritative  guid- 
ance for  the  conduct  of  their  lives.  In  post-  Vedic 
times  a  whole  department  of  literature  in  which  all 
that  had  been  taught  and  accepted  in  Vedic  times  re- 
garding sacrifice,  ritual  and  practical  life  general- 
ly had  been  gatnered  up  and  in  order  that  it  might  be 
of  as  little  burden  as  possible  to  the  memories  of 
those  who  had  to  remember  it  a  new  literary  form  was 
invented,  the  sutra .  'Tuis  is  a  literary  form  to  whi_h 
we  have  nothing  parallel  in  our  literature."  17  The 
word  is  derived  from  tne  root  siv  meaning  to  sew.  Su- 
tra means  thread.  The  term  sutra  is  applied  to  a  short 
abhorism  or  rule  or  book  of  such  lines  so  tnat  ite  nave 
here  a  type  of  literature  that  is  extraordinary  for 
brevity  in  expression.  Professor  Llacdonell  in  his  oan- 


17    ..iCilenzie ,   page  37 


SKrit  Literature. 1  page  36)  says  that  "the  composers  of 
grammatical  .Sutras  delight  as  much  in  the  saying  of  a 
short  vowel  as  in  the  birth  of  a  son,"  by  way  of  anpia- 
sizing  the  extreme  brevity  of  the  form. 

It  is  probable  that  the  sutra  form  appeared  about 
500  J5.0.  and  the  first  great  class  of  sutras  is  the 
3 ra ut a  outra . This  is  based  on  revelation  (srutij.  it 
is  composed  of  what  is  taught  in  the  £rahmanas  about 
the  performance  of  the  greater  sacrifices.  There  are 
also  the  '-irihva  autras  that  deal  with  the  ritual  and 
rites  to  be  performed  in  the  household  from  day  to  day. 
These  are  chiefly  based  on  tradition.  Then  we  have  the 
Jharma  .Sutras  dealing  with  the  problem  of  '  dharma '.  ^har- 
ma,  we  are  told,  is  a  word  difficult  to  translate.  it 
has  been  variously  called  Law  of  Being,  Religion,  Vir- 
tue, Law  and  i»uty.  All  these  suggest  something  of  the 
meaning,  but  the  fact  that  in  these  early  days  of  Hin- 
du history  no  sharp  distinction  .;as  drawn  between  mor- 
al and  religious  duty,  usage,  custom  and  law  gives  the 
term  a  broad  meaning.  Uharma  was  the  term  that  applied 
to  tne  whole  oomolex  or  form3  of  conduct  that  were  set- 
tled or  established. 

The  various  Vedic  schools  each  had  their  own  bod- 
ies of  sutra s  of  which  the  -irauta  outra  formed  the 
largest  part.  Perhaps  the  most  important  is  the  ..lan- 
ava  Pharma  Jastra  which  has  been  of  very  special  int- 
erest to  later  scholars.  There  is  a  long  list  of  the 


18 


gutra  literature  of  this  period  all  of  which  was  held  to 
he  of  particular  sacred  value  to  one  or  another  of  the 
groups  of  Hindu  religionists. 

d  Period  of  Raroayana  and  Mahabharata  (400  B.C.  to  400  A.D.) 
During  the  four  or  five  centuries  preceding  the  Chris- 
tian era  the  idea  of  incarnation  was  taking  shape.  This 
resulted  in  the  recognition  of  Visnu  and  his  various  in» 
carnations  as  "being  objects  of  worship  on  the  same  foot- 
ing as  Brahma.  The  great  epics,  the  Mahabharata ,  (  the 
Great  Bharata  War),  400  B.C.  to  400  A.D.,  and  the  Ram- 
ayana, (the  Career  of  the  God  Rama),  400  B.C.  to  200  B.C., 
show  us  this  movement  in  progress.  The  development,  which 
continued  for  some  centuries  afterward  and  grew  into 
the  bhaktl  movement  was  largely  due  to  the  Influence  of 
Buddhism  on  Hinduism.  In  order  to  maintain  Itself  in  the 
face  of  Buddhism  and  like  movements,  Hinduism  had  to  modify 
itself. Prom  the  poems  we  gather  that  "the  main  structure  of 
Hinduism  seems  to  have  been  completed  before  the  time  of 
Christ,  although  the  popularizing  of  Hinduism  has  caitin- 
ued."l8  Along  with  the  Pyranas  (Ancient  Tales)  that  came 
somewhat  later  we  have  in  the  epics  the  final  literary  pro- 
duct among  the  sacred  scriptures  of  Hinduism. 

e  Bhagavadgita  (100  B.C.  to  100  A.D.) 
However,  we  do  have  the  Bhagavadgita  of  nearly  the 

18    Hume,  page  30 


19 


same  period,   1100  js.C.  to  100  A.D.j  which  ia  a  very  high 
expression  or  Hindu  devotional  literature.  i*t  is  a  dram- 
atic poem  that  starts  with  a  stirring  scone  at  the  begin- 
ning or  a  battle,     jj'or  the  first  time  in  tne  recorded  his- 
tory of  rlinduism  a  Hindu  knight  raises  tne  question  of 
the  propriety  or  killing  people  in  war  (1:28-45;  2:4-8). 
The  charioteer  quiets  his  masters  conscientious  compunc- 
tions by  a  remarkable  discourse  on  immortality  and  the 
irresponsibility  or  tne  soul,  to  prove  his  point  he  quotes 
from  the  iiatha  Upanisad  12:18-19). 

"It  slays  not,  and  it  is  not  slain,  it  is  never  bom, 
and  it  never  dies,   ,/eapons  cleave  it  not,  nor  does  the 
fire  burn  it.  The  waters  wet  it  not,  nor  do  the  winds 
dry  it  up.   therefore,  snowing  it  to  be  sucn,  thou  ought- 
est  not  to  grieve  for  it." 

jo,   this  scripture,  aj  remarkable  ao  it  is  in  some  or  its 
teachings,  does  not  cnange  the  practical  duty  of  a  knignt 
as  a  member  of  tne  second  caste,  j'or,  as  we  are  told,  "To 
a  Ksnatriya  warrior  nothing  is  better  tnan  a  lawful  fight, 
then  by  abandoning  thy  proper  duty  and  thy  honor,  tnou 
wilt  be  guilty  or  a  crime" I  2: 31,33 ) . 

The  cnarioteer,  wno  is  the  chief  speaker  in  the  uha- 
gavadgita,  proves  to  be  the  deity  iirisha.  here  is  an  in- 
dication that  Hinduism  has  undergone  another  transforma- 
tion for  it  represents  the  oupreme  Jeity  in  the  form  of 
one  particular  man.  ivrisha  says  that  he  has  become  injar- 


20 


nate  "for  the  protection  of  good  men,  for  the  destruction 
of  evil-doers,  for  the  re-establishment  of  piety" (4:8) .^e 
are  also  told  that  whoever  will  worship  Krishna  with  abso- 
lute devotion  (bhakti)  -- 

"dwells  in  Me,  whatever  be  his  course  of 
life  (6:31).  They  who  worship  me  devout- 
ly, are  in  Mp;  and  I  also  am  in  them.  Be 
well  assured  that  he  who  worships  me  does 
not  perish."  (9:29,31) 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  Bhagavadgita  offers  un- 
iversal salvation  to  sinners;  and  even  to  women  and  lew- caste 
Sudras.  However,  it  reaffirms  the  main  features  of  histor- 
ic and  orthodox  Hinduism  in  its  description  of  the  un- 
changeable nature  and  function  of  the  four  castes. 

"The  office  of  the  Kshatriya,  born  of  his 
proper  nature,  is  heroism,  energy,  firm- 
ness, skill,  resolution  in  battle,  liber- 
ality, and  a  ruler's  bearing.  The  office 
of  a  Vaisya,  born  of  proper  nature  is  ser- 
vitude." (18:43-44) 

Indeed,  the  deity  of  the  Bhagavadgita,  Krishna,  declares 
"The  four  castes  were  created  by  me"  (4:13).  Other  teach- 
ings of  the  Bhagavadgita  are  reverence  for  the  Vedas  and 
that  the  great  goal  to  be  desired  is  the  termination  of  re- 
incarnation or  transmigration.  On  the  whole  the  book  Is  rath- 
er a  supplement  to  traditional  Hinduism  than  otherwise.  It 
adds  to  the  old  religion  the  new  formulation  as  found  in 
the  term  'devotion'.  The  practical  message  is  that  the  caste 
duty  must  be  performed  and  that  one  should  trust  his  God 
for  the  rest  of  his  salvation.  Salvation  is  to  be  obtained 
chiefly  through  personal  devotion  to  a  personal  deity. 


21 


3     ij'rorn  the  Bhagavadgi ta  to  rtarnanaia. 
a    Period  of  the  x'uranas,   500  A.D. 

following  the  period  of  the  bhagavadgita  to  about  500 
A.D.,  we  have  a  literature  called  x'uranas ,  or  'Old  Tales'. 
The  chief  note  or  this  literature  is  its  sectarianism. " There 
is  no  longer  any  attempt  at  a  national  literature  to  which 
all  might  contribute,  as  was  the  Cbse  with  the  Mahabharata . 
The  Puranas  give  us  the  whole  cycle  of  the  later  myths  about 
Krisna  connected  with  ...athura  and  vrindavana.  The  story  of 
his  childhood  is  given  in  full  detail,  and  all  his  pranks  a- 
mong  the  cownerds  are  related.  The  Har i vamsa  and  the  visnu 
Pur  ana  and  even  the  late  .bha  gay  at  a  Purana  do  not  mention  aad- 
ha,  Krisna' s  cowherd  mistress,  ohe  is  made  a  great  deal  of, 
however,   in  the  ^adma  Purana  and  the  .brahina-vaivarta  Purana. 
This  new  emphssis  in  tnese  later  books  is  the  source  of  the 
immorality  of  certain  of  the  vaisnava  sects.  Though  the  rur- 
anas  are  not  all  alike,  most  of  them  snow  e  clear  relation 
both  in  regard  to  literary  form  and  religious  thought  to  the 
various  strata  of  the  Mahabharata  and  to  the  Law  Books. 

b    oankaracarya  1788-850  A.D.) 

By  600  A.D.  both  a  decadence  of  .buddhism  and  an  invig- 
oration  of  brahmanism  had  set  in.  As  we  have  seen  the  i.ah- 
abhara ta  existed  as  a  great  collection  of  epic  and  religious 
poetry  and  the  major  part  of  the  Puranas  were  composed  by 
this  time,  it  is  difiicult  to  describe  the  distribution  of 


22 


sects  in  these  earlier  times.  Authorities  differ  as  to  wheth- 
er oiva  or  Visnu  commanded  the  allegiance  of  the  majority .The 
monuments  of  the  uuptas  at  ICran  suggest  that  these  great  kings 
were  visnuites,   but  a  little  later  the  cult  of  oiva  is  more 
prominent.  19    The  emperor  Harsha  1612-648  A.D.)  and  his  fam- 
ily were  inclined  toward  eclecticism  and  honored  Siva,  the  oun 
and  Buddha,  but  there  is  no  record  that  they  worsniped  visiinu. 
It  is  probable  that  during  the  seventh  century  a  struggle  was 
on  between  .Buddhism  and  Hinduism  and  Hinduism  resulting  in  a 
victory  for  oiva.  This  conflict  is  connected  with  the  names  of 
Kumarila  Bhatta  (725  A.D.)  and  oankaracaya  1800  A.D.).  however, 
it  cannot  be  confined  to  the  activities  ot  any  two  individuals. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  elements  that  compose  Hinduism 
had  been  active  before  the  eighth  century  and  that  nuddhism  con- 
tinued to  exist  for  some  time  after.  Probably  the  careers  of 
these  two  men  are  the  best  record  of  the  turn  religious  thought 
was  taking.  They  have  been  credited  with  reviving  Hinduism,  it 
is  true  that  they  did  lay  stress  in  the  authority  of  old  tradi- 
tion, but  the  outcome  of  their  labors  was  to  give  authority  and 
solidity  to  the  mixture  of  Brahmanism,  .buddhism  and  the  other 
popular  beliefs  tnat  nau  grown  up.  kumarila  was  said  to  have 
been  a  Brahman  of  Bikar  wno  was  a  Huddhist  monk,  but  became  a 
worsnipper  of  oiva  and  such  a  vigorous  persecutor  of  his  former 


19  iSliot,   page  207 


23 


faith  tnat  he  persuaded  a  king  of  his  time  I3udhanvanj 
to  exterminate  it  from  the  Himalaya  to  Cape  Gomorin. 
This,  of  course,  is  a  monstrous  exaggeration,  but  his 
philosophical  works  indicate  that  he  was  a  determined 
enemy  of  the  Buddhists,  he  taught  little  about  meta- 
physics or  the  nature  of  tfod,  but  he  insisted  on  tne 
necessity  and  efricacy  of  Vedic  rites. 

Sankara  ( Sankaracarva ) was  much  more  important  both 
as  a  thinker  and  an  organizer,  he  was  probably  born  766 
A.D.  in  a  family  of  Nambutiri  brahmans  at  haladi  in  co- 
chin state.  20    The  accounts  of  Sankara's  life  are  large- 
ly a  collection  of  legends  in  wnich,  nowever,  the  foll- 
owing facts  stand  out.  he  was  a  pupil  or  Govinda  who 
was  the  pupil  of  Gaudapada.  it  is  possible,  though  it 
cannot  be  proved,  that  this  was  the  uaudapada  wno  was 
the  author  of  the  metrical  philosophy  that  bore  his  name. 
Sankara  wrote  many  popular  nymns  as  well  as  some  commen- 
taries on  the  upanisads,  Vedanta  Sutras,  and  Tihagavdagi- 
ta.  Thus  he  recognized  both  Vedic  and  post- Vedic  litera- 
ture,    he  resided  for  some  time  on  the  Uarbudda  and  at 
Benares,  lie  made  several  journeys  on  which  he  rounded  four 
monasteries,  at  origeri,  furi ,  Dwaraka  and  Badrinath  in 
Himalaya,  it  is  said  that  on  his  death  bed  he  asked  for- 
giveness for  going  on  pilgrimages  and  frequenting  temples 

because  by  so  doing  he  had  seemed  to  forget  that  uod  is 
everywhere. 

20    U-rousset,  Page  62 


Sankara ' s  greatest  acnievement  was  an  exposition 
of  the  vedanta.  de  based  his  arguments  on  the  vedic 
texts  and  "aimed  at  being  merely  conservative.  "21  rmt 
the  Vedio  texts  are  obscure  and  even  the  ancient  com- 
mentaries are  obscure  and  inconsistent,  it  was  reserv- 
ed for  his  genius,  tnerefore,  to  produce  out  of  them 
a  system  that  even  now  holds  first  place  for  its  con- 
sistency, tnoroughness  and  profoundity.  Since  his  time 
the  Vedanta  has  been  considered  the  principle  pniloso- 
phy  ox  india,  a  position  it  does  not  seem  to  nave  held 
beiore.   ./hile  his  interpretation  of  it  is  often  contest- 
ed and  it  is  hardly  suited  to  popular  religion,  yet,  his 
philosopnieal  insight  still  commands  respect  and  to  seme 
extent  the  adnerence  of  most  educated  Hindus. 

c    Uaniidca  -  vasagar.  lUth-llth  centuries 

^ome  time  auring  the  tenth  or  eleventh  centuries, 
I  the  authorities  differ  greatly  as  to  the  date),  there 
apoeared  a  poet-saint  by  the  name  of  Man ikxa-vas agar . He 
exercised  a  great  and  enduring  influence  on  the  faith 
of  South  india  because  of  his  deep  personal  devotion  and 
his  Tiruvasagam.  or  'Sacred  Utterances',  which  is  full  of 
the  most  intense  religious  feeling.     "Here  we  have  the 


21    iliot,  page  208 


25 


doctrines  of  tne  oaiva  ^eddhanta  fused  into  passionate  ex- 
perience in  the  heart  of  a  worsnipper  of  Siva*1  22  Manikka 
is  said  to  nave  been  prime  minister  to  a  i.Jandyan  king  and, 
according  to  legend,  went  to  seek  horses  for  the  king,  jbut 
on  the  way  oiva,   surrounded  witn  a  great  company  of  saints, 
revealed  nimself  to  him.  The  king's  errand  was  forgotten; 
Manikka  renounced  the  world  and  began  a  pilgrimage  from 
town  to  town,  worshipping  at  the  various  seats  of  3iva  and 
composing  songs  and  hymns,  ifrom  this  time  on  Saiva  shrines 
became  popular  and  the  sect  was  permanently  established .  As 
is  the  case  with  many  saints  in  all  religions,  Lianikka-vas- 
agar  returns  again  and  again  to  his  conversion  as  being  the 
central  point  in  his  religious  experience  and  as  being  the 
source  of  nis  inspiration.  There  is  such  an  accent  of  hum- 
ility, a  sense  of  nis  unwortniness  and  an  emphasis  upon  di- 
vine grace,   that  he  seems  to  De  very  near  to  the  spirit  of 
the  christian  saints,  vie  find  him  again  and  again  giving 
such  utterances  as  a  devout  soul  would  express  wno  had 
sought  Lrod  sincerely  and  had  come  to  some  degree  of  fel- 
lowsnip  with  him.  e.g. , 

"'These  gods  are  gods  indeed ,  1 -' These  others  are  the  gods,' 
men  wrangling  say:  and  thus 
.False  gods  they  talk  about  and  rant  and  rave  upon  this 
earthly  stage,  and  I 

22    Macnicol,  page  171 


26 


No  pity  could  boast:   that  earthly  bonds  might  cease 

to  cling,  to  him  I  clung. 
to  him,  the  god  of  all  true  gods,  go  thou,  and  breathe 

his  praise,  0  humming- bee . "  23 

in  Manila  we  have  something  like  a  definite  reac- 
tion against  bankara ' s  teachings  that  lay  so  much  stre  ss 
on  the  pantheistic  doctrine  of  .brahman  and  the  complete 
identification  of  the  soul  wi  th  b-od,  along  with  the  tne- 
ory  that  the  world  is  altogetner  illusory.  The  tendency 
had  been  growing  slowly  away  from  Sankara  ajaa  Manikka 
was  about  the  first  tc  voice  it  and.  to  pave  tne  way  for 
x-iamanuja  (died  1137  A.D.)  who  established  in  an  orderly 
system  his  tenets  against  oankara's  monism. 

0  Place  kept  tor  an  appreciation  of  the  self  in  most  of 
India's  historic  religion 

This  nistorical  survey  oi  the  religions  in  India  and 

the  chief  personalities  associated  witn  them  preceeding 

Hamanuja  indicates  that,  with  a  few  exceptions,  place 

was  left  for  an  appreciation  of  the  self,  ^ven  in  the 
case  of  these-  exceptions,   sucn  as  primitive  Buddhism, the 
impersonal  tendencies  were  short  lived  and  soon  took  ov- 
er tneistic  elements.  In  the  Hig  Veda .  wnile  we  find  its 
conceptions  to  be  necessarily  tnose  of  a  primitive  age, 
the  worship  of  the  great  god   varuna  is  clearly  of  a  the- 
istic  nature.  He  stands  out  before  tne  people  with  t>ome- 

23    rope's  Tiruvasagam,   pages  143,144  UJacnicol,  page  173; 


27 


tiling  or  the  character  of  the  Jenovan  of  the  ::ebrews  for 
his  moral  greatness.  Toward  the  end  of  the   /edic  period 
we  feel  a  pantneistic  tendency  in  the  Vedic  polytheism 
whicn,  with  the  influence  of  certain  pftilosopnical  tend- 
encies, leads  to  the  way  of  abstraction  ending  logically 
in  agnosticism.  This  brings  us  to  the  brahman ic  period 
wnich  is  so  buried  under  its  fetichism  and  demonology 
that  it  is  difficult  to  find  anything  that  can  be  called 
theistic  here.  However,  we  hear  something  of  Vismi  as  a 
deliverer  of  mankind  from  distress  and  a  hope  for  immor- 
tality and  the  growth  of  the  feeling  or  bhakti ;  all  of 
which  at  least  leaves  the  way  open  to  theistic  thought. 
The  Upanisads  are  largely  antagonistic  to  the  sacerdotal- 
ism of  the  -brahmanas,  but  are  not  necessarily  anti-Hrah- 
manical.  Indian  thought  is  becoming  monistic,  thourrh  the 
conflicting  religious  currents  of  the  period  make  it  nard 
to  analyse,   in  some  of  the  Upanisads,   especially  the  prac- 
tical one  of  deliverance,   theistic  ideas  are  to  be  found 
clearly  impressed.  JSven  in  Jainism  and  Uuddhisin,  systems 
that  originate!  in  atheism,  certain  theistic  elements  are 
to  be  found.   In  Jainism,   it  is  true,   they  are  feeble  and 
can  he  but  vaguely  seen  in  tne  search  for  deliverance.  In 
Buddhism  tnere     are  certain  Visnuite  elements  as  seen 

in  the  plan  to  deliver  mankind  from  distress,  buddhism  is 


28 


"practical  and  non-metaphysical"  in  character.  Its 
asceticism  is  a  discipline.  In  other  words,  it  has 
theistic  elements  and  makes  room  for  faith.  In  the 
Bhagavadgita  we  have  teachings  that  express  the 
need  of  the  people  for  a  personal  G-od .  Its  teachings 
are  not  systematic  "but  an  immanent  G-od  is  brought 
into  relation  with  men.  He  is  related  to  the  doc- 
trine of  karma  and  the  doctrine  of  grace,  and  a 
doctrine  of  works  that  free  the  soul  is  formulated. 
Thus  we  have  seen  the  religion  of  India  throughout 
her  history  attempting  to  meet  the  needs  of  a  rest- 
less people.  It  often  seeded  that  all  religion  was 
to  Ve  covered  up  with  a  load  of  atheism  or  imper- 
sonal monism,  but  by  the  end  of  the  eleventh  cen- 
tury Hindu  thought  has  come  to  the  stage  of  devel- 
opment where  nothing  short  of  the  conception  of  a 
personal  God  will  satisfy. 

D  The  Contribution  made  by 

Ramanuja  (1017-1137  A. El)  24 
It  was  for  Ramanuja  to  make  a  long  stride  in 
the  right  direction.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Sri- 
Vaisnava  cult  of  the  Tamil  country.  It  was  during 
his  time  that  the  sect  reached  the  summit  of  its 
history  and  became  the  model  by  which    other  sects 

24    Dates  from  Grousset,  page  100 

Note:  This  would  make  him  120  years  of  age  at 
death. 


formed  their  literature  and  organization.  They  introduced 
the  singing  of  the  enthusiastic  lyrics  of  the  Alvars  in 
the  temple  ritual.  Long  before  Ramanuja  assumed  the  place 
of  leader  the  use  of  Tamil  in  the  service  of  worship  had 
"brought  the  cult  near  the  people.  The  change  from  the  use 
of  Sanskrit  to  Tamil  is  accredited  to  Natharauni,  a  poet» 
theologian  and  teacher  of  the  last  of  the  tenth  century. 
The  succession  of  teachers  is  Nathamuni,  Pundarlkakaha, 
Ramamisra  and  Yamunacharya  preceding  Ramanuja.  25  We  know 
little  about  the  second  and  third  of  these  men,  but  Yam- 
unacharya, who  lived  in  the  middle  of  the  eleventh  century 
was  a  competent  scholar  and  left  several  important  works. 
He  sought  to  establish  the  reality  of  the  human  soul  in 
opposition  to  the  school  of  Sankara  and  gave  the  earliest 
statement  of  the  Visishtadvaita  philosophy,  of  which  Ram- 
anuja became  the  classical  exponent. 

Ramanuja  was  born  at  Srlperumbudur  near  Madras  where 
he  is  still  commemorated  and  worshipped  at  a  celebrated 
shrine.  As  a  youth  he  studied  in  Conjuveram  from  a  teach- 
er, named  Yada  Prakasa,  belonging  to  the  school  of  Sankara, 
But  he  soon  disagreed  with  his  guru  and  became  an  adherent 
of  the  modified  monism  that  was  being  taught  in  Srirangam 
by  Yamunacharya.  He  was  still  a  young  man  when  his  teacher 
died  and  although  he  had  not  been  trained  in  the  school  he 

2$  Ramanuja  is  said  to  have  been  a  great  revivalist  and 
to  have  used  these  Tamil  hymns  in  his  work  as  religious 
leader  much  as  our  modern  Western  evangelists  use  the  gos- 
pel type  of  hymnology.  His  influence  as  practical  relig- 
ious leader  was  great.  He  stands  at  the  head  of  a  long 
list  of  reformers  (such  as  Nimbarka,  Madhva,  Ramananda  and 
Desika)  nearly  all  of  whom  built  upon  him. 


had  become  so  prominent  as  a  vaishnava  scnolar  tnat  he 
was  invited  to  become  leader  of  tne  sect,  ne  accepted 
the  invitation  but  did  not  begin  teaching  until  ne  had 
learned  all  he  could  from  former  pupils  of  his  ~reat 
teacher.     ±5y  nis  appointment  he  came  in  control  of  tne 
temple  of  origragam  as  well  as  of  the  school  and  was  in 
a  place  of  almost  pontifical  authority.  He  proved  to  be 
a  most  successful  teacner  and  controversialist  and  'for 
some  twenty  years  he  lectured,  neld  discussions  and 
wrote  booxs."  26 

1     The  revolt  against  Sanxara's  "Advaita" 
As  we  have  said,   he  revolted  against  aanxara '  s  nAd- 
vaita" ,  or  strict  monism,  oanxara  taught  that  notning 
existed  except  tne  one  existence  called  brahman  or  para- 
matman,   the  nignest  Self,  brahman,  was  pure  being  ana 
thought  I  he  considered  tne  two  to  be  identical)  witnout 
qualities.  "Brahman  is  not  intelligent  but  is  intelli- 
gence i i self."  2?     The  numan  soul  is  identical  with 
.brahman  and  not  merely  a  part  of  it.  it  is  itself  the 
wnole  universal  indivisible  Brahman.  This  does  not  real- 
ly assert  that  man  is  equal  to  G:d  for  xhe  soul  is  iden- 
tical with  Brahman  only  in  so  far  as  it  forgets  its  sep- 
arate numan  existence.  Thus  a  man  wno  has  pride  in  him- 
self is  differentiated  from  Brahman,  uf  course,  in  the 


26  j?'arqunar  -  -ieli^ious  Literature  of  india.  page 

27  ifiliot,  page  312 


242 


31 


world  we  seem  to  see  not  only  aiirerentia tion  and  mult- 
iplicity,  but  also  a  plurality  of  individual  souls  dis- 
tinct from  one  another  and  from  brahman.  This  appearance 
is  due  to  wnat  Sanicara  calls  :.ia;/a  (illusion),   which  is 
associated  with  .brahman  and  is  the  cause  of  tne  pnenom- 
enal  world.  Thus  he  gives  us  a  doctrine  of  illusion.  Noth- 
ing in  tnis  world  is  real.  Sankara  goes  on  to  explain  that 
.brahman  was  not  actuated  by  a  motive  in  the  ordinary  sense 
in  maicing  the  world,  for  that  would  imply  simply  human 
action  and  passion.  He  says,   "We  see  in  every-day  life 
that  certain  doings  or  princes,  who  have  no  desires  left 
unfulfilled,  have  no  reference  to  any  extraneous  purpose 
but  proceed  from  mere  sportf ulness.   ,;e  further  see  that 
the  process  of  ixinalation  and  exnalation  is  going  on 
without  reference  to  any  extraneous  purpose,  merely  fol- 
lowing the  law  or  its  own  nature,  analogously,  the  activ- 
ity or  the  Lord  also  may  be  supposed  to  be  mere  sport, 
proceeding  from  his  own  nature  without  reference  to  any 
purpose".  28    Of  course,  this  is  not  really  an  explan- 
ation of  the  scheme  of  things  or  of  the  origin  of  evil. It 
means  tnat  tne  Advaita  is  so  engrossed  in  ecstatic  con- 
templation of  the  omnipresent  branman  tnat  it  gives  no 


28    S.B.u).   Vo.  ^AAIY  pp.  30o-7 


• 


32 


attention  to  such  a  mere  by-product  as  the  physical 
universe.  Such  reasoning  could  not  go  unchallenged 
even  in  India.  There  are  Indications  that  Sankara' s 
doctrine  of  illusion  met  with    serious  opposition 
even  in  his  time.  The  author  of  the  Dabistan,(a  sev- 
enteenth century  work) ,  tells  a  Berkleyen  story  a- 
bout  Sankara.  "His  enemies  wished  to  test  his  belief 
in  his  own  philosophy;  so  they  drove  an  elephant  at 
him,  on  which  the  philosopher  ran  away.   'Ho'.'  they 
Jeered,   'Did  you  not  maintain  that  all    was  a  mere 
illusion?  Then  an  elephant  is  illusion.  vet  you  take 
flight  before  it.'   'Yes',  replied     the  philosopher, 
'all  is  illusion:  there  was  no  elephant,  and  there 
was  no  flight'".  29 

2    Ramanuja's  theory  of  "Vishishtadvaita" 
Ramanuja  developed  the  theory  of  Vishishtadvaita, 
or  at  least  put  it  in  its  best  expression.  like  San- 
kara he  based  his  theories  on  the  upanisads  for  Auth- 
oritative material.  The  Upanisads    contained  within 
them  various  currents  of  thought    so  that  it  was  not 


29    Hopkins,  Religions  of  India,  page  498  (foot  note) 


difficult  for  either  school  to  find  texts  in  support 
of  the  particular  and  differing  doctrines  neld  by 
each.  Thus  it  was  possible  tor  rtamanuja  to  find  a 
basi3  for  a  philosophy,   in  which,  while  the  absolute 
supremacy  of  brahman  was  maintained,  the  doctrine  of 
Maya  was  rejected  and  the  reality  of  the  world  and  of 
individual  souls  was  admitted.  The  doctrine  tnat  ind- 
ividual souls  are  not  essentially  one  with  tne  su- 
preme was  a  great  contribution  and  whether  or  not  na- 
manuja  himself  was  the  creator  of  the  ideal,  his  em- 
phasis on  tnis  point  meant  much  to  Hindu  rhilosophy. 

a  Individual  souls  are  not  essentially  one  vjit.h 

The  Supreme 

The  authorities  seem  to  be  unanimous  in  the  be- 
lief that  n:amanuja  taught  that  individual  souls  were 
not  essentially  one  with  the  Supreme.  3.  iff.  Hopkins 
says,  "  the  school  of  vedanta  I  that  is,   the  par- 
tially idealistic  school  of  liamanuja  (foot  note)  which 
is  not  'purely  idealistic',  grants  reality  to  uod  and 
to  the  human  soul."  30  Srousset  says,   "Ramanuja,  and 

30  dopkiins,  iS.  ethics  of  India,   page  196 


1 


after  aim,  all  the  vishnuite  teachers,  admitted  tnat 
the  souls  of  individuals  and  the  inanimate  world  were 
just  as  real  as  Brahman  himself,  and  tnat  their  indi- 
viduality could  never  be  entirely  lost."  30a J.  McKen- 
zie  tells  us  that  "Hamanuja  was  able  to  find  a  basis 

for  a  pnilosophy  in  which   tne  reality  of 

the  world  and  of  individual  souls  is  admitted."  31 
riamanuja's  own  words  substantiate  these  statements 
for  in  one  of  his  commentaries  ne  says,  9 We  nave 
proved  that  .Brahman,  which  tne  Vedanta  texts  teach 

to  be  tne  sole  cause  of  tne  world  is  other  than 

the  so-called  individual  soul."  32  It  is  important 
to  note  this  fact  of  his  belief  in  the  individ- 
uality of  the  soul,  not  merely  because  it  is  a  pro- 
gressive step  away  from  pure  monism  but  because, 
as  we  shall  see  later,  tnere  is  an  open  ques- 
tion as  to  whether  or  not  Ramanuja  carried  the 
idea    of    the     individuality    of    the     soul  through 


30a  urousset,  page  101  Itr.) 

31  McKenzie,  J.,  Hindu  ethics,  page  lb9 

32  &.B.E.  Vol.  Al VI II,   page  255f 


c 


35 


to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  associated  with  the  Supreme 
after  release  from  earthly  "bondage  or  is  re-absorbed  into 
the  Supreme.  At  any  rate,  we  are  safe  in  saying  that 
souls  during  their  earthly  existence  are  Independent  of 
the  Supreme  even  though  created  by  Him. 

(l)  The  Essence  of  the  self 
It  is  difficult  to  tell  whether  Ramanuja  felt  that  the 
soul  was  a  piece  of  Brahman  broken  away,  as  it  were,  o  r 
whether  it  was -something  other  and  that  Brahman  controlled 
it.  He  speaks  of  God  as  the  "internal  Controller"  of  men  . 
This,  from  one  point  of  view,  might  suggest  that  the 
soul  was  not  of  the  same  substance  as  God;  yet,  Ramanuja 
is  predominately  pan-theistic ,  and  he  insists  that  what- 
ever exists  is  contained  within  God.  This  would  admit  of 
no  ultimate  second  independent  nature  or  element.  Yet, 
within  this  unity  there  might  be  distinct  elements  of 
plurality  which,  if  effects  or  modes  of  God,  are  abso- 
lutely real  and  not  figments  of  illusion  as  Sankara  held. 
Souls  are  of  varying  classes  and  degrees  and  Include  mat- 
ter in  all  its  forms.  All  taken  together  are  represented 
as  constituting  the  body  of  God  and  are  in  the  same  in- 
dependent relation  to  him  as  is  the  matter  that  forms 
an  animal  or  vegetable    body    to    the     soul    or  .spirit. 
Perhaps  the  only  way  to  approach  an  understanding  of 
Ramanuja's  conception  of  the  soul  in  its  relation  to  its 


* 


36 


universe  is  to  say,  "as  the  Tbody  cannot  be  absolutely  1- 
dentified  with  the  soul,  the  world  of  spirits    and  the 
material  world  cannot  he  identified  with  God.  And  on  the 
other  hand,  as  the  "body  is  not  able  to  exist  without  the 
soul,  neither  one  nor  the  other  is  able  to  exist  with  - 

out  God;  as  the  body    does  not  live  unless 

it  is  "infused"  with  the  spirit,  so  the  soul  and  body 
do  not  exist  unless  the  divine  emination  penetrates  them.  33 
Now,  the  individual  soul,  while  it  is  a  mode  of  the  su- 
preme soul  and  is  entirely  deoendent  upon  it  and  con- 
trolled by  it,  is,  none  the  less  real,  eternal  and  en- 
dowed with  intelligence  and  self -consciousne ss .  It  is 
without  parts,  is  unchanging  and  imperceptible.  Souls 
are  classified  in  an  interesting  way.  There  are  eternal 
(nltya)  souls  that  (such  as  Anata  and  Garuda)  dwell  in 
constant  communion  with  Narayana,  and  released  and 
bound  souls.  Of  the  bound  souls,  some  spend  their  ti^e 
in  seeking  mere  earthly  gains,  others  strive  for  the 
bliss  of  heaven  and  still  others  are  ambitious  for  the 
eternal  bliss  of  final  deliverance. 

(2)  Its  source  found  in  God 
It  is  obvious,  from  what  we  have  said,  that  the  hu- 
man soul  has  its  source  in  God.     Just  how  serious  a 
matter  the  creation  of  souls  was  to  the  Supreme  is  a 
question.  Ramanuja  sometimes  seems  to  indicate  that  Brah- 

33  Grousett,  page  102  (tr.) 


r 


37 


man  was  not  concerned  primarily  with  the  human  soul  while 
it  was  on  earth  or  passing  through  the  stages  of  transmi- 
gration. He  says  that  God  "in  sport,  as  it  were,  creates, 
sustains  and  finally  re-absorbs  this  entire  universe  com- 
prising within  Itself  infinite  numbers  of  variously  con- 
stituted animated  beings."  34  Perhaps  we  can  best  express 
Ramanuja' s  idea  of  the  creation  by  saying  that  God  surely 
created  the  world  and  its  inhabitants;  why,  we  do  not  knew. 

( 3 )  Self-realization  ( satyakamatva)  one  of  the  experiences 

Of  the  human  soul 
The  soul  having  been  created,  whatever  the  means  or  rea- 
son, has  the  experience  of  self-realization.  That  is,  it 
experiences  consciousness,  a  consciousness  that  is  unique 
to  itself.  While  "the  individual  soul  is  the  same  substance 
as  Brahman,  and  purely  spiritual  as  he  is;  is  of  the  same 
substance,  yet  it  is  not  absolutely  of  the  same  nature. 
While  Brahman  is  infinite,  the  individual  souls  are  of 

limited  dimensions   Brahman  exists  independent 

of  souls  and  continues  to  exist  without  them."  35  This 
implies  not  only  the  separate  existence  but  also  the  in- 
dividual self  experience  of  the  human  soul. 

( 4 )  The  realization  of  self  in  present  and  future  life 

While,  as  we  have  seen,  there  can  be  no  doubt  about 
the  condition  of  the  soul  while  on  earth,  the  problem  of 


34  S.B.E.,  Vol.  XLVIII,  pare  256 

35  Grousset,  page  104 


38 


its  state  in  the  future  life  is  not  so  simple.  In  the 
present  life  the  s^ul  is  individual,  of  the  same  sub- 
stance as  Brahman  but  separate  within  him.  The  form 
in  which  it  exists  before  release  is  the  pralaya  con- 
dition which  occurs  at  the  end  of  each  world  period. 
During  this  interval  matter  exists  in  a  subtle  state 
possessing  none  of  the  qualities  that  make  it  an  ob- 
ject of  ordinary  experience.  Souls  also  cease  to  b  e 
connected  with  bodies  and,  while  they  retain  the  es- 
sential quality  of  being  knowing  agents,  are  unable  to 
express  any  manifestation  of  their  intelligence.  Brah- 
man in  this  condition  is  causal  state  (karanavastha) . 
Creation  develops  from  this  condition  by  the  will  of 
God.  Subtle  matter  takes  on  its  form  and  souls  extend 
their  intelligence  and  enter  into  connection  with 
bodies  which  are  ascribed  to  them  in  accordance  with 
their  deeds  in  previous  forms  of  existence.  Brahman 
is  said  to  occupy  the  state  of  effect  in  this  condi- 
tion (k^r^vastha)  .  There  is,  however,  no  essential 
difference  between  the  two  states.  The  effect  is  the 
cause  that  has  undergone  a  process  of  developrrmt.  How- 
ever, Ramanuja  finds  it  important  to  lay  stress  on 
the  distinction  we  have  just  pointed  out  because  it 
serves  to  explain  certain  passages  in  the  Uoanlsads 
that  seem  to  deny  all  duality.  In  the  causal  states 


m 


39 


differences  are  a  minor  detail  and  may  be  ignored.  Those 
passages  that  assert  the  creation  of  the  material  world, 
while  they  assume  the  eternal  existence  of  the  soul,  may 
be  explained  away  by  the  fact  that  in  its  subtle  state 
matter  may  be  regarded  as  in  a  sense  non-existent.  In 
that  condition  it  has  none  of  its  essential  qualities 
while  in  the  pralaya  condition  it  remains  intelligent. In- 
deed, "it  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  by  the  ingenious 
attempt  of  Ramanuja  to  reconcile  the  monism  of  his  pre- 
decessors with  his  personallstic  dualism."  36 

In  regard  to  the  problem  of  the  condition  of  the  in- 
dividual soul  after  salvation ,( e .g.  after  release  fro  m 
the  round  of  transmigrations),  L.D.  Barnett  says  that 
Ramanuja  held, "that  individual  souls    after  sal- 
vation enter  into  a  relation  of  perfectly  heavenly  ser- 
vice to  him."  37  Also,  Farguhar  says,  "When  the  releas- 
ed man  dies,  his  soul  enters  eternal  bliss,  retaining  its 
individuality  forever."  38  But  Sir  Charles  Eliot  sug- 
gests that  "Ramanuja  preaches    that  God  produc- 
es and  re-absorbs  the  universe  in  sport,"  39  and  Rama- 
nuja  himself  says  that  the  soul  reaches  the  "'abode  of 
Brahman '  and  there  'abides  within, i.e.  is  conscious  of 
the  highest  Brahman . 1 "40  In  his  commentary  on  the  Ve- 
danta  Sutra  I  Adhyaya,  1  Pada,  2,  in  regard  to  the  state - 

36  G-rousset,  page  104 

37  Barnett,  L.D.  Hinduism,  page  31 

38  Farquhar,  page  38 

39  Eliot,  Vol.  II,  page  234 

40  Macnicol,  page  106 


• 


(1 


40 


ment," (Brahman  is  that)  from  which  the  origin  &,  of  this 
(world  proceeds),"  Ramanuja  says,  "The  expression  'the or- 
igin,' &,  means  'creation,   subsistence,  and  reabsorpt ion.  '41 
The  question,  then,  arises  as  to  what  is  meant  by  "reab- 
sorption."  As  the  above  quotations  indicate,  some  au- 
thorities boldly  assert  that  Ramanuja  taught  that  the  soul 
maintained  an  absolute  independent  nature  in  blessed  as- 
sociation with  God.  Others,  especially  the  more  recent 
writers,  are  less  certain  and  speak  with  less  assurance 
about  this  conception  of  the  eternal  state.  From  an  in- 
vestigation of  the  translations  of  Ramanuja  into  English 
and  German,  42    it  seems  to  me  that  there  is  about  as  much 
basis  for    believing  that  he  held  to  the  re-absorption  of 
the  soul  as  to  individual  eternal  existence.  He  evident- 
ly set  out  to  prove  that  the  individual  soul  is  separate 
from  Brahman  but  is  not  clear  himself  as  to  whether  ornot 
the  soul  is  re-absorbed.  43    However,  the  fact  that  Rama- 
nuja  even  hints  at  the  possibility  of  individual  exis- 
tence in  the  hereafter  is  remarkable  and  indicates  a  great 
step  in  advance  of  the  too  common  belief  that  tends  to 
run  through  all  Hindu  thinking,  even  that  of  recent  times, 
that  the  soul  at  final  death  or  release  from  the  succes- 
sion of  re-births    loses  its  identity  and  comes    to  a 
state  of  perfect,   inactive,  passionless  rest.  Perhaps 
Sir  Charles  Eliot  best  expresses  the  entire  situation  whsn 

41  5.B.E.,  Vol.  XLVIII,  page  156 

42  S.B.E.  ,    Vnl.  XLVIII  and  Otto,  R. .Siddhanta  Pea  Ram  an  u. la 

page,57f 

43  Note:  This  opinion  was  expressed  by  Dr.  F.L.  Strickland 

and  Dr.  H.E.  Wark,  both  of  Boston  University,  School 
of  Theology. 


41 


he  says,  "For  the  Vishnuites    there  exist  God, 

the  soul  and  matter,  but  most  sects  shrink  from  re- 
garding them  as  entirely  separate  and  "bridge  over  the 

differences  with  various  theories  of  emanations  

for  practical  religion  the  soul  is  entangled  in  mat- 
ter and,  with  the  help  of  God,  struggles  toward  union 
with  Him.  The  precise  nature  and  intimacy  of  this  union 
has  given  rise  to  as  many  subtle  theories  and  phrases 
as  the  sacraments  in  Europe."  44  This  is,  it  is  true, 
a  statement  concerning  later  developments  Of  the  Rama- 
nuja sects,  but  the  fact  that  his  followers  seem  to  be 
uncertain  about  the  matter  as  well  as  the  evident  lack 
of  clearness  in  Ramanuja' s  own  works  leaves  us  free  to 
hold  the  opinion  that  he  was  reaching  for  a  truth  that 
was  just  beyond  his  grasp  and  that  he  failed  to  bring 
to  his  possession. 

( 5 )  Means  of  attaining  Salvation 
Having  seen  something  of  the  state  of  the  soul  dur- 
ing its  temporal  existence  on  earth,  in  Its  causal  state 
and  in  the  state  of  release,  and  that  the  state  of  re- 
lease is  the  goal  desired  by  the  soul,  we  are  ready  to 
consider  the  means  of  obtaining  salvation  as  taught 
by  Ramanuja.  He  used  as  authority  for  much  of  his  teach- 
ing the  Bhagavadglta .  This  scripture  expounds  the  doc- 
trine of  karmayoga .  According  to  this,  man  is  command - 


44    Eliot,  Vol.  II,  page  229 


1 


4 


ed  to  perform  acts  without  desire  of  reward.  It  includes 
the  ceremonial  worship  of  the  deity  which  in  many  of  the 
churches  of  Ramanuja  is  most  elaborate.  L.D.Barnett  says, 
"in  the  schools  of  Ramanuja  the  worship  of  Vishnu  and  his 
"bride  Lakshmi,  or  Sri,  is  marked  with  great  fervor  of  im- 
agination reminding  us  sometimes    of    Dante's  visions  of 
Paradise."  45    Karmayoga  also  Includes  the  practice  of 
penance,  the  offering  of  sacrifice,  the  bestowal  of  char- 
ity and  the  performance  of  pilgrimages,     These  various 
stages  in  the  development  of  the  life  of  the  devotee,  Ra- 
manuja  taught,  served  as  a  preparation  for  juanayoga,  or 
knowledge  of  oneself  as  distinct  from  matter    and    as  a 
form  of  Brahman.  This  leads  to  hhaktl  which  was  not,  for 
Ramanuja,  mere  ecstatic  devotion,  but  rather    a  contin- 
uous process  of  meditation  upon  God.  It  was    a  state 
promoted  by  such  subsidiary  means  as  the  use  of  none  but 
unpolluted  food,  chastity,  correct  performance  of  rites, 
the  practice  of  the  virtues  of  charity,  compassion,  ab- 
staining from  taking  life,  truth  and  uprightness,  cheer- 
fulness and  the  absence  of  elation.  If  bhakti    were  thus 
promoted  it  would  result  in  intuitive    conceptions  of 
God  which  make  up  the  highest  state  that  can  be  realized. 

Prapattl .  on  the  other  hand,  consists  in  the  sense  of 
submission.  Opposition  is  to  be  avoided.  There  is  some- 
thing of  the  feeling  of  dependence  on  the  Deity,  of  con- 
fidence in  his  protection.  The  believer  choses  God  as 
his  savior  and  places  himself  at  His  disposal.  He  is  ccn- 

45    Barnett,  page  31 


43 


scious  of  his  own  utter  debasement. 

Another  doctrine  accredited  to  Ramanuja  is  that  of 
acharyubhumanayoga ,  in  which  the  devotee  places  him- 
self under  the  control  of  his  teacher  who  performs  "the 
acts  necessary  for  deliverance  for  him. 

"b  The  place  of  the  Supreme  in  Ramanuja's  system 

Thus  far  our  emphasis  has  been  on  the  problem  of 
the  human  soul  and  we  have  mentioned  the  Supreme  Being 
in  a  somewhat  secondary  way.  Because  Ramanuja's  con- 
ception of  God  was  loftier  than  any  that  preceded  him, 
and  because  of  his  unique  method  of  dealing  with  the 
problem  of  "the  Absolute"  this  phase  of  his  system  should 
receive  special  attention. 

( 1)  He  is  the  source  of  Individual 
Souls 

In  the  first  place,  he  thought  of  G-od  as  the  source 
of  individual  souls.  Timing  again  to  Ramanuja's  com- 
mentary on  the  Vedanta  Sutra  (I  Adhyaya,l  Pada,2,)  in 
the  statement, " (Brahman  is  that)  from  which  the  origin 
&,  of  this(world  proceeds),"  Ramanuja  says  "The' this' 

(in  'of  this')  denotes    the  aggregate  of  living 

souls  from  Brahma  down  to  blades  of  grass,  all  of  which 

experience  the  fruits  (of  their  former  actions)  

'That  from  which,'   i.e.  that  highest  Person   from 

whom  the  creation,  subsistence,  and  reabsorption  of  this 
world  proceed  —  he  is  Brahman:  such  is  the  meaning  of 


1 


1 


the  Sutra."  He  then  quotes  from  the  Taitt.  Upanisad, 
III,  1," 'That  from  which  these  beings  are  born,  that 
by  which  when  born  they  live,  that  into  which  they 
enter  at  their  death,  try  to  know  that:  that  is  Brah- 
man'" 46  But  we  also  find  that  God  produces  the  to rid 
in  "sport"  and  we  wonder  whether  or  not  we  have  here 
a  fully  developed  idea  of  a  God  that  creates  for  a 
good  purpose.  It  has  been  suggested  that  it  is  not 
a  pernicious  sport,  however,  and  that  even  under  the 
pressure  of  orthodox  Hinduism,  from  which  this  no- 
tion comes,  Ram°nuja  is  trying  to  emphasise  the  good- 
ness of  God.  Yet,  we  can  but  wonder  at  the  God  who 
in  a  fickle  turn  of  mind  forgets  the  dignity  of  deity, 
stoops  to  human  pastime  and  does  things  that  have 
serious  and  lasting  effects  on  humanity.  Sir  Charles 
Eliot  again  suggests  that  while  "Ramanuja  preaches 

the  worship  of  a  loving  God,  when  we  read  that 

God  produces  and  reabsorbs  the  universe  in  sport  we 
find  that  we  are  farther  from  Christianity  than  we 
at  first  supposed."  47 

For  Ramanuja  the  idea  of  creation  is  so  bound  up 
with  re-absorption  and  release  that  it  is  impossible 
to  deal  with  one  without  mentioning  the  other.  More- 
over, this  interrelation  of  ideas  is  carried  into 
the  idea  of  the  person  of  the  'Creator-God'  in  a 
most  ingenious  manner.  Ramanuja  speaks  of  "Brahman- 

46  S.B.E.,  XLVIII,  page  156 

47  Eliot,  Vol.  II,  page  234 


- 


i 


« 


45 


Creator,  or  Brahman -Cause  and  Brahman  caused  or  Brahman 
effect."  48  The  first  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  transcend- 
ent and  personal  God  conforming  to  the  conception  held 
by  the  Visnuites.  The  second  compares  practically  with 
the  universe  of  things.  Brahman-Creator  is  of  subtle  mat- 
erial; Brahman -Created  --  has  'gross'  form.  "The  crea- 
tion of  the  world  eminates  from  Brahman  and  is  not  the 
production  of  anything  new;  it  is  only  a  changing  of 
the  attributes  or  condition,  a  pure  transformation  of 
that  which  is  subtle  to  that  which  has  form.  In  the  same 
way  the  destruction  of  the  universe  is  nothing  other 
than  the  transformation  of  that  which  has  form  to  the 
subtle  state."  49 

In  other  words  the  Cosmos  is  none  other  than  a  mode 
of  Brahman,  yet  for  all  practical  purposes  it  is  as 
though  it  were  distinct  from  Brahman.  It  passes  contin- 
ually from  homogeneity  to  hetrogeneity ,  from  evolution 
to  involution,  from  integration  to  formation  without 
ever  having  any  other  content  than  that  of  God.  God  is 
creator  and  that  which  is  created  is  God. 

(2)  Infinite  in  degree 

In  accord  with  what  we  have  already  said,  Brahman  is 
infinite  in  degree.  He  is  "existence,  knowledge ,  infinite; 
He  is  the  cause  of  creation,  sustenance  and  dissolution 
of  the  world.  All  existence  is  the  body  of  Brahman."  50 

48  Grousset,  page  103f 

49  Grousset,  page  103 

50  McKenzie,  page  159 


■ 


i 


« 


God  is  not  purely  abstract  but  possesses  real  qualities 
of  goodness.  He  is  "omniscient,  omnipotent,  supremely 
merciful."  51  Again,  He  is  "the  highest  Person  (puru  - 
shottama) ,  who  is  essentially  free  from  all  imperfec- 
tions and  possesses  numberless  classes  of  auspicious 
qualities  of  unsurpassable  excellence."  52  All  of  God's 
"purposes  come  true"  He  is  kind,  loving,  and  is  a  Fath- 
er to  all  men.  In  one  of  his  commentaries  Ramanuja 
says, "We  have  proved  that  Brahman,  which  the  Vedanta 
texts  teach  to  be  the  sole  cause  of  the  world,  must  be 
an  intelligent  principle  other  than  the  non-sentient 
prohhana,  since  Brahman  is  said  to  think.  We  have  de- 
clared that  this  intelligent  principle  is  other  than  the 
so-called  individual  soul."  53  At  the  same  time,  he 
says  that  God  contains  "this  entire  universe  comprising 
within  itself  infinite  numbers  of  variously  constitut- 
ed animated  beings."  54- 

It  is  not  surprising  that  Ram.enuja  had  some  difficul- 
ty in  picturing  to  hiTself  some  of  the  relations  that 
this  complex  explanation  of  God  and  His  relation  to  the 
universe  produced.  He  goes  on  to  no  little  rains  to 
justify  himself,  telling  us  that  the  relation  of  non- 
sentient  matter  to  Brahman  is  as  the  colls  to  a  body  of 
a  snake,  or  that  it  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  lumin- 
ous object  to  light  which  are  one  in  that  both  are  fire, 
and  he  emphasizes  over  and  over  again  that  "the  material 

51  Eliot,  Vol.  II,  page  229 

52  S.B.E.,  Vol.  XLIX,  page  3 

53  S.B.E.,  Vol.  XLVIII,  page  255 

54  S.B.E.     Vol.  XLVIII,   page  235 


world  and  human  souls  are  not  illusion  but,  so  to  speak, 
the  body  of  God  who  comprises  and  pervades  them."  55 

Ramanuja  claims  to  find  the  chief  support  for  his 
opinions  in  the  antaryami-brahmana,  contained  in  the 
Brhadaranyaka  Upan 1 sad .  In  this  sacred  book  Brahman  is 
described  as  being  inner  ruler  of  the  whole  universe  in 
all  its  aspects.  He  also  speaks  of  a  passage  in  the  Sve- 
tasvatera  Upanisad  that  lays  stress  on  Brahman  as  being 
the  empirical  subject  (bhokti) ,  the  objective  world 
(bhogya) ,  and  the  power  which  instigates  (preritr).  56 
(6)  The  five  modes  of  God's  Existence 

God  exists  in  five  modes.  They  are  (l)  Para,  the  en- 
tire Supreme  Spirit,  (2)  the  fourfold  manifestation  as 
"Vasudeva,  Sankarshana,  Pradyumna,  and  Aniruddha,"  (3) 
such  incarnations  as  Rama  and  Krishna, (4)  the  internal 
controller  or  Antaryamin  "who  abiding  in  the  soul  rules 
the  soul  within",  and  (5)  duly  consecrated  Images.  The 
first  form  is  the  highest.  Here  He  is  represented  as 
dwelling  in  His  city  of  Valkuntha  under  a  pavilion  of  gems 
and  seated  on  the  serpent  Sesa.  He  is  adorned  with  ce- 
lestial ornaments,  bears  his  celestial  arms  and  mani- 
fests himself  in  perfect  satslfaction  and  bliss.  In  the 
second  condition  the  manifestation  consists  of  His  sev- 
eral vyuhas  or  conditions  assumed  for  the  purpose  of 
worship  and  creation.  Of  these  Sankarsana  possesses  the 

55  Eliot,  Vol.  II,  page  235 

56  It  has  been  suggested  that  Ramanuja  may  have  received 
some  of  his  ideas  from  Christian  sources.  However,  since 
he  nowhere  mentions  them,  and  since  suggestions  for  all 
his  developments  may  be  found  in  Hindu  literature,  we  are 
inclined  to  agree  with  Macnlcol  (page  277)  that  the  opin- 
ion that  the  Bhagavata  religion  was  due  to  Christianity 

can  only  be  a  conjecture". 


1 


48 

qualities  of  knowledge  (jnana)  and  power  to  maintain  (bala). 
Badyumna  has  the  power  to  rule  (aisvarya)  and     to  continue 
as  an  abiding  character  (vairya) .  Aniruddha  has  the  powerto 
create  (sakti)  and  the  power  to  overcome  (tyas).  Vasudeva 
has  all  six  qualities.  The  third  form  is  made  up  of  the  ten 
avatars  of  the  ordinary  mythology.     It  should  be  noted  here 
that  Ramanuja  lays  great  stress  on  this  manifestation.  By 
the  grace  of  God  there  are  many  incarnations.  The    deity  is 
represented  as  coming  again  and  again  in  the  form  of  man  that 
certain  much  needed  truths  may  be  revealed.  The  fourth,  the 
Antaryamin  is  the  condition  in  which  he  lives  in  the  hearts 
of  men.  This  can  be  seen  by  the  supernatural  vision    of  the 
Yogi,  and  it  accompanies  the  soul  in  its  passage  to  heaven. 
God  in  the  fifth  form  dwells  in  idols  made  by  the  hands  of 
men . 

c  He  excels  other  thinkers  of  his  time 
There  are  several  reasons  why  v/e  think  that  Ramanuja  ex- 
cels other  thinkers  of  his  time.  He  emphasized  devotion  to 
a  personal  God.  This  opened  the  way  of  worship  and  salvation 
to  the  vast  crowds  of  common  people  who  had  here-to-fore  had 
little  hope  of  communication  with  God.  The  belief  in  a  God 
that  had  personal  qualities  of  goodness,  in  a  universe  that 
was  real,  and  in  salvation  for  all  human  souls  must  have 
stood  out  in  keen  contrast  to  others  of  his  time  (the  fol- 
lowers of  Sankara)  who  denied  the  personality  of  God  and 
indicated  that  the  great  accomplishment  of  man  should 
be  freedom  from  transmigration  terminating  in  imper- 
sonality. 


49 


E     Influence  of  his  life  and  teaching 

Our  emphasis  for  the  most  part  has  been  on  Ramanuja's 
philosophical  contributions.  Our  interest  in  this  dis- 
cussion is  primarily  in  the  field  of  philosophy.  However, 
we  should  call  to  mind  the  fact  that  this  man  did  not 
confine  his  activities  to  one  field  alone.  He  was  as  much 
a  reformer  in  religion  as  he  was  a  re-organizer  in  phil- 
osophy. Our  attention  ought  to  be  directed  to  the  practi- 
cal influence  of  his  life  and  teaching. 

1    His  Influence  on  the  Bhagavata  religion 

Ramanuja  completed  the  work  for  Indian  Theism  that  was 
begun  by  the  unknown  author  of  the  Bhagavadglta.  He  es- 
tablished it  in  the  midst  of  the  Bhagavata  religion  by 
giving  it  an  authoritative  basis  that  it  had  not  before 
had.  For  this  reason  his  name  became  a  new  prasthana  for 
Vai.snavism  throughout  the  country,  "a  source  whence  flow- 
ed, north  and  west  and  east  across  the  land,  rivers  of 
really  vital  and  ethically  enobling  religion."  57  Be- 
cause of  what  claimed  to  be  a  demonstration  of  its  an- 
tiquity and  its  intimate  relation  with  the  most  ancie  n  t 
and  authoritative  scriptures,  he  was  able  to  accompli s  h 
for  the  Bhagavata  religion  of  India  with  its  pronoun  c  ed 
theism  what  the  Greek  Fathers  did  for  Christianity  in 
its  Helllnic  environment. 

57    Macnicol,  page  112 


i 


50 


2  His  Influence  on  the  Bhaktl  faith 

Ramanuja  strengthened  the  religion  of  future  centuries 
greatly  by  his  addition  to  the  doctrine  of  bhaktl .  Up  to 
his  time  bhaktl  had  meant  merely  "loving  devotion".  Devo  - 
tion  was  now,  as  it  had  not  been  before,  definitely  linked 
with  reflection,  and  the  combination  gave  it  new  dignity. 
This  addition  to  the  doctrine  made  it  depend  upon  person  - 
ality  in  both  G-od  and  man  and  a  real  and  abiding  self.  It 
tended  to  diminish  pantheistic  beliefs  for  it  could  not 
thrive  in  the  pure    pantheism  so  common  to  Indian  thought. 

3  His  influence  upon  the  life  of  the  people 

There  is  a  story  related  of  Ramanuja  that  may  well  have 
something  of  true  tradition  behind  it  and  that  indicate  s 
something  of  his  influence  upon  the  people  of  his  time  and 
his  bearing  on  the  development  of  Vaisnavism  as  the  people 
saw  it.  It  is  said  that  a  noted  guru  of  his  time  gave  to 
Ramanuja,  under  the  customary  pledge  of  secrecy,  his  eso- 
teric doctrine.  But  having  learned  it  Ramanuja  felt  that  it 
was  the  way  of  salvation  that  all  the  people  should  know 
and  breaking  his  pledge  proclaimed  it  to  the  world.  A  Char- 
acteristic of  his  teaching  that  marked  it  off  from  other 
sects  in  India  is  its  exclu^iveness .  He  must  ha-re  had  a 
most  appealing  personality  to  draw  to  him  the  large  numbers 
he  did  in  the  face  of  this.  The  Indian  pantheistic  mind  has 
always  been  too  tolerant  of  any  faith  believing  that  each 
new  god  was  but  another  manifestation  of  the  nameless  One. 
But  for  Ramanuja  only  the  Vaisnavite  pantheon  was  tolerat- 
ed, a  move  toward  monotheism  seldom  seen  in  India's  religion. 


« 


51 


The  absence  from  the  religion  of  the  people  of  India  of 
the  intolerance,  and  what  might  be  called  the  "monothe- 
istic arrogance",  of  the  Hebrew  prophets,  is  due  more 
than  anything  else  to  the  pantheistic  root  of  most  of 
the  thought  of  India  with  its  consequent  half-hearted  - 
ness  in  affirming  the  divine  unity.  Perhaps  no  one  since 
the  time  when  the  Vedic  Varuna  was  worshipped  was  so 
convinced  of  this  Semitic  ideal  as  was  Ramanuja.  This 
new  interpretation  with  his  revivalistic  spirit  made 
it  possible  for  this  man,  already  in  a  powerful  position 
as  leader  of  his  cult,  to  gather  about  him  and  his  or- 
ganization a  devout,  spiritual  and  energetic  following. 

F  Summary 

A  review  of  our  investigation  discloses  the  fact,  as 
we  have  suggested  before,  that  Hindu  thought  is  not  to 
be  set  aside  too  lightly  by  students  from  the  West,  but 
that  many  and  profound,  developments  are  to  be  reckoned 
with. 

1  R£manuja  the  outcome  of  a  long  period  of  development 
We  have  seen,  moreover,  that  Ramanuja  was  the  nat- 
ural outcome  of  a  certain  line  of  development  in  thought 
that  covered  a  long  period  of  tiuie.  He  was  not  unlike 
the  great  men  of  other  countries  in  this  respect. He  did, 
it  is  true,  aake  a  great  contribution.  But  so  far  as 
we  have  been  able  to  discover  he  did  his  work  in  a  per- 
fectly normal  way. 


i 


52 


'Ye  traced  the  tendency'  toward  the  Ideal  of  a  per- 
sonal interpretation  of  the  universe  through  the  im- 
portant literary  productions.  We  attempted  to  make 
them  reveal  the  period  that  they  represented  and 
were  able  to  pick  out  some  of  the  indications  of  a 
growing  desire  to  solve  the  problems  of  life  in  an 
intelligent  way.  We  be^an  with  the  early  Vedas  and 
were  somewhat  surprised  to  find  that  already  a  very 
high  idealism  had  grown  up.  The  one  God,  Varuna  was 
expressing  for  the  people  almost  what  Jehovah  ex- 
pressed for  the  early  Hebrews.  He  over- shadowed  all 
other  deities  for  a  long  time  and  India  seemed  well 
on  the  way  toward  a  personali stic  idealism-  But  by 
some  strange  twist  Varuna  lost  his  power  and  thought 
took  another  turn  and  in  the  Brahmanas  and  Upani- 
sads  we  see  that  the  emphasis  is  taken  largely  away 
from  the  individual  and  his  salvation  and  social 
and  religious  institutions  swallow  up  the  masses  in 
a  great  priestly  system.  We  are  almost  inclined  to 
despair  of  any  hope  for  India's  intellectual  salva- 
tion, but  between  the  lines  we  see  that  it  is  quite 
probable  that  not  all  the  story  is  written  in  the  re- 
cords and  that  there  were  oany  who  knew  something  of 
the  value  of  the  individual  soul  and  of  fellowship 
with  a  G-od  who  was  a  personality  and  who  heard  and 
answered  prayers. 


53 


2  Ramanuja's  contribution  was  most  valuable 

After  the  periods  mentioned  there  was  a  change  for 
the  better.  Leading  up  to  the  time  of  the  Bhagavad- 
glta  there  were  occasional  leaders  who  broke  away 
from  the  traditional  order  that  had  culminated  in  the 
impersonalism  that  was  to  have  so  great  a  vogue  in 
India.  The  new  development  has  its  best  expression  in 
the  Bhagavadgita  with  its  suggestion  of  bhakti.  Those 
who  appreciated  this  new  emphasis  were  increasing  in 
numbers  when  Ram-muja  came  on  the  scene  in  the  twelfth 
century.  He  gave  the  idea  a  new  development.  He  made 
religion  more  worthful  by  backing  it  with  a  sane  phil- 
osophy. He  saw  that  the  individual  was  the  only  thing 
in  the  universe  that  really  was  important.  He  gave  In- 
dividuality new  meaning  and  the  human  soul  as  separ  - 
ate  from  the  Eternal  was  stressed.  Also  there    was  a 
new  emphasis  on  the  personality  of  G-od .  He  became  a 
Being  that  the  common  people  could  understand.  They 
were  able  to  go  in  oerson  to  the  God  that  Ramanuja 
disclosed  to  them  and  worship  Him.  He  became  a  Father 
to  them.  They  were  offered  a  way  of  salvation  that  was 
within  their  grasp.  God  was  no  longer  a  Being  that 
expressed  himself  in  absolute  disinterest. 

a  It  met  a  need  of  his  day 

Perhaps  the  important  fact  about  Ramanuja' s  life 
and  teaching  is  that  he  met  a  great  need  of  his  day. 
He  read  the  need  in  the  conditions     of  his     time  and 


was  most  successful  in  molding  the  best  of  India's 
past  into  a  solution  for  her  problems  then. 

Hoy/ever,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  he  rrade  a 
greater  contribution  than  any  other  philosopher  or 
religious  leader,  and  he  deserves  our  most  serious 
consideration,  there  was  much  that  was  left  un- 
done. He  did  not  entirely  overcome  the  impact 
of  Hindu  superstition.  He  allowed  doctrines  to 
creep  into  his  theology  that  will  not  stand  the 
test  of  criticism.  Also,  he  never  made  a  complete 
break  with  the  old  systems,  hence,  many  of  the  evils, 
such  as  caste,  transmigration  and  the  crude  idol- 
atry, all  of  which  were  involved  in  these  systems, 
remained.  Never- the-less ,  he  made  such  a  stride  for- 
ward that  all  that  is  purely  Hindu  and  of  real  worth 
in  India  that  has  developed  since  his  time  has  di- 
rectly or  indirectly  found  the  root  of  its  expres- 
sion in  him. 


i 


Bibliography 

Alyenger,  Krlshnaswami ,  Life  of  Ramanuja.  Madras:  1909 
Barnett,  L.D.  Heart  of  India.  London:  Constable  and  Company 
Barnett,  L.D.  Hinduism.  London:  Constable  and  Company,  1913 
Barnett,  L.D.  Hindu  Gods  and  Heroes.  New  York: 

Dutton  and  Company,  1922 
Bhandarker,  R.G.  Report  on  the  Search  for  Sanskrit  MSS  In 

the  Bombay  Presidency  during  the  year  1883-84 . 
Strassburg:  1913 
Carpenter,  J.E.  Theism  in  Medieval  India.  London: 

Williams  and  Norgate,  1921 
Cave,  Sidney,  Redemption,  Hindu  and  Christian.  New  York: 

Oxford  University  Press,  1919 
Cave,  Sidney,  Living  Religions  of  the  East.  New  York: 

Charles  Scribner' s  Sons,  1922 
Eliot,  Sir  Charles,  Hinduism  and  Buddhism.  London: 

Edward  Arnold  and  Company,  1921 
Farquhar,  J.N.  A  Primer  of  Hinduism.  London: 

Oxford  University  Press,  1912 
Farquhar,  J.N.  Modern  Religious  Movements  In  India.  New  York: 

Macmillan  Company,  1915 
Farquhar,  J.N.  Outline  of  the  Religious  Literature  of  India. 

London:  Oxford  University  Press,  1919 
Prazer,  R.W.   Indian  Thought,  Past  and  Present.  London: 

T.  Fisher  Unwln,  1915 
Govlndacharya,  A.  Life  of  Ramanuja.  Madras:  Murthy 
Govindacharya,  A.  Yatlnda  Mata  Dlpika.  Madras:  Murthy 

Grousset,  R.  Histolre  de  la  Philosophie  Orientale.  Paris: 
Nouvelle  Librarie  Nationale,  1923 


Holland,  W.E.S.  The  Goal  of _Indla.  London: 

Cathedral  House,  8  Paternoster  Row,  1920 
Hopkins,  E.W.  Ethics  of  India.  New  Haven: 
Yale  University  Press,  1924 
Hopkins,  E.W.  The  Religions  of  India.  Boston: 

Ginn  and  Company,  1895 
Hopkins,  E.W.  The  History  of  Religions.  New  York: 

Macmillan  Company,  1923 
Howells,  George,  The  Soul  of  India.  London: 

The  Kingsgate  Press,  1913 
Hume,  R.A.  An  Interpretation  of  India's  Religious  History. 

New  York:  Fleming  H.  Revell  Company,  1911 
Hume,  R.A.  The  World's  Living  Religions.  New  York: 

Charles  Scribner' s  Sons,  1924 
Hunter,  W.W.  A  Brief  History  of  the  Indian  Peoples.  New  York: 

Young  People's  Missionary  Movement,  1903 
Johnson,  S.  Oriental  Religions.  Boston: 

James  R.  Osgood  and  Company,  1873 
Jones,  John  P.  India's  Problem.  Krishna  or  Christ.  New  York: 

Young  People's  Missionary  Movement,  1903 
Jones,  John  P.   India,   Its  Life  and  Thought.  New  York: 

Macmillan  Company,  1915 
Keith,  A.B.  Ramanuja  (Encyclopedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics). 

New  York:  Charles  Scribner' s  Sons,  1919 
Macnicol,  Nicol,  Indian  Theisn.  London 

Oxford  University  Press,  1923 


MaxMuller,  F.  Ramanu ja.  London: 

Longman's  Green  and  Company,  1903 
MaxMuller,  F.  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  Oxford: 

Clarendon  Press,  1880 
McKenzie,  John,  Hindu  Ethics.  London: 

Oxford  University  Press,  1923 
Menzie,  A.  History  of  Religion.  New  York: 
Charles  Scribner'  s  Sons,  1895 
Mitchell,  M.  The  Great  Religions  of  India.  New  York: 

Young  People's  Missionary  Movement, 
Montgomery,  J. A.  Religions  of  the  Past  and  Present.  London: 

L.B.  Lippincott  Company,  1918 
Moore,  George  Foot,  History  of  Religions.  New  York: 

Charles  ScriTbner' s  Sons,  1913 
Otto,  Rudolf,  Siddhanta  des  Ramanu.la.  Tubingen: 
Mohr,  1923 

Paramanda,  Swami,  Bhagavadglta  (translated).  Boston: 

The  Vedanta  Centre,  1912 
Pratt,  J.B.   India  and  Its  Faiths.  Boston: 

Houghton  Mifflin  Company,  1915 
Reed,  Elizabeth  A.  Hinduism  in  Europe  and  America.    New  York 

G.P.  Putnam's  Sons,  1914 
Soper,  E.D.  The  Religions  of  Mankind.    New  York: 

The  Abingdon  Press,  1921 
Thurston,  Edgar,  Omens  and  Superstitions  of  Southern  India. 

New  York:  McBride,  Nest  and  Company,  1912 


Toy,  C.H.  Intro  1/ 1  jt  Ion  to  the  History  of  Religions. 

New  York:  Ginn  and  Company,  1913 
Whitehead.,  H-  The  Village  Gods  of  Southern  India- 

Oxford  University  Press,  1916 
Williams,  Monier,  Hinduism.  London: 

Society  for  promoting  Christian  Knowledge , 1 877 
Williams,  Monier,  Brahmanlsm  and  Hinduism.  New  York: 

Macmillan  and  Company,    189 1 


Works  that  have  Received  Thorough 
Con  slderatlon 


1.  Ramnnuja.  Encyclopaedia  Erltannlca,  New  York: 

Encyclopaedia  Brltannica  Company.  1910 

2.  Ramanu ja.  Encyclopedia  of  Religion  and  Ethics,  New  York 

Charles  Scribner' s  Sons,  1919 

3.  Grousset,  R.  Histolre  de  la  Phllosophle  Orlentale. 

Paris:  Nouvelle  Librarie  Nationale,  1923 
Hopkins,  B.W.  Ethics  of  India.  New  Haven: 
Yale  University  Press,  1924 

5.  Eliot,  Sir  Charles,  Hinduism  and  Buddhism.  London: 

Edward  Arnold  and  Company,  1921 

6.  McKenzie,  John,  Hindu  Ethics.  London: 

Oxford  University  Press,  1923 

7.  Otto,  Rudolf,  Slddhanta  des  Ramanuja.  Tubingen: 

Mohr,  1923 

8.  MacnicoL^  Nicol,  Indian  Theism.  London: 

Oxford  University  Press,  1923 


Hi 


( 


BOSTON  UNIVERSITY 


1  171 


9  02487  3897 


NOT  TO  BE  TAKEN 
FROM  THE  LIBRARY 


L-QZ 


jaisoj  y  auiqsns  'smepy 
Xq  pajruoEjnuew 
8681  '91   AON  aaJNSiVd 

J9A03  jdjJOsnueiAi 

lE3PI 


