===== Internet Archive OCR: prabdhachandr00krsnrich_djvu.txt =====

UC-NRLF 


PEABODHA   CIAOKfiDAYA 

OR 

RISE  OF  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT. 
A  SPIRITUAL  DRAMA 

AND 

ATMA  BODHA 

OR 

THE    KNOWLEDGE    OF   SELF, 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  SANSKRIT  AND  PRAKRIT^ 

BY 

J.   TAYLOR,  M.  D., 

MEMBER  OF  THE  ASIATIC  SOCIETY,    AND  OF  THE  LITEEAET 
SOCIETY,   BOMBAY. 


SECOND    EDITION. 


BY 


TO  OK  A  RAM    TATYA,    F.  T.  S., 

FOR  THE  BOMBAY  THEOSOPHICAL 
PUBLICATION  FUND. 


•FROM -THE- LIBRARY- OF- 
A.   W.    Ryder 


^2. 
^ 


PEABODHA  CHANDEODAYA 


OR 


RISE  OF  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT. 
A  SPIRITUAL  DRAMA 

AND 

ATMA  BODHA       -   " 


OR 

THE    KNOWLEDGE    OF   SELF, 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  SANSKRIT  AND  PRAKRIT, 

BY 

J.  TAYLOR,  M.D., 

MEMBER  OF  THE  ASIATIC  SOCIETY,    AND  OP  THE  LITERARY 
SOCIETY,   BOMBAY. 


SECOND   EDITIOK. 


PUBLISHED  BY 

TOOKARAM    TATYA,    F.  T.  S., 

FOR  THE  BOMBAY  THEOSOPHICAL 
PUBLICATION  FUND. 

1803. 


FEINTED  AT  THE  "  TATVA-VIYEOHAKA  "  PRESS. 


\>f  b-vs/^         \\KJe»  V—  Afc-* 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  word  Prabodha  is  derived  from  pra — meaning  forth,  or 
before,  and  lodha — knowledge,  hence,  ifc  signifies  the  knowledge 
which  dispels  ignorance.  In  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson's  Dictionary, 
we  find  the  following  equivalents : — wakef ulness,  active  or  vigilant 
state  of  being ;  intellect,  understanding,  knowledge,  wisdom.  In  the 
Marathi  Dictionary,  published  under  the  direction  of  the  Board  of 
Education,  in  Bombay,  the  learned  shastris  and  pandits  say  that 
Prabodha  means  the  knowledge  which  removes  the  darkness  of 
ignorance  caused  ly  the  illusion  of  Maya,  and  shoivs  the  relation- 
ship of  selfy  or  soul,  with  the  Universe  of  matter  and  spirit.  Mr.  J. 
Taylor,  the  author  of  the  work  uses  the  word  "  Intellect "  for  Pra- 
bodha ;  but  it  does  not  convey  the  full  and  comprehensive  meaning 
as  explained  in  Marathi  Dictionary. 

The  word  Chandrodaya. — from  Chandra,  the  Moon,  and  udaya,  the 
dawn,  means — '  The  dawn  or  rising  of  the  Moon.'  The  word  '  Moon ' 
is  also  used  to  express  the  God  presiding  over  the  mind,  and 
sometimes  the  mind  itself.  There  is  such  a  close  relation  between 
the  Moon  and  man's  mind  that  the  changes  in  her  position  affect  the 
mind,  either  physically  or  morally,  and  produce  either  good  or  bad 
results. 

Prabodha  Chandrodaya, — The  Title  of  this  book,  may,  therefore, 
be  properly  said  to  imply  either  "The  dawn  of  the  light,  or 
knowledge  dispelling  the  darkness  resulting  from  the  ignorance  of 
mind,  caused  by  the  illusion  of  Maya  "  •  or  "  The  spiritual  awakening 
of  the  mind." 

This  volume  being  simply  a  reprint  of  the  translation,  we  retain 
the  original  Title  of  the  book  though,  in  our  humble  opinion,  it  does 
not  convey  fully  the  sense. 

The  work  was  written  by  Krishna  Misra  of  Maithila,  one  of  the 
greatest  scholars  and  philosophers  of  his  time,  to  expose,  ridicule, 

M3194.8 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

and  contradict  the  ideas  of  Budhists,  Jains,  Charwakas,  Kapalikas, 
and  other  sects  which  had  taken  hold  of  the  public  mind  in  his  days, 
and  to  awaken  in  the  people  a  spirit  of  inquiry  into  the  principles 
of  Vedantic  Philosophy.  He  felt  the  necessity  for  it,  since  there 
was  then  a  great  tendency  to  atheism  and  other  cognate  doctrines  : 
To  check  the  strong  current  of  materialism  by  a  popular  agency  he 
wrote  the  work  in  the  form  of  a  drama  illustrative  of  the  nature 
and  action  of  the  mind,  with  its  good  and  bad  passions  in  play. 

It  produced  the  desired  effect,  and  became  so  popular  that  its 
fame  spread  far  and  wide.  It  attracted  the  attention  of  the  king  of 
Magadha  who,  with  his  Pandits  and  courtiers,  travelled  to  Maithila 
desk  to  witness  the  representation  of  the  drama  ;  as,  in  our  days,  the 
kings  and  princes  of  Europe  gathered  at  Baireuth  to  see  the  pro- 
duction of  Wagner's  mystical,  allegorical  opera  of  ''  Parsifal." 

It  cannot  be  said  with  certainty  how  far  the  author  succeded  in 
representing  Anti-Vedism  and  bringing  about  the  desired  revolution 
in  the  philosophical  views  of  the  people.  It  can,  however,  be  safely 
affirmed  from  what  historical  records  we  have,  that  the  strength  of 
the  Anti-VSdic  sects  began  to  decline  from  that  time. 

The  exact  date  of  the  work  is  not  known.  It  can  be  said  that  it 
must  have  been  written  either  before  or  during  the  reign  of 
Kirtivarma,  the  Rajah  of  Magadh  who  nourished  in  the  year  648  of 
the  Christian  Era  and  who,  as  already  mentioned,  is  said  to  have 
attended  its  representation.  It  is  about  this  time  that  Budhism  in 
its  corrupted  state  began  to  decline  in  India.  It  appears  that  the 
work  could  not  have  been  written  long  before  this  period.  If  there 
be  any  difference  of  opinion  as  to  its  exact  date,  it  can  only  be  as 
regards  years,  not  centuries. 

The  allegorical  representation  of  the  mind  and  the  passions  could 
not  be  said  to  be  original  with  the  author.  In  the  Vedas,  Maha- 
bharat  and  Puranas  all  the  passions  are  personified.  The  author  of 
the  Drama  has,  however,  arranged  them  so  well  that  in  the  first 
part  of  his  design,  he  makes  a  good  impression  (on  the  mind  of  the 
reader)  of  their  power  to  do  good  or  evil  as  a  person  may  choose  to 
submit  himself  to  their  influence. 


INTRODUCTION.  5 

He  then  propounds  the  problems  of  the  VSdantic  Philosophy  in 
a  most  simple  manner  so  that  they  might  be  understood*  and 
grasped  by  even  persons  of  little  education. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  Vedanta  Philosophy  takes  the  Mani. 
fested  and  Unmanifested  to  be  one  whole.  This  one  whole  is 
divided  into  ft^,  Microcosm  and  srsTR",  Macrocosm,  in  order  to 
facilitate  the  process  of  reasoning  on  the  subject  of  the  phenomenal 
universe.  Microcosm  though  but  an  infinitesimal  portion  of  the 
Macrocosm,  represents  its  potentiality  within  the  smallest  compass. 
Microcosm,  therefore,  is  nothing  but  a  prototype  of  macrocosm. 
Hence  the  study  of  microcosm  in  all  its  aspects  enables  one  to 
comprehend  what  the  macrocosm  may  be.  It  would  be  impossible 
for  one  to  study  the  whole  of  Cosmos.  One  can  study  the  Microcosm 
i.  e.  self  and  ascertain  what  it  is  and  what  laws  govern  it. 

This  being  the  case,  many  philosophers  of  all  ages  and  countries 
have  applied  themselves  to  the  study  of  self,  and  after  gaining  the 
desired  thorough  knowledge  of  self,  have  declared  that  it  must  be  the 
aim  and  object  of  all  men  who  aspire  to  spiritual  knowledge  to  study 
the  problem  of  existence,  as  this  is  the  only  way  for  man  to  acquire  the 
highest  knowledge  and  consequently  the  highest  good  or  happiness. 

There  are  but  two  ways  of  solving  the  problem  of  life  and 
arriving  at  the  truth ;  1.  Inductive  and  2.  Deductive.  The  Hindus 
and  some  of  the  Greek  philosophers  such  as  Pythagoras,  Plato  and 
others,  have  adopted  the  latter  system  since  it  is  the  surest  way  as 
it  deduces  from  the  existing  facts  their  true  cause.  In  the  study  of 
*  self,'  taking  man  as  he  is  existing,  he  is  found  to  be  made  of  (1.)  the 
lody  ,  including  the  brain,  heart,  lungs  and  other  viscera;  (2)  the 
vital  principle  that  keeps  his  body  alive  by  means  of  food,  water, 
and  air  ;  (3)  desire,  a  motive  power  which  keeps  up  existance  and 
makes  it  supportable  ;  (4  &  5)  the  mind,  with  its  higher  and  lower 
nature  or  passions ;  (6)  Budhi,  the  power  of  judgement  or  will ;  and 
(7)  the  soul,  which  cognizes  all  the  objective  and  subjective  exist- 
ences. The  last  of  these  divisions  is  allied  to  the  spirit,  or  universal 
spirit,  the  primal  or  first  cause  of  all  the  manifested  and  unmanifest- 
ed  nature.  Besides  these,  there  are  other  ways  by  which  man  is 
analysed  by  different  Eastern  philosophers.  The  comparative  state- 
ment given  in  the  Secret  Doctrine  Vol.  I  Page  157  is  copied  here 
for  the  information  of  readers. — 


G 


INTRODUCTION. 


Comparative  classification  of  divisions  mentioned  in    Budhist  and  Hindu 
teachings. 


1    Sthula  Sharira. 

Annamaya  Kosha  * 

] 

2    Prana  f 
3    The  Vehicle  of  Prana:}:.. 

V  Prunamaya  Kosha 

J>Shulopddhi.  § 

4    Kama  Rupa 

v 

{(a)  Volition  and 
feelings  &C.&G. 
(b)  Vidnyana  ... 

b-Manomaya  Kosha 
Vidnyanamaya  Kosha     ... 

1  Sukshmopddhi. 

6    Spiritual  Soul  || 

Anandmaya  Kosha 

Karanopddhi. 

7    Atma 

Atma 

/v 

Atma. 

Besides  these  there  are  still  finer  divisions  made,  and  each  of 
these  has  been  gone  into  separately  and  great  thought  bestowed  on 
all  of  them  ;  and  their  nature,  mutual  relationship  and  connection 
with  the  whole  being  of  man  have  been  deeply  studied,  determined 
and  identified  with  the  supreme  spirit. 

This  theoretical  knowledge  arrived  at  after  deep  research,  was  put 
to  the  test  of  experience  to  ascertain  whether  the  result  were 
correct.  They  had,  therefore,  to  adopt  means  to  realise  all  the  con- 
clusions they  had  arrived  at  objectively  for  their  own  satisfaction. 
To  realize  all  the  objective  existences  successively  they  had  to 
adopt  all  the  means  and  methods  that  could  be  suggested  by  the 
human  mind.  They  all  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion  that 
Parbraham  is  without  a  second,  and  all  that  we  see  and  observe  are 
his  manifestations  under  different  conditions,  He  is  the  source  of  all 
that  is  seen  in  the  shape  of  energy  or  force,  matter  or  motion,  soul 
or  spirit. 

This  knowledge  can  only  be  arrived  at  by  subjugating  the  mind 
and  its  passions  and  by  giving  up  all  the  selfishness  of  this  world. 

*  Kosha  is  "  Sheath  "  literally;  the  sheath  of  every  principle. 

t  Life. 

J  The  astral  body  or  Linga  Sharira. 

§  Sthulopadhi,  or  the  basis  of  the  principle. 

II  Budhi. 


INTRODUCTION.  7 

The  methods  adopted  by  different  philosophers  as  stated  above  have 
all  one  aim — that  of  subjecting  the  mind  or  extinguishing  it ;  for 
as  long  as  it  is  allowed  to  play  its  part,  the  experience  of  the  sub- 
jective, or  self  is  impossible,  since  it  is  the  mind  that  has  objectified 
itself  into  universal  matter  and  things.  Unless,  therefore,  the  mind 
is  extinguished,  or  one  completely  retires  within  himself,  subjective 
experiences  could  not  be  realized.  For  this  reason,  the  author  of 
this  spriritual  Drama  has  chosen  the  mind  and  its  appendages — the 
passions — as  actors,  in  order  to  give  the  readers  a  clear  idea  of 
the  power  the  mind  exerts  in  keeping  from  us  the  true  knowledge  of 
the  self  or  the  universal  soul,  and  in  tempting  those  who  are 
attached  to  its  illusions  to  undergo  all  sorts  of  pain,  rebirth,  etc. 

In  the  Christian  Bible,  the  mind  is  personified  as  the  Devil.  Its 
origin  is  said  to  be  angelic.  It  has  been  known  as  the  Devil  on 
account  of  its  revolt  against  God,  its  master.  It  was  this  that  crept 
stealthily  in  the  form  of  a  snake  into  the  mind  of  the  first  created, 
Adam  and  Eve,  and  diverted  their  attention  from  their  godlike  condi- 
tion to  worldliness,  and  caused  their  "fall,"  for  which  all  the 
Christian  world  has  to  suffer  eternal  damnation  unless  they  acknow- 
ledge the  Christ,  or  Budhi  37%,  their  Saviour,  and  follow  him  in 
order  to  inherit  the  redemption  he  has  offered  to  his  followers . 
This  redemption  is  the  purification  from  the  the  original  sin,  brought 
by  Adam  on  all  the  human  race  by  forgetting  his  own  identity  with 
Divinity,  the  original  self  and  falling  into  the  snares  of  the  mind, 
otherwise  called  maya  or  illusion — which  made  him  think  that  he 
was  separate  from  Divinity. 

This  was  the  First  Sin  in  which  according  to  the  Bible,  the  whole 
human  race  has  participated.  To  save  mankind  from  this  sin,  and 
to  save  them  from  the  eternal  damnation  of  Rebirths,  Christ  says  :— 
"  I  and  my  father  are  one."  The  knowledge  of  this  was  and  is  the 
true  expiation  and  salvation  preached  by  Christ,  the  Budhi  of  the 
author  of  this  work.  We  are  afraid  that  this  explanation  of  the 
Biblical  allegory  of  the  fall  of  the  angel,  subsequently  called  the 
Devil,  both  by  the  Jews  and  Christians  and  also  of  the  first  man, 
the  origin  of  sin,  and  the  means  pointed  out  for  its  redemption,  or 
absolution,  in  the  New  Testament,  will  never  be  accepted  by  the 
present  followers  of  Moses  and  Christ.  This  would  affect  their 
cherished  doctrines  of  the  duality  of  God  and  the  universe,  and  of 


8 


INTRODUCTION. 


God  and  man  ;  the  one  as  the  Creator  and  the  other  as  the  created; 
And  yet  it  appears  from  the  explanation  already  given  that  the 
writers  of  the  Bible  believed  the  absolute  Unity  of  the  Human  soul 
and  spirit,  of  the  Universe  and  the  Supreme  Spirit. 

In  order  to  arrive  at  the  true  knowledge  of  the  mind  and  its 
nature  one  must  read  the  Sanskrit  work  called  the  Yoga  Yashishta. 
When  once  the  mind  is  properly  understood  with  all  its  passions  or 
vritis,  the  student  of  the  Brahama  Yidya  would  not  find  much 
difficulty  in  realizing  the  knowledge  of  self  ft¥  or  microcosm  and  the 
supreme  soul  sr^F?  or  Macrocosm. 


With  these  few  introductory  remarks  we  recommend  the  readers 
of  this  spiritual  Drama  to  study  it  very  carefully,  and  calmly 
ponder  the  subject  treated  therein,  over  and  over  again  until  he 
solves  for  himself  the  problem  of  man's  existence.  This  work  it- 
self may  be  fairly  said  to  be  an  Introduction  to  the  Yedantic 
Philosophy  ;  there  is,  so  far  as  we  know,  no  easier  and  better  ar- 
ranged work  in  the  whole  of  philosophic  literature  for  those  who  have 
had  no  previous  training  in  the  Hindu  schools  of  philosophy.  To 
the  intelligent,  it  should  prove  a  key  to  the  hidden  chambers  of 
nature  ;  to  the  bigot,  it  will  be  but  a  clatter  of  words  and  a  painting 
of  fancy. 


TO  SIR  JAMES  MACKINTOSH,  KT. 

fa      fa.      (j'C. 


SIR, 

IN  January  1809,  you  mentioned  to  me,  at  Poona,  in  a 
Conversation  respecting  the  ancient  Literature  and  Science  of 
the  Hindus,  that  they  had  two  systems  of  philosophy,  which 
seemed  to  be  subjects  of  important  and  curious  enquiry  ;  the 
Vedanta,  which  was  supposed  to  have  some  similarity  to  the 
speculations  of  the  ingenious  and  celebrated  Bishop  Berkeley; 
and  the  Nyaya,  which,  in  one  of  the  Letters  Edifiantes,  is  said 
to  resemble  the  Logical  System  of  Aristotle.  You  conceived 
that  it  was  specially  a  matter  of  interest  to  investigate  the 
Hindu  Logical  System,  that  means  might  be  furnished  for  a 
comparison  between  it  and  that  of  the  Grecian  Philosopher*  in 
order  to  ascertain  whether  they  were  both  original,  or  whether 
the  one  had  in  any  degree  been  borrowed  from  the  other. 

During  my  residence  at  Poona  with  the  subsidiary  force,  I 
had  ^n  opportunity  of  procuring  a  number  of  the  most  celebra- 
ted books,  which  explain  the  principles  of  these  two  philoso* 
phical  sects,  and  it  was  my  wish  to  investigate,  in  the  first 
place,  the  Logical  System  ;  but  in  an  attempt  to  translate  a 
small  work,  I  found  that  I  was  still  too  young  a  Sanskrit 
student  to  give  such  a  faithful  version  as  would  render  it  use- 
ful and  valuable.  On  this  account  I  determined  to  postpone 
the  execution  of  this  design,  and  in  the  mean-time  to  examine 
a  little,  the  Vedauta  System,  which  is  more  easily  compre- 
hended than  the  other,  and  not  much  inferior  in  point  of 
curiosity  and  interest. 

For  some  months  I  was  occupied  in  the  perusal  of  books 
which  treat  the  subject  in  a  dry  didactic  manner,  and  which,  by 
announcing  the  doctrines  dogmatically,  instead  of  unfolding 
them  in  a  connected  series  of  reasoning  and  illustration,  pre- 
serve, in  many  places,  a  degree  of  obscurity  which  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  remove.  The  experience  of  these  difficulties 
naturally  induced  me  to  enquire  if  there  was  any  book  which 
*2 


IV  DEDICATION. 

explained  the  system  by  a  more  easy  method  ;  and  having 
heard  from  several  Pandits  that  the  Natak  (Play  ),  called  the 
Prab6dha  Chandrodaya,  or  the  Rise  of  the  Moon  of  Intellect, 
was  held  in  high  estimation  amongst  them,  and  was  written 
to  establish  the  V£danta  doctrines,  I  determined  to  read  it,  in 
hopes  that  the  popular  view  it  took  of  the  subject  would  lead 
to  a  general  understanding  of  its  doctrines,  and  of  the  princi- 
pal technical  terms. 

On  finishing  the  translation,  it  appeared  to  me  that  the  Play 
had  some  merit  as  a  poetical  composition ;  and  also  that  it 
exhibited  such  a  view  of  the  singular  opinions  of  the  VManta 
sect,  as  would  perhaps  be  more  pleasing  and  intelligible,  at 
present,  to  an  English  reader,  than  one  more  profound  and 
philosophical.  These  considerations  induced  me  to  submit  it 
to  your  perusal  and  examination.  I  regret  that  I  can  give  no 
historical  account  of  the  Play.  The  work  itself  mentions  that 
the  author  was  named  Krishnamishra,*  but  it  unfortunately 
does  not  notice  the  era  in  which  he  lived.  •  Mishra  is  an 
appellative,  which  is  taken  from  the  country  where  he  was 
born.  I  have  not  ascertained  its  exact  situation,  but  'from 
the  inscriptions  found  at  Monghir  which  mention  persons 
under  the  name  of  Mishra,  and  the  information  I  have  received, 
that  it  joins  Maithila  or  Tirhut,  and  contains  a  town  called 
Janakpur,  I  imagine  that  it  is  the  country  now  named  Mak- 
wani,  which  is  a  small  tract  lying  between  Tirhut  and  the 
chain  of  mountains  which  divide  Hindustan  from  Nepal.  This 
account  of  its  position  is  corroborated  by  the  meaning  of  the 
word,  which  is  an  union  or  mixture  and  probably  arose  from 
the  mixture  of  languages  and  the  people  in  that  border  country. 
As  Tirhut  has  always  contained  a  number  of  learned  men, 
Krishnamishra  may  be  supposed  to  have  had  ample  opportu- 
nity of  obtaining  accurate  information  on  the  subject  he 
writes.  In  this  country,  too,  the  Jainas  and  Bauddhas  were  for- 
merly numerous,  which  must  have  had  some  tendency  to  pre- 
vent any  gross  misrepresentation  of  their  tenets,  as  it  would 

[  *  Colebrooke  calls  him  Krishna  Pandita,— "Essays,  Vol.  II.  p.  103.] 


DEDICATION.  V 

have  been  easy  to  expose  the  ignorance  or  disingenuousness 
of  the  author.  These  circumstances  may  add  some  weight  to 
the  authority  of  Krishnamishra's  production. 

Perhaps  some  conjecture  may  be  formed  concerning  the  age  of 
the  Play,  from  the  mention  which  is  made  of  the  king  Shri  Kirti 
Varma,  who  is  said  to  have  attended  its  representation,  along 
with  his  court.  My  Pandita,  indeed,  says,  that  he  is  a  personifi- 
cation of  the  fame  or  glory  of  Gopala  ;  but  I  am  more  inclined 
to  think  that  he  was  a  real  personage,  and  that  the  poet,  out  of 
compliment  or  flattery,  represents  Gopala  or  Krishna  as  fighting 
his  battles,  and  establishing  him  on  the  throne.  If  the  Shri 
Kirti  Varma  was  a  real  being,  he  probably  reigned  over  Magadha 
or  Behar,  the  sovereigns  of  which  also  extended  their  empire  to 
the  provinces  which  lie  northward  of  the  Ganges ;  for  Varma,  or 
warrior,  was  a  family  name  assumed  by  the  Magadha  kings,  and 
Shri  was  prefixed  as  a  title,  intimating  success  or  prosperity.  If 
the  conjecture  be  correct,  it  would  lead  us  to  ascribe  a  con- 
siderable antiquity  to  the  Play.  I  do  not  know  the  precise  time 
when  the  Magadha  Kingdom  of  Behar  was  overturned,  but  it  is 
said  that  its  empire  over  the  other  provinces  ceased  in  the  year 
648.  We  also  know,  that  in  1225  the  Mahomedans  had  con- 
quered Bengal  and  Behar,  and  placed  governors  over  them  ; 
consequently,  if  the  Play  was  acted  in  the  presence  of  one  of 
the  Magadha  Kings,  it  probably  was  a  considerable  number  of 
years  prior  to  this  period.*  I  am  also  added,  that  the  copy  from 
which  the  translation  is  made,  was  collected  with  one  written  186 
years  ago  [A.  D.  1625] ;  and  as  this  old  copy  contained  the  com- 
mentary, which  is  never  composed  till  the  oirginal  has  become 
obscure,  it  affords  decisive  evidence  that  the  Play  itself  is  not  of 
modern  date.  The  age  of  the  Play,  however,  is  a  matter  of  com- 
paratively little  consequence,  as  far  as  it  concerns  the  explana- 
tion of  the  VManta  doctrines,  for  these  are  illustrated  by  differ- 
ent authors,  from  one  age  to  another,  with  scarcely  any  other 
variation  than  that  of  brevity  or  copiousness. 

[  *  Prof.  H.  H.  Wilson  classes  the  Prabodha  Chandrodaya  with  "com- 
positions of  a  period  at  least  preceding  the  tenth  century". — "Asiat, 
Researches,"  Vol.  XV,  p.  17.] 


VI  DEDICATION. 

The  small  treatise  which  accompanies  the  Play  was  written  by 
Shankaracharya,  the  celebrated  restorer  of  the  Vedanta  opinions. 
He  was  born  at  Shringagiri,  in  the  Karnatak;  but  the  Brah- 
man s  in  that  part  of  the  country  do  not  agree  as  to  the  exact 
period  of  his  birth.  He  is  considered  an  incarnation  of  Shiva. 
Some  allege  that  he  has  appeared  more  than  once  on  earth  for 
the  establishment  of  the  true  doctrine ;  and  they  say  that  his 
first  appearance  was  about  1500  years  ago,  and  his  last  about  600 
years.  It  is  known  that  he  lived  before  the  age  of  Ramanuja 
Acharya,  whose  birth  is  ascertained  to  have  happened  in  1009,  so 
that  if  we  allow  him  about  900  years,  perhaps  we  shall  not  be 
far  from  the  truth.  At  this  period  there  were  a  number  of  here- 
tical sects  in  India,  the  most  remarkable  of  which  were  the 
Jainas,  Bauddhas  and  Charvakas  ;  and  Shankara  is  believed  to 
have  become  incarnate  to  root  out  these  sects.  He  seems  also 
to  have  wished  to  unite  in  one  body,  and  under  one  discipline,  all 
those  who  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the  VMas.  In  the  first 
part  of  his  design  he  is  reported  to  have  been  very  successful. 
Shankara  wrote  a  large  and  celebrated  work,  called  the  Bhashya, 
which  is  a  commentary  on  the  Vedas,  but  which  I  have  not  yet 
been  fortunate  enough  to  procure.  The  treatise,  however  exhibits 
an  accurate,  though  concise,  view  of  the  doctrines  he  taught. 

I  have  subjoined  an  Appendix,  containing  a  few  brief  re- 
marks, which  are  intended  to  give  some  assistance  in  the 
perusal  of  the  Play.  The  want  of  perspicuity,  which  may 
sometimes  be  observed,  will,  I  hope,  be  ascribed  partly  to  the 
necessity  I  was  under,  of  writing  hastily  on  a  subject  which  is 
so  foreign  to  European  opinions  and  manners.  At  a  future 
period,  if  it  be  in  my  power,  I  may  send  you  a  general  view  of 
the  Brahmanical  Philosophical  System,  and  especially  of  the 
System  of  Nyaya,  in  regard  to  which  I  have  already  made  some 
progress.  It  would,  however,  be  improper  to  make  any  specific 
promise,  considering  the  limited  means  I  possess  of  conduct- 
ing investigations  of  such  difficulty  and  magnitude. 

These  papers,  which  I  have  now  the  pleasure  to  forward,  I 
commit  to  your  entire  care  ant}  disposal,  and  shall  consider  my- 


DEDICATION.  VII 

self  happy  if  they  be  honoured  by  your  approbation,  and  be 
thought  to  afford  any  elucidation  of  opinions,  which  may  be 
condemned  as  absurd  and  unworthy  of  regard,  but  which  have 
a  powerful  influence  in  forming  the  mind  and  character  of 
millions,  who  are  now  subject  to  the  British  Government. 

Permit  me,  Sir,  before  closing  this  letter,  to  express  my 
grateful  sense  of  the  kindness  and  encouragement  I  have 
experienced  from  you  since  my  arrival  in  this  country;  and  if 
it  could  add  any  lustre  to  the  high  station  you  occupy  in  the 
literary  world,  I  should  ascribe  to  you  this  slender  effort,  to 
promote  the  knowledge  of  Hindu  Literature  and  Philosophy. 

I  am,  Sir, 
Your  faithful  and  most  humble  Servant, 

J.  TAYLOR. 
Bombay,  5tk  October,  1811. 


r 


<*n 


\/ 


ipnwtfe  Ittpurm 


^fttf 

ation,...  ) 


The  consort  of  the  Male  or  First  Being. 

The  son  of  Maya. 

The  two  wives  of  Sense,  but  he  is  at- 


Maya,  . 

Sense,  . 

Action, 

Contemplation,... )        tacitea  to  tfiejormer. 

£'  >!  -* ;  "  ^  Vt:      '  f    Two  Kings  and  brothers,  sons  of  Sense  ; 

jxeason,    .     °"f""J        the  former  was  born  of  Contempla-  ±0-^4 

Passion,  OT..C7v.<U  L   f>^w,  the  latter  of  Action. 

Revelation,  tffif^The  consort  of  Reason. 
Intellect,^«v(^/:r^f A  The  children  of  Reason  and  Revela-  =•  ^^ 
Science,  ^f^jr£. )        tion. 

Retir emenj,  ,   The  son  of  Sense. 

X&Qligion,.5AM&tt^The  daughter  of  Virtuous  Action. 
Tranquillity,  $>&wfiThe  daughter  of  Religion. 
Compassion,  ;;..... ^  *  The  companion  of  Tranquillity. 

Friendship, The  companion  of  Religion. 

Devotion,  ,. The  friend  and  deliverer  of  Religion.  \^\^^ 

Spiritual     Con-  j 

templation,  Pa-  ( 

tience,  and  ......  f    Three  °fficers  °f  Rea^n. 

Contentment,  ...  *  ~ 
Understanding,.^..  A  friend  of  Reason. 


TJie  descendants  of  Sense    and  auxi- 
liaries of  Reason. 


Quiet, 
tion,  Virtuous  ] 

Action, 

Meditation, 

Penance,     Ordi- 
nance, Divine.. 

Vision,  &o J 

[  All  these  Beings  though  related  both  to  Reason  and  Passion 
are  attached  to  the  former. ,] 

f    An  arrogant  presumptuous  fellow  who 
Self-Sufficiency,  s        imagines  that  he  exists  distinct  from 
C*M  0t"~,'K^i  *t     L        universal  Being. 

A  (    Son  of  Self -Sufficiency,  and  an  officer 

Avance> 1        of  Passion. 


DRAMATIS 


Insatiableness,  ......  Wife  of  Avarice. 

son  °f  Avarice  and  IrisatiablenesSj 


The  son  of  Hypocrisy. 
Batu,  .....................   A  pupil  of  Hypocrisy. 

LOVe,V.,K.6uvrt..^-<...4  A  friend  of  Passion. 

Enjoyment,  /£/&*£_  Wife  of  lote  ;-<&>* 

Materialist,  •:^.*y-  j  / 

Digamber,  .........  I     *Fottr  heretical  Sectaries,  the  friends  and 


Mendicant,  .....  ....  [        auxiliaries  of  Passion 

Kapalika,  ........  J 

Anger,  ....*  ............  -  An  officer  of  Passion. 

Inj  ury  ,  .  .  &*\.  iw.  *  /;.  .  T^7/b  ^/*  Anger. 


T  foi-5o.*/\  i     -^^  Minister  of  Passion,  Pride,  Envy, 

religion,  .......  ,.  j        Haughtiness,  the  friends  of  Passion, 


Beings  are  attached  to  Passion.] 

/f/^Vv^iA/r  f    2^0  »wr<?  Intellect  or  Being  by  whom 
'  T  .......    •       (       all  these  Beings  are  upheld. 


PBABODHA  CHANDRODAYA; 

OR, 

RISE  OF  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT. 


PROLOGUE. 

As  the  snn's  meridian  rays  reflected  from  a  sandy  plain,  pre- 
sent the  appearance  of  water,*  so  the  ideas  of  ether,  air,  fire, 
earth,  which  form  the  universe,  proceed  from  ignorance  ;  but 
wise  men  know  that  these  elements  are  an  illusion,  as  the  neck- 
lace is  imagined  to  be  a  serpent* f  I  shall  therefore  celebrate 
that  resplendent  Being,  who  is  ineffably  happy,  pure,  and  who 
comprehends  his  own  essence.  May  that  glorious  Being  grant 
you  his  protection  ;  he  whose  forehead  displays  the  radiance  of 
the  moon  ;  who  by  painful  exercise  raises  his  soul  above  this 
mortal  framej  ;  who  is  tranquil ;  from  whom  happiness  is  insep- 
arable ;  the  Yogi !  he  who  becomes  visible  by  the  lustre  of  the 
eye  placed  on  his  simple  brow,  and  who  pervades  the  world. 
Tke  MANAGER  enters. 

Manager5:  Enough :  we  shall  not  delay  longer.  The  glorious 
Gopal§— -whose  lotus  foot  is  ornamented  with  the  crests  of  tribu- 

*  Mragjal— 'Deer -water.  As  deer,  from  not  knowing  the  nature  of  sun's 
rays  and  of  this  reflection,  suppose  that  it  is  water;  so  those  who  do  not 
Understand  the  nature  of  Spirit,  conceive  that  the  material  universe  has  a 
real  permanent  existence. 

f  This  is  a  very  frequent  allusion,  and  arises  from  the  figure  of  the  neck- 
lace rendering  it  liable  to  be  mistaken  for  a  serpent,  especially,  when  it  is 
seen  unawares,  or  by  an  obscure  light. 

J  It  is  supposed  that  there  are  three  great  canals  in  the  body,  filled  with 
air,  which  take  their  rise  from  the  cocoygis,  and  run  to  the  head;  one  on  the 
right  side,  called  ida,  one  on  the  left,  called  pingala,  and  one  in  the  middle, 
called  Sushumna.  By  compressing  one  nostril,  and  continuing  to  inspire, 
the  breath  is  stopped  in  the  middle  Vein  or  canal,  and  the  soul  (which  is  air) 
being  prevented  from  descending  to  the  lower  part  of  the  body,  remain  at 
the  crown  of  the  head.  Some  other  ceremonies  are  also  required,  such  as  a 
particular  posture;  directing  the  eye  steadily  to  one  object,  over  the  point  of 
the  nose,  &c. — This  is  the  practice  alluded  to  in  the  text. 

§    Vishnu. 


PROLOGUE. 

tary  Kings  ;  who,  in  the  form  of  Nrisinha,  opens  a  door  through 
the  breasts  of  his  enemies ;  who,  assuming  the  shape  of  a  boar, 
raises  np  the  earth,  when  it  has  sunk  in  the  Waters  of  destruc- 
tion, poured  down  upon  its  sovereigns  ;*  whose  fame  fills  every 
region,  as  the  locks  of  women  are  decked  with  flowers  ;  and 
whose  energy  is  like  a  flame  kindled  by  the  guardian  elephant 
flapping  their  enormous  ears  ; — has  commanded  me  in  these 
words  :  "While  the  most  excellent  King  Shri  Kirti  Varma 
was  employed  in  conquering  the  world,  my  spiritual  devotion 
was  interrupted,  and  my  days  were  spent  amidst  the  pollution 
of  various  sensual  enjoyments  ;f  but  now  my  purposes  are 
fulfilled  :— The  enemies  of  the  King  having  been  destroyed, 
the  administration  of  government  is  entrusted  to  his  celebrated 
minister.  The  earth,  encompassed  by  the  ocean,  is  subjected 
to  his  authority,  and  he  receives  the  homage  of  its  Kings.  I 
have  procured  repose,  and  wish  to  be  entertained  with  some- 
thing regarding  Spirit,  blended  with  what  is  lively  and  agree- 
able. Formerly,  the  respectable  Krishna  Mishra  composed  a 
play,  called  the  Prabodha  Chandrodaya,  which  was  delivered  to 
you  :  Produce  it  now,  before  the  King  Shri  Kirti,  who,  with 
his  court,  waits  anxiously  to  see  it  performed  ?" 

[The  Manager  walks  towards  a  room,  and  calls  an  Actress.] 

It  is  time  to  begin,  (Lifts  up  the  curtain,  and  looks  in.)-~ 
Madame,  come  forward. 

An  Actress  enters. 

Actress  :  I  attend,  in  obedience  to  your  commands.  What 
is  the  business  to  be  done  ? 

Manager  :  You  know  very  well,  Here  is  Gopal,  the  bright 
flame  of  whose  powers  blazed  in  the  forest  of  his  numerous  and 
powerful  enemies,  and  spread  throughout  the  three  worlds  : 
Gopal,  whose  glory  fills  the  universe,  who,  aided  by  his  sword  as 
his  friend,  conquered  the  lords  of  men  and  has  invested  with  the 
sovereignty  of  the  earth  Kirti  Varma,  the  chief  of  Princes.  The 

*     When  the  earth  is  desolated  in  consequence  of  the  crimes  of  its  rulers. 

f  It  should  be  recollected  that  these  words  do  not  intimate  any  vicious 
indulgence,  but  merely  signify  that  he  was  engaged  in  acts  connected  with 
objects  of  sense. 


PROLOGUE.  3 

field  of  battle  on  which  the  spouses  of  demons*  dance,  still  pro- 
claims his  renown,  in  sounds  proceeding  from  the  heads  of  the 
slain,  struck  like  cymbals  in  the  nimble  and  beautiful  hands  of 
young  female  Rakshasis,f  and  by  the  wind  blowing  through  the 
openings  in  the  skulls  of  lofty  elephants  killed  in  fight.  But 
now  he  has  entered  the  road  of  peace,  and  has  commanded  me 
to  act  the  Rise  of  the  Moon  of  Intellect,  which,  in  a  pleasant, 
sportive  manner,  displays  the  nature  of  Spirit.  Tell  the  Actors 
to  finish  their  decorations. 

An  Actress  enters  smiling. 

Actress  :  The  king  in  battle  has  gained  a  brilliant  victory 
over  the  army  of  Passion,  which  resembled  the  ocean  ;  as 
Krishna  obtained  the  goddess  Lakshmi  by  churning  the  sea 
of  milk,  by  the  might  of  his  arm  he  subdued  the  confiderate 
Kings  ;  his  dreadful  bow,  bent  to  its  utmost  stretch,  showered 
down  arrows  upon  the  horses  which  raged  like  waves  of  the  sea ; 
the  proud  elephants,  wounded  by  thousands  of  sharp  weapons, 
fell  in  every  direction,  and  appeared  as  the  mountains  of  the 
deep  ;  and  the  foot  soldiers  crushed  beneath  his  arm  sent  forth 
hollow  groans,  like  the  ooean  when  churned  by  the  great  moun- 
tain Achala.  How  has  this  person,  respected  by  the  Munis, 
and  who  performs  such  warlike  deeds,  obtained  tranquillity  ? 

Manager  :  Gopal,  who  partakes  of  the  divine  purity,  is 
quiescent  in  his  nature,  and  when  from  any  cause  a  change  is  ex- 
cited, it  afterwards  spontaneously  ceases.  His  anger  was  roused 
to  re-establish  the  Sovereigns  of  the  race  of  the  Moon,  who  had 
been  dethroned  by  the  Lord  of  Chedi  the  RudraJ  and  fire  of  de- 
struction to  the  Kings  of  the  Earth.  Thus  the  great  ocean, 
which,  when  enraged  by  the  wind  at  the  end  of  time,  overwhelms 
the  loftiest  mountains,  at  present  remains  calm  and  does  not 
pass  its  boundaries.  The  beings  who  sprung  from  a  portion  of 

*    Pishacha — evil  spirits,  devils,  ghosts. 

f    All  kind  of  evil  beings ;  persons  who  eat  flesh  and  drink  wine,  cannibals. 
J    A  name  of  the  destroying  God  Siva,  to  whom  the  Lord  of   Chedi  is 
compared. 


4  PROLOGUE. 

the  divine  Spirit,  and  who  are  clothed  with  power,  after  becom- 
ing incarnate  on  earth,  to  promote  the  happiness  of  mortals, 
again  return  to  a  state  of  rest.  Thus  also  the  illustrious  Muni 
Jamadagni  quenched  the  flame  of  his  wrath  by  devotion  ;  for 
having  extirpated  the  race  of  tyrants,  he  magnanimously  re- 
signed the  empire  of  the  world.  Thrice  seven  times  did  he 
exterminate  the  tyrants  ;  and  he  bathed  himself  in  a  river  of 
blood,  whose  stream  was  filled  with  the  skin,  flesh,  bones,  and 
brains  of  innumerable  Kings.  His  merciless  battle-axe  spared 
neither  woman,  child,  nor  old  age  ;  it  cleft  the  broad  shoulders 
of  the  enemy,  and  its  stroke  was  followed  by  a  dreadful  sound. 
Thus  Gopal,  having  finished  his  designs,  is  calm  and  tranquil ; 
like  Reason*  he  has  conquered  Passionf,  and  has  caused 
Intellect  to  spring  up  in  Shri  Kirti  Varma. 

[Behind  the  scenes.] 

Thou  meanest  of  actors,  whilst  I  live  how  can  my  lord  Pas- 
sion be  defeated  by  Reason  ? 

Manager  :  (Looking  mirthfully.)  Here  comes  that  fellow 
Love,  with  a  shining  countenance  ;  he  who  inflames  the  world, 
and  fascinates  the  soul :  whose  eyes  are  red  with  desire  ;  and 
whose  body  is  pressed  by  the  full  swelling  breasts  of  Rati,  who 
encloses  him  in  her  arms,  trembling  with  delight.  He  is  offend- 
ed at  my  words,  and  it  behoves  me  to  remove  his  displeasure. 

[They  go  out. 

*     Vivek — Reflection,  consideration. 

f    Moha,  that  which  fascinates  the  mind  and  embarasses  the  faculties. 


Act  I. 

LOVE*  and  ENJOYMENT!  enter. 

Love  :  (  Wratftfalli/.y^hou  meanest  of  actors,  whilst  I  live, 
how  can  my  lord  Passion  be  defeated  by  Reason  ?  Reason, 
who  derives  his  origin  from  Shastras,  exists  in  the  minds 
of  learned  men  only  until  an  arrow  be  shot  from  the  eyebrow 
of  a  beautiful  woman.  A  delightful  elegant  house  ;  young  girls 
with  bewitching  eyes  ;  creeping  plants,  on  which  the  bee  makes 
a  buzzing  noise ;  the  new  blown  malika ;  zephyrs  wafting  per- 
fume ;  and  moon-light  nights,  are  my  effective  weapons  which 
conquer  all  ; — what  then  is  the  might  of  Reason  or  the  birth 
of  Intellect }? 

Enjoyment :  Reason,  the  enemy  of  the  great  King  Passion, 
is  a  very  sage  person. 

Love  :  My  beloved,  yours  is  the  timid  nature  of  a  woman  ; 
why  should  you  be  afraid  of  Reason  ?  Though  my  bow  and 
arrows  be  formed  of  flowers,  yet  were  the  whole  world,  both 
gods  and  demons,  to  rebel  against  me,  their  fortitude  would  not 
endure  a  single  hour.  The  lord  of  gods  ( Indra  )  committed 
adultery  with  Ahalya  ;§  the  lord  of  beings  (Bramha)  was  ena- 
moured with  his  own  daughters  ;  and  the  moon  was  captivated 
by  the  wife  of  his  Guru.  Who  is  there  that  has  not,  through 
my  influence,  trodden  in  a  forbidden  path  ?  Do  not  the  wounds 
inflicted  by  my  arrows  madden  the  world  ? 

Enjoyment :  It  may  be  so  ;  but  he  who  is  aided  by  many 
of  our  powerful  enemies  ought  to  be  feared. 

Love  :  You  look  at  Penance,  and  others  the  ministers  of  the 
most  mighty  King  Reason,  but  we  shall  accomplish  their  ruin 
merely  by  mingling  ourselves  with  them.  Who  will  mildness 
be  before  Anger;  who  is  a  Bramha-Chari ||  opposed  to  me  ;  who 

*  Kama.  f  Rati,  the  wife  of  Kama. 

J  Prabodha.  §  Gautama's  wife,  and  the  daughter  of  Brauiha  Deva. 

(|  One  who  has  suppressed  the  sexual  passion. 


6  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA  ;  OR,  [Act  I. 

are  Integrity,  Piety,  and  Disinterestedness,  in  opposition  to 
Avarice?  Thus  Penance*,  Ordinance,!  Postures, J  Inspiration, § 
Expiration,  ||  Meditations,^  Divine  Vision,**  Ecstacy,ft  who 
proceed  from  composure  and  fixedness  of  mind,  will  speedily  dis- 
appear. Women  can  work  their  ruin,  and  Women  are  my  ready 
agents.  Looks,  language,  romps,  tender  tales,  and  embraces, 
and  even  the  remembrance  of  women,  are  sufficient  to  disturb 
the  mind.  Besides,  these  beings  will  unite  with  Irreligion,  the 
minister  of  our  King,  who  is  accompanied  by  his  intimate 
friends,  Pride,}!  Envy,§§  and  Hypocrisy. ||  || 

Enjoyment :  I  have  heard  that  you  and  Quiet,1f1T  Mortifica- 
tion,*** Reason,  &c.,  were  born  at  one  place. 

Love  :  Why  do  you  talk  about  our  being  born  at  one  place  ? 
We  were  born  even  of  the  same  parents.  By  the  union  of 
Mayaftt  with  the  Supreme  Spirit,  Mind,  their  first  born  son,  was 
generated,  who,  after  creating  the  three  worlds,  produced  our 
two  ancestors,  Passion  and  Reason.  He  had  two  wives  named 
ActionJJJ  and  Contemplation.§§§  Action  was  the  mother  of 
Passion,  the  founder  of  one  family ;  and  Contemplation  brought 
forth  Reason,  the  founder  of  another  family. 

Enjoyment :  If  this  be  the  case,  what  is  the  reason  that  you 
two,  who  were  begotten  by  the  same  father,  have  such  enmity 
against  each  other. 

Love  :  Though  we  were  begotten  by  one  parent,  yet  it  is 
known  throughout  the  world  that  an  open  feud  exists  between  us ; 

*  Yama. 

f  Niyama,  the  performance  of  stated  duties. 

J  Asana,  a  particular  mode  of  sitting. 

§  Pranayam,  Inspiration  being  continued,  confining  the  breath. 

[]  Pratyahar,  Expiration  long  protracted  /  expelling  the  breath. 

^  Dhyana.  **  Dharana. 

ft  Samadhi,  bringing  the  soul  to  the  crown  of  the  head.  Ecstacy,  trance. 
H  Mada.        §§    Matsariyam.       H||  Dambha.       ff  Shama.      ***   Dama. 
Iff  Delusion,  evil  principle  matter,  See  Apendix. 
%\%  Pravratti,  doing,  acting,  with  a  degree  of  intenseness. 
§§§  Nivratti,  laying  aside  action. 


Act  I.]  RISE    OF   THE    MOON    OF   INTELLECT.  7 

as  a  dreadful  war  which  involved  the  people  in  ruin,  was 
waged  by  Kurus  and  the  Pandus  for  the  dominion  of  the  Earth.* 
Our  father  framed  the  universe,  and  by  his  partial  favour,  it  has 
been  drawn  under  my  influence  ;  while  he  (  Reason  )  wanders 
almost  in  solitude.  On  this  account  he  now  wishes  to  root 
out  both  our  father  and  myself. 

Enjoyment :  May  his  sins  be  forgiven  !  But  what  is 
the  nature  of  his  crime  ?  Is  he  actuated  purely  by  envy  ;  or 
does  he  proceed  on  self-defence,  or  is  he  instigated  by  counsel  ? 

Love  :    There  is  a  secret  cause  for  his  conduct. 
Enjoyment :    Why  do  you  not  reveal  it  to  me  ? 

Love  :  Your  female  nature  makes  you  timorous  :  I  shall 
not  relate  to  you  the  frightful  acts  of  those  ill-disposed  beings. 

Enjoyment  t     (In/ear^)    What  kind  of  actions  ? 

Love  :  Well,  then,  my  beloved,  be  not  alarmed  ;  for -theirs 
are  the  hopes  only  of  persons  in  despair.  It  is  reported  that  a 
Rakshasi  will  be  born  in  our  family,  named  Science,!  terrible 
even  as  Kal  Ratri.J 

Enjoyment :  (Fea? fully.)  Horrible  !  How,  is  a  Rak- 
shasi to  be  begotten  in  our  family  ?  My  heart  is  filled  with  terror! 

Love  t  My  beloved,  fear  not,  fear  not,  fear  not ;  it  is  mere- 
ly a  rumour. 

Enjoyment :     What  is  this  Rakshasi  to  do  ? 

Love  :  Saras  wati,§  who  dwells  with  the  lord  of  all  beings, 
has  declared  that  Maya,  the  consort  of  the  Impassible  ||  Male, 
became  pregnant  without  his  embrace,  and  brought  forth  a  son 
called  Mind,  after  whom  all  beings  followed  in  succession  ;  and 

*  Related  in  the  Mahabharata,  of  which  the  Bhagvat  Gita  is  an  episode. 

f  Vidya,  Science,  learning. 

J  A  name  of  Bhavani,  the  goddess  of  destruction. 

§  The  consort  of  Bramha,  and  goddess  of  learning  and  eloquence! 

1|  Not  affected  by,  or  dependent  upon,  any  being. 


8  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA;  OR,  [Act  I. 

from  this  son  will  descend  a  daughter  called  Science,  who  will 
devour  father,  brothers,  mother,  and  the  whole  race.* 

Enjoyment:  (Trembling  with  fear.)  Defend  me  !( Sinks 
into  his  arms.) 

Love  :  (  Aside ;  feeling  the  delightful  impression.)  How 
ravishing  is  the  embrace  of  a  woman  whose  sprightly  eyes  dart 
glances  more  rapid  than  the  twinkling  of  the  stars  ;  while  the 
bracelets  on  her  arms,  which  encircle  the  body  like  creeping 
plants,  utter  gentle  pleasing  sound  ;  it  throws  the  soul  into  a 
delirium  of  pleasure,  and  the  whole  frame  quivers  at  the  touch 
of  her  prominent  and  palpitating  breasts.  (  Aloud t  and  embrac* 
ing  her  ardently.)  Be  not  afraid,  be  not  afraid  ;  during  our 
existence  how  can  Science  be  produced  ? 

Enjoyment :  Do  you,  who  are  her  enemy,  believe  that  thig 
Rakshasi  will  be  born  ? 

Love  :  Certainly,  I  believe  it ;  she  will  be  begotten,  to- 
gether with  her  brother  Intellect,  by  Reason  and  the  goddess 
Revelation f  ;  and  Quiet,  Mortification  and  others  will  be  taken 
into  their  service. 

Enjoyment :  Why  do  these  people^  rejoice  at  the  birth  of 
Science,  who  is  their  own  destroyer  ? 

Love  :  Do  wicked  men,  who  endeavour  to  annihilate  the 
world,  make  any  reckoning  of  crimes  ?  Observe  these  tainted 
natures  ;  these  crooked  dispositions  become  the  cause  of  de- 
struction to  those  who  gave  them  birth,  and  then  perish  them- 
selves. Thus  whilst  smoke  rises  to  the  clouds,  the  fire  is  ex- 
tinguished, and  afterwards  the  smoke  itself  disappears. 

*  Science  or  learning  reveals  the  nature  of  God,  and  enables  Mind  to 
perceive  that  it  is  not  distinct  from  the  Divinity ;  that  all  things  are  com- 
prehended in  him ;  and  that  the  appearance  of  individual  existences  is  an 
illusion.  Thus  by  destroying  the  notion  of  separate  being,  Science  is  said 
to  devour  father,  mother,  relations,  and  whatever  else  exists. 

f  Upanishad,  one  of  the  Divisions  of  the  Yajurveda,  receives  this  name  .  It 
signifies,  revealing  what  had  been  hid. — I  should  have  preferred  another 
term  in  the  translation,  had  I  known  one  which  would  have  expressed  the 
meaning  with  distinctness  and  accuracy. 

J  Quiet,  Mortification,  6cc. 


Act    I.J  RISE  OF  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT.  9 

[  Behind  the  Scenes.  ] 

Sinful  and  depraved  soul,  clost  thou  presume  to  call  us  evil 
doers  ?  Thou  complainest  of  our  enmity  ;  but  knowest  thou  not 
that  the  learned  in  the  Puranas  command  us  to  shun  even  a 
teacher  who  is  self-sufficient,  who  does  not  distinguish  right 
from  wrong,  and  who  walks  in  the  road  of  pride.  Under  the  in- 
fluence of  Self-sufficiency  our  father  (Mind)  Passion,  and  others, 
have  bound  in  chains  the  supreme  Lord,  and  forcibly  carried 
him  away.* 

Love  :  (Addressing  Enjoyment.)  Here  is  Reason  in  company 
with  Understanding,!  the  goddess  who  was  born  in  our  family. 
This  ignoble,  despised  person,  whose  wealth  consists  in  respect, 
and  whose  body  is  meagre,  shines  in  the  light  borrowed  from 
Understanding,  who  is  herself  obscured  by  Affection  and  others 
who  follow  the  impulse  of  their  own  desires,  as  the  light  of  the 
moon  is  bid  by  the  thick  vapour.  It  is  not  fit  that  we  remain 
longer  in  this  place. 

[  REASON,  the  king,  and  UNDERSTANDING  enter.  ] 

Reason  :  (Musing.)  Did  you  hear  the  proud  swelling  words 
of  that  low,  impious  person,  pronouncing  us  evil  doer  ? 

Understanding  :     Do  people  attend  to  their  own  faults  ? 

Reason  :  Pride  and  others,  who  are  full  of  self-sufficiency, 
and  whose  souls  are  depraved,  have  entangled  in  a  thousand  nets 
the  Supreme  Intelligence,  the  Happy,  who  is  exempt  from  sor-. 
row,  the  lord  of  the  universe,  and  have  retained  him  a  long  period 
in  a  state  of  weakness  and  imperfection.  These,  however, 
are  the  holy  people,  but  we  who  wish  to  break  off  his  chains 
are  sinners.  The  world  is  subdued  by  these  impious  beings. 

Understanding :  I  have  heard  that  the  Supreme-Being,  who 
pervades  the  three  regions  of  the  universe,  is  essentially  happy, 
and  forever  radiant  and  glorious  ;  how  then  was  he  bound  by 
these  polluted  beings,  and  thrown  into  the  sea  of  passion  ? 

*    The  meaning  of  this  is  given  in  the  Appendix, 
f     Mati. 

2 


10  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA;    OR,  [Act    I. 

Reason  :  As  man  when  deceived  by  female  arts  forgets  his 
natural  strength,  so  He,  whose  energy  is  mighty  and  imceasing, 
who  is  tranquil,  full  of  majesty,  just,  unchangeable,  and 'of 
perfect  understanding,  in  consequence  of  being  united  to  Maya 
forgets  his  own  nature. 

Understanding" :  Impossible  !  When  one  dark  line  con^ 
ceals  the  sun  with  its  thousand  rays,  then  may  Maya  overcome 
God  who  is  an  ocean  of  light  and  splendour. 

P/eason  :  Maya  is  incomprehensible*  ;  she  is  like  a  courte- 
zan ;  she  gives  the  appearance  of  reality  to  illusions,  and  thus 
she  deludes  the  great  spirit.  Behold  the  glorious  God  who  is 
unchangeable  in  his  own  nature^  is  subjected  to  unspeakable 
changes  by  this  weak  female  Maya  ;  as  crystal  f  transmits  the 
colour  of  the  body  applied  to  it ;  but  from  this  connection  Maya 
does  not  participate  in  one  ray  of  light.  She,  however,  most 
eagerly  wishes  to  deprive  Him  of  his  glorious  power. 

Understanding" :  What  are  the  means  by  which  this 
impure  being  deceives  God,  who  is  full  of  goodness  ? 

IReason  :  Maya  acts  without  regarding  either  reason  or 
object  J  ;  to  deceive  is  the  nature  of  women  who  are  like  demons. 
— Behold,  when  a  woman  by  deceitful  glances  penetrates  the 
tender  heart  of  man,  what  power  does  she  not  possess  I  She 
fascinates  him,  she  sports  with  him,  teases  him,  frowns  on  him, 
fills  him  with  eager  desires,  and  mocks  him.  There  is  also 
another  case. 

Understanding1 :    What  is  it  ? 

Reason  :  That  evil-working  woman  reflected  thus  :— • "  My 
youth  is  gone,  I  am  advanced  in  years  ;  this  man  (Spirit) 
also  is  old,  and  is  naturally  frigid  ;  I  shall  therefore  put  my 
son  in  the  place  of  the  Supreme  Lord."  Mind,§  who  knows  the 

*  Something  of  which  it  cannot  be  affirmed  that  it  is  either  true  or  false, 
real  or  illusory.  A  fuller  account  of  the  doctrine  connected  with  his  subject 
is  given  in  the  appendix. 

t     Lit.  Topaz. 

J     Maya  itself  is  an  unintelligent  principle,  and  moves  just  at  it  is  directed. 

§    This  word  I  have  elsewhere  rendered  Sense, 


Act  I.]  RISE    OF    THE    MOON    OF    INTELLECT.  11 

designs  of  his  mother,  who  is  intimately  united  with  her,  and 
partakes  of  her  nature,  formed  bodies  having  nine  apertures,* 
and  though  one  he  divided  himself  into  many,  and  inhabited 
these  bodies. f  Maya  then  impressed  him  with  her  own  active 
principles,  as  crystal  is  coloured  by  the  objects  with  which  it 
is  in  contact.J 

Understanding* :  The  Offspring  .'always  resembles  its 
parents. 

Reason :  Influenced  by  Self-sufficiency  his  grand-son  and 
the  eldest  son  of  Mind,  the  Supreme  Being  said,  "  I  am." 
Thus  the  Lord  having  fallen  into  the  sleep  of  Maya,  forgot  his 
own  nature,  pursued  the  operations  of  mind,  and  beheld  many 
kinds  of  dreams  ;  such  as,  I  am  born,  this  is  my  father,  my 
mother,  nay  family,  wife,  tribe  ;  there  are  my  children,  friends, 
enemies,  goods,  strength,  science,  relations,  and  brothers. § 

Understanding  :  After  this  exceedingly  long  sleep,  dur- 
ing which  the  divine  intellect  has  disappeared,  how  will  this 
intellect  again  arise  ||  ? 

(  The  King  abashed  hangs  down  his  head,  and  remains  silent. ) 

Understanding  :  Why  are  you  so  much  abashed  ;  and 
why  do  you  hang  down  your  head,  and  remain  silent  ! 

*  Eyes,  ears,  nostrils,  mouth,  anus,  and  urethra. 

f  Commentary. — As  the  reflected  object  is  contained  in  a  mirror. 

%  The  meaning  of  this  sentence  is,  that  the  world  originates  in  the  desire 
or  volition  of  the  Supreme  Being ;  but  that  its  increase  and  the  succession  of 
creatures  proceed  from  Mind  of  Sense. 

§  This  is  conformable  to  the  opinion  that  the  universe  is  One  Eternal 
Infinite  Being,  and  that  birth,  death,  relation,  &c.,  and  all  the  phenomena 
with  which  we  are  acquainted  are  mere  visions,  beheld,  not  by  individual 
minds,  but  by  the  Supreme  Being,  under  the  influence  of  incomprehensible 
Maya. 

||  During  this  sleep,  the  Deity  perceives  a  variety  of  phenomena,  and  is 
tender  the  influence  of  passion,  a  state  incompatible  with  pure  intellect, 
which,  like  crystal,  is  clear,  without  any  diversity  of  appearance:  hence,  while 
the  world  exists,  God  is  in  a  state  different  from  that  of  Simple  Being  or 
Intellect,  and  the  question  is,  How  will  he  again  return  to  this  condition  •? 


12        PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA;  OR,    [Act  I. 

Reason  :  Women  are  prone  to  jealousy  ;  I  have  committed 
an  error,  and  therefore  am  embarrassed.* 

Understanding  i  1  asked  you  this  question,  not  through 
jealousy,  but  because  strange  women  dissipate  the  thoughts  of 
excellent  husbands  who  are  devoted  to  the  duties  of  religion. 

Reason ;  Intellect  will  arise  when  the  goddess  Kevelation, 
who  is  offended  and  jealous  on  account  of  our  long  separation, 
is  united  to  me  ;  and  this  union  will  be  accomplished  when 
tranquillity  and  others  become  obedient  to  my  orders,  and 
when  thou,  forsaking  objects  of  sense,  shalt  remain  quiescent 
for  a  space  and  be  separated  from  the  states  of  wakefulness, 
dreaming  and  sleep. 

Understanding' :  Though  the  captives  and  adherents  of 
Self-sufficiency  may  be  delivered  from  this  mortal  state,  yet 
Self-sufficiency  being  dependent  on  original  Maya,  is  per^ 
manent,  and  must  always  exist.  Thus  it  appears  to  me. 

Reason  :  If  this  were  true,  it  would  be  long  ere  my  wishes 
are  fulfilled.  But  those  who  declare  that  He  who  is  One,  the 
Creator  of  the  world,  the  Lord,  the  Eternal,  is  divided  into 
many  ;  and  who  by  confining  him  in  bodies,  attribute  to  him 
a  principle  of  corruption  ;  of  them  will  I  make  an  oblation 
which  will  cease  only  with  their  lives  ;  and  I  will  again  esta- 
blish the  unity  of  Brahma. 

*  Understanding  might  be  jealous  of  the  union  of  Maya  with  God,  and  it 
was  the  duty  of  Reason  to  dissolve  it ;  as  he  had  neglected  to  do  this  he  was 
aihamed,  and  unable  to  give  an  answer. 


END  OF  THE  FIRST  ACT. 


Act  II. 


HYPOCRISY  enters. 

Hypocrisy  :~  The  great  King  Passion  has  thus  commanded 
me.  "  Reason  aiid  his  Ministers  have  sent  Tranquillity,  Mortifi- 
cation, &c.,  to  the  various  places  of  holy  resort  to  raise  up 
Intellect.  The  destruction  of  our  race  is  at  hand.  You  must 
exert  yourself  to  prevent  it.  Go  to  the  city  of  Varanasi,  the 
holy  place  in  which  beatitude  is  obtained,  and  interrupt  the 
religious  performances  of  those  who  are  seeking  deliverance  from 
earthly  affections."  I  have  solemnly  vowed  to  proceed  to 
Yaranasi,  which  must  be  subjected,  and  to  execute  the  com- 
mands of  my  Lord;  and  that  I  and  my  associates,  who  are  made 
happy  with  wine  perfumed  by  female  lips>  and  who  delight  in 
the  pleasures  of  love, — should  deceive  the  world.  We  shall 
spend  the  moonlight  nights  in  the  houses  of  courtezans ;  and  in 
the  day  we  shall  assume  the  characters  of  those  who  know  all 
things,  who  have  performed  a  great  sacrifice,  in  whose  dwelling 
the  Agni  Hotra*  has  long  been  observed,  and  who  comprehend 
the  Supreme  Being.  (Looking.)  Who  is  that  traveller  who 
has  crossed  the  Bhagirathi,  and  approaches  towards  us  ?  Will 
his  pride  consume  like  fire  ;  will  he  devour  the  three  worlds  ; 
will  he  scoff  at  the  people,  and  deride  them  with  his  learning!  ? 
But  I  conjecture  that  he  has  come  from  the  south  country.  I 
shall  therefore  hear  intelligence  of  Self-sufficiency* 

Enter  SELF-SUFFICIENCY^. 

S elf-Sufficiency  :  The  world  is  filled  with  folly.  Brutish 
men,  who  do  not  hearken  to  the  doctrines  of  the  teacher§ ;  they 

*    An  offering  made  by  fire  which  is  presented  twice  daily . 

f    Alluding  to'the  proud  haughty  appearance  of  Self -Sufficiency. 

J  This  is  a  compound  word,  signifying.  I  do  act,  &c.  In  philosophicial 
language,  it  denotes  consciousness  or  individuality.  As  the  notion  of  indi- 
viduality, according  to  Hindu  metaphysics,  proceeds  from  arrogance,  &c.» 
this  word,  in  popular  language,  means  pride  or  presumption. 

§     The  teacher  or  director  of  Self-sufficiency. 


1 4  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAY A  ;  OR,  [  Act  IT. 

do  not  know  the  Tautanita  Shastra*;  they  do  not  understand 
the  principles  of  Shaligirf;  why  then  mention  the  opinions  of 
Vachaspati.J  They  have  never  studied  the  maxims  of  Maho- 
dadhi§;  they  have  not  seen  the  Mahavratti || ;  they  have  not 
attended  to  the  investigation  of  abstract  existences.  Why  then 
do  they  indolently  sit  here  ?  (Looking  around. )  These  persons 
do  not  comprehend  the  meaning  of  what  they  read;  they  are 
satisfied  by  chailnting  the  words,  and  they  drown  the  Vedas. 
(  Going  towards  some.)  These  have  assumed  this  profession  of 
Sannyasi  for  the  sake  of  begging  ;  they  have  shaved  their  heads, 
and  believe  themselves  Pandits,  but  they  talk  of  the  Vedanta 
in  a  confused  and  unintelligible  manner.  (  Laughing ).  If 
doctrines,  which  are  opposed  to  the  evidence  of  sense,  be 
taught  in  the  Vedanta  books,  what  error,  in  comparison  with 
this,  is  advanced  by  the  Bauddha — Talking  to  such  persons 
is  a  deadly  sin.  (  Going  to  others. )  These  read  the  Shiva 
Pashupata,1[  and  labour  hard  to  understand  the  opinions  of 
Akshapada;**  they  are  brutes,  infidels,  and  whoever  converses 
with  them  falls  into  hell  ;  the  road  even  in  which  they  are  seen 
should  be  shunned.  (Going  to  others.)  These  hypocrites  carry 
off  the  wealth  of  the  rich;  they  repair  to  the  banks  of  the  Ganges, 
and  placing  a  stone  amidst^  its  cold  waves,  seat  themselves 
proudly,  holding  in  their  hands  the  sacred  grass,  with  the  Ka- 
randojwalaft  at  their  side,  and  they  show  the  suppleness  of  their 
fingers  in  twirling  the  Rudraksha  beads  of  their  rosary.  (Going 

*  This  is  a  Shastra  composed  by  one  named  Kamapila  Bhatta. 

f  The  doctrines  of  Prabhakara.  Rumania  Bhatta  and  Prabhakara 
Were  two  disciples  of  Jaimini,  the  founder  of  Mimansa.  (See  Appendix.) 
The  brutish  men  are  the  followers  of  Vedanta,  who  do  not  admit  the  doc-> 
trines  of  this  philosophical  sect. 

J  Brihaspati,  the  teacher  of  the  gods  who  composed  the  Nyaya  Bhashya^ 
a  system  of  metaphysics. 

§  Also  called  Shesha,  &.  Rishi  [  and  a  name  of  Indra.  ] 
||  A  book  of  the  Shaivashastra     [  also  a  name  of  Shiva.  ] 
^  Another  book,  containing  the  opinions  of  the  Shaivites. 
**  One  of  the  names  of  Kanad,  the  author  of  a  physical  systems 
ft  A  wicker  basket,  or  box,  in  which  the  family  God  is  kept. 


Act  II.]  RISE  OF  THE  MOON  OP  INTELLECT.  15 

to  others.}  These  support  themselves  by  taking  the  disguise  of 
Tridandi,  and  have  departed  both  from  the  Dvaita  and  Advaita 
paths*.  {Goes  to  others,  and  looks  at  them.)  Whose  hut  is  this 
which  stands  not  far  from  the  River  of  the  Gods  ?  In  the  front 
a  thousand  little  white  flags,  suspended  on  slender  bamboos, 
dance  in  the  wind,  and  the  ground  is  covered  with  deer  skins  ; 
near  it  are  seen  the  drishad  and  upala^  the  chamas,\  the 
chashal,\  the  ulukhal,\\  and  the  musala^  and  from  it  issue 
continually  the  fumes  of  clarified  butter  used  in  sacrifice,  which 
darken  the  air.  This  must  be  the  dwelling  of  some  one.  "Well, 
it  is  a  holy  place,  and  fit  for  staying  in  a  few  days.  (Enters  the 
hut  and  looks  round.)  This  fellow  seems  to  be  Hypocrisy  him- 
self, who  marks  with  fuller's  earth  his  forehead,  arms,  belly, 
breast,  neck,  lips,  back,  inside  of  lips,  thighs,  temples,  and  knees, 
and  who  decorates  his  head,  his  ears,  his  loins,  and  his  hands, 
with  small  tufts  of  sacred  grass.  I  shall  go  towards  him. 

Self-Sufficiency  :  Happiness  attend  you.  [HYPOCRISY  con- 
temptuously makes  a  sign  to  him  to  go  out  while  BATU**  enters 
with  a  smiling  countenance. ~\ 

Batu  :  Brahman,  remove  a  little  way  off".  First  wash  your 
feet,  and  then  you  may  come  in. 

Self-Sufficiency  :     (In  anger.)  Sinful  man,  I  have  been  at 
the  Turashkatt  country,  where  the  master  of  the  house  neither 
washes  the  feet  of  the  venerable  Brahman  and  of  the  stranger 
who  come  to  his  door,  nor  offers  them  a  seat. 
[HYPOCRISY  makes  a  motion  with  his  hand  for  him  to   remain.'] 

Batu  :    (Having  respectfully  saluted  him.)     My  respectable 

*  The  doctines  both  of  one  Being,  and  of  a  plurality  of  beings, 
f  Two  stone  vessels. 

J  Sacrificial  vessel  of  an  oval  figure  with  a  handle. 
§  Also  a  sacrificial  vessel  of  a  square  figure. 

||  The  mortar  in  which  rice  is  beat.  ^  The  Pestle  for  beating  it. 

**  A  disciple  or  pupil  of  Hypocrisy. 

ff  I  am  told  that  this  country  is  south-east  of  Poona;  but  I  have  not  been 
able  to  ascertain  whether  this  be  true,  or  what  is  its  modern  name.  [Perhaps 
Turan  or  Turkistan.j 


16  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA  ;  OR,  [  Act  II. 

friend,  you  have  come  from  a  far  country,  and  you  have  not  yet 
told  me  the  name  of  your  family,  or  what  is  your  profession. 

Self- Sufficiency  :  You  may  immediately  judge  of  my  family 
and  profession. — Hearken;  in  Gaud,*  a  country  of  unrivalled  ex- 
cellence, there  is  a  city  named  Raclhapuri,  which  contains  a  cele-. 
brated  place  called  Bhuri  Shreshthika  ;t  there  my  worthy  father 
dwells.  Who  has  not  heard  of  his  noble  and  renowned  sans  ; 
among  whom  I  am  distinguished  for  understanding,  abilities, 
knowledge,  courage,  mildness,  and  the  performance  of  duties. 

[HYPOCRISY  looks  at  BATU.] 

Batu  :  Venerable  stranger,  take  that  small  copper  pot,  and 
wash  your  feet. 

Self-Sufficiency  :  (Aside.  It  is  of  little  consequence;  I  shall 
do  it.)  Well,  after  washing  my  feet,  I  shall  depart. 

Hypocrisy  :  (Biting  his  lips.)  Stand  fartheroff ;  the  wind 
blows  particles  of  your  perspiration  in  my  face, 

Self-Sufficiency  :     This  is  strange  kind  of  Brahmanism, 

Batu  :  It  is  our  Brahmanism.  The  kings  of  the  earth,  who 
worship  this  holy  saint,  presume  not  to  touch  his  feet  ;  but  the 
sparkling  jewels  which  adorn  their  heads  irradiate  the  space 
before  his  seat.J 

Self-Sufficiency  :  (Aside.  This  is  the  land  of  Hypocrisy.) 
I  shall,  however,  sit  down  upon  this  seat,  for  such  is  my  incli- 
nation. 

Batu  :  The  greatest  men,  after  saluting  my  tutor,  do  not 
touch  a  seat. 

Self-Sufficiency  :  Shall  I,  whose  holiness  is  celebrated  in 
the  city  Kara  in  the  Dakshin,  not  be  permitted  to  take  hold  of 
this  seat  ? — Hear,  you  fool ;  my  mother  was  not  of  a  noble  family, 
but  I  married  the  daughter  of  an  Agni-Hotra  Brahman  ;  and 

*  The  country  of  Gaud  is  the  modern  Bengal, 
f  A  renowned  holy  place. 

%  He  was  held  in  such  profound  respect,  that  they  who  came  to  risit  him 
prostrated  themselves  at  a  little  distance  from  his  feet. 


Act  II.]  RlBE  OP  THE  MOON  OP  INTELLECT.  17 

therefore  am  above  my  father.  The  son  of  the  maternal  uncle 
of  the  friend  of  my  brother-in-law  was  only  falsely  accused; 
but  on  account  of  her  relation  to  this  person,  I  put  away  my 
dearly  beloved  wife.* 

Hypocrisy  :  Brahman,  this  may  be  true  ;  but  you  are  not 
yet  acquainted  with  our  character.  Formerly,  when  I  went  on 
an  occasion  to  the  abode  of  the  God  who  sprung  from  the  lotus,  f 
all  the  great  Munis  rose  up  from  their  seats,  and  Brahma  him- 
self entreated  me  to  remain  ;  and  purifying  his  things  with  cow- 
dung,  he  placed  m<3  upon  them. 

Self-Sufficiecny  :  (Aside.  This  is  the  language  of  an  hypo- 
critical Brahman.  Considers.  —  Perhaps  it  is  Hypocrisy  him- 
self. Angrily.)  Why  should  you  be  so  proud  ?  Who  is 
VasavaJ  ?  Who  is  the  God  sprung  from  the  lotus  ?  Of  what 
consequence  is  a  Rishi  birth  §  ?  But  before  the  energy  of  my 
devotion  hundreds  of  Purandaras||  ,  hundreds  of  Brahmans,  apd 
hundreds  of  Munis  vanish  away. 

Hypocrisy  :  (Looking  at  him  with  delight.)  —  This  is  my 
venerable  grandfather.  Respected  Sir,  I  am  Hypocrisy,  the 
offspring  of  AvariceH-  I  salute  you. 

Self-Sufficiency  :  My  son,  may  you  live  many  years.  I  saw 
you  tit  the  end  of  the  Dvapara  Yuga  when  you  were  a  child  ; 
H  long  time  has  passed  since  we  met  ;  I  am  now  bowed  down 
with  old  age,  and  I  do  not  readily  distinguish  persons..  Is 
your  son  Falsehood**  well  ? 


*    This  strongly  expresses  the  high   opinion  he  entertained   of  his  . 
purity,  and  describes  admirably  the   overstrained   scrupulosity,  of  one  who 
pretends  to  surpass  all  his  fellow  creatures  in  virtue.  f  Brahma. 

}     Indra,  patronymic  from  Yasava,  one  of  the  celestial  beings. 

<§  That  is,  what  honour  does  the  friendship  of  these  persons  confer  ?  for 
Indra  was  guilty  of  adultery  ;  Brahma  wished  to  commit  incest  with  his 
own  daughter  ;  and  the  mother  of  Vyasa,  one  of  the  greatest  Rights,  and  the 
.author  of  the  Puranas,  was  a  fisher  woman. 

||    A  name  of  Indra  —  he  who  clipped  the  wings  of  the  mountain*. 

^|     Lobha. 

**  Anrita. 

3 


18  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA  ;  Olt,  [Act  II, 

Hypocrisy  :     I  cannot  live  without  him  a  single  hour. 

Self-Sufficiency  :  What!  is  he  here  execnting  commands 
of  Passion  ?  Are  your  mother  and  father,  losatiableiiess*  and 
Avarice,  well  ? 

Hypocrisy  :  They  also  are  here,  for  I  cannot  remain  a 
moment  without  them.  But,  venerable  and  exalted  Sire,  to 
what  cause  do  we  owe  this  favour? 

Self-Suffi-ciency  :  My  child,  I  hear  that  Passion  is  sorely 
pressed  by  Reason,  and  I  am  come  to  learn  the  news, 

Hypocrisy  ;  It  is  well  you  have  arrived.  I  hear  it  reported 
that  the  great  King  Passion  is  coming  from  the  abode  of  Indra, 
and  he  has  commanded  me  to  reside  in  the  royal  city  Varanasi, 

Self-Sufficiency  :  AVhy  does  Passion,  who  occupies  every 
Leart,  stay  at  Varanasi  ? 

Hypocrisy  :  It  is  on  account  of  Reason.  Varanasi,  the 
indestrictible  city  of  Brahma,  is  the  birthplace  of  Science  and 
•Intellect ;  hence  Reason,  who  seeks  to  destroy  our  ra*ee,  desires 
to  dwell  there  for  ever.f 

Self-Sufficiency  :  (Fearfully.}  It  is  then  impossible  yon 
should  succeed  ;  for  in  this  city  the  conqueror  of  Tripura,f  who 
is.  compassionatey  reveals  Intellect  to  ignorant  men  at  the  end  of 
their  days,  who  buoys  them  up  amidst  the  fear  of  this  moral 
state. 

Hypocrisy  :  This  indeed  is  true  ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  those? 
who  are  overcome  by  Love,  Anger, §  and  other  Passions*  Holy 
men  declare,  that  he  only  whose  hands  and  whose  feet  are 

*     Trishna. 

f  [Varanasi,  the  indestructible  city  of  Salvation,  is  the  native  land  of 
Science  and  Intellect :  hence,  one  desirous  of  observing  the  precepts  lay 
which  a  continnance  of  family  is  cut  off  (and  final  beatit»de  obtained,)  is- 
solicitous  to  dwell  there  cotinually." — Colebrooke,  Essays,  vol.  II.,  p.  104 
Comp.  Wilson  Asiat.  Researches,  voL  XVI.  p.  7,.  note.] 

f    Mahadeva,  or  Shiva,  who  conquered  the  Daitya 

f     Krodha. 


Act   II.]  RISE   OP   THE    MOON   OF   INTELLECT.  1$ 

employed  in  the  service  of  God  ;  whose  mind  is  fixed  upon 
Him  ;  who  possesses  knowledge,  devotion,  and  fame  (respect), 
will  enjoy  the  fruit  of  this  place  of  pilgrimage. 

[Behind  the  Scenes.] 

Here  you  fellows,  the  great  King  Passion  is  arrived.  Sprin- 
kle the  pavement  of  precious  stones  with  water  impregnated 
with  sandalwood  ;  open  the  fountains  that  their  streams  may 
play  around ;  hang  up  festoons  of  large  brilliant  diamonds,  and 
let  the  flag  which  bears  the  bow  of  Indra  wave  on  the  top  of 
the  royal  residence. 

Hypocrisy  :  The  great  King  approaches  ;  you  must  shew 
him  respect,  by  advancing  to  meet  him.  • 

Self-Sufficiency*.  Let  us  do  so.  ( They  go  out.)  [PASSIO 
enters  in  a  pompous  manner  along  icith  Ids  attendants.] 

Passion  :  (Smiling.)  Uncivilized  ignorant  fools,  who 
imagine  that  spirit  is  something  different  from  body,  and  reaps 
the  reward  of  actions  in  a  futture  state ;  we  might  as  well 
expect  to  find  excellent  fruit  drop  from  trees  growing  in  the  air. 
But  assuming  the  existence  of  what  is  the  mere  creature  of  their 
own  imagination,  they  deceive  the  people.  They  falsely  affirm 
the  existence  of  that  which  does  not  exist*;  and  by  their  frequent 
disputations  endeavour  to  bring  reproach  upon  the  Nastikasf 
who  maintain  the  words  of  truth.J  Who  has  seen  the  soul 
existing  in  a  state  separate  from  the  body?  Does  not  life§ 
result  from  the  ultimate  configuration  of  matter  ||?  Consider 
this  attentively.  They  not  only  deceive  themselves,  but  like- 

*  Commentary. — The  existence  of  spirit,  or  a  substanee  different  from 
matter,  an  opinion  which  is  not  supported  by  the  evidence  of  the  senses. 

f  Commentary. — Who  do  not  believe  the  Vedas. — They  are  Materialists 
or  Atheists.  The  word  Nastika.means  negative. 

J  That  spirit  is  not  a  distinct  substance. 

§  This  word  also  signifies  sensation  and  intelligence. 

II  Commentary. — As  a  red  colour  is  produced  when  betel-nut,  betel-leaf, 
and  lime  are  masticated  together,  so  life  arises  from  a  combination  of  the 
elementary  particles  of  matter. 


20  PRABODHA    CHANDRODAYA ;    OR,  [Act   II. 

wise  deceive  the  world.  On  what  grounds  do  they  establish 
distinctions*  among'  beings  formed  with  bodies  possessing  th  ^  . 
same  parts  and  organs,  as  a  month,  &c.?  Why  do  they  affirn  |  j 
that  this  woman  belongs  to  one  person,  and  this  thing  to 
another  ;  these  are  distinctions  which  I  do  not  know.  Those  who 
enquire  whether  slaying  animals,  indulgence  at  pleasure  in  the 
tender  passions,  or  taking  what  belongs  to  another,  be  lawful  or 
unlawful,  do  not  act  conformably  to  the  principal  end  of  life.f 
(^feditaf'unj  proudly.)  The  Siiastra  whose  doctrines  are  obvious 
to  all,  and  which  is  founded  on  the  evidence  of  the  senses  ;  which 
admits  only  the  elements  of  earth,  water,  fire,  air,J  which  main- 
tains that  sustenance  and  love  are  the  objects  of  human  existence ; 
which  asserts  that  matter  §  possesses  intelligence,  ||  which  denies 
the  existence  of  separate  spirits,  and  affirms  that  death  is 
blessedness,  was  written  by  Vackaspati,1F  a  believer  in  this 
system  ;  he  delivered  it  to  a  Materialist,  who  taught  it  to  his. 
disciples,  and  these  disciples  instructed  their  followers.  Thus  it 
lias  become  widely  diffused  in  the  world. 

[  A  MATERIALIST**  and  one  of  his  pupils  enter.'] 

Materialist :  My  son,  you  know  that  Legislationft  is  the 
only  Science,  and  that  it  comprises  every  thing  else.  The 
threejf  Vedas  are  a  cheat.  Behold  if  Heaven  be  obtained  through 
the  officiating  priest,  sacrificial  rites,  and  the  destruction  of  the 
substances  employed,  why  is  not  abundance  of  excellent  fruit 
obtained  from  the  ashes  of  a  tree  which  has  haen  burnt  up  by 


*  Commec  tary.—  Of  Brahman,  JCshatriya,  Vaishya,  and  Shudra. 

f  Commentary. — Sustenance  and  loye;  not  religiop  an<i  beatitude, 

%  They  do  not  admit  the  existence  of  space,  which  is  reckoned  an  element 
by  the  orthodox.  §  Lit.  The  elements,  |]  Life,  Sensation. 

f  An  eminent  teacher  of  the  sect.  In  the  Hemakosha  it  is  written 
Varhasptya.  [See  Colebrooke,  Essays,  vol.  1,  p.  332.] 

**  Charyaka. — One  believes  in  the  existence  of  four  elements  only,  fire 
Water,  earth,  and  air.  The  orthodox;  say  that  they  are  Atheists,  [  See 
Colebrooke,  Essays,  vol.  J.  p.  402.] 

ft  The  law  of  the  punishment. — That  is,  we  are  influenced  in  onr  conduct 
by  the  fear  of  legal  punishment  for  offences  and  not  by  the  dread  of  futurity.. 

tJ  This  shews  that  sometimes  three  Yedas  only  are  mentioned  after  the 
fourth  \yas  written, 


Act  II.]  EISE  OP  THE  MOON  OF   INTELLECT.  21 

the  fire  of  forest.*  If  the  victims  slain  in  sacrifice  ascend  to 
heaven,!  why  are  not  parents  offered  up  in  sacrifice  by  their 
children  ?  If  funeral  oblations  nourish  the  deceased,  why  is  not 
the  flame  of  an  extinguished  taper  renovated  by  pouring  on  oil  ? 

Pupil :  Venerable  tutor,  if  to  gratify  the  appetites}  be  the 
principal  end  of  life,  why  do  these  men  renounce  sensual  plea- 
sures, and  submit  to  pain  arising  from  the  severest  mortifica- 
tions ?§ 

Materialist :  These  fools  are  deceived  by  the  lying  Sliastras, 
and  are  fed  with  the  allurements  ||  of  hope.  But  can  begging, 
fasting,  penance,  exposure  to  the  burning  heat  of  the  sun,  which 
emaciate  the  body,  be  compared  with  the  ravishing  embraces 
of  women  with  large  eyes,  whose  prominent  breasts  are  com- 
pressed within  one's  arms. 

•  Pupil :  Do  these  pilgrims  indeed  torture  themselves  in 
order  to  remove  the  happiness  which  is  mingled  with  this 
miserable  existence  ? 

Materialist :  (  Smiling.  )  You  ignorant  boy,  such  are  the 
fooleries  of  these  unenlightened  men.  They  conceive  that  you 
ought  to  throw  away  the  pleasures  of  life,  because  they  are 
mixed  with  pain  ;  but  what  prudent  man  will  throw  away  1111- 
peeled  rice  which  incloses  excellent  grain  because  it  is  covered 
with  the  husk  ? 

Passion  :  Those  opinions  which  are  supposed  to  be  verified 
by  futurity,  merely  gratify  the  ear.  ( Looking  ivith  joy. } 
Materialist,  you  are  my  beloved  friend. 

*  This  is  ridiculing  the  opinion  that  benefit  is  derived  from  offering 
oblations  to  the  Deity  ;  for  if  recompense  follow  destruction  in  the  case  of 
sacrifices,  it  is  affirmed  that  it  should  do  so  in  every  other  instance. 

f  Such  is  the  belief  of  the  Hindus,  and  they  state  this  circumstance  as  an 
excuse  for  the  apparent  cruelty  of  immolating  animals. 

J  Literally,  Eating  and  drinking. 

§  Paraka,  Santapana,  Shushtkala,  three  kinds  of  severe  penance  or 
atonement. 

II  Lit.  Sweetmeats, 


22  PRABODHA    CHANDRODAYA  ;  OR,  [Act   II. 

Materialist :  (  Looks  at  the  great  King  Passion  and  ad- 
vances towards  him.)  May  thoii  be  victorious.  Materialist 
salutes  t/iee. 

Passion  :     My  friend,  you  are  welcome,  sit  down  here. 

Materialist :  (  Sitting  down. )  Vice*  prostrates  himself 
at  your  feet. 

Passion  :     The  felicity  of  Vice,  I  hope,  is  unimpaired. 

Materialist :  By  your  bounty  all  are  happy.  Having  ac- 
complished what  he  was  ordered  to  perform,  he  now  desires  to 
touch  your  feet ;  for  blessed  is  he,  who  after  destroying  the 
enemies  of  his  Lord,  beholds  his  gracious  face  with  exceeding 
joy,  and  prostrates  himself  at  his  lotus  foot. 

Passion  :     What  exploits  have  been  performed  by  Vice  ? 

Materialist :  He  has  caused  the  most  virtuous  men  to  forsake 
the  road  commanded  in  the  Vedas,  and  to  follow  their  own  in- 
clinations. This  achievement,  however,  belongs  neither  to  Vice 
nor  myself;  for  it  was  your  Majesty  who  inspired  us  with  courage- 
The  people  who  are  doomed  to  inferior  duties,  and  who  were 
created  last,t  have  renounced  the  three  Vedas  ;  who  then  are 
quiet,  Mortification  and  others  ?  Besides  those  who  read  the 
Vedas  do  it  merely  for  the  sake  of  subsistence.  The  teacher 
BrihaspatiJ  has  declared  that  the  performance  of  sacrifice,  read- 
ing the  Vedas,  penances,  and  rubbing  the  body  with  ashes,§  are 
the  means  by  which  ignorant  weak  men  contrive  to  support 
themselves.  Also  in  the  cities  ||  of  the  Kurus,  Science  and  Intel- 

*  Kali,  the  name  of  the  present  or  sinful  age. 

|  The  military,  husbandry,  and  servile  classes. 

J  The  Guru  or  spiritual  director  of  the  Gods.  It  is  a  common  name  for 
a  person  of  that  description.  Here  it  means  the  spiritual  teacher  of  the 
Materialists. 

§  The  practice  of  a  class  of  mendicants. 

||  Hastinapur ,  Bhadrikedara,  three  places  of  pre-eminent  sanctity.  As 
Science  and  Intellect  had  not  appeared  in  them,*it  is  inferred  that  they  did 
not  exist  on  earth. 


II.]  RISE   OF   THE    MOON   OF   INTELLECT.  23 

lect  have  not  appeared  even  in  a  dream ;   therefore,   0  mighty 
King,  be  under  no  apprehensions. 

Passion  :  By  rendering  these  pilgrimages  of  no  efficacy, 
yon  have  done  excellent  service. 

Materialist :  Great  King,  I  have  another  petition  to 
present. 

Passion  :    What  is  it  ? 

Materialist:  There  is  a  person  named  Devotion*,  of  great 
influence,  who  performs  rigid  austerities  ;  and  though  she  now 
occupies  but  few  places,  yet  we  have  not  the  courage  to  look  her 
followers  in  the  face.  You  must  be  on  your  guard  against  her* 

Passion  :  [In  fear,  Aside.  Alas!  The  mighty  energy  of  this 
Devotee  is  ivell  known ;  she  is  my  natural  enemy,  to  destroy  her 
ivill  be  a  difficult  icorkJ}  But,  my  excellent  friend,  how  can  this 
person  appear  while  her  enemies  Auger  and  Love  continue  to 
live? 

Materialist .'  It  may  be  so,  but  one  who  expects  victory 
ought  not  to  be  remiss,  though  the  enemy  be  weak.  A  feeble 
enemy  gives  much  trouble,  and  may  even  inflict  a  mortal 
wound,  as  small  thorn  in  the  foot  pains  the  whole  body. 

iPassion  :     {Looking  behind  the  curtain.)    Who  is  there? 
A  SERVANT  enters. 

Servant :     Great  Sir,  what  are  your  commands  ? 

Passion  :  Companion  of  the  wicked f,  go  and  tell  Love, 
Auger,  Avarice,  Self-sufficiency,  Pride,  Haughtiness,  Envy,  &c., 
that  they  must  be  on  the  watch  against  Devotion,  and  slay  her. 

Servant :     I  shall  obey  your  orders*  (Goes  out.) 

[  A  man  enters  holding  a  letter  in  his  hand.  ] 

Man  :  I  come  from  the  country  of  Utkal  J,  where  a  temple 
called  Purushottama  stands  on  the  seashore,  from  which  I  have 

*  Vishnu  Bhakti,  a  worshipper  of  Vishnu. 

f  AsatBanga.  %  Orisa, 


24  1PRABODHA   CHANDRODAYA;   Ot,  [Act  II. 

been  sent  by  the  brave  Pride  and  Haughtiness  to  the  presence 
tt£tke  great  King.  (Looking.}  This  is  Varanasi,  in  which  the 
King's  family  dwells.  I  shall  enter  it.  (Enters  the  city.) 
The  Hero  I  perceive  is  deliberating  with  Materialist;  I  shall  go 
towards  him.  (  Goes  to  Jam.  )  0  King,  may  yon  be  victorious. 
Read  this  letter  which  I  was  ordered  to  deliver  to  you. 

Pa'ssion  :     (Taking  the  letter.)    Where  do  you  come  from  ? 
Man  *     I  come  from  Purushottama. 

Passion  :  (Aside.  This  probably  brings  unpleasant  netvs.) 
Materialist,  you  must  depart,  be  on  the  alert,  and  do  whatever 
is  required. 

Materialist :     I  only  wait  the  commands  of  your  Majesty. 

(Goes  out.) 
[PASSION  reads  the  letter.'] 

'"  Pride  and  Haughtiness  send  their  humble  prostrations  from 
Purushottama  to  tfhe  great  Lord  and  King  of  Kings,  residing  at 
the  splendid  city,  Varanasi,  and  represent,  that  we  are  in  good 
health.  The  Goddess  Tranquillity,  and  her  mother  Religion,* 
=have  entered  into  the  service  of  Reason,  and  day  and  night 
they  are  endeavouring  to  persuade  Revelation  to  return  to  himf. 
Virtuous  Action  J  who  formerly  associated  with  Love,  now 
associates  with  Retirement§  and  others  ;  and  separating  him- 
•self  from  Love,  he  occasionally  walks  in  secret  places.  What 
Ve  have  written  is  sufficient  to  inform  your  Majesty." 

Passion  :  (Having  read  the  letter :  Angrily.)  Consummate 
'fools  to  be  afraid  of  Tranquillity-;  how  can  she  appear? — If 
Brahma  be  unceasingly  employed  in  the  'creation  of  worlds  ; 
if  the  eye  of  the  God  ||  who  destroyed  the  sacrifice  of  Daksha, 
burn  with  desire  whilst  he  is  infolded  in  the  arms  of  Gauri  If; 

*  Shraddha. 

^  It  will  be  recollected  that  they  had  been  separated  before. 
J  Dharma — virtue,  justice,  ritual  observance. 

§  Vairagya,  forsaking  the  world  •.  here  it  signifies  the  renunciation  of  every 
3dnd  of  action. 
||  Shiva. 
^|  The  wife  of  Shiva,  she  is  usually  called  Parvati. 


Act  II.]         RISE    OP   THE    MOON   OP   INTELLECT.  25 

if  the  breast  of  him*  who  is  the  enemy  of  Daityas,f  and  who 
sleeps  on  the  surface  of  the  ocean,  be  imprinted  with  the 
smooth  locks  of  Kamalaf ,  how  can  Tranquillity  be  obtained  by 
inferior  orders  of  being§  ?  (To  the  man.)  ||  Subtlety,  go  with 
your  utmost  speed  and  deliver  this  my  message  to  Love : — 
"  Virtuous  Actions  in  my  opinion  is  a  base  person  ;  you  ought 
not  to  trust  him  a  single  moment :  bind  him  fast  and  secure 
him." 

Man  :    I  will  obey  your  Majesty's  orders. 

[Goes  out* 

Passion  :  (  Aside  ;  in  a  musing  posture.}  What  device  is 
there  against  Tranquillity  ?  Well,  it  is  sufficient ;  no  other  as- 
sistance is  required,  Anger  and  Avarice  will  do  the  business. 
Hallo  !  Is  there  any  one  there  ? 

A  SERVANT  enters. 

Servant :     What  are  the  commands  of  your  Majesty  ? 

Passion  :    Call  Anger  and  Avarice  here. 

Servant :    Your  command  shall  be  obeyed. 

[He  goes  out. 
ANGER  and  AVARICE  enter. 

Anger  :  I  have  heard  that  Tranquillity,  Religion,  and 
Devotion  are  hostile  to  his  Majesty.  But  while  I  am  in  exist- 
ence their  attempts  will  be  vain.  I  will  make  the  people 
blind  and  deaf.  I  will  over-power  them  with  wrath,  and  suf- 
focate them  with  rage,  so  that  they  shall  not  regard  actions, 
and  even  wise  men  shall  neither  hearken  to  what  concerns 
their  own  happiness,  nor  recollect  what  they  had  read  in  the 
noly  books. 

Avarice  :  Those  who  are  attached  to  me  will  never  reach 
the  farther  banks  of  the  successive  rivers  of  desire.  Shall 
Tranquillity  then  give  us  any  uneasiness  ?  Look,  my  friend,  I 

*  Vishnu.  fTne  kind  of  evil  beings. 

J  Lakshmi,  the  wife  of  Vishnu. 

§  Beings  of  the  highest  order  agitated  by  their  passsions  or  urged  by  the 
active  principles  of  their  nature,  do  not  enjoy  rest  or  tranquillity ;  how,  then, 
can  this  state  be  attained  by  weak  mortals  ?  ||  Jalma. 

4 


26  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA;   OR,  [Act  II. 

have  elephants  whose  frontal  protuberances  are  moistened  with 
the  water  of  inebriation*,  and  horses  swifter  than  the  wind 
which  advance  against  the  enemy ;  but  after  men  have  ac- 
quired these,  they  will  desire  something  else,  and  having 
obtained  this,  they  will  wish  for  more.  How  can  Tranquillity 
dwell  among  persons  of  such  restless  minds  ? 

Anger :  Companion,  do  you  know  my  prowess  ?  Instigat- 
ed by  me,  the  Lord  of  the  firmament  killed  Vratra,  the  son  of 
Twaahtra  ;  the  god  whose  forehead  bears  the  semilunar  lustre, 
cut  off  the  head  of  Brahma  ;  and  Kaushika  slew  the  sons  of 
Vasishtha  t-  In  a  moment  I  can  root  out  every  description 
of  men,  whether  they  be  learned,  celebrated,  attentive  to  duties^ 
charitable,  or  clothed  in  might. 

Avarice  :     Insatiableness,  come  forward. 

INSATIABLENESS  enters.. 
Insatiableness  :    What  are  your  commands  ? 

Avarice  :  I  have  heard  that  when  thou  art  pleased  with 
mortals  whose  minds  are  bound  with  the  cord  of  insatiable  de* 
sire,  their  bodies  become  swelled  with  fat,  and  after  obtaining 
fields,  villages,  forests,  mountains,  cities,  towns,  continents 
and  the  earth  itself,  they  are  eager  to  acquire  more,  nor  would 
they  be  satisfied  with  one  hundred  thousand  worlds  ;  how  then 
can  they  enjoy  Tranquillity  ? 

Insatiajbleness  :  I  am  continually  engaged  in  this  busi* 
ness.  If  you  will  now  give  me  your  commands,  millions  of 
words  will  not  suffice  me* 

Anger  :     Injury,  come  here. 


*  When  elephants  want  the  female,  or  are  inflamed  from  any  cause,  it  is 
supposed  that  a  certain  liquid  is  secreted  from  two  protuberances,  situated 
on  the  sides  of  the  head. 

f  These  relate  to  some  mythological  tales.  The  intention  is  to  prove  the 
influence  of  Anger  over  the  highest  order  of  Beings. 


Act  II.]        RISE   OP   THE   MOON   OP   INTELLECT.  27 

INJURY*  enters. 
Injury  :    I  attend.    What  orders  are  you  pleased  to  give  ? 

Anger  :  My  dear,  as  thou  art  my  spouse,  the  murder  of 
my  father  and  mother  is  but  a  small  matter.  Who  is  that 
demon  my  mother  ?  Who  is  my  father  ?  My  brothers  are 
like  worms  ;  my  relations  are  only  fit  to  be  slain  ;  and  the 
people  of  my  caste  resemble  the  embraces  of  a  deceitful  court- 
ezan. {Rubbing  kis  hands}.)  The  sparks  of  the  gleaming 
fire  of  anger  shall  not  be  extinguished  in  my  frame,  until  I 
have  massacred  their  whole  race,  even  to  the  child  in  the 
womb.  ( Looking.)  Here  is  our  Lord,  let  us  go  to  him. 
(  They  all  go.)  Great  King,  may  you  be  victorious  !  may  you 
be  victorious  1 

Passion  :  Tranquillity,  the  daughter  of  Religion,  is  our 
enemy  ;  she  is  one  who  must  be  punished. 

Allurement :    As  you  order.  [  They  go  out. 

Passion  :  By  mentioning  the  daughter  of  Religion,  an  ex- 
pedient has  occurred  to  my  mind.  Religion,  the  mother  of 
Tranquillity,  is  under  the  influence  of  another.  We  must 
endeavour  to  draw  her  away  from  Revelation,  and  to  bind  her 
fast.  In  consequence  of  the  distress  arising  from  the  separa- 
tion, and  of  herj  own  tender  disposition,  Tranquillity  will  be- 
come hopeless  and  dejected,  and  will  perish.  The  female, 
Delusion§,  is  an  excellent  person  to  seize  upon  Religion  ;  I 
must  employ  her  in  this  affair.  (  Looking  to  one  side.)  Al- 
lurement ||,  call  Delusion  immediately. 

[  ALLUREMENT  enters  along  with  DELUSION,] 

Delusion  :  My  dear,  it  is  long  since  I  visited  the  King  ; 
how  shall  I  look  him  in  the  face,  he  will  certainly  not  know 

me  ? 

*  Hinsa.    To  injure,  hurt;  in  common  language  to  murder. 

f  This  is  done  when  a  person  is  much  enraged. 

J  Kevelation,  Religion,  and  tranquillity,  lived  together  in  one  place: 
consequently  when  Religion  was  separated  from  Revelation,  Tranquillity 
was  also  deprived  of  her  company. 

§  Mithya  Dristi.  II  Vibhramavati. 


28  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA  ;  OR,  [Act  II. 

Allurement :  My  dear,  when  the  King  sees  yon  he  will 
forget  himself,  how  then  should  he  recollect  you  1 

Delusion  :  You  are  inclined  to  be  merry  at  my  good 
fortune. 

Allurement :  You  will  see  presently  how  fortunate  you 
are. 

Delusion  :  My  companions  are  very  drowsy,  and  must  rub 
np  their  eyes. 

Allurement :    Why  are  your  companions  so  sleepy  ? 

Delusion  :  Why  ?  A  woman  with  one  husband  only, 
cannot  get  sleep  ;  how  then  should  we  sleep  who  have  so  many 
husbands ! 

Allurement :     Pray  who  are  these  husbands  ? 

Delusion  :  The  great  King  Passion,  Love,  Anger,  Avarice, 
Self-sufficiency,  and  many  others.  1  captivate  all  who  are 
born  of  that  race,  young  and  old,  so  that  they  do  not  separate 
from  me  night  or  day. 

Allurement :  I  have  heard  that  Enjoyment  is  the  beloved 
wife  of  Love;  Murder,  of  Anger;  and  Insatiableness,  of  Avarice. 
If  their  husbands  wanton  with  you,  will  they  not  become 
jealous  and  hate  you  ? 

Delusion  :  Why  do  you  talk  about  their  jealousy  ?  They 
cannot  do  without  me  a  single  hour. 

Allurement :  On  this  account  I  said,  that  no  woman  in 
the  world  is  so  highly  favoured  as  you,  since  even  women  who 
are  neglected,  desire  to  be  on  gracious  terms  with  you.  My 
dear,  you  may  be  excessively  sleepy,  but  when  you  approach 
the  King,  and  the  rings  on  your  toes^  make  a  jingling  noise, 
he  will  be  somewhat  afraid. 

Delusion  :  Why  should  he  be  afraid,  for  he  has  ordered  us 
to  put  on  these  ornaments,  and  it  is  our  practice.  How  should 
men  be  alarmed  at  the  sight  of  their  mistresses  ? 

Passion  :  (Looking.)  Ah!  here  is  my  dear  Delusion.  She 
comes  walking  along  majestically,  and  the  loose  bracelets 


Act  IL]        RISE   OP   THE    MOON   OP   INTELLECT.  29 

tinkle  on  her  arms  ;  she  lifts  up  in  play  the  garland  of  flowers, 
loosened  by  the  respectful  officiousness  of  attendants,  and  thus 
displays  the  form  of  fingers  imprinted  on  her  breasts,  while  her 
large  eyes,  which  are  like  the  blue  lotus,  charm  the  heart. 
Allurement :     Let  us  approach  the  King. 

[DELUSION  advances  and  salutes  the  KING.] 
Passion :     Thou  whose   breasts   bear    the  impressions  of 
fingers,  sit  down  on  my  knee  and  embrace  me  ;  thou  stag-eyed 
maid,  imitate  the  playful  mien  of  the  daugher  of  Himashaila, 
seated  on  the  knee  of  Shankara*. 

[DELUSION  smiles  and  embraces  him."] 

Passion  :  (Having  received  her  embrace.)  This  embrace 
renews  my  youth  ;  the  emotionsof  love  disturb  my  faculties  ; 
emotions  which  of  old  are  known  to  arise  from  youthful  toying, 
which  render  the  mind  impetuous,  and  which,  accompanied 
with  various  delightful  enjoyments  cause  in  expressible  pleasure, 
and  are  eagerly  indulged  ;  these  emotions  are  again  excited 
by  your  embrace. 

Delusion  :  Great  King,  I  am  at  present  young;  but  time 
shall  not  remove  from  my  heart  the  affection  I  bear  you.  Give 
me  your  commands.  What  occasion  has  brought  me  to  your 
remembrance  ? 

Passion :  We  remember  only  such  as  are  absent  from  the 
mind  ;  but  your  picture  is  fixed  on  the  wall  of  my  heart. 

Delusion  :  Great  King,  you  are  very  gracious  ;  favour 
me  with  your  orders. 

Passion  :  You  will  execute  my  orders  as  you  walk  openly 
about.  Religion,  the  daughter  of  a  slave-woman,  acts  as  a  pro- 
cur  ess  to  bring  together  Reason  and  Revelation.  She  is  adverse 
to  me  ;  she  is  of  no  family,  and  she  is  a  sinner  and  a  com- 
panion of  sinner f;  seize  her  and  deliver  her  over  to  Heresy J. 

*  A  name  of  Shiva  or  Mahadeva. 

f  Comment. — She  seeks  to  destroy  my  race  and  associates  which  my 
enemies  Quiet,  Mortification,  &c. 

J  Comment. — Pashanda.  One  >vho  does  not  perform  the  ceremoaiea  and 
duties  of  the  established  faith. 


30  PRABODHA   CHANDRODAYA;   OR,  [Act  II. 

Delusion  :  This  is  enough,  when  Religion  is  made  your 
slave,  she  will  do  whatever  you  command.  She  will  declare 
that  virtue,  beatitude,  the  commandments  of  the  Yedas,  duties 
which  are  impediments  to  pleasure,  ordinances  of  the  Shastras 
and  future  rewards,  are  all  false  ;  she  will  instantly  renounce 
the  Vedas  ;  why  then  mention  Revelation  ?  She  will  unveil 
the  error  of  affirming  that  blessedness  consists  in  freedom 
from  sensual  pleasure,  and  she  will  separate  Revelation  from 
Reason. 

Passion:    My  dear,  you  understand  my  object  well. 

[Embraces  and  kisses  her. 

Delusion  :  I  am  not  ashamed,  though  my  Lord  has  em- 
braced me  so  publicly. 

Passion  :    Let  us  retire  to  our  several  homes. 

[  They  all  go  out. 


END  OF  THE  SECOND  ACT. 


Act  III. 


TRANQUILLITY  and  COMPASSION  enter. 

Tranquillity  :  (  Weeping. )  My  mother,  where  are  you  ? 
0  grant  me  one  beloved  view.  Alas  !  she  whose  delight  was  to 
sojourn  in  forests  where  the  deer  range  without  fear ;  to  wander 
where  the  waters  fall  from  the  mountains,  to  frequent  holy  places 
consecrated  to  God  and  the  retreats  of  devout  ascetics,  is  deliver- 
ed into  the  hands  of  Heresy  ;  she  is  like  a  black  cow*  in  the 
hands  of  the  butcher,  how  can  she  escape  ?  To  talk  of  her 
surviving  is  vain.  Prevented  from  seeing  me,  unable  to  per- 
form ablution,  hungry  and  thirsty,  and  deprived  of  my  society, 
will  Religion  survive  one  hour,  and  separated  from  Religion, 
Tranquillity  will  live  despised  by  the  people  ?  My  dear  Com- 
passion, be  not  concerned  about  me,  but  I  am  resolved  to  ac- 
company her  when  she  is  laid  upon  the  funeral  pile. 

Compassion  :  (  Weeping^)  My  dear,  these  words  are  more 
painful  to  my  ear  than  the  flame  of  a  fierce  fire  is  to  the  touch  ; 
you  will  kill  me  with  grief.  Preserve  our  life  for  a  little  space  ; 
I  shall  spread  the  melancholy  tidings  in  the  abodes  of  holy 
men,  in  the  assemblies  of  the  Munis,  and  on  the  banks  of 
Bhagirathi  ;  perhaps  she  is  lying  concealed  somewhere  through 
fear  to  Passion. 

Tranquillity  :  I  have  sought  for  her  on  the  banks  of  rivers 
covered  with  wild  grain,  and  inhabited  by  holy  hermits  ;  I  have 
searched  every  house  where  oblations  are  made  and  sacrificial 
utensils  kept  ;  I  have  searched  amongst  the  four  classes  of 
men  ;  but  I  have  not  received  the  smallest  intelligence  of  her. 

Compassion  :  My  dear,  I  must  tell  you  that  had  Religion 
possessed  the  principle  of  Truthf,  we  should  not  have  found 

*  A  cow  of  this  colour  is  highly  valued,  and  is  the  object  of  peculiar 
veneration, 
f  Satva  Guna, 


32  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA;   OR,  [Act  III. 

her  in  such  difficulties  ;  those  who  are  perfectly  pure  do  not 
experience  such  distress. 

Tranquillity  :  When  Fate  is  adverse,  what  may  not  be 
experienced  ?  Alas  !  the  operations  of  Fate  are  perverse  and 
cruel.  Lakshmi,  the  daughter  of  Janaka,  lived  in  the  house  of 
the  ten-headed  Ravana  ;  Danava  carried  down  to  hell  the  three 
Vedas  of  God  himself  ;  and  the  chief  of  the  Daityas,  Patala 
Ketu,  seized  by  a  stratagem  Madalasa,  the  daughter  of  a 
Gandharva.  Let  us  go  to  the  dwelling  of  Heresy. 

Compassion  :     Let  us  do  so.  [  They  walk  forward. 

Compassion  :    ( Fearfully^    My  dear,  here  is  a  Rakshasa 
Tranquillity  :    Who  is  this  Rakshasa  ? 

Compassion  :  Behold  him  I  his  disgustful  form  is  be- 
smeared with  ordure,  his  hair  is  in  wild  disorder,  his  body  is 
naked  and  horrible  to  view,  and  he  holds  in  his  hands  feathers 
of  the  peacock's  tail ;  he  comes  this  way. 

Tranquollity  :  This  is  not  a  Rakshasa,  for  he  has  no 
strength. 

Compassion  :    He,  however,  may  be  one. 
Tranquillity :    I  suspect  that  he  is  an  evil  spirit. 

Compassion  :  Why  do  you  talk  of  an  evil  spirit,  when  the 
sun  pouring  forth  streams  of  effulgent  rays  illumines  the  world. 

Tranquillity  :  Perhaps  he  is  come  from  the  pit  of  hell. 
[Looks  and  muses  a  little.~\  Ah  !  now  I  know  ;  he  is  a  Digam- 
bara  Siddhanta*,  sent  by  the  great  King  Passion,  who  ought 
by  all  means  to  be  kept  at  a  distance,  and  we  should  turn  our 
backs  to  avoid  the  sight  of  him. 

Compassion  :  My  dear,  wait  here  till  I  enquire  after 
Religion. 

*  The  Digambara  is  one  of  the  Jaina  classes.  The  word  signifies  clothed 
with  the  sky,  that  is,  naked. 


Act  III.  ]      RISE    OF   THE   MOON   OF   INTELLECT. 

(They  both  stand  and  the  DIGAMBARA  enters.) 

Digambara  :  Salutation,  salutation  to  the  Arhatas  !  The 
soul  is  like  a  taper*  confined  in  a  dwelling  which  has  nine 
openings.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  most  eminent  Jains  ;  it 
is  the  chief  good,  and  imparts  supreme  felicity.  (Aloud.) 
Listen,  my  disciples,  listen !  How  can  the  body  be  pure  which 
is  full  of  every  kin(J  of  defilement ;  but  the  soul  is  naturally 
free  from  pollution  ;  this  is  learned  by  reverencing  the  Rishis, 
as  saluting  them  at  a  distance,  respectfully  giving  them  excel- 
lent food,  harbouring  no  malice  against  themr  and  honouring-  M^ 
their  wives.  (  Looks  behind  the  scene.)  Religion !  Religion  1 
come  forward. 

[TRANQUILLITY  and  COMPASSION  look  in  that  direction.'] 

RELIGION!     (enters  having  the  habit  and  appearance    of 
DIGAMBARA,  her  master.) 

*  Commentary. — The  dimensions  of  the  soul  are  small,  so  that  it  is  con- 
fined in  an  habitation :  as  a  taper  lightens  only  the  inside  of  a  vessel  or 
house,  because  its  light  is  limited,  so  the  soul  which  illumines  only  the  body 
is  of  small  dimensions.  We  apprehend  the  meaning  of  these  expressions  to 
be  this,  that  the  soul  is  a  finite,  material,  subtle  essence,  which  pervades 
every  part  of  the  body,  illuminating  it  as  a  lamp.  This  meaning  is  confirm- 
ed by  a  passage  in  the  Panchadashi.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to  premise  that 
three  opinions  had  just  been  mentioned  respecting  the  nature  of  the  soul. 
1st,  that  it  is  imperceptibly  small ;  2nd,  that  it  is  of  a  middle  or  mean  magni- 
tude ;  3rd,  that  it  is  infinitely  diffused  like  space,  but  without  parts.  The 
passage  containing  the  Digambara  opinion  is  the  following :— "  The  Digam- 
bara sect,  ( by  which  is  denoted  the  Jamas,)  maintain  that  the  vital  soul  is  of 
a  medium  magnitude,  and  is  diffused  over  the  whole  body  from  the  head 
to  the  foot ;"  and  the  Vedas  declare  that  the  vital  soul  extends  from  the 
eyes  to  the  tips  of  the  nails.  Panchadashi  Chitra  Dipa,  shloka  82.  The .' 
Vedanta  sect  maintain,  on  the  contrary,  that  though  the  soul  be  confined  at' 
present  in  this  body,  yet  it  is  naturally  infinite,  unbounded,  and  eternal ; 
that  by  severe  austerity  it  can  even  in  this  life  pass  the  bounds  by  which 
it  seems  circumscribed,  and  range  through  the  infinite  of  worlds  and  space ; 
that  it  is  the  supreme  spirit  which  is  under  the  evil  influence  of  matter 
and  passion,  and  that  when  this  malign  influence  is  shaken  off,  and  all 
passions  and  desires  are  extinguished ;  it  rises  from  its  degraded  condition 
to  the  state  of  the  omniscient  and  omnipresent  Being. 

f  The  Eeligions  which  successively  appear  in  this  Act,  are  the  different 
heretical  Religions  of  the  parties  who  call  them. 

5 


34  PBABODHA  CHANDRODAYA  ;  OR,         [  Act  III. 

Religion  :  Them,  who  art  allied  to  the  King,  what  are  thy 
commands  ?  (  Tranquil liij  falls  doum  in  a  swoon.) 

Digambara  :  You  must  not  desert  the  Shravakas*  one 
instant. 

Religion  :     As  you  order.  [  Goes  out. 

Compassion  :  (To  Tranquillity.)  My  dear,  be  comforted. 
Let  not  the  mere  name  alarm  you.  I  have*  heard  that  Heresy, 
whose  nature  is  that  of  errorf,  and  who  proceeded  from  Slay- 
not:!:,  has  a  daughter  named  Eeligion.  This  must  be  the  false 
religion. 

Tranquillity  :  (  Comforted.)  It  must  be  so,  for  I  feel 
reluctant  to  approach  her  who  seems  my  mother  ;  also  her 
behaviour  is  both  virtuous  and  vicious,  and  her  appearance  is 
both  lovely  and  hateful§.  Let  us,  however,  go  and  look  for 
Religion  amongst  the  Saugatas.  [  They  walk  forwards* 

(  A  Bauddha  ||  enters  in  the  character  of  a  MENDICANT,  hold- 
ing a  book  in  his  hand.) 

Mendicant :  0  ye  devout  worshipperslf,  our  illuminated 
understandings  are  now  loosened  from  corporal  ties**,  because 
our  desires  are  extinguished,  and  we  know  that  the  visible, 
transitory,  and  unintellectual  objectsff,  which  seem  to  exist 
externally,  are  only  the  ideas  contained  in  our  minds.  (Advanc- 
ing forward  he  adds  proudly.)  How  excellent  is  the  religion  of 
the  Saugatas t  J,  which  grants  both  sensual  enjoyments  and  eter- 
nal felicity;  it  permits  us  to  inhabit  elegant  houses  and  to  possess 

*  This  is  the  name  of  the  Jaina  laity ;  in  Marathi  they  are  called  Shevari. 

f  Tama  Guna,  principle  of  evil  or  error. 

}  Ahinsa. — The  Jaina  religion  forbids  animals  to  be  killed  even  in 
sacrifice,  hence  it  is  said  to  have  proceeded  from  Slay-not. 

§  This  alludes  to  the  mixed  character  of  the  heretical  religion. 

||  Bauddhagama. 

^f  Comm. — Those  who  reason  according  to  the  book  of  the  Nastikas. 
**  Unconnected  with  the  various  kinds  of  objects,  as  blue,  yellow,  <kc. 
ft  Comm. — Which  are  contained  in  the  understanding,  and  which,    though 
they  be  internal,  seem  to  have  an  external  existence. 
JJ  Bauddhas.    Those  who  walk  in  an  excellent  road  or  good  men. 


Act   III.]  RISE  OF  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT.  35 

women  obedient  to  our  wills  ;   it  removes  the  restrictions  as  to 
time  of  eating*  ;  it  allows  ns  to  recline  on  soft  beds,  and  to% 
pass  the  shining  moon-light  nights  in  amorous  play  with  young 
damsels    who    have    sprinkled    themselves    with    odoriferous 
powders,  and  who  respectfully  serve  us. 

Compassion  :  Who  is  this  that  approaches,  tall  and  straight 
as  the  palm  tree,  his  person  emits  a  disagreable  odour,  he  is 
dressed  in  dusky  garments,  and  the  hair  is  pulled  from  his 
head  and  body. 

Tranquillity  :     My  dear,  this  is  a  Bauddha. 

Mendicant :  Listen,  0  ye  devotees  and  ye  holy  mendicant  ! 
While  I  read  the  ambrosial  words  of  Saugata  the  Lord.  0  ye 
mendicants,  I  survey  with  the  eye  of  Intellect  both  the  evil  and 
the  good.  I  cause  the  transitory  appearances  of  existence  ; 
the  soul  itself  is  not  permauentf  ;  therefore  be  not  displeased 
when  mendicants  desire  to  have  your  wives.  (Looking  behind 
the  scenes.*) — Religion,  come  forward. 

*  The  orthodox  Hindus  are  obliged  to  observe  particular  times  for  ablu- 
tion and  the  performance  of  various  acts  and  ceremonies,  and  also  are  con- 
fined to  certain  kinds  of  food,  and  to  eat  only  with  people  of  their  own  caste. 
These  restrictions  are  often  extremely  irksome  and  inconvenient,  hence 
Mendicant  reckons  their  removal  amongst  the  advantages  of  his  faith. 

f  Commentary.— It  does  not  meet  the  reward  of  actions  in  another  state  ; 
i.  e.  the  soiil  perishes  at  death.  The  following  passage  from  Buchanan's 
account  of  the  Burmas  will  elucidate  this  expression: — The  Burma  writings 
allege,  that  in  death,  whether  of  man,  beasts  or  of  any  living  being  (for  they 
believe  all  living  beings  to  possess  souls,)  the  soul  perishes  with  the  body  ' 
and  they  allege,  that  after  this  dissolution  out  of  the  same  materials  another 
being  arises,  which  according  to  the  good  or  bad  actions  of  the  former  life, 
becomes  either  a  man  or  an  animal,  or  a  nat,  or  a  rupa,  &c.  And  they 
further  allege,  that  beings  are  continually  revolving  in  these  changes,  for  the 
duration  of  one  or  more  worlds,  until  they  have  performed  such  actions  as 
entitle  them  to  Nibban,  the  most  perfect  of  all  states,  consisting  in  a  kind  of 
annihilation,  in  which  beings  are  free  from  change,  misery,  death,  sickness, 
or  old  age."  From  this  extract  it  appears  that  the  notions  of  the  Bauddhas 
(if  the  Burma  opinions  are  allowed  to  be  a  fair  representation  of  them,) 
respecting  the  nature  of  the  soul,  are  accurately  stated  in  the  text ;  for 
though  they  maintain  the  doctrine  of  tranasmigration,  yet  it  is  in  language, 
which  is  incompatible  with  the  belief  of  the  future  existence  of  the  same 
soul  which  now  animates  the  body. 


r 


86  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA ;  OR,  [  Act  III. 

RELIGION*  enters. 

Religion  :     Let  the  kinsman  of  the  King  command. 

Mendicant :  Be  favourable  to  the  Upasakas  and  Mendi- 
cants, and  abide  always  with  them. 

Religion  :     I  obey  yonr  orders.  [  Goes  out. 

Tranquillity  :    This  is  a  false  Religion. 

Compassion  :    It  is  so. 

Digambara  :  (Seeing  Mendicant,  he  calls  out  with  a  loud 
voice.)  Mendicant,  I  wish  to  ask  you  something  immediately. 

Mendicant  :  (Angrily)  Thou  sinner,  thou  infernal  person, 
what  dost  thou  say  ? 

Rationalist  :  Do  not  be  angry,  for  I  am  going  to  enquire 
about  the  Shastras. 

Mendicant :  0  Digambara,  do  you  know  anything  con- 
cerning the  Shastras  ?  Well,  I  shall  see.  (  Goes  near  him.) 
What  is  your  question  ? 

Digambara  :  I  say,  who  commanded  the  rites  which  are 
thus  observed  by  a  momentary  perishing  being  like  you.f 

Mendicant :  Hearken,  he  who  adopts  our  opinions  and  acts 
according  to  them,  and  subdues  his  passions  is  emancipated.! 

Digambara :  Fool,  supposing  that  in  the  revolution  of  ages 
some  one  is  in  this  manner  emancipated,  yet  what  recompense 
can  you  promise  for  the  actions  of  one  who  dies  now.§  I  also 
ask  who  taught  you  this  system  of  duties  ? 

*  The  religion  of  Bauddha. 

t  Commentary. — When  the  period  of  retribution  arrives,  you  shall  have 
ceased  to  exist,  and  your  actions  will  be  fruitless.  This  is  my  opinion. 

J  From  earthly  passions  and  frailties,  and  arrives  at  the  state  of  the 
eternal. 

§  It  has  been  already  stated  that  the  Bauddhas  affirm  that  the  soul 
perishes  at  death  ;  but  that  from  the  same  materials  a  new  being  arises  and 
so  on  in  succession  until  it  reach  a  state  of  supreme  bliss  called  Nibban,  or 
as  it  is  pronounced  in  India  Nirvana,  and  in  Ceylon  Nimban.  Rationalists, 
granting  the  supposition  that  this  opinion  may  be  correct,  enquire  what 
reward  of  various  actions  can  be  bestowed  on  him  who  dies  without  obtain- 
ing this  high  state  of  felicity ;  for  he  infers  that  if  the  soul  perishes  at  death 
no  retribution  can  be  experienced  by  the  former  individual,  though  a  new 
being  may  spring  from  his  ashes. 


Act  III.  ]          RISE   OF  THE   MOON   OF   INTELLECT.  37 

Mendicant :  These  duties  were  ordained  by  the  powerful, 
the  omniscient  Bauddha. 

Digambara  :  How  do  you  know  that  Bauddha  is  omnis- 
cient ? 

Mendicant  :     It  is  plainly  declared  in  the  holy  book. 

Digambara  :  If  you  believe  in  the  omniscience  of  Bauddha 
upon  his  own  declaration,  then  I  also  am  omniscient,  for  I 
know  that  you  and  your  father,  grand-father  and  ancestors  to 
seven  generations  were  my  servants. 

Mendicant :  ( In  anger.)  You  sinner,  devil,  and  impure 
fellow,  am  I  your  servant  ? 

Digambara  :  As  one  enamoured  with  a  beautiful  woman 
forsakes  his  wife,  so  I  would  advise  you  to  renounce  the  Baud- 
dha doctrine,  and  having  embraced  the  Arhata  religion,  prac- 
tise the  rites  of  the  Digambara. 

Mendicant :  0  reprobate,  your  own  religion  is  subverted, 
and  you  wish  to  subvert  the  religion  of  others.  What  person 
will  forsake  the  venerable  religion  of  this  country,  and  adopt 
your  despised  devilish  opinions  ?  Who  is  there  that  embraces 
the  doctrine  of  the  Arhata  ? 

Digambara  :  The  celestial  signs,  days,  eclipses  of  the  sun 
and  moon,  the  place  of  Jupiter,  and  the  notes  have  been  declar- 
ed in  the  Shastras  which  contain  divine  knowledge  ;  and  this 
is  the  omniscience  of  Arhata. 

Mendicant :  (  Laughing.)  The  abstruse  science  of  Astro- 
nomy has  existed  from  time  immemorial,  the  discovery  must 
have  given  you  immense  trouble.  But  if  the  soul  be  com- 
mensurate only  with  this  body,*  how  can  it  declare  what 
relates  to  the  three  worlds,  without  being  actually  present  in 
them.  Does  a  lamp  when  put  under  a  cover  shine  upon  the 
furniture  of  the  house  ?t  Therefore  I  conceive  that  the  religion 
of  the  Saugatas,  which  confers  happiness  and  pleasure,  is 
preferable  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Arhata,  which  is  condemned 
both  in  heaven  and  on  earth. 

*  Alluding  to  the  opinion  of  Digambara. 
f  And  so  forth. 


38  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA ;  OR,    [  Act  III. 

Tranquillity  :     We  must  move  to  another  place. 

Compassion  :  Do  so.  (  They  go  to  another  part  of  the 
stage.) 

Tranquillity  :  (  Looking.)  Here  is  Soma  Sidhanta*  be- 
fore us.  Let  us  go  to  him. 

[SOMA-SlDDHANTA  enters  aS  a  KAPALIKA.f] 

Kapalika  :  (  Walking.)  My  necklace  and  ornaments  are 
of  human  bones  ;  I  dwell  among  the  ashes  of  the  dead,  and 
eat  my  food  in  human  skulls.  I  look  with  eyes  brightened 
with  the  antimony  of  Yoga,  and  believe  that  the  parts  of  this 
world  are  reciprocally  different,  but  that  the  whole  is  not 
different  from  God.t 

Digambara  :  This  man  practises  the  rites  of  the  Kapalikas; 
I  shall  ask  some  questions  respecting  them.  (  Goes  near  him.) 

*  A  Rationalist  of  the  sect  of  Shiva.  The  word  Sidhanta  signifies  a 
demonstrated  truth  ;  what  is  proved  by  reasoning. 

f  The  word  signifies  one  who  holds  or  carries  a  human  skull ;  which  is 
the  practice  of  the  class  of  devotees.  I  have  retained  the  original  word  as  I 
do  not  know  how  it  could  well  be  expressed  in  English.^ 

%  Dr.  Mill's  translation  of  this  and  following  speeches  (in  the  Jour. 
Asiat.  Soc.  Beng.  Vol.  VI.)  is  as  follows:— 

To  them  enter  Soma-Siddhanta  in  the  guise  of  a  Kapalika  (or  man  of 
skulls,)  with  a  sword  in  his  hand. 

SOMA-SIDDHANTA. — (Walking  about.) 

With  goodly  necklace  deck'd  of  bones  of  men, 
Haunting  the  tombs,  from  cups  of  human  skull, 
Eating  and  quaffing, — ever,  I  behold. 
With  eyes  that  Meditation's  slave  hath  clear'd, 
The  world  of  diverse  jarring  elements, 
Composed,  but  still  all  one  with  the  Supreme. 

BUDDHIST. — This  man  professes  the  rule  of  a  Kapalika.  I  will  ask  him 
what  it  is. — (  Going  up  to  him.)  O,  ho, !  you  with  the  bone  and  skull  neck- 
lace, what  are  your  notions  of  happiness  and  salvation  ? 

SOMA-SIDDHANTA. — Wretch  of  a  Buddhist !  Well ;  hear  what  is  our  re- 
ligion : — 

With  flesh  of  men,  with  brain  and  fat  well  smear'd, 
We  make  our  grim  burnt -offering,  break  our  fast. 
From  cups  of  holy  Brahman's  skull,  and  ever, 
With  gurgling  drops  of  blood  that  plenteous  stream 


Act  III.]  RISE  OF  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT.  39 

0  Kapalika  !  what  is  the  nature  of  your   religious   rites,   and 
what  sort  of  beatitude  do  you  hope  to  enjoy  ? 

Kapalika  :  0  Digambara  !  hearken  to  our  rites  :  after 
fasting  we  drink  liquor  out  of  the  skulls  of  Brahmans  ;  our 
sacrificial  fires  are  fed  with  the  brains  and  lungs  of  men  mixed 
up  with  their  flesh,  and  human  victims  covered  with  the  fresh 
blood  gushing  from  the  dreadful  wound  in  their  throats,  are 
the  offerings  by  which  we  appease  the  terrible  God.* 

Mendicant :  (  Stopping  his  ears. )  Horrible  !  irreligious 
rites. 

Digambara  :  0  excellent  man  !  Some  wicked  person 
has  seduced  you  from  the  true  religion. 

Kapalika  :  (  In  wrath.  )  Thou  unholy  man,  who  art 
lower  than  the  heretics,  thou  who  shavest  thy  head  ;  thou 

From  hard  throats  quickly  cut,  by  us  is  worshipped 
With  human  offerings  meet,  our  God,  dread  Bhairava. 

BRAHMAN  MENDICANT. — (Stopping  his  ears.)  Buddhist,  Buddhist,  what 
think  you  of  this  ?  O  horrible  discipline  ! 

BUDDHIST.— Sacred  Arhata !  Some  awful  sinner  has  surely  deceived  that 
man. 

SoMA-SiDDHANTA.-~(In  a  rage.)  Apa ! — Sinner  that  thou  art  vilest  of  here- 
tics, with  thy  shaven  crown,  drest  like  the  lowest  outcaste,  uncombed  one, 
away  with  thee !  Is  not  the  blessed  husband  of  Bhavani  the  sole  cause  of 
the  creation,  preservation,  and  destruction  of  the  fourteen  worlds,  and  his 
power  established  by  the  fullest  demonstration  of  the  Vedanta  ?  Let  us  yet 
shew  even  you  the  magnificence  of  this  religion : — 

I  call  at  will  the  best  of  gods,  great  Hari, 

And  Hara's  self,  and  Brahma,— I  restrain 

With  my  sole  voice  the  course  of  stars  that  wander 

In  heavens's  bright  vault ;  the  earth,  with  all  its  load 

Of  mountains,  fields,  and  cities,  I  at  will 

Reduce  once  more  to  water — and  behold 

I  drink  up. 

*  Maha  Bhairava.     The  sanguinary  tenets  of  this  sect  are  contained  in 
the  Kalika  Purana.— See  As.  Res.,  vol.  v.,  p.  371. 


40  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA,  OR,  [Act  III. 

chandal,*  who  pullest  out  the  hairs  of  thy  body;  thou  deceiver! 
I  contemplate  the  Lord  of  Bhavani,  the  powerful  God  who 
creates,  preserves,  and  destroys  the  fourteen  worlds  whose 
glory  is  both  revealed  in  the  Vedas,  and  displayed  in  his 
works.  The  might  of  our  religion  is  such,  that  I  control  Hari, 
Hara  and  the  greatest  and  most  ancient  of  the  gods  ;  I  stop 
the  course  of  the  planets  in  the  heavens  ;  1.  submerge  the 
earth  in  water,  with  its  mountains  and  cities,  and  I  again 
drink  up  the  waters  in  a  moment. 

Digambara  :  0  Kapalika  !  For  this  reason  I  say  that 
some  juggler  has  deceived  you  by  exhibiting  illusory  appear- 
ances to  your  senses. 

Kapalika  :  Profane  man !  Dost  thou  denominate  the 
great  God  a  juggler  ?  The  wickedness  of  this  fellow  is  not  to 
be  endured.  (Draws  out  his  scimitar.)  I  will  appease  with 
the  blood  springing  from  his  divided  veins  and  bubbling 
through  the  wound,  the  consort  of  Bharga-and  the  assembly 
of  the  demons  summoned  together  by  the  sound  of  the 
Daniaru. 

(Raises  his  scimitar  and  advances  towards  DIGAMBARA.) 

Digambara  :  (In  fright.)  Good  Sir,  to  abstain  from 
murder  is  the  highest  virtue. 

[Takes  shelter  near  MENDICANT.] 

Mendicant :  (Keeping  ^KAPALIKA.)  0  most  excellent 
Kapalika  !  We  are  diverting  ourselves  with  the  play  of  verbal 

*  A  pariah ;  an  outcaste. 

BUDDHIST. — Alas!  poor  Kapalika,  this  is  just  what  I  said.  You  have 
been  deceived  by  some  juggler,  spreading  out  false  images  before  you. 

SOMA-SIDDHANTA. — What,  again,  thou  sinner;  Dost  thou  dare  to  call  the 
great  Maheshvara  a  juggler  ?  This  thy  malignity  must  not  be  forgiven.  Lo, 
therefore, 

"With  foaming  floods  of  gore  that  gush  amain 
From  throat  well  severed  with  this  sabre's  edge, 
I  make  my  sacrifice  to  him  that  calls 
With  beat  of  drum  the  hosts  of  creatures  after  him, 
Dread  Shiva — and  with  these  rich  ruddy  streams 
Delight  his  consort  well,  Bhavani. 

[DfcAWH  HIS  SWOBD.] 


Act  III.]       RISK    OF   THE    MOON   OP   INTELLECT.  41 

disputation  ;  it  is  not  right  ia  you  to  attempt   the  life  of  thia 
devotee. 

(  KAPALIKA  put  up  his  stvord.) 

Digambara  :  (  Recovering  from  his  fright?)  If  you  will 
suppress  your  anger,  I  shall  propose  a  few  questions. 

Kapalika  :    Say  on, 

Digumbara  :  I  have  heard  your  excellent  rites,  (  Ironi- 
cally )  but  what  is  the  nature  of  your  beatitude  ? 

Kapalika  :  Here  !  the  Lord  of  Mridani*  declares  that  he 
who  resembles  the  gods,  whose  crest  is  the  lunar  orb,  and  who 
with  delight  embraces  women  beautiful  as  Parvati,  feels  sup- 
reme bliss.  Who  has  enjoyed  happiness  independent  of  sensi- 
ble objects  ?  The  soul  that  lives  without  spiritual  abstraction 
is  in  a  state  of  felicity.  But  why  do  you  pray  to  become  like 
stones  ? 

Mendicant  :  It  is  irreligious  to  suppose  that  beatitude 
may  be  attained  without  the  extinction  of  our  desires. 

Digrambara  :  0  Kapalika  !  be  not  angry  and  I  shall 
speak.  To  affirm  that  a  corporeal  being  whose  passions  have 
not  been  subdued  can  enjoy  beatitude,  is  inconsistent  with  the 
declarations  of  the  Vedas.t 

Kapalika  :  (  Aside.)  The  intellects  of  these  persons  are 
bewildered  by  impiety.  Be  it  so.  (  Aloud.)  Religion,  come 
forward. 

[RELIGION  enters  as  a  KAPALINI.}] 

Compassion  :  My  dear,  look,  here  is  Religion,  who  sprung 
from  the  principle  of  error  ;  her  eyes  are  restless  and  tremulous 
as  the  water-lily  ;  human  bones  from  her  necklace,  and  other 
ornaments  ;  she  is  oppressed  with  the  weight  of  her  teeming 
breasts,  and  her  playful  mouth  resembles  the  full  moon. 

*  Shiva  or  Mahadeva ;  Mridani  is  one  of  the  names  of  Parvati,  his  wife, 
•f  The  Jainas  use  the  authority  of  the  Vedas  in  arguing  with  those  who 
believe  them. 

J  A  female  Kapalika. 

6 


42  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA  ;  OR,  [Act  III. 

Religion  :  (  Coming  forward.)  My  Lord,  what  are  your 
commands  ? 

Kapalika  :  My  dear,  take  this  proud  Mendicant  into 
your  arms. 

Mendicant :  (  Embraced  before  the  audience  and  thrilling 
with  pleasure.)  Ah  !  how  delightful  is  the  embrace  of  this 
Kapalini!  Often  have  I  ardently  embraced  widows,  and  closely 
pressed  their  big  swelling  receptacles  of  milk  within  my  arms ; 
this  by  Buddha  I  swear  a  hundred  times.  But  such  rapturous 
emotions  were  never  excited  as  by  touching  the  rising  bosom 
of  this  Kapalini.  Behold  the  pratices  of  the  Kapalikas  are  ex- 
cellent !  Reverence  to  the  Soma-Siddhanta  !  This  is  a  wonder- 
ful religion  !  0  renowned  Kapalika  !  I  shall  certainly  forsake 
the  ordinances  of  Buddha,  and  adopt  the  rational  faith  of  the 
great  Lord.*  You  are  my  teacher  ;  I  am  your  disciple,  in- 
struct me  in  the  religion  of  the  great  God. 

Digambara  :  0  Mendicant  !  the  touch  of  this  Kapalini 
has  polluted  you  ;  stand  at  a  distance. 

Mendicant :  Fool,  you  envy  me  the  heart-ravishing,  trans- 
porting embrace  of  Kapalini. 

Kapalika :  (  To  KAPALINI.)  My  dear,  take  hold  of 
Digambara. 

KAPALINI  embraces  DIGAMBARA. 

Digambara  :  (  Trembling  with  delight.)  0  Arha  !  sweet 
is  the  embrace  of  this  Kapalini  !  beautiful  maid,  inclose  me 
again  within  thine  arms.  ( Aside.)  My  sensitive  organ  is 
utterly  ungovernable  ;  what  remedy  is  there  ?  Well,  this  will 
do.  I  shall  conceal  it  underneath  this  bunch  of  peacock's 
feathers.  0  Kapalini,  thy  breasts  are  large  and  firm  ;  thine 
eyes  are  like  the  eyes  of  a  timid  antelope  ;  if  thou  wilt  wanton 
with  me,  who  cares  what  the  Digambaras  can  do  ?  Kapalika* 
yours  is  the  only  religion,  and  it  conducts  to  pleasure  and  be- 
atitude. You  are  my  master,  I  am  your  servant,  instruct  me 
in  the  precepts  of  Bhairava. 

*  Mahadeva. 


Act  III.]      RISE   OP   THE    MOON    OP   INTELLECT.  43 

Kapalika  :    Sit  down. 

(MENDICANT  and  DIGAMBARA  sit  down  whilst  KAPALIKA 
takes  up  a  vessel  of  liguor  and  extols  its  virtue.) 

Religion  :    This  vessel  is  filled  with  wine. 

Kapalika  :  Looks  and  drinks;  he  then  offers  the  remainder 
to  MENDICANT  and  DIGAMBARA.)  This  is  pure  nectar,  the 
medicine  of  life,  which  frees  us  from  mortal  cares ;  drink  it, 
such  is  the  command  of  Bhairava. 

They  consult  together. 

Digrambara  :  The  ordinances  of  the  Arha  do  not  permit 
us  to  drink  wine. 

Mendicant :  How  can  we  drink  what  has  been  left  by 
Kapalika  ? 

Kapalika  :  What  do  you  hesitate  about  ?  Religion,  the 
stupidity  of  these  two  fellows  is  not  yet  removed.  They  imagine 
that  because  the  wine  has  touched  my  lips  it  is  impure.  Well, 
do  you  purify  it  by  the  fragrance  of  your  lips  and  dispel  their 
folly;  for  it  is  said  that  the  lips  of  a  woman  are  always  pure. 

Religion  :  I  obey.  (Takes  up  the  cup  and  after  drinking 
offers  it  to  MENDICANT.) 

Mendicant :  This  is  a  distinguished  flavour. — (Takes  the 
cup  and  drinks.)  Ah,  how  beautiful  it  is!  I  have  often  drunk 
wine  more  fragrant  than  the  Bakula  flower*,  and  presented 
from  the  beautiful  lips  of  courtezans;  but  I  know  that  the  gods 
desire  in  vain  to  taste  wine  which  is  impregnated  with  the 
sweet  odour  of  Kapalini's  lips. 

Digambara  :  Holloa  Mendicant,  do  not  drink  the  whole, 
but  give  me  some  of  that  wine  which  has  touched  the  lips  of 
Kapalini. 

MENDICANT  gives  the  cup  to  DIGAMBARA. 

Digambara  :  (Drinks.)  Ah,  how  delicious  is  this  wine  ? 
how  pleasant  its  taste,  its  smell,  its  flavour.  I  have  long 

*  Mimusops. 


44  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA;  OR,        [Act  III. 

observedjthe  precepts  of  the  Arha,  and  been  defrauded  of  this 
excellent  beverage.  0  Mendicant,  my  senses  wander,  I  must 
sleep. 

Mendicant :    Do  so.  He  lies  down. 

Kapalika  :  (To Religion.)  My  love,  I  have  made  a  cheap 
purchase  of  these  two  slaves ;  come,  let  us  dance. 

(They  both  dance.) 

Digambara  :  Mendicant,  this  teacher  is  dancing  merrily 
with  Kapalini;  let  us  dance  with  them. 

Mendicant :  Let  us  do  so.  (They  alternately  dance  and 
fall  down  through  intoxication) 

Digambara  :  (Sings.)  0  Kapalini,  thy  breasts  are  large 
and  firm  ;  thine  eyes  are  like  the  eyes  of  a  timid  antelope  !  If 
thou  wilt  wanton  with  me,  who  cares  what  the  Digambara 
can  do  ? 

Mendicant :  0  teacher,  this  is  a  wonderful  Shastra,  in 
which  there  is  no  trouble,  and  by  which  we  immediately 
obtain  all  our  desires. 

Kapalika  :  What  do  you  see  wonderful  in  this  ?  Without 
renouncing  the  pleasures  derived  through  the  organs  of  sense, 
the  eight  great  Siddhis  may  be  obtained,  which  impede  the 
austerities  of  devotees,  who  are  endeavouring  to  break  the  chain 
of  worldly  affections,  and  also  the  power  of  influencing,  attract- 
ing, alluring,  pacifying,  rendering  insane, 'and  causing  a  person 
to  remove  to  a  distance,  which  are  the  inferior  Siddhis*. 

Digambara  :  0  Kapalika  ;  (Thinks  a  little.)  0  teacher; 
O  spiritual  director  of  the  sect  ! 

Mendicant  :  This  devotee  is  drunk,  and  raves;  you  must 
sober  him. 

*  The  name  of  a  superior  order  of  beings;  a  personification  of  the  powers 
and  laws  of  nature.  When  they  are  subjected  to  the  will  by  holiness  and 
austerities,  whatever  the  fancy  desires  may  be  obtained;  the  laws  of  nature 
are  controlled ;  the  magnitude,  weight  or  levity  of  the  body  is  increased  or 
diminished  to  an  indefinite  degree,  and  it  is  transported  in  an  instant  to 
any  part  of  the  universe. 


Act  III.]       RISE   OF   THE    MOON   OP    INTELLECT.  45 

Kapalika  :  Very  well.  (Takes  some  chewed  beetlenut,  and 
gives  it  to  DIGAMBARA.) 

Digambara  :  (Recovering from  his  intoxication.)  0  teacher, 
permit  me  to  ask  you  one  question  ;  this  wine  subjects  the 
Siddhis  to  our  will*  :  but  do  all  who  belong  to  the  sect  possess 
such  power  ? 

Kapalika :  What  a  great  affair  is  this  you  ask  ?— Behold, 
the  influence  of  my  art  attracts  whom  I  please  amongst  the 
celestial  female  musicians,  the  consorts  of  the  gods,  the  daughter 
of  the  Yakshas,  or  those  who  inhabit  the  three  worlds. 

Digumbara :  ( To  MENDICANT.)  I  know  by  calculating  the 
stars,  that  we  are  the  servants  of  Passion. 

KAPALIKA  assents  to  this  declaration. 

Digumbara  :  Let  us  consider  what  service  we  can  render 
the  King. 

Kapalika  :    What  service  ? 

Digambara  :  We  must  subject  to  the  King's  authority 
Religion,  the  daughter  of  Virtuous  Action. 

Kapalika  :  Tell  me  where  she  is,  and  by  the  power  of  my 
art  I  shall  quickly  draw  forth  this  daughter  of  a  slave-woman. 

DIGAMBARA  takes  up  a  pen  and  calculates. 

Tranqillity  :  My  dear,  I  hear  some  wicked  people  talking 
about  my  mother  ;  be  quiet  and  listen  to  what  they  say. 

Compassion  :    Let  us  do  so. 

They  both  remain  silent. 

Digambara :  She  is  not  in  the  waters,  she  is  not  on  the 
mountains,  she  is  not  in  the  dominions  of  hell  ;  but  she  dwells 
along  with  Devotion  in  the  hearts  of  the  eminently  pious. 

Compassion  :  (Joyfully.)  My  dear,  by  happy  fortune, 
Religion  remains  at  the  side  of  Devotion. 

*  This  alludes  to  the  exhilarating  effects  of  wine. 


46  PRABODHA   CHANDRODAYA;   OR,  [Act  III. 

TRANQUILLITY  dances  ivith  joy. 

Kapalika  :  Where  does  Virtuous  Action  dwell,  who  haa 
withdrawn  himself  from  love  ? 

Digumbara  :  (  Calculating  again.)  "  He  is  not  in  the 
waters,  he  is  not  on  the  mountain,  he  is  not  in  the  dominions 
of  hell ;  but  he  dwells  along  with  Devotion  in  the  hearts  of 
the  eminently  pious." 

Kapalika  :  (  Sorrowfully.')  Alas,  a  calamitous  event  has 
happened  to  the  King — Devotion,  who  raises  up  Intellect,  has 
been  joined  by  Religion,  who  possesses  the  principle  of  truth, 
and  also  by  Virtuous  Action,  who  has  been  delivered  from  the 
hands  of  Love  ;  if  this  be  the  case,  I  believe  the  business  of 
Reason  is  accomplished.  I  shall,  however,  stand  firm  in  the 
service  of  my  Lord,  even  unto  death.  But  I  must  employ 
Maha  Bhairavi  to  seize  Virtuous  Action  and  Religion. 

They  go  out. 

Tranquillity  :  My  dear,  let  us  go  and  give  information  to 
the  goddess  Devotion  of  these  desperate  persons'  designs. 

They  go  out. 


END  OF  THE  THIRD  ACT. 


Act  IV. 


FRIENDSHIP*    enters. 

Friendship  :  I  heard  in  the  company  of  Joyf  that  the 
goddess  Devotion  has  delivered  Religion  from  the  jaws  of 
Maha  Bhairavi. — When  shall  I,  with  a  palpitating  heart,  see 
my  beloved  friend  ?  (  Walks  about.) 

RELIGION  enters. 

Religion  :  (In  a  frightened  tone.)  Alas,  my  heart  trem- 
bles like  a  plantain-leaf ;  I  still  behold  Maha  Bhairavi  before 
me  ;  her  aspect  is  horrible  ;  her  ear-rings  are  human  skulls  ; 
thunder-bolts  are  shot  from  her  eyes ;  her  figure  is  deformed  by 
hair  which  is  of  the  colour  of  the  pale  yellow  flame  ;  and  she 
rolls  her  tongue  between  her  tusksf,  shining  like  the  moon  in 
her  phases. 

Friendship  :  (Aside.)  This  is  my  dear  friend  Religion. 
She  shakes  more  violently  than  a  plantain-leaf ;  her  mind  is 
disturbed  with  fear,  and  she  is  muttering  something.  Though 
she  be  so  near,  she  does  observe  me  ;  I  shall,  however,  speak 
to  her  (Aloud.)  My  dear,  you  must  be  greatly  terrified  that 
you  do  not  see  me. 

Religion  :  (Looks  at  her  and  sighs)  My  dear  Friendship, 
do  I,  who  was  held  in  the  teeth  of  Kalaratri,  again  behold  you 
in  this  birth. — Come  and  embrace  me. 

Friendship  :  (Embracing  her)  My  dear,  how  you  still 
tremble  through  fear  of  Maha  Bhairavi,  whose  might  is  set  at 
naught  by  the  goddess  Devotion. 

Religion :  Alas,  my  heart  trembles  like  a  plantain-leaf;  I 
still  behold,  &c. 

Friendship  :  (Resentingly.)  After  this  desperate  fright- 
ful looking  wretch  came,  what  did  she  do  ? 

*  Maitri.  t  Mudita. 

%  The  figure  of  Bhairari  ie  painted  with  two  large  tusks, 


48         PRABODHA  CHANDRODATA ;  OR,     [Act  IV. 

Religion  :  As  a  hawk  darts  down  upon  his  quarry,  she 
grasped  me  between  her  two  legs,  and  seizing  Virtuous  Action 
with  her  strong  left  hand,  she  instantly  mounted  up  into  the 
air  like  a  vulture,  carrying  in  its  curved  claws  two  pieces  of 
meat. 

Friendship  :     0  dreadful,  dreadful !     (Faints.) 

Religion  :     My  dear  friend,  be  composed. 

FRIENDSHIP  recovers  from  her  swoon. 

Religion  :  The  goddess  Devotion  hearing  my  dismal  cries, 
her  heart  was  melted  with  compassion  ;  and  glancing  at  her 
in  wrath  with  white-red  eyes,  and  terrible  eyebrows,  she  im- 
mediately fell  to  the  ground,  and  her  head  and  bones  were 
shivered  like  a  mountain-rock  struck  by  the  thunder-bolt  of 
Indra. 

Friendship  :  You  escaped  by  your  good  destiny,  as  an 
antelope  from,  the  mouth  of  a  tiger.  Well,  what  happened 
then? 

Religion  :  The  goddess  then  declared,  in  a  threatening 
tone,  "  I  will  utterly  exterminate  that  impious  King  Passion, 
together  with  his  whole  race,  who  do  not  submit  to  my  autho- 
rity ". — Afterwards  she  thus  addressed  me  :  "  Religion,  go 
and  deliver  this  message  to  Reason,  *  Put  forth  your  utmost 
might  to  conquer  Love,  Anger,  &c.,  that  retirement  may  again 
appear.'  In  the  meantime,  I  shall  instruct  your  army  in  the 
necessary  duties,  and  the  goddesses  Ritambar*  and  tranquil- 
lity, &c.,  by  appropriate  expedients,  will  awaken  Intellect  in 
the  Supreme  Spirit,  who  is  united  to  Revelation.  "  I  must 
therefore  go  to  Reason  ;  but  in  what  manner  will  you  occupy 
yourself  ? 

Friendship  :  By  the  command  of  Devotion,  we  four 
sistersf  are  to  reside  in  the  hearts  of  the  pious  that  we  may 
accomplish  the  purposes  of  Reason.  Good  men  will  meditate 
on  me  in  prosperity  ;  they  will  meditate  on  Pity  in  adversity, 
they  will  meditate  on  Joy  in  holiness,  and  they  will  meditate 
on  Grief  in  error  ;  then  the  mind  which  at  present  is  defiled 

*  The  goddess  of  Truth,  f  Friendship,  Pity,  Joy,  Grief. 


Act  IV.  ]       RISK    OF   THE   MOON   OF   INTELLECT.  49 

with  Anger,  Avarice,  &c.,  will  attain  a  state  of  purity.  Thus 
we  four  sisters  will  spend  our  time  in  endeavours  to  call  up 
Reason,  but  where  do  you  now  expect  to  find  him  ? 

Religion :  The  goddess  thus  spoke  to  me.  "  In  the 
country  named  Kara  flows  the  holy  Bhagirathi ;  and  on  its 
banks  there  stands  a  beautiful  place  of  pilgrimage,  where 
Mimansa*,  in  company  with  Understanding,  is  performing 
with  a  troubled  mind,  the  severest  austerities,  in  order  to  at- 
tract Reason  and  Revelation, 

Friendship :  Then,  my  dear  friend,  you  may  depart,  aud 
I  also  shall  employ  myself  in  the  duty  assigned  to  me. 

Religion :    Do  so! 

They  go  out* 

The  KiNGf  enters,  attended  by  a  CHAMBERLAIN. 

King: :  Sinful,  ghostly  Passion,  you  have  everywhere 
corrupted  the  most  eminent  men.  Immersed  in  the  peaceful, 
pure,  and  divine  sea  of  Amrita,  which  communicates  in- 
exhaustible strength  and  felicity,  and  whose  surface  is  unruffl- 
ed with  waves,  they  refuse  to  take  one  drop  ; — but  with  much 
labour  they  drink  the  insipid  waters  of  the  sea  of  deception ; 
they  bathe  in  it,  play  in  it,  and  repeatedly  plunge  into  it. 
Ignorance  is  the  source  of  Passion  who  turns  the  wheel  of  this 
mortal  existence,  but  it  is  removed  by  a  knowledge  of  the  First 
PrincipleJ ;  and  this  knowledge  springs  from  the  seed  of 
worship  and  obedience,  and  it  destroys  and  tears  up  the  root 
of  ignorance,  which  is  the  tree  of  carnal  affections.  The  gods 
come  down  to  aid  the  efforts  of  good  men,  or  those  who  know 

•    Philosophical  sect. 

f    Reason. 

J  TATVA. — This  is  a  phrase  frequently  employed  in  their  theological 
writings,  and  its  literal  translation  is  "  thou  art  he,"  which  denotes. — Thou 
art  the  Supreme  Spirit.  The  comprehension  and  belief  of  this  Sublime 
doctrine,  is  considered  the  only  means  by  which  the  soul  breaks  off  in 
material  connections,  and  is  elevated  to  an  union  with  the  Divinity.  In 
philosophical  and  popular  language,  it  signifies  an  element,  or  principle. 

7 


50  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA,  OR;    [  Act  IV, 

the  First  Principle  bring  them.  Devotion  also  has  given  this 
command  "Exert  yourselves  to  defeat  Love,  &c.,  1  am  your 
ally  ;  Love,  who  is  the  principal  enemy,  must  be  subdued  by 
Spiritual  Contemplation,  and  I  command  him  to  attack  this 
foe".  (To  the  Chamberlain*.)  Call  Spiritual  Contemplation"!". 

Chamberlain  :    As  my  Lord  commands. 
Goes  out  and  re-enters  ivitk  SPIRITUAL  CONTEMPLATION* 

Contemplation :  Alas,  this  world  is  ruined  by  Love,  who 
increases  the  pride  of  thoughtless  beauty,  and  by  that  sinful 
King  Passion.  Influenced  by  passion,  even  wise  men  behold* 
ing  woman,  who  is  the  daughter  of  impurity,  address  her  in 
tender  language  ; — "  0  charmer,  thy  large  eyes  are  like  the 
water-lily  ;  thy  lips  are  full  and  round  ;  thy  protuberant 
breasts  touch  each  other  ;  thy  beautiful  mouth  resembles  the 
lotus,  and  elegant  are  thine  eye-brows". — Viewing  her  in  this 
manner,  their  passions  are  inflamed,  they  are  transported  with 
desire,  and  follow  the  dictates  of  lust.  Those  also  who  are 
devoted  to  spiritual  contemplation,  and  who  possess  a  quick 
understanding,  are  robbed  of  the  fruit  of  retirement!  by 
women,  who  are  a  mass  of  flesh  built  up  with  bones,  and 
naturally  ill-savoured  and  disagreeable  to  behold  ;  for  decora- 
tions give  them  a  beauty  which  is  merely  adventitious  ;  their 
pendent  neck-laces,  their  numerous  tinkling  ornaments  of  gold 
and  precious  stones,  the  saffron,  with  which  they  are  sprinkled, 
their  garlands  of  variegated  and  sweetscented  flowers,  their 
various  dresses  and  shawls,  are  bestowed  upon  them  by  foolish 
men.  But  those  who  examine  the  interior  as  well  as  the  ex- 
terior of  objects  consider  women  as  accursed,  and  hence  they 
derive  their  name  Mari§  (Aloud.)  Thou  wicked  fellow,  Love, 

*    He  is  named  Vedvit ;  one  who  knows  the  Vedas  ;  Theology. 

f    Vastu  Tichara. 

\  The  presence  or  recollection  of  women,  excites  unholy  ideas  in  the 
minds  of  recluses,  who  have  abandoned  this  world  and  devoted  themselves 
to  spiritual  exercises,  and  thus  deprives  them  of  the  fruit  of  their  austerity, 

§    From  a  word  which  signifies  hell, 


Act  IV.  ]  R&E  OF  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT.  51 

thou  Chandal.  Thou  presentest  thyself  unsought,  and  dis- 
orderest  the  mind,  insomuch  that  one  imagines,  this  young 
woman  loves  me  :  this  moon-faced  damsel  looks  at  me  :  this 
girl,  with  eyes  like  the  blue  water-lily,  desires  to  press  me  in 
her  ample  bosom. — Fools  !  who  desires  or  beholds  ?  Know  you 
not  that  woman  is  formed  of  flesh  and  bones,  and  that  it  is  the 
invisible  spirit  which  beholds  ? 
Chamberlain  :  Holy  man,  this  is  the  way. 

They  both  walk  forward. 

Chamberlain  :  This  is  the  king,  who  is  sitting.  Ap- 
proach him. 

Contemplation:  (Going  to  him.)  Great  King,  may  you 
be  victorious. — Contemplation  salutes  you. 

King1 :     Sit  down  here. 

Contemplation :  Most  illustrious  King,  your  servant 
attends ;  favour  him  with  your  commands. 

King1:  Passion  ;  is  preparing;  to  engage  us  in  battle  ;  his 
chief  here  is  Love  ;  and  we  have  appointed  you  to  oppose  him. 

Contemplation  :  I  am  happy  in  being  thus  honoured  by 
my  Lord. 

King  :     With  what  weapons  will  you  combat  Love  ? 

Contemplation  :  I  must  employ  some  weapons  to  con- 
quer Love,  who  carries  a  flowery  bow,  equipped  with  five 
arrows*  First,  I  shall  closely  shut  up  the  avenues  of  Sense, 
and  consider  hourly  that  the  remembrance  or  image  of  woman 
disturbs  the  mind  ;  that  lust  terminates  in  lassitude  ;  and  that 
women  are  not  naturally  attractive.  Thus  I  shall  extirpate  Love. 

King :     Well. 

Contemplation:  Again  I  shall  retire  to  the  spacious 
banks  of  rivers  ;  to  mountains,  whose  rocks  are  smoothed  by 

*  Mohana,  Stambhana,  Unmadana,  Shoshana,  ;ind  Tapana;  or,  Fasci- 
nation, arresting,  maddening,  attraction,  inflaming. 


52  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA;  OR,        [Act  IV. 

rising  streams  ;  and  to  forests  crowded  with  trees  ;  seated 
there  in  company  with  the  tranquilizing  words  of  Vyasa,  and 
attended  by  learned  men,  who  will  be  mine  ;  subduing  Love, 
or  women  formed  of  flesh  and  nerves.  Love's  principal  weapon 
is  named  woman,  and  if  this  be  destroyed,  all  the  auxiliary 
weapons  will  become  ineffective.  Nights  illuminated  by  the 
moon's  beams,  powdered  sandal-wood,  female  decorations,  the 
spring  opening  upon  woods  which  are  cheered  with  the 
Bliramaras*  humming  noise  ;  the  season  when  thunder-bearing 
clouds  begin  to  collect,  and  the  breeze  blows  gently  through  the 
sweet-scented  Kadamba — are  the  tried  friends  of  Love  ;  when 
woman,  however,  is  vanquished,  they  are  all  defeated.  But 
enough  ;  let  my  Lord  now  command.  I  will  destroy  with  the 
sharp  arrows  of  reason,  the  enemy's  army,  and  then  cut  off 
their  King  ;  as  Arjuna  first  destroyed  the  army  of  the  Kurus, 
and  afterwards  killed  Sindhu  Raja. 

King: :  Be  assured  of  my  favour,  and  prepare  to  engage 
the  enemy. 

Contemplation  :    Your  orders  shall  be  Obeyed. 
Salutes  him  and  goes  out. 

King  :  (To  Theology,  the  CHAMBERLAIN.)  Call  Patiencet, 
that  he  may  overcome  Auger. 

Chamberlain  :     As  you  order. 

Goes  out,  and  returns  along  with  PATIENCE. 

Patience  :  The  equanimity  of  rational  men,  is  steady  as 
the  clear  unruffled  ocean,  so  that  thay  bear  with  reproach  from 
persons  whose  eyebrows  gathered  up  in  black  anger,  present 
a  fearful  appearance,  and  whose  eyes  are  red  as  the  setting 
sun,  {Confidently.)  I  alone  can  overcome  Auger  ;  I  shall  not 
fatigue  myself  with  words  ;  my  head  shall  not  ache,  nor  shall 
my  mind  be  heated,  my  body  shall  not  be  jostled,  and  there 
shall  be  no  shedding  of  blood,  or  foolish  war. 

*  A  large  black  bee.  f  Kshama. 


Act  IV.  ]          RISE   OF   THE    MOON   OF   INTELLECT.  53 

They  both  icalk  forward. 
Chamberlain  :    This  is  the  King  ;  go  to  him. 

Patience  :  ( Goes  to  him.)  Great  King,  may  yon  be  victo- 
rious.— Patience,  your  slave  prostrates  himself  at  your  feet. 

King: :     Patience,  sit  down  here. 

Patience  :  0,  great  King,  what  are  your  commands  ? 
On  what  account  lias  your  slave  been  called  ? 

King :  In  this  conflict,  you  must  conquer  that  wicked 
spirit  Anger. 

Patience  :  Through  your  divine  favour,  I  can  conquer 
Passion  ;  it  will  therefore  be  easy  to  subdue,  Anger,  who  is 
only  one  of  his  followers.  As  Katyayani  slew  the  demon 
Mahesha,  so  will  I  slay  Anger,  who  is  the  author  of  crimes, 
whose  eyes  dart  forth  fire,  and  who  causelessly  obstructs  devo- 
tion and  duties,  the  reading  of  the  Vedas,  and  the  offering  of 
oblations  to  the  gods,  and  the  progenitors  of  men. 

King  :  I  wish  to  hear  in  what  manner  yon  will  overcome 
Anger. 

Patience  :  How  can  he  feel  Anger  whose  heart  is  softened 
by  the  water  of  pity  ?  Unhappy  is  he,  who,  impelled  by  fate 
has  not  his  passions  under  restraint ;  he  endures  misery  most 
difficult  to  be  removed  :  wherefore  let  him  regard  an  angry 
man  with  a  smiling  countenance,  speak  benignly  to  one  who 
is  much  enraged,  consider  reviling  as  a  blessing,  and  submit 
to  injuries  as  a  punishment  for  his  sins. 

King  :     Extremely  well ! 

Patience  :  My  Lord,  when  Anger  is  subdued,  the  defeat 
of  Murder,  Contumely,  Pride,  and  Envy,  will  naturally  follow. 

King  :     You  will  make  ready  for  the  battle. 
Patience  :    As  my  Lord  commands. 

Goes  out. 


54  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA,    OR,         [  Act  IV. 

King  :     ( To  the  CHAMBERLAIN.)    Call  Contentment*,    the 
conqueror  of  Avarice. 

Chamberlain :    I  obey.    {Goes  out,  and    returns  with 
CONTENTMENT.) 

Contentment :  {Meditating  compassionately.)  Forests 
spontaneously  yield  their  productions,  which  may  be  gathered 
whenever  we  desire  ;  holy  rivers  furnish  cool  refreshing  water; 
the  plants  bear  young  leaves,  with  which  soft  beds  may  be 
made  :  why,  then,  do  people  suffer  distress  at  rich  men's  doors  ? 
(Aloud)  Fools  and  avaricious,  ye  are  unable  to  throw  off  your 
delusion.  Thoughtless  men  !  how  often  have  not  your  hopes 
been  disappointed  ?  And  yet  ye  continue  to  drink  the  waters 
of  this  insignificant,  deceitful  sea  of  wealth,  by  which  ye  are 
never  satisfied.  Surely  your  hearts  must  have  burst  an 
hundred  times,  had  they  not  been  formed  of  the  hardest  stone; 
but  such  is  the  operation  of  blind  avarice,  which  produces 
strange  effects  on  the  mind.  Stupid  people,  ye  accumulate 
gain  upon  gain  in  endless  succession,  and  thus  ye  are  everlast- 
ingly grasping  at  riches.  Ye,  who  are  enveloped  in  the  dark- 
ness of  Avarice,  know  ye  not  that  the  demon  Hopef  will  some- 
time urge  you  on  the  instant  destruction  ?  Besides,  after 
wealth  has  by  some  means  been  acquired,  it  is  either  lost 
suddenly,  or  gradually  spent ;  for  in  one  of  these  two  ways  it 
certainly  disappears. — Say,  then,  is  it  better  that  wealth  should 
not  be  acquired,  or  that  after  it  is  acquired  it  should  be  lost  ? 
But  the  loss  of  wealth  grieves  the  mind,  and  the  want  of  it 
does  not.  Death,  likewise,  sits  continually  upon  your  head, 
rejoicing  ;  old  age,  like  frightful  serpent,  swallows  you  alive  ; 
and  the  world  is  devoured  by  wives,  children,  &c.,  who  resem- 
ble a  collection  of  vultures.  Wash  off,  therefore,  with  the 
water  of  Knowledge,  the  impurities  which  arise  from  avarice" 
and  ignorance  ;  bathe  yourselves  one  moment  only  in  the 
ambrosial  sea  of  Content,  and  you  will  experience  bliss. 

*  Santoaha. 

\  Hope,  or  the  expectation  of  wealth,  will  lead  you  to  some  enterprise  in 
which  you  will  perish. 


Act   IV.]  BISK  OP  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT,  55 

Chamberlain  :  This  is  our  Lord  ;  0  holy  man,  approach 
him. 

Contentment :  (Approaches  him.)  My  Lord,  may  you  bo 
victorious  ;  Contentment  salutes  you. 

King1 :     Sit  down  here.     (Places  CONTENTMENT  beside  him.) 

Contentment :  (Sitting  down  humbly  beside  him.)  Let 
my  Lord  command  his  servant. 

King* :  You  are  acqauinted  with  the  news  :  but  enough  ;  do 
you  speedily  repair  to  the  city  Varanasi,  and  defeat  Avarice. 

Contentment :  I  am  ready  to  obey  your  orders.  Having 
routed  Avarice,  who  rules  the  inhabitants  of  the  three  regions 
of  the  universe,  and  who  has  become  old  in  murdering  gods 
and  Brahmans,  and  in  binding  them  with  the  fetters  of  pas- 
sion ;  I  will  afterwards  grind  him  to  powder,  as  Dasharatha 
did  the  prince  of  Rakshasas.  (Goes  out. 

A  MAN  enters  in  an  humble  manner. 

Man  :  The  auspicious  rites  have  been  performed,  to  ensure 
victory  ;  and  the  moment  fixed  on  by  the  astrologers  for  your 
departure  is  arrived. 

King* :    Then  let  the  generals  order  the  army  to  march. 
Man  :    As  your  Majesty  commands.  (Goes  out. 

Behind  the  scenes. 

Prepare  the  elephants,  whose  moistened  foreheads  are  suck- 
ed by  the  Bhramara  ;  harness  to  the  chariots  horses  whose 
speed  far  outstrips  the  wind  ;  let  the  cavalry  advance  with 
their  swords  in  their  hands,  and  let  the  foot  soldiers  march, 
raising  their  scimitars,  and  cover  the  face  of  the  country  like 
water  lilies. 

King  :  Well,  as  every  thing  is  prepared,  I  shall  begin  the 
march.  (To  his  attendance.)  Order  the  charioteer  to  make 
ready  war-chariot,  and  bring  it. 

Attendants  :    Your  orders  shall  be  obeyed. 

(They  go  out. 


56  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA,  OH,  [Act  IV. 

[The  CHARIOTEER  brings  the  chariot*] 

Charioteer  :  Great  King,  the  chariot  is  ready  ;  be  pleased 
to  ascend. 

[The  KING  after  performing  auspicious  rites,  ascends  the 
chariot."] 

Charioteer  :  (Boasting  of  the  rapid  motion  of  his  chariot.) 
Behold,  greater  King,  how  the  horses  carry  the  chariot  to  the 
borders  of  the  sky  ;  our  course  is  traced  from  the  cloud  of  dust 
raised  by  their  feet,  which  kiss  the  ground  ;  and  the  noise  of 
the  chariot  bounding  along  resembles  the  churning  of  the 
ocean.  The  distance  does  not  seem  great  to  the  city  Varanasi, 
which  purifies  the  three  worlds.  Behold  the  tops  of  its  lofty 
buildings,  resplendent  as  the  moon  ;  the  fountains  of  water 
are  playing  with  a  bubbling  noise,  and  numberless  flags,  of 
various  colours,  swim  in  the  air  like  steams  of  lightening 
issuing  from  the  clouds  at  the  end  of  the  rains.  Not  far  off, 
and  surrounding  the  city  are  gardens  perfumed  with  fragrant 
plants,  in  which  the  thick  green  foliage  of  trees  affords  a  cool 
shade,  and  in  which  the  bee  sipping  honey  from  the  flowers, 
expands  their  petals  by  its  buzzing  wings,  and  the  pollen 
dispersed  by  the  wind  resembles  mist.  The  wind,  loaded  with 
dust,  is  an  emblem  of  a  devotee  of  Shiva* ;  the  waving  ten- 
drils seem  to  be  the  motion  of  its  arms  ;  it  is  moistened  with 
the  waters  of  the  Ganges,  and  is  impregnated  with  pollen  ;  it 
worships  Shiva  by  scattering  the  flowersf  and  sings  his 
praises  in  the  Bhramara's  song. 

King:  (Looking  with  joy.)  This  city,  the  abode  of  him 
who  bears  the  crescent,  has  an  attractive  power  ;  it  is  equal  to 
divine  knowlege  for  the  removal  of  ignorance  ;  it  fills  the 
mind  with  joy,  and  releases  the  soul  from  corporeal  confiue- 

*  Who  covers  his  body  with  ashes. 

f  By  blowing  the  flowers  towards  the  image,  the  wind  is  represented  as 
performing  an  act  of  worship;  because  the  images  of  the  gods  are  worshipped 
by  sprinkling  them  with  flowers. 


Act  IV.]      RISE   OF   THE   MOON   OF   INTELLECT.  57 

ment.  Here  also  the  Ganges  winds  its  wreath-like  course,  and 
with  its  banks  whitened  by  circles  of  foam,  laughs  at  the 
phases  of  the  moon. 

Charioteer  :  (Driving  on.)  Renowned  King,  behold  this 
temple  of  the  eternal  Vishnu,  which  decorates  the  banks  of 
the  river  of  the  Gods. 

King"  :     (Joyfully?)     This  is  the  God  who  is  denominated 
the  soul  of  this  place  of  pilgrimage  by  those  who  know  its 
virtues  ;  here  devout  men  lay  aside  the  body,  and  are  absorbed  / 
in  the  universal  spirit. 

Charioteer  :  Behold,  renowned  King,  how  Love,  Anger, 
Avarice,  &c.,  at  the  mere  sight  of  us  withdraw  themselves  from 
the  country. 

King" :  It  is  so.  (Entering  the  City?)  0  Lord,  mayest 
thou  be  victorious  :  I  supplicate  thee  that  my  happiness  may 
be  perfected.  (Descending  from  the  chariot,  he  enters  the  city^ 
and  looks  round.)  Victory,  0  Lord  ;  0  thou  whose  lotus  feet 
are  irradiated  by  beams  reflected  from  the  crests  of  the  assembled 
Gods  and  their  armies,  and  whose  bright  nails,  shining  like 
a  fire-fly,  throw  a  variegated  lustre  on  thy  throne  of  gold  ;  0 
thou,  who  alone  canst  break  the  sleep  of  mortal  existence, 
daring  which  good  men  are  disturbed  by  a  succession  of  illusive 
objects.  0  Thou,  upon  whose  tusks  was  beheld  the  mass  of 
mountains :  when  those  raised  up  the  earth,  and  its  hills  were 
confounded  together  ;  thou  who  at  three  strides  didst  encom- 
pass the  three  regions  of  the  universe  ;  who  with  thy  powerful 
arm,  didst  uphold  the  mountain  Govardhana,  which,  as  an 
umbrella,  received  the  deluge  of  rain  poured  down  from  the 
cloud  sent  by  Indra,  when  the  destruction  of  the  world  was 
not  nigh,  and  who,  by  thus  saving  the  terrified  shepherds,  didst 
amaze  the  universe  :  0  thou  who  art  renowned  by  washing  off 
the  Sindur*,  red  as  the  setting  sun,  which  adorns  the  brows 
of  the  consorts  of  those  who  are  enemies  to  the  Gods-;  thou 

*  Minium,  or  red  lead. — When  a  man  dies,  his  widow  lays  aside  her 
ornaments,  and  ceases  to  mark  her  forehead  with  this  substance ;  accordingly 
the  meaning  is,  that  he  destroyed  the  enemies  of  the  gods. 

8 


58  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA  ;  OR,  [Act  IV 

whose  bright  sharp  nails  tore  open  the  breast  of  the  Chief  of 
the  affrighted  Baity  as  from  which  there  flowed  a  sea  of  blood  ; 
thou,  who  holdest  the  discus  which  was  furnished  by  dividing 
the  large  bones  of  Kaitablm,  the  enemy  of  the  three  words  ; 
thou  who  art  beloved  by  the  god  whose  eye  reflects  the  lunar 
rays  ;  thou  whose  bosom  bears  the  marks  of  small  leaves*, 
impressed  by  the  swelling  breast  of  Lakshmi,  who  sprung  from 
the  sea  of  milk,  when  it  was  churned  with  the  mountain 
Achala,  whirled  by  thy  mighty  arm  ;  thou  who  art  decorated 
with  a  necklace  of  large,  beautiful  pearls  ;  0,  Vaikuntha,  I 
adore  thee. — -Grant  me  that  intellect  which  bursts-  asunder  the 
chains  of  carnal  affections.  (Makes  a  sign  to  proceed,  and 
looks  round.)  This  is  a  delightful  country. — I  shall  remain 
here,  and  encamp  my  army. 

[  They  go  out. 

*  Hindu  Women  sometimes  decorate  their  breasts  with  small  leaves 
which  are  made  to  adhere  by  an  odoriferous  cement :  hence  the  above 
allusion. 


END  OF  THE  FOURTH  ACT. 


Act  V. 

RELIGION  enters. 

Religion  :  (  Thoughtfully.)  It  is  a  fact  universally  known 
that  the  anger  which  is  excited  by  hatred  amongst  kinsmen . 
consumes  the  whole  family,  as  a  violent  wind  causing  friction 
amongst  the  trees,  kindles  a  fire  which  burns  up  the  forest. 
(Weeping^)  Alas,  to  suppress  the  fire  of  grief  caused  by  death 
of  brothers,  is  impossible  ;  the  water  of  one  hundred  clouds  of 
reason  cannot  quench  it. — We  may  reason  thus  ;  the  seas, 
earth,  mountains,  rivers,  will  certainly  perish  ;  what  then,  is 
the  death  of  insignificant  animals  who  are  like  mowed-down 
grass  ?  But  reason  is  overwhelmed  in  the  depths  of  distress, 
and  the  fire  of  grief  consumes  the  heart.  Thus  it  has  happened 
to  me  on  the  death  of  my  relations  Love,  Anger  &c.,  who  were 
of  a  fierce  disposition*  ;  the  flame  of  grief  divides  my  mortal 
parts,  it  withers  up  my  frame,  and  burns  my  inmost  soul. 
[Musing.]  The  goddess  Devotion  commanded  me,  saying, 
"  My  child  Religion,  I  abhor  the  sight  of  murderous  battles  ;  I 
shall  depart  from  Varanasi,  and  go  to  Shalagrama,t  the  abode 
of  God,  where  I  shall  remain  a  short  time,  and  do  you  come 
and  inform  me  what  is  done."  I  shall  therefore  proceed  to  the 
goddess,  and  give  her  an  account  of  the  battle.  (Departs  and 
looks  round.)  This  is  the  Chakra  TirtliaJ  ;  here  Hari  himself 
dwells,  the  pilot  who  guides  the  bark  in  which  we  are  carried 
over  the  sea  of  life.  (Prostrating  herself.)  This  is  the  god- 
dess Devotion,  who  is  reverenced  by  the  Munis. — Tranquillity 
is  conversing  with  her  ;  I  shall  go  to  them.  [  Goes  to  them. 
DEVOTION  and  TRANQUILLITY  enter. 

Tranquillity  :  0  goddess  deep  thought  seems  to  occupy 
your  mind. 

Devotion  :  My  child,  during  this  terrible  war,  I  have  heard 
no  tidings  of  my  son  Reason,  who  is  opposed  to  that  mighty 
warrior  Passion  :  on  this  account  my  heart  is  troubled. 

*  Alluding  to  the  relationship  between  the  family  of  Keason  and  that  of 
Passion.  -j-  A  place  of  pilgrimage  near  Benares. 

J  A  circular  reservoir  of  water,  in  the  middle  of  which  is  placed  the 
image  of  some  divinity. 


60  PRABODHA   CHANDRODAYA;    OR,  [Act   V. 

Tranquillity  :  Why  should  you  be  uneasy  ?  If  you  vouch- 
safe your  favour,  victory  will  assuredly  attend  Reason. 

Devotion  :  My  child,  I  feel  confident  of  victory  ;  but  it 
-is  natural  to  be  anxious  about  a  friend  ;  and  I  am  the  more 
apprehensive  as  Religion  has  not  yet  arrived. 

RELIGION  comes  forward  and  salutes  them. 

Devotion  :     Religion,  are  you  safely  arrived. 
Religion  :     By  your  favour. 
Tranquillity  :     My  mother,  I  greet  thee  ! 
Religion  :     Embrace  me,  my  daughter. 

They  embrace. 

Religion  :     My  child,  by  the  kind  regard  of  the  goddess, 
Devotion,  may  you  occupy  a  place  in  the  hearts  of  Munis. 

Devotion  :     What  are  the  news  from  the  field  of  battle  ? 
Religion  :     Correspondent  to  the  demerits  of  thine  enemies. 
Devotion  :     Relate  the  particulars. 

Religion  :  Listen  ;  after  you  retired  from  the  abode  of 
Keshava  and  the  sun  laying  aside  his  purple,  began  to  appear 
in  white,  our  army  drew  up  in  array  ;  the  four  quarters  of  the 
world  were  deafened  by  the  lion-like  shouts  of  heroes,  who  were 
summoned  together  by  the  sound  of  victory  ;  the  sun  was  obscur- 
ed with  the  dust  raised  by  the  horse's  feet,  and  chariots  pound- 
ing the  ground  ;  the  ten  divisions  of  the  earth  were  darkened  by 
the  sindur  brushed  off  from  the  elephants'  foreheads  by  the 
flapping  of  their  huge  ears  ;  and  the  army  was  terrible  as  thun- 
der bursting  from  the  clouds  amidst  the  universal  ruin.  Then 
the  King  Reason  sent  Logic  to  Passion  with  this  message  : 
"  Depart  from  the  abodes  of  Vishnu,  from  the  banks  of  holy 
rivers,  from  consecrated  spots  in  the  forests,  and  from  the  hearts 
of  holy  men,  and  retire  along  with  your  companions  into  the 
country  of  the  Mlechhas.  If  you  do  not,  you  shall  be  hewn 


Act  V.]       RISE   OP   THE    MOON   OF   INTELLECT.  61 

down  by  the  sword,  and  the  blood  flowing  from  your  mangled 
corpse  will  redden  the  mouth  of  the  howling  jackal." 

Devotion  :    Well. 

Religion  :  Then,  0  goddess,  the  King  Passion  contracting 
the  eye-brows  upon  his  broad  forehead, replied  in  wrath,  "May 
Keason  reap  the  reward  of  his  iniquitous  act."  Saying  this, 
he  advanced  to  battle  at  the  head  of  the  Heretical  Theologies*, 
and  the  Heretical  Metaphysicians.  Meanwhile  there  suddenly 
appeared  over  the  head  of  our  army  Saraswatif  who  is  in- 
timately acquainted  with  the  Vedas,  the  Upavedas,  Puranas, 
Dharma  Shastra,  and  the  Itihasas,  holding  in  her  hand  a 
waterlily,  and  shining  like  the  moon. 

Devotion  :    Well. 

Religion  :  Then  the  worshippers  of  Vishnu,  of  Shiva  and 
of  the  Sun,  assembled  around  the  goddess,, 

Devotion  :     Go  on. 

Religion  :  Mimansa  then  presented  himself  eager  for  the 
fight,  and  accompanied  with  Sankhya,  Nyaya,  and  the  Maha- 
bhashya  of  KanadaJ .  Logic  was  the  thousand  hands  of  the 
goddess  with  which  she  threw  light  over  the  world  ;  religious 
duties  were  her  lips,  the  three  Vedas  were  her  eyes,  and  she 
seemed  another  Parvati. 

Tranquillity  :  But  how  came  such  an  union  to  be  effect- 
ed with  the  Logical  Shastras,  which  maintain  the  doctrine  of 
different  beings  and  substances  §. 

Religion  :  My  daughter,  when  a  common  enemy  attacks 
the  Shastras,  which  though  descended  from  the  same  source, 
are  at  mutual  variance,  they  form  an  auspicious  coalescence  ; 

*    A  gam  a. 

f    The  goddess  of  learning  and  eloquence. 

J  See  the  appendix,  in  which  some  account  is  given  of  these  philoso- 
phical sects. 

§  The  Logicians  maintain  that  matter  and  spirit  are  two  distinct  and 
eternal  substances,  and  also  that  the  vital  soul  has  a  separate,  individual, 
though  dependent  existence. 


62  PRABODHA   CHANDRODAYA ;   OR,  [Act  V. 

and  thus  notwithstanding  the  internal  disagreement  of  the 
Shastras,  which  proceeded  from  the  Vedas,  they  all  unite  in 
defending  the  Vedas  and  in  repelling  the  Materialists.  Be- 
sides, those  who  know  the  First  Principle  perceive  that  there 
is  no  contrariety  among  the  Shastras  ;  but  that  they  celebrate 
by  various  epithets  one  glorious,  tranquil,  eternal,  indivisible, 
uncreated  Being,  according  to  the  attributes  under  which  he  is 
announced ;  hence  he  is  named  Brahma*,  Achyutaf,  and 
UmapatiJ.  Thus  the  Supreme  Lord  is  revealed  in  the  diversi- 
fied descriptions  of  the  Shastras,  as  the  ocean  is  known  by  the 
conflux  of  waters. 

Devotion  :     Proceed  in  your  account  of  the  battle. 

Religion  :  A  dreadful  engagement  took  place  between  the 
two  armies,  in  which  were  mutually  opposed  elephants,  horses, 
chariots,  and  footmen.  Thick  showers  of  arrows  darkened  the 
air  ;  the  blood  flowed  like  a  lake,  the  mud  of  which  were  the 
carcases  of  the  slain,  the  wounded  elephants  resembled  rocks, 
and  the  fragments  of  painted  umbrellas  floated  like  hansa  birds.§ 
When  the  fight  had  become  terrible  by  their  contending  rage, 
the  Heretics  placed  the  Materialists  in  the  front,  and  they 
perished  in  the  conflict.  After  this  defeat  the  Heretical  books 
were  carried  off  by  the  flow  of  the  sea  of  orthodoxy.  The 
Saugatas  fled  into  Sindhu,  Gandhara,  Magadha,  Audhra,  -Huua, 
Vanga,  Kalinga,  &c.,  the  countries  of  the  Mlechhas  ;  and  the 
Heretics  Digambaras,  Kapalikas,  &c.,  concealed  themselves 
among  the  most  abject  men  in  the  countries  of  Panchala, 
Malava,  Abhira,  and  Avarta,  which  lie  near  the  sea.  The 
Mirnansa  supported  by  the  Logicians,  completely  routed  the 
Materialists,  who  after  their  defeat  retreated  to  their  own 
country. 

Devotion  :    Proceed. 

Religion  :  Love  was  slain  by  Spiritual  Contemplation  ; 
Patience  slew  Anger,  Contumely,  and  Injury  ;  Contentment 

*    He  who  proceeded  from  the  navel. 

f     The  eternal,  nnchangeable. 

J    The  lord  of  energy,  or  of  Uma,  a  name  of  Parvati,  §  Geese. 


Act    V.]       RISE    OP   THE    MOON   OF   INTELLECT.  63 

destroyed  Avarice,  Insatiableness,  Misery*,  Falsehood,  Slander, 
Theft,  and  Violence  ;  Candourf  slew  Envy  ;  Magnanimity  t 
conquered  Haughtiness  ;  and  Glory  §  subdued  Pride. 

Devotion  :  (Joyfully^)  Well  and  bravely  done.  What 
has  become  of  Passion. 

Religion  :  Passion  has  concealed  himself  along  with  the 
enemy  of  Joy,  though  I  do  not  know  where. 

Devotion  :  If  so  the  principal  thing  is  left  undone,  he 
must  be  slain  ;  for  a  wise  man  who  is  solicitous  about  his 
property,  will  not  suffer  to  exist  any  remnant  of  fire,  of  debt 
or  of  an  enemy.  But  what  are  the  news  respecting  Mind  ? 

Religion  :  0  goddess  !  overcome  with  grief  for  the  loss  of 
his  children  and  grand-children,  he  has  resolved  to  abandon 
life. 

Devotion  :  (Smiling.)  Our  work  is  then  accomplished, 
and  spirits  will  be  delivered  from  this  mansion  of  desires  ||, 
but  can  he  abandon  life  ? 

Religion  :  The  goddess  Revelation  having  resolved  that 
Intellect  shall  shine  forth  in  him,  Mind  will  not  forsake  his 
corporeal  dwelling,  but  will  devote  himself  to  Retirement. 

Devotion  :  Well,  I  must  send  Vayasaki  Saraswati  to  in- 
duce him  to  renounce  carnal  affections. 

[  They  go  out. 

SENSED  and  VOLITION**  enter. 

Sense  :  ( Weeping.)  Alas  !  my  sons,' where  have  you  gone  ; 
let  me  look  on  your  beloved  countenance.  Embrace  me,  0  my 

*     From  Miser.  f     Anasuya. 

t    Purotkarsha  Sambhavana.  §     Paragunadhiki. 

||  If  Mind,  which  is  the  seat  of  Passion,  Perish,  our  Passions  will  con- 
sequently cease. 

«([  Manas.  This  word  is  generally  translated  Mind,  but  it  properly 
denotes  the  seat  of  affection.  As  the  word  Sense  includes  both  the  intellec- 
tual faculties,  and  the  principles  of  feeling  and  passion  I  have  adopted  it  as 
the  one  which  most  nearly  expresses  the  meaning  of  the  original. 

**  Sankalpa :  a  resolve  or  determination. 


64         PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA;  OR,      [Act  V. 

children  Anger,  Enmity,  Hangtiness,  Pride,  and  Envy  ; — my 
members  are  full  of  pain  ;  I  am  old  and  destitute  and  no  one 
helps  me. — Where  are  my  daughters  Malice,  &c  ;  where  my 
daughters-in-law  Desire,  Injury,  and  Insatiableness.  How 
have  they  been  slain  in  a  moment  through  the  evil  stars  of 
wretched  me  ! — The  fever  of  grief  like  a  fiery  poison  runs  in 
my  veins,  it  burns  my  mortal  parts,  and  consumes  me  with 
universal  pain  ;  it  wounds  my  already  wounded  frame,  it 
deprives  me  of  reason,  disorders  my  mind,  and  devours  my 
whole  body.  (Falls  down  in  a  swoon.) 

Volition  :     0  king,  be  comforted. 

Sense  :  (Recovering.)  Why  does  not  my  consort  Action* 
aid  me  in  this  forlorn  condition  ? 

Volition  :  (  Weeping.)  Alas  !  my  Lord,  where  is  Action  ! 
— She  heard  the  destruction  of  her  children,  and  the  fire  of 
grief  rose  in  her  heart,  and  consumed  it  to  ashes. 

Sense  :  0  my  beloved,  console  me  with  one  kind  word. 
Absent  from  me,  you  can  neither  enjoy  happiness  nor  repose 
even  in  a  dream  ;  and  separated  from  you  I  am  as  a  lifeless 
corpse  ;  but  though  parted  from  you  by  inauspicious  destiny, 
know  that  I  still  continue  to  live,  for  life  refuses  to  depart. 

He  again  faints. 

Volition  :     0  King,  be  comforted,  be  comforted. 

Sense  :     (Recovering.)    I  have  already  lived  long  enough. 

Volition  :  Be  not  troubled,  for  the  fire  of  grief  will  be 
extinguished  when  you  ascend  the  funeral  pilef. 

VAYASAKI  SARASWATI  enters. 

Saraswati  :  The  goddess  Devotion  commanded  me  in 
these  words  :  "  My  dear  Saraswati,  proceed  to  the  dwelling  of 
Sense,  who  mourns  the  death  of  his  children,  and  raise  in  him 
the  light  of  Intellect,  and  use  such  persuasion  as  may  incline 

*    And  so  on. 

f    In  this  manner  it  is  said  the  Hindus  console  a  person  in  distress. 


Act  V.]  RISE  OP  THE  MOON  OP  INTELLECT.  65 

him  to  forsake  this  world."— Well,  I  shall  go  to  him.  (  Goes 
towards  him.)  My  child,  why  are  you  so  afflicted  ;  did  you  not 
formerly  know  that  this  is  a  transitory  state  ?  You  have  read 
the  Itihasas  and  the  legends.  Brahma,  Indra,  gods,  demons, 
Manus,  and  sages  ;  the  earth,  seas,  and  millions  besides  whose 
ages  are  100  kalpas  do  all  cease  to  exist.  It  is  not  strange 
then  that  affection  should  cause  people  to  mourn  the  death  of 
friends,  whose  being  is  like  a  bubble  of  water,  and  whose 
bodies  are  formed  of  perishable  materials  ? — Reflect  often  on 
the  instability  of  this  world.  He  who  meditates  on  what  is 
eternal*,  and  on  what  is  perishable  f  does  not  experience 
sorrow. — How  can  he  be  subject  to  passion  or  grief,  who 
believes  that  there  is  but  one  Being,  eternal  Brahma,  and  who 
beholds  no  other  existence, 

Sense  >  0  goddess,  reason  cannot  find  space  in  my  heart, 
which  is  filled  with  insupportable  grief? 

Saraswati :  This  is  the  fault  of  affection \  which,  it  is 
well  known,  upholds  this  state  of  vanity.  Man  plants  the 
poisonous  seed  of  sorrow  under  the  name  of  love,  from  which 
there  quickly  spring  up  shoots  of  affection,  which  contain  a 
fire  dangerous  as  lightning  and  from  these  shoots  grow  trees 
of  sorrow  with  innumerable  branches,  which  burning  like  a 
heap  of  covered  straw,  slowly  consume  the  body. 

Sense  :  This  may  be  true  ;  but  it  is  impossible  that  I 
should  live  who  am  consumed  with  the  fire  of  affliction.  0 
Saraswati,  I  am  fortunate  to  behold  you  at  the  moment  of  death. 

Saraswati  :  To  attempt  self-murder  is  a  dreadful  crime 
— Besides,  why  should  such  respect  be  paid  to  those  who  are 
a  source  of  misery  ?  Can  wives,  children  or  relations  confer 
happiness  ?  Has  it  ever  happened  in  times  past,  or  will  it  in 
ages  to  come,  that  they  relieve  a  person  in  distress  ?  But 
when  absent,  they  often  wound  you  in  the  tenderest  part ; 
indeed  astonishing.  Of  how  many  difficulties  and  troubles 

*     God,  the  universal  being. 

t    The  world  every  thing  besides  God. 

I    iSneha, 


66  PRABODHA    CHANDRODAYA;    OR,  [Act   V. 

are  they  the  canse  ?  To  support  them  how  many  rivers  are 
crossed,  how  many  dangerous  forests  are  traversed,  and  how 
many  people  are  beheld  with  countenances  pale  through 
disappointment. 

Sense  :  0  goddess,  it  may  be  so  ;  but  to  be  deprived  of  those 
whom  we  begat,  whom  we  long  tenderly  cherished  as  life  itself, 
and  who  fill  the  heart,  gives  greater  agony  than  a  mortal  wound. 

Saraswati  :  My  child,  this  delusion  proceeds  from  affec- 
tion, it  is  a  common  observation  that  a  person  is  distressed  if 
the  cat  eats  his  domestic  fowl ;  but  when  his  affections  are  not 
interested,  as  if  the  cat  eats  a  sparrow  or  a  mouse,  he  expres- 
ses no  degree  of  sorrow;  you  must  therefore  root  out  affection, 
which  is  the  cause  of  vain  attachments.  The  body  generates 
numerous  animals  which  people  are  anxious  to  remove,  but  to 
one  description  they  give  the  name  of  children  for  which  their 
lives  are  wasted  away  ;  such  is  the  delusion  of  the  world. 

Sense  :  What  you  say  is  true  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  untie 
the  knot  of  affection.  Do  you  know  any  means  by  which  one 
may  disentangle  himself  from  the  net  of  affection,  which, 
strengthened  by  long  indulgence,  has  entwined  its  threads 
around  his  heart. 

Saraswati  :  My  child,  the  principal  means  is  to  consider 
that  this  is  a  fleeting  existence.  In  this  wide  world,  how 
many  millions  of  parents,  wives,  children,  uncles,  and  grand- 
fathers have  passed  away.  You  should  consider  the  society 
of  friends  as  a  momentary  flash  of  lightning,  and  revolving 
this  often  in  your  mind,  enjoy  felicity. 

Sense  :  0  goddess,  you  have  dispelled  the  illusion,  but  the 
waves  of  affection  again  defile  my  heart  after  it  is  cleansed  by 
the  nectareous  instruction  flowing  from  your  lips  beautiful  as 
the  moon  therefore,  0  celestial  goddess,  command  some  me- 
dicine for  these  fresh  wounds  of  grief. 

Saraswati  :  My  child,  the  sages  have  said,  that  oblivion 
is  the  only  medicine  for  those  severe  strokes  of  grief,  which 
wound  unseen,  the  mortal  parts. 


Act   V.]        RISE    OP   THE    MOON    OF   INTELLECT.  67 


Sense  :  True  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  suppress  thought, 
after  it  is  once  suppressed,  a  new  succession  of  thoughts  arises 
which  overpowers  the  mind  as  the  moon's  rays  are  intercepted 
every  moment  by  broken  clouds. 

Saraswati  :  My  child,  this  is  the  unsteadiness  of  thought, 
but  you  ought  to  fix  it  on  some  tranquil  object.* 

Sense  :  Be  gracious,  and  inform  me  what  is  this  tranquil 
object. 

Saraswati  :  It  is  a  mystery,  I  may,  however,  reveal  it  to 
the  distressed.  Enter  into  the  ever-blessed  Brahma,  f  and 
collect  thy  thoughts  in  spirit  ;  as  a  person  cools  himself  by 
going  into  a  pool  of  water  in  the  hot  season.  Meditate  con- 
tinually on  Hari,  who  is  of  azure  hue,  and  who  wears  an 
invaluable  necklace,  and  is  adorned  with  ornaments  on  his 
arms,  in  his  ears,  and  on  his  head. 

Sense  :  {Thoughtfully  and  sighing.)  0  my  preserver  ;  I 
prostrate  myself  at  thy  feet. 

Saraswati  :  My  child,  you  have  a  docile  disposition,  for 
which  reason  I  shall  unfold  to  you  still  more.  Those  who  are 
void  of  understanding  are  exceedingly  grieved  by  the  death  of 
parents,  children,  and  relations,  and  beat  their  breasts  ;  but 
this  event  secures  to  the  wise  a  happy  repose,  and  induces 
them  to  seize  more  ardently  on  retirement  from  this  miserable 
world,  whose  end  is  without  fruit. 

'  RETIREMENT    enters. 

Retirement  :  (Meditating.)  The  Lord  of  Beings  does  not 
renewj  this  body,  which  is  formed  of  flesh  surrounded  with  skin, 
and  is  tender  as  the  leaves  of  the  purple  lotus.  He  drives 
away  vultures,  crows,  wolves,  dogs,  or-  curlews,  from  carcases 

*     What  is  free  from  sorrow,  Passion  &c. 

f  Embrace  the  doctrine  of  one  Being  and  thou  shalt  consider  thyself 
one  with  God. 

%  The  meaning,  I  understand,  is  this  :  that  the  human  form  is  obtained 
only  after  the  soul  has  gone  through  8,400,000  births  in  inferior  animals,  and 
that  it  is  not  bestowed  in  successive  times  of  the  same  individual. 


68  PRABODHA    CHANDRODAYA  ;    OR,  [Act  V. 

on  which  they  seize  and  devour  the  flesh  mixed  with  blood.  The 
pleasures  arising  from  external  objects,  which  are  changeable 
as  the  fluctuations  of  fortune,  terminate  in  vanity  ;  the 
body  is  an  abode  of  trouble  ;  much  wealth  endangers  the  life  of 
the  possessor,  sorrow  springs  from  every  connection,  and  women 
are  a  perpetual  source  of  vexation  ;  but,  alas  !  people  prefer 
this  path  of  misery  to  that  which  leads  to  spiritual  enjoyment. 

Saraswati  :  (To  mind.)  Retirement  has  come  to  see  you; 
do  you  receive  him  ? 

Sense  :    My  son,  where  are  you  ? 

Retirement  :  (Going  to  him.)  I  am  here  and  desire  to 
salute  you. 

Sense  :  Embrace  me,  my  son  ;  though  I  forsook  you  at 
the  very  moment  of  your  birth  (  RETIREMENT  embraces  him.), 
your  presence  has  appeased  the  violence  of  my  grief. 

Retirement :  My  father,  what  violent  grief  oppresses  you  ? 
It  is  a  matter  of  daily  occurrence  for  parents,  brothers,  children, 
relations,  friends,  to  meet  and  separate  again  ;  why  should  a 
wise  man  grieve  at  this  ?  It  is  like  the  meeting  and  separation 
of  travellers  on  the  road,  of  two  trees  in  a  river,  of  clouds  in 
the  sky,  and  of  passengers  in  a  ship. 

Sense  ;  (To  SARASWATI  with  joy.)  0  Goddess  !  what  my 
son  says  is  true,  But  after  Reason  has  dispersed  the  darkness 
of  the  illusions  of  sense  which  covers  the  mind,  it  still  returns 
to  those  things  which  are  deceitful,  as  the.  appearance  of  water 
on  sandy  deserts  ;  to  young  women,  plants  spotted  with  bees, 
gentle  breezes,  and  spread  Mallikas  shedding  perfume. 

Saraswati  :  A  person*  however,  ought  not  to  be  one  hour 
without  what  is  requisite  in  the  performance  of  his  duties f, 
and  henceforth  Contemplation  will  be  your  pious  consort. 

*    Literally — An  Householder. 

f  In  every  religious  Ceremony  of  importance,  a  married  man  must  he 
assisted  by  his  wife.  Accordingly,  Sense  being  married  to  Contemplation 
whom  he  had  forsaken,  Saraswati  advises  him  to  be  reconciled  to  her  that, 
as  an  householder  he  may  perform  all  the  duties  of  religion  agreeably  to  the 
prescribed  rule, 


Act.    V.]  RISE  OP  THE  MOON  OP  INTELLECT.  69 

Sense  :     (Bashfully.)     As  the  Goddess  recommends. — 

Saraswati  :  Let  Quiet,  Mortification,  and  Contentment, 
your  sons,  abide  with  you  ;  and  also  your  ministers  Penance, 
Prayer,  &c. :  and  be  pleased  to  appoint  Reason,  and  the  god- 
dess Revelation,  the  heirs  apparent  to  your  throne.  Receive 
also,  with  favour  and  respect,  the  four  sisters,  Friendship, 
Pity,  Joy,  and  Grief,  who  have  been  ordered  to  attend  you  by 
the  goddess  Devotion,  and  to  solicit  your  grace. 

Sense  :  You  shall  be  obeyed  ;  I  have  placed  your  commands 
on  my  head.  (Prostrates  himself  at  her  feet.) 

Saraswati :  Regard  Penance,  Prayer,  Posture,  and  Inspi- 
ration, with  reverence;  and  assisted  by  them,  conduct  the 
Government  of  your  Kingdom. — Having  thus  attained  a  state 
of  repose,  the  soul  will  discern  its  own  spiritual  nature*  united 
to  thee,  the  Eternal  is  subjected  to  birth  and  decay!  and  though 
he  is  one,  yet  to  our  understanding  he  seems  to  be  many,  as 
many  suns  are  reflected  by  the  waves  of  the  sea.  But,  my 
child  when  your  thoughts,  which  are  now  dispersed,  shall  be 
collected  together,  and  you  shall  remain  in  a  state  of  repose, 
then  the  eternally  happy  spirit  will  shine  forth  as  the  sun  is 
beheld  in  a  clear  surface  of  water.  Well,  let  us  now  proceed  to 
the  river,  and  pour  forth  liberations  to  our  deceased  kinsmen. 
AIL  As  you  command. 

[  They  all  go  out. 

*  This  implies,  that  he  will  perceive  himself  to  be  pure  Spirit,  or  the 
Supreme  Being. 


END  OF  THE  FIFTH  ACT. 


Act  VI. 


TRANQUILLITY  enters. 

Tranquillity :  The  great  King  Reason  thus  addressed 
me : — "  My  child  thou  knowest  what  has  happened.  The 
children  of  Mind  having  perished,  and  Passion  being  subdued, 
Mind  has  associated  himself  with  Retirement,  and  become 
tranquil.  The  five  troubles*  have  simultaneously  ceased,  and 
Man  encircled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  First  Principle.  Go 
quickly,  therefore,  and  bring  the  goddess,  Revelation,  with 
proper  respect.  {Looking.}  Here  is  my  glad  Mother  ;  she  is 
speaking  to  herself,  and  comes  this  way. 

RELIGION  enters. 

Religion  :  To-day  mine  eyes  have  been  satisfied  with  the 
nectar  of  beholding  the  King's  family  delivered  from  trouble. 
The  wicked  now  are  restrained,  the  good  are  revered,  and  the 
supreme  Lord  is  worshipped  by  all  his  creatures,  with  joyful 
minds. 

Tranquillity:  (Going  to  her.)  Mother,  what  were  you 
musing  on  as  you  approached  ? 

Religion ;     1  was  saying,  "to-day  mine  eyes"  &c. 

Tranquillity:  In  what  manner  does  Manf  restrain 
Mind? 

*  Avidya,  ignerance,  error — Asmita,  conceiving  Understanding  and  Spirit 
to  be  one  which  I  suppose  means  the  conception  that  the  active  and  sensitive 
principles  are  inherent  in  Spirit  or  Being. — Raga,  mental  passions  and  affec- 
tions.— Dwesha,  envy  or  hatred;  and  Abhinivesha,  fear  of  death. 

f  Purusha. — Considered  as  a  pure,  spiritual,  or  intellectual  being,  divest- 
ed of  passions  and  desires.  The  same  word  is  often  used  to  denote  the 
Supreme  Soul  as  the  source  of  universe. 


Act  VL]         RISE  OP  THE  MOON  OF   INTELLECT.  71 

Religion  :    As  he  would  the  most  dangerous  person. 

Tranquillity  :  Then  the  Lord*  himself  will  assume  the 
sovereignty. 

Religion  :  He  will  :  for  whoever  withdraws  his  soul  from 
external  existence,  he  is  God  ;  he  is  all  things  ;  and  he  is  the 
supreme  intelligence. 

Tranquillity  :    Why  does  God  cherish  Maya  ? 

Religion  :  Repress  her,  you  should  have  said  ;  how  can 
you  talk  of  cherishing  her  !  God  considers  her  as  the  origin  of 
evil,  who  must,  above  all  things,  be  repressed. 

Tranquillity  :  In  this  case,  how  will  the  King'st  affairs 
be  conducted^  ? 

Religion  :  Hearken  ;  he  will  meditate  with  delight  on 
what  is  temporal  and  what  is  eternal  ;  Retirement  will  be  his 
Companion,  his  friends  will  be  Penance  and  Prayer ;  Quiet 
and  Mortification  will  be  his  faithful  auxiliaries,  his  female 
attendants,  Friendship,  Pity,  &c.  ;  and  his  associate  will  be 
Desire  of  beatitude  ;  and  by  his  might  he  will  cut  off  his 
enemies,  Passion,  Affection,  Volition,  Relation,  &c. 

Tranquillity  :  How  stands  the  disposition  of  our  Lord  in 
regard  to  Virtuous  Action  §  ? 

Religion  :  My  daughter,  since  he  has  associated  with  Re- 
tirement, he  is  totally  disregardful  of  fruition  either  in  this  state 
or  in  another.  He  dreads  the  reward  of  good  which  is  of  a 
perishable  nature,  as  he  does  the  punishment  of  evil.  He  does 
not  perform  even  those  holy  actions  which  are  unaccompanied 
with  desire  of  reward  ;  but  believing  that  he  is  one  with 
God,  and  has  attained  perfection,  he  remains  in  a  quiescent 
state. 

*    Man.  f    Reason.  J    As  the  operations  of  reason  are 

grounded  on  the  belief  of  external  existences,   how  can  they  be  carried  on 
\vhen  this  belief  has  ceased  ?  §     Religions  duties,  charity. 


?2  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA;  on,         [Act  VI* 

Tranquillity  :  What  has  become  of  those  allurements 
which  Passion  carried  away  when  he  concealed  himself  ? 

Religion  :  That  evil  being,  Passion  sent  the  Science  called 
Madhumati,  together  with  these  allurements,  to  delude  the 
King  with  this  hope,  that  if  Reason  be  insnared  by  them,  he 
will  not  think  of  Revelation. 

Tranquillity  :     And  what  then  ? 

Religion  :  They  accordingly  went  to  the  King,  and  exhibit- 
ed before  him  that  science  which  deludes  the  senses,  "Here  is 
a  person,  said  they,  "who  hears  at  the  distance  of  100  Yojans;" 
and,  without  having  studied,  they  pretended  to  teach  the 
Vedas,  Puranas,  Bharata,  and  Metaphysics,  which  consist  in 
disputation.  According  to  their  will  they  produced  Shastras 
and  Purans,  composed  in  elegant  language  ;  they  traversed 
the  three  regions  of  universe  and  beheld  the  mountain  Meru 
sparkling  with  gems.  By  the  science  of  illusion  they  raised  a 
spot,  and  boasting  that  it  was  sanctified  by  the  presence  of 
divinities,  they  deceived  the  King,  saying,  "  sit  down,  here 
there  is  neither  birth  nor  death  ;  the  country  is  naturally  de- 
lightful ;  here  are  beautiful  celestial  singers  of  playful  mien 
whose  hands  administer  delights,  and  who  know  how  to 
charm  the  heart  ;  here  are  rivers  whose  sand  is  gold  ;  damsels 
with  slender  waists  and  round  hips,  whose  faces  resemble 
water-lilies  ;  and  here  are  gardens  producing  trees  whose 
fruits  are  rubies  : — enjoy  all  these  as  the  recompense  of  your 
holy  deeds." 

Tranquillity  :    Go  on. 

Religion  :  Influenced  by  Maya,  Reason  said.  "  These 
are  excellent  !"  he  believed  in  his  mind  that  they  were  reali- 
ties and  determined  to  enjoy  them  ;  and  thus  he  fell  into  the 
path  of  credulity. 

Tranquillity  :  Our  Lord  is  then  again  insuared  in  the 
net  cf  worldly  affections. 


Act   VI.]      RISE   OP  THE    MOON  OF   INTELLECT.  73 

Religion :    No,  no. 
Tranquillity  :    What  then  ? 

Religion  :  A  Logician,  who  was  standing  near,  fixing  his 
eyes  red  with  anger  on  these  impostors,  thns  spoke  to  our 
Lord  : — "  My  Lord,  what  are  you  doing  ?  Do  you  not  know 
that  these  persons  who  eagerly  devour  sensual  pleasures,  and 
delude  the  people,  will  precipitate  you  again  into  the  fierce 
fire  of  external  things.  Did  you  not  embark  in  the  vessel  of 
divine  meditation  to  be  carried  over  the  gulf  of  passion  ;  will 
you  now  proudly  leave  it,  and  perish  in  a  river  of  fire  ?  " 

Tranquillity:    Well. 

Religion  :  Hearing  these  words,  the  King  said.  "  Such 
external  objects,  to  be  sure  very  fine*,"  and  then  he  began  to 
revile  this  deceitful  science* 

Tranquillity  :    Bravo  I  bravo  f  But  where  are  you  going  ? 

Religion  :  At  the  Command  of  Lord  I  am  going  to  meet 
Reason.  I  must  therefore  proceed  quickly,  and  direct  my 
steps  towards  the  King. 

Tranquillity ;  And  the  great  King  has  ordered  me  to 
bring  Revelation  ;  Well :  I  shall  go. 

MAN  enters. 

Man  :  (Musing  with  joy.)  Hear  the  wonderful  acts  of  the 
Goddess  !  Devotion  !  Aided  by  her,  I  hstve  successfully  buffet- 
ed the  waves  of  trouble  ;  I  have  risen  from  the  fearful  whirlpool 
of  affection  ;  I  am  tranquil,  having  escaped  from  the  crocodile 
jaws  of  friends,  family,  and  relations.  I  have  extinguished  the 
internal  firef  of  Anger,  and  burst  the  cords  which  formed  the 
net  work  of  Insatiableness.  Thus  have  I  crossed  the  sea  of 
Passion,  and  safely  reached  the  opposite  shore. 

*  This  is  spoken  ironically,  and  alludes  to  the  appearances  raised  by  the 
jugglers.  The  appearances  are  whatever  we  perceive  in  this  world,  and 
jugglers  are  our  senses. 

f  Vadvanala. — A  submarine  fire,  which  is  supposed  to  consume  12  yojans 
of  water  daily. 

10 


74  PRABODHA    CHANDRODAYA ;    OR,  [Act  VI. 

REVELATION  and  TRANQUILLITY  enter. 

Revelation  :  My  dear,  how  can  I  endure  the  face  of  cruel 
Reason,  who  for  a  long  time  neglected  me,  as  if  I  had  beeq 
the  wife  of  another. 

Tranquillity  :  0  Goddess !  why  do  you  return  to  him 
who  behaved  so  cruelly  ? 

Revelation  :  Did  you  not  see  my  distress,  and  do  you 
talk  in  this  manner  ? — While  Reason  was  absent,  what  wicked 
unprincipled  fellow  did  not  desire  to  have  unhappy  me  for 
his  hand-maid?  The  bracelets  were  taken  from  my  arm  and 
broken,  and  my  hair  was  dishevelled  by  their  eagerness  to  .get 
the  precious  stone  with  which  it  was  fastened,  -„ 

Tranquillity  :  These  were  the  evil  doings  of  Passion  ;  no, 
fault  can  be  imputed  to  Reason,  It  was  Passion,  who,  by 
means  of  Iiove  and  others,  caused  Reason,  the  instructor  of 
Mind,  to  separate  from  you.  But  the  natural  disposition  of  a 
respectable  woman  is  to  wait  till  her  husband  be  rescued  from 
the  trouble  into  which  he  has  fallen  :  you  must  therefore,  meet 
the  King  with  kind  looks  and  endearing  words  ;  for  now  your 
enemies  are  destroyed  and  all  your  desires  are  fulfilled. 

Revelation  :  My  dear,  I  am  coming  along  with  my 
daughter  Gita,  and  shall  meet  him  in  secret ;  but  you  will  re^ 
spectfully  answer  whatever  question  is  asked  by  my  husband 
(Reason)  or  by  Man,  and  thus  intellect  will  rise  ;  for  how  can 
I  speak  with  confidence  before  the  Gurus. 

Tranquillity  :  This  subject*,  however,  need  not  be  discus- 
sed by  means  of  Gita,  for  it  has  been  already  declared  to  him  by 
the  Goddess  Devotion.— Walk  on,  and  shew  respect  to  pristine 
Man,  and  to  your  husband,  by  appearing  in  their  presence. 

Revelation  ?    As  you  desire. 

[  They  walk  forward* 
*  Jbe  Rise  of  Intellect. 


Act  VI.  ]  RISE  OP  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT.  75 

The  KING*  and  RELIGION  enter. 

King :     Will  Tranquillity  find  my  beloved  Revelation  ? 

Religion :  She  has  departed  to  execute  your  orders. — Why 
should  she  not  find  her  ? 

King- :    How  ? 

Religion:  The  Goddess  Devotion  has  already  told  you 
that  Revelation,  through  fear  of  Logic,  has  taken  refuge  with 
Gita  in  the  temple  of  Vishnu,  on  the  mountain  Mandara. 

King  :    Why  is  she  afraid  of  Logic? 

Religion  :  This  will  be  explained  to  you.  Let  us  proceed* 
Here  is  Man  sitting  alone,  and  is  waiting  to  see  you* 

King  :     (Going  towards  him.)  Venerable  Sire,  I  greet  thee* 

Man  :  Learning  reverses  the  order  of  Nature*  Your  great 
learning  has  enabled  you  to  instruct  me,  which  gives  you  the 
authority  of  a  Father.  Thus  when  the  Rishi  had  lost  the  road 
of  virtue,  he  asked  directions  from  his  son  ;  and  after  being 
well  instructed,  he  said  to  him,  "  Hearken  ;  you  must  act 
towards  me  as  a  father — this  is  your  duty*" 

Tranquillity  t  0  Goddess  I  The  Lord  is  sitting  in  com- 
pany with  Reason  ;  let  us  go  to  them*  (  Going  to  them.  )  0 
Lord,  the  Goddess  Revelation  has  come  to  prostrate  herself  at 
your  feet. 

Man  :  No,. no,  she  is  my  mother,  by  whom  I  was  instructed 
respecting  the  First  Principle,  and  it  becomes  me  to  reverence 
her.  There  is,  however,  a  great  difference  between  the  God- 
dess and  a  mother,  in  regard  to  instruction.  Our  mother 
binds  the  knot  of  worldly  affections,  the  Goddess  cuts  it 
asunder.— (REVELATION  seeing  REASON,  salutes  him,  and  sits 
down  at  a  distance.) 

Man  :  My  mother,  tell  me  where  have  you  lived  this 
long  time  ? 

*  Reason* 


76  PRABODHA  CHANDBODAYA;  OB,         [Act  VI. 

Revelation  :  I  have  spent  the  time  at  Matas*,  in  public 
placesf;  and  in  temples  which  contain  no  image  of  GodJ, 
hearing  the  discourse  of  foolish  people. 

Man:  Did  they  understand  any  thing  respecting  your 
opinion  ? 

Revelation  :  No  ;  they  merely  expressed  whatever  came 
into  their  own  imagination,  without  understanding  my  words, 
like  a  chattering  of  Dravid  woman §.  They  spoke  for  the 
sake  of  gain,  and  not  to  get  a  knowledge  of  my  doctrines. 

Man  :     Say  on. 

Revelation:  Departing  thence,  I  met  sacrifice ||  on  the 
road  surrounded  with  deer-skins,  fire-wood,  clarified  butter, 
and  sacrificial  vessels,  along  with  Inthi,  Pashu,  and  Somali, 
and  whose  rites  are  described  in  the  Puranas,  in  the  Sections 
on  Duties, 

Man:    Well. 

Revelation  :  I  thought  that  she  who  is  named  the  Bearer 
of  Books**,  must  have  some  Knowledge  of  my  principles  and 
therefore  I  resolved  to  pass  a  few  days  with  her. 

Man :    Proceed. 

Revelation  :  On  approaching,  she  received  me  courteous- 
ly, and  asked  what  were  my  desires  ?  I  answered,  having  no 
protector,  I  desire  permission  to  abide  with  you. 

Man  :     Go  on. 

*  The  retreat  of  Sanyasis,  Gosanvis,  Digambaras,  &c.  Jain  colleges  are  also 
named  Maths. 

f  A  square  in  which  people  meet ;  any  public  place. 
J  I  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  the  Sect  to  which  these  temples  be- 
longed ;  it  is  evident,  however,  that  they  belonged  to  some  Hindu  Sectaries. 
§  It  is  said  that  Dravid  women  cannot  pronounce  distinctly. 
||  Tajna-vidya. 
f  Different  kinds  of  Sacrifices. 

**  Alluding  to  the  number  of  books  in  which  sacrificial  rites  and  ceremonies 
are  described. 


Act  VI.]  RISE  OF  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT.  77 

Revelation  :  She  then  inquired  respecting  the  nature  of 
my  worship. 

Man:    Well. 

Revelation  :  I  replied,  I  worship  him  by  whom  the  world 
was  created,  in  whom  it  moves,  to  whom  it  shall  return,  and 
in  whose  light  it  shines  ;  the  Lord,  whose  glory  is  eternal  and 
unspeakable,  who  is  without  change,  everlasting,  quiescent, 
and  to  whom  holy  men  proceed  who  have  dispelled  the  dark- 
ness of  error*.  She  said,  "  How  can  He  be  God  who  is  with- 
out action  ?  It  is  actiont  which  dissolves  sensual  connections, 
and  not  spiritual  contemplation  ;  on  this  account,  those  who 
perform  actions  to  deliver  themselves  from  worldly  passions, 
and  whose  minds  are  tranquil  desire  to  live  one  hundred  years. 
Your  presence  is  not  required,  unless  you  worship  Him  who 
acts  and  enjoys  ; — how  long  must  I  abide  in  spiritual  Con- 
templation, and  what  is  there  objectionable  in  my  doctrines  ?" 

King  :  (In  derision.)  The  understanding  of  Sacrifice  is 
corrupt ;  her  vision  is  obstructed  by  smoke,  and  she  is  bewild- 
ered by  false  Logic.  The  Almighty  Lord  commands  Maya  by 
a  nod,  who  then  spreads  out  the  universe  :  thus  iron,  though 
motionless  itself,  is  moved  by  the  presence  of  the  magnetf. 
Such,  however,  is  his  state  of  vision  who  is  under  the  influence 
of  error.  Sacrifice  pretends  to  remove  by  action  this  sensual 
state,  which  proceeds  from  ignorance  :  this  is  like  employing 
darkness  to  cure  a  person  whose  want  of  sight  proceeds  from 
darkness.  But  the  enlightened  man  is  absorbed  in  him  who 
creates  the  seven  perishable  delusive  worlds  ;  and  in  no  other 
way  can  deliverance  be  obtained  from  mortal  births. 

Man :    Go  on. 

Revelation :  Sacrifice,  after  some  reflection,  said,  "  My 
friend,  if  you  stay  here,  my  disciples,  who  are  immersed  in  evil 
desires,  will  despise  their  duties  ;  be  gracious,  then,  and  if  it 
please  you,  depart  to  some  other  place." 

*  The  error  of  duality,  or  of  believing  more  existences  than  one. 
f  Keligious  rites  and  duties. 

J  Maya  is  not  itself  active,  but  moves  and  acts  as  directed  by  the  living 
spirit. 


78  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA ;   OR,  [  Act  VI. 

Man :    Proceed. 

Revelation  :    I  then  left  her,  and  went  on. 

Man :    Well. 

Revelation  :  Afterwards  I  saw  Mimansa,  attended  with 
Karma  Kanda*;  she  who  subdivides  duties  which  are  accom- 
panied with  reward,  and  performs  them  by  means  of  her 
assistants!  who  are  publicly  known  ;  she  who  has  reciprocally 
connected  the  various  duties  together,  and  who  is  supported 
by  the  authority  of  the  Tedas  f . 

Man :    Well. 

Revelation  :  As  in  the  former  instance,  I  requested 
permission  to  remain  with  her  a  short  time,  she  said,  "Remain;" 
and  then  asked  about  my  worship.  I  repeated  the  words—-"  I 
worship  him,"  &c. 

Revelation  :  Upon  this*  she  looked  at  those  who  were 
standing  beside  her,  and  said,  "  she  cannot  assist  us,  because 
she  does  not  admit  that  men  go  to  another  world,  where  the 
reward  of  virtue  is  enjoyed§ ;  she  ought  to  be  instructed  how 
to  perform  the  requisite  duties."  One  of  her  disciples  answer- 
ed, "  this  is  extremely  proper, "  another,  named  Kumarila 
Swami,  ||  who  is  greatly  celebrated,  and  knows  her  sentiments 
intimately,  said,  "  0  Goddess,  she  will  not  unite  herself  to 
man  who  acts,  but  she  will  adhere  to  the  Lord,  who  neither 
acts  nor  enjoys,  and  with  whom  actions  are  not  required." 
Another  said,  "  What !  is  there  any  other  ,b(3ing  besides  those 
visible  beings  whom  we  behold  ?"  Kumarila  Swami  smiled, 

*  A  division  of  the  system  which  treats  of  the  different  rites  and  duties. 
[See  Colebrooke's  Essays,  Vol.  I.  p.  296.]  f  Anga. 

J  This  passage  is  too  elliptical  to  be  perfectly  understood,  but  it  will 
receive  some  illustration  from  what  is  said  of  the  Mimansa  tenets,  in  the 
Appendix. 

§  She  believes  that  the  soul  should  desire  the  state  of  the  eternal  one,  all 
pervading  Being,  and  not  the  reward  of  actions  in  a  separate  state  of  bles- 
sedness. 

||  An  eminent  disciple  of  Jaimini,  the  founder  of  the  Mimansa  philosophy. 
[See  Colebrooke's  Essays,  Vol.  I.  pp.  297,  298,  312.] 


Act   VI.]  RISE  OF  THE  MOON  OF  INTELLECT.  79 

and  said,  "  Yes  there  is  ;  there  is  one  who  beholds  the  actions 
of  all,  and  there  is  one  whose  intellect  is  darkened  by  passion  ; 
there  is  one  who  seeks  the  rewards  of  actions,  and  there  is  one 
who  confers  the  rewards  ;  there  is  one  who  performs  duties, 
and  there  is  one  who  dispenses  retribution.  Why,  then,  should 
action  be  ascribed  to  the  Supreme  impassible  Lord  ?" 

King  '  Well  said!  Kumarila  Swami,  your  understanding 
is  excellent;  may  you  be  renowned*!  "Two  birds,  who 
always  accompanied  each  other,  and  mutual  friends,  perched 
upon  one  treef:  one  of  them  ate  the  ripe  fruit ;  the  other 
refrained  from  eating,  but  merely  sat  and  looked  at  it. " 

Man:    Well. 

Revelation  :    I  then  took  leave  of  Mimansa,  and  departed, 

Man:    Well 

Revelation  :  Proceeding  onwards,  I  beheld  Metaphysics, 
attended  by  a  number  of  pupils,  such  as  those  f  who  affirm 
that  there  is  a  being  distinct  from  the  universe,  ;  those  §  who 
deal  in  syllogisms  and  talk  about  principles  and  elements  : 
who  delight  in  sophistry,  and  in  puzzling  people's  under- 
standings ;  who  dispute  for  victory,  and  in  order  to  fix  the 
imputation  of  error  on  other  persons'  opinions  ;  those  ||  who 
maintain  that  God  and  nature  are  separate  beings,  and  are 
perpetually  enumerating  the  twenty-five  elements,  saying,  that 
consciousness  arose  from  magmtudelf  &c.,  and  so  on  in  succes- 
sive progression. 

*  This  is  cited  from  one  of  the  Vedas;  the  bird  which  ate  of  the  fruit  is 
the  sentient  soul,  the  other  is  pure  spirit.  The  example  of  a  bird  is  used  be- 
cause it  flies  freely  through  the  air ;  denoting  that  these  two  were  free  agents. 

f  Body,  Matter,  or  Maya.  J  Com. — Patanjalists. 

§  Com. — Naiyayikas  or  Logicians.     [Colebrooke's  Essays,  V.  I.  p.  261.] 

|J  Com. — The  Sankhyas,  who  maintain  that  nature,  in  which  the  three 
qualities  reside,  is  the  origin  of  all  things. — The  Three  qualities  are  Satva, 
Raja,  Tama,  or  truth,  passion,  and  darkness.  [Colebr.'s  Ess.  V.  I.  p.  249.] 

«[[  Primary  matter;  the  principle  of  magnitude;  it  does  not  possess  figure 
Of  Visibility  itself,  but  is  the  origin  of  all  visible  and  figured  things. 


80  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA  ;  OR,        [Act  VI. 

Man:    Well. 

Revelation  :  I  went  to  them,  and  the  same  introductory 
conversation  passed  between  us  as  with  the  other.  They  then 
began  to  talk  derisively  ;  one  said,  "  0  Revelation,  the  world 
arose  from  atoms* ;  another  said,  "  Why  do  you  ascribe  change 
to  God,  and  depend  on  virtues  which  are  of  a  perishable 
nature  ?"  and  a  third  affirmed  that  the  world  was  produced  by 
nature. 

King :  Erroneous  sentiments  I  These  persons  do  not 
even  understand  logical  reasoning.  Every  thing  finite  or 
visible,  is  created  because  it  is  an  effect ;  as  a  goblet,  &c.  atoms 
(finitude)  therefore  must  be  admitted  ;  but  this  world  being  an 
effect,  is  not  realf,  is  finite,  and  is  destroyed  and  renewed  ; 
it  is  like  the  moon  which  is  seen  in  water,  the  appearance  of 
cities  in  the  air,  dreams,  and  the  object  exhibited  by  leger- 
demain ;  it  seems  to  exist  only  while  the  soul  is  not  perceived 
to  be  comprehended  in  Hara  ;  but  when  the  knowledge  of  the 
first  principle  is  obtained,  it  vanishes  away  :  thus  the  pearl- 
oyster  presents  the  appearance  of  silver,  and  a  cord  that  of  a 
serpentj.  The  objection  which  charges  us  with  attributing 
change  to  God  is  fit  only  for  children.  How  can  this  Supreme 
Spirit,  who  is  unchangeable,  without  parts,  perfect  without' 
beginning  or  end,  and  whose  glory  is  eternal,  suffer  change  in 
the  work  of  creation  ?  Does  the  appearance  of  cloud  cause  a 
change  in  the  aether. 

Man  :  Well  said  :  this  discourse  delights  my  soul;  it  is  the 
reasoning  of  a  wise  man,  (  To  REVELATION.  )  Proceeds. — 

Revelation  :  Then  they  all  said,  "  this  person  maintains, 
that  the  soul  is  released  from  confinement  when  all  things  are 
annihilated  ;  she  walks  in  the  road  of  the  Nastikas  ;  do  not 

*  What  is  measurable,  finitude. 

f  Non  ens  ;  it  has  no  real  permanent  existence,  being  dependent  on  what 
is  ens,  or  Spirit. 

J  Whilst  the  real  nature  of  the  Oyster  and  the  cord  are  not  known. 


Act  VI.]         RISE  OF  THE  MOON  OF   INTELLECT.  81 

permit  her  to  escape."    On  this  they  all  attempted  in  a  tum- 
ultuous manner,  to  seize  me. 
Man  :     Very  bad. 

Revelation  :  I  fled  with  the  utmost  speed,  and  entered 
the  country  of  Dandakaranya,  where,  not  far  from  a  temple  of 
Vishnu,  which  stands  on  the  mountain  Mandara*,  they  broke 
off  the  bracelets  from  my  arms  and  wrists,  and  stole  the  orna- 
ment which  bound  up  my  hair. 
Man  :  Well. 

Revelation  :  Meantime  some  men  rushed  out  of  the 
temple  armed  with  clubs,  and  beat  them  so  severely  that  they 
all  fled  from  the  country. 

King  :     (  With  joy.  )     How  could  the  divine  Lord  endure 
those  who  sought  your  ruins  ? 
Man:    Well. 

Revelation  :  My  necklace  broken,  my  clothes  carried 
away,  the  ornaments  dropped  from  my  feet,  and  full  of  terror, 
I  sought  refuge  in  the  house  of  Gita.  My  daughter  Gita, 
seeing  me  come,  was  overwhelmed  with  joy,  and  calling  out, 
"mother,  mother,"  she  embraced  me,  and  caused  me  to  sit 
down.  After  hearing  what  had  happened,  she  said,  "  my 
mother,  be  not  distressed  ;  these  demoniacal  minded  persons 
deny  your  credibility,  and  walk  according  to  their  own  imagi- 
nations ;  but  God  will  punish  them  :  he  has  declared  concern- 
ing them,  I  will  cast  down  these  malicious,  cruel,  abject, 
wretches  into  an  abode  of  misery  and  the  womb  evil  spirit." 

Man  :  (  With  wonder.)  0  goddess,  I  wish  to  be  informed 
by  your  favour,  what  is  the  name  of  God  ? 

Revelation  :  {Angrily.)  How  can  an  answer  be  given  to 
him  who  does  not  comprehend  his  own  spirit,  any  more  than 
it  is  possible  to  inform  a  blind  man  respecting  the  figure  of 
his  body  ? 

Man  :  (  With  delight.)  How  can  I,  who  am  spirit,  be  the 
Supreme  Lord  ? 

*  [In  Bhagalpur— See  Franklin's  Site  of  Palibothra,  Pt.  II.  p.  14.] 
11 


82  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA  ;  OR,         [  Act  VI. 

Revelation  :  The  eternal  God  is  not  distinct  from  thee  ; 
and  thou  art  not  distinct  from  God,  the  greatest  of  beings :  but 
thou  appearest  to  be  a  separate  being  in  consequence  of  Maya, 
like  an  image  of  the  sun  reflected  in  water. 

Man  :  (  To  REASON.)  I  do  not  fully  comprehend  what  the 
goddess  has  said  ;  for  she  affirms  that  I,  who  am  united  to 
body,  who  am  a  separate  individual,  and  subject  to  birth  and 
death, — am  the  immutable,  happy,  and  living  spirit. 

Reason  :  Being  ignorant  of  the  thing,  you  do  not  under- 
stand her  words  ;  your  acknowledgment  is  true. 

Man  :  Inform  me  by  what  means  I  may  understand  their 
meaning. 

Reason  :  When  thou  shalt  know  that  the  soul  is  compre- 
hended in  living  spirit ;  when  thou  shalt  meditate  on  the  first 
principle,  when  thy  mind  and  consciousness  shall  be  destroyed, 
and  when  every  thing  around  thee  shall  disappear,  then  the 
glorious  God,  who  removes  mental  error,  who  is  unchangeable, 
eternal,  and  happy,  will  become  manifest. 

(  MAN  reflects  with  joy  on  what  he  has  heard.) 
MEDITATION    enters. 

Meditation :  I  have  been  commissioned  by  Devotion,  to 
reveal  her  secret  thoughts  to  Revelation  and  Reason  and  she 
has  also  commanded  me  to  abide  with  Man.  {Looking.)  Here 
is  the  goddess,  not  far  off  from  Reason  and  Man.  I  shall  ap- 
proach her.  ( Approaches,  and  addresses  her. )  The  god 
Devotion  thus  spoke  to  me  in  the  assembly,  "  The  gods  are 
merely  ideas  of  the  understanding ;  this  I  know  by  divine 
vision.  Thou  0  goddess,  art  pregnant,  and  in  thy  womb  are 
twins — Science  and  Intellect ;  and  this  Science  and  the  Science 
of  Devotion*  shall  meet  together  in  thy  mind." 

Revelation  :    May  it  be  as  the  goddess  has  said. 

(Goes  out  along  with  REASON. 

*  Sankarshana  Vidya ;  that  knowledge  which  is  acquired  by  Yoga  devo- 
tion, or  ecstatic  vision. 


Act  VI.]      EISE   OP   THE  MOON   OP   INTELLECT.  83 

MEDITATION  enters  into  MAN. 

Man  :  (Reflecting  on  what  has  happened  behind  the  scene.) 
Wonderful  I  Wonderful !  she*  who  sprung  from  the  decided 
breast  of  Mind,  has  suddenly  vanished  ;  as  a  bright  stream  of 
lightning  rending  the  clouds  illumines  the  world  and  rn  a 
moment  disappears,  she  engulphed  Passion  and  his  adherents^ 
and  glorious  being  Intellect  has  arisen  in  Man. 

INTELLECT  enters. 

Intellect :  I  am  intellect,  before  whose  splendour  the  three 
worlds  pass  away,  and  metaphysical  errors  cease  respecting 
pervading,  removing,  carrying,  destroying,  polishing,  and 
ornamenting,  for  there  is  nothing.  This  is  man  :  I  shall  go 
to  him.  (Goes  to  him.)  0  Man,  Intellect  salutes  thee  ! 

Man  :    (  With  delight.)    My  child,  come  and  embrace  me. 

(They  embrace. 

Man  :  (Joyfully.)  Thy  shades  of  darkness  are  dispersed, 
and  the  morning  appears  for  the  blackness  of  passion  is 
removed,  and  my  sleep  is  broken  ;  the  cool-beams  of  intellect 
shine  upon  me  :  Religion,  Reason,  Understanding,  Tranquil- 
lity, Penance,  &c.,  the  whole  world  seem  to  be  Vishnu.  Through 
the  favour  of  Vishnu  I  am  become  perfect.  Now  I  have  no 
consciousness  of  existence  ;  I  speak  to  none,  it  is  indifferent 
where  I  go,  .or  what  befalls  me  :  I  am  tranquil,  carnal  ties, 
fear,  sorrow,  the  influence  of  former  actions,  and  passion,  have 
come  to  an  end.  I  have  reached  the  state  of  annihilation,  and 
immediately  I  shall  assume  the  condition  of  a  Muni. 

DEVOTION  enters. 

Devotion  :  (  Walking  joyfully?)  All  my  wishes  have  been 
speedily  accomplished.  I  now  behold  you  delivered  from  all 
your  enemies. 

Man  :  0  Devotion,  when  you  are  propitious,  how  can  there 
be  distress  !  I  prostrate  myself  at  your  feet. 

Devotion  :  (Raising  him  up.)  Rise  up,  my  son  ;  have 
you  any  other  request  to  make? 

*  Science. 


84         PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA;  OR,     [Act  VI. 

Man  :  What  can  I  desire  ?  Reason  having  conquered  the 
enemy,  his  purposes  are  finished.  0  lotus-eyed  damsel,  I  am 
now  seated  at  the  feet  of  the  Supreme  Lord. 

May  plentiful  rain  water  the  earth ;  may  prosperous  kings 
govern  the  world;  may  holy  men,  who  remove  ignorance  by  the 
light  of  the  first  principle,  safely  cross  the  sea  of  passion,  the 
bottom  of  which  are  sensible  objects  and  affection. 

[  They  all  go  out. 


END  OF  THE  PRABODHA  CHANDRODAYA  NATAK. 


ATMA  BODHA, 


OR 


THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  SELF. 


ATMA  BODHA, 


OB 

THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  SELF. 


1.  This  Treatise  on  the  knowledge  of  Self,  is  designed  for 
those  who  are  seeking  deliverance  from  mortal  births,  who  ex- 
piate their  sins  by  rigid  austerities,  who  are  tranquil,  and  in 
whom  all  passions  and  desires  are  subdued. 

2.  Besides  knowledge*  there  is  no  other  meansf ;  it  is  mani- 
festly the  only  instrument  which  loosens  the  bands  of  passion; 
as  fire  is  indispensably  requisite  in  cooking,  without  knowledge, 
beatitude  cannot  be  obtained. 

3.  Action  J  not  being  opposed  to  ignorance  cannot  remove  it ; 
but  knowledge  dispels  ignorance,  as  the  light  dispels  darkness. 

4.  When  the  ignorance  which  arises   from  earthly  affec- 
tions is  removed,  Spirit,  by  its  own  splendour,  shines  forth  in 
an  undivided  state,  as  the  sun  spreads  its  effulgence  when  the 
cloud  is  dispersed. 

5.  The  soul  which  is  covered  with  the  rust  of  ignorance 
being  purified  by  the  exercise  of  reason,  knowledge  itself  also 
disappears§  as  the  Katak  seed  purifies  turbid  water,  and  after- 
wards disappears  combining  with  it. 

*  In  this  tract,  Knowledge,  by  way  of  eminence,  signifies  the  perception 
of  the  universe  as  one  simple  being. 

f  Com. — Austerities,  devotion,  praise,  sacrifice,  &c.,  are  merely  sub- 
servient to  knowledge  in  obtaining  beatitude. 

J  Action  in  general  is  opposed  to  that  quiescent  state  in  which  extatic 
vision  is  enjoyed,  and  the  soul  conceives  itself  to  be  one  with  God ;  it  here 
more  particularly  denotes  religious  rites,  ceremonies,  and  duties  or  whatever 
action  is  performed  in  order  to  obtain  supreme  felicity. 

§  Com. — Knowledge  is  then  Reflected  in  Spirit,  exists  in  it,  and  is  the 
same  with  it  and  thus  Spirit  shines  forth  as  one. 


88 


ATMA   BODHA,   OB 


6.  Life  is  like  a  dream,  in  which  various  passions,  <fec.,  are 
experienced ;  during  their  existence  they  appear  to  be  real, 
but  when  the  person lawakes,  it  is  discovered  that  they  were 
an  illusion. 

7.  The  world  seems  real  until  Brahma  be  comprehended, 
who  dwells  in  all  things  undivided,  as  the  pearl-oyster  appears 
to  be  silver*. 

8.  All  the  variety  of  beings  hangf  on  the  true  living  Spirit, 
and  are  comprehended  in  the  eternal  all-pervading  Being,  as 
the  different  kinds  of  ornaments  are  comprehended  in  gold. 

9.  The  Ruler  of  the  organs  of  sense,  the  Self-existent,  is, 
like  the  firmament  subjected  to  different  accidents,  and  from 
their  distinctions   he   displays  distinct  existences ;  but  when 
these  accidents  are  destroyed,  he  remains  the  One  BeingJ. 

10.  In  consequence  of  these   accidents   different   species, 
names,  and  characters  are  attributed  to  Spirit,  as  different 
tastes  and  colours  are  ascribed  to  water §. 

11.  The  body  is  composed  of  the  gross  parts  of  the  five 
elements  ;  it  is  under  the  influence  of  destiny,  and  is  the  habita- 
tion of  pleasure  and  of  pain  || . 

*  Com. — As  long  as  the  dark  shell  and  the  triangular  figures  of  the 
oyster  are  not  perceived. 

f    Lit. — Are  strung  on  him  as  beads  on  a  thread. 

J  Com. — The  Lord,  who  restrains  the  senses,  who  is  diffused  through 
all,  when  reflected  in  the  various  beings  which  were  formed  by  Maya,  ap- 
pears to  be  many ;  but  after  these  illusory  corporeal  appearances  vanish,  the 
idea  of  many  ceases,  and  the  Divine  unity  is  apprehended. 

§  Com. — As  water,  which  itself  is  insipid,  imbibes  a  bitter,  pungent, 
sweet,  or  sour  taste,  and  exhibits  a  red,  yellow,  &c.  colour,  according  to  the 
substances  with  which  it  is  combined,  so,  in  consequence  of  different  accidents, 
different  species,  names,  and  characters  are  attributed  to  Spirit,  though  they 
do  not  naturally  belong  to  it. 

||  Com. — Three  accidents  for  the  human  frame,  which  is  supposed  to 
include  three  different  parts  or  bodies,  are  by  ignorance  ascribed  to  God,  the 
first  of  which  is  named  Sthul  or  large.  It  is  formed  by  dividing  each  of  the 
five  elements,  and  after  separating  the  finer  parts,  the  gross  parts  are  mixed 
together. 


THE    KNOWLEDGE   OP   SELF.  89 

12.  The  subtle*  body  is  not  formed  of  these  gross  materials, 
but  is  united  with  the  spirits  of  lifef,  with  Mind,  Understand- 
ing, and  the  ten  organs,  and  it  is  the  instrument  of  sensation. 

13.  That  unintelligent  principle  which  is  from  the  begin- 
ning,  and  is   indescribable,   is  called  the  original  accidents  ; 
what  is  different  from  these  three  accidents  is  denominated 
Spiritf. 

14.  Occupying  the  five  places   of  life  and  passion,  pure 
Spirit  assumes  their  nature,  as  crystal  exhibits  the  colours  of 
the  objects  applied  to  it§. 

15.  After  mortifying  the  body,  which  contains  these  five 
places,  pure  spirit  is  discerned  by  reason,  as  rice  is  separated 
from  the  husk  by  beating  it. 

16.  The  eternal  and  omnipresent  Spirit  does  not  manifest 
himself  in  every  place  ;  he  is  beheld  in  the  understanding,  and 
not  in  material  objects  as  an  image  is  reflected  in  a  mirror. 

17.  Spirit  is  distinguished  from  the  body,  organs  of  sense, 
mind,  and  understanding,    by  the  operations  they   perform. 
Spirit  is  that  which  beholds  the  actions  of  all,   as  a  king  be- 
holds the  action  of  his  subjects  ||. 

18.  Ignorant  men  imagine  that  Spirit  is  the  agent  in  the 
operations  of  the  organs  of  sense,  &c.,  as  the  moon  has  the  ap- 
pearance of  motion  when  the  clouds  are  passing  over  it. 

*  Sukshma.     It  is  also  called  Liugadeha,  sensitive  principle  or  body. 

f  The  five  spirits  of  life  are  the  five  divisions  or  operations  of  Mahaprana ; 
they  are  named  Prana,  Apa"na,  Vydna,  Uddna,  Samana,  and  reside 
respectively  in  the  heart,  the  bowels,  the  whole  body,  the  throat,  and  the 
navel. 

J  Com. — The  Indescribable,  is  that  which  cannot  be  affirmed  to  be  either 
true  or  false.  See  Appendix. 

§  Com.— The  five  places  are  those  of  digestion,  life,  passion,  consciousness, 
and  happiness.  Pure  Spirit,  by  an  illusory  connection  with  these  places, 
exhibits  their  nature,  but  it  is  not  affected  by  them.  We  have  mentioned 
these  accidents  in  order  to  show  the  nature  of  Spirit,  or  essence ;  but  it  is 
not  necessary  to  advert  to  them  after  a  knowledge  of  the  first  principle  has 
been  obtained. 

(]  But  does  not  engage  in  them.  , 

12 


90  ATMABODHA,  OR 

19.  The  body,  organs  of  sense,  mind,  and  understanding, 
sustained  by  the  Living  Spirit,  perform  their  several  func- 
tions, as  the  people  conduct  their  affairs,  by  the  light  of  the 
sun*. 

20.  The  properties  of  body,  organs  of  sense,  and  mind,  are 
conceived  to  exist  in  the  true  living  spirit,  as  the  moon   seems 
to  move  when  it  is  reflected  in  running  water. 

21.  Action,  &c.,  which  are  the  accidents  of  minds,   are 
through  ignorance  attributed  to  spirit ;  in  the  same  manner  as 
from  ignorance  a  blue  colour  is  attributed  to  the  sky. 

22.  Affection,  desire,  pleasure,  pain,  &c.,  exist  in  the  under- 
standingt;  in  profound  sleep,  when  it  ceases,  they  are  not  ex- 
perienced :  consequently  they  exist  in  the  understanding,   and 
not  in  spirit}:. 

23.  As  the  sun  is  naturally  resplendent,  water  cold,  and 
fire  warm  ;  so  spirit  is  in  its  own  essence   true,  happy,  eternal 
and  without  pollution. 

24.  Having  through  ignorance  ascribed  both  intellect  and 
understanding  to  spirit,  people  begin  to  say,  I  am,  I  know,  &c. 

25.  As  spirit  is  incapable  of  change,  and  intellect  is  not 


*  Com. — The  body,  organs  of  sense,  mind,  and  understanding  possess  life — 
why,  then,  do  you  affirm  that  Spirit  is  the  only  lining  being.  We  answer, 
That  body,  &c  ,  upheld  by  the  eternal,  living  Spirit,  perform  their  functions, 
as  men  perform  the  acts  of  life,  by  the  light  of  the  sun ;  but  Spirit  alone  is 
life,  and  the  body,  organs  of  sense,  &c.,  are  inert  and  motionless. 

f  Here  it  perhaps  signifies  consciousness,  or  the  mental  faculties  in 
general. 

J  Com. — The  Vaisheshikas  (followers  of  Kanada)  maintain  that  affection, 
desire,  pleasure,  and  pain,  are  properties  of  Spirit ;  but  this  is  an  erroneous 
opinion.— They  belong  to  the  understanding ;  for  they  are  felt  in  the  states 
waking  and  dreaming,  whilst  the  understanding  exists ;  but  when  it  ceases 
(lit.  resides  into  the  original  accidents)  in  profound  sleep  they  are  not  felt ; 
hence  they  are  illusions  which  exist  in  the  understanding  and  not  in  Spirit. 


THE   KNOWLEDGE   OP   SELF.  91 

comprehended  in  understanding,  the  soul,  being  conversant  with 
impure  principles,  ignorantly  says,  I  am,  and  is  thus  delulded*. 

26.  Conceiving  that  he  is  soul,  man  becomes  afraid,  like  a 
person  who  mistakes  a  piece  of  cord  for  a  serpent ;  but  his 
fear  is  removed  by  the  perception  that  he  is  not  soul,  but  the 
universal  spirit  f. 

27.  Spirit  causes  the  understanding,  organs  of  sense,  &c. 
to  appear,  as  a  lamp  renders  objects  visible  ;  but  spirit  is   not 
made  manifest  by  these  gross  natures. 

28.  Spirit,  which  is  itself  life,  requires  no  other  living 
being,  but  is  manifested  by  its  own  animate  nature  ;  as  one 
lamp  does  not  require  another  to  make  it  visible^. 

*  I  almost  despair  of  rendering  this  passage  perfectly  intelligible  but 
the  following  appears  to  be  its  meaning : — Spirit  is  incapable  of  change  or 
mutation,  and  pure  intellect  does  not,  like  understanding,  display  active 
qualities ;  accordingly,  the  vital  soul  being  acquainted  with  perceptions  only 
which  arise  from  the  active  principles  of  things,  and  not  discerning  the 
nature  of  Spirit  in  its  original,  quiescent  state, — conceives  that  itself  acts 
and  exists  as  a  separate  individual ;  and  from  this  ignorance  proceeds  the 
illusion  of  external  beings.  The  active  principles  of  nature  are  called 
impure,  because  action  is  supposed  to  be  the  cause  of  those  passions  and 
affections  which  defile  the  soul. 

f  Com. — Man  attributes  to  himself  the  nature  of  soul,  and  thus  believing 
in  the  existence  of  another  being,  he  is  filled  with  fear ;  but  when  he  is 
instructed  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Shastras  by  his  teacher,  and  beholds  by 
the  eye  of  reason,  that  he  is  not  soul,  but  the  indivisible,  living,  happy,  one 
Spirit,  his  fear  is  removed ;  he  is  delivered  from  pain,  and  enjoys  supreme 
bliss. ..It  may  be  proper  to  remark,  that  Atma  or  Spirit,  primarily  signifies 
Being,  which,  according  to  this  system,  is  without  qualities :  Jiva  or  Soul, 
is  Being  in  a  sentient  state ;  that  which  feels,  acts,  and  enjoys.  Perhaps  it 
would  have  been  more  correct  to  have  translated  Atma,  Being ;  and  Jiva, 
Sensation.  See  Appendix. 

J  The  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  inanimate  matter,  depends  on  a 
percipient  being ;  whereas,  the  knowledge  of  spirit,  which  is  itself  lif e» 
depends  not  on  another  percipient,  but  Spirit  discerns  and  comprehends  its 
own  existence. ..Perhaps  it  was  intended  to  intimate  that  the  essence  of 
existence  consists  either  in  a  consciousness  in  the  thing  itself  or  in  its  being 
discerned  by  a  percipient,  for  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  of  existence  alto- 
gether independent  of  consciousness  or  perception ;  hence,  if  the  knowledge 
of  an  object's  existence  results  not  from  its  own  consciousness,  but  from  the 
perception  of  it  by  another,  it  can  be  said  to  exist  only  as  long  as  it  is  perceived. 


92  ATMABODHA,  OR 

29.  Having  by  the  declaration,  It  is  not,  It  is  not*,  removed 
all  the  accidents  which  constitute  the  world — the  soul  and 
the  universal  spirit  are,  by  means  of  the  celebrated  words, 
discerned  to  be  Onef. 

H*0.  The  unintelligent  objects,  as  body,  &c.,  are  of  a  fleet- 
ing, visible  nature,  and  resemble  bubbles  on  the  surface  of 
water  ;  but  it  is  required  to  believe  that  I  am  the  unpolluted 
Brahma,  whose  nature  is  unlike  to  them}. 

31.  I,  who  am  different  from  the  body,  experience  neither 
birth,  growth,  decay,  nor  death  ;  and  being  devoid  of  organs 
of  sense,  I  am  independent  of  their  objects  as  sound,  &c.  § 

32.  Not  having  mind  (sense)  I  do  not  feel  pain,  desire, 
envy,  nor  fear  ;  instructed  by  the  Vedas,  I  know  that  I  have 
neither  life  nor  mind,  but  am  a  clear,  transparent  being. 

33.  By  Brahma  were  produced   life,  mind,  the  organs  of 
sensation,  action,  the  ether,  air,  fire,  iwater,  earth,  which  com- 
pose the  universe  || . 

34.  I  am  without  quality  or  action  ;  everlasting   without 
volition,  happy,  unchangeable,  without  figure  ;  eternally  free, 
and  unpolluted. 

35.  I  am  like  ether,  which  is  universally  diffused,  and  per- 

*  This  alludes  to  the  denial  of  the  material  world,  and  of  all  individual 
beings  and  faculties,  passions,  &c. 

f  Com.— The  celebrated  words.  "  Thou  art  he;  this  Spirit  (of  mine)  is 
Brahma ;  I  am  he." 

J  It  is  asked,  may  we  not  possess  the  knowledge  of  Spirit  without 
denying  the  existence  of  other  objects.  We  reply,  that  without  the  belief  of 
the  non-existence  of  other  objects,  the  knowledge  of  Spirit  cannot  be  obtain- 
ed.— Thus  until  a  person  perceives  that  this  is  not  a  serpent  he  cannot  know 
that  it  is  a  piece  of  cord. 

§  Com. — The  five  following  Shlokas  describe  our  nature  as  discovered  by 
abstraction  and  intellectual  experience. 

H  This  Skloka  is  taken  from  one  of  the  Vedas,  and  explains  the  produc- 
tion of  life,  mind,  &c. 


THE  KNOWLEDGE   OF  SELF.  93 

vades  both  the  exterior  and  interior  of  things  ;  I  am  incorrupti- 
ble, everlasting ;  I  am  the  same  in  all  things,  pure,  impassible, 
unpolluted,  immoveable. 

36.  "  I  am  the  great  Brahma,  who  is  eternal,  pure,  free, 
one,  uninterruptedly  happy,  not  two,  existent,  percipient,  and 
without  end*." 

37.  The  perpetual  conception  that  I  am  Brahma  himself 
removes  the  confusion   arising  from  ignorance,  in  the  same 
manner  as  disease  is  removed  by  medicine. 

38.  He  whose  mind  does  not  contemplate  another,  who  re- 
tires to  an  uninhabited  place,  whose  desires  are  annihilated,  and 
whose  passions   are  subdued,  perceives  that  spirit  is  one  and 
eternal. 

39.  A  man  of  good  understanding,  does,  without  doubt, 
annihilate  all   sensible  objects   in   spirit,   and  contemplates 
always  one  spirit,  which  resembles  pure  space. 

40.  He  who  comprehends  invisible  essence,  having  rejected 
the  idea  of  forms  and  distinctions,   exists   in  the  universal, 
living,  happy  being. 

41.  In  the  great  Spirit,  he  does  not  observe  the  distinction, 
of  percipient,  perception  and   objects   perceived  ;  he   beholds 
one  infinite,  happy  existence, -which  is  manifested  by  its  own 
nature. 

42.  Thus  as  fire  is  caused  by  the  friction  of  two  pieces  of 
wood,   so  by  the  continual  contemplation  of  spirit,  a  flame  of 
knowledge  is  kindled,  which  burns  up  the  stubble  of  ignorance. 

43.  The  darkness  is  first  dispersed  by  the  dawn  of  know- 
ledge, and  then  spirit  shines  forth,  as  the  rising  of  the  sun  fol- 
lows the  dawn  of  day. 

44.  Spirit  exists  always,  but  in  consequence  of  ignorance 
its  existence  is  not  perceived ;  but  when  this  ignorance  ceases, 

*    This  is  cited  from  one  of  the   Vedas. — Percipient  signifies  merely  the 
abstract  nature,  and  not  the  active  quality  of  perception. 


94  ATMABODHA,  O$ 

Spirit  is  discerned  ;  as  an  ornament  which  had  been  hitf  be- 
hind a  person. 

45.  As  from  indistinct  vision,  a  post  is  sometimes  supposed 
to  be  a  man,  so  the  nature  of  Jiva,  or  Soul,  is  attributed  to  be- 
ing ;  but  when  the  principle  is  apprehended,  this  error  dis- 
appears. 

46.  When  knowledge  arises  from  the  perception  of  the 
first  principle,  it  dispeli  that  ignorance  which  says,  I  am,  this 
is  mine  ;  as  uncertainty  respecting  the  road  is  removed  by  the 
rising  of  the  sun. 

47.  The  Yogi,  whose  intellect  is  perfect,  beholds  all  things 
dwelling  in  himself,  and  thus  by  the  eye  of  knowledge,  he 
perceives  that  every  thing  is  Spirit. 

48.  He  knows  that  all  this  frame  of  things  is   Spirit,  and 
that  besides  Spirit  there  is   nothing ;  as  the  various  kinds  of 
goblets,  &c.  are  earth  ;  and  thus  he  perceives  that  he  himself 
is  all  things*. 

49.  She  emancipated  soul  is  that  illuminated  person  who 
throws  off  his  former  accidents  and  qualities,  and  becomes  one 
with  the  true,  living,   happy  Being ;  in  like  manner  as  the 
chrysalis  becomes  a  bee. 

50.  The  Yogi  having  crossed  the  sea  of  passion,  and  slain 
the  evil  spirits  Love,  Hatred,  &c.,  is  joined  to  tranquillity  and 
rejoices  in  Spirit. 

51.  Having  renounced  that  pleasure  which  arises  from  ex- 
ternal perishable  objects,  and  enjoying  spiritual  delight,  he  is 
serene  as  the  taper  under  a  cover,  and  rejoices  in  his  own 
essence. 


*  Com. — All  sensible  objects  are  beheld  to  exist  in  Spirit,  without  any 
distinction  "they  differ  merely  in  designation,  accident,  and  name  as  earthen 
utensils  receive  different  names,  though  they  be  only  different  forms  of 
earth,"  Vedas, 


THE    KNOWLEDGE    OP    SELF.  95 

52.  The  Muni,  during  his  residence  in  the  body,  is  not 
affected  by  its  properties  :  as  the  firmament  is  not  affected  by 
what  floats  in  it ;  knowing  all  things,  he  remains  unconcerned* 
and  moves  free  as  the  wind  f. 

53.  When  the  accidents  J  are  destroyed,  the  Muni,  and  all 
beings  enter  into  the  all  pervading  Essence,  as  water  mixes 
with  water,  ether  with  ether,  fire  with  fire,  &c. 

54.  He  is  Brahma,  after  possessing  whom,  there  is  nothing 
to  be  possessed  ;  after  enjoying  whose  happiness,  there  is  not 
happiness  to  be  desired ;  and  after  attaining  the  knowledge  of 
whom,  there  is  no  knowledge  to  be  attained. 

55.  He  is  Brahma,  whom  having  seen,  no  other  object   is 
beheld  ;  after  becoming  whom,  no  birth  is  experienced  ;  after 
the  perception  of  whom,  there  is  nothing  to  be  perceived. 

56.  He  is  Brahma,  who  is  diffused  through  all ;  in  the 
middle  space,  in  what  is  above  and  what  is  beneath,  thus,   the 
living,  the  happy,  without  duality,  indivisible,  eternal,  and  one. 

57.  Again  ;  he  is  Brahma  who  is  described  in  the  Vedanta 
as  the  being  who  is  distinct  from  what  he  pervades,  who  is  in- 
corruptible, unceasingly  happy,  and  one. 

58.  Upheld  by  a  portion  of  happiness  of  the  eternally  happy 
Being,  Brahma  and  the  other  gods  may  by  inference  be  called 
happy  beings. 

59.  All  things  are  united  to  him,  all  acts  depend  on  him  ; 
therefore  Brahma  is  diffused  through  all,  as  the  butter  is 
diffused  through  milk. 

60.  He  is  denominated  Brahma  who  is  without  magnitude, 

*     Lit. — Like  an  idiot ;  one  who  is  stupid  and  unaffected  by  any  thing 
around  him. 

f    His  movements  are  not  impeded  or  arrested  by  passion,  affection  &c. 
The  Sthual  and  Sukshama  bodies. 


96  ATMABODHA,    OR 

unexfcended,  uncreated,  uncorruptible,  without  figure,  qualities 
or  character. 

61.  He  is  Brahma  by  whom  all  things  are  illuminated,  whose 
light  causes  the  sun  and  all  luminous  bodies  to  shine,  but  who 
is  not  made  manifest  by  their  light*. 

62.  He  himself  pervades  his  own  eternal  essence,  and  con- 
templates the  whole  world  appearing  Brahma,  as  fire  pervades 
an  ignited  ball  of  iron,  and  also  displays  itself  externally. 

63.  Brahma  is  dissimilar  to  the  world,  and  besides  Brahma 
there  is  nothing  ;  whatever  seems  to  exist  besides   him  is  an 
illusion,  like  the  appearance  of  water  in  the  desert  of  Maru. 

64.  Whatever  is  seen,  whatever  is  heard,  nothing  exists 
besides  Brahma,  and  by  the  knowledge  of  the  principle  Brahma 
is  beheld  as  the  true,  living,  happy  being,  without  duality. 

65.  The  eye  of  knowledge  beholds  the  true,  living,   happy, 
all-pervading  being  ;  but  the  eye  of  ignorance  does  not  behold 
him  ;  as  a  blind  man  does  not  see  the  light. 

66.  The   soul   being  enlightened  by  hearing   Meditation, 
&c.,  and  burning   with  the   fire   of  knowledge,   is  delivered 
from  all  its  impurities,  and  shines   in  its   own   splendour,   as 
gold  which  is  purified  in  the  fire. 

67.  When  the  sun  of  spiritual  knowledge  arises  in  the  sky 
of  the  heart,  it  dispels  the  darkness,  it  pervades   all,  compre- 
hends all,  and  illumines  all. 

68.  He  who  has  made  the  pilgrimage  of  his  own  Spirit,  a 
pilgrimage  in  which  there  is  no  concern  respecting  situation, 
place,  or  time,  which  is  everywhere  ;  in  which  neither  cold  nor 
heat  is  experienced,  which  bestows  perpetual  happiness,  and 
freedom  from  sorrow  ;  he  is  without  action,  knows  all  things, 
pervades  all  things,  and  obtains  eternal  beatitude. 

*    "  In  his  presence  the  sun  shines  not,  neither  the  moon,  nor  the  stars ; 
the  lightning  itself  is  not  seen :  what  then  is  lire."?  Veda, 

END  OF  THE  ATMABODHA. 


APPENDIX 


APPENDIX. 


THE  Theological  and  Philosopical  opinions  advanced  or  alluded 
to  in  the  preceding  pages  being  involved  in  considerable  obscurity, 
an  attempt  at  a  short  illustration  of  them  may  not  be  deemed 
superfluous.  A  full  history  and  explanation  of  them  would  far 
exceed  the  limits  of  an  appendix,  and  also  require  a  more  extensive 
acquaintance  than  at  present  I  possess  of  the  writings  in  which  they 
are  contained.  Some  indulgence  must  be  requested  even  for  the 
few  observations  I  have  ventured  to  make ;  they  are  brief  and  super- 
ficial, and  confined  chiefly  to  those  parts  of  each  system  which  are 
noticed  in  the  translations. 

In  the  Rise  of  the  Moon  of  Intellect  eight  remarkable  systems  are 
mentioned,  some  of  them  indeed  in  a  very  cursory  manner,  but  so 
as  to  exhibit  their  leading  and  distinguishing  features ;  they  are 
named  Vedanta,  Nyaya,  Sankhya,  Mirnfmsa,  Patanjala,  Charvaka, 
Jaina,  and  Buddha:  The  object  both  of  Shankaracharya,  and 
Krishnainishra,  was  to  establish  the  principles  of  Vedanta,  and  they 
bring  forward  the  other  doctrines  only  to  expose  their  errors  and 
absurdities ;  it  will  seldom  however  be  found  that  they  are  guilty  of 
misrepresentation. 

It  is  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  Vedanta,  Nyaya,  Sankhya, 
Mimansa,  and  Patanjala  are  philosophical  and  not  religious  systems, 
and  also  that  the  authors  of  the  Play  and  the  Treatise  confine  them- 
selves almost  entirely  to  the  philosophy  of  the  heterodox  religious 
sects.  A  difference  of  philosophical  opinion  connected  with  the 
systems  which  admit  the  authority  of  the  Vedas,  is  not  incompati- 
ble with  the  worship  of  the  same  divinity,  and  the  observance  of  the 
same  religious  rites  and  practices.  The  religious  distinctions  ob- 
served amongst  the  Hindus  result  from  the  peculiar  or  exclusive 
veneration  paid  to  a  particular  deity,  and  the  adoption  of  those 
books  which  celebrate  him  as  the  greatest  of  beings.  The  Vaishna- 
vas  maintain  "  that  Vishnu  is  the  First  of  Beings,  because  Brahma 


APPENDIX, 

sprang  from  his  navel ;  the  worshippers  of  Shiva  assert  his  supre- 
macy, because  Vishnu  is  unable  to  discover  his  feet,  and  the  follow- 
ers of  Ganesha  believe  that  he  is  the  supreme  Lord,  because  Maha- 
deva  or  Shiva  before  slaying  the  demon  Puratraya,  paid  adoration 
to  him  who  controls  all  events."  And  thus,  as  is  remarked  by  the 
author  of  the  Panchdashi,  "  the  worshippers  of  other  gods  affirm 
that  they  are  above  all,  each  individual  conceiving  the  being  whom 
he  adores  as  the  Supreme  Lord."  These  sectaries  support  their  res- 
pective tenets  and  beliefs  by  the  Sutras,  Mantras,  Puranas,  &c., 
which  declare  the  object  of  their  veneration  to  be  the  First  Being  in 
the  universe,  and  they  are  distinguished  by  the  peculiar  rites,  obser- 
vances, marks,  and  dress  enjoined  in  these  sacred  books.  The  follow- 
ers, however,  of  the  Brahmanical  systems  of  philosophy,  may  be- 
long indiscriminately  to  any  of  these  religious  sects ;  and  accordingly 
we  find  that  the  Vedanta  philosophy  is  professed  by  numbers  in 
Bengal  who  are  chiefly  Vaishnavas,  whilst  it  is  also  the  system  most 
generally  received  on  the  western  side  of  India,  where  the  great 
majority  are  either  pure  Shaivas  or  of  the  Srnartha  sect,  which 
ordains  equal  adoration  to  Mahadeva  and  Vishnu. 

The  eight  sects  which  have  been  enumerated,  may  be  divided  into 
two  classes  ;  those  who  admit  the  Vedas,  and  those  who  reject  them. 
The  first  class  includes  the  Vedanta,  Nyaya,  Mimansa,  Patanjala, 
and  Sankhya ;  the  second  class  embraces  the  Jainas,  Buddhas,  and 
Charvakas.  In  the  following  remarks  I  shall  consider  chiefly  the 
Vedanta  system. 

The  name  Vedanta,  which  signifies  what  is  contained  in  the  VMas 
was  probably  given  to  this  sect  or  assumed  by  it,  because  its  doc- 
trines are  derived  entirely  from  the  text  of  the  V^das,  according 
to  the  most  literal  interpretation  ;  whereas  the  other  sects,  besides 
supporting  their  opinions  by  that  sacred  authority,  employ  logical 
reasonings  in  their  investigations. 

The  fundamental  principle  of  the  Vedanta*  philosophy  is,  that 
the  universe  is  one  simple,  unextended,  indivisible  Being,  who  is 
denominated  the  true,  the  living,  the  happy,  to  distinguish  him  from 
illusory,  inanimate,  visible  appearance.  It  is  evident  that  no  des- 

[  *  Conf .  Colebrooke's,  Essays,  Vol.  I.  pp.  325-377,  or  Transactions  of  the 
Royal  Asiatic  Society  Vol.  II.  pp,  1-39.  ] 


APPENDIX,  40t 

cription  can  be  given  of  this  Being ;  hence  in  answering  enquiries  the 
VMantas  sometimes  say  that  He  is  nothing,  which  must  be  under- 
stood merely  to  intimate  a  negation  of  sensible  qualities,  figure, 
extension,  &c.,  and  also  of  the  mental  affections,  passion  &c. 
Whilst  this  Being  remains  in  a  state  of  rest  there  is  no  visible 
world  or  sensitive  existences ;  but  when  at  the  impulse  of  desire 
motion  is  excited  in  him,  all  the  variety  of  appearances  and 
sensations  which  form  the  universe  are  displayed.  The  first  condi- 
tion of  this  Being  is  called  Nirgiina,  without  quality  ;  the  second 
condition  is  that  of  Saguna,  with  quality.  The  question,  how  does 
desire  or  volition  arise  in  this  simple  Being,  forms  the  subject  of 
many  disputes ;  and  I  believe  that  even  the  subtlety  of  Hindu 
metaphysics  has  not  yet  furnished  a  satisfactory  reply. 

The  motion  which  results  from  this  desire  is  denominated  Maya 
which  signifies  false,  illusory,  what  has  no  real  existence  *.  In 
popular  language  it  denotes  nature,  or  the  principle  from  which 
sensible  things  proceed ;  and  in  Mythology  it  is  known  under 
the  names  Saras wati,  Parvati,  &c.,  the  consorts  of  Brahma,  Shiva 
&c.,  and  who  are  also  considered  the  Shaktis  or  powers  of  their  res- 
pective Lords.  The  motion  which  is  thus  excited  is  the  immediate 
cause  of  creation.  It  is  declared  in  the  VMa,  "  that  God  as  Maya 
creates  the  world,"  and  in  the  Rise  of  the  Moon  of  Intellect  it  is 
said,  that  Maya  or  motion  produce  Mind  or  Sense,  from  which 
again  proceed  all  the  active  and  moral  powers  of  sensitive  beings. 
But  Maya,  or  motion  personified,  is  not  supposed  to  possess 
inherent  activity,  its  action  depends  on  Being,  and  hence  it  is 
said  in  the  Play  that  God  commands  Maya  by  a  nod,  who 
then  spreads  out  the  universe.  In  one  of  the  VMas  it  is  called 
jddd,  gross  or  sluggish,  and  that  which  deludes  the  spirit ;  and  gross 
or  sluggish,  it  is  added,  means  "  inanimate  things,  as  a  goblet,  &c. 
and  delusion  signifies  an  abstracting  or  entangling  of  the  intellect." 
On  this  account  it  is  said  to  possess  the  principle  of  darkness  and 
error,  for  it  is  the  gross  nature  of  Maya  which  prevents  the  per- 
ception of  Being,  and  in  consequence  of  this  it  causes  the  erroneous 
idea  of  various  existences ;  it  is  also  denominated  false  or  illusory, 
as  it  prevents  the  appearance  of  activity  and  real  being,  whereas  it 

*  I  am  not  quite  certain  as  to  the  etymology  of  this  word,  but  I  am 
told  that  it  has  two  meanings— negation  and  falsehood, 


102  APPENDIX. 

is  merely  an  accident  of  being,  and  moves  at  the  will  or  desire  of 
the  essence  to  which  it  belongs.  It  is  sometimes  however  represent- 
ed as  h  aving  a  real  existence,  but  this  means  only  that  it  exists  as 
motion  or  energy,  and  not  as  Being.  This  will  explain  the  ambi- 
guous terms  by  which  it  is  expressed  in  several  parts  of  the  trans- 
lations, as  where  it  is  affirmed  that  Maya  is  neither  true  nor  false.  It 
(s  not  true  because  it  has  no  essence  ;  and  it  is  not  false  because  it 
exists  as  the  power  of  the  universal  Being.  But  in  general  M^ya  is 
called  an  illusion  ;  it  is  compared  to  the  visions  of  sleep,  to  the  phan- 
toms which  appear  in  the  sky,  to  the  deceptions,  tricks  of  legerde- 
main. "  It  is  impossible  to  describe  Maya,  it  presents  itself  to 
the  senses,  it  is  understood  by  considering  it  to  be  like  the  deceit' 
ful  forms  raised  by  legerdemain,  and  the  illusory  appearances  which 
are  beheld  in  the  firmament."  Panchadashi*,  Chitradipashloka,  141. 

In  consequence  of  Maya  or  motion,  Being  displays  itself  under 
various  modifications.  In  the  Vddanta  books  four  modifications 
of  Being  are  enumerated  ;  "  1.  Brahma ;  2.  Kutastha  ;  3.  Jiva  ; 
4.  Isha ;"  and  they  are  compared  to  four  modes  of  existence  of  the 
sky  or  ether  ;  1.  As  it  appears  clear  and  limpid  in  the  vault  of 
heaven  ;  2.  As  it  is  confined  in  a  vessel,  &c.;  3.  As  it  is  reflected 
with  its  starry  furniture  in  water  ;  4.  As  it  is  obscured  by  watery 
clouds  ; — shloka  18  and  commentary.  But  as  these  different  states 
or  modifications  under  which  the  firmament  of  ether  is  beheld,  does 
not  change  its  nature,  and  as  it  would  be  erroneous  to  ascribe  to 
each  of  them  a  distinct  essence  and  separate  being,  so  it  is  equally 
erroneous  to  imagine  that  the  various  modifications  by  which  the 
all-prevading  Being  exists  or  displays  its  power,  are  real  and  indi- 
vidual existences.  In  conformity  to  this,  creation  is  not  considered 
the  production  of  forms  or  beings,  but  only  the  manifestation  of 
that  which  exists  eternally  in  the  one  universal  Being.  "  Creation 
signifies  displaying;  destruction  denotes  concealment.  By  sensa- 
tion, action,  &c.,  the  whole  world  which  is  hid  in  Himself  is  displayed 

*  This  is  a  work  which,  on  this  side  of  India,  is  universally  esteemed 
and  admired,  as  giving  an  excellent  account  of  the  Vedanta  tenets ;  this 
exhibits  a  view  of  them  more  succinct  than  is  given  in  the  large  work  of 
Shankaracharya,  called  the  Ehftshya,  whilst  it  is  supposed  to  be  not  inferior 
in  clearness  and  accuracy.  I  intended  also  to  have  given  some  extracts  from 
the  Yoga  Vdsishtha,  a  voluminous  philosophical  poem,  but  to  do  this 
requires  more  leisure  than  I  have  at  present. 


APPENDIX,  103 

as  the  unfolding  of  a  picture  displays ;  the  figures  it  contains;  by 
the  destruction  of  sensation  and  action,  the  whole  world  is  concealed 
in  Himself,  as  the  figures  are  concealed  by  foldingup  the  picture. 
Dissolution  and  creation  are  like  night  and  day,  sleeping  and  wak- 
ing, shutting  and  opening  the  eyes,  or  like  the  fleeting  ideas  which 
arise  in  the  mind  and  then  vanish  away."  Chitra-dipa-shloka, 
182,  3,  4,  5. 

That  modification  of  Being  named  Isha,  causes  the  ideas  of  sen- 
sible objects  and  that  modification  of  it  called  Jiva  or  Soul  causes 
Ahankara,  or  consciousness ;  in  consequence  of  which  there  arises 
in  Being  the  conception  of  different  individual  existences  which 
separately  think,  act,  and  enjoy  ;  but  as  these  distinctions  result 
entirely  from  sensation,  which  is  not  essence,  but  accident  proceed- 
ing from  motion  in  Being,  it  follows  that  to  attribute  to  such  dis- 
tinctions a  separate  individual  being  is  false  and  illusory,  as  it  is 
ascribing  being  to  what  are  only  accidents.  But  if  there  exist  in 
the  universe  only  simple  indivisible  being  and  accidents,  then  there 
cannot  be  many  individual  beings,  and  all  accidents  must  be  refer- 
red to  the  simple  undivided  Essence.  Accordingly  it  is  never 
thought  in  the  Vedanta  books,  that  these  accidents  exist  in  distinct 
individual  beings,  but  it  is  affirmed  that  the  great  Being  is  sub- 
jected to  them,  and  that  under  their  influence  there  arise  in  Him 
the  illusions  of  number  and  individuality  ;  but  when  the  accidents 
disappear,  and  these  illusions  are  dispersed  by  Being  ceasing  to 
move  the  modification  called  Jiva,  or  the  soul,  and  the  conception 
of  individual  existences  no  longer  continue,  there  remains  only 
one  all-pervading  nature.  Hence  we  find  this  declaration  in  the 
Rise  of  the  Moon  of  Intellect,  "  that  directed  by  Self-sufficiency  or 
Individuality,  Mind,  Passion,  and  others,  have  bound  in  chains  the 
Supreme  Lord  and  forcibly  carried  him  away ;"  which  means  that 
the  motion  of  Being,  having  produced  Mind  or  Sense  which  is  the 
source,  of  consciousness,  passion,  &c.,  there  necessarily  proceeds  the 
idea  of  plurality  of  beings,  and  Jpy  the  power  of  this  illusion  the 
Great  Being  is  held  in  the  confinement  of  Passion  and  Affection,  and 
says  I  am  ;  this  is  mine,  &c.  This  opinion  is  clearly  and  strongly 
expressed  in  another  part  of  the  Play,  in  which  the  Universal 
Being  is  represented  as  falling  into  the  sleep  of  Maya,  or  the  delu- 
sion of  motion,  and  beholding  various  kinds  of  dreams,  such  as 
I  was  born ;  this  is  my  father,  mother,  &c.  See  page  15.  Agree- 


104  APPENDIX 

ably  bo  this  explanation,  the  Omnipresent  Being  declares  in  one  of 
the  Vedas,  "  I  am  myself  in  many ;  by  my  desire  I  become  the  peo- 
ple ;  by  meditation  I  create  the  whole  world."  And  it  is  added 
in  the  Sama  Veda.  "  In  the  beginning  there  was  only  reality, 
(Essence  and  not  accident,)  but  when  the  glorious  Being  began 
to  contemplate  numbers,  then  were  resplendent  beings  produced, 
and  beings  from  seed. "  Panchdashi  Advaitya-dipa-shlokas  5,  6. 

As  a  natural  consequence  of  this  doctrine,  the  Vedantas  believe 
that  the  external  world,  and  also  the  phenomena  of  mind,  per- 
ception, judgment,  and  passion,  are  merely  the  diversified  energy  or 
motion  of  undivided  Being  in  consequence  of  which  it  exists  in 
different  states  or  under  various  modifications.  "  The  whole  world 
is  a  dream  in  the  undivided,  one  Brahma,  the  principle  ;  and  the 
division  into  animate  and  inanimate  things  arises  from  the  distinc- 
tion of  the  divine  Spirit  and  the  vital  soul. 

From  the  preserver  of  all  (Brahma)  down  to  inanimate  objects, 
all  are  parts  of  the  Infinite  Being.  Isha,  Sutra,  Virat,  Brahma, 
Vishnu,  Shiva,  Indra,  Fire,  Ganpati,  Bhairava,  Mairala,  Marika, 
Yaksha,  Rakshasa,  Brahmans,  Kshatriyas,  Vaishyas,  Shudras,  cows, 
horses,  deer,  birds,  pimpal  trees,  vadh  trees,  mango  trees,  &c., 
barley,  rice,  grass  &c.,  water,  stones,  earth,  wood,  metals : — all 
are  God,  and  through  them  he  is  worshipped,  who  is  the  dispenser 
of  rewards.  "  Chitra-dipa,  211,  205,  6,  7, 8. 

To  prevent  it  however  from  being  supposed  that  these  distinc- 
tions in  the  visible  and  animated  world  are  real,  and  that  they 
have  a  true  separate  detached  existence,  though  parts  of  the 
Infinite  Being,  it  is  declared  that  their  appearance  rests  on  an 
illusion,  and  are  beheld  only  by  such  as  are  ignorant  of  Being. 
"  Those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  undivided  being,  Brahma,  the 
principle,  the  impossible  one,  dispute  concerning  Jiva  and  Isha 
( the  soul  and  divine  Spirit )  who  are  the  effects  of  Maya  "  (shloka^ 
214:.)  But  when  this  delusion  is  dispersed,  all  these  appearances 
and  distinctions  Vanish  away,  and  there  exists  only  one  infinite 
quiescent  Being.  To  dispel  this  delusion,  therefore,  is  the  only 
means  of  obtaining  deliverance  from  sense,  passion,  and  affection, 
and  attaining  the  condition  of  the  eternal.  "  He  who  desires  release 


APPENDIX,  105 

from  the  confinement  (of  pas8ion>  &c»,)  must  cease  to  conceive  of 
a  distinction  between  the  Soul  and  the  Infinite  Spirit,  and  musb 
reflect  that  Brahma  is  the  Principle,  or  that  thou  and  Brahma  art 
one."— Shloka,  219. 

From  this  brief  statement  of  the  fundamental  doctrine  main- 
tained by  the  followers  of  Vedanta,  I  think  we  may  infer  that  their 
philosophy  is  founded  on  the  contemplation  of  one  infinite  Being 
existing  under  two  states  or  modifications.    The  first  state  is  that 
of  a  pure,  simple  abstract  essence,  inimoveable  and  quiescent ;  the 
second  state  is  that  of  Being  displaying  motion  or  active  qualities. 
Under  the  first  modification  he  is  named  Brahma,  or  the  Great 
Being ;   and  Kutastha  or  he  who  sitteth  on  high ;  under  the  second 
he  is  named  Isha,  the  Lord,  and  Jiva,  the  soul ;  or,   to  adapt  this 
explanation  to  the  division  already  given  of  these  modifications  and 
to  the  example  by  which  they  were  illustrated,  we  should  say  that. 
Brahma  is  Being  in  its  state  of  simple  essence  ;  Isha  is  Being  exert- 
ing energy  and  causing  the  phenomena  of   the  material  universe ; 
Kutastha  is  Being  existing  in  sensitive  creatures  in  its  pure,  simple 
state ;  and  Jiva  is  Being  in  a  sentient  active  state.     But  perhaps  it 
would  be  more  agreeable  to  the  etymology   of  the  words  to  call 
Isha  the  principle  of  energy  or  power,  and  Jiva  the  principle  of 
sensation.    Every  thing  rests  on  Brahma  or  Being ;  but  to  him  is 
more  immediately  referred  Isha  or  power ;  and  to  Kutastha  is  re- 
ferred Jiva  or  sensation.    In  common  books  and  language  these 
terms  denote  separate  individual  being ;  and  also  in  some  philoso- 
phical system  Brahma  or  Being  and  Jiva,  that  which  feels  are  con- 
sidered distinct  and  different  beings ;  but  the  Vedantas  deny  a 
plurality  of  beings,  and  assert  that  the  visible  phenomena  and  sen- 
sation, are  only  accidents  of  one  Infinite  Being,  though  in  order  to 
be  understood  they  speak  of  them  as  distinct  existences ;  hence, 
then  it  appears  that  the  VSdanta   philosophy  is  distinguished  from 
all  the   other  S7stems,  by  teaching  that  the  universe  consists  of  the 
undivided  indivisible  Being  and  motion.    Motion  includes  energy 
and  sensation ;  energy  includes  the  material  world  ;  and  sensation, 
includes  the  active  and  moral  faculties,  and  corporeal  feelings,  as 
pleasure  and  pain.    This  explanation  of  the  distinctions  which  are 
constantly  recurring  in  the  Vedanta  books,  and  on  which  the  system 
is  grounded,  receives  no  inconsiderable  degree  of  support  from  the 

14 


106  APPENDIX. 

following  passage  in  the  Panchadashi.  "  Ishvara  or  the  Lord  is  the 
principle  of  Happiness,  Jiva  or  the  vital  soul  is  the  principle  of  con- 
sciousness ;  this  distinction  is  caused  by  Maya,  and  these  two  modes 
of  Spirit  comprehend  the  universe.  The  creation  from  the  begin- 
ning to  the  consummation  of  all  things  proceeds  from  Isha  or  the 
Lord  life,*  from  the  time  of  awaking  until  it  ceases  in  the  infinite 
Being,  proceeds  from  Jiva  or  the  soul. — shlolcas,  212-13, 

The  reason  assigned  for  attending  to  these  distinctions,  also  corro- 
borates the  explanation  I  have  offered.  It  is  not  to  point  oufc 
different  substances  or  beings,  but  to  conduct  the  mind  to  the 
knowledge  of  that  one  and  all  pervading  Essence,  in  which  the  mo- 
difications exist  from  which  result  the  distinctions  we  observe.  Un- 
less the  nature  of  these  distinctions  were  understood,  the  soul  must 
remain  ignorant  of  its  own  nature,  and  continue  for  ever  under  the 
delusion  that  it  is  sensitive,  finite  individual  being ;  but  when  by 
investigating  these  distinctions,  it  comprehends  the  modifications 
from  which  they  arise,  the  delusion  is  dispelled,  and  it  knows  itself 
to  be  one,  Infinite  and  Eternal.  "  Though  it  was  necessary  to  treat 
of  Jiva  as  a  preliminary  step  to  enable  us  to  understand  what  is 
Jiva  or  the  soul,  yet  a  person  ought  not  to  be  immersed  in  this 
notion,  but  he  should  immerse  himself  in  Brahma,"  Shloka  220.  I 
shall  also  quote  a  passage  to  shew  that  I  have  given  a  correct  view 
of  the  distinction  between  Brahma  and  Kutasthas :  "  Kutasthas  and 
Brahma  are  different  only  in  name ;  as  the  sky  reflected  in  a  vessel 
of  water  seems  to  differ  from  that  reflected  in  the  firmament ;  but 
besides  this,  there  is  no  other  distinction," — Shloka  237. 

It  must  have  been  observed  in  reading  the  Play,  and  the  treatise 
of  Shankaracharya,  that  there  are  no  attempts  to  establish  the  Ve- 
danta  doctrines  by  any  process  of  reasoning.  The  authors  announce 
the  Principles  of  their  sect  in  a  dogmatical  authoritative  style,  a»  in- 
dubitable truths,  or  establish  their  assertions  by  the  authority  of 
the  sacred  text  alone,  and  attribute  the  disbelief  of  them  to  passion 
and  ignorance.  It  is  in  this  manner  that  the  Vedanta  doctrines  are 
generally  taught,  but  sometimes  we  find  an  appearance  of  reasoning 
and  argument.  The  following  quotation  hints  at  a  philosophical 

*•  More  properly  the  sensations  and  actions  in  which  sensitive  existence 
consists. 


APPENDIX.  107 

argument  of  some  weight  in  support  of  their  denial  of  a  material 
world.  "The  world  is  visible,  but  it  cannot  be  explained ;  the  world 
is  Maya,  and  therefore  no  hypothesis  should  be  formed  respecting  it. 
If  the  Pandits  were  to  attempt  an  explanation  of  the  world,  any 
one  by  taking  up  the  opposite  argument  might  expose  their  igno- 
rance. How  are  the  body  and  organs  of  sense  produced  by  virtue 
of  the  seminal  matter  ?  Or  supposing  this  could  be  answered,  how 
can  you  account  for  the  production  of  life  ?  If  you  say  that  it 
results  from  the  constitution  of  seminal  matter ;  the  instances  of 
unproductive  semen  will  reduce  you  to  the  absurdity  of  admitting 
that  the  same  proposition  may  be  both  negative  and  affirmative.  If 
you  say  I  do  not  know  how  the  world  arose,  and  therefore  request 
you  to  inform  me,  I  reply  that  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  most 
learned  men  the  world  is  merely  an  illusion  of  the  senses ;  for  what 
is  there  in  man  that  surpasses  the  illusions  of  sense  ?  He  lies  in 
the  womb,  he  is  vivified,  he  acquires  hands,  head,  feet  and  different 
other  members,  and  afterwards  this  organised  being  passes  through 
the  states  of  childhood,  youth,  and  old  age;  it  takes  various 
characters,  it  sees,  hears,  smells,  adores,  and  as  it  came  into  the 
world  so  it  goes  out  of  it.  The  seed  of  the  Bad  tree  (ficus  ladica) 
bears  an  analogy  to  the  body,  and  considering  the  smallness  of  the 
seed  and  the  largeness  of  the  tree,  it  is  evident  that  this  can  proceed 
only  from  Maya  or  delusion.  The  Logicians  proudly  suppose  that 
they  can  remove  these  difficulties,  but  their  opinions  are  completely 
refuted  by  Harsha  Misra,"  Slokas  142-8  and  Commentary. 

The  argument  appears  to  rest  on  two  circumstances,  first,  that 
the  generation  of  animals  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  its  apparent 
cause ;  second,  that  even  this  apparent  cause  sometimes  fails  in  pro- 
ducing the  effect,  as  in  the  case  of  sterile  females.  Hence  it  is 
concluded  that  animals  and  the  visible  world  are  not  real  existences 
but  mere  illusions.  The  author  has  not  stated  his  argument  in  a 
precise  manner,  but  he  seems  to  assume  that  matter  is  itself  inert 
and  lifeless,  and  consequently  incapable  of  producing  life  and  mo- 
tion ;  hence  it  must  be  admitted  that  there  is  a  living  Being  who 
is  different  from  what  is  called  matter,  and  that  this  Being  is  the 
cause  of  sensible  objects,  and  of  life  and  perception.  Of  what  use 
then  is  the  supposition  of  inert  matter?  If  all  effects  proceed 
from  the  unceasing  energy  of  the  Infinite  Being,  is  it  not  more 


108  APPENDIX. 

rational  to  affirm  that   he   is  the  immediate  cause,  than  that  he 
operates  circuitoualy  and  by  an  intermediate  substance. 

The  Vddanta  philosophy  does  not  correspond  with  any  system 
which  has  been  published  in  the  Western  world.  It  does  not 
teach  that  the  Supreme  Being  is  the  soul  of  the  universe ;  that 
animate  beings  are  separate  detached  portions  of  his  essence,  or 
that  visible  extended  material  frame  of  things  is  God ;  but  it 
affirms  that  the  world  is  one,  living,  unextended,  indivisible  Being, 
who  puts  forth  his  energy,  and  excites  in  himself  the  phenomena 
of  sensible  things  as  well  as  of  sensation,  passion,  &c.  In  explain- 
ing this  system,  however,  the  writers  frequently  make  use  of 
such  figures  as  may  mislead  a  person  who  has  only  read  detached 
passages  of  their  books,  or  who  has  not  closely  examined  the 
nature  of  their  doctrines.  In  consequence  of  this  the  VSdantas 
have  been  supposed  to  teach  the  doctrine  of  emanations  •  and  a 
passage  occurs  in  the  Atharvana  Ye1  da,  which  appears  to  counte- 
nance this  opinion.  "  As  the  sparks  proceed  from  fire,  so  various 
kinds  of  animate  and  inanimate  being  proceed  from  the  in- 
corruptible Being.*'  But  the  best  commentators  say  that  these 
expressions  do  not  mean  that  there  are  separate  individual  beings, 
but  only  that  whatever  is  beheld  is  the  Divine  essence.  The 
Vedanta  opinions  cannot  be  accurately  represented  by  any  figure ; 
they  must  be  deduced  from  plain  and  simple  declarations. 

The  Vedanta  philosophy  has  been  supposed  to  agree  with  the 
system  of  the  celebrated  Bishop  Berkley,  and  ife  certainly  does  so 
in  denying  a  material  world,  and  in  referring  sensible  things  to  the 
energy  of  living  Being ;  but  here  the  agreement  ends.  The 
Berkleyan  hypothesis  is  completely  opposed  to  the  Vedanta  doctrine 
by  maintaining  the  existence  of  separate  beings,  upon  whom  this 
energy  operates,  and  excites  in  their  minds  the  ideas  of  external 
things. 

After  this  slight  sketch  of  the  philosophy  of  Vedanta,  the 
practical  maxims  of  the  sect  will  be  easily  understood.  They  teach 
that  perfection  consists  in  rest,  and  that  motion  or  action  is  the 
origin  of  the  moral  distinctions  of  good  and  evil,  both  of  which 
must  be  renounced,  aa  they  involve  and  imply  each  other.  It  is 


APPENDIX.  109 

required  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  this  sublime  state,  that  the 
active  faculties  be  annihilated,  the  passion  and  affections  subdued, 
and  that  the  individual  be  totally  indifferent  to  external  things, 
animate  and  inanimate,  to  parents,  wives,  children,  relations,  goods, 
or  to  whatever  causes  pleasure,  pain  &c.,  and  this  furnishes  us  with 
a  reason  for  the  disrespectful  language  made  use  of  in  the  Play 
towards  these  relations  and  friends.  When  by  the  practice  of  rigid 
austreity,  retirement  from  the  world,  and  contemplation,  this 
quiescent  state  is  attained,  the  soul  perceives  that  it  is  Being,  and 
that  Being  is  all  things,  and  thus  it  becomes  the  one  Infinite 
Essence.  Action  or  religious  performances  do  not  conduct  the  soul 
to  the  state  of  the  Eternal,  but  to  a  place  called  Swarga,  where  it 
continues  until  the  holiness  it  had  accumulated  be  nearly  expended 
by  the  enjoyment  of  happiness,  after  which  it  returns  to  earth,  and 
takes  a  body  corresponding  to  the  remnant  of  virtue  it  brings  along 
with  it.  Agreeably  to  this  notion  the  Yedantas  condemn  the 
performance  of  action  as  it  retains  the  soul  in  the  prison  of  passion 
and  affection ;  but  whilst  a  person  continues  to  perform  the  common 
acts  of  life,  it  is  incumbent  on  him  to  attend  to  religious  duties  and 
rites.  It  also  has  been  found  expedient  to  modify  the  doctrine 
in  such  a  manner,  as  to  reconcile  it  with  the  occupations  and  acts 
on  which  the  existence  of  society  depends.  Accordingly  they  say 
that  renunciation  of  the  world  does  not  require  that  a  person 
cease  from  the  acts  and  duties  of  life,  but  only  that  he  preserve 
his  mind  in  a  state  of  perfect  indifference  and  tranquillity.  "If 
it  be  alleged  that  the  Puranas  declare  Bharata  and  others  did 
not  perform  the  acts  of  life;  we  would  ask,  why  do  you  not 
listen  to  the  Vedas,  which  declare  that  wise  men  eat,  act,  and 
procreate."— 271. 

Having  given  this  short  sketch  of  the  Yedanta  principles,  I 
shall  now  notice  in  a  very  cursory  manner,  the  other  four  Brahina- 
nical  systems  which  are  mentioned  in  the  translations. 

The  Nyaya  is  a  system  of  Logic  and  Metaphysics.  It  contains 
two  sects  which  were  founded  by  the  two  celebrated  teachers  Gau- 
tama and  Kanada.  The  sect  of  Gautama  is  the  most  ancient, 
and  those  who  adhere  to  it  are  by  way  of  eminence  named  Naiya- 
yikas,  and  their  philosophy  is  called  Nyaya ;  the  followers  of  Kanada 
are  frequently  named  Vaisheshika,)  and  their  system,  Tarkika. 


110  APPENDIX. 

Gautina  is  a  celebrated  character,  uot  only  in  India,  but  in  the  coun- 
tries to  the  eastward  of  the  Ganges,  where  he  has  been  raised  to 
the  rank  of  a  divinity,  and  is  worshipped  under  a  variety  of  names, 
which,  however,  are  all  easily  traced  to  the  primitive  word.  There 
is  little  distinction,  if  indeed  any,  between  the  systems  of  Gaut- 
ama and  Kanada,  except  in  the  number  of  orders  into  which  they 
have  divided  the  different  classes  of  Being.  Gautama  divided  them 
into  fceweny-three  classes,  which  Kanada  has  reduced  to  seven ; 
but  to  understand  the  opinions  alluded  to  in  the  Play,  it  is  not 
requisite  to  name  the  different  classes  of  Being,  to  enumerate  the 
accidents  and  logical  divisions  of  the  system,  or  to  notice  the  ar- 
rangement of  syllogisms,  which  perhaps  is  not  less  perfect  than  that 
of  the  Greek  Logician. 

The  Naiyayikas*  (under  which  term  I  include  the  followers  both 
of  Gautama  and  Kanada)  believe  that  there  are  two  eternal  substan- 
ces, spirit  and  matter  ;  the  one  distinguished  by  life  and  thought, 
the  other  by  being  inert,  lifeless,  and  moving  only  as  it  is  impelled 
by  Spirit.  They  do  not,  however,  suppose  that  the  world  in  its 
present  form  has  existed  from  eternity,  but  only  the  primary 
matter  from  which  it  springs  when  operated  on  by  the  Almighty 
hand  of  God.  Matter  in  its  primary  state  is  an  invisible  figureless 
substance.  It  is  very  common  to  express  this  primary  condition  of 
matter,  by  the  word  Uja  which  signifies  seed  ;  from  this  seed 
or  germ  the  world  is  called  forth  by  the  Intelligent  Living  being  ; 
and  at  its  final  dissolution  all  things  return  to  a  seminal  state,  in 
which  they  remain  until  again  spread  out  by  creative  energy.  In 
the  process  of  creation,  the  first  form  of  material  substance  is 
called  anu,  two  anus  make  a  dwenuJc,  three  a  trenulc  and  so  forth ;  and 
on  arriving  at  the  bulk  of  a  trenuk,  matter  assumes  figure  and 
becomes  visible.  In  the  first  or  invisible  atomical  condition,  matter 
is  eternal ;  in  the  second  or  figured  state  it  is  perishable.  Hence 
in  the  Naiyayika  system  the  elements,  water,  earth,  fire  &c.,  are 
always  divided  into  what  is  temporary,  and  what  is  eternal ;  the 
visible  state  of  water,  for  example,  is  temporary,  its  primary  state 
or  essence  is  eternal. 


[  *  Sec  Colebrooke's  Essays,  Vol.   I.  pp.  261-294,  or  Trans  Royal  Asiat, 
Soc.  Vol.  pp,  92-118.] 


APPENDIX.  Ill 

The  combinations  or  aggregations  which;  compose  the  material 
universe  are  produced  by  the  energy  of  an  Almighty  and  Intelligent 
•cause,  who  is  considered  the  Supreme  Being.  Matter  is  incapable 
of  action,  whence  it  is  evident  that  the  motions  of  material  objects 
are  caused  by  a  being  different  from  these  objects,  and  in  this 
manner  they  prove  the  existence  of  God.  Thus  the  author  of  the 
Muktavali,  in  delivering  the  opinions  of  the  Naiyayikas,  says, 
"  though  we  have  in  ourselves  the  consciousness  that  I  am,  I  feel 
pleasure  &c.,  yet  we  have  no  evident  knowledge  that  spirit  and 
matter  are  different  ;  but  this  is  proved  by  the  following 
argument  : — An  instrument  requires  an  operator ;  thus  without 
an  operator,  no  effect  could  result  from  cutting  instruments,  as 
an  axe  &c.,  in  like  manner,  without  an  operator,  no  effect  would 
result  from  the  eyes  &c.,  which  are  the  instruments  of  vision  &e.7 
hence  we  infer  the  existence  of  an  operative  Being.  Should 
it  be  said  that  operation  belongs  to  matter,  we  reply  that  matter 
does  not  possess  life,  as  is  evident  in  the  case  of  an  inanimate 
body.  It  may,  however,  be  urged  that  life,  as  consisting  in  per- 
ception, sensation  &c. ,  does  not  belong  to  a  dead  body,  just  as  it 
cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  individual,  who,  according  to  your 
opinion,  is  united  to  the  Supreme  Being.  We  reply,  if  life  or  sensa- 
tion be  a  property  of  matter,  how  can  the  events  of  youth  be 
remembered  in  old  age,  since  the  body  is  subject  to  growth  and 
decay."  Atma  PraJcarn. 

The  Naiyayikas  conceive  that  Spirit  is  a  figured  substance,  which 
means  that  it  possesses  magnitude,  but  this  magnitude  is  indivisible. 
According  to  Hindu  Metaphysics,  whatever  is  the  subject  of  active 
and  moral  qualities  must  have  magnitude,  for  these  qualities  imply 
action  and  change  ;  but  what  is  absolutely  without  magnitude  and 
figure  must  be  impossible  and  unchangeable  ;  hence  as  the 
Naiyayikas  maintain  that  the  supreme  Being  is  the  immediate  and 
active  agent  in  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  that  preception,  desire 
and  action,  are  in  him  permanent  qualities,  they  ascribe  to  him  a 
principle  of  invisible  magnitude.  This  magnitude  is  so  small,  that 
it  moves  in  the  smallest  nerves  which  are  the  one  thousandth  part 
of  the  diameter  of  a  hair  ;  and  this  opinion  is  supported  by  the  Vedas, 
''Spirit  is  more  minute  than  the  minutest  atom,  and  more  subtle 
than  the  subtlest  thing,17  But  it  must  not  be  inferred  from  this 


112  APPENDIX. 

that  they  are  materialists  ;  for  they  maintain  an  essential  distinction 
between  the  phenomena  of  matter  and  Spirit. 

They  believe  that  the  soul  is  a  portion  of  the  Supreme  Being, 
and  has  a  separate  individual  existence.  It  is  distinguished  from 
the  Creator  by  not  possessing  essentially  and  permanently  the 
qualities  of  preception,  desire,  and  action,  and  it  is  also  subject  to 
ignorance  and  sorrow  ;  but  the  Supreme  Spirit  is  perfect  and 
eternally  blessed. — "Truth  and  intelligence  are  the  attributes  of 
God,  and  are  not  to  be  ascribed  to  the  soul,  which  is  the  subject 
both  of  knowledge  and  ignorance,  pleasure  and  pain,  by  which  it 
is  distinguished  from  the  Supreme  Spirit  ;  therefore  God  and  the 
soul  are  entirely  distinct  beings  ;  if  you  deny  this,  how  can  you 
account  for  the  being  confined  to  material  habitations,  and  again 
released  from  them  ?" 

While  embodied  in  matter,  the  soul  is  in  a  state  of  imprisonment; 
and  is  under  the  influence  of  evil  passions  but  having  by  intense 
study  arrived  at  the  knowledge  of  the  natural  elements  and  prin- 
ciples, it  attains  the  place  of  the  Eternal.  In  this  state  of  Supreme 
bliss,  however,  its  individuality  does  not  cease  but  on  this  point  they 
express  themselves  very  obscurely.  They  admit  that  the  soul  is 
united  to  the  Supreme  Being,  but  conceive  that  it  still  retains  the 
abstract  nature  of  definite  or  visible  existence. 

The  dissolution  of  the  world  proceeds  from  the  destruction  of  the 
visible  forms  and  qualities  of  things,  but  their  material  essence 
remains,  and  from  it  new  worlds  are  formed  by  the  creative  energy 
of  God  ;  and  thus  the  universe  is  dissolved  and  renewed  in  endless 
succession. 

The  SANKHYA  sect  was  founded  by  a  philosopher  named  Kapila.* 
It  has  been  noticed  by  some  English  writers  as  advancing  the 
doctrine  of  materialism  :  but  the  Sankhyas  believe  in  the  existence 
of  two  eternal  substances  or  Beings,  the  one  named  Purusha  or 
Male,  the  other  Prakriti  t  or  nature.  They  conceive  that  Purusha,  J 

[*Conf.  Colebrooke  Essays,  Vol.  I.  pp.  227-260.  or  Trans  R.  Asiatic, 
Soc.  Vol.  I.  pp.  19-43.] 

[f  Conf.  Colebrooke,  Essays.  Vol.  1 .  pp.  242,  265,  338,  349,  407,  412,  413.] 
[t  Conf.  Colebrooke,  U,  S.  pp,  48,  89,  244,  344,N4ll.] 


APPENDIX.  113 

or  the  Male,  exists  in  an  eternal  state  of  rest,  impassible,  and  a  mere 
spectator  of  the  motions  of  the  universe.  This  state  of  the  Supreme 
they  illustrate  by  saying  that  He  resembles  the  water-lily,  which 
after  the  water  passes  over  it,  is  left  in  its  original  condition.  The 
motions  of  the  material  world,  and  also  sentient  beings,  proceed  from 
Prakriti  or  nature.  The  argument  by  which  this  opinion  is  support- 
ed is  not  very  clear,  or  perhaps  I  have  not  been  able  to  comprehend 
it.  "  Spirit  is  life  ;  effect  and  cause  are  inseparably  united;  con- 
sequently, when  the  effect  ceases,  the  cause  must  also  cease;  there- 
fore agency  cannot  be  attributed  fco  the  Supreme  Being,  and  the 
idea  that  He  acts  arises  from  the  union  of  life  and  Understanding/' 
MulctawaU,  Atma  PraJcarna.  This  passage,  however,  will  receive 
some  elucidation  by  remarking  that  life  here  denotes  its  simple 
abstract  nature  divested  of  the  qualities  of  thought,  feeling,  action  &c- 
This  simple  abstract  Life  is  the  Supreme  Being:  Understanding 
(which  denotes  the  active  and  sensitive  principles  of  beings)  arises 
from  the  operation  of  nature  ;  and  the  union  of  understanding  or  the 
active  faculties  with  life,  which  is  the  Supreme  Being,  produces  the 
idea  that  he  is  the  Agent  in  the  motions  of  the  universe. 

The  Yedanta  sect  affirm  that  understanding  is  the  termination  or 
completion  of  the  One  Being  ;  the  Sankhyas,  on  the  contrary,  assert 
that  it  is  the  completion  of  nature. 

Nature  is  eternal,  but  it  is  upheld  by  Life,  the  Supreme  Being. 
When  the  universe  disappears,  nature  remains  in  an  invisible 
seminal  state  ;  but  at  the  de&ire  of  the  Supreme  it  assumes  a  visible 
form  and  becomes  the  Creator  of  the  world. 

The  soul,  or  sensitive  part  of  living  beings,  arises  from-  the 
organization  of  nature,  but  is  formed  of  its  more  refined  parts.  It 
is  probably  this  opinion  concerning  the  soul,  which  had  led  to  the 
supposition  that  the  Sankhyas  are  Materialists.  By  the  efficacy 
of  virtuous  action,  however,  men  are  delivered  from  passion,  and 
united  to  the  Supreme  Spiritual  Essence. 

The  MIMANSA*  was  originally  taught  by  Jaimini.  Kuniarila 
Bhat  and  Prabhakar,  who  are  mentioned  in  the  Play,  were  t  wo  of 

[  *  Conf.  Colebrooke,  Essays,  Vol.  I.  pp.  39  Seqq.  and  295-324,  or 
Trans.  R.  As.  Soe.  Vol.  I.  pp.  493-  491.] 

15 


114  APPENDIX. 

his  most  eminent  disciples.  There  are  two  divisions  of  this  sect  ; 
one  named  Piirva  or  former,  the  other  named  Uttara  or  latter 
Mimansa.  The  Purva  Mimansas  say  that  motion  is  the  only  Being, 
and  that  it  has  existed  from  eternity,  and  will  exist  for  ever,  produc- 
ing and  maintaining  all  the  phenomena  which  compose  the  universe. 
There  is  neither  creation  nor  dissolution,  the  world  has  existed 
always  in  the  same  visible  form  which  it  now  exhibits.  Jaimini 
seemed  to  deny  the  existence  of  Paramatma  or  Supreme  Soul,  and  to 
admit  only  that  of  Jivatina  or  Yital  Soul  ;  for  which  reason  he  was 
charged  with  Atheism,  and  in  the  play  we  find  one  of  his  pupils 
asking  if  there  be  any  other  Being  besides  those  visible  beings  whom 
we  behold.  This  tenet,  however,  was  rejected  by  others  of  the 
Sect,  and  accordingly,  Kumarila,  in  reply  to  the  above  question  says, 
that  there  is  a  Being,  distinct  from  the  universe,  who  is  the  judge 
of  actions,  and  the  dispenser  of  rewards  and  punishments. 

In  asserting  that  motion  is  the  only  being,  the  Mimansa  is 
directly  opposed  to  the  Vedanta  System  ;  and  the  Play  exhibits  a 
controversial  conversation  between  Religion  and  Mimansa,  respect- 
ing the  nature  of  the  Supreme  Lord,  and  the  means  of  obtaining 
deliverance  from  this  state  of  mortality,  in  which  Mimansa  maintains 
the  necessity  of  action,  or  religious  performances  in  order  to  obtain 
beatitude,  because  the  Supreme  Lord  is  himself  an  active  Being. 

The  doctrine  of  Patanjala  agrees  with  Sankhya  philosophy  in  the 
belief  of  an  infinite  Being  or  Man,  who  is  impassible  and  unaffected 
by  nature.  But  from  the  following  passage  it  appears  that  the 
Patanjalists  conceive  the  soul  to  be  of  the  same  nature  with  Purush 
or  the  Infinite  Being,  and  not  an  effect  of  the  organization  of  matter. 
"  The  Lord  is  a  Great  Being  (  Man  )  who  is  free  from  pain  or  the 
influence  of  action,  and  is  impassible  like  soul."  Chitra  Dipa 
shloka  105. 

T"  3  three  remaining  sects  are  those  which  deny  the  authority  of 

the  Yeas. 


JAIXAS*  are  found  in  conisderable  numbers  in  different  parts 
of  India,  especially  in  Maisur,  Kanara,  and   Gujrat.     In  their   phi- 

[  *  Conf.  Celebroke,  Essays,  Vol.  I.  pp.  378-390,  and  Vol.  II.  pp. 
191-234  :  or  Trans,  K.  As.  Sec,  Vol.  I.  pp.  549  Seqq.  and  Asiat,  Res.  Yol.  IX, 
pp,  287-322.] 


APPENDIX.  115 

losophical  opinion  they  have  been  supposed  to  resemble  the  S&n- 
khyas,  but  their  tenets  exhibit  rather  a  mixture  of  the  Sankhya 
and  Mimansa  doctrines  than  an  exclusive  adoption  of  either*  Like 
the  Mimansa  they  believe  that  the  Supreme  Being  is  motion,  and 
that  he  is  without  figure,  impassible,  and  all-pervading  ;  and  like 
the  Sankhyas  they  believe  in  the  enternity  of  the  world,  and  conceive 
that  the  soul  is  only  a  refined  species  of  matter,  which  possesses 
thought  and  understanding,  and  which  pervading  the  whole  body 
illuminates  it  as  a  lamp  does  the  apartment  in  which  it  is  kept.  Wher- 
ever there  is  blood,  say  they,  there  is  soul.  As  the  Infinite  Being  is 
indescribable  and  incomprehensible,  they  direct  their  worship  ta 
Tirthankaras  or  deified  men.  The  Great  Being  is  omniscient,  but 
the  soul  possesses  only  finite  knowledge.  Man  is  elevated  to  the 
state  of  Infinite  Being  by  renouncing  secular  concerns  and  devoting 
himself  to  contemplation  and  divine  worship  ;  but  like  the  Mimansa 
they  conceive  that  holy  actions  are  required  to  secure  eternal 
beatitude. 

The  BAUDDHA  religion  is  now  almost  extinct  in  India,  I  have 
never  seen  any  who  professed  it,  though  Mr.  Moor  in  his  Hindu 
Infanticide  says  that  some  may  be  met  with  in  Gujarat.*  I  do  not 
know  whether  an  account  has  yet  been  given,  of  their  philosophical 
opinions  drawn  from  original  authentic  sources  ;  but  from  the 
declarations  of  Mendicant  in  the  play,  I  should  conceive  that  they 
profess  a  system  of  idealism  excluding  the  existence  both  of  matter 
and  Spirit,  and  admitting  only  that  of  sensations. 


It  is  generally  alleged  by  the  Brahinans,  that  the 
are  Atheists,  but  perhaps  they  are  only  Materialists,  and  maintain  an 
hypothesis  similar  to  the  one  advanced  in  Europe  by  Spinoza.  This 
conjecture  corresponds  with  the  account  given  of  them  by  Passion, 
in  which  it  is  said,  that  they  believe  only  what  is  proved  by  the 
evidence  of  the  internal  or  eternal  senses.  The  ai  gumenb  they 
employ  is  stated  in  more  precise  terms  in  a  Logical  book  called 
Dinkari  ;  There  is  no  evidence  that  a  Being  (  different  from  the 


[  *  Moor    evidently    refers    to  the  Jains,      Conf.      Colebrooke.   Essays, 
Vol.  I.  pp.  390-402.] 

[  f  Conf.  Colebrook.  Essays,  Vol.  I.  pp.  402-435.  ] 


116  APPENDIX. 

universe  )  exists,  for,  as  he  is  without  figure  and  quality,  he  cannot 
be  discerned  by  the  external  senses,  and  there  cannot  be  the 
evidence  of  mental  perception,  for  the  mental  perception  of  one 
person  cannot  discover  the  existence  of  another  Spirit." 

In  pursuing  the  sketch  which  I  have  thus  given  of  the  philoso- 
phical opinion  noticed  in  the  translations,  it  has  perhaps  occurred  to 
the  reader,  that  a  more  detailed  account  of  them  would  throw 
much  light  on  the  ancient  system  taught  in  Europe,  and  would  be 
a  valuable  addition  to  the  History  of  philosophy  and  of  the  huma.a 
Mind. 


BOMBAY — PBINTED  AT  THE    "  TATVA-VIVECHAKA  "  PRESS. 


<r    ~     / 


I 

n 


Jff 


RETURN  TO  the  circulation  desk  of  any 
University  of  California  Library 

or  to  the 

NORTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

Bldg.  400,  Richmond  Field  Station 

University  of  California 

Richmond,  CA  94804-4698 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS 
.  2-month  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling 

(510)642-6753 
.  1-year  loans  may  be  recharged  by  bringing 

books  to  NRLF 

.  Renewals  and  recharges  may  be  made 
4  days  prior  to  due  date 


DUE  AS  STAMPEDJ3ELOW 
IIAR1620M 


DD20  15M  4-02 


YB  4058! 


M31948 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 


BOOKS  FOR  SALE. 


1. 
2. 


7. 
8. 
0. 


12. 

ia 


ENGLISH   SERIES. 

Hatha  Yoga  Pradlpika,  English  translation  with  ihe  Sanscrit  Rs.  a 
texc  and  Commentary.     Price  including  postage  ..  1       » 

Principal  Twelve  Select  Upanishads,  with  notes  from  the 
Uhashya  of   bhrimat   ShankarAcharya  an-'  Anand^iri    bein^  a 
rim  of   I.b3  translations   pi  .dished   bv    the    Iloyal    Asiatic 
bociety  of   Bengal.     Price  including  posfa/e 

*  Yoga   Sutras  of   Patan.jali,  translated  bv  Professor 
Manilnl  Nabhnbhai  Dvivedi,  F.  T.  S.     Price   including  postage 
Bhagawac!    Gita,   translated   by    «Ir.   Charles   Wilkins    N!W 
-d,  wir\  t'.vo  learned  Introduc, 
odi  and  Mr.  Nobinchandra  B.inarii. 

.iCluJ]! 


4      a 


i 
1  nc 


5.    Discc  .urseh 


c, 
The    Uttara  Gita,    being  ths 


3 


Lhe  Bhag-awad  Gita,  by  T.  Subharao  B.A.! 

i  nee  i, 
A  G  .ide  to  Theosoph  \.     1'rice  ineludin?  posfcai« 

••'rs.  A.    P.  Vinnect,' 

... 

Ogi 

in[-  ! 

1  H.  Ii.  Wikou. 
->i 

al  Sandhya  ^^  «-«,..  ^w-4. 
Price exc]jd ing  postage          ...  n 

'hfi     TTt.t.arn    Cli+-i       :  .  :,   ..    xi,        •     •*,*'    . .     "  *    _      .*   ".  '*'  •••    " 

Shri 
...  0 
...  0 

il  bo  p«?-.fc  l>y  V, 


14 
6 


13 
10 


' 


3      6 


to  Mr.  Tookaram 


V    o 


ra^rr, 


?" 


1      * 
1       6 

«        V 


" 


ffr?rr 


