===== Internet Archive OCR: primerofhinduism0000farq_djvu.txt =====







_ OF HINDUISM 


J. N. FARQUHAR 


ai 
‘ 
i 

: 
in 
ae 
: 

; 

} 










OXFORD UNIVERSITY. PRESS 
_ LONDON: FROWDE 


Dig 











_ The Library 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
_ AT CLAREMONT 





WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA — 








A 
PRIMER OF HINDUISM 





A 


PRIMER OF HINDUISM 


BY 


J. N. FARQUHAR, M.A. 


LITERARY SECRETARY, NATIONAL COUNCIL OF YOUNG MEN’S 
CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATIONS, INDIA AND CEYLON 


SECOND EDITION REVISED AND ENLARGED 


Cw) 
eal ae 


‘ 
os 


W 


dvakeparawoacba TA ravTa év TO XpioTS 


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON: HENRY FROWDE 


1912 


OXFORD: HORACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 


bf Si aa a 


PREFACE 
@ 
§ Ir is the conviction of the writer of this Primer 
that Hinduism cannot be understood unless it be 
$ studied historically. For this reason the first thirteen 
§ chapters of the book deal with the growth of the reli- 
2 gion in connexion with the political and literary history 
6 of the country. Only when the student has realized 
: how Hinduism came to be is he in a position to attempt 
5 to study any particular part of the religion. To think 
£ of the religion as a sort of intricate machine to be 
= studied in pieces is to misconceive the whole. 

The practical purpose in view has dictated the 
method of teaching the history. The long millen- 
niums have been divided into periods, so that the 

_ mind may be able to retain the course of events. But 
_. it is most necessary to realize that these divisions are 
aN artificial, and that, while they do correspond to changes, 
.) they must not be pressed too far. There is usually no 
ay hard line between the periods: one melts into the 
> other. 
~The exact dates of most of the events in the history 
of Hinduism are unknown, and the same is true with 
regard to the literature. But, although the dates are 








336813 


6 PREFACE 


unknown, the order of events, and the relative age of 
the great groups of books, and of many of the indi- 
vidual books, are well established. For this reason 
the general place of certain events and books is often 
indicated in the tables of this Przmer, even when no 
definite dates are available. 

The Illustrative Readings will, it is hoped, enable 
the reader to envisage the character of the leading 
books more vividly than is possible from a bare de- 
scription. The tables are meant to bring chronological 
and other relationships before the mind in concrete 
form, and to serve for reference. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
PREFACE . : c : f ; : : 4 : 5 
LIsT OF ILLUSTRATIONS . : ‘ : : : yeni 
PART I. OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 
OF HINDUISM 
CHAMP PREIS TORIC PERIOD. . ; ; me els 
TABLE :— 
1. The Aryan Family of Languages . : : 5. | OO) 
CAP i pCREADIVE, PERIOD 4 : ‘ 7 = Bi 
ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS :— 
1. AHymntoAgni . 3 : ; ‘ : 20 
2. Funeral Hymn : : ‘ : i : 227, 
TABLES :— 
2. Divisions of the Vedic People : j : 4 8S 
3. The Three Orders of Brahmans . : : 5 PRS 
4. The Vedas and their Names . ; ‘ 5 BE 
5. Growth of the Three Vedas . : 5 ; > SS 
CHAP: III. SACERDOTAL PERIOD , F BS 
ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS :— 
3. The Origin and the Power of Sacrifice . , ees 
4. A Charm against Fever . : : , : x. Ae 
TABLES :— ’ 
6. The Chief Schools with their Brahmanas 5 Sey 


7. Relative Age of the Brahmanas . : 5 ney 


8 CONTENTS 


PAGE 
CHAP. IV. PHILOSOPHIC PERIOD: ESSENTIAL 
HINDUISM : : : 3 4 : 5 4 AS 
ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS :— 
5. The One Reality. : : f ; : 5 AA 
6. Excommunication . ‘ F : ; : ers 
TABLES :— 
8. The Ages of the World . F : : » . 46 
CHAP. V. PHILOSOPHIC PERIOD: THE UPANI- 
SHADS, BUDDHISM, JAINISM . ‘ , : Be end, 
ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS :-— 
7. The Vanaprastha andthe Agrama. . . . 53 
8. The Horse of the ASvamedha aie ey See ee 
g. The Human and the Divine Self . : : ia Saas 
TABLES :— 
g. Relative Age of Early Upanishads . : Aye: 
10. The Hindu Canon . : : : : : See Sy, 
CHAP. VI. SCHOLASTIC PERIODE : : ets: 
ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS :— 
TOM OUtkaIS = : : : : : : : > 68 
Iz. Buddhist Sutta. : : : : Se EOo 
12. Passage from a Verse Upaneas . : : Sele, 
13. Buddhist Teaching in Verse . : ; : ) Ppl 
14. Satyaki’s Sons Slain. : : : : 2 92 
TABLES :— 
11. Scholastic Period . ‘ ‘ : ‘ 873 
12. Manuals of the Vedic Schools ‘ : ; w= 7a 
13. Interrelations of Vedic Literature . : : ee 
14. The Buddhist Tripitaka ; é : : Coe iis 
15. The Four ASramas ‘ : : ; se RUS 
CHAP. VII. INCARNATION PERIOD . ; Be 
ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS : — ; 
15. Hindu Incarnation ; : ; ; : 5 ees 
16, Buddhist Incarnation . . : : ; 163 


17. From the Vedanta Stitras  . : uh Ame we O4 


CONTENTS 


TABLES :— 
16. Chronology of Incarnation Period 
17. The Six Systems of Philosophy 
18. Buddhas, Incarnations, and Tirthakaras 


CHAP. VIII. PERIOD OF DECADENCE 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS :— 
18. Vishnu as Saviour of the Gods 
19. Living Souls in Particles of Earth 


TABLES :— 
19. Period of Decadence 
20. The Hindu Pantheon 


CHAP. IX. PERIOD OF RECONSTRUCTION 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS :— 
20. The Praise of Siva in Tamil . 
21. The Praise of Vishnu in Tamil 
22. Extract from a Commentary . 
23. Siitras on the Nature of Bhakti 


TABLES :— 
21. Period of Reconstruction 
22. The Vaishnavas of the South 


CAPT war bitAke nl! PE RTOD 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS :— 
24. Baby Rama in His Mother’s Arms 
25. The Praise of Krishna in Marathi 


TABLES :— 
23. The Bhakti Period : ; ; 5 
24. The Tamil Literature of the Saiva Siddhanta 
25. The Literature of the Saivas and Vaishnavas 
26. The Followers of Ramananda 
27. Adoration Mantras 
28. The Kabirpanth 
29. Canon of the Vedanta 
30. Northern Krishnaite Leaders 
31. The Modern Bhagavatas 


PAGE 
95 


97 
98 


105 
106 


107 
108 


109 


124 
125 
126 
127, 


128 
129 


130 


140 
I4I 


142 
143 
144 
145 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 


10 CONTENTS 


PAGE 
CHAP, XI. PERIOD OF WESTERN INFLUENCE 150 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS :— 
26. The Folly of Idolatry . : : : F * fOr 
27. A New Reading of History . 3 c ; S162, 


CHAP. XII. HISTORY OF THE HINDU FAMILY 163 
CHAP. XIII. HISTORY OF INDIAN ASCETICISM 167 


PART II. HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


CHAP. XIV. WHAT IT IS TOBE A HINDU TO- 


DAY . 4 p ; ; A 3 ‘ A Sie: 
CHAP... XV. THE RELIGION OF THE LOWER 

CLASSES . ; c : ; : : c - 184 
CHAP. XVI. FORMATIVE ELEMENTS OF HIN- 

DUISM : : ‘ : ‘ - . : LoL 
CHAP. XVIL THE FUTURE OF HINDULSM e. i06 
BIBLIOGRAPHY . : , : P : s 203 


INDEX 5 : ? : : ‘ a 3 » 215 


al 
lomo) 


OS N NO He Rye ee oe 
YH OW ON ANAW bP 


~) 


So KY DN 
NI Own 


OMAN WD 


bis! OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


. Vanaprastha and Hut . 

. An Agrama 

. Early Indian Coin 

. Hindu Idolatry, Image of Sri 


A Hindu Temple in Buddhist pana 
North Gate of Safichi Sttipa 


. Buddhist Worship, a Stipa . 

. Buddhist Worship, a Dharmachakra . 

. Relic Casket from Peshawar 

. The Boar Incarnation of Vishnu . 

. Hindu Idolatry, Siva on a Kushan Coin 

. Buddhist Chaitya. 

. Image of Buddha . 

. Bodhisattva from Yusufzai 

. Mahayana Worship: Stupa at Renton 

. Mahayana Worship: Devotional Sculpture 
. Mahayana Worship: aes at Nara, a 
. The Trimirti : , 
. The Marriage of Siva . 

. Buddhist Image from Java . 

. Rock-cut Shrine 

» Lhe-Lemple of Makte svar - 

. Rock-cut Shrine 

. Jain Sculpture 

. Temple of Siva at Tanjore 

. Linga Shrine 

. Siva the Dancer 


PAGE 
31 
32 


59 
60 


61 
62 


80 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 


99 
100 


Iol 
102 
103 
104 
IIo 
III 
113 
105 


12 


28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
B25 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37+ 
38. 
39. 
40. 
4I. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Temple of Jagannath, Puri . 

Chalukyan Temple at Somnathpur 
Image of Sankara ; : 

Image of Ramanuja 

Gopurams 

Hindu Pillars in Mosque at Delhi 

Qutb Minar at Delhi : 
Temple of Subrahmanya 

Gopuram at Kumbakonam . 
Flamboyant Pillars in Dravidian Temple 
Kabirpanthi Picture in Chaura Monastery, Benares 
Tridandi Ascetic . : 

Sivaite Sadhu with Head- ee 

Sadhu wearing Sandals filled with Spikes 
Modern Tapas - : 
Sivaite Sadhu 

Shrine of Chengalamma 

Shrine of Bontala Gangamma 

Shrine and Stake of Potu-raju 

Shrine of Potu-raju 

Shrine of Poleramma . 

The Uncleanness of the Outcast 


PAGE 
116 
117 
119 
121 
123 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
147 
168 
169 
170 
171 
172 
185 
186 
187 
188 
189 
Igo 


PART. 


OUTEINE: OF “THE 
HISTORY OF HINDUISM 








CHAPTER I 


PREHISTORIC PERIOD 


1. (A) The Aryan People. In the dim background 
of history we catch misty glimpses of a great people which 
had a common culture, a common religion, and a common 
language, but which in the following centuries through 
division and migration split up into many groups and thus 
produced a large number of the leading nations of Europe 
and of Asia. In the language, religion, and life of their 
descendants we can still find traces of the common life 
lived so long ago by the Aryan race. 

2. The careful comparison of the religions of the various 
ancient Aryan peoples enables us to realize in some degree 
what the religion was in the still earlier days of the undivided 
people. It seems certain, first of all, that they honoured a 
vast number of special gods, each of them supposed to over- 
see some distinct aspect of life. But in that primitive age 
these Aryan men had already another group of gods distin- 
guished as the heavenly ones (deva—deus) from the vulgar 
throng. They were all natural phenomena, but they were 


Nortr.—The head-piece above is part of the coping of the rail of the 
Bharhut Buddhist Stipa now in Calcutta Museum (Cunningham, Stm#pa 
of Bharhut, pl, xlii). See below, p. 62. 


16 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


also all connected one way or another with the sky and with 
the grandest of nature’s operations. It seems clear that the 
undivided people already worshipped Sky, Sun, Moon, 
Dawn, Wind, Fire. But though they regarded and wor- 
shipped them as gods, they still called them by their 
significant names ; they had not given them proper names 
or epithets. The usual method of obtaining the help of 
the gods in those days seems to have been already prayer 
and sacrifice of a rudimentary kind. In both prayer and 
sacrifice true religious feeling mingled with belief in the 
occult power of charmed words and deeds. It was believed 
that special knowledge was required for both prayer and 
sacrifice. Hence, the man of skill in these important 
matters was a person of consequence. The Latin word 
jiamen and the Sanskrit drahman seem both to go back to 
the Aryan original which was used to designate this embryo 
priest. The earliest form of sacrifice consisted merely in 
laying out food and drink on the ground for the gods to 
come and enjoy. 

3. Ancestor-worship was almost as important to the 
original Aryan people as the worship of the gods. Un- 
civilized people usually believe that the soul survives death 
and lives a new life apart from the body. But early man, 
not having been able to reach the idea of spirit as distinct 
from material substance, conceives the soul as a material 
thing, and believes that after death it is dependent for its 
continued existence on food and drink precisely like a 
living man. In consequence of this, nearly all primitive 
races have been accustomed to provide food and drink for 
the departed souls of members of their own family. The 
food is laid out as for a feast, and the souls of the dead are 
invited to come and eat and be nourished thereby. We 
must note carefully that this practice, which is all but 
universal among the simpler peoples, is a service of souls 


THE ARYAN. PEOPLE 17 


and not a worship. The dead are dependent on the family 
for their nourishment. 

4. But these beliefs have passed among many peoples 
into a more developed stage, where the dead are conceived 
as being powerful beings, controlling the welfare of the 
family. When this idea arises, the old service of the dead 
becomes a worship. The family pays them great reverence, 
not merely because they are relatives, but in order to secure 
their loving care over the family. This form of worship, 
then, had been developed before the original Aryan. race 
split up. 

5. The father was the high-priest of the family, and con- 
trolled the worship of the ancestors of the family in all 
details. He alone knew the peculiar ritual which was 
traditional in his family, and which had to be maintained 
unchanged, if the favour of the dead was to be retained. 
He alone had the power to pass on the rites to his son. 
As high-priest of the ancestral rites he was the acknowledged 
head of the family. The reverence and the power which 
his priestly position brought him made him supreme in 
the home. He had full power over his wife and his young 
children, and in many of the nations of a later date his 
grown-up sons also were completely under his authority. 
The property of the family was altogether in his hands. 
This is the source of the patria potestas of Rome, and of the 
prominent place held by the father in Greece, Persia, India, 
and among Teutonic and Slavonic peoples as well. 

6. This type of family, which is known as the patriarchal, 
succeeded an earlier and less developed type; and the 
changed form of family life produced great and far-reaching 
results. The first of these was a new consciousness of the 
unity, sanctity, and value of the family; and this new and 
lofty conception produced in turn a great advance in family 
morality, in family feeling, and family pride. Marriage 


PP 639 B 


18 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


became universal ; for every man wanted a son to take over 
the worship of the ancestors at his death. Since the father 
was supreme, and since every family wanted sons, there was 
a tendency to set less value on woman, In consequence 
many girl babies were exposed or put to death in every race 
practising ancestor-worship ; and a woman was held to be 
of far less account than a man. 

4. (B) The Indo-Iranian People. A certain portion 
of the .mighty Aryan family broke away from the main 
stock—we do not know when or where—and remained a 
united people for some time, but finally fell in two, one 
taking up its abode in Iran, the other moving into the 
territory on both sides of the upper Indus. This people, 
the ancestors of the Zoroastrians and of the creators of 
Hinduism, may be designated Indo-Iranian during the period 
while they were still one. By inference from the Vedas, the 
earliest literature of India, on the one hand, and from the 
Avesta and other Iranian records, on the other, we are able 
to realize in hazy outline what the religion of this prehistoric 
people was. The Aveséa is the literature produced by Zoro- 
aster and his friends in the great reformation carried out by 
them about 600 B.c., but it contains many older elements. 

8. Clearly considerable advance had been made in con- 
ceiving the heavenly gods ; for there is now quite a group 
of personalized divinities with definite names and _ lofty 
functions. It seems clear that the following at least were 
fully recognized, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, Bhaga, and Indra, 
and along with them Yama and Soma. Theology had made 
a good deal of progress ; for they are thought of as spiritual 
beings, and the natural phenomena from which they 
originally sprang are now but the medium of their manifesta- 
tion. 

g. The sacrifice, meanwhile, had been greatly elaborated. 
A ritual had been established, and hymns as well as prayers 


THE INDO-IRANIAN PEOPLE 19 


accompanied the stated acts. The home of the gods being 
now consistently believed to be in heaven, it was the 
common practice to send the sacrifice to them on the flames 
and smoke of the altar fire. The drink of the gods offered 
in sacrifice is the juice of a plant called soma in Sanskrit, 
haoma in Zend, the language of the Avesta. A special 
ritual for the offering of this divine drink had appeared, and 
the drink itself had undergone apotheosis. Soma is already 
agod. The priests, too, have now far fuller functions and 
are called by special names. 

to. The belief about the dead had also made con- 
siderable progress. Burning had almost universally taken 
the place of burying, probably from a wish to release the 
soul as completely as possible from the body and to bear it 
away on the flame of the pyre to the heavenly regions. For 
when men die, they are believed to go to heaven, where they 
join the blessed dead and enjoy immortality with the gods. 
They are invited to the sacrifices in the same way as the 
gods. ‘They are believed to be very powerful. 


Note.—The tail-piece below is another part of the coping of the rail 
of the Bharhut Stipa (Cunningham, Stipa of Bharhut, pl. xliii). 
Note the animals worshipping the sacred tree. See below, p. 62. 





Aryan 


OUTLINE OF THE. HISTORY 


TABLES . 
' 1.The Aryan Family of Larguages 
I. Indo Iranion<< enskrit 
IL Armenian. Zend 
Ill. Greek 
IV. Albanian Osean. 
N. Italic << Letin. 
Umbrian. 
Old Gaulish. 
Welsh. 
Cornish. 
VI.Keltic eee BEN 
Marx 
Irish. 
Scotch Gaelic 
Gothic 
‘VII.Germanic << Seandinavian. 
West Germanic 
Letkie 


VIILLetto-Stewonie<— st sonic 


aatfaqata wat aaa ulate | 
fat at a: anzata t 


CHAPTER £1 


CREATIVE PERIOD 
THE THREE VEDAS 
Dates Unknown 


i. Aistory. Our first historical knowledge of the Aryan 
tribes which produced the great civilization of India shows 
them settled in the Western Punjab and beyond the Indus. 
They were a tall, fair people. They gradually spread further 
east, as far as the district of Karnal, later known as the 
holy land of the Kurus, Kurukshetra. They were then 
soldier-farmers, equally used to the plough and the sword. 
They were constantly at war with the aborigines around 
them; and they looked eagerly for sunshine and rain to 
mature their crops and give them fodder for their cattle and 
herds. They were still a primitive people, living in simple 
villages, with but few of the arts of civilization, and un- 
trammelled by the bonds of caste. They had no writing 
and no coinage. They ate beef and drank intoxicating 
drink. The tribes lived each under its own chieftain, and 


Notre.—The text at the top of the page is THE GAYATRI, the most 
famous of Hindu prayers: ‘ That excellent glory of the Quickening Sun, 
the god, may we attain; may he stimulate our devotions.’ A7gveda, 
III. lxii, 10. 


22 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


now and then quarrels led to war among them. The family 
was still in a healthy condition. Their women had a great 
deal of freedom throughout their lives. There was no child- 
marriage among them, no seclusion in the zenana, no widow- 
burning, and no law against the remarriage of widows. 
Like most primitive peoples, they practised the exposure of 
girl children and old people. 

12. Religion. Like their early Aryan ancestors, they 
worshipped the heavenly powers, calling them devas; and 
they were very conscious of the great advantage which their 
knowledge of these gods gave them over the aborigines. 
They arranged their gods in three groups, according as they 
belonged to the upper region of light, the atmosphere, or the 
earth. These three groups were designated Upper, Middle, 
and Lower. The chief divinities were—Upper: Varuna, 
Surya, Savitri, Vishnu, Ushas, Aditi, Mitra, Aryaman, the 
Asvins; Middle: Vata, Indra, Rudra, Parjanya, the Maruts ; 
Lower: Agnt, Soma, Yama. Their worship was largely 
sacrificial. Animals were often killed in sacrifice ; but their 
most elaborate rites were connected with the offering of the 
Soma, of which we have already heard, and of clarified 
butter, called giz. They were accustomed to have hymns 
recited at all sacrifices. But, although they laid so much 
stress on sacrifice, they had no temples and no images. 
Sacrifices were offered in the open air, and the arrangements 
were very simple. The gods were so closely connected with 
natural phenomena that no visible symbol was required. 

Already the people seem to have been roughly divided 
into three groups—warriors, priests, and agriculturists ; but 
they were classes rather than castes. The priest, Brahman, 
was already very influential; for he was believed to have 
great power over the gods. Every chieftain had his own 
Brahman chaplain, svrohita, whose help he sought before 
entering on any undertaking. The priests tended to become 


THE THREE VEDAS 23 


a caste ; for they already made great pretensions and claimed 
exclusive powers. They were sub-divided into three orders,! 
each of which had its own special duties to perform at the 
sacrifices. Already schools were in existence for the educa- 
tion of priests. In this fact lies one of the chief reasons for 
the extraordinary predominance which the Brahmans finally 
attained. 

13. Austerity, called ¢afas in Sanskrit, was practised in 
those days. Various forms of self-torture were endured, 
with a view to securing warlike prowess, invincibility, 
miraculous powers, or heaven. The muni, who practised 
tapas, wore yellow robes. 

14. The worship of ancestors was kept up with great care 
by the Indo-Aryans. They were called jAztaras, ‘fathers,’ 
were regularly worshipped, and were invited to come to the 
sacrifice along with the gods. After death it was believed 
that the souls of the good were conducted by Yama to the 
place prepared for them, where they enjoyed an immortality 
of peace and happiness along with the ‘fathers’ and the gods. 
There was no doctrine of transmigration in those days. 

15. Literature. By the end of this period the centre of 
Hindu culture had moved east with the moving tribes to the 
holy field of Kurukshetra. ‘The hymns, which had been 
composed during the previous centuries, and which were 
carefully preserved in the great families and believed to be 
inspired, were now gradually gathered in some priestly 
school into the great collection which is called the /vgveda. 
Young Brahmans committed these hymns to memory at 
school, in order to be able to use them at the sacrifices. 
The collection was universally accepted by the people as 
their sacred book, every hymn being recognized as a divine 
utterance revealed to the rishi, ‘seer,’ whose name it bears, 


1 See p. 28. 


24 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


Just ere the’ collection was closed, a hymn was added 
which declares that the three great divisions of the. people 
and the aboriginal Sidras had each a distinct origin in God. 
Thus a religious basis was found for that old-world form of 
fixed social organization which soon developed into caste. 

16. These hymns which form the Rigveda are one of the 
most interesting groups of literature in all the world. No 
other people ever produced a body of religious poetry of 
such striking originality and beauty at such an early stage 
of their history. The nearest parallel is formed by the 
Zoroastrian Gdathas or hymns of the Avesta, the earliest 
literature of the sister people, the Iranians or early Persians ; 
but they have not nearly the interest and power of the 
Rigveda. The people in their daily life, their war, toil and 
worship, stand out clear and distinct in these hymns; and 
there is something most fascinating in the way the gods are 
conceived and addressed. 

A few of the latest hymns are philosophical. They ask 
questions rather than answer them; yet already the con- 
ception of the One behind all the gods finds expression, and 
a number of the ideas which afterwards helped to create the 
Hindu systems are tentatively put forward. 

17. At a later date a large number of verses were gathered 
together, nearly all of them from the Aieveda, and so 
arranged as to form a special manual for the second order ' 
of priests. This collection was called the Samaveda. Its 
verses were chanted at the Soma sacrifice. Another manual, 
consisting partly of verses, partly of sacrificial formulae in 
prose, was put together for the use of the third order,) and 
was called the Yajurveda. At a later date a new school 
separated the sacrificial formulae from the verses. The old 
Yajurveda was thereafter called Black, while the unmixed 
text was known as the White. These new collections were 

1 See p. 28. 


THE THREE VEDAS 25 


held to be divinely inspired, just like the Rigveda. They 
were Revelation in the fullest sense. The word for revela- 
tion is srutt, ‘hearing.’ When the second and third orders 
had each formed its own Veda, the Rigveda tended to 
become the manual of the first order? only. 


H Seep. 28: 
NotTre.—The text below is THE CHARTER OF CASTE :— 
‘The Brahman was his (Purusha’s) mouth; the Rajanya was made 


from his arms; his thighs became the VaiSya; from his feet the Sidra 
was produced.’ Azgveda, X. xc. 12. 


ATAUISA Faatalata CsA AA: | 
HE A Vex: wa FAT waa | 


26 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS 


1. A Hymn to Agni, the Priest among the Gods 


Notr.—Fire is one of the early Aryan gods. When it became 
customary to send the sacrifice to the gods by fire, Agni, the fire-god, 
became recognized by the Indo-Aryans as the Messenger of the sacrifice, 
the great Priest. 


O worthy of oblation, Lord of prospering powers, assume 
thy robes, and offer this our sacrifice. 


Sit, ever to be chosen, as our Priest, most youthful, through 
our hymns, O Agni, through our heavenly word. 

For here a Father for his son, Kinsman for kinsman wor- 
shippeth, and Friend, choice-worthy, for his friend. 

Here let the foe-destroyers sit, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, like 
men, upon our sacred grass. 

O ancient Herald, be thou glad in this our rite and fellow- 
ship ; hearken thou well to these our songs. 


Whate’er in this perpetual course we sacrifice to god and 
god, that gift is offered up in thee. 

May he be our dear household Lord, Priest, pleasant and 
choice-worthy ; may we, with bright fires, be dear to him. 

The gods, adored with brilliant fires, have granted precious 
wealth to us; so, with bright fires, we pray to thee. 


And, O Immortal One, so may the eulogies of mortal men 
belong to us and thee alike. 


With all thy fires, O Agni, find pleasure in this our sacrifice, 
and this our speech, O Son of Strength. 


Rigveda, I. xxvi; Griffith, vol. i. 34. 


THE THREE VEDAS a7 


2. Funeral Hymn 


Note.—The verses of this hymn are used in the Hindu funeral 
ceremony as it is prescribed in the Sitras, See ASvalayana, Grékyasatra, 
iv. 1-6, 


Him who departed over the mighty mountains, and thus 
showed the path to many, the son of Vivasvant, the 
gatherer of the peoples, Yama the king, do thou honour 
with an oblation. 

Yama first found a refuge for us ; nor can that rich land be 
taken away. Whither our fathers of old time have gone, 
thither along their own paths the children go. 

Go forth, go forth by the ancient paths whither our fathers 
of old time have gone. Thou shalt see both kings re- 
joicing in their bliss, Yama and Varuna the god. 

Go join the Fathers, join Yama, and thy merit in highest 
heaven. Leaving thy imperfections, return to thy home, 
and, filled with life, join thy body. 

Depart, separate and disperse: for him the Fathers have 
prepared this place; Yama grants him a place of rest, 
adorned with days and waters and nights. 

By the straight path hasten thou past the two Sadrameyan 
dogs, four-eyed, brindled. Then draw near the mindful 
Fathers, who revel in bliss with Yama. 

And these two dogs of thine, Yama, warders, four-eyed, 
path-guardians, men-beholders, to them do thou entrust 
this man, O king, and bestow both health and wealth 
upon him, 

Rigveda, X. xiv. 1-2, 7-11. 


28 


OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


TABLES 


2. The Divisions of the Vedic People which 
became the Great Castes 


. Vaisyas: 
. Sudras: 


pb wWNH 


. Brahmans: prayer-men, priests. 
. Kshatriyas ; authority-men, rulers and soldiers (called also R@anyas). 


men of the people, agriculturalists. 
aboriginal people brought under Brahman authority. 


3. The Three Orders of Brahmans 


laa) 


. hotrt 
. udgatre 
adhvaryu 


nd 


the hotrz 
the udgatrz 


‘ sacrificer’ from hu 
‘ singer’ 


‘ working priest ° 


from udgat 
from adhvara 


pour on the fire. 
sing. 
a ritual act. 


4. The Vedas and their Names 


recites yzchas, ‘ praises’: 
raises samanz, ‘chants’: 


hence Xigveda. 
hence Samaveda. 


the adhvaryu mutters yajumshz,‘ sacrificial formulae’; hence Yajurveda. 
Notr.—The word Veda means knowledge. 


5. Growth of the Three Vedas 


DATES UNKNOWN 





External 
Events. 


Israel leaves 
Egypt, about 
1320 B.C. 


Fall of Troy. 


David, King 
of Israel, 
about 1000 
B.C. 








Llistory. Literature. 
The Indo-Aryans 
on both sides of 
the Indus. Gradual 
Composition 
The Priests Mi 
divided into 
Three Orders. 
the 
Rise of Priestly 
Education. Hymns. 
The Indo-Aryans 
as far east as Gradual 
Kurukshetra. | Compilation 
ofthe Compilation 
Theory of the Rigveda. of the Compilation 
Four Castes. Sdmaveda. of the 
Yajurveda, 











gat A Sat: | Sat asa Sat: | aa & 
ATAU: WIAA STATATS AFASTAT: 


CHAPTER ITI. 


SACERDOTAL PERIOD 
THE BRAHMANAS 
Dates Unknown 


18. The great question which we have to learn to answer 
at this point is: How did the simple people we have just 
heard of become the Hindus whom we know? The trans- 
formation took place as a result of two forces :— 

(az) The gradual development of the culture of the 
- people. 
(6) The gradual conquest of India by them. 

The conquest was carried out partly by war, but largely 
by the priests, who won over the tribes by their superior 
knowledge and culture. This chapter and the following will 
show how the simple faith of the Azgveda was transformed 
into the Hindu system. 

19. History. The Aryans continued to advance eastwards 
during this period, leavening the old population as they 
went, until by its close nearly the whole of North India had 
come under their government and civilization. As they 


Nore.—tThe text at the top of the page calls THE. BRAHMANS GODS : 
‘Verily, there are two kinds of gods; for, indeed, the gods are the 
gods ; and the Brahmans who have studied and teach sacred lore are 
the human gods.’ Satapatha Brahmana, MU, ii. 2, 6. 


30 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


went, the Brahmans brought the aboriginal tribes under 
their priestly rule, giving each tribe a definite place in their 
social system, which was now steadily stiffening into caste. 
Thus many new caste-groups arose. The land was divided 
into a great many small kingdoms, most of them ruled by 
kings of Aryan race. Large trade sprang up; even sea 
voyages on the Indian Ocean were undertaken ; and wealth 
increased. Through the intercourse of Indian sailors with 
merchants in Babylonia the art of writing was introduced ; 
but for lack of suitable writing materials it was not used for 
literary purposes for many centuries. By the end of the 
period the patriarchal family had become more developed, 
and women were beginning to be looked down upon. It 
became the rule that a Hindu could not eat with his wife. 

20. Religion. The extension and elaboration of the 
sacrificial system is what gives this period its religious 
character. While, in the times of the Rigveda, men sought 
to win the regard of the gods, or to persuade them to give 
their help by sacrifice, hymn and prayer, in this new period 
the sacrifice is regarded as a mysterious operation which, if 
faithfully carried out, will irresistibly compel the gods to 
grant the appropriate reward. If only carried far enough, 
sacrifices will exalt a man to the level of the gods. The 
accurate performance of every detail of the ritual thus 
became a matter of extremest importance. 

21. For this reason the priest was all-powerful. His help 
was needed at every point in the intricate ceremonial of the - 
altar. Without him the layman was helpless. Hence the 
divine authority of the Brahman was fully acknowledged and 
became firmly rooted in the religious practice of the nation. 
Indeed, so great had the power of the priests become that 
they were spoken of as gods upon earth, and were feared 
even more than the gods of heaven. Fees paid to them 
were declared to be quite as meritorious as sacrifices offered 


THE BRAHMANAS 31 


to the celestials. All the old sacrifices were greatly extended 
and elaborated, so that no layman could conduct them with 
accuracy. It was during this period that the Raasuya, or 
Coronation Sacrifice, the Asvamedha, or Horse Sacrifice, 
an assertion of imperial authority, the Purushamedha, or 
Human Sacrifice (but a substitute was used), and the other 
great sacrifices, took definite form and became famous. 

22. During this period the theological ideas of the 
Brahmans underwent a great change. A deep tendency is 
manifested towards belief in one God, either the personal 
Creator, Prajapati, or, more often, a mysterious incompre- 
hensible divine essence diffused through all things. Along 
with this new God came the idea that the ordinary gods 
were merely mortals until 
they extorted immortality 
from the Supreme by sacri- 
fice and austerity. Many 
of the ancient gods had 
already fallen into the back- 
ground, while others had 
come into great prominence, 
among whom were Rudra, 
who now received his more 
attractive name, Siva, and 
Vishnu; Sivaasthemountain- 
god and the god of thieves, 
and Vishnu as the sun-god. 

23. Towards the end of 
this period we begin to |, a VANAPRASTHA AND HIs Hur 
meet a real order of ascetics. From the Bharhut Stipa, now in 
They lived in the forest and Calcutta Museum (Cunningham, pl. 

xlvi). See below, p. 62. 
usually built themselves 
huts of wood or leaves. They were called Vanaprasthas, 
forest-dwellers, hermits, and a collection of their huts was 





32 OUTLINE OF: THE HISTORY 


called an drama, hermitage. They wore coats of bark or 
skin, wound up their hair in matted coils, and lived largely on 
woodland fare. The law of ahimsa (harmlessness), that they 
must not kill an animal nor break a living twig from a tree, 
gradually arose among them. They continued the worship 
of the gods and the worship 
of their ancestors, and they 
' 4 retained their place in the 
oe fe ik y= | family and in caste, but did 
Ae “7~t no work of any kind. They 
practised various methods 
of severe austerity, enduring 
extreme cold and _ heat, 
Rok a strange food, most painful 
i yi i WG ot : postures, and such like. 
NS ae ne : The purpose of the endur- 


TALIA. 
E ee, ESL ay, 
OWI SAO “J ance of this ¢apas was still 


ca in the main the attainment 
2. AN ASRAMA 


Two Vanaprasthas with their huts * peg yerte Boe ce 
and the implements of fire-sacrifice moral aims now began to 
ns ommiag same sromtte Buddhist’ mingle with the older mo- 
See below, p. 61. tives. Hermits seek purity 

of soul and nearness to God 
as well as power over gods and men. A special form of 
teaching, called avanyaka, i.e. belonging to the forest, seems 
to have been given to young men who were about to enter 
upon the hermit life. The essential element in this forest 
teaching was an attempt to spiritualize the sacrifice by means 
of allegory. This instruction would then form the basis of 
the hermit’s meditation in the forest. 

24. The aboriginal tribes were allowed to retain their 
old gods and their old worship. A practical acknowledge- 
ment of the supremacy of the Brahmans and of Brahmanic 
ideas was -all that was demanded of them. Naturally, in 





THE BRAHMANAS 33 


the intercourse which thus sprang up, the aborigines learned 
much from the Aryans. On the other hand, a great many 
aboriginal ideas and many alien religious practices and 
conceptions found their way into the Vedic faith. The 
most important change thus produced was the movement 
of thought towards Transmigration. Snakes, trees, and 
pools were by this time held in great reverence, and 
pilgrimage was recognized as a meritorious religious practice. 

25. Literature, &c. The priestly schools had now become 
great and learned associations, each with a tradition of its 
own ; and so honoured were they that a man was proud 
to avow himself a member of his school. Every Brahman 
had to pass through one of them, in order to qualify as 
a priest. He had to learn by heart the Veda which be- 
longed to his order, and to receive from the lips of his 
teacher a great deal of detailed information, especially with 
regard to his work at the altar, the correct pronunciation 
of the sacred hymns and the meaning of certain acts and 
stories. Language-study had made considerable progress 
among them. As time went on, the teaching given in each 
school took definite form and was handed down with great 
verbal accuracy from teacher to pupil. The oral tradition 
of a school was called the Brakmana of that school. From 
this point onward then each priest studied the Veda of his 
order and the Brahmana pertaining to it. Then as educa- 
tion advanced, a number of schools arose under each Veda, 
and differences, great and small, crept into the teaching, 
until each great school had its own Brahmana, usually 
called by the traditional name of the school. Thus arose 
the Brahmanas, the most absurd and uninteresting prose 
literature in all the world. They are, however, of consider- 
able value historically ; for they enable scholars to form a 
picture of the life and religion of the times. 

During this period a fourth Veda, the A¢harvaveda, was 


PP 639 Cc 


34 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


compiled. Although as a collection it is later than the 
other three, a great deal of the material embodied in it is 
of early date. It is a more popular work than the other 
Vedas, reflecting the superstitions of the people, and con- 
sists mostly of charms, which are of two classes, those that 
bring weal and those that bring woe. It was some time 
before the A‘harvaveda received equal recognition with the 
three older collections. 


NoTE.—The text below gives the rule, that A MAN MUST NOT EAT 
WITH HIS WIFE: ‘ Hence let him not eat in presence of his wife; for 
from him who does not a vigorous son is born; and she in whose 
presence he does not eat bears a vigorous son.’ Satapatha Bréhmana, 
X. ve 2, 9. 


AATSATATAT eT ATMS TAILS SATA 
Rasa = at warafa war aa ararfar i 


THE BRAHMANAS 35 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS 
3. The Origin and the Power of Sacrifice 


Now Prajapati the lord of creatures, having created living 
beings, felt himself as it were exhausted. The creatures 
turned away from him ; the creatures did not abide with 
him for his joy and food. 


He thought within him, ‘I have exhausted myself, and 
the object for which I have created has not been accom- 
plished ; my creatures have turned away from me, the 
creatures have not abode with me for my joy and food.’ 


Prajapati thought within him, ‘ How can I again strengthen 
myself ; the creatures might then return to me; the crea- 
tures might abide with me for my joy and food.’ 


He went on praising and toiling, desirous of creatures. 
He beheld that set of eleven victims. By offering therewith 
Prajapati again strengthened himself ; the creatures returned 
to him, his creatures abode for his joy and food. By offer- 
ing he truly became better. 


Therefore, then, let the sacrificer offer with the set of 
eleven victims, for thus he truly strengthens himself by 
offspring and cattle ; the creatures turn unto him, the crea- 
tures abide with him for his joy and food; he truly becomes 
better by offering ; therefore, then, let him offer with the set 
of eleven victims. 

Satapatha Brahmana, Il. ix. 1, 1-5; S.B.Z. xxvi. 217-18, 


36 


13. 


14. 


OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


4. A Charm against Fever 


. Hence, filled with holy strength let Agni, Soma, and 


Varuna, the Press-stone, and the Altar, 

And Grass, and glowing Fuel banish Fever. Let 
hateful things stay at a distance yonder. 

And thou thyself who makest all men yellow, consum- 
ing them with burning heat like Agni, 

Thou, Fever! then be weak and ineffective. Pass 
hence into the realms below or vanish. 


. Go, Fever, to the Mijavats, or farther, to the Bahlikas. 


Seek a lascivious Sidra girl and seem to shake her 
through and through. 


. Go hence and eat thy kinsmen the Mahavrishas and 


Mijavats. 
These or those foreign regions we proclaim to Fever for 
his home. 


. Go Fever, with Consumption, thy brother, and with thy 


sister, Cough, 

And with thy nephew Herpes, go away unto that alien 
folk. 

Chase Fever whether cold or hot, brought by the summer 
or the rains, 

Tertian, intermittent, or autumnal, or continual. 

We to Gandhiris, Mijavats, to Angas and to Maga- 
dhas 

Hand over Fever as it were a servant and a thing of 
price. 

Atharvaveda, V. xxii. 1, 2, 7, 8, 12, 13-14; Griffith, i, pp. 224-5. 


THE BRAHMANAS 37 








TABLES 
6. The Chief Charanas or Schools with their 
Brahmanas 
Charanas Brahmanas 
A. Rigveda— 
1. The Aitareyins Aitareya 
2. The Kaushitakins Kaushitaki 
B. Samaveda— 
ithe Dandins ss - Panchavinsa 
2. The Chhandogyas [Chhandogya| 
3. The Talavakaras . Talavakara 
Black Yajur— 
1. The Taittiriyins Taittiriya 
Cc 2. The Kathakas 
3 3. The Maitrayaniyas 
White Yajur— 
1. The Vajasaneyins . Satapatha 
D. Atharvaveda— 
Gopatha 








NoTe.—The Chhindogya Brahmana 


have the Chhandogya Upanishad. 


has not survived, though we 


7. Relative Age of the Brahmanas 











DatEs UNKNOWN 
External Indian , 
Lvents History ENeraure 
Elijah, the The Aryans in 
Prophet, about Kurukshetra THE BRAHMANAS 
ee 2 o & y Elaboration of Panchavimsa Gradual 
delay the sacrifice Spy Compilation 
composed. : Taittiriya or ths 
age Ps Ae Talavakara Atharvaveda 
Baye the Land Kaushitaki 
Prophet, ‘ 
737-700 B,C. Writing intro- Attareya 
duced Satapatha 
Rise of the Gopatha 











Vanaprasthas 
lt P 


agenfeematcetaa <fa 


BATATT AITSTTY aUt aafa | 


CHAPTER: TY. 


PHILOSOPHIC PERIOD 
ESSENTIAL HINDUISM 
Period ends about 480 B.C. 


26. History. This period saw the completion of the 
spread of Aryan influence all over North India, and the 
still further progress of the organization of the people under 
the Brahmans. North India was divided into a large 
number of different states, of which a few were ruled as 
republics, but the majority 
as monarchies. Several of 
them were of considerable 
size, and had great military 
power. The chief of them 
were undoubtedly Magadha, 
corresponding roughly to Bihar, and Kosala, corresponding 
roughly to Oudh. The capitals of these states were now 
large, prosperous, wealthy cities. Industry, trade, and the 
simple arts were progressing. A rude coinage, consisting 





3. EARLY INDIAN COIN 


NoTEe.—The text at the top of the page is one of the earliest utter- 
ances on KARMA AND REBIRTH :— 

‘In proportion as a man consists now of this or that, just as he acts, 
just as he behaves, so will he be born.’ SBrthadaranyaka Upanishad, 
IV. iv. 5. 


ESSENTIAL HINDUISM 39 


of rectangular pieces of gold, silver, and copper, with a few 
signs punched on them, was introduced. ‘There were still 
vast tracts of country under forest, but each of the states 
contained scenes of busy, happy life ; and there was constant 
communication between all the chief points. 

27. Religion. During this period the Brahmans continued 
their sacrificial work, and also carried on the great task of 
bringing the aborigines under the influence of Aryan culture. 
New gods and demigods constantly found their way into the 
pantheon. The schools of the priests were more important 
than ever. The city of Taxila in the extreme north-west of 
the Punjab was the chief centre of learning. 

28. Religion as a whole remained much as it was during 
the previous period. Innumerable sacrifices were still 
offered, and the old beliefs continued unchanged for most 
people. But the more intelligent men underwent a revolu- 
tionary change. 

(a) The old hazy pantheistic faith became clear and was 

grasped more firmly. ‘The whole world was paltry and 
unreal in comparison with the One which informed it and 
“was its sole Reality. All the ordinary gods were spoken of 
‘as mere temporary manifestations of the unchanging and 
actionless Absolute. Yet the worship of the gods went on 
unchanged, as the Absolute is unknowable. 

(2) The problems raised by the very varying fortunes of 
men and the extraordinary differences in character met with 
everywhere were solved for the Indian mind by the doctrine 
of Transmigration and its pendant Karma, ce 

~The doctrine of Transmigration is that souls are emana- 
tions of the divine spirit, sparks from the ‘central fire, drops 
from the ocean of divinity, that each soul is incarnated in a 
body times without number, that the same soul may be in 
one life a god, in another a man, in a third an animal or 
even a plant, and that there can be no rest for the soul nor 


40 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


relief from suffering until it finds release from the necessity 
of birth and returns to the divine source whence it came. 

~ The word Aarma means literally action, but the doctrine 
means the inevitable working out of action in new life. The 
idea is that a man’s body, character, capacities and tempera- 
ment, his birth, wealth and station, and the whole of his 
experience in life, whether of happiness or of sorrow, together 
form the just retribution for his deeds, good and bad, done 
in earlier existences. The expiation works itself out not 
only in his passive experience (dhok¢ritvam), but in his 
actions also (Aartritvam). Then these new actions form 
new karma which must necessarily be expiated in another 
existence ; so that, as fast as the clock of retribution runs 
down, it winds itself up again, as Deussen remarks. 

(c) As it is deeds, good or bad, that form arma, and 
thus lead to rebirth, the idea lies ready to hand that, if by 
any means a man can cease acting, he may thereby get 
Release from the necessity of rebirth. Quite naturally and 
unreflectingly men took action to mean the business of life ; 
so there arose the universal conviction that, if a man wished 
to reach Release, he must give up the ordinary life of man 
with all its gains, pleasures and interests and live an action- 
less existence, turning away from the unreal world and 
drawing near the one actionless Reality. The ascetic Nis 
the only truly religious man, according to this doctriné.” 

(d) It was perhaps the doctrine of the frequent rebirth of 
souls which suggested the theory of the cyclic destruction 
and.recreation-of-the.world. The idea is that the crude, 
external, phenomenal world periodically returns to a state 
of undifferentiated invisibility ; souls leave their bodies ; 
and matter and souls remain in undisturbed peace until the 
moment comes for a new creation. Then matter begins 
once more to evolve ; inorganic things, the vegetable world, 
animals, men and gods come into being; the process of 


ESSENTIAL HINDUISM 4I 


transmigration begins at the precise point where it stopped 
when the world disappeared ; the castes are re-formed ; the 
rishis see the Vedas once more ; and thus the world comes 
to be just as it was before. 

The period between creation and. destruction. is called a 
kalpa, the period of repose a pravaya. So much is common 
to all schools of Hindus, and to Buddhists as well. In the 
subdivision of the fa/pa a descending series of four ages, 
corresponding roughly to the golden, silver, bronze, and iron 
ages of the Classics, is much used, but there are considerable 
differences in the detailed application of the idea.! The 
Jains drop out the period of repose, and divide time into 
alternating periods of degeneration and progress. In all 
schools time has neither beginning nor end. 

(e) The Brahman was everywhere accepted as the divine 
teacher and sacrificer; his Veda was the one Revelation ; 
and Caste was the heaven-sent system for the social organi- 
zation of the people. 

(/) This then is essential Hinduism :— 

A. The Theory of God and the world, consisting of— 

(1) The one impersonal Reality and the unreal 
phenomenal world, which undergoes cyclic 
change. All minor gods are gathered under 
the pantheistic All. 

(2) Transmigration and Karma the explanation of 
the world. 

(3) Release from Transmigration and union with 
the one Reality, the object of all serious 
men. 

B. The organizing conception, consisting of— 

(1) The divine priest. 

(2) The inspired Veda. 

(3) Caste. 

1 See p. 46. 


42 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


(¢) By the time that this new conception of the world 
had taken distinct form, it had become the custom to send 
every boy belonging to the Brahman, Kshatriya, and Vaisya 
castes to a Brahmanical school to receive an education. 
A ceremony of initiation introduced the lad to this reli- 
gious training. A Brahman priest muttered sacred texts 
_ over him and put the sacred thread on his shoulder; and 
immediately thereafter his education began. It was a birth 
into a new life. Hence these three castes are known as 
twice-born. The fact that every man of these castes spent 
several years under Brahman discipline and teaching explains 
in some degree the extraordinary influence of the priestly 
class.) No one but a Brahman was allowed to teach. 
Teaching, sacrificing, and receiving gifts were the three 
functions which belonged to them by virtue of their birth. 
This universal education of the boys of the three twice- 
born castes, coupled with the absolute exclusion of every 
other one from this, the one avenue to culture and know- 
ledge then open in India, helps to explain the great 
predominance of these castes throughout India. No 
arrangement was made for giving girls an education; 
marriage took the place of initiation in their case. 

(2) By the end of our period we have trustworthy evidence 
to prove that two of the most characteristic Hindu customs 
were regarded as right, namely, the use of idols in worship 
and child-marriage. The Hindu law enjoined that a girl 
should be married before she reached the age of puberty, 
and this necessarily led to child-marriage. We may also 
note that by this time only the childless widow was allowed 
to re-marry. 

29. This brief outline of Essential Hinduism is sufficient 
to show us what an overturning change the Indian mind 
had experienced. The steadily-growing culture of the 
Brahmans and the wider experience of men and things which 


ESSENTIAL HINDUISM 43 


they were daily acquiring as they went on with the work 
of reducing the whole population of India under their own 
religious sway had brought them to this new and far-reaching 
system of thought. Under the wide dome of this universal 
pantheism they were able to gather all the aboriginal wor- 
ships of the land and by tactful arrangements to give them 
a certain distinct unity. The common people continued 
their worship practically unchanged : only Brahman teachers 
taught Transmigration everywhere, and spokeof the great God 
behind all gods. How different all this is from the beliefs 
of the Rigveda ! 

This radical system has been taught wherever Hinduism 
has gone ; it lies behind all the philosophies and is implied 
in the asceticism, the laws, the worship, and the life of the 
people. 


NotTE.—The text below is the law of CHILD-MARRIAGE in the 


earliest Hindu Law-book: ‘A girl should be given in marriage before 
puberty.’ Gautama, Dharmasitra, xviii. 21. 


Dera TAT 


44 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS 


5. The One Reality 


Who is he whom we meditate on as the self? What is 
that self? That by which one sees, by which one hears, 
by which one smells scents, by which one forms speech, by 
which one discriminates sweet and sour? That which is 
the heart and the mind, perception, injunction, understand- 
ing, knowledge, wisdom, vision, firmness, thinking, consider- 
ing, helping, memory, resolution, will, breath, love, and 
desire? All these are only names of knowledge. That 
(self) is dvahman, Indra, Prajapati, all the gods, the five 
great elements, earth, air, ether, water, lights, all these and 
those which are mixed with small as it were, seeds of various 
kinds, born of eggs, born from the womb, born from heat, 
born from germs, horses, cows, men, elephants, and all that 
breathes, whether it walks or flies, and what is immovable. 
All that is guided by knowledge, it rests on knowledge. The 
world is guided by knowledge. Knowledge is its founda- 
tion. Knowledge is drakman. He by his knowing self, 
having left this world and having obtained all delights in 
the world of heaven, became immortal. 


Attareya Aranyaka, ii. 6. From Keith’s text and translation in 
Anecdota Oxoniensia. 


ESSENTIAL HINDUISM 45 


6. Excommunication 


Novtre.—This passage has been selected for reading because it sets 
forth so clearly a number of the elements of the Hindu system. Here 
we have the sanctity of the Veda, the privileges of Brahmans, the 
restrictions of caste, the sacred cord, the lock of hair on the crown ef 
the head, and excommunication carried out by the performance of the 
funeral ceremony and zzferdictio agud, an old Aryan custom. The law 
here stated as applicable to a Brahman father who has to be excom- 
municated by his own son is of course all the more applicable to caste- 
breakers of lower degree. When a Hindu becomes a Christian by 
baptism, this law comes into operation, because he ‘dwells with men of 
the lowest castes’. 


Let him cast off a father who assassinates a king, who 
sacrifices for Sudras, who sacrifices for his own sake, 
accepting money from Sidras, who divulges the Veda to 
persons not authorized to study it, who kills a learned 
Brahman, who dwells with men of the lowest castes, or 
cohabits with a female of one of the lowest castes. Having 
assembled the sinner’s spiritual Gurus and the relatives by 
marriage, the sons and other kinsmen shall perform for him 
all the funeral rites, the first of which is the libation of 
water, and afterwards they shall overturn his water-vessel in 
the following manner ; a slave or a hired servant shall fetch 
an impure vessel from a dust-heap, fill it with water taken 
from the pot of a female slave and, his face turned towards 
the south, upset it with his foot, pronouncing the sinner’s 
name and saying: ‘I deprive N. N. of water.’ All the 
kinsmen shall touch the slave, passing their sacrificial cords 
over the right shoulder and under the left arm, and untying 
the locks on their heads. The spiritual Gurus and the 
relatives by marriage shall look on. 


Gautama, Dharmasiitra, xx. 1-6 (for this book see below, p. 73), 
S.B.£., vol. ii, pp. 277-8 


46 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


TABLES 
8. The Ages of the World 

There is some reason for thinking that at first the follow- 
ing was the whole scheme of the Ka/pa :— 

Krita yuga 

Treta yuga 

Doapara yuga 

Kali yuga 
The names are taken from the game of dice, Kvéfa, ‘ the 
four,’ designating the Golden Age, when virtue is four- 
square ; 77e/d, ‘the three,’ designating the Silver Age, when 
one-fourth part of virtue has been lost ; Dudpara, ‘ the two,’ 
when one-half of virtue has disappeared ; and Xa/z, ‘the 
one,’ when only one-fourth part of good remains. Yuga is 
the Sanskrit word for ‘age’. 

But the scheme was much elaborated by the various 
schools; and the doctrine finally adopted by orthodox 
Hinduism is that these four ages make one Mahayuga or 
Great Age, and that it takes 1,000 Mahayugas to complete 
a Kalpa. 

The number of dice spots was applied also to the length 
of the ages as under :— 


= Kalpa 


Dawn 400 
Day 4,000} = Krita yuga 
Twilight 400 
Dawn 300 
Day 3,000} = Treta yuga 
Twilight 300 
Dawn 200 | 
Day 2,000! = Dudpara yuga 
Twilight 200 
Dawn 100 
Day I eee| = Kali yuga 
Twilight 100 

This elaborate scheme arose much later than the philo- 

sophic period. 


= Mahayuga 


aaal Al aaa 
aaal at saifataa 
qaratscad TAT | 


Coie CER V 


PHILOSOPHIC PERIOD CONTINUED 
THE UPANISHADS, BUDDHISM AND JAINISM 
Period ends about 480 B.C. 


go. A time came when there arose a great passion among 
thinking men in North India to win Release, and many 
theories as to the true path to Emancipation were proclaimed. 
Most of the leaders declared that Release was the fruit of 
knowledge, but others laid stress on sacrifice or Vedic study, 
and many declared that the true means was /afas, austerity. 
So, many went out to the old hermitages and sought by 
indescribable self-torture to reach the end of birth and 
sorrow. 

gi. But the more serious men went farther. They re- 
garded the whole phenomenal world as inherently antagonistic 
to the spiritual life. They therefore decided to go much 


NoTE.—The text at the top of the page is AN ANCIENT PRAYER from 
the oldest Upanishad : — 
From the unreal lead me to the real! 
From darkness lead me to light! 
From death lead me to immortality! 
Brihadavanyaka Upanishad, I. iii, 28. 


48 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


farther than the hermits: they gave up the worship of the 
gods, ancestor-worship and all family connexions, and became 
homeless beggars. ‘They might seek Release either by Zagas, 
or by knowledge, or by a combination of the two; but in 
any case they abandoned all connexion with the life of men. 
This new type of ascetic was called parivrajaka, wanderer ; 
bhikshu, beggar ; sannyast, renouncer. 

32. The attempt to reach Release by means of true 
knowledge led to momentous results. Many theories of 
the constitution of the world were formed and taught ; but 
the most important of all is the doctrine of the Upanishads. 
The ordinary name for the World-soul was Brahman, a 
neuter noun which expresses the common thought of the 
time, that the World-soul is an impersonal essence present 
in all things. There were many speculations as to its nature ; 
until some wise thinker called Brahman the d@man, or Self 
of the universe. Then, as the soul of the universe was 
atman, and the soul of the individual was d@/man, the con- 
clusion was soon drawn that the two were identical. The 
great affirmation was made, ‘ My self is the infinite Self’ ; 
‘the soul of the universe, whole and undivided, dwells in 
me.’ Thus self-knowledge is knowledge of God ; and, as 
knowledge of God leads to Release, the man who realizes 
the identity of his soul with the World-soul is thereby set 
free from the cycle of births and deaths ; he will not be born 
again. The great phrases used are, ‘Thou art That,’ ‘I am 
Brahman,’ and ‘I am He.’ This is the Vedanta philosophy 
in its earliest form. 

The conception of Brahman-Atman in the Upanishads is 
a great lightning-flash of truth, and it is placed before us in 
many a noble passage: Brahman is Consciousness ; Brahman 
is the Reality of everything; Brahman is joy; Brahman is 
incomprehensible ; by the command of Brahman all things 
aredone, The phrase, sachchidananda Brahma, ‘ Brahman 


UPANISHADS, BUDDHISM, JAINISM 49 


is reality, intelligence, and bliss,’ is a very late one, not found 
in this period at all, but it sums up Upanishad thought with 
great accuracy. 

But there is one fatal omission in this conception. Brah- 
man is not conceived as holy: we are nowhere told that 
Brahman is righteousness. The fact is that the theory of 
the Atman is simply a very lofty philosophic presentation of 
the ancient pagan conception of God. Consequently, the 
Vedanta philosophy has never been to India what the teach- 
ing of the prophets was to Israel. Hinduism remains from 
first to last crippled, because the idea of God was never 
moralized. 

33. The philosophy of the Atman sketched above was 
by no means the only philosophic system put forward as the 
way to Release. Numerous philosophic leaders stand out 
dimly in the pale historic light, each with his own specialized 
doctrine and his following of monks. In an old Buddhist 
book there is a catalogue of sixty-two different theories of 
the universe taught at this time in North India. All these 
system-builders had a great deal in common. ‘Transmigra- 
tion was accepted as an axiom, and also the beliefs, that 
earthly things had to be given up if Release was to be won, 
and that knowledge was the right means of Release. Hence 
the search for knowledge and the wandering monkish life 
were universal among philosophers. Women also adopted 
the wandering life ; so that each school had nuns as well as 
monks. 

34. It seems to be certain that the Sankhya system as 
well as the Vedanta was sketched at this early date, but no 
treatise of the school belonging to this period survives. 
Among the numerous teachers of the time two stand out above 
all others, Mahavira, the Jain leader, and Gautama, the 
founder of Buddhism. ‘They were contemporaries, Mahavira 
the older of the two. Their exact dates are not known as 


PP 639 D 


50 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


yet, but it seems clear that Gautama’s death occurred within 
a few years of 480 B.c., the date which closes our period. 

35. Jainism was originally merely a specialization and 
intensification of the old ascetic discipline under the influence 
of an extreme reverence for life and of a dogmatic belief 
that not only men, animals, and plants, but the smallest 
particles of earth, fire, water, and wind are endowed with 
living souls. Consequently, a very large part of the Jain 
monk’s attention was directed to using the extremest care 
not to injure any living thing. So eager were the Jains to 
part with the world to the uttermost that many of their 
monks wore not a scrap of clothing. Twelve years of most 
severe asceticism were necessary for salvation. After that, if 
a monk did not wish to live longer, he was recommended 
to starve himself to death. 

36. Buddhism, on the other hand, while it recommended 
a mild asceticism, condemned self-torture, and found salva- 
tion in knowledge and right living. The knowledge which 
Buddha taught was summed up by him in three propositions, 
known as ‘the three characteristics of being’, namely :— 

All its constituents are transitory ; 

All its constituents are misery ; 

All its constituents are lacking in an ego. 
If a man realize that all things are fleeting, that life is 
sorrow, and that he has no soul to save, he will thereby be 
set free from the chains of the world, and will experience 
the zirvaua (i.e. extinction) of lust, hatred, and ignorance. 
Having reached freedom, he will live his life according to 
the noble laws of Buddha. Being thus a conqueror over 
the world, he will at death enter final érvana ; he will not 
be born again. 

Buddhism, Jainism, and the Sankhya system fail to teach 
the existence of the living eternal only God, but they 
recognize all the godlings of the Hindu system, giving them 

_a very humble place. 


UPANISHADS, BUDDHISM, JAINISM 51 


37. Philosophic leaders in those days received numerous 
honorific titles from their followers, buddha (enlightened), 
jina (conqueror), firthakara (ford-maker, i.e. religious 
leader), &c. Gautama finally became known as the Buddha, 
Mahavira as the Jina (whence the word Jain). 

38. Both of these leaders also formed an outer circle of 
lay followers, who were not required to practise the 
asceticism of the monks, but obeyed easy regulations. 

39. Literature, &c. The Brahmans, perceiving the power 
of the philosophy of the Atman, were not slow to adopt it 
and to introduce it into their schools. There it was taught 
as a special discipline preparatory to the life of the 
parivrajaka, while ordinary Brahman pupils took it as an 
extra subject at the close of the regular priestly course. 
As this knowledge was regarded as the final aim of all 
Veda study, it was called Vedanta, i.e. Veda-end. 

Gradually the allegorical teaching given as a preparation 
for the hermit life, and the philosophic instruction intended 
for the wandering life, took definite shape and were handed 
down orally from teacher to pupil in fixed language, each 
school having its own sacred deposit. The former was 
called avanyaka, or ‘forest teaching’, as we have seen ; the 
latter wpanishad, probably in the sense of ‘secret doctrine’. 
Thus were formed the wonderful treatises which we now 
know as the Aranyakas and the Upanishads. It is to be 
noted that the two types of teaching frequently overlap in 
one document. To this early period belong only the first 
great group of prose treatises, written in the style of the 
Brahmanas, viz. the four Aranyakas and the Brikadaran- 
yaka, Chhandogya, Taittiriya, Attareya, Kaushitaki, and 
Kena Upanishads. These have been used devotionally all 
through the centuries by a small but select company of 
intellectual and spiritual men. 

40. During this period the theory that the Brahmanas 

D2 


52 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


with their appendices, the Aranyakas and the Upanishads, 
are Revelation, ‘vw#t, in precisely the same sense as the 
Vedas themselves, took shape and found acceptance. 
Indeed it became customary to use the word Veda to cover 
all this prose literature as well as the hymns; so that one 
has constantly to ask whether the word is used in the wide 
or the narrow sense. The theory was that no hymn or 
Brahmana had a human author, but that they were eternal, 
and that they had been ‘seen’ by the vzshis, i.e. ‘seers’. 
Through this idea the limits of the canon were fixed. All 
that is svuf? is included ; all that is not svwéz is excluded. 
The Veda was held to be so sacred that to reveal any 
portion of it to any one other than a member of the three 
highest castes was regarded as a heinous sin (see p. 45). 
There is a vast amount of sacred literature besides this, but 
it is only smyiiz, ‘ recollection,’ that is Tradition. It has only 
a limited authority. 

41. Towards the end of this period the Ramayana in its 
earliest form, which consisted of only five books (ii-vi), was 
composed by Valmiki, in the Kingdom of Kosala. In this 
work Rama is a purely human hero, 


NotTEe.,—The text below expresses THE JOY OF KNOWING BRAH- 
MAN :— 


‘He who knows Brahman as Reality, Knowledge, Eternal, he obtains 
all desires.” Zaztéiriya Upanishad, I. i. 1. 


aa Wiatad FT Ml Az 
aaa Baty AAT i 


UPANISHADS, BUDDHISM, JAINISM 53 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS 


7. The Vanaprastha and the Agrama 


When Rama, valiant hero, stood 
In the vast shade of Dandak wood, 
His eyes on every side he bent 
And saw a hermit settlement, 
Where coats of bark were hung around, 
And holy grass bestrewed the ground. 
Bright with Brahmanic lustre glowed 
That circle where the saints abode: 
Like the hot sun in heaven it shone, 
Too dazzling to be looked upon. 
Wild creatures found a refuge where 
The court, well-swept, was bright and fair, 
And countless birds and roedeer made 
Their dwelling in the friendly shade. 
Beneath the boughs of well-loved trees 
Oft danced the gay Apsarases. 
Around was many an ample shed 
Wherein the holy fire was fed ; 
With sacred grass and skins of deer, 
Ladles and sacrificial gear, 
And roots and fruit, and wood to burn, 
And many a brimming water-urn. 
There, clad in coats of bark and hide— 
Their food by roots and fruit supplied— 
Dwelt many an old and reverend sire 
Bright as the sun or Lord of Fire, 
All with each worldly sense subdued, 
A pure and saintly multitude. 


Valmiki, Ramayana, Book III, Canto i; Griffith, p. 228. 


54 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


8. The Horse of the Asvamedha 
A Meditation for the Vanaprastha 


Verily the dawn is the head of the horse which is fit for 
sacrifice, the sun its eye, the wind its breath, the mouth the 
Vaigvanara fire, the year the body of the sacrificial horse. 
Heaven is the back, the sky the belly, the earth the chest, 
the quarters the two sides, the intermediate quarters the 
ribs, the members the seasons, the joints the months and 
half months, the feet days and nights, the bones the stars, 
the flesh the clouds. The half-digested food is the sand, 
the rivers the bowels, the liver and the lungs the mountains, 
the hairs the herbs and trees. As the sun rises, it is the 
 forepart, as it sets, the hindpart of the horse. When the 
horse shakes itself, then it lightens; when it kicks, it 
thunders ; when it makes water, it rains; voice is its voice. 


Verily Day arose after the horse as the golden vessel, 
called Mahiman, which at the sacrifice is placed before the 
horse. Its place is in the Eastern sea. The Night arose 
after the horse as the silver vessel, called Mahiman, which 
at the sacrifice is placed behind the horse. Its place is in 
the Western sea. Verily these two vessels arose to be on 
each side of the horse. 


As a racer he carried the Devas, as a stallion the 
Gandharvas, as a runner the Asuras, asa horse men. The 
sea is its kin, the sea is its birthplace. 


Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, i. 1; S.B. E. xv. 73-4. 


UPANISHADS, BUDDHISM, JAINISM 55 


g. The Identity of the Human and the Divine Self 


‘Place this salt in water, and then wait on me in the 
morning.’ 

The son did as he was commanded. 

The father said to him: ‘Bring me the salt, which you 
placed in the water last night.’ 


The son, having looked for it, found it not, for, of course, 
it was melted. 


The father said: ‘Taste it from the surface of the water. 
How is it ?’ 

The son replied: ‘It is salt.’ 

‘Taste it from the middle. How is it ?’ 

The son replied : ‘It is salt.’ 

‘Taste it from the bottom. How is it?’ 

The son replied: ‘It is salt.’ 

The father said : ‘ Throw it away and then wait on me.’ 

He did so; but salt exists for ever. 


Then the father said : ‘ Here also, in this body, forsooth, 
you do not perceive the True, my son ; but there indeed it 
is. ‘That which is the subtle essence, in it all that exists has 
its self. That is the True. That is the Self, and thou, 
O Svetaketu, art That.’ 


Chhandogya Upanishad, vi. 13; S.B.E. i. 104-5. 


56 


OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


TABLES 


g. The Relative Age of the Early Upanishads 


PERIOD ENDS ABOUT 480 B.C. 





Events outside 








badte Flistory Religion Literature 
Zoroaster, All North India | Transmigration} Vhe early prose 
660-583 B.c. | under Aryan and Karma Upanishads 
The Avesta influence accepted 
Jeremiah Rise of great eee 
627-380 B.C. cities t. Brthadaranyaka 
Taxila a seat 
of learning 
Chast ane 2. Chhandogya 
pears 
ee 3. Taittiriya 
Pythagoras, Gradual Con- 
died about quest of the she 
510 B.C. South 4. Adtareya = 
Athens a re- 
public, 510 B.C. yes arn 
Rome a re- Rise of Jainism | °* Kaushitaks 
public, 509 B.C. Rise of Bud- 
—T 6. Kena 
Death of 
Mahavira 


Confucius the 
Chinese sage, 
551-479 B.C, 


The Ramayana, 


Dari 
500 Darius Tv 


conquers the 
Punjab 


Death of 
Gautama about 
480 B.C. 





UPANISHADS, BUDDHISM, JAINISM 57 


10. Sruti, the Hindu Canon 


Notst.—For the Mahdnadrayana and the other Upanishads which are 
not mentioned in section 39, see section 51 and p. 73. Many later 
Upanishads, not included in this table, are recognized as §ru/i also; 
but they have no definite place in any Vedic school, but are loosely 
attached to the A¢harvaveda, 





























2 Aranyaka Upanishad 
Veda Segal For the For the 
Hermit Wanderer 
Rik 1, Attareya 1. Adtareya 1. Adtareya 
2, Kaushitaki | 2. Kaushitaki | 2. Kaushitaki 
Saman 1. Paticha- 
vinsa 
2. [Chhando- | . 2. Chhandogya 
sya} 
3. Lalavakéra 3. Kena 
Black Vajus \, Tawttiriya |1. Tattteriya | 1. Taittiriya 
Mahanarayana 
x 2. Kathaka 
3. 3. Maitrayaniya 
4 Suetasvatara 
White Yajus 1. Satapatha 1. Brihat \. Brihadaranyaka 
L$a 
Atharvan Gopatha Mundaka 
Pragna 


Mandikya 





BUDDHAM SARANAM GACCHAMI 
DHAMMAM SARANAM GACCHAMI 
SANGHAM SARANAM GACCHAMI 


CHAPIERY! 


SCHOLASTIC PERIOD 
SUTRAS AND SUTTAS 
480 B.C. to 184 B.C. 


42. History. The greatest fact to be realized with regard 
to the history of this period is the gradual Aryanizing of 
South India. We have no detailed account of how it was 
carried out. Doubtless the chief work was done by Brahman 
priests, who went all over the south country as missionaries 
of the faith and civilization of their people, but Aryan 
warriors also won themselves kingdoms in the south. 

43- Darius conquered the basin of the Indus and a part 
of the Punjab about 500 B.c., but we do not know how 
long Persian rule lasted there. Apart from this, North 
India remained practically as it was before until 321 B.C. 
The literature speaks of the existence of sixteen leading 
powers in North India in these centuries. The brilliant 
invasion of the Punjab by Alexander the Great in 326 B.C. 


NoTE.—The text at the top of the page is the FORMULA OF 
ENTRANCE INTO BUDDHISM, ‘I take refuge in the Buddha; I take 
refuge in the Doctrine; I take refuge in the Order.’ The language is 
Pali. 


, 


SUTRAS AND SUTTAS 59 


did not disturb appreciably the other parts of India; and 
very soon after his death in 323 B.c. a revolt destroyed the 
Greek power in the Punjab. 

44. But the young adventurer who overthrew the Greeks 
in the Punjab soon brought the whole of the northern half 
of India under his rule, and thus founded the first empire 
ever known in India (321 B.c.). His name was Chandra- 
gupta, and /afaliputra, i.e. Patna, the capital of Magadha, 
was his capital. His grandson, Asoka (272-231 B.C.), ruleda 
large part of South India also. Under this man, a ruler of 
the highest capacity and character, civilization made great 
strides. Stone architecture and sculpture made _ their 
appearance in India during his reign, and from his time 
onwards inscriptions are common. His descendants, how- 
ever, proved unfit for impe- 
rial power; and the empire 
gradually weakened and 
finally broke up in 184 B.C. 
After Alexander the coinage 
of India became artistic under 
the influence of the mints of 
Greece, Bactria, and Persia. 

45. Leligion. During this 
period Hinduism with its 





Veda and caste-system, its 
priests and regulated worship, 
completed the conquest of 
the peninsula. From this time 
onwards the Brahmans are 
everywhere recognized as 


divine representatives of the gods. 


4. Hinpu IDOLATRY 


The earliest surviving represen- 
tations of Hindu idols occur in 


Buddhist, sculpture. This is the 
goddess Sri fromthe Bharhut Stipa, 
now in Calcutta Museum (Cun- 
ningham, xxvi). See below, p. 62. 


But, although they 


became supreme wherever they went, and brought the better 
part of the population under their care, there were large 
sections of the people everywhere whom they considered 


60 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


too low and degraded to receive their ministrations. The 
descendants of these groups are found to this day in all 
parts of the country. In the south a very large proportion 
of the population was held to be so unclean as to be beyond 
the pale of Brahman service ; 
and the millions of their 
descendants still remain 
outside (see Chapter XV). 
This period is scholastic 
7M in most of its religious 
1 Gale Kill vr features. Hindu practice 
fs | — iy ~ became steadily more regu- 
- 1 ah ~ || Jar under the unceasing 
pressure of priestly autho- 
rity. This is most note- 
oe le ae =,| worthy in the realm of 
CIA Ase ee @ social life ; at the beginning 
of the period there was still 
a A Hiwon es In BuppHIst a considerable amount of 
LPTU . 

From the sate oe of second ae wile ee ppmeecot 
century B.C. (Maisey, xiii.). See Northern India, but by the 
ay ae Ne ee close 7 great advance had 
visible within the shrine. In =e taken place. The whole 
ee an eee ee a. s racitiase taetieoed sins 
seen in the right foreground. was very much what it has 

been for centuries. A large 
number of the secondary castes were already in existence. 
One of the chief characteristics of the priesthood at this 
time was the desire to express everything with great exactness 
in well-arranged manuals, each devoted to a single subject. 
This scholastic tendency comes out very distinctly in 
Buddhist literature also ; everything is classified, arranged 
in groups, numbered and labelled. There are four Noble 
Truths ; the Noble Path is eight-fold ; there are twelve steps 





SUTRAS AND SUTTAS 61 


in the theory of Dependent Origination, the Buddhist theory 
of how living beings come into existence. The same is true 
of Jainism, 





6. NorTH GATE OF THE SANCHT STOPA. 


This noble monument stands at Safichi in the Bhopal State. The 
huge mound of the stiipa is visible behind the gate, but the ornament on 
the top is gone. Portions of the stone rail are visible on each side of 
the gate. There are three other gates. (Photograph by Johnston 
& Hoffmann.) 


Images and temples rose during this period to the place 
which they have ever since held in Hindu life. The tradi- 
tional appearance of the various gods, with their dress, 
weapons, and ornaments, became definitely fixed ; while the 


62 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


plan of the temple court was modelled on the arrangements 
of the ground for the ancient sacrifices. 

46. When Gautama the Buddha died, his relics, divided 
into seven portions, were laid in seven sttipas erected for 
them; and the great teachers who followed him were 
similarly honoured. Nor was that all. Buddhists soon 
began to believe that the truth had been taught by a long 





7. BUDDHIST WORSHIP 


Men and angels adoring a stipa. This is a relief from the rail of the 
Bharhut Stipa of the second century B.C., now in Calcutta Museum. 
Cunningham, Stipa of Bharhut, xxxi. 


succession of Buddhas before Gautama, and that in the next 
age another, named Maitreya, would arise. (See p. 97.) 
All these things stirred feelings of piety and reverence in 
Buddhist hearts. Crowds of lay believers bowed down 
before the great stiipas in reverent meditation, adoring the 
relics and repeating sacred formulas, and walked round the 
stiipas in solemn religious march. To these observances 
and to the stated gatherings in the chattyas, or assembly 


SUTRAS AND SUTTAS 63 


halls, we must attribute the beginnings of Buddhist 
worship. 

47. In the ninth year of his reign Asoka became a Bud- 
dhist layman. Later he actually became a monk. He 
spent a great deal of energy in trying to lead his subjects 
to the adoption of the moral teaching of Buddhism. For 
this purpose, he had long edicts cut on rocks in various 





8. BUDDHIST WORSHIP 


A chattya or Buddhist hall and Buddhists adoring a dharmachakra, 
or wheel of the doctrine, a symbol of Buddha’s teaching. A relief from 
the Bharhut Stipa. Cunningham, xxxi. 


parts of his empire, calling on the people to cultivate filial 
piety, righteousness, reverence for all religions, and kind- 
ness to animals. He erected hospitals for man and beast, 
and in every way sought the welfare of his subjects. 
Innumerable religious edifices were erected to his order, 
chiefly stiipas, chaityas, monasteries, and rock-cut cells 
for monks. But the most significant act of his reign 
was the sending out of missionaries to spread Buddhism 


64 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


throughout India and the neighbouring lands. As a result 
Ceylon became a Buddhist country, and the religion also 
made great progress beyond the river Indus and upon the 
Himalayas. It was Asoka that made Buddhism a world- 
conquering power. 

48. The first beginnings of worship among the Jains 
appeared in much the same way as they did in Buddhism ; 
but this community was not so successful at this time in 
securing royal and wealthy patrons as the Buddhists were. 
Their earliest monuments are two to three centuries later. 

Then ‘the Jain community broke in two in A.p. 82. It 
was a question of clothes that led to the separation. The 
monks of one section wore no clothing and were, therefore, 
called Digambara, ‘clothed-in-atmosphere,’ while the monks 
of the other group wore white robes and were called Sve¢am- 
bara, ‘ clothed-in-white.’ 

49. Literature, (Quite early in this period, the earliest 
form of the great epic, the A/ahabharata, appeared. It 
probably arose in the country between the Ganges and the 
Jumna, It was then a poem of very moderate length, con- 
taining about 8,800 couplets, and was called the Bharata. 
Krishna is a purely human hero in it. 

50. The teaching of each philosophic leader was handed 
down orally in his monastic school. It is noteworthy, how- 
ever, that Sanskrit was used in the Brahmanic schools, while 
the Jains and the Buddhists used the vernaculars. 

As knowledge grew and the compass and the number of 
the subjects taught in the Brahmanical schools went on 
increasing, the mass of material to be learned by rote be- 
came more and more unmanageable. It became impossible 
for the student to store in his memory everything which 
he wanted to know, so long as it was presented to him 
in the extraordinarily prolix manner of the Brahmanas. A 
new method was therefore invented. All the knowledge 


SUTRAS AND SUTTAS 65 


which the student had to acquire was expressed in strings 
of aphorisms of the briefest and most pregnant description. 
As time went on and the new method developed, it became 
a conventional system of technical terms like a modern 
telegraphic code. These tabloids of condensed knowledge 
were called s#tvas. Is not this the very climax of scholas- 
ticism? These books, if books they can be called when 
they were not written down, dealt with all the subjects of 
a priest’s education. They were usually summed up under 
six heads, called the veda@ngas, or members of the body of the 
Veda. Of the six, Kalpa, ceremonial, is the most important. 
Under Kalpa there are three groups of sivas, the Svauta 
Sutras, which deal with the sacrifices, summarizing the 
teaching of the Brahmanas, the Grikya Sitras, which 
deal with domestic ceremonies, and the Dharma Siitras, 
which provide rules of conduct for the various classes of 
men and the various stages of life. The Brahmanical 
schools were now more numerous than ever, many of the 
earlier schools having split into several branches ; and each 
had its own series of si#¢ras, dealing in turn with all the 
subjects comprehended under the six vedaagas. Panini, 
the great grammarian, wrote in sé#vas, and his work 
comes under wydkarana, one of the vedangas (see 
p. 76). He was connected with Taxila and flourished 
about 300 B.C. 

The language used in the Brahmanical schools was gradu- 
ally polished and brought under phonetic and grammatical 
rules, while, with the spread of the people all over North 
India, the ordinary language had necessarily developed into 
a number of provincial vernaculars. The literary tongue of 
the schools was called samskrita, i.e. polished, while the 
vernaculars were called prakrita, i.e. natural. Panini’s 
grammar finally fixed the form of Sanskrit. Already in his 
day it was very distinct from the popular dialects. These 


PP 639 E 


56 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


latter naturally continued to change, and they have pro- 
duced the great modern Aryan languages of India, Hindi, 
Punjabi, Gujarati, Marathi, Bengali, Oriya, Assamese, 
and the rest. 

51. In certain of the schools at this time some of the best 
parts of the old Upanishads were versified and strung 
together, so as to make new Upanishads. (See p. 73.) The 
brief, pointed, aphoristic character of these poems shows 
plainly that they were put together with a view to their 
being easily committed to memory. 

52. As we have seen, the Jains and the Buddhists used, 
not Sanskrit, but the vernaculars in teaching their hearers. 
Their sermons were called swtéas, which is the vernacular 
form of the Sanskrit s#ras. These were handed down by 
word of mouth from teacher to pupil; but during the 
earliest generations they were considerably changed and 
expanded. 

By the year 200 B.c. the Buddhist Z7ifitaka, that is, 
the triple basket, or canon in three parts, was practically 
complete. Many of these swffas are beautiful as literature, 
and are filled with a love of righteousness and a mounting 
passion for spiritual things which give them great distinc- 
tion. When Buddhism was destroyed in India, this litera- 
ture perished also, but it has been most faithfully preserved 
in Ceylon. The language of the 77ifitaka is called Pali. 
This is not the name of any old Indian vernacular, but 
merely the Singhalese word for ‘text’, which has come to be 
used to designate the language of the text, in contrast with 
the Singhalese of the commentary. Scholars have not been 
able to decide as yet which of the old Indian vernaculars, 
through being used by the monks who won Ceylon to the 
faith, has been preserved for us in the Pali text. 

Jain teaching was similarly handed down, but reached its 
permanent form later still. 


SUTRAS AND SUTTAS 67 


Many other schools had their traditional swé/as, but they 
were necessarily lost when the school died out. 


NoTE.—The text below is a mnemonic verse giving the names of 
THE SIX VEDANGAS: — fzksh@, pronunciation; kalpa, ceremonial ; 


vycharana, grammar ; nirukta, etymology; chhandas, metre ; jyotisha, 
astronomy. 


frat aa Baraca 
frea get sitfat i 


68 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS 


10. Sutras 


Novre.—A literal translation of each sitra is given in italics, and 
then the meaning follows in roman. For a more condensed example 
see p. 94. 


1. Low, therefore, the right. 

Now, therefore, the right of performing sacrificial acts 

will be laid down here. 
2. Acts fruit-attended. 

Sacrificial acts are attended by fruits, such as heaven, 

wealth, &c. 
3. Of all without distinction. 

One would expect that there must be a right of all living 
beings without distinction to perform sacrificial acts, 
as all desire fruits. 

4. But of human beings from the power of undertaking. 

But the right belongs to human beings only, because 
they only have the power of undertaking sacrificial 
acts. 

5. Cripple, ignorant, eunuch, Sidra except. 

Cripples, those ignorant of the Veda, eunuchs, Sadras 
are to be excepted. 

6. Of Brahmans, Rajanyas, Vaisyas, from Srutt. 

The right belongs to Brahmans, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, 
but not to Siidras, according to Vedic precept. 

7. A woman also without distinction. 

A woman also has the right, as there is no distinction 

between her and her husband. 


Katyayana, Svauta Sutra, i. 1-7. 


SUTRAS AND SUTTAS 69 


u. A Buddhist Sutta 


Thus have I heard. 

On a certain occasion The Blessed One was dwelling at 
Savatthi in Jetavana monastery in Anathapindika’s Park. 
And there The Blessed One addressed the monks. 

‘Monks,’ said he. 

‘Lord,’ said the monks to The Blessed One in reply. 

And The Blessed One spoke as follows : 

‘I will teach you, O monks, the burden, the bearer of the 
burden, the taking up of the burden, and the laying down 
of the burden. 

‘And what, O monks, is the burden ? 

‘Reply should be made that it is the five attachment- 
groups. And what are the five? They are: the form- 
attachment-group, the sensation-attachment-group, the per- 
ception-attachment-group, the predisposition-attachment- 
group, the consciousness -attachment-group. These, O 
monks, are called the burden. 

‘And who, O monks, is the bearer of the burden ? 

‘Reply should be made that it is the individual; the 
venerable So-and-so of such-and-such a family. He, O 
monks, is called the bearer of the burden. 

‘And what, O monks, is the taking up of the burden ? 

‘It is desire leading to rebirth, joining itself to pleasure 
and passion, and finding delight in every existence—desire, 
namely, for sensual pleasure, desire for permanent existence, 
desire for transitory existence. This, O monks, is called 
the taking up of the burden. 

‘And what, O monks, is the laying down of the burden? 

‘It is the complete absence of passion, the cessation, 
giving up, relinquishment, forsaking, and non-adoption of 
desire. This, O monks, is called the laying down of the 
burden.’ 

Samyutta-Ntkdya, xxii. 22, 1; Warren’s Buddhism in Translations, 
p. 159. 


70 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


1. A Passage from a Verse Upanishad 


As the one fire that passed into the world 

Has there transformed itself to many forms, 

So the one Self within all creatures 

Transforms itself to many forms, while outside all. 


As the one air that passed into the world 

Has there transformed itself to many forms, 

So the one Self within all creatures 

Transforms itself to many forms, while outside all. 


Just as the sun, the whole world’s eye, 

By visible external foulness ne’er is tainted, 

So the one Self within all creatures 

By the world’s sorrow ne’er is tainted, being outside it. 


The one Controller, the Self within all creatures, 
Who makes the one form manifold— 

Those wise men who behold Him in the self, 
They and no others have eternal joy. 


He who, Eternal, Conscious, One, fulfils 

The longings of the Transient, Conscious, Many— 
Those wise men who behold Him in the self, 
They and no others have eternal peace. 


The truth, that this is That, they feel to be 
Bliss indescribable, supreme. 

How can I come to know it? 

Shines it effulgent, or reflecting light? 


There shineth not the sun, nor moon and stars ; 
These lightnings shine not ; how much less this fire! 
His lonely shining makes the All resplendent ! 

"Tis with His glory that this whole world gleams! 


Kathaka Upanishad, v. 9-15. 


SUTRAS AND SUTTAS 7% 


13. Buddhist Teaching in Verse 


Do not follow the evil law! Do not live on in thought- 
lessness! Do not follow false doctrine! Be not a friend 
of the world. 


Rouse thyself ! do not be idle! Follow the law of virtue ! 
The virtuous rests in bliss in this world and in the next. 


Follow the law of virtue ; do not follow that of sin. The 
virtuous rests in bliss in this world and in the next. 


Look upon the world as you would on a bubble, look 
upon it as you would on a mirage ; the king of death does not 
see him who thus looks down upon the world. 


Come, look at this world, glittering like a royal chariot ; 
the foolish are immersed in it, but the wise do not touch it. 


He who formerly was reckless and afterwards became 
sober, brightens up this world, like the moon when freed 
from clouds. 


He whose evil deeds are covered by good deeds, brightens 
up this world, like the moon when freed from clouds. 

This world is dark, few only can see here; a few only go 
to heaven, like birds escaped from the net. 

The uncharitable do not go to the world of the gods ; fools 
only do not praise liberality ; a wise man rejoices in liberality, 
and through it becomes blessed in the other world. 

Better than sovereignty over the earth, better than going 
to heaven, better than lordship over all worlds, is the reward 
of Sotapatti, the first step in holiness. 


Dhammapada, 107-174, 177-178; S.B.E. x. 47. 


72 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


14. Satyaki’s Sons slain 


Morning with her fiery radiance oped the portals of the day, 
Shone once more on Kuru warriors, Pandav chiefs in dread 
array ! 


Bhima and the gallant Arjun led once more the van of 
war, 


But the proud preceptor Drona faced them in his sounding 
car ! 


Still with gallant son of Arjun, Lakshman strove with bow 
and shield, 


Vainly strove ; his faithful henchman bore him bleeding 
from the field ! 


Lakshman, son of proud Duryodhan! Abhimanyu, Arjun’s 
son ! 


Doomed to die in youth and glory ’neath the same revolving 
sun! 


Sad the day for Vrishni warriors! Brave Satyaki’s sons of 
might, 
’Gainst the cruel Bhiri-Sravas strove in unrelenting fight, 


Ten brave brothers, pride of Vrishni, fell upon that fatal 
day, 


Slain by mighty Bhiri-sravas, and upon the red field lay ! 


Mahabharata, R. C. Dutt’s version, p. 109. 


SUTRAS AND SUTTAS 73 


TABLES 
11. Scholastic Period. 480 to 184 B.C. 


Sitras are the characteristic type of Hindu literature throughout this 
period. The Gautama Dharmasiitra, which is the earliest of the 
Dharma class, probably dates from the end of the philosophic period, 
and one or two of the Srauta class may be as early. In any case, all 
three classes, Srauta, Grihya and Dharma, continued to be composed 
throughout the period. They are not set down in this table, because 
their chronological order is not yet accurately known. 














ae Listory Religion Literature 
evenls 
Continued VERSE Earliest 
conquest of UPANISHADS form of 
the South the 
Mahabha- 
400 rata 
Socrates Kathaka 
drinks the 
hemlock, z 
399 B. C. L5G 
Plato, 
427-347 
Aristotle, 
384-322 P 
The Avesra| Alexander Svetasvatara | Gradual 
burned by in the A : 
Alexander Punjab Formation 
300 of the 
Rise of Buddhist 
Buddhist Pali 
architecture | Mundaka 
Agoka Buddhist Canon, 
missionaries the 
gees by Tripitaka 
Mahanira- | 
200 yana 
184 Fall of 
ASokan 


Empire 





74 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


12. Conspectus of the Chief 


NoTE.—This table is meant to show at a glance the way in which 
the Vedic literature grew up, and to which school each great manual 
belongs. The numbers show the school connexion: thus the great 
Taittiriya school of the Black Yajur Veda had a full series of manuals, 
Brahmana, Aranyaka, Upanishad, Srauta, Grihya, and Dharma siitras. 
Brackets are used to keep together the branch schools belonging to 
each ancient charana. Where there is uncertainty as to the school to 











Sruti 
Veda | Brahmana Arainyaka Opanishad 
1. Attareya 1, Adtareya 1. Adlareya 
RIK 
2. Kaushitakt 2, Kaushitaki | 2. Kaushitaki 
1. Pattchavimsa 
SAMAN : [Chhandogya]} 2. Chhandogya 
3. Talavakara 3. Kena 
I, Zaittiriva 1. Latttiriya \ Taztttiriya 
re kept 
( Mahanarayana 
BLACK 
YAJUS }2 2. Kathaka 
3 3. Maittrayaniya 
Svetasvatara 
VAIUS rm Satapatha 1. Brihat i She 
a 
ATHARVAN § Gofatha Mundaka 
Prasna 


Manditkya 








Manuals of the Vedic Schools 


SUTRAS AND SUTTAS 


75 


which a manual belongs, no number is prefixed to the name, as in the 
case of the Vastshtha Dharmasiira. One Dharmasitra has been put in 
brackets: the reason is that no manuscript of it has been found; it is 
known only by quotation ; but it is mentioned, because it is the source 
whence the Manava Dharmasastra (see section 62) sprang. All this litera- 
ture was taught only by Brahmans and only to men of the three twice- 
born castes. Women and men of other castes were not allowed to hear it. 


Smy tt 





Z 


Srauta Sitra 


I. A Svalayana 
2. Sankhdyana 


Masaka 
1. 4 Drahyayana 


Latyayana 


Baudhayana 
Apastamba 
Hiranyakesin 
Bharadvaja 


3. Manava 
1. Katyayana 


Vattana 
Kausika 


Grihya Sutra 


Ted Svalayana 


2. } Sankhayana 


Sam bavya 


Gobhila 
 Vknadira 


Baudhayana 
A pastamba 
Hiranyakesin 
Bharadvga 
2. Kathaka 

3. Manava 


1. Paraskara 


Dharma Sutra 


Vasishtha 





I. 


Gautama 





Apastamba 


Baudhayana 
vfs 


Hiranyakesin 


[3. Wanava] 





Kausika 





OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


76 


SvSuEpeA XIS OY 
—_—_ See 


Awouozjse ASojowsjo rvmures3 arjeut = sorjouo yd [etuourera9 
pysejohf DiYyNAINT § vupsvynhyA svpunyyD pysy2s odjoy 


rc .ChaoOVv""—"“—— 


(27n4§ WOT ‘9 "T 
(2griaus WIOIZ ‘dt ‘BINYLIONT YzLOUUS) “JI[ 0772048) 
VAHMYSILVYG  VWuLas-VWAVHC VULOS-VAHIYD = VULAS-VLAVAS 


AVHSINVdQ) VNVWHYUg 


(aspeymouy) vuvu (sy10M) vias0y 
WC ee — — 


var, 


IINJEIIP] IIPIA JO SuOT}EjorIayUy «EI 


SUTRAS AND SUTTAS vit 


14. The Buddhist Tripitaka 


1. Zhe Vinaya Pitaka: the Discipline Basket, the rules 
of the monastic life. 


(a) Sutta Vibhanga. 
(b) Khandhakas. 
(1) Mahavagga. 
(2) Chullavagga. 
(c) Parivara. 


2. The Sutia Pitaka: the Sermon Basket, the teaching 
of the Buddha. 
(a) Digha Nikaya. 
(b) Majjhima Nikiya. 
(c) Samyutta Nikaya. 
(d) Anguttara Nikaya. 
(e) Khuddaka Nikaya. 


3. The Abhidhamma Pitaka: the Exposition Basket, an 
enlarged and detailed treatment of Buddhist doctrine. 

(a) Dhamma Sangani. 

(b) Vibhanga. 

(c) Katha Vatthu. 

(d) Puggala Panhatti. 

(e) Dhatu Katha. 

(f) Yamakas. 

(g) Patthana. 


1 This part of the Buddhist canon was kept secret by the monks, and 
was not revealed even to the Buddhist laity. Most of the monastic 
orders seem to have refused to divulge their disciplinary rules. 


78 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


15. The Four Aéramas or Stages of Brahmanic 
Life 


During the scholastic period, it was recognized that the 
ideal life for a Brahman was to spend twelve years as a 
student, then to marry and beget children, and then to retire 


to the forest as a hermit, taking his wife with him, if he chose 
to do so. 


Ata still later date a fourth stage was added: the Brahman 
was recommended, after he had lived as a hermit, to end 
his days as a houseless pavivrajaka, thinking only of God. 


1. Brahmachari: student. 
2. Grihastha: householder, the ordinary Brahman priest. 
3. Vanaprastha: forest-dweller, hermit. 


4. Parivrajaka : wanderer, houseless monk. 


uf<araTa aTyat faatatTa y eeHaTA | 
waderaarata aratfa ya yA 


CHAPTER VII 


INCARNATION PERIOD 
POLITICAL TROUBLES: THE DHARMASASTRAS 


From the Fall of the ASokan Empire to the Rise 
of the Guptas, 184 B.C. to A.D. 320 


53. fZistory. The largest fact in the history of these 
centuries is the irruption of hordes of invaders from Central 
Asia across the Indus both in the north and in the south. 
Necessarily these invasions created great disturbances, and 
produced considerable mixture in the population of the 
frontier provinces. The break-up of the ASokan Empire also 
led to many revolutions and upheavals. There was thus 
much violence and frequent political change throughout 
these centuries in Northern and Central India. We need 
not here catalogue the many various dynasties which 
followed each other east, west, north, and south. We need 
only notice the rise of the one great empire which appeared 
during our period. This was the kingdom of the Kushans, 
a people from Central Asia, their greatest ruler being Kan- 
ishka. Peshawar was their capital ; and that city, during the 
first and second centuries of our era, was the centre of a 


Note.—The text at the top of the page is A COUPLET ON INCARNA- 
TION put into the mouth of Krishna: ‘ To save the righteous, to destroy 
evil-doers, to establish the Law, I come into birth age after age.’ 
Bhagavadgité, iv. 8. 


80 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


flourishing civilization in which Indian ideas mingled freely 
with the influence of Persia and of the Roman Empire. 
These kings would appear to have favoured Hinduism and 
Zoroastrianism quite as much as Buddhism; yet the latter 
religion clearly dominated the country round Peshawar. 
Architecture flourished, and 
a famous school of sculpture 
arose under Greek influence. 
The art of the kingdom is 
known as Gandharan art (see 
Figs. 9, 11, 14, 16 and pp. 198 
and 202). Buddhism found 
a new base for its operations 
in Peshawar; and Sanskrit 
first came to the front as 
the common language of 
India in the Kushan Empire. 

54. Religion. Under Asoka 
and his obscure successors 
Buddhism was greatly fa- 





9. RELIC-CASKET 
Recently discovered in the ruins 
of Kanishka’s stipa at Peshawar. 
The casket is of dark metal and is 


seven inches high. Contained a 
rock-crystal reliquary containing 
bones, said to be Buddha’s. On 
top of casket Buddha and two other 
figures. Note the haloes. Beneath 
is Kanishka himself. (From Jour- 
nal of Royal Astatic Society.) 


please Brahmans. With the 


voured. Vast sums of money 
were spent on Buddhist 
buildings ; and it seems 
clear from Asoka’s edicts that 
various laws and regulations 
were enforced which would 
please Buddhist monks and 
would necessarily greatly dis- 
fall of the great empire and 


the rise of the Sungas to power in Magadha, the tables 
were turned ; for the new dynasty favoured the Brahmans 
as much as the old favoured Buddhism. Patafijali, author 
of the Commentary on Panini’s Siittras and founder of the 
Yoga philosophy, was the priest of Pushyamitra, the first 


INCARNATION 8r 


Sunga king, and refers to his celebration of the Asvamedha, 
or horse-sacrifice, which is a public claim to imperial power. 
The influence and favour of the court led to great literary 
activity on the part of the priests. 

55. The main feature of the religious history of the period 
as a whole is this, that Hin- 
duism and Buddhism now 
stand opposed to each other 
as rivals, and influence each 
other very greatly in many 
ways. 

56. One very noteworthy 
change occurred in Hinduism 
at this time and, as we shall 
see, a similar change passed 
over Buddhism. While at the 
beginning of the fifth century 
B.C. Rama and Krishna were 
but human heroes, they were 
already worshipped in the time 
of Megasthenes, the Seleucid 
ambassador at the court of 
Chandragupta; and by the 





: 10. THE BOAR INCARNATION 
opening of the second century or VISHNU 


B.C. they were acknowledged This relief is at Mahavellipore. 


1 i ' It represents Vishnu in his boar 
Eee Mearnations of Misha. avatdra with his wife Lakshmi. 


In the first and last books Beneath is a five-hooded Naga, 
of the Ramayana, which ordivine snake. (Photograph by 
‘° e] 


: : Wiele & Klein.) 
were written in the second 


century B.C., Rama is represented as an incarnation of half 
the essence of Vishnu, and in the additions made to the 
Mahabharata about the same time Krishna is regarded as 
a minor divinity and in some sense as an incarnation of 
Vishnu. (See section 63.) 


PP 639 F 


82 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


During the next three centuries this rich warm worship of 
incarnate divinities became entwined with the philosophy of 
the Atman, and first Krishna and then Rama rose to the lofty 
position of incarnations of the Supreme. Krishna occurs in 
this guise in the latest parts of the Mahabharata, dating 
perhaps from the second century a.D., and also in the © 
Bhagavadgita. (See sections 63 and 64.) 

Certain of the old myths of the Vedas and Brahmanas 
were transformed into incarnations of Vishnu, and others 
were created. The series of semi-animal and other incarna- 
tions (avataras is the Hindu word) which are supposed to 
have preceded Rama and Krishna was thus formed. This 





11. Hinpu IDOLATRY 


A coin of Kadphises II, the Kushan king who preceded Kanishka. 
The reverse gives us Siva with his bull and his trident. Time, first 
century A.D. (V. Smith, Zarly History of India.) 


long line of Vishnuite incarnations is parallel to the long list 
of mythical Buddhas which grew up in the Buddhist Church 
and the similar list of mythical Tirthakaras which took form 
in Jainism at thistime. (See p. 97.) These new forms of 
faith, so well calculated to stir emotion and to provoke 
enthusiastic worship, naturally led to a great growth of 
Vishnuism. The leading school of Vishnuites were called 
Bhagavatas, i.e. worshippers of the Bhagavan, the Adorable 
Lord. Unlike the teachers of the Vedanta, who held that 
only the three highest castes could reach Release, because 


INCARNATION 83 


they alone were allowed to read the Upanishads, the Bhag- 
avatas offered salvation to all. 

But the cult of Siva did not lag behind. The sacred bull 
became his companion ; the trident was connected with him; 
the phallic symbol, the “ga, was adopted for his worship ; 
and he was represented as the typical ascetic. Vishnu in 





12. BUDDHIST CHAITYA 


Excavated in the solid rock at Karle, near Poona. In these assembly- 
halls a small sttipa, introduced to inspire meditation, led to real worship. 
The resemblance to a Christian church is very striking. Here we have 
the nave with its apse, and the stiipa taking the place of the altar. 
There are aisles behind the fine Persian pillars. Date, first century B.C, 
(Photograph by Clifton & Co., Bombay.) 


his incarnations, and Siva with these fresh attractions, now 
stand side by side with Brahma. (See p. 99.) The words 
Saivas and Vaishnavas are used for the followers of these 
gods. 
57. It was during this period that the six systems of philo- 
sophy which are recognized as orthodox by Hindus were 
F2 


84 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


worked out in detail. Each took shape in its own school, 
gradually developed and expounded by a succession of 
teachers. They expressed the system in sutras in the 
briefest possible way, and explained the sitras by means of 
a commentary. Many of these ancient sitra manuals have 
perished, but several survive, of which the greatest is the 
manual of the Vedanta school, the Vedanta-sitras of Bada- 
rayana. Table 17 gives the 
main facts about these 
systems. 

58. Buddhism, which 
originally was an agnostic 
philosophy attempting to do 
the work of a religion, early 
developed the beginnings 
of a worship, as we have 
already seen. During the 
first half of this period 
another step was taken. 
Images of Buddha, his chief 
disciples, the previous Bud- 
dhas and Maitreya, the 
coming Buddha, were set 

13. IMAGE or BUDDHA up at the stiipas, in pagodas 

Beside the dodhi tree at Anura- and chaityas. Though the 

be ve Ceylon, (From a post-  orisinal purpose was merely 

to stimulate meditation, and 
though the monks usually kept themselves to that, the 
necessary result was that the common people worshipped the 
images. Offerings of flowers and fruit were presented to them ; 
incense and tapers were burned before them ; and prayers 
were uttered with humble adoration and fervent praise. 
Thus far early Buddhism went ; and we have this form still 
preserved for us practically unaltered in Burma and Ceylon. 





INCARNATION 85 


59. But the kingdom of the Kushans was the scene of a 
still more significant change. Buddhism up to this time 
had contained many philosophic schools, but there had been 
no schism. In the great intellectual activity of the Kushan 
Empire, however, there came a 
development of worship and 
theology which split the Buddhist 
world in two. The new system, 
which finally received the name 
Mahayana (great path) in contrast 
with the old, which was called 
Hinayaina (humble path), soon 
became very popular. In it we 
meet the new doctrine, borrowed 
from Hinduism, that behind all 
things there is the universal soul 
of which the Buddhas are but 
manifestations. Under the old 
system the great ideal for the 
monk was to become an arhat, 
that is a perfect man, destined at 
death to pass into mrvana; but 
the ideal of the Mahayana was the 
Bodhisattva, a being who might 
become a Buddha and _ enter 
nirvana but denies himself that 
luxury, that he may remain in the 
heavenly regions a gracious and 14. BODHISATTVA FROM 
powerful divinity ready to help : ee) 
those that appeal to him. But the ee 8+ 
chief difference lies in this, that the Hinaydna saved the 
few, while the Mahayana offered Release to the many. 

The leaders of the Mahayana frankly treated the Buddhas 
and the Bodhisattvas as gods, and set up a most elaborate 





86 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


system of worship. In front of the images in the chaitya an 
altar was erected on which offerings were made. The 
chaitya thus became a temple and the monk a priest. 
Prayers were composed, and a special liturgy for each great 
divinity. Each accessory that was likely to make the wor- 
ship attractive and pleas- 
ing to the people was 
added—richly decorated 
altars, paintings, gorgeous 
robes, music, processions, 
banners, incense, &c. 
Thus Buddhism, origin- 
ally an agnostic philo- 
sophy, became one of the 
polytheisms and idolatries 
of the world. The list 
of the Buddhas is given 
on p. 97. 

Buddha himself was 
transformed into a 
Saviour god, incarnate for 
the good of men, as we 
may see from the Latta 
Vistara, the Saddharma 
Pundarika, and _ other 





15. MAHAYANA WORSHIP 


Small stiipa with image of Buddha 
carved on it, at Kenheri, near Bombay. works of the first and 


(Photograph kindly favoured by Mr. 


second centuries A.D. 
Frank Anderson, Bombay.) = 


Thus the same spirit that 
worked in Hinduism worked in Buddhism. The Gi/@ and 
the Saddharma Pundarika are parallel compositions. 

60. The most interesting of all the new divinities of this 
date is Amitabha, who is described in the Amitayus Sutra 
and a number of other books written in North India during 
our period. This Buddha is said to live now in a glorious 


INCARNATION 87 


paradise in the West ; but, when he was still a Bodhisattva, 
he vowed that he would never accept mrvana until some 
means were provided whereby all mankind would be able to 
receive salvation through faith in him. The worship of this 
imaginary god cannot now be traced in the history of ancient 
India, except in sculpture ; 
but it was carried into 
China, where he is still 
worshipped, and __ into 
Japan, where the two most 
vigorous sects of our time 
are worshippers of Amida, 
the Japanese corruption of 
Amitabha. 

(Mi SSAA, ee 
During the first half of 
this period the scholars of 
India began to use the art 
of writing for their books. 
The Buddhist Tripitaka 
was reduced to writing in 
ee shoul 85 Scone A piece of devotional sculpture 


we may be certain that from the Kushan Empire, found at 
about the same time, or Shri Bahlol in N, W. F. Province. 

i cee Gautama Buddha is in the centre, 
earlier, a similar Process AvalokiteSvara on the left, Maitreya 


was carried out in India, onthe right. These two are Bodhi- 
: > sattvas. (From Archaeological Sur- 

among Hindus as well as vey, 1906-4, p. 114.) 

Buddhists. 

62. We found in each Brahmanical school the subject of 
dharma, or the right behaviour of the Hindu in every station 
of life, dealt with in a Dharmasitra. In this new period 
these rules of conduct were gradually rewritten in a popular 
versified form to be used by the Hindu householder outside 


the schools. ‘The poems thus produced are known as the 





16. MAHAYANA WORSHIP 


88 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


Dharmafastras. The greatest of all these law-books is the 
Manava Dharmasastra, or law-book of Manu, which is 
believed to have been founded on the Jlanava Dharma- 
sitra. ts growth seems to cover several centuries. It had 
reached its present shape by 4.D. 200. One of the mo- 
mentous changes in Hindu life which this fresh code enables 





17. MAHAYANA WORSHIP. 


This is a bronze image of Vairochana, a Buddha of light, at 
Nara, in Japan. It is 53% feet in height. These gigantic 
images were common in India. (From a postcard.) 


us to realize is this, that all widows, even virgin child- 
widows, were by this time forbidden to remarry. 

63. It seems most likely that the first and the last books 
of the Ramayana were added about the beginning of our 
period. Here Rama is represented as an incarnation of Aa/f 
the essence of Vishnu and the Ramayana thereby becomes 
a Vishnuite work. About the same time large additions were 


INCARNATION 89 


made to the Mahabharata, which made it an epic of 24,000 
Slokas. In the new matter Krishna is a demi-god. The re- 
creation and re-publication of these great works, which 
glorify Hindu kings and Hindu life and worship, was almost 
certainly carried out under the patronage of the Sungas. 

About four centuries later (¢. A. D. 200) vast quantities of 
new matter were introduced into the Mahabharata, trans- 
forming the epic into a didactic library. Among the addi- 
tions was the Bhagavadgita. Here and elsewhere in the 
new matter Krishna is represented as the Atman incarnate. 

The two epics are the earliest popular literature of India. 
They sprang from the heart of the people; and though the 
Ramayana was edited for a sectarian purpose, and the 
Mahabharata has been perverted by the Brahmans into an 
immeasurable mass of priestly laws and traditions, they are 
still greatly beloved by the people; and, unlike the Vedic 
literature, they may be read by women, and by men of any 
caste. 

64. The Bhagavadgita or ‘Song of the Adorable’, which 
is largely a product of Bhagavata theology, is one of the most 
noteworthy pieces of literature produced in India. It is the 
noblest and purest expressions of modern Hinduism. The 
author wished to produce a poem to express his own bound- 
less reverence for Krishna, to gather the best thoughts of the 
Upanishads and unite them with the most helpful parts of 
the philosophies, and at the same time to bind people to the 
ordinary life and worship of Hindu society. His book was not 
intended to be a class-book to be used in a Vedic school or 
by a few hermits in a forest, but a manual which the farmer, 
the soldier, the shopkeeper, and the Brahman might read 
day by day, while pursuing their ordinary avocations. He 
did not wish to turn men into sannyasis, but wished to 
present a religious system which people might accept and 
use, while they continued their ordinary daily work and 


go OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


lived within the caste system. ‘The two most significant 
points in his teaching are the supremacy of Krishna and the 
theory of Karma-yoga. ‘The significance of Krishna lies in 
this, that he is conceived as the absolute Brahman, the object 
of all the meditation of the sages of the Upanishads, and at 
the same time as a personal god approachable with sacrifice 
and prayer, like other personal gods. The significance of 
Karma-yoga also lies in its combination of philosophy with 
the popular life: as Krishna unites the loftiest meditation of 
the philosopher with the simplest worship of the ignorant, so 
Karma-yoga unites philosophic renunciation of the world 
with practical everyday life. The commands of Karma-yoga 
are: Give up all desire for the fruits of action, and thereby 
fulfil the philosophic ideal, but continue to do your ordinary 
work in the world at the same time, and thus fulfil your duty 
as a member of a Hindu family and caste. The author of 
the Gi¢a@ is as anxious to persuade his readers to fulfil all the 
rules of caste laid down in the Dharmasastras, as he is to 
make them rise to the philosophic contemplation of the 
absolute Brahman. (See section 90.) No other Hindu book 
has laid hold of the educated classes with the same power as 
the Gita. 

65. About the Christian era the great books of Mahayana 
Buddhism began to be written. Some of the early ones are 
in the vernaculars, but very soon Sanskrit comes to the front, 
and thereafter every great Buddhist work was written in 
Sanskrit. A very large literature sprang up in North India 
at this time. Many most famous and influential works 
might be mentioned, the Questions of King Milinda, the 
Lalita Vistara, the Saddharma Pundarika, the Buddha- 
charita, the Amitayus Sitra, &c. These and many of the 
books of the old Tripitaka were carried over to China and 
translated into Chinese by competent scholars, both Indian 
and Chinese. 


INCARNATION gt 


Mahayanists formed a canon for themselves, consisting 
mainly of new Mahayana texts but also including large 
parts of the old canon. In arrangement it is a Tripitaka 
also. This canon has been lost in India, but is preserved 
in distinct forms in Tibet and in China. The student will 
most readily get some idea of it by looking through Bunyiu 


Nanjio’s Catalogue of the Chinese Translation of the Buddhist 
Tripitaka. 


NoTE,.—The text below is THE LAW AGAINST WIDOW-REMARRIAGE : 
‘Until death let the widow live a life of endurance, self-restraint, and 
chastity, yearning to fulfil the law of wives of one husband, that most 
excellent law.’ Manava Dharmasastra, v. 158. 


smetat acUTeatat fraat TaAaTicat | 
Gl ua vaUdat atgat aaqaaea 


92 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS 


15. Hindu Incarnation 
Krishna speaks at the battle of Kurukshetra :— 


‘Many births of Me and thee have passed, O Arjuna. 
I know them all; but thou knowest them not, O affrighter 
of the foe. 


Though birthless and unchanging of essence, and though 
lord of born beings, yet in My sway over the Nature that is 
Mine own I come into birth by My own Magic. 


For whensoever the Law fails and lawlessness uprises, 
O thou of Bharata’s race, then do I bring Myself to bodied 
birth. 


To guard the righteous, to destroy evil-doers, to establish 
the Law, I come into birth age after age. 


He who knows in verity My divine birth and works comes 
not again to birth when he has left the body, he comes to 
Me, O Arjuna. 


The Four Castes were created by Me according to the 
orders of Moods and Works; know that I am indeed the 
doer of that work, yet no worker, unchanging. 


Father of this universe am I, mother, ordainer, grand- 
sire, the thing that is known and the being that makes clean, 
the word Om, the Rik, the Sama, and the Yajus ; 


The way, the supporter, the lord, the witness, the dwell- 
ing, the refuge, the friend, the origin, the dissolution, the 
abiding-place, the house of ward, the changeless seed.’ 


Bhagavadgitd, iv. 5-9, 13, ix. 17-18; Barnett, in the Temple Classics. 


INCARNATION 93 


16. Buddhist Incarnation 
Gautama the Buddha speaks on Gridhrakiita :— 


‘ An inconceivable number of thousands of kotis of Aeons, 
never to be measured, is it since I reached superior enlighten- 
ment and never ceased to teach the law. 


I roused many Bodhisattvas and established them in 
Buddha-knowledge. I brought myriads of kotis of beings, 
endless, to full ripeness in many kotis of Aeons. 


I show the place of extinction, I reveal to all beings 
a device to educate them, albeit I do not become extinct at 
the time, and in this very place continue preaching the 


law.’ 


‘Repeatedly am I born in the world of the living.’ 


‘What reason should I have to continually manifest 
myself? When men become unbelieving, unwise, ignorant, 
careless, fond of sensual pleasures, and from thoughtlessness 
run into misfortune. 


Then I, who know the course of the world, declare, “I am 
the Tathagata,” and consider, How can I incline them to 
enlightenment? How can they become partakers of the 
Buddha-laws? 

So am I the Father of the world, the Self-born, the Healer, 


the Protector of all creatures. Knowing them to be perverted, 
infatuated, and ignorant, I teach final rest, myself not being 


at rest.’ 
Saddharma Pundarika, xv. 1-3, 7, 21-23; SB.£Z., vol, xxi. 


94 


OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


17. From the Vedanta Sutras 


NoTE.—A literal translation of each siitra is given in italics, and 
then the meaning follows in roman. 


I. 


Then therefore Brahman-inguiry. 
Here beginneth the inquiry into Brahman. 


Whence the birth, &c., of this. 
Brahman is that from which the creation, preserva- 
tion, and destruction of this world proceed. 


. Lrom being the source of Scripture. 


The omniscience of Brahman follows from its being 
the source of Scripture. 


. But that from immediate connexion. 


But that Brahman is to be known from Scripture, 
because it is connected with the Upanishads as 
their purport. 


from seeing not, unscriptural. 

On account of seeing (i. e. thinking) being attributed 
in the Upanishads to the cause of the world, the 
pradhana of the Sankhya philosophy is not to be 
identified with the cause indicated by the Upani- 
shads ; for it is not founded on Scripture. 


. Uf figurative, no, from word Self. 


If it be said that the word ‘seeing’ is used figura- 
tively, we deny that, on account of the word Self 
being applied to the cause of the world. 


Badarayana, Vedinta Sutras, I. i. 1-6. 


INCARNATION 




















95 
TABLES 
16. Chronology of the Incarnation Period 
External | History and : : 
Lvents Religion ils ied 
184 B.C. 184 B.C. Second Stage Books I and VII 
Fall of of of 
ASokan Mahabhérata Ramayana 
Empire 
100 B.C. Images in 
Buddhism 
72 Fall of 
unga 
Dynasty 
44 Caesar 
murdered 
31 Augustus 
supreme 
29 Christ stats 
crucified MAHAYANA 
= = || Gondophares LEADERS 
The New | 
Testa- Kanishka A$vaghosha Contant 
ment 
cos See Trans- 
eee Third Stage Nagarjuna lation 
or 
Mahiabhirata of 
: The Gita Bud- 
A.D. 2C0 Krishna as Abas 
hee the Atman Manava Aryadeva 
Christianity DRGIHIE Books 
in Malabar ‘Saeira 
into 
A.D. 300 
} Chinese 
Constantine 
grants 
Christians 
toleration, 
A.D. 320 








96 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


17. The Six Orthodox Systems of Hindu Philosophy 


sacrifice, founded on the Srauta Sutras. Jaimini wrote the 
main treatise, the Karma Mimamsa Sutras. 


2. The Uttara Mimamsda, ‘later inquiry’, the philosophy of the 
Upanishads, the Vedanta, systematized by Badarayana in his 
work known as the Veddnta Sitras, the Brahma Siitras, or 
the Sdrivaka Siitras. 


3. The Sankhya, a dualistic atheism, ascribed to the early sage 
Kapila. No early treatise survives. 


4. The Yoga. In this system the Sankhya metaphysic is combined 
with a personal God and with bodily and mental exercises 
called yoga. Patafjali, of the second century B.C., is the 


The Karma Mimamsd, ‘work inquiry’, the philosophy of 
| author of the manual, which is called the Yoga Siatras. 


logical categories, and attributes the origin of the world to 
atoms. The author of the manual, which is known as the 
Vatseshika Stitras, is remembered by the nickname Kanada, 
‘atom-eater ’. 


6. The Nydya accepts the metaphysic of the Vaiseshika, and adds 
a very detailed and acute exposition of formal logic. The 


5. The VazSeshika. This system classifies ail phenomena under 
C / 
manual, which is by Gautama, is called the Nyaya Sutras. 


INCARNATION 97 
18. Buddhas, Incarnations, and Tirthakaras 
Buddhas Avatiras of Vishnu Tirthakaras 
Mythical :-— 
Dipamkara 
Kondaiiiia Rishabhadeva 
Mangala *Matsya!: the Fish Ajitanatha 
Sumanas *Kirma : the Tortoise Sambhavanatha 
Revata *Varaha: the Boar Abhinandana 
Sobhita *Narasithha: the Man-lion Sumatinatha 
Anomadassin *Vamana: the Dwaif Padmaprabha 
Paduma *Parasu-Rama Supar$vanatha 
Narada *Rama Chandraprabha 
Padumuttara *Krishna Suvidhinatha 
Sumedha Vyasa italanatha 
Sujata Prithu sreyamsanatha 
Piyadassin Hari Vasuptijya 
Atthadassin Harmnsa Vimalanatha 
Dhammadassin Manvantara Anantanatha 
Siddhattha Yajia Dharmanatha 
Tissa Rishabha antinatha 
Pussa Hayagriva Kunthunatha 
Vipassin Dhruva Ayanatha 
Sikhin Dhanvantari Mallinatha 
Vessabhit Nara and Narayana Munisuyrata 
Kakusandha Dattatreya Naminatha 
Konagamana Kapila Neminatha 
Kassapa Sanaka Parsvanatha 
Historical :— 
Gautama *Buddha ? Mahavira 
Future :— 
Maitreya *Kalki 


1 The ten avatdras of Vishnu which are usually met with are marked 


with asterisks. 

2 The Buddha avatéra of Vishnu is really Gautama, the historical 
Buddha. -One of the many means employed by Hindus to overcome 
Buddhism was to recognize the Buddha as a Hindu incarnation. 


PP 639 G 


aAQy ATT ATATATT | 
AMAATTTATATATS TAS It 


CHAPI ER Vitt 


PERIOD OF DECADENCE 
THE GUPTAS: THE PURANAS 


From the Rise of the Guptas to the Fall of 
Harsha’s Empire. A.D, 320-650 


66. Listory. Our period opens with the rise of the great 
dynasty of the Guptas, who during the earlier part of their 
rule reigned at Patna, but later moved up to Ayodhya. 
Under their empire North India enjoyed a period of really 
good government, worthy of comparison with the time of 
Asoka. The two greatest kings of the dynasty were Samu- 
dragupta and Chandragupta II Vikramaditya. The latter 
king conquered Malwa and probably lived from time to 
time in Ujjain ; so that he may be the reality behind all the 
mythical tales told about the great Vikramaditya of Ujjain. 

67. This dynasty went down before the attacks of the 
Huns. These Mongol invaders behaved with monstrous 
cruelty and violence during the fifty years they were in 
India. They destroyed Patna. They sacked Buddhist 


NoTE.—The text at the top of the page is a couplet IN PRAISE OF 
Siva: ¢ Adoration to Sambhu, adorned with the chowrie-like moon on 
his lofty brow, main pillar in the building of the city of the three 
worlds!’ First couplet of Bana’s Harshacharita. 


DECADENCE 99 


monasteries, massacred the monks, and even killed the 
Patriarch. They were driven out, however, in A. p. 528; 
and from that time onward until the invasions of Mahmud 
of Ghazni about A.D. 1000, India was comparatively free 
from foreign attack. 

68. About A.D. 550 a powerful dynasty known as the 


Chalukyas arose at Badami in Dharwar and played a great 





18. THe TRIMORTI 


The Hindu Triad, representing Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva 
as one. A most powerful piece of sculpture, cut in the solid 
rock of the cave of Elephanta, near Bombay, dating from about 
A.D. 800. (Photograph by Clifton & Co., Bombay.) 


part in South Indian politics and civilization for two cen- 
turies ; while on the other coast at Kafichi, now Conjeeveram, 
the Pallavas ruled the surrounding country. 

69. During the seventh century another brillant figure 
appears in North India, the famous Harsha of Kanauj. 
He spent many years in conquest, and finally was the 
acknowledged sovereign of the whole of North India from 

G2 


100 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


the Himalayas to the Nerbudda. He was fortunate in 
having at his court a distinguished literary man named Bana, 
who wrote an historical romance setting forth the great deeds 
of his patron. We also hear a good deal about him from 
the Chinese traveller Hiouen Tsang, who was greatly 
honoured by him. Our period closes with his empire. 

70. Religion. Hinduism during this period is chiefly 





19. THE MARRIAGE OF SIVA AND PARVATI 


A very fine piece of work, but badly damaged. Also at Elephanta. 
(Photograph by Clifton & Co., Bombay.) 


marked by a coarse noisy sectarianism with little dignity or 
morality in it. The follower of Siva or of Vishnu uses the 
most extravagant language in praising his own God and 
curses the devotees of the other heartily. An attempt was 
made to reconcile all sectaries by the doctrine of the three- 
fold manifestation of the Supreme in Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Siva; but the concept never truly laid hold of the Hindu 


DECADENCE IOI 


people. The Triad is frequently mentioned, and it is now and 
then represented in sculpture ; but it was Siva and Vishnu 
that drew the reverence of men. The mythology of the 
time is wild and extravagant, and there is but little serious- 
ness in the teaching. The Puranas (see section 72) are full 
of bombast and pretentiousness. 

In this period the myths about Krishna underwent con- 
siderable embellishment. The story 
of his childhood was told in great 
detail, several points being borrowed, 
as it seems, from Christian sources. 
His cowherd exploits also took form 
at this time and captured the masses. 
All this fresh mythology had_ its 
centre in Mathura and Vrindavana. 
Clearly the cult of Krishna was 
carried on there with great fervour. 

Hinduism and Buddhism drew 
nearer and nearer to each other 
during those centuries, each borrow- 20. BuppHIst IMAGE 
ing from the other, both becoming From Java. In Cal- 

. } : cutta Museum. Note 
steadily coarser, but Hinduism con- the great halo. 
tinuously gaining in popularity. It 
was a period of marked decadence ; but Hinduism had by 
far the stronger constitution. 

71. This period saw a very great expansion of Buddhism 
in other lands. It became supreme in China; and through- 
out the period numerous Indian scholars went to China to 
teach the faith, while many Chinese pilgrims found their 
way to India. The translation of Buddhist texts into 
Chinese went on apace, both Indians and Chinese doing 
large service in this way. From China the religion passed 
into Korea and Japan. Devoted missionaries carried it to 
Burma, Siam, and Java, and won the populations of those 





102 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


lands. Its influence spread far and wide over the whole of 
Central and Eastern Asia. India was its home, and there 
its most famous scholars studied and taught. The greatest 
University of Buddhism, Nalanda in Bihar, was founded 
during the sixth century, 
and was adorned by a long 
succession of great scholars 
for at least two centuries 
thereafter. The philosophy 
of Buddhism at this time 
shows a great approxima- 
tion to Hindu thought. 

72. Literature, &c. The 
Guptas were great patrons 
of literature. The earliest 
existing Puranas, which 
embody the sectarian reli- 
gion of the period, seem to 
date from their time; and 
every branch of secular 
literature rose to splendour 

At Mahavellipore. A reference to oe eee — 
fig. 1 will show that the design is the Drama, Kavya poetry, 
copied from a hut. But the interest Rhetoric, Grammar, Astro- 
of the form is this, that it seems to 
be the origin of the curvilineartower NOmy, Romance. The word 
of the Indo-Aryan style. Imagine Pyzgnq means archaeo- 
the centre of the roof raised, and the ea 
lines of the Indo-Aryan tower are at 4og?ca, and was first used of 
once realized. (See figs. 22and 28.) o]q-world myths and tales 

about the origin of things. 
The existing Puranas, however, are sectarian pamphlets in 
Sanskrit verse, written to catch the popular ear and secure 
worshippers for Vishnu, Siva, or Brahma. Each begins 
with an account of the origin of the world, but soon 
becomes a panegyric of the favourite divinity. Men of 





21. Rock-curt SHRINE 


DECADENCE oe 


any caste, and women too, are allowed to read’ the 
Puranas. 

Buddhist literature at this time consisted mostly of philo- 
sophic works produced by the scholars of Nalanda. 

The Svetambara Jain canon received its final form in 
A.D. 454. 

73- During this period 
architecture was cultivated 
with zeal and success by 
Buddhists, Jains, and 
Hindus. A great deal ot 
the finest cave-work dates 
from this time. Very few 
buildings, however, be- 
longing to these centuries 
remain above ground. 
Yet one of the most 
beautiful, the great Bud- 
dhist pagoda at Buddh- 
Gaya, has survived, though 
probably much altered. 
The rich cluster of Hindu 22. TEMPLE OF MUKTESVARA 


temples at Bhuvanegvara At Bhuvanegvara. A small but 
. ‘ : beautiful shrine of the Indo-Aryan 
in Orissa are also still style. The ornamental arch in front, 


standing. They are of called a Torana, is very graceful, 
(Photograph kindly favoured by Mr. 
the Indo-Aryan style. Frank Anderson, of Bombay.) 


A Hindu or Jain temple 
consists of a cubical cell, lighted only from the door, but 
surmounted by a tower. The image is placed in the cell, 
which thus becomes the shrine. The tower marks the 
position of the shrine. Usually a porch stands in front of 
the door of the shrine. 

The three leading styles are distinguished from each other 
by the form of the tower. The Northern or Indo-Aryan 





104 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


tower has curvilinear sides: see figs. 22 and 28. The 
Southern or Dravidian tower is pyramidal and in stories : 
see figs. 23 and 34. The Chalukyan tower is usually star- 
shaped: see fig. 29. The earliest existing examples of 
Dravidian architecture are the Pallava temples of Conjee- 
veram and the rock-cut monuments known as the Seven 





23. RocK-cuT SHRINE 


At Mahavellipore. This and the other shrines, known as the Seven 
Pagodas, are all Hindu work. But the style of this example is taken 
unchanged from a Buddhist wéara or monastery. Then this in turn 
produced the tower of the Dravidian style. (See figs. 21 and 28.) 


Pagodas at Mah4vellipore near Madras, which date from the 
seventh century. About the same time the Chalukyan style 
arose in the West. 


Note.—The text at the bottom of the page is an example of Puranic 
intolerance; ‘Vishnu is the divinity of the gods; the Trident-holder 
(i.e. Siva) is the divinity of devils” Awrma Purana, xxii. 43. 


eatai gad fawetaarat faery i 


DECADENCE 105 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS 
18. Vishnu as Saviour of the Gods 
An Example of Puranic Mythology 


The gods addressed the mighty Vishnu thus— 
_ ‘Conquered in battle by the evil demons, 
We fly to thee for succour, Soul of all: 
Pity and by thy might deliver us,’ 
Hari the lord, creator of the world, 
Thus by the gods implored, all graciously 
Replied—‘ Your strength shall be restored, ye gods ; 
Only accomplish what I now command ; 
Unite yourselves in peaceful combination 
With these your foes; collect all plants and herbs 
Of diverse kinds from every quarter ; cast them 
Into the sea of milk; take Mandara, 
The mountain, for a churning-stick, and Vasuki, 
The serpent, for a rope; together churn 
The ocean to produce the beverage— 
Source of all strength and immortality ; 
Then reckon on my aid. I will take care 
Your foes shall share your toil, but not partake 
In its reward or drink th’ immortal draught’; 
Thus by the god of gods advised, the host 
United in alliance with the demons. 
Straightway they gathered various herbs and cast them 
Into the waters, then they took the mountain 
To serve as churning-staff, and next the snake 
To serve as cord, and in the ocean’s midst 
Hari himself, present in tortoise-form, 
Became a pivot for the churning-staff. 
Vishuu Purana, i.g; Monier-Williams, Zndian Wisdom, 498. 


106 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


1g. Living Souls in Particles of Earth 


NoTE.—This extract is inserted here as an example of the characteristic 
teaching of the Jains. Similar statements follow in the same S#¢ra with 
reference to living souls in fire, water, and air. 


The living worid is afflicted, miserable, difficult to instruct, 
and without discrimination. In this world full of pain, suffer- 
ing by their different acts, see the benighted ones cause 
great pain. See! there are beings individually embodied in 
earth ; not one all-soul. See! there are men who control 
themselves, whilst others only pretend to be houseless, i. e. 
monks such as the Buddhists, whose conduct differs not 
from that of householders, because one destroys this earth- 
body by bad and injurious doings, and many other beings 
besides, which he hurts by means of earth, through his doing 
acts relating to earth. 

As somebody may cut or strike a blind man who cannot 
see the wound ; as somebody may cut or strike the foot, the 
ankle, the knee, the thigh, the hip, the navel, the belly, the 
flank, the back, the bosom, the heart, the breast, the neck, 
the arm, the finger, the nail, the eye, the brow, the forehead, 
the head ; as some kill openly ; as some extirpate secretly ; 
thus the earth-bodies are cut, struck, and killed, though their 
feeling is not manifest. He who injures these earth-bodies 
does not comprehend and renounce the sinful acts ; he who 
does not injure these, comprehends and renounces the sinful 
acts. Knowing them, a wise man should not act sinfully 
towards earth, nor cause others to act so, nor allow others 
to act so. He who knows these causes of sin relating to 
earth, is called a reward-knowing sage. Thus I say. 


Achéranga Siitra, I, i, 2, 1-2, 5-6; S.B.E., vol. xxii, 3-5, 


DECADENCE 107 


TABLES 


1g. Period of Decadence 






External 


Events History and Religion 


Literature 




















A.D. 320 Rise of the Guptas | Vayu Purana 
A.D. 326 Samudragupta 
Buddhism | a.p. 375 Chandragupta II 
enters 
Korea BUDDHIST 
A.D. 400 
The Iron Pillar at Delhi Kalidasa SCHOLARS 
Jain 
Svetambara | Buddha- 
canon fixed ghosha 
A.D. 500 The Huns ees 
Fall of the Gupta Empire 
Pataliputra destroyed Early Puranas 
edited 
A.D. 552 A.D. 528 Deteat of the Huns |\j-—=-_|_ Asanga 
Buddhism Vasu- 
in Japan anes bandhu 
. ~ | Dignaga 
A.D. 600 PE 
Muham- | Harsha reigns A.D. 606-647 Rajputana Guna- 
mad Hiouen Tsang in India ert prabha 
570-632 A.D. 629-646 pela 
Buddhism | Persian cross at Kottayam Conjeeveram 
in Tibet, wee 
Siam, Mahavellipore | pparma- 
Burma Bhuvanesvara kirti 
and Java 

















108 ’ OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


20. The Leading Divinities of the Hindu Pantheon 


The incomprehensible Brakman is manifested in the 
Triad—Brahma, Vishnu, Siva. 


Brahma, the Creator, married 
Sarasvati, the goddess of learn- 
ing. 


re Vishnu, the Preserver, married 
Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, 
, called also Sri. 
Siva, the Destroyer, married 
Uma, the daughter of Hima- 
laya. She is also called Par- 


vati, Durga, Kali, Bhavani. 





Their sons are GaneSa, the ele- 
phant-headed god, whose func- 
tions are somewhat like those 
of the Roman Janus, and 

Karttikeya, called also Subrah- 
manya, Skanda and Kumara, 
the god of war. 


cTarlar spomoorumis! Ppoweis 
S1HSS, smiFar sporporrmis! oyip 
Horns Sor_woaGar ! 


GHADEER EX 


PERIOD OF RECONSTRUCTION 


POET-SAINTS AND COMMENTATORS 


From the Fall of Harsha’s Empire to the Conquest 
of North India. A.D. 650-1200 


74. History. ‘There are very few outstanding events in 
the dead, dull level of these five and a half centuries. 
Muhammadan aggression was almost entirely confined to 
Sind and the frontier until the latter part of the twelfth 
century. Yet great ethnic changes were going on. The 
foreign races which had entered India in the earlier cen- 
turies, and the aboriginal races of Bengal and Bihar which 
had risen to prominence, were gradually absorbed and 
assimilated by the old Hindu people. Numerous tribes 
were transformed into castes, and their leaders were sup- 
plied with a mythical genealogy. From the midst of this 
creative chaos arose the Rajputs and dominated the centre 
and the west for several centuries. They were a chivalrous 


NoTE.—The lines at the top of the page form ONE OF MANIKKA 
VACHAKAR’S GREAT SAYINGS about Siva: ‘Thou mad’st me thine; 
didst fiery poison eat, pitying poor souls, that I might thine ambrosia 
taste—I, meanest one.’ 7%ruvdachakam, Pope, p. 102. 


I10 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


race, and their kingdoms in Malwa, Delhi, Kanauj, Ajmir, 
and Gwalior showed great activity, military courage and 
high civilization; but their dissensions made them an easy 
prey, when the bold Muhammadan invaders came. In the ~ 
south a number of kingdoms arose and flourished and 
fell; and the local fortunes of Jainism, of Buddhism, or 
of some Hindu sect were frequently intertwined with the 





24. JAIN SCULPTURE 


Illustrating the worship of the Digambara Jains, at Kalugumalai, 
Tinnevelly. See section 48. (Photograph by Nicholas & Co., Madras.) 


political change ; but these events can scarcely be traced in 
a primer. 

75. Leligion and Literature. The steady rise of Hindu- 
ism to supremacy and the corresponding decline of Bud- 
dhism are the most prominent features of the religious 
history of this period. 

But when we look more closely, we become aware that 
a subtle change has passed over Hindu faith and practice. 


RECONSTRUCTION ; III 


Modern Hinduism has been born. The ancient Vedic 
sacrifices have fallen almost altogether into disuse. It is the 
worship of the temples and the annual festivals celebrated 
at home that hold the affections of the people. Where 








4, 
25. TEMPLE OF SIVA AT TANJORE 


This fine stone edifice is Dravidian in style: see section 73. 
It was built by Rajaraja the Great, a Chola king, about 
A.D. 1000, (Photograph by Wiele & Klein, Madras.) 


philosophic influence is strong, animal sacrifices are pro- 
hibited in the temples ; but in many places the practice has 
come in once more, along with many new divinities, from 
the aboriginal peoples. Processions and shows and 


112 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


dramatic representations are common. Prostitutes are kept 
in most temples as servants of the god. 

Another conception seems to have taken shape in our 
period, the idea that each goddess is the Sakti or energy of 
her husband. The god is conceived as retired, absolute, 
inconceivable : the goddess is a sort of emanation from 
him, bringing his power down to man, and is a much more 
approachable being than her lord. 

The two great sects, the Vishnuite and the Sivaite, still 
continue to hold the supreme place in the religion through- 
out our period. Their systems of worship are now com- 
pletely developed. The chief difference between Saiva and 
Vaishnava worship is this, that Siva is usually represented 
by the phallic symbol, the /#ga and the yond, while Vishnu 
is always represented by an image. The ritual differs in 
details, but only in details. Vaishnavas never sacrifice 
animals, and the same is true of all Saivas in South India. 
The usual offerings are grain, fruit, flowers, and milk. 
Both sects give éivtha and prasada to their worshippers, i. e. 
a portion of the water and of the food which have been 
offered to the idol. 

Both use sect-marks on the forehead and other parts of 
the body; but the Vaishnavas, in addition, brand on the 
body the symbols of Vishnu. Both sects pay worship to 
their teachers, gw7ws, and lay great stress on their ministra- 
tions. Both use a mantra or watchword, to which they 
attribute great supernatural power. Both appeal to men 
of all castes; yet both uphold the laws of caste with great 
rigidness. 

During this period a third sect of great importance arose, 
chiefly in Bengal, the Saktas or worshippers of AaZ, the wife 
of Siva, as his sak#’. They fall into two groups, the right-hand 
and the left-hand Saktas. Both groups show many signs 
of aboriginal influence, notably animal sacrifice and magic 


RECONSTRUCTION TI3 


rites ; and the basis of the whole cult in both is phallic ; 
but, while the right-hand group are respectable in their 
worship, the left-hand Saktas are most immoral. Their 
cult is based on the five M’s, or elements of worship 
the Sanskrit names of which begin with M, flesh, wine, 





26. LINGA SHRINE 


This shrine is within the cave temple hollowed out of the solid rock 
in the island of Elephanta, in Bombay Harbour. See fig. 18. The 
figures are dudrapd/as, door-wardens, keeping the entrance of Siva’s 
residence. (From a postcard.) 


women, fish, and finger-signs. In other points Saktas are 
like Sivaites. 

76. These sects naturally required manuals describing 
their worship and sectarian practices. The earliest of these 
books, which take the place occupied in Vedic worship by 
the Srauta-siitras, appeared early in this period. Vaishnava 
manuals are called Pafacharatra Samhitas, Saiva manuals 
Saiva Agamas, and Sakta manuals Zantras. This literature 

PP 639 H 


114 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


is in Sanskrit, and most of it is in verse. In many respects 
these books are like the Puranas. 

About the same time Buddhism in Bengal and Bihar 
yielded to the attractions of faké¢i-worship and magic, and 
developed Tantric thought and practice. A University filled 
with this spirit arose at Vikramasgila on the Ganges. ‘Tibet 
accepted this form of the faith and still remains true to it. 

77. The twelve Alvars (often called Azhvars : they were 
wandering teachers and poets of various castes) preached in 
South India a popular Vishnuism, which drew its inspiration 
from the Puranic stories of Krishna. They offered salvation 
through Vishnu to men of any caste. They caught the ear 
of the people with their beautiful Tamil hymns. These 
were finally gathered in a collection, the name of which is 
the Walayira Prabandham, but which is often referred to as 
the Tamil Veda. ‘These popular lyrics are still used in the 
daily worship of most of the Vishnuite temples of the 
south. 

78. Contemporaneously the Adzyars did a similar service 
for the religion of Siva. The three greatest of them were 
Appar, Nana Sambandhar, and Sundarar. Their Tamil hymns 
form the Devaram, or ‘Divine Garland’, and have exercised 
a great influence on Saivism. Like the Vishnuites, they 
offered salvation to all. In the tenth century a still 
greater man, known as J/apnikka Vachakar, consecrated his 
poetic gifts to Siva. He wrote a collection of exquisite 
Tamil lyrics which form the Zivwvdchakam, or Sacred Utter- 
ance. Both these collections of hymns are used in the 
worship of Siva in the temples. 

79. In North India the Bhagavata Purana or Purana of 
the Adorable, a rhapsody on Krishna, and by far the most 
influential of the Puranas, appeared somewhere about the 
tenth century. Nimbarka, whose followers worship Radha, 
Krishna’s cowherd mistress, as well as Krishna himself, came 


RECONSTRUCTION 115 


a little later. Jayadeva, the author of the Gita Govinda, or 
Cowherd Song, which celebrates Krishna in the richest 


bi 


29a 32 t* 


al 
-. 
m 
im. 
oo 


day 
ottaas 








27. SIVA THE DANCER, NATARAJA 


Siva’s activity in the world and in the soul is spoken of as sport, and 
is symbolized in his dance. (V. Smith, Zdzan Art, fig. 174.) 


erotic strain, flourished about A.D. 1100. The Bhaktt-siitra 
of Sandilya is a non-sectarian philosophic work, defining the 
Bhagavata doctrine. All these books are in Sanskrit. 

H2 


116 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


At Kalyan in the Maratha country in the twelfth century, 
Basava, the prime minister of the state, founded the Vira 
Saiva sect. The movement seems to have been essentially 
a revolt against Brahman domination. The ancient worship 





28. TEMPLE OF JAGANNATH AT PuRI, ORISSA 


A Vishnuite shrine of Indo-Aryan style. Note that there are 
three porches, each with a pyramidal roof. The curvilinear tower, 
marking the situation of the shrine, stands out behind. The date is 
about A.D. 1100. (Photograph by Wiele & Klein, Madras.) 


of Siva is retained, only the di#ga and Siva’s bull, Nandi, 
are very prominent. Members of the sect are distinguished 
from ordinary Hindus by the wearing of a small 4aga some- 
where about the person. Hence they are commonly called 
Lingayats. Their priests are called Jahgamas. At first 


RECONSTRUCTION 117 


they renounced caste completely ; but the old poison has 
crept in amongst them again, and they demand recognition 
for their caste distinctions in the census papers. Caste had 
been denounced earlier by Kapilar and Vemana, the first 
a Tamil, the second a Telugu poet ; but the Vira Saiva sect 








29. CHALUKYAN. TEMPLE 


At Somnathpur, in Mysore. The star-shaped tower may be 
distinctly seen. Part of the porch with its pierced slabs of 
stone is visible also. (See p. 104.) The date is about A. D. 1050. 


seems to have been the earliest organized movement that 
opposed the ancient basis of Hindu society. Similar 
attempts followed in North India. (See section gt.) 

80. Bhakti is one of the most important elements of the 
teaching of all these sects. Shak# means ‘adoration ’ 
directed towards Bhagavan, ‘the adorable,’ by the Bhakta, 


118 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


‘the adoring devotee.’ Bhagavan is used of Vishnu, 
Krishna, Raima, Siva, or any other god the worshipper 
adores. All the modern d/akti schools of Vishnuism are 
called by the common name of Bhagavatas, worshippers of 
Bhagavan. ‘This, as we saw in section 56, was the name of 
a very early Vishnuite school. 

81. This is also the period of the great acharyas or 
systematic teachers. Each was a sannyasi, and was either 
the head of a school or the chief priest of a sect. They 
distinguished themselves by writing, teaching, preaching, 
and public disputation. Their writings, which are in 
Sanskrit, are largely commentaries on the sacred books, 
both svuti and smriti; but they did large service also in 
combating Buddhism and Jainism, and some of them were 
great organizers as well. 

The Karma Mimamsa and the Vedanta (see p. 96) were 
the supreme schools of the time. The other four philo- 
sophies had their followers, but they were of comparatively 
little account. Every sect seems to have accepted Bada- 
rayana’s Vedanta-sitras as an authoritative work. 

The first of these famous acharyas is Kuméarila, who 
represents the Karma Mimdamsa school. He flourished 
about A.D. 700, and wrote a commentary on the sitras of 
Jaimini. 

A little more than a century later there appeared the 
ereat Sankara (A. D. 788 to about 850), the supreme acharya 
of the Vedanta school. His fame rests on his commentaries 
on the Vedanta-sitras, the Bhagavadgita, and the chief 
Upanishads. He held that the true Vedanta system was 
advatta, i. e.an unqualified monism. Nothing is real except 
Brahman. Man’s soul is the eternal spirit whole and 
undivided ; and the world is maya, illusion. Henceforward 
the central school of the Vedanta is advatta, strictly 
monistic. His scholarship and immense capacity secured 


RECONSTRUCTION 11g 


him great influence ; and his system of thought was accepted 
all over India. 

From this time onward the central school of the Vedanta 
accepts the doctrine of incarnations taught in the Giéd. 





30. IMAGE OF SANKARA IN THE KAMACHIAMMA TEMPLE, 
BIG CONJEEVERAM 


Note the single rod (see section 109) and the pose of the great 
teacher’s right hand. The smaller image in front represents Sankara 
also. It is “carried in processions, but the great image is never moved. 
(Photographed for the author.) 


Thus the ancient philosophy attached to itself a theology 
with the worship of a personal god and the use of idols. 
Sankara seems also to have accepted and taught the doctrine 
of the Hindu triad in the philosophic form, viz. that Brahma, 


120 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


Vishnu, and Siva are the triple manifestation of the imper- 
sonal One, but that they are not eternal beings. This is 
the theology of the Smarta Brahmans of South India. But 
he did a very great work also by his preaching in all parts of 
India, by his opposition to the sects that swarmed in his 
day, by re-arranging the ascetic orders and by the foundation 
of a number of monasteries for the encouragement of learn- 
ing, formed on the model of Buddhist monasteries. 

But the theistic sects, although they recognized the 
Vedanta-sitras as an inspired work, found it hard to square 
the monistic metaphysic and impersonal theology of Sankara 
with their religious beliefs. 

It was nearly three centuries later before the worshippers 
of Vishnu produced a man fit to wrestle with Sankara over 
this great question. Their protagonist is Ramanuja, whose 
mean date is A.D. 1100. He carried on the work of the 
Alvars, and was high-priest of the whole Vaishnava com- 
munity of the south. His commentary on the Vedanta- 
siitras is known as the Sri-bhashya, and has achieved a 
popularity almost as great as the work of Sankara. He calls 
his system w7sishtadvaita, modified monism, and claims that 
it is the true Vedanta, the doctrine of the Upanishads. 
Brahman is Vishnu and is personal. Man’s spirit is an aszéa 
or portion of God, and even in final union retains its own 
individuality and consciousness. The doctrine of incarna- 
tions is strongly held. 

On one point he held a very ambiguous position. As a 
Vedantist he could speak only to twice-born men ; for they 
only had the right to read the Upanishads. Further, his 
system was a burdensome one in its rules about eating, bath- 
ing, and dressing. But, on the other hand, as the heir of 
the Alvars, who had preached to all classes of men, he 
taught the common people Vaishnavism, and even admitted 
the outcastes on occasion to certain temples. 


RECONSTRUCTION 121 


A century later his followers fell into two sects, the northern 
school, Vada-ga/at, and the southern school, 7e#-ga/az. The 
chief difference between them lies in the doctrine of the 
influence of divine grace on the soul, the northern school 





31. BRONZE IMAGE OF RAMANUJA AT SRIPERUMBUDUR 


This image is said to have been consecrated during Ramanuja’s life- 
time in the temple of his native place, and may therefore be a portrait. 
Note the sect-mark on the forehead, the triple rod (see section 109), 
and the symbol in front, which represents Sathakopa, the great Alvar . 
See p. 129. (The author owes this photograph to the courtesy of 
Mr. A. Govindacharya Svami, of Mysore City.) 


teaching that it is ‘Co-operative’, the southern that it is 
‘Irresistible’. Both hold the doctrine of dZakiz, ‘love, faith, 
adoration,’ and also the doctrine of prapatt:, ‘surrender,’ 
but the southern section make this latter a passive, involuntary 
resignation correspondent to the irresistible grace of God. 


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL 
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


122 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


Hence the former is called the Monkey school, because 
the young monkey clings to his mother, while the latter 
is the Cat school, because the kitten is carried by the 
mother. 

The acharya of the worshippers of Siva is N ilakantha. In 
his commentary on the Vedanta-sitras he claims that 
Brahman is Siva and is personal, and that the soul is distinct 
from God. Yet the system is called advaita, i.e. monistic, 
the monism being explained in the sense that the individual, 
though distinct, is inseparable from God, and that when at 
last the man, achieving Release, approaches God, ‘he wears 
away atom by atom, so that at the moment of union nothing 
of him is left, and what is left is the Presence of the Supreme 
One only and the feeling of His Presence, and no feeling, or 
consciousness of feeling, of himself or others.’ The whole 
doctrine of incarnations is denied, but instead of it there is 
the doctrine that Siva manifests himself in various forms to 
his worshippers. 

It is most noticeable that these philosophic leaders, 
though they were sannyasis and Vedantists, yet lived in the 
closest co-operation with the temple-worship of the time. 
They worshipped images, and are themselves represented by 
images and worshipped to-day in numerous temples through- 
out India. 

82. During these centuries all the great centres of popula- 
tion were adorned with splendid temples covered with the 
most delicate and elaborate sculpture, though here and there 
horribly defiled by indecency. 

83. It was during this period that the custom of burning 
a widow along with her husband’s body became common 
and was recognized as right. The woman who dares this 
great act of devotion is highly praised in the Garuda 
Purana; and by common consent she was called a sazi, 
emphatically a ‘good’ woman. Hence the modern name of 


RECONSTRUCTION 123 


the custom, At the same time it became customary to 
demand that the widow who would not ascend her husband’s 
pyre should henceforward live a life ot asceticism and 
privation, 





32. GOPURAMS 


Of temple of Siva at Tanjore. A Dravidian temple usually 
stands in a large courtyard, the entrance to which is under 
a massive gateway called a Gopuram. Early examples such 
as these are of stone and are moderateinheight. (Photograph 
by Wiele & Klein, Madras.) 


Notre.—The text below is in favour of WIDOW-BURNING: ‘If a 
woman’s husband dies, let her lead a life of chastity, or else mount his 
pyre. Vishnusmyiti, xxv. 14. 


qa adft saqay azaraet aT 


124 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS 


20. The Praise of Siva in Tamil 


NoTE.—This is an extract from one of the hymns of Appar, one of 
the Saiva Adiyars, (See pp. 114 and 143.) 


Ritualism Valueless. 


From hold of moral blame and sin, 
O ye who would be truly free! 

Adore the holy feet of Him, 

Our Dancing Lord, and think of Him 
With love and joy. The Watcher will 
With you abiding grant His grace. 


What though ye be great doctors wise? 
What though ye hear the fastras read ? 
What though the duty ye assume 

Of doling out cooked food and gifts ? 
What though ye know the eight and two? 
It boots him naught who does not feel 
The noble truth that God is love. 


What though ye roam through lands and wilds? 
What though ye faultless penance make ? 

What though ye give up eating meat 

And heav’nward look? None wins reward 

But those that praise the knowing Lord. 


What though your views are proper, true? 
What though ye fast? Upon a hill 

What though ye make a penance great ? 
What though ye bathe and show you fair? 
It boots none aught but those that feel 
That all through time the Lord endures. 


Translated by J. M. Nallasvami Pillai. 


RECONSTRUCTION 125 


21. The Praise of Vishnu in Tamil 


NoTE.—These are two short extracts from the hymns of the greatest 
of the Alvars, who is known as Nammialvar, or Sathakopa. (See p. 129.) 


(a) The Love of God and of the World. 

My Father, Lord of worlds evolved, involved, breathes 
there the man 

That sees thy lotus feet with royal signs adorned, which 
stride 

The triple worlds at once, and seeing will not melt away 

In bliss ambrosial sweet, his heart immersed in joy 
supreme, 

A sweetness ravishing, a sense sublime ?—If so, ah fool! 

He knows not, what for him is highest good, pure love 
for Thee! 

Ah fool, to lose this wealth, and strain his every nerve 
to win 

With mountain-labour short-lived joy or power o’er 
mortal things, 

Ev’n if he sways the triad spheres, or sleeps in heaven’s 
shade. 


(b) A Prayer for Release from Transmigration. 

Eternal Lord of angels, who dost deign to veil Thy 
form 

In all Creation’s varied state, to save poor souls, 

Vouchsafe in all Thy grace to stay and hear Thy 
servants’ cry, 

That we be saved the dire return to former wretchedness, 

When we mistook the body for the soul, and sinned all 
sins, 

Which clung to us and fixed us evermore to mortal 


frames. 
From A. Govindacharya, The [oly Lives of the Ashvars, pp. 220-1. 


126 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


22. Extract from a Commentary 


Notrt.—This passage is given here to show the style of the great 
commentator, Sankara. It is also of interest as expressing the relation 
of the famous work, the Vedanta-siitras, to the Vedanta-texts, as the 
Upanishads are here called. 


Some of those who maintain a Lord to be the cause of the 
world, think that the existence of a Lord different from mere 
transmigrating beings can be inferred by means of the argu- 
ment stated just now without recourse being had to Scripture 
at all.—But, it might be said, you yourself in the Sutra under 
discussion have merely brought forward the same argument ! 
—By no means, we reply. The Sitras, i.e. literally ‘the 
strings’, have merely the purpose of stringing together the 
flowers of the Vedanta-passages. In reality the Vedanta- 
passages referred to by the Siitras are discussed here. For 
the comprehension of Brahman is effected by the ascertain- 
ment, consequent on discussion, of the sense of the Vedanta- 
texts, not either by inference or by the other means of right 
knowledge. While, however, the Vedanta-passages _ pri- 
marily declare the cause of the origin, &c., of the world, 
inference also, being an instrument of right knowledge in so 
far as it does not contradict the Vedanta-texts, is not to be 
excluded as a means of confirming the meaning ascertained. 
Scripture itself, moreover, allows argumentation; for the 
passages, Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 11. iv. 5, and Chhan- 
dogya Upanishad, V1. xiv. 2, declare that human understand- 
ing assists Scripture. 


Sankara’s Bhashya to the Vedanta-Satras, I. i. 2; S.B.E., vol. 
XXXiv. p. 17. 


RECONSTRUCTION 127 


23. Siitras on the Nature of Bhakti 


1. Now then there is a wish to know faith (i.e. dhahd2). 

2. In its highest form it is an affection fixed on God. 

3. From the promise of immortality to him who abides in 
Him. 

4. If you say, it is knowledge—no, because the know- 
ledge of one who hates Him is not an abiding in Him. 

5. And from its inferiority thereto. 

6. It is an affection from its being the opposite of hatred 
and from the Vedic expression ‘taste’. 

7. It is not an action; for, like knowledge, it does not 
depend on effort. 

8. Hence indeed is the endlessness of its fruit. 

g. And from the use of the word ‘ resignation’ ( prapatte) 
in the case of one who has knowledge, as in other cases 
where ‘resignation’ is used. 

to. This [faith] is the main thing, since the others 
depend upon it. 

22. This [faith] is indeed the highest from the express 
declaration of its superiority to the performers of sacrificial 
acts, to those who follow knowledge, and to those who 
practise concentration. 

24. But it is not the same as belief, because it has a wider 
range. 

78. All, down even to the despised castes, are capable of 
learning it at second-hand, like the great common truths. 

83. This [highest faith] is the true identity with the 
Supreme, since this is recognized as the meaning of the 
Gita. 


From Cowell’s translation of Sandilya’s Bhakti-Sitras. 


OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 



































128 
TABLES 
a1. Chronology of Period of Reconstruction 
External ; ee , ’ 
Eins Lfiistory Religion Literature 
A.D. 700 
711 Muham- Kumarila 
madans in 
Sind 
732 Europe The Parsis | Rock-cut Temple 
saved from arrive in of Kailas at 
Islam India Ellora 
A.D. 800 
Second Persian Sankara 
cross at 
Kottayam 
Decline of 
Buddhism 
A.D. goo 
Rise of Jainism Bhagavata 
in the South Purana 
A.D. 1000 Manikka Vachakar 
Rajaraja the 
Great The great Temple Nimbarka 
A.D. 1025 Tem- of Tanjore 
1096 The | ple of Somnath 
Crusades destroyed 
A.D. 1100 
Conquest of | A.D, 1193 Bud- Ramanuja, 
North India dhism crushed Gité Govinda, 
by Muham- in Bengal and Bhakti Stitra 
madans Bihar 
A. D, 1200 


RECONSTRUCTION 129 


22. The Vaishnavas of the South 


The 


Twelve Sathakopa 
Alvars 
Tirumangai 
(About a.D. 1100) Ramanuja 


ee 


Ten-galat Vada-galat 
| 
(xiii cent.) Pillai Lokacharya 
(xiv cent.) Rama-jamatri-muni Vedanta Desika 


(xili—xiv cent.) 


(xv cent.) Ramananda 


PP 639 I 


ATT AH ZT UIT WaT HAA UTA 
Ut ANU Sat AT AT att Fz Hert i 


CHAPTER 
BHAKTI PERIOD 
THE MUHAMMADANS: VERNACULAR LITERATURE 


From the Conquest of North India to the Battle of 
Plassey: A.D. 1200-1757 


84. History. The Muhammadan conquest of North 
India at the very beginning of this period, with the piece- 
meal conquest of Southern India during the following 
centuries, is practically all that the history of this period 
contains. The violence, bloodshed, and cruelty of the early 
conquests were followed by the marvellous wisdom, temper- 
ance, and justice of Akbar; but his great-grandson Aurang- 
zeb brought back the persecuting horrors and cruelties of 
the earlier time. The Hindu kingdom of Vijayanagar with- 
stood for a couple of centuries the whole force of the 
Muhammadans of the Deccan, but it was overthrown in 
1565, in the fierce battle of Talikot. From this time 
Muhammadan influence had a wider range in South India. 
From the sixteenth century onward, the Portuguese, the 


NoTre.—The text at the top of the page is in Hindi, and is said to 
be by Kabir :— ‘ 

‘The beads are of wood, the gods of stone; the Ganges and the 
Jumna are water; Rima and Krishna are dead ; the Vedas are fictitious 
stories.’ 


BHAKTI rom 


Dutch, the French, and the English were to be found at 
many points on the seaboard of India; but not until some 
decades after the battle of Plassey did Europe exercise any 
serious influence on the life of the people. 

85. Religion and Literature. The Muhammadan con- 
quest of India must not be regarded as merely a series of 
brilliant military exploits leading to a vast political change. 





33. Hinpu PILiars In Mosque 


Beside Qutb Minar, Delhi. This mosque was built trom the spoils 
of twenty-seven Hindu and Jain temples. 


The conquerors regarded themselves as crusaders, attacking 
a vast idolatrous paganism in the name of God. Hence, 
wherever they went, they destroyed the religious schools, 
overthrew the temples, smashed the idols, drove away or 
killed the Buddhist monks and the Hindu priests. Idolatry 
was forbidden, and a tax was imposed on non-Muslims. It 
was their missionary method, their way of overcoming 
Hinduism. Muslim policy allowed but little relief or peace 
i 


132 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


for the Hindu, or opportunity to rebuild, until Akbar arose. 
Throughout the whole vast territory in North India where 


34. QuTB MINAR AT DELHI 


The iron pillar dates from Chandragupta 
IJ,about A.D. 415. The pillars of the mosque 
are Hindu and Jain. The Minar, a memo- 
rial of the Muslim conquest, dates from 
about A. D. 1230. 





their armies came 
and went, there is 
scarcely a fragment 
of ancient Hindu 
work left, except 
what they built into 
their mosques. 

86. Buddhism 
seems to have dis- 
appeared almost al- 
together under the 
shock; and Hindu- 
ism suffered most 
severely also; for 
many Hindus _be- 
came Muslims, and, 
with the fall of the 
Hindu kingdoms and 
the forfeiture of tem- 
ple lands, school, 
monastery, and priest 
were left without in- 
come. Hence San- 
skrit scholarship and 
Hindu learning made 
comparatively little 
show in North India 
for a very long time ; 
but at Vijayanagar 
a great deal of good 
work was done. The 


commentaries of the brothers Sayana and Madhava are of 


great value. 


BHAKTI 133 


Yet Hinduism was too deeply rooted in the hearts of the 
people to be destroyed by adversity. Though changes 
necessarily arose as a result of the conquest, it is surprising 
how little alteration was produced in the religion. Indeed 
it would not be too much to Say that the crushing of the 
Hinduism of the temple and the scholar led to the out- 
bursting of a simpler and more helpful faith from the heart 
of the people itself. 





35. SUBRAHMANYA TEMPLE AT TANJORE 
(Photograph by Wiele & Klein.) 


87. The Muslims were later in penetrating into the south. 
So there we find good architecture still being built, e.g. 
the temple of Subrahmanya at Tanjore, one of the finest 
examples of the Dravidian style in existence. In the six- 
teenth and seventeenth centuries the greater temples were 
enclosed with enormous walls and were frequently used as 
forts. ‘The gopurams of this period are of enormous height, 
but their sculpture is of stucco, and the style is everywhere 
flamboyant and decadent. 


134 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


88. The religious movements of the north during these 
centuries fall into three groups, Ramaite, Krishnaite, and 
deistic ; yet all the sects have a great many points in 
common, inherited from earlier forms of Vaishnavism. 
They believe in one personal God who is full of love and 
pity for those who worship Him; yetall, except the followers 
of Kabir, recognize the other gods, and worship idols ; they 
all hold that the 
human soul is a por- 
tion of the Divine, 
and that it will eter- 
nally retain its indi- 
viduality ; they offer 
salvation to men of 
all castes, demanding 
faith and bhakti to- 
ward the Lord; they 
use the vernaculars 
instead of Sanskrit ; 
they exalt the guru, 
the religious teacher, 
to a place of great 
authority ; they use 
a mantra, i.e. a 

36. GOPURAM AT KUMBAKONAM secret phrase or pass- 

Photograph by Wiele and Klein.) word, which is whis- 
pered by the guru to the novice on initiation ; they partake 
of a sacramental meal; and each sect has its own order of 
ascetics as well as its congregation of the laity. 

89. Of the Ramaite leaders we shall mention the three 
most notable. Ramdananda was a native of South India and 
was a leader in the Srisampradaya, the church of Rama- 
nuja ; but in consequence of a quarrel he left the sect and 
migrated to North India. He gave up all the exclusiveness 





BHAKTI 135 


of Ramanuja, and also his troublesome restrictions about 
food. He preached in Hindi, and admitted all castes, even 
the lowest, to his fold. ‘He had twelve apostles, among 
whom were a Rajput, a currier, a barber, and a Muham- 
madan weaver.’ The whole d/ak¢#z movement in the north 
owes a great debt to Ramananda. He belongs to the first 
half of the fifteenth century ; yet his theology and practice 
show no trace of 
Muhammadan _influ- 
ence. 

Tulsi Das belonged 
to » the» church. of 
Ramananda. His 
activity was contem- 
poraneous with the 
reign of the great 
Akbar and of his son 
Jahangir. He alone 
among the dbhakit 
leaders did not found 
asect. He preferred 
to influence all his 
fellow - countrymen ; 


and he has won his 


reward ; for the mil- 37. FLAMBOYANT PILLARS IN DRAVIDIAN 
TEMPLE 





lions of the people ot 

Upper India to-day acknowledge Tulsi Das as their guide. 
The teaching which he imparted as he wandered over the 
land he gave permanent form to in the Ramacharit Manas, 
‘the Lake of the deeds of Rama’. It is a modern Rama- 
yana in the sense that it recounts the old story, but it is shot 
through and through with dfakt theology and with the 
healthy moral spirit of the poet. The language is Eastern 
Hindi. Those who know say that he produced ‘some of 


136 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


the most beautiful poetry which has found birth in Asia’ ; 
and the common people of the north show by their devotion | 
to his great work that they agree with this high praise. 

Nabha Das, a contemporary of Tulsi Das, wrote the 
Bhakia Mala, or ‘Garland of Devotees’, a series of brief 
biographies of the chief dak saints. 

go. The Krishnaite books in Sanskrit noticed in our last 
chapter were foliowed up by some very interesting vernacular 
literature in the latter half of the fifteenth century. Vidyapati 
wrote many lyrics in the dialect of Bihar; Chandi Das did 
similar work in Bengali; and in Rajputana, Mira Bai, a prin- 
cess, wrote beautiful songs, which are extremely popular, in 
the Braj Bhasha. This is the dialect of the country round 
Mathura, where Krishna’s life among the cowherds is fabled 
to have been lived. In this very country the first fully 
systematized form of popular Krishnaism was founded in 
the early part of the sixteenth century by a Brahman from 
the south named Vallabhacharya. In his teaching and 
among his followers the sensual and sexual elements which 
are present in all the later Krishnaite mythology come to 
the front and bear their evil harvest. His son-in-law Chai- 
tanya preached the faith of Krishna in Bengal, using the 
lyrics of Vidyapati to stir the emotions of the people. He 
was essentially a revivalist appealing to the feelings by 
music, singing, and devotional excitement. In his own 
time the nobler elements of the religion were in the ascen- 
dant; but soon immorality crept in and degraded the 
movement seriously. The most famous of Vallabhacharya’s 
successors was Sir Das, the blind poet of Agra. His work 
is called the Si#r-Sdgar, and consists of exquisite songs on 
the legend of Krishna in the Braj dialect. Namdev and 
Tukaram, who were both Marathas, were Krishnaites. 
Tukaram’s poems are greatly treasured. 

All the modern Bhagavatas reckon themselves to belong 


BHAKTI 137 


to one or other of four Mother-churches, though there are 
numerous subdivisions. 

Though both Ramaites and Krishnaites accepted men of 
every caste as members of their sects, yet they never dreamed 
of doing away with caste. (See section 64.) 

gi. The deistic movement springs from Kabir, the Muham- 
madan weaver who was one of the apostles of Ramananda. 
Here Muhammadan influence makes itself distinctly felt. 
For, though Kabir was a disciple of Ramananda, though he 
calls God by the name Rama, and has Vedantic ideas, he 
will have nothing to do with the doctrine of incarnations, 
and he condemns idolatry and caste with unsparing voice. 
Yet he is recognized as an incarnation himself by his fol- 
lowers, the Kabirpanthis ; and his polemic against caste has 
had but little effect: the Hindu and the Muhammadan 
members of his Church have separate monasteries and have 
little in common except their devotion to their Master ; and 
the Hindu members are almost all Sidras. His pithy cou- 
plets and epigrammatic sayings are still very popular. Dada, 
a sixteenth-century cotton-cleaner of Ahmadabad, leader of 
the Dadipanthis, got his theology from Kabir. 

No direct influence exerted by Kabir, however, is equal to 
the indirect influence which has arisen through the founding 
of the Sikh sect in the Punjab by his disciple Nanak. From 
the beginning the chief guru of the church exercised large 
power ; and the tenth guru, named Govind, took such steps 
as transformed the sect into a military order and finally 
created a great and warlike nation. But no guru succeeded 
Govind, and their sacred book, the Grant, is now the centre 
of the faith. It is a most interesting collection of varied 
material, some of it very trivial, some very valuable. Much 
of it was written by the gurus, but there are also hymns and 
sayings from all the great dhakii teachers of the north. 
The most important part, the Adi Granth or ‘Original 


138 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


Book’, was compiled by Guru Arjun in 1601. Govind Singh 
added a great deal of new matter in 1696, and the whole is 
now called the Granth. Nanak condemned idolatry, and _ 
Guru Govind abolished caste within the military order. 
Yet caste is now rife among the Sikhs; and the Granth 
is treated like an idol in their central shrine, the Golden 
Temple of Amritsar. 

It is a most extraordinary fact that the theology of Kabir 
was meant to unite Hindus and Muhammadans in the wor- 
ship of the one God ; yet the most implacable hatred arose 
between the Sikhs and the Muhammadans ; and from that 
hatred came the Khalsa, the Sikh military order, which 
created the fiercest enemies the Mughal emperors had. It is 
also most noteworthy that caste has found its way back into 
every Hindu sect that has disowned it. (See section 81.) 

92. In the fourteenth century a new Vishnuite movement 
appeared at Udipi, in the Canarese country. The founder 
of the church is known as Madhvacharya, his followers as 
Srimadhvas. Madhva was a sannyasi, and, like the other 
acharyas, he made his reputation by a commentary on the 
Vedanta-sutras. Wis system is a dualism, and is frankly 
called duaita, dualistic. If Ramanuja is farther from Sankara 
than Nilakantha, Madhya is still more distant. The sect of 
the Srimadhvas has attained considerable proportions and 
influence, especially in Western India. Later leaders pro- 
duced hymns in Canarese ; so that there is an opportunity 
for popularizing the doctrine. But Madhva was much more 
exclusive than either the Saivas or the followers of Rama- 
nuja. He laid great stress on caste, on cleanliness of person 
and clothes, and on temple ritual. Krishna was his favourite 
divinity. 

In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries the Saivas of 
the south developed their teaching into a philosophical 
system which is called the Sava Siddhanta, and which is 


BHAKTI 139 


expressed in a series of Tamil books, partly in verse, partly 
in prose. The teachers who produced this vernacular 
literature receive the title acharya. 

93. Muhammadan influence touched Hindus effectively 
in another direction. Partly in self-defence, partly in imita- 
tion of their masters, the upper classes of Hindu society 
began to seclude their women: the zenana system dates 
from Muhammadan times. Like other high-class customs, 
it is copied by the lower classes so far as their means will 
allow. 


Norte.—The text. below is by Nanak, and is from the daily liturgy 
of the Sikhs in the Adi Granth. The language is Hindi, but the 
script is Gurmukhi :— 

‘In the beginning was the Real, in the beginning of the ages was the 
Real. The Real, O Nanak, is, and the Real also will be.’ 


ntiz as WATE AST tt 
3 Sl ag lag Jat St as 0 


140 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS 
24. Baby Rama in His Mother’s Arms 


With fingers locked in prayer she cries,—‘ How may I dare, 
O lord god immortal, thy boundless praise to tell ?— 

Far above the world’s confusion and reason’s vain 
intrusion, whom all the scriptures witness incompre- 
hensible ; 

Whom saints and holy sages have hymned through all the 
ages, the fountain of compassion, the source of every 
grace ; 

Who aye with Lakshmi reignest, thou, even thou, now 
deignest to be my son and succour thy sore-tried 
chosen race. 

Though we know by revelation, heaven and earth and all 
creation, in each hair upon thy body may be found, 

In my arms thou sweetly dreamest, O mystery supremest, 
far beyond the comprehension of a sage the most 
profound.’ 

Smiled the lord at her devotion, and would fain have set 
in motion the magic that dazzles the crowd, 

Telling all he had done and the triumphs he had won, 
that his mother of her son might be proud. 

But hurriedly she cried,—‘ My soul is terrified by these 
marvels, disperse them from my sight ; 

Let me see thee as a child, disporting free and wild, for 
in this is my greatest delight.’ 

She spoke and he obeyed, and, at once in fashion made, as 
an infant began to cry. 


Tulsi Das, Ramacharit Manas, Book J, Chhand, 24-7; Growse’s 
Translation, pp. 96-7. 


BHAKTI I41 


25. The Praise of Krishna in Marathi 
(a) Krishna’s Saving Power 


What or whom shall we ask for but thee, O thou who 
fillest the globe and the universe? Who else knows how to 
fulfil our heart’s desires? What of other princes and kings ? 
There is none other in the three worlds that grants libera- 
tion, none that saves us but thou. When we think upon 
thy name and form, sin and fever run away in fear, desire is 
destroyed. Hari, this name of thine is truly called such in 
the Puranas, for it drives away death and re-incarnation from 
those they have seized. Why should I waste my speech? 
It is fruitless for me to praise any other than thee. O thou 
that destroyest the world, the great serpent is wearied with 
describing thee. Let my spirit repose in confidence at thy 
feet ; it is vain to ask for aught else. Thy title, ‘Lord of 
the humble’, is justified in the eyes of men; thou hast 
saved many a humble, many a guilty, many a sinful man. 
Tuka dwells at thy feet ; preserve him, O God! I ask that 
I may serve thee. 


(b) Zukaram’s Religious Experience 


Step by step he supports me: my life is led on to perfec- 
tion. I have found an assured place in him, and the world 
I have left void. My spirit goes forward on the path. Iam 
filled in the flesh with growing joy. Tuka says, In this 
mortal world I have joined the pervading spirit. 


The Poems of Tukaram, ¥raser and Marathe, pp. 89 and 245. 


142 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


TABLES 


23. The Bhakti Period, 1200 to 1757 
annena te ene See Se PT) eT 




















External : a9 5 
Rivets LfTistory Religion Literature 
1200 The Qutb | Namdev 
Minar and 
Mosque Mey-kanda-devar 
built 
1300 1336 Vijayanagar Umapati 
founded Madhva 
Sayana and Madhava 
1398 Taimiir in 
India 
1400 Vidyapati Ramananda 
Mira Bai Kabir 
1500 Martin | 1526 the Mughals Nanak 
Luther 


1556 Akbar Toleration 
1565 Battle of 
1588 The Talikot. Fall of Str Das Tulsi Das Dadi 
Armada Vijayanagar 
Chaitanya Bhakta Mala 








1600 Intolerance | 1601 Adi Granth 
renewed 
Cromwell | 1658 Aurungzeb Tukaram 





1696 Granth 





BHAKTI 143 
24. The Tamil Literature of the Saiva Siddhanta 


A. The twelve canonical books, called Zirumurat or 
Drivida Sruti:— 


Cent. Authors Books 
VII Appar 3 
Nana Samanta The Devaram | a 
VIII Sundarar I 
X  Maéanikka Vachakar Tiruvachakam and I 

Tirukovaiyar 

Nine authors : Tiruvigaipa I 
Tirumilar : Tirumantram I 
Nambi-andar-nambi : I 
Sekkilar : Periya Purainam I 


B. The fourteen Siddhanta Sastras. Of these the most 
important are :— 

XIII Mey-kanda-devar Siva-iina-bodham, a sys- 
tematic statement of the 
principles of the faith, 
translated from _ the 
Raurava Agama 

Mana-vachakam Kadandar Uzmai Vilakkam 


Arunandi-devar Siva-iina-siddhi, a fur- 
ther exposition 
XIV Umaéapati Sivacharyar Siva Prakiéam, a poem 


in a hundred quatrains, 
being a commentary 
on the two preceding 
works 

Tiru-arut-payan, a poem 
in a hundred couplets 
on divine grace 


144 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


25. The Literature of the Saivas and the 
Vaishnavas 


NoTE.—This table is meant to give some idea of the strikingly 
parallel development which these sects have had in South India. 
Both acknowledge the Vedas, though there are certain sections of them 
which they hold in less honour than their own literature. Both sects 
acknowledge to the full the inspiration and authority of the Vedania- 
Sutras. 


The following are the chief divisions of their respective literatures :— 











Saivas Vaishnavas 

1. Basal works in San- The Agamas The Samhitas or 
skrit verse, taking or Paiicharatra 
the place of the Saivagamas Samhitas 
Srauta-sitras and the 
Karma-mimamsa 

2. Tamil Hymns by The Devaram of The Walayira 
early saints the three Adiyars Frabandham of the 

and Manikka Alvars 


Vachakar’s works 





3. Commentary in San- | The Saiva Bhashya The S+z Bhashya 
skrit prose on the | of Nilakantha of Ramanuja 
Vedanta-siitras 





4. Philosophic works in The fourteen The Artha Patichaka 
Tamil Siddhanta Sastras | of Pillai Lokacharya 
and other books 


BHAKTI 145 


26. The Followers of Ramananda 


XV Cent. Ramananda 
Kabir died 1518 
is 
— 
coe Nanak 1469-1538 
£532-1623 Tulsi Das Dadi 1544-1603 
| 
| 
| 





Kabir- Dadi- Sikhs 
panthis panthis 


27. Adoration Mantras 
(az) Bhagavata :— 
Om namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya, ‘Om! reverence 
to the adorable Vasudeva.’ 
(2) Early Buddhist :— 
Om namo Bhagavate,‘Om! reverence to the 
Adorable.’ 
(c) Later Buddhist :— 
LVamo ’mitabhaya, ‘Reverence to Amitabha.’ 
(Z) The five syllables of the Saiva Siddhanta, S7dya 
namah, ‘ Reverence to Siva.’ 
(e) The followers of Ramanuja :— 
Om namo Narayandya, ‘Om! reverence to 
Narayana.’ 
(7) The followers of Ramananda :— 
Om Ramaya namah, ‘Om! reverence to Rama.’ 
(8) The Vallabhacharis :— 
Sri Krishnah saranam mama, ‘Holy Krishna is 
my refuge.’ 
PP 639 K 


146 


28. 


OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


THE KABIRPANTH 


Its Leaders, Sects and Books 


The Bap, i.e. Fa- 
ther, section at 
the Kabir Cha- 
ura,  Benares, 
and at Maghar, 


The S7a&, lit.‘ the 
account - book’, 
a collection of 
hymns, of Sak- 
fis, i.e. rhyming 
couplets, and of 
short prose expo- 
sitions of points 
of doctrine, pub- 


KABIR, died 1518 lished about 
1570. Many of 
these re-appear 
in the Ad 
Granth, Mul- 
titudes of other 

Sakhis are cur- 
rent and are 
attributed to 

| Kabir. 
The: . Afet ice 
Mother, section 
at Chatisgarh, 
“a Sukh Nidan, a 
Founder : manual of doc- 
DHARM DAS trine published 


Gorakhpur Dis- 

trict, where Ka- 

bir died. 
Founder : 

SURAT GOPAL, 





in 1729. 

Amar Mil, an- 
other manual of 
later origin. 


BHAKTI 147 


29. Canon of the Vedanta, the Prasthanatraya 


A. THE Upanisnaps. The following eleven are usually 
studied: Chhdndogya, Kena, Aitareya, Kaushitakt, 
Isa, Kathaka, Mundaka, Tatttiriya, Brihadaranyaka, 
Svetasvatara, Prasgna. 

B. THE BHaGAvADGITA. 


C. THE VEDANTA-SUTRAS. 
NoTeE.—In studying these sacred books the 4dvazti follows Sankara, 


the Visishtddvaiti follows Ramanuja, the Dvaiti follows Madhva, and 
the Saivite sects follow Nilakantha. 





38. PICTURE FROM Kabir CHAURA MONASTERY, BENARES 


Surat Gopal and Dharm Das kneel in front of Kabir, while his son 
Kamal fans him. (Photograph kindly favoured by the Bishop of 
Lucknow. ), 


K2 
























































148 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 
30. Northern Krishnaite Leaders 
Century Name Place Works Language 
XI Nimbs ke Go eae ee 
XII Jayadeva Bengal Gita Sanskrit 
Govinda 
XIII Namdey Maratha Hymns Marathi 
Land 
ee Me EE fe mee ie 
XV Vidyapati Bihar Sonnets Maithili 
Chandi Das Bengal Songs Bengali 
Mira Bai Mewar Songs Braj 
XVI Vallabha Mathura 
Sir Das Agra Sur Sagar Braj 
Chaitanya Nadiya Bengali 
XVII Tukaram Maratha Abhangs, Marathi 
Land hymns i 














BHAKTI 














149 
31. The Modern Bhagavatas 
Philosophic : Chie 
The Four Churches Posi ss is Main Sect eke ae 
I. Sri- Visishtadvaita,| Sri-sam- | 1, Ramanandis 
SAMPRADAYA Modified pradayas | 2. Kabirpanthis 
Founder : monism 3. Khakis 
io RAMANUJA 4. Mulik-dasis 
S 5. Rai-dasis 
3 6. Sena-panthis 
Z 
II. BRAHMA- Doaita, Madhvas 
SAMPRADAYA Wiralicn 
Founder : 
MADHVA 
III. Rupra- Suddhadvaita, | Vallabha- | 1. Mira Bais 
SAMPRADAYA Pure monism charis 2. Chaitanyas 
ica) Founder: 
2 VISHNU- 
S.|  svAMI 
en) 
Zi 
re IV. SANAKADI- Doattadvaita, | Nimavats | 1. Radha-Valla- 
SAMPRADAYA Dualistic bhas 
Founder : monism 2. Charan-dasis 
NIMBARKA 3. Sakhi-bhavas 





NoTe.—Sampradaya means tradition. 


Thus Sri-sampradaya means 
the tradition handed down from Sri, i.e. Lakshmi, the wife of Vishnu. 
The second tradition is said to come from Brahma, the Creator, the 
third from Rudra, i. e. Siva, and the fourth from the sage Sanaka and 
his brethren. 


act (eq ae Haga wa facat; By ata 
fepe fea a; fof «2 wane wf efacaa | 


CHAPTER 24 
PERIOD OF WESTERN INFLUENCE 


PROTESTANT MISSIONS: REVIVAL OF HINDUISM 


From the Battle of Plassey onward: A.D. 1757- 
I9IO 


94. Aistory. It is extremely difficult to give any satis- 
factory account of the fragment of a period with which we 
deal in this chapter. The great forces which are at work 
have only begun to evolve the results with which they are 
pregnant ; so that the writer has to choose between a recital 
of facts without any attempt at appraisement and an esti- 
mate of their meaning which must of necessity be largely of 
the nature of a prophecy. Yet it is so important to give the 
student of Hinduism some idea of the forces set in motion 
during the nineteenth century that the attempt must be 
made at all costs. 

Violence and confusion continued long after the battle of 
Plassey ; so that Western influence scarcely made itself felt 
in the life of the people until the dawn of the nineteenth 
century. Since then the whole political history of India is 
summed up in the gradual extension and consolidation of 
the British power and in its progressive adaptation to the 
needs of the people. The Mutiny and the recent outburst 

NoTEe.—The above text is the first of the four clauses of the Biya, 
‘seed’, of Brahma doctrine drawn up by Devendra Nath Tagore: ‘Inthe 


beginning there was only one supreme Brahman ; there was nothing else ; 
He created all this.’ The language is Bengali. 


WESTERN INFLUENCE 151 


of anarchism were but tragic episodes, and scarcely exercised 
any positive influence on the real movement of the time. 
Yet, though the period under review is very short, in no 
preceding period have such revolutionary changes been 
produced on the Indian mind. The only time in any way 
comparable with the present is that which we dealt with in 
our fourth chapter, when Essential Hinduism arose; but 
that was a normal development compared with the upheaval 
we see around us to-day. 

Western influence is an atmosphere, a new climate, which 
has found its way into Indian life, and it acts as impercep- 
tibly, as powerfully, and as universaily as the atmosphere. 
Yet the channels through which this impalpable element 
has been brought into the environment of all Indians may 
be distinguished. 

(a) The most important of these is Western education, 
whether given in school or college, in the vernacular or 
English, by Government teacher, missionary, Hindu or 
Theosophist. 

(2) The second place is held by Christian teaching, 
whether oral or literary. Both the direct presentation of 
Christian ideas, religicus, moral, and social, and the less 
welcome criticism of Hinduism, have been of incalculable 
service. 

(c) In the third rank stands Christian philanthropy, 
whether carried on by missionary societies or by Govern- 
ment agencies. All that has been done for the sick, the 
famine-stricken, for orphans and lepers, for the ignorant and 
the downtrodden, has been potent to wake the conscience 
of India. The earnest efforts of the Government to rule 
for the good of the people, to treat all races, religions, and 
castes as equal, and to give every one strict justice, has 
been an object-lesson of the utmost power. 

(2) The brilliant work done by Western scholars on 


152 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


ancient Indian literature has, on the one hand, opened the 
eyes of Hindus to the real history of India and of their 
religion in contrast with the old traditions, but, on the other 
hand, has filled them with a new pride in their religion and 
has given thousands courage to remain within the Hindu fold. 

These forms of activity have created a new race of men, 
the educated classes ; and through them to-day India is 
being rejuvenated. Around us on every side the new life is 
pulsing, expanding, remaking the country. The railway, 
the post office, the telegraph, the steamer, and European 
manufactures and commerce, have touched the masses of 
India in some degree, but it is through the educated men 
that the new age is being inaugurated. They are marked 
by their English speech, by great enthusiasm for education, 
a passion for self-government, a desire for economic progress, 
a new attitude to women, fresh humanitarian feeling, and a 
consciousness that the new India of their dreams: cannot be 
brought in without many reforms. All this is summed up 
to-day under the phrase ‘the National Movement’. 

95. Leligion. Hindus frequently declare that Hinduism, 
largely as a result of many decades of devastation and chaos, 
had fallen very low indeed by the opening of the nine- 
teenth century. There can be no doubt of the truth of 
this statement. Scholarship was seriously contracted ; 
spirituality remained only in the quiet places of the land ; 
a coarse ritualism was supreme in all the great centres of 
population ; and the more repulsive features of the religion, 
such as gross idolatry, immorality, infanticide, sa/z, hook- 
swinging, and other tortures, were very much in evidence. 
Unless this is understood, the course of events during the 
century is not comprehensible. 

During our period there has been no internal develop- 
ment of Hinduism whatsoever. All that has to be chronicled 
is the results produced on Hinduism and the Hindus by 
Western influence. 


WESTERN INFLUENCE 153 


The period under review falls very naturally into three 
subdivisions, 1800-30, 1830-75, 1875-1910. 

A. During the thirty years between 1800-30 the two 
most potent sources of influence upon the Hindu mind 
were, without doubt, the British Government and _ the 
Serampore missionaries. 

During those thirty years the idea that Britain was re- 
sponsible for the welfare of India was first distinctly recog- 
nized ; and the new spirit made itself manifest in a number 
of ways. The College of Fort William, Calcutta, was 
founded by Lord Wellesley to give Indian civilians a real 
knowledge of the people they were to govern. While the 
empire was steadily expanded, methods of government were 
as steadily improved, and new conceptions of policy took 
form. In 1826 began the great crusade against ¢/agi, i. e. 
the system of strangling and robbing wealthy travellers ; in 
1829 Bentinck put down sa¢ ; and about the same time the 
long-continued crusade against female infanticide was begun. 

The great triad, Carey, Marshman, and Ward, however, 
did far more to wake the Indian intellect than the Govern- 
ment of India. The actual baptism of Brahman converts 
was an unspeakable shock : what else could have so effectu- 
ally roused the Hindu? By literature more than by speech 
the missionaries started the effective diffusion of Christian 
teaching in North India; they scattered the Bible broadcast 
over the peninsula in the vernaculars ; they began the print- 
ing of Indian literature in both Sanskrit and the vernaculars ; 
they began the use of Bengali prose, and published the first 
vernacular newspaper ; they were the pioneers of widespread 
education ; and lastly, their bold exposure of the cruelties 
and immoralities of customary Hinduism, though crude and 
harsh to us to-day, was absolutely necessary to wake Hindus 
to a consciousness of the glaring faults of their religion. 

Apart from the foundation of the Christian Church of 


154 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


Bengal, the one noticeable religious outcome of these thirty 
years is the life and work of Raja Ram Mohan Rai, who 
set a fine example in his study of Hinduism ; who stood by 
the missionaries in their attack on safi and other cruelties ; 
and who founded the Brahma Samaj. His influence 
has been continuously felt down to our own days. 

B. Since Duff’s work colours all the religious history of 
the middle of the nineteenth century, we begin our second 
subdivision, 1830-75, with the year of his arrival in 
Calcutta. 

In 1834 the Government of India, largely under Duff’s 
influence, decided to favour Western instead of Oriental 
education. Henceforward both Government and the 
missionary societies pressed forward the foundation of High 
Schools and Colleges. The Universities of Calcutta, Bombay, 
and Madras were founded in 1857 amid the throes of the 
Mutiny. Government continued to put down immoral 
abuses in Hinduism and Indian life. 

During these decades Protestant Missions in India 
developed several new methods, and laid firmly the founda- 
tions of their future work. Apart from the Higher Education, 
which as a missionary method was largely the fruit of 
Duff's genius, the chief new creations were work by women 
for women and medical Missions. 

The Brahma Samaj is a Unitarian reforming movement, 
which arose within Hinduism under Ram Mohan Rai, but 
renounced caste and other Hindu forms of life during this 
subdivision of our period under Devendra Nath Tagore 
and Keshab Chandra Sen. The movement is strictly 
theistic and strongly opposed to idolatry. Its moral ideas 
and forms of worship are practically Christian. 

By far the most powerful religious influences during those 
years were missionary effort, especially as exerted through 
High Schools and Colleges, and the Brahma Samaj. The 


WESTERN INFLUENCE 155 


Protestant Church of India had its foundation laid strong 
and deep through the accession of groups of students won 
from the heart of Hinduism by Duff and other educational 
missionaries. Another stream of awakened men passed 
into the Brahma Samaj, chiefly in Bengal, but to some 
extent also in Bombay, Madras, and Lahore. Yet, sad to 
say, in Bengal at least, a far larger number of young men 
became atheists or agnostics, and led a rather reckless social 
revolt against the restrictions of Hinduism. The new 
illumination did not by any means lead to spiritual results 
in all cases. 

C. About 1875 a remarkable change makes _ itself 
manifest in the Indian spirit. Until then it seemed to have 
been at school. Now it seems to reach maturity and 
begins to act with all the vivacity and spontaneity of youth, 
An extraordinary number of fresh movements, educational, 
political, religious, social, economic, have arisen all over 
the country. Educated men are everywhere alive, filled 
with excitement, ambition, new capacities, new activities. 
We choose 1875 as the dividing line, because in that year 
both the Arya Samaj and the Theosophical Society were 
founded. 

Government has increasingly given itself to the effort to 
better the material and moral well-being of the people, 
especially by means of education, irrigation, railways, and 
famine-relief, but has been compelled to adopt a cautious 
policy towards the political aspirations of the educated, and 
thus has seemed on the surface to be more critical than 
sympathetic towards the Nationa] Movement. 

Missions during these years have exercised a powerful 
influence through the conversion of vast masses of the 
depressed classes, who throughout the centuries have been 
considered too unclean for contact with pure Hindus. (See 
sections 45 and 120.) Largely through these mass move- 


156 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


ments the Protestant Church in India has increased in 
numbers much more rapidly than any other religious body. 

The great feature of these decades, however, is the revival 
of Hinduism. As a result of the attack of Protestant 
Christianity, on the one hand, and of the rise of interest in 
Oriental religions in the West, on the other hand, Hindus 
have been roused to a great rally in defence of their 
ancestral faith. Every one will remember the parallel 
revival of the pagan faiths of the Roman Empire in the 
second and following centuries. The revival is found 
wherever there are educated Hindus, and it has taken 
many forms, but four organizations stand out above all 
others as leading the movement. 

(2) The first of these is the Arya Samaj, founded by 
Dayananda Sarasvati in the Punjab. It is strictly theistic 
and denounces idolatry. The founder also denounced 
caste, but the members of the Samaj do not practise what 
he preached: they remain within Hinduism. The Vedas 
are the only sacred book acknowledged ; and even portions 
of them are not accepted as inspired. The Samaj is vehe- 
mently anti-Christian, and has shown strong political leanings. 
It has grown very rapidly during the last twenty years, but 
only in the Punjab and the United Provinces. 

(4) The second organization is the Theosophical Society, 
which was founded by Madame Blavatsky and Colonel 
Olcott in New York in 1875, but removed its head-quarters 
to India in 1878. It has three aims: 

1. The formation of a real brotherhood amongst men of 
all nations and religions. 

2. The study of Aryan, and especially of Oriental, re- 
ligions. 

3. The investigation of the occult powers of man. 

Madame Blavatsky pretended to have intercourse with 
certain supernatural beings called Mahatmas, and all sorts 


WESTERN INFLUENCE 157 


of wonders were performed at the head-quarters in Madras. 
But the trickery was exposed, and Madame Blavatsky fled 
from India, never to return. 

The Society, however, has continued to grow and flourish 
in India, first under Colonel Olcott, and then under 
Mrs. Besant. The position maintained is that every re- 
ligion is legitimate and right, and that anything like pro- 
selytism is to be condemned. Yet Theosophy teaches Karma 
and Transmigration, and thus proclaims itself a friend to 
Hinduism and Buddhism and alien to all other faiths. It 
has been vehemently anti-Christian throughout its history in 
India. There can be no question that it has gained its 
position in India because it has defended Hindu idols and 
caste as well as philosophy. It came just at the moment 
when the Hindu wanted a champion, and multitudes of 
Hindus to-day feel safe behind its sophistries. The Society 
has done considerable service to India in the matter of educa- 
tion. Like the Islamia College at Aligarh, the Central Hindu 
College at Benares is modelled on missionary lines. In all 
earlier Hindu colleges for Western education no religious 
training was given, but in Benares Hinduism is taught, as 
Muhammadanism is taught at Aligarh. 

(c) The third organization sprang from an interesting 
ascetic named Ramakrishna Paramaharhsa, who lived in 
a temple near Calcutta. He had had no serious education 
either Hindu or Western, but was full of mother-wit and 
practical common sense. Gauging well the tendencies of 
the time, he took up the old Hindu proverb, that as all 
rivers run to the sea, so all forms of Hinduism lead to 
salvation, and applied it to all the religions of the world. 
He was ready to accept and to practise any aspect of 
Hinduism, and he imagined himself now a Christian, now 
a Muhammadan. He gathered a band of disciples around 
him and exercised considerable influence over the Brahma 


158 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


leader, Keshab Chandra Sen. By far the greatest of his . 
disciples was Svimi Vivekananda, who spoke at the Chicago 
Parliament of Religions, and then lectured with great success 
all over India. He sent out missionaries to Britain and to 
America; and, before his early death, founded several 
monasteries in India in which work still continues. He 
and his followers defend the whole of Hinduism. 

(Z) By 1890 these three movements had stirred the 
educated classes of India very deeply, and there arose 
a whole army of lecturers, monks, and teachers, who went 
from town to town, delivering apologetic lectures, expounding 
the sacred books, holding classes for their study, and founding 
societies for the defence of Hinduism. Out of these there 
sprang the fourth organization, the most orthodox of all, the 
Bharat Dharma Mahamandal, under the leadership of the 
Maharaja of Darbhanga, branches of which have been 
formed far and wide and have proved very influential. 

The Brahma Samaj has continued to work steadily through- 
out the years, but since the death of Keshab in 1884 it has 
had much less influence. The Prarthana Samaj, which 
arose in the Bombay presidency in 1867, as a result of the 
work of the Brahma Samaj, was long led by a very remark- 
able man, Mr. Justice Ranade. The main difference be- 
tween the two is this, that full membership in the Brahma 
Samaj places a man outside Hindu society, while members 
of the Prarthana Samaj continue in the old religion. From 
the Prarthana Samaj and Mr. Justice Ranade there sprang 
the Social Reform Movement, which has gradually attained 
influence all over the country and is a most healthy leaven. 
Its organ is the Judian Social Reformer. 

With the smaller movements we cannot deal in detail. 
Each of the sects has now its defence association and annual 
conference. 

All the organizations have a great deal in common. To 
be thoroughly Hindu, and at the same time to introduce 


WESTERN INFLUENCE 159 


just as much reform as is necessary to make the religion 
practically efficient in these modern days, and so to prove 
that Christianity is unnecessary—this is the ideal. Each 
section opposes Christianity; yet each copies missionary 
methods down to the last detail, and endeavours to prove 
that its theology is as strictly monotheistic as Christianity 
and its morality as lofty and practical. 

It is most noteworthy that movements in all essentials 
similar to the revival of Hinduism have taken place among 
the Jains, the Parsees, and the Muhammadans of India, and 
amongst the Buddhists of Burma and Ceylon, not to 
mention China and Japan. 

96. Literature. The literature of our period cannot com- 
pare with that of earlier periods in value or in literary power, 
but its interest is very great. 

The literature of the Brahma Samaj is perhaps higher in 
quality than any other. Raja Ram Mohan Rai published 
translations in English and Bengali of the leading Upanishads, 
but his most remarkable work was Zhe Precepts of Jesus, being 
a catena of passages from the Gospels. Devendra Nath 
Tagore prepared Brahma Dharma, a volume of extracts 
from the Upanishads, meant to. be used both as a service- 
book and as a manual of devotion. Keshab published a 
remarkable service-book called SJoka Sangraha, containing 
texts from Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh, Jewish, Christian, Muham- 
madan, Parsee, and Chinese Scriptures. His volumes ot 
lectures are interesting and illuminating. The only other 
work of genius written by a Brahma is Mozoomdar’s Oriental 
Christ. 

The founder of the Arya Samaj was no modern scholar, 
and so his works on the Hindu Scriptures are of no value, 
but, for the theology and organization of the Samaj, his 
Satyartha Prakasa is of great importance, Ramakrishna 
Paramaharhsa left nothing written, but Max Miiller published 
a volume containing a brief account of his life and a large 


160 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


number of his sayings as reported by disciples. Svami 
Vivekdnanda’s writings show a manly independence and — 
a national spirit which are altogether admirable, but they 
are marred by distortion of history and extreme exaggeration. 
Theosophy has produced a large literature, and Mrs. Besant 
has published many works on Hinduism, some of which one 
must read in order to understand her influence. Mr. Justice 
Ranade’s writings are full of ethical and intellectual force. 

A vast Hindu literature has kept falling from the Indian 
press in all the chief cities during the last thirty years, 
editions of the sacred books, above all of the Gifa, com- 
mentaries and translations both in English and the verna- 
culars, and defences of the teaching of the various Hindu 
sects. The earliest and most noteworthy of this latter 
group is probably the Neo-Krishna literature of Bengal, 
the leading writer being Bankim Chandra Chatterji. 
The protagonist of the Vaishnavism of South India is Mr. 
Govindacharya Svami of Mysore; of the Saiva-Siddhanta, 
Mr. Nallasvami Pillai; and of Madhvism, Mr. Padmana- 
bhachar of Coimbatore; while Mr. Sundararaman of 
Kumbakonam stands almost alone as the defender of the 
whole of ancient ritualistic Hinduism. 


NotE.—The text below in Bengali is by Ramakrishna Paramaharsa. 
‘ As some people come to this House of Kali by boat, some by carriage 
and some on foot—various people by various means at last reaching the 
same spot; so, though men are various and their creeds are various, yet 
the God whom they find by them is in all cases the same.’ 


ar se stalabes aifare seq ae Mee 
(eq onfees eae Ee iba wifAT awe: fer x 
Veer fer e ofe sifactce wezicn ifn Beofes 
au @eat fox 2 ufeg fer avez al a Pea 
MS SEM AWS Vlei Wecaae ae 


WESTERN INFLUENCE 161 


ILLUSTRATIVE READINGS 
26. The Folly of Idolatry 


Notr.—This is a passage from the autobiography of Dayananda 
Sarasyati. It refers to a time in his boyhood, when his father insisted 
on initiating him into the worship of Siva. 


As a preparation for this solemn act I was made 
to fast, and I had then to follow my father for a night’s 
vigil in the temple of Siva. The vigil is divided into 
four parts or praharas, consisting of three hours each. 
When I had watched six hours I observed about midnight 
that the Pujaris, the temple-servants, and some of the 
devotees, after having left the inner temple, had fallen 
asleep. Knowing that this would destroy all the good effects 
of the service, I kept awake myself, when I observed that 
even my father had fallen asleep. While I was thus left 
alone I began to meditate. Is it possible, I asked myself, 
that this idol I see bestriding his bull before me, and who, 
according to all accounts, walks about, eats, sleeps, drinks, 
holds a trident in his hand, beats the drum, and can pro- 
nounce curses on men, can be the great Deity, the Mahadeva, 
the Supreme Being? Unable to resist such thoughts any 
longer I roused my father, asking him to tell me whether 
this hideous idol was the great god of the scriptures. ‘Why 
do you ask?’ said my father. ‘Because’, I answered, ‘I 
feel it impossible to reconcile the idea of an omnipotent 
living God with this idol, which allows the mice to run over 
his body and thus suffers himself to be polluted without the 
slightest protest.’ 


Max Miiller, Bzographical Essays, p. 172 f. 


PP 639 L 


162 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


27. A New Reading of History 


Before even the Buddhists were born, there are evidences 
accumulating every day that Indian thought penetrated the 
world. Vedanta, before Buddhism, had penetrated into 
China, into Persia, and the Islands of the Eastern Archi- 
pelago. Again, when the mighty mind of the Greek had 
linked the different parts of the eastern world together, there 
came Indian thought ; and Christianity with all its boasted 
civilization is a collection of little bits of Indian thought. 
Ours is the religion of which Buddhism, with all its great- 
ness, is the rebel child and Christianity a very patchy 
imitation. One of these cycles has again arrived. There is 
the tremendous power of England which has linked the 
different parts of the world together. English roads no 
more are content like Roman roads to run over lands, but 
they have ploughed the deep in every one of its parts. 
From ocean to ocean run the roads of England. Every 
part of the world has been linked to every other part, and 
electricity plays a most marvellous part as the new messenger. 
Under all these circumstances we find again India reviving 
and ready to give her own quota for the progress and 
civilization of the world. .. . Everything looks propitious, 
and Indian thought, philosophical and spiritual, must once 
more go over and conquer the world. . . . 1 am an imaginative 
man, and my idea is the conquest of the whole world by the 
Hindu race. .. . Up, India, and conquer the world with your 
spirituality! ... The world wants it; without it the world 
will be destroyed. The whole of the western world is on 
a volcano which may burst to-morrow. 


Svami Vivekananda, Madras Lectures, pp. $3, 84, 85. 


afeag: feat wa 4 arfrat at ear deat qed | 
a ot Wataar weearat a: a Pec Pura i 


CHAPTER XII 


OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY OF THE 
HINDU FAMILY 


97. The beginnings of the Hindu family must be traced 
to the foundation of the Patriarchal family in prehistoric 
times on the basis of ancestor-worship. The natural results 
of this form of family organization are that the family and 
its morality are greatly strengthened ; the father’s authority 
is indefinitely enhanced ; marriage becomes universal ; the 
birth of a son is ardently desired; woman tends to be 
depreciated. 

Girls were not welcomed so eagerly as boys; hence the 
custom of the exposure of girl-babies arose. This began in 
early prehistoric times. 

The husband being the head of the family, a wife was 
regarded as one of his possessions, and polygamy therefore 
naturally arose. Hindu Maharajas still exercise this ancient 
right ; and any Hindu is free to marry a second wife, if the 
first prove barren. This also is prehistoric. 

98. Gradual rise of the /oimt Family. Each daughter 
goes to the home of her husband’s father; but each son 


NoTr.—The text at the top of the page refers to ANCESTOR-WORSHIP 
IN THE TIMES OF THE RIGVEDA :— 
‘Fathers, who sit on sacred grass, come, help us: 
These offerings have we made for you, accept them. 
So come to us with most auspicious favour, 
And give us health and strength without a trouble.’ 
Rigveda, X. xv. 4, 


L2 


164 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


brings his bride into his father’s house. The granddaughters 

and grandsons do likewise. Hence there may be, and often 

are, four generations all living together in one house, under 
the control of the one father. In his hands are the earnings 

of all; and every member of the family is carefully looked | 
after. The unity of the family is preserved, and the 
weaker members are cared for, but independence of 
character suffers. 

When the Hindu patriarchal family began to develop, and 
the father became more and more important, the rule arose 
that a@ man must not eat with his wife. This regulation 
probably dates from the ‘seventh or eighth century B.c. 

99. It became the rule before the sixth century B.c. that 
every boy of the twice-born castes should be educated. This 
excellent rule fell into disuse long ago. Though every boy 
received an education, 70 education was provided for a girl. 

too. By the fifth century B.c. it was the rule that a gi7Z 
must be married before puberty. The natural consequence of 
this religious law was that parents, in their eagerness to 
secure a marriage for their daughters, betrothed them and 
had the marriage ceremony performed very early. Thus 
child-marriage became the Hindu custom. Hence through 
the death of boy-husbands, virgin child-widows of all ages, 
from a few months old, are common. 

Only childless widows were allowed to remarry at this 
time. 

tor. Manu’s Law-book ordains that 2o widow, not even a 
virgin child-widow, may remarry. The exact date of the 
book is unknown ; but it is certain that this must have been 
the Hindu custom by the time of the birth of Christ. 

102. The custom of Saé, widow-burning, came gradually 
into use in the early Christian centuries and was embodied 
in a code somewhere about the sixth century. The rule 
ran that only a widow who wished to become a Saéz was 


THE HINDU FAMILY 165 


allowed to mount the pyre; but it is certain that there 
were many unwilling victims. Ram Mohan Rai witnessed 
the burning of a widow who struggled to escape, his own 
brother’s wife. It was only in North India that it became 
very common, and it was in Bengal that the largest number 
of cases occurred. 

103. At the same time it became the rule that a widow 
who does not mount the pyre must spend her life in perpetual 
mourning and asceticism. In Bengal the rule is that a widow 
has to lay aside all her ornaments, wear a sa@7z without 
a border, subsist on a vegetarian diet, eat only one meal per 
day and twice a month pass a whole day of twenty-four hours 
without eating or drinking. In many parts of the country 
widows have to submit to tonsure. And on the top of all 
they are usually made household drudges. There are certain 
parts of the country where their lot is not quite so hard. 

104. The zenana system, or custom of secluding the 
women of the upper castes in the woman’s apartments, arose 
during the Muhammadan period, perhaps partly in imitation 
of Muslim custom, but mainly in self-defence. This practice 
does not affect in the same degree those provinces that came 
little under Muhammadan domination. The zenana is 
necessarily confined almost altogether to the upper castes. 
The women of the common people usually lead a very free 
life. Yet this custom, like other characteristics of high- 
caste life, is copied by the lower castes so far as their means 
will allow. 

105. (2) Widow-burning prohibited by Lord Bentinck’s 

Government, December 4, 1829. 

(2) From 1830 onwards, a steady persistent crusade 
was carried on against female infanticide by 
the Government of India. 

(c) In 1865 the Government passed a law legalizing 
the remarriage of Hindu widows. 


166 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


NotTEe.—The text below is on THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN: ‘Let 
her be in subjection to her father in her childhood, to her husband in 
her youth, to her sons when her husband is dead: let a woman never 
enjoy independence.’ Manava Dharmasastra, v. 148. 


ata fagan fasanfuaree ataa 
qaiui vdft FA a atest Sawai i 


sfaeta aateta ge aifaufeaea | 
aatety fia fasafaaatea: i 


CHAPTER XIII 


OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY OF INDIAN 
ASCETICISM 


106. In the Vedas and the Brahmanas we meet with 
many references to ¢apas, austerity. Various forms of severe 
self-denial and self-torture were practised, such as the 
endurance of extreme cold or excessive heat, sustained 
fasts, the use of coarse and unnatural food, and such like. 
The belief was that by such means supernatural power 
could be obtained, or some definite desire fulfilled, or the 
highest place in heaven won, if only the pain were carried 
far enough. ‘The ends being here material, not moral, this 
practice must be called materialistic austerity. 

107. Towards the end of the period of the Brahmanas a 
new religious order appears. These men live in the forest 
and are therefore called vanaprasthas, 1.e. forest-dwellers, 
hermits ; and when a group of them live together, their 
retreat is called arama, hermitage. They keep up the 
worship of the gods by fire and prayer in the forests, and 
they practise the old ¢apas. It is still believed that by 
austerity many material blessings may be won ; but the new 
idea, that by /apas the man may be purified and elevated 


Nore.—The text at the top of the page is THE RULE OF THE 
HERMIT, Vanaprastha : ‘ Carrying with him the sacred fire, and taking 
also the fire-utensils, he may go forth from the village to the forest and 
reside there with all his senses restrained.’ Manava Dharmasistra, Vi. 4. 


168 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


morally and spiritually, now appears ; so that this is a new | 
stage of thought and practice: We have here moral ascett- 
cism. The hermit retained his place in the family and in 
caste ; he continued the worship of the gods and of his 





39. TRIDANDI AScCETIC 


This is the high-priest of the Tea-galai (see section 81) 
Vishnuites of the Tinnevelley District. Note the triple rod 
and the sect-mark, as in Ramanuja’s image (fig. 31). He 
wears a sacred thread, for, unlike the Ekadandis, the Tridandis 
do not give up caste. (Photographed for the author.) 


ancestors ; and he might even have his wife with him in his 
forest hut. He usually wore a coat of bark or of skin, 
lived usually on simple fare, and was forbidden to harm 
animals. 

108. When the new Hindu theory of God and the world 


ASCETICISM 169 


arose—the one divine Reality behind all phenomena, the 
world worthless and unreal, transmigration and karma the 
only explanation of the sorrows and inequalities of the world 
—there came with it a great desire for Release from re- 
birth, and the belief that in order to win Release a man 





4o. Sivaire SApHU wiITH HEAD-DRESS 


This extraordinary head-dress is in the form of a /iwga. He 
carries his danda in his right, his begging bowl in his left hand, 
wears a mass of necklaces of rudraksha berries and a cincture 
of bells. His face is smeared with ashes. (Photograph by 
Wiele & Klein.) 


must give up the work, the interests, and the pleasures of 
men. 

Consequently another religious order now appears, men 
who give up all their connexion with the life of man, re- 
linquishing not only business and pleasure but wife and 


170 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


children, the worship of ancestors, the worship of the gods, - 
property, house, ordinary food and clothing. They shaved 
off their hair, begged their food, and slept ina cave or at the 
root of a tree. Hence they were called pavivrijakas, 
‘vagrants,’ and dhikshus, ‘beggars’. But the most significant 
name is sannydsis, ‘ renouncers,’ because they renounced 








41. SADHU WEARING SANDALS FILLED WITH SPIKES 
(Photograph by Wiele & Klein.) 


ordinary life so completely. The points to be noted are 
those that contrast with the hermit: worship is abandoned 
altogether ; food and clothes are got by begging; and all 
connexion with the family, society, and the state is com- 
pletely destroyed. 

This new order of ‘monks ’, as we shall call them, was 


ASCETICISM 171 


divided into numerous groups differing in faith and 
practice. Buddhist and Jain monks as well as all classes 
of Hindu monks had the same general ideal of the 
houseless life, as they called it. This form of discipline 
may be called world-aban- 
doning asceticism, 

10g. Modern ascetics 
differ in several respects 
from the men of the earlier 
periods. The new ideas 
and practices came in with 
modern Hinduism. gx 
number of the modern 
schools were organized by 
the great Sankara in the 
first half of the ninth 
century. There are two 
main points to be noticed : 
(2) Modern practice is a 
combination of the practice 
of the hermit and the monk. 
The modern ascetic, or 
sadhu, as we shall call him, 
is supposed to be cut off Pete EEA ALAPAS 

; This sadhu, being swung head 

from the world like the  gownwards over a fire by a disciple, 


monk, but, like the hermit, was photographed recently at Alla- 
habad. (Photograph kindly favoured 


he does not give up wor- jy Mr. E. M. Moffatt.) 

ship. (8) Most sadhus are 

sectarians : they are devotees of Vishnu or of Siva. There 
are several orders, notably the “Lkadandis, or One-rod 
Sannyasis, to which Sankara belonged (see fig. 30), and the 
Tridandis, or Three-rod Sannyasis, to which Ramanuja 
belonged (see figs. 31 and 38), which are restricted to 
Brahmans. These conform in most points to the ancient 





172 OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY 


rule of the monk ; yet even they will be found worshipping 
one of the great gods. All the non-Brahman orders reflect 
a number of other characteristics of modern Hinduism: 
they believe in pilgrimage, and often wear showy tokens of 
the great ¢r¢has, or places of pilgrimage, which they have 





43- MopERN Sivaire SApHU 


His body is smeared with ashes. He was under a vow of 
silence and would not answer questions except with guttural 
grunts. He would not touch money, but a friend who hap- 
pened to be near accepted a few coppers and promised to 
buy him some food. Photographed outside the temple of 
Ramesvara at BhuvaneSvara. (Photograph kindly given by 
Mr. Frank Anderson, Bombay.) 


visited. They carry symbols of their gods. A Vishnuite 
will carry a sa/agréma stone, a discus, or an image of 
Rama or Krishna. A Sivaite will smear his body with 
ashes like Siva, and carry a trident, a tiger’s skin, or a human 
Skull. Many keep up the old forms of self-torture. 


ASCETICISM 173 


Asceticism has greatly deteriorated in modern times. 
There is no serious thought-movement in it ; a large propor- 
tion of sadhus are ignorant men ; many are grossly immoral ; 
some of the orders are coarse and indecent ; and Hindus 
acknowledge that there are but few sincere and earnest men 
amongst them. Yet here and there one meets a man of 
character and learning. 


NoTE.—The text at the bottom of the page is the tule of THE 
ANCIENT WANDERING MONK, Zarivrajaka: ‘ He shall have neither 
fire nor dwelling ; he may go to the village to get his food by begging ; 
he shall be indifferent, not irresolute, a man of meditation and of 
concentration of mind.” MJdanava Dharmasastra, vi. 43. 


qafactiaa: USATAAATIATAAT | 
Saaasaagar yftaaartea: | 





PART II 


HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 





AIATAUTS ANAT BT ASTATCATAT: | 
FeuTasaAqay wi aaify sitafa i 


GARTER XIV 
WHAT IT IS TO BE A HINDU TO-DAY 


A MAN is a Hindu because of two things, birth and con- 
formity. 

110. 4irvth. In order to be a Hindu, a man must have 
been born in one of the social groups which historically have 
become associated together in Hinduism, chiefly under 
Brahman supervision, and which are known as castes. 
A European may call himself a Hindu, because he believes 
certain Hindu doctrines ; but, according to all Hindu books 
and all Hindu usage, it is absolutely impossible for him to 
become a Hindu. 

111, Conformity. In order to remain a Hindu, a man 
born in Hinduism must conform to the usages of the group 
in which he was born. The customs of the various castes 
vary to an extraordinary degree. In some castes a great 
many things are obligatory, in others comparatively few. 

112, Conformity applies to four groups of actions :— 


(a) Marriace, Foop, Occupation, REsipENcE. The 
rules about marriage are the most fundamental part of caste. 


Nore.—The text at the top of the page describes THE ORTHODOX 
HINDU: ‘ He who observes the usages established among the virtuous, 
who is a believer in revelation, and free from ill-will, lives a hundred 
years, even though he does not possess any external marks of prosperity.’ 
Vishnusmriti, \xxi, 92. 

PP 639 M 


178 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


To marry outside one’s caste is altogether forbidden ; usually 
choice is further narrowed to one section or sub-caste ; and: 
even within this subdivision there are the further restrictions 
of pravara and gotra, which we need not explain here. To 
transgress any of the rules of marriage is the surest way to 
be excommunicated. Rules with regard to food restrict the 
articles of diet that may be eaten, the persons by whom food 
may be cooked, and the persons with whom it may be eaten. 
Educated men in the large cities usually keep caste rules 
about food in their own homes, but disregard them outside. 
Rules about occupation are in general very loose and easy 
among the educated classes, but very stringent where modern 
thought has not penetrated. An educated man may usually 
take up any occupation he pleases. The old law which 
forbade sea-voyages and residence outside India is being 
gradually laid aside by the higher castes. 


(6) Domestic CEREMONIES. The observance of certain 
domestic ceremonies is absolutely binding on every man 
who wishes to remain a Hindu. They are carried out with 
the utmost care in every family under the guidance of 
Brahman priests. 


In the code of Manu, as in the older sacred books, twelve 
domestic rites or sacraments, saseskaras, are prescribed for 
the twice-born castes :— 


(1) Garbhadhéna, impregnation, following the marriage 
ceremony. 

(2) Pumsavana, male-production, about three months 
after marriage. 

(3) Simantonnayana, hair-parting, the parting of the 
woman’s hair some time before the birth of her 
child. 

(4) Jata-karman, birth-ceremony. 

(5) ama-karana, name-giving. 


THE HINDU OF TO-DAY 179 


(6) Wishkramana, carrying-out. In the fourth month 
the child was carried out to look on the rising 
sun. 

(7) Anna-prisana, food-giving. 

(8) Chauda, tonsure. 

(9) Kesanda, hair-cutting. 

(10) Upanayana, initiation, the ceremony which intro- 
duces the boy to his education. (See above, p. 42.) 
(x1) Samdadvartana, home-coming, the return of the student 
to his home from the house of his teacher. 
(12) Vivadha, marriage. 
In the case of a girl there was no initiation, and the other 
ceremonies, with the exception of marriage, were performed 
without the recitation of sacred texts. 


To-day the twice-born castes usually observe only the 
following :— 


(5) Wama-karana, eae Usually observed to- 
(7) Anna-prasana, food-giving. gether. 

(10) Upanayana, initiation. 

(12) Vivaha, marriage. 

The other castes have corresponding ceremonies. 


(c) ANCESTOR-worsHIP. As we have seen in our first 
lesson, the Hindu family is patriarchal in form, because it 
rests on ancestor-worship. Modern customs differ a good 
deal in detail from the customs of the Rigvedic and earlier 
ages, yet in the main the ideas and the practice are the 
same. 

Strictly speaking, the ceremonies connected with the 
burning of the dead do not, in the opinion of modern 
Hindus, come under the head of ancestor-worship. All 
primitive peoples believe that whoever touches a dead body 
is defiled thereby, and this idea still survives in all its 
strength in Hinduism. Hence the burning of the dead, 

M2 


180 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


which is called antyeshiz, the last sacrifice, is polluting, and 
all the ceremonial connected with it is inauspicious ; while - 
the worship of ancestors is called svaddha, an act of faith, 
and all the ceremonies that come under that head are 
auspicious. Yet the same fundamental belief and practice 
are visibly present in both. 

The Funeral Ceremonies last ten days. The essential 
element in each day’s ceremony is the offering of a finda, 
i. e.a ball of cooked rice, to the spirit of the deceased. The 
first is offered on the first day, before the body is burnt, and 
one is offered each of the other days. The belief is that 
the spirit of the deceased through feeding on this food 
acquires a gross body, sthi/a farira, and is thereby trans- 
formed from a fvefa or wandering ghost into a pityi, a 
father, one of the company of glorified ancestors. 


Sraddha Ceremonies. A man’s relatives, male and female, 
on both his father’s and his mother’s side, for three genera- 
tions upward and three generations downward, are called 
his sapindas, i.e. ‘sharers in the pizda’, because they take 
part in the §va@ddha ceremonies with him. On the eleventh 
day, all the saprzdas gather in the house of the person who 
is holding the ceremony, and an elaborate ceremony is con- 
ducted, the central element of which is the offering of a 
Pinda to every deceased person within the circle of sapindas. 
A feast follows the ceremony. 

This is repeated monthly for one year, and then annually. 
These are obligatory. There are many other forms of 
§raddha which may be undertaken if one choose. 


(2) Worsuip or THE Gops. Rules about worship vary 
very much amongst the lower castes of Hinduism, but 
among the upper castes they run on the following lines :— 

(1) Daily prayers, connected with bathing and teeth- 

cleaning, and daily sacrifices. These are all observed by 


THE HINDU OF TO-DAY 181 


strictly orthodox Hindus, but are often altogether neglected 
by educated men. 

(2) The daily worship of the household gods. Usually the 
women see to this. 

(3) The recurrent festivals, fasts, and holy days. These 
vary very greatly in different parts of the country and in 
the different sects. No Hindu can avoid taking part in 
these from time to time. 

(4) The worship of the temple. This takes a large place 
in the lives of all Hindus except modern educated men, who 
very seldom go near a temple at all, at least in the North. 

113. Belief ts altogether free. A Hindu is generally 
understood to believe that the Vedas are inspired, that the 
Brahmans are divinely appointed priests, and that caste is 
a divine institution, but a man may declare that he believes 
none of these things and yet remain a good Hindu, provided 
he conforms. Yet the stability of Hinduism depends in the 
last resort on the existence of these beliefs. Conformity, 
however, involves a practical acceptance of the Vedas, the 
Brahmans, and caste ; for the Vedas are quoted frequently 
in the domestic ceremonies, and the presence of Brahmans 
is necessary for the right performance of each one of them. 

114. Although Hinduism has many gods, many theologies, 
and many sacred books, a man may remain an orthodox 
Hindu without believing in any god or any theology, and 
without knowing or acknowledging a single sacred book. 
He must give some sort of practical recognition to some god 
or gods in the domestic ceremonies and family festivals, but 
the divinities thus reverenced vary all over India ; there is 
no uniformity. Nor are there any theological conceptions 
which he need hold: an orthodox Hindu may be an atheist, 
an agnostic, or a Christian in his conception of the world. 
The sacred books of Hinduism are not read in the services 
of the temples, nor is the ordinary Hindu expected to 


182 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


study them. They are for the priest and the philosopher. 
The Ramayana and the Mahabharata, however, are very . 
largely read in the homes of the people. 

115. But, although there is no set of beliefs which the 
Hindu as a Hindu is expected to hold, there are certain 
ideas or convictions which all or nearly all Hindus except 
those permeated by Western thought will be found to hold. 
There are perhaps three which may be classed together as 
being nearly as universal as Hinduism. They are, first, the 
validity of caste and the authority of the Vedas and the 
Brahmans ; second, the doctrine of transmigration; and 
third, the sacredness of the cow. Perhaps it may be said 
that a further general characteristic of Hinduism is to be 
found in a tendency of thought, feeling, and aspiration of 
which the logical issue is a mystic pantheism; but the 
degree in which pantheistic belief is explicit seems to vary 
very greatly. 

Most Hindus are also touched at least in some degree 
with ascetic ideas. The villager, no matter how worldly his 
own life may be, is ready to affirm that the things of the 
world are worthless, that nothing is of any final value except 
God and the knowledge of God. He therefore holds that 
the man who does not give up the world in its entirety and 
become an ascetic does not really love God. He regards 
the preservation of animal life (ahims@) as meritorious. (See 
section 23.) 

116. Hindus are under the sway of innumerable super- 
stitions. With the exception of the cultured few, the whole 
people live in terror of evil spirits. A great deal of the 
ordinary worship of the home and the temple is directed 
against their malign designs and influences; while at every 
step one meets the magic word and the magic spell, the 
charmed act and the charm hung round the neck, to prevent 
or repel the assault of the fifa, the evil spirit. Amongst 


THE HINDU OF TO-DAY 183 


the uneducated everywhere the Brahman also is regarded 
with extreme superstitious fear: there is no limit to the 
powers of evil he is believed to control ; so that the humble 
villager is kept in subjection and terror. Though the simplest 
Hindu is ready to express belief in one God only, his prac- 
tical daily religion is a very vivid conviction that the idol in 
his village is alive, and not only eats, drinks, and sleeps but 
has power to bless or curse him in every detail of his life. 
The actual belief of to-day still is that the gods subsist on 
the sacrifices and offerings made to them, just as the spirits 
of dead ancestors are believed to live on the pindas offered 
in the Svaddha and the ¢arpana, water, offered in the daily 
ceremonies. The souls of the kids offered in sacrifice to 
the goddess K@/ are believed to go straight to heaven. 
Vishnu is believed to be present in great power in every 
Salagrama stone, a kind of black ammonite found in the 
Gandak river, and in every /ész plant. Siva and the other 
gods have similar superstitions attached to them. Indeed, 
there is no limit to the animals, trees, stones, rivers, wells in 
which divinities are believed to reside. The belief in holy 
times and places is quite as vigorous. Nor are these merely 
the picturesque fancies of Arcadian simplicity: they are 
powerful beliefs, sanctioned in very large measure by the 
highest Hindu authorities, taught in the literature and by 
the priests, and governing men’s lives. 


NotTe.—The text at the bottom of the page summarizes THE RELI- 
GIOUS DUTY OF THE HINDU: ‘ Let him worship according to the rule, 
the sages by the private recitation of the Veda, the gods by burnt 
oblations, the fathers by funeral offerings, men by gifts of food, and the 
spirits by the dad offering.’ Manava Dharmasastra, iii. 81. 


areas Daearaarrars | 
fagegtaa qaayatts afaaaut | 


qweygwaiat 9 afeatarafass: | 
HAUTATY BAM wat wrsaA 1 


CHAPTER XV 


THE RELIGION OF THE LOWER CLASSES 


117. The lower orders of the population of India fall into 
two great classes, those who have lived in close contact with 
Hindu society, and those who have lived apart in the moun- 
tains and forests. The latter have retained their old religion 
and social organization, but the former have all succumbed 
to the influence of caste and have absorbed large elements 
of Hindu theology, mythology, and superstition. 

118. Those peoples who have lived an isolated life and 
have in consequence not come under Hindu influence need 
be only mentioned here, as they do not naturally come 
into a study of Hinduism. We may just mention the names 
of the chief tribes. They are—the Santals, the Ordons, the 
Juangs, and the Kols of Western Bengal ; the Garos, Khasis, 
and Nagas of Assam; the Khonds of Orissa ; the Gonds 
and Bhils of Central India; and the Todas and other hill 
tribes in the Madras Presidency. 

119. The other class of tribes, however, have been de- 
cidedly Hinduized both socially and religiously, and there- 


NoTE.—The text at the top of the page refers to THE UNCLEAN 
CASTES: ‘But the dwelling of Chandalas and Svapachas shall be outside 
the village; vessels used by them must be thrown away; and their 
wealth shall be dogs and donkeys.’ Ménava Dharmasastra, x. 51. 


THE LOWER CLASSES 185 


fore they must receive our attention. Being organized in 
castes, they necessarily vary to a considerable extent in 
social standing. Certain castes are allowed to visit Brah- 
manical temples, and thus belong to the central mass of 
Hindus. These acknowledge the great Hindu gods and 





44. SHRINE OF CHENGALAMMA 


Chengalamma is a village goddess propitiated in times of 
trouble, She is somehow identified with the Margosa tree, 
and the square pattern made with red and yellow powder 
represents her, The ant-hillis the home of a cobra worshipped 
by the villagers asa Naga. (Photographed for the author.) 


conform to Hindu usage as far as they possibly can. Yet 
even these recognized castes worship many divinities which 
no Brahman would have anything to do with. 

120. There are, on the other hand, vast multitudes of 
people in both north and south who are regarded as unclean 


186 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


who are in consequence excluded from all Brahmanical 
temples, and for whom no Brahman will perform any cere- 
mony (see section 45). High-caste Hindus usually refuse 
the title Hindu altogether to these races; but they have 
come so largely under Hindu influence that they cannot be 
excluded from a study of the religion. They show this 





45. SHRINE OF BONTALA GANGAMMA 


A wayside goddess at whose shrine a weary traveller deposits 
a rag and a stone, in order that he may lose his fatigue. (Photo- 
graphed for the author.) 


Hindu influence first of all in their caste organization and in 
their social usages, which are very largely an imitation of 
high-caste practice ; secondly, in their belief in Hindu theo- 
logy and superstition, and their desire to bring their village 
divinities into some sort of relation to the great gods of the 
Hindu pantheon. 


THE LOWER CLASSES 184 


The lowest of these castes are held in such abhorrence 
that they are not allowed to live beside the higher castes. 
They form villages for themselves. 

121. Both of these Hinduized groups are inclined to pay 
worship to the lower divinities of Hinduism, Ganesga and 
Skanda (also called Karttikeya and Subrahmanya), the sons 
of Siva, who are believed to be of great service against 





46. SHRINE AND STAKE OF POTU-RAJU 


This deity is usually spoken of as the brother or husband of the village 
goddess. He is propitiated when danger threatens. The small stone 
represents the gods, The pointed pillar is really a stake on which 
the villagers used to impale the animals offered to him as propitiation. 
(Photograph kindly given by the Rev. W. T. Elmore.) 


demons, and above all Kali, the black, bloodthirsty, god- 
dess of the North, who is identified with the wife of Siva. 
Hanuman, the monkey-god, who is connected with agri- 
culture, is very widely reverenced ; and other divine animals, 
especially Nandi, Siva’s bull, and the divine serpents called 
Nagas: see fig. 5, p. 60, fig. ro, p. 81, and fig. 44, p. 185. 
Trees are worshipped all over India, and certain sacred stones. 


188 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


122. But the worship to which the ignorant Indian 
villager clings with most fervour is just the village divinity. 
These are found all over India, varying everywhere, yet 
retaining certain broad similarities everywhere. The points 
that are most worthy of notice with regard to these much 
honoured gods are as follows :— 

(a) Each is a local divinity, attached to the village, and 
reverenced for that reason. The gods of Hinduism, on the 
other hand, have usually a much wider vogue. 





47. SHRINE OF Potu-RAju 


(Photographed for the author.) 


() The priests of these divinities are not Brahmans, but 
men of all castes. 

(c) The great majority of these divinities are goddesses. 
In the South almost every one has the word amma, * mother,’ 
in her name. They are thus known as the Mothers. 

(d) They are propitiated rather than adored. Visitations 
of disease, famine, earthquake, &c., are attributed to them - 


> 
and special sacrifices and festivals are held to induce them 


THE LOWER CLASSES 189 


to remove the scourge. Animals are usually sacrificed to 
them on these occasions, fowls, sheep, goats, pigs, and 
buffaloes. 

(e) In the South each goddess has usually one, if not 
more, male attendants, but they are subordinate to her. 

(/) In the Tamil country in South India a god named 
Iyenar is found in most villages. He is the village watch- 











48. SHRINE OF POLERAMMA 


Poleramma is the protectress of the village boundary. 
(Photograph kindly given by the Rey. W. T. Elmore.) 


man. He is supposed to ride round the village by night, 
driving away demons. Animals are never sacrificed to him. 
Images of horses are set up at his shrine as dedicatory 
offerings. 

(g) The shrines of these divinities are of the rudest 
description, often only a small piece of land marked off by 
lines of stones. Frequently there is no symbol of the god 
at all; often a stained stone is set up; often a rude image. 


190 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


The illustrations in the text are all from the Telugu 
country. 

123. The people suffer greatly from their fear of evil spirits ; 
insomuch that a very large part of their religion consists in 
efforts to drive them away or to nullify their influence. 





49. THE UNCLEANNESS OF THE OUTCASTE 


This outcaste woman has come to make a purchase, but she dare not 
approach the merchant, far less enter the shop. From a distance she 
tells what she wants, lays down the money and then goes away still 
farther. The merchant brings out the goods, takes the money and 
retires. The woman then comes and takes away her purchase. (The 
author owes this photograph to the kindness of Mr. Henri Schaetti.) 


GOD THAT MADE THE WORLD 
HATH MADE OF ONE BLOOD 
ALL NATIONS OF MEN 


aaa faacl erat a arat: faaraen: | 
aa alata ai aa awa frwa 


CHAPTER XVI 
FORMATIVE ELEMENTS OF HINDUISM 


124. If we are to understand the spirit of Hinduism, it is 
necessary first of all to learn to sympathize with the im- 
measurable reverence which the Hindu feels for the social 
organization of his people. He believes that the constitu- 
tion of the family and the organization of society go back to 
time immemorial ; and modern research has in a measure 
justified the claim. Ancestor-worship and the patriarchal 
family date from the days when the Aryan people were still 
undivided ; and, while caste is a more recent growth, the 
spirit and principles of caste lie at the basis of all early 
society. To the Hindu, therefore, these things are sacred 
in the extreme, priceless in value, so much a part of the life 
of the people that they must on no account be disturbed. 
The old-world reverence for what is customary and settled, 
which was once universal, has been preserved in Hindu life 
unchanged down to our own days. 

Then, again, to the Hindu, as to the ancient Aryan, and 
to all early peoples, what we call moral laws are rather 
sacred customs which have been traditionally observed from 


Note.—The text at the top of the page gives THE LAW OF CUSTOM: 
‘Let him walk in that path of holy men which his father and his grand- 
fathers followed; while he walks in that, he will not suffer harm.’ 
Mianava Dharmasgastra, iv, 178. 


192 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


time immemorial than eternal principles of the moral life. 
These customs are inextricably interwoven with the special _ 
forms of family life and social organization which have 
created the people. To tamper with them is therefore to be 
guilty at once of sacrilege and of treason against the life of 
the race. 

But these customs, though regarded as inviolably sacred 
and absolutely essential for the well-being of the people 
which practises them, are not regarded as binding on other 
peoples: other customs may be necessary for them, and 
therefore sacred and inviolable to them. ‘The early peoples 
did not possess the conception of a lofty moral law by which 
all customs and all men are judged ; nor did they think of 
their own moral customs as being in any sense binding on 
the gods. They were above morality. 

We ought also to notice that there is a very large and 
very serious historical reason for this permanent attitude of 
the Hindu to the foundations of Hindu society. The race 
has been preserved amid the countless military and political 
changes of India by its faithful adherence to the traditional 
family and caste life. Of that there can be no question. 
The Chinese people have had a similar experience, and they 
are filled with a similar reverence. Thus, the old attitude 
is very largely justifiable ; but the changed circumstances of 
India render a new attitude most necessary to-day, as all 
thoughtful leaders see. 

On the other hand, it is this lofty belief in the sacredness 
of custom that has shielded all the abuses of family-life and 
caste-life in India. When a custom is believed to have 
come down from early times, the obligation to observe it 
seems to the ordinary Hindu to be absolutely beyond dis- 
pute. To break away from it in his eyes is tantamount to 
a revolt against society. Hence child-marriage, compulsory 
widowhood, widow-burning, widow-drudgery, female infanti- 


FORMATIVE ELEMENTS 193 


cide and the thousand inhuman cruelties of caste were in 
the past regarded as inviolably sacred, even by the thinking 
Hindu. 

125. The main idea which the Hindu has with regard to 
worship is that every god must be worshipped according to 
his own wishes. The command of a god must be honoured, 
no matter what it may be. The Hindu mind possessed no 
settled conception as to the moral or religious character of 
the gods; and consequently no man could tell beforehand 
what might be demanded by any god or goddess in the way 
of worship. 

The origin of the great gods of the Aryan peoples will 
make this idea still clearer. They were originally powers of 
nature, and therefore had wa¢wra/attributes. Sun and wind, 
fire and rain had no necessary connexion with morality. 
But they were powers, and therefore to be honoured and 
pacified by men. One could not guess beforehand what 
their wishes might be; but it was man’s interest to gratify 
them, whatever form of worship they desired, whatever kind 
of action they ordained. 

The conception of Brahman which inspires the Upani- 
shads also illustrates the point. In chapter v we found that 
Brahman is thought of as reality, intelligence, and joy, but 
not as righteousness. Yet the Upanishads are the very 
summit of Hindu thought. Thus moral character was in 
no sense a part of the Vedic conception of God. 

This explains the fact that new forms of worship were 
constantly admitted into Hinduism, once the people began 
to spread over India. So long as the practice of the new 
cult did not come into violent collision with the ancient 
organization. of the family and society and with the old 
customs connected therewith, there was no objection raised. 
It was quite probable that one of the innumerable gods had 
appeared and had given instructions for the institution of 
the new cult. 

PP 689 N 


194 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


We are now in a position to realize how it has been 
possible for the Hindu to admit such things as the follow- 
ing into his worship :—unlimited idolatry, human sacrifice, 
cruel torture, temple prostitution, and obscene sculpture. 
The same idea explains how the Hindu did not regard it as 
unbecoming that Kali should be the patron divinity of 
robbers and murderers. From the same point of view we 
can realize how the gross and grotesque images of the gods 
were possible. There was no definite conception in the 
Hindu mind as to what a god must be; and consequently 
any form might conceivably represent some divine power. 
All this lack of a limiting moral conception will also enable 
us to understand how the coarse myths of the Mahabharata 
and the Purazas were attributed to the gods, and how the 
ancient ascetics could believe that the tortures they endured 
were of real value. 

126. As among all early peoples, so among Hindus 
orthodoxy is conformity to religious custom and not any form 
of belief. The man who does what is demanded of him to 
the gods, to his ancestors, to his family, and to society is a 
good Hindu, no matter what he believes. This is quite 
comprehensible : it is only when spiritual religion arises that 
men realize the religious importance of the state of a man’s 
mind. Character too stands in no definite relation to Hindu 
orthodoxy. A man may be guilty of gross immoralities and 
yet may be in good standing in his caste and his family ; 
while a man of the noblest character who breaks a caste-law, 
however absurd or inhuman it may be, will be outcasted, 
In Mysore, where Christian baptism still deprives a man of 
his property, there were two brothers. One was a man of 
high character, but he had become a Christian; the other 
was an orthodox Hindu, but was lying in prison undergoing 
a sentence for some crime. The Christian was disinherited, 
and the criminal got his property. This is in strict accor- 


FORMATIVE ELEMENTS  _195 


dance with Hindu principle. The law-books contain many 
pieces of moral advice, but they scarcely touch the organiza- 
tion of the family or society. 

127. Thus far we have dealt with the principles lying at 
the basis of the ancient faith in its unmixed state as it still 
survives among the ignorant classes all over the country. 
But, as we have seen, the growth of culture and the 
conquest of India produced at a very early date a cata- 
clysmal revolution in Hindu thought. A great new 
theology was built up which set forth the one Reality over 
against the mirage of the world, and put forward trans- 
migration and Karma as the explanation of the sorrows and 
inequalities of human life. From this upheaval came the 
whole philosophic movement within Hinduism, with its 
speculative theories, on the one hand, and its ascetic 
renunciation, on the other. Wherever the Brahman has 
gone, he has carried with him some slight sketch of this 
new theology ; and in consequence it has become diffused 
generally throughout India. Ascetics have proved a power- 
ful object-lesson to the common people. Heice, there are 
a number of great religious ideas which are held by most 
Hindus and which have had a certain influence over the 
mind of the people. Perhaps, the most prominent of these 
principles are :—(1) the vanity of the world, (2) the supremacy 
of the spiritual life, and (3) the nobility of asceticism. Men 
have believed that only the man who is willing to give up 
everything for God is a true saint. Union with God has 
been the spiritual ideal of the people. 

The various theistic movements have greatly enriched the 
religious life of India. The belief in a personal God, in 
His love and grace and in the possibility of personal inter- 
course with Him has helped multitudes of Hindus to live 
a life of real religious joy and peace. Phakti has been a 
source of deep spiritual feeling, first to many educated men, 


N 2 


196 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


and then to the thousands of the common people who have 
followed Ramananda, Kabir, Tulsi Das, and the rest. 

128. Yet, strange to say, these spiritual movements, 
pantheistic and theistic, have failed utterly to spiritualize 
the Hindu faith. Popular Hinduism remains to this day 
gross, materialistic, idolatrous, and often obscene. How 
are we to account for the fact that the new thought has 
touched deeply only the minority and has failed to transform 
the life, the thought, and the religion of the masses? There 
are several reasons for this gigantic failure :-— 

(a) The very pantheism which satisfies the Vedantist 
justifies polytheism and idolatry. If you do not know 
Brahman, you must stick to your idols. So Indian theism, 
even the theism of Ramanuja and Tulsi Das, has never been 
seriously monotheistic. The god chosen for the place of the 
Supreme is set above all others, but the rest retain their 
divine position and form a happy family around him. The 
only Hindu reformer who is a serious monotheist is Kabir, 
and he is half a Muhammadan. Even Nanak, the founder 
of Sikhism, acknowledges the whole Hindu pantheon. 

(2) The doctrine of transmigration has been a serious 
hindrance in two distinct ways. First, it suggests that a 
man’s moral and spiritual state is scarcely under his own 
control, since it is the result of his past life: so that it is 
quite possible that he is not yet ina fit state for accepting 
a spiritual religion. Secondly, it suggests that, since a man 
will have many more lives, there will be plenty of opportunity 
for repentance in the future. 

(c) The ascetic cut himself adrift from human society, on 
the ground that ordinary human life is altogether secular 
and unspiritual. The religion of the race thus fell into two 
halves, the religion of the people and the religion of the 
monk ; and as the religion of the people was. considered 
utterly useless to the spiritual man, those who had risen to 


FORMATIVE ELEMENTS 197 


the higher life did not dream of exerting themselves to better 
that which seemed to them hopeless. 

(d) Since there was no moral element in the Vedic 
conception of God, the worship of God produced no com- 
pelling conviction in the mind of the worshipper that he was 
in duty bound to serve his fellow men. The ascetic is not 
a servant of humanity. 

129. Hindu morality grew with the culture of the race, 
and many a tributary rill of thought passed from philosophy, 
asceticism, and the higher theology, into the common mind 
of the people. Above all, Buddhism left a large moral 
legacy to Hinduism. There is much that is beautiful in 
family life, despite its many blots. The Hindu is charitable, 
peaceful, law-abiding. He honours religion and believes no 
nation can be built without it. Thus Hindu morality, as 
found in the best books and in the life of orthodox families, 
has many high qualities. The modern Hindu who has 
drunk of Western thought in Indian or European universities 
also maintains that Hindu morality has a solid spiritual basis 
in Hindu philosophy; that from that starting-point man’s 
moral relation to God and his complete responsibility to 
God may be clearly worked out. This is strange, if it be 
true ; for it is certain no one attempted to find such things 
in Hindu philosophy until Christian thought appeared in 
India. 

NoTr.—The text at the bottom of the page gives the sum of the 
Vedanta :— 

The hard-to-see, the mystery-hidden, 
Heart-dwelling, cave-abiding, old— 
He who by brooding o’er his inner self 


Sees Him as God escapes both joy and grief. 
Kithaka Upanishad, ii. 12. 


ad gow qeaquias yetfed aXts qUITA| 
qTeTaAaatfaaiad 24 AST UIT eaTrat TET 





CHAPTER XVII 


THE FUTURE OF HINDUISM 


130. Note the extraordinary strength of Hinduism :— 

(a) Like Chinese ancestor-worship, it has held the people 
firmly together for millenniums, while other civilized races of 
the ancient world have gone to pieces. 

() It has had to meet hostile attacks of overwhelming 
strength, and yet it has in each case won the victory : note 
especially Buddhism, Jainism, Muhammadanism. 

Its strength lies mainly in three elements :— 

(a) Lts family system, founded on ancestor-worship. This 
links each generation with the past and the future, and binds 
living members closely together. To give this up seems 
disloyalty to one’s ancestors and gross impiety towards other 
members of the family. 

(0) Zts caste system. This is strong in several ways. It 
is founded on original race and culture divergencies as dis- 
tinct as those that now sever European and Hindu: a man 


Novte,—The head-piece above is a scroll from Gandharan sculpture. 
Foucher, L’Art Gréco-Bouddhigue du Gandhara, fig. 103. (See above, 
section 53.) 


FUTURE OF HINDUISM 19g 


thus feels that he has an aristocratic stronghold in his caste, 
and also a certainty of the purity of his birth and of his 
customs. Caste has preserved the forms of ancient society 
almost unchanged into our day: it has thus the strength of 
immemorial custom. A Hindu feels that to go out of caste 
is practically to go out of civilization. The outcaste often 
finds life almost impossible. 

(c) Zts religious system, which must be acknowledged to 
be the highest form which polytheism has ever taken. It 
teaches a lofty conception of the world; it brings every 
detail of life under the rule of religion; and it has certain 
very beautiful ideas in connexion with home life, notwith- 
standing its degradation of women. Its strength lies largely 
in the fact that it justifies every form of traditional worship, 
and yet offers forms of spiritual faith to those who want such. 
It thus gathers to itself all the strength of custom and habit, 
and disturbs no one with serious demands. It can attract 
almost every type of mind ; for it offers a response to almost 
every form of religious need. 

131. If modern thought and Western influence could be 
kept out of India, Hinduism might go on indefinitely, only 
changing slowly as it has changed in the past. But modern 
thought, as introduced by missions, education, and Western 
influence generally, has begun to weaken Hinduism as no 
force active in India in earlier centuries ever did :— 

(a) The office clerk performs the svaddha for his father, 
but he no longer believes in its efficacy. Thus faith in the 
religious basis of the Hindu family has faded out of the 
minds of educated Hindus. 

(2) Our modern knowledge of the different races of the 
world and of the way in which they rise and fall in the scale 
of civilization has made it impossible for any thinking man 
to believe the ancient Hindu doctrine, that the four castes 
are divinely appointed and permanent institutions, and that 


200 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


it is a religious duty to observe the rules of caste. Educated 
Hindus frequently seek to defend caste as healthy in certain 
ways, but they do not pretend to believe the old doctrine. 
They never declare that it is wrong for a man who is not a 
Brahman to teach religion. 

The national movement with its demand for equality and 
its summons to union is everywhere weakening caste. 

(¢) Educated men defend idolatry as being a help to the 
ignorant, but they never say that they actually believe in the 
existence of the devas represented by the idols. Polytheism 
has become incredible. 

Compare the conditions which obtained in the Roman 
Empire, while Christianity was in its death-struggle with the 
old religions. 

132. Thus if the modern spirit is to remain in India, and 
education is to be extended, it is only a question of how 
long time the process of collapse will take. The religious 
foundations of Hinduism (namely, the rules of caste, the 
authority of the Veda, the authority of Brahmans, polytheism, 
and idolatry) crumble to pieces in the atmosphere of modern 
thought. They are, one and all, old-world superstitions, 
which fade away in the light of modern truth. 

We may therefore be perfectly certain that, unless some 
unforeseen revolution occurs to seclude India more securely 
than before from modern influences, belief in the essentials 
of Hinduism is bound to decay as surely as belief in witches 
and other fears have disappeared at home. 

But, though honest belief in these basal doctrines is 
certain to gradually disappear, most men will for a long 
time continue to remain within Hinduism : and all sorts of 
new defences will be hastily flung up around the old camp 
to save it from being stormed. The first great attempt in 
this direction is being made now by Mrs. Besant and the 
Bharat Dharma Mahamandal. 


FUTURE OF HINDUISM 20% 


As decay increases, however, the number of honest men 
who feel they cannot remain in a hypocritical position will 
steadily increase ; and the interest of the problem lies in 
them: where will they turn? Which religion will they 
adopt ? 

133. The position of affairs is most interesting. We have 
seen in chapters iii and iv how the early Indo-Aryans, as 
their ancient tribal experience became widened by the con- 
quest of India and their intercourse with many races and 
many religions, were compelled to transform their funda- 
mental conceptions, and to produce a new theology, which 
we dealt with in chapter iv under the name of Essential 
Hinduism. Similarly in these modern days, the widened 
experience, the new knowledge, and the fresh moral ideas 
begotten from contact with European religion, education, 
and government, and from the impact of the world’s com- 
merce on the economic life of India, are making another 
and more radical reconstruction of Indian ideas altogether 
inevitable. The old pantheistic thought does not thrive 
well in the new ethical atmosphere ; the idea of progress 
makes the old Hindu conception of cyclic change appear 
childish and old-fashioned ; transmigration does not seem 
such a solid and certain doctrine as it once seemed ; and 
modern thought simply destroys faith in the many gods of 
paganism and the value of idols. Thinking Indians must 
inevitably form new conceptions of God, man, morality, 
religion, and the meaning of the world. 

134. Hence, we may be perfectly certain that ancient 
Hindu thought cannot survive. Something else will take 
its place. A new religion must be found, a religion which 
will — 

(a) Provide a religious foundation for the wider and truer 
ideas which now dominate the Hindu mind ; 

(4) Satisfy the religious instincts of the people, and 
stimulate them to purity, progress, and strength. 


202 HINDUISM AS A SYSTEM 


Christianity is unquestionably the source of the new 
explosive thought which is recreating the Indian character 
and intellect to-day. There is no other religion that con- 
tains these master ideas. Only in the riches of Christianity 
—Christ and His cross, the Fatherhood of God, the Brother- 
hood of man, and the Kingdom of God—can Hindus find 
the universal principles needed for a new intellectual, moral, 
and social life. 

Except Christianity, there is no religion in the whole 
world that is rich enough in theology, worship, emotion, 
literature to take the place of Hinduism. 

135. We need not attempt to prophesy the day nor the 
hour when these vast changes will work themselves out. 
There may be no sudden outburst for a long time, but 
rather a continuous increase in the momentum of the move- 
ment towards Christianity. The progress of the faith in 
other lands will have an influence on India which it is at 
present impossible to estimate. We may expect great 
developments within Hinduism, a stubborn and prolonged 
resistance from the central party, but an abundant victory 
for Christ in the end. 


NoTE.—The tail-piece below is a scroll of bo-tree leaves from 
Gandhara. Foucher, fig. 95. (See above, section 53.) 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The following brief list of books is meant to guide the student in the 
early stages of his work. For this reason a good many references are 
given to sections and chapters of books, in order to make effective study 
possible with a few volumes. Many books which are out of print are 
mentioned, as they may be found in libraries or purchased second-hand. 
For information as to original texts, readers are referred to the Biblio- 
graphy at the end of Macdonell’s Sanskrit Literature. In the case of 
books published in India, Indian prices are always given. Where 
English prices are given also, they are the prices at which the books 
may be got from booksellers in Britain. The following abbreviations 
are used :— 


Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, LR. 
Grundriss der Indo-Arischen Philologie und Altertums- 
kunde, or Encyclopedia of Indo-Aryan Research. 
Published in parts, some of which are in English, 


some in German. Strasburg: Triibner. Grundriss 
Sacred Books of the East. SBE. 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. JeReAaS. 


I. GENERAL WORKS. 
(z) Hinduism. 
1. Hinduism. By L. D. Barnett, M.A., D.Litt. Constable & Co. Is. 
Every student ought to have this sketch. 

2. The Religions of India. By E. W. Hopkins, Ph.D. Ginn & Co. 
8s, 6d. net. 

The most recent manual of Hinduism. Contains much valuable 
material rather loosely arranged. 

3. Lhe Religions of India. By A. Barth. Translated by the 
Rev. J. Wood. ‘Triibner. 16s. 

Older than Hopkins’s book, but written with all the clearness of 
the best French work. 

4. The Religious Sects of the Hindus. Compiled by the late 
Dr. John Murdoch largely from Prof. H. H. Wilson’s famous sketch, 
Christian Literature Society. (As. 6.) 9d. 

A mine of information. Criticism occasionally harsh. 


204 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(4) Hindu Literature. 

5. The Imperial Gazetteer of India. Vol. ii. Clarendon Press. 
6s. net. 

A volume containing chapters by different writers on Epigraphy, 
Archaeology, Coinage, Literature, Architecture, and History. Chap. VI _ 
is an outline of the history of Sanskrit literature, while Chap. XI is 
a very useful sketch of vernacular literature. 

6. A History of Sanskrit Literature. By A. A. Macdonell, M.A., 
Ph.D. Heinemann. 6s. 

The best manual on the literature. 

7. A Literary History of India. By R. W.F razer, LL.B. Fisher 
Unwin. 125. 6d. net. 

An attractive volume, weaving the chief books, both Sanskrit and 
vernacular, into the history of India, 

8. A History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature. By Max Miiller. 
Reprinted, Allahabad, Panini Office, KOE?. ARS Ae 

In spite of its age this great work is still most useful for reference 
on Vedic literature. 

9. Lhe Heart of India. By L. D. Barnett, M.A., Litt.D. John 
Murray. 25. 

A series of useful extracts from Hindu literature, both Sanskrit 
and vernacular. 

II. PREHISTORIC TiMEs, 

For the Aryan period see article, Aryan Religion, by Dr. Otto 
Schrader, £.R.Z., and for the Indo-Iranian period see Chap. III of 
No, 15. 

III. THE VepAs. (1) Introduction. 

No. 6 contains sufficient introduction to each of the Vedas for the 
beginner. 

10. The Rigveda. By Adolf Kaegi. Translated by R. Arrowsmith, 
Ph.D. 91 pages of text with 1o7 pages of closely printed notes. 
Boston: Ginn & Co. 6s. 6d. 

11, The Atharvaveda. By Maurice Bloomfield. 136 pp. Grundriss. 
7s. 

(2) Translations. 

12. Rigveda, Samaveda, White Yajurveda, Atharvaveda. Translated 
by R. T. H. Griffith, M.A., C.LE, Benares: Lazarus. Rigveda, 
Rs. 14; Sdmaveda, Rs. 4; White Yajur, Rs. 3 as. 13; Atharvan, 
Rs,st2, 

13. Atharva-Veda-Samhitd. Translated by W. D. Whitney and 


C. R. Lanman. 2 vols. Harvard Oriental Series. Ginn & Co. 
21s, net. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 205 


(3) Life and Religion. 
14. Altindisches Leben. By H. Zimmer. Perlin, rom. 


15. The Religion of the Veda. By Maurice Bloomfield, Ph.D., LL.D. 
New York: Putnam’s Sons. 6s. 


IV. THE BRAHMANAS. (1) Introduction. 


See pp. 202-18 of No. 6, and pp. 342-455 of No. 8. Part IV of 
No. 11 contains a helpful introduction to the Gopatha Brahmana. For 
the religion of these books see Chap. IX of No. 2, and for the sacrifices 
see Chap. V of No. 7. 

(2) Translations. 


16. The Satapatha Brihmana. Translated by Julius Eggeling. 
Vols. xii, xxvi, xli, xliii, xliv of S.B.H. Each 125, 6d. net. Vol. xliy, 
18s. 6d. net. 

V. PHILOSOPHIC PERIOD. 

For general conditions read Chaps. I to VI of No. 93 below. For 
a sketch of the schools of the times see Chap. I of No. 96 below. 
A yivid picture of the Brahmans is given in Chap. VIII of No. 7. 
For Buddhism and Jainism see below, sections xvii and xviii. 


VI. THE ARANYAKAS AND UPANISHADS. 
(2) Introduction. 

17. Brahma Knowledge. By L. D. Barnett, M.A., Litt.D, John 
Murray. 25. 

An exposition of the teaching of the Upanishads, with a number of 
extracts from them. 

18. Zhe Philosophy of the Upanishads. By Paul Deussen. Translated 
by the Rev. A. S. Geden, M.A. T. & T. Clark. os. 6a. 

The standard work. 
(2) Translations. 

19. The [§a, Kena, Kathaka, Prasna, Mundaka, and Mandikya 
Upanishads, ‘Text and translation. By S. C. Vasu. Allahabad: 
Panini Office. Rs. 5. 

20. Upanishads (the eleven classical treatises). Translated by Max 
Miiller. .S.8.2., vols.iand xv. Each tos. 6d. net. 

21. Sechsig Upanishad’s des Veda. Von Dr. Paul Deussen. 
Leipzig: Brockhans. 20s. 

A most reliable translation. Introductions very valuable also. 

22. Aitareya Aranyaka (including the Upanishad). Introduction, 
text, translation, commentary. By A. B. Keith. Clarendon Press. 
255, net. 

23. Sdnkhayana Aranyaka. Translated by A. B, Keith. Royal 
Asiatic Society. 55. 


206 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(3) Concordance. 


24. Concordance to the Princifal Upanishads and Bhagavadgita. 
By G. A. Jacob. Bombay: Government Book Dépét. Rs, 8. 


VII. THe SirRAs. (1) Introduction. 
25. Rztual-Literatur, Vedische Opfer und Zauber. Von A. Hille- - 
brandt. Grundriss. 125. 
Chap. IX of No. 6 supplies a good historical introduction, and Chap. I 
of No. 8 still fuller information. Chap. XI of No. 2 gives a very 
helpful account of the popular religion reflected in these treatises. 


(2) Translations. 
26. Grihya Sztras (eight treatises). Translated by Oldenberg and 
Miiller, S.8.Z., vols, xxix and xxx. Each 125. 6d. net. 
27. The Sacred Laws of the Aryas (the Dharma-siitras of Apastamba, 
Gautama, Vasishtha, and Bandhayana). ‘Translated by Georg Biihler. 
S.B.£., vols. ii. and xiv. Each tos. 6d. net. 


VIII. Tue Epics, 
(@) The Mahabharata. (1) Introduction. 
28. Das Mahabharata. Von A. Holtzmann. 4 vols, Kiel. 42m. 
29. The Great Epic of India. By E. W. Hopkins, Scribner's. $4 net. 
Pages 277-98 of No. 6 provide sufficient introduction for the beginner, 
and thereafter 30 or 31 may be read. 


(2) English Translations. 
30. Lhe Mahabhirata and the Ramayana, condensed into English 
verse by R, C. Dutt. Dent, Avery Man’s Library, 1s. 
31. The Mahabharata, an English Abridgment. By Jehn Murdoch, 
LL.D, Christian Literature Society. (As. 7.) 100. 
A useful outline of the vast poem. The criticism is crude. 


32. Lhe Mahabharata translated into English prose, By Pratap 
Chandra Ray. 11 volumes. Calcutta. Out of print. 


(3) Vernacular Versions, 


CENTURY LANGUAGE AUTHOR TITLE 
XII-XV Telugu Three writers Mahabharata 
XV Bengali Kasi Ram Das : 
XVI Oriya Sarala Das Bharata 
Assamese Rama Sarasvyati 
XVII Malayalam Tufjattu Eruttachchhan 
XVII Gujarati Rewa-Sankar 


XIX Hindi Gokulnath 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 207 


(0) The Ramayana, (1) Introduction. 
33. Das Ramayana. Von Hermann Jacobi. Bonn: Friedrich 
Cohen, 15m, 
Sufficient introduction for the beginner will be found in pages 302-17 
of No, 6, and thereafter the student may read No. 30 or No. 34, or may 
take up the whole poem in No, 35. 


(2) English Translations. 

34. The Ramayana, an. English Abridgment, By John Murdoch, 

LL.D. Christian Literature Society, (As. 7.) 10d, 
A handy sketch of the Epic. Criticism rather crude. 

35. The Ramayana of Valmiki, translated into English verse. By 
Raiph T. H. Griffith, M.A., C.LE, Benares: Lazarus. Rs. 6. 

36. The Ramayana. ‘Translated into English prose by M. N, Dutt. 
7 vols, Calcutta. £1 8s. 


(3) Vernacular Versions. 


CENTURY LANGUAGE AUTHOR TITLE 
XI Tamil Kamban Ramayana 

Kanarese Kumara Valmiki Ramayana 

XIV Malayalam — Rama Charita 

XVI Oriya Balarama Ramayana 

XVI Bengali Kirtibas Ojha Ramayana 

XVI Western Hindi KeéSay Das kama Chandrika 
Assamese Rama Sarasvati Ramayana 

XVII Hindi Tulsi Das Rama Charit Manas 

XIX Marwari Mansa Ram Raghunath Ripak 


37. Ramayana of Tulsi Das, translated from the Original Hind?. 
By F, S. Growse, M.A., C.I.E. 2 vols. Allahabad: Government 
Press. Rs. 8 as. 8. 

IX. THE DHARMASASTRAS,. (1) Introduction. 

38. Recht und Sitte. Von J. Jolly. Grundriss. 95. 

Sufficient introduction for the beginner will be found in the Introduction 
to vol. xxv of S.B.Z., No. 39, and in pp. 263-9 and 348-433 of No. 2. 
(2) Translations. 

32, Manu, Vishnu, Narada, Brihaspati. Translated by Biihler 
and Jolly. S.8.£., vols. vii, xxv, xxxiii, Vol. xxv out of print; the 
others Ios. 6d, each net. 

X, THE PHILOSOPHIES. 
(@) General Introduction. 


40. The Stix Systems of Indian Philosophy. By Max Miller. 
Longmans, 75. 6d, net. 


208 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Beginners will find sufficient information in bi XV of No. 6, and 
in the Introduction to No. 57. 

41. Sarva Darsana Sangraha. By Madhava. Translated by Cowell 
and Gough. Triibner. 10s, 6d. 


(6) Karma Mimamsa, 
42. The Mimamsa Stitras of Jaimini. Translated into English by 
Ganga Nath Jha, Allahabad: Panini Office. Being published in parts.’ 


(c) Vedanta. (1) The System. 
43. Outline of the Vedénta System of Lhilosophy. By Dr. Paul 
Deussen. Luzac. 4s. 6d. 
44. Das System des Vedanta. Von Dr. Paul Deussen. Leipzig : 
Brockhaus. 12 m. 


(2) Translations. 

45. The Vedinta-siitras with Sankara’s C ommentary. Translated 
by George Thibaut. .S.B.Z., vols. xxxiv and xxxviii. 125. 6d. each. 

46. The Vedénta-siitras with Ramanuja’s Commentary. ‘Translated 
by George Thibaut. §.8.Z.; vol. xl viii, 255. 

47. The Veddnta-siitras on the Saiva Bhashya of Nilakantha. 

Being published. Madras: Meykandan Press. 

48. The Vedanta-sitras with the C ommentary of Madhva. Translated 
by S. Subha Rao. Madras: Natesan. Rs. 3 as. 8. 

49. The Vedanta-sitras with Baladeva’s Commentary. Translated 
by S.C. Vasu. Allahabad: Panini Office. Rs. 10 as. 8 

50. A Manual of Hindu Pantheism, the Vedantasara. ‘Translated 
with notes by G. A. Jacob. Triibner. 6s. : 


(d) Sankhya and Yoga. (1) The System. 
51. Sankhya und Yoga. Von R. Garbe. Grundriss. 35. 6d. 


(2) Translations. 
52. Hindu Philosophy, the Sénkhya Kariké. Translated by John 
Davies, Triibner. 6s. 
53. The Sankhya Aphorisms of Kapila. Translated by’. JegR. 
Ballantyne. ‘Triibner. 16s. 
54. Patawjal’s Yoga Sutras, with Commentaries. Translated by 
Rama Prashad. Allahabad : Panini Office. Rs, 4 as. 8. 


(e) Vaigeshika. 
55. The Vaiseshika-siitras of Kanada with Commentaries. Translated 
by Nanda Lal Sinha. Allahabad ; Panini Office. Rs. 7. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 309 


(f) Nyaya. 
56. The Nyaya Sitras of Gotama in English, Allahabad: Panini 
Office. Rs. 1 as. 8, 


XI. THE BHAGAVADGITA. (1) Introduction. 
Article ‘Bhagavadgita’ in #.2.Z. Also Introduction of No. 57. 


(2) Translations. 
57. The Bhagavadgité, Translated by L. D. Barnett, M.A., Litt.D. 
Dent & Co. 25. 6a. 
58. The Bhagavadgitg, Sanskrit text and English translation. By 
Mrs. Besant. Madras: Natesan. As. 2. 


XII. THE PuRSNAS. (1) Introduction. 


Chap. XVI of No. 2, and pages 299-301 of No. 6. See also 
Introduction to No. 59. 

(2) Translations. 

59. Vishnu Puraéna. Introduction and translation by Prof. H. H. 
Wilson. Murray. Out of print. . 

60. Markandeya-Purana. By F. E. Pargiter. Calcutta: The 
Asiatic Society. 155. é 

61. Garuda Purana Sdroddhava. Translated by Wood and 
Subrahmanyam. Allahabad: Panini Office. Rs. 3 as. 8. 

62. Bhagavata Purana. Texte sanscrit et traduction francaise par 
E. Burnouf. 4 vols. Paris. 

63. The Vishnu, Agni, Markandeya, Garuda, and Bhdgavata 
Puranas, Translated by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta: Elysium Press. 

XIII. Tue Samuiris, AGAMAs, AND TANTRAS. 

For the Vishnuite Samhitas see /.2.A.S., October, 1911; for the 
Saiva Agamas see No. 76 below; and for the Tantras, pp. 489-94 of 
No. 2. 

64. Mahénirvina Tantra. Translated by M.N. Dutt. Calcutta: 
Elysium Press. 


XIV. THE BHAKTI SECTS AND THEIR MODERN REVIVAL. 
(a) General. 

Pages 1-100 of No. 4, or Chaps. V and VI of No. 79, along with 
the article ‘Bhakti Marga’ in £.R.Z. and Chap. XI of No. 5, will 
suffice as a general introduction to Vaishnavism. Nos. 68 and 7o give 
information about the division of Ramanuja’s people into two sects. 
In order to realize how the philosophy of Ramanuja worked itself out 
in practice, No. 67 should be read. Chap. XIV ‘of ‘No. 7 gives a good 
introduction to the northern sects. For Saivism see No. 76 and the 

PP 639 fe) 


210 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


introductory pages of No. 77. Nos. 67, 68, 74, 76, are well worth 
notice as examples of the better type of literature produced by the- 
revival of Hinduism. For Neo-Krishna books see No. tig, Appendix. 

65. The Bhakti Sitra of Sandilya. Translated by Cowell. Cal- 
cutta: Asiatic Society. Out of print. 


(4) The Sect of Ramanuja. (1) Biographies. 


66. The Holy Lives of the Azhvars. By A. Govindacharya Svami. 
Mysore: G.T.A. Press. Re. 1 as. 8. 
Uncritical, yet informing. 
67. Life of Ramanuja. By A. Govindacharya Svami. Madras: 
_S. Murthy & Co. Rs. 2 as. 12. 
This is a translation of an ancient Tamil biography of the 
philosopher. It is a most revealing book. 
68. The Vatshnavite Reformers of India (seven biographies). By 
Rajagopala Chariar. Madras: Natesan. Re. I. 
(2) System. 
See No. 46. 
69. The Teachings of the Vedanta according to Ramanuja. By 
V. A. Sukhtankar. Vienna: Holzhausen. 
70. The Artha-Paiichaka of Pillat Lokacharya. Translated by 
A. Govindacharya Svami, Reprinted from /.R.A4.S., July, 1910.” 


(c) Ramananda and Tulsi Das. 
Pages 26-37 of No. 4; pages 147-8 of No. 79; page cxxivof No 72, 
and pages 418-20 of No. 5. For Tulsi Das’s great poem see No. 37. 
(d@) Kabir. 


. "1. Kabir and the Kabirpanth. By the Rev. G. H. Westcott, M.A., 
Bishop of Lucknow. Cawnpore: Mission Press, Re. I as. 8. 


(ce) The Sikhs. 


See pages 374-9 of No. 7, or pages 161-78 of No. 79, or Carpenter’s 
article in the Hébert Journal for October, gti. 

72. The Adi Granth, Translated by Dr. Ernest Trumpp. W. H. 
Allen & Co. 635. 

73. The Sikh Religion: a translation of the Granth, with lives of 
the Gurus. By M. A. Macauliffe. 6 vols. Clarendon Press. 635. net. 


(f) Madhvism, 
74. The Life and Teachings of Sri Madhvicharyar. By C. M. 


Padmanabha Chir, B.A., B.L. Published by the author at Coimbatore. 
Rs, 3. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 2X1 


Written by a Madhva, yet reasonable on the whole, and full of 
information. 


For Madhva’s philosophy, see No. 48. 
(g) Tukaram. 
75. The Poems of Tukéram. Translated and re-arranged by J. Nelson 


Fraser, M.A., and K. B. Marathe, B.A., LL.B. Christian Literature 
Society. (Rs. 2 as. 8.) 35. 9d. 
(2) Vallabhacharya and Chaitanya. 
Pages 60-9 and 79-91 of No. 4, along with pages 134-7 of No. 79. 
(é) Saivism. 
76. Studies in Saiva-Siddhanta. By J. M. Nallasvami Pillai, B.A., 
B.L. Meykandan Press, Madras, Rs. 3. 
Not absolutely reliable, but full of good material. 
77. The Tiruvisagam of Manikka Vasagar. By G. U. Pope. 
Introduction, text, translation. Clarendon Press. 21s. net. 
For the Saiva philosophical system, see No, 47. 


XV. HINDUISM AS LIVED To-DAY. 


No. 79 gives the best survey; but the student who wishes to obtain 
from Indian sources a vivid impression of the real character of Hinduism 
even at its best should read No. 67. For Hindu law see Nos. 38 
and 39. 

48. The Hindu at Home. By the Rev. J. E. Pa field, B.D. 
Madras: S.P.C.K. Ont of print. 

Describes vividly the superstitions of Southern India. 

79. Brahmanism and Hinduism. By Sir Monier Monier- Williams, 
K.C.LE., DiC, MA, Murray. Out of print. 

This book gives in clear and accurate form the details of Hindu 
worship and observance. 

80. Lmperial Gazetteer of India, vol. i. Clarendon Press. 6s, net. 

Deals with India and its resources, ethnology, caste, languages, 
religions, and statistics. 

81. The Village Dettces of Southern India. By the Bishop ot 
Madras. Government Press, Madras. Is. 3d. 


XVI. THE MODERN SAMAJES, &c. 

The article ‘ Brahma Samaj’ in Z.X.Z. will introduce the student to 
the theistic movement in Bengal. If that work is not available, a good 
summary of the history down to 1884 may be found in pages 475 to 528 
of No. 79; or No. 82 may be used. The best account of the Arya 
Samaj is also in 2.2.2. The serious student had better read No. 89 
also, as it is by the founder, and contains his autobiography. 

02 


212 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


82. The Brahma Sama and other Modern Eclectic Systems of Religion 
in India. Christian Literature Society. (As. 3.) 6d. : 

83. Biographical Essays. By Max Miiller. Longmans. 55. 

Contains brief lives of Ram Mohan Ray, Keshab Chandra Sen, 
Dayananda Sarasvati, Colebrooke the Sanskrit scholar, and others. 
_ 84. The Life and Letters of Raja Ram Mohan Ray. By Sophia 
Dobson Collet. Published privately in 1900 at 25. 6d. 

85. Zhe Autobiography of Maharshi Devendranath Tagore. Trans- 
lated from the original Bengali by Satyendranath Tagore and Indira 
Devi. Calcutta: Lahiri & Co. Rs. 2 as. 8. 

86. Lectures in India. By Keshab Chandra Sen. 2 vols. Cassell. 
Each vol. 55. net. 

87. The Life and Teachings of Keshab Chandra Sen, By Pratap 
Chandra Mozoomdar. Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press. 

A full and fairly accurate account of the life. 

88. The Oriental Christ. By Pratap Chandra Mozoomdar. Boston: 
Ellis. 65. 6d. 

A striking work from an advanced Brahma position. 

89. Daydénanda Sarasvati’s Satyirtha Prakash in English. Trans- 
lated from the original Hindi by Durga Prasad. Lahore: Viranand 
Press. Rs. 2 as. 4. 

The basis of the teaching of the Arya Samaj. 

90. Ramakrishna, His Life and Sayings. By Max Miiller. Long- 
mans. 55. 

91. Suami Vivekdnanda, a Collection of his Speeches and Writings. 
Madras: Natesan. Rs, 2. 


XVII. BupDDHIsM. 


(1) General Introduction. 
92. Buddhism as a Religion. By H. Hackmann. Probsthain. 
6s. net. 


Gives a life of the Buddha, a sketch of his doctrine and the historical 
development of Buddhism and a description of the religion as it exists in 
the various Buddhist lands to-day. 


(2) Early Buddhism, 
93. Buddhist India. By 'T, W. Rhys Davids. Fisher Unwin. 5S. 
Gives a vivid picture of the ‘historical conditions in which 
Buddhism arose. 
94. Buddha. By Dr. Hermann Oldenberg. Williams & Norgate. 185, 


A critical study of Buddha’s life and doctrine and of his monastic 
order. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 213 


95. Manual of Indian Buddhism. By H. Kern. Grundriss. 8s. 6d. 
A detailed survey of early Buddhism, 
96. Buddhism: its History and Literature. By T. W. Rhys Davids. 
Putnam’s Sons. 6s. 
97. Buddhism in Translations, By H. C. Warren, Harvard 
Oriental Series. Ginn & Co. 55. net. 
A very fine selection of translations illustrating the teaching ot 
early Buddhism. 
98. Vols. x, xi, xiii, xvii, xx of the S.2.Z. give translations of selected 
texts from each of the Pitakas. 
99. Buddhism, Primitive and Present, in Magadha, and in Ceylon. 
By the Bishop of Calcutta. Longmans. tos. 6d. net. 
100. The Legend of Gaudama. By Bishop Bigandet. Triibner. 215. 
Forms a most interesting introduction to Burmese Buddhism. 


(3) Mahayana Buddhism. 


tor. Vols. xxi, xxxv, xxxvi, and xlix of the 5.82.2. contain Mahayana 
texts, and form the best introduction to the Mahayana. 

102. Akvaghoshas Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana, Trans- 
lated by T. Suzuki. Chicago. 55, net. 

103. Zhe Path of Light, a Translation of Santi-deva’s Bodhichary- 
aqvatara. By LL.D. Barnett, M.A.,D.D. Murray. 25. net. 

104. Le Lalita Vistara, Traduit par P. E. Foucaux. Paris: Ernest 
Leroux. 15 fr. 

105, A Catalogue of the Chinese Buddhist Tripitaka. By Bunyiu 
Nanjio. Clarendon Press. 305. net. 

Gives in convenient form a conspectus of the Mahayana canon. 


(4) Tantric Buddhism. 


106. The Buddhism of Tibet. By Col. L. A. Waddell. W. H. 
Allen. 31s. 6d. 

107. Zhe Life of the Buddha and the Early History of his Order. 
From Tibetan sources. By W. W. Rockhill. Triibner. 9s. 

108. Uddanavarga. By W. W. Rockhill, Triibner. 9s. 


XVIII. JAINISM. 


109. The Indian Sect of the Jainas. By J. G. Bithler. Luzac, 3s. 6d. 

110. Notes on Modern Jainism. By Mrs, Sinclair Stevenson. Oxford : 
Blackwell. 1s. 6d. net. 

111. Jaina Sitras, Translated by Hermann Jacobi. 5S.&.£., vols. 
xxii and xly. 16s, net and 12s. 6d. net. 


214 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


XIX. HINDUISM AND CHRISTIANITY, 


112. The Challenge of the Non-Christian Religions, A reprint of © 
the concluding chapter of Commission 1V of the World Missionary 
Conference. Oliphant: Anderson & Ferrier. 6d. net. 

113. Dialogues on Indian Philosophy. By the late Rev. K. M. 
Bannerjea. Christian Literature Society, (Re. 1 as. 10.) “25.677: 

114. A Mirror of the Hindu Philosophical Systems. By Nehemiah 
Nilakantha Sastri Goreh, translated from the original Hindi by 
Fitz-Edward Hall, D.C.L, Christian Literature Society. (Re. 1 as. Io.) 
2s. 6d. 

Nos. 113 and 114 are classic treatises by Brahman converts of high 
scholarly attainments, but they are a little too far advanced for the 
beginner, and they lack the historic point of view. 

115. The High Caste Hindu Woman. By Pandita Ramabai. 
Revell. 2s. 6d. net. 

A striking volume by a lady who was born a Hindu, and has had 
such experience as scarcely any other woman in India has had. 

116. Things As They Are. By Amy Wilson-Carmichael. Morgan & 
Scott. Paper, Is. 6d. net. 

A very vivid yet altogether trustworthy picture of the darker side 
of Hinduism in South India. 

117. The Higher Hinduism in Relation to Christianity, By the 
Rey. T. E. Slater. Elliot Stock. 2s. 6d. 

118. Karma and Redemption. By A, G. Hogg, M.A, Christian 
Literature Society, (As. 6.) 15. 

This is a most original piece of thinking on the subject of 
transmigration and karma, 

119. Gité and Gospel. By J. N. Farquhar, M.A. Christian 
Literature Society. (As. 6.) gd. 

120, Judia’s Problem: Krishna or Christ. By John P. Jones, D.D, 
Revell. 55. net. 

121. The Desire of India. By S. K. Dutta, B.A., M.B., Ch.B. 
London: Young People’s Missionary Movement. 2s. net. 

Written for Mission Study. Gives a vivid picture of the people of 
India to-day, and a convincing statement of their need of Christ. 

122, An Interpretation of India’s Religious History, By the Rey. 
R. A. Hume, D.D, Revell. 35. 6a. 


INDEX 


Abhangs, 136, 141, 148. 
Abhidhamma Pitaka, 77. 
Aborigines, 21, 24, 30, 32, 33. 
Aboriginal worship, 43. 

Acharyas, 118, 

Adhvaryu, 28. 

Adi Granth, 137, 139. 

Aditi, 22. 

Adiyars, II4, 124, 144. 

Adoration Mantras, 145. 

Advaita, 118, 147. 

Agamas, see Saiva Agamas. 

Ages of the World, 41, 46, 201. 

Agni, 22, 26, 36, 

Ahimsa, 32, 182. 

Akbar, 130, 135. 

Alexander the Great, 58. 

Alvars, 114, 120,121, 125,129, 144. 

Amida, 87. 

Amitabha, 86, 145. 

Amitayus Sitra, 86, go. 

Amma, 188. 

Amfga, 120, 

Anarchism, 120. 

Ancestor-service, 16. 

Ancestor-worship, 16, 17, 23, 163, 
179, 183, 191, 198. 

Animals, 19 n., 22, 32, 33, 59, 81, 
C2 Os pli nel 2, 011 Os kO2) 187, 
189. 

Anna-pragana, 179. 

Antyeshti, 180. 

Appar, 114, 124, 143. 

Aranyakas, 32, 44, 51, 52, 57, 59, 
74,80, 102, 103 (Aitareya, ii. 6), 


a hee. 60, 61, 62, 63, 83, 
O2,nLO2 0 LOA, 107, REL ele 3) 
116, 117, 131, 132, 133, 134, 
135. 





Arhat, 85. 

Arjun, 138. 

Artha Pafichaka, 144. 

Arunandi-Devar, 143. 

Aryaman, 18, 22, 26. 

Aryan Languages, 20. 

Aryan religion, 15. 

Aryans, 15, 21, 42. 

Arya Samaj, 155, 156, 160. 

Ascetics, 3%, 40, 118, 119, 12ir, 
122, 124, 167, 182, 195, 106, 


197. 
Asoka, 59, 63, 64, 80. 
Asrama, hermitage, 32, 53, 167. 
ASrama, stage of life, 78. 
Aévamedha, 31, 54, 81. 
Atharvaveda, 33, 34, 37,57: (V. 
xxil) 36. 
Atman, 48, 55, 70, 81, 89. 
Aurangzeb, 130. 
Austerity, see Tapas. 
AvalokiteSvara, 87. 
Avesta, 18, 19, 24. 
Azhyars, see Alvars, 


Badarayana, 84. 

Bana, 98, 100. 

Bankim Chandra Chatterji, 150. 

Baptisms, 150, 155, 156. 

Belief, 181. 

Bengali, 66. 

Besant, Mrs., 157, 160, 200. 

Bhaga, 18. 

Bhagavadgita, 79, 82, 86, 89, 92, 
95, 118, 119, 127, 147, 100. 
(1V, 5-9) 92; (LV, 8) 79; UX, 
17-18) 92. 

Bhagavan, 82, 117. 

Bhagavatas, 82, 83, 89, 118, 136. 

Bhakta, 117. 


216 


Bhakta Mala, 136. 
Bhakti, 117, 121, 127, 134 ff., 


195. 
Bhakti-sitra, 115, 127, 128. 
Bharat Dharma Mahamandal, 158, 
200, 
Bharhut Stiipa, 15, 19, 31, 59, 62, 


2: 

Bhikshu, see Sannyasi, 

Bhita, 182. 

Bible, the, 153. 

Bija, 150. 

Blavatsky, Madame, 156, 157. 

Boar incarnation, 81. 

Bodhisattva, see Buddhism. 

Bontala Gangamma, 186, 

Brahma, 83, 99, 100, 108, 149. 

Brahmachari, 78. 

Brahma Dharma, 159. 

Brahman, 43, 48, 52 n., go, 108, 
193, 197. 

Brahmanas, 29, 33, 34, 35. 37) 51, 
52,57, 74, 76. Satapatha B. 
(CU is 216) 205 SEL fix ee 
5) 353 (X, v, 2, 9) 34. 

Brahmans, 15, 22, 25, 28, 29, 30, 
32, 33, 38; 39, 41, 42, 45, 58, 
59, 68, 78, 80, 181, 182, 183, 
186, 195, 200 ; (= gods) 29, 30, 
(authority) 30; (orders) 28. 

Brahma Samaj, 154-160, 

Brahma-sampradaya, 149. 

Branding, 112. 

Bronze work, 115. 

Buddhacharita, go. 

Buddh-Gaya, 102. 

Buddhism, 58, 64, 80, 85, 98, ror, 
128, 132, 197,198; (Hinayana) 
85, 87 ; (Mahayana) 85, 90, 91; 
(Tantric) 114; Bodhisattva, 85; 
Buddha, 49, 51, 56, 58 n., 86, 
89; Buddhas, 62, 82, 84, 85, 97; 
Images, 84, 85, 87, 88, ror; 
Mantras, 145 ; Missionaries, 63; 
Tripitaka, 66, 69, 71, 73, 773 
(Sathyutta Nikaya, xxii, 22, 1) 
69; (Dhammapada) 41; Ma- 
hayana Canon, 86, 87, go, 91, 
95 5 (Saddharma Pundarika, xv) 
93; Worship, 62, 63, 83-88, 





INDEX 


Bull, the sacred, 82, 83. 
Burning of the dead, 19, 179. 


Canon, (Buddhist) 77; (Hindu) ° 
57; (Saiva) 144; (Vaishnava) 
144; (Vedanta) 147. 

Carey, 153. 

Caste, 24, 25, 28, 30, 41, 45, 59, 
60, 112, 117, 137, 138, 154, 156, 
177, 181, 182, 184, 185, 186, 
190, IQI, 192, 193, 198, 199, 
200, 

Cat school, 122. 

Central Hindu College, Benares, 


157, 

Chaitanya, 136, 148. 

Chaityas, 62, 63, 83, 84, 85. 

Chalukyan style, 104. 

Chalukyas, 99. 

Chandalas, 184. 

Chandi Das, 136, 148. 

Chandragupta, 59, 81. 

Chandragupta II Vikramaditya, 
98, 132. 

Charanas, 37. 

Charms, 34, 36, 182. 

Chauda, 179. 

Chengalamma, 185. 

Chhandas, 67, 76. 

Child-marriage, 22, 42, 43, 164, 
192. 


‘Christianity, 51-9, 202. 


Coinage, 21, 38, 59. 
Conformity, 177, 181, 194. 
Conquest of India, 29. 
Cow, 182. 

Creation, 40. 

Custom, Igt. 


Dadi, 137, 145. 

Darbhanga, 158. 

Darius, 56, 58. 

pit Fae Sarasvati, 156, 160, 
161, 

Demons, see Evil Spirits. 

Destruction of the World, 4o. 

Deva, 15, 22. 

Devadiasis, 112, 194. 

Devaram, 114, 143, 144. 


INDEX 


Devendra Nath Tagore, 150, 154, 


159. 

Dharma, 58, 87. 

Dharmachakra, 63. 

Dharmasastras, 88, 90; Manava, 
75, 88, 91, 955 (III, 81) 183; 
(IV, 178) 191; (V, 148) 166; 
(V, 158) 91; (VI, 4) 167; (VI, 
43) 1733 (X, 51) 184. 

Dharma Sitras, see Siitras, 

Dharm Das, 146, 147. 

Digambaras, 64. 

Domestic ceremonies, 178. 

Dravida Sruti, 143. 

Dravidian style, Io4, 111, 
133) 134, 135- 

Duff, 154. 

Dyaita, 138, 147, 149. 

Dvaitadvaita, 149. 

Dvapara Yuga, 46. 

Dvarapalas, 123. 


123, 


Educated Classes, 152. 

Education, (Hindu) 23, 28, 33, 37, 
39, 42, 51, 64, 66, 164; (West- 
ern) 151, 154, 157, 199, 201; 
(Missionary) 151, 154. 

Ekadandis, 171. 

Elephanta, 99, 100, 113. 

Emancipation, see Release. 

Evil Spirits, 182, 187, 1go. 

Excommunication, 45, 178. 

Exposure of children, see Infanti- 
cide. 


Family, the, (patriarchal) 17, 22, 
163, 191; ‘(Aryan) 16 ff.; 
(Hindu) 22, 23, 30, 42, 88, 122, 
139, 163 ff:, 191, 192, 198, 199. 

Family priest, 17. 

Father, 17, 22, 163. 

Fathers, the, 23, 27, 163, 183 n. 

Festivals, 181. 

Fire, 26. 

Flamen, 16. 

Food, 177, 178. 

Funeral Ceremony, 27, 45, 180. 

Funeral Hymn, 27. 


Gandharan art, se 82, 85, 8y, 
198, 202, 








P23 | 


Ganega, 108, 187. 

Garbhadhana, 178. 

Gathas, 24. 

Gautama, the Buddha, see Bud- 
dhism. 

Seles of the Nyaya System, 
96. 

Gayatri, 21n. 

Ghi, 22. 

Girls, E3,122),942. 

Gita, see Bhagavadgita. 

Gita. Govinda, 115, 128, 148. 

Gopuram, 123, 134. 

Govindacharya Svami, 160. 

Govind Singh, 138. 

Granth, 137, 138, 139. 

Grihastha, 78. 

Grihya Sitras, see Siitras. 

Guptas, 98, 102. 

Guru, 45, 112, 134, 134. 


Hanuman, 187. 

Haoma, Ig. 

Harsha, 99. 

Harshacharita, 98, roo. 

Hermit, see Vanaprastha, 

Hermitage, see Asramas. 

Hinayana, see Buddhism. 

Hiouen Tsang, too. 

Hotri, 28. 

Household gods, 181. 

Huns, 28. 

Husband’s solitary meal, 30, 34, 
164. 

Hymns, 22, 23, 28. 


Idols, 22, 42, 59, 61, 84, 115, 119, 
121, 122, 137, 138, 155) 156, 
161, 183, 186, 189, 194, 196, 
200, 201. 

Immortality, 23. 

Incarnations, 79, 81, 82, 86, 92, 
93, 97, 119, 120, 122, 137. 

Indian Social Reformer, 158. 

Indo-Aryan style, 102, 103, 116. 

Indo-Iranians, 18. 

Indra, 18, 22, 44. 

Infanticide, 18, 22, 153, 163, 165, 
192. 

Initiation, 42. 


218 


Interdictio aqua, 45. 

Iranians, 24. 

Islamia College, Aligarh, 157. 
Tyenar, 189. 


Jagannath, 116, 

Jaimini, 96. 

Jainism, 50, 64, 128, 198; (Canon) 
103, 107; (Acharanga Sitra, 
I, i) 106 ; (Sects) 64; ( Worship) 
64, IIo. 

Jangamas, 116. 

Jata-karman, 178. 

Jayadeva, 115, 148. 

Jina, 51. 

Jnana, 76. 

Joint family, 164. 

Jyotisha, 67, 76. 


Kabir, 130, 134, 137, 138, 145, 
146, 147, 196. 

Kabirpanth, 146, 147. 

Kabirpanthis, 137. 

Kadphises II, 82. 

Kali, 108, 112, 183, 187, 194. 

Kali Yuga, 46. 

Kalpa = age, 41, 46. 

Kalpa = ceremonial, 64, 76. 

Kanada, 96, 

Kanishka, 79, 80, 82. 

Kapila, 96. 

Kapilar, 117. 

Karle, 83. 

Karma, 39, 40, 41, 76, 195. 

Karma Mimamsa, 96, 118. 

Karma Mimarhsa Sitras, 96. 

Karma Yoga, go. 

Karttikeya, 108, 187. 

KeSsanta, 179. 

Keshab Chandra Sen, 154,158,159. 

Khalsa, 138. 

Krishna, 64, 81, 82, 89, 90, tor, 
II4, 115, 136, 138, 140, 141. 

Krita Yuga, 46. 

Kshatriya, 28, 42, 68, 

Kumarila, 118, 128. 

Kurukshetra, 21, 23, 28, 32. 

Kushan Empire, 79, 80, 82, 85. 


Lakshmi, 108. See Sri. 





INDEX 


Lalita Vistara, 86, go. 

Linga, 83, 112, 113, 116, 169. 
Lingayats, 116. 

Lock of hair, 45. 


Madhava, 132. 

Madhya, 138, 147, 149. 

Madhvas, 138, 149. 

Magic, 182, 

Mahabharata, 64, 72, 73, 81, 82, 
89, 95, 182, 194. 

Mahatmas, 157. 

Mahavira, the Jina, 49, 51, 54. 

Mahayana, see Buddhism. 

Mahayuga, 46. 

Mahmid of Ghazni, 99. 

Maitreya, 62, 84, 87. 

Mana-Vachakam-Kadandar, 143. 

Manava Dharmasastra, see Dhar- 
masastra. 

Manikka Vachakar, 109, 114, 128, 
143, 144. 

Mantra, 112, 134, 145. 

Manu, 88. 

Margosa tree, 185. 

Marriage, 17, 42, 177, 178. See 
Family. 

Marshman, 153. 

Maruts, 22. 

Mathura, ror, 136. 

Maya, 118. 

Megasthenes, 81. 

Mey-Kanda-devar, 143. 

Milinda, King, go. 

Mira Bai, 136, 148. 

Missions 151 ff., 199. 

Mitra, 18, 22, 26. 

Monkey school, 122, 

Morality, 191, 193, 1 I 201, 

Motbes, 188. a 

Muhammadanism, 198. 

Muhammadans, 130 ff, 

Mutiny, 151, 154. 


Nabha Das, 136. 

Naga, 60, 81, 185, 187. 
Nalanda, 102, 103. 

Nalayira Prabandham, 114, 144, 
Nallasvami Pillai, 160. 
Nama-Karana, 178, 179. 


INDEX 


Nambi-andar-nambi, 143. 

Namdev, 136, 148. 

Nammialvar, 124, 

Nanak, 137, 139, 145, 196. 

Nana Sambandhar, 114, 143. 

Nandi, 116, 187. 

Nataraja, 115. 

National Movement, 152, 155, 
200. 

Neo-Krishna literature, 160. 

Nilakantha, 122, 144, 147. 

Nimbarka, 114, 128, 148, 149. 

Nirukta, 67, 76. 

Nirvana, 50, 85, 87. 

Nishkramana, 170. 

Nuns, 49. 

Nyaya system, 96. 


Obscenity, 122, 194, 196. 

Occupation, 177, 178. 

Olcott, 156, 157. 

Orders of Brahmans, 23, 24, 25, 
28. 

Oriental Christ, 159. 

Oriya, 66. 

Ontcastes, 60, 156, 185-90. 


Padmanabhachar, 160. 

Pali, 58 n., 66, 

Pallavas, 99. 

Paficharatra Samhitas, 113, 144. 

Panini, 65, 80. 

Pantheism, 31, 39, 40, 41, 43, 48, 
182, 196, 201. 

Parivrajaka, 48, 173, see Sannyasi. 

Parjanya, 22. 

Parsis, 128. 

Parvati, 100, 108. 

Pataliputra, 59. 

Pataiijali, 80, 96. 

Patna, 59, 98. 

Patria Potestas, 17. 

Patriarchal, family, 17. 

Philanthropy, 151. 

Philosophy, 47-51, 83-4, 89, 96, 
118, 119, 120, 122, 138. 

Pilgrimage, 33, 172. 

Pillai Lokacharya, 129, 144. 

Pinda, 180, 183. 

Pitaras, 23. 





219 


Pitri, 180. 

Plassey, 150. 

Poleramma, 189, 

Polygamy, 163. 

Polytheism, 196, 199, 200. 

Pools 33. 

Potu Raju, 187, 188. 

Prajapati, 31, 3 & 

Prakrita, 65. ag 

Pralaya, 41. 

Prapatti, 121, 12", 

Prarthana Samaj, 158. 

Prasada, 112. 

Prasthanatraya, 144. 

Pratap Chandra Mozoomdar, 159. 

Pratisakhya, 76. ' 

Prayers, 21 n., 47 n., 86, 180. 

Precepts of Jesus, 159. 

Preta, 180. 

Priests, 16, 17, 19, 22, 188. See 
Brahmans. 

Printing, 153. 

Prostitution, See Devadasis. 

Protestantism, 154, 155, 156. 

Puthsavana, 178. 

Punjabi, 66, 

Puranas, 102, 104, 105, 10%, 114, 
122, 128, 194; (Kirma, xxii. 
43) 104; (Vishnu, i. 9) Ios. 

Purohita, 22. 

Purushamedha, 31. 

Pushyamitra, 80. 


Qutb Minar, 131, 132. 


Radha, 114. 

Rajanya, 25, 28. 

Rajastiya, 31. 

Rajputs, 109. 

Rama, 52, 53, 81, 82, 88, 140. 

Ramacharit-Manas, 135. (1, 24-7) 
140. 

Rama-Jamatri-Muni, 129. 

Ramakrishna Paramahathsa, 157, 
160, 

Ramananda, 129, 134, 137, 145, 
196. 

Ramanuja, 120, 121, 128, 129, 144, 
145,147, 149, 171, 196. 


220 


Ramayana, 52, 56, 81, 82, 88, 89, 
95, 182, (III, i) 53. 

Ram Mohan Rai, 154, 159, 165. 

Ranade, 158, 160. 

Rebirth. See Transmigration. 

Release, 40, 41, 47, 48. 

Relic Casket, 80. 

Relics, 62, 80, 

Reliquary, 80. 

Residence, 177, 178. 

Revelation, 41, 52. 

Revival of Hinduism,. 156. 

Rice-ball, 180. 

Right living, 43. 

Rigveda, 23, 24, 25, 28, 57. (I, 
xxvé) 26; (IIE, xii. 10) 21; 
(X, xiv) 275 (X, xv. 4) 163; 
CAGexCiet 2) aes 

Rishi, 20, 41, 52. 

Rivers, 183. 

Rudra, 22, 31. 

Rudra-sampradaya, 149. 


Sachchidananda, 48. 
Sacred Thread,-42, 45. 
Sacrifice, 16, 19, 22, 23, 30, 32, 35, 
39, 68, 111, 112, 183, 194. 

Saddharma Pundarika, 86, go, 93. 
Sadhu, 171. 

aiva, 83. 

aiva Agamas, I13, 144. 
Saiva Siddhanta, 138, 160. 
Saktas, 112 f, 

Sakti, 112. 
Salagrama, 172, 183, 
Samavartana, 179. 
Samaveda, 24, 28, 57. 


Sambandhar. See Nana Sam- 
bandhar. 
Samhitas, See Paficharatra Sarh- 


hitas, 
Sampradaya, 149. 
Samskaras, 178. 
Samudragupta, 98. 
Sanaka, 149. 
Sanakadi-sampradaya, 149, 
Safichi Stipa, 32, 60, 61. 

andilya, 115, 12", 
Sangha, 58. 


INDEX 


Sankara, 118,1 19,126,128,147,171, 

Sankhya, 49, 50, 96. 

Sannyasi, 48, 51, 78, 170, 171. 

Sanskrit, 64, 65, 80. 

Sapinda, 180. 

Sarameyan dogs, 27. 

Sarasvati, 108. 

Sati, 22, 122, 123, 152, 153, 154, 
164, 165, 192. 

sathakopa, 121, 124, 129. 

Satyartha Prakasa, 160. 

Savitri, 22. 

Sayana, 132. 

Scholasticism, 60, 65. 

ae 23, 331373 39) 42, 51, 64, 


, 84. 
Sculpture, (Buddhist) 15,19, 31, 32, 
59,60, 61, 62, 63, 80, 84, 85, 86, 
87, 101, 198, 202; (Hindu) 59, 
81, 99, 100, 119, 135; (Jain) 
II0, 
Sea Voyages, 178. 
Sect-marks, 112, 121, 168. 
Sekkilar, hie ee 
Self, the. See Atman. 
Serampore Missionaries, 153. 
Seven Pagodas, 104. 
Siddhanta Sastras, 143, 144. 
Sikhs, 137, 139, 145. 
iksha, 67, 76. 
Simantonnayana, 178, 
iva, 31, 83, 98, 99, I00, 104, 
108, 109, III, 112, 1i3,°a14; 
123, 125, 149, 161, 171, 172, 
183. 


Skanda, 133, 18y. 

loka Sangraha, 159. 
Smarta, 76, 120, 
Smriti, 52, 76. 
Snakes, 33, 60, 81, 185, 
Social Reform Movement, 158," 
Society sacred, 191, 
Soma, 18, 19, 22, 24, 36. 
Spirits, 183 n. 
Sraddha, 180, 183, 199. 
Srauta Siitras, See Siitras, 
Sri, 59, 108, 149. 
Sri-bhashya, 120, 
Sri-Madhvas, 138, 
Sri-sampradaya, 134, 148. 


INDEX 


Sruti, 25, 52, 76. 

Sthila Sarira, 180. 

Stones, 172, 183, 187, 189. 

Stipa, 61, 62, 80, 83, 84, 86. 

Subrahmanya, 133, 187. 

Sidras, 24, 25, 28, 68, 137. 

Sundarar, 114, 143. 

- Sundararaman, 160. 

Sungas, 80-1, 89. 

Superstitions, 182. 

Surat Gopal, 146, 147. 

Sir Das, 136, 148. 

Sir Sagar, 136, 148. 

Siirya, 22. 

Sutras, 65, 69, 73, 75, 76, 84; 
(Dharma) 65, 73, 75, 76 ; (Gau- 
tama Dharma, xx. 1-6) 45; 
(Grihya) 27, 65, 735 75, 76, 
(Srauta) 65, 68, 73, 75,79, 96, 
113, 144; (Katyayana Srauta) 
68 ; (Philosophical) 84, 96, 127; 
Vedanta-sitras, 84, 96, 118, 
120, 122, 138, 144, 147; (1, i. 
1-6) 94; (1, i. 2) 126; Bhakti- 
sutras, 115, 127. 

Sutta Pitaka, 77. 

Suttas, 66, 69. 

ae Vivekananda, 158, 160, 

162. 
Svapachas, 184. 

vetambaras, 64. 

Symbols, 83, 112, 185, 187, 188, 
189, 


Talikot, 130. 

Tanjore, III, 123, 133. 

Tantras, 113. 

Tapas, 23, 32; 47, 167, 171, 194. 

Tarpana, 183. 

Taxila, 56, 65. 

Temples, 22, (Buddhist) 86; 
(Hindu) 60, 61, 102, 103, 104, 
III, 122, 181; (Jain) 103; 
(Village) 185 ff. 

Ten-galai, 121, 129, 168. 

Thagi, 153. 

Theosophy, 151, 155, 156, 157, 
160. 


Tirtha, (water) 112; (place of 
pilgrimage) 172. 


221 


Tirthakara, 51, 82, 97. 

Tirumangai, 129. 

Tirumilar, 143. 

Tirumurai, 143. 

Tiruvachakam, 114, 143; (VI, 50) 
109. 

Tradition. See Smriti. 

Transmigration, 23, 33,39, 41, 43, 
182, 195, 196, 201. 

Trees, 33, 183, 187. 

Treta Yuga, 46. 

Triad, 99, 101, 119. 

Tridandis, 168, 171. 

Trident, 82, 83. 

Trimirti, 99. 

Tripitaka. See Buddhism. 

Tulsi Das, 135, 140, 145, 196. 

Tulsi plant, 183. 

Tukaram, 137, 141, 148. 

Twice-born, 42. 


Udgatri, 28. 

Uma, 108, 

Umapati Sivacharyar, 143. 

Unclean castes, 60, 185-90. 

Universities, 154. 

Upanayana, 179. 

Upanishads, 38, 47, 48, 51, 56, 57; 
66, 79; 73, 74; 76, 89, 118, 126, 
147, 159. Brihadaranyaka (I, i) 
54; (I, ili, 28) 47; (IV, iv. 5) 
38. Chhandogya (VI, 13) 55. 
Kathaka, (II, 12) 197; (V, 9- 
15) 70. ‘Taittirlya (II, i. 1) 52. 
Verse, 57, 66, 70, 73 

Ushas, 22. 

Uttara Mimamsa, 96. 


Vada-galai, 121, 129. 

Vairochana, 88. 

VaiSeshika philosophy, 96. 

VaiSeshika Sitras, 96. 

Vaishnava, 83, 120, 129. 

Vaisya, 25, 28, 42, 68. 

Vallabhacharya, 136, 145, 148, 
149. 

Valmiki, 52. 

Vanaprastha, 31, 32, 37) 53) 54) 
60, 78, 167. 

Varuna, 18, 22, 26, 27, 36. 


222 


Vata, 22. 

Veda, Vedas, 21, 23, 24, 25, 28, 
41, 45,52, 59, 76, 156, 181, 200. 

Vedangas, 64, 67, 76. 

Vedanta, 48, 49, 51, 84, 96, 118, 
197. 

Vedzata Desika, 129. 

Vedanta-sitras. Sze Sitras, 

Vemana, I17. 

Vernacular newspapers, 153. 

Vernaculars, 64. 

Vidyapati, 136, 148. 

Vijayanagar, 130, 132, 

Vikramaditya, 98. 

Vikramasgila, 114. 

Village divinities, 185 ff. 

Vinaya Pitaka, 77, 

Vira Saivas, 116. 
Vishnu, 22, 31, 81, 83, 97, 99; Loo, 
104, 105, 112, 124, 171, 183. 
Vishnuism, 82, 114, 172, See 
Vishnu. 

Vishnusvami, 149. 

Vishnusmriti (xxv, 14) 123; (xxi. 
92) 177. 

Visishtadvaita, 120, 147, 149. 

Vivaha, 179. 

Vrindavana, Ior, 

Vyakarana, 65, 67, 76. 





INDEX 


Ward, 153. 

Wells, 183. 

Western education, 151. 

Western influence, 150 ff., 
201. 

Western scholars, 152. 

Widow-asceticism, 123, 165. 

Widow-burning. See Sati. 

Widow-celibacy, 22, 42, 88, gi, 
164, 192. 

Widow-remarriage, 165. 

Women, 18, 22, 30, 34n., 75, 89, 
103, 154, 163-6. 

Writing, 21, 30, 37, 87. 


199, 


Yajurveda, 24, 28, (Black) 24,57; 
(White) 24, 57. 

Yama, 18, 22, 23, 27. 

Yellow robes, 23. 

Yoga, 96. 

Yoga philosophy, 80, 96. 

Yoga Siitras, 96. 

Yoni, 112. 


Zenana, 22, 139, 165. 
Zend, 19. 
Zoroaster, 18, 56. 


' Zoroastrians, 18, 24, 80. 


\. ‘ 











— | Se, Ge ca ee ee ee ec ae bed eee 









































Library Bureau Cat. No. 1138 











BL Farquhar, John Nicol, 1861-1929. 
1150 A primer of Hinduism, by J.N. Farquhar ... 
—F33 2d ed. rev. and enl. London, Oxford University 
1912 Press, Henry Frowde, 1912. 

222p. illus., tables. 19cm. 


Bibliography: p.€2031-214. 
1. Hinduism. I. Christian literature society 


for India. II. Title. | 
3386813 
[ 


( CCSC/ehw 





