===== Internet Archive OCR: principlesoftant2852bhat_djvu.txt =====

The physical condition of this item is such that extreme care should be given to its use. We re 
that the borrowing library consider making it available for building use only. When returning it, ple 
use added packaging to minimize further damage in shipping. 


The volume is being sent to you for a limited 2-week loan period, calculated from date of shipmen 

There will be no renewal permitted and you may receive an automatically generated recall notice on it 

since we placed a save on it for binding on our online circulation system, LCS. The item will be forw 
Bier OLD Lority mending upon return. 


In an a ‘tempt: to meet the need of remote library users, we are maine every effort to share our ¢ 
through int srlibrary loan. If this approach does not prove workable, our alternative will be not to ] 
Eper condition it ms in the future. Your cooperation in handling this transaction will be appreciated 


= aS 


eat ene eee ame eee term ee Gee remy Gare cme GES ea GE GES GE See Gee Gem Ome Oe Ge see GE eee ms 


Interlibrary Services 
LIBRARY 128 
University of Illinois at Urbs 
1408 W. Gregory Drive 
Urbana, IL 61801 


128-13-81 


Return this book on or before the 
Latest Date stamped below. A 
charge is made on all overdue 


books. 
University of Illinois Library 


FES 17 1998 


MAY 16 1959 


ad 
(Re 

ik el 
' mY 


NASER tg yf 
ON, TTS 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


\ 


TELETCIE IGE 


THE TANTRATATTVA OF SHRIYUKTA SHIVA 
CHANDRA VIDYARNAVA BHATTACHARYYA 
MAHODAYA, 


WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY 


SHRIYUKTA BARADA KANTA 
MAJUMDAR 


EDITED BY 


ARTHUR AVALON 


LONDON 
BUZAG:&COhes 
46, GREAT RUSSELL STREET 
1916 


GAVATRi YANTRA. 


PRB eAC E 


" HIS second volume of Tantratattva, the translation 


of which is primarily the work of Sj Jnanendralal 
Majumdar, is the last. Inthe Preface to the First Part I 
spoke of the preparation of a third section, dealing with 
the philosophical bases of Tantra. I greatly, however, 
regret to announce the unexpected death of Pandit Shiva 
Chandra about the middle of this year. This particular 
project therefore unfortunately falls to the ground, and 
the work is limited to the dimensions in which it was first 
issued some twenty-two years ago. The philosophical 
aspect of the Tantra will, however, be found touched 
upon in the Introduction from the pen of Sj Barada Kanta 
Majumdar which follows, and I have myself further 
set out my own views on this part of the subject in my 
forthcoming work on ‘‘The Six Centres and the Kundalini 
Power.’’ The work here translated is, as already stated, 
that of an Indian mind unaffected by Western thought. 

On the other hand, a knowledge of the latter gives a special 
value to the Introduction which precedes it. Apart 
from its intrinsic merits, it has such value as being the 
record of the views of an English-educated Hindu, 

_ who finds in the conclusions of recent Western science a 
corroboration of his ancient Eastern beliefs. Its author 
is now an old man, to whom the Tantra has been the 
subject of study for many years. He yet modestly says 
S (p. lxii): “‘ I have attempted to give the reader the result 
of a general survey of the philosophy upon which Tantrik 
Sadhana, or self-culture, is based. But in so recondite 
and unfamiliar a subject, when the correctness of every 
individual interpretation may be called in question, the 

v 


vi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


reader is requested to go himself to the source, and there, 
with faith and devotion, and under the guidance of a 
Guru, drink of its waters.”’ 

So far as I have examined the matter, I find myself to 
be in general agreement with his statements as to what 
constitutes the teaching of the Tantra on the matters 
dealt with. This agreement does not, however, neces- 
sarily extend to every statement or to all matters of 
detail. Some of these are open to discussion, as he admits. 
I should, for instance, myself dispense with the ‘“‘magnetic 
current ’’ to which the Introduction refers at p. 1xxxvi 
with reference to the worship of images, and would deal 
with the matter as one of purely transformed conscious- 
ness in the worshipper himself. Some things also are from 
the limited character of the Introduction unsaid. 

As the reader will see for himself, Sj} B. K. Majumdar 
treats his subject from a religious standpoint. There 
are, in fact, two lines of work in the Tantra— 
namely, religion and magic. It is with the former that 
the author of this book and of the Introduction which 
follows deals. There are to be found described in the 
Tantra practices which have nothing to do with religion 
in its proper sense, and are indeed opposed to it. Such 
are deemed “‘ obstacles’’ by all those who are desirous 
of liberation. Thus what is called Nayika Sadhana, or 
the invocation of female spirits, is alleged in the Tantric 
works to have the effect there described. But never- 
theless the same Scriptures assert that these and other 
practices exist ‘‘for delusion.’”’ So the Shaktananda 
Tarangini says: ‘‘ Avidya binds the Sadhaka with Karma, 
and destroys knowledge. Therefore it is that Vidya 
should be worshipped, but Avidya never.’’ But why, it 
may be then asked, are such practices to be found in the 
Tantra at all, if it be admitted that they destroy and 
delude ? This is a characteristically modern question. 
A complete answer to it would, however, on account of 
its length, be out of place. It is sufficient here to say 


PREFACE Vil 


that the Tantras are an encyclopedia of all the sciences 
on all the planes, though the worker on the higher path 
is also taught not to venture below. A statement in a 
work on “ Toxicology’”’ that such and such substances 
will, if compounded, produce a deadly poison is a descrip- 
tion of simple fact, and not an invitation to compass 
thereby the death of a neighbour who stands in our way. 
A correct recipe may have been given, but he who so 
employs it is likely to incur the extreme punishment. 
In the same way there are spiritual executions. I raise 
the question to distinguish that aspect of the Tantra of 
which the author of the Introduction and myself speak 
from practices with which we are not here concerned. 
The Introduction also limits itself to a short review of 
the contents of the Tantra in the sense above described. 
Notwithstanding the present fashion in English-educated 
India, Sj B. K. Majumdar has not essayed historical 
speculation. Whilst every form of knowledge has its 
use, the Indian mind rightly apprizes as of the highest 
value the world of ideas, deeming the question of their 
“historical ’’ origins and development to be, as it in fact 
is, of much inferior importance. To the Western, and in 
particular the English, Sankritist the position is in 
general reversed. For, from the point of view he not un- 
commonly adopts, Indian civilization has little, if any, 
intrinsic value of its own; the bulk of its content— 
religious, philosophical, scientific, and artistic—being 
demodé Where it was not inits inception altogether absurd. 
In such case the only issue of importance is the question, 
When, where, and whence did these various “ errors ”’ 
and ‘‘ absurdities’ arise, and how they developed and 
propagated ? Yet they are not altogether niggardly of 
compensation even to such an inquirer, for material 
which is itself without value may yet be so put together 
as to make very good history. I do not myself share 
these views, since I find that many Indian concepts con- 
form to the results of the most recent scientific and psycho- 


Vill PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


logical research and metaphysical speculation, not to 
speak of other matters which demand, and in fact obtain, 
a different kind of verification. The historical aspect of 
the question is not, however, to be neglected, and I 
therefore avail myself of this opportunity of adding some 
observations to those I have already made in the first 
volume, and which have been suggested : to me by criticisms 
received since its publication. 

When it is asked what is the doctrine of the Shastra of 
which this work treats, it is necessary to clearly under- 
stand what is meant by ‘“‘ the Tantra.’’ It is sometimes 
held that ‘‘ the Tantra ’’ is something altogether different 
from and wholly unconnected with ordinary prevalent 
“‘ Hinduism,”’ to use a convenient, though in itself vague, 
term. According to this view, the doctrines and practice 
of “the Tantra’’ are really foreign to ordinary Indian 
thought. Another and less extreme view agrees with the 
last mentioned in so far as it holds that there is in “ the 
Tantra ’’ a nucleus of doctrine and practice which is 
specially ‘“‘ Tantrik ”’ in the sense that it is different from 
general Indian doctrine and practice and the particular 
teachings and practices of all others of its various sects. 
It is then suggested that around this nucleus has accu- 
mulated a body of doctrine and practice which the Tantra 
shares in common with other Shastras. In this view the 
supposed “‘ original Tantra ’’ has borrowed doctrine and 
practice both from the general Hinduism and its par- 
ticular divisions of worshippers, and has incorporated 
them into a composite system which is then called 
iwlantrik, ©: 

The result, on this view, is that the Tantra is an amal- 
gam consisting of a hypothetical nucleus, foreign in its 
character to Hinduism proper, enveloped by a number 
of other doctrines and practices borrowed by it from the 
latter. Those who hold by this theory of an original 
nucleus have not yet told us what it precisely is, or when 
it arose, nor whence it came, nor, indeed, where we may 


PCPA Es | 1X 


look for it. This theory may or may not be correct, but 
before we can be called upon to accept it, it must be 
established by evidence. Until then our hesitation to 
do so seems warranted by the fact that doctrines and 
practices which have been alleged to be specifically 
“ Tantrik ’’ have their counterparts in the Vaidik achara 
(way or practice). Thus the use of flesh, fish, and wine, 
which are supposed to be peculiar to one form of the 
Tantrik ritual, was common in the Vaidik age. The 
Mahabharata, Harivansgha, Kalikaé, Markandeya, and 
Karma Puranas also refer to the consumption of wine, 
meat, and flesh. As regards “‘the fifth,” even if we exclude 
Upanishads and other Shastras, which are alleged by some 
to be of sectarian authority only, we find a ritual use of 
that Tattva, though doubtless in different form, in the 
Mahavrata of the Aitareya Aranyaka and in the Vama- 
devyam Vrata of the Sama Veda. In this connection 
reference may be made to the Brahmavaivarta Purana. 
Magic, again, with which the Tantra has been particularly 
charged, forms a large part of the Atharvaveda. 

Then, as to the worship of Shakti or Devi, reference 
is made to Her in the Veda, such as the Sarasvatisikta, 
in the Yajur Veda the Lakshmi Sikta, and in the tenth 
Mandala of the Rig Veda the Devi Sikta;? and we have 
in the Upanishads? the story of Uma appearing in a blaze 
of light to Indra and the other Devas, to prove to them 
that it was not by their Shakti that they lived and moved, 
but that all which was done was so done by virtue of 
that Mahashakti. Touching this subject, nothing more 
is taught by the Tantra, though one portion of it has 
doubtless greatly elaborated, both on its theoretical and 
practical side, the magnificent doctrine of Shakti, or the 
Power or Energy of the Brahman whereby the Universe 

1 The term is here and elsewhere used by me in a general sense for 
intoxicating beverages. In India wine is also made of other substances 
than the grape—e.g., honey, rice, molasses, etc. 


_ 2 See Introduction, p, xliv, to Vol. I., ‘‘ Principles of Tantra.”’ 
3 Ibid. 


x PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


originates. Though this notion of Shakti is of great 
importance in the Tantra, it is by no means the peculiar 
appanage of that Scripture, but is, like other concepts, 
shared by it with other Indian Shastras, commencing, as 
above mentioned, with the Milashastra—that is, the 
Vedas and Upanishads. It is, however, of special im- 
portance in Tantra, because one of its schools has de- 
veloped, presented, and emphasized the doctrine, and has 
moulded its scheme of Sddhana and worship in such a 
way as to be the practical expression of its form of 
theoretical exposition. Thus, on the one hand, we have 
in what are called for convenience the Shakta Tantras, 
a philosophical doctrine of Shakti fully developed on the: 
one side (Jnanakanda), and devotion to and worship of 
the World-Mother on the other (Upasanakanda). As the 
notion of Shakti is accepted by other classes of Indian 
worshippers,! the promulgation of this cult has historically 
done much to weld together the different Indian sects 
through the recognition of a bond of common unity 
which the acceptance of the doctrine of Shakti implies. 
To this the Shaktisangama Tantra? refers when it says: 
‘‘ For the purpose of creation various religions have been 
promulgated, such as those of the Shaktas (worshippers. 
of Shakti), Shaivas (worshippers of Shiva), Vaishnavas. 
(worshippers of Vishnu), Ganapatyas (worshippers of 
Ganesha), Sauras (sun worshippers), and Buddhists, and 
many others. These sects often blame one another, and 
yet a harmony may be found. Explanation has been 
given of these doctrines in order to bring about this unity. 
In order to attain this all should worship the Devi Kalika, 
the Saviour (Tarini). I have promulgated the Shakta 
cult in order to demonstrate the unity of the fourteen 


! In varying ways—thus some worship Shaktiman, “‘ He who is the 
possessor of Shakti”’ in varying Deva forms; others worship Shakti 
Herself—philosophically there is no difference, as the possessor of 
Shakti and Shakti are one and the same. 

2 Eighth Patala cited with text in Nagendra Nath Vasu’s “ ae 
logical Survey of Maytirabhanja,”’ p. lx. . 


PREFACE a 


branches of knowledge.1 The Goddess Bhavatarini is 
the Deity presiding over the four Vedas, and the Goddess 
Kalika is the Deity presiding over the Atharva Veda. 
Though different sects find fault with one another, a 
harmony may be established between these seemingly 
contrary doctrines. In order to bring about this desired 
harmony all sects should worship Kalika, the Saviour of 
the world. Rites, according to the Atharva Veda, cannot 
be performed without Kali or Tara.2 She is called 
Kalika in Kerala (Malabar), Tripura in Kashmir, and 
Tara in Gauda (Bengal). She is the Kalottara or chief 
Divinity of Kalottarayana.3 

“It appears,’ says the author of the work last cited, 
“that from the above passages of the Shaktisangama 
Tantra the Shakta or Tantrika cult was promulgated in 
order to effect harmony among the various jarring sects. 
The result was that all the sects began to worship the 
female Energies of their own respective Deities.4 Some 
accepted a few Shaktis, others accepted many. 

‘“ This is perhaps the reason,’’ he adds, “‘ of the great 
fellow feeling between the Hindu and the Buddhist 
Shaktas, as well of the rites of the one being found in the 
Tantras of the other, and vice versa, for, according to 
Dr. Kern,® the development of Tantrism is a feature that 
Buddhism and Hinduism in their later phases have in 
common.”’ 

So far I have referred only to what are called the Shakta 
Tantras, or those Tantras which predominantly® deal 


1 That is, as the verse says, Purdna, Nydya, Mimansa, Sangkhya, 
Patanjala, Vedanta, Dharmashastra, Anga, Chhanda, Astronomy, and 
the four Vedas. 

2 Vina kéling vind tarang natharvvano vidhi kvachit. See last note. 

3 One of the Buddhist sects. 

4 Thus establishing a common worship of Shakti, whatever be the 
form the latter might assume in the different sects. 

5 “ Manual of Indian Buddhism,” p. 133. 

6 In all Tantrik cults Shakti is worshipped; for where Shiva or Vishnu 
are the Ishtadevata, Shakti is necessarily associated with them. 


Xil PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


with the worship of Shakti or Devi, the great Mother of 
the Universe. Thus, in the Shaiva Tantras, or rather in 
the Shaiva (as distinct from Shakta), worship governed 
by the Agama, the use of wine and animal-food is for- 
bidden1—on the other hand, matters which appear in the 
Shakta Tantras occur elsewhere. The particular Yoga 
called Shatchakrabheda, or matters dealt with by it, are 
to be found referred to in some of the Upanishads and 
Puranas, and in the works on Hathayoga, such as 
Shivasanghita, Gherandasanghita, and Hathayogapradi- 
pika. It has indeed been suggested that the Tantriks 
borrowed this Yoga from “‘ Nathism.’’ There are some 
who think that they have given both fact and explanation 
when they have invented a name. But what proof is 
there that the Hathayogis were not Tantriks, or that the 
latter did not also include as part of its doctrine Hatha- 
yoga. And if the two were different from one another, 
which borrowed from the other and what is the proof of 
it? The matter is of subordinate interest. It is more 
important to know whether this Tantrik Yoga is confined 
to and is the invention of the Tantrik and Hathayog?, or 
whether it has its roots in common Indian tradition. The 
Tantra is called the Mantrashastra, but Mantras are not 
confined to the Tantra. It deals with the theory of 
sound (Shabda), but so did the Mimangsakas. It men- 
tions the twenty-five Tattvas, but these are drawn from 
the Sangkhya. There are Tantrik works which are 
Vedantik in their general trend and aim. If there be one 
subject which appears to distinguish the Tantras it is 
portions of its ritual, such as the Yantras, Mudras, Vijas, 
Bhttashuddhi, and so forth. Indeed, it is more by these 
than anything else that the “‘ Tantrik’’ character of a 
work is established, and yet we find portions of this ritual 


1 In some forms of worship substitutes are prescribed (see Introduc- 
tion to my Tantra ‘‘ of the Great Liberation ’’). This practice of sub- 
stitution has, I am informed, been extended even to such Upakriya as 
Shavdsana, where the corpse is made of Kusha grass. 


PREFACE Xili 


in the Puranas. Further there appear to have been 
varieties of traditions or schools in the Shastras which are 
gathered together under the collective name of Agama, 
which after the Upanishadic age regulated the temple and 
domestic rituals. Which (or is it all of these) constituted 
the alleged Tantrik “‘nucleus’’? There are thus the 
Tantras of the three Krantas.1 There are also what are 
called the Five Amnaya,* not to mention the Shaiva, 
Shakta, and Vaishnava divisions of Tantrik worshippers. 
Though the fact is not generally known certain Tantras 
are alleged to have authority in different ages and places. 
Thus certain existent Tantras, such as the KAlivildsa, are 
alleged not to be in force in the present Kalpa, but to 
represent a prior tradition. So this Kalivilasa and other 
Tantras are said to have been operative in Ashva Kranta 
in the Kalakalpa. Of such the Mahavishvasara Tantra says 
that Tantras which belong to other Kalpas exist for the 
delusion of unbelievers (Pashandas). The burden of proof 
is on those who put forward a theory or hypothesis in 
these matters. Present historical knowledge is not 
enough to answer the various questions here raised. I 
prefer myself to proceed as far as possible upon the sure 
ground of fact and not upon historical surmises, for which 
there is at present at least no sufficient evidence, and 
which are not infrequently prompted by a dislike of the 
Shastra, and therefore by a desire to dissassociate it 
altogether from the common current of Indian tradition. 
In any case doctrine and practice are of greater import- 
ance than the question of historical origins. But those 
who are interested in this form of research should first 


1 See “‘ Principles of Tantra,’’ Vol. I., Introduction. 

2 Uttaramnaya, Dakshindmnaya, Pairvamnaya Pashchimamndéya 
Urddhvamnaya. 

3 In the 28th Patala of this Tantra K4li is represented as saying 
to Krishna: ‘‘ After this day of Brahma you will become the beloved of 
Radha, who will be born of my body ’’; and the 35th Patala refers to 
Krishna, Nanda, Radha of the third (present) Kalpa. It is noteworthy 
that in the roth Patala wine is forbidden in the Kaliyuga; and Patala 4 

directs all to follow the Achara of the Pashu. 


Say PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


study and endeavour to understand the living Tantra 
with the aid of those who profess it, and then accumulate 
the facts upon which alone any historical hypothesis of 
value can rest. 

Whatever theories may be advanced as to the existence 
and origin of some elements in the Tantra peculiar to 
itself, there is no doubt that as it now stands it embodies 
alarge number of others which are to be found in other 
Shastras, both religious and philosophical, though some 
of these are expressed by this Scripture according to its 
own peculiar terminology and form of exposition. But 
if we deal with the facts as they are known to exist now 
and have existed for unknown centuries past, we find 
that the Tantra embcdies and is interwoven with the 
general fabric of ‘‘ Hinduism,’’ of which it is an integral 
and closely associated part. Professor de la Vallée 
Poussin was then, it seems to me, right when, in answer 
to one of his English critics, he said of the Tantras: “ Je 
constate qu ils sont inhérents a toutes les formes religieuses 
de l’Inde.’’} 

In a similar manner a critic of a previous work of mine? 
incompetently complained that in a general account I 
there gave of some portions of Tantrik doctrine I had 
dealt with beliefs and practices to be found in other 
Shastras and systems of philosophy, a procedure which he 
charged was calculated to mislead others into the belief 
that they formed part of Tantrik teaching. A want of 
knowledge was here displayed. Why, he queried, had I 
dealt with the Sangkhya, thereby “‘ creating for the 


1 From a letter to Professor Rhys Davids, dated November 29, 
1896, published in J. R. A. S., January, 1899. He adds: “ Is vous 
-choquent, j’en suis chagrin; mais avouez que je n’y peux rien. Dé- 
clarer inutile l’étude des Tantras sous pretextes qu’ils sont modernes 
c’est vraiment abuser d’une premisse peu stable et mal definie.”’ 

2 Mahdnirvana Tantra. I should like to here state that the Intro- 
-duction which I wrote for that work does not in any way profess to be 
an historical criticism. It was a simple and very abbreviated state- 
ment of some generally accepted notions and practices prevalent in 
the Tantra as it exists to-day. 


PREPACE XV 


thousand and first time the false impression that the 
‘Tantra was concerned with it.’’ This criticism, which is 
a display of ignorance, might equally well be directed 
against the work here translated, which not only cites the 
Tantra, but also the Puranas, Darshanas, Smriti,and Vedas, 
The answer is the simple one that I dealt with some of 
the notions of the Sangkhya because they are expressly 
incorporated in the Tantras and Tantrik works with which 
I was conversant. I may refer my reader by way of 
example to the first chapter of the celebrated Prapan- 
chasara Tantra,1 and to the well-known and authoritative 
treatise, Sharada Tilaka. From what source other than 
the Sangkhya did the former derive its notions of Purusha, 
Prakriti, Buddhi, Ahangkara, and the other Tattvas, the 
Gunas, and so forth ? And of a passage in the second the 
great Tantrik Commentator Raghava Bhatta expressly 
says: “‘ Here the Sangkhya doctrine is exposed.’”’ From 
what source again but the Vedanta does the Tantra derive 
those doctrines which reconcile the Sangkhyan dualism in 
the unity of the Brahman ? The Tantra, in fact, could not 
‘claim to be an authoritative Indian Shastra if it did not 
recognize commonly accepted Indian doctrines. 
According to orthodox teaching, all Shastras, just as 
truth itself, constitute a unity. Otherwise the Tantra 
would be a mere sectarian Scripture outof all relation with 
common Indian beliefs, and essentially foreign to them. 
But a Scripture which is not in essential agreement with 
other Shastras is itself no Shastra at all. The Shastra, 
therefore, generally accepts and incorporates such 
common beliefs, though it may present them in its own 
peculiar way and terminology, and though it seeks 
practically to realize them by its own peculiar methods. 
It isin fact the latter which is the chief characteristic of 
this Shastra. The sphere of Indian religion has three 
departments, respectively known as Karmakanda (or 
formal ritual in its Vaidik sense), Upasana Kanda (or 


1 Published as the third volume of my “ Tantrik Texts.”’ 


XV1 . PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


psychological worship), and Jnana Kanda (or esoteric 
knowledge). Itis the second which is the peculiar subject 
of Tantra. Thus, again, it is said that ritual inits widest 
sense, as including both Karma and Upasana, is threefold 
—that is, Vaidik, Tantrik, and Mixed (Mishra), or 
Pauranik. But each of these, according to Indian teach- 
ing, has in common certain philosophic and religious 
doctrinal bases. When I speak of “‘ the Tantra,” I refer 
to what passes under that name to-day! so far as it is 
known to me, and not some hypothetical doctrine of past 
time of which at present we know with certainty nothing. 
In a review, however, of the first volume of this work an 
Indian writer, in the Prabuddha Bhérata? made the fol- 
lowing remarks on what he believes to be the origin of 
the Tantra. His speculations, whether correct or not, are 
of such interest that I quote them in full. He writes: 
‘Hitherto all theories about the origin and the im- 
portance of the Tantras have been more or less prejudiced 
by a wrong bias against Tantrikism which some of its 
own later sinister developments were calculated to create. 
This bias has made almost every such theory read either 
like a condemnation or an apology. All investigation 
being thus disqualified, the true history of Tantrikism 
has not yet been written; and we find cultured people 
mostly inclined either to the view that Tantrikism origin- 
ally branched off from the Buddhistic Mahayana or Vajra- 
yana as a cult of some corrupted and self-deluded mon- 
astics or to the view that it was the inevitable dowry 
which some barbarous non-Aryan races brought along 


1 Similarly, in the letter of Professor de la Vallée Poussin, from 
which I have already cited, he says: “M. R, appelle Bouddhisme la 
doctrine préchee, par Sakyamuni; j’appelle Bouddhisme I’état général 
de croyance qui s’est condensé autour du nom du Buddha.”’ In the 
case of the Tantra the reasons for such a course are much stronger; for 
whilst we do know something of the origins of Buddhism, those of 
the Tantra are obscure. 

2 A journal published at the Mayavati Ashrama, founded by the late 
Svami Vivekananda in the Himalayas (issue of July, 1914). 


PREFACE | XVvii 


with them into the fold of Hinduism. According to both 
these views, however, the form which this Tantrikism— 
either a Buddhistic development or a barbarous im- 
portation—has subsequently assumed in the literature 
of Hinduism is its improved edition as issuing from the 
crucibles of Vedic or Vedantic transformation. But 
this theory of the curious co-mingling of the Vedas and 
Vedanta with Buddhistic corruption or with non-Aryan 
barbarity is perfectly inadequate to explain the all-per- 
vading influence which the Tantras exert on our present- 
day religious life. Here it is not any hesitating com- 
promise that we have got before us to explain, but a bold 
organic synthesis, a legitimate restatement of the Vedic 
culture for the solution of new problems and new diffi- 
culties which signalized the dawn of a new age. 

“In tracing the evolution of Hinduism, modern his- 
torians take a blind leap from Vedic ritualism direct to 
Buddhism, as if to conclude that all those newly formed 
communities with which India had been swarming all 
Over since the close of the fateful era of the Kurukshetra 
War, and to which was denied the right of Vedic sacrifices, 
the monopoly of the higher threefold castes of pure 
orthodox descent, were going all the time without any 
religious ministrations. These aryanized communities, 
we must remember, were actually swamping the Vedic 
orthodoxy, which was already gradually dwindling down 
to a helpless minority in all its scattered centres of in- 
fluence, and was just awaiting the final blow to be dealt 
by the rise of Buddhism. Thus the growth of these new 
communities and their occupation of the whole land con- 
stituted a mighty event that had been silently taking 
place in India on the outskirts of the daily shrinking 
orthodoxy of Vedic ritualism, long before Buddhism 
appeared on the field, and this momentous event our 
modern historians fail to take due notice of, either, it may 
be, because of a curious blindness of self-complacency or 


2 because of the dazzle which the sudden triumph of Bud- 


b 


XVill PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


dhism and the overwhelming mass of historical evidences 
left by it create before their eyes. The traditional Kali 
Yuga dates from the rise of these communities, and the 
Vedic religious culture of the preceding Yuga underwent 
a wonderful transformation along with the wonderful 
attempt it made to aryanize these rising communities. 

‘“‘ History, as hitherto understood and read, speaks of 
the Brahmins of the pre-Buddhistic age—their growing 
alienation from the Jnana-kanda or the Upanishadic 
wisdom, their impotency to save the orthodox Vedic 
communities from the encroachments of the non-Vedic 
hordes and races, their ever-deepening religious formalism 
and social exclusiveness. But this history is silent on the 
marvellous feats which the Upanishadic sects of anchorites 
were silently performing on the outskirts of the strictly 
Vedic community, with the object of aryanizing the new 
India that was rising over the ashes of the Kurukshetra 
conflagration. This new India was not strictly Vedic, like 
the India of the bygone ages, for it could not claim the 
religious ministrations of the orthodox Vedic Brahmins, 
and could not therefore perform Yajnas like the latter. 
The question, therefore, is as to how this new India be- 
came gradually aryanized, for aryanization is essentially 
a spiritual process, consisting in absorbing new communi- 
ties of men into the fold of the Vedic religion. The Vedic 
ritualism that prevailed in those days was powerless, we 
have seen, to do anything for these new communities 
springing up all over the country. Therefore we are 
obliged to turn to the only other factor in Vedic religion 
besides the Karma-kanda for an explanation of those 
changes which the Vedic religion wrought in the rising 
communities in order to aryanize them. The Upanishads 
represent the Jnana-kanda of the Vedic religion, and if 
we study all of them, we find that not only the earliest 
ritualism of Yajnas was philosophized upon in the earlier 
Upanishads, but the foundation for a new, and no less 
elaborate, ritualism was fully laid in many of the later 


PREFACE Xix 


Upanishads. For example, we study in these Upanishads 
how the philosophy of Pancha-upasana (fivefold worship 
—viz., the worship of Shiva, Devi, Sun, Ganesha, and 
Vishnu) was developed out of the mystery of the Pranava 
{((Om’). This philosophy cannot be dismissed as a post- 
Buddhistic interpolation, seeing that some features of © 
the same philosophy can be clearly traced even in the 
Brahmanas—e.g., the discourse about the conception of 
Shiva. 

“ Here, therefore, in some of the later Upanishads we 
find recorded the attempts of the pre-Buddhistic recluses 
of the forest to elaborate a post-Vedic ritualism out of 
the doctrine of the Pranava and the Vedic theory of 
Yogic practices. Here in these Upanishads we find how 
the Vija-mantras and the Shatchakra of the Tantras 
were being originally developed, for on the Pranava or 
Udgitha had been founded a special learning and a school 
of philosophy from the very earliest ages, and some of 
the “ spinal’ centres of Yogic meditation had been dwelt 
upon in the earliest Upanishads and corresponding Brah- 
manas. The Upakaranas of Tantric worship—namely, 
such material adjuncts as grass, leaves, water, and so 
on—were most apparently adopted from Vedic worship 
along with their appropriate incantations. So even from 
the Brahmanas and the Upanishads stands out in clear 
relief a system of spiritual discipline—which we would 
unhesitatingly classify as Tantric—having as its core the 
Pancha-upasana, and around it a fair round of rituals 
and rites consisting of Vija-mantras and Vedic incanta- 
tions, proper meditative processes and proper manipula- 
tion of sacred adjuncts of worship adopted from the Vedic 
rites. This may be regarded as the earliest configuration 
which Tantrikism had on the eve of those silent but 
mighty social upheavals through which the aryanization 
of vast and increasing multitudes of new races proceeded 
in pre-Buddhistic India, and which had their culmination 
in the eventful centuries of the Buddhistic coup de grace. 


=o PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


“Now, this pre-Buddhistic Tantrikism, perhaps then 
recognized as the Vedic Pancha-upadsana, could not 
have contributed at all to the creation of a new India, 
had it remained confined completely within the limits 
of monastic sects. But, like Jainism, this Pancha- 
upasana went forth all over the country to bring ultra- 
Vedic communities under its spiritual ministrations. 
ven if we inquire carefully into the social conditions 
obtaining in the strictly Vedic ages, we find that there 
was always an extended wing of the aryanized society 
where the purely Vedic Karma-kanda could not be pro- 
mulgated, but where the moulding influence of Vedic 
ideals worked through the development of suitable spiri- 
tual activities. It is always to the Jnana-kanda and the 
monastic votaries thereof that the Vedic religion owed its 
wonderful expansiveness and its progressive self-adapt- 
ability, and every religious development within the Vedic 
fold, but outside the ritualism of Homa sacrifices, is 
traceable to the spiritual wisdom of the all-renouncing 
forest recluses. This ‘ forest’ wisdom was most forcibly 
brought into requisition when, after the Kurukshetra, a 
new age was dawning with the onrush and upheaval of 
non-Aryan and semi-Aryan races all over Iudia—an echo 
ot which may be found in that story of the Mahabharata, 
where Arjuna fails to use his Gandiva to save his pro- 
tégés from the robbery of the non-Aryan hordes. 

‘“The greatest problem of the pre-Buddhistic ages was 
the aryanization of the new India that rose and surged 
furiously from every side against the fast-dwindling 
centres of the old Vedic orthodoxy struggling hard, but 
in vain, by social enactments to guard its perilous insula- 
tion. But for those religious movements, such as those 
of the Bahgavatas, Shaktas, Sauras, Shaivas, Ganapatyas, 
and Jains, that tackled this problem of aryanization most 
successfully, all that the Vedic orthodoxy stood for in the 
real.sense would have gradually perished without trace. 
These movements, specially the five cults of Vedic wor- 


he as 


f 


f 


PREFACE. xxi 


ship, took up many of the non-Aryan races, and cast their 
life in the mould of the Vedic spiritual ideal, minimizing 
in this way the gulf that existed between them and the 
Vedic orthodoxy, and thereby rendering possible their 
gradual amalgamation. And where this task remained 
unfulfilled owing to the mould proving too narrow still 
to fit into the sort of life which some non-Aryan races or 
communities lived, there it remained for Buddhism to 
solve the problem of aryanizationin due time, But, still, 
we must remember that by the time Buddhism made its 
appearance, the pre-Buddhistic phase of Tantric worship 
had already established itself in India so widely and so 
firmly that, instead of dislodging it by its impetuous 
onset—all the force of which, by the by, was mainly 
spent on the tottering orthodoxy of Vedic ritualism— 
Buddhism was itself swallowed up within three or four 
centuries by this Tantric worship, and then wonderfully 
transformed and ejected on the arena as the Mahayana. 
“ The latest configuration of Tantrikism dates from 
this, its wonderful absorption and assimilation of Bud- 
dhism, and from this important fact it derives some 
important features of its later development. The pro- 
phecy of Gautama Buddha on the eve of investing his 
aunt with Abhisampadé or Sannydsa was fulfilled too 
literally when the proximity and free intercourse between 
the two orders of monks and nuns created in Buddhist 
history that odious problem of their religious life which 
they had to solve by introducing some mysterious rites, 
the philosophy of which, however, can be traced in the 
Vedas. No wonder if the current of such developments 
grew deeper and dirtier in time; only it is alleviating that 
there were cross-currents of constant correction flowing 
from Vedantic sources. Neither is it possible to deny 
that the Buddhistic phase of Tantrikism absorbed into 
the fold of Hinduism non-Aryan conceptions and rites 
of worship far more promiscuously than its pre-Buddhistic 
‘hase; but history proves that the digestive and secretive 


XXil PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


processes, as it were, have ever since been working, tardily 
sometimes, but successfully always, and the Tantras, as 
the marvellous restatement of the Vedas and the Vedanta, 
have at last appeared in the boldest relief through that 
miraculous embodiment of the synthetic spirituality of 
the whole race which we have to recognize to-day by the 
name of Shri Ramakrishna Paramahangsa.”’ 

The writer adds that a “‘ vindication of the Tantras 
redounds directly to the benefit of Hinduism as a whole,” 
for, in his opinion, ‘‘ Tantrikism in its real sense is nothing 
but the Vedic religion struggling with wonderful success 
to reassert itself amidst all those new problems of re- 
ligious life and discipline which later historical events 
and developments thrust upon it.”’ 

Of equal interest with the above is the following extract 
from another review by the well-known Bengali /itterateur 
Sj Panchkori Bandyopadhyaya in the Calcutta journal 
Sdéhitya.1 This article, from which I omit passages 
personal to myself or touching the book there criticized, 
‘ deals with the history of the Tantra in quite recent times 
in Bengal. Sj Panchkori Bandyopadhyaya writes: 

“At one time the Mahdanirvana Tantra had some 
popularity in Bengal. It was printed and published 
under the editorship of Pandit Ananda-chandra Vedanta- 
vagisha, and issued from the Adi-Brahma-Samaj Press. 
Raja Ram Mohan Roy himself was a follower of the 
Tantras, married after the Shaiva form, and used to 
practise the Tantrik worship. His spiritual preceptor, 
Svami Harihardnanda, was well known to be a saint who 
had attained to perfection (siddha-purusha). He en- 
deavoured to establish the Mahanirvana Tantra as the 
Scripture of the Brahma-Samaj. The formula and the 
forms of the Brahma Church are borrowed from the 
initiation into Brahman worship (Brahma-diksha) in this 
Tantra. Thelater Brahmos, somewhat losing themselves 
in their spirit of imitation of Christian rituals, were led 


1 Sraban 1320 (July, August, 1913), translated from the Bengali. — 


ERs EACH: 2 sceere x Xxlll 


to abandon the path shown to them by Raja Ram Mohan; 
but yet even now many among them recite the Hymn to 
the Brahman which occurs in the Mahanirvana Tantra. 
In the first era of the excessive dissemination of English 
culture and training Bengal resounded with opprobrious 
criticisms of the Tantras. No one among the educated 
in Bengal could praise them. Even those who called 
themselves Hindus were unable outwardly to support the 
Tantrik doctrines. But even then there were very great 
Tantrik Sadhakas and men learned in the Tantras, with 
whose help the principles of the Tantras might have 
been explained to the public. But the educated Bengali 
of the age was bewitched by the Christian culture, and 
no one cared to inquire what did or did not exist in their 
paternal heritage; the more especially that any who 
attempted to study the Tantras ran the risk of exposing 
themselves to contumely from the educated community. 
Maharaja Sir Jatindra Mohan Tagore, of sacred name, 
alone published two or three works, with the help of the 
venerable Pandit Jaganmohan Tarkalankara. The Hara- 
tattva-didhiti associated with the name of his father is 
even now acknowledged to be a marvellously glorious pro- 
duction of the genius of the Pandits of Bengal. The 
venerable (vriddha) Pandit Jaganmohana also published 
a commentary on the Mahanirvana Tantra. Even at 
that epoch such study of the Tantras was confined to a 
_certain section of the educated in Bengal. Maharaja 
Sir Jatindra Mohan alone endeavoured to understand 
and appreciate men like Bama Khepa (mad Bama), the 
Naked Father (Nydngta Baba) of Kadda and Svami 
Sadananda. The educated community of Bengal had 
only neglect and contempt for Sadhakas like Bishe Pagla 
(the mad Bishe), and Binu, the Chandala woman. Bengal 
is even now governed by the Tantra; even now the 
Hindus of Bengal receive Tantrik initiation. But the 
glory and the honour which the Tantra had and received 
«in the time of Maharajas Krishna Chandra and Shiva- 


XXIV PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


chandra no longer exist. This is the reason why the 
Tantrik Sadhakas of Bengal are not so well known at 
PLESCU tee eres |p 

‘The special virtue of the Tantra lies in its mode of 
Sadhana. It is neither mere worship (Upasana) nor 
prayer. It is not lamenting or contrition or repentance 
before the Deity. It is the Sadhana which is the union 
of Purusha and Prakriti; the Sadhana which joins the 
male principle and the mother element within the body, 
and strives to make the attributed attributeless. That 
which is in me and that for which I am (this conscious- 
ness is ever present in me) is spread like butter in milk, 
throughout the created world of moving and unmoving 
things, through the gross and the subtle, the conscious 
and unconscious—through all. It is the object of Tantrik 
Sadhana to merge that self-principle (Svarat) into the 
Universal (Virat). This Sadhana is to be performed 
through the awakening of the forces within the body. 
A man is Siddha in this Sadhana when he is able to 
awaken Kundalini and pierce the six Chakras. This is 
not mere ‘ philosophy ’—a mere attempt to ponder upon 
husks of words—but something which is to be done in a 
thoroughly practical manner. The Tantras say: ‘ Begin 
practising under the guidance of a good Guru; if you do 
not obtain favourable results immediately, you can 
freely give it up.’ No other religion dares to give so 
bold a challenge. We believe that the Sadhana of the 
Moslems, and the ‘ esoteric religion’ or secret Sadhana 
(and rituals) of the Christians of the Roman Catholic 
and Greek Churches, is based on this groundwork of the 
Tantras. 

‘“ Wherever there is Sadhana we believe that there is the 
system of the Tantra. While treating of the Tantras 
some time back in the Sahitya, I hinted at this conclusion, 
and I cannot say that the Author Arthur Avalon has not 
noticed it too. For he has expressed his surprise at the 


similarity which exists between the Roman Catholic ands 


PREFACE | XXV. 


the Tantrik mode of Sadhana. The Tantra has made 
the Yoga system of Patanjali easily practicable, and has 
combined with it the Tantrik rituals and the ceremonial 
observances (Karmakanda); that is the reason why the 
Tantrik system of Sadhana has been adopted by all the 
religious sects of India. If this theory of the antiquarians 
—that the Tantra was brought into India from Chaldea 
or Shakadvipa—be correct, then it may also be in- 
ferred that the Tantra passed from Chaldea to Europe. 
The Tantra is to be found in all the strata of Buddhism; 
the Tantrik Sadhana is manifest in Confucianism; and 
Shintoism is but another name of the Tantrik cult. Many 
historians acknowledge that the worship of Shakti, or 
Tantrik Sadhana, which was prevalent in Egypt from 
ancient times, spread into Phoenicia and Greece. Con- 
sequently we may suppose that the influence of the 
Tantras was felt in primitive Christianity. 

“ The Tantra contains nothing like idolatry, or ‘ worship 
of the doll,’ which we, taking the cue from the Christian 
missionaries, nowadays callit.... The Tantra repeatedly 
says that one is to adore the Deity by becoming a Deity 
(Devata) himself. The Ishta-devata is the very self of 
Atman, and not separate from It; He is the receptacle 
of all, yet He is not contained in anything, for He is the 
great witness, the eternal Purusha. The true Tantrik 
worship is the worship in and by the mind. The less 
subtle form of Tantrik worship is that of the Yantra. 
Form is born of the Yantra. The form is made manifest 
by Japa, and awakened by Mantra-shakti. Tens of 
millions of beautiful forms of the Mother bloom forth 
in the heavens of the heart of the Siddha purusha. 
Devotees or aspirants of lower order of competency 
(nimna-adhikari), under the directions of the Guru, adore 
the great Maya by making manifest (to themselves) one 
of Her various forms which can be only seen by Dhyana 
(meditation). That is not mere worship of the idol; if it 
1,ere so, the image would not be thrown into the water; 


: ¢ 
{ 


f 


XXV1 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


no one in that case would be so irreverent as to sink the 
earthen image of the Goddess in the water. The Pri- 
mordial Shakti is to be awakened by Bhava, by Dhyana, 
by Japa, and by the piercing of the six Chakras. She is. 
all-will. No one can say when and how She shows Her- 
self, and to what Sadhaka. We only know that She is, 
and there are Her names and forms. Wonderfully tran-. 
scending is Her form—far beyond the reach of word or 
thought. This has made the Bengali Bhakta (devotee): 
sing this plaintive song: 

‘Hard indeed is it to approach the sea of forms, and to bathe in it, 

Ah me! this my coming is perhaps in vain.’ 

“The Tantra deals with another special subject— 
Mantra Shakti. ... The Tantras say that the soul in 
the body is the very self of the letters—of the Dhvani 
(sound). The Mother, the embodiment of the fifty 
letters (Varna), is present in the various letters in the 
different Chakras. Like the melody which issues when 
the chords of a lute are struck, the Mother who 
moves in the six Chakras, and who is the very self of 
the letters, awakens with a burst of harmony when the 
chords of the letters (Varnas) are struck in their order.. 
Then Siddhi becomes as easy of attainment to the Sad- 
haka as the keeping of an Amalaka fruit in one’s hand 
when She is roused. That is why the great Sadhaka 
Ramaprasada awakened the Mother by the invocation 
—‘ Arise, O Mother’ (jagrihi, janani). That is the: 
reason why the Bhakta sang: 

‘How long wilt thou sleep in the Miladhara, O Mother 
Kulakundalini ?’ 

“The Bodhana (awakening) ceremony in the Durga 
Piija is nothing but the awakening of the Shakti of the 
Mother, the mere rousing of the consciousness of the 
Kundalini. This awakening is performed by Mantra- 
Shakti. The Mantra is nothing but the harmonious 


sound of the lute of the body. When the symphony 1S 
ie 


{ 
\ 


ae = = ae 


OS enema SS EO ——————uaLT. i 


= Sheng 


PREFACE XXVID 


perfect, She who embodies the Worlds (Jaganmayi) 
rouses Herself. When She is awake, it does not take 
long before the union of Shiva and Shakti takes place. 
Do Japa once; do Japa according to rule, looking up to 
the Guru, and the effects of Japa of which we hear in 
the Tantra will prove to be true at every step. Then 
you will understand that the Tantra is not mere trickery, 
or a false weaving out of words. What is wanted is the 
good Guru—Mantra capable of granting Siddhi, and 
application (Sadhana)... . 

“The Tantra accepts the doctrine of rebirth. It does 
not, however, acknowledge it as a mere matter of argu- 
ment or reasoning, but like a geographical map, it makes 
clear the unending chain of existences of the Sadhaka. 
The Tantra has two divisions—the Dharma of Society 
(Samaja), and the Dharma of Spiritual Culture (Sadhana). 
According to the regulation of Samaja-Dharma, it acknow- 
ledges birth and caste. But in Sadhana Dharma there 
is no caste distinction, no Brahmana or Shiidra, no man or 
woman; distinctions between high and low follow success 
in Sadhana and Siddhi. We only find the question of 
fitness or worthiness (Adhikara-tattva )in the Tantra. 
This fitness (Adhikara) is discovered with reference to 
the Sangskaras (tendencies) of past existences; that is 
why the Chandala Pirnananda is a Brahmana, and Kripa- 
siddha the Sadhaka is equal to Sarvvananda; that is 
why Ramaprasdada of the Vaidya caste is fit to be honoured 
even by Brahmanas. The Tantra is to be studied with 
the aid of the teachings of the Guru, for its language is 
technical, and its exposition impossible with a mere 
grammatical knowledge of roots and inflections. The 
Tantra is only a system of Shakti-Sadhana. There are 
rules in it whereby we may draw Shakti from all created 
things. There is nothing to be accepted or rejected in it. 


‘Whatever is helpful for Sadhana is acceptable. This 


Sadhana is decided according to the fitness of the par- 
ticular nerson (Adhikari-anusare). He must follow that 


XXVIIL PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


for which he is fit or worthy. Shakti pervades all, and 
embraces all beings and all things—the inanimate and 
the moving, beasts and birds, men and women. The 
unfolding of the powers (Shakti) enclosed within the body 
of the animal (Jiva) as well as the man is brought about 
only with the help of the tendencies within the body. 
The mode of Sadhana is ascertained with regard to these 
tendencies. The very meaning of Sadhana is unfolding, 
rousing up or awakening of power (Shakti). Thus the 
Shakta obtains power from all actions in the world. The 
Sadhana of the Tantra is not to be measured by the little 
measuring-yard of the well-being or ill-being of your 
community or mine. 


‘Let you understand, and I understand, O my mind ! 
Whether anyone else understands it or not.’ 


“The Tantra has no notion of some separate far-seeing 


God. It preaches no such doctrine in it as that God - 


the Creator rules the Universe from heaven. In the eye 
of the Tantra the body of the Sadhaka is the Universe, 
the autokratos (Atma-shakti) within the body is the 
desired (Ishta), and the ‘to be sought for’ (Sadhya) 
Deity (Devata) of the Sadhaka. The unfolding of this 
self-power is to be brought about by self-realization 
(Atma-darshana), which is to be achieved through 
Sadhana. Whoever realizes his self attains to liberation 
(Mukti). ... The principles of the Tantra must be 
lectured on to the Bengali afresh. If the Mahanirvana 
Tantra. as now translated is spread abroad; if the 
Bengali is once more desirous to hear, that attempt 
might well be undertaken. 

“‘ Our land of Bengal used to be ruled by Tantrik works 
such as the Sharadatilaka, Shaktanandatarangini, Prana- 
toshini, Tantrasdra, etc. Then the Mahanirvana Tantra 
did not have so great an influence. It seems to us that 
considering the form into which, as a result of English 


S 
4 
‘ 
i 


PREFACE XX1X 


education and culture, the mind and intellect of the 
Bengali has been shaped, the Mahanirvana is a proper 
Tantra for the time. Raja Ram Mohan Roy endeavoured 
to encourage regard for the Mahanirvana Tantra because 
he understood this. If the English translation of the 
Mahanirvana Tantra is well received by the thoughtful 
public in Bengal, the study of the original Sanskrit 
work may gradually come into vogue. This much 
hope we may entertain. In fact, the English-educated 
Bengali community is without religion (Dharma) or 
action (Karma), and is devoid of the sense of nation- 
ality (Dharma), and caste. The Mahanirvana Tantra 
alone is fit for the country and the race at the present 
time... . An auspicious opportunity for the English- 
knowing public to understand the Tantra has arrived. 
It is a counsel of the Tantra itself that if you desire to 
renounce anything, renounce it only after a thorough 
acquaintance with it; if you desire to embrace anything 
new, accept it only after a searching inquiry. The 
Tantra embodies the old religion (Dharma) of Bengal. 
Even if it is to be cast away for good, that ought 
only to be done after it has been fully known.... Will 
not the Bengali receive with welcome such a full 
offering (Arghya) made from a foreign land ?”’ 

Whether (as the writer of this article and of the Intro- 
duction which follows contend) the doctrines and ritual 
of orthodox Hinduism are suitable for the India of to-day 
is a matter for its people to decide. I have cited this 
highly interesting appeal to stand on ancient ways be- 
cause, to use the language of a friend of mine, and student 
of the Buddhist Tantra, it is ‘‘ pleine de détails intéres- 
sants et révéle d’une facon trés claire l’état d’esprit 


des Bengalis—je crois que l’on pourrait méme dire des 


 e 


Hindous en général—et leur opinion intime touchant le 
Tantrisme.”’ 
Even if this statement be held to go too far, it has 


XXX PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


certainly a very wide application, and it is for this very 


reason that, in a study of the Indian religions, the Tantra 
is of such importance. 


ARTHUR AVALON: 
KonArak, 
December 31, 1914. 


XXXI1 


CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION . : : : : eect 
PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 
PART II 
CHAPTER XI 
ON MANTRA 5 : é ; ‘ : 1—22 
CHAPTER XII 
LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND .- a) 23-53 
CHAPTER XIII 
ON THE GURU . : . ‘ 54-70 


CHAPTER: XIV 


DISCUSSION UPON, AND SELECTION OF, THE GURU 71—131 


Women Gurus, p. 73. 

Guru Family and Family Guru, p. 75. 
The Guru Profession, p. 88. 

The Characteristics of Disciples, p. 99. 
The Time for Initiation, p. 124. 


& CHAPTER XV 


WORSHIP IN GENERAL - - : - 132—164 


XXXll PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


CHAPTER XVI 


THE PLAY OF GUNAS - - : = 
Adhyatmikism, p. 203. 


CHAPTER XVII 


OUTER WORSHIP - - . . 


CHAPTER XVIIt 
ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP 


CHAPTER AI 


CEREMONIAL WORSHIP ° - . 


Bhava, p. 326. 

Entrance into the House of Worship, p. 346. 
Removal of Obstacles, p. 348. 

Seat, p. 349. 

Rules relating to Direction in Worship, p. 353. 
Time for Worship, p. 355. 

Place for Worship, p. 356. 

Worship of Shiva, p. 357. 

Order of Worship, p. 360. 


CHAPTER XX 


CEREMONIAL WORSHIP—Continued - . 


Purification of the “‘ Five,” p. 362. 

Purification of the “ Twelve,” p. 363. 
Purification of Elements, p. 365. 

NyAsa, p. 373. 

Mental Worship, p. 380. 

Invocation, p. 393. 

Articles used and Acts done in Worship, p. 399. 


PAGES 
165—210 


211I—265 | 


266— 323 


324—301 


362—4006 


rf a 


INTRODUCTION 


VAIDIK AND TANTRIK SYSTEMS OF SPIRITUAL 
SeCor LURE COMPAKED = 


S the Vedas are the Word of Brahma, so are the 
Tantras the Word of Shiva. Both are the Breath 
of the Supreme. It is not to be supposed that the 
Hindus look upon the Vedas or the Tantras in the same 
light as the Christians, Jews, and Muhammadans regard 
the Revelation on Mount Sinai, or the Koran. The 
Hindus have never said that the Godhead, having assumed 
a human form, descended and revealed Divine knowledge 
in human language to His chosen; nor do they hold that 
God or one of His Angels wrote out the Divine Revela- 
tion, and then handed it over to His Rasool. The mean- 
ing of Hindu Revelation is different from that which is 
generally assumed. The Breath of the Supreme is pure 
Divine Ideation, from which is evolved the universe. 
Sitting on his cosmic lotus-throne, alone in the primeval 
darkness of immense space, Hiranyagarbha, the infant 
Brahma, the progenitor of the manifested universe, knew 
not yet what He was nor what He had to do. Long years 
of meditation at length revealed to him the Divine Law, 
which is Divine knowledge (Jnana), thus enabling him 
to evolve the universe. From Brahma to the hosts of 
illuminated Rishis all are Seers or revealers of the arcane 
(immutable knowledge), which, like respiration, comes 
_ forth from the Brahman who is the Supreme at the dawn 
of evolution, and, like inspiration, is withdrawn into Its. 
fathomless Unknowable depths on the eve of dissolution. 
This eternal, immutable Jnana (knowledge) is the 

1 Cc 


li PRINCIPLES OF TANER 


Word of Brahma or Shiva which is revealed to humanity 
in its language by the illumined and, therefore, unerring 
Seers, the Rishis. The Word is the Sound, the Spiritual 
Sound, which is the Vehicle of the manifested Divinity 
the Saguna Brahman, and hence it is that the infallible, 
immutable Gnosis, the Vedas, is given the same name as 
that whichis given to the Divinity Himself—namely, Shab- 
dabrahman (the Sound-Brahman, or Immense Sound). 
Such being Divine Revelation, the Tantra is to the 
human spirit what science is to its intellect. The evolu- 
tion of the human intellect, and the consequent mastery 
of man over phenomenal nature, depend upon the pursuit 
of scientific method, which reveals to man the secrets of 
objective nature, and thereby renders her subservient to 
his purposes. Similarly, the Tantras have a science, a 
methodology, by the pursuit of which the human spirit 
can enter into the secret background of objective nature, 
free itself from the trammels of the senses and of their 
objects, and soar above them until, by gradual evolution, 
it raises itself into that plane of consciousness which is 
unalloyed bliss. At length the embodied spirit (Jiva), 
after its long and tedious journey in eight millions of 
bodies from the mineral to the animal, and many 
thousands of births and re-births in the human vehicle, 
returns to That whence there is no journeying back again. 
It may here be asked, “‘ Why are there the Tantras when 
the Vedas exist to point out to man his several paths to 
Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha,? the fourfold aspira- 
tions of humanity ?’’ No such question arose for the 
thousands of years during which the Tantrik method 


1 See Introduction to A. Avalon’s translation of the Mahanirvana 
Tantra referred to hereafter as ‘‘ See Introduction.” 

[Dharma is the performance of meritorious acts for the enjoyment of 
happiness in Heaven. 

Artha is the acquisition of wealth and of whatever renders life happy 
here below. 

Kama is desire and its fulfilment. 

Moksha is liberation or emancipation from birth and death.—B.K.M.} 


INTRODUCTION lil 


of spiritual culture was, as it is still being followed by 
the Hindus, be they Shaktas, Shaivas, or Vaishnavas, 
Sauras or Ganapatyas. The five classes of Hindu wor- 
shippers must be initiated according to the TAantrik 
method, which has been directed to be followed even in 
the Vaishnavik scripture Shrimadbhagavata (see Ska- 
ndha XI., chap. xxvii.). All the Vija Mantras,? excepting 
the Pranava (aja), are Tantrik, and the greater part of 
the methodology is either Tantrik or mixed—that is, 
Tantrik mixed with Vaidik, pure Vaidik methods having 
long been, and rightly so, abandoned. Under these cir- 
cumstances, the question, thus mooted, savours somewhat 
of scepticism and unbelief in the Hindu Dharma; at any 
rate, it does not lie in the mouth of a Hindu to put such 
a question. Be that as it may, since the question arises 
in these degenerate days, it is but meet that it should Le 
answered. 

The influence of time upon the constitution of man is 
a factor which must always be borne in mind in all con- 
siderations affecting his spiritual progress. The Hindu 
Shastras hold that the ever-recurring four ages (yugas)? 
exert a mighty influence not only upon the human race, 
but upon everything in the universe. Men in the first 
or Satya Yuga had a very long life on earth; their average 
height was that of a giant; they were capable of under- 
going very great physical and mental strain. They were 
truthful, honest, kind, compassionate, unavaricious, pure- 
hearted, and contented. Mendacity, theft, greed, lust, 
anger, vanity, jealousy, oppressiveness, and other faults 
were almost unknown to them. They were a race of 
sturdy, pure-minded humanity, for whom the method of 
spiritual culture was that promulgated in the Vedas. 

1 The five divisions of Hindu worshippers worshipping as their 
Ishtadevata, Shakti, Shiva, Vishnu, the Sun and Ganesha. 

2 [Root-Mantras. <A particular Vija Mantra is a particular sound- 
expression of a particular form of the Deity, so that a Vija Mantra is 


not a combination of letters, but is the Divinity Itself.—B.K.M.] 
3 See Introduction. 


iv PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


They had their passions under their control, which 
enabled them not only to undergo long Brahmacharya? 
and Tapas? in their youth, but to pass cheerfully through 
the most rigid ordeals incumbent upon a Vaidik neophyte. 
Their extraordinary physical and moral stamina enabled 
them to practise Dharana (concentration), Dhyana (medi- 
tation), and Samadhi (union with the Brahman) for a 
great length of time. Their longevity favoured their 
protracted spiritual exercises according to the Vedas , 
and their indomitable will, unyielding fortitude, and 
strong physique permitted the performance of Yajnas* 
extending continuously over a period of twelve years or 
more. It was for the guidance of men of such a constitution 
that the Vaidik method of spiritual self-culture existed. 
Men of the next Yuga (Treta) naturally deteriorated, 
but were still giants compared with the pigmies of the 
Kali (or last and present) yuga. For them the pursuit of 
Vaidik methodology, though comparatively arduous, was 
yet still practicable. Then came the Dvapara Yuga, 
when longevity declined by nine-tenths and stature 
by a half. Men began to fall considerably from the 
moral and spiritual eminence of the former two Yugas. 
Lust, avarice, jealousy, greed, and all other expressions 
of the lower human nature appeared prominently on the 
scene, to degrade man from his high physical and moral 
throne. It was then that Dharma* appreciably declined 
owing to men’s incapacity to pursue and practise Vaidik 
methods. The great Rishis, who are ever solicitous of 
the weal of the human race, perceiving this inevitable 
decline, dived deep into the perennial ocean of eternal 
verities, which is the Vedas, and drew from out of them 
the Smritis® as the methodology which to them seemed 


1 Control of the sexual propensities and over whatever ministers to 
them. 
2 Austerities. Endurance of the pairs of opposites, such as heat 
and cold, light and darkness, happiness and misery, pleasure and pain, 
ere. 3 Sacrifices, etc. See Introduction. 

* Religion Morality. See Introduction. 5 See Introduction. 


INTRODUCTION Vv 


to be adapted to the altered circumstances of the times. 
The Vedas fell into the shade, and in course of time there 
existed very few who could really unravel their mysteries. 
The Puranas were devised partly to preserve Vaidik 
teaching in the form of legends and myths, and partly 
to present a popular exposition of the cardinal truths of 
the Sanatana Dharma (Vaidik cult) to humanity such as 
it then was. 

It must not be thought that the method of self-culture 
prescribed for humanity of the Satya yuga was irksome 
and arduous to them. It was, on the contrary, exactly 
such as to suit the people of those times in view of their 
longevity, and of their physical and moral strength. But 
to the short-lived, debilitated, and morally debased men 
of the Kali Yuga the Vaidik methodology is a mountain- 
load which they have not the capacity to bear. What 
is deemed irksome to us was but natural to them. Let 
us imagine the fate of some weak Indian, were the dumb- 
bells with which Ram Murti, the modern Hercules, exer- 
cises, placed in his hands, and he were bidden to strengthen 
his muscles with them! Such an Indian must have 
instruments suited to his physique for his physical cul- 
ture. Even so is the case with spiritual culture. 
How can people whose average age is about thirty or 
forty years devote two-thirds or more of it to Vaidik 
study and Vaidik practice of Karmakanda,’ maintaining 
strict celibacy and undergoing great privations? They 
have neither the physical nor the moral strength necessary 
forit. And, evenif it be supposed that they could do it in 
some fashion or other, how can they find the time suffi- 
cient to carry on the arduous duties of a Vaidik house- 
holder, then go to the jungles to prepare themselves for 
jndna (knowledge), and finally, when ripe in divine 
wisdom, to assume the Sannydsi’s bowl 2? This, indeed, 


1 Sacrifices and other rites and ceremonies prescribed in the Vedas. 
2 The mendicant ascetic of the fourth or last Vaidik Ashrama. See 
Introduction. 


Vi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


is the Vaidik scheme of life. It was suited to men of 
that fortunate time. As it is now impracticable by the 
average man, it has naturally fallen into disuse. Methods 
of self-culture based on the immutable Vaidik truths are, 
from time to time, either devised by Rishis, such as the 
innumerable Vaidik Shakhas,} most of which are now 
defunct, or are promulgated by Avataras,? or revealed 
by the Godhead in view of the times in which men live. 
The Vedas stand paramount for each one and all of them. 
A method, therefore, which is essentially at variance 
with the Vaidik cardinal truths must be rejected as a 
man-made scheme, unworthy of acceptance. 

Towards the eve of the third Yuga (age) moral and 
spiritual degeneration overtook mankind, and it was then 
that the Divine Mother and the Divine Father revealed 
those Tantras which were suited to the constitution of 
the degenerate race of the man of the Kali Yuga. 

The Divine Mother, the ambrosial milk of whose breast 
ever flows for the succour of her children, thus addressed 
Her Lord: 


QAVANATSA GATT BAT ALT: | 
ufaamafagaar: seat uA CT: | 
AITAUTS STAY FIT HIT WAT il 
MAUIUMAIIIS TAT VATS g | 
feargfang AUTAREALAg Ty 

aa ara afaafa AeTaaucTmMaAy: | 
qafaat: wcfeat aratiaay: faagan: i 
SATA: YRS: UTATY VUTSTST: | 
ZqATTANATT YARRAUTTAT: 1 
Aaa: Aafaays aafaaaaraat: | 
faay aaaratar: awa feara aa 1 


Mahanirvina. First Ullasa. 


1 Branches or recensions of the Vedas. 
2 Descents of the Brahman: when on to the physical plane called 
** incarnations.”’ 


INTRODUCTION Vii 


“Under cyclic influence men will naturally become 
evil-minded and will be addicted to sinful acts. O 
saviour of the humble! O Lord! graciously tell Me the 
means by which men may acquire long life, health, 
strength, vigour, and manliness; by which they may 
become learned and. sound-minded; by which they may 
get effortless welfare; by which they may become en- 
dowed with great strength and intrepidity; by which 
they may become pure-minded, benevolent, obedient to 
parents, faithful to their wives, averse to others’ wives, 
lovers of God and of Guru, supporters of sons and rela- 
tives; by which men may become knowers of Brahman, 
learned in Brahmavidya (the transcendental science), and 
thinkers on Brahman. I pray Thee to tell me the means 
by which their welfare both here and hereafter may be 
secured.” 


The result of this prayer is the statement by Shiva of 
the Tantrik methods of self-culture and of the rules of 
conduct to be pursued by Sadhakas (aspirants). 

Here I may state parenthetically that esoteric Tantrism 
is as ancient as the Vedas. 


Fa Wa vad ast aia ETAT Wa: wa waAl aay 
gam eq eqar: fafufey caata gaara Ufé | 
Shukla Yajurveda, Chap. xix. 


“Oh, Deva Soma! being strengthened and invigo- 
rated by Sura (wine), by thy pure spirit, please the 
Devas; give juicy food to the sacrificer and vigour to 
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas.” 

aaa AfeceE wag | 
Rigveda, 


‘““Worshipping the sun before drinking madira (wine).”’ 


Vill PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


aq faqunqad Garaaaad act | 
Mantra Brahmana. 


“ By which women have been made enjoyable by 
men, and by which water has been transformed into 
wine (for the enjoyment of men),”’ etc. 


aararaya wea AY Ataqa Tha | 
Uaalata alae: watfaa qUeT 
aia y afaetia aatia fafauth g 1 
WAR BITS PHACTAU Ase i 
| Ramayana Uttara Kénda. 
‘Like Indra in the case of (his wife) Shachi, Rama 
Chandra made Sita drink purified honey-made wine. 


Servants brought for Rama Chandra meat and sweet 
fruits.’’ 


BAT AMIAATATaT Bereqat | 
afaat aca a featacaafaat 
datafafaaay aaa ACSTaaa | 
fafauracaren qaratatafteeay tl 
AANAITA WST ATTAIGATS | 


ANA FT AUT AATATY ATA: i 
Mahabharata, Udyoga Parva. 


“Arjuna and Shrikrishna drinking wine made from 
honey and being sweet-scented and garlanded, wearing 
splendid cloths and ornaments, sat on a golden throne 
studded with various jewels. I saw Shrikrishna’s feet 
on Arjuna’s lap, and Arjuna’s feet on Draupadi and 
Satyabhama’s lap.” 


It is only old wine in new jars which is presented by 
Shiva and Bhagavatt to men.of the Kali Yuga. An 
exoteric aspect, however, suitable for the generality of 
folk was added to the already extant esoteric path, which 
only a few are competent to pursue. 

It may be contended that Ishvara Himself, having 


~»» INTRODUCTION 1X 


incarnated towards the end of the Dvapara Yuga for the 
salvation of mankind, there was no need for the Tantras. 
But, in the first place, it must be understood that Ishvara, 
Hari, Shrikrishna, AdyAshakti, and Mahadeva are one 
and the same Supreme, only the vehicle in which the 
Supreme manifests Itself being different. The Tantras 
had already been revealed before the incarnation of 
Skrikrishna. The worship of the Divinity as Mother, 
which is the principal characteristic of the Tantras, had 
prevailed long before the advent of Shrikrishna. The 
Vraja Gopis worshipped Katyayant that they might gain 
Kanai as their husband. Rukmini, having paid homage 
to the Divine Mother, prayed: ‘‘ O Katyadyani! O Maha- 
maya! O Mahayogini! O Lady Paramount of all the 
Lords! O Devi! give me the son of Nanda Gopa as my 
consort; I bow to Thee” (Shrimadbhagavata Sk. X.) 
Besides this, I have already drawn attention to the fact 
that the Shrimadbhagavata prescribes the Tantrik form 
of worship, and that all the Pauranik worships abound in 
Tantrik Mantras. To the mass Shrikrishna taught 
Karma Yoga by Himself, performing various Yajnas ,* 
to the cultured classes He gave the transcendental philo- 
sophy of the Vedas, which is also the rock upon which the 
Tantras are built; and to those who, having emancipated 
themselves from the thraldom of the world and its con- 
ventions, to the God-loving Gopis, He imparted the 
highest mystery of Divine communion, which is likewise 
the highest mystery of Tantrik worship. Shrikrishna 
perpetuated the Tantrik methods of worship and yoga. 
He did not set up a new method, nor did He revive the 
obsolete Vaidik system. 

Mankind in the Kali Yuga have, by the efflux of cyclic 
time, dwindled into pigmies, both physically and spiritu- 
ally, though, by the law of evolution, their intellectual 
capacity has increased. But it is not through intellect 
alone that the Spirit can march on in its career of spiritual! 
progress. A man, however great in intellectual accom- 


1 Sacrifices, etc. See Introduction. 


x PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


plishments, may yet be a child so far as his spiritual 
nature is concerned. To cultivate the spirit, it is neces- 
sary to withdraw-to a considerable extent his mind from 
the senses and the brain, which are the instruments of 
intellectual culture. The Kali Yuga dwarf finds himself 
a prey to the glamour of phenomena and the allurements 
of the senses. Not having spiritual insight, he takes the 
unreal for the real, the evanescent for the eternal, bondage 
for freedom, and identifying himself with the body and 
the lower mind, makes of himself, in spite of his intellec- 
tual acumen, in spite even of his Upanishadik, Vedantik, 
and philosophic lore, a being who, so far as spirituality is 
concerned, is not far above the animal kingdom. Not 
having the strength nor the longevity to pursue the 
arduous Vaidik spiritual training, man would find himself 
in a very precarious state, and the Divine Scheme of 
spiritual evolution would be frustrated, had not provision 
suitable to the times, been made for his salvation. The 
Divine Mother, Adydshakti, in Her unbounded com- 
passion for Her children and in concert with the Divine 
Father, Mahadeva, therefore, revealed the Agamas and 
the Nigamas! for the salvation of humanity. These 
Agamas and Nigamas are known as Tantra. 

There may be souls, few and far between, who having, 
after ages of self-culture, been born in the present Kali 
Yuga with a goodly stock of spiritual training, are fitted 
to continue their evolution according to the Vaidik 
methods. But the vast vessel of humanity as a mass 
would be rudderless to pass safely through the ocean of 
the world were it not for the Tantra which is revealed 
towards the dawn of every Kali Yuga. The Tantrik 
methodology of spiritual self-culture has been followed 
and practised these thousands of years, and the country, 
from end to end, is permeated with it. But it is to be 
deplored that, owing to English education, which has 


1 As to the technical meaning of these terms, see Introduction to 
Part I., “‘ Principles of Tantra.” 


INTRODUCTION X1 


given a great impetus to intellectua] culture, and has 
brought philosophy within the reach of all, the aspirations 
of many who are spiritually-minded far exceed their 
spiritual capacity. Aspiring thus to what they do not 
deserve, they become, oftener than not, disappointed and 
dejected. 

The great merit of the Tantra is its all-comprehensive- 
ness. Humanity, in each of its phases and condition, 
has been provided with a system of culture suited to 
the nature and capacity of each individual. The milk 
of compassion of Jagadamba, the Divine Mother, flows 
perpetually and equally to every one of Her children, 
that they may drink of it and, acquiring thereby spiritual 
strength, may return to Her loving lap. She does not 
exact from Her weak and short-lived children of the Kali 
Yuga Jong and trying Brahmacharya’ and austerity to 
show them the way to Her Lotus Feet. Enervating is 
the influence of the Kali Yuga, but, in inverse ratio, high 
is the potency of the medicament She has prescribed for 
Her children. The low and the high, all are equally 
taken care of, and, for all, the path has been made smooth 
and straight. | . 

The doctrine of the Tantras, whilst recognizing Sang- 
khya-Patanjala, is Vedantik Advaitavada.. It reconciles 
duality (Dvaita) with unity (Advaita), the haven into 
which the wandering ego will at last find its eternal rest 
after it has worked out its Karma. The Advaita philo- 
sophy and the method of self-culture founded upon it, 
have their origin in the Vedas. It has, in modern times, 
been expounded by Shrimat Shangkaracharya; at any 
rate, its interpretation by Shangkaracharya has obtained 
firm hold in many men’s minds, and is regarded by them 
as infallible. There is another interpretation of Ad- 
vaitism by Ramanuja, which has also a large following 
in many parts of India. Both Shangkara and Ramanuja 
are human expounders of the Vaidik law, and both are 


1 See ante, p. iv, n. I. 


Xl PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


great souls of the Kali Yuga, but not Rishis. Shangkara’s 
transcendental philosophy advocates knowledge (jnana); 
Ramdanuja’s Vedantism champions devotion (bhakti) as 
the means to salvation. But both agree in having a 
pessimistic standpoint. The world, they maintain, has 
nothing in it which may help a man’s spiritual progress. It 
is darkness, misery, and the arch-enemy, which, by heavy 
chains, binds down man. The aspirant to spiritual 
culture must shun it as he would the python who might 
strangle him. All the faculties of the brain-mind have 
to be brought into requisition to combat the world, both 
subjective and objective, and thus to free the aspirant 
from the coils of the enemy. By elaborate processes of 
discrimination (viveka) the world must be negatived; 
and renunciation of everything appertaining to it crowns 
the efforts of the aspirant to knowledge (jnana). Even 
if the world were really what it is dismally painted to be, 
how many among all its millions can fight such a battle 
and emerge the conqueror? Such a system of spiritual 
culture is bound to fail, and to render religion an impossi- 
bility for the mass of the people. They, no doubt, have 
been provided with an elementary system of religion, 
but the root-idea is there, and fighting nature out is the 
watchword everywhere. This impotent militant spirit 
has wrought havoc in the Hindu mind, and rendered it a 
slave to the very world which it has been taught to 
vanquish. There have, certainly, been great souls who, 
after a culture extending over many births and rebirths, 
have at last succeeded in attaining the spiritual heights. 
But such souls are but few among many millions. “ Sar. 
vam khalvidam Brahma ” (Verily all this is Brahman) is 
the saying of the Veda and Vedanta. The neophyte 
who had been taught to hate the world as Kakabishtha 
(excrement of the crow), at length, and after ages of 
Sadhana, finds it to be nothing but Brahman. The 
Kakabishtha then reveals itself to him in all the glory of 
Divine effulgence. 


INTRODUCTION Xi 


The Tantras prescribe a very different method of self- 
culture. .Here the Great God (Maha Deva) Himself is 
the expounder of the Law—that is, the Divine knowledge 
—which He revealed at the dawn of creation in His 
aspect as Brahma. 

“ The hall of sorrow,” “ the vale of tears,’ “‘ the hall of 
torments,’’ and other such names by which schools of 
transcendental philosophy disparage the world, have no 
placein the Tantra. The Tantra is the Breath of Divinity, 
and the world is evolved from that Breath. The Divine 
Mother (call Her Father or Father-Mother as you choose) 
is in every molecule, in every atom, in all things which 
constitute the world. In fact, She is the causeless Cause 
of whatever is; She is the manifested Brahman. The 
world is the playground (Lilakshetra) of the All-blissful 
Anandamayi. The world is neither an illusion nor a 
non-reality ; nor is it under the government of the Ruler 
of Hell, whose autocratic tyranny drives sensible men first 
to raise the standard of revolt, and then, when they find 
no King great enough to drive the tyrant off, sends them 
in a stampede to the unknown and unknowable kingdom 
of an Abstraction, which is absolute existence, absolute 
knowledge, and absolute bliss. But, to their misfortune 
and discomfiture, they come to realize that the ramparts 
and battlements and fortifications of the kingdom of the 
supposed Archdevil are impregnable; that, as far as their 
imagination can extend, his empire also extends; and 
that their own selves—that is, their minds and what- 
ever constitutes their individual selves—is of the same 
material as that with which the alleged nefarious world 
is constituted. Having learnt this sad truth at last, many 
Sadhakas of other schools fall precipitately from the height 
of their hopes and aspirations. Discomfited, dejected, 
and crest-fallen, they can neither seek the supreme object 
of life (Paramartha) nor reconcile themselves to the world, 
in which they have to live not only during their present 
lives but in many lives yet to come. This dismal 


xiv PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA | 


philosophy is not merely the heirloom of Sadhakas. It 
has been almost indelibly impressed upon the conscious- 
ness of the ordinary run of men, with the result that the 
Hindus are in general pessimists and fatalists in high 
degree. oy 

The Tantrik Sadhaka,.by.his method of worship, is led 
from the outset to feel, and then by higher processes of 
self-culture to realize, the All-blissful Mother in the un1i- 
verse—nay, to regard the universe as the Mother Herself. 
Every man and every woman is to him the Mother Her- 
self; every living object is to him an object of obeisance. 
His thought and conduct are made to flow in that all- 
Joving and all-reverencing channel. Training his mind 
thus, the Sadhaka, far from finding the world to be a vale 
of tears, of sorrow, and of suffering, views it as the very 
Kashmir of subjective and objective beauty. Every 
man and woman—nay, all living things—are glowing 
with Divinity. This state of mind not only quenches the 
thirst of his lower nature, but spiritualizes its animal 
tendencies; not only does it buoy him up with fresh 
energy to pursue the Path, but he attains liberation 
(Mukti), eating the sweet fruit of the world, of which the 
Sadhakas of other schools are deprived. On the other 
hand, the man of the world who professes Tantrism has 
every faith in the reality of the world. To him it is not 
an illusion nor an evil, and therefore he exerts his utmost 
to make it the happy lap of the Mother, which it really is. 

The Tantrik Path, as I have already said, is smooth 
and straight. It is fitted to the constitution of the Kali 
Yuga man. The method of Tantrik self-culture has the 
supreme merit of accomplishing within a short time what 
other methods can hardly accomplish within a life. This 
is testified to by numberless adepts, ancient and modern. 
And it is for this that Pauraniks have largely drawn upon 
it. It is also said that Shangkaracharya’s Yoga system 
owes much to Tantrism. The Mahayana Buddhistic 
system is saturated with it. Nagarjuna, the great 


INTRODUCTION XV 


Buddhistik Adhat, who flourished about seven hundred 
years ago, was a great Tantrik yogi and alchemist, whose 
Baudha-Tantrik works are the authority of Northern 
Buddhism. 

The Tantra is non-sectarian. It provides methods of 
self-culture to all schools of Sadhakas, be they Shaktas, 
Shaivas, Sauras, Ganapatyas, or Vaishnavas, and holds 
that the Sadhana of the Divine, as the All-blissful Mother, 
is the easiest and straightest Path. 

The Tantra is the only Divine Revelation which throws 
open the gates of arcane nature to those who have the 
courage to peer into it. Man, in his onward Path, must 
dive deep into nature’s heart to discover what he, and the 
universe of which he is a component part, is. The 
method of spiritual self-culture leads him, step by step, 
to an acquaintance with nature’s supersensuous beings, 
high and low, and teaches him how to utilize the services 
of the high, and to ward off the evil influences of the low. 
This knowledge is of essential importance to the sojourner 
on the Path; for the evil spirits throw every manner of 
obstacles to impede his march and encompass his ruin; 
whereas the good spirits would gladly help him on if he 
but knew how to obtain their help. Woe to the aspirer 
who, having made the acquaintance of the lower spirits, 
abandons his true end and aim, and utilizes their services 
for unlawful worldly purposes. Such are the black magic- 
ians whose lot is miserable both here and hereafter. 

Self-culture, according to the Tantrik method, develops 
the Will and endows the Sadhaka with some lower powers 
(Siddhis) within a comparatively short time. Those who 
are charmed with those powers and are tempted to use them 
are like to share the same fate with the black magicians. 
The end and aim of high Tantrik Sadhana is the realiza- 
tion of the Advaita Tattva—the attainment of Kaivalya 
Mukti;* and it is to this end that the true Sadhaka conse- 
crates not only his present life, but a succession of lives 


1 Union with the Brahman. 


xvi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


extending over many ages. By intense Sadhana’ he has 
first to free himself from the chain of Karma,? which 
fastens him down to the three Lokas, Bhuh, Bhuvah, and 
Svah.* When past this triad of the Karmik chain, his on- 
ward progress continues until he can “ pierce through ”’ the 
Spiritual Sun (the manifested Brahman), and merge him- 
self with the Supreme. There must, indeed, be very few, 
even throughout countless periods of time, who have 
attained this liberation (Mukti) upon earth. But 
Sadhakas who devotedly and perseveringly pursue the 
path become Devas, Lords of Manvantaras,4 Lokapalas 
(planetary Lords), and Dikpdalas (Lords of space), and the 
like, and rise higher and higher until their work is ended. 
There are others who, refusing liberation, come down 
from time to time as Saviours of mankind. 

‘The investigations of the Tantrik into the inner temple 
of nature reveal to him many secrets both of an objective 
and subjective nature, including those of the human 
mechanism. It is thus that he is a theurgist and thauma- 
turgist, alchemist, herbalist, metallurgist, physician, 
astrologer, and astronomer. The Tantrik’s alchemy 
crossed the ocean and reached Europe; his chemistry 
discovered ages ago many truths, some of which have 
dawned upon European scientists within but recent 
times. He was the first in the world to use mercury, 
snake poison, and the metals as medicine. His system of 
medicine has superseded that of the Ayurveda. His 
science of Breath is still a mystery to the Europeans. 
Last, though not the least, there is what may be called 
his science of psycho-physical culture, which renders the 
physical body obedient to the will, and thus by certain 
postures not only enables him to ward off and cure 
cliseases, but to control the mind. The Tantra, in fine, 
is from its very nature an Encyclopedic science. It is 


1 Practise. See Introduction. 2 See Introduction. 
3 The three worlds—Earth, the atmospheric and celestial planes. 
4 A period of time. See Introduction. 


INTRODUCTION XVli 


practical, and has no concern with wordy warfare. It 
lights the torch and shows the way, step by step, until 
the sojourner comes to the end of his journey, realizing 
the universe in the Brahman and the Brahman in the 
universe. So has it been said: 


waaay faqtzaraa | 
a ag fafagfa eeafa i 
fafacqfaasatfasaaaten: i 
Ud Ud NaaAalaeta |i 


“All other Shastras are merely entertaining; they can 
show nothing on earth. But the medical science, 
astrology, and Tantra prove themselves at every step.” 


SHAKTI 


In the Sanskrit language the word Shakti is feminine. 
It must not, therefore, be supposed that that which is 
denoted by it is feminine. There is no word in the 
English language which conveys the exact meaning of 
the word Shakti as it is used in the Hindu Spiritual 
Science. It is neither force nor energy of physical 
science. The word Power may be used to designate it. 

Power or Shakti is the root of all existence. It is from 
Shakti that universes are evolved; it is by Shakti that 
they are sustained; and it is into Shakti that they are 
finally resolved. It is the same as Parabrahman. Para- 
brahman is Existence (Sat), Consciousness (Chit), and 
Bliss (Ananda). By Shakti is denoted exactly these three 
aspects in the One without a second. Chit is the Power, 
and the two other aspects go along with it; for without 
consciousness there would be neither existence or happi- 
ness. Shakti, then, is essentially absolute Satchit- 
ananda. 

Within, so to say, the womb of Shakti, is Maya or 
Prakriti, the matrix of the universe which, during cosmic 

d 


XVill PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


inaction or Mahapralaya is potential and latent, even 
as fire is latent within wood. Maya or Prakriti is not 
a non-reality, nor a state of equilibrium of certain things; 
nor is it asomething-nothing, something little (yatkinchit), 
an idea (bhava). It is as immutable and permanent as 
the triple aspects already mentioned. It enfolds, to use 
chemical phraseology, a triad of Gunas or Reals, which, 
mutating and combining, make up the appearance of the 
ever-changing world, and which, in Mahapralaya, are 
withdrawn within the bosom from whence they emerged. 
Maya or Prakriti, it must be understood, is ever in associa- 
tion with Chit, be it in Mahapralaya or in evolution; for 
there is only One without a second, and Prakriti must be 
an inseparable part or power of It. Parabrahman thus 
has a quadruple aspect, and is symbolized in the Tantra 
by a grain of gram (Chanaka). As a grain of gram is 
a bi-valvular unity,t enveloped by an outer skin, so is 
Shakti a Unity having the characteristic of a duality 
when viewed through the veil of Prakriti. This duality is 
neither Jiva nor Atma, nor matter and spirit, but a 
polarity. From the fathomless womb of Parabrahman 
or Shakti is evolved the universe, and into that womb it 
is withdrawn when the hour for final dissolution strikes. 
Shakti is, therefore, both centrifugal and centripetal 
Power. Itis male-female, and therefore expressed by ene 
word Brahman, in the neuter gender. 

The notion seems to prevail that what the Tantriks 
posit by Shakti is dead matter, Prakriti. Nothing can 
be farther from this unwarrantable conclusion. Shakti, 
as that which is potential, is much more expressive than 
Brahman considered as something neutral. Prakriti, the 
matrix of the universe of names and forms, is the veil 
through which alone it is possible to approach the Sat- 
chit-ananda Brahman by the human consciousness. It is. 
the destiny of human consciousness, which is relative, 
to merge itself into the one true Consciousness, which is. 


1 A grain of gram contains within one enfolding sheath two halves. 


INTRODUCTION X1X 


absolute, and thus to fulfil the end and aim of life. The 
Tantra, therefore, along with all other spiritual sciences, 
worships the Absolute through that in which It is mani. 
fested. 

The expression “‘ Veil of Prakriti’’ is, however, not an 
appropriate one. It is borrowed from the Theosophical 
literature. Chit or Shakti is self-manifesting. But im- 
mutable, undifferentiated Prakriti is the only ground in 
which it can manifest itself so as to be cognizable to the 
self, be it of man or of Devata. Prakriti, therefore, is 
not a “ Veil,”’ but, on the other hand, is Shakti itself in 
Evolution. When the first hour strikes for the com- 
mencement of the cosmic play (Jagat Lila), Prakriti 
becomes the Conscious Shakti, the Unmanifested Mani- 
fest, the First Cause, the Supreme Power, the Sun of all 
suns, from which universes are to evolve. It is the 
Karana Deha (causal body) of Chit-shakti. It is im- 
personal, all-pervading, immutable, and Chit itself. It 
is the God of all Gods; the object of the highest form ol 
human worship—nay, the object of the worship of all 
the Gods, including Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara. 
It is symbolized in the Tantra by a Vindu or dot (.), and 
expressed in human language by the word “ Chidghana ’’* 
(fag ). 

Vindu or Shakti is neither male nor female, but par- 
takes of the characteristics of both. In its Advaita, or 
non-dual nature, is a dual characteristic, a polarity, as I 
have already said, which may be expressed by the terms 
“positive ’’ and “ negative,’’ and which is denominated 
in the Tantra by Shiva and Shakti; pum (male), and 
stri (female); Sun and Moon; the male principle being 
Shiva, and the female principle being Shakti or Mahakali 
Mahakala (Shrikrishna) is as much Shakti as Mahakali, 
the one being the female, and the other the male aspect 
of the selfsame Shakti. 

The Tantra is, therefore, all-comprehensive and uon- 


, 


1 That is, a thickened mass of chit or consciousness. 


XX PRINCIPLES OF IANTRE 


sectarian. It enjoins the worship of Shakti—that without 
which nothing can live and move and have its being. 
The worship of Vishnu is as much a part of it as is the 
worship of Kali, although the worship of the latter is 
held to be comparatively easy, and more suited to the 
present race of men for reasons which I shall have occasion 
to state later. 

It must not be thought that, although Prakriti becomes 
conscious Shakti in manifestation, it is in any of its forms 
the ultimate object of worship. Worship, however, 
implies a duality. And although essentially the wor- 
shipper and the worshipped are the same—and it is the 
realization of this Unity which is the end and aim of 
worship—yet Shakti in manifestation cannot but be the 
object of worship so long as the Ego has its individuality, 
which is made of the stuff of Prakriti. It is, therefore, 
that in spiritual culture the Tantra postulates two 
Shaktis—Vachaka Shakti is manifested Chit in Prakriti, 
and Vachya Shakti is Chit itself, which is the goal to be 
attuned. It is by the realization of Vachaka Shakti 
that the Vachya Shakti can be attained. The Vachya 
Shakti is formless, and cannot, therefore, be the object 
of any form of Upasana (worship) or yoga practice. 

The manifested Shakti is the Power which is the object 
of adoration, prayer, and praise. So long as the human 
Soul remains such, it cannot go beyond. But when the 
Soul—that is, the causal body or Karana Sharira—is cast 
off, the duality for ever disappears, and the self is merged 
into that which is Shakti in itself. 

By whatever name it may be, whether Krishna, Vishnu, 
Shiva, Kali, Durga, Ganapati, or Surya, It is the mani- 
fested Shakti, the Saguna Brahman. But there are 
certain sects of worshippers who assign an inferior position 
to Shakti, and regard it as a female power only, subordi- 
nate to the God they worship. That the God they wor- 
ship is Shakti as well is ignored by them. In this they 
take an anthropomorphic view of the Supreme, who, 


INTRODUCTION Xx1 


according to them, is male (Shaktiman), and Shakti (his 
Consort) is his inferior, like some conceptions of an 
Oriental wife. The Tantra repudiates this view, and 
regards both Shaktiman and Shakti as the male and 
female aspects of the one Shakti. Where would be 
Vishnu or Krishna without Shakti (Power)? Bereft of 
Shakti, the Vehicle, designated as Krishna or Vishnu, 
and all other Vehicles from the highest God to the lowest 
atom, would be but a dead inert mass. It is Shakti 
which is life, intelligence, and consciousness. No state 
of existence can be superior to it. Both these aspects of 
Shakti are inseparable, and the one is not inferior to the 
other, any more than the negative pole of electricity can 
be considered to be subordinate to the positive. Hence 
it is that all the Gods are associated with Goddesses: 
hence it is that Rama has his Sita, Krishna has his Radha, 
and Mahakala is accompanied by Mahakali. 

It is Shakti (Power) which creates, Shakti which sus- 
tains, and Shakti which withdraws into Her fathom'ess 
womb innumerable worlds in infinite space. Indeed, She 
is space itself, and every being therein. 

Physical science is acquainted with one of Her physical 
powers, and that by its abnormal manifestations only; 
for the nature of electric force is unknown to the scientist. 
Science used to distinguish force and matter as two 
different things; but the trend of scientific thought seents 
to have undergone in this respect a revolution. The 
theory is now put forward that matter is a modification 
of force. Spiritual science holds exactly a similar view, 
but on a very broad line of thought, and maintains that 
from Shakti (Power) everything emanates, first in the 
spiritual, then in the celestial, and then in the terrestrial 
Kosmogenesis. 

It is peculiar to the Universal Mother that, unlike 
human and animal mothers, She devours and then dis- 
gorges Her offspring. Seated in the lotus forest, which 
floats in the water of space, She is perpetually devouring 


XSi PRINCIPLES OF DANG 


and disgorging the Elephant (the Kosmos). When She 
disgorges and nourishes She is the most beautiful of the 
beautiful; Her beauty enchants even the Gods; She is 
then Bhuvaneshvari and Bhuvanamohini. It is the 
descent of Spirit into matter. When She devours Her 
offspring with Her thousand mighty jaws, She is Maha- 
kali; Her transcendental beauty is realizable only by the 
wise and the devotee. Westerners and Hindus demoral- 
ized by Western civilization have the profanation to call 
this Her aspect as ugly and terrible. Yes, She is terrible 
to the earth-bound soul. But to the pilgrim on the path 
of return—the path of Nivritti—the Majesty of Her 
beauty and the message of peace and comfort in Her 
right hand are ineffable. It was this stupendous Majesty 
which the Lord Shrikrishna (who is the same as Kali) 
exhibited to His dear disciple Arjuna, when the latter 
entreated Him to appear before him in His godly form. 
Arjuna had entreated Him thus: ‘ O Yogi, how should 
I contemplate Thee so as to know Thee? O Bhagavan! 
in what object should I contemplate Thee ?”? The Lord 
then enumerated some of His Vibhutis (distinguishing 
qualities) which yet could not satisfy the disciple; for 
they were too abstract for contemplation and devotion. 
The Bhakta (devotee) must have something tangible to 
fix his mind upon. Therefore he exhorted the best of 
Purushas to show him his Divine Ripa (Form). Endow- 
ing him with spiritual vision, the Lord showed him the 
Ripa with which he had to commune. Shangkara- 
charya, in his commentary, describes this Ripa as en- 
dowed with Knowledge (jndna), Godly Qualities (aish- 
varya), Shakti, Strength, Virility (virya), and Effulgence 
(tejas). O Sddhaka of the Vaishnava school! is this 
Ripa ugly and hideous ? O devotee! do not be deluded 
by the glamour of earthly beauty; feast your spiritual 
eye with the Majesty of Divine grandeur and beauty. 
She is Maya, because Maya is a part of Her nature; 
she is Avidya because She binds; She is Mahamayaé 


INTRODUCTION sete 


because She dominates Maya; She is Vidya because She 
holds the torch which illumines the Path of return; She 
is Mahavidya because She is the Mother in whose sweet 
and soothing. bosom the wayworn pilgrim finds his eternal 
Fest: 

The Divine Mother is thus the cause both of bondage 
as well as of liberation. She is in all things, and all . 
things are in Her. She is consciousness; She is intelli- 
gence; She is sleep; She is wakefulness; She is hunger; 
She is thirst; She is shadow; She is substance; She is 
power; She is impotence; She is mercy; She is compas- 
sion; She is bashfulness; She is peace; She is esteem; 
She is beauty; She is ugliness; She is prosperity; She is 
adversity ; She is memory; She is truth; She is falsehood; 
She is good; She is evil; She is avarice; She is content- 
ment; She is mother; She is error; She is rectitude; She 
is illusion; She is reality; She is the power of the senses; 
She is ignorance; She is knowledge; She is the mysterious 
dispenser of a double force, from one of which surges 
forth the universe, and the other it is which withdraws 
it; She is the tide and ebb, the inspiration and respiration, 
the diastole and systole of the universe. Both centrifugal 
and centripetal forces are in Her. The Human Ego has 
the privilege to choose either of these spiritual forces to 
work cut its destiny: by the one it is thrown into the 
eddy of Pravritti (desire), to be whirled round and round 
until the great dissolution (Mahapralaya); the other girts 
it up with that power and energy which will enable it 
to strike through the eddy and reach the serene centre of 
the Mother’s bosom. 

The three aspects of Shakti, which constitute the 
Trinity of the Hindus, are Volition (ichchhashakti), 
Administration (k-iyadshakti), and Cognition (jnana- 
shakti). These are the three Powers which direct the 
evolution, the sustentation, and the involution of the 
Universe. The Nirvana Tantra says: “‘In the region of 
Truth, the Formless and Resplendent Pervader of the 


XXIV PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


universe, casting off the covering of Maya, became 
divided into two. The idea of creation arises from the 
division of Shiva and Shakti, oh Parvati! First of all 
was born the son named Brahma. Said Kalika: Hear 
me, O son! O Hero! take care to marry. Hearing this, 
Brahma then said: There is no Mother other than Thee; 
O beautiful one, give me a Shakti (wife). Hearing this, 
the Mother of the universe, from Her own body, gave him 
a charming wife, who is the second Mahavidya, the great 
Power named Savitri. Associate thyself with Her, and 
publish the Veda (Divine Knowledge), and become the 
Creator of the universe with ease. The second son born 
was Vishnu, vehicled by Sattva guna. Said Kalika: 
Hear me, O Son! O Hero! take care to marry, Said 
Vishnu: Thy sight renders man passionless. O Mother, 
O Consort of Shiva! How can I marry unless Thou 
givest me a fair maiden for wife? The Mother, from 
Her own body, gave him a wife. O Goddess! She is the 
Vaishnavi Mahavidya, Shrividya. With her help Vishnu 
sustains the universe. The third son begotten was the 
great Yogi Sadashiva. Seeing him Mahakali beamed 
with joy. O Son, great Yogi! give heed to what I say. 
Who is there a male like thee, and who is there a female 
likeme? Therefore, O Shiva! forthwith marry me. Sada- 
shiva said: O Mother! Thou hast verily said the truth; 
there is none who charms like Thee. There is no Purusha 
like myself. But I cannot marry Thee in Thy present 
body. If Thou art kind to me, change Thy body. 
Instantaneously Mahakali gave him Bhuvaneshvari.”’ 

The Kubjika Tantra says: “‘ Brahmani creates, surely 
not Brahma, therefore Brahma is but a Preta,’’! and so on 
with regard to Vishnu and Shiva. Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Shiva are quite powerless to discharge their respective 
functions without Shakti or Power. 


1 Literally a disembodied spirit before the performance of the 
obsequial rites. Here used in the sense of an inert corpse, for He can 
do nothing without the vivifying influence of Shakti. 


INTRODUCTION XXV 


The Devibhagavata (Skandha ITT.) relates that Brahma 
having asked Adydashakti as to whether She was male or 
female, the Divine Mother thus explained Herself: 


azag a Heisfa aieq aaa FI 
Gat areas arat Aer fa afafaaara i 
MagiCat aa al az afaara fe a: | 
faye: 4 q WaT qa ATA ATT: 
waaatfigata 4 aa faa aaa | 
aaa WAU ATT VAITY HAA lt 
AMA TAMN TAG ATA sara Far 
Rraatevay at ufafaad aarazay: i 
Uz squats F BATE Waa | 
euigulanersa afaa afa agar | 
Ale Al A UATE 4 Hla Agdaa | 

aa ala fane: ara afeaaicsd faa ga: | 


“That Male (Purusha) and Myseif are ever the same. 
There is no difference between Himand Me. The Purusha 
is what I am; I am what the Purusha is. Difference 
arises only from ignorance. _ He who is intelligent and 
is free from the bondage of the world can know our subtle 
difference; there is no doubt about this. The one with- 
out a second, perennial Brahman becomes dual at the 
time of creation. As a single lamp becomes dual by 
difference of Upadhi (condition), as a single face becomes 
dual in the form of an image in a mirror, as a single body 
appears in dual form with its shadow, even so our images 
are many owing to the difference of minds (which are 
made up of Maya). O Aja (unborn), for the purpose of 
creation the difference arises at the time of creation. 
It is only the difference between the seen and the unseen. 
At the time of final dissolution I am neither male nor 
female nor neuter. The difference (male and female) is 
imagined only at the time of creation.” 


XXVi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


To form a concept of the Godhead one worships, the 
idea of Shakti or Power is for the devotee a surer guide 
than the nebulous idea of Atma (spirit). It is very hard 
for those who have no faith in Shakti to trace the “ one 
without a second ” through the physical to the spiritual 
plane of existence, there being no appreciable link to 
chain the planes together. But a worshipper of Shakti 
need contend with no such difficulty. In all the planes 
of existence he finds the one power all-pervading. It is 
therefore laid down in the Tantras: 


ufaata faut @fa aim: erate aaa 


“© Devi! without a knowledge of Shakti, Mukti 
(liberation) is mere mockery.” 


THE SOUNDEESS SOU E. 


The second bell of cosmic evolution tolls. A flutter, a 
vibration thrills the triple Gunas in the womb of Shakti. 
Rajas, the active guna, after its long Pralayik slumber,? 
receives an impulse towards awaking. Immediately 
as its eyes open a bifurcation takes place in Shakti, 
resulting in what all religions designate the Verbum, 
the Shabdabrahman—the immense, all-pervasive, all- 
comprehensive, unbroken, undifferentiated Sound Spiri- 
tual. One aspect of Shabdabrahman is Nada, and 
another aspect is Vindu. As Nada She is the Mother, 
and as Vindu He is the Father, of the universe. They 
are an inseparable twain, ever in association in cosmic 
evolution. Shabdabrahman is the God, the Lord, the 
Mother, the Word, the object of worship of all sentient 
beings. 

The first manifestation of Shakti in the Spiritual plane is 
«Sound,”’ which is undifferentiated intelligent Akasha,? 
1 That is, without such knowledge liberation cannot be attained. 

2 That is, slumber during dissolution (pralaya). 


3 “ Ether,” the quality of which is sound, but, as hereafter explained, 
not the ether of the elements (mahdbhuta). 


INTRODUCTION XXV1l 


the Chidakasha* of philosophy, the Saguna Brahman of 
religion. 

This Sound, the causeless cause of manifold universes, 
must not be confused with the sound with which we are 
familiar, and which we have been taught to regard as the 
result of vibrations in molecules of matter. It is not the 
Karyakasha or atomic Akasha of philosophy, which is 
integrated and limited and evolved from Tamasik Ahan- 
gkara.2 Nor is it a quality of such Akasha. It is Chit 
Shakti vehicled by undifferentiated Prakriti—the mani- 
fested Godhead, uncreate, unborn, and eternal. Shabda- 
brahman is consciousness and intelligence, both cosmic 
and individual. It is the dual Shakti in unity, insepa- 
rately associated, though functioning in different ways. 

Duality in unity is the root principle of the Tantra. 
This duality may, for want of a better expression, be 
called a “ polarity.” The Vaishnavas have adopted this 
idea in their Krishna and Radha, Hari and Lakshmi. 
The Hindu Shastras hold that the universe has been 
evolved from the One—* without a second ’’—Cause, 
and that that Cause is both immanent and transcendent. 
The microcosm is in miniature what the macrocosm is. 
Evolution proceeds from the subtle to the gross. We 
find in the great physical force a duality of poles, which 
when brought in mutual contact produces a magnetic 
current. In the realms of atoms and molecules the same 
force has the aspects of attraction and repulsion which 
make the existence of material objects possible. In 
living mechanisms the heart and the Jungs are worked by 
a dual force which draws in and throws off blood and 
air, which render organized life possible. The fluid space 
of the earth is dominated by a similar dual force, which 
rhythmically causes both ebb and tide. We thus find 


1 Literally, ‘‘ ether consciousness,’”’ which is explained post. 

2 Ahangkara or egoity is threefold, according as one or other of the 
gunas of Prakriti predominate in it. TAamasika Ahangkdara is therefore 
that form of this tattva in which the inert Tamas guna predominates. 


XXVIll PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


that what little we know of force on the physical plane 
gives countenance to the theory of duality in unity. 

But the most extraordinary fact is the duality of all 
organized structures. Take, for instance, the structure 
of man. It is a duplex structure. ‘‘ Man is not formed,” 
to quote the learned author of ‘‘ The Mechanism of Man,” 
“as one whole, but of two distinct halves joined together. 
He has two sets of bones, muscles, and nerves, and two 
brains. True there is but one liver, stomach, and in- 
testine. This at first sight seems to be in conflict with 
the theory. But further examination shows the internal 
structure to be substantially the same as the external 
frame, the only difference being that the position is 
reversed, and instead of the point of junction being side 
by side, as with the framework of bone and its appendant 
muscles, it is, from the necessity of its position within the 
body and the requirement of but one heart, one liver, 
etc., only a junction of two halves before and behind. 
Tracing these internal parts from their point of union 
with the external frame at the neck, it will be seen at 
once that one-half of the whole springs from one side 
of the body, and the other half from the other side, and 
that they unite at a central line throughout, precisely as 
the two halves of the external frame are united. . . 
Looking beyond the human body, it will be seen that all 
organized beings are built after the same fashion. It 
will be found, on close inspection, that all other animals 
are so made. So likewise are all vegetables. Every leaf 
is duplex; so is every part of a flower. All organised 
beings are, in truth, formed of two halves joined together 
at a central line. Nothing organized is structured as 
one whole.’ 

This duality in unity in all organized structures is, as 
is pointed out by the learned author above quoted, due 
to the fact that two parents are required for the pro- 
duction of every organized being, and that each art 


1 “The Mechanism of Man,” by E. W. Cox, vol. i. 


INTRODUCTION XX1X 


contributes a germ, by the junction of which the duplex 
structure is formed. The human mind, also, has a dual 
nature—it is swayed as much by sentiments as by 
reason. Taking all these facts into consideration, it will 
not be wrong to infer that the Cause from which these 
effects are produced isa dual unity. The Tantra, however, 
postulates this as a fact, and builds up its Science upon it. 

The Nada aspect of Shabdabrahman is Kula-kunda- 
lini. Kula means the female organ of generation (yon). 
In the Bhagavadgita (xiv. 3), Lord Shri Krishna, as the 
male power, says: 


aa aifaaega afaa ai cure | 
aay: A*aaTat aat wafa wrca u 


“My womb is the great Eternal; in that I place 
the seed; thence cometh the birth of all beings, O 
Bharata.” 

According to the Mahanirvana Tantra, Kula means 
Jiva, Prakriti, Dik, Kala, and the five mahabhitas 
(sensibles) taken together. Now, all these taken together 
constitute the intelligent and material cause of the 
universe, which is the same as Yoni. As Kundala means 
the Coil (of the serpent), Kulakundalini means the 
Spiritual Power (the cosmic Mother) who Creates the 
universe of names and forms and coils up round it. She 
is Chit or consciousness vehicled by Prakriti. She is 
Sound, because the first manifestation of Prakriti is 
sound, which is withal Jnana (knowledge) and Light 
Seeeiuals She is the One Breath, One Life. She is 
universal Consciousness, all-pervading, not limited by 
time and space. She clothes herself with Prakriti when 
the hour for creation arrives. Essentially She is not 
different from the male aspect of Shabdabrahman, as 
both the aspects are indissolubly associated. She is the 
Paradprakriti or Supreme Power of Brahman. From Her 
is sprung the universe, from Mahatt to the atom, and 


1 The Tattva also called Buddhi. 


XXX PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


the universe is under Her control. She is Adya—the 
First Cause; She is all knowledge; and Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Shiva have their being in Her. She knows the 
universe, but none know Her. She is the embodiment 
of all Power; She is subtle; She is gross; She is mani- 
fested; She is unmanifested; She is formless, and yet 
with form. 

From the Sound Spiritual proceed two lines of Evolu- 
tion. The first line is by Sadrisha parinama—that is, the 
resolution of like to like—and consists of three female 
Powers and their male Counterparts in the following 
order: 


Raudri —Rudra —fire -—-Tamas -—Power of 
(m) Cognition. 

Jyeshtha —Brahma —Moon—Rajas —Power of 

(f) (7) | Volition. 

Vama —Vishnu —Sun —Sattva —Power of 
(f) (m) Causation 

(action). 


These three male and female Powers are the first 
triplication of the One Shabdabrahman, possessing 
within itself the three Powers of Volition, Causation, and 
Cognition; the three gunas, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas; 
and Its duplex Constitution. This line of creation is 
called Sound Creation (Shabdasrishti). 

The second line of evolution is called Form-creation 
(Arthasrishti). It is subdivided into two. The first sub- 
division embraces the Lords, and the second the Tattvas.} 
These are the Lords of our universe, having Parashiva as 
their Overlord. There are seven cosmic centres (Lokas) 
of Power, over each one of which each of these Lords 
presides in association with an aspect of Kulakundalini 
as His guiding Power. The centres and the Lords are 
thus stated: 


1 Buddhi and other derivatives of Prakriti. 


INTRODUCTION XXXI 


Loka. Male Power. Female Power. 

Satyam ) ParashivaorMaha- Adydshakti 
vishnu Mahakali 

Tapah Shambhu Siddhakali 

Janah Sadashiva (called Mahagauri 
Ardhanarishvara.) 

Mahah Isha Bhuvaneshvari 

Svah Rudra Bhadrakali 

Bhuvah Vishnu Radha 

Bhuh Brahma Savitri 


These seven centres are also seven planes of conscious- 
ness. Philosophy generalizes these seven planes of con- 
sciousness into three—viz, Jagrat (waking), Svapna 
(dreaming), and Sushupti (slumbering, or dreamless sleep’. 
The cosmic Virat-body is waking, Hiranyagarbha-body 
is dreaming, and the Ishvara-body is slumbering ccn- 
sciousness. The Virat-body is evolved from the last 
three centres, the Hiranyagarbha-body from the three 
centres above it, and the Ishvara-body from the highest 
centre. The consciousness of Vishnu is higher than that 
of Brahma, the consciousness of Rudra is higher than that 
of Vishnu, and the consciousness of Ishvara is higher than 
that of the three; and so on until we come to Parashiva or 
Mahavishnu, whose consciousness is the highest form of 
relative consciousness. 

The second subdivision begins with Mahat Tattva, and 
ends in the five Bhitas, which, being familiar to every 
student of Hindu philosophy, need not be detailed here. 

Kulakundalini is the vital Power of the universe. Her 
vehicle is the Hangsa of philosophy and religion. By 
Hangsa is to be understood the vital force, dual in its 
character, borne upon which She creates the universe. _ 

In the human body Kulakundalini is said to reside 
in the root-centre (Muladhara chakra) of force evolution 
inside a coiling nerve (Nadi). She coils round Svayambhu, 
the male aspect of Shabdabrahman, and covers his mouth 


XXX PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


with Her hood. Though sound is perpetually emanating 
from Her body, She is said to be slumbering. What Her 
slumber in the human body means is explained later on. 
I shall now deal with the sound emanating from Her 
body, and its nature and function. 

Hangsa is the name given to the root-sound emanating 
from the Pranik Vehicle of the Divine Mother. From 
Hangsa emanate forms, and from forms evolve universes, 
aud all that appertains to them. This Pranik Vehicle 
is a duality of male and female principles, the function 
of the male principle being to throw out and that of the 
female principle to draw in, or, in other words, they are 
centrifugal and centripetal respectively. In the human 
body and in the body of every living being the Pranik 
principle or Vital Power expresses itself in expiration and 
inspiration, and represents the sum total of a man’s life 
on this earth in his present birth. From the involuntary 
expiration of breath in the human body arises an in- 
audible sound, called Ajapa Mantra, which every man 
recites unawares. Cosmically this Ajapa is the centrifugal 
and centripetal energy, the attraction and repulsion of 
forces, observed everywhere; spiritually these two mighty 
aspects of the same Shakti are Pravritti and Nivritti, 
and so it is said: 


at fat uta Amequat Barat | 
aaltavggy a4 Wearad ti 


“That Lady paramount of all the Lords as the great 
Vidya is the cause of liberation; and as (Avidya) She too 
is the cause of bondage. "Chandi. 

The Vital Power is called Nada, Jiva, Prana, Ghosha, 
and by other names. The Vital Sheath of the Divine 
Serpent undergoes differentiations. From the first differ- 
entiation arise the Seeds of the universe. When the 
second differentiation takes place, the root—sound 
Hangsa, Sound, and Form, and all other dualities, come 


F INTRODUCTION XXXili 


into being. In its triple state the three Gunas, three 
Vedas, three articulate sounds (Varnas), three nerves 
(Nadis), and other triads, are projected. _Inits quadruple 
form four Varnas (sounds) and the quarternaries are 
evolved. In this wise various Sounds and Forms are 
produced, until in the fiftieth differentiation the fifty 
articulate Sounds, called Varnas, or letters of the 
alphabet, are manifested in the Divine Vehicle of the 
cosmic Mother. It is therefore said that the Divine 
Mother sings the symphony of the universe, the begin- 
ning of which is creation, and the conclusion is dissolu- 
tion (Mahapralaya). 

In the human mechanism the Muladhara Chakra is, as 
already said, the seat of Mother Kulakundalini, where She 
with the fifty Varnas as the strings of Her Divine harp for 
ever chants Her Celestial Song. Blessed be the Soul 
‘who has listened to this Divine Nada, and thereby 
liberated itself from the trammels of Maya. 

The fifty Varnas are fifty sounds of the Sanskrit lan- 
guage, or rather of the primitive language of which 
Sanskrit is the modification. These articulate sounds 
have been represented in different languages by different 
symbols; and, according to the divergent conformations 
of the vocal organs of different races inhabiting different 
zones of the earth, they are pronounced differently. 
For instance, the first sound of the vowels is symbolized 
by @ in Sanskrit, a in English, a in Greek, | in Arabic, 
and so on. It is pronounced aw in Sanskrit and derived 
Janguages in India, a in English, Alpha in Greek, Aliph 
jn Arabic, and so on. 

These sounds are very subtle things, effulgent and 
chromatic. They are living energies, which human 
thought prompts to expression through the vocal organ. 
When the seat of Sound—that is, the vehicle of Mother 
Kundalini—is penetrated by the active principle (Rajas) 
of Prakriti, the sound is called dhvani. Dhvani pene- 
trated by the inert principle (Tamas) is called Nada. 


é 


XXXIV PRINCIPLES OF TANTR& 


Nada becomes Nibodhika by a further impression of 
Tamas, and by successive impressions of the same 
quality it passes through successive stages of Ardhendu 
and Vindu, until at last it translates itself inthe Muladhara 
Chakra into what is known as the Para state of sound. 

When the sound reaches the Svadhishthana Chakra, 
it is called Pashyanti. It is then propelled to the heart- 
chakra, where it makes a more distinct vibration, which 
is audible to the Yogi during his first stage of concentra- 
tion, when his mind for the time being is withdrawn 
within itself. This is called the Madhyama state of 
sound. It is what is known as Nada, Anahata Shabda 
of Mother Kundalini. It is stated in Sharadatilaka, a 
Tantrik work of high authority, that the first sound heard 
by a Yogi is like the humming of bees; the next sound he 
hears is like that of air passing through a hollow bamboo; 
then is heard a bell-like sound; and so on. When a Yogi 
becomes accustomed to the hearing of sound, his inner 
consciousness wakens and he begins to acquire knowledge, 
which dispels the dark illusion of the world. From the 
heart-lotus the sound is propelled upwards, and, coming 
into contact with the eight organs of speech, it issues from 
the mouth and becomes audible. 

The fifty primary sounds which constitute the vehicle 
of Mother Kundalini are called Varnas, because they are 
coloured. They are of various colours: some red, some 
white, some blue; some are the colour of melted gold, 
and others of coral, and some are like electric light 
or other colours and hues. They are called Aksharas 
because, forming as they do the body of the universal 
Mother, they are imperishable. They are called Matrika, 
because from them the whole universe of forms, visible and 
invisible, terrestrial and celestial, has sprung into being. 

That molecular vibrations or sounds with which we 
are familiar: produce forms on sandy or some such surface 
over which sound-vibrations can act without friction, is. 
known to scientific musicians. <A particular tune pro- 
duces a particular form. A tune being a compound of 


INTRODUCTION 0:06 


primary sounds, it stands to reason that primary sounds 
have forms as well. If each of the seven tones of the 
gamut did not possess a form of its own, it would be quite 
impossible for a tune, which is a compound of primary 
tones, to express itself in a form. It has been found by 
experiment that each tune has a peculiar figure or form 
of its own. It may therefore safely be said that each 
musical form or figure is the molecular expression of a 
tune, which is a compound of primary sounds. If this 
state of things is found to be the order of nature in the 
world of molecules, it is but reasonable to suppose that 
the same law should prevail at the primordial source 
whence worlds are evolved. The Tantra says that the 
Kosmos is evolved out of the fifty Matrika sounds. The 
meaning of this, in the light of the above experiment, is 
plain enough. The Matrika sounds, in the processes of 
evolution, undergo various permutations, thereby giving 
rise to subtle figures, which form the groundwork upon 
which, with the accumulation of atcms and molecules, 
bodies of diverse density and shape are formed. The 
gross human figure of bones, muscles, and flesh has for 
its groundwork a network of fine nerves. Behind this 
nerve-structure is the subtle body, or Saikshma Sharira. 
Farther in there is the Karana Sharira, or causal body, 
the fifty-stringed lute (Vina) of Kundalini Herself, upon 
which She plays the Divine Song of the universe until 
its dissolution (Mahapralaya). 

When in the course of evolution rational man appeared, 
it was necessary to impart to him knowledge for the © 
perpetuation of the human race as well as for his libera- 
tion. It was to this end that the Self-existent Manu came 
down and gave him language. And what is that Lan- 
guage? It is not an arbitrary invention of words to 
signify objects. The Divine Manu, knowing the sound- 
forms of objects, gave man those forms and taught him 
the relation between those forms and the objects they 
connote. These sound-forms are words, and the objects 
‘they connote are the meanings of those words. The 


XXXVI PRINCIPLES OFAN RS 


sound-forms or subtle bodies of universal objects being 
imperishable, words are imperishable. Gross bodies are 
evanescent, but the subtle body or Stikshma Sharira per- 
sists till final dissolution of the universe, and the Karana 
Sharira, or causal body, is said to be eternal. The 
language which Manu taught was the primeval language 
of root-words, remnants of which are to be found in the 
Vaidik Mantras. Sanskrit is derived directly fromit. The 
innumerable languages of the world are its corruptions, 
or rather adaptations, in consonance with man’s environ- 
ments in different parts of the earth, and the consequent 
divergent configurations of his vocal organs. In every 
language there are root-words which are identical. 
There could, in fact, be no language without such root-— 
words as their basis. True it is that man has invented 
arbitrary words, and given them conventional meanings, 
but they are mere accretions to the original language. 
One may hear of words being coined (often-times from 
the primitive root-words), but who has ever heard of 
language being invented ? If none have so heard, then 
scoffing at what the Tantras reveal as the origin of lan- 
guage is unjustified. It may, in any case, be accepted 
as a workable theory which will. help materially—nay, 
powerfully—in aspiration for spiritual development. This 
aspect of the question I shall touch on Jater when dealing 
with Mantra. 

The Bhagavadgita is regarded universally as the 
highest embodiment of spiritual truths. In it (chap. viii., 
verse 13) we find: 


BS AaaTAt AT ASCl ATHAATA | 
a: watfa asa Zé a arfa acai afta u 
““Om! the one-syllabled Eternal (Brahman), re- 
citing, thinking upon Me, he who goeth forth, aban- 
doning the body, he goeth on the highest path.” 
If words be human inventions, and meanings con- 
ventional, then would it not be foolish to believe that a 


INTRODUCTION XXXVII 


conventional word like =a (Om) should possess such 
mighty power as to liberate a man from his cumulative 
Karmik causation, and to carry him there whence there 
is no return ? 

The Mandukyopanishad opens thus: 


aifadagutfag ag awiaarana ad vaafautefa 
aAMANT UT aad faaiatatd aewMiaAIT Ua | 


“One is Ishvara. The universe is its meaning. 
Present, past, and future are all one. That which is 
beyond the triple time is also .,,., (Om).” 


In the Shrimadbhagavata we read: 

“Soundbrahman and the supreme Brahman are both 
my immutable body.” 

From these and innumerable other passages in the 
Vedas, Upanishads, Darshanas,! and Puranas, the dis- 
cerning will learn that the Tantra only explains what the 
Veda asserts. 

The teaching of Jesus Christ, as embodied in the Gospel 
of St. John, strengthens our position, and proves the 
unity of truth in all revelations. The Gospel says: ‘ In 
the beginning was the Word, the Word was God, and the 
Word was with God.” The “ Word” is the Logos of the 
Greeks and Kabalists, and the Shabdabrahman of the 
Hindus. When the Kosmos is evolved, the Supreme 
Sachchidananda,? becomes Shabdabrahman, the Word; 
and Shabdabrahman, or Ishvara, being uncreate, unborn, 
and immutable, is ever with the Supreme. Hence in the 
Gita we read: wayyy fe nfastd “I am the image of God.” 


agai vw faada aaa utd aa 
“ That is my Supreme abode, whence there is no coming 
back.”’ | 
If Ishvara be vehicled by Sound, then the inevitable 
conclusion is that the Kosmos is evolved out of Sound. 


1 Systems of philosophy. 
2 Existence, consciousness, and bliss—or the Brahman. 


XAXVII1 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


That there was one root-language is also borne out by 
the Biblical myth of the confusion of tongues. Philology 
has considerably cleared the ground, and the day may 
not be very far distant when Science will astonish the 
world by its discovery of the one common root-language 
of the human race. 


MANTRA. .° 


If one were to make a Mantrik survey of India, one 
would be astonished to find that the Hindu life is satu- 
rated with Mantra. Be he a peasant or a prince, his 
whole life is regulated by Mantra. Various are the 
purposes for which Mantras are invoked, and _ their 
enumeration here will help towards the elucidation of the 
subject under consideration. Mantras are invoked for: 
(1) Secondary mukti (liberation). (2) Worship of the 
manifested God. (3) Worship of Devatds. (4) Com- 
munication with Devatas. (5) Acquisition of super- 
human powers. (6) Feeding Pitris and Devatas. (7) Com- 
munication with Ghosts and Upadevatas.’ (8) Warding 
off evil influences. (9) Exorcizing Devils. (10) Cure of 
diseases. (11) Preparing curative water. (12) Doing 
injury to plants, animals, and men. (13) Eliminating 
poison from the animal body. (14) Influencing others’ 
thoughts and actions. (15) Bringing men, beasts, Upa- 
devas? and Ghosts under control. (16) Purification of 
the human body by ceremonies called Sangskaras, and 
many other purposes, which need not be mentioned here. 
From the mother’s womb to the funeral pyre a Hindu 
literally lives and dies in Mantra. | 

What, then, is this mighty force which is believed to 
wield such a great influence upon a nation reputed to be 
both spiritually great and intellectually acute? From 
the hoary antiquity of Vaidik Mantras down to modern 
times, great and varied are the changes which have taken 


1 Lesser spirits. . 


INTRODUCTION en 9X As 


place in the Hindu’s philosophical thoughts and religious 
ideas, but Mantra stands with its head erect and limbs 
sturdy as the undying witness of God’s grace to His 
Hindu sons. The question, I fear, has not been seriously 
asked by the English-educated Hindu. The Hindu of the 
old school takes it as an heirloom from his ancestors with- 
out ever trying to understand what it really is and how 
it can be utilized. He recites it parrot-like, and thinks 
he has done his duty. It is this indifference on the one 
hand, and apathy on the other, which has rendered the 
Hinduism of the present day almost a dead religion. 

The above enumeration of uses for which Mantras are 
invoked will have shown that they are of various classes, 
and that they possess subtle powers of action on the 
spiritual, mental, and physical planes of existence. They 
are not words and sentences, neither are they syllables, 
although they are expressed by written character in 
words and sentences. There are various Mantras in the 
vernacular of India, used for non-spiritual purposes. In 
the Bengali language, especially in the form in which it 
is used in Assam, there are numbers of Mantras which 
are apparently quite meaningless; many of the words 
used therein are no words at all, for they convey no mean- 
ing. Words and sentences which have no meanings to 
convey to the understanding are no part of a language. 
If you believe that they are efficacious, you must admit 
that they are sound-powers acting on different planes of » 
consciousness. 

The efficacy of Mantras is not a matter of opinion, a 
mere theory which needs cogent arguments to bring it 
home to men’s minds. It isa fact in the arcana of nature 
revealed by God, testified to by the unimpeachable 
evidence of selfless, disinterested Rishis of hoary an- 
tiquity, and corroborated by hosts of Sddhakas* of all 
ages. There are numberless Sadhakas still living who 


1 In a general sense worshippers. See as to Sddhana, or practice, 
Introduction. 


x] PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


have had direct proof of the efficacy of Mantras. Each 
one of us can, if we will, obtain such direct proof our- 
selves. The Tantra which is known as the Mantra- 
shastra is an exact science, and does not shrink from 
the severest test which may be applied to it. Use a 
Mantra under the directions of a competent Guru, and 
you will acquire direct evidence of its efficaciousness. 
Our hereditary professional Gurus initiate us with sacred 
Vijamantra! and Gayatri,? and teach us Mantras for the 
worshipping of our Ishtadevata.* We go on, as we have 
been taught, from the day of our initiation to the end of 
our life, but it may be that no result is perceived. If we 
ask our Guru how this is so, he will reproach us with 
impatience and want of devotion. Placed in this pre- 
dicament, we lose our faith in Mantras, and become in- 
different to them. But we donot pause to reflect whether 
it be the fault of the Mantra, or of the instructor from — 
whom we had the misfortune to receive it, or of ourselves. 
It is quite an error to suppose that 1f Mantra be a sound 
power, it must yield the result sought for as soon as it is 
pronounced. Now, electricity is a physical force which 
has been imprisoned, so to say, in various sorts of mechan- 
ical contrivances in order to produce various results. 
There are books which describe these contrivances and 
prescribe their uses. Can anyone, by mere reading of the 
books, handle these machineries and produce the desired 
results ? If such be the case in dealing with physical 
forces, how much more is practical instruction necessary 
for the handling of spiritual and psychical forces. 

For the moment I leave out all other Mantras in order 
to confine my attention to such alone as are known 
as Vija Mantras. They are the powers which carry us 
safe through the world’s entanglements towards that 
haven of peace and bliss for which the human mind. 


t Seed-Mantras. See p. iii, n. 2 ante. 

2 The celebrated Vaidik Mantra of that name. See Introduction, 
‘“ Gayatri.” 

3 The chosen Deity of the particular worshipper. 


INTRODUCTION xli 


naturally, though unconsciously, yearns, though in ig- 
norance of the path it diverges into different treacherous 
ways, lured by the tempting light of Kama (desire). 
From what has been said regarding Varnas, it will have 
been seen that Varnas are living, conscious sound-powers. 
From Varnas are evolved secondary sound-powers, called 
Mantras. It has also been related how Shabdabrahman 
becomes a septenary of male and female Powers for the 
purposes of creation. Innumerable other Powers are 
evolved from them, who constitute the hierarchy of 
Devatas. The Powers, higher or lower, are spiritual 
entities, possessing body and mind, though the body of 
the higher Gods, such as Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, 
is to the human consciousness as unfathomable as the 
human body and mind is to.a cell inhabiting the human 
body. The embodied higher Devatas are Lords of Mercy. 
They also manifest themselves from time to time in the 
Deva Loka (the region of Devas), and on earth for the 
good of Devas and of humanity. They create their 
Avatara-body when they find it necessary to manifest 
themselves. The bodies of Devatas are sound-powers. 
In the fourth chapter of the Mahanirvana Tantra it is 
said : 
SUTAaA May BqR gals | 
araarat faaigra uae aratfaur aa: 
SGI S farsa VSeHATSYST TAT | 
Say fPICIT ATATTMATAUTCAT kt 
auagifaied aanarfe aTuay | 
afad wqaay . wwe 
| —~agulara t 
“For the benefit of worshippers, for the good of the 
universe, and for the destruction of Ddanavas,! Thou 
assumest various bodies. Thou art four-handed, two- 
handed, six-handed, and eight-handed. For the safety 


1 Demons. 


xii PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


of the universe Thou bearest divers weapons. In the 
Tantras are revealed Yantras, Mantras, and other methods 
of self-culture, according to those bodies.” 


Again, in the fifth chapter of the same Tantra it is 
stated: 


aq quraqaarta ararautacatfs oj 
aratagiaararfa afdd aa waa | 

aq ARUAIA HAATATAATYSS | 
agama afgafa qarafe 
ATAAITAAIT: BiSatageraan | 

a ag qT aay S & avat: vatfaar: | 
eo aa Aal: Qwaatat vafaaa: 

—uUqaiata | 


al) ae 


“ Thy manifestations are infinite, having diverse colours 
and forms. Different are the methods which must be 
diligently followed in order to realize them. None can 
describe them all. A little of Thy favour has enabled me 
to describe, according to My power, the methods of their 
worship and attainment in the Tantras.”’ 

‘“‘ Thy Mantras are infinite, by crores and arbuds' .. . 
Because thou art the Adya Prakriti, therefore all the 
Mantras mentioned in the Tantras are Thy Mantras.”’ 

From the above it will appear that Mantras are the 
bodies of the Devatas. They are not gross (sthtla) bodies, 
but subtle vehicles through which they manifest them- 
selves. In the Yamalatantra this is more explicitly stated: 


Saqarat: Wty MsaiTgIad Yar | 


“ Verily the body of the Devata arises from Vija.” 


The Shaktanandatarangini, a Tantrik work of great 
reputation by the renowned Brahmananda Giri, explains 


1 An arbud is ten crores, and a crore is ten millions. 


INTRODUCTION xl 


the word gtatq (vijat) to mean qajtq (varnat). And 
aut (varna) means a sound-power, as already ex- 
plained. 

If one reads between the lines, divesting his mind of 
the Illusion Theory of Shrimat Shangkardcharrya, he may 
find a corroboration of the principle above laid down in 
the following couplet from the fourth chapter of the 
Bhagavadgita: 


AMS GARATAT WATATATAC sfa AA I 


WaAta GTAafusla AMaqqIamaTaat ii 


“ Unborn, immutable, Lord of all beings though I am, 
entering my Prakriti, Iam born by My own Maya.” 

Here the Lord Ishvara, and not Parabrahman, ex- 
plains to his disciple Arjuna how He incarnates—that 
is, appears in human body. His birth is not like the 
birth of men; it is divyam (Drvine) (vide Shloka, ix., 
chap. iv.). The sikshma sharira (subtle body) of man, 
after having spent its subjective Karma, is impelled, by its 
own inexorable destiny, to take birth on earth through 
an earthly father and mother, who supply the materials 
for the building up of the physical body. The Lord has 
no such Sikshma Sharira which may serve as the instru- 
ment by which a Sthtila body functions; for it must be 
borne in mind that without Prana (the vital principle) 
and Antahkarana (the mind and the sensorium) a physica] 
body cannot for a moment live. The Lord enters his 
Prakriti, or rather brings it into requisition to form a 
Stikshma Sharira for Himself. Now, what is the Prakriti 
of Ishvara but Mala Prakriti in action? Is it not for 
exactly that reason that Ishvara is called Shabdabrahman ? 
It is therefore spiritual sound by which Ishvara (that 
is, Shabdabrahman) forms his subtle body of life and 
sensorium. Herein lies the Divine character of Ishvara’s 
appearances (Avatara). It is therefore called Divine 
(divyam). The subsequent process of acquiring a gross 
body is described in the above verse to be Atmamayaya 


xliv PRINGIPLES OF “TANIGRSs 


(by My own Maya). Now, if Maya and Prakriti be one 
and the same, the verse becomes meaningless. Maya 
or Avidya is that phase of Prakriti in which evolution 
from spirit to matter takes place, as distinguished from 
Mahamaya or Vidya, which is the agent for the involution 
of matter to spirit. The Lord, to appear in flesh and 
blood, had therefore first to build his Sound-body, and 
then to issue from the Mother’s womb in the ordinary 
way. It is this Sound-body of the Lord which is the 
Mantra of the Vaishnavas worshipping Shri Krishna. 

Mantra is not merely an important, but an essential, 
element of self-culture in Kriya yoga. The realization 
of Atma, the One True Self, is not possible so long as the 
mind functions in the brain and identifies itself with the 
sensations, perceptions, and concepts furnished by the 
phenomenal world. By Samadhi (communion) alone the 
true self can be realized. Kriya yoga prepares the mind 
for Samadhi. In Patanjali’s Darshana ( Yoga philosophy) 
Kriya yoga is thus defined: 


aq: ATTA ATW HATTA: | 

This aphorism is explained by Vedavydsa in his 
Commentary thus: 

mata wn fagia, waa anaran fat wau- 
faafasamra aTafsatata aa: digatwaad wf ava 
sulataa, aq faauaieaaqiundadafata aaa | ST- 
wre: suatfeufasiat 3U:, AAT at | Tacuia- 
Ula ARMA IAAI, ALATA AT I 

A free translation of the aphorism and its Bhashya is 
given below: 

‘“‘ Discipline (of body, speech, and mind), repetition of 
Mantras, or study of Moksha Shastras (scriptures teaching 
liberation), and worship of God, constitute Kriya yoga.” 


“Yoga is not attainable by persons who have not 
brought their body, speech, and mind under discipline. 


INTRODUCTION xlv 


The mind being coloured with the accumulated Sangs- 
karas or impressions of Karma without beginning and 
with desires resulting in misery, its Rajasik and Tamasik 
functions cannot be minimized without Tapas. Mind- 
cleansing Tapasya should be so practised that it may not 
injure the body. The word Svadhydya means repeating 
(japa) of Pranava (%T4—Om) and other Mantras, or 
the study of such Shastras as inculcate Moksha (libera- 
tion). Ishvarapranidhdna means the dedication of all 
works to the greatest Guru Ishvara (The Lord), or doing 
unselfish works.” 


Japa? of Mantra thus is an important factor in arriving 
at that stage of the mind which, in Yoga Shastra, is 
called Samprajnata Samadhi—that is, conscious com- 
munion. When man reaches that plane of conscious- 
ness, his accumulated Karma, and his earth-bound desire 
which is the cause of Karma, vanish never to return again. 
He realizes the all-blissful Divinity, and becomes Divinity 
itself. Divine worship is ordained as a preliminary step 
for this consummation; for it is by Bhakti and Prema 
(Faith and Love) to God that our congenital tenacious 
attachment to worldly things can be replaced, and the 
thirst for happiness of the ever-restless mind quenched. 
The daily worship which the Hindus perform consists of 
Sandhya and Pija,? in both of which Mantra is a necessity ; 
for the Mantra is not only potent in withdrawing the 
mind from its external functions, but it makes worship 
possible. From Mantra the worshipper gains the form 
of the object of his worship upon which he must practise 
his concentration and devotion, and when the worshipper 
has made some advance he will recognize the Mantra 
itself to be his Ishtadevata. Last, though not the least, 

1 Devotion, austerity, etc. See Introduction, and also for the 
meaning of the gunas, rajas, tamas, sattva. 


2 “ Recitation ’’ or “‘ repetition ’’ are the nearest English equivalents 
for this term, which is more fully explained in,Introduction sub. voce. 


ce Japa.” 
3 See Introduction. 


xlvi PRINCIPLES OF PAN iis 


is the power of Mantra to awaken the latent powers of the 
mind. The last chapter of Patanjali’s Darshana opens 
thus: 

watafyaaaranntsar: eae: | 


“Uncommon power of the mind is attained by birth, 
drugs, Mantra, Tapas, and Samadhi.” 


The practice of Mantra according to the TAntrik 
method develops without fail the latent faculties of the 
mind, with the help of which the Sadhaka must climb 
step after step until the final rung of the ladder is 
reached. | 

The object to be attained, or rather the one Immutable 
True Existence to be realized, according to the Tantrik 
philosophy, is Parabrahman. But the instrument—the 
mind—with which man has to realize is Prakritik—that is, 
evolved out of the three gunas of Prakriti. The gunas, 
being dissimilar in nature to Sat, Chit, and Ananda, 
cannot be the instrument which can directly seize the 
Absolute, just as one cannot catch air by iron tongs. 
Hence it is. that the Son of God 1s fiewiiediaten 
of the Christians, and Shabdabrahman or Saguna 
Ishvara? is the object of worship of the Hindus. The 
Mantra, I mean Vija Mantra, is Shabdabrahman. The 
Mantra power of Shakti has two aspects—Vachaka and 
Vachya, which are explained in the text.® 

The Vachaka Shakti of a Mantra is the vital, intelligent, 
and conscious entity through which the unconditioned 
evolves, or through which Nirguna (attributeless) Brah- 
man must be realized. Vachaka Shakti in its female 
aspect is Kundalini, and its male aspect Parashiva or 
Mahavishnu. Vachya Shaktiis that which is sought to be 
realized through the Vachaka Shakti. It is Nirguna Brah- 
man. The Mantra, by its innate power, reveals the Vachaka 

1 Existence, consciousness, and bliss, the nature of the Brahman. 

2 The Lord with attributes, as contrasted with the attributeless 


supreme—the Parabrahman. 
3 See vol.i., p. 151. 


INTRODUCTION xlvil 


Shakti to the human mind which, being thus freed from 
the chain of causation, is translated into the Vachaka 
Shakti itself. The realization of the Vachya Shakti is 
the last leap forward into that region of the Absolute 
whence no traveller ever returns either as Ishvara or 
Deva or Manava (man). The Tantrik Sadhaka is there- 
fore warned against that ignorance which takes Mantras 
to be mere words or letters of the alphabet: 

FU Agugfay_ Aa VATA | 

afaaral {ATRIA HAUT ACA ABT u 

“ Perdition is the lot of him who thinks that Guru is a 

mere man, that Mantras are mere letters of the alphabet, 
and that Pratima (the Image of the Deity) is mere stone.”’ 


The word Mantra is thus explained in the Pingala 
Tantra, quoted in Sharadatilaka: 


aaa faafaata arm aarcaarara | 
aa: aciia dfagt aa aaa 
“That from which the true knowledge of the universe 


and freedom from the bondage e the world is attained is 
called Mantra.”’ 


The ‘‘ true knowledge ”’ of the universe, according to 
Tantra, is the realization of the identity of Brahman and 
Brahmanda. This, too, is the Vaidik conception, as it is 
expressed in the aphorism: eg afaz gq (“ Verily 
all this is Brahman’’). I have elsewhere quoted from the 
Bhagavadgita a passage in which it is said that the 
Mantra =a (Om) is capable of freeing the Jiva, or em- 
bodied spirit, from the bondage of births and deaths. 
How mighty is the power of Mantra! It is Sound- 
spiritual, it is Divinity itself. Blessed is the man who, 
having heard the sweet, soul-soothing, ineffable Mad- 
hyama sound in the lotus of the heart, plunges deep into 
the ocean of Sushumn4,? to rise at the feet of Kula- 


1 The channel of energy (nadi) of that name situate in the spinal 
axis. See Arthur Avalon’s “‘ Six Centres and the Serpent Power.” 


xlvili PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


kundalini, singing Her song of the universe in Her Para 
melody.t Of all the methods for hearing the Sound- 
spiritual, taught in different schools of Yoga, the Mantra 
Yoga is the best, straightest, and easiest, because Mantra 
itself, being Sound-power, has greater aptitude than any- 
thing else to reach the bodily Sound-centres. 


INITIATION (DiksHA), GURU (TEACHER), AND SHISHYA 
(DISCIPLE). 


According to the Ayurvedik system of medicine, four 
factors are essential for the successful treatment of a 
disease. They are called Khuddak Chatushthaya. They 
are physician, medicine, nurse, and patient. The physi- 
cian must be capable of making a correct diagnosis of his 
patient’s ailment, the medicine should be appropriate 
and powerful, the nurse must be dutiful, and the patient 
careful of his health and possessed of faith in his physician, 
A successful treatment of the disease of the soul, called 
Bhavaroga, or earthly sufferings, is, similarly, dependent 
upon four essential factors. The patient is the man who, 
convinced of the existence of the disease which has over- 
taken him, is anxious to be cured; Bhakti, or devotion, 
is his nurse; he is the Guru, or teacher, who can properly 
diagnose the particular form of the patient’s illness, and 
impart to him the proper medicament—I mean Mantra— 
which has the potency to heal. 

The disease of the soul needs much more physicking 
than the disease of the body, of which the patient is fully 
cognizant, and which is of comparatively shorter dura- 
tion and can be diagnosed by objective means. But the 
disease of the soul is a chronic ailment of many births 
and re-births. The lot of such a patient is spiritually 
dismal, no doubt, but the glamour of Maya transports 
him to a fool’s paradise, where lust, avarice, greed, power, 


1 In the Maladhara, (vide ibid.). 


INTRODUCTION xlix 


and ambition feed him with dainty dishes, and lull him 
to forgetfulness of the disease which is eating into his 
very vitals. Fortunate is the man who, knowing his 
real condition, is to be found at the lotus-feet of his 
Guru. 

Knowledge of the human ego’s real condition arises 
first mediately from a proper study of the Shastras, and 
then directly by self-illumination. But the study of the 
Shastras as a mere intellectual exercise is fraught with 
mischief. In the Kularnava Tantra the Lord has a 
significant admonition on this subject, which, Pransiatcc 
runs thus: 

“ Fools led by the bondage of their animal nature fall 
into the deep well of the six systems of philosophy, and 
are unable to know what the Paramartha (supreme good) 
is. Perverse logicians, owing to their ignorance of the 
real meaning of the Vedas, roam here and there, scorched 
by the fire of scepticism. They do not know that within 
the surging waves of time they are under the mighty jaws 
of death. The man who knows the Vedas, Agamas, and 
Puranas, but who is yet ignorant of the Paramartha, and 
gives instructions, simply caws like a crow. Unmindful 
of the Paratattva (the Supreme), he is ever thinking of 
what is knowledge and what is knowable, and is immersed 
in study day and night. The words of such are flowing 
and rhetorical, but at heart they are anxious, sorry, and 
ill at ease. Men take great pains to prove the Paratattva 
to be what itisnot. They explain the gist of the Shastra 
to be what itisnot. They explain supersensuous matters 
without themselves realizing them. Some, led by vanity, 
study the Vedas without a Guru’s help; but a knower 
of the real sense of the Vedas is hard to find. As a spoon 
does not know the taste of the food cooked with it; as 
the head carries a load of flowers, but the nose enjoys 
its fragrance, so they study the Veda Shastra, but, being 
ignorant of the Paramartha (which is known only to 
Sadhakas), quarrel among themselves. As a milkman, 


f 


l PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


forgetting the goat in his arms, sees it in its image in a 
well, even so are men, who are unconscious of the Para- 
tattva that is in them, deluded by the Shastras. As the 
darkness of a house can never be dispelled by uttering 
the word “‘ lamp,” even so is the word-meaning of Shastra 
impotent to dispel the mayik darkness of the Ego. The 
study of Shastra by people not possessed of Prajna—that 
is, the inner light—is as though a blind man opened his 
eyes to see. The Shastra gives Divine knowledge 
(Tattvajnana) to those who have Prajna.” 

sata srad fe wreqa ‘“ The object of Shastra is to 
impart such knowledge as cannot be gained through the 
senses.”’ It therefore stands to reason that the real 
meaning of Shastra cannot be acquired merely through 
the brain. The door to supersensuous knowledge must 
be unlocked, and the sleeping Kula-Kundalini awakened. 
This is done by Diksha or initiation. Diksha is thus 
explained in the Tantras: 


Udlaa arraaag daa anrararaz | 
ametafa cafq afyat aafaaa: 2 
—afaat wart 
éfa! ciafatiaa a fafas a anfa: | 
TA AMAaT WANT Stfaal wae a 
QZaTAaAA | 
watfaat a wala coustfeat: fran: | 
a vafa fra! aut fraTaranatiaad ii 
QZaTAAA | 
Tan sat fagaa: qadat asic | 
atatfasagaian fraa waa fret! 
Sarasa araitafeaaaa: | 
naMQamaady fasifay fray vac i 
HUTA AY FAUT AT | 


INTRODUCTION li 


suraargdatta at faa aq faerie 1 
at glararmtaana TacaafaTgs o 
—ayTwyay | 

yaa fafadt wat ta gett qua | 

4 aq sad fafedifate ue uz 1 
Wes as saz | 

Fal aa Tes aTUaT fad AAT | 

qa: faa: wat ufaafaaaae|n: o 

The above verses, rendered freely into English, read 
thus: 

“Those who commune with the Divinity call it Diksha 
because it imparts Divine knowledge and cuts worldiy 
bonds ” (Yogini Tantra). | 

“He who has not been initiated cannot acquire Divine 
knowledge, and cannot gain a desirable state after death. 
Hence it is that one should, by all means, get himself 
initiated by a Guru ” (Rudra Yamala). 

“Those who, without being initiated, perform Japa, 
Puja, etc., derive no benefit, even as seeds, sown on stole, 
do not germinate ” (Rudra Yamala). 

_“ As iron is transmuted into gold when it is penetrated 
by Rasendra (great fluid), even so is the individual Ego 
converted into the Divinity by Diksha. His Karma 
being burnt by the fire of Diksha, he becomes freed from 
the bondage of Karma, and thus the fetters of Karma 
being removed, the Jiva becomes Shiva” (Kularnava 
Tantra, quoted in the Commentary on Kalpasitra). 

“No amount of Updsana (worship), without -Diksha, 
can give Divine knowledge; so one should, by all means. 
get himself initiated for the purpose of rendering the 
Mantra efficacious ”’ (Kularnava Tantra). 

“ One cannot derive any benefit by repeating a Mantra, 
learnt from books; on the other hand, injury is incurred 
at every step’ (quoted by Raghava Bhatta). 

“ Having acquired the Mantra from the Guru, it should 


lii PRINCLPLES JOR STAN Gis 


be cultivated in the disciple’s consciousness. Religious 
exercises for liberation are for fruition dependent entirely 
upon the Guru.” i . 

From what has been stated regarding the Sound 
Spiritual, Mantra and Kula-Kundalini, it will have been 
seen that Mantra is a living spiritual sound-Power 
emanating from the vehicle of the Divine Serpent. The 
human Ego, born on the earth as the consequence of his 
actions in previous lives, must work out such Karmas as 
are germinating, and will also germinate Karmas for its 
weal or woe. He is placed here below in direct communt- 
cation with the objective world through its five agents of 
knowledge and five agents of action. The knowledge 
acquired through the five senses is phenomenal: it is not 
true knowledge; it is knowledge as it seems, not know- 
ledge asitis. Itis the knowledge of actors as they appear 
on the stage, and not of the individuals who are dressed 
as actors in the green room. The green room of nature 
is hidden from the view of the senses. But it is in the 
green room that nature must be seen by the Ego in order 
that it may free itself from the glamour of maya which 
has rendered it an earth-bound spirit. Unless one recog- 
nizes the reality, there is no escape from its semblance. 
But the physical brain is not the place where, nor are the 
senses the avenue through which, the one Reality, the 
All-blissful Sat-chit-Ananda enthroned in the effulgence 
of the spiritual world is to be seen. The human body is 
a duality not only in the objective plane, but in the 
subjective plane as well. The mind receives objective 
knowledge through the brain by means of the senses and 
the sensory nerves. It can receive subjective knowledge 
through the spinal column by means of senses which have 
to be developed. But the passage through which the 
green room of the human body must be entered is barred 
by the hood of the Slumbering Serpent Kula-Kundalini. 
To wake Her up, to implore Her Divine grace that we 
may be shown the Real (which is no other than She), 


INTRODUCTION lili 


and that the unreal may be dispelled, is the work of the 
living Mantra-Power for the earnest Ego. 

Electricity is ubiquitous. It isin every atom, in every 
molecule, and in every thing made up of atoms and mole- 
cules. My penis made up of atoms and molecules. Why 
does it not, then, announce to me the existence of elec- 
tricity init ? Why does it not fan me in this grilling heat 
and give brilliant light to my failing vision, although that 
is my earnest wish ? The reason is that electricity, by pro- 
cesses known to experts, must be roused into action,.and 
manipulated in different ways to yield different results. 
Mantra Shakti, similarly, is ubiquitous; it isin every form 
of existence. Indeed, from Sound-power the universe is 
built. It has countless forms which pervade the uni- 
verse. It is the Guru, the Mantrik Scientist, who alone 
knows how to manipulate it and to employ it in producing 
the desired result—that is to say, in awakening the 
Slumbering Divine Serpent in man. 

The mere communication of an atomic sound from 
one’s: mouth to another’s ear cannot be expected to pro- 
duce such a result. The Guru has himself to vitalize and 
energize the Mantra in his own inner consciousness, and 
then to communicate the living spiritual force to the 
consciousness of his disciple (Shishya). If there be 
reason to believe in transference of thought from a hypno- 
tiser to his subject—and hypnotism has now been -recog- 
nized as a science—there is no ground for disbelieving 
the transference of a power even subtler than a thought 
(which is a power as well) from a Guru to his disciple. 
When such an event happens in the life of a person, his 
whole mental system undergoes a revolution; he receives 
a second birth, and it is for this that an initiated man is 
a Dvija (twice-born). The Veda withheld the privileges 
of a Dvija from the fourth caste (Shtidra), but the Tantra 
throws the portals of initiation wide open to every man 
or woman, whoever he or she may be. The Chandala’ 


1 One of the lowest castes. 


liv PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


and all others are all the children of the Divine Mother, 
the milk of whose eternal breast is sucked by every living 
being. 

Diksha, thus, is not a conventional] usage, a toll paid 
to the Divine ferryman for carrying the sojourner across 
the ocean of the world (Bhavasindhu). Spiritual India 
has, unfortunately, come to this pass, and it is the Tantra 
which can alone save it, as it has saved it in the Kali 
Yuga of every Kalpa. | 

Shabdabrahmamayi, the Divine Mother, must be 
reached. A deep, surging sea divides the sojourning Ego 
from Her. It is the Black Sea of objective knowledge, 
the Vaitarani of Hindu mythology. Mantra is the bark 
to carry it thither. The Guru must help the Ego in each 
of its steps forward into the region of the unknown. 
Indeed, without the Guru’s help the disciple cannot move 
one such step. The disciple must also work hard, under 
the instructions of the Guru, to keep up the energy of the 
Mantra. And when the Mantra is assimilated in the 
inner consciousness of the disciple, he is said to have 
become Siddha (accomplished) in it. He can then use it 
at his will, and, awakening Kula-Kundalini, plunge with 
Her into the Lotus-garden, where alone the nature of the 
Atma and Andtméa! can be realized. The human body, 
according to the Tantra, is a microcosm, which contains 
in miniature all that is contained in the Kosmos. It has 
the seven Lokas worlds or regions located in it, and the 
Sadhaka, who, with the help of his Vija Mantra, has 
known them and their over-Lords has left the mother’s 
womb never to come back again. It may here be noted 
by way of parenthesis that the seven Lokas are not 
states of existence, but worlds made up of different 
modifications of matter, and peopled by beings on 
different planes of consciousness. 

Such being Diksha, imagine what the Guru is! 


1 Not Atma. 


INTRODUCTION Iv 


at gs faaast as qfaataa: | 

wet ge fat get WE wel wat 1 

Wat Weds! darciadaaway | 

HU WAT FT SUT F TAATIVTITS: i 
—ARAAA | 

“Tf the Guru is pleased, Shiva is pleased; if he is dis- 
pleased, Shiva is displeased. If the Guru is pleased, 
Shivani' is pleased; if the Guru is displeased, Shivani is 
displeased. Hence, O Maheshani!! the Guru is the Lord, 
the sustainer and the annihilator. It is he who can give 
Moksha ” (Guru Tantra). 

But the human Guru is not the real Guru. The real 
Guru isin the Thousand-petalled Lotus. The human Guru 
bears the same relation to the Divine Guru that the 
Vachaka Shakti of a Mantra bears to the Vachya Shakti. 
The Yogini Tantra thus explains Guruship: 


AlSaars | 

TE: BIT ALITA AT A BATTAT | 
anisafua vats waa wathaa: | 

) MCAC Bars | 
atfeatat agtefa aetaret fe a: Gai | 
WA: a wa Safa TaAay ATV: |i 
Ta ia awa yaaa au" | 
ARIUS FAT FT A FRAT AT: |i 
aMaal A UA Blarat: waafe | 
aaverara fe aay fatcafefe | 
afusii HaTE agate waf< a 
Bat A Teal Sfa Aqsa ATA ANT: | 
AMA FUCA Gea HLA AU: | 
aaa waa ofa faarsts wrargs 


1 The Devi as consort of Shiva. 


yi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


AAV ASUIfA UA Va WA: GA | 

afasrrania ay aryaE agate | 

ASIC APA TS ASTTIAY Ware t 

“‘ Shri Devi said: ‘ Merciful Maheshvara ! tell me who is 
Guru. You have told me that the Guru is greater than 
Thou art.’ Shri Ishvara said: ‘ He who is the first Lord 
and is called Mahakala is the Guru, O Devi! in all Man- 
tras. None else is the Guru. He is verily the Guru of 
the Shaivas, Shaktas, Vaishnavas, Ganapatyas, Moon- 
worshippers, Mahashaivas, and Sauras.1 He and none 
else is the promulgator of Mantra. At the time of im- 
parting Mantra, O Daughter of mountain !? He manifests 
Himself in him who imparts Mantra. Hence, O Devi! 
verily there is no Guruship in man. The human Mantra- 
giver meditates upon the same Guru in the Head-Lotus 
as Him upon, whom the disciple must there meditate. 
Therefore, O Maheshvari! there is only one Guru: Be- 
cause He manifests himself in the human Guru, therefore 
the greatness of the human Guru is published in all the 
Shastras.”’ me 
The Yamala Tantra says: 


Wace: fra: Wea: ass Ze a ara: | 

qaeaata safy aatsfa wea | 

Bat aa att efa afe He: waraa 

aeifad T aalt VA Gay Te: aaT | 

aeifad ezarans aethad efearss i 

‘ There is only one Guru, who undoubtedly is Myself; 

Thou, too, O Devi! and Mantra, too, is Guru. Therefore 
Guru, Devata, and Mantra are the same. He is always 
to be contemplated in the Thousand-petalled Lotus, some- 


times in the Heart-Lotus, and sometimes as existing before 
the eyes—that is, in human form.” 


1 Vide ante, p. ili, n. I. 
2 The Devi as Parvati, daughter of the mountain King Himavat. 


INTRODUCTION lvl 


In initiating and instructing a disciple, the human Guru 
undertakes a vicarious duty, the magnitude of which he 
should fully realize.. He must fill himself with the Divine 
Presence, that his Shishya may be born to the spiritual 
life. He must also, impart to his disciple that sure 
knowledge which will lead him without error on the 
onward path of Sadhana. Henceforward the life of the 
disciple becomes a part of the Guru’s life. The Guru be- 
comes responsible for the sins of his disciple. 

We are apt to complain of the rarity of the Gurus, 
but we do not pause to consider the paucity of Shishyas 
(disciples). Ganapati, the elephant-headed Devata, by 
the grace of His Divine mother, had the consolation to 
believe that He was the best of singers. We, too, by the 
grace of Avidya, have an overweaning confidence in our 
intellectual attainments, thinking that we are perfectly 
qualified to receive the highest spiritual instructions. 

The Gautamiya Tantra says: 


fae: aeita: WaTat GeeTTITTAM: | 
adiade: aaa: faqarafed ta: 
wAfaAAAT FT ACYAI CA: | 
AST UTA ASH FSTl FSTUT: 
feadt aifwai fra aceareaaac | 
UAYAVATITIT A AART AIT CA: 
afar fararqstaaTay: | 
ee faafsar faataart faaatet faacac: 1 
‘“ The Shishya (disciple) should be of good parentage, 
pure-minded, bent upon realizing the fourfold aspirations ;} 
he should be learned in the Vedas, diligent, devoted to 
the welfare of parents; he should know Dharma and 


practise it; he should ‘serve the Guru; he should be 
acquainted with the true meaning of the Shastras; he 


1 That is, Dharma Artha, K4éma, and Moksha. See Introduction 
to A. Avalon’s ‘ *Mahanirvana Lantra.’’ 


lviii PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


should possess a strong physique and a strong mind. He 
should always do good to living objects; he should do 
only such deeds as are good for the afterlife. He should 
serve the Guru by speech, thought, body, and money. 
He should avoid works of which the result is transitory, 
and be diligent in working for enduring results. He 
should be one who has conquered Passi indolence, 
illusory knowledge (Moha), and anger.’ 

From the above it will appear that to be a real Shishya 
mere intellectual attainment is not sufficient. While he 
should be conversant with the Shastras (scriptures) to 
enable him to understand what he is, what his destiny is, 
what relation he bears to the universe and to the Lord 
of the universe, he should have purified his mind from 
the thousand and one worldly pursuits which detract 
rather than bring peace to it. He should diligently do 
what the Shastras enjoin, and scrupulously avoid un- 
Shastrik actions. He should have a living faith in his 
religion, and an earnest, irrepressible longing for spiritual 
advancement. Lust, anger, and their train should not 
be his masters. His profession should be in strict accord- 
ance with Shastrik morality. He should consciously do 
nothing that hurts or injures a fellow-being, and the milk 
of his kindness should ever flow to relieve suffering 
humanity. These and many other qualifications are 
required of the aspirant to the great path. It is also 
stated that a. candidate must remain under the personal 
observation of a Guru for a whole year before he can hope 
to be initiated. Deluded by Avidya, however, we do not 
pause to reflect whether the field in which the seed is to 
be sown is worthy of it. Sometimes, in our impatience 
(which is a state of mind quite unfitted for spiritual 
culture), we fly to sannydsis (ascetics), and, getting our- 
selves initiated by them, hasten homeward, hardly know- 
ing that thereby we transgress a positive injunction of 
the Shastra, and place ourselves in difficulties. It is 
laid down in the Tantras: 


INTRODUCTION lix 


aralaea faat afag aaaifaaa | 
asifgat 4 fret Starfafagarsta | 
Aaa afquaa AraqatwT AIzyq u 
qatar | 
aacrar fagetar dtara aaatfas: | 
fafaarafaut erat a at aarqafaat 
auTfaafidtiaaa | 
ara Surat FT aac fawtaa | 
 farearqaraa 
JASICy AMAT TACT AAAAA: | 
ATTA 
art arafise aaaafaqre: | 


QzZaAAA I 


“In the initiation one should exclude his maternal 
grandfather, father, a Sannydasi, and a Vanaprastha;1 
otherwise, there being contrariety in the respective posi- 
tions of Guru and Shishya, the Shishya is sure to meet 
death.” 

“Tnitiation by a Yati,? by one’s father, by a Vana- 
prastha,’ or by a Sannyasi is not favourable to the welfare 
of a Shishya.”’ 

“One should receive Diksha from a householder re- 
siding in the same locality with the Shishya.”’ 

“The Tantra enjoins initiation from a Guru who has 
wife and children.”’ 

“The Guru should be a householder, meditative and 
well versed in Tantrik knowledge and in Mantra.”’ 

The reason why a man who has freed himself of the 
illusory world and stands outside of it is ill-qualified to 
show the light, step by step, to a disciple whirling in the 
eddies of the world is plain enough. A Sannyasi is one 


1 One who has gone to the forest according to the rule of the third 
Ashrama. | 2 Ascetic. 


Ix PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


who has given up Karma, his mind having been purified. 
He is an Advaiti,! whose only avocation is the realization of 
the One without a second. But a householder is a man 
in, even if he be not of, the world: He is practically a 
Dvaiti,2 though intellectually he may not be so. His 
distracted mind must be soothed by worship, prayer, 
and hymn, and by other acts of devotion (Bhakti) to his 
Ishtadevata.? A Sannyasi, on the other hand, is a Jnani 
(one possessed of true knowledge) who, having crossed the 
threshold of Bhakti (devotion), looks down upon it as an 
illusion, an unreality. The mental attitudes of a house- 
holder and of a Sannyasi are poles asunder. It is, there- 
fore, inevitable that, in spite of his best endeavours, a 
Sannyasi’s teachings must contain much that is un- 
assimilable by a’ householder, who, by his strenuous 
efforts to practise such instructions, must succumb bodily 
and mentally. 

A householder Guru, on the other hand, is much on the 
same plane of consciousness with his disciple. Though 
in the small rowing-boat of Bhakti (devotion), he has 
oared manfully towards the ship of his destination, and 
neared it. His Bhakti is suffused with the Divine 
halo of Jnana (knowledge). He is the fittest person to 
lead a world-ridden disciple by the hand, instructing him 
in every point, and teaching him by personal example: 


wayqaiaqta fwwAaTa< wraqaty | 
—AZUTATA | 


“ Himself practises and puts Sor in practice ”’ 
(Rudra Yamala). 

Those who are real aspirants need not engine their 
progress by adhering to the ancestral Guru. If they have 
already been initiated by him, they may leave him and 
find out a higher one. 


1 A spiritual monist, not a mere philosophical monist, but one 
who himself in various degrees experientially realizes the truth of 
that doctrine. 2 Dualist. 3 See p. xl, n. 3; antes 


INTRODUCTION Ixi 
The Kamakhya Tantra says: 


asat Yat aa HTaTa jaca fF | 
SATA Aaa fa AAA UTA WTA 
AM Al Way A TA ATA AIZAA | 
arated fara fe act danfa fre i 
ata aa aaratfa a we: fag ua fe | 
aafad asifaar wid aifiat aa I 
AUAST GUT AF: FATA yMTAt AR | 
WMa_qsraTar fet Waar asia ti 
ATATRIT AAA | 


“A Guru exists to impart Jnanas (different forms of 
knowledge). Jnana leads one to Moksha (liberation), 
Hence Jnana is the supreme good. Therefore the Guru 
who is incapable of imparting Jnana should be aban- 
doned, as one who is desirous of food abandons the person 
who has no food to give. Onein whom Jnana shines is 
Guru; he is Shiva. Abandoning the ignorant, one should 
take the shelter of the wise. As a bee roams from flower 
to flower in quest of honey, eyen so should a Shishya, in 
quest of Jnana, go from one Guru to another.” 

If the ancestral Guru be really ignorant, there is nothing 
in the Tantra Shastra to compel one to seek initiation 
from him. But I feel the necessity of a word in favour 
of this much-abused man. I fear the Hindu Society is 
much more to blame than the ancestral Guru for this 
state of things. There was a happy time when every 
Hindu deemed it his duty not only to be initiated, but to 
practise worship with devotion and piety. Many amongst 
the higher classes lived a life which was rather religious 
than a purely social one. It was, therefore, incumbent 
upon the Guru so to qualify himself as to render himself 
a being higher than those around him. But the Hindu 
mind having considerably receded from such an ideal of 
life, initiation and worship are disregarded. ‘There being 


Ixii PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


very little demand for real initiation and instruction in 
true worship, the supply of duly qualified Gurus has 
naturally fallen off. That the Guru-class still exists is 
due, to a large extent, to our love for the husk with which 
we want to fill the social granary. The Gurus, moreover, 
are now ill-fed by the Shishya community, which accounts 
for many Guru families giving up the profession. It is 
the paramount duty of the Hindus of the present genera- 
tion to reform the Guru community, which can, I think, 
be easily effected by fostering the growth of a sincere and 
earnest desire to learn and to practise among ourselves. 

There is one aspect of initiation which I have left un- 
touched for want of information—I mean its astrological 
aspect. It is said that the nativity of a candidate and 
the particular Mantra in which he should be initiated are 
correlated. As I am not an astrologer, I am not com- 
petent to speak as to this. Those who profess to be 
astrologers are really empirics, and, having no scientific 
knowledge of astrology, cannot explain this correlation. 
But opinions are divided amongst Tantriks on ane point, 
and so it need not trouble us. 


THE OCTAGON OF SELF-CULTURE. 


In the previous sections I have attempted to give the 
reader the result of a general survey of the philosophy 
upon which Tantrik Sadhana, or Self-culture, is based. 
But in so recondite and unfamiliar a subject, where the 
correctness of every individual interpretation may be 
called in question, the reader is requested to go himself 
to the source, and there, with faith and devotion, and 
under the guidance of a Guru, drink of its waters. 

I shall now address myself to the subject of the supreme 
importance of Tantrik Sadhana, which, as already ob- 
served, is the easiest and the straightest path to follow 
for men of the Kali Yuga I should not be understood 


i The present, the last, and worst of the ages. See A. Avalon’s 
Introduction, ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra.” 


INTRODUCTION Ixiii 


to preach Shakta Dharma! to one and all. The Tantrik 
method of spiritual culture is not, as I have already said, 
sectarian. The Tantra provides paths of culture for all 
the five classes of Updsakas (worshippers) in Hinduism, 
and an advanced Tantrik Guru is as capable of illumining 
the path of a Vaishnava as that of a Shakta. 

The path of Dharma is twofold: the path of desire 
(pravritti) and the path of cessation of desire (nivritti). 
These two paths are in conformity with the two great 
Powers which are perpetually at work in the universe. 
One of the Powers is called Maya and the other Maha- 
maya. They are the two phases of the one immutable 
Shakti. Maya weaves the woof and the warf of Evolu- 
tion from Spirit to matter; Mahdamaya frees the Ego 
from its Karmik garb, and leads it on to its destination. 
To sail downstream is easy enough. It needs no toil, no 
struggle. The current is favourable; hoist the sail of 
your Desires on the mast of your untrained Will, and sail 
pleasantly along. But your pleasure is short-lived; there 
is sorrow in all of it. Like Sisyphus, you roll your stone 
up the mountain-top only to come down again. And 
as the desires, even of the most intellectually cultured, 
know no bounds, the Ego is drowned more and more in 
the quagmire of matter, forgetting its own self, and for- 
going the privileges of a human Ego which. after millions 
of journeyings, it has had the good fortune to acquire. 
The soft heart of the Divine Mother cannot bear to see 
Her children thus lost. She steps in and proclaims 
Pravritti Dharma, which her ordinary children must 
follow, so that in the long-run Pravritti may lead to 
Niyritti. This Dharma is work prescribed in the Shastras 
to be performed with Bhakti or devotion to God for 
accomplishing definite results. Pravritti being bridled by 
Dharma, unrestrained licence of desires is prevented, and 
the sojourner on the Pravritti path begins to learn Bhakti 
or devotion. The fulfilment of his desires, however 


1 The way or religion of those who worship Shakti. 


ser 


Ixiv PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


worldly, depends upon the favour of God whom he 
invokes from the depths of his heart. He performs the 
rites and ceremonies prescribed for the particular object 
he has in view with austerities and penances which are 
required, and thus, though the mainspring of his action 
be selfish, he unconsciously develops his higher instincts 
and nobler nature. From hankering after sensuous 
pleasure in the shape of money, power, fame, popularity, 
progeny, and so forth, he gradually lifts his eyes upwards 
and longs for power in the unseen world. He devotes 
his mind and soul to its acquisition. And when he is 
fortunate enough to obtain but a morsel of it, he at once 
realizes the nothingness of worldly desires. He forth- 
with parts with them as a serpent parts with its dead 
skin. The worshipper on the path of desire now lives 
in the supersensuous world; his worldly hankerings have 
ceased at any rate to a considerable extent, and he has 
made more progress towards the path of Nivritti than 
one whose desires are not restrained by Dharma, and 
who depends solely upon his own resources to combat 
Pravritti. 

To combat Pravritti! How sweetly sounds the phrase ! 
To do works for others! How much sweeter still! Let 
us not deceive ourselves, as we are apt to do. The octopus- 
like grasp of our cumulated Karma, extending over 
millions of births and rebirths, is so firm that it is 
impossible to free ourselves from it unless we begin in 
Pravritti Dharma and end in Nivritti. Is it possible for 
anyone to jump from the bottomless abyss of desires to 
the celestial height of Nivritti by a single leap? There 
must be intermediate rounds on the ladder, for nature 
does not work by leaps and bounds; sequences of causes 
and effects pervade it. Not even the Lokapalas, Dik- 
palas,? and Lords higher still are free from desires, though 
they, by spiritualizing many of such desires, have risen 
higher and higher on the upward path of progress. How 


1 Lords of the Regions and Quarters. 


INTRODUCTION Ixv 


can one be selfless unless he has dedicated his self to the 
Lord of all selves ? And how can one dedicate his self to 
the Lord of all selves by one single bound? As house- 
holders (Grihis) we are chained to the world by a thousand 
and one knots. Our family, our lust, our greed, our 
avarice, our ambition, all bind us down. We are over- 
whelmed with desires even unto death. Where, then, is 
our altruism ? If there were a scalpel to open the mind, 
or an X-ray apparatus to display it, it would doubtless 
be found that altruism is, in many a case, traceable to 
love of fame, love of popular applause, love of power, 
and other little self-loves. It is intense love of God alone 
which can make a person selfless in action. It is very 
unfortunate that in the name of altruistic work many 
English-educated Hindus have given up Pravritti Dharma, 
the inestimable boon which the wise, holy Rishis have 
given us for our salvation. 

In the Bhagavadgita the Lord (I adopt Mrs. Besant’s 
translation) says: 


aqfaur used at wat: gafaitssa 
MATT ATUTaY WTAt T ATATA I 
aut wit faa waafafatraa | 
faatfe wiftatsaaae a a aa faa: 0 
SZIUt a_ Vas Wal aaa J aa 
sifaa: a fe gata alaaraaai afaa 
qaat WAAAd BTA AT AVG | 
aigza: agfafa a Agia Tea: 

“Fourfold in division are the righteous ones who 
worship Me, O Arjuna: the suffering, the seeker for 
knowledge, the self-interested, and the wise. Of these 
the wise, constantly harmonized, worshipping the One, 
is the best; I am supremely dear to the wise, and he is 
dear to Me. Noble are all these; but I hold the wise as 


verily Myself; he, self-united, is fixed on Me, the highest 
goal. At the close of many births the man full of wisdom 


§ 


Ixvi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


cometh unto Me. ‘ Vasudeva is all,’ saith he, the 
Mahatma, very difficult to find.” 

Of the four kinds of worshippers mentioned by 
Bhagavan, the atta and the artharthi (the suffering and 
the self-interested) are Sakama Updasakas,’ who are on 
the path of desire. All the worshippers are called 
“ sukritinah ” (righteous)—that 1s, even those who are 
on the path of desire, have germs of good work in them, 
otherwise worship would not have formed a part of their 
work. ‘ Udardh sarva eva te ’’—that is, all of them are 
noble, dear to God, because the Godward mind, even if 
selfish, attains an amount of mental purification and 
contentment which is impossible for others to acquire. 
The last couplet means that a true Jnani—an advaitist? is. 
a product of many, many births, and that such a Mahatma* 
is very rare. It will thus be seen that Pravritti Dharma 
has a place in self-culture, however low compared with 
the highest, that place may be. It is for those who cannot 
dissociate their minds from worldly desires. And I need 
hardly say that the bulk of humanity is of that tempera- 
ment. If there be a blessed few amongst us who have 
governed their desires effectually, who are rather in than 
of the world, Pravritti Dharma, like dry leaves of trees, will 
fall from off them; but they are not, therefore, justified in 
giving up the Shastrik Dharma-Karma. The Lord Himself 
has exhorted them to perform religious works prescribed in. 
the Shastra selflessly for the instruction of the mass of men. 
Like a patient who accepts his physician’s diagnosis but. 
rejects his prescription, it would be the height of folly 
to accept Hindu philosophy and to reject its practice. 

The Tantrik system of culture on the path of desire is. 
remarkable for its aptitude in producing desired results. 

1 Worshippers for reward, and with the view to benefits to be gained 
such as the worshipper whose action is determined by the hope of 
gaining the pleasures of heaven or avoiding the pains of hell; as con- 
trasted with the Nishkama Sadhaka who acts for God’s good sake only. 


and not because such action will produce benefits for him. 
2 See.anie, p. Ix., n. 1. 3 Great soul. 


INTRODUCTION [xvii 


This is known to Hindus of all denominations. But it 
is not a mere hankering after worldly benefits. On the 
contrary, the Sakama Sadhaka longs more for a glimpse 
into the arcana of nature than for mundane comforts, 
and his longing is soon crowned with success. And having 
acquired a personal proof positive of supersensuous 
things, the vanity of sensuous desires forces itself upon 
him in a manner that mere Shravana (study) and Manana 
(contemplation) can hardly approach. This, it must be 
conceded, is a long leap forward. To withdraw the mind 
from worldly attractions and repulsions many births and 
rebirths have to be spent in study, contemplation, and 
discrimination. The Tantrik, on the much-despised path 
of desire, however, transfers his consciousness from mun- 
dane attractions and repulsions to a higher plane of 
existence within one life and even a much shorter period. 
Although it cannot give him Mukti (liberation)—and 
Mukti is not a bunch of grapes to be had by the mere 
stretching of the hand upwards to the trellis on which 
they hang—it can make him a Lokapala, a Dikpdla! a 
Manvantaradhipati,? or the like. 

It must not be supposed that the Sakama Tantrik 
worships Devatas? as the Divinity. He no doubt pays 
homage to Devatas as higher beings; but the object of his 
worship is the Divine Mother, who is the same as 
Mahavishnu, the manifested God, and the methods of 
his worship are very much the same as those of the 
worshipper on the Nivritti path. What is stated in the 
Gita as to the consequences of worshipping Devatas, 
Pitris, and Bhutas has no application to a Tantrik, the 
ladder of whose spiritual culture begins with the path of 
desire as the lowest round, and ends at that of which none 
knows—that is, Kaivalya Mukti, or complete liberation. 

1 Lords of the regions and quarters. 

2 Lord of the period called Manvantara. 

3 The writer here refers to the higher Intelligences intermediate 


between ishvara and man. Devatda is used also in another sense. 
Thus, the Divine Mother in Her various leading forms is called Devata. 


Ixviil PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


So long as a man is a Grihi (householder), so long is his 
path the path of Pravritti. If he thinks that he has 
outgrown it, but at the same time earns money, enjoys 
the world, forms attachments and repulsions, seeks name, 
fame, and popular applause, discharges the functions 
of a father of his household and of a member of the 
community in which he lives, he deceives himself. The 
path pointed out to him by the Tantrik is the best that 
he can have as an individual, as the father of a family, 
and as a member of society. The Tantrik culture is an 
all-round growth. It makes the body sturdy and strong, 
and proof to heat, cold, and rains; it wards off diseases 
from without, and resists diseases from within; it makes 
one hardy, painstaking, and patient. His will being 
regularly trained, he is resolute and intrepid. All these 
qualities of body and mind render him as much a useful 
member of society as a humble supplicant for the dust 
of the Mother’s feet. As for altruism, people thus trained 
are taught from the very beginning to do good to others. 
qUywartafaat areat faa: afa: 1 “Kali is the slave 
of those pious men, the rule of whose life is to do good 
to others,” says the Tantra. 

Now let us pass to the study of the path of cessation, 
called the path of Nivritti. Those whose minds have 
become sattvik by the reduction of their rajasik desires 
through practice on the path of desire, and those fortunate 
few whose past lives have prepared them for it, are the fit 
Adhikaris! on the Nivritti path. The Hindu ShAstras, 
whether Vaidik or Tantrik, regard Adhikara or personal 
competency as the most important factor in determining 
the mode of culture to be prescribed for a candidate. 
The Guru must test the mental calibre, moral proclivity, 
and physical aptitude of his would-be disciple (shishya), 
and must point out to him that path for which he is the 
most suited. 


1 Persons competent for a thing. The whole of Hinduism rests on 
the theory of competency, or adhikaravada. 


INTRODUCTION xix 


Sadhakas on the path of cessation of desire are divided 
into two classes—viz., those who are yet bound by the ties 
and conventionalities of the world, and those who have got 
rid of, or are resolved to get rid of, them. Their methods 
of culture are different. The ties and conventions are 
called Pasha—that is, fetters. They are eight in number, 
as the Kularnava Tantra says: 

BUT AST AY Wat ATA Vey wAAt | 
Sea WS AAT ATfacst arg: wala: 1 
FMUIAA | 

‘‘ Aversion, shame, fear, grief, disgust, family, custom, 
and caste; these are declared as fetters.”’ 

I need hardly point out that there is hardly one among 
a million who can say that he is free from these fetters. 
And there are but few who struggle to sail clear of them. 
My task is to study the Sadhana of the Adhikaris of the 
former class. This Sadhana may be roughly, though 
not exhaustively, classed under four heads: 1. Sandhya, 
or obligatory daily service. 2. Updsana, or worship. 
3. Shatchakrabheda. 4. Mudra Sadhana. The first two 
of these will form the subject of this section. 

In Patanjali’s Yoga Shastra eight methods are laid 
down as modes of self-culture for realizing the True Self. 
They are: 1. Constant practice, and Vairagya or that 
state of mind which is proof against worldly attractions 
and repulsions. 2. Worship of the manifested God. 
3. Pranayama, or regulation of breath. 4. Concentra- 
tion of mind on any one of the objects of the senses. 
5. Concentration in the heart-lotus. 6. Concentration 
with a mind free from desires.2 7. Concentration on 
the particular image of the Godhead worshipped by the 
Sadhaka, as it appears in the dream-state, and on the 
Sattvik nature of the mind in dreamless sleep. 8. Medi- 
tation on any object of liking. 


1 Vishayavati va pravrittirutpanna sthitinibandhani. (Patanjala, 
I-35.) 2 Vitaraga vishayadva chittam (ib. 1-37). 


Ixx PRINCIPEESSOR DAN ies 


Excepting Nos. 4 and 6, which are particular modes of 
concentration practised by Tantriks in Shatchakrabheda’ 
and secret worship,? the Tantrik Upasana includes all 
these and much more. I shall first take up the last, 
about which much misconception seems to prevail. The 
original text is: 

GuTfeaagra at 


‘““ And by meditation on any object of liking ”’ (the 
being copulative and not alternative). 
Vyasa’s commentary on the above aphorism is: 


azaifund aga urda, aa eeufafaanaarie fetar 
aaa | 


_ “ Whatever may be the object of one’s liking, let him 
meditate upon that. If the mind settles upon that 
particular object, it may settle also elsewhere.”’ 

This aphorism does not give unbridled licence to 
practise concentration upon any object at random. There 
are people who have very pronounced predilections for 
particular objects which they are unable to ignore. It 
is for these people that the above wholesome advice is 
given. An anecdote may here be related in illustration 
of this. Once upon a time there lived a very pious King, 
who was earnest upon giving a-religious training to his 
son. He repaired to a famous Yogi for whom he enter- 
tained great respect. After the usual exchange of 
greetings the King said: ‘‘ Mahatman! If you please, I 
should like to have my son initiated by your Holiness.” — 
“Very well, my son,’ replied the Yogi, “send him 
hither.” The King, very much gratified, prostrated 
himself before the holy man, and sped homeward. The 
day after the royal scion appeared before the Yogi, and 
paid his obesiance. ‘“‘ God bless you, child! Live here, 
and make yourself comfortable,’ said the Yogi to him. 


1 Asin Dhydna on the gandha tattva in the Maladhara, etc. 


Rahasya paija; a special mode of worship undertaken with the 
object of freeing the mind from desires, 


INTRODUCTION }xx1 


The royal youth, however, found not much in the Yogi’s 
Ashrama (hermitage) to comfort him, but the wild scene, 
the beautiful rivulet, the ravine, and the birds’ song 
made captive his heart. For three or four days he was 
found to enjoy Nature, but in the midst of his enjoyment 
he was observed suddenly to sigh and become pensively 
meditative. One day the Yogi asked him: “ Child, what 
aismyouees oir, replied the Prince, “I have a 
beautiful young elephant at home, which I love with all 
my heart. Its absence pains me.”’ “ Very well, I shall 
send for it,” said the holy man. The day after the 
young elephant was brought. The Prince’s joy knew no 
bounds; he began to caress it, kiss it. The Yogi said: 
“ Child, the first lesson I give you is to forget everything 
else and to concentrate your mind upon this young 
elephant. | obey,” said the Prince. A year after the 
Yogiinquired: “‘ Well, how far have you progressed ?”’ The 
Prince said: ‘‘ I have not yet been successful.’”” The Yogi 
encouraged him to persevere. Two yearsrolled on. One 
day the Prince appeared before the Yogi, and said: ‘‘ Holy 
Father, my mind is completely lost in the image of the 
young elephant. I see it everywhere. There is nothing 
else in the world to captivate my mind.” “‘ Sarvamangala’ 
bless you, my child, you have quickly won the battle. 
Come now and be initiated in the Mantra of your Ishtade- 
vata.’ So saying, the holy one put the Prince on the path. 

The reader will thus find that the choice of the object 
of concentration does not depend upon individual caprice. 
If the mind be so weak that it cannot readily part with 
its predilections, it is by a regulated exercise of those 
predilections that the ever-roving mind is settled. It is 
but a temporary arrangement for rare cases. To reduce 
the mind to a focus is a task of great magnitude, perhaps 
of a whole life. Nothing should be allowed to be identi- 
fied with the mind except a Divine image—that is, a form 
in which Divinity incarnates, and for this plain reason 
that what a man thinks upon that he becomes. If one 


‘ The all-auspicious Goddess. 2 Vide ante, p. Ix. 


Ixxil PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


concentrates upon a glass ball, a glass ball shall he 
become. Says Lord Shri Krishna: 


Wut at waded aTagTs AINA | 

In the Tantrik Mantra the worshipper finds an image 
of the Incarnation of the Divinity not a dead image, a 
shadow, but an image which, by Sadhana, can be con- 
jured up into the Divinity itself, the spiritual power 
inherent in the Mantra fortifying the will power of the 
Sadhaka to produce this result. From the very outset a 
Sadhaka is enjoined to fill his mind with the thought that 
he and the Divinity are one and the same. The realiza- 
tion of ase (I am He) is the aim and end of his worship. 

The Tantrik Sandhya is an obligatory service, which 
must be performed thrice a day—at dawn, at noon, and 
at sunset. It opens with a Mantra, which reminds the 
worshipper that his individual self is really no other than 
the one Self, manifested in the universe as the male and 
the female Power. The Matrika Shaktis are then brought 
into requisition to render his body and mind active with 
their soul-inspiring energy. The worshipper fays homage 
to the Devas, Rishis, Pitris, to his Guru,? and to humanity. 
With a libation of water he declares: aqutaqatia— 
that is, “ I gratify mankind.” 

As the Divine Mother is in everything and everything 
is in Her, service to every living being, whether human 
or not, is a part of his religion. 

Meditation, concentration, Pranayama, and Japa are 
the principal features of Sandhya. The object of 
Pranayama is to bring the involuntary act of breathing 
under control, and suspend its action at the will of the 
Sadhaka. The constituents of the subtle body are the 
vital air, the sensorium and the mind. The latter is 
intimately connected with breath. The breath serves as 
an instrument to introduce the mind to the world without. 
If one can regulate the breath, he can control the other- 
wise uncontrollable mind. The more one learns this 
art, the more is his will-power developed, the more is he 


t Gods, seers, and forefathers. 


INTRODUCTION Ixxiil 


enabled to concentrate his mind upon a particular object, 
and the more do his passions cease. As breath is the 
measure of life, and not days, years, and months, the 
Sadhaka’s span of life is prolonged, and his body is 
rendered immune to diseases. Life is a resultant of the 
kinetic karmik forces of a man in his previous birth. The 
karmic forces, either potential or kinetic, become a part 
of the mental sheath of the reincarnating Ego along with 
its sensorium and vital power, which latter is manifested in 
the body as breath. Breath is the nexus which joins the 
_ body with the mind. Control it, and you control the dalli- 
ance of the mind with the external world through the body. 
Pranayama is, therefore, an indispensable aid to medita- 
tion, concentration, and the development of will-power. 

In his commentary on verse 7, chap. i1., of the Shvetagh- 
vatara Upanishad, Shangkaracharya quotes from Shruti: 

WIUTATAATS Tal GAIA UNfa ATITA | 
aatataat fafea wrmrarariefa aha: 

““The soul being purified by Pranayama realizes 
Parabrahman, hence there is nothing higher than Prana 
yama,’ thus says Shruti.”’ 

He then says: 

“ First, Yajnas and other works should be performed, 
then Pranayama, etc.; then Communion, then knowledge 
of Vedantic teaching, and then liberation.’ 

Then, in his commentary on verse 8 of the same 
chapter, he says: ‘‘ Because the man, the impurities of 
whose mind have been cleansed by Pranayama, is able to 
concentrate his mind on Brahman, therefore Pranayama 
is introduced (in this Upanishad). At first the nerves 
should be purified, and after that one becomes fit to 
practise Pranayama.” 

The Shetashvatara Upanishad says (chap. ii., verse 9): 

WIMIT WISE TYR: | 
Sty wie atfanarapara: | 
Zelaamfag aeaaa | 
{agra wal UITAAIRAT: 


Ixxiv PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


“A wise man should skilfully regulate his breath. 
When the Prana becomes feeble it should be let off 
through the nostrils in small quantities. When one thus 
becomes gradually accustomed to holding the breath, the 
mind, like a chariot drawn by unruly horses—that is, 
senses—becomes fixed and fitted for Brahma-Jnana ” 
(knowledge of the Brahman). 

In Chapter XIV., Skandha XI. of Shrimad Bhagavata, 
in answer to Uddhava’s question as to how one who 
desires mukti (liberation) should contemplate Him, 


Bhagavan says: “‘ Sitting at ease upon an Asana (seat), | 


neither high nor low, with the body erect, keeping the 
palms of the hands one upon another upon the lap, one 
should fix his eyes upon the tip of his nose; then, governing 
all the senses, the path of breath should be cleansed by 
Puraka (drawing in the breath), Kumbhaka (holding it) 
and Rechaka (giving it out). Having by Pranayama 
drawn the senses from their respective objects, practice 
should also be made by degrees in an opposite direction. 
The sound ayyq (Om) in the heart, which is like a con- 
tinuous bell-sound, should be drawn upwards by 
Pranayama, and then Vindu should be placed upon it. 
In this wise Pranayama, with aya (Om), should be prac- 
tised ten times in each of the three Sandhyas. By doing 
this the breath is conquered within a month.” 

It will thus be seen that the Upanishads, the Puranas, 
and the Tantras with one voice proclaim the supreme 


importance of Pranaydma in self-culture. Itis, however, . 


the Tantra which has preserved knowledge of the mode 
of practice of this noble art, and it is the Tantriks who 
can teach it. Shangkaracharya, in his commentary 
above quoted, mentions atfsafe , or purification of the 
Nadis,? as a condition precedent to practising Pranayama. 
I believe the Tantriks are the only Gurus who know how 
to do it. Pranayama is essential in Sandhya, Upasana, 


1 “‘ Nerves.” Seé Arthur Avalon’s ‘‘ Six Centres and the Serpent 
Power,’’ and Introduction to his ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra.’’ 


a 


INTRODUCTION lxxv 


and Shatchakra Sadhana. But it must be learnt very 
cautiously and with the help of a Guru. As it has to be 
learnt by degrees it forms an essential part of daily 
service. 

Sandhya is mental exercise. The image of the Divine 
Mother, which is potential in the worshipper’s Ishta- 
Mantra’ and described in what is generally known as 
Dhyana (Contemplation), must be done in the mind. 
The mental image thus arising should be identified with 
the all-pervading Divine Mother, and concentration 
practised upon it. 

Dhyana (meditation) is of two kinds, Sikshma and 
Sthtla—that is, supersensuous and sensuous. — 


wagafaiga wiry fafa waa | 

aa aaay ce wa fauefumaaa i 

ACUSecaiiy EW aq Uafazer | 

AAY WRAY Ut WIAA War tt 

qaura aeyifa agiwafe aad | 

Baal AVIA AAT AlqaaTg_ara ti 

alaaaay | 

wuraeg fafau ai aenrEUadea: | 

Hei AT GAMAATETAATATITA | 

aaa aga arafaciad faafsrar 

wag afafsia aqcaaraarfuTr: | 

AAMT VITITITY Wl BAe aT | 

aaa Wag Bawa aaifa a 
agifaatgaaa | 


The Yamala says: 

“Dhyana is of two kinds, Sthila (gross) and Sikshma 
(subtle). Sd&ikshma, or supersensuous, is Thy sound-body 
(aeamaR 2A); Sthdila is meditation on Thy image, 


1 The particular Mantra which the particular Sddhaka receives at 
initiation. 


Ixxvl PRINCTPLCESSOH] LA Nees 


which is made up of hands, feet, etc. Thy Sukshmaripa 
(subtle form) is the Jnanamaya (conscious) body of 
Prakriti. © Maheshvari! The supersensuous seldom 
arises in the mind; therefore one should concentrate his 
mind on the Sthdla form and attain Moksha (liberation).”’ 

The Mahanirvana Tantra says: 

“Dhyana is of two kinds, Saripa (having visible 
image) and Artipa (not having visible image). Thy Arupa 
Dhyana is beyond the cognizance of speech and mind; it 
is unmanifested, all-pervading, incapable of being pointed 
out as ‘ this’ or ‘that.’ Yogis alone can cognize it by 
long Samadhi (ecstasy). I relate to you Sthula Dhyana, 
so that Sadhakas being hopeful of Sikshma Dhyana may 
practise it by fixing the mind upon it for the attainment 
of the object of their desire.”’ 

In the Dawn-Sandhya the Divine Mother must be con- 
templated in the root-lotus as the Creative Power. 
symbolized by a maiden having a string of beads in Her 
right hand and a jar filled with water in Her left, riding 
on a white swan. The white swan is the Hangsa of 
philosophy, the vital Power which must needs be Her 
vehicle for the purpose of creation, for without the vital 
power creation is impossible. The string of beads 
symbolizes Japa—that is, meditation on the creation of 
the previous Kalpa and production of similar sound- 
forms, which are the substratum of all things sensuous 
and supersensuous. The jar of water is the “ cause- 
water” (a@rcumartf ) of philosophy, the protoplasm out 
of which all bodies are formed. 

In the Noon-Sandhya She rides on the King of Birds, 
Gariida, in the heart-lotus holding in Her four hands 
conch, discus, mace, and lotus, and wearing a garland of 
flowers on Her breast. Gardda is light (which is life 
as well), the conch is sound, the discus is Avidya or that 
Power by which creation comes; the mace is the symbol of 
authority, and the lotus is the universe. She is now the 
Vaishnavi Shakti, who maintains and nourishes the 


INTRODUCTION Ixxvil 


universe. The garland of flowers symbolizes the count- 
less beings whom She nourishes. The explanations 
of the symbols given in this and the preceding and suc- 
ceeding paragraphs are my own. The Shrimad-Bhaga- 
vata explains the garland as meaning Maya, the mace as 
denoting the vital Power, the conch as meaning water, 
the discus as symbolizing light, and the lotus as signalizing 
Ananta, or space. 

In the Evening-Sandhya She rides the Great Bull 
(#etTqga:) in the white lotus, holding a trident in Her 
right hand and a noose (UTY:) in the left. When the day 
of Brahma—that is, a Kalpa—comes to a close, the bifur- 
cated male and female Powers again meet in equilibrium. 
This is symbolized by the trident. The noose is Avidya, 
which She has withdrawn into Her own hand to repose 
there until the darkness of Brahma’s night is dispelled. 

As Creator Her vehicle is Rajasik, as Preserver it is 
Sattvik, and as Withdrawer of the universe it is Triguna 
Maya,? the Tamasik Guna predominating. The creative 
energy is volition (qwetyfa:). the preservative energy 
is action (f#atwfa:), and the destructive energy is 
cognition (wTawim:). These three phases of the all- 
pervading Shakti must be contemplated on day by 
day in order that the Sddhaka may realize what the 
object of his worship is in manifestation. 

The image of the Ishtadevata must first be formed in 
the mind by Dhyana. Then the Vija Mantra should be 
repeated, keeping the image in view and withdrawing the 
mind from al! other thoughts. This is called Japa. 


aq wy yaay sfeyl atv eaat | 
facfaat AZTATL AMAT AIATTTT Il 
yarfsaar | 
afasaTaa TA fSaaaiaU: | 
aAISWTAaUM Gana aaa fra 
RAMU ATAT | 


1 Maya of the three gunas. 


xxviii PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


The Bhttashuddhi Tantra says: 

“Meditating on the form of the Devata denoted by 
the Mantra, Japa should be made in the mind.” 

The Ktilarnava Tantra says: 

‘‘ A Mantra should be repeated with faith, devotion, 
attention, submission, and perception of the Divine 
image in the mind.” 

Japa is of three kinds: Vachika (by audible words), 
Upangsha (lips and tongue moving; but inaudible to the 
person making Japa), and Manasika (mental; lips and 
tongue not moving). Japa has the supreme virtue of 
gradually withdrawing the mind from other thoughts 
and impressions, and fixing it on the Divine image. When 
concentration by this means is perfected, the conscious- 
ness of the Sadhaka is transferred to the Mantra-devata. 
This is called Mantra-chaitanya (awakening of Mantra) 
and the Sadhaka is said to have become Mantra-siddha 
(Mantra-perfect). 

It will thus be seen that Sandhya is of the highest 
efficacy in spiritual culture, and it is on this account that 
it is obligatory on every Hindu of whatever division of 
worshippers he be. I have already quoted from the 
Shrimad-Bhagavata, which is the scripture of the 
Vaishnavas, to show the importance of Pranayama and 
Sandhya. Other quotations from the same Shastra follow: 

“One who is desirous of cutting the bondage of I-am- 
ness of the Jivatma should worship Keshava according 
to the Tantrik method, which contains in it the Vaidik 
method as well.” 

‘“The man who in this wise worships Ishvara in Agni, 
Sarya, water, etc., or in one’s own heart, as the Atma, 
according to the Tantrik Karmayoga, soon attains Mukti 
(liberation).”” 

Skandha XI.; chap. ii. 


“O Uddhava! visiting My image and other symbol. 
visiting My Bhakta (devotee), . . . Diksha, according 


INTRODUCTION [xxix 


to the Vedas and the Tantras . . . these are the signs of 
Bhakti (devotion) to Me.” 
Skandha XI., chap. xi. 


_ “My worship is of three kinds: Vaidik, Tantrik, and 
mixed. Whichever of these three be to one’s liking, let 
him worship Me by that.” 
Skandha XI., chap. xxvii. 


“ Shaunaka said: O Sita, you are devoted to Bhagavan, 
you know all the doctrines of Tantra and many other 
things. I now ask you a question. Narayana, the 
husband of Shri, is only Chidghana (massive conscious- 
ness), but Tantrik Upasakas (worshipper), at the time of 
worship, attribute limbs, and these and other parts, such 
as Gartida, etc., weapons such as Sudarshana, and orna- 
ments such as Kaustubha, toHim. Tell me what things 
(Tattvas) are symbolized by them. I am desirous of 
knowing Kriya yoga.t Therefore, relate to me that 
skill in Kriya (action) by which men attain Mukti (libera- 
tion). Sdata said: Saluting my Gurudeva, I relate to you 
the Vibhitis? of Vishnu as stated in the Veda and the 
Tantra by Brahma and other Acharyas (teachers).”’ 

Skandha XII., chap. xi. 


These and other like statements should induce my 
Vaishnava brothers, who are too often apt to assail the 
Tantra, to abstain from the terrible sin of a patricide. 

Upasana is the worship of the Vachya Shakti? through 
the Vachaka Shakti of a Sadhaka’s Ishtamantra.* If 
the Ishtamantra denotes an Avatara® in male body, the 
worship is regulated in conformity with it; and if the 
Ishtamantra denotes a female Avatara the method of 
worship is of a different type. But the main principles ol 
worship are identical. The Ishtamantra, or Vija Mantra, 

1 Yoga through action. 2 Powers and manifestations. 

3 Vide ante, pp. xlvi, and post. 4 Vide ante, pp. Ixxv. 


5 Manifestation called ‘‘ incarnation’’ when it takes place on the 
physical plane. 


Ixxx PRINCIPLES OF? TANT Tea 


as previously stated, denotes two Powers, the Vachaka 
and the Vachya Shakti. By realizing the Vachaka 
Shakti, the abstract, unconditioned Paramatma, which 
is the Vachya Shakti of a Mantra, must be realized, the 
ultimate goal of all Sadhana being the realization of the 
One True Self. The Vachaka Shakti is the Manifested 
God, Saguna Ishvara, the Shakti of the Tantrik philo- 
sophy. We have seen how the one Shakti is bifurcated 
into male and female Shaktis for the purposes of evolu- 
tion, thus giving expression to Shabdabrahman. We 
have also seen how our solar system is presided over by 
seven Lords in its seven planes, each of these Lords being 
an aspect of Shabdabrahman. In Updsana (worship) 
the Virata Sharira—that is, the physical body of Shab- 
dabrahman—is the vehicle through which worship is 
offered. It is the Virdta Sharira, which is the ground of 
all Avataras. The Sahasrashirsha Purusha (thousand- 
headed Purusha) of the Vedas is the Virat Purusha of 
philosophy. The five Mahabhttas (elements), the ten 
senses, the five vital airs, MaMas (sensorium), Buddhi 
(intuition), Ahangkara (ego), and Chitta (mind) con- 
stitute the Sharira or body of Shabdabrahman, the 
plane of whose consciousness is called Jagrata, or 
waking. Worship begins from this state of Divine 
consciousness until it reaches the dreaming state, or 
Svapna. Beyond the dreaming state is Sushupti, or 
slumbering consciousness of Shabdabrahman, where 
worship ends. It must be remembered that the self- 
same Sachchidananda is worshipped in different vehicles, 
even as the selfsame gold is worn as a ring, a chain, a 
bracelet, and the like. 

It will thus be seen that Kali and Vishnu are essentially 
the same, only the vehicles and their characteristic 
qualities differing. The Tantrik’s predilection for the 
Divinity in its female form, as the Mother of the Universe, 
arises in part from the fact that the mother’s heart being 
softer than that of the father, she is more readily moved 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxi 


in favour of the son than the father. Some no doubt 
would regard this as a very pronounced instance of 
anthropomorphism. But in truth it cannot be denied that 
as the human mother is a spark of the Divine Mother, the 
qualities of head and heart of the former are but an 
infinitesimally small expression of similar qualities in 
the latter. From the bodies of the Divine Father and 
the Divine Mother proceed all evolutions of body and 
mind. The human father and the human mother, and all 
fathers and mothers in the universe, are Angsa-Shaktis— 
that is, individual powers emanating from the Divine 
Parents, who do not, like the Christian and the Moham- 
medan God, personally create bodies and souls. The 
characteristic predominance of emotional qualities in 
human mothers is an index that it must be so in the 
Divine Mother; the experience of Sadhakas proves this, 
and it is conceded in the scriptures of Vaishnavas as well. 

There is yet a weightier consideration than the above 
which has won the Tantrik over to the lotus-feet of 
Mother Kali. The paternal and maternal Shaktis, the 
positive and negative poles, the centrifugal and centri- 
petal forces, are perpetually in harmonious association 
to evolve and nourish the universe. The Paternal 
Shakti is ever fecundating, and the Maternal Shakti ever 
holding the child in her womb and nourishing it. This is 
the law of Pravritti (desire) in the universe. When the 
Divine Mother refuses fecundation and, dominating the 
Divine Father, asserts Her Will, then is She Mahavidya, 
then is She Niramayapadonmukhi (facing the state of 
freedom from sufferings). The milk of Her perennial 
breast then nourishes the aspirant, and gives him strength 
to march along the path of Nivritti (cessation). It is 
then that She, the Vama, the left-hand consort,’ usurps 
the right-hand place, and, slaying the demon-propensities 
of Her beloved sons, gives them hope and courage with 
Her right hand. The Fecundating Father, the source 


1 The position of the wife is on the left hand. 
h 


IXxxXll PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


of Pravritti, falls prostrate under Her feet to avert the 
destruction of His world. Such is Mahavidyd, the 
Divine Mother, the Lady Paramount of the Path of 
Nivritti (path of cessation), whom the Tantrik worships. 

Upisana, or worship, is of two kinds, internal and 
external. 


fafa masaAAT saa TaUTa Aa | 

aT faarareadt WMATA AT TAT 
acadafear | 

warara cia Hrat staat afaeraa: | 

aatTse TaaUTAafyarri sa BIA | 


es 


WUT ATAaZa: VASAT WHAT Wi 
wiaataqaaa | 


‘““Upasana (worship) of the initiated is of two kinds— 
internal and external. Internal worship is ordained for 
Sannydasis, and both internal and external for others.” 


Tantra Sanghita. 


“ Antarydga, or internal worship, gives Mukti (libera- 
tion) even to a living Sadhaka. Only Mumukshus or 
Munis (sages) bent upon Mukti are entitled to it. The 
Sadhakas, who are incapable of Antaryaga, should per- 
form it like external Paija (worship) with mental offer- 
se Oks Gautamiya Tantra. 

Antarydaga is based entirely upon a direct knowledge 
of the Power-centres or Chakras in the human body. 
The Sadhaka, having awakened Kula-Kundalini in the 
root-chakra, takes Her up, with the help of the vital air, 
from centre to centre, until the thousand-petalled centre 
in the crown of the head is reached; there the male and 
female Powers are brought together in blissful union. 
The Sadhaka having enjoyed this temporary bliss, which 
vitalizes his body and mind, transfers his consciousness 
to the heart-centre, in the ethereal space of which he 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxiii 


forms the mental image of the Divine Mother as it is 
expressed in his Vija-mantra. When the image has been 
thus formed, the mind is concentrated upon it with firm 
faith and devotion. When the image is portrayed upon 
the canvas of the mind with all the details of limbs and 
organs, as if it were a painting, the Sddhaka offers his 
sacrifices: 

BUAAA CATA ATATTCQaraa: | 

ula aUaisaiaaarea fAszaa | 

amadataad artaqata aac | 

WALA Fat Tq WAGs | 

fam WaUMag Ga Ud WTUT WATaT | 

aaa, guy Wayq qurafua i 

Bawaeala Bat qyaway Vata | 

qafafeaaanfa wae Haat | 

uM aati. cat eat arafaaa | 

AAAAAATCATTUIAAT AUT I 

AATWRACAA AAATAAG AUT | 

gaiqaaatayg erga watfwaa 

afeat ata aa unfafeafaaea | 

ZATAATHIATA VAN ad: uta | 

afa waziomraga: woNda i 


“‘ Give the heart-lotus as the seat; give the nectar flow- 
ing from the thousand-petalled lotus for the washing of 
the feet; dedicate the mind (Manas) as Arghya (offering). 
For washing the face and for bathing give the same 
nectar. Give ether (Akasha) as clothing; the principle 
of smell for odour; the mind (Chitta) for flower; the vital 
airs (Pranas) as incense; the principle of light (Tejas) as 
the lamp; the ocean of nectar for food; the sound called 
Andahata (inaudible sound in the heart-lotus) as the bell 
(ghanta); the principle of air as fan and fly whisk 
(Chamara); the actions of the senses, as well as the rest- 


Ixxxiv PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


lessness of the mind, as dancing. For the realization of 
divine thought give diverse flowers: freedom from delu- 
sion, egotism, attachment, spiritual insensibility, pride, 
arrogance, enmity, perturbance, envy, and greed—free- 
dom from all these are called the ten flowers. The 
supreme flower of Ahingsa (non-injury of any living 
thing), the flower of subjugation of the senses and the 
flowers of pity, forgiveness, and knowledge—these are 
the five flowers. With these fifteen flowers formed of 
sentiments (bhdvas) should a worship be performed.” 

After offering this mental sacrifice to his Ishtadevata 
standing before his mental eye in the heart-lotus, the 
Sadhaka makes mental japa: 


AlaT amas WaT questasatera4 

“The rosary is said to be formed of Varnas, or sound- 
powers, strung together by the thread Kundali.” 

The fifty severed heads of men which make up the 
necklace of Mother Kali must be replaced mentally by 
the fifty sound Powers (Varnas), strung together by 
Kulakundalini as thread, and the Vija Mantra is repeated 
with the help of this rosary. He then performs mental 
Homa. 

The Nitya Tantra says: 

aaerafafe aa wy aay | 
ay faaTaaaM HAT SUT Berhwya: ti 
mala satvagq fafa atcate|d | 
MAACAT WLAATATaA Ua ase 1 
aqatagaty HATY TITAg ll 
Asalal Uifreat away fafaaae | 
Bats AAA Fata ACA qaqa i 
watt aa Say GHA FAATS: | 
USSR ATAATSYG Ufasrat aa 3. Aq 
aAIUUts a Sia fawsed Tay aaa |i 
Uw uy faawg aaa aicafed | 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxv 


 Beaaatara etwas wSha t 
fanagqafaay FRITAAAT BAT | 
Aal afaaa: ATATA UT TAI Asa |i 


“O All-beautiful One! I tell you the ritual of Jnana- 
homa (homa of knowledge), give ear unto me. By 
knowing it one becomes Sadashiva, the Creator and De- 
stroyer. The quadrangular Vedi (altar) is made of Atma 
(individual soul), Antaratma (the manifested God), Para- 
matma (the Divine Mother), and Jnanatma (the Absolute). 
The Ardhamatra (Kundalini) should be considered the 
Yoni of the Homa-pit; the-Mekhala of the Vedi (altar), 
that is to say, the-line which encircles it as if by a 
waist-chain, should be thought of as consisting of 
Ananda (bliss); and the other three lines on the Vedi 
should be taken as its three Valis, that is to say, 
beauty-lines on the abdomen. The Kula-bhairava—that 
is, the Yogi—should kindle in it the fire of knowledge 
(Jnana); then the forms of the Matrikd-sounds should 
be sacrificed in the fire of Jnana, by which the sounds 
become Soundless Brahman. O the Adored of Viras! 
Merits, demerits, desires, doubts, action, inaction and 
Prakriti should be sacrificed by the mental spoon. Thus 
one becomes full of Jnana, and Parabrahman Itself.” 

From the above description of subjective Updasana, it 
will have been seen that only such highly developed 
Yogis and devotees are capable of it as have attained 
Samprajnata Samadhi, or Temporary Communion, in 
which the knower and the known are distinguished. It 
is the last stage of Updasana, a thin veil only separating 
the individual Atma from the universal Atma. Such 
Yogis are the product of ages of culture. 

Sadhakas, whose mental image is not so well defined 
and who cannot make it steady for any length of time, 
must form an objective image, exactly in the likeness of 
the subjective image, and worship their Ishtadevata in 
it. They must, however, perform mental Upasana. first 


Ixxxvi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


as best as they can, and then vitalize and energize the 
external image. By establishing a magnetic current 
between himself and the image before him, the mentally 
_vitalized image is communicated to it. The external 
image is no longer a mere doll; it is the Ishtadevata 
Herself. Between the Sadhaka’s faith and will, on the 
one side, and his Mantra-power, on the other, a change, 
so to say, takes place in the inanimate image. It is 
Mantra-shakti which is alone capable of performing this 
wonderful change and of rendering worship in images 
possible. 
The Kularnava Tantra says: 


Tal VATFARMC SI VASA FAT | 

aU waadt ga: ufaatfey crHe |i 

alfreura fae aaTaTa fates: | 

arag a fagrarzaniatafaaad 1 

HATA AA | 
“As milk, which is produced in every limb of the cow, 
flows out through the udders, so the all-pervading Devata 
manifests Herself in external images, etc. By the simili- 
tude of the external image to the mantrik image, by the 
speciality of the Paja, and by the faith of the Sadhaka, 
the Devata manifests himself.” | 
Pranapratishtha (enlivening) thus accomplished, the 

Sadhaka worships the Divine Mother, rapt in devotion 
and Jove. He has now no great difficulty in concentrating 
his mind upon the visible Ishtadevata. He makes medi- 
tation (Dhyana) and recitation (Japa) before this living 
image as long as he is capable of it. He offers flowers, 
incense, sweet-scents, the choicest eatables, valuable 
cloths and ornaments to his beloved Mother, who accepts 
them all. Thus, practising day by day, his restless mind 
begins gradually to compose itself, finding better and 
purer happiness in the Lotus Feet of the Divine Mother 
than in all that the world can offer him. Thus, learning 
to taste of celestial happiness, true Vairagya (dispassion) 


INTRODUCTION IXXXVil 


towards worldly happiness engrosses his mind. A man 
might spend a dozen lives in discrimination as to what 
is permanent and what is not so, yet Vairagya would be 
as far off from him as the mirage in a sandy desert; for, 
according to Vedanta Nitya-anitya-vichara, or discrimi- 
nation between what is permanent and what is transient, 
does not unfold itself in a mind which has not been 
purified by worship (Upasana). To try to be indifferent 
to worldly happiness without Updsana is to put the cart 
before the horse. 

The more the mind composes itself by external worship, 
the more abiding becomes the mental image. When, by 
this means, the state of Samadhi, or ecstasy, is reached, 
the external image is no longer required. 

After finishing his worship, the Sadhaka, by a process 
known as Sangharamudra, withdraws the vitality com- 
municated to the image, which then becomes a mere 
material image, fit to be thrown away. 

External Updsana is not mere prayer and praise and 
offering of food and drink. The Bhakta’s (devotee’s) 
mind cannot rest satisfied without singing the praise 
of his beloved Mother; the more he sings Her praise, the 
more his mind is elevated towards Her. The Mantra- 
power helps him to make his offerings acceptable. In 
the Gita the Lord says that he accepts flowers, leaves, 
etc., offered to Him with Bhakti (devotion). But how are 
such offerings to be communicated to Him unless the 
offerer and the image through which He is worshipped 
are en rapport ? The Tantra here steps in and solves the 
question. Prayer, praise, and offerings apart, the most 
important features of Updsana are: (1) Bhttashuddhi 
(purification of the elements constituting the subtle 
body). (2) Nyasa (the placing of the Matrika sounds and 
Vija Mantras on different parts of the body). (3) Prana- 
yama, or breath control. (4) Meditation (Dhyana). 
(5) Mental worship. (6) Japa, or recitation of Mantra. 

The first is accomplished either by Yoga process or by 


Ixxxviil PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


means of a particular Mantra. The object:of this is to 
purify the mind of its good and evil tendencies which 
have rendered the Ego a body-bound, selfish, small 
thing. The worshipper, in doing this purificatory rite, 
must think that, for-the time being, his Karmik body 
has been purified, that he (the true self—that is, Atma) 
now wears the mantle of Kulakundalini (the body of the 
Sound Spiritual), and that, therefore, he is no other than 
the object of worship himself. Being Deva himself, he 
worships Deva, thus realizing the Vaidik saying: 


WAUU AMeaAgrat AQUI FAA | 
Tad at Taal Faanaafuat ti 


“Brahman the oblation, Brahman the clarified butter, 
are offered in Brahman the fire by Brahman ; unto Brah- 
man verily shall he g0 who in his action meditates 
wholly upon Brahman.” 

The object of thé second rite (Nyasa) is to render the 
body spiritualized by the sound and Mantra Powers. 

The rest (3, 4, 5, and 6) have been dealt with in their 
proper place. 

It is by spiritualizing the body and the mind, and by 
devoutly thinking himself to be a part of tLe Unity, that 
a Sadhaka must perform his worship, which is, in fact, 
more Subjective than objective. Without these essentials, 
Upasana would be like royalty without territory. To 
withdraw the mind from external attractions and repul- 
sions and to consecrate it to the Divine Mother, Prana- 
yama, Dhyana, and Japa are essential. 

Upasana has many subsidiary elements in it, upon 
which it is not necessary here to dwell, as they are not 
likely to interest the general reader; they are, however, 
all-important, and should not be eliminated by an calnest 
Sadhaka from his Sadhana. 

Hindu society has been so constituted by the Rishis 
of Vaidik antiquity that it is not enough that every 
member of it is a good citizen. One should not only be 
a good citizen, but a good individual; and not only a 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxix 


good individual, but a God-loving individual withal. 
Such is the end and aim of Varnashrama Dharma (caste- 
system of Hinduism). Caste is not only a civil rule, but 
a religious ordinance as well. Society was so framed 
_ that it worked automatically to supply the material and 
spiritual wants of its members. Hindu society being 
thus constituted, every member of it is bound to be 
initiated, either according to his own choice, or according 
to the form of religion of his ancestors. The Hindus are 
generally either Vaishnavas or Shaktas. The mode of 
Upasana, briefly sketched above, is too high for the 
average Shakta Hindu, who must practise Sandhya and 
Upasana with devotion and faith, so that in the long run 
a may be prepared for the path. 

Spiritual» self-culture is pre- -eminently Sattvik.t The 
passions, propensities, attachments, aversions, and all 
those creations of Rajas and Tamas? which chain man 
down to earth and to things earthly, must be gradually 
but effectually washed off and the mind rendered per- 
fectly Sattvik. The Updsana, above described, is Sattvik 
in allits forms. Those, therefore, who, though governed 
by the laws of their caste (Varna) and stage of life (Ashra- 
ma), which is called Varnashrama Dharma, yet infringe 
them, and under cover of religious practice unlawfully 
eat, drink, and sexually enjoy for the gratification of 
their senses, are condemned by Shiva in the passage which 
the author of the Shaktananda Tarangini quotes from 
the Agamasanghita on the subject of false Tantras 
(Asadagama) : 

aat waw Safe UsHaTATAaTaaT | 
fafestacat: Gait AT WITIA TRA I 
ararat fafrad ca acTas atafe | 
autyaifad umafaqranvafa a | 
— yatafourare aad AACIAAT: | 
zfa waeiaae faetare fara: | 


1 The outcome of the Sattva guna. (See Introduction.) 
2 See, as to these gunas, 7bid. 


TXKX PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


as previously stated, denotes two Powers, the Vachaka 
and the Vachya Shakti. By realizing the Vachaka 
Shakti, the abstract, unconditioned Paramatma, which 
is the Vachya Shakti of a Mantra, must be realized, the 
ultimate goal of all Sadhana being the realization of the 
One True Self. The Vachaka Shakti is the Manifested 
God, Saguna Ishvara, the Shakti of the Tantrik philo- 
sophy. We have seen how the one Shakti is bifurcated 
into male and female Shaktis for the purposes of evolu- 
tion, thus giving expression to Shabdabrahman. We 
have also seen how our solar system is presided over by 
seven Lords in its seven planes, each of these Lords being 
an aspect of Shabdabrahman. In Updasana (worship) 
the Virdta Sharira—that is, the physical body of Shab- 
dabrahman—is the vehicle through which worship is 
offered. It is the Virata Sharira, which is the ground of 
all Avataras. The Sahasrashirsha Purusha (thousand- 
headed Purusha) of the Vedas is the Virat Purusha of 
philosophy. The five Mahabhitas (elements), the ten 
senses, the five vital airs, MaMas (sensorium), Buddhi 
(intuition), Ahangkdara (ego), and Chitta (mind) con- 
stitute the Sharira or body of Shabdabrahman, the 
plane of whose consciousness is called Jagrata, or 
waking. Worship begins from this state of Divine 
consciousness until it reaches the dreaming state, or 
Svapna. Beyond the dreaming state is Sushupti, or 
slumbering consciousness of Shabdabrahman, where 
worship ends. It must be remembered that the self- 
same Sachchidananda is worshipped in different vehicles, 
even as the selfsame gold is worn as a ring, a chain, a 
bracelet, and the like. 

It will thus be seen that Kali and Vishnu are essentially 
the same, only the vehicles and their characteristic 
qualities differing. The Tantrik’s predilection for the 
Divinity in its female form, as the Mother of the Universe, 
arises in part from the fact that the mother’s heart being 
softer than that of the father, she is more readily moved 


INTRODUCTION Ixxx1 


in favour of the son than the father. Some no doubt 
would regard this as a very pronounced instance of 
anthropomorphism. But in truth it cannot be denied that 
as the human mother is a spark of the Divine Mother, the 
qualities of head and heart of the former are but an 
infinitesimally small expression of similar qualities in 
the latter. From the bodies of the Divine Father and 
the Divine Mother proceed all evolutions of body and 
mind. The human father and the human mother, and all 
fathers and mothers in the universe, are Angsa-Shaktis— 
that is, individual powers emanating from the Divine 
Parents, who do not, like the Christian and the Moham- 
medan God, personally create bodies and souls. The 
characteristic predominance of emotional qualities in 
human mothers is an index that it must be so in the 
Divine Mother; the experience of Sadhakas proves this, 
and it is conceded in the scriptures of Vaishnavas as well. 

There is yet a weightier consideration than the above 
which has won the Tantrik over to the lotus-feet of 
Mother Kali. The paternal and maternal Shaktis, the 
positive and negative poles, the centrifugal and centri- 
petal forces, are perpetually in harmonious association 
to evolve and nourish the universe. The Paternal 
Shakti is ever fecundating, and the Maternal Shakti ever 
holding the child in her womb and nourishing it. This is 
the law of Pravritti (desire) in the universe. When the 
Divine Mother refuses fecundation and, dominating the 
Divine Father, asserts Her Will, then is She Mahavidya, 
then is She Niramayapadonmukhi (facing the state of 
freedom from sufferings). The milk of Her perennial 
breast then nourishes the aspirant, and gives him strength 
to march along the path of Nivritti (cessation). It is 
then that She, the Vama, the left-hand consort,’ usurps 
the right-hand place, and, slaying the demon-propensities 
of Her beloved sons, gives them hope and courage with 
Her right hand. The Fecundating Father, the source 


1 The position of the wife is on the left hand. 
h 


Ixxxll PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


of Pravritti, falls prostrate under Her feet to avert the 
destruction of His world. Such is Mahavidyd, the 
Divine Mother, the Lady Paramount of the Path of 
Nivritti (path of cessation), whom the Tantrik worships. 

Updasana, or worship, is of two kinds, internal and 
external: 


fafa MasaAAT aaa TAA | 
UATPAAM AAT WTAATATHAA AAT Il 
aaafeat | 
Saat Lit WAT staat Efsraa 
antMTe FAIA RIAA | 


> 
sS tH 


WUT ATAAZa: VASAT asa 
wamlaawar | 


‘“Upasana (worship) of the initiated is of two kinds— 
internal and external. Internal worship is ordained for 
Sannyasis, and both internal and external for others.”’ 


Tantra Sanghita. 


‘“ Antarydga, or internal worship, gives Mukti (libera- 
tion) even to a living Sadhaka. Only Mumukshus or 
Munis (sages) bent upon Mukti are entitled to it. The 
Sadhakas, who are incapable of Antaryaga, should per- 
form it like external Paija (worship) with mental offer- 
eas Gautamiya Tantra. 

Antarydga is based entirely upon a direct knowledge 
of the Power-centres or Chakras in the human body. 
The Sadhaka, having awakened Kula-Kundalini in the 
root-chakra, takes Her up, with the help of the vital air, 
from centre to centre, until the thousand-petalled centre 
in the crown of the head is reached; there the male and 
female Powers are brought together in blissful union. 
The Sadhaka having enjoyed this temporary bliss, which 
vitalizes his body and mind, transfers his consciousness 
to the heart-centre, in the ethereal space of which he 


INTRODUCTION IXxxiii 


forms the mental image of the Divine Mother as it is 
expressed in his Vija-mantra. When the image has been 
thus formed, the mind is concentrated upon it with firm 
faith and devotion. When the image is portrayed upon 
the canvas of the mind with all the details of limbs and 
organs, as if it were a painting, the Sadhaka offers his 
sacrifices: } 

BMAAA SAT AFATTC Yaga: | 

ula aTMaizataTaTSy frszaa | 

amgdatsad argata qaaq | 

MATA SAF Waa WAGs | 

far RMS Ya Ud WTUTA VATA | 

aaa, suey Waayq qurafur i 

Baas eat qaqa Vata | 

qafafgaaania wae ATA | 

gw arate. cat etal arafaga | 

AAATAASATCATTAIAAT AUT Il 

AACARACAY ASATAAA AUT | 

qaaqaaMag eugU warhwaa 

afdat ata aa unfafeafaaega | 

SATAATHTATA GAYA Ad: UTA 

afa wqetomaraga: voce i 


“‘ Give the heart-lotus as the seat; give the nectar flow- 
ing from the thousand-petalled lotus for the washing of 
the feet; dedicate the mind (Manas) as Arghya (offering). 
For washing the face and for bathing give the same 
nectar. Give ether (Akasha) as clothing; the principle 
of smell for odour; the mind (Chitta) for flower; the vital 
airs (Pranas) as incense; the principle of light (Tejas) as 
the lamp; the ocean of nectar for food; the sound called 
Anahata (inaudible sound in the heart-lotus) as the bell 
(ghanta); the principle of air as fan and fly whisk 
(Chamara); the actions of the senses, as well as the rest- 


Ixxxiv PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


lessness of the mind, as dancing. For the realization of 
divine thought give diverse flowers: freedom from delu- 
sion, egotism, attachment, spiritual insensibility, pride, 
arrogance, enmity, perturbance, envy, and greed—free- 
dom from all these are called the ten flowers. The 
supreme flower of Ahingsa (non-injury of any living 
thing), the flower of subjugation of the senses and the 
flowers of pity, forgiveness, and knowledge—these are 
the five flowers. With these fifteen flowers formed of 
sentiments (bhavas) should a worship be performed.” 

After offering this mental sacrifice to his Ishtadevata 
standing before his mental eye in the heart-lotus, the 
Sadhaka makes mental japa: ‘ 

Ala aaa) Wat Fuewtaszaferan 

“The rosary is said to be formed of Varnas, or sound- 
powers, strung together by the thread Kundali.” 

The fifty severed heads of men which make up the 
necklace of Mother Kali must be replaced mentally by 
the fifty sound Powers (Varnas), strung together by 
Kulakundalini as thread, and the Vija Mantra is repeated 
with the help of this rosary. He then performs mental 
Homa. 

The Nitya Tantra says: 

alagiafate aa wy agryeete | 
ay fanaa GUT Eat Arita: | 
mala qatar fates acatea | 
MATACTAT ULAATATAT UCAS 1 
aqatagaty KATY VACA 
Aearat afreut quwag fafanae 
AAS HAA Fata FATA Gaga i 
ara aa Sahl BHA PAATA: | 
USSR ATAATEY Bhaarat aa 3. Az 
aqua 4 efa fuse aa TAG I 
GW ud faaay dag acafed | 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxv 


—Baegaedtars estaarh usta 
fanaaefaaiy FRITAART AAT | 
aAat afaas: ATATT UT THI AAg 


“O All-beautiful One! I tell you the ritual of Jnana- 
homa (homa of knowledge), give ear unto me. By 
knowing it one becomes Sadashiva, the Creator and De- 
stroyer. The quadrangular Vedi (altar) is made of Atma 
(individual soul), Antaratma (the manifested God), Para- 
matma (the Divine Mother), and Jnanatma (the Absolute). 
The Ardhamatra (Kundalini) should be considered the 
Yoni of the Homa-pit; the-MekhalA of the Vedi (altar), 
that is to say, the-line which encircles it as if by a 
waist-chain, should be thought of as consisting of 
Ananda (bliss); and the other three lines on the Vedi 
should be taken as its three Valis, that is to say, 
beauty-lines on the abdomen. The Kula-bhairava—that 
is, the Yogi—should kindle in it the fire of knowledge 
(Jnana); then the forms of the Matrika-sounds should 
be sacrificed in the fire of Jnana, by which the sounds 
become Soundless Brahman. O the Adored of Viras! 
Merits, demerits, desires, doubts, action, inaction and 
Prakriti should be sacrificed by the mental spoon. Thus 
one becomes full of Jnana, and Parabrahman Itself.’’ 

From the above description of subjective Updsana, it 
will have been seen that only such highly developed 
Yogis and devotees are capable of it as have attained 
Samprajnata Samadhi, or Temporary Communion, in 
which the knower and the known are distinguished. It 
is the last stage of Updasana, a thin veil only separating 
the individual Atma from the universal Atma. Such 
Yogis are the product of ages of culture. 

Sadhakas, whose mental image is not so well defined 
and who cannot make it steady for any length of time, 
must form an objective image, exactly in the likeness of 
the subjective image, and worship their Ishtadevata in 
it. They must, however, perform mental Updsana. first 


Ixxxvi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


as best as they can, and then vitalize and energize the 
external image. By establishing a magnetic current 
between himself and the image before him, the mentally 
_vitalized image is communicated to it. The external 
image is no longer a mere doll; it is the Ishtadevata 
Herself. Between the Sddhaka’s faith and will, on the 
one side, and his Mantra-power, on the other, a change, 
so to say, takes place in the inanimate image. It is 
Mantra-shakti which is alone capable of performing this 
wonderful change and of rendering worship in images 
possible. 
The Kularnava Tantra says: 


Tal VATFRAMC SA BAAS AAT | 

AUT Agta sa: ufaatfey Cre | 

aifveura feae gaara fated: | 

aaa a fearatramatafaaaa 
HATUaTAAA | 

“As milk, which is produced in every limb of the cow, 
flows out through the udders, so the all-pervading Devata 
manifests Herself in external images, etc. By the simili- 
tude of the external image to the mantrik image, by the 
speciality of the Piya, and by the faith of the Sadhaka, 
the Devata manifests himself.” 

Pranapratishtha (enlivening) thus accomplished, the 
Sadhaka worships the Divine Mother, rapt in devotion 
and love. He has now no great difficulty in concentrating 
his mind upon the visible Ishtadevata. He makes medi- 
tation (Dhyana) and recitation (Japa) before this living 
image as long as he is capable of it. He offers flowers, 
incense, sweet-scents, the choicest eatables, valuable 
cloths and ornaments to his beloved Mother, who accepts 
them all. Thus, practising day by day, his restless mind 
begins gradually to compose itself, finding better and 
purer happiness in the Lotus Feet of the Divine Mother 
than in all that the world can offer him. Thus, learning 
to taste of celestial happiness, true Vairagya (dispassion) 


INTRODUCTION IXxXXvil 


towards worldly happiness engrosses his mind. A man 
might spend a dozen lives in discrimination as to what 
is permanent and what is not so, yet Vairagya would be 
as far off from him as the mirage in a sandy desert; for, 
according to Vedanta Nitya-anitya-vichara, or discrimi- 
nation between what is permanent and what is transient, 
does not unfold itself in a mind which has not been 
purified by worship (Upasana). To try to be indifferent 
to worldly happiness without Updsana is to put the cart 
before the horse. 

The more the mind composes itself by external worship, 
the more abiding becomes the mental image. When, by 
this means, the state of Samadhi, or ecstasy, is reached, 
the external image is no longer required. 

After finishing his worship, the Sadhaka, by a process 
known as Sangharamudra, withdraws the vitality com- 
municated to the image, which then becomes a mere 
material image, fit to be thrown away. 

External Upasana is not mere prayer and praise and 
offering of food and drink. The Bhakta’s (devotee’s) 
mind cannot rest satisfied without singing the praise 
of his beloved Mother; the more he sings Her praise, the 
more his mind is elevated towards Her. The Mantra- 
power helps him to make his offerings acceptable. In 
the Gita the Lord says that he accepts flowers, leaves, 
etc., offered to Him with Bhakti (devotion). But how are 
such offerings to be communicated to Him unless the 
offerer and the image through which He is worshipped 
are en vapport ? The Tantra here steps in and solves the 
question. Prayer, praise, and offerings apart, the most 
important features of Updsana are: (1) Bhtitashuddhi 
(purification of the elements constituting the subtle 
body). (2) Nyasa (the placing of the Matrika sounds and 
Vija Mantras on different parts of the body). (3) Prana- 
yama, or breath control. (4) Meditation (Dhyana). 
(5) Mental worship. (6) Japa, or recitation of Mantra. 

The first is accomplished either by Yoga process or by 


Ixxxviil PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


means of a particular Mantra. The object:‘of this is to 
purify the mind of its good and evil tendencies which 
have rendered the Ego a body-bound, selfish, small 
thing. The worshipper, in doing this purificatory rite, 
must think that, for the time being, his Karmik body 
has been purified, that he (the true self—that is, Atma) 
now wears the mantle of Kulakundalini (the body of the 
Sound Spiritual), and that, therefore, he is no other than 
the object of worship himself. Being Deva himself, he 
worships Deva, thus realizing the Vaidik saying: 


AAU TASaAaITat HAUT Faq | 
Tad at Waa Faqaneafaat ti 


‘“‘ Brahman the oblation, Brahman the clarified butter, 
are offered in Brahman the fire by Brahman; unto Brah- 
man verily shall he g0 who in his action meditates 
wholly upon Brahman.” 

The object of thé second rite (Nyasa) is to render the 
body spiritualized by the sound and Mantra Powers. 

The rest (3, 4, 5, and 6) have been dealt with in their 
proper place. 

It is by spiritualizing the body and the mind, and by 
devoutly thinking himself to be a part of tLe Unity, that 
a Sadhaka must perform his worship, which is, in fact, 
more subjective than objective. Without these essentials, 
Upasana would be like royalty without territory. To 
withdraw the mind from external attractions and repul- 
sions and to consecrate it to the Divine Mother, Prana- 
yama, Dhyana, and Japa are essential. 

Upasana has many subsidiary elements in it, upon 
which it is not necessary here to dwell, as they are not 
likely to interest the general reader; they are, however, 
all-important, and should not be eliminated by an a 
Sadhaka from his Sadhana. 

Hindu society has been so constituted by the Rishis 
of Vaidik antiquity that it is not enough that every 
member of it is a good citizen. One should not only be 
a good citizen, but a good individual; and not only a 


INTRODUCTION Ixxxix 


good individual, but a God-loving individual withal. 
Such is the end and aim of Varnashrama Dharma (caste- 
system of Hinduism). Caste is not only a civil rule, but 
a religious ordinance as well. Society was so framed 
that it worked automatically to supply the material and 
spiritual wants of its members. Hindu society being 
thus constituted, every member of it is bound to be 
initiated, either according to his own choice, or according 
to the form of religion of his ancestors. The Hindus are 
generally either Vaishnavas or Shaktas. The mode of 
Upasana, briefly sketched above, is too high for the 
average Shakta Hindu, who must practise Sandhya and 
Upasana with devotion and faith, so that in the long run 
ue may be prepared for the path. 

Spiritual self-culture is pre- eminently Sattvik. The 
passions, propensities, attachments, aversions, and all 
those creations of Rajas and Tamas? which chain man 
down to earth and to things earthly, must be gradually 
but effectually washed off and the mind rendered per- 
fectly Sattvik. The Updsana, above described, is Sattvik 
in allits forms. Those, therefore, who, though governed 
by the laws of their caste (Varna) and stage of life (Ashra- 
ma), which is called Varnashrama Dharma, yet infringe 
them, and under cover of religious practice unlawfully 
eat, drink, and sexually enjoy for the gratification of 
their senses, are condemned by Shiva in the passage which 
the author of the Shaktananda Tarangini quotes from 
the Agamasanghita on the subject of false Tantras 
(Asadagama) : 


ae maw Saf WMsaTATAaTaaT | 
fafaataqat: Gat ATTAWITIA FHA Il 
arara fafra ca acta aCaée | 
aqauisaifad umafaararuafead & | 
— yavafaurared Hated TACTAAT: 1 
afa waataaey fretars fare: | 


1 The outcome of the Sattva guna. (See Introduction.) 
2 See, as to these gunas, 7bid. 


XC PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


“O Devi! in the Kali Yuga most of the Rajasik and 
Tamasik people, having adopted prohibited practices, 
delude many others. O Sureshvari! those who, re- 
gardless of Varnashrama Dharma, offer us flesh, blood, 
and wine, are (various forms of) evil spirits.”+ = 

I believe, however, that more than half of Hindu India 
is Shakta, and I can safely assert that go per cent. of 
them are free from reproach in respect of the violation 
of true Shastric principles and practice. 


THE PILGRIMAGE OF THE HUMAN EGO. 


UAISACIA Vaat Sfeaat, afaa nrw: uger daa 
mufad ward vara, afay fang faraaeg atat 
Awarafry | 


In the above quotation from the Mundakopanishad it 
is said: 

“This subtle Paramatma can only be known by the 
mind, within the body, where the five vital airs reside. 
The minds of all are pervaded by the vital airs. The 
Paramatma manifests Himself in the mind when it is 
purified.” 

The Ego must clothe itself with eight millions of bodies, 
from the stone to the animal, before it can be fit to 
assume the human form. There is, however, no know- 
ing how many births and rebirths in each class of bodies 
it must undergo before it can adapt itself to the next 
higher body. Ages untold and births unnumbered at 
last usher the journeying Ego into the human body—the 
most perfect of all bodies cognizable by the senses. The 
Ego itself is but a body, a Stkshma Sharira—that is, a 
subtle body, consisting of the vital airs, the sensorium, 
and the mind. This bundle of very fine “‘ matter,” unlike 
its gross sheath, which decomposes and decays at short 

1 See as to this passage the remarks at pp. Ixviii-lxix of the Intro- 


duction by Arthur Avalon to the first volume of “Principles of 
Tantra.” 


INTRODUCTION XCl 


intervals, persists from the creation to the final dissolu- 
tion of the universe. It has a causal body (Karana 
Sharira) within itself, which is composed of a homo- 
geneous finer ‘“‘ matter.’’ The experiences of countless 
births and rebirths are stored up in the subtle body, and 
very fine impressions of those experiences are stamped 
upon the causal body. The one immutable Atma, pervad- 
ing and containing all existences, is made a captive, as 
it were, in each subtle body, from which circumstance it 
acquires its Egoity. The unconditioned Atma being thus 
conditioned, the pleasures and the pains, the happiness 
and the misery of the body are attributed to it; this is 
the work of Nature’s great housewife called Avidya 
(ignorance). When, however, the Ego acquires the 
human body, which is the most perfect of Sthi!a Shariras 
—that is, gross bodies—it is blessed with the opportunity 
of making a pilgrimage to its primeval source, and (dis- 
solving the compact subtle body) of uniting Atma with 
Atma. It needs ages of self-culture to accomplish this 
Paramartha (supreme object); but a beginning must be 
made by every human being. 

Avidya, the most expert and cunning housewife, has 
ten thousand arts and wiles to captivate her children. 
Like Rassellas, they must not be allowed to peep beyond 
the lofty ramparts of the happy valley. She has pro- 
vided every creature comfort for her children. People, 
charmed by her unceasing attentions, quite forget their 
real Mother, Vidya (knowledge), and hug the other with all 
the devotion of dutiful children. To save humanity from 
their pseudo-mother, Divinity from time to~time incar- 
nates and sends His chosen sons to teach them. It is 
by this means that man acquires the knowledge of his 
real state, and learns that he has a true Mother, who 
alone can save him from the glamour of Avidya. 

In this golden land of Divine Rishis, the land whence 
Divine knowledge radiated to all other lands, the path 
to Vidya was made an art and divided into different pro- 


x¢ii PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


gressive grades. The curriculum consists of Varna- 
shrama Dharma? (for full particulars of which the reader 
is referred to my Bengali book on the subject), external 
and internal worship, and Yoga. Varnashrama Dharma 
is the ground whereon the first battle must be fought 
with Avidya. It is the place where the Ego must put 
chains around the neck of Avidya so that she may not 
lead people wheresoever she may choose. It ‘is here that 
man gets the first glimpse of his real Mother Vidya. 
External worship further girds up the Ego to cope with 
Avidya. By these two means the Ego gradually learns 
to feel that it has a real Father and Mother; to find out, 
to worship, to love, and to know whom is the end and 
aim of its being. When the conviction of its necessity 
grows irresistible, the Ego determines to make the pil- 
grimage. But where is the grand trunk road over which 
it must wend its way ? 

From the text of the Mundakopanishad, which opens 
this section, it will be seen that the Divinity has to be 
sought within the body of the Sadhaka. Although the 
Divine Essence is immanent in everything in the Kosmos, 
the body of the Sadhaka, which is a part of the Kosmos, 
is the place where he can best find it, for the mind, which 
has to make the search, and the apparatus, with which 
the search has to be made, are located in the body; 
besides, the body is a Microcosm, containing within it 
the seven centres of Power and the seven presiding Lords 
mentioned in the second section. The seven centres are 
seven plans of evolution, and over each plane there is a 
presiding Deity, who directs and controls its work. 

The Universe, according to Tantra, consists of a single 
Mahabrahmanda, or grand universe, and numberless 
Brihat Brahmandas, or great universes. From the seven 
planes of the grand universe are evolved innumerable 
great worlds, each one of which is also divided into seven 
planes. Each planet, each satellite, each star, and every 


1 Vide ante. 


_ INTRODUCTION Xclll 


living entity in each world is itself a world in miniature, 
and has within it the seven centres of Power and. the 
seven presiding Deities. 
The Nirvana Tantra says: 
“FeAaSAY J FeRAM Sa FI 
aaa serat gia aaa yaatfa =” 
“ O Devi! within the Mahabrahmanda is Brihat Brah- 
manda; within it are beings and regions.” 
“ASTAM WH GIT WHIT aTH BET | 
add aa fe caf gegurwaya: i” 
“OQ Parameshvari! O Deveghi! all varieties of beings 


and things which are in the Mahabrahmanda are also 
within the Brihat Brahmanda.”’ 
“AAW WI AI TY Faas 1” 

“OQ beautiful-eyed one! hundreds of thousands of 
Brahmandas (universes) are evolved within it (Maha- 
brahmanda).”’ 

A vivid description of Brihat Brahmanda is given in 
the same Tantra. But as it is very long, I am reluc- 
tantly compelled to resist the temptation to quote it. 
I shall, however, place before the reader its salient points. 
The Brihat Brahmanda, or Macrocosm, has its Meru or 
vertebral column extending longitudinally from top to 
bottom. At the top is situated Satya Loka, and at the 
bottom Avichi. Between Satya Loka and Avichi lie 
the other six Lokas (worlds or regions) and the other six 
nether regions, altogether making up fourteen Bhuvanas 
or regions. Within the Meru reside the Gods—that is, 
the Powers which preside over the fourteen Bhuvanas. 
The centres of Power within the Meru are: 

1. Adhara! Chakra, which is also called Brahma- 
Padma (Brahma-lotus). It is just above the seven 
nether regions. The element earth is within its anther. 


-1 Or Mfladhara, as to which and the following chakras, or centres, 
see A. Avalon’s ‘‘ Six Centres and the Serpent Power.” 


XC1V PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


The seat of Kama (desire) is there. Within the seat of 
Kama is the male Deity, Svayambht Linga, and the female 
Deity, Kulakundalini. The Creator Brahma resides in 
the element earth. His female Consort is called Savitri. 
This is the causal Bhurloka. Here resides the Spiritual Sun. 

2. Bhima Padma, or lotus, or Svadhishthana Chakra. 
The element water is within its anther. Vishnu resides 
here with His consort. It is the causal Bhuvarloka in 
which the heaven of Vishnu, called Vaikuntha, is situated. 
On the right of Vaikuntha is Goloka,: where Vishnu 
assumes the form of a two-handed being with a flute in 
his hand. Here he is associated with the female Power 
Radhika. 

3. Manipura Padma. The element fire is within its 
anther. Rudra resides here with his consort Bhadra Kali. 
This is the causal Svarloka. 

4. Andhata Padma. The element air is within its 
anther. Ishvara resides here with his consort Bhuvane- 
shvari. Ishvara is the overlord of the three previous 
Lokas and their Lokapalas—viz., Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Shiva. This is the causal Maharloka. 

5. Vishuddha Padma. The element ether, or Akasha., 
is in its anther. The presiding Deity is half-male and 
half-female, called Ardhandrishvara, or Mahagauri, and 
Sadashiva, whose Vahana (carrier) is an animal, which 
is half-bull and half-lion. This is the causal Jana Loka. 

6. Ajna, or Jnana Padma. There is no element, but 
the universal Manas (sensorium) is the seed here. The 
Deities are Parashiva and his consort Siddha Kali. This 
is the causal Tapa Loka. Here resides the Spiritual 
Moon. 

7. Sahasrara Padma. This is the region of the First 
cause, the cause of the six previous causes; it is duality 
in unity described in the second section. This is the 
Satya Loka. 

These are the seven Lokas, or regions, of the Brihat 
Brahmanda. 


INTRODUCTION XCV 


The reader will note that they are within the Meru. 
We have heard of a Meru of the earth, a mountain 
situated just where there is a depression on the orange- 
shaped planet of ours. This mountain is said to be a 
hollow, vertical column of stone, which externally holds 
the earth fast, and internally contains the centres in 
which the Devas—that is, the presiding septenary Gods 
—reside. This idea of Meru must be magnified and 
transferred to the Meru of the Brihat Brahmanda with 
a view to form a notion of what is meant by it. 

It must be noted that the Kosmic Kundalini is vehicled 
by Triguna Prakriti! in Satya Loka, where She is called 
Maha Kundali, and by the eight primary divisions. 
fearth, water, fire, air, ether, manas (sensorium), Buddhi 
(mind), and Ahangkara (I-am-ness)], of Prakriti in Bhur- 
loka, where She is called Kulakundali. The highest and 
the lowest of the centres of Power are both guarded 
by Kundalini in Her two aspects. As in the Maladhara, 
so in the Sahasrara Padma She covers the cleft in the 
male Power with her hood. She coils up round the 
Universe with Her tail within Her mouth, having the 
inverted triangles within Her coils. The Theosophical 
Society has adopted this symbol from the Tantras. The 
triangles, as the Tantrik symbol of the male and the 
female Divinity, being well known, it is not necessary to 
quote Tantra to prove it; but as it is not generally known 
that the serpent lying with its tail within its mouth is a 
Tantrik symbol, I quote the following from the Shiva 
Sanghita: 

: “ufsatfugedt alfa: teagracraat | 

aa Gee Varad aafa Hwsat AT i 

aaeq THAT ATSt: aTataafsarate: | 

He fray at ose Gyarfaat feat i” 
fraafear | 


1 That is, Prakriti composed of the three gunas—Sattva, Rajas. 
and Tamas. 


xCVi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


_“ Between the anus and the generative organ is the 
Yoni, having its mouth downwards. There is what-is 
called the root. Kundali is always there. Encircling 
all the nerves with her body of three and a half coils 
(and) with her tail in her mouth, She lies within the cavity 
of the Sushumna nerve.” 

As the Macrocosm: has in it centres of Power, so has 
the Microcosm. The Nirvana Tantra says: 


“squay year quid ATA: | 
a ag efa waTwTaay yaatia Ta 
UWaAaAaAa AA AIT GAAAAA | 
Va aH Agee Yaris aged 
afaze Utah FATS ATA ATT: 0” 
fasten | 


‘Within the Brahma Padma, the earth, are men and 
other beings. O Devi! they are all worlds, and within 
them are the regions. Within them are the seven nether 
regions and the seven heavens. In this manner in all 
bodies, within the lotuses, are the fourteen regions. O Lady 
Paramount! verily every body is a Brahmanda (world).”’ 

The human body is called by the Hindus Bhogayatana 
—that is, a mansion wherein the reincarnating Ego is 
born to reap the fruits of its Prarabdha or Kinetic Karma; 
but it is also called Brahma-pura, the city of Brahman. 
Under the Hindu’s law of evolution it must be so; for 
evolution, as I have already pointed out in the previous 
section, is a double parallel motion, one tending down- 
wards and the other tending upwards. Pravritti and 
Nivritti, that is the outgoing and return movements 
are conspicuous everywhere in nature. For the purpose 
of reaping the fruits of Karma the embodied Ego must 
come in’ contact with the outside world, its subjec- 
tive enjoyments and sufferings having come to an end 
in heaven and hell. The objective world is the arena 
where it must battle with the results of its own previous 


INTRODUCTION XCVII 


Karma, and generate new Karma in accordance with. the 
Pravritti law of nature. To this end it is furnished with 
a system of nerves, which presides over, controls, and 
regulates the functions of the other systems—viz., the 
circulatory system, the respiratory system, the digestive 
system, the excretory system, the muscular system, and 
the skeletal system. These nerves are classified into: 
three main groups: (1) Efferent nerves. (2) Afferent 
nerves. (3) Inter-central nerves. 

“Efferent or centrifugal nerves are those which 
conduct impulses from the central nervous system: (brain 
and spinal cord) to other parts of the body.” ‘‘ Afferent 
or centripetal nerves are those which conduct impulses 
in the reverse direction—viz., from all parts of the body 
to the central nervous system.” ‘“‘ Inter-central nerves 
are those which connect nerve-centres together; they 
connect different parts of the brain and of the cord to 
one another.? 

The Bhogayatana aspect of the human body is dealt 
with in the science of Biology, and its Brahmapura aspect 
in the science of Yoga. 

The earth, as a Microcosm, has its Meru, a stony 
vertical column extending from its northern point of 
depression to the southern point. It is within the bowels 
of the earth that the Meru is situated, and the septenary 
Gods, presiding over the earth, are located inside the 
Meru. What are known as the north and the south pole 
are only circumpolar regions of the earth. The human 
body is a Microcosm as well. Its Meru is the vertebral 
column of bones extending from the depression, called 
Brahmarandhra (the hollow of Brahman, where the two 
halves of the body, like the two hemispheres of the earth, 
meet) to the anus. This bony column is filled with 
white and grey matter, wherein are nerves and nerve 
cells. The principal Yoga nerves are fourteen in number, 

1 “ Handbook of Physiology,” chap. xv., by W, D. Halliburton, 


M.D., F.R.C.S. 
a 


XCVIil PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


of which three are prominent—viz., Ida, Pingala, and 
Sushumna. Like all other nerves, their root lies in the 
Yoni— that is, the region between the anus and the 
generative organ. This region is called the Muladhara 
Padma. The Sushumna nerve is within the cerebro- 
spinal axis, and extends from the Muladhara Padma to 
the Sahasrara Padma, which is in the crown of the head. 
It is called the Jnana nerve, the nerve of pure psychosis. 
The I¢a and the Pingala nerves are in the periphery of 
the spinal cord, and starting from the Yoni (the Ida 
from the root of the left testes, and the Pingala from that 
of the right testes), wind up spirally, meeting the Sushumna 
nerve at five points—viz., the Yoni, the root of the genera- 
tive organ, the navel, the heart, and the throat. From 
the throat Pingala makes a circuit of the root of the nose 
between the two eyebrows and enters the right nostril; 
the Ida, making a similar circuit, enters the left nostril. 
In this wise an island-like centre is formed at the root of 
the nose. The five points of contact of the Ida and the 
Pingala nerves with the Sushumna nerve are five Padmas, 
or lotuses, or Chakras, or centres, and the island-like place 
is another centre, thus making six centres from the Yoni 
to the root of the nose. Above the sixth centre and 
below the thousand-petalled lotus are two Padmas, which 
are described in connection with the sixth. With these 
two and the thousand-petalled lotus the Padmas, or 
lotuses, are nine in number. All of them are located 
within or above the cerebro-spinal axis, which is called 
the Meru of the human body. 

The cause of a thing is called its Prakriti, and that 
which arises out of Prakriti is called Vikriti. The three 
principles of Mila-prakriti (original “‘ material ’’ cause of 
the universes)—viz., Sattva (spirit-manifestation), Rajas 
(activity), and Tamas (inertia) are the primary cause of 
the universe. From these three are evolved eight deriva- 
tive or secondary causes, which are: 

(x) Mahat, which is also called Buddhi, or intelligence, 


INTRODUCTION XC1X 


intuition; (2) Ahangkdara, the sense of separateness, 
individuality; (3) Manas, the mind in its ordinary 
sense, including the sensorium, the perceptive, ratio- 
cinative, imaginative, volitional, emotional, and other 
faculties; (4) Akasha (ether); (5) Vayu (air); (6) Tejas 
(fire); (7) Apas (water); and (8) Kshiti (earth). 

What is called Paraprakriti in the Bhagavadgita is 
‘Chit Power, which has been discussed in the first section. 
When worlds are evolved, Milaprakriti and Paraprakriti 
are united kinetically, and the result is the formation of 
seven, or rather nine, planes of conscious Powers, corre- 
sponding to the one primary cause and the eight secondary 
causes of the universe. In the human body, which is a 
miniature universe, these planes or centres of conscious 
power are: 

(r) Sahasrdra Padma. (2) Nada Padme. (3) Vindu 
Padma. (4) Ajna Padma, two-petalled Padma. 
(5) Vishuddha, sixteen-petalled Padma. (6) Andahata, 
twelve-petalled Padma. (7) Manipura, ten-petalled 
Padma. (8) Svddhishthana,  six-petalled Padma 
(sg) Muladhara, four-petalled Padma. 

It may here be noted that the conscious Intelligences 
from the second plane downwards are sound-powers, 
emanating from the first cause, the Mahastirya (the 
Grand Sun) of the worlds, whose hallowed mansion is 
the Sahasrara Padma, as also that from the fourth to 
the ninth, the Padmas are petalled by fifty primary 
sound-powers (see second section). These primary 
sound-powers are distributed in the Padmas in accordance 
‘with esoteric principles of combination of sounds. 

Enough has been said in the first section regarding the 
bifurcation of Shakti into male and female, and there is 
no necessity to recapitulate it here. Sufficient be it to 
say that all the conscious powers in the nine Padmas are 
male and female. 

Before entering into a general description of these 
Padmas, it is to be observed that the nomenclature of the 


Cc PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Gods and the Goddesses is according to the religious ideas 
of the great Sadhakas, who have revealed this most 
esoteric knowledge for the Supreme good of suffering 
humanity. The Padmas and their presiding Gods are 
facts in nature, which a Sadhaka has the privilege to 
see and to call by whatever names he chooses. Hindus, 
Mahommedans, Christians, Parsees, Buddhists, nay, 
agnostics, if they choose, can enter this Yoga path 
without committing themselves to any particular form 
of religion. One’s own religion, whatever it be, will, if 
practised through this esoteric path, lead the soul with 
scientific precision on to its destination. 

With a view to put the subject in a clear light before 
the reader, I shall first divide the nine Padmas into three 
groups. The first three Padmas constitute the first 
group, the region of cognition, in which the three cogni- 
tive Powers (Jnana Shaktis) are located. It may be 
called the region of pure Ideation in which the universe 
exists potentially. The second three Padmas constitute 
the second group, the region of action, in which the 
three active Powers are located. It may be called 
the region of mind, in which the universe assumes 
a form more definite, having the vital power, the sen- 
sorium, and the mind as its constituents. The third 
group of Padmas are presided over by the Powers of 
volition, action, and cognition, in subordination to the 
former group, who create, sustain, and destroy the fully 
manifested universe. 

At the top of and above the cerebro-spinal axis is the 
Sahasrara, and at the bottom the Mulddhara Padma. 
Kundalini is at both these points. The Sahasrara is the 
Mahastrya, the grand sun, both kosmically and indi- 
vidually, within whose effulgence Adydshakti Mahakalt 
and Parashiva are inseparably united. This Power is 
the First Cause, the Vachaka Shakti of a Sadhaka’s 
worship. The First Cause is Saguna Brahman, or 
Brahman with attributes, and contains within it the 


INTRODUCTION ci 


three Gunas, the three Powers, and the nine planes in 
the same manner as a lotus-seed holds within itself the 
future lotus-tree. In the Mtladhara Padma lies the 
duplicate Sun, which is the effulgence of Kula-Kundalint 
and Svayambhii Shiva. Brahma, the creator of names 
and forms, is there with his consort Savitri. The creative 
desire or Will, called Kama, is there also. As there is a 
hollow on the top of the highest Padma, so is there a cleft 
on the head of Svayambhi Shiva, which is closed up by 
Mother Kulakundalini, who, coiling round all the nerves 
at their root and encircling the Shiva, breathes forth the 
rhythmic vital Power through [ga and Pingala. Like one 
who sleeps, all Her other functions are apparently at rest; 
hence She is said to be sleeping. The creative Brahma 
with his consort Savitri is the conscious Power of earth. 

Earth is evolved from water. The preservative Vishnu 
with his consort Radha is the conscious Power of water. 
The centre within which they are located is Svadhishthana 
Padma. 

Water is evolved from fire. The destructive Shiva or 
Rudra with his consort Bhadrakali is the conscious 
Power of fire. Their centre is Manipura Padma. 

These three Padmas are the three Lokas, Bhi, Bhuvah, 
and Svah respectively. The re-incarnating Ego takes its 
recurring births and re-births in these three Lokas. 

Higher above, in the heart-lotus, is the region of air, 
in which are located Ishvara and Ishvari, the immediate 
cause of the three lower regions and their presiding 
Deities. This is called Andhata Padma. If the Ego 
can escape the eddy of birth and re-birth, and merge its 
consciousness in Ishvara, it attains what is called Salokya 
Mukti. This region is called Maharloka. The heart- 
lotus has behind it another lotus, in which lies the seat 
of the Jivatméa, the reincarnating Ego. To bring this truth 
home to the mind of the Sadhaka the Upanishad says: 


“Sl Guat Aya Talal BATA Fa ufCeaana | 
aac: fama arawaaara sfrarantfa a” 


Cll PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


“Two friendly birds live together on the same tree; of 
whom one eats the sweet fruits, and the other, without 
eating, only sees.”’ 

Higher up is Vishuddha Padma, in the region of the 
throat. Here is the region of ether, in which are located 
Sadashiva and Mahagauri. This is the Janaloka. 

Between the eyebrows, at the root of the nose, is the 
region of mind, where Shambhu or Mahakala and Sid- 
dhakali reside. This is called Ajna Padma. This region 
is the subjective Varanasi! (Kashi) of Visveshvara, be- 
tween the Ganga and Jamuna—that is, Ida and Pingala 
nerves. Within the anther of this Padma is the spiritual 
moon. 

The second and third Padmas are, in fact, the higher 
Powers of the fourth—that is, the Ajna Padma. Their 
Vehicles are Mahattattva and Ahangkaratattva, which 
are luminous like the Sun. The second, third, and fourth 
Padmas are Tapas Loka, while the Sahasrara is the 
Satya Loka of the microcosmic human body. 

The knowledge of these centres of Power in the human 
body is as old as the Vedas themselves. The great 
Rishis of the Vaidik wisdom-religion (Jnanadharma) 
learnt it from their Gurus, and it was passed on until 
we reach Manu, who, having received it by inspiration 
from the Most High, instructed humanity in the know- 
ledge of Yoga, of which the doctrine of the centres of 
Power in the human body is an essential part. The 
wisdom-religion enunciated in the Upanishads is based 
upon Yoga, which one must practise if he be solicitous 
of Brahma-Jnana (knowledge of Brahman, or spiritual 
knowledge). A mere study of the Upanishads does not 
impart that wisdom. The Upanishads contain frequent 
references to some of the centres of Power on which the 
attention is particularly directed to be fixed. Rishi 
Patanjali’s Philosophy of Yoga and Vedavyasa’s Com- 
mentary thereon mention these centres as the places in 


1 Benares. 


INTRODUCTION Cili 


the human body where concentration, meditation, and 
communion should be practised. Rishi Yajnavalkya of 
Upanishadik fame has a treatise on the method of Yoga 
in which he instructs his wife Gargi as to how Yoga should 
be practised within these centres. 

It will thus be seen that the centres of Power in the 
human body are not an innovation of the Tantriks. They 
have their root in the Kosmic Law of evolution, and 
were revealed to mankind for their salvation. But man, 
ever prone to drink of the lethean water of desire, had, 
in the great efflux of time, forgotten the inestimable boon 
of Yoga conferred on him and, therefore, towards the 
middle of the third cycle—that is, Dvapara yuga—his 
condition as a religious being had greatly deteriorated. 
In view of this state of things, and having regard to the 
approach of the Kali Yuga (age), with its darkening 
influences, the Lord of Yoga, Mahadeva, made a fresh 
revelation of Yoga with a method at once comprehensive 
and suited to the times. In the method thus revealed 
the centres of Power in the human body have been per- 
spicuously dealt with, and culture through them definitely 
laid down. Thus has Yoga been saved; and even now 
there are numbers who have kept the Divine science alive 
by following the method of the Lord of Yoga. The 
description of this Yoga is to be found in the Tantras, 
and the Tantriks are the masters of its practice. 

I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to make a 
few observations on Yoga, about which much miscon- 
ception seems to prevail amongst a certain section of the 
English-educated Hindu community. The Hindus have 
only one system of Yoga, which has come down to them 
from the time of the Vedas. It is called Ashtanga, or 
eight-limbed Yoga. Maharshi Patanjali’s “‘ Yoga Aphor- 
isms’’ constitute the philosophy of this Yoga. Although 
the methods of Yoga-practice are in the keeping of Gurus, 
books on such methods are not wanting. From Maharshi 
Yajnavalkya and Maharshi Dattatreya to Yogi Gorak- 


Civ PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


shanatha of modern times many have left treatises on 
the subject, and there is the Shiva Sanghita attributed 
to Shiva himself. The eight-limbed Yoga, for the pur- 
pose of practice, is divided under five heads: 

(1) Mantra Yoga. (2) Laya Yoga. (35) Hatha Yoga. 
(4) Raja Yoga. (5) Rajadhiraja Yoga. 

I have dwelt upon Mantra Yoga in the previous section. 
Laya Yoga is a Yoga the nature of which is described in 
the Gheranda Sanghita and similar works. Hatha Yoga 
includes what is commonly known as Pranayama, the 
object of which is to produce in one’s own body voluntary 
suppression of breath. In the previous section I have 
quoted Upanishad and Purana to prove its vital import- 
ance in Yoga. The following quotations will show that 
Veda, Tantra, Smriti, and Purana are unanimous in 
holding that Pranayama is an absolute necessity in Yoga 
Manu says : 


“zat wraaratat uraat fe Gat aan: | 
aaizarat cad erat: wT fraEta w” 
—ay: | 
‘* As baser things mixed with gold and other metals are 
removed by burning those metals, so the propensities of 


the senses are removed by Pranayama.” 
Rishi Patanjali says: 


“aa: daa WaATITaTUA 1” 


“From that (viz., by practising Pranayama) the veil 
which hides pure knowledge is removed.”’ 

Now, it must be distinctly understood that as Prana- 
yama is Hatha Yoga, the elimination of the latter from 
Yoga-practice would be as beneficial to the practiser as 
the removal of his brain would be to a thinker. Yoga 
has two divisions, one outer and the other inner. The 
outer division comprises Yama (control), Niyama (regu- 
lation), Asana (posture), Pranayama (breath-exercise), 
and 'Pratyahara (withdrawal), and the inner division 


INTRODUCTION CV 


comprises Dharana (concentration), Dhyana (meditation), 
and Samadhi (communion). Pranayama, without which 
Pratyahara or withdrawal of the senses from their objects 
is impossible, stands at the gate leading from the outer 
to the inner division. It cannot be avoided if one 
seriously wishes to practise Yoga. It may here be 
observed that there is no royal road to Yoga, which is, 
in fact, nothing less than the complete reversal of the 
natural order of thingsinits aspirer. Round after round, 
from Yama (control) upwards, the aspirer must ascend, 
fortifying his body and mind with energy and vitality 
enough to enable him to cope with the nature he has 
built within himself during myriads of births. The 
chronic diseases of the body and the mind must first be 
grappled with by means of Yama (control) and Niyama 
(regulation), which include among other things continence 
and worship. When the mind is full of faith and devo- 
tion, and the body is buoyant, due to the conservation 
of virile energy, it is then that the aspirer must perfect 
his postures (Asana), which help him materially in regu- 
lating his breath. 

Purification of nerves (dealt with in the fifth section) 
is the next step to be taken. The nerves, in their natural 
state, are covered with impurities, which must be re- 
moved before commencing Pranayama. To accomplish 
this there are available two alternative processes. The 
first is by inspiration (Piraka), retention (Kumbhaka), 
and expiration (Rechaka) of breath upon a regulated 
scale and with the repetition of certain Vija Mantras. 
The second is altogether physical, and is known by the 
name of Shatkarma (six practices)'—that is, Dhauti 
(washing), Vasti (contraction and expansion of the 
anus), Neti (cleansing of nostrils and throat by thread), 
Lauliki (pendulum-like motion of the stomach), Trataka 
{gazing at an object without winking until the tears 


1 See as to them Introduction to Arthur Avalon’s “‘ Mahdnirvana 
‘Tantra.”’ 


CV1 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


trickle), and Kapalabhati (inspiration and expiration of 
air, etc.). The second alternative method is not men- 
tioned in the Shiva Sanghita. It need not be practised 
by a real aspirant who has no physical infirmity or disease 
to obstruct his Sadhana. One of these—viz., Trataka—. 
however, is practised by those who are very loud in 
their denunciation of Hatha Yoga. In consideration of 
the physical and mental temperament of his Shishya the: 
Guru must decide which of the six modes of physical. 
culture should be given him along with the first method, 
which is absolutely necessary. It generally happens that. 
almost all the six modes are dispensed with. 

Here I must warn the reader that mere physical culture,, 
such as Asana, Shatkarma, and Pranayama, are of little 
avail unless they are accompanied with other practices of 
Sadhana. We daily meet pseudo-sannyasis and athletes. 
who exhibit for a few pice their skill in such physical feats, 
and even levitation. They may accompany spiritual 
self-culture, but by themselves they are nothing. 

Having purified his nerves, the Sadhaka must practise 
Pranayama, the object of which is to suspend breathing. 
for a considerable time without feeling the least uneasiness. 
in respect of this reversal of the ordinary respiratory law 
of Nature. This is called Kumbhaka; and when that is: 
attained, it is then that real Yoga begins. For those who> 
are physically or otherwise unfit to practise Kumbhaka. 
by the inspiration (Pairaka) and expiration (Rechaka) 
method, other methods are laid down in the Yoga. 
Shastra. 

To awaken Kulakundalini is the first grand work. 
achieved through long-practised Kumbhaka. In the: 
Muladhara Chakra Her vital sheath sends out, through. 
the Ida and Pingala nerves, an incessant centrifugal and. 
centripetal energy, which draws in and drives out the: 
atmospheric air. It is said that the range of the vital. 
energy thus sent out extends to nine inches without the 
nostrils. This output of the vital energy has, by volun- 


INTRODUCTION Cvil 


tary effort by means of Kumbhaka, to be withdrawn. 
When Kumbhaka is of sufficiently long duration, the 
vital energy, being no longer able to act and re-act upon 
atmospheric air, rebounds upon the vital sheath itself, 
thus producing an abnormal action, not only upon the 
vital sheath, but on the space in the vicinity occupied 
by potential fire. When these two Nature’s finer forces, 
allied together, impinge upon the vital sheath, the mind, 
ever sensitive to abnormal actions of the body, forthwith 
repairs to the spot, and makes its first acquaintance with 
its real Mother, Kulakundalini. Kulakundalini is thus 
aroused from Her apparent slumber, and the Ego finds 
itself at the lotus-feet of its long-lost Mother. The 
glamour of its stepmother, Avidya, for the time being 
vanishes, and the Ego—the reincarnating Jiva of millions 
of births and sufferings—implores the arms of its ever- 
gracious loving Mother. ° 
But the accomplishment of this end by the ordinary 
process of Pranayama is very arduous and tardy. The 
Yoga Shastra, therefore, provides certain psycho-physical 
processes, called Mudras, which operate as stimuli to 
Kumbhaka. 
The Shiva Sanghita says: 
“Sat TAMAS GS|r aah Husa | 
aat varia vans faa waar fa = a 
aad AqUVaA VaTUfaqHaae | 
AMCMAG YA AFTATA BATA |” 
—fyadfeat | 
“When, by the grace of the Guru, the slumbering 
Kundali wakes up, it is then that the lotuses are pene- 
trated, and the knots (of karma) untied. Hence, to 
awaken the Ishvari, sleeping on the cleft of Brahman, 
practise Mudra by all means.”’ 


Being thus awakened, Kundalini enters the great road 
to liberation (Mukti)—that is, the Sushumna nerve—and 


CViil PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


penetrating the centres one by one, ascends to the 
Sahasrara, and there coming in blissful communion with 
the Lord of Lords, again descends down through the 
same passage to the Maladhara Chakra. Nectar is said 
to flow from such communion. The Sadhaka drinks it 
and becomes supremely happy. This is the wine called 
Kulamrita, which a Sddhaka of the spiritual plane 
drinks. There are three planes of Sadhana, corresponding 
to the three planes of consciousness in which the mani- 
fested Divinity is realizable—viz., the Adhibhautik 
(subtle physical) plane, the Adhidaivik (psychic) plane, 
and the Adhyatmik (spiritual) plane. In reference to 
the latter the Tantra says: 


“grat Great ya: dtat tat wafa wae t 
BTA TU: Ural vasa 4 faaa uv” 


“ Drinking, drinking, again drinking, drinking fall 
down upon earth; and getting up and again drinking 
there is no re-birth.”’ 

During the first stage of Shatchakra Sadhana, the 
Sadhaka cannot suppress his breath for a sufficiently 
long time at a stretch to enable him to practise concen- 
tration and meditation in each centre of Power. He 
cannot, therefore, detain Kundalini within the Sushumna 
longer than his power of Kumbhaka permits. He must, 
consequently, come down upon earth—that is, the Mala- 
dhara Chakra—which is the centre of the element, earth, 
after having drunk of the heavenly ambrosia. The 
Sadhaka must practise this again and again, and by 
constant practice the cause of re-birth—that is, vasana 
(desire)—is removed. 

When Kumbhaka has, by practice, become of sufficient 
duration, the Sadhaka must concentrate his mind upon 
each of the centres, beginning from Mialadhara. Mother 
Kundalini leads him. She unites Herself with the Lord 
of each of the centres, and the Sadhaka must meditate 
on the united male and female Deity as his Ishtadevata, 


INTRODUCTION C1X 


that is, the object of his worship. When meditation on 
each of the centres is thus perfected, the SAdhaka becomes 
master of the element which dominates it. In this wise, 
the five elements dominating the five centres, from Mala- 
dhara to Vishuddha, being conquered, the Sddhaka is 
emancipated from the bondage of the objective world. 
Wealth, power, prestige, carnal passion, and all their 
train, have no power over him, he having become the 
master, and no longer the slave, of the elements. His 
mind and body gain immensely by the acquisition of such 
mastery. By meditation on and communion with the 
presiding Deities of the centres, his consciousness becomes 
identified with their consciousness. Thus the effect 
gradually merges into the cause, as the Sddhaka rises 
from the lower to the higher Divine Lotuses. | 
The sixth lotus from the lowest—that is, the Ajna 
Chakra—is reached. It is called Ajna Chakra because 
therein is the Lord of mind, whose Ajna or fiat creates 
and uncreates the elements and their Lords. Meditation 
on and communion with the Lord of this centre (which 
comprises the Nada and the Vindu centres) renders the 
Sadhaka master of Manas, Ahangkara, and Buddhi. He 
is no longer the creature of duality that he was. Worship 
of forms is passed, and true knowledge is revealed to him. 
He learns to distinguish between Atma and non-Atma. 
Prakriti, with her multifold divisions and subdivisions, 
being cognized, Atma is realized. Mother Kundalini now 
reveals Herself to Her dear son in Her pure Prakritik 
garb, and leads him on to the Lord of Lords, Cause of 
Causes, the Saguna Ishvara, where the Sadhaka finds 
Her and the Lord in undistinguishable association, and 
becomes the Lord Himself. This is called Raja Yoga. 
The Sadhaka, who, having now discovered the Vachaka 
Shakti of his worship, and having himself become the 
Vachaka Shakti, wishes to become the Vachya Shakti 
(the real object of his search), casts off the last remains of 
his Sakshma Sharira (subtle body), or, rather, Karana 


LX PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Sharira (causal body), and piercing the Spiritual Sun, 
drops, as it were, into the ocean of Chit—the real Shakti, 
the one true, blissful existence, the bourn whence no 
traveller ever returns. This is accomplished by what is 
called Rajadhiraja Yoga. 

In the Taittiriyopanishad self-culture through what 
are called Sheaths (Kosha) is indicated but not detailed. 
Bhrigu, the son of Varuna, is said to have accomplished 
it by (Tapas). Shangkaracharya explains Tapas to here 
mean concentration of the mind and the senses. Con- 
centration, meditation, and communion are the higher 
practices of Raja Yoga, and as nothing within the body 
can be cognized without concentration, it is clear that 
Bhrigu practised Raja Yoga for the acquisition of Brah- 
majnana (spiritual knowledge). The Sheaths are five 
in number—viz.: 

(1) Annamaya Kosha (the Sheath of food). (2) Prana- 
maya Kosha (the Sheath of life). (3) Manomaya Kosha 
{the Sheath of lower mind). (4) Vijnanamaya Kosha (the 
Sheath of higher mind). (5) Anandamaya Kosha (the 
Sheath of bliss). 

According to my view, these Koshas are mentioned to 
indicate the causes from which they arise, for Yoga is 
practised in the lotuses or centres of Power through the 
Sushumna nerve. There is no difference of opinion on 
this point. That Brahmajnana cannot be acquired 
without Yoga, and that Raja Yoga is the most potent 
means to acquire, itis conceded by the Commentators and 
indicated in the Upanishads themselves. Even in the 
Taittiriyopanishad the lotuses are broadly hinted at 
thus: 


“Sy Ualsaera Bray: | afaay gaat Aviva: | 
waa fecwaa: | WATT ATTA | aT UT Wa TaaeAa 
axafa: | Garsat Auredt faa 1” 


“ Within the heart (lotus) is an ethereal space, in which 
the immortal, resplendent Lord of mind resides. The path 


INTRODUCTION oxi 


of Brahman lies within the hanging breast-shaped thing 
(cranium) at the crest of the head where the hairs divide.’’ 

The centres of Power are the causes from which the five 
Sheaths arise. Bhrigu, by practising Yoga in those 
centres, gradually discovered the Sheaths. His first dis- 
covery was the Annamaya Kosha, which arises from the 
elements—earth, water, and fire. Earth and water 
produce food, which is assimilated by fire and converted 
into the substance which forms the body it nourishes. 
Earth, water, and fire, being the presiding elements in 
Maladhara, Svadhishthana, and Manipura centres re- 
spectively, they became the objects of Bhrigu’s concen- 
tration in the first place; because, by awakening Kula- 
kundalini the Sadhaka first meets Maladhara, then 
Svadhishthana, and then Manipura. 

The Pranamaya Kosha arises from Anahata and 
Vishuddha centres, in which vital air and Akasha respec- 
tively preside. 

The Manomaya Kosha is evolved from the Ajna centre, 
which is the centre of mind. 

From the Vindu and Nada Chakras arises the Vijnana- 
maya Kosha. And undifferentiated Prakriti in the 
Sahasrara is Anandamaya Kosha. 

It will thus be seen that by mentioning the Koshas the 
Upanishads do not lay down a system of culture different 
from that through the centres of power in accordance 
with the Rajayoga system. In fact, there are only two 
systems of self-culture mentioned in the Hindu Shas- 
tras—viz., Bhakti Yoga (Path of Faith and Love) and 
Jnana Yoga (Path of the Eight-limbed Yoga). As the 
Upanishads are the science of Jnana (knowledge), it is 
plain that Bhakti Yoga is not meant to be the instrument 
of culture for cognizing the Koshas. I have touched 
upon the Koshas to impress upon the minds of the public 
which reads the Upanishads the fact that in self-culture 
the path of knowledge is but one, and that that path is 
the Eight-limbed Yoga. 


Cxil PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


I will conclude with a few observations on self-culture 
by Faith and Love (Bhakti Yoga) and self-culture by 
knowledge (Jnana Yoga). The path, which begins with 
the suppression of breath (Kumbhaka) and ends in the 
realization of the unconditioned, immutable Brahman, is 
no doubt the high road to perfect knowledge; but it is a 
long, tedious, and trying journey, which very few are 
physically and mentally capable of accomplishing. 
Many aspirants, indeed, break down, and many succumb. 
One who is desirous of following this path should under- 
take it early in youth if he be physically and morally 
strong enough to pass through the rigid ordeals to which 
a neophyte is subjected by the Gurus who follow the 
Vaidik method of Yoga-training. J have heard it said 
by a venerable personage, who is reputed to be an eminent 
Yogi and a great Sanskrit scholar, that successful Yoga- 
culture is not possible unless pursued according to the 
Tantrik method, which renders the otherwise bleak 
prospect cheerful to the neophyte, and buoys him up 
with strength and courage commensurate with the 
arduous task he has undertaken. Very few, indeed, are 
there who are physically and morally fit for, and who 
have the opportunity to devote their life almost entirely 
to, the pursuit of Jnana Yoga. Besides, the Hindu 
scriptures insist upon the culture of the path of Faith 
and Love as the initial stage through which an aspirant 
must pass before he is fit to undertake the path of Know- 
ledge. | 

Of the Eight-limbed Yoga Niyama (Regulation) is the 
second limb, in which Ishvarapranidhana—that is, wor- 
ship of God—is the most prominent feature. It will, 
therefore, be seen that to eliminate the first and second 
limbs and begin with the third is a violation of the scheme 
of self-culture laid down in the Shastras, the effect of 
which cannot but be disaster. | 

While the fiery path of Jnana Yoga, dwelt upon in 
this section, is fit for but a few, the milky way of Bhakti 


INTRODUCTION CXiil 


Yoga, which is the subject of the previous one, is open to 
all—to the young and the old, the weak and the strong, 
and to the man of business who has not much time to 
spare for the systematic pursuit of Jnana Yoga. Bhakti 
Yoga carries the aspirant slowly but surely through the 
eddy of the world to that bourn where serene peace and 
calm predominate. It yields almost the same result as 
does the other system of culture. The first and foremost 
achievement of a Sadhaka is the awakening of Kula-— 
kundalini. Unless and until that is done, the roving 
mind, identified with the objective world, cannot be 
drawn in, and concentration and meditation successfully 
practised. It is by concentration and meditation that 
the blessed state of Samadhi (communion) is reached, 
and the Ego is freed from the trammels of the objective 
world. The important work of awakening the Divine 
Serpent is as much within the reach of the Tantrik Bhakti- 
Yogi as it is of the Jnana-Yogi. Japa and worship 
according to the Tantrik method and other means as 
taught by the Tantrik Guru, will infallibly awaken Kula- 
kundalini. 

The following aphorism from Patanjali’s ‘‘ Yoga Dar- 
shana Sadhanapada,”’ S. 45, will convince the reader that 
worship of God leads to Samadhi: 


“gafufafetacofrarare 1” 


“ By worshipping God Samadhi is attained.” 

High Tantrik Sadhakas unite both the Yogas in their 
self-culture, and obtain most happy results within a 
comparatively shorter time, without undergoing those 
privations and hardships which are the inseparable com- 
panions of the Sadhakas of the other school. 

Spiritual self-culture, like the culture of the mind, 
must be begun from the beginning. As with the cultiva- 
tion of the mind, so is it with the unfoldment of the 
Spirit; the rudimentary stages of knowledge cannot be 
leaped over and the highest wisdom at once attained. 

k 


CXiv PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


External worship leads to internal worship; internal 
worship purifies the mind; purity of mind induces con- 
centration and meditation; when meditation is ripe 
communion (Samadhi) ensues, and the Sadhaka attains, 
at last, the Highest Bliss. 

Tantrik Bhakti Yoga has another phase. It leads the 
intrepid Sadhaka, within but a short period, into the 
arcana of nature, and brings him even face to face with 
the Vachaka Shakti of his worship. But as these are 
secret things, I cannot speak of them here. 


THE SCIENCE OF TANTRIK—SPIRITUAL CULTURE 


ANTRIK Spiritual Culture (Sadhana) connotes three 
terms—viz., the subject, the object, and the means. 
The subject is the aspirer, the disciple who employs certain 
special means for the achievement of certain definite 
results, and whois called the Sadhaka. The object is that 
which is sought to be attained, and is called the Sadhya. 
Thirdly, the means are the various methods of culture 
laid down in the Tantras, which are only to be employed 
by a disciple under the directions of a competent Guru. 
Sadhakas are of three classes. The ordinary house- 
holder, who has a family to support, and who is bound by 
social and other ties, belongs to the lowest class. Higher 
Sadhakas, though householders, are free from many of 
the passions, prejudices, and desires for the enjoyment of 
earthly blessings which form the principal mainspring of 
action of the lowest class. The highest class of Sadhakas 
comprises god-like men, who have no fixed habitation, or 
family, or other ties which chain, who have no social 
duties to discharge, no conventionalities to conform to, 
no desires to satisfy, and nothing which is of this earth 
to seek. A Sadhaka of the lowest class is practically a 
dualist, for his own self is not in harmonious association 
with the Supreme Self of all the universes. His actions, 
therefore, flow from his desire for self-gratification. His 
devotion to the Supreme or his acquisition of occult 
Yoga powers is motived by the enjoyment of blessings 
suited to his taste. A Saddhaka of the next higher class 
believes his self to be 7m esse the same as the Supreme 
Self, thus, fixing his faith on the Advaita (non-dual) 


Brahman, he endeavours to view the universe as one 
CXV 


CXV PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


unbroken chain of appearances, which, though apparently 
divided, are but inseparable parts of one homogeneous 
whole. His actions, therefore, are in accordance with 
his faith. Passions, prejudices, distinctions, convention- 
alities, and all those hosts of feelings, emotions, and 
motives which crystallize themselves into attachment 
(Raga) and repulsion (Dvesha) have consequently no 
place in his broadened mind. Though living im the 
world, he is not of it. He is called, in thes Pantraea 
Grihavadhtta. Persistent conduct in conformity with 
these ideas leads him to that stage of blessed consum- 
mation where he is more a god than a man; the egotism 
of his gross and subtle bodies vanishes, he realizes the 
Eternal Blissful Mother, and finds Her in every being 
and in every thing. He is called a Kulavadhita, and 
belongs to the highest class of Sadhakas. 

The Sadhya, or the object sought to be attained, varies 
from the Highest Advaita Brahman to the lowest beings 
of the spirit-world, according to the capacity and pro- 
clivity of the Sadhaka. Unseen beings, intermediate 
between man and the manifested Brahman, good, bad, 
and malignant, swarm in the universe in every direction. 
They are either nature-born, or disembodied human egos. 
The Science of Tantra not only recognizes their existence, 
but describes and classifies them, and provides means by 
which communication may be had with them, and by 
which they may be controlled or avoided. Whilst the 
higher among these unseen Powers bestow upon a Sadhaka 
prosperity, progeny, health, fame, power, learning, and 
the like, and grant to him whatever he prays for his 
welfare, the lower and the lowest of the Powers only 
satisfy his base and carnal longings. He who cultivates 
acquaintance with such intermediate beings can never 
hope to attain liberation from the sorrows and pains of 
the world. Even Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva are perish- 
able; allegiance even to them is not beyond the grip of 
Maya. The fate of such worshippers is thus sum- 
marized in the Bhagavadgita: 


INTRODUCTION Cxvil 


“Those who worship the Devas go to the Devas; to 
the Pitris (ancestors) go the Pitri-worshippers; to the 
Bhiatas (spirits) go those who sacrifice to Bhiitas; but My 
worshippers come unto Me.’’—Chap. ix., verse 25. 


The Kularnava Tantra thus admonishes unwise men: 
AaAfawMAsUTfsesaal YAATAT: | 
aTMAATA aaa AMATI: AATAAA 

‘“ Brahma, Vishnu, Mahesha, and other Devatis, being 
within the category of ‘matter’ (Bhtta), are hastening 
towards destruction. Hence do what is right.” 

What is right (Shreya) is distinguished from what is 
dear (Preya) in that the thing dear, though honey for the 
time being, is venom in the long run; whereas what is 
tight is unsavoury in the beginning, but is ambrosia in 
theend. The Tantra Shastra holds that the right conduct 
of man is to identify himself with what is unperishable 
and perennial Bliss, and to forgo all objects of desire, 
however sweet they may be, as so many binding chains 
added to the already numerous heavy bonds which bind 
the Karmk body. 

The Tantias, like the Vedas, while laying down the 
Updasana (worship) of hosts of Devas and Devis for unwise 
men, who cannot overcome their cherished Vasana 
(desires) for present and but short-lived future happiness, 
proclaims the Updsana of the ‘“‘ One-without-a-second ”’ 
Brahman, and explains in detail how that supreme govd 
may be attained. 

The manifested aspect of Brahman is the object of 
worship. The Kathopanishad describes the Manifested 
Brahman thus: 


Gi USAT HAA: VEASHTAT | 
Tet vfae faved a wafacaawd | 
Vag Aa! 
at arta aaaafefagaataay | 
yet via fasatl at adinaaiaa | 
wag aa | 


CXVIll PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


“ He, who was, by meditation, the first-born before the 
creation of the five elements, who resides in the hollow of 
the hearts of beings, and is in all causes and effects. He 
who perceives Him in this manner perceives the Absolute 
Tisha, 

“She, who was born as Prana (the “One Life’), in 
whom are all Devatas, who is Aditi (eater of the five 
elements), who resides in the hollow of the heart, is in all 
causes and effects. He who perceives in this manner per- 
ceives the Absolute Brahman in Her.’—Kathopanishad, 
chap. iv., verses 6 and 7. 


The Shvetashvataropanishad opens with the query, 
What is the cause of the universe and all that is contained 
in it? The answer to this question is given in the 
following verse: 


@ QTAMANYTAT AIA 
Zaaufs aatifrTsa | 


‘‘ Immersed in concentration and meditation they found 
the Power (Shakti) which is the cause of the universe? to 
be lying hidden by Her own Gunas” (Sattva, Rajas, and 
Tamas).—Chap. i., verse 3. 


Reading between the lines, the truth is patent that the 
manifested Brahman is Shakti, and that Shakti, though 
one and indivisible, has dual action in cosmogenesis, and 
is therefore expressed in terms masculine and feminine; 
to explain, however indirectly, the idea of Divine causa- 
tion in human language. The manifested Brahman 
being essentially the same as the unmanifested Absolute 
Brahman, Shakti, when unmanifested is Chit (pure con- 
sciousness), and when manifested, is Chit with Maya or 
Prakriti, which is the material cause of the Universe, and 
which is the “ own attribute or guna” (Sa) of Shakti. 


1 The phrase zara fa means. Zalaat Pe Rec ru azafaat 
war ! commentary of Shangkaracharyya. 


INTRODUCTION Cxix 


The Tantrika view of Shakti is exactly the same, as 
has been explained already in an earlier portion of this 
essay. In the Sarvasdmrajyamedha Stotra of Dakshina- 
kali the following very clear statement is to be found: 


ARAM F TATAVAT UTTAHAT | 
atstat afaat eat IEA VATA Il 
HECHT AT GETRAT AAT AAT | 
TRIAiaa At Arar TAT aTat falamia: 1 


(The word grai in_ the above is thus explained 
in Brahmaydamala: @atyfafta erat sage aaa | 
“ This Chchaya is Devi-Shakti emerged from the body of 
Brahman. ’’) 

The above four lines may be thus rendered: 

‘“ The ineffable Superior Power is supremely attribute- 
less (that is, Absolute). This Devi (Power), being playful, 
imagined forms in Shinya? (that is, in the Absolute). In 
the initial work of creation, when She saw Chchaya, then 
She became the Power of Volition, and by Her Mahakala 
was created.” 

Duality in unity is the characteristic of the Tantrik 
doctrine, and all its methods of worship are based upon 
this truth. The Kularnava says: 


aaa afafemia gafusefea sagt | 
aa at fanart gatgataataanr: 1 


“Some wish (me to be) Advaita (non-dual), and others 
wish (me to be) Dvaita (dual). He who knows me in 
essence is free from both Dvaita and Advaita.” 

The Sadhaka who realizes Duality in the ‘‘ one-without- 
a-second’’’ Brahman liberates himself from the bondage 
of Maya. He is a true knower of Brahman; he is a true 
Kaula. 


yaa Ufa. faunas | 


1‘‘The soundless Sat-chit-dnanda Brahman is called Shinya” 
(Yogasvarodaya). 


CXX PRINCIPLES OF TANT 


RAT HAUT: GsHt Fay BA | 
AMAT AAA: SAA Az HAA | 


“ Kula is the Power of Brahman; Akdla is called Brah- 
man; he who knows Atma to be essentially Kila and Akila 
isicalled Kulina:y—-Kitlarnave Panic 


As in Kosmic creation Shakti becomes Nada and Vindu 
—Shakti and Shiva—so does Shakti become male and 
female in individual creation, the male principle existing 
in the smallest degreee in the female, and the female 
principle existing in the smallest degree in the male. 
These two great principles, which are ever in association 
in every act of creation, sustentation, and dissolution, are 
never divorced from each other, but are ever inseparably 
connected, though the predominance of the one or the 
other in objects presents the spectacle of apparent separa- 
tion. 

It is Shakti alone which can save a Sadhaka from the 
quagmire of his senses and their objects and lead him on 
to the blessed abode of Brahmananda (Brahman as 
Bliss). The individuality of a person is but the resultant 
of his feelings and emotions, ideas and thoughts in relation 
to the objective world, which he has experienced in thou- 
sands of births and rebirths, and which bind him down 
to the world and its objects. The dissolution of his 
physical body translates him into a region of temporary 
subjective happiness or misery, but as sure as the sun 
rises from the east, he must again pass into the mother’s 
womb, there suffer untold misery; and thence issuing into 
the world, must there for a brief span of time be tossed to 
and fro by his own Karma. This play is enacted for 
ever and ever, and there is no escape therefrom unless he 
can extricate himself from the grip of Avidya (nescience), 
the charming syren of worldly bondage, and take refuge 
at the holy feet of Vidya (knowledge). Vidya alone can 
make a Sadhaka the master of himself, and the conqueror 
of the elements, the senses, and the mind. 


INTRODUCTION CXxi 


at feat St ASTATaT at | Bat eet gy: | 
ats faatqatad alsa aa: ufaafa a 
“Vidya is Mahamaya, She should be served by the 


wise; he who worships Avidya enters the region of dark- 
ness.” —Shaktananda Tarangint. 


How Shakti became Shabdabrahman has been pre- 
viously described. Shakti, when manifested, is Prana, 
the one intelligent, all powerful, creative vital principle: 


MAA UT WUT WIT | Beat WRawray, wafaaaeiac, 
aT aaaTaaase Ag | 


“From the Atma this Prana is born. As shadow 
is to the body, so is Prana associated with Atma; 
it comes to this body by the action of the mind.” }— 
Prashnopanishad, verse 32. 


Hiranyagarbha or Prana is called the “ First-born ”’ in 
the Upanishads. We have seen that Hiranyagarbha and 
Aditi are one and the same, and that Aditi is what the 
Tantra calles Shakti. We have also seen that Shakti as 
Kulakundalini is the Mother of Universes, whose Breath 
is life. The fifty Matrika sounds, which form Her body, 
are Pranik Principles, from which universes are evolved, 
by which they are sustained, and into which they are 
disintegrated. “Sound” and Prana are univocal terms: 


We: WITY stay wEzae awa | 


‘‘ (Sound) is called Nada, Prana, Jiva, Ghosha, etc.” — 
Prapanchasara, 4th Patala, 


In Rudraydmala, quoted by the author of Pranatoshini 
Kulakundalini, is called @TFSat VATA A WAIT —“ of 
aerial form, located in the Mtladhara Chakra.” 

The knowledge of Shakti as Prana is of vital import- 
ance in spiritual self-culture. The Prashnopanishad thus 
summarizes the result of such knowledge: 


1 Karma which works is Sangskara, and the latter manifests as the 
mind. Therefore Sangskara as mind produces life. With the destruc- 
tion of mind (manas) there is liberation. 


CXXil PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


saufaaratd ura fauagza wqur | 
walaga we fawatqaagd t 

‘He who knows in detail the birth, the arrival (in 
human body), the place (in the body), the pervasiveness, 
the external (as sun, etc.) and the internal (as eyes, etc.) 
manifestations of Prana becomes immortal.’’—Verse 41. 

The Upanishad lays down the S@iva or principle, 
which the Tantra works out and develops into a method- 
ology, by the faithful observance of which a Sadhaka can 
not only approach the “ the One Life,” the Shabdabrah- 
man, the All-blissful Mother, but, freeing himself from 
the Karmik sheath which made him dissimilar to the 
Mother, become Her Very Blessed Self. 

It is only Yoga culture, described under the heading 
“ The pilgrimage of the human ego,” which enables a 
Sédhaka to know in detail “‘ the birth, the arrival, the 
place,’ and the like of Prana. 

The relation of the manifested Brahman or Shakti to 
the universe in its three planes of existence and its extra- 
| osmik aspect must be thoroughly grasped by a Sadhaka 
of the two higher classes. For without such knowledge 
Sadhana is impossible, and its ultimate result, the realiza- 
tion of Brahman, unattainable. The following is quoted 
from the Mandtkyopanishad as a key to the acquisition 
of such knowledge: 


aq QAZAMIAATAT HAY ASaATaA Bqauta | safc 
aarat afeuw: watg ualafaufage: wayrdaat 
Waa: UTS 149 

GAVIA TAA: AATF alafanfaqa: seo 
aavat fadta: ate: 1 

aa Mal 4 AVA ATA ATAUA A AAA aN wafa aa 
Id GIRAlA UslNa: WAT Ualeeaal qlee: 
PAA: ATS TATA: UTS: 1 3 

UG daat UT Fae UNISMaTaG Gift: Wee waat- 
wat fe AATATA | 


INTRODUCTION CXXIll 


aaa a afeay wWaaawy 4 wqiaad wy 
WAS AVIA AAMT TAA ayaa que gaaaag- 
ait NVR IYa Utd fangs aay aad aaara faqs: yx 

‘“ The syllable ‘Om’ is all that is the universe, and is 
Brahman; it is the Atm4, and is Brahman. Brahman 
(as Para and Apara) consists of four parts. (Not that 
Brahma has really four parts, but to explain its all-per- 
vasiveness parts are imagined.)”’ 

“The first part is the Wakeful State, cognizer of the 
objective world, seven-limbed,’ nineteen-mouthed,? gross- 
eater (called Vaishvanara). 

“The second part is the Dreaming State, cognizer of the 
subjective world, seven-limbed, nineteen-mouthed, cater 
of desires (called Taijasa?). 

“ That is, the State of Sound Sleep, where no desire is 
felt, no dream is seen, which is the undistinguishable 
cause and effect, in which the mentalities of the two 
previous states are undistinguishably blended together (as 
different objects in pitch dark nights), which is blissful 
(unaffected by the senses, their objects, and the mind), 
the eater of bliss and cognizer of the wakeful and dream- 
ing states through the mind. This, the third part, is 
called Prajnia.* 

“He, Prajfia, is the Lord of all, is allwise, is the regu- 
lator of all beings, is the birthplace (yoni) of all, is the 
creator and destroyer of all beings.* 

1 Seven limbs : Heaven is his head, the sun is his eyes, air is his 
Prana, the Akasha is the trunk of his body, water is the hinder part of 
his body, the earth is his foot, and fire is his mouth. 

2 Nineteen mouths—viz., ten Senses, five Pranas, Manas, Buddhi, 
Ahangkara, Chitta. Because he cognizes, feels and eats the gross 
objects by means of these nineteen mouths or doors, therefore he is 


called “ gross-eater.”’ 
3 Taijasa is beyond the cognizance of senses. He feeds upon mental 


states only. 

4 These three states of Divine Consciousness are symbolized by the 
three letters of eryq (om); a being the first state, and is called Rig- 
veda; w the second state, is called Yajurveda; and a> the third 


state, is called SAmaveda. 


CXX1V PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


“Not the cognizer of the objective world, not the 
cognizer of the subjective world, not the cognizer of 
both, not one in whom all states of mind are inseparably 
blended together, neither cognizer nor non-cognizer; 
unseen, not an object of action, imperceptible, undefin- 
able, unthinkable, ineffable, cognizable only by the know- 
ledge that the One Atma pervades all the three previous 
states; in which the three previous Mayik states are 
not—that is, the undifferentiable, peaceful, all-blissful 
Advaita the fourth—He is Atma, He is the fit object of 
knowledge.” 

The human mind being the result of accumulated 
Karma, good, bad, and indifferent, of untold ages, its 
natural alliance with the objective world has rendered it 
rather a product of such alliance than an entity possessing 
intrinsic capacity for cognizing the Supreme. As it is, 
the formation of a true concept of the Godhead is a diffi- 
cult task, which depends much more upon the purification 
of mind, by religious works, penances, devotion, and 
the like, than upon the power of the intellect, however 
cultured the latter may be. Such being the case, it is 
but natural that Sadhakas should oftener than not form 
a partial idea of the Supreme. The Sadhaka’s idea of 
the Supreme regulates the result of his Sadhana. The 
Prashnopanishad thus sets forth the matter: 


a aaaaraahrarda, a aq dafeaquaa aaa 
afaaaad | qaqa Aqaa a uAGe, A aa qVal AT qa 
Aga aaal afeataaaafe | 

au ufe faaiau aafa aad, as a aafealaa 
wastaq | a aaa faufaagua yactawa | | 

aq uatd faarsudifaadsarata gi uaqafaarata 
a tafa gai ama: | gat uTeletae fafasiad ua =a 
unrated fafaaa: a arafaadiad aaa | a Waa 
MTITATA UTTIAIT Yftqs Feraiaa | 


INTRODUCTION CXXV 


“Tf he (the Sadhaka) meditates on Brahman as con- 
sisting of one part only (the first part, as cognizer of the 
objective world), then by such meditation, acquiring 
knowledge, forthwith does he come to the earth (after 
death); the first part as Rigveda transmits him to the 
human species, where, by penance, continence, and faith, 
he enjoys glory.” 

“Tf he meditates on Brahman as consisting of the 
second part (cognizer of the subjective world), he attains 
the subjective world. He (after death) is carried by 
Yajurveda to the Soma Loka (Moon). There enjoying 
glory, he comes back amongst men.” 

“He who meditates the Great Lord as one whole, con- 
sisting of all the three parts, attains to the effulgent sun. 
As a snake gets rid of its skin, so is he freed from his 
impurities, and is raised to the Brahma-Loka! by Sama- 
veda. He realizes by meditation the Paramatma, which 
is within the body of every being, and which is greater 
than the aggregate of Jivas (individuals).’’? 

The Tantrik systems of self-culture are constructed in 
strict accordance with the three aspects of the Divine 
Mother, so that no Sadhaka’s work and toil may go 
amiss. They raise him step by step from the most 
external belfry to the innermost Tabernacle of Mother 
Mahakali, never forcibly weaning him from his habits, 
but transforming those habits into fragrant flowers and 
grateful offerings. 

The importance of possession of a thorough knowledge 
of Shakti is thus stated in Niruttara Tantra: 


qaati saad Wawa WAT | 
qfaaia faa efa faara aa aaa 1 


1 Called also Satyaloka, the highest region of the manifested Supreme. 

2 The manifested Supreme is the soul of all Jivas. He is the 
Antaratmé of all beings within the form of Linga Deha. The appar- 
ently separated Jivas are heaped together, as it were, in him without 
distintion, hence he is called “aggregate of Jivas ”’ ( mIqaa: ). While 
in the Brahmaloka-state, the SAdhaka is blessed with the vision of the 
Absolute, and of union with It as water unites with water (B. K. M.,). 


CXXV1 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


‘““ After many births the knowledge of Shakti is acquired. 
Q Devi! without the knowledge of Shakti Nirvana is 
unattainable.” 

The knowledge of Shakti is dependent upon self- 
culture for its attainment, for mere intellectual know- 
ledge gained by study cannot raise a man to the state of 
Divinity. Even intellectual unerring knowledge of the 
transcendental science is not attainable without devotion 
to God and Guru. The mind must be thoroughly trained 
in spirituality, and brought in harmony with super- 
sensuous truths before one can hope to be able to under- 
stand the true import of that with which the transcen- 
dental science deals. 

ae 2a acrmafaaa 24 aut ac | 
Aa BTAT TUT: WATT ATA: | 
Baraaciufasa | 

“The meaning of these truths of which I have spoken 
is revealed to the high-souled man, who has supreme 
and equal devotion to Devata and Guru.” 

The path of desire and the path of non-desire or cessa- 
tion are the two paths, either of which a Sadhaka must 
choose for himself. As man is a bundle of desires and 
propensities, the regulation of such desires and propen- 
sities on lines which may eventually free him from those 
bondages of woe is the end and aim of all method, either 
Vaidik or Tantrik. As the four Vedas are replete with 
hymns and prayers to God, or the Gods for the attain- 
ment of objects of desire, so also the Tantras are full of 
methods for the attainment of the same end. By follow- 
ing those methods, desires and propensities are circum- 
scribed, passions curbed, and animal nature transformed 
into Divine nature. It is in the lot of but a few to pursue 
the path of cessation from the outset. The vast majority 
of men must be looked after, in order that they may not 
only save themselves from being mere brutes, but may 
become good fathers, mothers, sons, brothers, neighbours, 


INTRODUCTION CXXVIi 


citizens—healthy, robust, and God-loving. The Tantra 
proclaims that its votaries shall become all these, irre- 
spective of caste, colour, and creed. 

Whether one be on the path of desire or on the path 
of cessation, Karma Yoga, Jnana Yoga, and Bhakti Yoga 
are indispensable to him. By continually practising 
works prescribed by the Tantras one’s mental and physical 
impurities are expurgated; the mind becomes pure and 
transparent, so as to be susceptible of the presence of 
the Divine light within; the body is no longe: the habitual 
store of Rajasik and Tamasik cells which incite the senses 
to ignoble works. By Jfhainayoga knowledge of Divinity 
is gained, and by Bhakti Yoga, Jiva and Shiva are united, 
and the supreme good attained; for, according to 
Tantrik Monism, not even a scintilla of difference is 
admitted to exist between Jiva and Shiva essentially. 

One of the characteristic works prescribed in the 
Tantras is what is called Prayoga (deputation). Ordin- 
arily, what man achieves is the result of his own exertions 
aided by the exertions of others, or of labour and skill 
purchased. But human exertions, labour, and skill often 
fail to produce a desired result. In the Hindu mind 
belief in the help of supersensuous beings js as ancient 
as the Vedas. Indeed, the Vedas are replete with sacri- 
fices to Devas for attaining desired objects. The Tantrik 
System, called “‘ Deputation,” is less arduous and less 
expensive, and can be given effect to within a short time. 
When at critical moments human efforts and skill give 
way, man in every country naturally raises his eyes 
upwards, imploring Divine help and mercy. Divine help 
and mercy, though in fact attainable, are yet very difficult 
to attain, for the degree of spiritual culture requisite for 
such a purpose is the attainment of but very few. The 
Tantra provides, however, comparatively easy means by 
which Devatas may be communicated with and their help 
obtained. This branch of Tantrik knowledge is no part 
of a man’s self-culture, it being merely an art, more useful 
than spiritually efficacious. 


CXXVili PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Whether in the path of desire or in the path of cessation, 
the worship of one Brahman is the burthen of the Tantra, 
and the object of that worship is the liberation of the 
individual soul from eternally recurring misery, uniting 
Atma with Atma by the dissolution of the Karmik body. 
To achieve that end, concentration, meditation, and com- 
munion are essential. But an object is necessary upon 
which to concentrate the mind. The universal or all- 
pervading form of Brahman functioning in undivided, 
homogeneous, effulgence through the waking, dreaming, 
and slumbering state of being, is scarcely such an object 
as the mind can grasp. Pratikast are therefore used as 
its substitute. The Avatdara forms, Yantras, and human 
forms in special Pajas, are the best forms. Images are 
fashioned after Avatara forms. When by dint of 
Sadhana Divine effulgence is cognized in a Pratika, then 
is it that the Sadhaka’s vision opens to see the universal 
Form. The incarnation forms? of the Divine Mother, 
called the Ten Mahavidyas, are the Upasya Devata (the 
worshipful God) of the Shakta Tantriks. Sadhakas, 
according to their predilections, heredity, or mental con- 
ditions, worship one or other of them, believing the par- 
ticular Form to be Brahman. Images of such Forms, or 
Yantras, are made, and external worship made to them 
as Brahman. If a Sadhaka’s Sadhana be intense and 
high, Brahman or the Divine Mother manifests Her 
Divine Self in the image, which for the time being glows 
with Divine Life. 


Tai AATF AAC SAC WAAaISaAT | 
ag agaat 2a: ufaatfey cis I 
ahrearg fare ystata fated: | 
ara a fagratzaatafafaaac | 


1 Pratikas are substitutes of Brahman in Updsana. Such substi- 
tutes are an aspect of Brahman, or a part of it, and are worshipped as 
if it were Brahman itself (B. K. M.). 

2 These forms are Nitya—that is, everlasting (B. K. M.). 


INTRODUCTION CXXix 


“As milk, pervading the whole body of cows, comes 
out through the teats, so is the all-pervading Deva 
revealed in images, etc. The reflection (of Atma) in 
images, etc., being the same as the Atma of the Sadhaka.t 
By virtue of the Paja and the Sadhaka’s faith, the Devata 
appears.”—Kularnava Tantra. | 

Sacrifice to God or the Gods in the form of food 
and drink is an old institution found in the records of 
almost all religions, ancient and modern, in all parts of 
the world, not even excepting Christianity and Moham- 
madanism. But the ethics of these religions do not give 
the vatson d’éire of such an institution. This seems to be, 
on the face of it, an anomaly, considering that the God 
of most of those religions is extra-kosmic and formless. 
The Vaidik manifested God being both immanent and 
transcendent in the Kosmos, the legitimate conclusion 
is what the Mandukyopanishad quoted above lays down 
as positive truth. In the Bhagavad-Gita the Lord says: 

“ He who offereth to Me with devotion a leaf, a flower, 
a fruit, water, that I accept from the purified self, offered 
as it is with devotion.’’—Chap. ix., verse 26. 


The Tantra, which claims to be the most correct and 
practical interpretation of Vaidik truths, holds that the 
Sadhaka who longs to be in harmony with the Divine 
Mother should not only sacrifice to Her as Vaishvanara, 
but as Taijasa and Prajfia as well. Indeed, the whole 
life of a SAadhaka is a sacrifice; he must efface his own 
personality and Ahangkara (I-am-ness), dedicating all 
his thoughts, deeds, and speech to the Divine Mother 
who resides in full glory in his heart, and is the real 
cognizer of the body. 

“Understand me as the Knower of the Field (body) in all 
Fields, O Bharata !’”—Bhagavadgita, chap. xiil., verse 2. 

1 The SAdhaka communicates the ray of his Atma to the image by 
what is called Pranapratishtha (Life-giving ceremony) (B, K. M.). 


2 See Introduction to A. Avalon’s ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra,” and ‘Six , 
Centres and the Serpent Power.” ; 


CXXX PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


This is called Atmanivedana (self-dedication). Egoism 
is the cause of heterogeneousness. The thought, “I am 
the doer, I am the eater, I am the enjoyer, and I am the 
sufferer,” makes apparent divisions within the homo- 
geneous One, thereby rendering the individualized egos 
a prey of the attractive and repulsive forces of Avidya 
and their miseries. The initial work, therefore, of a 
Sadhaka is to surrender himself completely to the Divine 
Will. 

““Whatsoever thou doest, whatsoever thou eatest, 
whatsoever thou offerest, whatsoever thou givest, what- 
soever thou doest of austerity, O Kaunteya! do thou that 
as an offering unto Me. 

“Thus shalt thou be liberated from the bonds of action, 
yielding good and evil fruits; thyself harmonized by the 
Yoga of renunciation, thou shalt come unto Me when set 
free.” —Bhagavadgita, chap. ix., verses 27, 28. 


The question is, How can this complete resignation be 
effected—resignation in act, resignation in speech, and 
resignation in thought ? Men’s physical wants, passions, 
propensities, and emotions are the motives of his actions— 
either these are to be suppressed for the development of 
his spiritual nature, or they are to be so used that they 
may not bind, but become useful agents for leading the 
small self to the Great Mother. Suppression being out 
of the question, various devices have been resorted to for 
circumscribing them, prominent among which is Brahma- 
charya (absolute continence) and offering of food to God 
before it is taken. A Sadhaka on the high spiritual path 
should be a celibate and very abstemious in food. Such 
are the hardships and restraints imposed upon him that 
oftener than not he succumbs in his effort to soar to his 
high aim; the strength of his wings fails, and he falls down, 
bruised and broken. Thus rendered unfit for both the 
lower and the higher paths of culture, his life becomes a 
desert of burning sands and scorching winds. A house- 


INTRODUCTION Cxxxi 


holder is bidden to offer food to God, and then eat it as 
Prasada (gracious leaving). He is enjoined to cohabit 
with his wife only during a few days in the month when 
fecundation is physiologically possible. These, as re- 
straints on the propensities of eating and sexual inter- 
course (the two most prominent propensities which rule 
man’s life), are serviceable bits wherewith to check the 
wayward steed of the senses; but the desire to relish the 
one and the other remains as fresh as ever. Though 
constant restraint may put down, it cannot efface. So 
says the Lord in the Bhagavadgita. : 

“ The objects of sense, but not the relish for them, turn 
away from an abstemious dweller in the body, and even 
relish turneth away from him after the Supreme is seen.” 
—Chap. ii., verse 59. 


The Yogavashishtha Ramayana says: 


Sa aaa fawrd aaniaa saa | 
fauaeacfarataqyat Fat Far i 


_“ Man’s disrelish for the objects of sense does not arise 
until the Knowable is known, as a creeper (is not born) 
in a desert.”’—-Chap. il. 


So long as relish remains, so long is man’s individuality 
in the ascendant; andso long as man’s individuality is in 
the ascendant, so long he is the enjoyer of food, drink, 
and the like. How can, then, all his actions be offered to 
the Supreme so that the offerer may be liberated from 
the bonds of action ? 

The answer is, By self-surrender or resignation to the 
Supreme. The Tantrik Sadhaka is enjoined to feel the 
Supreme as Divine Mother and Father, not only within 
himself, but within every being. By knowledge of Shastra, 
by faith, and by devotion to God and Guru, he must 
persistently practise this feeling so that in time it becomes 
a part of his nature. The nature of the Supreme as the 


CXXXIii PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


True Self, the real doer and the real feeler being realized, 
he can place his Karmik self completely at Her disposal 
in all his acts with a devout heart and inflexible will; 
he can worship Her with his thoughts, feelings, and pro- 
pensities, whatsoever they may be, and realize what he 
recites every morning: 


VIALS ATATET ATATSUTT WTATAT | 
BAA fa ATATAATSTT AT UAAA 


‘From the time I rise in the morning till evening, and 
from evening till morning, whatsoever I do, O Mother of 
the Universe ! that is surely Thy worship.” 

This is the mental attitude (ata:) of a hero (qtzx:) as 
distinguished from the mental attitude of the animal man 
(qxy:), who, however otherwise devoted and wise, eats 
the gracious leavings of God, relishing them as an indi- 
vidual only? and does not dare unite with his wife as an 
act of divine worship. Whereas every mouthful of food, 
every sexual relation, and every act is an oblation of the 
hero, who by these practical means spiritualizes his nature, 
and with the Divine Mother’s blessings becomes a Man- 
God (fza:), to be eventually dissolved and lost within 
the blissful effulgence of Mother Anandamayi.? | 

Brahmamay?i? has created this earth as the field wherein 
Jivas must reap the fruits of this Karma, and as sparks 
of Divinity perpetuate the human species. To reap the 
fruits of Karma the body must be kept up by food, and 
to perpetuate the species sexual union must take place. 
But considering the misery attendant upon both these 
functions, none would care to participate in them were 

1 When food (prasada) is offered to the Devata by the Pashu, it is 
considered that the Devata eats the subtle portion and leaves the gross 
part for the worshipper. The latter eats it as devotee (Bhakta)—that 
is, as one who considers himself as separate from the Devata, and whom 
he worships. The Vira, however, regards himself as the Devata, and 
therefore, when he eats, it is the Devata, and not the individual wor- 
shipper, who eats. This is a fundamental principle of the secret 


worship. 
2 The Devi who is Bliss. 3 The Devi who is Brahman. 


INTRODUCTION CXXXIli 


not the monitors of hunger and passion implanted in him, 
to goad him to action which he would not otherwise 
willingly take. But mere hunger and passion would not 
effectually serve the Divine purpose if relish for both were 
not implanted in him. As the Divine Mother and Father 
enjoy their creation in the aggregate, so does the Jiva in 
the individual. The Jiva being essentially the same as the 
Divine Mother and Father, bliss (Ananda) is his natural 
heritage. . 

Thus both eating and sexual union are Divine acts, 
which have nothing impure in them. Impurity is the 
progeny of Ajmana (absence of knowledge), which, having 
divorced Divinity from the Divine act, has lowered it 
into being mere sexual enjoyment. Thus, man divine 
has fallen from his high state to that of man the beast. 
It is the work of the Vira (hero) to undo the instincts born 
of Ajiana and harmonize himself with the Divine Law. 

The Divine Mother creates, maintains, and annihilates 
the Universe as an act of retributive justice to Karma- 
bound Jivas. It is Her pleasure or play (Lila), that 
Her children, by reaping the fruits of their Karma, may 
return to Her lap, never again to be tied and fettered by 
Karma. She enacts this drama of the universe, and Her- 
self enjoys it. Her actions, however, cast no fetters 
round Her, because She is free from attachment and 
repulsion, which are the binding cords of Maya. It is 
this feature of Her character which differentiates Her 
from the Jiva. So the Vedantik terse saying is: 

a=W: YET AAT, 
a sta: Gaara: | 

“ He is God, under whose control is Maya; He is Jiva, 
who is lorded over by Her (Maya).”’ 

The Jiva, who sets his heart upon the task of freeing 
himself from the bondage of Maya, must infuse every 
part of the alluring frame of the Enchantress with Divine 
love, and then throw them as a sacrifice into the Fire of 


CXXXIV PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


that Love. It is only by this means that lording Maya 
may be brought under control. 

What a Sadhaka must do to free himself from the 
attractions of objects of sense is thus stated in the Vama- 
keshvara Tantra: 


fABlatwuars aa arat AAT | 
fafgaauaaat eau aaatfa a 1 
ALTA AATAT GVH VTST Cat: Wan: | 
Berean fe faarat afcatfrar: u 
afar aT wast favs ar: | 

ug atTaTcal efa wqVATTA: War: i 

He carat garfa Woeatafeat fre | 
THICATT HAUT STA AAA AAT: | | 
FAA: UTAH TIST ATU AAT | 
gay fraada wat wiqeaa: | 
DATSTIU UITUT FT WTA TAIT 1 
aay aetefa afaat faacra faa 
BE UST TAT YS BAC Ga | 
frat aia adutfa eal ata GAA Il 
sitfaa efa aaa fram Saad | 
agifa Fergal Atatararafaat: 
UATE WUIUY frat waTaqey | 
mMyqaet usael wagafa a <a: | 
ayia faaqreteyat Tat: tl 
Hat Ala WT ACU VITA | 

Aad G4 SIS WIAAAAUNT | 

<a Sta sacar afmart vatfriat: u 
SIT faa TA IMIAS CU ifAt F | 
afaat: acagifa fase waat Car: i 
AT: VACA: AISA GRATAAT: | 


INTRODUCTION CXXXV 


Udy CAMTAM F FF Chaat: qari: 
aafafuniafugayrafrar fate: | 
avaarataant ost fafa aca 
qwenfatadta aaaresifa ce | 
faut aafafadta ura: ara fea war i 
aqua Tart eats faarared faura z | 
arya: facfaat gata wiTfATTT 1 


’ Many are the branches of knowledge touching work, 
some distinguishing features of which I shall briefly 
tell thee. In literature there are nine Rasa!; there 
are said to be eight Rasa in Yoga; in learning there 
are eighteen Rasa; nine are the Rasa in the Yoga of 
devotion; in objects of sense there are six Rasa. O Devi! 
the Rasa of wine are five. These are the fifty-five Rasa. 
O Dear One! hear attentively the names of the Rasa in 
the different works mentioned. The nine Rasa in litera- 
ture are—sexual love, heroism, compassion, laughter, 
wonder, terror, hate, peace, and anger. O Mahadevi! 
O Dear One! In Yoga-Shastra, Yama, Niyama, Asana, 
Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana,and Samadhi 
are the eight Rasa told in detail.2— The eighteen Rasa of 
learning are—(zr) Chhandas,which are the legs of the Veda; 
(2) Vyakarana (Grammar) is known to be its mouth; 
(3) Shiksha is its nostrils; (4) its hands are said to be 
Kalpa; (5) O Devi! Jyotisha (astronomy, astrology) is its 
eyes; (6) Nirukta is its ears; (7-10) each of the four Vedas 
is a limb of the Veda; (11) Mimdangsa; (12) Nyaya’; 
(x3) Dharma Shastra; (14) Purana; (15) Ayurveda; 
(16) Dhanurveda; (17) Gandharva Veda; and (18) Artha- 
shastra.4 The nine Rasa in Bhakti Yoga (Yoga of devo- 


1 This term means taste, relish, sentiment, juice, etc. 

2 See Introduction to A. Avalon’s ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra.” 
3 Philosophies so-called. 

4 Science of medicine, warfare, music, and economics. 


CXXXVi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


tion) are known, O Devi! to be thinking, praise, medi- 
tation, remembrance, serving the Holy Feet, worship 
and hymn, servitude, fellowship, and self-dedication. 
In objects of sense, O Parameshvari! the six Rasa are 
—flowers, scents, the beloved woman, bed, dress, and 
ornaments. In wine the five Rasa are—that made of . 
molasses, that made of honey, that made of sugar-cane, 
that made of fruits, and that made of corn.” 

‘Those who are experienced in the feeling of Rasa in 
these are called Rasika.” 

“OQ Parameshvari! O Devi! regulations concerning 
work are of five classes—namely, regulations as to daily 
service, Japa, purification, external and internal worship, 
and Purashcharana.* Regulations as to daily service 
relate to morning, noon, and evening rites.” 

« Experiencing all the Rasa and performing the pre- 
scribed works, the Sadhaka, with tranquil mind, shall 
perform Piérnabhishechana.’” 


az carat Terie Joerafear ze | 
FHT Aca Herat F TeUTTT: 
a_rIfedurics als W_TCAT HAA | 
ARITY Var Vfe wcaraaaraa: | 

aAgsq UAT Wiel Wea AVA It 

aut watueg AWW uefa af | 
ure fant wte 4 afafsat fra 
RCT aca g ufsita aera! 
waatt frat geet a Wiad frag 0 
TTUCIAAS: Sia ify aq 7 
TAA TeUia witfa: vearaarfaaie o 
qeurer fram aia Warfare aaa | 
awarata Baars afarata safe 1 


1 See Introduction to A. Avalon’s ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra.” 
2 The Pirndbhishechana here mentioned is not the second, but the 
fourth degree of initiation, known as Purnadiksha (B. K. M.). 


INTRODUCTION CXXXV11 


age WARAA Hanifanagr WI 

ara feat 4 Te Ald Aa WIAA TAA 8 
fraryta atzatfe qoraraca qaa | 
afar gata yhafaa 1 
Far: weyafeatl: TPATSMAAT ITT: | 
aaa Ate Alara ra faeitaa wart 
Aalst 7 Was wMafaarca | 
aMTIaaatty arerfe frefaa: 1 
guraranta avy waa Tad FHA 
AAAI WT MART IUMTTZA: | 
Wess Uses Wiss waa | 

we aaa Sfa WaaTat FATIH: a 
ayaqrara qaaifeaay aa: | 
aweararten ef4 aaTaacarieat | 
warat afaarent wrasse faat i 
afrargst Vf FAIMTAATUA | 

Usd AAATISY VaaT aa Vat hay o 
adqag aTaaacy saranrfaeas | 

yaa ager afa: Tataray Ta 
aat Mai aaa warfuat ade afa: | 
wavs Heaifa ata afad AAT 
WIAA TATA Va UAIAITA fe | 
fauna amary frend wafa fire t 
fasta aaataa aa gaia gaat 
Zeal Zé aarfra a am Uftasc | 
feai faai waa Zfa atarfeaaat | 
WTA ISNT YA AFT Ys It 


“ Hear attentively from me the different characteristics 
of the Rasa. Sexual love should be learnt of the hero; 


CXXXVill PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


in it are compassion, etc. Sexual love, etc., and hate,. 
etc., arise from the sexual Rasa ” (Shringara).? 

““O Devi! when sexual love realises the Supreme 
Object (Paramartha),? then is Supreme tranquillity. (The 
Sadhaka) then acquires the state of Rudra.” 

“OQ dearer than life! hear from me the purport 
of this. O Dear One! as the body cannot move with- 
out limbs, so the Vedic path none can enter without 
a knowledge of Chhandas (metre). O sweet-tongued 
Devi! Chhandas is not beautiful without rhetoric. 
The eye penetrates that which is unseen,’so does 
astronomy; eclipses of the sun and the moon make 
astronomy a science of direct evidence. Nirukta is a 
branch of Veda; from the branches Brahma is born. 
Devotion to Brahma arises from hearing songs; song 
arises from the mouth and nostrils. Without song there 
is no dance; dancing is born of songs. Shiksha and 
drama, etc., words and grammar are the couples in- 
separably allied: The Vedas with their six limbs explain 
the Brahman. The Nydya with Mimangsa surely explains 
Brahman. From constant thought upon the Para- 
matma, knowledge of Brahman arises in the Jiva. Pre- 
cepts are settled according to Dharma Shastra; Puranas 
spring from it, O Dear One! The Jiva, the Supreme 
object of whose life is bliss Divine (Brahmananda), and. 
who is eager for self-preservation, must learn Ayurveda 
(science of life—z.e., medical science), Dhanurveda 
(archery), and Gandharva Veda (music).”’ : 

‘““O Devi, the fully wise Sadhaka, with honey, juice of 
sugar-cane, milk, corn, scents, garlands, dress, and orna- 


1 Which is the root principle of all creation, Sexual love in this 
passage refers to its manifestation in the individual. The sexual Rasa 
from which it arises is its general principle of origin. 

2 Thatis when shringara, which the author translates as sexual love, 
is experienced in the union of the Jivatma and Paramatma—that is, 
the supreme object of Sadhana. The Bhairaviis Devi. The Sadhaka 
is Shiva. In their union there is no distinction. 


INTRODUCTION CXXX1X 


ments, should worship in union woman, who is the image 
of the Mother of the Universe. O Devi! the culture of the 
Rasa of sexual love! consists in the worship of woman.2 
Worship and the five classes of work already stated 
should be performed by the hero (Vira) for attaining the 
Devi. By worship arise nine degrees of devotion and 
ecstasy of Rasa. Then the Yogi, practising Yoga, shall 
be immersed in communion’’ (Samadhi). 

“ Therefore, O Maheshani, have I already stated that 
by feeling all the fifty-five Rasas one loses all desire for 
objects of sense and worldly work. The effect of non- 
desire is wonderful, and the Divine Mother is gratified 
by it. Embodied man cannot give up Karma (action) 
so long as he is embodied; so, concluding in this wise, 
divine acts by festive, religious, and other works, the 
Sadhaka verily becomes liberated in this life (Jivan- 
mukta) by virtue of his full knowledge and bliss of Rasa.’” 
—Chap. liv. 

Wine, as a means of spiritual self-culture, is another 
singular feature of some forms* of Tantrik Sadhana. In 
India the free use of wine in social and religious festivals 
was fairly general in the Satya, Treta, and Dvapara 
Ages (Yugas). It was, however, probably after the ruin 
of the race of Yadus during the last days of Shri Krishna’s 
life that stringent laws were framed in the Smriti Shastras 
against the use of wine by the three higher classes. Those 
laws were sedulously administered by the Hindu Govern- 
ments, and the result was a general abhorrence of 
spirituous drinks. Nothing better could have been 
devised for the welfare of man, for wine not only wastes 
the body, but it works havoc on the intellectual and 
moral faculties, pulling down man to the level of beasts. 


1 Shringararasasddhana. 

2 Vanitapfijane. According to the ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra ”’ the wor- 
shipper’s own wife. 

3 Each pleasure is but a portion {khanda) of the whole mixed with 
pain. He who has felt the whole (akhanda) attains Brahma bliss and 
loses desire for worldly things. 

4 Not of all and by some Tantras only. 


cx] PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


The Tantra Shastra—the Word of God—is fully alive to 
this: 

ata gfagt wage agfaefa | 

a wean Sfa agantafeena: t 

aaa MITA AAACN HA | 

afrau ga ata UTS ACS AIT I 

quae safy GIs ATaa | 

aaeraiaa efa qetics frefaa u 

‘“One who, being unripe in Kaula knowledge, wishes 
to drink wine, is, O Devi! a great sinner, and is unfit to 
perform all religious works.” 

“He goes to Raurava Hell who drinks unpurified 
wine, commits rape, and slaughters animals for self- 
gratification.” 

“O Devi! that is called drinking of wine which is not 
for Divine purposes; that is a great sin according to the 
Vedas, etc.”—Kularnava Tantra. 

Further, it is said in the same Tantra: 

azaraa Hast afe fate waa F1 
aaaTaca: Va fats weeeq TACT: t 
araaquaray fe yeafaiaa 

STS ATA: Fe TMA Wafer I 
mawaiia Safq afe ata ante 1 
waste waa MI aa: BW atfaazare y 

“If man could attain spirituality by drinking, then 
all ignoble drinkers would be liberated. If residence in 
heaven be the result of meat-eating, then all carnivorous 
beings would be righteous. If, O Devi! enjoyment of 
women be the cause of liberation, then all creatures by 
enjoying women would be liberated.” 

Why, then, it may be asked, are all these “ gates of 
hell’? introduced in self-culture, the object of which is 
liberation from the fascinations of Maya? The same 


6 


INTRODUCTION cxh 


Tantra which prescribes Sadhana with woman, wine, and 
meat, prescribes also various other methods of worship, 
and supplies Mantras, without which Hinduism all over 
India would be paralyzed. It is irrational to accept one 
portion of a Shastra as valuable and reject another as 
worthless. The earnest inquirer must forgo his preju- 
dices and passions, cherished ideas and preconceived 
notions, before he can enter the holy temple of spiritual 
truth embodied in the mandates of Lord Shiva. It must 
always be remembered that this is spiritual culture, and 
not the culture of the body and its senses. 

The Tantra Shastra, like all other revelations, does 
not always assign reasons for its mandates, but asserts 
that as Sadhana is practical, the most direct evidence of 
the truth of its statements can be obtained by accepting 
the Sadhana and working according to instructions. 

The principle underlying this Sadhana is thus 
enunciated: 


avq wat za: fafeaita arfzar | 
Maraeiat Iq ACaT Aaa ii 


“The Great Bhairava has ordained in the Kaula 
doctrine that Siddhi (spiritual advancement) must be 
achieved by means of those very things which are the 
causes of man’s downfall.” —Kularnava Tantra. 


The consideration of this principle leads us, in the first 
place, to adopt the evidence of analogy in regard to the 
physical body of man. Cobra poison, arsenic, aconite, 
croton, opium, and other animal and vegetable poisons, 
are destructive of life. But skilfully prepared and puri- 
fied, they not only save life but invigorate it. The Indian 
physician’s preparation of cobra poison is famous for its 
life-giving and invigorating virtues, so are the apothe- 
cary’s preparations of arsenic, etc. In some parts of 
India raw arsenic is used in moderate quantities for pro- 
longing life and putting off old age. It would thus appear 


cxlii PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


that nothing is absolutely harmful in nature. By skilful 
manipulation even poison yields manna. The poison of 
wine, by skilful treatment according to Tantrik precepts 
and instructions of Gurus, is not only 1endered innocuous, 
but is turned into a distinct force of labour, energy, 
patience, and intrepidity, all of which are essential in 
spiritual culture. 

Wine, by exciting the brain, turns ney mind to that 
channel of thought which is uppermost in the drinker’s 
mind.1 When the mind is pre-eminently devotional, the 
effect of wine upon it is to render it more so by concen- 
trating all the thoughts upon the object of devotion. 
Ecstasy (Ullasa) and communion (Samadhi) are after a 
long practice its riper developments in a Sadhaka. 

That which most attracts men to the taking of wine 
is its power to develop happiness in the drinker. The 
Sadhaka’s mind, freed from all base and ignoble thoughts 
and feelings, enjoys Brahmananda (Brahman Bliss) under 
its influence. 

As to the use of meat and fish, the Vaidik and the 
Tantrik Shastras agree in holding that slaughter of 
animals for Divine purposes is not sinful. 


fageatfeusty quféar fadtad | 
mare wifuat fear azifaarfeat fre u 
afafan aw afta ecaa acta | 
Zaaty faaty at gat wads faa 
““O Dear One! in sacrifices to the Pitris and Gods - 
killing of prescribed animals is ordained. For self- 
gratification killing of beings is nowhere permitted. 
Even a blade of grass should never be cut without a 
lawful purpose. Killing for the satisfaction of the Gods 
and twice-born (Dvijas) ? is not sinful.” 
1 The effect of wine is to intensify and reveal what is already in the 


mind. Hence it is said, In vino veritas. 
* Here Brahmanas to whom the sacrificial meats are given. 


INTRODUCTION cexliii 


The Kularnava Tantra says: 
TaaIac UH fra: qa afegqer: | 
aareararafrst: FF frat: Sf waz a 
aaa S aaa acrat fufyataaa | 
squteatea arate Haha: alfaarsa Fy 
Maa: ULaTAt afssrreaqayTA | 
SISA VA aAy HAs ATTA HAF 1 
aaa Fy Fuga gGaTaVefya: | 
aaa Atalay: agaaae faa: i 
aauftadaaa gat sta sud | 
aa ATATY AT Ala FAUTAA FRA 
ward gage yazaritd faz 
a faata satatat eau 4 fara i 
Qu uta: frat ate agat ca: Ga | 
ATIC AACA Was ATT Vas | 
Mas TAT SI ay seuafad | 
walfaana ae afar utact u | 
fragy frat ao faeay freqaes: 
fautageqrearayt acat areut faa 1 
AAMATTATAAITAT UTata | 
Wad SqaTatay aaaqufaaraai: i 
Tae Wasaat AAUTATUAT F | 
aaa ayaiaria qavat Ga @ araat 
AAAUACUTTT AA: QAET | 
aaqurafagay ayatTd TATIta 
aaa a: aarata aardifa a wast | 
mqaeaqammna afararataafaia: t 
aqaaiaraaiarat areata fara | 


cxliv PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


amare fantasy cau afad fra 

aa agg fanrat aaa fautaa | 
AYUTT AUT ATA TAS ATAATAS 
MIT: FATA: BAT ATA sIAaTy | 
uayat fata yTerat utaat Aaa | 
WIE ATA SAAR AAAWTA | 
Wats wat arearsfa aca ast aH 
araifefsaauy ararafa aas7 | 
viata a uaefa Tat: wT urfafaan: x 
BUGaT wat: Wa: waET atfawea Ft 
ufa at aadeayq a vawinaaa: i 
UTNaafaqaaararTs aac: | 

a we Fat aa arfeat alfataan: o 
rare wayqgrat araat saatfas | | 
Wal waAaefa a tat wT gue ti 


usnfiaaafedt eff wreneaatad | 
Sqaraeuaa frat acaad He u 
FAAACTTAA SAATCTUAN ATA: | 
Teueydgm: wad Faarfas ti 
Tetal alates: Hraatafsatsa: | 
wiadfefara: waa fae 1 
aaaiaia Shy Fate AlraA ITT | 
AEE AA Ale WeAfa Aqaretia 
Aas Cfrwrata sa urferarfaa: | 
tfa afar arity: seuss HAA | 
tafe waurta: atfaar faraaze: | 
agi qaaaefa yfaga: F arae 4 


INTRODUCTION cxlv 


“ As the personal servants of a King and not the State 
servants are dear to him, so, O Devi! are those who are 
devoted to internal worship, not others. Those who 
with devotion offer with their hands meat and wine cause 
bliss (Ananda); they are, my Dear One! Kaulikas. Our 
Supreme form, described as Sat, Chit, and Ananda, 
verily develops, O Dear One! by the enjoyment of wine. 
Bhairava inspires those who drink with a knowledge of 
the principles of Kula (Shakti), and who view all objects 
with an even eye. As a dark house is illumined by light, 
so does the Atma, enveloped by Maya, become visible 
by drinking. O Dear one! those who drink wine sancti- 
fied by Mantra (the mystic words of power) and offered to 
Gurudeva will never drink the mother’s milk again (that 
is, will never be reborn). Wine is Shakti, meat is Shiva. 
Their enjoyer is Bhairava himself; the bliss arising from 
their union is called liberation. Anandais Brahman. It 
- exists in bodies. Wine reveals it; hence Yogis drink it. 
Without attachment, fearless, uamoved by pairs of 
opposites (as pleasure and pain), without curiosity to 
know, versed in Vaidik lore, the Vira drinks wine 
which grants blessings.” 

& %* * * * 

«Q Parvati! the drink of nectar purified by Mantra 
develops god-like nature, and liberates man from the 
bondage of the world.” 

* % % * ane 

“For the gratification of the Gods, and also for the 
attainment of the knowledge of Brahman, should wine 
and meat alone be taken; he is a sinner who consumes 
them in order to satisfy his carnal appetite. Wine should 
be drunk in order that a clear perception of the form (of 
the Devata) arising from the Mantra (of the Sadhaka) 
may be thereby attained, and for pacification of the 
mind and the undoing of the bondage of the world. He 
who takes wine and the rest for self-gratification is a 
sinner. These things should be taken without thirst and 

m 


‘exlvi PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


longing, for the satisfaction of the Devata alone. O 
Dear One! the partaking of fish, meat, wine, and other 
things which cause excitement, at times other than those 
of worship, is sinful. As Soma-drinking is prescribed 
to Brahmanas during sacrifice, so wine, as that which 
yields joy and liberation, should be drunk at its proper 
time. It is. only after the true import of the Kula 
Shastra has been learnt from the Guru that one should 
partake of the five articles, otherwise one becomes 
a sinner. Even a Kaula goes to hell who drinks after 
the manner of Pashus? without worshipping Bhairava 
Deva, and without doing Tarpana with Mantra.” 
¥ * * % * | 

‘““ He who withdraws the senses from their objects and 
unites them with Atma is a true meat-eater, others are 
mere slaughterers of animals. The Shakti of a Pashu is 
asleep, that of a Kaulais awake; he who enjoys this Shakti 
is an enjoyer of Shakti. He who enjoys the bliss arising 
from the union of Parashakti with Atma has true sexual] 
union,® others are mere enjoyers of women. O Mistress 
of Kula! he who partakes of the five articles, knowing 
from the mouth of the Guru their true messiness cs 1S 
liberated.” . 

* * * * * 

“O Devi! I myself with Thee accept with pleasure 
Shrichakra Paja performed with Mantra by one, well- 
versed in the Shastrik import of Pija and Abhisheka,4 
who is devoted to Devata and Guru, who worships daily, 
who knows the esoteric meanings of the Kula Shastra, 
who with zeal performs worship, who has received instruc- 
tions from Guru, whose mind is pure, who is active, who is 
devoid of anger and greed, who is averse to the religious 
practices of Pashus, and who offers oblations. The wise 
Yogi should perform Kula-pdja, filling his mind with 

1 See Introduction to A. Avalon's “‘ Mahanirvana Tantra,” 
2 Panchamudra. 


_8 This is the ShrinSara Rasa of the Vira. 
4 Vide ibid. 


INTRODUCTION cxlvil 


the thought “I am Bhairava.’ Possessed of these and 
other qualities the Kaulika who regularly worships Thee 
obtains enjoyment and liberation.” 

These rather long extracts will, it is hoped, amply 
repay perusal, and bring home to the mind of the un- 
biased, earnest inquirer the truth of the compatibility of 
enjoyment and liberation existing harmoniously, provided 
that such enjoyment be lawful and not sinful. Yoga, 
which liberates, and Bhoga (enjoyment), which chains 
down, have been treated as though they were poles 
asunder in other schools of thought, which make it incum- 
bent upon the pursuer of the one to shun the other as one 
would shun a deadly cobra. The effect of this has been 
referred to more than once in this essay. The Tantra 
Shastra reconciles the two, not only in theory, but in 
practice. The testimony of thousands of Tantrik Yogis 
from remote antiquity corroborate its truth. 

According to the eight-limbed Yoga process, Kula- 
kundalini can be united in the thousand-petalled lotus 
with Parashiva. This is the union of Shiva and Shakti, 
and the fluid arising from this union is wine which the 
Yogi drinks. The truth of this is unquestionable, and 
forms the basis of the Shatchakra-Sadhana briefly 
described in a previous part of this essay. This system of 
Sadhana is called Jana Yoga—that is, the Yoga of 
Knowledge as distinguished from Bhakti Yoga, the Yoga 
of Devotion. The Yoga of Knowledge is so arduous and 
difficult that but very few amongst many thousands can 
appreciably succeed init. On the other hand, very many 
persons are physically unfit for it. 

Tantrik Yogis who pursue the path of knowledge regard 
the path of devotion as indispensable, for the latter 
wonderfully develops the spiritual faculties, unties 
worldly bondage more effectually, and operates as a 
guarantee against fall, the danger of which attends every 
step taken in the practice of the Yogi of Knowledge. 

Tantrik Bhakti Yoga stands upon its own feet, firm, 


Cxlvili PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


sure, Unerring, and suited to all constitutions and to all 
stations of life. It is for the prince as for the peasant, 
for the poor as for the rich, for the man of business as for 
the man of leisure. It makes no distinction of caste, 
colour, creed, or nationality, welcoming one and. all 
who will bow to the lotus-feet of the Divine Mother. It 
exhorts no privation, imposes no hard and fast conditions, 
but accommodates itself to the tastes and capacities of 
its followers, so that they may slowly but surely march on 
like heroes to the capture of the citadel of bliss. It only 
asks the ordinary disciple to be honest, sincere, kind, 
compassionate, and truthful, and to keep: his passions 
and greed under control. If he wants prosperity, pro- 
geny, and other material advantages, let him devoutly 
pray to the Divine Mother, and “ depute” Her angels 
to secure them for him. His desire will thus have a 
better chance of being gratified than by servitude, ser- 
vility, and many another questionable worldly artifice. 
Passion and greed being the two great powers of Avidya, 
which sow seeds of disease, death, discord, poverty, and 
ruin broadcast all over the world, they are so handled in 
the Yoga of Devotion that they not only lose their own 
strength, but become cheerful friends of the sojourner. 
The path of devotion—that is, the Kaula path—is there- 
fore a blessing, not only individually, but socially. 
Extreme Vedantik pessimism has rendered India what 
it is to-day—-neither soaring to heaven nor blooming 
on earth. Both heaven and a fruitful life on earth were 
the portion of its great ancestors who were wont to perform 
the Soma sacrifice in bygone ages. Casting our eyes on 
the West, we are dazed by the dazzle of worldly wealth 
on the one hand, and terrified by the ghostly shadow of 
poverty on the other. Big religious bodies there are, 
but where is God? Whilst India has no faith in the 
world, and only a dreamy faith in heaven, the West seeks 
a heaven in this world. The best remedy for this disease 
is to be found in that religion which both fully recognizes 


© INTRODUCTION cxlx 


the reality of the world, and regards it as the training- 
ground whereon man may grow into God. And so says 
the Kularnava Tantra : 


wat Baad aq Gad Gaara | 
WAT FT GAIT: FAIA SAT i 


“O Mistress of Kula! in Kuladharma, Bhoga (enjoy- 
ment) becomes complete Yoga (union of Jiva with Brah- 
man), bad deeds are made good deeds, and the world 
becomes the seat of Liberation.” 

Om Shantih, Om Shantih, Om Shantih, Om Kali. 


BARADA KANTA MAJUMDAR. 


BENARES, 
March 23, 1914. 


« 


OE oN Cb eb OT EL 
Gee vi OIVINITY, THE ALL-GOOD 
rN Deb rw TEOUS MOTHER 


TANTRA-TATTVA 
ea ed 


rraAt beh Re Gl 
ON MANTRA 


HE tribute of water which Bhagavan Stryyadeva,? 

the Regulator of the entire universe, takes from the 
earth during the eight months of Kartika, Agrahdyana, 
Pausha, Magha, Falguna, Chaitra, Baishakha, and 
Jyaishtha, He returns to the same earth in the form of 
rain during the four months of Ashadha, Shravana, 
Bhadra, and Ashvina. This taking of tribute again is 
performed by the stretching out of arms. Arm is the 
name of the agency by which things are done.’ For this 
reason Stiryyadeva is called by the names of “the 
thousand-rayed one,’’ “the thousand-armed one,’ and 
so forth. Terrestrial water is drawn by the power of the 
sun, and rises to the solar region.4 It is this power of 
-the sun which is called by the name of Raudra.® It is, 


1 Mantratattva—that is, the subject of and principles relating to 
Mantra. ~ 


2 Sun God. 

3 There is from the beginning a play on the Sanskrit word kara, 
which means “ tribute,” “‘ray,’? and ‘‘arm,”’ and is derived from the 
verbal root Kri, to do. 

# Siryyaloka. 5 Sunshine. 


VOL. Il. I 


2 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


however, a matter for consideration why the power of 
the sun is called Raudra. It ought to have been called 
Saura (that is, appertaining to the sun). Raudra is 
what appertains to Rudra. Why, then, is sunshine 
called Raudra ? In order to understand that it is neces- 
sary to discuss the subject! of Gayatri. Brahmdani, 
Vaishnavi, and Maheshvari, the presiding and controlling 
Deities of the three gunas of sattva, rajas, and tamas, 
the Creatrix, Preservatrix, and Destructress respectively, 
are the three Shaktis? whose forms are meditated upon 
in the solar orb at the three Sandhyas.? In the creation, 
preservation, and destruction, which take place every 
day, the morning Sandhya is the time of creation, the 
noon Sandhya is the time of preservation or maintenance, 
and the evening Sandhya is the time of destruction. In 
the morning the world of Jivas is freed from sleep, the 
tamasa* Shakti who rules supreme at the time of dis- 
solution,” and, loosened from the grasp of darkness, 
awakes. In the night the universe, although existing as 
before, remains covered by a tamasa envelope, so that, 
notwithstanding its actual existence, it is not perceived 
by Jivasin astate of sleep. For this reason, the universe 
must then be considered “‘ non-existing,’’ otherwise dis- 
solution® has no meaning.® In dissolution® the world of 


1 Tattva. 
2 Shakti is that ‘“‘ which makes able,’”’ or the power by which things 


happen or act. That power belongs to, or more properly is, the 
Brahman (God), and manifests in various ways (see Chapter VII. of 
First Volume). At Sandhya the Sadhaka worships the three powers 
of the Brahman as creator, maintainer, and destroyer of all things. 
These Shaktis are contemplated upon in the female forms of Brahmdani, 
Vaishnavi, and Raudri, or Maheshvari, the Shaktis of Brahma, Vishnu, 
and Shiva, threefold aspects of the One. 

> That is, morning, noon, and evening. 

¢ That is, the Shakti which manifests the dark inert Tamas Guna. 
(See Introduction.) 


5 Pralaya. 
6 That is, if the world ceases to exist during pralaya, it must cease to 


exist (to the sleeper) during sleep. If the condition during sleep is not 
pralaya, then nothing can be called such, 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 3 


Jivas exists in the womb of Prakriti in a subtle form as 
seeds, and then later the first blooms of creation appear 
through the power of Brahmashakti. In the creation 
also which takes place every day it is this Brahmashakti 
who emerges from the solar orb and suffuses the whole 
world. This is why in the morning-Sandhya rite, 
Brakhmashakti, the Creatrix, should be contemplated upon 
in the form of Brahmaniin the solar orb. At noon, when 
the adult world has reached its full maturity, when the 
forces (Shakti) of hunger and thirst have established 
their full sway over the world of Jivas; when even trees, 
plants, shrubs, and creepers are wearied of drinking the 
rays of the sun, and yet, under the influence of the force 
(Shakti) of preservation, hanker for that drink till even- 
ing; when the sun has been established in mid-sky between 
the mount of sunrise on one side and the mount of sunset 
on the other, it is then that in the noontime-Sandhya rite— 
the Vishnushakti, the Preservatrix of the Sangsara—must 
be contemplated upon in the form of Vaishnavi in the 
solar orb. Again, in the evening, when the world of 
Jivas has done its daily play and, weary of body, seeks 
to enjoy the blessing and balm of the sleep of dissolution,} 
it is then that Shivashakti, She who gives the unalloyed 
bliss of the enjoyment of the balm of dreamless sleep? 
ajid is the Destructress of the universe, appears (in order 
{;fat She may provide that balm) in the solar orb in the 
fm of Maheshvari. She covers life with Tamasa Shakti, 
ed drops the curtain of sleep on this Sangsara, the Mayik 
playground of error, and dispels from the minds of Jivas 
all\ the impressions which they have received from the 
outer world, such as wife, children, and so forth. It is 
this Shivashakti who must be worshipped in the evening- 
San ihya rite. The Shastra, therefore, enjoins that the 
Sandhya-rite, if performed other than at the prescribed 
time, is ineffectual. To let the morning-Sandhya (when 
the. Shakti of creation is supreme) go by, and to worship 
1 Pralaya. 2 Sushupti. 


4 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


the Shakti of creation during the period of supremacy of 
the Shakti of preservation, is tantamount to living in the 
domain of one King and paying the tribute due to him 
to another. The same rule also holds good in the case 
of the performance of the midday-Sandhya in the evening 
or at night when the supremacy of the Shakti of preserva- 
tion has passed, or in the case of the performance of the 
evening-Sandhya on the following day after the supremacy 
of the Shakti of destruction has passed away in the 
previous evening. I here give a general idea of the 
matter. To understand it more deeply and accurately 
we should know that Mahaprakriti,? who is the aggregate 
of the three Shaktis of creation, preservation, and de- 
struction, is composed of the three Gunas of Sattva, 
Rajas, and Tamas. It is not that when one of the 
Gunas is in play that the other Gunas remain dormant. 
The eternal play of creation, preservation, and destruction 
is ever equally present in Her, but we fail to recognize 
this with our imperfect vision. Let us suppose, for 

instance, that we see a hungry tiger killing a deer. We — 
think that it is the play of destruction of the Mother of 
the world. But a keener insight into the incident will 
make it clear to us that even in this play of destruction 
there equally exists, in succession, the play of the three 
Gunas of Her whose substance is the three Gunas. Wi 

see only the destruction of the deer. But although th). 
is a case of destruction so far as the deer is concerneth 
it is a case of preservation if we look at it from the poir ° 
of. view of the tiger. For the tiger’s body is preservé": 
by the blood and flesh of that deer. Again, the genera- 
tion of the tiger’s cub is due to the maintenance of the 
tiger’s body. Consequently, what is destruction for the 
deer is creation for the tiger’s cub, just as our own eating 
involves destruction of the seed-power of the tree, pre- 
servation of ourselves, and creation of our children. : It 
must, therefore, be understood that in Her the three fo.ms 


1 Great Prakriti. 2 See Introduction. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 5 


of play of the three Gunas exist equally and always, but 
that according to the Prarabdha Karma! of Jivas they 
appear as creation to some, preservation to others, and 
destruction to the rest. The Mother’s play is uniform, 
but with this difference—that, owing to diversity in the 
Karma of Jivas, the nature of that play is different.? 
She is the aggregate of all Shaktis whose substance is 
the eternal play of all three Gunas. That triple play of 
Hers does not rest for a single moment. It is only the 
blind vision of Jivas involved in error which makes it 
appear as if such play occurred in succession. The same 
water which quenches the thirst and gives life to one man 
may give death by drowning to another. What are we 
to understand from this—that water possesses the power 
(Shakti) of preserving life, or that it has the power of 
destroying it? Again, fish, tortoise, crocodile, shell- 
fish, and other aquatic animals are born in that same 
water and live therein, and die if taken out of it. Are we 
to understand from this that water has the power of 
creating and preserving life? The same sunshine which 
destroys the life of the wayfarer oppressed by summer 
heat in some far-stretching plain gives life to the cold 
Himalayan traveller whose limbs have been stiffened 
by the fall of snow. Say, now, does this indicate the 
life-destroying power or the life-preserving power of sun- 
shine ? Without this sunshine trees, shrubs, and creepers 
dwindle and die. Again, this very sunshine draws water 
from the earth and carries it to the solar orb. It was 
Narayana, the preserver of the world, who destroyed 
Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Kangsa,* and others in their 
incarnations, as Rama and Krishna. His name varies 
accordingly, and is suited to the different forms of His 
play in different capacities. The energy® which draws 


1 ripe Karma. See Introduction, Mahahuvana Tantra, p. CXxxix. 
2 That is, it is either creation, preservation, or destruction. 

3 Vishnu. 

4 Daityas, or demoniac beings. 

5 Tejas. 


6 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


water from the earth is Raudra! or terrible, so far as water 
is concerned. The same energy which previously mani- 
fested a different form then assumes a terrible aspect? 
for the purpose of drawing water. For this reason, 
although it is Saura or solar energy, it is then Raudra or 
terrible energy. Thus sunshine is called Raudra or 
terrible. The play of His forms and their names corre- 
sponds to the play of the Gunas. Brother Sadhaka, 
consider but once what difference does there lie between 
this Raudra or sunshine and Siiryya or sun. Sun is the 
name of a mass of compact energy,® solid and circular in 
form, while Raudra or sunshine is the name of the rays 
which it scatters on every side of it. In fact, the differ- 
ence between the sunshine and the sun is the same as that 
between the waves of the sea and the sea. Just as in 
the sea, water exists in a collected form, so in the solar 
orb energy® exists in such form. Just aS iitieweea 
single waves heave eternally, so do waves of energy in 
the solar orb. It must, therefore, be understood that 
wave is the same thing as water, and sunshine is the 
same thing as sun. The solar orb lies above (terrestrial 
water) at a distance of one lakh of yojanas,‘ and terrestrial 
water lies below (the sun) at the same distance. If the 
sun were to cease to draw this water from the earth by 
his energy, would it be in the power of water to rise to 
the solar orb ? Or would it be in the power of anything 
else in this universe to raise water to the solar orb? At 
what height lies that Brahmamayi who is hardly known 
to Vedas and Vedangas, and worshipped with difficulty 
by Yogis and princes of Yogis—She who is beyond the 
reach of mind and speech of even Brahma, Vishnu, and 
Maheshvara, and who is above the three Gunas ? Again, 
at what depth does the insignificant Jiva lie—he who is 


1 Raudra is an adjective of Rudra or Shiva, and means “terrible.” 


The reason why sunshine is called Raudra or ‘‘terrible’”’ is later 
explained. 


2 Rudra Marti. 3 Tejas, 
4 A yojana is equal to eight or nine miles, and a lakh equals 100,000 


ERINCIPLES OR TANTRA 7 


devoid of true consciousness,! full of Maya, and a member 
of the Sangsdra, which is made of the Gunas in various 
combinations ? Can it ever be in the power of the Jiva 
to enter by his own unaided Jivashakti? into Shivaghakti 2° 
Can the child who wishes to rise to the arms of its mother 
do so unless the gracious mother extends her affectionate 
arms and herself raises her child ? Who has the power 
and courage to say to him who stands in this limitless 
field of the universe and desires to go to Her, ‘‘ Go, 
Sadhaka, reach safely the arms of the Mother of the 
Dispeller of all obstacles, I stand security for your 
_ success ?”’ That alone which has such power is Mantra- 

shakti.2 Both Bhagavan and Bhagavati, therefore, say, 
“ Just as Parabrahman is my eternal self, so also Shabda- 
brahman® (which is Mantrashakti) is my eternal self.’ 
Like sunshine, which is the energy of the sun, Mantra- 
shakti alone is able to raise the Jivas who inhabit this 
universe to the arms of Brahmamayi, for Mantrashakti 
is Herself. Mantrashakti alone can lead the unconscious 
Jiva-world to a true perception of Paramatma by endow- 
ing it with that consciousness which it is. For this 
reason Mantrashakti is that which is alone efficient in all 
Sadhana,” prescribed in the Aryya Shastra, or to secure 
the Siddhi spoken of in it. Just as a lifeless body is 
incapable of work, so methods and processes devoid of 
Mantrashakti are incapable of achieving anything in the 
domain of Sadhana. 

In my brief account of Mantra in the First Part 
of “‘ Tantra-tattva,’® I have shown that the Devata 

1 Literally, ‘‘he who is Jada.” 

2 The Shakti appertaining to Jivahood, the state of the embodied 
spirit. 3 The Shakti appertaining to Shivahood. 

# Vighnahara, a name of Ganesha. 

5 The potency of Mantra, which is Devata. 

6 Supreme Brahman as contrasted with the manifesting Shabda 
Brahman (Sound Brahman). 

7 That is, spiritual training, practice, and ritual of all kinds which are 
the cause of spiritual achievement (Siddhi). (See Introduction.) 

EeMOl.d., p.. 151. 


8 PRINCIPLES ‘OF TANTRA 


presiding over a Mantra appears in a two-fold aspect— 
first in the aspect of Vachaka Shakti, and secondly in the 
aspect of Vachya Shakti. The Vachya Shakti reveals 
Itself only when the Vachaka Shakti has been aroused 
through the worship of the Sadhaka. Whatever may be 
the appearance of the Devata presiding over a Mantra, 
such appearances are nothing but different manifestations 
of power! of Kulakundalini? playing at the aperture in 
the Muladhara. It is the string of fifty letters from A 
to Ksha which is the (rosary) of Akshas* of Mother 
Sarasvati. Out of these fifty letters have been formed 
the nine crores* of great Mantras, which are the sole 
source and means of Siddhi and Sadhana.® A Mantra 
takes different forms according as it appears as seed, 
sprout, root, stem, trunk, branch, twig, leaf, flower, and 
fruit. Just as one cannot have leaf, flower, fruit, twig, 
and so forth, without first sowing the seed, so one cannot 
acquire competence® for the reception of other Mantras 
without first being initiated in the special Mantra of 
the Devata.2 For this reason the Mantra of the Devata 
which is received at the time of initiation is called Vija- 
mantra, or seed-mantra. The great Vija or seed which 
Parabrahman as Guru sows in the field of the Sadhaka’s 
heart, after having cleared, ploughed, and irrigated it 
with the water of His grace. The Mantra formed of 
the name of a Devata is the sprout which rises out of 
that great Mantra, and Tantrik Sandhya,® Gayatri? 
Nyasa,? Paja,? and Upacharamantras,™ are all its stems, 
trunk, branches, and twigs. Hymns of praise’* and 

1 Vibhati. 

2 The Devi of that name whose abode is the Muladhara Chakra of 
the Jiva. (See Introduction and Arthur Avalon’s ‘‘ The Six Centres 


and the Serpent Force.’’) 3 Seeds of a plant used for rosaries. 
4 A crore is ten million. 5 See note ante. 6 Adhikara., 
7 Svartipa. 8 That is, the Sadhakas Ishtadevata. 


®° These terms are explained in Arthur Avalon’s Introduction to the 
‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra,’ referred to hereafter as ‘‘ Introduction.” 

10 The Mantra by that name. 

11 Mantras used in making offerings to Devatas. 12 Stuti. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 9 


homage? are its leaves and flowers;and the Kavacha,? 
consisting of Mantras, is its fruit. Just as all seeds are 
contained in the fruits, and sprout, trunk, leaf, flower, 
and so forth, are contained in the seed in extremely 
subtle states, so all Vijamantras are contained in the 
Kavacha, which is the fruit of Mantra; and Siddhi and 
Sadhanashakti,? and so forth, are also contained in the 
Vija in extremely subtle state. Now, to-day many 
people, through ignorance of Shastric principles, think 
that Mantra is the name of the words by which one 
expresses what one has to say to the supreme Divinity. 
It therefore follows that I may submit my prayer to 
Him in whatever language I choose. What, then, is the 
necessity of my using the ever-ancient words of the 
Shastra.? In reply to this we would at the very start 
point out that the definition which has been given to 
Mantra by those who hold this view is contrary to 
Shastric principles, and consequently incorrect. In 
defining Mantra, Shastra says: “‘ That is called Mantra, 
from the Manana or meditation of which arises the 
Universal special knowledge (that is, special knowledge 
embracing the whole universe) or realization of the 
Monistic truth that the substance of the Brahmdanda? is 
not different from that of the Brahman. Man of Mantra 
comes from Manana, which leads to Trana, or liberation 
from the bondage of Sangsara® (tva of Mantra comes 
from trana), and which calls forth (Amantrana) Dharma, 
Artha, Kama, and produces Moksha.’ 


1 Vandana. 2 The protective Mantra. (See Introduction.) 

3 That is, the Shakti generated by Sadhana. 

4 Derived from the combination of man and tra. 

5 Universe, or “‘ egg of Brahma.”’ 

6 The Sangsdra is the coming and going, the cycle of birth, action, 
death, and rebirth; the world in which all live who have not by know- 
ledge of the self (€tmajndna) and the extinction of the will to separate 
life attained liberation or moksha. 

7 That is, Religion, Wealth, Desire, and its fulfilment known as the 
Trivarga, forming with moksha (liberation) the chaturvarga, or four 
aims of all sentient beings. (See Introduction.) 


10 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Putting aside unbelievers, such as have faith in the 
ordinances of the Shastra must now understand that to 
be Mantra, in which eternally exists the super-worldly 
threefold power of perceiving the Brahman in and 
throughout the Universe, of loosening the bonds of 
Sangsara,? and of calling forth Dharma, Artha, Kama, 
and Moksha.? | 

Everyone desires to practise Sadhana and Bhajana,® 
but the question is whether the hard labour which is 
involved will bear fruit directly. Who can answer this 
question ? Faced by this difficult problem, who but 
Mantra alone can proudly and loudly declare, “ Siddhi 
comes from Japa,* Siddhi comes from Japa, Siddhi comes 
from Japa without doubt ’’? Who has the confidence to 
say: “ If Siddhi is not achieved, I shall be responsible ” ? 
Who holds such dominion over the three worlds as to be 
able to stand between that Devata who is sought for, 
difficult of worship, and beyond the reach of mind and 
speech on the one hand, and the Jivasadhaka steeped 
in great delusion on the other, and say: “‘ Sadhaka, be 
not afraid, I stand surety for you’’? That surety is 
Mantra alone, the grantor of Siddhi and redeemer of all 
liabilities. How indomitable must be the attractive 
force of Mantra that it is able of its own strength to 
move even the great Devata, who is eternally possessed 
of Siddhi, and so stay by its own mighty power even the 
movements of Prakriti, instilling Shivahood into the 
Sadhaka by the expulsion of his Jiva nature; thus making, 
without labour on his part, the eight forms of Siddhi 
to play constantly before his eyes. When by virtue of 
Siddhi in Mantra vision of the three worlds is opened 
to the Sadhaka, then nothing is super-worldly to him. 
When by the grace of Mahamaya the door of Her Maya 
which makes the impossible possible is opened, then 

1 See note 6 on preceding page. 2 See note 7 on preceding page. 

* As to Sadhana, see ante (p. 7, n. 7). Bhajana is simple worship. 


4 Japa, oral or mental, “‘ recitation ’’ of Mantra, which is here stated 
to lead to success (Siddhi). 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA if 


there is nothing impossible for the Sadhaka himself. 
For this reason, it is sheer ignorance to suppose that 
Mantra is mere language. Vijamantras, in particular, 
cannot possibly be language, for they convey no meaning 
according to the human use of language. They are the 
Devata Herself,! who is the highest spiritual object for 
us. They are neither language, nor words, nor letters, 
noranything which you and I read or write but the Devata, 
who is eternally possessed of Siddhi, and is the Dhvani,® 
which makes all letters sound, and exists in all that we 
may say or hear. It is a great sin even to think that 
that Devata is mere letters. The Shastra has, therefore, 
said: ‘‘ They go to hell who think that Gurudeva is but 
aman, Mantra is but letters, and the image of a Devata 
is but a stone.” 

Here it is necessary to understand with some clearness 
the nature* of alphabets.» Commonly we consider 
alphabets to be written characters and pronounced 
letters.© In ordinary usage all the letters® are called 
Akshara,® but ‘‘ Letters® come to an end the moment 
they are pronounced, and never wait for a third moment.”’ 
Viewing the matter from this philosophical standpoint, 
it is Impossible for a word, a sentence, or language in 
general to be a combination of letters.’? As, for instance, 
in pronouncing the word Kalasa (pitcher), when La is 
pronounced after Ka, Ka is no more; and when Sa is 
pronounced after La, La is no more; so that, although 
the letters Ka, La, and Sa are successively pronounced, 
it is impossible to pronounce (all at once) the word 

1 Literally, Svaripa of the Devataé. Svaraipa literally means 
‘having its own form,” as opposed to the existence or appearance of 
the same thing in another form. 

2 Varna or Akshara. 3 Unlettered sound. 4 Tattva. 

5 Akshara. 

6 Varna. Both Varna and Akshara (Letters) are Kundalini made 
articulate in speech and visible in writing. Akshara also means an 
alphabet and “‘ indestructible.” 


7 That is, there cannot be a combination of letters any more than 
there can be such between the present and the past. 


12 PRINCIPLES OF TANT 


Kalasa. As a matter of fact, it is the letters which are 
pronounced, and not the words. Only the letters linked 
together in the forms of words as willed by Ishvara are 
pronounced successively one after another according to 
rules of the Shastras. It has, therefore, been said: ‘‘ The 
particular letters and number of letters which Ishvara 
has ordained should convey a particular meaning, and 
are capable of conveying that meaning, do, when uttered 
successively in the manner fixed, convey that meaning.” 
The truth concerning the origin of language is that after 
the appearance of the Vedas, which are the Shabda- 
brahman! in the form of Mantras, Ishvara, when creating 
for the world of Jivas languages consisting of an aggregate 
of sounds,? willed that such and such letters,? when 
combined together, should as a sound convey such and 
such a meaning. This is the eternal law and accom- 
plished fact. No one can change it by reasoning, argu- 
ment, and controversy, and cause a revolution in lan- 
guage. It is the existence of this eternal law which 
supports the world. For this reason the Shastra has 
said: “‘ The three worlds would all have lain in deep 
darkness had not the light called Shabda (sound) blazed 
throughout the entire Sangsara. The sound here referred 
to is that of the Vaidik language approved of by the 
Shastra. It is unnecessary to mention other languages, 
for they are all but transformations® of that great Prakriti 
the Vaidik language. However that may be, our concern 
at present is with the original language only. Here also 
two letters cannot be pronounced together. How can 
we admit that to be an Akshara® (letters of the alphabet), 
which is created at one instant, is destroyed at the next, 
and which when pronounced has disappeared? Yet its 

1 Sound Brahman. 2 Shabdas. 3 Varna. 

4 The relation between sound and its meaning is permanent. 
Language is not a mere matter of convention. A word denotes a thing 
because it must do so: Ishvara having so willed it. 

Pe Uktatie 

6 Akshara means both a letter of the alphabet and “ indestructible.” 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 13 


name is Akshara—that is to say, that which never wastes, 
is never destroyed, but is unbeginning, unending, ever 
established, and everlasting. It is a pity that, although 
we have all along been writing, reading, seeing, and 
hearing Aksharas,) we do not know as yet what an 
Akshara is. Bhagavan has said: “‘ Just as Parabrahman 
is my eternal body, so Shabdabrahman is also my eternal 
body.” Who but that self-manifest Bhagavan whose 
eternal body is sound can set forth its nature? In the 
Yogini Tantra it is said that at the beginning of creation, 
after the dissolution? at the end of a Kalpa,? the unborn 
and immortal charmer of the mind of Mahakala‘* stood 
with warrior frenzy on his breast in order to destroy the 
Daitya® named Ghora, who had been born out of a part 
of Shiva in the course of the joyful play of the two 
Parabrahmans.® The infinite millions of Yoginis? born 
of the rays of that lustrous form of the Mother of the 
World then began to dance around Herin mad joy. The 
war-music of Brahmamayi in martial play began to 
resound upon the battlefield of the entire Universe. 
Beating time to that music, my Mother, who is, as it 
were, the flag of victory over death,’ set in motion a 
second period of dissolution? by Her untiring dancing. 
Of that time Mahakala Himself gives the following 
account: 

“Seeing that very wonderful and mad dance of the 
Mother of the world, my mind was so distracted with 
fear that (finding no other means of escape) I took 
shelter in the body of Herself of Universal form,?° and 
then, entering the path of Sushumna,”* I saw and heard 


1 See ante, p. 11. 2 Pralaya. 

3 A Kalpa is a period betwen two dissolutions. 

= Shiva, 5 Demon. 

6 That is, Shakti and Shiva, who though in fact one, manifest in 
these dual forms. 7 A cclass of Shaktis attendant on Kali. 

8 Whoever reaches Her becomes victorious over death. 

9 Pralaya. 10 Virata. 


11 The Nagi, or channel of energy of that name. (See Introduction 
and Arthur Avalon’s ‘‘ Six Centres and the Serpent Force.’’) 


14 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


(inside that luminous Brahman body) things which, O 
Devi, were all so wondrous that I have never seen or 
heard the like again, and which I have not even the 
power to describe. Who can count, O Devi, the count- 
less millions of great Universes, which constantly move 
within Her body? Brahmas, Vishnus, and Mahesh- 
varas,? with millions of arms, heads, and differing forms 
(not to speak of Brahmas, Vishnus, and Maheshvaras 
with four, five, or a thousand heads) exist in that body. 
They are all Creators, Preservers, and Destroyers of 
different Universes, and possessors of all great powers.? 
O Devi, the sight of all these wonderful things over- 
powered my mind, and I forgot all (which had happened 
in the past. I even forgot myself, and) I wondered who 
I was (Great Devas were there, but none seemed to 
notice me). Nowhere was I asked by anybody who I 
was, (where I had been), and whence I came. O Devi, 
in the World of that Devi’s body I thus became forgetful, 
and doubts arose in my mind. I could remember 
nothing. Moving about in this way for a million years 
I (passed your navel region and) reached the lotus of 
your heart. The wonderful and beautiful sight which I 
saw there I have not the power, O Parameshvari, to 
describe fully. There I saw the Shastras which are the 
source of the Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha of Jivas.° 
Of that Shastra body Agama or Tantra (consisting of 
Mantra) is the Paramatma, Vedas are the Jivatma, 
Darshanas® are the senses, Puranas are the body, and 


1 Brahmandas. 

2 There is not only one Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara. Those 
which men worship are the Devas of this Universe, but there are count- 
less Universes, each of which has its own trinity of Devas. 

3 Aishvaryya—that is, the attributes of Ishvara. 

4 That is, he passed the Manipura chakra in its Universal form, and 
reached the heart (andhata) centre of the Devi’s body, the universe. 
The brackets are the Author’s. 

5 Religion and religious merit, wealth, desire and its fulfilment, and 
liberation. (See Introduction.) 

6 The philosophies. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 15 


Smritis are the limbs. O fair-faced Devi, all the other 
Shastras exist as hairs of Her body. In short, as the 
Jivatma is to the Paramatma, so is the Veda to the 
Tantra. (That is to say, just as the existence of the mind 
or the Jivatma, according to the Nydaya Philosophy, 
depends on the existence of Atma, so the existence of 
Veda depends on the existence of Tantra. Just as in the 
body of the Jiva Paramatma is the Shakti’ of pure con- 
sciousness, so in the body of the Shastra Tantra is the 
Shakti of consciousness consisting of Mantras. Just as 
all activities of the Manashakti? with Gunas? flow con- 
stantly through the Jivatma, so all Vichadra Shaktis,4 
consisting of knowledge varying according to competence,® 
caused by differences in the three Gunas, Sattva, Rajas, 
and Tamas, are eternally seated in the Veda. Just as 
the ultimate goal of mind is immersion in the Para- 
brahman, and the end of the active forces, consisting of 
Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, is to disappear altogether, so 
the ultimate goal of Veda_is to be merged in Tantra 
through the knowledge of the omnipresence of Brahman. 
And the end of the different Adhikaras® caused by differ- 
ences in the Gunas is to be totally destroyed.) Then, 
O Devi, I saw letters’ of dazzling brightness at the 
edges, the middle, and the roots of the petals of that 
lotus of Thy heart, embracing Shiksha, Kalpa, Nirukta, 
Chhandas,® and all other minor Shastras, givers of welfare 

1 Force, power, or active principle. 

2 Mind-power, or more strictly, Shakti in the form of the lower mind 
or Manas. 

3 Qualities. (See Introduction.) 

4 Powers of judgment and reasoning. 5 Adhikara. 

6 Adhikara is competency. A Sadhaka is entitled to worship and 
to have knowledge according to such competency. This competency 
is affected by the predominance of particular Gunas in the Sadhaka 
himself. When Brahmajnana is attained, then all question whether 
a man is fit for this or that necessarily disappears. The establishment 
of Adhikdra is only a means to an end, and with the attainment of the 
end (spiritual knowledge) disappears. 7 Varna. 


8 These are four Veddngas, dealing with orthography, ritual, 
etymology, and prosody. 


16 PRINCIPLES OF TANT RS 


to the three worlds. Then, O Devi, I saw, within the - 
pericarp of Thy lotus, hundreds of groups of letters? 
shining most brilliantly like millions of suns and moons, 
and surrounded by circles of the light of millions of great 
fires. Those luminous letters? with as their substance 
the true and lasting Parabrahman, shone with the bril- 
liance of millions of suns, were cool like millions of moons, 
and radiant as millions of fires. O Devi, those luminous 
letters* consisted of all knowledge, of all wonders, of all 
sacrifices,? and of all places of pilgrimage.? (That is to 
say, when the subject of Sadhana is the form of Mantras, 
the letters* generate knowledge of the science of all things 
in the Brahmanda. It is a matter of everyday ex- 
perience that wonderful events are brought about by 
changes produced inevitably in the laws of Nature by the 
great power of Mantraghakti,® which can make the im- 
possible possible. The Sadhana of letters leads unfail- 
ingly to the vision of the supreme Devata, a result which 
the performance of all the sacrifices like the Ashvamedha® 
and so forth cannot give. By the Sadhana of the great 
Mantra of letters one achieves at the same time the fruits 
of seeing and touching all places of pilgrimage. In fact, 
we go not too far in saying that places of pilgrimage 
themselves desire to be sanctified by the sight and touch 
of Great men’ accomplished in Mantras. Fora Sadhaka’s 
body is not an ordinary material body, but is the per- 
manent dwelling-house of Her who is the Mistress of all 
places of Pilgrimage? and who raises the fallen and 
grants liberation to the three worlds. O Devi, in these 
letters® reside all religious merit,?° all righteousness," all 
knowledge, and all Brahma bliss. (That is to say, by 
worshipping them one performs all acts of religious merit 
at one and the same time. One achieves by a single 
means all forms of righteousness which are the fruits of 


1 Varna. 2 Yajnas. 3 Tirthas. 4 Varna. 
5 The potency of Mantra or Shakti as Mantra. 
6 The Vaidik horse sacrifice. 7 Mahapurushas. 8 Tirtha. 


9 Varna. 10 Punya. 11 Dharma. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 17 


all religious acts; and one acquires that knowledge, 
which is the fruit of all righteousness—namely, that 
Brahman is omnipresent throughout the universe; for 
such an one the Brahmdanda? is filled with Brahmabliss, 
which is the fruit of the knowledge of Brahman.) O 
Maheshvari! these (Mantras) are evidence? of the exist- 
ence of the Vedas and the Shastras, and all Jivas are 
themselves the supreme energy? of Brahman and the 
supreme blessing. That is to say, many may easily say 
that a spiritual Shastra which speaks of fruit to be reaped 
in the next world is unauthoritative. But even un- 
believers* will shrink from calling a Shastra unauthorita- 
tive the fruits of which are visible in this very world. 
What this self-evident Shastra lays down as authoritative 
must also, as a matter of course, be considered as such 
by all people. Even believers®> may sometimes be led 
to doubt the authority of Veda because they see not its 
effects. But if Tantra which produces visible effects 
admits that Veda or Vedanga, or any other Shastra, is 
authoritative, then not even unbelievers can dispute it, 
for Tantra is self-evident. It is also self-evident that 
the letters® which are Mantras are a form of evidence of 
the existence of Jivas.?. The use of the terms guttural, 
palatal, cerebral, and so forth, in classifying letters® 
relates only to seats of pronunciation,® and not to seats 
of generation.*° For instance, what is pronounced from 
the throat is called guttural, what is pronounced from 
the palate is called palatal, and so forth. The word 
pronunciation® also means uz (above), charana (to cause 
to move)—that is, to make letters® which were moving 
below to move above. When that motion above is 


1 Universe. 2 Pramana, vide post. 3 Tejas. 

4 NAstika. 5 Astika, 

6 Each individual letter is a Mantra. 

7 Sound outwardly expressed manifests itself to the senses. As the 
organs of speech are not the seat of its generation, this indicates that 
there is an inner manifestation, as to which see p. 19. 

= Varna. 9 Uchcharana. 10 Utpatti. 

VOL, tI. 2 


18 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


manifested outwardly, and is perceived by the sense of 
hearing, it is certain that the motion below has also 
an inward manifestation in the most subtle supersensual 
form. It is this deep truth which has been clearly ex- 
pressed in the Shastra as follows: In the Prapafichasara* 
it is said: ‘‘ When through obstruction? of the vocal 
passage a child utters indistinct sounds, it is Kulakunda- 
lini, who, playing in the aperture of the Muladhara and 
coiled round Sushumna, utters indistinct sounds re- 
peatedly. It is the echo of this indistinct sound which 
comes out of the passage of the child’s throat.”’ 

The Prayogasara says: “‘O Devi, at that time Anta- 
ratma, the substance of which is sound,? Himself utters 
sounds. Itis these sounds of His which, in combination 
with each other, appear as letters.”’ : 

In the Saradatilaka it is written: ‘‘ Shabdabrahman?* 
exists in all things as consciousness. So it is this 5habda- 
brahman, the substance of which is consciousness, which 
exists in the bodies of living beings in the form of Kunda- 
lini, and then appears as letters in prose, poetry, and so 
forth, being carried by air® to the throat, palate, teeth, 
and other places.”’ 

In the Vishvasara Tantra there is the following: 
““Sadashiva Himself has spoken of Him as Shabda- 
brahman. That Shabda (sound) is in the Andahata 
Chakra.”’ 

And in the second Patala of the same book it is said: 
““O beloved one! in the Jiva’s own body itself blissful 
Parabrahman exists as Shabdabrahman, whose substance 
is all Mantras.’’ All Mantras are manifestations® of 
Kulakundalini Herself, who is the Shabdabrahman, whose 
substance is consciousness. So that the fact that they 
are pronounced (outwardly manifested) from such places 


1 See vol. iii. of the “‘ Tantrik Texts,’’ edited by Arthur Avalon. 

2 This may also refer to incomplete formation. 3 Nada. 

4 Brahman as ‘‘sound”’ manifesting the Universe, which is its Brahma- 
vibhiati. 5 Vayu. 6 Svariipavibhati. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 19 


as the throat, palate, and so forth, does not prove that 
Shabda (sound) or Mantras are generated at such places. 
Although Brahman as Shabda is not in reality generated, 
yet it first appears at the Muladhara. However that may 
be, what is known to us as Shabda (sound) or Varna 
(letter) is the Shakti which gives life to Jivas, so that 
without doubt Mantras which are Shakti! are eternal 
evidence of the existence of Jivas. Next it has been said 
that “‘ Mantras are the supreme energy? of Brahman.’ 
According to philosophers, Shabda (sound) is everywhere 
the quality (Guna) of Akasha (ether and space). For this 
reason many people are under the impression that Shabda 
(sound) is produced from Space (Akasha). This is merely 
observation of the effect. According to Tantra, which 
sees the cause of everything, this is a mistaken inference. 
Tantra, which sees through the subtlest supersensual 
things,® and is ever in favour of direct perception,* holds 
that Shabda is the cause of the Universe,® and not the 
effect of anything. The production of Shabda from 
Akdsha is merely its outward manifestation. In reality 
Shabda eternally exists as Brahman. 

In the Kamadhenu Tantra it is said: ‘“‘ Matrikashakti,® 
consisting of the fifty letters,’ from A to Ksha, is the seed 
of all things moving or non-moving. Of these letters,’ 
again, Visarga® is Shakti, and Vindu® is Purusha, and in 
the Ajapamantra?® of Prakriti and Purusha in union She*! 
is undifferentiated Ptirnabrahman.4* O Devi, from 
letters which are Mantras!* are born Prajapati Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Rudra, the Destroyer of the world.” 

“It is true and certain that supreme Kulakundalini 


1 Shaktimaya. 2 Tejas. qehacivas: 
4 Pratyaksha. 5 Brahmanda. 
6 Matrika, which is an adjective derived from Mother, means the 
letters of the alphabet. 
7 Varna. 8 The h# breathing with two parts. 
9 The nasal breathing with one point. 
10 That is, the Mantra of inhalation and expiration. 
11 That is, Matrikashakti. 12 Perfect Brahman. 4° Mantramaya. 


20 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Herself, who is the fifty letters,1 from A to Ksha, has 
given birth to this entire universe, consisting of moving 
and non-moving things.” 

In the Matrikodaya it is said: “‘ Ishvara is the author” 
of Vedas, Maharshis (great seers) are the authors of 
Puranas, but in no Shastra is it said that there is any 
author of Her. Matrika Devi, who is letter, is, therefore, 
not created, but self-existent.2 (For this reason a name 
of Kulakundalini, the Mantradevata whose substance is 
letters, is Matrika—that is to say, the Generatrix of these 
infinite crores of universes. It is not possible for Her to 
have a father and a mother. She is, therefore, called 
only by the name of Matrika, the Mother. She is the 
Mother of all, and not the child of any.) Just asin space* 
waves of sound are produced by movements of air,° so 
also in the space* inside the Jiva’s body currents of 
sound flow owing to the movements? of the vital air,® 
and its inward and outward passage as inhalation and 
exhalation. There is no generation of sound in space.* 
Sound is only manifested therein. Every intelligent man 
will understand that this manifestation of the gross’ 
form of sound is impossible unless sound exists in space* 
in a subtle? form, which is the permanent, separate root 
of gross sound. Such people, however, as want to ex- 
plain away the universe with its fourteen worlds by read- 
ing only the history of India or the Science of language® 
may find scepticism more agreeable to them than the 
taxing of their brains with such an extremely remote 
‘question as “‘ whence come sounds’! in space ?4 They 
satisfy themselves by saying that it is the law of nature 
that sound*® should be produced in space,+ and nothing 


1 Varna. 
2 Kartta: here only in the sense that the world got it through him 


(see post, p. 23). 


3 Svayambhu. 4 AkAsha, or ether. 
5 Literally, by strikes and counter-strikes of air (vayu). 
6 Pranavayu. 7 Sthala, 8 Sikshma. 


® Bhaéshdparichchheda. 10 Shabda. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 758 


can be said in respect of that which is a natural law! 
We, however, have no faith in the words of those who 
are so pleased to put such implicit faith in nature. For 
we think that in reality nature as a thing in itself does not 
exist. The existence of those qualities and properties 
in a thing which constitute such thing is its nature. If, 
therefore, one says, “‘A thing is produced by nature,” 
does he answer the question why it is so produced ? To 
say that a thing happens by nature is to say that it 
happens because it happens. Such a statement indicates 
no search for truth, but only an attempt at escape. In 
fact, Shastra (Scripture) is for those people only whose 
minds have become restless with the desire to know the 
truth. Those who have understood that the manifesta- 
tion of sound? in space? is an effect, and does not indicate 
that space is the cause of sound, are hardly likely to find 
peace and satisfaction in the statement that sound is the 
quality of space. What they want to know is the real 
truth, supersensual though it.be. But it is not within the 
power of any Jiva to open the door which hides that deep 
truth from us. Nevertheless, the pain which is caused 
by ignorance of that truth is unbearable. For this 
reason Bhagavan, who is the creator of all things, and 
sheds His mercy on all who seek it, has Himself revealed 
in Tantra, for the benefit of the three worlds, what He 
Himself saw in the eternal body of waves of existence,* 
consciousness,® and bliss® of Her who is all merciful. 
He has said that in the eternal body of the Devi, Mantras 
also, in the form of letters,” are eternal Brahman, full of 
energy® and aspects of Herself. Mantras which are seeds? 
out of which grow the fruit of the universe are eternally 
present in Her body. For this reason they are called 
Vijamantras (seed-mantras). Such a Mantra is the seed 
of Mantras, Yantras, Tantras, and Devatas. It is the 


1 Svabhava. In other words, it is the nature of the thing, and there 
is an end of it. 2 Shabda. 3 Akdsha. & Sat. 
5 Chit. 6 Ananda. 7 Varnas. 8 Tejas. 9 Vija. 


22 PRINCIPLES (OF TANGER 


seed of the creation, preservation, and destruction of the 
Universes, the maintenance of Jivas’ lives, Siddhi and 
Sadhana? of the four-fold aim of Purusha—namely, 
Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha,” and is also the most 
ancient, permanent, and eternal seed for the Shabda, 
which first puts forth its young shoot in Akdasha. If 
Shabdabrahman had not gem-like eternally shone as 
Mantras on the other side of the sea of Sangsara,? on the 
outside of the cauldron-shaped Universe beyond the 
reach of the mind and intellect* of Suras, Asuras, Kin- 
naras,°> men (Naras), and the entire world of Jivas; 
before the three eyes of the Guru of all things moving and 
non-moving, and in the body of Brahmamayi, who is 
beyond the reach of mind and speech—would the re- 
splendent luminous waves of sound have to-day illumined 
all quarters, piercing the vacancy® of space and scattering 
themselves throughout the Universe ? However learned 
you and I may to-day become by the reading of com- 
mentaries and the like, the subtle aphorism’ of sound 
remains eternally hidden in the deep womb of Her who 
is the unfathomable, untraversable, and unbounded ocean 
of truth. None but She can make it known. He, how- 
ever, whose wealth of Sadhana accumulated in many 
births has reached the stage of bearing fruit, is alone 
gratified by the taste of the immortalizing juice of that 
fruit, and acquires direct knowledge through sight of the 
luminous form of Mantra. 


1 They are the seed of SAdhana, initiating, maintaining it, and pro- 


curing its fruit (siddhi). 2 See p. 9, note 7, ante. 

3 See p. 9, note 6, ante. 4 Buddhi. 

5 Devas: their enemies the Asuras: and a class of the minor spirits 
called Devayonis. 6 Avakasha. 


7 Sutra. A common form of Hindu literature is the statement of 
the essence of a subject-matter in the form of an extremely abbreviated 
aphorism (sutra), the very brevity and consequent obscurity of which 
requires an extended commentary, and sometimes further notes on 
~such commentary. 8 Tattva. 


GENEVE RST 
LETTERED AND UNLETTERED SOUND! 


HABDA, or sound, is of two kinds — namely, 
 Dhvani and Varna.1 What is expressed in the 
string of letters? from A to Ksha?® is called Varna, and 
that which is not expressed by any alphabetical mark+ 
is called Dhvani. Difference of tone® alone is the cause 
of this two-fold aspect of Shabda. Those who are learned 
in sound® have divided it into these two classes but in 
reality there is no such difference in sound itself.’ Funda- 
mentally, Dhvani is the real substance,’ of which Shabda?® 
is only a manifestation.1° This Dhvani is the subtle 
aspect of the Jivas’ vital force,’ which is consciousness. 
It is in the form of Dhyani that this Shakti appears in 
and disappears from a Jiva’s body. Here it is necessary 
to expound the Shastrik principle with some clearness. 
According to Aryyas, Veda is not the production of any 
person, for it has no author. From Mahadeva himself 
to the Rishis all are remembrancers of Veda, and none its 
author. Shastra says that Bhagavan Himself, as the 
Avatara,!* Shrikrishna, and others, has only revealed the 


1 The first or unlettered form of shabda (sound), or sound in its 
subtle form, is Dhvani. Lettered sound is called Varna, which means 


letter (see post). 2 Akshara. 
3 The first and last letter of the Sanskrit alphabet. 
= Matra. 5 Svara. 6 Shabda. 
? That is, the difference noted is a conventional one. 8 Padartha. 
9 Sound. 10 Parindma, development or effect. 11 Shakti. 
12 Avatara isa descent of the Supreme. It may or may not be what 
is called an “ incarnation.’”?” An Avatara is an incarnation where there is 


a descent to the physical plane. A large number of Avataras are non- 
material manifestations. In the case of Shrikrishna there was an 
incarnation. 

23 


24 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Veda in the mortal world. But it also has been already 
said: ‘‘ Ishvara is the author of Veda.’ Again, Ishvara 
Himself says: ‘‘ Shabdabrahman and Parabrahman are 
both My eternal bodies.’’ We must now. see how these 
two apparently mutually contradictory statements of the 
Shastra may be reconciled. Every Mantra, be it Vaidik 
‘or Tantrik, is an appearance! of Brahman. Veda or 
Tantra, consisting of Mantras, is only a manifestation? of 
Brahman. Therefore, it cannot be said that Mantra has 
been created by Brahman. Rather is it that the Para- 
brahman appears as Mantra. For, although Brahman is 
the Creator of the world, He is not the Creator of Himself. 
Creation of Brahman is impossible, for He is without 
beginning and ever-existent. For this reason Shastra 
concludes that He appears to and disappears from the 
view of the world according to the will of Her who is 
will itself. Just as in the physical world Bhagavan has 
incarnated Himself as Rama, Krishna, and so forth, so 
in the world of Dharma? also He#4 has, through Samadhi 
or spiritual knowledge, manifested Himself as Shastra,° 
which is Shabdabrahman, for the severance of the bonds of 
ignorance.6 As Shyamasundara’? whether in His four- 
armed or two-armed appearance,® residing in Vaikuntha® 
or Goloka,?® incarnated as Rama and Krishna, so the 

1 Ripa 

2 Svariipavibhuti. Vibhti is one who is all-pervading, and Vibhfti 
is that which characterizes this higher nature. It is that which this 


nature displays and the power by which such display is made. Thus 
the world is known as a Brahma-vibhiti or vibhiti of the Brahman 


(God). 3 Here the spiritual world. * As Yogin. 
5 He appears to the mind of the Yogin who is Bhagavan as Shastra. 
6 Avidya. : 7 Vishnu. 8 Marti. 


9 The abode of Vishnu (Vishnohparamangpadam); a heaven of 
enjoyment with its celestial city, jewelled dwellings, and aerial cars 
(vimana), as described in Chapter XXIV. of Padma Purana. 

10 The abode of light (go-jyotih), a white circular ring of resplendent 
light, like a thousand moons: purity itself (suddha tattva), surrounded 
by translucid waters situate in Vaikuntha, the abode of the flute- 
playing Krishna and of Radhika Devi; a heaven, where there are 
many Devas offering homage to Vishnu Sattvaripa amidst the 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 25 


luminous Mantra form,? existing in the beautiful dark 
blue? limbs, made of massive consciousness, of Her whose 
substance is consciousness, and in every undulation of 
Her supreme beauty appears to the world as Shastra, 
which is Shabdabrahman.? 

At the beginning of the creation of the Universe the 
luminous bud of Mantras blossomed and created the 
fourteen worlds, which are the petals of its flower. It is 
the fragrance of its pollen which is existence,* conscious- 
ness,° and bliss,® which fills the three worlds with delight. 
After the greater dissolution,’ Brahma, the lotus-born,® 
appeared in the centre of the thousand-petalled lotus, 
which crowned the stem issuing from the navel of Bhaga- 
van Narayana,® lying in the causal?® sea. He then medi- 
tated the creation of a Universe suited to the age, and 
became immersed in Samadhi," achieved through the 
Yoga of meditation upon Brahmamayi.!? It was then 
that Veda, which is Shabdabrahman, appeared of itself 
in the firmament of His heart, and, issuing out with His 
breath, assumed four visible forms corresponding to Rik, 
Yajur, Sama, and Atharva, and stood before him. After 
learning the principles’? of creation, preservation, and 
destruction from the mouths of those incarnate Shrutis,*4 
Brahma set about His work. Many make abundant 


chanting of Vedas and of the musical modes known as Ragas, as 
described in Chapter XXVIII. of the Brahmavaivarta Purana. In 
the Tantra Shiva says: ‘I know of no place which is better than 
Golaka’”’ (Yadripang golokang dhama tadrupang nasti mamake 
jnane). 1 Marti. 2 Shyamasundara. 

3 The meaning of this passage is that just as Vishnu is the milasva- 
rupa (root-being) of those incarnations of His which are called Rama, 
Krishna, and so forth, so the luminous mantramirti is the mula- 
svartpa of Shastra, which is Shabdabrahman. 


4 Sat. 5 Chit. 6 Ananda. 

7 Mahapralya. There are minor and intermediate dissolutions 
(pralaya). 

8 Brahma was born on the lotus which sprang from Vishnu’s navel, 

9 Vishnu. 10 Karana. 11 Yoga, ecstasy. 

12 The Devi as Brahman. 13 Tattva. 


14 That is, the four incarnate Vedas. 


26 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


efforts to explain away this perfectly true account of 
creation by adorning it with such adjectives as “ Mys- 
tery,’’ ‘‘ Metaphor,’ and other far-fetched terms. But 
they do not care to understand that the day that this 
Tattva? vanishes you and I, along with these infinite 
Universes, will all vanish, one knows not where. Although 
Brahma is Himself perfect-Brahman, yet He appeared, 
as a Mother by the assumption of the form of Narayana, 
and Himself in play? took birth in the body of the lotus 
sprung from his own*t Navel, and thus became the first 
and yet beginningless® Jiva in the created Brahmanda.® 
The same process which He adopted at the time of His 
own appearance is that which exists eternally in the 
creation of the world of Jivas, chief amongst whom are 
the Suras, Asuras, Kinnaras, and Naras.? Narayana 
stands in the place of a Mother to Him. The Brahmanda 
is the issue of His womb. Maya is the womb. The 
causal® sea is the mass of water inside that womb. The 
stalk issuing out of the navel of Bhagavan stands for the 
umbilical cord,? and the thousand-petalled red lotus for 
the flower on that stalk. And Brahma, the grandfather 
of the world, who is Himself placed on that lotus as its 
fruit, stands for the child. Shakti at first held the vast 
world-child in Her womb, and became the Mother of 
Brahma, and then, as the power of preservation ap- 
peared, as Narayana, and assumed the form of Jagad- 
dhatri.1° The child in the mother’s womb, on gaining 
consciousness, remembers the events of the past lives; 

1 Adhyatmik. 

2 That is, creation, maintenance, and dissolution, for the existence of 
the world is bound up with the existence and operation of these 
Tattvas. 

3 Lila. The world is the play of the Brahman. 

# Because Brahma and Vishnu are but aspects of the One. 

5 Anadi. 6 Universe or mundane “‘ Egg of Brahma.” 

” That is, the Devas, their enemies, a class of Devayonis called 
Kinnara and men (Nara). 


8 Karana. 9 Literally the mother’s nadi. 
10 The Devi as supporter of the Universe. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 27, 


so the child in Brahmamayi’s! womb began, on the rising 
of consciousness, to remember all previous acts of creation, 
preservation, and destruction in other Kalpas.2_ Just as 
the memory of previous lives then arises of itself in the 
child’s mind, so Shruti? appeared of itself in the mind 
of Brahma. Again, as memory is the Atma-Shakti‘ in a 
Jiva’s mind, so Shruti is the Shakti of consciousness in 
Brahma’s mind. The hidden state of this Shakti of 
consciousness is Dhvani, and its outward manifestation 
is sound.® That Dhvani which is as it were the first 
shoot® of sound? is the Jiva’s vital? force. 

In the Prapafichasara it is said: ‘‘ The Universe of 
immovable and movable things is linked together and 
pervaded by this Shakti, which is Dhvani. It is this 
Shakti which is called by such names as Nada,® Prana,® 
Jivaghosha® and so forth.” Again: “It is this great 
Shakti whom Yogis know as Kulakundalini moving in 
the heart, and it is She who ever makes an indistinct and 
sweet murmuring sound,’? like the humming of a black 
bee, at the aperture“ in the Mdladhara.”’ It is with 
reference to this Dhvani that the Shatchakratattva has 
said : 

“ Kulakundalini lustrous as the flash of a hundred 
lightnings resides in all hearts, and is ever immersed in 
play in the Miladhara!? lotus. She it is whose sweet 
constant murmuring humming sounds like that of aswarm 
of black bees intoxicated with a draught of honey, and 
whois Dhvani. Her voice it is which sounds in the words 
of soft poetry, and is clearly audible in styles of Bheda 


* Lhe Devi. 2 The period between two dissolutions. 
3 The revealed Scripture. (See Introduction.) 

4 Here that which constitutes individuality. 5 Shabda. 

6 That is, the earliest manifestation. Dhvaniis unlettered sound. 
7 Safijivant, 8 Sound. 

° The vital force manifesting in breath. 10 Dhvani. 


11 The Devi lies close to the aperture in the Sushumna. 
12 The lowest chakra of that name. (See Introduction and Arthur 
Avalon’s “ Six Centres and the Serpent Force.’’) 


28 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


and Atibheda composition.t Again, it is the heaving of 
the Dhvani which causes the alternate inspiration and 
expiration of all Jivatmas in this infinite world. [By 
the above reference is made to the Sthiila or gross form of 
Kulakundalini. The Book then proceeds to define her 
Sukshma or subtle form.] She who dwells within this 
gross form as the supreme extremely subtle Kala,? who is 
consciousness shedding the sweetness of everlasting bliss 
and surpassing in beauty masses of lightning; She by 
whose light the whole visible sphere of the Universe is 
lighted, is that Parameshvari Kulakundalini, who is 
eternal knowledge, and the Ishvari® of all.’ 

Sadhakas will now understand that Kulakundalini has 
two aspects—namely, a Sthila, or gross form with attri- 
butes,* in which, like the humming of a moving swarm of 
black bees, She indistinctly utters the fifty letters and a 
Sakshma, or subtle form, which is attributeless,° and is 
existence, consciousness, and bliss.6 It is the Sthtla 
form appearing in different aspects as different Devatas, 
which is the presiding Devata of all Mantras; and it is 
the Sikshma form, which is that one Devata towards 
whom all Sadhakas worship is directed. For this reason 
the door of the temple of the Mother of the World is not 
opened so long as Kulakundalini, the snake sleeping in 
the bed of Svayambhu,” is not awakened; and Siddhiin 

1 Bheda and Atibheda are two modes of composition (Alangkara). 
Bheda is the mode in which difference is posited between things which 
are really the same. Thus, to say that a woman possesses celestial 
beauty not to be found on earth is bheda, because a distinction is 
made between the beauty of the woman, which is celestial and terrestrial 
beauty, although no such distinction really exists. Atibheda, on the 
other hand, is the mode in which equality is posited between different 
things ; as, for instance, to speak of a woman’s face as a moon is atibheda, 
because an equality is here established between a face and the moon, 
which are really different things. 

2 Milaprakriti, which is here regarded as one with the Brahman. 

3 Female of Ishvara, ‘“‘ Lord.” 

# Saguna. 5 Nirguna. 6 Sat, chit, Ananda, 

7 “ The self-existent one,” referring to the Linga of that name in the 
Muiladhara, around which Kundali is coiled. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 29 


Mantra is not gained so long as the Mantra is not 
awakened. -However that may be, we seek only to 
establish here that Shabda (sound), which is the mani- 
festation? of Dhvani, is nothing but a manifestation of 
the Shakti of consciousness itself, and Shabda is eternally 
present, full of lustre, in the lustrous eternal body of the 
Mother of the World. Because during creation it is 
manifested as the property? of Akdasha,4 it is not to be 
inferred that it is created with the creation of Akasha, 
and disappears with the dissolution® of the latter. Those, 
again, who believe that Akashat is a permanent thing 
can have no ground for objecting to our view. However 
much opinions may differ, it is certain that Veda con- 
sisting of Mantras is formed of Dhvani and Varna® to- 
gether. For this reason, drawn by the Samadhi’ Yoga 
of Brahma, Brahmamayi appeared in His heart as Veda, 
which is the Shabdabrahman, and to instil into Him the 
notion of the process of creation, issued out of His nostrils. 
The phrase “ Brahma is the author of Veda’’ means 
that Brahma is the author of the appearance of Veda in 
the sense that a Jiva is the author of his expiration and 
inspiration of breath. In truth, Veda eternally exists as 
Shabdabrahman,® and is not created by Brahma. Thus 
Veda is not the creation of any.® The effect?® of the 
Dhvani of Kulakundalini in the body of Ishvara is 
Veda, and the effect of the Dhvani of Kulakundalini in 
the body of Jiva is Shabda.“ In that Shabda is every 


1 The awakening of the Mantra is called Mantrachaitanya. Unless 
the Mantra is awakened in and by the consciousness of the Sadhaka, 
the Mantra thus becoming a part and parcel of the consciousness of the 
Sadhaka himself, it is mere dead sound and letter without fruit 
(Siddhi). Itis true that Shakti is there as everywhere, but it must be 
rendered conscious or realized to the Sddhaka. 


2 Literally, “‘ effect.” 3 Guna. 4 Space; ether. 
5 Pralaya. 6 Letters; that is, audible Dhvani. 

7 Vide Introduction. 8 The sound or manifested Brahman. 
® That is, it is apaurusheya. 10 Parinama. 


11 Veda is Dhvani uttered by Brahmé, and Shabda is Dhvani uttered 
by Jiva. 


30 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


form of Mantra, which is that which gives vitality to 
Jiva. 

According to natural law, a great Mantra repeats! 
itself when inspiration and expiration through the circular 
movement of the vital air of Jiva revolves the wheel of 
Dhvani. It is this Mantra which is called Ajapa Mantra, 
and it is so called either because it repeats? itself naturally 
without any effort on the part of Jiva, or because there 
is no other Japa? of a Mantra which is superior to this 
one. This Ajapa is the full life-time of a Jiva.? For this 
reason it is said: ‘‘ Being Ajapa (one who does not repeat 
any Mantra) during Ajapa (life-time), | have neither 
done Japa of any Mantra nor done any Tapas. My 
Ajapa (life-time) is about to end, and yet my Ajapa (the 
state of being without Japa) does not end.’”’® As Brahma 
when on the navel-lotus of Bhagavan thought of previous 
Kalpas,® so a Jiva when in his mother’s womb constantly 
thinks of his past lives. At that time waves of deep 
thought, such as, “ Who am = D?- = Whereiy 2 ae 
“Whence have I come?” “ Whose amit?” \ aia ms 
mine ?’”’ and so forth, arise in the Jiva’s mind. These 
waves of thought mingle with the Pranashakti.’ That 
Pranashakti in its turn within the two Nadis. Ida and 
Pingala strikes and strikes again against the Kundalini 
Chakra below the abdominal fire® of the belly. Stung by 
those blows dealt by Herself, the sleeping snake Kula- 
kundalini then hisses loudly. The Matrikas,?° or fifty 


1 Literally, ‘‘is made Japa of.” 

2 Vide last note and Introduction. 

3 For the Mantra consists of the breathing and expiration which 
ceases at death. 

4 Devotion, austerity, etc. As to Japa or 
see Introduction. 

5 A play on the word Ajapa. Ajap& means “‘ life-time,’ because 
life exists only so long as it is repeated. Next Ajapa may be made to 
mean ‘‘one who does not perform Japa,” and also “‘not Japa ’’— 
z.e., the state of being without Japa. 6 See p. 27, 0. 2. 

7 Vital force. 8 Jatharagni. 9 Garjjana. Literally, ‘“roars.”’ 

10 A name for the letters as embodying mother-sound. 


é 


‘recitation’’ of Mantra, 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 31 


letterst of the alphabet from A to Ksha? are only the 
manifested state of that hissing Dhvani.?_ It is with the 
help of these letters that the thoughts of the Jiva in the 
womb relating to past lives is reflected in waves of lan- 
guage ;* and then the Jiva’s mind® sees with mental eyes 
and hears with mental ears. When at birth upon the 
bursting of the womb the doors of all the senses of the 
Jiva are opened, then that internal Dhvani? passes out 
through the passage of the throat. When Jiva sitting 
in the dark prison-chamber of the womb meditates on 
the deep past history of itself,° then, as in the case of 
dream, it is mind alone which works and judges every- 
thing. The final conclusion to which that judgment leads 
is also related in the Shastras as follows: 

In the Bhagavatigita in Mahabhagavata Devi says to 
Himalaya: 

“ Jiva, dejected at the remembrance of the work of 
his bodies in previous births, then bethinks himself over 
the matter as follows: | 

“tr. In this way suffering many sorrows in previous 
lives, I have again taken birth on earth; for whilst in the 
Sangsara I failed to worship Bhagavati Durga, the Dis- 
peller of misery, but merely maintained relatives with 
money earned by unfair means. 

“2. If, however, I am this time delivered from any 
suffering in the womb,® no work will I do but the service 
of Maheshvart Durga, ever worshipping Her with self- 
restraint. 

“3. By my useless desires for wife, children, and the 
like, I have over and over again bound myself to the 


1 Varna. 2 Subtle sound (see p. 23, ante). Saks 

4 The meaning appears to be that, though being in the womb, the 
Jiva has no articulate speech, yet all thinking is by the aid of words 
whether expressed or not. At that stage it is the mind and not the 
outward senses which are working. 

5 Literally, ‘‘ on the profound past tattva of his Atma.” 

6 According to Hindu notions, the child in the womb endures great 
pains, which are forgotten on birth. 


32 PRINCIPLES OF TANT hae 


Sangsara,/ and thus worked only evil for myself. There- 
fore is it that I am suffering this intense pain in the 
womb. I therefore do resolve that I will no more uselessly 
serve this Sangsara. 

‘““4. Thus suffering from various sorrows according to 
his Karma,” the Jiva enveloped in the womb is expelled 
by the labour wind? and crushed through the pelvic bone. 
And then, widening his inner path, and smearing himself 
all over with fat and blood, he falls on earth, as it were, a 
sinner in some terrible Hell. Whereupon, deluded by 
my Maya, the Jiva forgets all the sorrows experienced 
during his stay in the womb, and then exists for some 
little time an insignificant mass of flesh. 

“5. So long as the outside of the child’s sushumna 
nadi* remains covered with mucus,® he cannot utter 
words with clearness.”’ 

We are here obliged to make mention of a modern 
saying in this connection, hoping to be pardoned by 
Sadhakas for this digression. 

Nowadays a number of poets and men learned in its 
science say that the excruciating pain of the mother in 
child-birth has no other cause than Ishvara’s despotic 
will; for, as He is Almighty, could He not, had He so 
desired, have provided an easy form of delivery instead 
of one which is very painful both for the child and its 
mother ? Why, because a Jiva is to be born, should 
another Jiva causelessly suffer such horrible pain? We 
say that no such questions can be put to Him. For in 
the first place, in the vast scheme of Bhagavan’s designs, 
which are like a great ocean, the individual counts for 
less than a mere bubble; and secondly, his work consists 
in ‘‘ killing seven serpents with one blow.’’® Who, then, 
can say that what you and I consider as your or my woe 


1 See p. 9, 0. 6, ante. 

* Actions and their effects. (See Introduction.) 3 Prasava-vayu. 
4 The ‘“‘nerve’’ of that name. (See Introduction.) 5 Shleshma. 
6 The Bengali expression for killing two birds with one stone. 


PRENCIPLERS OF TANTRA 33 


or weal is not linked with the weal and woe of hundreds 
of Jivas in this infinite world of moving and unmoving 
things ? Did Manthara! think that her words could 
have any other consequence beyond the gaining of 
Kaikeyi’s favour? It was Bhagavan (Rama) alone, he 
who for whose fourteen years’ exile in the woods all Devas 
had conspired, seeking the help of wicked Sarasvati,? who 
understood what the effect of her words would be; for He 
is the dispenser of all effects in the universe. Manthara 
did not expect anything from her words besides the fulfil- 
ment of a selfish end. Those words, however, brought 
about Ramachandra’s exile in the woods for fourteen 
years with his younger brother and wife;* the untimely 
death of Maharaja Dasharatha;4 the widowhood of 
Kaushalya, Sumitra, and Kaikeyi; the severe brahma- 
charya of Bharata; the killing of Maricha; the abduction 
of Sita; the death of Jatayu; the killing of Bali; the 
bridging of the sea; the burning of Lanka; the wounding 
of Lakshmana with shaktishela;® the destruction of 
Ravana, with his whole family; the ordeal through fire 
of Sita; the gaining of heaven® by the Devas, and so 
forth. These incidents, further, are but a few of the 
greater waves in the untraversable sea of Ramalila.’ 
Who can measure the destinies of the millions of Jivas 
which are linked with this Ramalila’7 ? The Ramalila’ 
was but the gateway through which those destinies 
issued. In a Jiva’s lila,® also, a similar mutual connec- 


1 Maidservant of Kaikeyi, wife of Dasharatha and stepmother of 
Rama, whose exile she caused when at the instance of Manthara she 
requested Dasharatha, her husband, to make Bharata her son king 
instead of Rama. 

2 The Devas wanted Rama exiled that he might go and destroy 
Ravana and the Rakshasas. Sarasvati is here spoken of as wicked 
(dushta), as the authoress of Mantharda’s evil suggestions. 

So Shalt, 

4 This and the following are all incidents in the Ramayana, which 
were the effects of Manthara’s advice to Kaikeyi. 

5 A missile named Shakti. 6 Svarga. 

7 Rama’s play on earth. 8 Play. 

MODEL 3 


34 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


tion of fates always exists, with this difference only, that 
in Bhagavan’s lila? the destinies concerned are in number 
millions, whilst in your or my lila they are only hundreds. 
Who can say that the destiny which, in the course of its 
production of fruits brings about the terrible suffering of 
the child at birth, is not connected with the destiny of 
the Mother? Secondly, the question why Ishvara did © 
this instead of doing that cannot be asked of Him. We 
cannot object and ask: ‘“‘ Why has He created eyes in 
man’s face instead of in his back ?”’ For, had He created 
eyes in man’s back, it might have been asked: “‘ Why has 
He created eyes in man’s back instead of in his face ?” 
One can question in this way anything. Ishvara never 
escapes these interrogations, which are the natural char- 
acteristic of ignorance. A Jiva devoid of the knowledge 
of the Self* is ever ignorant to Him who possesses all 
knowledge. So long as the Jiva, as it were a drop of 
water, does not mingle with the ocean, which is Shiva, 
there is no end to the former’s interrogations. Shiva 
gratifies the Jiva’s curiosity to the extent of telling him 
that only which He has been pleased to divulge in the 
Shastra spoken by Himself. The Medical Shastras may 
be ignorant of that purpose of His which is served by 
woman’s labour-pains, but it is known to the Sadhana- 
shastra.? 

In Tantra, Bhagavan says: “‘O Devi, at this critical 
ninth or tenth month of pregnancy the Jiva is struck by 
the powerful labour-wind,* and issues through the channel 
like an arrow let loose from a bow. Senseless from the 
womb, he does not know of his fall. The force of the 
labour-wind and the pressure of the generative channel 
at the time of birth make the Jiva forget all that which 
he had revolved in his mind during his stay in the 
womb.”’ 

In the Prapanchasara it is said: ‘‘ The more sinful the 

1 Play. 2 Atmajnana. 

3 The Tantra which is called by that name. 4 Prasava-vayu. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 35 


Jiva is, the greater is the pain which he suffers in issuing 
from his Mother’s womb. Extremely wonderful is the 
history of men’s Karma guided by the will of the Lotus- 
born.”’+ 

One sometimes meets a person who was formerly half 
paralyzed, or was attacked with some other disease 
’ equally or even more serious, or who was injured and 
almost died through violent delirium, but who has re- 
turned to life, and is now free from disease. He, how- 
ever, cannot now recognize his wife, son, or daughter, or 
others, or his possessions. Although to this man’s friends 
he still possesses all he had, yet the man himself is not 
aware that he has anything which he can call his own. 
This is a kind of rebirth in one life. 

When we find that such deep knowledge as one acquires 
through impressions received in early life is lost in old 
age, maturity, or even adolescence, it is a matter for no 
wonder that the light impressions on the child’s soft mind 
should disappear under the grinding oppression of the 
horrible pain of birth, and that the terrible horror of the 
frightful swooning and insensibility then experienced 
should dispel all memory of past events. Loss of memory 
is possible whenever the mind and brain, which are the 
storehouses of all knowledge, are violently disturbed 
through any cause. If by any violent shock the order in 
which the picture impressions lie arranged in successive 
layers in the mind is in any way disturbed, the tie with 
all these impressions is loosened, and the threads which 
bind them to each other are scattered one knows not 
where. The pain of childbirth has been ordained only 
that the trace of past events may be dispelled from the 
Jiva’s mind. Jiva’s assumption of a body is in order 
that he may suffer the consequence of past sin. It is not 
that the punishment is suffered owing to the assumption 
of body, but, as Shastra holds, assumption of body takes 
place owing to the necessity of suffering punishment. It 


1 Padmayoni, or Brahma. 


36 PRINCIPLES: OF TANT Rage 


is, therefore, useless to regret the assumption of body. 
Things have been so arranged according to the desire of 
the all-good Devi, who is full of goodness, that a Jiva 
suffers the consequences of sin at such times, in such 
manner, and by such means, as may clear of obstruction 
the path of his welfare. This is why it is often found 
that Jivas whose Destiny* is almost worked out die of 
the very pain of childbirth in places of pilgrimage,” and 
other seats of liberation, and are thus themselves liber- 
ated. 

As regards the question why the mother suffers pain, 
the answer is that the mother’s destiny? is alone respon- 
sible for the suffering. We must understand that she is 
engaged in giving birth simply because she may thereby 
suffer the fruits of her destiny,t and not that she suffers 
pain in order that she may give birth to a child. In that 
market in which the commodity is destiny’ there does 
not, and cannot, exist any consideration of relationship. 
In this domain of merciless creatures of stone, no body, 
be he or she father or mother, son or daughter, husband 
or wife, or anyone else, cares for another. And yet there 
does exist a strong, intimate, and mysterious mutual con- 
nection between such stones, like the mutual attraction 
between iron and magnet.? Both are hard to the utmost, 
and yet the two are in thorough union. But if destiny+ 
separates them, then in a moment all connection ceases, 
and the hard heart of the stone breaks through its own 
heat.4 The stone-mother breaks in pieces through the 
heat of her grief,® but her offspring, the stone-child, driven 
by its own destiny, has not one moment in which to 


1 Adrishta. That is the ‘‘ unseen’’ cause of man’s fate, which he 
has himself produced through previous Karma. 

2 Tirthas. 

3 Each person in this world works out his own destiny through 
others, and is thus brought into relationship with those who are associ- 
ated with him by Karma. The attraction which binds one to the other 
manifests in worldly relationships. 

4 That is, it suffers. 5 That is, she is overwhelmed with grief. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 37 


think of the suffering of its mother.t For this reason I 
was saying that in this stony domain all are stones ac- 
cording to the behest of the Daughter of Stone. Here 
the child does not suffer because of the mother, nor does 
the mother suffer because of the child. Each one follows 
his own path. 

It is only at crossings that one meets another for a short 
while. Then Maya, the guide, often establishes relation- 
ships “‘ dearer than life ’’ between them under the sweet 
and enchanting influence of which the traveller is made 
to forget the weariness of the journey, and adroitly taken 
by Her Maya to far-away abodes, sometimes in Heaven,? 
and sometimes in Hell.? Shastra has appeared in order 
that the traveller may surmount this forgetfulness, and 
that he be reminded now and then of the journey; and it 
is in order so to remind him of the pains of the journey, 
to bring to his memory the pangs which torture the 
depths of the traveller’s tired heart, that Shastra has 
spoken to us in the Sangsara of the good resolves which 
he had made during his stay in his mother’s womb. 

It is only when a Sadhaka’s mind has been perfectly 
cleansed by devotion* that he can, on hearing the gracious 
relation of Shastra, recall such resolves to his mind. It 
was with a heart pained with such recall of past and 
unfulfilled resolve that a Sadhaka sang: 


“Tam, O Mother, O liberatrix, a debtor at Thy feet. 
O Mother, I am helpless, having forsaken adoration 
and worship.® 
O Mother, I die through eating the poison of worldly 
enjoyment.® 
Suffering pains in the womb, I said: ‘ This time I go 
to the world that I may adore Thee. 


1 In the working out of fate there is no reason why the mother 
should not suffer in birth if that be her destiny. Relationships tempor- 
arily established at the crossing-points of different lives will not affect 
this. 2 Svarga. 3 Naraka. 

4 Tapas. 5 Bhajana, Pajana. 6 Vishaya. 


38 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


I will remain at my own place! as a good child, and 
will offer three-leaved twigs of bael? at the 
beauteous feet of the Mother.’ 

Now, having fallen on earth, I remain, O Mother! 
fallen® 

Through forgetfulness of Thee. O Mother, O de- 
liverer of the fallen, 

I have not performed, nor can I now perform, Sad- 
hana. 

O Durga, Mother ! I can no longer bear my sorrow. 

Good for nothing is Dasharathi.* 

What shall I do, O Shangkari? I cannot control 
my mind. 

Now, O Mother! I pray that Thou mayest bind the 
elephant-like mind 

With the rope of Thy own high quality,® and deliver 
me, 

O Devi, of dishevelled hair,® from. this bondage to the 
world.” 


Severely beaten and oppressed by the waves of a 
boundless sea of sorrows, the Sadhaka has here fully 
opened his heart, and with tears in his eyes said: “ I have 
not done, nor can I now do, Sadhana. O Durga, Mother, 
I can no longer bear my sorrow.’ In these few words 
the Sadhaka has expressed the insufferable mental agony 
which a Sadhaka feels when he falls from Sadhana, and 
is burnt in the flaming torments of Sangsara. Having 
relieved himself of such an outpouring, he moves, as it 
were, a cloud freed from its burdens of water in some 


1 Svapada, which expresses the same idea as Svaradj. All the suffer- | 
ings of Jiva follow from neglect of this. 

* Tripatra. Bael twigs, with three leaves, are offered in worship. 

3 A play on the word “ fallen,’? which here means firstly fallen from 
the womb or born, and then degraded. 

4 The celebrated Bengali poet and author of this song. _ 

© Her quality as deliverer. 

6 Kali and other destructive (Sangharini) forms of the Devi are so 
dishevelled. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 39 


invisible sky. There are many with poetic talent, but 
to draw such a living picture of the sufferer is the work 
of a living Sadhaka, who has gained such power! from 
Sadhana of the Mother of the World, and not the work 
of some unconscious poet,” with his idle pictures of leaves 
and creepers. Blessed are you, oh conscious Dasharathi, 
the neck jewel of the land of Bengal. Blessed is your 
musical Sadhana, or the modulation® of the Dhvani* of 
Kulakundalini. You have said that you are a debtor 
to the Mother. But this account of your debt has made 
the entire race of Sadhakas indebted to you. 

Many are experts in falling from Sadhana, but very few 
have the good fortune to be capable of such heart-felt 
repentance. It is, however, in order to secure such good 
fortune that the Mother of the World has, in spite of the 
Jiva’s forgetfulness of the events of past times and of the 
life in the womb, repeatedly pointed to them in the mirror 
of Shastra, saying: “My child, you have forgotten all 
that you said. Pain of birth has been created that there 
may be this forgetfulness, according to your Karma.” 

However that may be, our object here in introducing a 
discussion of this subject is to show this much only, that 
the appearance of consciousness in the Jiva is nothing 
but the appearance of the eternally existing Shakti of 
Dhvani* in the child in the womb, and that the vital 
Shakti of the Jiva is nothing but Dhvani in the form of 
Ajapa-Mantra. Through impressions acquired in previ- 
ous births, a Jiva forms words mentally to himself while 
in the womb. This is why the Shastra has said: “ Jiva, 
then, himself thinks and speaks in his mind.’’® This 
initial mental process manifests later as crying and the 
like after birth. Even the commencement of such crying 
is made whilst in the womb. At the time of birth the 


1 Shakti. 
2 That is, one not possessed of the high consciousness of the enlight- 
ened and devout Saddhaka. 3 Mirchchhana. 


# Power of subtle sound (see p. 23). 5 See ante, p. 31. 


40 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Jiva in the womb is greatly agitated. As he sits within 
the womb, all his limbs are repeatedly shaken. A feeling 
of weariness, which spreads all over the body, makes the 
child yawn. He swoons at every moment, and heaves 
sighs. Steeped in the deep darkness of the womb, the 
Jiva, on discovering himself to be in such terrible danger, 
becomes desirous of crying. All the inner processes 
necessary for such an act are performed at that time; it 
is only the outer process which is begun after birth. 
That process is as follows: The extremely subtle state of 
(that which subsequently appears as) a word* is called 
Para, and issues from the Maladhara.2 The less subtle 
state, when it reaches the heart,? is called Pashyanti. 
The still less subtle state which exists in conjunction 
with* Buddhi® is known as Madhyama. Lastly, there is 
the gross state of sound in which it issues from the throat 
of the Jiva, who now cries out. This state is known as 
Vaikhari, and it is at this stage and in this state of sound 
that the child’s cry becomes clearly audible. Therefore 
is it that the string of letters which exist (as subtle sound) 
in the Jiva’s Sushumna® are (not produced by), but 
merely manifested by means of the outward pressure of 
the vital air.’ Although all letters® exist in subtle forms 
in the perpetual Dhvani in the Sushumna,? yet they can- 
not issue at the same time that Kulakundalini, whose 
substance is consciousness, makes Her appearance. For 
so long as the paths along which the current of sound 
flows from the Mtladhara to the vocal orifice is not 
divided, so long letters cannot manifest in distinct forms, 
because those parts of the body are seats of the manifesta- 
tion of letters. | 

1 Vakya. . 

2 For these and other centres in Tantrik Yoga, see Arthur Avalon’s 
“‘ Six Centres and the Serpent Force.”’ 3 Hridaya. 

4 Sangyukta. 5 One of the aspects of the mind. 

6 Literally, in the yantra of the Sushumna, the Nadi of that name 
(see ante). 7 Pranavayu. 

8 “Varna 9 The “‘ nerve”’ of that name. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 4L 


Mantras are in all cases manifestations! of Kulakunda- 
lint Herself—She whose substance is all letters? and 
Dhvani, and who is the Paramatma Itself.2 Therefore, 
the substance of all Mantras is consciousness, though 
their appearance and expression is in words. As, not- 
withstanding the existence of consciousness in all things, 
it does not manifest without such processes as the union 
of blood and semen and the like; so, although the sub- 
stance of Mantras is consciousness, that consciousness is 
not perceptible without the union of the Sadhaka’s 
Shakti derived from Sadhana with Mantrashakti. Hence 
it has been said in the Saradatilaka: ‘‘ Although Kula- 
kundalini, whose substance is Mantras, shines brilliant as 
lightning in the Maladhara of every Jiva, yet it is only 
in the lotuses of the hearts of Yogis that She reveals 
Herself and dances in Her own joy. (In other cases, 
though existing in subtle form, She does not reveal 
Herself.) Assuming the bodily appearance of a coiling 
serpent, that Devi coils round Svayambhu Shangkara?# in 
the manner of the spirals of a conch-shell (in three and 
a half coils). Her substance is all Vedas, all Mantras, 
and Tattvas.® She is all good, and the extremely subtle, 
perceptible® Parameshvari. She is the Mother of the 
three forms of energy,’ and Shabdabrahman Itself.”’ 

Now, Sadhaka, remember that passage in the Yogini 
Tantra in which it is said: ‘“‘ Mantras are proof of the 
existence of all Jivas,8 and are the supreme energy” of 
Brahman and the Supreme Good.’’?° ‘“‘ Those Mantras con- 
sisting of energy are beyondall Maya. (Forunless Mantra™ 

1 Vibhiti (see ante, p. 24). 2 Varnas. 

3 That is, Kundali, Paramatma, Svaripini, and Varnadhvanimayi. 

4 That is, the linga of Shiva so named in the Miladhara. 

° Here all things. 

6 Pratyaksha. Derived from prati before, aksha sense; that is, per- 
ceptible to any sense according to the form of her manifestation. 

7 Tejas, that is, Moon, Sun, and Fire. 

8 But for Mantra, Jiva could not exist; and as Jiva exists, Mantra 
exists, 9 Brahmatejas. 


10 See ante, p. 17. The quotation from the Yogini Tantra is con- 
tinued from this place. 11 Literally, “the Tattva of Mantra.” 


42 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


had been above Maya, it would not have been possible 
for Mantrashakti to destroy the process of cause and 
effect in the world. It is not to be thought of that a 
subordinate should defeat by its own power the person to 
whom he is subordinate. It is, therefore, again said): 
All Mantras are destroyers of Maya. (One who is en- 
tangled in Maya can never sever its bonds.) Mantras are 
all blissful. (That is to say, when Mantrashakti is awak- 
ened, then all forms of bliss which may be had from the 
attainment of any object in the world are enjoyed. And 
for this reason a second adjective is given, it being said 
that) Mantras are full of Brahma-bliss. (That is to say, 
there is nothing in the world in which Brahman does not 
exist, and there is no bliss which is unattained on the 
attainment of Brahma-bliss. It has, therefore, been 
again said): Mantras are full of perfect bliss. (That is to 
say, She, who is Mantra,? is existence, consciousness, and 
bliss, and the sole centre of all bliss in the universe. 
Whoever, therefore, attains Her through Siddhi in Mantra 
lacks no form of bliss. It is this state of perfect bliss 
which is called liberation whilst in the state of a Jiva.? 
For this reason another adjective is applied to the 
Mantra, which is), Mantra is that highest good which is 
Brahma-nirvana—(that is to say, Kaivalya-liberation 
itself). Mantras are all Maya,3 all Vidya, all Tapas, all 
Siddhi.4 (Just as Brahman Himself, though without 
attributes, is yet the Lord of all attributes® and all 
attributes; © so Mantra, notwithstanding that it is above 
all Maya, is the seat of the manifestation of Maya, and 
is all Maya. Mantrasadhana’ is the great cause which 
enables a Sadhaka to accomplish wonders by means of 
Maya. By the words “ Mantra is all Vidya ’”’ is meant 


1 Literally, ‘‘ She who is the Svaripa of Mantra.” 


2 Jivanmukti. 3 Sarvamayamaya. 
4 That is, all Vidya (as to which, see post), devotion, austerity, etc., 
and achievement (see Introduction). 5 Guna. 


6 Gunamaya. 7 That is, Sadhana with Mantra. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 43 


that Mantra is the cause of the divisions of Adyashakti! 
into the aspects of Mahavidya, Siddhividya, Upavidya, 
Vidya, and so forth, according to the different forms? of 
Vidya. It is by virtue of Mantra-Sadhana® that Sad- 
hakas see the manifestation of Her different aspects. Or, 
Mantras are Vidya because by Mantrasadhana one easily 
acquires the fourteen forms of worldly knowledge, with 
their sixty-four branches, as also Brahma-knowledge,# 
which destroys all sins. Mantras are all Tapas,® because 
by their grace one acquires, without subjection of the 
body to hardships, the religious merit,® which is other- 
wise only acquired through physical austerities. Mantras 
are all Siddhi, because there is no Siddhi in the world 
which cannot be acquired by a Sadhana with Mantra.*)”’ 
«¢ Mantras are all forms of liberation. (That is to say, all 
forms of liberation bestowed by the Devata he worships, 
whether Salokya, Saripya, Sarshti, Sayujya,’ or Nirvana, 
are attainable by Mantrasddhana; for Mantra is itself 
liberation. He who wishes to ascertain the depth down 
to a particular point of an unfathomable ocean must 
descend to such a point. So a Sadhaka who desires a par- 
ticular form of liberation must attain Siddhi in a Sadhana 
suitable for its acquisition. Just as the sea can from its 
fulness supply with ease water in any quantity from a 
mere pailful to a mass great enough to deluge the unti- 
verse, so Mantra, which is replete with liberation, can 
grant to the Sadhaka any form of it from the lowest 
Siddhi to the supreme Nirvana. Mantra is truly Brah- 
man, who is light? and perpetual liberation. Differences 
in effect produced by Mantrasddhana are due to differ- 
ences in such Sadhana. Sdadhakas will now be able to 


1 Primal Shakti. 2 Tattvas. 
° That Sadhana, the object of which is Mantra. 
4 Brahmavidya. 5 Tapomaya. 6 Dharma. 


7 These are qualified forms of Mukti (liberation)—viz., dwelling in 
the same abode with the Devata worshipped, the assumption of his 
form and powers and unity with Him. Nirvana is unqualified Mukti, 

8 Muktimaya. 9 Jyotih. 


44 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


say whether Mantra, which is unchanged? even in Nir- 
vana,” should be considered to be a mere worldly physical 
sound, or Brahman Itself as the fourth state of conscious- 
ness.°) Mantras are all Vedas.4 (That is to say, if a 
Sadhaka attains perfect Siddhi in even a single Mantra, 
he becomes with ease possessed of the spiritual know- 
ledge which is acquired by learning all the Vedas, with 
all allied matters; or he can perform with his own Mantra 
all the rites which are performed with different Mantras.) 
Mantras are all worlds. (That is to say, Mantrashakti 
can, at the Sadhaka’s desire, reach and operate in all the 
fourteen worlds, and, penetrating through all their bar- 
riers, merge the Sadhaka in Itself.*) In Mantra are all 
enjoyments.’? (That is to say, whatever things are en- 
joyed by Sadhakas, are all produced by Mantrashakti®; 
or in Mantrashakti alone Sadhakas find all the enjoy- 
ments and happiness which others obtain from wife, 
children, and other worldly objects; or through the influ- 
ence of the intense universe-consuming power of Mantra 
all enjoyments become favourable to Siddhi.?) Mantras 
are all Shastras. (That is to say, after Mantrashakti has 
been acquired, there is no necessity to know any Shastra.) 

‘““Mantras are all forms of Yoga. (That is to say, there 
is no form of Yoga which cannot be accomplished by 
Mantrasadhana.)”’ 


1 Literally, ‘‘ whose Svaripa is not changed.” 

2 Because the Mantra is the Brahman. 

3 Turiya chaitanya. Turiya comes from chatur (four) and chha 
(the cha of chatur being dropped), and is the fourth state (avastha) of 
consciousness. Sdayana says that Turiya is taraka (deliverer). Accord- 
ing to the Vedantasdra, it is that state in which the Brahman exists 
without upadhi (limiting conditions). Yadanupadhitang chaitanyam 
tat turiyam itichyayate. Shrutisays that it is thus: Shantam (peace), 
Shivam (excellence), and Advaitam (non-duality). (See Introduction. 

4 Sarvavedamaya. 

5 Sarvvalokamaya. In Mantra are all the worlds, in that Mantra 
pervades all the worlds. 

6 That is, the Mantra can procure Nirvana for the Sadhaka. 

7 Sarvvabhogamaya. 8 The power of Mantra. 9 Success: 


PRINCIPLES" OF TANTRA 45 


“O Devi, my sight was paralyzed by the powerful 
splendour of the ightt of this mass of Mantras and Shas- 
tras borne on every petal of the lotus of Thy heart. I 
then sank into the sea of unconsciousness, which is de- 
lusion.? On recovery from that swoon, I again saw that 
mass of Mantras resplendent as the sun, as one who has 
been steeped in the deep darkness of night views the 
brilliant morning sunrise. By the grace of Mahakali, the 
Deity presiding over? all Mantras, I have attained Siddhi, 
and have become versed in all Shastras.”’ 

The string of fifty letters,4 from A to Ksha, which are 
the Matrika,° “is eternal, unbeginning and unending, and 
Brahman itself.’’ This great saying is the gist of all 
Tantras. Lest through human error the pronunciation 
of any letters* should be lost or distorted, Vidhata® has 
created alphabets,’ and put them into writing. Brihas- 
pati® says: ‘‘ Because Jiva is prone to error before he is 
even six months old, Vidhata® has created all Aksharas,’ 
and put them into writing in their due order.’’ Sadhakas 
should understand Aksharas’ to be created by Vidhata in 
the same way as the Vedas are created by Him.? Vidhata® 
has created the forms?® of written letters in resemblance 
to the forms seen by Maheshvara in the lotus of Mahesh- 
vari’s heart. 

That the Vindu, Matra, and Rekha™ in the alphabet 
are all really Brahman is clearly shown in that which the 
Kamadhenu and other Tantras say as to the identity of 
the letters from A to Ksha, with the Brahman, Vishnu, 

1 Tejas. 2 Moha. 

3 Adhishthatri, which is previously described as the sthila form. 


4 Varna. 
5 Mothers, a name for the letters as embodying sound produced by 


Mother Kundalini. 6 Brahma. 

7 Akshara. 8 Guru of the Devas. 

9 That is, He does not really create them, but they issue from Him 
as part of His being or His breath. 10 Mirti. 


11 Vindu is the dot which indicates the nasal breathing Anusvara. 
Matra is the upper part of a letter or the headline; and Rekha is the 
lines forming the letter itself. 


46 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Maheshvara, Shakti, Siryya, Ganesha; and other Devas 
and Devis are presiding Devatas of those lines and points. 
In fact, the writing which we in ordinary use know as 
Akshara (alphabet) is nothing but the Yantra of the un- 
decaying Akshara Brahman.? Just as in Sadhana forms 
made of earth or stone are used as Devatas, so in writing 
Yantras made of lines are used as Aksharas.2, When, by 
virtue of Sadhana, Mantrashakti is awakened, the pre- 
siding Devata of every line of the resplendent linear form 
(as it were an image) breaks through that form, and later, 
when Siddhi in the Mantra has been acquired, the Devata 
of worship who presides over all Mantras, considered as 
a whole, and who is existence, consciousness, and bliss, 
gratifies Her devotees by the revelation of Her very 
Seli. 

At dawn the powerful spreading rays of the sun pierce 
the deep, dark night, and are slowly followed by the orb 
itself, as it were a mass of heated gold reddening the 
summit of the Mount of sunrise.* Great Yogis, who are 
immersed in Sandhya® prayer, see in the centre of that 
luminous orb the beautiful form of Siryyadeva, seated 
on a red, full-blown lotus. In the same way, at the 
blessed appearance of dawn of Brahmamayi’s® grace, 
the fierce light’ of Mantra dawns in the Sadhaka’s heart, 
rending the darkness of delusion® of the deadly night of 
ignorance,® and fills the entire universe with the joyous 
love of the supreme Devata. Then successive companies 


1 The word Akshara etymologically means a (not), and kshava 
(decaying). 

“ Yantra, which literally means an “‘ instrument,’”’ here means the 
lines of a letter. As a stone image is used to represent the Devata, 
so the lines, etc., which go to make up the written alphabetical char- 
acters are used to denote the Devata, which manifests as letters. 

3 Svasvaripa. 

4 The sun rises from the top of Udayachala, or the Mount of rising 
(sunrise), and goes and descends to the Mount of sunset (astachala). 

5 A rite performed thrice daily at morn, noon, and eve (see 
Introduction). 

6 The Devi’s. 7 Tejas. 8 Moha. 9 Avidyaé. 


é 


PitNG PLES OLEAN TRA 47 


of Devas show themselves unsought in the petals of the 
Sadhaka’s thousand-petalled lotus. At the conclusion of 
the full display of her power,? Brahmasanatani, who is 
perfect and eternal Brahman, reveals Herself in the form 
worshipped by the Sadhaka in the midst of a circle of 
light overspreading the assembly of Devas and Devis. 
Immersed in the great sea of self-realization,? which is 
the Kaivalya® of Her who is Kaivalya itself, the Sadhaka, 
in the enjoyment of the sleep of Brahman-bliss, rests in 
the bed of consciousness in the bosom of the great deep 
Peace. This it is which is the undecaying nature?* of 
Aksharas (letters). In fact, Akshara, or written Mantra, 
is the same thing as Devata in image, or Yantra. By 
the force or lack of force of the SdAdhaka’s Sadhana, 
the Devata appears therein and disappears therefrom, 
Varna, Nada, Vindu, vowel and consonant in a Mantra, 
denote different appearances of the Devata. This is, of 
course, known to Sadhakas proficient in the knowledge 
of Mantras; but as the matter is strictly one to be learnt 
from Gurus only, we are unable to deal with it here. 
Certain aspects or Vibhtitis? of the Devata are inherent 
in certain letters,° but perfect Shakti appears only in a 
whole Mantra, and not in any disjointed letter.’ For 
this reason, any word or letter cannot be a Mantra. The 


1 Literally, “‘ when all Vibhitis have appeared ”’ (see ante, p. 24). 

2 Bhava; that consciousness which is the experience of the Kaivalya 
state. Bhdava literally means existence, and then feeling, etc., the 
term being here loosely used for such experience. 3 Liberation. 

4 Svarupa—that is, the true nature or aspect. 5 See p. 24. 

6 It is not merely the whole Mantra which is the Devata, though, as 
pointed out later, perfect Shakti appears only in a whole Mantra. 
Thus, in the Mayd-Mantra—viz., ‘“‘ Hring,” H=Shiva, R=fire, I= 
Mayashakti. Each letter is thus a Devata, and the whole Mantra is the 
Devata Tripurasundari, the meaning being that Maya is dissolved 
in the fire of knowledge. 7 Varna. 

8 Each of the letters is, as above stated, a Mantra. What is here 
meant is that it is not every Mantra which reveals a particular aspect 
sought. One must have recourse to that particular Mantra which 
is that aspect. 


48 PRINCI PLES* OG TAN Ue 


Mantra alone in which the playful Devata has revealed 
one of Her particular aspects is alone capable of revealing 
that aspect. Hence that Mantra is called in Shastra the 
Mantra of that particular aspect. Bhagavan, the Guru 
of all Mantras and Siddhis and creator of all things, 
has therefore said to Bhagavati: ‘“‘ It is certain that the 
form of a particular Devata will appear from the par- 
ticular Mantra of which that Devata is the presiding 
Deity, for a Devata’s body is formed out of Vijamantra.”’ 
In the Kamadhenu Tantra it has been said: “‘ If a Sadhaka 
contemplates with all his power the Devi, according to 
the Vija of individual Devatas, and Prafulla and Kalika 
(particular Mantrashaktis), then from that Vija itself 
appear Shakti, Vishnu, Shiva, Stryya, and other Devas. 
From Vija is manifested the immaculate Supreme Brah- 
man. Howcan Hari or Sadashiva appear in a Sadhaka’s 
heart without contemplation of Vija, for the eternal Devi, 
appearing as Vija, is the Genetrix of even Sadashiva ?”’ 
All the fruits of accomplishment? which are borne by the 
creeper? of a Sadhaka’s Sadhana depends on the great 
Mantrashakti appearing in the form of Vija.4 Shastra 
has therefore specified the rules and injunctions relating 
to the sowing of this Vija,° according to place, time, and 
person. Mantravichara, Mantroddhara,® and the like, 
are prescribed in order that it may be ascertained what 
Mantra should be selected, and then, on selection, in which 
field and according to what method it should be sown 
in order that it may speedily have good fruit under the 
special influence of the Devata. For this purpose refer- 
ence is had to such matters as the zodiacal constellations,’ 
star,> the planets, and the ascending and descending 


1 Adhishthatri Devata, which is described (see ante) as the Sthila 


form. 2 Siddhi. 
3 Sadhana is here compared to a creeping plant. 
4 Vijartipini. 5 Vija means seed. 


6 Mantroddhara is the search for and finding out of a Mantra for 
the purposes mentioned after Mantravichara, or discussion with the 
same object. 7 Rashi, 8 Nakshatra. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 49 


nodes of the moon, conjunctions,? and so forth, which 
exist as forces operating in the body of the Sadhaka. 

In the Vishvasara Tantra it has been said: ‘‘ Wise men 
should know Mantras to be of four kinds, according to 
the distinctive nature of the Chakra*—namely, Siddha, © 
Sadhya, Susiddha, and Ari. Of these, a Siddha Mantra, 
when it has been the subject of due Sadhana, becomes 
Siddha® in due time (that is, the time specified in the 
Shastra for Siddhi in respect of that particular Mantra). 
A Sadhya Mantra® becomes Siddha® after a long time 
through both Japa’ and Homa.’ A Susiddha}Mantra*® 
becomes Siddha® the moment it is received (from the 
Guru; but its fruit appears according to the Sadhaka’s 
Sadhana), and a Ripu Mantra? lays the axe at the root 
of Siddhi.” “‘ Know Siddhamantras to be friends, 
Sadhyamantras to be servers,*° Susiddhamantras to be 
helpers,*4 and Shatrumantras™ to be destroyers. Friendly 
Mantras become Siddha® through Japa,’ according to 


1 Graha—that is, Rahu and Ketu, or the points at which the path 
of the moon intersects the ecliptic. 

2 Yoga; conjunctions of stars with earth. 

3 The universe is contained in the body with all its external details. 
With the objective conjunction, etc., there is a corresponding con- 
junction in the Sadhaka’s body; or, more strictly, it is the same con- 
junction viewed in different aspects. 

4 Before initiation it is usual to ascertain whether a Mantra is 
svakula or akula. The circle in which nativity is marked in Astrology 
is called Chakra, but here the reference is also to the Tantrik Chakras, 
such as the A-ka-da-ma and others described in Tantrasara (see 22, 
p. 153, of my edition of the Mahdanirvana Tantra). 

5 Accomplished, perfected, fruitful. (Siddha) accomplished—that 
is, without much difficulty. 

6 Literally, ‘“‘ which has to be accomplished.” This term, as the 
others, is here technically used as descriptive of a particular Mantra; 
here a Mantra accomplished with great difficulty. 

7 Recitation of Mantra and sacrifice unto fire (see Introduction). 

8 Literally, ‘‘ well accomplished.” 

9 Or Ari. Ariand Ripu are synonymous words meaning “ enemy ”’ ; 
a Mantra with which no Siddhi is attainable by the Sddhaka to whom 
it is inimical. ; 

10 Sevaka ; during accomplishment. 11 Poshaka. 

12 Meaning the same as Ari or Ripu. 

VOL. Il. 4 


50 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


rules laid down in the Shastra. Sadhyamantras become 
Siddha? through much serving. Helper Mantras grant 
desires even without much service, and destructive 
Mantras most surely destroy the Sadhaka.”’ 

This is the general rule, but in certain special circum- 
stances, which must be learnt from Gurus only, there is no 
necessity for adjudging the suitability of Mantras.* Here 
the point for special consideration of Sadhakas is that, 
although the object of worship* of the Ishtadevata,° 
Patha,® Stava,? Homa,’ Dhyana,? Dharana,?° Samadhi,™ 
or other means, and of Siddhi and Sadhana with one’s 
own Dikshamantra,”” is the same; yet the actual working 
varies. The fruit which a Sadhaka achieves in ten years 
by means of Pdija, Patha, Stava, and so forth, can be 
obtained in but one year, month, week, or even one 
day, by force of a powerful Mantrasadhana; for in the 
case of Paija, Stava, Dhyana, Dharana,* and so forth, 
only the Sadhaka’s Sadhanashakti'4 operates; whilst in 
the case of Sadhana with Mantra, Sadhanashakti works 
in conjunction with Mantrashakti..® For reasons of 
place, time, and person a Sadhaka’s Sadhanashakti!4 may 
be, and actually often is, imperfect, and. meets with 
obstacles. But the invincible power of Mantrashakti’® 


1 Accomplished, perfected, fruitful. (Siddha) accomplished. 

2 That is, much Sadhana. 

3 As where the Mantra is received in dream. 

4 Ceremonial worship. For this and the following terms see Intro- 
duction. 

5 The particular Devata whom a particular Sadhaka worships, such 
as Krishna in the case of a Vaishnava, and in whose Mantra the SAdhaka 


is specially initiated. 6 Reading of Shastra. 
7 Hymn of praise. 8 Sacrifice into fire, which is of several kinds. 
9 Meditation. 10 Concentration. 


11 ‘Yoga ecstasy, or realization of the Brahman. 

12 The particular Mantra in which the Sddhaka has been initiated. 

13 Vante. 

14 That is, the force generated by the Sadhana of the Sadhaka himself. 
Its nature and intensity therefore varies. 

15 The power of the Mantra itself—7.e., a constant quantity when 
once realized through Mantrasadhana. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 51 


can never be defeated. Mantra is equally and in all 
places powerful, whether in the Upper,! Middle,? and 
Nether® worlds, or in water, on land, or in space. Man- 
trashakti is unconcerned with the question whether the 
Sadhaka’s purpose is good or bad. Fire will equally 
burn down a house in the case of a malicious arson as it 
will in Homa? accept the offerings made in the sacrificial 
pit in the name of Devatas. Whenever Mantrashakti is 
invoked, whether it be with the object of doing good or 
harm to one’s own self or another person, it will of a surety 
accomiplish that work. It is the Sahdaka who reaps the 
consequence, whether it be Heaven® or Hell.® As fire 
only dies out after it has consumed that to which it has 
been set, so Mantrashakti ceases to operate only when it 
has fully revealed its power. A Sadhaka’s individual 
(atma) Shakti is like wind, and Mantrashakti is like fire, 
so that where the Sadhaka’s individual Shakti is weak, 
the Divine Shakti of Mantra can in a moment make it 
very, very great. Just as waves of air, when struck and 
restruck by flames of fire, flow strong and fast in the sky, 
and these flames of fire, fanned by the rapid currents of 
air, blaze with redoubled force, so the SAdhaka’s individual 
Shakti, when struck again and again by Mantrashakti, is 
very rapidly developed, and then a strong, active indi- 
vidual Shakti unites with Mantrashakti to make the 
latter doubly powerful. Just as with the help of a breath 
of wind a small fire is generated, which then, by the 
movements of the air which is drawn into it, become so 

1 Svarga, the heavens. 

2 Martya, the world of mortals or this earth. 

3 Rasdatala, one of the nether worlds, for which it here stands as a 
general term. 

# Sacrifice into fire. <A pit is prepared, and on the hearth (Kunda) 
the fire is laid into which the offerings are thrown, that Agni (Fire) may 
carry them to the Devas. 5 Svarga. 

6 Naraka. When called into active operation, Mantrashakti displays 
its power, whatever be the result. If, however, the Sddhaka invokes 


that power for an evil purpose, that is the Sadhaka’s affair, and he will 
likely go to Hell. 


52 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


great that it illuminates the world and firmament with 
its lustre, so with the help of a mere particle of individual 
Shakti, Mantrashakti in a very small form appears, 
which then, with the development of the previously 
almost inert individual Shakti, becomes so great that it 
illumines the heart of the Jiva and penetrates even 
through Brahmaloka.t It is simply because Mantra 
possesses this wonderful power that a Jiva may accom- 
plish that which appears to be impossible; otherwise, how 
could anyone expect a Jiva to achieve by his own effort 
the treasure which is worshipped by Shiva? What indi- 
vidual Shakti does Jiva possess by virtue of which he 
can, without the help of Mantra, conquer the Jaivishakti? 
and transform it into the Daivishakti2?* In the vast 
field of the Sangsara, and in that darkness which is delay 
in the attainment of Siddhi, Mantra alone is the everlast- 
ing autumnal full moon which never sets and never rises.4 
The cool, pure, and bright rays of this moon are the 
infinite mercy of the Mother of the world. Pious Sadhakas 
and Sadhikas® are the Chakoras® and Chakoris,’ who are 
ever thirsty to drink these rays. Spreading their two 
wings of knowledge® and action,? they soar above the 
region of Sangsara to the greatest heights of the far- 
extending firmament of Sadhana, and there, dancing with 
joy, are blessed with the draught of nectar. Saddnanda?® 
has therefore said to Anandamayi:" “None but the 
Chakoras know the beauty of moonshine.” (Similarly, 
none but Sadhakas and Sadhikas know the nectar of 


1 The highest of the fourteen worlds or regions. 

2 That is, the Shakti of a Jiva as such. 

3 The Shakti of a Deva as such. With this Shakti he can accom- 
plish that which a Deva can. 

4 As it is always above the horizon, it cannot be said to rise or set. 

5 Female Sadhakas. 

6 Birds celebrated in Sanskrit poetry as being very fond of moonlight. 

7 Female Chakoras. 8 Jnana. 9 Karma. 

10 He who is ever-joyful—Shiva. ! 

11 She who is bliss; the Devi, His spouse. 


PRINCIPLESSOPR TANTRA 53 


Mantrashakti. The sight of it ever makes the community 
of one-eyed, faithless crows to squat in their dry nests, 
shutting their eyes in fear, and hiding their heads.) 

More than the above cannot be made public on the 
subject of Mantrashakti, the creeper which grants the 
fourfold fruit? to the Sadhaka. We, therefore, here stop 
after having merely pointed out the main principles alone.” 
The entire tree will become revealed when its branches, 
twigs, leaves, and fruits are distinctly shown. The 
Tantra Shastra is not a pleasure-ground for the ease- 
loving and luxurious. It is the hermitage, in the woods# 
built by Yoga, of Him who is the crest-gem of great 
Yogis,° and the Guru of all mobile and immobile things. 
Who has the power to touch, without His command, a 
single leaf or flower belonging to this lovely forest, full 
of energy ?® Whoever, with the mad thought of reliance 
on the powers of his own arms, enters into this forest 
without His command will of a certainty be burnt into 
ashes by the most terrible fire® of the Lord of Destruction, 
like flies which fall into a flame or Kandarpa’ when seized 
by the jaws of death. This is why, after having come 
so far, we now recede in fear. 

As to what yet remains to be explained, we bow to 
those Lotus-feet, so sought by devotees, and fervently 
pray that He may, according to what He Himself has 
said, appear in the hearts of all Gurus, and through them 
teach their disciples that aspect of His which is Mantra. 


1 Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha (see Introduction). 

2 Mila-tattva. 3 Which the Guru will do. 

4 Tapovana. 5 Shiva. 8 Tejas. 

7 The God of Love who was burnt into ashes by the fire of Shiva’s 
third eye. 


CHAP DE it 
ON THE GURU! 


LL that has been above mentioned in relation to 

Mantra Tattva depends on Gurutattva, for the 
root of initiation” is in Guru; the root of Mantra is in 
initiation ;? the root of Devata is in Mantra; and the root 
of Siddhi is in Devata. Bhagavan has, therefore, said 
in the Mundamala Tantra: ‘‘ Mantra is born of Guru, and 
Devata is born of Mantra, so that, O Beauteous One, 
Guru stands in the place of a grandfather to the Ishta- 
devata. Just as service done to the father or grandfather 
pleases the son or grandson, so service done to Guru 
pleases Mantra; service done to Mantra pleases Devata; 
and service done to both Guru and Mantra also pleases 
Devata.”’ , 

Any deviation from this line of action produces con- 
trary results; that is to say, just as service done to the 
son and grandson disregarding the father and grandfather 
really displeases instead of pleasing the former, so the 
worship of Mantra at a disregard of Guru or worship of 
Devata, at a disregard of Mantra or worship of Ishtadevata, 
at a disregard of Guru and Mantra, rather angers than 
pleases them. Here it should also be understood that, 
just as there is no possibility of pleasing the son and 
grandson by serving them at a disregard of the father 
and grandfather, so also there is no possibility of pleasing 
the father and grandfather by serving them without 
care for the son and grandson. There is no likelihood 


1 Gurutattva. 2 Diksha. 
54 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 55 


of pleasing the Guru even by serving him and Mantra at 
a disregard of Devata, or him alone at a disregard of 
Devata and Mantra. The necessity for these observa- 
tions exists in the fact that nowadays one finds many 
disciples' who only seek the protection of Guru for fear 
of having to make Japa? of Mantra, and to worship 
Devata. Such respect for Guru is in itself a sign of dis- 
honest motive. In fact, Siddhi is near at hand for him 
only who makes no distinction between Guru, Mantra, 
and Devata.? Shastra has therefore said: ‘‘ What does 
not the greatly pleased Jagaddhatri* give to him who 
makes no distinction between Mantra and Gurudeva ?”’ 
This is what Shastra says. But nowadays people greatly 
dispute about the Guru. There are many who dislike 
to worship a man as being in a real sense Brahman. As 
Mantra is, in their opinion, mere letters,® so Guru is, in 
THeteejudement, a mere man.© As a matter of fact, 
ignorance as to the subject of Gurus is the sole cause of 
such a conclusion, for from what Shastra says on the 
point there is no room for doubt that the Guru is not to 
be regarded as a mere man.» She who is the dispeller of 
all doubts and Mother of the Universe has Herself made 
this clear. In the Yogini Tantra it is said: “‘ Devi said, 
O Maheshvara, who is the Guru whom Thou, O all- 
merciful Deva! has called greater than Thyself ?” 
Ishwara replied: ‘‘O Mahadevi, the Dikshaguru’ in all 
Mantras is, O great Devi, the First Lord? Mahakala, and 
none other. He is undoubtedly the Dikshaguru in all 
Mantras—Shaiva, Shakta, Vaishnava, Ganapatya, Ain- 
dava,? Mahashaiva, and Saura. He alone, and none else, 
is the speaker of all Mantras. O Daughter of the Moun- 


1 Shishya. 2 Vide Introduction. 
3 All are Devataé and manifestations of the Brahman. 
* She who supports the Universe. 5 Akshara. 


6 Instead of being the embodiment of the one and only Guru, the 
Brahman. . 
(7 The C | a Rae 

eotror 


56 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


tain, at the time of giving Mantra to a disciple’ Mahakala 
appears in the body of man. O Devi, the Guru on whom 
the giver of Mantra? meditates in the lotus in his head is 
the same as Him on whom the disciple* also meditates in 
the lotus of his head. Therefore, O Maheshvari, there is 
the same Guru for both teacher? and disciple. O Shan- 
kari, it is because the Supreme Guru4 appears in the body 
of the human Guru that Shastras relate the greatness of 
the latter.” Just as an image is, after infusion of life 
into it, the appearance® of Her who lives on Mount 
Kaildsa,’ notwithstanding that it is made with mere clay 
taken from your or my house, so, notwithstanding that 
the body of Guru is born in this or that country, it is the 
appearance of Ishtadevaté. As in the Durga Pija fes- 
tival and other Ptijas life? must be established® in the 
image, so at the time of initiating disciples in Mantras 
the Guru must establish the life of the Guru! in his own 
body. Were Guru nothing but what we take him to be, 
then whose life is it that is established in him? Again, 
at the time of such establishment the Guru does not do 
so, saying: “‘ Let the life of me, holding such title, be- 
longing to such caste, and possessing such an appearance, 
be established.’’ He then establishes in Himself the vital 
force! of the Supreme Guru seated in the thousand- 
petalled lotus in the head of Jivas. He who is beauti- 
fully white like camphor, the jasmine??-flower, or the 
Autumnal Moon with His two hands granting blessing 


1 Shishya. 2 The initiator. 3 Guru. 

4 Whom both the earthly Guru and his Shishya worship. 

5 It is not the man who is praised, but the Supreme Spirit, whose 
representative and embodiment he is. 6 Marti. 

7 The abode of Shiva, where the Devi lives with Her Spouse. 

8 Prana. 

9 Pratishtha. This refers to the Prana-pratishtha rite by which 
through power of the worshipper’s consciousness Shakti is awakened 
in the inert substance of the image, and which is known as establishment 
of life in the image. 

ars: a 


lake); 


4 
i Fay ~ 


Ph) 


Oey | PUI Idi 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA By) 


and dispelling fear,! embraced on the left by His Shakti,” 
bright like the rising Sun, He sinks His own existence in 
the sea of His existence, and, considering Himself to be 
that Supreme Existence, bows to His own self as His 
Shishya bows to Him. Just as an image is an instrument*® 
in which Divinity+ is seated, so also is the body of the 
Guru. Were it the physical body of Guru which Shastra 
has spoken of as “ Guru,” then the formula for medita- 
tion® for every Guru would differ according to the appear- 
ance of the individual Guru. For this reason Shastra 
has clearly stated that one who thinks of Guru as a mere 
man—* My Guru is such a person having such an appear- 
ance ’’—is never liberated. If we were to consider that 
the image made for worship this year alone represents the 
true form of the Mother of the World, it follows that the 
image of the preceding or following year is unlike Her, 
for Her images cannot be exactly similar. Indirectly, 
also, it follows that there is no divinity in the images built 
in other people’s houses. Similarly, if we think that 
“my Guru is He whose name is such and such, and who 
has such and such a title,’’ we contradict the truth that 
“He who is my Lord is the Lord of the world, He who is 
my Guru is the Guru of the world.’’ We must therefore 
understand that in whatever form an image may be 
made, in every such image She alone appears who is in 
all things in the world; hence all images, though differing 
in appearance from each other, are the same, in that each 
embodies the Mother who is one, and not many. Simi- 
larly, although Gurus have different physical bodies, they 
are all the same in so far as they are embodiments of the 
One. Shastra has therefore said: ‘‘ He who is my Lord 
is the Lord of the world, He who is my Guru is the Guru 
of the world;” and hence in all Tantras there has been 
ordained one Dhyana® and one Mantra in the case of the 

1 That is, he makes the two mudrds (gestures) called Vara and 


Abhaya. 2 Spouse. 3 Yantra. 
4 Devattva. 5 Dhyana. 6 Formula of meditation. 


58 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Guru. In fact, just as the wick of one lamp is ignited at 
the flame of another, so the Divine Shakti which is Mantra 
is communicated to the disciple’s body from that of the 
Guru. Just asthe power’ of burning and giving light in 
the case of either lamp or of the fire which is the result of 
their combination remains the same both before and after 
the ignition (the fire in both lamps being the same), so 
the real Guru is everywhere the same, whether in the 
body of the (earthly) Guru or in that of his disciple. 

It is only so long as Shakti is not fully communicated 
to the disciple’s body from that of the Guru that there 
subsists the relation? of Guru and disciple. One is a 
disciple® only so long as one is a Sadhaka. On the attain- 
ment of Siddhi, this dualism is surpassed. Then there is 
none other than She, the One only, so that the relation 
of Guru and disciple* no longer subsist. Siddhi and 
liberation are existence as attributeless Brahman. But 
just as it is impossible to attain liberation beyond the 
reach of attributes without worship of the Devata with 
attributes, so it is impossible to attain monistic know- 
ledge without worship of the Guru. Hence Shastra has 
said: ‘‘ Obeisance to the Guru, by whom is shown the 
Brahman,* who pervades the entire universe of mobile 
and immobile things. Obeisance to the Guru, by whom 
the eyes of Jiva, blinded by the darkness of ignorance, 
are opened with the collyrium stick® of knowledge.” He 
by whose grace the Brahman who pervades the Universe 
is revealed and the eye of knowledge is opened is not a 
mere man, in spite of his appearance as such. 

When, after attainment of the previous human birth 
at the close of a journey through eighty-four lakhs of 
births, the gate of a Jiva’s good fortune is opened, then 
Bhagavan, Maheshwara Himself, appears before his eyes 
as Guru. At that time the wheel of Destiny has revolved 
to a point at which it places the Jiva in a position where 

1 Shakti. 2 Vyavahara. 3 Shishya. 4 Brahmapadam. 

5 Afijana or collyrium is used to brighten the eyes. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 50 


he can see all-merciful Sadashiva standing before him as 
Jiva’s Guru. Hence it often happens that the Guru, 
who has baffled search for even a hundred years, gratifies 
of his own accord, unsought and in one moment, the 
fortunate disciple without any effort on the latter’s part. 
By good fortune, a current of air then blows similar to 
that which, after a period of terrible drought, stirs fresh 
clouds heavy with rain, which will soothe with its ample 
showers the bosom of the parched yet sprouting fields. 
The crop of Sadhana which adorns the great heart of the 
Sadhaka intoxicates the world with the fragrance of full- 
blown flowers and the beauty of full-grown fruits. As 
a rule that fortunate day does not arrive unless it has 
been preceded by the germs of intense Sadhana _per- 
formed in previous births. We therefore often find that, 
even if a great saint,’ the very incarnation of Shiva, 
appears before an unfortunate Jiva, the latter does not 
bow to his lotus-feet. At that time the Jiva’s heart is so 
completely subdued by ignorance through the deluding 
Maya of the Mother of the World that his eyes open to 
discover only faults and no virtues in such a man. On 
the other hand, if a Jiva has acquired a store of religious 
merits in previous births, attachment and single-minded 
devotion to the feet of the Guru are natural qualities of 
his. For this reason Bhagavan Maheshvara Himself has 
said in the Kularnava Tantra: 

“O beloved, how can that subtle peBeu of Shiva 
which is one, omnipresent, attributeless,? indifferent, 
undecaying, unattached like space, unbeginning and un- 
ending, be an object of worship to the dualistic mind?”’ 
“ Hence it is that the Supreme Guru has entered into the 
body of the human Guru. O Devi, if a Sadhaka duly 
worships Him with devotion he grants that Sadhaka 

1 Mahapurusha. 

2 Nishkala. The Brahman is called Sakala when with Prakriti, as 
it is Nishkala when thought of as without Prakriti, for Kala is Prakriti 


(Saradatilaka, chap. i.). (See Introduction to A. and E. Avalon’s 
“Hymns to the Goddess.’’) 


60 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


both enjoyment and liberation (2). O Devi, although 
this My form as Shiva is My gross aspect, it is yet being 
full of light and energy* imperceptible to human eyes. 
For this reason I have assumed the form of Guru in the 
world of man, and thus protect the race of Shishyas? (3). 
Paramashiva Himself in human body secretly wanders on 
the earth in order to favour Shishyas (4). For the pro- 
tection of Sddhus,* Saddshiva assumes a modest (merci- 
ful)+ form, and though being Himself above the Sangsara, 
yet appears and acts in this world as though he were a 
man of the Sangsara (5). O beloved, the Shriguru® is 
Shiva, though He has not three eyes®; Vishnu, too, 
though He has not four arms; and Brahma also, though 
He has not four heads? (6). O Bhavani,’ when the fruits 
of sin predominate, Guru appears as man, and when the 
fruits of virtuous acts prevail, Guru appears as Shiva (7). 
Like blind men deprived for ever of sight of the sun, 
unfortunate Jivas are unable to see the real aspect of 
Guru, the embodiment of the Brahman, though he is 
present before their eyes (8). It is undoubtedly true 
that Guru is Deva Sadashiva Himself, for who is it who 
grants liberation to Sddhakas if Guru be not Shiva 
Himself? O Parvati,® there is not the least difference 
between Deva Sadashiva and Shriguru. Whoever makes 
a distinction between them commits sin (10). For, 


‘Lejas: 2 Disciples. 3 The pious. 

4 The brackets are the author’s. The original word is Nirahangkéra— 
without Ahangkara or egotism, which is here rendered by the author 
as modest. 

5 The revered Guru. Shri, or Auspicious, is a term of respect. 

S Asthas ohiva: 

7 Vishnu has generally four arms, though in his Krishna avatara he 
has two. Brahma has four heads. 

8 Feminine of Bhava, a name of Shiva in the watery form of the 
Ashtamtrti. The Vayu Purana says that He is called Bhava because 
all things come from Him and subsist in water. The Devi is Bhavani. 
as the Spouse and Giver of life to Bhava. 

9 The name of the Devi, as daughter of the Mountain King, 
Himalaya. 


BRINCIBEHS OF TANTRA 61 


O Devi, by assumption of the form of a preceptor, Guru 
Deva* severs the multitude of bonds which bind a Jiva 
to the state of a Pashu,? and enables him to attain to the 
Parabrahman (11). Assuming the form of a preceptor? 
all merciful, Ishvara liberates by means of initiation* 
Pashus bound by the bonds of Maya (12). Just as the 
words Ghata, Kalasa, and Kumbha?® designate the same 
thing, so the words Devata, Mantra, and Guru designate 
the same subject® (13). Devata in its ground’ is the 
same as Mantra,® and Mantra in its ground is the same 
as Guru.? Thus the effect of worshipping Devata, 
Mantra, and Guru is the same (14). In My person as 
Shiva I accept worship, and by appearing as Guru I 
sever the bonds of the Jiva’s existence (15).”’ 

In the Guru Tantra it is said: “‘ If through good fortune 
acquired by merit in previous births a Sadhaka does 
Dhyana and Stotra of Guru,’® Japa of Gurumantra,” 
worship of, satisfaction, and devotion to the feet of Guru,” 
then, O Devi, their Mantras become Siddha,!* and they 
are liberated from existence. The merit which a Shishya™ 
acquires during his stay in the Guru’s house is imperish- 
able, and if the Guru’s house happens to be in a sacred 
place of pilgrimage,*® that merit is increased a hundred- 
fold.” 

In the Rudrayamala it is said: “‘ By devotion to Guru 


1 The Guru, who is truly a Deva, being the earthly incarnation of 
Shiva Himself. 

2 The unlightened tamasik state (see Introduction). 

3 Acharyya. 4 Diksha. 

5 Synonymous words meaning “ pitcher’ or “‘ jar.” 6 Padartha. 

’ That is, the Svaripa of Devata (see p. 11, note 1). 

8 That is, the Svarfipa of Mantra. 

® That is, the Svaripa of Guru. 

10 That is, meditation on and hymns of praise of the Guru. Service 
is always given to the Guru by the Shishya. 

11 That is, ‘‘ recitation’ (see Introduction) of the Mantra, of which 
Guru is the Devata or “‘ Aing.”’ 

12 As Deva the Guru is object of worship. 

13 Perfected and fruitful. 14 Disciple. 15 Tirtha. 


62 PRINCIPEES OF TANTS 


a Jiva will attain the state of Indra,* but by devotion to 
Me he will become swine. (That is to say, if a Jiva, 
whilst giving devotion to his Ishtadevata, yet slights his 
Guru, he becomes swine.) In fact, no Shastra speaks of 
anything which is superior to devotion to the Guru.” 

Again: ‘“‘O Maheshvari, fie to his wrath, fie to his 
strength, fie to his race, fie to his works in whom devotion 
to Guru is not engendered !” 

The Yogini Tantra says: ‘‘ The place where Guru 
resides is Kailasa.2. The house in which Guru lives is 
Chintamani house.* The trees in the Guru’s house are 
Kalpa trees. The creepers are Kalpa creepers sums 
water even in ditches is Ganga.® In short, O Devi, every- 
thing in that sacred place is sacred. The female servants 
in the Guru’s house are Bhairavis,’ and the male servants 
are Bhairavas.’ In this manner it is that an earnest 
Sadhaka should think of his Guru. O Maheshyari, 
He who has gone round his Guru but once has circled 
the whole earth with its seven islands.” 

In the Vishvasara Tantra it is said: “‘ The place where 
Guru resides is Kashi.® The water of his feet is Jahnavi® 
Herself. Gurudeva is Vishveshvara!l® incarnate, and the 
great Mantra uttered by his fair mouth is the Saviour! 
Brahman Himself.”’ 

1 Lord of the Celestials. 

2 The sacred mount and abode of Shiva (see Introduction to my 
“‘ Mahanirvana Tantra ’’). 

3 The Chintamani Griha is that which yields all objects desired. 
Of that the chamber or house is built. The Devi there resides. Inthe 
commentary on the Gaudapada Sttra the Chintamani house is said to 
be the place of origin of all those Mantras which bestow all desired 
objects (Chintita). (See ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra,” p. 83, note 10.) 

4 Desire gratifying celestial trees. 

5 Creepers of the same character. 

6 Water of Ganges. 

’ The terms Bhairava and Bhairavi mean Shiva and Shakti in 
these forms of that name. They also mean Tantriks who have been 
initiated in the Virdchara ritual. 


8 The sacred city Benares. 9° The Ganges as daughter of Jahnu. 
10 Lord of the Universe. 11 Taraka. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 63 


‘“The appearance’ of Guru is the root of Dhyana, the 
lotus-foot of Guru is the root of Paija, the word of Guru 
is the root of Mantra, and the grace of Guru is the root of 
Siddhi.”’ 

“Tf a Sadhaka be cursed by Munis, Pannagas, or 
Suras,” or if he be threatened with the calamity of death, 
then, O Parvati, Guru can save him even at the time of 
such terrible peril and none other.” 

In the Guptasadhana Tantra it is said: ‘“‘ Guru is 
Brahma. Guru is Vishnu. Guru is Deva Maheshvara 
Himself. Guru is the place of pilgrimage.* Guru is the 
sacrifice. Guru is charity (that is, the religious merit 
acquired by means of charity). Guru is devotion and 
@eetetinies. Guru is fre. Guru is Siaryya.° The entire 
Universe is Guru.’’” 

“What further religious merit can be acquired by 
charity or devotion,® or by visiting places of pilgrimage.° 
by him who has worshipped the beautiful feet of his 
Guru? For such an one has worshipped the three worlds. 
All places of pilgrimage which exist in the whole Universe 
reside in the sole of the Guru’s Lotus-foot.”’ 

“Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, and Parameshvari Parvati, 
Indra, and other Devas, Yakshas, and other beings born 
of Devas® Pitris,? Ganga, and other sacred rivers, all 
Gandharvas?® reptiles, mountains, and other moving and 
unmoving things in the Universe, are eternally seated in 
the Guru’s body. That very instant the Guru is satisfied, 
they, too, are satisfied.”’ 

“Even Shastra is not greater than Guru, nor is 
Tapasya,"' Mantra, or the fruit of religious rites greater 
than Guru, nor is the Devi Herself greater than Guru, 


1 Marti. 2 Sages, Serpent Divinities and Devas. 
Sorcha. £ Yajna. 5 Tapasya. 
6 The sun. * Gurumaya. 8 Devayoni. 


® The forefathers (see Introduction). 
*0 Musical Devayonis: sons of Brahma. 
11 Devotion, austerities, etc. (see Introduction). 


64 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


nor is even Shiva greater than Guru. No form and 
appearance? is superior to that of Guru, and there is even 
no Japa? which is superior to Guru—that is to say, by 
performance of Sadhana of Guru alone one becomes 
Siddha? in all the other modes of Sadhana. Hence it has 
been said in the Yamala: 

‘““ Shiva alone is Guru, and I am that Shiva. O great 
Devi, Thou, too, art Guru, and Mantra alone is Guru. 
For this reason as regards Mantra there is no difference 
between Gurudeva and Ishtadevata.4 That Gurudeva 
must sometimes be contemplated in the thousand- 
petalled lotus (in the head), sometimes in the lotus of the 
heart (as Ishtadevata),2 and sometimes in His visible 
worldly form.” 

In the Pichchhila Tantra it is said: “‘ Gurus are of two 
kinds according as they teach and initiate. The first is 
the initiating Guru,’ and then follows the teaching Guru 
The initiating Guru is he from whom initiation in Mantra 
is taken, and the teaching Guru is he from whom Samadhi, 
Dhyana, Dharana, Japa, Stava, Kavacha, Purashcharana, 
Mahapurashcharana,” and other various forms of Sadhana 
and Yoga are learnt after initiation. Of these two he is 
the supreme Guru, from whom the great Mantra of 
Ishtadevata has been heard and learnt, and by him alone 
Siddhi can be attained.” 

In the Kulagama Gurus have been described and 
divided into the following six classes: 


1 Marti. 2 See Introduction and anfe, p. ro, note 4. 
3 Successful, accomplished, perfect; for Shakti is thereby fully 
developed. 


4 That is, the Guru as Deva and the patron Deva of the worshipper. 
The Mantra is both. 

5 This is not the Anahata lotus, but another close by it, where the 
chosen Deity is always worshipped. 

6 Shikshaguru and Dikshaguru. 

7 Dikshaguru. 8 Shikshaguru. 

9 That is, Yoga, ecstasy, concentration, ‘‘ recitation’? of Mantra, 
hymn, amulet, and the two rites known as Puraschcharana and the 
greater Purashchcharana (see Introduction). 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 65 


“Instigator? (or he who instigates initiation by ex- 
plaining its utility and that of Sadhana); Inaugurator? 
(he who inaugurates Sadhana and its aims)?; Explainer+ 
(or he who explains Sadhana and its object); Director® 
(or the person who definitely and clearly shows what 
Sadhana is and its object); Teacher® (or he who teaches 
Sadhana and its object’); and Illuminator® (or the person 
who imparts knowledge of, and concerning, Sadhana and 
its object by tearing asunder the ties of the heart). Know 
Gurus to be of these six kinds, of which the first five kinds 
are, as it were, the effects of the last as the cause ”’ (that 
is to say, without the spiritual knowledge which the 
Illuminatorimparts, instigation, inauguration, explanation, 
direction, and teaching, are not only ineffectual, but even 
productive of great harm both in this world and hereafter). 

For this reason Bhagavan, the creator of all things, has 
said in the Pichchhila Tantra: “‘ This Sadhanashastra is 
based solely on Guru. In it there is no beneficent lord 
other than Guru (that is to say, there may be hosts of 
lords who are not beneficent). O Maheshvari! a Sadhaka 
should seek the protection of Guru.” 

In the Rudraydmala itis said: ‘‘ O Parameshvari! the 
fool who commences Japa and Tapas? by reading books 
instead of receiving instructions from Guru acquires 
nothing but sin. Neither mother nor father nor brother 
can save him. O fair Lady! Guru alone can in a single 
moment destroy the mass of his sins, for in the Tantra 
Shastra none but Guru has any competence.!® One should 
therefore take as one’s Guru a very good man.” 


1 Preraka. 2 Stcchaka. 

3 He who after the first has sown the seed of desire, for it brings the 
Sadhaka to the point of commencing Sadhana. 

4 Vachaka. 5 Darshaka. 6 Shikshaka. 

’ That is, he who goes into details and teaches the ritual. 

8 Bodhaka, who gives intellectual grasp of the various aspects of the 
subject and spiritual knowledge. 

9 “ Recitation’’ of Mantra, devotion, austerity, etc. (see Intro- 
duction). 10 Adhikara, 

VOL iT: 5 


66 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


In the Guru Tantra it is said: “‘ If Guru be pleased, 
Shiva Himself is pleased; if Guru 1s displeased, the three- 
eyed Deva! is displeased ; if Guru be pleased, the all-good 
Devi is pleased ; and if Guru be displeased, Tripurasundari* 
becomes displeased. Hence, O Maheshvari! for the 
crossing of the sea of Sangsara, Guru is the only master, 
protector, and destroyer, and he also is the grantor of 
liberation.” 

The Sadhaka should now realize whether the state of a 
Guru as described in the above-mentioned quotations 
from the Shastra is something human or Divine, something 
appertaining to a Jiva or to the Brahman. If we are to 
suppose that the Gurudeva becomes man because that 
Gurushakti? which is Brahman appears in a human body, 
we must also conclude that Devata becomes clay or stone 
because She appears in a clay or stone image. In fact, 
that which constitutes the state of a Guru* is undivided 
perfect Brahman.® Though appearing in clay or in stone, 
the Brahman is all-pervading, and cannot be limited to 
any point. It is impossible that that which does not 
become limited in inert clay or stone will become so in 
conscious man. As a matter of fact, a Sadhaka can by 
the force of his own Sadhana awaken the Shakti of con- 
sciousness in unconscious images made of clay or stone. 
On the other hand, to him who is even not entitled to be 
called a Sadhaka, but is merely a seeker of competency® 
for Sadhana, that clay image is never conscious. For 
this reason, then, it is necessary, in order to gain that 
Shakti,’ to distinguish between conscious and uncon- 
scious. Amongst all conscious things such an one is 
required as can by the overpowering force of its conscious- 

1 Shiva. 2 One of the Dashamahavidya. 

3 The power resident in the Guru as such—not the ordinary human 
Shakti. 4 The Gurutva or Guruhood. 

5 Literally, Brahmatva or Brahmanhood. 6 Adhikara. 

7 The Shakti of consciousness spoken of above. That is, those who 


have not realized consciousness in all things must, in order to arrive at 
this state, make the distinction and take a Guru. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 67 


ness make even other unconscious things conscious. 
That is why, on the subject of taking Gurus,? the Shastra 
prescribes that discrimination be made between persons 
competent and incompetent to become Gurus, otherwise, 
had the Shakti which constitutes man been identical with 
the Shakti which constitutes the state of a Guru, any man 
would be acceptable as Guru, and there would have been 
no necessity for such a critical examination of inner and 
outer Shaktis.? 

In the Kulagama it is said: ‘‘ Those who are instructed 
by sages possessed of spiritual knowledge become un- 
doubtedly possessed of spiritual knowledge themselves. 
Those who are instructed by Pashus® should, O Devi! 
be themselves known as Pashus. For though a learned 
man can save an ignorant man, the latter can never save 
another ignorant man. A boat can carry a stone across 
a river, but a stone can never carry another stone across 
it. One person can never guide another person along a 
path which he has never trod himself; but he who has 
travelled along any one path, reached its end, and thus 
known the goal of all paths, can, standing at the centre 
to which all paths trend, call to the travellers on each of 
the paths, and thus help them to reach the place where 
he himself stands.”’ 

In the Mahanirvana Tantra it is said: ‘“‘ For Shakti- 
mantra a Shakta Guru is best, for Shivamantra a Shaiva 
Guru is best, for Vishnumantra a Vaishnava Guru is best, 
for Siryyamantra a Saura Guru is best, for Ganapati- 
mantra a Gadnapatya Guru is best, and a Kaula Guru is 
best for all these Mantras. A wise man should, therefore, 


1 Gurukarana. 

2 The inner Shakti i, that which manifests as true spirituality, 
The outer Shakti is such knowledge and faculties as learning in Shastra, 
details of SAdhana, ritual, etc. 

3 Sadhakas of the Tamasik class in the three Bhavas (see Intro- 
duction). 

4 To each member of the communities worshipping Devi (Shakta), 
Shiva (Shaiva), Vishnu (Vaishnava), the Sun (Saura), or Ganesha 


68 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


heartfully desire to take initiation from a Kaula.” For 
“ whoever has been initiated ina Mantra by a Pashu Guru* 
is undoubtedly a Pashu. Whoever has taken Mantra 
from a Viraguru* becomes a Vira. Whoever has taken 
Mantra from a Kaula Guru (one following Kulachara)° 
knows Brahman.” 

In the Brihannila Tantra it is said: ‘‘ A Shaiva may 
teach other Mantras (than the Shivamantra). A Vaish- 
nava may teach those (Vaishnavas) belonging to his own 
community. A Saura may teach Sauras. A Ganapatya 
may give Initiation in worship of Ganapati. A Kaula, 
however, is competent to give initiation in Shaiva, Shakta, 
Vaishnava, and all other worships. One should, there- 
fore, by all means seek the protection of a Kaula Guru.” 

In the Saradatilaka it is said: ‘‘ A Guru, according to 
the Tantra Shastra, is one who is possessed of the following 
qualities: A body which is pure both on the mother’s and 
father’s side; purity of thought; mastery over the senses; 
knowledge of the substance of all Tantras; knowledge of 
the purpose of all Shastras; a doer of good to others; 
devoted to Japa, Ptija,* and so forth; truthfulness of 
speech acquired by Tapas:° calmness; proficiency in the 
Vedas and the Vedangas;® eagerness to know the truths 


(Ganapatya), the Mantra of the Devata worshipped is given. Thus. 
the Shakta receives the Shaktimantra at initiation. The passage says 
that the Mantra should ordinarily be given by a Guru of the same com- 
munity as the worshipper, though a Tantrik Guru of the Kaulachara. 
may give, and is the best to give them all. 

1 One practising the Pashvachara—that is, the way of the Pashu. 
(see p. 67, n. 2). 

2 One practising the Virachara, the Achara of the Virabhava; as to 
which, see Introduction. 
3 The last and highest of the Tantrik Acharas (see Introduction). 

4 “ Recitation ’’ of Mantra and ceremonial worship. 

5 Devotion, austerity, self-restraint, self-control, etc. 

6 The Vedangas or “limbs” of the Vedas are Shiksha (science of 
proper articulation), Kalpa (ritual), Vydkarana (linguistic analysis or 
grammar), Nirukta (explanation of difficult Vedic words), Jyotisha 
(astronomy), Chhandas (metre). 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 69 


of the Yoga path, and who feels the presence of Devata 
in the heart, and so forth.”’ 

In the Vishvasara Tantra it is said: ‘‘ Such a Guru is 
prescribed by the Shastra as is eager to impart knowledge 
of all Shastras, efficient, learned in the meaning of all 
Shastras, sweet of speech, of good appearance, having all 
his limbs, Kulina (one practising the Kulachara). Of 
ucepars appearance, self-controlled, truthful, Brah- 
-mana,* of a peaceful mind, devoted to the welfare of his 
parents, and to all other duties belonging to an Ashrama,? 
and living in the same country as the disciple.’”” 

From the special mention of the adjective ‘‘ Brah- 
mana ’’ it must be understood that none but a Brahmana 
can be a Guru for the initiation of all castes. 

In the Bhuvaneshvari Tantra it is said: “‘O great 
twice-born! A Brahmana possessed of the knowledge 
of all times® can favour all castes by giving them initiation 
in Mantras. In his absence a peaceful and pious Kshat- 
riya can so favour Vaishyas and Shiidras. In the absence 
of even a Kshatriya Guru, a Vaishya possessed of the 
above good qualities may favour Shidras.” A Shitdra 
‘cannot be a Guru even for the initiation of his own caste- 
men, much less can he initiate men belonging to other 
castes. Thus the Shaktananda Tarafgini says: “Ii a 
Shiidra hears Vidya*—+.e., receives a great Mantra from 
the mouth of another Shidra—he is doomed to hell® in 
the next world, and suffers from constant misery in this.”’ 

In the Vasudeva-rahasya it is said: “‘ If a Shiidra hears 
Vidya or Mantra from the mouth of another Shidra, he 
starts for the Raurava Hell with ten million generations 
of his family. Both the giver and receiver of Mantra 
in such a case meet with the same consequence. For 


1 This is explained post, and p. 70. 

2 For the reason of this, see Pees: 3 Past, present, and future. 

4 Vidya is a Mantra, but may here mean such matters as are the 
subject of spiritual knowledge, though the text would indicate the 
former meaning. 5 Naraka. 


70 PRINCIPLES OF TANTR 


every word given and received both become guilty of the 
sin of Brahminicide.* 

In the Jnananandatarangini it is said: “A Shtdra 
should never give Mantra to another Shiidra. If he does 
so, both the giver and the receiver of Mantra will dwell in 
Hell with thirty million generations of their own families.” 

In the Kamadhenu Tantra it is said: ‘‘ The country in 
which a sinful Shadra selling? Mantra lives becomes 
fallen, and its ruler also is contaminated with sin. O Lady 
of restless glances! how can the tongue of that great 
sinner pronounce Mantra? O fair Lady! his tongue is 
full of excrement, urine, and blood. His face is like 
excrement and urine, his food is made of excrement, his 
water is urine itself, and he is a Chandala® by caste. The 
sight of his face makes Ganga‘ to fly from Her own waters, 
and millions of sites of pilgrimages® to fly from their 
respective seats. Ganga, the purifier of the three worlds, 
undoubtedly purifies even such great sinners as have 
committed such sins as Brahminicide and so forth, but 
at the sight of a Mantra-selling Shtiidra She at once leaves 
the place and repairs to Brahmaloka.’’® 

The adjective, ‘‘ belonging to an Ashrama,’’’ specified 
above in the enumeration of the necessary characteristics 
of a Guru should be understood to mean “ belonging to 
the domestic Ashrama.’’ In the definition of a Guru given 
by the Kularnava Tantra it is stated: ‘‘ A Guru should 
know the meaning of all Shastras and be a householder.® 
The purpose of the requirement that the Guru should be 
“living in the same country ”’ (as the disciple) is that if the 
Guru lives in another country it is difficult for the disciple 
to take instructions from and to serve him constantly. 


1 The killing of a Brahmana is one of the great sins. 

2 That is, making a trade of giving Mantra; which is not, however, 
unfortunately confined to Shidras. 

3 One of the lowest castes. * The River Ganges as Deity. 

5 Tirthas. 6 The highest of the regions. 

7 See the quotation from the Vishvasara Tantra at p. 69. 


CHAPTER: XIV 
DISCUSSION UPON, AND SELECTION OF, THE GURU! 


N the Yogini Tantra it is said: 

“Mantra should not be taken from the father, 
maternal grandfather, brother, one who is younger in age, 
or from one who is of the party of one’s enemy.”’ 

In the Ganeshavimarshini it is said: ‘‘ Initiation by a 
Yati,? the father, one living in a forest, or when taken 
from a Sannyasi does no good to a Sadhaka.”’ 

In the Rudrayadmala it is said: ‘‘ A husband should not 
initiate his wife, nor a father his son or daughter, and a 
brother should not initiate his brother. But if a husband 
is Siddha Mantra,® he can initiate his wife as his Shakti, 
-and in that case the Guru will not acquire fatherhood by 
reason of his having given Mantra, nor will the disciple 
become his daughter by reason of having received it from 
him. (The provision that a husband may initiate his 
wife as his Shakti must be understood to apply to Vira- 
chara and Kulachara® only. Such an initiation is not 
ordained for Pashvachdra® and the like, for in such 
Acharas there is no worship with Shakti.) The letters’ 


1 Guruvichara—that is, selection with judgment after discussion. 

2 Literally, ‘One who has completely subdued the senses’: an 
ascetic so called. 

3 This term has here a technical meaning, which is explained at 
Pp. 72, post. 

4 Ordinarily, when the Guru gives Mantra, the Shishya becomes his 
son; but this is not so in the case stated. 

5 The two divisions of Tantrik Sadhakas of those names (see 
Introduction). 6 The Achara of the Pashus. weVatna 


71 


72 PRINCIPLES OF TANT 


in a Mantra are the Devata, and the Devata is Guru him- 
self; so that Sadhakas and Sadhikas* who desire their own 
good should make no distinction between Mantra, Devata, 
and Guru.”’ 

In the Siddhi Yamala it is said: ‘‘O beloved one! if 
by good fortune a Sadhaka attains Siddhi in a Mantra, 
he may dispense with the ordinary conditions for be- 
coming a Guru, and initiate his own Shakti (wife).” 

In the Yamala it is said: ‘‘A husband should not 
initiate his wife nor a father his daughter; butif a husband 
is Siddhamantra,® he may initiate his wife as his Shakti, 
and in that case the initiated does not become a daughter 
to him. If a father is Siddhamantra,? he may initiate 
his son, and a brother may be initiated by a brother 
who is Siddhamantra, and thus become a Siddhamantra 
himself. For, in the case of a Siddhamantra all dis- 
qualifications for giving and receiving initiation become 
qualifications.® 

The word Siddhamantra does not here mean “‘ one who 
has attained Siddhiin a Mantra.’’ Itisa technical word, 
explained in the Kramachandrika as follows: “ Kali, 
Tara, Shodashi, Bhuvaneshvari, Bhairavi, Chhinna- 
masta, Dhtimavati, Bagala, Matafigi, : Kamalatmika. 
These ten Mahavidyas are called Siddhavidyas. Those 
who are initiated in their Mantra are called Siddha- 
mantras.” * 

In the Kali Kalpa it is said: “‘O Mahadevi! if a 
Mantra is worshipped by three generations (great-grand- 
father, grandfather, and father) in succession, then that 
great Mantra becomes Siddhamantra.”’ 

In the Matsyasukta, it is said: “‘ A mantra given by a a 
father is not faulty in Shaiva and Shakta rites, although 
it may not have force in other rites.”’ 

Moreover, in certain special matters a father has the 
right to initiate his eldest son if he is worthy, as, for 


1 Women Sddhakas. 2 See below. 
3 That is, all disqualifications cease. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 73 


instance, the Matsyastikta says: ““ One may give (Mantra) 
to his eldest son, the crest gem of his family.” 

The Shrikrama says: ““Mantra may with prudence and 
care be given to an intelligent eldest son.” 

And so forth. 


WOMEN GURUS. 


The Rudrayamala says that a woman may be a Guru 
who possesses the following qualities: She must be Kulina 
(practising Kulachara‘), Kulajaé (born of a Kaula* or 
respectable family), of auspicious appearance,® fair face,* 
and lotus-eyed; decked with gold and gems; endowed 
with intellect, calmness of mind, and all other good 
qualities; a followe: of her Achara,® good, pious, and 
chaste,® with control over the senses; of good conduct and 
devoted to the service of her elders; proficient in Mantras 
and in their meanings; ever engagelin Japa,’ and devoted 
to the worship of her Ishtadevata.8 By the worship of 
such a woman both Sadhana Shakti? and spiritual know- 
ledge is attained. A widow should not initiate? Initia- 
tion by a woman is to be recommended; in particular, 
‘initiation by a mother of her son, which giveg results 
eight-fold greater than is ordinary. 

A widow, however, may initiate if she has sons. A 
Siddhamantra™ may, without any restriction, be taken 
from widows, and such initiation will have ordinary 
effect. If, however, it is taken from the mother, it will 


1 That is, the Achara of the Kaula division of Tantrik SAdhakas. 

2 A family which is and has been in past generations followers of 
Kulachara. 

3 She must be endowed with all good signs. 

* Literally, ‘‘ whose face is like the moon.”’ 

5 Sadachara. Achara is the way or practice which the particular 
person should follow. 

8 Sadhvi, female of Sadhu. 

7 “ Recitation ”’ of Mantra (see Introduction). 

8 The particular Devata which she worships. 

9 Power inherent in and derived from Sadhana. 

10 Ordinarily; for, see post. 11 See ante, p. 72. 


74 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


produce eight-fold effect. If a Satit who has both hus- 
band and sons gives Siddhamantra without request and 
of her own initiative, then also such initiation will produce 
an effect eight times that of an ordinary initiation. Ifa 
mother gives her son the Mantra she herself worships, and 
the son becomes devoted to it, he undoubtedly acquires 
the eight forms of Siddhi. O Devi! initiation in the 
mother’s own Mantra is indeed precious; the Sadhaka 
who receives it from his mother in the first place obtains 
enjoyment? in whatsoever form® he desires, and then 
undoubtedly becomes possessed of the knowledge of the 
meaning of thousands of crores* of Mantras, and finally 
attains liberation. If a mother gives her own Mantra in 
a dream, and notwithstanding the Sadhaka is again 
initiated, he is doomed to be born as a Danava.® If 
through special good fortune a mother initiates her son 
at his request, there is in that case no necessity for 
Mantravichara,® and the Sadhaka acquires Siddhi. In the 
case also of a Mantra received in a dream there is no need 
for Vichara,® either in respect of the Guru or the Mantra. 

In the Rudrayamala it is said: “‘ In the case of a Mantra 
received in a dream there is no necessity for Vichara’ of 
Guru and Shishya. Jf a Mantra is received in a dream 
from a woman, it will be purified by a Sangskara.’’® “ No 
Mantra becomes effective without the taking of Gurwt® 
therefore the life of the Guru should be invoked into a 
Mantra received in a dream and into a Ghata, and the 
Mantra should then be received by writing it on a 

1 A wife perfectly devoted to her husband. 2 Bhoga. 

3 Literally, ‘“‘ body ” (Sharira)—he may by Sakéma Sadhana obtain 
such forms of enjoyment in this body, or in another body in another 
birth. By Yoga he can enter into other bodies in this birth. Thus, 
if he desires to become a Raja, he may in this or the next birth become 
one. 4 A crore is ten millions. 

5 Demoniac enemies of the Devas. 8 See antenpagas 

7 Discussion with a view to select (see ante, p. 71). 

8 Mantrasangskara—that is, purification of the Mantra, which is done 


afterwards. 
® That is, acceptance of Guru by Shishya, and of Shishya by Guru. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 78 


banian’ leaf with Kunkuma.’’* This is laid down in the 
Yogini Tantra and other books. 

The Dhyana,* Mantra, Stava,* Kavacha® and so forth, 
for women Gurus are different from those for male Gurus. 
Sadhakas will learn them from the Matrikabheda, Gupta- 
sadhana, and other Tantras. 

We have above quoted but briefly a few short excerpts 
from all that has been said in Shastra concerning Guru- 
vichara® and the outer characteristics’ of Guru. 

We have not even touched the inner characteristics of 
Guru, which have been specified in the Kularnava, 
Kamakhya, Rudrayamala, and other Tantras. For an 
exposition of these deep and solemn spiritual sayings 
would require a separate volume; secondly, these state- 
ments are not for public ears; and thirdly, we doubt 
whether the Gurus of the present day will be able to put 
their teeth into them.2 Far less do we expect that 
Shishyas? will be able to judge and select Gurus with 
intelligence. We therefore refrain from undertaking 
what is both a useless and, at the same time, improper 

task. 


GURU FAMILY AND FAMILY GuURU.?!® 


In the Yogini Tantra it is said: ‘‘ A special honour 
appertains to the Guru family for ten generations’ by 
reason of giving Mantra in Pashvachara; for twenty-five 


Vata. 2 A red powder made of a root called Sathi, coloured red. 

8 The formula containing a description of the Devata, who is the 
subject of meditation. * Hymn of praise. 

5 Amulet. 6 Selection with judgment of a Guru. 

7 That is, his knowledge of Sadhana, Shastra, etc., as compared with 
spiritual intuition. 

8 That is, understand them even a little. 9 Disciples. 

10 Gurukula and Kulaguru—that is, the subject of the Guru’s own 
family and of the Guru himself, who is family Guru to others. 

11 That is, if in searchng for a Guru one finds a member of a Guru 
family who comes within ten generations of an ancestor of his who had 
initiated an ancestor of the present intending Shishya, then the Shishya 
should accept him as his Guru, and so mutatis mutandis with the rest. 


76 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


generations by reason of giving Mantra in Virachara; for 
fifty generations where the Mantra is one of any of the 
Mahavidyas ;? and for one hundred generations by reason 
of teaching Brahmayoga.”’ 

In the Pichchhila Tantra it is said: ‘‘ If a Shishya for- 
sakes the family of his ancestral Guru under a sinful 
delusion, he dwells in terrible Hell? as long as the Sun, 
Moon, and Stars, endure.”’ 

In the Brihaddharma Purdna it is said: ‘‘ For this 
reason, if a descendant of the Guru family, who is even 
younger in age,® is a learned man, he should be accepted 
without discussion as Guru for initiation because he 
belongs to the Guru family.” Many Tantras have in 
this way ordained that the Shishya cannot forsake the 
Guru family. But in course of time this ordinance has 
become the cause of the ruin of the Aryya Society. 

As a matter of fact, the cause of this ruin is not the 
ordinance itself, but it is the arrogance of the Guru family 
and the ignorance of Shishyas which has brought it about. 

In the Kularnava Tantra it is said: ‘‘ Death overtakes 
him who forsakes Mantra, poverty overtakes him who 
forsakes Guru, and the Sadhaka who forsakes both Mantra 
and Guru goes to the Raurava Hell.”” Nowadays there 
are many who would make this verse an authority against 
forsaking the Guru family. But according to Tantrik 
Acharyyas* a Sadhaka will be considered sinful in the 
sense of this verse only if he forsakes his own Guru and 
Mantra; for one cannot abandon a thing which one has 
not accepted. The saying ‘“‘ One should not forsake the 
family of his ancestral Guru ”’ means that while there is a 
person fit to-be Guru in the Guru family, one should not 
forsake him and adopt another Guru. Otherwise, the 
Shishya is not prohibited from leaving the Guru family. 
What, then, do the words ‘‘ should not forsake ”’ mean ? 

1 The ten great mirtis of the Devi. 2 Naraka. 


3 That is, than some third person not belonging to the Guru family. 
4 Learned men. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA SPOT, 


Even the verses quoted above from the Yogini Tantrat 
are interpreted by some people to mean that successive 
generations should be honoured as descendants of Gurus 
of the Shishyas ancestor, even if they are not actually 
taken as Gurus.” 

We do not object to this interpretation. It cannot, 
however, have been intended by the Shastra that members 
of the ancestral family of Guru must be taken as Gurus, 
even if they are not fit to be such. This is clearly put in 
the Brihaddharma Purana, which says that, “‘ If a descend- 
ant of the Guru family who is even younger in age is a 
learned man, he should be taken as Guru’’?; that is to say, 
in such a case only the claim of the Guru family is indis- 
putable. As to placing oneself in the hands of an in- 
competent person simply out of regard for the Guru 
family, we leave it to the intelligent reader to decide 
whether upon a consideration of the principles which 
govern the matter of the Guru such a proposition is 
reconcilable with Dharma and reason. A learned man, 
though younger in age, is older in knowledge. In the 
domain of knowledge the Sadhanashastra is concerned 
- with seniority of knowledge only. Hence a learned man, 
even if he is younger in age, is considered older, and this 
seniority entitles him to be a Guru. Shishyas should also 
remember here that the learning which is here spoken of* 
is not the sort of learning for which degrees or titles® are 
given. On the contrary, the learning I speak of is that 
which utterly destroys all the bondage of Jiva.© Nowa- 
days, most of those who represent the ideal type of a 
learned man in worldly society are considered devoid of 
all sense, and perfectly ignorant in the society of Sadhakas. 

+ See p. 75. 

2 That is, though such may not be taken as Gurus, respect must be 
shown and support given to them. 3 See ante, p. 76. 

4 That is, the learning of the Guru, on which account he is selected 
to give initiation. 5 Upadhi. 

6 Literally, destroys all Upadhis of Jivahood, meaning the philosophi- 
cal Upadhis ofnameandform. There is herea play on the word Upadhi. 


78 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Hence, when one speaks of a learned man in the Guru 
family we must be understood to be speaking of one who 
possesses the learning which makes a man a Guru, and not 
the learning which consists in knowledge of the ordinances 
of the Smriti, or the subtleties of the Nyaya philosophy. 
Notwithstanding that a man is considered to be learned 
according to the notions of society, the Shishya should 
ascertain whether he is learned in the science of Sadhana. 
To the misfortune of Indian Society accomplished 
Sadhakas and Mahapurushas' have disappeared from 
Guru families, and with them also the divine energy? 
acquired by their Sadhana. The ruins of those Guru 
families now generally consist of a few Gurus, who exist 
like wicks which smell foul after the lamps have been 
extinguished. Society is on the verge of being destroyed 
by their oppressions and persecutions. They think that 
the profession of a Guru is a second Kulinism.* 
Considering how their indulgence in acts repugnant to 
Dharma is daily increasing, and how much of the poisonous 
fruits of their Karma have become ripe, it seems that the 
day is not far off when these Gurus will be paid off. 
Although such paying off is inevitable, according to 
natural laws, yet we shall raise here one or two points 
dealt with in the Shastra. For these Gurus have decided 
that they have got a charter over the race of Shishyas for 
all time, till the day of final dissolution, so that no one has 
now the power to deprive them of their right. They 
think that even if they are self-willed and oppressive, 
Shishyas have no right to discuss the matter, for “‘ there 
should be no discussion of the Guru’s family.”® We ask, 


1 Great men. 2 Tejas. 

3 As the Kulins think that by virtue of their birth they have a right 
to a superior position in society, so do Guru families. 

£ That is, will receive the Dakshina or present made to the Brahmana 
and go. 

5 This is an adaptation from the latter portion of the quotation from 
Brihaddharma Purana at p. 76, ante, which says: ‘‘ Without dis- 
cussion on account of his belonging to the Guru family.” 


PRINGUPERSTORSTANTRA 79 


Who has given them this charter? He within whose 
dominion these matters are has not given such a charter. 
On the contrary, he long ago foresaw that a forged charter 
might be produced, and made provisions accordingly. It 
is because these provisions are not known to the public 
that all this mischief has been done. If either Guru or 
Shishya has wrong notions on this matter, he should know 
the truth as stated in the Shastra, and be careful of his 
welfare. 

In the Rudrayamala it is said: ‘‘ One should abandon 
a Guru who is destitute of Brahma-bliss, ill-favoured, of 
evil repute, debased, of crooked mind,’ and heinously 
sinful. Noman, unless heis the Guru, should be honoured 
who suffers from the decomposing, or the Shitra, form of 
the eight kinds of leprosy; one who habitually practises 
black magic ?; sells gold *; is a thief or a fool; who is very 
short statured; or has a small tooth between his two 
front teeth; who is a person devoid of Kulachara, or rest- 
less,* or with a stain on his character; who is diseased in 
the eyes, or adulterous, foul-tongued,°® sensuous, or with 
any additional limb (as a person possessing an additional 
finger) ; or a hypocrite; or who has fallen from Dharma; or 
is garrulous; or is greedy, miserly, or a liar; who isa restless 
character; or without reverent feeling®; or who does not 
follow the five Acharas 7; or possessed of many faults.” 
That is to say, if after a person has been initiated his Guru 
contracts any of the above-mentioned faults, he should 
continue to honour and not abandon him; but one who has 
previous to such initiation contracted any of these faults 
should never be made a Guru. 


1 Krira. 

2 Literally, ‘‘ A person who habitually earns money for injuring 
(Himgsa) people by means of special rites intended for the purpose.” 

3 Sale of gold is forbidden in the Shastra for the higher castes. 

4 That is, without peace on account of outside troubles. 

5 In talk. 

6 Bhavahima. The brackets in the preceding case are the author’s. 

7 Apparently here the five-fold worship. 


80 PRINCIPLES OF TANTS 


In the Kalpachintamani it is said: “‘ He is unfit to be 
Guru who is consumptive, or has skin disease, or dead 
nails, or a small tooth between the two front teeth?; or is 
deaf, or has a cataract of the eye; or is bald, or lame, or 
deformed, or has an additional limb; is pink-eyed, or of 
foul breath? or has enlarged testicles; or is a dwarf, 
hunchback; or leper, or who is impotent, or possessed of 
any other physical defect.’’ After mentioning the physical 
defects, the book goes on to point out defects in habit and 
character. ‘‘ Wise men should be careful not to take 
initiation from or engage in any work (such as the estab- 
lishment of the image of a Devata) a Guru who does not 
perform his duties as enjoined in the Vedas and Smritis; 
who is rough of speech *; or is of evil repute; or does a 
priest’s work 4; or a medical man; or one who is sensuous, 
crooked of mind, arrogant, vain, addicted to vices, miserly, 
or wicked ; who keeps bad company; or is an unbeliever °; 
who is timid, or guilty of a great sin; who does not worship 
Devata, Agni,® Guru, the Mahavidyas,’ and so forth; who 
is ignorant of the Mantras for the Sandhya-rite,® Tarpana, 
Paja,® and so forth; who is idle, given over to enjoyments, 
or devoid of Dharma; who is an astrologer, or has any 
other defect mentioned in the Agama.?° 

In the Kamakhya Tantra it is said: ‘“‘ Through know- 
ledge’! a Jiva attains liberation, and knowledge is supreme 
over the supreme. Hence one should forsake a Guru 
who is unable to give knowledge just as a hungry man 
seeking food forsakes a householder who has no food to 
give him (1). That Guru is Shiva Himself, in whom shine 
the three forms of knowledge (namely, knowledge of 


1 Shyavadanta ordinarily means “ brown-toothed,” but is translated 
as above, according to the previous translation of the author. 

2 Puitinasika. Literally, “‘foul nosed,’’ which apparently refers to 
foul breath. 3 The Guru should speak softly and tenderly. 

4 Purohita, who is engaged in ritual service. 5 Nastika. 

eo rite: ’ The ten great appearances of the Devi. 

8 See Introduction. 9 Offering and worship. 

10 Tantra Shastra. j 11 Jnana. 


PING I PUES Or SPAN DRA 81 


Vira, Divya, and Kaula’; of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas?; 
of Guru, Mantra, and Devata; of the meaning of Mantra°; 
the awakening of Mantra*; and the Yonimudra).5 One 
should seek the protection of such a wise Guru, forsaking 
an ignorant one (2). From knowledge constantly pro- 
ceeds Dharma; from knowledge proceeds wealth®; from 
knowledge proceeds desire’ and its fulfilment; and from 
knowledge proceeds Nirvana liberation (3). Knowledge 
is the highest object; nothing than it is of greater worth; 
it is for knowledge that Jivas worship Devata; and 
knowledge is the final fruit of Tapasya® (4). Just as a 
honey-seeking bee flies from flower to flower, so a know- 
ledge-seeking Shishya should seek the protection of Guru 
after Guru (5). Many are the Gurus who extract money 
out of Shishya, but, O Devi! rare are those truly good 
Gurus who allay the burning of the Shishyas’ hearts (6). 
Obeisance to that Guru who has, with the collyrium- 
stick? of knowledge, opened the Jiva’s eye blinded by 
the darkness ofignorance. Mindful of this (that is to say, 
knowing how great is the responsibility of Guru), a great 
Sadhaka will recognize the wise to be Gurus only, and 
then, O consort of Shiva, Siddhi will surely be attained 
by means of the Shishya’s devotion only? (7). A good 
Guru is he who is calm and self-controlled, is a Kulina, of 

.1 Vira and Divya are two of the Tantrik temperaments (Bhava), 
and Kaula is the highest of its Acharas. 

2 The three gunas of Prakriti. 

3 Mantrartha. 4 Mantrachaitanya. 

5 A celebrated Mudra in Hathayoga. When Vayu is stopped by 
this Mudra, steadiness of mind is produced, and the detachment of 
Manas from its objects leads to the state known as Unmani (see Com- 
mentary of Kalicharana on v. 36 of the Shatchakraniripana). 

8 Artha. 7 Kama. 

8 Devotion and austerities. 

9 Anjana, which is used to clear the vision. 

10 Quaere whether there is a mistake in the author’s translation of 
the original Sanskrit, which runs, ‘‘ Shishyabhaktya kevalam nish- 
chitam,’’ which may mean that Kevala or Kaivalya-liberation is sure 
to be attained by means of the Shishya’s devotion. The author 


appears to have taken the word Kevala to mean “ only.” 
VOL. Il. 6 


82 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


pure mind worshipping with the five Tattvas* (8). He 
is called a good Guru who has the reputation of being 
Siddha,? maintains his Shishyas in any way which their 
necessities require, and works wonders by means of 
Divine Shakti (9). A good Guru is he who speaks of 
things previously unheard of and suited to the mind of 
the hearer truly and in a charming way, and who can 
equally explain both Tantra and Mantra (10). A good 
Guru is he who is always anxious to benefit the Shishya 
by giving him knowledge, and who is capable of punishing 
as well as rewarding (11). A good Guru is he whose aim 
is always the highest good* who ever converses upon 
spiritual truths, and who has a single-minded devotion to 
the lotus-feet of his own Guru (12). O Devi! if a Shishya 
is able to obtain a Guru who is the possessor of such 
qualities, he should at once seek his protection, relinquish- 
ing* an incapable Guru, and in such a case time® need not 
be taken into account (13). Reprehensible is the Guru 
who only takes property from the Shishya; who is an 
oppressor of many (extracts money, etc., from many 
Shishyas (disciples) on the pretext of giving initiation)® 
and is openly ridiculed by the people (14). If, notwith- 
standing that the Shishya is reverent in body, mind, and 
speech towards his Guru, the latter does not approve &f a 
thing for a Shishya out of desire for that thing himself, 
and wastes the Shishya’s money in improper ways, then 
that most depraved man who wishes harm to his Shishya 
out of greed should be forsaken (15).”’ 

Sadhakas will now ask themselves if the Guru family 
is to be considered above all discussion ? All the authori- 
ties quoted above say that such and such a Guru should 


1 Pafichatattva (see Introduction). 

2 Accomplished.. 3 Paramdartha. 

4 Tyaktva. This does not mean that he should forsake a man 
actually taken as Guru, but that in such a case he should relinquish 
selection from the Guru family. : 

5 Kalavichara—that is, whether the time is suitable for Gurukarana. 

6 Author’s bracket. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 83 


be relinquished. By the use here of the word Guru is 
meant not a person who has been accepted as Guru, but 
reference is made to that Guruhood’ which is nothing 
but the family Guruhood occasioned by birth in the 
family of ancestral Guru. Ifsuch a Guru is fully qualified 
according to Shastra, the Shishya should take him as 
Guru instead of seeking the protection of another Guru; 
otherwise he should be forsaken. This is the meaning of 
Shastra. A Judge and Administrator? with the neces- 
sary qualifications, though he is not the King himself, 
is yet his representative, and by virtue of the King’s 
power his commands are inviolable, and he himself is 
worshipped by all. This is the civil law® of the State. 
By the authority of this law he is the ruler of the kingdom, 
and the kingdom desires to be ruled by him. It is 
because he performs the duties imposed on him by the 
King that his commands are accepted without question, 
and people pay with confidence revenue into his hands. 
But if through arrogance or selfishness he, trampling on 
all political principles, misappropriates that revenue and 
oppresses the innocent, then that kingdom is in danger 
of destruction through his oppressions. The community 
of Shishyas is in like peril through the oppressions com- 
mitted by Gurus. In the administration of the State 
the Judge is concerned with political matters only, and 
if he interferes in any way with the principles of Dharma,* 
the whole kingdom is in an uproar, and gives unending 
fuel’ to the flaming fire of rebellion. Similarly, Guru is 
only the Judge of principles of Dharma; but if he inter- 
feres in any way and in any matter concerning purely 
temporal matters, there is every likelihood that the fire 
of rebellion may break out among Shishyas. And this is 
what has actually happened. There is, however, this 


1 Gurutva. 4 Vicharaka. 3 Rajaniti. 

4 See Introduction. Here religious and ethical rules of universal 
validity requiring universal allegiance as opposed to particular State 
laws. 5 Ahuti. Literally, offering. 


84 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


good news to tell—namely, that the One Supreme Queen* 
of the three worlds has entrusted the people with the 
selection of the Judge. If, then, the people select a 
robber as their Judge, the Queen cannot be blamed 
therefor. While in such case the oppressiveness of the 
robber will, on the one hand, deprive the people of the 
spiritual wealth which is their greatest possession both 
here and hereafter, the revenue, on the other hand, 
which they pay will not reach the Sovereign’s treasury. 
The person to whom, as our Supreme Guru, we will 
entrust our all, that it may be carried to Parameshvari, 
will misappropriate it, but because he does so we shall 
not ourselves be exempt from the punishment of being 
sent to hell,?, which we incur under the regulations of 
Her kingdom.? Just as a Judge has two aspects, in one 
of which he is an ordinary subject of the King like you 
and I, and another in which, as representative of the King, 
he is Judge over us both, so the Guru has two aspects, in 
one of which he is an ordinary Jiva with ten senses, 
Maya and Moha,4 like you and I, and in the other he is 
Parabrahman Shiva, above the senses, and the Maya 
which affects them. Revenue paid into a Judge’s hand 
is intended for the sovereign power. In the same way 
worship of the supreme Devata in the person of the 
Gurudeva is intended for Brahmashakti. But as revenue 
paid into the hands of a Judge who does not serve his 
Sovereign goes not to the latter but to the people,® so 
worship of the Rajrajeshvari (Queen of Queens) entrusted 
to a Guru inimical to Brahmashakti is likely to go, not 


1 Rajrajeshvari. 2 Naraka. 

3 Literally, ‘‘ Which will be brought upon us by the invincible 
power of politics ’’—that is, on the ground of not having paid revenue. 
If a person owes revenue and knowingly charges a robber with its 
transmission, he cannot set up the robbery as an excuse for non- 
payment. 

4 He, like the disciple, perceives with the senses which are subject 
to illusion. 

5 Praja-shakti. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 85 


to the*Brahmashakti, but to the robber Shakti.1 Hence 
the King of Kings,” who has promulgated rules of State 
for the universe, has in His ordinance on the selection of 
Guru Himself proclaimed to all people as follows: 

In the Brihaddharma Purana it is said: ‘‘ Sadashiva 
Himself is angered against him who is disliked by all. 
As people pay the King’s dues to the Headman, Judges, 
or Superintendents of administration, so Shishyas pay 
the Ishtadevata’s worship to Gurudeva. But just as if 
headmen and others who are dishonest or inimical to 
the Sovereign must be deposed, and the King’s dues paid 
to particularly trustworthy and good men, so Shishyas 
should forsake an inimical or arrogant Guru (that is to 
say, a mere man devoid of Divine Shakti, acquired by 
Sadhana, and subject to the six enemies*), and take as 
Guru a Mahdpurushat possessing the Shakti spoken of 
in the Shastra, and then offer his Sadhana at his feet.” 

Now I ask you (who belong to the Guru-Family), By 
whose grace are you Family-Guru? You are Guru 
because you carry out the orders of the Guru of all 
moving and unmoving things. To-day that King of 
Kings,° through whose Political Power you wield the rod 
over the whole kingdom, is Himself wielding the rod 
against you. After receiving punishment from you, I 
may shift my residence to the jurisdiction of another 
Judge; but where in the infinite. millions of universe can 
you find a place which is not within the jurisdiction of 
Him by whom you are going to be punished? In heaven,® 
the mortal world,’ or the nether world,’ wheresoever you 
may flee, the tremendous trident® of Virtiipaksha?® is 
pointed with unfailing aim at your breast. An ignorant 


1 Dasyu-Shakti. Such worship does not advance spirituality, but 


robs the Sadhaka of it. 2 Rajrajeshvara. 
3 “ The six ’’—that is, the six great deadly sins. 
4 Great man. 5 Rajrajeshvara. 6 Svarga. 
7 Martya. 8 Rasatala. 9 Shila. 


10 Shiva, with the slanting, dreamy, half-closed eyes of one who has 
taken bhang. 


86 PRINCIPLES: OF TANTRA 


Shishya may be afraid of you, but in the blazing fire of 
the wrath of the Bhairava, who creates, preserves, and 
destroys, and from fear of whom the Sun and Moon 
shine, the wind blows, and the God of Death! is ever 
busy, you are nothing but an insignificant speck of an 
insect. A Shishya who has committed even a thousand 
offences may receive pardon, but for you, relentless 
Robber-Guru, there is no escape. O Judge! to me an 
ignorant subject you appear to be a Judge, though not 
really so; but to the King you are nothing but a subject 
who has been guilty of a most heinous crime. And if 
you are proud of your judgeship, then, O Judge! how 
much greater is the punishment for theft when the Judge 
is himself the thief ? Hence I say, O Guru-Family, type 
of the Kali age! do not attempt to put forward a deed 
of permanent lease* as Family-Guru of Shishyas. If 
misappropriation of revenue is to be taken as the mark 
of an official, then can you tell me what it is which is 
called robbery 2? O Guru-Family of worshipful feet! 
know (and we say this with great sorrow) that to-day 
you have become so degraded in mind and position that 
one prays to be free of your presence, and is even ashamed 
to describe you as belonging to the Guru-Family. To-day 
a descendant of the Guru-Family plays the part of a clown 
in Jatra parties,* or of the heroine in dramatic perform- 
ances, or, in the part of the Shishya of some low man, 
touches the feet of a Chandala Guru‘; and the next 
moment this same man again places his feet on the head 
of a pure Brahmana and receives offerings of sandal- 


teYama: 

* Maurasi patta, a lease in perpetuity. Such a Guru is not to pretend 
to hold his disciples in perpetual fief because he belongs to the Guru- 
Family without regard to his qualifications to be the Family-Guru. 

3 Acting without stage and scenery; generally the actors are all 
- males. 

4 The meaning is that the man who plays the part of Guru may bea 
Chandala (one of the lowest castes), whose feet the man who plays the 
part of Shishya must touch. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 87 


paste and flower consecrated with the great Mantra of 
Mahashakti. Alas! O Mother of the World! where are 
you, O Mother! at this time? Rather the Mother is 
everywhere, but where are we ourselves? Had not the 
Mother been everywhere, had not Her eyes been wide 
open to see everything, and had not She with indomitable 
force spread the power of Her commands in every place, 
would the families of Siddha and Sadhaka Gurus,! the 
crest-gems of Aryyavarta,? which is the crown jewel of 
Bharatavarsha,*? have become thus extinct to-day? 
Would the race of Sadhakas devoted to Her who fulfils 
all Arthas (purposes and desires) have thus been extermi- 
nated for want of SAdhana and for the sake of Artha 
(money) ? Would descendants of Brahmanas, who had 
performed austere Tapas,+ have thus turned Chandalas 
in habit ? A blind man feels no discomfort in the dark, 
but he who can see is greatly frightened if the light in his. 
room be extinguished. Malpractices®> do no harm to 
Non-Aryyas, but if families of Sadhakas forsake Sadhana 
they are naturally ruined. So it is, O Guru-Family ! 
that doves nowadays roam over your homestead even at 
noon,® and Dharma’ looks at it with eyes wide open. 
But so intoxicated are you with the wine of delusion that 
your closed eyes can no more be opened by any means. 
Such as you are, you yet teach your Shishya a Mantra of 
obeisance which runs “ obeisance to the Guru who has, 
by means of the collyrium-stick of knowledge, opened the 
eye of him who was blinded by the darkness of ignorance.” 
O Mother! dwelling in great cremation grounds,® direct 


1 That is, the Gurus who have attained and those who are seeking 
and on the way to attainment. 

2 The land of the Aryyas. 3 India. 

4 Devotion, austerities, etc., (see Introduction). 5 Andachara. 

6 Roaming of doves is a mark of ruin and desolation. 

7 Dharma (religious duty, etc., here religion personified) cannot bear 
the sight of any wrong, but here He is represented as looking on with 
indifference. 

8 Shmashdanas, where She in Her dread forms dwells. 


88 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


the band of Bhairavas! to clear away the heavy mass of 
ashes which are, as it were, this sin. Command them to 
fan into flame the fire of the funeral pyre of Sat, Chit, and 
Ananda,” and to thus dispel the darkness of deep and 
crass ignorance in Bharatavarsha.® Let the children who 
have lost the Mother rediscover the Father with the help 
of this light even in the deep darkness of the present 
new-moon night. Let them run to Thee, O Mother! 
and find eternal rest at those lotus-feet which are fair as 
ten million autumn moons. 


THE GURU PROFESSION.4 


In India there has been, along with political revolu- 
tions, a revolution in language; and people now speak of 
Gurugiri, or profession of Guruhood.® Of all the means 
of earning money this profession of Guruhood is nowadays 
one of the best. In it the Paramartha (the highest 
spiritual end) has joined with Artha (money), and from 
their union has been born an Anartha (evil). As a matter 
of fact, however, there has not been a union in the true 
sense between Paramartha and Artha, and hence it is 
that this Anartha has come about; for a union between 
Paramartha and Artha would have the effect rather of 
destroying than of creating Anarthas (evils). 

However that may be, the community of Gurus who 
follow this profession is divided into two classes—namely, 
Prabhu (lord)® and Vibhu (omnipresent).” There is, more- 
over, another class which has taken the field recently— 
namely, the Svayambhu (self-existent). There is no need 


1 Attendants of Mahadeva and Mahddevi. 

2 The state of existence, consciousness, and bliss, which is the 
Brahman. 

3 India. 4 Gurugiri. 

5 Though Guruhood can never properly be a profession. 

6 Vaishnava Gurus. 

7 Referring to the Brahmos, who do not worship images or Brahman 
with form, but only the formless omnipresent. 


PE UNGIPEES OF TANTRA 89 


to explain what the first two classes are, or of whom they 
are composed. The name Prabhu has come into use 
through the grace of Prabhus. Nowadays, if anyone 
appears to be at all out of the common, people at once 
say: ““ Heisa Prabhu.” As for the class of Vibhus, they 
are going to be Vibhu (etherealized) themselves through 
their constant efforts to show the Vibhu (the Omnipresent). 
Whether they be good or bad, the first two classes origin- 
ally? based themselves on the Shastra. The third class 
which has succeeded them takes no heed, however, of 
any Shastra. ‘“‘ These sober men are learned men in 
their own estimation.” ‘“‘ In their own estimation they 
are men of calm mind? and learning. They pretend to 
teach “ Yoga.’”’ Itis by long searchin Puranas, historical 
works, and so forth, that one comes across the name of a 
Yogi here and a Yogi there. These had by centuries of 
Tapasya? at first acquired the title of ‘“‘ Muni”’ or ‘‘ Rishi,”’ 
and then after another hundred or thousand years 
received initiation in Yoga from a Devata, or some great 
Yogi like a Devata. But nowadays we have regular 
fairs of Yogis on the riverside and in the field,* and we 
often hear it said: ‘‘ Such and such a Babu has received 
Yoga from such and such a Babu.” To-day a gang of 
men who are at heart atheists,° Chandalas defiled by 
eating the leavings of women of the town, the handmaids 
of Pishachas,® lapped in luxury, and, heedless both of 
Devata and Dharma, has taken the place of the true 
Yogis of yore, on whose account? Urvashi, Menaka, 


1 Whatever be the subsequent developments leading away from 
Shastra. 

2 Dhira—the first fruit of Yoga, and a quality highly prized. 

3 Devotion, austerity, study, meditation, etc. 

4 Hatemathe. ‘‘ In the fair and in the field ”’ is a colloquial expres- 
sion—that is, so-called Yogis are available in any number at any place. 

5 Upandastika—though they may not know it, or may pretend not 
to be so. 

6 Low, unclean spirits. 

’ That is, for fear of disturbing their Yoga. 


90 PRINCIPLES OF TANT RE 


Rambha, Panchachtida, and Tilottama,! were wont to 
hide the lustre of their world-enchanting beauty by the 
assumption of the forms of beasts and birds, and flee to 
the very ends of the earth. Lord of the Kali Yuga! 
mighty indeed is your unfailing power. In this (so-called) 
Yoga no Devata’s name is mentioned. It has no form 
or Mantra; in short, it has little to do with worship.” 
Next, it has absolutely no concern with such things as dis- 
tinction of caste and Varnashramadharma.® Its Sadhana 
consists of inspiration and expiration of breath, and its 
results* are consumption, phthisis, or cough. Nowadays 
one meets a few such Siddhas® in every populous place, 
and as for Sadhakas® there is no lack of them anywhere. 
Those who tread this path generally belong to the com- 
munity of ease-loving people who are ignorant of the 
A BC of the Aryya Shastra, cast-offs of society with 
perverted intellects. The evil of all this is that such 
people and their male and female Gurus profess them- 
selves to be followers of the Aryya Dharma. 

A still greater evil is threatened by the fact that young 
men puffed up with their western education, but desti- 
tute of real worth, aimless and extremely lazy, show 
particular eagerness to learn this newly discovered Yoga, 
which presents itself to them as a religion’ which may 
be followed without any labour, trouble, or cost to them-. 
selves. To avail themselves of such a golden opportunity, 
young men often leave their houses and roam about hills 


1 Celestial female spirits called Apsaras, of surpassing beauty, who 
sometimes came to tempt the Munis and Yogis, and thus to test the 
reality of their spiritual progress. 

2 Upasana. 

3 Rules relating to caste (Varna) and stage of life (Ashrama; see 
Introduction). By these qualities (which are also those of the real 
Yoga) it is rendered attractive to those who have spiritual ambitions, 
but wish to avoid trouble. 

eeoida hi: 

5 Persons accomplished in such pseudo-Sadhana. 

6 That is, persons striving to be so “‘ accomplished.” 

7 Dharma. 


PICGNC UP EE SAO ML AN DRA! QI 


near railway stations,‘ and on return they are often heard 
to say: “‘ As I ascended the summit of such and such a 
hill I saw a great Yogi resplendent with light? lying in a 
state of ecstasy* ina cave. My heart melted at the sight. 
Silently I bowed to him and remained standing. After 
a short time the Yogi quietly opened his eyes; I again 
bowed to him. Immediately the Mahapurusha‘* looked 
at me, and, affectionately and with a smiling face, said: 
“So you have come, my child? I was very anxious for 
you; I have already known all about you by means of 
Yoga. I have myself a Guru in the Himalayas. Hark 
there, he is saying, my child, a future Yogi has appeared 
before you,’ and so and so on.”’ Sadhaka, the “ Yogi,”’ 
who tells this story, is the future ‘‘ Yogi” of whom you 
have just heard from the ghost Yogi (in the Himalayas). 

Again, some people are heard to say: “‘ Sitting in a forest 
a Yogi is singing to the strains of his vina,® and deer, 
tigers, elephants, and lions are embracing each other, 
and swooning away on hearing his song, and so on.”’ The 
“Yogi’’ has renounced all and become a Sannyasi, but 
has not been able to part with his dear vina.® Needless 
to say, that the ‘“‘ Yogi”’ who tells us the story has also 
a vind. These sham Yogis are daily gaining mastery 
over the ignorant community, spreading the web of their 
charm, to the danger of even intelligent men. 

Finding no other means of success, Mahiravana® the 
wizard of Lanka, at last deceived Hanuman by assuming 
the form of Bibhishana,’ and entering into the camp, 
carried away Raghunatha® and Lakshmana® to Patala.’° 


1 Here follow some caustic and amusing passages on spiritual 
shamming. As the aspirants after easy Yoga are only making a 
pretence of ‘‘ going into the wilderness,’ the railway station which 
brings them comfort and safety and affords the means of return must 
be near at hand. 

2 Jyotih. 3 Samadhi. 4 Great man. 

5 A stringed musical instrument. 6 The brother of Ravana. 

7 Ravana’s brother, who took the side of Rama. 

PRama. ® His brother. 10 The nether world. 


Q2 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Similarly, the band of these wizardly unbelievers* are 
deluding and deceiving the faithful hearts of intelligent 
men by holding before them the standard of the Hindu 
religion. Thus creeping into society, they have spread 
their net so as to carry away to Rasdtala the Aryya 
Dharma,” which is full of real Siddhi and Sadhana. Aryya 
society even now, I say, do not listen to the words of 
Mahiravana as though they were the words of Bibbhi- 
shana, the crest gem of devotees. Let not those who are 
enemies of Devata, of the Veda, and of Dharma, deceive 
you any longer by their talk about Yoga. Like Hanuman, 
you will practise Yoga at the door; but Mahirdvana will 
on his part carry away from the inner apartment to 
Rasatala the Sandatana Dharma, which is as precious a 
thing in the temple of your heart as was Ramachandra to 
Hanuman. We know that even in that case there is no 
cause for fear, for in that nether world* also Mother 
Bhadrakali is Herself the Saviour. We, however, are 
afraid, because we da not know how long it will be before 
we shall again see the face of Ramachandra. We, how- 
ever, know this also that if the Mother has determined to 
destroy Mahirdvana, then there is nothing which cannot 
happen in the kingdom of Mahamaya, who makes the 
impossible possible. Still we say, O Society! do. not 
forget to be on your guard; do not bring death on yourself 
by giving shelter to the Dharmarakshasa® in your house; 
do not, at this time when Dharma is being assailed, 
yourself attempt to weaken it. 

Necessity has compelled us to say even a few words 
more than what is strictly warranted on the subject of 


1 Nastikas. 2 The Hindu religion. 

3 Whilst Hanuman was keeping guard at the door of Rama’s camp 
Mahiravana entered into it in the guise of Bibhishana, and carried 
away Rama to Patala. 4 Patala. 

5 That is, perhaps, these Mahirdvanas have been only permitted to 
appear and take the sinful path that they may be eventually destroyed; 
for all is possible to Mahamaya. 

6 Rakshasa, or demon, in the garb of Dharma religion. 


Picun Clit oe Ohl ANDRA 93 


Gurutattva. In conclusion, we say to the Prabhus and 
Vibhus,* who follow the Guru profession, basing them- 
selves on Shastra, that they, too, are slowly approaching 
the condition of the Svayambhus, who compose the third 
class of Gurus. We are servants of the Shastra, and he 
who destroys its authority is to us an eyesore, however 
accomplished? he may be. To us nothing is of greater 
authority than the words of Bhagavan, who has Himself 
said, ‘“He who performs religious acts according to his 
own will, and in violation of the rules laid down in the 
Shastra, will not merely fail to attain Siddhi, but will go to 
hell.’”’ Professional Gurus, although the root of your 
profession is the Shastra, its fruit, twig, leaf, flower, and 
all else are opposed to the Shastra. 

Whenever you see a Shishya, place, time, and person 
have no effect upon you; but taking him to be your prey, 
you pounce on his shoulders according to the rule— 
“should be eaten the moment when received.’’ What 
Shastra authorizes you to do this? Even a deadly 
poisonous snake when it has bitten someone remains 
senseless and feverish for a whole week. It is generally 
at such a time that snakes are, through their want of 
power of movement, killed. Similarly, energy passes from 
the body of the Guru to that of his Shishya at the time of 
initiation, even if the former has previously greatly per- 
formed Tapas.° In order to recoup himself the loss of 
this energy,* the Guru has to perform for a great length of 
time Tapas,® as also Purashcharana in the form of Japa® 
of the Mantra, which he has given in initiation. Thus 
only he can regain his normal state. But you, the 


1 Vide ante, p. 89. 2 Siddha. 

3 Austerities, worship, and similar preparations undertaken with 
the view to kindle the fire of the Guru in the latter’s body, and later to 
recoup the energy transmitted to the disciple. 

4 Tejas; the transmission of which is known as Shaktisafichara. 

5 “ Recitation ’’ of the Mantra according to the Shastrik injunctions. 
This, when done under certain prescribed conditions, is the rite known 
as Purashcharana. 6 Prakriti. 


94 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


incarnations of abnormality,’ are in the habit of granting 
initiation at the rate of ten or twenty a day, as animals 
are offered for sacrifice on the great Navami? day. Race 
of Prabhus, the saviours of the helpless, can you say what 
will be your fate? In you are combined a venomous 
power to bite, and boa-like capacity of eating. You are 
shaking with the fever of delusion and stuffed with food 
up to the throat. O Prabhu! behold and see that the 
Prabhu (Lord) who punished the Kaliya Snake?® has to-day 
come to test your power and authority. Even now, 
while there is yet time, touch the beauteous feet of the 
lord of Lakshmi? and say: “‘ Lord of the helpless, friend of 
the poor, I have reaped the consequence of disobedience 
to Thy commands. Destroy the sins of this sinner, who 
has sought protection at Thy feet, and punish him with 
the rod of Thy grace. Let me be blessed with the touch 
of Thy beauteous feet.’’ And on your behalf we, too, say: 
‘“ Bhagavan, the chief purpose of Thy play? is to lighten 
the earth of the weight of unrighteousness, which op- 
presses itin India. To-day the weight of the Gurus has 
become a heavy burden. All merciful Deva, who but 
Thee can remove it? The race of Aryyas is sorely 
oppressed with initiation; the waters of the Jumna are 
terribly poisoned by this deadly snake, which is the race 
of Gurus. O Lord, colour for once the gem on the head 
of this snake with the colour of Thy spotless lotus-feet, 
which are like red lotuses.° With a thrust of Thy feet 

1 Vikriti. 

2 The Durga pfija begins on the seventh lunar day of the bright 
fortnight, and lasts till the ninth or Navami day, on which a large 
number of animals are sacrificed. 

3 Krishna, who killed Kaliya. This was a demon in the form of a 
snake which lived in a lake. Its presence made the lake so poisonous 
that fish could not live therein, cows could not drink its water, and 
birds flying over it fell dead. Krishna jumped into the lake and 
subdued the serpent, and compelled it to return to the sea. 

4 ila. 

5 That is, the Devata is invoked to stand on the snake when the red 


painted soles of the Deva will be reflected in the gem on the head of the 
snake. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 05 


free the earth of the poison fang which is self-seeking 
and drive this snake from Jambudvipa’ to Ramanakad- 
vipa,” the seat of your everlasting Rasa festivities. Let 
men and women, boys and girls, bathe with faithful hearts 
in the waters of initiation and cool their minds and hearts. 
Himavan,® Nishadha, Vindhya, Sumeru, Malyavan, and 
many other mountains,* are situated in Jambudvipa,° but, 
O Lord, no mountain is so unbearable® as this Guru pro- 
fession.’ We have heard that you held Mount (Giri) 
Govarddhana. This makes us hope that some day Thou 
wilt surely hold this profession (Girl) either by Thy foot 
or by Thy hand, for by the ill-fortune of India this pro- 
fession (Giri) also has become Govarddhana, thus fostering 
the ignorant.2 Thou didst uphold Mount Govarddhana 
in order to shatter the pride of the King of Devas.2 Once 
again, O Lord ! Thou wilt have to hold it in order to shatter 
the pride of the King of the Kali Yuga. It was Thou 
who as Mount Govarddhana didst receive the worship of 
the herdsmen, and Thou Thyself must receive worship as 
Guru Govarddhana (increaser of the race of Guru).?° The 
punishment of Kaliya! and the upholding of Mount 


1 India. 

2 One of the seven islands. The author takes advantage of the 
etymological meaning of Ramanaka, or that which gives pleasure, to 
make reference to the pleasure of the Rasalila. 

3 Himalaya. 4" Giri. 5 Vide ante. 

6 Krishna upheld Govarddhana when Indra deluged the surrounding 
country with continuous rain, and thus gave shelter to people and the 
cattle. 

7 Gurugiri; a play on the word Giri, which, as an independent word, 
means mountain, and as a suffix in Bengali means profession. 

8 A play on the word Govarddhana, which means that which 
increases (Varddhana) cows (Go). The ignorant are spoken of as a 
race of cows, the number of which is increased by these so-calied but 
incompetent Gurus. 9 Indra (see ante, note 6.) 

10 Krishna must uphold the race of Gurus as he upheld the mountain. 
He must raise the race from their depressed condition. Then the race 
of Gurus will be worthy of worship, as was Mount Govarddhana after 
Krishna had raised it. The Gurus are compared to Govarddhana. 

11 See ante, p. 194, N. 3. 


96 PRINCIPLES OF) TAN iia 


Govarddhana were both Thy play. Now, O Thou who 
art full of play,’ the field has been prepared for both these 
plays.t It remains only that Thou Thyself should in- 
carnate. And to Thee, Daughter of the King of Moun- 
tains,? we say, O Mother! Thou hast said that a Guru 
who gives Mantra is also Thy father’s Guru, and so stands 
to Thee as Thy grandfather. If, for fear of destroying 
the Gurus glory of the mountain-family of Thy father, 
Thou showest indulgence to this Guru profession, then we 
shall be obliged to stand before our Father, the Lord of 
Bhairavas, and the Dakshayajna® is the outstanding proof 
of the little forgiveness he accords to the family of his 
father-in-law.* And then the remedy will surely be 
attained. But in that case, O Mother! a blemish and 
rebuke will for ever attach to Thy father’s family. Hence 
we pray you as a good daughter to find out a remedy for 
all this while there is yet time. Do you yourselves settle 
in private a question which concerns you privately ? 

‘“O Guru family ! do not attempt to become a Guru in 
order to save Shishyas, but prepare yourselves to become 
a Shishya for your own saving. Then by the grace of 
Guru the world will become your Shishya. Had you 
yourself learnt how to worship a Guru, to-day you would 
not have had to suffer indignities, moving from door to 
door amongst Shishyas. If a patricide’s son is educated 
after the notions of his father, he is sure to turn out a 
patricide himself. Similarly, by receiving initiation from 
a Guru like yourself, who is estranged from ‘this Guru, your 
Shishya has to-day become ready to ruin you. It is 

1 Lila. 

2 The Devi Parvati, daughter of Himalaya, the Mountain King. 

3 The sacrifice of Daksha Shiva’s father-in-law, which the latter 
destroyed on hearing of the death of his spouse, the Devi, as Sati. 

4 A playful threat against the Devi. The author prays that She 
will remedy this evil of the Gurus. If She be unwilling to do so for 
fear of destroying the Guru glory of her father’s family, well, the 


author will go to Her husband Shiva, who, as the Dakshayajna showed, 
will not scruple to deal with this evil. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 97 


useless to mourn over this, for you are reaping the con- 
sequence of your own action. Had you yourself been 
Siddha,* or, at least, a Sadhaka,? your Shishya might 
some day have become a Sadhaka. Had you been a 
servant of your Guru’s house, esteeming it to be Vrinda- 
vana or Kashi? itself, innumerable men and women would 
to-day have left Kashi and Vrindavana that they might 
prostrate themselves in the dust at your door. But 
instead of that you are to-day a Guru only in name. 
Like a servant, you appear at the door of your miscreant 
Shishya to receive your annual due from him, only to be 
driven away like a dog; or you heartily approve of his evil 
practices in the hope of eating the remnants of his food. 
Know that it is the powerful influence of the Kali Yuga 
which prevents a thunderbolt from falling on your head. 
Even here the sorrowful tale does not end. In luxurious 
feasts, where wine and women of the town hold sway, the 
Guru is to-day engaged in cooking, for in the opinion of 
the Shishya the Guru is an hereditary slave bought for 
nothing. Dharmaraja,* Yamadeva! has hell become so 
full that it cannot afford room to these men, whose proper 
place is there? Save, O Bhagavan! This current» of 
abominable sin will bring on a great untimely dissolution® 
and destroy the world.® Gurus! forgive us. We shall not 
draw this picture of hell any more. O Mother, Jaga- 
damba !’ Thou art the Mother of the World. Be Thy sons 
good or bad, all this, O Mother! is Thy play. We know 
that Thou canst never forsake us. Hence with tears in 
our eyes we say, O Mother! what play is this of Thine to 
throw Thy babes in arms in the dust ? O Devi! beauteous 
with the dark hue of clouds laden with water! O merciful 
Mother ! with a copious shower of mercy from that three- 

Pebertected. 

2 That is, one seeking such perfection and power of accomplishment. 

3 That is, the town of Brindaban, sacred to Krishna and the holy 
city of Benares. 

4 A name of Yama, the God of Death. 5 Mahdapralaya. 


6 Sangsdara. 7 The Devi as mother of the world. 
VOL. II. he 


98 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


eyed spring,? the Devi Herself, which removes the three- 
fold sorrows? of the three worlds, wash away for once the 
mud of infamy which soils the Guru family in India; and 
showing Thy real self to Thine erring children, lift them 
to Thy bosom with Thy lotus-hands, which bestow blessing 
and dispel fear.? Paint, then, their soiled and vice-tainted 
eyes with the collyrium* of Thy love. O Thou, who 
grantest all desires! O Mother! who art the highest 
object of all desires,? Thou art.all to Shiva and the most 
precious to His heart. If to-day Jiva Thy son is able to 
hold those Beauteous Feet, the treasure which even Shiva 
by His Sadhana seeks to gain, then, O Queen of queens of 
the Universe,® of what can he bein want ? What poverty 
is it which can then oppress him and drive him to take 
(humble) stand at the door of his Shishya? O Mother! 
stand forth as Mother taking up Thy son in Thy arms. 
Let all the world touch Thy son’s’ feet after it has first 
rested at Thy feet. Make the world of Shishyas know 
that in order to understand what a Guru® is, one must 
know Thee first, and that Guru, who is only Thyself in a 
loving form, is weightier? than Thee. And let them hear 
the most secret and profound converse between Thee the 
Mother and Thy son, that loving and endearing welcome, 
which is Mantra. To hear and understand this is to 
destroy the discipleship of the Shishya, the Guruhood of 
the Guru, the Mantra-nature?® of Mantra, and the strife and 


1 Her three eyes are compared to a spring of water. 

2 Adhyatmik, or mental and physical troubles; adhibhautik pro- 
duced by the world, other men, animals, etc.; dadhidaivik, or danger 
from Devas and Spirits. 

3 The Devi’s hands are represented making the gestures (mudra) of 
granting boons (varamudra) and dispelling fear (abhaya mudra). 

4 Afijana, used to clear the vision. 


5 Paramartha svartpini. 6 Rajrajeshvari. 
7 The Guru. If people get faith in the Devi, then they will respect 
the Guru. 8 Lit. gurutattva. 


9 Gurutara; a play on the word Guru, which as a noun means 
‘spiritual preceptor’’ and as an adjective “‘ heavy ’’—that is, being 
greater. 10 Mantrattva. 


PRUNGIPLES-OF TANTRA 99 


struggle to attain to Thee. With such destruction all 
disappears in that unity which is the great truth that 
“when all is gone Thyself alone remains.’ Let us sink 
in the unity which is Gurutattva, Mantratattva, and Thy 
Tattva. If, however, it causes Thee great pain to destroy 
these three Tattvas which are so dear to Thee, then be 
Thou at least gracious to make us understand that! 
which the destroyer of Kama? has himself described as 
follows in the Kamakhya Tantra: ‘ The Devi’s favour 
must be secured first, and then the favour of Shriguru. 
After this, there is generated single-minded devotion to 
the lotus-feet of the Supreme Devata, through the 
influence of the great Mantra, which issues from the 
Guru’s mouth. That single-minded devotion makes the 
Sadhana pure; out of that pure Sadhana arises pure 
knowledge; and that pure knowledge leads to the attain- 
ment of the highest liberation of Jiva. This is the truth. 
This is the command of Shastra.’ ”’ 


THE CHARACTERISTICS OF DISCIPLES.® 


Nowadays, as there is no one to criticize the editor of a 
newspaper, whilst the latter criticizes the whole world, so 
there is none to criticize the characteristics of Shishyas 
whilst they criticize all Gurus.* Just as no one who 
stands by the side of the sharpened hundred-tongued 
quill of the editor has the right to say anything about him, 
so the race of Gurus when standing before the Shishyas, 
S@ueroic i Speech, can say nothing. For to the‘ 
single tongue of the Guru there are a hundred of the 
Shishyas. At the most the Guru will perhaps try to 

1 Literally, the tattva. 

2 Shiva, who destroyed Kama, the God of Love, with a flash of 
fire from His third eye when the latter sought to destroy Him from 
His Yoga, that He might unite with His spouse Parvati for the crea- 
tion of a son (Karttikeya). 3 Shishya. 

4 After administering due rebuke to the Gurus for their incompetency, 
the author proceeds to deal with the failings of the present-day disciples. 


100 PRINGIPLES OF TAN Tine 


explain one or two things to the Shishya in a few words 
in Sanskrit, but then the Shishya will most probably 
drive him away with his ridicule in English. The Shishya 
will test the Guru on the touchstone of Shastra, but the 
Guru will stare blankly at the gilt on the Shishya, for 
Jnana? is all that the Guru possesses, whilst the Shishya 
is strong with the weapon of Vi-jnana.? Society com- 
plains that it is no longer possible to obtain a Guru such 
as the Shastra indicates. From this it would seem that 
there is now no want of Shishyas, who are competent to 
be such according to the Shastra. We are, however, 
ourselves at a loss to know whether it is the Guru or the 
Shishya who is the more rare to find. Even to-day it is 
not impossible to find ten good Gurus out of every 
hundred. But does one find even a single Shishya out of 
a thousand who is competent to be a disciple according to 
the Shastra? Whatever is necessary in any fashion, for 
any purpose or in any place in this universe has been 
provided for even before its creation by the Mother. It 
is impossible that She who has been careful to create the 
mother’s breast with its milk, which provides food for the 
baby after birth, has not created competent Gurus for 
religious-minded Shishyas. As a matter of fact, just as 
competent Gurus are never in want of competent Shishyas, 
so competent Shishyas are never in want of competent 
Gurus.? The Shastra has, therefore, said, ‘‘ In the matter 
of Devata, Tirtha,* Dvija,° Mantra, Daivajna,® medicine 
and Guru, each person achieves results therefrom accord- 
ing to his thought; that is to say, one achieves visible 
results in proportion to one’s faith in them. Nowadays 
many people have acquired the habit of despising the race 
of Gurus on the supposition of their being incompetent. 

1 Spiritual knowledge which produces liberation. 

2 Scientific and artistic knowledge. 

3 Tt is a common saying that he who is fit for and truly deserves a 
Guru will surely find one. 


4 Place of pilgrimage; here the efficacy which is attributed to it. 
5 A twice born; here a Bradhmana, 6 Diviner, foreteller. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA IOI 


But how many of these people consider whether they 
themselves are competent to become Shishyas? Con- 
sidering the amount of competence which you and [| 
possess, 1t is sheer presumption on our part to deem the 
entire race of Gurus to be incompetent. Boys and 
young men stirred by the recent agitation over the subject 
of the Sanatana Dharma and whose meagre equipment 
consists of a knowledge of such matters as history, fiction, 
novel-writing, and of acting and the like, are busy in the 
occupation of selecting Gurus. A section of them have 
come to the conclusion that by ‘“‘ Guru’ is meant “a 
prince of Yogis sitting with closed eyes in the lotus pos- 
ture? on the snowclad summit of the Himdlaya, or in a 
solitary mountain cave, or in a thatched hut in the midst 
of some great forest outside the pale of human habitation, 
and surrounded by tame® wild animals.’’ I admit that 
such a person is a good Guru, but of what avail is he to 
you orme? True that an infinite store of precious gems 
exists in the womb of the unfathomable sea, but of what 
use is it to you or me? What can you or I expect from 
him who has forgotten the dualistic waves of the ocean, 
and has sunk to its depths wherein is the monistic truth ?4 
True that I am thirsty, and am standng on the bank of 
the river, but the water lies at a great depth below the 
top of the bank. I cannot cross that steep mountain-like 
formidable shore and descend into the water, and yet my 
life cannot be saved without it. What is to be done in 
such acase? Am I to beg water of one who has sunk and 
lost himself in the mid-current of the river, the flow of 
whose sense functions have mingled with that current of 
the river; who, though he is ‘“‘ who”’ to me is no longer 
“he” to himself ? Am I to beg of one who will not deign 
to turn his eyes even if countless Jivas like myself were to 

1 The Hindu religion. 

2 Padmdsana, a common form of Asana in Yoga. 

3 Wild animals do not fear or hurt the Yogi. 


4 Which is the state of the Yogi. He who can help the dweller ina 
dualistic world is he who is himself a part of it. 


102 PRINCIPLES (OF TANERE 


break their heads on the bank? To him it is nothing 
whether the world is safe or the great dissolution’ un- 
timely threatens. The entire universe has not the value 
of a straw to him. Can you and I expect to be reckoned 
as even atoms in his eyes? I can get water from the 
man who has crossed the shore and descended into the 
water, but has not yet reached the bottomless stream. 
For us and the ordinary people the. Shastra has there- 
fore said, ‘“‘ and a householder who knows the import of 
all Shastras is called a Guru,” and again, “a Guru for 
rites relating to Devas, Pitris, or both, should be a house- 
holder and fellow-countryman.” To him who has risen 
above false dualism the relation of Guru and Shishya is 
nothing but a flower in the ether.? 

Many people are willing to take initiation only if they 
can get householders like Yajnavalkya or Vashishtha for 
their Gurus, otherwise not. But they do not stop to con- 
sider that in order to obtain such Gurus they themselves 
must be Shishyas, like Rajarshi Janaka,* or Bhagavan 
Ramachandra. Doubtless everyone has his ambitions, 
but if they exclude the bounds of possibility men call 
them mad. If one proceeds to read fiction without under- 
standing it, oneis reduced to the plight of Duryyodhana 
in the court of Yudhishthira’s® Rajastya® yajna. To 
fasten one’s heart in the mould of novels and fulfil its 
unreasonable desires, and to acquire competence from 
Siddhi and Sadhana by seeking shelter at the feet of Guru, 


1 Mah4apralaya. 

2 Akashakusuma; the sanskrit form of the expression “‘ castle in 
the air.” 3 Sita’s father; Rama’s father-in-law. 

4 Son of Dasaratha, hero of Ramayana, incarnation of Vishnu. 

5 When Yudhishthira did the Rajastiya Yajna, a Gandharva prepared 
for him a carpet, the design on which was so natural that in crossing 
the room in which it was, Duryyodhana took a tank which was repre- 
sented on it to be real water, and tucked up his clothes lest they should 
be wetted, on which all the assembly laughed, to the discomfiture of 
Duryyodhana. 

6 A great sacrifice performed by a universal monarch at the time of 
his coronation as a mark of his undisputed sovereignty. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 103 


are not one and the same thing. Only such a man who 
has gone into the water can do me good as can come out of 
it, and either bring water to me who am on land, or can 
take me with him from the land to the water. There 
may be countless Siddhas? who are lying submerged in the 
water, but there is no means by which I may derive any 
benefit from them. But I shall be gratified if I get a kind- 
hearted person who is half-sunk or almost sunk, or has 
just entered into the water. Hence for all persons 
belonging to the household Ashrama, householders make 
the best Gurus. Some people, again, think that one 
should not take initiation from a Guru without first 
_ gauging the extent of his knowledge and intelligence. It 
is difficult to restrain one’s laughter at this idea. If 
before going to school a boy can measure the extent of 
his teacher’s knowledge and intelligence, then what is the 
necessity of his going to school at all? One must make 
an offering of one’s ignorance to whomsoever one accepts 
as one’s Guru. This is the natural law in the world of 
Guru and Shishya. Unless one is ignorant, there is no 
necessity to take a Guru. The Shastra therefore says, 
‘“T bow to the Guru by whom is opened with the colly- 
rium-stick? of knowledge the eye blinded by the darkness 
ofignorance.” To desire to test the knowledge and intelli- 
gence of the Guru is tantamount to the wish to see that 
which our parents have done in their childhood. As not- 
withstanding that parents have at one time been children, 
they are already youths when they become parents; so 
in spite of a Guru having been ignorant at one time, he 
is already an unfathomable sea of knowledge when he 
initiates you or I; otherwise, if the Guru who is to impart 
knowledge to the Shishya is himself ignorant, it is impos- 
sible to be initiated by him. I can examine only that 
subject of which I have knowledge. But to proceed to 
examine a subject of which I know nothing is tantamount 


1 Perfect men who have attained Siddhi. 
2 Afijana, which clears the vision. 


104 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


to exhibiting my own ignorance. Maybe that I am a 
passed degree-holder in many subjects. But does this 
entitle me to be an examiner of a Guru? Perhaps the 
Guru is not a passed degree-holder like myself, but what 
of that? JI am, despite of my being well educated in all 
subjects, a perfect ignoramus in the field of Sadhana, and 
the Guru is, notwithstanding his ignorance of all subjects, 
a past master? in Siddhi and Sadhana. What I have 
to learn from him is unknown to me even in dream. It 
is, therefore, the height of impertinence, presumption, 
and foolishness on my part to try, blinded as I am by the 
vanity of worldly knowledge, to test that spiritual know- 
ledge which is the possession of the Guru. There is 
nothing which I can teach the Guru, but my own know- 
ledge is so little that I can spend a life-time in seeking 
to increase it. 

There is, moreover, another class of meri who are 
charmed by the glamour of love-maddening plays, or by 
speech or writing, and are anxious to become Dhruvas* 
or Prahladas* ten times every hour. Yoga, Yajna, 
Tapasya,* and such other things, again are eyesores to 
them. They think in their minds: “I will melt Hari 
by weeping tears of play,° whether my mind and heart 
possess even a smack of devotion or not. I will be in 
the world an ideal devotee, for I have heard that a 
devotee does not require to perform Japa,® Tapas,’ 
worship, adoration, or anything of the kind.” All talk 
of knowledge is, as it were, forbidden by their Dharma. 
For the fruit of knowledge is liberation, and as Vaishnava 
books say ‘‘ Devotion® is superior to knowledge,® and 
liberation*® is its handmaid,” they are devotees, and do 


! Literally, Mahamahopadhyaya—that is, a great Pandit. 

2 Raja Uttanapada’s son, a great devotee for whom Vishnu made the 
Dhruvaloka. The Pole star is called Dhruva. 

3 Son of Hiranyakashipu, and a great devotee of Vishnu. 

*# Yoga, sacrifice, austerity, etc. 5 That is, by feigning weeping. 

6 Recitation of Mantras (see Introduction). 

(See Giie sNOLe.1pss05,.04G. =e bhakti 9 Jnana. 10 Mukti. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 105 


not want liberation. Itis asif liberation were prostrating 
itself in the dust with tears in its eyes before them, praying 
that it be accepted, and with annoyance they say: ‘‘ Be 
off! We don’t want you!’ Nowadays such men are 
found in abundance in quarters where live unbelievers* 
in disguise, who carry the banner of Hinduism, but are 
actually devoid of all Dharma.? Whatever be the acts 
of unrighteousness they may commit, they are found 
not guilty, and acquitted on their performing Sankirtana® 
to the accompaniment of a Khola‘ in the evening at the 
close of every week. In their opinion any Mantra or 
form of worship other than this ‘‘ cry of Hariin a tumult ’’® 
belongs to the province of the lowest grade of worshippers. 
However that may be, through the indifference and 
shortsightedness of preachers of religion (Dharma), and 
the strong forbearance oi the Aryya Society, which nothing 
can move, this community is daily receiving such indul- 
gence that the creation of a Non-Aryya Society—in fact 
but dubbed with the name of Aryya Society—is un- 
doubtedly inevitable. The band of these pseudo-Prah- 
ladas® think that all Gurus are like Shanda and Amarka,’ 
and cite the case of Prahlada to show that there is no 
necessity to take a Guru. They, however, do not stop 
even once to consider that if everyone can be a Prahlada 
by becoming a devotee in this fashion, why then has 
there been only one Prahlada during all these ages? In 
the infinite world of moving and unmoving things infinite 
numbers of devotees to Bhagavan have been born. But 


1 Nastika. 2 That is, who really do not belong to it. 

3 Dancing and singing the name of Hari (Vishnu), as Vaishnavas do. 

4 An elongated, drum-shaped, musical instrument used in Sankirtana. 
The reference is to Brahmos, who hold weekly prayer-meetings after 
the manner of the Christians. 

5 Gole Haribol—slang for doing a thing perfunctorily—e.g., where a 
large number of people cry Hari together, one of them may himself 
cry without care or heart for what he does and without notice. 

6 See p. 104, n. 3. 

7 Gurus to whom Prahlada’s father sent him for education, and 
who tried to dissuade Prahlada from worship of Vishnu. 


106 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


why has there not been born another like Prahlada ? 
Why has not Bhagavan stood before any other devotee 
in the form of half-man, half-lion?! Is devotion to 
Bhagavan (it is said) so partial towards one party that it 
cannot reveal its own power? to any person other than 
Prahlada? If the respect that is paid to Prahlada is 
due to this sort of devotion, then it is difficult to count 
the number of Prahladas which exist in this Sangsara.° 
Herein a little knowledge of the truth as told in the 
Shastra is necessary. 

Unable to bear any longer the oppressions of Hiranya- 
kashipu, Brahma and other Devas sought the protection 
of the Lord of Vaikuntha. Bhagavan said to them: 
“Wait a little time more. So long as he does not become 
the enemy of his own self (Atma), the store of his sins will — 
not be full, and I, too, shall not be able to destroy him.”’ 
The Devas were astonished, and asked: “ Lord, a Jiva 
never becomes an enemy of his own self. How then 
can this be possible ?’”? Bhagavan replied: “ You need 
not be afraid ; it is the self indeed which is born as a son, 
and I myself shall take birth as his son.”” The Devas 
understood the plan of the crest-gem of the cunning® and 
were assured. In order to accomplish the purpose of the 
Devas, Bhagavan incarnated Himself as Prahlada as a son 
of the King of Daityas® in the womb.of Kayadht. Now, 
is it not beyond the possibility of even a dream that that 
which happened to Prahlada, the incarnation of Bhagavan 
Himself in the form of a devotee, should happen to you,me, 
or anybody else? Because He showed a divinely brilliant 
example of an unflinching devotion to Himself by His in- 
carnation as a devotee in order to create a feeling of enmity 
in Hiranyakashipu, is it possible that you and [I should 

1 Vishnu took this form as Nrisingha avatara to destroy Prahlada’s 
unbelieving father for his persecution of the latter on account of his 
devotion to Vishnu. 2 Vibhati. 

3 That is to say, there are innumerable Prahladas in it. 


4 The father is born as the son. 
5 Chakri. 6 Hiranyakashipu. 


Pr UNCUPERS FOR TANT RA 107 


show the same? Hari, Hari, Hari!* If this could happen, 
why should He Himself have incarnated as Prahlada °? 
And did He, on being incarnated as Prahlada, show 
His devotion without first taking a Guru? Those who 
are ignorant of the Shastra may easily come to the con- 
clusion that Prahlada had no Guru. But learned men 
and Sadhus conversant with Shastra know that when 
Hiranyakashipu was away from home and in war the 
King of Devas’ stole away Kayadht? from the unguarded 
Daitya City with the object of destroying her and the 
child in her womb. On the way Narada, the Divine 
/RRishi, questioned him, saying: ‘‘ King of Devas! why 
this wickedness in taking away a woman with child ?” 
Indra replied with confidence: ‘“‘O thou whose wealth 
is Tapas,* the kingdom of Devas is on the point of being 
utterly destroyed by Hiranyakashipu’s oppression. If 
after this the father and the son unite to commit oppres- 
sions, the three worlds will be destroyed. From fear of 
this I have determined to kill the Daitya’s Queen along 
with the child in her womb, for I do not see any other 
means of averting the danger.’ The Divine Rishi 
laughed and said: ‘‘ King of Devas, stay your hand. 
This child has been conceived, and will be born for the 
very purpose of bringing to an end the oppressions of 
Daityas. You have no need to destroy the child in the 
womb, for this child is destined to reinstate the tutelary 
goddess of good fortune® of the race of Suras.”” Trusting 
the Rishi’s words, the King of Devas released the Daitya 
Queen, and went away to hisown place. Kayadht then 
fell at the Rishi’s feet, weeping, and said: ‘‘ Lord, seeing 
me helpless, the King of Devas stole me away, and now 
through your grace I am safe from him; but how can [ 
now go to the Daitya City? Even if a chaste woman 


' Equivalent to the English exclamation ‘‘ My God !” 

2 Indra. 3 Hiranyakashipu’s wife. 

+ Austerity, devotion, study, self-restraint, etc. (see Introduction). 
5 Lakshmi. 


108 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


of respectable family thus falls into the hands of an enemy, 
no one believes that she remains inviolate. Moreover, 
if the King of Daityas comes to know of that which has 
happened, he will most surely abandon me. O Lord! of 
what use is life to me if it be made unbearable through 
public calumny, abandonment of my husband, and the 
burden of pregnancy ? But how, on the other hand, 
can I surrender a body which bears a child? Father! 
save me from this terrible dilemma.” Seeing the Daitya 
Queen to be in such great danger, the Divine Rishi said: 
“Mother ! fear not that your virtue may be impugned; for 
that I am your witness. For the present do you stay in 
My hermitage until Hiranyakashipu, your husband, 
returns. Then you will go with him to the Daitya City.” 
Approving of the Divine Rishi’s assuring words, Kayadht 
stayed in Narada’s hermitage, during which time He 
explained to her, at her request, the Yoga of devotion’ to 
Bhagavan. Bhagavan, incarnated as a devotee, took 
Narada, the Guru of Devas, as His Guru, and Himself 
practised the Yoga of devotion’ to Himself while still 
living in the womb. The effect of that devotion’ was the 
assumption by Bhagavan of a half-man, half-lion form.” 
Now, seeing that Bhagavan Himself, the treasure which 
all devotees worship, made His own devotee® His Guru, 
whilst learning devotion to Himself, it is the height of 
ignorance to say to-day that Prahlada had no Guru. 
Bhagavan is almighty. It is not possible that He who 
could burst through a crystal column and assume a 
wonderful half-man, half-lion* form, full of brilliance, 
could not preach the Yoga of devotion to Himself without 
instruction from a Guru. But still, in order to uphold 
the honour of Shastra, the Guru of the three worlds 
became a disciple? Himself, and making His own disciple 
His Guru whilst He lived in the womb, He issued from it 


1 Bhakti. 
2 Narasingha, in which He appeared to kill Hiranyakashipu. 
3 Narada. 4 Narasingha. 5 Shishya. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 109 


as a Siddha.t Now, Sadhakas should understand that 
even He, devotion to Whom, even when simulated,” makes 
us proud, carried out an intricate scheme by making the 
King of Devas into an instrument for upholding the 
glory of Guruhood, and yet to-day we imagine Prahlada 
an ordinary son of a Daitya, and proceed to quote him 
as a precedent on the supposed ground that he had no 
Guru.? Marvellous is our audacity! Marvellous also 
are our intelligence and education, and marvellous, too, 
will be our inevitable downfall! Hence we say, do not 
imagine yourselves to be new Prahladas, mistaking a play 
of Daityahood to be one of Devahood, and a play of 
Brahmahood to be one of Jivahood.4 Do not thus be 
foolish according to the wish of Ishvara.5 Dwarfs that 
you are, do not stretch out your hands to catch the moon; 
mere flies ‘hat you are, do not jump into a pit of flaming 
fire, where you will be reduced to ashes. 

There is also another class of persons who think that 
a man can never be a man’s Guru; that a man’s Guru is 
Ishvara, and that to obey Him means to follow the 
teachings which He from time to time gives through the 
dictates of our intelligence and our heart. These people 
consider Nature (Prakriti) to be the Supreme Guru. 
‘Mountains, woods, groves, clouds, lightning, rivers, seas, 


1 One who is perfect. 

2 Men pretend to be devoted to Him, and take pride in showing 
themselves off as devotees, so great is the glory of Him to Whom they 
offer their simulated devotion. 

% That is, because after His birth there is no mention of His having 
a Guru. But Prahlada was Vishnu, and had a Guru when in his 
mother’s womb—namely, Narada—for the latter gave the mother 
instructions, which the child heard. So also Abhimanyu, Arjuna’s 
son, learnt the art of warfare in his mother’s womb. 

4 That is, do not misunderstand. This was an exceptional case, due 
to the fact that Prahlada was not a Daitya, but Deva; and not a mere 
Jiva, but Brahman. 

5 All which is done, whether by way of wisdom or folly, is done at 
ishvara’s command. Perhaps the meaning also is that in so far as 
Ishvara is the creator, His desire as such is that men should not follow 
the path of liberation, but maintain the Sangsdara. 


ILO PRINCIPLES OF TANG 


and lakes are all Gurus according to them. But we hold 
that a conscious human society cannot be built with the 
aid of such unconscious things. Unaided Nature’ can be 
the Guru of trees, creepers, birds, and beasts, but never 
of men. Immediately a cow brings forth a calf, the latter 
rises up and seeks its mother’s udder according to the 
law of Prakriti (Nature); but on the birth of a human 
child the loving mother must forget the pains of labour, 
and with her own hand hold her breast up to its mouth, 
otherwise its desire to drink its mother’s milk is not 
eratified. A calf one month old will, if thrown into 
water, easily swim across it according to Prakriti’s 
teaching. But throw a boy of ten or even twenty years 
of age into water, and (unless he has learnt swimming 
from another man) he will founder and die. Sadhakas 
should know that it is the same people who through their 
rejection of a human Guru, and dependence on Nature? 
as their guide,? have been reduced to such miserable 
plight in the waters of a mere tank, who are prepared to 
cross the ocean of existence ten times every half an hour 
in the name of Prakriti-Guru, and who also call on others 
to accompany them. If your desire to emulate birds and 
beasts were one which was capable of fulfilment, then, 
O Shishya of Prakriti !® your body also would have been 
similarly built. In fact, you do not understand Prakriti, 
whose Shishya you boast yourself to be. This is greatly 
to be regretted. What Jiva is there in this Universe who 
is not a Shishya of Prakriti? From the appearance of a 
_Jiva to his reabsorption in Parabrahman every faculty 
or act of body, speech, and mind is regulated according 
to the law of Prakriti. It is neither the mark of intelli- 
gence to say, nor is it the teaching of Shastra, that the 
four faculties of eating, sleeping, fearing, and of sexual 


1 Prakriti. aGuru. 3 Disciple of Nature. 

4 Bhaya—this is a common, though to us a peculiar, classification of 
faculties. Fear is considered inherent in the Jiva’s nature, and he can 
no more shake it off than he can shake off the desire to eat and sleep, etc- 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA wi ae 


intercourse, are alone governed by Prakriti. Bhagavan 
Himself has said to Arjuna: “‘ Jivas follow their individual 
Prakriti (Nature). How can it be forcibly suppressed ?4 
A person is born in a particular caste according to the 
decree of fate? and the fruits of his action® in previous 
lives. He can only attain Siddhi through the Achara‘ 
and Mantra in which he has been initiated by Prakriti.° 
The Shastra says that he whom Prakriti has made a 
Brahmana must attain the state of Brahman through the 
Achara* of a Brahmana. Just as looking at things from 
their gross aspect it is impossible to turn a beast into a 
man, so also if their subtle aspect be considered it is 
impossible to convert a Chandala into a Brahmana.® 
Had Prakriti surrendered all Her claim on a Jiva after 
his birth, then it might have been possible some day to 
bring about such a change of caste. But when Prakriti 
does not release Jiva, but, on the contrary, his relation- 
ship with Her subsists till the moment immediately pre- 
ceding complete liberation, it is by no means possible 
to avoid Her rule. According to the ordinance of Guru 
Prakriti, an unconscious hill or mountain can never be 
the Guru of a conscious man, and thus take the place of 
a conscious human being. But it is also a wonderful 
freak of Prakriti Herself that one who is himself a man 
can feel ashamed to call another conscious man his Guru, 
but feels not the least shame in calling an unconscious 
hill or mountain such. 

Some people, again, conclude that if work is truly done 
by the potency of Mantra, there is no necessity to take a 


1 Nigraha. That is, Nature cannot altogether be crushed. It will 
recur. Itis only by theslow process of Sadhana that it can be modified. 

2 Adrishta. That is, the unseen cause of that which makes him 
what he is and impels his action. 3 Karma. 

# The way or practice which he as a member of such caste and 
holding such and such a position in it has to follow. 

5 That is, Nature has made him Adhikari for a particular Achara or 
Mantra. Nature here is only the resultant of his previous Karma. 

8 That is, from one of the lowest castes into the highest. 


T12 PRINCIPLES OF TANT 


Guru. Why should not a Mantra taken by one’s own 
self from the Shastra lead to Siddhi? Although we have 
indirectly answered this question while discussing the 
subject of Gurus, yet we ask, Why should not such 
people also hold that the potency of Mantra* is without 
effect where a Guru is not taken? For the necessity 
of taking a Guru is as much asserted in the Shastra as 
the potency of a Mantra. What sort of faith is it which 
accepts one part of the Shastra and rejects another ? 

The Shastra says: “‘ All Japa is based on initiation, all 
Tapasya? is based on initiation. It is under the shelter of 
initiation that one should live in Brahmacharyya, Gar- 
hastha, and Vanaprastha Ashramas.2 O Beloved Devi! 
the performance without previous initiation of Japa, Puja,* 
and so forth, is like the sowing of seeds onarock. Assuch 
seeds will never bear fruit, nor will such acts. O Devi! 
an uninitiate attains neither a good state® nor Siddhi. 
For this reason one should by all means receive initiation 
from a Guru. Ifa person dies uninitiated, he goes to the 
Raurava Hell. One should therefore take care to receive 
initiation from a Tantrik Guru. If aman without being 
initiated by a Guru takes a Mantra which he reads in a 
book, then even a thousand Manvantaras® will not end 
the sufferings in hell of that worst of men. O Queen of 
Devas ! initiation taken according to the Shastra at once 
consumes lakhs’ of sins and crores’ of greater sins.2 It 
does not become an intelligent person to say that because 
when a lamp is lighted a man can see things for himself 
there is therefore no necessity to light the lamp. If a 
Sadhaka has acquired the necessary Shastrik competence, 

1 Mantrashakti. 2 See Introduction and ante, p. 107, n. 4. 

3 See Introduction. 4 Ceremonial worship. 

5 Sadgati: a better state than that which he possesses. 

6 A Manvantara is the one-fourteenth part of a Kalpa, or day of 
Brahma, which is 4,320,000,000 years. 

7 A lakh equals 100,000, and a crore equals 10,000,000. 

8 Sins are divided into upapataka (venial sins), pdtaka (greater 


sins), and mahapataka (great sins), though generally the classification 
is into the two last classes. 


PAtNOUPELS OR sTANTRA 1m 


he can by virtue of Mantrashakti' endow even an 
unconscious image with consciousness. 

But in order to awaken Mantrashakti! a Guru is, like 
alamp, necessary. It is true that the work will be done 
by the Mantrashakti, but who but a Guru has the power 
to awaken it? Just as a wick can, when lighted, burn 
and illuminate according to the quantity of its com- 
bustible substance, but in order to light it another flame 
is required, so similarly for the uninitiated a Guru in whom 
there is Divine Power, Sadhana and Siddhi is necessary. 
Such powers, however, exist in conscious beings only, 
and not in unconscious things. Among conscious beings 
also they can exist only ina Devata who is fully conscious, 
or in a Devata-like great man. This is why the Shastra 
ordains that a Siddha or Sadhaka man should be taken 
as Guru, and not creepers, leaves, hills, or mountains. 
Whatever may be the process, such initiation and Sad- 
hana as are spoken of in the Shastra can never be accom- 
plished without a Guru. It is true that the account of a 
country contains descriptions of its roads, but if a person 
is suddenly faced by a danger in the midst of these roads, 
how is he to be saved? As none but he who is fully 
acquainted with the road can know how to save him, so, 
although the Shastra contains accounts of Sadhana and 
Siddhi, yet when some superhuman? difficulty arises in 
the course of Sadhana, none but a Guru can save from it. 
The Shastra has therefore said: “If the Ishtadeva 
becomes wrathful, the Guru can save a Sadhaka; but if 
the Guru becomes angered, neither the Ishtadevata alone 
nor even all Devatads together can save him.” The 
meaning of all this will not probably be understood in a 
society without Sadhana, but even now in India incidents 
frequently occur which reveal the truth of these infallible 
commands which have issued from the beauteous mouth 
of Bhagavan Himself. Many Sadhakas who have reached 

1 The power inherent in, or which more strictly is, Mantra itself. 


2 Daiva. 
OIL. 1. 8 


114 PRINCIPLES OF TAN Iie 


a high stage of development are yet overthrown by the 
displeasure of the Guru, notwithstanding their good 
equipment of Sadhana, and become as low and destitute 
of lustre as stars which have fallen from the firmament. 
Again, we often see persons without Sadhana or purity of 
body, speech, or mind, without, in fact, anything to 
speak of in the way of Sadhana or worship, but who have 
ever in their mouths the cry, “‘ Victory to Thee, O Guru! 
O Shriguru !’’ both in prosperity and in adversity. And 
yet by the mercy of Her who is merciful, that Sadhaka 
easily acquires by his worship of Her in Her aspect as 
Guru, but for a very short time, the fruit which he could 
not acquire by lifelong worship of Her in Her aspect as 
Ishtadevata. He whose heart constantly rings with the 
triumphant clarion call to Siddhi* through austere 
Sadhana, whose heroic feet are restless to dance a leaping” 
furious dance in the field of battle, full of horror and 
intense darkness, and whose strength of Siddhi is ready, 
and is, as it were, roaring thunder for the shattering of 
the formidable army of Sangsara with its six divisions,° 
such a man knows that the triumphant and heroic son of 
_Bhairavi+ of Victory is unconquerable in the three worlds 
solely by virtue of his possession of the Supreme Weapon? 
of devotion to Guru. He alone who is ready to pass 
through that ordeal of burning fire knows that “ the 
word of Guru is true and everything else is false.’? The 
Shastra says: ‘‘If the Guru gives a command which is 
even contrary to the Tantra Shastra, that command must | 
be considered approved of by the Veda like the words 
of Maharudra.’’® 

When all earthly means fail: when Shastra shrinks 


1 Calling upon Siddhi to come to the Saddhaka. 2 Uttala. 

3 Six enemies or sins—lust (Kama), anger (Krodha), greed (Lobha), 
delusion (Moha), pride (Mada), envy (Matsaryya), which are here 
compared to the six divisions of the army, the Sangsara, which is to be 
conquered. 

4 The Devi, as spouse of Shiva the formidable (Bhairava). 

5 Brahmastra. Sr Shiva. 


PN ENCIPEES OR TANTRA 115 


back and Shastra? is robbed of its power; when even the 
Devata, with uplifted hand to bless, checks Her indomit- 
able will and stands back; when in that terrible and pitiless 
great cremation ground,” where horrors do a frantic dance, 
there is, despite the presence of the all-good Mother, 
nothing in all the infinite world which for our safety we 
can call our own; in that deep darkness of a new-moon 
night, haunted with destructive Bhairavas, Vetdlas, 
Siddhas, Bhiitas, Vatukas, and Dakinis?; when even the 
fire of the Sadhaka’s austere Tapas* is dimmed, and the 
firm and heroic heart of even the great Vira® shakes with 
fear; when even the intricate bonds of the Sadhaka’s 
posture,® on the back of the corpse which is awakened by 
Mantra, is loosened’; when with a fainting heart the Vira® 
feels as he sits the earth quake furiously under him; when 
without means of rescue he is about to fall and be crushed; 
when he is overtaken by the swoon of death—if even at 
such times the Sadhaka but freely and with full confidence 
opens his heart but once, and extends his uplifted hands, 
saving, ‘‘ Save me, I pray thee, O Gurudeva!” then the 
Mother of the world,. who is Herself the Guru, at once 
forgets all his faults, dispels all his difficulties with Her 
glance, and stretching forth ten hands instead of two, 
Pye eeeeeome, miyechiid, there 1s.no more fear,” and 
blesses the Sadhaka by raising him to Her assuring bosom. 
On that day the Sadhaka also puts to its final test the 
question whether Guru is greater or the Mother is greater.® 


1 There is herea play on the words Shastra and Shastra: the first mean- 
ing Scripture, and the second arms, or here religious rites, by which the 
spiritual combat is won. 2 Shmashana, where corpses are burnt. 

3 Various terrible spirits whose assaults the Sddhaka during his 
Sadhana suffers, and resistance to whom proves his worth. 

4 Devotion, austerity, etc. (see Introduction). 

5 Literally, ‘‘ Hero ’’; here one who follows the Tantrik Virachara. 

6 Padmasana, or ‘“‘ lotus-seat,’’ on the back of the corpse on which 
his Sadhana is done. 

7 From fear, or due to the moving of the corpse through force of 
the Mantra. 

8 This idle question will be solved in the realization of their unity. 


116 PRINCIPLES OF TANTiGx 


Hence I say, O brother Sadhaka! when will that day 
come to you, the day on which the Guru will merge in 
the Mother’s self," and you will be beside yourself in that 
maddening joy which is born of that union? O ALll- 
Merciful Mother! turn for once Thy merciful glance, 
brighten for once the fire? in the heart of the Sadhakas 
of Thy beloved Bharata,® and grant full success to the 
Sadhana of Thyself as son by appearing before him as his 
Guru in Thy aspect as Father and in Thy aspect as 
Mother, so that as servants bound to Thee by that grace 
of Thine we may dance with joy and sing: 

“None beseeches Thee, O Shyama! Thyself fulfillest 
Thy own desire. Thou weepest also just as Thou laughest 
in the intoxication of Thy happiness.” 

There is, however, a class of inquirers into Shastra who 
encourage themselves with the notion that they will set 
their minds to Siddhi and Sadhana in old age, after their 
intellect has been matured by knowing, hearing, and 
assimilating the views of all Scriptures. From the energy 
which these people display it would seem as if great men, 
such as Markandeya, Dadhichi, Valiraja,® and Bhishma- 
deva,® who enjoy eternal life, belong to their community, 
and that death finds no place in their nativity.’ It is 
with an eye to this class that poets have said: “‘ It is only 
ignorant boors® who think that they will bathe when 
there are no longer waves in the sea.”’ 

And for this reason Bhagavan has, in the discourse 
between the Deva and the Deviin the Kularnava Tantra, 
said: ‘If Atma itself does not keep Atma from injury, 
then where in the world is the benefactor who can deliver 
Atma from this sea of Sangsdra? (1) He who in this 
world does not undergo treatment for that disease which 

1 Svartipa. 2 Tejas. * India: 4 Munis. 

5 Prahlada’s grandson, for whom the Vamana avatara took place. 

6 Hero of the Mahabharata, General of the Kauravas. 

” The celestial combinations which are cast upon the horoscope. 


8 Varvaras: ignorant, rustic. The term ‘‘ barbarian’? comes from 
this root. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 117 


leads to hell, what will he do when with such disease he 
goes to the next world, in which there is no medicine ? (2) 
The supreme truth should be sought so long as this body 
exists. Who is there so perverse as to commence the 
excavation of a well with a view to extinguish a fire which 
has already caught his house? (3) Like a tigress, old 
age waits with open mouth to swallow the Jiva. As 
water continually exudes from a broken vessel, so is the 
period of life being constantly shortened. Diseases con- 
stantly inflict. wounds like enemies laying siege to a 
house. Hence one should as early as possible engage in 
the working of good to oneself? (4). Good work should 
be done what time there is no sorrow or danger, and 
when the senses are not disabled (5). Time passes in 
various occupations, but the Jiva knows it not. Happi- 
ness and sorrow born of the Sangsara kill the Jiva, but 
even then he does not know the path of the welfare of 
Atma (6). How many Jivas are born, fall into dangers, 
become subject to suffering and sorrow, and die? Even 
the sight of such does not enlighten the Jiva, maddened 
as he is by drinking the wine of delusion as to what is his 
own good (7). Prosperity is like a dream, youth is short- 
lived like a flower, and life passes like a flash of lightning. 
How can a man feel satisfied who has seen all this ? (8) 
The utmost period of a man’s life is a hundred years. 
Half of it is passed in sleep, and the remaining half also 
is made useless to him by childhood, disease, old age, 
sorrow, and other such causes (9). Utterly indifferent to 
the work which ought by all means to be begun, sleeping 
during the time he should be awake, and fancying danger 
where there should be firm faith—alas! by what ill- 
fortune is man in this fashion destroyed ? (10) How can 
Jiva, cherishing the fleeting Sangsara so dear to him, live 
without fear in this body as evanescent as a bubble of 


1 Jara (feminine). 
2 That is, of course, not in the selfish sense, but in the doing of good, 
which in fact benefits the Self. 


118 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


water, and which endures as little as the stay of a bird 
on the branch of a tree? (11) He seeks benefit from 
things which do him injury, thinks the impermanent to be 
permanent, sees his highest good in that which is evil, and 
yet does he not see that death is coming upon him ? (12) 
O Devi! deluded by the great Maya, the Jiva sees and 
yet sees not, hears and yet understands not, reads and 
yet knows not (13). The whole of this world is at each 
moment sinking in the deep sea of time,’ infested with the 
ereat alligators of death and disease (14).”’ 

Great is the power of those to make Providence? laugh 
who hope to be initiated after they have without aid 
heard and understood, and became learned in that which 
baffles understanding even when understood. To hope 
to get initiated after having studied philosophy, logic, 
Veda and Vedanta, is even more dangerous. 

In the Kularnava Tantra Bhagavan has said: “ Fools 
bound by the bonds of Pashuhood® fall into the deep 
well of the six systems of philosophy, and fail to know. 
what is their highest good* (1). Through ignorance of 
the meaning of the Vedas wrong-headed disputants ever 
wander about scorched by the fire of doubt, knowing not 
that, driven by the waves of time, they live within the 
fearful jaws of death (2). The words of a pandit who is 
well versed in Veda, Agama, and Purana, but has no 
knowledge of the highest good,* is for others a mere 
infliction. Know his words to be like the croak of a 
crow.° (The nature of the cawing of a crow indicates 
good or bad to men, but the crow itself is ignorant of 
this.°) (3) Oppressed by such thoughts as what is know- 
ledge and what is knowable, they read Shastras day and 


1 Kala, which is not translated as death, because death occurs below. 

2 Vidhata, the Dispenser. 

° The Tamasa state of a Pashu (see Introduction). 

4 Paramartha. 5 Which may or may not be auspicious. 

6 Good or bad fortune may be indicated by the sounds of animals. 
Such a pandit may do good or bad without knowing it. The paren- 
thesis is the author’s. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA I19 


night. But, O Devi! they for ever remain ignorant of 
the supreme truth’ (4). Many there are who acquire in 
the world a reputation for poetry and rhetoric, but the 
inner life of those fools whose senses are without repose 
is full of care and sorrow (5). The highest good? is one 
thing, but Jivas ever strive to picture it as something 
else. The purpose of the Shastra is one thing, but they 
explain it as another. They explain with perplexed 
minds, but do not themselves understand what they 
explain. There are some who, without instructions from — 
a Guru, but smitten by vanity, read the Vedas and other 
Shastras; but those who are possessed of the knowledge 
of their true meaning are very rare. As a ladle does not 
know the taste of the liquid which it serves to stir, and as 
the head carries flowers,* but their fragrance is smelt by 
the nose, so while these people read the Shastras, the 
truth they reveal is known by good Sadhakas only. Much 
labour do they give in the study of the Shastras, but the 
_ result of such study is mere dispute between them- 
selves (6-9). The foolish Jiva sees not the spirit* within 
himself, but is deluded into studying Shastra like the 
silly herdsman who, carrying the goat under his arm, yet 
thinks he sees it in the shadow which it casts in the 
water of a well (10). Mere verbal knowledge® of Shastras 
can never destroy the happiness and sorrow which arises 
from the world of sense any more than the rays of light of 
a pictured lamp can remove the darkness of a room (11). 
Study of Shastras by unenlightened® men is like seeing 
by blind men (a parting of the eyelids only).7 O Devi! to 
those only who are enlightened are Shastras, the source 
of spiritual knowledge (12). Some people stand in front, 
others at the back, some on the left, and others on the 
right of the place where the truth* is, and quarrel between 


1 Paramatattva. 2 Paramarthatattva. 
3 As women and others do, or as the Braéhmana in Pija puts flowers 
in his tied Shikha. 4 Tattva. 


4 That is, knowledge of the letter and not of the spirit. 
6 Prajnahina. 7 Author’s parenthesis. 


120 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


themselves, saying that the truth is of this kind, or of 
that kind, or of that other kind, and so forth. Even? in 
the case of a man famous by reason of his education, 
charity, heroism, and other qualities, but who is absent, 
some people say that he is of this kind, some others that 
he is of that kind, and so forth: thus picturing him in 
various ways.? (In fact, all will admit that the Spirit 
is far from those who dispute whether It is of this kind 
or of that)? (13-14). None has direct knowledge, though 
there are some who have knowledge derived from report 
(that is, to-day men possess that scholastic knowledge 
which enables them to argue with one another as regards 
the various paths spoken of in the Shastra. They refrain, 
however, from performing Sadhana, which will give them 
direct and immediate knowledge). O Beloved One! 
there is no doubt that those who as regard Shastra move 
in the dark are indeed far away from its fundamental 
truths? (15). Men desire to know from all Shastras what 
is knowledge and what is knowable. But, O Devi! the 
Jiva does not realize that one cannot reach the end of 
Shastras even if one were to spend in the pursuit a life 
of a thousand years, much less can they do so in a life of 
a hundred years (16). The Vedas and other Shastras 
are many, but life is very short. Moreover, in this life 
there are millions of hindrances. Therefore, one should 
acquire only the essence of all Shastras just as a duck 
takes the milk out of water with which it has been 
mixed* (17). An intelligent man should, after studying 
all Shastras, and after acquisition of knowledge of their 
essential principles,? abandon them all just as one who 
collects paddy throws away the husk and straw. As he 
who has been satisfied by a drink of nectar no longer 
cares for food, so one who has known the Spirit® has no 

1 That is, the people may forget the qualities of an ordinary man, 
but even in the case of a famous one there is dispute, etc. 

2 Author’s parenthesis. 3 Mila-tattva. 


4 It is able to sip the milk and leave the water, notwithstanding the 
two are together. 5 Tattva-padartha. 6 Tattva. 


BR NGPPlis, OF TANTRA tee 


Jonger need of the Shastras (18). O Lady adored of 
Viras*! liberation comes from knowledge alone; libera- 
tion cannot be had from anything else, neither from a 
study of the Vedas nor from reading of the Shastras. 
Neither the Vedas nor the philosophies are causes of 
liberation. Similarly, no Shastra is such cause. Know- 
ledge alone is the cause of liberation. All other branches 
of knowledge? are (for this purpose) fruitless. Better is 
it to bear even a single life-inspiring® great Mantra taught 
by Guru than the load of lifelesst blocks of wood which 
are various forms of worldly knowledge® (21). Only from 
the mouth of Guru cana Jiva learn the one immutable® 
Brahman’ which has been taught by Shiva Himself. 
Such knowledge cannot be attained through the study 
of even ten million Shastras ”’ (22). 

The Shastra not only speaks of the necessity of testing 
Tneetsorieebur also-ofthesmeed to carefully test the 
Shishya.? Before initiation a Shishya should live in his 
Guru’s house for one, two, three, or four years, according 
to'his caste. During these periods the Guru will test the 
reality of his devotion to Guru and Devata by constantly 
giving hard commands. Nothing concerning the Shishya’s 
body, mind, and speech should remain unknown to the 
Guru. During these years of residence with their tests 
the Guru will learn all about the Shishya’s whole life. 
He will test him to see whether after Shastrik initiation 
the Shishya will continue in the path of Sadhana as 
ordained in the Shastra. We do not know how many 
Shishyas exist to-day who are ready to undergo these 
tests, or how many are even aware of them, nor can we 
say how many Gurus are capable of holding such a test. 
It appears from the practice prevailing in these days that 
Gurus and Shishyas have made a private agreement 

1 See ante, p. 115, note 5. 2 Vidya. 3 Sanjivana. 

# Literally, ‘“‘ unconscious.’’ 5 Laukika Vidya, 

8 That is, the Brahman is Nishkriya (activeless), Prakriti is Sakriya 


(with action). Where there is non-duality there is no action. 
7 Advaita-tattva. 8 Disciple. 


122 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


between themselves to absolve each other of the responsi- 
bility of such mutual tests. In consequence of this com- 
pact the race of Gurus is to-day being exterminated, 
and the Shishyas, who should properly be the ruled, are 
becoming the rulers. Bhagavan, the Creator of all 
things, has also in the Tantra Shastra ordained rules for 
the testing of the Shishya, and has spoken as follows of 
the consequence of their violation: ) 

In the Navaratneshvara it is said: ““A Guru acquires 
fitness to give initiation and a Shishya to receive it, if they 
live together for one year.”’ 

In the Sadrasangraha it is said: “A good Guru will - 
test the Shishya under his care for one year.’ This test 
is for a Brahmana Shishya only. In the case of Shishyas 
belonging to the Kshatriya and other non-Brahmanik 
castes, the test is to be extended over gradually lengthen- 
ing periods. 

In the Rudrayamala it is said: “ Fitness to receive 
initiation is acquired by a Brahmana in one year, by a 
Kshatriya in two years, by a Vaishya in three years, and 
by a Shidra in four years after, their devotion to Guru 
has been during such period tested.” 

In the Kuldrnava and other Tantras it is said: “Ifa 
Guru initiates one who is unworthy through desire for 
wealth or through fear, greed, or the like, then the curse 
of Devata will fall on that Guru, and the initiation given 
by him will be fruitless. 

“Tt is useless to give initiation to one who is the 
Shishya of another, or who belongs to a bad family, or is 
a knavish, cunning, fraudulent man,* or who is vain of 
his learning, or who is disliked by his wife,” or who has 
passed the proper time for initiation, or has any physical 
defect.” 

1 Dhartta. 

2 Stridvishta. In rites the help of the wife is required, and nothing 
of use is achieved where there is lack of marital harmony. Moreover, 


his wife to the Shishya should be his house goddess (griha devata), and 
it is his duty to please her. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 123 


“He who gives initiation improperly, and he who 
receives it improperly, both the giver and receiver are 
cursed by the Devi. Without initiation according to the 
proper method and worship of the lotus-feet of Guru, the 
Shishya will but meet poverty and the Devi’s curse in 
this world.” | 

‘“ A Guru should first test a Shishya according to the 
rules of Shastra for the working out of the latter’s Bhoga! 
and Moksha,? and then give him instruction in Mantra, 
otherwise the initiation will be in vain. If through 
delusion both the Guru and Shishya give and receive 
instruction respectively in Mantra without mutually 
testing the fitness of one another, then both are doomed 
to the state of a Pishacha.? Both he who gives instruc- 
tion contrary to the Shastra, and he who receives it will, 
together with twenty-one generations above him, go to a 
Later iplesnell.’ 

“Tf a foolish Guru gives instruction to one who is 
unpurified,* then all his Mantras are destroyed—that is 
to say, their potency is lost, just as when paddy-seeds 
are sown in sandy soil their power to germinate is gone. 
As the minister’s sin affects the King, or that of a wife 
the husband, so a sin committed by a Shishya affects the 
Guru.’? 

In the Rudrayamala it is said: ‘“‘ A Guru should forsake 
a Shishya who is ever addicted to vice, lustful,® given 
over to other passions,’ of wicked mind,® and evil repute, 
untruthful, lacking in due humility,? wanting in know- 
ledge, wisdom, and dull of intellect, neglectful of Vaidik 
duty and of the Achara!® of his Ashrama,™ irreverent, 


1 Enjoyment and suffering. 2 Liberation. 

3 A low class of unclean spirits. 

4 Asangskrita. One who has not received the Sangskaras. 

5 The Guru will have to suffer for the Shishya’s sin. 6 Kamika. 

7 Kamadipriya. 8 Kutila, a designing man. 9 Avinita. 

10 Achara, from the root char (to do)—that is, acts, habits, practice. 
Evil practices are Anachara.! 

11 Stage of life (see Introduction). 


124 PRINCIPLES OF TANTS 


impatient, wrathful, adulterous, of evil mind and thought, 
without devotion, weak-minded, wicked, truthless, who 
does Sadhana with a heart unpurified, full of the defects 
of the Kali age, and spoken ill of by all. O Vira!’ if a 
Guru, through hope of wealth or the like, does not 
abandon such a Shishya, then that sinful Guru (more 
guilty than the Shishya) will, as well as the Shishya, be 
doomed to hell. The load of sins earned by that Shishya 
will, in a moment, destroy the Guru’s Siddhi, and at 
once throw him into hell for the undoing of all his deeds. 
Hence let a Guru take Shishyas after careful discrimina- 
tion according to the rules prescribed in the Shastra, 
otherwise he will be doomed to hell for his Shishya’s 
faults.” 


THE TIME FOR INITIATION. 


We nowadays find many reputed families of even the 
Brahmana caste, not to speak of Kshatriya and other 
castes whose members, though in no way under the 
influence of atheistic? principles, and having faith and 
reliance in Dharma,® are yet under the impression that 
the command of the Shastra in the matter of initiation 
is properly obeyed if a person is initiated some day or 
other of his life, no matter how old he may then be. Itis 
a matter of even greater regret that their Guru families 
labour under the same error. The cause of this is to be 
found in the Guru profession of the Guru families which 
we have described. However that may be, it is admitted 
on all hands that initiation is necessary for the purpose of 
Sadhana, and that its effect is Siddhi. Sadhana is per- 
formed with the co-operation of the threefold means of 
body, speech, and mind. When bodily functions have 
been fully developed and begun to show themselves in the 
spring shoots, it is then that the wind of the spring of 
initiation has begun to blow. It is to such persons as 
are not initiated at this time that the Shastra refers when 


1 See p. 115, note 5. 2 Nastika. 3 Religion and duty. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 125 


¢ 


it speaks of persons who have “ passed the proper time 
for initiation’ in the above quoted passage, setting forth 
the character of prohibited Shishyas.1 The proper time 
for initiation is the age of sixteen. The words of Devi 
to Shrikrishna in the Radha Tantra are as follows: 

“ One should receive initiation with devotion on the 
attainment of the age of sixteen. My Son! for one who 
has not received initiation at that age, even the Sang- 
skara® of taking the name of Hari is fruitless. (It is 
impossible to fully perform Sadhana after the expiry of 
the time for Sadhana, and a Mantra which has not been 
'matured by Sadhana does not bear fruit.*) One should, 
therefore, take care to receive initiation at the age of 
sixteen, otherwise everything which is done is counted 
but as the work of a Pashu.”’ 

For this reason Bhagavan Maheshvara has said: 
““O Mother of the three worlds! whoever after having 
travelled through eighty-four lakhs? of births has received 
the rare human form, yet fails to worship Thee, is like a 
man who rises to the top of a flight of stairs, and then 
falls down again.” Ifa man falls from one of the middle 
or lower steps of the staircase, he probably is wounded; 
or if he falls from one of the higher steps, he is likely to 
be killed; but if he falls from the highest point of the 
staircase, he cannot escape from being crushed and ground 
to dust. Similarly, if one falls after attaining human 
birth and Brahmanahood, which is rarer still, there is no 
easy escape for him. 

In the Kularnava Tantra it is said: ‘“‘ What wonder, 
O Devi! that this earthly body should be destroyed by 
the power of Him by whose power the earth is consumed, 
the Sumeru® is rent, and the Sea is dried up (1). We 
speak of ‘ My son,’ ‘ My wife,’ ‘ My wealth,’ ‘ My friend,’ 
but before one has got over this sort of senseless talk 
death seizes the body like a tiger (2). Death seizes a 


Bee N16, P. 122. 2 “ Sacrament.” 3 Author’s parenthesis. 
4 A lakh equals 100,000. 5 Mountain. 


126 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


man while he is still engaged in doing this thing or that 
thing, or thinking that he will have to do this thing or 
that thing (3). An intelligent man will do to-day the 
work of to-morrow, and in the forenoon the work of the 
afternoon, for death does not wait for the finishing or 
unfinishing of any work (4). Does not Jiva see approach- 
ing him before his eyes Death’s terrible army of diseases 
guided by Old Age, and with orders from Death him- 
self? (5). Death eats man after piercing him with the 
spit of thirst (desire), smearing him with the Ghee of 
mundane objects,* and roasting him in the fire of 
attachment and dislike (6). Death brings all under his 
rule, both boy or youth, old man or child in the womb. 
The visible world thus remains subject to death (7). 
Brahma, Vishnu, Maheshvara, and other Devas, and all 
classes of beings, move towards their own destruction 
(disappearance). A Jiva should, therefore, be prompt in 
doing with all his heart such things as are calculated to 
benefit him in this world and hereafter (8).”’ 

To him who has faith in such direct statements of the 
Shastra, and has eyes to see the transiency, under natural 
law, of the physical body, which is but a bubble in the 
visible world of Jivas, even the sovereignty of the vast 
Universe is as worthless as a blade of grass when compared 
with the value of even half a second of human existence. 
We know not to what benighted region we shall have 
to travel, according to our own Karma, after the disso- 
lution of this present body. Even Devas pray to be born 
in Bharata-varsha,’ that they may be there liberated by 
birth in a precious human body after forsaking all its 
enjoyments. This is that Bharatavarsha, that Aryya- 
varta,* which is the field of liberation and which, as well 
as our human body, has been attained, not by our effort, 
but by Her grace. If this time we lose these, who is so 

1 Vishaya. 2 Author’s parenthesis. 3 India. 


4 Aryydvarta is the western portion of Northern India. Bhdarata- 
varsha is all India, but now commonly used synonymously. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 727, 


fortunate amongst us as to dare say that he will surely 
return to this Bharata, this Aryyavarta, the land which 
it is hard for even Devas to attain? Who, too, will dare 
to say that he will also regain this human state and this 
Brahmanism ? Who can say to what unseen region this 
vaporous cloud will be blown by the wind of some 
unknown fate’? Hence, while there is yet time and the 
sun shines, the Mother’s son must cease playing, and seek 
to go to the Mother. He must take refuge with all his 
heart at the feet of Guru, that he may find the path in 
this deep darkness, making himself, according to the com- 
mand of the Shastra, the meanest servant of the Guru, in 
order that he may become an object of his mercy. 

The Shastra itself, the seat of infinite mercy, has 
specified the characteristics which a Shishya must 
possess in order that the desire, fulfilling creeper? of 
Guru’s grace, may bear fruit. 

For instance, it is said in the Gautamiya Tantra: 
“Born in a noble family; of pure spirit; seeking that 
which is the necessity of Purusha (Purushartha—the four- 
fold object of Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha’); 
learned in the Vedas; wise; devoted to the service of 
parents; a knower of Dharma* and a doer thereof; 
attached to the personal service of Guru; proficient in 
Shastra; strong of body and mind; ever desirous of doing 
good to Jivas; a doer of acts which bear good fruit in the 
next world; devoted to the service of Guru in speech, 
mind, body, and with his wealth; mindful only of acts 
the fruit of which endure’; with control over the senses; 
free from sloth; free from delusion and vanity ; devoted to 
Guru’s son, wife, and so forth as to the Guru himself—of 
such qualities should a Shishya be possessed, otherwise he 
is but a source of trouble for his Guru.” 


1 Adrishta. 2 Kalpalata. 
3 Author’s parenthesis—that is, religion, wealth, desire, and its 
fulfilment and liberation. 4 Religion, duty, etc. 


5 Not troubling over that which is transient and of no real account. 


128 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


In the Kularnava Tantra it is said: ‘‘O Mother! a Guru 
should not take as his Shishya one who is possessed of any 
of the following or similar faults: He should not accept 
one who is born in a family cursed by a Brahmana or 
almost extinct!; without any good quality on the maternal 
side; one who has been already initiated by a good Guru; 
an unbeliever?; imbecile (physically impotent or incapable 
of performing Sadhana)*; with an overweening idea of his 
own learning; having less or more than the usual number 
of or deformed limbs; paralyzed, blind, deaf, dirty, dis- 
eased, excommunicated, foul-mouthed; careless of the 
rules of dress*; full of faults?; with imperfect limbs, gait, 
and speech; ever inactive; under the influence of sleep or 
drowsiness; lazy and addicted to gambling and similar 
vices; whose appearance does not betoken devotion; 
mean minded, wanting in loyalty, and given to exag- 
gerated, improper, and obscene talk®; wanting in feeling 
for others; with no will of his own; ready to receive 
initiation and do other acts, not out of any particular 
desire of his own, but at the instigation of others; the 
mere instigator of others (he does not do anything himself, 
but instigates others’); cunning; impure as regards wealth 
and wife (he whose wealth has not been earned in the way 
prescribed in the Shastra, or whose wife is not married to 
him according to the Shastra, or is not chaste)’; given to 
the performance of acts prohibited by the Shastra, and 


1 For this indicates some inherited sin. 

2 Pashanda. 

3 Author’s parenthesis. 

4 Svechchhaveshadhara, who dresses as he likes, neglectful of the 
rules therefor. In Shastra there are rules for dressing, and for dressing 
at different times and for different Sadhanas. 

5 Dashita. 

6 This is the author’s translation of Vyalikavadi. By exaggerated 
talk is meant impossible “ yarns.’”’ It is “improper” where things, 
which may be permissibly said before one person, are not so permissible 
in the case of others—e.g., before parents and women. Ashlila is 
obscene. 

7 Author’s parenthesis. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 129 


omitting to do those which it enjoins; whose habit it is to 
divulge secrets, and to do mischief; of catlike qualitiest 
(as a cat takes away an article of food from the presence 
of men and eats it in a secluded place)?; self-conceited ; 
crane-like in nature (as a crane appears to be out- 
wardly very calm and quiet while all the time it is think- 
ing of destroying others’ lives, so this class of man, whilst 
possessing the external appearance of quiet, is yet in his 
inner self most dangerous)?; a detractor; deceitful; 
ungrateful; given to spying into others’ secrets; treacher- 
ous; rebellious; sinful; atatayi (atatayis are criminals of 
six classes—namely, incendiaries, poisoners, persons who 
bear arms to injure others, who steal others’ wealth, or 
lands, and others’ wives)?; one-eyed; of ill repute; who 
bears false witness; a deceiver of people; braggart or liar; 
cruel; indecent in speech; talkative; of wrong judgment as 
regards men or things’; quarrelsome; given to rebuking 
people without reason; ignorant; Charvaka (Nastika or 
unbeliever)?; a bore*; one who slanders people behind 
their back and speaks well of them before their face; or 
one pretending to a knowledge of Brahman which he does 
not possess; plagiarist;° or self-praiser, envious, given to 
evil-doing, or peevish (dissatisfied with his own self 
through being of an excessively angry temperament).’’° 

In the Gandharva Tantra it is said: ‘‘ Duly possessed of 
the aforesaid qualities; very sweet of tongue; stainless in 
body and speech; wearing white cloth; pure in habits’; 
incapable of speaking ill of others, or of showing disrespect 
to Devatas; never covetous of others’ food, wives, and 
land ; unwilling to give pain to others; kind to all creatures; 
sharp witted; a master of his senses; a believer® devoted 

1 Marjjaravritti. 2 Author’s parenthesis. 

3 Kuvichara, wrongly judging people or things. 

4 Through his talk. VAagvidamvaka, literally, ‘‘one who punishes 
others by his talk.” 

5 Vidyachaura. 

6 Atmakrodhana; author’s parenthesis. 7 

7 Shuchi. 8 Astika. 

VOL, Il. sf, 


130 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


to Guru; pure; calm-minded; without avarice, constant in 
his friendships; assiduous to obey the Guru’s words; ever 
firm in devotion to Guru, Mantra, and Devata; a 
Shishya should be possessed of such qualities, otherwise 
he will surely be a source of trouble to his Guru.” 

“A Shishya should, after bowing to his Guru, sit beside 
him, and leave his presence only with his permission. He 
should serve his Guru always with the desire to satisfy 
him, and should obey his orders with pleasure. He should 
never tell a lie or talk idly before his Guru. A $Shishya 
should not give way to lust, anger, greed, displeasure,’ 
loud laughter, flattery, fickleness, crookedness, remorse, 
before his Guru; nor should he have relations with him by 
way of lending, borrowing, selling, or buying. For Guru 
is Shiva Himself, and any attempt to establish with Him a 
relation other than that of worship with prayer and 
obeisance is likely to lead the Shishya to think of him as a 
mere man. To know that there is no distinction between 
Ishtadevata and Mantra, between Mantra and Guru, and 
between Guru and Atma. This, O Beloved! is the order 
in which devotion shows itself. He who disregards his 
Guru’s words and performs prayer and worship? according 
to his own notions thereof will never attain Siddhi in 
either Japa® of Mantra or worship of Devata. One should 
daily worship one’s Guru according to the Shastra by 
Japa or Mantras. The seat, bed, clothes, ornaments, 
shoes, shadow, and wife, and every other thing belonging 
to or connected with the Guru should be worshipped as 
though they were parts of the Guru himself.4 One should 
never walk across the Guru’s bed, seat, shoes, umbrella, 
bathing-water, or shadow. At the sight of Guru one 
should be cheerful and full of great joy, but should regard 

1 Mana. | 2 Upasana. 

3 “* Recitation ’’ (see Introduction). 

4 Literally, ‘‘ as his Vibhiatis ’’—-that is, as belonging to or connected 
with him; something of him may be said to enter into them. More- 


over, true respect is shown to a person when all which belongs to or is 
connected with him is respected. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 131 


his lotus-feet with awe and cautious eyes. There is not 
room enough in this book to quote even a hundredth part 
of all that is ordained in the Shastra as to the duties of a 
Shishya towards his Guru. It will, therefore, be useless to 
go further into that point here. The very fact that in the 
Shastra Guru has been spoken of ‘‘ as Shiva Himself in 
visible form,” thus giving to even the Ishtadevata a 
secondary position, will of itself enable intelligent Sad- 
hakas to understand what are a Shishya’s duties towards 
that most worshipful Supreme Devata. 


CHAPTER XV 
WORSHIP IN GENERAL! 


Pvyja? 


ANY people nowadays in a community which lays 
claim to great wisdom believe that image-worship 

was introduced and is maintained in the Aryya Society for 
those only who are very weak—that is, those who belong 
to a very low order of spirituality. We have little leisure 
to devote our attention to the words of such men as 
discuss these matters from the outside, just as a non- 
Aryya looks at the Durga-ptja festival in an Aryya house 
from the courtyard outside the Chandimandapa.? We 
are servants of the Shastra, and as such are bound to 
preach what the Shastra has clearly established. We 
shall therefore now see what Ptja (worship) is according 
to the Shastra. It is a matter of great regret that even 
amongst preachers of Shastrik principles there are many 
who are under the impression that “‘worship of the Deity 
with form* or image-worship?® is only a means of producing 
steadiness of mind.® They opine, therefore, that for him 
who has acquired such steadiness there is no longer any 
necessity for worship of the Deity with form or image- 


1 SaAdharana-upasanatattva. 

2 Piija is ceremonial worship with articles of worship (upachdara), 
generally before images. Upasana has a wider signification, being 
worship in its widest sense, including spiritual practices of all kinds, 
whilst the Sadhaka is in the realm of dualism. 

3 Place in the house in which worship of images is performed. _ 

4 Sakdara updsana. 5 Murti pija: Marti (form or appearance). 

6 Manahsthira. 

132 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 133 


worship. According to this argument we must suppose 
that there is an arrangement between the Devata appear- 
ing with form or present in an image and the worshipper 
by which the latter’s connection with the former endures 
only so long as his mind is not steadied, and that when it 
is so the Devata ceases to exist forhim. At the commence- 
ment and end of the worship of the Deity with form? the 
Sadhaka forgets himself and offers at His feet everything 
which he calls ‘My’ or ‘I.’” As regards this worship 
Bhagavan Himself, the Creator of all things, has in the 
Kularnava Tantra said, ‘“‘ Obeisance to that faith from 
which springs Siddhi in all things and the force of which 
makes even earth, wood, and stone bear real fruits.’’ 
Reference is here made to that whole-hearted faith by the 
attraction of which Devata Himself, who is all conscious- 
ness, is drawn towards and made to appear in uncon- 
scious images* made of earth, wood, or stone, or in 
Yantras,* and grants real fruits to Sadhakas in the form 
of Siddhi. If, then, worship with form founded on a 
Sadhaka’s firm faith is compatible with the belief that 
the Devata with form is false and is merely a means of 
steadying the mind, then I know not what kind of worship 
with form it is. Secondly, from such a wrong conclusion 
contrary to Shastra and opposed to all experience, it also 
follows that Pija, Patha, Japa, Homa, Shanti, Svastya- 
yana,* and the like, are nothing but lost labour, for we are 
told that the only effect of worship of the Deity with 
form is the establishment of steadiness of mind. We 
need hardly say that it is also lost labour to proceed to 
disprove a conclusion which on examination displays its 
own profound infidelity. Our object, however, in intro- 
ducing the subject here is to reveal the mystery of the 


1 Sakara upasana. 2 Pratima: Prati=likeness. | 

3 Diagrams (see Introduction). 

4 That is, ceremonial worship, reading, and recitation of the sacred 
texts, repetition of Mantras, sacrifice into fire, rites for working good 
and dispelling evil. 


134 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


problem as to “‘ how in course of worship of the corporeal 
the incorporeal is seen.”’ 

The Shastra says a Sadhaka should engage in medita- 
tion! by gradually concentrating* his mind on all parts 
of the Ishtadevata’s body; that is to say, the Sadhaka 
should, by repeatedly fixing his attention on the parts of 
the Ishtadevata’s body one by one, from the sole of His 
foot to His face or from His face to the sole of His foot, 
acquire such concentration as will during unperturbed 
meditation reveal to his mind’s eye the whole body of the 
Devata at one and the same time. If this be done, 
meditation on the Deity with form will gradually become 
both profound and steady. But remarkable, indeed, 
must be the profundity of meditation and concentration 
of those who from this come to the conclusion that the 
Formless will appear of itself in the course of meditation 
on the Deity with form in the sense that the Formless? will 
drive away the Deity with form.4 The Shastra has, of 
course, said that when the mind has become steady 
through meditation on the gross image it may meditate 
on the subtle image. When the mind has been perfectly 
centred, then the Devata is revealed in both Her gross 
and subtle aspects;° that is to say, in course of meditation 
on His playful® image such subtle aspects as omnipresence, 
possession of Maya, state of being above Maya, and so 
forth, are perceived in a subtle form as Shakti of conscious- 
ness, just as such gross aspects as love for devotees, all- 
mercifulness, almightiness, and so forth, instinct with the 
outcome of play, are perceived; and this is what actually 
happens to a Sadhaka when he attains Siddhi. We are 


1 Dhyana. 2 Dharana. 3 Nirdkara. 

4 Sakara. There are a class of people who think that forms are 
nothing, and, being purely imaginary, disappear when the real Formless 
One appears, and are merely useful to prepare the way for this; whereas 
the forms are the real bodies of the Devata, just as the physical body 
is the sheath of the Atma. The Devata does really appear in these 
forms. 


5 Sikshmatattva and Sthilatattva. 6 Lilamaya. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 135 


unable to make out how it can be concluded from this that 
the Devata with form vanishes and the formless appears. 
It is, of course, not a matter of wonder that to those whose 
meditation on the Deity with form is from the very com- 
mencement based on the notion that “‘ the form is false,”’ 
such form will vanish by the force of their singular 
devotion; nor is it impossible that when the form has 
vanished, an incorporeality which is non-existence? itself 
will be seen as a matter of course. What is to be here 
regretted is that mere men should without hesitation seek 
to establish as Shastrik this sight of an incorporeal 
nothing which their fate* has made inevitable for them.* 

In the Shrimadbhagavata Bhagavan Himself has said 
to Uddhava, the crest-gem of devotees: “‘ Just as gold is 
freed of its dross only by fire, and also gains its own 
(bright)° appearance by the heat of that fire, so a Jiva’s 
Atma is cleansed of the filth of Karma and desire by means 
of the Yoga of devotion® to Me, and is also transformed 
into My Brahman aspect by means of that same Bhakti- 
Yoga. Atma becomes purer and purer by hearing and 
uttering sacred hymns’ in My praise. The devotee 
whose heart is thus purified by devotion to Me sees with 
increasing power the supersensual® subtle truth as the 
physical eye when painted with collyrium is enabled to 
perceive very minute objects. Just as the heart of a 
person who constantly thinks of wife, son, and other 
mundane objects, becomes attached to them only, so the 
heart of him who constantly thinks of Me becomes merged 
in Myself. Hence, O Uddhava! give up thinking of the 
objects of the world, false and made of Maya as they are, 


1 Abhava. 

2 The author is here satirical. In the case of him who does not 
perceive the Devata with form, and thinks it to be nothing, it is quite 
natural that the Formless, whose form it is, should be nothing. 

3 Adrishta. 

4 They have not the fortune to be able to perceive the truth. 


5 Author’s parenthesis. 6 Bhakti. 
7 Gatha. 8 Atindriya. 


136 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


like objects of desire got in dream, and rest your mind, 
full of thoughts of Me in Me.’ Again, on the subject of 
meditation’ He has said: “‘ A Yogi will call to mind within 
the circle of fire in the lotus of his heart this form? of 
mine, beneficial in meditation—namely, a form full- 
limbed, calm, of beautiful features, with four long? and 
beautiful arms; a graceful neck and a fair forehead; with 
divine and gracious smile; decked with brilliant ear- 
ornaments? in his two well-shaped ears; dressed in yellow 
or deep blue; brilliant with the beauty of the Shrivatsa 
mark®; bearing a conch shell, a discus, a club, and a lotus 
in his four hands, and a garland of wild flowers on the 
breast; with lotus-feet shining with the lustre of be- 
jewelled anklets®; illumined with the light of the Kaus- 
tubha gem; ornamented with shining crown, bracelets, 
waist-chain, and armlets; beauteous in all limbs, pleasant; 
his countenance sweet with grace; with tender eyes and 
form fair tolook upon. He will meditate on this pleasing 
Brahma-form by fixing his mind on allitslimbs. Drawing 
his senses, such as sound, touch, sight, taste, and smell 
from their objects by means of his mind,’ and with the 
aid of Buddhi,®’ the charioteer the Sadhaka, will bathe his 
mind completely in the waters of love for Me. After that 
he will draw that mental vision® hitherto spread over all 
my limbs to one place and hold it there. It will not then 
be necessary for the Sadhaka to think of anything else.?° 
He will only meditate upon My countenance, on which 
plays a soft and sweet smile. When the mind can unin- 
terruptedly and without distraction contemplate that 
countenance, he will withdraw his single-pointed mind 
and fix itin the ether.** Then, after perceiving My (afore- 


1 Dhyana. 2 Ripa. 3 Long arms are a sign of strength. 
4 Makaras and Kundalas, ornaments of the ear. 

5 A lock of hair on the breast of Vishnu. 6 Nupuras. 

7 Manas. 8 Intellect. 9 Chittavritti. 


10 Previously the mind has been thinking of various attributes of the 
Devata—His person, dress adornments, and so forth; now it simply 
gazes on His countenance. 11 Vyoma. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 137 


said) subtle manifestations! in ether, in the mansions,” or 
in the whole of the infinite ether, he will draw his mental 
faculty, which has had the entire ether as its object, and 
again rest it in Me as the Paramatma. Then it will not 
be necessary to meditate on anything.? The Yogi, thus 
in Samadhi,4 will see me as the Paramatma of all Jivas as 
his own Atmé; as one light mingled with another, and not 
different from it. In a Yogi, who has thus by intense 
meditation attained Samadhi, the three forms of error®— 
namely, object of knowledge, knowing, and action®°— 
will soon be subdued.” 

A Sadhaka will here understand that Updsana’ exists 
only so long as Dhyana® exists. In the next stage, which 
is Samadhi or Nirvana, the mental faculty® is lost in the 
womb of Prakriti. The Yogi, who has thus lost his mind,’° 
forgets even the Jivatma as something separate from the 
Paramatma. Who, then, is it who perceives the incor- 
poreal aspect in the one and only substance of conscious 
ness at the time when even the sense ‘I exist ’’ is lost, 
when the senses, mind, and even the “‘ I,’”’ do not exist ? 
It is indeed difficult to solve this problem. We call this 
state not “ seeing the incorporeal,”’ but Videha-Kaivalya.™ 
We may admire the energy of those who in the hope of 
their becoming incorporeal in the circumstances described 
above, invoke the incorporeal, and see shapeless dreams 
for a hundred births; but to such we would also say that 
there is no need to try to make arrangements to become 
incorporeal, for He who will one day make this entire 
corporeal universe incorporeal will not bide long to make 
either you or me incorporeal when the occasion for doing 
so arises. But know it for certain, that so long as the 


1 Vibhitis. 2 Kaksha—thus a solar system would be such. 
3 For the mind and all else now becomes one with the Paramatma. 
4 Ecstasy, or the fourth Turiya state. 

5 Bhrama. 6 Dravya, jndna, kriya. 7 Worship. 

8 Meditation. 9 Manovritti. 10 Manas. 

1 Bodiless Kaivalya—-that is, Kaivalya in which all trammels of 
body or limitation disappear, or full liberation. 


i 


138 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Deity with form does not appear before you, not even the 
Devata without form can dissolve your own bodily form 
and give you Kaivalya*+ So much about meditation, 
concentration, and trance.” 

Next comes the process of Paija.* We have more than 
once shown that there can be no Updasana® of anything 
incorporeal. Now, what is image-worship ?*+ We must 
also see whether image-worshippers are really fools of a 
low order of spirituality who are led by blind faith. We 
cannot call that a criticism of image-worship which comes 
from those who have no inner knowledge of the subject. 
Rather it is a criticism of what they understand to be 
image-worship; for Puja and so forth are things of the 
Shastra, which lays down the mode of Paja, and the 
person competent to perform Ptja is a Sadhaka. On the 
other hand, the critic’s criticism is contrary to what the 
Shastra and Sadhaka say—“ It is Sadhana and Siddhi,”’ 
say the Shastra and Sadhaka. “It is play and amuse- 
ment,’’ says the critic. Now, in this conflict of views 
how can we disbelieve the word of those who by their 
practice have intimate knowledge of the matter, and 
believe those who have nothing to do with Shastra, 
Sadhana, or Siddhi? IJmage-worship is not to be under- 
stood from outside. Only the worshipper understands it. 
The critic, therefore, is nothing but a critic of his own 
intelligence and education. One who does Paija and one 
who merely observes it are not, surely, the same thing. 
One who looks at a sweet-shop can tell us the shape, 
colour, and quantity of the sweets there, as also whether 
they are hot or cold to the touch; but can he tell us whether 
their taste is sweet or bitter, sour or pungent ? How- 
soever clever a man may be, he only can tell us thereof 
who has tasted them with his tongue. Again, one who 
himself knows the taste of a sweet can never, despite his 
personal knowledge, make another who has never tasted 


1 Because in such case the worship is of no avail. 
? Dhyana, Dharana, Samadhi. 3 Vide ante, p. 132. 4 Mairtiptja. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 139 


it realize its taste even by the use of a thousand forms of 
speech or other device. Similarly, how can a man without 
faith know that supersensual truth which a capable 
Sadhaka realizes when he establishes a Devata’s life in 
his image by the powerful potency? of Mantra? The 
Shastra has nowhere said that one may as one wishes 
perceive the presence of Devata in the street, market, or 
at the bathing ghat? just as one desires. It has said, if 
such and such things are done, such and such things will 
happen. Now I ask, How much of those things have you 
and I done? The Shastra has said that it is only when a 
Sadhaka has long served his Guru, after having been 
tested and initiated by him in accordance with Shastra, 
and when he has fully understood the principles of 
Sadhana and become able to awaken the potency’ of 
Mantra through the preliminary Shastrik rites, that he 
becomes competent to cause by means of that Mantra 
the appearance of the conscious Devaté in Yantras, 
images, and so forth, made of such unconscious substances 
as earth, stone, and the like. Now, brother critic, tell 
me truly in the name of Dharma, opening for once the door 
of your heart, what have you done of all this? At the 
outset you are deeply suspicious, a great unbeliever. You 
have not the right even to serve Guru or receive initiation, 
not to speak of performing Sadhana and worship,® yet 
such as you are you proceed to criticize the worship of 
Devata in images, which can only be done by competent 
Sadhakas, who have knowledge of super-worldly truths.* 
What can be greater impudence on your part than this ? 
Unfortunately, in this land of madmen there is none to 
call a madman mad, and so, O brother critic! fortunately 
for you there is none to criticize you. But do not for 
this reason think to-day that the earth is the capita] of 
mad men only. 


1 Shakti. 
2 The steps leading down to the river or other water down which 
those who go to bathe, etc., descend. 3 Bhajana. 4 Tattva. 


140 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


The subtle criticism of critics and the goodness of 
Dayananda’s' party have nowadays given birth to a few 
new words, such as image-worship,? doll-worship,® and 
so forth. In consequence of the wide currency which has 
been given to such language by the community of un- 
believers, many senseless Hindus, both illiterate and 
literate, now take pride in publicly calling themselves 
image-worshippers or idolaters. Perhaps they think that 
these words are approved of the Shastra.- But how 
regrettable is this when we consider that such words 
cannot issue from the mouth of a man, the son of Manu, 
unless he has been born in a non-Aryya family with a 
non-Aryya disposition. The words when we consider 
them reveal a mine of profound infidelity.4 Many 
authors write, ‘“‘ The practice of worshipping images has 
been prevalent in the Aryya community from ancient 
times.’’ One might suppose from this that we had merely 
to do with the worship of images without reference to 
Mantra, Devata, or Sadhana. Others, fond of far-fetched 
meanings, say that image-worship is like the modern 
practice of showing respect and honour to the lifeless 
statues raised in memory of lamented deceased persons; 
just as if Devatas were all dead, and we (shameless 
men who have no faith in the next world and yet call 
ourselves Aryya) were showing our gratitude to them 
before their images. Alas! O Bhagavan! when will the 
eyes of this class of born-blind educated fools be opened ? 
When will we be saved from all such interpretations ? 
How long will this generation of Ghatotkachas,° sprung 
from the seed of Bhima in the womb of Hidimva, last ? 


1 Founder of the “ reformed *’ Hinduism known as the Aryya Samaj. 

2 Pratimaptja, or mtrti-ptja. 

3 Pauttalikata. Puttali means doll. 

4 Nastikata. Because it is not the pratima or the mirti, still less a 
doll, which.is worshipped, but the Devata in the heart, which inthe 
pranapratishtha rite is transferred to the image and worshipped. 

5 Demon Rdakshasa, son of Bhima (one of the Pandavas), and 
Higimva, a Rakshasi. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA I4I 


Half-castes are governed by the Dharma! of their mothers, 
therefore is it Bharata’s ill fortune that so-called religious 
principles* propounded in the nineteenth century vomit 
only infidelity. But the matter does not rest even here. 
For is it not said that Aryyas who worship the Deity with 
form are idolaters,® that idolatry is their Dharma, or, 
in other words, that those who worship the Deity with 
form worship idols, images of Devatas being those idols; 
that worship of the Devata with form is like the play of 
ignorant children with dolls, and that those who perform 
such worship are as ignorant as such children. O critic! 
you consider yourself to be a wise man. Will you tell me 
that those Sadhakas, crest-gems of the race of the wise, 
worshippers of the Devata with form, were ignorant fools— 
men who produced? the Vedas, Tantras, Puranas, systems 
of Philosophy, Astronomy, Ayurveda® and Dhanurveda ?® 
‘Why! itis the partaking by you of the mere leavings of 
their food in the pages of books which makes you so proud 
of your knowledge and wisdom.’ Is it not to invite 
death for insects like you and I to attempt to-day to 
leap across that sky-kissing untraversable mass of light,® 
which they with all the profundity of their knowledge, 
philosophy, and science took this worship to be? Hari! 
Hari! to call the most worshipful image of Devata, the 
object of the Sadhaka’s Sadhana an idol.? To call the 
Yantra* (in which presides the Devata who is conscious- 
ness itself) unconscious and inert. And yet it is only 
because an indistinct shadow of that Devata of con- 
sciousness is cast upon you that you believe your own 


1 Law. 2 Adhyatmika tattva. 3 Puttalika. 

4 That is, in the sense that the Scriptures are revealed to, and through, 
and spoken by the Rishis, who arranged them. In the higher sense 
the Veda is apaurusheya—that is, without author. 

5 Medical Shastra. 6 Scripture of warfare; literally, archery. 

7 What these men have put in their books is regarded as their food. 
So great are they that the so-called critics are proud of a knowledge 
gained second-hand from the leavings of such food. 

8 Lejas. ®Puttali: 10 Diagram (see Introduction). 


142 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


body to be conscious! When as an ignorant little child 
you sleep you may easily think that you are devoid of 
consciousness. But will a grown-up child also (who can 
call and awaken you!) think so? To the Father or the 
Mother of the Universe you and I are similarly ignorant 
children, and hence to us His or Her image appears un- 
conscious. But he who can call and awaken Him or Her 
—that is to say, he to whom Mother Kulakundalini the 
Devi, who is eternal wakefulness, has given the power to 
call and awaken Her by awaking Herself in him—to him 
the true image of Her body can never appear unconscious, 
for by the grace of Her who is consciousness he himself has 
been transformed into consciousness itself. You and I 
are unconscious? ourselves, and so to us Her image also 
appears unconscious. It is neither Her fault nor the 
fault of Her image. It is the fault of the Karma done by 
us in past lives. 

A discussion is impossible on the subject of the diverse 
fruits of worship, for it is difficult to explain the character® 
of fruits to a person who has no knowledge of the different 
kinds of taste. For this reason we shall endeavour to see 
by a consideration of the mode in which worship is done 
whether the community of Aryya SAdhakas—the wor- 
shippers of the corporeal, the worshippers of the Deity 
with form®—are ignorant fools of a low grade of spiritual 
competency or not. 

According to the Shastra it is the nature® of Asuras’ to 
be made dumb® with anger at the very mention of images 
of Devata. A feeling of enmity against Devata can never 
arise in a person’s mind unless there is an Asura disposi- 
tion in his character and family. Again, without the 
appearance of such a feeling of enmity one is never liber- 

1 Author’s parenthesis. 

2 Jada; not, of course, wholly so, but in the sense that we do not 
possess true consciousness, which perceives the Brahman in all things. 

3 Tattva. 4 Martimayi. 5 Sakara updsana. 6 Dharma. 
? The demoniac enemies of the Devas. 
8 Literally, ‘‘ unconscious.” 


Bea NGIPEES OF TANDRA 143 


ated from the state of an Asura. Just as according to 
natural laws when fever is about to leave a man his body 
perspires, so when the time comes for liberation from the 
state of an Asura a feeling of enmity against Devata is 
shown, for neither religious merit nor sin bears fruit in this 
world unless it grows enormous. Perhaps you think, 
“the image is not Devata. Why, then, does this body 
of fools! laugh or weep?” I ask, O prince of learned 
infidels! why, then, do you become angry at the mention 
of images of Devata? It is true that an Asura becomes 
angry at the mention of the names of Devata, but accord- 
ing to you an image is not Devata. Why, then, do you 
become angry at the mere sight of it? Angerisa Vikara? 
as much as laughter and weeping are. It may be that 
the sight of a Devata’s image causes in you anger, a 
rajasa vikara characteristic of a Danava’s state; while it 
causes in me joy, laughter, or tears of joy, Sattvika 
-vikaras* characteristic of manhood. Prakriti, consti- 
tuted of three Gunas, is the Mistress of those Gunas, and 
according to the proportions in which they occur in 
different persons She reveals different characteristics in 
them. If the sight of a Devata’s image had not produced 
any Vikarain you,* then you might one day say, ‘‘ Why do 
these people laugh or weep?” But when you are wont 
to become angry at the sight of an image, you would do 
well to think that that which can make one person angry 
can also make another person laugh or weep—that in the 
unconscious image there 1s some such powerful conscious- 
ness asmakes your eyes (which look upon all other persons 
and things with feelings of love, mercy, and brotherliness) 
red with a feeling of enmity. You, of course, do not 
believe that the image is the Devata. But just consider 
that if the mere giving the image the name of Devata can 
1 That is, the author and those that think with him. 
2 Transformation of a thing from that which is its original nature. 


3 That is, transformations due to the action of the Rajas and Sattva 
Gunas respectively. 


4 That is, had you yourselves been apathetic. 


144 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


cause in you a Vikarat so contrary to human feelings, 
what a great Vikara of joy and felicity ought to be pro- 
duced in those who see in that image the true light? of 
Devata. ‘With your physical eyes you see the worship of 
an image, but he who worships sees, with his super- 
human vision, the full appearance of Her who is con- 
sciousness itself in that unconscious instrument,’ the 
image. During the period extending from the invocation 
of life* until its final disposal® the earthen image is in 
the eyes of the Sadhaka, which have been cleared by 
the collyrium paint of Siddhi, consciousness itself.° It 
sheds the light, which is Brahman, of the beauty of 
the Mother of the Universe, the Brahmamayi, full of ever 
new charms. 

This is the Sadhaka’s point of view. Butif you, without 
Sadhana and full of scepticism, know and really believe 
the image to be unconscious, then what a mean, hateful, 
cowardly disposition you show in becoming angry with it. 
Why become angry with a thing which you know is 
unconscious and without power? Why, like Asura 
Kangsa, do you proceed to break the image by dashing it 
against the ground?’ You want to grasp and dash 
against the ground that which even a Prince of Yogis 
cannot keep confined in the temple of his heart!® You 
want to destroy one whom Kangsa could not subdue !% 
What can be a greater impudence on your part than this ? 

1 Vide ante, p. 143. 2 Pratyaksha jyotih. 

Pe Yantra. + Into the image by the Sadhaka. 

5 Visarjana; the withdrawing of the mental image from the objective 
image, with the Sanghara (dissolution) Mudra when it is broken 
and thrown away. It must be disposed of as a dead body. The 
root Visrija=to abandon, to leave, to give up; and Visarjana is 
allowing the Deity invoked to go from the image at the conclusion of 
worship. 

6 As collyrium clears the eye, so Siddhi or success in worship enables 
the Sddhaka to see in the earthen image, Consciousness. 

7 This Asura dashed the children of his sister Devaki on a stone, as 
he had been told that one of the children would be his destroyer. 


8 So great is the Devata that even great Yogis cannot hold Her. 
9 That is, Krishna. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 145 


With a frown at insignificant insects like you the Daughter 
of Nanda’ will return to the Vindhya mountain in order 
to destroy the conquerors of the three worlds, such as 
Shumbha and Nishumbha; but in order to crush your 
arrogance She will leave behind that manifestation? of 
Hers,* who descends in Nanda’s house in Gokula for play 
in the world of men. Had not Kangsa believed that he 
would receive from the eighth child of Devaki® the 
punishment he deserved for his sins, would he have 
proceeded to destroy her sons and daughters? This 
example makes us think that it is not that you do not 
believe in the divinity of images, but that it is in the fear of 
having to suffer the cruel torments of hell in repentance 
for your sins that you proceed to break them. This is 
the distinctive characteristic of your faith. From such 
fear you believe in images, but the pity of it is that, like 
the memory of an intoxicated man, this belief leaves you 
the moment you become blinded with a feeling of enmity. 
When under the influence of anger only you proceed to 
break them, you fail to realize whom you are going to 
break. O critic! none can break or make Her. Whom 
do you want to frighten by breaking the outer image ? 
We, too, break it after worship. May be that you dispose 
of it within your house while we dispose of it in water.° 
We dispose of the outer image outwardly and guard the 
inner image in our heart. The light of the image whose 
substance is consciousness, which we brought out from 
within us and attached to the image made of earth, we 
take back into ourselves after we have done with the 
worship of this earthen image. Nothing is thus broken 
and done altogether away with as in your case. As the 
outer temple® held the brilliance of a beauty filling the 
world, so also does the inner temple hold the grandeur of 


1 Devi as Yogamaya incarnated as daughter of Nanda, who gave 
Her to Vasudeva in exchange for Krishna, who was left with Nanda. 


2 Vibhiti. 3 That is, Krishna. a~ Tjlas 

5 After worship the image is thrown into water, such as the sacred 
Ganges. 6 Mandapa. 

OES IST. Io 


146 = PRINCIPLES: OF TANT Ey 


an incomparable beauty. Our Mother is without as She 
is within, and within as She is without. By my thus 
moving Her in thought from within to without and from 
without to within the door of my heart will become fully 
opened. On that day all invocation’ and final dismissal? 
into and from the image will cease for ever. The day on 
which I shall see the inner image when looking at the 
outer image, and the latter when I look within, when it 
will be the same within as without—on that day the 
Mother will bring my own coming and going® to an end, 
and the restless dancing Kali+ will seat Herself and rest 
in peace; unless it be that the blissful Devi,° finding the 
path cpen both within and without, runs from sheer joy 
hither and thither with even greater activity than before. 
But even if She does, I shall not on that day call or bring 
Her. In Her own joy She will come, go, dance, sing, and 
play of Her own accord. I shall only beat time and dance 
with Her, crying out, ‘‘ Victory to Mother.” O brother 
critic ! thou who art also the Mother’s son, by the Mother’s 
grace may you not be deprived of this joy. It is She 
whom you know as Mother within who graciously issues 
thereout by Her own power,® and thus gratifies the 
Sadhaka. Of this power® we shall give an account after- 
wards. Here we shall say this much, that it is a mistake 
to think that to an Aryya Sadhaka the want of an outer 
image means the want of an image within. On the con- 
trary, it is because there is an image within that it has 
been revealed without. It1is only after we have the inner 
image that we commence the outer worship. Even in the 
absence of an outer image the Sadhaka is able to carry out 
worship by means of the inner image. 

In the Shrimadbhagavata Shastra Bhagavan has said: 
“Images are of eight kinds—namely, of stone, wood, 
iron (metals),’ pastes’ of clay, and such other substances; 


1 Avahana, when the Goddess is called into the image. 

2 Visarjana, see p. 144. 3 In the Sangsara. 4 Nrityakali. 

5 Anandamayi. 6 Shakti. 7 Author’s parenthesis. 
8 Pastes of sandal and the like. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 147 


made of jewels, painted; and mental.’ In the presence 
of any of the seven kinds of images made of stone and 
the like, the mental image should be first worshipped 
with mental articles of worship before worship is done of 
the outer image with material articles. But in the 
absence of any of those seven kinds of images, those who 
do external worship must bring from within themselves 
the inner image and worship it. It is in this connection ° 
that Ramaprasdda,! the Prince of Sddhakas, has said: 
“ Prasada? says, ‘ My heart is a mould made of spotless 
lotuses. Mayest Thou dance after Thou hast been cast 
in that mould and made mental.’ ’’” 

In the Kularnava Tantra the Lord of Devas has said: 
““O Great Devi! Sadhakas devoted to the Karmakanda* 
by the combined force of Bhakti,° and Mantra give form 
to Her who is above form® and the supreme Shiva Himself; 
and worship Her between the sacred pit and the sacrificial 
ground,” on winnowing fans (even now in many places 
Aryya women design images of Devatas on winnowing 
fans with vermilion sandal and Durva grass, Atap rice® in 
Pajas and Vratas of Mangalachandi, Kulachandi,? and 
many other Devatas)*®; on walls (generally amongst 
Aryyas in the north-west images of Devatas are painted 
on walls),!° in Paja, Vrata, and other religious rites"; in 
Mandalas??(Sarvatobhadra and other Mandalas mentioned 

1 Ramaprasada Sen, the celebrated Bengali poet (born, 1718; 
died, 1775). 2 That is, Ramaprasada. 

3 That is, by being moulded in the heart of the Sadhaka. 

4 The Scripture dealing with ritual. 

5 Devotion. 6 Rupatita. 7 Sthandila. 

8 There are two kinds of rice prepared from paddy. In the first 
the paddy is boiled and the husk is removed. In the other the husk 
das removed without such boiling by exposing the paddy to the sun. 
This is atap, and the other is called ‘‘ siddha.’’ 

9 Devis. 10 Author’s parenthesis. 

11 As to Vratas, see Introduction. 

12 A geometrical figure frequently drawn or made with various 
colours. The difference between a Mandala and a Yantra is that the 


former is used in the case of any Devata, whereas a Yantra is appro- 
priate to a specific Devata only. 


148 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


in the Shastra),? on slabs (metal, wood, or stone slabs),* 
in the head? and in the heart (1). Although the milk of 
a cow is produced from the blood which circulates through 
her whole body, it flows only from the teats of her udder; 
so, although the universe-pervading Devata is present 
everywhere, Her true aspect® is realized in images only (3). 
If an image be in all respects similar to the aspect of 
Devata, as described in the Shastra, if the articles of 
worship* are collected with care, and if the Sadhaka has 
unswerving faith, then that Devata is sure to enter that 
image (4). Cream so long as it remains in a cow’s body 
does not nourish anyone, but for those who draw milk 
from the cow and collect the cream from it by their 
personal exertion in the way of boiling and so forth, that 
cream becomes a cause of physical nourishment. Just 
as in this way only the cream becomes a cause of physical 
nourishment, so, O Parameshvari! the Devata residing in 
the body of every person becomes the cause of the Sad- 
haka’s liberation in consequence of worship only. With- 
out such worship She does not grant the desired object to. 
the Sadhaka (5-6). For this reason the Devata should be 
worshipped by invoking into Her image Her life, senses, 
and everything else appertaining to Her, and by estab-. 
lishing them in such image with Tantrik Mantras; other- 
wise, without such establishment of life,° the worship will 
be ineffectual (7). If the establishment of life in an 
image is performed according to the Shastra, the worship. 
will bear the great fruit of liberation, even if it be defective 
as regards other Mantras and rites.° Such defects will 
be cured by the Sadhaka’s prayer to the Devata for 
forgiveness (8). Karma’ done in violation of the rules. 
laid down in the Shastra will be wholly fruitless in con- 


1 Author’s parenthesis. 2 Brahmarandhra. 
Se ovaru pas 
4 Upachara, such as water, flower, incense, lights, food, etc. 


5 Pranapratishtha. 
6 That is, other than those relating to the Pranapratishtha rite. 
7 Rites. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 149 


sequence of the fault known as Karmabhanga! (9). 
Karmas falling short of, or going beyond, the rules laid 
down in the Shastra will never bear fruit. The fruits of 
all good Karmas? performed according to the Shastra will 
always be as visible as a fruit or other thing held in one’s 
Home tOjmeiience, in Japa, Homa, Pdja*, and the like, 
Karma? performed in strict conformance with Shastrik 
rules will please the Devata, and secure both the fruits of 
Bhoga and Moksha# for the Sadhaka (11). O Spouse of 
Shambhu! futile is the worship and so forth done by those 
who do not know the nature® of the Devata, Yantras, and 
Mantrashakti® (12). Yantras are all Mantras,’ and 
Devata is the Shakti of Mantra itself. Therefore the 
Devata is at once pleased if She is worshipped with 
Mantras according to the Shastra (13). A Yantra is so 
called because it subdues (Niyantrana) lust, anger, and 
other faults of Jiva and the sufferings caused thereby. 
This Yantra is a source of satisfaction to Devata when 
She is worshipped in it (14). As the body is for a Jiva 
and as oil is for a lamp, so is Yantra the seat of eternal 
play for all Devatas (15). Hence, the principal part® of 
worship? is to adore the Parameshvari, after the making of 
and drawing of Her image and Yantra. But, O My Be- 
loved! the worship should be performed according to the 
rules, and after the Sadhaka has received full instruction 
therein from Guru (16).”’ 

Wherever Shastra has spoken of images, it has in this 
way similarly referred to the Mantra and Devata. It has 
also said: ‘‘ In this way the Sadhaka, who has controlled 
his Prana,?° should, having through meditation beheld his 
Ishtadevata in his heart, contemplate upon the unity of 


1 Violation of the order of worship. 2 Rites. 

3 “ Repetition’’ of Mantra, the sacrifice into fire and ceremonial 
worship (see Introduction). 4 Enjoyment and liberation. 

5 Svartipa. 6 Potency of Mantra. 

7 Mantramaya. The Yantra is the body of the Devatd, who is 
Mantra. 8 Kalpa. 


9 Paja. 10 That is, his breath by Pranayama. 


150 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


the image of the Devi both within and without.” The 
process for so doing will be described in its proper place 
later. Here only this much should be understood that it 
is the inner image which must be brought out and estab- 
lished in the outer image. Our critic will now consider 
whether it is not the height of folly to try to do away with 
worship of the Deity with form by breaking its image. 
Be the image, mental or material, we break it every day 
after worship. But in spite of so much breaking we 
cannot really break it for a single moment. Whenever 
or wherever I look, within or without, I ever see the Devi, 
whose substance is will, as Bhagavan or Bhagavati, in 
whatsoever form She is pleased to appear. I see my 
Mother, the mad,* disordered girl, dancing with gentle 
movements of her body, now taking up the flute instead 
of the sword, or again seizing the sword instead of the 
flute, or yet again at times making both the sword and the 
flute into one in Her hand; mingling Her laughter with 
Her dancing; now loosening and now binding up Her hair. 
If I sleep, she awakens me by coming Herself and playing 
on the flute. If I commit any offence, She raises Her 
sword and, smiling gently, threatens me with it. What 
infidel? is there who can break this image ? Who in the 
three worlds has the power to break the image to which 
my heart is bound with such a deep love? The outer 
image with which you are concerned is nothing but a 
reflection of the real one. So long as the inner image, 
which is thus reflected, is not broken, what will you gain 
by breaking its reflection? The fair and transparent 
moon is reflected in the clear bosom of a river. The light 
of its golden beauty is borne upon the innumerable ripples 
raised by the gentle stirrings of the evening wind. If like 

1 pagla, as already stated (vol. i., p. 297), the English word ‘“‘ mad ”’ 
fails to convey the meaning of the word ‘“‘ pagla,”’ for in Bengali it is 
tinged with a feeling of tenderness, and persons so called are often 
greatly loved. The term denotes rather a person of eccentric and 


amiable character, and is akin to the Persian Dewdana. 
2 Padshanda (heretic, miscreant). 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA I51 


foolish children you and I proceed to strike at that reflec- 
tion with our sticks, think you that we shall thereby break 
the moon itself? Mistaken as we are, the agitation of 
the water may lead us to think that the moon has been 
shattered into a hundred or a thousand fragments; but, 
O brother ! wait but a moment, and you will see that when 
the water has again become calm the full moon shines as 
fully there as ever. Then you will understand that the 
moon which is agitated by the waves is only a reflection of 
and not the moon itself. The moon appears in the water 
because the rays of the moon in the heavens have reached 
it. O Brother! you energetic child! the moon in the 
heavens will not be broken until the little arms of dwarfs 
such as you and [| can reach through the firmament where 
the moon light plays and touch the lunar orb itself. I 
therefore ask you, O brother! what is the use of striking 
_ at the reflection if you cannot touch that which it reflects ? 
The external image which you see before a devotee is not 
merely such, nor is the image (which has risen in the sky 
of the devotee’s heart) of Her who plays on the breast of 
Shiva and stirs in the hearts of devotees a mere outward 
thing. That image of Brahmamayi, which is reflected 
in the river of the devotee’s love-laden eye, shedding the 
light! of Brahman on the playful lucid waves of feeling; 
that image of Her who, though the one and only Ishvari, 
is reflected in multiple innumerable waves in the eyes of 
countless devotees, is not a mere outward thing. Were 
anyone to break that inner image, it might become him to 
say one day: “I shall do away with the worship of the 
Deity with form by breaking Her image.” If to-day you 
and I proceed to break an outer image with the cudgel of 
our own violent infidelity, do you think it will be really 
broken thereby ? Never! If, however, the eye of the 
devotee is hurt, sweet tears of devotion will fall from them, 
the sight of which will stir the hearts of all men. But, 
then, instantly before your eyes the deep waters assume 


1 Jyotih. 


152 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


a calm, gentle, and tranquil aspect. The agitation of the 
water does not cause the moon’s reflection to disappear. 
On the contrary, the clear moon-beams like garlands of 
light dance and play on every ripple. Similarly, your 
blow will not drive away the Devata’s image from the 
devotee’s eyes. On the contrary, the great Shakti of the 
mental Devata will play on every ripple in the water of 
the tears of the devotee’s eye. But before your own eyes 
the consoling peace will shortly descend and calm the 
tears. Then instantly you will see that Brahmamayi, 
who dwells in the hearts of devotees, has again fully 
appeared without; and then, seeing the displayed and 
fearful nature of Her gentle, sweet laughter in the presence 
of the devotee, and the vanity of our effort to break that 
image, it will seem to you as if the victorious queller of 
Mahisha’ is to-day laughing peals of laughter after She 
crushed the pride of Danavas under the toe of Her left 
foot and has bestowed the dominion of heaven? on Devas. 
O Mother of the world! let me see, O Mother! that day. 
By Thy kindness teach me that unbelief which causes 
Thee, O Mother (whom even Princes of Yogins seldom | 
attain in meditation),? to appear in person in the field of 
battle with assumption of a visible warrior form. Teach 
me that unbelief which causes Thee in Thy intense love 
to place on the hard neck and shoulder of the restless 
Danava‘* the beauteous lotus-foot, which is the treasure of 
the heart of Maheshvara.®> O Mother, full of unbounded 
mercy! there is nothing in the three worlds to compare 
with this mercy of Thine. It is by reason of this that 


1 The Asura. 2 Svarga. 3 Dhyana. 

4 Son of Danu, enemy of the Devas. 

5 It is the Devi’s love which leads her to punish the Asuras. As the 
latter have thus drawn the love of the Devi, even though it takes the 
form of punishment, the author expresses himself to be envious of the 
Asuras, enemies of the Devas, who are thus more fortunate than great 
Yogis (see verses 8 and 9 of the Hymn to Jagadambika in Chapter xix. 
of the Devibhagavata Purana, translated in A. and E. Avalon’s 
‘‘ Hymns to the Goddess ’’). 


PNG LPERS OK TANTRA 153 


Thou art, O Mother! the Mother of the Universe. What 
better proof of Thy mercy is there than this, that Thou 
hast no enemy in the Sangsdra other than Thy son ?? 
Hallowed is the merciful Mother! Hallowed art Thou, 
hallowed is Thy mercy, and still more hallowed is Thy 
inimical son! Brother critic! as you are my friend, I tell 
you with tears in my eyes that everyone is hallowed in 
this Sangsara, which is the Mother’s dominion. But you 
and I, unfortunate as we are, seem to be the most unhappy 
of those who are unhallowed. We are neither faithless 
nor faithful. We have neither been able to become 
enemies nor sons. In deep sorrow and with tears, there- 
fore, say: “‘ Tell me, Mother! where am I to stand, 
Mother ?” 

She alone knows where I am to stand. But I am here 
to say what I have heard about the path. I shall, there- 
fore, tell you one or two more things to-day. I hear that 
you are given to saying at every word “‘ image-worshippers 
are worshippers of unconscious matter.’* From this it 
indirectly follows that you are a worshipper of conscious- 
ness itself. It is not at all strange, but rather natural, on 
your part for you to say that image-worshippers are 
worshippers of unconscious matter, for “‘ a person speaks 
only of that which he understands,” and no one can 
blame him for so doing. There is, therefore, nothing to 
say to you on the score that you call image-worshippers 
worshippers of unconscious matter. But we shall to-day 
ask you one or two things, because you are a worshipper 
of Brahman Himself, Who is consciousness itself. 

You know that the verbal root bringha means to per- 
vade, and that Brahman is the name of Him who pervades 
the Universe. You are also in the habit of saying that 
Brahman is consciousness itself. Being a worshipper of 
that Brahman, with what heart, O brother! can you call 
an image unconscious matter? Is it an expression of 


1 That is, She looks on them as Her sons, although they are Her 
enemies. 2 Jada. 


154 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


faith on your part to say that He Who pervades the 
Universe, Who pervades everything and exists every- 
where, Who is equally present everywhere from Heaven 
to Hell, does not exist inanimage? It may, to acertain 
extent, become a dualist to say that “‘ unconscious matter 
and consciousness are two different things.” But being 
a worshipper of undefinable? Brahman, with what face do 
you admit the existence of that which is called “ uncon- 
sclous matter’’ as distinct from consciousness? You 
may, of course, escape by saying, “‘ be it unconscious 
matter or consciousness, I do not care for worship at all.” 
But in that case also you are in another way bound to 
admit that there is nothing which can be called uncon- 
scious matter. You call these things unconscious matter 
in which you do not see any sign of consciousness, as, for 
instance, earth, water, wood, stone, and so forth. Now, 
I ask, is it because there is really no consciousness in these 
things that you regard them as unconscious, or is it 
because you yourself have not the eye to see them other- 
wise >? Many people, again, say that such things as 
plants, trees, shrubs, creepers, and so forth, are uncon- 
scious. Perhaps they think that eating, sleeping, fearing, 
and having sexual intercourse, are four inseparable marks 
of Jivahood, and that all such things as are without them 
are unconscious. The Shastra, however, says that plants, ~ 
creepers, and so forth, are not unconscious things, but 
unmoving Jivas. Manu says: “ Through faults arising 
out of the body—that is to say, sins committed by means 
of the body—men become unmoving things (are born as 
plants, shrubs, creepers, and so forth)*; that is to say, the 
punishment for such sins consists in this, that in their 
subsequent birth such men are unable to do any desired 
work by their physical exertion. Through sins com- 
mitted by speech men are born as birds or beasts; that is 


1 Svarga to Naraka. 
2 Nirvishesha—that is, to whom no limiting attribute can be given. 
3 See ante, p. 110. 4 Author’s parenthesis. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 155 


to say, the punishment for such sins consists in this, that 
in their subsequent birth these men have not the faculty 
of speech. As the result of sins committed by mind, men 
are born in the lowest castes. The object of such punish- 
ment is that in their subsequent birth they may not be 
endowed with broad intelligent’ minds. It is merely in 
order to determine where we stand that we quote this 
passage from Manu. In fact, there are many others. 
Hundreds and thousands of reasons and authorities may 
be given and quoted in this connection, but we are afraid 
of digressing. What we want to show by the above 
passage is that plants, creepers, and so forth, are not un- 
conscious or inert, but living things, that they, too, are 
born and die, share happiness, prosperity, and adversity, 
and so forth, in a remarkable degree, with, however, this 
difference from other living things, that while we can 
clearly observe the changes which are caused in the latter 
by happiness and sorrow, we do not perceive similar 
changes in the case of trees, creepers, and so forth. There 
are two reasons for this difference. First, the force of 
consciousness” which exists as Jiva in a plant or creeper 
is completely overpowered by the force of Maya®; and, 
secondly, the changes which are caused in plants and the 
like by happiness and sorrow are so fine that our senses, 
gross as they are, have not the keenness and subtlety to 
perceive them. Only Rishis, who have attained Siddhi 
by Tapas‘ and see all things, and Devas and Devayonis® 
(Yakshas, Kinnaras, Vidyadharas, and so forth), have the 
power to perceive them. For this reason we read in 
Pauradnik and similar stories that whenever some great 
person has through a curse taken birth as a plant or the 
like, Rishis or Devas have, on knowing when the curse 
comes to an end, delivered him from life as an unmoving 


1 Their minds are enveloped by the Tamoguna. 2 Chitshakti. 

3 Maydashakti. 4 Austerity, devotion, etc. (see Introduction). 

5 Spirits emanating from the Devas and the Deva world. Deva eva 
yonih nidanabhitat yasya. 


156 PRINCIPLES OF TAN Tig 


thing. Shrikrishna Himself bears evidence of this in 
the incident of the breaking of the trees Yamala and 
Arjuna. 

Next, as to stones and metals. It is not necessary to 
deal separately with the subject of metals, for metals exist 
in mines in the womb of mountains, and there is no differ- 
ence between stones and metals as regards consciousness 
or unconsciousness. A mountain is a great living thing, 
and the greatest? of things that spring out of earth. It is 
in mountains that the earth’s power of bearing burden is 
mainly seated. Hence mountains are called “‘ supporters 
of the earth.’*® Mountains rise, grow, and become 
decayed. They rise by piercing through the earth; they 
grow by extending to the earth; and, again, during the 
time of their decay they gradually sink into the womb of 
the earth. As a mountain rises by penetrating through 
the earth, inch by inch, in thousands and hundreds of 
thousands of years, so it also disappears into the womb of 
the earth inch by inch during the same periods. A 
mountain has also birth and death. Ina dead tree there 
remains no vitality. The stones of a dead mountain 
become rough and destitute of moisture, like the dry wood 
of a dead tree; and as does such wood, they break into 
pieces under light blows. Dealers in stones who are 
versed in the science of the subject unhesitatingly admit 
this. They can also show, on an examination of them, 
which mountain is alive and which is dead. But perhaps 
you are shaking your sides with laughter on hearing that 
mountains have life. But can you say that to-day the 
mountains are not laughing on seeing you laugh in this 


i There is a tree called Arjuna. Shrikrishna broke a twin Arjuna- 
tree, and two Devayonis sprang forth, who had been cursed by a Rishi. 
The author here speaks of Yamala and Arjuna, but Yamala means twin, 
and it should be “‘ twin Arjuna trees.” 2 Literally, crest-gem. 

3 Earth is that which is the supporter of everything, and it is mainly 
through the mountains that it is so, for they are the greatest masses of 
earth, and the mountain ranges are thought to be the backbone of the 
earth. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 157 


way ? Can you show any substance in the world which 
has no life, and yet grows and decays? The longevity of 
a mountain is lakhs of crorest of years, thousands of 
Yugas,* hundreds of Manvantaras,? while you and I are 
not reckoned as even insignificant bubbles in the vast sea 
of time. How is it possible for us in a single life to probe 
into the question of consciousness or unconsciousness of a 
mountain by observing its birth and death? Who can 
say how many times* you and I are to be re-incarnated 
during the one life-time of a single mountain? It does 
not therefore become us to determine the question of 
consciousness or unconsciousness of a mountain, though 
we cannot see its birth and death. We, however, daily 
see the growth and decay of small hills, and from this you 
can very well realize whether a mountain is conscious or 
unconscious. 

Then comes the question of earth. Consciousness of 
earth is still more subtle—indeed, as subtle as any matter 
can be. It is extremely difficult to discover it with the 
help of physical perception alone. It can be ascertained 
only by means of Divine® powers attained by Sadhana. 
It is not therefore capable of explanation. Besides this, 
even if we think that the earth is unconscious, we must 
consider whether it is really so; whether earthly atoms 
are seats of the play of unconscious forces® only, or whether 
the force of consciousness lies in a subtle form within 
them and achieves its purposes by means of these uncon- 
scious forces which it has made its servants. Let us 
assume that earth is the seat of the play of unconscious 
forces only. But there, where I saw yesterday a stretch 
of barren earth, I see to-day the sprouting of new tender 


1 A lakh equals 100,000, and a crore is 10,000,000. 

2 A Yuga or age is a portion of a Kalpa, or day of Brahma of 
4,320,000,000 years (see next note). 

3 The Kalpa is divided into fourteen Manvantaras, which are again 
subdivided into seventy-one Mahdyuga, each of which is composed of 
Yugas. 4 Literally, ‘‘ how many,eighty-four lakhs of times.”’ 

5 Daiva (super-physical). 6 Jada Shakti. 


158 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


shoots. Whence has this vitality of conscious living 
things come to the inert atoms of unconscious earth ? 
This is the first stage. The subsequent stages are still 
more wonderful. Before our eyes the shoots grow into 
stalks and leaves and gradually bear fruit. When the 
crop becomes ripe, it is eaten by men, beasts, and birds, 
and is digested in the fire of the stomach. The essence 
of the digested crop is then transformed into fat, semen, 
and blood in the body. In the womb again the semen 
and blood are digested and grow into the living, conscious 
child in the womb. However learned we may be in 
various Shastras, we are unable to realize this directly, 
the mother alone being able to do so. Gradually when, 
after ten months and ten days, the child issues from the 
mother’s womb, we then see that the eating of an uncon- 
scious crop has produced this conscious fruit. If the 
semen and blood had not the force* of consciousness in 
them, whence has consciousness come to the child? If 
the crop which has been eaten had no consciousness in it, 
whence did consciousness come in the semen and blood ? 
If the tree had not consciousness in it, whence did con- 
sciousness come in the crop? And if earth had no con- 
sclousness in it, whence did consciousness come in the 
tree? Now, critic, who talks of unconsciousness! tell me, 
is it the earth which is unconscious, or is it you and I who 
areso? Isit not a sign of one’s own unconsciousness to 
consider the earth as earthen only, when it is thus full of 
consciousness in a subtle form. What can be more 
idiotic than to hold that the soil of the earth is uncon- 
sclous matter, when men, beasts, birds, insects, trees, 
shrubs, mountains, and all else derive their consciousness 
from the force of consciousness contained in every atom 
of the earth, and to ridicule away with ideas that which 
has puzzled the brains of even philosophers? The 
philosopher has said: 

‘““ Unconscious semen becomes instinct with conscious- 


1 Shakti. 


PivinGlPLHS OF TANTRA 159 


ness during its stay in the womb. Gradually hands, 
head, and various other organs spring up. Again, that 
same semen which has thus grown into a Jiva takes on 
successively the attributes? of childhood, youth, old age, 
infirmity, and so forth, one after another, and sees, eats, 
hears, smells, and moves about. What greater magic 
can there be than this ?”’ 

Here it may be objected that, if worship can be per- 
formed with earth, stones, wood, metal, and such other 
things, having regard to the Brahman-consciousness 
existing in a subtle form within it, why cannot it be per- 
formed with the bodies of men, beasts, birds, and so 
forth, in which that consciousness is more manifest ? 
We askin reply, Who is it who says that worship is not 
performed in this way ? In fact, it is so performed; the 
worship of the supreme Brahman appearing as Guru is 
done towards the human body of the Guru, Kumari? is 
‘worshipped in the bodies of virgins. The Spouse of Shiva 
is worshipped in the animal body of jackals, and it is in 
the form of the Brahmini bird? that the daughter of 
Daksha grants Siddhi to a Sadhaka’s Sadhana. All this 
is worship done with other bodies. But a Sadhaka must 
first of all worship his Ishtadevata in his own body, and 
then he will be entitled to do worship of Her in other 
bodies. Worship with portions* of Brahma-Chaitanya® 
leads to perfection® of Brahma-Jnana’ and not to the 
perfection of Brahman-worship.® For the purpose of 
Brahman-worship it is necessary to worship a form which 
has been assumed by the Devata to show Himself to 


1 Upadhi. 2 The Devi as a virgin. 
3 The Brahmini Kite (Kshemangkari) is worshipped. 

4 Angsha. 5 Brahman as consciousness. 6 Siddhi. 
7 Brahman knowledge, or spiritual knowledge. 

8 


By worshipping the objects in which the Brahman exists, a man’s 
knowledge of Brahman may be perfected; but, considered as worship, 
it is not the worship of Brahman in its entirety, which is only accom- 
plished in the case of Avataras on the earthly or spiritual plane, such 
as the Mahavidyas. 


160 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Sadhakas and to bestow favours on them. This image, 
again, must not be a production of the Sadhaka’s imagina- 
tion only. Such images alone should be worshipped as 
are images of forms actually assumed by Her. The 
worship also must be performed in the method approved 
of by the Shastra, and then Sadhana performed according 
to the Shastra is sure to lead to Siddhi.t Mantra-Shakti? 
wields sole authority wherever Siddhi is concerned. In 
Sadhana with Mantra the Devatda’s real form is revealed 
by the Shakti of the Mantra. Hence the only form which 
I should meditate on is the form which is the subject of 
the Mantra in which I aminitiated. Inmy own self I can 
meditate on that form for a very short time only. But so 
long as this meditation does not develop into perfect 
Samadhi,® I have not the power to hold that true form of 
Her constantly in my heart. It is therefore as an aid to 
this end that the same form is worshipped outwardly in 
images. Secondly, unswerving meditation is impossible 
at the time of worship. I am the worshipper, She is the 
worshipped, and to worship is my duty. No worship is 
possible without this three-fold knowledge. Moreover, 
when we make our various offerings we are thinking of 
these things. Single-pointed meditation is never possible 
when so many different forms of knowledge crowd together 
in the mind. For this reason there can be no outer 
worship without the establishment of an outer image. 

It may, however, be asked, Why should the Shakti, 
which is Her real aspect, appear in the outer image at my 
desire. That is a different question. On the one hand, 
images made of earth, stone, and so forth, are given the 
forms which Mantrashakti has revealed in the Shastra, 
so that the condition is immensely favourable, instead of 


1 Fruition. 

2 The potency of Mantra, or rather Shakti as Mantra. 

3 Ecstasy, or the attainment of the turiya consciousness (see 
Introduction). 

4 That is, of worshipper, worshipped, and duty to worship. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 161 


being unfavourable to the appearance of that true Shakti 
in them. On the other hand, Mantrashakti will awake 
by its own force and unite the Brahma-tejas in the heart 
of the Sadhaka with the Tejas in the outer form of the 
Devata, and then the two Tejas will together burn like a 
sacrificial fire, accepting the offerings made by the 
Sadhaka. What is there in this for you or I to object to 
or rack our brains over ? 

Mantra alone, which is the mediator in the affair, is 
responsible for it. Mantra will, by its own power, bring 
divinity’ to the image; you and I need not be anxious 
about it. It is for this reason that Mantrashakti? is at 
the root of all Sadhana. Mantra can, by becoming one 
only Ishvara (that is, supreme over all), cause such events 
by means of its super-worldly power as the three worlds 
or the universe cannot accomplish by their united effort. 
It is because Mantra possesses such wonderful power, that 
you and I, mere men though we be, are able to worship 
Devata. The Shastra has, therefore said: ‘‘ If the wor- 
shipper has strength of Tapasya® (that is to say, if his 
Mantra is conscious),# and if there is an abundance of 
offerings (that is to say, if such offerings inspire the 
Sadhaka’s heart with single-pointed devotion to the 
Devata),* and if the image represents the true form of the 
Devata (that is to say, if at the sight of the image the 
Sadhaka’s mind and eyes sink in the sea of its beauty, 
sweetness, and gracefulness),* then the Devata readily 
approaches that image.’ In order to gain for oneself 
the different Shaktis which Brahmamayi has put in 
different Yantras® in this house of the Universe, such as 
river, sea, mountain, tree, shrub, creeper, and so forth, it 
is necessary to worship Her in these Yantras.® This is 

1 Devatva. 2 See ante, p. 160. S<'See Pp. 155; 

# Author’s own interpretation. 5 Instruments. 

6 In order to acquire the Shakti of Hers, which is manifested as 
rivers, mountains, etc., it is necessary to worship Her under those 
aspects. This refers to minor Siddhis. Thus it is said that when 


Rama Krishna Paramahangsa was with another Sadhaka travelling 
VOL, II. II 


162 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


the ground of Her worship in jackals, Brahmini kites, 
cremation grounds,! dead bodies, women,” bael-trees, 
ashvattha trees, aparajita flowers, cows, bulls, Brahmanas, 
places of pilgrimage, fire, and so forth. Opportunity 
offering, we shall try to explain the principles of this 
subject in its proper place. Here this much only should 
be understood, that in whatever Yantra or image She 
may be worshipped, it is the worship of Herself in that 
form.’ For this reason even Vedantik Dandis,4 who take 
refuge with knowledge only, have said in the Paiichadashi: 
‘In the Vishvartipa portion® of the Purusha Stkta,® it 
has been said, from Brahma to a blade of grass every- 
thing is a limb of the vast’ macrocosmic body of Bhaga- 
van (1). Ishvara, Sutratma,® Virata, Brahma, Vishnu, 
Rudra, Indra, Agni, Vighna,? Bhairava, Mairala, Marika, 
Yaksha, Rakshasa, Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, 
Shidra, cow, horse, deer, bird, Ashvattha, banian, 
mango, and other trees, barley, paddy grass, and other 
crops, water, stone, earth, wood, axe, spade, and so forth— 
all are Ishvara. When worshipped as Ishvara they grant 
fruits according to the Shaktis, inherent in their respective 
Yantras” (2-4). The fruit of the worship will be according 
to the Yantra and the mode in which the worshipper 


to Dakshineshvara on a dark night, this Sddhaka turned his back to 
him, and light issued from it. It would be said that that power was 
gained by Agni (fire) Sadhana. 

1 Shmashanas. 2 Shaktis. 

° Svaripa Vibhiiti—e.g., if a tree be worshipped as Devata, it is not 
the tree which is worshipped, but the Devi in the form ofa tree. 

4 A sect of ascetics. 

5 Section dealing with the macrocosmic appearance of Bhagavan. 

6 The Vaidik Saikta of that name. 

7 Virata. The whole Universe is considered to be the body of the 
Devata, its constituent parts being the microcosmic aspect. 

8 That is, the Atma considered as the continuing thread on which the 
objective world is strung and which it infuses. 

9 Vighna Devata. Ganesha is so called as remover of obstruction. 
What follows and precedes are Devas, Devayonis, castes, etc. 

10 That is, the Sadhaka acquires the Shakti which is manifested in 
the objects. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 163 


performs the worship. The difference in quality which 
are found to exist in these fruits are caused by differences 
in the character of the Yantras of worship and of the 
worship itself, according as it is Sattvik, RAajasik, or 
Tamasik.* But liberation can never be attained without 
a knowledge of the Brahman, just as we sleep until we 
awaken ourselves. When one attains to knowledge of 
the non-dualistic Brahman, all this Universe of conscious 
and unconscious things in the forms of Ishvara, Jiva, and 
so forth, appears to be nothing but a dream (5-7).” 
Three causes operate for the attainment of this know- 
ledge of Brahman: (1) Hearing,” thinking,? and constant 
meditation,* prescribed in the Vedanta Philosophy; 
(2) practice of Yoga; and (3) Sadhana, consisting of a 
combination of the three things—Karma (work), Yoga, 
and Jnana (knowledge), with Bhakti (devotion) as their 
root.2 Of these three means the last is the easiest, most 
pleasant, most rapidly effective, and is suited to all the 
three classes of worshippers—namely, those who are 
given to worldly pursuits, those who are dissatisfied with 
the world, and those who yearn for liberation. In the 
realm of devotion the most worshipful and supreme 
objects of adoration® are those forms only’ of the Supreme 
Devata Parameshvari, in which She as the central source 
of all Shaktis has manifested Herself in order to make 
worship possible. The ultimate Siddhi spoken of in the 
Tantra Shastra dances on the palms of the hands® of such 
men as are not satisfied with Siddhi acquired from the 
worship of partial manifestations’ from Brahma to a blade 
of grass described above as Her Virata Vibhiti, but are 
desirous of attaining single-pointed devotion and libera- 
tion. They alone are competent to worship the Para- 


1 See Introduction, ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra.” 
2 Shravana. See as to this and two following op. cit. supra. 


3 Manana. 4 Nididhydsana. 
5 Commencement must be made with Bhakti. 
6 Tattvas. 7 Svaripa. 


8 That is, ‘‘ is easily attained by.” 9 Vibhitis. 


164 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


brahma aspect spoken of in the Tantra Shastra of Her who 
is Parabrahman. It is for them that the Mother of the 
three worlds, who is Turtya consciousness,’ has assumed 
that Brahman aspect, which is massive consciousness,” 
and bliss, and full of play.2 And it is for them that the 
Tantra Shastra has loudly said: “‘ Without a doubt he 
who enters upon the great path of Kuladharma‘* will soon 
walk into the city of liberation. A man should therefore 
place himself under the direction of a Kaula.” 


1 The fourth state. 
2 Chidghana—that is, nothing but a mass of consciousness. 
3 Lila. 4 Dharma of the Tantrik Kaulas. 


CHAPTER XVI 
THE PLAY OF GUNAS1 


FE as Shiva is sweet of form with infinite Gunas, 

notwithstanding that He is the immutable Being 
above Gunas ;? the only Lord and Controller of the Tamas 
Guna, though that is of His substance’; self-manifest and 
luminously white, like a silver mountain, though seated 
on the throne of (the dark) Tamas Guna‘; the Supreme 
Guru of spiritual knowledge, though His substance is of 
the Tamas Guna; found in great cremation grounds,® 
notwithstanding that He is the Lord of inconceivable 
wealth; an untraversable, calm, and solemn ocean,® 
though He is the Maharudra of the great dissolution’; 
dependent on the bliss of his own Sadhana,? notwith- 
standing that He is all joy itself; merciful and loving in 
appearance, in spite of being wrong-eyed®; the guide in 
the path of worship of Himself, though He is the wor- 
shipped of the three worlds; the owner of half of the body 
of the Daughter of Mountain,?° even though He is the one 


1 Gunalila; Guna is “Quality”? (see as to this Introduction to 


“ Mahanirvana Tantra ’’). 

2 Nishkalatattva, or the Tattva without Kala or Prakriti. 

3 He is tamogunamaya. 

* See ante, note. Shiva as such subdues manifestation (sattva). 

5 Shmashanas. 

6 He is both the ocean of peace and the destroyer. 

7 In His form as the great Rudra (Maharudra) of the great dissolution 
(Mahapralaya). 8 Shiva was Himself a great Sadhaka. 

9 Viripdksha. His eyes are represented as being in a dreaming, 
half-closed, and slanting position, like the eyes of those who have taken 
bhang. He is also, according to some, called Viripaksha, because he 
10 Parvati. 


is three-eyed. 
165 


166 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


eternal unity; the seeker? of the company of Her who is 
His eternal companion, notwithstanding that He is 
companionless?; the destroyer of the passion of desire,® 
though He eternally appears in the coupled+ form of 
husband and wife; the grantor unasked of eternal libera- 
tion® to all Jivas in the city of Kashi,° despite his being 
the Dispenser of all fruits of action to the whole Universe; 
easily appeased,’ even though he is also formidable and 
wrathful®; blue-throated, though ‘he is also white; the 
Saviour of the three worlds through his drinking deadly 
poison,’® yet also their Destroyer; taking pleasure in 
adorning Himself with serpents,’ despite his being the 
Director grey with ashes!” to the path of everlasting dis- 
passion; crested with the crescent moon, though His head 
is covered with matted hair!*; the carrier of trident and 
axe, though He grants blessing and dispels fear*4; prostrate 
under the feet of the Devi with dishevelled hair, notwith- 
standing that He is Himself the grantor of liberation to 
devotees!®; the Mahabhairava,!® who drinks the wine?’ of 


1 Sadhaka. 2 Nihsanga, unattached to anything, as are Yogis. 

3 Kama. 4 Yugala. 5 Kaivalya. 6 Benares. 

7 Ashutosha. This with simplicity is one of the chief qualities 
which make Him lovable to Devotees. 8 Ugra. 


9 Shiva is represented white as a mountain of silver. The blue mark 
on his throat was caused by his drinking (in order to save the world) 
the poison which issued from the churning of the ocean. 

10 See last note. 

11 Shiva is represented as garlanded with serpents, and as here taking 
pleasure in the play of such adornment, notwithstanding that neither 
this nor any other worldly thing is of concern to Him who is the 
accomplisher of liberation. 

12 Shiva, as do the Yogis, smears His body with ashes. 

13 Jatajita worn by ascetics; either their own hair or the hair of others 
bound up in a high twisted and matted mass on the crown of the head. 

14 In His hands He carried the trident (trishila) and axe (parashu), 
and with two others makes the gestures (mudra) called vara and 
abhaya. 

15 Shiva is generally represented as Shava (corpse), lying under the 
feet of Devi, for without Her Shakti (power) He is inert. 

16 A Bhairava is he who follows virdchara. 

17 Karana, a technical term in Tantra for wine. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 167 


joy, in spite of being perfect joy Himself; the crier of 
“Fear not,’’? though He is Himself a Bhairava?; five-faced,? 
in spite of being thousand-headed*; three-eyed, even 
though He has eyes which turn towards all things in the 
Universe; clad in space,® notwithstanding that He is 
Himself space; of infinite forms, though of eight forms®; 

the Preceptor of knowledge, though knowledge itself; He 
who brings us liberation, and yet attainable through 
liberation; the Lord of Kailasa and Kashi,’ though He is 
the Lord of the world; the Lord of all creatures,? though 
also the Master of the Spirit world®; the Lord of crea- 
tures,*° though the destroyer of the bonds of the Pashu!!; 
He who upholds Ganga in His plaited hair,!” though fire 
is in the eye on His forehead; the Destroyer of Daksha’s 
sacrifice,’ though He is the Supreme Lord" of all Yajnas; 
sorely grieved at sight of the play’? of the Devi’s death,*° 
though Himself above all delusion’’; the son-in-law of the 
King of Mountains,** notwithstanding that He is beyond 
all relationship; the father of young Heramva,? though 
He is Himself the Parabrahman”®; the Linga,”4 which is 


1 Ma bhaih. 2 That is, formidable and the causer of fear. 

3 Pafichanana. # Sahasrashirsha. 5 Digamvara, or naked. 

6 The ashtamirti of Shiva—viz., Bhava (water), Sarvva (earth), 
Pashupati (man the sacrificer), Bhima (ether), Ugra (air), Rudra (fire), 
Mahadeva (moon), Ishana (sun). 

7 The mountain Kailasa, His abode (see Introduction), and Benares, 
the city sacred to Him. 

8 Bhitapati, living on earth as opposed to ghosts which follow. 

9 Bhitanatha. 10 Pashupati. 

11 The Pashu is the unillumined man bound by the bonds (pasha), 
which, according to the enumeration of the Kularnava Tantra, are pity, 
ignorance, shame, family, custom, and caste. 

12 Shiva held the Ganges in His hair when it was called down from 
heaven by Bhagiratha, and fire flashes from His third eye. 

13 Yajna, according to the well-known legend as to which, see 
VOl. 1. ). 198. 14 Tshvara. Shiva is Yajneshvara. 

15 Lila; for all which Devatds do is such. 

16 At an sacrifice of Daksha on hearing Her husband slighted by the 
former. 17 Maya and moha. 

18 Shiva’s Spouse Parvati was the daughter of Himavat (Himalaya). 

19 Ganesha. 20 And beyond all causal forms. 21 Phallus. 


168 PRINCIPLES OF TAN Tis 


the source of the origin of the entire Universe; the eternal 
cause of Yoganidra,* though attainable by Karma, Jnana, 
and Yoga”; the sole Saviour of the world of devotees, 
though also the Destroyer of the three worlds; the con- 
stant companion of devotees,® and yet also attainable by 
Jnanis*; friend of the poor, and yet omnipresent; the Lord 
of the helpless, and yet the Lord of the three worlds; 
loving towards supplicants, yet also loving towards the 
whole Universe; the sole Lord of Tantrik Mantras, though 
being the object of worship in all Mantras and Yantras ; 
the eternal King of Kings® on the throne of the devotee’s 
heart, notwithstanding that He is the one Ishvara (Lord) 
in the infinite world. 

Again, as Krishna, He is the master-actor, cunning and 
full of deception,’ though Himself undisturbed by the 
waves of dualism; the assumer of a sweet form with three- 
fold bend,® in spite of being above all changes of nature? ; 
beautiful with the dark colour of water-laden clouds,’° 
though he is pure Sattva itself™ ; incarnated as the son of 
the ruler of Braja’* for the purpose of relieving the earth 
of her burden, though Himself the Perfect Brahman who 
is existence, consciousness, and bliss; the wearer of gar- 


1 “Sleep of Yoga.’ Jivashakti produces diversity. Yoganidra 
Shakti accomplishes unity—namely, that Shakti of Brahman which 
establishes unity with Him. 

Action, knowledge, and Yoga. 3 Bhakta. 

Those ‘“‘ who know ”’ and who have acquired spiritual knowledge. 
Diagrams of worship (see Introduction). 

Rajrajeshvara. 

Kapata shatha. Thus He pretended to suck the breast of 
Pitana, who was sent to destroy Him, but in doing so He sucked out 
her life (her pranavayu). 

8 Tribhanga, a position loved of the Hindu artist. The body makes 
three bends: the head is turned to one side, the opposite hip thrown out, 
and the limbs below take the direction of the head. 

® Bhava vikara. The tribangha is crooked. His straightness or 
uniformity is contrasted therewith. 

10 Krishna’s body is a very dark blue. 
11 The Guna is here thought of as colourless. 
12 Nanda Krishna’s foster-father. 


JID oO fF bb 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 169 


lands of gunja seeds,’ and yet possessed in full of the six 
forms of Lordliness?; covered with the dust of Vrinda- 
vana,* and yet being the adored of the Lakshmi of 
Vaikuntha*; a herdsboy, though the supporter of the 
three worlds; the beggar of food from a Brahmana Lady, 
though He is Himself the provider of the Universe’; 
decked with peacock’s feathers, in spite of his possession 
of infinite beauty ; the wearer of yellow-tinted loin-cloths, 
though he is beyond the covering of Maya®; He who took 
the help of Balarama,’ though He Himself helps the entire 
Universe; Who wandered in pastures, and yet Who 
moved in the hearts of great Yogis; upholder of Mount 
Goyvarddhana,? though also the upholder of the infinite 
Universe; the destroyer of the arrogance of Kangsa’? and 
Kaltya," and yet the peaceful charmer of Madana™; the 
Damodara,** who holds the Universe in his belly, though 
appéaring in the form of a young herdsboy; the charmer 
of Brahma, though He is Himself Hari, Hara, and 
Brahma; out of His love full of fear for Yashoda,** not- 


1 A small red berry, with a black spot on top, used as a weight by 
goldsmiths. 

2 Ashvaryya, such as omnipotence, omnipresence, and the like. 

3 The city of Brindabun, sacred to Krishna, 

4 The Tutelary Goddess of the heaven of Vishnu, as to which see 
ante, p.24. 

5 He once begged food of a Brdhmana woman in order to show her 
favour. 

6 Mayi is represented as a veil covering the pure Spirit. 

7 His brother. 8 As a cowherd. 

8 In orcer to save Brindabun from a great deluge. 

10 Asura, King of Mathura, who attempted to destroy Krishna, his 
sister’s (Devakt?) son. 

11 The serpent destroyed by Him. 

12 The God of Love or Desire. Hesurpasses Madana in attractiveness. 

13 He in whose belly (Udara) all Damas—that is, regions (Lokas)— 
are located. Vishnu is called Damodara also, because he has Dama, or 
self-control, and Svaprakasha, or self-manifestation. In Harivangsha 
it is said that Yashoda, Krishna’s foster-mother, tied a rope round 
his belly, and festened it to a Udfikhala (husking-bowl) to keep him 
out of mischief while she was doing her household duties. 

14 See note 13. 


170 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


withstanding that He is the Fear of Fear itself; ever 
present in Vrindavana,* though also present in every 
atom of the infinite Universe; the stealer of the clothes 
of young girls performing Katyayani Vrata,* though He 
is also the supplier of innumerable clothes to Draupadi 
when oppressed with shame and fear for her honour®; 
rejoicing in the sound of a flute, notwithstanding that He 
is the source of Nada, Vindu, Dhvani, and Mtrchhana*; 
ever eager to enjoy the Rasa®; of Rasa,® though He is 
Himself the great Rasa’; grieved at Radhika’s anger of 
love,® and yet eternally full of joy; constantly seeking® the 
company of Radhika, though He is sought by Her’? who 
seeks supreme love; ever bound, as it were by cords, by 
the love of the beauties of Vraja,‘! notwithstanding that 
He is eternally free, unattached, and without attribute; 
proficient in the amorous sports of women, and yet free of 
all sensuality!?; a youth victorious in war with passion,’* 


1 The City of Brindabun. 

2 Gopis performed the worship of Katydyani before the Rasa 
festival, at which time Krishna stole their clothes in order to make 
them appear before Him naked. 

3 It is narrated in the Mahabharata that when Draupadi was brought 
to the Court of Dhritarashtra, one of his sons, in order to insult her, 
began pulling off her cloth. She then prayed to Krishna, who supplied 
her with an endless cloth for the protection of her person. 

4 Different aspects of Shakti as subtle “‘sound.’’ Mérchhana, as a 
term of gross sound in the form of music, is the seventh of the grama 
or gamut (seven notes—sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, ni), corresponding with 
the European scale—c, d, e, f, g, a, b. The intervals between them 
are the sub-tones or Shrutis, of which there are twenty-two. The 
gramas are threefold—low, middle, and high, or Udarad, Mulara, Tara, 
corresponding with the three Svara, Udatta, Anudatta, end Svarita 
pronounced from the navel, chest, and head, and caled by the 
musicians nabhi (navel), baksha (chest), kapala (head). As there are 
seven tones and three gramas, there are twenty-one Mirchhanas. 

5 Essence of delight. 6 The Rasa festival. 

7 Bliss. All forms of bliss are from the Brahman, who is Bliss itself 
(rasovai sah), 

8 Mana, such as happens between husband and vife who are yet 
attached to one another, 9 Sadhaka. 

10 Radhika. 11 The herdswomen who loved Him. 

12 Kamadosha. 13 Kama. 


PRINGIBEES OF PANTRA ay a 


and yet immersed in the midst of waves of passion?; 
who appears separately to each of the innumerable groups 
of innumerable herdswomen,? though He is Himself one 
without asecond; restless and mad in His play as Brahman, 
though incarnated by way of play as a man; making 
Himself out to be adulterous to His own wives? in order 
to delude unhappy Jivas devoid of Sadhana; He who 
points out the subtle course of Sadhana Dharma,‘ despite 
His being the Guard of the bridge of Sangsara Dharma?; 
the rescuer of the triumphant standard of Sadhana 
Dharma‘ after defeat of Sangsara Dharma,* though He 
is the creator of both these Dharmas; partial® towards 
Dharma, and yet the dispenser of both Dharma and 
Adharma for the preservation of the world®; the constant 
friend of the Pandava’ family, though He has equal care 
for all things; the all in all to Bhaktas,® though also the 
adored of Karmis,? Yogis,° and Jnanis'!; the seeker of 
refuge with devotees, notwithstanding that He is Himself 
the refuge of all who are refugeless. 

Again, as Shakti She possesses infinite Gunas, notwith- 
standing that She is the sum of all Shaktis above Gunas; 
_ She is the establisher of concordance between mutually 
conflicting masses of Gunas in the dualistic world, though 

1 Not that He is overcome by it, but exists in the midst of it. 

2 To gratify the beautiful herdswomen (Gopi), His devotees, He 
appeared to each of them as if she alone was enjoying Him. There 
were thus as many Krishnas as there were Gopis. 

3 Rukmini and Satyabhama, to whom He appeared to be adulterous, 
owing to His companionship with the Gopis. 

4 The Dharma, which leads man out of the Sangsdra, as opposed to 
that which keeps, but regulates, him in the world (Sangsara Dharma). 

5 Though to the Supreme there is no distinction between Dharma 
and Adharma, yet he leans (pakshapata) to the former. 

6 He is the Dispenser of uprighteousness (Adharma), as also of 
Dharma, such evil being necessary for the preservation of the world. 

7 The five sons of Pandu who warred with their cousins, the 
Kauravas, as related in the Mahabharata. 

8 Those who seek Him through devotion. 

9 Those who seek Him through Karma or work. 


10 Those who seek Him through Yoga. 
11 Those who seek Him through Jnana, or knowledge. 


T72 PRINCIPLES OF TANT Ie 


Herself without a second; the dispeller of the devotees’ 
fears, yet revelling Herself in battle!; the delight of the 
heart of Shiva, though also the Mother of the trinity of 
Devas”; the beloved daughter® of the great Mountain,* 
notwithstanding that She is the Brahman who is exist- 
ence, consciousness, and bliss; possessed of eternally 
fresh youth, and yet the Mother of the Grandfather? of 
the three worlds; beyond the reach of speech and mind, 
though omnipresent in the three worlds; partial towards 
Dharma, though She is above all contraries®; the Des- 
troyer of the Daitya race,’ despite Her being the Mother 
of the Universe; again, the Deliverer of the Danava race,® 
though also its destroyer; the Dweller in the sea of milk,® 
yet moving in all the seven seas!®; the Dweller in the Isle 
of Gems,™ though also the Mistress of the seven Islands; 
the Dweller in the house of Chintamani,’* and yet also 
above all name and form?4; attached to the Parijata 
forest, though She is equally at home as in the forest; 
seated under the Kalpa tree,’° though being the eternal 
Kalpa creeper bearing the four-fold fruit of Dharma, 
Artha, Kama, and Moksha’®; seated on a jewelled throne, 


1 The Devi is a great warrior contending against the demoniac hosts 
of Asuras, Danavas, and Daityas. 

2 Whilst She is the Spouse of Shiva in Her form as Parvati, in Her 
higher aspect of Shakti, of which Parvati is but a partial manifestation, 
She is the Mother of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. 

3 Parvati. 4 Himalaya. 5 Brahma (see ante, note 2). 

6 Dharma and Adharma, or righteousness and unrighteousness; both 
issue from Her, though as Dharma is that which supports the world, 
She is, as its supporter, partial to it. 

7 Enemies of the Devas. 

8 Sons of Danu; enemies of the Devas. 9 Kshira. 

10 Of milk, water, ghee, and honey, salt and sugar-cane juice. 

11 Manidvipa (see A. Avalon’s ‘“‘ Mahanirvana Tantra’’). 

12 Jambu, Plaksha, ShAlmali, Kusha, Krafiicha, Shaka, and 
Pushkara. 

13 The stone which grants all desires (see A. Avalon’s ‘‘ Mahanirvana 
Tantra’’), 

14 Upadhi (limiting conditions). 15 Desire-gratifying tree. 

16 Religion, wealth, desire and its fulfilment, and liberation (see 
Introduction), 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 173 


though to Her both ashes and jewels are the same; lying 
on the lotus-seat of Sadashiva, the great Preta,t though She 
is the Shakti, the container? of the infinite Universe ; deeply 
black like black clouds, yet the giver of light to infinite 
millions of suns, moon, and other fires; blue like a mass of 
crushed collyrium,°® though full of light* and self-manifest ; 
dark of colour,’ and yet the Dispeller glowing with exist- 
ence, consciousness, and bliss of the inner darkness in 
the world of innumerable devotees; garlanded with fifty 
heads, whilst rejoicing in the sounds of fifty letters,® and 
of the lute’; the dweller in the Tripafchara,® despite the 
fact that She is above all Prapafichas®; crested with a 
crescent moon, yet averse to display; learned in the 
merriments of Kala (time), though the expert baffler of 
Kala (death); the dweller in great cremation grounds,!° 
notwithstanding that She is Mistress of the entire Uni- 
verse; whose hair is ever dishevelled for the removal of the 
bonds which bind devotees,*? despite the fact that She is 
Herself the Author of the bonds of existence, the Con- 
queror of the right side by putting forth the right foot,** 
in spite of Her assuming the form of a woman whose place 
is the left side*4; with fearful moving red eyes rolling with 
intoxication,*® and yet above all delusion’®; smiling 
sweetly, though having a terrible countenance; the giver 


1 Preta is literally the spirit of a person before the obsequial rites. 
In this connection it is used in the sense of corpse—that is, Shiva is 
inert, and can do nothing without Her vivifying Shakti. 

2 Adhara. 3 Anjana. 4 Jyotih. 

5 The Devi as Kali, Tara, and Chhinnamasta, is represented of a 
black colour. . 

6 Varnas. In Her terrible forms the Devi is garlanded with heads. 
As Kundalini She is present in the fifty letters existing as Dhvani in 
the Tattvik centres. 7 The Vina. 

8 A Yantra with three times five (Tripaficha) corners (Author’s note). 

9 Prapaficha is that which is made of the five elements—earth, water, 
fire, air, and ether. 10 Shmashdanas, 

11 As to the Pasha (bond), see p. 167. 12 Bhavabandhana. 

13 In the Dhydnas She is represented as putting forth the right foot. 

14 Va4ma, which means both female and left side. 

15 Madabharaghirnita. 16 Maya and Moha. 


174 PRINCIPLES OF TANT 


of blessings and of assurance of safety, yet at the same 
time bearing a sword and a severed head; the most 
shameless of women,t and yet Herself the author of 
the feeling of shame; clad in space,” though pervading 
the infinite space; mad after the delights of Yoga, 
despite of Her being all delight Herself; the beloved of 
Mahakala,? though the Mother of all things both moving 
and unmoving. 

O Sadhaka! where else will you find such an incom- 
parable infinite array of mutually conflicting Gunas in 
one and the same person? It is as if the infinite number 
of Gunas of Her whose substance is untold Gunas had 
flown away from their centre of attraction and were 
moving about the infinite Universe, but have now found 
Her whose Gunas they are, and rest in untroubled sleep, 
in their mother’s arms, like children who, having lost, 
have found again their mother. O Sadhaka! in worship* 
the principal place is awarded to the form with attributes.° 
It is these Gunas of Her whose substance is Gunas which 
draw the Sadhaka’s mind and heart from the Sangsara, 
thus giving him the enjoyment of incomparable peace in 
the cool shade of the Kalpa tree® of Her beauteous feet. 
It is because that form is the seat of infinite Gunas that 
it is so sweet and charming. Wherever a single Guna 
establishes its supremacy, it comes into conflict with 
other Gunas. Where pity is supreme, severity is uncared 
for and banished; Gunas are thus naturally conflicting. 
But where no Guna is supreme or the ruler, how can any 
one Guna be in conflict with another ? Children quarrel 
bitterly over their food only so long as their mother does 
not come and divide it among them, and assign to each of 
them their respective places. Similarly, Gunas quarrel 
with each other only so long as She who is above Gunas 


1 Nirlajja—without the physical or, other shame of woman. She 
shows Herself naked, dances naked, drinks wine, etc. 

2 Naked. 3 Shiva, the great Destroyer. 

4 Upasana. 5 Guna. 6 Vide ante, p. 172. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 175 


does not take them up in Her own bosom, which is itself 
free from all attachment. At the touch of Her beauteous 
self all Gunas disappear. This is why Her Gunas are 
not in mutual conflict; why streams of mercy flow from 
the Mother in the form of furious laughter; why the three 
worlds are deluged with waves of love of the Devi, who 
rejoices in war; why the Purusha, who is Nirguna and 
always blissful, pours forth His heart and rolls under Her 
feet, drawn thereto by the attraction of Gunas and love of 
- Her whose substance is bliss. Marvellous is the play of 
Gunas of Her whose substance is Gunas, a play which 
is, however, above Gunas. Marvellous is the play of 
Gunas of Her who is without Guna.? Marvellous is the 
array of Her Gunas in the Sangsara which is with 
Guna.? 

It is because Her Nirguna* aspect cannot exist in the 
Saguna Sangsara® that She who is above Gunas has 
assumed forms in which we find the full play of Gunas.® 
Although in the terrestrial world She resides in the heart 
of every Jiva, he cannot, find room for all Her Gunas. 
_ For this reason it is ordained that She should be wor- 
shipped first in the image of unrevealed consciousness, in 
which are reflected infinite Gunas, instead of in a Jiva, 
who is but a part of Her eternal revealed consciousness. 
When at length life is installed’ in the image, and Brahma- 
consciousness® is infused into it by Mantrashakti,? a 
Shakti, which is itself consciousness,’° appears in the image, 
earthen though it be, the like of which is never seen in the 
body of a Jiva, however much and with whatever devo- 


1 Literally, “‘ All the Gunas assume Nirguna aspect in spite of being 


Gunas.’’ Nirguna is the aspect without Guna, the Parabrahman 
aspect. 2 Nirguna. 3 Saguna, 
4 Attributeless. 5 The world of attributes. 


6 In Her all opposites meet. Therefore what appear to be Her 
Gunas are not really Gunas of Her who is above all Gunas. What is 
Nirguna cannot exist in the Sangsara. 

7 At the Pranapratishtha rite. 8 Brahmachaitanya. 

9 Power of Mantra or Shakti as Mantra. 10 Chinmaya. 


176 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


tion he may worship.1. Hence, although She is omnipre- 
sent, it is easiest to worship Her in animage. Bhagavan, 
the creator of all things, has therefore said: “Although 
milk is produced in all parts of a cow’s body, it is obtained 
only from the teats of her udder. Similarly, although 
Devata is all-pervading, Her true existence? is realized 
only in an image.’’ Should anyone attempt to draw 
milk from the nose, tail, or any other part of a cow’s body, 
on the ground that milk is produced in all parts of her 
body, he is certain to get for his pains only phlegm, dung, 
and other such things. Similarly, if anyone worships 
Her as a Jiva in a human body because She resides there 
as in all other things, he will discover the Jiva and not 
the Brahman.’ If, again, Brahman is worshipped in his 
partial aspect as Jiva, all his Shaktis are not-revealed in 
such Jiva* body. If, again, for this reason, the limiting 
condition of Jivahood be put aside and pure consciousness 
only is sought to be worshipped, what necessity is there 
for a Jiva’s body ? If Upadhis are omitted, the whole 
Universe is filled with Her presence. We thus come 
again to Her Nirguna aspect. When this matter? of the 
Nirguna aspect is realized, there is no longer any necessity 


1 A conscious man is ever imperfect. So that he is not a fitting 
object for the reflection of all Her Gunas in him; but the image being 
unconscious, it offers through Mantrashakti the best place for the reflec- 
tion of Her Gunas, 

2 Svaripa Satta. 

3 Literally, the Jiva-Tattva, and not the Brahma-Tattva. In the 
ordinary case of image-worship the image of unrevealed consciousness is 
selected, as it affords a perfect mirror for the reflection of the internal 
conscious image. It is otherwise in the case of the partial revelation 
of consciousness in a Jiva. If the conscious Jiva as such is worshipped 
as Brahman, there is obviously merely the worship of Jiva by Jiva. 

4 Or title, Upadhi. 

5 Tattva. The author here deals with.three cases: (1) If a Jiva is 
worshipped as such, then nothing is thereby got. (2) If the Jiva be 
not so worshipped, but as a partial manifestation of the Brahman, then 
there is only a partial vision of Divine Shakti. (3) If all Upadhi is put 
aside and pure consciousness is worshipped, then we have done with 
body altogether. , 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 179) 


for worship. In order, therefore, to realize in the Saguna 
state the presence of Brahman, who is eternally above 
Gunas, and yet whose substance is eternally Gunas, in order 
to feel the true presence of that Shakti, not by imagina- 
tion, analogy, or example, but truly and directly by the 
force of Her command and by means of Mantra, there is 
no other means in the matter of worship than to worship 
the forms, full of play,t assumed by Her of Her own will. 
This is the cause of the incomparable greatness of images. 
This is why an image is a pillar of support to Her worship. 
This is why an image-worshipper is entitled to Brahma- 
Kaivalya? itself. 

A Yantra also is like an image, the permanent seat of 
Her Brahma-play. But the subject of Yantra® is one 
which should be learnt from a Guru only. We are unable 
to reveal its solemn secret depths to the public. At most, 
we can say that a Yantra is merely a true manifestation 
of Her Mantra form. None but Sadhakas of a very high 
order of competency can understand the subject of 
Yantras. A Guru will test his Shishyas condition before 
disclosing it to him. For this reason the Deva of Devas 
‘has, in the Kularnava Tantra, ordained: 

“ Hence, the principal part of worship is adoration of 

the Parameshvari by preparing Her image or drawing Her 
_ Yantra. But, O my beloved! the worship should be per- 
formed according to the injunctions, after having learnt 
them all from the Guru.” 

Now, such as consider themselves famous, wise, and of 
great experience, on the ground that they have seen the 
map and read the geography of India, and who inwardly 
entertain the vanity of being accomplished Sadhakas, 
full of spiritual knowledge, on the ground of their having 
read the Yogavashishtha Ramayana, the Patafijala Satras, 
and the Pafichadashi,* will perhaps, after all I have said, 
even now reply with their belief in set phrases, “‘ What is 

1 Lila. 2 Supreme liberation. 


3 Yantratattva, 4 Books dealing with the Vedanta and Yoga. 
VOL. IT. 12 


178 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


invocation! or dismissal? of that which is all pervading ?” 
There is no need to give a reply to all that such people 
object. This much only we say: If the notion that ‘‘ He 
is omnipresent ”’ had really a place in your heart, instead 
of being only a word in your mouth, would you in that 
case have spoken of such relativities as “‘ you and I, that 
man and this man, he and who,” and come forward to 
answer my words ?”’ Need I say O Brother! that the idea 
that ‘“‘ He is omnipresent is contained in your books and 
hot in your head? You have not and cannot have the 
capacity to understand the cause of the classification into 
Jnanayoga, Bhaktiyoga, and Karmayoga, or of the distinc- 
tions which exist between them. This is why the very 
name of invocation and dismissal* throws you at first into 
a stupor,* and then makes you burst out into a loud cry 
ten times every half an hour.® Had you but the sense 
to understand that invocation and dismissal of the 
Devata are nothing but the taking of the Devata in the 
heart out of the heart and replacing the Devata of the 
heart in the heart at the close of external worship; had 
even the germ of the notion that Siddhi in Sadhana is 
but the name given to the appearance of super-worldly 
divine Shakti existed in the impressions you acquired in 
previous births, you could never have asked such a 
question, “‘ How can there be invocation or dismissal of 
Her ?” We doubt whether the sense of understanding 
existed in the seed from which all this senseless affair has 
sprung, and therefore much less are we likely to find it 
in the flower and fruit.© This is no exaggeration on our 

i Avdhana (see next note). 

2 Visarjana. Both refer to invocation and dismissal of the Devata, 
which is nothing but the rising into existence and the withdrawal of the 
Devata-consciousness in the mind of the Sddhaka. 

3 That is, of the Devata. 

4 Literally, “‘into sleep ’’ (Svapna). 5 Danda—2} dandas =1 hour, 

6 The meaning is that even Raja Ram Mohan Ray, who inaugurated 
the new school of “reformed ’’ Hinduism, had not a clear idea of 


invocation and so forth. It is not, therefore, at all likely that his 
followers should have any better notions. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 179 


part. What has blossomed in the flower has come out 
in the fruit. Judge yourself from this, the power of the 
seed.) 

Raja Ram Mohan Ray says: ‘‘O mind! what is this 
delusion of yours? Whom do you invoke or dismiss ? 
You say ‘come here’ to the omnipresent Being who is 
everywhere! Who are you and whom do you invoke ? 
What wonderful thing is this? You offer a seat to Him 
who holds the infinite Universe in Himself, and tell Him, 
“seat yourself here. How absurd this is! And you. 
utter hymns in praise of Him who is the master of this 
Universe, after having offered Him all kinds of food. How 
incongruous this seems to me!” 

We need not ourselves give a reply to this. The reply 
which has been given by high-souled Digamvara Bhat- 
tacharyya, whose heart was in Sadhana, is sufficient. 
He says: “‘ In delusion? is my peace. What harm does 
invocation or dismissal do to anybody ? Air fills every 
place, but still when the weather becomes oppressively 
hopmwercay, come, ai! Come, © life-giver!’ The 
Mother of the Universe pervades the Universe; but when 
‘I am overwhelmed with sorrow, I say: ‘Come, O Brah- 
mamayi, save me!’ In fact, meditation, knowledge, 
water, fruit, and all else belong to Her whom I worship 
with living and inanimate things. What harm does 
invocation or dismissal do to anybody 2?” 

The delusion is not a thing to be shaken off; and, if it 
can be, words or songs are not the means of effecting this. 
Why, then, suffer from all this mental disquietude by 
crying, “‘ Delusion ! delusion!” with tears in your eyes? 
The sleep is not to be broken. What, then, is the use of 
brooding over sorrow and distress and seeing the horror 
of bad dreams? It is, on the contrary, a sign of intelli- 


1 Possibly, the flower is Raja Ram Mohan Ray’s writings, the fruit 
is his followers, and the seed is himself. 2 Bhrdanti, or error. 

3 That is, with various articles of worship, such as animals (in 
-sacrifice), water, light, etc. 


180 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


gence to think of longed-for happiness instead of sorrow, 
and to enjoy dreams of that happiness during sleep.* 
This is why Digamvara was blessed with Sadhana—was 
indifferent to this life, scorched by the fire of Sangsara, 
and said: ‘‘ In delusion is my peace. What harm does 
invocation or dismissal do to anybody ?” It does ro 
harm to you, or to me, or to Him, whoisinvoked. Whom, 
then, does it harm? You are not harmed, because it is. 
I who invoke. I am not harmed because I find peace 
in such invocation, nor is She whom I invoke harmed in 
any way. In Her eyes it is not I who am invoking, but. 
She who is invoking Herself by becoming I. You and I 
think that you and I are invoking, but such invocation 
is, in fact, unreal. You may, however, ask, Why does. 
She make this unreal invocation? We reply that you 
had better ask Her, instead of a mere Jiva, for a reply 
to this question: ‘“‘ Why, being Herself Brahman, She has 
become Jiva? Why, being existence, consciousness, and 
bliss, has She become entangled in the world of contraries 
and sorrows ?”’ Full of the bliss of play” is She, and play” 
is Her play? of bliss. If, in this drama of Sangsara-play, 
She intoxicates Herself with Her own bliss by appearing 
as Jiva and invoking Herself, or She Herself enjoys Her 
own peace by seeing dreams in Her own delusion, what 
harm does it do Her? Andif, being a Jiva, I, considered. 
as a Sangsari,# invoke Her, that invocation also is in 
accordance with Her command. What question of harm. 
to Her can then arise over this? Hence, though he 
knew that this Sangsara was full of delusion, and had 
awakened from the horrible dream of the sleep of delusion, 
the cause of which he fully understood, the wild and 
deluded Sadhaka and unerring Tantrika, Digamvara,. 
sinking in the sea of peace, has said: ‘‘ In delusion is my 


1 Get as much happiness as you can even in delusion. 

2 Lila. 3 Nataka, which means drama, etc. 

4 Inhabitant of the Sangsdra—that is, from the point of view of Jiva. 
and Sangsdara. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 181 


peace.” “ You say, come here to the Omnipresent Being, 
who is everywhere. Who are you and whom do you 
invoke ? What wonderful thing is this?! There is no 
‘here or there’ for Him who is Omnipresent; how, then, 
Can it be said to Him, ‘ Come here ?’ ” 

Had Ray? looked into the matter a little more deeply, 
he would not most probably have said this; for it is uni- 
versally admitted that there is no here or there for the 
Omnipresent Brahman. Whose, then, is this “‘ here ane 
in the phrase “‘ Come here ?”’’ Itis the Sadhaka who says 
it, and itis his own. Although there is no here or there 
for the Brahman, there is here or there for the Sadhaka. 
Peesayoem a oule tO this place of mine.’’ Had [ said, 
“Come to this place of Yours,” I might some day be 
called to account for it. But the Sdadhakas ‘“‘ here,” 
which is spoken of in the Shastra, has, through deficiency 
of intelligence in the interpreter, become Brahman’s 
“here ’’; and, unfortunately, like one blind man resting 
on the shoulders of another blind man, you and I also 
have understood that this “here” is in reality Brah- 
Mijamee cto. 9 11, alter this, it is objected that there is 
no “here or there’”’ for Brahman, how, on being asked 
to come here, can He actually come? Should anyone 
make this objection, we would ask him to go alittle further. 
If there is no “ here or there ’’ for Brahman, there is also 
no coming or going for Him. Why, then, object to his 
“ coming here ”’ instead of at once objecting to the funda- 
mental matter, the ‘‘coming”’ itself? For him for 
whom there is no coming and no going, there is also no 
eating, no dressing, no taking, no giving, and, in short, 
nothing which can be negatived, and not even worship 
by you or me—nothing, nothing, nothing! Everything 
is thus cleared away and dismissed. This is what is 
called being too intelligent! Here Ray ought to have 
understood that what he was saying belonged to a different 


1 See ante, p. 179. 
2 Raja Ram Mohan Ray. 


182 PRINCIPLES OF TAN@Ies 


province’ altogether. Its proper place is in the sphere 
of pure knowledge? It has no place in the sphere of 
Upasana,® which is Karma, with Jnana, accomplished by 
Bhakti.4 To seek to ridicule a matter which belongs to 
one province® by taking it into another is unjustifiable. 
This is what is called ‘‘ absence of common sense.” 

Ray again says: ‘“‘ Who are you? and whom do you 
invoke ? What wonderful thing is this?” The cause of 
his wonder is: ‘‘ Who are you ? whom do you invoke ?” 
This ‘“‘ Who are you? whom do you invoke ?” can be 
explained in three ways. First, ““ Who are you ? whom 
do you invoke >?” may mean, you are He, for a Jivais a 
part of Brahman. This assumes a perfect knowledge ot 
Brahman, and is consequently a repetition of the same 
blunder above mentioned; and, as we have already replied 
to this phase of the question, we have nothing to say about 
it here. The second way of interpretation is, ‘‘ Who are 
you ? and whom do you invoke ?”” That is to say, when 
She resides in your own heart, whom again do you 
invoke ? We say, wonderful indeed must have been 
Ray’s knowledge of outer worship if he thought that for 
the purpose of that worship we invoke a Devata other 
than the Devata residing in our heart! He ought not 
to have ridiculed or even discussed a matter which he did 
not understand. “‘ He who worships an outer Devata, 
abandoning the Devata resident in his heart, is like one 
who runs after a heap of ashes, having thrown away the 
gem which he holds in his hand.’ (For, unless the 
spirit® of the Devata residing in the heart is communicated 
to the outer image, the worship becomes a worship of 
the image only, and not of the Devata.)’ If Ray under- 


1 Adhikaéra. That is, it was true as regards the Brahman aspect of 


things, but false when applied to the Jiva aspect and his worship, which 
is necessarily dualistic. 


2 Jnanakanda. 3 Worship. 

* Action done with knowledge and accompanied by devotion. 

5 Adhikara. 6 Tejas. Force and energy, vitality. 
7 


Author’s parenthesis, 


PUN CUVEE SOR PAN TRA 183 


stood that the worship which was based on these words 
of the Shastra was a worship of an outer Devata, to the 
exclusion of the Devata resident in the heart, then, also, 
he was greatly mistaken. Finally, the third way of 
interpretation is ,“‘ What are you ? whom do you invoke ?” 
That is to say, ‘‘ You are a Jiva smaller than the smallest, 
while She is greater than the greatest, boundless and 
external. How, then, is it possible for you to bring Her 
to you?” We reply, you and I have no reason to be 
anxious about this, for we do not worship Her according 
to a method devised by ourselves. The Shastra is Her 
command, and we conduct ourselves according to it. 
She has Herself considered the question how we may 
bring Her to ourselves, and it is because She has done 
so that She has assumed forms and manifested Herself 
as Mantrashakti,! and Herself made provision for Her 
worship accordingly. Moved by pity for Jivas, She has 
(infinite though She is) assumed finite forms, sometimes 
immense and sometimes small, because there can be no 
worship of the infinite and the eternal. According to 
the third way of interpretation, also, the passage, ‘‘ Who 
are you ? and whom do you invoke? What wonderful 
thing is this ?”” seems to us to be truly strange. Now, 
another thing may be said here. It is this: We admit 
that, although there is no “ here or there’”’ for Brahman, 
there is ‘‘ here and there ”’ for the Sadhaka; but when it 
is certain that Brahman is already at the place where 
you would invoke Him, why uselessly make the invoca- 
tion at all? It is with the view to this objection that the 
Sadhaka, with spiritual perception, has, by an analogy, 
explained this matter of the invocation and appearance 
of the Devata. ‘“‘ Air fills every place, but still, when 
the weather becomes oppressively hot, we say: ‘ Come, 
air! Come, O life-giver!’” In the material Universe 
the air is admittedly all pervading; but when the terrible 
heat of summer almost kills us, who is it who does not 


1 Power as Mantra. 


184 PRINCIPLES’ OF ‘TANT RA 


piteously and from his heart say: ‘“‘ Come, air, come to 
us’? ? Why do people say this ? Whence will air come ? 
Air is everywhere. Had the movement of air been in 
fact stopped, would Jivas have existed anywhere? A 
Jiva lives because there is air both within and without 
him, and because he breathes it into and out of himself. 
Why, then, invoke air, saying: “‘Come air, come”? 
When we look at the matter from the point of view of 
ourselves and not of the air, there is a sufficient reason 
for such invocation. The oppressive heat of fiery summer 
is scorching my mind and body; I feel then an acute 
necessity to invoke air. At such a moment, despite the 
universal presence of air, to me it seems to be in fact 
absent. It is not for respiration that I invoke air. I 
invoke the air to save me from the unbearable tortures 
‘of heat I suffer inwardly and outwardly—a work which 
cannot be accomplished by subtle air which has not taken 
on distinctive form. For this purpose we want the Wind- 
King, who moves on the breast of the Malaya Hill, robs 
the fragrance of sandal forests, soothes the burning of 
the Universe, and suppresses the rigours of summer. 
This is why, in spite of the universal presence of subtle 
air, I then ignore it and invoke the gross air, saying, 
“Come, air! Come, O life-giver!’”’ And itis not merely 
a matter of words only; for, as a matter of fact, so long. 
as this body of mine is not soothed by cool and refreshing 
waves of wind blowing strongly and with its sweet life- 
inspiring touches, I may search this entire vast Universe 
without finding anywhere the relief I seek. Similarly, 
although there is no reason, so far as She is concerned, 
for my invoking Her, there is ample reason, so far as I 
am concerned, for my doing so. I ama Jiva scorched by 
the fire of the three forms of sorrows.’ My mind and life 
are constantly on the rack of the terrible troubles of the 
Sangsara. Suffering miserably urder the influence of 
the poisonous exhalations of the world, I cry day and 


1 Caused by the self, the material, and the spirit world 


PRINCIPERS OF TANTRA 185 


night, ‘Save! save!’”” At such a time the fact of Her 
being everywhere does not remove my burning pains. 
And hence, in spite of Her residing in all things as form- 
less substance, to me Her presence seems Her absence; 
and, in spite of my knowing that Her substance is con- 
sciousness itself, Her presence with me does not satisfy 
me. I want Her whose presence will remove all my 
troubles. I am completely surrounded by the fearful 
huge fire of Sangsara, and have no way for escape. 
Scorched on all sides by the burning heat of this circle 
of fire, I, in despair, throw up my arms, and with heart- 
rending and deeply plaintive voice cry: ‘‘O Mother of 
the world! where art Thou ? I die—I die! O merciful 
Mother, save me! Come, O Mother! Come, O Mother! 
Come, O Mother, Mother of mine!’ Instantly, while 
these words are yet in my mouth, the Mother, the charmer 
of the heart of Bhairava,* grieved on learning of Her son’s 
sorrow, forsakes Her golden throne on Mount Kailasa,? 
and, without even staying to arrange Her dress, hastens 
to and stands before me, extending Her ten fear-dispel- 
ling arms in all ten directions,® and crying: “‘ Fear not! 
fearnot!’ Thenonly will my sins, my diseases, my griefs, 
my troubles, and my pains be for ever at an end. My 
distress will not be relieved without the aid of this merci- 
ful and gross manifestation, even though I should possess 
the knowledge of Her subtle existence as the all-pervading 
Devi. Digamvara has, therefore, said: ‘‘ The Mother of 
the Universe pervades the Universe, but still, when I 
am overwhelmed with sorrow, I say: ‘ Come, O Brahma- 
mayi, save me!’”’ That the Mother of the world per- 
vades the Universe is known to me as well as it is known 
to you; but knowledge alone without realization will rot 
end our troubles. Hence, when we are overwhelmed 
with sorrow, we say: “Come, O Brahmamayi!’’ True 
it 1s that we invoke Her by saying, “‘ Come,’”’ but we 


1 Shiva. 2 The abode of Shiva. 
3 N., N.E., E., S.E., S., S.W., W., N.W., Above, and Below. 


186 PRINCIPLES OF TANT 


invoke the aspect? of Her which governs all things, and 
not that in which She pervades all things.” 

Ray says: ‘‘ You utter hymns in praise of Him who is 
the master of this Universe, after having offered Him all 
kinds of food. How incongruous this seems to me!” 
One is pleased if one gets a thing which one does not 
possess; but it seems highly incongruous to utter hymns 
in praise of Him whose infinite wealth consists of this 
entire Universe, after offering Him all kinds of food. 
The offerings belong to His Universe, and not to you. 
Who are you, then, to offer Him that which already 
belongs to Him? Before making a gift of a thing you 
must establish your right of ownership to it. If you 
proceed to establish your right of ownership to things 
which belong to Him, you will be in a manner liable to 
punishment on a charge of theft; so what you gain by 
your offering is the punishment for theft. It is in reply 
to this that Digamvara has said: “‘ In fact, meditation, 
knowledge, water, fruit, and all things belong to Her 
whom I worship with living and inanimate things.” If 
one becomes liable to punishment for asserting one’s 
own right to things belonging to Her, then we cannot 
avoid punishment; for we ought to have remembered it 
when we speak of “‘my wife, my son, my property, my 
family,’’ and so forth, instead of only calling it to mind at 
the time of making offerings in worship.? What have 
you to call “ your’ in wife, son, house, and family ? 
If, for the purpose of your own gratification, you can safely 
enjoy these things as your own, why should you object 
to my offering Her Her own things as though they were 

1 Vibhiti. 

2 She is not invoked in Her omnipresent aspect, but in Her form as 
the Mistress of the Universe. 

3 A theme the author has in other places rightly enlarged upon. 
We hug dualism for our own purposes; it is only when we come to the 
question of worship that we conveniently seek to ignore it, and posit a 


philosophic monism which, though lying in our mouths, is at variance 
with all we do. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 187 


mine for Her gratification. The punishment for theft 
will be the same for you as for me; not only so, but my 
punishment for having made offerings to Her first and 
then partaken of it as Prasdda! will most probably be 
of a different nature from that which you will receive 
for having enjoyed yourself.2. Digamvara has therefore 
said that, be it meditation, or knowledge, or water, or fruit, 
everything belongs to Her, whom we worship with living 
and inanimate things. Your body, senses, mind, medita- 
tion, knowledge, and all, are Hers. If She cannot be 
worshipped with offerings belonging to Her, how can 
one pray to Her at all by meditation with a mind belong- 
ing to Her, or sing songs in Her name with a voice which 
is Her possession? You call me a thief if I offer Her 
things which are Hers, but She whose things they are 
has said: ‘‘ If a man enjoys the things given by Devas, 
such as gold, beasts, grains, and so forth, without first 
offering them to the Devas, he is a thief.’’ Now say, 
brother, is it I who am a thief for having made my 
offering, or you, who are a thief for not having done so ? 
It is true that this Universe is Hers, but have you and I 
realized it? Would anything have then remained as 
_“ mine”? Many people are very quick to understand, 
as a matter of mere knowledge, that the Universe is 
“Hers,” but they find it extremely difficult to put this 
knowledge into practice. On that day on which I shall 
really understand that everything is ‘“‘ Hers” there will 
be an end of the phrase “‘ my ” and of worship as well; 
but so long as I am incapable of doing that, with what 
face do you ridicule Her worship on the ground that it 
is ““by me’? Hence I say, immersed in delusion as 
you are, it is a great blunder on your part to call this 

1 Dedicated food. 

2 That is, it being conceded that all things belong to Her, the offence 
is less if we first offer what is Her own, and then partake of that 
which we have acknowledged to be Her own, than if without such 


tribute and worship we take for our own sensual enjoyment what 
is not our own. 


188 PRINCIPLES ‘OF TAND Re 


delusion “‘ delusion.” Undeluded Digamvara has there- 
fore said: ‘‘ In delusion is my peace. What harm does 
invocation or dismissal do to anybody ?” High-souled 
Dasharathi Ray? also, the musical Sadhaka, has preached 
the same doctrine. In his Agamani? he writes: 


‘The auspicious journey? gave Mountain* auspicious 
fruit. On an auspicious day in an auspicious 
moment came the Lady of Shankara.° 

In haste did Mountain® perform auspicious rites of 
invocation.” 

On the auspicious seventh moon everything was ready 
for the auspicious worship. 

The Tantradharaka® went on reciting Mantras from 
the book in his hand. 

Mountain began to worship Brahmamayi, knowing 
Her to be Brahman. 

He sat® on his seat with a pure mind. 

In various places near Chandi’ the sacred book of 
Chandi began to be recited. 

In the midst of this he fixed his meditation on Chandi, 
-his daughter. 

And putting a flower on his head,"* he worshipped 
Her with mental offerings. 

Restless grew Mountain’s mind as he saw Her. 

He saw that the infinite Universe was all His Uma’s. 


1 The celebrated Bengali poet, born 1804, died 1857. 
2 The coming of Durga. 
3 That is, the coming of Durga to the earth. 


4 Himalaya, Durga’s father. 5 Shiva. 
8 Devi’s father, to whose house Devi every year went. 
7 Mangalacharana. 


8 One of the priests whose duty it is to prompt the other priests with 
Mantras from sacred books. 

9 Literally, ‘‘ He sat with care ’’—that is, he followed out the injunc- 
tions relating to the place of sitting, the mode of posture, etc. 

10 The Devi, a title of Durga, Shakti of Shiva, as the powerful victrix 
of the demoniac hosts. 

11 Before worship a flower is put on the head, often inserted in the 
Shikha (crown-lock). 


ERINCLIPEHS OF TANTRA 189 


Everything was contained in the Daughter’s womb. 

The Daughter was no daughter. 

The world was filled with the Daughter’s daughters 
and sons. Millions of Brahmas, Vishnus, and of 
Shtilapanis' lived under the protection of Her feet. 
The Queen of Shiva was Mistress over all. 

Giving up meditating, Mountain said, a hundred 
streams flowing from his eyes: 

‘ What have I, O Chandi! with which to worship Thy 
feet? I am not in truth the monarch of this 
dominion. 

O Brahmamayi! whose articles, then, shall I give to 
whom ° 

Under the influence of anaes people say, ““ My, my!” 

And who is it who lives in the household Ashrama? 
who is not deluded ? 

O Mahamaya! what a Maya (delusion) it is that thou 
hast cast upon me! 

I pray Thee accept my offerings.’ ”’ 


SONG. 


“O Uma! what riches have I that I can give Thee ? 
Shutting my eyes, I see that all things in the Uni- 
verse are Thine. 

What gems and garments shall I give Thee when the 
sea, which is the mine of gems, is Thy servant, 
and in golden Kashi Thou dost live ? 


1 A name of Shiva as holder of the trident. 

2 Stage of life of which there are four—viz., student (Brahmachari), 
household (grihastha) here spoken of, forest recluse (vanaprastha), and 
wandering beggar (bhikshu). According to the Mahanirvana Tantra 
there are only two Ashramas in the Kaliyuga—viz., the second and 
fourth. 

3’ Spouse of Shiva so called, according to Kdaliddsa’s Kumara 
sambhavam, because “‘ By the words ‘ U, Ma’ (‘ oh, not ’) She was thus 
forbidden by Her mother to practise austerity. Thereafter the pure 
Uma obtained Her name.”’ 


190 PRINCIPLES OF TAN Tig 


O Ishvari Annaptrna,’ who can say that Hara? is a 
beggar, when Kuvera® is the store-keeper in His 
house ? The three worlds are beggars at the door 
of Thy three-eyed beggar.’’3 


Highly pleased, the Devi, with good cheer, said to Her 
father: 


‘Finish the worship which you have resolved on.4 


True the infinite Universe is all Mine. 
The wealth I have given You is Your own.? 
By Chandi’s® grace Mountain worshipped the feet of 
Chandi. 
The seventh moon day ended, and night approached.” 
Ah! how charming! This is truly the Devi’s divine 
message in the heart of the devotee! “ Finish the 
worship which you have resolved on. Your mental 
worship is done on your understanding that all things in 
e ‘5 . . . 
the Universe are Mine. Now finish the outer worship 
which you have resolved on in the notion that it is yours.”’ 
Lest you should say, ‘‘ What I shall offer you in outer 
worship is also Thine,’ the Mother, who dwells in all 
hearts, has said by way of reply: ‘‘ True, the infinite 
Universe is all mine, but the wealth I have given you is 
your own.’ From whose mouth, but that of the Mother, 
can I expect such a simple reply in such sweet, simple 
words? ‘‘ Although the Infinite Universe is all Mine, 
the wealth I have given you—that is to say, the wealth 
in regard to which I have given you the sense of ‘ mine- 
1 The Devi as Lady Bountiful—giver of food. 
2 Shiva. 3 God of Riches. 
4 Sangkalpa (see Introduction, ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra ’’). 
5 That is to say, as explained later, the wealth in respect of which 
the Devi has given the Sadhaka the illusory notion that it is his own. 
6 The Devi (see ante, p. 188). 
7 Though not really so the SAddhaka’s wealth appears to be his own, 
as itis the Devi Himself who is the cause of the delusion that it belongs 
to him. So long as the Sadhaka is under delusion the wealth is really 


his. What is the use of talking about it as ‘‘Her wealth”’ unless this 
is realized by dispelling the illusion ? 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA IQI 


ness ’—is your own; for this sense of ‘ mineness,’ which 
you have also, is My gift. Although the title to the 
substance of the thing is Mine, the title to its enjoyment 
is yours. To-day you offer this title of yours to Me, and 
in doing so you will finish your worship. Give Me, O 
father! the burden that is Mine, and be free from care 
yourself. Let Me to-day free you from all burdens by 
taking them on Myself.’’ O Mountain King! this is the 
way in which is accomplished the worship of those who 
see with their eyes that all is Hers instead of merely 
babbling of it with their tongue. . Blessed are you as a 
worshipper in this Sangsara! You are the best of those 
who have worshipped the Mother! You have said: 
‘Under the influence of delusion people say, ‘ My, my!’ 
And who is it who lives in the household Ashrama! who 
is not deluded ?”” But we do not know if there was ever 
in this world an undeluded follower of the household 
Ashrama like you.2 Millions of great Yogis have been 
unable to master, by means of their undeluded inner 
worship, what you have achieved in the household 
Ashrama, though deluded outer worship? 

Everyone in this world performs outer worship, but 
has the Treasure of the heart ever issued to console any- 
one as She has done for you? Full of Spirit,* full of 
Brahman, and full of bliss,ismy Mother. Although Sheis 
the presiding Devata in the heart, She has come to receive 
your outer worship. To whose house does She thus come 
of Her own accord and with loving regard to grant success 
to the Sadhana of the Sadhaka, after having passed an 
anxious year? in Her jewelled residence in Kailasa, the 
seat of peace ? Whoisso fortunate in this Universe as 
to be able to place before himself the Devata, full of 
Spirit* and of Brahman, residing in the heart, as a Devata 
in visible form® at the very beginning of worship ? Who 

1 Vide ante, p. 189. 2 Himalaya, the Devi’s father. 

3 “ Deluded ” is not here used in a condemnatory sense, but in the 


sense that it is dualistic, and like all which is such in a sense delusive. 
4 Jyotih. 5 In anxiety for her parents. 6 Martimayi. 


192 PRINCTPUES-OF (PANT ias 


is so fortunate that She who is the treasure sought in 
Sadhana seeks from him outer worship of Her own 
accord? Not only have you’ the glorious title of 
«¢Gauri’s Guru,’* but you are the Guru of the whole 
world by reason of your having initiated it in the worship 
of Gauri. It is on being initiated in the great Mantra 
of Gauri’s worship received from you that this Sangsara, 
consisting of moving and unmoving things, has to-day 
become entitled to the Durga Pija festival. For this 
reason Durga, the treasure acquired by you, through 
austere Sadhana is your Daughter, despite that She is 
the Mother of the Universe. Who has the power to 
worthily express the blessedness of the Mother? But 
O Mountain King, the prince of devotees ! O Siddha King, 
the beloved father of Siddheshvari!* Blessed, blessed, 
blessed are you to-day ! and blessed are we, the inhabi- 
tants of the world, in that we have you for our maternal 
grandfather. Hence we say: “O Lord! we pray Thee to 
make the fountain of the love of your Daughter, the 
charmer of Shiva, to play for once in the desert of the 
hearts of those who are unblessed in the world through 
failure to understand this blessedness of Yours. Let 
high waves of the sweet cry of ‘ Mother’ cool their burn- 
ing, stony hearts, and may infinite streams of bliss flow 
to-day through the earth by the grace of its supporter.’’* 

It is with reference to the above-ment? »ned notions of 
delusion that Ray° has said in another song: 


“Whose are you? Who is yours? Whom do you 
call your own? It is a dream which you have 
seen in the sleep of great delusion.® 


1 Himalaya, the Devi’s father. 

2 Gauri is the Devi. The Devi Purana says: ‘‘ She who was burned 
by the fire of Yoga was again born of Himalaya. As She has the colour 
of the conch, jasmine, and moon, She is called Gauri.’”’” She is of a 
golden colour. 

3 The Devi, as mistress of all Siddhi (success). Her father is Siddha, 
as.the possessor of it. 4 The Mountain. 

5 Raja Ram Mohan Ray. 6 Mahamaya. 


PRINCIPLES SOR TANTRA 193 


Just as a man mistakes a rope for a snake, so this 
world, which is a compound of the five elements, is 
false. The immaculate’ One alone being true. 

At night all sorts of birds live happily on the same 
tree. When, however, morning comes, they all fly 
away to different places. 

Know that advisers, friends, relations, and all will 
similarly pass away in time, and there will be 
none to prevent them doing so. 

When cruel death will grasp you, where will your 
flowers be, your sandal paste, jewelled ornaments, 
the men and women you love, your wealth, youth, 
honour, and your pride ?” 

Ray has seen the horrors of delusion in the fearful 
dream of Maya?-sleep in the earthly Sangsara. What he 
has said is doubtless true, approved of all Shastras, and 
admitted by everyone; but even this Sangsara, full of 
delusion as it is, appears to be the seat of unending peace 
when one hears what high-souled Digamvara has said on 
experiencing the most peaceful dream of that Maya- 
sleep, which is full of the Mother. Digamvara’s reply is: 

The Mother is mine, I am the Mother’s, and I call Her 
my own. I see in my dream the Mother who is 
Mahamaya.? 

When through mistake you think you see a snake in 
what is only a rope, do you then say that both 
the snake and the rope are false ° 

After living happily together at night, birds fly away in 
different directions. But they return again as I do. 

The coming and going in this Sangsara gives news of 
its permanency and of its truth. The thought of 
the Feet of Her who is made of consciousness is 
the bondage of Sangsara.’’4 


1 Nirafijana. 2 The sleep of delusion of worldly life. 

3 As both the Yielder and the Victrix of Maya. 

4 Lifeitself isa Sadhana,and every Jivais willingly or unwillingly a Sad- 
haka. Before he can attain liberation he must accomplish that worship|for 
which he is in the world, and untilit is accomplished he is bound thereto, 

VOL. II. 13 


194 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


What incomparable strength floods in the unswerving 
heart of the devotee who has held the great Shaktiinit! 
Immediately he is asked under the infallible authority* 
of the Vedanta Philosophy, ‘‘ Whose are you? Who is 
yours ?”’ the world-conquering devotee replies boldly and 
proudly, “‘I am the Mother’s, and the Mother is mine.” 
“Whom do you call your own?” “I call Her my own.” 
It is no dream which you have seen in the sleep of great 
delusion. I seein my dream the Mother who is Mahamaya. 
The dream of Maya frightens you out of your wits. I see 
in my dream the Mother who is Mahamaya Herself, the 
Queen over that Maya. How can Maya make him afraid 
to whom Mother Mahamaya reveals Herself ? 

“The world which is a compound of five elements is 
false, the Immaculate One? (alone) being true.’ This is 
true as much for me as for you. But you say that what- 
ever is seen in this Sangsara, made of Maya, be it in the 
earthly Sangsadra or in the Sangsdra® of Sadhana, is a 
dream (just as through mistake a man sees a snake in a 
rope).4 From this it follows that you are a non-dualist, 
and have no faith in anything which is dualistic. It is 
therefore certain that you have no faith in Sadhana, 
because it deals with the worshipper and the worshipped. 
Since you have no faith in Sadhana, and neither know 
what it is nor practise it, you will not be able to under- 
stand this Maya-sleep and dream even if they be ex- 
plained to you. It is, therefore, useless to discuss them 
with you. Or perhaps what you have said is not intended 
for the Sangsara of Sadhana, in which case also there is 
nothing to say. Now, “ Just as through mistake a man 
sees a snake in a rope, so the world which is a compound 
of five elements is false.” This also is true. What, 
however, we must here understand is the answer to the 


1 Literally, ‘‘ with the force of the infallible weapon.” 

2 Nirafijana. 

3 Here the author plays on the word. The sense is the sphere of 
Sadhana. # Author’s parenthesis. 


PieNelplls OL TANTRA 195 


question, ‘‘ When does it become false ? for whom does 
it become false ? and who may and may not say that it 
is false ?”’ 

Digamvara therefore says: I admit that the seeing of 
a snake in a rope is caused by mistake and is consequently 
false; but “‘ when through mistake you see a snake in a 
rope, do you then say that both the snake and the rope 
are false ?”) When a man is frightened by the sight of a: 
tiger in a dream, does he then think that the tiger is 
false ? If so, would anybody have ever been frightened 
by the sight of a tiger in a dream? True, it is that the 
tiger of a dream is eventually seen to be false, but that is 
after the dream passes off. Similarly, by mistake one 
sees a snake in a rope. It is true that the snake is false. 
But this knowledge of falsity is gained when the mistake 
is discovered.. How, then, can you realize that the 
Sangsara is false during such time as you see the Sangsara- 
dream in the sleep of Maya? It is precisely because 
Jivas do not realize this that the teachings of the Maya 
doctrine are unheeded by Jivas in the Sangsara. 

Another thing: if there is Maya, whose Maya is it? If 
even whilst living in the midst of Maya I gain Her from 
whom Maya comes, then notwithstanding that Maya is 
full of falsehood, the working of Maya becomes full of 
truth for met As even in dreams people take real 
medicines, or laugh real laughs in the ecstasy of unreal 
joy, or really weep on seeing the horrors of unreal danger, 
or are really engaged in discussion on reaching unreal 
places of debate; so if in the dream of Sangsdra in the 
Maya-sleep I can reach the domain of Sadhana and truly 
obtain the Mother whose substance is truth, then what 
better dream of happiness or better dream of peace can I 
have than this Maya? As people’s dreams pass off the 

1 That is, by true worship the Sadhaka gains the Mother Herself. 
If he succeeds in this, then, in spite of his being in the midst of Maya, 
‘he has attained the highest aim of being which is full of truth. Maya 


cannot harm the Sadhaka, for the latter possesses the wey Devata 
from whom Maya comes and who is its Mistress. 


196 PRINCIPLES OF “TANTRS 


moment they receive medicines, therein? so if my dream 
of Maya also passes off in consequence of my receiving 
the great remedy for the disease of existence, then I shall 
be blessed. If my practice of Sadhana on the -dualistic 
understanding that She is the Mother and I am the son, 
She is the Master and I am the servant, secures for me 
Her grace, then of a surety I shall be able to float joyously 
on the bosom of the sea of monism, swimming in the 
waves of dualism.?, As undecaying, immortal, and in- 
destructible consciousness I shall flow on the current of 
devotion, instead of sinking in the unfathomable depth of 
liberation, and thus swimming through the sea of libera- 
tion I shall at length land on that shore which is the Feet 
of the Devi with dishevelled hair. Then waking, I shall 
see that my dream has really brought me to the shore of 
Kulakundalini,* and that in consequence of receiving the 
great remedy for the disease of existence the sleep of 
existence has in truth passed away. Digamvara has. 
therefore said: Itis well that you see a dream in sleep and 
do not awake again. Had you really woken, then that 
awaking would have been happy and peaceful. But what 
you call waking is only a play of wakefulness without 
awaking, and itself a bad dream. Real waking brings 
happiness and peace, whilst wakefulness without waking 
drives them away, producing want of peace, and the 
lamentation, ‘‘ Alas! I am lost.’ Did all birds when 
leaving the trees do so for good and all, then the trees. 
would have become birdless in a single day. Similarly, 
had all Jivas passed away for good and all, the Sangsara. 
would have ended in a single age.* But just as birds fly 
away in the morning and return in the evening, so Jivas 
pass away when they die and return when they are born 

1 As where a person with an ailment dreams that medicine is given. 
to him by some Devata, which dream wakes him up; as, for instance, 
at the Shiva at Tarakeshvara. 

2 The motionless sea itself is monism, but the waves with which it is. 


agitated are dualism. 
3 The Devi presiding in the Maladhara. 4 Yuga, 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 197 


again. Hence it follows that what you call transiency 
of the Sangsara is in a way nothing but its flowing per- 
manence. Moreover, the constant coming and going to 
this and the next world gives news of the permanence and 
truth of the Sangsara. The Sangsara therefore is per- 
manently permanent in spite of its transiency;! and 
thought of the feet of Her whose substance is conscious- 
ness is the only permanent chain which binds me to this 
Sangsara. I love the permanent Sangsdra always and 
with all my heart, lest monistic experience should unite 
the Mother and the son into one.” 

I cannot bear this Sangsara, for I am terribly afraid, 
lest falling under the charm of liberation I should loosen 
my hold of the Feet of the Mother with dishevelled hair. 
How can I when liberated rest satisfied unless I have the 
Mother, and can call upon Her ten times every half an 
hour: ‘‘ Mother, O Mother! O Mother! Mother mine! O 
Uma! O Shyama! O Mother, Mother ?” 

This is why I say that even liberation is not more 
agreeable than being bound by the chain of the Mother’s 
love. And Digamvara has, therefore, said: ‘‘ Thought of 
the Feet of Her whose substance is consciousness is the 
bondage of Sangsara.’* As to the last few lines of Ray’s 
song, the naked (Digamvara) Sangsara of Digamvara‘ did 
not contain any of the things mentioned in them.’ So 
he did not care to give any reply to them. 

Ray has, again, said: 

Alas! by whom have you been deluded, O mind? How 
unfortunate it is that you believe imagination to be 
truth ! 


1 The world may be in flux, but the flux is a permanent thing. 

2 The position here taken is that of the Bhakta or devotee, whose 
devotion can only find play in a dualistic world which is shattered on 
the attainment of Brahmajnana. 3 Vide ante, p. 193. 

4 There is a play on the word Digamvara. The name also means 
*“ naked.”’ 

5 Digamvara has answered the other lines of Ram Mohan Ray, but 
not those at p. 193 about flowers, sandal paste, jewels, etc., which did 
not form part of his world, and about which therefore he did not 
trouble. 


198 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


You cannot give life to that which is under your 
control and yet desire to attain Him who is the 
life of the world. 

Sometimes you give the image ornaments and some- 
times good food. At one time you establish it 
and at another destroy. 

You make that dance before you,! which, neverthe- 
less, you believe to be your Lord. Who has ever 
seen so much folly anywhere in this Sangsara ?” 

Digamvara replies: 

“She, the Charmer of the world, has deluded the 
world with Maya. The Mother has revealed 
Herself, making imagination true. 

On imagination is She established, in imagination I 
give Her life. But this much I know, that truly 
do I offer myself to Her. 

Sometimes I give Her ornaments and sometimes food. 
At one time I establish Her and at another destroy. 

I see Her as Mother dancing on the breast of Father, 
and in fear I say: O Thou who art all, save all!” 

The Sadhaka will here notice what a great difference 

there is between the two. Ray asks, “ Alas! by whom 
have you been deluded, O mind ?”’ 
Digamvara replies: ‘‘Why mind alone? She, the 
Charmer of the world, has deluded the world with Maya.” 

Do you think that you will escape being deluded by the 
Maya of Her whose Maya deludes the three worlds ? 
Moreover, what you consider to be a folly in image-worship 
is also to be found in your worship of Sangsara.* If in 
spite of the worship of Sangsara being false you consider 
it to be true, why should you not consider the worship of 
images also to be true ? While you yearn for the company 
of father, mother, wife, son, and so forth, despite the fact 
that your relationship with them is false, why should you 


1 The Devi in some of Her forms appears as a dancer; one of the 
names of Kali is Nritya-Kali, or the “‘ dancing Ka4li.”’ 
2 That is, pursuit of worldly objects. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 199 


not also consider Her company an event of singular good 
fortune for you ? 

Next, had it been my imagination which I believed to 
be the truth, then you might say that I was mistaken. 
But it is not so. This imagination is Hers, who has 
created the universe out of Her imagination. She has 
thus created wife and son, and we cannot forget them. 
How can we, then, forget the form? which She has created 
(or imagined)? for Herself. Hence, while you say: ‘‘ How 
unfortunate it is that you believe imagination to be the 
truth,” we say: “‘ Alas! what a pity that you consider 
truth to be imagination in relation to the domain of 
Sadhana only, and not in relation to the Sangsdra also.” 
This is a sign of great self-forgetfulness. You may, how- 
ever, say: “ Although the Sangsara is an imagination, an 
image does not appear to me to be as true as my parents.” 
What matters it to anybody that it does not? What 
matters it to the sun that the owl does not see it? More- 
over, had it been possible for us to see whenever one so 
wished, you might perhaps with some reason have said: 
“I do not see.’ But here, She whom I want to see most 
show Herself before I can see.* Hence I do not wish to 
affirm of anything that it is true. But She, on Her side- 
gives reality to Her imagination (or creation) and presents 
Herself to view. What can you say to this? Ifit seems 
impossible to you that She who can give reality to such 
an imagination as is this vast and yet false universe can 
also (being Herself truth personified) give reality to Her 
own promise, then I have nothing more to say, for wonder- 
ful indeed is your knowledge of truth! As Her image is 


1 Marti: image. 

2 There is all along a play on the word Kalpana, which means both 
“imagination ’’ and “creation.” Moreover, the creation is Ishvara’s 
imagination. 

3 He to whom She shows Herself can alone see. 

4 Everything is in a sense untrue, but until this is realized it is idle 
to select out one thing from an illusive Sangsdra as true and reject 
another thing as false. 


200 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


an imagination, so also is Her presidency therein. As 
the giving of life to the image is an imagination, so life 
also is an imagination; as the Sangsdra is an imagination, 
so you and IJ also are an imagination; and, last of all, Her 
imagination (or creation) also is an imagination. It is 
thus a pure futility to discuss the point. So long as the 
imagination (or creition) of the forms which you and I 
possess is true, so also is Her form, even though imagined 
by Her, yet, true, true, true. On the same day on which 
your “‘ you-ness ”’ and my “ J-ness’’ will disappear, Her 
““ She-ness ”’ also will disappear. For the moment you 
had better consider yourself an imagination than call 
Her such. Hence I make that dance before me, which 
I believe to be my Lord (it is not I who cause the dancing).* 
I see Her as Mother dancing (of her own accord) on the 
breast of Fathér, and so in fear I say: “‘ O Thou who art 
all, save all!’ When I do not forget the multiple form 
of Her* who is all, what great sin have I committed that 
I should forget this form which is Herself in reality ? 
Her form will ever remain an imagination® to such men 
as do not know Her, but those who wish to see Her form 
and have faith in Her ever say: “‘ The Mother has revealed 
Herself, making imagination true.” 

In another song Ray says: ‘‘O mind! always do Sad- 
hana of Him who, being without Gunas,4 is the seat of 
Gunas, and is without imagination.” Digamvara (the 
Sadhaka), the chosen son of Digamvara (Shiva), at once 
says in reply: ‘‘ Why, then, madman, do you do Sadhana 
of Him, if He is without Gunas and without imagina- 
tion ?’’5 | 

We have not been able to find a subsequent verse in 
which another portion of Digamvara’s reply is contained. 

1 Author’s parenthesis; but She again it is who is the cause of that 
appearance of dancing to the Sadhaka. 

2 That is, the world. 3 That is, an unreality. 

4 See Introduction, ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra,” sub voce ‘“‘ Guna.” 


5 Without Kalpand—the expression here means the same thing as 
Nishkriya, or inaction. 


PRINCIPEES OF TANTRA 201 


First of all Ray says: ‘‘ Always do Sadhana of Him.” 
This Sadhana is not the Sadhana spoken of in the Shastra. 
It is Ray’s own Sadhana. For, in one of the following 
lines he says that Siddhi and such other things “ are 
fancies of the mind, impossible of achievement.’’ (And 
yet he tells us that we are always to do Sadhana of Him !)* 
Next he says: “‘ Wonderfully is the universe made. See 
the work and believe in its Author. Know only that He 
exists, beyond thought.” To this Digamvara replies: “ If 
you know only that He exists, why, then, do you sing 
songs? On whom do you meditate when closing your 
eyes, and whom do you think of ?? Here Digamvara has 
proved that there is no correspondence between Ray’s 
words and his actions. In another song Ray says: 
“ What an error it is (of yours),2 O mind! The eye does 
not see Him whom you wish to see. The ether surrounds 
the Universe. How is it that you consider Him to be 
like the ether who has made it so widespread ?” 

“What pains you are at to display Him who makes 
the sun, moon, and other planets to move constantly ! 
And we want to feed Him who is higher than the highest, 
who gives food to men, birds, beasts, and creatures of the 
waters !”’ 

He who does not see the fruits of a work calls it a folly. 
This is why Ray has said, “‘ What an error itis!” But 
he who has reaped its fruits has, with a clear vision, said: 
“Tt is not an error, itis not an error. Look there, look. 
There stands my Brahmamayi shedding light in darkness. 
Under Her feet lies Mahesha, prostrate and unable to 
move. Hundreds of thousands of human arms form Her 
waist-chain. From Her eyes issue the fire of suns and 
moons. Her mouth utters the words ‘fear not, fear 


1 Author’s parenthesis. This is absurd, for Shastrik Sadhana is 
done to obtain Siddhi, and Siddhi is the result of due Sadhana. 

2 How can we think anything of that of which we know nothing, 
except that it is something which exists. 

3 This parenthesis belongs to the original song. 


202 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


not.’ She sends forth peals of loud laughter. Fearful is 
She to look upon. The Heavens tremble. Victorious is 
She in battle. Free is the laugh She laughs with Her 
terrible mouth. The earth trembles under Her swan-like 
gait.1 Keeping time, gracefully She dances, tathai, 
tathai.’’? 

In the course of his reply to another’s words, Digam- 
vara has in this place given an account of his own work. 
Sadhana has here trampled on argument and carried the 
Sadhaka to the visible temple of Siddheshvari,* and what 
it shows him there makes him speak incessantly words 
which depict his own thought, leaving him no leisure to 
reply to those of others. Just as, if a man meditates on 
some subject before he falls asleep, an indistinct shadow 
of that subject falls on his dreams (even if the dream 
relates to a different matter), so the sky, the sun, and the 
moon, which had passed through Digamvara’s mind before 
he composed the song and was considering “‘ Whether 
it is a mistake,” appeared indistinctly along with the 
Viratat form of the Mother of the World. Digamvara 
was at that time lost in what he saw when he said, 
“ Look there, look,’’ or in what he saw before he said, 
“Look there, look.’’ 

A Sadhaka will here observe what a difference there is 
between Sadhana and philosophical reasoning—a differ- 
ence as great as that between Heaven and Hell. Can 
the bubbles of philosophical and scientific reasoning 
attract the notice of him who has sunk into the play of 
the waves of the charming sweetness of the Charmer of 
the world? Ah, how sweet, how sweet! What an 
accomplishment in Sadhana! It is as if She who is life 
itself has thrown the gate of life open and plays before 


‘ A waddling movement in women like that of a duck or swan is 
considered beautiful, for the swaying movements reveal the hips and 
their action. 

2 An onomatopzic word to denote the thud of dancing. 

3 The Devi as Lord of all Siddhi. 4 The vast form. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 203 


the eyes of the devotee, and the devoted Sadhaka, clap- 
ping his hands, fills himself with the sight and then shows 
it to the world, saying: ‘‘ Look there, look at my Mother! 
Free is the laugh She is laughing with Her terrible mouth. 
The earth trembles under Her swan-like gait, and keeping 
time She is gracefully dancing, tathai, tathai.”! Blessed 


Sadhaka, blessed are you! blessed is the earth with your 
blessing ! 


ApDHYATMIKISM.2 


We give a hundredfold praise to the community which 
suffers from the mental malady which makes them say 
that the Deity can have no form for having themselves 
afiorded us the means by which they can be found out. 
But there is another class of interpreters who suffer from 
a contagious fever, whose mere touch is fatal, and who 
yet can by no means be so easily found out. These men 
have surpassed the two Adhibhautik and Adhidaivik 
kingdoms and entered into the Adhydétmik realm.? 
Hence, whatever may be their practice, they are in speech 
advocates of Adhyatmikism. To them even the visible 
Sangsara formed of the five elements is almost Adhyatmik, 
not to speak of invisible abodes of the Devatas, Dharma, 
the next world, and so forth. 

According to them, Vedas, Tantras, Puranas, Itihasas,4 
are allegorical; Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara, are 
allegorical® persons; and so are Prakriti and Purusha, the 

1 Vide ante, p. 202. 

2 Adhyatma and Adhydtmika are adjectives meaning that which 
belongs or relates to the Atma or Self. When used with Jnana or 
Vidya it means the inner doctrine such as that taught by the Upani- 
shads. Here the term is used in the sense of a mistaken over-subtlety, 
a false esotericism; a discovery of imaginary hidden meanings in plain 
statements, which it does not suit the ‘‘ esoteric ’’ interpreter to accept, 
and accordingly resort is had to allegory. 

3 The author is here sarcastic, referring to the threefold divisions 
of the world, the Devas, and the self. They give the go-by to the 


two former, but suffer the pains of self-imagination. 
4 Historical works. 5 Ripaka. 


204 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


ten Avataras;? the ten Mahavidydés? and all Devas and 
Devis are all allegorical beings; Narada and other Rishis 
are allegorical persons; and so are Madhu, Kaitabha, Hiran- 
yaksha, Hiranyakashipu, Shumbha, Nishumbha, Mahis- 
hasura, Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Kangsa, Shishupala, 
-Jarasandha,® and others; the five Pandavas,* Draupadi,? 
Duryyodhana,® and others are allegorical persons; and so, 
too, are Vidyadharas, Kinnaras, Apsaras, Charanas, 
Siddhas, Gandharvas, Yakshas,”? Rakshas,? Bhtitas, Pre- 
tas,° Pishachas,8 Daityas, and Danavas?®; the cities 
Kashi, Kanchi, Avanti, Ayodhya, Mathura, Maya, Viraja, 
Dvaraka, Hastina, the sun, the moon, the planets, the 
stars, Svarga, Martya, Rasdatala,™ are all allegorical things. 
Even the ascending generations above father and grand- 
father and the descendants grandson and great-grandson 
are allegorical. In short, whatever we actually see and 
touch is true, everything which is invisible is allegorical. 
We are told that fools who are unable to grasp the weighty, 
solemn, and hidden principles of the Shastra, perform the 
Shraddha™ of fourteen generations. But, as a matter of 
fact, grandfather, great grandfather, and the like, have 
hidden Adhyatmik or “ scientific”’ meanings. Forinstance, 
the word Vangsha means a cluster of bamboos. Father, 
grandfather, and so forth, are each a ptra (link) of that 
bamboo. This is why they are called Ptirvapurushas 
(forefathers).1* The Aryyan Shastra enjoins that every 
year Shraddha should be performed for them, and the 
Shastra explains the word Shraddha as whatever is given 

1 The ten incarnations of Vishnu, as Matsya, Varaha, etc. 

2 The ten great appearances (marti) of the Devi, as Kali, Tara, 
Shodashi Chhinnamasta, Dhtimdavati Bagalaé, Bhairavi, Kamala, 
Bhubaneshvari, Matangi. See p. 192 of first volume. 

3 Various Asuras. 4 Sons of Pandu. 5 Their wife. 

6 Head of the Kauravas, the cousins of the Pandavas. 

7 Devayonis of various classes. 8 Demoniac spirits. 

9 Ghosts, spirits before the performance of the obsequial rites. 

10 Enemies of the Devas. 


11 The upper, earthly, and nether worlds. 
12 Obsequial rites (see post), 13 Author’s parenthesis. 


BioiNG@rrietos OF slANT RA 205 


to Pitris out of Shraddha or respect is called Shraddha. 
We are, however, told that the injunction that Shraddha 
should be performed every year for them means that 
every year a new cluster of bamboos should be planted 
round the house in a reverential spirit. Such men as have 
clusters of bamboos in their houses know this rule very 
well This is the secret Adhyatmik interpretation of the 
Shastrik command, and this is why the Shastra says that 
the Vangshas (lines of descendants) of those who annually 
perform Shraddha for Pirvapurushas never die out; that 
is to say, their houses never stand in want of bamboos, 
and so on. Similarly, we are to understand that all the 
rules and regulations contained in the Shastra concerning 
worship and like matters are equally allegorical. That 
people do not understand them to be so, but take them 
in a different light, is due simply to the lack of discoverers 
of their hidden meanings or Adhyatmik interpreters. 

O Sadhaka! such matters as worship of Devas and Devis 
have also interpretations similar to the interpretations of 
Shraddha you have heard above. These interpretations 
are nowadays so widely preached to the public that we 
refrain from relating them here. In fact, just as when 
Bhagavan Rama Chandra, whose life was in Janaki,? had 
gone in pursuit of Maricha, the horrible Rakshasa Ravana 
appeared in the garb of a Brahmana practising austerities 
at the door of the cottage of the Mahalakshmi? of the 
solar race on the pretext of begging alms; so these Dhar- 
marakshasas,* seeing that the Aryya society is nowadays 
equally masterless, helpless, and desolate, have slowly 
come forth in the garb of beggars and stood at the door of 
Dharmaprayritti.2 By reason of the nature of the present 


1 This is, of course, all sarcasm. 

2 Sita, daughter of Raja Janaka, wife of Rama. 

3 Sita, who was, as it were, the great Lakshmi or tutelary goddess 
of the solar race to which her husband Rama belonged. 

4 Evil spirits, destroyers of true religon. 

5 Religious instinct; that inclination (pravritti) in men which leads 
them to religion. 


206 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


age Bhagavan is at a great distance from us. Our only 
course of safety lies in keeping to the rules laid down by 
devoted seekers of the truth concerning Bhagavan. 
Dharmapravritti? needs, therefore, to be loudly warned 
to-day lest Janaki cross the circle drawn by Lakshmana 
about her. The present band of interpreters have un- 
doubtedly the inner natures of Rakshasas however much 
they may outwardly appear as ascetics. It is only until 
such time as they shall get the Dharmapravritti? of the 
public completely in their power that they will continue 
to expound such sweet interpretations as herdswomen 
means sensuous functions?; Shrikrishna means Atma; 
cloth means shame*; Kadamba tree® means Shatchakra®; 
His blue colour is the sky; the hues of dawn are his yellow 
cloth; the rainbow is his charming diadem, and so on. 
Later on, when enticed by these apparently sweet inter- 
pretations, the Dharmapravritti’? of the public has said 
“Yea” to them, and stepped beyond the bonds pre- 
scribed for it,’ they will at once throw off this ascetic 
garb, and, revealing their frightful Rakshasa aspect, say 
that “‘ Shrikrishna”’ or “‘ His lila (play) ’’ are unrealities, 
but that, in order to attract the minds of ignorant people, 
the authors of Shastras have thus allegorically explained 
the (omnipresence) of formless Brahman.® Then, op- 
pressed by the demoniac power of the Rakshasas, our 
Dharmapravritti will go weeping to the other side of the 
sea. On the way it may perhaps meet one or two 


1 A simile is drawn between the circumstances of Sita’s abduction 
and the abduction of Dharmapravritti by the Dharmarakshasas. 

2 Vide ante, p. 205. 

3 Referring to the Gopis who worshipped Krishna. 

4 Referring to the incident when Krishna removed the clothes of 
the bathing Gopis to compel them to appear before him naked. 

5 Nauclea cadamba, a tree with fragrant orange blossoms under 
which Krishna played. 

6 The Tattvik centres, Mféladhara, etc. See A. Avalon’s “‘ The Six 
Centres and the Serpent Force.” 

7 Vide anie, p. 205. 

8 That is, by Sddhakas and Bhaktas. 9 Nirakara. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 207 


Jatayus,’ but they will not be able to rescue it from the 
Rakshasas’ hands. We know that Bhagavan himself is 
ever solicitous to rescue Dharmapravritti, which is the 
object of His love. But that is no reason why we should 
willingly invite danger. No one should find time or 
inclination to discuss the inferences and conclusions of 
such men. Whenever one meets them one should sum- 
marily dismiss them from the door, saying, “‘ Begone!” 
Of course, if one thinks that a guest should not be dis- 
missed without a gift, one may give him such as he 
deserves.? 7 

Whatever a man does is done with a motive. These 
people also have theirs. It is, however, amusing to see 
how they dare expose their beloved Simul cotton-fruit® 
to a violent storm—a fruit which, if but slightly touched, 
bursts into a hundred fragments before a thousand eyes. 
The Shastra has, we are told, described the Devata, the 
Devata’s play,* and the seat of such play,* allegorically ; 
but has also told me that in order to see that holy place 
of pilgrimage of allegory I must travel 60,000 yojanas.° 
I must, then, really waste this real body of mine to a 
skeleton for the allegorical Devata, and for it I am called 
upon to say: “I must either accomplish my object or 
die in the attempt.” The Adhyatmik interpreter has, of 
course, explained all this in the Adhyatmik fashion, but 
I am at a loss to make out how I can now give an Adhyat- 
mik interpretation of himself. If the facts are not real, 
but imaginary, was it right on the part of Bhagavan and 
the Rishis who promulgated the Shastra to delude the 
hearts of simple folks with allegorical falsities. The 
purpose of the Shastra is to kindle the ight of true know- 
ledge in the hearts of men; and yet we are asked to say 
that it is that same Shastra which throws the world into 

1 When Ravana was carrying away Sita, on the road he met Jatayu, 
a great bird who was Sita’s father-in-law’s friend. Jatayu fought with 
Ravana, but was killed by him. 2 Give him some blows. 


3 When the covering is burst, the cotton within is blown away. 
4 Lila, 5 A yojana is eight or nine miles. 


208 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


a deep, dark sea of delusion by its false histories! This 
same Shastra ever befriends Jiva in this world and here- 
after by pointing out, with the utmost minuteness, what 
is good and what is bad for him at every moment, and 
every act from his conception in the womb to the final 
rites in the cremation ground; from the mother’s womb 
to the Brahmaloka; from Hell! to liberation?; and yet they 
tell us that this Shastra it is which plunges the entire 
world into Rasatala® by means of its falsehoods and 
fancies! We leave it to such to tell us also whether 
they themselves should be welcomed as learned men or 
avoided as Chandalas.4 How intense must be the en- 
mity of these men with Shastra or Bhagavan that, in 
order to avenge themselves upon it, they should lay out 
jars of Adhyatmik poison with layers of sweets and facile 
meanings on the top! The Shastra is not a net of self- 
ishness spread by human Pishaehas.® 

Its promulgators are He who, leaving Vaikuntha, de- 
scended on the earth in order to save the three worlds; 
and they who, in spite of being masters of the eight forms | 
of Siddhi® by the force of Tapas,’ yet lived in dense forests, 
wearing plaited hair and barks of trees, walked upon the 
topmost heights of discernment® and dispassion,? and 
were full of mercy, which they shed unsought. They 
have said that it is true, true, thrice true: “‘ True, true, 
true again; true, there is no doubt.” If to those who, 
intending to serve, mean selfish ends, call that firm truth 
falsehood, we give the credit of being truthful men, then 
who are to be counted liars in the world? It is also 
indeed curious that, while the Ayurveda, the Dhanur- 
veda, the Gandharvaveda,” Astrology, and the Tantra- 


1 Naraka. 2 Nirvana. 3 One of the seven nether worlds 

4 One of the lowest castes. 5 Low evil spirits. | 

6 The powers known as anima, laghima, etc. 

7 Austerity, devotion, etc. (see Introduction). 

8 Viveka. 9 Vairdgya. 

10 The Scriptures dealing with the art of medicine, archery (warfare), 
and music. 


PRINGIPGES OF TANTRA 209 


Shastra which deals with Mantras, are not considered 
allegorical, only that section of the Vedas which deals 
with the worship is thought to be so. You are at liberty 
to think it allegorical, but when you become ill, why do 
you not explain medicine to be allegorical ? Why do you 
not take the sun and moonasallegorical, and therefore light 
lamps at noon and bathe at night? The form of com- 
position known as allegory is a thing to be understood and 
enjoyed; but in what poetical work have you read that 
it is also a thing to be practised ? Does not your sinful 
tongue rend itself into a thousand parts when you say 
that the Maharshis,! who, proficient in all Shastras, pene- 
trated the depths of Sadhana, lying beyond even the 
keen intelligence of philosophers, and who, attaining 
Siddhi in that Sadhana, disclosed superworldly Divine 
_ truths to men as if they were ordinary visible things, 
could yet not find out the allegory you discover, even 
although they could apprehend the Formless One ? 

Are all the efforts which accomplished Sadhus, Sad- 
hakas, and learned men have bestowed on Yajna,? medi- 
tation, knowledge, Japa, Tapas,*® worship, study, and the 
like during the successive ages of Satya, Treta, Dvapara, 
and Kali, a mere waste of labour ? Could none of them 
understand the Adhyatmik meaning based on allegory ? 
Wonderful, indeed, is the power of research which you 
have acquired by the grace of the Lord of the Kali age! 
The word Adhyatmik means that which concerns Atma; 
but Atma is devoid of form, so that all that concerns it 
must also be formless. Thus the doctrine that the Deity 
is possessed of form* is about to be explained away. 
One may kill a serpent without breaking one’s stick.° 
Let the doctrine of the Deity, being possessed of form, be 

1 Great Seers. 2 ** Sacrifice ”’ (see Introduction). 

3 Repetition of Mantra; austerities, devotion, etc. Vide ibid. 

4 Sakaravada. 

5 A Bengali adage meaning: ‘‘One may accomplish one’s object 


without injury to oneself.’”’ 
VOL. AF, 14 


210 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


quietly abandoned, but in such a way that society may 
not be offended. This is the reason why we meet with 
so much unswerving faith in the Adhyatmik principles; 
this is why Adhyatmik interpretations of Shrimadbha- 
gavata, Bhagavadgita, Mahanirvana Tantra, and other 
books have nowadays gone abroad and are being sold, 
distributed, and discussed in meetings held under the 
standard of Aryyashastra; this is why hypocritical in- 
fidels are moving about the country preaching the irre- 
ligion' of Adhyatmik interpretation under the pretence 
of preaching Dharma; this is why unsuspecting honest 
people who, having in good faith collected those sharp 
weapons with the notion that they were Shastrik, are 
now being wounded with them. It is simply because 
they disguise themselves behind the name of Shastra 
that these robbers in the field of Dharma get shelter from 
religious men. It is, however, good news that the time 
for appearance of the mercy of Her who is full of mercy 
for the poor has become ripe, and that almost everybody 
has now learnt the lesson of experience. Still, according 
to the rule that well-wishers should, out of love, reiterate 
an advice, even if it is already known, we say again: 
“Society, beware, beware!” It matters not whether 
you fear cholera, small-pox, and malaria or not; but 
whenever you meet an Adhyatmik teacher, do not forget 
to make a profound bow and take leave of him in fear! 

We shall most probably have to show in the course of 
our discussion of other topics later on how, why, and 
whence this system of Adhyatmik interpretation has been 
evolved. For this reason we desist from further dealing 
with the subject here. 


1 Adharma. 


ea rleteh ee Neve | 
OUTER WORSHIP! 


HE Mahanirvana Tantra says: “‘ The highest state is 

that in which the presence of Brahman is perceived 
in all things. The middle state is that of meditation. 
The lowest state is that of hymn and Japa,” and the 
state lower than the lowest is that of external worship.1 
Yoga is realization or the accomplishment of Unity be- 
tween Jiva and Paramatma. Worship is based on the 
twofold knowledge that He is Ishvara, and I am His 
servant; but for him who has known that everything is 
Brahman there is neither Yoga nor worship.” 

The Niruttara Tantra says: ‘‘ Mental worship is superior, 
and external worship.is inferior. . By worshipping Devata 
a Sadhaka is himself honoured. Japa, without a doubt, 
leads to Siddhi in Mantra, and Homa leads to Siddhi in 
all things; for this reason a Sadhaka should perform all 
these three things—namely, Worship, Japa, and Homa. 

“O Kuleshvari!? Sadhakas following the Virachara 
and Divyachara* are competent for mental worship— 
that is to say, they alone are competent to perform mental 
without outer worship.” 

Similarly, other Tantras also have described external 
worship as being of a lower kind. It is these statements 
and authorities which have nowadays appeared in the 


1 That is, external ceremonial worship as opposed to inner mental 
worship. 2 Repetition of Mantra (see Introduction). 
3 Mistress of the Tantrik Kaulas. 
4 The two Tantrik Achadras above Pashvachara. 
2i1 


212 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


society of common people like a mighty comet threaten- 
ing untimely dissolution, and this is why people, proud 
of their philosophical knowledge, are most averse and 
even opposed to external worship. They are strongly. 
of opinion that outer worship is worse than the worst, 
so that its performance is degrading, or that the most 
degraded persons only will perform it. Why, then, 
should they perform it? We, too, admit that outer 
worship is inferior; but we ask, To what is it inferior ? 
Is it inferior to spiritual knowledge, or to meditation, or 
to Japa and hymn, or to that which they themselves do, 
abandoning all these ? 

It is true that outer worship belongs to the lowest 
order of competence, but what sublimity have you reached 
that you can turn up your nose at the very mention of 
it? To write Ka-Kha' in a primary school is no doubt 
the lowest stage in education, but do you think you will 
become a great Rishi, proficient in all Shastras, without 
having first acquired a knowledge of letters? If anyone 
has ever acquired proficiency in all Shastras, it is because 
of his writing of Ka-Kha under the Guru-Mahashaya.” 
Similarly, if anyone has ever acquired competence in 
spiritual knowledge, know that he has done so by virtue 
of external worship. It is true that the student leaves 
the primary school for the Tol® or the college, but it is 
certain that he does not leave behind him Ka-Kha.*. 
When Ka-Kha has become firmly and indelibly impressed 
in their minds for all life, it is then that boys enter the 
boundless sea of Shastra on the craft of that same Ka- 
Kha. Similarly, when, in course of the Sadhana of the 
lotus-feet of the Supreme Devata in external worship in 
the primary school of the Supreme Guru, meditation and 
concentration become natural to a Sadhaka, it is then 


1 Thatis, A BC. Ka-Kha being the first two letters of the Sanskrit 
alphabet. 2 The teacher in a primary school. 

3 Orthodox Sanskrit school. 

4 He does not unlearn all that he had learnt before. 


Phy GUE ESLOR AN TLRA 213 


that he enters the sea of eternal knowledge and crosses to 
the other side of existence with the help of the craft of 
those fear-dispelling Feet. The relation between the 
Sadhana of Mahavidya! and the worship of the Devata, 
whose substance is the Mantra given by the Guru, is 
similar to that which exists between the cultivation? of 
Vidya? and the writing of Ka-Kha under Guru-Maha- 
shaya. Whatever Shastra you may attempt to learn, 
the Mantra of Ka-Kha will take you safely through all 
difficulty. However vast the sea of Shastra may be, 
Ka-Kha will carry you across it. Similarly, however vast 
be the domain of Jnana, Yoga, and Samdadhi* may be, 
the great Devata, who is Mantra, will assume form, take 
you by the hand, and carry you across it. I shall see 
that the Mother, the Ishvari of all, with dishevelled hair, 
whose substance is bliss, is joyously laughing and dancing 
in Jnana, Yoga, Samadhi, or in whatever else I may 
think or do, and that such untiring dance is raising waves 
of love in the sea of my knowledge. You are mistaken, 
O brother! From whom have you heard that I have 
anything in this Sangsdra, be it Sadhana, prayer,® medi- 
tation,’ knowledge,® enjoyment, or liberation,*® in which 
the Mother is not? In my Sadhana is the Mother; in 
the object of my Sadhana is the Mother; in my Siddhi is 
the Mother; and in the object which I get by Siddhi is 
the Mother. She is at the beginning, at the middle, 
at the end, and beyond the end. Know that that which 
remains when all is gone is the Mother only. When there 
are none left to call the Mother “‘ Mother,” know that 
then, also, there will be the Mother only. For the Mother 
is my Mother as well as my son’s Mother, my father’s 
Mother, my mother’s Mother, and even Her own Mother; 
so that when all else is lost, there will remain the Mother, 


1 Supreme spiritual knowledge. 2 Sadhana. 
3 The lower knowledge. * Literally, ‘“‘ Of the Tattva of Jnana,” etc. 
5 Spiritual knowledge. 68 Bhajana. 7 Dhyana. 


8 Jnana. 9 Bhukti. 10 Mukti. 


214 PRINCIPLES OF TANT RE 


the Mother, the Mother! When will that day come on 
which, losing all we possess, we ourselves shall be like 
corpses and see the Mother only ° 

Nowadays numbers of precedents and authorities are 
being collected for the abolition of external worship. 
Someone writing on the life of Ramaprasada! says: “‘ Did 
he worship the earthen Kali? Never.’ He said: “ The 
fierce-visaged Devi in the temple of the heart-lotus,”’ as 
if Ramaprasada’s Kali was never wont to issue from 
himself, or as if the Kali of those who worship Her earthen 
image never appears in their heart-lotuses. The expres- 
sion ‘‘earthen Kali” itself is ridiculous,? brother critic! 
Even the earthen Ka4li is of real worth; but it is a matter 
of lasting regret that being a man of flesh and bone you 
have become earthen and of no worth. We know not 
when Fortune will smile on you so that the Mother 
will show Herself in and through earth; when you will 
understand that although earth is earth, there is no lack 
of the Mother init! Rdamaprasada says: “‘ Hundreds of 
true Vedas say that my Tara is without form.” Out of 
the thousand songs of Ramaprasada only this much has 
been quoted; not even one whole song, but only that 
portion of it in which the word “ without form ”’ occurs, 
as 1f Ramaprasada says on oath: “‘ Everything else that I 
have said is falsehood; only the portion‘ My Tara is without 
form’ is pure truth ’’; and, as if the following passages 
were mere raving fantasy or senseless talk, the only sensible 
statement being that which speaks of the Devi as being 
““ without form.”’ 


SONG. 


*“O Mother, how Thou didst dance in battle ! 
Incomparable is Thy garment, 
Loose is Thine hair, 
Naked art Thou on Hara’s breast. 


1 The celebrated Bengali poet and TAntrik, 
2 For Kali cannot be earthen. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 215 


How Thou didst dance in battle! 

Who is that dark Lady ?4 

Her colour is like crushed collyrium, 

Her face is like the circle of the autumnal moon, 

Her tresses are loosely flowing, 

Her body is splashed with blood ; 

She shines like a freshly-formed cloud streaked with 
lightning ! 

O who is that Charmer of mind—that Charmer of 
mind ? 

Like a mass of molten lightning is She. 

Her beauty shines like gems and rubies. 

O who is that Charmer of mind ? 

With a swaying gait, who comes there ? 

Her tresses are loose, and She is stirred by wine, 

She moves fast in battle, 

Seizes those who surround me,” 

Holds elephants in the hollow of Her hand; 

Ah! who is that Dark Lady coming there ? 

Who is She, young and naked, 

And yet devoid of shame ? 

She charms the world. 

What unseemly conduct for a lady of respectable 
family ! 

Her gait is like that of an elephant, 

She is intoxicated with wine,® 

Her tongue is lolling, 

Her hair is loose, 

The sight of Her makes men and Devas fear Her. 

Roaring She crushes Danavas.’’# 


O critic! wonderful indeed is the impartiality of your 
criticism! Ramaprasdda during his lifetime was seldom 
heard to speak of the formless. It was only when, after 
having worshipped the Devi, whose substance is con- 


1 Shydma. 2 Apparently referring to man’s sins. 
3 Asaverdvesha. 4 Sons of Danu; enemies of the Devas. 


216 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


sciousness in her image of Earth in the dead of the new 
moon night, he, on the following morning, went to 
throw that image of the Mother of the world into water, 
and after having placed the Mother’s image on the bank 
of the Ganges, descended into the water until it reached 
his waist—it was then that the Mother’s son stood before 
the Mother as “‘ belonging only to the Mother”; then, 
keeping his eyes fixed on the Mother’s image without, 
he went into Samdadhi,t having made the Sanghara 
Mudra,? and called the Mother within from without. 
Then immediately the Mother, the treasure of, and dweller 
in, the heart, and subduer of Death, knowing the ap- 
proaching end of the son’s play,® appeared all full of 
smiles in his heart. The fear-dispelling look of the Bliss- 
ful Devi dispelled the fear of existence. The dance of 
love of the Dancing Kali opened the door of his heart. 
His body, tired with the overflowing bliss of love, began 
to lose all self-control. His eyes, closed with bliss, filled 
with tears; then it was that, bringing to an end his 
beloved Sadhana, the Sadhaka sang to his heart’s content 
for the last time in his life to the ringing chords of his 
heart: 


“ The black cloud rises in the sky within. 

With joy the mind-peacock# dances and plays. 

The clouds, with rumbling sound, say, ‘ Fear not,’ 

The soft smile of the bliss of love is like the beauty of 
lightning therein. 

Fixed is the Sadhaka’s gaze. 

From the eyes tears flow incessantly wherewith the 
thirst and fear of the heart-chataka® are soon 
removed. 


1 ‘Trance; ecstasy. 

2 The Mudra of dissolution which is done when the life is taken from 
the image. 

3 Lila; here his sojourn on earth. 

4 Referring to the play of the peacock under cloudy skies. 

5 A bird which is said to live on the raindrop. 


PRINGIPLEES OF TANTRA 217 


After this birth comes the next birth, and then many, 
many births. 

But Ramaprasada says: ‘ There will be no more 
births for him in the womb.’ ”’ 


Notwithstanding his achievement he still hankered for 
the Mother. In fact, the certain knowledge that “‘ there 
will be no more birth in the womb ”’ increases such hanker- 
ing a hundredfold; and then, feeling unbearable pain at 
the prospect of being separated from the sight of the 
Mother of the world, the SAdhaka, whose life was in the 
Mother, again fell at Her feet and, weeping piteously, said: 


“ Will such a day come, O Tara! a day on which tears 
will stream from my eyes, when I will cry, ‘ Tara, 
dara, Para !'* 

My heart-lotus will be fully blown. 

The mind’s darkness will be dispelled, and then I 
shall fall and roll on the earth, and be beside my- 
self, crying, ‘ Tara !”4 

I shall forsake all distinctions. 

My mind’s sorrow will be destroyed. 

O! hundreds of true Vedas say that my Tara is 
‘without form.’ 

Shri Ramaprasada says ‘ The Mother dwells in all 
bodies. 

O blinded eye! see, the Mother is in darkness the 
dispeller of darkness.’ ”’ 


O Tara! when will the day come on which you will be 
without form? The day on which the heart-lotus will 
be fully blown and the mind’s darkness will be dispelled. 
_« Then I shall be beside myself, and falling on the earth, 
ory eeciLara t”’ 

On the day on which I shall forsake all distinctions and 
my mind’s sorrow will be destroyed, on that day hundreds 
of true Vedas will say, ‘‘ My Tara is without form,” and 


1 Title of the Devi as ‘‘ Saviour.”’ 


218 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


then only will the Vedic saying, ‘‘ Tara is without form,” 
become true for me. 

On the day on which this form of mine will vanish, on 
that same day my Tara also will be formless. Tara will 
not really be without form, but will be so for me. This 
is what Ramaprasada means to say, because it is the 
state of possession of form by me which leads to my 
worship of Her. 

On the day on which this form of mine will vanish and 
I shall merge in Her great liberation aspect, whose 
substance is consciousness, on that day, as I shall be 
without form, so my Tara also will be without form. 
Then will be the due time for the realization of the truth 
that Tara is without form, according to the teaching of 
the Veda; then, with the loss of power to perceive my 
own individuality, I shall also lose the power to perceive 
the Tarahood of Tara—that is, the fact that She is pos- 
sessed of form or individuality.2 If, therefore, there is 
any possibility of Tara ever being to me without form, 
it will be on that day; but, so long as I possess my own 
individuality, or so long as I am I, my Tara also is un- 
doubtedly Tara, possessed of form and Mother. 

Now tell me, is Ramaprasada, called Tara, possessed 
of form or formless? You want to quote the authority 
of Ramaprasdda, but we are greatly sorry that you do not 
feel that it will be long before you can understand what 
Ramaprasada has said. There is another thing which I 
want to ask you: Is it because you look upon Ramapra- 
sada as your Guru that you quote his words as authority, 
or because he happened to say something to your liking 
that you are disposed to quote his authority ? or, do you 
want to draw people to your party without understand- 
ing and misunderstanding what Ramaprasada has said ? 
Do you wish to steal the whole of the beginning and end 
of what Ramaprasada has said, and then to frighten them 
by a quotation from the middle of a single passage, without 


1 Kaivalya. 2 Literally, ‘‘ She-ness.” 


ial ENG PREY > OR TANTRA 219 


citing that which precedes or follows it? If you look 
upon Ramaprasada as your Guru and follow his teach- 
ings, why, out of his thousand sayings, have you quoted 
only the passage, “‘ Hundreds of true Vedas say my Tara 
is formless ?” From the fact that you have done so, it 
appears that there is a secret connection of some formless* 
love between you and that which is ‘‘ without form.’’ 
Here you have shown yourself to be partial, so that how 
can you escape? In order to give a judgment as an 
umpire on any matter one must be careful to observe the 
strictest neutrality. How can the interest of the public 
be safe where your actions are guided by selfish motives ? 
You who seek to establish that the Deity is without 
form! It is a nice question which you have raised; no 
one objects to it. But the question is, How is it that 
while out of a thousand songs you have picked out an 
expression which occurs only oncein them, you have yet, 
out of those thousand songs containing thousands of 
references to the Deity possessing form, not selected a 
single one of such references? Of course, there is no 
doubt that that which possesses form is immensely 
heavier than that which is without form,” and is a burden 
for most people. How can youalone bear the weight of 
Her whom all the inhabitants of the universe, composed 
of three worlds, have joined together in bearing’ for all 
time? As your body is fine, your mind Is fine, and your 
worship is fine; so, by good fortune, the Devata whom 
you worship is also fine, extremely fine—in fact, destitute 
of form. The weight of such a Devata is enough for 
you; but still, in spite of the fact that you find the weight 
of a Devata possessing form to be unbearable, you have 
not done well in suppressing the fact of the existence of 
that unbearable weight. If you could yourself raise it, 
you ought at least to have pointed out that, whilst 
1 Nirakarad—undefined. Here unsubstantial, fancied. 


2 Here possessed of form=substantial; not possessed of form= 
unsubstantial. 


220 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Ramaprasada spoke a thousand times of the Devata 
as possessing form, he only once spoke of the Devata 
as being formless; but such a saying was not for you 
and I, or for even Ramaprasdda himself. It was for 
the stage at which the individuality of Ramaprasada 
vanished, and the relation of worshipper and worshipped 
was past. 

Shri Ramaprasdda says: ‘‘ The Mother dwells in all 
bodies. Blinded eyes! see, the Mother is in darkness 
the dispeller of darkness.’’ The Mother is present in all 
things; but it is regrettable that you, whose eyes have 
been blinded by the darkness of ignorance, do not see 
Her for want of the sight of knowledge, and it is a matter 
for great regret that, although the Mother is the dispeller 
of darkness, you do not see Her in the darkness. It is 
true that the sun and the moon dispel the darkness of 
the world, but they cannot dispel the darkness which 
enshrouds a blind man. 

Unfortunately, a blind man differs greatly from those 
possessing eyesight. A blind man is himself wanting in 
eyesight, through the fault of the Karma done by him 
in previous births.1 Had it been darkness from without, 
the sun’s rays could have dispelled it. But the darkness 
inherent in the blind man’s eyes is due to the want of 
vital power; no external cause has brought about this 
want. It is an internal cause which has induced it in 
me, and the name of this cause is misfortune. If, now, I 
can destroy this misfortune by doing such acts as bring 
good fortune, if, by the grace of Devata, I get back my 
eyesight, then only I shall first see that the Mother is 
the destroyer of darkness even in the darkness, and next, 
being myself freed from all darkness, I shall see the 
Mother Herself fully. For, just as the Sun cannot be 
seen unless its power of dispelling darkness is seen, or a 
lamp cannot be seen unless its light is seen, or the lightning 


1 Cf. the New Testament: ‘“‘ Rabbi, who did sin, this man or his 
parents, that he was born blind ?” 


PR UNCEPELS.OR TANTRA 221 


cannot be seen unless its flash is seen; so, despite the fact 
that the Mother is all Shaktis, She cannot be seen unless 
Her Shakti becomes manifest. She is eternal knowledge 
and bliss. Who can perceive Her omnipresence without 
the light of Her knowledge ? True, the Mother is the 
destroyer of darkness, but then I am blind through the 
fault of my Karma. This darkness of mine is not from 
without; it is the inner darkness. The Sddhaka says I 
need not be afraid on this account, for just as this dark- 
ness is within, so are the sun and moon which will illu- 
mine it. She rises in the inmost recess of that which is 
within, so that that which is inner darkness in respect of 
the outer world is outer darkness in respect to Her who 
is within the inmost recess of the heart, and darkness 
flees afar from the fear-dispelling Shakti of Her refulgent 
rays. In order, therefore, to obtain the protection of the 
Mother of the world, whose glances are like infinite 
millions of suns and moons, we must leave the domain of 
darkness and attain the lunar region; and if one lives even 
in the darkness of Patala,* the rays of Her mercy make 
that region shine as though it were that of the moon. 
This is why, although you are blind within, you should 
know that even this “ within ’’ is without when compared 
with the place where She resides. This, too, is why, in 
spite of his knowledge that his eyes are blind, Rama- 
prasada says: “‘ Blind eyes see the Mother. For although 
you are blind in the dark, She is the destroyer of dark- 
ness,” and the moment this darkness will be destroyed 
yout will see that ‘‘ the Mother dwells in all bodies.” In 
fact, although Ramaprasada had been in the past a blind 
Jiva, he was not blind when he said this. It was with 
reference to the blindness of his past life that he says 
“blinded eyes.’’ What he sees now elates him with joy, 
and he gives expression to it when he says: “‘ See the 
Mother is in darkness the destroyer of darkness.’’ There 
is no more fear of darkness. The destroyer of darkness 


1 The nether world. 


222 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


has come. Hence, look while there is yet time, “ the 
Mother dwells in all bodies.”’ 

“Will such a day come, O Tara!’ This piteous prayer 
of Ramaprasdda’s heart is to-day being heard and ful- 
filled by Tara Herself, who stands before him. Men see 
that Ramaprasdda has to-day brought the Mother to the 
bank of the Ganges" to throw Her away, but the Mother 
sees that Ramaprasada has to-day brought the Mother 
to the bank o the Ganges in order that he may throw 
himself away.” 

In order to bring the worldly mb of the worldly Rama- 
prasada to an end, in order that She may take up to Her 
bosom Her most beloved child, and conclude with Dak- 
shina® the worldly sacrifice of Her devoted son, Dakshina* 
Herself has to-day appeared in the visible image. Even 
through that image, which has been abandoned by means 
of Mantra,®> Her inner advent has been revealed. The 
waves of light of Her whose substance is light have 
mingled with the waves of the Ganges, and with them 
have swelled the waves of the love of Ramaprasada,who 
has seen Varanasi® in water, on land, and in the heavens. 
‘‘To him who dies in KAshi,’’® Shiva says, “ Thou art 
That. Above my ‘Thou art That ismtiem@-cmmo: 
Mahesha.”’ ‘“‘ Why should I live in places of pilgrimage 27 
Many a Gaya, Ganga, and Vardnasi® I shall see under 
Shyama’s feet. What need have IJ for Kashi?® The 
lotus-feet of Kali are the equal of innumerable places of 
pilgrimage.’ These old sayings have to-day become true. 

“The day on which tears will stream from my eyes as 
I will cry, ‘Tara, Tara, Tara!” “ Presenthy =i seiaiene 


1 After worship of the image it is thrown into the sacred river. 

2 In death. 

3 The present made to the officiating priest at the conclusion of the 
sacrifice (Yajna), 

* A name of the Devi as the “ favourable one.”’ 

5 At the conclusion of worship the Devi is let depart from the image 
by the Visarjana Mantra and Sanghara Mudra. 

6 Kashi or Benares. ? Tirtha, 


BRING UR BESS OL VLANTRA 223 


beside myself, and, falling, roll on the earth, crying, 
‘Tara! ’’ When such a day truly came, by the grace of 
the Mother who is the Saviour of the poor, the refulgent 
light of the black beauty of the cloud-like black Devi, 
the charmer of Kala,’ made day and night one and the 
same. The three worlds sank in the playing waves of 
that beauty. The dark son of the dark youthful Mother 
at last reached the shore, which is the Mother’s bosom, 
after having swum through the ocean of time. The child 
of Kali, opening the temple of the heart, and bringing 
therein the Mother from without, shaking the bank of 
the Ganges with the deep and loud cry of the name of 
Kali, the conqueror of Kala,’ and offering his life as an 
oblation in the Kali Pija on the illuminated new moon 
night, at last slept in Kali’s bosom. The worship of 
Bhavani? ended with Ramaprasada’s life-play,? and he 
died without having to perform the ceremony in which 
the image is thrown away. We say: “Oh, the Mother’s 
blessed beloved son! Truly had you learnt how to bid 
the Mother depart by means of the Sanghara Mudra* 
after you had worshipped Her! and blessed art Thou, O 
Mother Bengal! Truly good teaching hast Thou given 
to Thy child. A marvellous teaching in the Mahamantra 
of Mahavidya didst Thou impart to Ramaprasada by the 
grace of which even that which he earned? in the work of 
throwing away the image became endless, wasteless, and 
unfailing both in this world and hereafter. 

“To-day hundreds of thousands of the poor who 
walked the road in India enjoy as masters the spiritual 
wealth of these earnings of Ramaprasada. Victory to 
Thee, O Mother! Victory to Thy Prasada !’’° 


1 Shiva, death or time. 

2 The Devi as spouse of Shiva in his form as Bhava. 

3 Bhavalila or life. 

4 The Mudra, signifying dissolution, used with the Visarjana Mantra. 

5 The spiritual merit earned. 

6 Prasdda may be a shortened form of Ramaprasada’s name, or may 
be ‘‘ grace ’’—probably the first. 


224 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


The Sadhaka will now understand in what way Rama- 
prasada’s Tara was formless. Ramaprasada called Tara 
formless at a time and on a day when he himself was no 
longer Ramaprasada. At present it has become very 
easy to the community of Asuras* to call Tara formless 
by taking up the note which Ramaprasada sounded at 
the time of his Samadhi? in Parabrahma. The very 
mention of the name of Tara possessing form makes the 
hearts of Asuras tremble. Their community can find no 
rest unless Tara becomes formless. Nevertheless, the 
precedent of Ramaprasada is not acceptable so long as 
one does not oneself realize the Videha Kaivalya? which 
Ramaprasada attained. Ramaprasada became himself 
formless immediately upon his calling Tara formless, 
whilst the more these men cry out, “ Without form! 
Without form !’’ day and night, the more do their own 
forms grow. What sort of formlessness is this ? 

While an effort is being made to prove that Rama- 
prasada’s Tara was without form, and that he did not 
believe in the Deity possessing form, it is also said that, 
as if urged by a presentiment of approaching death, he 
worshipped Kali, and on the next day, at the time oi 
throwing away the image, he was standing in the Ganges 
with the water reaching to his waist, and was singing the 
last song of his life) when his Brahmarandhra* burst 
open, and he died. 

People nowadays say that he did not die of any disease, 
but that excess of emotion® caused his death. What a 
strange conclusion this is of the messenger of Kali !® 
Ramaprasada did not believe in the Deity possessing 
form, but when he felt the approach of death he wor- 


1 Enemies of the Gods; here inimically disposed men, their types, on 
earth. 

2 Ecstatic union with the Brahman. 

3 Liberation by union with the Paramatma. 

# Opening in the centre of the crown of the head through which the 
Prana in the Yogi escapes at death. 

5 Bhava. 6 The Kali age personified. 


PRINCIPEES OF TANTRA 225 


shipped Kali in an image possessing form, and on the 
next day died while preparing to throw away the wor- 
shipped image. If he did not believe in the Deity pos- 
sessing form, was it through fear of death that he wor- 
shipped Kali in the image? If so, the critic ought to 
have understood that, whether during our lifetime we 
believe or do not believe in the Deity possessing form, we 
should so believe at the time of death, since even such a 
man as Ramaprasada had to believe it then. It was only 
when Ramaprasada became fully enabled to feel an un- 
embodied presence that he said only once and from his 
own standpoint: ‘‘ My Tara is without form.’ Ah! how 
charming! What an incomparable unfailing power does 
the love of Sadhana proceeding from the heart wield, so 
that, even when “without form,’ “ Tara is mine’’! 
Despite being “ without form,’ my Tard is still “‘ Tara’! 
It is not the intention of the Sadhaka to say that the 
embodied character of Tara will be lost in Her unem- 
bodied presence. He means: ‘‘ My embodied Tara will 
then drown me in the sea of Her unembodied presence. 
I shall lose my own self, and be completely merged in 
Hers.” Just as a child sleeps in its mother’s arms under 
the fold of her dress, so I shall be lost in the formless 
liberating’ womb of my Mother who is possessed of form, 
and holds the infinite universe within Herself. Beyond 
this, in his state of Sadhana, he did not perceive this 
unembodied presence. On the contrary, he has dlis- 
tinctly stated that it is impossible for even Yogis (not to 
speak of himself or common folk) to perceive an unem- 
bodied presence. Referring to that aspect of Devata 
which is Mantra, Ramaprasada has said: 


“Doubtless Kala? destroys the infinite universe. 
But the terrible mouth? grasps that Kala. 
For this reason Thou art called Kali, O Narayani! 
And yet Thou art called the Lady of Kala.* 


1 Kaivalya. 2 Death, time. 3 Of Kali. 4 Shiva. 
VOL, II. 5 


220 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


All Jivas meditate on the Guru in the Brahma- 
randhra,! 

And Sadashiva? is a great Yogi through meditation 
on the form of Kali. 

Truly the fifty letters? form the substance of Veda 
and Agama. 

But it is hard for even a Yogi to contemplate the 
formless aspect. 

Thou hast no form, Akshara* is Thy form. 

O Thou whose substance is Gunas! Thou hast taken 
forms according to the different Gunas. 

Veda says that Kaivalya is attained by worshipping 
the formless Deity. 

To me, this notion seems wrong, and the effect of 
lightness of intellect. 

Prasada says the mind ever seeks the Black Beauty. 

Do as Thou dost wish. Who wants Nirvana ?’? 


At this point the critic opens the chest of his learning 
and intellect, and becomes senseless and restless with 
brimming joy on hearing the verse: ‘‘ Veda says that 
Kaivalya is attained by worshipping the formless Deity.” 
The words, however, “ Veda says that Kaivalya is at- 
tained by worshipping the formless Deity,’ are not 
Ramaprasada’s. We have here merely a _ worthless 
vociferation of arrogant men wanting in all Sadhana. 
Ramaprasada has, in fact, protested against it, and said: 
“To me this notion seems wrong, the effect of lightness 
of intellect.’’ This portion only contains Ramaprasada’s 
own view. To those who say that there can be no 
liberation without absorption® in the formless Deity 
(why to them alone, to even Her who grants liberation ?), 
Ramaprasada replies with a frown: ‘‘ Prasdda says, the 

1 That is here, the head. 2 Shiva as the Guru. 

3 Varnas. 4 Written characters. 

5 See this explained post. He loves the Mother so much that he 


would rather continue to be Her worshipper than be that which is 
worshipped. 6 Laya. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 227 


mind ever seeks the Black Beauty. Do as Thou dost 
wish. Who wants Nirvana?’ If Nirvana liberation 
cannot be attained without a realization of Thy unem- 
bodied presence, never mind. What harm if it is not 
attained ? Who wants Nirvana liberation if he gets 
Thee? “Do as Thou dost wish.’’ Thou mayest or 
mayest not grant liberation. The mind, however, will 
not seek anything besides the Black Beauty. Those who 
eagerly seek their liberation without Her have no claim 
to Her boundless, infinite, unfathomable, deep, and pure 
love and devotion. This is what Ramaprasdda has 
clearly said in the following song: | 


“ What need have I for Kashi ? 
Kali’s lotus-feet are the equal of places of pilgrimage 
innumerable. 
When I meditate upon these Feet in the heart-lotus 
I swim in a sea of bliss. 
Just as fire burns a mass of cotton, 
So the name of Kali destroys all sins. 
A headless man can have no headache. 
Men discharge their debt to the forefathers! by offer- 
ing pindas? at Gaya. 
But it makes me laugh to hear of the performance of 
Shraddha® at Gaya. | 
For him who has meditated on Kali, 
Death at Kashi brings liberation. 
True this is Shiva’s saying, 
But at the root of all is devotion, 
And liberation is its maid, 
What is gained by liberation ? 
Water mingles with water. 
I love to eat sugar, 
But it is not good to become it. 
1 Pitris. 2 Balls of food. 
3 Obsequial rites done in reverence of the Pitris at the town ot Gaya. 


The meaning is that the worshipper of Kali gets liberation, and there- 
fore it is not necessary for his children to offer Shraddha. 


228 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


In amusement Prasada says, 

By the strength of the merciful Devi, 

The fourfold fruit? falls into the palms of him who 
contemplates the Devi with dishevelled hair.”’ 


Not merely the seeking of Nirvana liberation, but even 
its attainment, is not desired. He has said: “I love to 
eat sugar, but it is not good to become it.”” If by be- 
coming sugar itself [ am unable to taste sugar, then why 
should I become sugar? Lest it should be replied that 
this is for the cessation of the sorrows of Sangsara, Rama- 
prasada at once retorts that in the realm in which he 
lives there is neither Sangsara nor sorrow. Let him who 
is burdened with sorrow seek its cessation. ‘“‘ Why shall 
we speak of liberation alone? The fourfold fruit? falls 
into the palms of him who contemplates the Devi with 
dishevelled hair.’’ Only he who has experienced it knows 
what it is to attain in meditation Her, the mere thought 
of whom brings unasked the fourfold fruit. 

Another passage on which the critics lay stress is the 
verse: “ But it is hard for even a Yogi to contemplate 
the formless aspect.’”? Ramaprasdda has said it is hard 
to contemplate the formless aspect. The critic gives high 
praise to this, and asks: “Can it be doubted that the 
higher the form of worship, the more difficult it is ?’” 
meaning thereby that it was because Ramaprasada be- 
longed to a low order of worshippers that he found him- 
self in such a plight. The matter, however, is not one of 
insinuation only. The critics plainly say: “ It is a pity 
that Ramaprasada did not take the right path (worship 
of the Devata without form) from the very beginning. 
Had he in his Sadhana worked along this path from the 
very beginning, we cannot say what depths he might not 
have attained” (as the critic has done)3 Ah! how 


1 Dharma, Artha, kama, Moksha (see Introduction). 
2 That is, Dharma, Artha, and Kama besides liberation. 
3 Author’s parenthesis. 


PRINCIPEES OF TANTRA. 229 


wonderful! The beauty of the temple of formlessness is 
as great as the splendour of the formless steps which lead 
toit! But how could Ramaprasdda have had such good 
fortune ? When he came to this Sangsdra, the mine 
whence this gem has come had not yet been discovered. 
O critic! can you for a single moment shake off your 
heinous and hellish malicious propensity and sit still ? 
If so, I have one or two important questions to ask you. 
Ramaprasada has said: “ But it is hard for even a Yogi 
to contemplate the formless aspect.’ What does he 
mean when he says this, and to what class of worshippers 
does he refer? Are you able to understand it? The 
havoc you have made of Ramaprasdda’s song surpasses 
description. We shall demonstrate in detail that in the 
sphere of religion the preaching of a doctrine which it is 
not in our competence to practise is nothing but a form 
of covert robbery. 


“All Jivas meditate on the Guru in the Brahma- 

randhra,? 

And Sadashiva is a great Yogi through meditation on 
the form of Kali. 

Truly the fifty letters form the substance of Veda and 
Agama, 

But it is hard for even a Yogi to contemplate the 
formless aspect. 

Thou hast no form, Akshara? is Thy form. 

O Thou whose substance is the Gunas! Thou hast 
taken forms according to different Gunas.” 


Have you understood the meaning of the above? If 
you had, you would not have made such a mess of it. 
‘« All Jivas meditate on the Guru in the Brahmarandhra.* 
And Sadashiva is a great Yogi by meditation on the form’ 
of Kali.’ In order to understand this, it is necessary to 
become initiated and instructed according to Shastra by 


1 Vide ante, p. 226. 2 Written characters. 


230 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


a Guru. “ Truly the fifty letters form the substance of 
Veda and Agama, but it is hard for even a Yogi to con- 
template the formless aspect.’’ It will be many ages? 
before you can understand the “ but ’’ between these two 
hemistiches. This formlessness is not the unsightly mis- 
shapen formlessness of the nineteenth century. It is the 
formless aspect. This much is the Sitra.2 In the Vritti® 
on this Sitra the poet says: “ Thou hast no form, Ak- 
shara* is Thy form ’’; and he further makes the comment :? 
““O Thou whose substance is the Gunas! Thou hast 
forms according to the different Gunas.’’ This deep 
super-worldly truth® cannot be understood without 
special power acquired by Sadhana. It is extremely 
ridiculous for you, uninitiated as you are, to try to pass 
judgment on the play of Mantrashakti. It is just as 
though a child in the womb were to make effort to fight 
a battle ! 

O critic! had you been initiated according to the 
Shastra, instead of being an “‘ educated’’ man of the 
nineteenth century, we might have found a cure for 
your error; but as matters stand, things must remain as 
they are. It is the command issuing from the fair mouth 
of Vishvanatha Himself that this truth® must not be 
revealed to those who are not competent to receive it. 
Hence, although Ramaprasada’s song is in the form of a 
Stitra, we cannot scatter abroad its Vritti,’ Bhashya,’ 
and Tika’ in the market, the public bathing-place, and 
the fields. This much, however, we tell you: Why do 
you make yourself ridiculous in the world of Sadhakas, 
and bring ruin on the ignorant community by interfering 
(though you have no competence for Sadhana) in matters® 
which can be understood by Sadhana alone, and which, 
without Sadhana, cannot be realized by purely intel- 
lectual effort, however strenuous it be ? 


1 Yugas. 2 Aphorism. 3 Gloss. 
aU Videsaie mp e220, 5 Bhashya. 6 Tattva. 
7 Forms of commentary of greater or less degree of elaboration. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 231 


Ramaprasada was a seeker of! the supreme object,” 
and the critic seeks his selfish ends. The one is nectar, 
and the other poison; the one is heaven,? and the other 
hell.4 How dare you desire to mix the two together ? 
Covertly you have expressed your regret. ‘If only 
Ramaprasada in his Sadhana had worked along the 
right path from the very beginning!’ Oh the arrogance 
of it befitting an Asura! Is it because you have seen 
your own face in the mirror that you have come to think 
that Ramaprasdda was a Jiva from his birth blind, 
uninitiated, puzzled out of his wits, straying in a wrong 
path, and devoid of knowledge of the Shastra? Being 
a trader in Ramaprasdda’s name, and partaker of the 
leavings of his food, how dare you presume to show 
Ramaprasada the right path of Sadhana? You are 
seeking a means of livelihood for yourself in the Sangsara. 
Continue to seek that. Why trespass on Sadhana lying 
hidden in the womb of Shastra ? You have been attacked 
with the disease of formlessness; you may take a leap 
into the air; but why such braggadocio on your part, 
since Ramaprasada himself was not so diseased? The 
end of your Sadhana and Bhajana® is malice against the 
Deity with form; but the end of Ramaprasdda’s Sadhana 
and Bhajana was not malice against the Formless. But 
why should we mention Ramaprasdda alone? No 
Sadhaka can have such a motive. It is precisely because 
Sadhakas understand formlessness that they say that it 
is impossible to perform Sadhana or Bhajana® of the 
Formless. But those who have, on merely hearing the 
name of the Formless, thought it to be a Delhi Laddu,® 
cry out for worship of the Formless with flowers growing 
in the sky. For this reason, Shruti itself has said: 

1 Sadhaka. 2 Paramartha—that is, spiritual life and truth. 

3 Svarga. 4 Naraka. 5 Worship. 

6 A fabulous form of sweetmeat (Dead Sea apple) of Delhi which, 
while very tempting in appearance, is equally disappointing when 
eaten. Itissaid that he who has not tasted it is sorry, and he who has 
tasted it is sorry. 


232 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


‘“ Those who say that they know Brahman, to them it is 
unknown; and those who say that they have not been 
able to know Brahman, to them it is well known.” 
Brahman is undefinable, because its real aspect cannot 
be given any particular definition. In fact, it is because 
the name of the Deity possessing form does not strike 
such terror in the heart of Brahman as it does in those 
of the community who are the standard-bearers of the 
Formless Brahman that worshippers of the Deity pos- 
sessing form can entertain no malice against the Form- 
less. However that may be, whether Ramaprasada was 
a worshipper of the Formless or of the Deity possessing 
form, we have no desire to hear from the mouth of a 
dealer in ginger information about ships." 

Ramaprasada was not an African, European, or Ameri- 
can. His life’s play began and ended in Bengal. We 
are his neighbours. If men, whether at home or abroad, 
want to hear of him, they must come to us for it. We 
shall never go to anybody else to learn about him. The 
chief part of Ramaprasada’s Sadhana did not consist of 
singing in bands to the accompaniment of musical instru- 
ments, as is the case with the weekly-praying community ? 
He sank into the depths of the ocean of Sadhana, and it 
was only in intervals of rest from Sadhana performed in 
fixed Asanas® that he was now and then moved by the 
breeze of emotion to sing his songs. To-day the miser- 
able plight of the band of critics is due to their having 
fallen into the waves of this ocean in which they help- 
lessly struggle. Proofs of Ramaprasada’s Shavasadhana, 
Chitasadhana, Shaktisadhana, rosary of Mahashankha, 
Bilvamila, and Pafichamunda, and other Asanas,* we 


1 A Bengali adage used with reference to a man who speaks on a 
subject of which he can have no knowledge. 

2 The Brahmos meet for prayer every Sunday in imitation of Christian 
worshippers. 3 Certain positions (Asana) are assigned for worship. 

4 Referring to various Tantrik Sddhandas; with a corpse; on the 
funeral pyre; with a Shakti; rosary of human bone; five skulls; under 
a bael-tree; and other postures (Asana). 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 233 


still possess. The community of Sadhakas is still re- 
sounding with the deep trumpet sound echoing from the 
sphere of spiritual competence in which Ramaprasada 
moved, and of the truth? for which he bore a madly 
impassioned love. If outsiders could realize this truth 
by the mere hearing of one or two simple songs, then 
thousands of critics could have become Ramaprasadas in 
a single day. Guru was his guide, Shastra itself was his 
lamp, the path of Sadhana was the path he followed, and 
the Chintamani* region of the Mother of the world was 
that to which it led. Asin every other work, so in songs 
also he followed the command of Shiva, and took the 
name of Shiva. Can one who does not follow the com- 
mand of Shiva in practice presume to say anything of 
authority in the name of Shiva? Not to believe Shiva, 
not to believe in Shastra, not to believe in Guru, not to 
believe in Sadhana, and not to believe in the Devata who 
is the object of Sadhana, but to believe in Ramaprasada 
and his songs set to music! not to believe in Devata, and 
yet to be mortally afraid of Her as if She were some 
wandering spirit ;? to cut the root, and then to pour water 
on it—such was not the art which Ramaprasada had 
learnt. It was because Ramaprasada served the Shastra 
with bowed head and worked according to its dictates 
that the superworldly Shakti of Siddhi of which the 
Shastra speaks attended him constantly. 
In another song Ramaprasdada says: 


“O mind! you are still labouring under this error.* 

You do not clearly realize what Kali is. 

Although you know, why do you, O mind! seem not 
to know that the universe, consisting of three 
worlds, is the Mother’s image ? 

1 Tattva. 
2 Etymologically the word means “‘ gem of thought.’’ According to 
the Bhairavayamala, the supreme Abode of Devi is built of Chintamani 


stone. This is the supreme region. 
3 Bhita, ghost, etc. 4 Bhrama. 


234 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


And you want to worship Her by building images of 
clay ! 

The Mother who decks the three worlds with measure- 
less gems and gold, 

Her you want to deck with worthless tinsel orna- 
ments !—the Mother who feeds the world with all 
kinds of food. 

With what face do you think to feed Her on Atapa 
rice! and soaked peas ?’” 


And so on. 

Error is taking a thing to be that which it is not. 
False knowledge or mistake is want of true knowledge. 
To mistake is to understand a thing to be what it is not. 
Mistake is only another name for want of true knowledge. 
Like darkness at sunrise, false knowledge flies of itself at 
the dawning of true knowledge. 

It is universally well known that a mistake lasts only 
so long as true understanding is not had, and that when 
it appears there is an end of the mistake; but he who 
says, “‘ O mind, you are still labouring under this error,” 
understands that it is an error of his mind. Why, then, 
does he express the regret that he is still labouring under 
the error? An error ends the instant we discover it. 
But here, although he says that his mind clearly knows 
it to be an error, he yet, at the same time, regrets that 
the error still exists. Let the critic now understand - 
what sort of an error it is.2 Unlike you and me, Rama- 
prasdda did not jeer at others for worshipping images. 
Before warning outsiders he warned the person within,* 
and addressing his own mind said: “‘O mind! you are 
still labouring under this error.” Had it been you or 


1 Rice prepared from paddy without boiling the paddy, 

2 Peas are thrown into water and soaked before being offered to the 
Devata. 

3 We may know it in a sense to be May, but we cannot realize it so 
long as we are Jivas, to whom living in a dualistic world it is real. 

4. Himself. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 235 


me, the utmost that we could perhaps have done would 
have been to say, ‘‘O Brother! you are still labouring 
under this error,’’ meaning thereby that ‘‘ I am free from 
it, so that I am a much greater man than you are.” 
High-souled Digamvara, on whom the merciful Devi 
showered Her supreme mercy, touched the root of the 
matter when He calmly and solemnly said: “‘ In delusion 
is my peace.” But in the first stage of SAdhana, Rama- 
prasada, who could not then touch the root and master 
this weighty and solemn truth,! said with an impatient 
and restless heart, ‘“O mind! you are still labouring under 
this error.’ Ramaprasdda is eager and restless to drive 
away the delusion which Digamvara carefully cherishes 
in the inmost recess of his mind, and by doing so feels 
the bliss of the play of the Mother of the world. This 
restlessness on the part of Ramaprasada is merely the 
effect of the immaturity of his Sadhana. Because he 
was at one time thus restless, we must not think of him 
as being a worthless man; for, where there is possibility 
of rising, there is also the possibility of a fall, as the reverse 
also is the case. The very mention of Ramaprasada’s 
name throws some people into a frenzy of sentiment. 
They think that he was a born Yogi who had attained 
Siddhi in a previous birth, and consider him to be all in 
all in the realm of SAdhakas; but we are not of this 
opinion. For we first hear what he has to say from his 
own mouth (in his songs),? then ascertain its trustworthi- 
ness by comparison with the account of his Sadhana as 
known to the community of Sadhakas, and finally test 
it carefully on the touchstone of the Shastra. If even 
a much greater man than Ramaprasada says what is 
opposed to the Shastra, we at once discard it as if it were 
the words of a madman; for millions of Ramaprasadas 
do not count for even so much as the most insignificant 
insects, if the command of the Shastra (by the grace of 
which Ramaprasida is an authority) is contravened. 


1 Tattva. 2 Author’s parenthesis. 


230 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


We shall show that the song above quoted was composed 
by Ramaprasada in a very immature state of Sadhana. 
We must first understand that at the time when Rama- 
prasada composed this song he had passed the first and 
entered the middle, and not the last, stage in the domain 
of knowledge, and had only just entered the higher 
domain of Sadhana* It was because he wanted to 
unite Sadhana with Jnana (knowledge), only without 
reference to Bhakti (devotion), that he was led into 
inconsistency. 

“ Although knowing, why do you, O mind! seem not 
to know that the Universe, consisting of three worlds, is 
the Mother’s image ?’”’ The idea expressed in this passage 
belongs wholly to the realm of Jnana (knowledge); but 
the verse, ““ You want to worship Her by moulding images 
of clay,” reveals a state of mental restlessness so far as 
Sadhana is concerned. If everything in the three worlds 
is the Mother’s image, then who can say that an image 
built of clay is not the Mother’s image? If from the 
point of view of Jnana (knowledge) the Universe, con- 
sisting of three worlds, is considered the Mother’s image, 
then we must admit, with bowed heads, that an earthen 
image also is Her image. In short, we must not think 
that Ramaprasada, in contravention of the command of 
Shastra, is asking people to abstain from moulding images 
of clay. As a matter of fact, he is simply voicing his 
sorrow that, “ although the Mother is omnipresent in the 
three worlds, I have to-day to worship Her in single 
form in an earthen image, because I cannot see Her in 
Her Universe-pervading aspect.’ And what Sadhaka 
does not sing the same song of sorrow until he attains 
the final stage of Sadhana preceding Siddhi? It is in 
order to remove this sorrow that it is necessary to worship 
Her, otherwise, why should one worship Her if from the 
very outset the sorrow ceases, and the Mother is realized 


1 All seekers and worshippers are Sadhakas, but here reference is 
made to high Tantrik Sadhana. 


PRUNGER EES ORs LAN TRA 237, 


as existing throughout the Universe? It is hardly 
necessary to point out what little spiritual competence 
such people possess as actually see earth instead of the 
world-pervading Mother, and yet, taking their cue from 
Ramaprasada, say: ‘‘O mind! you are still labouring 
under this error. You want to adorn with worthless 
tinsel ornaments the Mother who Herself decks the world 
with countless gems and gold.” This, again, is an ex- 
pression which merely indicates an unfulfilled aspiration 
in the realm of devotion. It is foolhardiness on your 
part to want to adorn with tinsel ornaments the Mother, 
the Rajrajeshvari of the infinite Universe, who adorns the 
world with countless gold and jewels! From this it 
does not follow that the Mother cannot be adorned, or 
that the Mother does not adorn Herself; on the contrary, 
it proves that the Mother can be very well adorned, if 
one has the power to adorn Her.” She is the source of 
all beauty in the three worlds, so that it is the height of 
presumption to bring tinsel ornaments, worthless as 
grass, near Her fair body. It is difficult to restrain one’s 
laughter at even the thought of putting tinsel ornaments 
on the fair body of Her before whose feet the countless 
stores of jewels of even innumerable Kuveras® disappear 
as does the light of a lamp before the sun. It is because 
of the pain of the thought of this irremediable deficiency 
that Ramaprasada has said: ““ Ah! that Mother you wish 
to adorn with worthless tinsel ornaments!’ Why, 
despite of this, Shastra has prescribed that She shall 
be adorned, we shall show later. Here we say this 
much, that a person who proceeds to perform Sadhana 
is bound to satisfy his heart’s desire by adorning the 
Mother. Itis the duty of all Sadhakas, male and female. 
When the heart is immersed in the depths* of Sadhana, 
that which these depths are overpowers, according to a 
law of Nature, the Brahmatattva of the Mother of the 


1 Bhakti. 2 That is, if one is spiritually fit. 
3 Kuvera is God of wealth. 4 Rasa. 


238 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


world To conquer that unconquered power of the 
Sadhana, even She Herself, who is unconquerable, often 
feigns Herself to be incompetent. 

Sinking in the sweetness of the Creatrix’s play of love 
for Her devotees, Dasharathi, great depicter of sentiment,” 
has, in picturing the love of the Mother of the world, well 
displayed this in his poem entitled Agamani.2 When, 
for the sake of the Sadhana, which was the Durgaptja 
festival of the Prince of devotees, the Mountain-King, 
his Daughter appeared as the Destroyer of Mahisha, and 
stood in the courtyard in front of his Mandapa* on the 
evening of the sixth lunar day; when Menaka, his Queen, 
whose life was in Uma,” ran out with joy to welcome Her 
at the report of Her coming; and when startled and 
made afraid by the sight of Her martial appearance, the 
great Sadhika® of the Daughter’ lost herself at view of 
this other form&—then, on her, Mother Mahamaya, the 
daughter of old,® cast Maya, and assumed a form of 
surpassing beauty. 


SONG. 


‘““She appeared as Gauri, the Two-armed daughter of 
Mountain, Mother of Ganesha, 
Daughter of the Mountain-King,!° with the graceful 
gait of an elephant. 
Spouse of Ashutosha, with two little children, held 
on Her two hips.” 


1 When the Sadhaka becomes really full of devotion, then even the 
_ Devi seems to lose her non-dualistic Nirguna aspect, owing to the 
intensity of the Sddhaka’s devotion to the manifested aspect. 


2 Bhava. 3 On the coming—that is, invocation. 
4 Temple. 5 Her daughter, the Devi. | 
8 Menaka, Her Mother, 7 Kanydatattva. 8 Tattva. 


9 The poem is speaking of Her as Parvati, or Uma. By “of old”’ 
reference is made to her previous manifestation as Sati, daughter of 
Daksha. 

10 Himalaya. 11 Shiva, the “‘ easily appeased.”’ 

12 Children are so carried in the east. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 239 


Chandi appeared as though surrounded by moons.? 
The beauty of the moon-faced Uma surpasses that of 
a million moons. 
Ten moons shone on the nails of the Mother’s feet. 
Seeing this, the moon in the sky pales through shame. 
Yet, can She be compared to the moon; She, at whose 
feet the moons roll ? 
In Autumn, in the Himalayas, it was like a fair of 
autumnal moons. 
In receiving the moon-faced Uma, the Queen took, 
as it were, the moon in her hand. 
Behind Uma’s family of moons* the moon in the sky 
was concealed. 
With Her moonlike mouth the moon-faced Devi called 
out, “ Mother !’ 
The Queen replied:? ‘Is it you, O Durga! the Dis- 
peller of sorrows ? 
With weeping, O Tara, Mother ! I have lost the pupils 
(Tara) of my eyes. 
O Uma! to what a plight have I come since last I bid 
farewell to Thee! 
O Mother! my body remains in the Himalayas and 
my life in Kailasa.4 
In Thy absence I lie on the earth as one who is dead. 
To-day Thou hast brought life to my body, and with 
it speech. 
O Mother! how is it that Thou dost not remember 
that Thou hast a Mother ? 
If Thy mother dies sorrowing for Thee, Thou wilt 
incur the sin of killing Thy mother. 
Being sonless, what refuge have I but in my Daughter? 
O Brahmamay?! all my hope is placed on Thee. 
1 That is, her children—namely, her two sons, Ganesha and Kartik 
eya, and two daughters, Lakshmi and Sarasvati. 
2 Her children. 
3 What follows is a conversation between the Devi as Uma and her 


Mother Menakaé. Her daughtership to Menaka was one of Her 
spiritual Avatdaras. 4 The Mount and Paradise of Shiva. 


2.40 


PRINCIPLES OF TANS 


-Old age comes upon me day by day, and at any 


moment I may die. 

O Tara! wilt thou not seek me when my strength is 
gone ? 

What Thou doest, O Saviour from existence ! makes 
me afraid, 

Lest, O Mother ! when J send for Thee at the hour of 
death, Thou shouldst refuse to come.’? 

At these words of the Queen, the Queen of Shiva said 
in Sorrow: 

‘When did you, O Mother! seek me? Whose father 
is a King and whose Mother is a Queen, 

What if Her husband has, perchance, become a 
Sannyasi ? 

The bitter words of women kill me with shame. 

We hear them say Thou art a King’s daughter, but . 
hast Thou no Mother ? 

Father is of stone and so are you, O Mother! 

But I cannot conquer my love for you,” and so I have 
come of My own accord.’ 

The Queen replied: ‘O Lady of Ishana! true it is 
that I am stone, 

And, O Mother ! for Her® whose daughter Thou art, it 
was best to be of stone.’4 

Saying this the Spouse of mountain® greatly wept, 
and in plaintive words again addressed her 
Daughter: 

‘ As the motionless mountain is My husband, how can 
I get news of you ?’ 


1 Blessed, blessed are you, O Dasharathi, devoted poet! Rightly 
did you arrange to bring Her to you in due time. It is concerning this 
that there is the saying, ‘“‘ In men that is cleverness which secures both 
the worlds.”’ (Author’s note.) 

2 Literally, ‘“‘ Maya,” which here means attachment. 

3 That is, Menaka. 

4 Otherwise, how can She bear the pain of separation from Thee ? 
(Author’s note.) 

5 Himalaya, the husband of Menaka and father of Parvati. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 241 


O gracious Devi! I pray Thee forgive my offence on 
that account. 

Many are the people, O Uma! who before me call 
Thee miserable, and as I hear them my mind 
burns with fire. 

They say to me, O Queen! your Daughter, a tendril 
of gold, has become pale. 

Destroyer of Tripura’ lives by begging. 

Beloved Uma is my only treasure, the treasure of 
worship. 

I want to keep my Son-in-law in my house, but Tri- 
lochana? is not willing that I should do so. 

Then archly and with pride Durga said to Menaka, 

Who has told you of your Son-in-law’s distress ? 

My Husband is the Creator and Destroyer, the Lord 
of the three worlds. 

Rather is it you, O Mother! who are a poor man’s 
wife, but I am a Queen. 

My Lord is the Lord of Kashi,* and no one can de- 
scribe Him. 

O Mother! in the world it is by My Husband’s riches 
that people become rich. 

Whoever with devotion begs of My Husband, to Him 
does Trilochana* give the wealth of liberation at 
a glance. 

He is in want of nothing; but such is His nature that 
He yet behaves like some poor helpless man. 

He who grasps the meaning® of this is filled with 
feeling,® and is saved from the cares of existence. 

1 Shiva. 2 The three-eyed Deva, Shiva. 

3 The glory of luminous Kashi is much greater than that of all the 
riches of the infinite Universe. This is why Bhuvaneshvara (Lord of 
the world), Parameshvara (Supreme Lord), and other epithets have 
been omitted, and the epithet Lord of Kashi has been used to indicate 
the consort of Kali. The purpose is more elaborately expressed in the 
line, ‘‘ He is King of Kings at Kashi, and your Daughter is Queen of 
Queens.”’ (Author’s note.) 4 Vide ante. 

5 Bhava; a play on the word Bhava, which means both “‘ meaning ”’ 


and ‘“‘ feeling.” 
VOL. II. 16 


242 


PRINCIPLES’ OF TAN Dis 


Will your riches make your Daughter and Son-in- 
law rich ? 

Do you want to give riches to Her who holds the Uni- 
verse in Her womb ? 

Can He be poor in whose house your Daughter lives ¢ 

As Annaptrna I give food to the world, 

And the Ocean, Kuvera! and others guard the wealth 
of Shiva. 

How great, O Mother ! must have been the religious 
merit? you have earned 

That you were able to give your Daughter to Him ! 

Such is the power of My Husband that I can make 
you Indrani,? 

I am such a Daughter of yours as is equal to ten 
sons. 

It is out of jealousy that neighbours do not speak to 
you of happiness, 

But wound you, O Mother ! by speaking of sorrow. 

The Queen said: ‘ O Brahmamayi ! explain this to me. 

If Thou hast so much wealth, where is the sign 
of it ? 

O Shankari !* does not Shiva’s heart yearn to adorn 
Unees, 

Why has not my Son-in-law given Thee jewelled 
ornaments ? 

Of what use is wealth if the body of Uma-moon is 
unadorned ? 

Poorly dressed and on foot Thou hast come. This is 
what makes me doubtful (of your wealth).’ 

Playfully and with smiles Uma replies to Menaka: 

‘O Mother! Trilochana® cannot bear to see Me with 
ornaments, 


1 God of wealth. 2 Punya. 

3 Consort of the King of the Devas, Indra. 

4 Feminine of Shankara, a name of Shiva. 

5 The “ three-eyed,’”’ or Shiva, who in his forehead has the eye of 
wisdom (Jndnachaksu). 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 243 


For he says, What ornament is there in this world 
which can adorn Thee ? 

Tarini,* Thou art My crest-gem. Do gems become 
hee 2 

Will the moon look bright if gems are placed on it ? 

My simple dress ever charms Ashutosha’s? mind, 

And what Pafchanana? desires that I do. 

If this were. not so, innumerable and priceless jewels 
would lie in the dust before Me.’ 

The Queen said: ‘ Why should not ornaments become 
Thee: 

Ivory, when set in gold, becomes more beautiful. 

To-day I shall bring all kinds of jewels and see with 
my own eyes 

Whether, O Ishant! they become Thee or not.’ 

Then in joy of love the Queen of Mountain brought 
jewelled ornaments, 

And put them with care on Uma-jewel. 

Never, however, can ornaments look well on Uma’s 
body ; 

She became like the moon in the grasp of Rahu. 

In grief the Queen became, as it were, dead, and 
stopped the maids, 

Saying: ‘Do not bring worthless ornaments any 
more, 

And quickly take off those which I have already put 
on Uma. 

Let me see the unadorned body of the Mother. 

They do not become Thee, O Mother Shankari! 
Ornaments do not become Thee !’ 

What Providence® is it which has made Thee, O 
Mother ! Spouse of Hara ?°® 

How beautiful Thou art, O Tara! O Tara, with face 
like the autumnal moon, 

1 Epithet of the Devi as Saviour. 2 Shiva, the “easily contented.” 


3 Shiva, the “ five-headed.”’ 4 That is, the eclipsed moon. 
5 Vidhi. 6 Shiva. 


244 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


I have, O Mother! given the moon the name of Tara 
as I lost the Taras (pupils) of my eyes.’ 

This beauty charms Hara’s mind, and destroys its 
darkness. 

Is this the reason, O Mother Uma! why the Three- 
eyed Deva? does not allow Thee to be ever out 
of His sight 2” 


So long as the desire to adorn Her is not done away with 
in this manner, the effort? will not be successful; this is 
why Shastra has made provision for Her adornment. 
On that day on which She sees that I am tired out, dis- 
comforted, and put to shame in my efforts to adorn Her, 
the merciful Tripurasundari will, in order to end this 
trouble of Her son, adorn Herself with Her own beauty, 
and of Her own accord take Her seat on the throne of 
my heart. On the day on which when going to adorn 
the Mother with my ornaments, I shall myself be adorned 
with Her ornaments, on that day my yearning to adorn 
Her will end for good and all. Then I shall throw up 
my arms in joy and call out to the world to see how, 
although all efforts to adorn the Mother fail, he who 
makes the efforts is himself adorned by virtue of the 
religious merit* he thereby acquires. Ramaprasada has. 
also told us what sort of an eye is required to be able to 
perceive the beauty and sweetness of that adornment. . 
We shall try elsewhere to make this clear. Here we would 
say that, whether it suits the Mother or not, I shall adorn 
the Mother if my own condition requires it, for the Mother 
is as much my Mother as She is the Mother of Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Maheshvara. The Mother’s mother, Menaka, 

1 A play on the word Tara, which means the “ saviour ”’ (a name of 
the Devi), and also a “ star ’”’ and the “ pupil of the eye.”” According 
to the Bengali idiom, “pupils of my eyes” means the ‘light of my 
eyes.’’ The sense of the verse is that when Uma left Menaka the 
latter lost the sight of her eye, which is Uma Herself; and so by mistake- 
gave her the name of Tara (in its sense of star), although her proper- 


name is ‘‘ Moon.’’ 2 Shiva, Her Spouse. 
3 Sadhana. 4 Punya. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 245 


proceeded to adorn the Mother because it suited her to 
do so, irrespective as to whether it suited Uma or not. 
But because Menaka thought the ornaments which were 
suitable for her to be also suitable for the Mother, the 
Mother refused to beadorned with her ornaments (vanity)," 
and stood forth adorned with such ornaments only as 
properly belonged to the Mother. And then the divine? 
beauty of Menaka sank in® the sea of the indescribable 
beauty of Brahmamayi Uma. Then, throwing off the 
ornaments, consisting of the darkness of the vanity of 
individual existence, Menaka herself shone with the light 
of the Sun of the sole existence of the Mother of the 
world, and seeing at once the self-luminous true aspect 
of the Devi, which is consciousness, cried out: ‘‘ Do not 
bring worthless ornaments any more, and take off quickly 
those which I have already put on Uma. Let me see 
the unadorned body of the Mother.’ When, in order to 
satisfy the yearning and effort* of Her Mother, the perfect 
grace of existence, consciousness, and bliss® flowed in 
streams from the fair face to the fair feet of the Mother, 
all other adornments appeared as nothing before that 
supreme beauty. When thus her yearning was satisfied, 
Menaka eagerly said: ‘“‘ Let me see the Mother’s unadorned 
body,” for the Daughter, although a Daughter in the 
aspect® She had assumed for play,’ was then Perfect and 
Eternal Brahman in its aspect,® as the Supreme Unity. 
It was the upward flowing current of his spiritual 
feeling which pained Ramaprasdda at the absence of 
materials suitable for the satisfaction of that yearning, 
and led him to say: “‘ Ah! you want to adorn Her with 
worthless tinsel ornaments.’”’ This does not mean that 
“the Mother need not be adorned.”” The burden of the 
song of his sorrow was that he had not ornaments suitable 
for the adornment of the Mother. This must be so; for 


1 Ahangkara. (Author’s parenthesis.) 2 Daiva. 
3 That is, dwindled into insignificance. 4 Sadhana, 
5 Sat, chit, and Ananda. SOR ipa Lila. 8 Kaivalya-ripa. 


246 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


is there any such luckless son in the world as yearns to 
call the Mother Mother and yet has no desire to adorn 
Her? 


‘The Mother who feeds the world with all kinds of 
food, 
With what face do you want to feed Her on Atapa* 
rice and soaked peas ?”’ 


He who can adorn others can also be adorned himself. 
He who can feed others can also be fed himself.2 He 
who desires to adorn others may also desire to be adorned 
himself. He who desires to feed others may also have 
the wish to eat himself. Either say at once that the Devi 
neither adorns others nor is adorned Herself, neither 
feeds others nor eats Herself; or say that She both adorns 
others and is adorned Herself; both feeds others and Her- 
self eats. Even if She is not, according to you, Herself 
adorned in Her aspect with form, yet in the formless 
aspect at least, as you understand and speak of it, She 
appears to undoubtedly adorn others. If so, how do 
you escape from the difficulty ? All Shastras and all 
people agree that the Formless aspect is eternally attribute- 
less, and that it is impossible for that attributeless aspect — 
to have the desire (which is itself an attribute) to adorn 
the world; but, then, such is the virtue of the nineteenth 
century that nowadays we frequently hear of a Formless 
Deity with attributes. We, however, understand this 
attribute to be an attribute? of the worshippers of the 
Formless Deity instead of being really an attribute of 
the Formless Deity; for to admit the presence of an 
attribute in the Attributeless Brahman is tantamount to 


1 See ante, p. 234; 

2 The idea of eating is in Her, otherwise She would not have fed the 
world; and when the idea is in Her, the idea of Herself eating must 
also be in Her. When She is saguna, she is so not only to the world, 
but to Herself also. 

* A mental figment for which the worshippers alone are responsible. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 247 


cutting flowers from a garden in the air. Those who 
speak of Brahman as perfectly devoid of attributes 
admit, in order to account for the universe which is made 
of attributes, the separate existence of Maya, composed 
of the three Gunas or attributes. Owing to their not being 
able to bear the weight of the deep and solemn mental 
effort which is necessary for the admission of the separate 
existence of Maya, they are placed in the following di- 
lemmas: If, on the one hand, they do not admit the 
separate existence of Maya; on the other, they see that 
in the denial of all connection of the world with the 
Formless Brahman it is impossible to call Him “ Merciful 
Father.” If, on the one hand, It is addressed with 
attributes, shame will make it difficult for them to show 
their faces to worshippers of the Deity in His aspect with 
form, for in order to possess attributes it is necessary to 
possess form; consequently, they have denied perfect 
attributeness (that part of it which necessitates the pos- 
session of form)' and present to view a queer sort of 
Brahman, half of which is with attributes and the other 
attributeless. Formless, yet with attributes; with attri- 
butes, yet formless. This Brahman of theirs is called 
‘ existence, consciousness, and bliss,’’? after the Shastra;? 
“Merciful Father,” after the Bible; “‘ Creator ’’ (Karta) 
anicdealzord.’ (Ishvara), after the Koran; and the “ Form- 
less One,” through the malice which non-Aryyas bear 
against Aryyas; and He is also called “ full of love’’ at 
times for the attainment of their selfish ends. Because 
they will not allow their Brahman to be identified with 
the Devataé whom Aryyas worship, it has (despite its 
being, in fact, above name and form)* name, though not 
form,°® otherwise how can It be constantly addressed with 

1 Author’s parenthesis. 2 Sat, chit, and ananda, 

° That is, the Hindu Shastra. 4 Nama Ripa. 

5 The Hindu idea is that the Brahman has neither name nor form 
(Nirguna Brahman), or has both name and form (Saguna Brahman), 


These “ reformers ’’ put forward a Deity who has name, but no form, 
and is therefore neither Nirguna nor Saguna. 


248 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


the exclamation “‘O!” ? However that may be, even if 
this newly discovered Formless Brahman without attri- 
butes suits their purpose, we are ourselves in no wise 
bound to admit the existence of this novel appearance.* 
We care very little for the Attributeless Brahman if He 
does not appear with form, and much less do we like this 
Formless One with attributes. 

Who says that She who can feed others, as She can 
adorn others, cannot or will not Herself eat 22 If the 
will of Her who is will itself eternally exists, that will has 
as much relation to feeding as to eating.? If you say that 
it is impossible for Her to eat, we shall say that it is also 
impossible for Her to feed. If you admit the possibility 
of feeding, why should you not admit the possibility of 
eating ? You may say She feeds the world, but who 
will feed Her? For you may argue that it is impcssible 
to give food to Her who gives food to the infinite universe. 
To those whom a knowledge of words has robbed of their 
sense and who cannot understand the truth,* these words 
appear very sweet and as the final and essential truth; 
for their mind is naturally unwilling to disturb the state 
of self-intoxication which these delusive words produce 
in them. 


“The Mother who feeds the world with all kinds of 
food, 
With what face do you want to feed Her on Atapa® 
rice and soaked peas ?” 


Can anything be said after this? Here, once for all, 
is the most final decision which the matter admits of! 
For these people think (in consonance with their mental 
trend)® that it is utterly false that She eats or will eat, the 
only essential truth being that She feeds! 


1 Avatara. 
2 When the Sddhaka eats or thinks of eating, She it is who eats or 
thinks of it. 3 Vide ante, p. 246. 


& lative, see ey 106 GHicuD ena 6 Author’s parenthesis, 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 249 


If the Mother cannot be fed simply because She feeds 
the world, the reason for such inability is that if I want to 
feed Her She would demand repayment by me for all the 
food which She supplies to the world, for you ask yourself 
how much She who feeds the world can Herself eat. I 
say She may feed the world as much as She likes. What 
have I to do with that? I am bound to give Her only 
what She gives me to eat. 

My gratification will be in giving to Her the enjoyment? 
with which She has provided me and then retiring. I am 
not here to make payment of all Her dues. My responsi 
bility is to pay Her only such dues as I owe Her. She is 
Brahman only so long as I am Jiva. She is Mother only 
so long as I am son. She is a Devata only so long as I 
am aman, and my worship of Her lasts only so long as I 
am “I.” My worship of Her will be at an end the very 
day on which my “ I-ness”’ will be at an end, or my 
individuality will disappear the very day on which my 
worship of Her will come to a close. So long as I 
shall have to eat Atapa rice? and soaked peas, what 
justification have I for eating them without offering them 
to Her? 

Although She is the Mother of the world, She is also my 
Mother. Although She is Bhagavan of the Universe, She 
is also my Lord.* “‘ The food which IJ shall eat, even that 
food I must offer to Pitris and Devas.’ What I shall eat 
even that my Ishtadevata will partake of before me. 
Had She been capable of taking offence like you and I 
because the food consisted of ‘‘ Atapa rice and soaked 
peas,’ would She have been worshipped by the three 
worlds as their Mother, merciful, kind to the poor, Pro- 
tectress of the helpless, easily attainable by devotion and 
loving to devotees ? Had not Shri Krishna thrown away 


1 That is, She feeds the world; but you think that She has such a 
great body that She will not be satisfied with your small offerings. 

2 Bhoga. There is a play on the word which also means the food 
offered to the Devata. 3 Vide ante. 4 Prabhu. 


250 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


the food laid out by Rukmini! Herself (She who was full 
of supreme love and Mahalakshmi), and hurried to 
Dvaitavana* from Dvaraka® in order to eat the remnant 
of herb in the cooking-pot left over after Draupadi’s meal 
(when that virtuous woman-friend of His, frightened at the 
prospect of being cursed by a Brahmana, sought His pro- 
tection), would He have been called throughout the three 
worlds by the glorious name of “ Friend of Pandavas ’’? 
Had not Bhagavan, in spite of His being the Master of 
infinite universes and Lord of Vaikuntha,* assumed the 
form of young Gopala on being moved thereto by the 
great devotion of Prahlada, and taken with His own hand 
the plate of poisoned food from the hand of Prahlada, 
who was grieved to give it to Him; and had He not put 
that food with the fingers of His own lotus-hand into His 
fair mouth, which is wont to drink nectar® given by 
Brahma and other Devas, would He have been known 
by the beloved title of ‘“‘ Hari of Prahlada,” in spite of 
His being the Hari of the world? Had He not joyously 
taken in the hollow of His hand the grains of rice given 
by the wife (a devoted Sadhika)® of the poor and desti- 
tute Brahmana Sudama and tasted their sweetness, 
greater than the sweetness of nectar, singing the greatness 
of love, would anybody in this world have called Him 
Friend of the Poor and Merciful Bhagavan? Had not 
the Providence’ who dispenses the four-fold fruit to 
Jiva considered sweet the fruits half-eaten by herd-boys, 
would the sweetness of the name ‘‘ The joy of Nanda’® 
have been so much greater than that of ‘ Sachchi- 
dananda >?” Had not the Mother, the Genetrix of 
Brahma and other Devas, left Her bejewelled throne in 


1 His wife. 

* The forest where the Pandavas resided for some time during their 
exile. 

* Shri Krishna’s capital. 

* The heaven of Vishnu (see ante, p. 24). 5 Amrita. 

6 Feminine of Sadhaka worshipper. 7 Vidhata. 

8 Nandanandana. 9 Existence, consciousness, and bliss. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 251 


the luminously resplendent region of Kailasat and gone to 
the thatched hut of Kalaketu,? the hunter’s son, illumin- 
ating the house and the surrounding woods with the 
light of Her beauty ; had She not proved the fitness of Her 
name “ Chandi’ by giving the Chandala’s® son a place on 
the fair lap which is ever sought by Giha and Gajanana;+ 
if Annaptirna,® Charmer of the mind of KAla,® had not 
blessed Kalaketu by feeding him from the breast which 
even Brahma and other Devas hardly gain, and eaten the 
food of a Chandala; had the dispeller of Kalaketu’s fear 
of death shrunk from becoming a hunter’s mother—would 
the distressed Jivas of the world to-day have wept and 
ericGeee Voter?” Had not the Mother, the Devata 
whom Suratha and Samadhi’ sought in Sadhana gratified 
the two Sadhakas by accepting, in the woods on the bank 
of a river, their worship with fruits and roots and offerings 
of blood issuing from their pierced hearts,? would Sad- 
hakas have staked their lives in their determination to 
perform Sadhana of the Mother? Both Shastra and 
report say that Maharaja Suratha and Samadhi the 
' Vaishya King, whose life was itself a great Samadhi,® 
after establishing the Mother in an earthen image daily 
for three years, inflicted cuts upon their breasts with 
swords, and with the blood issuing therefrom made offer- 
ing in the great worship, that by such intense devotion"® 
they might speedily get sight of Her. 


1 The mount which is Shiva’s abode. 

2 An incident in Kavikankan’s Chandi. 

er Dhe hunter. 4 Karttikeya and Ganesha. 
5 The Devi as Lady Bountiful and giver of food. 6 Shiva. 
if 


The King Suratha and the Vaishya Samadhi referred to in Chandi 
(Markandeya Purana). When wandering in poverty in the forest 
Rishi Medhasa spoke to them of the Devi whom they afterwards 
worshipped: Suratha in order to become a great King, and Samadhi 
that he might gain Moksha. The Devi granted both boons, Suratha 
is to be the Manu of the Savarnika (the next) Manvantara. 

8 They pierced their hearts, and blood flowed out, which was then 
offered to the Devi. The Sddhaka sometimes makes offering of his 
blood after making incisions in the body. 

® Ecstasy, communion with Brahman. 10 Tapasya. 


252 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


This puts me in mind of something. The cutting of 
his own breast by a son in the worship of the Mother 
cannot be a favour of the Mother. And why being 
Mother should She be so cruel? In my opinion, how- 
ever, Suratha and Samadhi did not cut themselves to 
their hearts in order that by satisfying Her with such a 
sacrifice the Mother might appear before them. They 
had heard from their Gurudeva, Maharshi Medhasa, that 
the Mother dwelt and played in the hearts of devotees. 
Hence they took the terrible determination “ to see Her 
by bringing Her out from their hearts by importuning, if 
not by satisfying, Her.’’ And with such intention they 
inflicted sword-cuts upon themselves. Otherwise, what 
was the necessity for so intense a form of devotion ?* 
People may call the blood which issued from their hearts 
their heart’s blood, but I say that it was not merely the 
blood of the heart, but also attachment. And because 
this was so, blood flowed from the hearts of the Mother’s 
devotees, brimming with love for the Mother. The 
moment such hearts were pierced, streams of love flowed 
copiously from them. But that love is transparent, fair, 
pure, unsoiled, thick, deep, and milk-white. How, then, 
did it become blood-red ? How can I tell you? O 
devotee! you alone can say whence came that blood. To 
me it seems that the Mother who adorns the throne of the 
Isle of Gems? in the Sea of Milk? lay happily in that sea, 
which is the devotee’s heart, so that all blows which fell 
on it feil on the sacred feet of the Devi, who is so loving 
to Her devotees. Then, by the waves thus raised, the 
bright red paint on the lotus-feet of the Mother of the 
world,* which Sadananda® had lovingly applied with his 
own hand, was washed off, and, mixing with the deep 
attachment of the devotee’s heart, appeared as blood to the 
view of men. Otherwise, when the devotee had already 


1 Tapasya. 2 Manidvipa. 3 Kshitas 
4 Hindu women paint their feet with red lac, 
5 Shiva, the “‘ ever joyful.’ 


EPRINGERPEES “OB TANTRA 253 


offered his body, senses, heart, Atma, and all he possessed 
at Her feet, what was the necessity of re-offering that 
heart again and again to satisfy Her? The sea, despite 
its depth, is full of waves. Similarly, notwithstanding 
that love is ever deep, it is constantly restless. Such rest- 
lessness is its natural characteristic. To Him whom I 
love with all my heart, and to whose feet I have offered 
my all, to Him, nevertheless, I desire to offer it again and 
again, ten times every half an hour. 

I know not whether it is a quality of love or of its object, 
whether of the devotee or of the beauteous feet of the 
Mrotienem but it 1s a fact, that as often as Suratha and 
Samadhi, urged by such restlessness, struck their hearts, so 
often did the Mother of the world move Her feet tolet them 
know that She was awake, and gave clear evidence thereof 
in ripples of blood raised thereby. At last, fearing lest 
Maheshvara should take it to heart were all the dye so 
lovingly and carefully applied by Him washed off (lest 
Shiva’s words should prove false by the pain caused to 
the heart of the devoted Sadhakas were their constant 
offering of attachment to Her spurned and rejected),* the 
Daughter of mountain left that comfortable couch and 
showed Herself to the Sadhaka by awaking, as one who 
is consciousness, in the earthen image, the beauty of 
which gave joy to their eyes. She showed Herself in a 
manner as if She knew nothing of all that had happened 
theretofore. Her heavy and indolent eyes, like those of 
one who has suddenly awakened from sleep, were stirred 
by a Mother’s love, soothing the hearts of the devotees 
by shedding upon them the nectar of Her serene regard; 


1 Author’s parenthesis. The passage is obscure. It has been 
already said that the blood was not merely blood, but the attachment 
of the heart, the meaning of which appears to be that the shedding of 
the heart’s blood was, as it were, the shedding of the heart’s attach- 
ment. As this shedding is supposed to be caused by the Devi living 
in the heart, the Sddhaka might think it to be the rejection by Her 
of his offering of attachment. What the words of Shiva are cannot 
be made out from the context, unless it be the Tantra Shastra in general. 


254 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


and smiling softly with Her ruddy lips, She said to Suratha, 
‘Maharaja, take what you like,” and to the Vaishya 
also, “‘ Gladdener of Kula (Kulanandana),* take what you 
like.” Ah, how sweet! The expression ‘‘ Gladdener of 
Kula’ in the mouth of the Mother was no mere word of 
address. It showed that the gate of Her unbounded love 
was open. The Mother charms with such sweet and soft 
address those who seek Her by becoming Hers only. 
Maharaja Suratha was an interested? Sadhaka. In spite 
of having been robbed and driven away by sons and 
relations, the bitter thirst of his mind for enjoyment of 
worldly things was not satisfied, so that he worshipped 
the Mother in order to regain his lost kingdom. This was 
why the Mother who dwells in all hearts addressed the 
Prince as Maharaja. As for the Vaishya, his keen dis- 
passion,® which had consumed his worldly desires to their 
very roots, was not to be satisfied so long as he did not 
obtain the Mother, the Mahamaya, who is the centre of all 
this Maya. This was why the Mother very fondly and 
very affectionately used the title of ‘‘ Gladdener of Kula ”’ 
in addressing this son of Hers who had lost the Mother. 
Just as a worldly mother affectionately calls her son 
“support of his Kula (race), or ornament of his Kula 
(race),’’ if he be great and glorious; so the Mother, in 
spite of Her being above the world, was, as it were, over- 
powered by Her Maternal affection, and called the Vaishya 
““ Gladdener of Kula.’’ O Mother, Thou hast none in Thy 
Kula (race), how, then, could he become gladdener of 
Kula* to Thee ? Perhaps it is because Thou hast ap- 
peared as Mother that Thy attachment to Kula has so 


1 See post. 

2 Sakaéma; because he worshipped in order that he might gain the 
material benefit to himself of becoming a great King, whereas his 
companion was striving for the spiritual end of liberation. 

3 Vairagya. 

4 Kulanandana. The word Nandana means also son. There is 
a play on the “ Kula,’ which means “ race family,”’ as well as a form of 
Sadhana. Italso means “ shore’”’ or “‘bank.’”’ See text, post. 


PRINCIPERS“OP TANTRA 255 


greatly increased. That Thou hast none above Thee in 
Thy Kula (race)* is no reason why Thou shouldst not have 
descendants. If really Thou hast no descendants in Thy 
Kula, then who are we? Whether Thou hast a Kula or 
not, Thou are the root of Kula, Kulakundalini? Herself. 
The Kula path,? O Mother! is for him who follows Thy 
path. My desires for Kula* have been fully gratified. 
Now, O Mother! take me out of Kula* into Thy arms, so 
that sitting at the root of Kula® I may penetrate into its 
mysteries. Let the Kulakula sound® of the river of 
existence’ cease for ever. O Mother! it was because 
Samadhi, Thy son immersed in Samadhi,® gave lustre to 
this Kula® by passing beyond the two Kulas”®° of this river 
that Thou didst give him the endearing title of ““ Gladdener 
of Kula.” Blessed were you devotees, Suratha and 
Samadhi! How shall we, Jivas of the Kali age, penetrate 
the deep mystery of the offering of sacrifice by you? By 
you alone was it offered, and by the Mother alone was its 
meaning understood. O Sadhaka of the embodied Deity !?4 
be youinterested or disinterested in your Sadhana, inquire 
now of Suratha and Samadhi what has to be done in order 
to directly perceive* the appearance of the Mother in an 
outer image. The worship in which men like Suratha 
and Samadhi wounded their breasts with their own hands 
in order that they might see the Mother of the world in 
an outer image—that worship is called idolatry to-day in 
the Kali age by the community of infidels themselves, 
confused by the “‘ learning and science ”’ of the nineteenth 

1 No one is Her progenitor. 

2 The name of the Devi whose abode is in the Mailddhara. There is 


a play on the word Kula. 
3 The Tantra. 


4 Here ‘‘ family ’’—that is, the world. 5 Tantrik worship. 
6 The sound made by running water. Play on the word Kula. 

7 Bhavanadi. 8 Ecstasy; a play on the Vaishya’s name. 
9 Human race. 10 Banks. 11 Sakara. 


i 


2 That is, be the Sddhana done with the desire for personal benefit 
or not, as in the case of Suratha and Samadhi. 
13 Pratyakshakaranam, 


256 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


century. How absurd it is to say that Maharajadhira- 
jendra’ Suratha, the paramount Monarch of this earth, 
with its oceans, and high-souled Samadhi, whose heart 
was under the sway of intense dispassion,” and lighted by 
the fire of spiritual knowledge,? rent their- hearts and 
made streams of blood flow therefrom in the course of a 
play with a mere doll. Such criticism against the 
Savarnika Manu‘ is nothing but a clear sign of the influ- 
ence of the Kali age. However that may be, to Her who 
accepted even heart’s blood as sacrifice from Suratha and 
Samadhi in order to uphold the honour of the words of 
Shastra told by Herself, ‘‘ Atapa rice and soaked peas ” 
cannot be unacceptable; and it is because they are not 
unacceptable to Her that the Sadhaka has with simplicity 
said: 

“O Mother! in the Devaloka Devas worship Thee daily 
with nectar.2 O Jagadishvari!® rulers of the earth wor- 
ship Thee with delicious food. But, O Mother! Thou 
canst not for that reason reject my offering of leaves, 
flowers, fruits, and water. O Mother! does fire refuse to 
accept blades of grass because in the sacrificial pit fire is 
worshipped with firewood along with ghee?” Fire is 
called the “ all-eater,’””” because by virtue of its power of 
burning it is capable of appropriating to itself all things. 

Fire accepts and consumes indiscriminately anything 
which is offered to it. Similarly, the merciful Devi, who 
grants all desires, accepts, for the gratification of Sad- 
hakas, anything which is offered in the name of the 
Almighty, Omniscient, and All-good. This acceptance 
is not to supply any want on Her part, but in order that 
She who bears great love for Her devotees may maintain 
them and their Vratas.2 Otherwise, in the dominion of 


1 A compound of the words Maharaja, Adhiraja, and Indra. The 
word Indra used as a common noun means “‘ chief.’’ 

2 Vairagya. 3 Tattvajnana. 4 Vide ante, p. 251. 

5 Amrita. 6 Mistress of the universe. 7 Sarvvabhuk. 

8 Vows, religious rites (see Introduction). 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 257 


Her who is abundance? itself and is plenty,? the character 
of things* and power,‘ there can be really no want.2 If 
there be any want. it is only the want of want. Just as 
She has no want of “‘ 4tapa rice and soaked peas,”’ so also 
She has no want of sweet-meats, sweet-rice,® and nectar.” 
What cause for sorrow or shame is there, then, in offering 
Her “ atapa rice and soaked peas?’ To Her the store 
of nectar’ churned out of the seven seas is as much an 
atom as “ atapa rice and soaked peas ’”’ are atoms. She 
is as much unattached to Atapa rice and soaked peas as 
to nectar.’ Although She is really as free from attach- 
ment as the water on a lotus-leaf, when playing at the 
play of Sangsdra, full of Maya, She, in order to draw 
devotees to Herself, merely pretends to be delighted by 
the receipt of all these materials. Otherwise, what form 
of delight does the Devi, who is all delight and perfect 
delight, want that She should feel delight in receiving 
offerings of food.? 

It is ridiculous to think that offerings of food will give 
delight to the Anandamayi,!° who is present in every atom 
of those offerings as consciousness."1_ Her delight and joy 
of which the Shastra speaks in dealing with the subject 
of worship are not Her delight and Her joy, but the play 
of the delight of Sddhana and the joy of Sadhana in the 
Sadhaka. We shall try to explain this point more clearly 
in its proper place. Here only we would observe that 
Ramaprasada sang the story of His heart with a mind full 
of sorrow, a sorrow which attacks every Sadhaka so long 
as the supreme truth?” does not dawn in the first staget® 


1 Mahdabhava. 2 Bhava. 3 Svabhava. 4 Prabhava. 
5 Abhdava is non-existence. Mahdabhava and Bhava are translated as 
plenty, ‘‘ because they have been made antitheses of Abhava or want.”’ 
As for Svabhava and Prabhava, the author appears not to have been able 
to resist the temptation of using these words for the sake of alliteration. 
6 Paramanna; rice cooked with milk and sugar. 7 Amrita, 
8 Paramanu. To Her who is Brahma one is as insignificant as the 
other. 9 Naivedya. 10 Devi, who is bliss or delight. 
11 Chitsatta. 12 Paratattva. 13 Adhikara. 
VOL. Il. Ly, 


258 PRINCIPLES OF TANT Eee 


of Sadhana. This sorrowful song is not the expression of 
a decision arrived at in the domain of knowledge,’ but 
the indistinct expression of an ungratified longing in the 
domain of devotion.2, Through their senseless inter- 
ference in matters in which they have no competence, 
the community of undevotees, who are ignorant of the 
truth,* and without experience in these matters, put on 
the airs of wise men before the community of infidels* by 
giving to words belonging to the sphere of devotion a 
queer appearance, coloured by the sphere of knowledge.® 
But they failed to see that the sky was overclouded, and 
a single shower was likely to wash off the light® colour with 
which they had painted these pictures. It is highly 
amusing to see people taking the name Ramaprasada 
and making themselves known to others as his followers, 
yet all the time trying secretly to draw him to their own 
party. We are unable to understand how such people 
as hold so much intelligence in themselves’ can have room® 
to digest the food left by Ramaprasada. It is during 
life that evidence of men’s Sadhana is seen. But Rama- 
prasdda gave evidence of his Sadhana in death as well as 
in life. By performing worship the night preceding his 
death, and placing the Mother’s image before him even at 
the time of death, the high-souled accomplished Sadhaka 
has given us full proof of his faith in Brahman with form,® 
and of his performance of worship of the Deity with form.° 
During life the Mother with form™ danced constantly in 
his songs and his heart. If after this a man can find it in 
himself to say that “‘ Ramaprasada did not worship the 
Deity with form,’ he may as well also say that Rama- 
prasdda had no soul.” 

We shall quote here another of Ramaprasada’s songs 
of self-resignation. In this it will be seen how even his 


1 Jnana. 2 Bhakti. 3° Tattva., 4 Pdshandas. 
5 Jnanakanda. 6 As opposed to fast colour. 

7 Literally, ‘“‘ in their stomachs ’’—a Bengali idiom. 

8 In those stomachs. PP Oaktree 


10 Sakéra Updsana. 11 Martimati. 12 Atma. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 259 


body and senses, not to speak of his mind, heart, and very 
self, were absorbed in the worship of the Mother. 


“ Of what use, O brother! is this body if it does not 
melt in love for Dakshina ?? 

Oh, fie, fie, to this tongue if it does not utter the name 
of Kali. 

Those eyes are sinful which see not the form? of 
Kali. 

Oh, how wicked is the mind which does not sink 
under Her feet. 

May thunder strike those ears which do not hear Her 
sweet name, making copious tears flow from the 
eyes. For what purpose does their existence 
serve ? 

Oh, should we desire to have the hands which fill the 
belly, if they are not joined together to hold 
sandal paste, Java flowers, and bael-leaves ?4 

Oh, of what use are the feet, and wholly without 
purpose is the work they do by day and night, 
if they do not willingly and gladly carry us 
there where images of Kali are enshrined ? 

If a man’s senses are not under his control, can Devata 
be so? 

Ramaprasada asks: ‘ Does a Babui®-tree ever bear 
mango fruits ?’”’ 


Let the Sadhaka here ask the critic what kind of Rama- 
prasada it was who wrote this song ? 

There are, again, many people who, on hearing all this 
infidel talk, think it to be a novel and refined form of 
criticism, which the brilliant genius of the nineteenth 
century alone with its constant pursuit of knowledge and 
science has originated. But we say that this iconoclasm is 
not a thing of to-day only when considered as a revolution- 

1 Atmatattva. 2 The gracious Devi. . 3 Ripa. 


4 These are offered in the two joined palms to the Devi in worship. 
5 A wild tree. 


260 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


ary principle in the sphere of worship. It has always 
existed since the creation of light and darkness, since the 
beginning of the eternal quarrel between the race of Devas 
and the race of Daityas, and has lasted as long as nectar* 
and poison have existed together in the depth of the sea; 
as long as there have been light and spots in the moon; 
as long as there have been heaven and hell,? sin and 
virtue, Dharma and obstruction thereof,¢ Deva and 
Danava,° man and Pishacha,®° knowledge and ignorance, 
faith and faithlessness, Sadhus’ and libertines, devotees 
and infidels. Even those who go to heaven fall into hell® 
when their religious merit® is spent. Even wise men are 
led astray when the attraction of sin becomes strong, and 
even Sadhus’ hanker to eat and drink things injurious to. 
them when they become delirious in disease. 

Similarly, non-Aryya proclivities, the unhappy result 
of evil deeds in previous births, move and possess the 
hearts of Jivas, in spite of their having been born in the 
Aryya race. This it is which gives rise to the kind of 
criticism under consideration. Eternally ignorant as we 
are of the root principle, we see only the fruit, and think 
that the branch alone is its cause; whilst as a matter of 
fact He it is who is at the root of all fruits—He whose 
command gives sour, bitter, pungent, and sweet tastes. 
to the sap of trees from which fruits spring according to 
the seeds from which they grow. We therefore often 
find the hearts of even Chandalas, who are devoted to. 
Bhagavan, to be adorned with Sattvik’® qualities becom-. 
ing Brahmanas, whilst even Brahmanas fall into a state. 
worse than that of Chandalas if they become estranged. 
from Bhagavan. When, in spite of being the son of. 


1 Amrita. 2 Svarga and Naraka. 3 Papa and Punya. 
4 Vighna. 5 Enemies of the divine principle. 
6 A low, unclean form of Spirit. 7 Pious men. 


8 To work out the effect of sin. Ordinarily, hellis gone through first, 
then heaven, and then earth. 
9 Punya. 
10 Good qualities due to the predominance in them of the Sattvaguna.. 


Pere ost bAN dD RA 261 


Brahma Himself, and father-in-law of Bhagavan, who is 
perfect and eternal Brahman, and husband of Bhagavati 
Prajapati, Daksha did that which became an Asura, and 
lost all devotion to the feet of Bhagavan and Bhagavati, 
Pashupati,’ the Destroyer of the Pashu bonds? of the 
three worlds, attached to the headless trunk of His father- 
in-law the head of a goat, the worst of beasts.2 On the 
other hand, in the incident on which the Shivaratri Vrata* 
is based, we see the same Pashupati taking mercy on a 
Nishada® King, a killer of animals, delivering him from 
the terrible fear of death, taking him to the abode. of 
Kailasa, which great Yogis long to attain, and giving 
eternal peace to that Chandala, scorched as he was by 
the three fires,® setting him in the cool shade of His feet. 
The Gitdfijali’ therefore says: 


SONG. 


“Ah! the Dispenser of the fourfold fruit sits at the 
root of the bael-tree. 
Hence the Vyadha’s® hunting has brought the four- 
fold fruit to the hollow of his palm. 
Various kinds of fruits are borne by trees—-so people 


do think. 
But it is not the trees, O brother ! which really bear 


fruits. 


1 Shiva as Lord of creatures. 

2 Bonds which bind Jivas; as ropes bind pashus or beasts. 

3 This was after the sacrifice of Daksha, at which the latter had 
slighted Shiva. Hence Daksha is represented as a man with a goat’s 


head. 

# On a stormy night a hunter with game on his back got up on a 
bael-tree at the foot of which Shiva and Parvati came and sai. As the 
hunter mounted on the tree bael-leaves fell on Shiva. This satisfied 
him, and he blessed the hunter. 

5 King of Nishadas, or Vyadhas, or Chandalas, who live by hunting; 
regarded as a low and cruel caste. 

8 The three sorrows—Adhyatmik, adhibhautik, and adhidaivik—due 
to the self, the external material world, and the world of Devas. 

7 The authox’s volume of verses. 8 See note 5, ante. 


262 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Fruits are borne by the energy of its root. 

O Vyadha !? the tree which gave you shelter was no 
ordinary tree, but that which gratifies all desires.” 

At the root of that tree was the Guru of the world, in 
consequence of Sadhana performed by you in 
previous births. 

Blessed was your initiation in hunting, blessed was 
the training you had received in archery. 

In consequence of which the Destroyer of Kama? . 
accepted bael-leaves from you. 


. Blessed is the tithit of Shivaratri, in which the 


Mother, Protectrix of the world, took a Vyadha’s 
son into Her arms instead of casting him away 
as a Chandala.° 

If He who to-day, being born in a Brahmana family, 
omits to observe the Vrata, then whom would 
you call a Chandala ? 

Above were you, O Vyadha Chandala! and under 
you was the Lord of the three worlds. 

How can I understand the meaning of this—born 
though I am in a Brahmana family ? 

In order to uphold the honour of a devotee, Bhagavan, 
who is in the power of devotees, took His own 
place below, and raised the devotee on high. 

If the devotee falls, it will be difficult to save him. 

This was why the Lover of devotees sat at the root 
of the tree, in order that he might hold the 
devotee in His arms. 

O hunter ! in order to bow to you to-day it is neces- 
sary to cross the Lord of the Universe.® 

I therefore bow to your feet, O Chandala! from a 


distance. 
1 See note, ante, p. 261. 2 Kalpa-tree. 
3 Shiva as destroyer of the Lord of Desire. 4 Lunar day. 


5 One of the lowest castes. 
6 Vishvanatha, ‘‘ Cross,” because the Lord of the Universe is 
between the hymnist and the Vyddha, for Shiva was at the foot of the 


tree. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 263 


Bless me, O Nishada-King ! that I may to-day lose 
my Brahmanahood. 

And, making me your younger brother, give me, O 
brother ! a place in Mother Chandi’s bosom. 
You have, O brother! taken me up on the tree of 

Kula’ If I now fall, there will be an end of me. 
In the name of Shiva, in the name of Shiva, I stretch 
out my hand. Raise me to you.” 


Because such fall is inevitable in human life, the Three- 
eyed Bhagavan, who peers through the three divisions of 
time,” has, with a view to the cause of this fall, warned 
the world of SAdhakas beforehand, and Himself said in 
the Yogini Tantra :° 

“Many celestial* and terrestrial obstacles appear in 
pilgrimage, construction of palaces, and specially at the 
beginning of any religious act, Vrata, or Yajna.®° The 
Devatas who bring about or preside over these obstacles 
should be worshipped at the very outset with sweetmeats 
and sacrifice, otherwise irremediable obstacles will surely 
appear. Besides these outer obstacles, there are other 
obstacles which reside in the body of the operator or 
Sadhaka himself. These inner obstacles possess the minds 
of Jivas, and are manifested as sins knowingly committed. 
My Beloved ! hear an account of these obstacles. O Devi! 
some of these mental obstacles appear as restrainers,® 
and others as instigators.”’ (As a matter of fact, by 
fighting with each other, both these restraining and in- 
stigating obstacles seem only to waste the Sadhaka’s life- 
time, so that instigating obstacles also should be con- 
sidered as restraining obstacles in a different form; other- 
wise, an inclination® which instigates work would never 
have been called_an obstacle by the Shastra. Such in- 
stigating inclinations are merely ropes from which swing 

! That is, Kulasadhana. 2 Past, present, and future. 

3 Second Part, Eighth Patala. £)Daiva: 


5 Vow and sacrificial rite (see Introduction). 
6 Nivarttaka. 7 Pravarttaka. 8 Vritti. 


264 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


cradles of doubt. Description of obstacles follows:) 
“ Thought of sinful objects, whether they are near or very 
far off, be the distance a thousand or hundred thousand of 
yojanas;! detriment to religious work through laziness, 
grief, delusion, old age, and disease, which destroys youth 
and wealth (4, 5); quarrel with wife; famine; home diffi- 
culties (quarrels with relations, quarrels with members 
of family, and so forth); anxiety on account of many 
Vratas*’”’ (undertaking many Vratas at one and the same 
time, and then being anxious for fear of occurrence of 
omissions in their performance); “ the vanity that “lama 
righteous man’ (6); sudden subjection to grief, in spite of 
the absence of the occurrence of any sin® during the per- 
formance of a religious rite; the occurrence at the sight 
of Devata Himself and His manifestations* of such per- 
verse ideas as that Tulasi leaves® are mere leaves of a 
tree; myrobalans® are mere fruits of trees; Shalagrama’ 
is a mere stone; images of Devata are mere pieces of 
wood, and a BralHmana is merely an ordinary man; 
Svayambhu Shiva’ is merely a round stone; conch is 
merely a kind of shell, and the horn of rhinoceros? is 
merely flesh in a transformed state. These and such 
other notions as that Tirthas!® are merely water, Ganga 
is a mere river, and holy places are mere pieces of land, 
repeatedly appear in the mind of Jivas as obstacles in 
the form of scepticism, and obstruct the performance of 
a religious rite (7-10). Itis only when the mind is drawn 
by the upward attraction of Dharma by virtue of merit,* 
acquired in previous births, strengthened by firm faith, 


1 Eight or nine miles. 2 Religious rites (see Introduction). 
3 Pataka, which most probably here means sin caused by any 
omission or irregularity. £ Vibhitis. 


5 Used in worship of Vishnu. The Tulsi plant was originally a Gopi, 
beloved of Krishna, cursed by Radha. Brahmavaivartta Purana 


Prakriti Khanda. 6 Given at sangkalpa rite. 
* Stones of peculiar structure found in the Gandaki River, wor- 
shipped as Narayana. 8 Anadi, or self-sprung Lingas. 


° Used in Eastern Bengal in Tarpana as arghapatra (offering vessel). 
10 Here sacred rivers. tePunya. 


BRINCUIRPVES ORSTANTRA 265 


and thoroughly purified by instructions from Guru, that 
it is rendered capable of crossing this sea of obstacles. 
Again, a wicked mind is the cause of the appearance of 
these obstacles. In fact, the mind alone causes man’s 
bondage, as well as liberation (11).’’ (Knowing the truth 
about these obstacles, a Sadhaka should at the very 
commencement of a religious work resolve to control his 
mind, and should seek refuge at the lotus-feet of Maha- 
shakti, invoking Her that he may gain power and strength 
for himself.) 

Now, Sadhakas will see that the prediction of Bha- 
gavan in the Shastra is a subtle criticism of the present 
time. But seeing we see not, and knowing we know 
not, that there already visibly exists a visible root in- 
finitely more subtle than all these subtle fruits. Hence 
all that we can do is to weep plaintively and pray: 
“Victory to Thee, O Three-eyed Mother! Take me out 
of this deep, dark well of one-eyed criticism, and, O 
Mother ! give light to the eyes of Thy children of darkened 
vision by painting with the eye-paint of Thy beauty,’ 
which is existence, consciousness, and bliss,” an Afijana 
better than crushed Afijana; so that, looking at that fair 
countenance of Thine, soft with kindness, which, though 
black, is cool with the coolness of a crore? of moons, and 
is bright as though it were a sun, we may, O Mother! 
resign ourselves as the Mother’s children to the Mother’s 
arms.” 


1 The black appearance of the Devi is here called an Afijana (black 
collyrium), with which the eyes are painted. 
2 Sat, Chit, and Ananda. 3 Ten millions. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
ORDINANCES RELATING TO WORSHIP? 


N the authorities already quoted the Shastra has 

ordained the exorcism of Spirits? and removal of 
obstacles even before the commencement of worship, 
Japa, Yajna,* or such other thing. The reason for this 
is that through the oppressiveness of Bhitas, Pretas, 
Pishachas, Daityas, and Danavas,* even auspicious works 
become beset with obstacles, specially in the Kali age, 
and the nineteenth century therein. This is why we 
have had to write at such length in the refutation of the 
Kali-daitya® in connection with the subject of worship. 
Though every matter which we have discussed may not 
be found in the Shastra, we have been obliged to deal 
with them because they are relevant to the Shastra of 
which we treat. In order to depict the scenes of the 
Ramayana and the Mahabharata, it is as much necessary 
to introduce Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Duryyodhana, and 
Shakuni,’ as it is to present Sugriva, Vibhishana, Bhima, 
and Arjuna® Similarly, in establishing the authority of 
the rites relating to worship, it is as much necessary to 
Pajavidhana. 2 Bhitas. 
“ Recitation ” of Mantra and sacrifice. 
Ghosts, evil spirits, the demoniac enemies of the Devas. 
The evil genius of the K4li age. 6 Updsana-tattva. 

7 Allbad characters. The two first are brother Danavas. Duryyod- 
hana was the head of the Kauravas. Shakuni was his adviser and 
maternal uncle. 

8 All good characters. Sugriva was the Monkey-King ally of Rama- 
chandra. Vibhishana, though brother of Ravana, was ally of Rama. 


Bhima was brother of Yuddhishthira, two of the Pandavas, and Arjuna 
was their third brother. 


a PR 0 


266 


ERINCIPEES OF TANTRA 267 


introduce the band of wrong-arguers, who are a shame to 
the land of Bharata, the Motherland of Aryyas, as it is 
necessary to present Digamvara, Ramaprasada, and 
Dasharathi,? who lived in the love of the Mother of the 
world. The errors of the non-Aryya community are 
daily accepted, as though they were the sayings of the 
Shastra and the words of Sadhakas. It is in order to 
save the guileless Aryya community from this terrible, 
dangerous situation in which it is placed that we have 
been obliged to discuss the views of the opposing party, 
and to show that they are not approved of by the Shastra. 
How tortuous is the course of time? when everyone seeks 
a Dharma? suited to his liking. For those who thus 
seek Dharmas to suit their individual tastes, the Shastra 
is an eyesore; for that is called Shastra by which the 
wayward faculties of the mind are brought under control, 
and which is, in fact, the unfailing instrument by which 
the vast dominion of the Queen of Queens* of the Uni- 
verse is ruled. It is no wonder that the Shastra should 
be an eyesore to unruly subjects who dishonour the com- 
‘mands of their Sovereign. Subordination to the com- 
mands of Shastra is nowadays considered derogatory to 
freedom, and consequently extremely distasteful. What, 
however, such persons really think is that their Dharma 
should be subordinate to their command, for they con- 
sider themselves free men. 

_ Idleness makes people semi-omniscient, for idle people 
eagerly seek opportunities to avoid work; and it is really 
this eagerness to avoid labour which lies at the root of 
their unswerving faith in such Shastra as seek to estab- 
lish the superiority of Jnana-kanda,° of their unique love 
for the Yoga Vashishtha, Bhagavadgita, and Upanishads, 
and of their equally unique repugnance for Tantra, 


1 Celebrated Tantriks, SAdhakas, and poets. 

2 Time has a degenerating effect until the renewal of the world after 
dissolution (pralaya). 3 Religion, duty, etc. 

4 Rajrajeshvari. 5 Department of knowledge. 


268 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Mantra, Yoga, Bhajana, and Sadhana Shastras. Rising 
before daybreak, bathing early in the morning, perform- 
ance of the Sandhya rite,? cleansing temples, collecting 
Kusha grass, flowers, Tulsi-leaves, Bael-leaves, and so 
forth, fetching water from streams,” taking only one meal 
a day, eating havishya food® without flesh, performance 
of religious rites, Shraddha* and Tarpana,° observing hos- 
pitality and continence,® lying on the ground, keeping up 
at nights, visiting burning-grounds’ and places of pil- 
grimage,® constant expenditure of money on religious 
works in the names of Devas and Pitris®—all these are 
doubtless troublesome things. Had not Sadhana-Shas- 
tras prescribed them, we have little doubt but that these 
people would have at once abandoned the Gita?® and 
Upanishads, and sought refuge with Tantra and Mantra. 
At the foot of all this over-insistence on knowledge is the 
desire to avoid work. Those amongst the Vaishnavas 
who are steeped in lethargy and laziness have for a long 
time been saying: “‘ The Karmakanda™ is a jar full of 
poison.” The Shiva community also says, through the 
grace of Shankaracharyya: “‘ Sadashiva am J, and con- 
sciousness.’’?2 The Shakta community says: “ Bhairava 
am I; Shiva am IJ.” Those who are initiated and edu- 
cated in the polemics of knowledge and science of the 
nineteenth century consider the chief and final decision 
of all Shastras to be that there is no connection between 
Dharma and Karma;?* but in the Bhagavadgita (which 
is the basis for all the Shastras on the authority of which 
these people seek to establish the superiority of their 
novel, tasteful, and agreeable views) the commands which 


1 See Introduction. 2 For worship. 

3 A pure kind of food made with particular fruits and vegetables, 
and cooked in a particular manner. See my ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra,” 
pec;-a. 3: 4 Obsequial rites. 5 Oblation. 

6 Brahmacharyya. ”’ Shmashdanas. 8 ‘lirthas: 

° Forefathers (see Introduction). 

10 The Bhagavadgita now so widely known and preached. 

11 Department of work. 12 Chinmatra. 13 Karma, action, work. 


EP RENeCUREES OF TANTRA 269 


Bhagavan Shri Krishna Himself gave to Arjuna respect- 
ing work, when the latter was unable to decide for him- 
self what to do, clearly prove that there is no greater sin 
for a man who is attached to the world than to give up 
work.’ But we need not confine ourselves to ordinary 
folk attached to the world, for the Bhagavadgita says 
that the Yoga of work is the highest duty even of Yogis 
who are detached from it. For instance: 

“In this world there is a twofold path, as I before said, 
O sinless one! that of Yoga, by knowledge of the Sang- 
khyas; and that of Yoga by action of the Yogis.’’ 

“Man winneth not freedom from action by abstaining 
from activity, nor by mere renunciation doth he rise to 
perfection.’’ 

“Nor can anyone, even for an instant, remain really 
actionless; for helplessly is everyone driven to action by 
the qualities* born of nature.®’’® 

“Who sitteth controlling the organs of action, but 
dwelling in his mind on the objects of the senses, that 
bewildered man is called a hypocrite.” But who, con- 
trolling the senses by the mind, O Arjuna! with the 
organs of action without attachment, performeth Yoga 
by action, he is worthy.’’® 

“ Perform, then, right action, for action is superior to 
Inaction, and, inactive, even the maintenance of thy 
body would not be possible.’’”? 

“The world is bound by action, unless performed for 
the sake of sacrifice. For that sake, free from attach- 
ment, O son of Kunti! perform thou action.’ 

“He who on earth doth not follow the wheel thus 
revolving, sinful of life and rejoicing in the senses, he, 
O son of Pritha !2? liveth in vain.’ 

1 Karma, action, work. 

2 Mrs. Besant’s translation is here adopted. 

PeLils 4, 4 Gunas. 5 Prakriti. AO Gta {ELIESG: 

eit. $7. PxLLi..8: 10 Yajna. 11 TIT. 9. 

12 Pritha or Kunti was mother of the Pandavas. Hence Arjuna is 
called Partha. AS TITS x6, 


270 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Again: “‘ Janaka and others, indeed, attained to per- 
fection by action.’ 

“There is nothing in the three worlds, O Partha !? 
that should be done by Me, nor anything unattained that 
might be attained; yet I mingle in action.’’® 

“Who abides ever in this teaching of Mine, full of 
faith and free from cavilling, they, too, are released from 
actions.’’4 

“Who carp at My teaching, and act not thereon, sense- 
less, deluded in all knowledge, know thou these mindless 
ones as fated to be destroyed.’”® 

“Even the man of knowledge behaves in conformity 
with his own nature. Beings follow nature. What shall 
restraint avail ?’’ 

‘Better one’s own duty,’ though destitute of merit, 
than the duty’ of another, well discharged. Better death 
in the discharge of one’s own duty.’ The duty’ of 
another is full of danger.’’8 

In the fourth chapter it is said: 

“However men approach Me, even so do I welcome 
them, for the path men take from every side is Mine, 
O Partha 

“They who long after success in action on earth, wor- 
ship the Shining Ones,’° for in brief space verily, in this 
world of men, success is born of action.’’!4 

“The four castes were emanated by Me by the dif- 
ferent distribution of qualities’? and actions. Know Me 
to be the author of them, though the actionless and 
inexhaustible.’’** 

“Nor do actions affect Me, nor is the fruit of action 
desired by Me. He who thus knoweth Me is not bound 
by actions.’’"4 

1 III. 20, first hemistich. 

2 Pritha or Kunti was mother of the Pandavas. Hence Arjuna is 
called Partha. 

S(T is22: TI sis 5 III, 32; 6 ii, 33: 

i Dharmas Cui lions. OGL Niet ie 10 Devatas. 
te INN, fake 12 Gunas. to LN eran 16 ST Vitae 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 27% 


“Having thus known, our forefathers, ever seeking 
liberation, performed action. Therefore do thou also 
perform action, as did our forefathers in the olden time.’ 

In the fifth chapter it is said: 

“ Renunciation and Yoga by action both lead to the 
highest bliss. Of the. two, Yoga by action is verily 
better than renunciation of action.’ 

“He should be known as a perpetual ascetic? who 
neither hateth nor desireth. Free from the pain of 
opposites, O Mighty Armed! he is easily set free from 
bondage.’’® 

“ Children, not sages, speak of the Sangkhya and the 
Yoga as different. He who is duly established in one 
obtaineth the fruits of both.’’® 

“That place which is gained by the Sangkhyas is 
reached by the Yogis also. He seeth who seeth that the 
Sangkhya and the Yoga are one.’”’ 

“He who acteth, placing all actions in the Eternal,® 
abandoning attachment, is unaffected by sin as a lotus- 
leaf by the waters.’”? 

“ Yogis, having abandoned attachment, perform action 
only by the body, by the mind, by the Reason,”° and even 
by the senses, for the purification of the self.’’7! 

“ Having known Me, as the Enjoyer of sacrifice and of 
austerity, the mighty Ruler of all the worlds, and the 
Lover of all beings, he goeth to peace.’’™ 

In the sixth chapter it is said: 

“He that performeth such action as is duty, indepen- 
dently of the fruit of action, he is an ascetic,’ he is a 
Yogt; not he that is without fire and without rites.”?* 


SeTV STS. Wie Pa 3 Sannydasi. 
4 Cold and heat, hunger and plenty, etc. 
SNES: ON 4, aN ese 8 Brahman. 


9 V. 10; a constant simile denoting the detached aspect of the 
Brahman. 

10 Buddhi. Ae th te 12 V. 29. 

13 VI.1. That is, not he who merely renounces the household and the 
daily rites. 


272 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


“That which is called renunciation, know thou that 
as a Yoga, O Pandava! Nor doth anyone become a 
Yogi with the formative will’ unrenounced.’”? 

“For the sage who is seeking Yoga, action is called 
the means; for the same sage, when he is enthroned in 
Yoga, serenity is called the means.’’* 

“ The Yogi is greater than the ascetics.4 He is thought 
to be greater than even the wise.® The Yogi is greater 
than the men of action, therefore become thou a Yogi, 
OvATune eS 

“And among all Yogis, he who, full of faith, with the 
inner self? abiding in Me, adorneth Me, he is considered 
by Me to be the most completely harmonized.’’® 

In the eighth chapter it is said: 

“He who constantly thinketh upon Me, not thinking 
ever of another, of him I am easily reached, O Partha t 
of this ever harmonized Yogi.’ 

“Having come to Me, these Mahatmas come not again 
to birth, the place of pain, non-eternal. They have gone 
to the highest bliss.’’*° 

“The worlds, beginning with the world of Brahma, 
they come and go, O Arjuna; but he who cometh unto 
me, O Kaunteya !11 he knoweth birth no more.” 

In the ninth chapter it is said: 

‘“ He who offereth to Me with devotion a leaf, a flower, 
a fruit, water, that I accept from the striving self, offered 
as it is with devotion.’’?* 

‘“‘Whatsoever thou doest, whatsoever thou eatest, 
whatsoever thou offerest, whatsoever thou givest, what- 
soever thou doest of austerity, O Kaunteya! do thou 
that as an offering unto Me.’’!4 

“Thus shalt thou be liberated from the bonds of 
action, yielding good and evil fruits, thyself harmonized 


1 Sangkalpa. = OA es OY: 3 OV Tea 4 Tapasvi. 
5 Jnani. COV Ina: 7 Atma. SVE eas 
PONTE Ae LOSS Tits: 11 Son of Kunti, that is, Arjuna. 


12 VIII. 16. ABO OCR ZO} es DE Os. 


PRINCIPERS: OF TANTRA 273 


by the Yoga of renunciation, thou shalt come unto Me 
when set free.’ 

“The same am I to all beings; there is none hateful to 
Me nordear. They verily who worship Me with devotion, 
they are in Me, and I also in them.’ 

“Even if the most sinful worship Me, with undivided 
heart, he, too, must be accounted righteous, for he hath 
rightly resolved.’’ 

“ Speedily he becometh dutiful, and goeth to eternal 
peace. O Kaunteya! know thou for certain that My 
devotee perisheth never.’’4 

“They who take refuge with Me, O Partha! though of 
the womb of sin, women, Vaishyas, even Shidras, they 
also tread the highest Path ’”® 

“ How much rather, then, (do) holy Brahmanas and 
devoted royal saints; having obtained this transient joy- 
less world, worship thou Me.’’® 

“ On Me fix thy mind; be devoted to Me; sacrifice to Me; 
prostrate thyself before Me; harmonized thus in the Self, 
thou shalt come unto Me, having Me as thy supreme goal.’’”” 

In the twelfth chapter it is said: 

“ Arjuna said: “ Those devotees who ever harmonized 
worship Thee, and those also who worship the Indestruc- 
tible, the Unmanifested, whether of these is the more 
learned in Yoga ?’’’§ 

“ The Blessed Lord said: ‘ They who with mind fixed 
on Me, ever harmonized, worship Me, with faith supreme 
endowed, these, in My opinion, are best in Yoga.’ ’” 

“They who worship the Indestructible, the Ineffable, 
the Unmanifested, Omnipresent, and Unthinkable, the 
Unchanging, Immutable, Eternal,’’?° 

“ Restraining and subduing the senses, regarding every- 
thing equally, in the welfare of all rejoicing, these also 
come unto Me.’ 


StL eG, a lx 29. Tal ea Os DIB, opi 
Ue Aas. TBR Ke ie Leds Bat tere 
9 XII. 2. 10 XII. 3. LNT Lae 


Viouel 18 


274 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


“The difficulty of those whose minds are set on the 
Unmanifested is greater; for the path of the Unmani- 
fested is hard for the embodied to reach.””* 

“Those verily whom, renouncing all actions in Me and 
intent on Me, worship, meditating on Me, with whole- 
hearted Yoga.’ 3 

“These I speedily lift up from the Ocean of death and 
existence, O Partha! their minds being fixed on Me.’ 

“Place thy mind in Me, into Me let thy Reason* 
enter; then, without doubt, thou shalt abide in Me 
hereafter.” 

“ And if Thou art not able firmly to fix thy mind on 
Me, then, by the Yoga of practice, seek to reach Me, O 
Dhananjaya !’’° : 

“Tf also thou art not equal to constant practice, be 
intent on My service; performing actions for My sake, 
thou shalt attain perfecuea Ae 

‘* Tf even to do this thou hast not strength, then, PANG 
refuge in union with Me, renounce all fruit of action with 
the deieonteliatiae | 

“ Better, indeed, is wisdom than constant practice; 
than wisdom meditation is better; than meditation re- 
nunciation of the fruit of action; on renunciation follows 
peace.’’? 

In the eighteenth chapter it is said: 

“Nor, indeed, can embodied beings completely ane: 
quish action; verily he who relinquisheth the fruit of 
action, he is said to be a relinquisher.’’?° 

“ Good, evil, and mixed—threefold is the fruit of action 
hereafter for the non-relinquisher; but there is none ever 
for the renouncer.’’* 

“By devotion he knoweth Me in essence, who and 
what I am; having thus known Me in essence he forthwith 
entereth into the Supreme.’’” 


ca, 0s 2 X11. 0. OG aed 4 Buddhi. chee. 2 Bt >: 
6 XA1 AG; ‘i Siddhi, XLT 10: 8 Xia oR Le? 
OX VIL a SCV Deo: AD OVAL SS, 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 275 


“ Though ever performing all actions taking refuge in 
Me, by My grace he obtaineth the eternal indestructible 
abode.’’+ 

“ Renouncing mentally all works in Me, intent on Me, 
resorting to the Yoga of discrimination,” have theythought 
ever on Me.’’? 

“ Thinking on Me, thou shalt overcome all obstacles 
by My grace; but if from egoism thou wilt not listen thou 
shalt be destroyed utterly.’’4 

“Entrenched in egoism, thou thinkest, ‘I will not 
fight.’ To no purpose is thy determination; nature will 
constrain thee.’’”° 

“O son of Kunti! bound by thine own duty,® born of 
thy own nature, that which from delusion thou desirest 
not to do, even that helplessly thou shalt perform.’’” 

“The Lord dwelleth in the hearts of all beings, O Ar- 
juna! by His illusive power® causing all things to revolve, 
as though mounted on a potter’s wheel.’”? 

“Flee unto Him for shelter with all thy being, O 
Bharata! By His grace thou shalt obtain supreme 
peace, the everlasting dwelling place.’’!° 

“Thus hath wisdom, more secret than secrecy itself, 
been declared unto thee by Me; having reflected on it 
fully, then act thou as thou listest.’”4 

“ Listen thou again to My supreme word, most secret 
of all. Beloved art thou of Me and steadfast of heart, 
therefore will I speak for thy benefit.’ 

“ Merge thy mind in Me, be My devotee, sacrifice to 
Me, prostrate thyself before Me, thou shalt come even to 
Me. I pledge thee My troth; thou art dear to Me.’’!® 

“Abandoning all duties,4 come unto Me alone for 
shelter. Sorrow not; I will liberate thee from all sins.’’!5 


1 XVIII. 56. 2 Buddhi-Yoga. SX VALLES 93 
4 XVIII. 58. PIX VILETS5O. 

6 Karma; quaerve duty: rather effects of previous action. 

Pe WLLL: 60. 8 Maya. Se VALT OL: 
10 XVIII. 62. ALEX VET DG 5 eX VALEEOA 


13 XVIII. 65. 14 Dharma. 15 XVIII, 66, 


276 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Let SAdhakas now see for themselves whether in the 
Gita Bhagavan has prescribed abandonment of work" or 
performance of it. We are not at all astonished or 
erieved to see that a study of Bhagavadgita leads to an 
abandonment of Karmakanda* by sentimental folk who 
feign devotion and who go emotion-mad at the very 
mention of Bhagavadgita, though they have no devotion 
to Bhagavan Himself. What we are sorry for, is that 
even such men as worship the speaker of this Gita as 
their Ishtadevata and call it Bhagavadgita, on account 
of its words having issued from His fair mouth, say that 
“the Karmakdanda is a jar of poison.’’ Who can pene- 
trate this mystery ? When the fruit appears the flower 
dries up of itself and falls. 

But how wonderful must be the intensity of the greed 
and the impatience and hurry of those who, on seeing 
this, understand the flower to be of no use and proceed 
to destroy it the moment it is blown? What sort of 
degree-hunting malady® has seized society, that it should 
cause a mad rush to secure the highest degree in every 
department > Even in the worship of Devata each one 
aspires to be the highest degree-holder. “‘ In no depart- 
ment shall I be inferior.’’ This intensely devilish idea of 
the nineteenth century is about to become supreme by 
the defeat of the divine® notions which belong to the 
domain of worship. We cannot say when Vaidyanatha,® 
the destroyer of Tripura, will deliver society from the 
pains of this disease. 

Had the examination for the degree sought for been 

1 Karma. 

2 The department of Scripture dealing with action and ritual. 

3 Upadhiroga. 

4 A very keen observation. Everyone cackles about, Kaivalya, and 
would be a Yogi, not because of any inherent competency, but because. 
pride will not allow them to take a lower place. By the expression of 
their view that this is only for the ‘‘ ignorant,” they swing a censer to. 
their supposed “‘ knowledge.”’ 


5 Sattvik. 
6 Shiva, who is lord of physicians, for he cures all human ills. 


PN OPE ioe belo RA 277 


held at any seat of learning other than that of Sadhana 
of Mahavidya, the number of learned degree-holders 
would have been so large that it is doubtful whether place 
could have been found for them all in Brahmaloka, 
Vaikuntha, and Kailasa. But we are secure from this 
danger in that Bhagavan Himself, the dweller in all hearts 
and Creator of all things, is the Examiner. Unless He 
gives the degree of service to Himself, who is there who 
can free himself of servitude to the Upadhis 2! It is the 
presence of these latter pestilential Upadhis which pre- 
vents the acquisition of the former. These latter Upad- 
his must be shaken off before we can obtain the former 
Upadhi, or this Upadhi must be obtained before the 
others can be got rid of. There might have been a chance 
of bogus Upadhis (degrees) being considered genuine, 
were it possible to go elsewhere after having received 
them from Bhagavan. But, O pretender to devotion, 
who art so fond of the Upadhi (title) of devotee ! all this 
Universe is the field of work of that Rajrajeshvari alone, 
_ who is the sole Mistress of this infinite creation of things 
moving and unmoving. Where in this Universe can 
you go so that you may escape the all-penetrating look 
of Her whose eyes are infinite ? Who has told you that 
your bogus? Upadhi will not be caught in the net® of 
Her Maya, in which everything from Brahma to a blade 
of grass is eternally held? Why, then, further trouble 
to create a counterfeit* in the midst of this net? He 
who tries to snap the Karma-threads of this net by his 
own strength knows not that its meshes are there only to 
take him out of the water, and not that he may pass into 
it from the net. The kind of dissatisfaction with the 
Sangsara and Karmakanda ° which one occasionally feels 

1 The Upadhis (apparently limiting conditions) of name and form 
spoken of in the systems of philosophy. There is a play on the word 
Upadhi, which mean also “‘ degree” or “‘ title.” fe yalae 

3 A pun on the word Jala, which as an adjective means, in Bengali, 


“ counterfeit,’”’ and as a substantive means “ net.” 
_ 4 See last note. 5 With the world and ritual worship. 


278 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


before entry upon the path of spiritual knowledge,’ is 
cleared, is not true dispassion,2 but only passion in a 
different guise. Hence the fool who, on feeling such 
dissatisfaction, wants to forsake the Sangsara or Karma, 
only sticks in the meshes of that net, and resting half 
within and half without it loses his life amidst unsufier- 
able pains. He neither remains in the net nor passes 
out into the water, but failing both ways, “ falling from 
this and losing that,’’ becomes untimely subject to the 
grasp of death. It therefore becomes an intelligent 
person not to make futile efforts to tear the net, but 
endeavour to move about happily in the water within 
the net. If by the grace of the Devi, who is will, you 
gain the strength which will enable you to dive into 
deep water, if you have grown fit to sink in the fathom- 
less infinite sea of the Brahmamayi’s self, then Mahe- 
shvara, who holds the thread of this net, will Himself 
undo its top-knot. The tie of attachment to the Sang- 
sara will be loosened, and then, finding his path open, the 
Jiva, freed from existence,® will leap from the net with 
the cry, “ Victory, victory, victory to Tara!’ and sink 
into the sea of the Self of the Mother of the world; but to 
take a leap untimely is but the preliminary to a terrible 
fall. To renounce the Karmakdanda at this time is the 
taking of such an untimely leap. Had the talk of re- 
nunciation of Karma any reality in it, it would not have 
been necessary to have said so much as to renunciation 
of Karma before renouncing it.4 Just as death does not 
wait for anyone’s permission, so liberation does not wait 
for anyone’s comment. Inspiration and expiration of 
breath go on in a Jiva’s body by a natural process. The © 
wise-acre who tries to renounce work® by hanging him- 
self, and so interrupting this regular function of nature, 
will, whether he loses Karma or not, first lose his body. 


1 Tattvajnana. 2 Vairagya. 3 Jivanmukta. 
4 They talk cf renouncing Karma, and they talk so much of it 
because they cannot in fact renounce it. 5 Karma. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 279 


Similarly, in the case of those who are ever eager to re- 
nounce the Karmakanda prescribed to them individually 
as suited to the respective castes! and Ashramas? into 
which they are, according to their Gunas and natural 
law, divided, such men first renounce their Dharma, 
whether they renounce Karma or not. It is difficult to 
restrain one’s laughter on hearing the taik of renuncia- 
tion of Karma nowadays, for this renunciation means 
renunciation of the Sandhya prayers,? daily and occa- 
sional worship of the Deity, Shraddha* of parents, re- 
ligious festivities, such as Dola and Durga Pdja, and so 
forth; but not such things as the maintenance of wife 
and children, earning and spending money, eating and 
having sexual intercourse. The alleged justification for 
this sort of renunciation is said to rest, firstly in “ doing 
things which give Him pleasure,’’ and on the fact that 
a wise man’s actions are “like water on a lotus-leaf.”’ 
Can Sangsara ever bind a person who is wise? Men like 
Janaka® are examples to show that it cannot. Taking 
this ideal of Janaka, Bengal, the playground of religious 
anarchy, is nowadays giving birth to many Rayjarshis, 
Devarshis, Maharshis, and Uparshis.® Although Janaka 
or ‘‘ progenitor ’’ was the name by which Maharshi Janaka 
was known, he did not make himself such in fact. That 
he and his name might correspond, the Mother of the 
world, whose attachment to devotees is great, Herself 
became his daughter, and made him famous in the world 
by assuming the beloved name of Janaki, a name made 
glorious by the glory of the devotee; but in order to make 
the present-day Janakas worthy of the name, the Mother 
of the world should rather disappear than appear. Being 
religious heroes,’ they do not intend to show cowardice, 

1 Varnas (see Introduction). 2 Stage of life (see Introduction). 

3 The rite done three times a day (see Introduction). 

4 Obsequial rites. 

5 Rajarshi, King of Mithila, father of Sita, wife of Ramachandra. 


The first three are various classes of Rishis (seers), and the last 
means Pseudo-Rishis. 7 Dharmavira. 


for] 


280 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


like Janaka, by abstaining from taking wives to themselves 
on the way to fight the battle of religion* Why become 
afraid of the Sangsdra? They are, therefore, in no way 
inferior to Janaka, but rather, to a considerable extent, 
superior, in the character of Janaka, or progenitor, and 
Rajarshi.2 We are rather pleased than sorry at this. 
Our only concern is this: Rajarshi Janaka had another 
name—namely, Videha, or Bodiless*—from which Janaki 
got Her name Vaidehi. How long will it take these men 
to become possessed of this name ? How long must we 
wait in this Kali age to find among ourselves men like 
Rajarshi Janaka Videha (bodiless) of the Treta age ? How 
long will it be before these men relieve the burden of the 
earth by becoming Videha—that is, bodiless—upon it ?* 
Whether the ideal of Janaka obliges us to renounce 
wealth and wife or not, it does not at any rate require 
us to give ourselves up to worldly enjoyment. Moreover, 
Janaka did not renounce Sandhya prayers, worship, and 
the Karmakanda suited to his caste and Ashrama; on 
the contrary, he always took care to perform them as 
enjoined in the Shastra. Just as his other actions, such 
as his rule of his kingdom, were not based on egotism,? 
so his Sandhya prayers, worship, and so forth, also were 
not dependent onit. This is the story of the Rajarshi. 
As for the present day Pseudo-Rishis,® they, of course, 
become liberated Sannydasis at times of worship, prayer, 
and so forth, no matter whether they renounce anything 
else or not. Why, brethren, is your love for God so much 
greater than your love for your wives, children, and rela- 
tions, that when liberation, which loosens all bonds, is so 

1 Dharmayuddha. 

2 The people whom the author satirizes claim not only to be Rishis, 
like Janaka, but surpass him in that they become progenitors with 
their wives, a simpler and to most a more pleasant affair than the 
search for wisdom. 

3 Because, though with a body the world did not bind him. He was 
Jivanmukta. 


4 Here is a play on the word Videha, which referred in previous 
passages to Mukti, and here to death. 5 Ahangkara. 6 Uparshis. 


PRUNCIPEES OFS YANTRA 281 


near at hand, the bond of prayer will alone frustrate it ?? 
How imprudent is the scepticism of those who, blinded by. 
the vanity of their knowledge, are keen for every worldly 
pursuit, and yet would renounce Sandhya prayers, wor- 
ship, and so forth, on the ground of their being Karma ? 
In short, it is no easy matter to throw dust in the eye of 
Dharma.? 

Bhagavan, who sees all things, has said: “‘ Even 
against your will you will be obliged to do Karma.” 
Under the severe pressure of the unrelenting law of nature 
I am bound to serve Karma as a slave, for there is no 
means of escape from its close grasp. Why, when ac- 
cepting this slavish service of Karma, should I be deprived 
of the benefit of its fear-dispelling hand ? I would have, 
with all submissiveness, renounced Karma, had Karma 
renounced me. Since I have been born in the land of 
Karma, in order to perform it, I will not renounce Karma 
so long as life lasts; but if, on the other hand, Karma re- 
nounces me, I will not be sorry therefore. I am very 
much afraid of doing my own Karma, but why should I 
be afraid of doing the Karma of my Mother, seeing that 
She is the Dispeller of fear? I do not any longer belong 
to myself, so that, O brother! what Karma can there be 
which I can call my own? Karma is Hers, whose I am. 
I am the Mother and the Mother is mine. The glory of 
Karma with me lies no longer in its being Karma, but in 
the fact of its being the Mother’s Karma. So long as 
the relation of Mother, and son will not end for me, this 
joy of Karma also will not so end. Blessed are my birth 
and life in that, by being born in this land of Karma— 
that is, Bharata?—I am to-day going to sever the bonds of 
Karma with the Mother’s Karma-sword. Glorious is 
my Mother’s unbounded mercy that She, who is beyond 
the range of thought and truth itself, and full of mercy, 

1 They say that Updsana is wrong; on which they are asked whether 
they have risen so high spiritually that they have shaken off all bondage 


other than that of Updsana, which alone stands in the way of their 
gaining Mukti. 2 True religion. 3 India. 


282 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


and whose Karma approved by Her? is such that even 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Maheshvara, find it difficult of 
right performance, has, for my sake, with Her own mouth 
dictated in the Dharmashastras that Karma is Her 
worship, replete with Her love and tenderness! What 
can be a greater good fortune for a Jiva in the world than 
this >?) We know not if there is any other Jiva so unfor- 
tunate in the world as he who is deprived of this good 
fortune. O Mother of the world! save me, O Mother! 
Rather may I spend millions of lives in fearful Hells than 
that I should be deprived of the loving worship of Thee, 
O Mother! See that I, who have been initiated in the 
great Mantra, the gem of spiritual consciousness? (which 
is of rarity to even Brahma and other Devas), and who 
have been upbrought in the Sadhana of the great Yantra,° 
which is the source of the creation, preservation, and 
destruction of the three worlds, may not become Mother- 
less when Thou art the Mother! For what have I come 
here, if it be not to do the Mother’s work? Bless me, O 
Mother! by answering this, my question Thyself! O 
Mother ! the earth is too small to hold the bliss which I 
feel to-day when I remember that, being a Jiva, I have 
been initiated in thy Mantra as uttered by Shiva Himself. 
O Daughter of the Mountain! Thou art bliss itself. 
Thyself keep to-day Thy own bliss, and at the same time 
take this joyless son of thine up into Thy blissful arms in 
order to make the words of Sadananda* true. I have 
been initiated. Now, tell me how I am to be educated ? 
Thou hast Thyself promulgated Thy commands in the 
form of Shastra. Do Thou now Thyself explain the 
truth concerning Thee® by opening in the form of Sadhana 
the door of that Shastra. Tell me, O Mother ! what have 
you said in the Shastra ? 7 


1 That is, spoken of in the Shastra. _ 2 Tattvachintamani. 
3 See Introduction; here used in the sense that She is the instrument 
of creation. 


# Shiva, the.‘‘ Ever joyful.” 5 Literally, ‘‘ explain thy Tattva.”’ 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 283 


In the Tantra Sanghita it is said: ‘‘ For him who has 
received Mantra—that is, initiation—worship is of two 
kinds, according as it is outer and inner. Inner worship, 
to the exclusion of outer worship, is prescribed for San- 
nyasis, whilst both inner and outer worship are pre- 
scribed for all others.”’ 

In the Gautamiya Tantra it is said: ‘‘ This inner wor- 
ship grants liberation to Sadhakas even during their life- 
time, but Munis alone who are desirous of liberation! 
have the competence to perform it. Hence, such Sad- 
hakas as are unable to perform mental worship in the 
manner above described should do it with the aid of 
mental elements similar to those used in outer worship.’ 

The following are the words of Shiva in the Sanghita 
quoted by Raghavabhatta:* ‘‘O Devi! whose face is as 
the moon! by knowledge only and without gifts,# Homa, 
and other like actions,® a householder can never attain 
welfare either here or hereafter. If even a householder 
does not make gift or perform Homa or worship, as en- 
' joined, then who will daily do these things ? (2) O fair 
Devi! a Bramachari® has no right to make gifts (for he 
is destitute). Who, then, will make gifts to Gurus ac- 
cording to their capacity >? Those who live in forests’ 
also have not the means to make gifts. Moreover, in the 
Kali Yuga living in forests® is disallowed ”’ (3). 


1 Mumukshu. 

2 In outer worship articles (Upachdra) are used, such as lghts, 
flowers, incense. In the mental worship here spoken of ideal offer- 
ings are made which correspond to the material articles of external 
worship. 

3 The great Tantrik commentator and author of the commentary on 
the Sharadatilaka. 

4 Dana. 5 Karma. 6 The celibate student. 

7 That is, belong to the third, or Vanaprastha Ashrama. 

8 The Vanaprastha Ashrama. There were four Ashramas in other 
ages, but in the Kali Yuga there are only two—viz., the second 
Garhasthya (that of a householder) and the last Bhikshuka or Avad- 
hita. See “‘ Mahanirvana Tantra,’’ chap. viii. 8. Neither the condi- 
tions of life nor the character, capacity, and powers of the people 
of this age allow of the first and third. 


284 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Hence, Parivrajakas! only are able to secure liberation 
from all pain and sorrows by knowledge alone, without 
making gifts and performance of Homa and other ritual 
acts. O Devi! whose face is fair as a lotus, the Pariv- 
rajaka? who is not averse to the performance of ritual 
action,? and the householder who is averse (that is, feigns 
aversion)? to it, will both sink into Kumbhipaka‘* (5). Vir- 
tuous wives of the family and householders desiring their 
own welfare should daily perform worship with auspicious 
elements, and make gifts in the names of Devas, Brah- 
manas, and so forth (6). If members of the Vanaprastha 
Ashrama® and Yatis® daily do works of charity, and so 
forth, they will never be liberated from the Sangsara. 
On the contrary, they become more and more attached 
to it. Those who, after having adopted the Sannydsa’ 
or Vanaprastha Ashrama,® become attached to action,? 
like householders, fall from the height which they 
have reached, and become subject to sorrow here and 
hereafter (7). 

In fact, such householders as omit outer worship 
through sloth, make pretence to spiritual knowledge, 
and say “‘ outer worship is useless, and without spiritual 
significance. We perform mental worship only.” The 
above-quoted passages from the Shastra bear strong 
evidence to the fact that this judgment of theirs is wholly 
opposed to Shastra, and the result of views which are 
independent of it. It is with the mind that mental 
worship must be performed; but so long as that mind is 
not “under my control,’ with what shall I perform 
mental worship? So long as “I am of the mind,” 
instead of “‘ the mind being of me,’ I have no right to 
do mental worship exclusively. This is very true. If 

1 That is, ascetics: SannyAsis. 

2 Karma. 3 Author’s parenthesis. 
* One of the Hells. 5 Vide ante, p. 283. 

6 Those who have controlled their passions: ascetics. 


’ The fourth ascetic Ashrama. 
8 Laukika. Literally, temporal. 


EISTNCIPEES OF TANTRA 285 


through lack of mastery of my mind I am unable to offer 
mental flowers at Her feet, if I cannot with independence 
settle my mind on that which I desire, then what guar- 
antee is there that, when engaged in mental worship, for 
which I have no competence, my mind will not forget to 
contemplate Her feet, and think of the happiness of 
Sangsara ? Milk is admitted by all to be the most 
powerful of means for the preservation of human life. 
Curd, milk butter, ghee, and so forth, are all trans- 
formations of milk. This is why all things prepared from 
milk have the reputation of being delicious. But if by 
accident anything sour or bitter falls into milk and turns 
it, then, apart from any other test, even its smell causes 
nausea, and the revulsion which it produces is more 
lasting than that caused by any other thing. The only 
reason for this is that milk is the best of delicious things. 
Had not milk been so good, its corruption would not 
have been so bad. For instance, although sugar, sugar- 
candy, and sweetmeats are prepared from molasses, if 
“molasses is not sufficiently boiled and treated so as to 
be converted into any of these things, it will at any rate 
remain what it is—molasses—or become moist sugar. 
And this molasses or moist sugar, if it cannot be used 
in preparing Sandesha? with curd, will at least give 
sweetness to a sour curry of mango, amda,® or plum*—a 
sweetness so attractive that the remembrance of such a 
sweetened curry makes the mouth water, whilst the 
remembrance of sweetmeats produces merely a sensation 
of their absence, and nothing else. This is why it has 
been necessary to give a name to this mixed taste, and 
we accordingly have the adjective ‘‘ sour-sweet.’”’ The 
reason why molasses is not altogether spoilt by mixture 
with something sour is that it is not as superior a thing 
as milk is. Ifa person lives on milk only, he may per- 
chance meet with such a difficulty through his supply of 


1 Kshira; that is, milk thickened by boiling. 
2 A sweetmeat. 3 A sour fruit. 4 Kula, 


286 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


milk becoming accidentally spoilt, as one who lives on 
sweetmeats only can never experience. Similarly, 
although all admit that mental worship is the best of 
all forms of worship, if the mind with which that wor- 
ship is performed becomes corrupt, polluted, or dis- 
ordered, with what shall I perform the worship ? When 
the mind is in this state, such a stench issues from it as 
makes the approach of even men, not to speak of Devas, 
impossible. We quite understand that it is necessary to 
take the cream out of milk, but if the milk itself is putrid, 
whence am I to get the cream ? If I mix the cream that 
was in the milk with something else, and thus spoil the 
milk itself, if I mix the faculty of devotedness! that was 
in my mind with attachment to wife and children in the 
Sangsara, and then try to acquire spiritual devotion? to 
Bhagavan or Bhagavati with that mind, such an effort 
will prove as futile both here and hereafter, as if we 
sought to drink milk where there is only whey. Hence, 
so long as I am unable to bind at the door of the temple 
of my heart the All-good Suravi,? from whom are drawn, 
and who fulfils, all desires, the only way in which I can 
preserve my life is not to make myself dependent solely 
on milk, but to use milk, molasses, sweetmeats, or any 
other thing which I can procure at all times without 
difficulty. However sour be the mango or amda* you 
may give me, I shall mix with it the molasses of lesser 
devotion,® and prepare such a sour curry as will make 
the mouths of even Sannydsis and Sadhus water, and 
will bring back a liking for food even to a sick man, to 
whom it is repugnant, so as to render him again capable 
of eating even sweetmeats and sweet pudding. Of what 


1 Asaktishakti. Literally, ‘‘ attachment-Shakti.”’ 2 Parabhakti. 

3 The heavenly cow which is the mother of all cows, and which came 
out of the sea when it was churned. Here used metaphorically for the 
Devi. 


4 A sour fruit. 


5 Gaunibhakti. Literally, secondary, as opposed to Mukhya or 
principal. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 287 


use is it to tempt me with milk, pudding, and sweet- 
meats if I. have a dislike for every kind of food? If my 
mind is not calm, of what use is it to give me, who suffer 
from the disease of Sangsara, instructions in mental wor- 
ship, which is the food for Yogis ? So long as I have a 
dislike for food, J am not only unable to eat the food 
you offer, but am likely to suffer an untimely death by 
starvation. Hence, in the dispensary of Vaidyanatha,? 
and according to the Tantrik cult, food for sickness is 
not the same as food for Yogis. Sannydsts have the 
privilege of performing mental worship only, but as a 
man of the Sangsara, I may always perform both mental 
and outer worship. First of all, that is the most delicious 
thing for me which will cure my dislike for food. If you 
want to give me milk, give it; but so long as my dislike 
for food remains, pray do not depend on milk alone. For 
the moment, milk will not give as much gratification as 
sour things will do. To-day I shall feel immense joy in 
outer worship by illumining the Mandapa,? and filling it 
with the delightful fragrance of burning incense, making 
the quarters resound with the music of drums, kettle- 
drums, gongs, and bells, and with the heartfelt cry, 
“Victory, victory to Thee, Mother Tara!” along with 
recitation of hymns* which reach the inmost recesses of 
the heart, looking with the pupils (Tara)* of these two 
eyes straight into the pupils (Tara)* of the eyes of the 
three-eyed Devi, I shall see the Universe all full of Tara. 
But if I proceed to perform mental worship only without 
the necessary competence, therefore I shall, owing to the 
absence of Tara from the heart, despite the power of 
sight,> see darkness only in the three worlds as I sit in 
this temple, illumined with hundreds of lamps. Can the 

1 The word etymologically means ‘‘ Lord of healers ’’—epithet of 
Shiva, as the physician of all human ills. 

2 House of worship. 3 Stotras. 


4 There is here a play on the word Tard, which means the pupil of 
the eye, and is alsc a name of the Devi as Saviour, 
5 That is, despite the possession of pupils (Tara) in the eyes. 


288 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


simultaneous appearance of even hundreds of millions of 
suns and moons illumine the place where the Brahma- 
mayi is wanting? In the infinite firmament of my heart 
infinite numbers of planets, stars, suns, and moons shine 
less than glow-worms if the light of Brahmamayi is there. 
If it is not there, hundreds of thousands of each of such 
lights cannot make up for even a hundredth part of Her 
brilliance. So long as the brilliance of the full moon 
does not permanently exist in my firmament; so long as 
my Mother dwelling in the orb of Mantra, full of pure 
nectar, does not spread the lustre of Her eternally beam- 
ing smile on the hill of dawn of my heart;* so long as the 
bright and the dark fortnights? exist for me; so long as 
there are for me the double path of desire? and cessation 
of desire,* Sangsara and Sadhana, adherence to home? 
without and homeless asceticism® within; so long I must 
(if I would see the moonbeams which charm the mind of 
the Moon-crested Deva) make the moon rise without, 
destroying the darkness within with the light of this 
moon, and with the help of that reflected light discover 
the centre of its emanation. It is almost impossible to 
gaze directly at the sun, yet one may easily and minutely 
examine the solar disc in its reflection in the water of 
some stone or other vessel. In the same way subtle 
manifestations’ of Her real self become truly visible 
without in Yantras,® Mantras, images, and so forth. 
Pure mental worship has been prohibited for house- 
holders, because they cannot achieve it without outer 
worship. Sangsara Dharma?’ is the consecrated shrine 
of human worship.?° It is impossible for one who is 


1 Udayachala from which the sun is said to rise. 

2 The month is divided into two halves according to the waxing and 
waning of the moon. 3 Pravritti. 4 Nivritti. 5 Garhasthya. 
6 Sannydasa. 7 Vibhatis. 8 Diagrams (see Introduction). 

® The Dharma of the household life. 

10 “Worship,” in the sense that the performance of duty to fellow- 
men is such. The shrine of such worship is contrasted with that in 
which the Devata is worshipped. 


BRENGIPEES- OF TANTRA 289 


governed by it to perfectly accomplish mental worship 
of the Deity. Just as it is not easy to keep uncovered 
milk fresh in a cowshed full of cows’ urine, so also it is 
difficult to keep the mind attached in love to Devata in 
the Sangsara, with all its attachments and affection for 
wile and children. Hence, so long as my mind is not 
controlled, it is wholly useless to cry for mental worship. 

Not to speak of ordinary folk, even of such a renowned 
and accomplished Sadhaka as Maharaja Rama Krishna,? 
the following story is told: At a particular time during 
the first stage of Sadhana, after initiation, when the 
Maharaja, in disregard of his public duties, and with pro- 
hibition of public access, used to remain constantly im- 
mersed in Puija, Dhyana, and so forth, a pair of gold 
bracelets were ordered for his wife, Rani Katyayani. A 
few days after the order had been given the Raja, seeing 
the wrists of the Rani unadorned, asked her the reason 
for it, and was told in reply that the bracelets had not 
yet been prepared. Next day, when he was engaged in 
Paja, a Sannyasi with matted hair appeared at the gate 
of his palace, and asked the gate-keeper: “‘ Where is your 
Manaraja? Tell him that a Sannyasi? has come to see 
him.’ They replied with great humility: “ Lord! the 
Maharaja is now in the house of worship. No one may 
go there; and even if we speak to him now, there is no 
chance of getting a reply.” The Sannydsi laughed and 
said: “I tell you, go.’ The gate-keepers were afraid of 
disobeying him, and did as they were told to do, but to 
no effect. Raja Rama Krishna was at that time immersed 
in mental worship of his Ishtadevata, and so made no 
reply, notwithstanding the arrival of the Sannyasi. The 
gate-keepers came. back and told the Sannyasi what had 
happened. The Sannydsi raised his eyes a little, smiled, 
and said in a deep voice: ‘‘ When the Maharaja comes 

out after finishing his worship, tell him that to think of 
. 1 A member of the Natore Raj family—a great Sadhaka, 


2 Ascetic. 
MOL: 11. 19 


290 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


the Rani’s bracelets is not to perform mental worship of 
Ishtadevata.’’ Saying this, the Sannyasi went away 
hurriedly. The gate-keepers did not understand the 
meaning of his words, and did not dare oppose the San- 
nyasi from going away, for as an ascetic he was free to 
come and go. Afterwards, on coming out of the house 
of worship, Raja Rama Krishna asked the gate-keepers: 
“Where is the Sannydsi?’’ In fear they told him the 
_SannyAasi’s words, and of his departure. “ To think of 
the Rani’s bracelets is not to perform mental worship 
of Ishtadevata.’’ With the quickness of lightning these 
words entered through the Raja’s ears into his mind. 
He shook with fear at the offence which he had com- 
mitted, and repeated the words, “‘ Where is the Sannyasi?”’ 
in a voice choked with sorrow and trembling with fear. 
The Raja then himself ran into the public road to find 
him, but as he was then in a spiritually unfit state to 
meet the Sannyasi, he was unable to discover him. 
Nevertheless, what the Sannyasi had done and said made 
the Raja seclude himself from everybody after this inci- 
dent. No one could say as to where he was or what he 
was doing at any time. He became inattentive, his gaze 
was fixed, and his self ever immersed in a stream of con- 
tinuous Samadhi.1 Three years passed in this way. 
Then one day, when, according to his usual practice, the 
Raja was engaged in worship in his house of worship, 
the same Sannyasi again appeared. On seeing him, the 
gate-keepers made obeisance at his feet, and respectfully 
conducted him to the door of the Raja’s house of worship. 
On that day also the Raja was busy performing mental 
worship, but he found himself in a great difficulty. In 
order to worship the Devi who is mind itself* with mental 
articles of worship, the Raja had that day adorned the 
brow of the Devi with dishevelled hair with a high-crested 
mental jewelled crown. He then proceeded to adorn the 
shell-shaped neck® of the Devi who bears great love for 


1 Ecstasy. 2 Manomayi. 3 Kambu-Kantha. 


PRUNCEUPEES Ors TANTRA 291 


Her devotees with a mental garland of crimson Jaba? 
flowers. But as often as he raised his hands to put the 
garland on the Mother’s neck, so often his effort was 
baffled by the high crest of the crown. Having repeatedly 
failed, he became sorrowful and anxious, and thought to 
himself: ““ Perhaps to-day I shall not be able to put a 
garland on the Mother’s neck.” In unbounded sorrow 
his large eyes filled with tears, and weeping he cried: 
“O Mother! what shall I do?” A voice from outside 
replied: “ Rama Krishna! why do you weep? It is by 
putting a crown on the Mother’s head that you have 
to-day brought about all this trouble? Take it off, and 
then garland Her.’’ Rama Krishna started, left the 
Mother and Her worship, and opened both the outer and 
inner doors of the house of worship. He then saw before 
him a Mahapurusha,® a Sannydsi smeared with ashes and 
full of Tejas. He recognized him as Pirnananda Giri, 
the perfect Sadhaka, who had been his companion in 
Sadhana done by them in cremation®-grounds in the 
previous birth. He bowed at his feet, and said: “‘ Brother ! 
this is my condition to-day! The Mother and you know 
how I have passed these three years since you went away, 
after having done me the favour of putting me to shame.” 
Pairnananda laughed, and said: ‘‘ Have no fear, brother. 
It is because I then left that I am able to approach you 
to-day after these three years. Being what you were 
tiuen the time had not yet come for me to see you. 
Think what a difference there is between your former 
thought of the Rani’s bracelets and your present diffi- 
culty about the garland. It is because the Mother has 
blessed you that I am here again to keep my promise 
given in the previous birth.” After this incident Maha- 
raja Rama Krishna became a Bhairava and Maharani 
Katydyani a Bhairavi, and companions of Ptrnananda 


1 Scarlet hibiscus used in Tantrik Deviptja. 2 Vide post, p. 293. 
3 Great man. 4 Spirit, power, spiritual force, and lustre. 
5 Shmashana-sadhana. 


292 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Giri in Mahdshmashana-sadhana,! on the banks of the 
Atreyi at Buxar2 

Now, Sddhakas consider how few fortunate perfect 
Sadhaka Mahapurushas like Maharaja Rama Krishna 
are born in this Sangsara. How many in this world are 
blessed with friends of previous birth, such as Pirnananda 
Giri, to answer their questions? How many religious 
heroes are there who, being Princes themselves, have yet 
the strength to turn from royal opulence, splendours, and 
enjoyments, and become Shmashana-sannyasis 2? To 
how many Sadhakas does the Mother of the world show 
Herself in the form of Guru at the time of their death ? 
Even such a man as Rama Krishna, who had already 
greatly practised Sadhana in previous births, in the first 
stage of his present Sadhana forgot the Mother during 
mental worship, and thought of the bracelets of his wife. 
Mental worship being so difficult, does it not make one 
ashamed even to think that you and I, steeped in worldli- 
ness as we are, have perfect competence to perform it ? 
Parnananda Giri came to remind Rama Krishna of this. 
But for you and I it is not necessary that a Pirnananda 
Giri should so come, for does not the burden of this joy- 
less mountain* of Sangsara remind us of it? Rama 
Krishna’s connection with the Sangsara lasted only so 
long as he did not acquire full competence for mental 
worship, but when, by the grace of the Devi who is 
perfect Bliss, he met Pirnananda, and acquired such 
competence, from that time his connection with the Sang- 
sara ceased. Then was the day on which his mind be- 


1 The SAdhana done by Tantriks in the great cremation-grounds. 

2 “T hope some day to be able, by the grace of the All-good Mother, 
to present Sadhakas and Sadhikas with a biography of Maharaja Rama 
Krishna, in which his history both previous to and following this inci-. 
dent will be related ’’ (Author’s note). 

3 Tantrik ascetics who frequent and do Sadhana on the burning. 
ground. ; 

4 Nirdnanda Giri—a pun. The name Pirndnanda Giri etymologic- 
ally means ‘‘ mountain of perfect joy.” 


ENG LEER ORSTAN TRA 293 


came self-controlled, leaving all thought of the Rant and 
her bracelets. From that day began the dance of the 
waves of joy of the Devi, who is mind itself. She revelled 
in battle, in the broad field of his mind, and as a result 
the mental garland of Jaba flowers struck Her crown and 
was thrown back. 

Can you say that any incident of such a nature ever 
happened in the course of your or my mental worship ? 
We call the Mother into our heart by picturing the image 
of Her whole body in our mind. We then give Her seat,” 
welcome,’ water for the washing of her face,* grains of 
paddy and blades of Durva-grass to show the honour we 
pay Her,° water to cleanse the lips and throat,® honey,’ 
and other things, and water again.2 We next bathe the 
Mother of the world, and then adorn Her with clothes and 
ornaments. It was at this time of adornment that this 
trouble about Her crown and garland happened to Rama 
Krishna. Can the mind of a Jiva, attached to worldly 
things, remain undistracted during the time which is 
required to do all this? Not to speak of undistraction 
for the whole of this period, is it even steady for the 
length of time which it takes us to say these few words ? 
Hari, Hari! you and [ start on journeys to Vaikuntha, 
Kailasa, and Brindavana® under the guidance of minds 
which travel to the South Pole from the North Pole 
at every twinkling of the eye ten times every half 
an hour! You and I will be left on the path, and the 
mind will go to its own place.° Thus, neither home-life 
nor homeless asceticism," nor Vaikuntha, nor Kaildsa will 

1 From the day that the Raja withdrew his mind from worldly 
things and settled it on the Devi from that day the Devi began to 
dance with joy in his mind. And this dancing prevented him from 
garlanding Her whilst She had the crown on. 

2 Asana. 3 Svagata. 4 Padya. 

5 Arghya. 6 Achamaniya. 7 Madhuparka. 

8 Achamaniya is always given twice in worship. 

9 The heaven of Vishnu (see p. 24), the abode of Shiva and the city 


sacred to Krishna, 
10 That is, we shall never reach Kaildsa, etc. 11 Sannydsa. 


204 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


be forme. To live at home after that, with life only, but 
without the mind, is to lose all. The learned of ancient 
times have therefore said, ‘‘ where there is a chance of 
losing all, a wise man gives up half,” in order that he 
may save the other half. The Shastra, also observing 
our danger of losing all, has counselled the performance 
of both inner and outer sacrifice, and of both mental and 
outer worship. He who proceeds to perform exclusively 
mental worship in dependence on a mind untrained and 
unpurified runs every chance of losing all. At such a 
time I shall deem it a great gain if, by abandoning half 
of mind,” I can save the half of outer worship. Hence, 
until non-dualistic Samadhi? is attained, both Sannyasis 
and householders must perform both inner and outer 
Sacrifice. A householder in particular will be wholly 
ruined unless he does so. A Sannydsi’s mind may, by 
dint of his cultivation of discernment* and dispassion, 
become some day free from the bond of attachment to 
worldly things, and thus transparent and fair and pure; 
but for a householder, a Jiva ever bound by the ties of 
love to wife, children, and so forth, and thereby rendered. 
without understanding,® there is no such hope unless, by 
reason of a Sadhana performed in previous births, the 
merciful Devi shows him Her utmost mercy. 

In the Gandharva Tantra also Bhagavan, the creator 
of all things, has clearly so commanded after speaking of 
inner sacrifice: “O Maheshvari! by performing inner 
sacrifice in this manner SAadhakas become Brahman Itself, 
and it is in this way that I worship Ishvari. And Yogis 
and Munis also constantly perform worship in this way. 


1 Yajna. See as to the extensive meaning of this term A. Avalon’s, 
Introduction to ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra.”’ 

? That is, mental worship. 

° Monistic experience in Yoga ecstasy. 

4 Viveka; between the “ real ’’ and ‘“‘ unreal.”’ . 

5 Literally, ‘‘ made jaga,’’ which means inert, senseless. As true 
understanding is free of such attachments, anything which produces 
them tends to make the mind to that extent jada. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 205 


But a householder can never attain Siddhi by means of 
this inner sacrifice’ alone. He can attain Siddhi only if 
he performs both outer and inner sacrifice.’’! 

Here Sadhakas should note that Maheshvara Himself 
says: “‘Itis in this manner that I worship Ishvari! And 
Yogis and Munis also perform worship in this way.” As 
to His worshipping Himself whether as Shiva or as Shakti, 
we have nothing to say. But speaking of Yogis and 
Munis He says that they worship “‘ constantly,” meaning 
thereby that they, too, are afraid of falling from their 
station* unless they keep up a practice of constant 
worship. Now say, O mental worship ! is it not a sign of 
impending lunacy to think that to-day you and I, whose 
efforts at worship are few and far between, are not com- 
petent to accomplish the form of worship in which 
Maheshvara alone worships Himself with full competence, 
and in which the competence of Yogis and Munis is made 
to depend upon the constant practice of inner worship ? 
Had householders been altogether free of outer affairs the 
Shastra would never have bound them to outer practice, 
nor should we have had to enter into this close and sifting 
inquiry on the subject for their sake. You, O house- 
holder! may easily consider yourself free of all outer 
activities, but so long as you bear the title ‘‘ householder ”’ 
how can I believe it? The Sangsara consists of outer 
activities, and household Dharma is the Dharma by 
which the continuance of this Sangsdra is maintained. 
Who will then believe that a person whose title of * house- 
holder ” is based on his connection with this household 
Dharma has nothing to do with matters of outer concern ? 
As for those householders who have acquired detachment, 
discernment, and dispassion, whom Bhagavan has called 
Karmayogis® in the Gita, and who perform outer work 

1 Yajna; see note ante, p. 294. 

2 Adhikara; that is, losing their competency. 

3 That is, those who achieve Yoga by means of selfless, unselfish 


action, by which they become partakers of the universal activity of the 
Brahman for the good of the world. 


296 PRINCIPLES OF TAN Tigy 


with minds free from egotism, such great men are free 
from attachment to outer concerns, but not out of all 
touch with them. We call them unattached to action 
because, although they are in the midst of action, their 
mind is not attached to it. The mental faculties of a 
Yogi are for the most part satisfied with mental objects, 
so that he alone is competent to perform exclusively 
mental worship. As for myself, who am steeped in 
worldliness, my mental faculties always seek outer objects, 
so that it is not possible that I should have the competence 
for exclusively mental worship. <A single day’s absten- 
tion from outer bathing makes my body restless with the 
burning of summer heat; a single day’s fasting weakens 
my physical body; a single night’s waking robs me of the 
power of rising the next day. These causes not only 
make the body unfit, but also exhaust, disturb, and over- 
power its mental faculties. When thus my mind cannot 
have peace and comfort for a single moment in the absence 
of outer objects, it is obvious that it cannot rest satisfied 
with the performance of exclusively menta] worship. If, 
however, through continuous practice of inner worship 
along with outer worship I ever sink in the sea of Her 
manifestations*—Her form, qualities, name, and love— 
and am overwhelmed by them; if, like a deeply intoxi- 
cated man, who, though he rightly and with safety does all 
acts which are matters of daily habit, yet does not perceive 
that it is he himself who does them, I can become intoxi- 
cated with the drink of the nectar of love and devotion to 
Her; and though performing the works of Sangsara based 
on habit, yet do not perceive my own agency in such 
performance; and if I thus mingle my individual existence 
with Her existence, it is then that I shall be competent to 
give up outer and to perform exclusively mental worship. 
And on that day I shall not only give up outer worship, but 
all outer objects will of themselves be separated from me. 
So long as this does not happen, it must be deemed a great 


1 Though they do actions, they are not attached to them. 2 Vibhitis. 


Ee NCEE SOF TANTRA 297 


sin even to desire to give up outer worship by merely 
personal effort." If we suppose that we can constantly 
and carefully perform all outer works concerning the body, 
the Sangsdra and worldly things, and yet at the time of 
Her worship we can worship purely mentally, and then 
after such worship resume attention to our food and other 
physical desires and necessities, then let me tell you that 
such deceit practised on the Deity is but the broad road 
for a journey to hell. It is truly astonishing that accord- 
ing to your religion I am to continue to do acts which 
have the effect of tightening the bonds of Karma which 
lead to worldly Maya, attachment, and wrong action, 
making us fall, forgetful of inevitable death, from the true 
path, baffling the purpose of human life, and making us 
subject to the servants of death; but I am to give up acts 
which sever the bonds of accumulated Karma and destroy 
its sufferings by the sharp edge of the sword of knowledge, 
dispassion, and discernment, and the effect of which is 
to carry us through and beyond the Brahmaloka to libera- 
tion in the eternal abode of Brahmamayi. Just as water 
is drained away by water, or one thorn is drawn out by the 
aid of another, so by Karma are destroyed the bonds of 
Karma. Hence, Bhagavan Maheshvara, who grants the 
fruits of all Karma, and is the helmsman of the vessel 
_ which crosses the sea of Karma, has said with His own 
mouth in the Shaktanandatarangini:? 

“ Through Karma Jivas are born, through Karma they 
die. After destruction of body, through Karma they 
receive bodies in rebirth and again become subject to 
Karma (1). Just asacalf finds out its dam amongst a 
thousand cows, so the good and evil Karma of a Jiva 
follow their author among the infinite millions of Jivas. 

1 When the Sadhaka is in a position to give up outer worship, he will 
give up all other external activities. Before then it is useless to give 
up one and the most important form of such activities—namely, outer 
worship. 

2 rst Ulldsa, discourse on knowledge. A celebrated Tantrik work 
by Parnananda Giré. 


298 PRINCIPLES OF “TAN Eig 


Karma acquired in previous births is most powerful in 
this Sangsara. Who has the power to baffle its course ? (2) 
A Jiva’s body itself is made of Karma, and all Karma has 
its home in his body, so that only such pure ordinances 
should be followed as are favourable to Karmayoga (3). 
O Devi! all things moving and unmoving are made oi 
Karma. Karma is mother, Karma is father, and Karma 
itself is the Jiva’s guide in the spiritual path in the form 
of the Supreme Guru. Through Karma a Jiva attains 
heaven or hell? (4). Controlled by their virtues® and sins, 
pregnant with happiness and sorrow respectively, Jivas 
receive physical bodies in classes determined by such 
Karma and merely enjoy their fruits (5). O Parvati! it 
is only rarely and after passing through thousands of 
births in Sangsara that a Jiva receives a human body by 
virtue of accumulated Karma (6). Eating, sleeping, and 
sexual intercourse—these are common to all living crea- 
tures. Man’s superiority to all Jivas lies in his possession 
of knowledge. Hence, he who being a man is without 
knowledge is no better than a beast (7). O Mistress of 
Kula! though at the time of death a Jiva loses his own 
body, yet he does not realize the worthlessness of all 
relations with wife, mother, brother, son, and so forth (8). 
A man lives a hundred years; but a very short span of life. 
But even of these hundred years sleep usurps one halt, 
and the remaining half is spoiled by ignorance in child- 
hood, enjoyment in youth, sorrow in old age, and so 
forth (9). Sangsara is the root of sorrow. Whoever is 
in and belongs to this Sangsara is sorrowful. None is 
happy but he who has abandoned the Sangsara (10). 
Man remains ever bound to defecation in the morning; 
to hunger and thirst at midday; and to passion and sleep 
in the night (11). He is unwilling to taste the Divine* 


1 All precepts are from the supreme Guru. These precepts are the . 
Guru Himself. The Guru is these precepts, and His precepts when 
carried out are Karma. 

2 Svarga or naraka. 3 Punya. 4 Divya. 


Pieters Or TANTRA 299 


remedy for this great disease, but constantly partakes of 
all such injurious food as aggravates it, thinking it to be 
sufficient medicine (12). Knowing full well that the body 
exists in order that his own Dharma may be worked out, 
he again performs evil Karma with that body. Being 
the owner of a ‘ cow of plenty,’ the fool seeks the milky 
juice of the akanda plant® (that is to say, existing in a 
human body by the help of which the four-fold object of 
Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha? may be easily 
attained, he journeys down to perdition through the 
pursuit of worthless worldly happiness)* (13). The body 
is transient, and so is wealth. A Jiva’s death is always 
near him. MHence, in order that he be saved from the 
fear and anxiety caused by that ever accompanying death, 
let him first of all earn religious merit (14). Deluded is 
he who does not earn the permanent wealth of Dharma?® 
by means of his transient body, which changes at every 
moment of time (15). Nor father, nor mother, nor son, 
nor any other relation follow a Jiva to the next world that 
they may help him there. Dharma alone accompanies 
him to that inaccessible place to bear evidence of his 
Karma (16). Bound by ties of affection to wife and 
children, a person cannot attain liberation. Death 
exercises equal rule over all, be they learned or ignorant, 
strong or weak, rich or poor (17). Just as the wealthy 
man lies in constant dread of the King, water, fire, 
thieves, and even wife, children, and relations, so sinners 
live in constant dread of death (that is to say, only such 
men in the world are fearless by the grace of the fear-dis- 
pelling Mother as have prepared themselves to meet 
death by acquiring Dharma)® (18). Hence an intelligent 
man should do to-day and in the forenoon what has been 


1 Kamadhenu, the cow which gives that which is desired. 
2 This juice looks similar to milk, but is harmful. 

3 See Introduction. 4 Author’s parenthesis. 

5 Religion and duty. 

6 Author’s parenthesis. Dharma is here merit. 


300 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


set to be done to-morrow and in the afternoon, for death 
does not wait to see whether a work has been done or 
remains to be done (19). He alone can attain liberation, 
severing the bonds of Karma by means of Karma, who 
does such Karma with body, mind, and speech, with 
freedom from desire for the fruits thereof (20).” 

In the Rudraydmala! it is written: ** A Sadhaka attains 
Siddhi only when the Mother of the world is satisfied. 
To a Sakéma Sddhaka* She grants happiness and to a 
Nishkama Sadhaka® She grants liberation. Let no one 
think that She should be worshipped only at a certain 
period of life, for She is eternal, and Her presence is never 
wanting. It isnot also as though She were at a distance, 
and some time must elapse before She can be brought 
near to you, for She lives in all things (1). A Sadhaka 
should, therefore, always adore the daughter of the 
Mountain-King, the Mahamaya, who is eternal and true, 
He should ever sing hymns in Her praise, and worship 
Her, and ever hear and talk of Her name, Her qualities, 
form, and greatness, and so forth (2). A man of sense 
should, instead of wasting time in gambling, and the like 
useless pursuits, spend his life in worship, Japa, Yajna, 
Stava,* and so forth, of the Devata (3). What is achieved 
by talk of other matters but a useless waste of life ?. Hence, 
O Devi! a Sadhaka will, on receiving knowledge of Mantra, 
Yantra, and so forth, from the mouth of Guru, happily at- 
tain liberation from the terrible bonds of the Sangsara (4).”’ 

The following are Shiva’s words in the Kularnava? 
Tantra: “‘ O Devi, I shall tell thee what Thou hast asked 
me. Listen. O Shiva-Shasana,® a Jiva cannot attain 
liberation except through initiation (in the Tantrik 


6 One of the chief and oldest Tantrik Scriptures. 

2 That is, a Sadhaka who does action with desire for the fruit. 

3 Who acts wholly unselfishly; who does good not for the sake of 
reward, but for the sake of good. 

* Recitation of Mantra, sacrifice hymn. 5 and Ullasa. 

6 She who either instructs or is instructed by Shiva, as in the case of 
Nigamas and Agamas. 


PiuNCIPEES.OR “TANTRA 301 


cult)* (1). Attainment of Siddhi in Mantra is impossible 
without Yoga, and attainment of Siddhi in Yoga is 
impossible without Mantra. Hence, only the form of 
Yoga, in which both are practised, leads to attainment 
of Brahman (2), Just as in a dark room one can see 
everything with the help of a light, so a Jiva enshrouded 
in Maya sees the true aspect of Paramatma with the help 
of Mantra (3). Hence, one should earnestly receive 
initiation immediately on the attainment of his sixteenth 
year, Just as a piece of iron when treated with juices 
of herbs and Mantras turns into gold, so on being bathed 
in the milk of Guru’s mercy and initiated in the great 
Mantra a Jiva forsakes Jivahood and undoubtedly attains 
Shivahood (4).”’ 

In the Gandharva Tantra it is said :? “‘ Atma is Tripure- 
shvari® Herself, and is unattached, attributeless, and 
pure. A Sadhaka will in this way meditate on Atma and 
Ishtadevata as inseparable from one another, and become 
merged in Her (1). I am She (my substance is not differ- 
ent from Hers). By this thought immersion in Her is 
attained. One should certainly meditate on this. that 
there is nothing in this world save Her (2). The mass of 
Her spirit, fire, and energy? fills the entire universe. The 
thought of this will fill the Sadhaka with bliss, He will 
move freely like a Devata while yet on earth (3). There 
is nothing in the world which a Sadhaka who practises the 
Yoga of meditation in this manner should worship, for this 
virtuous great man deserves the worship of all and wor- 
ships none (4). Although possessing a human body, this 
wise man who is proficient in, and whose Atma is in, Yoga 
is in reality not a man, but a Devata. Such a man alone 
is a Sannyasi (one who has forsaken Karma).® Such a 


Author’s parenthesis. 

11th Ullasa section on Dhyana (meditation). 

The Devi as mistress of the three (tri) worlds (puras). 

Tejas. 

Author’s parenthesis—that is, work done for the sake of its fruits. 


oF wo DS 


302 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


man alone widens the path of Karma! The Atma of 
such a man alone is united with the Deity; and such a 
man alone is called a Muni by all Shastras. There is 
nothing in this world which he cannot do, and he alone is 
an accomplished great Yogi (5). He whose Atma is always 
united with Devata, gratifying and adorning his Atma 
with all pleasing objects of sensuous perception, and 
worshipping the Devata with a sense of Her inseparate- 
ness from his Atma, and whose Atma is ever united with 
Devata, is himself a Devata (6). A Sadhaka certainly 
will perceive the presence of his Devata in the work, the 
doer, and the work done; in whatever things—such as 
dance, music, and the like—he sees or hears; in whatever 
dresses and ornaments he wears; in whatever animals 
and things, be it elephants, horses, carriage, bedstead, and 
so forth, on which he goes and rests; in whatever he eats, 
and, in short, in whatever else he does (7). When in posses- 
sion of those objects of desire which a worldly man enjoys 
for his own self-gratification, a Sadhaka will perceive the 
Divinity within them, and enjoy them for the gratifica- 
tion of the Devata dwelling in his heart (8). Everything 
that a Sadhaka does, from his awaking in early morning 
to the time of deep sleepin the depth of the night, will 
be done with the sense of the presence of Devata therein. 
The habit of so doing will arouse a divine disposition? in 
the Sadhaka by means of which he will attain Siddhi (9). 
Only he who has such disposition becomes Siddha® and 
none else (that is to say, another person may have some 
other form of Siddhi, but for want of this disposition? that 
Siddhi will not produce liberation).4 Hence, such persons 
only as seek Dhyanayoga practice and liberation, and who 
constantly worship Tripurasundart the Devi, who is bliss 
itself, with devotion? will truly attain liberation ’”’ (10). 


1 That is, the fruit of that Karma is dedicated to the Supreme, and 
is not made to serve petty selfish ends. 

2 Divyabhava. By Perect. 4 Author’s parenthesis. 

5 Literally, “‘ with devotion in the Divyabhava.” 


PRINCIPLES OF EANTRA 303 


Through the ill-fortune of India, many people have 
nowadays learnt by rote such passages as “‘ outer worship 
is inferior,’ “ outer worship is a low form of worship,”’ and 
“ outer worship is lower than the lowest form of worship ”’; 
but most of them do not know for what rank of wor- 
shippers outer worship is inferior, or low, or lower than the 
lowest, and how these passages should be harmonized with 
their context. And some of them even desist from making 
any inquiry lest they should lose the opportunity of parad- 
ing the passages.. Bhagavan, who dwells in all hearts, 
has, however, ordained worship to be of different classes, 
according to differences in the competence of worshippers, 
and clearly said in the Mundamala Tantra: “ Mental 
worship, in which pure Sattva? alone operates, brings about ~ 
high Siddhi and grants liberation. This form of worship, 
which consists of inner sacrifice,* destroys the Jivahood of 
a Jiva and grants him Shivahood (1). Although outer wor- 
ship is Rajasi,* it grants all forms of prosperity, destroys 
all kinds of danger, secures enjoyment in this world and 
liberation hereafter, removes all evils, cures all diseases, 
annihilates all enemies, and severs all bonds (1). Beloved 
one ! what I have said as to outer worship being a lower 
form of worship is not intended to apply to Sadhakas 
following Virachara, or Pashvachara.2 For Sadhakas 
following the Divyachara® only outer worship is a low 
form of worship” (3). Here a Sadhaka should observe 
that even for Sadhakas of the Divyachara outer worship, 
is not altogether prohibited. It is merely a lower form 
of worship for them; that is to say, a person following 
Divyachara has perfect competence for inner worship, 
and therefore outer worship is not a necesssity for him. 
It will not, however, do him any harm if he performs it, 
for a worship of the All-good Devi, in whatever fashion 
it may be performed, cannot possibly injure anybody. A 


1 Otherwise by comparison with the context others might be 
disillusioned. 


2 That is, the Sattva Guna (see Introduction). 3 Yajna. 
4 That is, itis the outcome of the rajas guna. 5 See Introduction. 


304 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Sadhaka of the Divyachara is, in truth, a permanent 
source of great good, so that the non-performance of 
outer worship does not affect him. It is, therefore, 
immaterial for him whether he does or does not perform 
outer worship. It does not matter to the sea whether 
rivers fall into it or not. But you and I who follow 
the Pashvachara or Virachara are nothing but lakes of 
water which we have dug out ourselves. If we neglect 
the rivers, the result will be that we ourselves shall turn 
into deserts. It is, therefore, nothing but a sign of 
lunacy to frown with displeasure at outer worship, which 
is not prohibited to, nor worthy the disrespect of, even 
permanently liberated Sadhakas of the Divyachara. If, 
however, a householder is intently eager to perform ex- 
clusively mental worship, there is a path for him opened 
by Bhagavan Himself, by which he may fulfill this desire. 
The Mother of the world forbade that anyone should ever 
travel that path in the domain of Sadhana. If, unfor- 
tunately, anyone must travel it, the following are the 
conditions which have to be observed: 

In the Gandharva Tantra? it is said: “ If a householder 
lives in a forest, and on any particular day that forest is 
infested with lions and tigers, then on that day he may 
perform mental worship. Or, if he lives in a village or a 
town, and his house is besieged by the army of a foreign 
king, then in such time of political disorder he is privileged 
to perform mental worship. Or, whether he lives in a 
forest or in a village or town, if he is imprisoned by sen- 
tence of a law-court, then at such time also he may perform 
mental worship. But even in these three cases the 
Sadhaka is entitled to perform mental worship only if he 
is unable to obtain articles for outer worship.” 

His privilege to perform mental worship in these three 
cases depends on his inability to leave the place where he 
is situated to procure articles for outer worship. For, if 
such articles are to his hand, and nevertheless he omits to 


1 25th Patala. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 305 


perform outer worship, then even in the circumstances 
mentioned he will do wrong, because of his initial incom- 
petence for exclusively mental worship. Now, if there 
be anyone who desires to perform outer worship under 
the conditions above described, we think it would be well 
for him were the All-good Mother, who grants all desires, 
to refuse to fulfil this desire on his part. 

In the same Tantra it is said:t “‘ What is the use of 
saying much? This much only I briefly say, whether it 
be stated in the Shastra or not: A devotee should always 
perform worship with all kinds of both terrestrial and 
aqueous flowers and their leaves. Worship should be 
done with leaves if flowers be wanting; with fruits if 
leaves be wanting; with whole grains of barley where there 
are no fruits; or, at least, with water should there be no 
whole grains of barley. Daily worship should never be 
neglected. If even water is wanting, then only should 
one have recourse to exclusively mental worship.”’ 

In the Niruttara Tantra it is said:* “‘ By virtue of his 
worship of Ishtadevata a Sadhaka himself receives 
worship in the world (for whoever in this world worships 
Her is adored by the world).2 By Japa he undoubtedly 
acquires Siddhi (Anima, and so forth),? and by Homa he 
attains success in all worldly things. Therefore a Sadhaka 
should perform all three: worship, Japa and Homa. O 
Kuleshvari !4 only Sadhakas of Virabhava and Divyab- . 
hava® are competent to perform mental worship.” 

In the Pichchila Tantra it is said: ““ Even if a Sadhaka 
has received the Mantra of a Mahavidya or Siddhavidya,° 
that Mantra-vidya injures him if he neglects to perform 
Japa. One can never attain wealth without performing 
Homa, or Siddhi without performing Japa, and, O Para- 
meshvari! it is impossible to receive worship anywhere 
unless one worships his Ishtadevata.”’ 


1 Gandharva Tantra, 14th Patala. 2 7th Patala. 
3 Author’s parenthesis. * Mistress of Kula. 
5 See Introduction. 6 See p, 72h 


VOL, ITI. 20 


306 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


In the MundamAla Tantra it is said: “‘O Chandi! he 
who worships Kalika with devotion and according to the 
rites attains to the state of Shiva, even though he be a 
Jiva. This is true, true, undoubtedly true. A Sadhaka 
should always perform the rites. It is by the perform- 
ance of rites that a great Sadhaka attains the highest 
Siddhi. Hence, one should never renounce rites.” 

In the Yamala we read: “‘ Meditation? is of two kinds, 
according as it is gross or subtle. Subtle meditation 
is the meditation on the Devata’s body, consisting of 
Mantra, and gross meditation is meditation upon Her 
body, with hands, feet, and so forth. The subtle form of 
Supreme Prakriti is made of pure knowledge. It is not 
possible for a Jiva to meditate on this subtle form. By 
meditating on the gross form does a Jiva attain liberation.” 

“Q Devi! unless worshipped, the Devata never 
grants any fruit. It is only when the Sadhaka, with or 
without knowledge, meditates on, remembers, worships, 
praises in hymns, and pays obeisance to, the Devi that 
She grants liberation to Her worshippers.” 

In the Gandharva Tantra Ishvara said: “‘He who 
devotedly performs daily worship in this manner 
beomes like Kandarpa* to women, and powerful like 
Shiva in the world of men (x). He is truly fortunate, 
and an ornament of his race. Blessed indeed are his 
father and his mother (2). The Devi appears in him,° 
and, like myself, that person, possessor of great know- 
ledge, undoubtedly becomes master of the eight-fold 
Siddhi of Anima® and so forth (3). To his enemies he 
is destructive like fire, to his friends he is pleasing like 
the moon. In punishment he is like death, and in sanc- 
tity he is like fire’ (4). In speech he is like Vrihaspati, 

1 2nd Patala. 2 Kriya. 3 Dhyana. 

# Kama, the God of Desire. 


° Literally, ‘the anggas (part) of the Devi appears in him ”— 
t.e., divinity—but not in its plenitude. 

® See, as to these powers, Introduction. 

’ For fire purifies, and is itself never impure. 


PRINCI EER SOZOR. TANT RA 307 


in forbearance like the earth.1 Sarasvatt is ever present 
on his tongue, and Lakshmi in his house.* All Tirthas 
are permanently established in his body. He therefore 
has no fear of rebirth (5). In wealth he is the Lord of 
wealth (Kuvera),® and in fiery energy* he is like the Sun; 
in strength he is like the God of wind, Pavana; in liber- 
ality he is like Indra;® in singing he is, as it were, 
Tumvuru® himself. Such is the man who daily worships 
the All-good Devi, who grants all desires (6). O Mistress 
of Devas! if the worship of Mahatripurasundari’ is 
omitted for one day, the Sadhaka should expiate the sin 
resulting therefrom. He should fast on the day on which 
there is thus no worship, and perform preliminary rites 
for the next day’s worship. On the day following let 
him worship first the Guru according to the injunctions, 
and then after he has finished the worship of Ishtadevata, 
let him feed virgins and Brahmanas (7-8). Such is 
the expiation for omission of worship for one day. If 
it is omitted for more than one day, the defaulter should 
be re-initiated and perform Japa of his Ishtamantra® a 
hundred thousand times (9). Whoever omits to perform 
worship for two or three days in the Sadhana of Mahatri- 
purasundart and Yoginis (of any Shakti Devata),? loses 
all his Siddhi, and is cursed by the Yoginis (10). Life, 
learning, fame, and strength, leave him, and the Yoginis 
destroy his flesh, semen, vital fluid,? and blood, and frus- 
trate all his desires (11). Bitter quarrels arise with 
friends, and especially with wives. His sin ruins the 
crops, and he himself falls into dangers at every step (12). 
Truly, truly he is attacked with diseases, and being im- 


1 Vrihaspati is the Guru of the Devas. As the earth bears every 
thing, it is the model of patience. 

2 He has both wisdom and wealth; two things which generally do 
not go together. 3 Author’s parenthesis. 

4 Tejas. 5 King of the Devas. 8 A Gandharva. 

7 The Devi; as to Tripurasundari, see A. and E. Avalon’s ‘‘ Hymns 
+o the Goddess.” 

8 The Mantra in which he was initiated. 9 Rasa, 


3c8 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


poverished, he suffers even in this world the three forms 
of terrible sufferings (adhyatmik, dadhibhautik, and 
Adhidaivik, and of body, speech, and mind)? (13). 
(Sadhakas know that these things constantly happen 
where the path of Sadhana is obstructed).2, Though a 
Sadhaka cannot, owing to his neglect to act according 
to the Shastra, obtain liberation, yet by virtue of his 
initiation in the Mahamantra, he will go to heaven;® 
and then, after enjoyment of such happiness as is to be 
had therein, he will fall again on earth and become the 
Lord of an empire. And during life here he will have 
unparalleled devotion to the lotus-feet of the Mother of 
the world by virtue of the initiation accomplished in the 
previous birth. Thereafter he will attain to Kai- 
valya (14). The fool who neglects the worship of Ishta- 
devata and sets himself to meditation on Brahman 
without having first attained the highest fruit of worship— 
namely, chittalaya*—is in this world a murderer of Brah- 
man (15). If a Sadhaka who is devoted to Japa and 
meditation is at any time unable himself to perform 
worship and so forth by reason of his occupation in some 
work of gain or benefit (that is, acquiring something new 
or safeguarding that which has been already acquired), 
he should engage his own Guru to do worship on his 
behalf (16). All forms of Siddhi are in the hands of him 
whose welfare is the subject of constant concern to a 
pure-hearted Guru who is proficient in both knowledge 
and work, possessed of superworldly power, and inspired 
with the spirit of all Devas? (17). Not only in the case- 
of worship of Ishtadevata, but in that of every form of 
religious work prescribed in the Tantra Shastra, none 
but the Sadhaka’s Guru, Guru’s wife, and Guru’s son 

1 Author’s parenthesis. The first three classes of suffering are those- 
caused by the self, the outer material world, and the world of Devas. 

2 Author’s parenthesis. 3 Svarga. 

* That is, the absorption of the Jiva’s chitta in the object of worship. 


called Samprajidta Samadhi. 
5 Sarvadevasvaripamaya, 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 309 


is competent to perform it if the Sadhaka is unable to do 
so personally.” 

Ia the Pichchila Tantra it is said: ‘‘ The Guru per- 
sonally has the right to perform worship as prescribed 
in tke Tantra. It is well accomplished if performed 
by Guru, Guru’s son, or Guru’s wife. O Mistress of 
Devas! in the absence of Guru, a Sdadhaka should 
himself. perform worship and so forth.’ (Here by 
absence of Guru, Guru’s son, and Guru’s wife, is meant 
that, though alive, they are not available.) 

In the Varadaé Tantra it is said:* ‘‘ All the rites 
prescribed in the Tantra in connection with the wor- 
ship of Ishtadevata should be performed by the 
Sadhaka himself. In case of his inability to person- 
ally perform them, he should have them carried out by 
the Guru or his wife, if she is a mother (and if the Mantra 
and Devata of the husband and wife are the same).! 
If performed in any other way, everything will be 
spoiled.” 

In the Guptasadhana Tantra it is said: ‘“‘ O Mahesh- 
vari! if worship and so forth through any others, 
then these persons (Guru, his son, or his wife who is 
a mother)!—that is, by any other Tantrik preceptor?— 
then the fruits of such worship will fall into the grasp of 
Yakshas and Rakshasas* (1). (Hence, if a person is 
himself unable to perform the worship of his Ishtadevata, 
his Guru should take his place.) If the Guru, who is 
an appearance of Brahman, performs worship and so 
forth, then, O Maheshvari! such worship will bear a 
hundred-crore-fold® fruit (2). Or, O Parameshvari! if 
the Sadhaka performs such worship and so forth himself, 
he should at its conclusion offer to the Guru all the things 
which have been already offered to the Devata; for, on 
being offered to Guru they bear crore-fold® fruit (3). 
O Maheshvari! if the Guru’s wife performs the worship 


1 Author’s parenthesis: 2 roth Patala. 3 Acharyya. 
4 Demoniac spirits. 5 A crore is ten millions. 


310 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


and so forth, she should carry out the necessary sacrific’ 
and the like, but not the Homa. She should, after 44 
lection of the articles for Homa, place them before 1) 
Devi, and, by repeating the Milamantra,? offer ther" 
Mahadevi. By doing this only, the purpose of F? ¢ 
will be accomplished. A Sadhaka should never 4ing 
Homa done in fire by his Guru’s wife. O Devi! wi his 
of Ishtadevata, or whatever else is done by a Gurvéven ;* 
Shishya is productive of undecaying fruits. The pro- . 
visions in the Shastra for the appointment of various 
persons as representatives, such as a Ritvik’s son and 
others, where the Yajamdana® is. personally incapable, 
have force only with regard to religious rites prescribed 
in the Smriti Shastra. Worship prescribed in the Tantra 
Shastra should never’ be performed by means of such 
representatives. If a Sadhaka engages a Purohita* to 
perform Tantrik worship or other rites, not only will 
all his desires be frustrated, but even the ever-merciful 
Mother of the world, the Beloved of Mahakala, by whose 
worship our aims are attained, will become angry with 
him.” 

Although the Shastra says that the Sadhaka who gets 
the worship of his Ishtadevata and other rites performed 
by his Purohita will reap fruits contrary to that for which 
he looks, yet it may be that doubts and questionings 
may arise as regards this matter. In truth, however, 
such doubts are possible only for those who see no differ- 
ence between a Guru and a Purohita. He, however, 
who knows the real nature of the relationship between 
a Guru and a Shishya on the one hand, and between a 
Yajamana and a Purohita on the other, can have no 
such doubt. A Purohita is a fit representative of the 
Yajamana in the performance of religious rites, and may 

1 NValit 

2 The principal Mantra of the particular Devata worshipped. 

3 He who makes the sacrifice. 


4 Priest. The distinction between the Priest and the Guru is given 
in the text. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 205 


is rther, by the strength of his own devotion, advance 
so p well-being of the YajamAna? by his blessing. But a 
Tru is lord over the Shishya’s body, mind, life, and 
sonallect. He it is who secures for the latter shelter at 
in tkfeet of the supreme Devata. He it is who kindles 
by Geneficial lamp of Mantra in the terrible deep dark- 
Devas { Maya, and is the only helmsman who can safely 
himself.he vessel to the shore across the boundless sea of 
“Sangsdra. A Guru can never be his Shishya’s represen- 
tative; for, so far as a Shishya is concerned, the three, 
Guru, Mantra, and Devata, are one and the same. 
When, however, a Guru himself performs the worship, 
preliminary rites and so forth, which should have been 
performed by his Shishya, what happens is this: He 
performs worship of himself in the matter of the worship 
of the Shishya,® and the Shishya is blessed by making 
over the worship to the care of his Guru, who is visible 
Brahman. This has been clearly explained in the dis- 
course on Gurutattva.* Now, what we have yet to 
understand is how the fruit of worship is increased a 
millionfold by reason of the worship being performed 
by the Guru himself, and how the benefit of such worship 
is communicated to the person of the Shishya. The 
fruits of the sacrifice,> worship, and so forth, which a 
Purohita is empowered by Shastra to perform in cases 
where the Yajamana? is unable to do so himself, are en- 
joyable in this world and hereafter. And it is undoubted 
that, whatever is enjoyable, either in this world or in 
heaven,® is a subject of sensuous perception; for all objects 
of enjoyment are apprehended by the senses. From this 
it conclusively follows that the work of a Purohita is 
fruitful only as regards the body, senses, mind, and life 
of the Yajamana,? whether in this world or hereafter, 
1 Tapas (see Introduction). 2 Vide ante, 310. 
3 That is, the Shishya who wishes to worship the Devata through his 
Guru causes the Guru to worship himself, because the Shishya’s Guru 


and Devata are the same. 
* On the Guru. 5 Yajiia. 8 Svarga. 


312 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA’ 


but has no greater effect. But what a Guru does, reaches 
even the Atma of the Shishya. By virtue of the bene- 
ficial work performed by a Purohita, the Yajamana’s 
Atma may be carried to heaven? and: other regions of 
the next world; but its utmost effect is upon the causal 
body,? and the Atma itself is not directly reached. But 
the fruit of what a Guru does goes beyond the next world, 
and is the cause of the illumination of the superworldly 
supreme truth? in the Shishya’s Atma. These super- 
sensuous truths are the subject of constant realization, 
and superworldly wonders constantly happen in the 
Shishya’s Atma. At the movement, in every Chakra, 
of Kundalini, the Mistress of Chakras who plays in the 
heart of the lotus in the Kula-cave,* and moves along the 
stem of the Mdaladhdara lotus, the SAdhaka’s, Atma rises 
and sinks in the sea of the Brahma-bliss of Brahmamayi 
with the playful dance of the waves of the eight forms of 
Siddhi—viz., Anima and the rest.® It is impossible to 
explain this by an illustration drawn from the objective 
world. But just as the power of sight of a Yogi, although 
located in his eyes, reaches unchecked the solar orb in 
company with the solar rays, and by its keenness pene- 
trates its disc and then views the eternal play in the 
eternal regions of Brahmaloka,® Vaikuntha,’ and Shiva- 
loka,® so the Atma of a SAdhaka who has attained Siddhi 
in Mantra reaches, with the help of Mantrashakti the 
true aspect of the Mother of the world, the great Shakti, 
in whom alone are centred all Mantrashaktis, and ever 
beholds the play of bliss in all the regions where Her 
powers? are ever displayed. 

It is only the Shakti by which at the time of initiation 
the Tejas’® of the Guru is communicated to the Shishya; 
1 Svarga. 2 Karanadeha; the subtle body. 

3 Tattva. 4 That is, the Miladhara. 
5 As to these powers, see Introduction. 
6 The three highest of the upper worlds. 


“ The heaven of Vishnu (see p. 24). 8 The heaven of Shiva. 
9 Vibhitis. 10 Spiritual energy. 


EiyNGLPEES “OP TANTRA 313 


the Shakti which, like the burning and revealing light, 
is passed from the lamp of the Guru to the wick of the 
Shishya’s body, moist with the oil of the Guru’s love; 
the Shakti which on issuing from the Guru and entering 
the Shishya brings the two bodies into closer union when 
worship is done; it is that Shakti which alone is able to 
communicate, directly and at once, to the Shishya’s 
body the fruits of the worship and other acts performed 
by the Guru. For it is only the Mantrashakti of the par- 
ticular Devata which passes from the body of a par- 
ticular Guru to that of a particular Shishya which is 
capable of entering from that Guru’s body into the body 
of that Shishya. To no other Shakti is the path of com- 
munication open. 

Just as no one who is not intimately related to us is 
allowed entry into the inner apartments of our house, so 
the outer fruits of rites performed by another for the ac- 
complishment of a Sadhaka’s happiness enjoyable by his 
external senses cannot enter into the inner recesses of 
his heart. They are acquainted with the outside only, 
and outside they remain. For this reason, the effect 
Which is achieved by worship and so forth performed by 
Guru, who is visible Brahman,” or by the Guru’s wife 
or their son, cannot be accomplished if even ten million 
Purohitas together perform them in concert. Nay, even 
if, as a representative of the Yajamdana,® the Purohita 
performs the worship of the same Devata with the same 
Mantra (as is the practice in Bengal in Shyama Puja, 
Jagaddhatri Puja, and similar other Ptjas),* his worship 
is powerless to touch the Atma of the Sadhaka. For, 
unlike the Guru, the Purohita’s Atmashakti or Mantra- 


! The Guru communicates the Mantrashakti of a particular Devata 
from his own body to the body of the Shishya. It is the Mantrashakti 
of that particular Devata alone which can freely pass from the Guru 
to the Shishya along the path established between the two bodies by 
initiation. 

2 SAkshat Brahman. 3 Vide ante, p. 310. 

* The Kali Ptja and Paija of Jagaddhatri. Author’s parenthesis. 


314 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


shakti has never passed into the Yajamana’s Atma, since 
there can be no such passage without initiation. Hence, 
although a Purohita can, at the time of worship, make 
the Devataé approach by the force of Mantra, and thus 
accomplish the worship, the Merciful Mother returns in 
sorrow because She is unable, through the fault of the 
author of the rite, to give him all the desired fruits with 
which She came laden to his house of worship, and 
which She had intended to give him in fulfilment of Her 
promise.* To-day the affectionate Mother has with all 
tenderness brought with Her, tied up in her cloth,* 
precious gifts for her son, who ever lives away from home; 
but on coming to the son’s house She found that he is 
not there, and therefore cannot make over those gifts 
to him. Worse, however, than this, She sees the son’s 
presents given to Her, not by him personally, but by a 
representative of his. None but a Mother in this world 
can realize the terrible pain which such neglect on a son’s 
part causes to a Mother’s heart. Hence, seeing that the 
son has gone away to distant lands, the Mother sends 
him a message in the pages of Shastra, thus: 

“My child! worship Me if you will, give Me presents 
if you will, and I shall be present with joy to receive the 
gifts of My son. But, My child, see that you are not 
yourself absent, and do not make your gifts to Me 
through another. Otherwise, your neglect and absence 
and the sorrow they cause will keenly grieve My heart, 
and tears of sorrow will bedew My face, chasing away 
all smiles of joy. My child, am I nobody to you? Ah, 
silly child! I am the Mother—I am your Mother, the 
Mother of all the millions of universes. What secret 
can you have from Me who dwell in all things? And 
why be secret with your Mother, My child? You may 
desire to keep a thing secret from Me, but I come to know 


The promise made in the Shastra that such and such worship will 
be productive of such and such fruits. 
2 After the Indian fashion. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 315 


of it before it even passes through your mind. Such as 
I am, how can you keep anything secret from Me? 
Moreover, the relation between Mother and son is such 
that there can be no secrets between them. But perhaps 
you keep away from Me because of your lack of power, 
unworthiness, and impurity. But, My child, have you 
not heard that I am all powers,t and am the Saviour of 
the fallen, and Deliverer of the three worlds? You may 
be lacking in power, but I have all powers in Me. By My 
own Shakti I create universes from particles of dust and 
turn them again to dust. Being as IJ am the sole Mistress 
of the store of Shaktis, am I not able to make you powerful 
by My Shakti? You may be impure, but I raise the 
fallen. By taking My name Jivas become pure them- 
selves and purify the world. Being what I am, can I not 
Myself make you pure ? How impure can you become 
that I cannot make you pure? Ah, My child! how long 
does impurity last ? Only so long as My name does not 
enter your ears. It is true that Jivas fall, but that is 
only so long as I, who purify the fallen, do not take them 
up into My arms. You shirk My presence on account of 
your impurity, but no one remains impure after he has 
come to Me. I am a Dweller in cremation grounds,” 
because I do not wish that there should be anything 
impure in the world. Even My dead child is not impure 
to Me. As for you, you are a child vitalized by a great 
Mantra. Whatshould you fear? Hence I say, My child, 
Why have any hesitation before your Mother? What- 
ever you wish to give Me, bring it to Me yourself, saying, 
“Tam poor and impure,” and I shall not only take your 
gift, but purify you at the same time. [If only I get you 
to come before Me, I shall give you what I have to give 
you. This is why I say, dear child, do not wound your 
Mother’s feelings by charging another person with the care 


1 Shakti. 
2 Shmashana. Fire purifies all things, and here all bodies are con- 
sumed. Her manifestation is great in the burning ground. 


316 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


of the Mother. It does not matter to Me whether My 
worship is not done. But it is a sorrow which I cannot 
bear that I am unable to give you that which I brought 
for you.” 

It is the great pain of this sorrow which makes the 
merciful Devi wrathful. The Tantra Shastra has, there- 
fore, said: ‘If a Sadhaka engage a Purohita to perform 
Tantrik worship, all his desires will be Trustrated, and 
Kalika! will become angry.” It is because the Mother’s 
feelings are wounded that all the desires of the Sadhaka 
are frustrated; otherwise, why should the worship of Her 
who grants all desires be productive of such disastrous 
effect > Why should the ever-merciful Mother who has 
assumed the Kala*-subduing name of Kali in order to 
destroy even the Sadhaka’s fear of Kala” become angry ? 
It must be understood that this anger is not really such, 
but only profound mercy in another form. None, how- 
ever, but the Mother’s son who has with his own eyes 
seen the Mother’s play is ever privileged to enjoy the 
intense pleasure of seeing the play of the waves of this 
sweet and yet severe wrath of the Mother. This is why, 
O Mother ! we have in the Invocation at the beginning of 
this book begged of Thee Thy anger, which is sweeter 
than the sweetest of things which looks a complex,? and 
is yet a very simple thing; and this is why we have not 
cared to beg from Thee Thy mercy. O Merciful Devi! 
when wilt Thou show such mercy as to bless me by making 
me tremble at the play on Thy loving face of Thy pre- 
tended anger, instead of Thy happy and indulgent smile ? 
On that day Thy name of Chandi* will be justified, and 
my fear of the Rod® will vanish, O Mother! Does one 
who experiences such anger ever desire mercy again ? 
Thy anger is the hidden treasure of the secluded store 


1 The Devi. 2 Death. 

3 Kutila—that is, full of designs. 

4 Derived from Chanda, wrathful: the Devi as wrathful Destructress 
of Demons. 

5 The emblem of Yama, the God of death. 


RINGER CES OF sANITRA 217 


oflove. Thou mayst ask, How many have been so fortu- 
nate as to have learnt to become angry’ on seeing with 
their own eyes Thy anger? But, O senseless Child !? 
dost Thou, being the Mother, not even know that the 
anger of one who says, “I am growing angry,’ simply 
makes one laugh? Glory to Thee, O Merciful Mother! 
Glory, glory to Thy anger! Glory to Thy mercy! Glory 
to the anger by which mercy is conquered ! 

This wrath of the Mother of the Universe, rare in the 
three worlds, does not easily fall to the lot of even Shiva, 
not to speak of Jivas. 

Her anger and satisfaction, of which mention is made 
in the Shastra, is not really anger and satisfaction, but 
a mere show of them for the good of the Sdadhaka. 
Secondly, such satisfaction and anger have reference to 
the ordinances and prohibitions of the Shastra. Hence 
we are afraid lest we should, by failing to rouse that anger 
in Her which is really satisfaction, call upon ourselves 
the terrible curse of Her pretended anger, and thus bring 
about our ruin. The Shastra, therefore, ordains that 
we should never entrust Her worship to another. En- 
trusting, however, the worship to the lotus-feet of 
Gurudeva is not the same as entrusting it to another, 
for the relation between a Gurudeva and his Shishya is 
similar to that between the sea and the river. Although 
they take their rise from different sources, such as moun- 
tains, springs, and so forth, yet rivers in the end mingle 
with the sea and become one with it. So the Atmas of 
Shishyas, although appearing in different bodies, families, 
and races, mingle with the Guru’s Atma and become one 
with it. Just as the sea passes by the force of the tide 
into the rivers, so, on the rising tide of the bliss of Sad- 
hana in the Atma of the Gurudeva, its nature passes 
from him to the Shishya’s body by the force of his own 
Shakti. The water of the sea does not really increase 


1 That is, to show not common anger, but such anger as the Devi 
manifests. 2 Terms of endearment applied to the Devi. 


318 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


in volume, but merely heaves forward under the in- 
fluence of the full moon. No such heaving is, however, 
possible in the waters of rivers. Similarly, no increase 
or decrease of bliss is possible in the Guru who is full 
of perfect bliss; but that bliss heaves under the influence 
of the Shakti (force) of Sadhana. But (as is the case 
with the sea) such heaving is possible in the body of the 
Guru, which is full of perfect bliss, so (as is the case with 
rivers) it cannot take place in the bodies of Shishyas. 
What happens in the bodies of Shishyas takes place only 
through the grace of the feet of the Guru, who is a sea 
of existence, consciousness and bliss.1_ Had rivers been 
unconnected with the sea, the flow-tide could never have 
entered into them. Just as notwithstanding the water 
of the sea merely heaves and does not increase, the flow 
caused by the force of such heaving actually increases 
the water of rivers; so, despite the fact that the perfect 
bliss which is in Guru does not really increase through 
the worship which he performs, yet the motion which is 
given to it by the force of the Guru’s mercy actually 
increases the bliss of Sadhana in the body of the Shishya. 
This is why the Shastra says: “‘ If Guru, who is the visible 
Brahman, performs worship and so forth, then, O Ma- 
heshvari! such action will bear a hundred-crore-fold” 
fruit.”” This is why worship by Gurudeva is not, from 
the spiritual point of view, worship by another, not- 
withstanding that it is from the ordinary standpoint per- 
formed by a person other than the Shishya; for in such 
case the presence of the Guru is the presence of the Shishya 
for the purpose of that worship. If worship of the 
Sadhaka’s Ishtadevata is done by a person who, though 
not his Guru, is a Tantrik teacher, then also such worship 
will be productive of bad fruits; for notwithstanding that 
such a teacher is a Tantrik, he is in this matter in the 
same position as a Purohita, since in neither case is there 
the relation of Guru and Shishya between the party 


1 Sat, Chit, and Ananda. 2 A crore is ten millions. 


Pi Ger SOR TIANT RA 319 


officiating and him for whom the worship is done. The 
Shastra has, therefore, said: ““O Maheshvari! if one 
causes worship and the like to be performed not by these 
persons, but by a Tantrik preceptor, then the fruits of 
such worship will fall into the grasp of Yakshas and 
Rakshasas.””! 

All the points of difference which have so far been shown 
to exist between the effects flowing from the appointment 
of a Guru and a Purohita become operative only if 
worship performed by him is Siddha.? But where for 
want of Shastrik jurisdiction worship performed by a 
Purohita is beyond his competency, it cannot be Siddha.? 
No Tantrik rite, and not merely the worship of Ishtade- 
vata, will be Siddha if performed by a Purohita. ‘‘ The 
provision in the Shastra for the appointment of various 
persons as representatives, such as a Ritvik’s son and 
others, have force only in regard to religious rites pre- 
scribed in the Smriti Shastra. Worship prescribed in the 
Tantra Shastra should never be performed by means of 
such representatives.’’? Worship other than that of the 
Ishtadevata will be Siddha if performed by means of any 
Tantrik teacher; but in the absence of Guru, Guru’s wife, 
or Guru’s son, a Sadhaka must himself perform the 
worship of his Ishtadevata, or have it performed by his 
own wife, there being no other course open to‘him. 

The Rudra Yamala says: ‘‘ Worship is of three kinds— 
namely, daily,* occasional,® and performed for the attain- 
ment of a desire.”® Daily worship is that which a Sad- 
haka must daily perform on pain of incurring sin, as, for 
instance, Sandhya prayers, worship of Shiva, and worship 
of Ishtadevata. Occasional worship is that the non- 
performance of which is sinful, but which has to be done 
only on some particular occasion, as, for instance, Durga 
Paija, the illuminated Shyama Pdja, Shivaratri Vrata, 

1 Evil spirits. 2 Perfect, fruitful, efficacious. 
3 Pratinidhi. 4 Nitya. 
5 Naimittika. 6 Kamya. 


320 PRINCIPLES OF TANT Rm 


Janmashtami Pfja,* and the rites which must be per- 
formed at the time of an eclipse. Worship performed 
for the attainment of a desire is worship, the non-per- 
formance of which is not sinful, but the performance of 
which produces special fruits, as, for instance, Shanti, 
Svastyayana.* The great difference between daily and 
occasional worship and worship performed for the attain- 
ment of desire is that, while daily and occasional worship 
must be performed though one may not have any desire 
to satisfy, worship of the third kind need not be performed 
under such circumstances. 

The Nila Tantra-says: ““ A Sadhaka acquires the privi- 
lege of performing occasional worship when he performs 
the daily worship of Ishtadevata, and he acquires the 
privilege of performing worship for the attainment of his 
desire only when he has acquired Siddhi? in occasional wor- 
ship. The ordinance of the Shastra is that it is only whena 
person becomes accomplished (that is, remains constantly 
engaged)* in the first two forms of worship—namely, 
daily and occasional—that he becomes competent to per- 
form worship undertaken for the attainment of his desire.”’ 

In most parts of Bengal we find nowadays a class of 
people who never do daily worship, but who perform 
once every year with great éclat a ceremony such as the 
Durga Puja, or Shyama Paya, or Jagaddhatri Payja,® and 

1 Durga Pija is the Mahavrata in honour of the Devi, as Durga, so 
greatly celebrated in Bengal; Shyama Pija is Kali Paja when there 
are illuminations in honour of Devi, called the Dewali. Janmashtami 
is held on Krishna’s birthday, and the Shivaratri in honour of Shiva. 

2 That is, the rites of those names to procure peace and auspicious- 
ness. Thus, special worship done with the object of procuring the 
recovery of a sick child would be Kamya. Neglect to perform such 
worship would not in itself be a sin, but if devoutly performed it may 
lead to the result desired. 

3 That is, becomes accomplished. 

* Author’s interpretation; for it is only by constant practice that 
success in this or any other matter is attained. 

5 Shyama Puja is the Kali Paja, and in the Jagaddhatri Paja 
worship is done of the four-handed Jagaddhatri thrice on one day; 
whereas the Durga Pija is held for three consecutive days. 


PRUNe| PER SSOP TANTRA a2E 


who thereupon think that they have more than suffi- 
ciently compensated for the omission to do daily worship 
throughout the year. They ought, however, to open their 
eyes, which are closed by vanity, and first consider 
whether they have any right to perform such ceremonies 
as the Durga Pija. In fact, it is not only impossible 
that worship performed by such men without competence 
therefor should bear the fruit spoken of in the Shastra, 
but it is to all a matter of daily experience that such per- 
formances (contrary to the Shastra as they are) produce 
most baneful effects at every step. Through the fault 
of the performer, religious rites bear fruits contrary to 
that which should followthem. But we often hear critics 
say that the enumeration of the effects of religious per- 
formances mentioned in the ShAstra is a tissue of false- 
hood intended to allure people. We, however, reply that 
had religious performances been incapable of producing 
any effect at all, why do these contrary effects happen ? 
Whether we have the good fortune to be able to see it or 
not, every intelligent man ought to understand that, if 
the impreper performance of an act inevitably produces 
an effect contrary to that spoken of in the Shastra, it is, 
if properly performed, undoubtedly capable of producing, 
without fail, the effects which are promised by that Shastra. 
The Gandharva Tantra says: ‘“‘ A Mahapaja,? with all 
the various articles therefor and complete in all parts, 
should be performed every month of every year on 
auspicious days (1).- Besides this, worship should be done 
daily, for worship of Ishtadevata is a daily work. A 
Sadhaka may perform occasional rites when he is capable 
of thoroughly carrying out those of daily obligation. 
When he thus becomes an adept in the performance of 
both the daily and occasional rites, then he may think 
of performing those which are done for the attainment 
of a particular end? (2). Performance of occasional rites 
1 A great festival. Thus in Bengal the Durga Pija is a Mahaptja. 
2 Kamya. | 
VOL. II Papi 


322 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


is more imperative than that of those last mentioned, and 
performances of daily rites is more imperative than that 
of the occasional rites. The misguided man who pro- 
ceeds to perform occasional rites, or rites to obtain some 
object whilst neglecting to perform the daily rites and 
worship, reaps no fruit from the performance thereof (3). 
To attempt to accomplish occasional] rites, or those done 
for the attainment of a particular desire whilst neglecting 
to perform those of daily obligation, is as futile as it is to 
cohabit with a barren woman (4). [If all the articles for 
worship are not available, worship of Chakra-devata 
(one’s Ishtadevata in the midst of the group of five 
worshipful Devatas—namely, Shiva, Strya, Ganesha, 
Vishnu, and Shakti)’ should be performed with flowers, 
fruits, and such other things only. But where the wor- 
ship is performed in this manner, notwithstanding that 
other articles are available, such limbless* worship cannot 
be productive of full effects for the Sadhaka, any more 
than can a limbless man be the performer of a complete 
Yajfia? (5). Meditation, worship, Japa, and Homa, are 
the four hands of the Yajna* of worship; Matrika, 
Sho¢ha, and other Nydsas,* form its body; knowledge of 
the real truth as to Ishtadevata is its Atma; devotion is 
its head; reverence is its heart; and the art of perform- 
ance is its eye. Knowing the body of Yajna® to be com- 
posed in this manner, a good Sadhaka should perform it 
in all its limbs, and not divide and make it limbless (6). 
If the Yajnapurusha® is made limbless, great evil is 
likely to befall the Sadhaka. For this reason, in per- 
formance the limbs should not be neglected. If the 
Yajnapurusha® is perfect in all His limbs, He grants 
Siddhi to the Sadhaka in everything. It is by His union 

1 Author’s parenthesis. 

2 Angahina. That is, worship in which all the ordinary articles of 
worship are not used. 

3 Sacrifice (see Introduction). 


4 As to this Tantrik rite, see Introduction. 
5 Yajiia considered as a person. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 323 


with the supreme Shakti which arises out of the effort to | 
accomplish all those limbs that the Yajnapurusha pro- 
duces Siddhi! (7). The omission of limbs is not so repre- 
hensible in other worship as it is in that of the perfect 
Yajna-body of Tripurasundari (any Shakti image)? (8). 
For the attainment of Siddhi and Vibhitis? a Sadhaka 
should perform worship according to his means. If this 
rule is transgressed, not only will the worship be defective, 
but he will incur the great sin of murder of Brahman; 
since in that case the body of Yajna, which is the body 
of Brahman itself, is severed and thus made limbless. 
The limbs of the Yajna-body should be accomplished as 
directed in the Shastra, and neither more nor less; for 
both possession of greater or of a less number of limbs 
by the Yajna produces sin in the Sadhaka (9). A great 
Paja,* with abundance of materials therefore, should be 
performed on a fourteenth lunar day, or an eighth lunar 
day, or a full moon day, or between two months (the 
day between two months or the last day of a month),? 
or on a Mahabhita® day (10). If the fourteenth day of 
a dark fortnight be a Tuesday, that day is called a 
Mahabhita day. Any special performance on this day 
causes Bhitas (beings and things) to come within the 
control® of the Sadhaka. Again, if there is a conjunc- 
tion of the Pushya Nakshatra’ on that day, performance 
on that day is productive of countless fruits (I1).” 


1 A successful result. 2 Author’s parenthesis. 

3 Here powers. The powers of the Devata become, by worship of 
the Devata, Vibhitis of the SAdhaka. For when worship is Siddha the 
-worshipper and the Devata are one. 

4 Vide ante, p: 321. 5 See post. 

8 Vashikarana. 7 One of the twenty-seven ‘‘lunar mansions.” 


CHAPTER XIX 
CEREMONIAL WORSHIP! 


N the Gandharva Tantra it is said: ‘‘A man should 

worship a Devataé by becoming a Devata himself.” 
One should not worship a Devata without himself be- 
coming a Devata. If a person worships a Devata with- 
out himself becoming a Devata, he will not reap the 
fruits of that worship.” 

The Vashishtha Ramayana says: “ If a man worships 
Vishnu without himself becoming Vishnu, he will not 
reap the fruits of that worship. If he worships Vishnu 
by himself becoming Vishnu, a Sadhaka will become 
Mahavishnu.”’ , 

The Bharata says: “‘ Man should not take the name of 
Vishnu without himself becoming Vishnu, nor worship 
Vishnu without becoming Vishnu, nor remember Vishnu 
without becoming Vishnu. One cannot attain Vishnu 
without becoming Vishnu.”’ 

The Bhavishya says:? “A man should not remember 
Rudra without himself becoming Rudra, nor worship 
Rudra without becoming Rudra, nor take the name of 

1 Paja. 

2 Cf. the Rudraydmala: 

“Ye Gunah santi devasya paficha-ritya vidhayinah 
Te gunah sadhakavare bhavantyeva na chanyatha.”’ 
The Tantrik Sadhana is a means of realizing the advaita tattva, and: 
the first step towards this accomplishment is the unification of the 
Devata and the worshipper. The Nydsas with other ritual are intended 
to effect this. 
3 Apparently this and the next two references are Pauranik. 
324 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 325 


Rudra without becoming Rudra, nor will he attain 
Rudra without becoming Rudra.’ 

The Agneya says: ‘‘ By worshipping Rudra a Sadhaka 
becomes himself Rudra. By worshipping Vishnu he be- 
comes Vishnu. By worshipping Sirya he becomes Sirya. 
By worshipping Shakti he becomes Shakti, and by wor- 
shipping Ganesha he becomes Ganesha.” 

The Bhavishya says: ‘‘ Aman should not take the name 
of a Devi without himself becoming a Devi, nor worship 
a Devi without becoming a Devi. One should worship 
a Devata by becoming the self of that Devata—(that is, 
the Devata? Herself)—by means of Mantra-Ny4sa.’’? 

The Gandharva Tantra says: “It is by becoming a 
Devata that a person should worship a Devata. A person 
should not worship a Devata while he himself is a non- 
Devata. O Spouse of Shiva! if Japa is performed 
without Mantra-Nydsa, it is Asurik (non-Daiva)* and 
ineffectual. A man should worship a Devata by becoming 
the self of that Devata by means of Nydsa.2 By 
Pranayama,° Dhyana, and Nydsa,° a Sddhaka’s body 
becomes a Deva’s body.” 

The Gandharva Tantra says: “‘ Bhitashuddhi,’ Rishya- 
dinyasa,® Pithashaktinydsa, Karanydsa, Anganydsa, Ma- 
trikanyasa, and Vidyanyasa;? O Maheshvari! by means of 
these Nyasas a Sadhaka becomes himself full of Devata.”’ 

1 Thus the Acharabheda Tantra says: ‘‘ Vamach4ro bhavet tatra vama 
bhitva yajet param.”’ The mental attitude is reflected in the ceremonial 
provision of the Rahasya-paja, that the Sadhaka should dress himself, 
like a young woman, in beautiful garments; his forehead painted with 
vermilion, and his body perfumed and garlanded with flowers. 

2 Devatamaya. Author’s parenthesis. 

3 See Introduction. The object and effect of Nydsa is stated later 
in; the text. 4 Author’s parenthesis. 

5 See Introduction. 6 Breath control and meditation. 

7 Purification of the elements constituting in their Mahabhita form 


the gross body (see Introduction, and post. 

8 In this Nydsa there are five Nydsas, of which the Nyasa of the 
Rishi is the first. 

9 See as to the various forms of Nydsa and their meaning, A. Avalcn’s 
Introduction to ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra.” 


326 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


BHAVA.2 


If I wish to acquire the burning and lighting Shakti? 
of fire, I must be fire myself; or if I would possess the 
coolness and the Shakti of sweetness possessed by water, 
I must be full of water myself; or if I want to acquire the 
speed and the Shakti of touch possessed by air, I must be 
full of air myself; or if I wish to have the hardness and 
the Shakti of smell possessed by earth, I must be full of 
earth myself; so if I wish to acquire, even in the least — 
degree, the eternal Shakti (the eight forms of Siddhi and 
so forth,)* of Bhagavan or Bhagavati, I must be full of 
Him or Her. I must completely sink my individual 
existence in the existence of Him or Her whose Shakti is 
to be communicated to me, otherwise it will never be so 
communicated. One person becomes full of another to 
the extent to which he loses himself in the Bhava® of 
that other person; and the Shakti of the latter is com- 
municated to him to the extent to which he becomes full 
of such other. This is the natural lawin the domain of 
Shakti. The nature of Bhava,’ by means of which 
men acquire the power of becoming full of another person 
in the Sangsdra and in Sadhana can only be sensed by 
men of Bhava® Others cannot describe nor understand 
it. Nay, even Bhagavan, the consort of Bhavani and 
creator of all things, has, in trying to find out the nature 
of the play of Bhava, Himself become overpowered with 
his own Bhava, and has said: ‘‘The true form of Bhava 
cannot be explained by words.” We have not the power 

1 Idea, thought, feeling, sentiment, nature, state. This very 
important term is difficult to define, but the use to which it is put in 
the text will indicate its various shades of meaning to the reader. 

2 Power. 3 Agnimaya. 4 Author’s parenthesis. 

5 Vide ante, note 1. Here nature. And if he has the nature, he has 
the thoughts and feelings of that nature. 

6 If the Bhava of A is transformed into the Bhava of B, it follows 
that the former acquires with such transformation the Shakti of the 
latter. 7 Vide ante, note t. 8 Bhavuka, 


PI NCTEEES OK PANTRA 327 


to explain what it is. What we can do is to quote what 
the Lord of Shakti has Himself said on the subject. 

In the Kaulavali Tantra,’ it is said: ‘‘ Bhava is quality? 
of the mind. How can it then be expressed in words ? 
It can therefore never be spoken. Words can only point 
out the direction in which it lies. Just as the sweetness 
of molasses can be realized only by the tongue, and can 
never be explained and realized by even thousands of 
words, so Bhava and that which constitutes it? can be 
realized only by the mind, and can never be explained 
by word (1). One single Mahabhava* appears in different 
forms (devotion, love, affection, and so forth)® to express 
different conditions.° Again, when Bhava deepens, all 
those differences in it are ultimately lost in one single 
ereat Bhava (z2).’7_ It is this Bhava which is the Lord,® in 
whom all bliss is confined and consecrated. It is this 
Bhava which takes the Form of Prakriti, and it is this 
Bhava which is Atma, the Essence,? the Supreme and 
Great (3). As Bhava, this Atma is a thing to be heard of,?° 
to be thought of, to be constantly meditated on, and to 
be realized by Vira Sadhakas by means of various forms 
of Sadhana prescribed in the Tantra Shastra (4). It is 
this Atma whose substance is Bhava which must be heard 
in the word of Shruti; it is this Bhava which must be the 
subject of thought." It is this Atma whose substance 
is Bhava which must be meditated on according to the 
instructions of the Guru (5). When in this way hearing,” 
thinking, meditation,1° Sadhana, and so forth, have been 
performed, then that Atma which is Bhava, and which is 
detached from all things, is surely realized. When adorned 
by the multitude of Bhavas, Bhagavan Parameshvara 


1 tith Ullasa. 2 Dharma, 
3 Vibhava: its various parts and manifestations as explained in the 
next sentence. # Great Bhava. 5 Author’s parenthesis.. 
6 Upadhi. 7 Mahabhava. 8 Ishvara. 9 Rasa. 


10 That is, one should live and move in the company of such persons. 
as constantly speak of God and study Shruti (revelation) (see post). 
11 Manana. 12 Shravana. ‘3 Dhyana. 


328 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


begins to manifest the power of His own play in that body 
of the Sadhaka matured by Sadhana, then all the Bhavas 
of the Sadhaka disappear in the body of Bhagavan, 
leaving merely a feeling of the presence of Bhagavan, 
whose substance is one undivided Bhava and of massive 
consciousness and bliss (6). 

‘A cow eats various kinds of grass, but extracts from 
them only one essential thing,t which assumes various 
forms by connection* with the Upadhis*® of milk and so 
forth. In the same way, in whatever of its constituents* 
Bhava may be cultivated, in the end all Bhavas are 
converted into a single great Bhava in the form of the 
Supreme Devata, whose substance 1s massive conscious- 
ness and bliss (7). It is the essence! which is produced 
in the body of a cow from grass which ultimately appears 
as the chief essence,® milk, and from that milk is evolved 
that which is but a changed form of it, the essence? of 
curd; from curd comes ghee, and even from ghee some 
other essence! unnamed. But however numerous the 
varieties may be, such as milk, curd, ghee, and so forth, 
due to difference of conditions under which they are 
formed, the substance of them all is ultimately the 
essence! derived originally from grass; all which subse- 
quently appears, being merely the one thing in different 
forms. Similarly, in whatever Bhava His Sadhana is 
performed, He is the cause and effect of all Bhavas and the 
root thereof as Bhava, and in the end nothing remains 
but the substance of perfect bliss and massive conscious- 
ness in the form of one single great Bhava.® Viewed 
rightly, there is no cause or effect which is different from 
Him (8-9). As in the field of Sadhana His play’ as 
Bhava is thus diversified, so also in the domain of creation 
is it so. He is the only one Paramatma who has been 
born, is being born, and will be born in different matrices, 

1 Rasa. 2 Literally, ‘‘ by communication to it of ” (adhy4sa). 

3 Qualities, apparently limiting conditions. 


* Vibhava—that is, minor Bhavas, particular manifestations of Maha- 
bhava. 5 Paramarasa. 6 Mahabhava 7 Lila. 


ANGLE bo On TANTRA 329 


according to the different bodies to be assumed. After 
having performed the work of creation or manifested 
Himself as Jiva, He, though in reality undifferentiated, 
is, through the effect of sinful and meritorious works, 
sometimes born, sometimes dead, sometimes bound, 
sometimes liberated, sometimes happy, sometimes male, 
sometimes female, sometimes neuter, and sometimes 
beyond the Updadhis of sex and bodiless, though present 
in an infinite number of bodies (11). In this way 
the eternal Paramatma, who is the essence! and the 
great Bhava,* plays the play of His own diversity 
in the meditations, consisting of different Bhavas of 
Sadhakas, despite that He is Himself one and without 
a second. In reality the play also of Her who is full of 
play is the Shakti, which is Herself, and diversity in that 
play does not affect Her inherent unity (12). The Sad- 
haka in whom appears the Divyabhava or Virabhava 
sees the supreme Tattva or Brahmamayi in a single 
life? (x3). He who, liberated whilst yet living,* has 
become Atma in its true form, moves on the earth merely 
to work out the remaining portion of his Karma, which 
has begun to bear fruits? in his body. It is such a 
Mahatma, son of the Devi, who is called a Bhairava. 
Of the three Bhavas spoken of above, two, the Virabhava 
and the Divyabhava, are good® Bhavas, and are the 
essence of Kulatattva; and are superior on account of 
their connection with Kula, and are direct paths to 
liberation. For this reason the nature of’ these two 
paths should not be told to all classes of Sadhakas (15). 
The Sadhaka who does not perform Sadhana in the 
Bhava prescribed for him in the Shastra® for ten days 
1 Rasa. 2 Mahabhava. 

3 In other words, realizes Her. As regards these two Tantrik 
Bhavas see Introduction to Mahanirvana by A. Avalon. 

4 Jivanmukta. 5 Prarabdha. 

6 Literally, ‘‘ well established.” 7 Tattva. 

8 E.g.,if a vira, he must do worship with or in Virabhava—that is, 


not only with the particular ritual enjoined, but in the mental and 
devotional state and with the intention prescribed. 


330 PRINGIPLES OF TANT RE 


continuously, and whose worship of Ishtadevata becomes 
in consequence thereof defective, is fallen in the domain 
of Sadhana (16). To such a fallen man the Guru should 
not give instructions in any Bhava or worship. Such a 
fallen Sadhaka will only become pure in Bhava if he 
receives initiation again from a Kaula Guru. For this 
reason a right-minded Sadhaka should perform the 
worship of his Ishtadevaté and such other acts with 
great care and strict adherence to his own Bhava’”’ (17). 

In the Kaulavali Tantra it is said: ‘‘ Just as no Vaidik 
Sangskara! can be fruitful in a twice-born who is devoid 
of Veda;? or as devotion cannot develop without devo- 
tion to Vishnu; or as liberation without a knowledge 
of Shakti is ridiculous; or as competence in the Tantra 
Shastra is by no means possible without a Guru; or 
as a woman without husband has no right to perform 
any religious rite; or as a Virasadhaka of the Devi or oi 
Myself is not competent to perform his own Sadhana 
without Kulatattva;? so a Sadhaka devoid of Bhava has 
no competency for any form of Sadhana or Siddhi. 
Hence a Sadhaka should always adhere to a Bhava.* 
Competence in the Kula Shastra can in no way be 
acquired in the absence of Bhava. Hence only a Sad- 
haka pure in Bhava becomes a true Kaulika.”’ 

In the Kaulavali Tantra it is said: “I shall explain 
the true form of Bhava as it has been told in Tantra. 
Bhava is of three kinds—namely, Divya, Vira, and Pashu. 
According to these Bhavas, Gurus also are of three kinds— 
namely, Divya-Guru, Vira-Guru, and Pashu-Guru. Man- 
tra-devata also (Devata presiding over Mantra, Mantra- 
shakti)°? is of three kinds—namely, Divya-mantra, Vira- 


i “ Sacrament ”’ (see Introduction). 

2 Vedahina: who has not received instructions in Veda. 

3 The Kula articles; the Pafichatattva. 

4 That is, one of the Bhavas prescribed in the Shastra, such as 
Pashubhava, etc. Worship cannot be done as the worshipper pleases, 
but according to the injunctions of Shastra. 

5 Author’s parenthesis. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 331 


mantra, and Pashu-mantra; that is to say, a Mantra 
issuing from the mouth of a Divya-Guru is a Divya- 
mantra, a Mantra issuing from the mouth of a Vira-Guru 
is a Vira-mantra, and a Mantra issuing from the mouth 
of a Pashu-Guru is a Pashu-mantra (1). Of the said 
three forms of Bhava, the first—that is, the Divya- 
bhava—is the source of great good, and grants all forms 
of Siddhi. The second—that is, the Vira-bhava—is 
middling; and the third—that is, the Pashu-bhava—is 
spoken ill of throughout the world (2). Notwithstanding 
the repeated performance of Japa, Homa, and Tapasya, 
in the form of numerous physical austerities, Tantrik 
Mantras will never be fruitful without Bhava (3). A 
Sadhaka may perform thousands of Vira-sadhanas,! dis- 
cuss the extremely subtle nature of Kula and Akula,? 
or perform Pdja, and so forth, in Pithas;? or feed Brah- 
manas, make gifts out of love to his own or other families, 
or have control over his senses, or perform the rites of 
Kulachara;* but if, despite of adherence to Kulatattva,° 
his Atma is not pure in Bhava, all these acts will prove 
useless (4-5). 

“It is by virtue of Bhava that a renunciating (Nishka- 
ma)® Sadhaka attains liberation. It is by virtue of Bhava 
that a non-renunciating (Sakama)® Sadhaka’s family and 
Gotra’ prosper. Itis by virtue of Bhava that the bodies of 
both forms of Sadhakas are purified (6). What is the use of 


1 Sadhana of the Viradchara. 2 That is, Shakti and Shiva. 

% See Introduction. Places where portions of the body of Devi as 
Sati fell. 

4 The Achara of the Kaulas. Bhdskarardya, in his Commentary 
on the words ‘‘ worshipped by those devoted to the Kaula path ” in 
v. 93 of the Lalita, says that there are three modes of worship of Devi— 
viz., Samaya (Vaidik, and according to the five Agamas), Mishra (or 
mixed, described in the eight Tantras, Chandrakala, and others), and 
Kaula, which differ from the above two, and described in other Tantras. 

5 Vide ante. 

6 Author’s parenthesis. That is, a Sadhaka who acts selflessly 
without desire for the fruits of action. The Sakama Sdadhaka is he 
who acts out of interest. 7 Clan, lineage. 


332 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


an elaborate performance of Nydsas, or purification of 
elements,? or of worship, if there be no Bhava in the 
heart of the Sadhaka ? (7). Who is there who does not 
worship Vidya (Devata as Mantra),? and make Japa of 
Her? It is only through want of Bhava that perform- 
ance is ever fruitless (8). I shall speak, first of all, of 
the Divyabhava according to Tantra. A Sadhaka of the 
Divyabhava should meditate on the form,? thinking the 
whole world to be filled with a mass of the light* of that 
worshipped Devata and of the colour of that Devata. 
Establishing life in all limbs of the form of that Devata , 
by means of their respective Mantras,° let him see his 
whole Atma and the entire visible world to be constituted 
of Her. Thus should the Ishtadevata be worshipped 
by him (9-10).”’ And so forth. 

In the Rudraydmala (6th Patala) it is said: “ O Sada- 
shiva! hear again attentively of the Pashubhava. 
Even a Pashu® can, by acquiring powers similar to 
those of Narayana’ by means of Sadhana in his own 
Bhava, attain such Siddhi® as to be able, by the grace of 
Mahavidya,® to go to the City of Vaikuntha™ as an em- 
bodiment of great Dharma," with a four-armed body, 
bearing a conch-shell, a discus, a club, and a lotus in his 
hands,” and riding on Garuda‘? (1-2). The great Bhava 
of Pashubhava grants Siddhi in all Bhavas; for it is 
after first attaining Siddhi in the Pashubhava that a 
Sadhaka should certainly adopt the great and superior 
Bhava of Virabhava, and subsequently the very beautiful 
Divyabhava, productive of great fruits (3). Even whilst 
in the Pashubhava a Mantri can reach Siddhavidya™ (4). 


1 That is, Bhaitashuddhi; as to which, see p. 365. 

2 Author’s parenthesis. 3 Mirti. 4 Tejas, and energy. - 
5 That is, the Mantra assigned in Nyasa to each limb. 

6 See Introduction: the Bhava in which Tamas predominates. 

7 Vishnu. 8 Powers. ®° The Devi. 

10 The heaven of Vishnu (see ante, p. 24). 11 Here virtue, 

12 As does Vishnu with whom the SAdhaka is united. 

13 The Bird-King, vehicle of Vishnu. 14 Mantraseddhi. 


PRINCEPERS VOROCANTRA 333 


If by good fortune a Sadhaka is born in a Kaula family, 
and receives initiation in the great Mantra of the great 
Kaulika Devata worshipped in Kulachara by previous 
successive generations, he will surely attain Siddhi with- 
out having recourse to Pashubhava by travelling along 
the path of Kulachara only (5). But if a Sadhaka of 
the Pashubhava can fortunately gain the favour (con- 
sciousness)* of Vidya (Mantrashakti),1 then only will he 
become competent for the Virabhava. Subsequently, 
by the grace of the Virabhava, he will attain Divya- 
bhava (6). The best of men who take refuge in the 
Divyabhava, and the Virabhava become undoubtedly 
masters of desire-gratifying trees and creepers (7). A 
Sadhaka should live in some great Pitha? as an Ashrami 
(adhering to any of the four Ashramas—namely, 
Brahmacharya, and so forth),’ devoted to meditation, 
well versed in Mantras and Tantras, and possessed of 
self-control. Such a Sadhaka will command the world 
of Jivas by virtue of his own power (8). If, fortunately, 
a Sadhaka succeeds in attaining Bhava, Mahabhava, and 
so forth, it is not necessary for him to acquire any other 
fruits; for the moment a man attains to Bhava he knows 
My Tattva® (9). He who has attained Siddhi in Bhava 
very soon attains Siddhi in speech. Sarasvati constantly 
dwells within him, and Lakshmi lives constantly in his 
house as his Mother, forsaking even Narayana* in 
Vaikuntha.4 My perfect grace undoubtedly falls upon 
him, and then the Sadhaka surely attains great Siddhi. 
O Sadashiva ! true, true is this, and indeed true (11).”’ 
In our worldly experience we constantly see that the 
more a man becomes full of Bhava for wife and children, 
the more he loses himself and becomes full of them. The 
Shakti of love of the loved one, in respect of whom such 
depth of Bhava exists, is communicated in an equal 
measure to the body, senses, and mind of the lover. 


1 Author’s parenthesis. # Seat of the Devi. 
3 That is, he knows the, or My, truth. 4 Vide ante, p. 24. 


334 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


When a lover becomes restless and mad with such an 
intense love, then only, like one who is overpowered by 
wine, does he lose sight of the Sangsara, despite his living 
in it, and become free from all bonds of worldly things, 
despite that he is constantly immersed in them. He 
loves the Sangsdra because it is necessary for his Sadhana 
of love for his beloved one. Otherwise, why is it that 
the Sangsadra which a lover looks at with great endear- 
ment to-day pierces, as it were, his eyes like a poisoned 
arrow to-morrow if he loses his beloved one ? Why is it 
that onewho loves a husband orwife, or asonor a daughter, 
for whom his or her love has reached its full intensity, 
immediately renounces the Sangsara and becomes a 
Sannyasi, or attempts to end the pain of separation from 
the loved one by suicide ? The things of the Sangsara 
appear full of love to a lover because they are connected 
with the object of his love. The dresses and ornaments 
and even playthings of a husband or a wife or a son or a 
daughter who are absent become dear to us because of 
their connection with the objects of our love; otherwise, 
why is it that parents keep with great care things belong- 
ing to their children who live far away from them ? 
Such articles are materials for the perfection’ of Bhava 
in the domain of love. The sight of even a piece of 
cloth worn by a deceased son fills his parents with intense 
grief. The sight of a pair of shoes worn by her deceased 
husband moves a woman to tears. All these are but 
different forms of perfection? of Bhava. Now, let Sad- 
hakas consider what sort of a consummation® of Bhava 
there is if this love be centred not in wife and children, 
who are but, as it were, persons seen in a dream in this 
transient Sangsara, but in the beauteous feet of the 
Mother of the world, who is the centre of all love in the 

1 Siddhi, or consummation. 

2 Siddhi. That is, the wife has affection (Bhava) for her deceased 
husband, and this is brought out and intensified to its fulness by the 


sight of articles which belonged tohim. The Bhava therefore becomes 
Siddha. 3 Siddhi. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 335 


Brahmanda, full of love, full of Brahman, and full of 
bliss ? How intense will be the climax of the consum- 
mation’ of Bhava of him who has offered at the feet of 
the Mother all devotion, all love, and all affection for 
parents, wife, and children! Worldly Jiva! if the 
sight of a toy which belonged to a son or a daughter of 
yours can overpower you with Bhava and make you 
sometimes laugh and sometimes weep, just think what 
is it that a Sadhaka cannot do in the intoxication of 
Bhava whose son’s or daughter’s* plaything is this entire 
Universe ? In the sphere of his Bhava there is no such 
thing as Abhava (want of Bhava).* The sight of every- 
thing in this world moves him to overflowing Bhava. In 
whatever direction he turns his eyes, on water, land, or 
space, he sees the robes (Amvara) of Her who is robed 
with space (Digamvari). In play the Mad Girl+ has gone 
away, no one knows where, leaving Her garments behind. 
This is the reason why to-day the sky is full of the Mother’s 
robes and the Universe is full of the Mother’s ornaments. 
Say, now, how can a Sadhaka remain unmoved on seeing 
this? With what heart can a devotee who sees the 
Brahmanda® form of the Brahmamayi remain unmoved ? 
Unceasing tears of love flow from his eyes in the plenitude 
of his tender feeling. It is only when perfection’ of such 
perfect Bhava takes place that one begins to directly 
realize the truth of the words of Shiva: ‘ The Tattva of 
Shiva and Shakti is the cause of Tattvajnana.® O Devi! 
Nirvana can never be attained without knowledge of 
Shakti.’ Then only does the Sadhaka see with a Divine 
vision: “‘ She exists as Tejas’ in vehicles, stones, and 
minerals. O Mistress of Devas! after this what need 
be said about Her presence in living beings? Nothing 

1 Siddhi. 

2 The Devi is here called the son or daughter of the Sadhaka. 

3 Author’s parenthesis. Ordinarily the word means simply want. 

4 An expression of endearment used for the Devi (see p. 150, note). 


5 Universe. 6 Spiritual knowledge. 
? The luminous energy of the universal consciousness. 


336 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


exists where Mahamaya does not exist.’ Then only 
does the wave of Shiva’s song, ‘“‘ Thou Kali art alone the 
Dispenser of good, Spouse of Girisha,’ and art all things,”’ 
penetrate with its flow through the innermost recesses 
of his heart. Worship of the Devi’s playful? eternal 
forms is nothing but Sddhana for this great Siddhi. 
When by virtue of Siddhi in Sadhana, by means of the 
Shakti (all full of consciousness), of Mahamantra, the 
Sadhaka sees the Tattvas of the play of the Creation, 
Preservation, and Destruction of endless millions of) 
universes shining in Her Fair body from Her feet to Her 
head, then only do the great portals, which are the loss 
of oneself in Mahabhava for Her, open before that 
fortunate Sadhaka. This is why to the Sadhaka nothing 
is at that time so effective in awakening great love, 
drawing out the feeling of attachment, soothing the 
eyes, filling the heart with bliss, and pouring nectar into 
the inmost recesses of the heart, as the evidence of that 
vast play manifested as movements of every limb of 
the Mother in the refulgence of Her World-enchanting 
beauty. It is only when the Sadhaka’s eyes are painted 
with the collyrium of this attachment that the refulgence 
of the beauty, resembling a mass of crushed black 
collyrium, of the Fair Spouse of Mahakala shines in 
every bank of clouds. The light of Her who charms the 
Blue-throated Deva? beams through the blue throat of 
the peacock, and the endless waves of the beauty of 
Shyama flow in the deeply blue petals of fresh and full- 
blown blue lotuses, and in the soft and bright blue beauty 
of Aparajita* flowers. Then it is that the Sadhaka loses 
himself at sight of the mystery of the secret play of 
Mahaprakriti, the Genitrix of the Universe, in even the 
Prakriti® of the Universe. 


1 Shiva. 2 Lilamayft. 

3 Shiva Nilakantha, whose throat is blue from his having swallowed 
to save the world the poison arising from the ocean. 

4 A flower sacred to the Devi. 5 Nature. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 333 


Nothing is to me such an object of endearment, pride, 
affection, and displeasure, as the garments, ornaments, 
pastes for the body, and other things made glorious by 
the glory of the One at Whose feet I have resigned 
myself. At the sight and touch of these signs I remember 
Him and am filled with continuous ecstasy. Their 
absence from the body of a man makes him appear to my 
eyes as the image of a Pishacha,? and the Sangsdra as 
nothing but hell in another form. Such signs of the 
region of Kaivalya,® rare even amongst Devas, form the 
only certain means whereby I may be drawn out of the 
sea of Sangsara and then plunged into the sea of Her 
existence of consciousness and bliss. For this reason 
in the Shastra the Guru of the world has Himself com- 
manded that for the attainment of the state of self-loss 
in this Mahabhava such signs and marks should be 
worn on the body not merely during worship, but at all 
times. And it is according to His command that five 
different kinds of dress, forehead marks,* and so forth, 
have been ordained for the five classes of worshippers— 
namely, Shaiva, Vaishnava, Saura, Shakta, and Gdana- 
patya. These are—three lines on the forehead,°® trident, 
ashes, matted hair, Rudradksha® beads, tiger skin, 
Damaru,’ human skull, and so forth, for Shaivas ; a high 
line on the forehead,® yellow or white dress, marks of 
conch-shell, discus, club and lotus, rosary of Tulasi,? 
dots of sandal paste on the face,?? and so forth, for 
Vaishnavas;. red circular forehead mark, red dress, 
rosary of lotus seeds, and so forth, for Sauras;‘! yellow 

1 Abhimana —anger which is felt at neglect by the person one 
es low spirit—as we should here say “‘ devil.”’ 3 Liberation. 

4 Tilaka. 5 Tripundra—horizontal lines on the forehead. 

6 The seed of a plant used in the worship of Shiva. 

7 A small hand-drum. 

8 Urddhvapundra—a single vertical line on the forehead. 

9 Seed of the Tulsi plant sacred to Vishnu. 

10 Gopichandana; sometimes made with the dust of Brindabun and 


other Vaishnava tirthas. 11 Sun-worshippers. 
VOL. I. 22 


338 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


or red dress, three red lines on the forehead, Sarpasdtra,* 
Yogadanda,” and so forth, for Ganapatyas*; and crescent- 
moon-shaped mark with vermilion Kunkuma,? red sandal 
and the rest, yantra-shaped forehead mark, dishevelled 
hair, red dress, trident, and so forth, for Shaktas. All 
these are nothing but instances of ordinances passed in 
conformity with the great saying, “‘ A Deva alone should 
worship a Deva.’’® Whether visibly, or in work, or in 
body, or in Shakti—in short, in every way—a Sadhaka 
must be full of the power and manifestations® of the. 
Devata he worships. It is no wonder that such men as 
disparage worship and so forth of Devata should regard 
forehead marks, three-line marks,’ ashes, red dress, 
Tulasi, rosaries of Rudraksha beads, and so forth, as 
visible marks of hypocrisy. But how regrettable is it that 
such as daily perform worship and so forth yet often 
think that the wearing of forehead marks, three-line 
marks, and the like, is only another form of accepting 
flowers, sandal paste, and other things offered to the 
Devata®; so that it is enough to wear them as little 
as possible, and wholly unnecessary to make oneself 
ridiculous in the eyes of the educated community by 
decking oneself out as a master-stripes, with the body 
smeared all over with ashes or sandal paste. Some people, 
again, think that religion or worship of Ishvara are 
matters of the spirit,? and therefore there is no necessity 


1 A thread made in the form of a serpent used as Uttariya Vastra 
(cloth). , 

2 A staff of Yogis carried as evidence of their Yogadikshaé. They 
hold it until they attain Siddhi. As Ganesha is the Guru of the Yogi 
sampradaya (community), the Ganapatyas carry this staff. 

3 Worshippers of Ganesha. 4 Saffron. 

5 In order to aid the worshipper to become like the Devata he 
worships, he adopts the signs of the latter. This helps him to establish 
the unity of consciousness. So in the Rahasya pija the Sddhaka 
dresses like a woman. 6 Vibhiti. * Tripundra. 

8 These are offered first to the Devata, and then accepted by the 
Sadhaka as evidence of the presence of the Devata with him. 

9 Literally, “‘ things of the inside.” 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 339 


J 


for external marks. Some believe that forehead marks 
and the like are a form of advertisement, in order to tell 
people that ““I have become religious.” According to 
another view, the wearing of forehead marks, rosaries, 
and so forth, is but illustration of one’s shamelessness 
and stupidity. Seeing different persons hold such dif- 
ferent views, many people become, despite their faith, 
ashamed to wear such marks in the view of educated 
men. We may praise such people as become so ashamed 
on the score of their modesty, but we are astonished at 
the sight of the shamelessness of their sense of shame. 
Or perhaps the sense of shame within them is so greatly 
ashamed that no such shame is expressed without. 
Strange, indeed, are the religious faith and devotion to 
Devata of those who even in the matter of the worship 
of Ishtadevata become afraid or anxious because of what 
other people may think or say about them. Why 
should such shameless men, who have neither the strength 
to bear personally what others say nor to remedy it, 
talk of Siddhi and Sadhana? Or perhaps it is that Siddhi 
and Sadhana are not their object, and therefore they do 
not perform Sandhya prayers and worship. We do not 
know how to make them understand, but we ourselves 
are anxious to discover how we can understand them. 
Why should they show such weakness? Whom are 
they so much afraid of ? We shall try first of all to 
understand who the people are who frighten them, and 
why they do so. 

There are many kinds of wild, ferocious animals which 
frown, grunt, roar, and make all manner of frightful 
appearances at the sight of meek men. Men are not 
among the creatures on whom they can satisfy their 
ferocious instincts. Men do not in any way resemble 
the beasts with which they are in constant feud concern- 
ing home and food; and yet if they ever accidentally 
meet a man on their path, they put on a frightful aspect. 
The buffalo’s reddened eyes, and terrible glances, are 


340 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


aimed at us, so that he may strike with the points of his 
levelled horns, and his bellowing makes the heart tremble. 
The bull’s curved neck, the horse’s kicking, the snake’s 
loud hissing with expanded hood, the dog’s howling and 
lashing of the tail, the monkey’s grinning and jumping— 
what do all these things mean? Do these animals really 
want to satisfy their ferocious instinct on men wherever 
they meet them? If so, they must have some interest 
in doing so. But what is this interest ? Whether we 
see it in a gross visible form or not, Nature’s inscrutable 
law is that there must be some interest which underlies. 
and prompts action. We cannot, of course, say that this 
law explains their action as a means of satisfying their 
ferocious instinct, but this much we can say—that it is 
an effort at self-defence under the garb of ferocity. 
Ferocity is desire to kill. Among beasts, birds, insects, 
flies, and other lower animals, and even among men of 
their nature, gratification of this instinct to kill mostly 
exists where the killed is to be the food of the killer, or 
where it is possible that that which is to be killed would, 
if alive, have affected any interest of the killer. Where 
there is no interference with such interest, but there is. 
the possibility of personal safety being in jeopardy, there 
also we may see the gratification of such instinct. The 
sight of man inspires birds, beasts, and other lower animals. 
with fear for their safety. Even if man does not show 
any intention of doing harm to them, his very presence 
fills their minds with great fear. They therefore try to. 
get rid of that fear by frightening him in their turn. 
This is why they leap and jump, grunt and roar, frown 
and fury at his sight. This vast Universe-Kingdom is. 
ever governed by the infallible rule of Dharma.t_ Under 
this rule each one is ever engaged in the performance of 
individual duty. Even the heart of the most ferocious. 
ruffian, who fears neither the punishment of the King 
nor the community in which he lives, nor indeed anybody 


1 Law. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 341 


in the world, yet in the end trembles with fear of Dharma. 
Such is the incomparably great and universe-subduing 
power of Dharma that before it this entire universe, com- 
posed of Suras and Asuras,* of moving and unmoving 
things, ever bows its head. It is matter for no wonder 
that the rule by which even the world of unconscious 
things? is ever imperceptibly governed should also to-day 
govern the educated community. If one man is afraid 
of another, the sight of any sign of the latter naturally 
rouses terror in his mind. He who is a constant server of 
Dharma is pleased by the thought thereof, and is never 
frightened. But he who is certain in his mind, whether 
he admits it to others or not, that he is a sinner against 
Dharma, becomes naturally afraid at the sight of marks 
of Dharma in another. The cause of this fear is the 
thought, ‘‘ What will be my fate 2”? Again, such people 
think: ‘“‘ One of my race and form, with hands and feet—a 
man such as I am—is about to leave me far behind, and 
to become a traveller on the eternal fear-dispelling path.”’ 
Jealousy and malice, prompted by this thought, then 
overpower that fear and reveal themselves. The weak 
heart of the unrighteous man then loses all self-control, 
and, knowing he is in the wrong, and yet not having the 
strength to set himself right, thinks himself blessed by 
the service of jealousy and malice. Everyone in the 
Sangsara is not unrighteous, whether he is able to serve 
Dharma fully or not. On the contrary, Society and 
Sangsdra are full of men who are truly sorry at their 
inability to duly serve Dharma. In the present state of 
society it is difficult to find among one hundred men even 
ten who duly carry out their religious duties. I may 
not be able to observe these practices myself, but if I 
see anyone doing so, as the Shastra enjoins, I respect 
and honour him, while if I find anyone who is, like 
myself, devoid of such practices, I hate him with all my 


1 Devas and their enemies. 2 jada. 
3 That is, religious practices, the saying of their prayers, etc. 


342 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


heart, as I hate nobody else. In this way practising 
men* who wear the sacred crown, lock,? and thread,* fore- 
head marks,‘ carry rosaries, and so forth, rightly occupy 
a high position in society. The arrogant class, devoid of 
such practices, should fall low, and are, as a matter of 
fact, doing so. The true man of practice never, even 
in his dreams, thinks that his honour and glory should be 
widespread in Society; but the universe-enchanting great 
Shakti of Dharma appears of itself in the body of a 
religious man, and overpowers by its force even beasts 
and birds, not to speak of men and women. Men and 
women bow at his feet of their own accord, and show him 
honour and respect. At the sight of this honour and 
respect the eyes of self-willed men, devoid of good 
practice, are pierced as if by an arrow. But while, on 
the one hand, Nature’s rules cannot be thwarted, on 
the other men of beastly nature cannot bear the sight. 
It is then that, finding no other available means, the 
community of self-willed men, proud of their education, 
begin to vituperate, rail at, and ridicule the religious 
man’s forehead marks, rosaries, dress, and so forth. The 
object of this railing and vituperation is not really to 
‘lame Dharma or the marks of Dharma, nor to establish 
their uselessness; what is really unbearable to these 
people is that another person like themselves should be 
honoured in the Sangsara as a religious man. They 
therefore endeavour to destroy the honour which he 
receives, and to prove his worthlessness by speaking ill 
of Dharma or marks of Dharma. If for fear of banter 


1 As we say, ‘‘ Catholique pratiquant.”’ 

2 A long lock of hair on the top of the head left when the rest is 
shaved or cut. This is as it were the Flagstaff before the royal palace. 
For here in the Brahmarandhra is the abode of the Supreme.. 

3 A cotton thread, with three strands worn slanting across the chest. 
The three strands are Kayadanda, Vagdanda, and Manodanda—that 
is, controllers of body, speech, and mind. The thread speaks to the 
wearer of the necessity of these. They are also emblematic of the 
three Gunas. 4 Tilaka (see ante, p. 337). 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 343 


and ridicule a religious man gives up wearing marks of 
Dharma, or, though he does not abandon them, people con- 
sider him worthless, then in either case the purpose of the 
railers is served; for theirs is the victory if “‘ all brothers ”’ 
become “equal.” They are saved from all fear if no one 
by any sign or acts reminds them of Dharma in any way. 
Now, I ask you, O Sadhaka! do you wish to abandon 
that at which you aim in Sadhana out of fear of these 
great heroes? Do you really count as men the cowards 
who lick the feet of beastly propensities and manifest 
their meanness at every step? Ifa beast were to threaten 
you, would you, out of fear, give up the wearing of 
dresses that befita man? The difference between a man 
and a beast is the same as that between a Sadhaka and a 
man who is devoted to the Sangsara. It is out of con- 
sideration for your human state that the Shastra has 
given you the privilege of ascending to the high step of 
Devahood. If to-day you spurn the good fortune which 
is within the reach of your hand, and become a beast in 
imitation of beasts, then why all this trouble to attain 
that human birth which is rare even for Devas? Why 
this downfall after receiving initiation in the Mantra of 
the supreme Devata ? Why, being a son of the Queen 
of Queens, do you roam about forests in the company of 
beasts? True it is that you are afraid of beasts; but 
consider what we have said, and say whether it is really 
you who are afraid of beasts, or the beasts who are afraid 
of you? Everyone knows that Akrira was afraid of 
Kangsa;? but think just for once whether it was really 
Akrara who was afraid of Kangsa, or Kangsa who was 
afraid of Akrfra. It is true that the wearing of forehead 
marks, rosaries, religious dresses, and so forth, by Akriara 
was insufferable to Kangsa, but what answer would you 
give to the question, Why were they insufferable to him ? 
1 Kangsa was King of Mathura in the days of the Pandavas, and 


Krishna’s uncle. He sought to kill Krishna, but was slain by the 
latter. Akritira was his relative, but a very pious man. 


344 PRINCIPLES OF TANT igs 


Had not the daughter! of the King of mountains,* the 
sister of Achytita,? declared (as daughter of Nanda,* 
dashed to the ground by the hand of Kangsa) that the 
son of Devaki,® who was black as a cloud, had descended 
in the house of Nanda in Gokula as death in order to 
hurl on the head of Kangsa the fatal thunderbolt ? Had 
not Bhagavan, appearing as a herds-boy,® holding the 
rod of death, been constantly before the eyes of Kangsa, 
would the latter have fainted out of fear of Kala (death) 
at the mere mention of Kala (blackness) ? In that case 
would the terrible order of Kangsa’ for the oppression of 
Devas and Brahmanas and the killing of infants been 
proclaimed in Mathura? Would he have suddenly, 
looking like a madman, left his throne and rushed out, 
crying: “ Kill! kill!’ ? Hence 1) Say seth ee 
whether the frightful appearance which Kangsa used to 
display to Bhagavan and the devotees of Bhagavan was 
intended really to frighten Bhagavan, or to save himself 
from fear of Bhagavan. The Asura® knew and yet know 
not the Bhagavan,® so that in terror befitting an Asura 
he tried to save himself from His hand. Kangsa was 
an enemy of Bhagavan. Consequently, devotees to 
Bhagavan also became objects of his enmity, for a 
devotee’s body, senses, mind, and heart are marked and 

1 Parvati. 2 Himalaya. 3 Vishnu. 

4 The Devi Mahamay4é was born as the daughter of Nanda. She 
was born at Brindabun on the same day as Krishna was born at 
Mathura. Vdsudeva, Krishna’s father, took Krishna to Nanda’s 
house, and changed him for Nanda’s daughter, whilst the household of 
Nanda was made subject to the Devi’s maya. Vasudeva made over 
the daughter to Kangsa, who tried to slay her by throwing her on a 
stone; but she, assuming a heavenly body, went to heaven, and by this 
exchange the life of Krishna was saved from Kangsa, who was led to 
this action because he had learned that a son of his sister would kill him. 

5 Krishna. 6 Gopa. 


’ The incident is similar to that of Herod’s order for the slaying of 
the innocents. 


8 Kangsa was an Asura in human guise. 


° He was in the state of knowing that Krishna was Bhagavan, but 
could not act on that knowledge. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 345 


ornamented with signs of devotion to Bhagavan. The 
sight of these marks used to make the Asura’s heart 
tremble with fear. But did the sight of this fear of 
Kangsa frighten Akrfira, the crest-gem of devotees ? 
In order to remove all causes for fear, either from men, 
Kangsa, or existence itself, Akrira brought Bhagavan, 
who is the fear of fear itself, from Brindaban to the resi- 
dence of Kangsa, and thus provided the means of freeing 
Kangsa from all fears in this and the next world Had 
Akrira been really afraid of Kangsa, and had there been 
any malice against Kangsa at the root of this fear on 
the part of Akrira, would he have brought the Friend 
of the World? from Brindaban to Mathura, and thus 
performed an act of eternal friendship to Kangsa, both 
here and hereafter 2% 

Kangsa may have entertained malicious feelings 
against forehead marks and rosaries and the name of 
Krishna, but it was because there was at Mathura a 
person* who had incurred his displeasure by wearing 
those marks and rosaries, and taking the name of Krishna, 
that, notwithstanding that he was Asura, he attained 
a state rare even to Devas. Hence I say, O Sadhaka! 
if in the ordinary worldly way you look at the com- 
munity of Asuras, hostile to marks of Dharma, consider- 
ing them to be objects of enmity, you cannot subdue this 
feeling of yours towards them by ceasing to wear fore- 
head marks and rosaries. If, on the other hand, by 
the grace of Bhagavan, you have the power to do them 
mercy, then also you will be able to do so through 
the influence of forehead marks and rosaries, and in no 
other way. 

Sadhakas will doubtless fully understand from all that 

1 Akrira took Krishna to Brindaban so that He might slay Kangsa, 
and thereby save him who had done a Sadhana of Krishna as his 
enemy. For though opposed to Krishna, Kangsa yet had always his 
mind on him. 2 Krishna. 


3 For Akraira, by getting him slain, was the cause of his being 
saved 4 Akrtra. 


346 PRINCIPLES: OF TANTine® 


we have said so far that forehead marks, three lines, and 
other signs of Dharma which the Shastra ordains to be 
worn by Sadhakas on different parts of their bodies, are 
the chief materials for the attainment! of the state in 
which they are merged in Mahabhava. The wearing 
or non-wearing of these outer marks may not matter to 
the great man who has sunk in the depths of Bhava, but 
the non-wearing of them by people whose minds have 
not been matured in Sadhana, or who are about to 
enter upon its path, is undoubtedly the sole obstacle 
which prevents the opening of the door of Mahabhava 
for their incoming. It is the mature state of this Bhava 
which is called the state of merger in the object of wor- 
ship—that is to say, self-forgetfulness at the sight of the 
manifestation of the Self* of the worshipped Devata in 
one’s mind, heart, body, and Atma, and in all the things 
of this visible Universe. The sole cause of the attain- 
ment of Siddhi in this state of absorption is Mantra- 
shakti.e Materials of worship, and so forth, are all 
means whereby we may directly realize this Mantra- 
shakti. Sadhakas acquainted with the principles relating 
to worship of course know how perfection of the state 
of merger in Bhava appears in the person of a Sadhaka 
through the influence of Mantrashakti. Nevertheless, 
in order to give some knowledge to those who are eager 
to perform Sadhana, we are here bound to shortly in- 
dicate the lines along which the system works. 


ENTRANCE INTO THE HOUSE OF WORSHIP. 


In the fifth Patala of the Annada Kalpa it is said: 
“ Next (after bathing and wearing of forehead marks, and 
so forth),4 the Sadhaka should place Samanya Arghya? 


ene) CeKelsbe 2 Svartipavibhati. 

3 Shakti as Mantra. 4 Author’s parenthesis. 

5 That is, the general and ordinary offering as opposed to the 
Vishesha arghya or special offering. 


EPRANCEPLES OF TANTRA 347 


in front of the door of the house in which Ishtadevata is 
worshipped.” | 

In the eighth Patala of the Kamala Tantra it is said: 
“ A Sadhaka should enter the house of Yajna! after first 
worshipping the Door-devata? at the door with a handful? 
of flowers.”’ 

In the fourteenth Patala of the Nigamakalpalata it is 
said: “‘ A Sadhaka should worship the Door-devata? with 
devotion first at the eastern door of the house of worship, 
next at its southern door, then at its western door, and 
lastly at its northern door, and then worship his Ishta- 
devata inside the Yantra.’’4 

In the Gandharva Tantra it is said: “‘ If the Sadhaka is 
unable to construct a house with four doors or perform 
worship at four doors, he should at one door mentally 
imagine there are four, and there worship the Devata of 
the four doors.”’ 

In the Shivarchanachandrika it is said: ‘“‘ A house of 

-Yajna should be entered with the right foot.” 

In the Meru Tantra it is said: ‘‘ A Devata’s house should 
be entered by advancing the right foot first.”’ 

In the third Patala of the Sammohana Tantra it is said: 
“ Walking with great care,? a Sadhaka should enter a 
house of worship with the right foot first.” 

In the eighth Chapter of the Gautama Tantra it is said: 
“ Driving away spirits® and meditating on Vishnu in his 
heart a Sadhaka should enter into a house of Sadhana 
with his right foot first and with his head bowed.” 

In another Tantra it is said: ““ A Sadhaka should enter 
a house of worship meditating on the lotus-feet of the 
Devi in his heart, with his left’ foot first and touching the 


1 Literally, sacrifice; here worship in general. 

2 The Dvaradevatéa—that is, the Devata presiding over the entry. 

3 Afijali; offered in the palms of the two hands joined together. 

4 See Introduction. 

5 The limbs are, out of devotion, kept as close together as possible; 
there must be no strutting or striding into the place of worship. 

& Bhitas. ’ The apparent contradiction is explained post, p. 349. 


348 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


door slightly with his left side; that is to say, leaning 
towards the right side of the door, which is the left side 
of the Sddhaka, instead of passing just through its 
middle.” 

In the Tripurdrnava it is said: ‘‘ One should enter a 
house of Yajna by advancing the left foot first.” 


REMOVAL OF OBSTACLES. 


In the Shambhavi Tantra it is said: “ Next (after 
entering into the house), the Sadhaka should remove 
divine? obstacles by means of his divine sight,® obstacles 
in the midmost spaces of the sky+ by means of water 
sanctified® with the Astra Mantra,® and terrestrial obstacles 
by three taps with the heel of his foot.”’ 

In the third Patala of the Sammohana Tantra it is 
said: ‘‘On entering into the house a good Sadhaka 
should look at the articles for worship and next dispel 
divine obstacles by his divine look, obstacles in the middle 
spaces of the sky by means of water sanctified® with the 
Astra Mantra,® and terrestrial obstacles by three taps on 
the earth with the heel of his foot.” 

The eighth Patala of the Gandharva Tantra deals with 
divine vision, and says: “‘ A Sadhaka will become of good 
mind by looking with an angry look.” 

In the second Patala of the Vishvasara Tantra it is 
said: “ Divine look’ is the name given to that steady gaze 
in which there is no twinkling of the eye.” 


1 Author’s parenthesis. Thatis, the room in which worship is to be 
performed. 

2 Divya. That is, proceeding from Devas, Devayoni, and other spirits. 

3 Divyadrishti. This steady vision (asto which, see post, is acquired 
by the Hatha Yoga process known as Trataka. 

4 Antariksha. 

5 Abhimantrita. That is, on which a Mantra has been put, or which 
has (tocoin a word) been Mantra-ized. 

6 That is, the “‘ weapon Mantra ”’ ‘‘ Phat,’’ which is always used for 
such and similar purposes. 7 Divya-drishti. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 349 


In the fifth Prakasha of the Meru Tantra it is said: 
“ Divine obstacles should be removed by _ looking 
obliquely.’ 

Taking these dicta together, we can arrive at the con- 
clusion that ‘‘ divine look”’ is the name for an angry, 
oblique look, without twinkling of the eye. 

In the Kalikulamrita Tantra it is said: ‘‘ Terrestrial 
obstacles should be removed by three taps with the heel 
othe left foot,”’ 

In Somashambhu, quoted by Raghava Bhatta,? it is 
said: ‘ Terrestrial obstacles should be removed by three 
taps with the heel of the right foot.” 

The two contradictory dicta are reconciled in the follow- 
ing way: whether in entering the room or stamping with 
the heel, worshippers of Devas should extend the right 
foot first and tap with the heel of the right foot. Wor- 
shippers of Devis? should extend the left foot first and tap 
with the heel of the left foot. 

In the Tantrasara it is said: “‘ After first removing the 
obstacles a Sadhaka should next assume the proper sitting 
posture,* or he may remove the obstacles on taking his 
seat.” 


SEAT.* 


In the seventh Patala of the Gandharva Tantra it is 
said: ‘“‘ Next, the Sadhaka should take a seat neither low 
nor too high. He should never use a seat or an Arghya 
vessel® which is broken. 

“On a seat made of the skin of black deer a Sadhaka 


1 That is, out of the corners of the eyes. 

* The great Tantrik commentator on the Sharadatilaka. 

3 The Devi’s position is on the left side of the Devata, and in the 
Chakra the Shaktis sit on the left of the respective Sadhakas in the 
circle which surrounds the Chakreshvara. Woman generally is the 
left and man the right side. 

4 Asana. There are a great number of these (see Introduction), but 
the ordinary position for worshippers is ‘‘ the loosened lotus seat ” 
Muktapadmasana. 5 For offering. 


350 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


attains liberation, and on a seat made of tiger skin a 
Sadhaka attains both wealth and liberation. In a rite 
done to attain some desire a woollen seat! is the best—a 
red woollen seat being particularly suited for the attain- 
ment of the desired object. A seat of Kusha grass leads 
to attainment of Siddhi in Mantra, and in rites under- 
taken for the purpose of killing? a black woollen seat, and 
in the worship of Tripurasundari a red woollen seat is the 
best seat. A seat for use in worship must not be more 
than two cubits in length, one and a half cubits in breadth, 
and three fingers in thickness. As regards the seat of 
deer skin and tiger skin which grant Siddhi, as spoken 
above, a Sadhaka may use them in any way he pleases, 
for there is no rule which limits their dimensions. A 
householder, even if he be initiated, should never sit on 
a skin of a black deer (in the Yoginihridaya it is said that 
Yatis, those belonging to the Vanaprastha Ashrama, 
Brahmacharis, and Bihkshus, alone are competent to sit 
on the skin of a black deer).? Earthen seats cause sorrow, 
and wooden seats bring ill-luck. Seats of the wood of 
mango, Nimva,* and Kadamva? trees in particular, bring 
destruction of family. Seats of the wood of Vakula, 
Kingshuka, and Jack-fruit trees, cause loss of all property. 
Seats made of bamboo, brick, wood, earth, grass, and 
twigs, are the cause of poverty, disease, and sorrow. 
Hence, Sadhakas should never use such seats. Nor should 
they use seats cut by weapons, worn out, broken, un- 
clean, belonging to other persons, or unwashed. Among 
wooden seats, those made of Gambhari wood alone are 
good, all others being inauspicious. In performing 
worship a Sadhaka should not take a seat without dis- 
crimination. Seats of wood and other materials also 
should be of the dimensions prescribed in the Shastra. 

1 Kambala. 2 Marana. 

3 Author’s parenthesis. The first and last are ascetics; literllay 
“those who have controlled their passions ’”’ and religious mendicants. 


The second and third are members of the Ashramas of those names. 
4 Neem-tree. 5 Nauclea Cadamba. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 35r 


Wooden seats should be twenty-fou1 fingers long, sixteen 
fingers broad, and four fingers high. If both earthern and 
cloth seats are used together’ (from this it appears that 
in the absence of all other kinds of seat earthern seats 
also may be used),? and if wooden and woollen seats are 
used together, Sadhakas not only fail to acquire future 
religious merit,*® but also lose all merits acquired in the 
past. Considering all this, a Sadhaka should secure as 
best a seat as he can for his use.” 

In the Hangsa-Maheshvara it is said: “If a Sadhaka 
sits on hair, all his religious merits’ are destroyed. The 
very touch of hair instantly spoils Siddhi. A Sadhaka 
should, therefore, make his seat of skin denuded of 
hair.”’ 

In the Kalika Purana it is said: ‘‘ One should never use 
seats made of iron, or brass, orlead. In worship it is best 
for a Sadhaka to use a seat of stone, or gems,* or precious 
metals.° Worship of Devatas, even when the Sadhaka is 
in water, should be done when seated on seats, and not in 
a standing posture. In water, seats of stone, Kusha 
grass, wood, or metals should be used, and of no other 
material. In the absence of a seat of any of these kinds, 
one should imagine such a seat in the water itself; con- 
secrate it as a seat, and then worship the Devata in the 
water.” 

In the Kamadhenu Tantra it is said: “ All the Japa, 
worship, and so forth, become fruitless of him who spreads 
a seat in a Tirtha, and performs Japa and so forth sitting 
on it. The statement that the hardness of earth is due 
to the mass of the fat of Mahishasura’s body® (and is, con- 
sequently, unclean), applies to places other than Tirthas. 
(Fat of the body of Mahishadsura is most probably a 
clerical error for fat of the bodies of Madhu and Kaitabha, 


1 That is, if one is spread over the other. 

2 Author’s parenthesis. 3 Punya. 4 Mani. 

5 Ratna. Mani and Ratna are generally used synonymously. 
Ratna may also mean here precious stones. 

8 An Asura slain by the Devi. 


352 PRINCIPLES OF TANT Eas 


or it may have been the fat of Mahishaasura in some other 
ealnaeseneee 

In the thirty-first Patala of the same Tantra it is said: 
“A good Saddhaka should never sit on seats in Siddha, 
Pithas, and Tirthas.? If he does, he will not only reap no 
fruit for having visited such Tirthas, but will suffer the 
consequence of desertion of Tirthas.”’ 

‘A seat is called Asana for giving Atmasiddhi (A) 
(Siddhi of the self); preventing Sarvaroga (Sa) (all dis- 
eases), and giving Navasiddhi (Na) (fresh Siddhi).”’ 

In the Goraksha Sanghita it is said: “ Seated postures 
are aS many in number as Jivas and animals. For every 
one of the eighty-four lakhs® of Jivas a separate seated 
posture has been spoken of. Maheshvara alone is aware 
of the particulars of all these postures. Of the aforesaid 
eighty-four lakhs of seated postures, two are the best— 
namely, the Siddha seat (Siddhasana) first and the lotus 
seat (Kamaladsana) next. (As these seats are not used in 
worship and such other rites, we desist from dwelling on 
their characteristic peculiarities here.)*” 

Raghava Bhatta says: ‘“‘ Japa, worship, and so forth, 
should be performed sitting in postures, such as Padma, 
Svastika, Vira, and so forth,®? otherwise they will be 
ineffectual.”’ 

In another Tantra quoted by Raghava Bhatta it is 
said: “‘ Place the left foot on the right and the right foot 
on the left, gird up the loins and heels, and fix the gaze at 
the tip of the nose. To sit in this way is the Padma seat, 
adored of all Sadhakas (1).”’ 

In the eighth Chapter of the Gautamiya it is said: “ The 
two feet should be placed well on the two thighs. This is 
the Padma seat, beloved of Yogis.”’ 

1 Author’s parenthesis. 

2 All the Devipithas and Pithas, where great Sadhakas have attained 
Siddhi and other places of pilgrimage. 

3 A lakh=100,000, 


* Author’s parenthesis; but as to the lotus seat, see next passage. 
5 These are described post. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 353 


In the second Patala of the Sammohana Tantra it is 
said: “ A Yogi should sit with a straight back, crossing 
his feet This is called Svastika seat (2).”’ 

“ A Yogi should sit with a straight back, keeping one 
of his feet on the ground and placing his other foot on the 
thigh of that foot. This is called Vira seat.” Although 
the Shastrik authority does not say which foot should be 
on the ground, it has been the practice among successive 
generations of adepts? to keep the left foot down and 
place the right foot on the left thigh (3). 

In the third Patala of the Sammohana Tantra it is 
said: ““O Devi! a Sadhaka should sit on the prescribed 
seat,° arranging his limbs in any of these forms of sitting 
posture. At the time of worshipping a Devata it is not 
proper to place one’s feet in any other way.” 

In the Yogini Tantra it is said:.“‘ Placing a seat? on the 
ground a Sadhaka should sit on it, adopting the Svastika 
or some other form of sitting posture, and covering his 
feet with his cloth.”’ 


RULES RELATING TO DIRECTION IN WORSHIP.* 


In the Yamala it is said: “The space between the 
worshipped (Devata) and the worshipper (Sadhaka) should 
be on the east. The right side of the Sadhaka should be 
the south, the left side north, and the back west. In 
every case these directions should be adopted in perform- 
ing worship.’ That is to say, although the directions are 
fixed according to the rising and the setting sun, the 
direction which the Sadhaka faces in performing worship 
is the east. For there is no such thing as an absolute 
direction in the world, all directions being relative to the 
positions of the individual. The term “ direction,” itself 

1 Literally, ‘‘ putting his feet within the folds of his knees.” 

2 Acharyyas. 

3 Material seat spoken of before. Asana is used in the twofold 
signification of the actual thing on which a Sddhaka sits and the posture 
in which he sits. 4 Dik-nirnaya. 

YOu... i. 23 


384 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


proves this sufficiently. ‘‘ That which is merely directed 
or pointed out is called direction.’’ For instance, that 
which I call my east will be directed or pointed out as 
west by a person who is to the east of me. Hence it is 
quite plain that direction exists in respect of an individual, 
and not absolutely. But, blinded by the vanity of 
philosophic wisdom, some people do not see this derivative 
meaning of direction, but speak of the existence of abso- 
lute directions. Essentially, however, there is no such 
thing as direction; but whatever direction is pointed out 
at any time is direction at that time. If directions are 
fixed according to the rising and setting of the sun, they 
are the same for all people, and the pointing out of a 
direction by one person settles it for all. 

For the reasons given above, the Shastra has said in the 
Bhavachudamani: ‘“‘O Devi! according to the desire of 
a Sadhaka the Devata appears in all directions (for Her 
who is Omnipresent it is impossible that there should be 
either front or back). Still, one should perform a worship* 
and other ritual acts at night, facing the north2 In 
worshipping Shiva in particular, one should always take 
care to face the north, whether during day or in the night. 
As regards worship and so forth relating to Vishnu, it is 
best to face the east, though it is not improper to face the 
north. As regards Shakti, it is best to face the north, 
although it will not be out of order if the Sadhaka faces 
the east.” 

In the Varahiya it is said: “‘ Having bathed, one should 
sit for worship, clad in white, having duly done Acha- 
mana® and facing east.” 

In the Gautamiya it is said: ‘‘ A SAdhaka with well- 
controlled Atma should sit on the prescribed seat facing 
the east. 


1 Literally, ‘‘ Divine work.” 

2 This actual north will be the ritual east. 

3 Ritual sipping of water for the purpose of cleansing the lips, mouth, 
and throat. 


PRUNCIPEES OF TANTRA 355 


“ Bathed, clad in clean, fine, and unsoiled cloth, with 
face, hands, and feet washed, with forehead brightened 
by a high white line; having duly done Achamana;? 
having performed the sacred hand-mudra;? facing the 
east, properly seated in the Baddhapadmasana‘ or Svas- 
tika posture—thus should a Sadhaka worship with joined 
palms his Gurus and Ganesha.”’ 

In Haribhaktivilasa it is said: “A worshipper of 
Shrikrishna should generally sit facing the east during 
day, and in the-night a Sadhaka, with composed coun- 
tenance, should perform worship and so forth, facing the 
north. 

“Worship and so forth should be performed sitting, 
facing the north or east in front of the image of Devata.”’ 
That is to say, if the established Devata® is facing the 
west, the Sadhaka should face the east, and if the Devata 
is facing the south, the Sadhaka should face the north. 

In the Kalika Purana it is said: “‘ Of all the quarters 
the north pleases the Spouse of Shiva. A Sadhaka should. 
therefore, always sit facing the north in the worship of 
Chandika.” 

In the Shaktanandatarangini it is said: “‘ Worship of 
Devas should be performed facing the east during the day 
and facing the north in the night, but worship of the Devi 
and worship of Shiva should always be performed facing 
the north.” 


TIME FOR WORSHIP. 


In the twenty-eighth Patala of the Gandharva Tantra 
it is said: ‘‘ After receiving initiation from Guru in accord- 
ance with the injunctions a good Sadhaka should daily 
worship the Devi in the morning with undivided heart.” 

In the second Patala of the Yogini Tantra it is said: 
“* He who desires to reap a full crop of fruits from his 


1 Urddhvapundra. 2 Cleansing the lips and throat. 
3 Kara-mudra. 4 See Introduction. 


5 Pratishthita Devata; that is, the permanently fixed Devata. 


356 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


rites should begin them in the morning and finish them 
all by noon.’ 

In the eleventh Patala of the Nigamakalee it is 
said: ‘‘ The daily worship should be begun after the pass- 
ing of the half of the first Prahara! and finished at the end 
of tenDandas? If Japa and so forth are performed in the 
morning, it is not improper to perform worship at noon.” 

In the third Ullasa of the Mahanirvana Tantra it is 
said: ‘‘ The duties of the morning® should be performed 
in the morning, Sandhya prayers should be said at the 
three divisions of the day,* and worship of Ishtadevata 
should be performed at noon. This is the general rule 
for the initiated in all Mantras.” 


PLACE FOR WORSHIP. 


In the seventh Patala of the Gandharva Tantra it is 
said: “It is prohibited to worship Devata and so forth 
in a place which is unclean with hair, insects, and the like, 
cold, very low, very high, jungly, very windy, infested. 
with other animals, covered with dust or mud, where 
beasts are near by,” treeless, at a distance from water, 
open on all sides,® or unpleasant to the worshipper.” 
Worship should not be performed in even a holy place if 
its soil is saline or infested with insects.” The above is 
an account of places, the use of which for Yajna is pro- 
hibited. Below is given an account of places which are 
recommended for use in Yajna: 

““O Mahadevi! a place for the performance of Yajna 
by a Sadhaka should possess the following characteristics: 
It should be near to a tank or well, in a garden of flowers, 

1 The first three hours of the day. 2 Four hours after daybreak.. 

3 Pratahkritya. 4 The junctions at morn, noon, and even. 

5 Pashubhirnavilokita. That is, worship should be done in a place 
which cannot be approached by beasts. 

6 Andavritachaturdikshu. 


7 All such circumstances distract from the necessary tranquillity 
of mind. 


PRINCIPEES OF TANTRA 357 


having a beautiful temple? on it, with a clean altar, 
furnished with articles for drinking and eating, perfumed 
with camphor, sandal, incense, and so forth; bright red 
like the rays of the morning sun, pleasant, delightful to 
the mind, containing all the weapons of Devata and a 
well-furnished inner house.? 

“The best places are holy grounds,® river-sides, caves, 
Tirthas, summits of mountains, confluences of rivers, holy 
forests, solitary gardens, at the foot of bael-trees, valleys, 
places overgrown with Tulasi plants, pasture lands, 
temples of Shiva without a bull, at the foot of Ashvattha,4 
Amalaki® trees, cowsheds, islands, temples, seashore, 
one’s own house, the abode of Guru, places which naturally 
tend to generate single pointedness of mind, places free 
of animals and solitary. If a Sadhaka performs worship 
in solitude at any place, the Devi Herself accepts the 
leaves, flowers, fruits, and water offered by him. If the 
Sadhaka has sufficient reverence and devotion, if there 
are sufficient articles for worship, and if the worship is 
performed in solitude, the Mother of the world who is 
attached to Her devotees appears of Her own will at such 
a place.” 


WORSHIP OF SHIVA. 


In the fifth Patala of the Todala Tantra it is said: ““A 
Sadhaka, be he a Shaiva, or a Vaishnava, or a Shakta, or a 
Saura, or a Ganapatya,® should worship first Shiva and 
then other Devatas. If a person worships another 
Devata after having first worshipped Shiva, the fruits of 
that worship are truly increased a crorefold.’ If, how- 
ever, he first worships another Devata and then worships 
Shiva, all the fruits of that worship are devoured by 
Yakshas and Rakshasas.’’® 


1 Mandapa. 2 Grihantara. 
3 Yagabhimi; where worship is done. 
4 Pipul. 5 Emblic Myrobalan. 


5 Worshippers of Shiva, Vishnu, Devi, the Sun, and Ganesha. 
7 Ten millions. 8 Evil spirits. 


358 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Shiva’s words in the sixty-fourth Patala of the Utpatti 
Tantra are as follows: “‘ How can a Shakta,* or a Vaish- 
nava,! a Shaiva,? or a Ganapatya,’ attain Siddhi if he does 
not worship Shiva? O Devi! if a person worships 
another Devata without first worshipping Me, that wor- 
shipped Devata does not accept his worship, but returns 
to Her own seat, having cursed him. O Devi! O Mahesh- 
vari !? whatever in the way of flowers, Naivedya® and so 
forth, from even a mountain heap of sweetmeats duly 
arranged, fruits and all sorts of flowers gathered as pre- 
scribed, and of all kinds of food heaped as high as Mount 
Sumeru, and quantities of curry and so forth as great as 
great seas, are offered without first worshipping Shiva, 
will be unacceptable as excrements. In the Kali age, 
whoever worships another Devata without first worship- 
ping Shiva is guilty of a great sin.” 

In the first Patala of the Lifigarchchana Tantra it is 
said: ‘‘O Parameshvari! every one, be he a Shakta, 
Vaishnava, or Shaiva, should first worship Shiva with 
bael-leaves, then pray for His permission to worship other 
Devatas, and afterwards worship them. Otherwise, Ma- 
heshvari! without worship of Shiva everything will be 
as unacceptable as excrements. O Parameshvari!* so 
long as one lives on earth, one should daily worship 
Shivalifiga,? which is Brahman with supreme devotion.” 

In the twelfth Patala of the Matrikabheda Tantra it is 
said: “‘ The Devatas who are within this Universe, as well 
as those who are without it, are all gratified if only Shiva 
is worshipped.’ 

In the Mahalingeshvara Tantra it is said: “‘ A Sadhaka, 
whoever he may be, belonging to the three worlds will 
suffer a painful death if he worships Kali, Tara, and 
Tripurasundari,® without worshipping earthen Shivalifiga.”’ 


1 Worshippers of Shiva, Vishnu, Devi, the Sun, and Ganesha. 
2 The Devi as great Lord of the Universe. 

3 Offerings of food. £ See note 2, ante. 

5 The phallic form of Shiva 6 Forms of the Devi. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 359 


In the Tripura Kalpa it is said: ‘So long as a bad 
Sadhaka does not worship Shivalifiga, neither Tripura- 
sundari nor Tara nor Kali accept his worship.” 


“ Mahavidyam pijayitva 
Shivapijam samacharet 
Anyathakaranat devi 
Na ptjaphalamapnuyat.’” 


In the Meru Tantra it is said: ‘“‘ All Brahmanas, Ksha- 
triyas, Vaishyas, Shidras, and Anuloma? half-castes, 
should ever worship Shivalifiga with care and with Mantras 
special to its worship.” 

In the Yajnavalkya Sanghita it is said: ‘‘ By wor- 
shipping a single Vanalifiga® a man reaps the fruits of 
worshipping ten million other Lifgas. Constructing an 
altar (Gauripitha)* with copper, crystal, gold, stone, or 
silver, one should establish a Vanalifiga on the Pitha® 
and then worship it. Even liberation, not to speak of 
worldly gain, comes within the grasp of him who wor- 
ships Vanalinga daily with devotion.” 

In the Viramitrodaya it is said: “A householder 
should not worship a Vanalifiga which is very small, or 
very large, or brown. A Vanalifiga shining and deeply 
dark like a black bee is the best for worship by a house- 
holder. A Vanaliiga, whether it is with Pitha (Gau- 
ripitha)® or without Pitha, should be worshipped even 
without purification or so forth by means of Mantras. 
Every Vanalifiga, whether it exists in a palace or in a 
Pitha, grants Siddhi and liberation to the Sadhaka. 


1 No translation of this Sanskrit verse is given in the original, which 
in English runs: ‘“‘ Worship of Shiva should be performed after wor- 
shipping Mahavidya; otherwise, O Devi! the fruits of worship will 
not be reaped.” 

2 Born of father of higher caste and mother of lower caste. 

3 A Lifiga formed of stones of a particular oval shape found in the 
Gandaki River. 

4 Author’s note. This is the Yoni which encircles the Lifga. 

5 That is, the Gauripitha. 6 Vide ante, note 4. 


360 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


“O great King! none of the Vanaliigas existing on 
this earth require Pranapratishtha,? purification,* or the 
invocation or dismissal of Devata2 (In the eternally 
established Brahmalifiga Bhagavan the Creator of all 
things, is eternally present, so that both invocation and 
dismissal are impossible in respect of it.)”’ 

In the first Patala of the Lifgarchchana Tantra it is 
said: ‘‘ Beloved One! the country in which the Liga is 
not always worshipped is as degraded as a trenching- 
ground. If Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, and Vaishyas do 
not worship the Lifiga, they will at once become Chan- 
dalas.4 And if Shaidras do not worship Shiva, they will 
attain the state of swine. O Mistress of Devas! the 
house in which Shiva is not worshipped is like a pit of 
excrements, and one should avoid the food and drink of 
that house just as one avoids excrements.”’ 


ORDER OF WORSHIP. 


In the seventh Chapter of the Gautamiya Tantra it is 
said: “‘ Worship is of five kinds. Hear from Me the 
difference between them. I shall one after another 
speak of the differences between the five forms of wor- 
ship—namely, Abhigamana, Upadana, Yoga, Svadhyaya, 
and Ijya.° 

“ To go to the house of Devata, cleanse the place where 
the Devata is seated, and remove from the person of the 
image the pastes, flowers, garlands, and so forth, attached 
to it. This is called Abhigamana. Updadana is the 
name given to the cutting of flowers and the like and the 
collecting of materials such as incense, sandal, and so 
forth. IJjya is the name for the worship of the Ishtade- 
vata, with offerings of materials such as Padya® and so 

* That is, the life-giving rite. 2 Sangskara. 

3 Avahana and Visarjjana (see ante). 


4 One of the lowest and most unclean castes. 
® These are each described post. ® Water for washing the feet 


PRINGIPLES OF TANTRA 361 


forth, accompanied by Mantras, according to the Shastra 
after Bhtitashuddhi,* Pranayama,” Nydsa,? mental wor- 
ship, and so forth. Svadhyaya is the name given to the 
doing of Japa according to the Shastra of the great Mantra, 
consisting of the name ‘ Krishna,’ reading its Sikta,* 
Stotra,* singing the name of Hari, and studying the 
spiritual Shastra, in their respective order. Yoga is the 
meditation of Ishtadevata in one’s mind. O man of 
good deeds! these are the five forms of worship. They 
grant the fruits of Samipya, Saripya, Sadrishya, and 
Sayujya in succession:°> Abhigamana and Upadana grant 
Samipya, Ijya grant Sadrishya, Svadhydya grants 
Saripya, and Yoga grants Sayujya.”’ 

(The Gautamiya Tantra ordains worship of Vishnu. 
Consequently, it speaks of Japa of the Mantra, consisting 
of the name of Krishna, and singing of the name of 
Hari. But this is merely an indication of a Sadhaka’s 
duty relating to his Ishtadevata, be he a worshipper of 
Shakti or of Shiva, or of any other Devata. Sdadhakas 
other than Vaishnavas will understand the Japa of the 
name of Krishna, and singing the name of Hari to stand 
for Japa of the names of their individual Ishtadevatas, 
and singing of their names.) 


1 Purification of the elements. 2 Control of breath. 

3 See Intreduction. 4 Hymn. 

5 These are four qualified states (pada) of Mukti. Sddrishya is 
apparently Salokya, which precede and lead up to Kaivalya, or absolute 
liberation, which is the establishment of the true form (Svaripa) of 
consciousness. 


CHAPTER XX 
CEREMONIAL WORSHIP—Continued 


ia 


PURIFICATION OF THE “ FIVE.’ 


N the Kularnava Tantra it is said: ““O Devi! so long 
as a Sadhaka does not carry out the five forms of 
purification, how can he perform worship of a Devata ? 
These are Purification of self (Atmashuddhi), of place 
(Sthanashuddhi), of Mantra (Mantrashuddhi), of articles 
for worship (Dravyashuddhi), and of Devata (Devas- 
huddhi). Worship withou tpurification of the five is 
intended only for abhichara? 

“1. Purification of the self of the Sadhaka consists of 
proper bathing, purification of the elements (Bhitas- 
huddhi), breath-exercises (Pranayama), and so forth, and 
Nyasa of six parts of the body (Shagafigany4sa), and all 
other forms of Nyasa. 

“2. Purification of place is making the house of worship 
as clean as the centre of a mirror by dusting, wiping, and 
so forth, and adorning it with auspicious ornaments, 
such as powders of five colours, with seat, canopy, in- 
cense, lamp, flowers, garlands, and so forth. 

“3. Purification of Mantra is the performance of Japa 
of the letters of the alphabet which compose the Matri- 
kamantra, once in their regular order (anuloma), and 
once again in the opposite order (viloma),* by linking the 
letters of the Malamantra with them. 

1 Pafichashuddhi. 2 Rites done for malevolent purposes. 

3 See Introduction. 

4 That is, in the first place from A to Ksha, and in the second from 


Ksha to A. 
362 


ERINGI PLES OF TANTRA 363 


“4. Purification of articles is the sprinkling on articles 
of worship of water sanctified by a recital of the Mila- 
mantra and the weapon Mantra,! and then displaying 
the Dhenumudra (cow-mudra) over them.? 

“5. Purification of Devata is the placing of the image 
of the Devata on the Pitha,* invoking the Shakti of the 
Devata into it by means of Antramantra Pranamantra* 
and so forth, then bathing it (at least)® thrice along with 
recital of Milamantra,® and finally adorning it with gar- 
ments, ornaments, and the like, and offering incense, 
light, and so forth. These five forms of purification 


must be performed first, and then the worship should be 
commenced.”’ 


PURIFICATIONSOFR THE.“ TWELVE.’ ’ 


In the eighth Chapter of the Gautamiya Tantra it 
is said: ‘‘ Next is related the method of purification of 
the twelve, as followed by Vaishnavas. Purification of 
feet (2)® by Vaishnavas is the use of the fect in such 
blessed acts as going to the house of Bhagavan, following 
Bhagavan in YAatras® and festivals, and circling?® round 
Bhagavan with devotion. The purification of hands (2), 
which is done by taking leaves, flowers, and so forth, in 


1 That is, the Astra Mantra ‘‘ Phat.’ 

2 This manual gesture resembles the teats of a cow. Dhenu (cow) 
is here Kamadhenu, the celestial cow whose teats exude nectar. By 
displaying the Dhenumudra the Sadhaka expresses the desire that the 
offerings of food placed before the Devata may be turned into nectar 
(Amrita). 3 The seat. 

Antra is entrail, intestine. Pranamantra is the life Mantra. 
Author’s parenthesis. 

That is, the principal Mantra of the Devata 

Dvadashashuddhi, 

It is by adding the numbers within brackets in the text that the 
number 12 is obtained—viz., feet 2, hands 2, tongue I, ears 2, eyes 2, 
head 1, nostrils 2=12. 

® Festivals. Some festivals are specially so called, such as Ratha 
jatra (car festival), Sndna Jatra (bathing festival), and Rasajatra 
(Rasa festival). 

10 Pradakshina. The worship goes round and round the image. 


ant nn oO 


364 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


the hands wtih devotion, for the worship of Bhagavan is 
better than any other form of their purification. Purifi- 
cation of (the tongue or) speech (1) is produced by singing 
with devotion the name, beauty, and qualities of Bha- 
gavan Shri Krishna. Purification of the ears (2) is caused 
by hearing recitals of Bhagavan’s play and qualities; 
and purification of the eyes (2) is produced by the seeing 
of festivals in honour of His name. Purification of the , 
head (I) is caused by placing on the head water touched 
by Bhagavan’s foot,? and flowers, garlands, and so forth, 
offered to Bhagavan, and by bowing to Bhagavan’s 
lotus-feet. Purification of the nostrils (2) is produced 
by smelling the fragrance of offerings, scents, flowers, and 
so forth. Leaves, flowers, and all else offered at the 
lotus-feet of Shrikrishna purify the three-worlds, so that 
the touch of them instantly purifies a Sadhaka’s body, 
belongings, mind, life, and all else. (Here also Shaiva, 
Shakta, and other worshippers should understand the 
above as an indication of that which should be done in 
respect of their individual Ishtadevatas.) ”’ 

In the sixth Ulladsa of the Shaktanandatarangini it is 
said: “‘ After performing purification of hands with 
flowers, sandal paste, and such other things, one should 
fence the quarters? by clapping the hands thrice, higher 
and higher,® saying the weapon Mantra,? and snapping 
the fingers? ten times. Then, after having removed all 
obstacles and purified the flowers and so forth, make 
obeisance to the three Gurus® on the left side.” 

1 Padodaka-Padya is offered as the first article of worship for washing 
the feet of the Devata. After the feet have been so washed the wor- 
shipper sprinkles the water on his own head. 2 Digvandana. 

3 The palm of the left hand is struck with the forefinger and middle 
finger, and each time the hands are raised to a position higher than the 
last. 4“ Phat.” 

5 The hands are carried in a circle round the person or thing fenced 
and ‘‘ Phat” is said. A circle is thus established which excludes all 


evil influences. 
6 That is, Guru, Parama Guru, and Pardpara Guru. The Guru, his 


Guru, and the latter’s Guru. 


Pic NGEPEES TOP TANTRA 365 


In Tantra it is said:t ‘‘ One should make obeisance to 
Guru, Parama Guru, and Pardpara Guru on the left 
side, to Ganesha on the right side, and to one’s Ishta- 
devata on the head.” 


PURIFICATION OF ELEMENTS.” 


In the Gandharva Tantra it is said: “It is by virtue 
of purification of elements,” Rishi-nydsa, Pithanydsa, 
Nyasa of six parts of the body, Nyasa of hands, Matrika- 
nyasa, and Vidyanyasa, that a Sadhaka becomes full of 
the Deity, and these are the Nydsas* which must be per- 
formed daily. All other Nydsas are said to be Nydsas 
for the attainment of some particular desired end.’’4 

In the same Tantra it is again said: “‘ It is by virtue 
of control of breath,° meditation,® and Nyasa, that a 
Ssadhaka attains a Divine body. Abundance of Nyasa 
make the worship bear abundance of fruits. O Mahesh- 
vari! a Jiva’s body constituted of five elements, and ever 
associated with fzces and urine, is in its very nature 
unclean. In order that this unclean body may be purified, 
it is dried up by means of Vayumantra,’ and burnt and 
reduced to ashes by means of Agnimantra 


1 No name is given in the text. 

2 Bhitashuddhi. The elements (bhiita) are the five Tattvas, 
evlewemoedit = fite. water,’ and “earth,” though the reader 
must not identify these with the meaning of the English words. Thus, 
“ earth ”’ (Prithivi) is not common earth, but that universal movement 
(Parthiva vayu) which gives solidity to matter. Thus, ice, though itisa 
compound of water, is in the Parthiva or solid state. See Author’s 
““ Six Centres and the Serpent Force.”’ 

3 Nyasa comes from the root “‘ place,” and means the placing of the 
tips of the fingers and palms of the right hand on various parts of the 
body accompanied by Mantra. Its object is to infuse each of such 
parts with the life of the Devata, so that the Sadhaka becomes Deva- 
tamaya (see Introduction). 

4 That is, the fulfilment of some worldly end. Spiritual desire is 
no desire (Kama). 5 Pranayama. 6 Dhyana. 

7 That is, ‘‘ Yang,’’ the vija of the Vayu Tattva. 

8 “ Rang,” the vija of the Tejas Tattva. 


366 PRINCIPLES OF :TANTRA 


‘““ A shower of nectar’ is caused by means of Chandra- 
mantra,” and a flooding of water by means of Varuna- 
mantra.? The five elements composing the body must be 
purified by contact with unmanifested Brahman, brought 
about by means of Rechaka, Piraka, and Kumbhaka of 
breath,4 with the help of the said Mantras. This is 
called ‘purification of elements.’ After performing 
purification of elements in this manner, one should place 
Arghyas® and such other things, and next perform 
Matrika-nydsa, Mantra-nydsa, breath-control,® and Rishi- 
nyasa.’”? 


Purification of elements is accomplished by inner 


Yajna® and Pranadyama® together. Inner Yajna is 
accomplished in this way.t° Mother Kulakundalini, the 
World Consciousness"? living in the womb of the Mdla- 
dhara lotus, is awakened. She is taken along the Su- 
shumna path, piercing on the way throughout the six 
Chakra Miladhara, Svadhishthana, Manipura, Anahata, 
Vishuddha, and Ajfia. She and the Jivatma residing in 
the heart are united with the supreme Tattva of Parama- 
shiva residing in the petals of the thousand-petalled lotus 
Sahasrara. The Mayik elements!” of the phenomenal 
Mayik world are merged in the Parobrahmatattva of 
Shivashakti. The elemental products!* are the twenty- 
four Tattvas of earth, water, fire, air, ether, smell, taste, 
sight, touch, sound, nose, tongue, eye, ear, skin, voice, 
hand, foot, anus, genitals, Manas, Ahangkara, Buddhi, and 
Prakriti. The Sadhaka thinks to himself that in 
their Mayik existence they exist as seeds,44 and thus 


1 Amrita. 2 That is Ung. 3 That is, the ‘“‘ water ’’ Mantra 
Vang ae 4 That is, expiration, inspiration, and retention of 
breath in Pranayama. 

5 Offerings. 6 Pranayama. 7 See Introduction. 

8 See post, p. 367. 9 See Introduction. 

10 See as to this author’s Introduction to ‘‘ Mahanirvana Tantra” and 
“* Six Centres and the Serpent Force.” 

11 Jagachchaitanya, the virdta consciousness, or consciousness of the 
world as a whole. 

12 Prapaficha. +S Vikara. 13 Vive 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 367 


meditating offers a full Ahuti! of the Brahmdnda? in 
Brahman Itself. Next, with the help of purified Mind- 
Prakriti,? existing in the form of seed (vija), Mother 
Kulakundalini must, after re-awaking the dualistic 
Tattvas from their supreme union or undifferentiated 
non-dualistic Tattva of Shakti and possessor of Shakti 
or Prakriti and Purusha, be re-established in Her own 
place in the womb of the Midladhara lotus, and there 
united with Svayambhushiva. 

Next, in order to perform the outer worship of Her as 
Ishtadevata, a new and purified body must be constructed, 
composed of Mantra—that is to say, illumined with the 
Brahman-spirit of Mantrashakti, the substance of which 
is Brahman-vibhitis* only. Finally, the outer worship of 
Ishtadevata with Nyasa and so forth on that body must 
be commenced after re-establishing, in their own places as 
ingredients and materials for the worship of the Mother 
of the world, the five elements of earth and so forth, and 
the elemental Shaktis (force), all existing in subtle forms. 

Though we know that inner Yajna, or penetration of 
the six Chakras, forms a part of purification of elements, 
we do not dare enter into the subject here in this short 
Chapter, which explains the principles of worship. 
Because, firstly, the subject is so extensive that even 
another treatise of the same volume as this book would 
be insufficient for even such explanation as a person 
of such insignificant intellect as we are could by our best 
efforts give. Secondly, it is impossible to make the public 


1 Parnahuti—offering in fire in Homa in outer Yajna. But in the 
Tantrik inner Yajna Ahuti is the offering to the Devi residing in the 
body in the form of the Kulakundalini Shakti or Shabda Brahman. 
So when wine is drunk in Rahasyapfja, the wine is Ahuti to Her. 

2 Universe. 

3 Manasprakriti or Prakriti in the form of mind as sensorium. 

4 Brahmavibhitimaya—manifestations of Brahman power. 

5 See A. Avalon’s “‘Six Centres and the Serpent Force,’ being a 
translation, with Introduction and Commentary, of Purndnanda 
Svami’s Shatchakranirfipana, itself, forming the sixth Chapter of the 
Shritattvachintamani. 


368 PRINCIPLES OF TAN Tiga 


understand the meaning of the six Chakras, since it is 
not possible for anybody who is not a practising Sadhaka 
to understand them with the help of any amount of 
interpretation, however great his intellect and learning 
may be. Thirdly, an explanation of the subject of the 
six Chakras should properly be given by a Guru to his 
Shishya, for the Guru has, by communicating from 
his own body a Divine Shakti (power) into his Shishya’s 
body, opened the path for intercommunication of Shakti 
between the two bodies. It is possible for him alone to 
make his Shishya understand the account of the path 
of Mother Kulakundalini’s journey from Mdladhara to 
Sahasrara and back in the Shishya’s body. The com- 
bined efforts of even thousands of other interpreters will 
not succeed in explaining even a hundredth part of what 
a Guru will thus be able to teach his disciples. And 
something may be done if that hundredth part is preached 
orally. It is, however, not possible to gain success by 
written teaching. We would, however, in spite of the im- 
possibility of such an explanation, feel gratified to a certain 
extent if we could give a general description. But that 
also is impossible, for if we were to write an account of 
even the positions only of the six lotuses, it would not be 
possible to deal with the matter! without mentioning, 
explaining, and showing the necessity for the Mantras 
and so forth of the Devatas presiding over the pericarps, 
centres, filaments, stalks, feaves, and so forth, of those 
lotuses. Acting under the command from our Gurudeva, 
and in accordance with my own views, I have never as 
yet publicly mentioned these Vijamantras and so forth, 
and shall never mention them publicly. For this reason 
we are obliged to desist from entering into an explanation, 
although we would have been very glad to do so if we 
could. Fourthly, even if one is to offer an explanation, 
it will not only in no way render any help to the 
community of Sadhakas, but will also be likely to greatly 


1 Tattva. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 369 


injure them both here and hereafter. For it is the com- 
mand of Bhagavan Bhairavanatha! Himself, the Ishvara 
of the Tantra Shastra, that whoever advances in the path 
of the six Chakras without the help of the shadow of 
Guru’s fair feet is likely to fall into great danger at every 
step. Knowing all this, we desist from doing a thing 
which will lead to the ruin of both ourselves and others. 
We hope that Sadhakas will realize that we have done 
this for their good also. Of course, one may try to ex- 
plain the fundamental principles of Vija Mantras and so 
forth by hints and suggestions, and using symbolical 
words, signs, and so forth. But, firstly, this is throwing 
dust in the eyes of Dharma;? and, secondly, it is very 
difficult to say what space such an explanation would 
take. Now that the ‘“ Tantratattva’’ has come so near 
its end, it would be sheer madness to undertake so un- 
certain and extensive a task. Moreover, we do not 
believe that every subscriber or reader of the “ Tantra- 
tattva’”’ is astrue Sddhaka. If we learn that the publi- 
cation of such a book is necessary for the Community of 
Sadhakas only who receive their information from trust- 
worthy sources and successive generations of Gurus; 
and if, by the merciful glance of the All-good Mother 
suitable arrangements can be made, we shall in time 
proceed to carry out our desire of explaining the principle 
of the six Chakras. Sdadhakas will pardon me for not 
introducing the subject now and in this book. Further, 
according to the advertisement of the “‘ Tantratattva,’’ an 
explanation of the subject of the six Chakras is necessary 
in connection with that of Kulachara,? after the Pan- 
chamakara* and such other things have been explained.® 


1 Shiva, the Lord of Bhairavas. 

2 Deceiving Dharma, for such a course would be injurious to religion. 

3 The way of the Tantrik Kaulas. 

4 The Pafichatattva, meat, wine, fish, parched grain (Mudra), and 
woman. 

5 As these have not been explained, the time has not come for 
dealing with the subject. 

VOL. II. 24 


370 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


In the second Chapter of the Gautamiya Tantra it is 
said: “‘ Pranayama is of two kinds, according as it is 
Sagarbha and Nigarbha.1 Sagarbhapranayama is that 
which is performed along with Japa of Mantra, and 
Nigarbhaprandyama is that which is performed without 
any Mantra, and only according to counts. O man of 
good deeds! there is no Tattva, no Tapas, knowledge, 
state, Yoga, treasure, or other thing superior to Prana- 
yama.? One is sure to meet Brahman by the Yoga, 
which consists of the practice of Pranayama continuously 
for one year.’ It is undoubted that by dint of Pranayama 
alone all the Mayik envelope of Paramatma who is con- 
sciousness itself, is destroyed. There is no path to 
liberation besides Pranayama, so that whatever Sadhana 
is performed without Pranayama becomes fruitless. It 
is by having recourse to Pranayama that Munis have 
attained Siddhi, and a Yogi who is attached to Prana- 
yama is no mere Yogi, but Shiva Himself. Men learned 
in the Yoga Shastra have given the name Pranayama 
to the process which consists of inspiration, expiration, 
and retention of the vital air* The word “ Prana” 
means breath, and “ Ayama ’? means its control. That 
is, Pranayama, the Yogi’s instrument for Yoga, by which 
the Pranavayu (vital air) is checked. Yogis practice 
this Pranayama by holding their nostrils at the be- 
ginning as well as the end of Yoga. Air should be 
breathed out by means of the right nostril, breathed in 
by means of the left nostril, and retained with Japa of 
Mantra thirty-two times, by holding both the nostrils. 
Thisis called “ Pranayama.’’ By force of this Pranayama 
a Brahmana can speedily burn all sins, such as Brah- 
minicide, drinking of wine, incest, and so forth. Great 


1 These terms literally mean ‘‘ pregnant and non-pregnant.’’ In 
the same way cleansing of the Nadis is called either Samanu or Nirmanu 
—that is, with or without the use of Vija. 2 Matra. 


3 Breath-control according to the Shastrik injunctions. Strictly 
speaking, itis the development of Prana through control of the Prana- 
vayu. Itis generally described post. 4 Pranavayu. 

5 Prano vayuriti Khyadta 4yamastannirodhanang. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 371 


sins, such as fceticide, are destroyed by a practice of 
Pranayama for a single month. 

The Pranayama-practising Yogi who daily practises 
Pranayama sixteen times in the morning and sixteen 
times in the evening destroys all his sins within a short 
time, just as within such time fire consumes a heap of 
cotton. Pranayama is the expiation for all sins. As 
when a person puts off the coat of mail which he was 
wearing, his body becomes free from discomfort, so by 
dint of Pranayama a Jiva throws off the sheath of nes- 
cience? generated by desires and Karma, and is converted 
into immaculate Brahman. O Gautama! what is the 
use of saying much? Listen to my words: there is no 
path superior to Pranayama for Yogis to attain liberation. 
Hence a Sadhaka should, after performing Pranayama 
in the manner stated above, place all the Pitha-shaktis 
of Ishtadevata in his own body at the time of worship.” 

In the Vishuddheshvara it is said: ‘“‘ A Sadhaka should 
practise Pranayama thrice with Miélamantra.2 Of the 
three, Puraka, or inspiration, must be made through the 
Ida nadi® on the left, and with Japa sixteen times; 
Kumbhaka, or retention of breath, must be made in the 
middle, or Sushumna nad¢i, and with Japa sixty-four 
times; and Rechaka, or expiration, must be made through 
the Pingala, or the right nadi, with Japa thirty-two times. 
The exercise should then be continued, provided the 
Sadhaka is capable of doing so, in the reverse way—that 
is to say, Piraka through Pifigala, Kumbhaka in Sush- 
umna, and Rechaka through Ida; and then again in 
the opposite way—that is, Pairaka through Ida, Kum- 
bhaka in Sushumndé, and Rechaka through Pingala. 


1 Avidya. 2 The principal Mantra of the Devata worshipped. 

3 From the Méaladhara to the twelve-petalled lotus below the 
‘Sahasrara a Nadi (“‘ nerve ’’) runs which is called the Sushumna, within 
which are two others—viz., the Vajra and Chitrini Nadis. On each 
side of the Sashumna are the Ida and Pingala Nadis, the three being 
'Son,- Moon,’ and “‘ Fire: See Arthur Avalon’s “ Six Centres and 
the Serpent Force.” 


ay PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


The numbers of Japa stated above apply to the case of 
a Sadhaka who is able to do them. A Sadhaka who is 
unable to perform so many Japas will practise Pranayama 
with a quarter of these numbers.” 

In another Tantra it is said: “‘ Air should be breathed 
in with Japa done sixteen times; retained with Japa 
done four times this number-——that is to say, sixty-four 
times—and breathed out with Japa done half the number 
of that recited in retention—that is to say, thirty-two 
times. One who is unable to do Japa to this extent will 
practise Pranayama with quarters of these numbers— 
that is to say, eight! in breathing in, thirty-two in reten- 
tion, and sixteen’ in breathing out. Again, if one is. 
unable to do even this much Japa, he will follow quarters. 
of these numbers—that is to say, two in inspiration, 
eight in retention, and four in expiration.” 

The Shastra has thus ordained rules for the practice of 
Pranamaya, varying with the capacity of Sadhakas. And. 
there are even shorter methods for those who are unable- 
to carry out any of the above numbers of Japas. 

“Air should be breathed in through Ida, and, with. 
Japa of Milamantra done once, retained in Sushumna, 
with Japa done four times, and breathed out through. 
Pingala, with Japa done twice. Pranayama should be- 
performed thrice by repeatedly practising the above 
process. Pdraka is the name given to the act by which 
the stomach is filled with air from without, and Rechaka. 
is the name for the process of throwing out air from. 
the stomach.’ 

In the Jnmanarnava it is said: “‘ Pranayama is the- 
name of the process of holding the nostrils with the thumb. 
and third and small fingers without the help of the first 
and middle fingers. O Devi! without Pranayama one. 
is not competent to worship a Devata.”’ 


1 These are halves aad not quarters of the preceding numbers. 
2? That is, inspiration and expiration. This is the life of alk 
breathing things, and it is this which Pranayama controls. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 373 


NyAsa. 
Rishyadinydsa3 


“No Japa or Sadhana will be effectual without 
Vinyasa, or placing of Rishi (Seer), Chhanda (metre), and 
Devata. 

‘““He who has, after receiving instruction from the 
mouth of Maheshvara Himself, performed full Sadhana 
of a Mantra of a Devata is the Rishi of that Mantra of 
that Devata. His Nydsa should (on account of his thus 
having the position of Guru) be made on the head. 
Chhanda (metre) is called so on account of its doing 
Chhadana,? or keeping together all the parts of the Mantra. 
On account of its being composed of letters and feet, the 
Nyasa of Chhanda should be made in the mouth. And 
because Devata constantly resides in the heart-lotus of 
the Sadhaka, Her Nyasa should be made on the heart. 
A Sadhaka cannot reap the fruits of a Mantra if its 
Rishi and Chhanda are unknown to him. And for those 
who do not know the mode of application® of the Mantras 
they practise, those Mantras lose their strength.” 

In another Tantra it is said: “The Nyasa of Rishi 
should be made on the head, that of Chhanda in the 
mouth, that of Devata on the heart, that of Vija on the 
anus, that of Shakti on the feet, and that of Kilaka on 
all limbs of the body.” 


Mainkad-Nydsa?4 


In the Shaktadnandatarangini it is said: “ Nydsas 
spoken of in the Tantra-Shastra should be performed 
after first purifying the materials of worship and so forth. 


1 Nyasa of Rishi and so forth, as explained in the text. 

2 Root Chhad, to cover. 3 Niyoga. 

4 Nydsa of M&triké. The external Matrika are the letters and the 
sound they connote. The inner MAatrika, of which they are the mani- 
festation, is subtle sound or Jivashakti. 


374 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Matrika Shakti is of two kinds—namely, Para and 
Apara. Para Matrika resides within Sushumna, and 
Apara Matrikaé exists in the body.’ Outer Matrika is 
but another name of Apara Matrika1 The Nyasa of 
inner Matrika should be made on the petals, pericarps, 
and so forth, of the six lotuses comprising the six chakras, 
and the Nyasa of the Mantras of Outer Matrika should 
be made, in order, on the forehead, face, eyes, ears, nos- 
trils, cheeks, lips, teeth, head, mouth, hands, feet, joints,” 
sides, back, navel, belly, heart, shoulders, and from heart 
to hands, from heart to feet, from heart to belly, and from 
heart to face. 

If the Matrika Mantras® are placed in the reverse order, 
then the Matrika is called Sanghara Matrika; and if 
they are set forth in the order of the places of their 
origin from Shri-Kantha* downwards, then it is called 
Shri-Kanthadi-Matrika. | 


Mudra for Nyasa of Matrika. 


“The Nyasa should be performed mentally or with 
flowers, or with the thumb and the third finger.” 

In the Gautamiya Tantra it is said: “ Matrika is of 
four classes—namely, Kevala (plain), Matrika, Matrika 
with Vindu (-), Matrika with Visarga (:), and Matrika 
with both Vindu and Visarga. Kevala Matrika grants 
Vidya (learning), Matrika with both Vindu and Visarga 
grants Bhoga (enjoyment), Matrika with Visarga grants 
sons, and Matrika with Vindu grants Vindu or liberation. 
Whoever performs this Matrika-nydsa, which grants 
wealth, fame, and longevity, and destroys the evils of 
the Kali age, acquires the Vibhitis® of Sadashiva Him- 
Selina 


1 In the text it is Para, but this is an obvious mistake; it should be 
Apara. 

2 Agrabhaga. 3 Letters of the alphabet. 

4 Throat*s..ohn, 4s bonorine 5 The powers, etc. 


BRING PRPCESSOF «CAN TRA 375 


Vidya-Nydsa+ 


Nyasa of Vidya should be done on the head, Mdalad- 
hara,” heart, three eyes, two ears, mouth, two arms, back, 
knees, and navel. Whoever performs Nydsa in this 
manner attains the state of Pashupati,* even though he 
is in the body of a Pashu or Jiva.” 


Shodha-Nyasa.4 


In the Vira Tantra it is said: ‘‘ All the sins of a Sad- 
haka are destroyed if the Shogha-Nydsa, which is the 
principal of all Nydsas, 1s performed. Shod@ha-Nyasa 
overcomes the poison of snakes, prevents death from 
accidents, and destroys evil Grahas® and diseases. All 
harmful things are destroyed by the force of Shodha- 
Nyasa, and enemies are made thereby friendly. 

The poems of a Sadhaka who performs Shodha-Nyasa 
sweetly flow in waves like streams of grape-juice.® The 
eight forms of Siddhi—namely, Anima’ and so forth—lie 
within the hollow of his hands. Contemplation in the 
performance of Shodha-Nyasa destroys all sins of body, 
speech, and mind. All lesser sins® are destroyed by re- 
course to Shodha-Nydsa. A Sadhaka who has attained 
Siddhi in Shogha-Nydsa can, if he desires, enter into 
whatever form he sees. The life of him to whom a Sad- 
haka who has done Shodha-Nydsa bows is shortened.? 
Even Devatds, not to speak of men, tremble with fear 
at the sight of a Sadhaka who performs Shogha-Nyasa.”’ 

Rishyadi-nydsa, Matrika-nydsa, Vidya-nyasa, Tattva- 

1 Nyasa of Vidya, as above described. 

2 The centre, between the anus and root of the genitals. 

eeShiva. 4 Six kinds of Nydsas, 

Stars or planets ruling the destinies of creatures. 

Drakshdrasa. 

The power of becoming very small, very great, etc. 

Upapataka. 

It is inauspicious to be bowed to by one who is superior to oneself 


ODT A 


376 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Nyasa, Shodha-Nydsa, Jiva-Nyasa, Anga-Nyasa, Kara- 
Nyasa, Vyapaka-Nydsa, Pitha-Nyasa, and many other 
Nyasas, have been spoken of in many Tantras. It would 
be extremely improper for us to publish their application. 
All that we can do is to refer to the authorities only. We 
therefore desist from referring to their application. 
-These things, which can be learnt from Gurus only, 
Sadhakas will learn from their own Gurus. The etymo- 
logical meaning of the word “‘ Nyasa’ has been given in 
the Shastra as follows: 

“Just as wealth acquired with Nyaya or rectitude, 
when worn on the body in the form of ornaments, be- 
comes a source of joy and of security in adversity and 
prosperity to its owner, so the Vijas of Devatas, when laid 
out on the limbs of a Sadhaka’s body, become to him a 
source of Brahma-bliss on the one hand, and of security, 
both here and hereafter, on the other. The word 
Nyasa is formed by the combination of the initial 
syllables of Nyadya (because Nyasa is like wealth acquired 
with Nydaya or rectitude), and of Sarvva (on account of 
its capacity to secure Sarvva, or all things).” 

There is no means equal to Nyasa for attaining the 
state of perfect absorption in Bhava! for Devata. The 
chief end of Nyasa is at first by means of particular Nyasas 
to establish one’s Ishtadevata as differentiated Mantra 
Shakti? in all parts of one’s body; and then by means of 
Vyapaka, or comprehensive Nyasa, to feel the presence 
of the Devata as one undivided entity whose substance is 
Mantra all over one’s body from the feet to the crown 
of the head? It is by virtue of Nydsa that Sadhakas 
have been able to accomplish their desired ends. It is 
by virtue of Nydsas that Sadhakas are free and fearless, 

1 Vide ante, p. 326, et seq. 

2 Parichchhinna Mantrashakti. The Devata, as appearing in a 
particular Mantra, is thought of as defined or embodied in that par- 
ticular Mantra. Moreover, the Mantra is in the first place applied to 


particular parts of the body, and finally by Vyapaka Ny4dsa application 
is made to the whole body. 3 Brahmarandhra. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA ayy) 


unconquerable in the world of Suras, Asuras, and men. 
Fear itself flies away with fear on hearing the name of 
the Mother uttered with leonine voice. Of whom, then, 
can a Sadhaka be afraid who holds in his heart that 
Mother Abhaya,! the frightener of fear and dispeller of 
the fears of the three worlds? How can he fear who 
sits on Her fear-dispelling lap ? Who in the regions of 
Suras and Asuras,” moving and unmoving things, Indra, 
Chanda, Vayu, Varuna, Yama, and Yaksha,? has the 
power to thwart his purpose by any weapon? The 
thunderbolt* of Indra, the rod® of Yama, the serpent- 
chain® of Kuvera,’? and the club? of Vayu—which of 
these has the power to cope with him ? 

Does he who has taken the Rajrajeshvari up on his lap, 
or who has seated himself on the lap of the Rajrajeshvari, 
fear the soldiers and generals of the State? Thisis why 
a Sadhaka can proceed alone, proudly with a fearless 
heart, to perform Sadhana over a dead body, or practise 
Dhyana in a horrible cremation ground? in the midst of 
a dense forest. Standing between the world on the one 
hand and the Mother of the world on the other, the 
Sadhaka unfurls the standard of victory, and jumps into 
the arms of the supreme Devi of Victory.° “Fear” isa 
term never found in the dictionary of him whose life’s 
motto is “ Victory.” Hence a Sadhaka sits in worship 
of the Mother by covering his body with the undestruc- 
tible armour," consisting of Mantra, given by the Mother, 
enveloping his limbs with the spirit and energy” of the 
Mother, and becoming full of the Mother on the lap of 
the Mother. The Nyasa of Mantras on the Sadhaka’s 
body in the course of his worship of the Mother is there- 
fore nothing but keeping that which is his own thing 

1 Fear-dispelling Devi. 2 The Devas and their enemies. 

3 The Lord of the celestials, the Moon, Air, Waters, and Death 
Devatas, and the class of Devayoni called Yaksha. 

4 Vajra. 5 Danda. 6 Nagapasha. 

7 Lord of wealth. 8 Gada. 9 Shmashana. 

10 Jayajayanti. 41 Kavacha. 12 Tejas. 


378 PRINCIPLES OF TANGER 


(self-hcod)! as a trust (Nyasa) with the Mother. And it 
is the interest accruing out of this trust estate which is 
the only remaining resource at the last moment in this 
Sangsara of existence. 

Seeing this deep and solemn meaning of Nyasa, Gitan- 
jali? has said: 

“Everything of Brahmamayi is full of Brahman. 

“Ot! a Brahmafjali® to Her is the seeing Her with 
the eye-Brahman, taking Her to the heart-Brahman and 
the thinking of the foot-Brahman. 

“rt. O! nor hands, nor feet, nor ears, nor eyes nor 
anything of Her is made of the elements. The substance 
of Her form is Brahman. From the toes of Her feet to 
the crown of Her head, and at every place Brahman alone 
is manifest. 

“2, The nature* of Her body is only truly known to 
Vishnu, the pervader of the World, when severed by His 
Sudarshana Chakra, every part of Her body gave rise 
to a perfect image of Her in each of the fifty-one Pitha- 
Chakras.° 

“3. 0! he alone who worships Her knows how 
Her body is formed. After the completion of the chief 
worship, abstruse truth concerning the Brahman is re- 
vealed during the worship of the six limbs® 

“4. The land of Thy birth is Thyself. In Thyself art 
Thou manifested. In Thy heart art Thou Thyself. Thy 
head, Thy crest, Thy Kavacha, Thy eyes, and Thy 
weapon, are all Thyself. 


1 Ahangkara. 2 The author’s volume of poems of that name. 

3 Afijali or offering made to Brahman. 4 Tattva. 

®° When Shiva, after the death of his spouse Sati at the Daksha 
Yajna, was wrought with grief, and the world was thus, by the loss of 
His guiding and ruling power, endangered, Vishnu took the dead body of 
Shiva’s spouse from His arms, and that He might no longer nurse the 
remembrance of Her cut it into fifty-one fragments, which fell at 
various places in India called Pithas, at each of which the Devi is 
worshipped. . See p. 8, A. and E. Avalon’s ‘‘ Hymns to the Goddess.” 

6 Referring to the Shadanga Nyasa on the body of the Devata before 
pranapratishtha. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 379 


“5. Becoming Thyself, with Thyself, the Sadhaka sinks 
His self in Thyself. And again at the conclusion of wor- 
ship bringing out ‘ Thyself’ and ‘ Myself,’ the Sadhaka 
unites Thyself with His self and becomes One. 

“6. At the beginning of worship ‘I am He,’ and at its 
end “I am He.’ The‘ Thou’ which comes in the middle 
is also made of ‘I’; otherwise, how does Nyasa on Thy 
limbs affect Me or Nydsa on My limbs affect Thee ?# 

“7, When love awakes, is Sadhana possible between. 
Thyself and Myself 2? For when relation is lost in un- 
differentiation, the worshipper of Brahmamayi, intoxi- 
cated with the bliss of love, then becomes all full of 
Brahman. 

“8. Shiva is disconsolate with weeping at the thought 
that Her beauteous feet no longer touch His six limbs. 
What a mistake on the part of Shiva! In all Thy limbs 
art Thou, butin Thy feetamI. Hence I say My medita- 
tion on those feet is no error on My part.’’* 

In Shyamarahasya, Kalitattva, Shyamarchana Chan- 
drika, Kamala Tantra, Vira Tantra, Mahanirvana Tantra, 
Annada Kalpa, Todala Tantra, Gautama Tantra, Tara- 
rahasya, and many other Tantras, there are marked 
differences of opinion as regards the order in which 
Pranayama, Bhitashuddhi, Nyasa, and so forth, should 
be performed. Some Tantras ordain Bhttashuddhi 
after Pranayama, and others Pranayama after Bhitas- 
huddhi. Some ordain their performance before placing 
of Arghya,4 and others after it. In view of the existence 
of such differences of opinion, Bhagavan, the Creator of 
all things, has, in the Svatantra Tantra, decided the 


l They are one and the same, and therefore when the Sadhaka does 
Nyasa on Himself he does Nyasa on the Devata also. 

2 Love assumes union, and Sadhana is the state which leads to it. 

3 The verse refers to Shiva’s grief on the death of His spouse Sati. 
Shiva was deluded in thinking that He had lost the Devi because 
Sati had gone. For the Devi is everywhere, and not only in the feet 
of Sati. Though the Devi is everywhere, yet the Sadhaka fixes his 
mind on Her feet only. 4 The offering. 


380 PRINCIPLES OF. TANTRA 


question when He says “different Tantras ordain 
different orders of worship. A Sdadhaka should follow 
any one of them.’ That is to say, one should perform 
worship and so forth according to the rules ordained in 
that particular Tantra which is specially concerned with 
the worship of the particular Ishtadevata whom the 
devotee may worship. 

In the Kularnava Tantra it is said: “‘ He who daily 
performs Nyasa according to rules stated in the Agama 
Shastra attains Divine Shakti, and acquires Siddhi in 
Mantra. O my beloved! from the presence of the 
Sddhaka who performs Japa of his Ishta mantra along 
with Nydsa, Kavacha,! and Chhanda,? Devatas of ob- 
struction® fly just as a herd of elephants flies from the 
presence of a lion. The misguided one who does Japa‘ 
without performing Nyasa is beset by all manner of 
obstacles, as a young deer is beset by tigers.” 


MENTAL WORSHIP. 


The Shastra ordains Dhyana? after performance of 
Nyasa and so forth, and before commencement of mental 
worship. The plain meaning of the word “ Dhyana” 
is a single-pointed meditation. The Shastra also lays 
down which particular Devata should be contemplated 
in what particular form. It is merely this description 
of forms which is known as Dhyana in the society of to- 
day. Treatises on the rituals also give these Dhyana- 
mantras. The purpose of this is that the remembrance 
of these Mantras greatly helps the meditation of the 
Devata’s body from feet to head and from head to feet 
in order. But in course of time this purpose has been 
lost, and Dhyana has been reduced to a mere recitation 
of the Dhyana-mantras. Many people are under the 


1 The protective Mantra, 2 Vide ante, p. 373. 
3 Vighnadevata. 4 “ Recitation ”’ of Mantra (see Introduction) 
> Contemplation, vide post. 


PUN Ore Phas Obe TANTRA 381 


impression that whether they actually meditate on the 
form of Devata or not, Dhyana is performed if they 
merely recite the Dhyadna-mantra after Pitha-Nydsa. 
But the decision of the Shastra is otherwise. According 
to the Shastra, Dhyana is performed by really meditating 
on the form of the Devata, no matter whether the 
Dhyana-mantra is recited or not; for the Shastrik meaning 
of the expression ‘‘ Dhyadyet”’ is “should meditate,” 
and not “should recite the Dhydna-mantra.” Hence, 
the Dhyana which is pérformed by simply reciting the 
Dhyana-mantra while the mind is wandering elsewhere 
is no Dhyana of the Devata, but is rather a Dhyana of 
the worshipper himself. We often see that worshippers 
or Purohitas consider the time which is occupied in the 
recitation of the Dhyana-mantra to be a period of leisure 
for the mind, and utilize it in thinking on any other 
subject. Of course, one’s Siddhi in the worship of 
Devata depends on the manner of one’s Dhyana. It is 
therefore needless for us to say anything on the subject. 
But it is a settled fact that worship performed by this 
mode of Dhyana is no worship at all. 

In the Sanatkumara Tantra it is said: ‘‘ Outer worship* 
should not be done without first performing mental 
worship, for without inner worship outer worship is 
fruitless.”’ 

In the Bhitashuddhi Tantra it is said: ‘‘ Inner worship 
is ordained in all outer worships. O Maheshvari! a 
single inner worship grants the fruits of a crore* of outer 
worships. What necessity is there for outer worship for 
one who has become fully accomplished in inner worship 
which, even if performed but only once, grants the fruits 
of a crore* of outer worships? An effort to perform 
outer worship is senseless after inner worship has been 
perfectly accomplished. So also is it where there is want 


1 Worship of the Image, with materials such as flowers, lights, 
sandal, etc. 
2 Ten million, 


382 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


of materials, for in the absence of necessary materials 
outer worship is never fruitful.”’ 

In another Tantra it is said: “Even if all articles 
necessary for outer worship are available, it should be 
performed after performance of inner worship.” And 
nowadays we often come across the class of Sadhakas 
arrogating to themselves a high religious competence of 
whom we have spoken before as the people who consider 
outer worship as “ lower than the lowest.” They con- 
sider it beneath their dignity to worship a Devata with 
outer articles like flowers, sandal paste, incense, light, 
and so forth; for, with the notion “I am He,” they per- 
form worship by offering flowers of mercy, forbearance, 
and so on, and sacrificing the beasts of lust, anger, and so 
forth. Moreover, they even say that this form of worship 
only is true worship, or, in other words, outer worship 
is but useless trouble and wanton destruction of life. 
It is not that we accept or reject all that these people say. 
We are bound to accept with all submission whatever 
the Shastra approves of. It is, therefore, necessary to 
see once and for all what the Shastra says on this subject. 

In the Mahanirvana Tantra it is said: ‘“‘ The Sadhaka 
should, after performing Dhyana of the Ishtadevata in 
this manner, put a flower on his own head, and then 
worship Her with mental articles with great devotion. 
First, he should offer his heart-lotus for Her seat and 
then offer the Amrita! flowing from Sahasrara? for the 
washing of Her feet. The mind should be offered as 
Arghya,® and the Amrita flowing from Sahasrara for 
Achamana‘ and bathing. The element® Akasha,® should 
be offered as raiment, the sense of smell as perfume; 
the heart as flower; the five Pradnas’ as incense; the 

1 Nectar. 2 The thousand-petalled lotus in the cranium. 

3 The ritual offering. si 

4 Water which is sipped to cleanse the lips, mouth, and throat. 
be Tattvae 
6 


Ether and the space at which it appears. 
Prana, Apana, Vydna, Udana, Samana (see Introduction). 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 383 


element? fire? as light; the sea of nectar? as food offering?; 
Anahata Dhvani° as a bell; the element air® as a Cha- 
mara,’ and the functions of the ten senses and the rest- 
lessness of mind as the dance. Next, in order to perfect 
self-absorption in the Devata, the Sadhaka should offer 
fifteen handfuls? of mental flowers at Her lotus-feet. 
These fifteen handfuls of flowers in the form of Bhava?® 
consist of the ten flowers of non-mayd, non-egotism, 
non-attachment, non-vanity, non-delusion, non-arro- 
gance, non-enmity, non-perturbance, non-malice, and 
non-covetousness; and of the five flowers of ahingsa,!” 
control of the senses, mercy, forgiveness, and knowledge. 
Next should be offered with the mind?’ a sea of nectar, 
a mountain heap of flesh and fried fish, heaps of fried 
grain," with clarified butter, sweet rice, Kula-nectar, Kula- 
flowers,*® and water used for washing the Pitha!® Next, 
after offering as sacrifices, lust as a goat, and anger asa 
buffalo, the Sadhaka should proceed to perform mental 
Japa*’ In this Japa the fifty Matrika letters will be the 
heads of a rosary, and Kulakundalini Herself will be the 
thread on which these beads are strung. After offering 
Japa in this manner and mentally bowing with eight 
limbs,*® and thus finishing the inner Yajna,?® the Sadhaka 
should proceed to perform outer worship. At the be- 


Pe lattva: 2 Tejas Tattva. ° sudha. 4 Naivedya. 

5 The subtle sound which is produced in the heart-lotus. Nada 
(sound) is either Ahata, which is produced by the contact of two sub- 
stances, or the Anahata nada, which exists without such contact, or 
’ the Hangsa itself. At a certain stage of Yoga practice Yogts hear a 
bell-sound in the Anahata Chakra. 


6 Vayu. 7 Fly-whisk made of yak’s tail. 

8 Dancing is done before the Image in worship. 9 Afijali. 

10 Vide ante, p. 326. 11 Akshobha—that is, tranquillity of mind. 
12 Non-injury. 13 These are all ideal offerings. 

14 Mudra. 15 See A. Avalon’s ° Mahdanirvana Tantra.” 
16 Vide ibid. 17 Manasa Japa, as to which see Introduction. 


18 Ashtanga prandma, a form of obeisance in which eight parts of 


the body touch the ground, the tips of the toes, the knees, the elbows, 
tip of nase, and forehead. 
19 Sacrifice or rite. 


384 PRINCIPLES OF TAN Tie 


ginning of outer worship there is purification’ of Special 
Arghya,* concerning which listen to what I say. The 
mere placing of the Special Arghya greatly satisfies the 
Devata. On seeing the Arghya vessel put in its place, 
Yoginis® and Brahma and other Devas and Bhairavas 
dance with joy, and grant the fruits of the consummation 
of worship.” 

It is true that the Shastra lays down these rules for 
mental worship or inner Yajna, and it is clearly affirmed 
that this worship is more fruitful than crores* of other 
worship; but it must also be understood that inner 
Yajna or mental worship bears crorefold* fruit only if it 
is thoroughly performed. It is all very well to speak or 
hear of giving the heart-lotus for a seat and the nectar 
from Sahasrara® for washing the feet; but we must con- 
sider how many people there are who are able to carry 
this out practically. It is a terrible thing even to hear 
for anyone who is not a Sadhaka accomplished in the 
penetration of the six Chakras.° Does it not make you 
ashamed to think of offering the five elements Akasha 
and so forth’ as raiment, scent, flower, incense, and a 
light ? It is true that for one who offers handfuls of 
flowers of non-maya, non-egotism, non-attachment, non- 
vanity, non-delusion, non-arrogance, non-enmity, non- 
perturbance,® non-envy, non-greed, non-injury, control 
of the senses, mercy, forgiveness, and knowledge, there is 
no necessity for offering handfuls of real flowers. But 
it is difficult to restrain one’s laughter at the mere thought 
that a Jiva of the Sangsara who lives in the womb of 
Maya, and is wholly engrossed in feelings of lust and anger, 
greed and delusion, vanity and envy, will offer non-maya, 


1 Sangskara. 2 Offering as distinguished from SAmanya Arghya. 
3 Avarana Devatas of KAli, etc. 
4 Crore=ten million. 5 Vide ante, p. 328. 


6 Shatchakrabheda (see Introduction and A. Avalon’s ‘‘ Six Centres 
and the Serpent’s Force ’’) 

7 Space or ether, air, fire, water, earth. 

8 Vide ante—tranquillity of mind. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 385 


non-attachment, non-enmity, and so forth, as flowers. 
You have no doubt the right to cull and offer flowers, 
but nothing can be more foolish on your part than to 
proceed to collect and fill your flower-vessel with flowers 
of a kind of which there is not even one plant in your 
garden. There is the provision for sacrificing lust as a 
goat and anger as a buffalo. But is it possible for a Jiva 
attached to the Sangsdara to offer such sacrifices ? Is it 
not the height of presumption on your part to proceed to 
offer as sacrifice, and to boast of having offered, the goat 
and the buffalo, the oppressions and executions of which 
render you restless, and make you flee with fear both 
day and night ? You are given to saying in and out of 
season that outer offerings of leaves, flowers, incense, 
lights, Naivedya,*’ and so forth, are nothing. But we 
ask, Had these things been nothing, could you have 
known anything of that which you consider as some- 
thing ? If there were really no such thing as leaves, 
flowers, incense, lights, and so forth, whence, then, has 
come the provision of offering by analogy non-maya, 
non-arrogance, and so forth, as flowers, and lust, anger, 
and so forth, as goats and buffaloes in sacrifice? If 
there is at the root really no offering of flowers, whence 
comes the provision for the offering of non-maya, non- 
arrogance, and so forth, as flowers? You say that the 
external offering of flowers and so forth is nothing. But 
I ask, Is the offering of flowers of non-maya and so forth 
something real ? Can non-maya, non-arrogance, and so 
forth, be ever flowers ? Can real flowers have anything 
to do with the mind? Do plants in a garden ever bear 
flowers of non-arrogance ? Does lust ever really move 
about in the form of a goat ? Does anger ever approach 
you really in the form of a buffalo ? Can any of these 
things be ever an object of offering >? Now, ponder and 
say whether it is the outer worship or mental worship 
which is truly real. All that belongs to mental worship 


1 Food offering. 
VOL, II. 25 


386 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


is but the imagining of an image of outer worship, and is 
a shadow of it. When a Jiva really attains the state of 
non-maya, does he any longer make any distinction 
between the worshipper and that which is worshipped ? 
What Brahman will he worship, and for what purpose, 
he to whom Brahman is everywhere in the world, and 
who has become Brahman himself ? In fact, it is because 
Maya has not disappeared that provision is made for 
offering flowers of non-maya. The sole purpose of mental 
worship is that haply, in consequence of repeatedly 
thinking of flowers of non-maya, the bonds of Maya may 
be snapped in course of time. Otherwise, the Shastra 
would never have permitted a person who is steeped in 
Maya to offer flowers of non-maya. By such daily prac- 
tice of daily meditation and concentration the cloak of 
Maya that covers a Jiva is likely to fall off. This is the 
reason why, notwithstanding that worldly Jivas like our- 
selves have now no competency for meditation and 
Samadhi, which is knowledge, there is yet the possibility 
that he may be able by constant practice of outer worship 
to proceed along this path in course of time, by the 
blessing of Guru and the grace of the Supreme Devata. 
This is why, in dealing with the subject of a Sadhaka’s 
effort to achieve the impossible by offering things which, 
though he may wish at heart to give, he has really no 
power to give, the Shastra has said: “O Sdadhaka! 
even if you are unable to make an external offering, you 
have at least the right to worship the Devi who is mind 
by seating Her in your mind, to the knowledge and full 
contentment of your mind. Why should you be sorry 
on this account so long as the Mother who is mind exists 
and your mind is your own? Open for once the door of 
the temple of mind, and, seating the Mother, who is the 
Mind of the mind, on the throne of the mind, worship 
Her with all your mind, all your heart, and all your world.’ 


1 The world is considered the SAdhaka’s, and the offer of it to Her 
is seeing Her in everything in the world. 


PaceNG tLe LES Or TANTRA 387 


The Tull oblation in Her worship is completed with the 
full satisfaction of the mind.’ Fulfil the desire of your 
heart by offering in handfuls at the feet of the Devi 
seated on a corpse? all the worldly objects, desire, enjoy- 
ments, and aspirations, which are yours. Finish the 


mind’s play with the Mother to the satisfaction of your 


mind. If the Mother who is mind itself appropriates 
to Herself the functions of your mind, it will no longer 
be necessary for you to perform even mental, not to 


speak of outer, worship. 


So long as outer worship endures, there is the provision 


which requires performance of mental worship also. 


But even where these materials for outer worship are 
wanting, the Shastra ordains that there also mental 
worship makes the Sadhaka’s worship complete. For, 
She for whom worship is ordained is a thing of the heart, 
and outer worship is only an expression of the feelings 
of that heart. 

In the Yamala it is said: “‘O Maheshvari! where 


outer worship is impracticable, the Spouse of Shiva 


should be worshipped in the heart; and from this worship 


the Sadhaka will reap the fruits of all forms of worship.” 


inthe Gandharva Tantra it is said: “-The man who 


otters mental Naivedya® to the Mahadevi with devotion 


attains longevity and happiness. He who places round 


the neck of the Devi who is mind itself a mental garland 


of a thousand lotuses, lives in the City of the Devi for 
hundreds and thousands of crores of Kalpas,* and then 
(if he has desires)° in his next birth acquires sovereignty 
over the entire earth with all its seas. He who mentally 
walks round the Mahadevi has, through the influence of 
such movement round the Dakshina,° no longer to make 


1 The sense is, worship Her so long as you are not fully satisfied. 
Because, if you are not satisfied, She is not. 


2 She is here thought of in Shavasana. 3 Food offering. 
4 A crore is ten millions. A Kalpa is a period between two world 
dissolutions. 5 Author’s parenthesis. 


6 A name of the Devi, meaning the Merciful and Gracious One. 


388 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


any journey to the South (Dakshina) Nor will he see 
Hell in the Kingdom of Yama. He who devotedly bows 
to the lotus-feet of Mahadevi conquers this Brahmanda,? 
composed of three worlds, and sinks in Brahma-bliss 
in the eternal abode of the Mother of the world. He 
who, being incapable of such mental action, is restless 
with the thought, ‘ I shall worship Mahamaya, the spouse 
of Maheshvara, with various kinds of Naivedyas,’*® and 
who under the urgent promptings of this thought re- 
peatedly prays, ‘O Mother! give me Naivedyas® ac- 
cording to my mind. Let me worship Thee to the satis- 
faction of my mind by offering thee Naivedyas,? which 
are Thine’; or who, being himself incapable of making 
the offering, repeatedly urges another to do so, saying, 
‘ Offer Naivedya® to the Mother,’ he, too, conquers the 
three worlds, and enjoys perfect bliss in the Devi’s 
abode.”’ 

In the sixth Ullasa of the Shaktanandatarangini it is 
said: “‘ Those who seek the Devata without, forsaking 
the Devata residing in the heart, are like a man who 
wanders about in the search for glass after throwing 
away a Kausttibha gem* which he held in his hand. After 
seeing the Ishtadevata in one’s heart, one should establish 
Her in the image, picture, vessel, or Yantra,® and then 
worship Her. O Parameshvari! in the worship of 
Devatas one should think of the particular ornaments. 
and carriers® which belong to them individually.” 

“Next, I shall speak of inner Yajna, by virtue of 
which Sadhakas become full of the Divinity. Sitting 
comfortably with the face towards the east or north, a. 
Sadhaka should meditate on the Sea of Nectar in his heart. 
In that sea is the Isle of Gems,’ with sands of gold. It 

1 The region of the dead, the Kingdom of Yama. 

2 Universe. 3 Food offering. 

4 The Kaustibha is a great gem secured by Vishnu at the churning. 
of the ocean. 


5 The diagram such as the Shrividya Yantra on the cover of this. 
book. 6 Vahana. 7 Manidvipa. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 389 


is wondrously adorned with Kalpa-trees,1 laden with 
flowers, and with Mandara, Parijata, and other celestial 
trees, which are ever in bloom and fruit; fragrant to its 
farthest quarters with the sweet smell of various flowers, 
over which hover swarms of black bees, gladdened by 
the fragrance of their gay beauty. The isle resounds 
throughout with the sweet music of singing cuckoos.? 
The lakes of the island are brilliant with full-blown 
lotuses of gold. The island is, moreover, adorned with 
strings of pearls, heaps of flowers, garlands, silken 
draperies, and gates of gold. In that island one should 
think of a Kalpa-tree. The four Vedas of Rik, Yajus, 
Sama, and Atharva, characterized by the three Gunas 
of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, are its four branches. It 
bears wonderfully coloured flowers—yellow, black, white, 
red, and of other hues. It is full of singing cuckoos,° 
black bees, and many other kinds of birds. Thinking 
thus of the Kalpa-tree, one should next think of an Altar 
of Gems at its foot, and of a large Mandala,* red and full 
of lustre on that altar. This red Mandala is surrounded 
by jewelled steps brilliant as the rising sun, and by four 
gates with flying banners. It is encircled by walls of 
gems ornamented with every kind of jewel. It is pre- 
sided over by Indra, Yama, Vayu, Varuna, and other 
Lokapalas,® in their own respective places. It is in every 
quarter full of Siddhas, Charanas, Gandharvas, Vidy- 
adharas,” great serpents, playful Kinnaras,’ and Apsaras.’ 
There are on all sides fair women of the land of the Im- 

1 Desire-gratifying trees. 

2 Trees growing in heaven. These are Mandara, Parijata, Santana, 
Harichandana, Kalpavriksha. The first two and the last are here 
mentioned. | 


3 Kokila—the Koel, the black or Indian cuckoo (Cuculus indicus), 
which, with the spring, black bee, the vernal breeze, and so forth, are 


the companions of the God of Desire. - Be Leas, 


6 Guardians of Lokas or elemental or other Lords. 
7 Various classes of Devayoni or Spirits produced from the Devas 
and the Devas’ abode. 


390 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


mortals dancing and playing music. It is decorated with 
banners hung with innumerable little bells. It is orna- 
mented with gems of ruby? and lapis lazuli? and jewelled 
Chamaras;* festooned with garlands of large pearls, and 
coloured and painted with sandal and musk. 

“ O Devi! the Sadhaka should think that in the midst of 
this Mandala there is an altar made of great rubies. Let 
him there see in his mind the Devi’s four-sided throne on 
this altar tinted with the hue of the rays of newly risen 
suns and moons, and which is the three Devas, Brahma, 
Vishnu, and Maheshvara.4- O Maheshvari! the Sadhaka 
should think of a flowery bed on that throne, and then, 
after worshipping the Pithadevata’s® of the Ishtadevata 
therein according to the injunctions of the respective 
Tantras, let him meditate on the Parameshvari, seated 
in the posture of the lotus-seat® on Sadashiva, the Maha- 
preta,* on that flowery bed. Next, the Sadhaka should, 
after meditating on his Ishtadevata with ornaments, 
carrier’ weapons, and family,? and offering mental 
jewelled shoes at Her lotus-feet, take Her to the bathing- 
room.? There She should be seated on a throne and Her 
body first cleansed with a scented unguent composed of 
camphor, musk, sandal, Gorochana,!® and Kumkuma,4 
and then smeared with scented oil. Next, the Supreme 

1 Manikya. 2 Vaidiryya. 3 Fly-whisks made of yak’s tail. 

4 The altar is four-sided, and the Devas of which it is said to be 
made are in the text three. The four supports are generally given as 
Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Ishana. The fifth Sadashiva forms the seat 
of the bed on which the Devi is seated. These five Shivas are known 
as the Mahapreta. Hence Devi is called in the Lalita (v. 174) Paficha- 
pretamafichadhishayini. 

5 That is, Pairnashaila Pitha on the east, Uddiyana Pitha on the 


south, Jalandhara on the west, and Kamartipa Pitha on the north. 

6 Padmdsana. 

7 Vahana—the vehicle which bears the Devi or other Devata as the 
Bird King Garuda in the case of Vishnu. 

8 Parivara—each Devata has His or Her family. Thus, Durga has 
her sons Kartikeya, Ganesha, and daughters Lakshmi and Sarasvati. 

9 Sndna mandira. 

10 A pigment said to be prepared from the body of the cow. 

11 Saffron. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 391 


Devata should be bathed with water which has been 
stored in hundreds of thousands of golden pitchers, and Her 
(,ody should then be towelled with silken cloths. Next, 
_ after clothing the upper and lower parts of Her body in 
two pieces of cloth, the hair of the Devi with dishevelled 
hair should be combed and tied with bejewelled silken 
threads. Then mark Her forehead with a Tilaka! made of 
sandal and such other things, and paint the parting of 
Her hair with vermilion.2, Next, adorn the fair hands and 
arms of the Charmer of Shangkara with beautiful ivory 
wristlets, bracelets, and armlets; Her lotus-feet and toes 
with jewelled anklets and toe-rings, and Her nostrils with 
Gajamukta.° The Sadhaka having to the best of his ability 
adorned the different parts of Her body in this way with 
ornaments and garlands of flowers, should anoint all Her 
limbs with scent, sandal, and perfumed gums. Let him 
then place a gold-embroidered bodice on Her breast.” 

“ Meditating thus on the Devi at the time of Samadhi, 
the Sadhaka should, after performing Bhttashuddhi* 
and Nydasas,® worship the Queen of Maheshvara residing 
in his heart with the (other) sixteen articles of worship.® 
First, after offering a throne of gems,’ the Sadhaka should 
welcome Her® Next, he should, after offering water to 
wash Her feet,? place Arghya’® on Herhead. Let him 


The mark on the forehead worn by pious Hindus. 
A line worn by married women. 
A pearl said to be formed in an elephant’s head. 
Vide ante, p. 365. 5 Vide ante, p. 373. 
Upachara. These are—(r1) Asana (seat); (2) Svagata (welcome) ; 
(3) Padya (water for washing the feet); (4) Arghya (offering of paddy, 
flower, sandal paste, durva grass, etc., in the vessel or Kushi); 
(5 and 6) Achamana (water which is offered twice and sipped to cleanse 
the lips and mouth); (7) Madhuparka (honey, ghee, milk, and curd) ; 
(8) Sndna (water for bathing); (9) Vasana (cloth); (10) Abharana 
(ornaments); (11) Gandha (scent); (12) Pushpa (flowers); (13) Dhtpa 
(incense) ; (14) Dipa (light) ; (15) Naivedya (food offering) ; 
(16) Vandana or Namaskara (prayer). These are the ordinary sixteen 
Upacharas, but, as appears later at p. 399, other numbers are given. 

7 For Asana, see last note. 8 Svagata, see note 6. 

9 Padya (vide ibid). 10 Vide ibid. 


1 
2 
3 
4 
6 


392 PRINCIPLES OF TAN TRS 


then give the best nectar! for sipping? to Her lotus-mouth, 
and offer Her Madhuparka,? and then again water for 
sipping thrice.4 Next, he should mentally offer excellent 
sweet rice, rice mixed with clarified butter, with other 
food® and condiments, a sea of nectar, a mountain-heap 
of flesh, a mass of fish, all kinds of fruits, edibles, and 
drinks—the whole well arranged in golden vessels—and 
then betel with camphor® Next, he should, after men- 
tally worshipping the Avarana Devatas’ of the Devi, 
perform mental Japa of Mantra.? After performing Japa 
a thousand times, the fruits of the Japa, along with 
water from the Arghya vessel, should be poured on the 
left hand of the Devi. Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, and 
Ishvara, form the support of the bedstead, the upper 
portion of which is Sadadshiva Himself® On this bed, 
formed of Brahma-vibhiti,?® is spread a milk-white 
coverlet, beautifully strewn with every kind of flowers, 
and on this flowery bed Sureshvari"" lies in the enjoyment 
of all forms of happiness. Thus, should a Yogi Sadhaka 
meditate upon Her. Next, he should entertain Paramesh- 
vari with dances and with singing and playing of music, 
and then perform Homa for the accomplishment of the 
worship in all its parts. I shall now speak of this Homa, 
by means of which a\Sadhaka becomes all consciousness. 

“The Homa should be performed with the fire of con- 
sciousness in the fire-pit’? of the Maladhara-lotus. Atma, 

1 Amrita. 2 Achamaniya (vide note, p. 391). 

3 See note, p. 391. 4 The second Achamana. See note ante. 

® Vyaiijana—that is, fish and vegetables boiled in water with spices. 

° Thisisthe Naivedya. Seenote,ante. Vasana, Abharana, Gandha, 
Pushpa, have been already described. Mention does not appear to be 
made of Dhiipa and Dipa. Now follows Vandana. 

’ Attendant Devatds who form the suite of the Devi. 

8 See Introduction. ° The Mahdpreta, as to which see p. 390. 

10 Brahma-power and its manifestation. 

11 The Devi as Lord of all Devas. 

12 In the Homa rite, fire is kindled in a pit (Kunda) constructed for 
the purpose, and then the offerings of clarified butter and so forth are 


poured into fire, the “‘ all eater ’’ who carried them in their thus purified 
and subtle form to the Devas. ~° 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 393 


Antardtma, Paramatma, and Jnandtma, are the four 
sides of that pit made of consciousness. The half Matra? 
—namely, a small Vindu, with three curved lines beneath— 
surrounded by the waist-chain of bliss, forms the Yoni 
Yantra, made of Brahma-bliss.2 The Sadhaka should 
daily perform the Homa, meditating on I¢4 Nadi on the 
left, Pingala on the right, and Sushumna,? the door to 
Brahman between the two. Dharma and Adharma* 
should be considered to be the Havis, or offering of 
clarified butter, in this Homa.” 


INVOCATION. 


The Gandharva Tantra says: ‘“‘ Next, after per- 
forming Pranayama,® the Sadhaka should take handfuls 
of flowers. The Devi should never be invoked without 
handfuls of flowers. The Sadhaka who has controlled his 
Prana® will meditate on the Parameshvari as above de- 
scribed in his heart, and seeing by Her grace that image 
the substance of which is consciousness in his heart, let 
him think of the identity between that image manifested 
within and the image without. Next, the energy’ of 
consciousness within should be taken without by means 
of the Vayu-vija® with the breath along the nostrils, and 
infused into the handful of flowers.2 Thus, issuing with 


1 The Chandravindu, because it is not a full sound. 

2 © ). The three curves represent in one sense the trivali. 

3 See Introduction and A. Avalon’s ‘“‘ Six Centres and the Serpent 
Horce.”’ # Righteousness and Unrighteousness. 

5 Control of Prana manifesting as breath (see Introduction). 

6 The vital airs. The control of these airs (vayu) manifesting as 
breath actually effects control of the mind. 

A Teias. & The Mantra “ Yang.” 

° The Karma Mudra is formed with the flowers within. The hands 
are then lifted to the nostrils. The flower is breathed on through the 
left nostril with the Mantra “‘ Yang,”’ and the Sddhaka thinks that 
along with that air the Devata within is brought out and placed in the 
flowers. 


394 PRINCIPLES OF TANT RE 


the breath, the Devata enters into the flowers. The 
Sadhaka should then establish the Devata in the image 
or Yantra’ by touching it with those flowers. So long as 
the work of establishing the Devi in the outer image or 
Yantra is not accomplished, the Sadhaka should con- 
tinue to hold those flowers of meditation in his hand. 
If he does not hold them, Gandharvas? avail themselves 
of the opportunity to worship the Devata inside that 
flowery Yantra,2 and even if the SAadhaka thereafter 
establishes Divinity in the image, Yantra, and the like, 
by contact with those flowers, he will not reap the fruits 
of that worship. For this reason the Sadhaka should, 
after drawing Her into the flowery Yantra® by means of 
the Trikhanda Mudra,* take the Mother of the world, who 
is all brilliant and forceful energy,° out of that flowery 
Yantra? by the force of the invoking Mantra and place 
Her within the Pitha (a general name for images, vessels, 
pictures, and so forth).’’6 

Those who call the Aryya Society idolatrous because 
it worships earthen images, and who ridicule it on these 
grounds, should now open the door of their hearts, and, 
dispelling the darkness of their eyes, consider whether 
the children of the Aryya race who are, as it were, tens of 
millions of Koh-i-noors adorning the heads of the com- 
munity of worshippers in the three worlds, really worship 
a Devi made of earth, or a Devi whose substance 1s con- 
sciousness. What is the need of Mantras, Yantras, 
Yoga, meditation, concentration, and so forth, if we 
worship a Devi made of earth? If the earthen image 
be the Devi, why invoke into and establish life in it again ? 
And who in the world is such a fool as to invoke earth 


1 Diagram (see Introduction). 

2 Devayoni, sons of Brahma, belonging, together with the Apsaras, 
their wives, to Indras, heaven. Celestial musicians and choristers. 

3 The flowers which are for the time being the seat of the Devata. 

4 The gesture so called. 

5 Tejas. 6 Author’s parenthesis. 


PRUNGCEPERS OF TANTRA 395 


into earth ? Moreover, if Gurus, after thorough investi- 
gation into the things of the visible world, and who are 
unequalled in their power to display the principles of 
spiritual life, have egregiously blundered in not recog- 
nizing that earth is earth, who is there in the world who 
can rectify such blunders? But we say that they re- 
alized it to be the Mother, and not earth. They made 
themselves and the earth blessed by bringing the Mother 
into the earth, and by themselves seeing and then dis- 
playing to others the presence of Brahmamayi! in every 
molecule and atom of the Brahmanda.? It is therefore 
with a heart rent with sorrow that we say that it is the 
descendants of these very men who, through the influence 
of a pernicious system of non-Aryya education, have lost 
all spiritual insight, and are themselves ruined by their 
thought that Mother Brahmamayi,! manifest out of grace 
to devotees, and established in the form which She has 
assumed out of favour to Sadhakas, is not Mother, but 
mere earth. How can those who are engrossed in play 
with earth understand the play of the Mother? O 
Mother of the world! what trouble thou bringest on thy 
children! Even if, on account of this trouble, we are 
unable to understand the truth concerning Her by our 
own independent effort, we have surely the privilege to 
understand the account which She has given of Herself 
in the form of Shastra. But of this privilege also we are 
almost deprived through our ill-fortune. Through want 
of instruction from competent Gurus, and of the force of 
Sadhana, we have lost the privilege of understanding 
Her commands, even while seeming to understand them. 
O follower of the idol theory ! how ridiculous it is for 
you to call the Devata’s image an idol! The Devi’s 
substance is eternal consciousness appearing in Her 
earthen form. In Her eyes infinite crores® of living 


1 The Devi as Brahman Itself. 
2 The Egg of Brahma, or the Universe. 
3 A crore is ten millions. 


396 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


forms, such as you, are as dolls, and of no account. 
Know it for certain that to think of Her as an idol is not 
an effect of an auspicious glance from Her. Even if 
you find it difficult to understand such things as devotion, 
piety, knowledge, or faith, you, too, recognize with 
bowed heads the Shakti of things.) With what heart, 
then, do you disbelieve the appearance, through the 
operation of Mantrashakti, of a superworldly Shakti, 
unseen by the senses and minds of men such as you and I? 
Disease wastes the body, but medicine curesit. Medicine 
defeats the law of Nature according to which disease 
destroys the body, and shows its own supernatural or 
superworldly Shakti (power). By the law of Nature 
water is always cool, but when in contact with fire it 
becomes very hot, and, like fire itself, owing to the com- 
munication of the Shakti of heat into it, the same water, 
instead of cooling, causes a terrible burning sensation. 
Here also the law of Nature, according to which water is 
cool, is defeated by the Shakti of the thing we call fire. 
You, too, admit this. How, then, do you disbelieve that, 
under the influence of Mantrashakti, the Brahma- 
shakti? residing in the heart of a Jiva comes cut with 
breath, and is established in the outer image of Devata ? 
Why do you disbelieve that, under the influence of the 
Shakti of Mantra, the unconscious state of earth is 
destroyed and divinity is communicated into it as heat 
is communicated to water? In fact, it is one of the 
terrible diseases of the nineteenth century to raise at every 
word the cry, ‘‘The laws of Nature are violated.” It is 
a law of Nature that water is ordinarily cool, and it is 
also a law of Nature that it will become hot in contact 
with fire. Similarly, it is a law of Nature that earth will 
naturally remain earth, and it is also a law of Nature 
that it will receive divinity? under the influence of Mantra- 
shakti. Why, then, raise the objection that the law of 


1 Vastushakti. 2 Brahman as Shakti. 
3 Devattva, the state of Devahood. 


Pine Leb sORS TANTRA 397 


Nature is violated ? In fact, the root of this objection 
is to be found, not in the nature of the Universe, but in 
the nature of the objector. He has, perhaps, with the 
narrow notions which are the product of his intellect 
and knowledge, understood Nature herself to be very 
narrow. And this is why he understands Nature to con- 
sist of a few common rules belonging to the small depart- 
ment of unconscious things under the great Nature, 
Mahaprakriti, which is the only source of the Shakti 
which makes the impossible possible. And for this reason 
they cry out at every word that the law of Nature is 
violated. But, as a matter of fact, the law of Nature is 
one and inviolable, and consequently the appearance of 
the Devi, whose substance is consciousness in an earthen 
image, under the influence of Mantra, is natural and self- 
evident. Really this appearance is but manifestation. 
For where do you find a place in this Brahmanda? which 
is beyond the presence of Brahmamayi? She has not 
to come into image, Yantra, vessel, picture, flower, leaf, 
or whatever else you may mention; for She is present in 
all things, and all things are present in Her. But de- 
votees and Saddhakas are not satisfied with Her presence 
inasubtle form. This is why, in order to fulfil the desires 
of Sadhakas, and in order that they may possess Her 
sometimes as Bhagavan,®? sometimes as Bhagavati,* some- 
times as Father, sometimes as Mother, sometimes as Lord,* 
sometimes as Ishvari,5 and so forth; the Devi, who is 
wiil itself, though the one and only Ishvara and Ishvari, 
appears in different Sadhanas and in different forms of 


1 Of that which is already there. It is foolish to talk of any real 
bringing and going in respect of that which is always present, however 
its presence may be, owing to our own unenlightened consciousness, 
veiled from us. 

2 Universe. 

3 The Brahman as the possessor of all powers (Aishvaryya) which 
belong to ishvara, ‘‘ the personal God.’’ Bhagavati is the feminine of 
Bhagavan, 

4 Ishvara. 5 Feminine of Ishvara, or Lord. 


398 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Siddhi,* playing different plays in different forms—as 
Shyama and ShyAama, as Uma and Rama,? as male and 
female, as Ganesha and Mahesha, as Lord of wealth and 
Lord of day, because She is the Ishvari® of the hearts of 
Sadhakas. This is the reason why, despite Her being 
the Ishvari,? who presides over the Pranashakti* of the 
eternal Universe, Her Pranapratishtha® is effected by the 
Sadhaka’s Prana. Even though She is the Mother of 
the world, the Sadhaka worships Her as his own Mother. 
If I perform Sadhana of the Mother, it is not because the 
Mother is wanting, but because I wish to make good the 
wants or deficiencies in myself. Even though all other 
beings of the three worlds perform Sadhana of the Mother, 
that Sadhana does not satisfy me. And the Pranapra- 
tishtha® of the Mother is for fulfilling the desire of my own 
heart. 

In another Tantra it is said: “‘ Pranapratishtha® in an 
image of Shiva or Shakti is done by placing the hand on 
its Brahmarandhra,’ or forehead, or brow. According to 
some divisions of Tantrik teachers, Pranapratishtha 
should be done by placing the hand on the Brahma- 
randhra,’ forehead, and brow at one and the same time. 
Prdnapratishtha in an image should be done by touching 
the heart in the case of the Vishnu image, in the case of 
other Devatas by touching the feet, and in Shivalinga by 
touching the head.’ 


1 That is, particular SAdhanas evoke particular forms. 

2 That is, in various masculine and feminine forms. It is a vulgar 
error to say, as does Professor Fitzedward Hall in his notes on the 
Sangkhya, that Shakti is only feminine. Grammatically doubtless it 
is feminine, but Shakti is, and is the cause of, all forms. 

3 Feminine of ishvara, or Lord. 
+ Shakti manifesting as the vital principle. 
5 The rite by which establishment of Her life in the image is effected. 

6 That is, the particular Prana or vital principle of the Sadhaka. 

7 That portion of the crown of the head which is called the 
‘ fontenelle.” 


a 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 399 


ARTICLES USED AND ACTS DONE IN WORSHIP.? 


In the Sanatkumara Tantra it is said: “‘ The Ishta- 
devata should be worshipped daily with sixteen Upa- 
charas,” or with ten if it is not possible to worship with 
sixteen, or with five Upacharas if it is not possible to 
worship with even ten.” 

The Jnanamala, quoted by Raghava Bhatta,® says: 
‘“ The different classes of Upachara in worship are thirty- 
eight—sixteen, twelve, ten, and five.* I shall now relate 
what Upachara are involved in each of these classes, and 
what fruits are gained by the use thereof. 

“The thirty-eight Upachara are—Asana (seat), Ava- 
hana (invocation), Upasthiti (presence),° Sdannidhya 
(nearness),© Abhimukhya (facing),’? Sthirikriti (making 
fast),8 Prasadana (pleasing),? Arghya (offering), Padya 
(water for washing the feet), Achamana (water sipped to 
cleanse the lips, mouth, and throat), Madhuparka (honey, 
ghee, milk, and curd), Achamana again, Snana (bathing), 
Nirajana (waving of light),*1 Vastra (cloth), Achamana 
(the third time), Upavita (sacred thread)? Achamana 
again (the fourth time), Bhiishana (ornaments),** Darpana- 
valokana (looking at a mirror),’* Gandha (perfume), 

1 Upachara. There are ordinarily sixteen of these, as to which 
vide anté, p. 391. 

2 Articles used in worship. The Sanskrit word is kept in the text, 
as the English term “ articles ’’ does not correctly describe Upachara, 
which includes not only material articles such as flowers and lights, but 
welcome, prayer, etc. 

3 The great Tantrik Commentator on the Sharadatilaka. 

4 As appears from the text which follows, the Upachara are given 
“in numbers varying from 38 to 3. . 

5 That is, the coming of the Devata after the invocation. 

§ Her near approach to the worshipper. 7 Facing the Sadhaka. 

8 The Sddhaka makes the Devi assume a fixed position before him. 

? The Sddhaka gladdens and propitiates the Devi. 

10 The Devi is bathed. . 11 That is, before the Devi. 

12 Placing of sacred thread on the image. 13 The Devi is adorned. 


14 A mirror is presented to Her that She may regard Herself and 
toilet. 


400 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Pushpa (flower), Dhaipa (incense), Dipa (light),* Naivedya 
(offerings of food), Paniya (offerings of drink), the fifth 
Achamaniya (water for sipping as above), Hastavasa 
(napkin)? Tamvula (betel),*? Anulepana (unguent),* Push- 
pafijali (handful of flowers), Gita (singing), Vadya (in- 
strumental music), Nritya (dancing), Stuti (reciting 
hymns in praise), Pradakshina (walking round),® Push- 
panjali (second handful of flowers), and Namaskara 
(obeisance).6 These are the thirty-eight Upachara.”’ 


Thirty-six Upachéra. 


In the fifty-fifth Patala of Nibandha’ it is said: ‘‘ Asana 
(seat), Dantakashtha® (stick for cleansing the teeth), 
Udvartana® (anointing the body), Virikshana (rubbing 
the body),*° Samméarjana (rubbing off), Abhyafijana 
(second anointing, Sndana (bathing) with ghee and so 
forth), Avahana (invocation), Padya (water for washing 
the feet), Arghya (offering), Achamaniya (water sipped to 
cleanse the mouth), Snaniya (water for bathing), Mad- 
huparka (mixture of honey, milk, ghee, and curd), Acha- 
maniya again, Namaskara (obeisance), Nritya (dancing), 
Gita (singing), Vadya (instrumental music and offering 
of other things),!” Stuti (reciting hymns in praise), Homa,’* 
Pradakshina (walking round), Darpanadarshana (looking 
at a mirror), Chamaravyajana (waving of Chamara* 


1 Which is placed before Her and offered with a Mantra, as are the 
Tes. 
2 After eating and drinking, She cleanses Her mouth, and then a 
napkin is offered that She may wipe Herself therewith. 
This is always chewed after eating. 
Sandal paste, perfumed oil, etc. 
The Sadhaka walks round the image—a sign of reverence. 
Bowing. 7 Nibandha Tantra. 
The Hindus cleanse their teeth with a stick. 
Rubbing the body with perfume and fragrant unguents. 
That is, rubbing the unguents in. 
11 Of the unguent which remains on the body. 
12 This is in text, and treated as part of Vadya. 
13 Sacrifice into fire. 14 Fly-whisk made of yak’s tail. 


Oo OR a ere 


= 
o 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 401 


Shayya (bed),? Anulepana (unguent), Vastra (cloth) ,? 
Alangkara (ornaments), Upavita (sacred thread), Gandha 
(perfume), Pushpa (flowers), Dhtpa (incense), Dipa 
(light), Validana (offering of sacrifice),? Tarpana (offer- 
ing libations of water), Atmasamarpana (self-dedication), 
and Visarjana (dismissal). These are the thirty-six 
Upachara.”’ 


Eighteen Upachara. 


_ In the third Patala of the Phetkarini Tantra, quoted 

in the ShyamArahasya, it is said: ‘‘ Asana (seat), Avahana 
(invocation), Arghya (offering), Padya (water for washing 
the feet), Achamaniya (water sipped to cleanse the 
mouth), Snana (bathing), Vastra (cloth), Upavita (sacred 
thread), Bhtshana (ornaments), Gandha (perfume), 
Pushpa (flowers), Dhtipa (incense), Dipa (light), Anna 
{Naivedya),* Tarpana (offering libations of water), Malya 
(garland), Anulepana (unguent), Namaskdara (obeisance), 
and Visarjana (dismissal). A Sadhaka should perform 
worship with these eighteen Upachara.”’ 


Sixteen Upachara. 


In the Shivarchana Chandrika it is said: ‘‘ Asana 
(seat), Svagata (welcome),° Padya (water for washing 
the feet), Arghya (offering), Achamaniya (water for 
sipping as above stated), Madhuparka (mixture of honey, 
milk, ghee, and curd), Achamana (cleansing of mouth), 
Snana (bathing), Vasana (cloth), Abharana (ornaments), 
Gandha (perfume), Pushpa (flowers), Dhtpa (incense), 
Dipa (light), Naivedya (offerings of food), and Vandana 
(prayer with hymns in praise). These sixteen Upachara 
should be used and done in worship.” 

1 Offering of bed. It is imagined that the Devi will repose Herself 3 
thereon. 

2 Dresses are offered. 

3 In the case of Shaktas sacrifice of animals and fruits and vegetables, 
in Vaishnava worship the latter only. 

4 Offerings of food. 5 The Devi is welcomed as She appears. 

VOL. Il. 20 


402 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


Sixteen Upachira described in Another Way. 


In the Mantraratnavali, quoted in the Krishnarcha- 
nachandrika, it is said: ‘“‘ Padya (water for washing the 
feet), Arghya (offering), Achamantya (water sipped to 
cleanse the mouth), Snana (bathing), Vasana (cloth), 
Bhishana (ornaments), Gandha (perfume), Pushpa 
(flowers), Dhtipa (incense), Dipa (light), Naivedya (offer- 
ings of food), Achamana (water sipped as above), Tam- 
bula (betel), Archana-Stotra (hymns of praise), Tarpana 
(offering libations of water), and Namaskara (obeisance).”’ 


Twelve Upachiara. 


In the Svatantra Tantra it is said: “‘ Arghya (offering),* 
Padya (water for washing the feet), Achamaniya (water 
sipped for cleansing the mouth), Madhuparka (mixture 
of milk, ghee, honey, and curd), Achamana again (see 
above), Gandha (perfume), Pushpa (flowers), Dhtpa 
(incense), Dipa (light), Naivedya (offerings of food), 
Pradakshina (walking round), and Namaskara (obeisance). 
A Mantri? should perform worship with these twelve 
Upachara.”’ 


Ten Ubpachéra. 


In the Kali Tantra, quoted in the Shyamarahasya, it 
is said: ‘‘ Arghya (offering), Padya (water for washing 
the feet), Achamaniya (water sipped to cleanse the 
mouth), Madhuparka (mixture of honey, milk, ghee, and 
curd), Achamana (as above second time), Gandha (per- 
fume), Pushpa (flowers), Dhtipa (incense), Dipa (light), 
and Naivedya (offering of food). These are the ten 
Upachara.”’ 


1 Offering of paddy or unhusked rice (which is always atapa—that is, 
sun-dried), flowers, sandal paste, durva grass, etc. 

2 He who has the Mantra or secret word (Mantroguptabhashanam 
yasya asti), or initiated devotee. 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 403 


Seven Upachara. 


In the Prayogasadra, quoted by Raghava Bhatta, it is 
said: “‘Arghya (offering), Gandha (perfume), Pushpa 
(flowers), Akshata (barley, or atapa rice), Dhiapa (in- 
cense), Dipa (light), and Naivedya (offering of food). 
With these is performed seven-limbed worship.”’ 


Five Upachéra. 


In the fifty-fifth Patala of the Nibandha Tantra it is 
said: “‘ Gandha (perfume), Pushpa (flowers), Dhapa (in- 
cense), Dipa (light), and Naivedya (offerings of food). 
These are the five Upachara. A Sadhaka should always 
use these five in worshipping his Ishtadevata.”’ 


Three Upachara. 


“The five Upachara less Dhipa (incense) and Dipa 
right) — that is to say, Gandha (perfume), Pushpa 
(flowers), and Naivedya (offerings of food)—are known 
as the three Upachara. 

“The different classes of Upachara above enumerated 
consist of items varying from thirty-six to three in num- 
ber. The misguided Sadhaka who, for the sake of 
economy, though able to worship with the first-named 
classes, proceeds to perform worship with the latter, 
never obtains the fruits of the worship as stated in the 
Shastra.’ 


RULES FOR JAPA.? 


In the Pichchhila Tantra it is said: “‘ After performing 
Pranayama thrice, one should do the Rishi and other 
Nydsas.2_ Next, after performing the Ny4sa on six limbs, 


1 Japa is defined as Vidhaénena mantrochcharanam, or the repeated 
utterance, mentally or physically, of Mantra according to certain rules. 
It is of three kinds, and is described in the Introduction. 

2 Vide ante, p. 373. 


404 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


one should do the Kulluka Japa.* Next, after perform- 
ing Japa of the Mahasetu? and Setu Mantras,* one should 
do Japa of the Mulamantra? the fixed number of times. 
After this Japa, one should again perform Japa of the 
Setu and Mahdsetu Mantras, and then make an offering 
of the Japas. Next, after performing Pranayama thrice, 
one should bow to Parameshvari, according to the in- 
junctions relating to bowing with eight parts of the body? 
and so forth, or by touching the earth with only the 
heags 

In the fifth Patala of the Sarasvati Tantra it is said: 
“T shall now speak of another kind of excellent purifica- 
tion of the mouth (purification consisting of Mantra),4 
without which, O high-favoured Devi! Japa and worship 
will be ineffectual. O Devi! he who performs Japa with 
an unpurified tongue commits a sin. For this reason 
one should purify one’s mouth with all care.”’ 

In the Kularnava it is said: “ At the beginning of Japa 
a Saddhaka is affected by birth uncleanness, and at the 
end of Japa by death uncleanness.? A Mantra affected 
by these two forms of uncleanness is never perfect and 
fruitful. For this reason a Mantra should be cleansed 
of the two forms of uncleanness which attach to the be- 
ginning and the end, and then it should be repeated in 
Japa. When freed from those two forms of uncleanness, 
that Mantra grants all forms of Siddhi.® Therefore, for 
the attainment of the fourfold fruit’ one should perform 


1 See Introduction for a short description of this technical aspect of 
Mantra. 

2 The primary Mantra of the Devata. 

3 Ashtangapranama—bowing with tips of toes, knees, elbows, nose, 
and forehead touching the ground. 

4 Author’s parenthesis. This is known as Mukhashodhana. For 
this and other processes, such as Jihvashodhana, etc., processes pre- 
liminary to and involved in the right utterance of Mantra, see Intro- 
duction. 

5 As to the “ birth’”’ and “ death”’ defilements in the case of a 
Mantra, see Tantrasara, 75 et seq. 6 Success or fruit. 

7 Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha (see Introduction). 


PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 405 


Japa of the Milamantra,? commencing and ending with 
the Pranava,” reciting it one hundred and eight times, or 
seven times at the beginning and at the end of Japa.’ 

In the Yogini Tantra it is said: ‘‘ The Japa which 
forms a part of daily worship should be done with the 
fingers,* but not so a Japa in a rite undertaken for the 
attainment of some desired object. For, in Japas of the 
latter kind, the rule is that they should be performed 
with different kinds of rosaries, according to the different 
kinds of desired objects. The Shastra does not ordain 
that such Japas should be performed with the fingers. 
But, O Maheshvari! if rosaries are wanting, then they 
may be so performed.”’ 

In the Sachchhanda Maheshvara it is said: “‘ The rosary 
which is made of beads of Rudraksha,° coral, lotus-seeds,. 
and joints of Kusha grass, is a cause of happiness to the 
three castes of Brahmana, Kshatriya, and Vaishya. 
Women and Shiidras using rosaries made of these beads 
will be guilty of sin. Rosaries made of other kinds of 
beads are efficacious for them. 

‘Rosaries made of beads of Rudraksha,® conch-shell, 
lotus-seed, wild olive,® pearls, crystals, gems, gold, coral, 
silver, or roots of the Kusha grass, are prescribed for 
householders.”’ 

In the Vira Tantra it is said: “‘ One should carefully 
perform Japa with a rosary of Rudraksha beads in the 
night. But, O great Devi! a rosary of Rudraksha beads 
should never be used in Japa during daytime.” 

In the Rudrayamala it is said: “‘ A rosary of Rudraksha 
beads should never be used in Japa during the day. 


1 Vide ante, p. 404. 2 The Mantra Om. 

3 The Japais of the Milamantra only. Itis preceded and concluded 
by the recitation mentioned in the text. 

4 The counting is done with the thumb on each of the three joints 
(technically called ‘‘ yoni’’) of the fingers. The order, however, in which 
the joints are touched in counting varies with the Japa and worship. 

5 The seed of a plant used in the worship of Shiva. 

6 Putrafijiva. 


406 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


But, O fair-faced Devi! the doing of Japa with a rosary 
of Rudraksha beads in the daytime will not be blame- 
able in Purashcharana.’”? 

In the Yamala it is said: ‘‘ A rosary, which is Ishta- 
devata Herself, should be daily worshipped and daily 
used in Japa; for, if a rosary fasts—that is to say, is not 
used in Japa or worshipped—dangers befall the Sad- 
haka.”’ 

In the Kangkalamalini Tantra it is said: “‘ Japa should 
be done one thousand and eight, one hundred and eight, 
fifty and eight, thirty and eight, twenty and eight, 
ten and eight, twelve, ten, and eight times. A Sadhaka 
who is so able should do Japa with the higher numbers, 
and others who are not so capable with the lower numbers. 
O Maheshvari! know that in worship and other great 
daily rites different numbers are ordained to meet differ- 
ences in the capacities of Sadhakas.” 


1 As to this form of Sadhana, see Introduction. 


END OF PART II. 


WORKS ON TANTRA 


BY ARTHUR AVALON. 


TANTRA OF THE GREAT LIBERATION (MAHA- 
NIRVANA TANTRA). A Translation from the Sanskrit, with 
Introduction and Commentary. tos., or Rs. 8. 


HYMNS TO THE GODDESS. By Artuur and ELLEN 
AVALON. (From the Tantra and other Shastra and the Stotra of 
Shangkaradcharyya.) With Introduction and Commentary. 4s., 
or Ks. 3. = 

PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA (TANTRA Ya: 


Part,J:,108.3,0% KS 58:5) Partie sensor tomas 


THE SIX CENTRES (SHATCHAKRANIRUPANA). 
A description of the Tantrik Kundalini Yoga. (In the press. 


OCEAN OF KULA TANTRA(KULARNAVA TANTRA). 


A translation from the Sanskrit, with Introduction and Commentary. 
[In preparation. 


TANTRIK TEXTS 


With English Introductions, giving summary or general description 
of contents. 


Vol. I. TANTRABHIDHANA with VIJANIGHANTU 
and MUDRANIGHANTU. A Tantrik Dictionary. 2s., or Rs. 1-8. 


Vol. Il. SHATCHAKRANIRUPANA. A work on the Six 
Centres of the Body by Pirnananda Svami, with Commentary of 
Shangkara. PADUKAPANCHAKA (‘ Five-fold Footstool of the 
Guru’’), with Commentary of Kalicharana, and Notes from the Tika 
of Vishvanatha on the Second Patala of Kaivalya Kalika Tantra. 
9S5,/0r sa: 


Vol. III. PRAPANCHASARA TANTRA. A work on the 
Origin and Nature of the World and on Worship. 4s. 6d., or Rs. 3. 


A limited edition on thick paper of these Texts is supplied at the price of 35., 45., 
and 6s. vespectively. 


LOTBEeBAD-CF 


LONDON: Luzac and Co. 


Snuisiiiia | hackers Spink and Co, 


_/ Thacker and Co., Ltd. 
BOMBAY: \ Combridge and cot 


Higginbotham and Co., Ltd. 
MADRAS :; Nateson and Co, 

Ganesh and Co. 
ALLAHABAD: Ram Narain Lal. 


LAHORE: Rai Saheb Gulab Singh and Sons. 


Paseo ING RGA oss: 


On Mahanirvana Tantra, «Hymns to the Goddess,” 
Tantrik Texts (Vols. I. and II.), and 
Principles of Tantra (Vol. I.). 


“Mr. AVALON is, so far as I am aware, a new comer in Oriental 
studies, but he makes his entrance therein with ‘ éclat.’ His book 
brilliantly inaugurates the study of the Tantras, the literature of 
which occupies a front rank in the religious life of Modern India. 
For the Tantra governs Indian beliefs, doctrines, practices, and 
institutions. Nevertheless, the learned in Europe have hitherto 
put them aside, and have neither published any Tantrik texts nor 
translation ofthem. Western opinion has crushed them all under 
the weight of a common ill-fame, and summarily condemned them 
‘as compilations which are both stupid and obscene. Mr. Avalon 
has therefore set himself to work for the rehabilitation of this 
calumniated literature, and announces for early publicaticn a series 
of works on the Tantra and its texts. As a commencement he 
has selected the Mahanirvana Tantra, notwithstanding, or, rather, 
for the very reason, that the text has already been translated in 
India by a Bengali author. For he wished to show how much 
light an attentive and serious study can shed upon the mere 
mechanical understanding of words. In his work he has not 
made the least demand on European learning. He has, on the 
contrary, been able to dispense with it without prejudice to his 
research. On the other hand, he shows himself to be familiar 
with a considerable number of Tantrik works. Hecites them with 
profusion in the original Sanskrit, and derives from them the 
explanation of technical terms of which the dictionaries do not 
give us the meaning. His translation is preceded by an intro- 
duction of 150 pages, which is the most solid and exact account 
that has as yet been written on the doctrines of the Tantras, 
their ontology, mystical phraseology, worship, yoga, and ethics. 
All items of information given in this exposition are supported by 
the authorities he cites. We, however, greatly regret that Mr. 
Avalon has not added to his work an index of the technical terms 
which he defines in one or another part of his work, for in that 


409 


410 PRES Seno Leis 


case our dictionaries would have been enriched by an extremely 
valuable supplement. The depth of the Tantiik current which 
runs through the whole range of Indian literature will only be 
appreciated when we are in a position to give precise meanings to 
many terms which are at present vague and without definition. 
It is also to the Tantras with their magical invecations (SAdhana) 
that we must look for an explanation of all the enigmatical figures 
which decorate in their swarming multitudes the facades of the 
Indian temples. 

‘““Mr. Avalon’s second volume, part of which has been written 
in collaboration with Ellen Avalon, has not the same range. Mr. 
Avalon has there gathered together from various sources in the 
Tantras, Puranas, Mahabharata, etc., hymns addressed to the 
‘Goddess,’ or Devi, the most popular figure in the Indian Pantheon, 
and the perfect symbol of the Eternal Feminine in all its innumer- 
able manifestations. The greater number of these hymns are 
well known even in Europe (amongst Orientalists be it under- 
stood), and several have been already translated. But here, again, 
the notes with which Mr. Avalon has accompanied the text, and 
which are based on the commentaries or oral instructions of the 
Pandits, give us a laige amount of useful explanation. Littévateurs 
will appreciate the moving strains of these hymns, with their tone 
which is exalted and yet grave. The historian of religions may 
with confidence gather therefrom reliable materials for his study.” 
—Revue Critique. (Professor Sylvain Levi.) 


“The author has treated the subject with care and affection, 
and discussed the Shastra in an impartial manner. In the Tantra, 
as in other Shastras dealing with the inner life, there are passages 
full of technical expressions. It is, therefore, not difficult to 
realize what endless trouble the author has gone through in the 
endeavour to master this technical language so as to enable him 
to write this book. The footnctes show that he has sought the 
assistance of SAdhakas versed in the inner meaning of the Tantra. 
We cannot say whether the publication to the world by a foreigner 
of these secret scriptures is a fulfilment of the prophecy contained 
in the Tantras, but we think that more good than evil is likely to 
result... The two volumes in question deserve a very high rank 
among books of their class. The translation is as lucid as it is 
complete. In its perusal we do not recognize that we are reading 
a translation at all. We heartily desire that these books should 
be warmly received by all.’’—Udbedhana. 


“ Here, again (‘The Hymns’), as in the case of the Tantra, Mr. 
Avalon is a courageous pioneer, and deserves our grateful thanks, 
for he opens up still another field of research. One would imagine, 
from the ill-informed and misinformed animadversions on Indian 


PV woseNOLIGES AII 


religion which we meet with so frequently in the West, that all 
ended there in empty abstraction without any emotional content 
whatever. But this is not so. For one religious philosopher of 
that type of abstractionism there are perhaps 100,000 Bhaktas 
in India. It is in the soul of the people that we must seek the 
main characteristics of a national religion, and not in the mind of 
the exceptional philosopher.’”’—The Quest. 


“Personally, we are not admirers of either the Tantrik cult or 
literature . . . but it cannot be ignored ‘by any serious student of 
Hinduism . . . judged from this point of view, the editor, translator, 
and commentator are entitled to the gratitude of all students of 
religion .. . editing has been done with great care. .. with excellent 
introductions and commentaries.’’—Hindustan Review. 


“We welcome these two books for more reasons than one. The 
Tantras embrace every phase of human life, and there is hardly a 
branch of learning which is not covered by them. It has been the 
custom amcng some people to run dcwn the Tantra Shastra as 
obscene and immoral—as containing the germs of anarchy and 
disorder. It has been the custom among these superficial writers 
and speakers to opine that our Shastras are dry, intellectual specu- 
lations, which do not, in their higher phases, though devoid of the 
taint of idolatry, contain anything to touch the different phases of 
human nature. To them we recommend these two books, if they 
have a genuine desire to know our Shastras in their true aspect. 
They have been translated with great care, and are as faithful 
reproductions of the texts as translations could be. The Intro- 
duction to the Mahanirvana is a masterly summary of everything 
that the beginner ought to know, and the footnotes to the trans- 
lations have added greatly to the value of the book, and have made 
clear many a knotty point which to the ordinary reader is obscure. 
We are pleased to notice that the learned author is bringing out 
other books of this class. It was through the efforts of European 
scholars that the Vedas and Darshanas were saved from oblivion, 
and it was left to another European scholar to do justice to the 
sacred.Tantras.’’—The Bengalee. 


‘‘ These books, dealing with the secret mysticism and magic of 
India, are the most interesting which have been published in 
recent years. We will in a forthcoming number deal fully with 
these volumes. Meanwhile we recommend to our readers the 
comprehensive volume entitled ‘ Tantra of the Great Liberation.’”’ 
—Neue Metaphysische Rundschau. 


“An inestimable benefit to all interested in India and Indian 
thought, opening up the vast domain of Tantrik lore, which forms 
cne of the most important yet strangely neglected regions in the 


412 PRESS NOTICES 


realm of Sanskritic learning ... the prejudice of Western 
Sanskritists, and the consequent distrust of English-educated 
Hindus, taking their cue from their European Gurus, have been 
instrumental in making the Tantra looked upon with disfavour by 
the present generation. But there is no denying that almost the 
whole of present-day Hinduism, on both its philosophic and 
ritualistic sides, has a Tantrik basis . . . masterly translations and 
admirable introduction to the Tantrik system of thought and self- 
culture . . . with their very careful editing and beautiful printing 
in bold Devanagari characters, their handsome get-up and covers 
in red, symbolic of the Shaktas faith in the ‘ mother-aspect ’ of 
the Supreme, the publications in this series can vie with all the 
most famous series of Sanskrit Texts published by the premier 
Orientalistic societies of the world.’’—The Calcutta University 
Magazine. 


“A great historian has said that it would be the unfortunate 
lot of some future scholar to wade through the disgusting details 
of drunkenness and debauchery, which were regarded as an essen- 
tial part of their religion by a large section of the Indian Com- 
munity not long ago. It is a matter of congratulation that such 
an unfortunate scholar has made his appearance ... To the 
European reader unacquainted with Tantras it will reveal a new 
world altogether, so unlike things they have seen, heard, or even 
read; for few have heard of a religious system which enjoins the 
enjoyment of the pleasures of life, and even excessive indulgence 
in them—a system which enjoins offerings of wine and meat and 
even things unspeakable to the Deity ... Even the most squeam- 
ish critic is bound to pronounce this first attempt at translating 
a Tantrik work into English to be a success ... The footnotes 
will be very much appreciated, as they really elucidate the ideas 
embodied in the words of the original in the majority of cases.’’— 
The Englishman (Calcutta). 


“For many years past the Shastra has suffered neglect at the 
hands of both Indian and European scholars, and manuscripts are 
rapidly disappearing. This, with the general ignorance prevailing 
regarding the subject-matter cf the Tantra, threatens to pass the 
Shastra itself into oblivion, and the thanks of the public, especially 
of the Hindu public, are due to Arthur Avalon for his attempt at 
rescuing them from this undeserved fate ... Arthur Avalon 
changes all this. He penetrates into the innermost sanctum of 
our religion . . . dispenses, too, with the supercilious and arrogant 
manner that is generally adopted by the European scholar in 
dealing with matters Indian. He writes in the English language, 
but the matter and method are entirely those of a devout gee - 
—The Express (Bankipore). 


Pi ooIN © LIiGES AI3 


‘“Two very welcome additions to our store of translations from 
the Sanskrit... It wasa happy thought on the part of Arthur 
Avalon to present the chief works of this ancient religion in 
English dress... extremely fascinating phenomenon which is 
presented in the books here translated . . . their interpretation of 
the hymns selected for translation is generally unimpeachable .. . 
The learned introduction consists largely in a well-ordered explana- 
tion of the strange terms used in Tantrik worship, knowledge of 
which is indispensable to anyone taking up the subject for the 
first time... Weare glad to learn that Mr. Avalon purposes to 
translate more of these Tantras. Very few scholars have the 
training to attempt the task.’”’—The Nation (New York). 


“Arthur Avalon has made a very happy choice from amongst 
the immense material of Indian literature... The first attempt 
which has been made in a European language to place within the 
reach of a wider circle of scholars one of the numerous Tantras, 
which constitute the sacred scripture of the Kali, or Sinful Age, and 
which are, therefore, a highly important source for the study of 
present day orthodox Hinduism. The undertaking is as praise- 
worthy as it is difficult—praiseworthy because of the above- 
mentioned importance which attaches to these magical texts, and 
difficult by reason of the innumerable obstacles which oppose the 
European who tries to understand and translate the technical 
terminology here employed. In this circumstance lies doubtless 
the reason which up to now has hindered the untiring band of 
investigators into Indian literature from approaching the Tantras, 
and it is therefore to be reckoned to the special credit of Arthur 
Avalon that he has not been deterred from his task by these 
difficulties... The whole work bears the stamp of conscientious- 
ness and accuracy... In the case of such a translation even the 
best Sanskrit dictionary fails in matters of difficulty. It is 
necessary, therefore, to be familiar with commentaries on the 
same subject if we would understand what Hindu worship is and 
means... Arthur Avalon has conscientiously fulfilled his obliga- 
tion ; a fact which is noted, so that even the layman may have a 
notion of the labour which has had to be expended in the com- 
pletion of this compilation. It is praiseworthy, and deserves to 
be specially mentioned, that a lady should successfully take part 
in so difficult an undertaking, and be able to help in the transla- 
tion... For the student of religions there is, then, a mine opened 
for his inquiries, and we may therefore welcome with pleasure the 
announcement that the distinguished English Sanskritist has 
decided to continue his work on the Tantras, and to publish shortly 
three new works on the same subject.’’—Litevarisches Zentralblatt 
fiir Deutschland (F. B.). 


AI4 PRESS NOTICES 


‘Mr. Avalon is greatly daring in attempting an English version 
of the Tantrik literature describing the beliefs of the Shakta sect 
worshippers of the Mother Goddess. This body of literature is 
little known to European students, partly because the subject is 
repulsive, and partly because its followers are reticent in com- 
municating or interpreting their sacred books. In the present 
volume (Mahdanirvana), amidst much verbiage and puerility, the 
reader will find valuable accounts of domestic and temple ritual. 
A full Introduction and Commentary clears up most of the diffi- 
culties. .. . We know so little of the cult of the Goddess Devi. 


that this version of the Hymns in her honour is welcome.”’— 
Folklore. 


“This is not the first time that the Shastras (other than the 
Tantra) of the Hindus have been translated by European savants. 
Since the ‘ discovery’ of the Sanskrit language by Sir W. Jones, 
the attention of the learned in Europe has been widely drawn 
to other Shastras of the Hindus. But the Tantra Shastra has 
not been so fortunate, European savants having been previously 
under the impression that it was utterly contemptible and full 
of superstition. Mr. Avalon is the first to attempt to remove 
this stigma, and he is therefore undoubtedly the object of grati- 
tude of every Hindu. ... Itis not sufficient praise to say that 
the translation (Mahanirvana) is excellent and as faithful as 
possible, for the book has a distinctive feature of its own which 
we will here describe. ... The difference between Europe and 
India is very great. The surroundings, education, inclination, 
and notions of the European are totally distinct from ours. 
Whenever, therefore, he endeavours to analyze our Shastra, 
Dharma, Arts, and Literature, he judges them by the same 
standard as his own. The European savants study Indian 
Shastra with European eyes, and apply their own preformed con- 
ceptions to it. Whilst they show great eagerness to judge what 
is good and what is bad, they do not show any desire to ascertain 
the real character of our Scriptures. Where such Scriptures 
resemble those of the European, they call it good, and condemn 
it as bad where they differ. Taine displays this defect in the 
European character in the following observation: ‘ Here close by 
us is poor Mr. Max Miller, who, in order to acclimatize the study 
of Sanskrit, was compelled to study in the Vedas the worship of 
a moral God—that is to say, the religion of T. Paley and Addison.’ 
Whether that be so or not I will not inquire, my purpose being 
merely to illustrate how Europeans impose their notions either 
consciously or unconsciously on us. And thus their incomparable 
zeal and great labour is often lost. Mr. Avalon, however, has 
not so done. He did not begin his study with any preconceived 
notions, but in the true spirit of a searcher after truth. He has 


PRESS NOTICES 415 


carefully examined the Shastra with Indian eyes. Abstaining 
from abuse, he has endeavoured to understand it. ... I do 
not wish to discuss whether the Mahanirvana Tantra is good or 
bad, or adapted to the present age or not. What I have to say 
is that the way A. Avalon has dealt with it is best. . . . Praise 
or blame the Shastra if you like, but first try to understand the 
subject before expressing your opinion.” —Pratibhd (Dacca). (Sj. 
Upendra Chandra Guha.) 


“It is quite true that hitherto the Tantra Shastra, or body of 
treatises dealing with the rites, ceremonies, and practices and 
doctrine of what we may venture to call Hindu nature-worship, 
has hitherto been practically a closed book to Western scholars, 
and that Mr. Avalon is doing a very great service for students of 
comparative religion by making a small part of it accessible. 
But it is a most difficult and dangerous subject in every way, and 
confronts us with endless problems, religious, psychical, and 
moral, that are almost undreamed of to-day in the West. ... 
Pandit Bhattacharyyas’ treatise is a very able polemic filled 
with outbursts of high rhetorical beauty in defence of the Tantra, 
in which he skilfully avoids the abuses that cluster so thickly 
round the subject, and dexterously makes the high ideas of Indian 
philosophy subservient to his purpose. ... The treatise, of which 
the present volume represents Part I. only, is the most remark- 
able pronouncement on the subject which has yet appeared, and 
Mr. Avalon is to be thanked for making it accessible to Western 
readers. It is full of points of very great interest.’’—The Quest. 


“It is strange that, though Hinduism and its sacred writings 
have been critically studied by Western scholars for nearly a 
century, this Tantrik phase and its Scriptures have been hitherto 
neglected, with the result that very little is known of them, and 
that little, too, is full of misconception. To the ordinary mind 
the Tantra is associated with all that is abominable in Hinduism, 
and its very mention is enough to provoke disgust. ... This 
work of Mr. Avalon is a generous as well as a courageous task, 
and if at the end of his labours he succeeds in removing even some- 
thing of the stigma which attaches to the name of Tantra he will 
have achieved no ordinary triumph. ... This particular corner 
of the field of Sanskrit is virgin soil, and Mr. Avalon has entered 
upon it with enthusiasm, and persists in it with a doggedness 
that augurs well for his final success. His programme of opera- 
tions has already met with discouragement from what we may 
call the orthodox school of philologers, and one critical authority 
rather uncritically said that he was devoting his years to the 
elucidation of ‘ brainless hocus pocus.’ But we are glad to see 
that his labours have been highly extolled in Bengal, the present 


416 RE Sos NOG 


home of Tantrism, which is delighted at the disinterested efforts 
of an Englishman to vindicate their faith and its underlying 
philosophy before the learned world. One excellent trait of his 
scholarship is that he does not treat the Tantra writings as merely 
to be understood with the aid of the Sanskrit dictionary and 
grammar. He has studied them as living human documents 
expounded by indigenous Pandits ...a_ skilful exposition 
(‘ Principles of Tantra’) of Tantrik doctrines by one of these 
Pandits themselves ... it is very trenchant.’’—The Times of 
India (Bombay). 


“The appearance of Arthur Avalon as an exponent and de- 
fender cf the Tantras is a momentous event in the history of 
Sanskrit research. No better or sturdier champion the Tantras 
could secure in modern times, and his powerful grasp of the 
Tantrik philosophy and ritualism, his thorough appreciation of 
the Tantrik ideals and methods, his unabating energy and zeal in 
tackling the Tantrik mysteries, more than justify in us the hope 
that educated minds in the East as well as West will be ere long 
disabused of all that mass of prejudice that they have allowed to 
gather round the name of Tantra. It is needless to point out that 
this noble vindication of the Tantras redounds directly to the 
benefit of Hinduism as a whole, for Tantrikism in its real sense 
is nothing but the Vedic religion struggling with wonderful 
success to reassert itself amidst all those new problems of religious 
life and disclipine which later historical events and developments 
thrust upon it. ... In this new publication (‘ Principles of 
Tantra’) Mr. Avalon has not only fully maintained the tradition 
of superior merits in his translation, but has again brought out 
before the world of Sanskrit research another testimony of his 
wonderful amount of study and insight in the shape of another 
Introduction no less profound and weighty than his Introduction 
to the ‘ Tantra of the Great Liberation.’ But the most note- 
worthy feature of this new Introduction is his appreciative presen- 
tation of the orthodox views about the antiquity and the im- 
portance of the Tantras, and it is impossible to overestimate the 
value of this presentation.”—Prabuddha Bhédvata « ye 
Himalayas). 


“Mr. Avalon has not only rendered a great service to Indian 
literature, but has rescued from obscurity the life-work (‘ Prin- 
ciples of Tantra’) of that great Pandit. ... The crowning 
merit of his work consists in this—that it is, to the best of our 
belief, a first handbook of Tantra written straight out of personal 
experience. ... To a mind of superior vigour and acuteness 
Mr. Avalon unites a far more extensive intimacy with the products 
of Indian thought than we have ever encountered, after acquaint- 


PRESS NOTICES ) 417 


ance with hundreds of educated Europeans, in any other individual 
of his class... . A work of this nature, which seems to anchor 
the mind in the solid substance of Tantrik principles, cannot but 
be beneficial.”’—Amrit« Bazar Patrika (Calcutta). 


“ The book chosen by Mr. Avalon for introducing the West to 
the study of the Tantras is, at all events, an extraordinary work. | 
The author has written the book with his life-blocd, as it 
were, and it is impossible not to feel sympathy with him... . 
There is perhaps no one living at present from whom we may get 
so much solid information on the subject concerned than from 
Sieeourvae Chandra, author of this work. .’. . -A. Avalon’s 
scholarly Introduction and Preface contain an able and exhaust- 
ive criticism of the various unfavourable opinions on Tantrism 
which have so far come forthin the West. These at least should 
be read by everybody interested in Indian religions.’’—The 
Commonweal (Madras). 


“Most of those who know India know what moral and social 
results have been associated with Tantrik rites, and it may be 
doubted whether, even as an historical document, this long, 
obscure, and repulsive apology (‘ Principles of Tantra ’) was worth 
the considerable labour of translation and annotation.’’—Spec- 
tator (London). 


“This (‘ Principles of Tantra,’ Vol. I.) is an English translation 
by Mr. Arthur Avalon, the pioneer in the field of Tantrik research, 
and dedicated by him to the author of the work, who is one of 
the highest living authorities in Bengal on the subject concerned. 
: There are still many people who believe that ‘ the chief, and 
practically the sole, subjects of the Tantra ’ are ‘ sensual rites and 
black magic.” To them this book will be a revelation, for it will 
show them that there is still quite a different aspect of the Tantras, 
which is no less prominent for having been altogether neglected so 
far. They will be astonished to find that it is possible to deal 
with the philosophy of the Tantras without even referring to those 
rites and that magic, and they will grow suspicious with regard 
to those general statements about which our translator very aptly 
remarks. ... The value of the book is undeniable, as nothing 
like it has been so far available to the Western student... . 
Arthur Avalon’s Introduction is like that to his translation of 
the Mahdanirvana—a very remarkable piece of work.’’—The 
Theosophist (Dr. F. O. Schrader). 


BILLING AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, GUILDFORD, ENGLAND. 


9 PRINCIPLES OF TANTRA 


PART a. 


oe Te LPNERATATTVA OF SYUK LA SHIVA. 
auteee CHAN ARE VIDYARNAVA BHATTACHARYYA 
; MAHODAYA 


ee aN 


CANA 


ers I iz : 


| | WITH AN INTRODUCTION: BY 
SHRIYUKTA BARADA KANTA MAJUMDAR 


EDITED BY 


ARTHUR AVALON 


“ LONDON 
LUZLAG- & GO. » 

46, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, W.C. © 
(Opposite the British Museum) 


4 Y ie , Anh 
: ‘Te | 
ary 


ae 


‘ ‘ . 
f t 
‘ i 
ae Lave 
ws i) 7 
. % . 
ny 
: A 
a i 
: r aI 
She 4 - 
r i 
} 
. ‘ 
: Ya 
« 


hy. A‘a 
\ tevcla ries p 
a | TARA } 
ae | . Pals | 


{ ‘ 
ney \e ; 
y ea 
t 
F ; , 
‘ } 
iw AM 
' f i mm 
| 
i 
t 4 ' 
' uJ iy 
: 
. 
* 
“ 
‘ 
= ‘ 
q 
rv 
©] 
‘ 
/ = | 
- 
' 
‘ I 
1 
f 
‘ ‘ 
‘ a 
j 
C 
4 1 
' ; 
' 
i | 
‘ 
i , 
Ny 
« 
, 
‘ 
d i 
4 mh J | 
/ 3 rt ' oy \ 1 
¢ so ; ¢ 
P f AY) | 
: ne RY i. a > : ‘ 4 ay ae 
4 ' . 4158 wie. ¥ee 


ae i i St. ye vt 


are ‘ 4 ee 
i 


Roa 


seat se 


= 


+ i i } arena hehe bes th hits ¥ 
SUNG i tata tts 

"4 PN tae iyi eationett ! Pe tate te Reishee i ate 
relbt Perera i : hy ath t: i : 
‘eg biti sath ah Hay Lenriierarcontetnsh et 4 p 


= 
Pe 


ooh 
4h i 


ee Oe elt = 
acest 
: 

seats 


sas 232 
Sage pene a 


Rena 
Uebeb lated, 


ss 

waco 
es 
a 


i 


= 
ee 


i 
ae 
i 
} 
ve 


x 
mae 
San 


a 


Vee bated cnn 
OBE Repen ie 
HW dee hoe. 
ENS 6 
EN 


Ait 
0th 
i 
eh viet 


, tay 
if #5) 
rey 


HOPPE a ELE, 
Bh eh: 
eth drat: 


se es 
= 
G 


rt 
ASS TS 


ee 


it nab 0 
odie} Eo og pm Mey + At 
Ct hae Pie ; oflek ep ta Ak ee \ P An 
aigeanny wat yeh nd: he Oa rr , My . vty BR} Pa ry ¥ 
Me 


t 


