===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.274358.The-Purva_djvu.txt =====

PUEYA MIMAMSA SUTEAS OP JAIMINI 


CHAPTEES I-IU 


TRANSLATED WITH AN ORIGINAL COMMENTARY 


BY 

maHaMahopadhyaya pandit ganganath jha, 

M.A., D.Lira. 







COKTENTS. ' I 

*1 


FIRST ADHYlYA. 

MEANS OF AOQUIRLNG RIGHT KNOWLEDGE OF DOTY. 
First Pada, 


THE TARKA-POLEMICAL-PaDA. 


Acliiikarajiia 


Page. 



I.— Necessity of the Inquiry embodied in the Sutras 

II. — Definition of ‘Dharma’ 

in. — Propounding of the Enquiry intothevalid means of knowing Dharma 

IV. — Dharma is not amenable to Sense-perception and the other means of 

knowledge 

V. —The unquestionable validity of * Vedic Injunction ’ as the only means of 

knowing Dharma ... 

VI.— Eternity of Words 

li.— The Veda is expressive 

III.-— The Veda is not the work of a personal author 


Second Pada, 


THE authority OP THE ARTHAVaDA. 

l.“— Trust worthy charac ter of Arbhavada passages in general 
IL— Treating of the authority of such Arthavfida passages as have the form 
of Injunctions 

in.— Treating of such Arthavada passages as appear to contain the statement 
of reasons for certain courses of action 

IV. —Treating of the use of Mantras... 


Thied Pada, 


THE AUTHORITY OP SMRITIS AND USAGE ON MATTERS RELATING TO 

DHARMA. 

I.— The authority of Smritis in general ... 

II.— Greatest authority rests in direct Vedic declarations 
ni,— No authority attaches to such Smi.*itis as have their origin in wordly 
objects ... ... ' '.*»*: ; . ' 

IV,— Declaration of Substance is most authoritative ... 

,jy^ia),^Tr^ting of the scriptures of the Bauddha, ^e, / ^ ' ... , • ..... 

IV(h).— Authority attaching to the practices of good men 

shoihi _ always be taken In the sense attributed to it in 'the 



CONTBlsm. 


Adhikarana. 

Y(a)."-SigBMeation recognised by tlie Aryas is more authoritative tlian that 
accepted by the MIeehchhas... 

V(6X— -Treating of the comparative authority of Smritis and Usage ... 

V(c).--The sense that a word conveys in the Veda is more authoritative than that 

conveyed in ordinary parlance 

VI*— Treating of the authority attaching to w’^ords used only by the Mlechchhas 

VII.— No independent authoritativeness in the Kalpasutras 
Vll(a).— The Smritis and the Ahgas of the Veda, Shiksd, &c., like the Kalpasutra, 
have no independent authority, apart from the Veda 
VII(?>).— No authority belongs to the non-Vedic scriptures 

VIII.—The Hoidkadhikarana : Authoritative character of popular customs 

IX.— Vyltkitranddhikarana. . . 

X(a).— The words used and the things denoted by them in the Veda are the same 
as those in ordinary parlance 
X{b).— Words denote communities, not individuals 


Foueth Pada 


TREATING OF THE NAMES OP SACRIFICES, 


II- — ‘ CMtrd,’ &c., are names of Sacrifices 

III. ~‘ Tatprakiyanyfiya : ’ “ Agnihotra ” is the name of a Saerifleo ... 

IV. — ‘Tadvyapaae^nyftya’ : “iyena” anJ such other words arc names of 

Sacrifices 

V.— ‘ Vdjapeya,’ etc., are names of Sacrifices ... 

VI.— ‘ Agneya ’ is not the name of a Sacrifice ... 

Vir,— Such words as * Varhih * and the like denote the genus 
VIII-IX.-The names ‘proksani’ (VIII) and ‘Nirmanthya’ (IX) must be taken in 
their literal signification 

X*— The word ‘ Vais vadeva* is the name of a Sacrifice 

XI.— The mention of the number ‘eight’ in connection with the Vai.svSnara 
sacrifice is only an arthav^da 

XII.-The mention of the grass-bedding as ‘Master of the sacrifice’ is only a 
praise. [Fignrative description based upon Accomplishment of Pur- 
pose] ... 

XIIL-ThfeBrdhmana is praised as ‘Agni’ [Figurative d^eription based um'n 
sameness of origin] ... ^ ^ 

XIV.-The sacrificial post is praised as ‘Master of the sacrifice’ and as the 
sun [Figurative description based npon similarity of form] ... 

XV*— Indirect description based upon praise 

XVI.-Pigurative description based upon greatness of nnmber 

tile presence of an indicative sign 

XVIII. Doubts relating to the true meaning of sentence may bo set aside bv 
subsequentpassages ... ^ u a&iae »y 

XIX.— The indefinite is defined by the peculiar potency of things 


if 




GONTEmS. 


SECOND ADHYAYA. 

Fiest Fada. 

DIFFERENTIATION OF ACTIONS AND TEXTS PRESCRIBING THEM, 

Introductory — 

Atihikarana. 

L-— BhavartMdhikapana ... ... ... ... ... ... 

IL— There is such a thing as AptiFva ... ... ... ... 

IIL—Bi visions of Action into Primary and Secondary ... ... 

ni(a).— Definition of the Primary Action 

III(h).--Definition of Secondary Action ... ... ... ... ... 

character of Primary does not belong to such actions as the cleaning of 
the sruva, etc. ... 

Y. — MahendrMhikarana ... 

YL— The non-injnnctiveness of Mantras ... ... ... 

YIL—Definition of Mantra ... 

VIII.-— Definition of Brahmana ... ... ... ... ,.v 

IX.— Modified Mantras are not mantras ... 

X, — Definition of Eik ... ... ... 

XI.— The Definition of Sfiman — ... 

XII.— Definition of Yaj ns ... 

XIIL— Nigada is included in Yajiis ... ... 

XIY,— Definition of “ one sentence*^ or Syntactical Connection 
XY.— The definition of distinct sentences or Syntactical Disjunctions 
XYI.— Anusangadhikarana ; Eliptical Extension ... 

XYIL— Cases where Eliptieal Extension is not permissible ... 

Second Pada. 

I.— Difierence in the Apfirva of subsidiary sacrifices. Difference of Actions 
based upon the difference of words signifying the action ... 

II.— Difference of Actions based upon Kepetition of the same word : as in the 
case of the Samits and other sacrifices ... 

IIX,-.TreaMng of the relation of subserviency between the Ighfiras and the 
Agneya, etc. 

lY.— Exception to the foregoing Adhikarana ... 

Y. — The Aghfira, etc., are independent Actions 

YL— The Pasuyfiga and the Somay^fea are independent Actions 
YII.— Actions differentiated by means of number... 

YIIL— The differentiations of Actions bynames 

IX.— Differentiations of actions, through their deities 

X,— The Sentences * AgnSio^era juhoU and Dadhna /uhoti refer to the Sacnfice^ 

XI.— The mention of definite materials is with a view to distinct results 

XlI.-^The Ytovantiya, etc., are distinct Actions 





^ Thibd Pada; , , ' , ‘ - 

'he GrahSgrate is subsidiary to the lyoti^JoBia ... 

‘Jbe'Ayefti is a distinct Saerifloe ^ '..i ■■ _ 

oi the fire is an object of Jn|onctaon .... . ; .t*, 


... 286 
28 ? 


iii^ 


' ’‘''‘i-ll’j-i- ‘-r V. " ' j.v ^ ■ - ' • ' ' r 



CONTENTS. 


Adhikarana. 

IV.— The Daksdyaiia, etc., are Accessories 

Y.— Actions mentioned with specific substances and deities should be x^egarded 
as distinct 

VL-— Such actions as the Touching of the Calf and the like, are purelj’' purifica- 
tory 

VIL—The Naivarcharii is for the purposes of Adlidna 
Vni.— The tsviitrapatnivata is subservient to the Paryagnikarapa 
IX.— Ad^bhya, etc., are the names of the vessels 
X.— The Agnichayana is a secondary preparatory rite 
XL— The M^sagnihotra is a distinct Sacrifice ' 

XIL— The Agneya, etc., are K^mya Sacrifices 
XIIL— The Avesti leads to the acquisition of food. 

XIY.— The Repetition of the Agneya serves the purpose of Glorification 

Fouetii Pada. 

L— [Treating of the lifelong Agnihotra] 

IL— [The action mentioned in different Rescension texts is the same] 


THIRD ADHYlYA 


First Pada. 

L— Declaring the Subject-matter of the Adhydya 
II. — The definition of Subsidiary 
IlL— What can be Subsidiary ? 

IV.— The details of threshing and the rest pertain only to particular things ... 
Y.— The Sphya and the other implements have their use restricted... 

YT.—The quality of ‘redness’ is restricted to the substance, along with which 
it Is mentioned 

YIL— The Grahaikatva Nyaya The non-significance of number 
VIIL—The washing is not done to the chamasa, etc. 

IX. — The measure of 17 cubits applies to the sacrificial post used at the Pasu 

sacrifice 

X. — The action of ‘ Abhibramana’ is subsidiary to the ‘ Prayajas ’ only 

XL— The tJpavita is subsidiary to the entire Darsa Pfirnamdsa, and not to the 
Sdmidheni only 

XTL— The Yarana, the Yaibankatd and the other vessels belong to all sacrifices. 

The Mithosambandha Nyaya ... ... . 

XIIL— The Ydrtraghni recitation, etc., belong to the Ajyabhaga offerings, Ydr- 
traghni (Nyaya.) ... 

XIY.— The closing of the fist and such other details pertain to the whole context 
XV,— The quartering pertains to the Agneya cake only ... 

Second Pada. 

L— Mantras are employed according to their primary meaning (Barhirnydva.) 
n — The ‘ Aindri ’ mantras apply to. the gdrhpatya. (gdrhpatyanyaya) 

IIL— The mantras speaking of calling, are to be employed in calling... 
iy*-The mantras speaking ’ of walking I round the fire, are to be empIoyed Tn 
with the »atnedlrq(5tio|| ... 


CONTENTS. 


V 



Third Pada. 

•Tlie loudness, etc., pertain to the entire Veda 
-In the Adhana the singing is to be ^one gently 
■The Jyotistoma belongs to the Yajurveda 
-The context is a means of pointing out the use 


of mantras 

V.—The use of mantras ascertained by the order of sequence 
VT. — The use of mantras pointed out by name ... 

VII.-— Among direct declaration and the other means of ascertaining the use of 
mantras that which precedes is more authoritative than that which 
follows ... 

VTII. — The twelve Upasads pertain to the Ahina saoriSee ... 

IX*— The Pratipats are to be taken apart from the context along with the 
Kulaya, etc* 

X.—Tlie jr^ghni is not to be separated from its context ... 

XL — The joining of the slabs should find a place among the saiisthAs 
XIL— The prohibition of the Pravargya refers to the First Performance 
XIII*— The grinding of Phsa's share is to bo done at the Vik ritt sacrifices 

XIV, — The grinding of Pfisa's share applies only to the Rice 

XV. - “The grinding of Pfisa's share finds place only in that Charu, which Is dedi- 

cated to Pusan alone ..i 

, ' Foueth Papa. 

mention of the Hivita is an ArthavMa* ^ ... 

n*— The dsitrlbution of the Quarters must be regarded as mer^ Refe:fe^|je 


Adhikarana. 

Y.— The Suktavaka is employed in the offering of the grass bundle ... 

VI. — The SdktAvakas are to be employed in accordance with their meaning ... 

VIL — The “Kamyayajyanuvaky^ mantras belong to the Kamya saerxfiees only ... 

VIII.—The iipasthana of the Agnidhra priest should be done with those mantras 
that are found ill the same context 

TX. — The BhaksAnuv^ka mantras are to be used in connection with the iioldiiig, 
etc., in accordance with what is indicated by their words 
X.— From the word ^mandra' up to ‘ bliaksayamP is one mantra 

XT. —The mantras beginning with the words Trxdrapitasya’ are employed by 
modification to all Eatings ... ... 

XTI. — Indra also should be mentioned in connection with the Panarvinfta soma ... 

XIIL— At the eating of the Patnivata, Indra and other Deities should not be 
mentioned 

XTV.— At the eating of tho remnant of the Patnivata offering, there should be no 
mention of T vast ri 

XV,— At the eating of the remnant of the Patnivat offering, there should be no 
mention of the Thirty and three deities... 

XVT, — At the ‘ eating ’ there should be no mention of the Anuvasatk4ra deity 

XVII.— The remnants of offerings other than the one to Indra. should be eaten 
without mantras ... ... ... 

XVIIL— The “eating"’ of the remnant of the Indra- Agni offering, is to be done with- 
out mantras 

XfX.— The Mantras beginning with the word ‘Gayatra-chhandasah" are to be used 
in connection with the offering in which several metre.s are used 


Page. 

316 

319 

322 

823 

325 

326 

327 
329 

332 

333 

334 

335 



CONTENTS. 


Ac!Mkaran». 


■Tho passages beguiftmg with ‘ Parusidi^m/ &o., are only descriptive Re- 
ferences 

The prohibition of the Telling of Lies pertains to the Saerifice... 

-The Yawning pertains to the context of the Sacrifice 

•The prohibition of the threatening pertains to Man, in his ordinary 

capacity... ... ... — — ^ *“ 

Theprohibition of conversing with a woman in her courses, applies to 
Man, in his ordinary capacity 

-The wearing of gold pertains to Man in his ordinary capacity ... 

-The Jaya, &c., are subsidiary to Vedie actions ... ^ 

-The Expiatory Sacrifice is to be performed only in the ease of the gift of a 
horse, during a Yedic Sacrifice 

-The Yaruna-sacrifice, consequent upon Horse-gift, is to be performed by 
the Donor 

-The Somendra-charu is to be offered on a mishap befalling the Drink, 

during the performance of the Yedic Sacrifice 

-The offering of the Somendra-charu is to be made upon vomiting by the 
Saerificer 

-Out of the Agndya Ashtfikapala only a two-fold piece should be offered ... 
-TheSvlstakrit ofering should be made out of the Remnants of all sub- 


Fifth Pada. 

-The S vis takj.ut oblation of Remnants should not be offered out of the 
Clarified Butter, &:C, 

•The ‘ offering of Bemnants ’ is not to be made out of the material of the 
Sfikamprasthiya Sacrifice 

-There is to be no offering of Remnants at the Sautrfimani Sacrifice 
■At the Sarvap.rista Sacrifice the Svistiiakfit offering is to be made only 
once 

-Tn connection with the Cup dedicated to Indra-Yfiyu, there should be two 
eatings of the Remnant ... ... ... ... ^ 

-Eating of the Bemnants of Soma 

•There is Eating by the Priests to whom the Cups belong 
-The Udg^tpi priests should eat along with the Subrahmanya Priest 
-The eating of Soma is to be done by the Gr^vastut also 
-The pronouncing of the syllable ‘ vasat ' entities one to eat Soma 
-The pouring of oblations into the fire and the extracting of the Boma-juice 
also entitle one to eating 

-The pronounoer of the syllable * vasat ^ and others eat the Soma out of 
cups t..' ' **. ' -f 

■The Hoti*! priest is the first to eat the Remnant 
-The eating comes after Invitation 

•The Permission to eat should be given in terms of Yedic words... 

-The Answer should be by means of Yedic words— and that in accordance 
^th the meaning of the Mantra ... 


CONTENTS. 





Adliikayana,'. 


Page, 

435,;': 

:43a 


""The invitation should be extended to only those Priests that have to eat 
out of the same Vessel 

XVIII.— When the Master of the Sacrifice himself oMeiates, he is entitled to eat the 

•, ^ 

XIX.— The ‘ Fruit-Oup ’ is a substitute for purposes of the sacrificial offering 
XX.— The Followers of the VKsattriya cups’ must be Br^hmapas ... 

Sixth Pada. 

L— The character of consisting of leaves and such other things, that are laid 
down, apart from the context of any particular sacrifice, should be 
taken as pertaining to the archetypal sacrifice ... ... ... 440 

II.— The number seventeen pertaining to the Sfimidheni verses is applicable 

to the eetype ... ... ... ... 44.3 

III, — Such things, as the milking-vessel and the like, appertain to the archetype 444 

IV. — The laying of the fire is not subsidiary to the PavamSna Sacrifice ... 445 

V. — The laying of fire appertains to all Sacrifices ... ... ... 440 

VI. —The Pa vamfiiia sacrifices are to be ofiered ill the unsaneti fled fire ... 446 

Vll.— The Upakaraua and other preparatory rites should be performed only in 

connection with the animal dedicated to Agni Soma ... ... 447 

VIII.— Such details, as the fetching of the branch of the Palasha tree and the like, 

appertain to both morning and evening milkings ... ... ... 452 

IX.— The washing and such other details in connection with the vessels Is for 

the sake of ail the three Savanas ... ... ^ ^ . 453 

X.— The triplication of the cord pertains to all animals ... ... ... 453 

XI.— The placing, washing and such other details, are applicable to the Amshu, 

and the Ad^bhya vessels also ... ... ... ... ... 454 

XII, - The qualifications of the bricks, such as they should bear figures and the 

rest, pertain to the fire ... ... ... ... ... 455 

XIIL— The purchasing, the juice-extracting and such other details pertain to the 

Soma only ... ... ... ... ... ... 456 

XIV. — The details of the original substance are applicable to its substitutes also 457 

XV. — The details of the original substance are applicable also to such substitutes 

as are directly laid down in the Scriptures ... ... 458 

X VI .—The Pfk.sa n tyd and the rest ap pertain to the A gnistoma ... ... 453 

Seventh Pada. 

-Tifevarhi grass and ofelier things belong to the Darsha-Paraamasa as well 
as to their subsidiaries ... ... ... ... ... 4§2 

-The purificatory rites pertaining to the master of the sacrifice are 

neeted with the primary sacrifice ... ... ... ... 464 

«The Satimika altar pertains to both primary and subsidiary sacrifices ... 464 
-The touching of the offering material pertains to both the primary and the 
subsidiary sacrifices ... ... ... ... ... 465 

-The initiation and the sacrificial fees are connected with the primary 
sacrifice ... ... *** •»* *#t ... 466 

-Theinneraltar does notappertain to the sacrificial post ... ,,, 467 

-The HavirdhS,aa cart has no connection with the Si,midhem ... 468 

-The subsidiaries may be performed through other persons 469 

-The number of priests whose services have been bought is iimitpd ... 470 
«Xi^?|l^'.C)tomasldhvaryms are distinct from the aforesaid prieslis 472 

'' ■ '■ $72 



OONTENTS. 


,“-The BHmbei* of CliamasaUhvar^’H is restricted to Tea 
— The 8iiamitn is Bot distinct from the afore-oaentioaed priests ... 

— The UpagSs are not distinct from others ... 

— The Soma-Yendor Is distinct 

— The name ‘Kitvik ’ can apply only to the seventeen priests 
—The Brahma <and the other priests mentioned in the texts dealing with 
initiation and sacrificiai fee constitute the ‘seventeen Ititvilis’ 

—The ‘Seventeenth ’ among the Priests is the Master of the Sacrifice 
—Each of the Seventeen Priests are to perform only such acts as are specially 
assigned to him. In some eases, there are exceptions 
- The Praisa Mantras are to be recited by the Maitravaruna Priest 
“The Chamasahoma is to be performed by the Aflhvaryu 

-The Shyena and the Aajapeya sacrifices are to be performed by the several 
priests ... 

Eighth Pada. 

-The purchasing of the Services of Priests is the Work of the AXaster 
-The giving of the three-year-old cow is to be done by the Atihvaryu 

other embellishments pertain to the 

-The penances pertain to the blaster 

■The wearing of the red turban pertains to all priests 

‘ Desire for Kain ’ pertains to the blaster 

beginning toUi ‘ ayiu-M ’ is to be done by 

The Mantra mentioned in two places is to be recited by both persons 

The Mantra should be made to be recited only by a. person who knows it... 

The ‘ double acts ’ ar to be done by the Aflhvaryu ... ... ^ , 

^^arMcBllrsae^r^^^^^ Adhvaryu is to be recited by the Hotri at a 

The uttering of the Directions is to be done be a nrie.st othfii- #-,hnn hhr. 


XVlIh 

XIX-IX 


XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIfl. 






/ I 


- '. .iS''"' ™ ’y,*^;'^'^' / ''^‘S’^ ", , S'’'^it . i'A ^ ^ V >-! 


INTEODUCTIOM, 


iisfliiiii 



WTBODUOTION. 


Of the twelve Adhydyas, the first deals with the soitrces of knowledge 
as toBharma; the with what indicates difference among actions ; 

the third lays down principles by which it is ascertained what is sxib- 
servient to, or part of, which act; the fourth deals with the Motive 
underlying the acts ; the fifth with the order of sequence among actions ; 
the sixth with the questions as to persons entitled to the performance o 
the acts; the seventh with the s-ubject of transference of details nom 
one to the other action ; and the same subject is dealt with in greater 
detail by the eighth adhydya ; the ninth describes those cases where certain 
modifications are introduced into the original action , the tenth treats o 
cases where the transference of details is not permissible ; the elevenih 
points out instances where a single performance of an act serves the 
purposes of several sacrifices ; and the tivelfth with those eases where 
the details have to be repeated with each of the several sacrifices. 

These Sup'os have had several commentators, — such as Upavarsa, 
Bharrtimitra and others. These, however, are known to us only in 
name. The earliest commentary known to us is that by Shahara, 
known as the ‘ BhSsya.’ This has been published in the Bibliotheca 


/ 


INTEODUGTION. 


iii 


fresh material put at my disposal by my friend, Babu Govinda D^a, 
accumulated to such an extent that I came to the conclusion that a I'eally 
exhaustive translation of the Sutra and its commentaries will have to be 
made on the lines of my translation of the NySya-Sutras now appearing 
in Indian Thought. Since coming to this conclusion, I confined myself, 
in the present work, to a very brief account of each Sutra and Adhikarana, 
on the basis of the ‘ Subodhini As soon, however, as my hands are free 
from the Fyaya-Sutras, I intend to take up the critical translation of the 
Shabara-Bhasya, along with copious notes from all available commentaries, 
chiefly Prabhskara s Bvihati and KumSrila’s Vdvtika, with their respective 
commentaries. Thereby I shall, I hope, atone for the discrepancies of 
my present work. 

The work has turned out to be a long one ; and for this reason the 
publishers have wisely decided to issue the first three Adhvavas as 
Vol. I. 

^ In this work, as in all my works, I am indebted to my friend, Babu 
Govinda D^sa, without whose help I could not have obtained even a 
fraction of the matez'ial that he has supplied me with, and without which 
my work on these Surras would have been impossible. 

For the list of contents and the index, I am indebted to my sous, 
Bhavanatha and Amaranitha. ’ 


. Moib Collbgb, Allahabad; 

Novemler 15th, 1915. 


GANGANATHA JHA. 




II ? I ? M II 


THE PUEyA-lflApA-SijTRAS OF JAIIIHI 

WITH AH ORIGINAL COMMENTARY IN ENGLISH. 

FIRST ADHYlYA. 

MEANS OE ACQUERINGI RIGHT KlNOWLEDGE OE DUTY, 

First Pada. 

TEIE TARK.A-POLEMICAL— PADA. 


AdhiJmmna l~Neeessity of the l7iqtury embodied in 

the Sutras. 


sOtra 1. 


therefore, Dharma, duty-fgmrtrr 


^ Atha, now. ?rfT: Atali, 

Jijfiasa, desire to know, enquiry, 

1. Now, therefore, (tkere must be) an inquirv into 
(the nature of) Duty. — 1, 

COMMENTARY. 

^ When the student recalls to his mind the injunctive text ‘ SvadhyAyo- 
dhyetavyah,’ ‘ the Veda should be studied, ’-there arises a doubt in his 
-mind as to the scope and method of this study : should he only <.et up 
tHe words of the Yedic texts? or, should he, after having got up the°texts, 
proceed to learn the meaning of the texts and further developments there- 
j from? The former naturally is the course that suggests itself to him as 
the one to be adopted ; he argues that the study of the Veda has been laid 
_ down in the Veda this study, therefore, must lead to some desirable 
result as the text itself does not speak of any particular result, we must 
. assume the/ attainment of heaven’ to be that result as this result can ■ 
by virtue of the text itself, be obtained by the^ mere learning of the texts' 
the ‘study’ enjoined must end withdhis ;-and there can be no need, or 
justification for prolonging the study after that. 







rimVA-MlMAMSA-SUTRAS. I ADEYAYA 




/ 


/ PADA, n ADHIKAPANA, 8A. 8. 


may be that the teaching that is enjoined does not directly denote the 
learning of the meaning ; but it has to be borne in mind that in ‘studying 
the Veda/ it will be necessary .for the student to learn the subsiclituy 
sciences of graniinar, prosody, lexicography and the like ; and when he 
will have learnt all this, the knowledge thei-eby attained will naturally by 
itself enable him to understand much of the meaning of the Vedic texts 
also ; and when he has acquired this faculty, there would be many in- 
stances, where he would be in doubt as to the true nieaniiig ; such, for 
instance, would be all those thousand and odd cases that form the subject 
matter of the adliikaranas of the Miinamsfi. Sastras, Purvaand Uttara alike ; 
and in order to settle his doubts upon these points, it would he necessary 
for him to carry on, with the help of his Professor, a systematic enquiry; 
and thus tliis enquiiy necessarily becomes a part and parcel of that 
study and ‘ teaching’ which is enjoined by the text quoted at the outset. 

It will be noted that between the Bhatta and the Prfihhakara pre- 
sentment of the Adhikarana, there is no difference as regai'ds the basic 
topic or doubt ; as in botl) the investigation into the meaning of the Vedic 
texts forms the topic, and the doubt also is ihe same in both cases — ‘ is 
this investigation covered by the injunction of s^udJ^’ The only dift'or- 
ence that there is lies in the choice of the basic text, and the consequent 
shape given to the reasonings of the Purvapaksa and the Siddhanta. 


Adhikarci'na II. — Definition of ‘ Dharnia.' 

sffTRA 2. 

sm mt {\ R u 

Chodana, injunction (Vedic).-gi^; Laksanalj, source of know- 
ledge. That whereof the Vedic injunction is the only source of knowledge. 

Arthah, something desirable, Dharniali, (is) Duty. 

2. Dliarma or Duty is that wliicli, being desirable, is 
indicated (or tanght) by Vedic injunction. 

OOMMJBNTAUY. 

In the preceding adhikarana the conclusion was arrived at that it 
is necessary to carry on an investigation into the nature of Dharma. Tiie 
next question that arises is — Is there possible a definition of Dharma? or 
is there any valid means of knowing what this Dharma is ? The Purva- . 
p.ak§a argument is that there-can be no ‘ definition’ of Dharma ; as we can 
define only such things of the ordinary world of which we have some 
, while Dharma is something beyond the world, and as such not 



PUEVA.MiMiMSA-SUTEAS. 1 ADEYAYA 


liaving its distinctive features known, it cannot be defined. As regards 
the means of knowing Dharma, no such means is possible ; because it can- 
not be perceived bj' the senses; and what is absolutely beyond the sense.s 
cannot be amenable to Inference ; for a similar reason it must be beyond 
all words and phrases. Thus it must be admitted that (1) there can be 
no definition of Dharma, and (2) there can be no trustworthy means of 
knowing what Dharma is ; and under the circumstances Dharma nnist be 
rejected as a nonentity ; thus the whole inquiiy becomes aimless and futile. 
In answer to this the final conclusion is that — (1) Dhaiina can be defined as 
that desirable thing rvhich is mentioned or laid clown by Vedic Injunctions ; 
that is to say, that which the Vedic injunction lays dowm as leading 
to a desirable end is Dharma ; and from this it also follows that the Vedic 







1 PADA, III ADEIKARAm, S4. S. 5 

all Slid) ordinary things beccine included under tlje object of enquiry, it 
could not b6> rightly asserted that the Veda is the only means of knowing 
them ; for in regal'd to the ordinary things before our eyes, for instance, 
Visual Percejp lion would certainly be a surer guide than an}^ number of 
Vedic injunctions. The final conclusion is that the object of enquiry as 
expressed by tlie term ‘ wTat is expressed by the Veda’ must be timt alone 



which the Veda lays down as to be done ; and this is done only by the 
Injunctions, and not by mantras and arthavadas ; and on the point of a 
certain act, which is yet to be done, leading to a certain result in the 
future, there can be no guide save a trustworthy source of information ; 
and such a one excellence is the Vedic Injunction. As regards the 
instance cited above, of desirable results proceeding from the mere state- 
ment of facts, there is nothing to prove beyond doubt that the pleasurable 
feeling lias been produced by the conveying of the news. In the case of 
the injunction, however, there can be not the slightest doubt in the mind 
of the observant young man that the action of the fetching of the cow lias 
been the direct result of the ini unction ‘ fetch the cowu’ 







P/^BVA.MlMAMSA-S&ritAS. I ADHVAYA 


x v .—nnarma is not amenaUe to 8en,e- 
perception and the other means of knowledge. 

sOtka 4 . 

ii 9 ii 

'ontacUo^t'’ ^ San.prayoge, on 

,outact(oO. turusasya, of man. 5%*,njrpi Indriyanam, of tbeseUe- 

irgans. fr^ ouddln, of) coguiiion-sr^iT Jannia production ' ;.nn . 

rat, that (is) Fratyaksan^ sense percition ^ 

he means, Vidya.nana, that which exists at the 

Jpalambhanat, on account of apprehending. 3^««Tfrrii: 

4 . That oogaition of men which proceeds upon the 
,ontact of the sense-organs with existing objects, is Semc- 
,erccptzo« ; and this is not the means (of knowing dharma) ; 

ime— 4 ** objects existing at the present 

COMMJBNTARY. 

Tlie question propounded in the preceding aphorism wss-Can 
larma be known by means ot the Veda alone, or by the other means 
now edge abo . The prime /oeie argument is that beingan ‘ object 
knowledge dharma must be amenable, to all ‘ means oiLowiedie 



I PAD A, F HADIKARA'hU, 8i1.. 5 


The final conclusion is that even though dharraa is an object of kno\T- 
ledge, it is not amenable to sense-perception, because Sense-perception can 
apprehend onlj^ such objects as are in existence at tlie time of perception, 
and are in direct contact with one or more of the organs of perception. 
Neither of those conditions is fulfilled by dharma: it is not an object 
existing at the time of the perception, but lias to be brought into exist- 
ence by certain acts of the agent; nor is it ever possible for it to be 
in direct contact with anj^' organ of peiception ; for the simple reason 
that it has no external and tangible form. Then again. Inference, 
Presumptive Reasoning, and Negation are all more or less directly, depen- 
dent upon Sense-perception : as each of them has its foundation in some 
fact of sensuous perception ; consequently, what is never amenable to 
Sense-perception cannot be apprehended either by Inference or Presump- 
tion or Negation. It follows, then, that Verbal Authority is the only one 
of the recognised ‘ moans of knowledge ’ which can afford any knowledge 
of dharma. Of Verbal Authority also, it is the Veda alone whose validity 
is beyond all dispute, and which alone can provide an absolutely valid 
knowledge It will be shown later on that of the Veda also, it is 
only tlie purely injunctive passages that can be regarded as intrinsically 
valid. It, therefore, follows that a really valid knowledge of dharma can 
be obtained only by means of the Vedic Injunctions. The unquestionable 
authority .of these Injunctions forms the ‘ topic’ of the next adliikarana. 


Adhiluxrcma V. — The unquestionable validity of ‘ Vedie In- 
junction ’ as the only means of hnowing Dharma. 

SCfTRA 5. 


8 



PUBVA-MIMAMSA-SUTEAB. I adhvaya 


0 . ^ On the other hand, the relation of the word with 
Its meaning is inborn (and eternal) ; consequently injunction 
(which is a form of word) is the means of knowing dharma ; 
and It IS unfailing in regard to objects not perceived (by 
other means of knowledge) ; it is authoritative, according to 

^ adarayana, specially as it is independent or self sulficrent 
m its authority — 5. 

COMMENTARY. 

The qneetion ll.ol arises after tl,e cot. elusion has been arrivetl that 
no vahd knowledge of Dharma can be derived from Sense-perception Into- 
enoe, 4o., is :-Ia the valid knowledge of dlianna obtainable from ’ V.di„ 
injunction? The privia facie 
oelong to Veclic injunctions 


mt) case ot tJie assertions of 
can know what they assert oniy 
ig of the words contained in tiie 
ct that tile meaning of words is 
ich things of the ordinaiy world 
IS something beyond the world,- 
■d by means of any word cannot be 
1 ; it must be admitted therefore 
^pressed to us by means of any 
- reliable information with regard 
cognition, lye find that it is only 
into existence independently of 
X by convention a certain rela- 
P which one comes to be expressed 
tion fixing the relationship, origi- 
> eiior, like everything human; 
n words and meanings' being of 
II verbal cognition is dependent 
knowledge, derived 


WSMM. 





I PADA, VI ADBIKAEA'NA, Sli. 7. 


mems °f Wmg of ; specially became dka,-ma beicg eometbhig not 

cognt^ble by Senee-pcrception and the other ondinaty nteane oTooSn 

ofairextanitf iadependen; 

t,. , K absolutely seli-euffloienl in its reliability or 

mZiTot l-no'I 'rr"’'' '’7'’*° of'tl.e 

means 0 Unoy edge only when they aford cognitions that are found con- 

all trust ''iT” > “ ‘liemseH-es the means of knovyledge are 

all tt ushyorthy ahvays. Jn the case of Vedic injunction, it has never been 

nnr 0 give rise to cognitions that turn out wrong ; consequently its 
inherent trustworthy character remains unsullied. >*(l«=ntly its 


Adhikavana FT — Eternity of Words 

SUTRAS 6-23. 

“^1% rRT IK II 

^ Karma, '[word is] something produced or brought into existence or 
caused, non-eteinal. ij% Eke, some people, theNaiyayikas (assert^ fra- Taf 
that (in the uttering of the wordl IrL, „ 

always perceived. ^ t*" effort] is 

6. “ Some people hold that the ivord is caused (aon- 

eto” ™ perceptible only lifter an 

COMMBJNTTARY. 

In tlie preceding adlnkavana it has been proved that the relationshin 
betiveen the and xts meaning i. eternal. As this conclusion ne e - 
sarily presupposes tlie eternal.ty of the word itself, the present adhik 
seeks to establish this eternality. The question then being-ij 1 ! 

eternal ?-we have the prima facie arguments in support of he 
that It IS not eternal, stated in sutras 6 to 11. w ^ 

eternal, say the NaiyAyikas ; ia) because we always find' tk. u'® T' 

into eeftistence by the effort of the person using or u[terin<. it ■ a d T^ - * 
brought into existence by an effort cannot but be evanescent ’ Thi 
contains the first argument against the eternity of words. ' 

II VS a 

Asthanat, because of non-continuance or non-permanence 

. : 7 (6) “Because it does not persist”—/. 

_ . m Word muut be evaucBcent, becauee ae a matter of fact we Sad 

that It doe® mot continue to exist tor any length of timej one moment ’ 





PdBYA-MlMAM8A~8l^TBA8. ' J ADEYAYA 


it is pronounced, and the next moment it is gone. This would not be 
possible if the word were eternal. 

” u q n 

Karoti, does, produces— !(r?Eg:r«l ^abdat, because of the use of the word. 

8 (c) Because of the use of tlie word produces 
(utters) [with reference to words.] — ;8. 

COMMENTARY. 

(e) Words must be non-eternal; because we find people making use 
of the word bkaroti’ witli regard to words. Just as witli reference to 
the ordinary thing jar, they say ‘ ghatahkaroti,’ ^he makes the jar/ exactly 
in the same manner people say ^ s^abdahkaroti ’ which must mean ^ he 
makes or produces the word.’ This is the second argument against word- 
eternity. 

“ n i» 

Sattvantare, in the (perception of) other beings. Yauga- 

padyat, because of simultaneity. 

9 (d) “Because the word is found (to be pronounced) 

by [many persons] and in (many places) simultaneously.” — 9. 

COMarSNTARY. 

(d) Bere we have the third argument against word-eternity. As a 
matter of fact we find that one and the same word is perceived (heard) 
by more than one person, and also in more than one place, at one and the 
same time. This is possible only in the case of a substance that is omni- 
present, all-pervading, or that which is limited in its extent, but capable 
of being brought into existence at more than one place at the same time. 
The word is not an all-pervading substance ; hence it must follow that 
when perceived by different persons at different places, it must be produced 
in so many places. It must be admitted, therefore, tliat any single word 
is not one, but many, all produced in different places. 

Prakriti, original form— Vikrityoh, modification,— because of. 

'xT Cha, also. 

10 (e) “ Also because of their having original and 

modified forms.” — 10. 

. COMMENTARY. ■ , , ^ 

(e) In many cases we find that the words which appear in the original 
form ‘ dadbi atra ’ for instance — become modified into the form ‘dadhy- 
;^tm [; ‘ no .such raodifieatioh Js possible in. the case of things eterail 



1 pad A, n AmiKAitAlsJA, Sit ]. 


which, tbeir eternalit.y, nius 
tiiat there is luodification in the 
regarded as non-eternal. 


COMMENTAEy. 

AVhen many persons pronounce the 
increase in the magnitude of the word, 
word consisted not in its production, but 
the volume of the word would remain the 
number of persons pronouncing it; 
by lamps, the jar remains the same 
in to illumine it. As a matter of {at 
of the word-sound as pronounced by 
than when it it is pronounced bj 
that the ivord is modifiable ; and u 
eternal. 

This closes tlie reasoning against the eternity of words, 

m i\ w 

^ EW^Saniam, equal, g Tu, but. Tatra, in the 
Uarsanam, perception. 

12. (In both cases) the (momentary) peret 
(of word-sounds) is equa].— -12. ^ 

COMMEIVTAEY, 

With this aphorism begins the i-efutation of the prma facie 
ments set forth in shtras 6-11. Jt has been urged aLe tl/aH: 
many well-known facts, -c. j?., tlm momentary perception of the 
jound-that cannot be explained on the theoiy that all that the effort 
luman utterer does is to manifest, or render perceptible, the wort 
las always been in existence, and the effort does not create or brin 
®stence, the word. It is urged in reply to this that, whether we r 
he iyord ^.maniM^.by human effort, or as brought into existence 
he , feet remains that the word is perceived only for a moment 


same word, there is always an 
If the prononneing of the 
only in its manifestation, then 
same, notwithstanding the 
just as m the case of the jar manifested 
even if hundreds of lamps are brouo-ht 
3t, however, it is found that the volume 
a luiniber of persons is always greater 
' a single person ; and this also proves 
diat is liable to modification cannot be 


matter iu queytion^ 



PVEVA-MiMAMSA-S&TBAS. 1 ADUYAYA 


sense is that this well-known fact is as explicable under one theory as 
iiiuier tlie other* 

Satah, of that which already exists, Parani, at another time. 

5ErgT§Tr^ Adarsanani, non-perception, Vi say a, [with regard to the] object — 

Anagam^t, non-operation. 

13, It is of that (word) which already exists that 
there is non-perception at other points of time (before and 
after the utterance), — and this is due to the fact that (at such 
other points of time) there is no operation (of the manifestive 
agency) witli regard to the object (word-sound.) 

COMMENTARY. 

It has been argued above under sutra 7 tliat word cannot be regarded 
as eternal, because of the fact thatit is not found to be permanent, — it di.s- 
appears immediately after its utterance. The present suti'a supplier the 
answer to this argument. It has been pointed out under the preceding 
sutra that whatever theory we accept wdth regard to the perception of word- 
sound, the fact remains that it is perceptible only fora moment. It is 
now pointed out that this fact can be satisfactorily explained only on the 
eternity of words ; as on this theory it can be veiy rightly asserted 
that the wmrd is heard at one moment and not at the othej’, because it 
is only at one moment that the manifestive agency — which in many cases 
is human utterance, — is operating towards its manifestation, and not at all 
moments ; that this is so is shown by the further fact that as long as, and 
whenever, a man goes on uttering the word, we hear it ; so long as the 
utterance is operating, the perception is there ; when the utterance ceases 
to operate, the perception ceases ; thus showing that what the utterance 
does is only to manifest, or render perceptible, what is already existing. 
If, on the other band, the word were produced, or brought into existence, by 
our utterance,— just in the same manner as the jar is made by the potter,— 
it would be necessary that the word be heard all along since that point 
of time ; just as from the point of time at wjiich the jar is made, it conti- 
nues to be perceived as long as it exists. As a matter of fact, this is not 
found to be the case with the word ; which also goes to show that there 
is no production or creation of the word as there is of the jar. What the 
manifestive agency of the uttei’ance does is to remove or set free the 
air enclosed within the vocal pipe, which is impeding the exit of the word- 



u n II 

Adityavat, like the sun. Yaugapadyam, simultaneity. 

15. Tlie simultaneity (of perception by many persons) 
is as in the case of the sun. — 15. 

COMMBNTAKY. 

Sutra 9 has argued that the very fact of the word-sound being heard 
at the same time by different people and in different places proves that the 
word is not one, and is not eternal. It is in answer to this that the 
present sutra argues that it is true that different men at different places 
perceive, the word at the same time ; but this does not irrove that the word 
is many aud transient. The sun also is seen at the same time by many 
pei-sons at different places ; and yet it is one only and eternal ; in the same 
manner it is quite natural that the word should be one and eternal, and 
yet perceived by different people at different places, at the same time. 


(^rs^r) Sct^ttSabdantaram, another word or letter. Avikarah 

not a modification. 

16. It (the change produce by the conjunction of . 
letters) is a different letter; it is not a modification (of the 
original word.) — 16. 

; COMMENTARY.. ' • ■■■■;•' Y- ‘ 

When the two words ‘dad'hi’ and ‘ atra ’ are pronounced in close 
proximity, we have the form ‘ dadhyatra if this latter is a modification 




1 pADA, Vi ADUlKABAhU, Sit 16. 


I) 

Prayogasya, of the utterance. Param, pei taining, referring. 

14. [As for the use of the word ‘ produces ’] that refers 
to the utterance [of the word]. — 14. 

COMMENTARY. 

It has been argued in sutra 8 that we find people making’ use of the word 
produces with regard to words ; and this shows that words are produced, 
not eternal. In answer to this it is asserted that when we speak of the 
production of the word what we are referring to is only its uttei’ance by 
some speaker; and it is not that it is brought into existence, not having 
existed before. J ust as when we say ‘ gornayafikui’u,’ what we mean is, 
not that the cow-dung has tc be produced, but that a collecting of the 
cowdung has to be made ; so ‘ flabdaftkuru ’ must refer to the making or 
bringing into existence the utterance of the word. 




PfElpP 



iSctfiA'a 




PURVA 


MSA-SUTRAS. T ADHYAYA 


rffs? Nada, tone-^f^ Vriddhi, iiicrease — to Para, in reference to. 

17. The great increase (of magnitude) belongs (or is 
in reference) to the tone (not to the word itself.)— 17. 

COMMENTARY. 

It has been argued under sutra 11, that vyheii many persons utter the 
same word w'e perceive that the magnitude of tlie word imdej-goes an 
increase; wdiich shows that the word is liable to change, and as sucii 
transient. It is argued in answer to this that wdieu many persons pronounce 
the same word, what happens is not any change in the word itself, but 
cniy in the tone, which becomes louder or fainter as the number of persons 
become j more or less. In fact, on the theory of the Naiyayika, no increase 
of magnitude, is possible in the word ; as the word is only a form of 
sound ; and sound, accordine to him. is nnlv a nniiUi-.ir • 1 „o 


TO^^r^ II %m\ 

^1^57: Nityali, eternal, f fu, on tlie other hand, fjjff Syat, must be 
Darianasya, of the inanifester, of the utterance. Parartbatvat 

being for another purpose, ^ * 

18. On the othbr hand (word) must be regarded as 
eternal ; specially because the utterance is for an altogether 
different purpose. — 18. 

COMMENTARY. 

, Having met seriatim the arguments propounded by the adversary, 

forward reasopipgs in support of the etemifYbf 


^ 



/ FADA, VI ADEIKAEA-NA, 8i\. 20. 


Kiea or the transient character of words is based apoii 
utterance by iis brings the word into existence. Tt is here 
. IS not so ; we utter the word not for the purpose of produc- 
tlie word, but only for the purpose of expressing wliat the 
In fact, this purpose could not be served if the word uttered 
.sient; as in that case it would be destroyed the moment 
red ; and so not being in existence at the time that the hearer 
md the meaning,— whence could tliis compreheusion arise ? 
^ the compreheusion being there shows that the word that 


Sarvatra in all cases. Yaugapadyfit, on account of simul 

taneity or unanimity. . t>iniui 

19. Because in the case of all [words] there is simul- 
taneity or unanimity [of recognition].— 19. 

COMMENTARY. 

As a matter of fact we find that every word, as word 
sions is invariably recognised by all men as being the 

hear a word ‘ cow ’ for instance, we always recognise it as the 

word cow that we had heard on previous occasions. This 


, on several occa- 
saine : wlienever we 
sa.me 
recogn.ition of 

sameness is found, not with regard to one or a few words, but with regard 
to all words ; and not in the minds of a few men, but in that of all 
and what is thus universally vouched for cannot be 
admitted that the word that is heard and used to-day is 
that lias been heard from time immemorial ; that is to say 

R^sir SankliyS, number— ^jTT^CT.Afahavat, on account of absence. 

20. Also on account of the absence of number. 20 

COMMENTARY. 

In ordinaiy pailance, when a certain word is pronounced more than 
once, what we say is that the word has been used ‘ five,’ ‘ten ’ or ‘ twelve ’ 
times ; and it is not said that ‘ five,’ ‘ ten,’ or ‘ twelve ’ such words have 
been used. If the word were produced and destroyed each time, we should 
Iiave spoken of so many words, and not of the same word as spoken so 
many times. This universal usage also shows that the word is the same 
Ijaed that is fo say, it is eternal. ■ : ’ 


men ; 

.gainsaid. It must be 
precisely the same 
it is eternal. 























PLIBVA-M1MAMSI-SUTRA8. I adeyAya 


Anapeksatvat, because of independence or absence of cause. 

21. Because of tlie absence of cause. — 21. 

COMMENTARY. 

Ill the case of all tilings tliat are liable to destruction people alvvaj^s 
find some cause of destruction ; there in no such cause or agent of destruc- 
tion perceptible in the case of words ; consequently we cannot admit of 
such destruction; and words must be regarded as ‘indestructible,’ eternal. 

w rr \\ 

Prakbyabhavat, on account of the non-mention, ^ Cha, and, 

Yogyasya, of that which is capable (of being perceived). 

22. Also because wbat is perceptible [by the ear] is 
not what is spoken of (in the Vedie declaration ‘ the air 
becomes the word ’].— 22. 

COMMENTARY. 

The opponents of word-eternity bring forward tlie Vedic text ‘ tlie 
air becomes the word ’ in support of the contention that the word has a 
beginning, being, as herein declared, a mere product of the combination of 
air-particles. As against this view it is argued that this text cannot refer 
to what we know as the ‘ word ; ’ as this is what is perceptible by the ear ; 
and certainly no product of air-particles is such as cati be so perceived, — air, 
according to the Logician, being perceptible by the sense of touch alone. 


faf Lih a, indication— Darsanat, on account of our meeting with. 

Cha, also 

23. Also because we meet with [tests] indicative [of 
eternity of words]. — 23. 

COMMENTARY. 

This refers to such texts as ‘ vl.ch4— virupinityaya’ — ‘ by the word 
which is unmodifying and eternal ’—where the word is distinctly spoken 
as eternal. 

Stress is laid on the eternity of words inasmuch as if words have a 
source, they cannot but be fallible. Lecause such source must be in some 
sort of an intelligent person. As a matter of fact, we find that no such personal 
source is infallible. Hence the non-eternity of the word would strike at 

the infallible authority of the word and of the Veda, which is a mere 

collection^ of words upon which the whole fabric of Dharma, according 

to the Mimdrpsaka rests. 



I PADA, Fir ADETS.AJIAT^A, Sit 24. 


%"syTZ Racl^n.; 

f , . cuorcj. byuh, they (sentences) would be. str^fs A^^h^o,., 

hA.^7b77oXr,TZL A.an„i„.teatva., on account of no 

24 “ETen though (vyords and their meanings were) 
eternal (or eyen on the manifestation of words and their 
meanings) (the sentences) would remain inexpressive tor 
would be the product of separate effort) because (the meaning 

of 

COMMENTARY. 

^ The question of the relationship between the word and its meanino' 
having been settled, a furtlier question is raised Granting that the word 
eina and that its relation to its meaning is also eternal, what has this 

r.™f - -‘t »Mog .0 

ti„a - ' r enteiing into a,rguments bearing specifically on the Veda 

opponent takes his stand upon general principles. We grant that the 

r eternal ; all that this proves 

18 that words provide us with correct ideas j how does this prove the 

lust worthy character of the Vedic injunctions? These injunctions are 
m the form of sentences containing more than one word ; and'for the 
compi^hending of a conglomeration of words we need something more 
than the comprehension of the meanings of the component words Con 
sequently inasmuch as so far the Mim 4 msaka It AH H ... i 



Siisifii 




F&EVA^MtMAMSA-SCTEA 


1 AERY AY A 


TadbhOtanam, of words as pertaining or related tc 
denoted. Kriyarthena, with the word expressive of act 

Samamnayah, textual juxtaposition. Arthasya, of the me 

sentence), I annimittatvat, on account of being depen 

(meaning of words composing it). 

52. [In a sentence] all words denoting tilings are in 
close textual juxtaposition ivitli the word expressive of an 
action ; [and from this it follows that the meaning of the 
sentence must he got at through this juxtaposition of the 
words] specially because the meaning of the sentence is 
dependent upon the meaning of the words composing it. — 25. 

COMMENTARY. 

In answer to the above it is shown that as a matter of fact the inean- 
ing of the sentence does depend upon the meaning of the words composing 
it j there is nothing to prove that the sentence has any other meaning 
apart from what is afforded by the component words. For instance, in 
the sentence agnihotrilhjuhuy^t svargakamab ’ we find that the word 
expiessive of the Agnihotra sacrifice and also the word expressive of desiring 
heaven are both found in close 
denotes the action of offerivg ; an 


\\\x\\ 


to the word / juhuydt ’ which 
meaning that is afforded by 
dr the signification of the two 
signification of the verb. The meaning 
■should offer — the agnihotra^ which is 
nothing more than the denotations of the three words linked together. 
Hence when the word and its meaning are eternal, sentences formed by 
these words must also be eternal ; and thus the eternity of sentences 
being established, there is no incongruity in the view that the Veda is the 
trustworthy authority for all matters relating to Dliarma. 

Loke, in ordinary parlance. Sanniyamat, on account of re- 

striction or hmitation. !|%if Prayoga, usage-?rilRs4: Sannikarsah, explana- 
tion, justification. 

26. Inasmuch as we find a restriction in the case of 
ordinary parlance, it follows that [in the Veda also] there 
^ similar explanation fpr the use [of sentences],— 26, 






1 PADA, nil ADaiZARAHA 


111 the case of ordinary nsa 
luiow the meaning of each indivii 

the meaning of the sentence c ^ 

It could be safely argued that the 
the meaning of the words, 
nieaning of the sentence 
more or less than what is 


1 IS round tliat it is only when we 
ooividual word that we can use or comprehend 
composed of those words; from this analogy 
ThaV sentence depends upon 

aor ? I -T ^f5“itted that the 

a^mho tranjuhuyat syargakamar is nothinrr 
signified by each of the thr 


■ee words. 


Adhikar 


,f “"O'™, or.he .„„'k of’., lu": ‘,7' 

(because) they are named after men. ' Pun 

27 . "According to some people the Vedas' 

of liumau authors ; being, as they are, named after 

OOMMENTAEY. 

It has been asserted abore that the Veda is the sr,l 

matters relating to Dharina; and that the Veda is trust^^c 
It IS eternal, and as such free from all those discrepancies 
words of human beings are liable. The opponent now prc 
that the Veda, and the injunctions contained therein, are 
mnan authors, and as such they are not an absolutely trustu 
o information. The Veda, it is argued, must hare had a h 
because we find rarious sections of the Veda named afte 
Kathaha after the name of Katha, ‘Paippahlda’ after 
Pippalada and so forth ; all this proves that the section calle 
IS the work of Ae person called liatha, and that called ‘Pair 
composed by PippaMda. ^ 

vt “ II .* 

?rnT?T Anitya, non-eternal or transie 
because of her finding.. Cha, also. 

28. “ Also beca’use we find [ 

o:g many non-eternal tilings.”— 28. 


usakhyah, 


Piention 



PaBVA^UMlMSAMJTRAS, I ADEYAYA 


COMMENTARY. 

Another argument in support of the view that the Veda is not 
eterna] is here propounded. As a matter of fact, we find such statements 
in tlie Veda as — ‘ Anddtdakih akamayata,’ ' Auddalaki desired,’ "" Bahara 
pravahani desired/ and so forth — -wherein are mentioned persons and 
events that cannot be said to be eternal. That is to say, the presence 
of such sentences as the above proves tliat the sentences were composed 
long after the persons spoken of therein lived on the earth ; and that 
they did not exist before these persons ; that is to say, the Veda has 
had a beginning in time. 


Uktam, has already been declared and proved, g Tu, but, 
^abda, of words— Purvatvam, priorit}^ or eternalit3\ 

29. But the eternality of the word has already been 
established. — 29. 

COMMENTARY. 

In answer to tlie above arguments it is declareil tliat arguments 
in support of the eternality of all -words (and the A^'eda) have already been 
advanced above -under sutras 6-23, where it has been pi’oved that all 
words are eternal. All that is necessary, therefore, on the present occasion 
is to answer thearguments put forward by the opponent in sutras 27 and 
28. And this is done in the following sutras. 


?n!is*!r Akhya, the name, Pravaclianat, [is due to] excepiionally 

excellent study and teaching. 

30. The name [of the Vedic sections] is hasecl npon ex- 
ceptionally excellent study and teaching [of that section by 

a particular person.] — 30. 

COMMENTARY. 

In answer to sutra 2/, it is ui’ged that a certain section of the 
Veda is named * KathaTio,’ not because it was composed by Ivatha, but 
only because that section was made tlie subject of special study 
a peiBon of tbat name -who -was regarded as a specialist in that 
section of the Veda which, on that account, came to be known a|ter 
his name. 

'mg ii \\ ii 

TOgParamtu, the other (is). ^ ^ruli, sound-aim;!, Samanya, simi- 
lanty— Jjiaw Matram, only. 

^||f|s:'3l. ' The other is only a similarity of sounds.-— 31'.: '-'V’''''"-]*'' 






t PADA, Vili ADHlKAEA^A, 84. 27-3^. 


21 


COMMENTARY. 

As for the mention of the names of men and things in the Veda, 
there is notliing to show that the word as found in the Veda was actually 
the name of a person ; it is, in fact, nothing moi-e than a chance re- 
semblance of sounds ; the word as found in the Veda has since then been 
borne as the name of a certain person ; that does not show that in the 
Veda it must be regarded as a proper name ; it may be used there in a 
totally different sense ; for instance, as the Bhtisya points out, the word 
‘ pravahava’ may mean only the eT&eUent carrier. 

^ Krite, towards or of an action. ^ Va, or ^#^T: Vinivogah, urging, 
injunction, inducement, etjig; Syat, may be. Karmanah, of action. 

Sambandhat, on account of connection or relationsliip. 

32. [Such apparently absurd Vedic declarations as 
‘ trees performed this sacrifice ’ and the like] maybe regarded 
as inducements towards certain actions ; because of the rela- 
tionship or connection [of those sentences] with actions. — 32. 

COMMENTARY. 

The opponents of Vedic authority have argued that the Veda cannot 
be regarded as authoritative and trustworthy, because it contains such 
appai’eritly absurd statements as ‘ the cows sat at the sacrifice,’ ‘ the trees 
performed the sacrifice ’ and so forth. In answer to this it is urged that 
thougli these sentences are absurd when taken by themselves, tliey cease 
to be so when they are taken along with the context in wliich they occur. 
All these sentences are found in the section dealing with a certain 
sacrifice ; and in praise of this sacrifice it is declared that even such 
inanimate things as trees and the like have had recourse to the per- 
formance of the sacrifice ; so excellent it is, and so manifestly desirable 
are its results that eveu trees were induced to perform it ; under the 
circumstances it is only natural tliat such intelligent beings as men should 
perceive the excellence of the action, and engage in performing it. Thei'e' 
isjnotliing incongruous and absurd in the sentence if thus intelligently 
interpreted. 

Thus then the Veda, not being the work of a human author— whereby 
it is free from all the discrepancies consequent upon such authorship 
—and. there being nothing in the text of the Veda itself that shakes 
its authority, — it must be admitted that it is a trustwoi-thy source of 










PURVA-MImAMSA 8UTEA8. I ADHYAYA 


Second Pada. 

THE AUTHOKITY OP THE ARTHAVADA. 

Adhikarana I — Trustworthy eharaGter of ArthaoCida 

'passages in general. 

sOtRAS 1 - 18 . 


% lA i \ w 

lireraw Amnayasya, of tlie Veda. Kriyarthatvat, being for thi 

purpose of laying^ down actions, Anarthakyam, (there must be 

uselessness, Atadarthanam, of those (parts of it) which do no 

sej-ve that purpose. Tasmat, for this reason (m regard to such parts) 

fW Anityam iti, as non-eternal (not serving any eternalh- useful purpose 
in the shape of laying down actions). Uchyate, (the Veda) are declarec 

to be. 

1. The purpose of the Veda lying in the laying down 
of actions, those (parts of it) whicli do not serve that purpose 
are useless ; and in these therefore is the Veda said to be 
non-eternal (i.e., of no permanent value.) 1. 



11 PADA, I AmiKAnAl\JA, Sit s. 


We accept the Injunctive and Proliibitive Passages as authoritative, be- 
cause they serve to point out the results, the materials and the methods 
pertaining to actions ; but as regards the other three classes of passages 
contained in the Veda, inasmuch as they do not point out anything with 
reference to any actions to be performed, — should these also be regarded 
as authoritative or not ? The matter of Mantras and Islaines will be 
taken up later on ; at jn’esent we confine our attention to the . passages 
called ‘ arthavada’ — those that are valedictory, jpraising sometliing, e.g., 
tlie sentence ‘ Vayu is the swiftest deity’ — as well as those that are depre- 
catory — eg., ‘Pndra w^ept, and from that was silver produced.’ Are these 
passages authoritative ? That is, have they any bearing on actions and 
hence on Dhanna ? 

The Pilrvapalisa view is that these passages apparently can have no 
authoritative bearing on Dhanna ; for the simple reason that they do not 
declare anything wdtli regard to any actions to be performed or avoided. 
For instance, the sentence ' Vayu is the swiftest deity’ says nothing as to 
any action ; it simply declares an established fact ; our knowledge of V%u 
as tlie swiftest dei^y does not lielp us in the j)erformance or avoidance of 
any action. Similarly, the sentence ‘ Rudra wept, and from that was 
silver produced’ does not say anything as to any action. All these passages 
then, not serving the purpose of pointing to any action, must be regarded 
as useless— having no bearing on Dharma; and as such, serving no eter- 
nally useful purpose ; as it is only matters relating to Dharma tliat are of 
perennial interest ; similarly with all purely valedictory and deprecatory 
passages. 

” II ^ ii 

lOTW ^Sstra, (of) scriptures,—^ Drista, (of) directly perceived facts.— 
Virodh^t, because of the contradiction. Cha, and also, 

2. “ And also "because of the contradiction of the 

scriptures and of directly perceived facts.” — 2. 

COMMENTARY. 

This Butra puts forward another argument in support of the position 
advanced in the preceding sutra. 

The purely arthavida passages,” continues the, Pdrvapak^in, can 
have no authoritative bearing upon dharma. Because in the case of such 
passages as ‘ the mind is a thief/ .‘ speech is a teller of lies’ and the like, 
h as . they deqcyib^ ^ certain state pf things ^ they exist, they cap 





PdEVA-MlMlMSl-B&rEAS. I ADHYAVA 


have no bearing upon what should he done. In order to escape this 
predicament, it will perhaps he explained that what is meant by the de- 
claration the mind is a thief' is that 'inasmuch as such an important 
sense-organ as the mind is a thief, one should commit theft hj” the other- 
organs also and similarly by declaring that ‘speech is a teller of lies ’ it 
is meant that we should tell lies ; — both these passages in this manner- 
laying down things to be done, and as such having a direct bearing upon 
this case the passages would he contradictory to the 

ies. Similarly, we have such 
the day the smoke only is seen and not the bright- 
rassage is a direct contradiction of a directly per- 
actuallj' see the brightness of fire during the day. 

— . -.imana priest is represented 
are BrAhmanas or non-Brahmanas.’ .This 
perception, inasmuch as the BrAhmanahdod of the 
is a per-ceptible fact. 

“?r5ir 'KSfTuwig;” ii ^ ii 

fm Tatha, also, »lu?r»TRTg Phalftbhavat, because of the absence of re- 

suits. 

3. “ Also because of the absence of results.” — 3. 

COMMENTARY. 

Another argument against the authpritativeness of arthavfida pas- 
sages ;~With regard to the Qargatrirdtra Bralimarja, it is said—' the face 
of one who knows this brightens up.’ Now if the brightening in the 
face rs an already established fact,— then the passage is purely des- 
crrptrve of a fact ; and as such can have no bearing upon Dharma. If 
on the other hand, it does not exist, then the declaration becomes untrue 
mentioning things as existing when, in reality, they do not exist. 
Lastly, It the passage is regarded as indicatino' tbs TAQnlf +b»ri+ £ 


Dharma. But in 
scriptures that prohibit stealing and telling of 1. 
passages as — ‘during 
ness (of fire).’ This ] 
eeived fact, because we 

Lastly we have the passage wherein the Brfih 
as saying ‘we know not if we 
contradicts a fact of 
Brahmana 


u \\ 

IJif Anya, (of) others.— 4.narthakyat, 


because of uselessness. 



II PADA, T ADEIKABAIIA, Sit 6. 


Bgcsuso of tli6 usgIgssugss of otliors (otiiGr pas- 


COMMENTARY. 

The argatneuts put forward in the preced ing SAtra demolish the 
authority of all those arthavS. da passages which speak of excellent results 
following from trifling actions, e.g., such as the passage declaring that 
by acquiring the knowledge of the Aulvamedha one conquers earth. 
'Even granting for the sake of argument that the passages mention real 
results, i.e., declares certain result as following from certain actions ; — 
if it be true that one has to acquire the knowledge of the Asivamedha, 
and that^ for the sake of becoming immortal,— or that one should offer 
the Pdrn^huti and thereby obtain all that he denies, — then, inasmuch as 
all desires will have been fulfilled by the trifling act of the Purn^huti 
offering, why should any intelligent person have recourse to such 
elaborate sacrifices as the Jyotistoma and the like ? Thus by seeking 
, to est-^lisli the authority of a few Arthavada passages, you prove the 
uselessness of almost all real injunctions which actually and directly 
lay down definite actions. 

'' ” n V. (I 

Abhagi, (of) an impossibility (which cannot be negatived), 
Pratisedhat, because of the negativing, "sr Cha, also. 

5. “ Also because of tlie negativing of impossibili- 
ties.”- 5. 

COMMENTARY. 

In the Veda we meet with such passages as— ‘ the fire is not to 
be kindled on the earth,’ ‘ fire is not to be kindled in the sky,’ and so 
^rth; here we have the negation or prohibition of the kindling of fire 
in the sky ; as it is never possible for the fire to be kindled in the sky, 
Its negation becomes absurd ; so also, as the kindling cannot be done 
except OH' the earth, the negativing of this also becomes absurd ; and as 
no authority can belong to such absurd declarations, such passages 
cannot be regarded as trustworthy. 


Anitya, (of) non-eternal , things, 
mention.) 


Samyogat, because of the 


of the mention of npn-eternal thin 



pOrva-mImamsa-sutbas. t apeyaya 


COMMENTARY. 

We find in raany passages, the names of things that are clearly 
noil-eternal ; this vitiates the eternal character of these passages (if not 
of the entire Veda, which point has been discussed under sutras 1.1.28 
and 31). We have^ for example, the passage mentioning the ^ son of 
Pravidiana ’ as desiring souiething ; this ‘son of Pravahana ’ cannot but 
have been a perishable being; such jiassages, therefore, being non- eternal, 
cannot be regarded as trustworthy guides as to what is dut 3 ^ 

Wutli this Sutra 6, ends the statement of the Purva'pa^^a] the 
upshot of which is tliat Arthavcida passages cannot be regarded to be as 
aiitlioritative and trustworthy in matters relating to Dharma as tlie 

purely injunctive passages; for, reasons put forward in the sutivas 1 to 6 
above. 

SIDDEAiXTA. 

The Siddhanta or final conclusion is put forward in sutra 7, and 
further discussed in sutras 8 to 18. 

i%WRf It ^ 11 

Vidhina, with the injunctive passages, g” Tu, but, 
Jikavakyatvat, inasmuch as the}’' are syntactically connected, Stutyar- 

thena, by reason of their .serving the purpose of praising. Vidhioam, 

of what is enjoined. Syuh, they would be (‘aiithoritative'l 



It pAdA, t ADEtKABAis A, Si 


sacrificed?’ And ifc is in answer to this question that we Have tlie 
arthavada ‘ Vi\yu is the eftest deity, it carries the performer to prosperity 
very swiftly ; ’ thus we see that there is a syntactical affinity between 
these two passages, -whicli leads us to construe them together ; and inas- 
much as the arthavitda serves the distinctly useful purpose of prompting- 
men to the performance of the act enjoined by the injunctive passage, 
it cannot be said to have no bearing upon Dharina, 

In this connection it may be noted that, in regard to every injunctive 
passage we have two kinds of Bhavana or injunction — the aetual and the 
verbal, each of these having three factors of (1 ) the result, (2) the means 
and (3) the procedure; in the actual hMwnd, the ‘result’ is the result 
accruing from the performance of the enjoined action ; the ‘ means’ is the 
action enjoined, and the ‘procedure’ is the various subsidiary actions 
that go to make up the enjoined action. But of the verbal bhavana, the 
‘ result’ is the activity or prompting of the person ; the ‘ menus’ is the 
injunctive passage; and the ‘procedure’ — bow is this prompting to be 
accomplished by means of the injunctive passage ’—consists of the 
arthavada passages which accomplish this by praising the action. Thus 
we find that the arthavada enters as an essential factor in the Injunction. 

Kumirila has applied the reasoning to similar passages in the 
Puranas. He says that the praises and descriptions contained in the 
Pur^nas need not be accepted as literally true ; specially when they are 
not capable of being taken along with any inj unction of actions. To 
this category belong such descriptions as those of the Gandhamadana 
and the like ; these serve the purpose of giving pleasure in the mere 
recitation ; the description of wars also are meant simply to encourage 
the brave and the warlike as also the coward. In this manner, all these 
serve distinctly useful purposes. Where no such result is found, — as in 
the case of the hymns to deities — we assume an unseen or transcendental 
result. 

i\ ^ II 

gpappt Tulyam, (is) equal. Cha, and, also. Sampradayikatn, 

the connection of long-established tradition. 

8. And the connection of long-established tradition is 
also equal (to the Injunction and the Arthavada passage|j^. 


COMMESTTARY, 

The Arthavada cannot be rejected as useless, because it serves 
a distinctly useful purpose as shown above ; and also because of another 












pdEVA-MlMiUSA-SdTEA^. I ADHYATA 


reason, put forward in tbe present sutra. As a matter of fact, we nnd 
that the Arthai-ada passages are treated, by students of Veda, with as 
much regard and attention as the Injunctive passages ; from this we 
conclude that the rules laid down for the study of the Veda apply with 
equal force to both sets of passages ; and this regard and attention could 
not he paid to the Arthavada if they were entirely useless; in which 
case, the students could not have kept up the study of these passages. 

Aiiotlier interpretation of the sutra given by Kuinarila is as follows : — 
The injunction of Vedic study — upon which the traditional method of 
study is based — makes no distinction between the injunctive and the 
^Arthavclda passages ; and from this we infer that they have a distinct 
purpose of their own, in connection with the action laid down by the 
injunctive passages ; and this purpose consists in the praising of that 
action and thereby persuading people to its performance. 

franruT ^T5qqT%: i i 

I II ^ I I 5. H 

?WrHT Api apta, (is) not applicable. Cha, and. Anupapattilb, 

incongruity or contradiction, sr^nr Prayoge, on their (Arthavada passages) 
laying down actions. ^ Hi, because. Virodhab, incongruity or con- 
tradiction. Syat, would be. ^abdarthab, the meaning of the 

words; [or * it serves as an auxiliary to the injunctive word], g Tu, but. 

AprayogabliOtah, (does not) lay down actions, Tasmat, there- 
fore. Upapadyeta, it is all right (there is no incongruity). 

9. And the incongi-uity (urged above) is not applicable ; 
because there would he incongruity if the passages laid 
down actions ; hnt (in reality) the meaning of the words 
does not lay down actions [or the passage is an auxiliary 
to the injunctive word, and does not lay down actions 
hence it is all right [there is no incou.oTuitvV — ft 


tl PAD A, t ADEKAMAt^A, SA 11. 


29 


if it directly laid down the action of stealing. As a matter of fact the 
words of these passages are not taken in their literal sense ; nor are 
words from without added to them to make them regular iujunc* 
tibns of actions ; they are taken only as signifying praise ; this praise 
cannot contradict any scriptures or well-ascertained facts ; hence there can 
be no mcougruityjn regard to the authority of the arthavada passages. 

The Farti&d notes three different readings of this sutra : (l)‘opra- 
ptarichdnupapattini, ete.,’ in this case the sutra shall be rendered as ‘ we 
find the incongruity not applicable, etc., etc.’ (2) ‘aprdptanehanupdpdUirri, 
eto., the rendering in this case being ‘our theory is not open to the incon- 
gruity, etc., etc.’ (3) as taken above. 

II U 

Gunav^dah, (there is) indirect application. 5 Tu, but, 

10. But there is indirect application. — 10. 

COMMENTARY. 

“ It may be possible to take the arthavada along with, and as auxil- 
liaryto, the injunctive passage when the two treat of the same subject; 
how can this be possible when the two treat of two entirely different 
subjects? e.g., the arthavada praises the water, while the injunction lays 
down the use of the branch of the Vetasa tree.” The explanation given 
by the sfftra is that in all such cases there is an indirect application ; 
that is to say, the praise though applying directly to the water, applies 
indirectly to all things produced in water; and the enjoined Vetasa being 
one such thing, the praise becomes related to the injunction, through 
this indirect application ; the meaning being—' because water is calm, 
by the use of the Vetasa, which is produced in water, the sacrifice!- obtains 
calm and peace.’ 

II n II 

Ropat, on the (similarity of) form, unirs Prayat, on the character 
of the greater part. 

11. On the similarity of form, and on the character 
of the greater part (the indirect injunction of passages is 
based.) — 11. ■ 

> COMMENTARY,. 

; i This sutra meets the objections urged in sutra 2 with regard to 
the t^o arthavada passages : (1) ‘ the mind is a thief,’: and (2) ‘ speech is a 
liar.’ These two sentences are not to be taken in their litei-al sense ; 



PUBVA^MlMlMSA-^SLITRAS. I ADHYAYA 


^ Stri, (of) women, 

Kartuh^ of the father. ^ Cha, and. 
(there is) the finding* 

^ The BhdHtja and tbe VarWha both 
,$hepfore in the text of the sdtra ii 




31 



IT PADA, I ADHIKAEAI^A, Sit 14. 


31. On accoimt of the failing of the woman, (there can 
be no certainty of caste) ; specially as the son is often found 
to belong to the father.— 13. 

COMMBNTAEY. 

Under sutra 2 it lias been argued that the passage ‘we know not if 
we are Brahnianas or non-Br-ahmanas’ contradicts a fact of perception ; 
inasmuch as the Brahmanahood of the priest is a perceptible fact : when 
we see that the priest is the son of a Brahmana, there can be no doubt as 
to his Brahmanahood. The answer to this is that there is abrays a chance 
of the mother having misbehaved with a man of a different caste ; in fact 
such mixture of castes is not uncommon ; and in the case of mixtures 
if the son belonged to the mother, then the misbehaving of the mother 
would not affect the caste of the child ; but ive find Smritis declaring that 
the ‘ son belongs to the father hence as there is always a chance of 
misbehaviour on tlie part of the mother, there can be no certainty as 
to the caste of any person. Tlie passage praises the recounting of one's 
p’arara— names of one’s famous ancestors and declares that even if the 
reciter may have doubts- as to his Brahmanahood, it becomes universally 
recognised if he recounts the pravavas. 

® II 

^rran'ScR Akalika (for) iimnediate good, fcgr }psa, desire. 

14. There is desire for immediate good. — 14, 

COMMBNTAEY. 

The opponents cite another passage w'hich is opposed to the scriptures; 
for instance, the sentence, ‘ who know's whether or not theie is such a 
thing as heaven etc.’ ; this denial of the heaven world is a direct contradic- 
tion of all those passages that lay down the performance of certain sacri- 
fices for the attaining of heaven. The present sutra explains the real pur- 
pose of the sentence in question : The sentence occurs in connection with 
the injunction of putting many wide windows in the Sacrificial House ; 
the presence of many windows allows free exit to the smoke, and thereby 
removes one of the greatest discomforts of persons engaged in the 
performance ; this is the ‘ immediate good ’ mentioned in the stitra ; 


[e read which takes no time in appearing,’ which i,s the same as 



PtyEVA-MtMMSA-SJjTBAS. I ADEYlYA 


giving of many windows, the arthvada passages say— ‘ as regards such 
desirable results as the attainment of heaven and the like people may 
have doubts as to whether or not there is any such place as Heaven, — 
but there can be no doubt, as to the excellent results proceeding from 
the giving of many windows to the house ; ’ thus all that the sentence 
means is, not that there is no such place as heaven, but only that the 
results proceeding from the giving of many windows is so sure and 
immediate, that one cannot fail to realise its desirability. 





n fAda, 1 adhikaba}^a, sa 4. 


poifoiuiGd , the JlyivQ iu tits tthy is not spokGii of as j)rocGGdin^ fnti 
any sacrifices ; coiiseciuentiy tlie declaration tliat ‘ the performer of tli 
Puraahuti obtains all desires’ remains as uutj'ue as ever, Tlie reply t 
this is that, even in ordinary parlance we often speak of aU the riee liavin; 
been cooked ; this does not mean that all the rice in the world has Ircei 
cooked; all that it means is that the cooking has been accomplished of al 
the rice that had been set apart for being cooked on the particular Occasion 
in the same manner, what the passage means is not the accruing of all tha 
maj- be desiied, hut only that of those I’esults that follow from actions per 
formed with the help of consecrated fire. 

U II 

Phalasya, of the result. Karnianispatteli, the accomplish- 
ment being due to actions. Tesam, of those (actions), Lofcavat, as 

in the ordinary world. qrR»TrW5r: Parimaijatah, due to the magnitude. wr?W: 
Phalavi^tsali, difference in the results. tJtrw ^yat, there would be, 

17. The accomplishment of the result being dne to 
actions, there would be a difference in the results, due to the 
magnitude of the actions, — as in the ordinary world. — 17. 

COiMMB,\TARy. 

This Sutra supplies another answer to the objections answered in 
the preceding sutra. Tliere can be no incongruity even if we take tlie 
passage literally, and admit the fact of all results proceeding bum the 
Purnahuti. Even if all results do proceed from this, the character of 
these results cannot but differ from similar results obtainable from more 
elaborate and difficult actions ; for instance the heaven, i.e., pleasurable 
existence— obtained by the performance of the simple PArmhiiH would be 
of a kind far inferior to that obtained by the elaborate Darsa-P-Ctrfjatndsa. 





P(:''RVA-MIM1MSA-S0TBAS. i adeyaya 


a ^ q H 




r 


IT PIDA, II ADHIKAPANA, SA. 1, 2, 20. 


Adhihavana 1 1. —Treating of the aiifhority of such Artliamda 
IMssages as have the form of Injunctions. 


SUTEA 1. 2. 19-25. 




mPr: Vidhib, aa iiijunctioii. m Va, surely. Syat, must be. 

Apurvatvat, because ot its (laying down) something new (not known alreadv). 

Vadamatram, a mere description, Hi, (.specially) as. 
Anarthakani, (would be) useless. 

10. “ .It must be an injunction ; because it lays Oown 

sonietliiog new; specially as a mere descrijition would 
be useless.” — 19. 

COMMENTTARY. 

It has been sliown in the preceding Adldkarana that Avthavada pas- 
sages are anthoritativo, inasmuch as they are taken along witli tlio 
injnncti re passages, and serve the useful purpose of persuading men to 
peidorm tlie actions laiil down by these latter. But we find some passages 
wbicli, wltile containing the praise of something, contain also the injunction 
of an action ; for instance, the passage ‘ tlie sacrificial post is of minmbara 
wood : the mlumbara wood is the essence of food ; cattle are strong ; through 
the powerful udumbara post one (the priest) acquires powerfid cattle- 
the powerful (udumbara) tending to bring about power.’ With j-egard 
to this the question arises— Does it mention the result— the obtaining of 
strength and strong cattle~as actually following from the making ortlie 
post of the udumbara wood, the sentence thereby becoming an injmiction 
of the result or does it only express mere praise for purposes of jiersuasion ? 

The Piiroapahm view is that— “ the passage should be taken as an 
injunction, and not as a mere praise; and the reason given is that the 
passage lays down that the post should he made of udumhara wool, if ouo 
desires to obtain strength ; and as tins is not kid down by any otlier pas- 
sage, we cannot but connect the mentioned result with the mentioned 
action ; and so long as the passage is capable of being taken as an injunc- 
tion, it would be absolutely meaningless to take it as mere praise. ” 

n Ro H 

Lokavat, (it may be), as ia. ordinary parlance, iti, this. Chet 

if '(js;,urgfed). .■>’ ’ ' ' f* 

20» .If it is urged tli^t it. may bo as iu. ordinary 


^ l': .0 1' I'w. ‘ ‘ ^ * 

' th '• 








PUBrA^MlMlMSA-SOmAS. I ADIlYlYA 





11 PADA, II ADHIKARANA^ Su. h2, 


COMMENTARY. 

The Purvapaksa lias urged that, if taken as mere praise, the sentence 
becomes absolutely meaningless. In answer to this it is pointed out that, 
when taken as mere praise, tbe sentence cannot be meaningless or useless, 
because containing such praise, the sentence can be taken along with other 
injunctive sentences serving tlie purpose of persuading the agent to per- 
forin the action enjoined by tliose sentences, as sljown under sutra 1 . 2. 7, 
There are strong reasons against regarding the sentence as an injunction. 
Ill tlie first place, there is no injunctive word, the verb being in the 
present tense ; consequently the injunction could only be got at through 
the praise contained in the sentence ; under the circunistancevS, it is far 
more reasonable to take the praise as bearing upon an altogether different 
sentence ; as in the case of ordinary Arthavada passages. That is to say, 
the sentence ‘ one obtains powerful cattle ’ must be taken as mere praise ; 
to be taken along with the sentence ‘ the post is of udnmbara wood’; and it 
serves the very useful purpose of persuading the agent to make the post of 
that wood ; and it does not mean that one who uses that wood actually 
acquires powerful cattle ; the sentence, therefore, has to be taken as true 
only in its figurative or secondary sense of praise, and not in its literal 
signification. 


U II 

fwpj: Vidhili, the Injunction. Cha, also, Anarthakah, useless, 

meaningless. Kvachit, in certain cases, Tasmat, from it. 

Stutih, praise. Pratiyate, is deduced or understood. Tat- 

samanyat ; by reason of the similarity to that. Itaresu, in the case of other 

sentences, Tathatvam, the same character. 

33. In certain cases the Injunction is found to he actu- 
ally meaningless, in which case the sentence is taken as indi- 
cating praise ; when other passages are found to be similar, 
these also must be accepted to bare the same character. — 23. 

COMMENTARY. 

It may be argued that it i.s not right to reject the direct or literal 
signification of a sentence in favour of an indirect or figurative one. 
But, says the sfitra, there are many sentences, where jlhe direct sig- 
nification, which points to the enjoining of actions, is found to have 
meaning ; and in all these cases, we reject that signification, and 



PlJnVA-MlMimA-filjrnAH. / AT)T1YA7A 


accept the sentence as iiidicating mere praise ; for instance, the sen- 
tence ‘ Vayn is the eftest deity’ when taken in its direct significa- 
tion, must mean ‘ the Vayu should be made tlie eftest deity ; ’ this is 
meaningless ; as it is not possible for aii.7 agent to make Vayn eft or 
otherwise; for thus reason, we take the sentence as mere i)raise of \hiyu 
to wliom an animal is laid down (by another sentence) as to be sacrificed. 
The contention of tlie sfltra is that wdien, in such cases, all parties agree 
in rejecting the direct signification of injunction in favour of the indirect 
indication of praise, there can be no objection to the same in the case of 
all sentences tliat may be found to resemble tlie above sentence ; that is 
to say, when once we can, on sufficient grounds, reject the direct signifi- 
cation, there can be no reason why we should not do tlie same, whenever 
we have similar reasons for doing it. 


mm ff 


Prakarane, in, along wiiii, the context, stjstsw Sambhavan, com- 
patible. Apakarsati, removal or transference, Na-kalpyeta 

is not right. Vidhyanarthakyam, meaninglessness of the injunction 

ff Hi, because. Tamprati, with regard to that. 

24. In the case of that which 
being taken along) with its own context, 
right; specially because 


is compatible (capable of 
removal is not 
an injunction would be absolutely 
meaningless in regard to that (particular sacrifice.) — 24. 

COMMENTARY. 

The present siitra puts forward another argument in support 
of the view that in the case of many such sentences as the one in question 
we find ' it necessary to reject tlie direct signification of injunction in’ 
favour of the indication of praise. The sentence referred to is the follow- 
kg-‘that which is ' burnt becomes fit for the demon ’-occurrring 
in the Darsha-PHrijamdsa section ; according to the argument of the 
Phrvapaksa, the sentence must be taken as enjoining the demon as a 
deity for the sacrifice, to whom the burnt cake is to be offered ; and this 
would imply the removal of the previously mentioned deities of the sacri- 
fice, who should have to make room for the demon. As against this, the 
jfltra urges that so long as there is a possibility of the previously inen- 
ioned deities being retained there cap be no justification fop thejr 



// Pi/Ji, IT ADHiKAEAm, 1 


removal ; except for very strong reasons. In tlie case in question lioweverj 
we find no suclj reason ; as we are perfectly justified in taking tfie sen- 
tence as a praise of tlie iinburnt eahe, wliicli alone is fit for, tlie gods, the 
Imrnt one being fit only for demons. If, in order to avoid tins argument, 
the sentence were taken as an. injunction by itself, laying down an entirely 
distinct action, — that of burning the cake intended for tlie demon, — then 
the reply is that such an injunction could l]ave absolutely no sense, in 
regard to tlie particular sacrifice of the Darjia-Puranamasa, in whose context 
it occurs. 

This shows that there are many oases where the indirect indication 
is preferi’ed to tlie direct signification ; consequently there can be no objec- 
tion to the vsame being done in the case of the sentence under discussion. 






PUEVA-M1MIM8A-8UTRA8. / ADByAVA 


Adhikarana (III). — Treating of such Artkavdda passages 
as appear to eontain the statement of reasons for certain 
iowi’ses of action. 

SOTRA 1. 2. 26-30. 




^5: Hetuh, reason, Va, onlj^ Sy^U, must be. 

Arlhavattvopapattibhyani, because of usefulness and proof. 

26. “ The passage must be taken only as the statement 
of reason ; because of usefulness and proof. — 26. 

COMMENTARY. 

There are certain passages wliicli appear to contain tlie statement of 
reasons for a certain course of action. As for e.xample, tlie passage ‘ tlie 
libation should be poured with the slurpa because it is by means of this that 
food is prepared.’ Now, with regard to this, there arises the question- 
does the sentence ‘ because, etc.,’ lay down a reason for the pouring of 
the libation with the slurpa? or, is it a mere praise of the sfurpa meant to 
persuade the sacrifice!’ to use it ? 

Tlie Purrapaksa embodied in the sfitra is that— “ the sentence must 
“ be taken as containing the statement of a reason for the adopting of a 
‘^certain course of action; (1) because when thus taken, the sentence 
“ serves the veiy useful purpose of implying the use of all such implements 
“of cooking as the ladle, the vessel and the like, all of which are used 
“ in the preparing of food ; and (2) because it is only when it is thus taken 
that the assertion becomes at all ti-ue and justifiable ; that is to say, if the 
‘ sentence is taken as the praise of the slurpa onlj’, it fails to be 
‘ precisely true, as it is not only the b^urpa whereby food is prepai’ed ; 

‘ on the other hand, if we take the sentence as stating a i-eason for the 
using of the sluipa, as also of all those things that are instrumental in 
Uhe preparing of food, it becomes perfectly true; this is the ‘proof’ 
'spoken of in the sutra.” 

The Siddhanta in reply to the above is presented in the next sfitra. 


41 



i meaning expressed by the 
the surpa and the sentence 
y praise by that sentence 


,e pasfsage in question is a niere 
. as literally true; because the 


praise qf the slur 


27 . But it must he regarded as a praise (of the surpa), 
because this is enjoined directly by the word ; wliile there is’ 
no injunction of any other.— 27. 

COMMENTARY. 

The use oE the slurpa is laid down directly bj- the preceding sen- 
tence— iiurpena juhoti ; and as such this does .not stand in need of any 
corroboration by the statements of reason ; it is enough for us to know tlmt 
tlie durpa js laid down as the implement to be used ; we do not want to 
know w])y it is so laid down ; so if taken as stating a reason the sentence 
in question would become superfluous. If, on the other hand, it is taken 
as being a praise of the ilnrpa, it serves the useful purpose served by 
all artliavadas, in.3., that of persuading the performer to use the slurpa 
Then again, the .Purvapaksin contends that if taken as the statement of 
reason the sentence inclmles all such implements as the ladle and the like 
all of which are used in the preparing of food. The Siddhanti urges that this 
IS all the more reason why the sentence cannot be taken as the statement 
on-eason ; n would, in that case put the durpa, the use of wliich is 
directly enjoined by the preceding sentence, on the same footing as all 
other implements, which are not so enjoined ; and this could be far from 
right. 

1 hen again, what the sentence in question praises is only that by 
which food is prepared ; while the injunction is that of the durpa;and 
as that by which the food is prepared is the action of cooking,— and not 
the durpa, etc.,— the sentence in question does not, in reality, state any 
reason for what has been enjoined. This is the meaning that the Vtb’tika 
attributes to the last clause of the sutra. 

11 ^c; || 

Vyarthe, the raeam'ng expressed by the sentence not being applicable 
(to the iurpa). , ^1%; Stutih, praise. Anyayy a not proper. Id, 







i Jii 


PUBVA^MIMAMSA-SOTRAS. I ABEYAYA 


loocl is prepared l>y the action of cooking, and not by tbe siirpa. liie 
present sutra raises an objection : — “ If the food is prepared by tlie action 
of cooking, then the jiurpa cannot be riglitly spoken as that by means of 
which food is pi*epar^d ; consequently it cannot be right to praise it 
by that assertion any such praise the s^urpa would be most absurd.” 

w n 

Arthali, (there is) use (for it), g Tu, but. Vidhisesatvat, 

because it forms part of the injunction, jjsjf Yatha, as. Loke, in the 

ordinary world, 

29. (Oiir reply is), but wbat is expressed by tbe sentence 
is applicable (to the surpa), (and the sentence is not mean- 
ingless) because it forms part of tbe injunction ; and it is 
exactly as in the ordinary world. — 29. 

COMMEKTARY. 

All that is meant by saying that the food is prepared by the action 
of cooking, and not by the i^urpa, is that the former is the more im- 
mediate cause ; and by this it is not meant to deny the instrumentality of 
the sliu-pa entirely ; just as in ordinary parlance when a cei'tain w’ork is 
accomplished by a number of men, when we attribute the success to that 
person rvho has worked most, we do not deny ihe agency of the other 
workers, in the same manner, even though the slurpa may not be the 
direct and immediate cause of the preparation of food, it cannot be denied 
that it helps towards it. Such being tbe case, what is expressed by tbe 
sentence ■' because by means of it food is prepared ’ becomes quite appli- 
cable to it ; and tbe sentence cannot be regarded as meaningless ; specially 
as it forms part of, and is intended to be taken along with, the foregoing 
injunction, ‘the libation should be offered by means qf the surpa ; ’ that 
is to say, being intended for being construed along with tbe injunction, 
tbe sentence is naturally taken not quite in its primary signification, 
as pertaining to the direct and immediate cause of the preparation of 
food ; but in that secondary sense which is compatible with the sense 
of that injunction. 


r; ; Yadi, if. Cha, again, Hetuh, reason, Avastigtheta 

it iwould be restricted, Nirde^at, because of the specification. 



// PAbA, tv ADmKAtiAitA, 8i 


^Smanyat, through similarity. fti diet, if 

Avyavastha, indecisiveness or uncertainty, indefinit 
of injunctions. Syat, there would be. 

were the statement of i 
^vonld be restricted (to the 8'urpa only) 
which is specially mentioned. If it be^ 
of similarity (the assertion would i 
also; — we reply that in tliat 

come vague and uncertain.— 30. 

COMMENTARY. 

II tlie sentence in question were takei 
the use of the i^firpa, tlien the assertion—* 
pared ’—would have to be re.stricted to tiie si 
be taken as applicable to any otiier instru 
food ; because of all these instrunients, it is tin 
tinned. In answer to thi.s it might be urged 
asserts is the instrumentality towards food-pre 
be applicable to all things that are instnimer 
not be restricted to the diirpa only. But in t 
ing the reason, being found to be applieabh 
the iltirpa, there would be no finality in tin 
slurpa ; and this injunction would become \ 
on the other hand, when the sentence is ta 
It strengthens the injunction, and helps to mi 
liabh&bara s argument in support of tl 
injunction does not stand in need of the si 
reason ; the injunction being self-sufficient, 
corroboration of it must be superfluous ; but as 
be entirely superfluous, the sentence must be t 
of the implement whose use has been enioined 


reason, the assertion 
, j ; because it is that 
! urg’ed that ‘ by reason 
apply to other things 
case, the injunction would be- 


Adhikarana I V~Treating of the use of Mantras. 

SUTRA 1 . 2 . 81 - 58 . 


laf, with.— Artha, iii connect 

■ Jtions. MantrAnart 

d has to be supplied from shtra 



pdRVA-UlMAMSA-S&fEAS. AmYlYA 


31. “Because of scriptural 
with those (mantras) [Mantras can 
cant of any meaning].”— 31. 


It lias been proved above tJiat even sucii apparently ausiuu 
as many arthavula passages are foxuid to have a bearing upon dlmrma ; and 
tlais it is regarded as established that the entire Veda is to be regarded as 
authoritative on matters relating to clharvia ; from this it is naturally taken 
for granted that the mantras of the Veda also must be possessed of some 
such autliority. This much being granted, the cinestion naturady arises 
as to the jiarticular use to which mantras are to be put. rbat the 
mantras are not injunctions is clear and as such they cannot serve the 
purpose of laying down an action, as injunctive sentences do ; contain- 
ing no praise or disparagement, thej’' cannot serve the purpose that has 
been found to be served by the arthavtUla passages ; from this it follows 
that the only purpose that can be served by tlie mantras must lie in the 
use of the mere words composing the mantras ; and in connection with 
such use, the cpiestion that naturally arises is— are the words of the mantra 
pronounced for the purpose of conveying some meaning ? Or are they 
pronounced merely for the sake of the utterance, and no sense is intended 
to be conveyed by them ? 

The Ptirva-paksa view is that the mantras are not pronounced for 
the purpose of conveying any meaning, — they are in fact, not intended 
to be expressive of any meaning. Each of the following nine sutras begin- 
iug with sutra 31 gives a reason in support of this view. 

(1) “In connection with the picking up of the ahhri, we have 

the following te\t—decasi/alcetyiirahh!ja gdyatrcna ohhaudasa Made 

ill chatiirhhirabhrimddatte ; — where a set of four mantras is laid clown as 
to be pronounced at the time of the picking up of the ahhri ; now the 
words of the mantras themselves signify the action of picking up ; under 
the circumstances, if these words were really meant to be significant, 
the fact of the mantras being used for the picking up of the ahhri would 
be signified by the words of the mantras themselves, what would be the 
use of tlie subsequent direction—' one should pick up the ahhri with 
these four mantras ? — inasmuch as it has been found necessary’ to add 
this direction to the mantras, it is clear that the words themselves 
are not intended to bo significant ; they are meant only to be recited 
as so many words, irrespective of any sense that might be conveyed 





WWW 


Vakya, of the sentences.— Niyamat, because of the fi.\-iiy 

of order. 

32. (2) “ Also because the order of sentences (in the 

manUxih) is irrevocably fixed.”— 32. 

COMMENTARY. 

(2j “ Tlie second reason is that if tlie mantras were intended to be 
recited witii a view to the sense conveyed by tliein, there would be nothing 
wrong in changing the order of the words of tiie mantras ; for instance, in 
the case of the mantra ‘ agnimurdha divatj., cfec.,’ it would make no differ- 
ence at all if the mantra wei-e recited in the form ‘ mtirdhd agnili dkaJ.i &e. 
as this change in the order of the words would not make any difference 
in the sense conveyeil by the words. As a matter of fact, however, the 
oidei of the words composing a mantra is most rigidly fixed ; and one 
may not displace a single syllable,; from which it follows that the 
words are not recited for the purpose of conveying any sense ; their 
use lies in the purely verbal recitation.” 

“l^UTwra:” ti \\ II 

Buddha, (pertaining to) one who already knows.-!gr^r?r Sbstrat 
because of scriptural directions. 

, ('^) “ Because there are directions addressed to 

one who already knows.” — 33. 

COMMENTARY. 

_ (3) “We meet with such mantras as ‘ agnidagnin vihara varhrih 

atritttfc the words of which tnean ‘ Oh Aguidhra priest, move among the 

lires and spread kiitfa this mantra is addressed to the Agnidhra priest ; 
and as the priest already knows his duty— without which knowledge he 
could not officiate as priest - -as consisting in moving about tlie saciTficial 
fires, and spreading the kuifa; it would be superfluous to address to 
; Aim any such directions as ‘move among the fires, Ac.’ ; but these words 
are laid down as to be addressed to him ; from which the only inference 
is that the words as addressed to him, in the form of the mantra, are 
not intended to convey any meaning.” , , 

II ^8 II ■ ■" 

' !' (of) things 'that do 'not. exist, Vac’hanat 





pueva-mImamsA-sutra s. i adhyA ya 


34. (4) “ Because of tlie mention of sucli things as do 

not exist.” — -34. 

COMMENTARY. 

^4) “ We meet with such mavtran as ‘ chatvari srwgali irayomja 
the words of wJiich mean ^ it lias four horns and tln-ee feet’ ; now, 
as a matter of fact, we know'that tliereis no animal, no substance in fact, 
whicli has four horns and three feet ; and yet it is not possible for the 
\'eda to speak of such absurdities. The only conclusion that is possible 
is that the words are not intended to convey any meaning at all.” 

Aehetana, insens ate. Artha, things.-~ 5 =|Tsr?^^ Sumbandhat, 
because of being addressed. 

35. (5) “Because of their being addressed to in- 

sensate things.” — 35. 

COMMENTARY. 

(5; “ We find many mantras laid down as to be recited— the 
words of wliich signify that they are addressed to insensate tilings; 
such mantras, for instance, as ‘ osadhe trdydsva, die.' (‘0 lierb, save 
me), slirihotu cjraxfixa\i (listen, 0 ye stones ! ') ; — as the addiessing of 
such requests to insensate things as herbs and stones w'oiild be absurd, 
we are led to the conclusion tliat the WTirds are not intended to convey 
any meaning at all.” 

li II 

Anha, (in) signification. — Vipratisedhat, because < f contra- 
dictions. 

36. (6) “ Because of coirtradictioiis iii the significa- 

tiou.”— 36. 

COMMENTARY. 

(Q) We find such mantras as ‘ Aditirdyau\i, aditirantariksam ,' — the 
■words of which can only mean ‘ Aditi is heaven, Aditi is shy,’ a palpable 
absuidity , the same 4diti cannot be both heaven and sky ; this is the 
COTitf adictmu spoken of in the sutra ; similarly, the mantra Eko rudro 
na dvitiyal;^, ( ‘ there is only one Rudra, no second),’ if it meant what it 
appears to mean, it wmuld be a direct contradiction of the mantra 
‘asankhym sahasrdrii’ ye Rudr&k; the words of which mean ‘ the number 
of.Rudras is innumerable thousands.’ As the Veda eonW .nf u 



11 PADA, IV ADIUKAEA-NA, SA. 1. 2. 39. 


Svadhyayavat, as there is of the verbal text. Avacbanat. 

because of non-mention. 

37. (7) “ Because tliere is no mention (of the meaning), 
as there is of the verbal text ”.—37. 


Because it is unintelligible.” — 38. 

COMMENTARY. 

se of many mantras we find tljat the meaning of some 
y unintelligible: — E.g., ‘ sfi7,.yeva jaihhdriturphdrt.’. 
it the words of mantras are not meant to convey any 


auitya, transient things.— Samyogat, because of the mention. 
•jtHTRsftpit Mantranarthakyam, meaninglessness of the mantras. 

39. (9) “ Because of the mention of transient things, — 
the mantras cannot be regarded as conveying any meaning.” 
* commentary. 

(9) 111 the case of such mantras as — ‘ kinte kririvanti ktkate^u gdvak,’ 

if the words convey any meaning, they speak of certain particular cows of 






/ ADHYAYA 


possible for tlie eternal Veda to speak of such things, we 
that the words are not meant to eoin'ey any meaning a 
Such is the statement of the Purvapaksa 


Avis'istah, non-different. g, I'u, but. Vakyartliab, the signi- 

fication of sentences. 

40. But there is no difference in the signification of 
sentences (of the Veda and those in ordinary parlance). — 40. 

COMMENTARY. 

In reply to the Purvapaksa put forward in the foregoing sutras, the 
Siddhdnta is that the mavfras are always meant to convey a definite mean- 
ing ; because in ordinary parlance we find that wd.]enever a number of words 
are used as a sentence, they are always meant to convey a meaning ; and as 
the words of the mantras also constitute sentences, tliere is every reason to 
suppose tliat these sentences also are j.]ieant to convey definite meanings. 
Just as in ordinary parlance, so in the case of tlie mantras also, in every 
sentence tliere ai’e four faetoi's, viz,, the words, the meaning of each of 
the wmrds by itself, the sentence, and the meaning of the sentence ; now 
wdien the mantras are recited at a sacrifice, tlie words and the sentence 
composed by them serve the purpose of filing the verbal form of the text 
recited; tlie meanings of the component woj els collectively go to fix tlie 
meaning of the sentence ; and it is the meaning of the sentence alone that 
does not serve any other propose ; hence it is by means of this last factor 
that the mantra can benefit the sacrificial performance ; and this benefit, 
in most cases, consists in the iiidicating of the deity of the sacrifice. 


Gunartheiia, for purposes of qualification. ihnafi^rutih, 

repetition, 

41 . The repetition is for purposes of qtialification. — 41 . 

COMMENTARY. 

Tills sutra answers the argument put forward in sutra 31 above. The 
addition of the sentence ehaturlhiralhrimadalte is not for the indicating 
of the nse of the mantras at the picking up of the abhri — which is already 
indicated by the words of the mantras themselves ; — but for the pointing 
out of a further qualification of the mantras— ilim qualification being in the 







n PADA, tv ADnil^ABA2\U, S,t 1. 2 . 4 . 


Pai isankhya, (there is) exclusion, 

42. There is an exclusion. — 42. 


COMMENTARY 
Another mantra cited by the Purvapf 


comieetiou with aiitra 
ol, k - ‘ iinarnagrihhmm rashauamritasya,' to whicii is added the supple- 
mentary sentence ‘ ityasvabhulhdnimddatte' ; and it is urged that if tlic 
mantj-a were intended to be significant, as the lioiding of the reins is 
already mentioned by the words of the mantra itself, — wliat would be the 
use of iiientiouing it over again by means of the snpplemeiitary sentence. 
The reply to this is that the supplementary sentence serves the purpose 
of exclusion ; that is to say, all that the words of the mantra signify is 
the holding of the reins ; and as this could be the holding of the reins 
of the horse as well as that of the reins of the ass, the supplementary 
diiection is added that the mantra is to be recited in the holding of tlie 
reins of the horse ; which excludes the holding, of the reins of the ass 
thus the Bupplenientary sentence serv'es a distitictly useful purpose. 



pfjEYA-MlMAMSA-SUTEAB. 1 ADHYAYA 


ill fact tliey cannot be taken 
addressed to the cake an inaui- 
liare no nieaning at all ; these 
Artliavflda serving the purpose 
,rging of the cake laid down in 
■ds of the mantra are meant to 
further shown by the fact tliat toivards the end of the 
tim ie yajgnapatilj. prathatam ’ (may your master 
if we put the two together, we get at 
may become large, and may thereby 
i.c. ; ‘ if the cake is enlarged 
and this is a pure Arthavada serving the 
the priest to enlarge the cake, as laid down in the 


really mention the enlarging of the cake ; 
in their direct signification ; as they are 
mute thing, the addressing to whom can 
words, therefore, have to be taken as mer 
of persuading the performer to do the ei 
tlie supplementary direction. Tliat the vvor 
be an Arthavada is 
manira we have the words 
of the sacrifice become magnified) 
the idea addressed to the cake ‘You 
the master of the sacrifice become magnified 
the master becomes magnified 
purpose of persuading 
supplementary direction. 

n 

Avirucldham, not incompatible, Param, the assumption. 

44. Tlie assumption wonlcl not Le incompatible.— 44. 

COMMBNTAEY. 

In su. 32 above, it has been argued that, inasmuch as it is only 
when the words of tlm mantra are in a particular order that the mantra 
is recognised as such, and not when the order is changed, — it follows that 
no significance is meant to be attached to the words ; because the change 
in the order of the words does not change the meaning. The reply 
to this is that all that this argument means is that, in the case of the 
use of such maiitms we have to assume that the desired ' transcendental 
result can follow only when the words of the mantra are pronounced in a 
particular order ; and this assumption is perfectly compatible with the 
view that the words are meant to be significant ; as even then there would 
be nothing incongruous in the assumption that a certain transcendental 
result follows when the words are uttered in a certain order. So tiiis 
argument does not affect the case at all. 



// PADA, TV ADBIKAEANA, Sn. 1. 2. P. 


45. As regards the directions, no objection can be 
taken on the basis of reproach attaching to the signification ; 
because it serves the purpose of adding to his qualification. 


COMMENT AKY. 

Tn Sutra 33 above, it lias been argued tliat, in tlie case of such man- 
iras as ‘ agntd agiun viltara, &e.’ wliicli are addressed to learned priests, — 
if they ai'e meant to be signilicaiit, i.e., if the mantra i-eally were intended 
to convey the meaning ‘ 0 agnid priests, move among the fires,’--aiiy 
such addressing would be entirely superfluous; as the priest already 
knows what he has to do. The answer to this is that the objection is 
not well taken ; as even though the priest maj’ already know what he 
has to do, if he is, at the time of actual performance, reminded of his 
duties, — this only adds to his cpialification, enabling him to perform his 
duties more precisely than he would have done if he had only a vague 
notion of what was required of him. 

II II 

Abhidiiane, oa significance, being significant. ArthavadaJi, 

(the mantra, is) an arthavada. 

46. Being significant, the m.antr<t is regarded as an 
A r thavad a. — 4 6 . 

COMMENTARY. 

This answers the argument urged in sutra 34. The mantra “hav- 
ing four horns, &c.” must be regarded as conveying a definite meaning ; 
and the sense conveyed need not be ab.surd ; as the whole is a highly 
figurative eulogy bestowed upon the deity of the saciifice, the sun ; the 
“four horns ” of the sun are the four quarters of the day, — the three feet 
lefer to the three seasons, — the “ two heads ” to the two half-yearly periods, 
and so forth. 


gjgpjGOnat, on account of expression being taken in its secondary (figura- 
seuse. Avipratisedhah, non-contradiction. SyAt, there 


■Inasmuch as the expression is figurative, there 



I ADEYlYA 


COMMENTARY. 

In satra 36, it lias been argued that if the mantra 'Aditirdyaitli con- 
veyed the meaning that *Aditi is heaven/— it would be contradicting a fact ; 
because as a .matter of fact, Aditi is not heaven. The answer to this is 
that the mantra is not intended to be taken as literally true ; all that is 
meant by it is the praise of Aditi ; and when one praises a certain deity, 
lie can, figuratively speaking, speak of that deity, as anything and every- 
thing. So there is nothing in the sense eonve,yed by the mantra that can 
1)0 called as 'contrary to fact/ 


V idya-avachanam, the non-mention of the studying (of mean- 
ings). Asatpyogat, is due to tlie fact of non-connection. 

48. That the studying fof the meanings of mantras) is 
not mentioned fm the Vedic texts laying down Vedic stndjd 
is due to the fact that it (the knowledge of the meanings of 
mantras) has no connection (Avith the actual j)erformance of 
sacrifices). — 48. 

COMBIBNTARY. 

In sulra o/ it lias been argued that tbougb we liaA^e texts that lay 
down tlie study of the A^erbal text of the maiitras, there is none that 
enjoins the learning of their meanings, and that Ave donot find teachers 
of tlie Veda explaining the meanings of mantras. The answer to tfiis is 
tluit tlie Veda does not lay down the studying of the meaning for the 
simple reason that the meaning of mantras has no direct hearing upon the 
performance of sacrifices ; and the teachers donot take the trouble of 
explaining the meanings with care because the comprehension and retain- 
ing of the meaning is much easier than the retaininsr of the text. 


?Rr; Satah, of that which exist. q^^^Pat am, moreover. Avijnanam, 

ignorance. 

49. Moreover, there is ignorance (of the meaning) 
which is there all the same. — 49. 

commentary. 

In sutia 38, it is urged that there are certain mantras that are 
entirely unintelligible. The ansAvm' to this is that, that we donot ^rasn 


IT PADA, tv ADHIKARANA, Sil L S. 5L 


the meaning of a certain mantra does not prove tliat it lias no meaning ; as 
a matter of fact, every mantra, lias a definite meaning ; and when we can- 
not find out what it is in a certain case, that only shows tliat w’-e are 
ignorant of it. In fact there is no mantra whose meaning cannot be found 
out by earefid consideration and pondering. Examples of the interpreta- 
tion of apparently meaningless mantras are given in tlie T^-f-nfravartika 
(Translation, pp. 100-101.) 

w w 

Uktah, has been already explained. *5^ Cha, and. STRcSt^^irr: 
Anityasamyogafi, tiie mention of transient things. 

50. And the mention of transient things (in Vedic 
mrmtras) has already been explained.— 50. 

COMMENTARY, 

In sutra 30 it is urged that there are certain mantras wdiich, if 
regarded as significant, would be found to make mention of transient 
things, whicli would not be compatible with the eternal character of all 
Vedic mantras. The answer to tliis is that the difficulty witli regard to the 
mention in the Veda of apparently transient things, has already been ex- 
plained above, under sutra 1. 1. 31. 

w » 

Lihgopadesah, the mention of mantras by indicative names. ^ 
Cha, also (proves that the mantra is significant). TadarthatvAt, be- 

cause such is the signification of those (names). 

51. The mention of mantraahy indicative names also 
[proves that the mantras are significant] because such is the 
signification of those names. — 51. 

OOMMENTAEY. 

The above sutras have refuted the arguments of tlie opponent. With 
tlji.s sutra begins the statement of arguments in support of the Siddhanta. 
We find certain mantras designated by specific names. Sucli, for instance, 
as ‘ Agneyi,' ‘ Aindrt,’ these names signify respectively ‘ that which has 
Agni for its deity,’ and ‘ that which has Indra for its deity;’ now the fact 
that the particular mantra has Agni or Indra for its deity cannot be as- 
certained except by taking account of what the words of the mantra ' 
signify, hence we conclude that inasmuch as such significant names 
have been given to mantfas, they cannot but be regarded as intended to 
convey definite meanings, 












FJJeV A-MU lAMHA-8fjTRAS. I ADHYAYA 


Ohah, modification. 

52. (The acceptance of) modifications proves that 
rntnitras are meant to be significant. — 52. 

COMMENTARY. 

We find tlic Veda referring to modifications in tlie wording of the 
mantras ; for instance, the sentence ‘ na maid mrdhatc' ('the motlier grows 
not’) precludes the possibility of nouns in the singidar number being 
changed into those in the dual or plitral ; tlie sense of this sentence being 
that when a certain mantra contains the word ' enam ’ for instance, as 
referring to the sacrificial animal, this singular pronoun ' enam. ’ should 
not be changed into ' enan ’ when the nuinher of animals is more than 
one. This clearly shows that the ’ivords of tlie mantra, c.f/., ' enam ’ in 
the present case is intended to be significant of ' this,’ one animal. 

H H 

Vidhii^abdah, words in injunctive sentences. =qr Cha, also. 

53. Then again, we meet with certain words in 
injunctive sentences which show that mantras are intended 
to be significant. — 53. 

COMMBNTAKY. 

In the A%]a we find certain injimctions wiiich make mention of the 
parts of certain mantras, not by means of the exact words of tlie mantra, 
but by means^of other synonymous words. For instance, in one passage 
tlie mantra ‘ Satam liimal}’ is referred to as ‘ Satam liemantan.' This 
clearly shows that tlie Veda itself intends mantras to be significant. 

The PrAbh&kara view is, in the main, same as the above BhAtta view. 

“ The mantras must be regarded as intended to be significant ; because as 
part of the Veda, they must have a useful bearing on actions; this they can 
have only if they are regarded as indicating certain details (in the shape of 
the deity, for instance) connected with the action.” {Brihatt). And so 
long as they are found to supply some such useful information, it is not 
right fo regard Jhem as being intended for mere recitation, which recitation 
brings forth certain transcendental results. There may be some mantras 
that are not found to convey any information useful in sacrificial per- 
formances ; such mantras may be taken as being intended for mere verbal 
j-ecitation for purposes of transcendental results only. 

End of P6da ii of Adhyaya I, ‘ ■ i. > - 





)aksa on this point is that,' “ any action Jaid down in 
be dharma 5, because dharms 

if, 'i.' ?' c ‘ i 'I -i -i ' ’,'75:* t " V. . t 


THE AUTHORITY OF SMRITIS AND USAGE ON MATTERS 
RELATING TO DHARMA. 

Adhiharana 1 — The authority of Smritis in (jeueral. 

80 TEA n 8. 1-2. 

II ? t ^ I ? II 

W3J Diiarniasya, of dharma. ^abdamulatvat, on account of the 

character of having the Veda for its basis, As'abdani, that which is not 

Veda. Anapeksam, to be disregarded. St’St, would be. 

1. “Dharma having the Veda for its sole basis, that 
which is not Veda should be disregarded.” — ^1. 

COAXMENTAEY. 

The preceding two pddas have established the authority of the In- 
junctions, Arthaviidas and Mantras occurring in the Veda. WJiat calls for 
consideration next is the character of such words and expressions as are the 
names of sacrifices. But before taking up this ciuestion, the siltra takes up 
the (piestion of the authority of the Sinj-itis ; and the reason for this lies in 
the well-known fact that the knowledge of Smritis is found to help in the 
comprehension of the true meaning of many Vedic injunctions ; and in 
many oases, the authority of the Veda is open to rejection in favour of 
what is laid down in the Smritis ; and thus it becomes necessary to as- 
certain how far the Smriti may be allowed to interfere in matters relating to 
dharma, for which the Veda bus been found to be the sole audiority. But 
before considering these comparatively doubtful cases, — where the Smriti 
goes directly against the Veda, the author deals with the more general 
question — Is the Smriti to be regarded as having any authoritjf on matters 
relating to dharma ? 

To take u specific instance— the Smriti lays down the performing of 
the AstakA sTAddhas, with regard to which nothing is found in the Vedas. 
Now, the question arises,— Js the performance of the AstakA to be regard-: 

3 dharma to the same extent as the Agnihotra which is enjoined in 


ni PADA, I ADEIKAnAVA, BL 1. 8. I. 


Tiiied Pada. 







pCm^AMlAMSA^stlTRAS, I ADEYAYA 


has been defined in f^u 1. 1. 2 as that which is indicated by Vedic iDjnnc 
tions ; consequently, in all matters relating to dharma, all tliat is not Veda 
— vSmritis, Usage, &c., — cannot be regarded as authoritative.” 

3lfiT qTT It II 

?rfT fT Api va, but. cFi|gT*?rHir3; Kartrisamanydt, on account of the ageii 
being the same. Pramanam, proof. ?r5»THn; Aiiumanam, inference 

Syat, would be. 

2. But on account of the agent being the same, in- 
ference would he the proof (of Smriti having its basis in the 
Veda)— 2. 

COMMENTARY. 

The Siddlidnta on this point is as follows : — 

It is true that Veda is the sole authority for all matters relating to 
dharma ; but how do we know that the Smriti is not based on the Veda ? As 
a matter of fact, we find that the Smritis have been compiled by Maim and 
other well-known writers ; and we also find that the works of these writers 
in the realms of science and philosophy afford satisfactory explanations 
of their respective subjects. Under the circumstances, "with regard to 
the works of these writers, we can only have the following assumptions — 
(1) that Manu and otliers are totally mistaken in what they have asserted ; 
a {2} tliat what tliey have asserted is based upon their jiersonal observation 

P and experience ; (3) that they learnt it from other persons ; (4) that they 

I have wilfully made wrong statements, with a view to lead people astray ; 

I or (5j that wliat they liave asserted is based upon direct Vedic injunctions. 

I We do not find sufficient reasons to justify the acceptance of the first four 

I assumptions ; the only possible view, therefore, is tlie last one : whatever 

is laid down in the Smritis lias its basis in direct injunctions contained 
in the Veda ; in the case of sucli Smriti assertions as are not found to be 
corroborated by known Vedic texts, the presence of such texts is to 
be in fell ed, fioni the fact of Maim and other Smriti wi'ilers being 

I I trustworthy persons, taking their stand upon the Veda : that is to say^ 
^ when in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred we find that what Maim has 
laid down is in stiict accordance with Vedic texts as known to us, this 
■ i , justifies the inference that in the hundredth case also, the assertion must 
I have its basis in some, Vedic text not known to us; specially when we 
I know that many rescensional texts of the Vedas are lost to us ; and even 
: ,h those that are not quite lost are so scattered that it is not possible for us 
: : to lay our hands upon the exact text wanted. 



The basic reason for this inference as declared in the sutra is con- 
tained in the word ' kartrisf account of the agent being the 
same this, according to the older "commentators, means — ' because tlie 
agents or pei-sons wlio compiled the Sanritis are the same that performed 
actions laid down in the V eda ; that is to say, we know tliat during tlieir lives, 
Mann, Yajilavalkya and other writers on Smriti, acted fully in accordance 
with tlie injunctions laid down in the Veda; and for persons wlio were such 
strict followers of the Veda in conduct, it is not possible that they should 
have made asseilions except in acco]*dance with direct Vedic injunctions 
known to them ; thei-efore, we conclude that the Smriti is authoritative^ 

This interpretation is not accepted by Kuimirila ; because, he asserts, 
as men of the world, Man u and oilier writers must have done many acts 
under the influence of a tempoiai-y impulse, whicl} acts might be even 
contrary to Vedic injunctions. lie, therefore, takes the plirase ‘on account 
of the agent being the same ' to mean — ‘because the persons that com- 
piled the Srnritis are the same that learnt and studied the Veda;’ the 
reasoning being expanded in this form : — ‘ What is laid down in the Smriti, 
the performance of the Astaka for instance, lias been laid down, and 
recognised as dharma, by an unbroken line of teachers and students of the 
Veda ; and this leads to the presumption that what is thus laid down is 
surelj’^ based upon direct Vedic injunctions.’ 

Though the word in the sfitra is ‘ Anuniaua,’ which means Inference, 
— and as such Kuniarila’s interpretation might be suspected to be a devia- 
tion from the sutra — yet, he has been careful to point out that the word 
‘ auumana ’ in the sutra has not been used in its tecluiical sense of infer- 
ence, but in its literal sense of ' what comes after sense-perception and in 
this sense Presumption is as much ‘ Aimm^na’ as Inference. 

Though the above is tlie conclusion in regard to Smritis in general, 
Ivumarila does not blindly accept the entire Smriti literature to be equally 
authoritative ; he drawls a distinction ; he says: — 

‘ Among the Smri is themselves, such portions as are related to 
Dharma or Deliverance have their origin directly in the Veda; while those 
that have mere pleasure, in view are based upon tlie ordinary ex- 
perience of the world. This rule also holds good respecting Itihasas 
and Purtoas ’ — {Tantravatriha trans., p. 119.) 

, Among the auxiliary sciences, of lSikfe^\, Kalpa, Vyakarana, Ac., 
portions treating of things connected with sacrificial performances are 
based upon the Veda; while those ti'eating of things serving some ordi- 
nary worldly purpose have their basi^ in ordinary experience. 

‘ ‘ 8 • ^ 


m PAdA, 1 AbEtKAUAT^fA, M. L 3, t 





PURVA-MlMAMSA-S&rRAS. 1 A ptlf AY A 


Adhikarana II — Greatest authority rests in direct Vedic 
declarations. 

SOTRA 1. 3. 3-4. 

u ^ II 

Virodhe, there is contradiction, g Fu, when. Anapeksam^ 

to be disregarded, pirg Syat, should be. Asati, when there is none, 

f| Hi, because. Anumanam, inference or presumption (of coroborative 

Vedic texts;. 

3. Whenever there is contradiction between the Smriti 
and the Veda, the Smriti should be disregarded ; because it is 
only when there is no contradiction that there is presumption 
[of Vedic texts in support of the Smriti] . — 3. 

COMMENTARY. 

Tlie authority of the Smriti has been established in a general way. 
The author now proceeds to point out exceptions. In the case of such 
Smfiti-assertions as bear upon matters in regard to which we meet wdth 
no declarations in the Veda, we are free to presume that there must be 
somejYftlic texts, not known to us, that lend support to what is asserted in 
the Vb3a. But there are instances in which the assertion of the Smyiti is 







IT I PAD A, 11 ADEIKAEAm, 84. 1 


touiid to be contracliotory to, or incompatible witli, wliat is declared in a 
well-known Vedie text ; for example, we have a Srariti text laying down the 
povering of the whole sacrificial post with cloth, while, on the other hand, 
we have the Vedio text that the adhvaryu priest should sing a certain 
mantra while touching the post ; as this touching would not be possible 
if the entire post were covered with cloth, the assertion of the Sniriti is found 
to be incompatible with wliat is laid down in the Veda. And the question 
naturally arises — are such texts to be regarded as authoritative ? The 
I’easou for doubt lying in the consideration that, if such a text were regard- 
ed as authoritative, on the basis of the conclusion of the preceding adhika- 
rana, tixat would imply the refection of the Vedic text which it contradiots • 




'r,‘i f 



PUnVA-MlMlMSA-SUTBAS. 


In answer to the above, we have the Siddh^uta laid down in the 
Shtra. 

Wherever there is any contradiction between the Smriti and the \ eda, 
the authority of the Smriti is to be total h’ disregai-ded ; as it is only when 
tliere is no such contradiction that we can presume a "Vedictext in support 

Recanse the Smriti is not, like the Veda, 

„ its authority from the 

a Vedic text in corroboration of wliat is 
hen we do not find a Vedic text bearing on that 
Vedic text is found, and is found to be coutra- 
le Smriti, there can be no justification for 
support of this latter ; and the presence of the 
Vedic text to tlie contrary cuts off the very basis of the authority of the Smriti. 
Thus then, in matters relating to dliarma, the Smriti not being self- 
sufficient in its authority, the Smriti tliat contradicts the Veda cannot be 
taken as laying down an optional alternative ; as we assume in the case of two 
mutually contradictory Vedic texts. Because in the latter case, botli the 
texts being equally self-sufficient in their authoritj’^, we have no reason for 
rejecting one in favour of the other ; in the case of a Smriti and a \edic 
text, the latter is self-sufficient in its authority, while the former would derive 
its authority from a text that would be presumed; so that we have a 
distinct reason for accepting the latter and rejecting the former. The 
conclusion, therefore, is that no authority attaches to such Smriti texts as 
are contradictory to direct assertions of the Veda. 


of what i.s said in the Smriti 
self-snfficieu't in its authority ; in fact, it derives 
Veda ; and lienee we can presume 
said in tlie Smriti only w 
subject; so wlren such a 
dietary to what is asserted by tl 
nresuining a Vedic text in 


Hetu, (of) causes — Darsanat, because of our finding, "Sf Cha 


4, Also because we find causes. — 4. 

COMMENTARY. 

Another reason is given for r ejecting the authority of certain Smfitis. 
In the case of many Smriti texts we find that the assertions therein contained 
are to be attributed to such causes as greed, &c., on the part of the priests ; 
for instance, the injunction that the entire post is to be covered has its root 
in the priest’s desire for appropriating a larger piece of cloth. And in the 
case of assertions having such sources, we need not take the trouble to 
find their corroboration in any Vedic texts; because when we find 
• their basis in visible causes, we can have no justification for presuming 



iflllii 


Adhikarana 111. — [No authority attaches to such Smritis 
as have their origin in iwrldly objects.] 

The preceding sutra 4 has, in the first place, been taken by the Bhasya, 
as supplying an additional reason for rejecting the authoriy of certain 
Sra.-iti texts. It has also been taken as embodying a fresh adbikarana. 
Tiiere are some Sinriti texts which, though not contradictory to any Vedic 
texts, are found to have their origin in the greed of the priest and siicli 
other w’^ell-known causes. For instance, the text declaring the taking away 
by the priest of the cloth worn by the sacrifice!* during the Yaisarjana 
Homa. This assertion, being found to be due to the greed of the priest, 
does not stand in need of the corroboration of Vedic texts, the presumption 
whereof is precluded. Consequently no authority can belong to such de- • 
clarations as have their source in such ordinary causes as the greed of the 
priest, for instance. 

A note on Sutras 3 and 4, as emhodying Adhiharaias 2 arid 3. 

Kum^rila does not accept the above inte!*pretation of sutras 3 and 4, 
whereby certain Sinriti texts are shown to be absolutely devoid of 
authorit3^ His point is that, in Adhikarana (Ij it has been proved that 
all tliat is contained in the Sinriti has its basis in tlie Veda; and hence 
for every Cmriti text, there is a corresponding Vedic text. Such being 
the principle once laid down, even when we find a certain Smriti text con- 
tradicting the Veda, we must regard this as a case of contradiction between 
two Vedic texts; because by the law laid down in the preceding ad/w- 
harana^ there must be a Vedic text as the basis of this Smiili text; hence 
the contradiction in all such cases lies between two Vedic texts; and con- 
sequently we must take Sutra 3 as declaring that, wherever a Sinriti text is 
found to lay down a course of action which is found to be contrary to what is 
laid down in a Vedic text, and thus there being a contradiction between the 
two, it is desirable that in practice, we should adopt the course laid down in 
the Vedic text; just as in the case of two optional alternatives laid down 
in the Veda, we may, for certain reasons, adopt one in preference to 
the other ; and this does not mean that no authointy belongs to the Smriti ; 
because in the case of the optional alternative laid down in the Veda, if 
we give preference to one over the other, it does not mean that the text ^ 
laying down the other alternative,, is not authoritative. In practice, we ' 
can adopt only one ; and if we adopt one, and not the other, that does" not 
make the other text absolutely devoid of authority, . ; - ^ ^ 



r-*- 


pi)rva-m1mAmsA-sOtbas. 1 adhtAya 


According to this vie\v, the translation of Sutra 3 siiould I'un as fol- 

When there is a mnlradietion between the ideas expre 
text and the Smriti, that ndiicJt is independent of all else 
text'^ should he aeeepted as authoritative. 

That is to say, in cases where tlie Sniriti texts lia" 
other words, the sense of certain Vedic texts, without cj^u 
words of these latter, they make their authority clepe 

on of those Vedic texts whose meaning they are meant to 
; while the Vedic text, which declares wliat is contrary to wliat is 

such this 
laid 


■sed hij the V edie 
(i.e., the V edie 


presumpti 
express 

declared in the Siuriti, is self-sufficient in its authority, and as 
latter inspires greater confidence, and leads people to adopt the course 
down in this, in preference to the other course laid down in the Smriti, 
But this does not mean that the Smriti has no authority. 

Kumarila suggests yet another interpretation of sutras 3 and 4. They 
mean that, in matters relating to dliarnm, no authority can attach to such 
Smriti compilations as contradict the Veda — ix., which can have no basis 
in the Veda— because they are found to Lave their source in such percepti- 
ble causes as avarice and the like ; and under tins class of ‘ Smriti ’ are to 
be included not the Vedic Sinritis of llanu and others wd}ich have been 
proved to have their basis in the Veda, — but only the so-called Sniritis’ 
of Buddha, Sahkbya, Yoga, Pailcharatra, Pasupata and the like, — all of 
which luive within them, liidden under a thin coat of righteousness, 
instructions for tlie gaining of such visible ends as wealth, fame and 
respect, &c. 

J3y ‘Smritis' in this connection, Xuniarila takes only those that are 
recognised as authoritative throughout India — such, for instance, as the 
Smriti of Manu, the Itilifisas and the Puranas. The case of such local 
Sniritis as those of Vaffi^tha, &c , are dealt with later on under Sutras 15 
and 16. 

According to Prabhakara, wliose presentation of the adhikaranas is in 
accordajice with the JBliabya, the Purvapak^a is that,— tlie Smriti and the 
Veda being both equally authoritative, whenever the two are contradictory, 
we should reject the authority of both ; and in so far the universal authority 
of the Veda becomes weakened. The Siddhanta is tliat the two are not 
equal in their authority ; the Veda is self-authoritative, while the Srmiti is 





in PAdA, tv ADHiKAMhU, SA 1 


Adkikarana IV. — TJeclaration of Substance is most 
authoritative. 

SUTIU 1, 8. 5-7. 

ii ^ n 

“ 5T n ^ ii 

f^srr^'r^ ^istakopi 
the Veda, 

this be the accepted 


when there is no disturbance of what is laid down in 
Aviruddham, there is no contiadiction. hi chet if 

opinion. ^ Na, this cannot be right. 
Sastraparirnanatvat, because the limit is fixed by the scriptures. 

5-6. “ ‘When there is no disturhaiice in what is laid 

down in the Veda, there is no contradiction,’ — if this he the 
accepted opinion,— (5)— this cannot he right, because the 
limit is fixed by the scriptures.”— 5-6. 

COMMENTARY. 

The case of the Smriti "texts, dealing with actions to be done for die 
purpose of accoinplisbing certain results desired by man, lia,s been dealt with 
in die preceding adlukarana, ivliere it bas been shown that they ai-e to bo 
accepted as audioritative, or rejected as nnauthoritative, according as they 
are found to be corroborated or contradicted by Vedic texts. The pre.sent 
adkikarana deals with the Smriti texts bearing upon such small acts as are 
not performed for accomplishing any definite purpose, hut only come to be 
performeil on certain occasions in the eourse of sacrificial performances; for 
instance, the text that lays down that, in course of the performance, if the 
performer happens to sneeze, he should rinse his mouth. In connection with 
this text all that has to be considered is whether or not they are contradictorv 
to Vedic texts ; as when this cpiestion has been decided, the matter of their 
authoritative or unauthoritativ'e character is ea.si]y determined by the for- 
going adhikavam. The Veda lays down , the performance of a sacrifice, a 
performance consisting of a number of details carried into execution in a 
fieflnite order of sequence; if during such a performance, the performer 
liappens to sneeze, he should rinse his mouth —says the Smriti ; if he were 
to do this, the sequence of the details of the sacrificial performance would 
be broken ; for instance, the libation to Indra being laid down as following 
tlie libation to Agni, — if the sneezing and rinsing due to sneezing were to 
be 4qae the libation to Agni, the libation to fndra could not follow 
immediately after the libation to Agui. Now the question arises, whether 
or npt, in this case, .there is a contradiction between the Veda and the 
Smrifi;' and in this case all that we have to consider, is whether or not 



pdBVA-MtMAMSA-SUTEAS. I ADHYAYA 


ilie acceptcince of the SiDiiti-iiijiuictioii (ol rinsing the niontijj wonia inTei- 

fere with the proper accomplishment of the action laid down in the Veda ; 
that is to say, if we find that the rinsing of the moutli, in course of the 
sacrificial performance, is either not allowed, or distinctly prohibited, by the 
Vetiic text laying down the procedure of the sacrificial performance, then the 
conclusion must be that there is a contradiction ; if, on the other hand, 
we find that the intrudiictiou of tlie act (of rinsing) into the performance 
does not interfere with the main performance, hut in fact helps in its 
accomplishment, we come to the conclusion that there is no contradiction. 

The question being thus staled, the answer that naturally suggests 
itself is that the Smriti text that lays down an act in connection with, 
and in persuance of, what is laid down in the Veda, cannot be regarded 
as contradictory to the Veda; specially as the performance of that act 
does not interfere with the performance laid down in the Veda. All that 



65 



wr sRfir^ [ 

] II \S II 

wf? srr Api va, but. Karan Sgrahape, no motive being found. 

Prayuktani, (as) useful. JTfftwiiSf Pratiyeran, they should be recognised! 
%5 Tesu, in them, 'srsr^fffgr Adarsanat, because of not being found. 
Virodhasya, of contradiction. 

7. But HO motive being found, they should be re- 
cognised as useful ; [specially because we do not find any 
contradiction in them.]— 7. 

COMMENTARY. 

The final conclusion is put forward in this sutra. The last clause 
translated within square brackets, occurs in the next sutra; but the 
Vartika suggests its being taken along with the present sutra. 

In the case of Sinriti texts, we are justified in rejecting the author- 
ity of only those that are found to emanate from such ordinary motives 
as greed and tlie like, as in the case of the injunction of the covering of 

the entire post. In the case of the acts under consideration e.g., the 

act of rinsing— we cannot attribute its injunction to any such motives 
as greed, anger, and the like ; and hence, according to the foregoing 
Adhikarana, we shall be justified in assuming that the Smriti texts layino- 
down such acts have their basis in the Veda. Under the circurnstancej 
, the Smriti text cannot be rejected as absolutely devoid of autiiority! 
Then, in the case of the particular texts that may be found to be contrary 
to certain details laid down in the Veda -—e.g., when the injunction of the 
rinising of the mouth upsets the order in which the Vedic sacrifice is 
to be performed,— we must give preference to the Smriti (it havin^r been 
proved to have its basis in the Veda) as against the Vedic texts ; becluse in 
this case^ the Smriti text enjoins an act, while what it contradicts is not 
the act enjoined by the Veda, but only an accessory detail connected with 
that act,— rk, tire order of its performance. If the Smriti text laid 
down the rinsing as to be performed in place of the sacrifice, then 
It would contradict the Vedic text laying down an act ; as in that cLe the 
authority of the latter would be supreme ; but as it is, it is only in regard 
to the minor detail of order that what is laid down by the Vedic text is 
: affected, and not the act itself ; and there can be no doubt that what lays 
/down a minor detail should give way to that which .lays down an act ; that 
is to say, the prder of the details of the Vedic sacrifice has to give way to 
the act of rinsing laid down in tlie Smfiti. 


II/ PiDA, IV ADHIJCABANA, 8± 1. 3, 7, 



FJ^nVA-MtUAUSl-SI^TEAS. II ADHYAYA 


The atitliority of the particular Smriti text in question is thus ascer- 
tained on the ground of its laying down a substance, in the shape of an 
act, as against the minor qualification — of order — implied by the Vedic 
text ; specially as this order is not directly enjoined by the Veda, being 
only indirectly implied by the mention of a particular procedure to be 

adopted. - ' 

Thus then, the Smriti text being authoritative, the actions laid down 
by them must be accepted as useful — serving a useful purpose in connec- 
tion with the Vedic sacrifice. 

Nor is there any contradiction involved in the performance of such 
acts, — as rinsing and the like. Because the time taken by the performance 
of a sacrifice, as also the limit of its extent, is only a secondary element ; 
and as sucli they are not irrevocably fixed ; it will depend upon circumstan- 
ces ; and must vary with each particular performance ; for instance, if the 
priest is active, the performance will last for — say 2 hours ; while if he 
is lazy, it may last for 4 or 5 hours. And such being the case, rftnch 
stress cannot be intended to be laid on these secondary details by tlie Vedic 
text. Such being the case if one were to perform acts rendered necessary 
by certain unforeseen occurrences — e.g., sneezing — in the course of the 
sacrificial performance, the performance of such acts cannot, even though 
causing some interruption in the continuity of the sacrifice, be regarded 
as interfering in, or in any way affecting adversely, the main performance 
of the Vedic sacrifice ; in fact, they come to form part and parcel of the 
main performance itself. Consequently, there is no ground for regarding 
the Smriti text as contradictory to the Vedic text. 

NOTE ON SO. 5, 6 AND 7. 

The above is the presentation of the Adhikarana, according to. the 
Bhasya. This is not in keeping with ICum^rila’s view of the SmritiSj 
which, according to him, can never be contradictory to the Veda ; as there 
is no instance in which what is laid down in the S/nriti can be rightly 
taken as contrary to what is laid down in the Veda. He lias, therefore, 






61 



m pada, IV adhihabana, Bit i 


IRdhikararia -I v(a). — Lreating of the scriptures of the Bauddha, &cj. 

If the opponent holds the opinion that, “such declarations of 
Buddha, dee., as do not contradict the Veda, may be accepted as autho- 
ritatne, without any fear of contradicting the Veda. ” — (&i. 5), 

We deny this; because the number and extent of authoritative 
scriptures is strictly limited . — (Sil 6'.) 

rile sense of sutra 5, as representing tlie Pdrvapah-^a, may be summed 
up as follows : In the teachings of Buddha and such other heterodox 

teachers, we find many declarations that are perfectly compatible with 



It aMIYAYA 


TV (b)— Authority attaching to the practices of good men.] 

toe cannot find any perceptible Tnotire, a 
he pe?* formed, must be recognised {as Dliarnia) {Su, 7 d) 
we find that many beliave contrary to Vec 
men leading nnliealtliy lives ; a: 
recognisi 

to the doubt whether or not the 
should be regarded as authoritative in matters 


[Adhikaixma 

Those actions, for tvhich 
are yet found to 

ArooJig good men 
teachings, — being just like medical 
yet tlie fact of their being universally 

men leads us to tliink that all their actions must be in accordance with 
Vedic teacliings. This gives rise 
practices of good men 
relating to Dharma. 

The Pilrvapak^a view is as follows “ As a matter of fact we know 
of many instances, beginning from Prajnpati himself and down to our 
own times, of well-known good men behaving, on many occasions, con- 
trary to all laws of moralitj' ; further, we I'egard those people as 

‘ good ’ whose conduct is good ; if then we were to regard that con- 
duct as ‘good’ which belongs to good men, we would fall into the 
meshes of a ‘ vicious circle.’ Lastly, these ‘practices ’ are not included 
among the fourteen Vidy^s which alone have been held to be authoi'ita- 
tive.” 

; The Siddhanta embodied in sutra 7 is as follows .—'When we find 
that certain actions are performed by good men ; and we cannot attidbute 
them to any such perceptible motives as those of greed and the like, we 
ai-e led to accept them as Dharma ; but this does not refer to those actions 
that are performed either for the maintenance of the body, or for mere 
pleasure, or for some material gain ; in fact, we are to accept as Dhanna 
only those actions of good men which they do as Dharma ; that is to 
say, any and every act done by good men is not to he regarded as 
Dharma ; when they do an act, thinking it to he Dharma, then alone is 
that act to be regarded as Dharma ; and the reason for this lies in the 
fact that persons doing the act are fully conversant with the Veda and 
its teachings ; and hence what they regard as Dharma must be that 
which is so enjoined in the Veda ; consequently, the action of a good 
man, when performed as Dhanna, always points to the possibility 
of its being based upon the Veda. This meets all those cases of miscon- 
duct of good men that may be cited as instances to the contrary ; for 
instance, when Yudhi§thira told a lie, he did not regard that lying as 
Dharma; in fact, he knew it was not right, and yet did it under the force 
of desire to save his army from death at Drona’s hands. Those actions 
that are found to be due to such motives as love or hatred, anger or 


; 





II PlDA, F ADEIRAUaISA, 8i\. 1 


jealousy, avarice and the like, cannot be regarded as Dharoia ; as the 
shtra says, it is only that act which cannot be attributed to any such 
cause, and which (we add) is done by good men as Dharma, that can be 
accepted as such. The Snij-itis also assert the authoritative character 
of the ‘practices of good men,’ and ‘ the usages of particular castes and 
countries;’ and though these practices are not included among the four- 
teen Vidyas, yet they derive their authority from the Smritis which 
declare that the practices are based upon the Veda. 


A fourth interpretation is suggested by KumSrila, whereby all the 
three shtras (5, 6 and 7) are taken as embodying the Siddhanta in answer 
to the Pflrvapaksa supplied from without, bearing upon the authority of 
the practices of good men. The sense of the three sutras in this case would 
be as follows: — That which is taught in the Veda and the Snii'itis, — if 
this is not contradicted by the practices of good men, such practices can 
be accepted as authority on Dharma ; but whenever there is the least 
contradiction of Vedic teachings, then, as there would be a conflict of 
authorities, the practice cannot be accepted to have any authority at all. 


Adhikarana V . — A icord should always he taken in the sense 

attributed to it in the scriptures. 

- ■ StTTRAS 1. 8. 8-9. 

r esu, ill them. Adariian^t, on account of non-perception, 

Virodhasya, of contradiction or incongruity. Sam^^ equal, 
Vipratipattiti, the various comprehensions, 

8. “Inasmucli as no contradiction, or mcongruity, is 
fotind in of them, the yarions significations would be 
(iti antliority.)--8. : / 





5i"{!S ’:‘i 


PdliVA-UtMlMSl-SOTBAS. II ADRYAVa 


COMMBNTAEY. 

Wlieii one and the same wokI is found to be used in different senses 
by learned men, there arises a doubt in the mind of the student as to 
which of the significations is to be regarded as the most authoritative^. 
For instance, the word ' Yava ^ is used to denote the barley-corn as well as 
long-pepper ; now when one comes across the word ‘ Yava ' is one to under- 
stand the barley-corn or the long-pepper ? 

The Purvapaksa view is that the several significations would be 
equally authoritative ; inasmuch as all the significations belolig equally to 
the word; and there is no incongruity attaching to the acceptance of any 
of them ; consequently, all significations are to be regarded as equally 
authoritative ; it is enough to show that the word is used in that sense' 
by ;Some people. 

’mirRm ^ ii $. u 

dastrastha, 

accepted by men learned in 
Va, but. Tannimittatvat, 

authority). 

9. But the signification sanctioned by the scriptures 
(or accepted by people learned in the scriptures) is to be re- 
garded as more authoritative ; because the scriptures are 
the sole means of knowing Dharma. — 9. 

OOMMB.YTARY. 

Of all the several significations, tliat vvhicli lias the sanction and 
support of the Veda is to he regarded as the most authoritative ; 
because the Veda is the only means of obtaining the knowledge of dharma ; 
that is to say, in the case of the word ‘ yava ’ we find that the fact of its 
denoting the barley-corn is distinctly supported by the description of the 
corn contained in the Veda, which description is found to be applicable 
to the barley-corn, and not to long-pepper. In the same manner, in the' 
mase of all words with several meanings, that meaning is to be accept- 
ed as most direct and authoritative, which has the sanction of the Veda ’ 

and the support of all Vedic scholars. Specially as while all the various 
significations are equally sanctioned by ordinary usage, the one that we 
choose as the most authoritative has the . additional authority of Vedic 
sanction;.. ' ‘ ' ' , ‘ 


(that which is) sanctioned by the scriptures or 
the scriptures (is more authoritative). ^ 
because that is the sole source (of 





/// PAD A, V ADHIKABAT^A, S,t 1. 3. 9. 


The above is the presentation of the Adhikarana, according to the 
BhAsya and PrabhAkara. Kuraiirila objects to this interpretation, on the 
following grounds ; — 

The examples cited by the Bhasya are purely artificial j because 
nowhere is the word ‘yava ’ actually found to be used in the sense of 
long-pepper. (2) Even granting that it is so, the authoritative character of 
the meaning supported by subsequent passages of the Veda would come to 
be ascertained in accordance with sutra 1. 4. 29, where it will be shown 
that in all doubtful cases of the signification of words, a definite conclu- 
sion is arrived at by tire help of subsequent passages ; in tliissame marrner, 
we find that fact of the word ‘yava’ denoting barley-corn is ascertained 
by the help of the subsequent passage which describes the ‘yava’ 
plant as flourishing when all other plants are withered and leafless. f3) 
Under sutra 1. 4. 23, we shall show that there are many grounds— in tire 
shape of similarity — upon which the indirect denotation of words is 
based ; in accordance with this law, the signification of long-pepper by the 
word ‘ yava, ’ or of blackberry by the word ‘ vetasa, ’ could be possible only 
when taken as indirect indication based upon similarity ; — that is, the 
long-pepper is indicated by the word ‘yava’ because of its similarity 
to the barley-corn ; and such being the case, there could be no doubt 
as to the superior authority of direct denotation as against indirect 


Adhikaray^a V(a). — Signification recognised by the Aryas is more 
authoritative than that accepted hy the Mlechchhas. 

. • Whenever there happens to be a difference in the usa,ge of the Irya 
and that of the Miechchha, there arises a doubt as to whether both are 
equally authoritative, or one is more authoritative than the other. 

The Pffrvapaksa view is as follows “ In regard to all visible things, 
the significations accepted hy the Arya and the Miechchha are equally 
auth^tative (Sfl. 1. 3. 8.) ; it is only in the case of superphysical things that 

authority. In. the case of ordinary things,* the 
all words miist be accepted to be eternal'^from' the mere 





72 PMVAMIMAMSIMTEAS. II AdBYAYA. 

fact of their beitig expressive ; consequently so long as the word denotes 
a certain meaning it does not make any difference whether the significa- 
tion is known among the Iryas or the Mlechchhas. As an example we take 
the word ‘ piln ’ which, among the Aryas, denotes a particular tree, win e 
among the Mlechchhas, the elephant; both of Aese significations must be 
regarded as equally eternal and aiitlioiitative. 

In reply to this we have the Siddhanta in sfitra 1. 3. 9, as already 
explained above. As a matter of fact, the usage of the^ words among 
the Mlechchhas, when differing from that among the Iryas, must be 
put under the same category as the corrupt forms ^ of words. That is 
to say, the expressiveness of the word ‘ pilu ’ as denoting the elephant is of 
-the same kind as that of the corrupt word ‘ gavi ’ as denoting the cow ; 
and hence it cannot be regarded as equally authoritative with the significa- 
tion of words used among the Aryas. Hence the conclusion is that, inas- 
much as it is the Arya that takes his stand upon the scriptures, his ideas 
alone can have any authority in the matter of signification of words, 
— specially of those pertaining to dliaima ; because the knowledge of 
dharma is entirely dependent upon the scriptures ; and that among the 
Aryas also we should give preference to the usage of persons who are more 
conversant with the scriptures than others. 


Ill 


Adhikarava V(b).— Treating of the eomparative authority , 

of Smritis and Usage, .i 

By a third interpretation, Kumarila makes the two sutras 8 and 9 
embody a different Adhikarana, wherein the Smriti is proved to be 
possessed of greater authority than Usage. 

In cases where Usage is found to be contrary to Smriti, the Purvapaksa 
view is that both are to be regarded as. eimally authoritative; the contest* 
between them for authority being equal ^u. 1. 3. 8j ; and the reason for 
this lies in the fact that both equally have their basis in the Veda ; in fact, 
if there is anything to choose between the twm, it is the Usage that is 
possessed of greater authority than the Smriti ; because its results, in 
the shape of actions, are directly preceptible.” • 

. ^ The Siddhanta in reply to’ the above is that the Smriti is possessed of 

greater authority.; because it is this that is based directly upon the Vedtt 

' I - ' "V ^ "I T" t ’ ' ' ' ■'.■''fi”'"''"' , ‘ 

^ .The word ^ Yipratipattih ' of the Sdtra is taken in this case in its primary meaning 
hf ^ ch^test," and not in the indirect sense of YiviShd pratipattih, as in the preeedihginter- 

.... ’ ' ' " 






nr PAdA, V ADUrKARANA, SA. 1. S. 9. 


(Su. 1. 3. 9). In tlie case of the the corrohorative Vedic text is 

inferred directly, from the fact of tlie Srajlti being compiled by people 
learned in the \edas ; whereas in the case of Usage, we have first of all to 
infer a corresponding Smriti on which the Usage is based ; and it would be 
on the strength of this presumed Smriti that the ultimate corroborative 
Vedic text would be presumed ; thus in this case the support of the Veda 
is one step farther removed than in the case of the Smj-iti. Nor is there 
any Vedic text that sanctions all usages at one stroke ; and even those texts 
that are there can be got at only through the help of Smritis ; because 
Vedic texts in support of Usage are scattered over several parts of the Veda, 
and cannot be found out except through the Smritis. 

Adliiharma V(c ) — The sense that a look'd conveys in the Veda is more 
authoritative than that conveyed in ordinary parlance, 

Kumarila offers yet ancther interpretation of Sutras 8 and 9. Some 
words are found in the Veda to convey a meaning entirely different from 
that conveyed in ordinary parlance ; for instance, the word ‘ a^vab^la ’ 
in the Veda denotes seed, while in ordinary parlance it denotes horse’s 
hair. In all these cases the Piirvapaksa view is that — “ inasmuch as both 
meanings are equally well compi-ehended, the two significations should he 
regarded as of equal authority (Su. 1. 3. 8) ; specially because in the matter 
of the signification of words, the Veda does not in any way differ from 
other sources of verbal knowledge ; its superior authority being restricted 
only to things pertaining to Dhanna.” 

The Siddhinta is that, the signification of words which is based 
upon the scriptures is decidedly more authoritative, because the know- 
ledge of Dhanna is gained by means of the scriptures alone (Sutra 1. 3. 9), 

A signification accepted and sanctioned by the Veda is irrevocably' fixed 
and can never be set aside ; while that sanctioned by ordinary usage 
is variable, and liable to change under various circumstances. Conse- 
quently, the Vedic signification must be accepted as possessed of superior 
authority. 


Adhiharana VI. — Treating of the authority attach- 
ing to words used only hy the Mleehehliaa. • 

I 80TBA1.3.10. ■ .. 'h; 

! > Choditam, sanctioned, 3 bHV 5i#%\.PEaajetai- should b 


lag. " 





pdEVA-MtMAMSA-SdTBAS. 11 AI^HvAYA 


recognised. Avirodhat, because there is no contradiction or incon- 

gruity, Pram^nena^ by the Veda. 

10. [The word used by the MJechchha] should be 
recognised as sanctioned by the Veda ; because there is no 
incongmity [in this]. — 10. 

COMMENTARY. 

In the Veda we meet with some words tliat are not in use among 
the people of Aryavarta ; witli regard to the meaning of those words 
there arise two questions : (1) Should we take these words in the 
sense in which they are used by the Mleehchhas among whom they 
are in use ? (2) Should we give preference to the meaning that may 
be got at by breaking up the words so as to make them appear as 
being derived from Sanskrit roots and alfi.ves, as against the meaning 
assigned to them by the usage of the Mleehchhas ? As examples of 
such words of foreign origin may be mentioned — ‘ pika ‘ nema 

* tamarasa,' &c. 

The Piirvapah^a view is that, — “inasmuch as the usage of Mlech- 
chhas cannot be a safe guide in comprehending matters relating to Dharma, 
we shall not be justified in accepting the meaning assigned to the words 
by Mleehchhas ; it is necessary in all these cases to find out the Sanskrit 
roots from which these words are derived, and to assign to them mean- 
ings accordingly; that is to say, we should find out the etymology of the word 
in accordance with Sanskrit grammar, and assign to the words meanings 
indicated by this etymology ; and as Sanskrit grammar forms part of 
the“ scriptures,” the etymological meaning got at in accordance with 
•strict grammatical rules should be regarded to be as authoritative as thi 
ordinary meaning of any Sanskrit word. There is, therefore, no justifi- 
cation for accepting the usage of the Mleehchhas. Specially as tlierfe is 
a further danger in such acceptance of the subversion of the entire 
fabric of Vedic Dhaima. If we once get into the habit of accepting as 
authoritative things apart from the Veda,- -such as the usage of theMlech- 
chhas — this habit may have most undesirable extension. If we limit 
ourselves to the Veda and to the usage of Vedic people, we are forced 
to hunt out the requisite authority for our course of conduct among such 
sources ; but if we once accept a npn-Vedic source of information as autho- 
ritative in those cases where information from Vedic sources is not easib 
aqcessible, we shall be open to the temptation of accepting any non-Vedic 
j|i(ppation that may lie near at hand, and not make an effort to hunt out 



m YI ABniKAEAnA M. 1. 3. W 


the Vedic information. Hence the conclnsion that the usage of non- 
Vedic people cannot be trusted in the ascertainment of the meaning of 
doubtful words.” 

The Siddh4nta on this point is as follows : — 

If we find that the word used by the Mlechchhasis exactly the same 
as that found in the Veda, and the word is entirely foreign to the Arya 
voeabulaiy, we cannot but accept the sense which the word has in Mlech- 
chha usage ; for instance, the word ‘ pika ’ as found in the Veda being the 
same as that curreii t among Mlechchhas, we must accept the same meaning 
of it that it has among the Mlechchhas ; specially when such signification 
does not give rise to any incongruity in the authority df the Veda 
with regard to Dharma. According to this interpretation of the Sutra, 
the word ‘ prammena ’ = by the Veda. According to another interpreta- 
tion, the sAtra prammena avirodhat ’ means ‘ there being no contradiction 
of any authority i.e., there being nothing in the signification that 
contradicts, or goes against, the authority of the Veda with ipgard to 


ihe VArtika cites a few very interesting examples of cases where, 
even in regard to matters of Vedic ritual, we have to accept tlie authority 
of people other than Brahmanas versed in the Veda. For instance, 
when we meet with an injunction with reference to the ‘loma’ of the 
sacrificial animal, if we do not know what part of the animal’s body is 
meant, we refer to the butcher, and accept his word as authoritative in this 
matter. Then again, in connection with the Ni^ddas, etc., the Veda lays 
down that the sacrificial gift should consist of a base coin ; what is really 
a base coin cannot be known to any one except low class people 
who deal in such coins ; hence as to whether or not a certain coin is base, 
this question has to be decided on the authority of the counterfeit coiner. 
Exactly in the same manner, when we meet with such words as ‘ pika,’ 

• nema ’ and the like, — and find that we cannot ascertain their mean- 
ing either from the Veda or from the usage^f the Irya, we have to accept 
the authority of tlie usage of the Mlechchhas, among whom the words are 
. used in ^ definite sense ; specially as this acceptance would not be in- 
compatible with our theory that the eternal significations of eternal 
words can be ascertained by means of the usage of men ; because the 
Mlechchhas are as much men as any one else. >. 

c.f . The^ the usage of Aryas is certainly more authoritative 

than the usage of the -BHechchhas ; but this can be so only in cases where 
'■ those, oasos however iT^hei^, .the .former’ are not 





pdEVA-MlMAMSA-SI^TBAS. IF ADEYAYA 


available, the latter is the only antliority avai 
justification for rejecting it. 

It is only cases wliere the meaning of a 
ascertained by usage, that we can be justified 
iug in its etymology. 


AdUharana VII.—No independent authoritativeness 
in the Kalpasutras. 


of ritual, fft It* chet, if it be 
ivamat because tliere is no proper 


Prayogasastram, scr 
urged. 5T is not so. 

regularity. 

11. If it be urged that — “ they constitute the scrip- 
ture of ritual (and hence are as self-sufficient in their 
authority as the Veda) ” — li- 
lt is not so ; because there is no proper regularity. — 12. 

COMMENTARY. 

Tins aclliilcarana bas been taken by Kum^rila as having a four-fold 
bearing: — (a) according to the first interpretation, the question is as to 
whether or not the TTalpastitras are self-sufficient in their authority, like 
the Veda. The ease of the Kalpasutras stands upon a level different froin 
that of the Smritis ; because the Kalpasuti’as contain only the mention 
in a systematic form, of what is actually found to be contained in 
the Vedas; whereas in the Smritis we find may tilings not actually 
nresent in the Veda, and whose mention in the Veda is only pre- 



ition to the above presentation of the adhikarana Knm4rUa 
fbilwtn^ t 5 ivo ihore adhilcapnaS fropi the shtras il and 12. 




authority cannot be as self-sufficient as that of the Veda ; nor are they 
eternal, like the Veda ; specially because in regard to the Kalpastatras 
thei’e is no regularity ; that is to say, thei’e are no irrevocable rules of 
accent and pronunciation as there are in regard to the Veda ; or because 
there is no self-evident eternality and independence of human agency, as 
there is in the case of the Veda. 

13. Also because of the absence of descriptive pass- 
ages. — 13. 

Another reason why the KalpasCitra cannot be regarded to be on the 
same level as the Veda, lies in the fact that in the Veda we meet with many 
such descriptive passages as are not met with in ordinary parlance, 
— for instance, sneh apparently absurd declarations as ‘ Prajilpati cut 
out his own fat ; ’ which shows that the Veda is not the product of the 
human mind ; in the Kalpasutras there are no such passages; which also 
proves that the two are not on the same footing. 

Hlwspfmri; ii i « n 

Sarvatra, in the case of all. Jr%*Tf5 Prayogat, because there are 
(contradictory) assertion.s, Sannidhana^astrat, by reason of close 

proximity, -er Cha, also. 

14. Also because in all (Kalpaslitras) there are asser- 
tions (contradictory to the Veda) [this contradiction being 
easily perceptible] by reason of the easy accessibility of the 
assertions.— 14. 

COMMBNTARY. 

Absolute authority has been denied in the case of human utterances 
, because men are often found to be making assertions contrary to the Veda; 

this same circumstance is met with in the case of the 
i Kalpaadtras also : they bristle with statements contradictory to the Veda — 

' this contradiction being all the more remarkable by the fact of the Vedic 

texts contradicted being easily acces.sible. For instance, the Kalpasfltra 
declares that the Paryagni ’ should be made of all the substances userl 
at the sa.crifice, while the Veda distinctly declares that it is to be made 


ni PADA, VI ADETKABANA, S4. t. S. 14. 


- ’.I 



PI)rVA-M1MAM8A-S()TBA8. II ADEYAYA 


The Purvapak^ is tlaat Vedic character and anthority cannot be 
denied to the Sinritis, which are nnivei'sally recognised as constituting 
the * Dhannailastra ’ or ' scripture of Dharma ’ ; specially when it has 
been proA^ed that they are not devoid of anthority on matters relating to 
dharma. The Smritis either are anthorilative or are not authoritative ; 
no middle course is possible ; and as it has been proved in the opening 
adhikaranas of this pf1da that they are authoritative, we cannot but accept 
them to be so, by themselves ; because that which is not intrinsically 
authoritative, cannot be authoritative at all. Similarly, with the iVfigas 
of the Veda, the Siksa and' the rest: as they are recognised as the Afiga 
or limb of the Veda, we cannot deny the independent authoritj^ of these.’’ 

The Siddhdnta is that, in the case of the Smritis, and of the Ahgas, 
as we have a distinct knowledge of their being the work of human 
authors, they cannot be regarded as independent scriptures of dharma ; 
specially because there is no' proper regularity in these (as explained 
above, under sutra 12). 


Adhikarmja VII{b), — No aiithority belongs to the Non-Vedic scriptures. 

With regard to the non-Vedic scriptures of the Baiuldha, &c.,, 
the Purvapaksa is that, “ inasmuch as these are as much scriptures of 
action as the Veda, their authoritative character cannot be denied. The 
eternal and authoritative character of these scriptures can be proved 
by the same arguments that have 


been put forward in support of the 

eternality of the Veda.” 

The Siddh^nta is that, inasmuch as these other scriptures are 
acknowledged to have been the work of liuman authors, they cannot be 
accepted to be possessed of infallible authority. That they are not 
eternal is proved by their having been compiled by human authors; 
and also by tlie absence in those so-called ' scriptures ’ of all regularity ; 
that is to say, they are found to be full of incorrect words and phrases ; 
being composed principally in the Vernacular ; which makes their eternal- 
ity— and consequent infallible authority, impossible. Consequently in 
matters relating to dharma, it is the eternal Veda alone, Avhich is iiidepeiv 
den|i of human agency, that can be accepted as possessed of infallible 



ni PADA, VIII ADHin.AM’NA, Sil. L S. 16. 


Aclhiharana VIII. — The HoldhMhik 


'urana : Authorita- 
tive character of popular customs. 

SCfTRA 1. 8. 15-28. 

Anumanavyavasthansr, inasmuch as infereuce or presumption 
is limited in its scope. TatsamyuktaSi, qualified by that, srirnnf 

Pram an), authority. 

15. “ Inasimicii as all presumption is limited in its 

scope, the authority (of customs, based upon the presumption 
of Vedic texts) must be qualified by that limitation.”— 15. 

COMMENTARY. 

The usages have been held to be authoritative on matters relating to 
bhaima. Now with regard to popular customs — sucli, for instance, as the 
celebrating of the Holi in a certain fashion— the question is : is the autho- 
rity of these restricted to limited areas ? or have they universal force ? 

The Purvapaksa view is that— “ The authority of customs and 
usages, as of all sources of knowledge bearing on Dhanna, — rests ulti- 
mately upon the presumption of their having their orgin in the Veda ; and, 
as a matter of fact, we find that every one of these customs have only local 
currency ; consequently the Vedic texts presumed in support of these can- 
not but be in a form that would be limited in its scope, having only local, 
and not universal force.” 

“ Customs should be held to have limited authority, from the ana- 
logy of such usages and duties as are restricted within the limits of 
certain castes or families ; that is to say, the Vedic texts in supoit of 
customs may be presumed to be in the same limited form in which we 
find such texts as the Eajasuya sacrifice is to be performed by a Nsattriya 
king the text in support of the customs of observing the Holaka will 
.thus be in the form— the Holaka should he observed by the people of 
the east.” 

; ^ n n 

^ Api va, but. Sarvadharmah, duty incumbent oh all men. tajra 

Syat, .should be. TannySyatvat, because of that character, 

belonging to injunctions. , 'A.. - " 

-16.; But tbe duty must be incumbent upon all men : 
as suclt is tto cbaracter of all 


m;|unptipns. 



PLjBVA.MtMiM8i-Sl)TRAS. H ADEYAYA 


COMMBNTABY. 

that the customs in question cannot 
; because if the custom has any 
matter of fact, u’e find that all 
■ecognised authority are accepted as incumbent on 
len the Vedic injunction lays down tlie Agnihotra 
" finance of this Agnihotra is recognised as in- 
Such is the case with all Vedic injunctions ; and as 
thority ultimately to Vcdic injunctions, they 
ing as the direct Vedic 
the obsei’vance of the Holi, for 
binding upon any particular class or 
to find any such restidctive words as 
■ i, whereby the 

would become restricted. 


The Siddhanta on this point is 
be regarded as limited in their authority 
autliority, it lays down a duty ; and, as a 
duties laid down by any r 
all men. For instance, wh 
as to be performed, the perfor 

cumbent on all men. h 

the customs also owe their am 
also must be recognised to be as uni-zersally bind 
injunction. That is to say, the customs, 
instance,— cannot be regarded as I 
individual, specially as it is not easy 
would be presumed to be contained by the Vedic injunctions, 
authority of the custom would become restricted. 

■ ^ fkXti tl 


Dar^anat, due to direct perception, Viniyogah, restric- 
tion. Syat, could be. 

17. Restriction could only be due to [justified by] 
direct perception. — 17. 

commentary. 

The Phrvapaksa has argued that the texts in support of local customs 
may be presumed to be in the same limited form as those laying down the 
duties of particular castes and sects. But this is not possible , because 
in the case of the direct Vedic injunctions of duties for limited castes and 
sects, we have to accept the limitation of the application because the res- 
triction is directly perceptible in the Vedic text itself ; similarly, in the case 
of usages with limited authority, we actually perceive that they are met 
within well-defined limits ; and so we are justified in holding that the 



f^ifwiwTir ii \ I \ \ II 

fir.,, because there can be no indicative of limita- 

=«r Cha, also. Niyasya, of the eternal authority of injunctions. 

^ 18. -Also because there caa be no iadicative of limita- 
tion in the eternal authority of injunctions [or of particular 
agents.]— 18. 

COMMENTARY. 

It might bo urged that— even though limitation of countrv or nro- 
vtnee may not be pissiblo, it may be possible with regard to the agents- 

oa iction of the agent is as impossible as that of the country ; or because 
1 IS not possible for the Vedic inj unction, tvhich is eternal, to contain words 
indicative of limitation of its autinrity ; conseciueutiy, the to.xts presumed 

in support of customs, cannot but be in a form that would make them 
binding on all men. luem 

II H II 

^!IT Akhya, name. ^ Hi, because, Des'asamyogat, due to 

connection with place. ^ J s , oue lo 

19. Specially because the name is due to connection 
with place. — 19. 

COMMENTARY. 

The opponent might urge that the persumed Vedic texts may coutain 
such restrictive words a.s the ‘ Easterner ’ and the like, -the text in support 

of the Holaka being in the form ‘the HoMka should be observed by the 
Easterners. 

^ The answer to this is that there are no men witli whom such a name 
as the Easterner is inseparably and eternally connected ; the name is due- 
, to the mere chance connection of a man with a definite place -the eastern 
country ; hence while a man is resident in that country he will be included 
, in the term ‘easterner;’ but when be would go to aiiotber country he 
would cease to be so included ; hence if the Vedic texts were to contain 
such a restriction, the number of persons upon whom it would be bind-, 
mg would be constantly variable, and this would make the text va^ue and 

indefinite,— a character foreign to the intrinsic authority of Vedic texts/ ^ ■ 

10 BOtJxmg; indicative of restriction to particular agents.^ 


m pad A, VIII ADHlKATlAllA, SA. L 3. 19. 




ifiiiiiiiii!? 



pdBVA-MtMAUSA-SdTRAii. H ADUYAYA 


i o£ the Hoi aka, we know as a matter ot 
ioted within any such provincial limits 
observed by men of several provinces, 


siNa, not. Syat, would be. De^antaresu, in other commies. 

^ Iti Chet, if this is urged, Syat, it would be. Yogakhya, 

literally significant. *riiwg Mathuravat, like the name “ Mathura.” 

20 . As it [the custom] would not he prevalent in 
other countries [the names of people cannot be taken as 
based upon their connection with places of habitation, 
etc,] — if this is urged — 20 . 

21. [Our reply is] The names would certainly be 
literally significant like the name “ Mathura. 21. 

COMMENTARY. 

In sutra 19, it has been urged that the texts presumed in support of 
local customs could not contain the words limiting the customs to any par- 
ticular people ; because any such mention by name of any people would be 
very vague and indefinite. The opponent retorts Very well ; we 
admit that names would be vague and indefinite ; that is Just the reason 
why all such names as the ‘ Easterner ’ and the like should be taken 
as referring to connection with — residence in — a place ; these names must 
be regarded as not referring to any circumstance at all, being purely proper- 
names, which do not depend for their application upon anything signified 
by the etymological constituents ; the text would limit the custom to the 
‘Easterners,’ — whoever these people may be, and whatever the name 
might' mean ; it is enough for our purposes to have the text restricting 
the custom to only a particular set of people.” 

The answer to this is that the literal signification of such names 
cannot be gainsaid. For instance, we cannot deny that the word 
‘Mathura’ is applied to certain people simply because they reside in 
Mathui-a ; similarly, the name ‘ Easterner ’ cannot be applied to any man 
except (1) if be be an inhabitant of the eastern provinces, (2) or if 
he be one born in that province, (3) or if he be coming from that province 
at nthat time ; in any case the application of the name cannot but be duo 




83 



3*^^ Tulyam, similar. 5 Tu, but. ^<i^Qr Kartridharmepa, the qualifica- 
jtbh or speicfication of the agent. ' ., 

.23. But that would be similar to the specification of 


iiilisilli 

msmmg 


rn pada, Yin AmmAUAVA, i. 3. ss. 

to some sort of connection with the place. And we have shown above 
(under Sh. 19) that the prevalence of the customs in question is not always 
in accordance with their names ; since we find many persons residing in 
the eastern provinces not observing the Holdka ; while, on the other 
hand, certain residents of other provinces — on the north, on the west, — ■ 
whose forefathei-s had migrated from the eastern provinces — keeping up 
the custom. Hence we conclude that, inasmuch as the presence of such 
names in tire Vedic texts would make them vague and indefinite, the pr-e- 
sumed text could not contain any such words as would restrict the autho- 
rity of those texts. 


^ SRflJIWgt” II SIR II 


fr Va, or. sT^rJjRRi 


Karmadharmab, the property of the action. 

Pravapavat, like the sloping. 

22. “ [Tbe specifying names] may qualify the action, 

like the sloping ” — 22, 

COMMENTARY. . 

Having found it impossible to presume Vedic texts with srrcli quali- 
fying words as would specify the agents, the opponent puts forward the 
theory that the names occurring in the text may be taken as qualifying 
and thereby limiting, not the agent,— the people performing the action,— 
but the action itself ; that is to say, the epithet ‘ Eastern ’ will refer to the 
custom, and irot to the people observing that custom ; the text being that 
the custom can bring about its transcendental result only when observed 
in the eastern province ; in this way when the custom is called an ‘ eastern 
custom by the text, it cannot be binding upon people who do not live 
in the eastern province ; because the custom cannot be ‘ eastern ’ and 
‘western-’ at the same time. The opponent adds that such specifica- 
tion of action is not very rare in the Veda ; for instance, certain sacrifices 
to the VisVedevas are qualified as ‘ prachlnapravana the sense being 
that the sacrifices can bring about their transcendental results only 
when performed on grounds sloping towards the east. 



p6UVA-M1mAM8A-S6TEAS. I ADEYAYA 


COMMENTARY. 

going sutra is that this specification of the action 
and indefinite as that of the agent (as shown 
, case also, as there is no well-defined limit as to 
yhat the ‘western’ country, any specification 
-whetlier of the action or of the agent— would 
finite. For instance, what is ‘ western ’ for the 
for the Afgans ; and so forth ; hence no such 
f Vedic texts. 

elude that the Vedic texts presumed in 
as the BolAka and the like, cannot be 
aces, &c., and as such all these must be 


by nicans oi tli6S6 terms 
always be vague and ind 
Barmans w'ill be ‘eastern 
vague specification can find place in any 

For these reasons we cone - 

support of such local costoins 
qualified by any specification of pi 
taken as having universal authority 

Sutras 15 and 16 have been taken by Kutharila as also embodying an 
adhikarana dealing with the authority of such partially accepted Dharma- 
gPmtras as the sutras of Gautama, Sirfikha, Likhita and the rest. There 
arises a doubt as to the exact nature of the authority of these works ; 
because, in actual practice, the Dharmastitras of Gautama and the Qfihya- 
sfitras of Gobhila are accepted as autho'ritative only by the Samavedis ; 
—the Dhaimasutra of Vai^istha only by the Eigvedis ; theSinritisof fiafikha 
and Likhita by the Viyasaneyi-Suklayajurvedis, and so forth. The Purva- 
paki:a is that these works cannot be put on the same category as the univer- 
CTlly recognised Smyitis— that of Manu, for instance. They are acknow- 
ledged by only limited people ; hence they cannot have that same universal 
authority that belongs to the Veda or the Manusiniiti.”-(Sfi. 1. 3. 15.) 

The Siddhanta is that, on account of the universal character of the 
injunctions contained in the Smritis in question, these must be accepted as 
applying to all persons capable of performing the act laid^ down by them. 
That is to say, as the Smriti texts themselves do not contain any words that 
w'Guld limit their application, the Vedic texts that we might presume in 
support of them could not contain any such words ; hence there can be no- 
thing to justify our restricting the autliority of the Smriti texts in question. 

Adhikarana IX— V ydkdranddhikarana. 

[Necessity of Using the Coebeot Forms of Words.] 
sCTRAS 1. 3. 24-80. 

Prayogotpattya^astratvSt, because there is no scrip- 
t^rabinjunction as to their use. ' ^abdesu, in regard to the use of words, 
f Ifi, no. Vyavastha, restriction. SyAt, there could he. ' 



COMMENTAEY. 

The shtras dealing with Grammar have also been classed under 
‘ Smritis ; ’ and the next six Sutras proceed to consider the authoritative 
character of those grammatical Smidtis. These would be authoritative and 
uselul, only if the comprehension of the meanings of words and sentences 
were restricted to Sanskrit words alone ; as it is these alone that are dealt 
with by the Smritis in question. Hence the discussion begins with a consi- 
deration of this question. 

For the denoting of one and the same thing, we find people making 
use of pure Sanskrit words, as well as their vernacular corruptions ; for 
instance, the cow is spoken as ‘gauh ’ as well as ‘ gaya.’ Now the ques- 
tion arises— Ts it the Sanskrit word alone that directly denotes the cow 
— the vernacular form indicating it only indirectly, through its similarity 
to the Satiakrit word ? Or, are all words, Sanskrit as well as vernacular, 
equally directly denotative of the cow? 

The Purvapaksa view is as follows : — 

'■ As a matter of fact we find that in ordinary parlance, the word 
‘ gA,jui ’ is as capable of denoting the cow as the word ‘gauh’; and this 
fact can be taken to prove the eternal character of the word ‘ gaya ’ and 
its denotative power ; that is to say, we can reason thus —Because the word 
‘gaya’ denotes the cow to-day, it must liave denoted it hundred years ago 
and so on and on, the relation between the word ‘ gaya ’ and the cow must 
be accepted to be as eternal as that between the cow and the word ‘ gauh.’ 
Hence the conclusion is that we may use any words we like, so long as 
all of them are expressive of what we intend to speak of. If we had any 
Vedic injunction to the effect that ‘ one should use only such words as are 
correct according to tlie rules of grammar, ’ we would not be justified in 
making use of any other words; but as a matter of fact, there is no 
.such Vedic injunction ; consequently there can be no ground for the 
restricting our usage to only such words as are correct by the rules 
of grammar ; nor is there any Vedic authority for any such distinctioin 
as that it is only the Sanskrit word that is correct, and all others in- 
correct. In fact, it is impossible for any Vedic injunction to lay down any 
•such restriction upon usage; because the sense of the Vedic injunction is 
oxpfesised by ieoitipQ|rent wqrdp ; then if the same ipjuitction laid down 


24. “As there is no injunction as to their use, 
there conld he no restrictions with regard to the words 
hsed:’’--24;v:' ' ■ ■ •, \ 


Til PADA, IX ADHIKARANA, Sit. 1. 3. 24. 


I 

i 


iiiliiiiigf': 



p^bva-mImAusA-sj^tbas. 1 adbyaya 


restrictions as to the ttse ol: words, there would be an intordepenaence 
between the words and the injunction, “-the use of the words depending 
upon the injunction, which, in its case depends upon the words for 
the expression of its meaning ; consequent!}?' the comprehension of all 
Vedic injunctions depending upon the ordinarily accepted significa- 
tion of words, no words in ordinary usage could ever be differentiated by 
them as coiTect or incorrect. Further, a word can be regarded as inconect 
only when it is not expressive, —as then alone would it fail in its purpose, 
which is the sole criterion of incorrect nevss ; and hence so long as a word 
is found to be duly expressive of its meaning, there can be no reason for 
its being regarded as incorrect. 

** It is true that we have the grammatical Smritis indicating certain 
words as correct, and discarding others as incorrect ; and as Smritis they 
would lead us to presume similar Vedic texts also ; but such a Vedic in- 
•junction could be possible only if such use of correct words lad to tran- 
scendental results other than the i^erceptiblo result of expressing the mean- 
ing (which is found in the case of all words, Sanskrit as well as vernacu- 
lar) ; but we have no grounds for believing in any such transcendental 
result, so long as all that is necessary is accomplished by facts of ordinary 
experience ; that is to say, we are justified in assuming a transcendental 
element only when there is some incongruity without such assumption ; 
wliile in the case in question we do not find any incongruity in the meaning 
being expressed by the vernacular word. 

** Thus then, the grammatical Smritis relating to the use of words 
cannot have any basis in Vedic injunctions ; and as such they cannot 
serve the purpose of laying down rules regarding the accomplishment of 
Dharma. The case of the grammatical Smritis stands upon an entirely 
different footing from the other Smritis that have been proved to be autho- 
ritative ; because these latter are found to deal with subjects cognate to those 
dealt with in the Veda, while the grammatical Smritis deal with the 
use of certain words and phrases, which is a matter upon which, from 
the Very nature of the thing, the Veda cannot have anything to say. 
There being thus no Vedic corroboration possible in the case of the gram- 
matical Smritis these cannot be regarded as having any authority on matters 
relating to Dharma. Nor is there any use in studying the grammatical 
Smritis. 

The conclusion therefore is that all words — whether Sanskrit or 
Vernacular — are equally correct, so long as they denote their meaning ; 
affl' that, on that account, the science of grammar is absolutely valueless,” 



(synonymous) word. — 26. 

COMMENTARY. 

■ -The sole reason for assuming the significant potency of a word con- 
fists, in the necessity that there is of speaking of a thing by some name. 
Phat is to say, we accept the fact of the word ‘ gauh ’ being expressive 
)£. the cow, simply because in the absence of some such word we could not' 


III pADA, IX ADMiKABANA, Sil 1. 3. 26. 




U u 


^ , [Var lees. gJia] 

itr^ Sabde, in the word. Prayatnanispatteh, because it is 

accomplished by effort. ApaiAdhasya, of discrepanc}'. v i{ f ?irj w Bhagi- 

tvam, possibility. 

25. Because its utterance is due to (human) effort, 
there is a possibility of discrepancies in the word.— 25. 

COMMENTARY. 

Before putting forward the Siddluinta, the Sutra tries to weaken the 
position of the Purvapaksa. The corrupt vernacular words have been 
declared, in the Purvapaksa, to be eternal, on the sole ground of their 
being used in ordinary parlance from time immemorial, and being expres- 
sive of definite meanings. But, as a matter of fact, such long-established 
usage could be accepted only if we were sure that the word that the man had 
pronounced before me was exactly what he had heard from others. But 
in the case of all such words, as the utterance of the word is due to the 
effort of ordinary man, there is always a likelihood of his making mistakes, 
as no human effort is infallible ; it'may be that the form of the word as 
pronounced by the man before me is different from that of the same word 
as learnt from his father ; lienee in the^case of all vernacular words, there 
can be no certainty with regard to its eternal usage in that particular 
form. Thus the continuity of the usage being doubtful, it cannot warrant 
any conclusion as to the eternality of the word. 

Some people read the second word of the sfitra as ‘ aprayatna- 
nispatteh’ ; and the sense in that case would be — ‘ because the utterance 
of words is often brought about without proper effort on the part of the 
speaker, there is always a possibility of his making mistakes in the pro- 
nunciation.’ 

w w 

Anyayafi, not reasonable. Cha, and. Aneka^ah- 

datvam, to have more than one word. 

26. And it is not reasonable to have more than one 







' * 
t i. 




pdBVA-MlMAMSA-SdTRAS. t ADH YAYa. 



speak of the cow. Therefore, as this fact of the cow being spoken of would 
be accomplished by a single word, there would be no reason - 

more than one word as expressive of the same thing, t ms oiex.i ^ t, 

one tin Jig, it is not reasonable to assume more than one word. n le Cc . 
of Sanskrit words, however, when we find more than one word to be actua y 
used in the Veda as expressive of the same thing, we are forced to accept ai 
these words as expressive of it ; as otherwise the mfabible ^eda would 
become open to the charge of meaninglessness. There is no such reason iii 
the case of the vernacular words ; in fact, when the thing— the cow for 
instance,— has already got its expressive word ‘ gauh,’ which is found in 
the Veda, we have no further ground for accepting any vernacular word 
as expressing the same thing. The conclusion, therefore, is that even when 
one and the same thing is found to be expressed by more than one word, 
it is only one of these words that can be accepted as having an eternal 
denotative relation to that thing ; the using of all the other words must 
be taken as being due to some incapacity in the speaker to get at the 
true word ; and the fact of these other words being expressive of that thing 
must be attributed to some sort of similarity that they bear to the tiue 

word. 




^ Tatra, on this point. Tattvam, that (denotative potency). WWW- 

Abhiyogavi^esat, due to the peculiarity of close application. 

Syat, could be (ascertained). 


27. - On this point, that a word is really denotative 
could he ascertained by the application of certain general 
principles. — 27. 

COMMENTARY. 

When we have a number of words denoting the same thing, what 
would be the criterion as to which of these is endowed with real denota 
tive potency, and which expresses the thing only indirectly ? That is to 
say, what is there to show that it is the Sanskrit word that is leally deno- 
tative of the thing, and the vernacular words are, at best, only indicative 
of its indirectly ? 

The only practical criterion available lies in certain general princi- 
ples, whei’eby — by the close application, of which we could find out which 
' of the woi’ds fulfil the conditions indicated by those principles; this will, 
lead us to accept only these words as really denotative, and to - reject 






/ 


ni PAbA, IX ADBlKAtiA'XA, 1. 


those that do not fulfil those conditions." All such principles we find 
collected for us in the Sinritis of grammar ; wherein we have all that is 
necessary for ascertaining which form of a word is the correct one— t.c.! 
which is that form which is naturally and eternally denotative of the 
thing. And as it is only the Sanshilt fonn of the word that will satisfy 
the grammatical requirements, the inevitable conclusion is that it is the 
Sanskrit word, and not its vernacular counterparts, that is endowed with 
real denotative potency. 

Herein lies the usefulness and authoritativeness of the grammatical 
Smritis ; as without the help of tliese we could never discriminate between 
the correct word and its corruptions. 

I) II 

Tadasaktih, an incapability. =Br Cha, then again. 
Tadanuriipatvat, because of its similarity to it. 

.28. Then again [every case of the uttering of vernacu- 
lar words is due to] an incapability [to pronounce the correct 
word]; [and the meaning is expressed by the vernacular’ 
word] because of its resemblance to the correct word. 28. 

COMMENTARY. 

In all cases where vernacular words are used to express a certain 
meaning, the use of these instead of the correct Sanskrit word, must be 
. attributed to tlie fact tliat the man is unable to pronounce the latter, and 
therefore pronounces it in another form ; and lienee the vernacular usa»e 
must be regarded as by its very nature based upon the incapacity of the 
speaker ; and as such it cannot be accepted to be as autboritative and 
trustwortby •as the usage of Sanskrit words. 

Even though it is so yet the word, in the corrupt form, is found to 
express the intended meaning; and the reason for this lies in the fact 
that it resembles tlie correct word in sound ; that is to say, the word 
‘ gaya ’ denotes the cow, because it resembles the word ‘ gaoh ; ’ and 
hence when it is uttered, it recalls,' by similarity, the word ‘gaiihi’ 

^ . which, in its turn, brings to mind the cow ; so in this case also itis the 
correct word that is really denotative of the thing, cow. 

1*^:; Ekade^atvat, because it is a part. Cha, -and. ^ 

1,1: ' / ^ ^ case where the correct endings are ahse^t. ' ¥?pi 

bel : . ,, j ■" 

'"V'ia \ ■''[ ■■ ' 


' ‘ I' /.I ' • 

i4]i / ' ‘ * fo'V'"" 4’/' c"! , 


1 

[mi,. 





, 1 1 



pdEVA-MtMAMBA-SJiTUAB. I ADEYAYA 


In the case of those corrupt words in wJiicn me 
ings are absent, the denoting of the meaning would 
he fact of such a word being a part of the correct 


COMMENTARY. 

in which the vernacnlai' word differs materially from 
that the declensional and inflexional endings aie totally 
For instance, when in vernacular we use the basic 
we do not use the affix, &c. ; as when we 
use the word ‘manusya’ for man; 
of the word would be ‘manusyah.’ In 
‘Manusya’ is found to be expressive, 
correct word ‘ Manusyah ’ ; and thereby 
is what really expresses 


Another point 
the Sanskrit word is 
absent in the former, 
noun in its Sanskrit form, 
speak of the man going, we 
while the real Sanskrit form 
such case the vernacular form 
because it forms a part of the 
brings to our mind this complete word, wl 
the meaning. 

As against the usefulness of the Grai 
raised “ As all the correct words would 
ledge of the Veda would suffice to give us 
correct and which is incorrect ; and thus th 
grammatical rules, etc., for the ascertaining 

The answer to this is that the Veda d 
correct words ; it is true that the words conta 
but it is not true that all correct words are 
sequeiitly it becomes necessary to have cer 
eori'ectness or incoirectness of a word cu 
rules must be accepted to be eternal, (1) because 



According to Prabhakara, it is necessary to enquire into the trust- 
worthy character of Grammar, not because it is a Smriti, but chiefly because 
if the science of grammar were not trustworthy, the whole fabric of 
Vedic dharma would be jeopardised ; that is to say, that a certain word 
denotes a certain thing and not any other is ascertained finally by the 
1 ules of grammar alone / consequently, if these were untrustworthy, there 
would be no certainty in regard to the meanings of words ; and in that case 
the meaning of all Vedic tests would be doubtful and vague ; and this would 
shake the authority and trustworthy character of the entire Veda. The 
presentation of the purvapaksa and the siddhanta by Prabhakara does not 
differ from that by Kumarila. 

Adhikarana X(a). — The words used and the things 
denoted hy them in the Veda are the same 
as those in ordinary 'parlance. 

SCfTR^l. 3. 30. 

Prayogachodanabhav^t, because, otherwise, t^ere would 
be no injunction of actions. Arthaikatvam, sameness of denotation. 

Avibhagat, on account of non-differentiation, 

30. On account of non-differentiation [between tbe word 
as used in the Veda and as used in ordinary parlance] tbe two 
must be regarded as the same ; specially because, if it were 
not so, no injunction of action would be possible. — 30. 

COMMENTARY. ' './''vV' 

It having been proved that it is necessary to use the correct forms 
of words, it becomes necessary to consider the character of the denotation 
of words ; and, as it is the Veda with which we are immediately concerned, 
the first point that we have to consider is whether the word ‘gau^ * used 


down of certain restrictions which help in the fulfilment of dharma. 
For instance, the restrictions that Grammar lays down are — (1) that one 
should use only the correct forms of words, the knowledge and use of such 
words leading the speaker to heaven and helping him to accomplish 
the Vedic sacrifices ; and (2) that ‘such and such words are correct’ — and 
without the rules of grammar it would not be possible to distinguish correct 
from incorrect words. Thus then the rules of grammar, being that part 
of the Vedic dharma which consists of the use of the duly discriminated 
correct forms of words, serve the purpose of pointing out such correct 
word-forms as are really expressive. 


HI PAD A, X ADHIKARANA, SA 2. 3. SO. 







nlTiVA-MlMAMSA-8t)TBAS. I ADHYAYA 


in tlie Veda is the same as that word nsed in 
also if what the word denotes in the Veda is e? 
ordinar 3 r parlance. 

On this point the Purva; 

points of difference between 
1 ) in the Veda w 


is that — ‘‘ as a matter of fact we find 
the Vedic and the ordi- 
•e have cei'tain restrictions as to 
words in ordinary parlance ; (2) the 
1 in tlie Vechi are not the same as those 
the form ‘ jafighanat ’ which stands for 
words can be studied by the three higher castes 
with regard to ordinary words. 
:aiih ’ as used in the Veda, must be regarded 
•dinaTy parlance. ” 

We must admit the 
and also their denotations to be the same 
ill the Veda is the same as, — and 
as met with in ordinary 
le Vedic woi*ds would be something 
and so would be absolutely meaning- 
would fail in tlieir purpose, which 
when it \voiild not be comprelmnded, 


that there are many 
nary word ; for instance 
accentuation, which do not apply to 
conjugational forms met witl 
found in ordinary language ; 

*ahanat ; ’ (3) the Vedic 
onlv, while thei‘e is no such restriction 
For tliese reasons, the word ' gi 
as different from that same word as met with in or 

The Siddhanta view is put forth in the sutra 
two words to be the same, 

That is to say, the word * gauh ' as found 
denotes the same thing as--~t]ie word * gauh 
parlance because if this were not so, tl 
entirely new to the ordinary person 
less to him ; thus the injunctions 
consists in prompting men to action ; 
liow could it do the prompting? 

Another reason for accepting this conclusion lies in the fact that 
as a matter of fact, we do not find any difference between the two sets of 
words. That is to say, (J) we do not perceive any difference in form be- 
tween the word ' gauh ’ as found in the Veda and the same as met with in 
ordinary parlance; (2; we do not perceive any difference in their denota- 
tion : in both cases the word denotes tlie cow. 


iSutra 30 has been explained above as embodying an adbikarana by 
itself. By another interpretation, it is taken by the Bhasya as the first 
of a set of sutras (30-35) propounding the l^urvapaksa of another adlii- 
karana. This adbikarana is as follows - 

Adhikarana XQ)} [W ords denote communities^ 

not individuals] . ' 

StfTRA. 1. 3. 30-85. 


^ PrayogachodanAbhavat, because there would be no injunction 

^|actions words denoted communities.) Arthaikatvam, the denotation 




m PiDi, rz ABBIKkUK^l, S>1 1. 8. 81 



PI)BVA^M1mAMSA-SI)TBA8. I ADEYAYA 


COMMENTARY. 

If the word ‘cow ' denoted the community cow, we could 
any words expressive of the properties of cows ; because all p 
pertain to individuals, how could we have any such expression as 1 
cow? ? The community cow is certainly not white. Nor again < 
have any numerals in connection with nouns : how could we s 
iioenty eows^ when the cornmuriity cow is one only ? There are no p 
tliat could be spoken of as belonging to the entire community, 
reason also, it is necessary to admit that words denote individuals 


The Vartika does not accept this interpretation given in the Bhasya 
of sutra31 ; on the ground that it is too far-fetched, the word ‘ dravya' 
being taken in the sense of ‘ dravya-fciya/ — and cannot be got at directly 
from the words of the sutra. According to the Vartika, the sutra should 
be translated and explained in the following manner : — 

‘‘ Also because [if words denoted communities], there 
would be no denotation, by words, of .any individual sub- 
stances; — 

and the inevitable result of this would be that there would be a vast 
divergence between the noun and its adjective ; that is to say, if the word 
‘ cow ’ denoted the community cow, it could never denote any individual 
substance, in the shape of a particular cow ; and as all properties belong 
to individuals only — and never to any entire class — no adjectives, which 
denote properties, could ever be co-ordinated with, or applied to, the 
word ‘ cow ” 

I) 

32. “ Also because we fiad the word ‘ another ’ used 

[in connection with nouns].” — 32. 

COMMENTARY. 

** Another reason is put forward against the theory that it is the 
community that is denoted by words. In the Veda we meet with such 
assertions as ‘ if one animal should run " away, another animal should be 
got;* now, if the word ‘ animal ’ denoted the community ‘animal,’ there 
would be only one animal, all animals being included in that community ; 
end hence no such expression would be possible as ‘ another animal 
this would involve a contradiction in terms.” 

. This shtra is omitted by the Vtotika- ^ .V 


; 



II II 


Kriy^rthatv^t, be- 


?IT^: Akritih, the community, g Tu, but. 
cause it serves t!ie purpose of actions. 

33. It is the community that is denoted by words ; 
because it is the community that serves the purpose of ac- 
tions. — 33. 

COMMBNTABY. 

In vietT of sucli Vedic injunctions as ‘ Syenacliitam cLinvita ’ — ‘the 
kite-altar should be built’ — we must take the word to be denotative 
of the community that includes a number of specific individuals; 
that is to say, in the injunction quoted, it could not be meant that the 
altar should be built in the form of any particular individual kite ; 
if it meant that, then no altar could be built by people who had not seen 
that particular kite ; the injunction must mean that the altar to be 
elected should be of that shape which forms the common feature of all 
individual kites that is, the word ‘kite’ must signify that commona- 
lity or community in wliich all kites are included. Similarly in ordinary 
parlance, when a man is told to ‘bring a cow,’ he does not bring 
any particular cow ; he brings m any animal that is found to po.ssess 
those characters that are common to all cows. Further, if distinct indi- 
viduals were denoted by the word,— the denotation of the word would 
become as diverse and multifarious as there are individuals ; each 
individual is bound to have some feature or features that are not present 
in any other individual ; if it were not so, it would not be an individual. 
Consequently the denotation of a ivord if pertaining to individuals, would 
be as infinite in number as there are individuals ; that is, the denotation 
of the word ‘cow’ would not consist of the one community includin<r 
all cows, but of the infinite number of individual cows of the past, the 
present and the future. Then again, as each individual cow would be 

possessed of many qualities distinct from those possessed by tbe others 

the connotation of the word also would be diverse. All this would create 
a great deal of confusion. If, on tbe other hand, no individual cow is 

denoted by the word, but it signifies tbe entire communitv, then when- 

ever a person would be asked to ‘ bring a cow,’ though he would compre- 
hend the word as signifying the entire community of ‘ cows,’ yet what 
he would bring would not be this community,- there would be no . such ' 
absurdity,— he would naturally bring that- individual of the ‘ community 
whieh would be available to him. The pi-oprietynf bringing the -indivi- 
and not the entire comnaunity, being indicated, by the proximity 


III PiDA, ^ AmuKAUAtlA, Bit 1. S. 33. 





Pl)liVA-M!MAMSl-8dTIiA8. t ADBYAfA 


of the word ‘bring’ wliicli could never be taken as app y 

commtinity. . . 

Tliis shows that it is the community alone to which all m 

both Vedic- and profane-of actions can apply. Specia y 
individual objects being ephemeral, if the words— specia y o 
were to denote individuals, the relationship of the wok to i s 
could never be regarded as eternal- ; thus the entire fabric . 
would fall to the ground. 

The practical purpose served by this adhiliarana lies^ ni 
those cases where we have a conflict betiveen a rule an its 
It is only when words denote communities that any rule can . 

■al ; and if no rule can be regarded as general— a i 
der the view that all words denote spc' 
ould be no justification for rejecting 


as geuer 

rendered necessary un 
duals only— then, there wi 

of a special rule. . . . . 

(The Vartika gives here a full discussion of the various theories in 

regard to the denotation of words). 

^ U » 

Tj Na, no. Kriya, action, 

is urged. Arthanlare, perrtainin 

iujunction. ?r Na, no. fsiiP Dravy' ' 
if this is urged 1 * 

indicate through these the individi 
gasya, of action. AvibhSg 

34. If it be urged that — [if 
ties]— (a) “there could be no 
tions] ” — ‘Und also that, “(b) ther 
of ‘ another thing ’ ; and (c) there would he 
substances (and their properties) ”—34. 

■ 35. [The reply is] — because words denote cpmmunh 

ties [and through these indicate indirectly also the individuals 
forming the communities,] there would be no dissociation [of 


^!!n^Syat, would be. Iti diet, it tins 

■ = Tg to another thing, Vidhanam, 

„.yam, substances (properties). bi chet, 

thatvat, because words denote communitie.s (and 
•ming t!ie communities.) I’rayo- 

dissociatioii or disjunction. 

words denoted communi- 
action [according to injunc- 
■e could be no injunction 
signification of 







m PAdA, X ADHlXAEAnA, S,l. 1. 3. 35. 97 


COMMENTARY. 

The objectiotis that have been urged in sutras 30,31, and. 32, against 
the view that words denote coinnauuities, are recapitulated in Sutra 34 
and answered in Sutra 35. The objections are three : — 


(a) There would be no injunction of actions if words denoted 
communities ; as all actions, in practice, pertain to individual things.” — 
(Shtra 30). 

(h) “ We find Vedic injunctions laying down the use of another 
thing, if one thing is spoilt, — if the word denoted the community as a 
whole, there could be no ‘ one ’ or ‘ another.’ ” (Sutra 32). 

(c; “ No signification of substances with properties would be possi- 
ble.” — (Shtra 31). 

The answer given in Sutra 35 is as follows : — 

(o) Though it is true that what is db-ectly denoted by the word is 
the community, yet the relation between thecommunity and its constituent 
individuals is so close and inseparable that one will always imply the 
other; hence in the case of all injunctions, though the words would 
actually directly denote the community, they would indirectly indicate 
their invariable correlatives, the individuals also ; and the reason for this 
indirect indication, and our acceptance of it in preference to the direct 
denotation— would lie in the very fact that the opponent urges: it is 
only with reference to individual things that -actions can be performed ; 
hence it becomes necessary to accept the words as indicating the indivi- 
duals. As this would explain all that is necessary in regard to injunc- 
tion and actions, we find no justification for denying tlie primary position 
that in its ultimate denotation, the word denotes the community, — and 
accepting the other view that words denote individuals, in face of the 
many inseparable objections urged above. 

(6) Even though there can be no ‘ one ’ and ‘another’ in regard 
to the community, the-se would be quite compatible with the individuals; 
and as we admit these latter to be indirectly indicated by the words, the 
objection loses all its force. 

(c) Similarly, for the adjectives denoting properties : even though 
these may not apply to the community, they could pertain to the indivi- 
duals, .'"i 


• Thus we conclude even though words must be regarded as denoting 
communities — in view of reasons shown above,— they ' would also indi- ’ 






i||p| 


pdBVA^MtMAM8A-8&rMAS. / ADBVAYA 


Fourth Pada. 

TREATING OF THE NAMES OF SACRIFICES. 
Adhikarana I— Words like ‘ Udbhid ’ are names of sacrifices. 

StiTKA 1. 4. 1-2. 

Uktam, has been explained. Samannayaidamarthyam, 

the part of the Veda pertaining to actions, Tasmat, therefore. 

Sarvam, the whole of it. Tadartham, for that purpose. Syat, 

should be. 

1. “It has been explained that the Veda pertains to 
[helps in the performance of] actions ; therefore the whole 
of it should be taken as serving that purpose.”---!. . 

COMMENTARY. 

In the Veda we meet with many such words as ‘ Udbhid,’ ‘ Chitra, ' 
-Aguihotra’ and so on— which do not appear to be either injunctions, or 
}|f|lrMSdas or mantras. With regard to these, there arises a doubt as to 





IV PADA, / ADHIKAMAIIA, Sd. 1. 4. 2. 


whether these words lay down certain accessory details in connection with 
sacrifices, or they are only the names of particular sacrifices. 

On this question, the Purvapaksa as embodied in sutra 1, is as 
follows The conclusion arrived at in the foregoing sections of the 
sutra is tliat the Veda always lays down something that is directly or 
indirectly conducive to the accomplishment of actions ; for instance, the 
injunctions lay down actions not known otherwise ; the arthavadas praise 
certain things in connection with actions laid down by the injunctions, and 
thereby serve to prompt men to perform those actions ; the mantras 
indicate certain details— principally the deity— connected with the sacri- 
ficial action ; thus it follows that the entire Veda should be regarded as 
laying down things connected with some sort of sacrificial performance, 
hrom all this we conclude that the words under discussion, as forming 
part of the Veda, are expressive of things connected with sacrifical perfor- 
mances ; such being the case, we cannot take them as arthavadas, because 
they are not found to be subservient to any injunctions ; nor are they found 
to have the character of mantras; consequently, they must be taken as 
enjoining certain materials to be offered at sacrifices ; that is to say, the 
word ‘ udbliid ’ means etymologically, that which cuts, Le., the axe, or 
any such cutting instrument ; the meaning of the sentence thus will be that 
one should perform the sacrifice in which a cutting instrument is to be 
offered ; and similarly, in the case of all such words, we could find some 
such etymological meaning, by which it xvould denote some sort of a 
material substance that could be offered at sacrifices/^ 

^ ii , u 

?rf^^Api Va, but. Namadheyam, a name. iFqra: Syat, must be. 

^ Yat, which. Utpattau, when met with for the first time. 

ApOrvam, appears to be new, i.e., is not recognised as denoting anything already 
known. Avidhayakatvat, because it cannot be injunctive. 

2. But that which, at the very outset, is not recog- 
nised as denoting anything already known, must be a 
name ; because it cannot be injunctive [of any thing].— 2. 

COMMENTARY. 

When we come across such a word as ‘udbhid,’ for instance, in the 
sentence ‘udbhida yajeta,’ we do not at first recognise it as denoting , 
anything that is known to ns ; it is only when we come to look into the 
etymology of the word that we find that it may denote a catting instru- 

as the word is not readily recognised as having 

' ‘ I,' I'f*' •' > . 

’ '''' ’■•V''.’ 



?t)mA-MlMAM8A-86TRAS. I ADHYAYA 


sudi meaning, it cannot be taken as laying do.vn a material the s.gnmca- 
tion whereof by the word is got at with great difficulty ; and it is much 
more reasonable to take it as a name. Or (according to another interpre- 
tation of the sutra proposed by KumArila) the word must be taken as the 
name of that sacrifice which is found to be mentioned in the same sentence 
as accomplishing a transcendental result ;-in the case of ‘ udhhid the 
sacrifice whose performance is declared to accomplish the transcendental 
result which would bring cattle. 

The reason why the word should be regarded as a name is— because 
it cannot be injunctive of anything ; that is to say, it is not capable of en- 
joining a material. Because if, in the sentence in question, ‘ udbhida yajeta 
pa^Liklmah,’ the word ‘ udhhid ’ were to lay down a material to be offered, 
it would lay this down,— either with reference to the result, the meaning 
being that ‘one should seek to acquire cattle by means of the cutting instru- 

— or with regard to the sacrifice, the meaning being that one should 
accomplish the sacrifice by means of the cutting instriunent,’~or with 
reference to both, the sense being that ‘ one shonld^ acquiie cattle by 
means of the offering of the cutting instrument in sacrifice.’ Now, by the 
first of these, it would appear as if thejcattle were to be acquired directly 
by means of the instrument, without the making of any offering at all 
by the second, the mention of the result would have no connection with 
the sentence under the third, the word ‘ udbhida ’ in the instrumental, 
would have to be taken as equalifying the word ‘yAgena,’ implied m the 

verb ‘yajeta;’ and thus ‘udbhida’ will have to be taken as standing for 
‘ ndbhidvatn,’ ‘that which has the udhhid for ils material,’ thus involv- 
ing the undesirable contingency of making a word renounce its direct 
meaning and taking an indirect one,— a contingency permitted only in cases 
wbeie no other interpretation is available ; while, in the present case, the 
word can be taken as the name of a sacrifice, which obviates the necessity 
of having recourse to indirect or forced interpretation. 

Thus then, inasmuch as the word cannot enjoin a material, it 
must be taken as the name of a sacrifice. 



According to Prabliakara who accepts the interpretation as given by 
the Bhdsya, the purvapakba view is tliat the word ' iidbhid ’ lays down the 
cutting instrument as a material to be offered at some unknown sacrifice ; 
while according to the Purvapaksa as put forth by Kumarila, it is in con- 
nection with the well known Jyotistoma sacrifice that the word lays down 
the material. 


Adhikarana II . — ‘ Ohitrd/ &e., are names of Sacrifices. 

: SPTRA 1. 4. 3. ; 

ii ? 1 8 i ^ u 

‘ that (word) in 'which. Gm^opadeia^^ mention of 


IV PADA^ it adhikarana, Sil J. 4. 5, 


perfectly compatible witli the Siddhanta standpoint, in view of which it 
could be taken as embodying the Purvapaksa. By Kumarila’s interpreta- 
tion the first sutra represents an entirely distinct adhikarana, wdiich may 
be expanded as follows : — 

In regard to such words as ‘ udbhid ’ as occurring in the Veda, there 
arises a question— as these are neither injunctions, nor artliavadas, nor 
maiitras, can they be regarded as having any bearing upon Dharma ? The 
Purvapaksa view is that “ inasmuch as these words have no connec- 
tion with the performance of actions, they can have no bearing upon 
dharma.’’ The Siddhanta is — It has already been explained that the Veda 
hears directly upon the performance of actions ; hence the whole of it (includ- 
ing the words under discussion) must he accepted as serving that purpose. 
(Sfitra 1.) 

It having been established tl)at as forming part of the Veda, the 
words in question mast be taken as bearing upon dliarma, the next 
question that naturally arises is — What bearing have they ? In what way 
do they help our knowledge of dharma? And it is on this question 
that we liave the next adhikarana, represented by sutra 2. The Purva- 
paksa has to be supplied from without, — its sense being that the words in 
question must be taken as laying down materials for the sacrifices ; because 
such meaning of the word as could be got at through its etymology is 
apt to be accepted and recognised by all men ; and also because being 
thus taken, the word would serve the distinctly useful purpose of pointing 
out tlie material to heoffei-ed, — a point on whicli the rest of the sentence 
affords no information.” 

The Siddhanta is embodied in sutra 2, as explained in accoradnee 
with the Bhasya. 






Pl^EVA-MlMAMSA-SUTBAS. I ABHYAYA 


accessories. Pradh4natah, witli the principal factor. Abhi- 

sambandliab, is related. 

3. That word which [if taken as an injunction] 
would mention more than one accessory must be taken as 
related to the principal factor [i.e., the action mentioned in 
the sentence]. — 3. 

COMMENTARY. 

The foregoing adhikaraua dealt with such words as liad no meaning of 
their own, and whose meaning liad to be deduced from their etymology- 
The present adhikarana deals with those words which have a well-recognised 
meaning of their own ; for instance, the word ‘cliitra’ as occurring in the 
sentence ‘ chitraya yayeta pasiuk^iuah ; ’ with regard to this word, there 
arises the question — -is the word ‘ chitra ’ here to be taken as laying down 
tiie female animal of variegated colour (which is what the word actually 
signifies) ? Or is it to be regarded as the name of the sacrifice mentioned 
by the word ‘ yajeta ’ ? 

The Purvapaksa view is that — “ the word must be taken in its 
ordinary sense, the meaning of the sentence being—' one should perform 
a sacrifice with an animal which is female, and of variegated colour ; that is 
to say ‘ the animal sacrificed for the Agnh.omlya offering, should be a female 
and of variegated colour,’ — there being no justification for abandoning the 
natural meaning of the word, so long as it is found to be compatible 
with the context.” 

The Siddhanta view put forward in the sutra is as follows : — In all 
cases where a word, if, taken as laying down accessories, is found to men- 
tion more than one accessory detail, it is not right to take it as such an in- 
junction of accessories; because this would rise to a syntactical split ; for 
instance, in the case of the word ‘chitra,’ if we take it in the way suggested 
in the Pfirvapakba, it wmdd lay down three factors— (1) the animal, (2) its 
female sex and (3) its variegated colour : and the right construction of tlie 
sentence would be — ‘ The sacrifice should he performed with an animal, 
—this animal should be a female, — and this animal should be of variegated 
colour — thus a single sentence being split up into three sentences, ‘ a split’ 
permissible only when the sentence admits of no other construction. In the 
sentence in question, we have a simpler construction available the word 
‘chitra’ may be taken as “ related to the principal factor ” of the sentence, 

■ — viz., the, sacrifice denoted by the root in the wor-d ‘ yajeta ; ’ and the onljr 
way in which it caii be So related is to take it as the name of that sacri- 





IV FAT)A, 111 ADHlKAMAm, Sti. 1. 4. 4. 103 



Adhikarana III . — ‘ Tatprakliyanyaya “ Agnihotra ” is the 

name of a Sacrifice. 

sOtra-1- 4 . 4 . 


?rsT»i?i9/ratprakhyam, injunctive of that, "sr Cha, and. frfsWTWI. An 3 ’aiias- 

tram, other sentences* 


4. There are other sentences injunctive of that acces- 



sory. — 4. 

COMMENTARY. 

Adhikarana 1 dealt with words whose etymological sigiiiiicatioii point- 
ed to tiie sacrificial material only indirectly ; that is to say, ‘ udbhida ’ had to 
be taken by the Puiwapaksa as standing for hxdbliidvata,’ before it could 
be taken as laying down the material for the sacrifice 
formed the chief reason for rejecting the E''ur\>'i 
karaixa deals with tliose words whose etymologic! 
sacrificial accessory directly, for instance, the word * agnihotra, 
in the sentence 
that in lahieh the offering is 
laying down A. 

sitate recoui'se to indirect indication, there 
whether words like these are to be taken 


and this contigency 
'apaksa. The present adhh 
al signification points to a 
as occarring 

agnihotrena j nhuyat svargakamah,’ signifies etymologically, 
made to Agni and as such Ccin be taken as 
giii as the deity of the sacrifice ; and as this does not neces- 

arises the question as to 
as names of sacrifices, or as lay- 
ing down accessory details in connection with tlie sacrificek 

The Purvapaksa view is as follows The word ' agnihotra ’ direct- 
ly signifies that in. which yasmin’) the offering (hotram) is made to Agni 
C agnaye ') ; and as sucli there can be no objection to its being taken as lay- 
ing down Agni as the deity of the sacrifice ; specially as in conaectiou with 
the particular sacrifice herein referred to there are many minor sacrifices 
whose deity is nowhere mentioned; consequently, the word, when taken as 
laying down the deity, supplies a distinct need.” 

The Siddhanta view, embodied in the sutra, may be summed up as 
follows Inasmuch as in connection with the sacrifice in question we find 
other sentences laying down all necessary accessories, an enjoining of these 
by another word would be entirely superfluous. For instance, tlie mantra 
'Agnirjyotih, distinctly points to Agni as the deity of the sacrifice, what 
need then is there of that same deity being mentioned by the word ^agni- , 
liotra ? ' Consequently, the conclusion is that the word must be taken as 
the name of the sacrifice ; specially as * the cotmecuon of the deity Agni 
having'' ''been established 'by': the .aforesaid mantra,; and 
in aceof dance with this, people being ^actually found to take up the 











lip|i|l|l|ili 


liilllil 






p{jRVA-MlMAM8A-8dTRAS. 1 At>liUfA. 


performance of that sacrifice, the word ‘ agnihotra ’ cannot but be taken 
as merely referring to, and being descriptive of, that same sacrifice. 


Adhikarana IV —Tadvyapadesanydya : “ ^yena ” and 
such other words are names of sacrifices. 
sOtra 1. 4. e. 

IM I ^ I ^ n 

5. That also [should be taken as name] which points 
to a similarity [between the sacrifice and the accessory that 
it would indicate.] — 5. 

COMMENTARY. 

Adhikarana 11 has dealt with these words which, though capable of 
being taken directly as laying down accessory detads, give rise to needless 
syntactical splits ; the present adhikarana takes up tlie case of those words 
whose direct signification points to things that can be used as materials of 
offering, &c., and which, when taken in this sense, donot occasion any 
syntactical split. Fornnstance, the word ‘ Syena ’ in the sentence ‘ Syenena 
yajeta’ may be taken in its direct signification of the kite-bird ; and this 
word is quite capable of being used as the material to be offered at the 
sacrifice ; the meaning of the sentence being ‘ one should make an offeiing 
of the kite-bird.’ This is the Purvapaksa view. 

The Siddhanta put forth in the sutra is that, the word must be taken 
as the name of the sacrifice, as is cleaidy implied by another Vedic text 
in connection wiih the sacrifice ; this other text says ‘ just as die kite-bird 
falls upon its prey, so does this sacrifice fall upon his enemy ; this implies 
. that there is a similarity between the kite-bird and the sacrifice, which, on 
that account, may be taken as having, ‘Syena ’ for its name. If, in the 
sentence in question, the word ‘ fiyena ’ meant the kite-bird itself, then 
this other text would be describing a similarity of the kite-bird to itself, 
wilicli would be absurd. 

And further, as in the case of ‘udbhid^,’ it has been shown that 
before the word could be taken as laying down the sacrificial material, 
it would be necessary to regard it as equivalent to udbhidvata so, in 
the same manner, in the case of the word ‘ Syeiiena,’ before it can be taken 
as laying down a material, it will be necessary to take it as equivalent to 
‘ Syenavatft ; ’ as without this, the word ‘ Syenena ’ in its original form 
coidd not be construed with ‘YSgena.’ This undesirable contingency is 
iObriated by taking the word as the name of the sacrifice. 




‘ ' > : 


g '• ' 



IV PAD A, V ADHlKABAilA, SA. 1. 4. 7. 


105 


Adhikarana V. 


Vdjapeyci, ete., cive names of Sacvijices. 

SOTBAS 1. 4. 6-8. 

“5JTR^ ftsTRIl” — ffit lU II 

II v9 n 

^ Namadheye, in the case of wliat appears as a name, Guna- 

aruteh, because there is a mentioa of an accessory, SydC should be. 

Vidhanam, an injunction. s[r% ^ Iti diet, if this be "urged, (6) g:?2RfTtT 
lulyatyat, on account of becoming similar. Kriyayoh, of the two aetions? 

^ Na, this cannot be (7), 

6. “ In the case of what appears to he a name, inas- 
much as there is distinct mention of an accessory, it should 
be taken as the injunction [of that accessory] if this is 
urged.— 6. 

7 . This cannot be ; because in that case the two 
actions would become similar. — 7. 

COMMENTARY. 

Tile opponent reiterates liis position with regard to all those words 
tliat are taken as names. “ In the case o£ all words that you take as names” 
-says the Purvapaksin-“ when we find a distinct mention of the material 
or other acce.ssones, we cannot but regard tliem as injunctions of such acces- 
sories ; and there could be no reason for taking them as names of sacrifices. 

For instance, m the case of tlie word ‘ V.ajapeya,’ as occurring in the sen- 
tence Vrtjapeyena svArajyakamo yajeta,’ we find that tlie word distinctly 
mentions a material, in the shape of the juice or extract (‘ peya’} of food- 
grains (‘ vAja ’); and so we must take it as laying down this grain-juice 
as the material to be employed at the sacrifice performed for aequiri«<. the 
Kingdom of Heaven ; consequently the words cannot be taken as a name ” 
This is the Pfirvapaksa embodied in sutra 1.4.6. The Siddhftnta 
in reply to this, is put forth in sutra 1. 4. 7. If the sacrifice mentioned in 
the sentence in question had for its material the grain-juice, as held by the 
Purvapaksa, it would be a sacrifice of the ‘ Isti ’ class ; and thereby come 
to have Its procedure exactly similar to that of the Dar4a-pfirnam3sa which 
IS the archetype of all grain-sacrifices ; which would be an absurdity ■ as 
the procedure of the sacrifice is that of the Jyotistoma, which is the arche 
type of the Saumika ’ class. For this reason, the word ‘ Vfijapeya ’ can- 
not be taken as laying down the grain-juice as the material for the sacri- ;■ 
fice; It must be taken as the name of the sacrifice performed in accordance , 

with the procedure of the Jyotistoma, with a view to acquire the Kingdom 
;^of Heaven. ■, \ 



pObVA-MIMAMSA-SI^TEAS. I adhyAta 


Aika^abdye. in that which is expressed by a single word 
Parartbavat, there would be mutually contradictory characteis. 

8. That which is signified by a single word would 
come to have contradictory characters.— 8. 

COMMENTARY. 

In case the word ‘VSjapeya’ signified the grain-j«ice as the 
material then the sentence ‘VSjapeyena syarSjyakamo yajeta would 
have to ie construed as follows-(a) ‘ one should obtain the sovereignty 
of heaven by means of the sacrifice, and (b) the sacrifice should be accom- 
;MrbyLan. of to graio-joice aod to» to sacnSce thcogh 
signified by to single word ‘ yajeta,’ would have to character of an 
mstrnment wMi regard to the sovereignly of heaven, and^ to character 
of the object to be acconrpliehed, in regard to the giiun-jurce , u as a 
matte of fact. H is possible for one and the same thing to have, at one 
and the same time, to malually oonti-adiotory characters of the instru- 
ment and the object; so we conclude that the word 'V.japeya does 
i. ricvvvTn +iio Tvraferiftl, cfrainduico ; and that it must he taken as 


Tad-gunaJp, tnar anu av-i-casui rvoo. . . .. 

ran, should be enjoined. Avibhagat, because 

Vidhanarthe. in regard to the object of injunction, Na, n 
if. Anyena, by another, f^er^ Sistah, laid down. ^ 

9, The sacrifice as well as its accessoiies shoi 
joined [by tbe word], — because there is a combina 
factors of the injunction specially if they are 
down by any other word. — 9. 

COMMENTARY. 

The general character and function of names haying h 
hut in the foregoing shtras, with the present sfitra begins th( 
it&n of certain exceptions to the principles laid down, 


107 



IV pad A, VI ADHIKAEAT^A, 8A 1. 4. 9. 



pdBVA-MlMlMSl-SdTRAF^. I ABEYAYA 


is not mentioned by any other words; therefore we must conclude 
that the fact of the cake being tlie sacrificial material is also not 
mentioned by any other part of the sentence. (3) Lastly, the deity 
also cannot be taken as indicated by the other words of the sentence. 
There are only three ways of mentioning the deity to whom a certain 
material is to be offered — (a) by means of a nominal affix, e.g., tire 
affix ‘ail’ in the word ‘aindrain’ in the sentence aindram charnm 
shows that the charii is dedicated to Inclra ; (5) by means of the datire 
ending — e.g., the ending in the word ‘ V isnave ’ in the sentence, ATsiiave 
dvadaifakapaiam,’ shows that the cake is to be offered to Visnu ; and 
(c) by certain significant words of mantras— e.p., the word ‘ Suryah ’ 
fliA mantra. ‘ Siirvoivotih. etc. ’ shows that the morning libation is to be 


expressing the sacrince, ny reason oi me laci mat, me caivc uimuut ucwmo 
‘agneya,’ until it is offered to Agni— and this offering constitutes the 
sacrifice. 

Thus all the factors, the sacrifice and its accessories in the form 
of the deity and the material, are pointed out hy the word ‘ %neyah 
and as all these factors of the injunction are mingled together, there is no 
syntactical split at all. 


Adhiharana VII.— Such words as ‘ Varhih ’ and the like 

denote the genus. 

StTilA 1. 4. 10. 

lit i ^ u 

Varhirajyayoh, of the grass and the butter. Asams- 

,r4 even when no consecration has been made. ^abdalabhat, 




109 


IV PADA, VJII-IX ADEtKAEAVA, Sit 1. 4. 11-12. 109 

because the words are applied. Wtr®®*'?- Atachchhabdah, the A^ords cannot be 
regarcied as applicable (to consecrated grass and butter only.) 

10. Because tlie words ‘varMh’ [grass] and ‘ajya’ 
[butter] are found to be applied to unconsecrated gi'ass and 
butter, the words cannot be regarded as applicable only to 
consecrated grass and butter. — 10. 

COMMENTARY. 




lu connection with names we proceed to consider the significations 
of the names of materials. In regard to such names as ‘ varhih (grass', 
‘ ajb'a ’ (butter) and ‘ pnrodasfa ’ (cake), there arises the question — Do these 
words apply respectively to only such grass, butter and cake, as have been 
cojisecrated foi’ sacrificial purpo.ses, or to all grass, butter and cake in 
general ? Though the sutra mentions only the ‘ varhih ’ and the ‘ ajya,’ 
the Bhasya has added the ‘ puroddffa ' also. 

The Purvapaksa view is that — “according to sutra 1. 3. 9, the words 
in que.stion must be taken to be used by sacrificers, in the sense of the 
consecrated or sacrificial materials only.” 

The Siddlninta is that it is a well-recognised fact that the words 
found in the Veda are the same as those used in ordinary parlance and 
their significations also are the same in both cases (sutra 1. 3. 30) ; and as 
it has been proved under sutra 1. 3. 30 that all words denote communities 
and not individuals, we must take the words in question to be denotative 
of grass, butter and cake in general. Such being the case, there can 
be no justification for restricting these significations to only such of these 
things as have undergone a process of consecration. 


Adhikaranas VllI mid IX — The names ‘ Proksa.n% ’ {VIII) and 
' Nirmanthya ’ {IX) must he tahen in their literal signification. 

StlTRA 1. 4. 11 and 12. 

u ? I ^ I n 

Proksanisu, in the case of the Proksani (washing water). 
Arthasaipjogat, because tiie literal signification is applicable, Tatha, so, 
=sr Cha, also, Nirmanthye, in the case of the Nirmantha (fire produced 

bj friction,)''. ' ♦ - ' 

V Because in the case of the bwasMng water,’ ^ 

literal signification of the word ‘ proksani ’ is applicable [the 
WQxd musiJbe taken ip its literal sens6].r-l|, . 





.:: : 


j ^fc 


?*ili 



110 ' F^nVA^MlMlMSl^8l)TBA8. I ADTiTAlA. 

12. And so also in. the case of the fire produced hy 
friction ' [the word ' iiirmanthya ’ should be taken in its 
literal sense]. — 12. 

COMMENTARY. 

In regard to the }3aine *proksani ’ as applied to the water, the ques- 
tion arises as to whether the word has its denotation conventinally res- 
tricted to water? Or it has to be taken in its literal sense of that tvitJi 
tohich things are ivashed ? 

The Purvapaksa is that — the conventional meaning of the word 
being most direct and easily known, we can have no justification for 
taking the name ‘ proksani ^ as denoting that ivith ivhich things are 
washed^ 

The Siddhanta is that, it is true that the conventional denotation 
is most authoritative, but in cases where we find the literal signification 
quite compatible with the conventional signification, we can have no 
reason for rejecting this latter; for instance, in the case in question, we 
find that the literal meaning of the word ' proksani ’ — ‘ that by which 
things are washed ’ — is quite applicable to the water ; consequently we 
must take the name as used its literal sense ; this view having the 
advantage that the scope of the word-denotation is extended to all those 
liquids with which things can be properly washed, and not restricted to 
water only. 

Similarly in regard to the name ‘ Nirmaiithya,’ though it appears 
to be used in the sense of consecrated fire, yet it cannot be taken in its 
literal sense of fire produced hy friction ; the advantage of this view being 
that it is only wdien we take the word thus that we can do the baking with 
fire produced by friction at the time of the baking, and not by any 
ordinary fire produced at any other time. 


■ 




Adhikarana X — The word ‘ Vaisvadeva ’ is the 
name of a sacrifiee. 


SUTRAS 1. 4. 13 and 14. 


“ ^ II ? I « I U » 

ff il4i<<!lld , 51 % !t5f 


II II 




Vai^vadeve, in the case of the word ' Vaisvadeva.’ ^ 

ItpUK’ii option, Iti chet, if this is urged, sf ff Na vA, not so. 

, , - , ^ 


; 



\ t|,v 






TV PADA, I ADETKAMAl^A, SA. 1. 4. lS-14. 


Prakaraijat, because of the context. Pratyaksavidhsnat, because 

of direct injunction. >«r Cha, also, sr Na, there is not. Hi, because. 
Prakaranam, context, Dravyasya, of the thing, 

13. If it "be urged that “ in the case of the word 
‘ Vaisvadeva,’ there is an option.” — 13. - 

14. This is not so ; because of context [being the sole 
authority for regarding it as laying down the deity ;] while 
there is a direct injunction [of another deity] ; and certainly 
the context cannot set aside the thing [laid down by direct 
injunction.] — 14. 

commentary. 

The case of the word ‘ Vaidvadeva ’ as occurring in the sentence 
‘ Vaiiivadevena yajeta ’ is different from all other words dealt with in the 
foregoing sutras. (1) If we take it as laying down the deity Vis^vedeva, 
we find such signification to follow directly from the word, without 
having recourse to any indirect indication as was found necessary in the 
case of the word ‘ Udbhida (2) it does not lay down any accessories ; 
and hence causes no syntactical split, — as the word ‘ Chitra ’ does ; (3) 
there is no ambiguity about the meaning of the word as pointing to the 
deity — as in the case of the word ‘ Agnihotra ’ ; (4) the word ‘ Vais^vadeva ’ 
does not point to any particular sacrifice, — like the Vajapeya. 

•The question that arises in regard to this word is this : — Does 
the word point to Vi4vedeva as the deity of the sacrifice of the ChS.tur- 
mftsya ? Or, is it the name of this sacrifice ? 

The PArvapaksa view is that. — “ the word lays down the deity Vini- 
vedeva ; and as another deity, Agni, i.e., for the same sacrifice, is already laid 
down by another direct injunction, we must regard VWvedeva and Agni 
as the two deities to be accepted optionally. We must accept this view, 
because no useful purpose would be served by making the word a name 
of the entire Ch&turm§:sya sacrifice.” 

The SiddhAnta embodied in the efltra is that the word must be 
taken as the collective name of all the minor sacrifices that go to make up 
the Ch&turm§.sya sacrifice. We cannot take it as pointing to a deity of 
the sacrifice ; because Agni, &c., have been laid down as the deities of 
these sacrifices, by direct injunctions ; while the fact of Vislvedeva being 
their deity would, at best, be indicated only by the ‘context’-yi.e., by the 
word ‘Vaii^vadevena’ occurring in the same sentence as ‘yajeta’ ; and ’cer- 
taiplj the deity thus indicated by the context cannot be regarded as on 
ill, ^mei footing a| those laid down by ,^©tjt injunctions. The indication 





P6nVA-MtMAM8l-8J^TEAS. I ADEYAYA 


of tlj6 deity bj the affix in ‘Vaisivadeva’ is not of the same kind as that b}" 
the similar affix in htgneya’; because in the case of the latter the connection 
of Agni with a distinct material (the cake) is distinctly mentioned in tlie 
same sentence ; wliile in the case of the word ‘Vaitlvadeva/ no snch mate- 
rial being mentioned, the relation of the deity to some sort of material 
will haFe to be assame<l before the connection of the deity with the sacri- 
fice can be establislied. Consequently the indication of the deity by this 
word must be regarded as more indirect, and hence less authoritative, than 
that by direct injunction. Consequently we must accept, as the deity of 
the sacrifices in question, Agni and the rest, which are laid down by direct 


^aisivadeva’ as the name 
hiaturmas 3 ^a ; this collec- 
if bringing together all 
f being spoken of collect- 


Anartha-sambandhah, rela 


improper 


ice ‘Vairfvadevena ylijeta,’ 
.ame referring to all the 
be taken as indicating 
ith sacrifice of which the 
from those of the eight 
' among the Vaisvadeva 
is the deity.' 
the same word would in- 
eity for another sacrifice ; 
3 subject as well as the 
j the sacrifice is repeated 




ondary importance, 


are only of second- 



IF PiDA, II AmiKAUAl^A, 8A. 1. 4. 17. 


113 ^ 


• COMMENTARY. 

The opponent might urge that if it is only necessary to repeat 
the sacrifice in order to establish the property of the constrnctioii proposed 
in the Parv’-apaksa — this repetition might be done. To this the answer is 
that in all injunctions the sacrifice forms the most important factor ; and the 
accessories, being only subordinate to the sacrifice, are of secondary 
importance. Consequently it would not be right to repeat the sacrifice 
for the sake of finding room for the deity (which is after all only an 
accessory) denoted by the word ‘ Vaisiradeva.^ 

For these reasons, the only reasonable view is that ‘ Vaisfvadeva ^ is . 
the name of the eight sacrifices. 

Adhikarana XI — The mention of the number ‘ eight ’ 
in connection loith the Vaisvdnara sacrifice 
is only an arthavdda. 

SOtRA 1. 4. 17-22. 

ii ? i 8 i tvs ii 

(var. iec. s# 

<l^q:55r-' PUrvavantah, words expressive of things already known, arffwnrnrf; 
Avidhanarthal^, cannot serve the purposes of injunction. Tatsamar- 

thyam, capability of serving as injunction. ^Tirrarq Saraamnaye, in ^he text in 
question. 

17. “ It is only words expressive of things already 

known that cannot be taken as injunctions ; the text in 
question is fully capable of being taken as such.” — 17, 

COMMENTARY. 

The consideration of the question as to whether certain words ai’e 
names of sacrifices or injunctions of accessories having been finish6d we 
now proceed to consider whether certain words can be taken as injunc- 
tions of accessories. 

. . The sentence ‘ VaWvanaram dv^dasiakapaianinirvapet putre jate’— 
lays down the the cake hahed on twelve pans as to be offered at the Vai!fv4nai'a 
sacrifice ; this sentence is followed by a number of sentences makino' 
mention of cakes baked upon eight and nine pans ; now the question 
arises--is the word mentioning the ‘cakes baked upon eight pans, ’ &e. to 
be taken as laying down a distinct material for the Vaiilv&nara;' sacrifice ? 
Or, is it to be taken only as arthav4da, eulogising the cakes ? „ , - . ■ , - 

The Pfirvapaksa view embodied in the sfitra is as follows :^“As a 
l^fteral rale, when a word signifies something thSt is already known, 





pt)BVA'-MlMlM8A-8()TIiA8.. / ADBYAYA 


it has to be taken as either a naine or an artbavaua ; u 
question, we find that the expression ‘ cake baked on eight pans signi es a 
s:S....ce..o.k..«wa before, -tl,e precedieg sentence^ bavmg spoken o • 
the ‘cake baked on twelve pans;’ consequently there is nothin to 
prevent us Ironi taking it as laying down a second material ; so 

L two optional materials, for the Vaislvaiiara sacntice-the cake baked 

on twelve pans, and the cake baked on eight pans. 

The Vfirtika notices a different reading of the sfitra— 

etc.; in which case the sense of the Pfirvapaksa as embodied in 

the sfitra would be as follows “ Those words whose meanings are 
already known can be utilised only by being taken as injunctions ; while 
those whose meanings are not known should be taken as names, _ as s own 
under sutra 1 . 4 . 2 ; hence the mention of the number ‘ eight must be 
taken as laying down a fresh accessory.” 

This statement of the Pfirvapaksa, as the Vartika remarks is not 
correct; becase the mere fact of the signification ol' a word being unknown 
cannot make it a name ; on the other hand, just as the fact of a word 

being altogether new, having its ordinary signification unknown proves 

that it cannot be taken as laying down the accessory of a sacrifice, - 
fivantlv in the same manner, it is all the more impossible for it to he taken 






IV FID A, XI ADHTKARAhJA, Stt. 1.4.19. 


COMMENTARY. 

The Siddhflnta embodied in the sutra is as follows : — 

The Vaidranara sacrifice having its own specific number of pans 
distinctly laid down asticelve, any other number, eight, nine, &c., even tliough 
enjoined, could not be enjoined with reference to that sacrifice ; nor could 
these latter numbers be enjoined with i-eference to any other sacrifice, 
because no such other sacrifice is mentioned in the sentence. Nor could 
the clause mentioning these numbers be taken as laying down such a 
sacrifice ; because all that this clause does is to describe a certain kind of 
cake ; and it says nothing as to that cake being offei-ed to any deity ; and 
without the mention of this latter fact, no sacrifice could be indicated. 

Thus then, the number, as an accessory, even if it be 
enjoined by the words in question, could not pertain to any sacrifice ; and 
hence these would serve no useful purpose in regard to the performance 
of any sacrifice ; specially as the baking on eigl)t pans would not serve any 
useful purpose, when not belonging to any sacrifice. Or, the last clause 
of the sutra may mean, the mention of the number eight cannot serve 
any useful purpose with regard to the Vaiiivtnara sacrifice, the number 
of pans for which has already been laid down as twelve ; specially as the 
baking on eight pans would not serve any useful purpose noth regard to 
the cake that has already been baked on twelve pans. 

Not being capable of being taken as an injunction, the mention of 
the, number must be taken as Arthavada, eulogising the VaidvAnara 
sacrifice,— the sense being that—* when the baking on eight pans brings 
About sucii excellent results, how much better results could be accomplished 
by the baking on twelve pans, which is done at the Vai^vanara 
sacrifice ? ’ 

H H u 

Tachchhesah, being supplementary to that, sr Na, not. 
Upapadyate, is possible. 

■ 19. It is not possible for the sentences in question to be 

’taken as supplementary to the preceding injunction. — 19. 

' .COMMENTARY. 

objeotioft is i’aised :— • . , ■ ' 

I .'.Ir; u. The injunction mentions the “ baking on ttcetee pans ; ’ while the 
question praises' the baking on eight pans j how thsn could tfiie 
jii#ae Sjjply to-the toMner j--'. ^ ^ ^ i ■' 


! 



P&BV'A-SdtMAMSA-SUTBAS. I ADHYlF A 


«rwr*ir? Avibhagat, on account of non-exclusion. Vidhanartne, trom 

what is enjoined. Stutyarthena, serving the purpose of praising. 

Upapadyeran, it would be possible. _ ' i j j 

20. Inasmncli as [the smaller number] is not excluded 
' is quite possible for the sentences in 
to be taken as serving the purpose of praising 


from the greater, it 
question i- -- - 

[the latter.] — 20. 

■ COMMENTARY. , • 

Ab the numbers ‘eight’ and ‘nine’ are included m ‘twelve,’ 
any praise of the former will certainly apply to the latter ; as it would 
only be a case of the praise of the part being applied to the whole ; when 
the use of eight pans brings “ Brahmio glory,’ and that of nine pans gives 
vigour, the use of twelve pans must bring about still better results. 

^iiunr^r, 

II II 

eKirisi Karanam, instigator. 5?(TW Syat, could be. hi diet, if it be 

urged. Anarthakyat, on account of uselessness. Akaranatn, 

not an instigator, Kartuh, pertain to the agent. ^ Hi, because, 

Karanani, instigators, sgijrra: Gunarthah, for the purpose of praising, ft Hi, 
and. Vidhiy'ate, is mentioned. 

21. If it be urged that, — “[the desire for Brahmio 
glory, &c.] could be taken as the instigators of the numbers in 
question.” — 21. 

22. [Our reply is that] inasmuch asthe sentences would 
become useless (meaningless), the results cannot be regarded 
as instigators ; specially as all instigators must pertain.to the 
agent; consequently [we conclude that] the numbers in 
(^estion are mentioned for the purpose of praising.— 22. ^ 

COMMENTARY. 

The opponent urges. — “ The injunction of the numbers eight, &c., 
.would not be incapable of belonging to a sacrifice ; because the meaning 
of-the. son^tences .raentio.ning. the number ‘eight’ would be. ‘ one whp 
desires brahraic glory should perform the sacrifice at which the qffering 
consists of the cake baked on eight pans that is to say, the sense of the 




f 



whole would be ‘ if one performs the Vaifivinara sacrifice without having 
a view to any definite result, he should offer the cake baked on twelve 
pans ; but if he desires Brahmic glory, he should offer the cake baked on 
eighrpans.’- In this way the injunction of ‘ eight ’ would not be absohitely 
useless as regards the actual performance of sacrifices. 

“ This is what is meant by the results (Brahmic glory, &c.) being the 
‘instigators’ of the numbers; which means that it is the different results 
that lead to the acceptance of the different numbers.” 

This is the interpretation according to the Bhasya and the Vartika. 
Later, commentators explain the sutra to mean that ‘the numbers are 
the cause '6f the results,’ f.e., the use of eight pans is the cause of — brings 
about— Brahmic glory ; ’ and so forth. This interpretation of the 

word ‘ kArana,’ however, is not compatible with its use in the next Sutra. 

The answer to the above objection is given in sutra 1, 4. 22. The 
sense of the reply is that, if the mention of the several numbers were taken 
as laying down the acceptance of these numbers, in the event of the per- 
former desiring certain results,— then this would give rise to a syntactical 
split ; as is evident from the construction of the sentences in question as 
proposed under the preceding sutra ; which ivould further lead to the very 
undesirable severance of all connection of the injunction of the' Vairfvanara 
sacrifi'ce with the mention of certain results, following after the mention 
of the numbers under discussion the whole section running thus— 
‘ At the Vai^vanara sacrifice one should use the cake baked on twelve 
pans; — the use of eight pans leads to Brahmic glory; the use of nine 
pans accomplishes vigorousness; — he on whosse birth the ^'aisfvanara is 
performed, becomes vigorous, a large eater of food, with vigorous organs 
and powerful cattle.’ 

By reason of these syntactical splits, the proposed meaning of thfe 
sentences is not permissible ; under the circumstances, if the sentences in 
question be not taken as Arthavada, praising the Vai^vanara sacrifice, 
they become meaningless and useless. With a view to avoid this 
usqlessnessj we must take the sentences as. ArthavAda. 

Then again, how can the result in the case in question, be the ‘insti- 
gators'* of the acceptance of the numbers? It is the agent or perfornihr 
to whom all instigators should pertain ; that is to say, it is when the result 
belongs to the performer that it- can serve as the ‘instigator’; in the 
case in question, the I’esults are mentioned as accruing to the new-born child 
while the sacrifice is performed by the father. Consequently, the results 
^^e"^ ‘instigators,’ ai‘Wld,i:^;thndj^n6n.tr.a.(;;ij^ .c2 


IV PlB A,. XI ADEIKAMATSA, 1. 4.21. 



P&BVA^MtMMSA-SfyTRAS. I ADETAYA 


Adhikamna XII.—The mention of the graea-beming 
as ‘ master of the sacrifice’ is only a praise. \Figurative 
Description hosed upon Accomplishment of Purpose.] 

sOTBA. 1. 4. 28. 

11 ? I 2 I » 

23. The aooomplishmeat of purpose.— 23. 

COMMENTARY. 

Satras 23-28 deal witli cases of figurative descriptions ; herein are 
pointed out those facts upon which figurative representations are based. 
Sfitra 23 mentions the aeeomplishment of purpose as the first of these bases ; 
an example of this we have in the sentence ‘ Yajamanah prastarah, where 
the prastara, grass-bedding, is described as ‘ the master of the sacrifice ; 
because of the fact that the bedding accomplishes the Master’s purposes 
of comfort, &c., in the same manner as he accomplishes his own purpose ; 
hence the sentence must be tahen as a figurative description in praise 


Adhikarana XIII.— The Brahmana is praised as Agni 

{Figurative description hosed upon sameness of origin.] 

SflTRA 1. 4. 24. 

iM I ^ I u 

24. Bittli or Origin. — 24. 

COMMENTARY. 

The similarity ofoi'igin is the second basis for figurative description; 
when in the sentence ‘ Agnih brahmana^ the Brahmana is figuratively 
ribed as ‘ Agni,’ it is because both ‘ Agni ’ and the Brahmana are de- 
d in the Veda to have been born out of Prajapati’s mouth ; this des- 
.5nTi imnlving the praise of the Brahmana. 


25 . Similarity pi. slJage,-r-25 






IV PiBA, xvn ADEtKAEAT^A, BA. L 4. 28. 119 


OOMMSNTAIW.- 

Shnilarity of shape is the tliird basis of figurative description ; e.g-., 
when the sacrificial post is praised as the ‘ Master of the Sacrifice’ because 
it is as upright in form as the master is ; similariy it is praised as the sun, 
because if is as bright in colour as the sun. 



Adhiliarana XV.— -Indirect Description based upon praise. 

sOtra 1. 4. 26. 

sttot a % { ^ I a 

26. Praise. — 26. , 

COMMENTARY. 

Mere praise forms the fourth basis of figurative description ; e.g., in 
the sentence ‘ apailavo go-afivebhyah,’ ‘ animals other than the cow and 
the horse are no animals ’ — the word ‘ no animals ’ is only an indirect 
praise of the cow and the horse ; this figurative description of the other 
animals as “ no animals ” being based solely upon the praise of those two 
Miimals, - V - 


Adhikarana XVI. — Figurative description based upon 
greatness of number. 

: A ^ ; SOTRA 1. 4. 27. 

a I a 

27. Great large numbers. — 27. 

COMMENTARY. 

. Greatness of numher ioxms iliQ fifth basis of figurati%’e description; 
e.g., when a number of mantras are called ‘ sristi’ in the sentence ‘sri§ti 
rapadadh4ti ’ it is because of the recurring of the word ‘sristi ’ in a great 
number of mantras ; by which even those that do not contain the word are 

called ‘ ’ 


Adhikarana XVlI.- — Figurative description based upon 
the presence of an indicative sign. 

‘ SOTRA 1. 4. 28. • ■ 

% I 8 I 11 

of tbe presence of an indicati*^ sigii; 


, '• ■ ■' '7 





fl^EyA-MlMlMSA-SdTRAS;- I ABEfAYA 


Adhikarana X VIIT.—Doiibts relating to the true meann- 
ing of sentence may he set aside hy subsequent passages. 

SXJTRA. 1. 4. 29. 

Sandigdhesu, in all doubtful cases. Vakyagesat, by means 

of subsequent passages. , 

29. .In. doubtful cases, doubts are set at rest by the 

aid .of supplementary passages.— 29. 

COMMENTARY. 

■ Arthavadas, declarations of praise, have been shown to refer to the 
object of Injunctions ; it may be that in regard to an injunction, or to an 
arthav-ada, it is doubtful which arthavada refers to which injunction ; and 
there may be doubts with regard to the injunction itself ; as wlien .we meet 
■with- the injunction — 'wet pebbles are to be put in, there aiises the doubt 
fcs to the particular liquid with which the pebbles aie to be wetted ; this 
doubt is set aside by the supplementary passage— tejo vai ghpitam ■ 
which praises butter; as this indicates the butfer as the liquid with 
which the pebbles are to be wetted. This is due to mutpal need;; the in- 
junction needs the indication of a particular liquid, and the piaise of the 
butter needs an injunction with which it may be construed , and this 
mutual need leads' us to take the two together, and thereby come to the 
conclusion tliat the pebbles wetted with butter are to be put in. 







IF PAD A, XIX ADHIKABAIIA, S± 1. 4. 35. 


121 


COMMENTARY. 

One set of doubtful cases may be settled by supplementary declara- 
tions ; there are some doubtful cases, liowevea-, in which no such declarations 
are available ; in such cases what helps us to solve the doubt is the 
inherent capacity of things; for instance, the word ‘ anjali ’ is found to 
signify the joining of the two palms flatly in cases where it is laid down 
as the form of salutation to superiors ; but in the case of drinking water 
by the ‘ailjali,’ the same word is found to signify the cup-like shape formed 
by the joining of the two hands ; consequently when we come across the in- 
junction in connection with the Saktu-Homa, that the offering is to be made 
“ with the anjali,” there arises a doubt as to what the w'oi’d ‘anjali’ means 
in this case. This doubt is set at rest when we come to consider the fact 
that the flat palin-to-palm ‘ anjali ’ cannot contain anything to be offered, 
while the cup-shaped ‘anjali,’ is what will contain the flour to be offered ; 
this inherent capacity of things leads us to conclude that the offering is to 
be made with the cup formed by the joining of the two hands. 

That the offering is to be offerred with the hands joined in this form 
is to be regarded as possessed of the same degree of authority as the original 
Vedic injunction. Because, inasmuch as the injunction is vague and 
hence incomplete without this assumption, the assumption must be 
regarded as an integral factor of the injunction. 


Here ends Chapter I, wherein the Means of Knowing Dharma have 
been fully explained. In the Chapter 11, begins the consideration of the 
character of, and other details connected with, those actions that constitute 
Dharma. 


End of Adhyjlya 1. 





SECOND ADHYAYA. 

First Pada. 

DIFFERENTIATION OP ACTIONS AND TEXTS PRESCRIBING THEM. 


Introduetopy— 

In section I, Jaimini lias described the means o£ knowing Dliarma. 
The first sub-section has shown that the Vedic Injunction is such a means 
par excellence, and the other sub-sections have shown that the character 
of being such means belongs also to Arthavadas, Names, Mantras, Smritis, 
Usage, Supplementaiy Explanations and Indirect Implications. Thus the 
first section has supplied the full answer to tlie question ‘ what are the 
means of obtaining the true knowledge of Dharma ? ’ In answering this 
(question in detail, it has also been shown that the true character of 
Dharma belongs to such actions as (for instance) the Agnihotra and the 
Jyotistoma (directly enjoined in the Veda), the AstakA (laid down in the 
Smritis), the Holaka (as established by custom), and so forth. But in 


/ 



I PADA, inteoductory, 


actions laid down in the Veda, &c. ; and it is tliis basis that is discussed 
in the present section, where it is shown that one action is to be known 
as differeiit from another when the two are found to he mentioned by 
different words, a.nd so on (see helow). Then again, inasmuch as one 
action cannot ]}e regarded as entirely different from another, unless the 
transcendental results — apurras— proceeding from them be also different, 
we have here an explanation of the difference among the Apurvas also. 
Lastly, so far it would seem that for eacli act there is a distinct Apurva ; 
so in order to s?t aside this view, we have the further distinction of 
actions into ‘ primary ' and ‘ subsidiary,’ in connection with which it is 
shown that it is only the 'primary ’ action that leads to an independent 
Apurva, while those actions that are 'subsidiary’ tend merely to com- 
plete that 'primary’ action to which they are subsidiary, and as such 
have no distinct Apurvas of tlieir own. But this distinction between the 
'primary’ and the 'subsidiary’ action is merely mentioned here, — its 
detailed consideration being left over to sections '3) and (4). 

Kumarila’s view of the connection of the adhyaya is thus set 
forth in the Tantravfrtika : — What is explained in the present Adhyaya 
is that one action is known to be different from another on account of 
the two being mentioned by different words ; and it is in the wake of 
this difference that we have an explanation of the difference among the 
Apffrvas (resulting from the actions); and lastly, it is for the purpose 
of ascertaining which is the action that brings about the Apurva, that 
we have the consideration of the fact of actions having thecliaracter 
of the Primary or the Subsidiary. , That is to say, (1) the difference 
among actions is the natural and direct subject-matter of the Adhyaya; 
and the mention of the non-difference among certain actions is only a 
denial of the aforesaid difference; f2)— and with a view to establish 
the difference and non-difference of actions, we have an explanation of 
the difference and non-difference of their^ Apurvas (3) thus then, so 
far, it would seem that for each distinct action there is a distinct 
Apffrva; and here comes in the use of the consideration — as con- 
tained in Adhikarana III— of tlie Primary and Subsidiary character 
of actions, which serves to set aside the former mis-conception with 
regard to Apurvas ; (inasmuch as it shows that it is only the Pri- 
mary action that has a distinct Apffrva of its own For instance, 
even in .the case . of the sentences " vrihin proksati ” and " vrthin 
avahanti/' though the words 'avahanti’ and ' proksati ’ are different, 
yeL frasmuch as these actions are fourid to have, thei^ .sole end in the 
visible effects (of the preparation of rice and ite cleaning}^ we concind© 



PI^EVA-UtMlMSA-Bl^TEAS. H ADEYAYA 


that they cannot bring about any Apurva (transcendental result;, as 
for the Apfirva that is held to follow from the restriction of the method 
of pr^aring the rice, to threshing alone, it does not result from an action 
and as such is of no coiiseiiuence in the present contest. Hence we iind 
that it is only when certain actions haYe a distinctly primary character 
with reference to the substance, etc., that they are cognised as leading 
to distinct Aphi-Yas, and as such being totally distinct acbons. And it 
is for the due differentiation of such primary and subsidiary character, 
that the shtra (in Adhy^yas III and IV) will supply us with full _ explana- 
tions of such character ; and it is an exception to these explanations that 
are delineated in the two Adhikaranas contained in shtras II.1.9, and 

Thus then, the two characters of verbs having been pointed out, a 
third has to be shown in the shape of ‘Denotativeness ’ ; and in connec- 
tion with this, we have a consideration of the character of Mantras ; and 
then follow the dehnition, &c., of these ; and thus these definitions etc., 
ti-eated of to the very end of the Pada, are indirectly connected with the 
main subject. Then, having spoken of the difference among Actions, as 

based upon the diferenee o/ words, and repetition (of Injunctions) the 
sutra will point out, under the Adhikarana on ‘Paurnamasya (ILii.S et 

i-ha n-F ‘ RftDetitions ’ bein^ a ground or 




I PAm, 1 ADHIKAEAI^A, Sit. 1-4. 


125 


Thus alone can the connection o£ the Adhyaya be shown. Because 

(1) the I’elatiouship between the Primai’y and tlie Subsidiary, etc., 
is dependent upon a due ascertainment of dilfez'euces among actions ; 

(2) it is only when the action has been duly cognised that there 
can be any question as to a person being entitled to its perform- 
ance ; and (3) it is only when the Injunctions have been duly com- 
prehended that there can be a transference of the properties of one 
action to another. 

That is to say, until the means of knowledge has been duly defined 
there can be no consideration of the meaning of the Veda ; and as such 
no discussion as to the marks of difference among actions (treated of in 
Adhyaya II) can be introduced ; and inasmuch as it is only in the case of 
actions that have been found to be different, that there can be any idea 
either of relationship of the Primary and the Subsidiary ^ Adhyii,y& 111), 
or of their usefulness or otherwise (Adhj^aya IV) or of the order of their 
performance (Adhy&ya V), — none of these discussions could he raised, until 
we had throughly considered the marks of difference among actions ; 
so too, it is only when the charactei- of the action has been fully cognised 
that there can be any consideration of the question as to whether a 
certain person is entitled to its performance or not (Adhy&ya VI) ; and thus 
we find that this last question stands in need of all the five foregoing 
Adhyilyas. In the same manner, the Adhytyas VII-XII, treating as they do 
of the transference of properties, presuppose a full knowdedge of all Injunc- 
tions ; and as such the whole of this latter half of the sfitras is found to 
be dependent upon the whole of the former half. 

Thus it is clear that after the consideration of the Pramitna next 
comes that of the marks of difference, a treatment of which is therefore 
begun in Adhy&ya II. 

Adhiliarana I. — Bhdvdrthddhikarana 

[Dealing with Apdrva.] 
sCtteas 1-4. 

. The question to be treated of in this Adhikarana has been stated 
thus : — Which is the word in an injunction to which the Apfirva is related ; 
and which would on that account indicate the difference or non-difference 
among the Apffrvas leading up to the results, and thence also among the 
.actions themselves ? ,, 

The first step to the answer of this question is that the Apffrva is 
related to only one word in the injunctive sentence ;; and the second that 
it is related either to the noun or to the verb. This then leads to the 





...... w 




Pl^BVA-MtMAMSA-SdTnAS. 11 ABHYAYA 


final question— to ■which of these two, the noun or the verlD, is the Apiirva 
related ? The answer to this question is contained in the present Adhh 
karana. • ' 

The Purvapaksa to the Adhikarana is not contained in the sutras. 
It has been thus stated by Knmarila : — 

All tlie words signifying substances and properties, and denoting 
well-known entities, are well capable of being taken as expressing 
Instrumentality, &c. ; and hence it is through this that they come 
to be related to the result. As a rule the result, being a thing yet to 
be accomplished, stands in need of the Means- or Instrument, which is an 
already accomplished entity, aiid not in that of another result. Thus then, 
the substances signified by Nouns, being well-established entities, are 
capable of supplying tbis need of the result ; which need cannot be supplied 
by the verb, which itself is something yet to be accomplished. For these 
reasons, the result must be admitted to follow from the substance, &c., 
signified by Nouns, and not from verbs,” 

SIDBHANrA. 

5f?rfrwr: imf 

H H M I Ml 

vrr^r’zif: Bhavarthah, 'indicative of Bhavanas. Karma^abdah, 

verbs. Tebhyati, from these. f^Jtr Kriya, aparva. Pratlyeta, is 

known. Esa, this, r? Hi, because. Arthah, object; fact. Vidh!- 

yate, is laid down. 

1. All verbs are indicative of BhSvan^s ; and the know- 
ledge of the Apurva proceeds from these ; because this is 
what is laid down. — 1. 

That is to say, the verbs that denote the Bh4van4 bring about the 
cognition of the accomplishment of the Aphrva ; because the particular 
fact that one should accomplish heaven by means of the sacrifice is laid 
down by these. 

That the result cannot be related to the noun follows from the very 
natm’e of nouns (see Sec. 31 ; Nouns are the names of things already ac- 
complished, and not standing in need of any thing else,— being, self-suffi.- 
cient in their denotation. That word, on the other hand, to which the 
main result is related, must, as a matter of fact, be .something that has' 
.yet to be, accomplished, and as such stands in heed of such agencies as 
WChW help in its accomplishment. It is only verbs that are found to he 
.#ti;j>re8sive of things: that do. not already exist at the time, but have got to 


’ i' I-’ ' , ' 



/ PADA, I ADHIKABAI^A, SA. 1-4. 



pdBVA-MlMAU8A-SdTRAS. H AT)RYAyA 


;ion of the agent which ends in his 
‘ exists,’ and the like. In the case 
accomplished entity, the 
about the existence of something else, 
like. And the word ‘ vyapSra’ 
stance, — endowed with peculiar 
vingamixed natui'e, having an 
moved from its former position 
verbs it is the agent 
while in that of others, 
Hence 


conjugatic 
acquiring 

of other roots, when the agent is an already 
action signified is that which brings 
— e.g., ‘ sacrifices,’ ‘ gives,’ ‘ cooks,’ a 
(‘ action ’) signifies only a particu 
potencies, moved in its pristine character, ha 
existence in the past and in the future, as 
and not reached the next. And in the case of some 
himself that is cognised as being in this position 
where the agent is a well-established entity, it is something else, 
in a case where the agent himself happens to be in the said unsettled posi- 
tion, he stands in need of something else, for the fulfiraent of his own exist- 
ence ; and as such not functioning towards the aecoraphshment of any 
other substance, he cannot be spoken of as ‘ karoti ; ’ when, however, the 
agent is a well-established entity, and functions towards the fulfilment of 
something else, then he is spoken of as ‘ karoti ’ (does). Thus it^ is that 
when one asks ‘kirn karoti’ (what does he do?) the reply given is 
‘ pathati ’ (‘ reads ’), which latter combines within itself the generic (‘karoti ’) 
as well as the specific action (‘ pathati ’) [since the word ‘pathati ’ = ‘p4tham 
karoti’] ; whereas in reply to the same question there can be no such 
reply as — ‘ bhavati ’ (exists). 

Thus then, it is clear that all conjugational affixes that signify the 
actions of agents that are well-established entities, have the sense of 
‘ karoti ’ {accomplishes). And as such there must be something to he ac- 
complished, ; because unless there is something to he accomplished the word 
‘ karoti ’ is never used, and it is the nominative of the verb ‘ to be ’ (bha- 
vati) that becomes the objective of ‘karoti.’ That is to say, the verb 
‘ karoti ’ being transitive, unless there is something to he accomplished, 
the cPTiRP of the verb is not complete. It is a well-recognised fact that 


/ 





/ FADA, I ADSlKAUAT^A, Stl 1-4. 


ApQrva as related to the BhavanS. Artha^, meaning, frw Iti chet, 
if it be urged. 

2. If it be urged that tbe instrumentality of Apurva 
forms the meaning of all words.— 2. 

COMMENTARY. 

Against the first sutra the following objection is raised : — “ As a matter 
of fact we find that it is not only the verb that signifies the instrumen- 
tality of the Apurva, but the noun also ; so there is nothing to justify the 
view ttiat the Apurva is expressed only by the affix attached to the verb.” 

%«T! ^ srafft ii \ ii 

Yesam, whose, Utpattau, on utterance. Sve, its. 5r%lt Prayoge, 

as applied to the object denoted by them. Rupopalabdhih, there is 

direct cognition of the form of the object denoted. Tani, those. 
N^mani, are names. Tasmat, therefore. Tebhyah, for their sake. 

Parakanks^, need of another, Bhutatvat, because they are 

accomplished entities. ^ Sve Prayoge, so far as their use and denota- 
tion are concerned. 

3. [The answer is that] Such words on the utterance 
whereof for the denotation of objects, the forms of the 
objects denoted are directly cognised, are nouns ; and as 
such they do not stand in need of anything else, specially 
as the objects denoted are accomplished entities at the 
time that the words are used. — 3. 

COMMENTARY. 

la answer to the above objection it is explained that nouns denote 
things ; and as things are well-accomplished entities, they do not stand 
in absolute need of anything for the sake of whose connection the signifi- 
cation of such a transcendental thing as the ‘ Apurva would have to be 
a^umed ; for instance, when the noun ’ Soinena is found used in the sen- 
tence ‘ somena yajeta ’ it signifies the particular substauce ‘ soma ’ and 
there the matter ends ; and for comprehending the fall signification of 
this noun we do not want anything else ; hence the noun could have no 
connection ■ either with the Bhflvana or, through it, with the " 
The case of the verb which signifies something yet to be 

made clear in the next sfftra. - 




PJ^EVA-MtMAMSA-SJjTEAS. II ADHYAYA. 



%qT sprNfr ?r ?TT;=qT^?qraTFr ; 

srqrq^q n ^ ii 

aiqf Yesam, whose, g Tu, on the other hand. Utpattau, on ut- 
terance. Sve Arthe, with regard to their objects. JT#n: Prayogat, 

use. !T Na Vidyate, is not found. HlfH Tani, those. tHItS*ir5TIPT Akhyatani, 
are verbs. I'asmat, therefore. I'ebhyah, by means of these. 

Pratiyeta (the Apurva) would be cognised. A^ritatvat, on account 

of being dependent. Prayogasya, of their use. 

4. Such words, on the other hand, on whose utterance 
the objects denoted by them are not found to be present at 
the time, are verbs ; therefore, it is by means of these that 
the Apurva should be cognised ; specially as what is signi- 
fied by such words is dependent (upon other factors). — 4. 

COMMENTARY. 

In. the sentence “soinena yajeta ” the verb ‘y^j®ta’ denotes something 
which is yet to be accomplished. Hence it requires the mention of such 
factors as tlie means of accomplishing il, the purpose .served by its accom- 
plishment and the process by which the accomplishment is brought about, 
and so forth. Thus as the Apurva ‘ is ’ one of these factors, it is naturally 
more closely connected with the verb than with the noun. 

AdllikaranaJL— (There is such a thing as Apurva.) 

sCiTRA II. i-6. 

w x w 

■sjt^ chodana, Apflrva. Punah, and. Arambhah, injunction. 

5. And Apurva exists because of the Injunctions (of 
actions.)^ — 5. 

COMMENTARY. 

The above discussion as to the means of the comprehension of Apdrva 
has presupposed the existence of the Apurva itself. But inasmuch as 
its existence is not generally admitted the present sutra is introduced with 
a view to establish tlie existence of Apurvas. 

The Purvapaksa supplied from outside is as follows: — “ Any such 
thing as Aptirva cannot be perceived by the senses, because it- has 
neither colour, nor taste, nor touch, nor smell, nor. sound; nor is it 


Ife'" fy. ■ 





I FID A, II ADHIKABANA.S^l Ml 


cognisable by means of inference, because it bas never been found 
to be actually concomitant with any other thing whose presence might 
lead to the infejence of an Aphrva on the basis of that concomitant ; nor 
is it amenable to verbal cognition ; as we find no mention of it in the 
Vedas ; nor is it amenable to analogical cognition ; as having never been 
perceived, notliing could be known as similar to it, which makes all analogy 
impossible ; lastly, it cannot be known through presumption ; as there is 
nothing that cannot be explained without the assumption of the Apurva, 
Thus the only pramana to whicli the Apurva is amenable is negation ; 
which means that no such thing exists.” 

In answer to the above we have the following Siddlianta, as formulated 
in the above siitra. Inasmuch as sacrifices have been laid down for 
the purpose of certain definite results, to follow after the lapse of a long 
time — such deferred fruition of the action wmuld not be possible, unless 
there was an intervening agency of the Apurva. That is to say, the 
apparent inconsistency of the relationship of sacrifices and such results 
as the attainment of Heaven, etc., laid down in the Veda, — points to the 
fact that the existence of the Apurva also is laid down in the Veda itself ; 
and as such it is quite authoritative. 

The Purvapaksa argument against the assumption of Apurva is 
thus stated by Prabliakara : — The injunction imparted by the injunctive 
word only urges the agent to the performance of a certain action, and not 
towards anything desired by him ; the action is something epliemeral, and 
is not present immediately 1)efore the attainment of heaven by the agent, ; 
hence in order to meet these difficulties we .must accept the sacrifice itself 
to be either everlasting, or bringing about a certain faculty in the agent, 
or the favours of the deity; and there is no reason for assuming any such 
thing as the Apurva.” 

In answer to the above, he continues — 

‘ At the very outset you commit a mistake in assuming that the 
injunction prompts the agent to action ; wliat the injunction really does 
is to prompt him to exertion; and the particular action denoted by the 
foot is only the object of that exertion. [Thus then, what is denoted by 
the injunctive sentence is the ‘Niyoga’ (decree or mandate,); this 'man- 
date ^ urges the man to exertion ; and this ' exertion ’ pertains to some sort 
of action (denoted by the verb)]. The assumption that the action itself is 
everlasting is against all evidence ; the self also is, by its very omnipre- 
sence, inactive ; hence what brings about the final result cannot abide 



PtJBVA-MlMAMSA-SOTEAS. 11 ADHYAYA 


Tiie above passage from the Brihati is not quite clear; nor nas ir 
been possible for us to obtain a manuscript of this portion of the com- 
mentary, Rijuvimala. But the whole subject is discussed, from the 
Prabhakara standpoint, in the Prakaranapailchika (page 18o et seq.) from 

which the following may be gleaned 

There can be no doubt as to the ephemeral character of the sacri- 
fice itself; it is borne out by everyday experience. Nor can the 
sacrifice he held to be laid down for the purpose of obtaining the favour 
of the deity ; as there is no evidence in support of this ; as a matter ot 
fact also, sacrifices are never performed for that purpose; the deity is 
only one to whom theofiering is made; and we could please a deity by 

only such acts as could reach it; then again, it is not possible for any 
deity to get at all the offerings made by different men at all times ; speci- 
ally because no deity is eternal or omnipresent. Nor can we accept the 

view that the verb with the injunctive affix expresses an action tending to 

produce in the agent, a certain faculty, which is the immediate cause of 
the final result. This is the view favoured by Kumarila. We cannot accept 
this view ; as there is noprooE for the postulating of the appearance of any 
such faculty in the agent. That the sacrifice produces such a faculty is not 
proved either by Perception or by Inference, or even by Veibal AuBioi ty, 

Va^i>. texts noiiiting to any such faculty ; specially as 


based upon the consideration luai urn aufUMi - - 

final result, without some such faculty lasting during the time mtervenii 
between tbe completion of the action and the appearance of the resu 
But what presumption can justify us in assuming is some faculty or poten 
in that thing itself which is found to he incapable in the absence of tl 
faculty ; so in the case in question, the presumption can only point 
some faculty in the action, and not in the agent ; what appears in the agt 
cannot be regarded as belonging to the action ; hence what is broug 
about by the faculty abiding in the agent cannot be regarded as produc 

by the action. ^ 

The whole matter of what the Bhatta calls ‘ Apfirva and t 
Prabhakara ‘ Niyoga,’ is thus explained in the PrakaranapancM 

^ (1) The second aphorism of Adhyaya I has shown that what i 
miunotive sentence denotes is karya, something to be brought about. (2) 



I PAD A, 11 ADHIKABAI^A, Sit 1-4. 


the begiuing of Adhyiya VI, it has been shown'that, of this ksirya denoted 
by the sentence, the niyojya — i.e., the pereou X->TOtnpted to its bringing 
about — is one ndio is desirous of acquiring for Iximself some desirable 
result in the shape of Heaven and the like, — this being related to the 
karya. (3) In the Badaiyadhikarana (HI. i. 3) it has been proved that it is 
the ktrya that is the direct cause of the production of that desirable 
result which is desired by (and as such, qualifies) the prompted pereon. 
(4) In the Devat^dhikarana (Su. IX. i. 9; the Bhasya has shown that 
this karya cannot be the act (of sacrificing, for instance) ; as this act can- 
not possibly be the direct cause of the final result ; nor could it be held 
to lead to the result through the favour of the deity to whom the sacrifice is 
offered ; nor can it be regarded as leading to the result through a certain 
potency in the agent ; and it is well known that either the act itself, or any 
potency abiding in itself, does not last long enough to bring about the 
result. (5) In the ApfirvAdhikarana (II. i. 5) we have the final conclu- 
sions led up to by all the above adhikaranas; That which is denoted 
by the injunctive affix and other factors of the injunction is the kiiya 
inhering in the agent who is prompted by the sentence, and as connected 
with whom the k4rya is indicated ; as this IcArya is not cognisable by 
any other means of knowledge, it has been called Apfirva, something 
new, not known before. The connection of this IcHrya with the agent 
and the action may be thus traced : — The karya by its veiy nature is 
something brought about by kriti, or operation ; and this operation is 
none other than the exertion of the agent. In the BhavfirthMhikarana 
(II. i. 1) again, it is shown that no such exertion is possible, independently 
of some act denoted by the verbal root. Hence what the injunctive 
sentence denotes, in this connection, is the Niyoga or prompting, relating 
to that act. This act, thus being the object of that prompting, comes to be 
spoken of as the instrument by which that prompting is accomplished as 
shown under III. i. 3, Even though the kfirya is brought into existence 
at a time other than that of the appearance of the final i-esult, yet, inas- 
much as it is inseparably related to the prompted agent, — in whom the 
desire for that result is present, — there is nothing incongruous in regard- 
ing that k&rya as the direct cause of the result. This karya has been 
called Apfirva by the BhAsya by reason of its being something new to 
alT other means of knowledge, save the injunctive sentence, but the 
name given to it by Prabh^kara is Niyoga or prompting, by reason of the 
fact th4t it acts as an incentive to the prompted person (Niyojya) and 
makes Mm put fonth an exertion towards the accomplishment of the 
tk® yerbal root. This kArya or Niyoga. is expressed 




PI^EVA-MIMAMSA-SUTEAS. II ADHYAYA 


neither by the verbal root, nor by the injunctive amx, noi 
word in the sentence, but it is denoted by the sentence as 
other necessary factors being expressed by the several vs 
sentence individually, what the sentence as a whole expr 
Niyoga as related to the prompted person expressed by 
words in the sentence, {i.e., the word signifying the resn 
desiring which is the prompted person). That the Niyo^ 
pressed by the sentence is also proved by die fact that 
rule is that, that which is the principal thing made ki 
sentence forms its denotation; and there is no doubt 
things made known by the sentence, the Niyoga is the 
tant; for even though the final result has all the aj 
the most important factor, yet it is the Niyoga that is 
because it is the direct and immediate cause of the resi 
also the immediate effect of the action performed ; and fu 
the result also has to be regarded as subservient to the Nij 
of the fact that the result enters as one of the factors necet 
making up of the full character of the Niyoga. To explain- 
cannot be a true Niyoga until there is a Niyojya, the person l 
ed to exertion, as without exertion there can be no Niyoga 
without the agent there can be no exertion ; nor can an agent 
exertion -and be a Niyojya-until he is entitled to the 
resulting from that exertion ; and lastly, it is only the pe 
the result issuing from the undertaking that is entitled t( 
ance ; thus indirectly, through the agent, the result beco 
sary factor in the Niyoga ; this relation between the i 
result being similar to that between the master ^and the ser 
the servant the master cannot be a true ‘ master, and yet it 
that is the more important person of the two. 

The Prakaranapanohika raises an interesting question 1 
“ Granted that the injunctive sentence—' One de; 
should perform the jyotistoma,’— expresses the Niyoga a 
of Jyoti§toma sacrifice, and as being the dii 
But just as the sacrifice, being an effecl 
and cannot continue till the appearance 
the Niyoga also, as an effect, coul 


from the action 
attaining heaven, 
ephemeral existence. 

—so in the same manner, . „ 

transient, and as such unable to continue till the appearance of the result. 
Thus the very purpose for which the hypothesis of the Niyoga has been 
put forward, fails to be accomplished by it. This* cuts off the ground 
entirely from under the whole fabric of the Niyoga or Apffrva. ■ The 



1 PADA, ri. ADHIMBAI^A, Stt. 1-4. 


authoi’ fails to answer tliis objection satisfactorily. All that he says is 
that the Ni5^oga does not bring about the result immediately after it itself 
comes into existence, because in its action towards the bringing about 
of the I'esult, it stands in need of certain auxiliaries, which are not always 
available, and until wliose appearance the result cannot appear. This 
e.xplanatiou does not meet the difficulty that the Nij’-oga itself cannot, 
and does not, exist at the time that the result appears. He has explained 
in another place that it is through the prompted agent that the Niyoga, 
though itself appearing at the present time, brings about the result. 
This, however, is as much as to say that the Niyoga produces something 
in the agent, which latter something brings about the resirlt ; and 
thus this much-vaunted theory of the Prabhakara is found to be less 
acceptable than the Bhatta view, by which the action, — of sacrificing-— 
itself produces a certain faculty in the agent, which faculty brings about 
the result at the proper time ; while Prabhakara appears to assume a 
Niyoga intervening between the action and the something lasting that is 
produced in the agent, he does not call it faculty, but which comes to be 
the same. In order to meet the difficulty Salikanatha has been forced 
to call in the aid of ‘ Fate ; ’ he says that it is only when the Niyoga 
is aided by Fate that it brings about the result. This, after all, is a 
very poor explanation to be offered by the Mim§msanisnata ’ as he has 
called the followers of Prabhakara. 

Another question arising in this connection is that, what has been 
said above may be all right so far as those actions are concerned which 
are laid dow n as to be performed with a view to a certain result ; but 
how would it apply to those actions which are to be performed merely 
in fulfilment of a duty incumbent upon all persons, without reference 
to any result, or to those passages tliat lay down the non-doing of certain 
acts. ? The answer to this is that, in tlie explanation of Niyoga, the 
Prabhakara has brought in the result, not as something desired by the 
agent, but only as something the presence of which makes a person 
entitled to the performance of a certain act ; in the ease of those actions 
then, that are laid down as necessary duties to he performed throughout 
life, any person icho is endowed with life being entitled to the performance 
of those acts, the character of the agent becomes fully accomplished ; and 
this is all that is needed for the explanation of the Niyoga. 

By Kumarila’s view the Apurva is ‘a capability in the principal action, 
or in the agent, which did not exist prior to the performance of the action, 
existence is proved by the authority, of the scriptures.’ Before 

are performed, there is in 



pdBVA‘MlMlmA-8dTBA8. 11 AmfAtA 


tbe sacrifioeslhemselves, iix the fai-st place, an mcap.u.u., 

0 heaven, and in the second place, in the agent, that oE attaunng to 

hea.e». Both these incapacities .re set aside l.j the performance of the 

sacriHoe ; and this performance creates also a positire force or capacity, 
to ' irtne of rvhich heaven is attained ; and to this latter force or capacity 
we »ive the name ApOrva. The proof for the existaiice of sneh an 

Apa?va lies in presumption, -hased upon the fact that wthout some 
Ich force many Vedic passages are wholly inexplreable lor insmnce, 
there are many passages declaring that certain saenSces lead the 

sacriScer to heaven,- -the ides being that he g^ to heaven, no indeed 

immediately on the completion of the sacrifice, hot after death. Ihe 
auestion then arises, that as a general rule the effect comes into existence 
S its eause is still present, or immediately after the oause has 
ceased to exist; but in the case in question, the sacrifice ceases to 
exist at the present time, while the attainment of heaven comes ten or 
twelve or more years later. This can be explained only by the hypothesis 
that the saorifioe, on its completion, prodnees directly a certain potency 

Tfaculty in tl.e agent, which resides in him like many other Ml, es 

loughont life, at the end of which it leads him to heaven. Without 
Le such iuterveniiig poleno,-as the oonuecting link between the 
«rLeauditsnltimate«solt-the causal relation between these two 
f PXDlained. Apurva tlius is nothing more than a force set 
■'"Tlion by tLpeidormance of the action, -tlu^ force being the direct 
iLtrument whereby, sooner or later, the action accomplishes its result. 
There is nothing incongruous in this hypothesis ; as every action is 
actuallv found to set going certain forces, either m some substance 
or in persons connected with those substances ; and the force thus set 
going accomplishes its result, as soon as it reaches its Ml development 
tith the aid of attendant auxilliaries. The whole process is thus briefly 

stated systematically in the NySyamalavistara t 

“ (1) The sentence — ‘ one desiring heaven should perform sac iilices 
luvs down the fact that the sacrihee is instruraeiital m the bringing about 
" • ...i. iS'i TtiAn arises the Question— Jiow can the 


137 



I PAD A, III ADHIK ARANA, Stl 1-4. 


complex, being made up of a number of subsidiary sacrifices ; such for 
instance, as the Dari^apaurnatnasa sacrifices. In all sucli sacrifices, 
there are, as a rule, four kinds of Apflrva (1) The Phalapurva — 
that which brings about the result directly, and which is the immediate 
cause of the result ; (2) the SamudAyapurva— in the Dari^a-pamma- 
masa sacrifices, tiie three sacrifices performed on the New Moon day 
form one gi-oup and the three perfurmed on the Full Moon day another 
group ; each of these groups occurring at different points of time conld 
not ha\-e a single Apiirra ; hence each group has a distinct Apurva of 
its own, the two Apurvas coiubiniiig to produce the final PliaMpurva ; 
and each of these distinct Apurvas is called a ‘ Samudayapurra’ ; (3) the 
UipattyApuiwa — i.e., the three Apurvas following from each of the three 
sacrifices forming the Darfe group ; these three Apurvas lead to the 
SamndiiyApurva of the ‘ Panrnamasa ’ group, leads to the final PhalApfirva ; 
(4) the Ajfignpurva— each of these sacrifices of the group is made up 
of a number of minor acts, each of which in its turn, must have a 
distinct Apurva of its own ; as otherwise the act could not help in the 


iiie purpose served by tins Adliikarana has been thus explained in the 
Taatravartika : — “If the result were directly connected, not to a tran- 
scendental apurva but, to the material offered into the fire and such other 
visible accessories of the sacrifice, then there would be transcendental 
results following from each of tliese factors. And thus in the case 
of any particular material being lost, or otherwise rendered useless, during 
the performance of a sacrifice, it would be absolutely impossible to 
finish the sacrifice with a substitute. In ease, however, the result is 
related to the action, the use of the material would be merely a visible 
one ; and as such its place could very well be taken by its substitute, 
which is equally capable of fulfilling that visible purpose.” 


Adhikarana III. 


■Divisions of Action into Primary 
and Secondary. 
sCrTRA n-i-6. 

ti =* i ? k u 

Tani, those, aforesaid verbs, Dvaidhara, are of two .kinds. 

fSl GunapradhanabliQtani, being primary and secondary. f 

Verbs (and actions denoted by them) are of two 
primary and secondary.”~6, ’ ■ h 









pOBVA-MlMAMSA-SOmAS. U ADHYAYA. 


. OOMMBNTRY. 

It would seem fratn the above that there is always an Apflrva in 
connection with each distinct verb ; consequently the author now 
to differentiate the Subsidiary from the Primary actions 
alone are followed by an Apfirva.) But on this point we have the follow- 
ine P4rvapakska.-“ All verbs having the coiqmon character of a veib, 
inasmuch as the potency of the objective, proceeding from the tobe 

accomplished, is always brought about by fully accomplishe o ] , 

IZn! aenotU by all verbs are all primary. That is to say, so long as a 
deffnite purpose can be assumed, it is only right that every action, being 

expressed by a verb, should be accepted as serving a distinctly useful 

purpose, and as such, being Primary, and the means of bringing about an 
Larva. Consequently, like the verb ‘ yajati (offers a sacrifice), the 
nmaning of the verbs C avahanti ’), and the like also have so many distinctly 
TeL purposes served by the corn, &c. That is to say, just as the sacri- 
ficing is accomplished by the material offered, so IS the threshing accom- 
plished by the corn that is threshed. And as such the threshing must 
bring about an Apurva.” 

To the above, we make the following reply : — 

Siddh&nta.-In the matter of the relationship subsisting between the 
noun and and the verb, that action alone of which we do not perceive any 
distinct purpose can be accepted as leading to a transcendental result ; 
which cannot be in the case of any other action ; and such a supposition 
would be absolutely groundless. That is to say, in all cases where a 
certain action is related to a certain material, inasmuch as no action 
can be accomplished without a certain material, the material, being in 
the first instance found to bring about the action, is at once taken 
as serving the distinctly visible purpose of accomplishing the action 
Subsequently, however, in certain cases the action turns upon itself 
and imparts an aid to the material itself (as in the case of threshing 
which serves to purify the corn) ; while in other cases, the action rests 
within itself, its sole pui-pose lying in its own fulfilment (as in le 
cuse of Saerifieing). And in this latter case, there naturally arises in us 
a desire to know what the use of the action would be ; and as no visible 
nurpose is found to be se^^^^ we can always assume a transcendental one 
(in the shape of an Apilrva). In that case, however, where the action is 
found to have its sole purpose in the fulfilment of a visible purpose-such 
as the preparation of rice, for instance,— we can have no business to assume 
a transcendental purpose ; and the Injunction of the action haying beei 











PADA, in ABniKABAI^A, S± 8. 


justified by a visible purpose, tlie action is not recognised as bringing 
about any transcendental result. 


Adhikarana 111(B). — Definition of Secondary Actions. 

StTTRA II-i-8. 


u c: U 

l|: Yaib, by means of which. 5 Tu, while. ^ Dravyam.Ja material substance. 

Chikirsyate, is meant to be produced or purified. Guijah, secon- 
dary. ?r9r Tatra, in that case. Fratlyeta, should be recognised, 

Tasya, in regard to these. Dravyapradhanatvat, on account of the 

material substance being the dominant factor. 

, 8.. While those that tend to produce or purify a 

material substance are to be recognised as secondary, because , 
in regard to these the material substance is the dominant 



pdBV A-UtMAMSA-SijTEAS. II ADHYAYA 


Those actions, however, that either proauce a luaiw d. 
by the Laying, —ov uceomplish or prepare the pi 

priest by appointment, —or purify it,—e.g., the purifying 
threshing, or the preparing of the rice by grtndvng-aro 
ones, because they are always subservient to the piepc 

matei’ial. - . • + 

Without the aforesaid differentiation of actions into 

secondary, we would have the following aiionialies. :-If 
such distinction, even where the material to be offered is 
Priyahgu, the threshing, which would be necessary for the 
the Priyafign, would come to be applied to this urfhi corn, 
ing to that theory the threshing is also a prnuary action 
+1,^ matfirinl meiitioiiecl along with it (viz., the vrihi) cou 


AdUkarana J V.—The character of Frimary does not oem 
to such actions as the cleaning of the sruha, etc. 

SOTBA ll-i-9 to 12. 

^ Dharmamsire, i« rt.a case of all actions 3 ^ ^ar 

character of primary action. ??miSyat, there would be. Anuvpt 

because of the non-fulfilment of any visible effect, sfmmn. Pryajavat, as m 

case of the Pray aja sacrifice: 

9 “ Actions would bav© th© primary character ; uecai 

tlieirii-Ot producing any visible effects. 9. 


, . 



■/ PADA, IV AmilRAMhJA, SA. IL 


COMMMHTAEY, 

la the course of a sacrificial perforaiance tliere are many such actions 
us the sanctifying of the various implements, Sram, etc. ; and with regard 
to these tlie question arises as to whether these should he regarded as 
Primary or Secondary Actions. 

The Purvcvpakm view on this point is as follows :—We may regard 
those actions as secondary which produce some visible effect, either in 
the shape of a material substance or in that of some perceptible 
change in a substance. But so far as the purely sanctificatory actions 
are concerned they are not found to pi-oduee any perceptible effect; 
e.g.^ wlien a little water is sprinkled over the sugar, the sanctification that 
is produced in it is a purely imperceptible one. Oonseqiientljq as these 
actions are not productive of either a material substance or a visible effect, 
we cannot !)ut regard them as ‘‘ primary ” according to sutra (7). 


Tulyasnuiivar, on account of the fsiniilarity of mention, 

Va, but. Itaraih, to others. Sadharmab, similar. Syat, should be' 

10. But on account of tiie similarity of mention 
they should be similar to others. — 10. 

COMMENTARY. 

Siitra (10) represents the SiddMnta view wliioli is as follows : — 

As a matter of fact we find tliat in all the texts that speak of second- 
ary actions, the material substance, or the effects therein meant to be 
produced, is always expressed by .means of words with the accusative end- 
ing ; for instance, ‘ vrihin avahanti,’ ‘ purodailam prathayati.’ In the texts 
that speak of the actions under consideration we find the same fact, e.g., 

‘ srubam sa7nmur$ti.’ Thus as in both cases the words used are similar, 
there is no reason why the sanctifying of the sriiva should not be taken 
in the same category as the threshing of the corn. Thus, even thougli 
the subsidiary character of such actions is not proved by the appearance 
of any perceptible result, yet we have for it the authority of the Vedic 
word itself. ■ ; 

\\ II 

Dravyopadesali, (there is) mention of tiie material substance. 

11. , If it he argued that “there is such mention of 
i [in the case of primary actions. 

' :av . ."'i' '' "■■■ ' . ' ■ ■ : 



Pi)RVA-MtMAMSA-SdTRA8. 11 ADBYAYA 


Tlie argument on which the airidlianta nas oeeu ... -- 

accusative ending in ^sruvam’ makes the substance Sruva the P’'edo“i- 

nanfcfactor, and thereby makes the action secondary. But as a matte 
of fact, this argument cannot be accepted as conclusive ; as we meet with 
many instances where the accusative ending is used in connection wit 
the Lmes of materials where the material is distinctly intended to be 

the secondary factor and the action to be the primary factor ; e.fif sncti 

sentences as saktun juhoti. eka kapdlavi juhoti. Thus the mere fact of t e 
sruva being mentioned with the accusative ending cannot make tne 
action of its sanctification secondary. 

% in H 

H Na, not so Tadarthatvat, because it is for the sake of that, 

gngwi Lokavat, as in ordinary life, Tasya, ot the material. Uia, yet. 

^esabhfltatvat, on accdunt of its being subordinate. 

12. It is not so, because it [the second case-ending 
in tbe passages cited also] denotes tbe accusative as in ordi- 

t the material [denoted by the word 
case-ending] is subordinate [to the 


nary parlance .; ana yt 
having the second 
action]. — 12. 

According to rules of ...... 

predominance. ' As for such e-xpressions as “ sc 
the accusative ending implies the instrumental, 
a special case accepted for special reasons, and it ' 
rule that the accusative ending denotes predomin 

The special circumstances bearing upon 
juhoti ” are thus explained in the Tantrav§,rtika : 

In the word saktun the Accusative by itself 
only ; but this being found to be incompatible wit 
we accept it to indicate its correlative, suhservietv 
its own natural potency, the accusative always 
in the character of the -predominant ; but this na^ 
in the sentence in question, to be ineompatibh 
authoritative ; and as such it cannot be admittec 
pbaracter of thskdraka or case-relation is also inc 
as its invarisble concomitant, we accept this m 
Accusative, as not incompatible with the rsst of t1 



of the Homa. But such generic agency not being of much use, we naturally 
seek for a specific function of the Saktu ; and thus corne to the conclusion 
that it must be taken as the Instrument, specially in accordance with the 
law that ' that which is an accomplished entity is laid dowui for the sake 
of that which is yet to be accomplislied ’ — as propounded in Sutra VI. i. 1. 

Question . — ‘*But in wdiat way do you find the predominance of the 
Saktu incompatible with the rest of the sentence ?” 

Reply , — Only that substance is held to be an object of purification, 
or preparation, which has already been utilised or is to be utilised ; as for 
the Saktu, it is never going to be used after the Homa ; nor has it ever 
been utilised before. That is to say, only that substance wdiich is found to 
have been utilised in some way, or which is to be utilised at some future 
time, is capable of any process of purification ; and as such it attains pre- 
dominance with reference to the action. And when the substance concern- 
ed is such as has never been utilised, nor is going to be utilised, any 
purification of that would be absolutely useless ; and lienee any injunction 
of such preparation \voiild be wdiolly purposeless. The Saktu in question 
is such that it is never used before the Homa ; nor can it be used after it, 
having been turned into ashes; specially as there is no Injunction as to 
any such ashes of Saktu being used. Under the cireumstancevS, the only 
alternatives that we have are — (1) that the wdiole sentence is absolutely 
useless, or (2) that the Accusative is to be taken in its indirect sense. And 
the authority of the Veda having been an established fact, there can be 
no hesitation in accepting the second alternative. It is a common fact 
that the direct meaning of a word is ahvays set aside as mistaken,. when- 
ever it is faced by such exceptional circumstances (of incompatibility). 
And the acceptance of the indirect meaning of a word is always due to the 
necessity of avoiding the uselessness of the sentence ; otherwise if there 
were no such uselessness, it would be always possible to accept the original 
signification of the word. It is for tl^ese reasons that we accept the sen- 
tence in question to be an injunction of a Homa with the Saktu as the 
necessary mateiial, such an Injunction being in keeping with the context 
in which it occurs. 

The practical purpose of the Adhikarana is as follows :*»~(l) ln the 
piiinary sacrifice, there being many auxiliaries to the cleaning of the sruk, 
we conclude that the number of such auxiliaries must be three only, in 
accordance with the naaxim of the ' Kapinjala MXI.i.38-45) and hence 
evenwhen there is a multiplication of vessels, ---as in the case of the 
Pai^uchaturm^sya/ only three sruks would have to be cleaned, ih accordance 
the^'the^^ In accordance with the lSiddh4nta, 


I pAda, tv adeikabana, Sii. m 








P^RVA-MIMAMSA-SOTRAS. II adhyAya 


be ele?iiiefl ; because of tlie necessity 
ith each substance. (2) And again, 

‘ Pa^u ’ (TV.i.11-16), significance at- 
B Paridhi would have to be cleaned, 
according to the Siddhanta, all Ae 
and tliere would be some distinction 
plication ofParidhis. (3) And simi- 
1 (according to the Purvapaksa) to 
■ding to the Siddhanta) to apply to all 
to the law “ Visaye laukikam syM,” 
a stuvate,’ the cleaning 
'■ ig to the Pfirvapaksa; while 
of oi'dinary fire being absolutely 
only to such sacrificial 


on the other hand, all the sruks liave to 
of repeating the purificatory process w 
in accordance with the maxim of the 
taching to the number ‘ one,’ only or 
according to the Purvapaksa ; while 
Paridhis would have to be cleaned ; 
made in a case where there is a multi 
larly, the circling round fire, believe 
cake, comes (accor 
(4) Sirailarljr, according 

agn i mupasam4dh 4y 


appertain to one 
the cakes. 

in the case of the sentence 
would pertain to the ordinary fire, accordin 
according to the Siddh4nta, the cleaning 
useless, the cleaning laid down must appertain 
fires, as the ‘ Ahavaniya ’ and the like. 

Adhiharana 7. --MaliendrddUkarana : 

The Stuti and the §astra hymns are primary. 
sOTRAS II— i— 18 to 29. 

tatro^r: ^utaiastrayoh, from the stotra and sastra hymns, g lu, in 
Saraskarah, (proceeds) a sanctification. Yajyavat, as in 

tTe case orYajya hym,m. DevatAbhidhanatvat, because they 

signify deities. i • t j. +• 

13. “ The Stotra and Sastra hymns bring about sancti- 
fication like the Yajya hymns, because they distinctly signify 

deities. 13. commentary. 

Stotra is the name of those hymns that consist of mantras capable 
of being set to music and snug, -as distingnished from the Sastra which is 
the name given to the hymns consisting of mantras not sung. The case 
of these is brought up as an exception to the general principle laid down 
in the eighth sfitra above. 

A hymn is that which describes the relationship subsisting _ between 
'an object and its properties; and as such, in tlie first instance, it is accom- 
plished by such objects and properties ; specially as in the absence of these 
the hymn would be mere words, and not capable of being called 
'a “ hymn.’’ Of these two again, inasmuch as the properties described 
: 'do not form part of the action to be performed, they serve no useful pur- 
■- '^6^ witb rPg3'*'d to the action ; and as such they are taken absolutely as 




f 



I PAD A, F ADIITKAliANA, BA 14. 


serving the purpose of completing tlie hymn itself. Then, the question 
ariseS'^-The hymn thus accompilishecl, does it serve the purpose of bring- 
ing about an idea of the object hymned? and as siicli, is it subservient to 
this latter? 'or, is it something independently by itself, leading to a certain 
transcendental result ? 

On this point we liave the following Pimapahm :' — “ Inasmuch as 
we actually find tlie hymns perceptibly bringing about a remembrance 
(of the i.)eity) tliat serves to accomplish the sacrifice, we cannot but admit 
them to be subservient to such Deities.” 

sidditanta. 




w n 

Arihena, by its meaning, g Tu, but. Apkrisyata, would be 

carried away. Devatanamachodanarthasya, to the mention of 

the deities’ name, 3pT^irr?^r5 GunabhOiratvat, because it would be subservient. 

14. But in that case the hymn would he carried 
away from its sphere hy the meaning [purpose served by it] ; 
because it would be subservient to the mention of the deities’ 
name. — 14. 

COMMENTARY. 

, The sutra points out the fact of the Purvapaksa being contrary to 
other authoritive evidences. 

Tliat is to say, if the hymn in question consists of a Mantra, the 
object described in which does not exist at the time, then this object 
would carry away the hymn from its pre.sent context, and as such, there 
would'#3e a setting aside of that which is directly laid down. For instance, 
in a case, where wo have an Injunction laying down the use of a particular 
hymn on a particular occasion, if the Injunction happen to contain the 
name of a Deity — as in the case of a Hymn addressed to Indra being laid 
down as to be sung in connection with the ‘ Mahendragraha ’ sacrifice,— 
the Injunction would depend upon the Deity therein mentioned ; and 
hence in a case ^where that particular Deity (Indra) does not exist (as in 
the case of the MAhendra Sacrifice) — the particular hymn will have to be 
carried, away from the Mahendra vSacrifice to another sacrifice where 
Indra might exist. And this would be a direct contradiction of what is 
authorised , by the order and position of the hymn, <fec. The particular 
sequential .order that would, be contradicted in the present instance is that 



PUBVA-MImAMSA-SOTBAS. II ADHYAYA 


while the position contradicted would be— either the mention ot the hymn 
by the Injunction o£ the Rathantara, or the particular context in which 

they occur. 

n n 

Va^avat, like the word ‘ Va^a.’ Va, but, Gunartham, 

qualificatory, Syat, eould be. 

15. “ But the the word Mdhendra could he taken as 

pointing to a qualification, exactly as in the case of the word 
‘vast.’ 15. 

OMMENTARY. 

The Phrvapaksi offers on exaplanation of the difficulty urged by 

the Siddh4nta in the preceding sfftra. 

“ The above objection does not apply to the case in question. Be- 
cause a caiTying away of the. Mantra could be possible only if it mentioned 
something entirely different ; in the case in question, however, the hymn 
in question belongs to the same Deity that is referred to by the name 
‘ Mahendra ’ ; as the words ‘ Tndra ’ and ‘ Mahendra ’ are non-different. 
That is to say, the Indra that is hymned by the hymns in question is the 
same that is sacrificed to. in the Mahendra sacrifice ; and as such, the 

object referred to being actually present, wherefore should there be any 

necessity of carrying it away from its context? Nor is it absolutely 
necessary for the Mantra to make mention of every minute detail of 
the object connected with the sacrifice ; it is always found to mention 
something more or less than that, in accordance with its own capabi- 
lity, and as such it does not matter if the Injunction ^ of the Hymn 
speaks of Indra only, without the qualification ‘Mah4.’ For these 
reasons, the Hymn should be taken as pointing to Indra as apart fi«m any 
attributes, because much significance does not attach to the attrioutes, as 
the attributes are pointed out by the context itself ; all this being exactly 
similar to the pointing out of materials apart from qualifications. Nor 
does the Deity consist of the word alone— as we shall show under Chapters 
IX and X. And hence Indra cannot be taken as different fiom 
Mahendra, simply on the ground of difference between the words. 

The example of the ‘ va^a,’ ‘ barren goat ’ is cited in support of this ; 
though for Vayu, the texts lay down the barren goat, the animal, in all 

related mantras, is spoken of as ‘ goat ’ only. 

“Thus then,, it must be admitted that that which is mentioned by 

' the, word ‘ Indra ’ is the same that is mentioned by the word ‘ Mahendra 
“sDwially as there is no reason for assuming the two to be distinct. 





For these reasons, the word ‘ Mahendra ’ cannot be explained 
that Indra is the deity of the sacrifice, and that Indra is qualified by 
atness. What is possible is that the word be taken as one independent 
>le, independently of the component parts, as in that case alone could 
nominal affix be rightly explaind. And. 'thus it is established that 
IS- 4 deity' biher tiban Indra. ' ' - ' ^ 


1 PAD A, F ABEIKAEAKA, S£ 14. 


Oonsequently, there being no ground for the charge of the improper 
carrying away of the hymns, these must be admitted to be the subseiwient 
accessories of the Deity,” 

Na, this cannot be. drutisainvayitvat, because of the 

coiinection with tiie dirext word of the Veda. 

16. This cannot be, as the mantra is connected with 
the direct word of the Veda. — 16. 

COMMENTARY. 

It has been urged above that the hymns pointing to Indra, as apart 
from all qualifications, there is no need for any carrying away. But this 
is not so ; because the carrying away of the hymns is by no means avoid- 
able. For, if there were sufficient grounds for holding the identity of 
Indra and Mahendra, then alone would it not be necessaiy to carry away 
the hymns ; as a matter of fact, however, there is a distinct difference 
between the two. 

To explain — In the case of the word ‘ Mahendra ’ some people seeking 
to establish its identity with the word ‘Indra,’ explain it etymologically 
as ‘MahS,n’ + ‘ Indrab ’= ‘ Mahendrah ’ (the Great Indra), and then 
‘ Mahendro devatil asya ’ becomes ‘ Mahendra,’ (that Sacrifice of which the 
Great Indra is the presiding Deity). And in that case what the word 
* Mahendra ’ would signify would he that of which the presiding Deity is 
Indra as endowed with the attribute of greatness. But such a connotation 
is not possible ; as the signification of a word taken as one complete 
whole is always more autlioritive than that which is sanctioned by its 
etymological constructions ; and hence the word ‘ Mahendra ’ more directly 
denotes a distinct Deity in the shape of Mahendra than it does the ‘ Great 
.Indra.' 

Then again, if the word ‘ Mahendra ’ is broken up etymologically 
(as shown above), there is a distinct syntactical split ; and if, in order to 
this split, the etymological explanation is not resorted to, then the 
‘ Mahendra ’ distinctly denotes something entirely different from 





pdEVA-MtMAMSl-8t)TEAS. II ADHYAYA 


Nor can it be urged tliat ladra himself came to be cailed Mahendra, 
the ‘ Great Indra,’ after he had performed the grand feat of killing ’Vrittra; 
as in that case the Veda, in which the word ‘Mahendra’ occurs, 
would have a beginning in time. Consequently, the mention ot the killing 
of Vfittra must be taken as only eulogising ‘ Maheiulra ,’ which is a name 
eternal and complete in itself. 

li n II 

Vyapade&bhedat, because of the difference of names, n Cha, 
also. > P 1 / \ 

17. Also because of the difference of the (two) 


nameS: 


COMMENTARY. 

Mahendra ’ must be regarded as two distinct deities 
reason that the two names are distinct. 


gjjj: Gunah, the qualification. Cha, further. Anarthakah, useless. 

Syat, would be. 

18. And further because the qualification would he 
useleos. — 18. 

COMMENTARY. 

Whether the qualification be eternal or transient (f.e., natural or 
caused), if it be taken only as eulogising ladra, and not as entering into 
his deifio character, theu|its mention (in the sentence ‘ Mahendragraha,’ <^c.) 
would be absolutely useleiss. Because the only purpose for which a deity 
is spoken of, or enjoined, is to show how the particular action could be 
performed with reference to Him. And whether the qualification be laid 
down or not, when the performance of the Action would be quite possible 
with regard -to mere Indra, there would be no use of laying down the 
qualification. 

mi n h n 

. g^rr Tatha, As also. Yajyapuroi uchoh, in the case of ttie Yajya 

and the Furoruch mantras. 

19. As also in the case of the Yajya aud the Puroru- 
ch mautras.: — 19. 

COMMENTARY. 

' ’ The Yajy4 and the Puronuvakya, mantras are recited at sacrifices. 
.By means of the Yajya paantras offerings to the Deities are thrown into 
'(th^ fixe ; and by means of the Piironuvakya mantras the Deities are invoked. 
^■Bofch these sets of mantras make mention, either directly or indirectly, of 



t pADA, V ADHtKAEAI^A, Sit SI 149 

r .■■■■■" ■■■■ "■ .■ ' ■■■■'■ ■ ■ ' " '■ ■ ^ 

pavticiilai’ Deities to whom they are severally applicable. Isow as regards 
the deities Tiidra and Mahendra, we find that the Yajya and thePiiromi- 
vakya mantras for Indra difler from those of Mahendra. From this also 
it is clear that Indra and Mahendra are two distinct Deities. 

Oil this Sutra Mr. Ivnnte makes the following observations : — 

“ Jaimini uses tlie term Pnroruch in the Sutra. It deserves to be 
specially considered. Asvalayana in liis Srauta Sutra (I. 0. 10. 5. 4.) 
states tliat there are seven riks of the name of Purornch. These riks 
. are not to be met with in the printed edition of the Rigvecla Sarphita. 

There is a separate Adhyaya called Nivid-kuntapa, which gives the 
Purornch verses. These last are not in any way connected with the Y4jyfl- 
mantr-a. But the term “ Puroruch ” is used in the Sutra in connection 
with the Yajya, while the Puroruch-mantras are to be recited on the 
occasion of the repetition of what is known as Prauga Shastra. Hence 

commentators interpret “Puroruch” verses into Puronuvakyn verses.. 

With regard to the use of 

the term “Puroruch” in the sense of Puronuvakya we believe that the Sutra 
offers a difficulty which can be solved only on the supposition that the 
Sutra has been incorrectly handed down.” 

n Ro 11 

Va^ayam, in the case of the word “Vasa.” Artbasaraa- 

vayat, because the thing is in contact, 

20. In the case of the word “ Vasa,” iDecanse the thing 
is in contact (with our perceiving senses, — what has heen 
urged above in Sutra 35 cannot be accepted as right). — 20. 

COMMENTARY. 

It has been urged above in Sutra 15, that the object laid down as 
the “ barren goat ” is subseej^uently spoken of as “ goat ” only, and hence 
the qualification ‘barren,’ and also ‘goat’ must be taken as qualifying 
the object, and not as having any independent significance. But the fact 
is that such objects as the ‘ barren goat ’ and the like, help the sacrifice, 
by their material forms ; and as such all their specifications being directly 
perceptible, when it is found that the purpose is equally served by the 
use of a generic form ‘ goat ’ only, the Manti’a does not attach much 
■importance to the actual words “barren goat” employed in the fore- 
■ going Injunction. • . 

M II , 

'' I’^^cYatfa,' wherever.,-, .f(% Iti,’ there. ,,gr Va, but. Artbavafvat, 

fci • V ' because disiindtly-useful purpose would be served. . Syat, it could be. 







pdB^A-MiMlMSA-SdTRAS. II ADIIYXyA 


21. “ There may be [a carrying away ol the Jiymn m 

question] to an action wherever mere Inclra might be the 
Deity, and as a distinctly useful purpose would be served 
by it [there can be nothing objectionable in it].— 21.” 

COMMENTARY. 

The Sutra may be interpreted in two ways : (i) “ The Purvapaksa 
could be rightly renounced only if it were found to be opposed to a strong 
authority. As a matter of fact, however, it is not so ; because the Lifiga 
(Indicative Power) of tiie words of a iiymn is certainly much stronger than 
t.lhat of order or context, etc. ; and hence we cannot very well give up the 


Amnatesu, with those that are laid 


not be the case with those 
1 the Vedas.— 22. 

TARY. 

•ses or words consists in reading and 
1 they occur in different parts of the 
isferred are simply redundant and 


mantras. 

lantras. 






msm$ 


1 PIDA, V ADHIKABANA,:SA 23, 


These mantras are to be repeated on the occasion of the third 
Somadibation of the Agnistoma saciifice. They constitute the Agni 
manota Ststra which is described in the .Aitareya Brahamana (IIL 27), 
where it is considered whether the mantras are to be transferred back- 
wards and forwards or not. Tlie Sanskrit word for hackirard transference 
is * apakarsa ' and for forward transference is Utkarsa. The ases of 
Utkarsa or Apakar&a are mentioned in the Vedas. Therefore we can 
not adjust or arrange them ; the Vedas help themselves. 

As a matter of fact, we find that in many places we do not find the 
same meaning in all Mantras that are laid down in that connection, when 
these latter are removed from that context. For instance, in the case of 
the sentence ‘ Yamyah safisanti’ and the like— inasmuch as Yama is not 
the Deity of the otlier Grahas, if the Mantras laid down in that context were 
to be removed from there, they could not point to him. And as in that 
case the very Injunction of these could be useless, it would be necessary 
to admit the fact of their leading to transcendental results. And this may 
be said of all similar cases ‘as the one in question). And hence we cannot 
accept the hymn to be merely subservient to the Deity, 






' 




punvA-utMlMsA-sCTUAa. n adeyAya 


we find that the Mantras laid down do not mention any object tnat appears 
in tlie sacrifice in its material form, we have to accept the fact of their 
leading to transcendental results. But because a transcendental result 
is admitted in one case, that is no reason why we should reject a visib e 
purpose, even where it is present, and always assume a transcendental one. 
For instance, because the reciting of the Vaisnavi verse is found to serve 
only a transcendental purpose, it does not follow that only kanscendenta 

results follow also from that of the YajyA and the like, which are found 

to serve distinctly visible purposes. 

■ Apiva.it is not so. ^rutisarayogat, because of direct 

mention. Prakarane. appearing in the cmtext. Stautishamsat,. 

such words as “Stauti” and "^amsati." Knyotpaitim, production 

of transcendental result, Vidadhyatam, could bring about. 

24, Tlie above position is not tenable, as on account 
of the direct mention in the Veda [of the locative and the 
genitive, etc.], such words as ‘stauti’ and ‘satnsati appeai- 
ino- in the context should be taken as bringing about trans- 




as subseryientiy pointing oat the Deity, 


/ 1>ADA, V AmUKAEAl^A, S4. 24. 


And further, the various case-endings that we come across — viz., the 
locative in ‘ Kavatishu stuvati,’ the genitive in ‘ Indrasya viiyani ’ and the 
accusati^•e in “ Praugam samsati ” — as also the words ‘ Stauti ’ ‘ Samsati ’ 
and the like, would have their direct meaning only according to our 
theory, according to 3 'ou, they will have to be taken as signifying some- 
thing else. That is to say, the action of denoting the qualification and the 
qualified resting in the letters of a word, thus alone could the presence 
of the locative be explained. If, on the other hand, the Kavati were taken 
as serving tlie purpose of pointing out the Deity, then the word would 
have to appear with the Instrumental ending. 

Then again, the Injunction or BhavauA, of eulogy in the word 
‘ Stauti,’ and ‘ Saipsati ’ — is cognised as extending over a definite period of 
time ; and in this Injunction, tiie denotation of the root .serves as the 
means ; while all other noun.s, with several endings, come to be related, 
only in so far as they help in the fulfilment of what is signified by the root. 
Thus then, when the mantras serve the purpose of accomplishing the hymns, 
then, inasmuch as thej^ accomplish something that is desired, they serve a 
purpose laid dowm in the scriptures, and as such come to have a distinctly' 
useful end ; when they ilo the manifestation of the Deity, on the other 
hand, they do something that is not laid down in the scriptures ; and as 
such are found not to serve any apparent purpose. Hence it is more 
reasonable by far to have the hymns serving distinctly useful purposes. 

Further, for us, the genitive (In ‘Indrasya virynni, etc.) directly 
expresses the subordinate character of the deity ; and that which is sub- 
ordinate cannot be the predominant factor ; hence it being impossible 
for the Deity to be the predominant factor, the mantras cannot he taken 
as subservient to them; and consequently predominance must be attributed 
to the Hymn. If, in the case in question, predominance belonged to the 
Deity, then, as it would be expressible by a noun only, the word mentioning 
it would be found with the nominative ending, which could not express any- 
thing else, — as we find in the sentence “ agnirmurdhA,” etc., etc. .In the 
case in question, however, even that which we find having the nomina- 
tive ending is actually found, — on account of the fact of the homogeneity 
of the sentence as preceded by the capability of the words used, — to be 
for the purpose of expressing the connection of the qualification ; as for 
instance, ‘ Indra yAto jangainasyavasitasya rajA,’ And as there is no use 
of the qualifications, these cannot be accepted as the predominant factor; 
and hence, tbe only reasonable course open to us is to accept the word 
've of the Deity to the subservient to the hymn, which latter cannot 



pdBVA-MlMAMSA-SUTEAS. II ADHYAYA 


And thus the words ‘Sfcauti,’ and ‘ Sarasati cannot, many way, 
be taken as serving the purpose of the indirect indication (of the Deity) , 
and as such predominance must be attached to the eulogistic Hymn 
only. 

W W 

25. Also because of the distinctness implied by the 
word. — 25. 

COMMENTARY. 

We find it declared in the Veda that “ the Agnistoma is accompa- 
nied by twelve hymns;” and here the mention of the number ‘twelve’ 
shows that each hymn is distinct by itself. If it were not so, and if 
all the hymns equally served the purpose of pointing out the Deity, there 
could be no mention of the number ‘ twelve.’ If, on the other hand, 
the manifestation of the Deity by all the Hymns be not accepted to be 
identical, a distinct Deity could come to be pointed out by each verse, and 
bv each word : and thus being innumerable, they could not be spoken 





29. Tken again tliere is fulfilment of tlie re- 
suit. ^'—29. 

- , ' , - - ' - . ’ commintaey. . ” ■ ' I'-:!" 

, We find in flie Mantras coraposing the hymns in qnestiop requests 
for the fulfilment of certain desirable results. The particular desirable 
results thqt are asked for in the Mantra wo^h} be possible only if the 


r PAD A, F ADHIKAEANA, SA S9, 


COMMBNTAEY.- 

The Vedic text ^'sainbadhdhe yh stotra-shastre ” (the Stotra and the 
^^hastra hymns ai-e related) shows that the Veda recognises a difference 
between the two; as it is only when two thingsare different that tliey 
can be related to one another. Now, if both the hymns were to serve 
the same purpose of signifying the Deity (Indra), there would be practically 
no difference between the two. Tliey can, on tlie other hand, be 
regarded as distinct only if eacli of them serves the purpose of accom- 
plishing a distinct Apilrva, Thus we have the authority of the A%la 
itself in support of the view that the two hymns accomplish distinct 
transcendental results and are, as such, Primaries. 


^ II w 


Abhidhanam, mention. % Clia, also. gf;^?r?r, Karmavat, like 
that of the Primary Actions. 

28. Their mention also is similar to the mention 
of other Primary Actions.— 28. 

COMMENTARY. 

(i) Tn the text ‘pra-ugani sainsati,’ inasmuch as the Pra-uga- 
Hymn is spoken of by means of the accusative, this would be another 
argument in favour of tlie view tliat the hymn is a 'primary by itself. 
The principal action is always such as is desired for its own sake 
(and as such accompanied by the accusative ending) — e.g., ‘agnihotrm 
juhoti,’ ‘ f1gh4ramaghflrayati ’ etc. This could not be the case with the 
subsidiary actions, which are wholly subordinated toothers, and as such 
not desired in themselves. 

(ii) The Sdtra may be explained in anottier way. The very men- 
tion of the two names ‘ Stotra’ and ‘ Sastra’ is meant to point to the fact 
of these being principal actions ; otherwise the word used should have 
been prakArfana (mainfestation) only ; or there would be no name at 
all,' as in the case of the words ‘avahanti’ and the like. 



PUBVA-UIMAMSA sOteas. II ADHYAYA 


requests are always 

utioii. According to 
ailts would be asked for from the Deity, 
L', as in the case of ordinary 
the Master (Principal factor-Deity) exists, 
his I'eq^uest to the servant (the subsi- 
of manifesting the Deity). 


hymn were a principal action by itself 
preferred to one who occupies t 
to you, on the other hand, the res 
which you hold to he the predominant factor 
sacrifices ; because so long as t.*^ 
no one would think of prefering 
diary hymn which serves the purpose 

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE ADHIK ARANA, 

The above is an exposition of the Adhikarana according to^ the 

Bhlsya. The Tantravartika, however, takes exception to this exposition 

and contends that Indra and Mahendra are the names of the same Deity, 
arguin g that in the compound Mahendra the two factors ‘Mah&' and Indra 
do not as the Bhasya holds, function simultaneously; and therefore by 
the gradual functioning of these two factors all that the word ‘ Mahendra’ 
denotes is Indra qualified hj greatness. Thus the mam position of the 
PArvapaha remaining unshaken, the Sidhdnti must have recourse to 
another line of argumentation with a view to the effectual refutation of 
the Ptlrvapahsa. 

The following is the Siddhanta as explained by the Vartika ; 

As a matter of fact, the Deity enters into the sacrifice, not in its 
material form, but in the verbal (i.c., in the form in which it happens 
to be mentioned in the Scriptural Injunctionj; consequently, inasmuch 
as it is by the word ‘ Mahendra’ that the Deity is mentioned, we cannot 
but accept Mahendra as the Deity. Even if the meanings of the two words 
‘ Indra’ and ‘ Mahendra ’ be identical, -the deity in the particular Sacn- 
ffce in question must be that which is spoken of by the word ‘ Mahendra’ 
in accordance with the law laid down in the Sfftra : ‘ Vidhiiihabdasya 
raantratve, &c.,’ (X. iv. 23 )— and none other. And hence the character 
of the deity could not belong even to those mentioned by such names 
as ‘ Bribadindra,’ &c., -words that are more akin to ‘Mahendra’ than 
to ‘ Indra ’ — to say nothing of such other words as Indra and the like. 
When we find a certain Deity in a certain form laid down in connection 
with a certain sacrifice,— even though the Deity be the object denoted, 

and not the merely ‘ verbal’ form, yet, if we find the slightest difference 

from it in another otherwise expressed, we cannot admit this to be the 




I PAD A, V ADHIKAEAlsU, 8il 29. 


alone ; hence we can be assured of the fact of the sacrifice having been per- 
formed in clue accordance with the Injunction in the Veda, onh^ when we 
actually find that the Deity invoked has been exactly the same as is tliere* 
in laid down, [f, however, the slightest difference is made in that,— the 
fuiictioning of the Injunction having ceased with the laying down of 
the real Deity, Ac., — we will have to look for another authority for this 
slightly different Deity ; but as a matter of fact, there is no such autho- 
rity ; and as such the invocation of that Deity cannot but be unautho- 
ritative. This will be explained later on, where it is showui that ^Agni is 
the Deity of the Ashtakapala, and not of the Ajya, because with regard 
to tlie latter Agni is not laid down as the Deity. In accordance with 
this rule (1) when the Injunction has spoken of liidra as tlie Deity, the 
(leific character cannot be attributed to Agni, (2) when India is laid down 
as the Deity of Soma, lie cannot be the Deity of the Oake, (3) when 
India is laid down as the Deity of the pounded Soma, he cannot be the 
Deity of the creeper itself, (4) wlien pure Indra is laid down as the Deity, 
we cannot have him as qualified by some attributes ; so in the same 
manner, when we find the Injunction laying clown the qualified ‘ Great- 
India’ (Mgiliendra) as the Deity, we cannot take Indi'a alone. 

Another r^eason for this is that, inasmuch as in the Injunction in 
question, the Deity is predicated of something else, due significance 
must be attached to its ciualifications and adjuncts : specially as no 
such significance could be attached to them, only in case the Deity 
were that with regard to which something else was predicated. That 
is to say, if in the matter of the relationship expressed by the nominal 
affix (in ‘ Mahendra’), the Deity were that with regard to which it was 
predicated, then we could not attach any importance to tlie mention of its 
attributes. If, however, the Deity were not predicated, it would not have 
the character of the Deity, and hence we cannot but admit it to be predicat- 
ed. And as siiclv due significance must be attached to its qualifications; 
hence the removal of the qualification would do away with the very 
character of the Deity. For instance, in such sentences as — * the white- 
clothed persons should be fed,’ * the red-turbanecl priests pass along,’ ^‘the 
person with the stick repeated the ^ Praisa Mantras’ ” — if we take away 
the qualification, what is left behind ceases to form a material part of the 
sacrifice. If, however, the qualifications were such as having something 
else predicated of them — e.g., bring in those that have white clothing” — 
the men could very reasonably be brought even without the white clotliing 
(which they might lay aside before coming in). Hence, in the case in 
;'gU0|tidh,.>ten_ if’ tha. Deity were to enter- into the sacrifice, in its material 



P&BVA~M1MAMSA-SI)TBA8. II ADHYAYA 


forin, we coiikl not accept it as without its qualification ; as a matter of fact, 
however, we find that it helps the sacrifice, in its verbal form, — and 
•consequentlj^ anything else, that would be mentioned by a word apart 
from the Injunction, could not be recognised as the prescribed Deity. 

And further, when the Deity is mentioned by means of a compound 
it would not be open to the fault of the Injunction referring to more than 
one thing. Hence the Deity that would belong to the ^ Mahendragraha ’ 
could never be mentioned by the word ‘Tndra.’ That which is mentioned 
by this latter word can never be the Deity of that sacrifice ; and as such in 
the case of an injunction of this sacrifice, any mention of that Deity would 
be absolutely useless. 

Tims tlien we find that the sense of sutra 16 comes to be that the 
cognition of the Deity depends upon actual verbal expression ; and the 
fact of a certain word expressing the Deity comes to be accepted only if it 
is foiyid that such expression is in keeping with the character of the 
Nominal Affix. Hence we conclude that there is a distinct difference be- 
tween the deities ‘ Indra' and ‘ Mahendra.’ 


Adh'iharoMa VI, —The nondriJvncMreness of Mantras, 

SUTRA SO-Si, 

Vidhiinantrayoli, of the vidhiaud themaatra. Aikarthyam, 

same purport. Aika^abdyat, because of same words. 

30. The Vidhi and the Mantra must have the same 
purport because they contain the same words.”— 30. 

wPr n ii 

irfwr Api Va, iro. JitrnsjmzJIlV Pi ayogasamarthyat, because of its function- 
ing during action, jjssr: Mantraji, mantra, Abhidhanavacb!, ex- 

pressing mere direct meaning. Syat, should be. 

31. It is not so because the mantra functions only 
during Action, it must be taken as expressing only its direct 
meaning. — 31. 

COMMENTARY. 

We have seen in the preceding Adhikaranas that the whole question 
>1 ftU action being primary oi secondary turns ultimately upon the exact 



I pAdA, VI AtmiKAliAVA Sii. ^9. 


ineaiiiug of verbs contained in the Vedic passages relating to the actions. 
In this connection a further question arises as to whether or not every 
verb that we meet witli in the Veda enjoins an action. As regards the 
verbs tliat appear in the purely injunctive passages there can he no such 
doubt ; they do enjoin actions ; and the only question with regard to these 
is as to these actions being primaiy or secoiidarj'. But when we come to 
mantras it is clearly donbtful whether or not the verbs contained in these 
enjoin any actions. 

In accordance with the Bha^ya, the Adhikarana is explained as fol- 
lows : — Taking for example certain Mantras, there arises a question as to 
whether or not the verbs occurring in them serve the purpose of enjoining, 
as do those occurring in the Brahamana passages. And on this, the posi- 
tion of the Purvapakir.a is that, inasmuch as the words in the Mantra are 
the same as those in the BrAhamana, there is no reason why the former 
should not have the injunctive potency. And this is met by the Siddli^nta, 
which holds that, inasmuch as it i.s a Mantra, and has its subject already 
laid down in otiier passages, it cannot have any injunctive potency; hence 
all that the Mantra does at the time of the performance of the sacrifice is to 
recall to the mind that which has been previously laid down in the 
Bithamana passages. That is to say, the action, Goy^ga, for instance, 
spoken of in the mantra is not different fiom the same action mentioned 
in the Brahamana, because it is actually recognised as the same ; nor does 
the mantra lay down any accessories of the action (with regard to which it 
might be taken to have an injunctive potency) ; nor, lastly, can it be 
taken as containing an eulogy of something enjoined in another sentence; 
because the Mantra is an independent sentence altogether, and as such 
cannot be taken along with any other sentence. 

In contradistinction to serving the purpose of recalling to the 
mind that which has been laid down elsewhere, all that the Mantra could 
be taken as, would be as an Injunction or an Artbavada. As matter of fact, 
however, neither of this is possible. In the first place, the form of the 
action, that would form the object of injunction, is already known as laid 
down elsewhere ; as for its accessories, in the shape of the material, the 
result and the occasion, none of these is mentioned in the Mantra, which 
therefore can not be taken as laying down these. Secondly, when the 
Injunction in the case occurs in another (BrAhamanaj passage, which has 
all its needs already fulfilled, it is not possible for the Mantra to be taken: 
as an ArthavAda to that Injunction. This we have already explained under 
the Adhikarana on Mantras ( AdhyAya 1). For tliese reasons, mantras should 
‘fee taken only as recalling what has already been enjoined ’ ’ 



iiiWli® 


pdEVA-MlMlMSA-SdTEAS. IT ADHYAYA 


Kum4rila has taken exception to the above exposition 
karana and tins on the following grounds 

(1) What reason is there by which the injunctive po 
verb is supressed simply by the fact of its occui'ring in the 
is enlivened by appearing in the Brfthniana ? We actual! 
in mantras serving the purposes of injunction, e.g., \asa 
jalanalabhate’ ; and conversely there are, sometimes, verbs 
the Br^hmana, not having the injunctive potency : e. g., 
havir4rtimarchhet, etc.” Therefore there can be no such 
as has been shown in the above Sidhilnta. 

(2) Further, if the mantra be taken as supplementary 
mana, simply on the ground of the action having been er 
latter, — why could not we take the Bi-ahmana injunction its 
recalling the action previously enjoined by the mantra ? T 
there is no special reason whereby it could be ascertained 
mantra, having its injunctive potency suppressed by the fact 
having been enjoined by the Brahmana, should serve the pui 
ling the action thus enjoined, or vice verm. Thus then, 
that, inasmuch as neither the Mantra nor the Brahmana 
being taken as supplementary, specially as tlieie is no fca 
that could point it out as distinctly supplementary, both a 



I PlDA, VI ADHTKARA^A, 8,t. 2Q. 161 


injunctive potency. If, however, the presence of this potency in tlie 
mantra ?)e denied absolutely, — then it would be altogether needless to 
bring forward the fact of its having been kid down as to be employed, 
for the purpose of denying that potency ; because much reasoning is not 
required in denying wliat is impossible. Nor is there any self-contra- 
diction in the fact of the mantra performing botli the functions. For in- 
stance, even the Brahmana, though in itself injunctive, could serve the 
purpose of recalling something enjoined elsewhere; this we shall explain 
under the Sutra V, i. 16 



in any Brahmana, passage, as to be employed in a sacrifice, your argu- 
ment being inapplicable, there would be no ground for denying the 
injunctive potency of these. Hence even this argument of yours does 
not help in the matter. 

As a matter of feet, however, tiiere is no necessity of bringing in 
the mantras, specially in the present Adhikarana, as they have no parti- 
cular connection with the present context. Hence we explain the Adhi- 
karapa otherwise as follows ; — 

Verbs have been declared in the preceding Adhikarana to be of 
two kinds only— the Primaiy and Subsidiary. And the question now 
started is as to whether there are only these two methods of the functioning 
of verbs, or there is yet another method. And the position of the Purva- 
pak§a is that there is no third method. 

In reply to this Purvapaksa, we have the following : — 

Siddhanta. — Sutra (31) : But because of the power of usage, the 
mantra would express only the direct meaning. 

There is a third method — that of denotation. .J ust consider the 
following : Those verbs that have their injunctive potency destroyed by the 
presence of such words as ‘ yat ’ ajid the like (words which make that which 
they, precede, an Uddeilya, and which therefore can never be the Vidheya or 
object of injunction) must, in all cases, serve the purpose of simple Deno- 
tation. That is to say, whether the verb obcure in the Mantra or in, the 
Brahmana, when its injunctive potency happens to be set aside by the 
presence of another word, tlien, in that case, tlm verb must be admitted 
to be denotative. 

Examples— (1), In ‘ aa fena^anti, etc.,’ the Injunctive having become 
suppressed by the word ‘ yat,’ becomes supplementary. (2) In ‘ahe budhniya 
man tram me gop^ya,’ the suppression is by the vocative ending. (3) In 
‘ d4mi gfihn&mi,’ it is done by the First Person ending. ; (4) In ‘ yadi 
it is done by the word ‘ yad},’ , . 





g»ll 






piJeva-mImamsa-sOtbas. n adhyaya 


The fact is that such instances occur mostly m mantras ; an 
is the reason why the Bhasya has mentioned mantras only ; sj 

as it is a common idea that mantras are not injunctive. In Brail 

on the other hand, there are many Injuimtive affixes, and that is w 
Br4hmana is commonly known to be injunctive. And it is on y i 
few instances that the BiAhmanas are not injunctive ; that is tlie 
why no Brahmana passage has been cited as an instance. ^ 

In the matter of the Brahmana or the Mantra being injunctive 
mo™ 1= nr. nthfir reason save that which has been explained abov. 


the presence or absence ot sucn worus as ja. — -r, 

presLe and absence of the injunctive potency is not determined by the 

fact of the sentence being a Mantra or a Brahmana. _ 

But we do perceive the following point of difference between die 
Mantra and the Brahmana : In the case of the Brahmana the injunctive 
potency of the verb occurring in it having been suppressed by the above- 
Lntioned causes, this verb comes to be recognised as serving the purpose 
of pointing out something which affords the occasion for another action ; 
and the mere verbal form of the BiAhmana is not capable of being em- 
nlored in the sacrifice. In the case of the Mantra, on the other hand, as 

Ln as we learn its form-such as ‘dami,’‘grihnami, ‘agnin vihara, etc., 

etc ’ we at once realise that even the verbal form can serve the purpose 
of recalling certain actions ; and hence we come to the conclusion that the 
words of the Mantras are to be used in the sacrifice. Because in the per- 
formance of actions, it is necessary that there should be a recalling (oi 

remembering) of certain things ; and inasmuch as this recalling cannot be 
done by any means' other than Mantras {vide Mantradhikarana Adhyaya 
I) we find it only accomplished by such mantras as have no other 
function. That is to say, at the time of the performance of a sacrifice, 
nothing can be duly performed, unless it is duly remembered ; and thus 

the recalling of certain things being absolutely necessary, it would stand 
npftdofafit means of its accomplishment; and it would begin tc 


iUHliHH 


r 



1 pADA, VIT AmiKAEAT^A, Sit 3S. 


realised that these mantras are just the sort of sentences that are required 
for the purpose of reminding, — we come to infer, on the strength of Lifiga 
and Context, a l^ruti passage laying down the employing of these mantras ; 
and then these come to serve the purpose of simple Denotation. And it is 
also ascertained that it is only when we perform the action as recalled hj' 
these mantras that the proper desirable results follow. 

Now we have to explain the BhAsya in accordance with the ahox-’e 
interpretation of the Adhikarana. The assertion of the BhAsya — “Na, 
asakridapyuchchfirane tatparyat” — does not refer to the fact of the Action 
having been already enj(jined elsewhere. What it means is that on 
account of the presence of the word “yat,” the verb in the mantra dis- 
tinctly says that the mantra speaks of something laid down elsewhere. If 
the verb, with the words ‘ yat ’ etc., be uttered even a hundred times, it 
can never, by itself, give rise to any idea of an Apunm ; and it is on account 
of this fact that we have the idea of the action being laid down elsewhere. 

Prabhftkara’s view of this Adhikarana is thus expressed in the 
Brihati : — 

From the very nature of mantras it is clear that they cannot be 
taken as injunctions; — being, as they are, entirely devoid of any kind of 
injunctive word ; also because all mantras are found, either syntactically 
or by direct declaration, or by indirect implication, constructed along with 
other passages, which are injunctions. So if the mantras themselves were 
to enjoin another action, there would be two actions enjoined by what is 
practically only one ‘ sentence.’ Nor are the mantras found to contain 
any praise or deprecation ; so they cannot be taken as Arthav4da. 
With all this, however, the mantras cannot be regarded as absolutely 
meaningless or useless ; forming an integral part of the Veda, they must 
serve some purpose, must have some meaning, expressing something that 
is needful in the actions prescribed by the injunctive passages. 


Adhikarana VII. — (Definition of Mantra). 

' StTTBA II. 1. 32, , , 

*psnw II II 

; Tachchodakesu, tending to that. Mantrakhya, the name 

mantra is applied. 

32. The name Mantra is applied to those that serve 
the purpose of denoting things connected with prescribed 
'a(jtioM.~32. ' -v?', , ’ ‘ 






PI^BVA-M1MAMBA-SI)TEA8. 11 ABEYlYA 


1 PiDA, IX ADBIXAUAJ^A, SA. 84. 


165 


Adhikarmia IX. — (Modified Mantras are not mantras). 

sOTBA II-i-84. 

ft f^nmt n n 

Anamnatesu, to those that are not found in the Veda,^ 
Amaiitiatvanij the character of mantra cannot belong. Aran^tesu, 

with reference to sentences found in the Veda ft Hi, because. f%3Tr*T: 
Vibhagait, distinction. 

34. The character of mantra does not belong to what 
is not found in the text of the Veda. Because the aforesaid 
distinction applies only to such passages as are actually 
found in the Veda. — 34. 

COMMENTARY. 

In the case of the recitation of certain passages it is necessarj’ to make 
certain modifications in the original words of the passage, e.g., the mantra 
‘ Agnaye nirvapami ’ has to be changed ‘ into Sury%a nircapAmi,’ when 
the offering is made to Surya instead of to Agni. Into the text of certain 
mantras it is necessarj’’ to introduce the name of tire sacrificer and also the 
names of his Pravai’a Risis. Now the question arises as to whether on 
the introduction of the hrreign elements the mantras cease to be mantras. 

The Purvapaksa view is ihat, fulfiling as they do the conditions of the 
definition laid down in sutra 32, they must be regarded as mantra. The 
Siddhflnta is that even though the passages signify things connected with 
the pex’formanee, j'et they cannot be regarded as mantras ; as the definitions 
of Mantra and Brahmana are held by all learned men to apply to only those 
passages that form the actual text of the Veda. 


In connection witli this Adhikarana, Kumarila raises the further ques- 
tion — when only one word in a mantra is modified, does the whole mantra 
cease to be mantra? or only that part of it which has been altered ? The 
Purvapaksa view on this point is that the entire mantra ceases to be 
mantra ; as the name ‘ mantra’ is applied to a certain aggregate of vowels 
and consonants arranged in a particular order ; so that as soon as the 
slightest alteration is made in the text, that order becomes changed and 
the name can no longer be applicable. The SiddhSnta is thus laid 
down in the Tantrav&rtika 

; , . It is only the modified portion that ceases to be manti-a ; because the . 
generic form of the maiiti'a having been ascertained to, exist in a certain 
sentence, that generic character does not entirely disappear by a mere 



p^bva-mImAmsA-sutras. II apeyAya 


excess or diminution in a certain part of it. For instance, when a swell- 
ing appears on tlie neck of the cow, or wlien its liorns have disappeared, 
it does not entirely cease to be a ‘ cow ; ’ and the reason of this is that 
there are other parts of its body tliat are enough to show that it belongs 
to the class ‘ cow and we find that so long as even a part of the original 
body remains, the whole body is recognised as the same. In the same 
manner, it is a fact of ordinary perception that the character of a mantra 
manifested by the presence of a number of vowels and consonants 
arranged in a definite order, does not entirely disappear on the slightest 
modification made in it. 

For instance, there are many cases where the change of a letter or 
its deletion or some modification in the accent, is actually laid down in 
the scriptures, and certainly when these changes happen to be made in a 
mantra, it does not cease to be a Mantra; e.g., — (1) We have the direc- 
tion in the Veda ‘ Airam krtvodgeymm ’ (the mantra should be recited 
after the word ‘ ginX ’ has been changed into ‘ ira ’) ; (2) though a certain 
mantra has three accents at the time of the reading up of the Veda, yet 
it is laid down as to be recited in a single accent, at the time of the perfor- 
mance of sacrifices, and in neither of these two cases, do people cease 
to think of the mantras, thus modified, as mantras. 


Tesam, among them. ^ Rig, those are called Rik, Yatra, 
wherein, Arthavasena, in accordance with the meaning. 

P^davyavastha, division into metrical feet. 

35. Among tke mantras tliose are called ‘ Rik’ wkerein 
there is division into metrical feet in accordance with the 
limitations of the meaning. — 35. 

COMMENTARY. 

Mantras have been classed under three heads— Rik, S4maa and 
Yajus. Though the definition of the various classes of mantras has got 
no direct connection with the subject-matter of the Adhy^ya, yet the 
Sdtras treat of them, because a consideration of these is connected with 
the mantras, a consideration whereof was introduced in connection with 
the question as to their primary or secondary character. 

Though the Siitra defines the Rik as that where the division into 
feet is in accordance with meaning, the commentators are agreed on the 





/ PAD A, III ADHIKAMAIIA, Stl S7. 


point that division into feet is the only essential condition, and that the di- 
vision should be in accordance with the meaning is added only by way 
of illustration, e.cj., in the case of the Rik ‘ Agnih purvebhih, etc.,’ there 
is no verb in the first foot, and as such, there being no sense completed 
within it, the division into feet in this case is in accordance with the 
metre, and not the meaning. 

Thus then, on this point the conclusion is that the name Rik is 
applied to those mantras that are divided into feet, that is, certain well- 
defined parts, each consisting of a definite number of syllables ; and are 
called on that account by such prosodial names as Gayatri, Tristup, etc. 


Adhikarana XI — {The Definition of Sciman). 

sOTRA II-i-86. 

HWTW 11 II 

^RT?§2ir Samakhya, the name Stoan. 


Gitisu, to music, 

36. (Among mantras) the name ‘ Saman ’ is given to 
the music. — 36. 

COMMENTARY. 

The word ‘ Saman ’ does not strictly apply to the mantras them- 
selves ; it is applied to the'mnsic to which certain mantras are set, and not 
to the words; hence a mantra can he called ‘SSman ’ only when it is 
set to music and sung as such (Mim. Su. Vll. ii. 1 to 21). Thus one 
and the same mantra set to different kinds of music, becomes known 
under different names — such as ‘ Rathantara,’ Brihat and the like- This 
setting to music is regarded as a samskS,i-a, a purification of the mantras. 
(Mim. Su. IX. ii. 3 to 13) and as such owes its origin to the singer, and 
in 80 far it cannot be regarded as Veda proper, which is independent of 
all sources, human or divine. For instance, the syllables aliau, etc., that 
are added to the mantras by the exigencies of music, are by no means 
fixed ; they depend upon the singer, who may or may not use a certain 
syllable or sets of syllables (Mini. Sfi. IX. ii. 29.) In the case of all man- 
tras, where they are used as praise, they must be used in their Stman 
form, that is set to music and sung ; as the praise pleases more, if it is sung 
than when it is merely recited (IX. ii. 30-31). Sfimans are divided into 
several kinds, the division being based upon the different methods of 
singing; for ipstance, the Brihat S^man is to be sung with force and 
very loudly, while the Rathantara is to be sung neither loudly, nor 
Sfi. JX. ii.,46.) 








- " 


P^RVA-M!MAM8A-S0TBAB. II adhyAya. 


Adhikarana XII — (Definition of Yajiis). 

SOTRA II-i-87. 

$ 1 % w 1 

^ese, to the rest, Yajahsabdah, the name Yajus. 

37. To mantras otber than those specified the name 
‘ Yajns’ is giyen. — 37. 

COMMENTARY. 

The name ‘Yajus’ is given to all those mantras that are neither 
arranged in regular feet nor set to music. 

From the very dehnition of the Rik it would follow that t.here can be 
no metre in the Yaju? mantras. But Pingala in his Ohhandah-sutra says 
that there are metres in these also. That this is a later innovation is 
proved by the fact that true ‘ Vedic authority’ is not accepted by many old 
writers (Karka, for instance) to belong to those Yajus-mantras that are 
differentiated by metres ; and that even tliose who accept their authority 
(for instance, DevaySj nika j assert that there is no metre in many Yajus 
mantras, on account of the number of syllables in them not being fixed. 
Herein may be found an orthodox authority for the view propounded by 
Western Orientalists, that the metrical portions of the Yajurveda are com- 
paratively modern. • 


Adhikarana XIII—(Nigada is ineluded in Yajus). 


SOTRA II-i-3S-45, 




Nigadah, the Nigada mantra, m Va, verily. ^§4^ Chaturtham, the 
fourth. Syat, should be. ^«Tfw«rr5[ Dharmavi^esSt, because of its peculiar 

character. 

38. “ The Nigada should he regarded as the fourth 

kind of mautra, because of its peculiar character.” — 38, 

COMMENTARY. 

There are some mantras to which the name ‘ Nigada’ is given. With 
regard to these the question arises as to whether these are included under 
Rik, or Saman or Yaju§ or they form a class apart by themselve. The Purva- 
pak§a view is that these must be regarded as entirely distinct, because their 
characteristics are entirely distinct from those of the other thiee kinds , e.p., 
they have no metre, so they cannot be Rik ; not being set to music they 
cannot be Si.man ; lastly^ inasmuch as they are intended to be addressed to 
other persons they have to be recited loudly, whereby they have to be 
distinguished from the Yajus mantras, which are laid down as to be 









I PADA, HIT ADHIKARAm, Sd. 42. 


recited quietly. For these i-easons the Nigada must be regarded as 
the fourth class of mantras. 

u n 

Vyapadeg^t^ because of its different name. ^ Cha, also. 

39. ‘‘ Also because of its having a disinct name.” 


COMMENTARY. 

Another reason for regarding the Nigada as a distinct kind of 
mantra lies in the fact that it is named dift'erently from all other mantras. 

WT u w 

YajOmsi, mantras, wr V^a, but. Tadrupacvat, because they 

have the same form as that. 

40. But the Nigadas must he regarded as Yajus, 
because they have the same form as that. — 40. 

commentary. 

The Siddhanta is that Nigada must be taken as included under the 
class ‘ Yajus’, because its form is exactly like that of the Yajus. Being 
like this lattter, devoid of both metre and music. Then, again, the Veda 
itself in the passage — ‘ Ahe budhniya mantram me gopaya richo samAni 
yajdm§i’ — speaks of only three classes of mantras; which shows that 
there can be no justification for assuming a foui’th class, in the shape of 
the Nigada. 

ii ii 

Vachanat, because they are intended to be addressed to others. 
s>pirft«r: Dharniabigesah, the peculiar qualification. 

41. It is oil accouut of the fact that the Nigada is 
meant to be addressed to others that the peculiar qualifica- 
tion of it is mentioned. — 41. 

I’b,.'. . ' ' COMMENTARY. 

Among the Yajus mantras there are some whose words distinctly 
indicate that they are to be addressed to others by way of direction. 
From this it naturally follows that they should be recited loudly, and not 
quietly like the ordinary Yajus mantius. r.. 


Arth^^ because a distinct purpose is served. '*r Cha, also, 



Pl)BVA-MlMAMSi..8()TRAS. II ADEYAYA 


42. Also because a distinct purpose is sei-ved (by its 
being addressed to otlier persons,) 42. 

COMMENTARY. 

There is a distinct purpose served by the addressing, to other pei- 
sons, of such sentences as ‘ Agnid vihara,’ etc.: Unless these were addressed 
to other peeple, the action of ‘ walking ’ round the fire by the Agnidhra 
priest would not be accomplished ; and there would be no use of adress- 
ing, unless it were done loudly enough for others to hear ; it is for this 

reason that the particular qualification ‘ loudness ’ is mentioned. It is in 

this way too that the etymology of the word ‘ Nigada ’ becomes explained. 
As for the ‘ quiet utterance,’ though it is directly enjoined by the Veda 
{as belonging to all Yajus), yet as such utterance would hamper our 
purpose, it could not rightly form part of the Action; and hence we take 
that injunction to refer to the Yajus other than the Nigadas. 

oqjq^srr: || \\ 

gujjlf; Gunarthafi, for the purpose of expressing qualification, 
Vyapade^afi, name. 

43. The different name is only for the purpose of ex- 
pressing the particular qualification. — 43. 

COMMENTARY 

It has been urged in siltra 39 that the Nigada must be regarded as 
different from the Yajus, because it has a different name. The answer to 
this is that the difference in name is to be explained as being similar to the 
assertion ‘ Feed the BiAhmanas with curd, and the Parivi4jakas with 
milk,’ where the Parivrijakas also are Brahmanas, but with a particular 
qualification. So in the case in question also, the Nigadas are Yaju§, 
but with this qualification, that they are to be uttured loudly. 

n II 
n II 

Sarvesam, to all* Iti Chet, if this be urged (44.) 

Na, not so* Rigvyapadesat, because of their being distinctly 

named Rik* (450 

44 . If it be urged that the name ‘ Nigada’ would apply 
to all mantras. — 44. 

45. Our reply is that this cannot be ; as they are 

distinctly named as Rik. — 45. . 


/ 



/ PIDA, XIV ADHIKAEAhU, Stl 46. 


COMM'INTAEY. . 

An objection is raised tbe, -word, ‘ Nigada ' ' "be .axplaiiied 

as that wliich is recited londty Nigadyate’), then all maiitins woiild 
become Nigadas (because the Eik and the'Sama mantras also are' recited 
loudly); hence the name cannot be said to be for the purpose of 
expressing a particular property/' 

Sutra 45 supplies the answer to the above objection : — ** There can 
be no such incongruity as mentioned above ; because we find Vedic texts 
laying down in certain cases the use of the Eik, after having denounced 
the Nigada (as for instance, in the sentence ‘ Ayajya vai nigadah’). And 
if both liik and Nigada were the same, then these texts would enjoin the 
same thing that they have denounced, and this is an impossibility. Nor 
is there any incongruity in. the signification of the root ‘ gada because 
what it does is to denote a particular property of sentences that have the 
character of the Yajus (and as such it could not apply to the Rik and 
theSama)/' 


Adhikarana XIV. — Definition of one sentence'' or 
Syntactical Oonnection, 

sDtRA n. n 46. 


Arthaikatvat, being expressive of a single idea. qsR Ekam, one. 
3R?i Vakyam, sentence, Sakftiichet, if found wanting. Vibhage, 

on being taken severally, Syat, should be. ' 

46. So long as a single idea is expressed by number of 
words, which on being separated are found to be wanting 
in expressiveness, they should be taken as forming one 
sentence.^ — 46. 

OOMMBi'fTARY. 

Tliis Adhikarana lays down the principle of Syntactical Connection. 
Both Prabhakara and Kuraarila take this principle as applying to the Yaju§ 
mantras only ; as the extent of the Rik and the Sama is fixed respectively by 
the metre and the music. The principle may he thus stated : — When a 
number of words are found to be such that when construed collectively, 
they are expressive of a single idea, — and when taken severally they are 
not expressive of any idea being short of some necessary' syntactical 
factor, these words must be regarded as forming a single sentence. As 
an example we have the following : — -In connection with the Dari^a-Pdrnii- 
^crifices, we read the sentenee ‘ Peyaaya, tv4 savitui? prasave--' 







Pl^EVA-MtMAMSA-SI^TliAS. H ADHYAYA 


hastabhyam agiiaye juBtam inirvapami i^ata- 
17 ). Here we find four distinct parts, each of which might 
dependent sentence and manti-a, unless we had something 
whole must be taken and used as a single sentence and 
mething we have in the form of the principle in consider- 
ce the first part— devasyil tva sardtuh— we find that it 
any idea, being wanting in the verb ; similarly with each 
! we find that it is wanting in some integral syntactical 
)art also ‘ agnaye justam nirvap§.rai’ though otherwise 
d to be in need of an instrumental nominative in connec- 
3sive past participle ‘ justam ’ ; we further observe that 
biole together, it expresses the single idea of the nir- 
,inn of something resorted to or accepted by the arms of 


iiiWiKsi 


/ PADA, JF ADHTKABANA, 47. 


COMMENTARY. 

With regard to such mantras as — (1) “ Ihe tva — CTrJe tva, etc.”; (2) 
“Ayuryaiuena kaipatatu prano ynjnena, kalpatam, etc./’—tlie question arises 
as to whether the entire mantra is to be regarded as one sentence, or every 
S 3 mtactically complete part is to be regarded as a distinct mantra. Ihe 
Purvapaksa view is that the reciting of a mantra produces only an in- 
visible result ; consequently the less the number of mantras tlie less the 
number of assumed invisible results ; so tliat it is far more desirable to 
take the whole as one mantra rather than regard it as composed of as many 
distinct mantras as there are syntactically complete parts in it- Ihe Sid- 
dhfinta view is that so long as a number of words expresses a complete 
idea independently of other words, there can be no justification for taking 
them as component parts of another sentence. 

This Adhikarana lays down the principle of Vakyabheda or Syntacti- 
cal Split. This principle, an antithesis of the foregoing, may be thus 
stated When a number of words are found to be such that when each 
word, or set of words, taken severally, independently of others, is equal- 
ly capable of expressing one complete idea, each of these should be 
regarded as a distinct sentence. For instarce, in the passage, — Ayur- 
yajnena kalpatam— prfino yajfiena kalpatam, etc. (Vajas, Sam. 9-21), 
each part is a distinct sentence, complete in itself, because it expresses a 
complete idea, independently of the other. That this construction is the 
correct one is also proved by the Vedic junction ‘ klriptirvadiayati ’ where 
the passage in question is spoken of by the name ‘ klriptih ’ in the plural, 
which shows that the passage contains as many distinct sentences as there 
are repetitions of the word ‘ Kalpatam ’ in it. This principle applies, not 
only to cases where the words of the mantras are found to be construable, 
bat also to those cases where, even though the words actually present in the 
mantra are such as not allowing of separate construction, yet such words 
are added to the mantra, under proper authority. For instance, in the 
mantra — Ikhe tvojre, etc. (Vajas, Sara. 1. 1), — we find that the mantra as it 
stands, is not capable of being broken up into many sentences ; but in 
connection with the several parts of this passage we meet with such 
Vedic injunctions as ‘ with the words urje he washes it ’ and so forth 
{vide Satapatha Br. 1, 1, 6, 6; 1, 7, 1, 2 ; 4, 3, 1, 1, 7) ; on the authority 
of these injunctions then, it becomes necessary to supply to the manti-as 
such words as ‘ chhinadmi ’ and ‘ anumarjmi ’ and so on ; and with these 
supplied, each of the several parts of the passage becomes a complete 
sentence, expressing a complete idea — such as— -(I) ‘ 0 pakt^a branch, I 
am cutting thee for the obtaining of desirable food,’ and (2) ‘ I am washing 

h';-h ^ 





P(^EVA-M1MAM8A-SI^TBA8. II adhyAya 


thee for the obtaining of strength,’ and so forth. In connection with 
this, however, it ma.y be noted that a single Yajus cannot be broken up 
into many sentences without sufiicient authority. We had such authority 
in both the cases cited above. This ‘ sj- ntactical split,’ as it has been 
called, is permissible only in very rare cases ; in fact, not until it is shown 
that no other construction is possible, — either in view of . the structure 
of the sentence itself, or in virtue of some direct injunction necessitating 
such split ; and the reason for this is that in cases wdiei'e the nature of the 
sentence is such that it admits of being taken as a single sentence, if 
we do have recourse to ‘ syntactical split,’ we incur the responsibility of 
abandoning the natural syntactical construction without any authority ; 
and further, where the sentence, taken as a single mantra, would lead to 
a single transcendental result, we — by forcing the syntactical split — make 
it necessary to assume a number of such results preceding from each of 
the different mantras into which the original passage may be split up. 
And in a case where we have no direct inj unction necessitating the syntac- 
tical split— and where the split necessitates the addition of more woi’ds, — 
these words, being supplied by ourselves without the authority of the 
Vedic injunction, cannot be regarded as ‘ Vedic and hence the mantra 
containing those non-Vedic words would no longer remain ‘ mantra ’ in 
the proper sense of the term. 

To this principle we have a corollary to the effect that, when diffe- 
rent parts of a mantra are found by their implication to be meant for- 
serving distinct purposes, each such part should be regarded as a distinct 
sentence. For instance, in the mantra — Syonante sadavankrinomi...tasmin 
sida (Taitti. Br^hmana, 3, 7, 5, 2 ; and MAnava ^rilutasutra 1. 2. 6. 19), — 
we find that the first part, by its meaning, is intended to be employed 
in the act of preparing the ‘seat’ for the cake, while the last part, in the 
same manner, for that of actually keeping the cake upon that ‘ seat ’; 
hence the passage is regarded as containing two distinct mantras. This 
been. called ‘syntactical split due to difference in use ’ !see Brihatl 



I PADA, XVI ADHIKABANA, 84. 48. 


48. Eliptical Extension serves to complete tlie sent- 
ence, as it is equally applicab].e to all.-^48. 

COMMENTARY. • 

This Adhikarana embodies what has been called the principle of 
Eliptical Extension. In many Yajti^ passages it is found that there are 
several sentences that stand in need of a certain word or phrase or 
clause, while the whole Yajiis contains only one such word or phrase 
or clause ; in such cases it would appear, and has been held, as the Purva- 
paksa, that this word, phrase or clause is to be construed and used along 
with only that one of the several sentences which happens to be nearest 
to jt, and the lacunte in the other sentences are to be filled up by means 
of words borrowed from ordinary parlance ; and it is the possibility of 
this construction that the present principle precludes. By this principle 
the word, phrase or clause is to be used along with every one of the 
sentences, provided that every one of these is of the same type and form ; 
and the reason for this is that the intervention of a similar sentence 
does not become an obstacle to syntactical connection. As for example, 
we have the passage — ‘yft te agne aySsy^ tanurvarsisthA gahvaresthS, 
ugram vacho apavadhittvesSmapavadhit sviha — ya te agne rajasaya 
ya te agne hai-asaya (Vajas. Sam. 5-8; and ^atapatha Br., 3. 4. 4. 23). 
Here by the principle above stated, the clause (taniili...svaha) has to 
be repeated along with ‘ yu te agne rajasaya, as also with ya te agne 
hara.«aya ; and its connection does not cease only with ya te ayahsaya. 
In this example the clause to be connected with dilTerent sentences, forms 
the principal clause in each sentence ; but it does not make any differ- 
ence even if the clause in question be a subordinate one. For instance 
in the passage — chitpatistva punatu vakpatistva punatu— devastva 
savita punatu— achchhidrena pavitrena vasoh shryasya ras^rnibhih— (Taitti. 
Sam. 1. 2. 1. 2) the subordinate clause ‘ achchhidrena... rasfmibhih ’ has 
to be taken with each of the sentences ending in ‘ punatu.’ 

Supplement to Adhikara^ja XVI. 

Question : — The above discussion applies to those cases where a sen- 
tence itself IS wanting in an essential part. I here are cases, however 
where the sentences are complete in themselves, and it is only a certain part 
of the sentence that is found to be standing in need of sentences to which 
it could be attached ; as, for instance, we have a series of complete 
sentences— chitpatistva punatu, Vakpatistva punStu, Devastva savita 
punatu ; and at the_end of these we find the words achchhidrepa pavitrena. 
And in this case how would this last be construed ? ) ;; - -i; ■ 

- On this we have the following : 




PI^BVA-MIMAMSA-SUTRAS. II ADEYA7A 


pOrvapaksa. 

would have becoiue fully satisfied by beiug 
that immediately precedes them ; becaixse all 
complete in themselves, there would be no 
Anusafiga.” 

SIDDHANTA. 

•eply : If the words formed part 

(recedes them immediately, then 
it is, they are found to be I'elated 
ley can not but be construed with 
Litain the same verb). That is to 
sequence, the words in question 
punatu and as this verb is the same in all 
2 of this also must be the same in all. 
Citapati, Savitr, etc., make any differr 
connected with Citapati, or Vakpati or Savitfi 
of purifying) subservient to the 
f it would rest satisfied with 
Thus then, the instrument 
sidiary to the action (verb pun4tu), the 
ill have to be used as often as the verb 
sed as long as there is cooking. 


To the above we make tlie following r 
of the whole of that sentence wnich p 
it could be as asserted above. But as : 
only to the verb ‘ punatu a 
all the three sentences (as al 
say, independently of any 
become related to the verb 
the three sentences the meaning 
Nor can the difference of nominatives 
ence in that meaning as 
Deva. Nor is the action concerned {i.e. 
instrumentality (of achchhidra pavitra) whereby 
its single contact witi 
(achchhidrena pa vitrei 
words denoting the : 
would be used, just as 

Adhikarana XVII— Gases where Eliptieal Extension 'is not 

permissible. 

sOTRA II. i. 47. 

n u 

VyavaySt, on account of intervention. fT Na, not. 
Anusajyeta, could be extended. ... j 

49. Where there is an intervention of unconnected 
■words, there can be no eliptieal extension. -19. 

COMMENTARY. 

This Adhikarana is brought in simply by way of a counter-instance to 
the functioning of mere Proxmity (in the matter of Anusaiiga). As it is found 
that where the intervention is by words not connected with the factor 

to be brought in. we do not accept an Anusafiga in view of the incon- 

F^kBlance. in Ac case o! the sentences (1) 'tknte Vhyurvatena gaA- 
chhat&m (2) Sanjayatrairangani. and (3) Sateyajfiapatirosli^a, though the 



I PAD A, XVII ADHIKABAhU, 84. 49. 


missing factor ‘ gacliclihatani ’ is admitted as forming part of the fu-st 
mantra, it is found to be incapable of being taken along with the second, be- 
cause of the plural number of the noun ‘ ahgani ’ (which would take the verb 
‘ gachcbhantam ’ and not ‘ gachclihata,m ’} ; and thus the factor in question 
not being equally construable with all the mantras in question it cannot be 
taken along with the third mantra, through the nominative in this, yajua- 
patih,’ is in the singular ; and as such quite compatible with the singular 
of ‘ ^achchhatam.’ It is on account of the intervention of the unconnected 
second mantra, between (1) and (3), that this verb ‘ gachchamrn ’ is not 

taken with (3). . , , • i tt i 

And thus the missing factor of (2) and (3) not being found in the Veda, 

we are forced to admit one out of ordinary parlance ; lienee in both 
of these we supply tlie necessary word from without. And though the 
word ‘ gachchhantam ’ (in the secotul mantra.) and ‘ gachchhatam ’ (in the 
third) are not actually pronounced, yet their existence must be admitted as 
Otherwise the signification of the sentence would remain incomplete for 
: want of a verb. 

Thus then in the case in question there is no Anubafiga. 

Tlie use of this discussion lies in the fact that, if certain words form- 
ers :44’ ‘ Anusahga,’ they would form a mantra ; and as such, any mistake 
='lnlie pronunciation of these would have to be accompanied by expiatory 
rites ; whereas if the words supplied are out of ordinary sentences, they do 
not constitute a mantra and hence any mistakes in pronunciation, etc., 


% 







.T’i'.T:’^;’'-''\'i 


SECOND ADHYAYA 


Second Pada. • 

Adhikamna 1. — Difference in the Apurva of subsidiary 
sacrifices. Difference of Actions based upon the 
difference of words signifying the action. 

sOtRA II. ii. 1. 

a \ w 

ap ^ t ^ ^abd4iitare, the word being different. Karmabhedalj, difference 

of action. ?para«=«ir^ Kfitffnnbandhatvdt, because of its being specially qualified. 

1. WEen there is a different word there is a different 
action because it is specially qualified. — 1. 

COMMENTARY. 

In the foregoing introductory chapter we have dwelt with all matters 
connected, directly and indirectly, with the subject under consideration ; 
and now we are going to take up the subject-matter of the Adhyaya in the 
shape of the difference among actions on the ground of the difference 
among words, etc. 

And first of all we take up the differences caused by the difference 
of expressions, because it is this difference that points out most clearly 
the difference among actions. In connection with this we should have 
cited the examples of all verbal forms connected with one or many verbal 
affixes such as yajati, dadati, juhoti, nirvayati, etc. Tlie Bhasya has 
cited only three — ‘yajati, dadati and juhoti,’ because, inasmuch as all 
these denote the giving away of something, their significations are all 
akin, and as such they naturally appear to have identical meaning. 

And on this point, inasmuch as there are three kinds of Purvapak^a 
introduced in the Bhasya, it seems as if the doubt on the point in 
question should also have been expressed in three ways. 

These are : — (I) Do the three Blutvanas denoted by the three words 
{yajati, etc.) — bring about a single Apdrva, or three distinct Apurvas 7 
(2) Do the three- denotations of the three roots qualify a single Bh&vand, 
or three distinct Bhdvands ? (3) Do the three roots denote a single object 
oj: three distinct objects. 


179 



11 PAD A, T AmiKABA^A, S± I 


As a matter of fact, Ixowever, there is only one clouht in connection 
with this subject. In the case of the three verbs, is there only one 
BMvand as cxualified by the denotations of the three roots, or is there a 
distinct Bhavana for the denotation of each root? What the word ^ karma' 
(in the sutra) denotes is the Bk&vand as qualified by the denotation of 
the root. And it is the Bhdvand that would be differentiated by means 
of different words, etc. As for the Apurva, inasinuch as it is not directly 
expressed by the words in question, and as it follows in the wake of the 
action itself, it cannot form a subject of separate treatnieiit. Though the 
^hmity of three root meanings’’ spoken of in the Bhasya is not possible 
in the case of all root-endings, yet it might be mentioned, somehow or 
other in connection with the roots ^yajati,' etc., in question, but in the case 
of these, though it may be possible yet much stress should not be laid 
upon this unity. Thus then the root-meanings being really different, 
there seems to be yet another ground for doubt in the mind of the 
Pijirvafahsi^ viz., is the Bliavaua mentioned as subservient to the root- 
meaning, and as such does it end with each root-meaning ? or are root- 
meanings subserving to the Bhavana, and as such they conjointly serve 
to qualify it ? 

On this we have the following 

Purvapaksa (A). 

is conjointly tliat the root-meaning qualifies the Bhdvand. Inas- 
much as the Bhasya often uses the word SSamudaya’ (combination) — as 
in the sentence SamudAya — Sehhikh^^itali, ' Samiidayadikamapurvam,’ na- 
chas^abdah samiidayah, etc. — and as it speaks of the Apitrva as one only, 
it seems clear that tlie idea desired to be conveyed was thai a 
Apurva follows from all the three Bkdvands. And in support of this idea 
the Bhasya brings forward the following arguments : In the first instance, 
that which is not seen is concluded to be non est ; and also so long as 
(in the absence of the unseen factor) there appears no incompatibility 
in what is actually seen (with what is spoken of), it is coucluded that 
the unseen does not exist; it is only when there is a contradiction 
between the seen and the spoken, that we can rightly assume the existence 
of the unseen ; and hence, when the contradiction is removed hj the 
assumption of only one such unseen factor, there need be no assumption 
of many such factors. It is with a view to this that it has been declared : 

^ When there is a contradiction, then alone can an unseen factor be assum- 
ed, whereby the seen or the heard would become supported.’ ■ And under 
the circumstances if there were no difference — on the ground of simplicity — 




:^^|||p|||i| 

, 3«sSfc!saBaAi.^« 



*1 


ililiiilil 






, 4 / 






PDRVA-MtMAMSA-SUftiAS. II ADHYAYA. 



between the assumption of one and that of many factors, then we might 
go on assuming many factors; but, as a matter of fact, wedopeicene 
such a difference, hence it must be admitted that a single unseen Apuitct 
follows from the combination of the three Bhavantls.” [Thus is Pilrva- 

paksa A.] _ . 

This statement of the Ptirvapahsa however, is open to the following 
objection: ‘ What is that word that has laid down the^ co??!hinat /on 0/ 
BMvan&s, wherefrom the single Apilroa would follow ?’ And in view 
of this objection the Bhasya states the Ptirvapahsa somewhat differently 

as follows 

Purvapahsa (B). 

The Action laid down by the three sentences is one only, but various- 
ly coloured, like the rainbow, by the denotations of the three roots; and 
in support of this the following arguments have been brought forward : 
If we accept this conclusion then it is necessary to make but a slight 
assumption of the unseen factor. If the actions are held to be diffeient, 
then it would be necessary to assume many unseen factors, for which there 
could not be the least justification. For these reasons ‘a single composite 
is meant to be expressed,’ — by which it is meant that there are many 
parts of a single action. Therefore we must conclude that in the word 
‘yajati’ the first part ‘yaji’ signifies the sacrifiee and the second part 
signifies the and so forth. Some people seem to think that the 

expression ‘Athava’ in the Blntsya is a mistaken reading. But it could 
be very well explained in the following manner : The Bhasya has 
brought forward two sets of arguments in favour of the Purvapahsa , 
having explained the first of these, in the sense of the advantage of 
assuming less of the unseen than what is necessary in the other theory, 
it is only right that it should introduce the second by Athava (or secondly). 
That is tosay, the sense of tlie BA&i/a comes to be this : It is not necessary 
for us to point out the disadvantage, in the other theory, of having to 
assume nruch more of the unseen element, as it is by means of the words 
themselves that we shall prove the Bliavaua to be oire only. And it 
proceeds to do this by showing that though the first parts of the verbs 
differ from one another, yet inasmuch as all of them have the same affix, 
their denotations are identical. This is what is meant by the sentence (in the 
Bhasya): ‘tatha dadatitipurvo datatyartkam uttarastameva hhdvayediti.’ 
The latter portion of this seems at first sight to mean that the second party 
shows that the object of the Bhdvand is the roob~meaning ; but this is not 
. what is meant ; because it has been shown that in all cases that which 
, is d«aoted by the root can never be the object of the Bhavand - 
iO'AiyS'r '.jAV , 


m 







because any such assertion could never be of an5'' use to the Punapaksi. 
In the same .manner it cannot be said that the root-meaning is described 
by the second part of the verb. Therefoi’e we must construe the sentence 
as follows ; On the word ‘dadati the fii'st part (the root dS,) signifies to 
give ; and the second part (the affix) serves to describe that BhdvtmA which 
has been previously denoted b5^ the affix in ‘yajeta’ — the only purpose of 
this descriptive reiterations by ‘dadati’ of the previously denoted Bhdvand 
being the connecting of the said Bhdonna with the denotation of a root 
other than the former (yajt). The same may be said with regard to the 
word ‘juhoti’ also. That such is the sense of the BMsya is also shown 
by the fact that in connection with the word ‘yajela’ the ‘BMpja’ does 
not make use of the word ‘a uuvadati’ ^describes) the only reason whereof 
being that in this case there is no Blidvana, previously expressed, that 
could be described (by the affi.i in ‘yajeta’). If the Blidsya had meant 
the denotation of the root to be the object of the Bhdvand then this would 
apply to the first verb, as well as to the other two (ami thus there could 
be no difference in the way of explaining the signification of the three 
verbs) ; and the Bhasya could not have left off the first verb (‘yajeta’) 
and made the declaration (of the root denotation being the object of the 
Bhdvand) with regard to the last two only. CouseqTiently we must take 
the Bluhya only as pjointing to the singleness of the Bhdvand. Thus 
then, there is a single Bhdvand, and a single Action, in the case in 
question. ■ 

In answer to the above we have the following Siddhauta : — 

Whenever there is a difference in the denotations of the roots, we 
must conclude that the Bhavana also is distinct in each case. And when 
a Bhuvanfl has once appeared as qualified hy the denotation of one root, 
it is not possible for the same Bhavana. to be subsequently qualified by 
others as well. 

Tliat is to say, though the word denoting the Bhavan^e is on only 
and its denotation — the Bhavana — forms the predominant factor, 3 "et 
whenever there is a diffei’euce in the qualifying root-denotation, the 
Bh&vanfi. must be admitted to be distinct also. Nor, is it possible for 
three root-denotations to fail in within a single Bhavana. Nor can they 
form a single composite whole, because all of them equally have the same 
purpose of expressing the instrumental factor (of the Bhavaufi) ; and also 
because each of them is expressed by a different word, quite independently 
of another. Nor is it possible for a single root-denotation to include 
within, itself three I’oot-denotations ; and it is not possible for 'three 
roots, independent of one another, to be laid down in a single word, for 


tl PADA", I ADHlKARAlsjA, 8ii. 1. 




pi^rva-mImAmsA-si^tbas. n adhyAya. 


tlie sake of any affix ; because in tlie matter of tlie adapting of affixes 
Panini uses the word ‘dhatoh’ (l!I-i-91), where great significance attaches 
to the singular number (and this shoivs that in one word one root can 
be adapted to only one affix). Nor is it possible for the three verbs to 
form a single sentence ; as they do not serve the same puipose, they do 
not appear incomplete on being separated (and as such they do not fulfil 
the conditions of syntactical unity) ; and it is not possible to make a single 
sentence out of them, by assuming a single Ainirva (as following from 
them); because such an assumption has been negatived under Si/tra II-i-47, 
and also because the difierence or non-difierence among Actions is not 
dependent upon a difference or non-difference among Aplrvas ; as a 
matter of fact it is quite the contrary (f.e. , the difference or non-difference 
of AfArvas depending upon that of Actions). 

For these reasons the actions expressed by the three verbs must be 

held to be different. In support of this we have the following: when a 

piece of rock-crystal has been spoken of as red, the mention of ^ hladk 
could not but be taken as referring to another piece of crystal ; in the 
same manner, when one word has spoken of the Blidvana as connected 
with one root-denotation, the mention of other roots could not but he taken 
as referring to other Blmmnds. 


Adhikarana II.—Differenee of Actions based upon 
Repetition of the same wovd as in the case of 
the Sa^nits and other sacrifices. 


SUTRA. II. II. 2. 


Ekasya, of one word. ^ Evam, also. Pimaksrutih, repetRion. 

Avi.^esat, if there were no distinction. ^ Ariarthakain, useless. Hi, 

as. Sy4t, would be. 

2 . The repetition of the same word also (is a means 
of differentiation) ; as because the word does not lay down 
any specific particulars the repetition would he useless.— 2. 

COMMENTARY. 

We meet with such sentences in the Veda as : — “ samldhoyajati, 
vidoyajati tanunpataniyajati, varliiryajati, swahakaram yajati here we 
find each sentence mentioning the Action hy means of the same word 
‘ yajati.’ The question then arises — does the word ‘ yajati repeated five 
times lay down one Action and one Apurva or five Actions and five 










TI PAD A, II ADE7KARANA, 8A 2. 


The Pfirvapaksa used is thus stated in the Tantravartika : — 

They indicate only one Apurva ; because as shown in the previous 
Adhikai'am^ though the signification of the affix be the same, yet a 
difference in the roots serves to differentiate the Actions ; when, However, 
the root also is the same, what would be there to point out the fictions to 
be different ? 

Further, on the utterance of the first sentence — samidhoyajatt — an 
idea of the Action 'yaga' presents itself to the inind ; and hence when the 
same verb is pronounced again, the Action denoted by this is at once 
recognised as the same that had previously come to the mind ; and as 
such the repetition does not point out any difference in the Action, 

The Siddhaiita is that the given words denote five distinct Actions 
and Apurvas. And this on the following grounds 

The sentences in question occur in connection with the Pj^ayaja 
sacrifices performed in course of the Darjia Purnamasa ; the verb ‘yajati ’ 
iir these sentences cannot be taken as enjoining an original sacrifice, as 
this sacrifice is already laid down by the text laying down the original 
Dar^la Pdrnamasa. Each repetition of the word ^yajati ' therefore, must 
be taken as referring to that original sacrifice ; — on tlus account the 
words ‘ samidhah,^ ^ tanunputam* and the rest can be taken as laying down 
either the materials to be offered or the deities to whom tlie offering is to 
be made ; — as a matter of fact, however, we know that both these acces- 
sories of tlie original sacrifice are laid down in another sentence, directly 
connected with the primary injunction of the original sacrifice— agnejms- 
takapalobhavati, where Agni is mentioned as the deity and the cake baked 
on eight pans as the material ; — if then the words ‘ sainidhah’ etc., must 
be taken as injunctions of accessories and not in connection witli that 
same sacrifice (and not in connection with five other sacrifices) each of them 
must be taken as mentioning a distinct deity which would mean that tlie 
actual action oi SaeAnfieing or offering is to be repeated as many times as 
there are deities mentioned ; — so that each stands for a distinct 

act of offering leading to a distinct Aphrva. 

In the above reasoning the Siddii^nta has proceeded after admitting 
for the sake of argument that the sentences lay down accessories. As a 
matter of fact, however, this is not possible : the word ^ Samidhah,' etc., 
ending as they do with accusative cannot be taken as denoting materials 
to be offered as has been shown under Sute Il-i-il, 12, Nor again 
can they be taken ashnentioning the deity as will be shown later on under 
Sutra IX-i~9, Thus in any case the sentence must be taken as laying 
down five distinct Actions and five distinct Apfirvas. 


Ilf 


3ti|i|^p|ii® 




4 <:"' ':, ■•■“:, ... ._ 




■ - . 


ri4k'!Cf»m- .jl. ,-■: 



Pl)BVA-MlMAMSA-SdTBAS. II AD HYAYA. 


karana III.— Treating of the relation of suUermsney 
between the Agharas and the Agneya, etc. 

S'&TRAS. II. ii - 3 to 8 . 


■ Pratoam tlie context. 3 Tu, verily. _Paurt,aiTiiisyain, to ^ 

the Paunjmasi. Rupavaehnat, none o£ the details being ' 

3 Tlie context certainly refers to the Paiuna ^ ( 

the principle) ; specially (with regard to the other sacrifices 
the details are not mentioned).— 3. 

COMMENTARY. 

The present AtlUkaTana has been introiiiiced .i-s '^“'‘"f , '''.‘* ** 
exceptions to the conelnsion arrived at in the loregou.g Adl„ha.a„a. 

There are two texts ^ 

We have the t.xt-‘,H%ne„.,it«h'eir.!r ' 

*,5e/.9al0 hhamli ': and then con.e the s,x “"“y” < ,,il‘kri.e samI- 

—(2) f.gMramagharayati— (3) a,iyal)hagnnyajat ( ■) *• ' n , , . n 

vadva,i,-( 5 ) patnisamraj.n yajati.-id) s„„,iswsi.w.l.fi'f' > .. 

thes'e are followed by the t«t ‘ ya evamvidvAn panrnam„s..n yajat. y, . 
vidvtn amavasyam yajati, &c.’ , ^ , <ac 

How the gnestion arises, -do the two verbs in the “» 
lav down two entirely independent actions or do they only lo ei r . . 
Sriave hee,^ laid down by the P-di„g sente,.^ w sch 
to constitute the Dar^a PurnamSsa sacntces 
actions the Agneya and the rest themselves that t icy t 
one another is shown by their difference m their accessories. 

On this point the Purvapakea view is as follows •• ' f 

Inasmuch as all the sacrifices in question are mentioned by -%ffer- 
e„, «cris and ate bP 

nortaiice Though these two reasons— Difference of words and Itepetitio 
!!l noi connected direcdy with the fact of ‘ Equal 

are taken along with this, through the difference 

would indicate), which is also implied in the assertion of Equal mpo 
tance ’ (as shown above). That is to say, the sacrifices denoted by the two 

^yajetas' are shown to be different from those of the Actions 

along with the D&rm-Pmam&sa) that are. not ySga (but Homa, etc.) by 
to merL in Wa ; while they are «bow\to be different rom the 
.c a .-.• -.c xu„ „r^v.wi ‘ ’• and hence they must all be 




‘ and hence they must all be 







n PADa, III ADBIKARANA, Sit 


tvYo sentences in qiuestion ; and as such we cannot make the injiiuctive 
potency of these ‘ yajstas ’ give up the function of laying down the actions 
tlieiuselves. And thus also even when the sacrifices enjoined by the two 
yajatis in question are distinct from the Agneyti, etc,, they are found to 
have distinct forms of their own ; and hence they must be admitted to be 
distinct actions ; and as such, there being nothing to show that the results 
follow from the six primaries Agneya and the rest only, (because the only 
sentence that had been accepted as showing this was ‘ ya evam.,' etc., which 
however has been shown to be the injunction of a distinct sacrifice al- 
together j, the character of the primary belongs equally to all the sacrifices 
mentioned in the vaiious sentences quoted to the Pray^ja, etc., the 
Aghnra, etc., as well as to the .Sgneya, etc). 

The Purvapaksa to this Adhikarana has also been stated in' the 
following somewhat different form : — 

We admit that the sacrifices are distinct ; but we cannot admit of 
the fact of the character of the Primarj^ belonging equally to all. Because 
the names ‘ Amavasya ’ or ‘ Darsa ’ and ‘ Pawvjamdsi ’ would apply only to 
some of the sacrifices, and not to all ; and the I’esult is spoken of as follow- 
ing from these that are qualified by these names ; and as such there can 
be no equality in the character of all the sacrifices. That is to say, the 
words * Darsa ’ and ‘ Pauruam&sa ’ denote sacrifices with a qualification 
(that of being named by these words) ; and as from the sentence—' Darsa 
pawaamasdbhy^m svargahdmo yajeta ’ — it is clear that it is only from such 
qualified sacrifices that the particular result could follow, we must take 
these alone as the primary sacrifices ; and all other sacrifices mentioned 
along with them (and without any distinct results of their own) must be 
accepted as the subsidiaries of these two. It may be noted that this 
second PArvapak^a is at variance with the Siddhanta only as regards the 
difference of the sacrifices mentioned by the two *ya,jetas' from the primary 
sacrifices of the Darsa Paurmmdsa. The find form of Pfirvapaksa is 





Pl)EVA-MlMAMBA-SdTBA8. 11 ADHYAYA 

nasmucli as tlie application of the iiaraes Dar:^ 
,nr1« ii-Don the siauification of the root ‘ yaji all 


The words ‘yajeta’ in these sentences, or .n« 

would become wholly futile. If, however, they are taken as 

the sacrifices mentioned in the text, then the materials and the deities 

„( all these saoriaces, as also the pai-lioalar points of ‘ 

.. In. Wnrmed. being found to be duly mentioned, the mil form 

i; and as such the sentence becomes 
at which they should be performed, 
lat the material and the Deity of the foui 
sable. But tliough it is true that the 
the material employed, 
remains 


utilised in pointing out tne tnn 
It has been argued above 
sacrifices are also clearly cog. 
common material, . Dhruva, might be taken as ^ 
yet inasmuch as there is no mention of a Deity, the saciifiee 

as indistinct as over. 

Nor it is possible for the Deity to oe indicated by the wn 
mantras employed ; because the mantras in question are^distinctl 
out by the order in which they occur, to belong to the Ajyayabh 
For these 'reasons there can be no Injunction of tbe Deity, 
the sentences brought forward ; because these have been shown t 
connection with the matter. And hence the sacrifice held to ^ be 
by tbe sentence ‘Fa ev&m, etc.,’ not having its details of material 
clearly mentioned, it cannot be taken as one different from those ] 
laid down. The result being found to follow from only those 
that go to form the composite udiole, all the sacrifices other I 
must be taken as subsidiary to them (tbe former ones the A, 
the rest, being taken as the Primary Sacrifices, and as such the 
all of ‘equal importance.’ 

Viiesa Dariauat Oha. also because we find peculiar quantity, 
Sarve8am,ofall. ^ Samesu, if equal. f% Hi because. Apravjttib, 

appear in them. PnqHy4t, would be. ^ . ; v"';;.;" 


187 



If PiDA, III ADHIOBAN4, M, 5, 


4. Also because we find a peciiliarit)^ (in tlie shape 
of the appearance of the subsidiary Praj^aja in the modifica- 
tions of the Primaries) (we cannot hold all to be equally 
Primaries) because they (the Pray aj as) could not appear in 
them (the modifications) if all were equal — 4, 

COMMENTARY. 

If tlie sacrifices inentioned by the sentences ' ya evtmi etc' were dis- 
tinct fi'om all others, then the A ghara and the other subsidiaries wTiuid all 
equally be Primaries ; and, hence, in accordance with the Sutra "VlII-i-BO 
the snbsulary Pro^ydjas, etc., also, like the Agneya and the other Pri- 
maries, would enter into the instrumental factor (in the bringing about 
of the principal result) ; and as such they would no longer be able to 
supply the want of the method in the Blnivaua (bringing about) of the 
modifications of the Primary, wliich has its or already 

laid down ; and as such these modifications would no longer take into 
themselves these Praydjas^ etc.; they are actually found to be taken up 
by these modifications ; as otherwise we could not have a text enjoining 
'Kppjiqla' as the material to be used at the Praydja^ lohen performed 
ill eonneetion with the modifieations. 

Consequently in order to establish the fact of the Pvaydja^ etc., being 
subsidiary to the Agneya and the rest, we must take the two sentences 
in question as referring to the previously mentioned saciilices. 

^T%#JtTrTg^u ^ u 

G-anastu, accessories, ^^riifei saiiiyogat, because of direct men* 

tion* 

5. Objection: “ Tbe sentences (Yadagneya, etc.) lay 
down accessories, because of the direct mention (of the root 
‘yaji’ in the other sentences).” — 5. 

COMMENTARY. 

' If we accept distinct sacrifices to be laid down bj^ the sentences 
‘ya emm, eta.' then we have the following advantages: (1) The singular 
number iu the word ‘paurmmdstm’ because quite explicable with reference 
to the noun itself, without having recourse to any indirect indication, 
by the word, of the composite of sacrifices. (2) If we accept these sentences 
as Injunctions, we have a farther advantage, vis. : the root is found 
to be directly mentioned, and jt is , not necessary to infer it from the 
mention of the Deity (as you have got to do in the case of holding the 




* .. . ■ 


188 PI^BVA-MIMAMSA-SOTBAS. II ad eyaya. 

Injunction to lie in the sentence ‘yucia! 7 ne?/a,’ etc.)- (3) In yoiir case tlie 
sacrifices enjoined by these inferred ‘ijajis' being more than one, their 
A'p’urvds would also be more than one and thus in compaiison wit t le ^ 
process of taking the sentences as .referring to the ' beforementioned 
sacrifices, that of taking them as inriependent Injunctions is far more 
advantageous. As for the appearing of the Prayrljas in the moclifictions 
‘(urged in the preceding Stitra) it can be explained, eithei by qualifjm^ 
the injunction of Kri^rjala in the performance of the Pra]fAjas in tie 
modifications, by adding the condition ‘ in such cases when there are sen- 
tences that must be taken as AnuvMa, or by taking it as laying down a 
material for the Praydja occurring in the primary itself. 

II i II 

%i^ ChodanA injunction, ^ir V4, hut. 5>5 UIt Gunanain,^of accessories. ^ 
Yugapat, simultaneously, sireim Sastr4t, by the scripture. Ohodite, being 

declared, Hi, because, Tadarthatwat, for the sake of accessories. 

TO TO Tasya tasya, with each, Upadiiiyat, would be enjoined. 

6. Reply : But they are Injunctions ; as otherwise 
many accessories would he declared simultaneously ^ by the 
scripture, because if they appeared after the sacrifices had 
been enjoined then their such appearance could be only for 
the sake of the accessories and as such we would have to 
admit of an injunctive word with each accessory. 6. 

COMMENTARY. 

The sentences ‘yadagneya,’ etc., cannot be taken as laying down the 
accessories of the sacrifices enjoined by the sentences ‘ ya evdni, eta. Be- 
cause it is a well recognised rule that when the Action is one that has been 
already enjoined (by a previous sentence) we cannot lay down more than 
one accessory with regard to it; as it is only when the Action has not 
been otherwise enjoined that even a number of accessories could be laid 

down by a single effort (of that Injunction). 

That is to say, in all original Injunctions of Actions, the Injunctive 
Affix proceeds to enjoin only the Bhdvand because it is only this factor 
that is not got at by other means. And so long as this Bhdvand is not 
fully equipped with all its factors, by means of the Denotation of the 
Root and the other factors in the sentence (denoting the various auxiliaries 
tb© sacrifice), it cannot be brought to action ; and hence until all this 









iranoTis 


HR 


has been fully laid clown, the Injunction is not complete. And it so 
happens that by the apparent inconsistency of the generic character of 
the auxiliaries that are recognised as constituting tlie factors of the 
BMvand — this inconsistency leads us to look for a specification of the 
said auxiliaries, — then it is that the BMva^id comes to be specified by 
those specifications which are implied by the Instrumental case-endings 
found in the same sentence, and which also are on the look out for the 
Bhdmnd (as the object to be specified). And in the case of each word, 
the Glass, Gender and Numher, that belong to an object,— all these come 
to be recognised, by sneans of the direct signification of the particular case- 
ending, as auxiliaries to the Bhavana because all these (class, etc.) on 
account of being expressed by the same word, have among themselves 
the relation of the qualification and the qualified, and are not recognised 
as belonging to, or depending, upon one another (and as such must be 
concluded to form part of something else ; and that is the Bhdvand). And 
thus it is that all words near the Bhdvand or removed from it, fall in with 
the Bhavand, notwithstanding their remoteness or proximity — in the way 
that we have explained under the Adhihamria orAnnsngainfheiore- 
going Pdda ol this Adhydya. And it is only then that, having got hold 
ois, Bhdvand fully endowed with all its qualifications, the Injunction 
becomes complete. 

And as in all such cases the Injunction lays down the qualified 
Bhdvand by a single effort, it does not entail any such anomaly as the 
assumption of various potencies in the Injunction, Because it is only 
when the direct functionings of words ai-e multiplied that it becomes 
very complicated ; and when the words end in expressing a single fact 
then there is nothing incompatible in the indirect implication of many 
things. That is to say, the direct Injunction having been once utilised 
in the laying down of the c^ualified Bhdvand — if it were taken again to 
direetly function towards the laying down of something else, then it 
would be necessary to repeat the Injunctive word over again, and this 
being incompatible with the Veda, would not be warrantable ; when, how- 
ever, the Injunctive word has ceased its functioning with having laid down 
the Bhdvand, then, on account of the apparent inconsistency .of its own 
signification it would give birth to {i.e., indirectly imply) other Injunc- 
. five words expressive of such qualifications (as would be necessary for 
removing the said inconsistency) ; and in this the original injunctive 
word would not have to give up its one form as appearing in the Vedic 
text ; although it would serve all the purposes that would be served by 






mm 




PUBVA 


.MtMAMSA-SDTBAS. II ABBYAYA. 


And tliongh in this manner the Injnnction of the finahfication won c 
appear aftev the original Injunction of the BliavanA itseh yet m 
accordance with the law kid' down under the Aihikaran<'> on A ^ (m 
the first pMa of the first AdhyrUja), the qualifications themsdves wdl ha^e 
appeared before that. That is to say, though, as a matter of fact the 
Apparent Inconsistency due to the fact of the Bhavana being > 

appearing subsequently leads to an idea of the Injunction o. t le qua i ica 
tion, long after that of the original Injunction^ (of the Bhamnauye._ .^^ 
accordance with the rule arrived at in the Adhikarana on A fiu as i ■ is 
impossible for the BMountL to be qualified, in the absence of the qualifica- 
tions themselves, it must be admitted that these must have been ful 
fledged entities from before ; as it is through these alone that any idea of 
the Bli&mnti being qualified could be brought abmit. . 

All these injunctions (of qualification), pointed out by the apparen 
inconsistency of a perceptible fact, operate either simultaneously or 
one after the other. And thus we find that if wo admit a sentence 1o he 
the Injunction of a fresh Bhauaik, tlieu it becomes an easy matter to get, at 
the Injunctions of its accessories by the help of the rauginal njunction 
of the qualified BMvan% which is capable of giving birth to various 

On the other hand, hovnever, (if the sentence he taken as only 
referring to a Bhdvaml previously enjoined by another sentence^ this is 

not possible. Because as a rule, it is only when Primary is earned to a 

place that it draws with itself all Its accessories ; while if it is one o . tie 
accessories that is carried, it does not carry with itself another accessory, 
because these two are not so intimately connected. That is to say w leu 
the BMvand is such as has been got at from another sentence, 
Ininnetive word in the sentence in question cannot eiqoin that Bkavana 
over again-as a repeated Injunction of the Bhdvand would be as use ess 
as the powdering of that which has already been powdered ; and then 

not performing its injunctive function, it does not become the means o 
giving birth to various Injunctions with regard to things connected witli 
that BMvaud ; as it is only when the Injunctive word enpim the qimhhei 
BMvand that it makes possible assumption of such Injunctions ; and this 
is not possible in the case in question ; hence the Injunctive Affix is found 
to he such as has its direct expressive potency quite inoperative (towards 

the injunction of. the BMwnd) and, hence, in accordance with the rule 

laid down under the Sfltra dnartliahy at ladangem, that Injunctive Affix 
eomes down from the Bhdvand and directs itself towards tlie auxilianeB 


’ . c< 


with it. And then those qualifications of Class, Orenuer 


lii 


V . ... 

" 'ks-S.i, ' .v-', 1 

"ii'.’t''. . ’ ■ -'f 1 ' 









11 PADA, 111 AmiKAnAlJA, 


Number, wliicli qualify tbe auxiliary expressed by a single word, serve to 

point out tliat auxiliary, -exactly in tbe. way that we have explained iii 

tlie case of the Injunction of a qualified BMvana : and as such these 
qualifications are alt enjoined, and hence in the case of a single word, even 
though the BhAvam has been enjoined by another sentence, it is possible 
to have the Injunction of many things (in connection with it). When how- 
ever there is a combination of many auxiliaries mentioned by many words 
(as in the case of the sentences ‘ Agneyostdhapdlah, etc. ) then in that case, 
there being no sort of relationsliip among these auxiliaries themselves, the 
■words expressing them also remain unconnected (with one ^ another) ; and 
hence when the Injunction betakes itself to one of them, it has nothing 
to do with any other ; and when it would betake to this iattei, 
it could not liave anything to do with auotlier, and so on ; because 
all of them being wliolly unconnected with one another. lor these 
reasons it is not possible, in this case, to have tlie one implied by 
the other, as we had in the case of the Injunction applying to the 

Bhavana. , • 

Thus then in this case, the original Injunction not giving 

birth to other Injunctions, the former being one only, would be wholly 
taken up in the laying down of one auxiliary ; and then the declaration 
that it lays down another also, would not be possible, unless we meant to 
repeat tbe original Injunction ; this would entail the anomaly of all these 
repeated Injunctions being of human origin (and as such having no 
authority). This is what is meant by the second half of the SMra, which 
means that if the sentence ivere taken as laying down an action that has 
been already previously enjoined, as such laying down could only be 

for tlic purpose of mentioning the accessory, the Injunctive word would 

have to be repeated for the sake of tbe Injunction of each one of the 
accessories. 

Thus then in tbe sentence ‘ Agneya, etc. ’ we must have the injunc- 
tion of the connection of a material and a Deity ; but this connection is 
not possible with regard to any sacrifice that may have been previously 
enjoined by other sentences ; and hence, in accordance with the Sdtra 
‘ QunAahchayArm Sambayidliah ’ we must admit a distinct sacrifice to be 
actually enjoined by this sentence {yaddgneyali, etc) ; and then we have 
the same rupavachana mon-mention of the form) ‘ that was urged in the 
third Sutra] and as such the. sentence ‘ ya eaam,’ etc., must be taken as 
only referring to the sacrifices enjoined by the sentence ‘ yadagneyah, etc' , y. 
And by this we are forced to have I’econrse to indirect indication, etc. 
for the purpose of explaining the singular ending (in PaurnamdsAm). 



P1)BVA~M1MAMSA-8I)TBA8. IT ADEYAYA 


If the Amavasya were a single saoiu#. 
the Sannayya (Ourd and Butter) and the 
optional alternative, and then why should th( 
preparation of one oE these before the other 
employ and prepare only one of the two alter 
■ When there are various sacrifices, ther 
come to he taken as both forming the mat 
sacrifices, and as such all the various materif 
fices, it becomes quite rele 
of these before the other, which 


the Am^ioasyii sacri 
tion of one 
in any other case. 

And, further, in accordance wun me v,... 

above tlie three Mori6oee there wot, Id be a foorth (m the shape of that 
eojoioed by the sentence ‘ ya evam’ etc.) t and as such the pas^ge quoted 

in the Bhfisya would refer to them as uttumn. (m the plural) an 1 not 

utrari lin the Dual) which refers to the two composite sacrifices, the Vats 
and tli6 PaiivimMiiBa). 

u c u 

Li^ga. Darsanat. Gha, and. 

8. Also because we find (in the Veda) indicative 
words. — 8. 

COMMENTARY, 

If the sentences 'ya ettam, etc.' enjoined two distinct saorifioes. then the 
ntnnher of saeriSces would be more, and if 

number would be less than ‘thirteen’ and fourteen ivhich aie the 
numbers that are mentioned in connection with the libations in t le oi 
and the Pmmam&sa. Because these numbers could oe possible only 
ill the Pattrnam^sa there were three, and in the Darsa two primary libations 
(and this would not be the case if the sentences ‘ ya evam etc., are taken 

mdfinftnderit sacrifices, or as tlie lojimctions 


II PlDA, IV ADEIKABAVA, S?1 9. 


193 


For these reasons we conclude that the sentences S/a efe./ 
merely refer to the two previously maintained composite sacrifices. To 
this effect, we have the following declaration : 

(1) Because the enjoined sacrifice has no form (material, etc.), (2) 
because the words of the sentence directly denote the sacrifices mentioned 
in the context, and (3) because it is only in these latter sacrifices that we 
find distinct forms and details, — we must admit the sentences, ‘ ya evain, 
etc./ to be mere references to the two composite sacrifices laid down in the 
preceding sentences/’ 


Adhikarana IV, — Exception to the foregoing Adhikarana. 

sOtRAS II. ii. 9 to 12. 

h 5. 11 

Pauruam^sivat, like the Paurijam^si. Upamsuyajah, the 

Up^m^a sacrifice. Sy^t, should be. 

9 . “ The case of the Upainsu sacrifice should be 

exactly like the Paurnanias!.” — 9. 

COMMENTARY. 

The next three Adhikaranas deal with the exceptions to Adhi- 
karana III. 

There is one sentence : — Jlrai vA etadyajSasya kriyate yadanvancliau 
puroda^au, upatp4uyajamaatara yajati ; and then we have a set of sen- 
tences-^ VisijurupSni^a, yastavyo j4mitv4ya, prajapatirupamifu, yastavyo 
jAmitvaya, agnisoinaup^ipilu yastSvyavajilmifcavaya ; and on these three 
arises the following question : does the expression ‘ upArpiluyajam, in the 
first sentence, only serve to speak of (refer to) the whole batch of sacrifices 
mentioned in the latter set of sentences ? or does it serve to lay down an 
independent sacrifice by itself? And on this question, we have the 
Pitrvapaksa embodied in the SAtra ; and in support thereof we have the 
following arguments. 

To the sentence ‘ Updmsuyajam,' c&e.,’ apply all the conclusions 
arrived at in the foregoing Adhikarav,a. 

“ Because inasmuch as the sacrifices laid down in the latter set of 
sentences have their accessories in the shape of the respective deities duly 
mentioned, while that which is mentioned in the first sentence has no ; ■ 
such accessory mentioned, we cannot but conclude that this latter sacri-\ 
fice depends upon the former sacrifices. 



pdBVA-^MtMAMSA-S^TBAS. 71 ADEYAYA 


“ That is to say, in the three semeuces wo 
, ,erb i and as ssoh they have the character of absolute Injunction aad. 

ace if we were to assume these sentences to enjoin independent Mcii- 
„ ken we would render ourselves open to all the aforesaid obj^ticns 

to details of these being unknown, and also of the necessity of having 
assume many unseen, factors.” 

“ And further, we find each of the latter three sentences mentio 

. the rlovll of the evil effects' of the iami (a technical fiaw m he 

rformance of a sacrifice, explained below) ; and it is with regard to this 

Lw of the jami that the first sentence mentioned the Up&msu sacri ices. 

Itt to y 1 ohing at the whole section, from the first sentence to h 
rat lb to sr j t.iie fir-st sentence) and the 



II PADA, tv ADHIKAEAhU, 84. 10. 


195 


In the case of the sentence mentioning the Vaisv&nara sacrifice, vte 
find that from beginning to end the text treats of ‘ twelve cakes,’ and hence 
the mention of the numbers ‘eight ’ and the rest come to be taken as form- 
ing part of the twelve; and as such the sentences mentioning tliese small 
numbers ai’e not taken as separate Injunctions of those numbers. In the 
same manner in the case in question, we find that the Injunction is 
inti’oduced by the words ‘ jami va etat’ which describe a certain flaw 
in the sacrifice ; and it is clear that such mention of the flaw must have 
some bearing on, and be needed by a certain enjoined, sacrifice ; 
conseqitently it appears tliat the sentences ‘ Vip.iu, etc.,’ speaking of the 
removal of the flaw serve the purpose of eulogising that enjoined sacrifice. 
When it so happens that between the offering of two cakes there is no 
other action to be performed, then we have what is called the flaw of 
‘ jami ’ and hence the mention of the ‘ removal of jami ’ must be taken as 
eulogising that action which would be laid down as to be performed 
between the two offerings ; and from this it follows that in the case in 
question, what has to be eulogised in the sacrifice Updmsu, which is 
distinctly laid down as to be performed ‘ in the interim while in the 
sentences ‘ Viim, ete.,' we find described the ‘ removing of the jami,’ 
which is the eulogy required by the aforesaid Updirim sacrifice ; and 
consequently we disregard the injunctive character of these sentences, 
because their injunctiveness is nowhere found to be required, and hence 
all of them come to be taken as mere eulogistic sentences. Specially as 
we do not find the “ interim ” mentioned as to the time, in the sentences, 
‘ Vi^m, etc.’; and as such the ‘ ja?ai ’ with a mention of which the context 
was introduced, not having any direct connection with these sentences, 
these cannot be taken as embodying the Injunctions of any action for that 
‘ jami ’ ; and hence too the ‘ removing of jami ’ mentioned in these 
sentences cannot be taken as eulogising these latter Injunctions. On the 
other hand, that action, which is mentioned directly in connection with 
the time ‘interim’ is distinctly found to be the object of Injunction by the 
sentence that begins with the mention of ‘jami’-, and then on this ground 
the other sentences come to have their use in eulogising that action ; 
under the circumstances, it is scarcely right to accept an Injunction that 
we entail the assumption of many imperceptible elements. 

And further, in the case of the sentences ‘ etc.,’ these being 

taken as connecting the sacrifices with the Vism, etc., the ‘ sacrifice ’ 
would be indirectly implied as subordinate to that connection ; and so long 
as a directly expressed sacrifice is available (in .the sentence Up4ihrfum, etc.) 
it is not right to accept an indirectly implied sacrifice to be enjoined. 





Pl)RVA-MlMAMSA.8dTEA8. 11. ADBYAYA. 


That is to say, the affix Havya’ in the ‘ yastavyah ’ is in the passive 
and as such the predominant factor in the sentence is ‘ Vwm ’ to whom 
tlie ‘sacrifice’ is subordinate (sentence meaning etymologically that 
Ff?mt is the objective of the sacrifl.ce); and the performahility of the 
sacrifice could be only inferred indirectly from the sentence, -the factor 
of the ‘ sacrifice ’ being extracted out of the word ‘ yastavyah ’ and this 
would be scarcely proper; because we have a direct Injunction of the 
sacrifice in the sentence ‘ antara yajatV Even though it were possible for 
the sentence ‘ Vmu ’ to be taken apart from the sentence ‘ antara yajati ' 
yet all that they could do wmuld be to lay down the Deities for that 
sacrifice which is laid down as to be performed in the ‘ interim ’ (in 
the sentence antara, etc.) ; and they could not lay down distinct Actions. 

As a matter of fact, it is not possible even for the Deity to be laid 
down by such sentences. Because the word ‘ yaspvyah ’ in these does not 
signify either the Deity or that to which something is given ; because all 
that they actually signify is a material subordinate (belongingl to the 
sacrifice ; consequently what we have to do is to take the potency of the 
objective as the predominant element ; and as such what the word would 
signify would be what is signified by the Accusative case-ending ; and 
certainly that does not establish the Character of the Deity. Because the 
root ‘yaji' meaning ‘to give away’ its actual objective is that which w 
given away, and hence the onlj possible explanation would be that the 
deity approached by the object given aw'ay, comes subsequently to be 
indirectly connected wi^h the sacrifice. But in this way, the words come 
to have two objectives ; and, hence in accordance with the Sutra mmpatil}. 
sabddrthah [IL iv. 23] what happens is that the objective, in the shape of 
the thing given away, is set aside, and another, in the shape of the Deity 
worshipped, becomes manifested ; and the verb thereby coming to be 
recognised to have only one objective (in the shape of the Deity worship- 
ped) ; it is only after its Dative potency has been wholly suppressed,^ that 
the Deity could be spoken of as the objective, as in the sentence ‘ Vi^vum 
i/ajati’ (in the Active Voice) -or (in the Passive Voice). 

And certainly in this we do not find any denotation of the Deity ; all that 
we find in the character of Deity (of Vmu) is indirectly indicated by the 
apparent inconsistency of its objective character. And consequently, in 
taking this sentence as an independent Injunction, we would have to get 
at the requisite Bhdvand only by undertaking all the trouble 'of assuming 
a Deity. And certainly in comparison with all these assumptions, it is 
more reasonable by far to take the sentence as a mere Arthavada (of Die 
sacrifice laid down in ‘ antara yajati .) 






• 






11 PlDA, F AmitKAU^tlA, Sd. IS. 


197 


11 n II 

wr Guva, -firoperty. gw=«ira Upavaadhat, on accoaat of mention. 

11. Because tlie property is mentioned.— 11. 

COMMENTARY. 

That action (is enjoined by the sentence ‘ antara etc.’) in connection 
with which we find the property o£ Upamsu mentioned in the sentence 
‘ Upamsu paurvamdsy&m yff/an,’ wliicli serve the purpose of laying down 
the time (PaurmmM) for the sacrifice. But this sentence is not the 
original injunction of the said property ; because the sentence not embody- 
ing an injunction of a sacrifice, the said injunction of the piopeity 
involve the injunction of many things (which is highly objectionable). 
And for this reason we must take the sentence upatnsu paurnamS.syam, 
etc., as only describing that which has been enjoined by the sentence 

antara, etc. 

Pr%e, as if it were, Vachan^t, on account of mention. Oha, 

also. 

12. Also because the sacrifice ia question is mention- 
ed in Vedic texts as if it were a primary sacrifice. 12. 

COMMENTARY. 

We find the sentence Hridayamupdmsuyajal} which eulogises the 
UpS,ip!lu sacrifice as if it ivers (Praya) the principal limb (heart) of the 
sacrificial person ; and thus clearly shows that it is a primary (and not 
secondary) sacrifice. 

Adhikarana V. — The Aghdra, etc., are independent 
actions. 

^ sCTRAS II. ii. 13 to 16. 

Agharagnihotram, the Agh^ra and the agnihotra. Arfipa- 

twat, because they have no forms. 

13. “ The Agbara and the Agnihotra (merely refer to 
. other sacrifices) because we do not find mentioned in the Veda 

' thfi forms (the accessory details) of these sacrifices.”— 13. 

' [This adhikarana is based upon two sets of passages: (1) We have 
the sentences ‘Urdhvamdgharayatif ‘ Sarttatamaghardyati’ and ‘rjum 









198 JlJEVA-MlMlMSA-SdTRAS. . II A DEYAY A. 

agharayati’ followed by agharam agliarayati ; and (5) we have the sentences 
‘dadhna juhoti,' and ‘payasd juhoti,’ etc., followed by ‘agnihotram Jiihoti.^ 
And the question is as to whether the two sentences ‘agharamagharyati 
and ' ggniliolram juhoti’ laydown actions totally distinct from those 
mentioned in the preceding sentences, or they only refer to those same 
actions? And the position taken up by the PArvapaksa is that the 
sentence ‘ agharamagharayati ’ only refers collectiv-ely to the set of actions 
mentioned by the sentences ‘ urdhavam, etc.,’ and so also with the sentence 
‘ agnihotram juhoti’ Nor can this Adhikarana be said to have been 
included in the foregoing one ; because]. The Aghara and the Soma that 
present themselves to the mind on the utterance of the sentence ‘ Urdhva- 
magharayati’ and ‘ payasd juhoti’ are exactly as they are pointed out by 
these sentences ; nor in this case is there a suppression of the BMvands 
of the ydja and the homa by the supervening character of the material ; 
as we have in the case of the sentence ‘ Fisyurup^iiisw ijastainjali, and 
further, in the case in question the various sentences cannot be taken 
together as forming a single sentence as in the previous Adhikarana ) , 
nor does any of the two parties admit of the sentences being mere eulogis- 
tic ones ; and hence the Injunction would be an absolute one, of the 
Action, just as (in the previous case) you hold it to be that of the Acces- 

Bory. 

That is to say, we do not, as in the case of the sentences uparnku, etc., 
admit the fact of all the sentences in question forming a single sentence ; 
nor do they serve the purposes of glorification ; and hence according to both 
parties the sentences come to be accepted as Injunctions and the only ques- 
tion that arises is as to whether the Injunction is one of the Accessory only, 
or that of the Action accompanied by that Accessory ? And on this we 
have the following 

PtRVAPAKSA. 

“ The Injunction is one of the Action. Because the Injunctiveness 
being mentioned by the Affix, can never belong to the Noun. It may be 
urged tliat the Injunction of the Noun would follow from^ the Bhdvand, 
but in that case, it w'ould be the Bhdvand that would be enjoined first. 

That is to say, the Injunctive character does not rest with the words 
‘ dadhi ’ and the rest ; and being expressed by the Affix, that character 
could not be related to the curd, etc., except by means of t\\% Bhdvand and 
the Boot-meaning. For we have no such sentence as dadhnd-yut (the yut 
being the injunctive affix only, apart from the Verbal Root) ; the sentence 
that we have is {^dadhnd kurydt where the relationship of the dadhi with 
the affix is through the root ‘ kr.’ Thus then the peiiormability qf the 










II PADA, V ADHIKARANA, 8d. 14, 


dalhi etc., being due solely to the Bhdvand and the Eoot-meaning—how is 
it that these letters are denied to be the objects of the Injunction? For, 
certainly, the [iij unction of these we can never point out any 

Injunction of the Accessor}^ Because no sooner do we proceed to sliow 
such an Injunction than the Injunction of the Bhdvand and the Root- 
meaning i^resents itself forcibly. Consequently we must admit that what 
is enjoined is either the Soma or the Bhdvand as qualified byilie dadhi. 

And, then each of the Bhdvands, being duly recognised as having 
distinct accessory details of its own, the very fact of their following one 
after the other, points to tlie fact of their forming a single collective 
whole ; and it follows that it is this collective whole that is meant by 
the sentence ^agnihotram juhotil And the use of this reference lies in the 
unification of the Injunotions of the means and the result of these sacri- 
fices. And thus dadhi and the other materials, each belonging to a 
distinct Action by itself, we are saved the undue necessity of taking them 
as optional alternatives. 

In the same mannei*, in the case of the sentences '(Jrdhvamagharayati, 
etc., etc., though we do not find the material or the Deity of these mention- 
ed, yet in accordance with the rule laid down in connection with u'pdmhi 
qualifications of urdhva etc. may be taken as specifying differentias ; and 
through these those Actions being taken as having their accessories men- 
tioned, it is only the action mentioned by the sentence agharam agliarayati 
that remains without a mention of its accessory details; and as siicli being 
wholly incapable of attracting men towards itself, it has to be taken as a 
mere reference to the previously mentioned sacrifices. And in that case, 
too, the use of such reference lies in the unification (of the three sacrifices) 
which is necessary for the imvpose of the employing in them of the mantra 
ida urdhas adhvara etc., and the connection of the single Deity mentioned 
in the sentences {tasyagharamagliarya^ etc.) 

ii ii 

w Sarpjna, names, UpavandhSt, presence. 

14. “ Because distinct 


names are given. — 14. 

COMMENTARY. 

,V v„: “ And further, names are employed only with a view to pointing out 
a certain definite peculiarity ; and in the case in question we do not 
perceive what these peculiarities are (that are pointed out by the names 
‘aghard' and ‘agnihotra’ unless w:8 tike them as referring to the foregoing 
sacrifices). If the name ‘agnihotrd ' were taken only as pointing to Roma in 





siHIIP 




mill 

sSSliMliiiSifel 


p6rva-m1mamsA-8^tras. II ADEYAYA 


much as this is already known, it would not be any new 

11 , there is nothing 
of that would be 


general, then, as 

Action (mentioned by the word). And as already kf 
in it that has to be known and as such no injuuctii 
possible. 

“ [\ I'i W 

Aprakyitatrat, ? 

15. Because it is not related to tte context. — 15. 

COMMBNTAEY. 

Under Sutra 2.2.5, it has been held that an Action can obtain its 
accessories from other sentences ; so that in the case in questioii the sen- 
tence ‘agnihotram juhot 'i might be taken as the original injunction of aii 

loifi dr»wn bv such sentences as tai^dulai 


there arises a Frakaram (or desire) ot Knowing now mm .r, uu 

brought about by means of that Action, and as such tlie Prakarava 
could only proceed from the assumed sentence that would suin up all 
the three factors of the Bhdvana in connection with the Action m 

H H U 

Oliodana, injunctions. ^ V4, really, ais^rter SabdS,rthasya. what is ex- 
pressed by the words, Prayogabhutatvat, simply to be performed, ac^: 

Tatsannidheh, of the same words, Gunarthena, for the purpose of laying 

down accessory details. 5 ^: Punahsrutih, repetition. 

1 6. They are really Injunctions of independent Action 
because the words distinctly express something to be per- 
formed and the repetition of the same words is for the 
mirnnsp. of lavine down accessory details.— 16 . 


201 


II PADA, V ADEIKABAhU, Si. 16. 


and ‘ (tI-sI/ijm, etc.,’ because the Injunctive potency of these sentences is 
taken up by laying down of the accessorie.s in tlie shape of ‘itrdhva' and 
‘cladJd,’ which are not laid down by any other sentence ; and as such 
we cannot very well discard the idea oi these sentences merely referring 
(by the words ‘agharyati ’ and juhoti ’j to the actions of Aghara and Eoma 
(enjoined by the two former sentences). 

Whenever we come across the Injunction of a qualified Action what 
we have to consider in the first sentence, is what factor of the object of 
Injunction is such as has been laid down elsewhere and what is not so ; 
and wdien this has been duly cl iseriminated, the Injunction comes to be 
taken as pertaining wholly to tliat factor which has not been laid clown 
elsewhere ; in the case of the sentence ‘chidhna juhoti,’ as the object of 
injunction is the action of ‘Roma as qualified by dadhi,’ when we find that 
the Eonia has already been laid down by the sentence ‘agnihotram juhoti,’ 
we conclude the Injunction in question to pertain to the dadhi only, and the 
Bhavand and the Root-meaning (denoted in ‘dadhna juhoti’) are said to be 
mere references to those enjoined elsewhere ; and it is never said that from 
the very beginning the sentence ‘dadhnd juhoti’ enjoins only the accessory 
with refei’ence to the previously enjoined Bhivand and Root-meaning. 

The arguments of the Piimapah,sa are thus disposed of in the 
Tantra Vartika. 

(1) As for the names ‘ Agnihotra’ and ‘Aghara’ they can be explained 
as serving the purpo.se of pointing out the peculiarity indicated by the 
verbs ‘juhoti’ and ‘agharaynti’ and in the present instance, they serve to 
distinguish the two actions in question from all other actions (of Eonia 
and Aghara) ; on the ground of these two being enjoined. 

(2) As for the absence of the accessory details (as urged under 
SMra 15), we find that the material and the Deity are distinctly pointed 
out by the context. Nor can it be urged that there being no method 
mentioned in the injunctive sentence (that there would be no context) ; 
because no such method would be looked for until the relationship with 
the Result had been established. 

(3) Nor it is possible for us to have the Inj unction of the Result 
with regard to an Action of which the Material and the Deity have not 
been laid down. Because the Result miglit very well be laid down with 
regard to the Eoma only, of which the material and the Deity might be ( 
mentioned later on ; and there would be no incongruity in this. 

(4) As a matter of fact, in similar cases, we do admit of reference 
to previously enjoined actions. But the. acceptance of this reference 

always depends upon the fact of the action referred to being one that 

' ' ' 4 ’ '■ ' " ' " 



PUBVA-MIMAMSA-SUTRAS. II ADEYAYA 


has been already enjoiBed (or mentioned) ; and as such it always stands 
in need of recognising the Actions as the same as that which has been 
previously enjoined, 

(5) The mere fact of the Aghara being mentioned in another 
Prakarana does not do away with all the intervening Praharmas of the 
Aghara. Because even in the case of the Aghara (as laid down by the 
sentence ‘agharamagharayati ’) the conjugational affix always raises in us 
a desire to know the Ohgect, the hwtriment and the Method of the action ; 
and hence it is quite possible for the material and the Deity to be 
indicated by the Prakaraya (as the said desire could be fulBlled only by 
an indication of these). 

Then again, your theory would necessitate the assumption of many 
unseen factors. Because you make each of the sentences ' dadhnrl juhoti 
etc. and ‘urdhvamagharayati,' etc-, lay down an independent Action, and 
we do not find any deity laid down either for the Roma of dadh% or for the 
4rdhva aghara, etc., and in the case of the sentence ‘urdhvamagharayati,’ the 
material too is not mentioned, and inasmuch as you hold each of them 
to be the injunction of an independent action, they could not be taken as 

laying down the matemls, etc., for one another. 

For these reasons it must be said as we have put it. 

(6) It has been argued above that in the sentence ‘agnihotram 
juhoti,^ if the first word were to express an action, then, inasmuch as 
an Action could never be the objective, the accusative ending (in 
‘agnihotram:) would be wholly inexplicable. In reply to this we urge 
that an action can be the objective of such verbs as bahkalpa (determina-- 

t.hfi like: and as such the accusative ending in ‘ a(/ni/totram ’ 


Adhiharana VI.— The Pasiiydga and the Sommjdga are 
independent actions. 

SOTRAS 17 to 20. 

^ ii t's u 

Dravyasariiyog^t, on account of connection with certain materials. 
^ ChodanA injunction, Paiusomyoh of the Painy4ga and the Soina- 

.a,cm. -a®ji»Prakarane, in the context, Hi, as. ^ Anarthako, would ■ be 




203 



11 PADA, Vl ADElKAMm, 8A. 17 


useless. Dravyasamyogo, mention of the material. ’Uf Nafai, because they 

do not. <9W Tasya, of them, firis?’! Gufl&rthena, the purpose of laying do\ra ac- 
cessory materials, 

17. Because of the connection with certain materials 
the words, ‘Pasu, etc.’ and ‘ Soma, etc.’ contain injunctions; 
as in the context the mention of the mere material would be 
useless — s|)ecially because the words do not serve the pur- 
pose of laying down accessory materials.^ — 17. 

COMMENTARY. 

(1) We liave a sentence ^ Pasuincdablieta ' and in continuation of 
this we have the sentences ' hridayasydgre vadyati, atha jihvdya athava* 
hmsdh, (2) Then again we have the sentence ^Someiia yajati^ and in its 
continuation, the sentences ^ Aindravdyavan grihy&ti^ maitravavunmn grih- 
etc. And the question that arises is this : Is Alabheta a mere 
refermee to the actions laid down by ‘ amdyati ’ and is yajeta ’ a mere 
reference to those laid down by 'grihjidti ’ or do they lay down independent 
actions by themselves ? The question is ultimately stated in the following 
form : Is the word 'PakC a mere reference to the hridaya, etc., and the 
word ^yaji ^ to the sacrifices implied by the ^YOxd ^avadyati ^ or do they lay 
down an independent ^ yaga ’ and ^ Pasu ’ (as its material), the other 
sentences only serving to point out their accessory details ? In the same 
manner, the question with reference to the other set of sentences is this : 
Is the word ^yajeta,' a mere reference to the sacrifice implied by the rela- 
tionship of the material and the Deity, as mentioned in the sentences 
^ dindravdyavam, etc.’; and the word ^8oma^ to the juice used at those 
sacrifices or the sentences ^Somena yajeta ^ lays down an independent 
action together with the material to be used in it ? 

On this question the Pdrvapaksct view is as follows : — 

The words in question are mere references to a number of actions 
taken collectively. 

I Because as in the case of the sentences ^ Yaddgneyostakapdlljt.^ 
etc., the real end of the sentence is not served until the ‘sacrifice’ has been 
inferred ( because the cake cannot be spoken of as ^Agneya' until it has 
been offered in saerifiee to the Deity Agni ) — So also in the case of the 
sentences ^Aindravdyavamd etc., their full signification would not be accom- 
plished until they implied, a sacrifice ( at which the Soma would be offered 
to Indi'av^n, when alone it could be spoken of as Aindrardyavami), That 
is to say, the relationship of the Deity and the material mentioned in the 


204 niEVA-mtMlUBMdTRAS. II ADEYAYA. 

word ‘Aindravayavavi' cannot be complete until a sacrifice lias been impli- 
.ed, and so long as the sentence itself is not complete, it cannot stand in 
need of any otlier . sentence (in the shape of ‘Someua yajcfa,’ for wliicli 
according to the Siddhanta it would lay down as accessoiy detail) , and 
as such the sacrifice mentioned by the sentence ‘Somem ijajeta’ could not 
j^et come in as the sacrifice souglit after ; nor, on the other hand, would 
it be possible for the sentences ‘Aindravdyavdm,’ etc., to lay down the 
Deities for the sacrifice laid down by the sentence ‘Sonieva yajeta ; which 
having no Deity mentioned, is wanting in an accessory detail of another 
sacrifice, we are forced to admit that that spoken of in the sentence ‘ Somena 
yajeta’ is a mere reference to those sacrifices that have been laid down 
in the context (by the sentences ‘Aindravdtjavam grilindii,’ etc.) 

In answer to the above the Siddhanta, as put forward by the 

Bhasya, is as follows : — 

It is only when the sacrifice mentioned in a sentence is actually 
recognised to be the same as those mentioned before, that we take it to be 
a mere reference to these ; in the case in question, however, we do not 
find this to be the case. 

That is to say, if in the case in question we recognised the sacrifice 
to be exactly the same in all its details as those mentioned before,- as we do 
in the case of the Ptmmmdsa sacrifice, then we could take the sentence as a 
mere reference, If again, the sentence were held to be a reference to the 
root ‘yaji ’ alone, then we could conclude it to be a reference bereft of the 
cxualifications. In the cases in question, howevei', we find ^the sacrifices 
mentioned before are— (1) those that have the ‘ Endaya, etc.,’ and (2) those 
having the juice, for the material to be offered ; while the sacrifices men- 
tioned by the sentences in ciuestion have, for their materials, the Pam 
and the Soma, respectively ; and thus these letters not being recognised 
to be the same as the former ones, we cannot take these sentences to be 
iQ6rG references to the former sacrifices. 

The Vartika is not satisfied with the above presentment of the 
Adhikarana. Against the above statement of the Siddhanta it quotes the 

following argument of the opponent : 

In the case of the Astahapdla cake, etc., though we find that these 
cakes are directly laid down as the materials, yet we accept the corn 
(Krifef)asthe material, though this is pointed out only by syntactical 
connection ; and in the same manner we could accept the ‘ 8oma ’ as the 
enjoined material. It is only when there is a contradiction between two 
things that the stronger sets aside the weaker ; and this is not the case 
when, two things are quite compatible with one another. In the case in 






11 PAD A, VI ADEI.KABAh‘A, 8,t. 17. 


205 


c[ii6stioii wo find tliattlio ^Sovu^^ is quito coinpcitiljlo witli t\iQjuic6 boc^iiiso 
tins latter stands in need of something from wliich it could be extracted 
and the Soma-plant comes in as fulfilling this requirement. For instance, 
in the case of the sentence 'Agneyo'stakapalah^ etc., though we find that 
the 'Astakapdla is directly laid down by the sentence, yet when tlie Vrihi 
and the Yava come to be laid duuui as the materials, there is no contradic- 
tion ; for these corns are actually required as the material out of which the 
Astakapdhi cake would be made; and certain!}^ in taking up the Vrihi 
one does not give up the making of the Astakapdla ; and hence in this 
case the action with reference to winch Vrihi is laid dowii as the material 
is not recognised as any other than that for which the ^AstaluipciliV has 
been laid down. Exactly in the same manner, in the case in question, 
in taking up the Somapla.nt, one does not give up the juice, and hence 
there being no incompatibility between the two, inasmuch as the Soma 
mentioned in the sentence in question can very well be taken as the 
material for the sacrifices laid down by the otlier sentences, the sentence 
in question cannot be taken as laying down a distinct Action, merely 
on the ground of a difference in the materials mentioned. And further, 
the argument applies equally to the Siddhdnta also ; because the Siddhdnta 
also does not hold that the impounded soma plant is to be offered at the 
sacrifice ; and hence just as for you t\iQ plant would only be the source 
of the juice, so also would it be iov PiiTvapaknn, As a matter of fact, 
it is your own theory that would be the more incongruous of the two. For 
in your case, if the Plant, as mentioned in the originative Injunction, 
were to be the sole means of accomplishing the sacrifice, then it would 
never do to tuni it into juice, in accordance with other sentences. In 
our case, inasmuch as the juice would not be possible witliourj its origin 
(in the shape of the Plant), our sentence be always on the look-out for the 
mention of this source ; and hence even if such source happens to be 
mentioned by another sentence, there is iiotliing incongruous in our 
having recourse to it. In your case, on the other hand, inasmuch as the 
original Plant itself is quite capable of being offered bodily by itself, it 
does not stand in the need of any mention of its modifications ; and as 
such any connection of these would be wholly incompatible, consequently 
we could not accept any such connection as laid down by other sentences. - 
In view of these arguments, based as tliey are on the firm ground 
of such examples as the afoi'esairl injunction of Vrihi, etc., which com- 
pletely shut out our mouth, it is best for us not to start the question of 
the injunction of Materials, and toconlEine ourselves solely to the refutation 
of the view of the sentences in question being mere references to previously 





pdBVA-MtMAMSA-Sf^TliAS. 11 ADEYAyA, 


mentioned sacrifices. In tlie case of tlie Paki, however, as the animal as 
a whole is not capable of being bodily offered at a sacri6ce, the above 
arguments of the opponent would not apply ; and hence for this case alone 
the argument of the Injunction of diSerent materials would be a good one 
for the Siddhdnta. But in the case of ‘ Soma ’ it becomes necessary for us 
to refute the opponents arguments based upon the Injunction of the 
Vrilii ; and for this purpose we have the next Siitra. 

Or, we may take it thus— that having refuted the former Siddhdnta 
arguments (by means of the ai’guments based upon the Injunction of Frihi) 
the true conclusion is arrived at by means of the arguments embodied in 
the following Sutra. 

Or, lastly, we can take the present Siitra as embodying the 

PuTva'pakfia and the next Sutra, in which the ‘ elia ^ may be taken in 

the sence of ‘ (which is a sign ol; the ‘ Siddhdnta-Sutra ) as putting 
forth the Siddhanta. 

It may be asked how the present Sutra can be taken as expiessing 
the Pitrvapah^a. This we proceed to explain as follows 

The c|iiestion being, do the sentences hridayasya, etc., and 

^ Aindravdyamm, etc.,’ serve the purpose of laying down accessory detads, 
like the Dadhi, etc., and the subsequent sentences (Pakimeic., and Somena, 
etc.) are the originative Injunctions of the sacrifices concerned ? oi do 
the former sentences themselves serve as the Injunctions of Sacrifices? 


of such materials as ' Hfidatja, etc., these sentences are tiie injunctions or 
the Pam and the Soma, as otherwise, through the context tlie connection 
of ‘ Eridaija, etc.,’ would become subsidiary to the sacrifice whde as a 
matter of fact, it is not possible for this connection to serve as its accessoiy, 
because that would be contrary to the Pasu and tlie Soria-plant laid down 
in the original Injunctive sentences. Or in accordance with a previous 
law, the Paiti and the Soma having been ohtained from other sentences, 
the mention of the connection of materials, in the present context, would 
in your theory be wholly useless. In my theory, on the other hand, the 
word Soma (in ' Somena yajeta ’) is the name of the sacrifice, and the sentence 
' Agn^to'^niyam pamm ' serves the purpose of laying down the Deity 
* AmmrSoma k and thus none of these two sentences making meidion of 







11 PAD A, VI ADHIKABAIIA, SA 17, 18, 


an3^ material, tlie mention of materials in the other sentences is not at all 
siiperfiuoiis. Consequently we conclude tliat the real Injunctions of the 
sacrifice are contained in the sentences ‘ Hridayasyay etc.,; and ‘ Aindravrl- 
yamm etc.,* (and the sentences AgniBpm%yam.ypakum^ etc,,* and ^ Somena 

’ are mere references to these sacrifices taken collectively^ the 

former serving the purpose of pointing out the Deity for the oiTeriiigs of 
tlie pieces, and the latter supplying the name of the sacrifices taken 
collectively.) 

The Vartika takes the next Siitra as emhodying the Siddlianta of the 
Adhikarana while the Bliasya takes it as meeting certain Puvapaksa 
arguments. 


Aohodakafi, cannot be injunctive. ^ Clia, further, Samsk^rafi, 

laying down purificatory rites. 

18. But as (laying down) parificatory rites they cannot 
be injunctive (of independent Actions).— -18. 

COMMENTARY. 

The sentences in question cannot be taken as mere references to 
previous sacrifices, heeatise of these latter ""not being the saerifiees treated of 

hy the context, an argument that has alreadj’- been explained on a 

previous occasion in Sutra If, ii. 10. 

Question : ‘‘ But how is it that these are not the sacrifices treated of 
by the context?” 

Answer: Because the words ‘aoadyati' and ‘ grihj.^ti' are not 
injunctive of sacrifices ; as what they do is only to lay down certain 
purificatory or preparatory rites ; because they are actually found to end 
with them: as when a sentence is actually found to have its sole ending 
in the pointing out of such rites, there is no ground for assuming a 
sacrifice to be indirectly indicated. 

Thus, then, the actions (mentionedin the sentences ‘ AmdravSymm, 
etc.,’) having the character of mere Preparatoiy Actions, they stand in need 
of the mention of a ^ saavifiae' somewhere else: and as such there 
would be nothing incongurous in the fact of such a sacrifice being laid 
down by another sentence (Soinena yafeta), etc. 

■ , And our way of taking the sentences has the following advantage.' 

(1) The singular number in ‘ Jyotiftamena’ becomes capable of being 
taken directly land not figuratively as necessitated by the P-Aiwapaksa, 
which makes it refer to many sacrifices), (2) yre are saved the useless trouble 







Pt)EVA-MiMAMSA-Sl)TEA8. II ADEYAYA 


of accepting the word ‘ Smna ’ (in ‘ Somena ynjeta ’) as a second name for 
the ‘ Jyotistoma; (3) nor is it necessary for us to accept the apparently 
useless fact of the sentence in question being a reference to all the other 
sentences, as in the case of the Purvapaksa in connection with 

‘ AgMrilgnihotra.’ . . 

For these reasons we conclude that the sentences m question are 

injunctions of the InimaZ and the Soma sacrifices. ^ ^ ^ 


Karmaipab, of tlie action* 
as the substances are dis- 
i Syat, it would ].)e, 
it is subservient to tlie 


case — -^mere uc u. ^ 

account of the distinctness of the substance that is to be j 
purified by means of the gruhaij(t in connection with the said 
any other connection were mentioned, it loould be wholly tiseless 
not be performed ; and Iience, there is a difference of the gralm 
it is subservient to the substance to be purified (by that grahajay 
The VSrtika has suggested another 
it is as follows 
prepared ‘ Soma’ 

of the separateness of the material accepted 


tadbheddt’ i.e., because ot the diversity ot tne 

there is a repetition of the action of sacrifice ; ‘ because 

■if all of tliem were not offered 
%ld be useless ’ ; and hence even though in the original 
orifice lias been mentioned hut once yet ‘ there is a 
•formance, because of the fact of the originally enjoined 
uhservient to the various conditions mentioned in other 




II PlDA, VI ADRIKABAVA, BA 79, SO. 


the previous holding into separate cups would become wholly useless ; and 
the deities, to whom the cupfuls have been previously dedicated, would 
not become connected with (possessed of) their specified shares ; nor is it 
possible for all the deities to be referred to at the time of the (single) 
offering, hence it is not possible for people, afraid of repetition, to mis u|) 
all the j nice and make a single offering of it ; specially as even if this 
were done, it woidd lead to a confusion of the shares (previously specified). 
And when the shares have been once separately specified, it becomes 
necessary for the other party to clear up the said confusion, unless of course 
he has a scriptural text distinctly laying down such confusion. Thus 
then, it being necessary to make the offering as previously determined, 
it is only when all the deities (and the grahairas as taken collectively, that 
the following sentence — dasaitanadhvaryuh pratahsavane grihndti, aswino 
daSamo grihiiMi tctm tritiyavi juhoti etc., etc., (laying down the definite 
order and the summing up of the various ‘ gmliavas ’ becomes explicable.) 

Thus then we conclude that the whole forms a single action (of the 
Jyotidoma). 

The use of the present Adhikarma lies in the fact that, according to 
the pArvapakm, among the sacrifices subsidiary to the same sacrifice (the 
Jyoti§toma), we would have the performance of the details with regard 
to one cup, and that, too, only once ; whereas, according to the SiddMnta, 
the whole thing has to be done exactly as in the Primaiy Sacrifice (the 
Jyotistoma). 

Sanskaral?, tlie purificatory action, w Tu, liowever. ^ n Na Bliidyeta, 
would not diSer. Parartliatvfiit, on account of being for the sake of some- 
thing else, Darvyasya, of the substance, Gu^^abhutatvat, because it 

has a subordinate position. 

20. The purificatory action would not differ because 
tbe substance being for the sake of something else has a 
subordinate position. — 20. 

COMMENTARY. 

In the Pfirvapaksa it has been argued that in the case of the tying 
of the animal there are a number of texts laying down the tethering post 
to be of Kbadira, PalMa, etc., and this tying being a purificatory act the 
various trees mentioned have been regarded as optional alternatives. In 
the same manner it has been urged in tbe case of the many deities men-' 
tioned also Indra, V4yu, etc., these should be regarded as optional 
alternatives. ■ ■ ■ . . 



PUEVA-MIMAMSA-SUTBAS. 11 APEYltA 


, la answer to tins argument tlie Sutra points out that the analogy- 
put forward does not liold good. In the case of the tethering post the 
several kinds of wood are laid down clearly for the purpose of accomplish- 
ing a purification. Hence there could he no necessity for the using of all 
the words, for which reason they are taken as optional alternatives. In 
the case of the deities on the other hand the passages under consideration 
do not mention them as accomplishing the sacrifice. Consequently not 
being subservient to anything they must be regarded as ecxually indepen- 
dent and hence every one of them has to be adopted. 

It may be noted that this Sutra has been omitted by Kumilrila in 
his V§,rtika. 



11 PADA, VIII ADHIKAEANA, SA. 31, 3. 


Nor can the number be said to be made up by a repetition of the same 
Action ; because it is only wlien there is no other way of explaining the 
number that it is held to be made up by Eepetitions as in the case of the 
Pmtjajas, the Upasadas and the like, which have had their own limits pre- 
viously specified. In the ease in question, however, inasmuch as no other 
number of the Action has been previously . specified the number (three) must 
be taken as pointing out the separate character of the Actions themselves. 
And hence as the number is found to inhere in the Separateness of the 
actions themselves, we can not accept it as referring to the Separateness 
due to the mere repetition of the same action ; as we shall show later on, 
under the Sfitra ‘ AgamadvA ’ hhyasasydsentativ&t — (X. V. 16;. 

The above is the presentation of the Adhikarana according to Kuma- 
rila. He lias taken for his basic text a passage in which the differentiating 
number refers to the action. The Bh a sya, however, has taken for its basic 
text the sentence ‘ Sapbklafia pray^patyfin paslun tllabhet’ while the numbers 
pertain not to the action but to the animals. The Ahtrtika points out 
that the Bhasya has chosen this text because it is more difficult to prove 
that the number pertaining to an accessory detail differentiates actions 
than to prove the same with regard to the number pertaining to the 
action itself. 


Adhikarana VIII. — The differentiations of Actions hy names. 

SUTRA II. ii. 22. 

%r II RR II 

SaAjM, name. ^ Oha, also, Utpattisamyogat, because of its 

occurring in the originative injunction. 

22. Name also (serves to distinguish Actions) because 
of its occurring in the originative Injunctions. — 22. 

COMMENTARY. 

The differentiation of Actions by means of Accessories and context, 
bristling with many discussions, is postponed for a future occasion ; and 
we proceed to consider the case of name. , , ; 

[In connection with the sentence ‘ Athai^a jyotik atha 
atha sarmiyotil}'’ there arises the following doubt— Do these names only 
serve to refer to the Jyotisfcoma for the purpose of laying down ‘a thou- 
sand’ as the sacrificial gifts in cortnectien with it? Or do they lay down 






212 


pOeVA-MIUAMSA-SI^TEAS. II ADEYATA. 


-i'i' 



:| I ':i 

] l( 

'j| ,!j 


otlier Actions at wHcli that is the sacrificial gift ? And on this we have 
the following ] — 

Piirvapahsa, — Inasmuch as the words ‘ atha' and ^ esa ’ stand in need 
of something that has gone before, and as the rejection of the original sub- 
ject and the taking up another is a faulty process, — it follows that the 
various names apply to the single sacrifice *J yoti^tovia for which, as in the 
case of the * DaJcsayafia^ Sacrifice another detail (in the shape of the gift of 
a 'thousand)’ is laid down. And when we already have a sentence 
\TyotistomGna SvargaJmmo Yajeta' that lays down the connection between 
the material and the result, if we accept the words in question to be the 
names of the same Actions, wo are saved the necessity of assuming— (1) 
another Action, (2) an Apurva in keeping with that Action, and (3) wholly 
unheard-of methods for the accomplishment of that Apurva, etc., etc., and 
there would be the farther advantage that as the mention of the gift of 
' a thousand’ could be taken as lajdng down a method of procedure with 
regard to the Jyotistoma, we would not have to get aside this sacrifice 
(which forms the oidginal subject of the context). If the sentences in 
question were to be Inj auctions of other Actions, there would be no use for 
the word ' atha' which refers to something gone before ; for one sacrifice 
does not stand in need of another ; nor does any significance attach to any 
order of sequence among the sacrifices (that are independent of one anothei) 
as we shall show later on. And hence the word ' atha cannot be 
taken as signifying tbis order of sequence. Nor does the N(xvic expiess 
a Bhcivanti nor is the Hoot-meaning found to be mixed up with the 
Name, in the sentence in question, as is the case with the root' yaji’ (which 
is often mixed up with names of Sacrifices), and as such there could be 
no idea of difference among the Boot-meaning, Nor again is the Name an 
injiinetive loord^ whereby it could urge people to other (actions than the 
Jyotistoma) ; and so long as the human agent is not urged into activity, 
even if a difference could be cognised^ we could attach no significance 
to it exactly as we do with regard to. the singular number in ' graharrd 
(in the sentence graham sammdrstiK The injunctive word (in the sentence 
Etena SaliasradahsiT^ena yajeta) that we have in connection with these 
sentences, is taken up by the mention of the accessory detail (in the 
shape of the sacrificial gift of 'a thousand’) ; and as such it cannot 
pertain to the form of any Action. If the Injunctive words were not 
thus set aside then, too, the difference of the two Saerifiees would be based 
upon the repetition of the word yajeta and not upon the Names. 

The mention of a Eesult also does not give rise to the idea of 
difference among Actions,' in accordance with the II4ii.26. Gr 







II PADA, VIII ADHIKAEAIIA, SA 22. 


it may be that iaasmiicli as the (gift of a thousand rests upon the previously 
mentioned J yotldomu, the particular result mentioned in connection with 
this gift may be taken as following from the employment of this accessoiy 
gift in connection with the same ‘ Jotlipma,' just as the emplo5dng of 
different accessories (at the same saciilice) such as ‘ dadhi’ and ‘ milking- 
vessel’ is laid down, with a view to particular results (in the shape of the 
obtaining of an organ of sense and Gattle, respectively). And thus, too, 
the Action referred to cannot be a new one. 

Tn the case of the word ‘ Jyotif,’ etc. there is a further peculiarity: 
they foi’in part of the name ‘ e/yotwfoma’ and as such they cannot fail 
to give an idea of the ‘ dyotistoina’. Specially as we find the ‘ Jyotistomd’ 
actually spoken of as ‘ Jy<Aild in the sentence ‘ Vasante Vasante Jyotid, etc. 

For these reasons, we conclude that inasmuch as in the case in ques- 
tion, we find none of the aboveinentioned grounds of diversity, vis. — Dif- 
ference of words, Repetition of the same word, Number, the mention of an 
Accessory incompatible with the original Action, and a Difference of con- 
text — the actions referred to cannot be any other than the original 
‘Jyotistoma.’ 

Sidihanta . — To the above we make the following reply : when no word 
expressive of the Action has been used, the name that happens to be men- 
tioned first cannot but give rise to the idea of something new. That is to 
say, in a case where the Action has been already laid down by means of a 
previously pronounced verb, before the name comes to be mentioned, the 
unity or diversity of the Actions concerned having, in that case, already 
been ascertained elsewhere by means of the verb, the subsequently appear- 
ing Name would not distinguish the Actions. In the case in question, 
however, we find that the name is mentioned in connection with an -Action 
that has yet to be laid down (by the subsequent sentence ‘Mena Sahasradak- 
sinena yajetd") and such like the number, it must be expressive of Separate- 
ness. Because in all cases, it is most improper to use one word in more 
than one sense, or to express one thing by more than one word ; and hence 
whenever we come across a new thing, we look for a new name; and vice 
versa whenever we find a new name we look for a new thing. When ' 
however, we directly perceive both of these to be the same that has been 
known before, then this perception sets aside the weaker authority of the 
aforesaid character of the name. .But so long as there is no such' recog- 
nition of identity, there is nothing to set aside the idea of difference ‘ 
naturally afforded by the difference of izaineis. * ' ' 

For instance, in the case in question, we find that entirely different 
from the previously mentioned Jyoti^toma^ them is, later on, a new name 



PI^BVA-MIMAMSA-SUTRAS. II ADEYAYA 


coiiuectioii witli what 

)Yeol ; and lienee it 
by itself the 

bat follows as well 
of whicli this is the name, and 
gone before refer to, and liave 
such cannot refer to anything 
i ’ that comes afterwards 
bough, on account of the 
taken up by the laying 
gift of ^ a thousand ), and as 
to distinguish the Action, yet, 
on account of the intervention 
dealing with the 
word ‘ gauh ' 


‘ aflid gciuV ; and as this latter lias apparently" 
has gone before, it cannot bring about any i 
gives vise to the notion of something else coi 
name gaitli.) And then w^e proceed to look out, in 
as in what has gone before, for tliat thing 
we find that all the ‘ yojettis that has 
been absorbed by the Jyoti^tovid, and as 
else or have any other name ; but as for tl 
(in the sentence * Etena sahasrctdah^hiena 
mention of the Result, the Injunctive potency is 
down of something else the accessory 
such the Injunction itself does not serve 
inasmuch as according to Sutra 11. i. 49, 

‘ gauli ’ (between the passages 

Ath lisa eta) the 


w 


of an unconnected word 
Jyotistoma and the sentence 
does not veiy well fit into what has gone before ; and hence the idea of what 
has gone before not presenting itself at the time that the sentence Atlia 
gaufy ’ appears, the continnance of the previous context is broken off, and 
the mind naturally seeks for something else ; and the subsequent ‘ yajeta 
presenting itself to the expectant mind and being incapable of referring to 
the Jyoti§tom.a sacrifice, which is already possessed by another name and 
turns itself to an object other than the taking up of that the continuation of 
which lias been broken off. Consequently then, the subsequent ‘ yati ’ 
being separated from tlie previous context, by the giver of the name ‘ gaiili, 
cannot go over to it, nor does the previous context go over to it ; and 
hence fer force it goes over to another object. 

Thus, then, the word ‘ atha ’ not being able to be taken as signify- 
ing either reference to what has gone before, or immediate sequence.it 


2l5 



it pAdA, tx ADHIKAEATsIA, SA 23. 


Adhikarana IX. — Differentiations of actions 
through their deities. 

sOTRA IL ii. 23— 24. 


r * ^ 


'V 


5^3;^ CTii^ia,ycIia, an accessory also. Apurvasainyoge, wlien it is a new 

one. Y^kyayoh, of the sentences. =9^m Samatv^t, because of equal inde- 

pendence. 

23. An accessory also (serves to differentiate actions) 
when it is a new one, and incapable of being connected with 
the foregoing (action) because both the sentences are equally 
independent of each other. — 23. 

COMMENTARY. 

Before dealing with the differentiating of Actions by context, we 
proceed to consider the Diversity and Unity of Actions based upon their 
Accessories. 

In connection with the Chaturmasya sacrifice with reference to the 
Faisradeoa Parva, we find the sentence ‘ Vaisvadevydmik^a, ’ which serves 
to lay down the saerifiee implied by the connection between the material 
and the Deity herein mentioned ; and following on this we find the sen- 
tence ‘ Fa? And on this point there arises the following 

doubt : Does the second sentence lay down ^an accessory material for 
the sacrifice laid down by the former sentence or does it serve to lay down 
a distinct sacrifice implied by the particular connection of the material 
and the Deity mentioned in itself ? 

Thougli there was a third alternative also possible, namely, that 
both the material and the Deity mentioned in the second sentence are 
laid down with reference to the previous sacrifice, yet this bas not been 
put forth, because it has been shown in the Adhihorma dealing with the 
Paurnam&si sacrifice, that it is not possible for many accessories to be laid 
down in connection with an Action that has been already enjoined by a 
previous sentence. 

Thus, then, the question comes to be this : Is the material Vajina 
connected, in the previously laid down sacrifice, with the Deity (Ftew- 
devas) of that sacrifice, or is it connected with another Deity (Fuj/i) another 
sacrifice and another Apfirva ! ' ; " 

On this, we have the following : — . * ^ 

P4rvapah§a>~-^The second sentence serves to lay down the materia? 
Vdjim witb regard to the previous sacrifice. . 



Pf)RVA-MiMAM8A-SdfBAS. 11 ADEYAYA^ 


Because of the word Vaji being taken as one who has Vaja or food 
and the food meant being the Amiksd that has been laid down in the 
immediately preceding sentence (Vaisvadevydthikslid) it is the action too 
referred to in this second sentence being the same as that laid down in 
the former sentence, what this second sentence does is to lay down a new 
material, in the shape of the Vajina. 

That is to say, we do not know of any such deities as the Vdjis and 
no unknown meaning of the words can serve to complete the meaning of 
a sentence ; but as a rule whei’ever the meaning of a word as a whole is 
unknown, what we do is to accept the meaning that is afforded by its 
constituent parts ; and in the case in question we find that in the first 
sentence, the Visvadevas are represented as ‘ Vaji ’ because of their having 
Amihqck (which is a food, Vdja) and then these same Deities being under- 
stood, in the second sentence, to be connected with the material ‘ Vajina ’ 
they cannot be set aside from this connection (because there is no other 
known meaning of the word as a whole). These Deities (Visvadevas) 
are already impressed with the connection of the sacrifice previously 
implied by the first sentence ; consequently, when with a view to esta- 
blishing their relationship with the material Vajina, we come to assume 
a ^ sacrifice ’ we find that there is no reason why we should set aside the 
sacrifice that is pointed out by the word ‘ Vdji ’ (which is synonymous with 
Visvadevas, and as such points to the sacrifice implied in the former sen- 
tence) ; and whUe we have that sacrifice, there arises no further incon- 
sistency with regard to anything' else ; and hence we conclude that in the 
second sentence we have the same sacrifice, the same ApArra and the same 
Deity as those in the previous sacrifice, and as such there is no reason for 
assuming any other sacrifice. 

• For these reasons we conclude that in view of the two sentences in 
question, the two materials, Amiksd and V ajina must be taken as per- 
taining to the same sacrifice, to be employed in it either as optional 
alternatives or both jointly and that the action mentioned in the second 
sentence is not different from that laid down in the first. 

To the above, we make the followdng reply : — 

SiddMnta. — Inasmuch as the sacrifice laid down by the first sentence 
has already a material mentioned for it, another material (mentioned in tlie' 
second sentence) cannot possibly belong to it ; and hence the mention of' 
such a material, for the sake of establishing its relevancy, could not but 
indicate another Action. 

The meaning of the Stifra thus comes to be this: Inasmuclt; ^ 
the Guya, (material) is new and incapable of being connected with the 



n PlDA, IX ADHIKABAm, SA 


previous Action it gives rise to tlie idea of a distinct Action ; specially as 
tlie two sentences are ecxual, ie., indepfendent of eacL. other. That is 
to say, each of the two connections between Deity and material (that the 
two sentences speak of), not allowing the presence of the other, as income 
patible with itself, lays down a distinct Action. 

The passage in questiozi comprises two distinct sentences ‘ VaUva- 
devyamilcsa’ and ‘Vajibhyovdjinam’ and the case of the two sentences is not 
alike as in the sentence ‘ Vaisvadevydmik^a there are two relationships : (1) 
The Relationship of the material and the Deity, and (2) the Relationship of 
the qualiSer and the qualified ; and of these the former is directly men- 
tioned by the words, while the latter is indicated by syntactical connection. 

For this reason, the qualification of the word ‘ amik§d ’ by the word 
‘ Vaii-vadevi ’ is not through the. meaning of these words; as it is in the case 
of the expression ‘ NUotpaldvi ’ what the fact is, is that the Nominal affix 
itself directly denotes the Amiki^d together with the Deity Visvedevah and 
the particular material referred to (hj the pronoun ‘ asiydlj, ’ in the ex- 
pounding of the Nominal affix) is indicated by the proximity of the word 
‘ Amik^d' The case of the other sezitence ‘ Vdjivyobajindm ’ is entirely 
different. 

Because, firstly, in the sentence ‘Vajibhyo Vajinmn,’ the material to be 
offered is not denoted either by the noun ‘ Vajin ’ or by the Dative affix (in 
the word ‘ Vajibhyal} ’) ; nor do any of these express the connection of that 
material with the Deity ; and hence we cannot cognise these by any other 
means save the syntactical connection (of the two words). Tliat is to say, 
in the word ‘ Vajibhyalj, ’ either the basic noun or the affix or both of them 
together express either the material in general or a particular material or 
connection of some material with the Deity, all that the word denotes is 
that “ the object signified by the noun is the recipient ; ” and certainly theio 
is no idea of the relationship of the “ material ” included in the word ; 
and hence it has to be cognised by means of the syntactical connection 
based upon the proximity of the word ‘ Vajinam.’ 

And, secondly, in the case of the word ‘ Vaisvadevi ’ we find that the 
signification of the Pronoun ‘ asydli ’ is included in the Nominal affiv, 
but in the case of the word ‘ Vajibhyafy ’ the Dative is not laid down in 
the sense of that of which the object signified by the basic noun is the 
receiver of the gift : That is to say, in the case of the former, we find 
that the Nominal Affix has been laid down by grammarians in the sense 
of ‘thaf 0 / -the object signified by the basic word is the Deity ’ ; 
whi^e- the Dative has not been laid down in the sense that ‘ that which is 
sigB^p^jby the Tjasic noun is the tdowyiej', of that (a certain gift)’: 



PI^BVA-MiMAMSA-SUTBAB. It ADEYAYA 



Adhikarana XI, — The mention of definiie materials is 
loitli a vieip to distinct results. 

StTTRAS II, ii. 25, 20. 

^ ii Jtvt ii 

Plialasriiteb, because of the mention of distinct result* 5 Tu, really* 
Karma, a distinct action, wh Sj4t, sliould be* Phalasya, of the action, 
KarmayogitySt, being connected with a definite action. 

25. Because of tlie mention of a distinct Result, tliere 
would be a distinct action (laid down by the ' sentence) 
specially as the Result is always connected with a definite 
Action. — 25. 

COMMENTARY. 

In continuation of tlie sentence ‘ Agnihotram juhoti ’ we find 
the sentence ‘ Badhnindriyaharaasya juhuydt ’ and this gives rise to the 
following doubt : Does this second sentence lay down an Action different 
from that laid down by the former sentence ? or does it only serve to men- 
tion a distinct result as following from the offering of a particular material 
at the same sacrifice ? 

Two conclusions have been previously arrived at (1) If the original 
Injunction of the Action contain the mention of no accessory, the accessory 
mentioned in a subsequent passage pertains to the Action laid down by that 
Injunction' (2) If the original Injunction contain the mention of an 
accessory, there being no possibility of the connection of more than one 
enjoined accessory, the mention of another accessory pertains to another 


II PAD A, X-XI ADHIKARAhJA, Sil 24, 25. 


Adhikarana X. 

The Bluisya has also taken Sutra 24 to represent an Adhikarana by 
itself. In the case of the two sentences ^ Agnihotrena jiiJiotV and ‘ Dadhnd 
juhoti’ the question arising as to whether the two sentences refer to the 
same or to different actions. The conclusion is that the former 
sentence not laying clown any material for the ‘ iJonja ’ the latter sentence 
should be taken as laying down the material for that same ‘ Homo.’ 

It may bo noted that there is no difference in the actual interpretation 
of the ‘iSiltra.’ In both cases the Sutra deals with a counter-instance 
to what has gone before. The only difference is that hy one interpretation 
the Sutra is made a loortion of Adhikarana IX while by another it is 
made an independent Adhikarana by itself. 








l^tJEVA-UlMAUSA-Sl^TEAS. 11 ADRYAYA. 


Action. In. tlie case in question, we find that the sentence lajnng down 
the original action—' Agnihotram juhoti ’—does not mention an accessory 
{viz., the material ‘ I)adhi ’’'and the Result ‘ A erpdrRig of sense, efficiency ); 
and there arises a doubt as . to‘ the likelihood or otherwise of these latter 
appertaining to the former Action. 

For the purpose of settling this doubt, we have got to settle at first 
the question as to whether the Result mentioned in the second sentence 
follows from the ‘ Homa ’ or from the particular material ‘ DadliV 

■ There being every reason for a dou.bt in connection with the sen- 
tences in question, we proceed at first to deal with the following 

Pilrvapak§a.— Though in the case in question, the previous sentence 
‘ Agnihotram juhoti f mentioning the material, yet the sentence in question 
C dadhnendnyaUmasya juhuydt ’) lays down a distinct Action ; because 
this latter contains, i.e., distinctly mentions, a Result (‘ Sense-efficiency ’), 
and it is only from an Action that a result can follow. 

The whole of the Bhavarthfldhikarana (II. i. 14) serves as the present 
Purvapahsa. Because the conclusion therein arrived at was tliat it is 
only Verbs and nqt Nouns or Adjectives (laying down the material or 
other accessory details), that are connected with the word speaking of the 
Result, and hence inasmuch as the Result is always connected with an 
Action, when there is a distinct Result mentioned, the sentence in question 
must be taken as laying down a distinct Action, and not as only pointing out 
another material (dadhi) for the previously mentioned Action {Agnihotra). 

Because the material having been already mentioned once, the 
same cannot be enjoined over again ; and if you hold the sentence to lay 
down a material that has not been already laid down, then the mention 
of the Result would be altogether superfluous (as no Result can ever 
follow from the material 'dod/w’). That is to say, in a case where the 
word speaking of the Action does not speak of a material, we can take 
another sentence as laying down that material, only if either that material 
does not happen to have been laid down already by a previous sentence, 
or if the sentence in question is not found capable of asserting anything 
more than what has already been mentioned. In the case in question, 
however, we find none of these conditions present, as the material ‘ dadhi ’ 
has been previously laid down by another sentence ‘ dadhnd juhoti,’ and 
the sentence in question mentions a Result (sense-efficiency) over and 
above what has been spoken of before. It is with a view to all this that 
the Bhd§ya has summed up the Pfirvapaksa in the words : we find a 
distinct result mentioned in the sentence in question ; and a (distinct) 
Result can, rightly speaking, follow from a (distinct) Action only. 


i'.. , 




11 PADA, XT ADHIKABANA, Si1. 26. 


221 


^ sr^>^ II Hi II 

^3<jircs(m Atiilyatvat, Oil accolint of not being exactly siiTiilar, - g Tn, Init. 
5iT^: Vakyayoli, of tlie two sentences. 3% Qu^ie, as laying down an accessory. 
TO Tasya, for the action. . Pratiyeta, should be recognised. 

26. Tlie two sentences not being exactly similar, tlie 
second sentence should be taken as laying dovrn an accessory 
for the previously mentioned Action. — 26. 

COMMBNTAEY. 

The sentence in question is not similar to those with reference to 
which it has been concluded, under the Bhflvtrthftdhikarana (11. i. 1), 
that the Result follows from that which is expressed by the Root. 
Because so long as the potency of the Injunctive has not been removed 
from that which is expressed by the verbal root, whatever result is 
mentioned is taken as pertaining to that Root-meaning ; when however, 
the potency of the Injunctive is transferred to the Accessory, if a Result 
happens to be mentioned, then inasmuch as this mention of the Result 
would be touched bj’- the Injunction of the Accessory it is along with 
that necessary that the Result comes to be taken. 

That is to say, the Injunctiveness in reality residing in the BMvand 
is transferred to from 0 !ie to the other factor, according as that factor 
comes to be recognised as helping that BMvand. And at the time that 
the Injunctiveness, as transferred to the Root-meaning, gets at the BMvand 
with a particular result, — it is the Root-meaning that is made the Instru- 
ment (of its accomplishment) ; and everything else becomes subservient 
to that Root-meaning. This (fact of Injunctiveness pertaining to the 
Root-meaning) is found to be the case, in connection with the sentence 
‘ Agnihotram jiiliuydt svargaMmaT},' where the name(Agnihotra) is incapable 
of wresting, for itself, the operation of the Injunctive. On the other 
hand, in the case of the sentence in question d dadhndndriyaMmasya 
jiihuyat’), the word ‘ dadhi' has got none of the various characteristics 
of a NSmadheya (Name of a sacrifice) (as detailed in the Fourth Pdda 
of the First Adhydya) and hence it must be taken as something enjoined ; 
and as such it wrests to itself the Injunctive operation that had been 
pointing to the Root-meaning. Thus then, the BMvand in question, 
affected by its contact with the Dadhi, comes to stand in need of reference 
(to a previous Action) by means of the Root-meaning of the sentence ; 
and consequently when we find a Result mentioned, we at once conclude 
this Result to be something to be brought about by the instrumentality 
of the Dadhi, and not by that of the Eoma (expressed by the Root-meaning 


iitiia 


■■V g,, 


PI)EVA-M!mAMSA-8(jTEA8. II ADHYAYA. 


of ‘ juhuyat ’ ; specially because those that are not enjoined cannot be 
accepted to have the Character of the Instrument ; and when we have 
accepted a certain other thing to he the object of the Injunction, we 
can never take the sentence as laying down that from winch the Injunctive 
operation has been wrested, as we have already shown above (under 
Sutra II. ii. H) just as on account of the Injunctive operation being wrested 
by the Dadhi we deny the fact of the sentence enjoining the Sbvia, so 
in the same manner, on account of the presence of the word mentioning 
the Result, ive cannot take the sentence as enjoin uig the dadht lotth 
reference to the Eoma (because of the chance of sjmtactical split, etc., etc.) : 
hence what we hold is that the sentence enjoins the Dadlii icith reference 
to the Bhavand, and as such, it must be admitted that the Result follows 
from the Dadhi, and the sentence does not lay down a distinct action. 


Adhikarana XII— The Yamvantlya, ete., are 
distinct Actions. 


StTRA. II. ii. 27. 


^ Samesu, tho sentences being similar, Karmayuktam, related 



to the actions, Sydt, should be. 

27. ^Mien tlie sentences are similar (the Result) would 
he connected with distinct Action. — 27. 

COMMENTARY. 

We now proceed to deal with an exception to the foregoing Adhi- 
haraijia. 

The subject of the Adhikarana is thus shown : (1) we have the 
sentence ‘ trivridagnhtomal}, tasya vdynvij-isu ehaviirisamagnktomnsama 
'kritvd. hrahmavarehasahdmo yajetef and then in continuation of this Agni^tut 
sacrifice we have the sentence ‘ vdravantiyamagni^tomasdma Mryam’ 
which lays down an accessory in the shape of the vAravanttyamagni- 
domasdma hritvd pakihdmo hyetena yajetd. [This difference between the 
bearing of the two sentences being that when the Varvantiya is sung 
to in connection with the VAyavya verses then the result is in the shape 
of ‘ Brahmic glory ’ while when the same is sung in connection with the 
Bevati verses, the Result is in the shape of ‘ Cattle ’]. 

Here, too, we have as before, the following doubt : — Does this 
last sentence enjoin an independent action, distinct from that laid down 
ip. the previous sentence, as qualified by a distinct material (ip the shape 


' - ' i" 



it TADA, XII ADHlKAEANA, Sit. 27 


Gomieetion with the Revati verses) ? 
down this distinct material only, with referei 
of the sentence dealt with 


of the Varvanthja in 
serve to lay 

Action, just as in the case 
Adhikarana? 

And on this we have the following: ■ 

■In view of the reasons detailed, a 
s Adhiharaiw , it must be i 
only to lay down the Result 


Purvci,pahsa. 

arrived at, in the foregoing 
sentence in question serves 
a particular accessory (in connection with the previously mentioned action). 
Because, as a matter of fact, we find that the Injunctive potency of the 
sentence is taken up by the connection between the Revati and the 
V dvavantiya, and then we find a Result mentioned along u ith this In- 
junction ; consequently we cannot take the sentence as laying down the 
Saenfiee (as that would entail a dual junctioning of the Injunction, 
thereby leading to syntactical split). And as for the connection between 
the Revati and the Vdravantiya., this would be brought about, without 
a repetition of the Inj uuctive affix, by the word ‘ kritvd ’ which is 
mentioned distinctly by itself (and as such this would not involve the said 
syntactical split). 

To the above we make the following reply : 

Sicldhdnta— When there is an Accessory which accepts the previously 
mentioned Action as its substratum, then alone is it so that we do not 
perceive any difference between the Actions (mentioned in the two 
sentences') , and the reason is that in such a case what the latter sentence 




pduVAMtUAMBl-BJJmAS. 11 ADRYYA. 


by itself, capable of directly accomplisbiug the sacrifice; becaose it is 
neither a Deity nor a material (which two alone are directly accomplishing.- 
the sacrifice); because the sacrifice requires for* its accomplishment, yiio 
other helping factors, except those of the Deity, the material, and '.the 
performer; and hence it is never accomplished directly by means 1 of 

a Soma {Vdravantiya and the like). 

Thus then, though through the peculiar character of the context, the 
sacrifice (previously mentioned) is present in the mind, yet it does not be- 
come cognised as the substrate of the said Soma, because of its inherent 
incapability of having that character ; and hence that ‘ sacrifice’^ cannot 
be accepted as referred to by the sentence in question {Revati^u, etc.,) 
specially as we have no grounds for .believing that the sacrifice herein 
mentioned is the same as the one previously mentioned. As for the 
Hymning, that forms a part of the previous ‘ sacrifice and which being 
accomplished by means of the Varvantiya Soma, is capable of being taken 
as its substrate~it is not pointed out by the context ; because the presence 
of Hymning in the previous ‘ sacrifice ; the * Ag ni^tut is only based upon 
an indirect implication. 


Adhikarana XIII. 


-A single result following from two 
Actions. 


SUTRA II. ii. 28—29. 


U sie II 

Saubhare, in connection with the Suhhara. Purhsasruteh, be- 

cause of the mention of human effort, Nidhanam, with the Nidhana. 
Kimasamyogah, connection of a desii-able result. 

28. Because of the mention of human effort in con- 
nection with the Saubhara there must be a distinct desirable 
result connected with the Nidhana. — 28. 

COMMENTARY. 

From among the Ukthya Hymns, the Saubhara is the Brahmasdma 
that has been laid down in connection with the Jyotistoma ; in connection 
with this we have the sentences ‘ Yadi Rathantaram,’ etc., which serve to 
lay down certain motive causes ; and then later on, we meet witlr the 
sentence. — (1) ‘ Fo Vfi^iMwo yo annddyakdmo yah svargahdmafy sa 
savhharena stuvitaf which mentions the three results in connection with 
the Saubhara which is a necessary accompaniment of the Jyotklorm 
sacrifice, in accordance with the rule that all such desirable results are 




...r 







IT PADA, XIII ADHIKARAXA, SiJ. 28, 


connected with the necessary accompaniment, hecanse tliis is equally 
present in all cases ; and it will be shown later on, under Stitra I V. iii. 5, 
that such an accompaniment can be only that which helps the sacrifice and 
fulfils a desirable end of the human agent ; and under SMra IV. iii. 26, 
that the several results mentioned follow from the said necessary accom- 
paniment, alternatively. Then again, with reference to the aforesaid 
Saubh'ira, we have the following sentence (2) Rhiti : vrktiMm&ya 
nidhanam kurydt urgityannMyakdmdyi^ un iti svargakdviasya [Nidhanam 
is the concluding part of the Sama.] 

In connection with these two sets of texts, we proceed to consider the 
following question : Does the Saubhara (mentioned in the former sentence) 
bring about its result by itself, independently of the Nidlianas, his and the 
rest [mentioned in sentence (2)] which bring about separate results of their 
own (apart from that of the S mbham), or these ‘ his ’ etc., have been laid 
down as the various instruments which when employed in connection 
with the same aforesaid Saubhara, help it in bringing about the said 
lesul ts ? 

Though this question has nothing to do with tlie difference or non- 
difference of Actions, yet it has been introduced here as in a way connected 
with the subject. Or, it may be that, like the difference and non-difference 
of Actions, the diffei-ence and non-difference of the resultant Apitrva also 
forms the subject matter of the Adhydya. 

On the above question, we have the following : — 

pDrvapaksa (A). 

PArvapak^a — If the results mentioned in the latter sentence were the 
same as those that followed from the Saubhara itself, then their repetition 
(in the latter sentence) would be wholly useless ; because in that case, there 
would be nothing that would be laid down by the sentence in question ; ■ 
because the hi? and the rest are already known, from other Vedic texts, as the 
Nidlianas of the Saubhara (and the only other object spoken of in the 
sentence is the result, and this you take to be the same as that previously 
mentioned, and so the sentence would have nothing new to say. ) Nor can 
it be urged that the sentence in question would serve the purpose of 
restricting the Nidlianas because these being directly laid down (in other 
Vedic texts) as the Nidhanas to be employed they cannot rightly be 
set aside on the strength of any such implied restrictions. As a matter 
of fact, in all cases, restriction as serving the sole purpose of setting aside 
something, is highly . objectionable. But when all other i objects are 
indirectly implied, then it is possible for the one that is directly laid down 
to set aside the rest. Because we find that they are all directly laid down by 








226 P^B7A-M1MAM8A-8I^TBA8. II ADEYlYA. 

tlie text that lays down the SawMara ; and iinder the circumstances it is 
scarcely right to take any one of them as settitig aside the rest, on Ae 
mere ground of repetition actuated by an Injunction ; specially when this 
latter admits of another explanation. In accordance with our theory, 
however, the use of ‘ his and the rest having the capability of bringing 
about distinct results of their own, would be more desirable, for the agent, 
than those that have been mentioned as forming part of the Sauhhara and 
thereby helping in the accomplishment of the sacrifice ; and on ground of 
this greater desirability the former would very rightly set aside all the 
latter. 

(2) The sentence in question would serve a useful purpose, only if it 
laid down the relationship (causal) between the Bain, etc., and the Ms 
etc., which is not laid down in any other sentence. And this would also 
save us from the anomaly of taking the word ‘ ’ as a mere 

qualification of the 8auhhara in a sentence which would be taken as serving 
to restrict the Nidhan'Js,—-whi]e it is quite capable of being taken directly 
by itself (as mentioning the result following from the Eidhanas). 

(3) In the Veda, which consists of Injunctions, we always want 
a lot of desirable results, because that makes it easier for the Injunctions 
to urge the human agents to action. 

For these reasons we conclude that the results following from the 
Nidhanas are distinct from those mentioned as following from the 
Sauhhara itself. 

U 5^5. n " . 

^ Sarvasya, of the - whole. ^ Yh, but. UktakamatvS,t, having 

their results already mentioned, uftpj Tasmin, to that, ot: Kfimahi^rutih, 

mention of the result. ^ Sy&t, should refer, fi'rtnif Nidhanartha, for the 
purpose of restricting the Nidhana. Punah^rutih, repetition. 

29. But because the results mentioned pertain to the 
whole Sauhhara the result mentioned subsequently should 
also pertain to the same. The second mention is only for 
the pui’pose of restricting the Nidhana. — 29. 

, OOMMINTARY. 

In answer to the aforesaid PArvapaha we have the following 
, 8idd1umta (A .) — The his cannot be connected with the Result, because 

„ would make the mention of the JVfdftqnd wholly redundant 





IT PADA, Kill ADBIKARATJA, Sil 29. 


the Nidhana be taken as connected with the Sauhhara, the Result could be 
taken as qualifying the Sauhhara, 

That is to say, if we were to take the sentence as—' one should bring 
about rain by means of the his and by that as a nidhana of the Saubhara, 
“there would be a syntactical split ; for if the his were not connected 
with the Saubhara, then the sentence would be wholly redundant. In 
accordance with our theory, there is nothing without some use; and 
out of the things spoken of in the sentence in a question, the Saubhara, as 
bringing about Rain, etc., mentioned in another sentence, has already 
been laid down elsewhere, as also the Results themselv"es, and hence 
all that the sentence lias got to lay down is the relationship between the 
hi^ etc., and the Saubhara ; and as such there is no syntactical sjilit. 

Nor is the sentence altogether useless, as it serves the purpose of 
restricting the particular nidhauas. Even apart from any consideration of 
the one being more desirable, there is, in the case in question, a distinct 
setting aside of the one by the other, on the ground of one being more 
generic in its character than the other ; as, for instance, the word 
' Saubhara^ applying to all parts of that Soina^ it is only by indirect indica- 
cation that all its nidhanas (his etc.,) could be mentioned by the sentence 
speaking of the ‘ Saubhara ’ ; wliile the sentence in question mentions the 
particular nidhanas directly ; and as such this latter is more authoritative 
than the former (and as such this would very well restrict the use of the 
nidhanas implied in the former sentence). And just as that which is 
implied is set aside by that which is directly mentioned, so is also that 
which is indirectly indicated. Or, the sentence in question does not set 
aside anything of the song mentioned by the word ' Sauhhara ’ because all 
that it does is to lay down certain letters ‘ tris^ for instance, and as such 
it would set aside certain other letters only {and not the song itself.) If 
the sentence had laid down the part o£ some other song, then the part 
of the ' Saubhara' would be set aside by that ; as a matter of fact, however, 
the restriction of the nidhana only serves to preclude certain letters of 
the (the Smna). And as such there is no anomaly of the preclusion 
of that which has been directly laid down- 

For these reasons, we conclude that the repetition of the Results in 
the sentence in question serves to restrict the Nidhanas. 

Kumarila is not satisfied with the above preseufcation of the AdhR 
kara^a and he makes the following observations : — 

. As for the form of the doubt itself, there can be no such doubt, because 
the construction of the sentence in question is wholly different from that 
on which the abovementioned doubt has been based, because (in the 






228 pdB7A-MiMAM8A -SdTBA8. 11 ADEYAYA. 

sentence ‘ tfi^iti vrkUkamaya nidhanam\ tfis cannot be taken along 
with the nidhanam because of tlie intervention between them, of the word 
vriftikamaya as it would be very undesirable to take the sentence as 
tri? is the nidhana, etc. (This is the case of the above representative of the 

So also in the case of the above representation of the SiddMnia li 
the sentence be taken as laying down the ‘Pru’ with reference to the 
nidhana as qualified ‘ desire rain,’ then, inasmuch as it would con- 
tain a reference to a. qaaZijtiad object, there would be distinct syntactical 

split. If it be taken as laying down the trk with reference to the mdhanas 
only (not qualified by “ desire for rain”), then Ae mention of the Result 
would be wholly useless. Because the connection with all mdhanas has 
already been laid down by mere mention of the ‘ sauhhnra ’ and hence 
no useful purpose would be served by the sentence laying down such a 
connection only. If again, the sentence be taken as— ‘ yat 

saulharam tasija yannidlianam tatra his padamprayufijtta’ (one should use 
the word trf? in the nid/iona of that which is sung for the sake 

of Rain)— then, inasmuch as this would involve various predictions, there 
would be a syntactical split. Though ‘desire for rain,’ 8auhJw.ra and its 
nidhanas have all been mentioned before, yet inasmuch as there are many 
other nidhanas present in the Sauhhara it is necessary to make an attempt 
to preclude these and thereby the sentence would come to serve more 
purposes than one 5 and that would entail a syntactical split. 

Then again, the Siddhanta as represented above, has not quite 
effectually refuted the PUrvayak^a ; as the fact of the etc., being 

mdhanas is mentioned by Veda itself. 

For the above reasons, we must explain the 4 dhifcnraj.m as follows: 

The tm being taken with the word vri^tikdmdya there arises a 
doubt as to whether the sentence point to its connection with the result 
or with the means. That is to say, the sentence being taken as tri?iti 
Vfi^tihtmdya there arises a doul)t as to whether the tris is related directly 
to the Result, or to a particular means (in the shape of the Sauhhara) as 

qualified by the Result ? - _ 

In fact, it is this construction of the sentence that has been shown in 
the Bhdsya by means of the sentences ‘trmti nidhanamiti etat phalamhha- 
vaittid The sentence , ‘ Vrkpikdmdyeti Sauhharavike^aiiam, {BJmya ) — 
means that the Sauhhara not being mentioned by name in the sentence in 
question, it is only by means of indirect indication that it could be qualified 
by the Result therein mentioned. The assertion ‘ Na tpi^ samhandJtal 
; meai^. that the tr*? lias no connection with the form of the result. 







II PADA, XIIl ADBIKAIUNA, Sit 29. 


And then, inasmuch as the position of the Pilrvapahsa based upon 
the repetition of the Injunction would be established otherwise, through 
the force of the Collective Injunction relating to the sacrifice in question, 
proceed to pat forward the following position of the 

Purvapah^lia (B). — If eveiy one of the nidhanas were restricted with 
reference to the Sauhham as engaged in fulfilling its own function, — then, 
inasmuch as the Injunction of the and the rest would be established hy 
the very fact of these being brought forward by the Collective Injunction, 
of the sacrifice in question, there would be no use of another Injunction of 
them (in the sentence in question). No such Collective Injunction, how- 
ever, is capable of expressing the independent relationship of the his with 
the particular Result; and as such, in giving expression of this relation- 
ship, the sentence would be serving a distinct useful purpose. 

And further, the wmrd ^ Viddikci/mctya,' hawing directly mention- 
ed the human agent concerned — it is only natural that when this agent 
comes to look for the means of accomplishing the Result, this want is 
supplied by the mention of etc. Otherwise (if the result belonged 
to the Sauhhara, then! this Saubhara could be mentioned as the means 
sought after, only through indirect Injunction, based upon the fact of its 
occurring in the same context and beiiig capable of bringing about the 
Result in question, x^nd certainly there can be no ground for having re- 
course to such an indirect Indication (so long as the want is found to he 
supplied by means of Direct Assertion). 

This representation of the Purvapaltsa appeared to have been in- 
tended by the Bhdsya as is shown by the sentence ' TatMsrutilahmm 
visaye^ etc.” 

The Siddhdnta in that case would be represented as follows : — 

Siddhdnta{B}, — The previous sentence having spoken of a certain 
Result as following from the Saubhara as a tchole, what the sentence in 
question does is to restrict the pjarticular nidhanas of the Saubhara with 
reference to each one of the results mentioned (and thus the mention of 
the results in the previous latter sentence is a reference to the very same 
results mentioned in the sentence). 

That is to say, inasmuch as the results mentioned in the sen- 
tence in question are distinctly recognised as being the same as those 
mentioned^^previously in connection with the Saubhara as a whole— we can 
mover believe them to be distinct results (following from the particular 
nidhanas). o ' ~ 

To the question — “ Why then should there be a repetition the 
answer — "Nidhandriha punasruti]^ (the repetition is for the purpose of 







PI^BfA-MtMAMSA-Sl)TBAS. II ADEYAYA 


restricting the Nidhanas). This Adhiharana embodies tne excepuun uu uuu 
of tl)e hregoing Adhihamms, viz., that the result follows from the Accessory 
(II. ii. 26), and that it follows from the Action and not from the Accessory 
(II. ii. 27). Because what is herein shown is that the sentence in ques- 
tion does not lay down the Result, but only indicates the Hi? etc., as 
part of the Sauhhara leading to the aforesaid results. 

The syntactical split that had been urged against us, would have been 
admitted of a relationship of the Nidhana (with the His, 
took the Nidhana as directly qualifying the 8auhlia.ra. ^ As a 

of these, as we hold the relationship 
Vfistikdmai and the fact of 
m, we deduce from the 
s deduced from the context do not 
And hence the anomaly of syntactical split does 


possible, if we 
etc.) or if we 

matter of fact, however, we do none 
to exist between the His and the word 
the Nidhana being the qualification of 8auhhar 

cbntearf ; and certainly the peculiarities < 

cause a syntactical split. 

not quite apply to us. 

[SUPPLEMENTABY ADHIKARAIjrA.] 

There is yet another point to be considered in this connection : (1) 
Does the sentence in question serve to restrict the His, etc., with leference 
to the means of accomplishing Rain, etc., in the shape of the Sauhhara 
in whatever rescension of the Veda the Sdina may be found to appear? 
Or is the Sauhhara to be employed for one desiring rain, in that form 
in which it appears in that rescension wherein it is found with the Hi? 
as its Nidhana ? Similarly with the other two Nidhanas l^rg and un. 

And on this point we have the following : 

Pilrvapak^a. — As all the Sauhharas appearing in the thousand rescen- 
sions of the Sdmaveda are recognised as optional alternatives, what the 
sentence in question does is merely to restrict the Hi-% etc., with legaid 
to the desire for rain, etc., (the Sauhhara being of any Rescension of the 


II PAD A, XIII ADEIKABAIIA, SA. 29. 


231 


The sentence in question is capable of yet another interpretation. 
The sentence lays down the mere relationship between the Saiibhara and 
the ffis both of which have been mentioned previously the construction 
of the sentence being ‘Yat vrkttikdmaya saubharam, yaeea hisityevam 
nidhmtam, tadekatra Sampddaniyam. 

Thus, then we conclude that the sentence serves to restrict the use 
of the whole Sauhhara Sdma with reference to the various I’esults. 






'y. 


SECOND ADHYAYA. 

Thied Pada. 


AdkiUraM I. -The Ch-aUgrata is subsidiary to tlw 
Jyotisfoma. 


sOTRAS II. ill. 1—2. 




w:Gu5alj,the accessory, g Tn, really, Kratusamyogat, on ac^ 

of connection witli the sacrifice, Kannfintaram, a distinct ac 

Prayojayet, would bring about, Samyogasya, of the connection. ■ . 

Asesabhfltatvat, on account of being in its entirety. ^ -in 

1. The Accessory, being in connection with t e 
sacrifice, would bring about a distinct Action, because the 
connection is in its entirety. 1. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the JyotiMa, from among the various alter- 
native Sdmas, the Brahadr dUnt'hra has been laid down as 

accomplishing the particular hymn (Prohtha! ; and then we find the sen ten 

‘ Yadi Rathantarasdmd. somah syit amdravdyava'jran ^ ’ 

yadi Brihatsdma sukrdgran (If the soma, is connected wit t le t'lr . 
sdma, precedence should be given to the holding of the vessels dedicated 

lndT(^ and Vdyu etc., etc., etc.) ^ it ii ' 

And in connection with these two sentences, there arises the o ow 
ing question with regard to the Action with its Accessory that is mentione 
i/the latter eentence: I. it aa actio.. disti..ct tom the „r 

is it the same Jt/otistoma mentioned over again, for the purpose o . p i g 
out the reason for the precedence of the various vessels at the same sacri- 
fice, as characterised by the Buthctntara Sama ? 

For the sake, of this question, we have got to consider the following 
question la the Eathantara related to the sacrifice in its entirety is 
the Batfeontom the only Somu to he used at it)? Or is it related by 


r 

p 




I 







ni PAD A, 1 ADEIKABAl^A, Sti. 1 


mere existence (i.e., the Eatlinntara is one of the many nsed in the 
sacrifice.) ? 

And this leads us to another question — Is the Bathantara accepted as 
qualified by the sacrifice or tlie sacrifice as qualified by the Bathantara? 

The conclusion that would suggest itself at the first sight, in connec-- 
tion with the above questions, would be as follows ; — The action men- 
tioned in the sentence in question is none other than t]ie Jyotistpnia 
itself — (1) because the presence of the Bathantara SAma, as also that 
of the Brihat SAma, is mentioned by another sentence ; (2) because the 
word ‘ yadi ’ distinctly points to the conditional character, which depends 
upon the previous mention of that which is laid down as the conditipri ; 
(3) because the particular precedence of the vessel is included, in the' 
collective sentence laying down the whole procedure of the Action collec- 
tively ; (4) because the accessory mentioned more authoritatively else- 
where ; specially so, in accordance with the Sutra 11. ii, 16. , 

In opposition to this position of the SiddMnta, we proceed to put 
forward the Ptirvapahm embodied in the Sutra 

Purvapaltm. — The Action mentioned in the sentence in question is a 
distinct Action because a compound is possible only, when the words 
compounded have a certain capability ; and this capability, is held to exist 
in the qualifying ; and the qualification serves to differentiate the 
object qualified ; while in the Jyoti^pma we do not find the' Bathantara 
differentiating the sacrifice (by precluding all other SAmas). 

It has been explained above under Sutra II. ii. 23, that it is 
only when the Accessory mentioned is wholly unconnected with the 
pi-eviously mentioned action, that it serves to differentiate the Action 
mentioned in the sentence from that mentioned before. In the case 
in question, however, we find that the existence of the object expressed 
by the Bahuvrihi compound — ‘ Bathantara SAma’ — is pointed out by 
the word ‘ yadi ’ as the condition (for the precedence of the vessel) ; and 
the character of the condition is not found to belong to the existence of 
^g mere Bathantara ; as that has only a subordinate position in the com- 
;^unii (being only a qualification of that which is expressed by the com- 
pound). Specially as in the sentence, we do not recognise the Bathantara 
to be qualified by the Sacrifice— we could not very well take the existence 
of the Bathantara as the condition. Nor is it possible for the SAma 
(Bofh-antara) to be differentiated by the Sacrifice ; because that (Si^ma) 
exists' elsewhere also. It could have been so. differentiated, if the Bathan- 
tara was the Sama peculiar to the sacrifice in question alone ; but as a 
ipatter .ofiact, that is not so, ■' ‘ ■; 'v:-';',’',:,-. 


ilSIP 

. > ^ i. ij,r. 








SIB 


pIjbva-mImamsA-slItmas. n 


■ Therefore we must take the compound as expressing the fact of the 
tei^s the only 8tn,a connected veith the VoMer ct^ntficc, 
and inasmuch as we do not find either the Jyomtoma or anj^ other s. 
fice, connected with that B&ma only, the presmce of the mere Eathantura 
could not he the condition of any such sacrifice. 

Thus, then, having to renounce all notion of condition, we find the 
word ‘ Rathantarasama ’ to he inexplicable, and from this apparent incon- 
sistency of the word, we come to take it as laying down an altogether 
Ltinc? Action, at which the Eathantara would he the only Sana employed. 
SpeciaUy as that distinct Action is quite capable of being perfoimec . 
And the mere existence of the Kaihantara cannot be a qualification, as 
it does not extend over the whole of the Sacrifice, and not being ^a 
qualification it cannot have the capability (of being compounded), 
and without the capabilities, there can be no compound ; but as a mattei 
of fact we find the Samasa actually present in the case in question , 
consequently the Action mentioned in the sentence is not recognised as 
beintr the same as the one mentioned before. For these reasons it is con- 
cluded that the sentence in question is the Injunction of a distinct Action. 

. rri T 'mi'- 


^ Ekasya, of the same Action. 3 Tu, bat. Lihgabhed^t, on 

account of diverse characteristics, Prayoiamirthain, for a certain^purpose. 

Xuchyeta, could be mentioned, Ekatvam. being one only. 3^^! Gupavak- 
yatvat, being a subsidiary sentence. 

2. The same Action having diverse characteristics 
these could be mentioned for a certain purpose-- the Actaon 
being one only, on account of the sentence (in question) 
being subsidiary (to the previous sentence).— 2. 

COMMENTARY. 

On account of the reasons shown - briefly at the opening of the 
present Adhikarana, we conclude that the sentence in question merely 
lays down accessory details for the previously mentioned Jyotistoma, and 
does not put forward a distinct sacrifice. (1) Because it is the same 
sacrifice of the Jyotiipma that is mentioned with its several characteristic 
Samos, with a view to serve the purpose of showing the cause or condition 

of the precedence to be accorded to one or the other of the vessels; and 

inasmuch as the sentence in question is subsidiary to , the foregoing 
^ptence, it cannot give rise to any notion of a distinct sacrifice ; and 
hence the Saetnfiee in question is believed to be one and one only. (2) Or, 






Ill pADA, 11 ADHlKARANA, 8il. 3. 


235 


because of j.he fact of tlie Uathaiit'ira, etc., being laid down in the sentence 
in ciuestiou, it is concluded that it is the Jyotiitoma sacrifice that is laid 
down as having these Simas mentioned in the sentences that are subsi- 
diary to the original laj unction of the Jijobistoma; and coniequently, the 
Action mentioned in th« sentence in cxuestion is none other than the 
Jyotistoma, which therefore is the only one sacrifice spoken of in the 
two sentences. 

For these reasons we conclude that the sentences in question only 
serve the purpose of laying down certain conditions of preoedenoe [ and do 
not lay down distinct actions]. 


Adhikarana II. — The Avesti is a distinct sacrifice. 

SfTTRA U. iii. 3. 

ii^ii 

Avestau, ill the Avesti. Yajiiasamyogat, on account of comiec- 

tion with, the sacrifice, Kratuxiradhauam^ pointing chiefly to a sacrifice. 

Ucliyate, must be accepted. 

3. Because of the mention of the Avesti being con- 
nected with the mention of the sacrifice it must be accepted as 
pointing chiefly to a Sacrifice (and not to an Accessory). — 3. 

COMMENTARY. 

In the same context with the sentence ‘ Raja rdjasAyefia svdrajyakamo 
yajeta\ we find the sentence — {i) Agneyodaliapalo hiraitydn dah^vijd and so 
forth, which serve to lay down, by mentioning the relationship ■ of certain 
substances with particular deities, the sacrifice known as ‘ Ave^i ’ ; and 
then subsequently, we come across the following sentence : (il) ‘ Yadi 
Bt'ahmatTi.o yajeta Bdrhaspatyam madhye nidhayd hutimdhutim hutva 
Jiutuabhigharayet yadi Rdjanya Aindram, yadi Vaisyo V aisvadeoam' 

With regard to this last sentence, there arises a doubt, as before ; 
and it is this : (a) Does it serve to lay down the inserting of the Bdrhas- 
patya, etc., as due to (conditioned by) the connection of the Ave-jti as 
forming part of the BdjasAya, with the various castes, a connection that 
has already been laid down in the previous sentences? Or, does it lay 
down a distinct perforinance (of the Avesti), in connection .with the 
etc., not mentioned before ? . , - , ■ 

■ , This leads us to the further question : viz., (6).— Are all the three 

castes entitled , to the performance qf the . or the Ksatriya only. 







pOuva-uIMAMsa-sOtras. ti adeyaya 


[ As if tlie latter, then the connection of the three ^ castes \Tith the 'Oe^.i 
of the Bdjastiya cannot he said to have been previously mentionecl.J. ^ ^ 
(c) And this last question 
word ‘ E&ja,’ which is the wort 
pei’forinauce of the Rajasuyo, ; 
we shall have to consider the question 
K^atriya or one who •performs 
And on this question we 
Pilrvapahfa. — In view c. 

Adldharam, it nnist 


i would lead us to the consideration or tne 
■d that specifies the agent entitled to ^die 
and in connection with the word ‘ Bdja,’ 
as to whether it signifies the 
the functions of a king ? 
have the following ' 
of the conclusion arrived at in the foregoing 
he admitted that the latter sentences only serve to 
lay down the conditions for the particular inseHions. 

And to the performance of B&jnsAya, all the three castes arc entitled, 
as shown by the word ‘ Bajd’ which signifies ‘ one who performs the 
functions of a king.’ Because all through the word, it is only one perform- 
ing the kingly functions that is spoken of as ‘ Bdjd.’^ And it is thus 
alone that the text in question can have an extended application. 

That is to say, when it is possible for the word ‘ Bc0to to be taken 
both ways (f.e., as signifying the Ksatrinja, and as signifying one who 
performs the kingly functions), it is far more advisable to accept the 
signification of all the three castes ; because this interpretation alone 
would be compatible with the mention (in the subsequent sentences) of 
the conditions (‘ Yadi Bruhmma, eted) and with the context, etc., and also 
because this interpretation would not curtail the scope of the declaration 
of all the three castes being entitled to the performance of the Bi^asdya. 

For these reasons it must be admitted that persons of all the three 
castes, performing the functions of a king are ‘ Bajas’ and these functions 
nrp, well known to consist in the protection of the people and the removal 



in pAda, 111 AmiKAnA'NA, Sii 4. 


applicability of the literal meaning ; and then, too, there is no one definite 
literal meaning that is recognised as imiversally applicable ; as on the 
one hand, the word ^ is not found to be applied to such bright 

things as Fire and the like ; nor, on the other, to such representatives of 
the king as are not duly anointed, though performing quite well the 
kingly functions of protecting the people and the like. 



Adhikarana III, — The laying of the fire is an object of 

Injunction. 
sOtra il ul 4. 

n ^ H 

Adhiine, to the laying of fire. Sarvasesatvat, because it forms 

an integral factor of all sacrifices. 

4. Tlie Injunction does not point to the laying of fire 
as this forms an integral factor in all sacrifices. — 4. 

OOMMEiVTARY. 

In connection with the sentence ‘ Vasante Brahmaijo grti.iddadlika,’ 
there is a doubt, as in the previous instance, as to whether the ddlutna 
(.laying of fire) has been previously mentioned then even in the absence 
of the conditional ‘ if the sentence would be taken' as laying down 
the condition (for the particular season to be chosen) ; and in that 
case, the construction of the sentence in question being — ‘Yad Bmhma%ia 
ddadhita tad Vasante.— The Vasanta and the Srci/iHmya would come to 
restrict one another {i.e., the spring would be the time for the Brdhmatia 
and Brdhmatia would be the performer in the Spring time). While on 
the other hand, if the laying of fire be not found to have been previ- 
onsly mentioned, then the sentence in question would become the 
Injunction of the hajing as performed by the Brdhnam at the time oi 
the Spi'ing and the following would be the advantages of this latter in- 
terpretation : — 

(1) In the three sentences— (o) Fasaute Brdhmano’gninddadliitd, 
ib) Qrisjne Edjdnyal}, (e) Sdradi Fa%a^,— inasmuch as the laying men- 
tioned in the first sentence would be wholly taken up by the acces- 
sories (Brdhmana and Vasanta) mentioned in the same sentence ; the 
accessories mentioned in the other two sentences would point to 
distinct actions of (Laying) ; and as such there , would Layings 

of fire; (2) the presence of the Atmanepada aBx in ddadJiUa would 
point to the necessity of the sacrificer himself laying his own fire; 










pdB VA-M1MAMSA-SUTBAS. 


II ADEYATA. 


(3) tlie EMva would become precluded (from sacrifices^, as only tlio tlute 
laybps oi fii-e are laid dowu and without the layiug of Cfo, 
would be perEot-med. If, ou the oti.ei lumd the eeulenees ‘ ■ 

not os lujunetioiisof the laying, hut as simply layiug down conditio 
then we would have the reveme of all these three advantages. 

What is said in regard to the sentences in cinestion would a so 
apply to such other passages as Vasante Brdhmmam upanayita, gri^me 
m^yam, Vaihjam ; as the condition of these sentences is exactly 

like that of those dealt with m this Adhikarai.ia. 

The Adhikarana may he briefly summed up thus : ^ 

Ptirvapah.n.—The Laying of Fii-e having been implied by an in- 
lunction of a saenfice in general (as ewargaUmo yayek.) ov laid down 
by a general Injunction (such as ya evamvidwdnagmddhatte) its mention 
over again in the sentences in ciuestion must be taken as mentioning the 
various castes as conditions for the particular times of the Laying. _ 

That is to say, in the first instance the first argument in our 
favour is that, inasmuch as the Injunction of such actions as the 
Agnihotra and the like would not be possible without the sacrificial 
fa" made ready by the proper method of laying it A ib laying o 
the fire must be taken as implied by those very Injunctions; and 
hence the mention, in the sentences in question, of the same Laijmg 
must be taken as serving the purpose of laying down the Brahmaya 
etc., by way of specifying certain conditions. If, however, it be argued. 
that on account of these injunctions having other direct ohjeets of 
Injunctions they cannot rightly serve the purpose of indirectly imply- 
mg any such action as the said Laying— theri, in that case we would 
bring forward another independent Injunction of the laying itself, 
in the shape of the sentences ‘ Ya evamvidvam agninadJiatte, etc- ; an 
InjunctiOT which is wholly distinct from the previous Injunction, whicli 
has its Injunctive potency taken up by the laying down of the Accessory 
details. And thus then, the Laying of Fire having been already laid 
down in this Injunction, the sentences in question could not be taken 
as enjoining the same Laying of Fire. 

The argument of the Siddhdnta may be thus summed up : 

Siddhdnta.— So long as we have a direct Injunction, we cannot very 
well admit of an implied or inferred one ; and hence either the mention 
of the pu 3 %ose to be served or that of the existing state of things, ’ 
can never serve as Injunctions. 

That is to say, the mere mention of the purpose to he served by 
of F^e (in the shape of the accoiBplishment of the 





Ill PAD A, IV ADHIKABANA, SA 5 


Ahavaniya fire for t1ie i\gnibotra &c.), caBnofc be taken as iieeessaril}^ 
pointing to the injunction of the said Laying as the necessary fire could 
be obtained l}y merely begging it of another Agniliotra performer, speci- 
ally as in the case of the i 
by those of Agnihotra, etc., there is no 
that which is 
necessary Injunction 


n junction of the Laying of fire hem g 

Atmanepada restricting the fire to 
prepared by the Sacrificer luniself. When, lioweAmr, the 
is found to be directlj^ asserted (by a Vedic text), 
there is no Inconaistencj^ wliich could lead us to assume an unheard of 
text (as containing the required Injunction) the only ground for assum- 
ing such text being some sort of an . Apparent Inconsistency. Then, 
as for the mention of the existing state of things, in tlie sentence ' Ya 
evari vidvamtgnhiddhcittef etc., — so long as we find a direct Injunction, 
of the Laying of fire in the shape of the sentences in question ‘ Vasante 
Brdhmano^ gninddadJiUaf etc., etc., any mere description of the existing 
state of things can never acquire an Injunctive potency (to the same 
effect) ; specially as this latter has got to serve a distinct purpose of 
laying down all such details as the fetching of the water, etc., mentioned 
in the original direct Injunction. 

For these reasons, it must be admitted that the sentences in question 
serve to lay down the hitherto uumeiitioned Laying of fire as performed 
by the Brdlvmaijm^ etc. 


Adhikarana IV. — The Ddksdyajia, 6fe., are Accessories, 

SOTRAS II. iii. 5 to 11. 

Ayanesu, in the sentences containing the word Ayaiia. Chodanan- 

taram, distinct injunctions, Sanjhopavandliat, because of the particular 

names. 

5. “ The sentences containing the word Ayana must 

be taken as containing Injunctions of distinct actions : — (1) 
because of the particular names attached to them.” — 5. 

COMMENTARY. 

[In connection witli Darsa-P'Armmdsa we find the sentence ‘ Dahsd- 
ya^Ory^'Snena yujekipriijaMmalt. Sdhimprasthdpyena yajetd pasuMmaJj., 
safikrdimydgena yajetd annddydMmal^’ And in connectiot." with this 
there arises a doubt as to whether these sentences simply lay down certain 
accessoi’ies for the Darki-P^wemds t as bring about certain definite results 
Off they lay 'dowh distippt sacrifices independent of the Darsa-PtlnianiAsq, 




i. 






240 IT ADHYAYA. 

PtlrvapaksCK-U con.iection with the smtexioe ‘ Dadhmdriyak^rna^ya 
3uhmj<U: it has' been shown above (II. ii. 25, 26) that this sentence lays 

down a certain result following from a certain accessory of the same 
sacrifice. And this is quite proper; because in that case iheBMJn is 
not mentioned as co-extensive with the Eoma, that would on account of 
this name, be taken as different from the previous Eoma. In the case 
in question, on the other hand, we find that the name Baksayam 
mentioned as co-extensive (identical) with the mcnfice, as has not been 
applied to the previous sacrifice (the Darsa-Parnamdsa) ■ consequently 
in this case, there can be nothing incongruous of the fact of the word 
‘ Dah^ayam ’ pointing to distinct sacrifice qualified by that name. Nor 
is there any such substance as ‘ DaA?ai/atia ’ known to exist, as we do 
find those like the Dadhi. Consequently, on account of the reasons shown 
under II. i. 1, we conclude that inasmuch as the sentence lays down a 
^ sacrifice with reference to a definite result, that sacrifice is wholly distinct 

! .. from the previous Dansa-Pwriiamusa. 

i “?fgi!rT iK ii 

OTt AgunS., not pertaining to the accessories. ^ Cha, also, Karma- 

choclanam, injunctions of actions. 

6. “ Because the Injunction of the Action does not 

pertain to the Accessory.”“-6. 

COMMBNTARY.^^ ) 

That is to say, the Injunctive potency of the sentence in question 
has not been removed away from the Action, so that it could go over to 
the Accessory. 

''mm ^ ^ n vs n 

uwn' Samaptam, complete. Oha, also. <111 Phale, by the mention of the 
result c«5|3i^V^kya'm, the sentence. 

; 7, “ Because the sentence is quite complete with the 

i mention of the result.” — 7. 

ivl'j;::-,,- COMMENTARY. 

; ■ ' Inasmuch as the result can never form the object of Injunction, the 

sentence cannot be said to lay down the Result with reference to the 
. : sacrifices, — ih the same way as the Corn is taken as laid down, in the 

; ^utence VrththhiryajM ; md as such the sentence must be taken as en* 
i' . i pm iug an Action (as no third object nf Injunction is possible in the sen- 

as po Action .th^f , has already been enjoined 'Qh<^: 




(A 

•A.i''!' ,.k. 



in PAD A, tv ADHlKABAi^A, 


auuqssuiy is poiuteu out oy cue context itseii— jiist as are many 
other accessories, like the UktJiya and the rest ; that is to say, we find in 
the context that after the sentence in question has laid down the Dctk- 
myam as an Accessory ; there is another sentence that points oat the 
actual form of that Accessoiy. 

And just as in the case of Dadhi, so here also, the is 

not found to be taken as co-extensiA’-e or identical with tlie sacrifice. 

And further, eA'en if the Ddhsayatja, etc., be taken as co-extensive 
with ‘sacrifice’ then too, on account of their proximity to the Dadhi, etc., 
these sacrifices would be recognised as mere modifications fof the Darsa- 
Ptirnamdsa). . Consequently even in this case, what the sentence AA’ould do 
would be to lay dovAm the Result folloAving from a modification of the 
Baria-PdrnanVisO' and not from any other sacrifice wholly distinct from it. 

In this way, an utter disruption of the context would also be avoid- 
ed. Though there will be a rapture of the context in connection with the 
Dak^ayam to tliis extent, that which is mentioned as leading to a 
definite Result {e. g., the Ddk^ayava) cannot be taken as part of the 
procedure,— yet inasmuch as the Darka-Ptivmmma, would form the sub- 
strate of the Ddksayaya, the mention of the Darha-Piirwmdsa, could \iery 
well be connected with the subsequent sentences (under eonsideration) and 
. thus help them -fin their denotation). .... 






pdBVA-MiMiUSA-SdTBAS. It ADBYAYA 


n ^ « 

rag^^sn^ Lifiga darsan^t eta, also because we fii 

9. Also becase we find Vedic tex 
difference). — 9. 

Wc have the seiitencc 

ijajetd yadi Dakmyamyoji syat atlia api pmichadm 
hi eva sa savipadyate ; < 

eva khalu sa sampad bkavati ’ ‘ one should perform 
thirty years; but if the sacrificer happens to be a perfor 

ijava, he could finish it in fifteen years as in t„.„ 

and two Darsas are 

these 1 

fifteen years only ! 

This completion of the ‘ thirty years' 
the performance of the Ddkqdya%ia)^ distinctly indicates the 
of the Ddk^dyana from the Darsa- 
course of the DaTsa-PuTi^amasa 
of an altogether different sacinfice 
the fact of the thirty-year-course being 
course of the D&M&yana). Nor could there be a 
of the thirty-year limit, whereby the fifteen-ye; 
due to a different sacrifice (that is to say, the i 
an altogether different sacrifice could not justify a re; 
thirty-year limit). Nor can it be urged that the course 
Fumamasa is reduced to one of a fifteen years’ by reason ol 
being a performer of another sacrifice in the shape of 
Because if this latter were wholly distinct from the forme 


COMMENTARY. 

Trimsatam varsdni Darsa-pdrna'rn&sdbydm 
~ ’ isaiva varshmi yajeta atra 

due hi paurtjamasydm yajetd due ama'udsye atra hi 

the BarsorPurmi^idsa for 
rmer of the Ddleqd- 
this sacrifice two Paurmmdsis 

pex-formed; and hence the requisite number df 

latter would be completed by the Ddk^dyat^a being performed fox 

and the Darsa-Purmmdsa (by 
non- difference 
Ptiruamdsa. For the thirty yeai’s 
could not be made up by , the performance 
(while the text distinctly lays down 
s- made up by the fifteen-year- 
gratuitous rejection 
r course would be 
ere performance of 


Ill PAm, IV ADEIKARAWA, 84. 10, 11. 


243 


COMMENTARY. 

(This SAtm meets the PurvapaTtsa argument of Stitra 6). 

The Name serves the purpose of distinguishing an Action from 
others, only when it occurs in the originative Injunction of that Action. 
In the case in question, however, we find that the name ‘ Ddla^yaxia ’ is 
not connected with anj' originative Injunction ; specially as in this case 
we do not find the sentence introduced by any word expressing the 
beginning of a new action, — as we do in the sentence ‘ Atha esa jyotijf.’ etc., 
And then, inasmuch as the name is quite capable of being explained as 
mentioning an Accessory of the previous Sacrifice, it cannot serve the 
purpose of distinguishing the Action. That the word ‘ DdJt^dydria denotes 
a mere repetition of the previous sacrifice of the Darsa-P4rnamdsa is shown 
by the sense afforded by the components of the word itself, as also by the 
above-quoted text (that there are two Dar'sas and two PArvamdsas, in the 
DAh^ayaxia) . Hence we conclude from the context that the Result 
mentioned in the sentence in question follows from the Ddk^dyar,ia 
as based upon the Darsa-PArijamdsa. The word ‘ Daksa ’ means ‘ the 
Saerificer ’ who is expert and very quick at the performance of the Sacrifice 
(‘ of thirty years, in only half the time’) ; the Priests appointed by such a 
saerificer are ‘ dahm ’ (appointed by the clever saerificer) ; and the ‘ ayam’ 
(performance of these priests) is the ‘ Ddksdyam ’ (and thus we find that 
the constituent parts of the word also points to the same fact that is 
mentioned in the text quoted above;- 

The name ‘ Sakamprasthiya ’ also means that the substance referred to 
by this word is offered [prastMyate) along with isAkum) the smaller vessels, 
before the cutting up of the ‘ Sdnndyya ’ cake ; and thus this name is also 
found to belong to a material only, in connection with the previous 
sacrifice ; and hence in this case also there is nothing to oppose the 
recognition, in the sentence in question, of the Action that has been 
mentioned before. 

ssrofa: SamAptih, completion. Avi4is^, nothing peculiar. 

11. There is nothing peculiar in the completion (of 
the sentence with the mere mention of the result).— 11. 

COMMENTARY. 

[This meets 84tra 7.] 

Though the sentence does not enjoin the Result in reference to 
the Action, yet, inasmuch as it does not speak of any connection between 





isisisi 




Adhikarana V.— Actions mentioned witii speeijic 
and deities should he regarded as distinct. 
sOTBAS hi. iii. 12 to 17. 

Samsk^rat Cha, a mere preparatory rite. ^ Aprakaraiie nc 
occurring in any particular conteict. Akarmasabdat, as there rs no 

nioBtioDing action. 

12. “ It is a mere preparatory rite as not occurring 

in tlie context (of any particular sacrifice) ; specially as tliew 
is no word denoting an Action. 12. 

COMMENTARY. 

Without reference to any particular sacrifice, rve find tlie senteuc 
‘Vdvavvam sveta mitahheU IMtiktimai; ‘Sauryam^ ahamm mrvape 
brahmavarehasaUmah.’ And in connection with this there arise t 
following questions (i). Inasmuch as, as a general rule, all sentence 
not apppearing in reference to any particular sacrifice, are taken as servin 
some purpose of the Action, mentioned yn the context,- does th 
Uir flnwTi tlic accessorios 'Sveta and 'alia.ru respective! 





Til PADA, F ADEIKARAVA, Sit 12, 1 


On the above questions, we have at first, the following 

Pilrvapahm (A), — Just as in the case of the Bahmyuma it has been 
found (in tl^e loregoing Adhikarmja) that, the sentence mentioning the 
connection of the Accessor}^ and thus there being no word injunctive of 
any Action, the sentence could not be tahen as laying down a distinct 
Action,' — BO would it also be in the case in question. This similarity 
bet ween the two cases is what is implied by the word ' clia ' in the Siitra, 

^T W \\ W 

Y^vaduktain, wiiat is distinctly mentioned, Ya, but, ^ 1 %: Karina- 
3?ah, of the action, Srutimulatvat, being based on direct Vedic decla- 

[ rations. 

13. “ The Action meant to be laid down is just what is distinctly 

mentioned, because the only basis for Actions is direct declaration/' — 13. 

COMMENTAKY. 

[In reply to the above we have the following argu- 

ments which, however, embody another theory which is not acceptable 
to the Siddhdnta and which is on that accoiint put forward as a second 
Pitrvapaksa answered in the next 

Purvapaksa (B). — As direct declaration is the only basis for the en- 
joining of Actions, the Action meant to be laid down must be just what is 
distinctly mentioned by it, so that in the case in cpiestion the only Actions 
mentioned are those of touching ’ and ‘preparing/ Hence these are the 
only Actions that must be regarded as accomplishing the results mentioned. 
And the element of saevijite need not enter into these Actions at all. 

As for the word * ‘ Vdyavyam ' (which might be urged as pointing 
to the fact of the ‘ white object ’ being offered to the Deity Vdyn, which 
offering would constitute a sacrifice), it could be explained awa.y, as being 
a mere reference, on the ground that all substances are capable of being, 
in some way or other, related to certain deities (even without their being 
actually offered to them). Or, tlie sentence might be taken to mean that 
— ‘when one has set aside a certain object for the sake of Vdyu/d we 
happen to touch it, it would bilng prosperity to us/ And as the sentence 
embodies a qualified Injunction, there would not be any very great trouble 
in taking the sentences thus. Or, the sentences might mean that the 
desirable results are obtained as soon as the white object is touched for,^ 
the sake of Vdyu, or whan the boiled rice is prepared for the sake of the ^ 
Sun, And certainly it is not in a sacrifice alone that anythipg can be/; 
done for 'the sake of certain Deities, Because there is no incompatibility 
in something being done for the sake of a certain Deity, whenever that 



|||;|| 




FtE7A-MtMAM8A-SdmA8. II AEEYAYA 


sncb (even if it be not a 
s, in accordance 
bite sbould be 


happens to be enjoined for being done as 
sacrifice). Therefore all that the sentence in' 
with the expressed Injunction, is that ‘ someti 

touched for the sake of Vioyu.’ 

Thus there being no ground for connecting 
m’iginal primary Action mentioned before they n 
down a distinct touching and preparing. ^ 


upon each or uie worus uuutoiucu — 

ease in question, as pertaining to the rela 
Deity and the word ‘Vayavyam’ expressing 
relationship would not be possible withe 
naturally implies such an Action, specialh 
of bringing about the relationship. For if y 
without offering to the Deity Vdyti, it would 



lil PAD A, VI ADElKABA^A, Szl 15, 16 


■ COMMBrvTAEY. 

We have the text ^ Saumd^raudntn eharun nivvapet pariirite 

yajeta ; and in this ns soon as the word ‘ Saimdvaitdmn ' (which speaks 
of the connection of the com with the deities, Soma and Euclra) has been 
■uttered, though thei-e is no word expressing "'sacrifice ’ — yet inasnuichas 
the sentence ' Parikrite yajetd ’ which lays down the proper cooking of the 
riee^ refers to a previous Sacrifice by the word \ yajeta' — ^we always 
recognize the sentence as laying down a certain .action connected with 
‘ sacrifice! In fact, in the case of the sentence ^ Agnisotmyam pakimMabheta' 
it is only by the above reason tliat the presence of ^sacrifice' is admitted. 

In the previous Adhikaraim we considered the question as to whether 
the sentence is an Injunction or a mere reference to a previous Action ; 
while what we have considered in the present Adhikarara is the caiestion 


‘8uch actions as tJie Touching of the 
? like are piireiy^^p^ 




p^r*' 


pcJeva-mImAmsA-sij'tras. n aduyAya. 


tlie Injunction of a ^crifioe, the BMsyn proceeds to explain tlie present 
Adhikarana as an exception to tlie foregoing one. 

Tkongli, as a matter of fact, on account oE the sentence dwelt with 
liere being a counter-instance of the foregoing Siddhdnta argiiiaents based 
upon the connection of the Enjoye)% t.lie Piiri'apakm of the present Adlii- 
kararia has almost wholly been represented (in the shape of the Siddhdnt/^ 
of the foregoing Ad-hikcivciud) j yet tlie Bhcifpjci proceeds to piesent it afiisli, 
because of the peculiar character of the intellect of certain peisons , as 
there are some people, so imbued with the idea of the Logician, that they 
think of interpreting Veda also by means of Inferences from siinilaiity , 
and these persons would never grasp the fact of the Puri^apakm having 
been refuted, unless it has been duly set forth previously. 

Some people accept the word'iZaZ>7zet4’ as synonymous with 'Sacrifice 
on the strength of the foregoing Adhika.raiia while others take it as merely 
implying the 'Sacrifice ; and it is both these views that they bring 
forward in connection with the sentence in question also. And we have 
in connection with this a twofold— 

P-urvapahsa.—l^mnely : '\l) The sentence in question lays down a 
distinct sacrifice, (2) it lays do-wn the calf in connection with the sacrifice 
that has been laid down previously.” 

The Siddhdnta view is that in the case of the sentence dwelt with 
in the foregoing Adhikarana we accepted the injunction of tlie 'sacrifieef 
on the sole ground of relationship between the substance and the DeikY 
therein mentioned by the word ‘ Vaydvyam ^^ — and not, either on the 
strength of a newly discovered expressive potency of the word 'Alahheta 
or on that of fallacious Inference (of the implication of 'Sacrificed by the 
word 'AlahhetiV), In the case in question, liowever, as we have no word 
expressive of the said relationship (of ileity and the substance), we must 
take tlie word 'Alabhetd' in its simple direct signification. Thus would 
the similarity of the present ' touchiniP \\'hh. the purificatory secondary 
Actions of and the like to be explained; as the 'Totiehing'^ 

also ^vould be a mere secondary rite ; and this ‘touching of the calf at the , 
particular time of milking the cow, would serve a visible purpose of 
making the cow yield more milk. 


II n 


Arthavfida ottS: Upapatte ^ Olia and. ^ 

17. Also because of the possibility of the connection 
, vvSift- particular Artbavada.— 17. . 












I 



Ill PAD A, Vll ADHIKAEANA, 84. 17, 18. 


COMMANTARY. 

Close iii 3 on the sentence in question we have the sentence 
V (itsanikclnkl hi fosavah (‘Animals love their young ones dearly’) ; and 
this could he taken as an Arthvdda showing a reason for the previous 
Injunction, only when the preceding sentence ‘VatsamUahhetd’ is taken as 
enjoining the ‘ touching’ by way of fondling it for the purpose of 
making the cow yield more milk [the two sentences together meaning 
that one should touch (fondle) the calf with a view to the yielding more 
milk because animals love their young dearly. ] 

If, on the other hand, the word, ‘Alahketdl meant touching for the 
pui-pose of killing’ (by way of offering to a Deity) the mention of the fact of 
the young being dearly loved by animals would be wholly irrelevant ; 
for in that case the purport of the two sentences would be this* 
Because the calf is loved by its mother’, therefore it should be touched 
for being killed — certainly not a very relevant proposition ? In the other 
case (i.e. when Alabhetd means touching by way of fondling) it would be 
quite natural to expect that inasmuch as the cow is fond of the calf, 
if we fondle the calf or the calf fondles us, the cow would be moved 
to yield more milk, the flow of which would be accelerated by the 
sight of her calf being fondled. 

Thus also, it must be admitted that the sentence in question lays 
down mere ‘ touching ’ as a secondary action calculated to serve a useful 
purpose. 


Adhikarana VII. — The IV aivdreliaru is 
for the purposes of Adhdna. 

SOtRA II. iii. 18. 

Saniyuktah, connected. 5 Tu, verily, Arthasabdena, with the 

•word mentioning an action, Tadarthah, for the sake of that, 

^rutisaniyogat, because such is the direct signification of the words. 

18. As connected with, the word mentioning an Action, 
it must the taken as being for the sake of that Action ; 
specially as such is the direct signification of the words of 
the text.-^18. 

OOMMlNTAitYf 

.. The Adhikaram before last having dealt with the significations of 
the 'words ‘ Alabhetd,’ and ‘Ntruapet’ as contained in the sentences 



pdBV^-MlMAMSA-SlJTBAS. 11 ADEYIyA 


‘ koetamalalliehi ’ and ‘ SauryAn carimnirvapet ’ tlie last Adliiharaxia lias 
dealt with the counter instance of the first part of that Adhikaram an' 
the present Adhiharava proceeds to deal with the counter instance of the 
second portion dealing with the ‘Preparing' in connection with the boiled 
riee nor is the case of this exactly similar to that dealt with in the forego- 
ing Adhikaraxia as in this we have a further ground of doubt, in the shape 

of the mention of a Deity {Brihaspati.) , 

[In connection with ‘ AgnV we meet with the sentence Naivaras- 
charubhavati’ and then ‘ Yadenam oharumupadadUtV and here arises 
the question as to whether the boded rice is laid down for the purpose of 
the sacrifice (the sense of the text being that having sacrificed out of the 
rice, the remnant is to be kept aside), or that it is laid down for the sole 
purpose of being k&pt aside]. And on this question we have the 

following: — 

PURVAPAKSA. 

PCit'Vapakm.—' The character of a subsidiary to sacrifices is inherent 
in all such substances as boiled rice cake and the like ; and hence in all cases 
it is necessary to give up one’s ownership of these substances (in favour of 
some one else). Consequently, what the word ‘ Upadadhati in the sentence 
‘charum upadadMtV is that there is to be a ‘Prapatti’ (keeping aside, throw- 
ing away) of the corn and as no such pratipatti of a thing would be possible 
until it had been already utilised, we are led to look out for that at which 
the boiled rice could have been utilised ; and the foremost of all, that 
which presents itself as beifig most capable of affording an occasion 
for the said utilisation of the Rice, is the sacrifice ; and hence we are 
led to accept the fact of the corn being of use at the scarifice. Subsequently 
too, we meet with the sentence ‘ Brihaspatiretadanmm ijannivctrafi etc., which. 
distinctly mentions Brihaspati as the Deity of the Rice ; and under the 
circumstances, if the connection between the Rice and that Deity were 
not duly established by means of a sacrifice, the mention of the Deity 
would be absolutely meaningless. Thei'efore, we must take the sentences 
in question to mean that “ after having performed the sacrifice of the 
BpikaspatyachoiTm which forms part of the ^gneya sacrifice, we should desist, 
for a time, from proceeding with other sacrifices connected with the 
‘Agneya ’ and keep aside the Bice (that has been offered to Brihaspati).” 

Siddhdnta.— To the above we make the following reply : There is 
nothing inherent in the Bice that would always make jt employed at . 
sacrifices ; in fact, the use to which such things are to be put is ascertained 
by mjeans of the authoritative directions that maybe found with regard to 
' As ‘soon as- the appearance of the Sice hasbe^a meationed,. yve - 





Adhiharana VIll. — (The twastrapatntvatdia 
subservient to -the Paryagnilmrana). 

sCfTRA II. iii. 19. 

qr## 5 nun 

P^tmvate, in the PatniFakl 3 T 11 , really, PurvatwS,t, because 

it is recognised as the previous one. Avachchhedab, preclusion. 

19. Inasimicli as the Patntvata is recognised as the 
previous one, the sentence in question must be taken as 
serving the purpose of precluding (the subsequent subsi- 
diaries.) — 19. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection witli wliat has gone before we proceed to consider 
whether the word ‘ Utsrdati' signifies the sacidfice or not. 

The sacrifice having been laid down in the sentence ‘ Tva^nim 
pdti^imtamalabhate ’ we find another sentence ‘ Pciryagnikritmi patniva- 
tdinutSfijaniV And in connection with this latter sentence, there is a 
doubt as to whether it lays down an Accessory to the sacrifice (laid down 
in the former sentence), or a distinct Action, the doubt being due- to the 
two-fold construction of which the sentence is capable. And on this 
we have the following : — 

P4rvapahfa. — “ The sentence lays down a distinct Action ; because 
the, Injunctive potency of the sentence pertains, as in the case of the 
sentence ‘Vdyavyam svetamdlahhetd' to the relationship between' the sub- 
stance and the Deity. , . ■■■■ ‘ TA 

^ And further inasmuch as the sentence in question does not 
contain any mention of the action motioned therein cannot 




III PADA. VTII ADEIKARANA, &t 18, 19. 


natiirallj' seek for the nse to -uhich it could he put ; and we are met 
by the sentence ‘Yadenam eharuupadadMti’ which directly lays down the 
fact of the Bi&e helping towards the preparation of the altar for tlie 
reception of the fire to be used at the sacrifice. And the Rice thus 
having its use clearly defined, it could not have any connection with 
another Action, even if such an action were directly mentioned, and 
hence it is all the more impossible for it to having anything to do with 
an Action that is not even mentioned (but only indirectly implied). Nor 
can the keeping spoken of be said to have the character of the Pratipatti ; 
because Ave do not know of any use to which it could be put prior to 
the keeping. 





252 Pl^BVA-MlMAMSA-SdTBAS. II ADEYAYA. 

be recognised as the same as that mentioned in the previous sentence (in 
which the word TvMph forms an important factor) ; and (if the action 
mentioned in the two sentences be taken as the same on the ground of 
both sentences laying down the ‘ Patnivatd ’ then on account of the sentence 
in question containing the mention of ‘ Paryagnikctraua also, there would 
be a syntactical split (if it laid down the Patnivatd also). ’ 

SiddUnta.— To the above we make the following reply : Inasmuch as 
the sacrifice mentioned in the sentence in question is actually recognised 
as the same as the one mentioned in the previous sentence, we can- 
not perceive any other sacrifice in it ; and what the sentence in question 
does is to lay down, with regard to the same sacrifice, all the subsidiary 
procedure ending with the ‘ Paryagnikarana.’ 

The word ‘ Patnivatd ’ in the sentence in question can very well 
denote the previous sacrifice, even though it is accompanied by two quali- 
fications, just like the word agni in connection with the Manotd sacrifice. 
And the words ‘ paryagnihrtamutsrjati ’ also are cognised, on account of 
the contest, as laying down an accessory for that same sacrifice. 

AdTiihaTanct, IX. — Addbhya, etc., are the 
names of the vessels. 
sCtTRA II. iii. 20. 

g i ^4iir8(m AdravyatvSit, on account of there being no mention of the sacrificial 
material, Kevale, there being the mention of mere holding, Karma- 

^esah, subservient to the action, Syat, would be. 

20. Wiien - the name appears by itself without any 
mention of the sacrificial material and there is merely the 
mention of ‘ holding’ it would be subservient to the action. — 20. 

COMMENTARY. 

[ In no particular connection we find the sentences, esha mi limisd 
'hamryafeta yo d&lhyam gTihitvd somdya yajate and parA va etesydyuT} prana 
eti yonkum ^Hndti.'] 

And with regard to the holding of the AdAhhya and the Am'm there 
is a threefold doubt, just as in the case of the dlanibha (touching). And 
just as in that case, so here also, after having set aside the two other alter- 
native theories, we have the following — 

PurvapaksTia . — The sentence in question enjoins two saerifices. The 
arguments in support of this view are as follows : It has been shown abov^ 








Ill PlDA, IX ADHIKABANA, Bd. 20. go3 


(under 'N dmadheya) that the name of a sacrifice serves to distinguish it even 
from that sacrifice which may have been originally mentioned in the 
context ; and hence it will distinguish actions all the more easily from 
those that are not mentioned in the same context, with i-egard to which 
there can be no idea of identity. 

In the case in question we find that the names ‘ Addbhya ’ and ‘Amhi’ 
are not known to belong to any sacrifice mentioned in the context ; and 
hence the sentence cannot be taken as laying down a mere repetition of 
the same. Consequently we conclude that the sentence lays down the 
Ekdha sacrifice w’hieh forms part of the Jyotktoma — this conclusion being 
pointed put by the similarity of the injunction of ‘/mldwiy.’ Nor is the 
case in question similar to that of the ‘ touching of the calf ’ ; (1) because 
in the first of these two sentences in question, we find the direct mention 
of the ‘ saerifiee ’ and in the second we have a specific name which serves 
to distinguish the Action so named from all other actions ; and (2) because 
the presence of the injunction of holding in. the sentences transfers, to the 
actions herein mentioned, all the details of the Jyoti^toma ; and as 
such these actions become fully equipped with all the necessary factors 
of the material and the Deity, etc., (which is not found in the case of the 
sentence ‘ vatsamdlabheta.' 

And -for these reasons, we conclude that the sentences lay down 
distinct sacrifices. 

Biddhcinta. — To the above we make the following reply : — 

In the case of sentences where we have only tlie name and the 
holding mentioned (as in the case in question), the chances of the mention 
of a saerifiee are very much less than in the case of the sentence ‘ vatsamd- 
Icibhetd,’- because the former is devoid even of the mention of a material. ' 
That is to say, we find that, in the sentences in question, the mention 
of the Deity is a long way off ; and even the object that would form the 
objective of the mentioned ‘holding’ is not mentioned. Because the 
substance cannot be pointed out except by a class or by a property. . And 
so long as it has not been ascertained that the actions mentioned in the 
sentence are sacrifices, there can he no idea as to the sacrifices being 
similar to the Jyotktoma and as such ‘soma’ (the material- offered at- 
•the Jyotktoma) could not be recognised as the material to be held. 
And as for the verb ‘ grilimti ’ also, there is no reason to believe that it is 
always, concomitant with the Jyotit^ma; because all that it -expressess 
is mere holding (and this action is present in all sacrifices). ; . . : ■ i . ., 

Nor are the names in question ‘ Addbhya ’ and. ‘ Amm,’ the names of 
any sacrifices, .whereby thejr could serre tp distinguish these, sacrifices, 










- ... 


pdBVA-MlMAMSi-SlJTBAS. U ABEYAYA. 



! 8 '^ 


, .-ii'.'s'' ' 


Because tliese words have been accepted as names, simply on the ground 
o£ their eo-extensiveness with ‘ holding ’ and as for the difference of hold- 
ing’ from the previous sacrifices, we also admit it ; but it does not follow 
from this that the sentence lays down a distinct Saerifiee. 

As a matter of fact, we have proved under Sutra IT. ii. 18, that 
even when such sentences are accompanied by the mention of Deities and 
materials, they cannot be taken as laying down Sacrifices while in the 
ease in 4uestion, we do not find even this ''mention of the Deity and the 
material). As for the Sacrifice that is mentioned by the word ‘yajeta ’ in 
the sentence speaking of the Addhliija, it cannot in the present instance, be 
taken as enjoined by the Injunctive affix {in yajeta) which has its injunctive 
potency transferred elsewhere fto the Accessory) as shown under the 
Purvapaksa of the Sutra II. ii. 27. Therefore the sentence (speaking of 
Adtlbhya) must be taken as laying down the ‘holding’ with reference 
to a certain sacrifice (laid down before). 

Adhikarana X.—Tlie Agnichayana is a secondary 
yreyaratory rite. 

.sCtTRA II. iii. 21-23. 

a a 

Agnih, the word Agni. 3 Tu, realty. Li Agadars'andt, because 

of the preseflce of indicative marks. Ivratusabdah, denoting a sacrifice. 

>iaiRi?r Prattyate, should be recognised. 

21. “ The word Agni should be recognised as denoting 

a sacrifice because of the presence of indicative marks.” — 21. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the sentence ‘ Agninekimite ’ followed by the 
sentences — * athatognimagnifiomendnuy'ijati, tamukthyena tamatirdtrena, 
tarn qoAakinaj etc. —we have a threefold doubt : (1) Does it lay down a 
distinct Sacrifice, or (2) Does it lay down mere chyana (collecting) ? 
or (3) Does it lay down an accessory for all the Primary and Subsidiary 
sacrifices ? 4nd on this we have the following — 

' Purvapaksna, — (1) As we do not find the sentence repeated again in the 

Context, as we do in the case of the sentences dealt with in the foregoing 
Ajdhikoi’ana, (2) as. no nseful purpose would be served by the mere 
purification of Agni, we conclude, from the very fact of the presence of the 
.name, that the sentence lays down a distinct sacrifice ; and thus alone 
- > we Justify the subsequent meation of the Result, in the senteiiee 



Ill PADA, X ABElKAItAT^A, Sit 21, 22. 


^ Eidhnoti,^ etc. Nor can the result hei’ein mentioned be said to follow 
from an Accessory ; because no substrate of aay such Accessory is 
mentioned in the context. 

And then we perceive that such distinctive marks as the Upasad, etc.^, 
wliich are the invariable accompaniments of the Soma saerifiGe, are connect- 
ed with the Action mentioned in the sentence in question. 

So also in the sentences ^ AtliMo' gnimdgnupmenamiip^^ etc., we 

find that ^ Agni'* is the name of a sacrifice to be performed, because the 
sentence ' Agnim yajati' is precisely similar to the sentence ‘ Samidhoyajati ' 
wherein it has been shown under Sutra 1. iv. 4, that the word ■ Samidhal} ’ 
is the name of a sacrifice ; and hence we come to take the sentence in 
question as laying down a sacrifice qualified by the name ^ Agnid And 
this Agni-sacrifice comes to be qualified by the Sansthas of the Agnisioma, 
which are found to be present in it. Then as for the words ' dviratra,' 
etc., they could be taken as pointing out the alternatives of time. 

SIDBHArrA. 

^ Dravyam, the material. ^ V4, but, ^ Syat, should be. Cho- 

dana}4h, of the injunction. Tadarthatvat, on account of being for that 

purpose, 

22. The material should be mentioned by the word 
because the Injunction is for that purpose. — 22. 

COMMENTARY. 

Inasniitch as the word ‘ Agni ’ is one that has its sigaification 
universally known, unless this signification is found to give rise to certain 
anomalies, like syntactical split, etc., we cannot reject the sense of Fire, 
and tiake the word as the name of a sacrifice. 

That is to say, the word Agni ’ is not known to have any literal 
meaning, like the words ‘ and the rest, nor is it accompanied 

by any of the three conditions of ‘ Namadheya,' viz., ‘ V&kyahlieda ’ 

‘ Tadvayapadesa ’ ‘Tatprakliya ’ and (explained in Adhikarana I, Pada iv) ; 
and hence it could not be taken as the Name of a sacrifice. 

It has been ui'ged above that it fulfils the Ndmadheya condition 
laid down in Sutra I. iv. 4. But it would have been so if the Agni were 
actually enjoined in the sentence, as something to be purified by ehayana 
(collection). And it has never been spoken of as to be so purified (in any 
other sentence save the one in question) ; and hence the condition laid 
down in Sutra, I. iv. 4, does not apply to the present case. 







1 !• 
■ , I 


'f 






256 


pdnVA-UlMlMSl-SdTRAS. It adiiyAya. 


■ Therefore ‘Agai,’ spoken of in the sentence, is a sulastance (and 
not a sacrifice). ^ 

^TrmRTH n n 

T^^tsamyogat, by connection with that. Kratuh, the sacrifice. 

Tadakhyah, of that name, Sy4t, might be. in Tena, by that, nnmmnnn 
Dharmavidhfi.naai, laying down of details. 

23. On account of the fact of the connection of Agin 
with all sacrifices a sacrifice might he named ‘Agni/ hut 
that name, would only serve to lay down the details of the 

sacrifice. — 23. 

COMMBNTAKY. 

In the case of such sentences as ‘ agneUastram ’ (that have been 
cited by the PArvapaha as showing that ‘ Agni ’ is the name of a 
sacrifice), we have to take recourse to indirect indication,^ as there is no 
other way in which the sentence could be explained. In this sentence the 
w'ord ‘ Acini’ indicates the place or altar connected loiili Fire, and this 
place indicates the sacrifice performed at that altar (and thus it is by 
a very indirect process that the word ‘ Agni ’ can indicate the sacrifice). 
But the fact of such indirect indication being accepted in one place 
does not make it necessarily acceptable in all other cases. Hence in 
the case in question, where the indirect indication can be very well 
avoided it is only right that we should accept the word ‘Agni’ as 
signifying the substance (Fire). 

In connection with the present Adhiharam, the author of another 
Bh/mja has also treated of the questions of Agni-(l) having a result or 
being fruitless, (2) being an independent action or subsidiary to another 
sacrifice, (3) being eternal or transient, (4) being a modification or not of 
UttaraoediM. But all these questions have already been dealt with 
in other Adhikarams, in connection with other similar sentences, and 
hence we have not taken them up for consideration here. And the Author 
referred to also has introduced them here by way of showing off the 
excellence of his memory. 


Adhiharana XI.— The Mdsdgnihotra is a distinct sacrifike. 


sOTRA IL iu. 24. 


Prakaraodjitare, when there is a difference of context. 
Prayojantoytvam, there is a difference in the Bh&vanA 





m PiDA, Xi ADBiXARANA, Su. 24. 


24. When there is a difference of context, there is 
difference in the Bhavana. — “24. 

COMMBNTAEY. 

We have finislxed the consideration of the question of the Differei^ 
tiation of actions hy means of Accessories, and we have also dealt with all 
side issues of such questions, as to what sort of Accessory is that mention- 
ed in the subsequent sentence, which, not being aixplicable to the action 
mentioned in the previous sentence, makes that mentioned in the subse- 
quent action different from it ; and which sort is that which is applicable 
to the previous action, and as such does not make any difference in the 
Action. And the five means of differentiation having been dealt with, 
we now proceed to consider the differentiation of actions by context. 

[In connection with the KundapAyindmayana, we find the sentence 
‘ Mdsamagnihotram juhoti, mdsam darsapitrmmdsdhkyam yajate,’ and on 
this there arises a doubt as to whether these sentences lay down the 
month as the time for the previously mentioned Agnihotra and the Parka- 
Puriyimdsa or they lay down actions totally different from these]. 

And on this we have the following — 

PArvapahp.— Such words as ‘ Agnihotra ’ and the like, having aheady 
on one occasion denoted a certain action, the mere fact of the word occurr- 
ing after a long interval does not make any difference in the Action itself. 
That is to say, just as where the word ^Agnihotra ’ is uttered in Valabki 
or in PAtalipiitra, it does not signify two different things ; so no matter 
whether the word occurs in one context or in another, its denotation can- 
not be different. For certainly the difference in tlie context does not 
bring about a fresh denotative potency in the word. And hence the' 
verbs ‘ yajate,’ 'juhoti,' etc., also as qualified by these words (‘ Agnihotra,' 
etc.) do not signify anything different ; specially as the absence of an- 
other meaning does not make anything meaningless or irrelevant. For 
in the case in question, the mention of the ‘ month ’ is not incompatible 
with the ordinary ‘ Agnihotra' ; because the monthly Agnihotra could very 
well be taken as an alternative . to the Lifelong Daily Agnihotra. Or, it 
may be that the lifelong daily performance is laid for that Agnihotra 
which forms a necessary duty ; while there are other occasional perform- 
ances of the same Agnihotra with a view to the obtaining of certain 
desirable results; and it is for these that the sentence. lays down the 
'montii' &s the time. And it is only desirable that the syntax (of the 
sentence in queation) should set aside that .which is ..pointed out by the 

.'.'..i .......... 








pdRVA-UlMAMSX-StJTBAS, It ADRYAYA, 


Siddlumta.—To the above we make the loii' 
111 the sentence in question, we find tin 
is laid down as to be performed after the Upasadi 
any such Upasuds preceding the original Agmhoi 
Agnihotras must be different. 

That is to say, if the sentence in quest 

the month, then we could have thought that the 
with reference to the original Agnihotra. As a ] 
such is not the case ; as the sentence distinctly 
be performed after the Upasads ; and as such 1 
must be taken as qualifying the time for the p< 
fir.fi. In connection with the original Agnihotr 



Ill PADA, XU ABTHKAPAXA, &l 


down only the connection of the sacrifice with the month ; and as such 
there being no syntactical split, there would be nothing to show that the 
Barka PArmmdsa herein mentioned is different from that mentioned 
before. 

Thus then tlie explanation of the Siddh&nta as given in the Bhftsjm 
being found to be untenable, the Vartilca explains it as follows: — 

When the Accessory, though mentioned in a separate context, is 
laid down as a matter of independent Injunction, i.e., forms the predicate 
of the sentence, then it can be delegated to the previous action (and would 
not make any difference in it) when however the Accessory is mentioned 
only as an Uddekya (not an object of Injunction, but an accomplished 
thing, forming the subject of the sentence), then the action with reference 
to which it appears must be taken as different from the previous action. 

In the case in question, we pei'ceive a difference between the two 
Agnihotras, not because of their being mentioned in separate contexts, 
but because of the fact of all connection with the previous context having 
been cut off. That is to say, when no idea of the original Agnihotra is 
present in the mind, at tlie time that the sentence in question is met 
with then the action mentioned in the latter cannot but be recognized 
as diffrent from the previous Agnihotra. And as for the difference of 
contexts, even though it is present, it does not serve any useful purpose 
with regard to the differentiation ; as we shall show under Sutra II-iii-25. 


Adhilmrana XII. — The Agneya, etc., are Kamya Saerifiees. 

SUTEA n. 41125. ' ' 

m Phalam, tte result. ^ Oha, also. Akarmasannidhau, mentioned 

apart ’irom actions. ■ 

25. The Eesult mentioned apart from Actions (is a 
mean^ pf difference}.— 25, 











F^BVA-MMAMSA-SI^TRAS. 11 AmYAYA 


COMMENTARY. 

■ ■■ I have been dealt with. We now 
which the difference of context operates 
are peopile who hold the differentiation 
:arana) to be made by a difference of 
Ij the Bhasya), while others according to the 
be made by the connection of a particular time ; and 
Eerentiation bronght about merely by such 
the relationship of an anupMeya substance, 
an the real state of things to these persons that 
has been introduced. And what is dealt with in the 

jg not a seventh cause of differentiation. 

Then, the fact of plaee and oaeasion being anupadeya is too well- 
n, as has been shown in the foregoing Adliikaram ; and hence in the 
at AdUharam we do not cite any examples of these. And, m fact, 
dlotving two passages, too, dealing as they do with pUae and oeeasion 
raid have been dealt with in the preceding Adhikaram, "oiz'- d) 
ijdvaguryo- vU^ajita yajeta Samyuthane visvajit, etc., (.these too speak- 
f oeeasion) ; and (2) Dahm^na tirena Sarasioatydh dpieijenaslitaliapd- 
’ — ''anpal'in.o- nf Place'). Thoueb, as in the case of the 


All the six causes of differentiation 

proceed to show another way in ^ 

towards differentiation. There 
(in the case cited in the last Adhik. 
context only (according to 
YArtlka) hold it to L, — - 
they do not admit of any d 
agencies as non-proximity or 
It is with a view to expla: 
the present Sdlra 
present AdhiTtwvarjta 


remain incomplete {.me ■yap is mieiieu 

pronounced), and hence the sentences do not stand in need of the ‘ yap ’ 
occurring in any other sentence ; and hence the actions mentioned in them 
must be taken as distinct from any others previously mentioned. 

Then as for the other two Aiiupad&yas the BQSitlt and Ohjcct to he 
purified (or prepared; — we proceed to consider them now, amenable, as 
they are, to tlie same line of reasoning. 

Of these two, the mention of the Result has been cited in the BM- 
fya: AgneyamastAkapdlannirvapet rukkdmaiy, ‘ Agm!ito7nhjd7nekddasa- 
kgpdla^inivrapet hrahmavarohasaM'oiak Aindramekddasakapdlamih'vapet 
prajdkdmai).’ And as for the mention of the Object to be purified, we have 
the sentence ‘ Traidhdtaviyd dtk^auiya, etc., which lays down a purifica- 
tory rite for the sacrificer. 

The Bhd§ya speaks of the sentences as being found without re- 
ference to any particular Action ; and this is done with a view to show 
that the case in question is not capable of being dealt with under Differ^ 
emc of Context, 




in PAD A, XII ADHIKARANA, 84 . 25, 26. 


[This question being as to whetliei' the sentences in question only 
serve to lay down certain results with reference to the original Agneya, 
etc., or they lay down distinct sacrifices], we have the following — 

Pitrvapakm. — Prahvitem phalavidhiriti — That is to say, the sentence 
in question lays down the Result wdth reference to the sacrifice mentioned 
before, — 'first in the same manner as Ahavamya and the rest are laid down ; 
because the Results herein laid down ai-e capable of being desired, even by 
one who is engaged in the Davki Puryamdsa. 

Siddhdnta.— The reply to this is tliis— t/m Result can never he 
enjoined. The sentence of this is that, on account of the reasons shown 
under Siitru, VI.i.3. of the Sodngahdmddhikaraya, the Result has al ways the 
character of the Uddesya (that subject with regard to which something else 
is enjoined). Because if the Result were enjoined, it could be so only with 
regard to the Action ; and as such being a part of the Action itself, it 
would lose its character of Result to be brought about by that Action). 
And, on the other hand. If the action were not enjoined with reference to the 
Result then it would not have the character of the means' to that Result ; 
and as such it would become fruitless. If again, both (Action and Result) 
were Uddesya or both were Vidheya then they would have no connection 
with each other. And so the only alternative left to us is ■ to admit that 
the sentence lays down an Action with regard to a particular Result. And 
then just as in the preceding case (of an Action being laid down with 
reference to a particular time, so in the present case also), the Action thus 
laid down in the sentence in question would be one that is wholly 
distinct from all previous actions. 

Tiie same line of reasoning would apply also to the case of the 
sentence that speaks of a purificatory rite for the sacrificer. 

Nor is it possible for the transient Desire (for certain results) to be. 
the means of accomplishing such eternal Actions as the Agn&ya, etc. (and 
.this is what it would come to if the sentences were taken as laying down 
the Result with reference to sacrifices.) • „ 

For these reasons, we conclude that the sentences in question lay 
down Actions that are, distinct from all previous Actions. 



PI)rVA-M1mIM8A-80TRA8. II ADEYAYA 


Aclhikarana XIlT.—[The Avesii leads to the acquisition 

of food:] 

SUTKA IT. iii. 26. 

ii ii 

Sannidhau, when there is proximity, f Tn, really, Avibb^gat, 

there is no separation, PhalArthena, for the purpose of pointing out result. 

Punahsrutih, repetition. 

26. When there is proximity, there is no separation ; 
and hence the second mention is for the purpose of pointing 
out another Result.— 26. 

COMMENTARY. 

The present Adhihara^a is introduced by way of a counter instance 
to all the preceding AdMkarcm<’s based upon non-proximity. 

The mention of ‘ the Result ’ (in the 8nn'a) indicates all other 
Anupadeyas. And hence the sentences forming the subject-matter of the 
present Adhikarana are all the following:— (1) Agneyo’^tahapdlo hJiamti 

etayd annddtjaUmam yajayet, or Dursapdrnamdsabkydm svargaktmo 

yageta se§cU svintAkritam yajet, etc. (mentioning the Result); (2) Sam 
dm^saptiri^amdsdbhydm yajeta (mentioning the Place) ; (3, Pdrmmdkydm 
Paurnomasfchjd yajeta (mentioning the Time ) ; and (4; Ydvajjivam Darsa- 
paur).ia,mdsdbhydm yajet (mentioning the occasion). 

[The question with regard to these being as to whether the actions 
mentioned are the same as those of the same name mentioned before, or 
they are distinct Actions altogether], we have the following — 

Pdwapaksa . — “ Inasmuch as all these sentences lay down certain 
Actions, with reference to a particular Result, Place, etc., we conclude, 
in accordance with the foregoing Adhikaraya, that these Actions are other 
than those previously mentioned. 

And in favour of this view, we have the following arguments : 
Inasmuch as there can be no Injunction of that which has already been 
enjoined we would have to take the names of Actions in the sentences 
in question as mere references to the original Actions (of those names) 
if we do not take the Actions as distinct) ; and that which is referred to is 
that which is the Uddekya (that with regard to which something else is 
laid down) but as a matter of fact, we do not find the Actions (mentioned 
in the sentences) to have the character of the Uddesya. 

8iddhd7ita.—To the above we make the following reply : 

The potency of the Injunction varies according as it happens to be 
^ originative or an applieatory one. And hence wlien it is practicable, 





in pAdA, Xllt ADEtKAEAliA, Sd. 36. 


we take it as having the potency of only one ; but when that is not found 
possible, we accept it as having both. 

That is to say, in the case in question, we are forced to accept the 
same sentence to be an originative as well as an applicatory Injunction. It 
is only when the applicatory Injunction is such that thei’e is no inconsis- 
tency in its pointing to the presence in itself of originative potencies, that 
we take it as having only the applicative potency, with regard to Actions 
whose idea is present in the mind as having been brought about by 
another originative Injunction. But the case of the sentence in question 
not being like this, we have to admit to have the double potency.) 

The use of the present Adhikaraiia has been expressed by the 
BMfija as lying in the fact that, if the sentence in question refers to the 
originol Avei^ti, then, the suhstanae to be offered at the sacrifice performed 
for the acquiring of Food, would he the Agneyi cake; while if the Action 
were other than the A uesti, then we would have some other substance. 

To this, however, some people make the following objection : “ Even 
if the Action spoken of in the sentence ‘ Etayd tmnddyahdmam ydj'njet,’ 
were other than the original then, too, inasmuch as the word 

‘ etayiV would point to the fact of this other Action being similar to the 
Ave-i\i, the substance employed at it would jbe the same as that used 
in the Ave^ti, and no other substance would have to be used.” 

But this question is not quite pertinent. Because so long as it is 
possible for the word ‘ etayd ’ to be taken, as in the case of the sentence 
‘e§ajyotis,’ etc., in its direct sense, as referring to the Action to be 
spoken of immediately after it, — it can be rightly taken as indirectly 
indicating similarity. Hence there is nothing incorrect in the assertion 
‘ another substance will have to be used at the sacrifice.'’ 

We have found that the Bhapja and the Vdrtika lay down six means 
for the differentiating of Actions : — 

In another commentary (by Bhavaddsa, perhaps) only four such causes 
are mentioned, viz., (1) difference of words, (2) Difference of Names, (3) 
Difference of Accessory Details, and (4) Difference of Result. He has 
included Repetition and Number in Difference of words, and the 
‘ Difference of context,’ etc., in the ‘Difference of Result,’ because all that 
the context does is to help the Result. 

But this appears to be highly objectionable. Because, in the ' first ' 
place (Repetition) cannot be included in ‘.Difference of Words’; as.; 
if the word yajate is repeated five times, or any number of times for the 
matter of that, it does not become a differmt icord. . And when the word 
i is used by way of Bkase^a as pointing to seventeen Prajdpatyas^ 






, ■ ■ 


'iiiiliiill;Sl|ilifl^ 


pdEVA^MlMlMSl^sOTBAS. II ADEYAYA. 


we do not have so MfJi^ny different words, as the word is actually 
found to be one and the same only, in all cases. This is . what has been 
explained iindeiv LL15, and also in -^Siltra Li. 20. And the 

singleness of such objects will be explained later on 
Consequently we conclude that in such cases, 
find other ground for difierentiatihg the actr 
this commentary has gratuitously assumed the words to be different, 
even though, as a matter of fact, the word is one and the same. Secondly, 
this author of the commentary has failed to grasp the fact of the 
Eesult, etc., not being able to differentiate actions wdren the Context does 
not haf)pen to be different — a fact that has been shown over and over 
again in the Sulro(> just explained (IL iii. 26) and also in Sutra IL ii. 10, 


under Sutra Vl.iii.l2. 

not being , able to 
nis, the author of 


Adhiharana XIV —[The Repetition of the Agneya serves 
the purpose of GlorifioationJ} 

SUTBAS II, iii, 27-29* 

Agneyab, the Agneya sacrifice. ^ Tu, really. TJktahetutv&t, 

reasons already explained, Abhyasena, as repeated. Pratiyeta, 



ni PADA, XIV ADEiXAIiAm, Sit 27, 28. 


27. The Agneya loould appear as if it loere to he 
repeated, heeause of reasons already explained— 27 . 

OOMBIENTARY. 

We find the sentence ‘ Agneyo 
and then again ‘ Agneyostakapalo am. 
hhavati ’ (this latter occurring in the ( 
arises the question as to whether T 
the latter sentence is also mentioned ( 
or the two Agneyas are distinct actions. 

This conclusion pointed out by the 
that the two are the same, 
reference to the particular time of 
is unupadeya. 

And against this conclusion we have the following — 

Purvapak^a. — It has been shown above that it is only when the 
Repetition is formed to serve no other purpose that it can be taken as 
serving the purpose of differentiating actions. And in this case in question, 
we actually find the repetition serving no other purpose hence we take it 
to mean that the Agneya is to be performed twice over, that is to say, 
the two performances would constitute two distinct actions. 

In contradiction to this we have another alternative theory, which 
we bring forward as — 

SiddMnta (A.) 

It II 

Aviblicigat, on account of non-dilferentiation. 5 Tu, really, ^ 
iCainia??o> of tiro action. , Dviriiktofiji by reason of mere repetition* ^ 
NavidMyate, would not be enjoined. 

28. Tlie action not being found to be differentiated, 
tbe mere repetition of the same action would not make any 
difference in tbe action itself. — 28. 

OOBIMBNTARY. 

In the case of the sentences ‘ Samido yajati Bido yajati,’ etc., it is only 
right that we should take the repetition of ‘ yajati ’ as serving the purpose 
of differentiating the actions; because in tliis case we find the distinct 

repetition of the ‘ Sacrifice’ In this case in question' on the other hand 

the sacrifice has got to be inferred from the relationship of the substance 
(cake) with the Deity Agni (expressed by the word "Agneya ’). And in- 
. as the Deity, as mentioned in the sentence* are found precisely 


neyoHtako^'palo cirndvdsydydrii hhavati^ 
amdvdsyctydm paur}^.amdsyd neliachyiito 
the text before the former.) And then 
the same Agneya that is mentioned in 
. J over again in the former sentence. 


previous Adliihara'i).a would be 
even though the action is laid down in 
the A'indvasyd which by itself, 








pdBVA-MlMAM8A-8l)TRAS. II ADHYAYA 


mecl in tlie other, we are led, by tiie idea ot 
ed from tlie previous sentence to conclude that it 
mentioned in the latter sentence also. 

the Deity and the substance also are 
because as a matter 
If the difference be 
of the individuality of substance and the Deity, 
would be present also in the different 


the same as those mentu 
those that we had obtain 
is the same action that is 
It might be ar, 
distinct in the two cases, 
of fact, they 


■gued that 

But that is not possible ; 
are actually recognized as non-difierent. 

based on the difference < 

then such difference of individuality 
performances of the same action. 

Therefore we conclude that both sentences are optional Injunctions 

of the same Agneya to be performed in the Amdvasijct day. 

Or according to the law — Yugap(itpr<ivrtteryixthd sydt sattvadarsay.am 
(i.e., two sentences operating simultanenously we must take them according 
as we find the object mentioned in them), it is the same action that is men- 
tioned by both sentences. And it cannot be definitely ascertained^ which 
oAntfiTinfi rea,llv lava down the action and which is a a mere repetition and 



SECOND ADHYAYA, 

Foueth Pada. 


Adhikarana I.— [Treating of the lifelong Agnihotra]. 

Yavajjivikab., lifelong, ^iwjre; Abhyasalj, repetition. Karma- 

dharmab, a property of the action, mmn Prakaraaftt, because of the context. 

1. “ The lifelong repetition is a property of the action 

because of the context.”— 1. 

COMMENTARY. 

[We find the sentences ‘ Ydvcijjivamagnihotram juhoti,’ ‘ Fdvajjivum 
Darsapdr^amisdh'hydm y^'eta ? And with regard to these sentences, there 
arises a question as to whether the mention of ‘ lifelong ’ qualifies the 
action, the sentence laying down the lifelong repetition of the action ; or 
It serves to lay down a restriction for the performer of the action. That 
is to say, does the sentence lay down the Repetition of the action or only a 
restrietion for the agent ? ]. 

The relevancy of this Ad/w/OTra^ia in tlie present context is thus 
explained by the Vdrtlka : — 

Just as the causes of difference operate towards the differentiation 
of the forms of action, 
their performances, 
as they are by the 


Agnihotra, etc., qualified 
arises the question as to 
a distinct action by itself, or 
all the daily performances go to form a single action, meant to bring 
about a particular desirable end, and the time for whoso performance is 
the whole of one’s life. If then, the time— whole of one’s life— were laid 
down as a property of the action, then the mere offering of the morning 
and evening libations in accordance with the injunctions “he should 
offer the morning libation with the mantra, ‘ Suryo joytil}, etc.,’ and i 
he should offer the evening libation with the mantra ‘ AgnirjSytil}, etc.,— 

would not be enough to complete the Agnihotra, till the specified time 

life long ’ expires ; and hence a performance of the Agnihotra would 





peRVA-MlMAMSA-SOTRAS. IT ADHYAYA 


le same process witli regal'd 
er hand, ‘ living ’ be taken as 
rhich the sentence lays down 
would last till the Performer 
reference to any desir- 
■mance being sinful, it 
as he lives, either 
for the avoiding of the sin incurred 
this case the sentence would lay 
And in this case the occasion 
s and evening together 


Jyotispma is made up or the i-epetiuon oi 
to each of the many Orahas. If, on the otbe 
the occasion (or cause), with reference to w 
the action, — then, inasmuch as the occasion \ 
lasts, the action comes to be enjoined without any 

eglect of the perfor 
for the man to perform it as long 


able result ; and as such a n^ 
would be necessary i- — - 
for the fulfilment of his own duty, or 
by non-performance ; and hence in 
down a Restriction (or Duty) for the man 

of the Agnihotra performance would be rnornin^ ^ ^ 

with the life of che agent ; and hence as this occasion would present 
itself every day, the action would be complete every day also; and hence 
the complete performance of the Agnihotra would be repeated each day ; 
the performance of each day forming a distinct action by itself (indepen- 
dently of the other day’s performance). 

On the question 

P'lh’vapakm 

a single performance of it 
and (3) the sentence serves 

Siddhdnta . — 

n ^ 11 

Kartuh, of the agent. ^ Va, really, Srutisamyog&t, be- 

caase of the direct significatioa of the words. 

2. It must be taken as a property of the Agent, be- 
cause of the direct signification of the words. — 2. 

COMMENTARY. 

The word is to be supplied from the preceding SMra; 
and hence the proposition laid down by the Siddhdnta is that ‘ It is the 
property of the Agent that is enjoined. This property of tne Agent too is 
binding, and does not depend upon his own sweet will. 

Because in our interpretation of the sentence, both the words 
‘ Ydvajjivam and the verb ‘ juhoti ’ — retain their direct signification ; while 
in TTAni* in fArnrAbatinn. thftv will have to be tabea in their indirect indicated 


then we have the following- 
1) All the daily repetitions < 
(2) lifelong is a qiu 
to lay down the time. 


Aim Tt' 


269 



IV PAD A, I ADHIOKAISU, 8»1 2, 3. 


the affix signifies the BhAvand as qualified by the Root-meaning. And hence 
our interpretation is quite in keeping with the direct signification of both 
these words. In your interpretation, on tlie other hand, Ufe-tinie not being 
capable of directly qualifying the action) indicates the time, and the verbs 
also would indicate Repetition ; — then again, that wherein the Injunction 
ends, is accepted as the object of that Injunction ; — hence it will be neces- 
sary for you to reject the direct denotations of the words ‘ Jiva’ and the 
verb, and make Time and Repetition the objects of the Injunction ; and 
thus your Injunction comes to be based upon indirect Indication. 

In both cases, in consideration of what is directly expressed by the 
words of the Vedic texts, we reject what is implied by the context, and 
conclude that the sentences in ciuestion lay down the Eoma (of the 
Agnihotra) and the Yoga (of the Darsa-Purmmdsa) with reference to 
the life-time,— and that they lay down a property of the performer. 


LitigadarsanAt, because we find indicative words, ’st Oha, also. 

Karmadharme, if the property pertained to the Action, f? Hi, because. 

Prakramena, by beginning. Niyamyeta, would be completed, 

ua Tatra, then. Anarthakam, meaningless, Anyat, another. 5 iira 

SyAt, would be. 

3. Because we find indicative words to the same effect 
if the time pertained to the action, the action once begun 
would take up the whole time and the other Injunction would 
become meaningless — 3. 

COMMENTARY. 

We have the text — ‘ Api hava e§a svargdlloMehekhidyate yat...amd- 
vasydm paurvamdsim' atipdtayet ; and by atipatti here is meant trans- 
gression. 

The time for the Darsa PArnamdsa of which the Agnihotra forms an 
integral factor, according to you, is the whole lifetime; and certainly 
no transgression of that time is possible. Because if the performance of a 
certain action is begun at the prescribed time, it is admitted that the time 
has not been transgressed. And certainly one who is a ‘ performer of the 
Darkt, Pitrnamdsa ’ could never have allowed its prescidbed time (his 
lifetime) to lapse without having begun its performance ; because if 
he were to die without having begun it, he would not be a performer of 
the D&rm P’A’mo.mdsa. If by transgression were meant ‘ non-completion 



ptlEVA-MlMlMSl-SI^TRAS. 11 ADEYAYA. 


during the prescribed time ’ then too, inasmuch as this ‘non-completion ’ 
could be ascertained only after the death of the performer, the laying 
down of tlie Expiatory Rite (for such transgression) would be wholly 
superfluous. 

In accordance with our theory, on the other hand, inasmuch as 
the beginning as well as the completion of the Darsa PttrKiomdaa is laid 
down for every month during the lifetime of the performer, it is possible 
that there may be transgression of that particular day of the month 
(omission of performance on that da\’ ; and hence too it would be quite 
possible for the ti-ansgressor to perform the expiatory rite after that 


wm’ Vyapavargam, completion. ’?Cha, also. Dar&yati, speaks of 
K41ah, time. Ohet, if. Karmavedah, difference of action, wu Sy4t, should 


4. We have a text that speaks of the completion of 
the Action. If there' is time, the performances of the Action 
shonld he distinct. — 4. 

We have the sentence ‘ Darsa P'Ari^amdsdbhydmisWd somena yajetd. 
Now, if all the lifelong repetitions were to constitute a single per- 
formance of the Darsa PHrmmdsa, then, for reason shown above, 
the Soma sacrifice would have to be performed only after all the repe- 
titions had been finished ; and (as these would be finished onl}? after 
the death of the performer) the dead person could not perform the Soma 
Sacrifice. If, on the other hand, there is time for the performance of 
the Soma sacrifice (after the completion of the Darsa Ptlrnamdsa.’ This 
non-filling up of the whole lifetime is found to be possible, only if the 
‘ lifetime ’ is taken as a property of the Performer ; because in that case, 
each monthly performance of the Darsa Ptirnamdsa is a distinct action 
by itself. Thus then the latter part of the SAtra means that if there 
is time left by the performance of Darsa P4ra^mdsa for the performance 
of the Soma sacrifice, then each performance of the Darsa P4rmmdsa 
should be a distinct action, as held by us. 

The latter part of the Snitra is also capable of another interpretation. 
If the whole lifetime be laid down as the time for the performance of 
the Darsa PArnamdsa, then the Soma sacrifice as well as all other actions 
that may be laid down for the man, would be performed in the midst 
of the Darsa PAmamdsa ; and in that case inasmuch as all these other 





IV PADA, 1 AmiKARAhJA, 8f,. 4, 5, 6 


actions would break up the continuity of the lifelong extensive 
Barsa — Purijamrisa the assertion ‘ Barm — PAi'nanidsahhydmikvd {‘ having 
performed the Darm P iirmfndm) would be wholly iucompatable and 
fui’ther, this interpretation of the Barsa P47'>jiamdsa would constitute 
the improper procedure deprecated in such sentences as ‘ he falls 
off from heaven, who perverts the sacrifice ’ and the like. 

For these reasons also we cannot take the sentence in question as 
laying down the time. 


Anityatvat, on account of non-binding chai’acter. 5 Tu, really, ’t Na 
not. V# Evam, so. wa Syat, could be. 

5 . Because of the non-binding character of the action 
(according to yon) it conld not be so. — 5. 

COMMENTARY. 

We have already shown that in order to take the word ‘ Yuvajfivam ’ 
as laying down time, it would he necessary to have recourse to indirect 
Indication. And now we proceed to show that even if we allow the 
indication, the action not having a binding character, it eoidd not he so. That 
is to say, that alone can be spoken of as pointing to a definite point of 
time which is sure to appear, and always in connection with that point 
of time , As for instance, the Amavasyd is pointed out as the day in 
which the moon is not visible but there is no such single thing that invari- 
ably maiks the end of the life-time of all living beings; and hence this 
life-time is not capable of being definitely pointed out by means of 
anything, thus then the time (life-time) being wholly indefinite being 


lilllffiidlisiiiSI 
\ i iJ.,., ,.',.4.. 

IM,’’ ‘ , ; ' ‘4'; ’• ’'"''i 


irtii 


272 pdRVA-MtMAMSA-SdTRAS. 11 AMYAYA. 

subsidiary sacrifices, the Saurya, etc., also would come to be performed 
throughout one’s life, which is not desirable^e.m. for the Purvapahs^). 

Kartuh, to the ageu't 3 Tu, if. Dharmaniyamat. restriction 

of character. K41asfetram, time injunction. Nimittam, occasion. 

mn Sy4t, woxild be. t p xr 

7, If tlie restriction pertained to the pertoriner the 

time injuDction would be taken as mentioning tke occa- 

Sion. . COMMENTARY. 

What is said in this Mira being analogous to what has been said m 

Sutra 4 the VArtika has given three explanations : 

(1) This Satra being the last of the Adhikarma rightly recapitu- 
lates what has been said before. in • 1 

{2) It may be that though the author of the StUra has already said 

that the Eestriction in question is a property of the Performer, --yet e 

has not yet shown what, in that case, would be done with lliewoid 
‘ YAvajjivam; and hence he now declares that the word can be taken «s 
mentioning the oaeo^sion. 

Or it may be that the &Atn^ replies to the cxuestion— In regard to 
the Agnihotra and the Dar-ia P4ni<mclsa inasmuch as we have the 
mention of the word ‘YAvayjivam^ we could take lifelong as the 
occasion, but how can that be the occasion for the Animal sacrifice, the 
Soma sacrifice and the Ohnturmdsya sacrifice The sense of the SAtra thus 
is that even in the case of these latter, the prescription of time, mentioned 
repeatedly, would serve to point out the life time as the occasion the 
said prescription being in the form of the sentence ‘ Vasmte vasante 
jyotiqa, etc.’ This sentence does not lay down the time for the perform- 
ance of any optional sacrifice because an optional sacrifice, depending 
for its performance upon one’s whim, and as such beiiig only subsidiary, 
it could not be spoken of as to be performed in eoery spring. Then as for 
the Necessary Binding Sacrifice, if that were to be performed but once, 
in any one Spring, the repetition of ‘ Vasante ’ would be wholly useless. 
Nor is there any ground for limiting its performance to only a certain 
number of Springs, consequently we must conclude that the Injunction 
means that the sacrifice is to be performed in every Spring that might 
gsour during the lifetime of the Performer. And as for the Locative in 
A ’ tils'* point/ to Vasanta being the occasion, just as it do^ ha 

ttie word ‘ hhinne ’ in ‘ bUnne juhotif It is fpi^. Aese reasons 







273 



IV PADA, n AmimAUAT^A, BA. 7, S. 


that th© Sutra lays down that in. all thes6 cases, iiiasmucli as the mention 
of time lays down restriction for the performer, it must be taken as 
laying down the Occasion. Thus it is too that the necessary and binding 
character of the Animal sacrifice, the Soma sacrifice and the Ghatiirmtsya 
sacrifice becomes established. 


Adhiharana II. — [The action mentioned in 
Bescension texts is the samel. 

SOTTRAS It. iv. 8-32. 


cApiamry rims. nnyartna, distinct purposes. Darsanit, 

because we find, sitar^ ^4kh4ntare8u, when the texts belong' to distinct 
rescensions. Karmabhedah, difference of action. ^ Syfit, should be. 

8. ‘‘ When the texts belong to distinct Rescensions, the 

actions must be distinct ; because we find (differences in) 
(1) the name, (2) the form, (3) the particular details and 
because of (4) Repetition, (5) Deprecation, (6) Incapability, 
(7) Mention of completion, (8) Expiatory Rites, and (9) 
Distinct purposes.” — 8. 

COMMENTARY. 

[ There are various Rescensions of the Veda ; and it is found that 
the same action is very often mentioned in all these texts ; then there 
arises the (Question as to whether all these actions are one and the 
or is every one of them distinct from the rest]. 

Tlie present Adhikaraua is taken up with a view to show that there 
are no grounds for the Differentiation of Actions except those already 
dealt with. And hence we proceed to bring forward certain other 
grounds of difference, and then demolish them; and then we shall show 
also, in course of the discussion, that every one of the grounds herein 
mentioned is included in one of those that have been already dealt with 
in the previous Adhikarai^as. ■ • 

On this question we have the following , -• 

PArvapaksa. — The action mentioned in. eaich Rescensional text is 
, that it is distinct ; to say, the Agnihotra mentioned in the Katha Bescension 


same. 




SiSiwiifiii ■ill 


* 







PI^RVA-UImAMSA-SUTRAS. 11 AmYlYA. 





is distinct from the Agnihotrd mentioned in the Tdiitir^ya HesGensioii ; for 
the following reasons : — 

j , Oil account of the Biffereime of Name : for instance we find people 
declaring that such and such a thing is found mentioned in connection 
with the Kdthakd Agniliotra and that in connection with the Taittiriya 
Agnihotra (which showed that the two Agmhotras are district, one being 
called the Kdthaka and another the Taittiriya). [Here too the differen- 
tiating agenc}^ is that of Name, which is equivalent to ^ Sahddntara ’ 
dealt with in Sutra ILii.l. ]. 

2. On account of the Differenee of Form, for instance, in one text 
the cake dedicated to Agni Soma is said to be ‘ ekddakakapdla ’ while in an- 
other it is said to be ^ dwddasakapdlad In this case also, inasmuch as the 
^eleven ^ and ‘ twelve^ are not capable of being exchanged, in the way that 
we find in the case of the numbers ‘ eight ^ and ‘ twelve ^ with regard to the 
Fa?.k^ft??.ara or in that of the Amiksd and the Vagina — the differentiating 
agency is that of the accessory (and this has been fully dealt with in Il.ii). 

3* On account of the difference of saoidficial details, for instance, 
the Taiitiriyas, in connection with the sacrifice, la}" down eating on 

the ground, while those, belonging to other Rescensions do not do so ; so 
also while in connection wdth Agni sacrifice some lay down the carrying of 
the water-pot of the tutor, while others do not ; and in connection with 
the Akvamedha, some lay down that the sacrifices should present 
grass to the Horse, while others do hot lay this down. And in all these 
cases, the differentiating agencies are those of the eating on the ground, 
carrying of the water-pot, and the presenting of the grass-— all of which 
are mere sacrificial accessories, but taking the place of the method of the 
sacrifice, these have been mentioned apart from the former accessories, 
which are wholly outside the performance. 

4. On account of Bepetition, i.e,, if the same action were mentioned 
in all the Rescensional texts, there would be many useless repetitions. 
In this case differenliatino agency is that of ' Repetition ’ (and has bean 
dealt with under Siltm ILii.2). 

5. On account of Deprecation, for instance : some people deprecate 
the offering of the morning libations before sunrise, while others deprecate 
the offerings of the same after sunrise. In this case also, the differentiat- 
ing agency is that of the time^ which is only an Accessory. 

6. On account of Incapability. In this case also the differentiating 
agency is that of the Accessary, because all that is meant is that all the 
various details mentioned in connection with the action, in the several 

' tex,t% could not possibly be performed at the single performance of the 





IF PADA, II ADIlIKARAl^A, 8A. 8, 9. 


action must be taken as distinct in 


/. Uii account of the difference in Gotnpletion 
that the differentiation is done by the Accessorj^ ; be* 
by that the upholders of one text declare 'our Agm 
ed here, and not there, as in the Agni sacrifice of th 
this would not be possible if there were a single Agni 

8. On account of the laying down of distin 
Though this is included in 'Deprecation ’ yet it is br 
lately ; because the mere deprecation of the time (bei 
might be explained as pointing to 
for the same action ; hence what is 
mention of Expiatory Rites is 
alternati 


meant by the bringing forward of the 
that if the two times were mere optional 
would be faulty ; as a matter of fact, inasmuch 

as expiatory rites are laid doivii in connection with both, both would be 

faulty winch could not be if the action were the same. Hence the action 
must be regarded as distinct. 

9. On account of the perception of distinct purposes being 
served m the direction that if the sacrifieer happens to be previously 
ini mted. he^should employ the Atirdtra oi the Bvihatsdma ; heomee the 
Rathantara boma will have been already employed at the previous initia- 
tion ; while if he does not happen to have been previously initiated, he 
should employ the Rathantara Soma, in the Tdndaka, however, we have it 
distinctly laid down that the Jyotistoma is the very fij^st of the sacrifices to 
be performed. And the uncertainty of precedence spoken of in the previ- 
ous direction would be possible only if the Jyoti^toma mentioned in the 
latter sentence were other than Jyotiftoma occurring in the same text 
with the former sentence. For, if all the Jyoti^toma were one and 
the same, then inasmuch as in accordance with the Tdndaka direction 
in the case of all texts, it would always be the Jyotiftoma that would be 
performed first, the sacrifieer would always have been initiated for the 
Jyotvitoma, the said mention of uncertainty—* if he be not initiated ’ 
—would be wholly incompatible ; as no sacrifieer would ever be found to 
bp uninitiated, . , 

'V,,, . ■ ' Siddhdnta.~ ■ . ■ • vi::;;; 


^ Ekam, one, ^ only, Ohodaii4kli;i 

apause of the non-difference of Connection, form, Injunction and Name, 


^aviges4t, 








276 PI^BVA-MIMAMSA-SOTBAS. II ADHYlYA. 

9. The action is one only ; hecause of the non-diffei- 
ence of (1) Connection, (2) Form, (3) Injnnction and ( ) 
Name, — 9. 

COMMENTARY. 

That is to say, the identity of actions, recognized by means of their 
Names, Forms and Accessories, does not disappear even when they happe 

to be mentioned in various Resceusional texts. . n 

The Bhdsya says ; The action spoken of in all texts, or in a ra 
mma., i, one and the same. The sense o£ the phrase m aU Brshmapas 
is that the same is the ease even when the *!'* 

BrShnianas of the same Veda. As for instance, when the Jpet^foma a 
the Dv^iaiiU sacrifices are mentioned in the Panekamnea and the 

Mdvinsa Brahiiiayas of the Sdma-veda. ^ t> i +1 i 

(1) ‘ By ‘ Connection’ is meant the connection of the Resnlt, asttia 

is the chief factor in the relationship, (2) By ‘Forms’ 

Deity Bad the (material), as being the most nearly related, (6) tiy in- 
junction ’ is meant that which partakes of the Boot-meaning as wel as the 
Bhdvana, (4) And lastly, hy Name are meant Jyoti^toma and t le i ce 
which are found to be exactly the same in all texts. Thus then, there 
being so many reasons for recognizing the action to be the same, we cannot 
but admit its identity in all texts specially as we do not find any rea- 
son for taking it as different. 

H ?rraT n « 

n Na, not. ’Wf'n N§,mn4, hy name. ^ Syit, would be. Aohodana- 

vidhSnatvat, because the names do not speak of actions. 

10. Difference conld not be established by the names 
in question because the names do not speak of actions. 10. 

COMMENTARY. 

Even if ‘ Kdthaka ’ and ‘ Kaldpaka ’ were the names of actions, then 
too, inasmuch as these do not occur in the originative Injunction of the 
actions, they could not serve to distinguish one action from another. 
As a matter of fact, however, they are not the names of actions at all ; 
because by the law that ‘ it is not right to accept a multiplicity of mean- 
ings,’ the names belong to the books, and it is indirectly through 
these that they are applied to the actions (treated of in these books). 

^*05 n n u 

^ Sarvesam, of all. Cha, also, Ayekakamyam, one action. 

,,, 




1 I 1 ‘ ,, * V, ^ ki-H 












IV PAD A, II ADHIKABANA, SH. 11, 12, 13. 


11. (If the name belongs to actions) all actions would 
become one. — 11. 

COMMENTARY. 

The differentiatioa of the cause is generally found to bring about the 
differentiation of the effect. Hence inasmuch as the name ‘ Kathaka ’ is 
one only, all actions— A3?7i/jot?^a and the rest— mentioned in that text, 
would come to be taken as one (if the name belonged to the actions’). 

Though the reasoning herein advanced partakes of the nature 
of the Faulty Apparent Inconsistency {vide Nydtja SMras, V.i.21), because 
there is no actual invariable concomitance between the conclusion (oneness 
of actions) and the Reason (oneness of Name) — yet the Siddhdnti has 
purposely brought forward a faulty argument, as a proper I’eply to the 
Purvuyahm, which is based upon fallacious arguments through and 
through because a faultj^ rejoinder is always allowable against faulty 
arguments {vide Nydya Sutras, V.i.39, et seq). 

Kritakam, coined. ^ Cha also. Avidhaiiam, name. 

12. The name is one that has been coined. — 12. 

COMMENTARY. 

It has been shown under Sdtra Li.30, that the names Kathaka 
and the like are coined ones ; and certainly such recently coined names 
could not vepr well differentiate the eternal actions. 

That is to say, though on account of the eternality of the class 
Kathaka, the word ‘ Kathaka' eternal one, —yet it is a universally 

recognised fact that the word was applied as a name to the Vedie 
text, solely on account of the fact of that particular text having been 
taught, pre-eminently, by the teacher named Katha' And there 
is no doubt that it is not the aotion that is taught but the Verbal text; 
and hence the name not applying to actions, it could not differentiate 
them. 

Ekatve, eveu wkeu it is one. ^ Api, also, Param, diversity. 

13. Even a single action bas diverse forms.. — 13. 

" COMMENTARY. , ' ' T - ‘''''f', „iv'v 

Mere difference in such details as the number, pf .cannot 

establish a ’ difference between actions ; . because so long as there is 
absolutely no difference in the KapAlaitseU, that in, its number is an 




PUBVA-MIMAMSA-SOtRAS. 11 adeyaya. 


insignificant detail. Hence we conclude that the two numbers— Eleven 
and Twelve— are optional alternative accessories with regard to the 
same action. 


term u 


%aiT Vidyayara, pertaining to the science, Dharinasastram, injunc- 

tion of the detail. 

COMMENTARY. 

As for tlie difference in the sacrificial details, several of these are 
mentioned in the various texts, simply by way of showing all that has 
to be learnt alrout the sacrifices, and not as laying down something .to . 
be actually carried into practice at the performance. 

Agneyavat, as in the case of Agneya. 3vt^=9;Panarvachanam, there 
would be repetition. 

i: 15. “ There will he a repetition as in the case of 

: the Agneya. — 15.” 

COMMENTARY. 

This Sittra may be taken either as i-eiteration of the Pilrvupal'm 
argument — that many repetitions of the same action would be useless, — 
or as explaining the repetitions of the same action, as resembling that 
of the Agneya ; the sense of the latter explanation being that the Re- 
petition serves the distinct purpose of glorifying the action (and as 
such there is incongruity in it) [vide Sutra II.iii.29). * 

Adyurvaclianam, there is no repetition, Va, however. 
l^atisarnyogavisesat, ^there being no difference in the method of declaration. 

16. As a matter of fact, however, there is no repeti- 
■ tion as there is no difference in the method of declaration. 

■ 16 . 

COMMENTARY. P 

The word ‘ Fd ’ in the SrUra serves to reject the explanation just 
given in the second interpretation of the foregoing SAtra. And the 
: reason for this rejection is that a Repetition is taken as serving other 
minor purposes, only under two conditions : vis., (1) when the Repetition 
consists in another mention of the action only; and (2) when there 
v'fP are two objects of Injunction, in a single sentence. In the case in p 

however, none of .these two conditions are present; because . 










IF pADA, II ADElKAlUhU, Sit 16, 16 A, 


we find that the Repetition is one of the Primary Action itself together 
with all its details of procedure, etc. This is what tlie Bhmya under- 
stands by the word ' Srutisamyogavihesa, in the 

But the Sutra h capable of also another interpretationj as follo’ivs : 
As a matter of fact, there is no Repetition in the case in question ; one 
sentence is known as a Repetition ’ of the other, only when both occur 
in the text of the same Rescension ; while in the case in c{uestion, we find 
that the mention of the action is found in distinct texts oilAie K^lialta, 
etc., and that too only once in each text. • 

In accordance with the law spoken of before that one man can read 
the text of only one Rescension, one who has read of the Agnihotra men- 
tioned in the text of the Kathi Rescension, does not know of that 'which is 
mentioned in that of the Taittiriya Rescension ; or even if he happens to 
know it, inasmuch as he has all necessary knowledge of the Agnihotra 
from the text of his own {Katha) Rescension, he takes its men lion in the 
other Rescension to be meant for those professing that Rescension ; and 
hence he does not look upon it as a mere fruitless repetition. Similarly, 
dors the professor of each particular Rescension treat of the text of other 
Rescensions. And every one of these professors equally recognizes the 
Agnihotra as mentioned in a single text (this is what is meant by the non- 
difference in the method of declaration}. Nor is there any order of sequence 
among the various Rescensions ; by which it could be ascertained that it 
is by the text of any one of them that the Agnihotra is originally spoken of 
and those found in the rest are mere repetitions. To this effect it has 
Been declared elsewhere : ^ Inasmuch as all Rescensions have a simul- 

taneous existence, no one of them can be looked upon as a repetition of the 
other ; specially as there is no order of sequence in which the various 
Rescensions are to be studied, as there is in the study of the various portions 
„„of .,a single, .Rescension/ 

Consequently, even in the case of the mention of an action in a 
single text, if that very mention (of the same text) happens to be repeated 
at another time, for the sake of another person, such mention is not taken 
to be a mere useless repetition, — and the reason for this is that the persons 
a 1 dressed are different in the two cases ; so would it also be in the case of 
the mention of the Action in various texts. i :. 


I0A. / Be€aus6‘0f tlie noii4Eli.er€i^0,"of texts* — 16A. 



280 pdRVA-MlMAMSA-SUTB AS. 11 ADHYAYA, 

As a matter of fact the texts of two Rescensioiis can 
never be retained in the mind of the same person. 

This Mtra has dropped out of the BM,ycc ; hut is explained rn the 

VartiM* : 

n u 

^ Artha. Purpose. Asanuidliesclia, on account of non-proximity. 

17. Also because of the non-proximity of the purpose. 


COMMENTARY. 

The various texts are known as the ‘ Branches of the 
simply on account of their containing certain points of the same 
the shape of actions, just like the many branches of the same tree 
That is to say, if the action mentioned in the various Res 
texts differed from one another, there inasmuch as the very roots 
would be distinct, on account of the facts of flowers and fruits m 
of the results of actions-being different from the very beginnm^, 
speak of the texts as ‘ distinct Vedas ’ and not as 
(or branches). On the other hand, when the roots in 
and the stems in the shape of Tnjunettons are 
would be in the details of procedure, etc., w. 
number of fruits and flowers on 
such from the similarity of the tree ^it is ri 
should be spoken of as so many 

The B'Cdra may also be taken as meeting 
regard to Repetition. The sense w ^ 

be a case of Repetition, where what has been spoken of 
to the same man to whom it had been previously addressed. In 
in question, however, we find that, that _ which is mentioned m 
to tn tlifi nersoii nrofessinsc a different lext. 


' ig, we would 
‘ distinct Reseensions, 
the shape of actions 
i the same, the only difference 
hich would be difference in the 
the various branches of the tree ; and as 
ght that the different texts 
different ‘Branches’ or (Rescensions.) 

n the aforesaid objection with 
ould then be that, we take that to 
once is approximate 



i, TOogaise 


IF PADA, il At)HtKAEA'^A, BA 18, 19. 


original Injnnctive sentence, being laid down only as with reference to 
the Agnihotra, etc., come to be recognised as meant for all persons (pro- 
fessing all tests), and as such to be necessarily procured ; and hence it 
follows that in matters of snsidiary accessories, we should not rest 
contented with our own jparticular test. Nor do we find a single author 
of the KalpasAras confining himself within his own particular Eescen- 
sion; and for this reason also, we cannot ascertain all the details of any 
sacrifice from out of one particular test only. 

This as regards subsidiaries ; as regards the primaries also, inas- 
much as the names of actions {KMiaJm and the like) are not capable of 
specifying the sacrifices as one professing any particular Rescension, 
the Injunctions of these primaries (in whatever test) must be taken as 
laying down these actions for all who may be desirous (of obtaining the 
result following from these actions) ; and hence the actions mentioned 
in all the tests appear before each one of the performers. Then inas- 
much as all these {Agnihotras, for instance) lead to the same result, they 
could not all be performed conjointly and the result having been 
accomplished by means of anyone of these all the rest would become 
useless. If they be explained as serving the purpose of optional alter- 
natives, then it would be far more reasonable to accept the tests themselves 
as optional alternatives. 

gni tt n isa f ii u ii 

Samaptivat, accompanied Iby tlie nxention of completion. ^ Cha, also. 
Sam jireisa, assertion, 

19. Also because there is the assertion speaking of 
“completion.” — 19. 

COMMENTARY. 

If the sacrifices (Agnihotra for instance) mentioned in various tests, 
were distinct actions, then each of them would be completed, first it would 
happen to be mentioned in its own text, then we could not have such 
assertions as ‘ Our Agnihotra sacrifices does not end here ’ (this could 
be possible only when the speaker recognised the Agnihotra that is 
being performed to be the same as that mentioned in his own text). 
“The Anvdrohas are the mantras in connection with the SthaMrohava, 

- h these that the sacrifice is finished; by the prdfee^s of ; 

the Maitraydi^i Eescension ; but our sacrifice does not end there,”— such 
^isertipus of the learners of Veda distinctiy^phow that even students,. 





PUBVA-MImAMSA-SOTBAS. II AbEYAYA. 


^ Ekatve, when the action is one. Api, even. 'raS Para^ji, others. 

NindHiaktisamaptivachanani, the mention of deprecation, inca- 
pability and completion. ^ 

20. Even wEen tEe action is one and tEe same, tEe 
mention of (1) Deprecation, (2) Incapability and (3) Com- 
pletion is quite explicable. — 20. 

COMMENTARY. 

(1) All that the mutual deprecation of the offering being made 

before and after sunrise would show would be that the two theories’ are 
optional alternatives. Even according to your theory, you admit the 
Result of such offerings to be alternatives. ^ . 

(2) Similarly as for the Incapability or capability of persons, it 
varies with each individual ; and it is equally uncertain with regard to 
the details laid down in all tests, as well as with regard to those 
mentioned in one text only (i.e., there are men who are quite capable of 
duly carrying out all the minute details mentioned in all the various 
texts, while there are others that are not capable of performing even 
those mentioned in one text only), and after aU there is not much 
difference between the details mentioned in the various texts. 

(3) As for the declaration of completion, or otherwise that depends 
upon what the speaker may have learnt, and hence that does not estab- 
lish a difference between actions. 

Pr4yascbittam, expiatory rite, Nimitteiia, occasion. 

21. TEeu as for tEe meution of tEe occasion for ex- 
'i^i^ipiatory rites. — 21. 

COMMENTARY. 

bA-i Iji^g S-Atm recalls for the pui-pose of refuting it what has been 
. urged by the PArvapakgi under (8) of Sfftra 8, in connection with the 

' laying down of distinct expiatory rites for the actions concerned. This 
P4rvap<ik^a argument is met in the next sutra. 

•V PrakxafiQ^^^ in accotdancd witlitlio motliod 8tart6d with.* ^Va>r6ally- 

would be. controlled. 

:M; ; TEe application of the expiatory rites would be 

'tEe^ ^metbod^ itarted'- w 



IV PADA, 11 ADEIKARANA, Stl 22,, 23, 24. 


in all cases of alternative procedure, one can start with liis perform- 
ance distinctly in accordance with one method of procedure only ; and 
hence, if subsequently he happens to leave olf the details of that method, 
and takes up those of another, he commits a distinctly wrongful infringe- 
ment ; and thereby renders hitnself liable to expiatory rites ; and thus the 
mere mention of expiatory rites does not necessarily show that any, or 
both, methods is objectionable or inacceptable by any performer. 

efrrftr: u ii 

wff: Sarnapti].!, completion* Purvavatvdt, because depending upon 

what has gone before. Yath^jny^ite, according to what we know, 

Pratiyeta, should be accepted. 

23. Inasmuch as the completion depends upon what 
has gone before, we accept it in accordance with our own 
knowledge. — 23. 

COMMENTARY. 

We have shown under siitra (19) that the mention of completion is 
compatible with both the unity and diversity of actions. But, inasmuch 
as the assertion of completion is always in accordance with what the 
speaker might know, it serves to establish the unity of action ; and the 
reason for that assertion is that it is regulated by what has been done 
before in the beginning. 

Or the sfitra might mean that, inasmuch as all verbal usage 
depends upon its previous acceptance by people, we could conclude that 
the ‘ completion’ spoken of is what we actually find to be. And for this, 
we often find that when the action has not been completed, as soon 
as the details mentioned in one text have all been performed, the pro- 
fessors of that text declare ‘ Our this sacrifice ends here’ ; and hence 
there is no incompatibility in this assertion (with our theory). 

11 'UJ II 

Lingam, indicative word. Avisistam, equally applicable. 

Sarva^esatv&t, because pertaining to all. ^ Nabi, nor. m Tatra, in the 
text. Kai*macliodan4 injunction of another action. Tasmdt, there- 
fore. Dv^das'dhasya, of the Dv^daga sacrifice. Ah4i4fchyapde&h, 

incongruity in the performance, w?; Sy4t, would be. ^ 

. 24. Tke indicatiTe words are equally applicable to 

bqtbwi^w^ — ^bec^qso tbe ipeptiop ^ Jyotiftoma ap tbe 



P()BVA-M1MAM8A-SUTRA8. II ADHY Al A, 

bo performod) portains to all (Rescensions) noi 
another Jyotistoma; therefore there 
an incongruity in the performance 


very first to 
does the text enjoin 
would (in both cases) be 
of the Dvadas^ha. 

COMMENTARY. 

This meets an objection urged by the PurvapaTt^i (Va. Text p. 198, 

line 26). ^ . 

The presence of uninitiated sacrifices at the DvMasdha is equally 
incongruous, for both of us. Because what the Td.ni^<ka lays do™ is t le 
fact of the Jyotistoma mentioned in all texts being always the first to be 
performed. Nor does the TdndaU enjoin a distinct JyoHstoma of its 
own with regard to which alone it would lay down that restriction. Thus 
then the restriction applying to the Yajurvedis also, and hence the said 
incongruity being found to be present in both theories, both of us should 
explain the clause in question as meaning that ‘ if the sacrificers happen 
to be initiated or not initiated for the BvMasma. And hence on this 
point there is no difference between our theories. 

^ 

Dravye, with regard to substance. ^ Cha, and. Achodiwat, 

not beincr enjoined, Vidhindm, of injunctions, Avyavasthd, mdefi- 

niteness." Syfit, would be. Nirdeadt, by being pointed oxit. 

Vyavatistheta; would become well defined, Tasmfit, therefore, 

Nityanuvadah, everlasting description, vtra Syfit, would be. 

25. (The measuring of the Vecll) not being enjoined 
with regard to any substance, the injunctions would be 
indefinite ; while when it is pointed out, they become defined, 
and hence it would be taken as an everlasting description. 


COMMENTARY. 

This meets an objection urged by the P4rvapakst (Va. Text 
199, line 8). ^ 

It lias been argued above {Sahara Bhdsya^ p. 199, line 8, et seq,) tliat 
ere could be no mention of tbe measuring of tbe Paksa and the Vedi {if 
e action were the same)* And to this we inalce the following • 

. is to say, the sentence ^yat paksasaniTnitaniy etc*} appears in 

-'^6 Injunctioii (there is but one post, and eleven auituale),' 



IV PIDA, 11 ADEIKABANA, Stl 25, 20. 


and it means that as at the Ekada.Hm, there would be a deal of trouble, 
if any of the two measures mentioned were accepted, it is far better to 
have only one post. And as for the measuring of the pahm, as it is one 
that has never been enjoined, it naust be taken as always appearing as 
a mere description; and the Injunction of the measuring by the Fed j 
also only serves as a praise, showing the superior excellences of a single 
Sacrificial post. And as for the measuring by the ‘ eyes’ of the chariot, 
it would be done at that sacrifice, in connection with which the Ekad'^hini 
is laid down ; and as such there would be no incompatibility. In the 
case in question, however, the measuring by the Vedi appears as the 
object of Injunction, by means of praise; and as such we cannot very 
well take it as eulogising anytiiing else. Consequently it must be con- 
cluded that the ‘measuring by the which is not enjoined is a 

mere description for the sake of praising the ‘ measuring by the Vedi' 
And as, in regard to the Agni sacrifice, this ‘ measuring by the Vedi, 
would be the most authoritative, on account of its being mentioned in 

the same context, the Injunction of the ‘measuring by the eyes of the 

chariot,’ being thus freed from the primary Agni sacrifice, would betake 
itself to its subsidiaries. 

The sdtTa may be taken as follows : If the measuring with the 
Vedi were not laid down with regard to a substance, then there would be 
no restriction with regard to the measuring of the Pa7£.?a, etc., all of which 
would be (equally) implied and that would be set aside by the direct 
mention of the ‘measuring by the eyes of the chariot.’ In the casein 
question, however, it is not so ; and hence there is no contradiction. 

VihitpratisedhUt, on account of the prohibition of what is en- 
joined. TO Pakse, optional. Atirekah, excess, wa Sy^t, would be, 

26. 6a account of tLe injunction and prohibition of 
the same thing the excess would be optional, — 26. 

This sdtra meets one of the objections urged in the BMsya, p. 19 
line 17. 

OOMMINTABY. 

One text lays down the holding of the Sod^M at the Atirdtrd ; 
while another prohibits it ; and hence its holding or not . holding being 
both optional, when it is not held there would be an excess of two hymns 
only ; when however it is held, the excess comes to be three, because in this 
latter case, there are two Rik verses added to the group of twenty-one, and 
in this way we do. not find any contradiction between the |e?ts concerned . 



. - . . 


pdBVA-MlMAU8A-S{)TBAS. 11 ADHYAYA 


Sarasvate, in tlie Sarasvata sacrifice, Vipratisedhfit, on ac- 
count of prohibition. Yad^iti, the conditional ‘if’, wu SyM, shoulc 

be added. 

27. In the Sarasvata sacrifice on account ot the pro- 
hibition the sentence should be taken with a conditional 


COMMENTARY. 

This meets the objection urged by the P'di’vapah-fi in the Bhasya, 
p. 190, litie 22. As in regard to the Sarasvata sacrifice just as in the 
case of*the DvddaMha shown above, the previous performance of the 
Jyotistoina would be found necessary for both of us (disputants), both 

of us should explain the sentence concerned as follows 

‘If in the case of the performance falling in the bright fortnight 
of the month ending vvith Paur^amdsi the sacrificers happen to be Pitw- 
dfisins then they should fast; whereas if in the case of tlie performance 
falling within the dark fortnight ending with Amuvasyd, the^sacrifieeis 
happen to be SdnncUjijins, they should remove the ‘calves.’ ^ And in 
this way, we find that the mention of different sacrificers {Puroddsins and 
Sdnndyyins) indicates the different times of the performance, and as such 
there is no incompatibility. 

II =|c: II 

^ Upahavye, in regard to the Upahavya. vfwra^i: Pratiprasavali, iucon- 

28- “ In regard to the Upabavya there would be 

certainly incongruity.— -28, 

COMMENTARY, 

This Sfitra recalls an objection urged by the P-Arvapaltsi BMsya 
p. 200, line 1} the purport of which is as follows : — 

In one Rescension we find the sentence ‘ upahavyo nirvktal}, agni- 
§tomo yajno raihdntarasdma, asvahsyAao dakslivad ; while in another we 
find, ‘ upaJiavyal} anirvdttaf}, vktlio yajno bfihatsdmd, aevdh eveto Tpkma- 
laUp dah^^d ; and in this case, in view of these two Injunctions the 
two' Hymns could be taken as optional alternatives ; yet, inasmuch as this 
alternative is already obtained from the Primary sacrifice, any mention 
of Jit would be absolutely useless,, if the action {upahavya) w:ere one 
gnly ; while if the two upaliavyas are distinct, the repetition (of what 
i#:'bee»<^eptione4- 4» connection . with the Primary) would serre .the 



iv PADA, ti ADBlKABAi^A, SA 28, 29, 30, 


purposes of restrictions. Hence too the two actions must he taken as 
distinct, "" 

II II 

5*5151? Gtinartlia, for tlie purpose of indicating an accessory, Va, but* 

Punabsrutih, repetition. 

29. The repetition referred to serves the j)nrpose of 
indicating another accessory. — 29. 

COMMENTARY. 

The answer to the above objection is that the repetition' of the 
Brihata and the Rathantara could be explained as serving the purpose 
of restricting the number. 

II II . 

sic?f?5?: Pratyayab, idea, Chapi, also. Dars%at5, supports. 

30. The Veda also lends support to the idea (that the 
action mentioned in the diverse texts is the same). — 30. 

COMMENTARY. 

We find tliat tlie Veda, speaking of tlie Roma, in reference to the 
Pmyaja lays down the mantra ‘ Kritumsi,’ etc., which appears in 
entirely different rescensional texts, as to be employed in the Asmidddna; 
and this distinctly shows that the action thotigh spoken of in various 
texts is held to be one and the same. 

Api v4, but. Krainsamyogat, on account of distinct orders 

of procedure. Vidhijpvitliakatvam, difference in the injunctions. 

Ekasy^m, in regard to what is laid down in one text, Vyavatistheta^ 

should be. 

31. “As there are distinct orders of f)rocedure the 
Injunction pertaining to vrhat is laid down in one text must 
he regarded as distinct (from those pertaining to what is 
laid down in other texts). — 31. 

COMMBNTAKY, , 

. 'The action mentioned in one text must be regarded as different 
from the same action sppken of in another text for the simple reason 
that the order of procedure is found to be entirely different in two cases. 



silii 




■ITMlili 


- li 'ABMya^a^ 




rco».o.idea„«^».o.e. ^ 

’"Ttere beingno oonneotioa with contradictory pro- 

tf»^tion ia taken as one and 
jjjj^;^;^^‘^^oiuiected with that action, must be tab^fetas. 

jifffgr^ihg |fe idea of that same action. 32. 

Vr^*#"' COMMENTARY. •■ * 

'actions are one is shown by SyntoctW OonneeSonf^Me 
■^' 'dilEerto' in tlie order of procedure would, at best, be pointed by 
' they happen to be mentioned ; and as a rule Syntactical 

..Connec&f.iSf'always more authoritative than mere order. BecauBe 
^ a xiltihf fact, we find that such details as are ment^ed even m the 
reiected bv any considerations of Order, time or Extent; 

L is pointed Syntacti- 

ijected by any sn^flxansideraf 


^en, how could it 
^nnection of Ved 

^^ias, then, we conclude that the action mentioned in 
being distinctly recognized as the satf©, w 
'these as a distinct action. And it has also bee 
no seventh means of differentiating actiondj^e^^ 
^^R’^^eii explained above, which afford all the means fof 

^fcatation of actions. , ' 

End of Adhy^ya U. : 





THIRD ADHyAYA. -’ 

First Pada. 

Adhikarana I. — Declaring the Suhject-matter of the Adhydya, 

n \ ii 

Atha, now. to : Atai^, then. Sesalaksa^am, ; the Adhy4ya 

dealing with Sesa, 


COMMENTARY, , 

, The difference among actions having been establislied, the next 
question that arises is,— Is each and every action expressed by verbs 
occurring ij) tlie Vedic texts an independent act by itself,’ bringing into 
existence a di^inct Apurva? or, are some subordinate to, and subserve 
the various .purposes of, some others? — and if the latter, what actions 
are subservient to what ? Though this is what forms the main subjec.! of' 
Adhy4ya (3b yet it will be shown here that it is not only actions that are 
subservient or subsidiary to actions, but that under the word ‘ subsidiary’ 
-‘se?a’, ‘ afiga ’ d.srita — are also included substances and their pro- 
perties. The consideration of this point is all the more important, as the 
subject-matter of all the rest of the Sutras (Adhydya 4 to 12) avb directly 
or indirectly, based upon this relationship of the ‘ principal’ and !* siibsi- 
diail'j^^Bioag actions as says Kumarila. ' f 


Adhikarana II. — The definition of Subsidiary. 

I II t, 

, IN'; Sesah, subsidiary. wlrJira Pararthatvat, on account of being for the 

^ A2..'*A:\,thin^ sulbsidiaiy ieasoji"of its 





p6BVA-MtMAMBl-8dTEAS. Ill ADEYAYA 


OOMMpNTAllY. 

That is to say the ^ subsidiary ’ — ^ sem' — is defined as that which 
is for the sake of another; that is to say, that which is indicated by 
direct assertion etc, as aiding some action towards the fulfilment of its 
Apicrva ; tliis latter qualification being necessary in order to preclude 
mere verbal relationship. This being for the sake of another does 
not necessarily in itself imply that the Subsidiary should in some way 
help the Principal, but such help is assumed on the strength of Presump- 
tion. For instance, in the case of the action o£ sprinkling water on ilxe 
corn, the fact of its having been laicb down in connection with a sacrifice 
leads to the presumption that it must accord some help to that sacrifice. 
Similary in the case of the Frayajas^ laid down in connection with the 
Dar^apnrnamdsa sacrifice, we find that these latter stand in need of some 
help ; and also that tlxere are certain other actions laid down (in the shape 
oE the Praydjas)^ which stand in need of some other action to which they 
could accord help; and this mutual need leads us to the presumption that 
the Praydjas subserve the Darsapurnamdsa. 


Adhikarana III. — What can he Sudsidiant f 


n \ w 

DravyaguQasanskS/i’esii, to substances, accessoides and puri- 
fications sm#: badarifi says BMari. 

3. The subsidiary character belongs to substances 
accessories and purifications only. — 3. 

COMMBNTABY. 

The question being whether only substances, accessories and puri- 
fications can be subsidia7ies or actions and results also, we have the 
P'iLrvd'pak^a view as stated by Bddari that subsidiary character can 
belong to the first three only. That sacrifices and results cannot be 
subsidiaries is clear from the PArvapaltsa siltra of the first Adhiharma 
of the sixth Adhyaya. 

In answer to this we have the Siddh^nta in the next three sutras. 

II « « 

II y II 

, 5?^ ^vrfTif^ig^li i II 

. ' Karmapi, actions. also. Jaiminih, says Jaimini. 

?l^lfelmty4t, on account of being for the sake of the .result. 4. w? Phalancha 



I PADA, in ADHIKARAm, Sit 4, 5 , 6. 


the resalt also, purns4rthat’vfi;t, |>^caase it is for the sake of the agent 

5. Puriisa^cha, the agent also, karmarthatvat on account of 

being for the sake of action. 6, 

4. Jaimini says tliat actions also are subsidiaries 
because they are for the sake of the result. 

5. The result also can be subsidiary because it is for 
the sake of the agent. 

6. And lastly the agent also is subsidiary because 
he is for the sake o|^the actioi^c — 

COMMENTARY. 

(1) . That substances ai’e subservient to sacrifices follows from their 
very nature ; they e.vist, because they subserve some purpose. 

(2) . Mantras and;- Deities also are necessary appendages to the 

sacrifice. h 

(3) . Such 'purificatory ov preparatory acts as the threshing of the 
corn come to be regarded as ‘subservient,’ to sacrifices, in view of the 
fact that sacrifices need some substances out of which the cake and such 
other things could be made ; the cake, for instance, must be made of some 
corn ; but no entire corn ’can make it ; the grains have to be threshed 
and cleaned, so that it may be used for the making of the cake to be 
nsed at the sacrifice. 

(4) . Actions (sacrifices) also are ‘subservient,’ to their result ; 
•a^ it ia/or the sake of the result that the action is performed. 

'• " ; . (5).» The ‘mitZt’ is ‘ subservient because it is for the sake of thQ 

• .human agent that seeks it, and accomplishes it by means of the action. 

(6). The human agent is ‘ subservient ’ to the actions— being the 
‘performer’ who will accomplish the action, for the sake of which, therefore, 
he would exist. The ‘subserviency’ of the agent to the action is expressed 
by the word enjoining the act ; for instance, of the word ‘'yajeta' the 
‘sacrifice’ forms the principle factor in the denotation, and as no such 
action as the sacrifice would be possible without an agent, the agent also 
must be regarded as implied by the same word. Apart from this, there 
are cases where the human agent occupies the most subordinate position ; 
e.g., in the case whei’e the man is required simply for the purpose of 
measuring the height of the sacrificial post. 

The above is the view of Jaimini as interpreted by the Bhasya ; 
which quotes the interpretation of the author of the Vpitti (Upavarsa) — the 
sense bf which may be thus stated: — It is only Substances, Mantras and 
Deities and Purificatory acts that can, by their very nature, be subservient 



Pl)BVA-MtMAMSA~SdTBA8. Ill ADHYAYA 


to sscrifi'ces as held hy B&dari ; as it is only these that can nBvev be 
'principals’ j and the reason for this view, says the Bfihcitt (pp. 66b), lies 
in the fact that the Pliyoga or Apdrm is accomplished by the sacrifice, 
which in its turn, is accomplished by Substances, Mantras and Deities 
and purificatory Acts, which latter alone are forces contributing to the 
ultimate result —To the other three things, mentioned by Jaimini, the 
subserviemy can belong only relatively; for instance, the sacrifice 
(mentioned in sfitra 4) is principal in relation to the substance, but sub- 
servient in relation to the result ; the result (mentioned in sfitra 5) is 
principal in relation to the sacrifice, but subservient in relation to the 
aqent ; the human agent (mentioned in sutra 6) also is principal in relation 


Adhikarana IV. — The details of threshing and the 
rest pertain only to 'particular things. 

II vs II 

^ Teslim, of those details. ^ arthena, purpose, visible result. 
Samhaudhah, connection. 

7. They are connected with a definite purpose. — 7. 

COMMENTARY, 

In regard to the Daida-Purnam^sa we find the Injunction ‘Daida- 
pfirnam&sabhy^m svargakamo yajeta ; and in connection with these two 
sacrifices, we have various texts laying down such details as the nirvapana 
(pouring out), the prok§ana (washing) avahanana (threshing), and so 
forth, as relating to vegetables, and utpavana (sprinkling), vitapana 
(boiling), graham (holding), asdddna (procuring;, and the like, relating to 
the butter ; and again idkha-harana (fetching of the twigs), Oav&mprasthd- 
pana (fetching of the cows) QavdmprasnAvana (making the cow yield 
milk), and so forth, relating to the Sdnn&yya (the mixture of Curd and 
, Butter). And with regard to these details, there arises a question as to 
these three classes of details are to be performed In 


*1 






I PABA, 17 ABEIKABTSA, SA. 8. 


mixture, alike ? or should their performance be restricted to only those 
materials, in which they are found to serve some useful purpose. 

The Siddhanta on this question is that every one of the details in 
^question is found to serve a definitely useful purpose and as such can 
”'pert&r.\^nly to such things with regard to whom that purpose is possible ; 
for instance, threshing serves to remove the chaff from the grain and as 
such it can pertain only to such things as have the chaff and the grain. 
In the presence of a visible result it is not right to assume an invisible one. 

Against this position of the Siddhanta we have the Purvapaksa 
in the following sutra. 

sr^OTT- 

n ^ n 

Viliitah, laid down, h Tu, but. Sarvadharinah, pertaining to 

all. Syat, should be, Sanyogatah, in regard to connection, 

Avisesitt on account of non-difference, Prakaran4vises4t, on account 

of non-difference of context. ^ Clia. also. 

8. Every one of them should be taken as pertaining to 
all, because of their nou-dilference in connection and non- 
difference in context. — 8. 

COMMENTA.Ey. 

In as much as the result of the Darsapiurnamdsa is one only, there 
-«atmot be more than one Aparva, and the capability of bringing about this 
Aptirm belongs equally to the vegetables, the Butter and the Ourd-Butter 
mixture ; hence the details laid down with reference to these materials 
must be taken as pertaining to all of them. 

And in support of this universal application, we have (in the sutra. 
two reasons: (1) ‘ Samyogato’ ' vikesdt' andi {2) Prakaranamsesdt' That 
is to say, the chai’acteristic of bringing about the ApArva that we find 
in one object (corn), as the ground of its connection with a particular detail 
{Threshing), is also found in the other object ; because as for the specific 
cliaracteristic of the class ‘ corn ’ (which subsists in the corn only), this is of 
use only in the indication, and is of no use in restricting the application of 
the Threshing. Then, as for the objective character, o f the coni as mentioned 
in the sentence Vrihimvahanti), it is found in all the other objects also ; 
as all of them are objects to be offered. Therefore it must be admitted 
ihat^deaving aside all such objects as are ndt connected with the Apdrva, 
as are not objects to be offered, and as do not help, in the bringing about 



Pl)BVA-MtMAMSA-SUTEA8. Ill ADHYAYA 


of the particular AyAno. of the context, with reference to all othei 
objects, all the details should be performed. 

H S. n 

9ra%r<iiij Arthalop&t, on account of the absence of a useful purpose, 

akarma, no action, wa Syat, would be. 

9. By being separated from a useful purpose it would 
no longer be an action. — 9. 

COMMENTARY. 

argument that if we 
for instance, — there would 
that is, ceasing to be per- 


The SiddhAnta meets the Purvapaksa by the 
dissociate the particular detail — of threshing, 
be the danger of its ceasing to. be an action ; 
formed at all. 

^ Phalam, the result. 3 ^*11, also. Saha chestaya, along with the 

operation, Sabdtohah as expressed by the words, abh 4 v 4 t, in its 

absence. yiprayoge, on account o£ its absence. ^3 Sy^t, would be. 

10 . Then again, the result is found to appear along with 
tbe operation. It is only when there is no visible result that 
its absence could justify the details being taken merely as 
expressed by the words — 10. 

COMMENTARY. 

It has been urged that, “inasmuch as we shall assume certain 
imperceptible effects, there would not be an absence of useful purposes.” 
And to this the following reply is made. 

As a matter of fact, we find that the Threshing brings about its 
perceptible result in the Corn, along with its performance ; while in the 
others (the Butter etc.), we find the mere operation of Threshing, without 
any results ,* and so long as a useful operation is possible, no Vedic 
injunction can ever urge the agent to the performance of a useless 
operation ; and in the absence of such urging by a Vedic injunction, 
there cannot be any ground for an assumption of imperceptible results. 
And thus there would be a mutual interdependence ; the assumption of 
the injunction (of Threshing with regard to the Butter) being based upon 
the Results (imperceptible), and the assumption of the results being 
baised upon the injunction. That is to say, in regard to the Butter etc. 
.^e do. not find either the injunction or the result (of Threshing) ; while 
ill rfg^d to the corn, we find both independently of each other. 


t PADA, V ADSIKASANA, 8a. 11. 


295 


Adhikarana V. — The Sphya and the other implements 
have their use restricted. 

Dravyaip, things. ^ Cha, also. Ut^^attisainyogafc, on 

account of being connected with the originative injunction, Tadartham, for 

the sake of that. ^ Eva, only. Cliodyeta, should be laid down. 

11. The things being connected with the originative 
injunction should be taken as laid down for the sake of 
that. — 11. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Darsa-Pari^mnasa, we find the sentence 
‘ Sphyascha hapdlani aha agnihotrahaoani aha hipaneha, hrmdjmavaha 
shamya aha uhlkhalanaha miisalaneha drshaehahopata aha, etdni vai dasha 
yajndyudhani. And there arises a doubt as to whether each of these 
implements is to be employed in whatever they may be found capable of 
doing, or only in that in connection with which they are mentioned. 

On this point we have the following Purvapaksa : — 

In as much as there is no connection with distinct Apurvas, and as in 
all cases equally there are perceptible effects produced, we must employ 
the Implements in accordance with their capabilities. In this way, the 
sentence sphyakha etc. would become justified as constituting an injunc- 
tion ; and as for the plural number in etdni, that could be explained as 
based upon the plurality of the objects (sphya etc), enjoined ; otherwise, 
as the whole forma a single sentence, there would be a single injunction. 
Consequently it must be admitted that the implements are to be. employed 
according to their capabilities. 

The Siddhanta view is that the implements in question are to be 
employed in connection with the actions along which they are mentioned 
in the injunctive sentences. All that the sentence enumerating the 
implement does is to give a collective description of the various imple- 
ments and there is nothing to dissociate them from the actions along 
with which they have been originally laid down. 



Pt^BVA-MtMiMSA-SdTRAS. Ill ABEYAYA 


Adhikarana VI. — The quality of ‘redness' is restricted 
to the substance along with which it is mentioned. 

Arthaikatve, when it is possible for the two to be ta^en together, 
Pravyagiixiayoh, of the substance and the quality, Aikakarmy&t, 

they have the same function, Niyamah, restriction, Sy4t, should be. 

12. Between tlie substance and the property, when it 
is possible for the two to be taken together they must serve 
the same function and as such their application should be 
restricted — 12. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with tlie Jt/otisfoma, we find the sentence 'armaya- 
'pingdk^ya ekaMyanyd somam hrimti and then the text goes on adding 
‘ajayd krinati, vasasA krindti, etc., where the woi’d ‘Aruva’ denotes the 
quality, while the words ‘ Pingaksi' and ‘Ekahdyant' denote the substance, 
because of their co-extensiveness (with the p7’iee to be said for the Soma). 
And with reference to the quality of ‘Redness’ (signified by Ai'uv-a) there 
arises a question, as to whether it qualifies the substance that is men- 
tioned in the same sentence with itself, or it qualifies all the substances 
mentioned in the context. 

The basis of the Pfirvapaksa on this is borrowed from sutra 8 above: 

That which is laid down would appertam to all, because there is 7W 
difference in their relationship, and because of the non-difference of the 
context. (Sutra 8). That is to say, in as much as Direct Assertion and 
Syntactical connection are wholly indifferent on the question, we cannot 
but take our stand upon the indications of the context ; so that in the 
present instance there is nothing to preclude the quality of redness from 
being taken with all the substances that are mentioned in the context. 

The Siddh§.ntin’s answer to the above is as laid down in the sfitra, lu 
the case in question the substance and the property are found to be such 
that neither the substance nor the property alone by itself can be 
employed. For instance, the redness can be of use only as qualifying 
the particular substance cow, and the pow also must be of some colour ; 
and further the two words ‘ArmAya' and ‘Bkahayanyd’ having the same 
instrumental ending, the two become related through syntactical connection 
to the action of purchase ; hence the conclusion is that the property of 
redness must be taken as related to the particular object cow mentioned 
in ihe same sentence. v 





1 PAD A, VII ADEIKAUATSA, m: 13. 


Adhikarana VII. — The Qrahaikaiva Nyaya : — The 
non-signifi Gance of number. 

^T%#ftTrTg^lli \\ II 

Ekatvajmktam, qualified by singularity* ekasya, of the 

singularity, Srutisaiiyogafc, on account of being directly mentioned. 

13. The thing must be qualified by singularity as 
singularity is directly mentioned.— 13. 

COMMENTARY. 

The application of the various accessories has been duly explained : 
now we proceed to consider tbe details of the employment of these 
accessories. 

In connection willi the Jyotistorna we liave tlie sentence 
[Dasd'pairtrem graham stimmdrsti' ; and there arises a question as 
to whether the walking is to be of only one vessel or of all the vessels 
mentioned in the context. Just as in the sentence we have a question 
as to the significance of the singular mimber, so also in others, we 
have it as to that of the Dual and the Plural; e.g,^ ^ Yasya puroddian 
Ksdyatali' and ' Eammi ahlvighdrayatV In all these cases, an action 
is enjoined with reference to a particular thing ; and hence there 
naturally arises the question as to whether any significance is to be 
attached to tbe Number of tbe word signifying this thing or not. 

On the above question we have the Purvapaksa put forward in siitra 
13, the sense of which is that, as the text distinctly mentions the loashing as 
to be done to graham in the singular, there can be no justification for 
disregarding the singular ending; and this leads to the general conclusion 
that in the case of all sentences due significance must be attached to the 
particular number used in connection with the predicate ; exactly in the 
same manner as it is done in connection with that of the subject. 

■ ^,''1316 Bhasya has included here the questions of significance being 
clied to the gender also ; but the Vdrtika says that the Bhasya has 
'^one this only by the way, as the question in connection with gender will 
be dealt with later on. 

, ' Sar^es^rp, of all. v4, but. laksapatv^fc, the indication 

pertaining to. ayi^iston, equally. H5,^.>.because. wai laksa^^am, the 



.. VI. ..Ml. .V. -WifE* E. 








PI)rVA-M1MAM8A-8I)TBA8. IU ADHYAYA 


14. All individuals should be taken as indicated, for 
the simple reason that the generic indication is applicable 
to all. — 14, 

COMMENTARY. 

It is a well-established fact that whenever anything is referred to by 
means of a generic nanae that name pertains to all the individuals 
included under that name. For instance, in the passage in question we 
find the word ‘graham ’ used as a generic name for all vessels ; and so 
long as there is nothing to indicate the contrary there can be no justifi- 
cation for restricting the action to a single graha. The conclusion thei'efore 
is that the washing laid down in the sentence in question should be done 
to all the vessels that are to be used at the sacrifice in connection with 
which the sentence occurs. 

1 SRfT^rT U \ X H 

Chodite, in regard to which that is enjoined, h Tu but. toIcTO 
Par^rthatvat, being subordinate to something else. 5s?2rf5fu Yath^sruti, exactly 
as mentioned, Pratlyeta should be taken. 

15. That which is enjoined should be taken exactly 
as it is mentioned because it is subordinate to something 
elsfe. — 15. 

COMMENTARY. 

The opponent has urged the case of the sentence ‘ pammdlahheta’ 
where due significance is attached to both number and gender of the 
word pahun. The answer to this is that the case of the sentence graham 
sammar^ti is not exactly analogous to that of pasumdlabheta. In the latter 
the animal is distinctly laid down as subordinate to the sacrifice, and as 
there is nothing to indicate that the action of sacrifice has to be repeated 
with all its subordinates, there is naturally a desire on our part to find 
out the exact number of subordinates required to fulfil the action and 



1 PAda, VllI-IX ADHlKARAi^A, SA 16, 17, 18. 299 


Adihkarana VIII. —The washing is not done to the 

ehamasa etc. 

gwrfiT n H n 

Samskar^t, because it is purificatory. ^ V^, really, jwn 
as to accessories. Avyavastiia, no restriction, Syat, should be. 

16. As the washing is purely purificatory there should 
be no restriction as to its axDplicatioii to the several acces- 
sories. — 16. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Jyotistoma we meet with the sentence 
‘ graham sammarspri the question arises as to whether this washing 
applies to all sacrificial vessels ehamasa and tlie, rest or to only those 
partietdar vessels called ‘ grahas' which are besmeared with soma juice. 

The Purvapaksa embodied in the sutra is that all the vessels shoidd 
be washed as washing is purely purificatory and purification is equally 
necessary and applicable to all the vessels. 

srr ^ ?[rs^srfrr3!!r- 

5?i^ Vyavastlia, there should be restriction, va, really, Arthasya, 
of the object, Sruti samyogat, being directly mentioned, to Tasya, such 

things. 3i5^W!rc^<5 Sabda]3ramajQatw4tj based upon scriptures. 

17. There should be a restriction as the one particular 
object is directly mentioned and specially as such matters 
are based entirely upon the scriptures, — 17. 

OOMMENTABY. 

The washing applies to the ‘ grahas’ only as the text quoted dis- 
tinctly mentions them by name and in the face of this direct declaration 
it would be very wrong to apply it to any other vessels. 


Adhikarana IX. — The measure of 17 ouhits applies to the 
sacrificial post used at the Pasu sacrifice. 

siwSwgfRwi 11 II 

; Anarlihakyfiit, on account of uselessness. ^^5 Tadafigesu, should 

apply to its subsidiaries. ^ ' 

' 18. ‘ Because it is of no use in the primary sacrifice 

itself, it must apply, to the subsidiaries.-?— 18. 




pdBVA-MlMlMHA-Sl^TBAS. Ill ADlif AY A 


COMMENTARY. 

Ill connection with the ^ Vajpeya sacrifice 
saptadaaharatmh bajpeyashyayiipah and in this co 
, rises as to whether the measure oE 17 ««abits appl 
/■ajpeya itselE (there being no yupa in that sacrifi 
moa used iu coiiiiectiou with the ‘ jpatluyaga whi 


'apaksa is that the text distinctly mentions the measure 
with' the Vajpeya itself and there can be no justification 
.pplicable to something else. 

Jhanta as embodied in the sutra is that as a matter of fact 
'peya belongs to a particular form of the soma sacrifice in 
jrificial post has no place. Under the circumstances if the 
nade applicable to this sacrifice itself it will be absolutely 
1 order to avoid this the word ‘Vajpeya’ in the text may 
(directly indicating the vessels used at the Vajpeya sacrifice, 
rse to indirect indication cannot be justified solong as there 
Jity of avoiding it. As a matter of fact it is easily avoided 
word Vajpeya in its wider sense of the particular soma 
I biijpeya along with al! its subsidiaries among which 
f4i 1 vA..o*a at which the post is used to which the measure 


Adhikarana X.—The action of ‘ Avikramana is subsidiary 
to the ‘ Prayajas ’ only. 

Kartriguoe, in the case of performer’s (Qualifications. 5 1 u, and 
Karm.l.samavay^t, because it cannot co-inhere with the action. : 

(vdkyabhedah). syntactical split, ’enu Sy 4 t, would be. 

19. As the qualification of the performer cannot 
inhere in an action the sentence should he broken up.— 19. 

OOMMENTABY. 

Purificatory Actions, Substances and Accessories have duly been dis- 
cussed j and we now proceed to consider those cfses in which an Action, 
beinff mentioned as related to another action, comes to be taken as a 


A. i : 


i PAD A, X AinnKABAXA, SA. 20. 


3Ul 


For instance,^ in the case of the sentence ' ahhihrtvman juhoti' we 
find in the word ‘ abhikrdman the repetitive affix ' uamttV ; and hence, 
there arising the question as to what is done by one ' w^alking round and 
round’ we meet witli another word ‘ jithoti which points to the Praydja, 
in whose context we iind tlie sentence in question. And then tliere is a 
doubt as to wlietlier the ‘ walking round’ is eunnecLed with that Fniyaja 
alone, or to every one of the Romas that are nientioned in connection 
with the Darsa Pilrnamasa, 

in regard to the above question the Purvapaksa view is that 
inasmuch as the avikramana is an action meant to be a qualification for 
the performer it cannot be taken as having any connectioii wdtli the 
particular * homa’ mentioned by the word ‘ jiiliotV in the sentence, that 
is to say, the avikraviaxia or walking round cannot be connected with the 
Prayajas. It cannot, in fact,lielp in tlie accomplisliment of the Prayaja 
Roma, And as such its mention cannot have any syntactical connection 
with the injunction of tlie Prayajas; so that in the sentence in question 
the ]:)articiple avikrdmana should be taken apart from the principal verb 
jithoti as pertaining to all actions mentioned in all other contexts. 

II Ro u 

TOM Sak^mkham, in neech 5 Tu, but. Ekavdkyam, syntactically 

connected, ’eim Sy^it, would be. Asamaptam, incomplete, ff Hi, because. ^ 

Purveiia, by the preceeding ^vord alone. 

20 . But there is a deficiency in view of which the whole 
should be taken as one sentence specially the sense of the 
sentence is not completed by the first word. — 20. 

COMMfiNTARY. 

The Siddliaii tin’s answer to the above is that as a matter of fact the 
word {avikrdmana) being a gerund cannot be taken as completing the 
sentence. It stands in need of another finite verb and as such a finite verb 
is available near at hand there can be no justification for dissociating it 
from that verb. 

The Tantravdrtika is struck bj' the palpably absurd Purvapaksa as 
represented in the Bhasya and therefore offers a somewhat different 
explanation of the Adhikarana. It puts forward the Pftrvapak§a in the 
following form 

Inasmuch as the ‘ walking round’ is laid down with reference to all 
the Romas of the context, that are referred to by the word ‘ juhoti ', — and 
as there is no intermediate context (that could take in the Prayajas only), 






VMi 

luj ^ jss}f 


pdRVA-MlMAMSA-SdTRAS. Ill ADUYAYA. 


— the connection o£ the walking round cannot but be controlJed by the 
single great context (which takes in all Hornas^ ; and in this case the sense 
of the preceding {Purm'pahm) siUra would be thus : In the property 
of the agent: — he., in ' walking round '—e/ie/'e beiinj no inherence of the 
action of Praydja.^ which could be brought about only by an intermediate 
context, there would he a split of the sentence^ only in so far as tlie 
^ walking round’ would not be syntactically connected with that inter- 
mediate context. 

In that case, the present (Siddlianta) sxttra should be interpreted 
as follows : Sakdnksani would refer to the intermediate context ; and 
the sense of the Siddhdnta would be that the ‘ walking round’ is syntacti- 
cally connected with the intermediate context, through its connection 
with the want of the procedure, which is aroused by the injunction 
of the Pruyajas (he., the ‘walking round’ is to be taken as forming part 
of tlie procedure of the Prayajas) And in this case, the concluding 
clause asamdptam hi puroena^ would not mean the incompleteness of the 
sentence but that the intermediate context is not completed by ivhat 
precedes — Le,, by the mere injunction of the form and the accessories of 
the Prayajas, 


Adhikarana XL — The UpavUa is suhsidiai^y to the 
entire Darsa Purnamasa and not to the 
Sdmadheni only, 

w 

Samdigdhesu, in all doubtful cases, Yyav%at, on account of 

interruption, V^kyabhedah, syntactical dissociation, mn Syit, should be. 

21. On account of the intervention of sentences of 
doubtful connection the sentences should, he dissociated. 


OOMMjBNTARY. 

THs Adhikarana is meant to settle the question as to whether the 
conneetion of actions is controlled by the intermediate or prime context. 

In connection with the Darsa PUmamdsa the Sdmidhani Mantms 
are laid down as the seventh and eighth Anuvdkas, the Nivids are laid 
down as the ninth ; and the Kdmyas, identical with the Sdinidhants, as the 
t^th ; and then in the. eleventh we have the mention of the saerifieial 
thr^d as to h©- worn on ihc' left shoulder, passing under the right arm-pit. 


I - 



1 PADA, Xll ABEIKABA^A, 8il 22. 


And there arises the question as to whether the thread is to be so 
worn at the time that the person is reciting the bcmiidhcDVis or during all 
the time that he is performing all that is laid down in the context. 

The Purvapaksa view is that in accordance with the conclusion 
arrived at in the preceding Adhikarana the mention of tlie Upavtta 
must he connected with what is nearest to it. That is to say with the 
mention of Sdmidhants only. 

The Siddhanta embodied in tlie sutra is that between the mention 
of two sets of Sdniidhaiits we have the mention of the Nimids and as such 
tlie connection of SamidhaivU being interrupted and the irresistable 
conclusion is that the Upamta should be connected with the entire 
context of the Dars^a Purnainlsa and should be borne throughout its 
performance and not only during the recitation of the Sdmidhani. 


Adhikarana XII. — The Varana, the Vaikankatd and 
the other vessels belong to all saerijiees. The 
Mithosamhandha Nyaya. 

gjffRT ii ii 

5<!P)T Guijanam, of the accessory details. Oha, also. Par^rth&tw^t, 

on account of being subservient to the purpose of something else, Asain- 

bandha, no relation. SamatwAt, on account of being equal, wu SyAt, 

should be. 

22. As the accessory details are all subservient to the 
purposes of something else, they are all of equal importance 
as such can have no relationship among themselves. — 22. 

COMMENTARr. 

This Adhikarana is an exception to Adhikarana 9. 

In connection with the kindling of fire, we find laid down certain 
vessels- of the Varava and the Vaikankatd wood, as employed at the 
performance of the sacriiice, some of which are used at the Eoma, while 
others are not used. And inasmuch as these vei^sels have nothing to do 
with the actual, kindling of fire they are, as a matter of course, taken apart 
from- the context ; and then there arises a question as to the particular 
sacrifice at the performance of which they should be used. 

And on this question we have the following Puroapak^a. 

, : “'In accordance with rule laid ddwn in Sdtra Ill-i-lS, we must 

ponclqde thqt the vessels in (question ftpo : used for holding the offering 





PI^BVA-MlMlMSl-SUTRAS. Ill ADHYAYA 


materials at tlie Pacam^ne#!, as this Jsii being' laid down jn connection 
with Undling of fire, is directly subsidiary to it and the vessels mention- 
ed in the same context have to be connected with an offering and the 
nearest offering with which they can be connected is the Pavamana offering. 
For the simple reason that the vessels as well as the PavSinana oileiings 
are mentioned in the context of the fire kindling. So that there being no 
use for the vessels at the kindling itself they must be connected with the 

nearest offering. 

The Siddlnlnta embodied in the sutra is as follows : 

That the said vessels belong to the fire kindling through the Pava- 
m&na sacrifice is shown only by the context, while that they belong to the 
fire and through that to all sacrifices is shown by the syntactical force 
of the sentence ‘ Yaddhataneye Jnhoti etc. and the latter is certainly moie 
authoritative than the former. 

And further there is no close relationship between the Pavamana 
offerings and the fire kindlhig as the offerings are as much subsidiary to the 
fireas the kindling is and thus there being no relationship between the 
two the vessels found mentioned in the context of the kindling cannot 
reasonably be connected with the Pavamana offering. 

The Vdrtika is not satisfied with the way in wliich the Bhftsya rests 
the Siddhanta upon an assumed sentence in the shape of Fndd/iacauetye 
fuJioti. In fact it discards the entire Adhikarana and takes the present 
sutra as a supplementary to the foregoing Adliikarana. Ihat is to say 
in connection with the conclusion of the foregoing Adhikarana there 
arising the aigument that as the Nibids are subsidiary to the Samdhenis 
a mention of those cannot interrupt or disjoin the context— the answer 

given by the sutra the sense of which is that inasmuch as the Nibids also 
like the Simidhenis speak of the kindling of fire they aie equally sub- 
to the nurnoses of fire and as such one cannot be taken as -subsi- 







I PAD A, XIV ADHIKABANA, SH, SI 


COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Darsa PiirnamSsa we meet with the passage 
^ y avtraghni 'pauriiamXsyain vridhanivatiamdnasydyam^ and in regard to 
this there arises the doubt whether the two pairs of mantras Vartraghni 
and Vridhariwati belong to tlie prijnary sacrifice of the Darila Purnam^sa 
itself or to the Ajyavaga offerings. 

The Purvapaksa view is that inasmuch as the Mantras are dis- 
tinctly mentioned in the text along with the Darina Purnarmlsa itself there 
is no reason why they sliould not be taken as belonging to these. 

The Siddhanta embodied in the sutra is as follows : — 

That any connection of the Mantras with the Darina Purnamasa 
would be useless, because the Purnamasi sacrifice constitutes one action, 
so also does the Dan4a sacrifice and as such there could be no room for 
two Mantras in either of these and farther because the deities mentioned 
in the mantras are not found connected with any of the two primary 
sacrifices, that is to say the Vartraghni and the Vridhariwati each consists 
of twm mantras, one mantra speaking of soma and another of Agni- and 
as a matter of fact neither soma nor Agni -by itself is the deity of the 
Darsia or of the Purnamdsa. The conclusion therefore is that the two 
j)airs of Mantras should be connected with two Ajyavaga offerings. As 
there offerings are two in number the two mantras will fit in with these 
quite appropriately and the words Paurnam4syam and Am4vSsyayani 
occurring in the sentence quoted should be taken only as pointing out 
the times for the offering. 


Adhikarana XIV, — The dosing of the fist and such 
other details 'pertain to the whole context 

Anantaryam, proximity. Aohodan^, aot injunctive. 

24. Proximity is not injunctive (or connection). — 24. 

COMMENTARY. 

We have just dealt with the employment of mantras in accordance 
v?ith the order in which they are mentioned ; and now. we proceed to deal 
with the exceptions of that rule. 

' 1“ connection with the Jyoti^toma we find the sentence — ‘ Mu^tim 

.Karoti, VacHaviyacahati dik^taniavedayati mdiiien again 'hastan 
, avdnenikti ulaparajinstranati ; and in connection with this, there arises ^ 


I , ,, 



, .. _ 





pi^bva-mImAmsa-si^tbas. Ill ADHYAYA. 


doubt as to whether the ' muqtiharna ; (closing of the hst) and vagyamah 
(silence) simply serve the piirpose of dvedand (Addressing t ie ini ia.ec 
sacrificer) or they enter into the whole of the context ? And similarly too, 
as to whether the hastavdnejana (washing of the hand) is foi the so e 
purpose of ‘ uluparajistarana ’ (spreading of the bundle of grass) or it 

pertains to all the actions performed? 

The Purvapaksa view is that owing to the close proximity of the 
sentences the closing of the fist and the silence should be taken as subsi- 
diary to the addressing and the washing of the hand to the spreading of 

the grass. 

The Siddhantin ansvTer to the above is that the force of the context, 
the actions in question, must refer to the whole set of actions mentioned 
in the context. This connection could be rejected only if there were 
more authoritative means indicative of their connection with the one parti- 
cular action only. As a matter of fact, however, there is nothing to 
establish any sort of syntactical connection between the fist closing and 
the addressing. There is mere proximity of the two sentences and 
certainly the context is more authoritative than mere proximity. 


ii ii 


cimmi Vaky^nam., the sentence. ^ Oha, also, SamSptatwat, being 

completing themselves. 

25. Also because every one of the sentences is complete 
in itself.” — 25. 

COMMENTARY. 

A further reason why there can be no syntactical connection between 
the two sets of sentences lies in the fact that every one.pf them is complete 
in itself and thus there is absent the principal condition necessary for 
syntactical connection as laid down in Sutra II- i-46. 


Adhikarana XV. — The quartering ■ 'pertains to the 
Agneya cake only. 


Sesah, the auxiliary. 3 Tu, really, vhotr: Gunasanayuktah, connected 
■ with the accessory detail, S.l.dh&raoah, common to all. Pratiyeta, 

■ be recognised. Mithah, mutually. TesS.m, of thoge, 
adh4t, absence of connection, ' , b ■ 












' * ‘ '1 'I v‘ . ! 11 











i PAD A, XV ADRIKAEATXA, SA 26, 27 


26. “The auxiliary connected with the accessory 
details should be taken as common to all specially as there 
is no special connection between the two.” — 26. 

COMMENTARY. 

We have spoken of the application of accessory details, in accordance 
with order in which they are mentioned ; and we now proceed to consider 
whether that application is possible to a part also, or only to the whole. 

In connection with the Darsa Pih'namS,sa, we find the sentence, — 
agneyam oTiaturdha karoti ; and with regard to this there arises the ques- 
• tion as to whether the ‘ ehaturclhakarana ’ (quartering) is to be done to the 
Agneya cake only, or to the Agnisomiya and Aindragna cakes also- 

The Purvapaksa embodied in the sutra is that the Quartering 
applies to all the three cakes as the Aindragna and the Agnisomeya 
cakes are also entitled to the name Agneya as the cake dedicated to Indra 
and Agni can certainly be spoken as dedicated to Agni. Nor is there any 
other text which makes the Quartering more nearly related to the Agneya 
cake than to the others. 

In connection with this sutra a curious fact reveals itself. From 
the closing lines of Bh^sya on this sutra it is clear that the Bhftsya reads 
the sutra as tejam samhandhat as what it says is as follows : — (Page 241 ). 

“ If thei’e were no relationship between the Agnisomiya and the 
Agneya cakes, then there would have been some justification for restrict- 
ing the quartering to the Agneya cake only as it is, however, there is a 
relationship between the two so that there should be no such restriction,” 
On the other hand we have the Tantramrtika quoting the Bhisya as 
‘ mithaslis&masambandhSt achodana; syat ’ it is not easy to reconcile this 
quotation with the above declaration of the Bhdsya. 

I i 

Vyavasth4, restriction, m V4, but. Arthasarnyogat, on account 

of connection witli the direct meaning. Lihgasya, of the indicative power- ^ 
Arthena, with such meaning. Sambandh4t, connection, Laksa]aarth4, 

serving the purposes of indication. 5 ^ 5 ^: Guigia^rutih, subsidiary text. 

27. ' ' “ There should be restriction as there is an actual 
relationship with the direct meaning of the word specially as 
the indicative power is connected with kuch meaning as for 


308 pOBVA-MlMA MSk-SOTBiS. HI ABEYAYA. 

the subsequent mention of the Agneya it is for the purpose 
of indicating the talk of the Agneya cake-.2i. 

COMMENTARY. 

The SiddMnta is 

ircl: tSTcrrihl :^etit; ; whener„ Ag..i is 

Tk n coai Inrty with any other deity the -dhei’ pratyaya become 

taweaible BO tLt the presence of the dhak pratyaya m the word Agneya 
TaCi. clear that the name can be applied only to that cate wb.ch .s 

A r fori fn Ao-niand Agni alone so that tins restriction is indicated by 

dedicated » word ‘ Aaneya ’ which makes known the par-' 

that indicative power o£ the word Agneya wmo ^ 

ticular deity. In support of the Purvapaksa they have cited the text Ag 

ryasyamastakam bibhaiya pra^ritayamabadhyati’ where even though 
wlat is mentioned is the igneya only yet ‘»e avadana m made out rf 

alt the cakes. The answer to this is that the meaning, o , , , , 

when the several cakes are cut the catting of the Agneya should be done 
at its head so that it only serves the purpose of indicating a P^t^ 
spot in the Agneya cake for a special purpose and has just no bear ig 

in the present question. 


* 







iiiiiilill 

liiliillS 




THIRD ADHYAYA. 

Seoond Pada. 

Adhikarana 1. — Mantras are employed according to 
their primary meaning (Bahirnydya). 

Artli4vidhanasamarfcli374t, becaase of tlie -power of denoting 
things. Mantresu, among mantras. Sesabhava, subsidiary 

character, wh Sj4t, should be. Tasm^t, there, Uti^atti sambandhah, 

connection with the primary. Arthena, with meaning. Nityasam- 

yogat, on account of eternal relation. 

" 1. “ In as much as subsidiary character of mantras de- 

pends upon their power of denoting things the particular 
mantra should be taken as related to its primary denotation 
as it is only with such denotation that they are eternally 
related.” — 1. 

COMMENTARY. 

VVe now proceed to deal with the application of Mantras in accord- 
ance with their own ‘Linga’. By ‘Linga’ is meant the capability of 
the Mantra to signify something ; and as a matter of fact, this capability 
is sometimes found to pertain to the direct primary, and sometimes to 
the indirect secondary meaning. And hence in the case of Mantras it 
is donbtful whether they are to be used in their primary sense or in the 
secondary one. 

The discussion in the Bhdsya is started with reference to a typical 
mantra ‘barhirdevasadanam dAmi’ the question is whether this mantra 
is to be used in the chopping of Kusla grass only which is directly 
denoted by the word ‘barhi’ or in that of any grass, which. could be only 

secondarily or indirectly indicated by the word. ^ 

' The Phrvapatsa view is that the use of a mantra always depends 
upon the expressive power of its words and the word ‘barhi’ is as expres- 
sive of the Kui^a as of any other grass so that there is nothing to justify 









pdBVA-MiMiMSA-SdTBAS. Itl ADHYAYA 


tlie chopping of Knf^a alone. The 
IS that, when we find, in the context of 
with the word ''Pusan , we do 
ntvas to another sacrifice, even 
in the Darsa PUrjiamdsa ; he- 
indirectly indicates ‘Agni’, which is a deity at 
to be shown to the direct 
then it would be necessary to remove 
are actually mentioned in 
the word ‘Agni’ would 
is to be performed 
■ould be duly followed, even without 
i.e., the Sauryacharn is a modification 
d the Mantra laid down for the latter 
when one comes to ofier the haurya Chaim, he 
is not Agni, but Surya, in this 
and this change would 
mi would 


the restriction of the mantra to 
advantage gained by this view 
the Darsa PArnamdsa certain Mantras 
not find it necessary to remove these Mi 
though there is no such 
cause the word 'PH^an’ 
that sacrifice, while if any preference were 
denotation of the word Rtsan 
the Mantras from the context in which they 
the Veda. In the same manner inasmuch as 
indicate the Silrya, the Injunction (that the ectype 
in the same way as the archetype) w 
changing the words of the Mantra 
or ectype of the Agneya Cham, an 
being ‘agnayetoa\ etc, 
employs the same Mantra, but as the deity 
case he changes ‘Agnayetva’ into suryayatvas, 
not be necessary according to the Purvapaksa as the word Ag- 
be significant of Surya as of Agni). 

In reply to the above Purvapaksa we have the following Siddhanta 
embodied in the siltra as follows : — 

Mantras become auxiliaries to sacrifices, only on account of their 
capability of expressing certain meanings ; and when they have this 
purpose served by their direct primary meanings, the acceptance of 
their secondary meaning would involve the necessit}’ of assuming another 







II PADA, II ADHIKABAm, 8A 2. 3. 


Samskarakatw4t, on account of its sanctificatory character. 
Achodite, to that which is not enjoyed. ^ Na sy^t, cannot apply. 

2. The Mantra being a sanctificatory factor cannot 
apply to that which is not enjoyed.- — 2. 

COMMENTARY. 

This siitra meets wliat the Purrapaksa has said with regard to the 
v?ord ‘Pirsan’. That the Mantras of the Daiia Purnamdsa do not apply 
to Pusan etc, which are not enjoined as its deities, is only reasonable ; 
because all Sanctifications appertain to that which has to be Sanctified ; and 
hence the indicative power of the Mantra, which, is more authoritative 
than the context, would make it applicable to Pdsana etc, and not to 
the Deities of the Darsa Pilrnamdsa. 


Adhikarana 11. — The 'AmdrT mantras apply to the 
gdrhpatya. {gdrhpatyahyaya) 

I \ 1 

Vachanat, because of the subsequent injunction. Ajath^rtham, 

not in its direct sense. ^ Aindri, the aindri mantra, Syat, should be 
taken. 

3. “ The Aindri mantra should not be employed in 

its direct literal sense because of the direct injunction,” — 3. 

COMMENTARY. 

We now proceed to deal with an exception to the general rule 
arrived at in the foregoing Adhikarana. 

The sentence cited in coimectiou with this Adhikarana is~‘nive~ 
ohanat sangamako vasundmiti aindryd garhpatyamupatisthalt,’ and though 
this Mantra is as applicable to the sacrificial fire (G^rhapata) asv to Indra, 
yet, the special mention of ‘aindrya' shows that it is to be taken in its 
direct sense applying to Indra. Some people, however, take the present 

Adhikarana as based upon the sentence ‘ Kadachanastariraisi Indra 

etc. i ;.■ . , 

In both these sentences, however, the question is the same, vis 

Is the mantra to be taken in its direct , literal meaning, and as such 
recited is descriptive of Indi’a or is it be to taken in its indirect 
meaning, and thereby applied to the sacrificial fire, on the strength of 
the subse<|uent direction ? ,, f 


li 




m 


' 312. pdRyA-MlMAMSl-SOTBAS. Ill ADHYAYA. 

! Oa tlie above question we liave tlie following Purvapaksa 

In accordance witli the conclusion arrived at in the foregoing 
I Adhikarava, the Mantra mast be taken as applying to the Deseriptton of 

Indra. Then, as for the accusative ending in ‘garhapatyan it cou d ^ e 

taken as indicating other agencies, such as the vocative or the Ablative 

etc, just as in the case of the sentence ‘Sahtdn Juhoti; the accusative 
^ in saUAn is taken as indicating the Instrumental similarly in the case 

in question, inasmuch as the ohjeetimty (expressed by the Accusative) 
is found to be incompatible, we cannot attach any direct, significance 

to it, and must take as indicating mere agency in general. C^sequently 

'■ in accordance with the sfitra Vl-i-1,. the sacrificial fire (Garbapatya) 

becomes subsidiary to the Descnpfion s^of India . ^ i t i 

In answer to the above we have the following Siddhaiita embodied 
in the sfitra ; — , ■ ,t. . 

On account of the clear injunction aindrya garhapatyam prawthate 

the mere indicative • power of the mantra can have no force against it 
so that when we have to consider which of the two the mantra or the 
injunction has to relinquish its direct meaning we cannot but decide 
' that it is the mantra that should do so. Thus the mantra in question 

has to be employed in connection witii the ‘garhapatya. 

Gun S-t, due to certain circumstances and qualities. but. ^Api, 

,i Abbidhfinam, indication, uira Syfit, should be. Sambandhasya, 

the relationship. Asfiastrahetuwat, not being dependent upon scrip- 

tural injunctions. 

4. The required indication would be based upon cer- 
tain common characteristics specially as the lelationship of 
their words and their meanings is not determined by scrip- 
tural injunctions. — 4. _ 

COMMENTARY. , 

' d [Qq behalf of the Pur vapaksa it may be urged that in the absehce 
of any scriptural texts there can be no justification for making the word 
Indra of the mantra apply to fire. But the answer to this would be that 
as a matter of fact in the case of no word is its denotation determined by 
; scriptural texts and as for the word Indra applying to fire this is quite 

: possible because of the following characters which are common to both. 

.1' , (2) Both are connected wdth the sacrifice 

.(2) The word Indra as derived from the lOOt Indi which signifies 
’ v ‘ ■? ' supreme lordship is as applicable to the fire as to the god Indra. 






illiliii# 







n PAt>A, 111 AmiKAUAi^A, SA. S, 6 . 


Adhikarana III. — The Mantras speaking of calling 
are to he employed in calling. 

I ^ I 

■ ■ ■ 

TatM, similarly, AhYS,nam, calling, srf? Api, also. ^ Chet, if 

this he urged. 

5. It may be said that the law of the preceding 
Adhikarana applies to the case of the Mantras that mention 
calling. — 5. 

COMMENTARY. 

We have dealt witli the general rule that mantras are to be taken 
in their primary sense, and also with an exception to this rule. We now 
proceed to consider which cases are subject to the general rule and which 
to the exception. 

There is a mantra — ‘ RavimHelii ebe.,' which speaks of the calling 
of the saeri fleer’s who prepares the offering material, and with regard 
to this mantra, we have the following question : Is it to be applied 
to that aalling, the mention of ‘ threshing ’ in tlie direction accompanying 
the mantra iiti triraoaglmanahvaynti) being explained as pointing out the 
time for the ‘calling’? Or, in the strength of the direction, the mantra 
is' to be applied to the ‘ threshing ’ which is the first to be mentioned in 
the direction, and not to the calling to which it literally pertains ? 

The Purvapaksa view embodied in the sfltra is as follows : — 

As the text directly mentions the ‘ threshing ’ and the word havdf- 
krita in the mantra is capable of being taken as applying, even though 
indirectly to the threshing which also is something that helps in the 
making of the ‘ havisa the present case is exactly analogous to the 
one dealt with in the preceding Adhikarana so that the mantra in question 
should be taken as applying to the threshing and not to the calling. 

^ I i i 

, w Na, not so. Kalvidhih, indication of time, Ohoditatwdt, 

because it is already known. 

6. “ It cannot be so ; tbe subsequent direction only 
points out tbe time which is already recognised by ex- 

i.|);erience.— 6. ^ .A', ■ 


I 



pdRtA-MlMAMSA-B^TUAS. Ill ADByAYA 


commentary. 

The subsequent direction on which the Purvapaksa lays great 
stress cannot be . taken as laying down the use of the mantra at the 
‘ threshing ’ as the actual threshing being already enjoined elsewhere all 

is to lay down the tlii'eefoldness of the 
’ ig out the time at which 
be recited, though this time does not stand in the need 
well-known from ordinary experience that one 
is to be called at the time that t^e 
to be prepared. It is in view of this fact that the 
vidhi ’ in Kalvidhi means only point- 


that the present direction does 
.repetition and it also serves the purpose of pointin, 
the mantra is to I - - - 
of being enjoined as it is 
who is to prepare the offering material 
material is going 
Vdrtika declares that by the word 
ing out and not injunction. 

The Subodhini in construing the sutra adds a second ‘ Na ’ and 
takes it to mean (1) “that the direction cannot be taken as enjoining 
the mantra in connection with the threshing ; (2) that it cannot be taken 
as enjoining the time.” But in the way that the Vflrtika has taken the 
sutra there appears to be no justification for interfering in the wor-ding 
of the sfitra. 

vs i 

fimram Gun^bh&vAt, on account of the absence of the character. 

COMMENTARY. ♦ 

It has been urged by the Pfirvapaksa that the word ‘ haviskrita ’ 
can be applied to the threshing but this is not possible as the character 
of making the offering matetdal and by its very nature it is incapable of 
being called or addressed which calling is directly mentioned in the 
mantra. 

The Vartika adds ‘ though you could in some way or other, assume 
the threshing to be the ‘ maker of the offering material ’ yet the subsequent 
word ‘alzrat/atf’ (calls) would be absolutely meaningless, in regard to the 
inanimate threshing. And further we find the vocative case ending (in 
Haviskrit) and then an order or request (to come) contained in the word 
‘ chi which is in the second person singular, all this would be absolutely 
meaningless if the Mantra were applied to the Threshing. On the other- 
hand, when the, manfm is applied to the Sacrificer’s wife, who is an 
animate’ and intelligent being, all that has been indicated becomes 
ipplicable and useful ; consequently the words of the Mantra cannot be 
aeeepted as applying it to the Threshing. 



II PADA, IV ADHIKABAm^ Stl 8, 9, 10. 


Lingfichcha, also on account of other indications. 

COMMBNTAKY. 

Close upon the sentence under consideration, we find the sentence 
^ vagvai haviskrt ^ where w^e find the ^ maker of the offering material ' 
eulogised distinctly as a feminine character ; and this would he applicable 
only to tlje sacrificer’s wife ; as otherwise (if it were taken as applying to 
the Threshing), inasmuch as the action (of Threshing) has not its gender 
restricted to the feminine being, as a matter of fact, of an imperceptible 
gender, the eulogy in question could be applied to it, only indirectly, by 
applying the word ‘ kriycl ’ (which is in the feminine gender). 

For these reasons, it must be admitted that the mantra is subsidiary 
to tlie ealling. The Subodhini reads the sutra as itascha tathcUingat), 

WiiuT: Vidhikopah, incompatibility of direct injunction. ^ Oha, also. 
Upadese, if the direction in question be taken as enjoining the use of a mantra. 

Sy^t, would be. 

9. “ There would be an iiicompatibilit}^ of injunctions 

if the direction in question were taken as laying down the 
use of the mantra in connection with ‘ Threshing.’ — 9. 

COMMENTARY. 

As a matter of fact we find that an entirely different mantra — 
‘ avaraksodibah. ’ etc., is distinctly laid down as to be used in connection 
with the ‘ Tfaresbing ’ so that if the direction in question he taken as 
laying down another mantra there would be a conflict of injunctions. 


Adhikarana IV. — The mantras speaking of walking round 
the fire are to he employed in connection with the 
same direction. 

Mot 

w Tatha, similarly. Utthana visarjane, with rising and giving 


Similarly with rising and giving vent.”~10. 

COMMENTARY. 

don with the Jyoti^pma, we find the sentences, utti^an 
nin^ vikara, and vratam hftmp iti vdcham visrpti, and. in 





FI^BVA-M1mAMSA-SI)TRA 8. Ill adhyaya 


regard to these, there arises a question as to whether the two mantras 
agnidagnin etc., and ‘ vratan Krnuta,' are enjoined as applying to the 
‘ rising ’ and the ‘ giving vent to speech or these two latter are mentioned 
simply with the "purpose of pointing out the lime of the recitation of the 
two mantras. 

The Pui’vapaksa view is that the mantras to be employed in the 
act of ‘ rising ’ and in the act of ‘ giving vent to speech ’ respectively. 
But the SiddhSnta as embodied in the sutra is that the ‘ rising ’ and 
‘ giving vent to speech ’ only indicate the time just as in the preceding 
Adliikarana. 


Adhikarana V. — The Suktavali is employed i 
offering of the grass bundle. 

Stiktav&ke, in the Suktayak, ^ Gha, also. Kdlavid: 

o£ time, (Par&rthatwat) because it serves another purpose, 

4. The Suktavaka must be taken as la; 
the time as they serve different purposes— 4. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Darsa-^Purnam^sa we find 
suhtHvahena prastaram prastarati; and there nrises the qn 
whether this sentence lays down tlie SCiktavdka as subsi{ 
Offering of the grass hu7idle, or it only indicates the ri?? 2 c. 


11 PAD A, V ADEIKAEAl^A, SA. 12, IS. 


317 


bundle), as the name ‘ yajya ’ (as applied to the Suktavaka) 
coiild not be meaningdess. — 12. 

COMMENTARY 

lathe sentence ' SAktdiAkena prastaram prastarati' we find that 
the SAktaodka is distinctly mentioned as connected with the action (of 
Praharana, offering) ; and the Instrumentality thus distinctly mentioned 
cannot be set aside : specially because of the great authority attaching 
to the signification of the case-ending (in sAktdvakena). Thus then the 
word ‘ svLkbdodka ' would in its direct meaning, be connected with the 
Action, otherwise what would be connected with the action would be the 
time indirectly indicated by the Sfihtdodka. And it is only the Suktavdka 
that is taken as Subsidiary to the Action ; and being thereby similar in 
character to the otlier subsidiaries of sacrifices, it becomes capable of 
having the name ‘yrtjya.’ applied to it;— as is done in the declaration 
sAktdvakend ydjydsahdaly 

^ Sa, the Shktav&ka. Devat^rthah, serving the purpose of indicating 

the Deity, Tatsarnyogat, only on account of its connection with it. 

13. “ The Suktavaka serves tbe purpose of indicating 

the deity only on account if its connection (with the offering 
to the deities therein indicated)— 13. 

COMMENTARY. 

It has been urged in the Purvapaksa that as the suktavaka serves 
the purpose of indicating the deity it cannot be connected with the offer- 
ing. But in answer to this it is pointed out as follows 

Tliough it is quite true that the words of the Suktavdka itself point 
to the fact of its serving the purpose indicating the Deity, yet this indica- 
tive capability does not disappear from it, when it is employed in connec- 
tion with the offering of the grass bundle, because in this latter it is not 
employed in any other way (then the one justified by the indication of 
the words). The fact is that the capablity of the Suktdvdka to indicate 
the deity stands in need of a reconciliation with the Direct Declaration 
‘siiktavakena prastaram prastarati.’ and this latter Declaration also, finding 
the sfiktavdha itself making no mention of the said offering and finding , ' 
itself iacapable in the absence of bach indicativeness (of the offering), - 
of applying it to the said offering, and yet not taking upon itself the 
responsibility of creating a fresh indicative potency , keeps looking out 







^*te,«l!y 




Pl)BVA-MtMAM8A-S0TBA8. Ill ADEYAYA 


for some such, way iu which the siiktavaka could be employed in the 
work mentioned by it, and yet not stepping beyond what is signified 
by the words of the mantra itself. Under tlie circumstance what can be 
more natural than that the saktSvaka mantra should be connected with 
that same action of offering along with which it is mentioned and as the 
offering is to those same deities that are indicated in the Suktavaka the 
incongruity urged by the Purvapaksa entirely ceases. 

sif^: Pratipattih, a purificatory offering of disposal, ifa Itichet, if it be 
urged. Svistakrit, like the svistakrit offering, Ublivayasans 

fc4rah two fold character. 

14. “ If it be urged that the throwing of the grass 

bundle into the fire is only an offering of disposal, our 
answer is that like the swistakrita offering the action 
would have a two-fold character — 14. 

COMMENTARY. 

An objection is raised. The bundle of grass is one on which the 
ladle has been kept during the sacrifice so that when it is laid down 
that it should be thrown into the fire it is only by way of disposing of 
the thing for which there is no farther use. Thus being of the nature 
of disnosal offering the action cannot stand in need of a mantra ; hence 



tl pAdA, VI AbrilKAEANA, Sit. 15, 16 


Adhikarana VI. — The Suktdvdkas are to he employed 
in accordance with their meaning. 

Kritsnopadesat, on account of being enjoined as a complete 
whole. iibliayatra, at both, Sarvavaclianam, the recitation of the whole. 

15. Because it is enjoined as one complete wliole 
the wliole of it should be recited on both occasions. — 15. 

COMMENTARY. 

Reverting to the original subjects of the Darsa Purnaindsa, we pro- 
ceed to consider the question as to whether the whole of tlie Silktai^dha 
is to be recited at the Darsa as well as the Piirnam&sa sacrifices, or 
portions of it are to be extracted in the case of each of these in consideration 
of the Deities (connected with the sacrifices and spoken of by the Mantras.) 

And on this question we have the following : — 

Pitrmpaltsa, — The whole of it is to be recited at each of the two 
sacrifices. Because if the Mantras^ as it appears in the text, that is called 
the ; and if extracts were made from it, it -would cease to be 

Siiktamka ; and hence in this latter case, the offering of the grass-hiiridle 
would be made with a mantra that is not Siiktdvdka and that would be 
an infringement of the Injunction Hiiktdvakena Prastaram Prastarati^ 

YathS,rtham, in accordance with the meaning, m Va but. 
Sesabhutasamsk^r^t, because purificatory of auxiliaries. 

16. But the mantras are to be used in accordance with 
their meaning because they are meant to be purificatory 
of auxiliaries. — 16. 

COMMENTARY. 

As a matter of fact the use of mantras depends upon what their 
words signify so that from among the Shktstvaka Mantras those whose 
words are indicative of the deities of the Dar^a ; sacrifice should be used 
at that sacrifice while those others should be used at the Pflrnamisa 
whose words, indicate the deities of that sacrifice and reason for this 
lies in the fact that the only useful purpose served by the Mantra consists 
in sanctifying certain sacrificial auxiliaries so that at. ,any particular 
sacrifice only that much of the Mantra has to be used, whose words have 
a sanctificatory bearing on the auxiliaries efHhat sacrifice (vide III-ii-2]. 
-The propriety of the use of only extracts from niantras .ia .further explained 
to 29 and 12-^29). ■ : 





eetion :—But on acconnt of the direct mjunc- 
5 and not mere extracts should be used.- 

COMMBNTARY. 

n is raised. The text distinctly says that the offering 
th the Sm&v&ka and as the name SMtamha applies 
y of Mantras and not to mere extracts from them any 
2ts would be contrary to the injunction. 

akari,&vhhiagat,as there would be not disjoining from^tbe 
oth,^#Prati,to. Kritsan^abdah, the word who . 

, word “ whole” could apply to the two parts as 

ppear in the same context. 18 . 

COMMENTARY. 

f the saktavaka is used at the Dar^a Sacrifice and another 

amisa sacrifice and as the Dar^a and Purnamasa togethei 

■ we can certainly say that the whole of the Suktavaka 
even though the two parts of it have been used at two 
,-et it cannot be denied that the whole of it has been used 
aposite sacrifice named the Dai-s^a Pfirnlmasa. 
yahas taken exception to the above exposition of the 
^ objections are thus explained m the Vartika The 
3S are laid down with reference to a certain result, and 
"nee to the method ; consetiuently it is only with reprd 
and not with regard to the met/md, -that they couU be 
■en in combination (with one another). Because it is the 
laid down with reference to the Primary sacrifices; as 
were not so laid down.it could not perforin an auxiliary 
ces, and then if the method be taken as enjoined, then 
would be wholly impossible for this method and the 
,es to be enjoined with reference to each other,— as that 
hem wholly unconnected, the method could not but 
lioined with reference to the Primary sacrifice. And 
SB Primary Sacrifices or Uddeehyas, i.e., those with reference 
ling is enjoined) no significance can be attached to their 
ich is denoted by the Dmndva compound (Dar^a-Pfii^a- 
3 onsequently, the sentence laying down the method being 



II PADA, VI ADRlKABAt^A, SA. IS. 


taken as complete with each one of those sacrifices, each of tlie Primary- 
sacrifices must be accepted to be connected with the whole of the method 
and the performance also coming to be done accordingly, inasmuch as 
each of the six Primary Sacrifices constituting the Darsa and the PaJ?'- 
namdm, performed at different points of time, would be complete in 
itself, the Recitation of the Sdktdmka would be done but once, and 
would apply to all the rest. Thus, then, though the Siihtdvdka may not 
be repeated with each of the six Primary Sacrifices — the Agneya and 
the rest like the Prayaja, yet the whole of it will have to be repeated once 
on the occasion of the Darsa, as well as once of that of the Purnamdsa 
As otherwise, the Prayaja etc. also would have to be performed in parts ; 
for which there would be no authority at all. Consequent, on account 
of the superior authority of direct Declaration {Sdktdvdkena, eta.) We 
should set aside the Indications of the Mantra words ; and take the 
Sithtdvaka (as applied to the grass-hundle offering) either in an indirect 
secondary sense, or as leading to certain imperceptible results, or as 
indicating, for the offering, other Deities (than those related to the DarnSa- 
Pfirnamisa.) 

In view of the above considerations the BShsya puts forward the 
SiddhS,nta as follows ; — 

When extracts are made of the SAktAvdka in accordance with the 
significations of its various parts, each of these extracts becomes a 
SAktavdka because there are many Sdktav&kas, specially as we find that 
the various mantras Agniridam eto., (constituting the SAktdvdka, which are 
capable of indicating several Deities connected with different sacrifices, 
serving distinct purposes independently of one another, do not form a 
single sentence by being syntactically connected. Hence it must be 
admitted that there are many Sdktdvdkas (contained in the Sdktdvdka) each 
of which is supplied with elliptical portions from that which precedes as 
also from that which follows it. For instance~(l ) there is one Sdktdndka 
beginning with the mantra Idamdydodprthioi eto., and ending with 
agniridam eto, '2) while there is another beginning with ‘ Idamdydvd- 
'prthivi, eto., and ending with Somidam, etc. 

Thus then, we find that among these SUktdvdkas, which differ with 
each different deity, and which are amenable to the same procedure of 
recitation, — there are some that are recited as common to many. And 
hence whichever of these may be recited at the offering of the grass-bundle, 
the offering will have been done with the S4ktdvaha (as declared in 
the injunction, SUktdvdkena Prastdram Prastarati.) 




PiyRVA-MlMAUSl-8i:jTBAB. Ill ADHYlYA 


The Vartika however is not satisfied with this exposition of the 
Siddhanta. It says: — It must be admitted that though evei’j one of the 
sentences is complete within itself, as regards its meaning, — yet, inasmuch 
as they are all enjoined with reference to the Offering (of the grass- 
bundle), all of them combined should be taken as forming a single 
sentence. 

If each of them were a distinct sencence by itself then we would 
have the following anomalies • (1) each of them would have to be recited 
separately, because at the time of the performance the Deity is the princi- 
pal factor; just as in the case of the mantras of the Upasad, Dahsina etc., 
and (2) inasmuch the singular number (in S^htarnTtem) would be sig- 
nificant with reference to the offering of the grass-bundle, its requirements 
would be fulfilled by the recitation of any one of the sentences. 

Thus, then, we conclude that in the Darn^a, as well as in the 
P'&rnamdsa, sacrifices, the s'uktdvaka to be recited is only that much 
which contains the words pointing out the Deities of each sacrifice, — 
such recitation being quite in keeping with law and reason. 


Adhikarana VII. — The “ Kamyaydjydniwakyd mantras 
belong to the Kdmya saerifices only. 

Lingakramasain^khy^u^t, on account of the cumulative force 
of Indicative power, order of sequence and Name. Kamyayuktam, in 

connection with the Mmya sacrifices only, Raniamn4nani, the recit- 

ing. 

19. “On account of the cnmnlative force of Indicative 
power, Order of sequence and Name, the reciting should be 
done in connection with the Kamya sacrifices only.” — 19. 

. COMMENTARY. 

We find the Kdmya sacrifices (ie., those performed with a view 
to certain desirable results)— Amc?rdgr?za and the rest — laid down in a 





tl PAD A, Vlll AmiKARAl:^A, SH. 19, 20. 


the order in which they are mentioned, 
to be connected with those Deities, or tl 
aforesaid Kdmya saciifices, in 
mentioned. 

Pdrmpohsa . — On the above 
couplets, through their Indicativ 


question the Purvapahsa is that— “ The 
e power, are to be employed in all the 
sacrifices that have those Deities.” 

The Siddhanta as embodied in the sutra is that the use of the 
mantra is regulated not by its Indicative power alone but by Indicative 
power,^ Order of sequence and name and there is no doubt that on the 
strengfh of all these three the mantras in question are to be employed only 
in the Kamya sacrifices and that too in the same order in which these 
latter are mentioned. 


Adhikarana VJII. — The upasthana of the Agntdhra priest 
should he done loith those mantras that are found in the 

same context. 

Adhifc4re, in connection with a certain sacrifice, 'jt Cha also. 

Mantravidhih, injunction of mantra to be employed, I'adfi,- 

ksesu, to those not appearing in the same contest ftgrsira 8istew4t, Ibecause 
both are enjoined. 

20. “ In regard to any sacrifice wlien a certain mantra 

is enjoined it applies also to the mantra appearing in the same 
context as this also is as mnch enjoined as the mantra 
appearing in the same context. — 20. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Jyotistoma we find the direction that the 
Agnidhra should be worshipped with the Igneya mantra. The ques- 



pdBVA-MtMAMSA-SdTBAS. HI ADBYAYA 


fi^Ps^ Tad3,khyoT8., those that are mentioned as belonging to the sacrifice 
named. !iOTlvri%«n Prakaraijopapattibhyfiin, on account of context and reasons. 

21. “ Only those mantras should be used that are 

spoken of as belonging to the sacrifice under treatment, 
on account of context and reasons.” 21. 

COMMENTARY. 

The Siddhanta embodied in this sutra is that only Igneya mantras 
are to be used that are mentioned along with the Jyotistoma. Firstly, 
because on the ground of context the connection between the two is only 
natural ; secondly, because there are other reasons also in support of 
this view. One of which is that when the upasthfina is mentioned in the 
section of Jyotistoma it is clearly meant that it helps in the Apurva 
following from the Jyotistoma, which shows that the mantras chosen 





11 PiDA, IX ADEIKABAVA, Stl S. 


COMMENTARY.. 

Anotlier reason in support of the siddhanta is that the injunction 
of the Agneya mantra as a means to the upastii^na would he wholly useless 
as it \TOuld have no connection with any desirable result, because as for 
the iipasthana itself it is not described as leading to any result and as for 
the result of the Jyotistoma tliere can be no connection with this as 
according to the Purvapaksa view of the present case the employment 
of details is not to be governed by context. 

I I 

Sarves§;m, of all. Cha also, Upadistatwat, enjoining. 

20. “ And also because all mantrs are already 

enjoined. — 20. 

COMMENTARY. 

It might be urged on behalf of the Purvapaksa that if only the 
Agneya mantra of the Jyotistoma context were to be used, then there 
would be no use for the other Agneya mantras. But the answer to this 
is that tlie other Agneya mantras are as a matter of fact already enjoined 
in relation to other fruitful actions. 


Adllikarana IX. — The Bhaksdnuvak mantras are to he used 
in connection with the holding etc., in accordance with what 
is indicated by their words. 

us i 

LifigasainS,khy4u&bhyS,m, on account of indication and name. 

Bfa.aksS.rthat&, employed in the eating, Anuv4kasya, of the 

anuv^ka. , 

24. On account of its indicative power and nanie the 
Anuvaka must be employed in the eating. — 24. 

COMMENTARY. 

We find the Bhaksa mantra laid down as follows : ‘ Bhakse hi mA 

vi^a, ; &hi vaso purovaso hahubhydm saghydsam, nrchaksantvd diva 

avakhyi^am, hinva mi. md mi mdvititrqa'h mandi'dhhihhutiTj, hituh 

......trpyatu......gdyatrachehhandasah I ndrapitasya hhakshaydmi.’ With 

regard to the whole of this Anuvfika there arises the question as' to whether 
the whole of it used in connection with the eating or the several parts of it 
are to be u^d in connection with the sabsidi^ ^tiona of holding, 



,:r 


S26 pdEVA-MiMAMSA-SdTBAS. HI ADEYAYA. 


seeing and proper digesting as may be fonnd to be indicated by tbe 
words of the several sentences composing the Aniivaka. 

On the above question we have the following Purvapatsa 
embodied in sutra 24 as follows: — 

Inasmuch as it is the Eating alone that is enjoined, — as the word 
^ hJtaksay ami ^ in the Anuvdka itseli distinctly indicates that Eating^ — as 
the whole of the Anuvdha^ being held between the two words bhakse 
and ‘ bhaksaydmi ^ cannot possibly pertain to anything else, — and, 
lastly, as, in accordance with the siltra IX-i-37, the Holding etc., also 
being mere concomitants of the principal action of Eating, the whole 
Anuvaka is capable of being taken as a single sentence syntactically 
connected, — the Anuv4ka must be taken as to be used, in its complete 
form, in connection with the Eating specially as the entire anuvaka is 
called the Bhahanuvaka. 

TO Tasya, of it. Bilpopadesabhyllm, on account of the peculiar 

form and injunction. Apakarsa, disjunction. ^!TO Arthasya, of the actions. 

^T%c2rrH choditatvdt, on account of being laid down. 

25. “ The mantra is to be dissociated (from the eating) 

because of the peculiar form of the mantras and also be- 
cause of the direction, specially as the subsidiary actions 
(of holding etc.) is also enjoined.” — 25. 

OOMMBi^^TARy. 

The Siddh^nta embodied in the sutra is as follows: — 

As a matter of fact it is found that certain words of the mantras 
are indicative of the subsidiary action of holding etc. Secondly, these 
subsidiary actions are also enjoined and as such stand in need of 
being connected with some mantra. From these two facts it is much 
more reasonable to associate the mantras with the actions indicated by 


Adhiharana X.. — From the word ^mandra 
‘ hhaksaydmil it is one mantra. 

piTftwRrg; 

Guu4vidhanS.t, on account of mentioning a sr 
Ifandradih, the sentence beginning with mandra. 


. ... 



11 PADA, XI ADRIKABAl^A, S^i. 28. 


one mantra, slionld be. ?i%: Tayot, of the two. Ekg,rthasarnyog^t, 

on account of expressing a single fact. 

26. “ The portion beginning with ‘mandra’ is to be 

taken as a single mantra, because it speaks of one subsidiary 
detail; specially as the two sentences therein contained 
jointly express a single fact — 26. 

COMMENTARY. 

In the aforesaid ' Bliahmmivaka we find the sentence mandrabhi- 

ihiltih hliahsayami and in connection with this, there arise the ques- 

whether the sentence, from the beginning down to ‘trpyatu' forms 
one mantra, and that beginning with ‘vammat’ down to the end forms 
anothei’, or the two together form a single mantra. 

On this we have the following Piirvapahsa . 

Inasmuch as, like Holding etc., in the previous Adhikarava, the 
single fact of saffs/action is denoted by the sentence ending with ‘trpyatu’ 
this must be taken as a distinct mantra, 

SIDDHANTA. 

To this we make the following reply ; That Action alone can form 
the object of Indication by mantras, which requires a distinct effort for 
its accomplishment,— and not these that merely follow on the wake of 
other actions. That is to say, in the case of the Holding etc. we find that 
unless one performs these other actions, he cannot accomplish the 
Eating ; and hence it was only right for the performer, as well as for the 
scripture, to make a distinct effort (towards its performance and Indica- 
tion respectively}. In the case in question, however, we find that for 
the satisfaction of Hunger) there is no other effort possible than what is 
involved in Eating ; and as such no useful purpose could he served by 
its indication (by the mantra). Consequently, we can explain the 
Imperative (in trpyatu,'' either as denoting a request-, or as having the 
force of the Present ; and thereby the two sentences would be connected 
syntactically, — indicating ‘jointly’ the single act oi Eating as qualified 
by satisfaction, — thus forming a single montm. 


Adhiharana XI. — The mantras beginning with ifie word 
Indra pitasya are employed by modifieation to all Eating. 

Ifinga^ as the mantra - distinctly indicates - a 

ucular thing- vm’if^ 'Sam^navidhteefu, of thoss that 

‘■''r'-', ■ , h -A h/'T'hM- ' '■ h, . . 



PUBVA-MImAUSA-SOTB AS. Ill adhyAya. , 

by the same injunction, Anaindr^ijam, those not dedicated 

Amantra twaixi, without any mantra. 

“ Inasmuch, as the mantra indicates the particular 
those that are all enjoined by 
bating ’ of the soma other than 
done without any 


‘ Eating ’ out of a nu: 
the same Injunction,' 
that dedicated to Tndra is to be 
mantra” — 24. 

OOMMENTAKY, 

[In connection with the Jyotistoma, there 
dedicated to a number of Deities, Indra and t 
these offerings are to he eaten, and the mantra 
tion with this eating is the Bhakmnuvdha un( 
there now arises the question as to whether the 
with the eating of every one of the remnants, 
has been dedicated to I 
without any mantras.] 

Inasmuch as the wor 
with the soma (that is offered to Indra), 

mantra in( — 

can be no modifications in mantras connech 


•d Indrapitasya (in the mantra) is co-extemive 
' " as there are no words in the 

dicative of those not dedicated to Indra, and lastly, as there 

;ed with the Primary Actions, 

(and every one of the eatings is a distinct Primary by itself), it would 
appear that the eating of the soma dedicated to other Deities is to be done 
without mantras. 

As against the above we have the following Purvapaksa. 

ft I \ 

YathadevatamvA, or in accordance with the deity, Tat- 

prakrititvam, having that for its archetype, if Hi, because, Darsayati, is 

shown. 

28. “ The mantra will have to be applied in accordance 

with the Deity (to whom the offering has been made) ; 
because the offerings to the other Deity are shown to have 
their archetype in the offering made to Indra ” — 28. 

COMMBiVTARY- 

In connection wjth the eating of the soma dedicated to other 
Deities than Indra, the mantra is to be repeated with the necessaiy modi- 
fications ; because the offerings to the other Deities are mere ectypes 
qf the offerings to Indra, Though all the offerings are similar actions, 



II PADA, XII ADEJKABAXA, SA. 29. 


yet inasmuch as they are distinct actions, some wonld be mei-e offshoots 
of tiie other. And here we find that the offering of the Dhrumsoma to 
Indra forms the archetype of the other offerings, as is clearly shown by 
the mantra for the holding of the soma. 

It is interesting to note that the statement of Sicldhdnta of this 
Adhikarana is postponed to the end of the Pada where sfitra 43 lays down 
the final Siddhanta derived from the discussions embodied in sutras 
27 to 42. 


Adhikarana Xll. Indra also should he mentioned in 
connection with the Punarvinita soma. 

PunarambhinitesTi, in connection with Punarambhinita offerings. 

Sarvesam, of all. TJpalakaanat^, mention. Dvisesatwat, 

because it contains the reniB ants of both. 

29. “In connection with the Punarahhynita, there 
should he a mention of all Deities, because it contains the 
remnants of both. — 29. 

COMMENTARY. 

While the foregoing Adhikarana still rests in the PArvapaksa, and 
the Siddhanta is not finally stated and established, till the end of the 
Pada, we take for granted, for the time being, the propriety of having 
modifications, and then proceed to consider under what circumstances the 
modifications, if allowable, would be possible. 

When the soma contained in certain vessels has been offered and 
poured out, even while there may be some remnants left in them, more 



PI^BVA-MtMAMSA^SdTBAS. Ill ADHYAYA 


with the offerings to many Deities that 
■■ 1 with the Second Homa, — implied 
connected with those offerings such, for instance 

havmatie etc, etc ; — and 
" ’ 5 have been made, the vessels are brought 

of the post-sacrificial eatinff, then they are found 
—the former, the remnants of the first offering 
that of the offering to And then, 

for the mention of the Deities (in course of the 
with the eating of these remnants) 
should be a mention of Indra, 
its Deity has been passed 
ntm being read Indra mitra- 
to be mentioned 
Mitravaruna pitasya, etc.). 


the Directions, in connection 
are made by the priests in connection 

in the Yajyd. mantra c — 

as maitravaruno mitravanmau mitram vayam 
when, after all these offerings 
out for the purpose < 
to contain two remnants, 
to Indra, and the latter 
when the time comes 
mantras to be recited in connection 
there arises a doubt as to whether t 
whose connection with the vesse, 
ever, as also of Maitravaruna, the 
varuna pitasya, etc., — or that the latter ones only aie 
(the mantra, in this case, being read as 

This question turns upon another question, as to whether the 
advent of the other Deity wholly sets aside the connection with the 
previous Deity, or not. If it does set it aside, then Maitravaruna, etc; 
alone should be mentioned ; while if it does not set it aside, then there 
should be a mention of Indra also. 

On this question we begin with the statement of the Siddh^inta 
(in the present sMra 29), the sense of which is that all the Deities should 
K. T„Ant;oTif.d. because of the vessel containing the remnants of both 


‘ - Vs. nn 





11 pIdA, XIl ADElKABA^lA, Six. 31 


To tbis pfirvapaksa \sre make the following reply : 

wslfWTfr I \ 

?si3q^<!iT^r Agralia^jadva, on account of tlieir being no actual taking up. 
Anap^yah, there can be no setting aside. ^ Sy4t, would be. 

31. “ Inasmuch as there is no actual taking up (of the 

remnant of the former offering, by the latter Deity) there 
could not be a setting aside (of the previous Deity.)”' — 31. 


COMMENTARY. 


That is to say, tbe connection of tbe Deity is established by means 
of scriptures alone and at the time that the substance is held in the hand 
for being offered, it begins to belong to the Deity, only in accordance 
with the scriptural Injunction ; and that with which it begins is that 
with which it ends. lathe case in question, we find that the directions 
with I'egard to the “ Pmiarabhyannita ” distinctly show that the sub- 
stance to be offered to the other Deities is to be hdd in the vessels which 
contain some remnants of the soma previously offered to Indra ; and the 
presence of this remnant is meant only as a characteristic of the vessels 
(in which the subsequent offering is to be held). Thus then, inasmuch 
as, at the time of the holding ol the latter off ering, the remnant of the 
previous offering is not recognised as belonging to the latter Deities, — at 
the time of the actual offering also the offering being only of that sub- 
stance which has been held (or taken up) for offering, even though the 
Remnant of the previous offering lies in close proximity to that substance ; 
yet, inasmuch as it is not included in the words conveying the offering, 
it does not belong to the latter Deity. Nor, at the time, are there any 
other words conveying the gift of that remnant (to that Deity), for the 
simple reason that there is no Injunction to that effect. Nor, too, is 
that remnant even distinctly touched by words conveying other gift 
to that Deity ; — because the gifts are conveyed by means of particular 
words, at the time that the various offerings are quite separate 
from one another. And, as a matter of fact, no further words are 
used at the actual offering ; for the simple reason that no such 
words are necessary in connection with the gift that has already 
been conveyed by means of words. And then again, a single substance 
cannot be offered more than once. Hence it is that there is no use 
of words conveying the gift, at the time that the actual offering is 



pdEVA^MluAMBA^SdTBAS, HI ADEYAYA 


And hence, at the time .ol the Bating^ as there will be left in the 
vessel a portion of this remnant also, whose connection with the previous 
deity has not been set aside, — it would be absolutely necessary to make a 
mention of that previous duty bn the Mantra that is recited). 


Adhikarana XIIL — In the eating of the Pdtmvata Indra 
and other Deities should not be mentioned, 

P^tnivate, in the case of the Patnivata. ^ Tu, really. Pfirvavat, 

as before. 

32. “ In tlie case of the Patnivata it sPould certainly 

be as in the preceding case.” — 32. 

COMMENTARY 

We proceed to consider exceptions to the general rule arrived at 
in the foregoing Adhikarai],a , 

As a matter of fact, we find that the remnants of the offerings to 
the pair of Deities are thrown into the and from that they 

are again transferred to the Agrayanasthdli, and subsequent to this, we 
liave the declaration of the holding of the Patnivata in the sentence 
‘ Pdtnivatamugvaydpt grhyiati. 

And when the eating of remnant of this Patnivata offering comes 
to be done, there arises the question as to whether the deities other than 
Patnivata should be mentioned in the mantra recited, or not. And on 
this we have the 

PURVAPAKSA. 

That they should be mentioned — the mantra being read as Indra- 
vayupatniva tp itasya etc . 

5rf50TT§:r i i 

Qraha^at, on account of being taken up. gr Va, but. Apanitam, 

removed, wu Syat, would be. 

33. “ Inasmuch as the remnants is taken up (by the 

subsequent deity) the connection of the previous deity should 
be set aside.”— 33. 

COMMENTARY. 

The present case is by no means similar to that dealt with in the 
previous Adhikarana. Because at the time of the holding of the offering 
to Patnivat, the proximity of the other Deity is actually set aside ; and the 
affering to Patnivat is laid down as to be conveyed together with the 



offering). 


11 PkDA, XIV ADHIXARA^U, 8± 34, 35. 


Adhikarana XIV. — At the Eating of the remnant of the 
Patnivat offering there should be no mention of Trastri. 

1^8 1 

c^lxx.' Tvastaram, the deity tvastpi. 5 Tu, really, Upalaksayeta, 

should mention, Panat, on account of the drinking. 

34. Tvastri should be mentioned because of the 
drinking.’’ — 34. 

COMMENTARY. 

[In connection with the Patnivata offering, we have the Mantra, 
^ Agnai patnivan, Sajtirdedena Tvantra Sornam Piva, and with regard 
to this, there arises the question as to whether Tocisti should be 
mentioned at the eating or not.] 

On this question we have the following Purvapaksa. 

Inasmuch as in connection with the Patnivata offering, Tvastr 
is spoken of as ‘ Drinking the Soma' in the company of Patnivata, he 
also must be regarded as the Deity of that offering, as indicated by the 


words of the Mantra, 

AtulyatvSit, on account of inequality, g Tu, really. Naivain, 
not so. Sy^t, would be. 

35. Sucli should not be the case because of inequa- 
lity.— 35. 

COMMENTARY. 

Tvastr should not be mentioned ; because between the Mantra and 
the Direct Injunction, there is a vast difference of authoritative strength 
(this is one ‘ inequality’) ; and then again there is a difference in the 
characters of Tvastri and Patnivat as nominatives to the action of Drink- 
ing ; as vrh&t the Mantra denotes is the mere companionship (of Tvastr) 
(this is another ‘ inequality’). 

Thus it must be admitted that the Mantra does not indicate the fact 
of Tvastri being the Deity (of the Patnioat offering) ; and as such there 
should' be no mention of him (at the eating of the remnant of that 



pdBVA-MiMlMSk-SdTEA^. HI ADEYAtA 


Adhikarana XV.— At the eating oj the remnant oj me 

Patnivat offering there should be no mention of the 
Thirty and three deities. 

I I 

^’sig Trinifet, the thirty. Cha, also. TOsif^ Pai^rthatwit, as it serves another 
purpose. 

36. “ So also tke thirty (and three), as the Mantra 

serves another purpose.” — 36. 

COMMENTARY. 

This Adhikarana simply deals with the applicability of the 
conclusion of the foregoing Adhikarana to another case. 

In connection with the same Patnivat, we find another Mantra 
“ Aibhih agne sarathani yahyarvdk mlndratham vd vibhavo hyasvdTj. pdtni- 
vatastrimhatastrhnsaha devdnauwadhamdvaha mddayasvct, ; and therea rises 
the question as to whether at the eating of the Remnant of the Patnivatd 
offering, there should be a mention of the ‘ Thirty and Three’ Deities 
spoken of in this mantra or not. 

And on this question we have the following Purvapaksa. 

“ Inasmuch as there are several points in which the present case 
differs from that dealt with the foregoing Adhikarana, the conclusion 
thereof is, for this reason, not applicable to the present case. These 
points of difference are the following : — 

(1) The same mantra that indicates Agni to be the Deity, also 
indicates the fact of Agni being the Distributer of the Drink to the 
Thirty and Three Gods, who are spoken of as the partakers of that 
Drink • and hence the fact of these latter also being the principal Deities 
is shown by the mantra itself, which prevents Agni in quite a secondary 
position (of that of Distributer or Attendant at meals). 

(2) In the case of the mantra treated of in the previous Adhikarana, 
we found that it denoted mere comyanionshvp, and hence Sva^r not 
being found to be mentioned on terms of equality, was rejected from the 
deific position. The case is reversed in the mantra now under considera- 
tion, as in this it is Agni that is spoken of as subordinate ; and hence the 
former law cannot apply to the present case. 

f'i ;r (3) All that the Injunction contained in the word with the nominal 
affix (Patnfpan) denotes is that the deific character in connection with the 


335 



11 F1J)A: XVI ADEIKABAVA, 8± 37, 


Action in question consists in the fact of a certain Deity being Patnivan^ 
(having a wife); and this qualification is found to be as concomitant with 
Agni in the mantra Agndi Patrivan as with the thirty and three gods, 
who are also spoken of in the same mantra as having wives, in the 
sentence PatniDatastrimsatastrimscha devdm. 

In answer to the above we have the following Siddh§.nta embodied 
in the sutra. 

There slioiild be no mention of Thirty and Three gods at the 
eating ol the Patnivat Eemnant. Because in all cases the functioning 
of the mantra is controlled by wdiat is directly enjoined ; consequently, 
as in the case of Trastr so in the present case also, the mention of the 
Thirty and Tliree gods (in the must be taken as contributing 

to the praise of Agni. That is to say, inasmuch as the sole business of the 
mantra lies in recalling to mind what has been previously enjoined (in 
the Injunction {patnivalani grhuati,) it could not, in any case, serve the 
purpose of indicating either the fact of Agni being the Dhtributor^ or 
of tlie Thirty and Three gods being the partakers, of the Drink, both of 
these facts not having been previously enjoined. 


Adhikarana XVI. — At the ‘ eating^ there should he no 
mention of the Anuvasatkdr deity. 

Vasatakarascha, the VasatMra also. Kartpvat, like the 

37. “The Vasatkara also, like the Agent, (should 
not be mentioned”). — 37. 

COMMENTARY. 

[There is an Anuvai^atkara mentioned in the sentence ‘ Somasyagre 
vihityaniivamtkaroti,’ and in connection with this there arises the ques- 
tion as to whether this Anumsatkara should be mentioned or not, at the 
time of the Ealmg.} 

On this we have the following Purvapuksa. 

‘ Inasmuch as there is no doubt as to the deifio character of the 
Anumsatkara being expressed by the said Injunction, as well as by the 
words of the mantra, there must be a mention of this.” 

SIDDHANTA. 

To the above we make the following reply : Just as the Drinker 
appearing subset^uently could not m?tke .a mention of the previous 


PdEVA-MlMAMSA-SCTEAS. Ill ABEYAYA. 


Drinker, who is not connected with the Primary sacrifice, so m the same 
manner, there could he no mention of the Vasntkara in question. 
Because this latter is not mentioned in the Primary sacrifice ; and even 
when it does appear, it does not appear as doing anything for that 
sacrifice. Consequently there should be no mention of this. 


Adhikarana XVII.—The remnants of offerings other than 
the one to Indra shoidd he eaten without mantras. 


Ohhandahpratisedhah, it is a mere preclusion of the metre. 3 
Tu, really. Sarvag&mitv&t, on account of pertaining to all. 

38. “ A.S tlie soma belongs equally to all the Deities 

(there can be no relationship o£ the A-rchetype and Ectype 
among the various offering) ; (and as for the declaration^ of 
the change into the Anustup metre) is a mere pieclusion 
of the use of the preceding metre.” 38, 

COMMENTARY. 

We now proceed to offer our reply to the opponent’s arguments con- 
tained in sAtra (28). 

There should not he any modifications in the muntrus, in accoi dance 
with the Deity, the remnant of whose offering is to be eaten ; the remnants 
of the offerings to other deities than Indra should be eaten without 
mantras. Because the whole action of the -Tyotistoma forms a single 
context ; and as such an action could not he its own archetype iPrakrti) 
and ectype (vihriti). 

That is to say, if each of the several repetitions of the same action 
of offering to the various Deities (which repetitions constitute tlie 
Jyoti^toma sacrifice) were a distinct action by itself, then each would have 
been related as the archetype and ectypes of another. As a matter of 
fact, however, they are not so many distinct actions ; for neither the 
soma nor any accessory details are laid down with reference to these 
individual offerings ; as the way in which one of these takes up the soma 
etc. is exactly the same in which they are taken up by the rest. 

Thu^ then, the soma is equally connected, by injunction, with all 
the Deities ; and thus none of the offerings could be taken as a mere ectype 




idiiiiiiliiiiiiiii 


^ .b; 

















n PADA, XVIU ADHIKARANA, Sit. S 9 . 


_ n has been argued above (under sAtra 28) that, inasmuch as we have 
an injunction as to changing the metre of the original into the Anustup 
the offering in connection with which this change is laid, down is an 
ectype of the former. But the injunction of the change could very well 
be applicable, even when the Soma is equally applicable to all Deities, as 

M ^ qualified injunction of a particular 

e je in the place of the Jagatt metre which would have been used on 
account of the offering falling in the Third Savana. Or it may be that, 
inasmuch as the several Samasthas of the Jyotistoma are mere ectypes’ 

■ IS only natural that there should be modifications in connection with 
ese ; but that does not serve the purpose of “ showing ” that the offerings 


Adhikarana XVIII. — The 


Bating ” of the 
of the Indra-Agni offering is to be done u 

mantras. 


Aindr^gne, in the case of the offering to Indra-Agni. 

LiAgabhAvat, on account of the presence of indicative forc^. 
would be« 

39. “ 111 the case of the offering to Indra-A 

mantras should be used as there is in the mantra . 
with the necessary indicative force.” — 39. 

COMMENTARY. 

The question dealt with here is whether or not the mantr 
putasya etc., is to be used in the case of the remnant of offerin^^ 
Indra in conjunction with some other Deity, Agni, for instance.^" 

The Pfirvapaksa embodied in sfitra 39 is as follows 

In the case of the Indra-Agni offering, inasmuch as both I 
Agni would drink the soma offered, we could very well assert tha 
it had been drunk by Indra, and half by Agni. And as the cha 
'being drunh hy Indra’’ does not exactly exist in the Remnant that 
us (at the time of Bating), -we must take the warA' lndrapitasya 
Man^a) as applying to it, through that portion of it which h 
poured in libation, and there is no such limit to this as that is on 
so much has been drunk of that it can be called by the name. 



PUEVA-MImAMSA-SUTRAS. Ill adbyaya. 


ii)g property expressed 
tlie Indra-Agni offering, the re 
Jndrapttasya, etc.) 


Thus then, inasmuch as the distinguish 
TOi'd ‘ Indrapitasya' found to exist in ^ 

A this latter also is to be eaten with the mantra 

^ Ekasmin, to aU. m V^, really. Devatantai-at, because of its be- 
ing a distinct deity. Bibhagarat, just as in the case of quartering. 

40. “ The Mantra should apply to that of which there 

is a single Deity (Indra) ; because (Indra-Agni is) a distinct 
Deity (from Indra ) ; just as in the case of the quartering 

(of the cake.) — 40. , • i 3 i • 

The Indra-Agni offering would certainly have been included in 
the vfQxd‘Indrapita; if the distinguishing feature, expressed by the word, 
had consisted in the functioning of the Deities_ towards actual drznhtng 
of the soma. But as a matter of fact, our Deities do not drink ; as all 
that they do, in the case of an offering being made to them, is that they 
serve as the Recipients of the conveyance of the gift. And at the time 
that the gift is conveyed to a joint Deity, there cannot be a mention of 

anv one of them singly : as like the nominal affix (in A^nci/am) the com- 
pound also (in Indra-Agni) would not be possible in case the factors com- 
pounded depended upon something else. Consequently, just as in the 
case of the quartering of the Agneya Cake the quartering does not pertain 
to the cake dedicated to Indra-Agni jointly, so in the case in question also, 
inasmuch as tlie word ‘ Indrapitasya ’ denotes the fact of Indra alone being 
the Deity, it could not apply to the offering that is made to both (Indra 
ond conioiutlv, and as such the Mantra in question cannot be 


Adhikarana XIX.— The Mantras beginning with the 
word ‘ Gayatra-ehandasah ’ are to he 'used in con- 
nection with the offering in which several 
metres are used, 

1 I 

41. “ The Metre is like the Deity.” — 41. 

COMMENTARY. 

The present Adfetfearatia deals with an exception to the conclusion 
}d at in the foregoing Adhikararq. 




339 



n PAD A,. XIX ADIilKAEANA, Stt 42,43, 


We find in the Bfiaksdnuvdk, certain mantras beginning with the 
word ^ Gaytraeehajidasah,* and there arises the question as to whether these 
mantras are applicable to that soma-offering alone wherein the Oayatri is 
tlie only metre used, or also to those in which many metres are used, 

On this we have the following Pi^rvapaksa. As shown in the 
foregoing Adhikarana, inasmuch as the compound Oayatraoehandasah 
would be impossible if the Gayatri metre depended upon any other metre, 
the wmrd ^ Gayatraaekandasah ’ could not apply to offering wherein, the 
Gayatri metre used would depend upon other metres ; and hence the 
mantras in question should be employed in connection- with that soma- 
offering wherein the Gayatri is the only metre used. 

WT I I 

^ Sarvesu, to all offerings, Va, certainly, wmm Abhav^t, on account of 
the absence, : Ekachhandasah, a single metre. 

42. They should apply to all offerings as there is no 
offering in connection with which a single metre is em- 
ployed.” — 42. 

OOMMBNTAEY. 

We have shown in connection with the quartering also, that if there 
were, in the context, no such cake as belonged to agni alone, then we could 
have accepted those belonging to it in conjunction with other deities 
also (as the objects of quartering) ; — so also in the foregoing Adhihamua, 
it was simply because there was an offering made to Indra alone, that 
we denied the applicability of the epithet ‘Indrapita to that which was made 
to Indra conjointly with Agni. But it is a well-known fact there is no 
offering in which the Oayati'i is the only metre used, and as in the 


sacri- 
fices mentioned in all the three vedas, other metres are sure to come in. 
Consequently, the name ‘ gayatracehandasah’ must be taken as applying to 
those in which there are many metres used ; j ust as the name ‘Bathanta- 
sj,md’ is applied to offerings wherein there are many other sdmas also. 

The last sdtm of the pdda does not embody a distinct Adhikaraxm, 
It summarises the final Siddhdnta conclusion derived from the discussions 
contained in the above sdtras 27 to 42. 

I . 

Sarvesam^ of all. ^ Va, certainly, Bkamat^tryam, connected with 

one mantra, Aitisayanasya, according to Aiti^ayana, 

Bhaktip^natvat, on account of the contingency that cMnkiag will have to be taken 



iilffF 


PI)EVA-M1MAMSA-8I)TRAS. hi adeyaya 


in its secondary sense. Savan^dhikaro, pertaining to the Savana. ff Hi, 

because. 

43. “ One and tlie same mantra belongs to (the eating 

of) all (the offering) as held by Aitisayana; because the 
word ‘ IndrapUa ’ indicates the savana ; as otherwise, the 
drinking, (as pertaining to the Bemnant) will have to be 
taken in its secondary figurative sense.” — 43. 

COMMENTARY. 

Tlie word ‘ Indrapitdsya' is to be taken, not as qualifying ‘ samasya’ 
but as qualifying the Prdtalpavana' (Morning libation), and as such apply- 
ing to every one of the offerings connected with that savana. Nor is the word 
‘ PrdtaJisavana’ co-extensive with Soma ; as it is the name of a certain part 
of the sacrifice (Jyoti^oma). If then the word meant the ‘ soma connected 
with the Prdtahsavuna,^ then we should have had the word ‘ Pratahsavani- 
yasya’ (and not Pratahsavanasya.) Thus then the word ‘ Pratahsamnasycd 
being taken as co-extensive with Endrayitasya,' the genitive in these two 
words is due to their differentiation from all connection with Soma ; 
and that in ‘somasya’ being non-coextensive, is based upon the non-differen- 
tiation (from the soma). 

Thus then, on account of the indication of another word (savanasya) 
and on account of the fact of all the offerings having the same connections 
and occuring in the same context, the mantra should be used in connec- 
tion with everyone of them. 

We conclude thus for the simple reason that, otherwise, the soma- 
remnant (if connected with Indrapita) would have to be taken in its 
secondary figurative meaning. That is to say, the whole quantity of soma 
conveyed, by means of words, as gift to Indra, would be the direct or prin- 



THIRD ADHYAYA 


Thied Pada 


Adhikarq.na I, — The loudness etc. pertain to the entire veda. 

I ? I 

5^: Srutebj on account of direct declaration. WcirraK: Ajatadliikarali, 
pertaining to the community, Syat, should be. 

,1. “On account of the direct declaration the proper- 
ties should pertain to the community.” — 1. 

COMMENTARY, 

Having dealt with the applicability of mantras based on their indi- 
cative power, we now proceed to take that based upon syntactical con- 
nection. 

The sentences taken up for consideration are ‘vehehairiahJ}. hriyate 
^the Rik is recited loiidhd etc, anrl also Tadyadi fltta uloanamkriyati 
Ofirhapatyam paretya hhfih sodheti juhmydt d£ we should make a mistake 
in the Rk. he should offer a libation into the gdrliapabya fire with the 
»na7?tra hhit/i sraW) and so forth. 

The question now is this : In the former sentence which lays down 
the qualifications of loudness etc. with reference to the Rk. etc. as also in 
the latter sentence which lays down the Homa into the three Fires with 
the three vydhrtis, —shoald we, on the strength of the fact of its being 
directly mentioned as independent of anything else, take the word 
* Ilk.’ in the sense of verse as explained in Sutra II-1 35 ? Or should we 
take it as denoting the whole of the Egveda consisting of the entire set of 
mantras and Brahmanas’ 9 . 

On this question, then, we have the following Phrvapak^a. 

In accordance with the arguments advanced under the P'drmpalt^a 
of SMra l-iv-29 ; it must be admitted, on the strength of the direct 
Declaration of the object pf .Injunction,, that the properties pertain to the 
communities of the 5k. etc. to the verse etc. and not to the 'Egveda 




n 


it 


h;. 1 



P[)BVA-M1MAM8A-SUTBAS. in ADEYAYA. 


WT I ^ I 

^ 5IT Yedova, it should pertain to the Veda. Pi-ayadarianat, because 

of the fact of the words occurring in a context pervaded by the idea of the Veda. 

2. “ It should pertain to the whole Veda, because of 

the fact of the words occurring in a context pervaded by 
the idea of the Veda.” — 2. 

COMMENTARY. 

As a matter of fact we find the sentences under consideration in a 
context that begins with the speaking of the entire Veda so that there is 
no reason why the word should be taken in its restricted sense ; and 
it is only natural the words Rk. etc. should be taken as indicating tlie 
entire Veda. 


I ^ I 

3. Because of indicative words. — 3. 


COMMENTARY. 


There are many other texts also which show that the words 
‘ 5/i ’ etc, stand for the entire Vedas. For instance, in the sentence 
‘Rghhih ■pratardivi dem iyate, yajiirtedena tisthati madhyc’knaJ^, 
stimav^dendstamayi mdtriyate VedairaeUnyaistribhirifi Sihyali. ;—vie find 
the three last feet, all speak of the Vedas, and hence we are 
led to take the word ‘Bk’ (in Rghhih) as indicating the Bgveda ; 
specially as the last feet speaks of ‘ Vedam in the plural (which could 
not be if only two Vedas, the SAma and the Yagus, were meant), which 
distinctly shows that the word ‘ Bk ’ indicates the whole of the Bgveda- 
Mantras as well as Brdhmartas. 




t!Rfq^5ir^ Dharmopades'achciia, on account of injunction of qualification. 
Nalii, not. Dravyeija, with the substance. ^0^: Saipbandhah, connection. 

4. “On of account injunction of qualification it could have 
no connection with the substance.” — 4. 

COMMENTARY. 

If the injunctions were taken as laying down the qualifications of 
the Bk ■ verse, etc., then, inasmuch as the sentence ‘ BiehyadhyMham 


Sdma geyati’ points to the fact of the Soma- never being separate from 


, -the 5'b th® qualification of the former would be included in that of 
latter ; and as such the further injunction -‘Uchehaif^ Sdma would be- 

■A, .;.'- ' 












Ill PADA, 1 ADlilKARAVA, S4 6, 5. 


Because it is not possible for one to sing tbe 8mna based upon a 
Rk. ill any other waj’-, while lie is reciting tbe Rh itself loudly. 

Jf, however, we take the qualifications as laid down for the V edas, 
both iujunctious become quite justified, inasmuch as what is enjoined 
by the Sdmciveda is wholly different from that which is enjoined by the 
RgvM,a. 

For some reason, not given, the Vartika puts this Sutra at the 
end of the Adhikarana after Sutra 8. 


i^iiw Trayividy4khyat, the title ‘Tryi Vidya-’ Cha, also, Tadvidi, 
to one who knows them. 

5. “ The title Trayividya is applied to one who knows 
the three Vedas.” — 5. 

COMMENTARY 

The Bl, Sdma and Yajzis are known as ‘ Trayi ’ ; and the word 
^Tmyicidya’ is capable of being explained only as ‘ Trayi Vidya asya.' 
This word is found to be applied, in usage, to one who has read the 
three Vedas, and not to one wdio has only read the Rh verse, the Sfiina- 
song and the Yoju ^ ; because the name is never applied to the ‘Sdma- 
vedis', even though in knowing the Sama Veda he knows the three — vi^: 
Rk verses, Satnas, as well as certain Yoju-^. Consequently it follows that 
in the word ‘’Trayividya' the word 'trayi' is used in the sense of the Three 
Vedas ; and hence it must be admitted that the words ‘ Rk ' ‘Sdma,' and 
‘Yajuf’ which are spoken of in lexicons as co-extensive with the word 
‘trayi', denote the Vedas themselves, and thus too we find that the words 
‘ Rk ' etc., are applied to the Vedas. 

I i I 

Vjatirkame, in case of transference, Yathasruti, in accor- 
dance witii tte direct signification. Iti chet, if this be nrgned. 

6. . “ In a case where there is transference, the in- 
junction will have to be taken in its direct signification.” 


■ COMMENTARY. 

This is a reference to a previous objection, (the , sense whereof is 
this): In a case where a Rk verse will be found in the Yajurveda, it 
will have to be sung slowly, as occurring in the Yajurveda, according to 
the SiddMnta, this however, is not the case 5; while according to us. 



pdBVA-MlMAMSA-SI^TBAS. Ill ADHYA^A 


heiiig a Ek mrse^ in whichsoever Veda it might appear it will have 
been quite reasonably sung loudly, in keeping with the direct significa- 
tion of the Injunction. 

qi(| I I 

'n Na, not Sarvasmin, to the whole. Nivesat, on account 

of belonging. 

7. “ Reply : No ; because the qualification belongs 

to the whole.” — 7. 

COMMENTARY. 

The mere fact of being found in the text of a Veda does not make 
a sentence liable to be called by the name of that Veda. The fact is 
that, that which is enjoined by one Veda, is always done in accordance 
with that Veda ; consequently a mantra would be called by the name 
of that Veda in which it may be enjoined. If it should be found to have 
been enjoined in both Vedas (the Yajiis and Bk), then inasmuch as 
the law laid down in Sutra llI-iii-10 would not apply to the case, we could 
not but take the two (qualifications of loudness and slowness) as optional 
alternatives for that Mantra. 

Vedasaniyogat, on account of being connected with Veda. Na, not. 

Prakaranena, by the context. VEdhyeta, could be set aside. 

8. “Because of being connected (syntactically) with 
Veda’ the indication (by the words ‘ Eh ’ ete., of the Rigveda 
etc.,) could not be set aside by the context.”— 8. 

COMMENTARY. 

That is to say. Syntactical connection being more authoritative 
than context, there would be nothing objectionable in the indications 
of the context being rejected in favour of Syntactical connection. 

Some people read ‘vddheta’ instead of ‘vadhyeta.’ 

Adhiharana II. In the Adhana the singing is to he done 

gently. 

Gunamuihyavyatiirame, when there is conflict between the 
properties of the primary and its subsidiary, Tadarthatvat, because it is 

i.ts purpose. 5^ Mukhyena, by the primary, Vedasanvrurah 


liMli 



Ill PABA, T1 ADEI KARAN a, SA. 9. 


PUBVA-MlMAMSA-SdTBAS. HI ADE7AYA. 


The Vartika is not satisfied with the above representation of the 

Adhikarana. It offers three additional expositions as follows 

Adhikarma (B) 

Questions to le dealt with-.— In a case where a thing having its origin 
in one Veda, has its application or use laid down in another Feda, 
should that thing be equipped with the properties peculiar to the former 
veda, or with those of the latter ? 

PArvapaha : — Inasmuch as the origination of a thing always 
precedes its application, the properties employed should be those of the 
veda in which it has its origin.” 

Biddh&nta : — The properties should be those of that Feda which 
lays down its application — (1) because the origination of a thing is only 
for the sake of the uses to which it may be applied ; (2) because it is 
only when the thing in question— the SSma singing is applied to use 
that it stands in need of some tone to be applied to it ; and hence the 
t 072 es enjoined (in the Injunction ‘uehehaihacha etc.’) are those that are 
perceived at the time of usage, and not at the time of the origination ; 
as there is no injunction of its being brought into action at that time. 

Adhikarana (0) 

Question In a case where the origination and the Application of 
■ a certain thing are non-concomitant, i.e , the origination is in one Veda and 
the application in another,— with the propeities of which Feda should 
the Sama be equipped. 

PUrvapahM It must be equipped with the properties of the 
originative Veda ; or with those of one or the other, optionally.” 

Siddhdnta :— It should be equipped with those of the Applicatory 
Veda ; as application is the more important factor. 

Adhihai'ana (D) 

Question : — In a case where the Prima^’y is in one Veda, and the 
Accessory in another, after the name of which Veda should the Accessory 
be called ? 

The Siddhdnta conclusion would be that it should be called after 
the veda in which the Primary happens to be mentioned. 

In this case,(D) however it would be necessary to reject the conelu- 
,, sion arrived at in the ni-vii-Sl and to accept the performer to be , 
' the same, in the original sacrifice, as in its modifications, — the one that 
' in connection with the Primai^, If then^ on the streng^ j 


■ 


■ 








■ 

^■11 



m PADA, ni ADBlKARAnA, 8A. 10 . 


of the Injunction, that Performer stould be accepted who is mentioned 
in the same Veda with the Accessory — then the tone to be employed would 
also be the same that belongs to the Aeeessory ; and it would not be 
proper to employ tlie tone of the Primary. 

For this reason, it is best to take the Adhikararia as based upon the 
consideration of the comparative authoritativeness of the originative and 
the applicatory injunction. As it is only thus that the citing of the 
example of Adhana appears justifiable. Specially as if the Adhikaraiia 
be explained as pertaining to the incompatibility of the Primary and the 
secondary, or to the contradiction between the Primary and the subsidiary 
— then, it would be necessary to explain how this would be a mere repeti- 
tion of what is said under Sdtra XII- ii-25. 


Adhikarana III. — The Jyotistoma belongs to the 
Yajurveda. 

n I 

Bhuyastwena, in accordance with that in which most of its details 
are laid down, Ubhayasruti, that which is spoken of in two Vedas. 

10, “ Tlie Action, mentioned in two Vedas is to be 

taken as belonging to that in which most of its constituent 
delails are found.” — 10. 

COMMENTARY. 

We now proceed to consider the question after which Veda a certain 
Primary Action is to be called, when it is found to be mentioned in 
more than one Veda. (As for instance, we find the Jyoti^pma mentioned 
in the Yajurveda, as well as in the Sdmaveda, and the question is whether 
we should call it a ‘ Yajurvedic’ or a ‘Sdmavedia' sacrifice.) 

The Purvapaksa is put forth in the following manner ‘Just as in 
the various texts of the same Feda, so in different Vedas also, we have 
the action laid down originatively ; and hence the matter of the property 
attesting to it would be a matter of mere option ; or it may be that, 
inasmuch as both Fedas woidd be found to lay down the form as well as 
the accessories of the action, sometimes one and sometimes the other Veda 
might be taken as originative of it. 

The Siddhdnta conclusion is that it is to be called after that Veda 
, in which we find it laid down originatively, amd not a mere subsidiary. 



pdRVA-MtMiMSA-SdTRAS. Ill ADHYAYA 


The question however remains which of the tw’o Vedas is to be 
taken as laying flown the particular action Jyotidoma, for instance 
originatively. The reply to this is that, that Veda which is found to 
mention the largest number of the necessary details of the sacrifice 
should for that very reason be accepted to be the original enjoiner of 
that aclion and in tlie case of the Jyotistoma it is found that it is the 
‘ Yajurveda in which the largest number of its details are found 
mentioned. 

The Vartika is not satisfied with the above exposition of the Adhi- 
karana. Here is what it says : — 

But this explanation of the word ‘ hhAyasiva ’ (in the stJtra) is not 
quite correct. Because when a certain thing has been I’ecognized from 
its nature, to be indicative of something else, a little or more of it does 
not make any difference in its coguition. For instance, when smoke is 
recognized to be indicative of the Fire, whether it be much or little, it 
must indicate the fire. In the same manner, in the case in question, it is 
the presence of the details of procedure that has been recognized as 
indicative of the origin of the injunction of the sacrifice; and even in a 
case where very little of these details is mentioned, even this little would 
be inexplicable unless it indicated the perfonnability of the saciifice ; and 
hence even this little of it would certainly indicate its performability (and 
as such the presence of its originative injunction). Then again, in the case 
in question, it is not the largeness of subsidiaries that is meant to be the 
details of procedure ; but what people call the subsidiary, that itself is 
Ivhat is meant by the Details of Procedure. Then it might be held that 
“ where we find only a little of the details of piocedure mentioned, we 
must take it as laid down with reference to the Primary sacrifice enjoin- 
ed in another Veda.” But the same may be said of a case where a large 
number of these details are mentioned {i.e., these may be taken as laid 
down with reference to the sacrifice enjoined in another Veda). 

Consequently we must expound the Siddhanta as follows : In the 
case of the Jyotispma, w’e find the form of the sacrifice consisting of the 
Substance, the Deity and the Action ; and it is in the Yajurveda that all 
these three are laid down ; while what the other Veda .the SSmaveda) 
does is to merely mention the Action by name with a view to laying 
down certain Hymns, etc. in connection with, it ; and hence inasmuch 
this latter stands in need of the mention of the Substance and the Deity, 
ij; cannot be taken as independently by itself, laying down the Action in 
qrt^tion. This we have explained under the ^akhdntantdhikarana 



in PADA, IV ADHIKAPAhJA, 84. 11 


{II — i\' — 8 et secj,) And even tliongh tlie complete form oJ 
k given in the Yajiirveda, yet it is quite possible to establis 
ship of this sacrifice to the Hymns, etc. mentioned in the 
as even thongli these latter serve only transcendental (irnpe) 
yet they are taken as connected with the sacrifice, on the st 
directions laid down in connection with them. 

Thus then, the meaning of the6'Zi^ra comes to be this 
which is mentioned in two Vedas, should have its name f 
the mention of a larger number — i.e. the whole — of its cons 
which may be capable of supplying all its requirements. T1 
of only '' ti€o Vedas , because the Rk and the Sdma Vedas h 
character of Loudness, and as there being no difference con 
this, a mention of these wmuld be useless. (Hence all the 
is possible is as between the Yajurveda and the Sama'i 
Yajurveda and the Egveda). 


Adhikarana IV. — The context is a means of pointmg 
out the use of mantras. 

sraTwrg i ? ? i 

Asatpyuktam, that which is not co-related. Hrora PrakarapAt, by the 
context. Itikartavyatarthitv^t, because it stands in need of the 

details of procedure. 

11. “ (Mantra) tliat which, is not already co-related be- 

comes co-related by the context, because it stands in need 
of the details of procedure.” — 11. 

OOMMBNTAEY. 

Of the six means of ascertaining the relation of mantras the Bh4§ya 
has already cited instances of Direct declaration, indicative power and 
syntactical connection. It now proceeds to show how the use of a Mantra 
can be ascertained by means of context. 

The Purvapaksa view is that nothing can he ascertained by means 
of the context as to the use of Mantras. 

The siddhanta embodied in the sutra is as follows : — 

To the above, we make the following reply: So long as the continuity 
of the details of procedure relating to the Primary Action has not been 
broken, whatever action, without any particular result, happens to be 
mentioned in the text, is taken to he an accessory of that Primary, — and 
this only by means of Context (prahamm)- 


pdR]^A-M!MAM8A-8dTRA8. til ADUYAfA. 




For instance, tlie Injunction ‘ Darkpiln.amdsdl^hydm svargaMmo 
yajHa ’ having given the idea that ‘ one shotdd obtain Heaven by means 

of the Haria-PtIrBamcfsa sacrifices,’ there arises a question as two ‘hoio’ 

this is to be done ; and while this ‘ how ’ is being expounded in the Veda, 
we find mentioned certain Actions (the Praydsas) apparenUy useless 
(having no use stated in the context), in such sentences as ‘ Samidho yajaU, 

‘ Tardnap&tam yajati; etc., etc. Now then,' we are led to believe that 
some help must arrive for the Darsa or Pdrmmdsa, (in the shape of certain 
details of its procedure), and also that these latter Pmyaias must have 
some end or purpose to serve. And then, we find that for the Darsa- 
PArmmdsa, there is no aid,— mentioned either in the same word, m the 
same sentence, in the same context or in any other context,— which we 
could perceive by any of the five means of cognition tSense-perception and 
^ the rest), or by any words cognizable by these means of cognition. Simi- 
t larly too with the Pmj/ajos (we do not perceive their end or purpose). 

And yet it is necessary that both of these must exist (as otherwise the 
' Darm-PArmrncisa could not be performed, and the mention of the Praydyas 
in the Veda would be wholly useless). And we could conclude that 
these do not exist at all, only if we failed to obtain them by all the 
resources at our command. As a matter of fact, however, we have, at our 
command, a means, in the shape of Context, of obtaining an idea of those 
much-needed factors. Nor is extreme proximity the only ground of 
relationship between two things ; and as a matter of fact, the Vedic 
potency continues to move on to the more remote factor, when it does not 
find a fit object among the more proximate ones. And in the case in 
question, it is this fact that will be the ground for admitting the mutual 
help (accorded between the Darsa-PHrmiridsa and the Praydjas). The 
fact that, on not obtaining a fit object among those in close proximity, a 
remote one is admitted, is established by the mutual requirements (of 
the Primaiy Sacrifice' and the Praydjas ). — the infallible conclusion being 
that the aid that the l^arsa-PAi'V.amdsa stand in need of is supplied by the 
■ Praydjas, and, the use or purpose to be served, which the Prat^as are in 
waht of, lies in the help that they accord to the Darsa-Pdwamdsa. And 
as a matter of fact, neither of these has got anything more proximate to 
itself, supplying the said needs. Though we could assume this help to be 
accorded by some other Action, — yet, inasmuch as this other Action will 
have had its relationships all supplied through other Primary sacrifices, 
it would not stand in need of being connected with the Darsa-PAmamdsa, 

( ' For , the same reason, the Pra^rfyas cannot be taken as leading to Heaven 

' ' |the cpnimon result assumed in connection with the Visvajit, etc.). Nor 


q'l: 


. I 

illiiS 

' 1 


' '' ' 

I'm'. ■■ . 







in PADA, V ADHIKABAm, 8A 12 . 


again could they be taken as bringing abotit, independently by themselves, 
the Result that is declared as following from the Darsa-Pilrnamdsa ; 
because this one-sided supplying of requirement (by the Larsa-P'drrj.amasa 
to the Praydjas, could be admitted, only if there were no relationship 
between them based upon mutual requirement ; and not while such a 
relationship is possible. Consequently, it must be admitted that these 
two supply eacli other’s needs, Just in the same way as the person whose 
cart-horse has died is helped by one whose cart has been burnt, and vice 
versa. 


Adhikarana V.—-The use of mantras ascertained by the 
order of sequenee. 

I n I 

Kramascha, order of sequence also. ^JRimtsira Desaslmany^t, on the 
ground of the sameness of portion. 

12. The order of sequence • also (serves to point 
out the application of) on the ground of the sameness of 
position. — 12. 

The Piii'vapahsa, with regard to this siUra and the next — dealing 
with the agency of Order o/ sequenoe and Na7ne~is much in the same 
strain as that with regard to that of Gontext, in the foregoing sitU'a. 

SinnHANTA. 

The Order of sequence, consisting of the commonality of position, is 
of two kinds, as based upon the text and upon actual performance ; and it 
is a means of pointing out the application of Accessories. 

Even when the two are not performed at the same place, if it be found 
that the mantra appears in the same place in the mantra-seetion of the 
Veda, as the Injunction of the primary sacrifice does in the Brahmana- 
Section,— -then, when we proceed to seek for the relatives of both, the one 
brings the other to the mind, by reason of their sameness of position, — in 
accordance with the Law of Sequence. That is to say, when we proceed 
to look for the mantra to be employed in connection with the Primary, that 
is the first to be enjoined (in the Brdhmana-section}f we begin from the 
very beginning of the mantm section ; and as soon as the .first mantra 
comes to our mind, if we do not'find any reasonS>for passing it over, we 
accept that as the mantra sought after. In the same manner, when we 
proceed to iQok for an Action, to which the! occurrine in the 





PI)EVA-M1MAM8I-S15tBA 8. Ill ADEYAYA 


beginning of the mantra-section would be an auxiliary, we begin Irom the 
very first Action enjoned in the Brahynana-section ; and not finding any 
reasons for passing over that Action, we accept that as the one in connec- 
tion with which the mantra should be employed And in the same 
manner, the second would be connected with the second and so forth. 

In the case of such mantras as the Agyieyanu mantra, their applica- 
tion is found to be pointed out by the indications of such words as' Agneija' 
and the like. Consequently, the Bhdsya has cited, in the piesent connec- 
tion, the mantra ' DabdhirndmdsU ete.,^ whose connection is not pointed 
out by the indicative power of its words and which is found mentioned 
in the same order of sequence as the Updmmydja, 


Adhikarana VL — The use of mantras pointed out hy name. 

\ \\ \ 

Akhy^chaivam, the name also. T»darthatw4t because it is 

, for that purpose. 

13. The Name also does so : because it is for that 
purpose. — 13. 

The Name, that 'is applied to Action.? in its literal sense, is a sure 
pointer of their r-elationship : and that relationship is shown to be one that 
the Auxiliary bears to be Primary, 

As tire names ‘ Adhvaryam’ and the like ai-e used in the Veda alone, 
we do not show here the objections that were brought forward, on a pre- 
vious occasion, in regard to the names occurring in ordinary parlance. 

As a matter of fact we find that the Adhvaryu (Priest) stands irr 
need of a firnction for himself — something to be done by him; and if no 
particular function present itself, then he would take up anything. Simi- 
larly the action, called ‘ IdJivaryava,’ stands in need of an auxiliary in 
the shape of a Person that might perform it. And at the very outset, 
the idea afforded by the two words A dhmryava ’ and Adhvaryu ’ is that 
the action that is done by the AdHaryu is called ‘ Adhvaryata,’ and that 
he who is the performer of the Adhvaryava action is one who is called 
‘ Adhvaryu’ ; the signification of the basic noun ‘Adhvaryu’ (in the 
^ word ‘ Adhvaryava’} ipdicating that of the derivative {Adhvaryava) , 

, or vice versa. Though the derivative is a distinct word,— and hence the 
’ A® Adhvaryu ’ and ‘Adhvaryava ’) are independent of each other 



Ill MDA, ni ABEIKA-RAI^A, 8 ± 14. 


—yet iaasinucli as it is only flie eternal functioning of a word that 
(lepeiids upon an eternal relatioaiship, we have given the above explana- 
tion with regard to all such names as are applied to things in their literal 
sense; and we have already shown before (under the AvestyadUkarana) 
that the functioning of the word ‘ Bdjya’ has had no beginning in time. 
As for the causal relationship between the word and its meaning, there 
is nothing incongruous in it, even if they be eternal. 


"View, 






364 pOBVA-MmAMSiB’^TBAS . Ill ADHrAYA. 

The SiddhSma emhodied to the aiitra is that among the six that 
which follows is weaker in its anthorit, than that wh.ch precedes it 
and the reason for this lies in the principle that the nltimate ? 

in all matters relating to Dharma lies with the direct declarations of 

the Veda; and the other five derire their authority more or less directly 

from that direct declaration. For instance, indicative powei car 
point out the use of a mantra until there is a prior assumption of a 
direct Vedio declaration authorising that use, so that there is a certain 
degree of remoteness from its purpose to the case of the indicative 
power wliich is not present in tlie case of direct assertion. 

The following are a few examples of the conflict the fact of all the 
primaiy sacriBces of the Jyoti?toma etc. belonging to the Adhvaryu 
alone ; these sacrifices being syntactically connected with the Des-ire for 
I Heaven, ’ they come to belong to all persons desiring any result, 

i Objection : “ This that you have explained would be an instance of , 

t the superiority of Direct Assertion (and not of Syntactical Connec- 
tion).” _ . 

Beply : The indication in question is not due to any particular 

word (of the inantra), as the Injunctive affix does not denote the agent, 
it is got at by means of a co-ordination based upon the indications 
due to the proximity of two words (which constitutes Syntactical Connec- 
tion) ; and hence it is a case of the supersession of Name by Syntactical 
Connection. 

As an instance of Conflict between Context and Name, we have 
the case of the Praydjas, that are mentioned in the Brdhmana named the 
‘ Pauroddsika, ’ which (though, by the name, belonging to the Purodasa 
sacrifice) are applied to the Sanndyya Upamsu-saerifiee, as shown by the 
Context. 

We have explained the examples of conflict involved in the appli- 
cation of a single Accessory to several Primaries. And it now becomes 
necessaiy to explain the instances of those involved in the application 

of several Accessories to a single Primary. 

/j) As an instance of coi^ict between Direct Assertion and 

. jnjicative Power, we have the case of the AradH Verse : the s|ntCT^^ , 

‘ aindryd gdrhapatyamupati^thate’ being found (by reason of the 
pada-ending in ‘ Upatisffiate ’) to be injunctive of a certain action the 
" instrumentality whereof belongs to a mantra (Vide Pdnini SAtra 
X-^iii— 25 ), —and the Indicative Power (of the word ‘ gdrhapatyam’} 

i _ jkT_ * Qv>-tr. 'noTiaimTify f.n 



the applicability of ajay mantra pertaining to A 






Jil, lua 

' * 'i A * 't' n ^ 1 1 

lipifii* 
iiliiiiili 





Ill PADA, VII ADEIKAEAllA, SA 14. 


Direct Declaration (by the Instrumental in ‘aindry&’) lays down the 
application of the Aind^'i Verse ; and when the place has been once 
filled by that verse, there is no room for any other verse. 

(2) As an instance of conflict between Direct Assertion and 
Syntactical Connection, we have the case of the Ydjnayapvtya Pragdtha, 
in which Syntactical Connection points to the use of the word‘yb*a, ’ 
while what is actually used is the word ‘ ira, ’ as shown by the Direct 
Assertion airankrtvd udgdy^t’}. In the same manner, for the Visve- 
Dems, the substance mentioned by Direct Assertion is the Amik?d, 
while Syntactical Connection shows it to be the Vajina ; and this latter, 
being possessed of an authority inferior to that of Direct Assertion, being 
rejected, the Vajina is not admitted as a substance for the Visve d^vas. 

(3) As an example of conflict between Direct Assertion and 
Context, we have the case of the Dar.ka-P-dri}amdsa performed with a 
desire to obtain /a?ns, — in regard to which the Context pointing to the 
use of fifteen S&midhani-recitations, the Direct Assertion (contained in 
the sentence ‘ Pratisthdkdmasyaihaoimsatiranbilydt ’) shows the number 
of the recitations to be twenty-one ; and hence there is a rejection of the 
number ‘fifteen’ which pertains to that performance of the Darka- 
PArmmdsa, which is done without desire for any particular result. 

(4) Of the contradiction of Direct Assertion and Order, we have 
the case of the sacrifice performed with the desire for cattle, for which. 
Order points to the eharmsa as the Vessel (for the fetching of water) ; 
while Direct Assertion (in the sentence ‘ godohena pasukdmasya ’) declares 
that vessel to be the milking vessel; and here the indications of the 
former are set aside. 

(5) Similarly as an example of the contradiction of Direct Assertion 
and Name, we have the case of the Vajap&ya, which, from its Name 
appears as to be performed by the Adhvaryu, while the Direct Assertion 
{‘Vajapeyena svdrajyakdimaT} etc. ’) points to it as to be performed by one 
who desires the ‘ Kingdom of Heaven and hence there is a rejection of 
the Adhvaryu as the performer of that sacrifice. Another example of the 
'same we have in. ‘yajamdnasya ydj yd.’ In connection with the Pitryajas, 
the name ‘flautra ’ points to the fact of the ydjvd beloneins' to the 


iHiMiMIgiiii' 


'>1 

la 


f 



356 Ill ADEY AY A. 

^ j : ^ ». - — — 

pertain to the action of seating or depositing (the Puroddsa] ; while 
Indicative Power points only to the part ‘ tasmin sida ' &fi ihe mantra 
pertaining to that action. In the same manner, while Syntactical 
Connection connects the portion ‘ tasmin stda ' with the action of 
AbhigMrava (Pouring of ghee over the grass-bedding), while Indicative 

Power points to ‘ Byonante halpaydmi ’ only as belonging to that action ; 

and tlie former is accordingly set aside. 

As an instance of conflict between Indicative Power by (1) Context, 

(2) Order, and (3) Name, we have, (1) the case of the Kirodpa, etc., for 
which the mantra ‘ Devasyd bva, etc. ’ is pointed out by Indicative Power, 
which sets aside the applicability of any other mantra indicated by the 
Context ; (2) the Aindrdgna is performed with a view to a certain desir- 
able result, wherein the couple of Ydjij&nuvdkyds proceeding from the 
Sdmidheni, indicated by the Order, is set aside by Indicative Power j and 
^ (3j in the Sotnafaudriya, wherein the application of the Manu-Verses 

pointed out by Name as the Ydgydnuvdkyds is set aside by those Ydjydnu- 
mihyas that contain words indicative of Soma and Eudra 
I As an example of conflict betw'een Syntactical Connection and 

Context, we have the sentence ‘ P^trvedyuramdcdsijdyctm redinkaj'oti.’ 
The Context shows that we should have recourse to that process of making 
the Vedi (altar) wdiich is laid down as following after the of 

the sacrificial material ; while the Syntactical Connection with ‘ amdvdsyd’ 
shows that it should be done on the ‘previous day.’ This is not a case 
of Direct Assertion ; as the Locative Ending {in ‘ a7ndvftsy dy dm') does 
not denote the relationship of the Primary and the Accessory; though it 
denotes loeaNon, yet the character of Location could not possibly belong 
to the action ; consequently the connection shown must be admitted to 
have been pointed out by the proximity of the words to one another 
(which constitutes Syntactical Connection), and which operates more 
quickly than the Context. 

Of conflict between Syntactical Connection and Order we have 
an example in those Pratfpat&aZpas of the J yoti^toma i\i&t are performed 
with a view to certain results, or on account of a certain occasion having 
presented itself ; we have the Direct Assertion specifying only one foot 
of each Mantra, as the one to be employed ; and then the second and 
subsequent feet that are to be used aie shown, by Order or Position, 
to be those of the verses appearing in the same order in connection with 
those Xalpas whose pejformance is absolutely binding; for instance, in V 

. ‘ connection with the Declaration ‘ Fr?.' a^o, parasra dhdrayeti rdyanydya 
pratipadgn kurydt, ' the second and third feet to be employed are 8hoWlii,7 


pfawpaaaii Ku\ 










Ill PAD A, VII ADHIKAEANA, Stl 14. 


by Order, to be ‘ pavamdndyenddm ahhidevam iyak^ate’ but we have 
Syntactical Connection indicating, — maruttvate ehamatsaraJ^ visvd dadkund 
ojasd ’ — as the feet to be added (and it is this latter tliat is accepted as 
the correct form). 

- Of conflict between Syntactical Connection and name we liave the 
following example: In the chapter called ‘ /fautm ’ we have a mention 
of the addressing of the Directions, in the sentence — Tasman 'maitra- 
vavmah pre^ynti ehdnuahdha’ ; and when we look out for the person 
who is to do this Addressing, the aforesaid Name points to the Eotr 
priest as the person ; while the Syntactical Connection of the sentence 
quoted points to Maitrcivaruna. Then as a matter of fact when the 
required agent has been pointed out by some one means, there is no need 
of the mention of any other ; consequently Maitravaruna liaving been 
pointed out by the raore-quickly-operating Syntactical Connection, the 
indication of the Name is set aside, long before it has had time to reach 
the assumption of a corroborative Context. 

As an example of conflict between Context and Order, we have 
the use of the word ‘gird' and ‘ird’ in regard to the Hymn. In the 
Agnistosna Sdma, the word to be used is indicated by Order to be ‘ gira ’ ; 
while Context points it out to be ‘ ird’ ; and certainly this latter is 
stronger in its authority. On the former occasion we had cited the 
case of the words with regard to the Sdma (while the present is with 
reference to the Stotra), consequently the two cannot be said to be 
mixed up. 

As an example of conflict between Context and Name, we have the 
case of the sentence ‘ tasmdn maitracarutial} pre^ati chdniicMheti ’ as with 
reference to the Jyotistoma. The addressing spoken of in this devolves 
upon the Eotr priest, as indicated by the Name (‘ Eautra, ’ of the section 
in which the sentence occurs) ; while the Context distinctly points to 
Mditrdvarm"' as one who does it. This same example had been cited 
above ; but that was with reference to the* form of the Addressing of the 
Directions itself. 

Lastly, as an example of conflict between Order and Name, we 
have the case of the couple oi Aindriigna mantras occurring in the chapter 
of Kdmyaydjyds ; the Name of these mantras points to the fact of their 
being used as alternatives in both the offerings Ito Indra and Agni) ;) 
while the stronger authority of Order indicates the use of the first couple 
with the first, and of the second with the second. As for the Indicative 
Powpr of the Mantras themselves, it lends its support to both alternatives ; 
consequently, the case is one of conflict between Name and Order. 


It ^ .r\ I ‘pi. I ‘<1!^ 




'/•V 


i' . ■; 




pOrva-uImAmSA-sOtbas. Ill ADBYAYA. 


Adhikarana VIII.— The twelve Upasads pertain to the 

AMna sacriiice. 

WT \ \ 

AMnat, the word Ahtaalj. w Va, really, Prakara^at, on account 

of the context. Gamjah, indicative of the presence of a qualification. 

15. On account of the context the word Ahiiia should 
be taken as indicative of the presence of qualification.” — 15. 


COMMENTARY. 


In the context of Jyoti^toina we find the sentence — ‘ There are to 
be three ttpasals for the Sa?ina and twelve for the AMna.' And in this 
the words ‘ s&hna,' meaning ‘ that which is finished in a day,’ refers to the 
JyotiUoma, with regard to which we have the declaration — ‘ They finish 
it within a day’; consequently it follows that the Ji/otisfoma . has three 
upasach. Then as regards the clause ‘ twelve for the Ahina,’ there arises 
the question as to whether ‘ twelve upasads’ also belong to the J yoti^- 
tomu, or only to the Ahina sacrifices, the Doddasa (Twelve- Day sacrifice) 
and the rest? 

If the name ‘ AMna’ could, in some way or other, be found to be 
applicable to the Jyotistoma, then in view of the compatibility of the 
Context, the ‘ twelve upasads' would certainly be taken as finding a place 
in that sacrifice. If on the other hand, the name ‘ aMna' belonged to 
those sacrifices that extend over a number of days, then, inasmuch as the 
‘ twelve upasads’ would be connected with the Direct Declaration 
(‘ twelve upasads for the AMna'), they could not be taken up by the 
Context, which takes up only that which is not related to Direct Declara- 
tion (Vide Stltm III — iii — 11), [and consequently the ‘twelve upasads’ 
would belong to those sacrifices that last for many days, and not to the 
one-day Jyoti^omaL\-, and thus the sentence in qxrestion presents a case of 
the conflict between Direct Declaration and Context. 

And on the above question, we have the following ; — 

“For these reasons we conclude that the name ‘ AMna' signifies ‘that 
which does not abandon {na jahdti) any sacrifice, in supplying the details 
‘ of the performance’ and ‘ that which is not abandoned {na hiyate) by any 
.sacrifice (for all of which it serves as the original fountain-head’; — 
and inasmuch as it is the Jyotistoma alone that is possessed of these 
qualifications ^aad fulfils these conditions), and as the Context to be- 
long to the yoti^toma, it must be this to which the twelve upasads 
“belong, . 


MM 









Ill PAD A, VIIl AplllKAKATSA, Sd. 18. 


The word ‘ gaui^ay in tlie sriti'a must be taken as signifying ‘ that ’ 
pointed out by the qualification,’ and not in the ordinary sense of the 
indirect, secondary signification.” 

Asamyogat, on account of being not connected. 5 Tii, but. 
Mukhyasya, direct meaning, Tastnat, from that, Apakp&yeta, 

should be disjoined. 

16. “ On account of the absence of any connection of that 
which directly denoted (by the word Ahina) “ the twelve 
upasads” should be disjoined from that (context of the 
Jyotistoina).” — 16. 

COMMENTARY. 

The Siddh4nta embodied in the sutra is that as a matter of fact 
there is no counection between the Jyotistoma (which is finished in 
one day) and the Ahina which directly denoted a sacrifice extending over 
many days. So that the twelve upasads laid down for the Ahina can 
have no connection with the context of the Jyotistoma. 

Though the real sense remains the same the interpretation of the 
sutra by tlie Vartika is somewhat different from the above'. It is 
as follows; — 

By the word ' mukhya’ (‘ Principal ’) in the siUra is meant the Jyotir 
toma because it is the first to be performed ; and as a matter of fact, 
this has no connection whatsoever, with the word ‘ AMna.’ And inasmuch 
as the J yotistoma has no connection with this name, the number (‘ Twelve') 
that is found mentioned in connection with that name could not be taken 
as belonging to that sacrifice, merely because of the Context ; consequently 
it must be taken (and used), apart from that. Specially as we find that 
the number ‘ Twelve’ is connected with the AMna, by means of the 
Direct Declaration of the genitive {in ‘ ahinasya’ }; and as for the word 
‘ Ahina what it literally signified is a numher of days, while the Jyoti^ 
toma is a distinct Sdhna — , being finished in a single day. 

Nor can the word be rightly made literally applicable to the 
" P Jyotkpma, by being explained as a negative compound. Because any 
such literal application is set aside by the meaning known to be conveyed 
by the word as a whole. Then again, as a inatter of, fact, we do not find 
,, the word bearing the marks of a negative compound; because a .negative 
compound having the accent of the indeclinable,, it is, the first word or 
; the basic word, that should have had the, wiotta; (Acute) accent in its 




PORVA-MIMIMSA-SI^TRAS. it I adeyAya. 



begmiiiiig ; while, in reality, we find that it has the acute^ accent at the 
middle. For this reason it must be admitted that the word is made up of 
the word ‘ ahan ’ ( = Dayl with that affix ‘ hha.' In that case, in accordance 
with the VaTtiJi’Q — Syoimadi^u tipadesirad I'achanam svarosiddhyarthaw-, 
we have the insertion of the particle *««<’; and thereby the letter ‘i’ 
forming the beginning of the affix, it is only right that the. acute-accent 
should be on that letter. 

For these reasons the word ‘ must be taken as the name of 

those sacrifices that extend over a number of days. 

The Vartika is not satisfied with the above exposition of the Adhi- 

karana on the following grounds ; 

' Firstly, because it is scarcely right fur the details of one sacrifice 
(the AMna) to be laid in the Context of another {{he JyUisioma ) ; secondly, 
in case such details were laid down, the continuity of the Context would, 
be broken by that interpolation of foreign matter; and then it would 
involve a deal of trouble to take up the chain of the Context over again ; 
and thirdly, we find that the ‘ twelve upasaxls’ for the Twelve Day sacrifice 
have already been enjoined in the Context of this latter sacrifice, and 
as all the sacrifices extending over a number of days have their origin in 
this Twelve-Day sacrifice, the said injunction in the Context of this 
latter would be enough to connect the ‘ twelve upasads ’ with all such 
sacrifices. Consequently, the sentence in question must be taken wholly 
as containing the injunction of the ‘ three upasads alone ; specially as 

tliere are no objections against this. Then, as for the connection of 

‘ 2W«e,’ that has been enjoined already in another sentence; and hence 
its mention in the sentence in question must be taken as meant to be in 

praise of the propriety of the number of upasads at the Jyotistoma, — 

just as in the case of the nivita (‘ the sense of the sentence being that the 
Jyotistoma has only three upasads, and as for twelve upasads these belong 
to such petty sacrifices at the Ahina and the rest, and not to the excellent 
Jyoti^pomasaerihcel) 

The VArtifca puts the Adhikaranain the following form ' 

If the character of ‘ AMna' had belonged to the Jyotistoma, then, 
the sentence in question would have been an Injunction ; but inasmuch as 
that character belongs to the sacrifices extending over a number of days, 
for which, again, the ‘ twelve upasads’ have been already laid down else- 
whei'e, — the sentence in question cannot but be taken as meant to eulogise 
(tbe Jyotistoma as shown above). 

• ^ (\; Thus, then, the question of the Adhikaram comes to be this : ' Is 


tMiJyott^ma. the AMna, for which the sentence, occurring in its 







Ill PAD A, IX ALBIKAEAISA., 84. 17. 


Context, lays down an accessory detail ? Or the ‘ word ilMna’ applies 
to the sacrifices extending over a number of days,^ — and inasmuch as the 
‘ twelve upasads’ for it have been laid down elsewhei-e, their mention in 
the sentence in question is meant to serve some other purpose (that of 
eulogising f.i.) ? 

Objection : — “If such be the case, then the Adhikarana would not be 
a discussion of the conflict and non-conflict of Context (with Direct 
Declaration) ; because it would come to this that, though connected 
with the AMna sacrifices the ‘ twelve upasads ’ would be mentioned 
with a view to eulogise the J yotistema." 

Reply: — That does not quite affect the case. Because as a matter of 
fact, the Fitraapaksa (B) would favour the Context; inasmuch as the 
Context would take up the number ‘ twelve’ as enjoined (in connection 
with the subject : of the Context, the Jyotistoma) while the SiddMnta 
(B) does not favour the Context ; as in accordance with this view the 
‘ twelve’ belongs to the sacrifices extending over many days, which 
has nothing to do with the Context ; which latter therefore, in this case, 
becomes contradicted. And that this is still of use, in another way in 
the Context has got nothing to do with the main point at issue. 

If, however, in accordance with the law arrived at in the next 
Adhikamua, we could admit of the Removal (or taking apart, of the 
‘twelve upasads’), and if while we had the Injunction in one Eecensional 
text, we could justify, on tbs ground of its having no other use, the 
injunctive character of that contained in another Text — then, in that ease, 
we could take the Adhikarana as presented in the Bhd§ya. 

In any case, it becomes fully established that the sentence ‘ dvdda- 
kthinasya’ is to be taken apart from the Context, as it evidently pertains 
to those sacrifices that extend over many days. 


IX. — The Pratipats are to be taken apart from 
l - the context along with the Kulaya, etc. 

Dwitvavahutvayuktam, that which is associated with singleness ■ 
and duality, m Vtl, really. Ohodan§,t, on account of being directly enjoin- 
ed. w Tasya, of that. • . , , , . 

17. Tliat wMch-is associated with singleriess and 
duality (should loe taken apart from the context because it is 
(directly enjoined (elsewhere). — 17. . , : - 



PURVA-MIMIMSA-SOTRAS. Ill ADEYAYA 


COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Jyoti^toma we find the sentence ‘ yuvdm M- 
sthali, svalitpati iti dvayoryajamanayol^pratipadam kurijAt, ete asrgraminda- 
iti bahuhhyo yajamAnebhyal}.’ And in reference to this there arises a 
doubt as to whether the two Pratipats herein laid down find place in the 
Jyoti^toma, or they are to he taken apart from it and used in connection 
respectively with the Kuldya performed by two yajamdnas, and with the 
Dvirdtra performed by more than two yajamdnas? 

The sdtra begins the discussion with the putting forward of the 
SiddMnta, in accordance, with the conclusion anived at in the foregoing 
Adhi'kara'ti.a. 

SIBDHANTA. 

The passage in question does not lay down the Duality and Plural- 
ity of the yajamdna ; because it is fully taken up with the enjoining of 
the Pratipats : and refers to the Duality, etc., only as conditions for the 



Ill FID A, IX ADI KARAN A, Sit. 19, 


^ Na, not so. : Prakyiteh, of the original sacrifice, Ekasamjogat, 

being connected ^ith one only, 

19. Reply : Kot so ; because tbe original (Sacrifice of 
the Context) is connected with one only. — 19. 

The word ‘ Prakrti here is meant to signify the Sacrifice that forms 
the subject of the Context ; and it might have been meant to indicate 
that, being the object of direct Injunction, the singleness of the yajamdiia 
in the Jyotistoma cannot be. superseded ; though that which is indirect- 
ly implied could be rejected, for special purposes. As a matter of fact, 
we know that the singleness of the yajamdna is directly enjoined specially 
as we find that whether the Jyotistoma is laid down as to be performed 
with a view to a certain desirable result, or as a necessary duty, the 
yajamdna is distinctly mention as one only, as is shown by the use of the 
wmrd ‘ yajetal Nor do we find any reason for not attaching a significance 
to the singular number of that verb ; in fact, we shall show later on, in 
Adhyaya VI, that due significance is really meant to be attached to it. 

The leaving off of certain accessories oi the Jyotistoma, on account 
of the incapacity of the sacrifice!’ to carry them all out entirely, — that has 
been brought forward by the Purmyaksi, — is also based uj)on the 
declaration the Sacrifice should be performed in such a way as 07 ie 'person 
may be able to perform it and in other cases also we find the vvord 
' one,’ which shows that the leaving off allowable is meant to refer to 
other accessories (and not to the number of yajamanas) ; as for instance, 
leaving off the exact amount of the ^ gift,’ the sacrifice can be fully accom- 
plished by one person. Then again, inasmuch the number ‘ one’ is found 
both in the originative injunction (of the Jyotistoma), as well as in 
that of its actual performance, we cannot but attach due significance to 
that number. Thus then, we conclude that inasmuch as the original 
sacrifice of the has only one yajamdma^ it does not fulfil the 

conditions of the use of the particular Pratipats in question ; and hence 
these latter must be taken apart from it. 

Nor can the Duality of the yajamdna be taken as referring 
to the presence of the wife of the yajamdna, — then, as her presence with 
her husband is a necessary condition for all sacrifices, such Dualitv could 






364 PtjEVA-MtMAMSl-StTEAS. Ill ADHYAYA. 

making it include the sacrificer’s wives, we would be assuming, without 
sufficient grounds, an ehasesa compound made up of heterogenous ele- 
ments {one male and two females). 

In the case of the sentence ‘ ksatme vasdnau, etc.’ (met with in 
connection with the Agnyddhdna) we have had to accept the wife as the 
second person as there was no other way of taking it ; specially as the 
Ahddna is nowhere laid down as to be performed by two men, in the way 
that we find the Dviyanja {Kulaya) laid down. 

Then again inasmuch as the sacrifice would alxvays be performed 
by the yajamama accompanied by one or more wives, tliere would, accord- 
ing to you, always be ‘ two’ or ‘ three’ ‘ yajamdnas ' ; and thus all sacrifices 
fulfilling the conditions laid down for the use of the Pratipats in question 
these would come to be used on all occasions ; and the Pratipat that is 
laid down as the unconditional invariable concomitant of the Jyotis 
toma would never be used, and would become wholly useless; or, at best, 
it would be taken as an optional alternative to those Pratipats that are 
laid down apart from the originative Injunction. 

For these reasons, it must he admitted that the Pratipats in question 
are to be taken apart from the Context. 

Adhikarana. X. — The Jaghni ie not to he separated- from 

its context. 

'snit J4ghnl cha, J%hi)i also. Ekadeiatvdat, because it is a part. 

20. The Jaghni also (would be taken apart), “ because 
it is a part.” — 20. 

We now proceed to consider the exception to the principle of factors 
being taken apart from their context. 

In connection with the Darsa Pdmamdsa, we find the sentence 
‘ Jdghanya patvih sanydjayanti ’ ; and as this admits of two distinct con- 
structions, bearing upon the comparative predominance and subservient 
character of the two factors (in the sentence), — there arises a doubt as to 
its actual meaning. That is to say, (1) if the sentence be taken as laying 
down the Patnisamydjas as purificatory rites for the purification of the 
(the animal’s tail), then, inasmuch as the object of purification 
; wotild be the predominant factor, it could not be removed from its place ; 
and consequently, the Patnisamydjas would be taken to whea-e the Tadl 


S 





Ill PAT) A, X ADHIKARATSU, SA 21 


of purification (Ly means of tlie Patortsawyajas ; consec|neiitiy the Tail 
of the animal that lias served its purpose in connection with the Agnt- 
somiya \Youl(l come to he taken ns that to be purified the Patnisam- 
ycvjas [^^ml thus, in tliis case, there would b(3 a removal of the Tn?’?. from 
all connection with the Darsa Pfm^amasa'], (2) If, on the other hand, 
the sentence be taken as laying down the Tail (with reference to the 
Pat7iisamydjaSy then, in that case, inasmuch as the idea of the sentence 
being a reference to the subject of the Context does not entirely dis- 
appear, the injunction of the Tail comes to belong to the Darna- 
Purnamdsa [and thus thei'e is, in this case, no removal of the Tail from 
the Gontextl\ 

On this question, then, we have the following: 

PURYAPAKSA. 

‘^(1) Because the Tail helps the Da7^sa-P^tn^a??14sa indirectly ; — (2) 
because that which helps directly in the body of the sacrifice is the more 
important (3) because the other {i,e, Paimsamydja) being enjoined 
by means of the verbal root (in ' samydjay&t') is more approximate to 
the Injunction ; — (4) because, inasmuch as any single part of an animal 
(the Tail) could not justify the employment of the whole animal, it would 
be necessary to take it oui of the animal that Las been used elsewhere 
and hence in that case the Samy&ja would come to have the character of 
a Pratipatisamsbh^a (the setting aside of that which has been used) ; — 
therefore the sentence in question must be taken as laying down the 
purification of tbe Tail of the animal used in connection with the 
Agntsomiya ; and hence it must be taken apart from the Context (of 
the Da7\sa PdrvamdsaV 

; WT i ^ t i 

Ohodana vi,, it must be taken as the injunction, ^rt Apfirva- 

tv&t, because it is something new. 

21, It must be taken as the injunction (of the tail) 
because it is something not already enjoined elsewhere, — 21. 

OOMMENTAftY ■ ■ ' ‘ ■ 

The Siddhanta embodied in the sutra, is as follows; 

As a matter of fact, the Injunction in, questiob is wot taken apart 
from the Context; because if the Tail were referred to as something 
to be purified (by means of the PatnisamayA^j^then that would haYe been 



WRVA^UtMAMSABUTBAS. Ill ADEYAYA 


tlie cause of the Injunction being taken apart ; as a matter of fact, however, 
we find that the Tail is enjoined as an accessory of the Sacrifice, exactly 
like the other accessories, in the shape of Butter and the like ; so that 
there is no justification for its being separated from the context. 

I I 

92 . (Objection) “But the Tail is apart.” — 22. 

“It has been argued in the Ptirvapah^a that, inasmuch as the 
Tail is a part of the aniroal, — and as the orginative injunction speaks 
of it as related to something already existing, — it could not be utilized, 
etc., etc.” And to this argument the Sutra offers the following reply : — 

^ Na, not so. Prakriteh, of the original. 5ia!R3?gra Astetratvfi,t, 

being obtained by non-scriptual means. 

23. Not SO ; because the original (Darsa-Purnamasa 
Jaghani, Tail) is obtained by non-scriptural means. — 23. 

COMMENTABY. 

Under the circumstances, that alone would have been useless which, 
without taking up the original, could not he recognised ; e. g in the case 
of the sentence ‘uttardrdhat srdstakrte’ ‘vadyati’ in this what is to be 
offered is not recognizable without a reference to the original Cake). 
The word 'Jaghani' however is, like the word ‘ f/fdat/a ’ and the like 
denotative of a certain lirrib of the animal ; and as such, it could be very 
easily obtained, without getting hold of the whole animal for the pui-pose, 
or even out of the animal that has been used for another purpose ; specially 
as in the sMra ‘ Rtipam vd sesahhutmt ’ it is shown that an accessory 
could be used by whatever method it may be produced or obtained. Nor 
is it impossible for the ‘ J dghant’ to he known apart from the rest of the 
body ; for we actually find meat-vendors selling the bodies of animals, 
limb by limb ; and certainly the ‘Jdghani' (Tail) could be obtained by 
purchase, from these vendors. Nor again is it necessary that it should be 
obtained from the goat ; as all that is laid down in the text is only the 
particular limb, ‘ Tail’. In fact, in the Agnisliomiya also, it is quite possible 
for the ‘ Heart ’ etc. to be obtained by purchase ot other ordinary means ; 
though it is so, yet in the case of these, as we find their particular ‘ class ’ 
and method of obtaining distinctly specified as ‘ by killing ’ and all tbe 
rest,— we do not have recourse to purchase, or other ordinary means, for 
obtaining these. But in the case of theTail we have no such means specified 
in the ^riptures. 



in VADA, XI ADElKAUAllA, 8A. 24. 


Tlie word PrahHti is meant to give an idea of tlie Darsa-Pdrnamdsa. 

Tluis then it becomes established that the Jdcjhani (Tail) is an 
accessory in the ‘Patnisaniydjas’ performed along witli Barsa-Pimjamdsa ■, 
and as sncli is to be nsed as an optional alternative for Butter. 


Adhilmrana XI. — The joining of the slabs should find 
a place among the sansthds. 

Saiitardanam, the joining together, Prakritan, in' the original 
sacrifice, Krayanavat, like tlie purchase. Anarthalop4t, on 

account of the non- disappearance of its nsefnlness. S}4t, should find a 


24. “ The Joining Together should find a place in the 

original sacrifice, because, like Purchase, its usefulness 
does not disappear.” — 24. 

We now proceed to consider the cases of conflict and non-conflict 
between Syntactical Connection and Contest. 

In connection with the Jyoti^toma we find two slabs of stone laid 
down, to serve as the receptacle npon which the Soma should be pounded ; 
and with reference to these stone-slabs, we have the declaration ‘DtrgJia- 
some-santrdydd-d]i 2 'tyai,’ — that is, ‘having separated the two slabs one 
should join them together, for the obtaining of Dhrtil With reference 
to the word ‘ Dirghasoma ’ in this sentence, there arises a doubt, as to (a) 
whether it ajDplies to the original sacrifice (the Jyotistoma), as indicated 
by the Context, (b) or it applies to such sacrifices as extend over longer 
periods of time, and as such not being compatible with the Context, has 
to be taken apart. On the point in ciuestion we can have also the followino' 
alternative, (a) the word applies to the Jyoti§toma itself. (6) or to the 
Jyotistoma as performed by a tall CDirgha') yajamdna, (e) or to the 
Uktha and other samastMs or parts (of the Jyotistoma), (d) or to the 
Satra and AMna sacrifices (that extend over many days), (e) or to all 
sacrifices excepting the Agnistoma (which is the first samasthd of the 
Jyotistoma. - . . ' , ' . 

On this question we have the following ; — , , ^ ' 

Preliminary Purvapaksa. — ^' (I) Because the vrord * Dirghasoma ^ 
is applicable to the Jyotistoma as compared with such shorter sacrifices 
as the I§t% the Pam eaerifieej the Darvi horrid mtd the like, — (2) because 





Pl)BVA-MlMAMSA-SdTBAS. Ill ADHYAYA 


tlie purpose served By tBe joining together,’ the strength of the pounding 
slab is quite applicable to the Jyoti^oma, (3) because the Injunction of 
‘ not-joining together,’ could be taken as an optional alternative (to the 
‘ joining together ’), just like the alternative of vrihi and yava, — therefore, 
for the sake of the Context, the ‘ joining together ’ should not be taken 
apart from it. 

The expression ‘ like Purchase ’ may be explained as an instance 
of the non-disappearance of usefulness brought forward without any 
reference to the Injunction of ‘ not-joining together.’ 

' The objection being — ‘ Inasmuch as the J yotispma sacrifice takes 
very little time to finish, there would not be much use in the said joining 
fogetfeer of the pounding slabs being done in connection with that sacri- 
fice,’ — -we have the reply — that does not much affect the question, as the 
joining together will still have its use, ‘ like the Purchase.’ That is to say, 
the actual price of tlie Soma not being very much, and its purchase having 
been accomplished by the payment of any one of the prescribed articles,, 
—cloth and the rest — in exchange, one still gives to the owner all 
these articles, in keeping with the scriptural text laying down all these 
articles as to be giv’en in exchange for the Soma ; and though the payment 
of these latter is not necessary, yet it is not altogether useless, serving the 
purpose of still further winning the good graces of the owner ; because 
it is well-known that the scriptures declare the fact of prosperity resulting 
from the purchase of Soma, if effected to the entire satisfaction of its 
original owner. In the same manner, even though the unjoined slabs 
would be quite efficient for the pounding of the Soma for the J yoti^tomd, 
yet, inasmuch as we are cognizant of the fact that the pounding done on 
the strengthened slabs brings about prosperity, the ‘ joining toother,’, 
done in accordance with the sentence under consideration, would not be 
entirely useless (even in the J yotispina).” 

“For these reasons, we conclude that, the ‘joining together’ is not 
to be taken apart from the Context.” 

PRELIMINARY SIDDHAnTA. 

Utkarsaii, removal* ^ Vi., certainly. Graha^dt, on account 

of Vi^esasyaof the speciality. 

, , 25. It should be taken apart ; because of the men- 

the. speciality. — 25. , ^ 


369 



III PAD A, XI ATMIKABAXA, SA 27, 28. 


the like (wliich have no connection with Soma ; because these latter do 
not belong to the same class (as the Jyotistoma and the other Soma- 
sacrifiees), and because they are not spoken of in the Context ; and it is 
only when the two relative members of the comparison are mentioned that 
they are differentiated into the ‘ Long ’ and the ‘ Short,’ — and in the case 
in question we do not find the Isti etc., mentioned, in comparison with 
which the Jyolispma could be spoken of as ‘ Long.’ 

gr II 

wi'Bi Kartrito, pertaining to the performer, Visesasya, the speciality. 

TiftfvpirTO TanniinittatvS,t, being based upon it. 

26. “The speciality could be taken as pertaining 
to the performer as it is upon him that it is based.” — 26. 

“ So long as we could interpret the word ‘ Dirghasoma ’ in keeping 
with the indications of the Context, it is not proper to entirely reject this 
Context. And as the matter of fact, we find that it can be taken as 
|>ertaiuing to the Performer. Nor would that make any difference in the 
as regards the compound ; because in any case we have the acute 
accent upon the last syllable ; consequently we must expound the com- 
pound as the Genitive Tatpurma ‘ Dirghasya’ pum^sya Soma]}.)" 

^ ^Eirg ii ’{VS I) 

; Kratuto, pertaining to the sacrifice. Arthavfidfinupapateh, 

Pn account of the inexplicability of the Arthavada. ^ SyAt, should be. 

27. It must pertain to the sacrifice; as, other- 
wise, the two words could not have their own signifipations 
[and the Arthavada would not be explicable.] — 27., ,, ; , 

The epithet ‘Long’ must pertain to the ; (and not to the 

Saerifieer ; and the compound must be expounded as a KarmadMrya 



PI^BVA-MlMlMSA-SI^TRAS. Ill ADHYAYA 


Answer r—The chief reason for this is that it is only when the com- 
pound is thus explained that we have the direct significations of the 
component words ; otherwise (if the compound be taken as the Oenitive 
Tatpuru^a) one of the words qualifies something wholly different (namely 
the Sacrificer), and that wmnld make the direct primary significations of 
the words incompatilDle. 

Thns then, when we come to think of the extremely large quantities 
of Soma to be ponnded, we come to desire much strength and durability 
in the pounding slab; and in that case the injunction contained in the 
sentence in question (as explained by us) would be found to serve a visi- 
ble purpose (that of making the slab strong by ‘joining together ’ the 
two slabs). Otherwise there would be no cause for desiring any extra 
durability in the slab, and consequently, the Injunction would not serve 
any iiseful purpose. 

So also, the Arthavada contained in the word ‘ Dhrlyai * points to 
the propriety of our interpretation of the compound. 

For these reasons, it must be admitted that the joining together 
should be taken apart from the Jyotistoma 

II Rq 11 

flWTCT Samsth^s'cha, in the case of the Samsth^s. Kartrivat lik the 

performer. Dharao^rth4vi^§s4t, the mention of Dhriti being Lqual. 

28. “ In the case of (the word ‘ Dirghasoma ’ applying 

to) the Samsthas also, the mention of ‘Dh^tyai ’ would be as 
inexplicable as in that of (the epithet ‘ Dirgha’ belonging to) 
the Performer.”— 28. 

This Sutra must be taken as urged by the opponent in reply to the 
following argument of the Siddhdnta: It is possiblethatthe'joinitio- 
together ’may not find a place in the first &mst/ 2 ^-the Agnistoma-ol 
the Jyoti?toma; but it could pertain to the other samsikh-the 
Uhthya and the rest, -which are ‘longer’ than the Agni^ma, and by 
connecting, with which we keep our interpretation in keeping with the 
Context. Consequently, we must take the ‘joining together ’ as finding a 
place m all the three samsthds; specially as the fact of the samstMs 
belonging to the same Context as the J yoti^toma has yet to be refuted 
by the SamstMdhiharana (IIl-vi-41 et seq.) Or, even if there be a 
distinct Context of the samstMs, -then too, it would be only in thosl 
awes^ry details that are of use in the Agnistoma, wherein the ‘joining 
together ’ could be precluded, on account of the contradiction involved in 



ni PAD A, XI ADUIZAUAXA, 8tl 29. 


tlie mixture of the necessary and the unnecessary qualifications. Conse- 
quently we must admit that the ‘joining together ’ should have a place in 
the second and subsequent Samstkcts (sections) of the Ayotistoma. 

As against these argninents we have the above sntra, which formu- 
lates the following. 

FINAL PORTAPAKSA. 

“ Inasmuch as the quantitj' of soma used in everyone of the 
mmsthAs is the same as in the Agnistoma) the work of the pounding too 
in everyone of these would be exactly similar and hence the eulogy 
'dhrtyai’ {=for the sake of making it strong and durable) would be 
as useless in this interpretation, as in that in which the Performer 
(is held to be qualified by epithet ‘ Dtrgha’). 

'I hat IS to say, though the subsequent samsthds take a longer time 
in performance (than the first samsthch, yet in every one of these, the 
quantity of soma pounded is only ‘ten-handfuls,’ as per injunction dasa 
mushUmnimite, which is applied, by implication, to every one of the 
samstlias of the J yotistoma. Thus then the strength and durability 
required (in the pounding slab) being the same in all eases, the absence 
of perceptible use and Arthatdda (in ‘ dhftyai ’) remain as inexplicable as 
in the former case. 

Thus then the inexplicability of being common in the 

case of all samstMs the ‘ joining together’ should be taken apart from 
tlie latter samsthds also (and hence from the whole Context of the Jyoti?- 
tpma). 

FINAL SIDPHANTA. 

^ IMS. II 

^ «ai=ii% Ukthyadisu, to the Ukthya etc. gr Vk, really, wfei Arthasya, 
the meaning, VidyamAnatvAt, being applicable. 

29. It should belong to the Ukthya and the rest ; 
because the significations of the words are quite applicable 
to them. — 29. 

For reasons shown above, the ‘joining together’ should find a 
place in the samsthds of the Ukthya and the rest. And as an 
increase in the number of offerings would mean a corresponding 
increase in the quantity of the substance to be offered, the Arthavdda {con- 
. tained in the word ‘ dhftyai ’) would be quite explicable in this case. As 
for the assertion, that ‘ the quantity of soma-juice would be increased by 
the addition of water ;’ — it is not admissible f inasmuch as the 



purva-mImAmbI-sj^tbas. in adeyAya 


sacrifice is laid down as to be perforined witb the soma no other substance 
couJd rightly be added to it, without the authority of a direct scriptural 
declaration to the effect. Consequently under such circumstances, it 
would be the quantity of the soma itself that should liave to be increased. 
But then this increase cannot be either in tbe thichness of the bundles or 
in the number of joints (because of these two being restricted to ‘ten- 
handfuls ’ and ‘ three joints ’ respectively) ; consequently, the only way in 
which the quantity of soma juice could be lawfully increased would be by 
getting hold of such pieces of the plant as have their joints at longer 
intervals than is ordinarily the case ; and in this manner we would have 
increased the quantity, and yet kept within bounds of the restrictions 
as to the measure of soma and also preserved the compatibility of the 
Context and the word ‘ Dirghasoma ’ because the ‘ length ’ of the pieces of 
the creeper would justify us in calling the soma itself ‘ long.’ 

^ It II 

Avis'es4t, equally, Stutih, the eulogy, Vyarthd^ mean- 

ingless* ^ Itichet, if thus be urged. 

30. “ The oppoi).ent urges that the eulogy would 
be equally useless in the case of the Ukthyas also.” — 30. 

COMMENTARY. 

For the Jyotistoma ten-handfuls of the soma-sticlcs are laid down, and 
as the Ukthya, etc., are only parts of the dyotistoma the quantity should 

be the same in these also. So that there is no sense in the praise of the 
slabs as being conducive to firmness. 

\\\\ 11 

Syat, would be. Anityatvat, not being universally applicable. 

31. “ There would be some sense in the praise, as 
the restriction is not universal.” — 31. 

COMMENTARY. 

The answer to be above objection is that the limit of ten handfuls 
is not meant to apply to all sacrifices so that in the case of any sacrifice 
if the number of offerings is a large one, the use pounding of a larger 
quantity would be quite justified and it is with a view to such cases that 
we have the word Dhfitye, 



m PIBA, XII ADHIKABAJ^A, 84. 33. 



FdE7A-MtMAMBMt!TBAS. Ill ADHYAVA 


that sacrifice ; (4) and because of the indications by the Context (in wbicli 
the sentence under consideration occurs^,— [the expression ‘ First Sacri- 
fice ’ should be taken as referring to the whole of the J yotupma]. 

naimittliikain, relatiye. ^ really, Kartrisanyogat, 

tlirough. the connection of the performer. Lingasya, the indicative power. 

Tannimittatvdt, being determined by that. 

33. It (the ‘ First ’) is conditionally relative, through 
the connection of the Performer ; because the Indicative 
Power (of the word) is actually determined by that. — 33. 

If the word ‘ Pratliama ’ (‘ First ’) were a name of the Jyoti§pma it- 
self, then what has been said in, the PArvapaksa would be quite admis- 
sible. As a matter of fact, however it is sound to be expressive of the 
Performance. 

That is to say, what the word ‘ Prathama ’ actually denotes is that 
operation of the performer which precedes all his other operations, and not 
any particular Action ; and it is only by its connection with the said opera- 
tion that it conies to be applied to the Action also ; but this too would 
be possible when the Action would be undergoing such an operation as 
that pointed out. Specially as when one is found to be g'oing on with the 
second and subsequent performances (of the Jyotistoma), he is not spoken 
of as ‘ performing the first ’ ; nor is one, who is not actually performing 
a sacrifice, called ‘ the performer of the first sacrifice.’ 

Thus then, the word ‘ First ’ having been shown to be denotative of 
the first operation, if it be, applied by indireet indication, to that which 
has that (firstness) as its qualification (the Jyotifioma sacrifice f. i.) then 
that would involve a certain degree of remoteness (of the word) from its 
objective ; and this remoteness can be admissible only in such cases where 
no syntactical connection is found to be possible without it ;—e. g. in the 
sentence ‘ e.?a vdm prathamo yajnanam, In the case in question, 

however, we do not find the character of ‘ First ’ incapable of being taken 
as the ground of the Prohibition (of Pravargyn) ; connsequently, it would 
be only after having superseded this previous denotation of the word, 
that we could apply it to the (Jyotistoma), even in course of its 

first performance ; and under the circumstances, the chances of its being 
applicable to the other performances (by the same sacrificer) would be 


375 



in PADA, xm-xiv ABRIKAUAXA, Sit 


Adhikarna Kill. — The grinding of PUsa’s share is to 
he done at the Vikrti saerifiees. 

Wj SI®# II ^8 II 

, grinding, 

Acliodanlit, 

regard to the archetype; 

is recognised as 

because it is not enjoined witli 


TO raus^iam, pertaining to Pdsan. Pesanam, 

Vikritau, in the ectype. snfi^i Pratlyeta, should be understood, 
on account of non-impression, ji®# Prakritau, in 

34. The grinding of Pusa’s share 
pertaining to the ectypes 
regard to the archetypes. — 34. 

[In connection with the Darsa-P4niam6sa, we 
Tasmdt Pdsa prapistahhdgah, adatkohi sah (‘ Thus thi 
share ground, because he is without teeth ’j; and in re^ 
arises the question as to where this grinding is to 
Vikrti sacrifice or in the Prakrti.] And on this que 
conflict between Syntactical Connection and Context 
accordance with the ‘ Law of the joining-together,’ III- 
it is clear that the Grinding is to be done in the Vikrti ; 
is yet introduced again, simply with a view to serve as 
to the next Adhikarana. 


Adhikarna XIV. —The Grinding of Pusa’s share 
applies only to the Bice. 

PURVAPAKSA. 

■' .k . .. 

II H 

wj T4t, that. "ehiM' SarvArtham, must pertain to all. ?ia5«ira Aviiies4t 

on account a non -distinction. 

35. “ The grinding applies to aU offering materials 
equally ; because of non-distinction.” — 35. ‘ ' 

“ Whatet'er may be the particular material to be offered to Pusan 
be it Rice, or Cake, or the animal Body,-— it is , necessary to grind; it as 
no distinction has been made in the sentence laying down the Grid*ing 
as to the paidicular material to which it should apply.” . . • 



lifSijs 


376 pObVA-MIMAMSA-SOtRAS. Ill ADE YAYA. 

SIDDHANTA. 

=§, m,ovo„ rAcraiYl to tile sraiti. V4, really. Artlioktam, it 

the cake, Arth- 

in rBAS-i'd to the animal. 


serves the useful purpose. 5^ 
vipratisedhat, incongrinty to the use. 

NasyM, could not apply* 

36. But it should apply to the grain 
in the case of the Cake, it is 
useful purpose served by it ; and in 


only ; because 
necessarily implied by the 
' ■ . the case of the animal 
body, it could not apply to it, because of incongruity.— 36. 

In the ease of the animal body, there would he a deficiency in the 
character of the Primary offering. Because the Primary offenng has 
been recognized as being in ike shape uf the Heart, etc, ; and this could 
be done only by cutting these limbs out of the body. But when the body 
would be ground down, the necessary shapes would be no longer there, 
and so the offerings could not he cut out off the masses of those shapes. 
Even though it might be possible to make those shapes out of the 

pounded mass of flesh, yet in this case the names Heart and the rest 

would apply to these newly-shaped masses of flesh only secondmily,— 
just like the name ‘gavaya’ to the animal made of clay; and that 
causes a deficiency in the offering. Then again, we have the declaration 
that ‘ the piece is to be cut out from that region in which it has been 
torn from the body’; and when the Heart, etc. have been ground down, it 
could not be known by which particular part it had been torn from the 
body of the animal. 

Thus then we find that it is only in the case of the Grain (or 
Rice), that the grinding does not cause any deficiency in the offering 
material, and that it is not necessarily implied by the purposes served by 
it • consequently we conclude that the grinding laid down should be taken 



in PAD A, XV ADHIKAENA, SiH. 88, 89. 


Adhikarana XV. —The Grinding of PusTs Share finds 
place only in that Charu which is dedicated to Pusan alone. 

u u 

Ekasmm, pertaining to one deity, Ekasanyog^t, on account of 

connection with one. 

^ 39. (There should be a grinding of the O/iarM) on% 

when there is one (Deity) ; lecaim (the mention of grinding 
is) connected with one (Deity) only . — 39. 

Now then, there arises the question as to whether the Grinding is to 

he done also when the offering of that Charu is meant for two Deities 

Indra and Pu§an,— or only when it is meant for Pusan alone. And 
as the question is subject to the principles arrived at under the ‘ CiiatMrdho- 

haram ’ and the ‘ Indrapita ’ Adhikmmja (III~i— 26 et. seq., and III ii 

— 27 et. seq.) —we (omit the Purvapaksa and) start off with the— 

siddhAnta. 

Inasmuch as we find the sentence, under consideration, which lays 
down the speaking of Pihan alone as having his ‘ share ground,’ 

the’Gnndtny would apply to that Charu alone which is dedicated to 





PUEVA-M1MAMSA-8()TRAS. Ill adhyAya 


that Gharu which is meant for rusan alone : in tlie case or tne uriaiu 
meant for two deities (Pfisan and Indra), would you grind the whole of 
it or only half? If the latter then the cooking of it would he deranged; 
and if the fomaer, the two shares would get hopelessly mixed up. 

That is to say, if only half of the Charu were ground and the other 
half left unground, the ground half would become cooked very much 
sooner than the other half ; consequently, if the whole thing would be 
removed from the oven as soon as the ground half would be ready cooked, 
then the other half would remain uncooked ; while if we were to wait for 
this latter to become ready cooked (before removing the vessel from the 
oven), then by that time the ground half would become melted off in a 
single mass (of flour.) A careful and neat method of cooking makes even 
a ‘ cooked rice ’ of the ground grain also ; but this would be absolutely 
impossible in the way suggested (by the PUrvapaksa). It might be 
suggested that the portion consisting of whole Rice should be put upon 
the fire first, and when that should have become half-cooked, then the 
ground half would be put in (and then the two portions would be ready 
by the same time). But in that case the simultaneity of the cooking 


disappear. Then, lastly, if for the sake of Piisan, Indra s share were 
also ground, then the two shares would get hopelessly mixed up ; and if 
the portion of one Deity happened to be offered to another, that would 
mean a great anomaly in the sacrifice. 

But upon the above we have the following arguments for the 

pObvapaksa. 

wi't ^ II a? ii 

^ wi apiv4, but. Sadwitiye, where there is a second also* 

Sy4t, should be* Devat^nimittatw^t, on account of being due 

to the character of the deity. 

41. “ Even in a case where Pusan is coupled with 

another Deity (we would have the Grinding) ; as the presence 
ol that Deity (Pusan) is the only condition (laid down for 



ni PlDA XV ADHIKAENA, 8A 41 


We could liave the grinding even in those cases where we had 
Pfisan coupled with another Deity. Because if the grinding were laid 
down either for that offering which is meant for Pffsan alone, or for 
that which forms part of the sacrifice to Pfisan ; — then, in that case, 
there could have been no grinding in regard to the Gharu meant for two 
Deities, on account of its not being declared to be for that purpose. As 
a matter of fact, however, we find that the only condition laid down 
for the Grinding is the presence of P-itsan, and not any substance 
qualified by that Deity. Then, inasmuch as the character of the Deity 
of a sacrifice is 'pervasive (that is, the Deific character pervades as one 
complete whole over both Deities in a Two- Deity sacrifice), though 
the sacrifice which has two Deities (Indra and Pusan) could not be 
spoken of as ‘ one qualified by P4san as its Deity,’ yet by this it is not 
meant that either P'dsan, or his Portion, does not exist in connection 
with that sacrifice ; as will be declared in connection with the Manola 
(in Adhydya X) that ‘ though Agni is not its Deity, yet that does not 
mean that he does not inhere in it.’ Consequently, even if the deific 
character does not belong to Pusan (in the case of the Two-Deity 
sacrifices), as the only condition (for grinding) is the mere presence of 
Pitman, even when the Gharu would be meant for two Deities (Indra and 
Pusan), — it is always cognized that half of it is the portion of PQsan 
alone, in accordance with the conclusion arrived at under 8'dtra X— iii— 
53 ; and thus when we would come to do the grinding of this portion of 
the Gharu, then in accordance with the ‘ Law of Kdnsyahhofi (which 
makes it incumbent upon the Teacher to eat out of the Kansya vessel, 
for the sake of his Pupil who is under a penance which makes it necessary 
for him to eat out of such vessel, and for whom it is necessary to eat only 
of what has been left by his Teacher), as the condition of even that which 
may be the secondary factor might affect that of . the other, the Portion 
of the other Deity also would come to be ground, for the sake of the 
grinding of Pfi§a’s portion); and there would be nothing objectionable 
in this. If, however, it be found undesirable to do something (the 
grinding of Indra’s portion) not directly laid down, and it be concluded 
to grind only the Half meant for Pusan, — even then, the proper cooking 
of both (the ground and the unground grain) could be done by some 
.clever stroke of the culinary art. Or we could very legitimately do 
away with the necessity of the minor , details of the fact of , the cooking 
of both being simultaneous, or that of both being, cooked in the same 
' vessel ; and thus we should do the grinding (of Pfi^a’s portion even in 
! the cake of the Ghdtru being meant for both In<%^^%|;Pfi|an), 





pdEVA-MlMiMSA-S^TBAB. Ill ADHYAYA 


'' It bas been argued above' (under 39) that ' the Laws of the 
Ghatiirdhdkarana and that of I ndraptta would apply to the case in ques- 
tion (and the performance of the grinding would be limited by the 
words of the sentence laying it down).’ And to this we make the 
following reply : As for the compound (in ' Indrapita') and the word 
formed by a nominal affix ('i.e. ^ Agneya'), these can never appear in 
connection with such words as are incapable of affording the sense 
required ; consequently in the case of the use of such words, we do not 
admit the capability of the expressive of one Deity referring to that 
which belogns to two Deities. That is to say, in the case of the words 
' Agneycif^ and ‘ Indvapita^^ we find that they are fully capable of referring 
to Agni and Indra respectively, and as such cannot in any ease refer to 
that which belongs to two Deities ; but in the sentence under considera- 
tion we find that the word ‘ Pum^ does not occur in a compound, (and 
hence there is no exclusive capability belonging to it) ; hence even though 
the compound ^ PrapistahhdgaJ}^ is dependent upon something else, yet 
a reference to the Cam meant for two Deities does not deprive the word 
‘ Puf^if of any recognized capability ; and hence there can be nothing 
objectionable in speaking of the offering meant for Indra and Ptisan as 
‘ one meant for Pusan.” 

n 8^^ (I 

42. “ Also because we perceive an Indicative Force.” 


“ The reason (for grinding) that is given is- ‘ because Pit^n is with- 
out teeth' ; and this clearly indicates that the Grinding depends tipon, 
and is conditioned by, the Deity. And certainly Pusan does not become 
endowed with teeth, \vheu joined by another Deity ; hence the condition 
(for grinding) remaining intact in the latter case also, it is necessary to 
do the Grinding Specially as it is thus alone that we could I’econcile 
the following declarations : ‘ We should offer the Oharu meant for Soma 
and Pusan, half of which has been ground’ ‘In the case of two-Deity 
offerings, half of the Oharu should be ground and half unground.’ And 
that this is the right course is also indicated by the fact of the presence 
of the Deity being laid down as the sole condition for having recoui-se to 
Grinding.”.. 

U . 

VacL^ndt, through the direct injunction, Sarrapesnam the 




Ill PADA, XV AmiXAPAXA, S4. 4 S. 


grinding of all. cfsrf^ Tamprati, with regard to that, l^h&stravattvit; 

Boripturally authorised, Arth4bh4vat, there being no use. % Hi. 

because. 'A Charau, in regard to the charu. Apesapam, negation oi 

grinding. ^ Bhavati, there is. 

43. “ If the sentence were an injunctive one, then we 

would have the Grinding of all (offering materials) ; and 
with reference to that (the unqualified Soma-Pausna offer- 
ing) the Grinding would be scripturally authorised ; and 
it would be of the Charu that there would be no Grinding ; 
as there would be no use for it,” — 43. 

“ (In regard to the sentence ‘ soma'pausnan cTiarunnirvapet nemapis- 
tam, etc!) it might be argued that ‘ inasmuch as it is an Injunctive 
sentence, the expression nemapistani could not have the desired indi- 
cative force ; in fact it would point to the contrary view.’ And in view 
of this objection, we explain as follows : If this were an Injunctive sen- 
tence, then, inasmuch as it would not be right to have an injunction 
of many things by a single sentence, the ‘ grinding of half would be 
the object enjoined ; and then, this could be enjoined, with reference 
either to the ‘ Charu,' or to ‘ Somdpau^a' ; and with reference to which- 
soever of these two the injunction would be made, that could not be 
qualified by the other, — and hence the grinding would come to have an 
universal application ; and as such all the offerings would have to be 
ground ; and in that case one of the two words (‘ Charu’ or ‘ Somapaiq- 
na’) would become useless. That is to say, if we were to take the 
Injunction as ‘ that which is the Charu should be half-ground,’ then the 
grinding coming to be recognised as applyingto all Charus, the word Somd- 
pausna, as refenung to only one of the Charus, would become useless. If 
on the other hand, the Injunction be. interpreted as that ‘ that which is 
Somdpausrica should be half-ground,’ then too, the Grinding yvould come 
to apply to all offering-materials ; because all that the word ‘ Somdpau§m 
would indicate would be the character of being meant for the joint Deity 
Soma-P4san ; and this would be equally applicable to the Cahe and 
the Animal Body also (just as much as to the Charu) ; and thus the word 
‘ Charum’ would become absolutely useless.” 

“ Specially would such be the case, because with reference to that—i.e. 
with reference to the Somd-pausna even when uftq.ualified (by ‘ Charu’)—- 
the grinding would be scripturally authorised, as no useful purpose 
would be served by the qualification.” . 



pdBVA-MtMAMSA-Si^TRAS. Ill ADHYAYA 


“ In fact, in accordance with this view, there would be no grinding 
of the Gharii” 

'' Thus then, inasmuch as the grinding would apply to all materials, 
it could not be taken as applying exclusively to the Gliarii ; and hence its 
n*ention (in the sentence ‘ somdpaup:ian chariim, etc.’) would be wholly 
useless. Consequently it must be admitted that this, sentence enjoin- 
ing the relationship of the Gharu with the Deity (Soma-Pusan, the 
‘ half-grinding' is merely spoken of by way of reference (and not as an 
object of Injunction). And thus this latter word, not forming part of 
an Inj unction, comes to be taken as having the desired indicative force 
(assigned under S'dira 42).” 

SIDDHANTA. 


Ekasmin, to one only. ^ Va, really, Arthadharmatvat, 

because it pertains to the resultant. Aindragnavat, as in the case of 

Indz'a. Agni. Ubhayoh to both. ^ wq Nasyit, could not pertain. 

Achoditatwat, because it is not enjoined. 

44. It pertains to one only ; because it is meant to 
belong to the resultant (Apurva) ; consequentlj^, it could not 
belong to both, just as in tbe case of the Aindr%na, because 
it is not so enjoined. — 44. 

We could have the grinding only when PAsan alone would be the 
Deity, and not when he would be joined by another Deity. Because thfe 
grinding does not belong either to the Deity, or to his portion ; in fact it 
is laid down as a detail belonging to the sacrifice of which , Pusan is the 
Deity. 

That is to say, (before the offering has actually been made) there 
is no ‘Portion’ {Bhdga) of the Deity, to which the Grinding could belong. 
Specially as the material becomes the ‘ portion’ of a Deity, not merely by 
being offered to him, but by being accepted by him. And further, the 
word ‘ BMga’ (Portion) is made up of the root ‘ bhaf with the affix 
‘ ghan,’ in the Accusative sense,— it being etymologically explained 
‘ bhajyate ( = ‘ sevyate’) ya^ ‘ hhagaJ}' { = that whiah is aeeepted) ; conpe- 
ijittently; that which is accepted by one is his ‘ BMga’ (Portion). And as 
a of f^t 'we do not find the Deity actually accepting the offering ; 


383 





ITI PADA, XV ADEIKARATAA, SA 45. 


specially as the fact of the Deity actually partaking oj the offering will be 
refuted later on, in AdMya IX. In fact, even if the Deity were to 
accept it, — yet, it could not have the capability of introducing an 
accessory, as also will be shown in Adhy^ya IX (under the Siltra IX — i — 4 
et seq). Thus then, it being as impossible for the Grincluig to be an 
accessory of the ‘ Portion’ as that of the ‘ Deity,’ it must be taken as an 
accessory belonging, through the sacrifice, to its resultant Apilrva ; — 
as is shown by the first Adhikarana of Adhydya IX, as also by the 
‘ Dei'atddhikarm (Adli. IX).’ The author of the Bhasya has also referred 
to the same fact of the grinding being an accessory of the sacrifice, by 
denying that of its belonging to the Deity. 

Hetum^trim, mere supplementary reason, Adantatvam, 

absence of teeth. 

45. The absence of teeth is a mere supplementary 
reason.— 45. 

It has been argued by the opponent that “ the mention of the reason 
‘ because he is without teeth’ shows that the grinding is an accessory of 
the Deity.” And to this we offer the following reply : — The sentence 
‘ because he is without teeth’ is an Arihavdda having a form indicative of 
a supplementary or corrohorative reason; and as such it is only meant to 
be an eulogy of the particular accessory in question fyiz. grinding) ; and 
as there would be nothing objectionable in this, it could not show that the 
accessory belongs to the Deity.” 


46. The other is an injunctive sentence. — 46. 

Inasmuch as the ‘ half-grinding^ has never been found to have been 
enjoined elsewhere, the sentence ( ‘ Somdpamnam, etc.’) would be an 
Injunction (and not merely indicative of the fact of the grinding applyift-g 
to the Gharu meant for the two deities Soma and Pd^an). And as the 
object of the Injunction is a qualified one, there would be no syntactical 
split. And as in accordance with the law of the Arunddhikarana, the 
factors spoken of in the sentence would restrict one another, the 
Injunction of the grinding could not pertain to aM offering materials. As 
a matter of fact, it is only in comparison with an unqualified Injunebiori 
that the qualified Injunction could be said to be less authoritative ; in the 
9 ase in question however there i§ qo In|nnction j consequently 








PI^RVA-MIMAMSA-SOtbAS. Ill adeyaya. 


I 


the sentence in question, cannot be taken as merely indicative (and not 
injunctive). . 

For these reasons the Orinding mast be taken as pertaining to the 
Portion of a single Deity. 

Thus ends the Third Pada of Adhyaya in. 


i, 




|4 ‘‘ l 'a * , ' 


lislIWi 


lilllilBiB 





third adhyaya. 

PaDxI Foueth, 

AdJnkarana I —The me^ition of the Nivifa is cm Arthavdda 

sOtras 1—6. 

it % n 

the Nivlta ; is obligatory on the man ; of the word ; 

on accouat of implying tlie predominance of that. 

1. ''Tlie Nidte must be regarded as obligatory on 
the mail ; because the word implies his predomiiiaiice.’’ 

COMiMENTARY. 

lu connection with the Varslia-PiiTnamdsa sacrifices, we find the 
passage The NivUa belongs to men ; the Prdchinmita to the PUris and 
the Vpavita to the gods ; when one puts on the UparAta, lie wears the sign of 
the gods. The three terms, ‘ Nivita^^ ^ Prdehindvita ^ and ‘ CJpavUa ' refer 
to the three ways of wearing tlie ‘ Sacred Thread ' or the ‘ 





FdBVA-MlMAHSASdTRAS. Ill ADEYA^A 


gr It =i M 

m|5i:, descriptive ; ^ir but ; of the thing ; ^Jwara, on account of its 
being already in existence. 

2. But it may be purely descriptive ; specially as the 
thing (the Nivtfa) is something that is already known. 

COMMBNTAEY. 

An objection is raised against the Pdrvapak§a — The Nivita being 
something already hnown as the most convenient way of wearing the 
uttonya, its mention in the sentence in question must be purely descrip- 
tive ; it could be injunctive or mandatory, only if it spoke of something 
new, not already known. 

iDjunctiye^ g, but; sometliing new ; shonld be. 

3. Ans. — But it should be regarded as injunctive ; 
as what it lays down is something new.’’ 

OOMMENTARy. 

Tbe answer to the objection is that, though it is generally known 
that, the Iswita is the most convenient way, yet it is not known that it 
is necessary to wear the uttariya in tliat fashion ; and inasmuch as the 
sentence provides this element of obligation, wdiich is neio, it must be 
regarded as mandatory.'"'' 

^ sn^rufi^: iRTg; ii « ii 

• it ; 3TOJ, by context ; a detail pertaining to the sacrifice should 


4. It should, by context, be regarded as a detail per- 
taining to tbe sacrifice. 

COMMENTARY. 

It may be admitted— says the objector to the Purvapaksa,— that the 
sentence in question is an injunction of the Nivita ; but we cannot admit 
that it is laid down as pertaining to the lian ; because occurring as it 
does in the context of the particular sacrifice of the Parsha-Purnam&sa, 
_whatever the sentence layfi down must be taken as pertaining to that 





IV PlDA, I ADHIKABA, Sil 5, 


5. Specially by reason of wliat is supplementary to 
the sentence. 

COMMENTARY. 

Another argument in favour of the view that the Mmta is laid 
clown as pertaining to the sacrifice consists in the fact that the section in 
which the sentence occurs is called the ‘ adJivaryava’ section — the section 
dealing with things relating to the A^hvaryu priest. [This name of the 
section being what is ‘ supplementary to the sentence ’] and inasmuch 
it is only when the man is pei-fonning a sacrifice that he is called the 
‘ Adhvaryu,’ it follows that what the sentence lays down is in relation to 
the sacnjfice. 

n i u 

in the context of the sacrifice ; that which ; related ; 

as there is no incongruity, 

6. Specially as there would be no incongruity in the 
NiiAta pertaining to that (sacrifice) which is related (to 
the Man). 

COMMENTARY. 

It' is true that the sentenee, by itself, points to the Nivtta as pertain- 
ing to the Man, while its relation to the sacrifice is indicated only by eoiitext 
(as shown under Sfitra 4) and by the name ‘adhvaryava’ (as shown 
under Sfitra 5) ; — but even when we take the Nivtta as pertaining to the 



PURVA-MIMAMSASIJtrAS. . Ill adhyaya 


-COMMENTARY. 

^he Purvapah§a is finally summed up. TLe Nivita must appertain tc 
only such acts in which Ma??,aiid not the Deity, is the predominant factor; 
that is, such acts as the attending on guests, and so forth. The 3’eason for 
tliis conclusion lies in the fact that all tlie three methods spoken of in the 
passage aie of equal importance ; none of tliem is spoken of as subordinate 
to any other ; the meaning clearly is that in connection with acts in which 
Deities nre the predominant factors, sacrifices— the ‘ ^ method 

is to be adopted ; in connection with tliose in which the Pitris are the 
principal party, shrficlcjhas — the ^ Praehiiiavita^ is. to be adopted ; 

and, lastly, in connection with those in which Men aie the predominant 
party— e.gr. attendance on guests— the 'Nivita' is to be adopted; this 
shows that each of the three methods has a distinct application of its 
own ; so that the mention of the ^ Nivita ' must be taken as appertaining 
to Man,^ Hence there can be no Justification for regarding the Nivita as 


MW* 



IV FAD A, I ADHlKAmA, SiL 9. 


OOMMENTAEY. 

Another argument in support of the SuhlMnta is put forward The 
passage under consideration contains the injunction—' when one puts on 
the Upai'ita, he wears the sign of tlie gods, which lays down the Dpavita 
method ; and the sentence mentioning the NiuUa is capable of being 
syntactically co-ordinated with this injunction ; while if this latter were 
another injunction, no such co-ordination between the two clauses of the 
passage would be possible ; which would give rise to a syntactical split. It 
IS best, therefore, to take the mention of the Mctta merely as describing a 
well known fact;— and this for the purpose of eulogising the enjoined 
DpavUa the sense of the whole passage being— ' the FI ivitam not fit 
for^aets pertaining to gods, as it is fit only for Men;— nor is the 
PrdehmMta fit for such acts, as it is fit only for Pitris ;— the only fit 
method for such acts connected with the gods as the Oarsha-PArmmdsa 
and the like is the Upavita ; hence it is this Upavita method that should 
be adopted during the performance of the JMrsha-PArmvidsa and such 
other sacrifices to the Gods.’ 

After this there are six Sutras explained in the Tantravartika, 'which, 
howeA’'er, have been omitted in the Bliasya. ’ 

Several reasons have been suggested by the commentators for this 
omission :— (1) The author of the Bhd^ya missed these Sutras ; (2) he 
wrote liis commentary on them, but this part of his xvork has been lost ; 
(3) he omitted them as being unimportant ; (4) he omitted them because he 
thought these not to have been the work of Jaimini. The Shdstradipikd 
makes four arjhikarams out of these six SAtras. These Adhikaranas are as 
follows : — 

A4hikaram(l)A~^q%^ 1 1 H 

TOW the upavita ; because we find indicatives ; belonging 

to all sacrifices ; must. ’ ® 



PdEVA-MlMAMSA-S^TRAS. Ill ADEYAYA 


the Gods that the milking is done hy men loearing it in the Vpav^tta 
fashion’;— here it is laid down as a general law that in sacrifices to the gods 
the Upavita is adopted ; from whicdi it is clear that this is to be done in 
all sacrifices to the gods ; specially, as it is not possible for this passage 
to be taken as referring to the one particular sacrifice of the T)arsha- 
PUrnamdsa; firstly, because the passage does not occur in the section 
dealing with the T)arsha-Purmmdsa, and, secondly, because the plurality 
of gods expressed by the word ’T)h&hhyaT}' precludes all possibility 
of its being related to any single sacrifice. The Siddhdnta is put forth 

in the next Siitra. ^ 

gt qSfRJl M SR 

w, not so ; because of context ; rm, of thst same; 5(4^, reference. 

Sutra 9b. It is not so ; because the context (is of the Enrsha-Purm- 
m&sa) ; and (the indicative cited) is a mere reference to the same. 

The fact of the matter is that the Cpaetto being found enjoined in 
the context of the Varsha-PArvamdsa, it must pertain to this latter alone, 
and not to all the sacrifices to the gods; then, as regards the passage put 
forward by the Pdrvapaksim, that is easily explained as a mere reference 
to what has been enjoined in connection with the Varsha-Pdi'vamdsa ; 
and, lastly, as for the plural number in ‘ d&vEihyaT},’ in the passage cited 
by the Pwrmpaifsfjn, that also is easily explained as referring to the several 
doUies to whom the various offerings of the Earsha-Pth’vamdsa and its 


Pi 

iiai 



IF PADA, 1 ABUlKAEnA, SA 9. 


Sutra (9(1) — The me^ition of the North must he aii injunction ^ because 
it lays doicn something neio. 

In connection with the Mritagnihotra, we read — ‘ Those grasses that 
lie to the North sljoiild be spread with their tops towards the South ’ ; in 
connection with this arises the question as to the mention of * lying to the 
North ’ being an injunction or a reference, — the PHrmpaksa is that the 
mention of the North must be regarded as an Injunction, as it lays down 
something new, something not already enjoined in another passage. The 
Siddhanta is put forth in tlie next Sutra. 

^3^ II ?r 

What is already (known) ; ^ in fact ; i indicative 

Siltra (9e) — In reality, the passage is only indicative of what is 
already known. 

That the grass should be spread with their top-ends towards the 
North is already known from long- established usage and also from such 
Sinrifti texts as ‘ agravanti iidagagrdrji ’ ; and it is this usage that is indi- 
cated in the passage under consideration. It will not be right to argue 
that it is more in keeping with the principles of the Shdstra to regard the 
said usage and Smi'iti as based upon tbe Injunction contained in the 
passage ; — because the usage and the Smriti refer to all pointed things — 
the meaning being that pointed things should always, at all sacrifices, 
have their points turned towards the North ; while the passage we are 
dealing with refers only to the single sacrifice of the Mritagnihotra ; and 
hence having a very restricted scope, this latter cannot form the basis 
of the Smriti text which lias a very much wider scope. 

Acjhikarana ID— II >T 

, An injunction ; f, verily ; relating to the holding ; becaxise 

it is something new. 

SHtra (9f) — Verily it is an Injunction relating to the Holding, 
because it is something new. 

In connection witli the same Mritagnihotra, we meet with another 
passage — ‘ the fuel should he held underneath, it is held above in the case 
of sacrifices to the gods’— where the latter part refers to what is done 
at the ordinary Agnihotra ; and the question arising as to this latter 
clause being an Injunction of the holding glote of the fuel or a mere 
reference to it,— the Purvapaksa is that it is a mere Eeference; in answer 
to this, the Sfitra puts forward the Sii^hdnta—th&t the clause must be 
regarded as enjoining that the fuel should be held above ; for the simple 
reason that suclr holding is not found to be laid down anywhere else ; and 
hence being something not already known fimiji other sources, it must 
he taken as efijb&ed bjr the passage under cdflsideratibh. 





— 


FdWA-MtUAMBA-SdTEAS. Ill ADEYAYA 


Adhikarana 11— The distribution of the Quarters must he 
regarded as mere Reference. 

etTTRA 10. 

0 t « II 

distribution of the quarters ; t, also ; ngu, analogous ; of the 

connection ; ^nSIgfsira, on account of being for a purpose. 

10. The (case of the) distribution of the quarters also 
is analogous ; specially as the connection is for a definite 
purpose. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Jyotistoma we read — ‘ The gods took, the 
East, the Pityis the South, the Men the West, and the Rudras (or Asuras) 
the North.’ In connection with this, the question .arises — The passage 
declaring the fact of the Men having tahen the West, is it an Injunction or 
a mere descriptive Reference ? The Purvapak^a view is that the passage 
is to be taken as enjoining that Men should tahe the West. The Sutra de- 
clares that the case of this passage is analogous to that of the Nivita passage 
dealt with in the foregoing Adhikaraiia ; so that all that has been said 
there applies to this case also. Hence the Sujcjhdnta is that it is a purely 
descriptive Reference. An additional argument is put forward by the 
Shtra in support of the Siddhdnta : The connection of men with the West 
is found to serve a useful purpose ; that is to say, when a man is walking 
in the morning, if he keeps on walking to the West, he has the sun always 
on the back, which makes the walking more comfortable than if he walked 
towards any other quarter ; and in view of this visible advantage, no 
Injunction is called for, for the purpose of men having recourse to the 
West; hence it follows that the passage in question merely mentions 
a well-known fact for purposes of reference. 


Adhikarana 111. —The passages beginning loith ‘ Paru^i- 
ditam ’ &e. are only descriptive References. 

II ? ? II 

the mention of ‘ parusi dita,’ ‘ pfirua,’ ‘ ghjrita,’ and ‘ vidag- 
dha ’ ; also ; agu, analogous to the foregoing. 

11. The case of the passages mentioning (a) ‘ cut at 
the joint,’ (jb) ‘ fuU, ■' (e) ‘ butter and (d) ‘ charred ’ is analo- 
gous to the foregoing. . . . ., , . . 







IV PADA, IF ADBIKAE^A, Si. 12. 


Adhikarana IV .—The prohibition of the Telling of Lies 
pertains to the Saerifiee. 

^ ^Tci n ^ n 

the negative act ; mentioned in connection with the sacrifice • 

on account of its being related (to another injunction); niere 

reference to a permanent injunction ; should be. 

12. The negative act mentioned in connection with 
the sacrifice should be regarded as a mere reference to a 
permanent injunction ; because it is related to such a one.” 

COMMENTABY. 

In conueetion with the Varsha-PArmmdsa, we read — ‘ one should 
not tell a lie ’ ; and in connection with this the question arises as to 
whether this prohibition pertains to the sacrifice, the sense bein that 
one should desist from telling lies during the performance of the Parsha- 
PdrmwAsa, or it pertains to the ordinary life of man, the sense bein^ that 
m ordinary life one should not tell lies. The Pirvapak^a is that the 
prohibition applies to man’s ordinary life, even though it occurs in the 
contest of a particular sacrifice ; because the injunctive aflSx in ‘ should not 
tell ’ directly expresses the effort of the eqm, and; rfieuce the connection of 


liipi 



pdRVA-MlMiMSA^SdTEAk III ADtlYAYA 


the prohibition with the Man is expressed directly by tlie Veclic text ; while 
its connection with the sacrifices depends entirely upon the fact of its 
occurring in the context of the j)articnlar sacrifice ; and the direct declara- 
tion of the Vedic word is certainly more authoritative than the indication 
of context. Then, as regards the question as to wliether the passage in 
question is an Injunction or a Reference, it is clear that it is a mere 
Eefere^iee to what has already been enjoined to every child during the 
Upanayana ceremony, when he is told to Heli the truth and follow his 
duty,’ throughout his life. The prohibition of telling lies, being directly 
related to this permanent injunction of telling the truth, must be regarded 
as a mere reference to this latter. 

The Siddhanta is put forward in the next Sutra. 

n \\ u 

It must be an injunction ; in reality ; because the connec- 

tion is different. 

13. In reality, it must be regarded as an Injunction ; 
because the connection is different. 

COMMENTARY. 

In reality, tie passage in question must be regarded as an Injunction 
by itself, pertaining to tlie T)arsha-P'urvamasa because tie connection 
of tiis prohibition is entirely different from that of tie Injunction during 
Upanayana ; it is quite clear tiat tie injunction of ‘ telling tie truth’ 
pertains to tie ordinary life of man, while tie prohibition of ‘ telling lies ’ 
pertains to tie particular sacrifice ; hence the latter cannot be regarded 
as a mere Reference to tie former. 

An objection has been raised against tie Adiiiarana itself — “Accord- 
ing to both views, it is clear- that one should not tell lies in ordinary life, 
as w'ell as during the performance of the sacrifices ; wdiat then is the 
purpose of the A^hikaraxia ? ” 

The answer is supplied by the BM^ya—li the Pfirvapalc§a view 
be right, and the prohibition pertain to man’s ordinary life and be a 
mere Reference to the Injunction during Upanayana, tlien, by acting 
against the Prohibition, the penalty incurred would be that laid down in 
Smritis,— the Injunction during Upanayana being based upon Smyitis ; 
whereas if the Sid^Mnpx is right, and the prohibition pertains to the 
^orifices, the penalty incurred by its transgr-ession would be that laid down 
Yajurpeda, wherein the Vanhor-P'Aniam&sa, and its details are laid 





IV PADA, V ADHIKARNA. 


Adhikarana V . — The Yatming 'pertains to the 
context of the Saerifiee. 

SfTTEAS 14-16. 

u m ^ 

like the Alima ; jisq's#:, is a detail pertaining to the Man • 

because It IS recognised to be for his sake. ’ 

* The reads for But the sense remains the same 

14. The character in question pertains to the 
because it is recognised to be for bis sake, —like the Ali 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Parslia-Pili-nam&sa, we read— “ Yawnir 
should recite themsahratu -thereby one gathers within himself the 

jftowrj ,1, 

as to whether the yawmng pertains to the Han in his ordinary cai 
or to the Varsha-PUrna'musa sacrifice. The Ptlrmpafea put forw 
the Sutra is that it pertains to Han in his ordinary capacity ; becau 
sentence clearly indicates that it pertains to the Man ; specially 
latter part of the sentence speaks of an ordinary tphysical) adva 
accruing to the Man, in the shape of the collecting of the breatlis ' 
need be nothing incongruous in the character mentioned in the na 
being removed from the context ; as such removal from the context ^ 
uncommon ; for instance, in the case of the AMna sacrifice, the t' 
UpaBacJs are disconnected from their context-as shown under a fore< 

The Sid dhfinta is put forward in the next SMra.—- 

n ^vc II 

xwi!t^,the peculiar force of the context remaining undisturbed* 

I T ^-TT * ''ssissrt scc^rTnf ^ mtm. ^ *1 _ j _T * « < « ^ ■ ■■ 9 ■. 


XU. ±U lecuiiy, me cnaracter m question is 
of the Man as connected with the sacrifice ; b 
peculiar force of the contest remains undisturbed 

COMMENTARY. 

The force of the context is as effective in the present 
any other case ; hence what is indicated by the context c 
^side, . What the pontext clearly indicates ig #i»i,ithe mwni 



PIJrVA-M1MAM8A^S0tRA 8. Ill ADRYAYA 


to the Man, only during the pcrforimnee of the saerifiee 
in coniiGctiou witlx tlio siibstBiicB corn 
a$ is to be employed at the saerifiee^ ai 


pertains 

the ' washing ’ mentioned 
to pertain only to such corn 
the ordinary corn. 

II H II 

8<m^ana , by reason of special mention j would be disconnected from 

the context, 

16. It is only by reason of special mention that there 
can be disconnection from the context. 

COMMBNTAEY. 

There is always some special reason when anything mentioned is 
disconnected from its context. For instance, in the case of the Ahtna and 
the Upasads, cited hy the PHrmpakm, there is a passage which distinctly 
mentions the number ‘twelve’ as related to the Ahina ; so that, if the 
twelve Upasacls were not disconnected from their context, the said mention 
of the number ‘ twelve ’ as pertaining to the Ahtna would be nullified. 
In the case in question, however, there is no such justification for the 
disconnection of context. 


in regard to the ‘Shamyu % also ; because it applies to all, 

17. The same holds in regard to the ‘ Shamyu ’ also ; 
because it applies to all. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Rarsha-P'&rnamasa we meet with along 
passage, wherein Brihaspati imparts advice to Indra, in course of which 
le prohibits certain acts,— such as the threatening of the Brdhmana and 
die like ; the whole of this advice is called (in the passage itself) ‘ Shamyu.’ 
In regard to this, the question arises as to whether the prohibition of the 
threatening of the Brfihmana ’ applies to the sacrifice,— the meaning 
leing that during the saerifieial performance the Brlihmana should not 
•e threatened— or it applies to Men in their ordinary capacity— the 
being that the Brahmana should nerer be threatened. The PArva- 
is that the prohibition of the threatening must pertain only to>he 



IF Pi7)4, vn AmiKAET^A, 8i%. 18. 


me cinriiig winch the Parslia-Pih^xiamasa sacrifices are b< 
for tlje simple reason tjiat it is found in the section deal 
■sacrifices. TJ)e SicJcJMnia embodied in the Sutra is that 
must pertain to all time ; as the passage contains tlie 
Brahmana , which applies to all Br^hmanas, whene\'er 
not only to tliose met with during a sacrificial sessio: 
passage in question has to be disconnected from its context 


Adliikarana VII. -[The prohibition of conversing with a 
woman in her courses applies to Man in his 
ordinary capacity.] 

SOTRAS 18-19. 

I) II 

prior; because of removal ; ’■iotiwb::, of the woman in her 

courses, 

18 . Inasmuch as the woman in her courses is already 
removed beforehand [the prohibition must apply to Man 
in his ordinary capacity.] 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Varsha-PHrmm&sa, we read—' One should 
not converse, with a woman in her courses the question arises as to this 
prohibition pertaining to the conversation (between the priest and the 
wife of the xMaster) during the sacrificial performance, or to that which 
people hold in ordinary life. The Pumapak^a is that, inasmuch as the 
prohibition occurs in the context of the sacrifice, it must pertain to the 
conversation during its performance. The SicUMnta embodied in the 
Suti'a is that the pz'ohibition pertains to nv/t.innvn 



pi)rva-m 1 mamsa-si)tbas. in adeyAya 


Adhikarana Vlll. — The 


loearing of gold 'pertains to 
Man in his ordinary capacity . 

SOtRAS 20-24. 

II 5to II 

-:iiwsK^, not in contest (of any particular sacrifice) ^ f, really; mns 

pertain to man (in his ordinary capacity) ; m:, from those ; because o: 

difference. 

20. That which does not occur in the context of any 
particular sacrifice, must pertain to Man in his ordinary 
capacity ; because it differs from those (that are found in the 
context of particular sacrifices). 

COMMENTARY. 

^ There ai-e several stmy passages, not in the section dealing with any 
particular sacrifice, — laying down that ‘Gold should be worn,’ ‘clean clothes 
should be worn’ <fec. &c. The question arising as to this ‘ wearing of gold ’ 
pertaining to some sacrificial performance or to Man in his ordinary 
capacity,— the Sutra puts forward the Siddhanta view that, inasmuch 
as there can be no grounds for connecting the said ‘ wearing of gold ’ 
with any particular sacrifice ; we cannot but take it as referring to Man 
in hia ordinary capacity. 

The Pflrvapaksa is put forward in the nest Sfitra— 

ii si? ii 

'because it is ' without ^ substance ; 3, but ; 3»r:, auxiliaw ; 







»astt 


tv PiDA, VlIT AbiltKABl^A, 8A 21, 22, 28. 


^1* But boccinsG tli 0 pHssEgo is witlic 
of a substance, it must be taken as auxiliary 
hotra and other sacrifices).” 

COMMENTARY. 

I he passage must he regarded as siipplementar 
arid other sacrifices, laying down the ‘ wearing of got 
detail m connection with these sacrifices. Because the 
contain the mention of any substance, in the shape of eit 
0 enng material, through whose mention an indepi 
offenng could be assumed as forming the basis for the p 
^ wearing of gold ; further, the word actually found 
inasmuch as this ‘wearing’ (of gold) can be only p 
character,— and purifications can only be regarded i 
follows that the ‘ wearing of gold ’ mentioned must be 


II II 

[Secondly] because of its connection with the 


COMMENTARY. 

This Sutra puts forward another reas 
pa^?o— The ‘ wearing of gold ’ is found me 
in the Yajurveda, which is 
clearly shows that the ‘ wear! 
the sacrificial priest ; and. a 


m support of the Pdrm- 
ned in a passage occurring 
also called the ^Adhtaryava Veda ' ; which 
ig ’ is something to be done by the Adhmvyt^, 
It IS only something related to the sacrificial 
- . , pertains to Man in his ordinary activity — that 

can be done by the ‘ sacrificial priest.’ it follows that the ‘ weaifn. ’ t 
something auxiliary to the Agnihofra and such other sacrifices as'’ the 
Mrsha-Purmmdsa and the like, which are perfprmed by the Adhvn^,,,. 


because there is connection of a substance ; also. 

23. “ Also because there is connection of a substance, 

COMMENTARY. 

Another reason is put foward in support of the Pttrranafeja—T 
passage m. question mentions the particular substance-, Gold, as ‘shou 
be WOTn;. ^d this can only mean that ‘by the action of wearing, the go! 
IS to be purified ; and such, purification can sprve a useful 



pdBVA-MtMlMU-SdTRAS. HI ADRYAYA. 


only in connection with a sacrificial performance ; it can have no bearing 
upon the ordinary activity of Man. 

u 11 

wra, should be ; U in reality ; the thing in question ; like the 

connection (of a particular result) ; '«%'«, with a result ; relation ; fRura, 

hence ; an action ; as says the teacher Aitishl,yana. 

24. But, in reality, the thing in question is related to 
a result, like the connection (of another thing, with a 
particular result) ; hence it must he regarded as an action 
(fulfilling an ordinary human purpose) — as has been taught 
by Aitishayana. 

COMMENTARY. 

This Sutra answers the Purvapah^a arguments and establishes the 
final Siddhanta. What is laid down in connection with the gold, i.e., 
wearing— is actuallj mentioned in the passage itself, as related to a definite 
result ; in the shape of the disfiguring of the enemy ; — then, as a 
matter of fact, the passage does not occur in the context of any sacrifice, 
the wearing cannot be regarded as merely purificatory of the gold ; for there 
is no sacrifice at which the gold thus purified could be utilised from 
all this it follows that the loearing is only an aetion in itself accomplishing 
some ordinary worldly purpose for the man ; just as rve find in the 
case of the Prdjdpatya observances, which, being mentioned as related to 
the particular result of being freed from sitis, are regarded as independent 
actions by themselves. Hence the conclusion is that the ‘ wearing of gold ’ 
is something related to the Man in his ordinary capacity. 


Adhikarana IX. — The Jaya, &e., are subsidiary to 
Vedie actions. 

sffTRAS 26—27. 

is auxiliary ■, wroi, which is not mentioned in the context (of any parti- 
cular action) j because there is no specification •, of all actions. 

25. “ Wliat is not mentioned in tbe context of any 

ll^ietilar action must be auxiliary to all actions; as no 
l^^ification is possible, ’’ ■ ' 


* 


iPllilPiw 



Iv PADA, J.X AdklKABi^ A, 8A. 26, 87. 


. OOMMENTABY. 

Stray passage says— ‘If one- desires to attain prosperity 
act, he sliould offer tLe and other oblations’; — now 
ses— are these oblations to he regarded as auxiliary to the 
of Agniliotra and the rest ? or to all actions, including 
aiy ivoildlj acts of cultivation, &c.? The P‘d 7 'v>apaksa is 
i he regarded as auxiliary to all actions ; because, in the 
are not mentioned in the context of any particular action ; 
here is nothing to specify that the oblations are connected 


the oblations in question 
Vedic actions) ; becaus 

26. Bttt the Oblat 
Vedic sacrifices only 
Sacrificial Fire. 

COitMENTARY. 

Inasmuch as the oblations have been called ‘ Homa,' ‘oflerinc^ 
into Fire,’ it follows that they have to be offered into the’ AkavanZ 
or Consecrated Sacrificial Fire; as all ‘Homas ’ are laid down as to h 
offered into the Ahavaniya Fire. Hence, it follows that the oblations ii 
question can be auxiliaries to only those actions in which we liave thi 
Consecrated Sacrificial Fire ; and as this Fire is possible only in the case 
of the Vedic Sacrifices of the Agnihotra &c., it follows that it is to these 
latter only that the said Oblations can be auxiliary. In the case of the 
ordinary worldly acts of cultivation, Ac., on the other hand, there is no 
possibility of any kind of Consecrated Fire. 

U (I 

(they must be) auxiliary (to Vedic actions) ; % also; because of 

the name. 

27. lliey must be regarded as auxiliary to Vedic 
actions, also because of tbe name. 

COMMENTARY. 

Another reason is put forward in support of the. Sid^hdnta—The 
Oblations in question are found mentioned in the Yajuneda; and, as tbe 
name of this is ‘ A^hvaryava,’ tbe Oblations mns^be related to onlv such 


5, but ; should be restricted (to 

se of their connection with the Sacrificial Fire, 

.-i-ions must be restricted to the 
because thej" are connected with thfi 


pdnVA-MtMAM$A-&OfUAB. til ADlltAtA. 


actions as admit of the employment of the Acjlivafyu priest , and, as it is 
only Vedic actions that admit of such employment, the Oblations must be 
restricted to these latter alone. 


Adhikarana X~The Expiatory Sacrifice is to be per- 
formed only in the case of the gift of a horse during a Vedic 
Sacrifice. 

SCTRAS 28-29. 

u u 

because of its being sinful; ?fg:, the (Expiatory) sacrifice ; It^, in 
connection with the ordinary (not Vedic sacrificial, Horse-giving) , ’(sra, should be; 
snsara, based upon scriptural sanction ; specially because ; in connection 
with the Vedic (Sacrificial Horse-giving); u, not ; sin ; ’ara, would attach. 

28. "The expiatory Sacrifice should be performed 
only in connection with the ordinaiy Horse-gift ; as it is 
only this that can be sinful ; as for the Vedic Horse-gift, 
it cannot be regarded as sinful, being, as it is, sanctioned by 
scriptural authority.” 

COMMENTARY. 

It is laid down that — a man sliould mahe as many offerings to 
Vanina as there are horses that he receives’ [It will be shown in the next 
afjhikarm, that receiving here stands for giving]. And in regard to this, 
there arises the question — are these expiatory offerings to Varuna to be 
made in connection with the gift of a horse made in ordinary life? 
with that made in the course of the performance of a Vedic Sacrifice ? The 
PArvapah^a put forward in the Siltra is that it is the giving of horses in 
ordinary life tliat should be accompanied by the expiatory offering ; because 
it is only such a gift that has been declared to be sinful, in the passage— 
‘one who in ordinary life mahes a gift of horses, is caught by Varuna’ ; — 
and it is only a sin that has to be expiated by means of offerings the 
gift of horses during a sacrificial performance is one that is laid down in , 
' . the scriptures as to be made ; and hence no sin could ever attach to such 
^.::, ^c tioned gifts ; which, therefore, would not stand in need of being 
ed by means of expiatory offerings. 








I*' 





IF PAD A, XI ADEIKAPAPIA 


The SicldMnta is put forward in the next Sufi-a. 

(ifcis) a mere Arthavdda ; ^r, in reality ; frwra, hence; =?«. related to 
sacrifice ; should be regarded. 

29. Ill reality, however, the passage (speaking of the 
sinfulness of tlie ordinary horse-giving) is a mere Arthavada ; 
hence the expiatory offerings must be regarded as related' to 

(Horse-giving during) sacrifices. 

COMMENTARY. 

The passage quoted to show the sinfulness of Horse-giving is a 
mere Arthaiyhla ; and it does not really mean that the giving is actually 
sinful; this is clear from the fact that a man making a Horse-gift in 
ordmaij life is never found to be beset with dropsy, which is what is meant 
by being caught by Varuna ’ (in the passage in question). Hence, it 
foLows that the expiatory offerings appertain to the giving of Horses in 
course of sacrifices. 


AdhikaranaXI. The Varuna-saarifiee, eonaequent upon 
Eorse-gift, is to performed hy the Do7ior. 

SCTTRAS so— 31. 

II lo II 

not laid down ; verily ; because the action is totally different. 

30. “ The sacrifice is really not laid down (for the 

Donor) ; because the action (mentioned in the passage as 
the occasion for the sacrifice) is different (from the act of 
Giving the Horse.) 

COMMENTARY. 

The expiatory offering spoken of in the foregoing A^hikarava m laid 
down in the passage--' as many horses a man receives, so many should 
the VArum offerings be made ; — now the question arises— are these Varuna 
offerings to be made by the Donor or by the Receiver of the horses ? The 
Pirvapahid pnt forward in the Sfitra is that the offerings should be made 
by the Receiver apd not by the Donor j as the a0icm,. Vfhich is mentioned 





Pl)RVA-UlMAM8i-Sl)TRA8. HI ADHYAYA 


in tlie passage as giviBg rise to an occasion for the ojfex'ings is spoken o 
by the word ‘ receives and certainly the action of Receiving is totall3 
different from that of Giving. Hence it follows that the offerings shoulc 
be made by the Priest, receives the gift of tlie Horses during the sacii 
ficial perfornaance. 

The SiddMnta is put forward in the next Sfitra. 

r\ — - ^ 


w, the offering ; %raj by the force of indicatives ; belonging to one 

who employs the Priest ; should, 

31. The offering has to be made by the person who 
employs the Priest ; — as is clearly shown by the force of 
indicatives. 

COMMENTARY. 

The expiatory offerings have to be made by the Master of the Sacri- 
fice, who employs the Priest, and is the Donor of the horses ; that this 
is the riglit course, we gather from the force of indicatives ; this * indicative ’ 
consisting in the inter-relation of words and passages in the context: In 
the same context, we Iiave tlie passage relating tlie story that ‘ Prajapati 
gave a horse to Varnna,— he was torn,— lie preceived the VSnina offer- 
ings,— he offered these,— lie thereupon became free from the clutches of 
Varnna in the whole of this passage the pronoun ‘he ’clearly refers to 
Prajapati ; this passage clearly means that when Prajapati gave a horse 
to Varuna, he fell a victim to Vanina and became torn, —whereupon he 
made the offerings to Varuna, and was then delivered of the mishap ; and 
this is a clear indication of the fact that the man who gives a horse becomes 
a victim of Varuna ;— and for deliverance from this, the giver should offer 
the Varuva offerings. From this it follows tlie that the Varuna offeiing 
is to be made by the Donor of the horse. 

Then, as regards the passage on which tlie discmssion was started — 
where we have the words ‘as many horses as he receit'es ’.—the word 
‘ receives ’ has to be taken in tlie sense of the causal ‘ malte to receive ’ 
;.e., ‘give’; in view of the story of Prajapati just quoted ; if the word 
‘receives ’ were taken in its literal serrse, the direct meaning of the entire 
story would have to be altered; than which it is much simpler to a Iter 
the meaning of the single word ‘ receives.’ 




IV PiDi, .XU ADUIKAEATSA, 8tt 82, 33 


Aclhihcircinci XII. — The SoMendTci-eln 
- ofered on the mishap befalling the Drink d 
formanee of the Vedie Sacrifice. 

SCTTEAS 32-33. 

\\ \{ 

w^iaiiTqa, Drinking-mishap • also ; sf-i, analogous to that 

32, “ The case of the mishap befalling 

of Soma would be analogous to what has bee 
(in the Pniwapaksa, regarding the expiatory oi 
ing upon the Receiving of the Horse -gift,)” 

COMMB.NTARy. 

In regard to the passage—' when a man TOmits 1 
drunk, he is called the Soina-vomiter — for him nn of 


lli6 buldhcbnta is put forward in the following Siifcra. 

^ AT II ^ ^ H 

on account of its constituting an offence ; g, but; pertainins 
vomiting during the performance of a Vedic sacrifice ; mm, should ; servi 
a ijseful purpose ; % specially because ; lr%*, as occurring during ordinary li 
no ; offence ; wn, would be. ^ 

33. The offering should pertain to the vomitir 
during a Vedic sacrifice, as it is only such vomiting th; 
constitutes an offence ; specially, as that occurring durin 
ordinaiy life, serving as it does a useful purpose, cannot I 
regarded as an offence. 

f* ''V ' COMMENTARY,- , ' , 

It is only vomiting during a sacrificial performance that is reg 3 rd( 
§s m offence : hence the expiatory offering laid down in 



pi^bva-mImimsa-sOtbas. hi. adhyAya 


vomiting must pertain to only such vomiting as occurs during a sacrifice. 
As regards ordinary vomiting, on the other hand, it is found to serve 
a distinctly useful purpose, in tlie shape of removing excessive foreign 
matter from the system, and thereby restoring equilibrium to it ; as such, 
this cannot be regarded as an offence ; and hence it cannot form the 
occasion for an expiatory offering. 


Adhikarana XIII^ — The offering of the Sommdra 
eharu is to he made upon vomiting hy the Sacrifieer. 

^ SCTTRAS 34-36. 


2g ; should be done in all cases ; because all 


said offering should be made in all cases 
ing sacrifice) ; as all are equally offensive,” 

COMMENTARY. 

the Som^ndra offering dealt with under the foregoing 
iion arising as to whether the offering is to be made on 
na by any one of the persons (Sacrifieer and the 
le Sacrifice, or only on that by the Sacrifieer himself, — 
forward in the Sutra is that, inasmuch as eveiy 
sacrifice is equally offensive, the offering should be 
is any vomiting, either by the Sacrifieer or by any 


is put forward in the next Sutra — 

^ (i II 

sacrifieer ; in reality ; because tbe performance is for 


ality, (the offering should be made) on 
Sacrifieer ; because it is for his sake (that 
erformed). 

COMMENTARY. 

n question sliould be made on the vomiting by tbe 
ause the performance during which the offensive 
r the pf the Sacrifieer ; so that the offering of th§ 



IV PAt)A, till ADlllKAtiAtA 


Sovien^ra-ckaru also should be for his sake, i.e., for the correctiug of an 
offence committed by him. 


36. Also because we find passages indicative (of the 
same conclusion). 

COMMBiSTARY. 

Ihcre is another passage which indicates that it is the Samj^ieerb 
vomiting that forms the occasion for the Som^ndra offering ; — ‘ when Soma 
m vomited, calamity befalls the Soma-drinker ’ ; this shows that the vomit- 
ing brings calamity to the drinker ; and as any mishap relating to the 
Sacrifice can bring calamity to the sacrificer only, and not to the priests - 
this clearly indicates that the mishap also must be at his hands only ; all 
which goes to show that the Somhujrn offering is to be made when the 


AdUharanaXIV.—OvtoftheAcjnkja A-^Udha'pcda • 

only a two-fold piece should he offered. 

SOtRAS S7~41. 

offering of the entire ; the cake ; because it is for that 

rse. 

37. “Tbe whole of the cake should be offered ; as it 
been consecrated for that purpose.” 


because what is laid down is a piece cut out p 5, but ; 3 t^:, remnant 




408 PdEVA-MlMiMSA-SdTRAS. Hi ADHYAYA. 

38. Inasmucli as what is laid down as to be offered is a 
piece cut ont (of the whole), there should be a remnant. 

CMMBNTARY. 

We have such inj imctions as — ‘one should cut out two pieces out of the 
cake,’ ‘ on should offer the two-fold piece ’ ;~from which it is clear that 
what is to be offered is only a piece or pieces cut out of the entire cake ; 
and it follows that the rest of it is to be kept back. 

An objection is raised against tlie SicJ4ha7ita. 

31 W WT II U 

merely samctiticatory ; but ; because it is for that purpose. 

39. “ But the cuttings laid down must be regarded 
as purely sanctificatory of the Cake ; as the entire Cake 
has been consecrated for the purpose of being offered.” 

COMMENTARY. 

The cuttings out of the cake that have been mentioned in the 
passages quoted must be i-egarded as purely sanctificatory ; and in tliis 
manner alone we can reconcile such cutting with the well-known fact that 
the entire Cake has been consecrated to Agni for the sole purpose of being 
offered. Hence, what is to be done is that the entire Cake is to be offered 
away by instalments of two pieces each time. 

The next Supa supplies the answer to this objection — 

having been done ; g, but ; the act ; once ; should be 
(no repetition of it) ; the substance ; being subservient (to the act). 

40. But, the act (of offering) having been done once, 
there should he no repetition of it ; specially, as the substance 
is only subservient (to the act). 

COMMENTARY. 

There can be no justification for the repeated offering of two-fold pie- ? 

ces, as urged by the Opponent ; for what is laid down is the act of offeiing ; -i 

and when this will have been done once, by the offering of the first two- I 

fold piece, there would be no justification for making another offering. | 

It is true that such repeated offerings may seem to be called for by the ,1 

fact that a lazge- part of the consecrated substance will i-emain unspent ; J 

; bntij as a matter of fact, tbe substance is meant only to subserve the 
purposes' of the offering, and not the latter of the former ; hence, the 










lY.PADA, Zr ADIUKARAi^A, BL 41, it 


inere fact of there being a remnant of the substance cannot justify a 
repetition of the offering. 

Another reason is put forward in support of the Siicjhdnta — 

41. Also because we find the keeping back of remnants 
(indicated in the Veda), 

COMMENTARY. 

Such texts as — ‘one should cut out the Idd offering from the 
remnant,’ ‘ he should make the Svi^takrit offering out of the remnant ’ — 
clearly indicate that part of the consecrated Cake has to be kept back as a 
‘ remnant.’ 


Adhikarana XV. — lire Hzistakrit offering should he made 
out of the Remnants of all substances used 
at the sacrifice. 

SOTRAS 42-46. 

ii n ii 

being unable (to necessitate offerings . ; out of only one sub- 
stance; should be made; the remnant,; being merely a 

subservient factor. 

42. “ The offerings should be made out of only one 

substance ; as the mere presence of the substance does not 
necessitate an offering ; the substance being merely subser- 
vient (to the act of offering).” 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Idarsha-Purvamasa, several such oblations as 
the ‘ Sviitahrit' and the rest are laid down as to be offered out of the 
‘ Remnants ’ ; the question arising as to whether these offerings should be 
made out of the remnants of every one of the several substances used 
during the performance, or out of that of any one substance only, — the 
Pitrvapahsa propounded in the Sutra is that tlmy are to be made out of the ' 
remnant of a single substance j as.;(in accordance with, the reasoning put 
forward by the Sidcjhdvtin, under Stitra. 41) the act of the offering having 
been accomplished out of the remnant of a single substance, the mere 
presence of a number of other remnants cannot justify the repetition of 



pdBVA-MiMAMSAsOTBAS. Ill ADTlVAfA 


the offerings ; specially, as the siibstance js subservient to tlie oltering; 
and not the offering to the substance. 

The next Sutra supplies another argument in support of the Pitr- 

mpahsa, 

U II 

43. “ Also because the embellishment is accomplished 

(by means of a single offering).” 

COMMENTARY. 

ve is to embellish 
and, as this embellisli- 
:le offering, there would 


The only purpose that the offerings in question ser 
—enhance the value of— the principal sacrifices; 
ment will liave been duly accomplished by a sing 
be no point in the repeating of the offerings 

The next Sutra puts forward the Siddhdnta. 

WT II II 

ont of all remnants ; in reality ; tlie cause or occasion being 

equally present; the embellishment ; pertaining to the substance. 

44. In reality, the offerings should be made out of all 
remnants ; because the occasion is equally present in all ; 
specially as the sanctification pertains to the substance. 

COMMENTARY. 

The offerings should be made out of the remnants of all the sub- 
stances *, because the only occasion for the making of any offering is due 
to the injunction that ‘offerings should be made out of remnants’; and 
this is as applicable in the case of the remnant of one substance as in the 
remnants of the other substances ; so that there can be no justification for 
the omitting of the oblations out of the other remnants. Further, the 
‘offerings’ under consideration are meant to be sanctificatory of the 
substances ; so that, if we omitted to make the offering out of the 
remnant of any substance, that substance would remain without that 
sanctification ; hence, for the purpose of securing this sanctification for all 
the substances, it is necessary to make the offerings out of the remnants 
of all of them. 

Another reason is put forward in support of the Siddhdnta. 

II II 

45. Also because we find indicatives (of the same.'; 
ponclnsion). 



IV PAD A, xn ADHIKABAl^A, Sit 46, 47. 


COMMEJrTARY. 

There is a passage which represents the gods 
Svl^taJifit ofterings should be made one by one,’ from 
repeated offerings have to be made. 

The Vdrtika treats tliese four Sfftras as p: 
Adhikarcixia, and not as an independent A^bikaratjo b 


AtjHhdvcinci Ji-Vl. In ease, the SvistciJtvif, offevhig is to be. 
made out of a single Remnant, it is from the 
first Remnant that it should be made. 

SOTRAS 46-47. 

out of only one ; if ; sraTwfi, just as one desires; all being 

of eqxial importance. 

46. In case tlie oblation is to be offered out of only 
one Remnant, it may be offered out of any Remnant one 
pleases ; as all remnants are of equal iraportance.” 

COMMENTARY. 

This Adhiharava represents what has been called a ‘ Kritvd-cMnta,’ 
eg., a discussion based upon a supposition ; the view of the PtirvapaMn 
of the foregoing Acjhikarava is taken for granted,— ws , that the oblation 
is to be made out of a single Remnant, and then the que.stion arises as to 




P!^BVA~M1MAMSA-81jTBAS. Ill ADEYAYA. 



M 


Hiai 




COMMENTARY. 

When one begins to make the offerings, the Remnant that presents 
itself before him earlier than the rest is the remnant of the first substance ; 
and inasmuch as this is the first in point of time,— and there can be no 
ground for rejecting it — it follows that the offering should be made out 
of this first Remnant. 

Ad^dkarana XVII. — The division of the Gcike is for the 
purpose of eating. 

sCfTRAS 48-51. 

there being no mention of eating ; ^r^:, the term indicating 
the gift ; must have the sense of payment for service, 

48. Inasmucli as we do not find any mention of 
^ eating,’ the term indicating the gift must he taken in the 
sense of payment for service.” 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the quartering of the Cake at the TOarsha- 
Pumcwiasa, we read — ' this is for the Brahinana priest, this for tl.ie Hotri, 
this for tlie Adhvaryii, and tills for the Agnidlira ’ ; in connection witli 
this arises the question — Is this distribution of the cake-pieces meant 
to be given to the priests simply as payment for services rendered, or 
for bemg actually eaten by them ? The Pitrvapaksa embodied in the 
Sutra is that tlie distribution or giving of the cake-pieces — expressed by 
the genitive ending in ‘ brahmanah ‘ hotuh, &c.’ — must be taken to 
be in the way of payment for services rendered ; as there is nothing in 
the passage to show that the pieces are meant to be actually eaten by the 
priests. Simple payment for services rendered being the ordinary 
custom,— it is more reasonable to accept that alternative than that (here 
is to be actual ^eating’; which latter could be accepted only if there 
were any word actually expressive of that idea. 

The next Sutra supplies another reason in support of the Pdrm- 
pak§a . — 

n li 

49. “ Also because this is what is praised,” 

. COMMENTARY. 

^ follows says~‘ tliis is the sacrificial fee at the Da}#a- 

Biir)}amdsa ’—which praises the distribution of the cake-pieces m forming 





IV PAD A, XVll ADlilKABA'^A, Sit. 50, 51 



THIRD ADHYAYA 


Fifth Paha. 

Adhikaranal. — The 8 mstakrif oblation of Remnants should 
not be offered out of the Clarified Butter, &e. 
sOtHAS 1-12. 

ii \ ii 

of the clarified butter ; also ; because of eounection witli alL 

1. “ [The Remnant, offerings shonld be made] ont of 

the Clarified Butter also ; because the offering laid down is., 
in connection with all (materials).” 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection vvitli the I)arsha-P'0,rijiamasa, we have several intervening 
sacrifices; and for these several offerings of remnants — called ’ Scistakrif,' 
*Idd,’ and so forth — are laid down; now the question arises — at 
these intervening sacrifices, ag!.,— the Updmshu sacrifice, at which cer- 
tain oblations are poured out of the Clarified Butter deposited in the 
bdiruva vessel— should there be, or not be, an ‘ offering of remnants ’ out of 
the Butter also ? This question has arisen in regard to the Butter onljq 
because the entire quantity of Butter required for the whole ParsJia- 
Ptirrfamasa is deposited in the Dhrma vessel, and out of this a portion, 
being divided into four parts or quartered, is offered at the UpAnishu 
sacrifice ; so that, if an ‘ offering of remnants ’ is to be made, there would 
be no butter left for the succeeding offerings; and 3 mt, an ‘offering of 
remnants ’ would appear to be binding. The Pilnapak^a is that an 
‘ offering of remnants' must be made out of the Butter also, as the Butter 
stands on exactly the same footing as the other materials ; and the offering 
is laid down in connection with all materials. 

The next three Sfftras put forward other arguments in support of the 
Piirvapaksa . — 

w R (i 

: ?• Also bccRus© of tb© rsasoii [of tb© offering, b6iiig 
i^|>li'6able. to all materials].’’ ^ 



V PADA, i ADHlKARANA Sa. I 


P ^ • X--— ‘S'- H reason tor tue otter] ngs ol 

v-emiiants : It says— ‘ The gods said to Svi^taJirit—feich offerings for 
rjs ; He said— I ask this boon that J may have a share of the offerings— in 
the shape of remnants; ’ this is the sole ground on whicli the remnant- 
oterings are made ; and this reason holds good just as much in regard 
to the Clarified Butter, as to any other material. 

(I ^ ti 

ju regard to one offering-material ; because we find used 

the term ‘Samavatta, collective oblation.’ 

3, “Further, because in regard to one offering-mate- 
rial, we find used the term ‘ collective oblation.’ ” 

COMMJSiVTARr. 

In connection with the ‘ Cliaru-offering ’ at the P'rayaiiwya sacrifice 

to Svi^aTirit, we find a passage using tlie term ‘ collective oblation this 

clearly indicates tbat the oblation is to be made out of all the materials 

used at the sacrifice ; which shows that the offering is to he made out of 
tbe Clarified Butter also. 


m connection with the Clarified Butter ; further ; becaus 
find ; an ArthavMa passage relating to the Svistakrit. 

4. “ Lastly, because we find that an ArthavMa j 

sage relating to the Svistakrit offering of Remnants actua 
refers to the Clarified Butter.” 

commentary. 

^ We find an ArtlmvA(}a passage to the following effect—' witli e 
offering, the Clarified Batter should be poured back,— but after hav 
made the Svistakrit offering out of the Clarified Butter, such pour 
should not be done’ and this clearly shows that the Svistahrit. offer 
is to be made ont of the Clarified Butter also. 

The Siidhdvta is put forward in the next Sdtra. 

ii k ii 

: ^on . account of there being no remnant ; 3, bpt ; % mt ; w, so ; 1 

could be ; on account of the whole being ^ven away ; srStot, absei 

of remtt3-nt» ' .-■ .. , . . , _ ■ 




pdRVA-k}MiMSA-Sl)TRAB, Hi ABRYAYA 


But it could not be so ; for the simple reason that 
30 remnant (of the Clarified Butter) ; and this 
)f remnant is due to the whole of it having been 


COBIMBNTARY. 


The 8i(lflhanta is that it is not possible to make any ‘ offering of 
remnants ’ out of the Clarified Butter, for the simple reason that, as a 
matter of fact, there can be no ‘remnant’ of the Butter sanctified for the 
sacrifice, the whole of it having been offered away— at the Updmshuydga, in 
which all the four quarters of the material have to be poured as oblation. 

prat spng; ii «. ii 

(srarxpjira, on account of its being common (to others) ; not ; n sira^, in 
the DhruvS, vessel ; «ira, would be. 

6 . What is left in the Dhruvd vessel cannot be re- 
garded (as the Remnant to be offeiud) ; as the Butter con- 
tained in that vessel is meant for several offerings. 


COMMENTARY. 


It might be urged that even though the Glai’ifiecl Butted' offered at 
the Upanshu sacvUice is only that portion of it that has been ‘ quartered 
so that even after the offering of the quartered Butter, there would be some 
Butter left in the Tjhnwd vessel, out of which the ‘ remnant-offering ’ 
could be made. The answer to this is that what is left in the Phnivd vessel, 
after the ‘ quartered ’ Butter has been offered, cannot be regarded as a 
“ remnant ” in the proper sense of the term ; for a thing can be called a 
remnant only when all that had to be done out of it has been finished ; 
such is not the case in the case under consideration ; it is true that the 
quartered portion of the Butter has been offered away ; but the whole of 
the Butter in the vessel was not. intended for this offering alone ; so that 
what remains behind after the offerings of the ‘ quartered ’ Butter has 
still got to be utilised in . the oblations that come after the Updmshu 
sacrifice ; e.g., the oblation to Vifnii. For this reason, there can be no 
‘remnant’ of the Glarified Butter, out of which the ‘remnant-offering’ 
could be made to Svi^kfit. That this is so is supported by a direct 
VedLc declaration to the effect'*-' The Clarified Butter held in the 
BhtyffvS vessel is for the purpose of the entire sacrifice.’ 

I ;; ■ ■ ■ - ■ • 'V' 



V PAM, 1 ABlllKAPA^A, Sil 7, 8, '9. 


it iTiigilt be argued that, — though there is no ' remnant ’ iu the 
Pknwd vessel, yet tbe ‘offering of remnant’ might be made out of the 
Butter that will have I’emained behind in the Juh4, with which the 
oblation has been poured in ”;~-the answer to this is, that what may 
remain behind in the Juhti is only such butter as has already been 
apportioned ; and what has been apportioned must be regarded as having 
fojmed part of tlie oblation poured in according to the injunction ‘ one 
should pour oblations of tlie apportioned butter so that, even tliougli 
some of this butter luay be left behind in the Juhd, it could not be 
rightly used for any such other oblation as the ‘ offering of remnants.’ 

%c3; II q 

8. “ But it might be as in the case of the Cups.” 

COMMENTARY. 

In answer to the foregoing tiMra, the opponent brings fonvard the 
following argument—" In several sacrifices where oblations are poured 
by means of Gups, even though the cups along with the contents have been 
already consecrated to particular deities, yet out of what is left in those 
same cups, people make the Anuca^aikdra offerings, which are of the 
nature of the ‘offering of remnants.’ In the same manner, even though 
the Butter in the JuhH has been already offered, yet the little that 
might be left behind, could very well serve as the material for the ‘offer- 
ing of remnants’.” 

The answer to this argument is given in the next 

II 5. II 

%'the analogy does not hold ; because there would be an infringe- 
ment of the Injunction ; because it makes it a fit offering material; % 

- ; :9. .Tbe analogy does not hold good ; (I) because (in 

the case of the Cups) ■ there would be, an infringement of 



PURVA-MiMAMSi-SdTRAS. iU ADByAyA 


Injunctions (if the remnant offering were not made) ; and 

W also because the consecration only serves to make it a fit 
offering material. 

COMMENTARY. 

Our answer is, that the case of the Batter in the Wiriml. is not 
analogous to that of the Soma-juice in the Cups. In the latter case we 
fand a distinct Injunction laying down the offering of the left contents of 

, " no such offering were made, there 

infringement of that injunction secondly, the ‘consecra- 

. . - * snnie as the ‘ apportionment ’ 

consecration ’ means is that 
fit for offering ; and it does not neces- 
- --.-I poured in as oblation ; hence 
t other deities. The case of ‘ apportion- 
ug ; it is distinctly laid down tliat what 
in as oblation ; so that no remnant 
al thus apportioned can be offered to otlier deities. 

u ^ © ii 

n can pertain only to what has eoine 
^^> 1 , the, term ‘ all.’ 

. . pertains to what is there; as 

what IS laid down can pertain only to such things as are in 
existence. 

COMMENTARY. 

i' ‘'r ■ ‘ of remnants ' 

Sb? ,hfn"f °“‘f oloor tlal tbs 

o should be made out of the Butter also. But the terms ‘ all 

oZZ lh Tf f ^ the 

the ‘offerincrof tn lasheen shown that there is no rem?tant ; so that 
the offeiing of all remna,^ cannot hare any connection with the Butter. 

the kind ’ text (ui-ged in Sntra 3) refers to 

COMMENTAKY. 

^ ^ Under Sfitra 3 the opponent has brought forward the term ‘collective 

iffering as indicative of the fact that tha * aff • j: * 

oi uie ract that the offering of remnants ’ is to be 


the cups to other deities 
would be au 
tion ’ of the contents of the Cups is not the i 
of the contents of the Phruvd ; ail that the ' 
the substance has been rendered f 
sarily mean that the entire contents have been 
the remnants 
ment ’ stands 
has been ann 


wna, because what is laid dow 
ice ; nm, refers to ivhat is in existence 

). The term 



V PAD A, JI ADRIKARAt^A 


(I li 

non-einptjing, 

passage (brought for 
means that (the vesseJ) sh 


the last ; signifies 

12. The last 
nent iu Siltra 4) 
ly empty. 

COMMENTARY. 

« bnder Shtra (4) the opponent has brought forward the 
after the Svistakfit offering, there is no pouring back of the Bi 
thePhroa^yesser-in support of the view that the Svdstakrit 
IS to be made out of the Butter also. The ansiver to that is nou 
A 1 that the passage indicates is that the vessel should not be 
emptied, until the Svistakj-it offerings have been made; as ti 
several other purposes to be served by the Butter-apart from an 
oblations-till the Svistakrit oblation has been poured ; such p 
for instance, as the sprinkling of it upon husha grass, and so fort 
this oblation has been poured in, tliere is no more use for the Bu 
view of wliich it could be poured back into the vessel ; hence, there 
no pouring back after the Svistakrit offerings this being the 
of the passage, there is nothing in it to show that the Svistakrit o 
are to be made out of the Butter. 


Adhiharana TI. The ‘ offering of Remnants ’ is not 
he made out of the material of the SakamprasMya Saerifiee. 

SffTRA 13. 

II ? ^ II 

the S&kamprastMya saerifiee; the Svistakrit offering - 

also ; similar to the foregoing* 

13. At the Sakamprasthlya Sacrifice also tlie offerini 
of tbo Syistakrit is as in the foregoing ease 




420 PIJrVA-M1mAM 8A~8(^TBAS. Ill ADEYAYA. 

00MMBNTAR7. 

In connection with the T)avsha-Vurr,iamAsa, we liave the Sdka^npras- 
tlliya Sacrifice; and in connection with this also the question arises as to 
whether or not there is to be the Sindahrit-oHeving of Remnants at this 
sacrifice. The Siddhanta is that this case is exactly analogous to the one 
dealt with in the foregoing adhikaniya ; that is, there is to be no offering 
of Remnants. 


Adhikarana HI. —There is to he no offering of Rem- 
nants at the Saufridmani Sacrifice. 


St'TRAS 14-15. 


II II 

%!irn«!iT^, at the Sautrfimani sacrifice ; also ; nij, out of the Cups. 

14. — At the Sautrarnani sacrifice also [there should be 
no offering of Remnants] out of the Cups. 


COMMENTARY. 


At the Sautramani sacrifice there are certain cups dedicated to the 
Ashvius, to Sarasvati and to Indra. \7ith regard to these also the Siddhaijta 
is that there can be no ‘offering of Remnants on the same ground of 
the entire contents being offered and there being no Remnants left, as 
that urged in iVdhik. (1). 

II n II 

Ufa, indicative of the same fact ; also ; the declaration of remnant. 

15. The declaration of remnant also is indicative of 
the same fact. 

OOMBIENTARY. 

We meet with the declaration— ‘something should be kept back 
the whole should not be offered and this advice to keep back a little 
clearly shows that what was intended was that the entire contents of the 
Cups should be offered up; and this little that is to be kept back has been - 

declared to be for a purpose entirely different from that of being offered 

as ‘ remnant it is clearly laid down that the little that is kept bLk is for 
the purpose that it may be drunk by the BrAhmana,-or, in some eases for " v, 

.being poured info a jar with a hundred holep, ‘ ' ;■ 

ult'' 



V PA DA, TV ADHTTTABANA, S-. 


Adhikarana IV. — At the Sarvaprista Saerifiee the 
Svistakrif offering is to he made only once. 

SCITRAS 1«— 17. 

w %^{\ 

_ even though the substance is the same ; inasmuch as the 

actions are diverse ; urasu#, in connection with each act of offering ; should 

be done. 

16. Even tliongli the substance is the same, — inas- 
much as the actions are diverse, the (Svistakrit offering) 
should be done in connection with each act.” 

COMMB.YTARY. 

Ibe Sarvapriga Sacrifice consists of a number of oblations to Indra, 
out of a single Cake. Tn connection with this, there arises the question 
whether one sliould offer the Soi.?tat:rh oblation of Remnant in connection 
with every one of the said oblations, or he should offer only one such 
oblation. The embodied in the Sutra is that, inasmuch as 

each oblation to Indra is a distinct act by itself, the ‘offering of Remnant ’ 
should accompany eveiy one of them ; even though the fact that all the 
oblations are offered out of a single Cake might indicate the plausibility of 
die other alternative,-it cannot be denied that each oblation stands by 
itself, and, as such, should be accompanied by its own ‘offering of 
remnant.’ ^ 

Tlie 8{f](]hd7ita is put forward in the next Siltra, 

inasmuch as there can be no differentiation ; but ; ^ of the 
remnant; in regard to all ; being the same. 

1 7. Inasrnuch as there can be no differentiation of 
the Remnant, it is the same for all [hence there can be only 
one offering of Remnant]. 

! V ‘ ' COMMENTARY../ 

The oblations having been offered out of a single Cake, it is not 
possible to differentiate the ‘ rqmnant ’ of each oblation separately ; hence 
we cannot but regard tlie single ‘remnant’ as, pertaining to all the 
oblations ; and from thfs it follows that there js to be only one ‘ offering 
pf remnant,’ '' v 



P^^WA-MIMAMSA-SIjTEAS. Ill ADHYAYA. 


AdMhamnaV . — In eonnectionicith the Cup dedicated 
to Indra-Vdyu, there should he two eatings 
of the Bemnant. 


SUTRA 18. 




in the case of the Cup dedicated to Indra-Viyu ; f, but ; on the 
strength of direct injunction ; afffw#, in connection with each act ; eating ; 
wu, should be. ’ 

18. Tn the case of the Cup dedicated to Indra-V%u, 
however, there should he eating in connection with each 
act (of offering), on the strength of direct injunction. 


COMMENTARY. 


_ _ In connection with the dyotistoma, a Cup is dedicated to tlie two 
deities, Indra and Ygyu, and an offering is made to each of these deities 
out of that Cup. Now the question arises as to whether there should be 
only one ‘ Eating of Remnants ’ out of the Cup, after both the offerinas 
have been made,^ or there should be two ‘Eatings,’ one after each 
offering. The Pdrvapaksa view is that, inasmuch as the ‘Eafino’’ is 
purely sanetificatory of the Soma-juice, there should be only*^ one 
eating. The SnWutnta put forward in the Siltrn is that there should be 
««-oeat,ngs;-as is distinctly laid down in the direct injunction-- one 
should eat twice out of the cup dedicated to Indra- Vftyu. 


Adhiahrana VI. —Bating of the Remnants of Soma. 


SOfRAS 19-21. 


11 H a 


., notr^,f there is no injunction. Eating ; 


19. “ In the case of Soma there is no Eating ; as there 

IS no injunction to that effect.” 

COMMENTARY. 

At the Jyoti^oma sacrifice, Soma-juice is employed; and the 
question arising as to whether or not there should be any eating of Remnants 













Pada, Vi aPbikaraPa 


ns koma, ^ the Pn,rvapaltm put foTOard in the 
mm 1 as there js no text laying down fhe eating d 
“ere sJioidd be no snob eating. 

The SiddMnia is put forward in the next Satra. 

u :(o II 

meanintrs ffn ^**^^*^’ because we 

meanings (to be indicative of such eBthm., 

O' 

20. In fact, there should be (eatiue of 
we find texts which, though having other 
indicative of the said eatins: 

■O'* 

COMMENTARY. 

eai! we have no texts that dir 

eating of Soma, yet there are texts which, though direct 
meanings rfo uidirectiy indicate tlie Eating of Soma- si 
piiests place tlie Cups of Soma dedicated fo the Ash 
re a ta.r, after they have heen eaten out of, and refilled. 


new 5' ; "5?™!. because thejiaj dowi 

.r w'„„in»; b. ..rid accordance with di.,ct i, 

21. Ill fact, the texts are direct mjunctioas - 
down something not already laid down elsewhere ' 

the eatings would be in strict accordance with di 
junction. 

COMMENTARY. 

Against SQtra 20 it might be urged that the texts n 
lie only indirectly indicative and, in the absence of direct in 
-here can be no justification for tlie eating of. Soma. The a 
- ns is that, It IS true that the texts only indirectly speak of the 
mt even so, inasmuch as they lay down something new~s( 
lot a ready mentioned elsewhere~they are as good as direct inju 
■nd hence the eating of Soma, on the strength of these texts, caa 
e regarded as being m strict accordance with Direct Injunctions 



pdRVA-MlMiMSA-SUTBAS. Hi ADE^A¥A 


Adhikaranu VII. — There is Eating hy the Priests to lohom 

the Gups belong. 

sOtka 22. 

II II 

out of tlie C^ips ; because of the names ; the application 

(of the name) ; being due to that fact. 

22. Oat of the Cups (there must he eating), — because 
of the names (given to the Cups) ; the aj)plicatioii (of these 
names) being due to that fact (of the eating being done 
by the Priests,) 

COMMENTARY. 

At the Jyotistoma sacrifice there are ten Cups, each of which 
has a distinct name’— m., ‘ the Hotri's Cup/ ^ the Brahman’s Cup’ and 
so forth. The qiiestioB arising whether or not out of each of these Cups 
the Remnant has to be eaten by the priests, — the Purvapakba is that there 
is no such eating. In answer to this, we have tlie SidrlMnta as embodied 
in the Siltj'a : — TJieje must be eating of the Remnant out of these Cups ; 
this is evident from the names given to the Cups ; that is, the Cup 
is called ‘ Hotri s Cup,’ simply because the Hotri priest drinks the Remnant 
out of that Cup ; the expression ‘ /whtlz chamasalii.,' ' Hoqi’s Cup,’ means 
‘that wherein the Hotri 6"2p&Vc72a?/?aii so that, unless the priest actually 
did sip out of the Cup, it could not be called ' ehainasa,' ‘ Cup ’ ; so that 
the very application of the name is dependent upon actual eating, 

for this reason ; % further ; for the non-Brahmana ; the 

Soma ; prohibits, 

22. (a) It is on account of this fact (of Priests eating 
out of the Soma-cups) that the Veda prohibits Soma- drink- 
ing for the non-Brahmana. 

COMMENTARY. 

[This supra aijpears in the Bib. Ind. edition of the BM^ya, as a part 
of the Bhd?ya. The Suhodhini mates it a separate 

Tiiis Sdtra puts forward another argument in support of the 8i(Jdhdnbi. 
We have in the Veda the following passage—' If the BrShmana offers* 
a sacrifice on behalf of a Egatt-riya or a Vaishya, and the latter should 
desire to eat the Soma-remndnt, he should be given a mixture of banyan- 
shoots and curd, and not Soma ’ ; this clearly shows that there should"^ be 
eating out of the Soma-Cuos. bv the PriestR 



V PADA, VIII ADBIKABANA 


Adhiharana VdgAtri priests AouU eat alon 

loith the Suhrahmanya Priest. 

SdfRAS 28—26. 

o-'yijSW-l by re»o„ 

23. " Oah' one priest should eat out of tlie UdHStri 

cup , such being the force of direct asseidion,” — (a) 

COMMENTARY. 

At the Jyotistoma there 
and we have seen that the r 
to be eaten by the priests ; 

Udg%i priests’; in connectb 
(ffil Is the remnant in this Cnp 
(i) or by all the priests ? (e) or 
‘ Soma-singers,’— *.e., the Ut^c/d 
by these three ‘ Soma-sin jsrers ’ 


, named after the li’riests ; 
-juice in these Cups have 
'sis called Hhe Gnp of the 
1 cup, the question arises-^ 
ly one priest, the Uclgdtri? 
iree priests who are actual 
and the Pratihortfi ? (f ) or 
uhrahma'eya priest ? 
constitute the three Pitrvapaksa views, 
n Sdtra (23), is that the eating shonid be 
euch being the indication of the name of 

and inasmuch as the indication 
of the name of the Cup is the sole authority for the eating, there can be 
no justification for the eating of the remnant in ‘ the Cup of the Udgdtri, ’ 

by any other, except the priest. 

The second Ptirmpakm is put forward in the next SMra. 
all ; W, in fact ; because all are clearly indicated. 

24. “ In fact, all tlie Priests (should eat of the Cud) 

because there is an indication of all.” — (6) ’ 

COMMENTARY. 

Uie eating Bboiikl be done by all the Pri«te, and notby tbero,a« 

the Cup o/ the Udgapris, clearly indicates that ^nawy-he., all— should 
eat. If the eating were restricted to the Uclgdtri pvieei alone, the plural 
number would have to be discredited as a mistake, foli is tr„e thaUnce 
the name mentions foe Ut^atrt onljr, and foe . nun} her of the BdadM 



PORVAMiAMSA^SUTBAS, III ADIIYAYA 


priest is one only, there is nothing to justify tlie eating by the other 
priests;— but the answer to tins is, that the only reasonable solution 
of the difficTilty appears to be to take the plural term ' TJdgcitris ' as 
standing for the ‘ Urjgdtri ’ and tlie rest ’ ; there can be no other justifica- 
tion for the plural number, the actual number of the IJclgtitvi priest 
being one only. 

(c) The third PlivmpaJasa is put forwaid in the following Sfitra. 

singers of hymns ; sir, in reality ; fir#ti»ira, because the indication is of 
these ; specially in view of the direct mention of the plural number. 

25. (c) “ In fact, the singers of hymns alone (should 
eat) ;~inasmuGh as the indication is of these alone; 
specially in view of the plural number.” 

COMMENTARY. 

It is clear that the name of the Cup mentions the V^gatri, and it 
ptits this term in the plural number ; — now the priest, actually called 
^Udgatri, is one only ; but there are three priests who maybe called 
Udgdtn, ’ in the sense that they are all ‘ singers,’ and the term ‘ Udgdtri ’ 
means ‘ singer ’ ; hence, if the eating is taken as to be done by the three 
singing priests-tlie Frastotri, the Udgdtri, and the Pratihartri- the indi- 
cation of the term U dgdtrixi&m ' is correctly observed ; the eating being 
done by three priests (whereby the plural number is justified), and these 

being all ^whereby the name ‘ r/cVitW ’ is justified), in its literal 

sense). 

The Sifl(Jhuntci is put fonvard in the next Sfitra. 

^ U II || 

all ; 3, verily, 9,*,,. because of their oou„ection'',ith lie partichr 
Veda ; wwra, for special reasons ; to one part only ; ^m, should be. 

^ 26. Verily aU (fonr, should eat); because they are 

all comieoted with the SSma-Veda ; and it is only for a 

spcial reason that the name is restricted to some only fof 

tile fo-ur). j V 

COMMENTARY. 

^ There are four priests connected with the Sdma-Veda ; and the third 
restnoriug the ea.iug the three acl„,l ai„,„ , leayee eff fte 
{ourth, to -Sulrak^aiy. priesf. For toe ereeptto, however .hi 



V PAD A, JX ADEIKAUANA, SH.'st 


no justification ; for the term ‘ Uclgdtriv 
the term for mere singer could he ‘ g&tri 
lefers to that form of singing which is j 
section of the 8dma-Veda ; so tliat the . 
take the term ‘ UiJgdtriijdin ’ in the pi 
(connected with the Sdma-Veda ; and in ■ 
conclusion is that the eating should he 
priests-ms., tlie Prastotri, Udgdpri, the . 
and there is no ground for excluding the 
where there are some special reasons that 
priest from the term Uclgdtri ; for inst 
Uc^dtri priests sing the hymns,’ the nan 
priests that actually do the singing, — and 
not do any singing and, as such, cannot h 
This is the view of the Biidsj'a. T1 
as the right one ; on the ground that the 
Uoom where the eating is done. 


Adhikamna IX. —The eating of Soma is to he done hy the 

Qrdvastut also. 

SOTRAS 27—30. 

ti d 

for the Gr4vastut priest; eating; nm; jg. . 

BO SBch eating is laid down. 

27. “ For tlie Gravastut priest there is no eating ; as 

no such eating is laid down,” 

COMMENTARY, 

At the Jyotistoma sacrifice there are four Hotri priests 
GrAvastut is the fourth. In regard to him, the questio 
whedier.or not he should eat the remnant of Soma-juice. G 
is that he is not entitled to eat it ; for the simple reason i 
Vedic text mentioning such eating by the Grdvastut. 

The Siddhinta is put forward in the following Stltra. 

fiR^, in connection with the H&riyojam cup j in n 
there is mention of all. 





P{)rVA-MIMAM 81-SUTRA. ill AbHYkYA 


28. Inasmucli as in connection with Hariyojana 
cup there is mention of ‘ all’ [the eating should be done b}^ 
the Gravastut. also]. 

COMMENTARY. 

Among the Soma-cnps there is one Ccilled the ‘ Hariyojana ’ cup, 
by reason of its being consecrated with the Mantra Ravrtrasi Hdriyojana, 
etc .' ; and, in regard to this cup, we have the text — ‘ other cup-bearers eat 
out of their respective cups ; but alt eat out of the Hdriyojana cup ’ ; and 
when all eat, it follows that the Ordmstut also eats. 

An objection is raised against the Siddhdvta, in the following Sutra. 

it pertains to the cup-bearers ; in fact ; because of proximity. 

29. ‘‘Butrin fact, on account of juxtaposition, tlie 
passage quoted must refer to the cup-bearers.’’ 

COMMENTARY. 

The ‘all ’ of the text must refer to the 
that are the immediate antecedents of ‘all 
the other cups, the Soma is eaten by their i 
Hariyojana cup, all of them eat it \ Th 
bearers have been mentioned in 
‘air in the following 
ttie Ovdvastut is not a 
by the OrdvastuV^ 

This objection is answered in the following Sutra. 

ii ti 

it refers to all ; 5, in fact ; Biracsrm, such being the sense of t 
injunction ; for the purpose of eulogising it ; the mention oi 

bearers. 

■ 30. ■ As a matter of fact, however, the eating m 
ed must be taken as referring to all,— such being th( 
of the direct injunction ; and the mention of the cup-1 
is only by way of eulogising the Hariyojana Cup. 

commentary. 

When we find the text distinctly laying down that ‘ all sh 
out of the Hariyojana Cup,’, there can be no justification for restric 
eating to the Gup~bearers only, and excluding the Ord}}a.<ih,.f. Ac 


lese 

he passage meaning—' out of 
active bearers ; but out of the 
us then, inasmuch as the Oup- 
the clause immediately preceding, tlie 
clause must refer to the same Cup-bearers j and as 
cup-bearer, the passage cannot justify the eating 



V PlDA, X-Xl ADRlKAEA'l^A 


the preceding clause — wh 

meant to serve the purpose 
of the phrase being — * r 
eat the Soma, but the B&r 
out of it.’ From all this it 
by tlie Ordvastiit priest also. 


-‘woere tae cup-bearers are mentioned — this is 

pose of eulogising the Hariyojaiia Cup ; the sense 
Out of the other Ouj)s only their respective bearers 
:::riyojava is so good that all the priests partake 
appears that the eating of Soma is to be done 


^ A4htkarana X.—Tlie pronouncing of , the syllable 
vasat entitles one to eat Soma. 

SUTRA SI . 

^3^, by reason of the pronouncing of the syllable ‘ va^at ’ ; also ; 
one should eat. * ’ ’ ^ 

3,1. One is entitled to eat (Soma) also by reason of his 
pronouncing the syllable ‘ vasat.’ 

commentary. 

hroni Adhikarana ( 7 ), it would seem that the eating of Remnants 
out of the Cups was due entirely to the names given to the Cups ; and 
this would imply that no priest, except those after whom the Cups a^e 
named, are entitled to the eating of Remnants. This notion is set aside 
by the present Sutra ; which shows that, irrespective of the fact of no Cup 
being named after a certain person, if that person happens to be one who 
has pronounced the syllable ‘va^at ’dnvmg the sacrificial performance, - 
that fact alone entitles him to the eating of Remnants. This is clear 

from the injunction that ‘ the first eating is that of the pronouncer of the 
syllable vasat.’ 

Other circumstances entitling a priest to the eating of Remnants are 
pointed out in the next Adhikarana. 


Adhikarana XI. — The Pourin 
fire and the extracting of the Soma- 
eating. 

sOtra S2. 

II 

32. By reason also of the ‘ poi 
‘ extracting the Soma-juice ’ [one be 
eating]. 



PljRVA-MlMAMSA-SdTRA. Ill ADRYA^A 


COMMENTARY. 

That these two acts entitle one to the eating of Remnants is clear 
from the following text — ‘Having extracted the Soma-juice by means 
of stones, and having poured oblations into the Sacrificial Fire, they return 
to the Room and eat the Remnants.’ 


Adhikarana XII. — The pronouncer of the syllable 
‘vasat ’ and others eat the Soma out of cups. 

SOtRAS 38-85. 

in view of direct injunction j in regard to the cups j Wtr:, 

indefinite ; as regards other vessels. 

33. “Inasmuch, as in regard to the cups there is 
direct injunction (of the cup-bearers eating out of them), 
[these alone should eat of the cups] ; and inasmuch as there 
is no such definite restriction in regard to the other vessels, 
[other priests should eat out of these latter]. 

COMMENTARY. 

It has been decided that all those who officiate at the sacrifice— 
the cup-bearing Eotii, &c., as also the non-cnp-bearing extractor of the 
juice and the rest— are to eat the Remnants. Now, the question arises as 
to the particular vessel out of which the Remnant is to be eaten. As re- 
gards the Oup-bearers, there is no question, each of them eats out of his own 
Cup ; there arises a doubt, Jiowever, as regards those who have no cups 
of their own ; e. a., the pronouncer of the ‘ vasat' the nersnn wli C\ TkATlT'O 





V PIDA, XIII ADHIKARANA 


tlie Clips, by the other Priests also]- the 
eating being present [in their case also] ; 
regard to the Cups, there is (in reality' 
regards the persons (to eat out of thena),— 
express being [simply that the Cup-beareri 
the cups, and not that these alone shall do 

COiVfMENTARy. 

The grounds upon which the Remnant has t( 
;«ps are as much present in the case of the Priests 
o np-bearers. Nor is there any restriction necess 
text that speaks of tiie Cup-bearers eating out of t 
this text says is that the Cup-bearers shall" eat out c 
that these alone shall do so, and none others. Her 
justification for disallowing the Priests in question to 

II 

'1^%, in connection with the cups ; % further j 
tioneci* 

35. Further, because in connection 
we find mentioned others also (anart, Frcu-n +i 


A4hHara»a Xlll.-The Bolri priett is the first to 

ic C- C 8&TBAS 36;-39. ■ , ■ 

36. “Out ol a single vessel, in due accordance with 

the patpirg,! order, the Adjivar^u shoijld f^t fir§t of all,” 



P^nVA-MtMAM8l-S6TRA. Ill ADEYAYA 


commentary. 

fn regard to a case wliere 
out of a single vesel, the doubt ar 
first. The Ptmapuh^a view is 

who is holding the cup should begin the ( " 

who is holding it, it is he that should eat first of all. 
The SmUnta is put forward in the next 8tara- 

wr ii i\ 

Iraf, the Hotri priest ; gr, in. reality ; 
the words of the Mantra. 

37. In reality, the Hotri 
being the clear indication of the 


several priests have to eat the Remnant 
to which 'of the priests should eat 
te natural order is that the man 
eating ; and as it is the Adhvarvu 


priest [should eat first] 
J words of the Mantra. 

COMMENTARY. 

That the Hotri has precedence over others is elearlv indie 
KveraUtntra tete-O) ' The Hotri ale the subslonoe fat (S y 
all the Hotn should protect ue,’ and so forth. ’ 

ti ^c: II 

38. Also because such is the direct injunction. 

COMMENTARY. 

■ .T“ »'“<> to Ilia effect that- 

IS that by the k a-9ai5-pronotincer ^ ‘ ‘ ‘ 

the ‘ Vasat ’-pronouncer) has precedence 
eating. 

II H II 

39. Also because of the order of 
the grounds (of eating). 

COMMENTARY. 

Lastly each priest is entitled to the eating 
does e.g the Hotri pronounces ‘Vasat,’ the Adhvaiw, 

_ Va.?at comes first -after that, comes thepouring of t 
m consideration of this order of sequence in their < 

ITotn who should eat first. ' 


, . the first 

winch also shows that the Hotri (i 

J over others, in the mat 





V PADA, XIV-XV ADHIKARANA S, 


7 



pt^EVA-MlMlMSA-SdTRA. JII ADHYAYA 


Adhiharana XVI.-— The Answer should he hy means of 
Vedie words — and that in aceordanae with the meaning of the 
Mantra. 

StfRA 42. 

u 

in the case of invitation ; mh , in accordance with the sense ; 

answer. 

42. In the case of invitation, the answer should be 
(in the form of the words of the Mantra ; and) in accordance 
with the sense of the words, 

COMMENTABY. 

The Invitation is to be conveyed by means of Vedic words ; in regard 
to the answer also, the Siddtidnpi is that it should be in the form of words in 
the Mantra itself ; and tliat, too, in accordance Avith the meaning of words. 
That is, the Mantra ’ upahtlta upahvayasva' consists of two words — Q) 
‘ npahvaj'asva,’ rvhich means ‘ dost thou invite ? ’ and (2) ‘ upahuta’ — ‘ tliou 
art invited and it is clear from this that (1; is the answer given to (2) ; 
hence, even though the words are mentioned in the order given, in view 
of their meaning, the second word should come first, as embodying the 
question, and this should be followed by the first word, which embodies 
the answer-. 


Adhiharana XVII. — The Invitation should he extended 
to only those Priests that have to eat out of the same Vessel. 

SlfTRA 48. 

wmmfl U II 

ua, Invitation ; to persons eating of the same vessel ; OTsinim, because 

of congregation. 

43. The invitation should be extended only to persons 
eating out of the same vessel ; as it is only in their case that 
there is congregation. 

COMMENTARY. 

The question arising — should the said invitation be extended 
to atty and every person or to only those entitled to eat out of the same 



V PJDA, JtVlII ADfiTKABANA, S 7 I 44. 


for the Sacrificer; w, reality; wxnimra, by reasoa of the 
cause (or conditions). 


presence of the 


vessel P -the SidcIMvta is tlmt it should be extended to these latter only ; 
because individual invitation becomes necessary only in a case where many 
persons come together being entitled to any single act ; and, as such coming 
together or congregation is possible only where several persons have to eat 

out of the same vessel,— it is only in such a case that invitation becomes 

necessary. 


Adhikarana XVIll. — Wheyi the Master of the Sacrifice 
himself officiates, he is entitled to eat the Remnant. 

SOTRAS 44—46. 

^rT5?TTq5W fTTqyfr^ 22 ii 

even on the transference of the Y4jyA; not ; is transferred ; 

like the appointment. 

■14. Jiven oil the transference of the Yajya, there is 
no transference of the eating; jitst as (there is no trans- 
ference) of the appointment.” 

COMMENTARY. 

At the Jjmti^toma there is an olfering to the seasons ; in connection 
with which It IS laid down that the Master of the Sacrifice should request 
the Hotri to make the offerings, or he should himself make them • in the 
latter case, the Idjyd 1 . eing the xMaster’ own. When the Master makes the 
offerings, the Yajyd is transferred from the Hotri priest to the Master •— 

TTi or not by reason of this transference 

of the Yajya, the Master becomes entitled to the ‘ Eating of Remnant ’ 
which ordinarily would have been done by the Hotri. The Pttrvapahsa 
18 that the transference of the Yajyd does not imply the transference of 
the eating ; because, as a rule, no transference is permissible — 
as regards the Yajyd, we have the text actually laying down ’its 
transference under certain circumstances ; but this text cannot be extended 
to the transference of anything else ; so that there is no authority for the 
transference of the eating. Just as, even though the offering may be made 
by the Master, there is no ‘ appointment ’ of him, as there is of the Priests. 

The Sujrjhdnta is put forward in the following Siiitra. 

‘lI'.i' 'X ' ' ' ' 



PdBVA-MtMiUsk-SOfBA. lit ADTIYAYA 


45. In reality., for the Master of the Sacrifice also 
[there is Eating] ; as the conditions necessary (for the Eating) 
are present (in this case). 

COMMENTARY. 

As a mattei’ of fact, what entitles the Hotri to the eating is the 
fact of his being the ‘ pronouncer of the Vasat' ; and in the case in question, 
when the offering is made by the Master, and he takes up the Yajya, he 
also pronounces the ‘ Vasat, ’ which is laid down as to be pronounced over 
the ; so that the pronouncing of the ^ V asat^^ which is the sole 

condition for ' eating/ being fulfilled by the Master, he naturally becomes 
entitled to the Bating also. 

w u 

on account of its having been accomplished long ago ; of the 

appointment ; mm there is non-transference. 

46. Of the Appointment there is no transference, in- 
asmuch as it has been accomplished long ago. 

COMMENTARY. 

The Purvapali§iii lias cited the instance of the ‘ appointment,’ which 
is not transferred to the Master. The answer to this is, that the case 
of Bating is not analogous to that of Appointment ; the ‘appointment’ of the 
Priest is done at the beginning of the Jyoti§toma sacrifice ; so that there 
is no possibility of its being transferred from tbe Priest to the Master 
at the time that the offering to the seasons comes to be made by tbe 
latter ; such is not the case with the' eating,’ which being something yet to 
come, can very well be transferred from the one to the other. And when 
the text lays down that the ‘ Master himself should make the offerings,’ 
the duty of doing all that is to be done in connection with the sacrifice 
devolves upon tbe Master; and this certainly includes the Eating also. 


Adhikarana XIX. — The ‘ Fruit-Cup ’ is a substitute for 
purposes of the sacrificial offering. 

ShfRAS 47-ol. 

the Fniit-Cup ; occasional, due to a particular cause ; 

is a substitute for purposes of the eating ; such being the sense of the 

'Tiiic 



V PAD A, Xtl ADUIKARA^A, SA. 47, 48, 49. 43? 


47. “ The Fruit-Cup must be regarded as an occa- 

sional or conditional substitute for the Eating ; — such being 
the Vedic text.” 

COMMENTARY. 

Ill connection with the Jyotistoma, it is laid down that ‘‘If the 
Master of the sacrifice be a Ksattriya or a Vaishya, and he be desirous 
of eating the Remnant, tlie Priests should prepare a mixture of banyan- 
shoots and curds, and offer this, not Soma, for his eating.’’ This mixture, 
kept in a Gap, is a called ‘ Phalachamasa,' ' Fruit-Cup.’ — Now, the question 
arises —is this new mixture to be prepared simply for the Master’s eating ? 
or should this be the material to be actually used in the olferiags, as a 
substitute for Soma?— The Purvapikm is that, inasmuch as the text 
quoted distinctly says that this mixture should be offered to the 
Master for his eating, there can be no justification for utilising it as a 
material for offering. 

The Sid4hd'nta is put forward in the next STlfm. 

WT, ii 2^ w 

a substitute for purposes of offering ; in reality ; of the 

consecration ; being intended for the sacrificial material. 

48. In fact, it must be regarded as a substitute for 
the purpose of offering ; because consecration is always 
intended for things to be offered. 

COMMENTARY. 

The ‘ Eatiag of Raimiaat ’ is laid dowu only by way of a ‘ cansecra- 
tioii ’ — as, without the eatiug, the Remuaut would be wasted. So that, 
wlien the text lays down the eatiag of the Mixture, this eating can only 
be by way of ‘ consecration ’ ; and ‘ consecration ’ is possible and necessary 
only for a substance that is meant to be actually offered,— and not for 
one tliat is meant only to be eaten. From all this it follows that the 
Mixture is meant for the offering, and only thence, for the eating, 

49. Also because an actual oblation (is laid down.) 

We have a text that actually lays down an oblation of the Mixture 
in question— ‘ out of the Fruit-Cup the oblation is made with afresh 



PU^A-MImAmsA-SDTM. Hi AbE^AtA 


Jinsiia-sprout ; ’ this leaves ao doubt that the ilixture is to be used 

entirely for eating only. 

H Vo II 

along with the Cups ; % further ; , because it is spoken c 

coem. 

50. Further, because it is spoken of as (having 
lifting) coeval with (that of) the Cups (of Soma offered.) 


Adhikarana XX. The Folloivers on of the ‘ Ksaffr 

must he Brdhmanas. 

sflTRAS 52-58. 

II VR M 

, among the followers on ; with a view to homog 

52. “Among the followers on [there should b 

yasj for the sake of homogeneity.” 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Eajasiiya, -we read -‘a hundred 
hould eat the Soma, and the Brfthmanas should follow on upon 
low, in connection with the cup of Banyan-shoot-Mixture that 





V PADA, ax ADBIKARANA, 84. 53. 439 

K^attiiyas for the sake of homogeneity; i.e., just as the followers on of 

the Brahmana cups are Brahmanas, so those of the Kmttriya cup should be 

KsaWnijas, 

The 8iddhanta is put forward in the next S4tra.— 

{\^\ II 

arfwr: they should be Br41ima!jas ; gr, in reality ; because the 

Vedic text is equally applicable. 

53. In fact, they must be Brahmanas, because the 
Vedic text is equally applicable (to the Brahmana and the 
Ksattriya Cups.) 

COMMENTARY. 

^ The Vedic text says—* the Brdhmams should follow on upon each 
cup’ — thus all the * hundred Brahmanas’ beins nrovirl^rl fm- • :f 


End of Pada Y of Aclbyaya III 


fliiliSS 

iiiisi 


m 



THIRD ADHYAYA. 

Sixth Pad a. 

Adhikm-ana 1. Sutras 1 — 8. — The eharoeter of consisting 
of leaves and suck other things that are laid doum apart 
from the context of any particular sacrifice should he 
taken as pertaining to the archetypal sacrifice. 


_ must pertain to all ; ^iurorm as it has no connection with any 
particular context. 

1. “What is laid down must pertain to all, as it is not 
connected with the context of any particular action.” 

COMMENTARY. 

Apart from the context of all sacrifices, we find the sentence — 
“ He who uses the Juhu made of leaves, does not hear anything unpleasant 
of himself.” In regard to this, the question arises whether this making 
of the Juliflis meant for the archetypal sacrifice of the Darsha— Purnamasa 
or its ectypal sacrifices as well. The Pilrvapaksha embodied in the Sutra 
is, that it should be taken as referring to all sacrifices, and not to the 
archetypal sacrifice only ; for the simple reason that the passage in 
question is not found in the context of any particular sacrifice. 

The Siddhanta is put forward in the following Sutra — 

to the archetypal sacrifice ; w in reality j as thus there would 

be BO SBperfluouB repetition. 

^ 2. What is laid down must pertain to the archetypal 
sacrifice, as it is only thus that there will be no superfluous 
repetition. 

COMMENTARY. 

Though It is true that the exact relation of what is laid down 
cannot be ascertained with the help of the context, yet there is one ground 
for taking it as applying to the archetypal sacrifice only :--There is the 





-w ^ ^bnikiRAm, Su t, 4. 

cZefo'tZT" f'**" 

•ppljincv “ '” question were 

eoncerneJ ,, ‘ " ‘k®”' »» '“>■ “e these sa. 

tbroiiffh the wh r"*”* "““W “me in two wsi 

■onhrned in ,r *'«• d 

Juons repetition ^oT‘f ““<> "“is would involv 

0 He archetype only we" voTd tW ' T T'"* ' 

.ef.rr .] T* ^ ^ Old tills I'edundaiicy, and yet ser*nr#: 

t abore'rre““d ,0 (“““f'''”'' 

6, ni iej^aui to ti-ansfereiice of details. 

I he Vaitiha notices another reading 
Theconstr ' 


of the Sutra— -|^ 

■uction in this case would be— irhat is 
v'Te ; for, if it pertains to the ectvnpt? tl 
oe neper, .nous repetition. The sense of the .rgnn.en. reSi « 

I) ^ u 

with the exception of that • 3 hnt • ac 

applicability being asserted. ’ “ ’ ' general law 

sacrifiL Wlioability of the Juha to the 

sacrifices being asserted in the passage in quest 
general law (relating to the transference of detaH 

. ichetype to the ectype) must be taien as applying 
other details, except the Juhfl. ” applying 

COMMENTARY. , 

followr^Th“'''‘r^’i'“ argument of the Siddh 

if r redundancy can be easily avoided if we take the apn 

of the Juhu to the ectypes as based upon the passage under con!fd, 
.. excluding tbis particular detail from the operation 
,:r¥erred to ; so that the details other than the particular kind of jTht 
1 come into the ectypes from the archetype by virtue of the gene! 1 
the Juhu would come in by force of the passage under discuTsTc^. 

H ^ 11 

nnf (by the Siddhantin) that su( 

actually found to be the case. 

' . OOMMENTARY. 

‘ if ihl the Purvapaksha the argument 
, oiceo a isconuected sentence were more authorifati-im rP, 





P^RVA-MiMAMSA-SOTBAS. lU ADEYAyA 


general- law, tlien the whole of the general law rniglit very well be discarded ; 
which, however, is not found to be done in practice, as we do find the 
Prayajas of the archetype transferred to the ectype. 

The Purvapafcshin answers this argument in the following Sutra — 

“ff u V( i\ 

5. “ Not so, as the injuiiction (contained in the dis- 
connected sentence in question) serves the purpose of laying 
down only one thing.” 

COMMENTARY, 

The acceptaace of the force of the diseoauected sentence tinder 
discussion will not justify the discarding the whole of the general law ; for 
the sentence will bring into the ectype a single thing in the shape of 
the particular Juhu ; so that for endless other details the ectype will have 
to depend upon the general law of transference of details from the arche- 
type to the ectype. 

liiVen so far as the Juhu itself is concerned, it will come into the 
ectype only by virtue of the general law ; as all that the disconnected 
sentence will do will be to lay down the fact that the Juhu to be used 
should be one 7?iade of leaves. 

The Siddhanti urges an argument in the following Sti^ra against the 
Purvapaksha — 

^ II i II 

6. If it be urged that the coming in also (of the Juhu 
may be only by virtue of another disconnected sentence). 

COMMENTARY. 

I or the coming in of the J uhu itself into the ectype, it may not be 
necessary to depend upon the general law of transference, as we can find 
several disconnected passages, which may be regarded as laying down 
the use of the Juhu ; so that the general law will still remain futile. 

The Piirvapakshin supplies an answer to the above argument in the 
following Sut-ra. 

ins II 

h«ot so, because of the similarity of words.” 

COMMENTARY. 

The Other disconnected passage which the Siddhantin refers to is 
ixactly m the same form as the sentence under discussion. That 



PADA, n ADBIKAEAt^A 


says, “He vvboses?-w^;isoi 

the sruh ah'eady known b 
question says— “ He wbos 
something in connection 
Jneans. Thus both these 
far as both iay down 
known by other 
knowii 
law 


tiie said icnid ** onri , 

7 some refers 

p Tid, • f 1 sentence 

e Juhn ,s of leaves, etc.,” which also Jays dou 

witJitheJuhQ already known by some otln 
sometlW-' «ame position, in s 

mea.,; “ L witli thearaj or ,T„ha alread 

the genera. la. „( .ralrt,.:: " Zl^ron^Ar “““ '' 
IS not curtailed. ’ ' “ °°P® genera. 

Th eSnjdta nftn pels forward hfo folfowinj, Sdt,.,_ 

,1 q ,1 

■« ft. general law, , in real.,, 

fteconneeted pa.»ge, w* i. .e'ke TretaZ” 

COMMBNTAEY. 

i.. ftetizr:: t^tr:riraZf ” r 

'ne«ca.ion for any defods Z info f ^ 

fself on the strength of a stinv d it. , ? independently by 

■easonable conclusion can be that the rcToUhTjur^^l’ 

ZM”'"* ‘"“PPly to ft. arohelvoeo,, )r'‘’l“, 


^ /• -t /i6 namoer seventeen 'pertain 
'I 'verses is applicable to the eetype. 

^rg; h 5. u 

df there is another particular ; 5 in reality ; ^ 
other than that particular ; ^ should apply to 

m the context itself there is anothe 
which is different from this detai 



PtlRVA-MlMAMSA-StJTBAS. Ill ADEYAYA 


this number seoenteen is to apply to the archetype — according to tli 
sion arrived at in the preceding Adhikararia—or it should apj 
ectype. The former view embodying the Purvapaksha, the Siddha 
forward in the present Sdtra. As a matter of fact, we find that 
the archetype is concerned, an injunctive passage occurring in th 
of that sacrifice lays down the number of Samidheiu verses as fif^ 
that any other number mentioned in a disconnected passage < 
reasonably be applicable to the archetype, as any such applicati< 
lead to a confusion between the two numbers fifteen and seoenteen, 
the conclusion is that the number seoenteen must apply to the 
alone ; and out of the several ectypes of the Darslia Purnamasa it 
at the Mitrabinda and a few ^others that the number of Sami 
to be seventeen. 


Adhikarana III ^ (Siitrd 10) — Budi things^ as the milking 
vessel and the like^ appertain to the archetype, 

that which 

should pertaia to the 
because of the 


is due to a particular circumstaace 
archetype ; precluding the oth 

mention of the particular circumstance. 

COMMENTARY. 

_ _ In close proximity to' the Darsha Pftrnamasa se( 
injanction that, in case the sacrificer is desirous of ob 
should fetch water in the milking vessel. Fn regard to 
arises as.to whether the milking vessel is to be used at tli 
the eclype. The Pfirvapaksiia is that, inasmuch as at 
u.se of the Ghamasa Vessel is already laid down, any oth 
can be used only at the ectypes. In answer to this, the pr 
forward the Siddiiinta that, though it is true that at t 
Ghamasa is the vessel to be ordinarily used, yet what 
question lays down is the use of tlie milking vessel undi 
tions ; that is to say, the meaning of tlie passage clea 
sacrifice where the fetching of the water is laid down ai 
fetched in the Oliamasa vessel, if the sacrificer happens tc 
should use the milking vessel instead. Prom this it 
milking vessel is to be used at the achetypal sacrifice. 


ty, 




^ ^“6 •‘aynig of fire ; by reason 

The hying of fire must be siibsicliarj to the sacri- 
it occurs ill the same context.” 

COMMENTARY, 

proximity to the injunction of the Pavamilna Sacrifice we 
g aying down that the Brahman should lay his fire 
'tc.etc rhe question arises as to whether m- not this 
IS subsidiary to the PavarnSna. The Purvapaksha is that, 

s found in the same context, the laying of fire must be 
Je 1 avamana. 

hanta is put forward in the following Siitra— 

II u II 

n reality ; be subsidiary to them, because they are 

icratory of the fire. ^ 

reality, the laying of fire cannot be subsidiary 
lana, etc., as these also only serve the purpose 




Pi:fRVA.MlMiM8A-80TEAS. Ill ADBYAYA 


Adhihavana (Suhxi 14-13.) — The laying of five 
appertains to all Sacrifices. 

mi II II 

rm it j must be for the sake of the sacrifice ; mx like artchetypal ^ 

other. discounected declarations. 

14. The fire- laying must be for the sake of the arche- 
P®> j^^st like other disconnected assertions. 

COMMENTARY. 

In regal'd to the laying of lire itself, the question arises as to its 
pel taining' to the archetype or to both the archetype and ectype. The 
Purvapaksha, in accordance with the conclusion arrived at in the first 
Adhikarana, is that it should pertain to the archetype only, inasmucli as this 
laying of fire also happens to be laid down in a stray disconnected passage. 

The Siddhanta is put forward in the following Sfitra — 

II ? II 

for the sake of all ; w in reality ; the laying of the fire ; ^^iFstra 

baving its own time. 

15. In reality, the laying must be regarded as pertain- 
ing to all sacrifices, inasmuch as it has its own time 


J 



VI PADA, VII ADRIKARAVIA 


OOMMBNTARY. , 

^na sacrifices, the question arising a 
i into the duly sanctified fire or into 
the PCirvapaksha put forward in the Sutr 
■amana sacrifices have the Darshan Pur nan 

fi-rtni <i t 1 acquire all the details by transfere 

um lliat a.,!ietype ; and as the sanctified fire also is one such detail, ll 

no .^son why that also shonld not co.ne into the PavamSna saerilict 
ine biddhanta is out forwart^ in -Cnsii • 


Ill regard to the Pavanni 
ether these should be offered 
iiiary unsanctified fire, 
t, inasnyrch as the Pav 
their archetype, they should 


’T not soi w in reality i nrw-i those Pavatnana sacrifices 
purpose of sanctifying the fire. 

17. In reality, this cannot be so; as 
bacrifices themselves serve the lourpose of 

OOMMKNTARY. 

As a matter of fact, the Pavainana sacrifices are c 
whole ptoooedtog which brings shout the due sauctil 
1 01 this reason it ,s not possible for those saorMoes th 

m need of the sanctified fire. 


Adhikarana VII Sutras 18, 27 — The Upl 
other preparatmj rites ehculd be performed onli 
Hon with the animal dedicated to Agni-Soma. 

with T^'‘ applicable ■, to all ^ what is laid dow 

with animals as there is no difference in the context. 

. , '■ “^^at 18 laid down in connectioi 

animals should apply equally to all the animals, 
t lee are mentioned in the same context.” 

COMMENTARY. 

BOtoio!" r ‘iere ™ fee anit 
sotniya, the Savaniya and the Anubaiidhya ; in close pro 

^ZT details in connect 

In U T details, the quest 

to the particular animal or animals in 




pdEVA-MiMiMSA-SOTRAS. Ill ADRYAfA 


have to be carried oitt, — the first Purvapaksha put lorwarcl m tue present 
Sutra is that, iiiasrauch- as the all three animals are equally mentioned 
in the context of the Jyotishtoma Sacrifice, the said details should be 
carried out in connection with all the three. 

The next Sfitra puts forward the second Piirvapahsha. , 

U U U 

oil account of its position ; also ; in connection with the first. 

19. “ On account of its position, the details should be 
cairied out in connection with the first or Agni somiya 
animal (as also of the Savaniya.) ” 

COMMENTARY. 

The second Ptirvapaksha is that the details should be carried 
out in connection with only two out of the three animals ; these two 
being the Agni-somiya and the Savaniya. In reality the present Sfitra 
puts forward the claims of Agni-somiya animal only, but admits the 
claims of the Savaniya also. The claim of the Agni-somiya is based upon 
its “ position that is, its killing is laid down as to be done on the fourth 
day of the sacrifice, and the details in question are also laid down in 
comiectioii with the perfonnances of the same day. Exactly for the same 
reason the details are applicable to the Savaniya animal also, which also 
is killed on the same fourth day. As regards the third, the Anubandhya 
animal, it comes in only at the end of the whole sacrifice, in fact, after the 
final bath ; so that the details in question cannot apply to this. 

The Siddlninta is introduced in the next Sfitra — 

^ SrT^^[TrrSllIPTT II Ro II 

next day 5 5 in reality ; according to some Yaidikas ; such being 
the case ; mentioned in connection with the jireceding day ; for the 

purpose of laying down necessary details. 

20 . According to some Vaidikas, the Savaniya animal 
is mentioned in connection with the following day ; and in 
this case its mention in connection with the preceding day 
is only for the purpose of laying down certain subsidiary 
details in connection with it. 

commentary. 

j , As a matter of fact, it is found that really the passage that lays down the' 
Savaniya animal is that which speaks of it as to he used on the Suty4 day, 



ADHltARA^A S', 


.4«i,i,r, ■ '™ ‘''““'>6 <>etails 

of .0 6ava,„ya a,„.„al i„ ccoeolion with tl.< 

fhat It, IS simply fcr Um p ^ f 

connection with it. i ut pr 


^aRiRf: the injunction of time, ^ %7t 


-00X1;?]’ ;“®”“^ explanation that 

•se only lays down the time for the sarr!fio:„„ „t 

mentioned in the other passage.' “« 

COMMENTARY. 

‘Pakslii meets the above argument with the f ll 

There are two passages mentionina I f^^Jowing 

g It with the fourth dov n ^ animal ; 

= . ‘ lomtn day and the other with the fiM ■, 

>peas IS that in accordance with the form. ™ * 

the SiddhSnti iiimecU lavs do, ™ Pftsage— which 

al also-the SavrnTv. f , tl* 

‘ke paipoes of th^Xtrhl^ “ ““ 

m this fashion it would!,. „„f„ 


one passR; 
the animal : 


450 


p(^rva-m1mAmsa-siJtbas. in adbyayA. 


concerned ; and it cajinot in any case be Ix'eated as the passage laying 
down the use oi the Savaniya animal as a %vhole. This can only be 
regarded as done by the other passage, which connects the Savaniya with 
the fdtli day, and as such, puts behind the Agni-somlya. 

H II 

23. If it be urged that “ tlie whole has to be drawn 
back, in view of what is laid down as to be done.” 

COMSIENTAKY. . 

The Purvapakshi answers the argument put forth in Sutra 22. We 
have a text distinctly laying down that, after having drawn out the fat, the 
man should keep seated, covering the fat with the mushti till the Iloma. 
How, if the di awing out of the iat of the Savaniya alone were tp be done 
on the iouith day and the actual Homa or ofiering on the next day, this 
would imply that the man would remain seated for 24 hours ; and, as this 
is not possible, the only right conclusion is that not only the fat-extraction, 
but the actual offering also of the Savaniya has to be put back a day. 
earlier ; so that it would l)e connected with the same day as the Agni- 
somiya, 

ii ii 

^ Kot so ; tbez’e being no transgression of the Veda. 

24. -Ibis cannot be ; as there would be no transgres- 
sion of the Veda. 

COMMENTARY. 

All that the text quoted by the Purvapakshi says is that the 
Iat should be kept covered with the mushti-, and, as" this injunction 
would be fulfilled by its being covered by a mushti or handful of grass or 
leaves, it by no means necessitates the sacrificer himself sitting there all 
the time till the offering has been made. Consequezitly, there can be no 

justification for the entire details of the Savaniya to he put back to the 
■fourth day. 

- ?i?zfera; II II 

on account, of the -position ; § in reality ; -it belongs to the first • 

the sanctification ; being for the sake of that, 

25. Tims, in reality, by reason of its position, the ■ 
detail in question nrast belong to the first (Agni-somiya). 
.^ni^al ; specially as the sanctification is meant for tlie; , 
-that animal.' ^ ' ' ' ' ’ ""''v'. 



VI PAD A, VTT ADHIKABANA 


Jt llclS 1)6611 sllOWIl 

belong only to tlie Saraii 
to the third, the Aiinhai 
bodied in Sutras 20 to 24 
the Savaniya ; so the on]; 
the Agnisomiya. A fartli 
the sanctification brouglit. 

aflect only the AcfnfsAmtTr 


Also because we fiad texts indicatin 


same 


indicates thaVthe details h^quesZ mL! to' 

as a matter of fact there « i « • Agnisomiya, because, 

»>ya. HeJe, tiln: 

animal-ofFering, the time mid dnr subsidiary to the 

me time micl-day fits ai quite rightly. 

. pit^ II II ■ 

not injunctive ; of a particular detail. 

canfit ? f put forward 

cannot be regarded as injunctive of tbe detail referred to, 

COMMENT ABY. 

Tlih S(itra anticipates the tollowiag argameat of the P6i-v«nak,h; 

We havea tert that apeata of coveriag the hole i„ the aoi aTLI; 

-made for the extracting of the fat-wilh the cake : and „e Lie Ll 

present both in the Agnljoinlja and the Savaniya, both of these 

apparently connected with the cake so that the ind' ,• ' ®, 

the nrecedinp' Sritvo /i . ° ® indicative cited in 

tne preceding butia does not necessarily indicate the Agnisomivn 

eulogising the cake; and hence there beina nothin., to inl'f 
ins of the caKp wJm fU a Y , notiung to justify the eonnect- 
^igot the cake mth the , Savaniya, the said indicative must be taken aa 
pointing specifically to the Agnigomiya alone. 



P^RV A-MIMAMSA-SGtraS. Ill adey.aya 


Adhih 


arana VIII. (Sutras 28 — 29.) — Such details as the 
fecthing of die branch of the Paldsha tree and the like, 
appertain to both morning and evening milkings. 

ii Rc: II 

the two milkings ; the time being different; not 

connected ; that which is mentioned would be. 

r « account of the time of the two milkings being 

aitterent, that milking which is mentioned could not be 
connected (with the details).” 

COMMENTARY, 

,1,. ««> Da,-shapar,amasa there are two milkiage 

*owr „"™ “"'■“"“J milking ;eertain details are lafd 

the P m'lkmgs, such as the fetching of a branch of 

forth n regard to tbeae details, the question arise, as to whether this 
Bhonld be done tn connection with the ntorning milking „r S he 

thar-lf ”” l'"'Tl P"1 forward in the present Slltrn is 

that- theyshonid.bedone in connection with the evening milking They 

should not be done in connection with the morning rndking b«anse .hi 
passage .n which these dehtils are laid down is in doser the 

ps^ge mentioning the evening milking than to that which mlntions 
he morning milking; nor will it be possible for what has been dine “n 
wnnection with the evening milking to be connected with the moraine 
one, aethers is a great gap between the times of the two. ® 

llie Siddhanta is iDufc forwfirrl in o ax... 



pad A, IX, X ADHIXAEAPJA 


^ time is laid down for an acti 

ishtriT “ ''“'•.“'“S 0“ i‘> details ; so ,1 

a>oo* .i,h r/L Laas! ‘‘ 

Adhikara^a IX {Slum SO).~The washing 
details in eonneetion loith the vessels 
sake of all the three Savanas. 

. ’Tt!,«.^o)r||.^> iTfr ^nn II 3. 

m as in the preceding Adiiikarapaj to the 

Savanas “• ™«i»n of .he details in oo„„ee.i„n ti 

tiU. In accordance with the foregoino 
etails connected with the vessels pertain to f.t 


in connection with the ,Jt 
extractions of the Soma juice, ‘ 
evening. Jn connection with the 
tioned, and their washing 
tion arises 


/otishtoma, there are three Savanas or 
in the morning, at mid-day and in the 
morning extraction, ten vessels are men- 
i are also laid down. The ques- 
essels and their details are related to tho 


g and other details 
as to whether these v( 

morning-extraction only or to all the three 
IS that they must be related to the mornin 
connection with this that they are actually n 
fomard m the Sdtra is that they she. Id be tal 

two “to” ‘ ““ 


Adhikarana X {Siltra 31 ) 


■The triplication of the cord 
pertains to all animals. 

g l«rs-<^j(Hrin ii n 

WV. he cord also, 

also regard to the cor 

so, specially as there is a text indicative lof the same " 

' ‘ CSOMMBNTARy. ' 

cord 


1 

,i| 

;p 

il 


r i 







454 Pl^BVA-MlMAMSA-S&rBAS. Ill ADEYlYA. 

the cord certain details are laid down, such as it should be of kusha grass, 
it should be triplicated, anti so forth. The question arises as to whether 
these details appertain to the Agni-fomi3'a animal only or to the Savaniya 
animal also. The Pilrvapaksha is that they should pertain to the Agni-somij^a 
only, as it is in connection with this that they are actually mentioned. The 
Suldlianta put forward, however, in the present Sutra is that the cord, along 
with its details, should pertain to- both animals ; because in connection with 
the Savanlya animal also we find a passage referring to the cord as 
being three-fold, which is clearly indicative of'the fact that the triplicat- 
ing and other details of the cord ai’e applicable to this animal also. 

Adhikarana XI (Sutra S2-S4), — The 'placing, washing and 
such other details are applicable to the ilms/tw and the 
Addbhya rebels also. 

in close proximity ; laid down j not connected ; with the 
others ; on account of non-proximity. 

32. “ That which is laid down in close proximity to 

one thing cannot be connected with the other things, simply 
because it is not in close proximity to these.” 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Jyotishtoma, there are certain vp.s,sels men- 
tioned m the same context, such as the Aindra, the Vayava, and so forth 
while there are other vessels, such as the AcUbhya and the rest which are 
not mentioned in the context of any sacrifice. In connection with these 
sacrificial vessels, the Jyotishtoma section lays down certain details such 
Bstcashtng and the rest. The question now arises, wdiether these wash- 
ing, etc,, are to be done only to those particular ve.ssels that happen 
to be mentioned m the same context, or to the other vessels also. The 
Purvapaksha put forward in the present Sutra is tliat they should be done 
only to those particular vessels, for the simple reason that they are mew 

tmned in the same context with those vessels, while with the other vessels 
they have no sort of connection whatsoever. 

The SiddbSnta is put forward in the following Sutra— 

^ I) II 

^connected; ^ in reality;^ Uing for the sake of that; the 
subsidiary details,- being opemtive towards the same. 







XII ADETKARAXA 


sqrf II ^2 I) 

■e can be restriction only by reason of specific 


mention 


COMMBNl’Afty. 

can be restricted to a particular vessel 
ally mentioned ; for instance, wJien it i 
■ma vessel should be filled with milk, 
le cup only that special and not to other 


^miKamna XII (SMra 35).-~The quaU 
(he hrieks, aueh as they should hear figures m 
pertain to the. fire, 

II II 

^appertains to the fire ; apart from the content ; 

35. Even thoiigb mentioned in another co 
appertain to the fire, according to the conclusion 
m the preceding Adhiharana. 

[A: , , ; ^OMMBOTaEY* 

_ h c<,„n<Mtion with the great fire-kmdli„g, 
the bricks are laid down, such as they should not be h,.nta. 


ions 



Pf^RVA-MlMAMSA-SdTRAS. lil ADHyAyA. 


lia^’e no darlc patch, and so forth ; in another context there are certain 
other qualifications mentioned, such as they should bear certain figui'es, 
and so forth. Now, the question arises as to whether or not these latter 
qualifications also appertain to the fire. The Pfirvapaksha is that, being 
mentioned in a totally different context, the qualifications cannot pertain 
to the fire. The Siddhanta embodied in the present Sutra is that, even 
though mentioned in a separate context, they must be taken as pertaining 
to the fire, because of the same grounds on which, iji the foregoing Adhi- 
karana, the washing, etc. have been taken as applying to the other vessels 
also. That is to say, bricks can be of use at sacrifices only in the making 
of the altar, and as the altar is for the fire, the qualifications of the brick, 
wherever mentioned, must appertain to the fire only. 



Adhiharana XIII,(8utra 36.) — The purchasing, the juice- 
extracting and such other details pertain to the Soma only. 

that which is due to a particular circumstance ; not being 

the same j having the same details j ^ should be. 

36. That which is due to a particular circumstance, 
not being the same as the original, it cannot ha ye the same 
details appertaining to it. 

COMMENTARY. 

_ In connection with the drinking of Soma at the Jy^toma 
sacrifice, it is laid down that, if the sacrificer happens to be a Ksh^^^^^nd 
wishes to drink the remanant of the Soma-juice, he should be given, Vot 
the actual Soma, but a substitute in the shape of the decoction of banyan- 
shoots m curd. Now, the question arises, as to whether or not in connec- 
tion with this decoction, one should perform all those details that are 
prescribed in connection with the Soma itself, such as purchasing it with 
a cow, extracting Its juice with certain rites, and so forth. The Purva- 
paksha is that, as a substitute, the decoction should undergo the same 
process as the original. The Siddhanta put forward in the Sutra is that the 
decoction is not a permanent substitute, but one to be used only under the 
particular circumstance of the sacrificer being a Kshattriya, and as such 
It cannot stand on the same footing as the Soma, and hence cannot h 
the same details applied to it* 




f 'A 



ADSIKABA, SH. S7, 88. 

Uhtharana XIV . (Sutras 3^—39 V-Thp m 
or^si^l sui^a„ „^UcaUeto iu If 

gr^» II „ 

*rf^. tie substitute ; ^aJsoj ngu as above. 

37.^ The substitute also should be treated accordiu 
principle arrived at in the precediuo- 


oanyau-shoots whicb is given to tie K.haS va to 
similar question arising in connection with fhl sub«ti 
.sed in accordance with the general Z 

thing IS i,ot avaiiaWe, a similar thing should he used 
^ays that on the analogy of the foregoing Adhikarana the 
an connection with the original substance shoZ j % 
substitute ; so that when, in the absence of Vribi one uses 
e need not do the washing, threshing, pounding deai 
are done in connection with Vribi, 

Tie 8i«h«n(a is put fomard in tie followins Suta. 

u ira>3i%5^ n n 

XT ™ , 

t?' in question is not analono 

the preceding Adhikarana. because in this case? 
serves the same purpose as the original. 

COMMENTARY 

; The substitution of Mvara for Vribi does not stand or 
lugasthat of ^e decoction , of banyan-sboots for sLa 
atter case, the decoction is meant, nnlrr 



458 P^EV A-M1MAMSI-8I3tbA 8. Ill ADEYAYA. 

conclusion is that, though the Vrihi and Nlrara differ in their gross form, 
the character of the constituent atoms of both is exactly alike. 

Question,— What do you gain by regarding these tAvo substances 
as constitutionally the same ? 

The answer to this question is supplied by the following Shtra— 

39.— Because it would not be authorised by the Scrip- 
tures, 

COMMENTARY. 

In case the NlvSra were something constitutionally different from 

^^crifices to the same extent that 
the Vrihi is,— being, as it is, not actually prescribed. 

Adhikamna XV Sutra iO.~-The details of the original 
suhstanee are applicable also to such substitutes as are 
directly laid down in the Scriptures. 

II H 

substanir^ Purpose of restriction ; the mention of the secondary 

40, The mention of the secondary substance is for 
the purpose of restriction. 

COMMENTARY. 

Jble ‘0 .,e P.U,, T.e tif i “nt ZZZZS 

tte MrZsZ ttVvii ff/: 

0 . 86 , there seed be no eooi injunction of PmlU as is oonWnZZZ 

bTTczzi: -r'- 

fttofft “‘“7™*““' “> ‘berttt.W “ftTZL Lng 


■ 





XFI ADHIKARNA , 41 , 42 . 

Adhikarana XVI Sutras 41, 4:Q.~-The Dikmn 
the rest appertain to the Agnistoma. ‘ 

the several for 
there beinff 


h ii 

no ZJJ- are of equal importanci 

no bleak in the context. 

41. “ The several forms or modes are of equal iraDorf 

auce ; there being no interruption of the context.” ^ ' 

COMMEiYTARY. 

The single sacrifice of the Jyotistorm has seven ‘forms ’ nr < a 

iccording as it is finislmrl modes, 

1 ^ nnisiieci With one or the other hvrmn 

t :: “SL?- ;str.r. S?: 

The next .bW pats for, yard another argument in support of the 


Pitrvapaksa, 

“oJItfotra- II ,1 

mention j ■?, also j 3^n, indicates them as equal. 

42. “ There is mention also of these as 

portance. 

COMMENTARY. 

We bare the Text-' At the Agnietoma the Agneya 
e^nficed.-at (be second, Uhihya, the Afa^jaa animal, 
the Sodasi, the Aindra— Vi§nu animal here we find the 
as second,’ ‘ third, ’ &c., which clearly indicates that th 
importance. Further, each of the seven modes is mentior 

tThe “ ^ ‘ desirous 

take up the llkpiya ; desiring power, he should take up tl 

&c. ; this also cleady shows that they are of equal iniporta 

the details in question must be applicable to all. ; 



pObva-mimimsa-sOtbas. hi adhyaya 


are mere modifications ^ f in reality ; there being mention 

^ of a particular result 5 of the fixed or primary one 5 being analogous . 

43 , [The other ‘ modes ’ are] in reality only modifi- 
cations of the primary mode ; inasmuch as a particular 
result being mentioned in connection with each of them, 
their case is analogous [to that of other modifications,] 

COMMENTARY. 

The Ukthya and the other five ‘ modes ’ are mere modifications of 
the primary mode of the ‘ Agnistoma ’ ; this is clearly proved by the fact 
that in connection with each of them a distinct result is mentioned ; and 
as such, their case is anologous to that of other modifications ; for 
instance, the water is generally fetched in a cup : but it is added that, 
m tho event of cattle being the desired result, the water should be fetched 
in the mdking vessel; where the milking vessel is regarded as a ‘modifica- 
tion of the Cup. Similarly, in the case in question, the Agnistoma having 
been laid down as the primary mode, it is added-' if one desires cattle, 
one should take up the Ukthya ’ ; which clearly shows that the Ukthya is 
only a modification ’ of the Agnistoma. 

II aa u 

merely verbal ; 5 in reality j ^5^; the comprehensive reference. 

44. The comprehensive reference merely verbal. 

COMMENTARY. 

Tins Sfltra answers the Pilrvapaksa argument based upon the 
mention of the Uk^ya as the ‘ second ’, the as the ‘ third ’and 
soon. The answer is that this reference to the whole as forming one 
comprehensi ve whole, or aggregation of all the seven ‘ modes,’ is merely 
Veibal^, such merely verbal reference cannot justify onr regarding all thi 
seven modes as of eoual imnnrta 





VI PAD A, XVI ADEIKABBA, SA i6. 


COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Ohthya, we read—' 
of the ^ Butter at the Ukthya, there should be 
ran(pit ; here we have the prohibition of the o 
in connection with the Agnistoma ; and as no 
Ukthya itself, such prohibition would be ■ 
serve a useful purpose, only when it is 
come in at the Ukthya by virtue of its being a ‘ m 

prohibition indicates, 

at the Ukthya is a modification ’ of the Agni^oma. 

2^ By reason of the peculiar accessory detail ; 

_ 46. The mention of one is due to 

character of that one. 

commbntary. 

ThisSfitra answers the following objection.—- 
ipp icable to the Agnistoma by the force of the eonte 
^ “^.entioning the by name in a s 


! be no offering 

■g of it on the 
I is prescribed 
offering is prescribed for the 
meaningless ; but it comes to 
i found that the offering miahi 


men 


peculiar 


of Adhydya Ilf 




ililllli*® 


THIRD ADHYAYA. 

Seventh Pada. 


Adhikarana I. Sutra 1- 


■The Varhi grass and other 



things belong to the Darsha-Purnamdsa as ivell as 
to their subsidiaries. 

On account of the peculiarity of the context ; that which 

is not connected ^ belongs to the primary. 

1. On account of the peculiarity of the context, that 
which is not connected with anything belongs to the primary 
sacrifice/^ 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Diirsha-Purnam^sa, we find mentioned the 
kusha grass along with certain qualifications, as also the altar with its 
qualifications. The question arises as to whether these belong to the primary 
sacrifice of the Darsha-PurnamL^sa only, or to both the primary and subsi- 
diary sacrifices. The PurYapaksha embodied in the sutra is that 
whenever anything is mentioned in the context, tliere arises on our 
part a desire as to the particular action to which that something — which 
is expressly mentioned as connected with any action -'-should belong; 
and when we find that it can belong to the primary sacrifice, the want 
of the context is fully satisfied; so that there is nothing to justify the 
connecting of that thing with any further action, in the shape of the 
subsidiaries. 

^ mm wrw 

to all ; w in reality j belonging ; wq should be ; m with 

them } giSTTO being connected. 

2. In reality, they belong to all, because they are 
connected with them. 

COMMENTARY. 

This shtra puts forward the Siddhgntl. The things in question must 
belong to the primary as well as to the subsidiary sacrifice, because we 
have injunctions of several little details — connected with the primary as 
well as the subsidiary sacrifices— -as to be done in connection with the grass 






m PADA, I ADHIKAmA, BA. 3, 


is laid down ia ooZZ7. rZ T^ ' 

of its subsidiaries- and cIV- ^ifii several 

a».hoH«,e .:r. ji : 

contest. maicated by the requirements of the 

%; H ^ 

3 In that case, the things in 
belong also to the.aotion mentioned in pro. 

m. -r, COMMENTARY, 

belon.. ,l raises an objeoUoti-n the 

alt , . »• MWdiaries, 

aiMto the Imdapilrijajaa, which is mentione, 

pZ,t-'“®“’ ”0‘ 

f^uinamasa wbicli would be absurd. 

^ ff I) ^ II 

. . That cannot be ; because the te. 

DatTfp-*’ are for the purpose 

arsha-Purnamasa (and its subsidiaries.) 

COMMENTARY. 

Ihe answer to the above objection is that, as f 
texts menboning the grass and the altar are found 
Llarsha-Pur^amasa ; hence when in shtra 2 it is 
to all sacrifices, what is mean 
masa and its subsidiaries in wl 
there can be no justification for 
outside the circle of the Darsha-Pfirnamisa. 

W ^ \i 

5 . Also because we find texts indicatiye of the 
conclusion. ■ 

. -OOMMENTARYi..;. ;■.■■■,; b..' 

down T'* butter, it" 

o n that It serves the purpose of the primary Darsha- Pflrnam^sa 

tW T 1 Ajyabhaga offering,;, and this clearly im 

that, just as the said pouring is filated to both 'the: primary an 
subsidiaries, so also are the other details, sn^b «« .i. ' . 


grass and the altar 
then they should belong 
■ in close proximity to 
orm part of the Darsha- 


a matter of fact, the 
■d in the context of the 
said that they belong 
t IS that they belong to the Dai-sha-Pania- 
lose context they are mentioned ; so that 
connecting the things with any sacrifices, 



PI^RVA-MImAMHA-81)TRAS. hi ADEYAYA 


Adhiharana II — Siztrd 6. — The 'purificatory rites pertaining 
to the master of the sacrifice are connected loith the 
» primary sacrifice. 

ii S, ii 

On account of his being connected with the result ^ 5 in realit}? j 

what is laid down in connection with the master ; mFi-m must belong 
to the primary sacrifice. 

6. What is laid down in connection with the master 
should, in reality, belong to the primary sacrifice, because of 
his connection with the result. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Jyotistoma, certain purificatory details are 
laid down in connection with the master of sacrifice ; such, for instance, 
as the shaving of the head and beard, etc. The question arising, whether 
these details pertain to the primary sacrifice only or to both the primary 
and subsidiary sacrifices. The Pnrvapaksha is that, according to the 
conclusion of the foregoing Adhikarana, they should pertain to both. 
The SiddhSnta put forward in the sutra is that such purificatory details 


Adhikarana III. SMras 7 and 9.— The Saumika altar 
pertains to hath primary and subsidiary sacrifices. 

^ ti vs (I 

“ On account of connection with tbe wish to do.” 

COMMENTARY. 

_ The question being whether the Saumika altar belongs to the prim; 
sacrifice or to both primary and subsidiary sacrifices. The Purvapaks 
pt forward in the sfitra is that it belongs to the primary sacrifice on 
because we find the sacrificer declaring,-*' We sbaU be able to accompli 
our work on an altar of this size,” which shows that the making of t 
altar is in accordance wiA the sacrificBl-’s desire for a certain act; and • 
a. inatter of fact, the sacrificer’s desire is always for the nrimore 







VII PABA, IV ABBlKAmA 


which directly brings aba 
the primary sacrifice only. 
The Siddhiinta is on 


It— it folloTO that the altar belongs to 
in the next sutra. 

ii ^ n 

r but ; -irajra: the mention of the result ; 
dishing all. wa should be. 

Qtioned as following from the 
'ies ; hence the desii'e 


therefore ; desire for e 

8. But the result is 

primary, accompanied by the siibsidial 
to perform must 


pertain to both. 

- speaks of 

saciifice, it is the sacrifice 
so that, when the sacrificer 
is for performing, not tl 
prescribed subsidiaries 
to both the primary and subsidiary sacrifices. 

-towards the east of the sacrificial house 
tile oaclas (assembly of 

(the place for the safe I 

land, along with the Sadas, etc., 

I he position of the Sfitras 
somewhat confused ; the Pur^apaks'ha 
and its Siddhauta in Sfitra C 
in Sfitra 8 and its Siddh4nta 


a certain result as following from 
ig with all its subsidiaries, 

has a desire to perform a 
primary alone, but the f ri 
whence it follows that the 


a certaiii 
that is meant ; 
sacrifice, this desire 
primary, along with all its 
- -0 Sari m i ka Vedi belongs 

^ land is selected for 

^ _ P n, o£ .lie oUermg material), etc. This plot o( 

IS called the Saumika Vedi. 
of tins and the following Adhikarapa is 

Q 7 c i 3 appears in Shtra 7, 

’■ "'1"^ ^dbifcarana 4 the Puiu^apaksha occurs 
-a in outra 10. 


Adhikarand IV. (SHtraa 8 and 10.)— The touehir, 
offering material pertains to both the prime 
and the subsidiary sderifiees. 

usrrftTiri^ n t „ 

9. “ So also by direct mention.” 

COMMENTARY. 

There is a text laying down that at the Pfiruam4sl the 
offering material should be done with the ChaturhotS Man 
le Amavasya with the Panchahot^ Mantra. There beinf a 

idkt'The'’p‘“”"1 ^ “““ "lone 6r to both “ 

tdiaiy, the Purrapaksha pat forward to the git™ is ,1,., 


466 



p^bva-mImAmsa^bOteas. in adeyaya 


of tli_& direct mention of tiie primary sacrifices, Purnamasi and Am&vfisyS, 
the touching should pertain to these alone. 

The SiddhSnta is put forward in the following tenth Sutra. 

?prTfWTO[ w u 

because what is mentioned is a particular detail ; for the 
sake of all j the declaration. 

10. The declaration of the touching is connected with 
all the sacrifices, because what is directly mentioned is only 
a particular detail. 

COMMINTAEY. 

In the text quoted, the terms Phrnamiisl and Am^vdsyS. do not 
stand for the primary Amdvasya and Purnamfisl sacrifices ; they stand 
only for the two particular days of the month ; thus mentioning only a 
particular detail, in the shape of time for the action of the Touching laid 
down. Thus there is nothing to indicate that the Touching appertains to 
the primary sacrifice only. The conclusion, therefore, is that it pertains to 
the primary as well as to the subsidiary sacrifices. 


Adhikdrana V. (Sutras 11 and 12.) — The initiation 
and the sacrificial fees are connected with the 
'primary sacrifice. 

^ ii 

the initiation and the sacrificial fee ; g in reality ; by reason 
of direct assertion ; iramw belong to the primary. 

11. The initiation and sacrificial fees are connected 
with the primary, such being the direct assertion. 

COMMENTARY. 

In regard to the initiation and sacrificial fees the question being as to 
whether they are connected with the primary or with both the primary 
and the subsidiary, the Purvapaksha is that they appertain to both. 

The Siddahnta, as put forward in the present Sfitra, is that they are 
related to the primary only ; because we have a direct assertion to the 
effect that, the initiation belongs to the Soma, and so does the sacrificial 
fee.” 

II ? St II 

. 12. Also, because we find separation. 



VII PADA, VI ADEIKAUIsIA 


COMMENTARY. 

' In connection with the modification of 
we find a text speaking of a certain offerinfi 
whicii clearly shows that these subsidiary sa 
with the real initiation 


AdUkarana VI. (SiUra, 13--14.)-Tl,e inner altar does 

not appertain to the sacrificial post 

13. Similarly, the altar belongs to the sacrificial post 

COMMENTARY. 

We ‘1" with refot^nee to ,1 

liole made for the sacrificial post, we have the declaration that half is tl 

mnar altar and half the outer altar. lu regard to this the" arise, fl 

ollowing doubt :-doe8 this sentence actuaUj- laj down the ballot tl 

inner altar as the place for the digging of the hole for the post or does^ 

ody^speak of the altar for the puipose of indicating the ice of tl, 

Phijapaksha put forward in the Sfitra is that, like the ini 
tiationof the foregoing Adhikarana, the Altar must he regarded as subs 
serving the purpose of, sacrificial post. 

The Si^hiinta is put forward in the following Sfitra. 

I) I) 

Mere spot j m m reality ; with what is mentioned ; on 

account of syntactical connection, ' 

it ‘ ^^1 Passage refers to the ordinary spot, because 

It IS only thus that the syntactical connection of what is 
asserted can be maintained. 

COMMENTARY. 

The passage cannot be taken as laying down the inner part of the 

takT ^ if this part of the sentence were 

ken m this manner, the other part, which speaks of the outer part of the 
altar, will have to be taken as meanina- somsf-hin^ , *i, i._ 



468 f6rVA-M1MAMSA-S6tRA 8. Ill ADEYAYA. 

Adhikarana VII. SHtras 15 — 17 . — The Havirdhdna 
cart has no connection with the Samidheni. 

ii n H 

l^he words they recite the Samidhenl verses/’ in 

coxmection with the Havirdhana carts; on account of its being directly 

mentioned. must be subsidiary to the samidhenis. 

15. Inasmuch as the words. “ They recite the 
Sarnidheni verses, ” is mentioned in connection with the 
Havirdhana carts, the Havirdhana must be subsidiary to the 
Sarnidheni verses. 

COMMENTARY. 

Id connection with the Jyotishtorna, we find the text declaring that 
the Simidhenl verses should be recited in that Havirdliana cart, in which 
the Soma juice is extracted. Now tlie question arises, whether or not the 
particular Havirdhana cart mentioned is subsidiary to the Sarnidheni verses. 
The Purvapaksha put forward in the Sfitra is that in view of what is 
directly asserted in the sentence, the cart must be regarded as subsidiary 
to the Sarnidheni verses. 

The Siddhanta is put forward in the following Siitra. 

#1?^ I) H M 

The spot only> win reality; directly perceptible ; because 1 
useful purpose; %fTO of the Soma. 

16. The spot only is indicated ; because it is the Soma 
whose purpose is found to be served (by the cart). 

COMMENTARY. 

What the sentence does is simply to indicate that the place where the 
Sarnidheni verses are to be recited should be tlie spot where the Southern 
cart has been 'placed, and not that occupied by the Northern cart. The 
reason is that we actually see with our eyes that the cart serves the 
purposes of the Soma, which is contained in the cart; so that being already 
subsidiary to the Soma, the cart does jiot stand in need of. any other thing 
to which it would be subsidiary. 

mmi^ ^ II II 

, fl’irtwn The name; also; ufg points to the same conclusion. 

; i Bsme also points to tbe same Conclusion. 



yjl PAD A, VIII ADEIKARNa, 84. 17, 18. 


’COMMBHTAEY. 

■ fact, we find that the Veda 
which shows that the cart is su 


Adhiha 


rana VIII Siitras 18 — 2l.~Th 
performed through other 5 

“straps# 

^1^’’ II ?c: II 

SK^Htiri The result mentioaed in 
performer j he being the p, 

in the performance : should 


n%?«R belongs to the actual 
> therefore ■, ^ himself : 


‘-S belong, to the actnJprr^rTnd it 1 1 
Of the sacrifice who is entitL to the luir t "T 
performance should be undertaken by himself.”’ ™ 

OOMMEiVTARY, 

and the\“: B^shapdrgam.sa 

perforxned by the master of the Sacrifice himself? ® 

of the gift alone is to be done by himself and !f ^ ^ 

through other persons? (e) m- xl i.- ^ either by himself or 

himself and the rest through other peiZis ?“ 'H 

first Pmwapaksha that the whole sotf -fi ' i ^ forward the 

be performed by the master himself h ’ 

‘>;e «sau „t that 

new to obtain for himself the results described fn the S “ 

whtch it follows that every little detail of the saorific shodd b.T f ”1 
by the master himself. ® «>aould be performed 

The next sfitra puts forward the Second Purvapafcsha. 

. “3^ 5 SPirUW!TUWn?«r: 

srr II II 

i° the mkine of the gift i 5 but i «wm, heinu the »ri„ei„.i 

^ thepertormer rf the rest t of fee priacii»l'n.Z . li ° T '“"f" * 



PJ^RVA-UImAMBA-SOTBAS. Ill adeyaya 


19. So far as tlie making of tlie gift is concerned, in- 
asmuch as it is the most important act, it should be done by 
the master who is the principal person. As for the rest of 
the sacrificial details, they may be performed either by 
himself or through other persons. 

COMMENTARY. 

The actual paying of the sacrificial fee to the officiating piiests could 
in no case be done by the priests themselves ; so that this has to be done 
by the master himself. As for the rest of the details, there is no reason why 
they should not be done either by the master himself or through other 
persons. 

The Siddhanta is put forward in the next Sfitra. 

wr f^srf^Tg[. smm- 

; Another person; reality; ^should be; because the 

buying is prescribed ^ on account of the impossibility ; as regards 

himsell 

20. It should be done through others, because the 
Scriptures prescribe the buying of the priests, and no 
buying is possible of the master himself. 

COMMENTARY. 

With the exception of actual paying of sacrificial fee, the rest of 
the sacrifice must be performed through others, because the Scriptures lay 
down that, for the performance of Sacrifices, the services of duly qualified 
priests should be bought with proper gifts ; so that, if it were possible for 
the master himself to perform all the details, this injunction would be 
futile ; specially as there could be no buying of the man himself by 
himself. As regards the results, they will in this case also accrue to the 
master ; as, when he has actually paid for the services of the officiating 
priests, what is done by these is as good as done by the master himself. 


. Adhikarana IX. SMras 21 — 24. — The number of priests 
whose serviees have been bought is limited. 

m In regard to that ; according to the work to be done ; the 

number of performers j wu should be ; tiSsw: no restriction ; because there 

jsmoswifioatioii. ' ■ 



vn PAPA, IX ADEI KAUA}^A, BA. 21, 22, 28. 

‘ As regards the priests to be employ 
j m accordance with the work to be do; 

specially because ther 


number being 
should be no restriction ; 
specification of any number ” 

COMMENTARY. 

Cl regard to the exact ruimber of 
arises the qaestion as to whether or not thei 
uiwapaksa put forward in the p 
text specifically meutioniag their i 

How many priests would be employed will always 
of the sacrifice to be performed 
hard and fast rule as to the exact number of 
The Siddhfinta is put forward ... 

In reality, however ; ?iT^ra 

in accordance with the 

22. In roality, however 
a different I" 
should be exactly 


priests to be employed, there 
ir number is restricted. The 
present Sutra is that, in the absence of any 
number, there can be no restrietion. 

, , . depend upon the nature 

. , an or this reason also, there can be no 
priests to be employed, 
in the following Sfitra— 

■ n (I 

on account of the difference of names ; 
names ; should be. 

) inasniucb as tho Voda givos 
name to each of the priests, the number employed 
/ m accordance with those names. 

COMMENTARY. 

As a matter of fact, wi 
given a distinct name ; sucl: 

‘ Brahman ’ and so forth ; and 
so that the number of priests en 
names. 

An objection is raised — 

The same person ; 

p. “But one and the 
diversity of his functions 

It may be possible, 
in the Vedic texts, 1 
by virtue of the diverse functions 
man may do the ] 

hymns ; and he Would thus bear the 
The auswer to this objection is 


on account of the diversity of his functions. 

— J same priest, by reason of tl 
(may have more than one name) ’ 

COMMENTARY, 

that of the names mentioni 
-Wte be bon., by one and .h, 

j served by bim ; for example, the ean 
ponnng of the oblations and also the saying tb. si 




472 


FtiEVA-UlMAMBA-Sl^fBAS. HI ADBYAYA. 








•n?w 


Tf II =t« II 

n This is not possible ; at the very first ai^pointnient ; because. 

24. This is not possible, as it is at the very first 
appointment (that the names are given to the priests). 

COMMENTARY. 

The mere fact of two functions being, by chance, served by any priest 
does not make him entitled to the two names, as the names are assigned to 
the priests at the very outset, each of them receiving his name along with 
the appointment ; and there can be no alteration of this name at any subse- 
quent time. 


Adhikanma Z, Sutra 25, — The Ghamasddhvaryus are 
distinct from the aforesaid priests, 

\\ \\ 

The Chamas^dhvaryu priests ; also ; by names ; be- 

cause they are spoken of. 

25. The Chamasadhvaryus are distinct, as they are 
spoken of by distinct names. 

COMMENTARY. 

The question arising as to whether or not the Ghamasddhvaryus are 
included in the aforesaid priests, the Siddhanta put forward in the present 
shtra is that they are not so included; they are distinct, inasmuch as 
they are found spoken of by means of a distinct name of their own 
They are called ‘ Chamasadhvaryus’ as distinguished from the ‘ Adhvaryu’ 
and the rest. 


Adhikarana XI, Buira 26. — There are several 
Ghamasddhvaryus. 

II \i. 11 

At the appointment ; because plurality is mentioned. 

26. Inasmuch as at the appointment, the plural 
number is found used (their number must be several). 

COMMENTARY. 

In regard to the Ghamas&dhvaryu, the question arises—Is there only 
one, such priest, just as there is only one Hotfi, only one Adhvaryu, and 




AmiKABAt^A, Sti. 21, 28. 


• me put forward in the Sfitra 

Tse? ®PPO“*- 

kes this Adhikarana a corrollaiy to the foregoing 


Adhihar 


.poer Ten ; because we fin 

. Ifie number of these pries 
we ud tests indicative of that number 

Sid,)l of the Cham, 

S.^h..,ta put foraard iu the Shta is, that the 

eth p ‘>5' 'on rtioh aaya that ■ te, 

oh Chamaaa, which makes the uumber of Brs 
tins passap speaks of ten Chamasas , from whiol 

Ckataaaaa-wl 


AdJiikavt 


XIII, SMras 28—29.— The Shamitri 
'.c^from the afore-mentioned priests. 

The priest ; . also ; because of the distinct name. 

feiiamitri priest also must be distinrt 
ause of the distinct name given to him.” 

COMMENTARY. 

ith regard to the Shamibri priest the onianiipiTi n • 
he also is distinct from tb,. S li ^ ’ question arises as to wh 

The Pfir.nn!r r. or he is included amon^ , 
dis in!t fTSe r be regard, 

i. ^::n altttZtrhror- -e 

The Siddhfin(,a is put forward in the following Sfitra— 

I ^T<i IJ ^ ^ II : ^ 

Bj tJie force of the context ; ^ in realif-v * 

words aceompau™ohiea»™„te.eu.. ' " '“‘■‘S' ' »*"»*! there b,». 


3 accompanying his appointment. 


PdEVA-UmAMSl-SdmAS. Ill abeyaya. 



h t 




29. In reality (he is not distinct), because there are 
no words accompanying his appointment, and also because 
by the force of context (he is included among the other 
priests). 

OOMMINTARY. 

In the case of the other priests, the name is found among the words 
accompanying their appointment ; this is not the case with the Shamitri 
priest (]ie who quarters the animal sacrificed) ; and further he is mentioned 
in the context which speaks of the Adhyaryu and his subordinates ; hence 
the conclusion is that the duties of the Shamitri are performed by the 
Pratipriasthdtri. 

Adhikamna XIV. Sutra 30. — The Upagas are 
not distinct from others. 


II \o u 

The Upagas ,• also j because we find texts indicative of this 

conclusion. 

30. The Upagas also (are not distinct), because we 
find texts indicative of this conclusion. 

COMMENTARY. 

A similar question arising in regard to the Upagds or Subordinate 
Singers, the Purvapaksa is that they are distinct ; bearing as they do a 
distinct name of their own. The Siddh^nta put forward in the Sfitra is 
that they are not distinct ; because of the text that says that ‘ the Adhvaryu 
should not do the Upagana which means that the functions of the 
Upagfis are fulfilled by the other priests, the Adhvaryu alone being ex- 
cepted. 

Adhikarana XV. Sutra 31. — The Soma-Vendor 
is distinct. 

II 3 ? li 


mmr ii n 

fes# The Vendor j 5 really ^ w is distinct ; the action ; not 

being enjoined. 

31. The vendor must be distinct (from the other 
priests) ; because the action (of selling) is not enjoined. 


0 - ^ 


¥ 



VII FADA, XVI ADBIKAUA-XA, Stl 32. 


Adhikarana XVI. Siltras 33- 
ean apply only to tlu 

Because of the performance of 
the title ‘Ritvih because t' 

32. “ Inasmuch as all the 

cribed duties, the title of Biimk 
cially as no differentation is made.” 

. COMMENTARY. 

Ihe question arising as to whether 
-^kamasddhvayus are entitled to the name 
brward in the present Shtra is that, inasm 
een principal ones, the Adhvaryu, &c., t 


name Ettmk ’ 
e seventeen priests. 

H H 

escribed duties ; applies to all 

e is no differentiation, 

priests perform the pres- 
is applicable to all : sue- 


VdEVA-MlMAMBA-SCTBAS. Ill ADHYAYA. 


34. If it be .argued that by an alternative interpreta- 
tion (the title may be applied to the Chamasadhvayus) — 

COMMENTARY. 

The opponent argues that the text laying down tlie appointment of 
the ‘Ritviks' says ‘the Ritviks should be appointed'; and the plural 
number in ‘ Ritviks' can refer to seventeen^ as also to twentyseven ; so that, 
even though it is true that by one interpretation the title ‘ Ritvik ' can 
apply to only seventeen priests, it is equally true that by another interpre- 
tation it can apply to the twentyseven priests also—this number being 
made up of the seventeen principal priests and the ten Chamasadhvayus. 
From this it follows that the title can apply to these latter also. 




^ That cannot be ; all ; are not entitled. 

35. Our aaswer is that that cannot be ; as all (the 
twenty-seven) are not entitled (to the name.) 


COMMENTARY. 


As a matter of fact, there is nothing to indicate that all the twenty- 
seven priests are entitled to the name ; as a matter of fact, it is only the 
seventeen principal priests that are so entitled. 


Adhikarana XVI J . Siitra 36 — 37. — The Brahma 
and the other 'priests mentioned in the text dealing 
with initiation and sacrificial fee constitute 
the ‘ seventeen Ritviks. ’ 

Eestriction; 5 in reality; in connection with the Fee* 

these being directly mentioned by name. 

36. In reality, there is restriction (to the Brahman and 
the rest) ; because it is these that are mentioned by name, in 
connection with the.payment of the* Fee. 

COMMENTARY. 

It being settled that the title of ‘ Ritvik ' can apply to the seventeen 
priests only, the next question to be settled is who these seventeen are. 
The 8i(J4hgnta put forward in the Sfltra is that, inasmuch as we find: 


r 





vil PADA, vm AmiKARlSi, SA.S7,3S. 


■* aving „,„,;„„J. ,.^ ohamte'ot bain 

> 0 hese; because their initiation is laid ( 

• Also because the initiation of these 
own after the fact of their being ■ masters , 
las been mentioned. 

COMMENTARY. 

of tte S 

on with Satras it is kid down that ‘the Bit, 
of the sacrifice ;-and then, when it comes to initial 
3nteen priests that are mentioned by name, as to be ir 

)f the master.’ This also proves that it is these sev 
1 the ‘ seventeen Ritviks.’ loese set( 


Adhikar 


'ana XVIII. 84tra S8.—The ‘Sevet 
the Priests is the Master of the Baer 

They have the master for theii- seventeenth 
of the similanty of functions. vnieenm 

38. They have the Master for the 
because of the similarity of functions. 

COMMENTARY. 

^ In connection with the Jyotistoma, we have the as 
are seventeen Ritviks’; those actually named in coi 
ppointment however, are only sixteen ; the question ^ 
how the number seventeen is to be made up: Is the Maste 
as the seventeenth’ ? or is the seventeenth Bitvik to be 1 
^ong the Audience ? The Si^^finta put forward in the 
Master is to form the seventeenth • + 1 ,^. . ■ 


because 


seventeenth 



p^rva-mImamsa-sCtbas. hi adhyaya 


Adhiharanas XIX and XX. S'dtras 39 — 42. — Each of the 

Seventeen Priests are to 'perform only such acts as are 
specially assigned to him. In some eases, there 
are exceptions. 

II II 

^ The priests ; mhV, are the performers of all acts ; the fires ; ^ 

also ; because they have their own time. 

39. The priests are to perform all acts ; because they 
have been engaged (for that purpose) ; the (three) Fires also 
are connected with all sacrifices, having as they have their 
own time. 

COMMENTARY. 

There are two qiiestions dealt with in this duplicate Adliikarana : 
(1} are the duties of each Priest such as have been specially assigned to 
him? or are all of them to perform all acts ? Are the three sacrificial 
Fires (Gfirhapatya, Ihavaniya and Daksin^oi) meant for any particular 
sacrifice ? or for all sacrifices ? The Purvapaksas are~~(l) That all 
Priests are to perform all the acts ; because their services having been 
engaged in connection with the entire sacrifice, there can be no justifica- 
tion for restricting their functions; — (2) the three Fires are meant for all 
sacrifices ; for they have their own time, and have not been laid down in 
connection with, and as subservient to, any particular sacrifice. 

The Siddhdvta of (2) is the same as the Pitrvapahsa ; the three Fires 
are meant for all sacrifices. In regard to (P, the Siddhanta is put forward 
in the following Sutra. 

imoii 

Because of connection ; of the acts ; restriction * 

shotild be ; #TOr the said connection ; serving an useful purpose. 

40. In regard to actions, there is restriction, on 
account of the connection (of particular acts with particular 
Priests). 

COMMENTARY. 

.A. A matter of fact, .we find the acts divided into several sets, eacti 
set being named after a particular priest ; e.g., one set of acts is named 
Alhvaryava; another ‘ Hautra,’ and so forth ; from which it follows that 
he acts called ’ are to the performed by the Adhvaryu, those 





Vll PADA, XX ADHIXABAXA, 8i 


there is rostrietLr ^ ^ -me ; 

reason^of T‘ “ 9™®“''“ ‘here is restriotion, by 

leason oi the partienlar name assigned to it. ^ 

Commentary 

Tn the case of certain acts we finrl tJiaf +i,« i • i , , 

rr :: 

specially ooaneoling the act with a fT 

performed by the Yajatnana. and not by the Jdo,ri Prieit ^ 

Ihe Subodluni takes this and the next Sfltra as referrin<r tn 
of the Praisa Mantras, which are .i,. < rr .1 case 




480 


Pt^RVA-MlMAMSA-SOTEAS. Ill ADHYAYA. 


should listen to the morning hymn as recited hy the Hotri priest ’ ; and 
this refers to the said recitation being done by the Hotri priest as a 
settled fact ; and the said reciting is also found among the acts named 
‘ Hautra,’ from which also it follows that it is done by the Hotri. 

The Subodhini makes a separate Adhikarana (20j of Sfitra 41 and 42 ; 
and does not make an independent Adhikarana, in regard to the three 
Fires. We have adopted the arrangement of the NydyamdlaL'istara. 


Adhikarana XXL Sutras 4S—45.—The Praisa Mantras 
are to he recited by the Maitrdvaruna Priest. 

(Exception to Adikarana 19). 

H || 

IT The reciting of he Praisa Mantras ; is to be done by the 

Maitr4varuna ; on account of direct injunction. 

43. The reciting of the Praisa Mantras is to he done 
by the Maitravaruna priest ; as there is a direct injunction 
to that effect. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Praisa- Mantras it is found that the reciting 
of these is found among those actions what are called ‘ Hautra,’ whereby 
the reciting would be done by the Hotri priest ; there is, however, a direct 
injunction to the effect that ‘ the reciting of the Praisa Mantras is to be 
done by the Maitrdvaruna Priest.’ There, thus, being a doubt as to the 
priest who should recite the said Mantras, the Pdrvapaksa is that, in 
accordance with Adhikarana (19), the reciting should be done by the Hotj*i 
priest. The Siddhdnta put forward in the present Sutra is that it is to be 
done by the Maitrdvaruna priest ; for the simple reason that what is 
directly enjoined is more authoritative than what is merely indicated by a 


name. 


Phis Siddhdnta having been amved at, the further question arises 

Does this setting aside of the indication by the name ‘ Hautra ’ apply to 
all Prams, or to only those Praisas that are accompanied by ‘ descriptions’ ? 
As a matter of fact, there are several kinds of ‘ Prams ’ or ‘ Directions ’ '• 

(») some are pure ‘Praisas ’ or ‘ Directions,’ e.y., ‘Recite this before the 

burning fire ; of several such ‘ Directions,’ some are pronounced by the 
t are named after him ■ pr„„ounced 

M T ; W ftew is another 

imd ol Direction, which w accompanied by a descriptive declaration ; 


i'A 

Y. 


■ 



ra PADA, TO AmtKABAm 


r supplied fuel to the Fire (thk k 

^ OUS hey anaomt you at a sacrifice’ ; these 
hence called ‘ Eautra’ Now. the questiou 
down the reciting of the Praisas 
applies to all these several kinds > 
accompanied by a description ? 1 
pronounced by the Main-avaruna 
the Eotri or the Adhmri/u is jus 
(Jioar’yava ; while in support of al 
we have the direct iniunction 


-..0 Hot,ri 
iptive asser- 
are recited by the Hofri 
is, whether the direct i: 
as to be done by the Mait 


and 
iiijiinction 
"jr^varuna 

WMs, or to mily such Praisas as are 
urvapalcsa is that they are all to be 
cause that they are to be recited by 
oaly by the nam.es ‘Eautra ’ and 
ig pronounced by the Maitntvaruna, 

we have the SicUMnta put forward in 

^ ^ II sa ii 

Praisas, accompanied fay 
’ ' because of their beins* 


‘“‘<=>“«ytae(Martravanma’s) title to 

appl.es to only those Praisas that' are aceo 
descr.pt.ve assertions ; becanse (in the inj. 
description is mentioned) along with 'Praisa ' 

COMMENTARY. 

^ The injunction is in the form— ‘ The Maitr 
1 raisas and the descriptions^ • t 
of the two together, it follows’that 
accompanied by descript 
have to be pronounced by the Maitr 
Descriptions ai’e 
by virtue of the 
A further 


, pronouiic^^^^ 

and, inasmuch as this injunction spi 
-d It allies to only such Praisas as 
ions ; so that it is only such mixed Praisas i 

X. The pure Praisas or the p 

be recited by those priests with whom they are rela^t 
names assigned to them. ' 

rewon is p„, torwarf in support of the same oonoUtsion. 

^ II n II 

& th. moming hjtnn ; , ^ 

4o. Also, because we find the Hotri mentioned in oo, 
nection with the Jiforning Hymn. 

COMMENTARY. 

^The aMorning Hymn is of the nature of pure .‘ description ’ • an 
we find texts connecting this with tlie Entr 



PURVA-MlMlMSA-StlTRAS. TII ADTIYAYA 


named ; which shows that the pure description is not to be pronounced by 
the Maitravaruna priest ; from tliis also it follows that it is only the mixed 
‘Prai§a ’ and ‘ Description ’ that are to be recited by the Maitravarnna. 


^ In connection with the chamasa 


} ^ ul$o; because we fii 



SA 4i 

Phn we find otlier pri 

UamasadWyus) mentioned in connection c 

COMMENTARY. 

f sayiug-'He makes over the 
the Olnir ™?T ’ f"* he v 

than L Ghn Ml 

% srrft^^ai; n «§. II 

pei-foru^s).'' liability j S theyj sliould be 

49. It is only in the event of the AdbvaiM 
capubeof making the offerings that the Ohann 
u d be legarded (as the persons makino fbr^c.n. 


AdhihavducL XXI II Sufrn^ 50 .5 7 7^7 a? ^ 

• r^iapya are to le perforJly UZZt 

'Priests. 

^ II 11 

iix a particular Veda; as iu the foregoiug 
there IS uo such restriction as to theacf 
eda; in accordance with injunctions; 

an action is laid down in a particular 
is governed by the conclusion of the 

f, there is no such 

_ any particular Veda, the perfor- 

mance may be in accordance with particular injunctions ” 


Because it is 
adliikaraTja ^ in ca 

being mentioned in any j 
should be* 

50. “When 
Veda, its performance 
foregoing adhikarana ; where, however 
exclusive connection with 




PURVA-MImAMSA-SOtBAS. It I ADEYAYA 


Ihe ShySoa sacrifice is laid down exclusively in the Samaveda ; and 
the Vajapeya exclusively in the Yajurveda ; the name of the Samaveda 
IB the ^ Auigdtra ’’ Veda, the Veda connected with the UdgcUri priest, i.e., 
mentioning acts to be done by the Udgdiri; and the name of the Yajur- 
veda is the ‘ Aijhvayava ^ Veda, the Veda connected with the Adhvaryu 
priest, i e., speaking of acts to be done by that priest. Now, the question 
is — Is the ShySna sacrifice to be performed by the Udgatri priest only, 
and the Vajapeya by the Adhvaryu only ? or are they to be performed by 
all the priests collectively? The Pnrmpah^a put forward in the Sutra is 
that, by virtue of the names ' AiidgCtpra ’ and ' Adhvaryava,^ the sacrifices 
must be performed by the single priests ; the ShySna by the Udgatri alone 
and the Vajapeya by the Adlivaryii alone ; and it is only when ive find a 
sacrifice not exclusively connected with any particular Veda, that we can 
admit of the performance of the several details of that sacrifice being 
performed by the several priests, in accordance withtbe injunctions that 
lay down certain acts as to be performed by particular priests. 

The Siddhanta is i^iit forward in tlie next SiUra, 

%% n n 

Because it borrows its details (from its Archetyiae) ; in reality ^ 
each man having his own character ^ wh should be 5 by the 

force of the injunctions ^ ^ along with; subsidiaries; indefinite; 

^ in regard to the rest. 

51. Inasmticli as the sacrifices in qaestion borrow 
their details (from their Archetypes), and they have to be 
performed along with their subsidiary details — each act has 
to be peiformed by its own s^secified performer, by virtue of 
the direct injunctions ; in regard to those others (that have 
no injunctions bearing on them), there is indefiniteness (and, 
hence, they may be performed by the priest whose name is 
connected with the name of the particular Veda). 

COMMENTARY. 

The Shi’^na and the Vajapeya have the Jyoti§toma for their 
Archetype ; hence the details of these sacrifices are in accordance with 
those- of the Jyotistoma-: -in regard to the Jyotistoma, we have definite 
injunetions laying down what act. is to be done bv what, Privet 



- to ViDA, Xxil t ADaiKAtlA^A 

inasmuch as all these details /im 
also, It naturally follows that he 

prescribed performers. There 

or of the Vajapeya whicli belong 
transference from the Archetype • ^ 

kind, if we do not find any definite i 

tjiere may be a certain indefiniteness 
I le principle enunciated by the Puiwj 
be performed by the priest whose na 
■lie particular Veda in whir^li -p • 

We S : 

against direct injunction. ® 

^^dofPadaVIIofAclhy&yaUJ. 


the Shy^na and the Vajapeya 
e acts are to bo done by their 
may, howevrer, be some details of the Shygaa 
■ to It specifically, and do not come in by 
and, in connection with details of this 
injunctions specifying their performer, 

J ; 80 that, in such cases, we may accept 
^apaksin, and conclude that they should 
th the name of 
When, hpwever, 










THIRD ADHYAYA 


Adhikarana II (Sutra 2).~The giving of the three-year- 
old cow is to be done by the Adhvaryu. 

^ II R II 

on account of direct injunction ; ?fi?w of others ; wra should be. 

2. An act of giving can be done by others, when there 
is a direct injunction to that effect. 

OOMMINTARY. 

^ As an exception to the foregoing Adhikarana we have a case of the 
making pf.the gift of the three Varas ’’—that is of three three-voar r.lri 



ii 




VUI PAD A, III adhikabna 


lik. ih. r ^ embellishments should be rest^ 

of ft,! v'^r “ aooordaoce with the 

eda , speoiaUy as they tend to make the man us 
OOMMBNTAEY. 

to beard, etc., th( 

to eye and so forth are some of the embel Hah 
Yajurveda. The question aris 
flone to the Master or to the 
forward in the Sfltra is that they 
tiiey are raentioned.in the YajurVeda which 
priest. Nor can these embellish 
useless ; as they tend to luake him 
accordance with the ■ 
is to be (lone by the j 
The SidfJhanta 


“ tug oi couyrium 
oients mentioned in the 
nbellishnients ai-e to be 
^ Phrvapaksa put 

r ore to be done to the Acjhvnry., ; because 

■* Adhvaryava after that 

mente as done to the prieat be regarded an 

or- -t ,i ’’'■‘““’"''“'on isin due 

pinieiple that the action mentioned in a certain Ved 

pneet after when that Veda in named. 

i IS put forward in the next Sfitra. 

fjmnmrg; « « h 

wyttbelonglolhe masterjimrealityiBWaammlie beina lb. ■ • , 

man j like the principal actions. ' ® principal 

4. the embellishments belong to the Master 

hebemg the pnneipal man, Jnet as the prinSpal act ."tie 

COMMB.VTARY, 

net as the principal act of making gifte is done bv him 



I^OrVA-MImAMSA-SI^TRAB. Ill adeyaya 


5 . Also l3ecause there is direct assertion. 

COMMENTARY. 

We have a text saying llie Adh vary u applies oil to Lis 

body here if tlie applying of the oil were meant to be done to 
the Adhvaryu’s own body, we should have had the Atnianepada ending 
in ahhyanakti as it is however we have the Parasmaipada ending ; 
which shows that the act is to be done to some person other tlian the 
Adhvaryn himself; and this other person can only be the Master. 



iiSIliiillil 


ic>. 

„■ , , , COMMBNTAEy. 

long to tile idli«° "‘““■ol'monts belong to the Mastei 

* K «■ 

the embellishments with 
answer to Z 

I that the Master i tr" " Sutrt 

1 no case there can be^ person at the perfor 

«• Hence there between the Master a 

-ter,x%pXt:bir“" 

Adkiiarana IV (.Suirmi-ID-The penanco 
pertain to the Master. 

^ II 

•V wni-M ’ «'■ a as It IS conducive to the result -^rre 


a supplementary declaratit 


5 'iSg points to the same conclu- 



nssi 


490 pdBVA-MUlAMSA-SiiTBAS. I IT ADEYAYA. 

10. There is a supplementary declaration also which 
points to the same conclusion. 

COMMENTARY. 

Anent the fasting in question there is a declaration in the Kalpasiitra 
to the effect that — ‘ when the initiated master becomes Jean, he becomes 
pure ; when he is empty of food he is pure ’ and so forth ; which indicates 
that the fasting is to be done by the Master. 

u? ? ii 

BOTa on the strength of direct injunction ; to other persons.; iwra could 
pertain. 

11. It is only on the strength of direct injunction 
that penances could pertain to other persons. 

COMMBKTARY. 

In some cases it is found to be directly enjoined that the fasting 
is to be done by the priests ; and in such cases, there can be no doubt ; 
it has to be done by the priests, and not by the Master. 


Adhikamna V (Sutra 12.) — The wearing of the red 
. turhafi 'pertains to all priests. 

because it is an accessory qiialilication ; bt also; by the particular 
Veda; 52?^ restriction ; w not ; would be. 

12. Because it is an accessory qualification, there 
should be no restriction of it by the particular Veda. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Vajapeya sacrifice laid down in the Yajur 
{Alhvaryava) Veda, we find it mentioned that the priests should wear 
golden necHaces ; similarly in, connection with the Shyena sacrifice laid 
down in the S^ma {AudgMm) Veda we- find it mentioned that the priJsts 
should wear red turbans. In regard to these cases the doubt arises-are 
the things mentioned to be worn by all the priests ? or by only one of them ? 
The Purrapaksa is that they are to be worn by only one priest •- i e 
the goUen necklaces being mentioned in the A^hvaryava Veda’ a're 
toh^ A4hmryu oply ; and the tuiiah, being laentioned 

in.theAu4gMmYeda,is to be worn by the Ulgdtri priest only. 



nu PADA, VJ adbikabaka 


are to be worn by t\xe pZ^X 

of the sentence ; wliile that tho.r .1 ‘^'^P^^^secl 

be based .he tlfoT Z Vedl” ™d\1^ 

».»ee,.'„a is ™„,e a„H.„,i.„,i™ ,ban 

Adhtkarana VI (Sintra 13-14.)~-‘ Desire fo)' 

pertains to the Master. 

^ ^niTrs#^rnTg[ n h ii 

ttapu^nSrisZj. »' “» ' 

13. Similarly the desire also (pertains to ( 
because it is he that is connected with the puri 
performance.) ^ ^ 

COMMENTAKY. 

iedreerataTf“n"? ..t Aat- 

esires ram, he should build the sadas on lower ground ” 
nses~whose desire is here meant? Is it the dLTe of t 

Mel bt; Ta*’™' ■ i» ‘bat it i, „f ,] 

eat. because the passage occurs in the Yajurvedo, wl,i 

Aihmryam after that priest. The Sa®a„ta put forward 

ha ae d«,e is of the saoriieer; because I is he rto 

tlb the real purpose, or result, of the aacriflce: the rei 

icrihcial performance accrues to the Master. 


per^^,™ ““'““i <*'1 to othe 

* 1 , . -V strength of a direct 

that It could pertain to others. 

' gommbntaey. 

^ In some cases it is directly asserted that ‘ the ITdggtri n 
desire a certain thing; and in such cases the d^siw will i 
fhat oi the particular priest mentioned ; and not, of t,hA Mootaa,. 


assertion 




492 POEVJ^UtMAMSA-BOTEAS. Ill ADEYAYA. 

Adhikarana VII (Szitras 15-16.) — The reciting of the 
Mantras hegirining with ‘ dyurdd ' is to he 
done hy the Master. 

such mantras ; ^ also ; as ai’e not directly connected with 

any particular action ; as before, 

15. Same is the case with those mantras that are not 
directly connected with any particular action. 

■ COMMENTARY 

There are certain mantras laid down as to be recited during per- 
formances ; one such mantra being — ^dyurdd asi ague else,’ ; the question 
arises by whom is this mantra to be recited ? By the Adhvaryii Priest ? 
or by the Master ? T!h.Q Fdrvaipahsa is that occuring in Adhvaryava 
Veda, the mantra should be recited by the Adhvaryu Priest. The 
Siddhanta put forward in the Sutra is that — (1) because the mantra in 
question is not connected with any of the acts done by the Priests, — and 
(2) because it speaks of a desirable result occuring to the reciter, — it 
should be recited by the Master. 

A further argument is put forward in support of the SicUhdnta.— 

n HUH 

during separation ; ^ also ; because we find it indicated, 

16. Also because we find indications (of recitation) 
during separation. ■ 

COMMENTARY. 

We have the words saying—' being here I address yon 0 Agni, wlio 
are those ’ ; which shows that the reciter is separated— i.e., at a distance— 
from the Agni ; as this cannot be the case with the Adhvaryu priest, who 
has always to be near the Agni, it clearly indicates that mantra’ is to 
be recited hy the Master. 

^ Adhilmrma VIU (Sutra m.-The Mantra mentioned 

ifi two pldCBs is to bo TBcitBd by both pBVso'iis* 

tl 11 

mentioned in two places ; 5 but ; ^ both ; 
the two-fold mention ; being for a purpose. 

‘ > In the ca^e of maptras mentioped in two places, ? 


■ 






mention of the 


ajasya na prasavena c6c. ’—occurs in the 
uties of the Master, as also in that dealing wi 
In oonnectmn with this the doubt arises-Is tl 
'Ster. or by the AdliTarju? The PHnapaha 
le conclusion of the foregoing Adhikarana the 
the Master only. The Siddhanta propounded 
lould be recited by both; as otherwise what 
:'eing mentioned m the other section, if it were 
person ? ^Yhen the mantra is mentioned in two 

- definite purpose ; and this purpose is that it is 
h persons. 


Adhiharana IX (SMra l8).~The mantra should be 
^ be recited only by a person who knows it. 

^ II 0 

18. It is only a person 
should be made to recite it 
permitted (to be the Master of 


laid down ; is, 

who knows (the mantra) that 
, becansano ignorant person is 
a sacrifice.) 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the V^japeya sacrifice, the Master is spoken of as 
made to recite the ‘ fciripti mantras’; U, the mantras beginnin<. with 
mnena lalpatdm etc. In regard to this the question arisfs-Ts tt In y 
22 knowing the mantras and their meaning that is to be made to 
them . or even an ignorant person may be made to do so. ? The 
pa sa being that any person, learned or ignorant, should be made to 
the mantras ; for the simple reason that we have no such injunction 
1 the learned alone should be made to recite. The aimdnta pro- 
^ n the Sutra 18 that the recitation meant is to be done by only 
ersons as know tbe mantras and their meanings,. For the simnle 

^ f ?■}, f t ^ to liave a sacrifice per- 

, and before be c^n be eqtitled td appear thereat as the ‘Master,’ be 


m pc^rva-mImamsA-sOtbas. hi adhyaya. 

lias to be one wlio has duly studied the Veda and learnt its meaning. And 
\vhen no ignorant person can be the ‘ Master,’ how can he be made to 
recite the Mantras, which are laid down as to be recited by the Master ? 



Adhikamna X {Sutra 19, 20). — The ‘double acts’ are to he 
done by the Adhvaryu. 

HUH 

because of the section being named after the Master ; the 
action y performed by the Master ; ^3: should be, 

19. “ The actions in question should be performed by 

the Master ; as they are mentioned in the section named 
after him.” 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Darsha-Pflrnamasa twelve actions are men- 
tioned ; sxich as (1) the removal of the calf ; (2) thumping of the corn, and 
so forth, which are called ‘ double ’ acts, because each of them is meant 
to include iivo actions ; for instance, (1) the ‘ removal of the calf ’ includes 
the removing of the calf hy means of the Palasha stick, and also the placing 
of the Vessel far holding the milk that has been milked ; and so on with the 
rest. Now all these actions are mentioned in the section dealing with the 
duties of the Master. And for this reason, the Purvapaksa propounded in 
the SiJtra is that they should be done by the Master, and not by the 
priests ; such being the clear indication of the name of the section ; which 
is called ‘ Yajamdna,’ of the Vajam^na or Master. 

The Siddh^nta is put forward in the next Shtra. 

uup? < r iwu. iiroii 

the Adhvaryu priest ; m in reality ; he is for that purpose ^ 
because; as compatible with law ; urosim^the indication by ‘name.’ 

20. In reality the Adhvaryu should perfoiin the acts 
mentioned ; because it is for that purpose that he is engaged; 
as for what is indicated by ‘Name,’ this can be accepted (as 
authoritative) only when it is compatible with law. 

COMMENTARY. 

As a matter of fact the Adhvaryu is engaged only for the purpose of ^ 
;dpi|^«iieh.;«8 as those under discussion ; and further, the acts themae|ye 9 i !l 





tl ADUtKABAlsIA 


tlie duties of the A(lhtai‘ijii 
they have only 
ig mentioned the acts, it is 
duly accomplished these 
gets these acts done by the Adhvaryu, 
accomplished ’ them. If we laid stress 
ng ‘ Ydjamdna and held that the acts 
en we would be going directly against 
f own IS more authoritative than what 


secnon dealing with the duties of theMnst^,. 
^ een mentioned in another con nection ; after havin 
said; he who forms the sacrifice after having 
acts j and certainly when the Master 
he can certainly be said to have ‘ 
upon the name of this section bei 
should be done by the Master,— th 
the Law that what is directly laid 
is merely indicated bv a ‘ name ’ 


^1). — iiiQ mantra belonging 
IS to be recited by ike Eotri at a 
particular sacidfiee. 


cular reladonship is mentioned ; ^ the o'ther “rnorfirtel T 
parison with others ; b.anse; a peculiar connection rr:;nrb 

rpoite 1 K '''' incongruity, tlie mantra (slioi 

^ Hotri priest) ; because of the peculiar rel 
(between the Hotri and the Adh.atyu); the ofe m! 

(to theHorv^*^ by “Other priest; because his relatim 
(to the Hotri) is more intimate than of the other priests. 

COMMEtifTARY, 

In connection with the Agni- 
of all scrificial animals —the A(lhvj 
with the mantra ‘ Pai'ivtra 
Hotfi, who, in so doing, re 
these become admissible to 
of the Agnisiomiya offering, • 

Archetype by virtue of the _ 
are in accordance with those 

t}xB Kundapdyindmayana we further find^ ip ;fe 
who is the Hotri is also the Adhvaryu’; from ww4 
duties of the Adhvaryu devolve upon the Hotri ; so that 
manti-a va'^'^-virasi eto: as aho oi ‘ mvA ^ i 


■somiya animal--wh 
aryu twines the i 
and this twining ii 
le mantra ‘ Yuvd S 
' the Kundapdyindmayana, t 
and which therefore admits 
general law that ‘ the del 
of the Archetype.’ 


|: 496 pdEVA-MiMAM8A-8()TRAS. Ill ADEYAYA. 

the Hotri. The question is — ^is tlie same man to recite both the mantras ? 
or he should recite only one ? The Purvapaksa is that, in as much as 
both duties devolve upon him, the Hotri should do both. The Siddhanta 
; ( put forwai'd in the Sfltra is that, there is a clear incongruity in the same 

man being required to recite two mantras at the same time; hence the 
; j light course is that the Hotii should recite only one of the two mantras ; i.e., 

he should do the twining of the rope and recite the mantra ‘ parivirasi ete.’; 
and the other mantra, etc.’ should be recited by the Maifra- 
varuna priest, who is more closely related to the Hotri than the other 
priests,— in that he is seated in close proximity to the Hotri. 

Adhikarana XII {Sutra 22). — The uttering of the Direetions 
is to he done hy a priest other than the one that 
carries out those Directions. 

the utterance of the directions ; also ; TOfwun as it is the duty of 

others. 

22. The utterance of the Directions is to be done by 
others ; as it is the duty of others. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the Darsha-Pilrnamasa, there are certain minor 
actions, such as the arranging of the vessels and fuels, etc. The question 
is— By whom should those acts be done ? The P&vvapaha is that they 
should all be done by the Aihmryu, as they are mentioned in the Adhvar- 
yava or ! ajurveda. The Siddhanta put forward in the Sdtra is that it is 
only the Direction for the doing of these acts that has to be pronounced 
by theAdhvaryu; the actual doing of the acts is to be done by other 
persons. For the fact of the Directions being addressed in the second 
person—' thou bring the vessels’, etc.-clearly indicates that the acts are '' 
to be done by persons other than the one who pronounces the Direc- > 
tions; and from the folbwing A^hikaram, it Mlows that the Directions 
have to be pronounced by the Adhvaiyu ; hence it follows that the acts 
, are to be done by other priests. 




XIV ABlilKARAhU 


, /I I’ealUy the^ Adhvaryu should do it, a 

found mentioned (in the Adhvaryava Veda). 

COMMENTARY. 

that .1 al.„„ld be <l„„e by .l,o Adhvaryu ■ ^ ^ 

eentiOBed tbe Veda named after bin. ; i,«. , he AclLayava Vec 

l.e.e .a no mom author.miive indieation of anything ,o the eontrar 
■ says the opponent-'* there is a Vedic text which i 

. entjoned in the i)irection ; so that, by the conclusion arrived .ai 
t^oing ArJ/Hkara>ja, the pronouncing of the Direcf.inn ,».,c.y k., , 


Adhikar 


■ana XIV (SMras 25-27).~~The resul 
in the mantTOB with which certain acts a 
accrue to the Master. 

the result accrues to the priest ; (meutioj 

with which certain acts are done ; such being Ihe direct 

i 25, “The result mentioned in the Ka 
aecrne to the Priest, such being the direct m< 
•wdrda”'' ' ' ' 



P()RVA-MlMAMSA-SdTRAS. lit AbllYAYA 


COMMENTARY. 

There are certain mantras recited by Priests during the performance 
of certain acts ; these mantras are called ‘ kararia-ma7itras,’ ‘ Instrumental 
Mantras.’ Some of these mantras speak of certain desirable results as 
acci'uing from the act ; for instance, while doing the ‘ Fire-laydng ’ the 
Priest recites a mantra containing the words ‘ may effulgence be mine.’ 

arises — does this ‘ effulgence ’ accrue to the priest 
Or to the Master, to whom the results of the 
The Purvpaksa propounded in the Sutra is that the 
ncing the mantra ; as such is the 
— ‘ may effulgence he mine and 

;ular points directly to the man pronouncing the 


Now the question 
pronouncing the mantra ? 
sacrifice accrue? 

result should accrue to the priest pronoti 
direct meaning of the woi-ds ; these say 
this first person singi 
words. 

The Sid^hanta is pul forward in the following Sutra — 

^ H u 

it accrues to the Master j ^ in reality ; the whole performance 

being for his sake. 

26. In reality the result should accrue to the Master ; 
the entire performance being for his sake. 

COMMENTARY. 

•As the entire performance is for the sake of the Master, ever? residt 
that accrues from the acts constituting that performance should accrue 
to him alone. 

li Rvs u 

27. Also because we find texts indicative of the same 
conclusion. 

COMMENTARY. 

• There are Vedic texts declaring— ‘ whatever blessings the Priests 

pronounce during the performance they all accrue to the Alaster.’ 


Adhlkamna XV (SMra 28).- -Such results menlioried 
in the Kanma-mantras as are helpful in the 

performance accrue to the Priest. 

^ helpful in the performauce: reMt ; ^ accrues to the priests 

rH to the ixiastei' ; serving his purposes^ 



vm PADA 


lliat result which is helpful in the DerforiD 
accrues to the Priests ; as these are ot use to L Mai" 

COMMlNTlI^y, 

while V the ] 

speaks of ‘the freedom from heat’ o u •. fi this m 

ssStJMiilPS 

■aved from heat, he becomes nil the more eflicienf ■ nncn.eLt dm 
performance comes to be better performed Sn ’rl 
iW, the result nltimater t: ^b 


it1h!7rT results mentioned 

' the Karana-Mantra accrue to both Master and Priest. 

II ij 

29. Because of direct assertion. 

COMMENTARY. 

. aco™"To r„r. , 

to the Priest, in accordance with tl,?8iddhtato of'ti 

kara^a, the Siddhanta as put forward in the o^'Sgoiag Adh 

to both, the Master 'and I pZ T f 

snenknfno • inest, as the words themselves directl 

speak ol It as accruing to tis both. 'oecii, 

Adhikarana XVII (SMra 30).~The sanctification 
of the substances helps the Primary 
as loell as the Subsidiary. 

the sanctification of substances ; n qittsilS i aN n as there is no diffpr 
ence m the Context ; pertain to all actions. ' 

sanctification of substances pertains to all 
,^^c0Sy— 'there bein^ no difference |n the content, 


P6nVA-MlMAM8A-S0TEAS. Ill ADHYAYA. 


COMMENTARY. 

The sanctification of the things used at sacrifices — such as the grass 
&c. — is helpful to all sacrifices, the Primary as well as the Subsidiaiy, 
the Archetype as well as the Ectype. This has been already decided 
in Adhikarana (1) of PMa VII of Adhyaya 111 ; and it is repeated here only 
as introducing, and giving rise to the cxuestion of, the following Adhi- 
karana. 


Adhikarana XVIII {Sutra 31). — The. distinctive details 
of the Areketype do not pertain to the Ectype. 

II II 

on account of direct mention ; in the Ectype ; of the 
distinction details ; no connection. 

31. In asmnclias (in connection with the Archetype) 
the particular action is specially mentioned, there can be 
no room for such distinctive act in the Ectype. 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with Archetype it is laid down that the pit of the 
post is spread over with grass ; and there are certain sanctifications laid 
down for this grass. The question arises— are these sanetifactory rites 
to be performed at the Ectypal sacrifice also ? The Siddh^nta is that 
they are not ; since out of the large number of the Archetypal details 
only those have to be transferred to the Ectype of which there is any 
use ; now of the sanctification of the grass there is no use at the Ectype ; 
as there is no ‘ spreading of grass ’ mentioned in connection with it, as 
it is in connection with the Archetype. 

Adhikarana ^ XIX (Shtra S2).-~The ‘ VidhitV and the 
Pavitra should he made of any 07'dinary 
Kusha grass. 

^ ^ H II 

its being contrary ; ^ verily ; nfmm on account of the definite Vedie 
declaration; undefined ; as regards other cases. 

32. In asmuch as there is a direct Vedic declaratio; 

(m regard to one particular case), an application of th,© 








flilh ) ’'"V * 







Fj// P AD A, XX AmiKARAXA, SA 


to other cases would be contrary to that declaration. Hence 

COMMENTARY. 

In connection with the narsha-Pfu-namasa, the Vidhriti .nrl P v 
ire kid down as to be made of Knsha mnss Th« ' ^ 

ould be a contravention of the Veda Hpnno fi tz-tj •• 

ready there in the shape of tlie ‘ Pan6hoia°l> 

.W ... qnesfon shodd be of Kueha-bladee" 1. ‘'^ 


Adhilmrana XX (SHtra 33).~The ‘ Calie-deposiU ’ 
should he made out of the Cake prepared 
at the Primary Sacrifice. 

ii i, 

TW . setting aside ; 5 really ; of a portion • fi- nni riiiii u 

anetion pertains to what is already there. ’ 

33. The setting aside shonlcl be of a part (of the 
y _ a ed caie) ; as the injunction points to what is 



PriRVA-MlMAMSA-SOTRAS. HI ADIIYAYA 


AcUukdvana AAI {oitti'a 64-6 d). — I ke ^Lerice enjoined 

in connection loitk Sacrifices for a purpose, is for 
the sake of the Primary Sacrifice. 

mt (I w 

At tlie ectype ; the details ; is for the sake of all ; 

Just like the details of the Archetype. 

34. “ The details of the Ectj’pe are for the sake of all 

sacrifices ; just like the details of the Archetype.” 

COMMENTARY. 

In oonnection with tlip Sacrifices performed with a view to a defined 
result, it is said that they should be performed in silence. The question 
arises —Is this ‘silence’ for the sake of the Primary as well as its Subsidiaries ? 
or for that of the Primary onl3^ ? The Pfirvapaksa is that in accordance 
with Adhikarapa I of Pada VI of Adhiyaya III, where it is declared that 
the details of the Archetypal Darsha-Purnamasa pei'tain to all sacrifices, 
the particular detail must pertain to the Primaiy as well as to the Sub- 
sidiary sacrifices. 

The Siddh^nta is put forward in the following Sutra— 

U il 

iwit: pertaining to the primary ; m in reality ; in connection with the 
snbsidiray ; because it is not prescribed, 

35. It must pertain to the Primary ; as it has not 
been prescribed in connection with the Subsidiary. 

COMMENTARY, 

The said silence sliould pertain to tlie Primary Sacrifice only ; as 

the passage enjoining the silence refers specifically to the Primary; and 


Adhikarana XXII (Sktra 36-S8).--The Ajya ehurne 
out of the Butter in a leathern vessel pertains 
to the Subsidiaries of the ShySna sacrifice. 

«r»^a»ifcs because of the proximity (of the word ‘Ajya’); 
impossible ; it pertains to its subsidiaries. 

36. It being impossible (to connect the Ajya, i 



XXll AbtilKAEAl^A <S'i 


lust prtain to the Subsidiaries ; special] v 
proximity (of the word Ajya) 

COMMENTARY, 

|li Uie Siijgna sacrifice we read ‘the Ijya is that chura- 
I a leathern vessel/ The questior, arises-does the 
01 the Ajya pertain to the Primary Shyena Sacrifice ? 

le 1 lu-vapaksa being tiiat it pertains to the Priniarv 
-ardin the Sutra is that it is to be employed;; 

f is used at 

nit of H Soma-sacrifice for its 

Je use of Ajya ; hence any peculiar qualifica- 
^ have no bearing upon that sacrifice. As regards 
•s, _ being Lftis or grain sacrifices, they have the 
leir Arciietype, and as sucli, by implication, they 
, in regard to which the qualification in questioi'i 


not being in the same oonte.t 
nor pointing to that. 

38. That cannot be; as they do m 
same context ; specially as the said acts are 
as subsidiary (to the Shyena). 

COMMENTARY. ‘ 

The said ‘butter in the leathern vessel’ is nc 
cm. text of the Fire-laying rites; nor are these rites laii 
diary to the Shydna, Hence there is nothing to ihstii 
the said Butter with the Fire-lavine’ ritpa 


diaries 



P(JRVA-M!mAMSA-S()tRAS. Ill ADllYlyA 


Adhikarana XXIll {Sutra 39-41). — The Ajya made 
of Butter 'pertair^ to all the Siihsidiaries of the 

Shyena. 

II n 

in regard to that time ; because inference is possible , 

39. Because their connection with the time (of 
extracting Soma-juice) can be inferred [the said qualification 
of the Ajya can pertain to only such subsidiaries of the 
Shyeiui as are connected witli that time].” 

COMME.NTTAEY. 

lo connection with the qualification of the ijya that it should be 
churned out of the Butter in a leathern vessel — the question ai’ises — Does 
this -pertain to all Subsidiaries of the Shygiia or to only some of them? 
The Purvapaksa propounded in the Sfitra is that it pertains to only some 
subsidiaries of the ShySna ; that is, to only those that are- connected with 
that particular time at which the Soma-juice is extracted ; this connection 
being inferred in the following manner—' The details of the Ectype 
of the Shyena are connected witli the time of Soma-juice extraction, 
because they are particular details related to the Ectype of the Soma- 
sacrifice, like the killing of animals.’ 

Ihe Siddhanta is put forward in the following Sutra— 

II 11 

pertains to all; w in reality; there being no grounds for 

differentiating. 

40. The qualification must pertain to all subsidiaries ; 
because there is no ground for any differentiation. 

COMMENTARY. 

We have the direct Vedic declaration to the effect that at the sacri- 
fices in question the Ijya used should be churned out of Butter, while 
there is no Vedic text that would justify any such differentiation as is 
made in the Purvapak§a ; hence the qualification must be connected with 
all the subsidiaries of the Shy§na sacrifice. 

11 II 

in regard to what is directly laid down by a text ; mere 

inference. ^ 

41. As against what is directly asserted by a text mere 
Inference (can have no force). 


..r~' - ' 




nil PADA, XXIV adhixapana, sa 


AcUiiharana XXIV (Sutra 42-44).—lt is only the 
Savaniya Gake that should consist of -flesh. 

42. Flesh should form the constituent of only the 
bavauiya cakes ; because there is a particular injunction. 

COMMENTARY. 

ni coiiiiectioii with tiie Shakyayana there is a text declariii^ that the 

K]™rri,“ ZT" y that (he Master 

a„XG ° J “"derlakeii on a certain day. The 

question arises.— Is it onlv the aMvartUr.., *i.„* . . . / . 



Pl)BVA-MlMAMSA-8dTMS. Ill AUEYAYA. 


This objection is answered in the following Sfltra 

f\ fN ^ ^ . 


SUBJECT INDEX. 


Agents. Words have no perceptible— 

Arthavada passages have no bearing upon Dharma . ' 
oe regarded as untrustworthy 

rfehavada passages have no connecfcion with actions to be performed 

n regarded as useless ... ... ^ ^ ^ 

” ^"p2"air regard'and attention as the injunction 


PAG®. 

16 


» do not lay down actions 

» » like ‘ the mind is a thief ' and ‘speech is a liar,’ are to be taken 

in their indirect application ... 

>1 has a definite meaning when construed along with iniunction " 

- nalogy, ordinary usage we may conclude that the sentence ‘thte 

. ^ "Sgoodmiik in question is mere praise 

'‘y *'>» “«"« 

^ 'k ‘kafc tUe former Is the more iiiuBedIa6e oati«! 

Arthavada passages have bearing on JDharma 

‘igneyi,’ ss-IuTlag bees giran to omntras, they esnsot 

Astsfcfil. ihe aV^ 

Agrlte T“ •» 

tf , r . °T ““I" » “»•»««« ... 

uthor ty, no -attaches to such Smritis as have their origin in worldly obLts 
Asa.....fve .y„reA ss. ssmS.r o,-u .Srl.Ily Ll« t^leTles 

rifaMTO ^ acknowledged as autho- 

Aryas, signification accepted by the— is more jintwVfof)..,. +1!’' « x 

theMIeehhas ... . authoritative than that accepted by 

Ahgas of the Veda have no independent authority 
Authority, no-belongs to the non-Yedie scriptures 

Accessories are only of secondary importance 
Agni, Brahmana praised as— 

Actions, verbs and-denoted by them are of two kinds-primary and secondary 
” Pri’Zy !! purificatory of material substances! are 

A x” a material substance are secondary 

Aotion,^^en there IS a different word, there is a different-, because it is speoiallj 

Apfirva,do the tereeBhdvanfis tooted by the three words, 
bring aboutf a single—, or three distinct Apdrvas 
A ternatives, to the ease of the many deities mentioned, also Indra, Yfiyu' etc., these 
should, be regarded as optional alternatives 


27 

28 
ib, 

30 

32 


44 

53 

55 

ib, 

59 

61 


" m 

71 

78 

112 

118 

137 

139 

139 

178 

ib. 



8DBJBGT INDEX 


Actions, ntimbcr would serve to differentiate the— 

Accessory, an —also serves to differentiate actions, when it is a new one 
Action, because of the mention of a distinct Kesult, there would be a different — 
Accessory, when there is an— , which accepts the previously mentioned notion as its 
substratum, then alone is it so that we do not perceive any difference 
between the actions 
Avesti is a distinct sacrifice 
Accessories, The D^ks<1,yana, etc., are— ... 

Actions mentioned with specific substances and deities should be regarded as 
distinct 

„ , the Result mentioned apart from — is a means of difference 

Accessories, the subsidiary character belongs to substances— and purifications 
Actions also are subsidiaries 
Agent also is subsidiary 

Accessory details are all subservient to the purposes of something else ... 


BMmmst all verbs are indicative ol 

„ , a single unseen ‘ Apurva ’ follows from the combination of three 

BhSvan^, when there is a difference of context, there is a difference in the Bh^van^ 


Community serves the purpose of action ... 

Contradiction, when there is a— between the seen and the spoken^ then we can 
rightly assume the existence of the unseen ... 

Character of the Primary does not belong equally to all sacrifices 
Connection of a material and a Deity is not possible, with regard to any sacrifice that 
may have been previously enjoined by other sentences 
Calf, touching of the— is purely purificatory 

Conversing, the prohibition of the— with a woman in her courses applies to man in 
his ordinary capacity 


Desire to know duty must arise after the text of the Veda has been learnt during 
residence with the teacher ... 

Desire to know duty must be the motive for enquiry into the nature of duty 
Dharma is the desirable thing which the Vedic injunction lays down 
Dharraa is not amenable to sense-perception 
„ is something beyond the world 
Different men at different places perceive the word at the same time 
Dharma cannot be bound by Arthavada passages 

Descriptions like those of Gandham^dana serve the purpose of giving pleasure in 
the mere recitation ... ... 

Doubts relating to the true meaning of sentence may be set aside by subsequent 
passages ■ ... ... ... 

Difference in the roots serves to differentiate the actions 
,Dto%aiia, etc., are Accessories ... ... . - 

Difference, the result mentioned apart from the actions is a means of— 
DSffer§n<?e.eort4 not be established by the names, bwause the names do not speak of 


- -v* ‘f ■ A • ■ • ' 




SUBJECT INDEX. 


in 


E 


Examination of the character of the means of knowledge necessary 
Bhptical extension serves to complete the sentence, as it is egnally applicable to all" 
Effort, because of the mention of hnman-.in connection with the Saubhara, there 
must be a distinct desirable result connected with the Niclhana 

Inar^-Agm offering is to bo done without 
Eating, in the case of Soma, there is no - 

„ » the— comes after the invitation 


Page, 


6 

175 

224 

:m 

m 

4B}) 


Fire is not to he kindled on the earth 
Eigiirative Description based on greatness of number 
Figurative Description based on the presence of an indicative sign 
Fire, the laying of the— is an object of injunction 

, the laying of the— forms an integral factor in all sacrifices 


. ' ' G, 

Gandhamadana, Descriptions like those of-serve the purpose of 
mere recitation 

Grah^grata, the-is subsidiary to the Jyotistoma ... 

Grinding, the applies to all offering materials eq^ually 
Gold, the wearing of —pertains to man in his ordinary capacity 

H 

Hymn is subservient to the mention of the deities’ name 
Hotfi, the— priest is the first to eat the Remnant 


giving pleasure in 


•25 
119 
■ 'ib. 
237 
ib. 


27: 

252 

575 

898 


145 

481 


Injunctions and Prohibitions serve distinctly useful purposes in matters relatino’ to 
Dharma ... ... ^ 

Injunctions, all these-of qualification pointed out by the apparent inconsistency of 
a perceptible fact, operate either simultaneously or one after another 
Indicative, wo find~words in the Veda 
Injunction of the Noun would follow from the Bhavana ... 

„ . whenever we come across the-of a qualified Action, what factor of 

the object of Injunction is such as has been laid down elsewhere, and 

what has not ... 

„ , when we have accepted a certain thing to be the object of the—, we 

can never take the sentence as laying down that from which the 
injunctive operation has been arrested 
„ of the Action does not pertain to the Accessory ... 

Individuals, all— should be taken as indicated ... 

Jndra, the Deity in all this is— ^ ... , ^ ’I.-..,'” ' 


190 

192 

198 


201 


222 

240 

208 

820 


J'yotistoma, the Grahagrata is subsidiary to the- 



StJBJEQt INDEX. 


Pagb, 


Kalpasutras have no independeiifc authoritativeness... 

„ , being works of men, are not as free from various sources of error as the 

eternal Yeda 

K§attriya, the Followers on of the— cups must be Brahmans 


Meaning, Helationship between wordand— is eternal 

„ of the sentence does not depend upon the meaning of the words com- 
prising it 

Mixed Mantras should be used ... 

Mantras are not Injunctions 

„ are not pronounced for the purpose of conveying any meaning ... 

Mantra, the order of words composing a— is most rigidly fixed 
Mantras are always meant to convey a definite meaning, as in ordinary parlance a 
number of words used as a sentence always convey a meaning 
Mantra can benefi.t the sacrificial performance 
„ can be regarded as Injunction 

„ * Aditirdyauh ' cannot be regarded as contrary to fact ... 

Meaning, failure to grasp the— of a certain Mantra does not prove its meaning- 
lessness ... ... ... ... ... ...... 

Mim^msaka can have no justification for doubting the authority of any Smritideela- 
rations ... ... ... ... ... 

Meaning, doubts relating to the true— of sentence may be set aside by subsequent 
passages ... ... ... ... ... ... 

Mantra and Vidhi must have^the same purport ... 

„ is applied to those that serve the purpose of. denoting things connected with 
prescribed actions 

Mantra,Mgadashouldberegardedasthefourkindof— 

Mention of the mere material is useless ... ... ... 

Material, the mention of the mere— would be useless 

„ the— having been already mentioned once, the same cannot be enjoined 

over again 

Material, the— should be mentioned fby the word, because the Injunction is for 
that purpose 

Mantras, the- speaking of walking round the fire are to be employed in connection 
with the same direction 

Mantras are to be used, in accordance with their meaning 


Nigada should be regarded as the fourth kind of Mantra 
Mgadas must be regarded as Yajus 

Nidhana, as a general rule the song to be employed for the sake of Rain, etc., must 
be of that particular— 

Kaiv^racharn, the— islf or the purposes of Idh^na 
Names do not speak of actions 

Name,iif the-belong to actions, all actions would become one 

Name is one that has been carried 

Mrti, must be regarded as obligatory on the man 




-s*. ,-f MJ." 




SUBJECT INDEX. 


§7 


ih. 


Praise, when taken as mepp ^ Page. 

meaningless or useless ’.! sentence- the cow gives good milk ’-canaot bo 

Praise, the sentence — Hhe cow syives ffoorl miTV * + t 

™‘Z7i"jzzVT:ir:^’ -..mu 

'’IdtoteT''* adopt llecoarso toid iow„l„fc 

Practice, in-, we can adopt only one alternative, to the evel'usion of the nfhn. 

necessarily implying the absence of authoritative^ess in tlat Zr ’ 

Potency, the indefinite is defined by the pecnliar-of thinl 

“ “"I «' ‘p- 

^sakoZom\^h~“*'f ", substance being for the 

sake of something else lias a subordinate position 

Proximity, when there is -uthere is no 

IWormcr, qaalihcation of the- cannot inhere in an action 

Proximity is not injunctive 

Priest, the offering has to be made by the person who employs tho- 

Priests, all the— should eat of the cup ... ... 

R 

Relationship between the word and its meaning is eternal 

"" “ *‘^“«°e«dental-where no distinct nsefnl purpose 

Of Arthavada passages is perceived purpose 

Relationship, the-of the deity and the ‘material mentioned’ in the wort ‘Aindr;" 

vayfivam. cannot bo complete until a sacrifice has been implied 

lotr ‘d “d ■«>» S d,..™ u 

spartatowh na aaubharejja sluvita,’ serves to restrict the 

•” ".-'r - — “-u^th-o 

^snlt, the-mentioned apartfrom Actions is a m<,ans of difference 
Result also can be subsidiary ... 


38 

61 

122 

207 

200 

202 

800 

805 

404 

425 


27 


204 


212 


227 

280 

258 

291 


belongs to the Father 

study, the passage declaring the ‘ shining of the face’ of the man who studies ‘a 
particular Brahmana of the Veda, Is only a praise of that— 

Signmeant names like- Ap«c2,f,>‘Am«,-havi^ - 

but be regarded as intended to convey definite meanings ... ■ * 

having any authority w matter^relating to 


7 

SI 

82 

m 

55 



-Mi 


SUBJECT INDEX, 


Page. 


Sfmr iti is based on Dlmrma 

Bneh portions of the Smritis themselves as are related to Bharnia or deliverance, 
have their origin in the Veda : those that have mere pleasure, etc., are based on 
the ordinary experience of the world 
Smriti and usage arc both to be regarded as equally authoritative 
S'mnii is possessed of greater authority than usage 

fJacrifiee, that which points to a similarity between the~and the accessory 
should be taken as name 

Sacrificial post is praised as the master of the sacrifice and as the sun ... 

Stuti hymns are primary 
Bastra hymns are primary 

Been, that which is not—is concluded to be won cst ... 

Sentences lay down accessories,.. 

Sacrifices, inasmuch as all— are mentioned by different words and also by repetition 
of words, they must be all of equal importance 
Sacrifice, so long as a directly expressed -is available, it is not right to accept an 
indirectly implied sacrifice to be enjoined ... ... ... 

Sentences, v/hen the— are similar, the Kesult would be connected with distinct 
Action ... 

Sacrifice, the— requires for its accomplishment, no other helping factors, except those 
of the deity, the material, and the performer 
Song, as a general rule, the— to be employed foj? the sake of Kain, c£?c., must be of 
that particular Nidhana ... ... ... ... ... 

Substances, actions mentioned with specific— should be regarded as distinct 
Sacrifice, the word Agni should be regarded as denoting a—, because of the presence 
of indicative marks ... ... ... ... ... 

Separation, when there is Proximity, there is no— ... 

Subsidiary, a thing is called— , by reason, of its being for the sake of another 
„ the— character belongs to substances, accessories, and purifications 

Substances, the subsidiary character belongs to— accessories and purifications 
Sfiktavaka, the— serves the purpose of indicating the deity 
Singing, in the Adhana, the— is to be done gently 


Utterance makes, what is already’existing, manifest 

Universal usage of the word shows that the word is the same, whenever it is nsod ... 
Usage and Smriti are both to be regarded as equally authoritative 
„ is less authoritative than Smriti 

Utterance of vernacular words implies an incapability to pronounce the correct 
word ... ... ... ... 

Updmsu, the case of the— sacrifice, etc., should bo exactly like the Purnamasd ” 

„ sacrifice is mentioned in Veclic texts as if it were a primary sacrifice 


Vedic Injunction is tho solo moans of knowing Bharma 
„ Injunctions are absolutely trustworthy 
Veda in its inherent trustworthy character remains unsullied 
Veda, in the words of the opposer, is the work of human authors 





■'t?' 'fJ?Jt:- ■ '^J‘*W'' 


80BJBGT I'NDEX. 


Vll 


rf .cea„«J 

performed the saeriflee,’ and so forth sacriQeo,’ ‘ tlw trees 

source of such knowledge is available'^f^ le atmg to Dharma ; and, since no other 
^ only source of knowledge relating to Dharma acknowledged to he the 

Veda, no sentencetf tto-clnte e^tS statement of reasoii ... 

vedio injunction is .self-sufficient •■• ... ... 

Verbs, all-are indicative of BhavanSs 

™ r-d'^T t ?H~ 

^ ““««»llo"oa I,. „.. a,„„e 

‘ Va«»l,- tl» prenonuMag of the .yIl»Mo-onHH„ one io em s„„;. 


Pact. 


21 


22 

iB 

ib, 

ib. 

00 

89 

126 

m /: 


%S7 

429 


w 

Word, Relationship between - and its meaning is eternal 
,, IS Won- eternal (Nyaya) ... 

)! is produced ( „ ) 

Words can be modified ( „ ) ... 

Word is perceived only for a moment 
„ its production means simply its utterance by some speaker 
» being pronounced by many persons, it is not changed, but only its tmie 
„ Its universal usage shows that the word is the same, whenever is u L 

Woi-ds have no perceptible agent of destruction ... it i.s used 

„ pi^ovide US with correct ideas 

Word, a-should always be taken in the sense attributed to it in H,« 

Word * possibility of discrepanc es in Ihe”*"^ 

V ords denote communities, not individuals ... P^c^es m the- 

Word, repetition of the same— is a means of differentiation 


,'f :;'9 

hi. 

10 

ib. 

11 

13 

14 

15 
10 
17 
69 
87 
89 

182 


Yajus, Nigadas must he regarded as--- 


... m 




Alphabetical Index of the Sutras 


^rnrf^^rrf^^; in. iv. 12 390 

5 rs:g:... nr. vi. .35 ... ... '" ^^ 45^ 

^r»H 53 ’” -?.54 

IL iii. c ... ... 240 

ginew srSta^... li. ii. 24 ’'’ ■*■ Jjg 

rn. ii. 31 ... '” ■■■ 331 

... rr. ii. 18 . ^ ^ ^‘'’ ';• : . i :'**o :-907 

?>%r?srr !pn«fjT... Ill, vi. 27 ... ^ 

^^^$r^r 5 T... nr. iv. 30 . ’ ' j.A'' 

If. ii. 26 ... 221 

™»t«#Ws,...i.i. 1 .. **’* 

wmsTJ 5 Na^ 3 ... III. L 1 ... .*4 ^’’’ 280 

«T?r .. iii. 20 ' 

; I.i 31 “W' 

^^r^.;..!!!. ivi ■ \v. ' 

g nr. ii. 20 ... 

5r^f i| Ill, viii. 20 ... 494 

w5*Ri5^?f«qni?qTg;... nr. ni. 47 ... ... 432 

?!^?lTg:... III. viii. 23 ... '.'■ 497 

^ Wgr^q... II. i. 26 ... ... ] 154 

?*I!g[:ijtw?sm^qv 55 q?rr qi®^...nr. ii. 2k 324 

I i. 21 .... ... __ Ig 

wsifcj^srra... in. iv. 19 .., ... ... ’“ 393 

irwTfrr^«fSRfiiW!fr&§ % %qfiT!... II. i. 34 '*' 165 

^»re W 5 !n^... It. iv. 6 ;;; 

iitSwr? 5 [<tmi,...I. i. 28 ... ,„ ... „, 19 

W#RSr€%»Tfg^,.,. I. ii. 6 ... ... 25 

I. ii, 39 ;., ..’ ” 47 



PAGE, 


STirnif ^rg;... r. iii. 15 
^RffsqfT?!:. ■ ni. V. 52 

55a%r^ra. . .II. i. 48 
in=9lfl[^3Bi«f...IIL V, 12 ... 

us^r^^rsw... L ii. 18 ... 

I. iii. .32 

sr#q^... II. i. 27*’ 

?)RR^«png[;... I. ii. 4 ... .’’ 

?iRimsn^^?[ts^g^... I. iii. 26 
m 3*1! S|^:?. . II. iii. 29 

III. vii. 20 

^ III. iv. 2 

*rii*iniia[r m. ii. 30 

^HRe^migc in. viii. 33 
^ ^fniiissnfsriiTijm^miT !pjTg^... L iii. 2 

wr sr^gjr^ sr^^g; [ ] . . . I ijj 7 

irf^ ^ . . II. iv. 3 1 

?rRr srr *TTtr^?f ^ri^Mrgr^lgflrsrriigrrgrit. . . L iv. 2 

«fq[wr sr§rnmj?«q^?i; II i. 31 ... 

^ m srf^retg* ^3! . . . III. vii. 22 

^ ^ »cq%‘ %«rr?rw. . . Il 

i. 24 ... ... N ■ 

?lfq ^ III. iii. 41 

lET^sr^ ! ?r*f5rrat^%«iRg^^, . . I. iii. 1 e 

5 III. iv. 20 

II. ii.l5 

3n^aw?^t«!5iw fe%?:g:^Nf?isr3in3Wf^?r... Ill iv 49 

wnfrrariiqf^r: 1 sr^rJ»% mw 1 5ri^^??g>’!i^nr w?r! 1 mtt 

I. ii. y ... «. v 

iwiiJm^twra... 1. ii. 5 ... ' 

... I. ii 46 

wfiT^R ^!E!5ga... II. i. 20 

11^1 ^r^mpcn: W^iffsira... II. iii. 5 ”. 

wlwrtriT<rlsr...Il. iii. 17 ?.. 

wr fwrm^creinf w" sr^cr... III. iv. 29 
I, ii. 43 ... 



.f'A-: »«F^5j 


page. 


W«fgTtT m sr^lDT^... III. iv. a 
?n3r^sri^siTg^... lIl s 6 
ir^trqrf«# Ill i. 9 

^^5, f^dq?qr?^. q«ir^r%. . . I. ii. 29 . . . 

II. i. 43 

?r«il5r is^q^q^^cqrg^... L iv. 30 
u«ilf%errqT«iW!aE^N^ ( %^r»Trr?; ) ^qr?? ; 

Ill ii. 1 ... 

II. iv. 17 ... 

^qrarsnfJT^rfifT^^q igw^cqrrT... n. i 14 

III. vi. 23 ... 

H. i. 43 

SCsq^’S^l* .. HI. i. 12 

ci^q ?ar|w^qr^... 111. v. 7 

^rqmiaqra... L iii. 13 

I. ii. 38 

?l{iRr«Rq^ilI5j;.. I. ii. 34... ... . 

Ill v. 17 ... 

qj^qiT . . II. iii. 28 

?nqqt?:q[ .. 1. iv. 20 

I. ii. 44 

I. ii. 40 

%?^. . . III. iii. 30 

qJff^qi^qigarqR g^q%... II. iii. 3 
insr^tsiil^scq:... III. vii, 49 
^msgr^^jqrtqrrg;... Ill vi. 39 
^qqqrT% ^%qr?»Tgrr- • • III, v. 5 

ira^paf siqvO!ng[^?l% q5^ar?rr^qrg[... Ill iii. 11 
?TWn5q^?^... Ill iii, 16 

I i 7 

HI- iv. 14 ... 

lllHiT m JWRqitf %qi:... Ill iii. 15 

L 14 ; „'. 

.. I. iii. 33 ■ ../' '■ 



PAGE, 


*rmr ^ f^s§%TJnngc^... I. iii. 19 
IL iv. 15 

sr^^... 11. iii. 27 
IL ii. is 
III. y. 1 

?rR%«ar^^*frg[REgs®f^^«sir... Ill, v. 4 
I. i. 15 

“irran^sfq %g[;... III. viii. 37 
in«ir% II. iii. 4 

9JR?DrH . I. iv 

III. vii. 18 

iJTHScr^f fl%^r-.. III. i, 24 

Ill vii. 3 ' w. , 

?ITO^l*l«35Bftr5r^«N«ITHT^... HI. vi. 32 

;3*n^aBr^r ^ R?«r cr?^grr?i;... HI- '■ ... 

JTsii?:5niRi;...jll. vi. ii... 

^Twa’ic^rn... 1. ii. 22 
^3 5Tiq^4f<i|W... I. i 29 

^ III. iii. 29 

ft^SSTT^R^I^;... I. ii. 50 

^ gjiiirr^n«^ cT^hicq# cr?s$ . . 1. i v . i ... 

?rsrjrr?»t# ^ fr^jf^sirsTRt;... III. vii. 37 
i?t8E^^rsTiiBr5flr^^?r... III. iii. 25 ... 

^^srsgrr III. iv 92 

... III. v. 23 
.T. III. vi. 6 
... III. vii. 26 

fg.* 3r^??rra#!?^r^cii^... i. i. 24 ... 

... HI. v. 10 

iR^Sfif § SI15TRc^5#5r«Td smR^?! ?rewaff?T HI. 

3Wi5*ar ... III. vii. 30 

wr ?Tr3TO^ % sfTTORi . - ni. ii. 1 2 ’ " 

fe‘*T?!^sirar ... Iir. iv. 9 

si%srerw5 ... II. iv. 28 



TO ... IL iv. 13 

•.. I- iii.' 29 

<wira am^', ^ __ ^ 

... m.iv.46 

^Jw^TOraTt^firanra?: - ni"ii.40 ■" 

... HI. V. 3 
^rni^ ... HI. iii. 39 

... HI vii. 23 

^S ftm Jh^a^jR,* jiwaTOwr ' i 

^^r^%TOq%;ii^i,r^r5NRj; ... II. iv 9 
^ISr § ... HI. ii. 39 ... ’.” 

5 ^*ng;sr%^¥r^5 jjj jg 

^SEfs^TO’^g^ ... I. iv. 8 

«n^%a^ ^ _ 

SgqtsJ®^ I cIrJI*ir®RtI^iri^^ ... I. i, ,5 

'^^fitSEi^g;^ ... I. i. 8 

... II. iv. 2 

«RW^ «ifewRi:5iOTT^* mm' ... II. iv. 7 ”' 

ii# s% g ijftgTT^rar?i; ... in i. ig "' 

^ ^Mmm^ ... iii. iii. 26 

... nr. ^ii, 33 

sfT# m ... I. iii. 22 
«ifrR?ftr tirftj ... m. i. 4 .” 

*a|i^ t<rt ... in. 33 !” 

ijn# 5r5i ^[5RT^ ... I. i. 6 
sn§raRii[ ...ILiv. 12 

'9W95. ’FErrg^ S[ar?iT 3^»id^rg; ... in iv 40 
;.. Ill, ii. 15 



PAGE, 



PAGE, 


'gtTRTSrstRTg^ ... III. vii. 48 

^ wimRRB^na afi^raiTO ..' iii. y. 22 

WHjltiTOiVTOa: B llHsam^ ... III. „ii 4 g 

3«?T«fcMttri^ ... Ill V. 50 
... III. iii. 37 

TTO'??rr “gr 5i%»Trg^ ... m. vii. 7 

^rgiRroT.- ... II. i. 5 

wwriB ... in. viii. 7 

... I. i. 2 

tr ?rsr^5r?^ ... ir, n 10 
... III. iii. 21 

?SWiTf gnqFsi^rg; %i%^ % 

... ii, ii. 6 ... ^ 

^srT^fTTc^!^^ p?r%JTflr%^rcsr^^: ... m. vi s 

S" !K^g-<iii3a a,: s 

si^?r srintr^ ... l. iii. 10 

3 'TO’^rgi;?r«n«r% sr€t% ... m i 15 
8'??R|^^.,.IIUi.41 
8 s'?!sr %^5 «^ 8 itgrrg[; ... m. ii, 33 

... III. iii. 20 ... ■’ 

... I. iv. 24 

8r%l^<srTaT5cn ... III. V. 11 

^ ^ . . . III. viii. 18 

ffsrmr ... II. i. 32 

... I. iv. 19 .” 

ar?«T% ^»f^5!Tg; ... III. viii. 33 " ‘‘^ 

... in. iv. 6 

331^^% ?I«irs%5!RWIWI^ ... Ul vi. 14 

... I. iv. 4 

^ iii. iv. 

sr;Sj^msfr^ ... Ii. iii. 23 

a:w48iiR>^M T g ^ ... ill. iv, 34 

III. iii, 35 Z 1, 

... III. iv. 49 



PAGE. 


L iv. 23 

... iir. vii. 21 

... III. V. 42 

a5r5ic^f5i^iiifiR^^,pjjg(. J.J 27 ^ 

?f«rr^5^t^Ri;...III. viii. 13 ..’ 

5rai 'BT ^ssE^,..r. iv. 12 

?i«JT'f«5RiT^g^...r.ii. 3 ..*.* ’ ■ 

^?n3?Tr5^re%T:...lL i. 19 

5rar^^j^{...riL vii. 13 
^rar i^?r...m. vii. 9 
sTOTiRn^ ^...iiL ii. r 
ii. 10 

^^g;si%»T??rT ^«m:.. .1. m. 35 
3r^^5in5nff...r. ii. 31 
?»'?5r^?fsr...f. iii. 28 
?r^’??Tr m sm#7<7%WTTH...Iir. ii. 21... 

^f«i?l9TJ|5n3^q^%*»Trg;. .. Ilf. v. 4 1 
atwsnnf iEfJiBrrar5i:...Ill. V. 43 

^mnr^CsiRT^ 5T ftrsTj t 

3?^ teni.. wnin .11 af5iftraOTn...r.’i.'25 

Hn^ 5^,^ ft inn ^ 5a 

m[m . .III. vii. 42 

^srarg^jT... in. V. 15... 

?r^ ^qt^^:r.r. iv. 5 
'^5#5*rg^nwsrRf... III. vi. 3 

i!3[c«st*jra^ *iirwR?T...iri. vi. 30 
^^T^5!%%?^rq;^r^...ia viii. 9 ... 
?r^Tqt 5 r?mm?n%iT firf 51 ? . . . iir. vii. 4 1 . . . 

a^TwrfTswwBr v. 22 a 

^ftwqdfgj...l. i. 3 

sft'itiiRnf wrant'Wftrftamn ".'m. ii. 86 
a#r3[«rgTOTii^%...n. l e 

smrai^. . .Ill, .vi. 1 6 



PAGE, 


ii, 8 

i5?i?^fcrfe??^C..L iv. 7 ... 

p*!"! iii. 23 ... ' 

^rs[r ? gr^.* . . n, i. i o 

i5Jr: qr^firf^} 5rsK?:»!jr^qTcr ...iir. vi. is 

"s ’T i. 35... 

^a|«s|{...UI, i. 7 

^ra' . ■ I. iii. 8 

5 m'^^; si3%csrra ?i»*TJi?Egr 50r«rg?^...iii. vii, 39 "' 
3'q®^^in5W?r...iii. ii. 34 

... 

_ ]■■ 

^*l^5f5fTV..IU. vii. 27 
%cr...iiL vi. 4 ... 

iv_ iq 

. vii. 4 ... 

55^«I^gr...I. ii. 12 
f^A..lLl 23 

t’^resr’ #m??i...in. vii. le 

^ %S^«crr^qc^'r^.,.TU vii, 14... 

tT ^qTg[....iif. jy 33 
5[rr^ ^wt ^incr...nr. iv. 

trt^; aCT5S »cf ^?lRj;^..,III. vi. 28 

S[5!I3<U«^^ gn^;...!!!. i. 3 

spr s^ingt^rifiTT 5[ar%%rJ)T5f% 

3?!n«r?r...n. ii. 17... 

!^ar*gr??Tr?j;^%Rpfr,qr}?r^i^^...n. iii 22 . ... 

isw^»iiir...ni. iv. 23 ... 

s##5^s srflRsnr 

.Ill viiL 30 ... 

S[^ ^ ir#fT«5!iw iftWaRfiri? 

• ?piig;.irr. iv. 25 ,, 

w^' Siir«d f«fe...in V. 16 ^ 


AQ\ 




w ^n'?5ira?E?r...ni, m. n 

viii. \7 

ST^3Tg«...II, 9 

«r^i%ir%%«rr^. . . nr. viii, 40 . . . 
^jns^^r^srrs^fH^* m^...l in. i " 

wqf^rra 57% g^:...iii. iii. 4 ... 

’T^wi%?Rrrg(;...r. iii, 12 ... 

^ ®rt?t^...ir. i. 45 
*TiT®f|f§r^^M^?grRi;...iir. ii. 6 

’r^«jr%fen 5 ?i^...ii.iv.i 8 ... ^ 

' sr^*f?^...iir. v"9 

*T . . in. vi. 5 

*r ^ ^«r^*ic^...ir. i. 12 

^ . .in. vi. ,88 

^ 5r5Tf*f % cr?^f^r^...ni. vii. 4 
*T> . . ni. vi. 7... 

*r ?w:*ir^5...n. i. 22 
^ *insTr ?^R[«rhf5!r%«rr*ir^...ii. iv. 10 
^ 'rf% ifTtr?^...ni. iii. 38 ... ^ 

*Tg^^...i. ii. 21 

•t iii. 19 

*T . . .rn. iii. 23 

*T^5rRiPTrf^^...in. vi. 12 

” 5> ...in. vi. 17 

«r ^ ’T^TOr?! III. vii. 33 
*r ^ sr«c?Bra^?i ?5f5T*5t • -in. iv. 9 

*r 5rr^njfti?T?!R^gf ...i. iii. g 
*T, i. 16 

«T . . . III. iii. 7 

*^^'^w^«r?:rgt ...nr. vii. 35 
’Twr^cf^ 1% ^...i. iii. 20 

*TO% W...I. i. 17 

viii. 78 

*»«% aura ^ iv. e 







A„ f. J -* % ^ 


( xi ) 




PAGE, 


SD[T«0fis&^5 ??n'gt...n. v, 8 

5rr»%%!r^grig;...iiT. vL 24 

.. Ti. i. 38 ^ 

'rrr^rq'rg; . . j. i. 1 8 . . . 
irqwg ^%?Drf^: sflr»^rni?5l^...nr. vii. 36 
S=®^-‘ . . JII. vi . 40 

?i«sr.- ^?iT^...irj. iv. 38 ... ’‘‘ 

vi. 34 

v' 

crciraR?grr?^ ...rir. iv. i 
^i:%^*fm...lll. vii. 12 ... 

... 

sr^^r ?r%flCTt} ^nfirj&qR^ ...in. vi. lo . . 

|i^ra^«g«i<?^5E«n5rf^«^ ...nr. vi. 36 

srr <rfeftfTr^rg[...iri. iii. 3*3 

5»f?I#%...III. vii. 24 

1^?WJl^...TII. viii. 41 ..’ 

iii. 18 ..’ 

'I#^li^%^...IIT. vii. 34 ... 

’Tc^^fcRrrorH^flnrn...i. i. 31 
wlcmf3prT5nH.,.l. iv. 16 

.I.' ii. :12::' ;;: , ... ^; ;: v '' - ' ■ 

^ jjj jj 

§ »pferr^g«i?}. . .ir. iii. 19 
iirsraiTTO 32 ... 

ircsfl^5^^...iii. ii. 32 ... ."’ 

...m. u. 29 

uj. i. 6 

. . . in. vii. 44 

'j«J^?^%50trgi;#^w II. ii. 21 ... 

WH!#<fg[;^«if5Pn^t ^urg^..! ii. ii. 9 ... *., 

W s#%cr in. Hi. 34 

KH vi. 9 


273 
... 450 
.. 168 

• 14 

.. 476 

.. 458 

.. 407 
.. 455 

• 500 

, 385 

. 466 

. 449 

. 444 

. 456 

^::374,.’ 
472 
504 
362 
476 
149 

2a 

112 

49 

392 

405 

332 

329 

290 

481 

113 

210 

193 

875 

443 



sfaragr... ni. iv. 5 

sr«K^rin n^fpim. .. in. vii. i 

*WTOf?it a^sn5?i?grn... ii. iii. 24 

III. li. 18 

SWC«!%«mTSl «CT555n^... III. vi. 29 

III. vii. 29 

sm K^ H SE5<^g; %«If %?T* srici . . . 

II. ii. 3... 

I. i. 10 .?. 

^ . . III. vi. 2 

ar II. iv. 22 

a^arwRra^fTRfiT... I. i. 22 
agrq;... la vi. 37 

iqrgi' • .. in. ii. 14 

III. vi. 45 

aR#it5tiir*mriTraaraj : in. v. 33 

5RR!i=m# ^^r'aHr... n. iv. 30 

a^m#5r?fmRr^«cw^ramR;... i. iii. so 

a^m5iRTlir% ^q;... I. iii. ii 
a^nR?T»i?[w... I. i. 14 ... 

a^cq9qRarRRr?i;5!s|3 ^ mwm i. iii. 24 

.a^R!g;sra^?!iR(uq-}... jn. v. 46 
srcrerr... I. iv. 26 ... 

srraq^ssngyq^Kdi^j. . , m. iv. is 

ararfqr^ r m vii. 45 ... 

am(^?^ ^fftr#flr-.. II. iv. 21 

a?^ ag^re - ir. ii. 12 

. III. vii. 43 

a^xnj^Tf^^BRrg;... III. viii. 22 
aJ^Va# i. iv. ii 

»%t%*Trcr... iil. v 47' 
ajasfagssaiacargr... Ill i. 5 ' 

asa «rr«;ter%.'^. ii. iii. 25 

ii. i. 29 ... ’ * 

^ 5 Rr^WRTfs[sr^ mw.i in. i 10 ' 

mm a;^rfeaRr...\r on 



w 


, 


■j 'V*' , * •‘A>'.**^',i^,*-’^'» ''*t 

if%.:.i..: 1 , ■ • ■ , . ^': 


( Xlii ) 


sreiR^?!.., III. vii. 6 

"TTSS??! { ^qf ^ _ 

f§:wi5i;... 1. ii. 33 .?. ... 

sTSP»rar 3«?TOsf^... III. V. 53 
«% ^^sira¥?ni%% ^ ... III. viii. 43 
m s[s% ?m?grRi;... ill. h. m 

. . III. iv. 4 8 ... ’ ". 

%?ir f^#?r%... ii i i 

^wr... I. iv. 27 

^?r^: .. III. iii. 10 
Jisn^giqjfeqrreisg;.. . III. viii. 15 

?RRl^Rf %?5Ilf^!&qrg;^ ... ui. viii, 42 
Sr«l3RR^5&^pgj... I, iv. 15 ... ’’’ 

ft«i?gTw«f5gr^psiTg;... III. i. 23 ... ^.’ .. 

gi^qjTSt^rg;... III. iv. 47 
g^r^5f^?n%r%5RqT?i;... iii. viii. 35 

ifsqq^^^Ha^iinri;; q:^qf 11 . iii 14 

mum 5wi>^5?T3.sKii%?n5iJn^?5:... iii. viii. 19 ... 

^ a^^^n^rg;.., ll. i. 40 

«15r^gi5s^qxg?g;^qig;... II. i. 21 ... ..’ 

t^cT ^ gru^f^ t ^?i%. . . Ill ii. 28 
gr 5fqg?r ?^R:rg^... III. ii. 16 

I. ii. 30 ... ... ^ 

si^5i%l45T?risi?gj... 1. iv. 3 

wiR^miraR^... in. V. 45 

«irawi!nE3ggiww?gig.«iilgg;.. III. viii. 4 
siq?:qRj;... II^ 

«I]Rrs3S^%rwqW; 5Pl»?:?|irrg[... II. iv. 1 

gT^?nj ^{Ir^svTO^... II. iii. 13 
sr^r sr 

«rfsrr^si%iTf?i... II. i.4 ... ... 

Iw gcq^fl si%Jt 5cir^ sTwrir 

:,«^!!^;...n.i.3 . ...^ ,, .,.,, : ,, ^ _ 

mir ?r«rwg^s[aR?r gisggcgr^... ii, 1 7 ... 

SRg5[ar!mRiqi?t... il. i. 8 ... 


' PAGE. 

. 464 

,33 
45 
439 
505 
413 
412 
126 
119 
347 
492 
505 
112 
304 
4U 
502 
246 
494 
169 
149 
328 
319 

42 

101 

435 

487 

487 

267 

245 

130 

129 

139 

139 



tAGEl, 


tariff UL vL 3^ 

w^Jiraig;;.. r. ii. 11 ... 

I. i. 23 

*j >j ••■ li- 8 ... . ... 

>, „ ... II. iii. 9 

,) „ ... II. iii. 15 

*, „ ... III. iii. 42 ... 

„ ,,...111.^36 ... 

w III" ly. 45 ... ... ,,, . 

„ „... IILv. 51 

» )f 13 ... ... 

„ „ ... in. yi. 26 

„ „ ... III. vii. 5 

„ „ ni. viii. 27 ... ... 5 , 

^fli»s!rnitgc.«KTR^* ni. ii. 19 ... 

crsrH^iWRig; . . 11 . i v. :■ 

^ ... m. ii. 27 

fern ^is^niwif «i^«§i?nr ugnmn -- in. ii. 24 ... 

femw... in. ii. 8 ... 


I. ii. 5l^ ,•:. ; .. V-::::::'-:-- 

•:y;}#r^sr^%^v,.-i.Ji.-20 ',...■' -■ ... , V 

^ ?rferawg;sr%rn5!ferf;i* ^nig;... i. i. 26 ..* 

^ifnr... III. V. 38 

III. vi. 44 . .... 

cT jr% 5Ji^sigcmg: wqlwi^ % 

iii. 43 

wri^msf ^^Enrai;... Ill, ii. 3 ... 

^■Binii^jaiaidwpB^... in. v. 40 . 

in. ii 17 ... . ..," 

^FNf^«it ?*ngr... in. viii. 2 , 




V'’ 


( XV ) 


l:|3f^ii^|pitsl»^^ 

?^^4^rafwg%q|5r* ;pi:,.. jn, ,r. 21 
;i." 

«rsannw^^Bmnn<^^ ir. i. 20 ^ 

^ 5 !f^g?nr^’>mj;... IL .. “' 

in. ii. 37 . ^ 

«i^?i;... III. V. 31 
^ i. 25 

wmr^?ng;... II. iv.*i6 A 

^ ^itR^rni;. .. til vi. 43 ... 

34' : : ■■'• 

^Aws^^cr^ig;... in. vii. 31 
%?ir?rf vrftsar^gin... II. iv. 14 
^q 5 r%... I. ii. 15 

i. ii. 48 ... ’’ 

^f«r%Tq ^qt 5 f ??Trti;... III. ii. 9 

i^r^^^mRi^ig;... III. iv. 13 

I. ii. 19 !.” 

III. iv. 9 ... ... 

cTWWFir^rtg 




wiiSi? 



{ xvi ) 



PAGE. 

II . iv. 6. ... ... ... 271 

srm??ir?i;IL iv. S2 288 
iii. 3 ... ... 58 

!it%-.iii. viii. 32 ... ... 500 

fsr^^sFTm uiTfr^! m%... ii. ii. 4 ... ... iso 

II. iii, 16 ... . ’ 247 

f^cr sM*: ?qig;. . . II, iv. 26 ... ’ ” 285 

wigr iii. i. 8 ... 293 

w«|^frr5€Ef... I i. 11 ... ... ... 11 

III. iv. 22 ... ... . ' 399 

sr ^1^... HI. iii. 8 ... ... 34.^ 

#^^'!p<srj5iqf:... I. i. 27 .... ... ]’’ 49 

• HI Vii. 50 ... ... 483 

^tr^srra^slifT?!:... III. iii. 2 ... . 342 

T. iv. 13 ... nj! 

5!i%^&?qr«rr^^^t^... III. iii. 6 ... 343 

S!I<lt5iar?T§[^... II, ii. 7 ... ... . ' “ J92 

s!rqrt5[r?E^55?ig?i:... III. vi. 42 ... 459 

.. II. i. 17 ... ... . ' J4g 

5?r<;^5mw... II. i. 39 ... ’ 


If. iv. 4 ... 

T5Is^ffW?Bcgfig;... III. i. 27 ... 

... Ill 






( x?ii ) 


i,j ^.. ,g 

^r ^ramficerig[^... i. iii. 9 

I. iii. 5 ’" 

:;:::#^'5ma.w^ ■ : ... ■ ”* , " ■ ;' ' :'"' ' 

2 ... '” ' ■^' ' ' ■” 

€»p?gf in. i^_ 27 

.cJj Q , 

aiir^ffsa®^}... 11. i. 33 
^^I5![isf:... II. i. 37 ... ” 

iv 25 

a.^;Trama*^TOn,B«RaBi aij fewaH.'.' 

8ii?:3rr5rrf^m{ ^qrrg^... iii.iii. 1 ..^ 

m si^%s'i!nT&r.. Iii io 

hi. /H i.. 32 '' - i 

%fr%rrcqfe^T»n?i... ir. ii. 22 

II. ii. 14 

^gfj <ro7f50r'jiJi^, fgR?inr*mi?i;... i. i. 13 ... 

^c^pcit l. i. 9 ... 

cRjrTW»?^i%^q[ 

::;/;;c5rr?t..;.:i:. i.: 4\; 

.. III.iv. 9 

•■ cic^rarmg;... in. ii. 13 

• IILi. 21 .’^ 

«riT^%fqfg[;^?Tf^... III. Hi. 24 ... 

-— ^ . . III. viii. 36 

JLvHL^ 

W ^... III. i7. 4 

• I i. 12 ... 

«^«i»is%qT5S«i! I. ii. 45 

‘«piwr^g^... III. vH. 17 ... I. 

?i«iRirr% sr^^.„ ii. iv. 23 





PAGE. 

. 469 

, 70 

• 63 
409 
289 
401 

306 

164 

168 

400 

353 

341 

448 

15 

373 

211 

199 

12 

10 

6 

391 

317 

120 

302 

367 

508 

262 

386 

11 

50 

468 

283 



XVI u 


II. Hi. 11 ... 
^wr^raitw:n^... IL iv. 19... 

^a^ 'ir^i^w*^... ii.iii. 7 ... "' 

II. ii. 27 

^in^... II. i. 47 . ... '" 

cr%Urgfwr^... in. vi. 33 
%fg5^^|ir asr^: n. iii. is 

^ ^ . ^rar'qft^Tg:. . . iii. i v. 17 
a^fari^RfrftfUT... iji. 16 ... 

a%nTg[;?r%srR5twirn?gr, . . 1 . iii. 1 4 
ssmlmqsn^... I. i. 19 ... 

g[l%«!r^^^gTg;... in. iv. 37 

u ii 

in. vi. 1 ... ... .„'°, 

arjW^?jT«rr*Rii?qfjR5?^... in. vi. 15 .. ! 

^§%?%^r*TT^^ii5t:?srft^^d*5irrg^... nr. V. 26 

ett «rrg|^ cr^^c^r^i;. . . lii. i v. 4 1 

in. v. 24 

?iwar5%f;sRiEr ?!irg;... li. iv. 11 

^aiars^nji^r^i^,.. in. ii. 23 

^RTg[,a?«i^ ssrTO^%;... in. V. 30 
^?^... II. i. 44 ..^ 
ffltrs ^5% ^... ir, i, 2 
^ sr^niRrg; wafers' ^ . . ril. i.’ 14 ... 

^ 5 III. viii. 40 

51% af %^! 0 rrEr 7 f 5 EI 5 ?ERlf%qRT^ %... JH. ii. 43 

5r%af Etr 5f^* 5?w^ in. vii. 2 

5rt g ^ iwrarg^ q:««S!>fiir:... in. ii. 42 
5f5?crwRT^rf^if ??n^....iii. ii. 2 ... 

^*5EBTOr3|T gEBRf ajERTT . . Ill i. 1 6 

II. iii. 12 

ESfsRR^eg ST ftr^cT, sfurt gsgi^ g ^f a r... n. ii, 20 

3 ^®ryR«iir^ Er«n%qf s!iErf%i?acr.. in. viii. 3 
#?®aRrnir-. III. iv. 43 

«i5«IIT^.q^srr5srir«ll ni. ii! 28 

HT^iaT^# 5r3(er... lu. v. i§,. 




( xix ) 

^?fT? ?mm % f^m... iir. 120 
^«iT^9?nsrf^ ^?i(gr... III. V. 6 ... 

?lrfi^^^rn ... ui. vU. 15 
f^{lr%^cr 5E?n^. . . 11 . iv. 27 

*eTOwra;... I. iv. 25 ..? 

^rr jferrr^rl^'^ 5?nra... in. iv. 31 
^g5Wi%^!i;R5flrfgr<i^T^:5^... III. ii. 11 
%i,SW=55n^¥|#iTf^gt... Ill, V. 19 ... 

^hira«Rir3:^*5^... III. V. 14 

WR^r^nj... 11. ii. 28 ... 

?3cr5i^^rr^* ?ir3?irafgcnrfH«rR?^. . . ii. i. 1 3 

iTcR*!. . . I. 1^27 
^Ji;... III. V. 25 ... 

I. H. 13 ■... ::; : ... , : : ■; 

^i%il['^j|p:^«a?!iT^frRrg;. . . ill. vi |i ... 
;'|i^w^|^?i..v;iii.M^^ ; ^ ; '.V. : ^ 

. . . in.’;.vi.:;23;: ; ^'■: ■; : , . .■„ ' ^ ^ :.:. 

in. iil 31 ... 
i I. iii. 21 

« 3 111 . v. 34 .. . 

?«fis[r s rS'si ?5r%q;... III. V. 20 

fiTtr 1 creni??^ sRf^rarasij . Ill; iv. 24 . . 

viiL 1 .:;: V.-^- 

5;^iF^;:^r*cr5fewR|;;.-.niI.: iv;': 35'; ^ 

jc^jj... III. iii. 45 

jfsM^... m. V. 37 

• HI. V, 49 ... .... ... 

^fuTfiRwrwn s ^... HI. V. 32 

III. iv. 26 



PAGE. 
. 801 
. 416 

. 468 

. 286 
. 118 
. 404 

, 316 

422 
420 
224 
144 
40 
426 
30 
459 
448 
450 
506 
:,372;::;; 
82 
430 
::423:y' 
400 
47 
486 
498 
406 
477 
427 
60 
383 
- 40 


437 

429 

401 



