===== Internet Archive OCR: 2015.42344.Raja-Yoga--Ed-6_djvu.txt =====







RAJA YOGA 

OR 

JCONQUERING THE INTERNAL NATURE 

SWAMl VIVEKANANDA 



SIXTH EDITION 

1923 


All Right Reserved. 


Price ; Re. 






CONTENTS 


RAJA YOGA 


Introduction (by Sister Nivedita) 

Page. 

ii 

The Author’s Preface 

. viii 

Introductory .... 

. 1 

The First Steps .... 

. 17 

Prana .... 

. . 30 

The Psychic Prana .... 

. 48 

The Control of Psychic Prana . 

. 56 

Pratyahara and Dharana . . ^ . 

. 63 

Dhypna and Samadhi 

. 73 

Raja- Yoga in Brief .... 

. 86 


PA'i ANJALI'S YOGA APHORISMS 


Introduction . ... .94 

Concentration : Its Stages . . .101 

Concentr 2 ii[on : Its practice . . .150 

Powers .196 

Independence 222 

Appendix: References to Yoga . . . 243 

Glossary 258 






Each Soul is potentially divine and the 
goal is to manifest the divinity that is within, 
by controlling nature, external and internal. 

We shall have to do this either by work, 
or worship, or psychic control, or philosophy, 
by one or more of all these — and be free. 

This is the whole of religion. Doctrines, 
dogmas, rituals, books, temples, and forms 
are but secondary details. 



THE EDITOR'S PREFACE 

In presenting this thoroughly revised edition of 
Raja Yoga before the public, the Editor has taken 
pains not only to set right the inaccuracies of the 
lecture-portion of the book, but also of that portion of 
it which deals with the original aphorisms of 
Patanjali. The reader will be astonished to find, in 
going over the book, that the Swami could do such 
full justice to ;he subject in imprompt lectures before 
his classes in America. 

In explaining the aphorisms, the Swami as the 
reader will find, has deviated in some places from the 
course usually taken by old commentators on 
Patanjali. To help the reader to form his own 
judgment in such places, the editor has adjoined in 
foot-notes the explanations of the passages by those 
commentators. 

The Editor has been fortunate moreover in 
securing an introduction to the book from the learned 
pen of the late Sister Nivedita — by a search among 
her papers. He has thought fit to publish it with the 
present edition, in as much as it gives clearly the 
Western standpoint from which the book had been 
judged at its first appearance, and by which it was 
found so valuable and original in its treatment of the 
subject as to be deemed fit to be translated in all the 
principal languages of Europe. 


SARADANANDA 



INTRODUCTION 


Visitors to India quickly become familiar with 
the Sadhus and Fakirs, or religious beggars, who form 
so picturesque an element of Indian crowds. Most 
of these, whether Hindu or Mohammedan, are 
wanderers and some of them belong to floating orders 
of great prestige and antiquity. All alike wear as 
their badge, the gerrua, or earth-stained cloth, of 
salmon-pink colour, and some are further distin- 
guished by the carrying of large rosaries, scared staffs 
or tridents, the smearing of face and body with mud 
or ashes, and the wearing of the hair in matted locks 
piled high on the head. Some of these varied brother- 
hoods of Yogis, Nagds, Ooddssies, and what not, are 
famous for their Sanskrit learning ; and of none is this 
more true than of the clean-shaved Sannydsins of the 
Puri and other Paramhansa Orders, founded by 
Sankaracharya, — himself a sannyasin of 2000 years of 
spiritual descent, — about the year 800 A.D., and to 
whose number the Swami Vivekenanda — writer of 
the present book in the original English — ^belonged. 

Born and educated in Bengal, he became a 
sannyasin in his youth, and as such was the first 
religious teacher of modern times in India, to break 
through the barriers raised by Hindu orthodoxy, and 
cross the seas, for the purpose of preaching in the 
West. His first journey was made to the United 
States, vid China and Japan, in order to represent the 
religious ideas of the Hindu peoples at that Parlia- 
ment of Religions which will be remembered as a 
feature of the Chicago Exhibition of the year 1893. 
He was deeply conscious of the significance of the 
step he was taking. Hinduism had not then thought 



[ iii ] 


of itself as a missionary faith. “1 go/* a friend 
reports him as saying, at the moment of leaving his 
mother-country, “to preach a religion of which 
•Buddhism is but a rebel child, and Christianity, with 
all its idealisms, a far-fetched imitation.” 

The Swami’s success as a preacher, at Chicago, 
was followed by some years of work and travel in 
America, and in the years 1895 and 1896, by two visits 
to England and to the Continent of Europe. On his 
return to India, early in 1897, he was accorded an 
ovation by his countrymen, which may be termed 
historic. From Colombo, where he landed, to 
Madras, from which he had originally been sent forth, 
and again in the various visits which he was called 
upon to make, after reaching his monastery in 
Calcutta, to the cities, provinces, and feudatory 
princes of the north, his journeys formed a veritable 
triumphal progress. And in the south, where the 
Hindu consciousness has been least impaired by the 
proximity of Islamic Communities, his rulings on 
controverted points of faith and doctrine were by 
common consent, from that time forward, placed on 
the footing of a final authority on Hinduism. India 
thus ratified by acclamation the mission and the 
utterances of the yellow-clad begging-friar who had 
gone forth from her shores, four years earlier, in her 
name. It may serve to give some idea of the extent 
to which ancient culture is still living in India, when 
it is said that for fourteen days in Madras, noonday 
sittings were held daily by the Swami, in which 
scholars and Brahmins of distinction brought to him 
philosophical and other questions, to be answered by 
him, first in Sansl^rit and then in English, Sanskrit is 
by no means a dead language in its own country. 



[ iv ] 


The Swami’s second and last journey to the West 
was made in the year 1899. He returned to India 
late in 1900, and less than two years later, on July 4th 
1902, he died. He had visited Paris three or fou|; 
times in all, spending several weeks there, in the year 
1900, and speaking twice at the Sorbonne. 

In the work done by the Swami Vivekananda in 
his own country, he never adopted the role of a 
religious or social reformer. He took no advantage 
of the position accorded him to impose any favourite 
sectarianism of his own upon others. To all the 
perplexities of the present age of transition, he replied 
by raising the banner of a spiritual Hinduism, idesJ, 
dynamic, and towering high above all those externals 
of caste and custom which might be expected to 
change with changes of place and period. He held 
that even the Vedas and Upanishads had voiced 
nothing else than the call to this central and most 
searching form of religion, and that the same had been 
the message, written or unwritten, of all the Indian 
saints and teachers, in times more modern. 

As an apostle of Indian thought in the West, 
however, the Swami 's labours were of a somewhat 
more complex character. Here we find him, in the 
numerous works which he has left, not only defining 
and expanding the great basic philosophy of 
Adwaita or Unity, — the idea of the Immanent 
Divine, — but also, as in the case of the present 
volume, acting as a witness to the authenticity of an 
antique form of knowledge, which, familiar as it is 
to India, can scarcely be regarded as known to 
Europe even by name. 

Apart from its obvious division into an original 
treatise and the translation of an Oriental work and 



[ V ] 


its commentators, this book of Raja Yoga falls under 
a twofold category. In the first place, we find our- 
selves listening as it were to a melody which identifies 
the subject with religion, and in the second to an 
intermingled strain by which it is regarded purely as a 
science. On one side, we hear the impassioned cry, 
“The way is found ! Children of immortality, and ye 
who dwell in higher spheres, by perceiving Him who 
is beyond all darkness, your path is made from out 
of this darkness. And to escape, ye have no other!” 
And on the other hand, as we follow page after 
page, and comment upon comment, we feel that, — 3t 
least as regards temper, apart from the question of 
credibility, — we are in the presence of nothing more 
or less than an ancient and unfamiliar system of 
Psychology, complete of its own kind, and supported 
by a vocabulary and system of reasoning curiously 
unlike any to which we are accustomed. 

Both points of view are correct. Raja Yoga 
from the Oiiental point of view, is religion : from the 
Occidental, it is science. We in the West are not left 
entirely without witness to the occasional occurrem^e 
of saintly raptures and prophetic visions which can- 
not be adequately described as mental aberrations. 
Without Francis of Assisi, Joan of Arc, Teresa of 
Jesus, and Ignatius Loyola, all our history would have 
been the poorer. But we have felt ourselves under 
no necessity of giving a scientific account of such 
phenomena. They have taken place for the most 
part, in spite of our misunderstanding of them, not 
because of our sympathy. In the East, however, 
humanity will give birth to a religious idea, with as 
much simplicity and directness as in the West would 
characterise the invention of a machine, or the 



VI 


1 


elaboration of an industrial process. It follows, then, 
that the recognition of that mood in which religions 
are born, — ^that mood which the Swami Vivekananda 
terms ‘superconsciousness,* — must, necessarily form 
an integral part of Eastern Psychology. 

Could any dictum range itself more haughtily, 
more fearlessly, under the banner of scientific ideals, 
than the seventh aphorism of Patanjali’s first chapter 
—“Direct perception, inference and competent 

EVIDENCE ARE PROOFS**? Is there any trace of con- 
fusion in the mind of the man who wrote this? Any 
pet dogma to be screened from destructive criticism? 
Any window to be kept dark? The same words, 
by implication, base the claim of the aphorism to 
credence, on experience alone. There is here no 
room for the appeal to authority — “Competent 
evidence** — mark the pride of the adjective ! — to 
guide the student ; “inference** as a reliable means 
of determining points of theory ; but both of these 
alike dependent on that which alone, therefore, 
forms the ultimate test for all, “direct perception.** 
Is it not true that such a readiness to submit the 
whole content of faith to the test of experience, 
refusing authority, is to Western thinking, one of the 
differenticB of science rather than of Religion? 

Another point on which this Eastern science, — 
assuming its credibility, — challenges comparison with 
that of the West, is the question of method. In the 
very nature of the investigation, the human body is 
itself the laboratory, and all instruments, save those 
found within, are excluded. But it is not equally true 
that there is no experiment. The whole research 
claims to be built upon experiment. And when we 
read that the heart itself can be brought under such 



[ vii ] 


•sontrol that the circulation of the blood can be 
regulated or stopped at will, we catch a glimpse of 
the courage and devotion to knowledge that the 
ijubject must have demanded in its pioneers. There 
is no reason to believe that the sacrifice of life 
demanded for the authoritative establishment of its 
various steps, was in any way less than that required 
by, for instance, modern Chemistry or modern 
Medicine. And in the severity of the discipline 
imposed, it is evident that the habits of life of the 
modern scholar must give precedence to those of the 
older. 

One more point remains to be touched upon. 
Patanjali, writing his Yoga Aphorisms in the second 
century B.C., must not be looked upon as an author, 
in our twentieth-century meaning of the term. 
Rather, he was a recorder of those conclusions which 
had been arrived at by the concensus of erudite 
opinion in his time. His name is used to this day 
as that of the head of the Yoga School. But this is 
perhaps much the same thing as to make the Presi- 
dent of the Academy of Science personally respon- 
sible for all the scientific discoveries published under 
the imprimatur of that body, in a given year of 
grace ! The Yoga Aphorisms represent an era in 
culture, the work of a great floating university of 
begging friars, which at the time of their publication 
was already many centuries old. 

Finally, this strange old science of Raja Yoga 
is to this day alive in India. Many thousands of 
students have made some progress in it ; some few, 
it may be, are highly proficient. In any case, we 
who have been his disciples, — ^both Indians and 
Europeans, regard the writer of this book, the 



[ viii ] 


Swami Vivekananda, as belonging to the latter of 
these two classes. He was one of those souls for 
whom Samddhi, or super-consciousness, had no 
secrets, and when he publishes a statement regarding 
the nature of Yoga, his words fall under the category 
of “Competent Evidence.*’ 

Nivedita 

OF Ramkrishna- Vivekananda. 
THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE. 

Since the dawn of history, various extraordinary 
phenomena have been recorded as happening 
amongst human beings. Witnesses are not wanting 
in modern times to attest to the fact of such events, 
even in societies living under the full blaze of modern 
science. The vast mass of such evidence is unreh’able, 
as coming from ignorant, superstitious or fraudulent 
persons. In many instances the so-called miracles 
are imitations. But what do they imitate? It is not 
the sigii of a candid and scientific mind to throw over- 
board anything without proper investigation. Surface 
scientists, unable to explain the various extraordinary 
mental phenomena, strive to ignore their very 
existence. They are, therefore, more culpable than 
those who think that their prayers are answered by 
a being or beings above the clouds, or than those 
who believe that their petitions will make such 
beings change the course of the universe. The latter 
have the excuse of ignorance, or at least of a defec- 
tive system of education, which has taught them 
dependence upon such beings, a dependence which 
has become a part of their degenerate nature. The 
former have no such excuse. 

For thousands of years such phenomena have 



f ix ] 


been studied, investigated, and generalised, the whole 
ground of the religious faculties of man has been 
analysed, and the practical result is the science of 
I^aja-Yoga. Raja-Yoga does not, after the unpardon- 
able manner of some modern scientists, deny the 
existence of facts which are difficult to explain ; on 
the other hand, it gently, yet in no uncertain terms, 
tells the superstitious that miracles and answers to 
prayers, and powers of faith, though true as facts, are 
not rendered comprehensible through the supersti- 
tious explanation of attributing them to the agency of 
a being or beings above the clouds. It declares that 
each man is only a conduit for the infinite ocean of 
knowledge and power that lies behind mankind. It 
teaches that desires and wants are in man, that the 
power of supply is also in man ; and that wherever 
and whenever a desire, a want, a prayer, has been 
fulfilled, it was out of this infinite magazine that the 
supply came, and not from any supernatural being. 
The idea of supernatural beings may rouse to a 
certain extent the power of action in man, but it also 
brings spiritual decay. It brings dependence ; it 
brings fear ; it brings superstition. It degenerates 
into a horrible belief in the natural weakness of man. 
There is no supernatural, says the Yogi, but there 
are in nature gross manifestations and subtle mani- 
festations. 1 he subtle are the causes, the gross the 
effects. The gross can be easily perceived by the 
senses ; not so the subtle. The practice of R&ja- 
Yoga will lead to the acquisition of the more subtle 
perceptions. 

All the orthodox systems of Indian philosophy 
have one goal in view, the liberation of the soul 
through perfection. The method is by Yoga, The 



[ X 1 


word Yoga covers an immense ground, but both the 
Sankhya and the Vedanta Schools point to Yoga in 
some form or other. 

The subject of the present book is that form of 
Yoga known as Raja-Yoga. The aphorisms of 
Patanjali are the highest authority on Raja-Yoga, and 
form its text book. The other philosophers, though 
occasionally differing from Patanjali in some philoso- 
phical points, have, as a rule, acceded to his method 
of practice a decided consent. The first part of this 
book is comprised of several lectures to classes deli- 
vered by the present writer in New York. The second 
part is a rather free translation of the aphorisms 
(Sutras) of Patanjali, with a running commentary. 
Eifort has been made to avoid technicalities as far 
as possible, and to keep to the free and easy style 
of conversation. In the first part some simple and 
specific directions are given for the student who wants 
to practise, but all such are especially and earnestly 
reminded that, with few exceptions. Yoga can only 
be safely learned by direct contact with a teacher. 
If these conversations succeed in awakening a desire 
for further information on the subject, the teacher 
will not be wanting. 

The system of Patanjali is based upon the system 
of the Sankhyas, the points of difference being very 
few. The two most important differences are, first, 
that Patanjali admits a personal God in the form of a 
first teacher, while the only God the Sankhyas admit 
is a nearly perfected being, temporarily in charge of 
a cycle of creation. Second, the Yogis hold the 
mind to be equally all-pervading with the soul, or 
Purusha, and the Sankhyas do not. 


The Author . 





RAJA YOGA. 

CHAPTER 1. 

Introductory. 

All our knowledge is based upon experience. 
What we call inferential knowledge, in which we go 
from the less general to the more general, or from 
the general to . the particular, has experience as its 
basis. In what are called the exact sciences, people 
easily find the truth, because they appeal to the 
particular experiences of every human being. The 
scientist does not tell you to believe in anything, but 
he has certain results which come from his own ex- 
periences, and reasoning on these experiences, when 
he asks us to believe in his conclusions, he appeals 
to some universal experience of humanity. TTius, 
for every exact science there is a common basis by 
referring to which we can see at once the truth or the 
fallacy of the conclusions drawn there-from. Now, 
the question is, has Religion any such basis or not? 
I shall have to answer the question both in the 
affirmative and in the negative. Religion, as it is 
generally taught all over the world, is said to be based 
upon faith or belief, and, in most cases, consists only 
of different sets of theories. The reason why we find 
all religions quarrelling with each other is because 
all those theories are based upon belief. One man 



L 


RAJA YCXiA 


says there is a great Being sitting above the clouds 
and governing the whole universe, and he asks me to 
believe that solely on the authority of his assertion. 
In the same Way 1 may have my own ideas, which 1 
am asking others to believe, and if they ask a reason, 
I cannot supply them with any ! That is why religion 
and metaphysical philosophy have a bad name now- 
a-days. Every educated man seems to say: “Oh, 
religion and metaphysics are but bundles of theories 
without any standard whatever to judge them by, 
each man preaching his own pet ideas.” 

It must be told nevertheless that there is a 
universal basis for our belief in religion, governing 
all the different theories and ideas of men about 
religion in different countries. For, going down to the 
very bottom of them all we find that they also are 
based upon universal experiences. To make this clear 
I shall ask you in the first place to analyse all the 
various religions of the world. You will find them 
divided into two classes, namely, those that have a 
book to support them, and those that have it not. 
Those with books are the strongest, and have the 
largest number of followers, while those without 
books have mostly died out, and the few that still 
exist will be seen to have sprung up in recent time 
and have very small followings. Yet, in all of them 
we find one consensus of opinion, that the truths they 
teach are the results of the experiences of particular 
persons. The Christian asks you to believe in his 
religion, that is to believe in a God, in Christ 
as the incarnation of that God, in a soul, and in a 
better state of that soul. He cannot give you any 
reasons for his belief. But if you go to the very 
fountain-head of Christianity you will find that his 



INTRODUCTORY 


belief is based directly upon experience. For, Christ 
said, He saw God ; and the disciples said they felt 
God. Similarly, Buddhism Is based on Buddha’s 
experience. He experienced certain truths, saw 
them, came in contact with them, and preached them 
to the world. So on with the Hindus. In their 
books, the writers, who are called Rishis or sages, 
declare that they also experienced certain truths, and 
those they preached. Thus it is clear that all the 
religions of the world have been built upon that one 
universal and adamantine foundation of all our knowl- 
edge, namely direct experience. The teachers all 
saw God ; they all saw their own souls, they all saw 
eternity, as their future, and what they saw they 
preached. A peculiar clEiim, however, is put before 
us, in modern times, by the followers of all the 
religions, that such direct religious experiences are 
impossible at the present day ; they were possible 
only with persons who were the first founders of the 
religions that subsequently bore their names. And 
that because such experiences have become obsolete, 
now-a-days, so people will have to take religion now 
on belief. This we deny emphatically. For if there 
has been one case of experience in this world in any 
parti cuar branch of knowledge, it absolutely follows 
that the experience had been possible millions of 
times before, and will surely be repeated eternally. 
Uniformity is the rigorous law of nature ; therefore, 
what happened once can happen always. 

The teachers of the science of Yoga, therefore, 
declare religion to be based not merely upon the 
experience of ancient times, but that no man can 
really be religious until he has the same perceptions 
himself, that Yoga is the science which teaches us 



4 


RAJA YOGA 


how to get those perceptions, and that it is useless to 
talk about religion until one has felt it. Why is there 
so much fighting and quarrelling in the name of God ? 
Indeed, there has been more bloodshed in the narAe 
of God than for any other cause ! And the reason 
for that is that people never went to the fountain- 
head of religious experiences themselves and were 
content only with giving a mental assent to the 
customs of their forefathers, and wanting others to do 
the same. But what right has a man to say that he has 
a soul if he does not feel it, or that there is a God if 
he does not see Him ? If there is a God we must see 
Him, if there is a soul we must perceive it ; other- 
wise it is better not to believe. It is better to be an 
outspoken atheist than a hypocrite. TTie idea, with 
the “learned,” in modern times, is that religion and 
metaphysics, and all search after a Supreme Being, 
are futile ; while, with the semi-educated, the idea 
seems to be that these things really have no basis at 
all and that their only value consists in the fact that 
they are strong motive powers for doing good to 
the world. For, if men believe in a God, they may 
become good, and moral, and so make good citizens. 
We cannot blame them, however, for holding such 
ideas, seeing that all the teaching in religion that 
these men get is simply to believe in an eternal 
rigmarole of words, without any substance behind 
them. They are asked to live merely upon words, 
and can they do it? Indeed, if they could, 1 should 
not have the least regard for human nature. Man 
wants truth, wants to experience truth for himself, to 
grasp it, to realise it, to feel it within his heart of 
hearts ; and then alone, declare the Vedas, “will 
all doubts vanish, all darkness be scattered, and all 



INTRODUCTORY 


crookedness be made straight” : “Ye children of 
immortality, even those who live in the highest 
sphere, the way is found ; there is a way out of all 
tl^is darkness, and that is by perceiving Him, Who is 
beyond all darkness, and there is no other ’way.” 
The science of Raja Yoga proposes to put before 
humanity a practical and scientifically worked-out 
method of reaching the truth in religion. 

Every science must have its own method of in- 
vestigation. If you want to become an astronomer, 
and sit down and cry, “Astronomy, Astronomy,” it 
will never come to you. But if you want to be an 
astronomer, you must go to the observatory, take a 
telescope, study the stars and planets, and then you 
will become an astronomer. The same with 
Chemistry. A certain method must be followed. 
You must go to the laboratory, take the different 
substances, mix them up, compound them, experi- 
ment with them, and out of that will come the 
knowledge of Chemistry. Thus each science must 
have its oWn methods of procedure, and the science 
of Raja Yoga has its own. 1 could preach you a 
thousand sermons, but they would not make you 
religious, until you first practised the yoga methods. 
For these are the ways to truth in religion advocated 
by the sages of all countries and of all ages, men 
pure and unselfish, who had no motive whatever but 
to do good to the world. They all declare that they 
have found some truth higher than what the senses 
can bring to us, and they challenge verification. 
They say to you, ‘Take up the methods and practise 
honestly, and then, if you do not find the desired 
results, you will have the right to say there is no 
truth in the claim ; but before you have done that. 



b 


RAJA YOGA 


you are not rational in denying the truth of these 
assertions/ So we must work faithfully, using the 
prescribed methods, and light will come. 

In acquiring knowledge we make use of genera- 
lisation, and all generalisations are based upon 
observation. We observe facts first, then generalise, 
and then draw our conclusions or principles. The 
knowledge of the mind, or of the internal nature of 
man and its workings, can never be had until we have 
the power, first, of observing the facts that are going 
on within it. It is very easy to obsen^e facts in the 
external world, and many thousand instruments have 
been invented to observe nature, from every point, 
but in the internal world no instrument can help us. 
Yet we all know that we must observe here too, in 
order to have a real science of the mind. Without a 
proper analysis, any science will be hopeless, mere 
theorising, and that is why all the psychologists have 
been quarrelling among themselves since the begin- 
ning of time, except those few who found out the 
proper means of observation. 

The science of Raja Yoga, in the first place, pro- 
poses to teach men such means for observing the 
internal states, and the instrument, it says, is the 
mind itself. The power of attention of the mind, 
when properly guided, and directed towards the 
internal world, will analyse mind itself, and illumine 
facts for us. For the powers of the mind, it says, are 
like rays of dissipated light ; when they are con- 
centrated, they illumine everything. And that, in 
fact, is the only source of knowledge that we have. 
Everyone is using it, both in the external and the 
internal world ; but, for the psychologist, this minute 
observation which the scientific man can throw upon 



INTROQJUCTORY 


/ 


the external world, will have to be thrown on the 
internal world ; and this requires a great deal of 
practice. From our childhood upwards we have 
been taught only to pay attention to external things, 
and never to things internal, and most of us have 
nearly lost the faculty of observing the internal 
mechanism. To turn the mind inside, stop it from 
going outside, and then to concentrate ail its powers, 
and throw them upon the mind itself, in order that it 
may know its own nature, so that it will analyse 
itself, as it were, is indeed very hard work. Yet 
that is the only way to anything like a scientific 
approach towards the subject. 

Now, what is the use of such knowledge * In 
the first place, knowledge itself is the highest ieward 
of knowledge, and in the second place, there is utility 
also in having it. It will take away all our misery. 
When, by analysing his own mind, man will come 
face to face with something within him which is never 
destroyed, something which is, by its own nature, 
eternally pure and perfect, he will no more be 
miserable, no more unhappy. For, all misery comes 
to us from fear, and from unsatisfied desire. But man 
will find then that he never dies, and therefore will 
have no more fear of death. Again, when he knows 
that he is perfect, he will have no more vain desires. 
Thus both the causes of fear being absent, there will 
be no more misery for him, but perfect bliss, even 
while he is in this body. 

We have told already that there is but one way 
by which to attain the knowledge of the mind, namely, 
that which is called concentration. The chemist 
in his laboratory concentrates all the energies of his 
mind intu one focus, and throws them out upon 



6 


RAJA YCXIA 


the materials he is analysing, and so finds out their 
secrets. The astronomer concentrates all the 
energies of his mind and projects them through his 
telescope upon the skies, and the stars, the sun, aod 
the moon, give up their secret to him. The more I 
can concentrate my thoughts on the matter on which 
I am talking to you, the more light shall 1 be able to 
throw upon it ; and the more you concentrate your 
thoughts on my words, the more clearly will you grasp 
what I have to say. 

How indeed Has all this knowledge in the world 
been gained but by the concentration of the powers 
of the mind? Nature is ready to give up her secrets 
if we only know how to knock at her gates and give 
them the necessary blow. The strength and force of 
the blow come through concentration. For, there is 
no limit to this power of the human mind. The 
more concentrated it is, the more power is brought 
to bear on one point, and that is the secret. 

It is easier to concentrate the mind on external 
things, for the mind naturally goes outwards ; but, in 
the case of religion, psychology, and metaphysics, 
the subj’ect and the object are one. For, the obj'ect 
here is also internal, the mind itself being the object 
of study. It is thus a case of mind studying mind. 
We all know that there is that power of the mind 
called reflection or introspection. As for instance, 1 
am talking to you, at the same time I am standing 
aside, as it were, like a second person, and knowing 
and hearing what I am talking. You work and think 
at the same time, and still another portion of your 
mind stands by and sees what you are thinking. The 
self-same reflective power of the mind should be 
concentrated and turned back upon the mind itself, 



INTRODUCTORY 


y 

and as the darkest places reveal their secrets before 
the penetrating rays of the sun, so will this con- 
centrated mind penetrate its own innermost secrets. 
Thus alone shall we come to the basis of all our 
beliefs, and attain real religion, and thus we shall 
perceive for ourselves whether we have souls or not, 
whether life is of five minutes or of eternity, whether 
there is a God in the universe or none. It will all be 
revealed to us then. This is what Raja Yoga 
proposes to teach. The goal of all its teaching is how 
to concentrate the mind, how to discover the hidden 
facts in our minds, and then generalising on thosr^ 
facts, how to form our own conclusions from them. 
It never asks us, therefore, what our religion is, 
whether we are Deists or Atheists, or whether we 
are Christians. Jews, or Buddhists. For, every human 
being, it says, has the right and the power to seek 
for religion ; and that every human being has the 
right to ask the reason why, and the power to have 
his question answered by himself, if he only takes 
the trouble. Sufficient to its purpose, therefore, that 
we are human beings. 

We see then, in the study of Raja Yoga no faith 
or belief is necessary. Believe nothing until you find 
it out for yourself — ^that is what it teaches us. For, 
truth requires no prop to make it stand. Do you 
mean to say that the facts of our awakened state 
require any dreams or imaginings to prove them? 
Certainly not. But the study of Raja Yoga takes a 
long time and constant practice. A part of this 
practice is physical. For, though the main part of it 
is mental, yet as we go along we shall find that it 
teaches that the mind is intimately connected with 
the body. And as it believes that the mind is simply 



10 


RAJA YOGA 


a finer part of the body, and that the mind acts upon 
the body, so in the same way it believes that the body 
must also act upon the mind. For if the body is 
sick, the mind becomes sick also, and if the body is 
healthy the mind also remains healthy and strong. 
Again, when one is angry, the mind becomes dis- 
turbed ; at the same time, when the mind is dis- 
turbed, the body also becomes disturbed. With the 
majority of mankind, however, the mind is entirely 
under the control of the body. For, the mind in 
them is very little developed. Truly speaking they 
are but very little removed from the lower animals, 
seeing that the power of control in them is little 
higher than that of the lower animals. Indeed, if 
we think about it we have very little command of 
our minds on account of the powerful control of our 
bodies upon us. Therefore to bring that command 
about, and get the control over both body and mind, 
we must take at first certain physical helps ; and 
when the body is sufficiently controlled, we can then 
attempt the manipulation of the mind. And when 
we have brought the mind sufficiently under control, 
we shall then be able to make it work as we like, and 
compel it to concentrate its powers as we desire. \ 
According to the Raja Yogi, the external world 
is but the gross form of the internal, or the subtle. 
For, the subtle or fine is always the cause of the 
gross effects. So the external world is the effect, 
and the internal the cause. In the same way the 
external forces are simply the grosser effects of the 
fine internal forces. Therefore, he who has dis- 
covered and learned to manipulate the internal forces 
will get the whole of nature under his control. The 
Yogi thus proposes to himself no less a task than ta 



INTRODUCTORY 


II 


master the whole universe, by getting control of the 
whole of nature. He wants to arrive at the point 
where what we call “nature’s laws” will have no 
infliTence over him, and where he will be able to get 
beyond them all He aims at nothing less than to 
be the master of the whole of nature, both internal 
and external. 

Again, the progress and civilisation of the 
human race has the same end in view, namely, the 
controlling of nature. 

But various races differ in their processes of 
reaching to that end. Just as in the same society 
some individuals want to get the control o^ the 
external nature, and others want the same of the 
internal nature, so it is with the different races ; 
some want to control the external nature, and some 
the internal. Some say that by controlling internal 
nature v^e shall be able to control everything in 
nature, and some, that by controlling external nature 
we will get the control of everything. Both of these 
views will found to be correct when carried to the 
extreme, because there can never be the distinction cf 
internal and external from the ultimate stand-point. 
There it is found to be a fictitious limitation that 
never existed. Both the externalists and the inter- 
nalists are destined therefore to meet at the same 
point, when they reach the extreme limit of their 
respective knowledge. And as the physicist, when 
he pushes his knowledge to its furthest limits, finds 
it melting away into Metaphysics, so the metaphysi- 
cian when doing the same, 'will find that what he 
calls mind and matter are but apparent distinctions, 
which will have to vanish for ever. 

The end and aim of all science is to find the 



12 


RAJA YCXIA 


unit, out of which all this manifold universe is being 
manufactured, the one that exists as the many. Raja 
Yoga proposes to start from the internal world, to 
study internal nature, and to get the control of the 
whole of nature, both internal and external, through 
the control of that. It is nothing new but a very old 
attempt. India has been its special stronghold, but 
it was also attempted by other nations. In Western 
countries it is thought to be mysticism, and people 
who wanted to practise it in ancient times were 
either burned or killed as witches and sorcerers. 
For various reasons, it fell, in India, into the hands 
of persons who destroyed ninety per cent of the 
knowledge, and of that portion which still remained, 
tried to make a great secret. In modern times, many 
so-called teachers of the Yoga have arisen every- 
where, in all countries, who seem to be worse than 
those of India, because the latter knew something, 
while these modem exponents know nothing. 

Anything that is secret and mysterious in these 
systems of Yoga should at once be rejected. The 
best guide in life is strength. In religion, as in every- 
thing else, discard everything that weakens you, and 
have nothing to do with it. All mystery-mongering 
weeJcens the human brain. Through that the science 
of Yoga has been well nigh destroyed, but never- 
theless it is really one of the grandest of sciences. 
From the time that it was discovered, more than four 
thousand years ago, it was perfectly delineated, 
formulated and preached in India ; and it is a strik- 
ing fact that the more modem the commentator, the 
greater the mistakes he makes, and the more ancient 
the writer the more rational he is. For, most of the 
modern writers have introduced all sorts of mystery 



INTRODUCTORY 


13 


into it. Thus it fell into the hands of a few persons 
who made a secret of it, instead of letting the full 
blaze of daylight and reason fall upon it, and they did 
s<5 that they might have the powers to themselves. 

At the very first, 1 want to make it clear that there 
is no mystery in what I preach. What little 1 know 
of the subject 1 will tell you. As far as I can reason 
it out 1 will do so, and what 1 do not know or cannot 
make clear to your reason, of that 1 will simply tell 
you what the books on Raja Yoga say. It is wrong 
to believe blindly. Therefore exercise your own 
reason and judgment ; practise, and then see for 
yourself whether Xvhat the books teach are corre -.t or 
not. Take up the study of this science as you would 
any other science of a material nature, and remember 
there is no mystery and no danger in it. For as far 
as it is true it ought to be preached in broad day- 
light, and the danger comes from the attempt to 
mystify the thing. 

Before proceeding further, 1 will state to you a 
little of the Sdnkhya philosophy, on which the whole 
of Raja Yopa is based. According to that philosophy, 
perception comes to us through the five external in- 
struments, such as, the eyes etc.; they carry it to the 
organs within, the organs to the mind, the mind to 
the determinative faculty, and from that the Purusha 
or the soul receives it, and gives the order back, as 
it were ; and the order comes back to the external 
instruments through all the stages mentioned above, 
only, in the reverse order. Thus sensations are 
received. With the exception of the Purusha all 
of them are material, but the mind is of much finer 
material than the external instruments. That material 
of which the mind is composed becomes grosser. 



14 


RAJA YOGA 


and becomes what is called the Tanm&trcia or subtle 
matter. Becoming still grosser it forms itself again 
into the external material. That is the psychology 
of the Sankhya. So that, between the intellect and 
the grosser matter outside, there is only a difference 
in degree. The Purnsha is the only thing which 
is immaterial. The mind therefore is an instrument 
in the hands of the soul, as it were, through which 
the soul catches external objects. This mind is 
changing and vacillating constantly, and it can either 
attach itself at once to several organs, or to one, or 
to none, for instance, if 1 hear the clock with great 
attention, 1 will not perhaps see an3^hing, although 
my eyes may be open, showing that the mind was 
not attached to the seeing organ, although it was 
to the hearing one. In the same way, the mind can 
be attached to all the organs simultaneously. The 
mind again has the reflexive power of looking back 
into its own depths. This reflexive power is what 
the Yogi wants to cultivate. By concentrating the 
powers of the mind, and turning them inward, he 
seeks to know what is happening inside. TTiere is 
thus no question of mere belief in what we have 
stated so far, but it is the analysis of certain philo- 
sophers. Modern physiologists will tell you that the 
eyes etc. are not the organs, but that the organs are 
the nerve centres in the brain. They will tell you 
moreover, that these centres are formed of the same 
material as the brain itself. So you see, they are at 
one with what the Sdn]^hyas tell you ; but they 
make their statement from the physical side, while 
the Sdnkhyas from the psychological side ; yet both 
statements are the same. Beyond this point of 
agreement, however, we shall have to demonstrate. 



INTRODUCTORY 


15 


The Yogi proposes to himself to attain to that 
fine state in which he will be able to perceive all the 
formative stages of a perception. For, says the Yogi, 
there must be in us separate mental perceptions of 
all the different stages of it ; hence why shall we not 
perceive consciously how the sensation is travelling 
through the organs, how the mind is receiving it, how 
it is going to the determinative faculty, and lastly, 
how this faculty gives it to the Purusha} There is a 
method, however, by which we can do so. And 
as, he says, each science has its own method ard 
until we follow that we can never understand it, so 
is the case with Raja Yoga. 

Certain regulations as to food are necessary to 
the student of Raja Yoga ; we must use that kind of 
food which brings us the purest mind. If you go 
into a menagerie you will find the results of par- 
taking different kinds of food demonstrated at once. 
You see the elephants, huge animals, but calm and 
gentle ; but if you go towards the cages of the lions 
and tigers you will find them restless, showing how 
much difference of character has been produced by 
food in them. All the forces that are working in 
this body have been produced out of food ; we see 
that every day. If you begin to fast, your body will 
get weak and your physical forces will suffer ; then 
after a few days, the mental forces will also begin 
to suffer. First, your memory will fail. Then will 
come a point, when you are not able to think, much 
less to pursue any course of reasoning. We have, 
therefore, to take care what sort of food we eat at the 
beginning ; but when we have got strength enough, 
and when our practice is well advanced, we need 
not be so careful in this respect. The plant must be 



16 


RAJA YOGA 


hedged round, while it is growing, lest it be injured ; 
but when it becomes a tree the hedges are taken 
away ; for then it is strong enough to withstand all 
assaults. * 

A Yogi must avoid the two extremes of luxury 
and austerity. He must not fast, or torture his flesh. 
For, says the Gita, “He who fasts and he who eats 
too much, he who keeps awake and he who sleeps 
much, he who works too much and he who does no 
work, none of these can be Yogis.** 



CHAPTER 11. 


The First Steps. 

Raja Yoga is divided into eight steps. The first 
is Yama ; that is to say, the practice of non-killing, 
truthfulness, non-stealing, continence, and non- 
receiving of anything, even if it be a gift, that is con- 
ducive to luxury. The next is Niyama ; that it to say, 
the practice of the virtues of cleanliness, content- 
ment, mortification, study, and self-surrender t-j God. 
Then come the steps Asana or posture, Prandydma 
or control of Prdna, Pratydhdra or making the mind 
introspective, Dhdrand^ox concentration, Dhydna or 
meditation, and Samddhi or super-consciousness. 

The Yama and Niyama, as we see, are moral 
trainings ; without these as the basis, no practice of 
Yoga will succeed. As these virtues become estab- 
lished in the Y ogi he will begin to realise the fruits of 
his practice and Xvithout them it will never bear fruit. 
A Yogi must not think of injuring anyone by thought, 
word or deed, and this applies not only to men, but 
to all animals. Again mercy shall not be for men 
alone, but shall go beyond and embrace the whole 
world 

The next step is Asana, posture. A series of 
exercises, physical and mental, is to be gone through 
every day, until certain higher states are reached. It 
is therefore quite necessary that we should find a 
posture in which our body can remain long without 
feeling any inconvenience. And that posture which 

2 



18 


RAJA YOGA 


will be found easiest will have to be taken by each 
one when practising Yoga. For, it may be very easy 
for one man to think, remaining in a certain posture, 
which may be very difficult for another. We ’will find 
later on that during the study and practice of this 
psychological Yoga there will be a good deal of 
changes going on in the body. Nerve-currents will 
be displaced and find new channels. New sorts of 
vibrations will begin, and the whole constitution will 
be remodelled, at is were. The main part of these 
changes, however, will lie along the spinal column. 
Therefore the one thing necessary for the posture to 
be taken is to hold the spinal column free by sitting 
erect and by holding the three parts of the body, the 
chest, the neck and the head in a straight line. Let 
the whole weight of the body be supported by the 
ribs, and then you shall have an easy natural posture, 
with the spinf straight. You will find on experiment 
that you cannot think very high thoughts with the 
chest in. This portion of the Yoga is almost similar 
to the Hatha Yoga, which deals entirely with the 
physical body and the one end of which is to make 
the physical body strong. We have nothing to do 
with that Yoga nevertheless, because the practices 
taught by it are very difficult, and cannot be learned 
in a day, and, after all, do not lead to any spiritual 
growth. You will find many of these practices in 
Delsarte and other teachers, as for instance, placing 
the body in different postures. But the object of 
them is physical, and not psychological ; and so far 
they are all true. For there is not a single muscle in 
the body over which man cannot establish perfect 
control by practice ; even the heart can be made to 
stop or go on at his bidding ; and, in the same way. 



THE FIRST STEPS 


19 


each part of the organism can be made to obey him. 
The result of the practices of Hatha Yoga, therefore, 
is to make men live long. Health being thus the 
chief idea, the one goal of the Hatha Yogi, he is 
determined not to fall sick, and he never does. He 
lives long ; a hundred yeeurs is nothing to him. He 
is quite young and fresh \srhen he is a hundred and 
fifty years old, without a single hair turned grey. But 
that is all. A Banyan tree lives sometimes to five 
thousand years, but it is a Banyan tree and nothing 
more. So, if a man lives long, he is only a healthy 
animal. One or two ordinary lessons of the Hatha 
Yogis, however, are very useful. As for instance, 
some of you will find it a good thing for headaches 
to drink cold water through the nose as soon as you 
get up in the morning ; your brain will be nice and 
cool for the whole day, and you will never catch cold. 
It is very easy to do so by putting your nose into the 
water, and making a pump action in your throat. 

After one has learned to sit erect and firmly one 
has to perform, according to certain schooL, a 
practice called the purifying of the nerves. TTiis part 
of the practices has been rejected by some as not 
belonging to Raja Yoga, but as so great an authority 
as the commentator, Shankaracharya, advises it, I 
think it fit to mention it here, and 1 will quote his own 
words upon the subject from his commentary to the 
Shvetashvatara Upanishad, “The mind whose dross 
has been cleared away by Prandyama, becomes fixed 
in Brahman ; therefore Pr&nay&ma is being pointed 
out here. The nerves are to be purified at first, and 
then will come the power to practise Pr&ndy&ma, 
Stopping the right nostril with the thumb, fill in air 
through the left nostril according to your capacity ; 



20 


RAJA YOGA 


then, without any interval, throw the air out through 
the right nostril, closing the left one. Again, inhaling 
through the right nostril eject through the left, ac- 
cording to capacity ; practising this three or five 
times at four intervals of the day, — ^before dawn, 
during mid-day. in the evening, and at mid-night, — 
in fifteen days or a month purity of the nerves is 
attained ; then begins Pr&ndyama'' 

Practice, however, is absolutely necessary. You 
may sit doWh and listen to me by the hour, every 
dav, but if you do not practice, you Will not get one 
step nearer lo realisation. It all depends on practice. 
We can never understand the teachings until we ex- 
perience them for ourselves. We will have to see 
and feel them for ourselves. And mere listening 
to explanations and theories will never do. There 
are, however, several obstructions to practice. TTie 
first and foremost of them is an unhealthy body ; if 
the body is not in a fit state, the practice will be 
obstructed. Therefore we shall have to keep the 
body in good health ; we shall have to take care of 
what we eat and drink, and what we do. Always 
use mental efforts, as in what is usually called 
“Christian Science,*’ in America — to keep the body 
strong. But after that think no further of the body. 
Never forget that health is only a means to an end. 
For if health were our only end in life we would be 
like animals ; and animals rarely become unhealthy. 

The second obstruction is doubt ; and for the 
matter of that, we always feel doubtful about things 
we do not see. Man cannot live upon Words, how- 
soever much he may try. So, doubt comes to us as 
to whether there is any truth in these things or not ; 
and even the best of us will doubt sometimes. A few 



THE FIRST STEPS 


21 


days of practice, notwithstanding, will bring to you 
enough glimpse of the truth to give you encourage- 
jnent and hope, as a commentator on Yoga Philo- 
sophy remarked long ago : “When one single thing 
about what it says, is realised, howsoever little it may 
be, that itself will give us faith in the whole of the 
teachings of Yoga.*’ As for instance, after the first 
few months of training and practice, you 'will begin 
to find perhaps that you can read another’s thoughts 
and that they come to you in picture-forms. Or 
perhaps you will see and hear something happening 
at a long distance, when you concentrate you^ mind 
and try to do so. Or that, when you concentrate 
your thoughts on the tip of your nose, you will begin 
to smell most beautiful fragrance, thus making you 
convinced that there are certain mental perceptions 
that can be perceived without the contact of physical 
objects. Such little glimpses will come to you from 
time to lime enough to give you faith, strength, and 
hope. But you must always remember that these 
are but means to convince you of your progress and 
that the aim, end, and goal, of all this trail ing is 
liberation of the soul. Absolute control of nature, 
and nothing short of it, must be our goal. We must 
be the masters of ourselves, and not of nature ; no, 
neither the body nor the mind, for the matter of that. 
Aye, we must never forget that they belong to us 
and not we to them. 

A god and a demon once went to learn about the 
Self from a great sage. They studied with him for a 
long time, and at last the sage told each one of them, 
“Thou thyself art the Being thou art seeking.” Both 
of them thought at first that their bodies were the 
Self ; and returning to their people, both of them 



22 


RAJA YCXiA 


said, “We have learned everything that is to be 
learned ; eat, drink, and be merry ; for we are <he 
Self and there is nothing beyond us.“ Now the 
nature of the demon was ignorant and clouded, so 
he never inquired any further, but was perfectly 
satisfied with the idea that he was God, and that by 
Self nothing more was meant than the body. But the 
god had a purer nature. He at first committed the 
mistake in thinking the idea that “I, the body, am 
the Brahman, so keep it strong, healthy and well- 
dressed, and give it all sorts of bodily enjoyments.” 
But, in a few days, he found out that that could not 
be the meaning of the words of the sage, his master, 
and that there must be a higher interpretation of his 
teachings. So he came back and said, “Sir, did you 
teach me that this body is the Self? If so, I see all 
bodies die ; but can the Self die?“ The sage said, 
“Find it out for yourself ; thou art That.” Then the 
god thought that the vital forces which work the body 
were what the sage meant. But after a time, he 
found out the fact that the vital forces remain strong 
when one eats, and become weak when one starves. 
The god then went back to the sage and said, “Sire, 
do you mean that these vital forces are the self?** 
The sage said. “Find out for yourself ; thou art 
That.” The god returned once more, and thought 
that the mind, perhaps, was the Self. But in a few 
days he reflected that thoughts were so variable, now 
good, now bad ; the mind, therefore, was too change- 
able to be the Self. He went back to the sage and 
said, “Sir, I do not think that the mind can be the 
changeless Self ; did you mean that?” “No,** replied 
the sage, “thou art That ; find it out for yourself.*’ 
The god went back, and at last found out the 



THE FIRST STEPS 


23 


Self that Was beyond all though t, — the One that was 
without birth or death, and whom the sword could 
not pierce, or the fire bum, and whom the air could 
not dry, or the water melt — ^the One that was begin- 
riingless, birthless, immovable — ^the One that vras 
intangible, omniscient, and omnipotent Being. And 
so the God realised at last that he was that Self 
beyond the body and the mind, and was satisfied ; 
but the poor demon did not get at the truth, owing 
to his fondness for the body. 

There are in this world many such demoniac 
natures, but still there are some of the nature oT 
gods. Thus it is that when one proposes to teach a 
science that increases the power of sense enjoyment 
in man, one finds multitudes ready for it ; but when 
one undertakes to show mankind the supreme goal 
of life, one finds that there are almost none. Very 
few indeed have the power to grasp the highest and 
fewer still have the patience to attain to it ; and 
those few know this also that even if the body be 
kept for a thousand years the result will be the 
same, tor, in the end, when the forces that hold rt 
together go away, the body must fall. No man was 
ever born who could stop his body from changing 
for a single moment. For, body is the name of a 
series of changes, and *‘as in a river the masses of 
water are changing before you every moment and 
new masses are coming in, keeping always the same 
form, so is it with this body.” Yet the body must 
be kept strong and healthy ; for, it is the only instru- 
ment we have with which to reach the goal. 

The human body, again, is the greatest of its 
kind in the' unwerse, and a human being the greatest 
being. Man is higher than all the animals and all 



24 


RAJA YCXiA 


the angels, so say the Scriptures. None is greater 
than man, for even the Devas or gods Vill have to 
come dovv^n again and attain salvation through a 
human body. For, man alone attains to perfection, 
and not even the Devas. According to the Jews 
and the Mahommedans God created man after 
creating the angels and everything else ; and after 
creating him He asked the angels to come and 
salute him ; all did so, except Iblis ; so God cursed 
Iblis, and he became Satan. Behind this allegory is 
the great truth, that this human birth is the greatest 
birth that one can have. The lower creation and 
the animals are dull, and are manufactured mostly 
out of Tamas. Therefore the animals cannot have 
any high thoughts. The angels or Devas, again, 
can never attain to direct freedom without taking 
human birth on account of the excess of enjoyment 
that prevails on their sphere. In human society, in 
the same way, too much wealth, or too much 
poverty, is a great impediment to the higher deve- 
lopment of the soul. It is from the middle classes 
that the great ones of the world come. For, here 
the forces are very equally adjusted and balanced. 

Returning to our subject, we come next to 
PranQyama, or controlling the breath. One might 
say, what has that to do with concentrating the 
powers of the mind ? But that will not be right, for 
breath is like the fly-vheel of this machine. In a big 
engine you will find the fly-wheel moving first, then 
that motion is being conveyed to finer and finer 
machinery until the finest and the most delicate 
mechanism in it is in motion in accordance. The 
breath is like that fly-wheel, supplying and regulating 
the motive power to everything in our body. 



THE FIRST STEPS 


25 


There was once a minister to a great king. He 
fell into disgrace, and the king, as a punishment, 
ordered him to be shut up in the top of a very high 
tower. This was done, and the minister was left 
there to perish. He had a faithful wife, however, 
and at night she came to the tower and called to her 
husband at the top to know what she could do to 
help him. He told her to return to the tower the 
following night and bring with her a long rope, a 
stout twine, some pack-thread, some silken thread, 
a beetle, and a little honey. Wondering much the 
good wife obeyed her husband, and brought him 
the desired articles. The husband directed her to 
attach the silken thread firmly to the beetle, then to 
smear his horns with a drop of honey, and to set 
him free on the wall of the tower, with his head 
pointing upwards. She obeyed all those instruc- 
tions, and the beetle started on his long journey. 
Smelling the honey before him he slowly crept 
onwp'^d and onward, in the hope of reaching it, 
until at last he reached the top of the tower, when 
the minister grasped him and got possession v^f one 
end of the silken thread. He told his wife then to 
tie the other end to the pack-thread, and after he had 
drawn up the pack-thread he repeated the process 
with the stout twine, and lastly With the rope. Then 
the rest was easy. The minister descended from the 
tower by means of the rope, and made his escape. 
The motion produced by breath in this body of ours, 
is the “silken thread.” Laying hold of that, and 
learning to control it, we grasp the pack-thread of the 
nerve-currents ; and then, from them we get at the 
stout twine of our thoughts, and lastly, at the rope of 
Prana, controlling which we reach freedom. 



26 


RAJA YOGA 


Indeed we do not know much about our oWn 
bodies ; we cannot know. For, at best we can take 
a dead body, and cut it in pieces, and there are some 
who can take a live animal and cut it in pieces, in 
order to see what is inside the body. Still, that has 
nothing to do directly with our own bodies^ and so we 
know very little about ‘what is going on inside them. 
And why do we not do so? Because our attention is 
not discriminating enough to catch the very fine 
movements that are going on within. We can know 
of them only as full- formed perceptions of the mind, 
after they have passed through the more subtle 
stages of formation. To get hold of them before- 
hand, we must have the power of perceiving very 
fine things, and for securing that kind of subtle per- 
ception, we shall have to begin with the grosser per- 
ceptions and get hold of that one amongst them 
which is setting the whole engine in motion. And 
that is the Prana, the most obvious manifestation of 
which is breath. Therefore, along with breath, we 
will have slowly to enter the body, and that will 
enable us to find out the subtle forces, that is to say, 
the nerve-currents, that are moving all over the body. 
And as soon as we perceive them and learn to feel 
them, we shall begin to get control over them, and 
through them over the whole body. Again, the mind 
is also being set in motion by these different nerve- 
currents. Therefore, by controlling them we shall at 
last reach that state where we will have perfect 
control over both body and mind, making them both 
our servants. Knowledge here is poWer, and literally 
so, and we shall have to get this power. So we must 
begin at the very beginning, and practise Pranayama, 
or the restraining of the Pr&na. The Prdnaydma, is a 



THE FIRST STEPS 


tl 


long subject, and will take several lessons to illustrate 
it thoroughly. Therefore, we shall take it part by part, 
and see gradually the reasons for each exercise and 
the forces that are set in motion in the body by it. 
The things that Raja Yoga teaches will purely come 
to us, but they will require constant practice ; and the 
proof of their correctness will come with practice. 
For, no amount of reasoning that 1 can give you, 'will 
be sufficient proof to you, until you have demonstra- 
ted them for yourselves. But as soon as you begin to 
feel the nerve-currents in motion Within you, your 
doubts will vanish, and that will come to you after 
days of hard practice. So you must practise twice at 
least every day, and the best times for it are towards 
the morning and the evening. For, when night passes 
into day, and day into night, they pass through a 
state of relative calmness. The early morning and the 
early evening, therefore, are the two hours when 
calmness overshadows everything in nature. And 
your body and mind also will have the like tendency 
to become calm at those times. We must take ad- 
vantage of that natural condition, and practise Yoga 
in those times. Make it a rule not to eat anything 
until you have practised the lessons ; for if you do 
this, the sheer force ofhunger will break your lazi- 
ness. In India, they teach children never to eat until 
they have practised their lessons on Yoga and wor- 
shipped God. It becomes natural to them after a 
time and they never feel hungry until they have 
bathed and gone through the practices. 

Those of you who can afford it will do better to 
have a room for this practice separate. Do not sleep 
in that room, for it must be kept holy. Never enter 
the room until you have bathed, and are perfectly 



28 


RAJA YOGA 


clean in body and mind. Place flowers in that room 
always, for they are the best surroundings for a Yogi 
— also pictures that are pleasing. Burn incense there 
morning and evening, and do not indulge in unholy 
thoughts in that room. Allow only those persons to 
enter it who are of the same thought as yourself. 
Then by and by there will come an atmosphere of 
holiness in the room, and when you are miserable, 
sorrowful and doubtful, or when your mind is dis- 
turbed in any way, the very act of entering that room 
will make you feel composed. Thus it was ho\v the 
ideas of the temple and thechurch were originated, 
and in some temples and churches you will find that 
sort of holy atmosphere even now, but in the 
majority of them that has been lost. Thus the idea 
in having such a room is that by keeping holy 
vibrations there the place will become and remain 
illumined. Those who cannot afford to have a room 
set apart as aforesaid can practise Yoga anywhere 
they like. Sit always in a straight posture while 
practising and the first thing to do is to send a 
current of holy thought to all creation ; repeat 
mentally : “Let all beings be peaceful ; let all beings 
be blissful.’* Send such currents of thought to the 
East, South, North and West. The more you do that, 
the better you will feel yourself. For you will find in 
the long run that the easiest way to make yourselves 
healthy is to see that others are healthy, and the 
easiest way to make yourselves happy is to see that 
others are happy. After doing that, those who 
believe in God should pray — but not for money, or 
health, or for going to heaven, but pray always for 
knowledge and light. For every other prayer is 
selfish. Then the next thing to do is to think of your 



THE FIRST STEPS 


29 


own body as strong and healthy. Think that it is 
best fitted to help you to cross this ocean of life. 
Freedom is never to be reached by the weak ; so 
throw away all weakness ; tell your body and mind 
that they are strong, and have unbound^^d faith and 
hope in yourself. 



CHAPTER 111. 


Prana. 

Pr^nayctma is not, as many think, something 
related solely to breath ; indeed, breath has very 
little to do with it. For breathing is only one of the 
many exercises through which we get to the real 
Pranaydma, Prandyama means the control of 
Prana. According to the philosophers of India, the 
whole universe is composed of two materials, one of 
which they call Ak.dsa. It is the omnipresent, all- 
penetrating existence. Everything that has form, 
everything that is the result of compounds, is evolved 
out of Akosa. It is the Al^dsa that has become the 
air, the sun, the earth, the moon, the stars, and the 
comets. It is the Ak^sa that has become the human 
body, the animal body, the plant body, and indeed, 
every form that we see and sense and everything 
that exists. But the Ak.dsa itself can never be per- 
ceived ; it is subtle beyond all ordinary perception 
and can only be seen when it has become gross and 
has taken form. At the beginning of creation there 
was nothing else but Akosa ; at the end of the cycle 
the solids, the liquids and the gases will all melt into 
the Ahidsa again. And during the next creation 
everything will similarly proceed out of i41cdsa. 

By ’what power is the Ak^sa being thus manu- 
factured into the universe ? By the power of Prdna, 
Just as the Akasa is the infinite omnipresent material 
of the universe, so is the Prdna the infinite, omni- 



PRANA 


31 


present manifesting power of it. At the beginning 
of a cycle all forms of energy are being manufactured 
by Pr&na and at the end of it they resolved back into 
tKe Prana until they are evolved out of it again, in 
the next cycle. It is the Prana, therefore, that is 
manifesting itself as gravitation, as the actions of the 
body, as the nerve-currents and as thought-force. 
From thought, down to the lowest physical force, 
everything is thus the manifestation of Prana. 
Therefore the sum-total of all the forces in the 
universe, mental or physical, when resolved back to 
its original state, is called Prana. “When there was 
neither aught nor naught, when darkness was cover- 
ing darkness, what existed then ? The A kasa existed 
without motion.” — The physical motion of the Prdna 
remains stopped at the time, but it exists all the same. 
There can be no doubt about it ; for, we know from 
modern science that the different forms of energies 
that are in the universe are interchangeable but in- 
destructible ; and that the sum-total of them remains 
the same throughout. So, at the end of a cycle these 
energies quiet down and become potential, and, at 
the beginning of the next one they start up again, 
strike upon the A kasa, and evolve out of the A kasa 
the various material forms. And, as the A kasa 
changes, so the Prana itself changes again into all 
the different manifestations of energy. 

We have told before that the knowledge and 
control of Prana is really what is meant by Prana- 
yama. Therefore, that opens to us the door to 
almost unlimited power. Suppose, for instance, one 
understood the Prdna perfectly, and could control it, 
what power on earth could there be that would not 
be his? He would be able to move the sun and the 



32 


RAJA YOGA 


stars out of their places, and to control everything 
whatsoever in the universe. From the minute atoms 
to the biggest suns, everything would then be under 
his control. That indeed is the end and aim of 
Pr&nayama and when the Yogi becomes perfect, 
there will be nothing in nature not under his control. 
If he orders the gods to come, they will come at his 
bidding ; or if he asks the departed to come they 
will come. All the forces of nature will obey him 
then as his slaves I And the ignorant seeing such 
powers of the Yogi, call them miracles. The one 
peculiarity of the Hindu mind is that it always in- 
quires for the last possible generalisation, leaving the 
details to be worked out afterwards. The question 
was raised in the Vedas — “What is that, knowing 
which we shall know everything?” And since then 
all books on philosophy that have ever been written 
by the Hindus, have always struggled to find out and 
prove that there exists something by knowing which 
everything becomes known to man. But you will 
say, if a man wants to know the whole of this uni- 
verse he must know every individual grain of sand 
even bit by bit and that means infinite time. There- 
fore, how can he know all of them and how can 
knowledge be? How is it possible then for a man 
to be all-knowing through the knowledge of the 
particulars? In answer to this the Yogis say that 
behind these particular manifestations there is a 
generalisation. Behind all particular ideas there 
stands a generalised and abstract principle ; grasp it, 
and you have grasped everything. The whole of 
this universe has thus been generalised, in the 
Vedas, into One Absolute Existence. And he who 
has grasped that Existence has grasped the whole 



PRANA 


3i 

universe. All forces have similarly been generalised 
into Prana. And he who has grasped the Prana 
has grasped all the forces of the universe, mental 
and physical. He will not only control his own body 
and mind, but all bodies and minds that exist, 
because Prana is the generalised form of all the 
different manifestations of force and he has con- 
trolled it. 

The control of Prana being thus the one idea of 
Pranaydma, all the trainings and exercises advocated 
by Raja Yoga are for that one end. Each man there- 
fore must begin them from where he stands, and 
learn to control the things that are nearest tr him. 
The body is nearer to us than anything else in the 
universe, and the mind, the nearest of them all. TTie 
Prana which is working the mind and the body, 
therefore, is the nearest of all the forms of Prdna in 
the universe. This little wave of Prdna which re- 
presents our own energies, mental and physical, is 
the nearest wave to us of all, that exist in the infinite 
ocean of Pidna, and if we can succeed in control- 
ling that little wave, then alone can we hope lo 
control tfie whole ocean of Prdna. The Yogi who 
can do this, attzuns to perfection, and no power that 
binds man is any longer his master. He becomes 
almighty, and all-knoWing almost. 

There are sects in every country who have 
attempted to control Prdna. In the West, at present, 
there are the Mind-healers, the Faith-healers, the 
Spiritualists, the Christian Scientists, the Hypnotists, 
etc., and if we go to analyse them we shall find at 
the back of each the claim to control Prdna, whether 
they know it or not. If you boil all their theories 
down, the residuum will be that. For it is the same 

3 



34 


RAJA YOGA 


force indeed that they are manipulating, only 
unknowingly. They have stumbled on the dis- 
covery of that force, but do not know its nature. 
So, truly speaking, they are unconsciously using the 
same poWer which the Yogi uses, and which comes 
from controlling Prana. 

The PrAna is the vital force in every being, and 
the finest and the highest manifestation of all its 
actions is thought. Again, thought as we see it is not 
everything of it. For there is that class of thought 
which we call instinct or unconscious thought, and 
which is to be found in the lowest plane of mental 
action. As for instance, if a mosquito stings us, 
without thinking, our hand will strike it, automati- 
cally or instinctively. That is a class of expression 
of the thought-power. All the reflex actions of our 
body belong to this plane of thought. There is then 
the higher plane of conscious thought, in which we 
reason, judge, think, and see the pros and cons of 
things. Yet even that is not the whole of the mani- 
festations of thought-poWer. We know that reason 
is limited. There is a limit to which it can go and 
beyond that it can never reach. The circle within 
which it runs is very limited indeed. Yet, at the 
same time, we find facts rush into that circle. Like 
the coming of comets certain things come within it, 
and we are sure they come from outside the limit of 
our reason. We are sure that the causes of the phe- 
nomena thus protruding in that small limit are out- 
side of that limit. Our reason and intellect cannot 
reach the sources of them, but, says the Yogi, we 
need not despair for that. For the mind can exist on 
a still higher plane, — the super-conscious. And when 
the mind has attained to that state, which is 



PRANA 


35 


called Sam&dhi or super-consciousness by perfect 
concentration, it goes beyond the limits of reason, 
and comes face to face with facts Which no instinct 
or reason can ever know. By the trained manipu- 
lation of the subtle forces of the body, which are but 
different manifestations of Prana, you will be able to 
give a push to the mind to go higher up into the 
super-conscious plane and to act from that plane. 

Every plane of existence in the universe is a 
contiguous mass. Speaking physically, the universe 
is one ; there is no difference between the sun and 
you. The scientist will tell you, it is only a fiction to 
say the contrary. There is no real difference between 
the table and me ; the table is one point in the mass 
of matter, and I another point. Each one of the 
different forms represents, as it were, a whirlpool in 
the infinite ocean of matter, and none of them are 
constant. The universe with its constantly changing 
material forms, is like a rushing stream where there 
are millions of whirlpools, the water in each of which 
is different every moment, by the passing out of old 
particles of vvater and the coming in of fresh ones, on 
account of the turning process. A mass of matter 
goes round and round, entering each one of these 
material whirlpools by turns. As for instance, it 
might be for a few years into the body of a man, then 
get whirled out in the form of, may be, an animal, 
from that after a few years, it might rush again into 
another whirlpool, called a lump of mineral, and so 
Dn. It is a constantly changing process and not a 
single body is constant. There is no such thing as 
my body, or your body, or any other body, except in 
words. It is one homogeneous huge mass of matter, 
one point of which is called the moon, another the 



36 


RAJA YCXiA 


sun, another a man, another the earth, another a 
plant, another a mineral, and so on. Not a single one 
of these points is constant, but all of them going 
through the changing process ; it is matter, eternally 
concreting and disintegrating. So it is With the mind 
which is made up of subtle matter like the ether, in 
an intense state of vibration under the action of 
PrSna. There in the realm of that subtle matter you 
will find the same kind of one unbroken homogene- 
ous whole, and if you can manage to get yourself to 
feel simply that kind of subtle vibration, for a time, 
you will see and feel then that the whole universe is 
composed of such subtle vibrations of Prana, Drugs 
have the power sometimes to bring us to that condi- 
tion. Many of you may remember the incident with 
Sir Humphrey Davy, when the laughing gas over- 
powered him, during a lecture before his class, and 
he remained motionless and stupefied ; and, how he 
said afterwards that he felt at the time, as if the 
whole universe was made up of ideas ! It was 
because the gross vibrations of Prana had ceased 
for him and only the subtle vibrations of it were 
present to him at the time. That was how he saw 
the whole universe to be like an ocean of ideas and 
himself and every one else in it, to be but little 
thought- whirlpools in that ocean. 

Thus, in the universe of thought we find the sort 
of unity and contiguity that we find in the universe 
of gross matter, and at last, when we reach to the 
Self, we shall find the Self to be One. For beyond 
all motion there is but One. In manifested motion 
there is only a unity, while beyond motion there can 
be nothing but the Absolute, the One without a 
second. Tliese facts can no more be denied, as 



PRANA 


37 


modern science has demonstrated them. Modern 
physics has demonstrated that the sum- total of the 
energies in the universe is the same throughout. It 
has proved also that the sum-total of energy exists in 
two forms. It becomes potential for a time, by 
being toned down and calmed, and then it comes 
out for a period and manifests itself as all the various 
forces. And this process of manifestation and going 
back to the quiet state, is going on again and again 
through eternity. The Yogi calls that sum-total of 
energy the Prana, and the control of Prana is what 
is called Pran6yama, 

The Prcin&ydma as before stated, has very little 
to do with breathing. The most obvious manifesta- 
tion of Prana in the human body is in the motion of 
the lungs For, if that is stopped, all the other mani- 
festations of force in the body will immediately stop. 
There were persons who trained themselves in such 
a manner that their bodies were alive even after that 
motion was slopped, or who could bury themselves 
for months and live without breathing. But, for all 
ordinary persons, the movement of the lungs is the 
principal gross motion in the body. To reach the 
subtle we must take help of the gross and so on 
travel slowly towards the most subtle, until we gain 
our point. The motion of the lungs being like that 
of the fly-wheel, in setting the other forces of the 
body in motion, we shall have to get hold of that 
first, in our attempts to control Prana, So P randy dma 
has come to mean the controlling of this motion of 
the lungs. This motion again is associated with 
breath. We must remember however that breath 
does not produce it, but on the contrary it is pro- 
ducing breath. For this motion draws in the air by 



38 


RAJA YCXiA 


pump action. The Prana is moving the lungs » and 
that motion of the lungs is drawing in the air. So 
Pranay&ma is not breathing, but it is the controlling 
of that muscular power which moves the lungS;. 
Or in other words, it is the controlling of that mus- 
cular power which is going out through the nerves 
to the muscles, and from thence to the lungs, making 
them move in a certain manner. For it is the Prana 
which we shall have to control by the practice of 
Prdn^yama, And when this action of the Prana has 
become controlled, then we shall find that all the 
other actions of the Prana in the body will slowly 
come under our control. 1 myself have seen men 
who have controlled almost every muscle of the 
body. There is nothing very strange in that. For, 
if I have control over certain muscles of the body, 
why shall I not have it then over every muscle and 
nerve of the same? What impossibility is there? 
We have lost control over them at present. As for 
instance, wc cannot move the ears at will, but we 
know that animals can. W^e have not that power 
because we do not exercise it. This is what is called 
Atavism. We know it however that powers which 
have become thus latent can be brought back to 
manifestation again. By hard work and practice 
certain motions of the body which are now dormant 
can be brought back under perfect control. It stands 
to reason, therefore, that there is no impossibility, but, 
on the other hand, every probability, that each part 
of our body can be brought under perfect control. 
The Yogi does this through Pr&nayama. Some of 
you have read perhaps in the books on Yoga, that 
in Prdndydma, when drawing in the breath, you must 
fill your whole body with Prdna. In the English 



PRANA 


39 


translations of them Prana has been rendered into 
breath, and you must have felt at a loss to find how 
that is to be done. The fault is with the translator. 
I^or every part of the body can really be filled with 
Prana, or the vital force, and when you are able to 
do that, you can control the whole body. All sick- 
ness and misery felt in the body will be perfectly con- 
trolled, and you will be able to control another’s 
body even ; and in that lies the secret of healing. 
For everything is infectious in this world, good and 
bad. Therefore, if your body be in a certain state of 
tension, it will have the tendency to produce the 
same kind of tension in others. Thus if you are 
strong and healthy, you will have the tendency to 
produce health and strength in those that live near 
you, but if you are sick and weak, you will have the 
tendency to make them the same. The vibration of 
your body will be, as it were, conveyed to their 
bodies. Thus in the case of one man trying to heal 
another, it c^^m be done simply by transferring his 
own health to the other. This, however, is the pri 
mitive method of healing, for consciously as we^l as 
unconsciously, can health be so transmitted. The 
weak man, living with a strong man, will thus be 
made stronger, whether he knows it or not. But 
when a strong man tries to do it consciously to a 
weak man, the result comes quicker and better. But 
there are cases where a man who is not very strong 
himself, brings health to another. It is because that 
man has a little control over Pr&na and can rouse, 
for the time being, his own Prana to a certain state 
of vibration, and transmit it to the other person. 

There have been cases where the healing process 
has been carried on at a distance ; but there is 



40 


RAJA YOGA 


nothing strange in that ; for, in reality there is no 
distance in the sense of a break. Where is the 
distance that has a break ? Is there any break 
between you and the sun ? It is one continuous mass 
of matter, the sun being the one part and you the 
other. Is there a break between one part of a river 
and another ? Such being the case there is no reason 
why the healing force of Prana Will not travel and 
act at a distance. Those cases are perfectly true, 
and the Prana can really be transmitted to a very 
great distance ; but I regret to say that to one 
genuine case, there are hundreds of cases of fraud 
regarding the same. It is not so easy to transmit 
Prana thus, as one thinks it to be. In ordinary cases 
of healing you will find the fact that the healers are 
simply taking advantage of the natural healthy state 
of their own body. There is no disease in this world 
which kills the majority of persons attacked. Even 
in cholera epidemics, if for a few days sixty per 
cent, die, the rate comes down to thirty and twenty 
verj’^ soon and the rest recover. An .Allopath comes 
and treats the patients at the time giving them his 
medicines ; the Homoeopath comes and does the 
same, and cures perhaps more simply, because he 
does not disturb the patients, but allows nature to 
deal with them : and the faith-healer cures more 
still, at such times, because he brings the strength of 
his mind to bear, and rouses, through faith, the 
dormant Pr&na of his patient. 

But the one mistake which the faith-healers con- 
stantly make is to think that it is faith itself that 
directly heals a patient. That alone will not cover all 
the ground. There are diseases where the worst 
symptom is that the patient never thinks that he has 



PRANA 


41 


that disease. That tremendous faith of the patient is 
itself a symptom of the disease, and usually indicates 
that he will die quickly. In such cases the principle 
of such faith-healers does not apply. It is by rousing 
the Prana that real curing of the patient can come 
there. The pure man, who has controlled his Prina, 
has the power of bringing it into a certain state of 
vibration, which can be conveyed to others, arousing 
in them a similar vibration. You see instances of the 
kind every day. I am talking to you. What am 1 
trying to do here ? I anj trying to bring my mind to a 
certain state of vibration, and the more 1 succeed in 
bringing it to that state, the more you will be affected 
by what I say. Again all of you know the fact that 
on days the speaker is more enthusiastic you enjoy 
more his lectures, and that on days in which he is 
less enthusiastic you feel lack of interest. 

The gigantic will-powers of the world-movers 
can bring their Prana into a very high state of vibra- 
tion. It becomes so great and powerful indeed at 
the time, that it catches others in a moment, draws 
thousands towards them, and half the world be^^ins 
to think as they do. The great prophets of the world 
had thus the most wonderful control of Prdna, which 
gave them that sort of tremendous will-power. They 
could bring their Prana to the highest state of vibra- 
tion, and that was what gave them the power to 
sway the world. All manifestations of will-power 
arise from this control. Men may not know the 
secret, but this is the one explanation of the fact. 
It happens sometimes that the supply of Prana in 
your own body gravitates more or less to one part. 
The balance then is disturbed ; and when the 
balance of Prana is so disturbed, \vhat we call 



42 


RAJA YOGA 


disease is produced. To take away the superfluous 
Pr&na from that part and to supply the Prana that 
is wanting in other parts will be then, the curing of 
the disease. That again is Prdndydma ; and we 
shall have to train ourselves to find out the fact 
when there is more or less supply of Prana in one 
part of the body than there should be. The feeling 
will become so subtle by training that the mind will 
feel that there is less Prana in the toe or the finger 
than there should be, and possess the power to 
supply it. That, therefore, is one among the various 
functions of Prdnaydma. All the functions of Pr&na 
will have to be learned and mastered by us slowly 
and gradually. The whole scope of Raja Yoga is 
really to teach the control and direction of the Pr&na 
in different planes. And to gain that end the one 
direction that Raja Yoga gives to a man is to con- 
centrate his energies and become master of the 
Pr&na that is in his o'wn body. By meditation alone,, 
that is achieved ; and by it is meant the attempt to 
concentrate one’s energies and get the control of the 
Pr&na in one’s own body. 

In the ocean there are huge waves like moun- 
tains, then, smaller waves, and still smaller ones 
down to little bubbles, but the background of all of 
them is the same ocean. The bubbles are con- 
nected with the infinite ocean as well as the huge 
waves. Similarly, though the difference between 
one man and another may be like that between one 
of those gigantic waves and a little bubble, yet each 
is connected with the infinite ocean of energy, that 
being the common birthright of every animal that 
exists. Wherever there is life, the storehouse of in- 
finite energy is there behind it. Starting from some 



PRANA 


43 


fungus, or from some very minute microscopic 
bubble, and drawing greater and greater strength all 
the time from that infinite storehouse of energy, the 
form becomes changed slowly, until, in course of 
time it becomes a plant, then an animal, then mem, 
and ultimately God. The ultimate result, however, is 
attained in millions of aeons ; but an increase of 
speed and struggle is able to bridge the gulf of time. 
And that which naturally takes a long time to accom- 
plish can be shortened by the intensity of the action. 
The Yogi taking his stand on the fact says, that a 
man may go on slowly drawing in energy from the 
infinite mass that exists behind and require perhaps 
a hundred thousand years to become a Deva, and 
then, five hundred thousand years perhaps, to be- 
come still higher, and perhaps five millions of years 
after that lo become perfect, but given rapid growth, 
the time will be lessened. Why is it then not pos- 
sible to reach perfection in six months or years with 
sufficient effoit? Reason shows that there can be no 
limit of time as with regard to that. For, if an 
engine, with a certain amount of coal, runs at two 
miles an hour, add more coal and it will cover the 
same distance in quicker time. Similarly why shall 
not the soul, by intensifying its action, attain to that 
goal in this very life? We know it for certain that 
all beings will at last attain to that perfection. But 
who cares to wait all those millions of aeons? Why 
shall we not reach it immediately, in this body and 
in this human form? Why shall we not get infinite 
knowledge and infinite power even noW? 

That is the ideal of the Yogi and the whole 
science of Yoga is directed to that one end. It 
teaches men how to intensify the power of assimila- 



44 


RAJA YOGA 


tion, and thereby reach perfection quickly, instead 
of slowly advancing from point to point, and waiting 
until the whole human race has become perfect. All 
the great prophets, saints, and seers of the world 
have done the same. In that one span of life they 
lived the entire life of a race, bridging the great 
length of time that it takes for ordinary humanity to 
come to the state of perfection. In one single life 
they perfected themselves. They had no thought 
for anything else and never lived a moment for any 
other idea whatsoever, and thus the way was shorten- 
ed for them. And that is what is meant by concentra- 
tion. It is to intensify the action of the process of 
attaining perfection by the assimilation of infinite 
energy, thus shortening the period of time that is 
taken by nature to lead humanity to that goal. And 
Raja Yoga is the science which teaches us how to 
gain that power of concentration. 

Now, let us consider what Prctnay&ma has to do 
with spiritualism. For that also is within the province 
of Prandydma. Indeed if it be true that the de- 
parted spirits really exist, then it is quite probable 
that there are hundreds and millions of them living 
here even now, whom we can neither see, feel, nor 
touch. We may be continually passing and repass- 
ing through their bodies, and yet they may not see 
or feel us. For the two planes of existence in which 
we and they live and move are related to each other 
like a circle within a circle, and those alone that are 
on the same plane can see one another. For we 
represent Prdna in a certain state of vibration and it 
is quite natural that beings that are in the same state 
of vibration will see us. And if there are beings 
who represent Prdna in a higher state of vibration. 



PRANA 


45 


it is clear that they will not be seen by us. By 
increasing intensity of light we come to a point at 
fast where we cannot see any light at all, but there 
may be beings with eyes so powerful that they can 
see such light. Again there aie animals that can 
see in the dark "where we cannot, such as cats and 
owls. It is so because our range of vision covers 
only one plane of the vibrations of Prana. The 
existence of such different planes in the vibrations of 
Prctna can be well understood by taking the case of 
the atmosphere. It \s piled up layer on layer, but 
the layers nearer to the earth are densei than those 
above, and as you go higher up the layers of atmos- 
phere become finer and finer. Or we can take the 
case of the ocean ; where, as you go deeper the 
density of the water increases, and for that reason 
the animals that live at the bottom of the sea can 
never come up to the surface. 

It will be easy now to understand spiritualism in 
the light of the aforesaid facts. Think of the universe 
as an ocean of ether, in vibration under the action of 
Prana, and that it consists of layers that are in va'^y- 
ing degrees of vibration. TThen suppose that each 
of these layers consists of many a million of miles 
in the same degree of vibration, and that the vibra- 
tions are quickest at the centre of the universe and 
the least, at its outermost fringe ; and that each of 
these layers representes one single plane of exist- 
ence. Think of the whole thing as one circle, the 
centre of which is perfection. Then matter will be 
its outermost crust, next 'will come mind, and the 
spirit will be its centre. In the above picture of the 
universe we can be perfectly certain, that those 
who live on the same plane of vibration will have 



46 


RAJA YOGA 


the power of recognising each other, but will not 
recognise those that live in planes above or below 
them. Yet, says the Yogi, just as by the telescope 
and the microscope we can increase the range of 
our vision, and make higher or lower vibrations of 
light cognisable to us, similarly, every man can bring 
himself to the state of vibration belonging to the 
planes that are above and below him, thus enab- 
ling himself to see what is going on in them. Let 
us now suppose that this room is full of beings whom 
we do not see, and that they represent Pr&na in a 
certain state of vibration, and we represent it in 
another state of vibration. Suppose they represent 
its quicker and we its slower states of vibration. 
Such a supposition is not preposterous, for Prana is 
the material out of which they as well as we are com- 
posed, and that all are but parts of the same ocean of 
Prana, differing only in the rate of its vibrations. Now 
if I can bring myself to the quicker vibrations, this 
plane will immediately change for me, 1 shall not see 
you any more. You will vanish then, but those that 
represent such quick vibrations will appear before 
me. All such bringing of the mind into higher states 
of vibration has been included in Yoga Philosophy 
in that one word — Samadhi. The higher or super- 
conscious vibrations of Prana bring to us different 
kinds of Samadhi, and the lower states of Samadhi 
give us visions of the departed spirits. The highest 
grade of Samadhi, however, is that where we see the 
material out of which all the different grades of beings 
in the universe are composed, and that has been 
spoken of in the Vedas as the lump of clay which 
being known, we know everything in the universe. 

Thus we see that Pranayama includes all that is 



PRANA 


47 


true of spiritualism, and that wherever there is a sect 
or a body of people trying to search anything that is 
occult and mystical, it is really the control of Prana 
that they are seeking to find. We have found it too, 
that wherever there has been an extraordinary dis- 
play of power, it has been due to Prandydma, and 
that even the physical sciences can be included within 
its sphere. For what moves the steam-engine? — 
Prdna, acting through the steam. What are all these 
phenomena of electricity but Prdna} Indeed what is 
physical science but Prdndydma, by external means ? 
That part of Prdndydma which attempts to control 
the physical manifestations of Prdna by physical 
means is called physical science. But Prdna, mani- 
festing itself as mental power, can only be controlled 
by mental means, and that part of Prdndydma that 
tries to control the manifestations of Prdna as mental 
force, by mental means, is called Raja Yoga. 



CHAPTER IV. 


The Psychic Prana. 

According to the Yogis there are two nerve- 
currents in the spinal column, called Pingald and Ida, 
and that there is a hollow canal called Sushumnd 
running through the entire spinal cord. At the lower 
end of the hollow canal is what the Yogis call the 
“Lotus of the Kundalini” They describe it as 
triangular in form, in their symbolical language, and 
say, there is a power called Kundalini lying coiled up 
in it. When that power or Kundalini awakes it tries 
to force a passage through this hollow canal, and as 
it rises higher step by step, layer after layer of mind 
becomes open, and wonderful powers and visions 
come to the Yogi. And when it reaches the brain, 
the Yogi becomes perfectly detached from his body 
and mind, and his soul finds itself to be free. We 
know from physiology that the spinal cord is com- 
posed in a peculiar manner. If \ve take the figure 
eight horizontally ( oo ) we find it composed of two 
parts and that these two parts are connected in the 
middle. And if we pile such figures, one on top of 
the other, that will represent roughly the spinal 
cord. The left, then, will represent the Ida, and the 
right, the P ingala, and that hollow canal which runs 
through the connecting centre of the figure will be the 
Sushumnd of the spinal cord. The spinal cord ends 
in some of the lumbar vertebrae, and a fine fibre 
comes lower down from it, but the canal is present 



THE PSYCHIC PRANA 


49 


even there in that fibre, only it has become much 
finer. The canal is closed at the lov^er end, which 
is situated near what is called the sacral plexus, 
which according to modern physiology is triangular 
in form. The different plexuses that have their 
centres in the spinal cord can very well stand for 
the different “lotuses” of the Yogi* 

The Yogi conceives of several such centres in 
the spinal cord, beginning with the Muladhdra or the 
basic, and ending with the Sahasrdra or the thousand- 
petalled lotus in the brain. So, if we take these 
different plexuses as representing the lotuses, the 
idea of the Yogi can be understood very easily in the 
language of modern physiology. We know from 
modern science, that there are two different kinds of 
action of the nerve currents, — one afferent, the other 
efferent ; one sensory and the other motor ; one 
centripetal and the other centrifugal. One carries 
the sensations inward to the brain, and the other 
from the brain outward to the body. But the vibra- 
tions of the nerves are all connected with the brain 
in the long n:n. We have to remember several ot^er 
facts of physiology, in order to clear the way for the 
explanation which is to come. The spinal cord, at 
the brain, ends in a sort of bulb, in the medulla, 
which is not attached to the brain, but floats in a 
fluid in it, so that if there be a blow on the head, the 
force of that blow will be dissipated in the fluid, 
and not hurt the bulb. Secondly, we have also to 
know that, of all the centres, we have particularly 
to remember three, — the Muladhdra or the basic, the 
Sahasrdra or the thousand-petalled lotus in the brain, 
and the Manipura or the lotus in the navel. 

We shall consider next, a fact from physics. 

4 



50 


RAJA VOGA 


We all hear of electricity and various other forces 
connected with it, but what electricity is, no one yet 
knows, and so far as it has been known, it is a sort of 
motion. But there are various other motions in the 
universe ,* what then is the difference between them 
and electricity? Suppose this table in is motion, or 
that the molecules which compose it are moving in 
different directions. Can that be called electric 
motion? — No. But if the molecules of the table are 
all made to move in the same direction then the 
motion in it will be called electricity. For electric 
motion is produced only when the molecules of a 
body all move in the same direction. As for instance, 
if all the air-molecules in this room are made to move 
in the same direction, it will make the room a gigantic 
battery of electricity. 

We shall have to remember here another fact 
from physiology, that the centre which regulates 
the respiratory system, has a sort of controlling action 
over the nerve currents, and that, that centre is 
located in our body, opposite to the thorax, in the 
spinal column. That, indeed, is the centre which 
regulates the respiratory organs, and at the same time 
exercises some control over all the other secondary 
centres. 

We shall see now, why practices in breathing 
have been advised in Raja Yoga. In the first place, 
from rh5rthmical breathing will come a tendency of 
all the molecules in the body to move in the same 
direction, and it is necessary to have that. For, when 
mind changes into will, the nerve currents change 
into a motion similar to that of electricity, because 
the nerves have been proved to show polarity under 
the action of electric currents. That indicates the 



THE PSYCHKC PRANA 


51 


l^act that when the will is transformed into nerve 
currents, it is changed into something like electricity. 
Therefore, when the motions of all the molecules of 
th*e body have become perfectly rhythmical, the body 
has, as it were, become a gigantic battery of will. 
And a tremendous will is exactly what the Yogi 
wants. This, therefore, is the physiological explana- 
tion of the breathing exercises, that they tend to 
bring a rhythmic action in the body, and help us, 
through the respiratory centre, to control the other 
centres. And that is what the Yogi aims to do when 
he speaks of rousing the coiled-up powsjr in the 
Muladhara, called the Kundalini with the help of 
Prandydma. 

Everything that we see, imagine, or dream, we 
have to perceive in space. The ordinary or physical 
space has been called in Yoga Philosophy as the 
Mahdkdshci, or great space. But when a Yogi reads 
the thoughts of other people or perceives super- 
sensuous obje Ts, he sees them in another sort of 
space called the Chitidkosha or the mental space. And 
when perception has become objectless, and the soul 
shines in its own nature, the Yogi is said to have 
attained the Chiddkjdshay or the knowledge space. 
So, when the Kundalini is aroused, and enters the 
canal of Sushumndy in the body, the perceptions that 
come to a Yogi take place in the mental space, and 
when on reaching that end of the canal which opens 
out into the brain, it helps to bring about what is 
Known in Yoga Philosophy as the objectacles per- 
ception, the phenomenon is perceived by the Yogi 
in the knowledge space. 

Again, taking the analogy of electricity we find 
that man can send a current only along a wire, but 



52 


RAJA YOGA 


nature requires no wires to send her tremendous 
currents. This proves that the wire is not really 
necessary, but that only our inability to dispense with 
it compels us to use it. Similarly, all the sensatidns 
and motions of the body are being sent into the brain,, 
and out of it, through the wires of nerve fibres. The 
columns of sensory and motor fibres in the spinal 
cord are the Ida and the P ingala of the Yogis. They 
are the main channels through which the afferent 
and the efferent currents are travelling. But why 
should not the mind send the nerve currents without 
the help of any wire, when it is being acted upon or 
when it reacts in response to some action? The 
Yogi says that by doing so you will be able to get 
rid of the bondage of matter. But how to do it? The 
answer is, that if you can make the current pass 
through the Sushumna or the canal in the middle of 
the spinal column, you have solved the problem. 
The mind has made this net- work of nervous system, 
and will have to break it. And when no more wires 
will be required by it to work, then alone will all 
knowledge come to it and all bondage of the body 
will cease for it. That is why it is so very important 
for us to get control of the Sushumna. The Yogi 
says, you can send the mental current through the 
hollow canal without the help of any nerve fibres to 
act as wires and that indeed is the solution of the 
problem. In ordinary persons, the Sushumnd is 
closed up at the lower extremity and no action comes 
through it. But the Yogi proposes a practice by 
which it can be opened, and by which the nerve 
currents can be made to travel through it. 

When a sensation is carried to a centre, the 
centre reacts. In the case of automatic centres, this 



THE PSYCHIC PRANA 


53 


reaction is followed by motion ; but in the case of 
conscious centres, it is followed first by perception, 
and secondly, by motion. Again all our perceptions 
are but reactions to actions from outside. But how, 
then, do perceptions in dreams arise when there is 
no action from outside? The sensory motions, there- 
fore, are coiled up somewhere in the body, just as 
the motor motions are known to be in different 
centres. As for instance, 1 saw a city ; the percep- 
tion of that city was from the reaction to sensations 
brought from outside objects comprising that city. 
That is to say, a certain motion in my brain mole- 
cules was set up by the motion in the in-carrying 
nerves, which again were set in motion by external 
objects in the city. But I can remember the city 
even after a long time. In that case also, perception 
must have come in the same way as in the case when 
1 first perceived the city. The memory, therefore, is 
exactly the same phenomenon, reproduced only in 
a milder fonr. But whence is the action that sets 
up that milder form of similar vibrations in the brain ? 
Nol certainly from the primary sensations. There- 
fore, it must be that a part of the original sensations 
are lying coiled up somewhere, and they, by their 
acting, bring out from the mind the mild reaction 
which we call dream perception. The centre where 
all such residual sensations are. stored up, is called 
the Muladhara or the root receptacle, and the coiled- 
up energy of action that is lying in it, is called the 
Kundalini or the “coiled-up.” It is quite probable 
that the residual motor energy is also stored up in 
the same centre ; for, after deep study or meditation 
on external objects, the part of the body where the 
Muladhara centre is situated (probably the sacral 



54 


RAJA YOGA 


plexus) gets heated. Now, if that coiled-up energy 
be roused and made active, and then consciously 
made to travel up the Sushumna canal, as it goes on 
acting upon centre after centre, a tremendous 
reaction will set in. The perceptions made in dreams 
or by the faculty of imagination, come when a minute 
portion of this energy of action travels along a nerve 
fibre and causes reaction from centres. It is evident, 
therefore, that when this entire Kundalini force 
travels from centre to centre, layer after layer of 
the mind, as it were, will be perceived by the Yogi in 
its fine or coarse form. And when the vast mass of 
this energy stored up in us from time immemorial, 
travels along the Sushumna, by the power of intense 
meditation, and strikes the centres, the reaction is 
tremendous and immensely superior to the reaction 
during dreams or imagination. Nay, it is then im- 
mensely more intense than the reaction during sense 
perceptions. For, when it reaches the brain, the 
metropolis of all sensations, the whole brain and 
indeed every perceiving molecule in it, as it were, 
react, and the result is the full blaze of illumination, 
and the perception of the Self. That indeed is super- 
sensuous perception, and the mind that has reached 
that stage is said to have attained the superconscious 
state. Then alone will the causes of both sensation 
and reaction, be revegiled to us as they are, and from 
that will come a perfect knowledge of everything in 
the universe. For the causes being known, the 
knowledge of the effects is sure to follow. 

Thus the rousing of the Kundalini is the one 
only way to the realisation of the Spirit or Self by 
attaining perfect wisdom through superconscious per- 
ception. And the rousing of that power may come 



THE PSYCHIC PRANA 


55 


in several ways, — through love for God, through the 
mercy of perfected sages, or through the power of 
the analytic will of the philosopher. Wherever there 
i^ or ever has been any manifestation of what is 
ordinarily called supernatural power or wisdom, 
there must have been a little current of the Kundcdini 
into the Sashumna. Only in the vast majority of 
such cases of super-naturalism, men had ignorantly 
stumbled on to some practice which set free a minute 
portion of the coiled-up energy of the Kundalini, 
Again, all worship leads men, consciously or uncon- 
sciously, to this one end of rousing that energy. The 
man who thinks that he is receiving responses to his 
prayers from outside, does not know that the fulfil- 
ment came from his own nature really, and that he 
has succeeded by his mental attitude during prayer 
in waking up a bit of this infinite power which is 
lying coiled up within his own self. Thus, Him, 
Whom men ignorantly worship under various names, 
through fear and tribulation, the Yogi declares unto 
the world to be the living Power that is lying coiled 
up in every being, the Giver of eternal happir ess. 
Raja Yoga, therefore, is the science of religion and 
the rationale of all worship, prayers, forms, cere- 
monies and nuracles. 



CHAPTER V. 


The Control of the Psychic Prana. 

We have now to deal with the exercises in 
Prdndyamd. We have seen that the first step in 
P randy dma, according to the Yogis, is to learn to 
control the motion of the lungs. And the reason for 
doing so is to feel the finer motions that are going on 
within the body. Our minds have become exter- 
nalised, and have lost sight of the fine motions 
produced by nerve currents that are going on all over 
the body, bringing life and vitality to every muscle. 
And if by any process we can learn to feel them 
again, we shall be able to control them. The Yogi 
says, we can do so. How? By taking up and learn- 
ing to control the motion of the Prana, manifested in 
the lungs. And when we have done that we shall in 
time be able to control the finer motions also. 

Let us proceed now to the exercises in Prand- 
ydma. Sit upright ; the body must be kept straight 
during these practices. The spinal cord, inside the 
vertebral column, is not attached to it. And if you 
sit crookedly, you disturb the spinal cord ; so let it be 
free by sitting upright. Every time that you sit 
crookedly and try to meditate, you do injury to your- 
self. The three parts of the body must be always 
held in a straight line, the chest, the neck, and the 
head. You will find that with a little practice this 
posture will become as natural to you as breathing. 
The second thing is to get control of the nerves. We 
have seen that the nerve centre that controls the 



THE CONTROL OF THE PSYCHIC PRANA 


57 


respiratory organs, has a sort of controlling effect on 
the other nerves. To learn to control that centre, 
therefore, by practising rhythmical breathing, is neces- 
sary. The breathing that we generally use should 
not be called rhythmical at all. It is very irregular 
in both men and women, even though we take into 
consideration the natural differences of breathing be- 
tween men and women. 

The first lesson is just to breathe in and out, in a 
measured way. That will harmonise the system. 
When you have practised this for sometime, you will 
do well to join the repetition of some sacred word to 
it, as “Om,” and let that word flow in and out with 
the breath, rhythmically, harmoniously. In India, 
we use such symbolical words instead of counting 
one, two three, four while practising Prdnayama, 
and 1 advise you to do the same. You will find that 
the v^hole body will become rhythmical by the pro- 
cess. And when you have practised it for a suffi- 
cient length jf time, you will learn what rest is. 
Sleep is not rest, speaking comparatively. For thir 
kind of rest will soothe the most tired nerves, and 
after an experience of it you will find that you have 
never before rested really. 

The second lesson in breathing is to breathe 
measured breaths using the nostrils alternately. As 
for instance, close the right nostril and draw the air 
in, slowly, through the left. Thus as soon as the 
lungs are full, close the left nostril and throw the air 
out, slowly, by opening the right. Take in air again, 
as soon as the lungs are empty, through the right 
nostril, or by the same one by which you have just 
thrown out the air. Qose it when the lungs are full and 
throw the air out slowly, by opening the left nostril. 



58 


RAJA ycx;a 


Take in air now, through the left, close it as soon 
as the lungs are full and then throw it out by open- 
ing the right. And so on, using each time the nostril 
by which you have thrown out the air for filling the 
lungs again. The books on Yoga say, that this lesson 
is necessary to practise for some time, for the purifi- 
cation of the nerves and for getting the pupil ready 
to take up the higher exercises in breathing. The 
effect of this practice will be apparent in the dis- 
appearance of harsh lines from the face and in the 
calmness of the mind. Beautiful voice too will 
come. 1 never saw a Yogi with a croaking voice. 
These signs will come after a few months* practice. 
After practising this kind of breathing for some time, 
take up the following higher lesson.) Fill slowly the 
lungs with breath through the Ida or the left nostril, 
and at the same time concentrate the mind on the 
nerve current produced by it. Think as if you were 
sending the nerve current down the spinal column, 
and stri^cing violently on the last plexus — ^the basic 
lotus, which is triangular in form and the seat of the 
Kundalini, Hold the current there for some time. 
Imagine then, that you are slowly drawing out that 
nerve current with the breath into the other side, and 
then slowly throw it out through the right nostril. 
This you will find a little difficult to practise. The 
easiest way is to stop {he right nostril with the thumb, 
and then slowly draw in the breath through the left ; 
then close both nostrils with thumb and forefinger ,j 
and imagine that you are sending that current down, 
and striking the base of the Sushumnd ; then take 
the thumb off, and let the breath out through 
the right nostril. Next, inhale slowly through the right 
nostril, keeping the left closed by the forefinger ; 



THE CONTROL OF THE PSYCHIC PRANA 


59 


then close both, as before, and then let the breath 
out through the left nostril ; and so on alternately. 
The way the Hindus practise it would be very diffi- 
cult for the people of the West, because they do it 
from their childhood, and their lungs are prepared 
for it. At first, it is well to begin with four seconds, 
or lesser time even, and then to increase it very 
slowly. Draw the air in, in four seconds, hold it 
inside for sixteen seconds, then throw it out in eight 
seconds. This done three times with the alternate 
nostrils, will make up one Pranaydma. Think 
always of the triangle at the base of the spinal column 
and concentrate the mind on that centre while you 
are practising Prdndydma. Such imagination will 
\help you a great deal. } The next lesson in breathing 
is to draw the breath in slowly and then immediately 
to throw it out slowly, and then to stop it outside 
or not to allow it to enter the nostrils again, using 
the same numbers as in the preceding lesson. Thus 
the only difference between this lesson and the pre- 
ceding one is that in the first case the breath was 
held in, and in the second, held out."^ Some of the 
Yoga books say, however, that this last lesson is the 
easier /one of the two, and that the breathing lesson 
in which you hold the breath in the lungs must not be 
practised too much. Do it only four times in the 
morning and four times in the evening. Then, when 
’you have practised the lesson for a long time, in- 
crease slowly the time and the number. But never 
do the same until you are sure that you have the 
power to do so, and that you take pleasure in it. 
So, increase the time and the number of your breath- 
ing lessons very carefully and cautiously. For it ia 



60 


RAJA YOGA 


sure to injure you if you practise the lessons irregu- 
larly or increase their time and number ha^ly. 

Of the above four processes in breathing, the 
first two are intended for the purification of the 
nerves, and are neither difficult nor dangerous. The 
more you practise them, the calmer you will be, and 
you can practise the first one even while you are 
sitting at your work. You will be all the better for 
it. And one day, after you have practised the lessons 
for years, the Kundalini will be aroused. fFor those 
who will practise the lessons only once or twice a day, 
just a little calmness of the body and mind will come, 
and beautiful voice. And for those who will go on 
further with them, will the Kundalini be aroused, 
the whole asiject of nature will change, and the book 
of knowledge will be open. No more then, will they 
need to go to books for knowledge ; for their own 
minds will have become filled with infinite knowledge 
at the time. ^ 

Let us proceed now to sum up what we have 
already learnt from the foregoing lessons. We have 
seen how the Ida and the Pingald currents are flowing 
through either side of the spinal column and also of 
the function of Sushumna, the passage through the 
centre of the spinal cord. We have been told that 
the three are present in every animal that has a spinal 
column, but that the Sushumnd is lying closed in 
all of them. The Yogis declare that in ordinary 
mEinkind also the Sushumnd is closed and therefore 
its function does not become evident, while the 
functions of the other two, the Ida and the Pingald, 
are evident in carrying power to different parts of 
their bodies. The Yogi alone has the Sushumnd 
open With the opening of the Sushumnd and the 



THE CONTROL OF THE PSYCHIC PRANA 


6i 


rising of the nerve currents through it, thought begins 
to rise higher, and we get beyond the senses ; our 
minds then become supersensuous or superconscious, 
and we get beyond intellect where reasoning cannot 
reach. fThe prime object of Raja Yoga, therefore, 
is to teach people how to open that Sushumna, 
Along this Sushumna are ranged the centres of dis- 
tribution, or in the figurative language of the Yogi, 
the different lotuses. The lowest one of these is at 
the very end of the spinal cord, and is called the 
Muladhara ; the next one higher up the spinal 
column is called Svddhisthdna ; the next, Manipura ; 
the next, Andhata ; the next. Vtsuddha ; the next, 
Ajnd ; and the last one, which is in the biain, is 
called the Sahasrdra, or “the thousand-petalled.’* 
Of these we shall have to take special cognitioii of 
two centres, the lowest — ^the Mulddhdra and the 
highest — the Sahasrdra.) In the lowest one all the 
residua! energy of the nerve currents are stored up, 
and that has *^0 be taken up from there and brought 
to the last one, — the Sahasrdra, in the brain, ^gain, 
the Yogis ci§iim that of all the energies in the human 
body the highest is called the **Ojas.”^ This form of 
energy — the Ojas, is stored up in the brain, and the 
more the qurmtity of Ojas is in a man’s brain, the 
more powerful, intellectual and spiritually-minded 
will that man be. {That, indeed, is the virtue of the 
Ojas. We see it every day that some people although 
speaking beautiful language and beautiful thoughts, 
cannot impress others, while some speaking in 
language which cannot be called beautiful, charm 
others. That is so, on account of the power of Ojas 
stored up in the brain of the latter persons.^ 

In all persons there is more or less of this Ojas 



KAJA YOGA 


62 

Stored up. And all the forces that are in the body, 
when not dissipated, go finally to form the Ojas. We 
must remember the fact that they become so by the 
process of transformation, as you find it everywhere 
in nature. The same energy which is working outside 
of us as electricity or magnetism, become changed 
into our inner forces, and the same forces that are 
being manifested as muscular energy in us change in 
the end into the Ojas. The Yogis say that, that part 
of human energy which expresses itself in sexual 
thought, and in the act of procreation, when chej^ed 
and controlled, easily becomes changed into O/jgis. 
And as the lowest centre in the spinal C9rd, the 
Muladhara, is the one which guides all the sexual 
functions, therefore the Yogi pays particular attention 
to that centre. He tries to take up the whole of that 
sexual energy and convert it into Ojas. is only the 
chaste man and woman who can thus transform their 
energies into the Ojas and make it rise and become 
stored up in the brain ; and that is why chastity has 
always been considered the highest virtue of all. It 
is because of losing that power, the Ojas, that an 
unchaste man feels that his spirituality is gone and 
withal, mental vigour and strong moral stamina. 
That is why in all the religious orders in the world that 
have produced spiritual giants, you find the observ- 
ance of intense chastity always insisted upon, and that 
is really why the order of monks came into existence, 
giving up marriage. Thus there must be perfect chasti- 
ty, in thought, word and deed, if one is to become a 
real Yogi. For, without it the practice of Raja Yoga is 
dangerous, and may lead to insanity. Therefore, if 
people practise Raja Yoga and at the same time lead 
an impure life, they can never become Yogis. 



CHAPTER VI. 


Pratyahara and Dharana. 

The next step to be taken after Pranayama is 
called Pratyahara. What is this^ Yon know the 
instruments of perception. First of all, there are the 
external instruments, such as the eyes, the ears and so 
forth ; then, the internal organs in the body, the brain 
ceptres ; and lastly, there is the mind. When these 
come together and attach themselves to an external 
thing, we jperceive that thing. We know at the same 
time how very difficult it is to attach the mind to one 
organ only or to concentrate it in one object. The 
mind is like a slave in the hands of these instruments. 

Men af^ taught to be good all over the world. 
There is hardly a child, born in any country in the 
world, who his never been told the words — do not 
steal, and do not tell a lie, but nobody ever tells the 
child how he can help himself when tempted to do 
those things. Why should he not become a thief ^ 
We do not teach him how not to steal. We tell him 
simply not to do so, whereas the only way to help him 
really will be to teach him to control his mind. Raja 
Yoga teaches one how to get th^t control by means of 
Pratydhara. For all our actions, internal and external, 
occur only when the mind joins itself to the centres 
in the brain, called the organs. The mind is drawn 
to join itself to these centres, sometimes willingly 
and at other times unwillingly, and that is why 
people do foolish deeds and feel misery. They would 
never do so if their minds had those brain centres 



64 


RAJA YOGA 


under control. For, what would be the result of such 
a control? The mind would then be able to disjoin 
itself from the brain centres at its will, and feeling 
and willing would be under its control, consequently. 
It is clear so far. But is that possible practically ? It is 
perfectly possible, and you see it to be so, in modern 
times, in the acts of the Faith-healers who teach 
people to deny misery, pain and evil. Their philosophy 
is rather round about, but it is a part of Yoga which 
they have somehow stumbled upon. In cases where 
they succeed in making persons throw off suffering 
by denying it, they have really taught them something 
of Prdtyahara, in so far as they have made the minds 
of those persons strong enough to refuse to take the 
records of their senses. The Hypnotists, similarly, by 
their suggestions excite in the patient a sort of morbid 
Pratydhara for the time being. For hypnotic sugges- 
tions can act only upon a diseased bodj^and a cloud- 
ed mind. \nd until the operator, by means of fixed 
gaze or otherwise, has succeeded in putting the mind 
of the subject in a sort of passive, morbid condition 
his suggestions never work. Therefore, the control 
of the brain centres of perception which comes to a 
hypnotic patient and to many a patient of the Faith- 
healer, is temporary and utterly reprehensible, be- 
cause it leads them to ultimate ruin by making them 
weak. It is not really the controlling of the brain 
centres by the power of one's own will, but is, as It 
were, stunning the patient's mind for the time by 
sudden blows which another’s will delivers to it. It 
is not like checking the mad career of a fiery team by 
means of reins and muscular strength, but like the 
temporary check produced by asking another to 
deliver heavy blows on the heads of the horses, to 



PRATYAHARA AND DHARANA 


65 


stvin them for the time to gentleness. At each sitting 
the m^n operated upon loses a part of the power of 
his own will and, at last, his mind, instead of gaining 
perfect control of the brain centres and of itself, be- 
comes a shapeless, powerless mass. The only pros- 
pect of- the* patient then is the lunatic asylum. Every 
attempt at control, therefore, that is not voluntary 
or that does not come from the controller’s own 
mind, is not only disastrous, but it defeats the end. 
For we must remember this always that the goal of 
each soul is freedom and perfect control, — freedom 
from the slavery of matter and thought, and perfect 
control of external and internal nature. Instead of 
leading towards that goal, every will-current from 
another, in whatever form it might come to one, either 
as direct control of one’s organs, or as something that 
forces one to control them while under a morbid 
condition, rivets only one link more to the already 
existing heavy chain of bondage of past thoughts and 
past superstitions. Therefore, beware how you allow 
yourseKes to be acted upon by others, and beware 
how you unknowingly bring another to ruin. It rr/ght 
be true that some succeed in doing good to many for 
a time, by giving them in that way a new trend to their 
propensities, nevertheless, it is true at the same time, 
that they bring ruin to many unconsciously by the 
hypnotic suggestions that they throw around, rousing 
in men and women that sort of morbid and passive 
condition which makes them almost soulless at last. 
Whosoever, therefore, asks any one to believe him 
blindly, or drags one behind him by controlling him 
by his superior will, is an injurer to humanity, though 
he may not be conscious of the fact. 

Therefore, use your own minds to control your- 

5 



66 


RAJA YOGA 


selves and remember this always, that until you are 
a diseased person, no extraneous will can w^oA^pon 
you. Avoid everyone, however great and he 

may be, who asks you to believe blindly. There have 
been dancing and howling sects all over the world 
whose teachings, for their rapid spread at*the time, 
have been classified at present under the head of 
infectious diseases. They exercised singular control 
for the time over sensitive persons, to degenerate 
whole races in the long run. Aye, it is healthier far 
for the individual and the race to remain wicked than 
to be made apparently good by such morbid 
extraneous control. Alas ! the heart sinks to think of 
the amount of injury done to humanity by such irres- 
ponsible, yet well-meaning, religious fanatics. They 
little knew the fact that the minds which attained to 
sudden spiritual upheaval under their suggestions, 
with music and prayers, simply made themselves 
morbid and powerless, and opened themselves to any 
other suggestion, be it ever so evil. Little did those 
ignorant, deluded persons dream that, whilst they 
were congratulating themselves upon their mira- 
culous power to transform human hearts — a power 
which they thought was poured upon them by some 
Being above the clouds, — they were sowing the seeds, 
of future decay, of crime, of lunacy, and of death. 
Beware, therefore, of everything that takes away your 
freedom. Know that to be dangerous, and avoid that 
by all means in your power. For, he alone has 
succeeded in Pratyahcira who can attach or detach his 
mind to or from the brain centres at will. Pratyahara 
means literally “gathering towards,” and can be 
defined as chjpEiking the out-going powers of the 
mind, thus fifebhng it from the thraldom of the senses. 



PRATYAHARA AND DHARA^f)^^ifV 


67 


And wHen we can do that we shall really possess a 
character and have made a long step towards free- 
dom. We are mere machines, indeed, before that 
power has really been secured. 

How hard it is to control the mind ! Well has it 
been compared to the maddened monkey. There 
was a monkey, restless by its own nature as all 
monkeys are. Some one made it drink freely of 
wine, so that it became still more restless. Then a 
scorpion stung it. You know perhaps that when a 
man is stung by a scorpion he jumps about for a 
whole day, so the poor monkey’s restlessness grew 
worse than ever. Then as if to complete its misery a 
demon entered into it and made it restless more than 
it ever was ! What language can describe now the 
uncontrollable restlessness of that monkey ! The 
human mind is exactly like that monkey. Incessantly 
active by its own nature, it becomes drunk with the 
wine of desire, and that increases its turbulence. 
After desire has possessed it once, comes the sting of 
the scorpion of jealousy, and it becomes restless at 
the sight of those whose desires meet with fuHilme*xt. 
And last of all, the demon of pride takes possession 
of it, making it think of itself as of very great 
portance. How hard it is to control such a mind ! 

TTie first lesson in Pratyahara is to sit for some 
time and let the mind run on. The mind is bubbling 
up all the time. It is like that monkey jumping about. 
Let the monkey jump as much as it can ; you simply 
\^ait and watch. Knowledge is power, says the 
proverb, and that is true. Until you know what the 
mind is doing, you cannot control it. Give it the full 
length of the reins ; many a hideous thought will 
come into it while you are thus watching and you will 



68 


RAJA YCXiA 


be astonished to find that it is possible for you to think 
such thoughts. But you will find at the same time 
that each day the mind’s vagaries are becoming less 
and less violent, and that each day it is becoming 
calmer. In the first few months you will find that the 
mind will have a thousand thoughts, later you will 
find that it has toned down to perhaps seven hundred, 
and after a few more months, that it has still fewer 
thoughts and so on, until at last it comes under perfect 
control ; but we must practise patiently every day to 
find such results. As long as the steam is turned on, 
the engine must run, and as long as things are before 
us, we must perceive. And a man, to prove that he 
is not a machine like the engine, must demonstrate 
the fact that he is under the control of nothing. That 
control of the mind, which is manifested in not 
allowing it to join itself to the centres, is Pratyah&ra. 
How is this practised? It is a long work, not to be 
done in a day. Only after a patient, continuous 
struggle for years can we succeed in doing so. 

The next step in Raja Yoga depends on the 
previous one. After you have practised Pratycihctra 
for a time, take the next step Dharand, or holding 
the mind to certain points. Now what is meant by 
holding the mind to certain points ? It is to force the 
mind to feel certain parts of the body to the exclu- 
sion of others, — as fcjr instance, trying to feel only the 
hand to the exclusion of other parts of the body. So 
when the activity of the mind is confined and limited 
to a certain place only, that is called Dhdrand. This 
Dhdrand is of various sorts, and along with it, it is 
better to have a little play of the imagination. As for 
instance, the mind should be made to think of one 
point in the heart. That is very difficult indeed ; and 



PRATYAHARA AND DHARANA 


69 


an easier way to it is to imagine a lotus there and to 
think that that lotus is full of light — effulgent light — 
and confine the mind there. Or think of the lotus in 
the brain as full of light, or of the different centres 
in the Sushumna mentioned before. 

The Yogi must always practise. He should try 
to live alone, for the companionship of different sorts 
of people distracts the mind. He should not speak 
much, because too much speaking distracts the mind. 
He should not work much, because too much work 
distracts the mind ; and you will find at the same 
time that the mind cannot be controlled after a whole 
day’s hard work. One possessed with a firm deter- 
mination to abstain from what has been spoken above 
becomes a Yogi. And such is the power of good 
that even the least done in that direction will bring 
a great amount of benefit. The practice of Yoga 
will hurt none, but will benefit everyone. It will 
tone down nervous excitement, and will enable us 
to see things more clearly by bringing calmness to 
the mind. Our temperament will be better, and so 
our health will be better with the help of it. Sound 
health will come as one of the first signs, and along 
with it, beautiful voice. Defects in the voice will be 
changed also. And those will be among the first of 
the many effects that will come. Those who practise 
hard will get many other sigrfs. As for instance, 
there will be sounds, sometimes, as a peal of bells 
heard at a distance, commingling, and falling on the 
ear as one continuous sound. Sometimes such things 
will be seen as little sparks of light floating and 
becoming bigger and bigger. And when these things 
come, know that you are progressing very fast. 
Those who want to be Yogis and to practise very 



70 


RAJA YOGA 


hard, must take a little care of their diet at first. 
Those who want to make very rapid progress, if they 
can live on milk and cereals alone for some months, 
will find it an advantage. But those who want to 
practise a little only in their everyday business life, 
let them not eat too much, otherwise they may eat 
whatever they please. 

A strict diet is absolutely necessary for those who 
want to make faster progress and to practise hard. 
For as the organism becomes finer and finer with the 
help bf it, you will find that the least thing throws 
you out of balance at first. One morsel of food more 
or less will disturb the whole system. But when you 
will be able to get perfect control of yourself, you 
will then be able to eat whatever you like. You will 
find that when you are beginning to concentrate, the 
sound of the dropping of a pin will seem like the 
peal of a thunderbolt going through your brain. For 
as the organs get finer, the perceptions become finer. 
Such are the stages through which we shall have to 
pass, and all those who persevere will succeed. Give 
up argumentation and such other distractions. Can 
there be anything in dry intellectual jargon ? It only 
throws the mind off its balance and disturbs it. The 
things which Yoga teaches will have to be realised, 
and no amount of talking will do that. So give up 
all vain talk. Read only those books which have 
been written by persons who have had realisation. 
Be like the pearl-oyster. There is a pretty Indian 
fable to the effect that if it rains when the star Svati 
is in the ascendant, and a drop of that rain falls into 
an oyster, that drop becomes a pearl in time. The 
oysters know this, so they come to the surface when 
that star shines, and wait to catch the precious rain- 



PRATYAHARA AND DHARANA 


71 


drop. And when a drop of rain falls into its shell on 
such an occasion, quickly the oyster closes its shell 
and dives down to the bottom of the sea, there to 
Vait patiently until the drop is developed into a pearl. 
We should be like that. First hear, then understand, 
and then, leaving all distractions, shut your minds to 
all outside influences, and devote yourselves to 
develop the truth that is within you. There is the 
danger of frittering away our energies by taking up 
an idea for some time for its novelty, and then giving 
it up for another that is newer. Take one thing up 
and do it, and see the end of it, and before you have 
seen the end, do not give it up. He alone who can 
become mad upon an idea, will see the light. But 
those who always go after new ideas and never care 
to carry them out in their lives, will never attedn 
anything. They may titillate their nerves for a 
moment, but there it will end. They will be slaves 
in the hands of nature, and will never get beyond the 
sphere of the senses. 

Aye, those who really want to be Yogis mu^t 
give up, once for all, this sort of doing things by 
halves. Take up one idea. Make that one idea 
your life ; dream of it, think of it, and live on that 
alone. Let the brain, the muscles, the nerves and 
indeed every part of your body be full of that idea, 
to the exclusion of every other idea. That indeed 
is the way to success, and that is how the great 
spiritual giants are produced. If we really want to 
be blessed, and make others blessed, we must leave 
all superficial talking and go deeper into the subject. 
And the first thing necessary for it is never to allow 
the mind to get disturbed and never to associate with 
persons whose ideas are disturbing. All of you know 



72 


RAJA YOGA 


from experience that certain persons, certain places, 
certain foods repel you ; avoid them. And those 
who want to attain the highest end of Yoga, must 
avoid all company whatever, good or bad. Practise 
hard ; plunge in and work, without thinking of any- 
thing else. And if you are sincere and persevering 
enough, in six months you will be a perfect Yogi. 
But those who will take up a little of Yoga with a 
little of everything else, they will get no higher. It 
is of no use, indeed, simply to take a course of 
lessons. Those who are full of Tamas, ignorant and 
dull, — those whose minds never get fixed on any idea, 
who only crave for something to entertain them — 
religion and philosophy are but matters of entertain- 
ment to them. They come to religion as to an enter- 
tainment, and get what little they desire out of it. 
They are the unpersevering. They hear a talk, think 
it very nice, and then go home and forget all about 
it. Such people will never become Yogis. To suc- 
ceed in Yoga, you must have tremendous persever- 
ance and a tremendous will. ‘‘I will drink the 
ocean,” says the persevering soul, ‘‘at my will moun- 
tains will crumble up.” Have that sort of energy, 
that sort of will, and work hard, and you will surely 
reach the goal. 



CHAPTER Vll. 


Dhyana and Samadhi. 

We have finished taking a cursory view of the 
different steps that are to be practised daily by the 
student of Raja Yoga, except the finer ones, which 
deal with perfect concentration, the ultimate end to 
which Raja Yoga leads us. We see that all know- 
ledge of human beings which is called rational, is 
referred to consciousness. , As for instance, 1 am 
conscious of this table, I am conscious of your pre- 
sence, and so forth. That alone makes me know 
that you are here, the table is here, and that the things 
1 see, feel, and hear, are here. There is however a 
considerable part of my existence of which I am not 
conscious — such as, the different centres and organs 
inside the spine and the brain, the different parts of 
the brain itself, and so forth. Nobody is conscious of 
those things. When I eat food I do it consciously, 
but when I assimilate it 1 do it unconsciously. Again, 
when that food is manufactured into blood, or when 
out of the blood all the different parts of my body are 
made, it is done unconsciously.. Yet it is I who am 
doing all this, and there cannot be twenty people in 
this one body. But how do 1 know that I do those 
things and nobody else? It may be urged that my 
business is only in eating the food, but the assimila- 
tion of the food and the manufacturing of the body 
out of it are done for me by somebody else. But 
that can never be. because it can be demonstrated 



74 


RAJA YOGA 


that almost every action of which we are unconsci- 
ous now. can be again brought up to the plane of' 
consciousness. The heart is beating apparently 
without our control, and none of us here can conttol 
it ; it goes on its own way. But there are men, who 
by practice have brought even the heart under con- 
trol, so that it would beat at their will, slowly, or 
quickly, or almost stop. Nearly every part of the 
body can thus be brought under control. That 
shows that the things that are generally considered to 
be independent of us are also worked by us, only we 
are doing them unconsciously. We have, thus, two 
planes of existence in which the mind is working. 
First, the conscious plane, that is to say, the plane in 
which every work is always accompanied by the 
feeling of egoism in the mind. Next, the unconsci- 
ous plane, namely, the plane in which every work is 
beneath our consciousness or is unaccompanied by 
the feeling of egoism. That part of our mind's work 
which is unaccompanied by the feeling of egoism is 
unconscious work, and that part which is accom- 
panied by the feeling of egoism is conscious work. 
In the lower animals, there is the prevalence of un- 
conscious work and this is called instinct. In higher 
animals, and in the highest of all animals, man, the 
second sort of work or that which is accompanied by 
the feeling of egoism, prevails, and is called conscious 
work. 

But the matter does not end here. There is a 
still higher plane in which the mind can work. It can 
go beyond consciousness. And just as unconscious 
work is beneath our consciousness, so here is another 
kind of work which is above it and which, also, is not 
accompanied by the feeling of egoism. The feeling 



DHYANA AND SAMADHI 


75 


of egoism exists only in the middle plane and when 
the mind is above or below that plane, there is no 
feeling of “I,” and yet the mind works. And when 
the mind goes beyond the plane of self-conscious- 
ness, that stage of it is called Samadhi or super- 
consciousness. For it has then really gone above 
consciousness. But how do we know that a man in 
Samadhi has not gone below his consciousness at 
the time, and has not degenerated instead of going 
higher, as in both the stages its works are unaccom- 
panied by egoism? The answer is, by the effects or 
results we know the stage which is below, and that 
which is above. When a man goes into deep sleep 
he enters a plane beneath eonsciousness. He works 
the body even at that time — he breathes, he moves 
and so forth — but he does so without any accom- 
panying feeling of ego ; in other words, he is uncon- 
scious. And when he returns from his sleep, he is 
the same man that went into it. The sum-total of 
the knowledge which he had before he went into 
sleep, remains the same ; it never increases in the 
least, nor any enlightenment comes to him during 
the time. But when a man goes into Samadhi, if 
he goes into it a fool, he comes out a sage. That 
shows the difference. From one state a man comes 
out the very same man that went in, and out of 
the other state the man corner enlightened, a sage, 
a prophet, a saint, — his whole character and life 
changed and illumined. Such are the two effects. 
Now the effects being different, the causes also must 
be different. And as this illumination with which a 
man comes back from Sam&dhi, is much higher than 
what can be attained from going into unconscious- 
ness, and higher even than what he can get by the 



76 


RAJA YOGA 


help of reasoning while in the conscious state, it must 
therefore be superconsciousness, and for this reason 
Samctdhi has been called the superconscious state. 

That, in short, is the idea of Samadhi. Let us 
now look to its application. The field of reason, or 
of the conscious workings of the mind, is narrow 
and limited. It is a definite little circle within which 
human reason has to move. It can never go beyond 
that. Yet it is beyond the circle of reason that lies 
all that humanity holds most dear. All such ques- 
tions, as whether there is an immortal soul, whether 
there is a God, whether there is any supreme intelli- 
gence guiding this universe, are beyond the field of 
reason. Reason can never answer those questions. 
And what does reason say on them? It says, “I am 
agnostic ; I do not know either yea or nay. ’ Yet 
those are the questions that are so important and 
vital to us that wihout proper answers to them, our 
existence will become unbearable. All our ethical 
theories and moral attitudes, all that is good and 
great in human nature, have been moulded upon 
answers that have come from beyond that circle. 
That is the reason why human life will be impossible 
without answers to such. For if life is only a little 
five minutes’ thing, and the universe only a “fortui- 
tous combination of atoms,” then why should we be 
ethical and do good, to another? And why should 
there be with us mercy, justice, and fellow-feeling? 
The best thing for us, then, in this world would be to 
make hay while the sun shines, each man for him- 
self. For if there is no reality in the hope for a future 
existence, why should I love my brother, and not cut 
his throat? If there is nothing beyond, and no free- 
dcm from the thraldom of conditions brought about 



DHYANA AND SAMADHI 


77 


by rigorous dead laws, I should only try to make 
myself happy here. We find people saying, now-a- 
days, that they have found out the basis of morality 
on utilitarian grounds, and that procuring the greatest 
amount of happiness to the greatest number is that 
basis. But why should we do that even? Why should 
a man not produce the greatest unhappiness to the 
greatest number, if that serves his purpose ? How will 
utilitarians answer that question? Again, how would 
you know what is right from what is wrong, if there 
be no future life for man? 1 am impelled by my 
desire for happiness and I fulfil that, and it is in my 
nature to do so. And if I know it for certain that there 
i'-j nothing beyond, why should 1 not do so, and why 
should you complain, wherf I try to fulfil it? What 
necessity will be there, then, for preaching about 
morality, about the immortality of the soul, about 
God, about love and sympathy, about being good, 
and, above all, about that one idea upon which hang 
all ethical rules guiding human actions and conduct — 
unselfishness? Why should we be unselfish? Where 
indeed is the necessity of my being unselfish? Why 
should I be so? You call yourself a rational man, a 
utilitarian, but if you do not show me the reason for 
the same, I will call you to be most irrational. Show 
me the reason why I should be unselfish, and not like 
a brute, act without reason? It may appear to be 
good as poetry, but poetry is no reason. Show me 
the reason why 1 should be so. Because some people 
call it to be good to become so, does not weigh with 
me. I want to know the ultimate utility of my being 
unselfish. And if utility consists in securing the 
greatest amount of happiness, 1 find it very useful to 
be selfish, inasmuch as I get the greatest amount of 



78 


RAJA YOGA 


happiness by cheating and robbing others. What is 
the answer? The utilitarian can never give it. The 
answer is that our present existence in this world is 
like a drop in an infinite ocean, a link only in an 
infinite chain of existence. Whence, then, did those 
that preached unselfishness, and taught it to the 
human race, get that idea? We know it for certain 
that the idea is not instinctive ; for, animals, which 
have instinct, do not have it. Neither does reason 
know anything directly about the idea. Whence did 
it come, then? 

We find in studying history, that there exists 
one fact that was held in common by all the great 
teachers of religion that the world ever had : namely, 
that they all claim to have got the truths that they 
preached from beyond, though many of them did 
not know whence they were getting them. As for 
instance, one said that an angel came down in the 
form of a human being with wings, and told him, 
“Hear, oh man, this is the message.*’ Another 
said that a Deva or a “bright being” appeared to him 
and taught him the tniths. Another said that he 
dreamed that his ancestor came and told him all 
those things, and that he did not know anything 
beyond that. But this thing is common among them 
that they all claim to have heard the voice of God, or 
seen some wonderful vision. All claim that their 
knowledge has come to them from beyond and not 
through their reasoning faculty. And what does the 
science of Yoga teach? It teaches that they were 
right in claiming that all their knowledge came to 
them from beyond reason, nevertheless, it came from 
within themselves. 

The Yogi teaches that the mind has a higher 



DHYANA AND SAMADHI 


79 


State of existence, which is beyond reason, and above 
its ordinary conscious state, and when it gets to that, 
then knowledge beyond reasoning comes to it. The 
knpwledge that comes to such a mind is real meta- 
physical knowledge and is beyond all physical 
knowledge. Metaphysical or transcendental know- 
ledge thus comes to man, and that state of going 
beyond reason, transcending ordinary human nature, 
may come sometimes by chance to one who does 
not understand its science ; he, as it were, stumbles 
upon it. And when he thus stumbles upon that 
higher state he generally interprets his supercon- 
scious knowledge to have come from outside. Tliat 
explains the fact why an inspiration, or a piece of 
transcendental knowledge, alftiough same in different 
countries, has been held in one country to have come 
through an angel, and in another through a Deva, and 
in still another through God. And what does that 
mean? It means that the mind brought the know- 
ledge out of its own inner self, but that the finding out 
of the knowledge was interpreted according to the 
beliefs and education of the persons through whom 
it came. And the real fact is that those people, as 
it were, stumbled upon the superconscious state. 

The Yogi says, there is a great danger in stumb- 
ling upon the state. In good many cases there is the 
danger of the brain being destroyed, and, as a rule, 
you will find that all men, however great they were, 
who thus stumbled upon the super-conscious state 
without understanding it, groped in the dark, and had 
along with their knowledge some quaint superstition, 
generally. They opened themselves to hallucinations. 
Mohammed claimed that the Angel Gabriel came to 
him in a cave one day and took him on the heavenly 



80 


RAJA YOGA 


horse, Harak, and he visited the heavens I Withal, 
Mohammed, spoke some vvronderful truths, and if you 
read the Quoran, you will find the most wonderful 
truths mixed up with such superstitions. How will you 
explain it ? The man was inspired, no doubt, but that 
he somehow stumbled upon that inspiration. He was 
not a trained Yogi, and therefore, did not know the 
reason of what he was doing. Think of the good that 
Mohammed did to the world and also of the great 
evil that has been done through his fanaticism ! Think 
of the millions massacred through his teachings, 
mothers bereft of their children, children made 
orphans, whole countries destroyed and millions upon 
millions of people killed I 

In studying the liv^ of many great teachers we 
find that there was this danger. Yet we find at the 
same time that they were all inspired. Somehow or 
other they got into the superconscious state ; but, 
whenever a prophet had reached it by the simple 
force of emotion, or just by heightening his emotional 
nature, he brought away from that state some truth, 
and along with it some fanaticism and superstition 
which injured the world as much as the greatness of 
the truth did good. Indeed, to get any reason out of 
this mass of incongruity we call human life, we shall 
have to transcend our reason, but we must do it 
scientifically, slowly, and by regular practice, and with 
all that we must cast off all superstition. We must 
take it up just as we do any other science. On reason 
we must have to lay our foundation, and follow it as 
far as it leads ; and when reason fails, reason itself 
will show us the way to the highest plane. So when- 
ever you hear a man say, **1 am inspired,*’ and then 
talk the most irrational nonsense, avoid him by all 



DHYANA AND SAMADHI 


8 ( 


means. Why? Because instinct, reason and super- 
consciousness, or the unconscious, the conscious, and 
the superconscious states — belong to one and the 
sanre mind. There are not three minds in one, but 
that the same mind passes through the three stages in 
the process of its own development. Instinct de- 
velops into reason, and reason into transcendental 
consciousness ; therefore one never contradicts the 
other. So, whenever you meet with wild statements 
which contradict human reason and common sense, 
•reject them without any fear, because real inspira- 
tion will never contradict but will always fulfil reason, 
just as you have found greg^t prophets saying, ‘I 
come not to destroy but to fulfir*. Thus inspiration 
always comes to fulfil reason, and is in direct harmony 
with it. Therefore, whenever it contradicts reason 
you must know that it is no real inspiration. 

All the different steps in Yoga are intended to 
bring us scientifically to the superconscious state, or 
Samadhi. The most vital point to understand, there- 
fore, is that inspiration is as much in every man’s 
nature even at the present day as it was in the time 
of the ancient prophets. Those prophets were not 
unique men but were just the same sort of men as 
you or I, except that they were great Yogis and had 
gained superconsciousness, whereas you and I have 
not reached the same. They were not peculiar 
people. The very fact that one man ever reached 
that state, proves undoubtedly that it is possible for 
every man to do so. And not only is it possible to 
reach the state, but every man must, eventually, get 
to that state, and in that indeed is religion. Ex- 
perience is the only teacher we have. We may talk 
and reason all our lives, without ever understand- 

6 



82 


RAJA YOGA 


ing a word of superconscious truth, until we experi- 
ence it ourselves. You cannot hope to make a man 
a surgeon by simply giving him a few books ; he 
must have experience. You cannot satisfy my 
curiosity to see a country by showing me a map ; 
I must have actual experience. Maps can only create 
a little curiosity in me to get more perfect knowledge 
of the country. Beyond that, they have no value 
whatever. The Scriptures of the world serve in the 
same way, to rouse and stimulate the devotees to 
get direct experience of the superconscious state. 
Therefore all unnatural clinging to books only de- 
generates the human m.ind. Was there ever a more 
horrible blasphemy than to say that all the knowledge 
of God is confined in this or that book? How dare 
men call God infinite and yet try to compress Him 
into the covers of a little book ! Millions of people 
have been killed, because they did not believe what 
the books say ; because they would not see all the 
knowledge of God within the covers of a book 1 
That age of killing and murdering has gone by at, 
present, but the world is still tremendously bound 
up in its belief in books. But in order to reach the 
superconscious state in a scientific manner, we shall 
have to give up such clinging to books and practise 
and pass through the various steps that Raja Yoga 
teaches us. 

After Pratyah&ra and Dharana, we come next 
to Dhyana, or meditation. When the mind has been 
trained to remain fixed on a certain internal or ex- 
ternal location, for a few minutes, there comes to it 
the power of flowing in an unbroken current towards 
that point. This state is called Dhydna. And when 
this power of Dhyana has been so much intensified as 



DHYANA AND SAMADHI 


83 


to be able to reject the external part of perception, 
and remain meditating only on the internal part, or 
the meaning of it, that state is called Samddhi. The 
three* steps of Dhcirana, Dhydna and Samddhi taken 
together have been called in the Yoga books by the 
name of Sarny ama. That is to say, that if a mind 
can first concentrate upon an object, and then is able 
to continue in that concentration for a length of time, 
and then, by continued concentration, is able more- 
over to dwell only on the internal part of the i>ercep- 
tion of which the object was the effect, everything 
comes under the control of such a mind. 

This meditative state of the mind is the highest 
state of human existence. For, so long as there is 
desire in us, no real happiness can come. It is only 
the contemplative or witness-like study of objects 
that brings to us real enjoyment and happiness. The 
animal has its happiness in the senses, the man in his 
intellect, and the god-man in spiritual contemplation. 
It is only to the soul that has attained to this con- 
templative state that the world has really become 
beautiful. To him who desires nothing and does not 
mix himself up with them, the manifold changes of 
nature appear as one vast panorama of beauty and 
sublimity. 

We proceed now to deal with the ideas that have 
to be understood clearly as regards Dhydna, or medi- 
tation. When we hear a sound, there is first the 
external vibration, secondly, nerve motion that carries 
it to the mind ; and thirdly, the reaction from the 
mind, along with which flashes the knowledge of the 
object, which was the external cause of those 
physical and mental changes from ethereal vibra- 
tions up to mental reaction. These three have been 



84 


RAJA YCKkA 


called in Yoga philosophy as Sabda or sound, Artha 
or meaning, and Jnana or knowledge. In the language 
of modem philosophy they are called the ethereal 
vibration, the motion in the nerve and brain, and'^the 
mental reaction. Now these, though three distinct 
processes, have become mixed up in such a fashion 
as to become quite indiscernible. In fact, we cannot 
perceive now any one even of the above three 
causes ; we perceive only the effect of the three, and 
call that effect the external object. Every act of 
perception, nevertheless, includes the three elements 
and there is no reason why we should not be able to 
distinguish between them. 

Such being the case, when by previous prepara- 
tions the mind has become strong and controlled, and 
the power of finer perception has been attained, then 
it should be employed in meditation. This medita- 
tion must begin with gross objects at first and then 
rise slowly to finer and finer objects, until it has be- 
come objectless. The mind should be employed 
first in perceiving the external causes of sensations, 
then to find out the internal motions, and then to per- 
ceive the reaction of the mind. When it has suc- 
ceeded in perceiving the external causes of sensations 
by themselves, it will acquire the power of perceiving 
all fine material existences, all fine bodies and forms. 
When it has succeeded in perceiving the motions in- 
side, by themselves, it will gain the control of all 
mental waves within itself or in others, even before 
they have translated themselves into physical forces. 
And when it will be able to perceive the mental re- 
action by itself, the Yogi will acquire the knowledge 
of everything, inasmuch as every sensible object and 
every thought is the result of that reaction. Then 



DHYANA AND SAMADHI 


85 


will he have seen, as it were, the very foundations of 
his mind, and it will be under his perfect control. 
Different powers will come to the Yogi, and if he 
yields to the temptation of using any one of these, the 
road to his further progress will be barred. Such is 
the evil of running after the enjoyments of these 
powers. But, if he is strong enough to reject even 
those miraculous powers, he will attain to the goal 
of Yoga, namely, the complete suppression of the 
waves in the ocean of the mind. Then alone will 
the glory of his soul, untrammelled by the distractions 
of the mind and the motions of the body, shine in its 
full effulgence ; and the Yogi will find himself at the 
time, as he is and as he always was, namely, the 
essence of knowledge, immortal, and all-pervading. 

Samddhi is the final natural inheritance of every 
human being — nay, of every animal even. From the 
lowest animal to the highest angelic being, each one 
will have to come to that state some time or other, 
and then and then alone, will religion begin for him. 
And what have we been doing all the time but 
struggling towards that stage? There is no difference 
now between us and those who have no religion, 
because we have had no experience of the super- 
conscious state. And by concentration alone do we 
get to that experience. Each one of the steps to 
attain this state of Samadhi has thus been properly 
reasoned out and adjusted scientifically by the Yogis ; 
and, when faithfully practised, they will surely lead 
us to the desired end. And when we have reached 
that end, then will all sorrows cease, all miseries 
vanish, the seeds of actions will be burned, and the 
soul will be free for ever. 



CHAPTER VIII. 


The Raja Yoga in Brief. 

This is a summary of Raja Yoga freely translated 
from the Kurma Pur ana. 

The fire of Yoga bums the cage of sin that is 
around a man. Knowledge becomes purified, and 
Nirvana is obtained directly. From Yoga comes 
superconscious knowledge and that knowledge helps 
the Yogi to attain liberation. He who has attained 
knowledge by Yoga, with him the Lord is pleased. 
Know them to be gods incarnate who practise 
Mahayoga, either once a day, or twice a day, or 
thrice, or always. Yoga is divided into two parts. 
One is called the Abhdva, and the other, Mahdyoga. 
That in which one’s Self is meditated upon as zero, 
or as bereft cf every quality or limitation whatsoever, 
is called Abhdva. And that in which one sees the 
Self as full of bliss bereft of all impurities, and one 
with God, is called Mahay oga. The Yogi realises 
his Self by each one of them. The other Yogas that 
we read and hear of do not deserve to be compared 
with the great Brahmayoga, which the Yogi attains 
by means of them both and in which the Yogi finds 
himself and the whole universe as God Himself. That 
indeed is the highest end of the two kinds of Yoga. 

The steps that are to be taken in Yoga are — 
Yama, Niyama, Asana, Prandycima, Pratydhdra, 
Dharand, Dhydna and Samddhi. Non-injuring any- 
body, truthfulness, non-covetousness, chastity, and 
not receiving anything from another, are called 



RAJA YCXiA IN BRIEF 


87 


Yama ; it purifies the chitta or the mind. The non- 
producing of pain in every living being, by thought, 
word and deed is what is called Ahimsa, non-injur- 
ing. There is no virtue higher than non-injuring. 
There is no happiness higher than what a man obtains 
by his attitude of non-offensiveness to all creation. 
By truth we attain to meritorious work. Through 
truth everything is attained ; for, in truth is esta- 
blished everything. Relating facts as they are — that 
is truth. Not taking others’ goods by stealth or by 
force is what is called Asteyam, or non-covetous- 
ness. Chastity in thought, word and deed, always and 
in all conditions, is what is called Brahmacharyya. 
The non-receiving of anything whatever from any- 
body, even when one is suffering, is what is called 
Aparigraha. For the theory is that, when a man re- 
ceives something that is conducive to luxury from 
another man, his heart becomes impure, he loses his 
independence, and becomes bound and attached. 
The following are helps to success in Yoga — Niyama, 
regular habits and observances ; Tapas, austerity ; 
Svadhyaya, study ; Santosha, contentment ; Saucha, 
purity ; Ishvara pranidhdna, worshipping God. 
Fasting or in other ways controlling the body, is 
called the physical Tapes, Repeating the Vedas and 
other Mantras f by which the Sattva material in the 
body is purified, is called Svddhaya or study. There 
are three sorts of repetitions of such Mantras, One 
is the verbal, another semi- verbal, and the third 
mental. The verbal or audible is the lowest, and 
the mental or inaudible is the highest of them. The 
repetition which is so loud that anybody can hear is 
the verbal ; the next one is where only the organs 
vibrate, but no distinct sound is heard by a man who 



66 


RAJA YOGA 


is sitting near. That in which there is no sound 
whatever, but is only the mental repetition of the 
mantra, thinking of its meaning at the same time, is 
called the “mental muttering,” and that is the highest. 
The sages have said that there are two sorts of puri- 
fication, external and internal. The external puri- 
fication of the body is by water, earth, and so forth ; 
as for instance, by bathing. The internal purification 
or the purification of the mind is attained by the 
observance of truth in thought, word and deed, and 
all the other mental virtues. Both are necessary. It 
is not sufficient that a man should be internally pure 
and externally dirty. When both are not attainable 
the internal purity is the better, but no one will be 
a Yogi who does not observe both the kinds of puri- 
fication. Worship is performed by praising, by 
remembrance and by devotion to God. We have 
spoken about Yama and Niyama. The next thing 
to consider is Asana or posture. The only thing 
to understand in it is to hold the body straight, leav- 
ing the spine free, with the chest, the shoulders, and 
the head straight. Where lliere is danger from fire or 
water, where the ground is strewn with dry leaves, 
where there are wild animals, where four streets 
meet, where there is too much noise, or too many 
ant-hills, and where there are many wicked persons. 
Yoga must not be practised in such places. This 
applies more particularly to India. Do not practise 
Yoga when the body feels very lazy, or when the 
mind is veiy miserable and sorrowful, or when the 
body is ill. Go to a place which is well hidden, and 
where people do not come to disturb you. For as 
soon as you do not want people to know what you 
are doing, all the curiosity in the world will be 



RAJA YOGA IN BRIEF 


89 


awakened ; again, if you go into the street and want 
people to know what you are doing, they will not 
care. Do not choose dirty places, but choose a place 
wth beautiful scenery around, for practising Yoga. 
And when you practise, begin by saluting all the 
ancient Yogis and your own Guru and God. Next 
comes Prcindyama, Prana means the vital forces in 
one’s own body, and Yama means the controlling of 
them. There are three sorts of Prandydma, the very 
simple, the middle, and the very high. Prandyama is 
divided into two parts ; one is called filling, and the 
other is called emptying. When you perform a 
Prdndydma in twelve seconds, it is the lowest 
Prdndydma ; when you do it in twenty-four seconds, 
it is the middle Prdndydma ; and when that 
Prdndydma is performed in thirty-six seconds or 
more, it is called the higher Prdndydma, That 
Prdndydma in which there is first perspiration, then 
vibration of the body, and then the rising of the body 
of the performer from the seat, with great bliss in 
the man’s soul, is the highest Prdndydma. Thei 5 
is a mantra called the Gdyatri. It is considered to 
be very holy in the Vedds. It runs thus — “We 
meditate on the glory of that Being who has pro-, 
duced this universe ; may He enlighten our mind I * *< 
Then Om is joined to it at the beginning and at thd 
end. Repeat Gdyatri three times during a Prdnd-\ 
ydma. In all books they speak of Prdndydma being 
divided into Rechak,a or exhaling, PuraJ^a or inhaling, 
and Kumbhaka or restraining, stationary. The 
Indriyas or the organs of the senses are going out- 
wards and coming in contact always with external 
objects ; to bring them under the control of one’s will 



90 


RAJA YCXIA 


is what is called Pratyahara wTiich means literally, 
the gathering towards oneself. 

Fixing the mind on the lotus of the heart, or on 
the centre of the head, is what is called Dharand, 
When the mind remains fixed in one place, and 
when its waves rise up, holding to one object only, 
or in other words, when all other waves of it have 
stopped — except one kind of wave only, that state of 
the mind is called Dhydna, or meditation. When 
no such object is necessary for the mind to hold on 
and when the whole of it has become a single-form- 
ed wave, that state of it is called Samddhi. Bereft 
of all help from places and centres, only the meaning 
of the thing remains present in the mind at the time. 
If the mind can be fixed on a centre for twelve 
seconds it will be a Dhdrana ; twelve such Dhdrands 
will be a Dhydna ; twelve such Dhydnas will be a 
Samddhi. 

Dhydna has already been spoken of. A few 
examples are given now about what to meditate 
upon. Sit straight, and look at the tip of your nose. 
You will find that that helps to concentrate the 
mind, and that by controlling the two optic nerves 
one advances a long way towards the control of the 
arc of reaction, and so on to the control of the will. 
These are a few specimens to meditate upon : 

Imagine a lotus upon the top of the head, several 
inches up, with virtue as its centre, and knowledge as 
its stalk. Imagine the eight petals of the lotus to be 
the eight powers of the Yogi and the stamens and 
pistils inside, to be renunciation. Salvation comes 
to the Yogi who refuses the external powers, so the 
eight external petals of the lotus are to be thought of 
as the eight powers, and the internal stamens and 



RAJA YOGA BRIEF 


9 \ 

pistils as the renunciation of all those powers. Inside 
of that lotus think of the inexpressible One, 
surrounded with efiFulgent light, — the One Who is 
Almighty, Intangible, and Whose name is Om. 
Meditate on that. 

Another meditation is being given below : Think 
of a space in yiur heart, and in the midst of that 
space think that a flame is burning. Think of that 
flame as your own soul, and inside that flame think 
of another effulgent space, and consider that as the 
Soul of your soul, — God. Meditate upon that in the 
heart. Chastity, non-injuring, pardoning everyone — 
even the greatest enemy, truth, faith in the Lord, 
these are the qualities that in their perfection lead to 
Yoga. Be not afraid if you are not perfect in all 
of them, but work for getting perfection in one of 
them and the others will come. He who has given 
up all attachment, all fear, and all anger — he whose 
whole soul has gone unto the Lord — he who has 
taken refuge in the Lord and whose heart has be- 
come purified, with whatsoever desire he comes to 
the Lord, He will grant that to him. TTie*’efoAe 
worship Him through knowledge, or love, or re- 
nunciation. 

“He is My beloved worshipper who is not jealous 
of any being, who is the friend of all, who is merciful 
to all, who has nothing of his own, whose egotism is 
lost, who when injured always pardons, and never 
loses his balance in happiness or misery. Know him 
to be My beloved bhakjta who is always satisfied, who 
works always in Yoga, whose self has become con- 
trolled, whose will is firm, and whose mind and intelli- 
gence are given up unto Me. Know him to be My 
beloved who never becomes the cause of disturbance 



92 


RAJA YCXIA 


to Others, and never in his own turn gets disturbed by 
them, and who has given up excessive joy, grief, fear, 
and anxiety. Know him to be My beloved who does 
not depend on anything, who is pure and active, who 
does not care whether good comes or evil, and never 
becomes miserable, and who has given up all efforts 
for himself. Know him to be My beloved who is the 
same in praise or blame, with a silent, thoughtful 
mind, blessed with what little comes in his way, who 
has no home of his own and who is steady in his 
ideas. Such alone can become Yogis.*** 

There was a great god-sage called Narada. Just 
as there are sages or great Yogis among mankind, so 
there are great Yogis among the gods. Narada was 
such a Yogi. He used to travel everywhere. One 
day when he was passing through a forest, he came 
across a man who had been meditating until the white 
ants had built a huge mound round his body; the man 
had been sitting in that position so long ! He said to 
Narada. “Where are you going?** Narada replied. 
“1 am going to heaven.** “Then, ask God when He 
will be merciful to me — when I shall attain free- 
dom.** Narada said, he would do so and went on 
his way. But before he had gone very far he came 
across another man, who was jumping about, singing 
and dancing. He said, “O Narada, where are you 
going?** and his voice and gestures were wild! 
Narada said, “I am going to heaven.*’ “Then, ask 
God when I shall be free.’* Narada agreed and went 
on. In course of time he came again by the same 
road, and there was the man who had been meditat- 
ing till the ant-hills had grown round him. He said 


* BKagavad'Gita, Ch, XII, Verses 13-16 and 19. 




RAJA YOGA IN BRIEF 


93 


‘*0, Narada, did you ask the Lord about me?” ”Oh, 
yes.” “What did He say?” “The Lord told me that 
you would attain freedom in four more births.” Then 
the man began to weep and wail ; and said, “Alas 
1 have meditated until an ant -hill has been raised 
around me, and still I have four more births yet to go 
through!” Narada went to the other man. “Did 
you ask my question?” “Oh, yes. Do you see this 
tamarind tree? 1 have to tell you that as many leaves 
as there are on this tree, so many times you will be 
born before you attain freedom.” The man on hear 
ing this began to dance for joy, and said, “Indeed, 
I shall have freedom after such a short time 1 ’ ’ And 
a voice came unto him that very moment, saying, 
“My child, you will have freedom this very minute.” 
That indeed was the reward for his wonderful per- 
severance. For, he was ready to work through all 
those births and nothing discouraged him. But the 
first man felt otherwise and thought that even four 
more births would be too long. Only perseverance 
like that of the man who was willing to wait aeons, 
will bring about the highest result. 



PATANJALrS 


YOGA APHORISMS 
Introduction. 

Before going into the Yoga- Aphorisms we shall 
discuss one great question, namely, that upon which 
the whole theory of religion rests, according to the 
Yogis. It seems to be the consensus of opinion of all 
the great minds of the world, and it has almost been 
demonstrated by researches into physical nature, 
that we are but the outcome and manifestation of an 
absolute condition, which is at the back of our present 
relative condition, and that we are going forward, to 
return to lhat again. That being granted, the ques- 
tion arises at present, which of the two conditions is 
better, — ^the absolute or the relative. There are not 
wanting people who think that the manifested state 
is the highest state of man. Thinkers of great calibre 
are of opinion that we are but manifested specimens 
of an undifferentiated being, and that the differentiat- 
ed state is higher than that undifferentiated or abso- 
lute condition. Because they imagine that in the 
absolute there cannot be any quality whatsoever and 
therefore it must be insensate, dull, and lifeless. For 
that reason, they think that this life alone can be 
enjoyed and that therefore we must cling to it. Now, 
let us first inquire into the other solutions that have 
been found of human life. There was an old solu- 
tion that man after death remained as he was and 
that all his good sides, minus his evil sides, remained 



YOGA APHORISMS 


95 


for ever. Logically stated this means that man’s 
goal is the world, and that this world carried a stage 
higher, with the elimination of its evils, is the state 
they call heaven. TTiis theory, on the face of 
it, is absurd and puerile, because it cannot be. 
There cannot be good without evil, or evil without 
good. To live in a world where it is all good and no 
evil, is what Sanskrit logicians call a “dream 
in the air.” Another theory in modem times 
has been presented by several schools, namely, 
that man’s destiny is to go on always improving, 
and struggling towards, but never reaching the 
goal. This statement, though apparently very 
nice, is also absurd ; because there is no such thing 
as motion in a straight line. Every motion is in a 
circle. If you take up a stone, and project it into 
space, and then wait long enough, that stone would 
come back exactly to the place from where it started, 
provided there are no forces to the contrary to prevent 
it from doing so. A straight line, infinitely projected, 
must end in a circle. Therefore, the idea that the 
destiny of man is infinite progression forward and 
forward without a halting, is absurd. Although 
extraneous to the subject, 1 may remark here that the 
idea of a force always completing a circle explains 
the ethical theory, that you must not hate but love 
every one. Because, just as in the case of electricity 
or any other force, the modem theory is that the 
power leaves the dynamo and completes the circle 
back to the dynamo, so with all forces in nature ; they 
must come back to the source. Therefore do not hate 
anybody, because that force of hatred which comes 
out from you, must, in the long run, come back to 
you. And if you love, that love also will come back 



% 


RAJA YOGA 


to you, completing the circuit. It is as certain as it 
can be, that every impulse of love or hatred that goes 
out of the heart of man comes back to him in full 
force and nothing can stop it. On other and practical 
grounds, however, we see that the theory of eternal 
progression is untenable ; for destruction is the goal of 
everything earthly. All our struggles and hopes and 
fears and joys end but in death. Nothing is so cer- 
tain as this. Where, then, is this infinite progression, 
this motion in a straight line? Everywhere around, 
we see but the display of things going out to a dis- 
tance, and again coming back to the centre from 
which they started. See how from nebulae the sun, 
the moon, and the stars are produced ; then they 
dissolve and go back to nebulae. The same is being 
done everywhere. The plant takes material for its 
growth from the earth, and then in the end dissolves, 
and gives it back. Every form in this world is taken 
out of the surrounding atoms and then goes back to 
those atoms again. 

It cannot be that the same law acts differently 
in different places. For, law is uniform, and nothing 
is more certain than that. And if what has been said 
above is the law of nature, so will it be with thought. 
That also will dissolve and come back to its origin. 
Therefore, whether we will it or not, we shall have 
to return to the origin, which is called God or the 
Absolute. We have all come from God, and we are 
all. bfl>y]Qd.1;.Q go to God^^^^^ that God by any name 
you like-— call him^God, or Absolute, orT^ture, or by 
any other name, the fact will always remain the same. 
And God will ever be what tEe scriptures have pro- 
claimed — “From whom all this universe comes out, 
in whom all that is bom lives, and to whom all that 



YOGA APHORISMS 


97 


is living returns/* This one fact is certain. Nature 
works on the same plan, and what is being worked 
out in one sphere, is being worked out in millions of 
other spheres. What you see with regard to the 
planets, the same will you find with this earth, with 
men and with the stars. The huge wave is a com- 
pound of millions of small waves ; so the life of the 
whole world is a compound of millions of little lives, 
and the death of the whole world is the compound, 
likewise, of the deaths of millions of little beings. 

Now the question arises, is going back to God 
the higher state, or is it not? The philosophers of 
the Yoga-school emphatically declare that it is. 1 hey 
say that man's present state is a degeneration and 
there is not a single religion on the face of the earth 
which says that man is an improvement. The idea 
with them is that the beginning of man is perfect and 
pure, that he degenerates until he cannot degenerate 
further, and that there comes a time when he shoots 
upward again to complete the circle ; the circle 
spoken of above, must be here also. However loW 
he might go, he must ultimately take the upward bend 
again, and go back to the original source, which is 
God. Man comes from God in the beginning, in the 
middle he becomes man, and in the end he goes back 
to God. This is the method of putting it in the 
Dualistic form. In the Monistic form they say that 
man is God even now, arid goes back to Him again. 
If the present state of man is the higher one, then 
why is there so much horror and misery in it and why 
is there an end to it? Aye, if this is the higher state, 
why does it end? That which corrupts and degene- 
rates can never be the highest state. Why should 
it be then so diabolical, so unsatisfying? It is only 
7 



98 


RAJA YOGA 


excusable, inasmuch as through it we are taking a 
higher groove ; we have to pass through it in order 
to become regenerate again. Put a seed into the 
ground and it disintegrates, and dissolves after a 
time, and out of that dissolution comes the splendid 
tree. So every soul has become degenerated, to come 
out as the stately tree. So it follows that the sooner 
we get out of this state, which we call “man,** the 
better it is for us. Is it by committing suicide that we 
get out of this state? Not at all. That will be 
making it all the worse. Torturing ourselves, or con- 
demning the world, is not the way to get out of it. 
We have to pass through the Slough of Despond 
and the sooner we are through, the better. At the 
same time it must always be remembered that this 
is not the highest state. 

Now what is really diflficult to understand here is 
that the Absolute state, which has been declared by 
the Yogis to be the highest, is not, as some fear, the 
state of the zoophite or of the stone. That would be 
a dangerous thing to think. According to such 
thinkers there are only two states of existence, — the 
one like that of the stone, and the other, of thought. 
But what right have they to limit existence to these 
two ? Why can there not be a state infinitely superior 
to thought? The vibrations of light, when they are 
very low, we do not sae ; when they become a little 
more intense they become light to us ; when they 
become still more intense we do not see them ; it is 
as darkness to us. But is that darkness which we 
see in the end, the same in character as what we saw 
in the beginning? Certainly not ; there is the diflFer- 
ence of the two poles between them. Similarly, is 
the thoughtlessness of the stone the same as the 



YOGA APHORISMS 


99 


thoughtlessness of God? Certainly not. God does 
not think ; He does not reason ; why should He? Is 
anything unknown to Him, that He should reason? 
The stone cannot reason ; God does not. Such is 
the difference. These philosophers think it to be 
awful to go beyond thought ; for they find nothing 
beyond thought. But the fact is that there are higher 
states of existence beyond reasoning. It is really 
beyond the intellect that the first state of religious life 
is to be found, and when you step beyond thought, 
intellect and reasoning, then alone you have made 
the first step towards God. TTiat indeed is the f egin- 
ning of real life, whereas this, that is commonly 
called life, is but an embryo state. 

The next point to consider is, what proof is there 
that the state beyond thought and reasoning is the 
highest state? In the first place, all the great men of 
the world, men who really moved the world and 
never thought of any selfish ends whatsoever, have 
declared that the present life is but a little sta»ge on 
the way, and that our real life is beyond, in the 
Infinite. In the second place, they have not only said 
so, but laid the attainment of that type open to every- 
one ; they have left the methods by which they 
attained it, so that all can follow in their steps. In 
the third place, there is no other way left and there 
is no other explanation to this our present limited 
existence. Taking for granted that there is no higher 
state, why then are we going through this circle all 
the time ; what reason can be there to explain the 
existence of this world? The sensible world will 
then be the limit to our knowledge, if we cannot go 
any farther and if we must not ask for anything more. 
That indeed is what is called agnosticism. But what 



100 


RAJA YOGA 


reason is there to believe in the testimony of the 
senses? I would call that man a true agnostic who 
would stand still and die never believing in the 
deluding testimony of his senses. Aye, if reason is 
all in all, it leaves us no place to stand on this side 
of nihilism. And if a man is agnostic of everything 
else but money, fame and name, he is only a fraud. 
For. Kant has proved beyond all doubt that we can 
never penetrate beyond the tremendous dead wall, 
called reason. And that is the very first idea upon 
which all Indian thought took its stand, dared to 
seek, and succeeded in finding something higher than 
reason, where alone the explanation of the present 
state is to be found. This indeed is the value of the 
study of Yoga, that it will take us beyond the world 
of senses. The prayer in the Vedas, “Thou art our 
father, and wilt take us to the other shore of this 
ocean of ignorance,” has indeed been fulfilled, and 
Yoga is that science of religion which takes us 
beyond the realm of reason. Yea, nothing else can 
do so. 



THE YOGA APHORISMS. 

CHAPTER I. 


I— wrfv irt<: i 

Concentration : Its Stages. 

1. Atha Yogdnushdsanam. 

1 . Now concentration is explained. 

2 . Y ogasch ittavrittinirodhah . 

2. Yoga is restraining the mind-stuff 
{Chitta) from taking various forms {vrittis). 

good deal of explanation is necessary here. 
We have to understand what Chitta is, and what its 
vrittis are. I have eyes. But the eyes will not see by 
themselves, if I take away the brain-centre which is 
in the head. TTie eyes will still be there, the ’•etina 
complete, and also the picture, and yet the eyes will 
not see. So the eyes are only secondary instruments 
and can never be called the organs of vision. TTie 
real organ of vision is in the nerve-centre of the brain 
and without that the two eyes alone will not be 
sufficient for vision. Again, a man is seen sometimes 
to sleep with his eyes open. The light-picture is 
there then and the brain-centre is there also, but the 
man does not see. For, a third thing is necessary, 


m H \ w 




102 


RAJA YOGA 


namely, that the mind must be j'oined to the organ. 
So for every act of vision we must have the eye or 
the external instrument, the brain-centre and the 
agency of the mind. Carriages roll down the street, 
and if you are deeply engaged in something, you do 
not hear them. Why ? Because your mind was not 
attached to the organ of hearing. So for every act 
or perception we need first the instrument, then the 
organ, and thirdly, the mind-attachment to these 
two. The mind takes the impression farther in and 
presents it to the determinative faculty — Buddhi — 
which reacts. And along with this reaction Hashes 
the idea of egoism. Then that mixture of action and 
reaction is presented to the Purusha or the Soul, 
who perceives every object in this sort of mixture. 
The organs or Indriyas together with the mind or 
\Janas, the determinative faculty or Buddhi, and 
egoism or Ahamkdra, form the group called the 
Antahharana or the internal instrument. The Manas , 
the Buddhi and the Ahamhara are but various pro- 
cesses in the mind-stuff, called Chitia. CThe waves of 
thought in the Chitia are called vrittis,^ the literal 
rendering of which is the whirlpool. Now, what is 
thought? Thought is a force like gravitation or re- 
pulsion. It is absorbed by us from the infinite store- 
house of force in nature ; the instrument called 
Chitia takes hold of this kind of force, and when it 
passes out at the other end, it is called thought. This 
force is supplied to us through food. And as out of 
the food the body obtains the power of motion and 
so forth, so out of it is manufactured other finer 
forces, which we call thought. Naturally, we see 
then, that the mind is not intelligent ; yet it appears 
to be so. Why? Because the intelligent soul is 



YOGA APHORISMS 


103 


behind it. You are the only sentient b^ng, and the 
mind is but the instrument through which you catch 
the external world. Take, for instance, this book ; 
as ^ book it does not exist outside ; what exists out- 
side is unknown and unknowable. It is the sugges- 
tion that gives a blow to the mind and the mind gives 
out in response to that a reaction — ^just as when a 
stone is thrown into the water, the water is thrown 
against it in the form of waves. The real universe 
is thus the occasion of the reaction of the mind. A 
book-form, or an elephant-form, or a man-form, is 
not outside ; all that we know of each one of them 
is but our mental reaction from the outer suggestion. 
Matter has thus been rightly defined as the “p^nna- 
nent possibility of sensation,” by John Stuart Mill. 
It is only the suggestion that is existing outside. 
Take for example the event of pearl-making by an 
oyster. A grain of sand or something gets inside and 
begins to irritate the oyster which throws a sort of 
enamel-coating round the sand and this makes the 
pearl. TTie universe as we perceive it, is made 
likewise of our own enamel, so to say, while the real 
thing which causes us to perceive the universe is, 
like the grain of sand in the oyster, inside the enamel 
which we have thrown around it. The ordinary man 
will never understand it, because, when he tries to 
be able to do so he throws out and sees only his own 
enamel. We shall now understand what is meant by 
vrittis. The real man is behind the mind ; the mind 
is but the instrument in his hands, and it is his own 
intelligence that is always percolating through it. It 
is only when the real man stands behind it that the 
mind becomes intelligent, and when he gives it up 
it falls to pieces and becomes nothing. So you 



104 


RAJA YOGA 


understand what is meant by Chitta, ( It is the mind« 
stufF, a nd the vr ittis are the waves or ripples that ri se 
m it when ex ternal c ^ses impinge on it . These 
vrittis, therefore7 fornT the^whole of our universe ; 
and we shall go beyond thought and reason or attain 
the Absolute state, if we can make these vrittis cease. 

The bottom of a lake we cannot see, if its surface 
is covered with ripples. But when the ripples have 
subsided, and the water is calm, then it is possible 
for us to catch a glimpse of the bottom. Again, if 
the water of it is muddy and agitated all the time, 
the bottom will not be seen. But when the water is 
clear, and there are no waves, we shall see the 
bottom. Now the bottom of the lake may represent 
our own true Self, the lake, the Chitta, and the 
waves, the vrittis in it.^ Again, the mind exists in 
three different states ; one is called Tamas, or dark, 
just as in brutes and idiots, where it acts only to 
injure others and no other idea comes to it. Then 
there is the active state of mind, called Rajas, when 
its chief motives for action are power and enjoyment 
and when it says unto itself, “I will be powerful and 
rule others.** Then at last, when the waves cease, 
and the water of the lake becomes clear, there comes 
to it the Sattva or serene and calm state. This state 
is not inactive, but rather intensely active. For it is 
the greatest manifestation of mental power to remain 
' calm always. It is easy to be active. It is easy to 
let the reins go, and let the horses drag you. Any 
one can do that. But he who can stop the plunging 
horses is the strong man. For, which requires the 
greater strength, letting go, or restraining? The calm 
, man is not the man who is dull. You must not 
mistake Sattva for dulness, or laziness. The calm 


YOGA APHORISMS 


105 


man is one who can restrain the mental waves at will. 
Activity, therefore, is the manifestation of a lower 
kind of strength, and calmness, of a superior kind. 

• The Chitta is always trying to get back to its 
natural pure state, but the organs draw it out. To 
restrain it and check its outgoing tendency, and to 
start it on the return journey to the essence of intelli- 
gence is what Yoga leaches ; only in ihls way can 
the Chitta get into its proper course. 

Although the Chitta is present in every animal 
from the lowest to the highest, it is only in man that 
we find it possessed of intellect, and until the mind- 
stuff has become intelligent it is not possible for it to 
return inside its own self through all the various steps 
taught in Yoga, and liberate the soul Immediate 
salvation is impossible for the cow or the dog, 
although they have a mind each, because the Chitta 
ii them has not as yet taken the form that we call 
intellect. 

TTie Chitta manifests itself in the following 
different forms — scattering, darkening, wakening, 
and concentrating.* These are the four states Ui 
which the mind-stuff manifests itself. The scattered 
form is one of activity, when it has the constant 
tendency to go after the acquirement of power, 
pleasure and so forth, which bring pain in the end. 
Then, the darkened form is one of dulness, the only 
tendency of which is to injure others. TTie commen- 

* The commentators speak here of another form of Chitta, 
called the Ntntddha or the perfectly concentrated. But as the 
Ekdgra and the Niruddha have only a quantitative difference 
between them, and as both of them lead one to Samddhi, the 
Swami has overlooked the division. For, in fact the Ekdgra 
leads one to the Niruddha state. 



106 


RAJA YOGA 


tator says, the first form is natural to the Devas and 
the angels ; and the second form, to the demoniacal 
natures. The wakening or the Vikshipta form is 
when the Chitta struggles to centre itself. The 
EkAgra or the concentrated form of the Chitta is 
what brings us to Samadhi, 

3. Tadd drashtuh svarupevasthanam. 

3. At that time (the time of concentration) 
the seer (Purusha) rests in his own (unmodified) 
state. 

As soon as the waves have stoppej^ and the lake 
has be come quiet, we_see the ground below the lake. 
So ydt^the mind ; when it is calnij^ we see what our 
own^ nature is : we then do not identify ourselves 
with the waves, but remain our own selves. 

4. Vrittisarupyamitaratra. 

4. At other times (other than that of 
concentration) the seer is identified with the 
modifications (of the Chitta). 

For instance, I am in a state of sorrow, for some 
one blames me. This is a modification or oritti, and 
I identify myself with it, and the result is misery. 

5. Vrittayah panchatayyah hdishtd aklishtah. 

5. There are five classes of modifications, 
(some) painful and (others) not painful. 

6. Pramdna-'Viparyyaya-vikalpa-nidrd-smritayah . 

w ti ^ II 

II 8 II 

ii t ii 



ycx;a aphorisms 


107 


6. (These are) right knowledge, indis- 
crimination, verbal delusion, sleep and memory. 

7. PratyakshSnumanigamdh pramdncinu 

*7. Direct perception, inference, and com- 
petent evidence are proofs or right knowledge. 

When two of our perceptions do not contradict 
each other we call it proof or right knowledge. As 
for instance, I hear something ; if it contradicts some- 
thing that I have already perceived, I begin to doubt 
it and do not believe it. There are three kinds of 
proof. Direct perception or Pratyaksham, that is to 
say, whatever we see and feel is proof, if there has 
been nothing to delude the senses. I see the world ; 
that is sufficient proof that it exists. Secondly, Anu- 
mdna or inference, that is to say, when you see a sign, 
and from that come to the thing signified. Third^, 
Aptavakyam or the direct perception of the Yogi, or 
of those who have seen the truth. We are all 
struggling to gather knowledge, but whereas you and 
I have to struggle hard, and come to knowledge 
through the long and tedious process or reasoning, 
the Yogi who has become perfectly pure, has not to 
go through that process. For the past, the present, 
and the future are spread before his mind like a book 
to read ; he, therefore, does not require to go through 
the tedious process of reasoning, and his words 
become proofs, because he sees all knowledge in 
himself ; thus in one sense, he can be called 
omniscient. The authors of the sacred scriptures 
were such persons ; therefore the scriptures are 
regarded as proof. And if any such persons are living 


II '0 II 



108 


RAJA YCXIA 


at present, their words also will be regarded as proof. 
Other philosophers have gone into long discussions 
about Aptas or persons who have thus found all 
knowledge within themselves. They have raised the 
question, where is the proof that that is so? The 
answer is that the words of such people are proof 
because they see what they say. For, is it not a fact 
that whatever I and you see are regarded as proofs, 
if these do not contradict any past knowledge? 
There is knowledge beyond the senses, and when- 
ever it does not contradict reason and past human, 
experiences, that knowledge is to be regarded as 
proof. Else any mad man may come into this room 
and say he sees angels around him ; that of course 
would not be proof. Therefore, to become regarded 
as proof the knowledge, in the first place, must be true 
knowledge ; secondly, it must not contradict know- 
ledge of the past ; and thirdly, it must depend upon 
the character of the man who pronounces it. It has 
been said sometimes that the character of the man is 
not of so much importance as what he may say and 
that we must first hear what he says. This may be 
true as regards other things ; a man may be wicked, 
and yet make an astronomical discovery ; but in 
religion it is different, because no impure man will 
ever have the power to reach the truths of religion. 
Therefore, we have first of all to see that the man 
who declares himself to be an Apia is a perfectly un- 
selfish and holy person ; secondly, that he has reached 
beyond the senses ; thirdly, that what he says does 
not contradict the past knowledge of humanity. For 
any new discovery of truth does not contradict the 
past truths, but fits into them. And fourthly, that 
truth must have a possibility of verification. If a man 



YOGA APHORISMS 


109 


says, “1 have seen a vision/ and tells me that I have 
no right to see it, I will never believe him. Every 
one must have the power to see the vision for himself. 
Again, no one who sells his knowledge is an Apia, 
Ail these conditions must be fulfilled ; you must first 
see that the man is pure, and that he has no selfish 
motive, or that he has no thirst for gain or fame. 
Secondly, he must show that he has reached the 
superconscious state. TTiirdly, he must give us some- 
thing that we cannot get from our senses, and which 
is for the benefit of the world : we must see also that 
It does not contradict other truths, for if it contradicts 
other scientific truths we must reject it at once. 
Fourthly, the man should never be singular in his 
experience ; he should represent only what all men 
can attain. The three sorts of proof, then, are direct 
sense-perception, inference, and the words of an 
Apia. I cannot translate this word into English. It 
cannot be rendered by the word “inspired,” because 
inspiration comes from outside, while this sort of 
knowing state comes from within one’s own self 
The literal meaning of the word is “attained.” 

8. Viparyyayo miihy&jnanamatadrupam 

ptatishthiiam. 

8. Indiscrimination is false knowledge not 
established in the real nature (of things). 

The next class of vrittis that arise is mistaking 
one thing for another, as a piece of mother-of-pearl 
is taken for a piece of silver. 

9. SabdcLjnananapaii vastusUnyo Vikalpah. 






no RAJA YOGA 

9. Verbal delusion follows from words 
having no (corresponding) reality. 

There is another class of vrittis called Vikalpa. 
A word is uttered, and we do not wait to consider its 
meaning, but jump to a conclusion immediately. It 
is a sign of weakness of the Chitta. You can under- 
stand now the theory of restraint. The weaker the 
man is, the less he has of restraint. Measure your- 
selves always with the standard of restraint. When 
you are going to be angiy or miserable on hearing 
some news, reason it out and see how it has thrown 
your mind into such vrittis, 

10. Abhava-pratyaydbalamband vrittirnidrd, 

10. Sleep is a vritti which embraces the 
Reeling of voidness. 

The next class of vrittis is called sleep and dream. 
When we awake to know that we have been sleep- 
ing, we can then have a memory only of that percep- 
tion. For, that which we do not perceive we can 
never have any memory of, and every reaction is a 
wave in the lake. Now, if during sleep the mind had 
no waves, it would have no perceptions of the state, 
positive or negative, and therefore we would not 
remember them. The very reason of our remember- 
ing the state of sleep, therefore, is that during sleep 
there must have been a certain class of waves in the 
mind. Memory is another class of vrittis, which is 
called Smriti, 

1 1 . Anubhutavishaydsampramoushah smritih. 


I II \o II 
wftr: II U II 




YOGA APHORISMS 


111 


1 1 . Memory b when the {vrittis of) per- 
ceived objects do not slip away (and through 
impressions come back to consciousness). 

Memory can be caused by the previous three 
classes of vrittis. For instance, you hear a word. 
That word is like a stone thrown into the lake of 
Chitta ; it causes a ripple ; that ripple, again, rouses 
a series of ripples in it ; this process is called memory. 
So during sleep a peculiar kind of ripple is raised in 
the China and when that throws It into a ripple of 
memory it is called a dream. Dream is another form 
of the ripple, which in the waking state is called 
imagination. 

12. Abhydsavairagydhhyam tannirodhah. 

12. Their control is by practice and noir- 
attachment. 

The mind, to have this sort of non-attachment, 
must be clear, good and rational. Why should we 
practise? Because each action is like a pulsation 
quivering over the surface of the lake. The vibration 
dies out, and what is left of it is the Samskara or 
impression. When a large number of one kind of 
impressions is Lft on the mind they coalesce and 
become a habit. It is said that * 'habit is second 
nature*’; not only so, but it forms also the first and 
the whole nature of man ; for, everything that we 
are is the result of habit. That fact ought to give us 
consolation, because, if one’s mental constitution is 
made up only of habit, one can make and unmake it 





112 


RAJA YOGA 


at any time. Thus Sams/earas are left by all the 
vibrations that are passing through our mind, each 
one of them leaving its result. Our character is the 
sum-total of these impressions or marks, and accord- 
ing as a particular kind of wave prevails in the mind 
it takes its peculiar tone. If good waves prevail it 
becomes good, if bad ones prevail it becomes wicked, 
if joyful ones do so it becomes jovial, and so forth. 
The only remedy, therefoie, for bad habits is to form 
counter habits ; the impressions that have been left 
by bad waves of thought and which are commonly 
called bad habits, are to be controlled by good 
habits. Go on doing good and thinking holy thoughts 
continuously ; that is the only way to suppress base 
impressions. Never say, “that man is hopeless,’* 
because he represents only a bundle of habits, that 
can be checked by new and better ones. For our 
character is nothing but repeated habits, and repeated 
habits alone can reform it. 

13. Tatra sthitau yatnobhydsah, 

13. Continuous struggle to keep them 
(the Vrittis) perfectly restrained is practice. 

What is practice ? It is the attempt to restrain 
the mind, or in other words, it is to prevent the 
Chitta from going out into waves. 

14. Sa tu dtrghal^dla-nairantaryya-satkarasevHo 

dridhabhiimh . 

14. Practice becomes firmly grounded 
when observed for a long time with constant 
and intense zeal (to attain the end). 

^ II u 




YCXiA APHORISMS 


113 


Restraint does not come in one day, but by long 
continued practice. 

1 5 . Drishtanusraviko-vishaya-vitrishnasya 
• vasi^ara-samjna vairagyaw. 

15. That state of the mind which comes 
as the effect of giving up thirst of enjoying 
objects of the senses, either seen or heard, and 
in which one becomes conscious of one’s power 
of control of those objects, is non-attachment. 

The two motive powers of our actions are (I) 
what we see ourselves ; (2) the experience of others. 
These two forces are throwing the lake of the mind 
into various waves. Renunciation is the power of 
battling against them and holding the mind in check. 
Therefore, renunciation of the motive powers of our 
actions is what we want. As for instance, you are 
passing through a street and a man comes and takes 
your watch. TTiat throws your Chitta immediately 
into the form of a wave, called anger. Allow not 
that to come. If you can prevent the rising of that 
wave, you have renunciation or V airdgyam, Sii*n- 
larly, the worldly-minded teach us that the attain- 
ment of sense-enjoyments is the highest ideal in life 
and in course of time that appears to us as a 
tremendous temptation. To deny one’s self of such 
enjoyments and not allow the mind to come to wave- 
forms with regard to them, is renunciation. There- 
fore, to control the twofold motive powers arising 
from my own experience and from the experience of 
others and prevent the Chitta from being governed 

8 



114 


RAJA YCKiA 


by them, is Vair&gyam. Such waves of the mind 
should be controlled by me, and not I by them — this 
sort of mental strength is what is called renunciation 
or Vairagyam and that is the only way to freedom. 

16. Tatparam pumsha-l^hyatirgunavaitrishnyam. 
16 . That extreme non-attachment which 
gives up even the qualities » shows (the real na- 
ture of) the Purusha.* 

It is the highest manifestation of the power of 
non-attachment when it takes away even our attrac- 
tion towards the qualities of nature. We have first 
to understand what the Purusha or the Self is, and 
what the qualities are. According to Yoga Philo- 
sophy the whole of nature consists of three qualities ; 
one is called Tamas, another Rajas, and the third 
Sattva, These three qualities manifest themselves 
in the physical world as attraction, repulsion, and 
control. All things in nature, all manifestations of 
it, are but combinations and recombinations of those 
three forces. Nature has been divided into various 
categories by the Sdnkhyas ; the Self of man which is 
beyond all of them is effulgent by Its very nature. 
It is pure and perfect. And whatever of intelligence we 
see in nature is from the reflection of the Self upon 
nature. For, nature itself is insentient and we must 
— 

HUH 

* The commentators have explained the aphorism as 
follows — ^That non-attachment becomes extreme and takes away 
even the attraction of the mind towards the qualities of nature 
after one has seen the Purusha. But as that is, as it were, 
putting the cart before the horse, the Swami has rejected it and 
explained the Sutra differently. 


YOGA APHORISMS 


115 


remember that nature includes mind also. TTie mind 
is in . nature and thought too is in nature. From 
thought down to the grossest form of matter, every- 
thing is in nature, or in other words, is a manifestation 
of nature. This nature has covered the Self of man, 
and when it takes away the covering, the Self 
becomes unveiled, and appears in Its own glory. 
Non-attachment, as it has been described in aphorism 
15, as being the control of the objects in nature, is 
the greatest help towards manifesting the Self. TTie 
next aphorism defines Sam&dhi, or perfect concen- 
tration, which is the goal of the Yogi. 

17. V itark.ci-vichdTdnanda8mitdnugam&t 

samprajndtah. 

17. The concentration called perfect 
knowing is that which is related to reasoning, 
discrimination, bliss and unqualified egoism. 

Samadhi is divided into two varieties. One is 
^^ alled t he Sampr^n ata, or that which brings pei?ect 
knowledge of the object of meditario n — an d the 
c5fher, the A sam0rajjnata , or that in which not hing is 
known, but in whic^th^^lf only remains in Its full 
glor^* Th e ^ampraj n dta is o f four vari etie s. In this 
kind of Samadhi come al l the pow ers of c o ntrollin g 
nature. The first variety is called the Savitarl^a, when 
the mind nieditates upon an object a^in and again , 
*^by fsolatmgTrtfonrbther oEj Scts. f Tfiere are two sorts 
of cdDTects^fdr'liniedita^ — ^the categories of nature, 
and the Purusha, Again, the categories are of two 
varieties ; the twenty-four categories are insentient. 







116 


RAJA YOGA 


and the one sentient, is the Purusha, When the mind 
thinks of the elements of nature by thinking of their 
beginning and their end, this is one sort of Saoitarka, 
The words require explanation. This part of Yoga is 
% based entirely on the Sankhya Philosophy, according 
to which egoism, will and mind have a common basis, 
called the Chitta. The Chitta is the stuff out of which 
they are all manufactured. This mind-stuff takes in 
the forces of nature and projects them as thought. 
There must be something, again, where both force 
and matter are one. This is called the Avyaktam, or 
the unmanifested state of nature, as it existed before 
creation and to which, after the end of a cycle, the 
whole of manifested nature returns, to come out again 
after another period. Beyond that is the Purusha, 
the essence of intelligence, by knowing Whom one 
becomes free. There is no liberation in getting 
powers. They lead us only after the enjoyments of 
this life. \But all search for enjoyment in the world 
is vain, ana this Is the old, old lesson which man finds 
^"KarHTo learnJWh^en he does learn it, he gets out 
oTTKeTniverse and becomes free. [The possession of 
what are called occult powers only intensify the world 
in our minds and in the end intensify suffering. As 
a scientist, Patanjali is bound to point out the possi- 
bilities of this science, though he never misses an 
opportunity to warn us against going after powers. 
{Kno wledg e al one is power, and as soon as we begin 
to know aThing we get power over iCJ 5b, w^hen the 
mmdnEeginsToTneHi^ elements it 

gains power over them. ^That sort of meditation 
where the external gross elements are the objects, is 
called Savitarka>) Tarl^a literally means question, and 



YOGA APHORISMS 


117 


Saviiarka, with question. Therefore the meaning of 
the word is — questioning the gross elements, as it 
werjs, that they may give up their truths and their 
powers to the man who meditates upon them. Q\gain, 
in the very same meditation, when one struggles to 
take the elements out of time and space, and think of 
them as they are, by themselves, it is called 
Nirvitarka, or without questioning. '^(When meditation 
goes a step higher, and takes the Tanmatras or fine 
elements as its object, and thinks of them as in time 
and space, it is called Savichdra, or with discrimina- 
tion, and when the samelneHifation gets beyond time 
and space, and thinks of the fine elements as they 
are, it is called Nirvichdra, or without discrimination^ 
The next step is \^en both the gross and the fine 
elements are given up, and the object of meditation 
is the interior or the thinking organ, and when the 
thinking organ is thought of as bereft of the qualities 
of activity and dulness, it is then called Sd r^ n dam, 
or the blissful Samddhi. In the Samddhi in which 


we think of the mind as the object of meditation a.id 
in which, after meditation becorring deep, only the 
Sattva- state of the Ego, as differentiated from all 
other objects, remains, that is called the Asjxiit^ 
Samddhi ; and the man who has attained to this kind 
of Samddhi has attained to the state called Vi^eha 
or “bereft of body.” For, he can think of himself 
now as without his gross body ; although, he will 
have to think of himself as with a fine body. Those 
that in this state get merged in nature without 
attaining the goal are called Prakritilayas ; but those 
who do not stop even at that kind of fine enjoyment, 
reach the goal, which is freedom. 



118 


RAJA YOGA 


18. Virama-pratyaydbhydsapurvah sams^ara- 

seshonyah, 

18 . There is another Samadhi which is 
attained by the constant practice of cessation of 
all mental activity, the Chitta (then) retaining 
only the unmanifested impressions. 

This is the perfect superconscious Aeamprajnata 
Samadhi, the state which gives us freedom. The 
first state does not give us freedom or liberation of 
the soul. A man may attain to all sorts of powers, 
and yet fall again. There is no sedeguard against his 
falling until the soul goes beyond nature and beyond 
conscious concentration. It is very difficult to attain, 
although its method seems very easy. Its method is 
to hold the mind as the object of meditation allowing 
no thought to come into it, thus making it an entire 
vacuum. When we can really do this, in that 
moment we shall attain liberation. When persons 
without training and preparation try to make their 
minds vacant, they are likely to succeed only in 
covering themselves with Tamas, or materials which 
make the mind dull and stupid, and lead them to 
think that they are making a vacuum of it. To be 
able really to render it into a vacuum is to manifest 
the greatest strength and the highest control. For 
when this state of Asamprajndta superconsciousness 
*s reached, the Samadhi becomes seedless. What is 
meant by that? In that sort of concentration where 
there is consciousness and where the mind has 
succeeded only in quelling or holding down the waves 





YOGA APHORISMS 


119 


of the Chitta, the waves are still there in the form of 
tendencies, and these tendencies or seeds will 
become waves again when the time comes. But 
whfen you have succeeded in destroying those tenden- 
cies of the mind, then the Sdmadhi has become 
seedless ; for, then there are no more seeds in the 
mind out of which to manufacture again and again 
this plant of life, this ceaseless round of birth and 
death. You may ask, what state would that be in 
which we shall have no consciousness and no know- 
ledge? The answer is — ^What we call knowledge is 
a lower state than the one that is beyond knowledge. 
You must always bear in mind that the extremes 
look very much alike. The low vibrations of ether 
are called darkness, for we cannot see in them, and 
the very high vibrations of ether are also called 
darkness, for we cannot see in them either ; but one 
is real darkness, and the other is really intense light ; 
yet they appear to us to be the same. So, although 
ignorance is the lowest state, knowledge the middle, 
and existence beyond knowledge, the highest state, 
yet the state of ignorance and that bey<^nd 
knowledge, appear alike to us. Knowledge or 
consciousness is a manufactured something or a 
combination, and therefore it is not the reality. 

Now, what will be the result of the constant 
practice of this sort of highest concentration? All 
old tendencies of restlessness and dulness will be 
destroyed, as well as all tendencies, good and bad. 
The rase is similar to that as when chemicals are used 
to take the dirt and alloy off gold. As the ore is 
smelted down, the dross is burnt along with the 
chemicals. So the strong controlling power of that 
sort of concentration will stop the bad tendencies 



120 


RAJA YOGA 


first, and eventually, the good ones also. And when 
all good and evil tendencies have thus been sup- 
pressed, there will remain the Soul, in all its glorious 
splendour, untrammelled by anything whatever, and 
that Soul alone is omnipresent, omnipotent, and 
omniscient. So, by giving up all powers we become 
omnipotent, and by giving up this little life we go 
beyond mortality and become infinite life itself. 
Then alone the Soul will know that it had neither 
birth nor death, neithef want of heaven nor of earth. 
Then alone, will it realise that it neither came nor 
went and that it was nature which was moving all the 
time, and that movement was reflected upon its own 
self. The form of light cast by the lens upon the wall 
moves, but the wall foolishly thinks it is itself moving 
— so it is with all of us : it is the Chltta that is 
constantly moving and manipulating itself into 
various forms, and we are thinking that we are those 
various forms All such foolish delusions will vanish 
by the powers of the highest concentration. And 
when die free Soul will command — not pray or beg, 
but command — then whatever It desires will be 
immediatel3' fulfilled ; whatever It wants It will be 
able to do. According to the Sankhya Philosophy 
there is no God. It says that there cannot be a God, 
a Creator of this universe, because if there were one. 
He must be a .soul, and a soul must be either bound 
or free. But God can never be either of those two 
things. For, how can the soul that is bound by 
nature, control nature, and create? It is itself a slave. 
On the other hand what business has the soul that is 
free, to create and manipulate all these things? It 
has no desires, so cannot be under any necessity to 
create. The Sankhya Philosophy says therefore, that 



YOGA APHORISMS 


121 


the theory of God to explain creation is an 
unnecessary one ; and that the hypothesis of the 
existence of nature explains it all. But after admit- 
ting nature as the creative principle, Kapila teaches 
that there are many souls, who, though they have 
nearly attained perfection, fall short of it, because 
they have not been able to renounce perfectly all 
powers. T4ieir minds for a time merge in nature, to 
re-emerge as its masters. Kapila admits that there 
are such gods. All of us can become such gods, and 
according to the Sanl^hyas the God spoken of in the 
Vedas is really one of these free souls. Beyond such 
gods, Kapila says, there is not an eternally free and 
blessed creator of the universe. On the other hand 
the Yogi says, “Not so ; there is a God ; there is one 
Soul separate from all other souls, and He is the 
eternal Master of all creation, the ever free, the 
Teacher of all teachers.” The Yogis admit that such 
free souls as the Sdnkhyas call ‘merged in nature’ also 
exist. They are Yogis who have fallen short of per- 
fection, and though they may remain for a time as 
rulers of parts of the universe after being thus 
debarred from attaining the goal, they will eventually 
realise perfection. 

19. Bhavapratyayo videhaprakrlti-laydnam. 

19. (This Samadhi when not followed by 
extreme non-attachment) becomes the cause of 
the re-manifestation of the gods and of those 
that become merged in nature. 

The gods in the Indian systems represent certain 


IK^ll 




122 


RAJA YOGA 


high offices which are being filled successively by 
various souls. But none of them is perfect. 

20. Sraddha-vtryya-smriti’-samadhi’' 

prajna-piirtyalia itareshdm. 

20. To Others (this Samddhi) comes 
through faith, energy, memory, concentration, 
and discrimination of the real. 

These are they who do not want the position of 
gods or even that of rulers of cycles. They attain to 
liberation. 

21. Tivrasamoegdndinasannah. 

21 . Success is speedy for those who have 
a strong desire (for attaining Samddhi). 

22. Mridu-madhyddhimdtratvdttatopi visheshah. 

22. The strong in desire again differ 
according as the effort that is produced by that 
desire is mild, medium, or supreme. 

23. Ishvara-pranidhdnddvd. 

23. (Success is speedy) also by devotion 
to Ishvara. 

24. Klesha-I^armavipdl^dshayairapdrdmrishtah 

Purushavishesha Ishvarah. 


w \\ w 

H II 



YOGA APHORISMS 


12? 


24. Ishvara (the Supreme Ruler) is a special 
Purusha, untouched by misery, the results of 
actions, and desires. 

We have seen already that the Yoga Philosophy 
of Patanjali is based upon the Sankhya Philosophy, 
only that in the latter there is no place for God, while 
with the Yogis, God has a place. The Yogis, how- 
ever, avoid the idea about God as the Creator of the 
Universe, although, Ishvara according to the Vedas is 
the Creator of the universe. They admit, however, 
that it must be the manifestation of one wll, seeing 
that the universe is harmonious. Thus the Yogis 
want to establish a God, but avoid carefully the 
question of creation ; in fact, they do not raise it at 
all. Yet they arrive at God in a peculiar fashion of 
their own, as you will find in the next aphorism. 

25. Tatra niratisayam sarvajnatvavtjam, 

25. In Him becomes infinite that all- 
knowingness which in others is (only) a germ. 

The mind must always travel between two 
extremes. As for instance, the very idea of limited 
space gives you the idea of unlimited space also. H 
you close your eyes and think of space as having a 
limit, you will find that at the same time that you 
perceive the little circle of space, your mind has 
drawn a circle round it of unlimited dimensions. It 
is the same with time. For, if you try to think of 
limited time, say, a second, you will find that with the 
same act of perception, you are thinking of time as 


m IRUll 



124 


RAJA YOGA 


unlimited also. So with knowledge, the manifesta- 
tion of which is as a germ in man. And to think of 
that fin ite knowledg e you will have to think of infinite 
knowl edge around it. Therefore the very nature of 
our m ental constitut ion shows usi_ that there is 
unlimitedLjLnQYdbdge, and the Yogis call that 
unlimited knowjedge God. 

Sa purveshamapi guruh 

l^alenanavachchhedctt. 

26 , He is the Teacher of even the ancient 
teachers, being not limited by time. 

It is true that all knowledge is within ourselves, 
but this has to be called forth by another act of 
knowledge. Although the capacity to know is inside 
us, it must be called out, and the Yogi maintains that 
that calling out of knowledge can only come through 
another knowledge. Dead, insentient matter can 
never call out knowledge, it is the action of know- 
ledge that is required to bring it out. Therefore, 
knowing beings must help us to call forth what is in 
us. The help of teach^^eing thus always necessary, 
the Yogi says , the world is never without them, and 
no knowledge can come without their help. God is 
the Teacher of all teachers, because those teachers, 
however great they may be, — gods or angels — were 
all limited and bound at one time, but God was never 
so. Therefore these are the two peculiar deductions 
of the Yogis. First, that in thinking of the limited, the 
mind must think of the unlimited, and that if one part 
o^ that perception is true, the other must be so, for 



YOGA APHORISMS 


125 


the reason that their value as perceptions of the mind 
is equal. The very fact that man has a little know- 
ledge, shows that God has unlimited knowledge. 
And if 1 am to admit one, why shall 1 not the other? 
Reason forces me to take or reiect both. If I believe 
that there is man with a little knowledge, 1 must admit 
also that there is some one behind him with unlimited 
knowledge. The Second dedu ction _ is that no 
knowle dge can come without a teacher. They^drnit 
with the modern phiiosopKers that there is something 
in man which evolves and that although all knowledge 
is in man, yet certain environments are necessary to 
call it out. Now, we do not find any knowle dge 
coming to any man without the h elp of t eachers, and 
so the ^ijgtenceof men-teacTi^s, god-teachers, angel- 
teachers,_ and_ so Jfpjrth,_ are admit t ed by he Yosd s. 
But as they are all limited, so the question rises, who 
was the teacher before them? Thus we are forced 
to admit, as the last conclusion, the existence of a 
teacher who is not limited by time, and that One 
Teacher with in finite k nowledge without Seginnmg or 
end, is called God. 

27. Tasya vachakph pranavah, 

27. His manifesting word is OM. 

Every idea that you have in the mind has a 
counterpart in a word, and that word and the thought 
are inseparable. TTie external part of an idea or that 
by which it expresses itself to us, is what we call 
word, and the internal part of it is what we call 
thought. Therefore, no man can, by analysis, 
separate thought from word, and the idea that 


nw?; II 11 




126 


RAJA YCXiA 


language was created by men or that certain men 
came together and decided upon certain words to 
express certain thoughts, has been proved to be 
wrong. So long as things have existed there have 
been words and language. What then is the con- 
nection between an idea and a sound-symbol ? For, 
although we see that there must always be a word to 
represent a thought, it is not necessary that the same 
thought requires the same sound-symbol. The 
thought may be the same in twenty different countries, 
yet we find, the sound-symbol to represent it is 
different in them. To this we say that although we 
must have words to express thoughts, yet these words 
need not necessarily have the same sound, and that 
sound-symbols will vary with different nations. Thus 
our commentator says, “Although the relation 
between thought and word is perfectly natural, yet it 
does not mean a rigid connection between one sound 
and one idea.** The sound-symbols vary, yet the 
relation between them and the thoughts is a natural 
one. And the relation between thoughts and sounds 
becomes natural only when there is a real connection 
between the thing signified and the symbol. Until 
that is so, the symbol will never come into general 
use. Symbol, thus, is the manifestor of the thing 
signified, and if the thing signified has been in 
existence, and if, by experience, we know that the 
symbol has already expressed that thing many a 
time, then we are sure that there is a real relation 
between the two. Then, even if the things signified 
be not present, there will be thousands who will know 
them by the symbols. So there must be a natural 
connection between the 8>rmbol and the thing signi- 
fied, before it can recall the thing signified when 



ycx;a aphcmusms 


127 


pronounced. Now the author says that the manifest- 
ing word of God is OM. Why does he emphasise 
this, when there are hundreds of words for God and 
when that thought is connected with a thousand 
words? For, do we not find the idea of God con- 
nected with hundreds of words, each one standing as 
a symbol for Him? True, but there must be general- 
isation among all those words, a substratum or a 
common ground for all those symbols, and that 
alone will really be the best symbol of them all to 
express the idea conveyed by the word God. Let us 
try to find that out. In producing sounds we use the 
larynx, and the palate as a sounding board. Now, 
can there be a materialised sound, of which all other 
sounds will and must be but manifestations? Or in 
other words, can there be a sound-symbol that would 
represent naturally all the various sound-symbols that 
exist in the world? We shall see that the word OM 
( A am ) is that sound-symbol and that it can very well 
be regarded as the basis of all sounds. The word OM 
is composed of three letters A . U. and M, The first 
letter A, is the root sound, the key-note, and it is 
pronounced without touching any part of the tongue 
or palate ; M represents the last sound in the series, 
being produced by closing the lips, and in pronounc- 
ing the letter U the sound rolls from the very root to 
the end of the sounding board of the mouth. Thus, 
OM represents the whole phenomena of sound-pro- 
duction. That being so, it must be the natural 
symbol, the matrix of all the various sounds. It 
^denotes the whole range and possibility of all the 
words that can be made. Apart from these 
speculations, however, we see that around this word 
'OM have centred all the religious ideas in India, or 



128 


RAJA YOGA 


that all the various religious ideas of the Vedas have 
gathered themselves round the word OM, But the 
question might be asked what has that to do with 
America or England, or any other country? Simply 
this, that as the word OM has been retained at every 
stage of religious growth in India and as it has been 
manipulated to mean all the various ideas about God 
by monists, dualists, mono-dualists and separatists, 
and has been taken even by atheists, to express their 
highest ideal, it has virtually become the one symbol 
now, to represent the religious aspiration of the vast 
majority of human beings and that therefore, it ought 
to be recognised and accepted as such by all the 
nations of the earth. Take, for instance, the English 
word God. It covers only a limited function of the 
Lord, and if you want to express any virtues of God- 
hood that is beyond it, you will find it insufficient. 
As for instance, you shall have to add adjectives to it 
to make it signify the Personal, the Impersonal, and 
the Absolute aspects of God. Similar is the case 
with the words for God in every other language ; 
their signification is very small. This wtjrd OM. 
however, has around It all the various significances. 
Therefore, why should it not be accepted by every- 
one? 

28. T ajjapastadarthabhavanam . 

28. The repetition of this (OM) and medi- 
tating on its meaning (is an easy way to attain 
Samddhi^) 

Why should there be repetition of OM? In 


II II 




YOGA APHORISMS 


129 


noticing the theory of Samskflras, we have seen that 
the sum-total of impressions always lives in the mind. 
Impressions, though they become latent for a time, 
remain in the mind all the same and as soon as they 
get the right kind of stimulus, manifest themselves. 
Take for instance the case of atomic vibration ; it will 
never cease even when this universe is destroyed. 
The manifestation of massive external vibrations will 
disappear then, as the sun, the moon, the stars, and 
the earth melt down, but the vibrations in the atoms 
'remain all the same. Each atom will perform then, 
the same function as the big worlds are doing at 
present. Similarly, the vibrations of the Chitta 
subside externally, after each direct perception, but 
continue to go on in it like atomic vibrations, and 
when they get the right kind of impulse, come out 
again. We shall be able to understand now what is 
meant by repetition. It is the greatest kind of 
stimulus that can be given to the spiritual Samskdras, 
“One moment of company with the holy serves like 
a ship to cross this ocean of life.” — Such is the power 
of association. So the repetition of OM, and thinking 
of its meaning, serves in keeping that kind of good 
company in your mind. Study, and meditate on it 
after you have studied it. Thus light will come to 
you, and the Self will become manifest. 

But one must think of this OM, and of its mean- 
ing too. Avoid evil company, because the bad 
impressions of old are still in you, and evil company 
i.s what is necessary to call them out again. In the 
same way good company will call out the good im- 
pressions that are in us, but which have at present 
become latent. Thus there is nothing holier in this 
world than to keep good company, because, theii 

9 



130 


RAJA YOGA 


good impressions will have the tendency to come to 
the surface. 

29. Tatah pratyal^-chetanadhigamopyantardyd 
bhdvascha, 

29. From that is gained through intros- 
pection, the knowledge of the living Self, Who 
is within every intellect and the destruction of 
obstacles also (to realise Him). 

The first manifestation of the repetition and 
thinking of OM will be that the introspective power 
will be manifested more and more, and all the mental 
and physical obstacles to the realisation of the Self 
will begin to vanish. What are the obstacles to the 
Yogi? 

30. V yddhi-stydna-samsaya-pramdddlasyd-viraiu 
bhrdntidarsandlabdhabhumikatvdnavasthita-tvdni 
chitta-vi^shepdstentardydh. 

30. Disease, mental inactivity, doubt, in- 
difference, laziness, the tendency to go after 
sense-enjoyments, stupor, false perception, non- 
attaining concentration, and falling away from 
that when attained on account of restlessness, are 
the obstructing distractions. 

The body is the boat which will carry us to the 
other shore of the ocean of life. So it must be taken 


II II 

II II 



YOGA APHORISMS 131 

care of and kept free from diseases. Unhealthy 
persons can never become Yogis. Mental inactivity 
or dulness makes us lose all lively interest in a subject . 
One* must avoid it by all means, otherwise, one will 
not get the necessary energy to practise. Doubts 
will arise in the mind about the truth of the science of 
Yoga, however strong one's intellectual conviction 
may be, until certain peculiar psychic experiences 
come, as hearing and seeing at a distance and so 
forth. Those glimpses of the innate power of the 
*mind strengthen the student and make him persevere. 
The state of falling away when attained, is like the 
following : — Some days or weeks when you are 
practising, the mind will be calm and easily con- 
centrated, and you will find yourself progressing fast. 
Then all of a sudden that progress will stop one day, 
and you will find yourself, as it were, stranded. Do 
not leave practising then, but persevere. For, all 
p»-ogress proceeds by such rises and falls. 

31 . Duhkha-daurmmanasyangamejQyattXi- 
svasaprasvdsd oik.shepasahabhuvah . 

31. Grief, mental distress, tremor of the 
body and irregular breathing accompany non- 
retention of concentration. 

Concentration will bring perfect repose to mind 
and body every time it is practised. When the 
practice has been misdirected, or not enough con- 
trolled, the disturbances mentioned above will come. 
Repetition of OM and self-surrender to the Lord will 
strengthen the mind, and bring fresh energy^et such 


II II 




132 


RAJA YOGA 


times. The nervous shakings will come to almost 
everyone. Do not mind them at all, but keep on 
practising. Practice will cure them, and make the 
seat firm. 

32. T atapratishedhdrthamekatattvdbhyasah. 

32. To remedy this, the practice of con- 
centration on one subject (should be made). 

Making the mind take the form of one object for 
some time will destroy the aforesaid obstacles. This 
is the general advice. In the following aphorisms it 
will be expanded and particularised. And as one 
kind of practice might not suit everyone, various 
methods wall be advanced, and everyone wall have to 
find out by actual experience which helps him most. 

33. Maitri-‘k<i^und-muditopekshdndm sukha- 
duhkha-punydpunya^oishaydndm bhdvandtaschitta 
prasddanam. 

33. Friendship, mercy, gladness, indif- 
ference, being thought of in regard to subjects, 
happy, unhappy, good and evil respectively, 
pacify the Chitta. 

We must have the following four sorts of ideas. 
We must have friendship for all ; we must be merci- 
ful towards those that are in misery ; when people are 
happy we ought to be happy, and to the wdcked we 
must be indifferent. So with all objects that come 


ii ii 


II 11 




YOGA APHORISMS 


133 


before us. If the object is a good one we shall feel 
friendly towards it ; if the object is one that is miser- 
able we must be merciful towards it. If it is good we 
musf be glad, if it is evil we must be indifferent. 
TTiese attitudes of the mind towards the different 
kinds of objects that come before it will make the 
mind peaceful. Most of the difficulties in our daily 
lives come from being unable to hold our minds in 
this way. For instance, if a man does evil to us, 
instantly we want to react evil, and every reaction of 
evil shows that we are not able to hold the Chitta 
down ; it comes out in waves towards the object, and 
we lose our power. Every reaction in the form of 
hatred or evil is so much loss to the mind, and every 
evil thought or deed of hatred, if it is controlled, will 
be laid in our favour. It is not that we lose by thus 
restraining ourselves, but we gain infinitely more than 
we suspect. Each time we suppress hatred, or 
feelings of anger, it is so much good energy stored up 
m our favour, and that energy will be converted into 
higher powers. 

34. Prachchhardana-vidharanabhycim va 

prdnasya, 

34. By throwing out and restraining the 
Breath. 

The word used in the aphorism is Prana, and 
Prana is not exactly breath. It is the name for the 
sum-total of the energy that is displayed in the 
universe. Whatever you see in the universe, what- 
ever moves or works, or has life, is a manifestation of 
Prana, The Prdna before the beginning of a cycle. 





134 


RAJa yoga 


remains in an almost motionless state, and when the 
cycle has begun it begins to manifest itself. It is the 
Prana that is manifesting itself as the nervous motion 
in animals, as well as thought in human beings. * The 
macrocosm, as well as the microcosm, is therefore a 
combination of Prana or energy and A J^asa or matter. 
Out of Al^dsa are manufactured the different materials 
that you feel and see, and out of Prdna, all the various 
forms of energy. Now the restraining of Prana is 
what is called Prdndydma and among other ways, it 
is done also by controlling the breath. Patanjali, the 
father of the Yoga Philosophy, does not give very 
many particular directions about Prdndydma ; but 
later on other Yogis found out various things about it, 
and made out of it a great science. With Patanjali it 
is one of the many ways, but he does not lay much 
stress on it. He means here that you simply throw 
out the air, then draw it in, and then, hold it for some 
time, that is all ; and by that process the mind will 
become calmer. But, later on, you will find that out 
of this has been evolved a particular science called 
Prdndydma. TTie most important thing to remember, 
however, regarding Prdndydma, is that Prdna is not 
the breath. But that which causes the motion of the 
breath, or that which is the vitality of the breath itself 
is Prdna. The word Prdna, again, is used for all the 
senses and in places in the scriptures they have been 
called Prdnas ; similarly, the mind also has been 
called Prdna ; so it is evident that Prdna is the name 
of all kinds of forces. And yet we cannot call it a 
force, because all the forces are but manifestations 
of it. It is that which manifests itself as motion and 
every other force that can be produced out of motion. 
The Chitta, or the mind-stuff, is the engine which 



YOGA APHORISMS 


135 


diaws in the Prana from its own surroundings and 
manufactures out of that Prana the various vital 
forces of which the first are the forces that keep the 
body in preservation, and the last, thought, will, and 
ad other mental powers. By controlling the process 
oi breathing we can control all the various motions in 
the body, and the various nerve-currents that are run- 
ning through the body. First, we begin to recognise 
them, and then, slowly, we get control over them. 
The latter Yogis maintain that there are three main 
currents of Prana in the human body. One they call 
Ida, another Pingald, and the third Sushumna. The 
Pingala, according to them, flows through the right 
side of the spinal column, the Ida, through the left 
and the Sushumna through the vacant channel that is 
at the middle of it. The Ida and the P ingala, accord- 
ing to them, are the currents that are active in evei^-^ 
man, and by their working we are performing all the 
functions of life. The activity of Sushumna although 
present in all as a possibility, is an accomplished fact 
with the Yogi only. You must remember that 
that changes the body of the Yogi, and as you 
on practising Yoga your body too will change and 
will not be the same body that you had before the 
piactice. That is quite rational, and can be explained. 
Because, every new thought that comes to us must 
make, as it were, a new channel through the brain. 
That explains indeed the tremendous conservatism 
of human nature. For our mind likes to run through 
the ruts that are already in the brain, because it is 
easy to do so. If we consider, for example, the mind 
to be like a needle, and the brain substance, a soft 
lump before it, then each thought that we have, 
makes a way of its own, as it were, in the brain. 



136 


RAJA YOGA 


This way would close up, had it not been for the 
grey matter that comes and makes a lining to keep it 
separate from other ways made similarly by other 
thoughts. If there were no grey matter there would 
be no memory, because memory means going over 
those old thought-ways and retracing a thought as it 
were. Now you will understand how. when 1 talk 
on subjects in which 1 take ideas that are familiar 
to everyone, and combine and recombine them, it 
is easy for the audience to follow ; because those 
thought-channels are present in everyone’s brain, and 
it is only necessary for them to recur to those. But 
when I speak of a new subject altogether, then new 
thought-channels have to be made by them in the 
brain, and so it is not understood so readily. For, it 
is the brain (and not the people themselves) that 
refuses unconsciously then to be acted upon by that 
new idea and resists. The Prana in the mind is 
trying to make new channels, at such times, and the 
brain will not allow it. This is really the secret of 
conservatism. The fewer channels there are in the 
brain, and the less the needle of Prana has made such 
passages, the more conservative will be the brain, and 
the more will it struggle against new thoughts. The 
more thoughtful the man, the more complicated will 
be the thought-channels in his brain, and the more 
easily will he take to new ideas and understand them. 
So with every fresh idea we make a new impression 
in the brain and cut new channels through the brain- 
stuff. That is why we find that in the practice of 
Yoga there is so much physical resistance at first — 
that being the attempt to introduce an entirely new 
set of thoughts and motives. That is why we find also, 
that that part of religion which deals with the world- 



YOGA APHORISMS 


137 


side of the Infinite is widely accepted, while the other 
part, the Philosophy or the Psychology, which deals 
with the inner nature of man, is frequently neglected 
by •people. The definition of the world according to 
Vedanta is — Infinite Elxistence projected into the plane 
of consciousness. A part only of Infinite Existence 
has been projected into consciousness, and that we 
call our world. So there is Infinite beyond the world 
also, and religion has to deal not only with that part of 
that Infinite which we call the world, but also v/ith the 
Infinite that is beyond. Any religion which deals with 
either one of these alone, will be defective. It must 
deal with both of them. Now, that part of religion 
which deals with the part of the Infinite which has 
come into the plane of consciousness, and which has 
become limited, as it were, by the cage of time, 
space and causation, is quite familiar to us ; because 
we are in that already and ideas about this world have 
been with us almost from time immemorial. But that 
part of religion which deals with the Infinite that is 
beyond, appears to be entirely new to us, and that 
attempts to form ideas about it produces new channels 
in the brain, disturbing the whole system, and that is 
why you find in the practice of Yoga, ordinary people 
are at first turned out of their grooves. In order to 
lessen those disturbances as much as possible, all 
these methods are devised by Patanjali, that we may 
practise any one of them best suited to us. 

35. Vishayavati va praorittimtpanna manasah 
sthitinibandhini . 






138 


RAJA YOGA 


35. Tlie practice of those forms of concen- 
tration that being extraordinary sense perceptions 
and cause thereby perseverance of the mind— is 
another way (to Yoga). 

Such practices fall naturally in the province of 
Dhdrand, or concentration. The Yogis say, that if 
the mind becomes concentrated on the tip of the 
nose one begins to smell, after a few days, wonderful 
perfumes, if at the root of the tongue, one begins 
to hear sounds, if on the tip of the tongue, one 
begins to taste wonderful flavours, if on the middle 
of the tongue, one feels as if he were coming in con- 
tact with something, and if on the palate, one begins 
to see peculiar things. Now, if a man whose mind 
is disturbed and who doubts the truth of Yoga, take 
up some of these practices, he will have his doubts 
set at rest when after a little practice such perceptions 
would come to him, and the result will be that he will 
persevere. 

36. Vi&okd vd jyotishmati. 

36. Or (by meditation on) the Effulgent 
One who is beyond all sorrow. 

This is another sort of concentration. Think of 
the lotus of the heart, with petals downwards, and 
running through it the Sushumnd ; take in the breath, 
and while throwing the breath out imagine that the 
lotus is turned with the petals upwards, and inside 
that lotus is an effulgent light. Meditate on that. 


II H 




YOGA APHORISMS 


139 


37. Vttaraga-vishayam vd chiitam, 

37. Or (by meditation on) the heart that 
hag given up all attachment to sense-objects. 

Take some holy person, some great person whom 
you revere, some saint whom you know to be per- 
fectly non-attached, and think of his heart. That 
heart has become non-attached, so to meditate on that 
heart will calm the mind. If you cannot do that, 
there is the next way. 

38. Svapna-nidrd-jndndlambanam vd, 

38. Or (by meditation on) the knowledge 
that comes in sleep. 

Sometimes a man dreams of angels coming and 
talking to him and that he is in an ecstatic condition, 
that he is hearing music floating through the air. He 
is in a blissful condition in that dream, so when he 
wakes, it makes a deep impression on him. Let him 
think of that dream as leal, and meditate upon it. To 
meditate on any holy thing that you have seen in 
dreams, helps concentration. 

39. Yathdbhimata-dhydnddvd. 

39. Or (by meditation on) anything that 
appeals to one as good. 

This does not mean any wicked subject, but any- 
thing good that you like. As, for instance, medita- 
tion on any place, or scenery, or idea that you like 


II ii 

II n 




140 


RAJA YOGA 


best ; in short, on anything whatsoever that naturally 
concentrates the mind. 

40. Paramanu-parama-mahattoantosya vashi- 
k^rah. 

40. Thus meditating, unobstructed, 
things atomic as well as infinite, the Yogi’s mind 
attains the stage called ‘perfectly controlled.’ 

The mind, by practice, easily contemplates the 
most minute as well as the biggest thing. Thus the 
mind- waves become controlled. 

41. Kshinavritterabhijdtasyeva manergrahitri- 
grahana-grahyeshu tatstha-tadanjanata-samdpattih . 

41. The Yogi whose vrittis have thus 
become powerless (controlled) by meditating on 
the receiver, the receiving (process) or the re- 
ceived (the self, the mind, or the external 
objects), obtains concentratedness and sameness, 
like the crystal (before different coloured objects). 

Now, what is the result of that sort of constant 
meditation? We must remember here how in a 
previous aphorism Patanjali, dealing with the various 
states of meditation, said that the objects for medita- 
tion at first will be the gross ones, then the fine ones, 
and then still finer ones, and how, from all these 
meditations, which are not of a very high degree, he 


H 8 ni 


11 80 h 






YOGA APHORISMS 


141 


said, we get as a result that we can meditate as easily 
on the fine as on the grosser objects. In this aphorism 
he says that the Yogi sees the three things, the 
receiver, the received, and the receiving instrument, 
corresponding to the soul, the object, and the mind. 
TTius three objects of meditation are given us. First, 
the gross things, as bodies or material objects, 
secondly, fine things, as the mind, or the Chitta, and 
thirdly, the qualified Purasha itself or the egoism, and 
not the Purasha as it is by its own nature. By prac- 
tice, the Yogi gets established in all these medita- 
tions. And whenever he medidates on any one of 
those objects he is able to keep out all other thoughts 
and he becomes identified with that on which he 
medidates ; or, in other words, when he medidates 
his mind becomes like a piece of crystal before which 
flowers or coloured things being placed, it becomes 
almost identified with them. As for instance, when 
red flowers are placed before, the crystal looks red, 
or if the flowers are blue, the crystal looks blue, and 
so forth. 

42. Tatra sahd&rtha-jriarxaV'tl^alpaih sarrikirnA 
sauHarl^A samctpattih, 

42. That in which sound, meaning, and 
resulting knowledge are mixed up, is (called 
Samddhi) with reasoning. 

Sound here means vibration ; meaning, the nerve 
currents which conduct it ; and knowledge, reaction. 
The various meditations that we have considered so 
far, have been called by Patanjali Savitarka or medi- 


7m n n 




142 


RAJA YOGA 


tation with reasoning. Later on he will give us 
higher grades of Dhydnas or meditations to practise. 
In those meditations, however, that are called “with 
reasoning. “ we keep the duality of subject and objv3ct, 
which results from the mixture of word, meaning, 
and knowledge. There is first the external vibration, 
the word ; this carried inward by the nerve currents 
is the meaning. After that there comes a reactionary 
wave in the Ch.Hto, which is knowledge. The 
mixture of those three makes up what we call per- 
ception of an object. And when the mind is concen- 
trated in one such perception only, it is said to be in 
Samddhi with reasoning. The next Samadhi is 
higher. 

43. Smriti-parisuddhau soarUpa-sunyevdrthamdU 
tranirbhdsd nirvitarkd* 

43. The Samadhi called ‘without reason- 
ing’ (comes) when memory becomes purified or 
devoid of all impressons, and the mind remain- 
ing unified with the object or the knowledge 
portion of a perception, expresses that only. 

It is by the practice of meditation on the sound, 
the meaning and the knowledge portions of a percep- 
tion that we come to the state where the three do not 
mix and where we can get rid of them. We will first 
try to understand what those three are. You 
remember the simile of the lake regarding the Chitta 
or the mind-stuff, and the vibrations in it produced 
by word or sound, like pulsations coming over it. 






YOGA APHORISMS 


143 


You have that calm laJce in you. Now let me pro- 
nounce the word, “cow.” As soon as it enters through 
your ears, a wave is produced in your Chitta. 
Thfat wave representing the idea of the cow, is the 
form or the meaning as the Yogi calls it. The idea of 
the cow that you perceive now is really that wave in 
the mind-stuff, and that comes as a reaction to the 
external and internal vibrations produced by the 
sound, and with that the sound wave dies away ; for, 
no wave can exist without a word. You may ask 
how it is when we only think of the cow, and do not 
hear a sound. The answer is, that you make that 
sound yourself. You then say “cow” faintly in your 
mind, and with that rises the wave. There caimot be 
any wave without an impulse of sound, and when it 
does not come from outside, it comes from inside, and 
when the sound dies, the wave dies. What remains 
after that is the result of the reaction, and that is 
knowledge. The sound, the meaning and the know- 
ledge portions of a perception, however, are so closely 
combined in our mind that we cannot separate them. 
As soon as the sound comes, the nerves vibrate, and 
the wave rises in reaction ; they follow so closely upon 
one .another that there is no discerning the one from 
the other : but when meditation has been practised 
for a long time, memory, the receptacle of all impres- 
sions, becomes purified, and we are able clearly to 
disting^uish them from one another. This is called 
**Nirvitark,a' Samadhi or concentration ‘without 
reasoning.’ 

44. Etayaioa saoichdrd nirvichdxd cha sul^ma' 
oishayd vy&khyatd. 


W^f^fKT ^ II 88 It 





144 


RAJA YCXIA 


44. By this process (the concentrations) 
with discrimination and without discrimination, 
whose objects are finer, are (also) explained. . 

A process similar to the preceding is applied 
again ; only, the objects to be taken up in the former 
meditations are gross, and in the later they are fine. 

45. Sukshma-vishayatoanchdlinga-'paryava&anam. 

45. The finer objects end with the 
Pradhana. 

The gross objects are the elements, and every- 
thing is manufactured out of them. The fine objects 
begin with the Tanmdtras or fine particles. The 
organs, the antakharana or the internal organ — 
divided according to its functions into manas, buddhi, 
egoism, and Chitta or the mind-stuff — which causes 
all manifestations, the equilibrium state of Sattva, 
Rajas and Tamas materials called Pradhana (lit. 
chief), Prakriti (nature), and Avyal^ta (unmanifest), 
are all included within the category of fine objects. 
The Purusha or the Soul alone is beyond them all. 

46. T& eVa savijah samadhih. 

46. These concentrations are with seed. 

These do not destroy the seed of past actions, 

and therefore cannot give liberation ; what they bring 
to the Yogi is stated in the following aphorisms. 

47. Nirvichdra-vaisdradyedhy&tma-prasddah, 


m II 8^ « 

II S’© n 




YOGA APHORISMS 


145 


47. The concentration “without reason- 
ing” being purified, the Chitta becomes firmly 
fixejl. 

48. Tatra ritambhard prajnd. 

48. The knowledge in that is called 
“filled with Truth.” 

The next aphorism will explain this. 

49. Srutdnumdna-prajndbhydmanyaoishayd 

viseshatvdt, 

49. The knowledge that is gained from 
testimony and inference is about common 
objects. That from the Samadhi just mentioned, 
is of a much higher order, being able to penetrate 
where inference and testimony cannot go. 

The idea is that we have to get our knowledge of 
ordinary objects by direct perception, by inference 
therefrom and from testimony of people who are com- 
petent. By “p^pl^ who are competent,” the Yogis 
always mean the Rishis, or the Seers of the thoughts 
recorded in the Scriptures, that is to say, the Vedas. 
According to them, the only proof of the Scriptures 
is that they are the testimony of competent persons. 
Yet, they say the Scriptures cannot take us to realisa- 
tion. We can read all the Vedas, and yet will not 
realise anything ; by practice alone of their teachings 
can we attain to that state which realises what the 
Scriptures say, which penetrates where neither reason. 


m ^?IWT WITT II 8^ II 

U 8ft II 

To 



146 


RAJA YOGA 


nor perception, nor inference can go and where the 
testimony of others also cannot avail* TTiis is what 
is meant by this aphorism. The realisation of that 
state is real religion, and all the rest is only prepara- 
tion for the S 2 Lme. Thus, hearing lectures, reading 
books, or reasoning, is merely preparing the ground 
for its coming ; it is not religion. Intellectual assents 
and dissents are not religion. The central idea of the 
Yogi is that just as we come in direct contact with the 
objects of the senses, so religion also can be directly 
perceived in a far more intense sense. The truths of 
religion, such as God, the Soul, and so forth, cannot 
be perceived by the external senses. 1 cannot see 
God with my eyes, nor can 1 touch Him with my 
hands, and neither can I reason about things that are 
beyond the senses. Reason leaves us at a point quite 
indecisive, as regards those things. We may reason 
all our lives, as the world has been doing for aeons, 
regarding them, with the result that we shall find in 
the end, that we are incompetent to prove or disprove 
the facts of religion. What we perceive directly we 
take as the basis, and upon that basis we reason. 
So it is obvious that reasoning will have to run 
always within the bounds of perception. It can 
never go beyond : the whole scope of spiritual 
realisation, therefore, is beyond sense perception. 
And the Yogis say that man can surely go beyond 
sense perception, and reason. He has in himself the 
faculty and the power of transcending his intellect. 
And this is true not only of him, but of every being 
in creation. By the practice of Yoga that power is 
aroused, and man then transcends the ordinary limits 
of reason, and directly perceives things which are 
beyond reason. 



YOGA APHORISMS 


147 


50. Tajjah samsk^r6nya-samsk.arapratibandhi. 

50. The resulting impression from this 
Satnadhi obstructs all other impressions. 

We have seen in the foregoing aphorisms that the 
only way of attaining super-consciousness is by con- 
centration, and we have also seen that what hinder 
the mind from concentration are the past Samsl^aras 
or impressions. All of you have observed that when 
you are trying to concentrate your mind, your 
thoughts wander. When you are trying to think of 
God, that is the very time when the Samas^/lras 
appear. At other times they are not so active, but 
when you want them not to be, they are sure to be 
there, trying their best to x:rowd inside your mind. 
Why should that be so ? Why should they be much 
more potent at the time of concentration? It is 
because you are repressing them at the time and 
therefore they react then with all their force. At 
other times they do not react. Numberless are these 
past impressions lodged in the Chitta, waiting like 
tigers to jump up. These have to be suppressed 
during meditation so that the one idea which we are 
aiming at may arise to the exclusion of the others, 
even though they all struggle to come up at the time, 
and the powers of the Samskdras in hindering con- 
centration of the mind be tremendous. The kind of 
Sam&dhi which has just been described is the best to 
be practised, on account of its power of suppressing 
the Samskdras. The Samakdra which will be raised 
by this sort of concentration will be so powerful that 





148 


RAJA YOGA 


it will hinder the action of the other Samskaras and 
hold them in check. 

51. Tasyapi nirodhe sarva-nirodhannirvtjah 
samddhih, 

51. By the restraint of even this (impres- 
sion, which obstructs all other impressions), 
ail being restrained, comes the “seedless” 
Samadhi. 

You must remember that our goal is to perceive 
the Soul itself. We cannot perceive It, because It 
has got mingled up with the productions of nature, 
the mind, and the body. The most ignorant man 
thinks his body to be the Soul. The more learned 
man thinks his mind to be the Soul, but both these are 
mistaken. What n)akes the Soul get mingled up with 
the mind and the body, is the fact that the different 
waves in the Chitta, as soon as they rise, cover the 
Soul, so that we can see only a little reflection of It 
through them. So, if the wave is one of anger, we 
see the Soul as angry and say, we are angry. If the 
wave is a wave of love, we see ourselves reflected in 
that wave, and say we are loving. If that wave is 
one of weakness and the Soul is reflected in it, we 
think we are weak. Such ideas come from those 
impressions, because the Samsl^dras cover the Soul. 
TTie real nature of the Soul can never be perceived 
as long as there is one single wave in the lake of the 
Chitta or until all the waves in it have subsided ; so 
Patanjali teaches us first the meaning of these waves ; 
secondly, the best way to repress them ; and thirdly. 






YCXJA APHORISMS 


149 


how to make one wave so strong as to suppress all 
other waves, fire eating fire as it were. And when 
only one such wave remains, it is easy to suppress 
that. When that is gone, the Samadhi or concentra- 
tion is called seedless ; then nothing is left of the 
former state of the mind and the Soul is manifested 
just as It is, in Its own glory. Then alone do we 
know that the Soul is not a comopund, but that It is 
the only eternal, simple in the universe, and as such 
1 1 can never be born or die, and that It is the 
immortal, the indestructible, the ever-living essence 
of intelligence. 



CHAPTER II 


Concentration: Its Practice. 

I . Tapah-svadhyayesvarapTcmidh6nani 

kriydyogah. 

1 . Mortification, study, and surrendering 
the fruits of work to God are called kxiydyoga. 

The different kinds of Samddhi with which we 
ended our last chapter are very difficult to attain ; so 
we must take them up slowly. TTie first or the preli- 
minary step to attain them is called kriyayoga. Kriyd 
literally means, work ; therefore, the word means, 
working towards Yoga. “The organs are the horses, 
the mind is the rein, the intellect is the charioteer, the 
soul is the rider, and the body is the chariot.*’* The 
master of the household, and the Lord of them all, 
that is to say, the Self of man, is sitting in that chariot. 
If the horses are very strong and do not obey the 
rein, if the charioteer, or the intellect, does not know 
how to control the horses, then the chariot will come 
to grief. But if the organs or the horses are well 
controlled, and if the rein or the mind is well held in 
the hands of the charioteer, the chariot will reach the 
goal. What is meant, therefore, by the word, morti- 
fication, is to hold the rein firmly while guiding the 
body and the organs, or in other words, not letting 


* Katha Upanishad — I — iii — ^verses 3-5. 




YOGA APHORISMS 


151 


them to anything they like, but keeping them under 
proper control. Now. what is meant by ‘study* in the 
aphorism, is no study of novels or story books, but 
study of those works which teach the liberation of 
the soul. Again, the word study does not mean 
controversial studies. The Yogi is supposed to have 
finished the period of controversy. He has had 
enough of that, and has become satisfied. He 
studies only to intensify his convictions. Vdda and 
Siddhdnta are the two sorts of studies mentioned in 
the Scriptures, of which Vdda is argumentative and 
Siddhdnta, decisive. When a man is entirely ignorant, 
he takes up the first or the argumentative kind of 
study and goes on fighting, and reasoning pro and 
con ; and when he has finished that stage, he takes 
up the Siddhdnta or the decisive kind, or that which 
helps him to arrive at a conclusion. Again, simply 
arriving at conclusions will not help him ; but his 
desire to realise them must be intensified. “Books 
are infinite in number, but time is short ; therefore 
the secret of knowledge is to take what is essential ’ 
— so says an old Indian adage. Take that as your 
guide and try to live up to it. There is an old Indian 
legend that if you place a cup of milk and water 
before a rdja-hamsa or swan, he will take all the 
milk and leave the water. TTie aforesaid adage 
directs us to conduct ourselves in that way in acquir- 
ing knowledge, taking what is of value leaving out 
the dross.* Intellectual gymnastics are necessary at 

II 



152 


RAJA YOGA 


first. For we must not go blindly into anything. But 
the Yogi has already passed through that argumenta- 
tive stage and has come to a conclusion which is like 
the rocks, immovable. The only thing he now seeks 
to do is to intensify the desire to realise that conclu- 
sion. Do not argue, he says, even if one forces argu- 
ments upon you, but be silent. Do not answer any 
argument, but go away calmly, because arguments 
disturb the mind. The only thing necessary now is 
to train the intellect to attain Samadhi ; therefore, 
what is the use of disturbing it for nothing? The 
intellect is but an instrument with limited power and 
can give us only knowledge circumscribed by the 
senses. The Yogi wants to go beyond the senses ; 
therefore, intellect is of no use to him. He is certain 
o^ this and therefore remains silent and does not 
argue. Every argument throws his mind out of 
balance and creates a disturbance in the Chitta, and 
every such disturbance is a drawback. He knows it 
for certain that argumentations and searchings by 
means of reason are only to find out the way, that 
there are much higher things beyond them and that 
after all, the whole of life is not for school-boy fights 
and debating societies. By “surrendering the fruits 
of work to God” is meant to take to ourselves neither 
credit nor blame, but to give up both to the Lord 
and be at peace. 

2. Sa samadhi-bhaVanarthah Idesa-tanu 

karanarthascha. 

2. That brings forth Samadhi and mijni- 
mises the pain-bearing obstructions. 


€ II II 



YOGA APHORISMS 


153 


Most of US make our minds like spoilt children, 
allowing them to do whatever they want. TTierefore 
it is necessary that kxiya-yoga should be constantly 
practised, in order to gain control of the mind, and 
bring it into subjection. The obstructions to Yoga 
arise from lack of control, and cause us pain. TTiey 
can only be removed by denying the mind, and hold- 
ing it in check, through the means of kriyd-yoga. 

3 . Avidyasmitd'raga-doeshdbhinivesdh kf^sdh. 

The pain -bearing obstructions are — 
ignorance, egoism, attachment, aversion and 
clinging to life. 

These are the five kinds of pains, the fivefold tie 
that binds us down, of which ignorance is the cause 
and the other four, its effects. It is the only cause 
of all our misery. What else can make us miserable 
when the nature of the soul is eternal bliss? What 
can make the soul sorrowful except hallucination or 
delusion produced by ignorance ? Indeed all pain of 
the soul is simply delusion. 

4 . Avidyd I^shetramuttareshdm 

prasuptadanu'Vichchhinnoddrdndm, 

4. Ignorance is the productive field of all 
those that follow, whether they exist in dormant, 
attenuated, overpowered, or expanded state. 

Ignorance is the cause of egoism, attachment, 
aversion and clinging to life. These obstructions to 
Yoga, again, exist in different states. They are 


W'SIV. II ^ II 




154 


RAJA YOGA 


sometimes dormant. You often hear the expression 
“innocent as a baby/* yet in the baby lies dormant 
the state of a demon or a god, which will come out 
by and by. In the Yogi, the impressions or the 
Sums^drus of the foresaid obstructions, left by past 
actions, are attenuated ; that is to say, they exist in 
a very fine state, and he can control them or not 
allow them to become manifest. The word over- 
powered means that sometimes one set of impressions 
is held down for a while by those that are stronger, 
but they come out when that repressing cause is 
removed. Tlie last state is the expanded, when the 
Samsl^ara, having helpful surroundings, attain to great 
power and activity for producing good or evil. 

5 . Anitydsuchi-duhkhdndtamsu nityasuchi- 

sul^hdtmakhydtiravidyd. 

5. Ignorance is taking the non-eternal, the 
impure, the painful, and the non-Self, as the 
eternal, the pure, the happy, and the Atman or 
Self. 

All the different sorts of impressions have one 
source, ignorance. So we have first to learn what 
ignorance is. All of us think that we are but bodies 
and not the Self that is pure, effulgent, and ever bliss- 
ful ; and that is ignorance. We think of man, and look 
upon him as body only. This is the great delusion. 

6 . Drigdarshana-saktyorel^dtTnatawdsmitd. 

6. Egoism is identification of the seer with 
the instrument of seeing. 



YCXiA APHORISMS 


155 


ITie seer, really, is the Self, who is pure, ever- 
holy, infinite, and immortal. And what are the 
instruments? The Chitta or mind-stuff, the Buddhi 
or determinative faculty, the Manas or mind, and the 
Indriydni or sense organs. These are the instruments 
for the Self to see the external world, and the identi- 
fication of Self with the instruments is what is called 
ignorance, and that produces egoism. We say ‘1 am 
the mind,' ‘1 am thought,’ '1 am angry,’ or ‘I am 
happy.' But how can that be when we are the Self? 
We should identify ourselves with the Self that can 
never change. And if the Self is unchangeable, how 
can It be one moment happy and the next, unhappy? 
It is formless, infinite, omnipresent. What then can 
change It? It is beyond all law. What then can 
affect It? Aye, nothing in the universe can affect It, 
and yet through ignorance, we are always identifying 
ourselves with the mind-stuff, and thinking that we 
are feeling pleasure and pain. 

7. Sukhdnttsayi rdgah. 

1 . Attachment is that which dwells on 
pleasvire. 

We find pleasure in certain things, and the mind 
like a current flows towards them ; and this following 
after the pleasure-centres as it were, is what is called 
attachment. We never feel attached where we do 
not find pleasure. We find pleasure in very queer 
things sometimes, but the principle remains that 
wherever we find pleasure, there we get attached. 

8. Duhkhdnusayt dveshah. 

h ^ n 



156 


RAJA YOGA 


8. Aversion is that which dwells on pain. 

That which gives us pain we immediately seek to 
get away from. 

9. Soarasavdhi vidushopi tathamdhobhinivesah . 

9. Flowing naturally from former experi- 
ences of death is the clinging to life that is 
established even in the learned. 

This clinging to life you see manifested in every 
animal. Attempts have been made also to build the 
theory of the existence of a future life upon it, and 
the fact that men are so fond of life has been taken as 
pointing to the possibility of a future existence, where 
their desire to live will meet with fulfilment. Of 
course it goes without saying that this argument is 
without much value ; but the most curious part of it 
is, that in Western countries, the idea is applied to 
men alone and not to other animals. In India this 
clinging to life has been one of the arguments to prove 
past experience and existence. As for instance, the 
old philosophers in India have advanced that if it be 
true that all our knowledge has come from experi 
ence, then it surely follows that what we have never 
experienced, we can never imagine or understand. 
It has been seen that as soon as chickens are hatched, 
they begin to pick up food. Again, it has been 
observed many times where ducks have been hatched 
by hens, that as soon as they came out of the eggs 
they flew to water, and the mother thought they 
would be drowned. If experience be the only source 
of knowledge, then, where did these chickens learn 





ycx;a aphorisms 


157 


to pick up food, or the ducklings, that the water was 
their natural element? If you say it is instinct, it 
means nothing ; it is simply giving a word, but is no 
explanation. Now what is this insinct? We find 
that we have many such instincts in ourselves. As for 
instance, a pianist will remember the fact that when 
he first learned to play the piano, how carefully he 
had to pul his fingers on the black and the white keys, 
one after the other ; but after long years of practice, 
he can now talk with his friends, while his fingerc play 
mechanically. It has become at present an instinct 
with him. So with every work that we do * by prac- 
tice it becomes an instinct, or in other words, it 
becomes automatic ; but so far as we know, all the 
cases which v/e now regard as automatic, are 
degenerated reason. In the language of the Yogi 
instinct is involved reason. Discrimination becomes 
involved, before we get to automatic Samsk.aras. 
Therefore it is perfectly logical to think that what we 
call instinct in this world is simply involved reason. 
And as reason cannot come without experience, all 
love for water are thus results of past experienc *s. 
The chicken s fear for the hawk, and the duckling’s 
love *for water are thus results of past experiences. 
TTie question that rises now is whether that experience 
belongs to a particular soul, or to the body simply, or 
in other words, whether the experience which comes 
t<i the duck as soon as it is born is the duck’s fore- 
fcither’s exeprience, or the duck’s own experience. 
Modern scientific men hold that it belongs to the 
body, but the Yogis hold that it is the experience of 
the mind transmitted through the body. This is 
called the theory of re-incarnation. We have seen 
now that all our knowledge, whether we call it reason 



158 


RAJA YOGA 


or instinct, must come through that one channel called 
experience, that all that we call instinct at present, is 
the result of past experience degenerated into that 
form, and that that instinct can be transformed into 
reason again. This is true of every knowledge in the 
universe, and upon this has been built one of the chief 
arguments for re-incarnation in India. The recurring 
experiences of pain and death in the past produce in 
course of time this clinging to life. This is why the 
child is instinctively afraid : because the past experi- 
ence of pain is there in its mind. Even in the most 
learned men, who know that this body will go, and 
who say, “Never mind, we have had hundreds of 
bodies, and the soul cannot die“ — in spite of all 
their intellectual convictions, we find this clinging on 
to life. Now whence is this clinging to life? We 
have seen it to have become instinctive or in the 
psychological language of the Yogis it has become a 
Samskdrc And the Samskaras are the fine impres- 
sions lying dormant below the surface of the Chitta 
All the past experiences of death that have become 
instinct at present, are nothing but cases of experience 
that has become subconscious. They live in the 
Chitta, and are not inactive, but working underneath. 
The Chitta-vrittis or the mind-waves, which are gross, 
we can perceive and feel ; so, they can be easily 
controlled ; but what about the finer instincts? How 
can they be controlled? As for instance, when 1 am 
angry and my whole mind becomes like a huge wave 
of anger, I see and feel it, and therefore can easily 
fight and control it ; but I shall not succeed in rooting 
it out of my mind until I can get down below to its 
causes. Let me explain the matter clearly. A man 
begins to say something harsh to me, and I begin to 



ycx;a aphorisms 


159 


feel that I am getting heated ; he goes on till 1 am 
perfectly angry, and then forgetting myself entirely 
I identify myself with anger. Now, when he first 
began to abuse me, I thought, “1 am going to be 
angry.” Then anger was one thing and 1 was 
another ; but when I became angry, 1 became anger 
myself. The Yogi says that such feelings will have 
to be controlled in the germ or the root, that is to 
say, in their fine forms, and before we have become 
conscious that they are acting on us. With the vast 
majority of mankind the fine state of such passions is 
not even known — the state in which they emerge from 
subconsciousness. When a bubble is rising from the 
bottom of the lake we do not see it, nor do we see it 
even when it has come nearly to the surface ; it is 
only when it bursts and makes a ripple that we know 
that it is there. The Yogi says that we shall only be 
successful in grappling with the waves when we can 
get hold of them in the bubble form and subdue them 
before they have become gross, otherwise, there is 
no hope of conquering any passion perfectly. To 
control our passions we have to control them at their 
very roots ; then alone shall we be able to burn out 
their very seeds. And as fried seeds thrown into the 
ground will never come up, so these passions will 
never arise after that. 

10. Te pratiprasavahey&h'sukshm&h, 

10. They (the pain-bearing obstructions), 

when fine are to be rejected (destroyed) by raising 
opposite modifications. 


H \o n 




160 


RAJA YOGA 


How are these fine SamsJ^dras to be controlled? 
We have to begin with the big waves, and then come 
down to finer ones. For instance, when a big wave 
of anger has come into the mind, how are we to 
control that ? Just by raising a big opposing wave of 
love. Sometimes a mother is very angry with her 
husband, and while in that state the baby comes in, 
and she kisses the baby ; the old wave now dies out, 
and a new wave, namely, the love for the child, arises. 
That suppresses the other one ; for, love is opposite 
to anger. So we find that by raising an opposite kind 
o^ waves we can conquer those which we want to 
reject. Then, if we can raise in our mind opposing 
waves, which are subtle, they will check the fine 
workings of anger beneath the conscious surface. 
We have seen before that instinctive actions first 
began as gross conscious actions, and then became 
fine and subconscious. So, if good waves in the con- 
scious Chitta be constantly raised, they will gradually 
become subtle, and oppose the Samsl^dra forms of 
evil thoughts.* 

1 1 . Dhydnaheydstadvrittayah. 

1 1 . The gross modifications of them are 
to be rejected (destroyed) by meditation. 

Meditation is one of the great means of control- 
ling the rising of mind- waves. By meditation you can 
make the mind subdue these waves, and if you go on 


* The commentators explain this aphorism thus — 

They are to be destroyed by reducing the Chitta to its use 
in the involving process (which leads to Samadhi). 

HUH 



YCXiA APHORISMS. 


161 


practising meditation for years until it has become a 
habit, and until it comes to you in spite of yourself, 
anger, hatred and so forth, which are but gross 
manifestations of the pain-bearing obstructions of 
ignorance, egoism, etc. will be controlled and 
checked. 

12. KlesamUlah l^armasayo drishtadrishtajanma- 
vedaniyah. 

12. The receptacle of works has its root in 
the pain -bearing obstructions, and it makes one 
experience the fruits of works in this visible 
(present) life, or in the unseen (future) life. 

By the expression ‘receptacle of works* is meant 
the sum-total of Samsk.dras. TTie mind is thrown into 
ci wave by whatever work we do, and after the work 
IS finished, we think the wave is gone. But it is not 
so. The wave then becomes fine, but it still exists 
there. For when we try to remember the work, it 
comes up again in the form of a faint wave. So it 
was there ; and if it were not there, there would bt 
no memory. Thus every action and every thought, 
good or bad. settle down and become fine, and are 
stored up in the Chitta, Both happy and unhappy 
thoughts are included within the pain-bearing obstruc- 
tions, because according to the Yogis, the happy 
thoughts also, in the long run, bring pain. All happi- 
ness or enjoyment which comes from the senses will 
eventually bring pain. For, it will make us thirst 
for more, and that brings pain as its result. There is 
no limit to man’s desires ; he goes on desiring, and 


II 




162 


RAJA YOGA. 


'when he comes to a point where desire cannot be 
fulfilled, the result is pain. Therefore the Yogis 
regard the sum-total of the impressions, good or evil, 
as pain-bearing obstructions ; for they obstruct the 
way to freedom of the Soul. 

It is the same with the Samskdras or the fine roots 
of all our works ; they are the causes which will bring 
forth effects, either in this life, or in the lives to come. 
In exceptional cases, when these Samsf^dras are very 
strong, they bear fruit quickly ; exceptional acts of 
wickedness, or of goodness, bring their fruits even in 
this life. The Yogis hold that men who are able to 
acquire a tremendous amount of good Samskdras have 
not to die, but, even in this life, can change their 
bodies into god-bodies. There are several such cases 
mentioned by the Yogis in their books. Such men 
change the very material of their bodies and arrange 
the molecules in such fashion that they have no more 
sickness, and therefore, what we call death does not 
come to them. And why should it not be so> The 
physiological meaning of food is assimilation of 
energy from the sun. That reaches us through plants 
and animals that we eat. Therefore, science says that 
we take so much energy from the sun, and make it a 
part of ourselves. TTiat being the case, why should 
there be only one way of assimilating energy? The 
plant’s way is not the same as ours ; the earth’s 
process of assimilating energy differs from our own. 
But all assimilate energy in some form or other. The 
Yogis say that people with a tremendous amount of 
good Samskdras are able to assimilate energy by the 
power of the mind alone, and that they can draw in 
as much of it as they desire without recourse to the 
ordinary methods. As a spider makes its web out of 



YOGA APHORISMS. 


163 


its own substance, and becomes bound in it, and 
cannot go anywhere except along the lines of that 
web, so we have projected out of our own substance 
this net- work called the nerves, and we cannot work 
except through those nerve-channels. But the Yogi 
says we need not be bound by that. 

The case may be regarded as similar to that of 
sending electrical currents. We can send electricity 
to any part of the world, but we have to send it by 
•means of wires. But Nature can send a vast mass of 
electricity without the help of any wires at all. Why 
cannot we do the same?* Now, it is a fact that ^he 
nerve currents are very much like electrical currents 
and we can send them all over the body by the help 
of our mind and will. Nay what we call mind is 
very much the same as electricity. It has been proved 
also that the nerve fluid within our body shows 
polarity in answer to electrical directions. At present 
we can send our mental electricity only through the 
help of the nerves. But why can we not send that 
electricity without such aid? The Yogis say it is 
perfectly possible and practicable, and that when you 
can do that you will work all over the universe. You 
will be able to work with any body anywhere, with- 
out the help of the nervous system. When the mind 
is acting through the nerve-channels we say the man 
IS living and when these cease to work the man is said 
to be dead. But when a man is able to act either with 
Cl without these channels, birth and death will have 
no meaning for him. All the bodies in the universe 
are made up of TanmStra^ or fine material particles 


• The reader must remember that the Swami wrote this 
before the discovery of wireless telegraphy 




164 


RAJA YOGA. 


and their difference lies in the arrangement of them. 
And if you are the arranger you can arrange them in 
your body in one way or another. Now, who makes 
up this body but yourself? Who eats the food? If 
another ate the food for you, you would not live long. 
Who makes the blood out of food? You, certainly. 
Who purifies the blood, and sends it through the 
veins? You. We are the masters of the body, and 
we live in it. Only we have lost the knowledge of 
how to rejuvenate it. We have become automatic or 
degenerated. We have forgotten the process of 
arranging the molecules of the body. So, what we 
do automatically has to be done knowingly. We are 
the masters and therefore, we shall have to regulate 
that arrangement, and as soon as we can do that we 
shall be able to rejuvenate it just as we like, and then 
we shall have neither birth nor disease nor death. 

13. Sati miile tadvip^ko jdtydyurbhogah. 

13. The root being there, the fruition 
comes (in the form of) species, life, and experi- 
ence of pleasure and pain. 

The roots, or the causes, that is to say, the 
Sams\dras being there, they produce the effects of 
works. The cause dying down becomes the effect ; 
again, the effect getting subtler becomes the cause of 
the next effect. A tree bears a seed, which becomes 
the cause of another tree, and so on. All our works 
now are the effects of past Samskdras ; again, the 
works that we are doing at present, becoming 
Samskdras will be the causes of future actions, and 
thus we go on. So this aphorism says that the cause 


^ ^ tt II 




YOGA APHORISMS. 


165 


being there, the fruit must come, in the form of birth 
ill a species of being ; one will be a man, another 
an angel, another an animal, another a demon and 
so forth. Then again, the effects of different k.arma 
will produce unequal length of life. As for instance, 
one man lives fifty years, another a hundred, another 
dies in two years and never attains maturity ; all these 
differences in life are regulated by past fearma. Then 
again, one man is born, as it were, for pleasure, and 
even if he buries himself in a forest, pleasure will 
follow him there. Another man, wheresoever he 
goes, is followed by pain ; everything brings pai i to 
him. That also is the result of their past l^arma. 
According to the philosophy of the Yogis all virtuous 
actions bring pleasure, and all vicious actions, pain. 
Any man who does wicked deeds is sure to reap their 
fruit in the form of pain. 

14. Te hl&da-paritapaphalcih 

punydpunyahetutvdt, 

14. They bear fruit as pleasure or pain, 
caused by virtue or vice. 

1 5 . Parindmatapa-samsk&ra-duhl^airguna'Vritti- 
virodhdchcha sarvameva duhkham oioekinah. 

15. To the discriminating, all is painful on 
account of everything bringing pain, either as 
consequence or as anticipation of loss of happi- 
ness or as fresh craving arising from impressions 


^ II II 

n u II 



166 


RAJA YOGA. 


of happiness, and also on account of the counter- 
action of qualities. 

The Yogis say that the man who has discriminat- 
ing powers or good sense, sees through all that are 
called pleasure and pain, and knows that they come 
to all, and that one follows and melts into the other ; 
he sees that men follow an ignis jaiuus all their lives, 
and never succeed in fulfilling their desires. The 
great king Yudhisthira once said that the most 
wonderful thing in life is that, every moment we see 
people dying around us, and yet we think we shall 
never die. Surrounded by fools on every side, we 
think we are the only exceptions, the only learned 
men. Surrounded by all sorts of exepriences of fickle- 
ness, we think our love is the only lasting love. How 
can that be? Even love is selfish, and the Yogis say 
that, in the end, we shall find that even the love of 
husbands and wives, and children and friends, slowly 
decays. Decadence seizes everything in this life. It 
IS only when everything, even love, fails that with a 
flash, man finds out how vain, how dream-like is this 
world. Then he catches a glimpse of Vairagyam or 
renunciation, and through that a glimpse of the be- 
yond. It is only by giving up this world that the other 
comes, and never through holding on to this one. 
Never yet was there a great soul who had not to 
reject sense pleasures and enjoyments to acquire his 
greatness. The cause of misery is the clash between 
the different forces of nature, one dragging man one 
way, and another dragging him another way, render- 
ing permanent happiness impossible. 

16. Hey am duhhhamanagatam. 






YOGA APHORISMS. 


167 


16. The misery which is not yet come is 
tc be avoided. 

Some k,arma we have worked out already, some 
we are working out now in the present, and some are 
waiting to bear fruit for us in the future. The first 
kind is past and gone. The second we will have to 
work out. So it is only that which is waiting to bear 
fruit in the future that we can conquer and control, 
and towards that end all our forces should be directed. 
TTiis is what Patanjali means when he says, that 
SamsI^aras are to be controlled by counteracting 
waves (II. 10). 

17. Drashtri-drisyayoh samyogo heyahetnh. 

1 7 . The cause of that which is to be 
avoided is the junction of the seer and the seen. 

Who is the seer? The Self of Man or the 
Purusha. What is the seen? The whole of nature 
beginning with mind, down to gross matter. All 
pleasure and pain arise from the junction between 
the Purusha and the mind. The Purusha, you mus*^ 
remember, according to this philosophy, is pure ; only 
when joined to nature. It appears to feel pleasure or 
pain by reflection. 

18. Prakasa-kriya-sthitisilam bhiitendriyatma- 
k^in hhogapavargartham drisyam. 

18. The experienced or the seen that is 
composed of elements and organs (both internal 
and external), is of the nature of illumination, 
action, and inertia, and is for the purpose of 
ii ii 



J68 


RAJA YOGA. 


experience (of the world) and release (of the 
experiencer). 

The experienced, that is to say, nature, is com- 
posed of elements and organs — the elements, gross 
and fine, which compose the whole of nature, and the 
organs of the senses, mind, etc. — and is of the nature 
of illumination or Sattva, action or Rajas, and inertia 
or Tanias. Now what is the purpose of the whole of 
nature? It is that the Purusha may gain experience. 
The Purusha has, as it were, forgotten Its mighty, 
godly nature. There is a story that Vishnu, the 
protector of the gods, once became a pig, wallowing 
in mire ; he had a she-pig, and a lot of baby pigs, and 
was very happy. Then some gods saw his plight, and 
came to him and told him, “You are the king of the 
gods, you have all the gods under your command. 
Why are you here?*’ But Vishnu said, “Never mind, 
1 am all right here ; 1 do not care for heaven while I 
have this sow and these little pigs.” The poor gods 
were at their wit’s end. After a time they decided to 
slay all the pigs one after another. And when all 
were dead, Vishnu began to weep and mourn. 
Then the gods ripped his pig body open and he came 
out of it and began to laugh. For, then he realised 
what a hideous dream he had, to imagine that he, the 
king of the gods, had become a pig and that pig-life 
was the only life so as to want the whole universe to 
come into that life ! The Purusha, when It identifies 
itself with nature, forgets that It is pure and infinite. 
The Purusha does not love, but It is love itself. It 
does not exist, It is existence itself. TTie Soul does 
not know. It is knowledge itself. TTierefore, it is a 
mistake to say the Soul loves, exists or knows. Love, 



YOGA APHORISMS. 


169 


'existence and knowledge are not the qualities of the 
Purusha, but Its very essence. When these get 
reflected upon something, we call them the qualities 
of that something. But it is not so with regard to the 
Purusha. For those are not the qualities but the 
essence of the Purusha or the Atman — the great 
Atman, the great Infinite Being, without birth or 
death, and established in Its own glory. It appears 
to have become so degenerate that if you approach 
to tell It, “You are not apig,“ It begins to squeal and 
bite. 

Thus is it with us all in this dream-world of 
Maya, where it is all misery, weeping and crying, 
where a few golden balls are rolled, and the world 
scrambles after them. You were never bound by 
laws, for Nature never had a bond for you — that is 
what the Yogi tells us. The Yogi shows how, by 
junction with nature, and identifying Itself with the 
mind and the world, the Purusha thinks Itself miser- 
able. Then the Yogi goes on to show us that the way 
out is through experience. We shall have to get all 
this experience, but let us finish it quickly. We have 
placed ourselves in this net, and will have to get out. 
We have got ourselves caught in the trap, and we will 
have to work out our freedom. So let us get this 
experience of becoming husbands, wives and friends, 
and making little loves ; we will get through them 
safely if we never forget what we really are. Let us 
never forget that this is only a transitory state that we 
have to pass through . Elxperience — the experience of 
pleasure and pain — is the one great teacher : but let 
US know that it is only an experience on our way to the 
goal and that it will lead us step by step to that state 
where all things will become small, and where the 



170 


RAJA YOGA. 


Purusha will appear so great that the whole universe 
will seem like a drop in the ocean, and will fall off 
b> its own nothingness. We shall have to go 
through various experiences, but let us never forget 
the ideal. 

19. V iseahaoisesha-lingarndfralmgani 

gunaparvdni , 

19. The states of the qualities are the 
defined, the less-defined, the indicated only (but 
not defined), and the non-indicated or signless. 

The system of Yoga is built entirely on the 
philosophy of the Sdnkhyas ; so let us remember here 
the cosmology of the Sdnl^hya philosophy. Accord- 
ing to the SdnkhyaSy Prakriti or Nature is both the 
n material and the efficient cause of the universe. In 
Nature there are three sorts of materials, the Sattva, 
the Rajas, and the Tamas. The Tdmas kind of 
materials is dark by nature and produces ignorance 
and heaviness. The Rajas produces activity and the 
Satioa, calmness and light. Nature, before creation, 
is called by them Avyakfom, undefined or indiscrete, 
that is to say, a state in which there is no distinction 
of form or name, and in which these three materials 
are held in perfect balance. Then the balance is dis- 
turbed, the three materials begin to mingle in various 
fashions, and the result is the universe. In man also, 
as in everything else, there exist these three kinds 
of materials. When the Sattva material prevails, 
knowledge comes to him : when Rajas prevails, 
comes activity : and when Tamas, darkness, lassi- 
tude, idleness, and ignorance. According to the 





YOGA APHORISMS. 


171 


Sdnkhya theory, the highest manifestation of Nature, 
consisting of those three materials, is what they call 
Mahat or intelligence, that is to say, universal intelli- 
gence, of which each human intellect is a part. In 
the Sdnkhya psychology there is a sharp distinction 
between Manas or the mind function of the internal 
oigan and the function of it called the Buddhi or 
intellect. The mind function is simply to collect and 
carry impressions and present them to the Buddhi or 
the individual Mahat, which determines upon it. Out 
of Mahat comes egoism, and out of egoism, the fine 
materials. The fine materials combine and become 
the gross materials that are outside in the external 
universe. The claim of the Sankhya philosophy is 
that, beginning with the intellect down to a block of 
stone, everything is the product of one substance, 
their difference consisting only in the finer or grosser 
states of manifestation of that substance. The finer 
is the cause, and the grosser is the effect. According 
to the Sankhya philosophy, beyond the whole of 
nature is the Purusha, which is not material at all. 
Purusha, therefore, is not at all similar to any of 
the products of Nature, such as, Buddhi, mind, the 
Tanmdtras, or the gross materials. It is not akin to 
any one of thes^, and is entirely separate from them ; 
for, it is entirely different in its nature. From this the 
Sankhyas argue that the Purusha must be immortal, 
because It is not the result of any combination, and 
that which is not the result of combination can never 
die. The Purushas or Souls are infinite in number. 

* The reader will note the difference on this point, between 
the Sankhya and the Yoga Philosophies. The latter holds that 
out of Mahat is being produced both egoism and the fine 
materials 



172 


RA/A YOGA. 


Now we shall understand the Aphorism which 
says that, the states of the qualities are defined, 
undefined, indicated only, and signless. By the 
defined is meant the gross elements which we can 
sense. By the undefined is meant the very fine 
materials, such as the Tanmatras, which cannot be 
sensed by ordinary men. If you practise Yoga, 
however, says Patanjali. then after a while your 
perceptions will become so fine that you will actually 
be able to perceive the Tanmatrds. For instance, 
you have heard how every man has a certain kind of 
light about him : he says that that can be seen by the 
\ ogi. We do not see it, but we all throw out these 
Tanmatrds, just as a flower continuously sends out 
fine particles, which enable us to smell it. Every day 
of our lives we thus throw out of our own selves a 
mass of good or evil, and wheresoever we go the 
atmosphere is full of such fine material particles. 
That is how there came to the human mind, uncons- 
ciously, the idea of building temples and churches. 
Why should man build churches in which to go to 
worship? Why not worship Him anywhere? For, 
even if he did not know the reason, man found out 
the fact that that place where people worshipped God 
became full of good Tanmatr&s. And as people go 
there every day and think godly thoughts, the place 
gets more and more full of good Tanmatrds and 
becomes more and more holy. Now, if any man who 
has not much Sattva in him goes there, the place will 
influence him, and arouse his Sattva quality. Here, 
therefore, is the significance of temples and holy 
places : but you must remember that their holiness 
depends on holy people congregating there. The 
difficulty with man is that he forgets the original 



YOGA APHORISMS. 


173 


meaning, and puts the cart before the horse. It was 
men who made these places holy, and then the effect 
became the cause and made men holy. If the wicked 
only were to go there it would become as bad as any 
other place. It is not the building, but the people, 
that make a church, and that is what we always 
forget. That is why sages and holy persons, who 
have much of this Sattva quality in them, can send it 
out and exert a tremendous influence day and night 
on their surroundings. Thus a man may become so 
pure that his purity will become tangible and whoso- 
ever comes in contact with him then, will become 
pure. 

Next “the indicated only“ means the Buddhi, or 
the intellect, “The indicated only“ is the first mani- 
festation of nature ; from it all other manifestations 
proceed. And the last is “the signless** or the 
undifferentiated Prakriti herself. There seems to be 
a great difference between modern science and 
religion at this point. Every religion has the idea 
that the universe has come out of intelligence. 
The theory of God, taking it in its psychological 
significance, apart from all ideas of personality is 
that, intelligence is the first in the order of creation, 
and that out of that intelligence has come what we 
call gross matter. But the modem philosophers say 
that intelligence is the last to come. They say that 
unintelligent things slowly evolve into animals, and 
from animals into men. They claim that instead of 
ever3rthing coming out of intelligence, intelligence 
itself is the last product to come. But though the 
religious and the scientific statements seem directly 
opposed to each other, yet both of them are true. 
For if we take an infinite series, such as, A — — ^A — 



174 


RAJA YOGA. 


— A — B, &c., the question might well arise as to which 
is first. A or B. If you take the series as A — B you 
will say that A is the first, but if you take it as B — ^A, 
you will say that B is the first. So it depends upon the 
way we look at it. Intelligence undergoes modifica- 
tion and becomes the gross matter, this again merges 
ifi intelligence, and thus the process goes on. The 
Sanl^hyas and other religionists put intelligence first, 
and the series becomes intelligence first, and then 
matter. Tlie scientific man on the other hand puts 
his finger on matter, and says, matter first, and then 
intelligence. Yet they both indicate the same chain. 
Indian philosophy, however, goes beyond both intelli- 
gence and matter, and finds a Puruaha or Self, which 
is beyond intelligence, or of which intelligence is but 
the borrowed light. 

20. Drashtd dristmdtrah suddhopi pratyaydnu- 
pasyah, 

20. rhe seer is intelligence only, and 
though pure, sees through the colouring of the 
intellect. 

This is again Sdnl^hya philosophy. We have 
seen from that philosophy that from the lowest form 
up to intelligence all is Nature, and beyond Nature 
are Purushas or souls, which have no qualities. Then 
how does the soul appear to be happy or unhappy? 
The answer is — by reflection. If a red flower is put 
near a piece of pure crystal, it appears to be red, 
similarly the appearances of happiness or unhappi- 
ness of the soul are but reflections, and the soul itself 






ycx;a aphorisms. 


MO 


has no colouring. For the soul is eternally separate 
from nature ; nature is one thing, and soul another. 
The Sankhyas say that intelligence is a compound, for 
the reason that it grows and wanes, or that it changes 
just as the body changes, and that its nature is nearly 
the same as that of the body. As a finger-nail is to 
the body, so is body to intelligence. T he nail is part 
of the body but it can be pared off hundreds of times, 
and the body will still last. Similarly, intelligence 
lasts for aeons, while the body is “pared off“ or 
thrown off numbers of times. Yet intelligence can- 
not be immortal, because it changes, that is to say, 
grows and wanes, and anything that changes can 
never be immortal. Therefore intelligence is manu- 
factured, and that very fact shows us that there must 
be something beyond that. It can never be free, for 
everything connected with matter is in nature, and 
therefpre bound for ever. The free must certainly be 
beyond cause and effect. The Purusha or the soul 
of man is such and therefore free. And if you say 
that the idea of freedom is a delusion, I shall say that 
the idea of bondage also is a delusion. For two facts 
come into our consciousness, and stand or fall with 
each ‘Other. These are our notions of bondage and 
freedom. And if we want to go through the wall of 
reason, our head bumps against it and we see that we 
are limited by that wall. At the same time we think 
we can go beyond it at our will. We do the same 
with regard to everything that is beyond reason. At 
every step such contradictory ideas come to us. We 
have to believe that we are free, yet at every moment 
we find we are not so. And yet if one idea is a 
delusion, the other is also a delusion, and if one is 
true, the other also is true, because both stand upon 



176 


RAJA YOGA. 


the same basis, namely, consciousness. The Yogi 
says, both are true — that we are boimd so far as intelli- 
gence goes and that we are free as far as the soul is 
concerned. The real man is the Soul or the Purusha, 
which is beyond all law of causation. Its freedom is 
percolating through layers of matter in various forms, 
intelligence, mind, &c. It is Its light which is shining 
through all and intelligence has no light of its own. 
Again, each organ has a particular centre in the brain 
and it is not that all the organs have one centre in the 
train. Thus each organ is separate. And yet why 
do all perceptions harmonise? Where do they get 
their unity? If it were for the brain, it would be 
necessary for all the organs of the eyes, the nose, the 
ears and so forth, to have one centre only, while we 
know it for certin that there are different centres for 
each, and the fact stands that a man can see and hear 
at the came time. So a unity must be there at the 
back of intelligence. Intelligence is connected with 
the brain, but behind intelligence even, stands the 
Purusha or the unit, where all different sensations and 
perceptions join and become one. The Soul itself is 
the centre where all the different perceptions converge 
and become unified. That Soul is free, and it Is Its 
freedom that tells you every moment that you are 
free. But you mistake, and mingle that freedom every 
moment with intelligence and mind. You try to attri- 
bute that freedom to the intelligence, to find soon 
afterwards that intelligence is not free. You attribute 
that freedom to the body, and immediately nature 
tells you that you are again mistaken. That is why 
the^e is this mingled sense of freedom and bondage 
in us at the same time. The Yogi analyses both what 
is free and what is bound, and his ignorance vanishes. 



YOGA APHORISMS 


177 


He finds that the Purusha alone is free, and is the 
essence of that knowledge which, coming through the 
Buddhi, becomes limited intelligence. 

21. Tadartha eva drisyasydtmd. 

2 1 . The evolutionary nature of the experi- 
en<^ is for Him (Purusha), 

^^ature or Prakriti has no light of its own. As 
long as the Purusha or the soul is present in it, it 
appears as illuminated, but that light is borrowed ; 
just as the moon's light is from reflection. According 
to the Yogis, all the manifestations of nature are 
caused by nature itself, but nature has no purpose in 
view, except to free the Purusha. 

22. Kritartham prati nashtamapyanashtam tad- 
anyasddhdranatodt, 

22. Though destroyed to him who has 
attained the goal, yet it (the experienced) is not 
destroyed, being common to others. 

The whole activity of nature is to make the Soul 
know that It is entirely separate from nature. When 
the Soul knows this, nature has no more attractions 
for It.‘ TTius, although the whole of nature vanishes 
for one who has become free, there 'will always 
remain an infinite number of others, for whom nature 
will go on working. 

23. Svasvdmi-sakfyoh svariipopalabdhihetuh 
samyogah. 


II II 

ii n 

12 



178 


RAJA YOGA 


23. Junction is the cause of the realisation 
of the nature of the powers of the experienced 
and its Lord (the experiencer). 

According to this aphorism, both the powers of 
Soul and nature become manifest when they are in 
conjunction. Then alone, all manifestations are 
thrown out. Ignorance is the cause of this conjunc- 
tion. We see every day that the cause of our pain 
and pleasure is always our joining ourselves with the 
body. If I were perfectly certain that I am not the 
body, 1 should take no notice of heat and cold or 
anything pertaining to the body. The body is nothing 
but a combination of material particles and it is a 
fiction only to say that I have one body, you another, 
and the sun another. For the whole universe is one 
ocean of matter, and your body, my body and the 
sun*s body are as little whirlpools in it. We know 
again that matter is continuously changing ; so what 
is forming the sun one day, may form next day the 
matter of our bodies. 

24. Tasya heturavidyd. 

24. Ignorance is the cause of that 
(junction). 

Through ignorance we have joined ourselves with 
A particular body, and thus opened ourselves to 
misery. But this idea of having a body is simply 
superstition and it is superstition that makes us happy 
or unhappy. It is superstition caused by ignorance 
that makes us feel heat and cold, pain and pleasure 
and so forth. It is our business, therefore, to rise 


ii h 



YOGA AiPHORtSMS 


179 


above that superstition, and the Yogi shows how we 
can do this. It has been demonstrated that, under 
certain mental conditions, a man may be burned, yet 
he will feel no pain. But the difficulty is that such a 
sudden upheaval of the mind comes like a whirlwind 
one minute, and goes away the next. If, however, 
we gain it through Yoga, we shall permanently attain 
to the separation of the Self from the body. 

25. Tadabh6v6t samyogcbhdoo hanam taddriseh 
kaivalyam. 

25. There being absence of that (ignor- 
ance), there is absence of junction ; that entire 
absence (of junction) is (called) singleness or 
freedom of the seer. 

According to Yoga philosophy, it is through 
ignorance that the Soul has been joined with nature. 
And the aim is to get rid of nature’s control over It. 
That indeed is the goal of all religions. Each Soul is 
potentially divine, and the goal is to manifest the 
divinity that is within, by controlling nature, exten al 
and internal. We shall have to do this either by work, 
or worship, or philosophy — ^by one or more, or by all 
of these — and be free. This is the whole of religion. 
Doctrines, dogmas, rituals, books, temples and forms 
are but secondary details. The Yogi tries to reach 
that goal through psychic control. Until we can free 
ourselves from nature, we are slaves and must get on 
as she dictates. The Yogi claims that he who controls 
mind, controls matter also. For the internal nature 
is much higher than the external, and much more 
difficult to grapple with and control ; therefote he 



180 


RAJA YOGA 


who has conquered the internal nature, controls the 
whole universe ; it becomes his servant. Raja Yoga 
propounds the methods of gaining that control. There 
are forces in our internal nature, higher than we know 
of, and those will have to be subdued. This body 
is just the external crust of the mind. They are not 
two different things ; they are to each other as the 
oyster to its shell ; that is to say, they are but two 
aspects of one thing. The internal substance of the 
oyster takes up matter from outside, and manufactures 
the shell ; in the same way the internal fine forces 
which are called mind, take up gross matters from 
outside, and manufacture from that this external shell, 
the body. If, then, we have control of the internal, 
it will be easy to have control of the external. Then 
again, these forces are not different. It is not that 
some forces are physical and some mental. The 
physical forces are but the gross manifestations of the 
fine forces, just as the physical world is but the gross 
manifestation of the fine or causal world. 

26. V ioel^akhyStiraviplavS hdnopdyah . 

26 . The means to the destruction of 
ignorance is the powrer of unbroken discrimina- 
tion. 

This real goal of Yoga is to have the power of 
discriminating between the real and the unreal, 
knowing that the Purusha is not nature, that is to say, 
neither matter nor mind ; and that because it is not 
nature, it cannot possibly change. It is only nature 
which changes, combining, dissolving and recom- 
bining continually. When through constant practice 


a II 




YOGA APHORISMS 


181 


we begin to discriminate that fact, ignorance will 
vanish, and the Purusha will begin to shine in its real 
nature as omniscient, omnipotent and omnipresent. 
27. 7 asya saptaddh6 prdnta-bhiimih, 

27. (Possessing unbroken discrimination) 
His (the Yogi’s) knowledge attains the sevenfold 
highest ground. 

This kind of knowledge comes to the Yogi, in 
seven grades, one after the other, and when one of 
these begins, we know that we are getting to that 
high place of knowledge. TTie first to appear wiP be 
the conviction that we have known what is to be 
known and our mind will cease to be dissatisfied any 
longer. For, as long as we are thirsting after know- 
ledge, we go on seeking for it wherever we think 
we can get it, and failing to find it in one place, we 
become dissatisfied and begin to seek for it in a fresh 
direction. But all search after knowing absolute 
truth is vain, until we begin to perceive that the 
knowledge of it is within ourselves, that no one can 
help us to it and that we must help ourselves to attain 
it. Now, by the practice of the power of discrimina- 
tion, the first sign that we are getting near that truth, 
will come in the form of the aforesaid conviction, and 
from that the dissatisfied state of the mind will vanish. 
We shall feel quite sure then that we have found the 
truth, and that it cannot be anything else but the truth, 
and that will help us to persevere until the goal is 
reached. The Yogi’s mind now rises to the second 
grade of knowledge and the sign of it appears in the 
conviction that comes to him about the absence of all 


cH?? II II 



RAJA YOGA 


m2 

pains. It will be impossible now, for an 3 rthing in the 
universe, external or internal to give him pain. In 
the third grade the conviction comes that by attaining 
this knowledge he has attained the highest thing that 
could come to man. In the fourth grade of know- 
ledge comes the conviction that he has fulfilled all his 
duties now. and has come to the end of all work 
whatsoever, through discrimination. Next will come 
to him what is called the freedom of the Chitta in the 
following forms of knowledge. (I) He will realise that 
all difficulties and struggles, and all vacillations of the 
mind have fallen down, just as a stone rolls from the 
mountain top into the valley, never to come up again. 

(2) He will realise that his Chitta melts away into its 
cause, whenever he so desires, on account of the 
purity and perfection of his determinative faculty. 

(3) He will find that he is always established in Self, 
that he had always been alone throughout the 
universe and that neither body nor mind was ever 
related, much less joined to him. The Yogi says we 
have been alone, omnipotent, omnipresent, ever 
blessed, and our own Self was so pure and perfect 
that we required none else. Yea, we required pone 
else to make us happy, for we were and are still 
happiness itself. We shall find that this knowledge 
of our own perfection does not depend on anything 
else ; and that throughout the universe there can be 
nothing that is not made effulgent by us. This will 
be the last state, and we will become peaceful and 
calm, never to feel any more pain, never to be again 
deluded, and never to be again touched by misery. 
We will know from now always, that we are perfect 
and almighty. 



YOGA APHORISMS 


183 


28. Yog6ngdnushthSnSdaoisuddhik,8haye jndna- 
dipHrivivekflkhyaieh. 

28. By the practice of the different parts 
of Yoga the impurities being destroyed, know- 
ledge becomes effulgent up to discrimination. 

Now comes the practical direction. What we 
have been speaking about till now is much higher. 
It is away above our heads, but it is the ideal. And 
to realise that, it is hrst necessary to obtain physical 
and mental control. Then alone will the realisation 
of that ideal become steady. The ideal being 
known, what remains now, is to practise the method 
of reaching it. 

29. Yama-niyamdsana-prdntiydma-pratyahdra- 
dharanS-dhydna-samddhayoshtSoangSm. 

29. Yama, Niyama, Asana, Prdndydma, 
Pratyahara, Dharana^ Dhydna, and Scmnddhi; 
are the eight limbs (parts) of Yoga. 

30. A himsa-satySsteya-brahmacharyydparigraha 
yamdh. 

30. Non-killing, (and non-offering pain to 
any one), truthfulness, non-stealing, continence, 
and non-receiving (of things conducive to luxury) 
are called Yama. 

A man who wants to be a perfect Yogi must give 
up the sex idea. The soul has no sex ; why should 





RAJA YOGA 


l«4 

we degrade ourselves with sex ideas? Later on we 
shall understand better why those ideas must be 
given up. The mind of the man who receives gifts of 
things conducive to luxury, is acted on by the mind 
of the giver, so the receiver is likely to become 
degenerated. Receiving such gifts is prone to destroy 
the independence of the mind, and make us slavish. 
TTierefore, receive no such gifts. 

31. Ete jAti-desha-k^la-samaySnaOachchhinn^h 
sarvabhauma mahavratam. 

31 . These, unbroken by time, place, pur- 
pose and caste-rules or custom are (universal) 
great vows. 

Non-killing, truthfulness, non-stealing, chastity, 
and non-receiving are to be practised by every man, 
woman and child, that is to say, by every soul, 
irrespective of nation, country or position. 

32 . Saucha-santosba-tapahsaadhyayesvara- 

pranidhSndnt niyamah, 

32. Internal and external purification, con- 
tentment, mortification, study, and worship of 
God, are Niyamas. 

External purification is keeping the body pure ; 
dirty man v\rill never be a Yogi. There must be 
internal purification also. That is obtained by the 
virtues named in I. 33. Of course, internal purity is 
of greater value than external, but both are necessary, 
and external purity, without internal, is of not much 
value. 



YOGA APHORISMS 


185 


33. l^itarkabadhane pratipaJ^sha-hhctoanam. 

33. To obstruct thoughts which are 
inimical to Yoga, contrary thoughts should be 
brought. 

That is the way to practise the virtues that have 
been stated. As for instance, when the idea of steal- 
ing comes, non-stealing should be ♦^hought of ; or 
when the idea of receiving gifts comes, replace it by 
.a contrary thought. 

34. Vitarkd himsadayah krita-kdritanumodita 
lobha-krodha'moha-puroikd mridu-madhyddhimdtrd 
duhkhdjndndnantaphald iti pratipakshabhdvanam. 

34. The obstructions to Yoga, such as, 
killing, falsehood and so forth, whether com- 
mitted, caused or approved, through thirst, 
anger, or forgetfulness, of slight, middling or 
great intensity, result in infinite ignorance and 
misery — ^such is (the method of) thinking 
contrary thoughts. 

If 1 tell a lie, or cause another to tell one, or 
approve of another doing so, it is equally sinful. If 
it is a very mild lie, still it is a lie. Every vicious 
thought will rebound on the thinker, and every' 
thought of hatred which you may have thought, in a 
cave even, is stored up, and will one day come back 
to you with tremendous power in the form of some 
misery here. If you project hatred and jealousy, they 



166 


RAM VOGA 


will rebound on you with compound interest. No 
power can avert them ; when once you have put 
them in motion you will have to bear the fruits of 

them. If you remember this» it will prevent you 
from doing wicked things. 

35. Ahims6-pratishth6yctm tatsannidhau oaira- 
tySgah. 

35. Non-killing being established, in his 
presence all enmities cease (in others). 

If a man realises the ideal of non-injuring others, 

then, even the animals which are by their nature 
ferocious will become peaceful before him. The 
tiger and the lamb will play together before that 
Yogi. When you have come to that state, then alone 
you will understand that you have become firmly 
established in non-injuring. 

36. Satya-pratishthdydm kriy&phalctsrayatvam. 

36. By the establishment of truthfulness 

the Yogi gets the power of attaining for himself 
and others the fruits of work without doing those 
works. 

When this power of truth will be established 
within you, then even in dream you will never tell an 
untruth. You will be true in thought, word and 
deed. Then, whatever you say will be truth. As for 
instance, if you say to a man, “Be blessed,” that man 
will be blessed ; or if a man is diseased and you 
say to him, “Be thou cured,” he will be cured 
immediately. 

ii 9 ^ li 



YCXIA APHORISMS 


187 


37., Asteya-pratishthdySm saroa-ratnopasthdnam, 

37. By the establishment of non-stealing 
all wealth comes to the Yogi. 

The more you fly from nature or Prakritt and the 
things of her creation, such as, riches etc., the more 
do they follow you, and if you do not care for them 
at all they become your slaves. 

38. Brahmacharyga-pratishthdyam vtryyal&hhah. 

38. By the establishment of continence 
energy is gained. 

The chaste brain has tremendous energy and 
gigantic will power. Without chastity there can be 
no spiritual strength. The spiritual giants have all 
been men with great continence, and indeed, that is 
what gave them the power to lead mankind. There- 
fore the Yogi must be continent. 

39. A parigraha-sthairyye ianma-kathantasam- 

bodhah, 

39. When he is fixed in non-receiving he 
gets the memory of past life. 

The Yogi who does not receive presents of things 
conducive to luxury, does not become beholden to 
others, but remains independent and free. And by 
giving up the ideas of luxury and enjoyment his mind 
becomes pure. Then again, with every such gift, he 
is likely to receive the evils of the giver. Therefore 
it is best if he does not receive any gift whatsoever. 


II II 

ii n 
ii ii 




188 


RAJA YOGA 


The highest point of non-receiving, however, is 
reached when the Yogi, looking upon his body as 
the instrument which brings the evils of luxury and 
enjoyment, gives up the idea of taking any more 
bodies in future and becomes perfectly indifferent to 
the existing one also. Then he gets the memory of 
his past lives and becomes perfectly fixed in his ideal. 
He sees then that he has been coming and going 
many times ; so he becomes deteiTnined that this 
time he will be free, and that he will no more come 
and go and be the slave of Nature. 

40. Sauchdt avdnga-jagupsa parairasamsargah. 

40. Purification being established, arises 
disgust for one’s own body, and non-intercourse 
with others. 

When there is real purification of the body and 
the mind, the ideal of keeping the body nice vanishes. 
A face which others call most beautiful will appear 
to the Yogi as merely animal, if there is not intelli- 
gence behind it. Again, what the world calls a 
very common face, he regards as heavenly, if the 
spirit shines behind it. The thirst after body is the 
gieat bane of human life. So, the sign of the 
establishment of external purification is that you do 
not care to think you are a body. It is only when that 
comes that we get rid of the body idea. 

41 . Sattvasuddhr-saumanasyail^agratendrtya- 

jaydtma-darsana-yogyatvdni. 

41. From purification arises also purity of 

II 8 0 II 



YOGA APHORISMS 


189 


sattvay cheerfulness of mind, concentration, con- 
quest of the organs, and fitness for the realisation 
of the Self. 

By the practice of internal purification the aattva 
material prevails, and the mind becomes concentrated 
and cheerful. The first sign, therefore, of your 
becoming religious is that you are becoming cheerful. 
To become gloomy is no part of religion. To have 
pleasurable feelings is the nature of sattva, and every- 
thing becomes pleasurable to the sattvika man. So 
when cheerfulness comes to you, know that you are 
progressing in Yoga. All pain is caused by tamas ; 
so you must get rid of moroseness, knowing it to be 
the result of tamas. TTie strong. |he well-knit, the 
young, the healthy and the daring alone are fit to be 
Yogis. To the Yogi everything is bliss, every human 
face that he sees brings cheerfulness to him. Tbat is 
the sign of a virtuous man. Miseiy is caused by sin, 
and by no other cause. What business have you 
with clouded faces? If you have a clouded face do 
not go out that day but shut yourself up in your rocm. 
For what right have you to carry that disease out into 
the world? When your mind has become controlled 
you shall have control over the whole body. Instead 
of being a slave to this machine, the machine then 
will become your slave. Instead of this machine 
being able to drag the Soul down it will become Its 
greatest helpmate. 

42. Santoshcidanuttamah sukhalabhah . 

42. From contentment comes superlative 
happiness. 


11 « 9 11 



190 


RAJA YOGA 


43 . Kdyendriyasiddhiraauddhi''k^hay6t-tapa9ah. 

43. The result of mortification is to bring 

powers to the organs and the body, by destroy- 
ing their impurity. 

The results of mortification are seen in the 
heightened powers of vision, hearing things at a 
distance, and so on. 

44 . Svadhydy&dishta-deimtd-aamprayogah . 

44. By the repetition of the mantra comes 
the realisation of the intended deity. 

The higher the beings that you want to get at. 
the harder is the practice. 

45 . Samadhisiddhirisvara-pranidhdndt. 

45. By sacrificing all to Isvara comes 
Samddhi. 

By resignation to the Lord. Samddhi becomes 
perfect. 

46. Sthira-sukhamdsanam. 

46. Posture is that which is firm and 
pleasant. 

Now comes y4sana, posture. Until you can get a 
firm seat you cannot practise the breathing and other 
exercises. Firmness of seat means to keep the body 
in such a position that you do not feel it at all. 


\ II w 
I € ^ ii h 

H II 




YOGA APHORISMS 


191 


Ordinarily you will find that as soon as you sit for a 
few minutes all sorts of disturbances come into the 
body ; but when you have been able to secure firm- 
ness of seat you will get beyond the idea of the 
concrete body or in other words, lose all sense of it. 
You will then feel neither pleasure nor pain. And 
after getting up from that posture you will feel rested. 
It is the only perfect rest that you can give to the 
body. When you have succeeded in conquering the 
body and keeping it firm, your practice will remain 
firm, but while you are disturbed by the body your 
nerves will become disturbed, and you will no? be 
able to concentrate the mind. 

47. Prayatna-saithilydnanta-a^mapattibhydm . 

47, By lessening the natural tendency (for 
restlessness) and meditating on the unlimited 
(posture becomes firm and pleasant). 

We can make the seat firm by thinking of the 
infinite. We cannot think of the Absolute Infinite, 
but we can think of the infinite sky. ocean and so 
forth. 

4d. Tato doandvdnabhighdtah. 

48. Seat being conquered, the dualities do 
not obstruct. 

The dualities, such as, good and bad, heat and 
cold, that is to say, all the pairs of opposites, will 
not then disturb you. 




u B'o n 




192 


RAJA YOGA 


49. Tasmin sati sodsa-prasvdsayorgati- 
oichchhedah prdndydmah, 

49. The control of Prana by controlling 
the motion of the exhalation and the inhalation 
(can be practised easily) after (securing) that 
(firmness of seat). 

When posture has been conquered, then the 
motion of the Prdna is to be broken and controlled. 
Thus we come to Prdndydma or the controlling of the 
vital forces of the body. Prdna is not breath, though 
it is usually so translated. It is the sum-total of cosmic 
energy. It is the energy that is in each body, and 
its most apparent manifestation is the motion of the 
lungs. This motion is caused by Prdna drawing in 
the breath, and it is what we seek to control in 
Prdndydma. We begin by controlling the breath, as 
the easiest way of getting control of the Prdna. 

50. Bdhydbhyantara-stambha'Vrittih desa^dla- 
samkhydbhih paridrishto dirghah siikshmah. 

50. Prdndydma is (considered) lengthy* or 
fine according as (its three parts), the external, 
the internal and the motionless or holding pro- 
cesses are modified by the regulations of space, 
time, and number. 

The three sorts of motion in Prdndydma are, first, 
that by which we draw the breath in, secondly, that 

* The words ‘Fine* and ‘Lengthy’ have been used in the 
sense of skilful and uns'^ilful. 



YOGA APHORISMS 


m 


by which we throw it out, and thirdly, that by which 
we hold the breath in the lungs, or stop it from enter- 
ing the lungs. These vary by differences in space, 
time and number. By ‘space’ is meant that the 
Prana is held to some particular part of the body.*^ 
By time is meant how long the Prana should be con- 
fined to a certain place. And by number we are told 
to inhale, exhale and hold the breath for a certain 
number of seconds. The result of P randy ama is 
Udghdta or awakening of the Kundalini. 

51. Bdhydbhyantara-vishaydk.shepi. chaturthah. 

51 . The fourth is restraining the Prana by 
directing it either to external or internal objects. 

This is the fourth sort of Prdndydma. Prana can 
he directed either inside or outside. 

52. Tatah k.^biyate prakasdvaranam. 

52. From that, the covering to the light or 
the Chitta is attenuated. 

The Chitta has, by its own nature, all knowledge 
in itself. It is made of sativa particles, but is covered 
by rajas and tamas particles, and by Prdndydma that 
covering is removed. 

ii w 

* The word ‘space’ has another meaning according to 
certain commentators. It means the actual space covered by 
each inhalation and exhalation. As for instance, during ex- 
halation the distance to which breath is projected outside differs 
with different people. The case is the same during inhalation 
also. 


ttct: qqrrirniTqrii ii li 

13 




RAJA YOGA 


]94 


53. Dhdranasu yogyata manasah. 

53. The mind becomes fit for Dharana 
(from that). 

After this covering has been removed we are 
able to concentrate the mind. 

54. Svasva-vishaya-samprayogdbhdoe chitta- 
soariipdnul^dra ivendriydndm pratydhdrah. 

54. The drawing in of the organs is by 
their giving up their own objects and taking the 
form of the mind-stuff. 

The organs are producing the different states of 
the mind-stuff. As for instance, I see a book : the 
form that 1 see and call the book, is in my mind and 
not in the thing that is outside, which calls that form 
up. So with everything else ; their forms are in the 
Chitta or the mind. Thus the Chitta is identifying 
itself with and taking the form of whatever the 
organs are bringing to it, at present. Now if you can 
restrain the mind-stuff from taking these forms by not 
allowing the organs to go outwards, or in other words, 
by drawing them inside yourself, then the mind will 
remain calm. This is called Pratyahara. 

55. Tatah parama-vasyatendriydndm. 

55. Thence arises supreme control of the 
organs. 

When the Yogi has succeeded in preventing the 
organs from going outside to external objects, and in 


II II 

to: II II 




YOGA APHORISMS 


195 


making them remain one with the mind-stuff, then 
comes perfect control of the organs. And when the 
organs are perfectly under control, every muscle and 
nerve will be under control, because the organs are 
the centres of all the sensations, and of all actions. 
These organs are divided into organs of work and 
organs of sensation. So when the organs are con- 
trolled, the Yogi will be able to control all feeling and 
doing ; in fact, the whole body will then come under 
his control. TTien alone will one begin to feel joy 
in being born ; then alone can one truthfully say, 
‘‘Blessed am I that I was bom.’’ And when that 
sort of control of the organs is obtained, we shall 
feel how wonderful this body really is. 



CHAPTER HI. 


I— I 

Powers. 

We have now come to the chapter in which the 
Yoga powers are described. 

1 . Desabandhaschittasya dharana, 

1 . Dhdrand is holding the mind on or con- 
fining its activities within a limit, (such as, some 
particular object or part of the body). 

Dharana or concentration is to hold the mind on 
some object, either in the body or outside the body, 
and keep it in that state for some time. 

2. Tutra pratyayaikotanata dhyanam. 

2. An unbroken flow of perception or 
knowledge of that object is Dhydna, 

While trying to hold itself to one particular place 
in the body, such as the top of the head, the heart 
and so forth, if the mind succeeds in perceiving that 
only or in receiving sensations through that part of 
the body only and through no other part, that would 
be Dhdrand ; and when the mind succeeds in keeping 
itself in that state for some time it is called Dhydna 
or meditation. 


II t n 

ini OTTO?rrii?Tr n ^ q 




POWERS 


197 


3. T adev&rtham&tra-nirhh&sam svariipa- 
siinyamwa samddhih. 

3. When that perception, by giving up 
almost its own (usual) form (of the consciousness 
of the subject, the object and their relation), 
reflects only the meaning (of the object part of 
itself) then it is called Samddhi. 

That comes, when in meditation the form or the 
'external part of a perception is given up. Suppose, 
for instance. I were meditating on a book, and that I 
have gradually succeeded in concentrating the mmd 
on it, and perceiving the internal sensations or the 
meaning portion of it only, by detaching that from 
the form of the book, then that state of Dhydna is 
called Samddhi, 

4. Trayamekdirct samyamah, 

4. (The aforesaid) three (when practised) 
in regard to one object is called Samyama. 

When a man can direct his mind to any particular 
object and fix it there, and then keep it there for a 
long time, separating the object from the internal 
part, or the meaning portion of it, then, it is called 
Samyama; or in other words, when Dhdrand, Dhydna 
and Samddhi follow one another in such an unbroken 
succession on an object as to appear as one, then 
the mind is said to have attained the state called 
Samyama. The form of the object meditated upon 
has vanished then, and only its meaning remains in 
the mind. 

ii « ii 




198 


RAJA YOGA 


5 . T ajjay^t prajnalokah . 

5. By the conquest of that state (or by 
making it natural to the mind with practice) 
comes the light of knowledge. 

When a man has succeeded in making this state 
of Samyama appear naturally or without any efforts 
to him, then all powers will come under his control. 
This is the great instrument of the Yogi. The objects 
of knowledge are infinite, and have many divisions 
and subdivisions in them, such as. the gross, grosser, 
grossest, and the fine, finer, finest and so on. And 
the direction with regard to the power of Samyama is 
that it should be first applied to gross things, and 
then after getting knowledge of them, it should be 
brought to finer things slowly and by stages. 

6. Tasya bhiimishu oiniyogah, 

6. That (power of Samyama) should be 
applied to higher planes (gradually). 

This is a note of warning not to attempt to go 
too fast. 

7. Trayamantarangam purvebhyah, 

7 . These three are more internal (or direct 
means) than those that preceded, to attain the 
Samprajnata class of Samadhi. 

The steps of Yoga that we have considered 
before, namely, Pratyahdra, Prdndydma, Asana, 


ii 'i II 

^ II ^ II 

II >0 II 



POWERS 


199 


Yama and Niyama, are external or indirect means to 
concentration in comparison with the last three steps 
of Dharana, Dhy&na, and Samddhi, When a man has 
attained to the latter, he may attain to omniscience 
and omnipotence, but that would not be salvation. 
For those three even, would not make the mind 
Niwikcilpa or changeless, but would leave in it seeds 
for getting bodies again. It is only when the seeds 
are, as the Yogi says, ‘fried,* that they lose the 
possibility of producing further plants. The attain- 
ments of powers can never fry the seeds of harma, 

8. T adapt bahirangam nirvtjasya. 

8. But even these (three steps) are external 
or indirect means to the attainnient of the seed- 
less {Samddhi), 

Compared with that seedless Samddhi, therefore, 
even these steps are external. We have not yet 
reached then, the real or the highest Samddhi, when 
we have attained perfection in those three steps as 
well as the various powers that follow as the results 
of it. But by means of their help we have then 
come to realise only a lower stage of Samddhi in 
which this universe still exists as we see it, and in 
which are all these powers. 

9. Vyutthanamirodha-samskdrayorabhibhavapra- 
durbhdoau nirodha-k^hana-chittdnvayo nirodha-pari- 
ndmah. 


II ^ n 

II € H 



200 


RAJA YOGA 


9. By (constant) suppression of the dis- 
turbed modifications of the mind, and the rise 
of modifications of control, the mind is said to 
be established in the controlling modifications ; 
in this state the mind gaining the power of 
perfect control remains in itself, or in its real or 
unmodified nature. 

That is to say, in the first state of Samddhi, the 
modifications of the mind have been controlled, but 
not perfectly ; because, if they were so, there would 
be no modifications. If there is a modification which 
impels the mind to rush out through the senses, and 
the Yogi tries to control it. that very control itself will 
be a modification. In this state one kind of waves 
will be checked by another kind only. So it will not 
be the real state of Samadhi, in which all the waves 
subside ; or in other words, the control itself will then 
be the prevalent wave in the mind. Yet this lower 
stage of Samddhi is very much nearer to the higher 
one than the state of the mind when it comes 
bubbling out. 

10. Tasya prasdnta-vdhitd samskdrdt. 

10. Its flow becomes steady by habit. 

The flow of this continuous control of the mind 
becomes steady when practised day after day, and 
the mind obtains the faculty of constant concentration. 

1 1 . Sarodrthataik,dgrafayoh hshayodayau 
chittasya samddhiparindmah. 


ii t ® II 


POWERS 


201 


1 1 . Taking in all sorts of objects, and con- 
centrating upon one object — these two powers 
being destroyed and manifested respectively, the 
Chitta gets the modification called Samadhi. 

The mind naturally takes up various objects and 
runs into all sorts of things. That is the lower state 
of it. TTiere is then the higher state of the mind 
when it takes up one object, and excludes all others ; 
o^ that Samadhi is the result. 

12. Santodiiau iulyapratyayau chitfasyaikagratd- 
parindmah. 

12. The one-pointedness of the Chitta is 
when the past and the present are made similar. 

How are we to know that the mind has become 
concentrated ? By the fact that the idea of time will 
vanish. The more time passes unnoticed, the more 
concentrated we are. In common life we see that 
when we are interested in a book we do not note the 
time at all, and when we leave the book we are 
often surprised to find how many hours have passed. 
Thus time will have the tendency to stand in the pre- 
sent alone during concentration. So the definition 
is. given, when the past and the present come together 
and become one, the mind is said to be concentrated. 

13 . Etena bhiitendriyeshu dharma-lakshana- 
Vasthd parindmd vydkhyatdh. 

13. By that (namely, the aforesaid 
aphorism) has been explained the threefold 





202 


RAJA YOGA 


transformation of form, time and state, in fine or 
gross matter, and in the organs. 

By this the threefold changes in the mind-stuflf as 
to form, time, and state are explained. TTie mind- 
stuff is changing into xmttis, this is change as to form. 
To be able to hold the changes to the present time, is 
change as to time. To be able to make the mind- 
stuff go to the past forms, giving up the present, is 
change as to state. The concentrations taught in the 
preceding aphorisms were to give the Yogi a 
voluntary control over the transformations of his 
mind-stuff, which alone will enable him to make the 
Samyama named in III. 4. 

14. Santoditavyapadesya-dharmanupaii dharmt, 

14. That which is actedi upon by trans- 
formations, either past, present or yet to be mani- 
fested, is the qualified. 

That is to say, the qualified is the substance which 
is being acted upon by time and by the Samskdras, 
and which gets changed and manifested always. 

15. Kramdnyatvam parindmdnyatve hetuh. 

I 5 . The succession of changes is the cause 
of manifold evolution. 

1 6. Parindma-traya-samyamadatitanagata- 
jndnam, 

16. By making Samyama on the three 
qftnrnFrr’nS ii u h 


« 14 n 



POWERS 


203 


sorts of changes (namely ; of form, time and state) 
comes the knowledge of past and future. 

To understand this aphorism we shall have to 
remember first the definition of Sarny ama. When 
the mind has attained to the state in which it identifies 
itself with the internal impression of the object, 
leaving the external part of it, when, by long practice, 
that state is retained by it, and when it can get into 
that state in a moment, that state of it is called 
Sarny ama. If a man in that state wants to know the 
past and future he has to make a Samyama on the 
changes in the Samsl^aras (111. 13), of which sume 
are working now at present, some have worked out, 
and some are waiting to work. Thus by making a 
Samyama on these he knows the past and future. 

17. Sabdartha-praiyaydnamitareiaradhyasdt san- 
karastat-praoibhdga’Samyamdt sarvabhiita-rutajnd- 
nam. 

17, By making Samyama on word, mean- 
ing, and knowledge, which are ordinarily con- 
fused, comes the knowledge of all animal 
sounds. 

The word represents the external cause, the 
meaning represents the internal vibration that travels 
to the brain through the channels of the Indriyas, 
conveying the external impression to the mind, and 
knowledge represents the reaction of the mind with 
which comes perception. These three confused, make 

t'o II 



204 


RAJA ycx;a 


up each one of our sense objects. Suppose for 
instance, 1 hear a word ; there is first the external 
vibration, next the internal sensation carried to the 
mind by the organ of hearing, then the mind reacts, 
and I know the word. The word I know is a mixture 
o^- the three — ^vibration, sensation, and reaction. 
Ordinarily these are inseparable ; but by practice the 
Yogi can separate them. When a man has attained 
to this, if he makes a Samyama on any sound, he 
understands the meaning which that sound was 
intended to express, whether it was made by man 
oi by any other animal. 

18. Samskara-adl^shat-'k.^randt piiroajdtijndnam. 

18. By perceiving the impressions, (comes) 
the knowledge of past life. 

Each e.xperience that we have, comes in the form 
of a wave in the Chitta ; this subsides and becomes 
finer and finer, but is never lost. It remains there 
in minute form, and if we can bring this wave up 
again, it becomes memory. So, if the Yogi can make 
a Samyama on these past impressions in the mind, 
he will begin to remember all his past lives 

19. Pratyayasya parachitta-jndnam. 

19. By making Samyama on the signs in 
another’s body knowledge of his mind comes. 

Each man has particular signs on his body, which 
differentiate him from others. So when the Yogi 
makes a Samyama on those signs he knows the nature 
of the mind of that person. 

II II 



POWERS 


205 


20. Na cha tat sdlambanam tasydvishayibhiitatvat. 

20. But not its contents, that not being the 
object of the Samyama* 

The Yogi would not know the contents of the 
mind of the person by making a Samyama on his 
body. There would then be required a twofold 
Samyama, first on the signs in the body, and then on 
the mind itself of the person, before the Yogi could 
know everything that is in that man’s mind. 

2 1 . Kdya-rupa-samyamdttadgrdhya-sakti- 
siambhe chak.shuh-prakdsdsamyogentardhdnam, 

21. By making Samyama on the form of 
the body, the power of that fojjm to appear as 
object of perception becomes obstructed ; and 
thereby separating itself from the power of mani- 
festation in one’s eye, the Yogi’s body becomes 
unseen. 

A Yogi standing in the midst of this room can 
apparently vanish. He does not really vanish, but he 
will not be seen by any one. The form and the body 
in his case, will then be separated as it were. We 
must remember therefore, that this can only be done 
when one has attained to that kind of power by con- 
centration in which the form and the thing formed can 
be separated. Then alone, by making a Samyama 
on that, the power to perceive forms in others’ eyes 


* The Swami has explained this aphorism and the pre- 
ceding one a little differently from the commentators. 


206 


RAJA YOGA 


will be obstructed, because that power can only 
display itself when there is a junction between the 
form and the thing formed. 

22. Etena sabdadyantardhanamukfam. 

22. By this the power of making words 
and so forth disappear, are being explained also. 

23. Sopakxamam nirupa^ramancha k^rma tat- 
samyamadapardnta-jnanqmarishtebhyo vd . 

23, Karma is of two kinds, namely, those 
that are to be fructified soon and those that are 
to be fructified later. By making Sarny ama on 
them, or by the signs called Arishta (p)ortents), 
the Yogis know the exact time of separation 
from their bodies. 

When a Yogi makes a Samyama on his own 
karma, that is to say, Upon those impressions in his 
mind which are now working, and those which are 
waiting to work, he knows exactly, by those that are 
waiting, when his body will fall. The Yogi thus 
knows when he will die, at what hour and even at 
what minute. The Hindus think very much of that 
knowledge or consciousness of the nearness of death, 
because it is taught in the Gita that the thoughts at the 
moment of departure are great powers in determining 
the next life. 

24. Maitryddishu baldni. 


II II 

II II 



POWERS 


207 


24. By making Sarny ama on friendship, 
mercy and so forth (spoken of in 1 . 33.), the 
Yogi excels in those qualities respectively. 

25. Baleshu hastibalddim. 

25. By making Sarny ama on the strength 
of the elephant, and others, their respective 
strength comes to the Yogi. 

When a Yogi has attained to this power of 
Samyama and wants strength, he makes a Samyama 
on the strength of the elephant, and gets it. Infinite 
energy is at the disposal of every one, if he only knows 
how to get it. The Yogi has discovered the science 
of getting it. 

26. Praorittydloka-nydsdt sUkshma-vyaoahHa- 
Viprakrishta-jndnam . 

26. By making Samyama on the effulgent 
light (spoken of in 1 . 36) comes the knowledge 
of the fine, the obstructed, and the remote. 

When the Yogi makes Samyama on that efful- 
gent light in the heart spoken of in 1 . 36, he sees 
things which are very remote, as for instance, things 
that are happening in a distant place, and which are 
obstructed by mountain barriers, and also things 
which are very fine. 

27. Bhuoana-jndnam sUryye samyamdt. 


II n 

II II 

II II 



208 


RAJA YOGA 


27. By making Sarny ama on the sun 
(comes) the knowledge of the world. 

28. Chandre taravyiiha-jndnam, 

28. On the moon, the knowledge of the 
cluster of stars (comes). 

29. Dhruve tadgati jndnam. 

29, On the pole-star, the knowledge of 
the motions of the stars (comes). 

30. N dbhtchak.r(:i k.aya-oytiha-jndnam. 

30. On the navel circle, (comes) the 
knowledge of the constitution of the body. 

31. Kanthakiipe k^hufpipashd-nicrittih. 

31. On the hollow of the throat, (comes) 
cessation of hunger and thirst. 

When a man is very hungry, if he can make 
Samyama on the hollow of the throat hunger ceases. 

32. KUrma-nadydm sthairyyam. 

32. On the nerve called Karma, (comes) 
fixity of the body. 

That is to say, when he is practising Yoga, the 
body will not be disturbed. 

33. Murdhajyotishi siddha-darsanam. 

wt cT^m^TiTit II II 

II II 

W 11 

II II 




POWERS 


209 


33. On the light emanating from the top 
of the head, (comes) the power of perceiving the 
Siddhas. 

The Siddhas are beings who are a little above 
ghosts. When the Yogi concentrates his mind on the 
top of his head he will see these Sidcihas. The word 
Siddha does not refer here to those men who have 
become free — a sense in which it is often used. 

• 34. Pratibhddod sarvam. 

34. Or by the power of Pratibhd, all 
knowledge (comes to the Yogi). 

All the powers mentioned above can come with- 
out any Samyama to the man who has the power of 
Pratibhd or spontaneous enlightenment from purity. 
When a man has risen to a high state of Pratibhd, he 
has such great light in him that all things become 
apparent to him. All knowledge and power come 
to him naturally then, without making the effort of 
Samyama. 

35. Hridaye chitta-samoit. 

35. (By making Samyama) in the heart, 
(comes) the knowledge of minds. 

36. Sattva-purushayoratyanta-samkimayoh pra- 
tyaydviseshddbhogah pardrthatvddanya-svdrthasam- 
yamdt purusha-jndnam. 


II ^t\\ 

14 




210 


RAJA YOGA 


36. Enjoyment comes by the non-discrimi- 
nation of Soul and sattva which are different. 
The latter, whose activities are for another, is 
separate from the self-centred one, (who is the 
reflection of the Purusha). Samyama on the self- 
centred one gives knowledge of the Purusha, 

All action of sattoa, which is a modification of 
prakriti characterised by light and happiness, is for 
the Soul. When that sattva is free from egoism and 
illumined with the pure intelligence of Purusha, it is 
called the self-centered one, because in that state it 
becomes independent of all relations. 

37. Tatah prdtibha-sravana-vedanddarsd- 

svddavdrtd jdyante. 

37. From that arises the knowledge of 
hearing, touching, seeing, tasting, and smelling, 
belonging to Pratibhd. 

38. Te samddbdvupasargd vyutthdne siddhayah. 

38. These are obstacles to Samddhi; but 
they are (regarded as) powers in the ordinary 
conscious state in which comes the perception 
of the world. 

According to the Yogi the knowledge of the 
enjoyments of the world comes by the junction of the 
Purusha and the mind. So by making Samyama on 
the knowledge that they are two different things, 


W. II ^'0 II 

^ ii ii 




POWERS 


211 


namely, nature and soul, one gets knowledge of the 
Purusha, From that arises discrimination. And 
when one has got that discrimination he gets the 
Pratibh6 or the light of supreme genius. These 
powers, however, are obstructions to the attainment 
of the highest goal, namely the knowledge of the pure 
Self, and freedom. These are, as it were, to be met 
in the way, and by rejecting them one attains the 
highest. But if one is tempted to acquire these, his 
further progress is barred. 

39. Bandha-karana-saithilyat prachdra-$am- 

vedandchcha chittasya para-sartrdvesah. 

39. When the cause of bondage has 
become loosened, the Yogi, by his knowledge 
of manifestation through the organs, enters 
another’s body. 

TTie Yogi can enter a dead body, and make it 
get up and move, even while he himself is working 
in another body. Or he can enter a living body, and 
hold that man’s mind and organs in check, and for 
the time being act through the body of that man. 
That is* done by the Yogi’s coming to the discrimina- 
tion- of Purusha and Pral^riti or nature. If he wants 
to enter another’s body he makes Samyama on that 
body and enters it, because, not only is his Soul 
omnipresent, but his mind also. For, each individual 
mind is but a part of the universal mind, although 
from ignorance it thinks it is separate from that and 
can only work through the nerve-currents in one 
body. Therefore, when the Yogi has lossened himself 






212 


RAJA YOGA 


from the nerve currents in his own body, he can 
work through other bodies also. 

40. Udanajayajjala'pam)ia'\antak.adisht>a- 

sanga utkrantischa. 

40. By conquering the current called 
Uddna the Yogi does not sink in water, or in 
swamps, he can walk on thorns, and can die 
at will. 

Udana is the name of the nerve-current that 
governs the lungs and all the upper parts of the body, 
and when he is master of it he becomes light in 
weight. He does not sink in water ; he can walk on 
thorns and sword blades, stand in fire, and can depart 
from this life whenever he likes. 

41. Samana-jayat prajvalanam, 

41. By the conquest of the current Samdna 
he is surrounded by a blaze of light. 

Whenever he likes, light flashes out from his 
body. 

42. Srotrakasayoh sambandha-samyamdd- 

divyam sratram. 

42. By making Samyama on the relation 
between the ear and the Akdsa comes divine 
hearing. 

There is the Al^dsa or the ether, and the instru- 
ment, to receive vibrations of it, the ear. By making 


5' II 8 O II 

II 8t n 




POWERS 


213 


Samyama on them the Yogi gets supernormal hear- 
ing ; that is to say, he hears everything. Anything 
spoken or sounded miles away he can hear them. 

43. Kayd^cisayoh sambandha-^samyamdllaghu^ 
tula-samdpatt^schdl^dsa-gamanQm. 

43. By making Samyama on the relation 
between the Al^dsa and the body, also, on the 
lightness of objects, such as cotton- wool, the 
Yogi becomes able to go through the skies. 

The Ak,dsa is the material of this body ; it is 
only Akdsa in a certain form that has become the 
body. If the Yogi makes a Samyama on the Ak:d^ 
material of his body, it acquires the lightness of 
Akdsa, and can go anywhere through the air. 

44. BahirakalpUd vrittirmahd-videhd iatah pra- 
kdsdvarana-k^hayah. 

44. By making Samyama on the real 
modifications of the mind that are outside of 
the body, and which are called the great dis- 
emf^odiedness, comes disappearance of the 
covering to light. 

The mind in its foolishness thinks that it is work- 
ing in this body. Why should 1 be bound by one 
system of nerves, and put the Ego only in one body, 
if the mind is omnipresent ? There is no reason why 
1 should do so. The Yogi wants to feel the Ego 
wherever he likes. The mental waves which arise in 






214 


RAJA YOGA 


the absence of egoism in the body are called ‘real 
modifications’ or ‘great disembodiedness.* When he 
has succeeded in making Samyama on these modi- 
fications, all covering to light goes away, and all 
darkness and ignorance vanish. Ever3i:hing appears 
to him to be full of knowledge. 

45. SthiilcL-sVariipa-sul^shmdnvayarthavatioa- 
samyamddbhiiia-jayah . 

45. By making Samyama on the elements, 
taking up successively their gross form, species, 
fine form, qualities and utility,* comes mastery 
of the elements. 

The Yogi makes Samyama on the five common 
manifestations of the elements, namely on their gross 
form, species, fine form, qualities and utility, succes- 
sively. This Samyama is taken up generally by a 
sect of the Buddhists. They take a lump of clay, and 
make Samyama on that, and gradually begin to see 
the fine materials of which it is composed ; and when 
they have known all the fine materials in it, they get 
power over that element. So with all the elements. 
The Yogi can conquer them all. 

* These are the five general manifestations of all the 
elements. The gross is their sensible form. The species refers 
to their solid, liquid and gaseous states, as well as to their 
volume and motion. The prevalence of sattoa, rajas or tamas 
in them which brings forth illumination, restlessness or dullness 
in them, is what is referred to by the term ‘qualities.* And 
the power of each of the elements to produce in us any kind 
of enjoyment, physical or mental, is what is meant by the word 
‘utility.* 



POWERS 


215 


46. Tatonimadi-prddurbhdvah kAya-sampattad' 
dharmdnabhighdtascha, 

46. From that come the (eight) powers, 
such as making the body small as an atom and 
so forth, also the qualities of the body known 
as the wealth or the glorification of the body, and 
the indestructibleness of the bodily qualities. 

This means that by the conquest of the elements 
the Yogi attains the eight powers which can be briefly 
summed up as follows : He can make himself as 
minute as a particle, or as huge as a mountain , as 
heavy as the earth, or as light as the air ; he can rule 
and conquer everything he wants. A lion will sit at 
his feet like a lamb, and all desires will be fulfilled at 
his will. 

47. RiipaAdvanya-bala-vajra-samhananatvdni 
kdyasampat, 

47. The wealth or glorification of the body 
is beauty, complexion, strength (and) adaman- 
tine hardness. 

The body becomes indestructible. Nothing can 
injure it. Nothing can destroy it until the Yogi 
wishes so. “Breaking the rod of time he lives in this 
universe with his body.“ In the Vedas it is written 
that for that man there is no more disease, death or 
pain. 





216 


RAJA YOGA 


48. Grahana-svariipdsmitdnvaydrihavattoa- 
samyamddindriya-jayah . 

48. By making Sarny ama (on the five 
general manifestations or states of the organs, 
namely,) objectivity, the power of illuminating 
or making things perceived, the fact of being 
followed by egoism, qualities and utility succes- 
sively, comes the conquest of the organs. 

In perception of external objects the organs leave 
their place in the mind and go towards the object : 
this is followed by knowledge and egoism. When 
the Yogi makes Samyama on these by gradation he 
conquers the organs. Take up anything that you see 
or feel, a book for instance ; first concentrate the 
mind on it, then on the knowledge that is in the form 
of a book, and then on the Ego that sees the book 
and so forth. By that practice all the organs will 
be conquered. 

49. Tato manojavitvam vikciranabhdvah pradhd- 
najayascha. 

49. From that comes to the body the 
power of rapid movement like the mind, power 
of the organs independent of the body, and con- 
quest of nature. 

Just as by the conquest of the elements comes 
glorified body, so from the conquest of the organs 
will come the above-mentioned powers. 


TOt W W 



POWERS 


217 


50. Sativa-tyurushanyath6-khydUmatrasya saroa- 
bhdvadhisthatritvam saroa}natritoancha, 

50. By making Samayma on the discrimi- 
nation between the Sattva and the Pumsha 
comes omnipotence and omniscience. 

When nature has been conquered by knowing 
the difference between the Ptirushu and the Prakrtti 
and the Pumsha has been realised as indestructible, 
pure and perfect, then comes omnipoteiice and 
omniscience. 

51. Tadvairdgy adapt doshavijakshaye l^aiv- 
alyam. 

51. By giving up even these aforesaid 
powers comes the destruction of the very seed 
of evil which leads to Kaivalya or aloneness. 

He only can attain aloneness or absolute inde- 
pendence, and become free who gives up the afore- 
said powers as trifling things compared with the reali- 
sation of the Self. When one gives us even the ideas 
of omnipotence and omniscience, there comes entire 
rejection of enjoyments that the world can give and 
also of the temptations which come from the celestial 
Beings about going to other spheres and enjoying 
more intense pleasure there. Therefore, when the 
Yogi has seen all these wonderful powers, and 
rejected them he reaches the goal. For what, 
indeed, are all these powers but manifestations of 
Prakriti or Nature, which are sure to end sometime? 






218 


RAJA YOGA 


They are no better than dreams. Aye, even omni- 
science is a dream. For, it depends on the mind 
and so long as there is a mind it can be there in 
one ; but the goal is beyond even the mind. 

52. Sth&nyupanimantrane sanga-smayaJiaranam 
punaranishta-prasangdt, 

52. The Yogi should not feel allured or 
flattered by the overtures of celestial beings, for 
feeu: of evil again. 

There are other dangers too ; gods and other 
beings come to tempt the Yogi. They do not want 
anyone to be perfectly free. They are jealous, just 
as we are, and worse than we sometimes. They are 
very much afraid of losing their places. The Yogis 
who do not reach perfection die and become gods ; 
leaving the direct road to liberation, they go into one 
of the side streets, and get these powers. Then they 
have to be born again. But the Yogi who is strong 
enough to withstand such temptations, goes straight 
to the goal and becomes free. 

53. Kshana-tatkramayoh samyamadvivel^ajam 
jndnam, 

53. By making Sarny ama on a point or 
particle of time (that cannot be divided) and its 
precession and succession comes discrimination. 

How are we to avoid these Devas, and heavens, 
and powers? By discrimination or by knowing the 
good from the evil, the real from the unreal. There- 


II U 



POWERS 


219 


fore a Sarny ama is given by which the power of dis- 
crimination can be strengthened. This is by making 
a Samyama on a particle of time, and the time pre- 
ceding and following it. 

54. jati-lakshana-deshairanyatanavachchhedaU 
tulyayostatah pratipattih. 

54. The things which cannot be differen- 
tiated by species, sign and place, and therefore, 
appear to be apparently similar, even those will 
be discriminated by the above Samyama. 

The misery that we suffer comes from ignorance 
or from non-discrimination between the real and the 
unreal. We all take the bad for the good, the dream 
for the reality. The Soul is the .nly reality, and we 
have forgotten It. Body is an unreal dream, and we 
think we are all bodies. This non-discrimination is 
the cause of our misery, and it is caused by ignorance. 
When discrimination comes it brings strength, and 
then alone ran we avoid all these various ideas of 
body, heavens, and gods. This ignorance arises 
through differentiating things by species, sign and 
place. For instance, take tx cow. The cow is 
differentiated from the dog by species. Then with 
regard to the class of animals we call cow, how 
do- we make the distinction between one cow and 
another? By signs. Again, if two objects are 
exactly similar they can be distinguished if they are 
in different places. But when objects are so mixed 
up that even these differentiae will not help us, the 
power of discrimination acquired by the above- 
mentioned practice will give us the ability to 





220 


RAJA YOGA 


distinguish them. The highest philosophy of the 
Yogis is based upon this fact, that the Purusha is 
pure and perfect, and is the only ‘simple’ thing that 
exists in the universe. The body and mind are com- 
pounds, and yet we are ever identifying ourselves 
with them. This great mistake has come because 
the distinction between the Purusha and everything 
else has been lost. So when this power of dis- 
crimination has been attained, man sees that every- 
thing in this world, mental and physical, is a com- 
pound, and. as such, cannot be the Purusha. 

55. Tarakam sarvavishayam sarvathavishaya- 
makxamancheii vivekajam jnanam. 

55. The saving knowledge is that knowl- 
edge of discrimination which simultaneously 
covers all objects, in all their variations. 

The term ‘saving’ in the aphorism has been used 
to signify that, that knowledge takes the Yogi across 
the ocean of birth and death. The whole of Prakriti 
in all its states, subtle and gross, is within the grasp 
of that knowledge. There is no succession in per- 
ception of this knowledge ; it takes in all things 
simultaneously at a glance. 

56. Sattva-purushayoh suddhi-samye haical- 
yamiti. 

56. By the similarity of purity between 
the Sattva and the Purusha comes Kaivalya. 

When the soul realises that it depends on 





POWERS 


221 


nothing in the universe, from gods to the lowest 
atom, that is called Kaivalya (lit., isolation) or per- 
fection. It is attained wiien this mixture of purity 
and impurity called sattva or intellect has been made 
as pure as the Pmusha Itself ; then the sattva reflects 
only the unqualified essence of purity, which is the 
Purusha. 



CHAPTER IV. 


Independence. 

I . Janmaushadhi-mantra-tapah-samadhijah sid- 
dhayah. 

1 . The Siddhis or powers are attained by 
birth, chemical means, power of words, morti- 
fication or concentration. 

Sometimes a man is seen to be bom with Siddhis 
or powers, because he had earned those in his 
previous incarnation, and is born, as it were, to enjoy 
the fruits of them at the time. It is said of Kapila, 
the great father of the Sankhya Philosophy, that he 
was a bom Siddha, which means, literally, a man who 
has attained to success. 

The Yogis claim that extraordinary bodily and 
mental powers can also be gained by chemical means. 
All of us know the fact that chemistry originally 
began as alchemy ; for, men went in search of the 
philosopher’s stone and elixirs of life, and so forth. 
In India there was a sect called the Rasdyanas. 
Their idea was that ideality, knowledge, spirituality 
and religion were all very good for men to have, but 
the body surely was the only instrument by which to 
attain to them. So, if the body came to an end every 
now and again, it would take so much more time to 


ii \ w 




INDEPENDENCE 


223 


attain to those ends. As for Instance, a man wants 
to practise Yoga, or that he wants to become spiritual. 
But before he has advanced very far he dies. Then 
he takes up another body and begins again, and 
after making a little progress meets with death again ; 
and so on he goes. But in this way much time is 
Jost in dying and being born again. Therefore, if 
the body could be made strong and perfect, so that 
it would get rid of birth and death, we should have 
so •“much more time to get to spirituality. So the 
Rasayanas teach to make the body strong first. 
They claim further, that this body can be made 
immortal. Their idea is that if the mind manu- 
factures the body, and if it be true that each mind is 
only an outlet to the infinite energy, there should be 
no limit to each such outlet in getting any amount 
of power from that store. Then why should it be 
impossible to keep our bodies all the time? Again, 
we have ourselves manufactured all the bodies that 
we ever had and as soon as this body dies we shall 
have to manufacture another. And if we can dv 
that after death, why can we not do it just here and 
now, without getting out of the present body? The 
theory is perfectly correct. For, if it be true that we 
live after death, and make other bodies, why is it 
impossible for us to have the power of making 
bodies here, without entirely dissolving the present 
body and by simply changing it continually? They 
thought also, that in mercury and in sulphar was 
hidden the most wonderful power, and that by certain 
preparations of these a man could keep the body as 
long as he liked. Others believed that certain drugs 
could bring powers, such as, fl3ring through the air. 
Many of the most wonderful medicines of the 



224 


RAjA ycx;a 


present day we owe to the Rasayanas, notably the 
use of metals in medicine. Certain sects of Yogis 
claim moreover, that many of their principal teachers 
are still living in their old bodies. Patanjali, the 
great authority on Yoga, does not deny the possibility 
of such things being true. 

Siddhis can be had also by the power of words. 
There are certain sacred words called Mantras, 
which, when repeated under proper conditions have 
power to produce extraordinary powers. We Are 
living in the midst of such a mass of miracles, day 
and night, that we do not think anything of them. 
But there is no limit really to man's power, the 
power of words and the power of mind. 

Siddhis come also by practising mortification. 
You find that in every religion asceticism or mortifi- 
cation of the flesh had been practised, and that in 
every religious conception the Hindus always went 
to extremes. You will find even now, men with 
their hands up all their lives, until they have 
withered and died. Men keep standing, day and 
night, even at present, until their feet swell, and if 
they live at all, by practising such austerity, their 
legs become so stiff in this position that they can no 
more bend them, but have to stand all their lives. 

I once saw a man who had kept his hands raised in 
this way, and 1 asked him how it felt when he did 
it first. He said that it was awful torture ; it was 
such torture that he had to go to a river and put 
himself in water, and that allayed the pain a little 
for some time ; but that, after a month he did not 
suffer so much. Through such practices also extra- 
ordinary powers or Siddhis can be attained. 

Lastly, Siddhis can be attained by concentration 



INDEPENDENCE 


225 


Concentration is Samadhi, and that is Yoga proper ; 
that is the principal theme of this science, and it is 
really the highest and the most naturrJ means to 
develop our bodily and mental powers. The oth»;r 
means to attain such powers which we have 
considered so far, are only secondary, and we cannot 
attain to the highest manifestation of power, namely, 
the realisation of the Self or Sou! through them. 
Samddhi is the means through which we can gain 
anything and everything, mental, moral and spiritual. 

2. J dtyantara-parindmah prakritydpurdt. 

2. The change into another species is by 
the filling in of nature. 

Patanjali has advanced the proposition that 
extraordinary powers come sometimes by birth, by 
chemical means, or through mortification. He has 
admitted also that this body can be kept for any 
length of time. Now he goes on to state the cause 
of the change of the body into another species. He 
says, that is done by the filling in of nature, anu 
explains in the next aphorism how that is done. 

3. Nimittamaprayojakarn prakfUindm varana- 
bhedastu tatah \shetri\avat, 

3. Good and bad deeds are not direct 
causes in the transformation of nature, but they 
serve as breakers of obstacles (in the path of her 
evolution), as the farmer, (who breaks the 

15 




226 


RAJA YOGA 


obstacles to the course of water thus letting it 
run down by its own nature.) 

The water for irrigation of fields is already in the 
canal, only shut in by gates. The farmer opens 
these gates, and the water flows in of itself, by the 
law of gravitation. So, all progress and power are 
already there in every man ; perfection is man’s 
nature, only it is barred in and prevented from taking 
its proper course. If anyone can take the bar off, 
then, in rushes nature and the man attains extra- 
ordinary powers. Those we call wicked become 
saints, as soon as the bar is broken and nature rushes 
in. It is nature that is driving us towards perfection, 
and eventually, she will bring everyone of us to attain 
it All these practices and struggles to become 
religious are only negative work. They are simply 
to take off the bars, and open the doors to that 
perfection which is our birthright by nature. This 
theory of evolution of the ancient Yogis will be 
better understood in the light of the modern research 
of the present times. And it will be found that the 
theory of the Yogis is a better explanation of 
evolution, after all. For, the two causes of evolution 
advanced by modem science, namely, sexual selec- 
tion and survival of the fittest, are inadequate to 
explain the facts. Suppose, for instance, human 
knowledge to have advanced so much as to eliminate 
competition, from both the functions of acquiring 
physical sustenance and of acquiring a mate. Then, 
according to modern science, human progress will 
stop and the race will die. The result of this 
theory has been to furnish every oppressor with 
an argument to calm the qualms of his conscience. 



INDEPENDENCE 


227 


Men are not lacking who, posing as philosophers 
and therefore, the only Judges of competency, want 
to kill out all wicked and incompetent persons and 
thus preserve the human race I But the great ancient 
evolutionist, Patanjali, declares that the true secret 
of evolution is the manifestation of the flow of per- 
fection which is already in every being ; that this 
perfection has been barred, and that the infinite 
tide behind is struggling to express itself. These 
struggles and competitions are but the results of our 
ignorance, because we do not know the proper way 
to unlock the gate and let the water in. That 
infinite tide behind must express itself and that really 
is the cause of all manifestations. Competitions for 
life and sex gratification are only momentary. They 
are but unnecessary and extraneous effects, caused 
by ignorance. Even when all such competitions 
have ceased nature will make us go forward until 
every one of us has become perfect. Therefore 
there is no reason to believe that competition is 
necessary to human progress. In the animal the man 
was suppressed, but as soon as the door was opened, 
out rushed man. So. in man there is the potential 
god, kept in by the locks and bars of ignorance. And 
when knowledge breaks these bars, the god becomes 
manifest. 

4. Nirm6na’‘chittanyasmitd’'matrat. 

4. From egoism alone proceed the created 
minds. 

The theory of karma is that we suffer for our good 
or bad deeds, and the whole scope of philosophy is 




228 


RAJA YOGA 


to reach man to the glory of his own real nature. All 
the Scriptures sing the glory of the soul of man, and 
then, in the same breath preach the doctrine of 
karma or that good deeds bring such results, and bad 
deeds such others. But if the soul can be acted upon 
by good and bad deeds, then the soul does not 
amount to much. So the theory of the Yogis is that 
bad deeds put a bar to the manifestation of the 
nature of the Purusha and good deeds take the 
obstacles off, helping thus to manifest the glory of 
the Purusha, The Purusha itself is never changed 
according to the Yogis. Indeed whatever he may 
do will never destroy the glory of his own nature, 
because the soul can never be acted upon by any- 
thing, a veil only will be spread before it by them, 
hiding its perfection. 

With a view to exhaust their karma quickly, the 
Yogis create k&ya-vyuha or groups of bodies, in which 
to work it out, and for all those bodies they create 
minds from their own egoism. TTiese are called 
‘created minds,* in contradistinction to their original 
minds. 

5. Pravritti-bhede prayojakam chittamekamane- 
kcshSm. 

5. Though the activities of the different 
created minds are various, the one original mind 
is the controller of them all. 

TTiese different minds, which act in these 
different bodies, are called made-minds, and the 
bodies, made-bodies ; that is to say, manufactured 




INDEPENDENCE 


229 


bodies and minds. Matter and mind are like two 
inexhaustible storehouses and when you become a 
Yogi, you learn the secret of their control. The 
control of them was yours all the time, but you had 
forgotten it and when you became a Yogi you 
recollected it only. After that you can do anything 
with them and manipulate them in every way you 
like. Thus the Yogi manufactures bodies and minds, 
and the material out of which a manufactured mind 
is created, is the very same material which is used by 
nature in the macrocosm for manufacturing minds. 
It is not that mind is one thing and matter a.iother, 
they are only different aspects of the same thing. 
Asmita or egoism is the fine material out of which 
these made-minds and made-bodies of the Yogi are 
manufactured. Therefore, when the Yogi has found 
out the secret of the gross and the fine energies of 
nature, he can manufacture any number of bodies 
and minds out of the substance known as egoism. 

6. Taira dhyanajamanasayam. 

6. Among the various Chittas that which 
is attained by Samddhi is desireless. 

Among all the various minds that we see in men. 
that mind only is the highest which has attained to 
Samddhi or perfect concentration. A man who has 
attained certain powers through medicines, or through 
words, or through mortifications, has in him living 
still the desires which bring misery and evil, but the 
man who has attained to Samddhi through concentra- 
tion is free from all desires. 


7 ^ II < II 



230 


RAJA YOGA 


7. Karmasukilakrishnam yoginastrioidhamita-' 
Teshdm. 

7. Works are neither black nor white for 
the Yogis ; for others they are threefold, black, 
white, and mixed. 

When the Yogi has attained perfection, his 
actions, and the k^rma produced by those actions, do 
not bind him, because he did not desire to enjoy 
their results. He just works on ; he works to do 
good, and he does good, but does not care for the 
result, and therefore, bondage will not come to him 
from l^arma. But for ordinary men. who have not 
attained to that high state, works are of three kinds, 
black or evil actions, white or good actions, and 
mixed. 

8. T atasiadvipcd^anugun&namevabhioyahtiwa- 
san&ndm, 

8, From these threefold works are mani- 
fested in each state only those desires (which are) 
fitting to that state alone. (The others are held 
in abeyance for the time being.) 

Suppose for instance, that I have made three 
kinds of k^rma, good, bad and mixed, and suppose 
that I die and become a god in heaven. Now the 
desires in a god body are not the same as the desires 
in a human body. For, the god body neither eats 
nor drinks. So in that god body I will never have 
the desire to eat and drink like many. But what 


ti '5> ii 



INDEPENDENCE 


231 


becomes then of my past unworked k.armas which 
produce as their effect the desire to eat and drink? 
Where would those l^armas go when I become a 
god? The answer is that desires can only manifest 
themselves in proper environments. Or in other 
words, only those desires will come out, during the 
time that 1 become a god, for which the environment 
is fitted ; the rest will remain stored up. In this life 
we have many godly desires, many human desires, 
many animal desires. If I take a god body, only 
the good desires will come up, because for them 
the environments are suitable. And if 1 take an 
animal body, only the animal desires will come up 
and the good desires will wait. What does this 
show ? That by means of envirornnent we can check 
these desires and that only such \arma will come 
out then as is suited to and fitted for that particular 
kind of environment. This shows that the power 
of environment is the great check to control even 
karma itself. 

9. Jafi-'desa-kala-vyaoahitdnamapyanantaryyarr 
smriti-samskdrcyorekariipatv&t. 

9. There is consecutiveness in desires (of 
one specie,^), even though they are separated by 
(desires of other different) species, space and 
time, from there being identification of memory 
and impressions. 

Experiences or sense-perceptions becoming fine 
are turned into impressions ; and impressions revi- 
vified become memory. The word memory here 




232 


RAJA YOGA 


includes the unconscious co-ordination of past ex- 
pel iences which are already reduced to impressions, 
with the fresh impressions of conscious actions of 
the present. In each body, the group of impressions 
acquired in similar bodies alone, in the past, becomes 
the cause of action. And the experiences acquired 
in dissimilar bodies are held in abeyance. Thus each 
body acts as if it were a descendant of a series of 
bodies of that species only ; and therefore, the con- 
secutiveness of desires is never broken. 

10. Tasamanaditvanchasisho nityatvdt. 

1 0. Thirst for happiness* being eternal (in 
every one), (the) desires (are) without beginning. 

All experience is preceded by desire for happi- 
ness. TTiere was no beginning of experience, as 
each fresh experience is built upon the tendency 
generated by past experiences ; therefore desires are 
without beginning. 

11. Hetu-phaldsraydlambanaih samgrihitatvad- 
eshdmabhdve tadabhdvah, 

1 1 . Being held together b^^ cause, effect, 
support, and objects, in the absence of these the 
absence of them (desires) follow. 

Desires are held together by cause and effect, 
and once raised they never die without producing 
their effects. Then again, the mind-stuff is the great 
storehouse or support of all past desires, which have 


II II 

nun 

* Some commentators have made the word dsis of the text 
to mean, the desire to exist eternally. 




INDEPENDENCE 


233 


been reduced to the Samskara form. Therefore, until 
the chain of cause and effect and the chitta have 
worked themselves out. the desires will never die. 
Moreover, so long as the senses recen t the external 
objects, fresh desires are sure to arise. So, if it be 
possible to get rid of the cause, effect, support and 
objects of desires, then alone will they vanish. 

12. AtHanagatam soarupatostyadhvuveddd- 
dharmdndm. 

12. The past and the future exist (then) in 
heir own nature, for qualities change their ways 
(and manifest themselves) differently, (but not 
the things qualified). 

13. Te oyakta-suk.shma-’gundtmdnah . 

1 3. They are manifested or fine, being of 
the nature of the Gunas. 

The Gunas are the three substances, sattoa, 
rajas, and tamas, whose gross state is the sensible 
universe. Past and future arise from the diferent 
modes of manifestation of these Gunas. 

• 14. Parinamaikjatvadvastu-tattoam. 

• ^ 14. The unity in things is from the unity 

in changes. (Thus, though there are three 
substances, their changes being co-ordinated all 
objects have their unity). 


^ II II 




234 


RAJA YOGA 


15. Vastu'samye chittahhed&ttayorvwiktah 
panth&h, 

15. The object being the same, perception 
and desire vary according to the various minds. 

17. TadupardgSpekshatvdchchittasya vastu jna- 
tdjnatam* 

1 6. The fact of things becoming known or 
unknown to the mind, is dependent on the 
colouring which they give to the mind. 

1 7. Sada jnatdschittavrittayastatprabhoh puru- 
shasyaparinamitvdt. 

17. The states of the mind are always 
known because the lord of the mind, the 
Purusha, is unchangeable. 

The whole gist of this theory is that the universe 
is both mental and material. Both these worlds are 
in a continuous state of flux. As for instance, what 


w: nun 

^ II U II 

* In certain editions of the book there is to be found another 
aphorism before the present one as follows — 

Na chaikachittcrtantram vastu iadapramana\am tada i^tm 
syat, 

if cT^ II 

The object does not appear the same in all states of the 
mmd, and becomes evidenceless also; so nothing of the object 
exists during the highest state of Scnn&dhi. 

Such editions count 34 aphorisms instead of 33 in this, 
chapter of the book. 




u 11. 



INDEPENDENCE 


235 


is this book? It is a combination of molecules in 
constant change. One lot is going out, and another 
coming in ; it is whirlpool, as it were. But what 
makes the unity ? What makes it the same book ? 
The changes in the molecules of the book are 
rhythmical, or are in harmonious order. They are 
sending impression to my mind, and these pieced 
together make a continuous picture, although the 
parts are continuously changing. Again, the mind 
.which perceives the book, is continuously changing. 
The mind and body are like two layers in the same 
substance moving at different rates cf speed. But 
the one being slower and the other quicker relatively, 
we can distinguish between the two motions. 
Supposing, for instance, a train if in motion, and a 
carriage also moving alongside it, it is possible to find 
the motion of both of them to a certain extent. But 
something else is still necessary to perceive their 
motions. For, motion can only be perceived when 
there is some^-hing else which is not moving. As for 
instance, when three things are relatively moving, we 
first perceive the motion of the faster one, and then 
that of the next slower one by comparing their 
motions with that of the slowest one. Then to per- 
ceive the motion of the slowest one, the perception 
of another thing is necessary which moves more 
slowly, or in other words, you must get to something 
else, again, in which the motion is still slower, to 
perceive the motion in that one, and so on. And as 
in this way there cannot be an end to the assumption 
of things with slower and still slower motions, logic 
tells you to stop somewhere, and complete the series 
by the assumption of the knowledge of something 
which never changes. Therefore, the Yogi is right 



236 


RAJA YOGA 


when he says that behind this never ending chain of 
motion is the Purusha, the changeless, the colourless, 
the pure. And all these impressions are merely 
reflected upon it, as a magic lantern throws images 
upon a screen, without in any way tarnishing it. 

18. Na tat svabhasam drisyatvdt, 

18. The mind is not self-luminous, being 
an object. 

Tremendous power is manifested everywhere in 
nature, but it is neither self-luminous, nor intelligent. 
The Purusha alone is self-luminous, and gives Its 
light to everything. It is the power of the Purusha 
that is percolating through all matter and force. 

19. E\asamaye chobhaydnavadhdranam, 

19. From its being unable to cognise two 
things at the same time. 

If the mind were self-luminous it would be able to 
cognise two things at the same time, which it can- 
not. If you pay deep attention to one thing you lose 
sight of another. If the mind were self-luminous 
there would be no limit to the impressions it could 
receive. The Purusha can cognise all in one 
moment ; therefore the Purusha is self-luminous, and 
the mind is not. 

20. Chittdntaradrisye buddhi-buddheratiprasan- 
gah smritisank,arascha, 

20. Another cognising mind being 

^ II 11 

II K H 



INDEPENDENCE 


237 


assumed there will be no end to such assump- 
tions and confusion of memory will be the result. 

Let us suppose that there is another mind which 
cognises the ordinary mind, then there will have to 
be still another mind to cognise that one, and so on, 
until there will be no end to such minds. The logical 
result of such an assumption will be to admit the 
confusion of memory, for then there will be not a 
single, but many storehouses of memory. 

21. Chiterapratisamkramaydstaddkarapattau 
svabuddhUsamvedanam, 

21. Purusha, the essence of knowledge, 
being unchangeable, when the mind takes Its 
form, it becomes conscious. 

Patanjali says this to make it more clear that 
knowledge is not a quality of the Purusha. When 
the mind comes near the Purusha, It is reflected, as 
it were, upon the mind, and the mind, for the time 
being, becomes luminous and thinks as if it were 
itself the Purusha. 

22. Drashtri-drisyoparaktam chittam sarvdr- 
tham. . 

22. Coloured by the seer and the seen the 
mind is able to understand everything. 

The external world, or the seen, is being 
reflected on the side of the mind and the seer, on the 
other ; thus comes the power of all knowledge to 
the mind. 


II II 



.238 


RAJA YOGA 


23. Tadasamkhyeya-vasanabhischitramapi pa- 
rartham samhatyal^aritv&t, 

23. The mind through its innumerable 
desires acts for (the enjoyment of) another (the 
Purusha), because it acts in combination (with 
the objects). 

The mind is a compound of various things, and 
therefore it cannot Work for itself. Everything that 
is a combination in this world has an object for 
combining in that way ; that is to say, there is a third 
thing for which that combination goes on. Similarly 
the combination of the mind is for the Purusha, 

24. Viseshadarsinah atmabhava-bhdvand-vini- 
vrittih. 

24. For the discriminating the perception 
of the mind as Atman, ceases. 

Through discrimination the Yogi knows that the 
Purusha is not mind. 

25. Tadd vivekariimnam k.aivalya-prdgbhdvam 
chittam. 

25. Then bent on discriminating (always, 
the subject from the object), the mind attains the 
previous state of Kaivalya or isolation. 

Thus the practice of Yoga leads to the power of 
discrimination and thereby to clearness of vision. 
The veil drops from the eyes, and we see things as 





INDEPENDENCE 


239 


they are. We find then, that nature is a compound, 
and is showing the panorama of the world for thfe 
Purusha, Who is the witness. We find moreover, 
that nature is not the Lord and that all the combina- 
tions of nature are simply for the sake of showing 
these phenomena to the Purusha, the enthroned king 
within. Thus when discrimination comes by long 
practice, fear ceases, and the miiid attains isolation 
or perfection. 

26. T achchhidreshu prutyaydntarctni samskure- 
bhyah. 

26. The thoughts that arise as obstructions 
to that, are from (past) impressions. 

All the various ideas that arise making us believe 
that we require something external to make us 
happy, are obstructions to that perfection. TTie 
Purusha is happiness and blessedness by Its own 
nature. But that knowledge becomes covered over 
at intervals, even when the Yogi has attained su'h 
right power of discrimination, by past impressions. 
And the Yogi becomes free, only when those impres- 
sions work themselves out. 

27. HanameshSm hj^savaduhtam. 

27. The destruction of them (past impres- 
sions), is in the same manner as of ignorance, 
egoism, and so forth, as said before (in II. 10). 


II II 




240 


RAJA YOGA 


28. PrasamkhyanepyakMstdasya sarvathd viveka- 
khyaterdharma-meghah samddhih, 

28. Even after arriving at the discrimi- 
nating knowledge of the essences, he who gives 
up the fruits (of that knowledge, namely, the 
powers), unto him comes as the result of perfect 
discrimination, the Samddhi called the cloud of 
virtue. 

When the Yogi has attained to this sort of discri- 
mination, all the powers mentioned in the last 
chapter come to him, but the true Yogi rejects them 
all. Unto him comes then, a peculiar knowledge, or 
a particular light, called the Dharma Megha, or the 
cloud of virtue. All the great prophets of the world 
whom history has recorded had this. They had 
found the whole foundation of knowledge within 
themselves. Truth to them had become real. Peace, 
calmness and perfect purity had become their very 
nature, only after they had given up the vanities of 
powers. 

29. Tatah klesakcLrma-nivrittih. 

29. From that comes cessation of pains 
and works. 

When that cloud of virtue has come, then no 
more is there any fear of falling. Nothing can drag 
the Yogi down after that, and no more will there be 
evils or pains for him. 


ii ii 



INDEPENDENCE 


241 


30. Tadot sarv&varanamal&pctasya jn&naayanan-' 
ty&j-ineyamalpam . 

30. Then knowledge, bereft of covering 
and impurities, becoming infinite, the knowable 
becomes small. 

Knowledge itself is there then, with all its cover- 
ing gone. One of the Buddhistic s'^riptures defines 
what is meant by the word Buddha, as the name of 
the state in which comes knowledge, infinite as the 
sky. Jesus attained to that and became the Christ. 
All of us can attain to that state where, knowledge 
becoming infinite, the knowable becomes small. The 
whole universe, with all its objects of knowledge, 
becomes then as nothing compared to the realisation 
of the Purusha. The ordinary man, on the contrary, 
thinks himself to be very small, while to him the 
knowable seems to be infinite. 

31. Tatah kritdrthdnam parindma-k.rama-samdptir- 
gundndm, 

31. Then are finished the (series of) suc- 
cessive transformations of the qualities, they 
having attained the end. 

Then all these various transformations of the 
qualities, which change from one species to another, 
cease for ever. 

32. Kshana-pratiyogt partndmdpardnta-nirgrd- 
hyah hxamah. 


16 




242 


RAJA YOGA 


32. TTie changes that exist in relation to 
moments, and which are perceived at the other 
end (that is to say, at the end of a series) are 
succession. 

Patanjali here defines the word succession as the 
changes that exist in relation to moments. While 
we go on thinking, with each moment there is a 
change of idea, but we perceive these changes only 
at the end of a series. This is called succession. 
For the mind that has realised omnipresence there 
is no succession. Everything has become present for 
it ; that is to say, to that mind the present alone 
exists, and the past and the future are lost. Time 
stands controlled to it, and all knowledge flashes into 
it in a second. 

33. Purushartha-siinyandm gundndm pratipra- 
savah J^aivalyam svariipa-pratishthd vd chiti-sakferiti. 

33. The resolution, in the inverse order, 
of the qualities, bereft of any motive whatso- 
ever, of action for the Purusha is Kaivayla, or 
it is the establishment of the power of knowledge 
in its own nature. 

Nature's task is done now — ^the unselfish task 
which our sweet nurse. Nature, had imposed upon 
herself. She gently took the self-forgetting soul by 
the hand, as it were, and showed him all the experi- 
ences in the universe, all manifestations, bringing 


W II 



INDEPENDENCE 


243 


him higher and higher through various bodies, till 
his lost glory came back, and he remembered his 
own nature. Then the kind mother went back by 
the same way that she came, for others who also 
have lost their way in the trackless desert of life. 
Thus is she working, without beginning and without 
end. And thus through pleasure and pain, through 
good and evil, the infinite rivei of souls is flowing 
into the ocean of perfection, or self-realisation. 

Glory unto those who have realised their own 
natura ; may their blessings be on us all I 




APPENDIX. 


REFERENCES TO YOGA. 

SVETASVATARA UPANISHAD 
Chapter U. 

6. Where fire is churned or produced by 
rubbing (for sacrifice), where air is controlled 
(by Yoga practices) and where Soma flows 
abundantly (in sacriflcial rites) there the mind 
attains perfection. 

8. Placing the body in a straight posture, 
with the chest, the throat, and the head held 
erect, making the organs together with the mint’ 
perfectly established in (the lotus of) the heart, 
the sage crosses all the fearful currents (of 
ignorance), by means of the raft of Brahman. 

9. The man of well-regulated endeavours 


n i, ii 

II II 


246 


RAJA YOGA 


controls the Prana, with its other manifested 
forms, and when it has become quieted, breathes 
out through the nostrils. The persevering sage 
should hold his mind (firmly), as a charioteer 
holds the restive horses. 

10. By taking shelter in caves, where there 
is not too much wind, where the floor is even, 
free from pebbles or sand and from fear of fire, 
where there are no disturbing noises from men 
or waterfalls, and in places helpful to the mind 
and pleasing to the eyes, the mind is to be joined 
in Yoga. 

1 1 . Forms with appearances like snow, 
smoke, sun, wind, fire, firefly, lightning, crystal 
and moon coming before, gradually manifest the 
Brahman in Yoga. 


ii <t ii 




irw^fir-arfiijqttTftr ^ ii tt n 



APPENDIX 


247 


12. When the five-fold perceptions of 
Yoga, arising from (concentrating the mind as) 
earth, water, light, air and ether, have appeared 
to the Yogi, then he has become possessed with 
a body made up of the fire of Ydga and then he 
will not be touched by disease, old age or death. 

13. The first signs of entering Yoga are 
lightness of body, health, thirstlessness of mind, 
clearness of complexion, a beautiful voice, an 
agreeable odour in the body and scantiness of 
excretions. 

14. As gold or silver, covered with earth, 
when cleaned, shines full of light, so the 
embodied man seeing the truth of the Atman as 
one, attains the goal and becomes sorrowless. 

Ttsit *1 sm *r : 
ms?? gtntfvflv ii ii 

ii t? « 

vbt: WBft ii its » 



248 


RAM YOGA 


Yajnavalkya Quoted by Sankara. 

“Practising the desired postures according 
to rules, the Yogi will become conqueror of 
them ; then, O Gargi, he will proceed to practise 
Pranayama. 

“Seated on a (deer or tiger) skin, placed on 
Kusa grass, spread on the floor, and worshipping 
Ganapati first with fruits and sweetmeats, he will 
then resign himself to His care, take an easy 
posture and place his right palm on his left. 
Then, according to the prescribed way he will sit 
facing the east or the north, and hold his throat 
and head in the same line with lips closed, body 
perfectly immovable and eyes fixed on the tip 
of the nose. Avoiding too much food or fasting, 

lisnsj =i? I 

^ II 

af ar# i 

ii 

“O nJ 

^ «aaa; ii 

arfta^taa aaa: i 

fariat ^rtaai a^aaaii^a: ii 
aranf a5i»i#Na5?Taqf«iair*(ti i 
g aga ii 

amrf i 

T?aT ara‘ ii 



APPENDIX 


249 


he should thus purify the Nadis carefully, in 
accordeince with the prescribed way, for with- 
out it his practices will be fruitless. Thinking 
of the (seed- word) ‘Hum’ at the junction of 
Pingala and Ida (the right and left nostrils), the 
Ida should be filled with external air in twelve 
Matras (seconds), then the Yogi will meditate on 
fire in the same place repeating the word ‘Rang,’ 
and while meditating thus, should slowly eject 
the air through the Pingala (right nostril). Again 
filling in through the Pingala, the air should be 
slowly ejected through the Ida, in the same way. 
This should be practised for three or four years, 
or three or four months, according to the direc- 
tions of one’s Guru, in secret, that is to say, 

fsi%n^^»if55r?r ii 

trm gft: if 

g w»!: I 

ii 

^ iranaa sftr i 

f 50^1 II 

HTWini ?ur: ir^sf 0^3015 1 

urnruim: n 



250 


RAJA YOGA 


alone in a room, in the early morning, at midday, 
in the evening, and at midnight, until the nerves 
become purified. Lightness of body, clear 
complexion, good appetite and hearing of the 
Nada, are the signs of the purification of nerves. 
Then should be practised Pranayama composed 
of Rechal^a or exhalation, Kumbhal^a or reten- 
tion and PurakcL or inhalation, joining the 
Prana with the Apana is Pranayama. 

‘ ‘Filling the body with air from head to foot 
in sixteen matras, the Yogi keeping himself 
well controlled should throw it out in thirty-two 
matras, aind with sixty-four should make 
Kumbhaka, that is to say, should hold the air 
out and keep himself free from any kind of 
motion. The holding in of the filled up air at the 
top of the head, O Gargi, has also been called 


^ ^ 

jm: ii 
g ^?r5rT i 



APPENDIX 


251 


Kumbhal^a by other seers, who versed in Pr&' 
n&y&ma, conquer the breath and make them- 
selves pure in body and mind. 

“According to that the body is to be filled 
in with air in sixteen matras, then the Kumhhakfl 
is to be made with sixty-four, and then with 
thirty -two the air should be ejected. 

“By Pranayama the impurities of the body 
are thrown out : by Dharana the impurities of the 
mind; by Pratyahara impurities of attachment. 
And by Dhyana is taken o/F everything that hides 
the lordship of the Soul.” 


Sankhya. 

Book UL 

29. By intensity of meditation (only), all 
things come to the pure-minded Yogi, as in the 
case of Prakriti; (that is to say, the fulfilment, 
of the Yogi’s desires comes without any per- 
ceptible reason, as in the case of the evolution 
of Prakriti or nature.) 

* * * # 

wTsstwn?! wafn ii ii 




252 


RAJA YOGA 


30. Meditation is the removal of attach- 
ment, (which with its consequence, restlessness 
of mind, is being brought about by the quality 
called Rajas). 

31. It is perfected by the suppression of 
the modifications (of the chitta.) 

32. By Dharana, posture and performance 
of one’s duties, comes perfect suppression of the 
mental modifications. 

33. Restraint of the Prana is by means of 
expulsion and retention. 

34. Posture is that which is steady and 

easy. 

36. By non-attachment amd practice 
meditation is perfected. 

37. By reflection on the principles of Pra- 
\riti or nature, and by giving it up ais “it is not 
That (Parasha), not TTiat,” that discrimination 
is perfected. 


II H 
II II 

II 

ii ?? ii 

II » 

II II 

^[‘piiwirflTSfiT 11 H 



APPENDIX 


253 


Book IV. 

3. Instruction is to be repeated. 

5. As the hawk becomes unhappy if the 
food is taken away from him and happy if he 
gives it up himself (so he who gives up every- 
thing voluntarily is happy.)* 

6. As the snake was happy in giving up 
its old skin.f 

8. TTiat which is not a means of liberation 
is not to be thought of; it becomes a cause of 
bondage, as in the case of Bharata. 

srir^ 11 ^ II 

II n II 

II i II 

II ^ II 

* The commentators have explained this aphorism thus — 

There can never be any happiness in the world u >mixed 
with evil, as in the case of the hawk, which became happy and 
unhappy at the same time when set at liberty by its kind 
keeper; it then felt happy to think of its own freedom, but 
became sorry to be away from its keeper, who had been so 
kind to it. 

t The aphorism has been explained differently by commen- 
tators as follows — 

No such scruples as the consideration of the relation of me 
and mine, or of love on account of long association with 
Prakriii, should stand in our way of giving it up ; for, then it 
would be to our ruin, as the snake was captured and ruined 
by the charmer for keeping its old dropped off skin near its 
hole on account of love for the same. 



254 


RAJA YOGA 


9. From association with many persons 
there is obstruction to meditation, through the 
arising of passion, aversion, etc., like the sound 
produced by the shell bracelets on the virgin’s 
hand while she was at work and while she did 
not want them to produce such a sound. 

10. It is the same even in the case of two. 

1 1 . The renouncers of hope are happy, 
like the girl Pingala, (who weary of waiting 
long gave up the idea of being loved by any 
man finally, and became happy.) 

1 3 . Although devotion is to be given to 
many institutes and teachers, the essence is to 
be taken from them all, as the bee takes the 
essence from many flowers. 

1 4 One whose mind has become concen- 
trated like the arrow-maker’s,* his meditation 
is not disturbed. 

1 5 . Through transgression of the original 
rules there is fruitlessness as in other worldly 

II ^ II 

II ^ o II 

w \ \ w 

i! i ^ w 

II ^8 II 

* The arrow-maker was so deeply intent on his work that 
he did not notice the passing of the royal procession by him. 




APPENDIX 


255 


things, or in other words, (the purity of mind 
which leads to perfection in Yoga) becomes 
more unattainable. 

19. By continence, reverence and devo- 
tion to Guru, success comes after a long time, 
as in the case of Indra* 

20. There is no law as to time as in the 
case of Vamadeva (who attained liberation, 
according to the scriptures, in an incredibly 
short time.) 

24. Or through association with one who 
has attained perfection. f 

27. Not by enjoyments is desire appeased 
even with the sages (who have practised Yoga 
for long.) 


* Indra worshipped his guru Brahma thus for a long time 
and realised Brahman in the end. 

if II II 

ii ii 

t Commentators have explained this aphorism differently 
as follows — 

When one has be'fcome quite established in Yoga he attains 
the power of giving up naturally everything that leads to 
bondage, like the crane of the fable, which could drink the 
milk only out of a plate of milk mixed with water, and reject 
the water. 


^ II II 



256 


RAJA YOGA 


Book V. 

129. The Siddhis attained by Yoga can 
never be attained by any other means, such as 
the pxjwer of chemicals, etc., and therefore are 
not to be belittled. 


Book VI. 

24. Any posture which is easy and 
steady is an Asana; there is no other rule 
about it. 


Vyasa Sutra. 

Chapter IV Section /. 

7. Worship is possible in a sitting posture. 

8. Because of meditation. 

9. Because the worshipping or the medi- 
tating person becomes motionless (and is 
compared to the immovable earth). 

10. The Smritis also say so. 


f*raR: II ^8 II 
II « II 

II II 

II < n 

^ n t® II 



APPENDIX 


257 


1 I . There is no law about the place where 
worship is to be performed ; it should be done 
wherever the mind is concentrated. 

These several extracts give an idea of what 
other systems of Indian Philosophy have to say 
upon Yoga. 




17 




GLOSSARY. 

Ahamkdra 

Egoism. 

Ahimsd 

Nop-injuring. 

Ajnd 

The sixth lotus of the Yogis 
opposite the junction of the eye- 
brows. 

Ak.dsa 

The all-pervading material of the 
universe. 

A ndhata 

The fourth lotus of the Yogis 
opposite the heart. 

A ntahl^arana 

The internal instrument. 

A numdna 

Inference. 

A parigraha 

Non-receiving of gifts. 

Apia 

One vdio has attained (supreme 
consciousness), who is self- 
illumined. 

A ptavdk.yam 

The words of an Apta. 

A pdna 

The nerve current which governs 
the abdominal region. 

Artha 

Meaning. 

Asana 

Posture. 

A samprajndta 

The highest super-conscious state. 

Asmitd 

Egoism. 

A steyam 

Non-stealing. 

A vyakfam 

Indiscrete, unmanifested 

Brahman 

The One Existence, the Absolute. 

BuAAhi 

The determinative faculty. 

Drahniacharyya 

Chastity in thought, word and 
deed. 



GLOSSARY 


259 


Chidakosa 

Space of knowledge, where the 
Soul shines in its own nature. 

Chitta 

Mincl-stuft. 

Chittdl^dsa 

Mental space. 

Devas 

1 he shining ones, semi-divine 
states attained by works of good 
desire. 

Dhdrand 

Concentration . 

Dhydna 

Meditation. 

El^dgra 

Concentrated. 

Gdyatri 

A ceitain holy verse of the Vedas 

Guru 

Teacher. 

Hatha Yoga 

The science of controlling body 
and mind, but with no spiritual 
end in view, bodily perfection 
alone being the aim. 

Idd 

The neive current on the left side 
of the spinal cord. 

Isvara 

The supreme Ruler. 

I ndriyas 

The iniernal organs. 

Isvarapranidhdna 

W orship of Isvara. 

Jndna 

Knowledge. 

Karma 

Work ; also the effects of work ; 

‘ • 

the law of cause and effect in 
the moral world. 

Kaivalya 

Isolation. Supreme attainment. 

Kriyd Yoga 

Preliminary Yoga, or the practice 
of preparatory exercises. 

Kundalini 

The coiled-up, the sleeping Divine 
power in all beings. 

Mahat 

Cosmic intelligence. 

Mahdkdsd 

Ordinary space, or great space. 



260 

Manas 

Mahayoga 

Maniram 

Manipura 

Mulddhara 

Nirvana 

Nirvitarka 

Niyama 


Nirvichdra 

Ojas 

Pingald 

Pradhdnu 

Prakriti 

Prdna 


Prdndydma 

Prativd 

Prakritilayas 

Pratydhdra 

Pratya\sham 

Purusha 

Rajas 

Pdin hlnm^n 


RAJA YCXiA 
Mind. 

Seeing the Self as one with God. 

A sacred word. 

The third lotus of the Yogis* 
opposite the navel. 

The basic lotus of the Yogis 

Liberation. 

Without question. 

Cleanliness, contentment, morti- 
fication, study, and worship of 
God. 

Without discrimination. 

All the energies of the body anc 
mind transformed into spiritua 
force and stores in the brain. 

The nerve-current on the right side 
of the spinal cord. 

Nature ; lit. the chief. 

Nature. 

The sum-total of the cosmic 
energy ; the vital forces in the 
body. 

Controlling the Prana. 

Divine illumination. 

Souls that failed to attain freedom 
and became mingled in nature. 

Making the mind introspective. 

Direct perception. 

The Soul. 

Activity. 

Swan 



GLOSSARY 


261 


Raja Yoga 


Rdsdyanas 

Sabda 

Saucham 

Samddhi 

Sahasrdra 

Samdna 


Samskdra 

Samyama 

Sdnandam 

Santosha 

Sattva 

SdttvikcL 

Savitarl^a 

Savichdra 

Siddhdnta 

Siddhas 


Literally, Royal Yoga. The 
science of conquering the inter- 
nal nature, for the purpose of 
freeing the Purusha, or, in other 
words, realising the Divinity in 
every being. 

A chemist sect of ancient India. 

Sound. 

Cleanliness. 

Super-consciousness . 

The thousand-petalled lotus in the 
brain. 

The nerve current that performs 
the function of digestion, keep- 
ing up the internal fire. 

Impressions in the mind-stuff that 
produce habits. 

Dhdrand Dhydna and Samddhi in 
one. 

Blissful Samadhi. 

Contentment 

The principle of goodness or 
purity. 

Having the Sattva quality de- 
veloped. 

With question. 

With discrimination. 

Decisive knowledge. 

Perfected beings, or Yogis, who 
have attained supernatural 


powers. 



262 

Siddhis 

Srr.rUi 

Svadhisthdna 

Svadhyayo 

T arnas 

Tamnairas 

Tcpas 

LJddna 

Udghata 

Vdda 

V airagyam 
Vishuddha 

Vikalpa 

I'ikshipia 

V rith 
Yaina 

Yoga 


RAJA YOGA 

1 he supernatural powers attained 
by the practice of Yoga. 

(1) Memory. (2) A class of authori- 
tative books next to the Vedas. 

The second lotus of the Yogis in 
the pelvic region. 

Sacred study. 

Darkness, inertia. 

Fine materials. 

Austerity. 

A certain vital force in the body. 

Awakening the Kundalini. 

Argumentative knowledge. 

Renunciation. 

The fifth lotus of the Yogis, 
opposite the throat. 

Verbal delusion. 

Thai form of the Chitta when it is 
struggling to centre itself. 

Wave-form in the mind-stuff. 

Internal purification through moral 
training, pieparatory to \ oga. 

Joining ; joining the lower with 
the higher Self. 



UDBODHAN SERIES. 

SWAMI VIVKKANANDA’S WORKS. 


Books. Rs. a. 

JnaJia-yoga (Second Edition) - - - - 16 0 

K^rma-yoga (4th Edn.) -- -- OHO 

Bhr.ktI-yoga Do. - - - - 0 10 0 

The S'^'ience and Philosophy of Religion 0 10 0 
A Study of Religion - - - - - - 10 0 

Realisation and Es methods - - - - 0 12 0 

Thoughts on Vedanta - - - - 0 10 0 

Religion of Love -- - -- 0100 

Address at the Chicago Parliament of 

Religions (Fifth Edition) - - - - i; 6 0 

Mv Master (Third Edition) - > - - 0 6 0 

Life or Pavhari Baba - - - - - - 0 3 0 

Christ, the Messenger - - - - 0 3 0 


All the above mentioned books aje to be had 
at reduced r?tes for the subscribers of Udbodhan, 
a Bengali Monthly organ of the Ramkiishna Math. 
Annual suf scription -- -- -- Rs, 2/H 

Besides the above, all the Origiiial Ben.f li 
Works of the Swami and the Bengali Translations of 
his English Works are always available. 

l^hotcgi'aphs and Half-tone Pictures of Sri Rarna- 
kri^na Deva and of the Swami Vivekananda are 
also to be had. 

Sister Niveditas 

The Master as I Saw Him— Pages from the life 
of the Swami Vivekananda D. Crown, 16 mo. 513 
pages ; containing Appendices of 27 pages more. 
Price: Rs. 2/8/- 



THE 

INDIAN LECTURES OF THE SWAMI 
VIVEKANANDA. 

Being a record of his addresses in India after his 
Mission to the West. 

This collection of his speeches delivered in the 
year 1897, in reply to addresses of welcome offered 
to him by his countrymen after his return from the 
West — the same known as Lectures from Colombo 
to Almora — has been le-edited and revised in this 
by comparing the speeches with the first-publirhed 
newspaper reports of the same. On^ of the most 
catching features being the excellent marginal notes 
affixed. These Lectures embody in them as is well 
known to every body in India and abroad, by now, 
the most salient features of the Swami’s constructive 
plan for the regeneration of India on the basis of 
the eternal truths of the Hindu religion — ^the 
Vedanta, and as such should find a pi :e every- 
where as the Gospel of the 'Sanatana' national 
righteousness or Dharma of India reformulated to 
sL't modern conditions by the great Swami.* 
Excellent binding and beautiful typography. Printing 
on nice Indian paper. The price is Rs. 2-8 as. 
To be had at the “Udbodhan Office,*’ I, Mukerjee 
Lane, Baghbazar P.O., Calcutta. 




