===== Internet Archive OCR: ramakrishnahisli025100mbp_djvu.txt =====

VI PREFACE. 

I 



there are certainly some of them who deserve our 
interest, nay even our warmest sympathy. The tor* 
tures which some of them, who hardly deserve to be 
called Saamyasins, for they are not much better than 
jugglers or Ha2f//ayogins, inflict on ihcnuwlvr*, the 
ascetic methods by which they try to subdue and 
annihilate their passions, and bring themselves to 
a state of extreme nervous exaltation accompanied 
by trances or fainting fits of long duration, arc well 
known to all who have lived in India and have 
become acquainted there not only with Rijiih-s and 
Maharajahs, but with all the various elements that 
constitute the complicated system of Indian society. 
I Though some of the stories told of these martyrs 
i of the flesh and of the spirit may be exafj^ralcd, 

1' enough remains of real facts to rouse at all events 
our curiosity. When some of the true Sa?/myftsins, 
however, devote their thoughts and meditations to 
philosophical and religious problems, their utterances, 
: which sway large multitudes that gather round them 
; in their own country, cannot fail to engage our 
' attention , and sympathy, particularly if, as in the 
case of Rlmalmsh^a, their doctrines arc being spread 
by zealous advocates not only in India, but In 
America also, nay even in England* 

We need not fear that the Sa^znyMns of India will 
ever find followers or imitators in Europe, nor would 
it be at all desirable that they should, not even for* 



PREFACE. VII 

the sake of Psychic Research, or for experiments in 
PhysioO'psyclfolo^ical Laboratories. But apart from 

that, a better knowledge of the teachings of one 

of them seems certainly desirable, whether for the 
.statesmen who have to deal with the various classes of' 
Indian society, or for the missionaries who are anxious . 
to understand and to influence the inhabitants of that 
country, or lastly for the students of philosophy and 1 
religion who ought to know how the most ancient 
phjlosophy of the world, the Veddnta, is taught at the : 
present day by the Bhaktas, that is * the friends and 
devoted lovers of God/ and continues to exercise its 
powerful influence, not only on a few philosophers, but ; , 
on the large masses, of what has always been "called 
a country of philosophers, A country permeated by * 
such thoughts as were uttered by Rftmakrishwa cannot j 
possibly be looked upon as a country of ignorant \ 
idolaters to be converted by the same methods which ' : 
are applicable to the races of Central Africa. 

As the Voclfmta forms the background of the say ings 
of R,fimakrisha, I thought it useful to add a short 
sketch of some of the most characteristic doctrines of 
that philosophy* Without it, many readers would 
hardly be able to understand the Ideals of R&ma* 
krislwa and his disciples. 

I am quite aware that some of his sayings may sound 

strange to our ears, nay even offensive. Thus the 

conception of the Deity as the Divine Mother is apt to 



v iii PREFACE. 

startle us, but we can understand what^ Rfimakmhjm 
really meant by it, when we read his saying (No, 89) : 

<; 'Why does the God-lover find such pleasure in address- 
I 'ing the Deity as Mother? Because the child is more free 
\ with its mother, and consequently she is clearer to the child 
* than any one else.' 

Sometimes the language which these Hindu devotees 

use of the Deity must appear to us too familiar, nay 

even irreverent. They themselves seem to be aware 

of this and say in excuse : 
'A true devotee who has drank deep of Divine Love 

is like a veritable drunkard, and, as such, cannot always 

observe the rules of propriety ' (104)* 

Or again : 

* What is the strength of a devotee? He Is a child of 
God, and tears are his greatest strength * (92), 

Unless we remember that harem means originally 

no more than a sacred" and guarded place, the follow- 
ing saying will certainly jar on our ears : 

( The Knowledge of God may be likened to a man,, while 
the Love of God is like a woman. Knowledge has entry 
only up to the outer rooms of God, but no one can enter 
into the inner mysteries of God save a lover, for a woman 
has access even into the harem of the Almighty ' (172)* 

How deep Rimaknsh^a has seen Into the mysteries 
of knowledge and love of God, we see from the next 
saying : 



PREFACE, IX 

* Knowledge and love of God are ultimately one and the - 

same. There is no difference between pure knowledge and 
pure love.' 

The following- utterances also show the exalted 
nature of his faith : 

'Verily, verily, I say unto you, that he who yearns for 
God, finds Him ' (159). 

* lie who has faith has all, and he who wants faith wants j 
air(aor). 

* So long as one docs not become simple like a child, 

one does not get Divine illumination. Forget all the 
worldly knowledge that thou hast acquired, and become as 
ignorant about it as a child, and then thou wilt get the 
knowledge of the True 9 (241). 

1 Where does the strength of an aspirant lie ? It is in \ 
his tears. As a mother gives her consent to fulfil the desire ; 
of her importunately weeping child, so God vouchsafes to/ 
! f is weeping son whatever he is crying for ' (306), 

* As a lamp does not burn without oil, so a man cannot 
live without God ' (288), 

*Go<l is in all men, but all men are not in God ; that is 
the reason why they suffer' (215), 

From such sayings we learn that though the real 
presence of the Divine In nature and in the human, 
soul was nowhere felt so strongly and so universally 
as In India, and though the fervent love of God,,, nay 
the sense of complete absorption in the Godhead, 
has nowhere 'found a .stronger and more eloquent ex- 
pression than in the utterances of Ramaknsh;/a, yet 



Jt 



A I 



X PREFACE. 

he perfectly knew the barriers that separate divine* 
and, human nature. 

If we remember that these utterances of Rfima- 
knshm reveal to us not only his own thoughts, but 
the faith and hope of millions of human beings, we: 
may indeed feel hopeful about the future of that 

/country. The consciousness of the Divine in man is 

!$?*?.> and {s shared "by all, even by those who seem to 
; worship idols. This constant sense of the presence of 
God is indeed the common ground on which we; may 
: hope that in time not too distant the great temple of 
the future will be erected, in which Hindus and mm- 
Hindus may join hands and hearts in worshipping the 
ji same Supreme Spirit who is not far from every one 
| of us, for in Him we live and move and have our 
I": being. 

F. At M. 
IGHTHAM MOTE, 
Oct. is, 1898. 



- -* ,/Wi 




CONTENTS 



INTRODUCTION 

The Mah&traans . 

The Kcmr Stages of Life . 
Saj#nyfiins or Saints ., 
Ascetic Exercises or Yoga . 
Rdmakr/shwa 

Pay&nanda Sarasvati ..* 
Pawftri Bfiba 

Debcndran^th Tagore ... 
Rai Shaligrfim Sahcb Bahadur . 
Ramakrzshwa .... 
The Dialogic Process . 
Rfimakr/shwa*8 Life .*. 
Remarks on Rftrnakn"shwa ) 's Life . 
r f !t Judgement .. 



Wife ...... 

Rdmakr/sha* Influence on Kcshub Chunckr Sen 



Ekam advitiyam. One without; a Second 



Final Conclusion, Tat tvamasi 
Remarks on the Sayings . 

THE SAYINGS OF 
INDEX TO THE SAYINGS 



i -<>7 

a 

6 

8 

JO 

12 

16 
20 

-5 
30 



66 
% 
74 
Ho 

9* 
95 

98-187 
1 89-* 200 




THE LIFE AND SAYINGS 



RAMAKtf/SHJVA 



The MaMtaxans. 

Ir is not many years since I felt called upon to say 

a few words on certain religious movements now going on 
in India, which seemed to me to have been very much 
misrepresented and misunderstood at home. To people 

who are unacquainted with the religious state of India, 
whether modern or ancient, and ignorant of the systems 
of philosophy prevalent in what has often, and not unjustly, 
been called a country of philosophers, it is very difficult to 
understand these movements, more particularly to distin- 
guish between their leaders, who may be open to criticism, 
and the ideas themselves by which they feel inspired, and 
which they preach, often with great eloquence, to the 
multitudes that believe in them and follow them. My\ 
article, entitled * A Real Mah&tman/ appeared in the ; 
August number, 1896, of the Nineteenth Century ^ and * 
gave rise to a good deal of controversy both in India 
and in England, My object was twofold; I wished to 
* B 



2 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK/SHA'A. 

protest against the wild and overcharged accounts of Saints 
and Sages living and teaching at present tin India which 
had been published and scattered broadcast in Indian, 
American, and English papers, and I wished to show at 
the same time that behind such strange names as Indian 
T i! os ?? h y> and Esoteric" Buddhism and all the rest, there 
wasjomething real, something worth knowing/ worth know- 
'k in JL5^f or , us > tf l e students of 'Plato and Aristotle, Kant 

Jj a ~ nd Hegel, in Europe. What happens so often to people 

whose powers of admiration are in excess of their know* 
ledge and discretion, has happened to the admirers of 
certain Hindu sages. They thought they had been the 
first to discover and unearth these Indian Mah/ilmans, 
whom they credited not only with a profound knowledge 
of ancient or even primeval wisdom, but with, superhuman 
powers exhibited generally in the performance of very silly 
miracles. Not knowing what had long been known to 
every student of Sanskrit .philology, they were carried awar 
by the idea that they had found in India quite a new race 
of human beings, who had gone through a number of the 
most fearful ascetic exercises, had retired from the work!, 
and had gained great popularity among low and high by 
their preachings and teachings, by their abstemious life 
by their stirring eloquence, and by the power ascribed to 
them of working miracles, MaMtman, however, fe but 
one of the many names by which these people have 

^-^6^$4jAle, and"7rt]he rest ''lfiiT ywn 

used simply as a complimentary term, much as we use 



THE FOUR STAGES OF LIFE. 3 

reverend or honourable, but it has also been accepted as 
a technical terlh, applied to a class of men who in the 
ancient language of India are well known to us by their 
name of Sawmyasm. Sawnyasin means literally one who 
has laid down or surrendered everything, that is, one 
who has abandoned all worldly affections and desires, 
* He is to be known as a Sawnyfisin,* we read in the !' 
Bhagavad-gita V, 3, 'who does not hate and does not;.' 
love anything. 5 

The Fotir Stages of Life, 

The life of a BrShman was, according to the Laws of 
Mann, divided into four periods or A^ramas, that of 
a pupil or BrahmaMrin, that of a householder or 

Gjthastha, of an ascetic or Vanaprastha, and of a 
hermit or Yati 1 . The first and second stages are clear 
enough; they represent the scholastic and the married 

stages of a man's life, the former regulated by the strictest 
rules as to obedience, chastity, and study, the second 
devoted to all the duties of a married man, including the 
duty of performing sacrifices, both public and private. 
The names of ascetic and hermit for the third and fourth 
stages are of course approximate renderings only ; not 
having the thing, we have not got the name. But the 
chief difference between the two seems to be that in the 
third stage the Brahman still keeps to his dwelling in 
the forest outside his village, and may even be accompanied 
there by his wife, see his children, and keep up his sacred 
1 Monu VI, 87, 
B2 



4 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA'/SHtfA. 

fires, performing all the time certain exercises, as enjoined 
in their sacred books, while in the last Stage a man is 
released from all restrictions, and has to live alpno and 

without any fixed abode 1 . Some translators have used 
hermit for the third, and ascetic for the fourth stage. In 

Sanskrit also there exists,, a variety of names for these two 

j stages, but the distinctive character of each is dear* the 

,( ** wi ** wil(htllis ,, 1 , ,,_ 

jthird stage representing a mere retreat from the world, 
{the fourth a complete sjjjjgnder of all worldly interests, 
( f . *?a cessation of all duties, a sundering of all the fetters of 

K! passion and desire, and a life without a fixed abode. The 

|M modern MahStmans should therefore be considered as 

, belonging partly to the third, partly to the fourth or h$t 

* f stage. They are what we should call friars or itinerant 

mendicants, for it is their acknowledged privilege to beg 
and to live on charity. 

Another name of these SawnySsins was Avadh&ta, 
literally one who has shaken off all attachments^ wliife^In 
the language of the common people they are often called 
simply Sadhus, or good men. 

It has sometimes been denied that there are any 
Sawnylsins left in India, and in one sense this is true 
The whole scheme of life, with its four stages, as traced 
^ in the Laws of Manu, seems to have been at all 



! Ij ' " more or less of an ideal scheme, a plan of life uch as, 

f - according to the aspirations of the Brfhmans, it ought to 

f be > but as > takin ^ human ^ature as it is, it could hardly 

I | : - ever have been a11 over India * Anyhow, at present, though 

f l| X Apastanaba II, 9, 22, 21, &<; 



THE FOUR STAGES OF LIFE. 



5 



there are men In India who call themselves Sa^/nyasins, 
and are called 6adhus by the people, they are no longer 
what Manu meant them to be. They no longer pass 

through the severe discipline of their studentship, they 
need no longer have fulfilled all the public and private 

duties of a married householder, nor have remained for 
a number of years in the seclusion of their forest dwelling, 
They seem free at any time of their life to throw off all 

restraints, if need be, their very clothing, and begin to 
preach and teach whenever and wherever they can find 
people willing to listen to them, 

That the rules laid down in Miami's Law-book had often 
been broken in early times, we learn from the existence of 
a whole class of people called Vrdtjras. As far 'back as 
the Bruhina^a period we read oaf these Vratyas, outcasts 
who had .not .. practised brahma/frarya, proper studentship 3 , 
but who, if they would only perform certain sacrifices, 
might be readmitted to all the privileges of the three 
upper castes. That these Vrutyas were originally non- 
Aryan people is a mere assertion that has often been 
repeated, but never been proved. The name was technically 
applied, during the Brdhmaa period, to Aryan people who!,.' 
had belonged to a certain caste, but who had forfeited] 
their caste-privileges by their own neglect of the duties? 
pertaining to the first stage, bralmui&irya. There were 
actually three classes of them, according as the forfeiture 
affected them personally or dated from their parents or 
grandparents. All the three classes could be readmitted 
1 Journ, A$ Soc, Bombay, XIX, p* 3.58 (they use silver coins). 








6 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

r after performing certain sacrifices. In the modern lan- 
^ /! guage vrdtya has come to mean no mows than naughty 
' , or unmanageable. 

It is curious to observe how the Buddhist revolt was 
mainly based on the argument that if rnKindjatiun or 
spiritual freedom, as enjoyed in the third, 'and more par 
ticularly in the fourth stage, was the highest gnnf, of our 
wjjj Hfe on earth,_ it was a mistake" to wait for it till the very 

e ^L of j*' Th ' e Buddhists were in one sense VrSiyas who 
declined to pass through the long and tedious discipline of 
a pupil, who considered the performance of the duties of 
a householder, including marriage and endless sacrifi<*irs, 
not only as unprofitable, but as mischievous. Buddha 
I himself had declared against the penances prescribed for 
, ' the Brfihmanic ascetic as a hindrance rather than m a help 
to those who wished for perfect freedom, freedom from all 
passions and desires, and from the many prejudice { ,f 
^Brthmanic society. It seems almost as if the early 
! Buddhists, by adopting the name of Bhikshu, mendicant, 
jfor the members of their order (Sawgha), had wished to 
{show that they were all Sawnyto'ns, carrying out the old 
prahmanic principles to their natural conclusion, though 
.|they had renounced at the same time the Vedas, the Law* 
- /of tradition, and all Brihmanic sacrifices as mere unity 

and vexation of spirit. 



I Sft^z&y&sing or Saints* 



* 

Similar ideas existed already among the IMbrmns, and 
we meet among them, even before the rise of Buddhism, 



OR SAINTS. J 

with men who had shaken off all social fetters who had 
left their home und family, lived by themselves in forests or 

in caves, abstained from all material enjoyment, restricted 
their food and drink to a startling minimum, and often 
underwent tortures which make us creep when we read 
of them or see them as represented in pictures and, in 
modern times, in faithful photographs. Such men were 
naturally surrounded by a halo of holiness, and they 
received the little they wanted from those who visited 
them and who profited by their teaching, Some of these 
saints, but not many, were scholars, and became teachers 
of ancient lore. Some, however, and we need not be 
surprised at it, turned out to be impostors and hypocrites, 
and brought disgrace on the whole profession. We must 
not forget that formerly the status of a Sawnydsin pre- 
supposed a very serious discipline during the many years 
of the student and the domestic life. Such discipline 
might generally be accepted as a warrant for a well- 
oontrolled. mind and us security ag.ain.st the propensity to 
self-indulgence, not quite uncommon even in the lives of 
so-called Saints. When this security is removed, and ! 
when anybody at t any time of life may proclaim himself 
a Sawnyasin, the temptations even of a Saint are very < 
much increased. But that there were real 8*uvnyasins, and ! 
that theses are even now men who have completely shaken 
ofiTthe fetters of passion, who have disciplined their body 
and subdued the imaginations of their mind to a perfectly 
marvellous extent, cannot be doubted* They are often 
called Yogins, as having exercised Yoga. 



8 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA7SHJVA. 

Ascetic Exercises or Yoga* 

# 

> Within certain limits Yoga seems to be an exeellciti cliv 

;j cipline, and, in one sense, we ought all to be Vogins, Yoga, 

] as a technical term, means application, n>nvntnition, rffnrf ; 

, the idea that it meant originally onion with the fldfy has fon^ 

been given up. This Yoga, however, was sonn H'tWutai into 

an artificial system, and though supplying the means only 

that are supposed to be helpful for philosophy, it. has hmi 

elaborated into a complete system of philosophy, tht? Yoga 

philosophy ascribed to Pata/7#ali, a variety of K;i|i!*Vs 

S&wkhya-philosophy. As described by .Svftmin Ranra 

knshataanda in the Brahmavfidin, p, 511 scq., it ronwHis, 

as practised at present, of four kindsMa n t ra, Lay;i f K %a, 

' and S^,^7 S a * Ma ^H a " y 8 a co * ns & ts r"rcpcaiig 

a certain word again- and 'again, particularly a word expres- 
sive of deity, and concentrating all one's thought* on it 

is the Concentration of all our thoughts m 



a thing or the idea of a thing, so that we become ....,, 
one with it Here again the ideal image of a god, or 
names expressive of the Godhead, are the best, as pro 
ducing absorption in God. R*a-yoga consist* in cor, 

JWg.,the breath . , so : ,_as , to "control the mind. It was 

observed that when fixing our attention suddenly on any- 
thing new we hold our breath, and it was suppled there- 
' >i ' re that < : .? cent li t i .? of *e mind would be sure to follow 

, ijj ^^ojding^a^ ;r oi|h^b:reath, or the Prd^ayuma. H a Ma- 

f yoga is concerned with the general health of the body7an<i 

|| supposed to produce concentration by certain portiL of 



J ASCETIC KXERCTSES OR YOGA, 9 

-; the body, by fixing the eyes on one point, particularly the 

I tip of the nosef and similar contrivances. All this is fully 

described in the Yoga-Sfltras, a work that gives one the 

impression of being perfectly honest. No doubt it, is 

difficult to believe all the things which the ancient Yogins 
are credited with, and the achievements of modern Yogins 
!t * also arc often very .startling. I confess I find it equally 

1 difficult to believe them or not to believe thorn. We arc 

j' told by eye-witnesses and trustworthy witnesses that these 

, * Yogins go without food for weeks and months, that they 

can sit unmoved for any length of time, that they feel no 
I pain, that they can mesmerise with their eyes and read 

people's thoughts. All this 1 can believe, but if the same ; 
authorities tell us that Yogins can see the forms of gods ' 
and goddesses moving in the sky, or that the ideal God' 
t appears before them, that they hear voices from the sky, 

* perceive a divine frngrumu:, and lastly that they have been ' 

seen to sit in the air without any support, 1 must claim 
the privilege* of St. Thomas a little longer, though I am ; 
/ bound to say that the evidence that has come to me in 

'jjjjX support of the last achievement is most startling 1 * * 

^"" That what is called a state of Sunmdhi, or a trance, can 

be produced by the very means which are employed by the 
Yogins in India, is, I believe, admitted J>y medical artd 
p^chia|ric ^ authorities ; and though impostors certainly 
, exist among the Indian Yogins, we should be careful not 

|l to treat all these Indian Saints as mere impostors. The 

J temptation, no doubt, is great for people, who are believed 

I * * See fttao IL Walter, Ha///jtyo#tipra<Hpik;l, 1893, 



10 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF KAMAKA7.SI1.VA, 

to be inspired, to pretend to be what they are believed to be, 
nay, in the end, not only to pretend, but realty to believf what 
Bothers believe of them. And if they have been brought tip 
in a philosophical atmosphere," or are filled by deep religious 
fe< ^ n s ' % would very naturally become what tin- Mabar 
; mans are described to be-men who can pour out their smik 
I mperfervid eloquence and high-flown poetry, or who arc ibk- 
j to enter even on subtle discussions of the great problems 
| of philosophy and answer any questions addressed to them. 



'.;{| 

i or later wants lo 



Such a man was RSmak^lm, who has lately obtained 
conrieable celebrity both in India and Amorfc., whcr, his 
dimples have been actively engaged in preaching hi, r ,,.| 
an rts to his doctrines, even amon, ChiL 

This may seem very Grange, nay, ll M ," 
to us . Bnt we havfi ^ tQ ' ^ 

r? 6 nUmbm f ^ ^ ' wha a 
ves Chnstms, without even having had an id ,, a ( 
what Christ really taught or what He was teant ^1 t f 



I I 

them, it is to them at first a heathen and despised religion. 
If they listen toU at; all, it is of their own free will ; and if 
they believe in any part of it, it is of their own free choice. 
A chosen religion is always stronger than an inherited religion, 
and hence we find that converts from one religion to another 
are generally so zealous for their new faith, while those who 
never knew what real religion meant arc enthusiastic in 
proclaiming any truths which they seem to have discovered 
for themselves and to which their heart has yielded a free 
assent. Hence, though there may be some exaggeration in ' 
the number of those who are stated to have become con- 
verted to the religion of R;1ruak/vsh//a, and though some 
who now call themselves converts to the V'ecldnta may .in _ 
reality have made but the first step towards real Christianity,! 
there can be no doubt that a religion which can achieve such i 
successes in our time, while it calls itself with perfect truth 
the oldest religion and philosophy of the world, vix* the; 
Vcdanta, the end or highest object of the, Veda, deserves our! 
careful attention '. 

Ramak/7sh;;a himself never claimed to be the founder 
of a new religion* lie simply prrarhed the old religion of 
India* which was founded on the Veda, more partiYulurly on 
the Upanishjuls, and was systematized later on in the Sfttras 
of Badarftyawa, and finally developed in the commentaries 

* TMi l the explanation given of the* imtwr of Vedfwta. Hut It is 
probably an afterthought. Like* other compound,*; in anta, such as 
SiddhftntA} Sfttr&nta, &c,> it wiw probably meant at first for no 
more than the subject-matter of the Veda j then, UK it *tnnd* at the end 

of Brlhmswfts and Ari#*yakaft it wftt explained an end of the Veda# and 

lastly as the end, i,& the goal, the highest object of the Ve4a, 




12 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA7SHAVU 

of &mkara and others. Even in preaching that religion, 
arid in living the life of a .recluse, as he did, R;nn;ik/ r /s!v/a 
* by no means claimed to stand alone. There were .several 
pleading Ved&nta preachers in India during this last fifty 
; years, sometimes called Paramaha;//.sas. Keshub Chu rider 
; Sen, well known in England and America, who was a great 
reformer with a strong leaning towards Christianity* was not 
counted as one of them, because he never passed through 
the proper discipline and did not live the life of a S;i///ny*iMn. 
But he mentions four among his contemporaries who 
deserved that title ; first, Dayananda SarasvuU, for ;i time 
ately connected with Madame Blavatsky ; smwdly, 
ri BSbaof Ghazipur; thirdly, the vSikh Naguji of i>oor^ 
raon; and lastly, our RSmakmhwa, commonly tailed the 
Paramaha^sa of DaJkshiaesvan * These/ he adds, ' are the 
four ascetic saints whom our friends have from time to time 
duly, honoured, and in whose company they have sought 
the sanctifying influences of character and example, Mity 
we respect,' he continues, *and serve with profound respect 
I . , and humility, every ascetic saint whom Providence may 

fit . ' ^ing to us. Thejmpure become pure in the company of 

Stdhus/ 



Day&nanda SarasTatt* 

Of the life of the first, of Dayinanda Sarasvatt, we have 
very full accounts. He initiated a great reform of Brih* 
manism, and seems to have been a liberal-minded man, so fir 
as social reforms were concerned. He also was willing to 
surrender his belief in the divine revelation of the Bflliiiia% 
r 

r 



; 



BAYANANDA RARASVATl. 13 

though he retained it in full strength with regard to the 
Vcdic hymns. He published large commentaries on the 
Vedas, which show great familiarity with Sanskrit and very 

wide reading, though at the same time an utter want of critical 
judgement, lie sanctioned the remarriage of widows, sup- 

ported the movement in favour of raising the marriageable 
age of boys and girls, and altogether showed himself free 

from many prejudices as to caste, food, and all the rest. He 
condemned idolatry and even polytheism. His name became 
better known in Europe also, from the time that he fell 
into the net spread for him by Madame Blavatsky* But this 
lasted for a short time only, and when he perceived what 
her real objects were, the Sawnyfisin would have nothing 
more to say to, her, She was not quite the Maitrey! he had 
expected. He did not know English, she did not know 
Bengali or Sanskrit ; hence they did not understand each 
other at first, while later on, as some people said, they 
understood each other but too well However that may be, 
he certainly seems to have been a powerful disputant, his 
influence became greater and greater, till at last his op- 
ponents, the orthodox and unchanging Brfihmans, were 
suspected of having poisoned ' their dangerous rival. He 
died tiudctenly, but his followers, under the name of Arya- 
Sam&j, form still a very important and growing sect in 
India, that keeps aloof from all European influences, 



The second Saint was PawUri Baba of Ghazipur, Little 
is known of him, but his recent death has created a painful 



V 

A If 

1 V 



14 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF KAMAKA'/SHA'A. 

sensation all over India. He had lived for about thirty- 
years at Ghazipur, and was venerated asa Saint by thr 
whole native community. The last nine years, hnwevrr, ho 
had almost entirely withdrawn from the world 1 , living hy 
himself in a compound surrounded by hi^h walls ;md 
protected by a formidable gale. Inside there was u small 
flower-garden, a well, a small temple, and his own dwelling 
house, which consisted of one room. Me never allowed tin- 
gate to be opened, and no one ever saw him except hi?, 
younger brother. Once every week or ten days, however, 
he would come up to the gate and am verso for few 
moments from within with any one who happened lu IK: 
there. His younger brother always remained within railing 
distance. But though his saintly brother had told him that 
he could not any longer bear the misery which the Kali yu#t, 
i. e. the present age, had brought upon India, he little sus- 
pected what his brothers meant The venerable man, after 
taking his usual bath and performing his devotions, sirems to 
have covered his whole body with clarified butter, to have 
sprinkled himself all over with incense, then to have sot 
rl| re to the four corners of his lonely house, and when the 
flames had taken hold of it on all sides, to have deliberately 
thrown himself into the fire, thus performing his last 
sacrifice. Before anybody could rescue him, the old nwn 
was burnt to ashes, and what remained of him was con- 
signed with due ceremony to the sacred waters of the 
Ganges. All this happened only a few months ago. It is 
always difficult to get an exact account of anything thai 

i Interpreter, June, 1898. Indian Social Reformer, June 19, 1898. 



1 



PAWARI BAM. 15 

happens in India. The conflagration of the house in which 
the old Saint ha< lived for many years cannot be doubted, 
nor the discovery of his burnt body. But some of his 
friends, unwilling to admit his self-immolation, ascribe the 
fire to an accident, while others consider his voluntary 
sacrifice as the proper ending to his saintly life. 

His name Pawari,, sometimes spelt Pahfiri, is explained as 
a contraction of PayanShart, he who lives on air. 

His teaching was probably much the same as that of 
RSmak/7sha, but I have not been able to get a more 
accurate account of it. His position, however, as a Sage 
and a Saint seems to have been generally recognised, and 
Keshub Chunder Sen is a sufficient authority for the fact 
that he well deserved a place by the side of such men 
as Dayananda Sarasvat! and Rdmakrah;/a. The people 
of India evidently distinguish clearly between these professed 
ascetics and saints on one side, and mere reformers such as 
Rammohun Roy and Keshub Chunder Sen on the other. 
They evidently want to see a complete surrender of the/ 
world and its pleasures, riches, and honours before they] 
quite believe in the truth and the sincerity of any teachers! ' 
and reformers. Having undergone severe tortures and/ 
penances is likewise an essential condition of Sainthood, 
and for the crowd at large even the ^ower of working 
miracles is by no means out of fashion yet as a test of 
being an inspired sage. 

The best-known name by which some of these sages are 
called isParaniaha^/s^a name that hardly lends itself to trans- 
lation in English, Scholars who like to cavil and raise a smile 




1 6 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA7SHA r A. 

at every custom or tradition of the Hindus, translate it literally 

by Great Goose, but it would be more fiu'thful to render 

that ancient title by High-soaring Eagle. Besides* lutwsa, 

though it is the same word as goose, is not the same: bird. 

But though these Paramahawsas form an flifa by themselves, 

we know how many men there have been and are even 

now in India who, by the asceticism and saintliness of their 

lives, deserve a place very near to the Paramahawsas in 

I our estimation. We know how Udayashankar, the Prime 

\ Minister of Bhavnagar, tried hard to revive, in his own case, 

\ the strict rules of life prescribed for the ancient Sawnyasins, 

: The life of Keshub . Chundcr Sen also, though he wan 

; a married man and travelled much and moved in the world* 

': was a life of extreme self-denial, as much a*s that of any 

; Paramahaj^sa. 

",/ ' , Bebendran^th 3*agote. 
ThJr'Same applies to DebendranSth Tagore the friend 
and constant patron of Keshub Chundcr Sen* Though he 

, t ,wt*^i,,,,, ift(< , ii , lij > i>ni , hi ,,,,., .. ' ' 

was the head of a wealthy and influential family, he spent 

,,-most of his life in retirement from the world, in ntudy* 
'^ meditation, and contemplation* He has reached now what 
is considered a very high age in India, eighty*two t and we 
are glad to hear that he has written an autobiography l.o be 
published after his death. As the friend and protector of 
Keshub Chunder Sen, though for a time separated from him, 
he has acted a far more important part in the history of the 
^IfeSSl?^? 1 ^ t ^ ian * s commonly supposed. The following 
account of a visit lately paid to him by some members of 
the Br^hma-Samdj will give us an idea of the life of this 



DEBENDRANATH TAGORE. I'J 

man. I am in possession of some of his letters, which are 
very instructive, but which are hardly tit for publication, 
Some friends who visited him lately give the following 
account of their interview with the old Saint. 

'We were conducted to the spacious verandah on the 
second story, where the venerable old man was seated on 
a chair. We bowed down reverentially and took our seats. 
The Maharshi was the first to speak. He said ; " Since you 
came here three months ago, my communication with the 
external world has been much diminished I see things 
much less and hear much fewer words. But that is no loss to 
me. As my dealings with the external world are decreasing, 
my Yoga with the internal world is rapidly increasing. No 
effort on my part is now required for communion. I sit 
by myself and enjoy this company/ 7 As he spoke these 
words his countenance glowed with emotion. 

On being asked if he remembered the different occasions 
on which he selected the verses from the Vedantic 
texts to form the liturgy of the Brahma-Sanmj (published 
by him many years ago), the Saint replied; "I cannot 
call back to my mind after such a length of time the 
process through which these texts were brought together 
from different Upanishacls. I have got the essence of these * 
things 'within me now, and I am enjoying the sweetness ' 
thereof. So there is now no more need for me to go to 
the texts. I fully agree with you, that from the True and the 
Intelligent we go to the Infinite person, and that then we find 
in the Infinite infinite splendours and behold his infinite 
mercy and other attributes* I might have talked much 

c 




1 8 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKJWSH.VA, 

with you on these subjects, had you conic a short time 
'^before this. Now my mind is mostly occupied with tilings 
which the eyes see not nor the ears hear, so I shall not he 
able to talk much with you. ... I have written an amnint 
1 of my life as I have been moved by the Spirit of (Jod, but 
I do not know of what use it will bo. Now 1 haw bmnne 
quite useless to the world, I have now wry little to 
connect me with the world." When we rcpli.-d that 
we did not consider his life to have been in vain, as he 
had given the world an example of a life lived in and 
with God, the Maharshi continued, "I am living the life of 
a recluse, I have no energy left. The energy and e:trmrst 
^ ness you see in me now is roused only by a-dug y ()H . 
I Long, long ago, while J was studying the rjnish;uls, 

I liSJite .dawned upon my soul and J felt thai India 

I 1 w 5S!d,,one day worship Brahman, the Only "True God. 

' l then badly wanted acompanion, a man after my own 'lie-art, 
who would have my feelings and join hands with me. 
I tried almost all the men of light and leading of the time, 
; but could find none. I then left Calcutta in despair and 

repaired to the hills. After a two years' stay (!,<,, the fall 
; of the river Sutlej suggested to my mind a sacred lesson. 

I heard a voice urging me to go to Calcutta and resume 
my holy work. I was so much engrossed with this divine 
voice that nothing would give me rest. Every object 
seemed to reverberate the Divine injunction and press me 
, to fulfil the Lord's will. In all haste I came back, and as 
( 1 1 came back, Brahmdnanda (Keshub Chtmder Sen) made 

f - Acquaintance. I saw at once that he was exactly the 



DEBENDRANATH TAGORE, . 19 

right man whom I wanted. I could then discern why 
I was led by the Spirit to come back to Calcutta. My joy 
knew no bounds. We passed the greater portion of the 
nights in conversation about deep spiritual matters, even 
up to two in the morning. Brahmananda even tolcl me 
that when he would be gone, those whom he would leave 
behind would express and promote my cause, I find his 
words are going to be fulfilled now." "Yes," we replied, 
" that is very true. While our minister was with us in the 
flesh, we did not realise our nearness unto you so much. 
Our impression is that the Brahma-Samdj has accepted 
Riija Rammohun Roy, but has not yet accepted you* As 
you represent Yoga or direct vision of God, the Brdhma- 
Sarn&j will not be able to attain to that feature of spirituality, 
unless it accepts you. The present deplorable state of 
the Brahma-Samdj is owing to its non-acceptance of you." 
The Maharshi replied : " God has called you to preach the 
Brahma Dharma to this poor country of India, and particularly 
to Bengal our weak, indigent, and helpless country. As 
the mother loves her decrepit child more tenderly, so God 
has shown this greater love to these His poor ones. For 
this special grace we are peculiarly thankful to God. God 
has shown special favour to you, and has made you 
particularly fit for your work* 1 have published my last 
work about Paraloka and Mukti, the next world and 
salvation, in a small volume* 1 make an offering of it 
to you." After these words the pilgrims departed, much 
comforted and helped 1 *' 

1 Unity and the Minister, 1896, July xa. 

C 2 



i! 



2O THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF KANf AKA/SUA'A, 

I thought that this glimpse at what passes in India 
within doors, and is but seldom seen or fcvcn SUSJK:< fr<! by 
those who tell us so much about the jxtlarcs, the Rajahs 
and Mahlrajahs s the car of JuL^vrn ( ith, the Towers of 
Silence, or the Caves of Ellora, was worth preserving and 
might interest the true friends of India. 

We have but to open the Indian papers in meet with 
notices of men who have led the same saintly ami Clod- 
devoted life as Debendranath Tagore, but who nevertheless 
have not reached the rank of a Paramaha;;/sa in the eyes of 
the people of India. It Is quite possible that some of them 
who are venerated as Saints in their own country, would he 
disposed of as fools or fanatics by Kuropean eritirs. Still 
:f they hold their own place in their own country, ami they 
\ represent a power which ought not to bo entirely neglected 
by the rulers of * weak, indigent, helpless Bengal 1 

Bai Shaligrtai SaJieb Bahadur* 
One more case and I have done with my Imperfect 
sketch of the stage on which Mmakmlwa appears before 
us to- act his part, together with his fellow-actors who sup- 
ported and often guided him in his unselfish and devoted 
endeavours. We read in the Prabuddha Bhftrata, May, 
1898, .p. 132 seq., of one Rai ShaligrSm Sahcb Bahadur, 
\ ,'Saheb Bahadur, who is now about seventy years of age, 
| has spent a very active and useful life as an official "in 
-' | the Post Office, where he rose to be Postmastcr-Gem-ral 
'' ^ the North-Western Provinces. It seems that "the horrors 
of the mutiny in 1857 made a deep impression on his mind. 



RAI SHALIGRAM SAHEB BAHADUR, 21 

He saw thousands of men, women, and children butchered 
before his eyes, thfe rich reduced to poverty, the poor raised 
to unexpected and undeserved wealth, so that the idea of 
the world's impermanent and transient nature took complete 
possession of him arid estranged him from all that had 
formerly enlisted his interest and occupied his energies. 
From his very youth, however, his mind had been filled 
with religious and philosophical questions, and he is said to 
have devoted much time from his youth onward through 
all the years of his official life to the study of the Sacred 
Scriptures. No wonder therefore that after witnessing the 
horrors of the mutiny and its suppression, he should have 
wished to flee from this den of misery and to get happiness 
unalloyed and permanent where alone it could be found. 
He went to consult several Sa?/myasins and Yogins, but 
they could not help him. At last one of his colleagues at 
the Post Office recommended his elder brother as a spiritual 
guide who could be trusted. For two years he attended his 
lectures, compared his teaching with that of the Upanishads 
and other holy writings, and then became his devoted pupil 
or Chela. During his stay at Agra he allowed no one else 
to serve his master. He used to grind the flour for him, to : 
cook his meals, and feed him with his own hands. Every ;. 
morning he could be seen carrying a pitcher of pure water 
on his head for the Guru to bathe in, which he fetched I 
from a place two miles distant. His monthly salary also 
was handed over to the Saint, who used it for the support of 
his pupils, wife and children, and spent the rest in chanty. 
All his home affairs were superintended by his Guru, and 



22 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKAVSILVA. 

this was done in spite of the opposition of his rastemen 
who were Kayasthas, and did not approve of one of their 
caste cooking the Saint's food and eating from his dishes, 
because the Saint was a member of another caste, that of 
the Khetris. After some time the pupil wished to retire 
from the postal service, but the Saint would not allow it. 
When he was appointed Postmaster-General of tht.- North- 
West he fell on his knees before the Saint anil Ix-^ed 
his permission to retire and enter soul and body imotbe 
true spiritual life, but the Saint once more refusal, saying 
that the discharge of his official duties would in no way 
interfere with his spiritual progress. Accordingly he left 
^ Agra, and for many years held his new post at Allahabad, 
y as it is said, with great success, having introduced many 
A reforms and useful changes in the Postal Department. 
| It was not till the death of his Guru in .897 that the 
; Postmaster-General felt himself free and justified in leavinij 
| the service. He then became a Guru himself, ami im 
I parted spiritual instruction to those who came to seek for 
i his help. Often those who came to listen to him " were 
so inspired by his teaching that they renounced the world 
and be ga to tad the life of Safins, so that it became 



h 

bsfamdy and become an ascetic. Nay, it WSIS aid 
hat no one could even look at the lamp burning on 
the upper story O f his house without being influenced to 
renounce the world, to forsake his relation", and " 

to the 



of the old man was stillalive, his house besieged every 



23 

day by large numbers of persons, both male and female, 
who flock there from different parts of the country. He 
holds five meetings day and night for the purpose of im- 
parting religious instruction, so that he has hardly more 
than two hours left for sleep. Everybody is welcome, and 
no distinction is made between Brfihman and *SMra, rich 
and poor, good and bad. The people are convinced 
that he can work miracles, but he himself regards such 
things as unbecoming, and below his dignity. It is said ; 
that the late Doctor Makund Lai, Assistant-Surgeon to the 
Viceroy, was in the habit of sending to him patients who 
had made themselves senseless by excessive practice of 
Pr&wdy&ma, restraint of the breath, and that by a mere look he 
brought them back to their senses, and taught them that 
this practice was of little good, and in many cases injurious, 



The few cases mentioned here may suffice to show that 
Rdmakralwa was by no means a solitary instance, and 
that, however much the old social system of the Four 
Stages as described by Manu may have changed, there, are 
still Sawnydsins in India who live the life of the ancient j 
Sawny&sins, though of course in different surroundings and j 
under different conditions. These cases are as well authen- 
ticated as anything that coraes to us from India is ever I 
likely to be. If we turned our eyes to the ancient litera- ' 
ture of that country, we should see Sawnyiisins in large 
numbers, but their performances would probably be con- 
sidered as fabulous, nor should I venture to say that they 




THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

are what we mean by well authenticated The fart t how- 
ever, that some of these Sawnyusins reduced themsdves hy 
ascetic exercises to mere skeletons l or became raving in;ic! 
men can hardly be doubted, if we may judge by the warn- 
ings against such excesses which appear at u very early 
time in the ancient literature of the country* A welMtmmt 
instance is that of Buddha himself, who, before he fiwndcd 
his own religion, went through all the tortures of limb- 
manic ascesis, but derived so little benefit from them that 
he denounced the whole system, as then practiced, not 
only as useless but as mischievous, preferring in nil things 
what he called the via media, 

If now we turn our attention again to the fourth of the 
Paramaha^sas, recognised by Keshuh Chunder Hen ;IH 
pre-eminent among his contemporaries, we shall fed less 
surprised by his life and his doctrines, but amrpt him as 
one of a class which has always existed in India. We 
possess indeed full accounts of his life, but they arc often HO 
strangely exaggerated, nay so contradictory, thai it seemed 
almost hopeless to form a correct and true idea of his earthly 
career and his character, I applied therefore to one of his 
most eminent pupils, Vijek%anda ? asking him to write down 
for me what he could tell of his own knowledge of hj 
venerable teacher, and I received from him a full degcrip. 
tion of, his' Master's life. It will be easily seen, however, that 
even this account is not quite free from traditional elements, 
If I give It as much as possible unaltered,! have a reason for it. 



THE DIALOGIC PROCESS. 2 r 

JThe Dialogic Process. 

Such as it is, it will give us an insight into the way in 
which a new religion, or rather a new sect, springs up and 
grows. It will place before our eyes the transformation 
which mere repetition, conversation, or what is called oral 
tradition will and must produce in the description of the 
facts as they really happened. We can watch here what 
is really a kind of Dialectic Process which is at work in all 
history, both ancient and modern. This Dialectic Process 
as applied to the facts of history comprehends all the 
changes which are inevitably produced by the mere com- 
munication and interchange of ideas, by the give and take 
of dialogue, by the turning of thoughts from one side to 
the other. It is in reality what is called in German the 
threshing out of a subject, a kind of Durchsprechen> or 
what the Greeks called a speaking forward and backward, 
or dialogue, Even Hegel's Dialectic Process, the movement 
of the idea by itself, that leads irresistibly froxn positive to 
negative and to conciliation, has its origin in what I should 
prefer to call by a wider name the Dialogic Process, of the 
greatest importance in history, both ancient and modern. 
There is hardly a single fact in history which can escape ' 
being modified by this process before it reaches the writer 
of history. It must be distinguished from the ' Mytho- 
logical Process^ which forms indeed a part of it, but 'acts 
under much more special rules. We can watch the Dialogic 
Process in Modern History also, though we have here 
reporters, and newspapers, the autobiographies and remin- 




26 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK&7KIWA, 

iscences of great statesmen which would seem to render 

this Dialogic infection impossible or hatmiess. We can 

only guess what it must have been in times when neither 

shorthand nor printing existed, when writing and re;idtig 

were the privilege of a small class, and when very often 

two or three generations had passed away before the idea 

of recording certain facts and certain sayin&s ocairred to 

a chronicler or a historiographer* It is extraordinary thai 

so many historians should have completely mr#Ie<:U'd this 

, Dialogic Process through which everything must pass before 

it reaches even the first recorder, forgetting th;|t il amUl 

. never have been absent. How many difficulties would have 

, been solved, how many contradictions explained, nay how 

: ^ many miracles would become perfectly natural and iniel- 

Vf legible, if historians would only learn this one Icnson, that 

' J we do not and cannot know of any historical went that bag 

''. *jot P^P^y passed through this Dialogic process. 

^ ^ kke ' s recent an ' event as the telegram sent from 
Ems, where I am writing* It was meant to tell the world of 
the supposed insult which Benedctti had offered to the King 
of Prussia. ' That telegram marks one of the most decisive 
events in modern history, it has really helped to change the 
whole face' of Europe. What do we know of ft, even after 
Bismarck's own confessions, beyond what he thought and 
spoke in his own mind, beyond what he said to my friend 
Abeken, who wrote it out and sent it off, beyond what the 
people in Germany and in France thought of 'it, said of it, 
made - O f it, whether as justifying or condemning the war 
that sprang out of it. Shall we ever know the 



THE DIALOGIC PROCESS. 27 

verba of Benedetti, his tone of voice, the tone of voice in 

the Emperor's Feply, the consternation or chuckle when 
the iron chancellor heard from all parts of Europe the echo 
of his own words and thoughts. And yet all this happened 
but yesterday. Benedetti himself has told us what he 
actually said, what the Emperor replied ; Bismarck himself 
has told us what he meant when he had the cooked telegram 
published to all the world. Does the historian know then 
what really happened, what was intended by the words used 
by Benedetti, by the Emperor, and by Bismarck ? Here in 
Ems the very spot is shown where the words were spoken, 
though opinions vary even on this point. We possess now 
the version given by the French diplomatist which is totally 
different from that given by Bismarck, and yet they had 
passed through one Dialogic Process only, that of the old 
King in his conversation with Benedetti and in his com- 
munications with his ministers* Again, every reader of 
modern history is acquainted with the words put into the 
mouth of the French officer at Waterloo, a guards meurf, 
mats ne sc rend pas ; and every reader of French Memoirs 
knows by this time the real word which is said to have 
been uttered at that historical moment. How can we ; 
ever hope to escape from the transforming power of oral 
tradition? 

The changes wrought by that power are of course more 
or less violent according to circumstances ; entirely absent, 
I believe, they never are. And nowhere are they more'! 
evident than in, the accounts which have readied us of \ 
the founding of new religions and of their founders. In 



1 

i 



28 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF R 

the case of Buddhism, It is well known that some cxrcllcnt 

scholars have actually denied that there ever was such 

a person as the young prince of Kapiluv.lstu, of whose life 

and doings and sayings we possess fuller accounts than of 

the founders of any other religion. And let it f>o ivmcro- 

bered that no revealed or miraculous character is rlainnul 

for Buddha's biographies, nay that Buddha himself nrjerted 

any such exceptional claims for himself ami for his 

apostles, being satisfied with having been a man on earth, 

which, according to him, is the highest form of being In 

thejvrorld, potentially, and is, even in reality, hi^h above 

all angels and above all gods (clevtis), such as they were in 

his time, Atideva, above all gods, is one of tlu* nuiucs 

assigned to Buddha, showing the estimation in which 

Buddha and in which the gods were held by their followers. 

" This inevitable influence of the Dialogic: l*rotx*ss in 

.history cannot be recognised too soon, l! will remove 

; endless difficulties by which we are ensnared, cndles* dis* 

ihonesties in which we have ensnared ourselves*. If we 

1 lonce understand that after only one day, one week, one 

year any communication, even a communication given from 

heaven, must suffer the consequences of this Dialogic Process* 

must be infected by the breath of human thought and oC 

human weakness, many a self-made difficulty will vanish* 

many a story distorted by the childish love of the miraculous 

will regain, its true moral character, many a face disguised 

by a misplaced apotheosis will look upon us again with 

his truly human, loving, and divine eyes, All honest hearts, 

whatever religion they may profess, will feel relieved and 



THE DIALOGIC VROCKSS. ^9 

grateful if they once thoroughly understand the dialectic: or 
dialogic working*of oral tradition, particularly where it can 
be traced back to pure and perfectly natural sources. 

It is for this very reason, and because this process cm 
be so seldom watched, but can f^m-.nilly be traced in 
its later results only, that even this slight sketch of what 
a disciple of Rfimakmhwa, with every wish to be truthful, 
can tell us of his master, may be of some interest to our- 
selves both for its own sake and for the light which it throws 
on the conditions under which every religion has to grow _ 
up and tVbc\ recor^. Nothing is so human as religion, 
nothing" so"" much exposed to the frailties inherent in human 
nature. Whatever the origin of a religion may be supposed 
to have been, its growth from the very first depends clearly 
on the recipient soil, that is, on human nature, and to. 
study that human nature as it reacts on religion is one, ., 
of the most useful lessons of Comparative Theology. * 
I had made it as clear as possible to Vivckananda that 
the accounts hitherto published of his Master, however 
edifying they might be to his followers, would sound 
perfectly absurd to European students, that stories of 
miraculous events in childhood, of apparitions of goddesses 
(dev!) communicating to the Sa;/mylsin a knowledge of 
languages and literatures which, as we know, he never 
possessed in real life, would simply be thrown away on 
us poor unbelievers, and that descriptions of miracles per- 
formed by the Saint, however well authenticated, would 
produce the 'very opposite effect of what they were in- 
tended for. Vivekftnanda himself is a man who knows 



1 




30 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF KAMAK/WK) JA'A, 

England and America well, and perfectly understood what 
I meant. Yet even his unvarnished description of his 
Master discloses here and there the dear trares of what 
I call the Dialogic Process, and the irrepressible mm>. uli .in- 
tendencies of devoted disciples. And I am really gl.ni that 
it does so, if only it helps to teach us that an historian 
can ever pretend to do more than to .show us what a man 
or a fact seemed to be to him or to the authorities whom 
he has' to follow, and not what he or it actually was. 
I have also, as far as I could, consulted another acrtnmt 
of the life of Rfimakrrahaa published in tin: late numbers 
of the Brahmaradin. But I am 'sorry to say that this 
account stops with No. 19, and has not been continued. 

B&maknalwa's Life. 

Rfaabfihm, we are told, was born in the village of 
KamSrpukar, in the Zillah Hugli, situated about fuur mite 
to the west of the JahanSbad subdivision, and thirty-two 
miles south of Burdwan. His life on earth began on the 
2 oth of February, 1833, and ended the ritli of August 
1886 x a.m.^ The village in which he was |w||1 ^ 
inhabited chiefly by people of the lower caste*, mostly 
blacksrmths, Karmakars, or in familiar abbreviation, K 
mars, and hence called Kamarpukar, with some .sprinklin, 



"N 



.* i 1 



S LIFE. 3 I 

of the only Brahmanic family settled in the village. 
Though very peor, he would rather starve than stray 
from the strictest path of Brahmanical orthodoxy. The 
original name given to his child was GadSdhara, a name 
of Vishu, which means one who holds the club, and it 
was given him, we are told, on account of a prophetic 
dream of his father, to whom, while on a pilgrimage 
to Gya, Vishwi appeared, telling him that he, the deity, 
would he born as his son. It was later in life that he 
began to be called RAmakrrsha. We are told, and we 
could hardly have expected anything else^that his father, 
whose name was Khudiram ChattopMhy&ya, was a great 
lover of God, a man pure in mind, handsome of figure 3 
straightforward and independent. Rumour saysand 
what is rumour but another name for the Dialogic 
Process of which we spoke-^-that he possessed super- 
natural powers, particularly what is called Vak-siddhi, 
power of speech, which means that everything he told, 
good or bad, of anybody, would always come to pass. 
He was highly reverenced by all the people of his village, 
who stood up whenever they saw him coming, and saluted 
him, nay who would never talk frivolity in his presence. 

It could hardly have been otherwise than that his mother 
also, Chandramam Devi, was a pattern of simplicity and 
kindness. We are told that Mathunt Ndth, the rich and 
devoted disciple of her son, came to her once and pressed 
her to accept a present of a few thousand rupees, but to 
his astonishment she declined the offer, 

The father proved his independence while still living at 



32 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK/SMA'A. 

Dere, on his own ancestral property. The Zemindar of the 
village wanted him to appear as a witness on his side* 
threatening him with confiscation of his properly and ex- 
pulsion from his village, if he refused Khudiram refused, 
left his village, and migrated to KamSrpur* a village two or 
three miles east of Dere. There, through the help of some 
true friends, he managed to make a poor living, and yel he 
was always profusely generous to the poor and Jm.spitaMc 
to everybody, living chiefly in the company of religious 
men, performing every kind of worship, and trying to 
realise religion to its fullest extent* 

There is a story that Eftmakrah^a's father was going 
to pay a visit to his daughter one day, some twelve or 
fourteen ^ miles from the place where he lived* After 
travelling more than half the way, he came across a Bel- 
tree, beautifully covered with new-grown green leaves* 
These leaves are very sacred to a Hindu, and they use 
them in worshipping the god 5iva. It was sprint; tinu-. 
The Bel-trees were casting off their old leaves, and the 
man had not recently been able to find any goad leaves 
to offer to Siva. On rinding these, he at once climbed up 
the tree, gathered as many leaves as he could carry, and 
returned' home to worship iva, without going to see his 
daughter. He was a great lover of Mma and his tutelary 
deity was the pure and divine *fii R&na&ndia. lie had 
a little plot of land outside the village, and in the sowing 
time, after getting a man to plough the field, he would go 
himself, put a few grains of rice in the name of Raghuvfra 
on the ground first, and then order the labourers to finish 



LIFE- 33 

the work. It is said that that little plot of land produced 
enough, as long a he lived, to maintain the whole of the 
family. He ever depended upon his Raghuvira, or the hero 
of the race of Raghu, the divine Rama, and never cared for 
the morrow. His son Ramakr/shwa, we are told, had 
something in him which attracted everybody and made 
people love him, as if he were of their own kith and kin, 
even at the first appearance. 

The young child used to repeat the whole of the religious 
operas and dramas, the acting, the music, and everything, 
after hearing them on^ce. He had a very good musical 
voice and a taste for music. He was a very good judge 
of the merits and defects of the statues or images of gods 
or goddesses, and his judgement was held as final by the 
old people of the village, even from his childhood* He 
could draw and make images of gods himself. One of 
the broken stone images of $ii Kr/sha, which he repaired 
in later days, is still to be seen in the temple of Dakshiwe^- 
vara of Rani Rasmoni, about four miles to the north of 
Calcutta. After hearing a religious drama, c. g. the doings 
of *Sri Krahwa, he would gather his playmates, teach them 
the different parts, and enact it in the fields, under the 
trees* Sometimes he would build" an image of the god 
5lva, and worship it with his companions. At the age of 
six he was well versed in the Pur&was, likewise in the 
'Kamaya^a, the Mahabharata, and the *$rlmad Bh%avata, 
by hearing them from the Kattaks, a class of men who 
preach and read these Purd^as for the enlightenment of 
the uneducated masses all over India. (His knowledge of 




34 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMA1/SIIA T A 

the Pura^as, the MahfibhSrata, the Rfimsty.iwt, and the 
BMgavata must have been in Bengali,* as he never, ac- 
cording to Mozoomdar., who was his friend, knew a word 



"" The pilgrim road to Puri passes through the outskirts 
of the village where he lived, and very often a whole host 
of ascetics and religious men would come and take shelter 
in the Dharmas&la or pilgrim-house, built by the Lilhii 
family, the Zemindar of the village. Rfirnakmh//a used 
to go there very often, talk to them on religious subjects, 
mark their habits, and hear their tales of travel. 

It is the custom in India to gather all the learned pandits 
or professors of the neighbourhood at a funeral ceremony. 
In one of these gatherings in the house of the La ha family, 
a question arose about some intricate points of theology, and 
the professors could not come to a conclusion* The boy 
Rdmaknsh^a went to them and decided It cpickly with his 
simple language, and all present were astonished. (This 
might be taken from any Evangelium infantiae.} 

Before he reached his teens, he was walking in the fields 
one day. The sky was very clear and blue, and he saw 
a flight of white cranes moving along it. The contrast of 
colours was so very beautiful and dazzling to his imagination, 
and produced such thoughts in him, that he fell down in 
a trance. (This would admit of a very natural pathological 
explanation, and may therefore be perfectly true, though it 
would easily lend itself to further poetical expansion.) 

He was the youngest child of a family of three sons and 
two daughters. His eldest brother, R&mkumdr Chattopa- 



LIFE, 35 

dhyaya, was a very learned professor of the old school. He 
had his own school at Calcutta. At the age of sixteen 
RSmakr/shwa, having been invested by his own father with 
the sacred Brdhmanic thread, was taken to this school, but 
what was his disgust to find that after all their high talk on 
being and non-being, on Brahman and Maya, on how the 
soul is liberated by the realisation of Atman, they would : 
never dream of practising these precepts in their own lives, but ; 
run after lust and gold, after name ancl fame. He told his 
brother plainly he would never care for that kind of learning, 
the sole aim of which was to gain a few pieces of silver, or 
a few maimds of rice and vegetables. He yearned to learn I 
something which would raise him above all these, and give \ 
him as a recompense God Himself. From that time he' 
kept aloof from the school. 

The temple of the goddess Kali at Dakshiwcmira, about 
five miles to the north of Calcutta, was established in 1 85 3 A.D. 
It stands on the side of the Ganges, and is one of the finest 
temples Jrx India. The temple deeds were drawn in the 
name of the Guru, or spiritual director of Rani Rfismoni, 
for she being of a lower caste, none of the higher castes 
would come to the temple and take food there if she drew 
the deeds in her own name* The eldest brother of Sii RSma 
knsha was appointed as priest to the temple* The two 
brothers came on the day when the temple was first opened 
and established, but such were the caste prejudices of Rdma- ] 
kmha at that time that he protested vehemently against ! 
his brother's taking service under a *SCidra woman, or one of ' 
the lowest caste, and would not take any cooked food in 

* D 2 



f 



36 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA'/SJWA. 

the temple precincts, because it was forbidden in the .Ytistras. 
So, amidst all the rejoicings of the day, in'which some fifteen 
to twenty thousand people were sumptuously entertained, 
he was the only man who kept his fast. At night lie wont 
to the grocer's close by, took a pice-worth of fried paddy, 
and returned to Calcutta. But after a week his love for 
his brother made him return again, and at his entreaty he 
consented to live there, on condition, however, that he .should 
be allowed to cook his own meals by the side of the Ganges, 
which ^ the holiest place according to the Hindus. A few 
; months afterwards his brother became incapable of ron- 
ducting the services through illness, and requested Rfum- 
k/wha to take charge of the duties. He consented .it 
last, and became a recognised worshipper of the goddess 




as , he could do nothing from 
. ? or did he^r'S anything which he 

not thoroughly believe. He now began to look upon 
the image of the goddess Kill as his mother and the mo 

f ie 



i; ; , . jmiverse. He believed it to be living and breaUnn. 

and taking food out of his hand. After the regular forms of 
worship he would sit there for hours and hours, singing 
hymns and talking and praying to her as a child to his 
mother, till he lost all consciousness of the outward world 
Sometimes he would weep for hours, and would not be 
comforted, because he could not see his mother as perfectly 

as ^ , wished . People became d . v . ded . n thdr . y 

regarding him. Some held the young priest to be mad, and 
some took him to be a grea t l over O f God, and all this 



RAMAKWSHJVAS LIFE. 37 

outward madness as the manifestation of that love. His 
mother* and brothers, thinking that his imagination would 
cairn down when he had a young wife and a family of his 

own to look after, took him to his native village and married 
him to the daughter of Rama Chandra Mukhopildhyfya, who 
was then five years of age, iTrirnat? Saroda Devi or Sara- 
damani Devi by name. It is said when his mother and 
brothers were looking after a suitable bride for him, he 
himself told them that the daughter of such and such a man 
was destined to be joined to him in marriage, and that she 
was endowed with all the qualities of a goddess or Devi, 
and they went and found the bride. 

He used to hold that some women were bom with all the I 
qualities of a Devi, and some with the opposite qualities J 
the Asuri, or the demoniacal. The former would help their | 
husbands in becoming religious, and would never lead them 
to lust and sensuality, and he could distinguish them by 
their mere appearance. A woman, a perfect stranger to 
him, came to see him once at Dakshitfewara many years 
afterwards. She was of a noble family, the wife of a gentle- 
man, and mother of five or six children, yet looked still 
very young and beautiful. Rumakmh/za told his disciples 
at once that she had the qualities of a Devf in her, and he 
would prove it to them. He ordered them to burn some 
incense before her, and taking some flowers, placed them on 
her feet and addressed her as c mother.' And the lady who 
never knew anything before of meditation, or SamSdhi, and \ 
had never seen him before, fell into a deep trance with her 
hands lifted as in the act of blessing. That trance did not 




38 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF R^MAK-R/SIWA. 

leave her for some hours, and he got frightened at the 

thought that her husband would accuse him of some black 

magic. He began, therefore, to pray to his mother Kali 

(the goddess) to bring her back to her senses. By-ami- by 

she came to herself, and when she opened her eyes they 

''were quite red, and she looked as if she were quite drunk. 

"Her attendants had to support her while she got into 

)a carriage, then she drove back home* This* is one of many 

' instances of the same kind (evidently cases of hypnosis). 

Of men he used to tell the same* In his Liter days, when 

crowds of men and boys came to him to learn, he would 

select and point out some who, he said, would realise 

religion in this life, and of the rest he would say ihat they 

must enjoy life a little longer before they would have 

a sincere desire for religion. He used to say, * That wan 

|/who had been an emperor in his former birth, who had 

,1 enjoyed the highest pleasures the world can give, and who 

/ I had seen the vanities of them all, would attain to perfection 

un this life on earth,' 

After his marriage he returned to Calcutta and took upon 
himself the charges of the temple again, but instead of 
toning down, his fervour and devotion increased a thousand- 
fold. His whole soul, as it were, melted into one flood of 
; tears, and he appealed to the goddess to have mercy on 
!him and reveal herself to him. No mother ever shed auch 
1 burning tears over the death-bed of her only child. Crowds 
^assembled round him and tried to console him, when the 
I blowing of the conch-shells proclaimed the death of another 
| day, and he gave vent to his sorrow, saying, * Mother, oh my 



RAMAKR/SHjVA S LIFE, 39 

mother, another day has gone, and still I have not found 
thee/ People thought he was mad, or that he was suffering 

from some acute pain, for how was it possible for them, 
devoted as they were to lust and gold, to name and fame, 
to imagine that a man could love his ....God .or Goddess 
Mother with as much intensity as they loved their wives and 
children ? The son-in-law of Rim EismonI, Babu Mathurd- 
nath, who had always had a love for this young Brdhman, 
took him to the best physicians in Calcutta to get him 
cured of his madness. But all their skill was of no avail 
Only one physician of Dacca told them that this man was 
a great Yogin or ascetic, and that all their pharmacopoeia 
was useless for curing his disease, if indeed it were a disease 
at all. So his friends gave him up as lost. 

Meanwhile he increased in love and devotion day by 
day. One clay as he was feeling his separation from Devt 
very keenly, and thinking of putting an end to himself, as 
he could not bear his loneliness any longer, he lost all 
outward sensation, and saw his mother (Kail) in a vision. 
These visions came to liim again and again, and then he 
became calmer. Sometimes he doubted whether these 
visions were really true, and then he would say, * I would 
believe them true, if such and such a thing happened,' and 
it would invariably happen, even at the very hour he ex- 
pected. For instance, he said one day, 'I could believe 
them true, and not resulting ffom a disease of my brain, 
if the two young daughters of "R&ni Rasmoni, who never 
once came to this temple, would come under the big banyan- 
tree this afternoon, and would speak to me/ though he was 




40 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF KAMAKK/SILVA. 

a perfect stranger to them. And what was his astonishment 
when he saw them standing under the. 'tree a! the r.xact 
hour, and calling him by name, and tellin:.:: him to he 
consoled, for the Mother Kali would surely have merry <>n 
him. These ladies of the Zenana had never eotne t < > a { ml >Iie 
place, especially when young, but somehow or other they 
got a strong desire to .see that temple that \rr\ <uy\ and 
they got permission to go there. 

These visions grew more and more, and hi-; (ranees 
became longer and longer in duration, till every our saw 
it was no longer possible for him to perform his daily 
course of duties. For instance, it is pK'.seii!e<l in the 
6astras that a man should ]>ut a flower over iii:, own head 
and think of himself as the very god or |.;oddcv; he j<, j(oing 
: to worship, and Rdmak/vshwa, as he put the tlo\ver, and 
thought himself as identified with his mother, -would j,!et 
entranced, and would remain in that state for hours. Then 
again, from time to time, he would entirely lose his own 
identity^so much so as to appropriate to himself the oiierinp. 
brought for the goddess. Sometimes for^nin^ to adorn 
the image, he would adorn himself with the flowers. 
MathurSndth at first objected to this, but shortly alter 
wards, it is said, he saw the body of Rfuniik/7hh//a trans- 
figured into that of the god i'iva, and from that day 
forward he looked upon him as God Himself, and 
addressed him always as Father whenever lie spoke to 
jhim. He appointed the nephew of Kanuikmhwi to 
.'conduct the regular services, and left him free lo do 
(' whatever he liked. 



KAMAKJR/SI-WA S LIFE. 4! 

The ardent soul of Rumakr/sh/ia could not remain quiet I 
with these frequent visions,- but ran eagerly to attain per- 

faction and realisation of God in all His different aspects, ; 
He thus began the twelve years of unheard-of tapasya, or 
ascetic exercises. Looking back to these years of self- 
torture in his later days, he said, 'that a great religious 
tornado, as it were, raged within him during these years and 
made everything topsy-turvy.' He had no idea then that 
it lasted for so long a time. He never had a wink of sound 
sleep during these years, could not even dosse, but his eyes 
would remain always open and fixed. He thought some- 
times that he was seriously ill, and holding a looking-glass 
before him, he put his finger within the sockets of the eye, 
that the lids might close, but they would not. In his 
despair he cried out, ' Mother, oh ! my mother, is this the 
result of calling upon thee and believing in thee ? ' And 
anon a sweet voice would come, and a sweeter smiling face, 
and said, * My son ! how could you hope to realise the 
highest truth, if you don't give up the love of your body 
and of your little self? J c A torrent of spiritual light,' he 
said, * would come then, deluging my mind and urging me 
forward, I used to tell my mother, " Mother ! I could 
never learn from these erring men; but I will learn from 
thee, and thee alone," and the same voice would say, " Yea, 
my son I " ? I did not once/ he continued, c look to the 
preservation of my body. My hair grew till it became 
matted, and I had no idea of it. My nephew, Hr/daya, 
used to bring me some food daily, and some days succeeded 
and some days did not succeed in forcing a few mouthfuls 



42 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA'/SJLVA, 



Ganges, 
rubbish 



down my throat, though I had no idea of it. 

I used to go to the closet of the servants arid SUVCJUTS and 

' clean it with my own hands, and prayi.-d, u Mothrr ! drstroy 

in me all idea that I am great, and that I am a Br.lhma.iu 

'and that they are low and pariahs, for who an- tlu-y but 

Thou in so many forms ? " ' 

* Sometimes/ he said, C I would sit by thr 
with some gold and silver coins and a hraji of 
by my side, and taking some coins in my ru.;hl ham] 
and a handful of rubbish in the left, I would tell my 
soul, "My soul! this is what the world calls numey, 
impressed with the queen's face. It has thr powrr of 
bringing you rice and vegetables, of feeding the [>uor f of 
building houses, and doing all that the world oils great! 
but it can never help thec to realise the ever existent 
knowledge and bliss, the Brahman, Regard it, therefore, 
as rubbish." Then mixing the coins and the rubbish in 
my hands, while repeating all the time, "money is rubbish, 
money is rubbish," I lost all perception of difference 
between the two in my mind, and threw them both into the 
Ganges. No wonder people took me for mad.' About 
this time Mathur&nStha, who was very devoted to him, one 
day put a shawl fringed with gold round him, which cost 
about 1,500 Rs. At first he seemed to be pleased with it 
But what was the astonishment of ' Mathurftndtha when 
jthe next moment R&makmh^a threw it on the ground* 
| trampled and spat on it, and began to cleanse the floor of 
I the room with it, saying, 'It increases vanity, but it can 
j never help to realise the ever-existent knowledge and bliss 




RAMAK-RZSHtfA S LIFE. 43 

(Sat-kit-dnanda), and therefore Is no better than a piece of 
torn rag.' * 

c About this time,' he said, * I felt such a burning 
sensation all over my body ; I used to stand in the waters 
of the Ganges, with my body immersed up to the shoulders 
and a wet towel over my head all through the day, for it 
was insufferable* Then a Brahman lady came and cured 
me of it in three days. She smeared my body with sandal- 
wood paste and put garlands on my neck, and the pain, 
vanished in three days/ 

Now this Bjahm^Jady^was, we are told, an extraordinary 
Bengali woman* She was versed in the philosophies and 
mythologies of India, and could recite book after book 
from memory. She could hold her ground in argument 
with the best pandits of the country. Tall and graceful, 
she combined in herself all the physical and intellectual 
qualities that would raise any man or woman high above 
ordinary mortals. She had a fine voice and was well 
versed in music. She had given up the world, practised 
Yoga (ascetics), attained to some wonderful Yogic powers, j 
and was roaming all over India in the red garb of a 
Sa^mjjisin. Nobody knew anything of her birth or family 
oFTname even, and nobody could induce her to say any- 
thing about them. She was as if some goddess had come 
to this earth to help men to perfection, moved by the 
sorrows and sins of this wicked world. She seemed to 
have known full well that she was destined to help three 
particular personages, who were very advanced in attaining 
perfection, Rtmaknsh^a had been informed by his divine 




1: 



44 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF KAMAKtf/SHMV. 

mother that she would corne and teach him the certain 

way to attain perfection. He recognised her at once, and 

she recognised him and said, ' I have found out the other 

_ two, and have been searching for thee for a long, long time, 

' and to-day I have found thee/ Up to this time Rama- 

,, Wslwza had not found a single soul who coulcl understand 

his superhuman devotion and perfect purity, and the 

s arrival of this woman was therefore a great relief to him. 

His devotion and love knew no bounds. 

All people were astonished at the wonderful learning of 
this 'Brahman lady, but they could not understand how she 
^ could sympathise and place even above herself this half- 
'Crazed Ramakrfehaza they took him for. To prove that h<* 
'|was not mad, the lady mentioned some Vaish//ava M-riptuirs, 
jgot the manuscripts from some learned pandits, and quoted 
jpassage after passage, showing that all these physical 

''^SS^^ ardent lover of God. " 'it'" was 

recorded in these books that all these states physical and 
mental -did happen to the great religious reformer of Hengal, 
*$$ ^Chaitanja, four hundred years back, and the remedies 
were given, too, by which he overcame them. For instance, 
tfesJH^ as if all the body were in flames,' 

from which SA Mmaknsh^a was suffering at the time, was 
mentioned in these Vaish^ava scriptures as having happened 
to the shepherdess of Braja, to the stainless SrtJI&gfcg, the 
beloved of K>wha, centuries before, and again" hTlatcr 
times to 5Chsit^ja, whm both ^qf .them felt deeply the 
Ipain of separation from their beloved (Godl In both 



Ihese cases relief came by smearing the body with sandal- 



RAMAKR/SHZVA S LIFE. 45 

wood paste and wearing garlands of sweet-scented flowers. 
The lady held it4:o be no real disease, but a state of physical 
disturbance, which would come to all who arrive at that 

"'" '"' ' - " ' ' ,,.*, '4* 

stage of Bhakti, or love of God. She applied the same 
remedies for three days, and the trouble passed away. 

At^another _time during her stay he suffered much, from 
an insatiable appetite. However much he might eat, the 
appetite was there, preying upon him as if he had taken 
nothing. The Bnthman lady assured him that the same 
had happened to Chaitanya and other Yogins, and ordered 
all sorts of dishes to be put into his room on every side, 
day and night. This practice was continued for a few 
days, and the sight of so much food gradually acted upon 
the mind, and the false sensation passed away. 

The lady lived there for some years, and made her friend / 
practise all the different sorts of Yoga which make a man ; 
complete master of his body and mind, render his passions 
subservient to his reason, and produce a thorough and 
deep concentration of thought, and, above all, the fearless/ 
and unbiased disposition which is essential to everybody' 
who desires to know the truth and the whole truth. 

About this time Edmakrahwa began to practise Yoga, or? ; 
the physical discipline, which makes the body strong and! 
enduring. lie began by regulating his breath, and wentf 
through the eight-fold methods prescribed by Pata^ali ' 
His teachers were astonished at the short time in which he 
came to the realisation and attained the end of all these 
ascetic practices. One night, when he was practising Yoga, I 
he was very much frightened at two strings of clotted blood \j 




THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA'/SiiA'A. 

coming out of his mouth. The temple services were then 
in the ha ids of one of his cousins, Hakdh;"ui, a man of 
great learning and purity and possessed of certain psyrhiral 
powers, such asV&k-siddhi, power of speech. A few days 
before, RSmaknsh/za had offended him by pointing out to 
him certain defects of his character, so much so that his 

., cousin cursed him and said that blood should conic out of 
his mouth* So Ramakr/shwa was frightened, but a great 
Yogin who was living there at the time came to his help* 
and after' inquiring into his case assured him that it was 
very good that die blood had come out that way, It was 
because be had to teach many men, and to do good to them, 
that he wa$ not permitted to enter into that Hamadhi (trawc) 
from which, nobody returns, He explained to him that 
when a njan has attained to the perfection of this Yoga his 

-blood rushes to his bmin, and he becomes absorbed, in 
Samdhi, perceives his identity,, with the Supreme Self, and 
peverjeturns any more to speak of his religious experiences 
|t(L,othei:s, Only a few returned, namely, those who by the 
?will of God were born to be the great teachers of mankind, 
Irr their case the blood rushes to the brain, and they feel 
the identity for some time, but after, .that the blood flows 
out again and they are able to teach. 

By^ this time, Mmaknslua had learnt all that the 
Brahman lad^ could teach, but he was still hankering after 
'higher truths, when a^<?;Sfo!n (a true philosopher) came 
and initiated him into w the truths of the Vcdinta. This 
,was a Samnyfsm named Totd-puri, tall, muscular, and 
powerful. He had taken the vow of the order 'from his 



LIFE, 47 

very boyhood, and after a hard struggle had succeeded in 

realising the highest truths of the Vedanta. He wore no \ //>r 

clothes whatever, and never rested under a roof. When the ^ < ? i 

doors of palaces might have been opened to him if he had 

only wished, he passed the night always under a tree or the 

blue canopy of the heavens, even in winter and in the rainy 

season, never remaining more than three days in any place, 

and never caring to ask for food from anybody. Free as 

the wind, he was roaming all over the country, teaching and ; 

exhorting wherever he could find, a sincere soul, and helping i 

them to attain'to that perfection which he had himself! 

reached. He was a living illustration of the truth that : 

Ved&nta, when properly realised, can become a practical 

rule of life. On seeing Sri RSmakr/sha sitting on the y' 

border of the Ganges, he at once recognised in him a great 

Yogin and a perfectly-prepared ground for the reception of 

the seeds of the highest truths of religion. He addressed 

him at once and said, My son ! do you want to learn the 

way to perfect freedom ? Come, then, and I will teach It to 

you/ RdmaWsh#a, who never did anything without first 

asking his mother (the goddess K&ll), said that he did not 

know what he should do, but he would go and ask his 

mother. He came back in a few minutes and told the 

Sawmyasin that he was ready. TotS-puri made /him ^ take \ 

the vow, and told him how he was to meditate ind how to i . 

realise unity. After three, days of jgractice ,he attained | ' 

to the highest, the NirvJkalpa stage of SanaMhi, where!, 

there is no longer any perception of the subjjbct.ox of the! 

object. The Sawmyasin was perfectly bewildered at the| 



1 



48 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA7S1WA. 

rapid progress of his protege, and said, c My hoy ! what 
I realised after forty years of hard struggle, you have 
: arrived at in three days. I dare not call you my disciple ; 
henceforth I will address you as my friend,* And such 
was the love of this holy man for Svt Rfimakr/sb/a that he 
stayed with him for eleven months, and, in his turn learnt 
many things from his own disciple. There is a story told 
of the SawnySsiru He always kept a fire and regarded it 
as very holy. One day as he was sitting by this fire and 
talking to Sri RSmafcralwa, a man came and lighted his 
pipe out of the same fire. The Sawnyfusin felt enraged at 
this sacrilege, when a gentle scolding came from his disciple, 
who said, ' Is this the way that you look upon everything as 
Brahman? Is not the man himself Brahman as well as the 

fire? Whatjs highland what is low in the sight of a 

^fl^SJ* ' ^ e Sawnyilsin was brought to his senses, and 
said, * Brother, you are right. From this day forth you shall 
never find me angry again/' and he kept bis worci He 
could never understand, however, RSmakr/shwa'a love for 

his Ms,th er (tjjjg JBftd4eK.Kat). He would talk of it as 

iere superstition, and ridicule it, when Ramakr/ah/w 
[made him understand that in the Absolute there is no 
|thou, nor I, nor God, nay, that it is beyond all speech or 
thought. As long, however, as there is the least grain of 
relativity left, the Absolute is within thought and" npeech 
and within the limits of the mind, which mind i* sub- 
servient to the universal mind and consciousness ; mid this 
omniscient, universal consciousness was to him hi* mother 
and God. 



LIFE. 49 

After the departure of Tot&~puri, Rtmakr/sh^a himself 
tried to remain always in union with the absolute Brahman 
and in the Nirvikalpa state. Looking back to this period 
of his life in his later days, he said, c I remained for six 
months in that state of perfect union which people seldom 
reach, and if they reach it, they cannot return to their 
individual consciousness again. Their bodies and minds * 
could never bear it. But this rny body is made up of* 
Sattwa particles (pure elements) and can bear much strain. 
In those days I was quite unconscious of the outer world. 
My body would have died for want of nourishment,, 
but for a Sddhu (an advanced religious ascetic) who came 
at that time and stayed there for three days for my sake. < 
He recognised my state of Sam&dhi, and took much in- p 
terest to preserve this body, while I was unconscious of its : 
very existence. He used to bring some food every day, and 
when all methods failed to restore sensation or conscious- *' 
ness to this body of mine, he would even strike me with *' 
a heavy club, so that the pain might bring me back to con- ? 
sciousness. Sometimes he succeeded in awakening a sort " 
of partial consciousness in me, and he would immediately * 
force down one or two mouthfuls of food before I was lost * 
again in deep Samddhi. Some days when he could not *' 
produce any response, even after a severe beating, he was * 
very sorrowful' After six months the body gave way under 
these severe irregularities, and Ramakr/sh^a was laid up' 
with dysentery. This disease, he said, did much in bringing 
him back to consciousness, slowly and gently, in a month 
or two. When the native physicians had cured him, his 

* K 






\' ' 5 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA/SHM,. 

| ," ' deep religious zeal took another turn. He began to prac- 

' li?l a , nd , realise thc v 'iishava ideal of love for Clod. This 

l , ' love > according to the Vaishwavas, becomes manifested 

| ' practically in any one of the following relations thc re- 

r r * ' lation of a servant, to. his master, of a friend to his fnVnd. 

. of a ? h J d , to his parents, or vice versa, ami a wife to her 
husband. The highest point of love is reached when thc 
h an soul can lve his God as a wife loves her husband, 
. ., jThe shepherdess of Braja had 'this sort of love towards 

{the divine Krcsha, and there was no thought of any carnal 
Relationship. No man, they say, can understand this love 
of Sri Rddha and Sri KrMa until he is perfectly free 
from all carnal desires. They even prohibit ordinary men 
to read the books which treat of this love of Kfulha and 
Krh*^ because they are still under the sway of passion. 
^?k?? sh *a injDrderJo realise this love, dressed himself 
i LJ2aftl's..attire__ for several days, thought of himself as 
S2SS> andjtJMt ; succeeded in gaining his ideal. He 
saw the beautiful form of "SA Kmha in a trance, and was 
SSS" Aft er having thus devoted himself to Vaish- 
avism, he practised in turn many other religions prevalent 
m India, even Mohammedanism, always arriving at an 
understanding of their highest purposes in an incredibly 
short .time. Whenever he wished to learn and practise the 
doctrines of any faith, he always found a good and learned 
| man of that faith coming to him and advising him how to 
do it. This is one out of many wonderful things that 
happened in his life. They may be explained 3S happy 
..coincidences, which is much the same as to say they were 



RAMAK.R/SEUVA S LIFE. 



wonderful, and cannot be explained. To give another such 
instance. At the* time when he perceived the desire of 
practising and realising religion, he was sitting one day 
under the big banyan-tree (called the Pancha-vatl, or the 
place of the five banyans) to the north of the temple. He 
found the place very secluded and fit for carrying out his 
religious practices without disturbance. He was thinking 
of building a little thatched hut in the place, when the tide 
came up the river and brought along with it all that was 
necessary to make a little hut the bamboos, the sticks, the 
rope and all and dropped them just a few yards off the 
place where he was sitting. He took the materials joyfully, 
and with the help of the gardener built his little hut, where 
he practised his Yoga. 

In his later days he was thinking of practising the tenets 
of Christianity. He had seen Jesus in a vision, and for 
three days he could think of nothing and speak of nothing ; 
but Jesus and His love. There was this peculiarity in all 
his visions that he always saw them outside himself, but 
when they vanished they seemed to have entered into him. 
This was true of Rama, of *Siva, of Ml!, of Knsh^a, of 
Jesus, and of every other god or goddess or prophet. 

After all these visions and his realisations of different 
religions he came to the conclusion that all religions are 

, . - .. " w. "< . i 

true, though each of them takes account of one aspect only 
of the Akha^a Sa^Wid&nanda, i.e. the undivided and 
eternal existence, knowledge, and bliss. Each of these} 
different religions seemed to him a way to arrive at that* 

One. ; 

* 

E 2 



If i 



52 THE LIFE AND SAVINGS OF RAMAKA7SII.YA. 

During all these years he forgot entirely that, he had 

been married, which was not unnatural r for one who had 

lost all idea of the existence even of his own body. The 

girl had in the meantime .attained the n^e of seventeen or 

eighteen. She had heard rumours that her husband had 

become mad, and was in deep grief. Then again she heard 

that he had become a great religious man. She determined 

therefore to find him and to learn her fate from himself. 

Having obtained permission from her mother, she walked 

all the way, about thirty or forty miles, to the I )ukshi//e.v- 

vara temple. Ilamakr/slma received her very kindlv, but 

told her that the old Rfunakrzsh;/a was dead, and that the 

.new one could never look upon any woman as his wife, I le 

'said that even then he saw his mother, the Goddess Kali, 

in her, and however much he might try he could never see 

anything else. He addressed her as his mother, worshipped 

her with flowers and incense, asked her blessings, as 

a child does from his mother, and then becnim.: lost in 

? a deep trance. The wife, who was fully worthy of such 

KJi ero > to !. d J lim she *tcd nothing from him as her 

| ^band, but that he would teach her how to realise God, 

land allow her to remain near him and cook his meals and 

'do what little she could for his health and comfort. From 

ithat day forward she lived within the temple compound, 

and began to practise whatever her husband taught her. 

Mathuranatha offered her the sum of 10,000 Rs., hut she 

declined, saying that her husband had attained perfection 

by renouncing gold and all pleasures, and she did not care 

for any, as sheros determined to follow him. She is. living 



RAMAKLR7SHJ7A S LIFE. 



53 



still, revered by all for her purity and strength of character, 
helping others of lier sex to religion and perfection, looking ' 
upon her husband as an incarnation of God Himself, and 
trying to forward the work her husband began. 

Though Ramak/Tshflza had no proper education, he had 
such a wonderful memory that he never forgot what he 
once heard. In his later days he had a desire to hear the 
AdhyStma Rmdyaa, and he requested one of his disciples 
to read it to him in the original verse. As he was hearing, 
another of his disciples came and asked him whether he 
was understanding the original verses. He said he had 
heard the book before, with an explanation of it, and there- 
fore knew all of it, but he wanted to hear it again because 
the book was so beautiful, and he repeated at once the 
purport of some of the verses which followed, and which 
were about to be read. 

He had attained to great Yoga powers, but he never'* 
cared to display these marvellous powers to anybody. He / 
told his disciples that all these powers would come to 
a man as he advanced, but he warned them never to take 
any heed of the opinions of men. They had not to please 
men, but to try to attain the highest perfection, that is, 
unity with Brahman* The power of working miracles was \ 
rather a hindrance in the way to perfection, inasmuch as 
it diverted the attention of man from, his highest goal 
But persons who went to him "have found abundant proofs 
of his possessing such powers as thought-reading, predict- 
ing future events, seeing things at a distance, and healing 
a disease by simply willing. The one great power of 





54 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK/SlfA'A. 

which he made most use, and which was by far the most 
wonderful, was that he was able to change a man's thoughts 
by simply touching his body. In some this loach produced 
immediate Samfidhi, in which they saw visions erf gods and 
goddesses, and lost for some hours all sensation of the out- 
ward world. In others it produced no outward changes, 
but they felt that their thoughts had received a new direc- 
tion and a new impetus, by which they could easily travel in 
the path of progress in religion. The carnally minded, for 
instance, would feel that their thoughts never ran after 
carnal pleasures afterwards, the miser would find that he 
did not love his gold, and so on, 

About that time Mathurfmiltha and his family wont on 
a pilgrimage, and took Ramakr/slm with them. They 
visited all the sacred places of the Hindus as far as IWn- 
dabana, and Rmaksh#a took the opportunity not only 
of seeing the temples, but of forming aajujuni.-iwvs with 
all the religious men, and with the Sawny-lsias who 
were living in these places, such as the famous Tailanga 
'Swamin of Benares and Gangit MM of Br/ndahana. These 
Sadhus assigned to him a very high position, and regarded 
him not only as a Brfthma#vfmin, but as a great religious 
'teacher (Ach^rya), nay, as an incarnation of God Himself* 
,'At Bnndabana he was so much struck by the natural 
scenery and associations of the place, that he nearly made 
up his mind to reside there for ever. But the memory of 
his old mother made him return home. On his way back 
he was so much struck by the poverty of a village near 
Vaidyanfith, that he wept bitterly, and would not go from 



RAMAKK/SHNAS LIFE. 55 

the place without seeing them happy. So Mathurdndtha 
fed the whole vill&ge for several days, gave proper clothing 
and some money to each of the villagers, and departed 
with Rdmakr/sha contented. 

*When the rose is blown, and sheds its fragrance all 
around, the bees come of themselves. The bees seek the 
full-blown rose, and not the rose the bees.' This saying of 
Sri Rdmaknshwa has been verified often and often In his 
own life. Numbers of earnest men, of all sects and creeds, 
began to flock to him to receive instruction and to drink 
the waters of life. From day-dawn to night-fall he had :; 
no leisure to eat or drink, so engaged was he in teaching, j 
exhorting, and ministering to the wants of these hungry / 
and thirsty millions. Men possessed of wonderful Yoga 
powers and great learning came to learn from this illiterate 
Paramahawsa of Dakshie^vara, and in their turn ac- 
knowledged him as their spiritual director (Guru), touched 
as they were by the wonderful purity, the childlike sim- 
plicity, the perfect unselfishness, and by the simple language 
in which he propounded the highest truths of religion and 
philosophy. But the people of Calcutta knew him not I 
till Babu Keshub Chunder Sen went to him and wrote (; 

about him. Rtmakr/srma's interview with Keshub was 

brought about in this way. It was in the year 1866 that 
Keshub was leading a life of prayer and seclusion in a 
garden house at Belgharia, about two miles from the 
temple of Dakshwejvara. Rdmakr/sh^a heard of him, and 
went to see him. Keshub was so much impressed with 
the simple words, full of the highest knowledge, the 



J 



I 



i 

I"; 



56 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK/C/SI uV.V 

wonderful love of God, and the deep traruvs of .Sri R.hna- 
krfeha, that he began to come often rind oftrn to him. 
He would sit for hours at the feet of kamakv7;4i/;a and 
listen with rapture to the wonderful sayings on rrli^'on 
of that wonderful man. From time to tnm- K:im;ikr/sh//a 
would be lost in a deep Samadlu, and Kohub would 
gently touch his feet that he mi-lit thi'ivby I..- purified. 
Sometimes he would invite the Paramaha///:,,) to his House, 
or would take him in a boat and j micro I a few miles 
up and down the river, lie then usnl i<> question him 
.on some points of religion to clear rnvny his own doubts. 
A strong and deep love grew up between ihr two, and 
Keshub's whole life became changed, till, a (rw years 
later, he proclaimed his views of religion as the New 
; Dispensation, which was nothing but a partial representa- 
tion of the truths which Rfimalw/sh//a had tau n ht for 
\ a long time. 

A brief sketch of the teachings of Ramakmb^a, and 

a few of his sayings, which Kcshub published, wiTi/simi- 

cient to rouse a wide interest in the I'aramahnwsa, an<l 

| numbers of highly-educated men of Calcutta and women 

I of noble family began to pour in to receive instruction 

! from this wonderful Yogin, Mmakmhfia began to teach 

them and talk to them from mom til! evening, At night 

too, he had no rest, for some of the more earnest would 

remain and spend the night with Mm. He then forgot 

his sleep, and talked to them incessantly about Bhakti 

(devotion) or G&* (knowledge) and his own experiences 

and how he arrived at them. Though this incemnt labour 



RAMAK^TSHJVA S LIFE. 57 

began at last to tell upon him, yet he would not rest. In 
the meanwhile the crowds of men and women began to 
increase daily, and he went on as before. When pressed 
to take res^ he would say, * I would suffer willingly ail 
sorts of bodily pains, and death also, a hundred thousand 
times, if by so doing I could bring one single soul to 
freedom and salvation.' 

In the beginning of 1885 he suffered from what is known 
as *th6 clergyman's throat/ which by-and-by developed 
into cancer, He was removed to Calcutta, and the best 
physicians were engaged, such as Babu Mohindra Lai 
Sircar, &c,, who advised him to keep the strictest silence ; 
but the advice was to no effect. Crowds of men and 
, women gathered wherever he went, and waited patiently 
to hear a single word from his mouth, and he, out of com- 
passion for them, would not remain silent Many a time 
he would be lost in a Sam&dhi, losing all consciousness 
of his body and of his disease, and coming back he would 
talk incessantly as before. Even when the passage of his 
throat became so constricted that he could not swallow 
even liquid food, he would never stop his efforts. He was 
undaunted and remained as cheerful as ever, till on August / 
16, 1886, at 10 o'clock in the night, he entered into j 

SamMhi, from which he never returned. His disciples I 

,**""*"* -* ,- - ... , - ***-**.... F > 

took it at first to be an ordinary Sam&dhi, such as he ; 
used to have every day, during which the best doctors / 
even could not find any pulsation or beating of the heart ; | 
but, alas, they were mistaken. 

Rdmakr/shwa felt such an aversion to gold and silver 




i 



58 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK AVSHA'A. 

that he could not even touch them, and a simple touch, 
even when he was asleep, would produee physical con- 
tortions. His breath would stop, and his lingers would 
become contorted and paralysed for a few minutes, even 

: when the metal had been removed. In his later days he 
could touch no metals, not even iron, 

He was a wonderful mixture of God and man. In his 
ordinary state he would talk of himself as servant of all 
men and women. He looked upon them all as Ckki He 
himself would never be addressed as Guru, or teacher, 
Never would he claim for himself any high position. lie 
would touch the ground reverently where his disciples had 
trodden. But every now and then strange fits of God- 
f?^12S?.Ss came t upon him. He then became changed 
into a different being altogether, He then spoke of himself 
^as being able to do and know everything lie spoke as 
j if he had the power of giving anything to anybody. H C 
I would speak of himself as the same soul that had heai 
jborn before as Mma, as K>/sha, as Jesus, or as Huddha, 
'born again as Rfimakr&lwia, He told Mathurtin&tha, long 
before anybody knew him, that he had many disciples who 
would come to him shortly, and he knew all of them, He 
said that he was free from all eternity, and the practices 
and struggles after religion which he went through were 
^only meant to show the people the way to salvation. He 
had done all for them alone, He would say lie was a 
jNitya-mukta, or eternally free, and an incarnation of God 
iHzmself. 'The fruit of the pumpkin/ he said, "comes out 
first, and then the flowers ; so it is with the 



REMARKS ON RAMAK-RlSI-LtfA S LIFE. 59 

or those who are free from all eternity, but come down 
for the good of others.' 

During the state of Samitdhi he was totally unconscious 
of himself and of the outward world. At one time he 
fell down upon a piece of live coal during this state. It 
burned deep into his flesh, but he did not know for hours, 
and the surgeon had to come in to extract the coal, when 
he came back to consciousness, and felt the wound. 

At another time his foot slipped, and he broke his hand. 
The surgeon came and bound it up and advised him not 
to use it till it was quite cured. But it was impossible. 
As soon as anybody spoke anything of religion or on God, 
he went straight into the state of Samddhi, and his hands 
became straight and stiff, and the injured hand had to be 
bound up again. This went on for months, and it took 
six months or more to cure that simple fracture. 

Mathur&nStha proposed again and again to hand over 
to him the temple of Dakshiwe^vara and a property yielding 
an income of 25,000 Rs. a year, but he declined the pro-\ 
posal, and added that he would have to fly away from the I 
place if Mathur&ndtha pressed his gift upon him. At ^ 
another time another gentleman made an offer of some I 
25,000 Rs. to him, with the same result. 

Bemarks on BtaiakmlMa's Life. 

This is all that VivekCxnanda sent me when I had asked 
him to write down whatever he could gather from his own 
memory and from communication with Rdmaknsham's other 
disciples. I had warned him repeatedly not to send me 




t' I 

Jrf 



/ 



6O THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

mere fables, such as I had read about his Guru in several 
Indian periodicals, and I believe he fully*understood what 
I meant. Yet we can hardly fail to see the first beginnings 
of the ravages which the Dialogic Process works even in the 
first generation. Given his own veneration for his departed 
master, there is a natural unwillingness, nay, an incapability, 
to believe or to repeat anything that might place his master 
in an unfavourable light. Besides, his master was dead when 
these records were written, and the de mortuis nihil nisi 
^bonum is deeply engraved in every human heart. What is 
believed and told by everybody in a small village, chiefly by 
his friends and admirers, is not likely to be contradicted ; 
and if once a man is looked upon as different from others, as 
/possessed of superhuman and miraculous powers, everybody 
j has something new to add in confirmation of what everybody 
fis ready to believe, while a doubt or a denial is treated as 
a sign of unkindness, possibly of envy or malice. The story, 
for instance, of the Brihmja mi kd who was sent as a 



messenger and teacher to R&maknshwa, will sound to us 

far from probable. But when I first heard of it, this lady 

was represented as a kind of goddess who met her pupil in 

a forest and instructed him, like another Sarasvatl, in all 

* the Vedas, Puriteas, and philosophies. The difficulty that 

; had to be solved by this heavenly apparition was, no doubt, 

J the fact that R^makr/shzza -had never received a proper 

I classical education, and yet spoke with authority about the 

| ancient literature and religion of his countrymen, The 

fact that he was ignorant of Sanskrit, nay, that he did not 

know a single word of the sacred language of India, is 



MOZOOMDAR'S JUDGEMENT, * 61 

denied by nobody, and has been distinctly asserted by one 
of his great adftrirers, the Rev. P. C, Mozoomdar. Of 
course he knew Bengali, and a man who speaks BengS.li 
can guess the meaning of Sanskrit as an Italian may guess 
the meaning of Latin, Some of the classical Sanskrit texts 
exist in Bengali translations, and may have given him all 
the information which he wanted for his own purposes, to 
say nothing of his constant intercourse with learned men 
who would have warned him against mistakes and answered 
any question he chose to ask. Thus the Dea ex machina 
was really not wanted* If this Br&hman lady was called a 
goddess, we must remember that Devi is not much more 
than a title of honour given to high-born and illustrious 
ladies, nay, that an exceptionally well-informed and en- 
lightened lady might well have been spoken of as an 
incarnation of the goddess Sarasvati. In India the distance 
between deity and humanity is very small ; gods are believed 
to become men, and men gods, without much ado about it. 

Mossoomdar's Judgement. 

Fortunately in our case we have the testimony not only 
of VivcHnanda, who, as a devoted disciple of Mmaknsrma, 
might be suspected of partiality, but^fc baY^^XSSLiKW^ 
pendent witnesses, some favourable, others unfavourable. 
Mozoomdar must be counted as a favourable witness. He 
stands aloof from the propaganda carried on by Rdmaknshwa's 
disciples, but he speaks of him in the highest terms. In 
a letter which he addressed to me in September, 1895, he 
wrote : ' Both in Keshub's Life and Teachings, and in the 



62 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF UAMAKAtfSn*VA. 



old Theistic Review, I have frankly and warmly expressed 
my estimate of that saintly man and our obligations to him. 
But there was another side of his character, which of course 
one could not take up, because it was not edifying/ Here 
we see another ingredient of the Dialogic Process. 

B&maknah;w y s Language* 

'His speech at times was, abominably filthy. For all that, 
he was, as you say, a real Mahatmah, and I would not with- 

* ! draw a single word 1 wrote in his praise, Rfmiakr/sh/ia was 
'' not in the least a Vcddntist, except that every Hindu uncon- 

sciously imbibes from the atmosphere around some amount 

* of Vedantism, which is the philosophical backbone of every 

* national cult He did not know a word of 'Sanskrit, and 
'"" it is doubtful whether he knew enough Beng&li* His 
* spiritual wisdom was the ^result of genius and practical 



There is a ring of truth and impartiality about this, and 
there is no sign of jealousy, which often breaks out, even 

in India, among religious reformers and their followers, 
As to his^Mj^bnguage, we ...... must be prepared for much 

pkmjjgieaking ...... mpng^O^jo^^Qgs- In a country where 

certain classes of men are allowed to walk about in public 
\ places stark naked, language too is not likely to veil what 
with us requires to be veiled. There is, however, a great 
difference between what is filthy and what is meant to be 
filthy. I doubt whether the charge of intentional filthiness 
or obscenity, which has been brought against writers like 
Zola, could be brought, or has ever been brought, against 



'R^MAKRISHNAS LANGUAGE. 63 

RSmakmh^a. It is quite true that Hindus who belong 
socially to the higher classes, though not necessarily Bdhmans 
by birth, would be more careful in their expressions. We 
seldom find any blemishes of that kind in the writings of 
Rammohim Roy, Keshub Chunder Sen, and their friends. 
But a certain directness of speech which would be most 
offensive in England is evidently not regarded in that light 
in India, and every scholar knows that many of their classical 
poems, nay, even their Sacred Writings, contain passages 
which simply do not admit of translation into English. In 
the three centuries (mtaka) of Bhartnhari, treating of worldly 
wisdom, love, and passionlessness, the second, that of love, 
has generally been left out in English translations. But 
the spirit of that *Sr/wgara-iktaka is by no means the same 
as that of Zola's novels. On the contrary, the object of 
the poet is to warn people against voluptuousness, not 
as something in itself criminal, which has never been an 
Indian view, but as a hindrance in obtaining that serenity 
of mind without which the highest objects of life, dis- 
passionateness, serenity, and clear-sightedness can never 
be obtained. A most useful edition of all the three 6atakas 
has lately been published by Purohit Gopi Nath, M.A., 
Bombay, 1896, 

It should not be forgotten that in Homer, in Shakespeare, 
nay, even in the Bible, there are passages against which our 

""^n**** 

modern taste revolts, yet we object to Bowdlerised editions, 
because the indecencies are never of an intentional cha- 
racter, and would seem to have been so, if they were now 
removed by us. 



V 



' 



64 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 



's Wife. . 



Another charge which Moxoomdar seems to consider as 

proved against Rdmakr/sh^a is what he calls his almost 

barbarous treatment of his wife. What he means is evi- 

dently that he forgot or neglected her till she was seventeen 

years of age. But this can hardly be called barbarous in 

India, where it is a recognised custom that a girl of five years 

of age, as his wife was when he married her, should remain 

at her parents' house for years before she migrated to the 

house of her husband and his parents. And that a man 

in a state such as R&makr/srma is described to have been in 

should decline to Hye maritalement, is again by no means 

unusual in Eastern, nay, in Western countries also, 

, "Vivekananda told us that when at the age of seventeen^ 

j his wife went to find him, he received her with real kind* 

| ness, and that she was quite satisfied to live with him 

j on his own terms, if he would only enlighten her mind and 

j make her to see and to serve God. Such a relationship is 

|by no means without a precedent, and cannot be called 

) barbarous, for wknti non fit injuria. Strange to say, 1 

j received not many days ago a letter^ from an American lady 

who had gone to visit R&rnaknsrma's widow, Mrs. S. C, 

Ole Bull, the widow of the famous violin player, and 

deeply interested in the religious movements in India. 

On July n, 1898, she writes from SAr&gpx in Kashmir; 

'We were the first foreigners who were allowed to see 

Saraja-devf^ the widow of Rdraaksha. She called us 

* Ker children, and saying that our visit to her was of the 






RAMAIISHJVA J S WIFE. 65 

Lord, she felt no strangeness in being with us. When 
asked to define thfe obedience to a Guru, who in her case 
was her husband, she replied to the effect that when one 
had chosen a Guru or teacher, one should listen to and 
obey all his directions for spiritual advancement, but in 
things temporal one could most truly serve a Guru by 
using one's own best discernment, even if at times it were 
not in agreement with suggestions given. 

'When she gladly gave her husband, to whom she had 
been united by child-marriage, her assent that he should 
lead a Sawny&sin's life, she gained his intimate friendship, 
and became his disciple, receiving daily instruction. During 
the years qf her life with him she was his adviser, praying 
earnestly for such purity of motive that she might never 
fail him. She had also taken the vow of poverty and v 
chastity, and in renouncing the natural joys of a mother, 
she became with him the spiritual parent of many children/ 

It is strange that a man of Mozoomdar's knowledge and 
experience should have considered the resolve of Rlma- 
knshwa's wife to live with him as a Saawnydsin! as bar- 1 
barons treatment. She herself evidently did not think so, I 
nor have I heard of any other cruelties on the part of her f 
husband. If she was satisfied with her life, who has any f 
right to complain ; and is love between husband and wife \f 
really impossible without the procreation of children ? We ^ * 
must learn to believe in Hindu honesty, however incredulous 
we might justly be on such matters in our own country. 
Anyhow, I know of no one else who has taken offence 
at Rfonakmhwa's 





66 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK/e/SHJVA, 



's InfLnence on 



Chtmder Sen, 

A more painful misunderstanding has arisen with regard 
to the exact relationship between RSmakr/slwa and Keshub 
Chunder Sen. A disciple may mean many things, but 
Keshub Chtmder Sen was never chary in giving credit 
where credit was due, and he was the last man to withhold 
the name of master and teacher from Rfimakr/sh#a or any 
one else from whom he had received inspiration, encourage- 
ment, or instruction. 'Whoever he may be/ he writes, 
' I desire to learn from him. If I see an ordinary minstrel, 
I love to learn at his feet. If an ascetic comes, I consider 
that a lac of rupees has come to my house. I learn much 
by hearing his hymns. ... I can clearly perceive that when- 
ever a saint takes leave of me he pours into my heart his 
virtues. To some extent I become like him -lam a born 
disciple? On the other hand, no one repudiated the title of 
Master or Guru more emphatically than Rfimakrishwa. A 
relative of Keshub Chunder Sen, however, who evidently 
completelymisapprehended what was implied by the influence 
which I said that Rdmaknsha had exercised on Keshub 
Chunder Sen, Mozoomdar, and others as his disciples, is 
very anxious to establish the priority of Keshub Chunder 
Sen, as Jf there could be priority in philosophical or religious 
truth. c It was Keshub Chunder/ he tells us, * who brought 
Ramaknstwa out of obscurity.' That may be so, but how 
often have disciples been instrumental in bringing out their 
: master? He then continues to bring charges against 
Rtmaknsh^a, which may be true or not, but have nothing 



INFLUENCE. - 67 



to do with the true relation between Keshub and 
knshnsi. If, as we are told, he did not show sufficient 
moral abhorrence of prostitutes, he does not stand quite 
alone in this among the founders of religion. If he did not 
' honour the principle of teetotalism according to Western 
notions/ no one, as far as I know, has ever accused him of 
any excess in drinking. Such bickerings and cavillings 
would have been most distasteful both to Keshub Chunder 
Sen and to Ildmakr/sh^a. Both had no words but words 
of praise and love for each other, and it was a great pity that 
their mutual relation should have been treated in a jealous 
spirit, and thereby totally misrepresented. I can under-* 
stand that in India, where the relation between Guru and 
*5ishya is a very peculiar and very definite one, one of Keshub 
Chunder Sen's relatives should have objected to Mma- 
k/7sha being represented as the Guru of Keshub. Keshub >" 
had no real Guru, nor was he a Brahman by birth like 
Rimaknsrma. But that he learnt from Mmakr/shwa he, as 
well as Mozoomdar, has repeatedly admitted As to myself,; 
I can only say that Keshub Chunder Sen's memory is quite 
safe in my hands, perhaps safer than in those of his rela- 
tives* I stood up for him when his nearest friends forsook, 
him and turned against him. If my words could possibly 
have been misunderstood in India, I gladly state that neither 
did Blmaknsha act as Guru or Keshub Chunder Sen as 
*Sishya. The only thing that interested me was whether 
the influence exercised by the former on the latter might 
possibly account for certain, as yet unexplained, phases in 
the later spiritual development of Keshub Chunder Sen. 

F 2 



68 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK/^SHA T A. 

It would be a real help in judging of Keshub Chunder Sen 
if we knew that to quote the words of r Mo7.oomdar { his 
association with R&makrarma developed the conception 
of the Motherhood of God'; or, again, that * the strange 
selectivism of Ramakr/srma suggested to Keshub's appre- 
ciative mind the thought of broadening the spiritual struc- 
?ture""of his , own movement/ Whether toward the end of 
'his life Keshub became mystic and ecstatic in his utter- 
ances, and whether his concept of the Godhead as the 
Divine Mother was inspired by Rainakr/sha, 1 gladly leave 
to others to decide. By whatever terms these words mystic 
and ecstatic may be, if translated into Bengali, in English 
they mean exactly that spirit which pervades many of the 
utterances of the so-called New Dispensation, and which 
was so severely, and far too severely, animadverted on by 
many of Keshub's European admirers. Mystic has no such 
terrible meaning in English as its corresponding term 
seems to have in Bengali. People always seem to imagine 
that mystic has something to do with mist. Thus the late 
B. R. Rajam Iyer wrote in the Prabuddha Bharata, p. 1 23 ; 
* The Vedanta will certainly be mysticism if it seek to make 
a man live without food, enable him to preserve his life as 
long as he pleases, or get stiff like a corpse, dead entirely 
to the world, though an obscure spark of life may yet linger 
in the system. The Vedinta will be mysticism if it seek 
to enable man to work wonderful feats, as flying in the air, 
leaving the body at will, and wandering in space unob- 
structed like a ghost, or entering into the bodies of others, 
and possessing them like spirits, and doing similar things 



VEDANTA-HilLOSOPHY. 69 

of an unnatural character. The Veddnta will certainly be 
mysticism if it seek to make a man read the thoughts of 
others, and lay him in an eternal trance, when he would be 
more dead than alive, both with reference to himself and to 
others.' I quote these words partly to show the misapplica- 
tion of the term mysticism, for all this should not be called 
mysticism, but fraii'3 and jugglery ; and partly to show what 
the Ved&nta is not, and certainly never was, in the eyes of 
Keshub Ch under Sen or Blmakr/srma. It was in order to 
express my conviction that some later phases in Keshub's 
so-called New Dispensation were not essential to his simple 
original teaching, that I tried to trace them, back to their 
different sources. If some of R&makr/shTza's followers have 
made capital out of these remarks, surely such local jealousies 
and backbitings may safely be ignored. An honest under- 
standing between East and West, which was one of Keshub's 
highest ideals, cannot be furthered by the somewhat childish 
misunderstandings of Keshub's self-constituted advocates. 
Keshub himself would have been the last person to approve 
of the spirit that pervades his friend's passionate, though, 
I trust, well-intentioned advocacy. 

Vedtata-phHosopliy. 

If now we return to Ramakr/sha, I can assure Keshub's t 
zealous advocate that I never looked upon Rdmaknsha| 
as the originator of the' Ved&nta-philo^ophy. He was! 
not "aTman possessed of a scholarlike knowledge of the \ 
ancient system of the VedSnta-philosophy, nor do I feel - 
certain that even Keshub Chunder Sen had studied, S&m- * 



7O THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK^JSIWA. 

kara's or Blm&nu^'s famous commentaries on the Vedanta 
Sfttras. But both were thoroughly imbited with the spirit 
of that philosophy, which is, in fact, like the air breathed 
more or less by every Hindu who cares for philosophy or 

I religion. It is difficult to say whether we should treat 

tthe Vedanta as philosophy or religion, the two being really 

| inseparable from the Hindu point of view. 

What is curious, however, both in Keshub Chundcr 
Sen's and in Ramakr/sh/za's utterances, is the admixture 
of European ideas. Neither the one nor the other would 
have spoken as they did, before the English Government 
began its educational work in India, The bulk of their 
teaching is, no doubt, Indian to the backbone. It is the 

'old Indian philosophy, properly called Vedfmta or the 
highest goal of the Veda, but there is clearly a sprinkling, 
and sometimes far more than a mere sprinkling, of European 
thoughts in Keshub's .writings; and we often meet with 
quite unexpected references to European subjects, not ex- 
cluding railways and gas, in the sayings of RSmakrahwa* 

It is necessary to explain in a few words the character 
of that Ved&nta-philosophy which is the very marrow 
running through all the bones of Rtmakr/sh^a's doctrine. 
It is by no means easy, however, to give a short abstract 
of that ancient philosophy, particularly if we consider that 
it exists now, and seems always to have existed, under three 
different forms, the Adyajji^S^chool (non-duality school), 
the yinsh/a-advaita School (non-duality school, with a 
difference), and tDvaTtT^hool (real duality school), 

i, the last of which seems hardly to have a right to the name 

I ._*?*... ^ 



n 



VEDANTA-PHILOSOPHY. 7 1 

of Vedanta, but nevertheless is so called. The Advaita or 
non-duality school chiefly represented by *Sa?;zkara and his 
followers, holds that there is and there can be on^ reality 
only, whether we call it God, the Infinite or the Absolute, the 
Unknowable or Brahman, so that it follows by the strictest 
rules of logic that whatever is or seems to be, can be that one 
Absolute only, though wrongly conceived, as we are told, 
by Avklyd or Nescience. The^human soul, like everything 
else, is and can be nothing but Brahman or the Absolute, 
though for a time misconceived by Avidyd or Nescience. 
The desire of each individual soul is not, as commonlyf 
supposed, an approach to or a union with Brahman, but 
simply a becoming what it has always been, a recovering 
and recollection of its true being, a recognition of the full 
and undivided Brahman as the eternal basis of every 
apparently individual soul. 

The second school, called Vmsh/a-advaita, or Advaita, 
noa-duality, with a difference, was evidently intended for 
a larger public, for those who could not bring them- 
selves to deny all reality to the phenomenal world, and 
some individuality likewise to their*own souls. It is diffi- 
cult to say which of the two schools was the more ancient, 
and I am bound to acknowledge, after Professor Thibaut's 
luminous exposition, that the Virish/Sdvaita interpretation 
seems to me more in keeping with the Sfttras of BSda- 
r&ya$a. It is true that Rani'lnu^u lived in the twelfth, 
*Sa02kara in the eighth century, but there were Vmsh/Mvaita 
expositions and commentaries long before Ildm&nu^a. 
Considered as a case of philosophical athletics, the rigidly 

,"'<-"**, 



' 1< 
"J i 



< If. 



72 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKrt/SLUVA. 

monistic school cannot fail to command our admiration. 
Sawkara makes no concessions of any Jcind. He begins 
and never parts with his conviction that whatever is, is one 
and the same in itself, without variableness or shadow of 
turning. This, what he calls the Brahman, does not possess 
any qualities (vuesha), not even those of being and thinking, 
but it is both being and thought. To every attempt to 
define or qualify Brahman, *Sawkara has but one answer- 
No, No! When the question is asked as to the cause of 
what cannot be denied, namely, the manifold phenomenal 
world, or the world as reflected in our consciousness, with 
all its individual subjects, and all its individual objects, 
all that *Sa;wkara condescends to say is that their cause is 
Avidya or Nescience. Here lies what strikes a Western 
mind as the vulnerable point of 5awkara's Vedanta-philo- 
sophy. We should feel inclined to say that even this 
Avidya, which causes the phenomenal world to appear, 
must itself have some cause and reality, but Sawkara does 
not allow this, and repeats again and again that, as an 
illusion, Nescience is neither real nor unreal, but is some- 
thing exactly like our own ignorance when, for instance, 
we imagine we see a serpent, while what we really sec 
is a rope, and yet we run away from it in all earnestness 
as if it were a real cobra. This creative Nescience once 
granted, everything else proceeds smoothly enough. .Brah- 
man (or Atman), as held or as beheld by Avidya, seems 
modified into all that is phenomenal. Our instruments of 
knowledge, whether senses or mind, nay, our whole body, 
should be considered as impediments or fetters rather, ns 



,. J 



VEDANTA-PHILOSOPHY. 73 

Up&dhis, as they are called, which one feels tempted to 

fcfr*f ""''"" " ' 

translate by impositions. And here the difficulty arises are 
these Upadhis, these misleading organs of knowledge, the 
cause or the result of Avidyt? With us they are clearly 
the cause of Avidyd ; but are they not, like everything that 
we call created, the result also of that universal beginning- 
;i( less Avidyft, without which Brahman could never have 

become even phenomenally creative ? This is a point that 
requires further consideration. It is touched upon, but hardly 
decided, by *Sawkara in his commentary (pp. 787, 789), where 
we read l : * The omniscience and omnipotence of the Atman 
are hidden by its union with the body, that is, by the union 
with the body, senses } Manas (mind), and Buddhi (thought), 
the objects, and their perception as such.' And here we 
have the simile : As fire is endowed with burning and 
II light, but both are hidden when fire has retired into the 

I wood or is covered with ashes, in the same manner, through 

I the union of the Self with the Upadhis, such as body, senses, 

:,'):; &c., that is, with the Upadhis formed by Avidyd from N&ma- 

i rftpa, names and forms, there arises the error of the Atman 

y *'' not being different from them, and this is what causes the 

f hiding of the omniscience and omnipotence of the Atman. 

It is under the influence of that AvidyS, that Brahman 
assumes or receives names and forms (namarftpa), which 
come very near to the Greek \<tyot, or the archetypes of every- 
NL thing. Then follow the material objective elements which 

constitute animate and inanimate bodies, in fact the whole 
1 objective world. But all this is illusive. In reality there 

1 Deussen, System des Ved&nta, p. 115, 



74 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

are no individual things, no individual souls (^tvas) ; they 
only seem to exist so long as Nescience prevails over 
Atman or Brahman. 

Ekam advitiyam. On without a Second* 

If you ask, what then is real in all things and in every 
individual soul? the answer is, Brahman, the One without 
a Second, the One besides whom there is nothing ; but this 
answer can be understood by those only who know Avidya, 
and by knowing it have destroyed it. Others believe that the 
world is this or that, and that they themselves are tins and 
that. Man thinks that he is an Ego dwelling in the body, 
seeing and hearing, comprehending and reasoning, reasoning 
and acting, while with the strict .Ved&ntist the true Self 
lies deep below the Ego, or the Aha m, which belongs to 
the world of illusion. As an Ego, man has become already 
an actor and enjoyer, instead of remaining a distant witness 
of the world. He is then carried along into the Sa?wsira, 
the concourse of the world; he becomes the creature or 
the slave of his accumulated acts (karman), and goes on 
from change to change, till in the end he discovers the true 
Brahman which alone really exists, and which as being 
himself is called Atman or Self, and at the same time 
Paramitman, or the Highest, Atman and Brahman, both 
being one and the same thing. Good, works may be help- 
ful in producing a proper state of mind for receiving this 
knowledge, but it is by knowledge alone that men can be 
saved and obtain Mukti, freedom, and not by good works. 
This salvation or freedom finds expression in the celebrated 



EKAM ADVITIYAM. 75 

words Tat tvam asi, thou art that, i.e. them art not thou, 
but that, I. e. the "only existing Brahman; the Atman, the 
Self, and the Brahman are one and the same. 

Strange as Ankara's monism may seem to us, yet the t , 
current idea that God created the world out of nothing 
can, strictly speaking, mean nothing else than that nothing , 4 

can ever exist by the side of God, that God, out of His own ? 

energy, supplied both the material and the efficient cause l ^ 
of the world. Ramanj^^a is less ^exacting. He is at one 
with *Sawkara in admitting that there can be only one 
thing real, namely Brahman, but he allows what *Sawtkara 
strenuously denies, that Brahman possesses attributes* 
His chief attribute, according to R&mdnu^a, is thought or 
intelligence, but he is likewise allowed to possess omnipo- 
tence, omniscience, love, and other good qualities. He is ; 
allowed to possess within himself certain powers (raktis), 
the seeds of plurality, so that both the material objects ; 
of our experience and the individual souls (givas) may be 
considered as real modifications of the real Brahman, and 
not merely as phenomena or illusions (mdy&). In this 
modified capacity Brahman is spoken of as |$yar& the 
Lord, and both the thinking (kit) and the "unthinking 
world (a^it) are supposed to constitute his body. He^is 
then called the Antarydmin, the ruler within, so that 
both the objects and the souls which he controls are 
entitled in their individuality to an independent reality, * 
which, as we saw, 5awkara boldly denies. Though Rftrndnu^a 
also would hardly accept our idea of creation, he teaches 
evolution or a process by which all that existed potentially 



' ' 



m '.- 



fill 



76 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA'/Sl IA r A. 

or in a subtile invisible form in the one Brahman, while 
in. its undeveloped state (pralaya), becomes visible, material, 
objective, and individual in this phenomenal world. Could 
our evolutionists have wished for a better ancestor? Their 
phraseology may be different, but what is meant is the same. 
Ramanu^a distinguishes between Brahman as a cause and 
Brahman as an effect, but he teaches at the same time that 
cause and effect are always the same, though what we call 
cause undergoes pariw.ima, i.e. development in order to 
become what we call effect. Instead of holding with Aa///kara 
that we are deceived about Brahman, that we turn it aside 
or invert it (vivarta) while under the sway of Nescience, 
Ramanu^a teaches that Brahman really changes, that what is 
potential in him at first, becomes real and objective at last. 
Another important difference between the two is that while 
-Sa/wkara's highest goal consists in Brahman recovering itself 
by knowledge, Ramanu^a recognises the merit of good 
works, and allows a pure soul to rise by successive stages 
to the world of Brahman, to enjoy there perfect felicity 
without fear of new births or of further transmigration. 
With him, as with us, the soul is really supposed to 
approach the throne of Brahman, to become like Brahman, 
and participate in all his powers except one, that of creating, 
that is, sending forth the phenomenal world, governing it, 
and absorbing it again when the time comes. Thus not 
only does Ram&nu^a allow individuality to individual souls, 
but likewise to f^ara, the Lord, the personal God, while with 
Saazkara a personal god would be as unreal as a personal 
soul, both becoming real only in their recovered identity. 



'.r 




EKAM ADVITIYAM. 77 

What R&mamj^a thus represents as the highest truth and 
as the highest goal to be reached by a man seeking for 
salvation, is not altogether rejected by Siwkara. It is 
tolerated, but it is looked upon by him as Lower Know- 
ledge, the personal Brahman as the Lower Brahman. That 
Brahman is called aparam, lower, and sagu^am, qualified, 
and being a 'merely personal God, he is often worshipped 
by RSmanu^u and his numerous followers, even under such 
popular names as Vishnu or NSraya^a, With *Sa^kara that 
personal frvara or Lord would be conceived as the prajtika, 
the outward face or appearance only, we might almost say as \ 
the persona or the irp6cr<>7rov of the Godhead, and his ' 
worship (up&sana), though ignorant, is tolerated and even \ 
recommended as practically useful. The Jewish and the 
Christian idea of God would be in his eyes the same, 
a pratika or persona of the Godhead. A worship of that 
God makes the God to be what he is worshipped as (Ved. 
Sfttra III, 4, 52), and, such as it is, it may lead the pious 
and virtuous man to eternal happiness. But it is true 
knowledge alone that can produce eternal salvation, that is, 
recovered Brahmanhood, and this, even in this life (^ivan 
mukti), with freedom from karman (works) and from all 
further transmigration after death, in fact with freedom from 
the law of causality. It seems strange that the followers of j 
these two schools of Vedinta have so long lived in peace and 1 
harmony together, though differing on what we should con- 1 
sider the most essential points, whether of philosophy or} 
religion. The followers of 6kwkara do not accuse the fol- 
lowers of RSmSnu^a of downright error (mithy&damna), but 




f 

. 



78 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK^ZSIWA. 

of Nescience only, or of, humanly speaking, inevitable Avidya. 
Even the phenomenal world and the individual souls, though 
due to Avidy&, are not, as we saw, considered as empty or 
false; they are phenomenal, but have their reality in Brahman 
if only our eyes, by the withdrawal of Avidy&, are opened 
* to see the truth. What is phenomenal is not nothing, 
but is always the appearance of that which is and remains 
real, whether we call it the Brahman, the Atman, the Abso- 
lute, the Unknowable, or, in Kantian language, das Din$ 
an sick. Besides, it is recognised, even by the strictest 
monists, that for all practical purposes (vyavahdra) the 
phenomenal world may be treated as real. It could not 
even seem to exist (videri) unless it had its real founda- 
tion in Brahman. The only riddle that remains is AvidvS, 

Kip^WIWwW ^v^'Wrf.;- ,<*!** 

or Nescience, often called Mayl or illusion. &wkara him- 

^A^AS^vm^tl^ ^ ^Si^W^MW!**^^ 

self will not say that it is or that .it is not real All he can 
say is that it is there, and that it is the aim of the VedSnta- 
philosophy to annihilate it by VidyS, Nescience by science, 
proving thereby, it would seem, that AvidyH is not real 

At first sight this Vedanta-philosophy is, no doubt, start- 
ling, but after some time one grows so familiar with it and 
becomes so fond of it that one wonders why it should not 
have been discovered by the philosophers of any other 
country. It seems to .solye^ all difficulties but one, to adapt 
itself to any* other philosophy, nay, to every^Bnd of religion 
which does not intrench itself behind the ramparts of revela- 
tion and miracle. The difficulty is to find a natural approach 

rt IV ,*' " " kW- ,.,, ,,. .iJ,!!-.,!' 1 - ! " "'* '' "" : ' '< : ''"""-.. Mi ,,,*' w-^^l*"" 1 ""*"** 

to it from the position,, .which we occupy injtooking at 

philosophical and religious problems. I tried before to open 



EKAM ADVITIVAM. 



79 



one of its doors by asking the question, what, | Jfoe cause^of 
all things? and wemet with the answer that that cause must 

wWiww**!***^;*!^* '" '' 

be one, without a second, because the very presence of 
a second would limit and condition that which is to be 
unlimited and unconditioned. We saw how, in order to 
explain what cannot be doubted, namely, the constant 
changes in the world by which we are surrounded, Avidya 
or Nescience was called in to explain what cannot be denied 
the variety of our sensations. It is curious only that what 
the Greek philosophers called the logoj^the thoughts or 
names as architypes of all phenomenal things, were by the 
VedSnta treated not as the expressions of Divine Wisdom or 
of Sophia, but as Nama-rupa, names and forms, the result of 
Nescience or AvidyS. This Greek conception, apparently 
the very opposite of that of the Vedanta, is nevertheless the 
same, only looked at from a lower and higher point of view. 
ga,, names and forms, andj^goiy, names and what; 



is named, express the same idea, namely, that as words are' 
thoughts realised, the whole creation is the word or thej 
expression of eternal thoughts, whether of Brahman or 
of the Godhead, or, in another version, that the world 
represents the idea in its dialectic progress from mere being 
to the highest manifestations of thought. That Brahman 
can easily be proved to have originally meant word, makes 
the coincidence between Ved&nta, Neo-Platonism, and 
Christian philosophy still more striking, though it would be 
hazardous to think of any historical connexion between 
these ancient conceptions of a rational universe. Lest it 
should be supposed that I had assimilated the Hindu idea 




THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

of the word, as being with Brahman and becoming the 
origin of the world, too closely to the Greek conception 
of the LogoSj I subjoin a literal translation of a passage in 
a$tea'. commentary (p. 96, i). He holds that Brah- 1 
man is pure intelligence, and when the opponent remarks 
that intelligence is possible only if there are objects of in- 
telligence, he replies: 'As the sun would shine even if there 
were no objects to illuminate, Brahman would be intelli- 
gence even if there were no objects on which to exercise 
his intelligence. Such an .object, however, exists even 
before the creation, namely, Nama-rupa, the names and 
forms, as yet undeveloped, but striving for development 
(avyakr/te, vya^iktrshite), that is the words of the Veda 
living in the mind of the creator even before the creation V 
Might not this have been written by Plato himself? 



I We may try no^anottojJagtr for an entrance into the 
Vedanta-philosophy, which may help in bringing the 
jVed&nta nearer to ourselves, or ourselves nearer to the 
jjVeddnta, so that it may be looked upon not simply as a 
{strange and curious system, but as a system of thought 
jwith which we can sympathise, nay, which, with certain 
fmodifications, we can appropriate for our own purposes a . 

One of the most ancient commands of Greek philosophy 
was the famous IV&& crivr<fo, know thyself. Here the 
Hindu philosopher would step TrT alToncc and say that 

1 See Detissen, Das System des Ved&nta, pp. 75, 147. 

2 Cf. Deussen, 1. c. p. 60 seq. 






rN6I 2EAYTON. 8 1 

this is likewise the very highest object of their own pWlo- ; 
sopT^^oniy that they express it more fully by Atmanam 
atmana pa^ya, See the Self by the Self ! But like true 
philosophers they would let no word pass unchallenged, and 
would ask at once, who or what is meant by the aM?, 
or by the Self? The Ved^nta-philosophy has been called 
a philosophy of negation, which tries to arrive at the truth 
by a repeated denial of what cannot be the truth. It often 
defines its own character by Na, na, Not this, not that. 
First of all then the Yedanta would say, the aMs, or that 
which is what we are, the Self, cannot be the ^g^y. In the 
true sense of the word, the body is not, has no right to be 
called being, sa^ because sooner or later it ceases to be, and 
nothing can ever cease to be, if it really is. As the bodyf 
Is not eternal, it is not real in the highest sense of reality J 
If therefore we want to know what is truly real, the body 
(deha or sthfilasarira) cannot be the aMs or the Self. 

But if we see that all we know comes to us through 
the five senses of seeing, hearing, touching, tasting, and 
smelling, that we cannot go beyond the senses, that we 
never have nor can have more than sensuous images of 
the world and of ourselves, and that what we call our 
knowledge consists in the first instance of these images, 
not of any realities, which we may postulate, indeed, as 
underlying these images, but which we can never reach, 
except by hypothesis, might we not say that ojJJ^ggggp 
as a whole are our aMs or Self? The Veddntist would 
reply again, No, no. Our senses are wonderful indeed, 
but they are only the instrument^ of our knowledge, they 



! : .' 

'* 

;; I! 9 82 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAOJ/SILVA. 

|| g, |;5 form part of our body, they perish with the body, and 

cannot therefore constitute our real Self? Besides the five 
senses which the Hindus call v7anendriyas, senses of 
knowledge, they admit five other senses which they call 
karmendriyas, senses of action, namely, the senses of 
speaking, grasping, moving, excretion, and procreation. 
|t|^ This is an idea peculiar to the Hindus, the former five 

'* '"''" ' being intended for action from without to within (upalabdhi), 

-.the latter for action from within to without (karman). The 
'images brought to us by the senses, on which we depend 
for all our knowledge, are what we should call states of 
consciousness, they are not even our Ego, much less our 
Self. They come and go, arise and vanish, and cannot 
J therefore be called real or eternal, as little as the body, 
jln all these images we may distinguish the subject or the 
^active element, and the object or the passive element. 
The passive or objective elements are what we are ac- 
customed to call matter, and this matter, according to the 

Illffl five senses by which it is perceived, is divided into five 

kinds, viz. ether, corresponding to hearing; light, corre- 
sponding to seeing ; air, corresponding to touching ; water, 
corresponding to tasting; and earth, corresponding to 
smelling. This is all that we can legitimately mean by 

fc^fo the five elements. They are to us states of consciousness, 

, or vi^na only. But though to us elementary matter 
' exists, and can exist as known, or in the form of knowledge 
^only, the Vedanta does not deny its existence, whatever 
| it may say about its reality. If the objects of our sensuous 
I knowledge are all the result of Avidya, the elements also 



it 



SEAYTON. 83 

must share that fate, and cannot claim more than a phe- 

.-:. '.. . 

wrnenal .reality. * 

As, however j there are few, if any, sensations correspond- 
ing to one element only, without being mixed up with 
others, each element is supposed to be five-folded, that is, 
to contain one preponderating quality, and small portions 
of the others. This so-called Pa/7^ikara^a or quintupling 
is not to be found, however, in the ancient Ved&nta; it 
belongs to the refinements, and not always improvements, 
which we owe such works as the very 



popular Vedstntasdra, A different and, as it would seem, 
far more primitive conception of the elements is found in 
the Upanishads, for instance, the ^TMndogya Upanishad 
VI, 2, We generally find in India four elements, or, with 
the addition of dkSj-a, ether, as the vehicle of sound, five. 
The jnost primitive conception of the constituent elements 
of the world, however, would seem to have been three, 
namely, what is earjhy, what is fiery, and what is watery. 
These three elements could not possibly be overlooked, and 
this threefold division is actually found in the JTMndogya, 
where the three elements are called Anna. Tern. and 

***V;- Jy*i*W 

^or, as they are arranged there, first, Te^as, including 
light, and warmth, then Ap, water, and lastly Anna, 
earth* It is true that Anna means otherwise food, but 1 
it can here be taken in the sense of earth only, as sup- ; 
plying food. The first is represented as red, the second 
as white, the third as black. These three elements also I 
are represented as being mixed In three proportions, f 
and as constituent elements of the human body they are 

G 2 






84 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK/WS! INA. 

! represented as passing through three forms of development, 
the earthy portion being manifested in "faeces, flesh, and 
Manas, the watery portion in urine, blood, and life, the fiery 
portion in bones, marrow, and speech. There are many 

; of these purely fanciful speculations to be found in the 

| Upanishadsf This, however, should not^be allowed to pre- 
judice us against what is simple and primitive and rational 
irTthese depositories of ancient thought. But if it is asked, 
Can these passive and active senses be the Self? the 
Vedantist says again, No;' no; they are not what we are 
in search of, they cannot be the aM?, which must be real, 
unchanging, and eternal. 

If this applies to the ten senses, it applies with equal 
strength to what is sometimes called the eleventh sense, the 
Manas, all treated as material, and as products of the earthy 
element. Manas is etymologically closely connected with 
mens and has therefore been generally translated by mind. 
But though it may be used in that sense in ordinary 
language, it has a narrower meaning in Sanskrit philosophy. 
It is meant for the central and combining organ of the 
senses of perception and action. This Manas performs 
originally, what we ascribe to the faculty of attention 
(avadhdna) : it acts, as we are told, as a doorkeeper, pre- 
venting the impressions of the different senses from rushing 
in simultaneously, and producing nothing but confusion. 
It is easy to show that this central sense also falls under 

| the Ved&ntic No, no. It cannot be the Self, which must 
be permanent arid 'real; it is an in9t,rument only, and there- 
fore called anta^kara^a the inner organ* We see here the ' 



TNOOI SEAYTON, 85 ) 

same confusion which exists elsewhere. There is such an 
abundance" of words expressive of what is going on within 
us, our anta/^kara^a, our mind in its various manifestations, 
that we are embarrassed rather than helped by this wealth, 
The worst of it is that as there are so many words, it was 
supposed at a later time that each must have its own 
peculiar meaning \ and, if it had not, scholastic definition 
soon came in to assign to each that special meaning which 
it was to have in future. In the meantime the stream of 
languages flowed on in complete disregard of such artificial 
barriers, and with^every new' philosophy the confusion 

became greater ; and greater* It is easy to understand that 

if "each" language " By itself can seldom give us well-defined 
terms for the various manifestations of our perceptive and 
reasoning powers, the confusion becomes still greater when 
we attempt to render the psychological terms of one by 
those of another language. For instance, if we translated ' 
Atman, as is mostly done, by soul, we should be rendering ; 
what is free from all passions by a word which generally \ ^ 
implies the seat of the passions. And if we were to follow * 
the example of others and translate Manas by understanding 
or Verstand, we should render what is meant as chiefly 
a gerceptive and arrangmg,Jaculty f by a name that implies 
reasonlng'*lrom " the lowest to the highest form. With USE 
Verstand is what distinguishes men from animals, while jnf 
the Ved&ata Manas is not denied to animals, not even, jjs it |' ^ 
would seem, to plants l . 

It seems better therefore to retain as much as possible 
x Deussen, 1. c. p. 258. 



j< 



/ 



F . ' H 



86 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK-R/SHNA. 

I the technical terms of Sanskrit philosophy, and to speak of 
} Atman or the Self instead of soul, of Manas, or possibly 
I mind, instead of understanding or Ver stand. 

We shall see that even in Sanskrit itself the confusion 
is very great, there being more terms than can be accom- 
modated or be kept distinct one from the other. By the 
side of the Indriyas, or senses, for instance, we also find 
PrSwaSj literally vital spirits, which include the Manas, and 
as a conditio sine qua non, but not as one of the Indriyas, the 
so-called Mukhya Pr&Tza, the vital breath, that passes from 
the lungs through the mouth, and which again in a very 
artificial, if not to say foolish, manner is divided into five 
varieties. The Manas is then treated, like the senses, as 
part of the body, being meant at first, I believe, for no 
more than the central and superintending jperceptiy^ organ, 
But it has many functions, and the names of some of them 
are interchanged with the names of the Manas itself. We 
have Buddhi, the general name for perception and mental 
activity, 3ntta, thought or what is thought, Vi^tfdna, 
discrimination, some of which are sometimes treated as 
separate faculties. Saawkara, however, sho^s his powerful 
grasp by comprising all under Manas, so that Manas is 
sometimes reason, sometimes understanding, or mind or 
thought. t This simplifies his psychology very much, though 
Ut may lead to misunderstandings also. Manas gives us the 
f I images (Vorstellungen) which consist of the contributions 
| of the different senses ; it tells us this is this (nujfeja) and 
H fixes it (adhp^^ya). Images are formed into concepts and 

1 J words (saswkalpaj; these may be called into question (saavaya}, 

*****^^ 



PN&9I 2EAYTON. 



8 7 



and weighed (vika^) against each other, so as to give us 
judgements. Here then we should have in a rough form 
the elements of our psychology, but it must be confessed 
that they were never minutely elaborated by the Vedanta 
philosophers. Even the meanings here assigned to the 
different psychological terms, were so assigned etymo- 
logically rather than from definitions given by *Sawkara 
himself. According to him., Manas gives us everything; 
impressions, images, concepts, and judgements, nay even 
self-consciousness or Aha^zMra, i, e. the Ego-making, and 
consequently the distinguishing between subjects and ob- 
jects, all are Manas. But when we ask, is the Manas, or 
the Aha#zkra, or Buddhi, or -ATitta, are any of the 
attributes of Manas, such as Oma, desire, DM, fear, Hri, 
shame, Dhl, wisdom, Vi/&ikits&, doubt, *$raddhd, belief, 
AjraddM, unbelief, Dhr/ti, decision, Adhr/ti, wavering, 
are all or any of these the true Self? the Ved&ntist answers; 
again, No, no ; they are temporal, they are composite, theyj 
come and they go, they cannot be what we are in search] 
of, the true and eternal Self. It is clear that when we say* 
my body, there are two things presupposed, one thing the 
body, the other he to whom it belongs. So again when 
we speak of my senses, my mind, nay of my Ego, we 
distinguish between a possessor and what for the time 
being he possesses. But we should never say my Self, 
because that is tautological ; the Self cannot belong to any 
one else. If we were to say my Self, we could only mean 
our Ego, but if we say our Self, i.e. the Self of all, or simply 
Self, we mean Brahman, Brahman as hidden within us and 




88 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKR/SHA T A. 

within the world. At the time of death the organs of know- 
ledge are not-supposed to be destroyed absolutely, but while 
: there is another lift before us, they are reduced tea seminal 
or potential form only, and though the outward organs them- 
selves will decay, their potentia or powers remain, dwelling 
in what is called the Sfikshrna-5arfra, the subtile body, the 
bo.dy that migrates from birth to birth and becomes again 
and again a Sthula-5arira, a material body. But when real 
freedom has once been obtained, this Sukshma-Aartra also 
vanishes and there remains the Atman only, or Brahman as 
he was and always will be. The form assumed by the 
body in every new existence is determined by the deeds 
and thoughts during former existences : it is still, so to say, 
under the law of causality* 

Then what remains for the aur<fc, for the Atman ? The 

,***>* " i 

Greek sages have hardly any answer to give \ to them the 
avros was seldom more than the Ego, Ahawkara, while with 
the Vedantist it is distinctly not the Ego as opposed to 
a Non-Ego, but som$;]3i^ not touched 

by the 'law of causality, something neither suffering, nor 

,..* **<?* *';,* fliJtftWi-J'ni/ " .,...""> , ,.,,,.. ,. ,.,"., ,,_, O* ,, 

enjoying,., nor .acting, but that; without which neither the 
gross nor the subtile body could eyer w cxj#t This Self, 
this the true aMt, was discovered in the lotus of the heart 
in true Self-consciousness, it was discovered as not-personal ; 
though dwelling in the personal or living Atman, thg t C$3gj 
it remained for ever a mere looker-on, untouched by anything, 
' As I said before, the Vedanta-philosophy is a philosophy 
of negation ; it says No, no, it says all that the Self is not, 
but what the Self is, defies all words and all thoughts* 



2EAYTON. 89 

Our thoughts and our words return from it baffled, as the 
Veda says. There are passages in the Upanishads where 
attempts are made to bring us nearer to a conception of the 
Self, whether we call it the Brahman or the Atman, but 
these attempts never go so far as a definition of these two, 
or of this One Power. In the JTMndogya^ Upanishad 
III, 14, we read: * Surely this universe is Brahman. It 
should be worshipped in silence as the beginning, the | 
being, and the end of all. Its matter is thought, life its | 
body, light its form. Its will is truth, its Self the infinite 1 
(ether). It works all, it wills all, it scents all, it tastes all, i 
embracing the Universe, silent and unconcerned. This is ( 
the Self in the innermost heart, smaller than a mustard- j 
seed or the kernel of it. This is the Self in the innermost j 
heart, larger than the earth, larger than the atmosphere, I 
larger than the sky, larger than all worlds. The all- , 
working, all-willing, all-scenting, all-tasting one, the all- \ 
embracing, silent, unconcerned one, this is the Self in ' 
the innermost heart, this is Brahman, this I shall become 
when parting from hence. He who has this, does not 
doubt' 

This subject is treated again and again. Very much 
as we saw it treated in the JO&ndogya, we find it treated 
in the Taittirlya Upanishad II, 1-7. One covering after 
another is there removed, till there remains in the end 
the pure Self, First the body of flesh and blood is re- 
moved, then the vital breath, then the Manas, and with it 
thought, till at last nothing remains but the Self full of 
bliss. This is called the sap or the essence. It is this Self 




m\\- & 



THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAM.AKK/S!hVA. 

that brings bliss, finding peace and rest in the invisible, 
the immaterial, the inexpressible, the unfathomable. So 
long as anything else is left, hidden anywhere, there is no 
peace and no rest, however wise a man may think himself. 
Or, as Y^/fcvalkya says : ' He who knows this, knows 
everything. 7 Every name that can be imagined for ex- 
pressing what is really inexpressible, is assigned in the 
Upanishads to Brahman. Brahman is neither long not- 
short, neither subtile nor gross ; he is without parts, without 
activity, still, without spot, without fraud, he is unborn, 
never growing old, not fading nor dying, nor fearing any- 
thing; he is without and within.' Whether such a being 
can be called he, is very doubtful, for he is neither he 
nor she; he is It in the very highest sense of that un- 
differentiated pronoun. 

We thus see that both methods, the first that started 
from the postulate that the true Self must be one, without 
a second, and the second, which holds that the true Self 
must be unchanging, eternal, without beginning or end, 
.arrive at the same final result, viz. that the Self of the 
: world can be nothing that is perceived in this changing 
; world, and that our own Self too can be nothing that is 
perceived as changing, as being born, as living and dying. 
Both may, in one sense of the word, be called nothings ; 
: though they are in reality that in comparison with which 
. everything else is nothing. If the world is real the Self 
is not K if the Self is real the world is not. 



FINAL CONCLUSION, TAT TVAMASI. 91 

Final Concltision, Tat tvamasi. 

Then follows the final conclusion that these two Selfs are 
one and the same, only reached by different methods. Man | 
is man phenomenally, the world is world phenomenally, the 
gods of the world are gods phenomenally, but in full reality 
all are the Godhead, call it Atman or Brahman, metamor- 
phosed and hidden for a time by Avidyd or Nescience, but 
always recoverable by Vidya" or by the Vedanta-philosophy. 

These ideas in a more or less popular form seem to 
pervade the Hindu mind from the earliest to the latest 
date. They are taught in the schools, but even without 
the schools they seem to be imbibed with the mother's 
milk. They are often exaggerated and caricatured so as I 
to become repulsive to a European mind, but in their I 
fnirity and simplicity they contain an amount of truth which | 
can no longer be safely neglected by any student, whether j 
of philosophy or religion. It can no longer be put aside asf 
merely curious, or disposed of as mystic, without a defini- 
tion of what is meant by mystic, and without an argument 
that everything that is called mystic has really nothing to 
do with either religion or philosophy. That it may lead to f 
dangerous consequences no one would deny, but the same I 
may be said of almost every religion and every philosophy, I 
if carried to its last consequences. I have already drawn \ 
attention to the false reasoning, that because good works 
cannot secure salvation, therefore bad works also are in- 
different or harmless. Good works, according to the 
Vedanta, certainly do not lead straight to salvation, but 







92 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK^7SIIA T A. 

.they represent the first essential step that leads on to 
salvation, while evil deeds form a barrier that keeps a man 
from making even the first step in his progress towards 
knowledge and beatitude. That a Saint cannot sin, or 
that Sriens non peccat, has been held true not in India 
only, but it is easily seen in what sense this is either 
true or false, whether in India or at home, it cannot be 
deeply enough impressed on the minds of the modern 
apostles of Ramaknslv/a that nothing would be more* 
likely to lower their master and their own work, in the." 
eyes of serious people than the slightest moral, laxity on 
, their part, or a defence of any such laxity on the ground 
that a GV7anin, a Knowcr, is above morality. It. is one 
thing to say that such a man cannot sin because his passions 
are completely subdued, another that if he should from any 
defect of knowledge lapse from his passionless and perfect 
state it could not be imputed to him as sin. I confess 
there is a little uncertainty on that point even among ancient 
authorities, but we know as yet far too little of the classical 
Vedantic writings to speak with confidence on such a point. 
There are too many passages in which strict .morality is 
enjoined as a sine qua non for Vedantic freedom to allow 
any one to use a few doubtful passages in defence of ini- 
. morality. When we have first learnt all that can be learnt 
; from the Vedanta, it will be time to begin to criticise it, 
I or, if possible, to imgrove it, j We study the systems of 
Plato and Aristotle, of Spinoza and Kant, not as containing 
the full and perfect truth, cut and dry, but as helping us 
on towards the truth. Every one of these contains partial 



FINAL CONCLUSION, TAT TVAMASI. 



93 



truths which might easily be proved to lead to dangerous 
consequences. What is necessary to us at present, more ' 
than at any previous time, is a historical study of all 
philosophy, that of India not excluded, in its genetic or 
dialectic development, so that we may not be swayed by every 
philosophical breeze that announces itself as new, though 
it has been discussed again and again before, and, it may 
be, far more thoroughly than by its most recent advocates. 
It will hereafter sound almost incredible that in our time 
the philosophical public should have been startled by the 
Idea of %^^^, as a philosophical novelty, nay, that there 
should have been an angry contest as to who was really 
the first discoverer of what has been discussed again and 
again during the last two thousand years. What is pari^dma, ' 
if not evolution, the evolution advocated by Mmtnu^, but 
rejected by 6a;;/kara. That the illustration of this evolu-, 
tionary process of the world, as given in our time, should 
stand incomparably higher than anything attempted from 
R^manu^a down to Herder, who would deny ? But to the 
historian of philosophy the idea is one thing, its illustration 
of it quite another. It is most unfair to represent a man like ? 
Darwin, who was the most eminent observer of nature, as; 
a philosopher, an abstract philosopher, the very thing which , 
he himself would have most strongly deprecated. 

At present, however, I am not concerned with Indian 
philosophy, fure et simple^ but with its effects on the 
popular mind of India, as shown by one of its recent 
representatives, Rdmakr/sh^a, He himself distinguishes 
very clearly between philosophy or GVIIna (knowledge) and 



; i 



\ I 

I; 



'I 



94 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKAVSTWA. 

devotion or Bhakti, and he himself was a Bhakta, a wor- 
shipper 1 or lover of the deity, much more than a 6vHnin 
or a knower. It was in order to show the background 
from, which Ramaknsh^a emerges, and the lights and 
shades of the atmosphere in which he moved, that 
I thought it useful to add a short sketch of Vedanlic 
thought. Ramakr/shma was in no sense of the word an 
original thinker, the discoverer of a new idea or the pro- 
pounder of any new view of the world. But he saw many 
things which others had not seen, he recognised the Divine 
Presence where it was least suspected, he was a poet, an 
enthusiast, or, if you like, a dreamer of dreams. But surh 
dreams also have a right to exist, and have a claim on our 
attention and sympathy. Ramakr/shwa never composed 
a philosophical treatise; he simply poured out short sayings, 
and the people came to listen to them, whether the speaker 
was at the time, in full possession of his faculties, or in 
a dream, or in a trance. From all we can learn, it is quite 
clear that he had, by a powerful control ..oL. his breath, and 
by lor ? c .? ntinued asceti ?, exercis es, arrived at such a pitch 

of nervous excitability that he could at any moment faint 

away or fall into a state of unconsciousness, the so-called 
Samadhi. This SamfidhMnay be looked at, however, from 



_ This difference between Bhakti, devotion, and CBdna, knowledge 
is fully treated by Kishori Lai Sarkar in his interesting little book The' 
Hindu System of Religious Science and Art, or the Revelations of 

* Rationalism and Emotionalism, Calcutta, 1898. < 6V7ana,' the author 
says, 'sees with a telescopic, Bhakti with a microscopic eye ffflona 

; perceives the essence, Bhakti feels the sweetness. 6'ana discovers the 
Supreme Intelligence, Bhakti reciprocates the Supreme Loving Will ' 



THE SAYINGS OF RAMAKK7SHAA. 



95 



two jgoints, as either purely physical or as psychical. From 
an ordinary Sam&dhi a man may recover as one recovers 
from a fainting fit, but the true Samadhi consists in losing 
oneself or finding oneself entirely in the Supreme Spirit 
From this Samadhi there is no return, because there is 
nothing left that can return. A few men only who havei 
reached it, are enabled to return from it by means of a sxnalli 
remnant of their Ego, and through the efficacy of their ' wis 
to become the instructors and saviours of mankind. Somel 
thing very like Samidhi is the state of deep dreamless sleep, 
during which the soul is supposed to be with Brahman for 
a time, but able to return. This deep, unconscious sleep 
is one of the four states, waking, sleeping with dreams, 
sleeping without dreams, and dying. With Rlmaknsh/za 
it often happened that when he had fallen into this deep 
sleep, he remained in it so long that his friends were afraid 
he would never return to consciousness, and so it was at 
last at the time of his death. He had fallen into a trance, 
and he never awoke, but even death could lay hold of his 
body and his breath only; hisJSelf, no longer his, had 
recovered its Brahmahood, had become what it had always 
been and always will be, the Atman, the Highest Self, in all 
its glory, freed from all the clouds of appearances, and 
independent of individuality, personality, and of the whole ? 
phenomenal world. 

The Sayings of Rftmakmh;m. 

His sayings or Logia were collected and written down by 
his pupils, in Bengali; some were translated into Sanskrit 




THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMA KM/SHAW. 

and into English. There are many that remind us of old 
Sanskrit sayings, of which there are several collcclions, all, 
however, in metrical form. The sayings of Riimaky/sh;/a 
are different, because they are in prose, uttered evidently 
on the spur of the moment, and tinged here and there with 
European ideas which must have reached Rainak/'/sh^a 
through his intercourse with Anglo-Indians, and not from 
books, for he was ignorant of English. I received a complete 
collection of them from Ramak/-/sha's own pupil, Viyekti- 
^nanda, well known by his missionary labours in the United 
States and England. I give them as they were sent to me, 
with such corrections only as seemed absolutely necessary. 
I thought at first of arranging them under different heads, 
but found that this would have destroyed their character 
and made them rather monotonous reading. I believe 
as they are, they give a true picture of the man and 
of his way of teaching, suggested by the impulses of the 
moment, but by no means systematic, and by no means free 
from repetitions and contradictions. I should have liked 
very much to leave out some of his sayings, because, 
to our mind, they seem insipid, in bad taste, or even 
blasphemous. Eut should I not in doing so have offended 
against historic truth? We want to know the man who 
has exercised and is exercising so wide an influence, such 
as he was, not such as we wish him to have been. He 
himself never wished to appear different from what he was, 
and he often seems to have made himself out worse than 
he was. Besides, if I had done so, I know that there are 
men who would not have been ashamed of suspecting me 



THE SAYINGS OF RA.MAKRISHNA. 



97 



of a wish to represent the religions of the East, both modern 
and ancient, as better than they really are. These are the 
very men who would find many a lesson to learn from 
Rimakr/sh^a's sayings. No, I said, let the wheat and the 
tares remain together. Few thoughtful readers will go 
through them without finHing some thought that makes 
them ponder, some truth that will startle them as coming 
from so unexpected a guarter. Nothing, on the other hand, 
would be easier than to pick out a saying here and there, 
and thus to show that they are all insipid and foolish. 
This is a very old trick, described in India as the trick of 
the rice-merchants who wish to sell or to buy a rice-field, 
and who offer you a handful of good or bad grains to show 
that the field .is either valuable or* worthless. To my mind 1 
these sayings, the good, the bad, and the indifferent, are 
interesting because they represent an important phase of 
thought, an attempt to give prominence to the devotional! 
and practical side of the Ved&nta, and because they show! 
the compatibility of the Vedinta with other religions. They) 
will make it clear that the VedHnta also possesses a morality^! 
of its own, which may seem too high and too spiritual foil j ; 
ordinary mortals, but which in India has jlone good, is doing!, ^ 
good, and may continue to do jjpod^for centuries to' come. I 'jj 
In conclusion, I have to thank my friend MozoomdarjP 
and several of the disciples of Rimakmh^a, more par- 
ticularly Vivk&nanda and the editor of the Brahmav&din, 
for the ready help they have rendered me in publishing this 
collection of the sayings of their departed Master. 





THE 



SAYINGS OF 



1. THOU scest many stars at night in the sky, but findest 
them not when the sun rises. Canst thou say that there 
are no stars, then, in the heaven of day? So, O man, 
because thou beholdest not the Almighty in the days of 
thy ignorance, say not thai: there is no God. 

2. As one and the same material, viz. water, is called by 
different names by different people one calling it * water,' 
another 'vari,' a third c aqua, 7 and another *pam' so 

' the one Sat-y^it-ananda, the Everlasting-Intelligcnt-Bliss, is, 
invoked by some as God, by some as Allah, by some as 
Hari, and by others as Brahman. 

3. Two persons were hotly disputing as to the colour 
of a chameleon. One said, * The chameleon on that palm- 
tree is of a beautiful red colour.' The other, contradicting 
him, said, ' You are mistaken, the chameleon is not red, but 
blue.' Not being able to settle the matter by arguments, 
both went to the person who always lived under that tree 
and had watched the chameleon in all its phases of colour, 

1 Some more of R^makmhwa's sayings have been sent to me lately, 
but their publication will have to wait for another opportunity. 



THE SAYINGS. 99 

One of them said, * Sir, is not the chameleon o'n that tree 
of a red colour?' The person replied, 'Yes, sir.' The, 
other disputant said, ' What do you say ? How is it ? It is 
not red, it is blue. 7 That person again humbly replied, 
'Yes, sir.' The person knew that the chameleon is an 
animal that constantly changes its colour; thus it was 
that he said 'yes' to both these conflicting statements. 
The Sat-/fcit4nanda likewise has various forms. The devotee 
who has seen God in one aspect only, knows Him in that 
aspect alone. But he who has seen Him in His manifold 
aspects, is alone in a position to say, e All these forms are 
of one God, for God is multiform.' He has forms and has 
no forms, and many are His forms which no one knows. 

4. Many are the names of God, and infinite the forms 
that lead us to know Him. In whatsoever name or form 
you desire to call Him,, in that very form and name you will 
see Him. 

6. Four blind men went to see an elephant. One 
touched the leg of the elephant, and said, ' The elephant is 
like a pillar.' The second touched the trunk, and said, 
'The elephant is like a thick stick or club.' The third 
touched the belly, and said, ' The elephant is like a big 
jar/ The fourth touched the ears, and said, ' The elephant 
is like a winnowing basket* Thus they began to dispute 
amongst themselves as to the figure of the elephant. A 
passer-by seeing them thus quarrelling, said, 'What is it 
that you are disputing about ? ' They told him everything, 
and asked him to arbitrate. That man said, * None of you 

H 2 





THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAICR/SII^A. 

"-has seen the elephant. The elephant is not like a pillar, 
its legs are like pillars. It is not like a big water-vessel, its 
belly is like a water-vessel. It is not like a winnowing 
basket, its ears are like winnowing baskets. It is not like 
a thick stick or club, but its proboscis is like that. The 
elephant is the combination of all these.' In the same 
manner those quarrel who have seen one aspect only of the 
Deity. 

6. As the same sugar is made into various figures of 
birds and beasts, so one sweet Mother Divine is worshipped 
in various climes and ages under various names and forms. 
Different creeds are but different paths to reach the 
Almighty. 

7. As with one gold various ornaments are made, having 
different forms and names, so one God is worshipped in 
different countries and ages, and has different forms and 
names. Though He may be worshipped variously, some 
loving to call him Father, others Mother, &c., yet it is one 
God that is being worshipped in all these various relations 
and modes. 

8. Q. If the God of every religion is the same, why 
is it then that the God is painted differently by different 

.religionists ? A. God is one, but His aspects are different : 
^as one master of the house is'TatKer to one, brother to 
; another, and husband to a third, and is called by these 
j different names by those different persons, so one God is 
| described and called In various ways according to the 



THE SAYINGS. 



IOI 



particular aspect in which He appears to His particular 
worshipper. 

9. In a potter's shop there are vessels of different shapes 
and formspots, jars, dishes, plates, &c. but all are 
made of one clay. So God is one, but is worshipped in 
different ages and climes under different names and aspects. 

10. God is one, but his aspects are many. One and the 
same fish may be made to taste differently, according to the 
different modes of preparing it, so one God is enjoyed 
variously (i. e. in His various aspects) by His devotees. 

11. Man is like a pillow-case. The colour of one may 
be red, another blue, another black, but all contain the 
same cotton. So it is with man one is beautiful, one is 
black, another is holy, a fourth wicked; but the Divine 
dwells in them all. 

12. All waters are brooded over by N&rcLya^a, but every 
kind of water is not fit for drink. Similarly, though it is 
true that the Almighty dwells in every place, yet every 
place is not fit to be visited by man. As one kind of 
water may be used for washing our feet, another may 
serve the purpose of ablution, and others may be drunk, 
and others again may not be touched at all ; so there 
are different kinds of places. We may approach some, we 
can enter into the inside of others, others we must avoid, 
even at a distance. 

13. It is true that God is even in the tiger, but we must\ 
not go and face the animal. So it is true that God dwells i 



IO2 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKjR/SHJVA. 

even in the most wicked, but it is not meet that we should 
associate with the wicked. 

14. The manifestation of the Divinity must be under- 
stood to be in greater degree in those who are honoured, 
respected, and obeyed by a large following, than in those 
who have gained no such influence. 

15. The Master said : * Everything that exists is God/ 
The pupil understood it literally, but not in the true spirit. 
While he was passing through a street, he met with an 
elephant. The driver (mlhut) shouted aloud from his 
high place, ' Move away, move away ! J The pupil argued 
in his mind, e Why should I move away ? I am God, so 
is the elephant also God. What fear has God of Himself?' 
Thinking thus he did not move. At last the elephant 
took him up by his trunk, and dashed him aside. He was 

v , severely hurt, and going back to his Master, he related the 
whole adventure. The Master said, *A11 right, you are 

-' ' God. The elephant is God also, but God in the shape of 
the elephant-driver was warning you also from above. Why 
did you not pay heed to his warnings ? ' 

16. God, His scripture (the BMgavata), and His devotee 
are all to be regarded as one, i.e. in one and the same light* 

\ 17. Every being is NMya^a. Man or animal, sage or 

V knave, nay, the whole universe, is Nr&ya^a, the Supreme 
Spirit. 

18. As many have merely heard of snow but not seen 

it, so many are the religious preachers who have read only 

v in books about the attributes of God, but have not realised 



7' 



THE SAYINGS. 



103 



them in their lives. And as many may have seen but not 
tasted it, so many are the religious teachers who have got 
only a glimpse of Divine Glory, but have not understood 
its real essence. He who has tasted the snow can say 
what it is like. He who has enjoyed the society of God 
in different aspects, now as a servant, now as a friend, now 
as a lover, or as being absorbed in Him, &c., he alone 
can tell what are the attributes of God. 

19. As the Jamp does not burn without oil, so man |,[ \ 
canno^Jive without God. 

20. The human body is like a boiling pot, and the 
mind and the senses are like water, rice or potato, &c. 
in it. Put the pot with its ingredients on the fire ; it 
will be so hot as to burn your finger when you touch it. 
But the heat does not belong to the pot, nor anything con- 
tained in it, but is in the fire. So it is the fire of Brahman 
in man that causes the mind and ,the senses to perform 
their functions, and when that fire ceases to act, the senses 
also, or the organs, stop. 

21. Says God, C I am the snake that biteth and the 
charmer that healeth ; I am the judge that condemneth 
and the executioner that whippeth.' 

22. God tells the thief to go and steal, and at the same 
time warns the householder against the thief. 

23. How doth the Lord dwell in the body ? He dwells f 
in the body like the plug of a syringe, i. e. in the body, \ 
and yet apart from it 



*?. 

f i 




104 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK7SILVA. 

24. The Lord can pass an elephant through the eye of 
a needle. He can do whatever He likes. 

25. As fishes playing in a pond covered over with reeds 
and scum cannot be seen from outside, so God plays in 
the heart of a man invisibly, being screened by Miyd from 
human view. 

20. A man sitting under the shade of the Kalpa-vr/ksha 
(wishing-tree) wished to be a king, and in an instant he 
was a king. The next moment he wished to have a charm- 
ing damsel, and the damsel was instantly by his side* The 
man then thought within himself, if a tiger came and 
devoured him, and alas ! in an instant he was in the jaws of 
a tiger ! God is like that wishing-tree : whosoever in His 
presence thinks that he is destitute and poor, remains as 
such, but he who thinks and believes that the Lord fulfils 
all his wants, receives everything from Him. 

27. The landlord may be very rich, but when a poor 
cultivator brings a humble present to him with a loving 
heart, he accepts it with the greatest pleasure and satis- 
faction. 

28. While a bell is being rung, the repeated ding-dongs 
can be r distinguished one from the other, but when we 
stop ringing, then an undistinguishable sound only remains 
audible. We can easily distinguish one note from the 
other, as if each distinct note had a certain shape ; but the 

; continued and unbroken sound when the ding-dongs have 
I ceased is undistinguishable, as if formless. Like the sound 
I of the bell, God is both with and without form, f 



THE SAYINGS. 



105 



29. As a boy begins to learn writing by drawing big 
scrawls, before he can master the small-hand, so we must 
learn concentration of the mind by fixing it first on forms ; 
and when we have attained success therein, we can easily 
fix it upon the formless. 

30. As a marksman learns to shoot by first taking aim at 
large and big objects, and the more he acquires the facility, 
the greater becomes the ease with which he can shoot at 
the smaller marks on the target, so when the mind has 
been trained to be fixed on images having form, it becomes 
easy for it to be fixed upon images having no form. 

31. God is the Absolute and Eternal Brahman, as well 
as the Father of the Universe. The indivisible Brahman 
is like a vast shoreless ocean, without bounds and limits, 
in which I can only struggle and sink* But when I 
approach the always sportive (active) personal Deity (Hari), 
I get peace, like the sinking man who nears the shore. . 

32. God is formless, and is with form too, and He is 
that which transcends both form and formlessness. He 
alone can say what else He is. l 

33. At a certain stage of his path of devotion, the 
devotee finds satisfaction in God with form ; at another 
stage, in God without form, ; 

34. The God with form is visible, nay, we can touch 
Him face to face, as wj*6 one's dearest friend. 

35. As at one time I am clothed, and at another time 
naked, so Brahman is at one time with attributes and at 
another without. > 



> f 



I O6 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKJRJSH2VA. 

30. As water when congealed becomes ice, so the visible 
form of the Almighty is the materialised manifestation of 
the all-pervading formless Brahman. It may be called, 
in fact, Sat-/$it-ananda solidified. As the ice, being part 
and parcel of the water, remains in the water for a time 
and afterwards melts in it, so the Personal God is part and 
parcel of the Impersonal. He rises from the Impersonal, 
remains there, and ultimately merges into it and dis- 
appears. 

37. His name is Intelligence ; His abode is Intelligence 
too, and He, the Lord, is Intelligence Himself, 

38. Two are the occasions when the Lord smiles. First, 
when brothers remove the chains which partition off the 
family property, saying, ' This is mine and that is thine ; ' 
and secondly, when the patient is on the point of death, 
and the physician says, ' I will cure him.' 

39. Lunatics, drunkards, and children sometimes give 
<^t^he^truth^"unconsciously, as^ if inspired by Heaven. 

40. The sun is many times larger than the earth, but 
owing to the great distance it appears like a small disk. So 
the Lord is infinitely great, but owing to our being too far 
from Him we fall very, very short of comprehending His 
real greatness. 

* 41. Knowingly or unknowingly, consciously or uncon- 
sciously, in whatever state we utter His name, we acquire 

jthe merit of such utterance. A man who voluntarily goes 
into a river and bathes therein gets the benefit of the bath ; 



THE SAYINGS. IO7 

so does likewise he who has been pushed into the river by 
another, or who while sleeping soundly has water thrown 
upon him by another. 

42. Satan never enters the house wherein are always 
sung the praises of Hari. 

43. A king having committed the mortal crime of killing 
a Brdhma/za, went to the hermitage of a sage to learn what 
penance he must perform in order to be purified. The 
sage was absent from home, but his son was there* The 
son hearing the case of the king, said, * Repeat the name 
of God (Rcima) three times and your sin will be expiated/ 
When the sage came back and heard the penance prescribed 
by his son, he said to him in great wrath, * Sins committed 
in myriads of births are purged at once by but once uttering 
the name of the Almighty ; how weak must be thy faith, 
O son, that thou hast ordered that name to be repeated 
thrice 1 For this offence of thine go and become a JC&n* 

And the son became the Guhaka Kbndtfa of the 



44, Consciously or unconsciously, in whatever way one 
falls into the trough of nectar, one becomes immortal 
Similarly, whosoever utters the name of the Deity voluntarily 
or involuntarily finds immortality In the end. 

45. As a large and powerful steamer moves swiftly over 
the waters, towing rafts and barges in its wake, so when 
a Saviour descends, He easily carries thousands across the 
ocean of MHyi (illusion), 




'/'',* 



I O8 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

^0. When the flood comes, it overflows rivers and 
streams, and makes one watery surface of all adjacent 
lands. But the rain-water flows away through fixed chan- 
' nels. When the Saviour becomes incarnate, all arc saved 
through His grace. The Siddhas (perfect ones) only save 
themselves with much pain and penance* 

47. When a mighty raft of wood floats down a stream, it 
can carry a hundred men, and still it does not sink. A reed 
floating down may sink with the weight of even a crow. 
So when a Saviour becomes incarnate, innumerable are the 
men who find salvation by taking refuge under Him. The 
Siddha only saves himself with much toil and trouble. 

48. The locomotive engine reaches the destination itself, 
and also draws and takes with it a long train of loaded 

i wagons. So likewise act the Saviours. They carry multi- 
tudes of men,, heavily laden with the cares and sorrows of 
the world, to the feet of the Almighty, 

49, , When Bhagavdn 5r! RAma/Sandra came to this world, 
seven sages only could recognise Him to be the God 
, incarnate. So when God descends into this world, few only 
can recognise His Divine nature. 

1 1 60. On the tree of Sat-^it-dnanda there are innumerable 
:' ;Rlmas, Knshwas, Christ's, &c. ; one or two of them come 
| 'down into this world now and then, and produce mighty 
changes and revolutions. 

61. The Avatira or Saviour is the messenger of God, 
JHe is like the Viceroy of a mighty monarch. As when 



THE SAYINGS. 



IO9 



there is some disturbance In a far-off province the king 
sends his viceroy to quell it; so whenever there is any 
waning of religion in any part of the world, God sends His 
Avatara there. 

62. It is one and the same Avat&ra that, having plunged 
into the ocean of life, rises up in one place and is known as 
Krishna, and diving again rises in another place arid is 
known as Christ, 

53. In some seasons water can be obtained from the 
great depths of the wells only and with great difficulty, but 
when the country is flooded in the rainy season, water is 
obtained with ease everywhere. So ordinarily, God is 
reached with great pains through prayers and penances, 
but when the flood of Incarnation descends, God is seen 
anywhere and everywhere. 

54. A Siddha-purusha (perfect one) is like an archaeo- 
logist who removes the dust and lays open an old well 
which was covered up during ages of disuse by rank 
growth. The Avat&ra, on the other hand, is like a great 
engineer who sinks a new well in a place where there was 
no water before. Great men can give salvation to those 
only who have the waters of piety and goodness hidden 
In themselves, but the Saviour saves him too whose heart 
is devoid of all love, and dry as a desert 

65. Think not that Bima, SitH, Sri K>/sha, RMM, 
Ar^una, &c., were not historical personages, but mere 
allegories, or that the Scriptures have an inner and esoteric 
meaning only. Nay, they were human beings of flesh and 



.*"" 




I IO THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKA7SI WA. 

blood just as you are, but because they were Divinities, 
their lives can be interpreted both historically and spiritually. 

56. None knoweth the immensity of the sacrifice which 
the Godhead maketh when it becomes incarnate or becomes 
flesh. 

67. The Saviours are to Brahman as the waves are to 
the ocean. 

58. What is the state which a Sidclha attains ? (A perfect 
man and well-cooked food are both called siddha. 
There is a pun here on the word.) As potato or brinj.il, 
&c., when boiled properly (sicldha), becomes soft and tender, 
so when a man reaches perfection (Siddha) he becomes all 
humility and tenderness. 

59. Five are the kinds of Siddhas found in this world : 

(1) Trie Svapna Siddhas are those who attain perfection 
by means of dream inspiration. 

(2) The Mantra Siddhas arc those who attain perfection 
by means of any sacred mantra. 

(3) The HaA&at Siddhas are those who attain perfection 
suddenly. As a poor man may suddenly become rich by 
finding a hidden treasure, or by marrying into a rich family, 
so many sinners become pure all of a sudden, and enter 
the Kingdom of Heaven. 

(4) The Knpa Siddhas are those who attain perfection 
through the tangible grace of the Almighty, as a poor man 
is made wealthy by the kindness of a king. 

(5) The Nitya Siddhas are those who are ever-perfect. 
As a gourd or a pumpkin-creeper brings forth fruit first and 



THE MAYINGS. Ill 

then its flower, so the ever-perfect is born a Siddha, and all 
his seeming exertions after perfection are merely for the 
sake of setting examples to humanity. 

60. There is a fabled species of birds called 'Homi/ 
which live so high up in the heavens, and so dearly love 
those regions, that they never condescend to come down to 
the earth. Even their eggs, which, when laid in the sky, 
begin to fall down to the earth attracted by gravity, are 
said to get hatched in the middle of their downward course 
and give birth to the young ones, The fledgelings at once 
find out that they are falling down, and immediately change 
their course and begin to fly up towards their home, drawn 
thither by instinct. Men such as *Suka Deva, Nirada, , 
Jesus, Sawkar^irya and others, are like those birds, who* 
even in their boyhood give up all attachments to the things' 1 
of this world and betake themselves to the highest regions 
of true Knowledge and Divine Light. These men are,, 
called Nitya Siddhas. 

*!*!*'' "' " '' 

61. The Divine sages form, as it were, the inner circle of 
God's nearest relatives. They are like friends, companions, 
kinsmen of God. Ordinary beings form the outer circle or 
are the creatures of God. 

62. When the shell of an ordinary cocoa-nut is pierced 
through, the nail enters the kernel of the nut too. But in 
the case of the dry nut, the kernel becomes separate from 
the shell, and so when the shell is pierced the kernel is not 
touched. Jesus was like the dry nut, i.e. His inner soul 



THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKfl/SIWA. 

was separate from His physical shell, and consequently 
the sufferings of the body did not affect Him. 

63. Once a holy man, while passing through a crowded 
street, accidentally trod upon the toe of a wicked person. 
The wicked man, furious with rage, beat the Sddhu merci- 
lessly, till he fell to the ground in a faint. His disciples 
took great pains and adopted various measures to bring 
him back to consciousness, and when they saw that he had 
recovered a little, one of them asked, c Sir, do you recognise 
who is attending upon you ? ' The Sadhu replied, * He 
who beat me/ A true SMhu finds no distinction between 
a friend and a foe. 




64. The,,,,, swan can _ separate the milk frorjQL,,,,wciter ; it 

drinks only the milk, leaving the water untouched. Other 
birds cannot do so. Similarly God is intimately mixed up 
with M&y& ; ordinary men cannot see Him separately from 
M&ya". Only the Paramaha^sa (the great soul -here is a pun 
on the word 'hawsa/ which means both soul and swan) 
throws off Mlfcy&, and takes up God only. 

65. The wind carries the smell of the sandal-wood as 
well as that of ordure, but does not mix with either. 
Similarly a perfect man lives in the world, but does not 
mix with it. 

66. A perfect man is like a lotus-leaf in the water or like 
a mud-fish in the marsh. Neither of these is polluted by 
the element in which it lives. 

67. As water passes under a bridge but never stagnates, 



THE SAYINGS. 113 

so money passes through the hands of 'The Free' who 
never hoard it, -; 

68. As a rope that is burnt retains its shape intact, but 
has become all ashes, so that nothing can be bound with 
it ; similarly, the man who is emancipated retains the form 
of his egoism, but not an idea of vanity (Ahawkira). 

69. As an aquatic bird, such as. a pelican, dives into 
water, but the water does not wet its plumage, so the 
perfect man lives in the world, but the world does not 
touch him. 

70. When the head of a goat is severed from its body, 
the trunk moves about for some time, still showing the 
signs of life. Similarly, though the Aha^zkira (vanity or 
egoism) is beheaded in the perfect man, yet sufficient of its 
vitality is left to make such a man carry on the functions of 
physical life ; but that much is not sufficient to bind him 
again to the world. 

71. Ornaments cannot be made of pure gold. Some 
alloy must be mixed with it. A man totally devoid of 
Miyi will not survive more than twenty-one days. So long 
as the man has body, he must have some MHyi, however 
small it may be, to carry on the functions of the body. 

72. In the play of hide-and-seek, if the player once 
succeeds in touching the non-player, called the grand-dame 
(Boo^), he is no longer liable to be made a thief. Similarly, 
by once seeing the Almighty, a man is no longer bound 
down by the fetters of the world. The boy, by touching 




IK 



If: 



i| 



114 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK&TSH2VA. 

the Boor2, is free to go wherever he wishes, without being 
pursued, and no one can make him a thief. Similarly, in 
this world's playground, there is no fear to him who has 
once touched the feet of the Almighty. 

73. The iron, once converted into gold by the touch of 
the Philosopher's stone, may be kept under the ground, or 
thrown into a rubbish-heap, but it remains always gold, and 
will never return to its former condition* Similar is the 
case with him who has once touched the feet of the 
Almighty. Whether he dwells in the bustle of the world, 
or in the solitude of forests, nothing will ever contaminate 
him. 

74. The steel sword turns into a golden sword by the 
touch of the Philosopher's stone, and though it retains its 
former form it becomes incapable of injuring any one. 
Similarly, the outward form of a man who has touched the 
feet of the Almighty is not changed, but he no longer 
doeth any evil. 

75. The loadstone rock under the sea attracts the ship 
sailing over it, draws out all its iron nails, separates its 
planks, and sinks the vessel into the deep. Thus, when the 
human soul is attracted by the magnetism of Universal 
Consciousness, the latter destroys in a moment all its 
individuality and selfishness, and plunges it in the ocean 
of God's infinite Love. 

76. Milk and water, when brought into contact, are sure 
to mix so that the milk can never be separated again. 
So if the neophyte, thirsting after self-improvement, mixes 



THE SAYINGS. 115 

indiscriminately with all sorts of worldly men, he not only 
loses his ideals, but his former faith, love, and enthusiasm 
also die away imperceptibly. When, however, you convert 
the milk into butter, it no longer mixes with water, but 
floats over it. Similarly, when the soul once attains God- 
head, it may live in any company, without ever being 
affected by its evil' influences. 

^ 77, So long as no child is born to her, the newly-married 
girl remains deeply absorbed in her domestic duties. But 
no sooner is a son born, than she leaves off all her house- 
hold concerns, and no longer finds any pleasure in them. 
On the contrary, she fondles the newborn baby the livelong 
day, and kisses it with intense joy. Thus man, in his state 
of ignorance, performs all sorts of worldly works, but no 
sooner does he see the Almighty, than he finds no longer 
any relish in them. On the contrary, his happiness now 
consists only in serving the Deity and doing His works 
alone. 

y 78. So long as a man is far from the market, he hears 
a loud and indistinct buzzing only, something like ' Ho ! Ho !' 
But when he enters the market he no longer hears the 
uproar, but perceives distinctly that some one is bargaining 
for potatoes, another for Brinjal, and so on. As long as 
a man is far away from God, he is in the midst of the noise 
and confusion of reason, argument, and discussion; but 
when once a person approaches the Almighty, all reasonings, 
arguments, and discussions cease, and he understands the 
mysteries of God with vivid and clear perception. 

I 2 




THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK/SILtfA. 

79. So long as a man calls aloud, 'Allah Ho ! Allah Ho ! ' 
(O God ! O God !), be sure that he has not found God, for 
he who has found him becomes still 

80. So long as the bee is outside the petals of the lotus, 
and has not tasted its honey, it hovers round the flower, 
emitting its buzzing sound ; but when it is inside the (lower, 
it drinks its nectar noiselessly. So long as a man quarrels 
and disputes about doctrines and dogmas, he has not tasted 
the nectar of true faith when he has tasted it he becomes 
still. 



81. Little children play with dolls in a room apart just 
as they like, but as soon as their mother comes in they 
throw aside the dolls and run to her crying, l Mamma, 
Mamma ! ' You also are now playing in this world deeply 
absorbed with the dolls of wealth, honour, and fame, and 
have no fear or anxiety. But if you once see the I )ivine 
Mother entering in, you will not find pleasure any more in 
wealth, honour, and fame. Leaving off all these you will 
run to Her. 

- 82. The naked Sage, Totapuri, used to say, 'If a brass 
pot be not rubbed daily, it will get rusty. So if a man does 
.not contemplate the Deity daily, his heart will grow impure.' 

To him Sri Rimakr/sh;za replied, * Yes, but if the vessel be 
of gold, it does not require daily cleaning. The man who 
has reached God requires prayers or penances no more.' 

H 83. He who has once tasted the refined and crystalline 
sugar-candy, finds no pleasure in raw treacle j he who has 
slept in a palace, will not find pleasure in lying down in 



THE SAYINGS. 1 17 

a dirty hovel. So the soul that has once tasted the sweet- 
ness of the Divine Bliss finds no delight in the ignoble 
pleasures of the world. 

* 84. She who has a king for her lover will not accept the 
homage of a street beggar. So the soul that has once found 
favour in the sight of the Lord does not want the paltry 
things of this world. 

^ 85. When a man is in the plains he sees the lowly grass 
and the mighty pine-tree and says, c How big is the tree and 
how small is the grass ! ' But when he ascends the moun- 
tain and looks from its high peak to the plain below, the 
mighty pine-tree and the lowly grass blend into one indistinct 
mass of green verdure. So in the sight of worldly men 
there are differences of rank and position, but when .the 
Divine sight is opened there remains no distinction of high 
and Ipw. 

86. When water is poured into an empty vessel a bubbling, 
noise ensues, but when the vessel is full no such noise is 
heard. Similarly, the man who has not found God is full of 
vain disputations. But when he has seen Him, all vanities 
disappear, and he silently enjoys the Bliss Divine. 

i. 87. A woman naturally feels shy to relate to all the talk 
she daily has with her husband, save to her own companions. 
Similarly, a devotee does not like to relate to any one but 
a true Bhakta (devotee) the ecstatic joys which he experiences 
in his Divine communion ; nay, sometimes he becomes im- 
patient of relating his experiences even to those of his own 
class. 



Il8 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK/SIWA. 

88. The moth once seeing the light never returns to 
darkness - the ant dies in the sugar-heap, but never retreats 
therefrom. Similarly, a good devotee gladly sacrifices his 
life for his God by renunciation. 

89. Why does the God-lover find such pleasure in 
addressing the Deity as Mother ? Because the child 
is more free with its mother, and consequently she is 
dearer to the child than any one else. 

90. The pious man, like a hemp-smoker, finds no 
pleasure in singing the praises of the Almighty alone. (The 
hemp-smoker never finds pleasure in smoking alone.) 

91. If a strange animal enters a herd of cows, it is 
driven off by the combined attacks of the whole herd. But 
let only a cow enter, and all the other cows will make 
friends with her by mutual licking of bodies. Thus, when 

j a devotee meets with another devotee, both experience 
i great happiness and feel loth to separate, but when a scoffer 
enters the circle they carefully avoid him. 

92. What is the strength of a devotee ? He is a child 
of God, and tears are his greatest strength. 

93. The young of a monkey clasps and clings to its 
mother. The young kitten cannot clasp its mother, but 
mews piteously whenever it is near her. If the young monkey 
lets go its hold on its mother, it falls clown and gets hurt. 
This is because it depends upon its own strength ; but the 
kitten runs no such risk, as the mother herself carries it 
about from place to place. Such is the difference between 
self-reliance and entire resignation to the will of God. 



a ;] 



THE SAYINGS. IIQ 

94, It is fabled that the pearl oyster leaves its bed at 
the bottom of the sea and comes up to the surface to 
.catch the rain-water when the star Svati is in the ascendant. 
It floats about on the surface of the sea with its mouth 
agape, until it succeeds in catching a drop of the marvellous 
Sv&ti-rain. Then it dives down to its sea-bed and there 
rests, till it has succeeded in fashioning a beautiful pearl 
out of that rain-drop. Similarly, there are some true and 
eager aspirants who travel from place to place in search of 
that watchword from a godly and perfect preceptor (Sad- 
guru) which will open for them the gate of eternal bliss, 
and if in their diligent search one is fortunate enough to 
meet such a Gum and get" from him the much-longed-for 
logos, which is sure to break down all fetters, he at once 
retires from society, enters into the deep recess of his own 
heart and rests there, till he has succeeded in gaining 
eternal peace. 

05. The flint may remain for myriads of years under 
water, still it does not lose its inner fire. Strike it with 
iron whenever you like and out flows the glowing spark. , 
So is the true devotee firm in his faith. Though he may 
remain surrounded by all the impurities of the world, he 
never loses his faith and love. He becomes entranced as j 
soon as he hears the name of the Almighty. 

96. The Stone may remain for myriads of years in water, 
and the water will never penetrate it. But clay is soon 
softened Into mud by the contact of water. So the strong 
heart of the faithful does not despair in the midst of trials 



! 



tjf"i *' Wlw^S "mr f 





1 2O THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF KAMAKAYSIIJVA. 

and persecutions, but the man of weak faith is easily 
shaken even by the most trifling cause. 

97. How sweet is the simplicity of the child ! He prefers 
a doll to all riches and wealth. So is the faithful devotee. 
No one else can throw aside wealth and honour to take 
God only. 

98. God is like unto a hill of sti&'ir. A .small ant carries 
away from it a small grain of sugar, the bigger ant takes from 
it a larger grain. But the hill remains as largo as before. 
So are the devotees of God. They become ecstatic with 
even a grain of one Divine attribute. No one can contain 
within him all His attributes, * 

99. A logician once asked .Sri Riunak/'/sh^a, 'What 
are knowledge,, knower, and the object known ? * To which 
he repne3, ' Good man, I do not know all these niceties of 
scholastic learning, I know only my Mother Divine, and 
that I am Her $pn.' 

100. A man who finds all the hairs of his body standing 
on end at the bare , mention of Sri HarPs name, through 
sheer ecstasy, and who sheds tears of love on hearing the 
name of God, he has reached his last birth, 

101. The more you scratch the ringworm, the greater 
grows the itching, and the m<ye pleasure do you find in 
scratching. Similarly, the devotees once beginning to sing 
His praises, never get tired of it, but continue for hours 
and hours together. 

102. When grains are measured out to the purchaser in 



THE SAYINGS. 121 

the granary of a rich merchant, the measurer unceasingly 
goes on measuring, while the attending women supply him 
with basket-fulls of grain from the main store. The mea- 
surer does not leave his seat, while the women incessantly 
supply him with grain. But a small grocer has neither 
such attendants, nor is his store so inexhaustible. Similarly^ 
it is God Himself .who is constantly inspiring thoughts and 
sentiments in the hearts of His devotees, and that is the 
reason why the latter are never in lack of new and wise 
thoughts and sentiments; while, on the other hand, the 
book-learned, like petty grocers, soon find that their; 
\houghts have become exhausted. 

\103. A born farmer does not leave off tilling the soil, 
though it may not rain for twelve consecutive years, while 
a/merchant who has but lately taken himself to the plough 
i discouraged by one season of drought The true believer, 
is never discouraged, if even with his lifelong devotion he 
fails to see God. 

104. A true devotee who has drunk deep of the Divine ' 
Love is like a veritable drunkard, and, as such, cannot 
always observe the rules of propriety. 

105. Dala (sedge) does not grow in large and pure 
water-tanks, but in small stagnant and miasmatic pools. 
Similarly, Dala (schism) does not take place in a party 
whose adherents are guided by pure, broad, and unselfish 

. motives, but it takes firm root in a party whose advocates 
are given to selfishness, insincerity, and bigotry. (* Dala, 7 
in Bengili, means both sedges and schism.) 




122 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK/SHtfA. 



106. The Yogins and Sajwy&sins are like snakes. The 
snake never digs a hole for itself, but it lives in the hole 
made by the mouse. When one hole becomes uninhabit- 
able, it enters into another hole. So the Yogins and the 
Saazyasins make no houses for themselves ; they pass their 
days in other men's houses to-day in one house, to-morrow 
in another. 

107. The sage alone can recognise a sage. Ho who 
deals in cotton twists can alone tell of what number and 
quality a particular twist is made. 

108. A sage was lying in a deep trance (SMinftdhi) by 
a roadside ; a thief passing by, saw him, and thought within 
himself, * This fellow, lying here, is a thief* He has been 
breaking into some house by night, and now sleeps ex- 
hausted. The police will very soon be here to catch him. 
So let me escape in time.' Thus thinking, he ran away, 
Soon after a drunkard came upon the sage, and said, 
f Hallo ! thou hast fallen into the ditch by taking a drop 
too much. I am steadier than thou, and am not going 
to tumble/ Last of all came a sage, and understanding 
that a great sage was in a trance (Samddhi), he sat down, 
and touched him, and began to rub gently his holy feet. 

109. An itinerant Sidhu came once upon the Kilt 
temple of Elm RUsamam, and seeing a dog eating the 
remains of a feast, he went up to him and said, embracing 
him, * Brother, how is it that thou eatest alone, without 
giving me a share? 7 So saying, he began to eat along 
with the dog. The people of the place naturally thought 



THE SAYINGS. 123 

him mad, but when standing before the temple of the 
Goddess, he began to chant forth some hymns in praise of 
KIM, and the temple appeared to shake through the fervour 
of his devotion. Then the people knew him to be a great 
Sidhu. The true SUdhus roam about like children or mad 
men, in dirty clothes, and various other disguises. 

110. The true religious man is he who does not do 
anything wrong or act impiously when he is alone, i.e. 
when there is none to look after and blame him. 

111. In the Bengali alphabet no three letters are alike 
in sound except the three sibilants (&, sha, and sa), all 
meaning ' forbear,' 'forbear,' 'forbear.' This shows that 
even from .our childhood we are made to learn forbear- 
ance in our very alphabets. The quality of forbearance 

_is of the highest importance to every man. 

112. Sugar and sand may be mixed together, but the ant 
rejects the sand and goes off with the sugar-grain ; so pious,.. 
men sift the good from the bad. 

113. It is the nature of the winnowing basket to reject 
the bad and keep the good; even such is the case with 
pious men. 

114. He is truly a pious man who is.. 1 .jjead i eyeatt ( .iajife, 

i, e. whose passions and desires have been all destroyed as / 

,*..... V - -" - |/; i 

in a^ dead body. ' y 8 1 " 

115. Worldly persons perform many pious and charitable 
acts with a hope of worldly rewards, but when misfortune, 
sorrow, and poverty approach them, they forget them all 



1 1 

! I 

I Divine name. 



124 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK/^/SIWA. 

They are like the parrot that repeats the Divine name 

' BldharKsha, RMha-Kr/shwa ' the livelong day, but 
cries Kaw, Kaw 7 when caught by a cat, forgetting the 
ivine name. 

A , .'lie. A spring cushion is squeezed down when one sits 
upon it, but it soon resumes its original shape when the 
pressure is removed. So it is with worldly men. They 
are full of religious sentiments, so long as they hear religious 
talks ; but no sooner do they enter into the daily routine 
of the world, than they forget all those high and noble 
thoughts, and become as impure as before. 

117. So long as the iron is in the furnace it is red-hot, 
but it becomes black as soon as it is taken out of the fire. 
So also is the worldly man* As long as he is in church or 
in the society of pious people, he is full of religious emo- 

1 tions, but no sooner does he come out of those associations 

,\ than he loses them all. 

'*i 

' 118, Some one said, * When my boy Harish grows up, 
I will get him married, and give him the charge of the 
family; I shall then renounce the world, and begin to 
practise Yoga/ At this a S&dhu remarked, 'You will 
never find any opportunity of practising Yoga (devotion)* 
You will say afterwards, " Harish and Girish are too much 
attached to me. They do not like to leave my company 
as yet." Then you will desire perhaps,, " Let Harish have 
a son, and let me see that son married." And thus there 
will be no end of your desires.' 

119* Flies sit at times on the sweetmeats kept exposed 



THE SAYINGS. 1 25 

for sale in the shop of a confectioner ; but no sooner does 
a sweeper pass by with a basket full of filth than the flies 
leave the sweetmeats and sit upon the filth-basket. But 
the honey-bee never sits on filthy objects, and always 
drinks honey from the flowers. The tu worldly men are like J 
flies. At times they get a momentary taste of Divine j 
sweetness, but their natural tendency for filth soon brings j 
them back to the dunghill of the world. The good man, on 
the other hand, is always absorbed in the beatific con- 1 
templation of Divine Beauty, 

N.B. The worldly man is like a filthy worm that always 
lives and dies in filth, and has no idea of higher things ; 
the good man of the world is like the fly that sits now on 
the filth and now on the sweet ; while the free soul of 
a Yogin is like the b,e that always drinks the honey of 
God's holy presence, and nothing else. 

120. When it was argued that a family-man (Gr/hastha) 
may remain in the family, but may have no concern with 
it, and consequently may remain uncontaminated by the 
world, an illustration was cited to refute such an argument, 
which is as follows : 

A poor Br&hmaTza once came to one of those family- 
men, who are unconcerned with family affairs, to beg some 
money. When the beggar asked of him some money, he 
replied, ' Sir, I never touch money. Why are you wasting 
your time in begging of me?' The Brihrna^a, however, 
would not go away. Tired with his importunate entreaties 
the man at last resolved in his mind to give him a rupee, 







THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAUAKRISUNA. 



and told him, ' Well, sir, come to-morrow, I shall see what 
I can do for you.' Then going in, this typical family-man 
told his wife, who was the manager of all his affairs, he 
being unconcerned, 'Look here, dear, a poor Brahmawa 
is in great difficulty, and wants something of inc. I have 
made up my mind to give him a rupee. What is your 
opinion about it? 7 'Aha! what a generous fellow you 
are!' she replied, in great excitement at the name of a 
rupee. ' Rupees are not, like leaves or stones, to bo thrown 
away without any thought.' 'Well, dear/ replied the hus- 
band, in an apologising tone, ' the man is very poor and 
we should not give him less than a rupee.' 'No !' replied 
the wife, ' I cannot spare that much ; here is a two-anna, bit 
and you can give him that, if you like,' The man of 
course had no other alternative, being himself unconcerned 
in all such worldly matters, and he took what his wife 
gave him. Next day the beggar came, and received only 
a two-anna-bit. Such uncontaminated family-men are 
really henpecked persons who are solely guided by their 
wives, and as such are very poor specimens of humanity. 

121. Seeing the water pass glittering through the net 
of bamboo frame-work 1 , the small fry enter into it with 
great pleasure, and having once entered they cannot get 
out again and are caught. Similarly, foolish men enter 
into the world allured by its false glitter, but as it is easier 
to enter the net than to get out of it, it is easier to enter the 
world than renounce it, after having once entered it. 

1 A trap for catching small fish. 



THE SAYINGS. 127 

122. Men always quote the example of the king kanaka, 
as that of a man who lived in the world and yet attained 
perfection. But throughout the whole history of mankind 
there is only this solitary example. His case was not the 
rule, but the exception. The general rule is that no one 
can attain spiritual perfection unless he renounces lust and 
greed. Do not think yourself to be a (kanaka. Many 
centuries have rolled away and the world has not produced 
another (kanaka. 

123. This world is like a stage, where men perform many i 
parts under various disguises. They do not like to take 
off the mask, unless they have played for some time. Let 
them play for a while, and then they will leave off the mask 
of their own accord. 

124. The heart of the devotee is like a dry match ; and 
the slightest mention of the name of the Deity kindles 
the fire of love in his heart. But the mind of the worldly, 
soaked in lust and greed, is like the moist match, and 
can never be heated to enthusiasm, though God may be 
preached to him innumerable times. 

125. A worldly man may be endowed with intellect as 
great as that of (kanaka, may take as much pains and 
trouble as a Yogin, and make as great sacrifices as an 
ascetic ; but all these he makes and does, not for God, but 
for worldliness, honour, and wealth. 

120, As water does not enter into a stone, so religious I 
advice produces no impression on the heart of a worldly I 
man. 



<15!a 



128 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

127. As a nail cannot enter into a stone, but can easily 
be driven into the earth, so the advice of the pious does 

I not affect the soul of a worldly man. It enters into the 
heart of a believer. 

128. As soft clay easily takes an impression, but not so 
a stone, so also the Divine Wisdom impresses itself on 
the heart of the devotee, but not on the soul of the worldly 
man. 

129. The characteristic of a thoroughly worldly man is 
that he does not only not listen to hymns, religious dis- 
courses, praises of the Almighty, &c., but also prevents 
others from hearing them, and abuses religious men and 
societies j and scoifs at prayers. 

130. The alligator has got such a thick and scaly hide 
that no weapons can pierce it ; on the contrary, they fall 

| off harmless. So, howrnuchsoever you may preach religion 
; to a worldly man, it will have no effect upon his heart 

131. As the water enters in on one side under the bridge, 
and soon passes out on the other, so religious advice affects 
worldly souls. It enters into them by one ear and goes 

| out by the other, without making any impression upon 
their minds. 

132. By talking with a worldly man one can feel that 
his heart is filled with worldly thoughts and desires, even 
as the crop of a pigeon is filled with grains. 

133. So long as the fire is beneath, the milk boils and 
bubbles. Remove the fire and it is quiet again. So the 



II.. 



THE SAYINGS. 129 

heart of the neophyte boils with enthusiasm, so long as v 

he goes on with his spiritual exercises, but afterwards it | 

cools down. 

134. As to approach a monarch one must ingratiate 
oneself with the officials that keep the gate and surround 
the throne, so to reach the Almighty one must practise 
many devotions, as well as serve many devotees and keep ; 
the company of the wise. 

135. Keep thy own sentiments and faith to thyself. ^ 
Do not talk about them abroad. Otherwise thou wilt be 

a great loser. 

136. There are three kinds of dolls ; the first made 
of salt, the second made of cloth, and the third made of 
stone. If these dolls be immersed in water, the first will 
get dissolved and lose its form, the second will absorb 
a large quantity of water but retain its form, while the 
third will be impervious to the water. The first doll 
represents the man who merges his self in the Universal 
and All-pervading Self and becomes one with it, that is 
the 'Mukta purusha'; the second represents a true lover 
or Bhakta, who is full of Divine bliss and knowledge ; and 
the third represents a worldly man, who will not absorb 
the least drop of true knowledge. 

137- As when fishes are caught in a net some do not 
struggle at all, some again struggle hard to come out of 
the net, while a few are happy enough to effect their escape 
by rending the net; so there are three sorts of men, 






1 30 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

viz^ fettered. (Bacjdha), wriggling (Mumukshu), and released 
(Mukta). 

188. As sieves separate the finer and coarser parts of 
a pulverized or ground substance, keeping the coarser and 
rejecting the finer, even so the wicked man takes the evil 
and rejects the good. 

139. Two men went into a garden. The worldly-wise 
man no sooner entered the gate than he began to count 
the number of the mango-trees, how many mangoes each 
tree bore, and what might be the approximate price of 
the whole orchard. The other went to the owner, made 
his acquaintance, and quietly going under a mango-tree 
began to pluck the fruit and eat it with the owner's con- 
sent Now who is the wiser of the two? Eat mangoes, 
] it will satisfy your hunger. What is the good of counting 
i the leaves and making vain calculations? The vain man 
! of intellect is uselessly busy in finding out the * why and 
wherefore' of creation, while the humble man of wisdom 
makes acquaintance with the Creator and enjoys Supreme 
Bliss in this world. 

l 140. The vulture soars high up in the air, but all the 
while he is looking down into the charnel-pits in search 
of putrid carcasses. So the book-read pandits speak glibly 
and volubly about Divine Knowledge, but it is all mere 
talk, for all the while their mind is thinking about how to 
get money ? respect, honour, power, &c, the vain guSrdon 
of their learning. 

141. Once a dispute arose in the court of the Hah&rHjah 



THE SAYINGS. 131 

of Burdwan among the learned men there, as to who was 
the greater Deity, ,51 va or Vishnu. Some gave preference 
to 5iva, others to Vishmi. When the dispute grew hot 
a wise pandit remarked, addressing the Raja, ' Sire, I have 
neither met -Siva nor seen Vishmi; how can I say who 
is the greater of the two?' At this the dispute stopped, 
for none of the disputants really had seen the Deities. 
Similarly none should compare one Deity with another. 
When a man has really seen a Deity, he comes to know 
that all the Deities are manifestations of one and the same 
Brahman. 

142. As the elephant has two sets of teeth, the external 
tusks and the inner grinders, so the God-men, like *Sri 
K>/sha, &c., act and behave to all appearances like 
common men, while their heart and soul rest far beyond 
the pale of Karman. 

143. The SMhu who distributes medicines, and uses .in- 
toxicants, is not a proper Sadhu ; avoid the company of such. 

144. A Brihma^a was laying down a garden, 'and looked 
after it day and night. One day a cow straying into the 
garden browsed away a mango sapling which was one of 
the most carefully-watched trees of the Brihma^a, The 
Brihma^a seeing the cow destroy his favourite plant gave 
it such a sound beating that it died of the injuries received. 
The news soon spread like wildfire that the Brihma^a, 
killed the sacred animal. . , 

Now the Brahma^a was a so-called Vedantist, and when 
taxed with the sin denied it, saying, 'No, I have not 

# K 2 



132 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

killed the cow; it is my hand that has done it, and as 
Indra is the presiding Deity of the hand, so if any one has 
incurred the guilt of killing the cow, it is Indra and not I,' 

Indra in his Heaven heard all this, assumed the shape 
of an old Brihma^a, came to the owner of the garden, and 
said, 'Sir, whose garden is this?' 

Brhrna#a c Mine.' 

Indra 'It is a beautiful garden. You have got a 
skilful gardener, for see how neatly and artistically he 
has planted the trees ! ' 

Brihma^a 'Well, sir, that is also my work. The trees 
are planted under my personal supervision and direction/ 

Indra f Indeed ! O, you are very clever. But who has 
laid out this road? It is very ably planned and neatly 
executed.' 

Brihma^a * All this has been done by me.* 

Then Indra with joined hands said, *When all these 
things are yours, and you take credit for all the works 
done in this garden, it is hard lines for poor Indra to be 
held responsible for the killing of the cow/ 

145, If thou art in right earnest to be good and perfect, 
God will send the true and proper Master (Sad-Guru) to 
thee. Earnestness is the only thing necessary. 

148. As when going to a strange country, one must abide 

.; by the directions of him who knows the way, while taking 

the advice of many may lead to confusion, so in trying to 

reach God one should follow implicitly the advice of one 

single Guru who knows the way to God, 



THE SAYINGS. 133 

147. Whoever can call on the Almighty with sincerity 
ind intense earnestness negds no Guru. But such a man 
s rare, hence the necessity of a Guru or Guide, The Guru 
should be only one, but Upagurus (assistant Gurus) may be 
nany. He from whom any thing whatsoever is learned is an 
Jpaguru. The great AvadMta had twenty-four such Gurus. 

148. Many roads lead to Calcutta. A certain man 
started from his home in a distant village towards the 
metropolis. He asked a man on the road, 'What road 
must I take to reach Calcutta soon?' The man said, 

Follow this road/ Proceeding some distance a he met 
mother man and asked him, * Is this the shortest road to 
Calcutta?' The man replied, *O, no! You must retrace 
four footsteps and take the road to your left' The man 
iid so. Going in that new road for some distance he met 
a, third man who pointed him out another road to Calcutta. 
Thus the traveller made no progress, but spent the day in 
changing one road for another. As he wanted to reach 
Calcutta he should have stuck to the road pointed out to 
him by the first man. Similarly those who want to reach 
God must follow one and one only Guide. 

149. The disciple should never criticise his own Guru. 
He must implicitly obey whatever his Guru says. Says 
a Bengali couplet : 

Though my Guru may visit tavern and still, 
My Guru is holy Rai Nity&nanda still. 

150. Th^, iwi Gura is a mediator. He brings man and// 

God together, " ' ' ' " M "*" ( 



1 34 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKRISHUVA. 

151. Take the pearl and throw the oyster-shell away. 
Follow the mantra (advice) given thee by thy Guru and 

: throw out of consideration the human frailties of thy 
| teacher. 

152. Listen not, if any one criticises and censures thy 
Guru. Leave his presence at once. 

I 153. As* the moon is the uncle of every child, so God 

is the Father and Guide of the whole Humanity. (The 
children in Bengal call the moon their ' maternal uncle.') 

154. A disciple, having firm faith in the infinite power 
of his Guru, walked over a river even by pronouncing hi^5 
name. The Guru, seeing this, thought within himself, 

I 1 Well, is there such a power even in my name ? Then 
I must be very great and powerful, no doubt ! ' The next 
| day he also tried to walk over the river pronouncing * I, I, I/ 

l but no sooner had he stepped into the waters than he sank 

t i and was drowned. Faith can achieve miracles, while vanity 

i or egoism is the death of map. 

i '--,,, .......... - - 1 " "- ......... ......... *" 

! j 155. Gurus can be had by hundreds, but good Chelas 

(disciples) are very rare. 



;;| n :156, It is easy to utter *do, re, mi, fa, sol, la, si/ by 



| ;;| 

i mouth, but not so easy to sing or play them on any instru- 

j . ment So it is easy to talk religion, but it is difficult to act 

I .... **"'"" '""*"*" ........ ^ 

religion. 



, tf 157. Common men talk bagfuls of religion, but act 
* I '^SSSffi of &, while the wise man speaks little, but his whole 
|| .life is a religion acted out. 

it 



THE SAYINGS, 



135 



158. What you wish others to do, do yourself. 

159. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that he who yearns 
for God ? finds Him. 

160. The petals of the lotus drop off in time, but they 
leave scars behind. So when true knowledge comes egoism 
goes off, but its traces remain. These, however, are not at 
all active for evil. 

161. There are two Egos in man, one ripe and the other 
unripe. The ripe Ego thinks, c Nothing is mine ; whatever 
I see, or feel, or hear, nay, even this body is not mine, I am 
always free and eternal.' The unripe Ego, on the contrary, 
thinks, ' This is my house, my room, my child, my wife, my 
body, &c. 5 

162. The cup in which garlic juice is kept retains the" 
nasty odour, though it may be rubbed and scoured hundreds 
of times. Egohood also is such an obstinate creature. It 
never leaves us completely. 

163. The leaves of the cocoa-palm fall off, but leave still 
their marks behind on the trunk. Similarly, so long as one 
has this body, there will remain the mark of egoism, how 
high soever a man may advance in spiritualit4 But these 
traces of egoism do not bind such men to tft; world nor 
cause their re-birth. t. 

164=. The sun can give heat and light to the whole world, 
but it can do nothing when the clouds are in the sky and 
shut out its rays. Similarly, so long as egoism is in the soul, ( 
God cannot shine upon the heart. 



1.1 



2 

'I 



'i, 






136 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK^/SIWA. 

165. Vanity is like a heap of rubbish or ashes on which 
the water, as soon as it falls, dries away. Prayers and 
contemplations produce no effect upon the heart puffed 
up with vanity. 

166. Of all the birds of the air the crow is considered to 
be the wisest, and he thinks himself so too. He never falls 
into a snare. He flies off at the slightest approach of danger, 
and steals the food with the greatest dexterity. But all this 
wisdom can supply him with no better living than filth and 
foul matter. This is the result of his having the wisdom of 
the pettifogger. 

167. Once upon a time conceit entered the heart of the 
Divine Sage Narada, and he thought there was no greater 
devotee than himself. Reading his heart, the Lord .Sri 
Vishnu said, ' Narada, go to sucli and such a place, there is 
a great Bhakta of mine there, and cultivate his acquaint- 
ance.' Narada went there and found an agriculturist, who 
rose early in the morning, pronounced the name of Han 
only once, and taking his plough went out to till the ground 
all day long. At night he went to bed after pronouncing 
the name of Hari once more. Narada said within himself, 
'How can this rustic be called a lover of God? I see him 
busily engaged in worldly duties, and he has no signs of 
a pious man in him.' Narada then went back to the Lord 
and said all he thought of his new acquaintance. The 
Lord said, ' Narada, take this cup full of oil, go round this 
city and come back with it, but beware lest a drop of it fall 
to the ground.' Narada did as he was told, and on his 



THE SAYINGS. 137 

return he was asked, 'Well, Nirada, how often did you 
remember me in your walk?' 'Not once, my Lord/ 
replied N&rada, *and how could I when I had to watch 
this cup brimming over with oil?' The Lord then said, 
e This one cup of oil did so divert your attention that even 
you did forget me altogether, but look to that rustic who, 
carrying the heavy load of a family, still remembers me 
twice every day.' 

168. There are three kinds of love, selfish, mutual, and 

'MWHWIMIM* \Man*1" n 

unselfish. The selfish love is the lowest. It only looks 
towards its own happiness, no matter whether the beloved 
suffers weal or woe. In mutual love the lover not only 
wants the happiness of his or her beloved, but has an eye 
towards his or her own happiness also. The unselfish love 
is of the highest kind. The lover only minds the welfare 
of the beloved. 

169. A true lover sees his God as his nearest and dearest 
relative, just as the shepherd women of Vnnd&vana saw in 
5rl KnshTza, not the Lord of the Universe (Gagann&tha), 
but their own beloved (Gopln&tha). 

170. I must attain perfection in this life, yea, in three 
days I must find God ; nay, with a single utterance of His 
name I will draw Him to me.' With such a violent love the 
Lord is attracted soon. The lukewarm lovers take ages to 
go to Him, if at all. 

171. A lover and a knower of God were once passing 
through a forest On their way they saw a tiger at 
a distance. The Gn&niu or knower of God said, 'There 




138 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK/SIItfA. 

is no reason why we should flee ; the Almighty God will 
certainly protect us.' At this the lover said, 'No, brother, 
come let us run away. Why should we trouble the Lord 
for what can be accomplished by our own exertions ? ' 



v, 172. The Knowledge of God may be likened to a man, 
while the Love of God is like a woman. Knowledge has 
entry only up to the outer rooms of God, but no one can 
enter into the inner mysteries of God save a lover, for 
a woman has access even into the harem of the Almighty. 

173. Knowledge and love of God are ultimately one and 
the same. There is no difference between pure knowledge 
and pure love. 

174. A group of fishcrwomcn on their way home from 
a distant market held on an afternoon, were overtaken by 
a heavy hailstorm at nightfall in the middle of their way, 
and so were compelled to take shelter in a florist's house 
near at hand. Through the kindness of the florist they 
were allowed to sleep that night in one of his rooms, where 
some baskets of sweet-smelling flowers had been kept for 
supplying his customers. The atmosphere of the room was 
too good for the fisherwomen, and they could not, owing 
to it, get even a wink of sleep, till one of them suggested 
a remedy by saying, i Let each of us keep her empty basket 
of fish close to her nose, and thus prevent this troublesome 
smell of flowers from attacking our nostrils and killing our 
sleep.' Every one gladly agreed to the proposal, and did 
accordingly ; and soon all began to snore. Such, indeed, is 



j THE SAYINGS. 139 

| the power and influence of bad habits over all those who 

are addicted to them. 

175. A tame mungoose had its home high up on the wall 
of a house. One end of a rope was tied to its neck, while 
the other end was fastened to a weight. The mungoose 
with the appendage runs and plays in the parlour or in the 
yard of the house, but no sooner does it get frightened than 

: it at once runs up and hides itself in its home on the wall. 

i But it cannot stay there long, as the weight at the other end 

I of the rope draws it down, and it is constrained to leave its 

home. Similarly, a man has his home high up at the feet 
of the Almighty. Whenever he is frightened by adversity | 
and misfortune he goes up to his God, his true home ; but 
in a short time he is constrained to come down into the 
world by its irresistible- attractions. 

176. As HeloncM (Hingcha repens] should not be 
counted among pot-herbs, or sugar-candy among common 
sweets, because even a sick man can use them without 
injuring his health; or as the prawava ("^f) is not to be 
counted as a word, but as Divinity itself; so the desires 
of holiness, devotion, and love are not to be reckoned as 
desires at all 

177. When the fruit grows the petals drop off of them-f 
selves. So when the Divinity in thee increases, the| 
weakness of humanity in thee will vanish, 

178. The new-born calf falls and tumbles down scores 
of times before it learns to stand steady. So in the path I 
of devotion, the slips are many before success is achieved. 



f 



I4O THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAICR/SBUVA, 

^ 179. Some get tipsy with even a small glass of wine. 
Others require two or three bottles to make them intoxi- 
cated. But both get equal and full pleasure of intoxication, 
Similarly, some devotees get intoxicated with celestial bliss 
by coming in direct contact with the Lord of the Universe, 
while others become full of ecstasy even by a glimpse of the 

A' Divine Glory. But both are equally fortunate, since both 
are deluged with Divine bliss. 

180, The snake is very venomous. It bites when any one 
approaches to catch it. But the person who has learnt the 
snake-charm can not only catch a snake, but carries about 
several of them like so many ornaments. Similarly, he who 
has acquired spiritual knowledge can never be polluted by 
lust and greed. 

181, When a man realises one of the following states 
he becomes perfect: (i) All this am I; (2) All this art 
thou ; (3) Thou the Master, and I the servant* 

182, Thou shouldst sacrifice thy body, mind, and riches, 
to find God. 

I 183. Humanity must die before Divinity manifests itself 
j But this Divinity must, in turn, die before the higher 
I manifestation of the Blissful Mother takes place. It is 
\ on the bosom of dead Divinity (*Siva) that the Blissful 
Mother dances Her dance celestial. 

184. He finds God the quickest whose yearning and 
concentration are the greatest. 

185. SamMhi is the state of bliss which is experienced 



THE SAYINGS. 

by a live fish which, being kept out of water for some time, 
is again put into it 

186. There are hills and mountains, dales and valleys, 
under the sea, but they are not visible from the surface. 
So in the state of SamMhi, when one floats upon the j 
ocean of Sat-/$it-&nanda, all human consciousness lies 
latent in him. 

187. If you fill an earthen vessel with water, and set 
it apart upon a shelf, the water in it will dry up iii a few 
days ; but if you place the same pot into water it will remain 
filled as long as it is kept there. Even such is the case 
with your love to the Lord God. Fill and enrich your 
bosom with the love of God for a time, and then employ 
yourself in other affairs, forgetting Him all the while, and 
then you are sure to find within a short time that your 
heart has become poor and vacant and devoid of that 
precious love. But if you keep your heart immersed 
always in the depth of that holy love, your heart is sure \ 
to remain ever full to overflowing with the Divine fervour 
of sacred love. 

188. He who at the time of contemplation is entirely 
unconscious of everything outside, has acquired the per- 
fection of contemplation, 

189. A jar kept in water is full of water inside and 
outside. Similarly the soul immersed in God sees the | 
all-pervading spirit within and without. 

190. When the grace of the Almighty descends, every 




ft 



142 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK/SILtfA. 

one will understand his mistakes ; knowing this you should 
not dispute. 

191. The darkness of centuries is dispersed at once as 
soon as a light is brought into the room. The accumulated 
ignorances and misdoings of innumerable births vanish 
before the single glance of the Almighty's gracious look. 

192. When the Malaya breeze blows, all trees, having 
stamina in them, become converted into sandal-trees ; 
but those which have no stamina remain unchanged as 
before, like bamboo, plantain, palm-tree, &o. So when 
Divine Grace descends, men having the germs of piety and 
goodness in them are changed at once into holy beings 
and are filled with Divinity, but worthless and worldly men 
remain as before. 

193. As the dawn heralds in the rising sun, so unselfish- 
ness, purity, righteousness, &c., precede the advent of the 
Lord. 

194=. As a king, before going to the house of his servant, 
sends from his own stores the necessary seats, ornaments, 
food, &c., to his servant, so that the latter may properly 
receive him ; so before the Lord cometh, He sends love, 
reverence, faith, yearning, &c., into the heart of the 
devotee. 

195. Shallow water in an open field will in time be dried 
up though no one may lessen it by using it. So a sinner 
is sometimes purified by simply resigning himself totally 
and absolutely to the mercy and grace of God. 



THE SAYINGS. 143 

196. A policeman can see with a dark lantern (bull's- 
eye) every one upon whom he throws the rays, but no one 
can see him so long as he does not turn the light towards I 
himself. So does God see every one, but no one seeth 
Him until the Lord revealeth Himself to him in His 
mercy, 

197. There are some fish which have many sets of 
bones, and others have one; but as the eater cleans all 
the bones and eats the fish, so some men have many 
sins and others have few; but the grace of God purifies 
them all in time. 

198. The breeze of His grace is blowing night and day 
over thy head. Unfurl the sails of thy boat (mind) if thou ' 
wantest to make rapid progress through the ocean of life. 

199. Fans should be discarded when the wind blows. 
Prayers and penances should be discarded when the grace 
of God descends. 

200. Creeds and sects matter nothing. Let every one 
perform with faith the devotions and practices of his creed. 
Faith is the only clue to get to God. 

201. He who has faith has all, and he who wants faith 
wants all. 

202. The faith-healers of India order their patients to 
repeat with full conviction the words, 'There is no ill- 
ness in me, there is no illness at all.' The patient repeats c l 
it, and, thus mentally denying, the illness goes off. So if 
you think yourself to be morally weak and wiffibut good- 



144 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMA.KA7STWA. 

ness, you will really find yourself to he so in no time. 
Know and believe that you are of immense power, and the 
power will come to you at last. 

203. Bhagavfin Sii Rama&indra had to bridge the 
ocean before he could cross over to Lawkn. (Ceylon). But 
Hanuman, his faithful monkey-servant, with one jump 
crossed the ocean through the firmness of his faith in Kama. 
Here the servant achieved more than the master, simply 
through faith. 

204. A man wanted to cross the river. A sage gave 
him an amulet and said, 'This will carry thcc across/ The 
man, taking it in his hand, began to walk over the waters. 
When he reached the middle of the river curiosity entered 
into his heart, and he opened the amulet to see what was 
in it. Therein he found, written on a bit of paper, the 
sacred name of Rfima. The man at this said dcprecatingly, 
1 Is this the only secret?' No sooner had he said this than 
he sank down. It is faith in the name of the Lord that 
works miracles, for faith is life, and doubt is death. 

205. Q. How can I perform devotion when I must 
always think of my daily bread? A. He for whom then 
workest will supply thy necessities. God hath made pro- 
vision for thy support before he sent tlice here. 

206. Q. When shall I be free? A. When thy I-hood 
(egoism) will vanish, and thy self-will be merged in the 
Divinity. 

207. Out of the myriads of paper kites that are made to 



THE SAYINGS. 145 

fly in the air, only one or two rend the string and get 
free. So out of hundreds of SMhakas, only one or two- 
get free from worldly bonds. 

208. As a piece of lead, thrown into a basin of mercury, 
is soon dissolved therein, so the human soul loses its in- 
dividual existence when it falls into the ocean of Brahma. 

209. Q. What do you say about the method of religious 
preaching employed now-a-days? A. It is inviting hundreds 

; of persons to dinner, when the food supply is sufficient for 

one only. 

210. Instead of preaching to others, if one worships God 
all that time, that is enough preaching. He who strives to 

] make himself free, is the real preacher. Hundreds come 

j from all sides, no one knows whence, to him who is 

| free, and are taught. When a flower opens the bees come 

I from all sides uninvited and unasked. 

; 211. Hast thou got, O preacher, the badge of authority ? 

(. As the humblest subject wearing the badge of the King 

|. is heard with respect and awe, and can quell the riot by 

I showing his badge ; so must thou, O preacher, obtain first 

f the order and inspiration from God. So long as thou hast 

I not this inspiration, thou mayest preach all thy life, but that 
will be mere waste of breath. 

212. He alone is the true * man 9 who is illumined with 
' the Spiritual Light 

| 213. The soul enchained is 'man/ and free from chain is 

'Siva '(God). , 



146 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKJR/SHJVA, 

214, The heavier scale of a balance goes down while the 
lighter one rises up. Similarly he who is weighed down 
with too many cares and anxieties of the world, goes down 
to the world, while he who has less cares rises up towards 
the Kingdom of Heaven. 

f 216, God is in all men, but all men are not in God: 
that is the reason why they suffer. 

218. There are two sorts of men. The Guru said to one 
of his disciples, 'What I impart to thee, my dear, is 
invaluable ; keep it to thyself/ and the disciple kept it all 
to himself. But when the Guru imparted that knowledge 
to another of his disciples, the latter, knowing its inestim- 
able worth, and not liking to enjoy it all alone, stood upon 
a high place and began to declare the good tidings to 
all the people* The Avatiras are of the latter class, while 
the Siddhas are of the former. 

217. No man keeps a total fast. Some get food at 9 a,m., 
others at noon, others at 2 p.m., and others in the evening, 
Similarly, at some time or other, in this life or after many 
lives, all will see God. 

218, When fruit becomes ripe and falls of itself, it 
tastes very sweet; but when unripe fruit is plucked and 
artificially ripened it does not taste so sweet and becomes 
shrivelled up. So when one has attained perfection, the 
observance of caste distinctions falls off of itself from him, 
but so long as this exalted knowledge is not reached, 

! one must observe caste distinctions. 



THE SAYINGS. 147 

219. When a storm blows, it is impossible to distin- 
guish an A^vattha (pippal) and a Va/a (banian) tree. So 
when the storm of true knowledge (the knowledge of one 
universal existence) blows, there can be no distinction of 
caste. 

220. When a wound is perfectly healed, the slough falls ; 
off of itself; but if the slough be taken off earlier, it bleeds. < 
Similarly, when the perfection of knowledge is reached by ! 
a man, the distinctions of caste fall off from him, but it is i 
wrong for the ignorant to break such distinctions. 

221. Q. Is it proper to keep the Brahmanical thread? 
A. When the knowledge of self is obtained, all fetters fall \ 
off of themselves. Then there is no distinction of a Brali- 
ma^a or a Sudra, a high caste or a low caste. In that case 
the sacred thread-sign of caste falls away of itself. But so 
long as a man has the consciousness of distinction and 
difference he should not forcibly throw it off. 

222. <2- Why do you not lead a family life with your 
wife? A. The God Kartikeya, the leader of the Heavenly 
army, once happened to scratch a cat with his nail On 
going home he saw there was the mark of a scratch on the 
cheek of his Mother. Seeing this, he asked of her, ' Mother, 
dear, how have you got that ugly scratch on your cheek ? ' 
The Goddess Durga replied, c Child, this is thy own handi- 
work, the mark scratched by thy own nail.' K&rtikeya 
asked in wonder, Mother, how is it ? I never remember 
to have scratched thee ! ' The Mother replied, * Darling, 
hast thou forgotten having scratched a cat this morning? 7 

L 2 



148 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK/WSHJVA. 

Kirtikeya said, ( Yes, I did scratch a cat ; but how did your 

cheek get marked ? ? The Mother replied, * Dear child, 
nothing exists in this world but myself. I am all creation, 
Whomsoever thou hurtest, thou hurtest me/ Klrtikeya 
, was greatly surprised at this, and determined thenceforward 
never to marry ; for whom would lie marry ? Every woman 
was mother to him, I am like Kurtikeya. I consider every 
woman as my Divine Mother. 

223. When I look upon chaste women of respectable 
families, I see in them the Mother Divine arrayed in the 
garb of a chaste lady \ and again, when I look upon the 
public women of the city, sitting in their open verandas, 
arrayed in the garb of immorality and shamelessness, I see 
,, in them also the Mother Divine, sporting in a different 
way. 

324. The light of the gas illumines various localities with 

various intensities. But the life of the light, namely, the 

gas, comes from one common reservoir. So the religious 

| teachers of all climes and ages are but as many lamp-posts 

i, through which is emitted the light of the spirit flowing 

| constantly from one source, the Lord Almighty. 

225, As the rain-water from the top of a house may be 
discharged through pipes having their mouth-pieces shaped 
like the head of a tiger, a cow or a bull, &c., although the 
water does not belong to these pipes, but comes from the 
heaven above, so are the holy SUdhus (saints) through whose 
mouths eternal and heavenly truths are discharged into this 
world by the Almighty. 



THE SAYINGS. 149 

220. The cries of all jackals are alike. The teachings of 
all the wise men of the world are essentially one and the 
same. 

227. Whatever gives happiness In this world contains a 
bit of divine enjoyment in it. The difference between the ;' 
two is as between treacle and refined candy. 

228. He who is absorbed in others' affairs, forgets his 
own outer and inner affairs (i.e. does not think about his 
own lower and higher self, but is absorbed in the affairs of 
other selfs). 

229. When the mind dwells in evil propensities, it is like i 
a high-caste Brihma^a living in the quarters of the out- 
castes, or like a gentleman dwelling in the back slums of 
the town. 

230. If a man sees a pleader he naturally thinks of cases 
and causes j similarly, on seeing a pious devotee, the man 
remembers his God and the hereafter. 

231. Q. What is the reason that a Prophet is not honoured 
by his own kinsmen ? A. The kinsmen of a juggler do not 
crowd round him to see his performances, while strangers i 
stand agape at his wonderful tricks. 

232. The seeds of Va^rav|ntula do not fall to the bottom 
of the tree. From the shell they shoot far away from the 
tree and take root there. So the Spirit of a Prophet mani- 
fests itself at a distance, and he is appreciated there. 

233. There is always a shade under the lamp while its 
light illumines the surrounding objects. So the man in the 



1 



1 5O THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

immediate proximity of a Prophet does not understand him. 
Those who live afar off are charmed by his spirit and extra- 
ordinary power. 

234. The waters of a swiftly-flowing current move round 
and round in eddies and whirlpools, but quickly crossing 
these they resume their former course. So the hearts of 

I the pious fall sometimes into the whirlpools of despondency, 
: grief, and unbelief, but it is only a momentary aberration. 
It does not last long. 

235. A tree, laden with fruit, always bends low. So, if 
* thou wantest to be great, be low and meek. 

236. The heavier scale goes down and the lighter one 
5 rises up. So the man of merit and ability is always humble, 
| but the fool is always puffed up with vanity. 

237. The anger of the good is like a line drawn on the 
surface of water, which does not last long. 

238. If a white cloth is stained with a small speck the 
blackness appears very ugly indeed by the contrast ; so the 
smallest fault of a holy man becomes painfully prominent 

by Ms surrounding purity. 

239. The sunlight is one and the same wherever it falls ; 
but bright surfaces like water, mirror and polished metals, 
&c., can reflect it fully. So js the Light Divine. It fall? 
equally and impartially on all hearts, but the pure an^. 

I clean hearts of the good and holy SMhus only can fully 



rt . 
reflect it. 

240. As in a pane of glass on which quicksilver has 



THE SAYINGS. 



15* 



the 



been laid, one can see his face reflected, so in the chaste 
heart of a totally abstinent man is reflected the image of : 
the Almighty. 

241. So long as one does not become simple like a child, 
one does not get Divine illumination. Forget all the worldly 
knowledge that thou hast acquired, and become as ignorant j 
about it as a child, and then thou wilt get the knowledge of I 
the True. 

242. The Hindu almanacs contain predictions of the 
annual rainfall. But squeeze the book, and not a drop of 
water will be got out of it. So also many good sayings | 
are to be found in books, but merely reading them will j 
not make one religious. One has to practise the virtues 
taught therein. 

243. Q. Why do religions degenerate? A. The rain- 
water is pure, but becomes soiled according to the medium 
it passes through. If the roof and the pipe be dirty, the 
discharge is dirty. 

244. Money can procure bread and butter only. Do 
not consider it therefore as if it were thy sole end and aim. 

245. As by rubbing gold and brass on a touch-stone, 
their real worth becomes known ; so a sincere SMhu and | 
a hypocrite are found out when they are rubbed through 
the touch-stone of persecution and adversity. 

248. The iron must be heated several times and hammered 
before it becomes good steel Then only it becomes fit to 
be made into a sharp sword, and can be bent any way you 




tol 



152 THE LIFE AND SAYINUS OF RAMAKtf/SHtfA, 

like. So a man must be heated several times in the furn 
of tribulations, and hammered with the persecutions of 
world, before he becomes pure rind humble. 

247. Remain always strong and steadfast in thy < 
faith, but eschew all bigotry and intolerance. 

248. Be not like the frog in the well. The frog in 
well knows nothing bigger and grander than its well. 
arc all bigots: they do not see any tiling butter than tl; 
own creeds. 

249. There was a man who worshipped *SIva, but hai 
all other I )eities. One day *.Viva appeared to him and sn 
f I shall never be pleased with tbee. so long as thou hat 
the other gods.' But the man was inexorable. After a i 
days ,Siva again appeared to him. This time he appeal 
as Hari-Hara, that is, one side of his body was that of *Si 
and the other side that of Vishnu* At this the man v 
half pleased and half displeased, lie laid his offerings 
the side representing .Siva, and did not offer anything 
the side representing Vishu, and when lie offered t 
burning incense to his beloved God (Siva) he was careful 
well as audacious enough to press the nostril of Vishwu, t 
other half of Hari-Hara, lest the fragrance should be pleasi 
to Vishnu. Seeing him altogether inexorable, the God Sj 
was sorely displeased with him, and at once vanished frc 
his sight. But the man was as undaunted as ev$r, Hoi 
ever, the children of the village began to tease him by utti 
ing the name of Vishu in his hearing* Displeased wi 
this, the man hung two bells to his ears, which he used 




THE SAYINGS. 



*53 



ring as soon as the boys cried out the names of Vishu, in 
order to prevent the sound entering his ears. And thus he 
was known by the name of Bell-eared, or Gha/a-kar^a. 
He is still so much hated for his bigotry that every year at 
a certain period the boys of Bengal break down his effigy 
with a cudgel, and this serves him right. 

250. As the young wife in a family shows her love and 
respect to her father-in-law, mother-in-law, and every other 
member of the family, and at the same time loves her 
husband more than these ; similarly, being firm in thy devo- 
tion to the Deity of thy own choice (Ish/a-Devati), do not 
despise other Deities, but honour them all. 

251. A truly religious man should think that other re- 
ligions also are paths leading to the truth. We should 
always maintain an attitude of respect towards other 
religions. 

252. The difference between the modem Br&hrnaism and 
Hinduism is like the difference between the single note of 
music and the whole music. The *modern Brihmas are 
content with the single note of Brahman, while the Hindu 
religion is made up of several notes producing a sweet and 
melodious harmony. 

253. Some years ago, when the Hindus and the Brihmas 
were preaching their respective religions with true earnest- 
ness and great zeal, some one asked Bhagavin SA Klma- 
knsrma his opinion about both parties, on which he replied, 
1 1 see that my Mother Divine is getting her work done 
through both parties. 3 




If. 

I ' 



154 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK/WSIWA. 

254. Hari (from hrz, to steal) means * He who steals our 
hearts/ and Haribala means 'liari is our strength/ 

255. Sin like quicksilver can never be kept concealed. 
(When a man takes calomel, sooner or later it is sure to 
show itself in the shape of eruptions on the skin.) 

256. The tears of repentance and the tears of happiness 
flow from the two different corners of the eye. The tears 
of repentance flow from the side near the nose, and the 
tears of happiness flow from the other extremity. 

257. Visit not miracle workers. They arc wanderers 
from the path of truth. Their minds have become 
entangled in the meshes of psychic powers, which lie in the 
way of the pilgrim towards Brahman, as temptations. Beware 
of these powers, and desire them not. 

258. A man after fourteen years of hard asceticism in 
a lonely forest obtained at last the power of walking over 
the waters. Overjoyed at this acquisition, lie went to his 
Guru, and told him of his grand feat. At this the Master 
replied, * My poor boy, what thou hast accomplished after 
fourteen years' arduous labour, ordinary men do the same 
by paying a penny to the boatman.* 

259. A youthful disciple of 5ri Rdrnak/7*sh//a once 
acquired the power of reading the heart of another. When 
he related this experience to the Master, he rebuked him 
and said, ' Shame on thee, child, do not waste thy energies 
on these petty things/ 

260. A washerman keeps a large store of clothes and has 






154 T HE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK&TSHJVA. 

264. Hari (from hri, to steal) means *He who steals our 

hearts/ and Haribala means *Hari is our strength/ 

255. Sin like quicksilver can never be kept concealed. 
(When a man takes calomel, sooner or later it is sure to 
show itself in the shape of eruptions on the skin.) 

250. The tears of repentance and the tears of happiness 
flow from the two different corners of the eye. The tears 
of repentance flow from the side near the nose, and the 
tears of happiness flow from the other extremity. 

257. Visit not miracle workers* They are wanderers 
from the path of truth. Their minds have become 
entangled in the meshes of psychic powers, which lie in the 
way of the pilgrim towards Brahman, as temptations. Beware 
of these powers, and desire them not. 

258. A man after fourteen years of hard asceticism in 
a lonely forest obtained at last the power of walking over 

, f tje waters. Overjoyed at this acquisition, he went to his 
Guru, and told him of his grand feat. At this the Master 
replied, 'My poor boy, what thou hast accomplished after 
fourteen years' arduous labour, ordinary men do the same 
by paying a penny to the boatman/ 

259. A youthful disciple of Sri Rdmakr/sh^a once 
acquired the power of reading the heart of another. When 
he related this experience to the Master, he rebuked him 
and said, ' Shame on thee, child, do not waste thy energies 
on these petty things/ 

260* A washerman keeps a large store of clothes and has 



J 



THE SAYINGS. 



*55 V 



a rich wardrobe, but these are not his. As soon as the 
clothes are washed his wardrobe becomes empty. Men , 
having no original thoughts of their own are like the .' 
washerman. 

261. Greed brings woe, while .contentment is all happi- 
ness. A barber was once passing under a haunted tree 
""when he heard a voice say, ' Wilt thou accept of seven jars 
of gold ? ' The barber looked round, but could see no one. 
The mysterious voice again repeated the words, and the 
cupidity of the barber being greatly roused by the spon- 
taneous offer of such vast wealth he spoke aloud, 'When 
the merciful God is so good as to take pity even on a poor 
barber like me, is there anything to be said as to my ;,; 
accepting the kind offer so generously made?' At once 
the reply came, * Go home, I have already carried the jars 
thither/ The barber ran in hot haste to his house, and 
was transported to see the promised jars there. He opened 
them one after another and saw them all filled, save one 
which was half filled. Now arose the desire of filling this 
last jar in the heart of the barber. So he sold all his gold 
and silver ornaments and converted them into coins and 
threw them into the jar. But the jar still remained empty. 
He now began to starve himself and his family by living 
upon insufficient, coarse, and cheap food, throwing all his 
savings into the jar, but the jar remained as empty as ever. 
The barber then requested the King to increase his pay as 
it was not sufficient to maintain him and his family. As he 
was a favourite of the King, the latter granted his request. 



150 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

The barber now began to save all his pay and emoluments, 
and throw them all into the jar, but the greedy jar showed 
no sign of being filled. He now began to live by begging, 
and became as wretched and miserable as ever. One day 
the King seeing his sad plight, inquired of him by saying, 
* Hallo ! when thy pay was half of what thou gettest now, 
thou wast far happier and more cheerful, contented, and 
healthy, but with double that pay I see thce morose, care- 
worn, and dejected. Now what is the matter with thee? 
Hast thou accepted the seven jars of gold ? ' The barber 
was taken aback by this home-thrust, and with clasped 
hands asked the King as to who had informed his majesty 
about the matter. The King answered, ' Whosoever accepts 
the riches of a Yaksha is sure to be reduced to such an 
abject and wretched plight. I have known thee through 
this invariable sign. Do away with the money at once. 
Thou canst not spend a farthing of it, That money is for 
hoarding and not for spending/ The barber was brought 
to his senses by this advice and went to the haunted tree 
and said, * Yaksha, take back thy gold/ and he returned 
home to find the seven jars vanished, taking with them his 
life-long savings. Nevertheless he began to live happily 
after it. 

262. It is very pleasant to scratch a ringworm, but the 
after-sensation is very painful and intolerable; so the 
; pleasures of the world are very pleasant in the beginning 
but their after-consequences are very terrible to contem- 
plate. 



THE SAYINGS. 157 

263* Q. What is the world like? A. It is like an 



fruit, all skin and stone with but very little pulp, the eating 
of which produces colic, 

264. Like unto a miser that longeth after gold, let thy 
heart pant after Him. 

265. So long as the heavenly expanse of the heart is 
troubled and disturbed by the gusts of desire, there is little 
chance of our beholding therein the brightness of God. 
The beatific vision occurs only in the heart which is calm f 
and rapt up in divine communion. 

266. The soiled mirror never reflects the rays of the sun, 
and the impure and unclean in heart who are subject to 
My& (illusion) never perceive the glory of the Bhagav&n 
(the Venerable). But the pure in heart see the Lord, as 
the clear mirror reflects the sun. Be holy, then. 

267. As on the troubled surface of rolling waters the 
moon shines in broken images, so on the unsettled mind of 
a worldly man engrossed in M&ya, the perfect God shines 
with partial light only. 

268. Why does a Bhakta (one full of the love of God) 
forsake everything for the sake of God? An insect flies 
from the darkness as soon as any light meets its eyes ; the 
ant loses its life in molasses, but never leaves them. So 
the Bhakta cleaves unto his God for ever, and leaves all 
else. 

269. As one can ascend to the top of a house by means 
of a ladder or a bamboo or a staircase or a rope, so diverse 




158 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK7SILVA. 

! ti a * so are t* 16 wa y s an< ^ means to approach God, and every 

| religion in the world shows one of these ways, 

270. If God is Omnipresent, why do we not see Him ? 
Standing by the bank of a pool thickly overspread with 
scum and weeds, you will say that there is no water in it. 
If you desire to see the water, remove the scum from the 
\ surface of the pond. With eyes covered with the film of 
f Miy& you complain that you cannot see God. If you 
!; wish to see Him, remove the film of Miyi from off your 
! eyes. 

| 271. Why cannot we see the Divine Mother? She is 

>\ like a high-born lady transacting all her business from 

:* behind the screen, seeing all, but seen by none. Her 

? devout sons only see Her, by going near Her and behind 

\ the screen of MHyl 

: | 272. Dispute not. As you rest firmly on your own faith, 

allow others also the same liberty to stand by their own 
faiths. By mere disputation you shall never succeed in 
convincing another of his error. When the grace of God 
descends on him, every one will understand his own 
mistakes. 

273. A husbandman was watering a sugar-cane field the 
whole of a day. After finishing his task he saw that not 

Xa drop of water had entered the field; all the water had 
gone underground through several big rat-holes, Such is 
the state of that devotee who, cherishing secretly in his 
heart worldly desires (of fame, pleasures, and comforts) 
and ambitions, worships God. Though daily praying, he 



THE SAYINGS. 1 59 

makes no progress because the entire devotion runs to ? 
waste through the rat-holes of his desires, and at the end \ 
of his life-long devotion he is the same man as before, and | 
has not advanced one step. 

274. Keep thyself aloof at the time of thy devotion from 
those who scoff, and those who ridicule piety and the pious. 

276. Is it good to create sects ? (Here is a pun on the 
word ' D a V which means both a * sect ' or ' party ' as well 
as 'the rank growth on the surface of a stagnant pool/) 
The 'Dal' cannot grow in a current of water: it grows 
only in the stagnant waters of petty pools. He whose heart 
earnestly longs after the Deity has no time for anything 
else. He who looks for fame and honour, forms sects 
(Dal). (105.) 

276. The Vedas, Tantras, and the Purawas, and all 
the sacred scriptures of the world, have become as if defiled 
(as food thrown out of the mouth becomes polluted) : 
because they have been constantly repeated by and have 
come out of human mouths. But the Brahman or the , 
Absolute has never been defiled, for no one as yet has f 
been able to express Him by human speech. 

277. The parable of a Br&hman and his low-caste 
servant : 

As soon as MiyH is found out, she flies away. A priest 
was once going to the village of a disciple. He had no 
servant with him. On the way, seeing a cobbler, he 
addressed him, saying, * Hallo ! good man, wilt thou 
accompany me as a servant? Thou shalt dine well and 



I I 



1 6O THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 

wilt be cared for; come along/ The cobbler replied, 
' Reverend Sir, I am of the lowest caste, how can I repre- 
sent your servant?' The priest said, * Never mind that. 
Do not tell anybody what thou art, nor speak to or make 
acquaintance with any one/ The cobbler agreed. At 
twilight, while the priest was sitting at prayers in the house 
of his disciple, another Brahman came and addressed the 
priest's servant, * Fellow, go and bring my shoes from 
there.' The servant, true to the words of his master, made 
no response. The Brdhman repeated the order a second 
time, but the servant remained silent. The Brahman 
repeated it again and again, but the cobbler moved not an 
inch. At last, getting annoyed, the Brihman angrily said, 
* Hallo Sirrah 1 How darest thou not obey a Brahman's 
command ! What is thy caste ? Art thou not a cobbler ? ' 
The cobbler hearing this began to tremble with fear, and 
piteously looking at the priest said, *O venerable Sir, 
O venerable Sir ! I am found out. I cannot stay here any 
longer, let me flee/ So saying he took to his heels, 

278. What is the relation between <?tvatman and 
Param|ti)pLan, the personal and the Highest Self? 

As when a plank of wood is stretched across a current of 
water, the water seems to be divided into two, so the 
indivisible appears divided into two by limitations (Upidhi) 

of Mlyit In truth they are one and the same. 

* ^*"""""" * ' '' "'"' 

279. There is little chance of a ship running astray, so 
long as its compass points towards the true North. So if 
the mind of man the compass-needle of" the ship of life 



THE SAYINGS. l6l 

is turned always towards the Parabrahman without oscilla- j 
tion, it will steer clear of every danger. 

280. The Avadhuta saw a bridal procession passing 
through a meadow, with the beating of drums and the 
blowing of trumpets, and with great pomp. Hard by the 
road through which the procession was passing he saw 
a hunter deeply absorbed in aiming at a bird, and perfectly 
inattentive to the noise and pomp of the procession, casting 
not even a passing look at it. The Avadhuta, saluting the 
hunter, said, c Sir, you are my Guru. When I sit in medi- 
tation let my mind be concentrated on its object of 
meditation as yours has been on the bird/ 

281. An angler was fishing in a pond. The Avadhuta, 
approaching him, asked, c Brother, which way leads to such 
and such a place ? ' The float of the rod at that time was 
indicating that the fish was nibbling the bait : so the man 
did not give any reply, but was all attention to his fishing- 
rod. When the fish was caught, he turned round and said, 
'What is it you have been saying, sir?' The Avadhuta 
saluted him and said, * Sir, you are my Guru. When I sit 
in the contemplation of the Param&tman, let me follow \ 
your example, and before finishing my devotions let me not 
attend to anything else.' 

282. A heron was slowly walking to catch a fish. 
Behind, there was a hunter aiming an arrow at it ; but the 
bird was totally unmindful of this fact The Avadhuta, 
Saluting the heron, said, ' When I sit in meditation let me 

M 



I 

! 

i 

j 162 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAK^JSIWA, 

i ' *. 

j *ij follow your example, and never turn back to see who is 

I behind me. 7 

283. A. kite with a fish In its beak was followed by 
I a host of crows and other kites, which were screeching and 
| ;< pecking at it, and were trying to snatch the fish away. In 
* ; whatever direction it went the crowd of kites and crows 
\ followed it, screeching and cawing. Getting tired of this 
t ' annoyance, the kite let go the fish, when it was Instantly 
1 caught by another kite, and at once the crowd of kites and 
! j; crows transferred their kind attentions to the new owner of 
. 4 the fish. The first kite was left unmolested, and sat calmly 
; < :' on the branch of a tree. Seeing this quiet and tranquil 
l - :; state of the bird the Avadhftta, saluting It, said, c You are my 

4 Guru, Kite ; for you have taught me that so long as man 

; does not throw off the burden of the worldly desires he 
j i, -; carries, he cannot be undisturbed and at peace with him- 
; ; r self. J 

284. The human Guru whispers the sacred formula Into 
the ear; the Divine Guru breathes the spirit Into the 
soul. 

285. If thou wishest to thread the needle, make the 
thread pointed, and remove all extraneous fibres. Then the 
thread will easily enter into the eye of the needle. So if 
thou wishest to concentrate thy heart on God, be meek, 
humble, and poor in spirit, and remove all filaments of 
desire. 

286. A snake dwelt In a certain place. No one dared 
to pass by that way. For whoever did so was Instan- 



T 



THE SAYINGS. 163 

taneously bitten to death. Once a MaMtman passed by 
that road", and the serpent ran after the sage in order to 
bite him. But when the snake approached the holy man 
he lost all his ferocity, and was overpowered by the gentle- 
ness of the Yogin. Seeing the snake, the sage said, * Well, 
friend, thinkest thou to bite me? 7 The snake was abashed 
and made no reply. At this the sage said, 'Hearken, 
friend, do not injure anybody in future.' The snake bowed 
and nodded assent. The sage went his own way and the 
snake entered his hole, and thenceforward began to live 
a life of innocence and purity without even attempting to 
harm any one. In a few days all the neighbourhood began 
to think that the snake had lost all his venom, and was no 
more dangerous, and so every one began to tease him. 
Some pelted him, others dragged him mercilessly by the 
tail, and in this way there was no end to his troubles. 
Fortunately the sage again passed by that way, and seeing 
the bruised and battered condition of the good snake, was 
very much moved, and inquired the cause of his distress. 
At this the snake replied, ' Holy sir, this is because I do 
not injure any one, after your advice. But alas ! they are so 
merciless 1 7 The sage smilingly said, e My dear friend, 
I simply advised you not to bite any one, but I did not tell 
you, not to frighten others. Although you should not bite 
any creature, still you should keep every one at a consider- 
able distance by hissing at him/ 

Similarly, if thou livest in the world, make thyself feared 
and respected. Do not injure any one, but be not, at the 
same time, injured by others. 

M 2 




THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK/SILZVA, 



287. When the bird has flown away from it, one cares no 
i longer for the cage. So when the bird of life has flown 
{ away, no one cares any longer for the carcase. 

288. As a lamp does not burn without oil, so a man 
| cannot live without God. 

289. 200. A learned Brahman once went over to a wise 
king and said, ' Hear, O king, I am well versed in the holy 
scriptures. I intend to teach thee the holy book of the 
Bhigavata, 7 The king, who was the wiser of the two, well 
knew that a man who has read the BMgavata would seek 
mpre to know his own Self than honour and wealth in 
a king's court. He replied, * I see, O Brahman, that you 
yourself have not mastered that book thoroughly. I promise 
to make you my tutor, but go first and learn the scripture 
well' The Brlhman went his way, thinking within himself, 
6 How foolish the king is to say I have not mastered the 
Bhfigavata well, when I have been reading the book over 
and over again for all these years/ However, he went over 
the book carefully once more and appeared before the king. 
The king told him the same thing again and sent him 

away. The Brahman was sore vexed, but thought there * 

must be some meaning for this behaviour of the king. He 
went home, shut himself up in his closet, and applied him- t 

self more than ever to the study of the book. By and by the | 

I hidden meanings began to flash before his intellect; the j 

j vanity of running after the bubbles, riches and honour, 
I kings and courts, wealth and fame, all vanished before 
! his unclouded vision. From that day forward he gave 



THE SAYINGS. 165 

himself up entirely to attain perfection by the worship of 
God, and never returned to the king. A few years after 
the king thought of the Brahman, and went to his house to 
see what he was about. Seeing the Br&hman, all radiant 
with the divine light and love, he fell upon his knees and 
said, ' I see you have now arrived at the true meaning of 
the scriptures ; I am ready to be your disciple, if you will 
duly condescend to make me one.' 

291. As long as there is no breeze blowing, we fan our- 
selves to alleviate heat, but when the breeze blows both for 
rich and poor, we give up fanning. We should persevere 
ourselves to reach our final goal as long as there is no help 
from above ; but when that help comes to any, let him 
then stop labouring and persevering; otherwise not. 

2192. <2* Where is God? How can we get to Him? 
A. There are pearls in the sea, you must dive deep again 
and again until you get the pearls. So there is God in the 
world, but you should persevere to see Him. 

293. How does the soul stay in the body? As the 
piston stays in a syringe. 

294. As in mid-ocean a bird, which found its perch 
upon the topmast of a ship, getting tired of its position, 
flies away to discover a new place of rest for itself, and 
alas ! without finding any, returns at last to its old roost 
upon the masthead, weary and exhausted; so when an 
ordinary aspirant, being disgusted with the monotony of 
the task and the discipline imposed upon him by his 
well-wishing and thoroughly experienced preceptor (Guru), 







1 66 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAJC&/SRZVA. 



loses all hope, and, having no confidence in him, launches 
forth into the broad world ever in search of a new adviser, 
he is sure at last to return to his original master after 
a fruitless search, which has, however, increased the 
reverence of the repentant aspirant for the^ master. 

295, In the month of June a young goat was playing 
near his mother, when, With a merry frisk, he told her that 
he meant to make a feast of Rls-flowers, a species of 
flowers budding abundantly during the time of the Rlsllla 
festival. * Well, my darling/ replied the dam, ' it is not 
such an easy thing as you seem to think. You will have to 
pass through many crises before you can hope to feast on 
Rls-flowers. The interval between the coming September 
and October is not very auspicious to you ; for some one 
may take you for a sacrifice to the Goddess Durgd ; then, 
again, you will have to get through the time of KSlt-pftgft, 
and if you are fortunate enough to escape through that 
period, there conies the (?agaddhitn-p%fl, when almost all 
the surviving male members of our tribe are destroyed. If 
your good luck leads you safe and sound through all these 
crises, then you can hope to make a feast of Ris-flowers in 
the beginning of November,* Like the dam in the fable, 
: we should not hastily approve of all the aspirations which 
! our youthful hopes may entertain, remembering the mani- 
! fold crises which one will have to pass through in the 
i course of one's life. 

296. As the fly sits, now on the unclean sore of the 
human body, and now on the offerings dedicated to the 



THE SAYINGS. 



I6 7 



gods, so the mind of the worldly man is at one time deeply 
engaged in religious topics and at the next moment loses 
itself in the pleasures of wealth and lust. 

297. As the rain-water falling upon the roof of a house 
flows down to the ground through spouts grotesquely 
shaped like the tiger's head, thus seeming to come out of 
tigers' mouths, while in reality it descends from the sky ; 
even so are the holy instructions that come out of the 
mouths of godly men, which seem to be uttered by those 
men themselves, while in reality they proceed from the 
throne of God. (See 225). 

298. As it is very difficult to gather together the mustard- 
seeds that escape out of a torn package, and are scattered 
in all directions ; so, when the human mind runs in diverse 
directions and is occupied with many things in the world, it 
is not a very easy affair to collect and concentrate it. 

299. As thieves cannot enter the house the inmates of 
which are wide awake, so, if you are always on your guard, 
no evil spirits will be able to enter your heart to rob it of 
its goodness, 

300. The new-born calf looks very lively, blithe, and 
merry. It jumps and runs all day long, and only stops to 
suck the sweet milk from its dam. But no sooner is the 
rope placed round its neck than it begins to pine away 
gradually, and, far from being merry, wears a dejected and 
sorry appearance, and gets almost reduced to a skeleton. 
So long as a boy has no concern with the affairs of the 
world he is as merry as the day is long. But when he once 



'<; 1 68 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKft/SHJVA. 

[ < feels the weight of the responsibilities of a man of family, 

j 'j '< by binding himself in time to the world by the indissoluble 

tie of wedlock, then he no longer appears jolly, but wears 
the look of dejection, care, and anxiety, and is seen to lose 
the glow of health from his cheeks, while wrinkles gradually i 

make their appearance over the forehead. Blessed is he 
that remains a boy throughout his life, free as the morning 
( ;l air, fresh as a newly-blown flower, and pure as a clewdrop. 

, ' 301. A boat may stay in the water, but water should not 

; ; stay in the boat. An aspirant may live in the world, but 

i ,i the world should not live in him. 

!; . 302. He who thinks his spiritual guide a mere man, can- 

- I , not derive any benefit from him. 

303. What you think you should say. Let there be a 

i ' 5 ' \ harmony between your thoughts and your words ; otherwise, 

: '' \, ! if you merely tell that God is your all in all, while your 

i , I mind has made the world its all in all, you cannot derive 

! , , any benefit thereby. 

! ? ' 304. A' young plant should be alwafs protected by a 

5 ; fence from the mischief of goats and cows and little urchins. 

* " But when once it becomes a big tree, a flock of goats or 

a herd of cows may find shelter under its spreading boughs, 

and fill their stomachs with its leaves. So when you have but 

' little faith within you, you should protect it from the evil 

influences of bad company and worldliness. But when once 

; 4 " you grow strong in faith, no worldliness or evil inclination 

' will dare approach your holy presence ; and many who are 

' ' 4 wicked will become godly through your holy contact. 



THE SAYINGS. 169 

305. If you wash the body of an elephant and set him at 
large, he is sure to get himself dirtied in no time, but if 
after washing him you tie him down to his own room he 
will remain clean. So if by the good influences of holy 
men you once become pure in spirit, and then allow yourself 
the liberty to mix freely with worldly men, you are sure to ? 
lose that purity soon ; but if you keep your mind fixed on < 
your God, you will never more get soiled in spirit. 

300. Where do.es the strength of an aspirant lie ? It is 
in his tears. As a mother gives her consent to fulfil the j 
desire of her importunately weeping child, so God vouch- 
safes to His weeping son whatever he is crying for. 

307. Meditate on God either in an unknown corner, or 
in the solitude of forests, or within your own mind. 

308. Chant forth the sweet name of Hari (God), keeping 
time all the while by clapping your hands, then you will 
acquire mental concentration. If you clap your hands, 
sitting under a treafr the birds on the boughs thereof will fly > 
away in all directions, and when you chant forth the name 
of Hari and clap your hands, all evil thoughts will fly away 
from your mind. 

309. 310. As the same fish is dressed into soup, curry, or 
cutlet, and each has his own choice dish of it, so the Lord 
of the Universe, though one, manifests Himself differently 
according to the different likings of His worshippers, and 
each of these has his own taste of God, which he values the 
most. To some He is a kind master or a loving father, 




'ft'" 



T7O THE LTFK AND SAYINGS OK 

a sweet smiling mother or a devout friend, and to others 
a faithful husband or a dutiful and obliging son. 

311. Bow down and adore where others kneel, for where 
so many hearts have been paying the tribute of adoration, 
the kind Lord will manifest Himself, for He is nil mercy. 

312. There are men, who, although they have nothing 
to attract them in this world, create some attachments for 
themselves, and so try to bind themselves to this earth. 
They do not want; and do not like to be free. A. man 
who has no family to care for, no relatives to look after, 
generally takes a cat, or a monkey, or a dog, or a bird for 
a pet object and companion ; and thus slakes his thirst for 
milk by drinking mere whey. Such is the power of Maya 
or Nescience over humanity. 

313. 314. A patient, in high fever and excess of thirst, 
imagines that he can drink away quite a sea of water; hut 
when that fit of fever goes and he regains his normal 
temperature, he can barely quaff off *i single cupful of 
water, and his thirst is at once appeased with even a very 
small quantity of it. So a man, being under the feverish 
excitement of Maya, and forgetful of his own littleness, 
imagines that he can embrace the whole of Divinity within 
his own bosom, but when the illusion passes away a single 
ray of Divine Light is seen to be sufficient, to flood him 
with eternal divine bliss. 

315. A man, under the influence of very high fever 
and in excessive thirst, is placed between a row of pitchers 




7 



THE SAYINGS. 

filled with cold water and a set of open-mouthed bottles 
filled with flavoury sauces. Is it possible for the thirsty 
and restless patient in such a case to refrain from either 
drinking the water or from tasting the sauces placed so 
near him, although thereby his case may become worse? 
Even such is the case with the man who is under the 
maddening influence of his ever-active and misleading 
senses when he is placed between the attractions of woman's 1 j 
charm on the one side and those of wealth on the other. \ 
It is then difficult for him to behave properly, and he is 
liable to deviate often from the true path and thus make 
his case worse. 

316. None ventures to keep milk in a vessel in which 
curd had formerly formed, lest the milk itself should get 
curdled. Nor can the vessel be safely used for other 
working purposes lest it shoul<| crack upon the fire. It is 
therefore almost useless. A good, and experienced pre- ^ 
ceptor does not entrust to a worldly man valuable and 
exalting precepts, for he is sure to misinterpret and misuse 
them to suit his own mean designs. Nor will he ask him 
to do any useful work that may cost a little labour, lest he 
should think that the preceptor was taking undue advantage 
of him. 

317. When a certain quantity of pure milk is mixed with 
double the quantity of water, it takes a long time and much 
labour to thicken it to the consistency of Kshira (condensed 
milk). The mind of a worldly man is largely diluted with I 
the filthy water of evil and impure thoughts, and it requires ; 



tf 




EM 

F? < ' 

1 i i 



172 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK/S1UVA. 

much time and labour before anything can be done to 
purify and give the proper consistency to it. 

318. The vanities of all others may gradually die out, 
but the vanity of a saint as regards his sainthood is hard 
indeed to wear away. 

319. Of the grains of paddy which arc fried in a frying- 
pan, the few which leap out of the pan and burst outside 
are the best fried, being without the slightest mark of any 
tinge; while everyone of the properly-fried grains in the 
pan itself is sure to have at least :i very small charred mark 
of a burn. So of all good devotees, the few who altogether 
give up the world and go out of it are perfect without any 
spot,, while even the best of those devotees who are in the 
world must have at least some small spot of imperfection 
in their character. 

320. We cannot say that God is gracious because He 
feeds us, for every father is bound to supply his children 
with food ; but when He keeps us from going astray, and 
holds us back from temptations, then He is truly gracious. 

321. If you can detect and find out the universal illusion 
or M&ya, it will fly away from you, just as a thief runs away 
when found out. 

322. Fire itself has no definite shape, but in glowing 
embers it assumes certain forms, and the formless fire is 
then endowed with forms. Similarly, the formless God 

; sometimes invests Himself with definite forms. 

323. Should we pray aloud unto God ? Pray unto Him 






THE SAYINGS, 173 

in any way you like. He is sure to hear you, for He can 
hear even the footfall of an ant* 

324. He who tries to give one an idea of God by mere 
book-learning is like the man who tries to give one an idea 
of KM (Benares) by means of a map or a picture. 

325* A man began to sink a well, but having dug down 
to the depth of twenty cubits he could not find the least 
trace of the water-spring which was to feed his well So he 
desisted from the work and selected another place for the 
purpose. There he dug deeper than before, but even then 
he could not find any water. So again he selected another 
spot and dug still deeper than before, but it was also of no 
avail. At last in utter disgust he gave up the task alto- 
gether. The sum total of the depths of these three wells 
was little short of a hundred cubits. Had he had the |, 
patience to devote even a half of the whole of this labour i 
to his first well, without shifting the site of the well from 
place to place, he would surely have been successful in 
getting water. Such is the case with men who continually 
shift their positions in regard to faith. In order to meet ! 
with success we should devote ourselves entirely to a single 
object of faith, without being doubtful as to its efficacy. 

328. Although in a grain of paddy the germ is considered 
the only necessary thing (for germination and growth), while 
the husk or chaff is considered to be of no importance, still 
if the unhusked grain be put into the ground it will not 
sprout up and grow into a plant and produce rice. To get 
a crop one must needs sow the grain with the husk on ; but 




174 THE LIKK AND SAYINGS OF 

if one wants to get at the germinating matter itself he must 
first perform the operation of removing the husk from the 
seed. So rites and ceremonies* arc necessary for the growth 
and perpetuation of a religion. They are the receptacles 
that contain the seeds of truth, and consequently every man 
must perform them before he roadies the central truth. 

327. The pearl-oyster that contains the precious pearl 
is in itself of very little value, but it is essential for the 
growth of the pearl. The shell itself is of no use to the 
man who has got the pearl, neither are ceremonies and 
rites necessary for him who has attained the Highest Truth 
God. 

828. A woodcutter led a very miserable life with the 
small means he could procure by daily selling the load 
of wood brought from a neighbouring forest. Once a 
Sa#my3.sin, who was wending his way through, the forest, 
saw him at work, and advised him to proceed onward 
into the interior recesses of the forest, intimating to him 
that he would be a gainer thereby. The woodcutter 
obeyed the injunction and proceeded onward till he came 
to a sandal-wood tree, and being much pleased lie took 
away with him as many sandal-logs as he could carry, 
and sold them in the market and. derived much profit. 
Then he began to think within himself why the good 
Sa#my&sin did not tell him anything about the wood of 
the sandal-trees, but simply advised him to proceed onward 
into the interior of the forest. So the next day he went 
on even beyond the place of the sandal wood, and at last 



T 



THE SAYINGS. 175 

came upon a copper-mine, and he took with him as much 
copper as he could carry, and selling it in the market got 
much money by it. Next day, without stopping at the 
copper-mine, he proceeded further still, as the Sidhti had 
advised him to do, and came upon a silver-mine, and took 
with him as much of it as he could carry, and sold it all and 
got even more money; and so daily proceeding further 
and further he got at gold-mines and diamond-mines, and 
at last became exceedingly rich. Such is also the case with 
the man who aspires after true knowledge. If he" does not' 
stop in his progress after attaining a few extraordinary and'] 
supernatural powers, he at last becomes really rich in the 
eternal knowledge of truth. 

329. If you first smear the palms of your hands with 
oil and then break open the jack-fruit, the sticky milky 
exudation of the fruit will not stick to your hands and 
trouble you. So if you first fortify yourself with the true . 
knowledge of the Universal Self, and then live in the midst , " 
ofwealth and women, they will affect you in no way. * 

330. He who would learn to swim must attempt swimming 
for some days. No one can venture to swim in the sea after 
a single day's practice. So if you want to swim in the sea 
of Brahman, you must make many ineffectual attempts at 
first, before you can successfully swim therein. 

331. When does a man get his salvation ? When his I 
eggj&n dies. 

332. When a sharp thorn finds its way into the sole of 
one's foot, one takes another thorn to get the former out, 



I 76 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF 



and then casts both of them away. So relative knowledge 

alone can remove the relative ignorance which blinds the 
eye of the Self* As both such knowledge and ignorance are 
I comprised truly under Nescience, the man who attains the 

t l highest GVIana, or knowledge of the Absolute, does away 

[ [ ' with both knowledge and ignorance in the end, being him- 

> self free from all duality, 

* 838. To drink pure water from a shallow pond, one 

should gently take the water from the surface, and not dis- 
turb it. If it is disturbed the sediments will rise up from 
the bottom and make the whole water muddy. If you 
desire to be pure, have firm faith and slowly go on with 
your devotional practices, and waste not your energies 
in useless scriptural discussions and arguments. The little 
\ brain will otherwise be muddled* 

884, If this body is worthless and transitory, why do 
pious and devout men take care of it ? No one takes care 
of an empty box. All protect with care a chest full of 
precious jewels, gold, and costly articles. The pious soul 
cannot help taking care of the body in which the Divine 
one dwells, for all our bodies form the playground of the 
Deity. 

836. The tender bamboo can be easily bent, but the full- 
grown bamboo breaks when an attempt is made to bend it. 
It is easy to bend young hearts towards good, but the heart 
of the old escapes the hold when so drawn. 

880. The locomotive engine easily drags along a train of 



f 



THE SAYINGS. 



177 



heavily-laden carriages. So the loving children of God, 
firm in their faith and devotion to Him, feel no trouble in 
passing through all the worries and anxieties of life, and 
leading many men along with them to God. 

337. Every man should follow his own religion, A 
Christian should follow Christianity, a Mohammedan should 
follow Mohammedanism, and so on. For the Hindus the 
ancient path, the path of the Aryan Rishis, is the best. 

338, 339. He alone is the true man who is illumined with 
the light of true knowledge. Others are men in name only. 

340. The magnetic needle always points towards the 
'North, and hence it is that the sailing-vessel does not lose 
her course. So long as the heart of man is directed towards 
God he cannot be lost in the ocean of worldliness, 

341. A the village maidens in India carry four or five 
pots of water placed one over the other upon their heads, 
talking all the way with one another about their own joys 
and sorrows, and yet do not allow one drop of water to be 
spilt, so must the traveller in the path of virtue walk along. 
In whatever circumstances he may be placed, let him always 
take heed that his heart does not swerve from the true path. 

342. In our theatrical exhibitions wherein the life and 
exploits of Kwshwa are exhibited, the performance com- 
mences with the beating of drums and the singing aloud of 
< O K>/sha, come ; come, O dear one.' But the person 
who plays the part of Krishna pays no heed to this noise 
and turmoil, and goes on complacently chatting and smoking 

N 



178 THE UFK AND SAVINGS OF RAMAK/C/SII7VA. 

in the green-room behind the stage. Hut as soon as the 
noise ceases, and the pious sage .Narada enters on the stage 
with sweet and soft music and calls upon IO/sh//a to come 
out with a heart overflowing with love, K>/shwa finds that 
he can no longer remain indifferent, and hurriedly comes on 
!;o the stage. So long as the religious devotee cries, ' Come, 
O Lord; come, O Lord,' with lip-prayers only, verily the 
Lord will, never come ; when the Lord does come, the heart 
of the devotee will melt in divine emotion, and his loud 
utterances will all cease for ever. The Lord cannot delay 
in coming when man calls upon Him from the depths of 
his heart overflowing with deep love and devotion. 

348. There is no Path safer and smoother than that of 
ba-kalarnfi (sit). Ba-kalama means resigning the self to the 
will of the Almighty, to have no consciousness that anything 
is 4 mine/ 

344. What is the nature of absolute reliance ? It is that 
happy state of comfort felt by a fatigued worker, when re- 
clining on a pillow he smokes at leisure after a hard day's 
toil : it is a cessation of all anxieties and worries. 

345. As dry leaves are blown about here and there by 
the wind, and have no choice of their own, and make no 
exertion : so those who depend upon Clod move in harmony 
with His will, and can have no will, and put forth no effort, 
of their own. 

346. 347. What do you think of the man who is a good 
v orator and preacher, but whose spirituality is undeveloped ? 

He is like a person who squanders another's property left in 



THE SAYINGS. 



179 



trust with him. He can easily advise others, for it costs 
him nothing, as the ideas he expresses are not his own, but 
borrowed. 

348. A worldly man is best known by his antipathy to 
whatever savours of religion. He does not like to hear any 
sacred music or psalm, or to utter the holy name of God, 
and even dissuades others from doing the same. He scoffs 
at prayers, and pours down a volley of abuse upon all religious 
societies and men. 

349. As a boy holding on to a post or a pillar gyrates 
round it with headlong speed without fear of a fall, so, fixing 
thy hold firmly on God, perform thy worldly duties, and 
thou shalt be free from all dangers. 

860. As an unchaste woman, busily engaged in household 
* affairs, is all the while thinking of her secret lover, even so, , 
O thou man of the world, do thy round of worldly duties, | 
but fix thy heart always on the Lord. 

361, As a wet-nurse in a rich family brings up the child 
of her master, loving the baby as if it were her own, but 
knows well that she has no claim upon it ; so think ye also 
that you are but trustees and guardians of your children 
whose real father is the Lord God in Heaven. 

362, It is useless to pore over holy scriptures and sacred 
Shastras without a discriminating and dispassionate mind. 
No spiritual progress can be made without discrimination 
(Viveka) and dispassion (Vairigya). 

363, Know thyself, and thou shalt then know the npn- 

N 2 



f> 



I* * 



i. 



1 8O THE LIKE AND SAVINGS OF RAMAK^/SIIJVA. 

self and the Lord of all. What is my ego ? Is it my hand, 
or foot, or flesh, or blood, or muscle, or tendon? Ponder 
deep, and thou shaft know that there is no such thing as I. 
As by continually peeling off the skin of the onion, so by 
analysing the ego it will be found that there is not any real 
entity corresponding to the ego. The ultimate result of all 
such analysis is God., When egoism drops away, Divinity 
manifests itself. 

354. The truly devotional and spiritual practice suited 
for this Iron-age (Kali-yuga) is the constant repetition of 
the name of the Lord of Love. 

355. If thou wishest to see God, have firm faith in the 
efficacy of repeating the name of Uari, and try to discriminate 
the real from the unreal. 

366. When an elephant is let loose, it goes about uproot- 
ing trees and shrubs, but as soon as the driver pricks him 
on the head with the goad he becomes quiet ; so the mind 
when unrestrained wantons in the luxuriance of idle thoughts, 
but becomes calm at once when struck with the goad of 
discrimination. 

857. Devotional practices are necessary only so long as 
tears of ecstasy do not flow at hearing the name of Hari. 
He needs no devotional practices whose heart is moved to 
tears at the mere mention of the name of Had. 

358. The companionship of the holy and wise is one of 
the main elements of spiritual progress. 

359. The soul reincarnates in a body of which it was 



THE SAYINGS. l8l 

thinking just before its last departure from this world. 
Devotional practices may therefore be seen to be very 
necessary. When, by constant practice, no worldly ideas 
arise in the mind, then the god-idea alone fills the soul, and 
does not leave it even when on the brink of eternity. 

360. How should one love God ? As the true and chaste 

9 

wife loves her husband and the niggardly miser loves his 
hoarded wealth, so the devotee should love the Lord with 
all his heart and souL 

36L How may we conquer the old Adam in us? When 
the fruit grows out of the flower, the petals of the flower 
drop off of themselves. So, when the divinity in thee in- 
creases, the weaknesses of thy human nature will all vanish 
of their own accord. 

382, 383. When does the attraction of sensual and worldly 
pleasures die away? In God, who is Indivisible Ever- 
Existing Bliss, there is a consolidation of all happiness and 
of all pleasures. They who enjoy Him can find no attrac- 
tion in the cheap and worthless pleasures of the world. 

384. In what condition of the mind does God-vision take 
place ? God is seen when the mind is tranquil When the ; 
mental sea is agitated by the wind of desires, it cannot ; 
reflect God, and then God-vision is impossible. 

385. How may we find our God? The angler, anxious 
to hook a big and beautiful Rohitta-fish, waits calmly for 
hours together, having thrown the bait and the hook into 
the water, watching patiently until the bait is caught by the 




THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKJRJSH2VA, 

fish. Similarly, the devotee who patiently goes on with his 
devotions is sure at last to find his God. 

366, The heart of a sinner is like a curled hair. You 
may pull it ever so long, but will not succeed in making it 
straight So also the heart of the wicked cannot be easily 

: changed. 

367, Knowledge leads to unity, and Ignorance to di- 
versity. 

368, 360. The society of pious men is like the water in 
which rice is washed. The rice-water dissipates intoxica- 
tion. So doth the society of the pious relieve worldly men, 
intoxicated with the wine of desires, from their intoxication. 

370. The agent of a rich Zemindar, when he goes into 
the mofussil or interior, tyrannises in various ways over the 
tenants. But wben he comes back to the head-quarters 
under the eyes of his master, he changes his ways, becomes 
very pious, treats 'the tenants kindly, inquires fully into all 
their grievances, and tries to mete out impartial justice to 
all The tyrannical agent even becomes good through the 
fear of the landlord, and by the effect of his society. 
Similarly doth the society of the pious make even the^ 
wicked righteous, awakening awe and reverence within 
them. 

371. Moist wood placed upon a fire soon becomes dry, 
and ultimately begins to burn. Similarly, the society of the 
pious drives away the moisture of greed and lust from the 

t hearts of worldly men and women, and then the fire of 
Viveka (Discrimination) burns in them. 





THE SAYINGS. 183 

372. How should one pass his or her life? As the fire 
on the hearth is stirred from time to time with a poker to 
make it burn brightly and prevent it from going out, so the 
mind should be invigorated occasionally by the society of 1 
the pious. 

373. As the blacksmith keeps alive the fire of his furnace 
by the occasional blowing of his bellows, so the mind 
should be kept a-burning by the society of the pious. ; * 

374. Throw an unbaked cake of flour into hot ghee, it 
will make a sort of boiling noise. But the more it is fried, 
the less becomes the noise ; and when it is fully fried the 
bubbling ceases altogether. So long as a man has little 

knowledge, he goes about lecturing and preaching, but! 
when the perfection of knowledge is obtained, he ceases to ! 
jroake vain displays. 

375. That man who, living in the midst of the tempta- 
tions of the world, attains perfection, is the true hero. 

376. We must dive deep into the ocean of the Eternal- 
Intelligent-Bliss. Fear not the deep-sea monsters, Avarice 
and Anger. Coat thyself with the turmeric of Discrimina- 
tion and Dispassion (Viveka and VaMgya) and those 
alligators will not approach thee, as the scent of this 
turmeric is too much for them. 

377. When unavoidably entering into places where there 
may be temptation, carry always with thee the thought of 
thy Divine Mother. She will protect thee from the many 
evils that may be lurking even in thy heart. Cannot the 



154 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF RAMAKK7SIWA. 

presence of thy mother shame thee away from evil deeds 
and evil thoughts? 

378. How may we conquer the love of life? The 
human frame Is made up of decaying things ; of flesh and 
blood and bone. It is a collection of flesh, bone, marrow, 
blood, and other filthy substances subject to putrefaction. 

f By thus analysing the body, our love thereof vanishes. 

379. Should the devotee adopt any particular costume ? 
The adoption of a suitable costume is good. Dressed in 
the Sa.;;myasin's orange robes, or carrying the religious 
mendicant's tambourine and cymbals, a man can never 
utter light and profane things, or sing profane songs. But 
a man dressed in the smart style of a beau will naturally 
have his heart inclined to think low thoughts and sing low 
songs. 

380. Sometimes peace reigns in the heart., but why does 
it not always last long ? The fire made by the burning of the 
bamboo is soon extinguished unless kept alive by constant 
blowing. Continual devotion is necessary to keep alive the 
fire of spirituality. 

381. Those who live in the world and try to find 
salvation are like soldiers that fight protected by the breast- 
work of a fort, while the ascetics who renounce the world in 
search of God are like soldiers fighting in the open field. 
To fight from within the fort is safer than to fight in the 
open field, 

382. Pray to the Divine Mother in this wise. Give me, 




THE SAYINGS. 

O Mother ! love that knows no incontinence, and faith 
adamantine that cannot be shaken. 

383. As persons living in a house infested by venomous 
snakes are always alert and cautious, so should men living 
in the world be always on their guard against the allure- ^ 
ments of lust and greed. 

384. If there is a small hole in the bottom of a jar of 
water, the whole water flows out of it by that small aperture. 
Similarly, if there be the smallest tinge of worldliness in the 
neophyte, all his exertions come to naught. 

M 

I 386. When the butter is produced by churning the 

whey, it should not be kept in the same vessel containing 
the remaining whey, for then it will lose something of its 
sweetness and cohesion. It should be kept in pure water 
, ' and in a different vessel. So after attaining some partial 

If perfection in the world, if one still continues to mix with 

the worldly, and remains in the midst of the world, it is f 
likely that he will be tainted ; but he will remain pure if he * 
lives out of it. , Jb 

386, Y&u cannot live in a sooty room without blackening 
your body to some extent, however small it may be, with 
all your caution. So, if a man or a woman lives in the 
company of one of his or her opposite sex of the same age, i 
with the greatest circumspection and control over his or her 
passion, still some carnal thought, however small, is sure to 
arise in his or her mind. 

387. Two persons, it is said, began together the rite of 




1 86 THE LIFE AND SAYINGS OF R&UAKRISHNA. 

invoking the Goddess Kali by the terrible process called 
' *Savasadhana. 3 (This Tantrik invocation is performed in 
the cemetery yard, the invoker sitting on the body of a corpse 
in a dark night.) One invoker was frightened to insanity 
by the horrors of the earlier portion of the night ; the other 
was favoured with the vision of the Divine Mother at the 
end of the night. Then he asked her, c Mother ! why did 
the other man become mad ? ' The Deity answered, * Thou 
too, O child I didst become mad many times in thy various 
previous births, and now at last thou seest me.' 

388. There are various sects among the Hindus ; which 
sect or which creed should we then adopt ? Pfirvati once 
asked Mahideva, * O Lord 1 what is the root of the Eternal, 
Everlasting, All-embracing Bliss ? ' To her MahMeva thus 
replied, * The root is faith.' The peculiarities of creeds and 

I sects matter little or nothing. Let every one perform with 
faith the devotions and the duties of his own creed, 

389, As a little boy or a girl can have no idea of 
conjugal affection, even so a worldly man cannot at all 
comprehend the ecstasy of Divine communion. 

' ' 390. The body is transient and unimportant Why then 
is it so much looked after? No one cares for an empty 
box. But people carefully preserve the box that contains 
money and other valuable property. The virtuous cannot 
but take care of the body, the temple of the soul in which 
God has manifested Himself or which has been blessed by 
God's advent, 



THE SAYINGS. 



I8 7 



391. How long does godliness remain in man? The 
iron is red so long as it is in fire. It is black the moment 

it is removed from fire. So the human being is godly so \ 
long as he is in communion with God. 

392. Soft clay admits of forms, but the burnt clay does 
not. So those whose hearts are consumed with the desire 
of worldly things cannot realise higher ideas. 

893. As the water and its bubbles are one, and as the 
bubbles have their birth in the water, float on the water, 
and ultimately are resolved into water ; so the r!vitman ) 
and the Param&tman are one and the same : the difference < 
is in degrees the one is finite and small, the other is | 
infinite ; the one is dependent, the other independent. 

394, 395. When the tail of the tadpole drops off, it can 
live both in water and on land. When the tail of ignorance 
drops off, man becomes free. He can then live both in 
God and in the world equally well. 



m 



*&L 



r 



INDEX TO THE SAYINGS 1 . 



[ The references in this Index correspond to the numbering of the 
Sayings in this volume."} 



Adam, how to conquer the old, 

3<Si- 

Adore where others do, 311. 

Advice of many, leads to con- 
fusion, 146, 148. 

Affairs, danger of being absorbed 
in others', 228, 

Agriculturalist and Vishwu, 167. 

Aha^k&ra, vanity or egoism, 70. 

Almighty, the, dwells in every 
place, 12. 

visible form of, the materialised 
manifestation of the formless 
Brahman, 36. 

sight of, gives safety, 72. 

power of, lasting, 73. 

power of, makes a man in- 
capable of evil, 74. 

absorbing effect of, 77. 

arguments cease in presence of, 
78. 

how to reach, 134. 

man's home at feet of, 175. 



Almighty, the, grace of, 190. 

disperses accumulated ignor- 
ance and sin, 191. 

source of light of the spirit, 
224. 

transmits truth through teachers, 
224, 225. 

image of, reflected, 240. 
Alphabet, Bengali, in. 
Amia fruit, world like, 263. 
Anger, shortlived in good men, 

2 37- 
Ant distinguishes sand from sugar, 

112. 

Ar^na, human being and Divinity, 

Aspirant, may live in the world 
but It should not live in him, 
301. 

like a bird, 294. 

- tears, the strength of, 306. 
Avadhtita, twenty -four Gurus, 
147. 



1 This Index was made for a collection of the Sayings of 
krashwa which was sent to me in manuscript. "When the MS. came to 
be printed there were several sayings which had been given twice. As 
these had to be left out when they occurred the second time, it was 
necessary to assign two numbers to some of the sayings in order not to 
disturb the figures of the Index. 




i go 



INDEX. 



AvadMta and hunter, 280, 

and fisher, 281, 

and heron, 282. 

and kite, 283. 

Avatata or Saviour, messenger of 

God, 51. 
Avat&ras, Knshwa and Christ as, 

52. 

keep knowledge to themselves, 
216, 

Baddha, fettered, 137. 
Ba-kalam& (sic)) resigning 1 the self 

to will of Almighty, 343. 
Barber and jars of gold, 261. 
Bee like a Yogin, 119. 
Believer, true, never discouraged, 

103. 

Bengali alphabet, in, 
Bhagavan, glory of the, 266. 

3rJ Rama/andra, journey to 
Ceylon, 203. ^ 

recognised by seven sages, 

49- 
Bha;gavata, scripture, 16. 

knowledge of, 290. 
Bhakta or true lover, 136, 268. 
Bigot, like frog in well, 248. 
Bigotry, to be eschewed, 247. 
Blind men, the, and the ele- 
phant, 5. 

Body, playground of Deity, 334, 

transient and unimportant, 390. 
temple of the soul, 390. 
Books, mere reading of, will not 

make a man religious, 242. 
Boon or grand-dame, in hide and 

seek, 73. 
Boy and goat, likeness between, 

joo. 
Brahmaism and Hinduism, 252, 

253- 

Brahman (Brahma), fire of, causes 
mind to perform its functions, 
20, 

God the Absolute and Eternal, 
3*- 



Brahman (Brahma), sometimes 
with attributes, sometimes with- 
out, 35. 

all-pervading and formless, 36. 

visible Almighty a manifesta- 
tion of, 36. 

Saviours are to Brahma as 
waves to ocean, 57. 

Deities, manifestations of, 141. 

Human soul loses individual 
existence in ocean of, 208. 

temptations in path towards, 

257- 

inexpressible, 276. 

hides behind Mitya, 313, 

sea of, 330. 

Brdhman and low-caste servant, 
parable of, 277. 

and king, story of, 290, 

and Sawnyasin, story of, 342. 
Br&hmaa and his garden, 144, 
Brahmanical thread, 221, 
Bubbles and water are one, 393. 
Burdwan, Maharajah of, 141. 

Cage, no value when bird has 

flown, 287. 
Calcutta, many roads lead, to, 

148. 
Caste, distinctions of, disregarded 

by a perfect man, 218, 319, 220, 

221. 

Cat scratched by Kirtikeya, a 3 3. 
Ceylon or La^kd, 203. 
Chameleon,^ many colours of, 3. 
Chelas (disciples), very rare, 

*55* 

Child, simplicity of, 97, 241* 
Children at play, 81, 
Christ and Kr/sh?za, both Avatlms, 

52. 

Clay, burnt and soft, 392. 
Cloth, doll of, 136, 
Conceit of Nirada, 167, 
Contemplation, perfection of, 188, 
Contentment is happiness, 261. 
Costume of devotee, 379. 



INDEX. 



191 



Creeds, paths to reach the Al- 
mighty, 6. 

and sects, matter nothing, 200, 

388. 
Crow, wisest of birds, 166, 

Dala, sedges and schism, 105, 275. 

Darkness of centuries dispersed at 
once by light, 191, 

Deities, manifestations of Brah- 
man, 141. 

not to be compared, 141. 

all to be honoured, 250. 
Deity, daily contemplation of, 

necessary, 82. 
Desires of holiness, devotion, and 

love not to be reckoned among 

desires, 176. 
Devotee, stages in path of devotion, 

33- 
- loath to relate experiences, 87. 

sacrifices life to God, 88. 

pleasure in meeting a fellow, 
91. 

tears, the strength of, 92. 

a child of God, 92. 

retains faith and love, though 
surrounded by impurities of the 
world, 95. 

desires God only, 97. 

never wearies of praise, 101. 

inspired by God, 102, 

heart of, fired by name of God, 
124. 

* reminds men of God, 230. 

progress stopped by desires, 

373- 

costume of, 379. 

Devotees, those out of the world 

are perfect, 319. 
Devotion, difficult to practise, 

n 8. 

many slips in path of, 178. 

how possible when working for 
daily bread, 205. 

keep aloof from scoffers during, 
374, 



Devotion, continual, necessary to 
keep up fire of spirituality, 380. 

Disciple, must not criticise Guru, 
149. 

faith in power of Guru, 154. 

a good one very rare, 155. 
Dispute not, 272, 

Divine Glory, effect on man, 

Mother in every woman, 222, 
223. 

Light falls impartially on all 
hearts, 239. 

Illumination, only comes to 
those who are simple as a child, 
241. 

Communion, incomprehensible 
to worldly man, 389. 

Divinity, manifested in greater de- 
gree in those who are honoured, 
14. 

Sacrifice made in Incarnation, 

56. 

weakness of humanity vanishes 
at increase of, 177? 3^i 

manifests itself after death of 
Humanity, 183. 

self merged in, 206. 

manifests itself when egoism 
dies away, 353. 

Do yourself what you wish others 

to do, 158. 
Dolls, the three, 136. 
Doubt is death, 204. 
Durg&, mother of Klrtikeya, 222. 

Earnestness, necessary, 145. 
Egoism, disappears when know- 
ledge comes, 1 60. 

marks of, never eradicated, 162, 
163. 

shuts out God from the heart, 
164. 

death of, gets salvation, 331, 

drops away and Divinity mani- 
fests itself, 353. 

Egos, two in man, 161. 



192 



INDEX. 



si 



Elephant and blind men, 5. 

God in the, 15. 

Faith, true, crids all quarrel and 
dispute, So. 

weak, easily shaken, 96". 

achieves miracles, 154, 202, 
203, 204. 

only clue to reach God, 200. 

he who has, has all, 20 :r. 

who has not, wants all, 201. 

is life, 204. 

be steadfast in, 247, 272. 

liberty of, 272. 

should be protected in the be- 
ginning, 304. 

must devote ourselves to single 
object of, 325. 

how to attain firm, 333. 

root of Internal .Bliss, 388. 
Faith-healers, 202. 

Fault of holy man intensified by 

surrounding purity, 2$$, 
Fire of Brahman, working of, 20. 

no definite shape, 322. 
Fisherwomen, story of, 1 74. 
Flint, always retains inner fire, 

_95- 
Fly and honey-bee, contrasted, 

IK). 

Fool, puffed up with vanity, 236. 
* Forbear ' in Bengali, in. 
Free, when shall I be ? 206. 
Frog in a. well, 248. 

Cagannatha, Lord of the Universe, 
169. 

(kanaka, King, 122, 124. 

Garlic, odour of, lasting, 162. 

<7Jvatman and 1'aramatman, re- 
lation between, 278, 393. 

<7wana, knowledge of the Absolute, 
332. 

Goat, moves after decapitation, 70. 

story of young, 295. 

God, compared with stars by day 
and by night, I. 



God, worshipped under different 
names, 2,4, 9. 

multiform, 3. 

appears to us in whatever form 
we desire to call Him, .j. 

different ways of worshipping, 

many aspects of, <S, ro, 309. 

present even in tiger or wicked 
man, 13. 

everything that exists i:i, 15. 

to be regarded in same light as 
His Scripture and His devotee, 
16, 

impossible to live without, 19. 

both the snake and the charmer, 

31. 

both judge and executioner, 21. 

ineilcs the thief, Ja. 

warns the householder, 22. 

dwells in the body, yet apart 
from it, 23. 

omnipotence of, 24. 

screened by M;iyfi, 25, 270. 

like the wis] ling-tree, 26. 

with and without form, 28, 32, 

33i 3-sa- 

the Father of the Universe, 

3'- 

- the Absolute and Ktenml Brah- 
man, 31. 

with form is visible, 34. 

is Intelligence, 37. 

readied by prayer and penance, 

53- 

divine sages, like kinsmen of, 
6" I. 

ordinary men the creatures of, 
61. 

separable from Maya, 64. 

infinite Love of, 75. 

man in the midst of confusion 
of argument and reasoning when 
away from, 78. 

he who has found Him, is 
quiet, 79, 86. 

devotee a child of, 92. 



>,, 



INDEX. 



193 



God, like a hill of sugar, 98. 

inspires His devotees, 102. 

will send Master, 145. 

how to reach, 146, 148, 269, 

292. 

- and man, brought together by 
Guru, 150. 

Father and Guide of Humanity, 

^53- 

he who yearns for, finds, 159. 

shut out from heart by egoism, 
164. 

nearest and dearest, 169. 

attracted by violent love, 170, 

knowcr of, 171. 

why trouble Him for what we 
can do ourselves, 171. 

only a lover enters into the inner 
mysteries of, 172. 

sacrifice all to find, 182, 

concentration necessary to find- 
ing of, 184. 

how best found, 184, 365. 

heart must be kept full of love 
for, 187. 

all-pervading Spirit, 189, 
Soul immersed in, 189. 

resignation to mercy of, 195. 

only reached by faith, soo, 

provided for us, before sending 
us into the world, 205, 

gives order and inspiration to 
preacher, 20. 

. in all men, 215. 

all men not in, 215. 

all will see, 217. 

- devotee reminds men of, 230. 
* heart pants after, like miser 
after gold, 264, 

must be calm in order to see, 203, 
Omnipresent, 27- 

how to concentrate the heart 
on, 285. 

man cannot live without, 288. 
- source of all holy inspiration, 

397, 
mind fixed on, never soiled, 305. 



God, meditate on, in solitude, 
307. 

holds us back from temptation, 
320. 

hears footfall of ant, 323. 

book-learning can give no idea" 
of, 324. 

children of, feel no anxiety, 
33<5- 

those who depend on, move in 
harmony with will of, 345. 

perform worldly duties, holding 
fast to, 349, 350. 

how to love, 360. 

Indivisible Ever-Existing Bliss, 

363- 

God, attributes of, only realised! 
by communion with Him, 18. 

too vast for man's compre- 
hension, 98. 

God, grace of, purifies sin, 197. 

prayers and penances dis- 
carded when it descends, 199. 

God, greatness of, man too far 
away to comprehend, 40* 

God, knowledge of, like a man, 
172. 

and love, ultimately the 
same, 173. 

God, love of, like a woman, 172. 
God, name of, merit in, 41, 43, 

44. ^ 

ecstasy on hearing, loo. 

God, will of, resignation to, 93. 
God, worship of, preaching enough, 

210. 
Godliness, how long it remains in 

man, 391. 

Godly men, inspired by God, 297. 
God-men, souls beyond pale of 

Karman, 142. 

God-vision, how attained, 364. 
Gold and brass, how distinguished, 

245. ^ 

seven jars of, 201. 

Good and bad, sifted by pious 
men, 112, 113. 



j 

j 
K 

1 



194 



INDEX. 



Gopmatha, beloved, 169. 
Grace, divine, changes men, 192. 
Grace of God, purities sin, 197. 

a breeze always blowing, 
198. 

prayers and penances dis- 
carded, when it descends, 1 99. 

Great, be low and meek if thou 
woulclst be, 235. 

Greed brings woe, 261. 

Guhaka A'awa&la of RSmayawa, 

43- 

Guide, one to be chosen, 146, 148. 

spiritual, more than mere man, 
302. 

Guru, guide to Gocl, .146. 

sent by God, 145. 

necessary, 147. 

to be implicitly obeyed, 149. 

not to be criticised, 149, 152. 

is Mediator, 150. 

faith in powers of, 154. 

difference between human and 
divine, 284. 

Habit, power of, 1 74. 

Hanuxnnn, monkey- servant of 

Bhagavan Sri .Rfunn&indra, 203. 
Happiness, divine enjoyment in 

whatever gives, 227. 

is contentment, 261. 
Hari, personal deity, 31. 

praise of, efficacious in ex- 
cluding Satan, 42. 

c He who steals our hearts/ 
254. 

mental concentration acquired 
by chanting name of, 308. 

efficacy in repeating name of, 

355- 

tears of ecstasy on hearing 
name of, 357. 

Haribala, Hari is our strength,' 

254. 
Heart, full of vanity, prayer has no 

effect on, 165. 

power of reading the, 259. 



Heart, pants after Gocl like miser 
after gold, 264. 

how to concentrate on God, 
285. 

must be guarded, 399. 

easily influenced when young, 

335- 

of man, directed towards God, 
340. 

must riot swerve from true path, 

34 1 - 

consumed with worldly things, 
392. 

Hemp-smoker, no pleasure in 
smoking alone, 90. 

Hero, true, he who attains per- 
fection amid temptations of the 
world, 375. 

Hindu almanacs and rainfall, 242. 

Hinduism and Brahmaism, 252, 

253- 

Hindus, sects among, jK8. 
Holy and wise, companionship of, 

358- 

Horna, bird, Co. 

Honey-bee and fly, contrasted, 

ru> 
Human frailties of teacher, to be 

disregarded, 151. 
Humanity must (lie before Divinity 

manifests itself, 183, 
Humility, virtue of, 335, 236. 
Husbandman and sugar-cane, 

273- 

Ignorance and knowledge, com- 
prised under ignorance, 332. 

leads to diversity, 367. 
Incarnation, flood of, 53. 
Individual existence, lost in ocean 

of Brahman, 208. 
Indra, deity of hand, 144. 
Intelligence, God is, 37. 
Intolerance to be eschewed, 247. 
Iron changed to gold, 73. 

Jack-fruit, 329. 



INDEX. 



Jesus, inner Soul separate from 
physical shell, 62, 

physical pain no effect on, 62. 

K&H, temple of, 109. 

goddess, rite of invoking, 387. 
Kal'pa-vrz'ksha, wishing-tree, 26. 
Kantian, heart of God-men be- 

yond pale of, 142. 
KHrtikeya, leader of heavenly 

army, 222. 
Kite and fish, 283. 
Knowledge, true, causes egoism 

to disappear, 160, 

of God, like a man, 172. 

entry only to outer rooms of 
God, 172. 

and love, ultimately the same, 

*73- 

true, of one universal existence, 

210. 

of True, gained by forgetting 
worldly knowledge, 241. 

and ignorance comprised under 
Nescience, 332. 

leads to unity, 367. 

a little makes a noise, 374. 
20"*'sha, life and exploits of, 

342. 

and Christ, both Avatftras, 
52, 

KsMra, condensed milk, 317* 




&, Ceylon, 203. 
Lead, dissolved by mercury, 208. 
Life sacrificed to God by re- 

nunciation, 88. 
of wise man, a religion acted 

out, 157. 

- love of, how conquered, 378. 
Light disperses darkness of cen- 

turies, 191. 

. spiritual, illumines true man, 

212* 

divine, falls impartially on all 
hearts, 239. 

Loadstone rock, 75. 



Lord, advent of, preceded by un- 
selfishness, &c., 193. 

prepares heart to receive Him, 
194. 

unseen until He reveals Him- 
self, 196. 

all mercy, 311. 

of Love 3 repetition of name of, 

354- 

Lotus-leaf, like perfect man, 66. 
Love, three kinds of, 168. 

of God, like a woman, 172. 

and knowledge, ultimately the 
same, 173. 

of God, heart must be kept 
full of, 187. 

of life, how conquered, 378. 
Lover of God, ardent and luke- 
warm, 170. 

Lust and greed, no effect on him 
who has acquired true know- 
ledge, 1 80. /,, ? , 

^ * ''' " ' 

MahMeva on faith, 388. " " * 

Mahi-tman and snake, 286. 
Malaya breeze, converts trees to 

sandal-trees, 192. 
Man, emancipated, like burnt rope, 

68. 

freed by touch of Almighty, 
72. 

playing in the world like child 
with doll, 81. 

truly religious, no difference 
when alone, no. 

two Egos in, 161. 

knowledge of God like a, 172. 

his home at feet of Almighty, 

true, illumined with Spiritual 
Light, 212, 339. 

Soul enchained is, 213. 

of merit, always humble, 236. 

heated in furnace of persecution, 

246. 
. cannot live without God, 288. 

easily led away, 315. 



O 2 




;/- 



196 



INDEX. 



Man becomes free when tail of 
ignorance 1 drops off, 395. 

Mantra of Guru to be followed, 
human frailties disregarded, 151. 

Marksman, how trained, 30. 

MayS, screens God from human 
view, 25, 270. 

ocean of, 45. 

God intimately connected with, 

6 4 . 

necessary to life, 7*- 

illusion of, 266. 

worldly man engrossed in, 267. 
- eyes covered with film of, 270. 

screen of, 271. 

flies away as soon as found out, 
277, 321, 

limitations of, 278. 

or Nescience, power of, 312. 

mask of Brahman, 313. 

fever of, 314. 

Men, three sorts of, 137. 

God in all, 215, 

all not in God, 215* 
two sorts of, 216* 

without original thoughts, 260. 
Mercury dissolves lead, 208. 
Mind, concentration of, learnt first 

by fixing it on forms, then on 

the formless, 29, 30, 

evil propensities of, 229. 

compass-needle of ship of life, 

279. 
difficult to concentrate, 298. 

fixed on God, never soiled, 

305- 

ruled like elephant, 356, 

invigorated by society of pious, 
372, 373* 

Miracle-workers, warning against, 

?57* 
Miracles worked by faith, 154, 

***2O2, 2O3, 304. 

^Mirror, soiled, does not reflect rays 
' of sun, 266. 

Money, like water passing under 
a bridge, 67. 



Money, not sole end and aim, 224, 
Moon or ' Uncle Moon/ 153. 
Moth, having seen light never 
returns to darkness, 88. 

Mother, Deity addressed as, 89, 
Mother Divine, worshipped in 
various forms, 6. 

why invisible, 271. 

protects from temptation, 

377- 

prayer to, 382. 

Mountains and plains, different 

view from,, 85. 

. xmder the sea, invisible, 86. 
Mukta, released, 137. 
Muklapunisha, one who merges 

himself in the Universal Self, 

t .v>. 

Mungoosc in house, 175. 
Mutual love, 168. 

Name of God, merit in pronounc- 
ing, 41, 43, 44. 

Ndrada, Divine Sage, 167. 

Nrya#a, all water brooded over 
by, 12. 

every being is, 17. 

Nectar, trough of, makes immortal, 

44. 
Neophyte, harmed by mixing with 

the world, 76, 
spiritual exercises necessary to, 

^33- 

wprldliness in, 384, 
Nescience, or Maya", power of, 312. 

mask of Brahman, 313. 

knowledge and ignorance com- 
prised under, 332. 

Nitya Skldhas, ever-perfect, $9," 
60. 

Ocean of Sat-Ait-Snanda, *86. 
Oyster, pearl, 94. 

Pandits, false, like vultures, r40. 
Parabrahman, mind turned to- 
wards, 279. 



INDEX. 



I 97 



Pararnsitman and (jiviltman, rela- 
tion between, 278, 393. 

contemplation of, 281. 
Paramahawsa, soul and swan, 64. 
Parents, guardians, and trustees of 

children, 351. 

Parrot and Divine Name, 115. 

PSrvati or Eternal Bliss, 388. 

Pearl, how fashioned, 94. 

Pelican, not wetted by water, 69. 

Perfect man, in the world but un- 
touched by it, 65, 66 } 69. 

freed from egoism, yet alive, 

68, 70. 

observes no caste distinctions, 

2l8, 2T9, 220, 221. 

reflects image of Almighty, 

240. 

influence diffused every- 
where, 294. 

Perfection, state of, 181. 

Persecution, a touchstone, 245. 

Persevere until help comes, 291. 

Personal God, rises from Imper- 
sonal, 36. 

Philosopher's stone, 73, 74. 

Pillow-case, man compared with, 
II. 

Pious man, sifts good from bad, 
112, 113. 

dead even in life, 114. 

only temporarily despondent, 

234. 

society of, like rice-water, 

369. 

makes wicked righteous, 

37- 
drives away lust and greed, 

37*- 

. - invigorates mind, 372, 

373- 
Potter, makes many-shaped vessels 

out of same clay, 9. 
P.ower, comes to those who think 

they have it, 202. 
Prayer, no effect on heart filled 
; with vanity, 165. 



Prayer and penance not necessary 
to him who has reached God, 
82. 

discarded when grace of 

God descends, 199. 

Preacher, inspired by God, 211. 

with undeveloped spirituality, 

347- 
Preaching, present method of, 209. 

worthless without inspiration, 

211. 

Property, division of, 38. 
Prophet, why not honoured by his 
own kinsmen, 231. 

spirit of, manifests itself at a 
distance, 232. 

appreciated at a distance, 232, 
233. 

Psychic powers, dangerous, 257. 

Pupil, the, and the elephant, story 
of, 15. 

Puriwas, defiled by constant re- 
petition, 276. . 

Pure in heart see God, 266. 

Purity precedes advent of the Lord, 

of holy men, intensifies faults, 
238. 

difficult to keep in the world, 

385. 

Rma, God, 43. 

human being and Divinity, 55. 
Rank and position, no difference 

in Divine sight, 85. 
R&s-flowers, 295. 
RSsltia festival, 295. 
Reliance, nature of absolute, 344. 
Religion, no effect on worldly 

man, 130. 

easy to talk, difficult to act, 

156, 157- 

life of wise man, a religion 
acted out, 157. 

not learnt from books, 242. 

every, a way to reach God, 

269. 

y >t' .. i i .t .. "s4 



rf 



- r 




198 



INDEX. 



Religion, rites and ceremonies 
necessary to growth of, 326. 

every man should follow his 
own, 337. 

Religions, why they degenerate, 
243. 

respect for other, 251. 

all paths leading to truth, 
251. 

Religious preaching, 209. 

sentiments, not to be talked 
about, 135. 

Reticence very desirable, 135. 
Rice-water, dissipates intoxication, 

.369. 
Rites and ceremonies, necessary 

for growth of religion, 326. 
unnecessary to him who 

has attained highest growth, 327. 
Rohitta-lish, 365. 
Rope, retains form when burnt, 

but of no use, 68. 

Sadhakas, few get free, 207. 
Sadhu, the, and the wicked man, 

6 3- 

makes no distinction between 
friend and foe, 63. 

characteristics of, 109. 

the, and the dog, 109. 

false, 143. 

true and false, discovered in 
persecution, 245. 

Sadhus (saints), dispense heavenly 
truths, 225. 

reflect Light Divine, 239. 
Sage, recognised alone by sage, 

107, 108. 

in trance, 108. 

Sages, Divine, like kinsmen of 

God, 61. 

Saint, vanity of, 318. 
Salt, doll of, 136. 
Salvation got by death of egoism, 

33*- 
Sama'dM, trance, 108. 

state of bliss, 185, 186. 



Sand and sugar, distinguished by 
ant, 112. 

Sandal, trees changed to, by Ma- 
laya breeze, 192. 

Saiwivyasin, has no homo, like a 
snake, 106. 

Satan kept out by praise of Ilari. 
42. 

Sat-Xrit-aiiarula, Ocean of, iS6. 

the Everlasting .Intelligent 
'Bliss, 2. 

various forms, 3. 

solidified, 36. 

tree of, 50. 

S'avasfulhana, rite of invoking god- 
dess Ka.li 1 , 3'Sj".. 

Saviour, carries thousands across 
ocean of Maya, 45. 

saves all, 46, 47! 48, 54. 

carries inuUitudus to feet of 
Almighty, 48. 

sent to rekindle religion, 51. 
Saviours are to Brahmzm as waves 

to the sea, 57. 
Sects and creeds matter nothing, 

200, 388. 

how created, 375. 

among Hindus, 388. 
Self, universal, \ 36. 

merged in Divinity, 206. 

knowledge of, 221. 
Self-reliance, danger of, 93. 
Selfish love, lowest kind, 168, 
Shepherd women of VYzndavana, 

169. 

Siddha, state to wliich he attains, 
58- 

= perfect man and well-cooked 
food, 58. 

five kinds of, 59, 
Siddha-purusha like an archaeo- 
logist, 54. 

Siddnas, save themselves by pain 
and penance, 46, 4,7, 48. 

spread knowledge, 216. 
Sieve, wicked man compared to a, 

138. 



INDEX. 



199 



Sin, purged by uttering Name of 
the Almighty, 43, 

purified by grace of God, 197. 

never concealed, 255* 

Sinner saved by resignation to will 

of God, 195. 

Sltfc, human being and divinity, 55. 
.Siva and Vishwu, which the greater, 

141. 

soul free from chain, is, 213. 

and bigoted worshipper, 249. 
Snake and Mah&lman, 286. 
Snow, 1 8. 

Soul attracted by magnetism of 
Universal Consciousness, 75. 

having attained Godhead, un- 
influenced by world, 76. 

immersed in God, 189. 

loses individual existence in 
ocean of Brahman, 208. 

free from chain is *S v iva, 213. 

enchained is man, 213. 

how it stays in body, 293* 

re-incarnation of, 359- 
Spiritual Light illumines true man, 

212. 

progress impossible without dis- 
crimination and dispassion, 352, 

progress, main elements of, 358. 
Stf. KHshwa R&dhl, human being 

and divinity, 55. . 
Stars, invisible by day, T. 
Stone, impervious to water, 96, 

126, 130. 

doll of, 136, 

Sugar and sand, distinguished by 
ant, 112. ' ' , ' 

Sun, power, of, 164, . , , - 

-. reflected best from polished 
surfaces, 239, a 66* 

SvM, star, 94* 

Svtti-rain, 94. 

Swan, peculiarity of, 64, 

Tadpole, 395. 

Tantras, defiled by constant repe- 
j tition, 276, 



Teachers, channel through which 
light is transmitted, 224. 

Tears, strength of a devotee, 92, 
306. 

of repentance and happiness 
flow from different corners, 
256. 

Thoughts and words, harmony 
between, 303. 

Tiger, God present in the, 13. 

Treacle and candy, difference be- 
tween, 237. 

Truth, uttered by lunatics, drunk- 
ards, and children, 39. 

all religious paths leading to, 
251. 

Universal Consciousness, mag- 
netism of, 75. 

Existence, knowledge of, 219. 

Self, knowledge of, 329. 
Unselfish love, highest kind, 168. 
Unselfishness precedes advent of 

the Lord, 193. 
UpMhi, limitations, 278. 
Upaguras, many, 147. 

Vairgya, dispassion, 352, 376. 
Va^ravantula tree, seeds of, 232. 
Vanity, death of man, 154. 

like heap of rubbish, 165. 

of saint, 318; 

Vedas, defiled by constant repeti- 
tion, 276. 

Vishwu or 5iva, which the greater, 
141* 

Viveka, discrimination, 352, 376. 

fire of, 37i. 

Vulture, soars high but searches 
for carrion, 140. 

Water, brooded over by NMyawa, 

12. 

* no effect on stone, 96, 126, 
136. 

power of walking on, 258. 

and bubbles are one, 393. 



.' INDEX, 

if like a sieve, i ^H \VA^I ***^, v * *. 

- sWofe,, SiSjiny" 8hottld * 



f"\ 
and mother, 77. 

Wind, carries all scents, 65 

Wit1lHrA<>#* b^gjj^f I* 



a, a a^. 

: ; -r love oiGadlikea/ 173, : 

and Sawnydsin, story 

Words ami thoughts, harmony be- 

n > 303. 

d, men who have renounced 
tae, oo. 
perfect man lives In but does 

not mk with, 65, 95. 

over perfect mm, 



1*6 a stage, 

irresistible 



may live-in, 
ce between those 




*~~ heart ' 

-r unlnfluiced b, AVWk 
xa6,ia7,ra8, 130, rs 

characteristics of, xaol 

full of worldly th<*ttgh% lis. 

unchanged by Divine 0*i% 

*" "^perfect God shines In purtinl 
-"^Io$e Mad ^ a ^ 



A . fow* filled with wo 

thoughts amd desires* s^H 
T wtlpnthy to ail that 
ofreligios, 34$. 



NLy, f 

,X|.|- 

vd 



.1 



! 







